

========================================================================
CHAPTER TWO - The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry
========================================================================

--- Terms of Reference ---
2.1
The Terms of Reference of the Inquiry relevant to the subject matter of Phase Two, Stage Four (‘Stage Four’) are as follows:
‘(c) by reference to the case of Harold Shipman to enquire into the performance of the functions of those statutory bodies, authorities, other organisations and individuals with responsibility for monitoring primary care provision and the use of controlled drugs; and
(d) following those enquiries, to recommend what steps, if any, should be taken to protect patients in the future ...’
.
CHAPTER TWO - The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry
The Subject Matter


========================================================================
CHAPTER THREE - The Appointment of General Practitioners and the Administration of General Practice prior to 1980: Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice
========================================================================

--- From 1974: the Structure and Functions of the Family Practitioner Committees ---
3.13
In 1974, the year when Shipman started in practice, the NHS was subjected to the first major structural change since its foundation. Fourteen regional health authorities (RHAs) were established. Their role included responsibility for planning and for the allocation of resources to 90 area health authorities (AHAs). The AHAs had responsibility for establishing FPCs for their areas. These FPCs replaced the executive councils. The AHAs had statutory responsibility for providing family health services, including medical services. The duty of administering those services was given to the FPCs. The authorities with responsibility for Tameside were the North West RHA, the Tameside AHA and the Tameside FPC.
3.14
In general, FPCs were governed by an executive board, comprising a chairman and 30 members, 15 of whom were from the contractor professions (i.e. GPs, dentists, opticians and pharmacists). The eight medical members were nominated by the LMC. There were 15 lay members also. The chairman could be either a lay or a professional member. FPCs had no officer (i.e. employee) members. The most senior member of staff was an administrator, who would have an assistant. Those two members of staff would be appointed by the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS). The entire staff of an average FPC would number no more than about 25.
3.15
FPCs were responsible for ensuring access to, and the availability of, medical services to the local population. In addition, they had responsibilities for
maintaining their medical lists
the remuneration of GPs
administering the terms of service for GPs
implementing a mechanism to deal with GPs who breached their terms of service.
3.16
The task of the FPCs was to ensure that the systems prescribed for discharging their various functions were properly implemented. One witness described the FPCs as ‘really just pay and rations organisations’. They had no management role. Nor did they have any responsibility for professional competence or quality of care. These were matters left entirely to the profession. The FPCs had no access to independent medical expertise. The LMCs assumed responsibility for maintaining professional standards locally. Nationally, as I have already said, the GMC was responsible for regulating the professional conduct of the doctors on its register.
The Medical List
3.17
Each FPC was required to keep a medical list of doctors in its area who had undertaken to provide general medical services. Applications by doctors for inclusion on a medical list were made in three different circumstances:
where a member of an existing group practice retired, died or left for other reasons and a replacement was required
where a single-handed practitioner died or ceased practice, leaving the practice vacant
where there appeared to be a demand for an additional doctor.
In each case, a decision had to be taken as to whether a vacancy should be declared. The FPC could not itself take that decision. Instead, it was taken by the Medical Practices Committee (MPC), a national body whose function was to ensure an equitable distribution of GPs across the whole of England and Wales.
3.18
When a vacancy was declared in order to replace a member of an existing practice, the role of the FPC in the appointment of a doctor to fill that vacancy was very limited. I shall refer to that role in greater detail at
paragraphs 3.51-3.54
, when I describe Shipman’s appointment to the Donneybrook practice. When a vacancy arose in either of the other two circumstances mentioned above, the FPC was responsible for advertising the vacancy and for shortlisting and interviewing candidates. The FPC would then make recommendations to the MPC, which was responsible for making the final selection.
3.19
The power of a FPC to remove a GP from its list was limited to cases where the GP had died, had ceased to be a registered practitioner, had failed to provide medical services for a period of six months or where the GP’s registration had been erased or suspended by the GMC. In certain circumstances (see
paragraph 3.24
below), a FPC could make representations to the NHS Tribunal that a doctor should be removed from its list. The NHS Tribunal was a non-departmental body with judicial powers. Its purpose was to protect family health services from doctors who prejudiced their efficiency. The Tribunal had the power to remove a doctor from a FPC’s list or to declare that the doctor should not be employed in any capacity connected with the provision of medical services.
Remuneration
3.20
FPCs were responsible for the payment of GPs, in accordance with the increasingly complex scheme of fees and allowances set out in the Red Book. Some of those allowances (e.g. those for postgraduate and vocational training) were designed to provide an incentive to improve standards. However, they were very limited in scope.
The Terms of Service
3.21
Once a GP was included on the medical list, s/he was subject to terms of service which were set out in the National Health Service (General Medical and Pharmaceutical Services) Regulations 1974 (the 1974 Regulations). The terms of service imposed a number of requirements on GPs, including the following:
to render to their patients all necessary and appropriate personal medical services of the type usually provided by GPs
to keep adequate records of the illnesses and treatment of their patients on forms supplied for that purpose by the FPC
to order, by issuing a prescription, any drugs or appliances which were needed for the patient’s treatment.
3.22
Other terms covered such matters as the acceptance and termination of responsibility for patients, responsibility for the provision of deputies and assistants, provision of proper and sufficient accommodation at practice premises and the provision of medical certificates. It was the responsibility of FPCs to administer the terms of service and to take action on any matters arising from such administration.
Failure to Comply with the Terms of Service
3.23
FPCs also had responsibility for putting in place and administering a disciplinary mechanism for dealing with cases where it appeared that a GP had failed to comply with his/her terms of service. Each FPC was required by the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Regulations 1974 to establish at least one medical service committee (MSC). The function of the MSC was to hear complaints against GPs of alleged failures to comply with their terms of service. Three lay members of the FPC sat on the MSC, together with three doctors appointed by the LMC and the chairman. The chairman was a lay person, and did not necessarily have to be a member of the FPC.
3.24
The task of processing complaints and providing secretarial and administrative support for the MSC was undertaken by staff of the FPC. However, it was the MSC which took the decision whether or not a GP had breached his/her terms of service and which recommended any further action it thought appropriate. The FPC would then consider the MSC’s report and would decide what action to take. It could recommend to the SoS that a warning should be issued or that an amount should be withheld from the GP’s remuneration. It could, in certain circumstances (and after consultation with the LMC), impose a limit on the number of patients on a GP’s list. In a serious case, the FPC could make representations to the NHS Tribunal that a doctor’s continued inclusion on its medical list would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the services it provided. Efficiency could be affected if the GP posed a threat to patients or if the standard of care provided fell far short of that which the NHS and patients had a right to expect. Such representations could result in the GP’s removal from the FPC’s list and, in an extreme case, from all NHS lists. Referrals to the Tribunal were, however, very rare and the procedure very cumbersome. The FPC had no power itself to remove a doctor from its list (save in the limited circumstances referred to at
paragraph 3.19
) or to impose conditions on his/her continued inclusion on the list.
3.25
Where, after consultation with the LMC, it appeared to a FPC that a doctor was incapable of carrying out his/her obligations under the terms of service by reason of physical or mental illness, it was open to the FPC to require the doctor to supply a medical report to the LMC. However, the FPC was not able itself to choose the practitioner who prepared the report, to specify the aspects of the doctor’s health to be dealt with in the report or to see the report when prepared. All these functions were performed by the LMC. All the FPC was entitled to was a report from the LMC, setting out the views of the LMC about the doctor’s fitness to discharge his/her obligations. Even if the report showed that the doctor was unfit to practise, the FPC could not remove him/her from practice, or make alternative arrangements for patient care, without first consulting the LMC and then obtaining the consent of the SoS.
The Limited Role of the Family Practitioner Committees
3.26
In summary, the role of the FPCs was very limited and in some respects rather curious. They were responsible for administering the provision of general medical services, but had little control over the GPs responsible for providing those services. Issues of standards and quality of care were regarded as matters for regulation by the profession itself. FPCs were the recipients of complaints, which might include complaints about the quality of services, but could exert little or no influence over that quality. They had limited opportunity for direct contact with the GPs on their lists and, as I shall go on to explain, little information about them.
3.27
In the 1970s, there was a recognition in some quarters (notably by the Royal College of General Practitioners) that standards of care among GPs were extremely variable and, in the case of some, unacceptably low. Some members of the profession began to take steps aimed at raising standards. At that time, FPCs did not undertake any monitoring of clinical performance or of the quality of the services offered. Insofar as any monitoring of GPs was undertaken, it was done by the Regional Medical Service (RMS).
Before 1974
The Regional Medical Service

--- Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice ---
3.31
Following his departure from Todmorden, Shipman worked for about 20 months in the Community Child Health Services in Newton Aycliffe, County Durham. There, he conducted clinics and advised on child development. In the summer of 1977, he responded to an advertisement which had been placed in the medical press by doctors practising at Donneybrook House in Hyde. They were seeking a replacement for Dr John Bennett, who had recently left the practice.
Arrangements within the Practice
3.32
The arrangements between the seven doctors of the Donneybrook practice were somewhat unusual. The practice had been formed by the amalgamation of three separate partnerships. Following the amalgamation, two of the doctors who had formed one of the pre-existing partnerships continued to operate a single list of patients. The two doctors shared the care of those patients. The other five members of the practice each operated his own individual list. All seven members of the practice shared staff costs and other expenses. For most purposes, they were treated by the Tameside FPC and its successors as a single partnership.
3.33
Following the departure of Dr John Bennett, six doctors continued to practise at Donneybrook House. They were Dr John Smith (the senior partner), Dr Derek Carroll, Dr Geoffrey Bills, Dr William Bennett, and two relatively new recruits, Dr Geoffrey Roberts and Dr Ian Napier, who had joined in 1975 and 1976 respectively. It was Dr Roberts’ first post in general practice. Dr Napier had worked for two or three years in another practice in Stockport before joining the Donneybrook practice. Dr Bills and Dr Carroll continued to operate a shared list. The others worked virtually as single-handed practitioners, save that they organised themselves into two groups for the purpose of providing cover for half days. Dr John Bennett and Dr Roberts had formed one group and Dr Smith, Dr William Bennett and Dr Napier formed the other.
3.34
Dr Smith, Dr Bills, Dr Roberts, Dr Napier and Dr Jeffery Moysey (who joined the practice in 1983) gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Dr Carroll and Dr William Bennett provided statements.
Preliminary Steps
3.35
Although most of those involved have no clear recollection of this part of the process, it seems that, when Dr John Bennett left, the doctors at the Donneybrook practice must have notified the FPC. The procedure was that the FPC would make a report to the MPC and would obtain approval in principle for the appointment of a replacement doctor. That approval was received in July 1977. It would have been something of a formality. At the time, Tameside was a ‘designated’ area, which meant that a high level of need for doctors had been identified by the MPC. The Donneybrook practice was a busy practice and a replacement doctor would plainly have been necessary. When the members of the Donneybrook practice received confirmation that they could proceed to select a replacement, they placed advertisements in the press.
3.36
After Shipman’s application had been received, a decision was taken to interview him. Dr Roberts’ recollection was that recruitment was difficult at that time, there was a poor response to the advertisements and Shipman was the only applicant interviewed. Dr Bills also remembered that this was a difficult time at which to recruit. Dr Napier believed that there were a number of other applicants from whom to choose. Other members of the practice had little recollection of the matter.
The Interview
3.37
There was some difference of recollection also as to whether there was only one interview or a preliminary interview followed by a more formal meeting between Shipman and his wife, Mrs Primrose Shipman, and members of the practice. Dr Roberts recalled an interview conducted by Dr Smith, Dr Bills and himself. He believed that Mrs Shipman was present for some or all of the time. Dr Bills did not remember Mrs Shipman being there. Dr Smith remembered Mrs Shipman attending. Dr Napier believed that he too attended an interview and, from his description of what was discussed, it appears that this must have been the same occasion as the others described. He said that Mrs Shipman was not there. It may be that, as Dr Roberts has suggested, Mrs Shipman was present for only part of the time. That might account for the different recollections about her presence.
3.38
All those present remembered that Shipman volunteered information about problems he had experienced in Todmorden. Dr Smith said that Shipman referred to himself as ‘making a confession’ about what had happened there. He told the interviewing panel that he had become depressed as a result of being required to undertake an unfair share of the work at his former practice. Dr Roberts understood that Shipman had resorted first to treating himself with anti-depressant medication and that he had subsequently become addicted to pethidine.
3.39
Other members of the interviewing panel remembered only that he had become addicted to pethidine or a similar drug. Dr Roberts remembered Shipman telling them that he had been convicted of criminal offences in connection with his drug taking. Dr Roberts had understood that these were in contravention of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. He had not appreciated that they had involved the forgery of prescriptions and offences of obtaining drugs by deception. Indeed, he was surprised when he read in the Inquiry’s First Report the nature of the offences of which Shipman had been convicted. Dr Napier recalled no mention of any involvement with the criminal courts. Dr Roberts said that Shipman also told the interviewing panel that he had received a warning from the GMC and that he had undergone treatment by a psychiatrist. Of the doctors who interviewed Shipman, only Dr Napier gained any impression of how long the conduct had continued. He told the Inquiry that he had in his mind a period of about six months, although he did not know how he had gained that impression. It seems likely that Shipman generally underplayed the seriousness of the events that had occurred in Todmorden and gave a self-serving account of how and why his difficulties had arisen. However, the interviewing panel would not have realised that.
3.40
Despite the problems that Shipman had described to them, it is clear that the impression of him formed by members of the interviewing panel was generally favourable. Shipman seemed enthusiastic and energetic. He had an interest in, and recent experience of, child development (which was an expanding field at the time). He also had an interest in preventive medicine. He appeared to be candid about his past history and to be mature in his approach to it. His story about his treatment at his previous practice was plausible, given the climate at the time. In short, he won the confidence and sympathy of his interviewers.
Subsequent Enquiries
3.41
Following the interview, it was resolved that enquiries should be made of the GMC, of the Home Office (in order to determine whether any restriction had been imposed on his prescribing) and of the psychiatrist who had treated Shipman. It is not clear whether this was Dr Ronald Bryson, under whose care Shipman had been when an inpatient at The Retreat (a private hospital in York where he was treated following the discovery of his drug abuse), or Dr Hugo Milne, who saw him as an outpatient thereafter. It seems likely to have been the latter, as he would have had more recent knowledge of Shipman. In any event, Shipman provided the necessary details and Dr Roberts was deputed to make the enquiries.
3.42
Dr Roberts ascertained from the GMC that Shipman was registered, with no restrictions on his practice; in fact, the GMC had no power to impose such restrictions at that time, but Dr Roberts would not necessarily have been aware of that. Witnesses from the GMC have confirmed that Dr Roberts would not have been informed that Shipman had a fitness to practise (FTP) history, i.e. that he had been the subject of a warning (in the form of a letter) in respect of convictions which had been reported to the GMC. Warning letters were treated as confidential between the GMC and the doctor concerned. In fact, as I have said, Shipman had told the interviewing panel that he had received a warning from the GMC.
3.43
Dr Roberts then spoke to the Home Office. He said that he was told that there was no restriction on Shipman’s ability to prescribe. Mr Frank Eggleston, the Senior Drugs Inspector at the Home Office’s Bradford office in 1977, gave oral evidence. He could not remember dealing with Dr Roberts’ query and there is no record of it on file. One of the other inspectors may have spoken to Dr Roberts. Their approach would, he believed, have been broadly the same as his own. He would have told the caller whether or not Shipman had been made the subject of a direction restricting his ability to prescribe. He would not have volunteered any further information, even information (e.g. about the circumstances giving rise to a criminal conviction) which was already in the public domain. He would not have wanted to damage Shipman’s employment prospects and would, therefore, have been very circumspect in what he said.
3.44
Dr Roberts then spoke to the psychiatrist. He recalled that he was told that Shipman had had an addiction problem, had undergone a period of detoxification, had been treated for depression and had finished his treatment. He recalled no discussion about the underlying cause of Shipman’s problems, or about the circumstances of the offences of which he had been convicted. Dr Roberts was concerned to know whether Shipman was fit to take up general practice and he recalled that, put simply, he received the answer ‘Yes’. Dr Napier recalled being told subsequently that the psychiatrist had expressed the view that it would be a great loss to medicine if Shipman were unable to practise. That view would have reflected the sentiments contained in the letter written by Dr Milne and submitted by Shipman’s solicitors to the GMC at the time that Shipman’s case was under consideration in 1976.
3.45
Dr Roberts also remembered speaking to one of Shipman’s former partners at Todmorden. He said that he received ‘some vitriol’ about Shipman at first and was told that Shipman had stolen or misappropriated pethidine from the practice. However, he was also told that, despite his problems, Shipman had been a good GP. Dr Roberts did not recall any discussion about Shipman’s addiction and did not think that such a discussion would have been appropriate in the circumstances. Nor had he raised with Shipman’s former partner the suggestions that Shipman had been overworked when at the practice. Dr Roberts believed there would have been little to be gained by doing so since all he would have got would have been a different point of view from that of Shipman. Shipman’s account of his experiences at the practice had been convincing and Dr Roberts was prepared to accept it. The impression Dr Roberts was left with was that:
‘... Shipman had been a man with problems which had led to his leaving the practice but his basic skills as a GP were good’
3.46
Dr Roberts believed that he would have spoken to Shipman’s employers in County Durham although he had no specific recollection of doing so. That would have accorded with his usual practice. There seems little doubt that Shipman would have received a positive reference from that quarter. In short, the enquiries undertaken by Dr Roberts did nothing to undermine the account that Shipman had given of his problems and the favourable impression that the panel had formed during the interview.
The Decision to Appoint
3.47
Dr Roberts recalled that he imparted the information he had collected to his partners informally, rather than at a practice meeting. Both Dr William Bennett and Dr Carroll remembered being told of Shipman’s drug problem, which appeared to have been treated and resolved. Neither remembered being aware that Shipman had been convicted of any criminal offences. Dr Carroll said that he was not aware of Shipman’s convictions until the conclusion of the trial in 2000, when they received a good deal of publicity. Even had he known of them, he said, it would not have affected his view that Shipman should be appointed. Dr Bennett was certain that he was unaware that Shipman had forged prescriptions. He said he would have regarded that as a serious matter and would have been uncomfortable having a partner who had been convicted of offences of dishonesty. It is quite likely that the fact of Shipman’s criminal convictions was not explained to Dr Bennett or Dr Carroll. Little emphasis appears to have been placed on that aspect by those who interviewed Shipman. It is quite possible, therefore, that they did not regard it as sufficiently significant to pass on to the others.
3.48
Dr Napier told the Inquiry that he had felt some hesitation about appointing Shipman, since there were other applicants for the job and he felt there was a risk that Shipman might relapse into his former habit of drug taking. Dr Smith acknowledged that Dr Napier may have questioned whether it was right to take on Shipman but does not recall any strong opposition to his appointment. None of the other doctors remembered there being any dissent on the issue. In any event, a decision was taken to appoint Shipman for a probationary period of either three or six months. That was the usual basis on which appointments were made as it gave both sides an opportunity to ensure that they were able to work satisfactorily together. During the probationary period, Shipman was to take on the usual duties of a GP principal and to assume responsibility for Dr John Bennett’s list of patients. The legal formalities were not concluded until the expiration of the probationary period.
3.49
Dr Roberts explained that, in making their decision, members of the practice took their lead from the GMC. The GMC, which they believed would have had knowledge of all the facts relating to Shipman’s drug taking activities, had found that Shipman was fit to practise. It was not for the practice to go behind that finding. He told the Inquiry that, if Shipman had been subject to restrictions on his practice (e.g. prescribing restrictions), he would not have been taken on, since this would have caused practical difficulties in his day-to-day professional life. Similarly, if he had been subject to professional supervision, this would have been a bar since there was no one available at the practice with the necessary experience to exercise formal supervision over him. If the treating psychiatrist had said that Shipman was not ready for practice or that he required professional supervision, this would also have been a decisive factor. As it was, all the indicators appeared to be positive.
Controlled Drugs
3.50
Several members of the practice recalled that, at some time, Shipman had said he did not intend to keep controlled drugs. It may be that he expressed this intention at interview, although Dr Bills had no recollection of it. Dr Roberts remembered being informed of Shipman’s intention and of the name of the drug (Fortral) which he was proposing to use for pain relief in place of a controlled drug. In accordance with their way of running their practices, members of the practice maintained their own supplies of controlled drugs for use in emergencies. There was no supply of drugs available to all members of the practice, as there had been at Todmorden, and no CDR in common use.
Shipman’s Application for Inclusion on the Medical List
3.51
Once the practice had made its selection, Shipman applied to join the medical list held by the Tameside FPC. The application form (as prescribed by the 1974 Regulations) required details of his medical qualifications, the practice that he intended to join, the nature of the services (e.g. maternity and contraception services) he was to provide and his current employment. He was required to identify the proposed geographical area of his practice, his practice premises, his surgery hours and telephone details. Shipman also completed a supplementary questionnaire in which he indicated,
inter alia
, that he had been a principal in general practice previously and had practised in the area of the Calderdale FPC. This questionnaire was for statistical purposes only. Shipman was issued with various other forms of an administrative nature which he was required to complete. No information was sought or given about his disciplinary record or about any criminal convictions he might have.
3.52
Having received Shipman’s application for inclusion on its list, the FPC checked with the GMC that he was on the register. Without registration, he would not, of course, have been eligible for admission to the list. The FPC would not have enquired of the GMC whether Shipman had a FTP history, i.e. whether he had previously been disciplined by the GMC. As I have said, the GMC would not have provided any further information, even if asked. There was no contact with his previous employers or with the Calderdale FPC. No references were taken up or sought. Having satisfied themselves that Shipman was registered with the GMC, staff at the Tameside FPC sent his application to the MPC, together with the FPC’s report supporting his application.
3.53
The MPC granted the application. A vacancy had been declared and the practice had made its choice of candidate. Provided that the relevant procedures had been properly complied with, approval of the application would have been automatic. Once the MPC’s approval had been given, Shipman’s name was included on the medical list. The fact that he was to serve a probationary period was a matter between him and the other members of the Donneybrook practice. So far as the FPC was concerned, Shipman was free to practise as a GP principal.
Conclusions

--- Introduction ---
3.1
When Shipman’s crimes came to light, there was a general feeling of disbelief that the authorities responsible for the provision of primary health care had not detected his aberrant activities and taken action to remove him from practice years before. The discovery that he had been convicted in 1976 of criminal offences in connection with controlled drugs (a fact which it was understandably assumed must have been known to those authorities) only served to increase that feeling.
3.2
Shipman was in general practice from 1974 until 1998 with a break of two years (from September 1975 to October 1977), following his departure from Todmorden. Over that period of more than 20 years, there were significant changes in the way that general practice was organised. Since 1998, the pace of change has quickened still further. Many new arrangements have been introduced, some as a direct result of the discovery of Shipman’s activities and others as part of wider moves to improve the quality of care within the NHS. The framework within which general practice is conducted today is very different from that which existed in the 1970s and 1980s.
3.3
In this Chapter and in
Chapter 4
, I shall describe the arrangements which were in place for regulating the activities of general practitioners (GPs) during the time when Shipman was in general practice. In
Chapter 5
, I shall set out the changes which have occurred since he ceased practice in 1998. The details of many of the arrangements that I shall describe were complex. For present purposes, it is necessary only to summarise the position briefly. I shall deal only with the arrangements as they affect England. I shall also consider the actions of those responsible for appointing Shipman to his position in general practice in Hyde in 1977.
CHAPTER THREE - The Appointment of General Practitioners and the Administration of General Practice prior to 1980: Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice
The Wider Professional Regulatory Framework


========================================================================
CHAPTER FOUR - The Monitoring of General Practitioners from 1980 to 1998: the Arrangements for Monitoring in Tameside
========================================================================

--- From 1990 to 1998 ---
Changes on the Ground
4.13
During the early 1990s, the FHSAs began to use the new tools they had been given to develop their management role. They grew in size. Tameside FHSA doubled the number of its staff to about 50. The FHSAs employed medical advisers, many of them from the Regional Medical Service (RMS), which had been part of the new DoH since the latter’s creation (it had formerly been part of the DHSS) in 1988. In 1991, the RMS was transferred to the Department of Social Security (DSS) and thereupon ceased to have any general responsibility for GPs.
4.14
The level of prescribing costs incurred by GP practices was a matter of considerable concern to FHSAs. If a fundholding practice overspent on its prescribing budget, the FHSA was responsible for paying the excess. That had an obvious impact on the FHSA’s own budget. If a non-fundholding practice failed to keep within its IPA, the excess was met from central funds held by the DoH. However, the FHSA would be under pressure from the RHA to use its influence to modify the activities of high cost prescribers in its area. In practice there was little a FHSA could do if a practice overspent, unless it could successfully establish that a GP was guilty of excessive prescribing: see
paragraph 4.21
4.15
Initially, therefore, the work of medical advisers was primarily concerned with promoting rational and cost-effective prescribing practice. At this time, the main emphasis was on cost factors. Efforts were made to discourage GPs from prescribing expensive proprietary drugs. They were encouraged instead to prescribe cheaper, generic equivalents. The advisers used prescribing data provided by the Prescription Pricing Authority (PPA) to inform their discussions with GPs. The PPA is a special health authority which processes all NHS prescriptions written by GP and nurse prescribers in England. Prescriptions are submitted by community pharmacists and dispensing GPs who receive payment from the PPA. The PPA also collates and disseminates (to GP practices, PCOs and other NHS bodies) data about drugs prescribed and the costs thereof. From April 1991, medical advisers were also authorised by the SoS to inspect GPs’ controlled drugs registers (CDRs) and stocks of controlled drugs, to ensure compliance with the statutory requirements relating to the keeping of controlled drugs.
4.16
The FHSAs also began to recruit pharmaceutical (or prescribing) advisers (usually part-time) to assist with the more technical aspects of prescribing. The pharmaceutical advisers brought with them a higher degree of specialist knowledge about drugs and their properties than was possessed by the medical advisers. Local incentive schemes were set up to promote cost-effective prescribing. If a non-fundholding practice underspent on its IPA, it would receive additional funds to invest in the purchase of equipment or other improvements. Agreed formularies (i.e. lists of drugs to be prescribed) were developed for GPs’ use. The emphasis shifted to the promotion of good quality prescribing practice, as well as cost savings. FHSAs began to employ community pharmacists who would discuss with doctors the prescribing needs of individual patients or groups of patients. Pharmaceutical advisers did not possess the same powers to enquire into a GP’s prescribing as did medical advisers. Nor did they have any authority to inspect GPs’ CDRs or stocks of controlled drugs. If they had any reason for concern about a GP’s handling of controlled drugs, they would refer that concern to others for investigation.
4.17
The receipt of a range of incentive payments for the provision of additional services and other activities made it necessary for systems of verification of claims for payment to be developed. GP practices were required to set up systems for collecting data to support their claims for incentive payments. That process was facilitated by the increasing computerisation of GP practices which began at about this time. The collection of this data, together with other information which practices were now obliged to supply to them, enabled FHSAs to build up a more accurate picture of the care being provided by individual practices.
4.18
FHSAs established medical audit advisory groups (MAAGs) to encourage GP practices to carry out audits of their activities. The profession insisted that audit should be led by members of the profession, should be formative (i.e. educational) in nature, should be confidential and should not be linked to management processes. As a consequence, audit results were reported annually to the FHSA in an aggregated, anonymised form. FHSA managers had no access to the results of audits carried out by individual GP practices. These were seen only by GP members of the MAAG and by the staff responsible for supporting the MAAG.
4.19
There was no longer any significant overlap between membership of the FHSAs and that of local medical committees (LMCs). Nevertheless, FHSAs continued to consult closely with LMCs. Tameside FHSA (whose one medical member was not a member of the LMC) instituted routine monthly meetings with the LMC. In general, the two co-operated well, although some difficulties were experienced when the FHSA was called upon to implement Government policies (such as the fundholding arrangements) which were unpopular with some GPs. Relationships with LMCs varied from area to area, depending upon the personalities involved.
Developments in 1992
4.20
The National Health Service (General Medical Services) Regulations 1992 consolidated and amended the 1974 Regulations and included new terms of service (the 1992 terms of service) which were largely unchanged from those which had been in force previously. The 1992 terms of service (amended over time) remained in force until April 2004.
4.21
Also in 1992, the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Regulations 1992 introduced a new procedure for dealing with allegations of excessive prescribing. Prescribing could be excessive by reason of either the quantity or the number of drugs prescribed. FHSAs were given the power to refer such cases to professional committees. Those committees consisted of a doctor with substantial experience of clinical pharmacology (chosen from a panel selected, after consultation, by the SoS) together with two GPs, one of whom had been nominated by the LMC. This procedure replaced the previous arrangement whereby LMCs had been responsible for adjudicating in such cases: see
Chapter 3
. The professional committees could determine the amount of any financial penalty to be imposed. Dr David Edwards was a former regional medical officer (RMO) and co-Medical Adviser (with Dr David Archer) to a consortium of the Tameside, Wigan and Stockport FHSAs in the early 1990s. He was, he believes, the first adviser to use this procedure successfully. This was after he had left the consortium and moved to Wigan. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that it was invoked only on very rare occasions thereafter.
4.22
The LMCs continued to have responsibility for determining issues relating to medical certification and record keeping, as well as for considering complaints made by one GP against another and involving a question of the efficiency of services. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that these latter procedures were not used frequently, although Mr Greenwood remembered one occasion when the LMC for Tameside considered concerns reported by the partners of a practice about the clinical activities of one of their colleagues. LMCs also continued to be involved in the procedures for dealing with doctors who appeared unfit to discharge their obligations under the 1992 terms of service by reason of physical or mental illness. In 1980, the General Medical Council (GMC) had introduced its new procedures for dealing with doctors whose fitness to practise was seriously impaired by ill health. The more intractable cases of illness could, therefore, be referred to the GMC.
Shipman’s Move to the Market Street Surgery
4.23
In 1992, Shipman moved from the Donneybrook practice to the Market Street Surgery, where he practised single-handed until his arrest in 1998. He was already on Tameside FHSA’s medical list. He was merely leaving one practice and setting up another in the same area. No application to the Medical Practices Committee was necessary. All Shipman was required to do was to establish to the satisfaction of the FHSA that he had suitable premises from which to practise, that his arrangements (e.g. his times of availability) would adequately meet the needs of patients and that the other necessary administrative arrangements had been made. The FHSA had no power to prevent the move, although it would have been open to it to withhold funding for infrastructure costs had it chosen to do so.
4.24
Having found the premises at 21 Market Street, Shipman wrote to Mr Barry Thomas, General Manager of the FHSA, asking him to view the premises and give his approval. At the FHSA’s request, he also submitted an outline business plan. Subsequently, Shipman met Mr Thomas, Dr Roger Freedman (the Medical Adviser at the time) and the secretary of the LMC. As a result of that meeting, the premises were approved.
4.25
Mr Greenwood said that the FHSA would have had mixed feelings about Shipman’s move. On the one hand, he was the first doctor to move outside the two large practices which operated from Donneybrook House and would thus have provided some welcome diversity in the types of practice on offer. On the other hand, the creation of a new practice involved additional costs to be met by the FHSA. Another factor was that, unusually for the time, the Tameside FHSA had a policy of not supporting single-handed practice unless an applicant could demonstrate that s/he would provide a better quality of services locally. In the event, the FHSA must have been satisfied that that was the case since it supported Shipman’s move. Mr Greenwood believed that Shipman’s stated intention to hold open surgeries (at a time when patients were experiencing real problems in getting appointments with other practices) might have been a significant factor in the FHSA’s decision.
The Mid-1990s
4.26
In the mid-1990s, there were a number of organisational changes in the NHS. In 1994, the number of RHAs was reduced from fourteen to eight. The North West RHA was merged with the Mersey RHA. With effect from 1st
April 1996, the RHAs were abolished altogether and their functions were taken over by eight Regional Offices of the NHS Executive. The North West Regional Office covered Tameside. These Regional Offices were responsible for the performance management of primary care as part of their responsibility for the management of healthcare systems in their areas.
4.27
At the same time, the DHAs and FHSAs were abolished and their functions were devolved to a hundred new unitary health authorities (HAs) of which the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA) was one. The WPHA covered the areas previously administered by the Tameside and Oldham FHSAs, together with the Glossop area, which had previously been part of the Derbyshire FHSA. The primary care team at the WPHA was led by Mrs Jan Forster, Director of Primary Care. The two Medical Advisers, Dr Alan Banks and Dr Frances Bradshaw, shared the position of Assistant Director. Under the HA structure, local GPs were not formally involved in the management of local primary care services. However, there was close co-operation between the WPHA and the LMC.
Complaints and Discipline
4.28
In April 1996, changes were also made to the complaints and disciplinary systems governing GPs. These were separated so that the determination of a patient complaint no longer led automatically to the possibility of disciplinary proceedings. Each practice was required to have a complaints procedure, and patient complaints were initially dealt with at practice level. If that failed, conciliation and, possibly, a hearing by an independent review panel (IRP) could follow. The IRP would produce a report, setting out its findings and, if appropriate, making recommendations for changes to the GP’s practice. However, neither the IRP nor the HA which received the report could compel the compliance of the GP in question. I shall describe these arrangements in detail in
Chapter 7
4.29
All HAs were required to set up medical disciplinary committees, whether alone or jointly with other HAs. If a HA received information which it considered could amount to an allegation that a GP had failed to comply with his/her terms of service, it had a number of options. The HA could:
take no action or
refer the matter for investigation by another HA’s disciplinary committee and/or
refer the information to the NHS Tribunal, the GMC or the police.
4.30
If the allegation was being dealt with through the complaints procedure, the HA had to await delivery of the IRP’s report or the abandonment/withdrawal of the complaint by the complainant before taking disciplinary action by referring the complaint to another HA’s disciplinary committee. The process was cumbersome and lengthy. It is perhaps not surprising that, as I shall explain in
Chapter 7
, it was little used.
4.31
One effect of the changes to the complaints procedure was that, after 1996, HAs only rarely became aware of the subject matter of individual complaints made about GPs. Practices were obliged to make an annual return to the HA, stating how many complaints had been made to them, but that return did not include information about the nature of the complaint made. Moreover, the system depended on practices being frank about the number of complaints received. HAs did not have a full picture of the complaints being made in their area. This deprived them of a valuable means of monitoring quality of care and services. It ran counter to the increased role which, in other respects, they were playing in the management of primary health care.
The Position in 1998
4.32
By 1998, considerable progress had been made by HAs in the collection of data about GP practices and in the encouragement of practices, by means of financial incentives, to improve the range and quality of their services. Nevertheless, there were still considerable limitations on the ability of the HAs to deal with those GPs who were not amenable to change. The medical advisers had powers only to enquire about prescriptions and referrals and to inspect GPs’ arrangements for keeping controlled drugs. Otherwise, they had no right to enter practice premises. They had to proceed by means of persuasion and the use of influence. Ultimately, they had no sanction against a GP who overspent his/her IPA, provided that s/he was not guilty of ‘excessive prescribing’. Dr Banks, former Medical Adviser to the Tameside FHSA/WPHA, told the Inquiry that prescribing was ‘a very powerful tool’ available to GPs. If they became alienated, they could spend a lot of money on prescribing and, by so doing, have an adverse effect on the FHSA/HA’s budget. Because of that, he said, he was anxious not to alienate Shipman. At first consideration, Dr Banks’ attitude to Shipman might seem rather pusillanimous. For a doctor deliberately to increase his spending on drugs as part of a ‘power game’ would be quite unacceptable. However, I have much sympathy with Dr Banks’ position and attitude. A doctor’s right to prescribe as s/he thinks fit in the patient’s interest has always been jealously guarded and it could be very difficult to demonstrate that a doctor was prescribing expensive drugs for improper reasons. The evidence suggests that Shipman would have been well able to quote published papers to justify his prescribing decisions. Moreover, he was a very prickly, difficult and sometimes arrogant personality. I can understand why Dr Banks thought that a confrontation might be counter-productive.
4.33
Following the changes of 1996, HAs had less involvement with patient complaints. Indeed, as I have said, they received incomplete information about complaints which were made and consequently had less opportunity to gain intelligence about poor practice. Disciplinary action for breach of a GP’s terms of service was taken rarely and referrals to the NHS Tribunal became even less common. HAs still had only a very limited power to remove a doctor from their lists. Their only recourse, if dissatisfied about some aspect of the GP’s practice that did not amount to a potential breach of his/her terms of service, was to refer the doctor to the GMC. Dr Banks told the Inquiry that, in his view, matters of clinical competence were for the GMC and could not be dealt with at local level.
The Problem of the Poorly Performing Doctor
4.34
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was mounting awareness of, and concern about, doctors whose conduct, competence and/or quality of care was substandard. It was recognised that by no means all these doctors were being brought to the attention of the authorities. Even if they did, they could not readily be dealt with by the existing procedures.
4.35
The only mechanism by which such problems could be tackled at that time was by invoking an informal procedure whereby the LMC would appoint ‘Three Wise Men’ to enquire into a GP’s performance and would attempt to resolve any problems which were identified. Every HA was advised to enter into an agreement with the LMC for the setting up of such a procedure. However, the procedure had no statutory basis and the GP could not be compelled to co-operate. Not surprisingly, the procedure frequently failed to resolve the problem.
4.36
The Medical (Professional Performance) Act 1995 (the 1995 Act) introduced what became known as the GMC’s performance procedures. Prior to the introduction of these procedures, the GMC had been able to take action only if a doctor had been found guilty of serious professional misconduct or was suffering from a serious impairment of health. The 1995 Act, which came into effect on 1st
July 1997, gave the GMC power to suspend or impose conditions upon the registration of a doctor whose professional performance was found to be seriously deficient. The aim was to enable the GMC to take action where complaints about a doctor’s clinical performance over time suggested a pattern of serious deficiency.
4.37
Local arrangements were to be put in place to assist in identifying doctors (both GPs and hospital doctors) who were performing poorly and to ensure that, wherever possible, action was taken at a local level to remedy their failings. Only when that remedial action failed should a referral to the GMC become necessary.
4.38
Around the time of the introduction of the new GMC procedures, a considerable amount of guidance was issued to HAs concerning the arrangements which they should put in place to deal with poorly performing doctors. I shall describe those arrangements in
. It took time for the necessary arrangements to be put in place. In most areas, the procedures did not come into operation until 1998 or later. When eventually they were in operation, they represented a very significant adjunct to the complaints and disciplinary mechanisms previously available to the PCOs.
From 1980 to 1990
The Arrangements in Tameside

--- The Arrangements in Tameside ---
4.39
I shall now turn to consider the arrangements for monitoring GPs which were in place in Tameside during the period of Shipman’s practice there. Could and should those arrangements have led to his earlier detection or, at any rate, should they have alerted the authorities to the fact that he was aberrant in some way? Were there effective mechanisms which could have been put in place but were not? How did the arrangements in Tameside compare with those elsewhere?
4.40
As I have already explained, the bodies successively responsible for organising primary care in Tameside did not know until 1998 that Shipman had criminal convictions (including convictions for forging prescriptions) associated with the misuse of controlled drugs. They were therefore unaware that he posed any particular risk, in relation to his prescribing practices or otherwise. Their conduct must be viewed in that light. It has been suggested to the Inquiry that the Tameside FPC and its successors should be criticised for failing to ‘unearth’ information about Shipman’s past history. I shall deal with that suggestion later in this Chapter.
4.41
Shipman was, in many respects, a competent doctor. He kept abreast of current medical literature and of developments within the field of general practice. He was an enthusiastic proponent of preventive medicine. When target payments for vaccination, immunisation and cervical cytology were introduced, he consistently attained those targets. His Market Street practice established sound systems for monitoring and treating patients suffering from chronic disease, such as asthma. It is possible (as some have suggested) that Shipman created an appearance of greater professional competence than he in fact possessed. In any event, it is unlikely that routine examination of the limited amount of data available to the Tameside FHSA/WPHA about his practice activity would have raised any concerns about his competence or professional conduct. The routine checks which were carried out by the WPHA in later years to verify Shipman’s claims for payment for items of service showed no significant discrepancies. Inspections of his practice premises found them to be in good order. Moreover, as I shall explain in
Chapter 6
, although complaints were made against Shipman, they were not such as would have raised serious concerns about his conduct or competence. Most conventional monitoring techniques would, therefore, have failed to identify him as a potential source of problems.
4.42
I intend to focus on those aspects of Shipman’s practice which, had they been subject to specific enquiry, might have been identified as abnormal in some way, and as meriting further investigation. Those aspects are the number of deaths among his patients and the circumstances surrounding those deaths, his prescribing (in particular, his prescribing of opiates) and the quality of his medical records. I shall also consider other information which, during the later years, was held by the Tameside FHSA/WPHA and which might have contained significant material.
The Number and Circumstances of Patient Deaths
4.43
Before Shipman’s arrest, it had not been the practice of PCOs to monitor the death rates among patients of individual GPs. There were a number of reasons for this which I shall explain in
Chapter 14
. There can be no criticism of the PCOs in Tameside for the fact that they did not undertake any monitoring of this kind.
4.44
At present, there is no system for collecting and analysing information about the circumstances of deaths. Thus, no one in authority was alerted to the abnormally high proportion of Shipman’s patients who had died at home, or who had suffered sudden, unexpected deaths or who had died (on Shipman’s own admission) in his presence or shortly after a visit from him or whom he had ‘found’ dead. No one in authority was aware of the fact that six deaths had occurred on his surgery premises. None of the PCOs responsible for Tameside over the years held such data or had any means of obtaining it. They cannot, therefore, be criticised for being unaware of it.
4.45
Under the new coroner system proposed in my Third Report, all deaths would be reported to the coroner, and far more information would be available about the circumstances surrounding each death. That information would come from the person (usually a healthcare professional) who confirmed that death had occurred, from the doctor who gave an account of the deceased’s medical history and from a member of the deceased’s family or someone else with knowledge of the deceased. Information from these various sources would be cross-checked. The coroner system would hold all the relevant data. It would be possible to monitor that data and investigate any apparently unusual patterns or other features. At present, this exercise just cannot be done.
The Period from 1977 to 1990: the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee
4.46
As I explained in
, the role of the FPCs prior to the mid-1980s was extremely limited. It was concerned with matters of administration, rather than professional conduct or clinical practice. FPCs carried out no form of activity that could be described as the ‘monitoring’ of the GPs on their lists. Nor, during this period, could a FPC expect to receive expressions of concerns from one doctor about another. As I shall describe in
Chapter 10
, the culture at that time was such that few doctors would have regarded it as their professional duty to report a colleague, even if they had had concerns about his/her fitness to practise. On the rare occasions when a concern was expressed, it would be dealt with by the LMC rather than the FPC: see
paragraph 4.22
4.47
Virtually the only source of information which might have led to the identification of a ‘problem doctor’ would be complaints from patients or their representatives. It is significant, therefore, that Mr Greenwood had, by the mid- to late 1980s, instituted a system of reviews of the complaints log held by Tameside FPC. As I have explained, Mr Greenwood recalled that his review revealed the existence of an administrative problem affecting one practice. It would not have revealed a problem with Shipman. At no time during his career did a complaint or pattern of complaints emerge, such as would have led to wider suspicions about his activities. As I shall describe in
Chapter 6
, some complaints were made about him. However, they gave no indication of his criminality.
The Period from 1977 to 1990: the Regional Medical Service
4.48
As I have said, the RMOs made regular visits to GPs during this period. The Inquiry received evidence from three former RMOs. Dr Jack Edwards, a former GP, was a RMO from 1965 until 1992 and covered the Tameside, Trafford and Stockport areas. Dr Archer, another former GP, joined the RMS in 1987 and was based in Manchester, covering four FPC areas, including Tameside. In January 1988, he was seconded to the Trafford FPC and did not thereafter visit GPs in Tameside until he returned there as Medical Adviser to the Consortium of the Tameside, Wigan and Stockport FHSAs. Dr David Edwards, who left general practice in 1986 to join the RMS, covered the Wirral and Cheshire areas (excluding Stockport). In June 1990, he left the RMS and joined the consortium of the Tameside, Wigan and Stockport FHSAs as co-Medical Adviser with Dr Archer.
Shipman’s Prescribing
4.49
No reports of practice visits by RMOs to GPs in Tameside have survived. Dr Archer was, however, able to refer to notes of visits (including visits to the Donneybrook practice) recorded in his diary. All the witnesses agreed that one of the topics discussed at their meetings with GPs was prescribing. Dr Archer said that the topic would be discussed in general terms. He would stress the need for economy in prescribing. He would advise GPs to take care when prescribing new drugs. He would encourage them to report adverse reactions to drugs.
4.50
In general, RMOs would have only basic information about the prescribing costs of each practice. More detailed data was made available to them only if the practice had been identified by RMS Headquarters as a high cost prescriber. The usual rule was that, if a practice’s prescribing costs were more than 25% above the average, the RMO would be required to visit the practice to discuss ways in which the GP(s) in question might modify their prescribing habits.
4.51
None of the RMOs who provided evidence to the Inquiry remembered Shipman having been identified by (or to) them as a high prescriber. Dr Archer’s notes of visits to Donneybrook House in December 1987 and January 1991 contain no mention of any concerns about him. This may well have been because Shipman’s prescribing costs at that time formed part of the prescribing costs for the whole Donneybrook practice. Prescribing data available to the RMOs would have related to the practice, not to individual doctors within the practice. If the Donneybrook practice had not been identified as having high prescribing costs, more detailed data would not have been obtained. Thus, the RMOs would not have been aware of Shipman’s prescribing costs relative to those of his colleagues at the practice.
4.52
Between 1977 and 1990, Shipman killed 71 patients. Although the Inquiry has no information about his acquisition of opiates during this period, I have no doubt that he was diverting diamorphine, which had been prescribed in the names of patients, for his own purposes. He had done that in Todmorden (with pethidine) and was to do it again (with diamorphine) when at the Market Street Surgery. The basic prescribing information generally available to RMOs would not have shown that Shipman was prescribing opiates. Indeed, as I have explained, it would not have shown details of Shipman’s prescribing at all.
Enquiries into Shipman’s Keeping of Controlled Drugs
4.53
The RMOs were responsible for checking GPs’ CDRs and stocks. Four members of the Donneybrook practice recalled their CDRs being inspected. Only one (Dr Ian Napier) remembered a RMO inspecting his stock of controlled drugs. Dr David Edwards told the Inquiry that Shipman had informed him that he did not keep controlled drugs and did not have a CDR. He does not remember whether Shipman gave a reason for this. It was not unusual. A significant proportion of GPs did not keep stocks of controlled drugs. Dr Edwards would therefore have had no reason to doubt what Shipman said. There seems little doubt that, whichever of the RMOs had asked about his arrangements for controlled drugs, the answer would have been the same.
4.54
It should also be noted that, during this period, regular inspections of pharmacists’ CDRs were carried out by police chemist inspection officers (CIOs). They would have been focussing their attention solely on controlled drugs and had, by virtue of their position, a considerable amount of knowledge and experience about their use. They noticed nothing suspicious about Shipman’s prescribing. That being the case, it would appear unrealistic to suggest that the RMOs should have done so from the information contained in the practice prescribing data.
Shipman’s Record Keeping
4.55
The Inquiry was told that, until the 1960s, the practice had been for RMOs to inspect GPs’ medical records to ensure that they were being maintained in accordance with the terms of service. That practice had ceased (certainly in Hyde) well before Shipman arrived. The Inquiry has been unable to ascertain why the practice fell into disuse. Inspecting records is a time-consuming process and it may be that it had been discontinued for that reason. It is possible that it had come to an end as a result of resistance within the medical profession to inspection of its records. It was certainly unpopular. Dr Geoffrey Roberts, formerly secretary of the LMC for Tameside, told the Inquiry that he had tried to institute a system of inspections of surgery premises in 1980. He made one inspection, which included looking at records, but said that the GP in question ‘took great exception’ to this. It may be that the RMOs met with a similar reaction when they carried out their inspections. Be that as it may, it is clear that, by 1977, the practice had long been discontinued.
4.56
Had Shipman’s medical records been subjected to critical scrutiny, two features might have emerged. First, the quality of his records might have been observed to be poor. That was certainly the general view of those doctors who subsequently examined his records for the purposes of the Inquiry. I say that the records ‘might have been’ considered poor because Dr Napier, one of Shipman’s colleagues at the Donneybrook practice, was candid enough to tell the Inquiry that the records of all the doctors at the Donneybrook practice, including his own, were ‘fairly terrible, if not pathetic’ at the time Shipman left. They had subsequently been greatly improved with the advent of computerisation. It may be, therefore, that the overall quality of Shipman’s notes would not have attracted particular attention.
4.57
The other feature would have been the nature of the entries made in connection with the deaths of patients. Sometimes, those entries were extremely sparse and information about the circumstances of deaths, the diagnosis of the cause of death and the basis for the diagnosis was plainly inadequate. Sometimes, the records were much more detailed but revealed unusual circumstances surrounding the death. Many examples of such entries (some dating from the 1980s) are discussed in my First Report. Whether or not the unusual features of the entries would have been noticed would have depended first on whether the RMO had elected to inspect the records of a deceased patient whom Shipman had killed. The chances of that are perhaps small, as most such records would have been sent back to the FPC shortly after the patient’s death. Even if they had been returned to Shipman subsequently, they are likely to have been stored at his home, where many records were found after his arrest. It would also have depended on whether the content of the notes was considered critically. If the purpose of the inspection was to ascertain whether the notes were arranged in chronological order, whether proper summaries had been prepared and other matters of that kind, the odd features might have been missed.
The Period from 1990 to 1998: the Tameside Family Health Services Authority and the West Pennine Health Authority
4.58
In 1991, as I have explained, the FPCs were replaced by FHSAs. The FHSAs took over all the responsibilities which had previously lain with the RMS, save for those relating to certification for the purpose of DSS benefits. The independent medical advisers whom the FHSAs were required to employ took over responsibility for monitoring GPs’ prescribing and for assisting in the introduction of the new IPAs. From 1990, Dr Archer and Dr David Edwards, both former GPs and RMOs, were co-Medical Advisers to a consortium of the Tameside, Wigan and Stockport FHSAs. They were succeeded, in November 1991, by Dr Freedman, a former GP. In August 1993, he became Medical Director of the Manchester FHSA and his place at Tameside was taken by Dr Banks, another former GP.
4.59
From April 1991, the advisers also took over responsibility for inspecting GPs’ CDRs and their stocks of controlled drugs. It seems that, from that time, fewer inspections of CDRs and stocks of controlled drugs took place than previously. Dr Jim Smith, Chief Pharmaceutical Officer for England at the DoH, conceded that that was the case. He said that, in the early 1990s, controlled drugs were not a priority. He thought this was because they were not perceived as a problem. The other systems of control (operated by the Home Office and the police) were thought to be sufficiently robust. He acknowledged that that view had been proved wrong. A team which included Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester, undertook a study, the results of which were reported in a paper entitled ‘Reducing Leakage of Prescribed Drugs’ in January 2002. In the course of the study, the team identified 59 GP practices in Leicestershire and Rutland that kept stocks of controlled drugs. Thirty one of those practices had undergone no inspection of their CDRs or controlled drug stocks for a period of more than ten years prior to the study. Only six practices had been inspected within the previous 12 months. It appears, however, that the advisers in Tameside did question GPs about their arrangements for keeping controlled drugs. I shall refer to Shipman’s responses to such questions later in this Chapter.
4.60
Tameside FHSA also appointed a pharmaceutical adviser. Mrs Rosalyn Anderson was the pharmaceutical adviser to the Tameside FHSA (later the WPHA) from September 1992 until April 1996. Mrs Bernice Abrahams (then Miss Bernice Caden) stood in for a year in early 1993 while Mrs Anderson was on maternity leave. Mr Peter Welsby overlapped with Mrs Anderson for about six months before taking over from her.
Prescribing Data
4.61
By the early 1990s, more informative prescribing data had become available from the PPA. Prescribing analysis and cost (PACT) data was available in paper form. It had certain limitations. The standard eight-page PACT report gave information about prescribing by GP practice, not individual GP, unless the GP practised single-handed. It did not contain information about private prescriptions. It did not identify the patient for whom a drug or appliance had been prescribed. In fact, then - as now - no patient-specific data was collected by the PPA.
4.62
The data was presented by reference to the British National Formulary (BNF). The BNF is divided into chapters, each setting out details of drugs that act on a specific therapeutic area. Each chapter is divided into sections dealing with the types of drug which act on that therapeutic area. The sections are further broken down into paragraphs and sub-paragraphs, providing highly specific details of the drugs of each type. Sub-paragraphs are further broken down into details of drugs, products and individual formulations.
4.63
Using the prescribing of a diamorphine 100mg injection by way of illustration, the information contained within the BNF is as follows:
BNF Chapter 4:
Central nervous system
BNF Section:
Analgesics
BNF Paragraph:
Opioid analgesics
BNF Sub-paragraph:
Opioid analgesics (i.e. the same as the BNF paragraph)
BNF Chemical substance:
Diamorphine
BNF Product:
Diamorphine HCl (systemic)
BNF Presentation:
Diamorphine HCl injection 100mg ampoule
4.64
PACT reports in paper format were available to GP practices and PCOs. Each report covered a period of three months and compared practice data with FHSA/HA national averages. A standard PACT report would show the practice prescribing costs for the BNF section. Using the example of diamorphine, it would show the practice prescribing costs for analgesics but would not distinguish between the different types of analgesic (still less the chemical substances, products or presentations) prescribed. Thus, it would not be evident from the PACT report that a doctor had prescribed diamorphine. Although the reports identified the 20 leading drugs in the practice by cost and frequency of prescribing, the fact that opiates are inexpensive meant that even large quantities of diamorphine would not have appeared, particularly if a practice was a high cost prescriber in other areas. An exception would be if a number of high dose (100mg or 500mg) ampoules of diamorphine had been prescribed. The high dose ampoules are significantly more expensive than the lower dose ampoules. Usually, the high dose ampoules are prescribed for a terminally ill patient for a short period immediately prior to death. Paper PACT reports have remained essentially the same since they first became available.
4.65
PACT catalogues were also available to PCOs and, on request, to GP practices. In general, they covered a period of three months, although catalogues containing as much as two years’ data could be requested. The catalogues were very bulky, anything from 70 to 250 pages for a three-month period. They contained a detailed inventory of every drug prescribed by the practice at BNF presentation level. The catalogue would show the number of times a drug was prescribed, the quantity of the drug prescribed and the total cost. It would not show for how many patients the drug had been prescribed. PACT catalogues contained raw data and offered no means of analysing trends or comparing prescribing between practices.
4.66
Since 1992, electronic PACT systems have been available to PCOs and other NHS bodies. The first of these, PACTLINE, provided data for only the previous year’s prescribing. Analysis could be performed down to the level of BNF section (e.g. analgesics) only. Further analysis had to be performed using the paper PACT catalogue. The FEPACT (later known as HAEPACT) system, introduced during 1994 and 1995, enabled PCOs to send requests to the PPA mainframe for analysis of drug and presentation level data. This was used to obtain a more detailed analysis of the information already available from PACTLINE. Theoretically, it would have been possible to request an analysis of Shipman’s prescribing of diamorphine injections by means of this system. In practice, however, such a query would not have been made without a prompt suggesting that something was amiss. In general, the FEPACT/HAEPACT systems were used to obtain further data about problem areas identified by PACTLINE. Had the Tameside FHSA/WPHA obtained information from elsewhere that Shipman was misusing diamorphine, it could have interrogated the PPA system to explore that possibility. It would, however, have had to have been alerted to a potential problem in order to make the enquiry in the first place. Only two years’ historical data was available on the electronic systems. In April 1997, a new EPACT system replaced PACTLINE and HAEPACT. EPACT permitted more sophisticated analysis and reporting. However, the system was not straightforward and required a degree of expertise.
4.67
In April 1999, a new system, ePACT.net, was introduced. Training in the use of the system was available. Initially, the training course did not cover techniques for analysing the prescribing of controlled drugs. As a result of Shipman’s conviction, however, appropriate training was started in May 2000. Since then, many PCOs have instituted a system of regular monitoring of the prescribing of controlled drugs by GP practices in their area. The ePACT.net system has three significant advantages over its predecessors. First, it is much easier to use. Second, the system permits interrogation of the system on-line, so that the results are available immediately. The third advantage of ePACT.net is that data for the previous three years is available for analysis. This gives a greater opportunity to see the emergence of a pattern.
Shipman’s Prescribing
4.68
It is clear that, from at least March 1992, Shipman was identified by the Tameside FHSA as a high cost prescriber. The problem was caused by his tendency to prescribe expensive drugs, in particular lipid-lowering drugs. He favoured branded drugs over the less costly generic variety. In 1993, he was the lowest prescriber of generic drugs in the area. As a high cost prescriber, Shipman received regular visits from the FHSA’s medical and pharmaceutical advisers. They tried to persuade him to modify his prescribing habits.
4.69
When challenged about the high cost of his prescribing, Shipman was always able to justify himself, by reference to current research or his own patient data. He would claim to have a low death rate among his asthmatic patients and no suicides among depressive patients, and would cite this as evidence of his successful use of anti-asthmatic and anti-depressant medication. He would explain and justify his belief in the prophylactic effect of lipid-lowering drugs. GPs had clinical freedom to prescribe as they believed appropriate for their patients. Advisers could only encourage and attempt to persuade them to change their prescribing habits. They were powerless to do more unless a GP was guilty of prescribing so excessively as to contravene his/her terms of service. Dr Freedman recalled that, at one time, before he left the Tameside FHSA in August 1993, there was some discussion as to whether it would be appropriate to refer Shipman to a professional committee on the grounds of his expensive, and low generic, prescribing. He believed that the FHSA took advice from one of the regional pharmaceutical advisers. The view was that the new procedures could not be applied to Shipman since his prescribing patterns did not fall into the appropriate categories. It was decided that it was better to pursue an ‘educational approach’.
4.70
In 1993, Shipman acquired a computer system with software designed to encourage the use of generic drugs wherever possible. Whether because of that or (as Dr Banks suggested) in response to the introduction by the FHSA of financial incentives for generic prescribing, Shipman increased his generic prescribing markedly. From that time, he became one of the highest prescribers of generic drugs in the FHSA. However, his overall prescribing costs continued to be the highest in the area. In 1995, Shipman joined a fundholding consortium with a shared prescribing budget. The consortium engaged the services of Ms Carol Abdulezer, an independent pharmacy consultant, to prepare a formulary for use by the consortium. In the course of that work, she reviewed the PACT data of all the GPs in that consortium, including Shipman.
4.71
Shipman did not modify his prescribing costs, even when he was subjected to pressure from colleagues within the consortium. In June 1998, three months before his arrest, his prescribing costs exceeded the HA equivalent by 75% and the national equivalent by 88%. Throughout this period, Shipman’s prescribing was a matter of real concern to the Tameside FHSA/WPHA and to the North West Regional Office of the NHS Executive. However, that concern did not relate to the quality of his prescribing. It was not felt that he was prescribing inappropriately or inadequately. He was not prescribing drugs which had been superseded by more effective preparations or drugs known to be of limited therapeutic value. On the contrary, he favoured modern, newly developed drugs. The sole reason for concern about Shipman’s prescribing habits was their cost.
Shipman’s Prescribing of Opiates
4.72
The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Dr Archer, Dr David Edwards, Dr Freedman, Dr Banks, Mrs Abrahams and Mr Welsby, whose joint employment as advisers to the Tameside FHSA/WPHA spanned the period with which I am concerned. The Inquiry also heard evidence from Ms Abdulezer. Mrs Anderson was prevented by family difficulties from attending to give evidence but provided two statements. Notes and letters relating to prescribing visits, some of the prescribing data used to prepare for those visits and other relevant documents were made available to the Inquiry. None of the Tameside FHSA/WPHA advisers had ever had occasion for concern over Shipman’s prescribing of diamorphine. Ms Abdulezer had had occasion to speak to him about it once in circumstances which I shall relate shortly.
4.73
As I have explained, the standard paper PACT reports were not sufficiently detailed to show that diamorphine had been prescribed. When the advisers obtained the more detailed PACT catalogues, their attention would have been focussed on the areas of high cost. These would not usually include opiates which, as I have explained, are relatively inexpensive save for the high dose ampoules of diamorphine.
4.74
If an examination of a PACT catalogue had revealed that a large quantity of diamorphine had been prescribed during the period (usually three months) covered by the catalogue, it would be assumed that this was attributable to pain relief prescribed for a terminally ill patient in the last stages of his/her life. Such patients often need very large quantities of diamorphine to relieve their pain. The Inquiry was told that the advisers would not want to appear to be ‘penny pinching’ in such a sensitive area. Accordingly, they would be reluctant to question the amount of diamorphine prescribed in these circumstances. Mrs Anderson said that she would not have looked at a GP’s use of controlled drugs in detail unless she had been alerted to a potential problem.
4.75
In March 1992, Shipman prescribed two 30mg ampoules of diamorphine. He prescribed no more that year. The prescription would have attracted no attention. Between February and August 1993, he prescribed 14 single 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, in the names of 13 different patients. These would not have been evident from the electronic PACTLINE system or the standard paper PACT reports. They would, however, have appeared in the PACT catalogues for the three quarters during which the prescriptions were issued. Prescription of a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine as a ‘one-off’ means of treating a patient would be unusual. A series of such prescriptions would be even more unusual. If noticed by someone with knowledge about the use of opiates, this pattern of prescribing should have raised questions and concerns. In my Fourth Report, I was critical of the pharmacist and the CIO who failed to notice the unusual nature of these prescriptions from the entries in the CDR kept at the pharmacy at which the prescriptions were dispensed. However, I am not critical of the FHSA advisers responsible for examining the PACT data for the periods covering these prescriptions. I have already explained that the information contained within the PACT catalogues would not have told a reader how many patients had received the diamorphine. That fact, and the fact that the reader would be examining one quarter’s catalogue at a time, would mean that the information, even if noticed, would have had very little impact. The total amount and cost of the diamorphine prescribed over a single quarter would have been relatively small. The information would have appeared in a bulky document containing a great deal of data about the drugs, including high cost drugs, prescribed by Shipman over the same three-month period. It is not surprising that these single 30mg ampoules of diamorphine were not noticed.
4.76
In November 1993, Shipman’s method of obtaining diamorphine changed. He took possession of two or three boxes, each containing ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine, after the death of a patient. He said that he intended to destroy them. The diamorphine had been prescribed for administration by means of a syringe driver to a terminally ill patient who had died at home. Thereafter, Shipman obtained diamorphine in large quantities by prescribing it for cancer patients who did not in reality require it, by removing it from the houses of patients who had died of cancer or by collecting it on behalf of a terminally ill patient and keeping some or all of the drug for himself.
4.77
As I have said, Ms Abdulezer did have occasion to ask Shipman about his prescribing of diamorphine. She told the Inquiry that, when examining the prescribing data of the fundholding consortium of which Shipman was a member, she discovered that his diamorphine prescribing for the quarter had increased. She immediately assumed that the reason for the increase was that Shipman was prescribing for a terminally ill patient. Her purpose in speaking to him was not to investigate the reason for his prescribing or to seek to persuade him to reduce it, but to ascertain for how long the need for the drug was likely to continue. She wanted to know whether she should request the Tameside FHSA/WPHA to take it into account when setting the consortium’s prescribing budget. Shipman immediately identified the patient concerned, retrieved his/her medical records and showed Ms Abdulezer a letter from the hospital setting out the dosage of diamorphine to be given. He told Ms Abdulezer that the drug would not be required for long as the patient was in the end stages of a terminal illness. The following quarter, the costs had returned to their previous level so Ms Abdulezer did not query them further. She cannot remember the name of the patient but thought that the incident had occurred in 1995 or early 1996. She had no reason to doubt Shipman’s word.
4.78
During those two years, Shipman had several patients who suffered from cancer and were in genuine need of large quantities of diamorphine. In fact, we now know that he diverted some of their diamorphine for his own purposes. That would not have been evident to an adviser, armed only with the PACT data and reliant upon Shipman for any additional information. The PACT data did not identify the patient(s) for whom the drug was prescribed, nor of course did it give any information about what had happened to the drug once it was prescribed and dispensed. It would have been easy for Shipman to convince an adviser, as he did Ms Abdulezer, that the diamorphine had been legally prescribed to a patient and used by him/her.
4.79
For the reasons I have explained above, I do not find it surprising that the monitoring of prescribing which was carried out by the Tameside FHSA/WPHA advisers did not reveal cause for concern about Shipman’s prescribing of diamorphine. Even if it had, I have little doubt that Shipman would have been able to allay any concerns which arose.
4.80
Meanwhile, over the same period, the police CIOs were carrying out inspections of the CDR held by the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, from where most of Shipman’s diamorphine prescriptions were dispensed. They too saw nothing to cause them concern. As I have explained in my Fourth Report, they are not to be criticised on that account save in respect of the records relating to the 30mg ampoules of diamorphine dispensed in 1993. The prescriptions were all made out correctly in the names of real patients who were suffering from cancer. It was not apparent to the CIOs - or indeed to the dispensing pharmacist - that Shipman was prescribing more than the patients actually needed. Nor could they know what a detailed interrogation of the PACT data would have revealed, namely that Shipman was a high prescriber of diamorphine, although not the highest in the area. Nor were the CIOs aware that Shipman sometimes collected the drugs on his patients’ behalf. That information was not recorded in the CDR, although if my recommendations are accepted, it will be in future. In the Fourth Report, I have also recommended that a single agency should have the function of inspecting the CDRs and examining the PACT data. In that way, the officers of one body would have a complete picture of a doctor’s practice in relation to the prescribing and collecting of controlled drugs.
Enquiries about Shipman’s Possession and Prescribing of Controlled Drugs
4.81
I have already said that Dr David Edwards had been told by Shipman that he did not keep controlled drugs and did not have a CDR. That was when Dr Edwards was a RMO. Later, he became one of the Tameside FHSA’s first Medical Advisers. Dr Archer, Dr Edwards’ co-Adviser, did not say in his statement to the Inquiry whether or not he had discussed the matter with Shipman but, if he had done so, no doubt he would have received the same answer.
4.82
Dr Freedman told the Inquiry that when, on one of his prescribing visits, he asked Shipman whether he had a CDR, Shipman answered that he did not keep controlled drugs. He said that he was afraid they might be stolen. When asked what he would do in an emergency, he told Dr Freedman that it was not his practice to visit patients who telephoned the surgery with the symptoms of a heart attack. He said that, when this happened, he would immediately ring for an ambulance and get them straight into hospital where they could be more promptly treated. As it happens, Shipman frequently claimed that his victims had died of a heart attack after he had failed in an attempt to treat or resuscitate them but Dr Freedman was not to know that. There seems little doubt that Shipman would have given the same answer to anyone who put the question to him. It was not an unusual stance for a GP to take. No adviser would have had any reason to doubt Shipman’s word.
4.83
In October 1998, following Shipman’s arrest, Dr Banks, then Medical Adviser to the WPHA, asked the PPA to analyse Shipman’s prescribing of 100mg diamorphine injections. Because of the restrictions on the available data (see
paragraph 4.66
above), it was possible to look at only the previous two years’ data. Two points emerged from this analysis. The first was that Shipman was not, as might have been expected, the highest prescriber of this dosage of diamorphine in the area of the WPHA. In fact, he was the sixth highest prescriber over the two-year period. He might well have been found to be the highest if a longer period could have been examined; he prescribed heavily and stole a very large amount in the first half of 1996. The second point was that, although Shipman’s pattern of prescribing 100mg ampoules of diamorphine was unusual (in that there was more frequent relatively low level prescribing than would be expected), the prescribing patterns of the other high prescribing doctors were not all conventional either.
4.84
If this unusual pattern had come to the attention of the authorities and Shipman had been asked about it, he would have been able, on each occasion, to produce evidence of a patient (whether terminally ill or recently dead) for whom the diamorphine had been prescribed. The records of most of those patients would have confirmed that they were in genuine need of large quantities of diamorphine for pain relief. The district nurses who were caring for the patients would, if asked, have confirmed that no more of the drug was being prescribed than was necessary. They would have been unaware of those drugs which Shipman had collected from the pharmacy and diverted for his own ourposes. Even on the occasions when he had prescribed diamorphine for a patient who was not in genuine need of it, Shipman would no doubt have given a plausible reason, associated with the patient’s cancer, for prescribing the drug. It would have required an in-depth investigation, of the kind that would be undertaken only if real concerns or suspicions had arisen, to reveal Shipman’s practice of collecting and keeping drugs for himself.
Record Keeping
4.85
During the period from 1991 until 1998, no routine inspections of medical records were conducted in Tameside. Dr David Edwards told the Inquiry that, when he was co-Medical Adviser, from 1990 until 1991, he sometimes received requests from patients’ relatives to view medical records in connection with a complaint or following the death of a patient. He would seek the permission of the patient’s GP and of the LMC before showing the records to the relatives and explaining their contents. If Dr Edwards noticed that records were substandard, he would speak to the GP concerned.
4.86
Dr Banks agreed that individual sets of patient medical records might be examined in connection with the investigation of a complaint against a GP. However if, on examination, the records appeared inadequate, he said this would not lead to any wider inspection of the GP’s records.
4.87
The view held by Tameside FHSA/WPHA was that they had no right to inspect records save in the limited circumstances described above. This view is not shared by the DoH. Its view is that, pursuant to paragraph 36 of the 1992 terms of service (which required GPs to keep adequate medical records and to forward them to the FHSA (later the HA) on request as soon as possible), a PCO could request to see the medical records at any time. However, Dr Banks said that any attempt to carry out random inspections of GPs’ records would have been resisted by the profession. In the past, there had been problems in gaining access to records for the purpose of verifying financial claims made by GPs in respect of treatment given to patients. The WPHA had succeeded in reaching an agreement with local GPs that staff should have such access for the limited purpose of financial audit. Not every HA in the country had achieved the same success. Dr Banks said that, if the WPHA had attempted to carry out random inspections of records, ‘the BMA (
British Medical
Association
) would have been on our backs immediately’. Dr Banks did, of course, examine 15 sets of Shipman’s deceased patients’ records in the course of the abortive police investigation of March 1998. He thought that the records lacked information but assumed, not that Shipman was a poor record keeper, but that the records must be incomplete.
4.88
The introduction of medical audit revealed problems with the records kept by some GPs in Tameside. Records which were incomplete or disorganised or which lacked a detailed summary card caused difficulty in retrieving information for the purpose of audit. In order to tackle this problem, the Tameside FHSA instituted a scheme (subsequently continued by the WPHA) whereby teams of trained, non-medical staff went into GP practices to summarise and reorganise medical records. There was no compulsion on a practice to accept this service. The work of the team did not involve any clinical assessment of the records and it was in no sense a process of monitoring. Shipman never availed himself of this service.
Other Sources of Information
4.89
In the early 1990s, the Tameside FHSA introduced a system of ‘practice profiling’. There was no requirement upon it to do so. The profiling was an additional exercise which it chose to perform. It involved using the available information about list sizes, prescribing and referral activity, chronic disease management and financial matters such as payments for items of service in order to compare the performance of individual GP practices. Each practice was sent a copy of a profile which showed its performance compared with other (anonymised) practices. The profiles became more sophisticated over the years and incorporated a wider range of information.
4.90
Mr Greenwood said that the purpose of the exercise was to identify trends which might assist in planning services in the future. He said that the FHSA was also trying to identify outliers with a view to offering help and support to them and to bringing them more into line with their peer group. The profile also provided a means by which GP practices (which operated to some extent in isolation) could compare their performance with that of other practices. In the early years, senior managers from the FHSA visited all the GP practices in the district annually to discuss their profiles. Over time, it was felt that this did not represent an effective use of resources and the visits were discontinued.
4.91
The Inquiry has the practice profiles compiled in respect of the Market Street practice in March 1996, 1997 and 1998. The profiles show a high level of practice activity in such areas as childhood immunisations and cytology. They also show evidence of Shipman’s high prescribing costs. The only additional data which might have been significant related to the low level of hospital activity among his elderly patients (i.e. those over 65). In both 1996 and 1997, Shipman’s practice had the lowest level of hospital activity in the district among patients of that age. In the light of what we know now, this factor has some significance. No figures for hospital activity appeared in the 1998 profile.
4.92
Both Mr Greenwood and Dr Banks explained that the data for hospital activity was regarded as very unreliable. Dr Banks said that, in any event, hospital activity was not a matter within the remit of medical advisers. The use of hospital services tended, he said, to be regarded as a public health issue to be considered in conjunction with those providing the services. Mr Greenwood said that the advisers would look at the correlation between hospital activity and prescribing (e.g. to see whether practices that prescribed a high level of anti-asthmatic medication had fewer admissions to hospital). Otherwise, hospital activity was regarded as a planning and funding issue. Even if it had attracted attention, the low level of hospital activity among Shipman’s older patients would no doubt have been attributed to his declared policy of keeping his elderly patients at home for as long as possible.
4.93
The Tameside MAAG was set up in October 1990. It was a sub-committee of the FHSA. It included among its members GPs (some nominated by the LMC), a postgraduate tutor, a representative from secondary care and the FHSA’s medical adviser. The FHSA employed a former nurse manager, Ms Heather Harrisson, as audit facilitator, and another member of staff as secretary. The task of the MAAG was to facilitate audit activity by offering advice, education, training and support in audit. GPs were encouraged to participate and the MAAG would suggest suitable topics for audit with a view to obtaining data which could be used to improve patient health. The MAAG co-ordinated district-wide audits which offered a degree of comparative feedback. Every GP practice was offered an annual visit by members of the MAAG. The practice would be invited to make available the written results of its audits for discussion with GP members of the visiting team.
4.94
Audits were carried out by GP practices themselves. They were not obliged to submit their results to the MAAG although most did. If submitted, the reports were discussed at a MAAG meeting at which only GP members (and one member of the staff) were present. The full MAAG would discuss only aggregated and anonymised audit results. The FHSA did not have access to audit results relating to individual practices.
4.95
In April 1996, the Tameside and Oldham MAAGs merged to form the West Pennine Primary Care Clinical Audit Group (WPPCCAG). The Glossop practices joined the WPPCCAG in 1997. At that time, HAs were given specific management responsibilities for clinical audit. It was intended that audit should be closely linked with improvements in the quality of clinical care. The HAs were to have a part in determining what audits should be done. They had to monitor the range and extent of participation in audit by practices and to secure the increasing involvement of patients in the audit process. However, HAs still did not see individual practice audit results and had no opportunity to assess their quality. Nor would they become aware of any signs of substandard practice that the audits might reveal.
4.96
From the time of his entry into single-handed practice, Shipman was an enthusiastic participant in audit. His practice nurse, Sister Gillian Morgan, and practice manager, Mrs Alison Massey, also participated in audit. Shipman submitted to the MAAG (later the WPPCCAG) a number of audits dealing with a wide range of topics. None disclosed any substandard practice. A few practices in the district had conducted audits of their patient deaths. Shipman never did so although, as I related in my Second Report, he claimed untruthfully to Dr Banks in July 1998 that he and Sister Morgan had carried out an audit into patient deaths that had occurred in the early part of 1998. In November 1997, Mrs Massey conducted an audit of patients who had left the practice in the preceding six months. She discovered at least 29 cases in which the patient had died. This was a high number. The average mortality rate for GP practices is about ten patients per thousand per annum. Given Shipman’s practice list of just over 3000, about 15 deaths in six months could have been expected. However, the audit expressed the number as a percentage (27.9%) of patients leaving the practice. The total number of patients leaving was not stated. Those who saw the audit would not have been aware of the underlying number of deaths.
4.97
In general, Shipman’s audit activity reinforced the impression of a well-run and enthusiastic practice. In November 1997, a letter from the audit administrator observed that Shipman’s practice
‘has been identified as one of a number who undertake a high level of audit activity, and are well advanced with practice development’
From 1990 to 1998
The Arrangements Elsewhere

--- Introduction ---
4.1
In the 1980s, the primary care organisations (PCOs) began to assume some responsibility for monitoring the operation of certain aspects of general practice. As time went on, they began to take steps directed at improving the quality of care provided by general practitioners (GPs). In this Chapter, I shall examine the arrangements for the monitoring of GPs between 1980 and September 1998, when Shipman ceased to practise. I shall also describe the steps taken by successive PCOs in Tameside to monitor the GPs in their area during the time that Shipman was in practice there. I shall go on to consider whether more should have been done in that respect by those organisations, by reference to the steps being taken at the same time by PCOs in other parts of the country.
CHAPTER FOUR - The Monitoring of General Practitioners from 1980 to 1998: the Arrangements for Monitoring in Tameside


========================================================================
CHAPTER FIVE - Developments in the Arrangements for Monitoring General Practitioners since 1998
========================================================================

--- The Ability of Primary Care Trusts to Manage Their Lists ---
5.30
PCTs do not, in general, employ GPs. They do not, therefore, have the usual power of an employer to ‘hire and fire’. In the past, they had little say over who was admitted to their lists and no power to remove a doctor who was performing unsatisfactorily. This has now changed.
The Lists
5.31
In
, I explained that PCOs were required to maintain a medical list of doctors in their areas who had undertaken to perform GMS. The medical list related to GP principals only. There was no requirement for non-principals, or those providing medical services under PMS contracts, to be included on a PCO’s list. In practice, some PCOs maintained lists of non-principals. They did this as a service to GP practices, which were seeking to employ locums or deputies. This was an informal, local arrangement. If no list of non-principals was kept, PCOs had little idea of who was practising in their areas. This remained the position until comparatively recently.
The Medical Supplementary List
5.32
From June 2002, all GP non-principals (except those working under PMS contracts) were required to be included on the medical supplementary list of a PCT. The term ‘non-principals’ covers locums, deputies, associates, retainers and GP registrars (i.e. trainees). Some non-principals (e.g. locums) may operate in an area covered by several different PCTs. They are required to be on the list of only one of the PCTs in whose area they work. A non-principal must maintain a connection with the area of the PCT on whose list s/he appears. If s/he does not, the PCT is entitled to remove him/her from its list.
5.33
As from April 2002, GP principals were prohibited from engaging as a deputy or employing any doctor (save for a doctor performing PMS) who was not included on (or the subject of an outstanding application for inclusion on) a medical supplementary or medical list. The requirement for non-principals to be on the PCT’s list is now covered by the new GMS Contract. DoH guidance makes it clear that any person employing or engaging a non-principal who is included on a PCT’s list bears responsibility for satisfying him/herself that the non-principal has the necessary clinical skills and experience to undertake the tasks s/he is recruited to perform. The non-principals must provide clinical references, which should be checked. Inclusion on the PCT's list is no warranty. Once again, this is covered by the new GMS Contract.
5.34
From the time of the introduction of supplementary lists, PCTs have had the same powers relating to admission to and suspension or removal from the supplementary list as for the medical list.
The Services List
5.35
Until recently, doctors performing PMS were not, in general, included on a PCT list. Some might be on the medical supplementary list. However, as from February 2004, all doctors performing PMS (other than those already included on a supplementary list) were required to be on a PCT services list. Applicants had to produce satisfactory evidence of their intention to provide PMS in the area of the relevant PCT.
The Medical Performers List
5.36
Since April 2004, a new medical performers list has replaced the three types of list described above. All GPs performing medical services, whether under GMS or PMS contracts, must appear on the list. The Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Act 2003 provides for regulations to be made in the future prohibiting certain healthcare professionals (e.g. practice nurses) from working in a GP practice unless they are on a PCT list. If such regulations are made, and lists of nurses and other healthcare professionals are created, this will enable PCTs to apply the same rules for inclusion and continuance on the list to other healthcare professionals as are currently applicable to GPs.
Admission to a List
5.37
I have described in
the procedure, as it was in 1977, for the appointment of a replacement member of an existing GP practice and the very limited part played in the process by the PCO (then the family practitioner committee (FPC)). I explained also that the FPC played a greater role in the selection and appointment of a doctor to fill a single-handed practice vacancy or where a vacancy arose for an additional GP in its area.
5.38
Between 1977 and 1998, there were changes to the arrangements for dealing with applications for inclusion on the medical list and to fill vacancies. It is not necessary for me to enumerate the various changes in detail. In essence, however, the powers of the PCO remained much the same. There was still no requirement for applicants for inclusion on the list to provide information about previous disciplinary proceedings or criminal convictions.
The Introduction of Statutory Criteria
5.39
In December 1998, the National Health Service (General Medical Services) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 1998 made significant changes to the arrangements. Again, there is no need for me to describe these in detail. However, an important development was that the Regulations introduced statutory criteria to be applied by PCOs (then the HAs) when deciding whether to approve for inclusion on their lists a candidate who had been selected by an existing practice and when itself selecting a candidate to fill a vacancy. The Regulations also gave HAs power to determine (within certain limits) their own criteria, against which applicants would be judged. This power gave HAs more flexibility in planning for the future. For example, they could require that applicants for a vacancy should have specific language skills or a particular expertise in caring for children. Despite these changes, the power of a HA to influence a practice in its selection of a replacement doctor remained limited. DoH guidance at the time stated that, if the selected candidate did not meet the criteria set out by the HA, the HA should have discussions with the practice with a view to reaching an
‘acceptable compromise’
. If no agreement could be reached, the HA should consider whether to appoint the practice’s selected candidate or to decline to do so and require the practice to select another candidate. The guidance warned:
‘Refusal to appoint a doctor in these circumstances should be an exception and HAs will need to have strong reasons for doing so.’
5.40
This guidance was not likely to encourage HAs to raise opposition to a candidate selected by a practice. Moreover, there was still no requirement for applicants to declare - or HAs to seek - information about previous disciplinary proceedings or criminal convictions.
Declarations by Applicants
5.41
That changed on 4th
February 2000, four days after Shipman’s conviction for murder. The National Health Service (General Medical Services) Regulations 1992 (the 1992 Regulations) were amended to require applicants to declare whether they had been convicted of any criminal offence or had been bound over or cautioned and whether they were or had been the subject of any disciplinary proceedings by their professional or regulatory body, in the UK or elsewhere. HAs were given the power to reject an application if, having considered the content of his/her declaration, they regarded the applicant as unsuitable for inclusion on their medical list.
The Abolition of the Medical Practices Committee
5.42
The Health and Social Care Act 2001 abolished the Medical Practices Committee (MPC). From that time, PCOs were given the power to decide whether there was a need for a replacement or additional GP in their area.
Pre-Admission Checks
5.43
The National Health Service (General Medical Services) Amendment (No. 4) Regulations 2001 (the 2001 Amendment Regulations) made it obligatory for a PCO (then the HA) to carry out certain checks before admitting a doctor to its list. HAs were required to check, as far as practicable:
the references provided by the applicant
the information given by the applicant relating to his/her medical qualifications and his/her registration
the contents of his/her declaration about any past criminal or disciplinary record. This declaration was now required to be significantly fuller than previously: see
paragraph 5.60
whether there was any past or ongoing fraud investigation involving the doctor.
5.44
The HA was also required to take up and consider two references.
5.45
These checks are now carried out by PCTs. At present, there is no requirement that a PCT should carry out checks with the Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) before taking a decision as to whether to admit a doctor to its list. The DoH has left this to the discretion of individual PCTs. Dr Anne Rothery, Medical Director of the Tameside and Glossop PCT, told the Inquiry that her PCT chooses to make such checks. It is a time-consuming operation, taking about half a day for each check. The CRB has, of course, been under considerable pressure since it was established and there have been long delays in completing checks. Since April 2004, all GPs applying to join a PCT’s list have been required to provide an enhanced criminal record certificate as part of their application. This should provide information about unproven allegations, criminal charges which were not proceeded with and acquittals. However, the extent of the information contained on the record is dependent upon the applicant giving all relevant addresses and his/her correct names.
5.46
The Family Health Services Appeal Authority (Special Health Authority) (FHSAA (SHA)) (formerly known as the Family Health Services Appeal Authority) is the body which used to hear appeals from the former medical service committees and, after that, the medical disciplinary committees. It maintains, on behalf of the SoS, a record of doctors who have been refused admission or conditionally admitted to, or suspended, removed or contingently removed from, the list of a PCT. The completeness of the information held by the FHSAA (SHA) is entirely dependent upon PCTs notifying it of relevant decisions. Although PCTs are required to do this, it does not always happen. Since November 2003, it has been mandatory for PCTs to make a check with the FHSAA (SHA) before admitting a doctor to their lists. The Government has recently announced its intention to abolish the FHSAA (SHA) and to transfer its functions to the NHS Litigation Authority.
5.47
Dr Sarah Wilson, Director of Public Health and Medical Director, Trent SHA, said at the Inquiry’s seminars that the checks which PCTs are required to carry out involve ‘a real chase-round’. Their completeness depends on people knowing what checks are to be made and with whom. The clerical staff who carry out the checks do not always have this knowledge. The suggestion was raised during the Inquiry hearings that it might be possible to simplify the process and Sir Nigel Crisp said that the suggestion would be considered.
Non-principals
5.48
Non-principals are required to make the same declarations on their applications to join a PCT’s list and have the same ongoing duty to declare criminal and disciplinary proceedings. PCTs are responsible for making checks on their qualifications etc., on an application to join the list. DoH guidance refers to the impracticability of making detailed enquiries about a non-principal’s employment history and suggests that attention should be concentrated on any significant breaks in the career history.
Personal Medical Services Providers
5.49
Until the introduction of the new services lists, PCTs did not receive declarations from many doctors working under PMS contracts about criminal or disciplinary proceedings in which they had been involved. Nor could PCTs take action to remove or suspend a doctor performing PMS, a
lacuna
which could cause considerable difficulty. Such action was possible only if appropriate provisions were contained in the local PMS contract. Since February 2004, doctors providing PMS have been obliged to make the same declarations, and are subject to the same sanctions of removal and suspension from the list, as GMS providers.
Refusal to Admit
5.50
The 2001 Amendment Regulations also extended the grounds on which a HA could refuse to admit a doctor to its list. Previously, these had been very limited. A HA had been required to refuse entry to its list if the applicant lacked suitable experience, did not speak the English language sufficiently well, was 70 or over or had been disqualified by the NHS Tribunal. In addition, HAs had discretion to refuse admission to a doctor who had had conditions imposed on his/her registration by the GMC or who did not fulfil the criteria for the post. HAs could also refuse admission if they considered that, in the light of his/her declaration about past or ongoing criminal or disciplinary proceedings, a doctor was unsuitable: see
paragraph 5.41
5.51
The 2001 Amendment Regulations made it mandatory for a HA to refuse to admit a doctor to its list in certain circumstances, the most important of which were:
where s/he had been convicted in the UK of murder
where s/he had (after 13th
December 2001) been convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of over six months
where s/he was the subject of a national disqualification by the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA) in England or a comparable body elsewhere in the UK: see
paragraph 5.54
5.52
In addition, HAs were given discretionary powers to refuse entry to their lists if:
they considered that the doctor was unsuitable for inclusion on the list by reason not only of the contents of his/her declaration about past or ongoing criminal and disciplinary proceedings but also by reason of any other information in the possession of the HA, or by reason of the results of the checks made on his/her qualifications and/or registration
having contacted referees, they were not satisfied with the doctor’s references
the facts relating to past or current fraud investigations by the NHS Counter Fraud Service (now the NHS Counter Fraud and Security Management Service) and any fraud case involving or relating to the doctor justified it
they had grounds for considering that admitting the doctor to the list would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the service that s/he would undertake.
Statutory criteria, to be taken into account before reaching a decision on these issues, were set out. HAs were given the power to defer a decision in certain circumstances or to impose conditions on a doctor’s inclusion on the list.
5.53
These powers are now exercised by the PCTs, which are required to notify to the FHSAA (SHA) all decisions to refuse admission or conditionally admit a doctor to their list.
The Family Health Services Appeal Authority
5.54
In December 2001, the NHS Tribunal was abolished and the FHSAA was created. Despite the similarity of name, the FHSAA is a different body from the FHSAA (SHA) (formerly the FHSAA), to which I referred at
paragraph 5.46
. The FHSAA is an independent tribunal, whose President and members are appointed by the Lord Chancellor. Appeals against the refusal of a PCT to admit a doctor to its list (save when the refusal was on mandatory grounds) are determined by the FHSAA. PCTs which refuse a doctor admission to their lists are advised to consider approaching the FHSAA, with a view to the FHSAA imposing a national disqualification on the doctor. In the past, a national disqualification did not necessarily mean that a doctor was disqualified from inclusion on all PCT lists. It was possible, for example, for the FHSAA to disqualify a doctor from all supplementary lists, but not other lists. In practice, this was rarely (if ever) done. Since the introduction of the medical performers list, the position has changed and any national disqualification (whether imposed before or after April 2004) applies to all medical performers lists.
The Effect of the Changes
5.55
The changes which I have described have enabled the PCOs (now the PCTs) to exercise real control over who is and who is not admitted to their lists. It is now the PCT (not the MPC) which determines whether there is a need for a new doctor or practice in its area. It is the PCT (after consultation with the LMC and any practice involved) which sets the criteria by which applicants for a vacancy are to be judged. These new powers have enabled some PCTs to develop a strategy for recruitment, tailored to the needs of their population and of GP applicants. This can be of particular assistance in deprived areas where recruitment is difficult.
5.56
The new system of declarations by applicants, and the requirement for PCTs to carry out more comprehensive checks on the information provided by applicants, should mean that PCTs are much better informed about any adverse past history of doctors applying for inclusion on their lists. If a PCT decides to admit to its list a doctor with a criminal or disciplinary record, it can do so conditionally, and can design suitable conditions to be imposed on the doctor for the protection of patients. Where appropriate, it can refuse admission. Had Shipman’s application to join the list in Tameside been made now, with these new provisions in place, the PCT would have been fully aware from the first about his criminal convictions. It could have enquired into the circumstances of them and into his progress since leaving Todmorden. It could have made its own decision as to whether it thought it appropriate to admit him to its list. If the PCT had decided to do so, it could have made special arrangements to monitor his prescribing. It could have advised the local police chemist inspection officer to scrutinise with care any relevant entries in pharmacists’ controlled drugs registers. Above all, from the very start, it would have known far more about the person with whom it was dealing.
5.57
I described in
how, in 1992, Shipman was able to move easily to single-handed practice. He was already on the medical list, so few formalities were required. If the HA had been wholly opposed to the move, it could have refused the necessary funding. However, it might have had inadequate information about the doctor concerned (in this case, Shipman) on which to base an informed decision. Now, however, it would be open to the PCT to give careful consideration to the need for, and the desirability of, the formation of an additional single-handed practice and to the suitability of the applicant doctor. If the PCT was aware that the doctor concerned had a criminal and/or disciplinary record like Shipman’s, it might be unwilling to enter into a contract with him as a single-handed practitioner. It would not be open to him, under the provisions of the new GMS Contract, to take with him his list of patients as Shipman did from the Donneybrook practice. It seems doubtful whether, if the present arrangements had been in place in 1992, Shipman’s move to the Market Street Surgery would have taken place.
Doctors Already Included on a Primary Care Trust’s List
5.58
The new provisions governing declarations by applicants for inclusion on PCOs’ lists about any past criminal or disciplinary proceedings did not, of course, cover doctors who were already on the lists. It was evident that there might be doctors who, like Shipman, had criminal convictions or disciplinary findings against them of which the PCO was unaware. Therefore, the 2001 Amendment Regulations also contained a ‘catch-up provision’, requiring every doctor on a medical list to supply to the relevant HA by 31st
March 2002 written information as to whether s/he:
had any criminal convictions in the UK
had been bound over following a criminal conviction in the UK
had accepted a police caution in the UK
had been convicted elsewhere of an offence, or what would have constituted a criminal offence if committed in England and Wales, or was subject to a penalty which would be the equivalent of being bound over or cautioned
was currently the subject of any proceedings which might lead to such a conviction, and which had not yet been notified to the HA
had been the subject of any investigation into his/her professional conduct by any licensing, regulatory or other body anywhere in the world, the outcome of which was adverse
was currently the subject of any investigation into his/her professional conduct by any licensing, regulatory or other body anywhere in the world
was, to his/her knowledge, or had been where the outcome was adverse, the subject of any investigation by the NHS Counter Fraud Service in relation to any fraud case
was the subject of any investigation by another HA, or equivalent body, which might lead to his/her removal from any of that HA’s lists, or any equivalent lists
was, or had been where the outcome was adverse, subjected to an investigation into his/her professional conduct in respect of any current or previous employment
had been removed from, contingently removed from, refused admission to, or conditionally included in any list or equivalent list kept by another HA, or equivalent body, or was currently suspended from such a list.
5.59
It will be appreciated that this declaration was more comprehensive than that which had been required since February 2000 to be made by applicants for inclusion on a list. In particular, it included action taken by a previous employer or PCO. At the same time, the declarations to be made before admission to the list were extended. If any of the above circumstances were declared, the applicant had to give details of the relevant investigation or proceedings. Doctors already on the medical list and new applicants to the list were required to give similar details in respect of any body corporate of which they were directors. The 2001 Amendment Regulations also required doctors to consent to the HA seeking information from third parties about any investigations into their conduct where the outcome had been adverse.
5.60
In addition, the 2001 Amendment Regulations imposed an ongoing requirement on doctors to inform the HA within seven days of a conviction, caution or binding over, or of the start of any proceedings or investigations of the type specified in
paragraph 5.58(e)-(j)
and any action by a HA of the type specified at
paragraph 5.58(k)
5.61
Such declarations are now made to PCTs. There is to be a ‘catch-up exercise’, requiring all GPs already on a PCT’s list to provide an enhanced criminal record certificate, unless one has already been provided. PCTs will require all GPs on their lists to apply to the CRB by 1st
February 2005. Any GP who fails to comply with the requirement will be removed from the PCT’s list. However, as it is expected that there may be some delay in processing the large number of applications, PCTs may allow an extension of time. At present, PCTs may require a GP to provide such a certificate if they have reason to believe that his/her declaration was not complete, but it is not a general requirement.
5.62
As from November 2003, GPs were required by their terms of service to report to the PCT any death occurring on their surgery premises. This duty is now placed on practices entering into the new GMS Contract. Since March 2004, GP practices have been required to keep registers of gifts with a value in excess of £100 given to members of the practice and doctors and other persons employed in the practice, together with their spouses or partners, by patients, patients’ families and business associates or potential business associates. Both these provisions were plainly designed with Shipman in mind.
Removal, Suspension and Contingent Removal from a List
5.63
I have already mentioned in
that, in 1977, the powers of a FPC to remove a GP from its list were very limited. That remained the position until 4th
February 2000 when the 1992 Regulations were amended to make it mandatory for a PCO (then the HA) to remove from its list a doctor who had been convicted in the UK of murder, or had been convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of at least six months. This latter provision was later changed to a period of more than six months. In his supplementary statement to the Inquiry, Sir Nigel Crisp said that the original intention had been to limit mandatory removal from the list to those cases in which a sentence was passed exceeding the maximum sentence for an individual offence which could be imposed by a Magistrates’ Court, i.e. to reflect the view taken by the judicial system of the seriousness of a particular offence. These provisions for mandatory removal were similar to those referred to in
paragraph 5.51
, governing the admission of doctors to the list.
5.64
The Health and Social Care Act 2001 conferred powers (and, in some circumstances, an obligation) upon HAs to remove a doctor from their list on the grounds that:
the doctor’s continued presence on the list would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the medical services which doctors on the list undertook to provide (an ‘efficiency case’)
the doctor had been involved in an incident of fraud or attempted fraud (a ‘fraud case’)
the doctor was unsuitable to remain on the list (an ‘unsuitability case’).
5.65
In an efficiency case or a fraud case (but not an unsuitability case), HAs were also given power to impose conditions on a doctor’s continued inclusion on the list. If the conditions were subsequently breached, the doctor could be removed from the list. Thus, the imposition of conditions was termed ‘contingent removal’. Conditions could be subject to a review. HAs were also given power to suspend doctors in certain limited circumstances, namely when it was necessary to do so for the protection of members of the public or was otherwise in the public interest.
5.66
A decision to remove a doctor from the list, or to impose conditions on his/her continued inclusion on the list, might be taken for a number of reasons. Those reasons might relate to prejudice to efficiency arising from the doctor’s poor performance. They might relate to financial dishonesty or addiction to drink or drugs. A PCO might also decide to remove a doctor from its list by reason of information about a recent involvement in criminal or disciplinary proceedings which had been disclosed pursuant to the provisions described at
paragraph 5.58
. The 2001 Amendment Regulations set out criteria to be applied when removal was being considered on the grounds of unsuitability, fraud or prejudice to efficiency. One of the criteria to be applied in all cases is
‘the likely risk to patients’
posed by the doctor’s past conduct.
5.67
Appeal against a removal from a list went to the FHSAA. HAs were advised, if they took a decision to remove a doctor from their list, to consider approaching the FHSAA with a view to the imposition of a national disqualification. A provision was introduced whereby a doctor could not, except with the consent of the SoS, have his/her name removed from a medical list until any action by the HA on whose list his/her name appeared had been determined. This was to prevent a doctor from evading action by a HA by voluntarily removing his/her name from its list.
5.68
These powers have now devolved to the PCTs. They are now required to report to the FHSAA (SHA) (soon, the NHS Litigation Authority) decisions to remove, suspend or contingently remove a doctor from their lists.
The Effect of the Changes
5.69
The new powers available to control their lists represented a considerable advance in the ability of the PCOs (now the PCTs) to deal with problem doctors. No longer do they have to rely on other bodies (in particular, the GMC) to take action. If the protection of patients requires it, they can take urgent steps to suspend a doctor. If the problem is less acute, they can place conditions on his/her continued inclusion on the list, so as to secure patient safety and ensure the efficient delivery of services. Mr Greenwood said that the new provisions had ‘transformed the system’. They had equipped PCTs with new powers and new sources of information. He believed these were essential if PCTs were to increase their ability to monitor GPs in the future.
5.70
Use of these new powers can, however, lead to the loss or restriction of a doctor’s livelihood, and can damage his/her professional and personal reputation. They must be used responsibly and any action taken by a PCT must be based on sound and reliable evidence obtained in the course of a thorough and objective investigation. Otherwise, injustice may be done and decisions taken under the powers will be constantly subject to appeal and to challenge in the courts. That said, it is vital that PCTs develop the confidence and the skills to use the new powers when the situation demands it.
5.71
DoH figures show that, between 14th
December 2001 (when GP list management was first introduced) and March 2003, PCTs reported to the FHSAA (SHA) 37 suspensions and nine removals from their lists, together with 16 contingent removals. Three of these removals followed the conviction of the GP concerned for criminal offences. No reasons for the action taken were available in the other cases. In addition, PCTs reported that they had refused 33 doctors inclusion on their lists and imposed conditions on inclusion in 49 cases. One refusal related to the fact that the doctor concerned had served a sentence of imprisonment. Other than in that case, no information is available about the circumstances giving rise to the refusals or the imposition of conditions.
5.72
Between 1st
April 2003 and 31st
March 2004, a further 22 suspensions were notified to the FHSAA (SHA). Including those extant from previous periods, there were 25 suspensions still in force as at 31st
March 2004. In addition, there had been 25 removals from PCT lists and two contingent removals. Doctors had been refused admission to a PCT list on 21 occasions and had been included conditionally in 28 cases. There had been five successful appeals against PCT action and a further seven appeals remained outstanding. No information is available to the Inquiry about the reasons for the actions taken by PCTs during the year to 31st
March 2004. PCTs are not required to notify this level of detail to the FHSAA (SHA). It seems to me unfortunate that this information is not collected and analysed. It would assist in providing guidance to PCTs about the sorts of circumstances in which they should exercise their management powers. It would also enable evaluations to be carried out to discover whether PCTs are making adequate and appropriate use of their new powers. As of 31st
March 2004, there were nine national disqualifications in force.
5.73
Unverified figures supplied by the FHSAA(SHA) for the six-month period to 30th
September 2004 reveal that there were a further 27 suspensions during that period with 46 suspensions extant on 30th
September.
Gaps Remaining in the Information Available to the Primary Care Trusts
5.74
There are still significant gaps in the information available to a PCT about GPs applying to, or already included on, its list. In particular, a PCT will not usually be aware of:
complaints (even complaints of a serious nature) made by patients or others about a GP while s/he was on the list of another PCT or in employment elsewhere in the NHS or in the private sector. A PCT would be aware of such complaints only if they had been determined and had resulted in list management action by the PCT, or disciplinary action by the GMC or an employer. For example, an applicant GP who had been the subject of a series of unproven complaints of indecently assaulting patients would not have to declare that fact. The only circumstances in which the PCT might learn of his/her history would be if it were told informally, or if the police had investigated and a CRB check revealed that information.
concerns about the doctor’s performance expressed by colleagues, healthcare professionals or others. A PCT would be aware of such concerns only if they had resulted in list management action by another PCT, or disciplinary action by the GMC or an employer.
under the GMC's ‘old’ fitness to practise procedures complaints made to the GMC about the doctor, unless the GMC took a decision to proceed with the complaint beyond the screening stage. Since August 2000, the GMC has been required to inform employers and PCOs about such complaints once that decision has been taken; that decision may be taken some time after the complaint is received by the GMC. If the complaint is not pursued, no notification will be given. The arrangements under the ‘new’ procedures should result in earlier notification of allegations made to the GMC. In addition, since May 2004, the GMC has adopted the practice of having early discussions with a doctor's PCO in some cases. Thus, the gap here is now not as great as it was.
the past or ongoing involvement of the doctor in clinical negligence proceedings, whatever the outcome.
complaints made to the GP’s practice. Until April 2004, a practice was obliged only to inform a PCT of the numbers of complaints made. Under the draft Complaints Regulations to be implemented shortly (see
), there will be an obligation to inform the PCT of the subject matter of complaints. However, the PCT will not see the complaint itself and is reliant upon the honesty of practices in reporting complaints to it.
5.75
These gaps mean that PCTs may be unaware of information about GPs which is highly relevant to the protection of patients. If PCTs are to comply with their duty of quality and provide safe and effective local medical services, it is imperative that they be placed in possession of all available information about the GPs on their lists. In future, if and when PCTs are required to participate in the process of revalidation, by signing a certificate warranting that there are no unresolved significant concerns about the doctor, it may become even more important for PCTs to have full information about the GPs on their list. I shall describe the proposals for revalidation in
Chapter 26
The Primary Care Trusts
Dealing with Poor Performance

--- Introduction ---
5.1
In May 1997, a new Government came into office. These were difficult times for the NHS. Concerns about the high mortality rate among children undergoing complex heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary had become public knowledge by 1995. It was known too that senior staff at the hospital had been aware of problems for some time and had taken no action. Three doctors were charged by the General Medical Council (GMC) with serious professional misconduct (SPM). Hearings began in October 1997 and ended with all three being found guilty of SPM in June 1998.
5.2
In December 1996, Rodney Ledward, a consultant gynaecologist, whose lack of skill had caused injury to many of his patients over a period of 15 years or so, had been dismissed from the hospital at which he worked. His case came before the GMC in September 1998. He too was found guilty of SPM. There had been complaints and concerns about his conduct and competence over a long period, yet he had been allowed to continue in practice. Also in September 1998, Shipman was arrested and it soon became clear that he might well have killed a large number of his patients over many years.
5.3
These events, and other less high profile incidents, focussed public attention on the adequacy of the arrangements then in place for identifying and eliminating incompetent or aberrant clinical practice. Those arrangements had patently failed to protect the patients of Ledward and Shipman, and the children who had undergone surgery at Bristol. It was evident that change was urgently needed.
5.4
The subsequent years have been a period of great change for the medical profession and the NHS. In the field of general practice, there have been significant developments in the role of primary care organisations (PCOs). They have been given additional powers which should enable them to exercise a far greater degree of control than before over the general practitioners (GPs) on their lists. In addition, they have been developing ways to improve the quality of care and to deal with doctors who are not providing an acceptable standard of care. In this Chapter, I shall describe the developments that have occurred and consider how they are working in practice.
CHAPTER FIVE - Developments in the Arrangements for Monitoring General Practitioners since 1998
The Devolution of Power to the Primary Care Trusts

--- The Primary Care Trusts ---
Organisation
5.21
Each PCT is governed by a board, which has responsibility for the statutory functions of the PCT. It takes decisions on committing financial resources, on policy and strategy and on human resources issues. The board consists of the chairman of the PCT and between ten and fourteen members, not more than seven of whom may be officers of the PCT. The number of officer members of the board may never exceed the number of non-officer members. The non-officer members are lay people, in the sense that they are not practising healthcare professionals or employees of certain specified NHS bodies. The non-officer members are drawn from the locality and are appointed by the SoS, as advised by the NHS Appointments Commission. The officer members must include:
the chief executive, the director of finance and the director of public health of the PCT
the chairman of the professional executive committee (PEC) of the PCT: see
paragraph 5.23
. He or she is deemed to be an ‘officer’ of the PCT for these purposes
between one and three persons (at least two of whom must be members of the PEC) appointed by the chairman of the PEC following nomination by the PEC. All such persons are deemed to be ‘officers’ of the PCT for these purposes.
5.22
At least one of the officer members in categories (b) or (c) must be a GP and one (from the same categories) must be a nurse. The officer members may include officers other than those specified at (a) above. The chairman must be a lay member of the board.
5.23
The PEC is responsible for driving the activities of the PCT. Sir Nigel Crisp, Permanent Secretary of the DoH and Chief Executive of the NHS in England, observed in his statement to the Inquiry that the PEC is the ‘engine room’ of the PCT. It is dominated by clinicians, the objective being that professionals providing services locally should play a real part in shaping policy and developing services for their area. The PEC sets policy for the implementation of the functions of the PCT and exercises a management function. It has between seven and eighteen members, including the chief executive and director of finance of the PCT. Membership of the PEC also includes local professionals (including at least one GP and one nurse, together with such other professional members as reflect the functions carried out by the PCT), one or two representatives from Social Services and one member with particular expertise in public health. GPs usually form the majority of the PEC and the chairman of the PEC is almost invariably a GP.
5.24
PCTs vary in size. An average-sized PCT will be responsible for about 100 GPs. That is significantly fewer than were covered by the former HAs. The size of the PCTs should mean that their staff are in a good position to acquire a real knowledge of the GPs and other professionals responsible for providing health care in their areas. However, the size of the PCTs also has its disadvantages. It is not practicable for an individual PCT to employ staff who possess all the specialist skills that it will at times require. Many do not have a medical director. This is, no doubt, one of the reasons why PCTs were given the power to join together in order to discharge some of their functions. Many PCTs are making use of this power and are developing ways of increasing the range of skills open to them by sharing services. The Inquiry heard from Dr Robert Queenborough, Medical Director, Trafford North and Trafford South PCTs. His PCTs share a single management team while retaining separate boards, PECs and finances. As time goes on, it may be that the pooling of resources between PCTs will become more widespread.
Operation
5.25
The functions of the PCTs are wide-ranging. Like their predecessors, they have responsibility, not only for the provision of primary medical services, but also for pharmaceutical, ophthalmic (now termed ‘optical’) and dental services. They also have responsibilities for such matters as the improvement of health in their community, the commissioning of secondary care, and co-ordination with other organisations to provide integrated health and social services. As I shall describe, their management powers in relation to their lists of GPs have now been extended considerably. This places additional responsibilities upon them. The PCTs must also act on concerns about doctors who are providing an unacceptable standard of practice. A number of witnesses and participants at the Inquiry’s seminars drew attention to the considerable determination and resources (both human and financial) required of a PCT when dealing with a doctor who is performing poorly or who is otherwise giving cause for concern. The administrative work associated with the new GMS Contract also represents a formidable challenge for PCTs. All these various functions and responsibilities place a heavy burden on what are, as I have said, small organisations. Not surprisingly, the evidence shows that their efforts to cope with the demands made upon them are meeting with variable degrees of success.
5.26
Another set of problems faced by PCTs arises as a result of their newness. The disbanding of the former HAs and the creation of the 303 new PCTs resulted in the dispersal of a large number of staff with considerable expertise in the field of primary care. In particular, many medical advisers, with an intimate knowledge of the doctors in their areas, have been lost. A number of witnesses have spoken of the loss of ‘corporate knowledge’ or ‘corporate memory’ in some areas. It will take time to accumulate that knowledge (or memory) once again. It is to be hoped that the present structures will be left in place long enough for the PCTs’ members and staff to develop that knowledge and memory.
5.27
I have already observed that one of the perceived strengths of the new PCTs is that they are led by local professionals. While this has obvious benefits, there are also potential drawbacks. Most PEC chairmen (who are automatically on the board of the PCT) are local GPs. They may also be officers (e.g. secretary or chairman) of the local medical committee (LMC). PCTs are still obliged to consult with LMCs on a wide range of issues. It is easy to imagine circumstances (e.g. when a PCT is in discussions with a LMC about a controversial issue affecting the interests of local GPs) where a conflict of interest may arise. Even when no actual conflict exists, it may be difficult for the doctor concerned to adopt the objective approach that might be expected of a governing member of a public organisation. Mr William Greenwood, formerly Assistant Director of Primary Care at the WPHA, now Director in Chief, Manchester Shared Services Agency (employed by the Central Manchester PCT), mentioned potential tensions about budget management and priorities which might arise. The position becomes even more difficult when a complaint is made or a concern is expressed about the professional practice or conduct of a close professional colleague of a PEC member or chairman or, as has already happened in some areas, the member or chairman him/herself.
5.28
Dr Queenborough said that there was a degree of confusion about the role of the PECs and, in particular, about the accountability of individual members of PECs. He would like to see members of the PEC independent of the LMC. However, he said that, in his area, there were just not enough GPs prepared to take an active role in local medical affairs to make that possible. Mrs Chris Page, Head of Service Redesign, Bebington and West Wirral PCT, told the Inquiry that her PCT had come to an agreement with the LMC that any officer of the LMC who was appointed to the PEC would stand down from his/her position on the LMC. Dr John Chisholm, Chairman of the General Practitioners Committee of the British Medical Association, said that similar agreements had been reached in only a minority of PCTs. He did not support such a division of roles. It was his view that any potential conflict of interest could be managed. He, like Dr Queenborough, was conscious that there was only a small number of doctors willing to take on an active role and to work on behalf of PCTs. Also, he believed that an overlap of membership between the two organisations could be positively advantageous. He did not, however, regard it as ‘ideal’ for the chairman of a PEC to be an officer of the LMC.
5.29
Despite the strong professional presence on PCTs, the PCTs do not always enjoy a good relationship with local GPs. Professor Martin Roland, Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre and Professor of General Practice, University of Manchester, himself a practising GP, told the Inquiry that it would be wrong to assume that GPs, as a body, regarded PCTs in a positive light as friendly, helpful and supportive towards the profession. On the contrary, some view their PCTs very negatively. Dr Michael Taylor, Chairman of the Small Practices Association, said that the perception of single-handed practices tended to be that PCTs were hostile, rather than supportive, towards them. There is no doubt a good deal of concern and suspicion about how the PCTs will choose to exercise their recently acquired powers to manage their lists. There is also a continuing tension between independent contractor GPs and the PCTs who are seeking to ‘manage’ them.
Changes in the Arrangements for General Practice
The Ability of Primary Care Trusts to Manage Their Lists

--- Maintaining Quality ---
5.98
The recent emphasis on quality of care has given rise to a corresponding increase of interest in ways of securing and maintaining good standards of medical practice. This has resulted in a number of initiatives aimed at assuring the quality of services provided by individual doctors and GP practices.
Individual Mechanisms
Summative Assessment
5.99
In the past, GPs underwent no specific training to equip them for their work in general practice. Qualification for inclusion on the medical register was considered sufficient preparation for their future role. Over time, some individuals began to undertake voluntary vocational training. However, it was not until 1981 that vocational training, consisting of at least a year spent as a GP trainee in an approved training practice, together with up to two years in educationally approved posts within a number of defined specialties, became mandatory.
5.100
Even after 1981, there was no formal assessment at the conclusion of vocational training by which the competence of the trainee could be tested and a decision taken as to whether s/he was suitable to enter general practice. A certificate of satisfactory completion of training was all that was required. Between 1989 and 1992, only 0.26% of trainees failed to obtain such certificates. Entry to general practice was more or less guaranteed, therefore, upon completion of vocational training. Some doctors elected to take the RCGP’s Membership examination within a short time of starting in practice. However, there was no obligation to do so.
5.101
For training purposes, the UK is divided on a regional basis into 22 deaneries. The deaneries are responsible for commissioning postgraduate medical education. They are based around each UK medical school. Responsibility for the provision and organisation of training within each deanery rests with the director of postgraduate general practice education. The organisation of training includes the accreditation of training practices which are subjected to detailed assessment visits every three years, together with continuous monitoring of the quality of the training provided. In England, just under 25% of GP practices have at least one approved trainer. Nearly 4000 GPs are approved trainers. Responsibility for overseeing the training of GPs currently lies with the Joint Committee on Postgraduate Training for General Practice, which conducts three-yearly monitoring visits to the deaneries. These visits include detailed assessments of training practices (conducted jointly with the RCGP) to ensure that standards of accreditation are being maintained. In the future (currently expected to be September 2005), responsibility for overseeing the training of GPs will be transferred to the Postgraduate Medical Educational and Training Board (PMETB), which also has responsibility for the training of hospital doctors.
5.102
In 1996, summative assessment for all GP trainees (now known as GP registrars) was introduced throughout the UK. This became mandatory on 30th
January 1998 for all GPs practising in the NHS. There is no requirement that a GP practising in the private sector should have undergone vocational training or summative assessment. The components on which candidates for summative assessment are judged are:
an assessment of knowledge and problem solving
an assessment of consultation skills, judged by means of a videotape or simulated surgery
a written submission of practical work, usually an audit
a trainer’s report.
The four components of the assessment are designed to reflect tasks which any independent principal in general practice should be able to perform competently. If a candidate fails one or more components of the assessment, s/he is given extra training to assist him/her to pass on the next occasion. There is no limit on the number of attempts a candidate can make, although funding may not be available for indefinite further training.
5.103
The knowledge and problem solving tests are administered and marked nationally. The trainer’s report is compiled within the training practice. The other two components of the assessment are judged by trained assessors and calibrated by the deaneries. The National Summative Assessment Office carries out quality control of assessment results. A recent review of summative assessments carried out between 1996 and 2001 revealed a disparity in the failure rates between deaneries, with rates varying between 1.1% and 10.1%. The system of summative assessment was designed to give patients the protection of knowing that all GPs completing vocational training would have had their competence assessed to a national standard. The disparity demonstrated in the review is worrying since it suggests that standards differ significantly from area to area. The authors of the review (representatives of two deaneries and of the National Summative Assessment Office) calculated that, if the failure rate in the deaneries with the lowest failure rates had been in line with the average, a further 40 GP registrars would have failed. That suggested that there might be 40 GPs from that period currently in practice who should not have been assessed as competent. The authors suggested that action was required to make standards more consistent.
5.104
At the Inquiry seminars, Dame Lesley Southgate, who is a member of the PMETB and the chair of its Statutory Assessment Committee, expressed the view that summative assessment in its present form was very likely to be abolished in future and that entry to a new GPs’ specialist register would be governed by an assessment similar to that required for Membership of the RCGP: see below. She expected that this would lead to a raising of standards but also expressed the concern that the change might lead to tensions between the PMETB and the Government as the latter would be concerned about the provision of sufficient numbers of GPs to staff the NHS.
Membership of the Royal College of General Practitioners
5.105
The RCGP has developed a number of awards to mark excellence in individual doctors. Membership of the College by examination is usually undertaken just before or just after the end of a GP’s vocational training. I have already explained that a GP registrar must undergo a summative assessment at the conclusion of his/her vocational training. Dr William Reith of the RCGP said that it was widely accepted that the level of attainment needed to pass the summative assessment was less than that required to secure Membership of the College. He attributed this primarily to the fact that the Membership examiners are a small group of well-trained individuals who impose consistent standards. He drew attention to particular differences between the two procedures in the assessment of the video recording of a candidate’s consulting skills, an element common to both summative assessment and the Membership examination. The criteria applied by the RCGP are different from those for summative assessment. In addition, for the Membership examination, assessment of the video recording is carried out by trained individuals who specialise in that part of the examination. For the summative assessment, assessment of the video recording is carried out in the deaneries by a large number of doctors applying less consistent standards.
5.106
It is difficult to establish a precise pass rate for the Membership examination because it is modular in form and candidates can sit modules at different times. Historically, the pass rate was about 90% although, following the recent introduction of the modular format in place of the previous ‘all or nothing’ approach, one would expect the pass rate to have increased (as it is now possible for a candidate to fail a module and retake it). Also, the introduction of Membership by assessment of performance (see
paragraph 5.109
) means that GP principals seeking Membership are likely to opt for that route, rather than for Membership by examination. These more experienced candidates tended to have slightly lower pass rates in the examination than their more junior colleagues, probably as a result of difficulties with examination technique. The fact that fewer of them are taking the examination will have tended to cause the pass rate to increase.
5.107
Of course, in comparing the pass rates for summative assessment and Membership of the RCGP, one is not comparing like with like. Candidates for the Membership examination are self-selecting. It is perhaps unlikely that the weaker recruits to general practice would choose to sit the examination. If all those who underwent summative assessment also sat the Membership examination, the gap between the pass rates for each would no doubt be considerably wider.
5.108
Dame Lesley told the Inquiry that the issue of the difference between the standard for summative assessment and the standard for the Membership examination had been debated over the years. The purpose of the two processes is different. Summative assessment is intended to establish that the candidate has attained a minimum standard for practice. The Membership examination is intended to establish the standard for high quality performance and entry to the RCGP. It is more academic in nature. One element of summative assessment is a report from the GP registrar’s trainers, based on his/her observations of the GP registrar or practice. This is not a feature of the Membership examination.
5.109
Membership of the College by assessment of performance was introduced in 1999. It involves a searching assessment of a doctor’s clinical abilities and practice. He or she must submit a video recording of consultations and some audit work and undergo a practice visit, including an inspection of medical records. By October 2004, 79 GPs had successfully completed Membership by assessment of performance and 194 were officially registered as working towards the qualification.
Fellowship of the Royal College of General Practitioners
5.110
Fellowship of the RCGP by assessment was introduced about a decade earlier than Membership by assessment. This is a very demanding qualification, requiring the demonstration of extremely high standards of care. Candidates must have been Members of the RCGP for at least five years before embarking upon their Fellowship. By October 2004, 289 GPs had successfully completed the Fellowship, and a further 16 were in the process of doing so. Because the qualification is so demanding, it has not attracted as many applicants as the College initially expected.
Practice-Based Mechanisms
Practice Accreditation
5.111
Practice accreditation is a process by which GP practices submit themselves to assessment of various aspects of their organisation by a visiting team. In England, it is a wholly voluntary process. There is no link between practice accreditation and GP appraisal.
5.112
Methods of practice accreditation began to be developed in the 1990s. Mr Newton told the Inquiry that, in 1998, the Sheffield HA, together with the Leicestershire HA, developed a practice accreditation scheme, the Commitment to Quality Programme (CQP). This scheme has been continued by the PCTs within the area of the South Yorkshire SHA, working in conjunction with PCTs from Leicestershire and Lincolnshire. After wide consultation, a number of standards of good practice were set. GP practices are required to meet these standards in order to secure accreditation. A senior PCT manager works with practices to assist them in preparing for their assessments. The formal assessment is carried out by a team of trained assessors who systematically audit all aspects of a practice’s activity against the CQP standards. The teams may consist of two doctors or a nurse and a manager. A representative from the PCT accompanies the team on the assessment visit and has access to the assessment report. The assessment is practice-based and is not directed at assessing the performance of individual doctors. It does, however, include an examination of medical records, protocols and the personal development plans of GPs working in the practice. Reciprocal arrangements between PCTs mean that the assessment team can be drawn from outside the area of the practice being assessed. Accreditation lasts for three years, after which a further assessment is required in order to secure re-accreditation.
5.113
Mr Newton said that good GP practices have found the scheme very helpful. They use the standards as a checklist to ensure that they have proper systems in place. Even more encouraging, however, is the fact that many practices in deprived areas have joined the scheme. The PCTs provide support for practices to assist them in meeting the standards for accreditation and in making any necessary improvements. They operate a website from which practices can obtain
pro formas
for documents needed to comply with the standards (e.g. staff contracts of employment, confidentiality agreements, etc.) and other assistance. Mr Newton said that the CQP provides an excellent opportunity for PCTs to get to know the practices in their areas.
5.114
The RCGP has devised a programme, known as the Quality Team Development Programme, which is used by some PCTs and is similar in some respects to the CQP. Under the programme, PCTs carry out a preliminary audit of GP practices to see whether they meet the required standards. They then assist and support practices to improve in those areas where they fall below standard. There is no final assessment visit and no ‘pass or fail’. The programme is intended to promote continuous quality improvement and, once again, is entirely voluntary.
5.115
During the time that the Quality Team Development Programme was being developed in England, the Clinical Standards Board for Scotland (now part of NHS Quality Improvement Scotland) had identified a need for a similar programme in Scotland, but with the added element of a formal assessment in order to secure accreditation. The Quality Team Development Programme was modified for use as a practice accreditation scheme, and the Clinical Standards Board endorsed the scheme as its preferred method of assuring quality in general practices in Scotland. The scheme is operated by RCGP Scotland.
5.116
Like the South Yorkshire scheme, the Scottish practice accreditation scheme is pitched at a level that any reasonable GP practice should be able to achieve. According to Dr Hugh Whyte, Senior Medical Officer, Directorate of Health Policy and Planning, Scottish Executive Health Department, assessors look for evidence of,
, clinical audit, critical incident analysis and clinical effectiveness. Assessors are trained and approved by the RCGP. They may be clinicians, practice managers, nurses or lay people. The assessment includes a random inspection of records and (unlike the South Yorkshire scheme) interviews with the doctors working in the practice. It also examines practice organisation. The assessors produce a report which is submitted to the relevant PCO. The report identifies strengths and weaknesses and makes recommendations for change. PCOs use these reports as part of their clinical governance strategy.
5.117
At present, the Scottish practice accreditation scheme is voluntary. By October 2004, 586 of the 1052 GP practices in Scotland had attained some form of accreditation (or were about to do so), either by means of this scheme or under the system for approving practices as suitable for training GP registrars. The latter system is more demanding than the practice accreditation scheme. All practices approved for training purposes should be able to attain accreditation comfortably under the practice accreditation scheme. The two schemes have now been linked, so that assessments for both are carried out simultaneously. The practice accreditation scheme is also linked with the system of appraisal in Scotland. GPs working in practices which have achieved accreditation will automatically be taken to have completed certain aspects of appraisal. There was a Ministerial commitment in Scotland that all practices would have achieved accreditation by the end of 2004. Whether this will be achieved (albeit later than originally envisaged), and what will happen if some GP practices decline to undergo the accreditation process, is not yet clear. There is no mechanism to compel co-operation. But it does not appear that there was any great resistance to the proposal. I think that this must be attributable to the determination and enthusiasm of the leaders of the profession and at Government level in Scotland. I am sure that there is also real enthusiasm within the RCGP in England but, as yet, this has not resulted in the same commitment by the profession as a whole. It may be that the difference is one of scale and that it is much more difficult to motivate a large body of professional people than a relatively small one. However, it seems to me that it would be very valuable if all GP practices in England could also be encouraged to meet the standards necessary for accreditation.
5.118
The RCGP also operates a Quality Practice Award which was described to the Inquiry as the ‘gold standard’ for accreditation. It was launched in 1997. As its name suggests, the Award is directed at the achievements of GP practices, not individual doctors. It demands high standards and culminates in a formal assessment to ensure that those standards are met. Dr Reith explained that the Quality Practice Award gives practices more opportunity to be creative. They are able to choose certain aspects of care, or special interests, and to provide more detailed evidence of expertise in those areas. By October 2004, 118 practices had attained it and 31 were working towards it.
5.119
To some extent, practice accreditation may have been overtaken by the terms of the new GMS Contract: see
paragraphs 5.123-5.134
. Under the Contract, practices will earn ‘points’ (and therefore additional remuneration) for meeting certain quality standards. Some of those standards are similar to those which must be attained in order to secure practice accreditation. It is possible that the need for separate accreditation schemes will diminish in the future. For the present, however, the new Contract provides that GP practices accredited under the Quality Practice Award will be excused from providing evidence about certain aspects of their activities. It is intended that, in the future, other organisational quality schemes may be approved for a similar purpose.
The Value of Quality Markers
5.120
As several witnesses pointed out, practice accreditation schemes have limitations. They are directed at practices, not individuals. They focus on organisational factors, on systems of care and on measurable aspects of care. They do not test the skills of the doctor in the consulting room. Nevertheless, accreditation contains some elements relevant to the practice of individual doctors. Records are reviewed and staff are interviewed. Under the Scottish model, doctors are interviewed also. All these aspects may well reveal problems with a doctor’s competence or performance, if such problems exist. In single-handed or small practices, the weakness of an individual doctor may be evident. In a large group, it may be more easily obscured. The evidence shows that poor practice organisation can frequently be symptomatic or causative of poor performance. Dr Reith pointed out also that practices and doctors may be performing poorly because they lack resources, are under-staffed or are operating in deprived areas. They may need help and support to provide a proper service. An assessment for the purposes of practice accreditation may reveal these types of problem and result in the necessary support being provided. Perhaps the most valuable aspect of an accreditation scheme, however, is that it provides an opportunity for assessors - whether from the PCT or elsewhere - to go into practices and observe at first hand how they are run and whether there are obvious problems with organisation, facilities or relationships. There are considerable benefits for practices also. Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester, observed that even the process of sitting down as a team and working out how to achieve the standard is a useful exercise. The problem is that, in England, participation in practice accreditation is entirely voluntary and has not had the boost of Ministerial commitment as in Scotland. Those practices that do not choose to participate can avoid the close scrutiny to which practices applying for accreditation are subjected.
5.121
Individual markers of quality are of real value in assessing the standard of a doctor’s practice. Membership of the RCGP by examination indicates the attainment of a standard higher than that required by the compulsory summative assessment at the conclusion of GP vocational training. Membership by assessment of performance, which can be undertaken at any point in a GP’s career, requires evidence of a high standard of clinical care. Fellowship of the RCGP by assessment demands real excellence. There is, however, no requirement for GPs to submit themselves to these examinations or assessments and a sizeable proportion (well over a third) of GPs do not. No financial reward is available for those acquiring these quality markers.
5.122
It is interesting to note that, despite his much-vaunted professional prowess, Shipman did not seek an optional qualification. He did not take the Membership examination. By contrast, he encouraged his practice staff to obtain appropriate qualifications and expressed pride when they did so. There was no practice accreditation scheme in operation in the Tameside area during the time he practised there. Even if there had been, it seems highly unlikely that he would have participated. I do not think that he could have taken the risk that a random inspection of his records might cause someone to question the care of his patients. His staff, if interviewed, might have spoken about the high level of deaths among patients in the practice or about deaths which had occurred in the surgery. While accreditation is not directed at detecting aberrant behaviour by individual doctors, it is possible that, if accreditation were compulsory, the mere knowledge that their practice would be placed under close scrutiny would serve to some as a deterrent against such behaviour and to others as an incentive to improve.
The 2004 General Medical Services Contract

--- The 2004 General Medical Services Contract ---
5.123
The new 2004 GMS Contract was implemented on 1st
April 2004. From that date, PCTs were placed under a new duty to secure the provision of primary medical services. These services can be commissioned by four routes: by GMS, by PMS, by alternative providers (e.g. the voluntary sector, commercial providers, NHS trusts or other PCTs) or by direct provision by the PCT itself.
5.124
A contract to provide GMS is made between a PCT and a practice with at least one GP provider of services. A contract is no longer between a PCT and an individual GP. The contracting practice may be a single-handed practice, a partnership or a certain type of limited company. Patients now register with a practice, rather than with an individual GP. At the time of registration, they are asked to name a preferred practitioner within the practice.
5.125
Contracting practices are under an obligation to provide ‘essential services’ during ‘core hours’. They can opt out from providing ‘additional services’ (i.e. cervical screening, contraceptive services, adult and childhood vaccinations and immunisations, child health surveillance, maternity medical services and minor surgery). From 1st
January 2005, practices can also opt out from providing out of hours services. Where a practice chooses not to provide certain additional services, or out of hours services, it is the responsibility of the PCT to commission others to provide those services.
5.126
The new Contract is designed to encourage practices to develop different ways of working, using an increased mix of professional skills. For example, a practice may decide to employ more nurses to carry out some of the functions previously carried out by doctors. Practices might also make greater use of employed (possibly part-time) GPs. It is no doubt hoped that this will ease, to some extent, the problem of inadequate GP numbers. The opportunity to opt out of providing out of hours services is intended to make the job of a GP more attractive and thereby to help GP recruitment and retention.
5.127
From 1st
April 2004, the GP terms of service, and the disciplinary mechanisms invoked (rarely) in the event of a breach of those terms of service, ceased to have effect. The new Contract arrangements are governed by the 2004 Regulations. The Schedules to the Regulations set out the obligations on practices that enter into the Contract. Under Schedule 6, such a practice is obliged,
:
to have in place an effective system of clinical governance
to carry out its obligations under the Contract with ‘reasonable skill and care’
to operate a complaints procedure in accordance with the NHS complaints procedure and to provide the PCT at such intervals as required with information about the number of complaints received
to co-operate with any investigation of a complaint by a PCT or the Healthcare Commission
to hold adequate professional indemnity insurance
to ensure that those performing services within the practice are suitably qualified, are competent, have the necessary clinical experience and training and are registered (where appropriate) on the PCT’s list
to ensure that those performing services within the practice have arrangements in place to maintain and update skills and knowledge
to ensure that GP performers participate in appraisal
to ensure compliance with a NCAA assessment when required to do so by the PCT
to provide suitable premises
to allow persons authorised by the PCT to enter and inspect the practice premises
to keep adequate patient records and ensure patient lists are kept up to date
to have arrangements in place for effective infection control and decontamination.
5.128
The sanctions available to a PCT where a contracting practice fails to discharge its obligations are set out in the 2004 Regulations. In certain circumstances, a PCT can terminate a GMS Contract. If a contracting practice breaches the terms of the Contract and the breach is capable of remedy, the PCT can give notice to the practice, requiring it to remedy the breach within a certain period. Where a breach is not capable of remedy, the PCT may serve a notice, requiring the practice not to repeat the breach. If the breach is repeated, or further breaches occur, the PCT may terminate the Contract. A PCT can do this only if satisfied that the cumulative effect of the breaches is such that it would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the services provided to allow the Contract to continue. Other sanctions (e.g. termination or suspension of specified obligations under the Contract, or the withholding or deducting of monies payable under the Contract) are also available.
5.129
The significant difference under the new mechanism is that such sanctions as the withholding of payments can be applied only to the contracting party and not (unless s/he is a single-handed practitioner) to individual GPs. However, it is perhaps reasonable to suppose that a doctor whose conduct causes, or might cause, the practice as a whole to suffer a financial or other type of penalty may be under a certain amount of pressure from his/her colleagues to mend his/her ways. The DoH points out that, under the GMS Contract, a contractor is fully responsible for any failure to exercise reasonable care and skill by any person performing services under the Contract. Any contractor who does not deal appropriately with a failure by a doctor employed by the practice could therefore place at risk the entire Contract. PCTs will also retain their powers to remove, contingently remove and suspend practitioners from their lists.
5.130
The new Contract introduced a new quality and outcomes framework (QOF), a system of financial incentives designed to encourage practices to achieve certain quality standards. A significant amount of a practice’s remuneration will potentially be linked with the QOF. The Contract contains 146 indicators, which, if attained, carry ‘points’ which represent additional payments. Practices can select indicators that they will attempt to attain. The indicators relate to:
the clinical domain (covering such areas as the prevention of coronary heart disease, treatment of diabetes, etc.)
the organisational domain (covering such areas as patient records and practice management)
the patient experience domain (covering length of consultations and patient surveys)
the additional services domain (covering cervical screening, child health surveillance, maternity services and contraceptive services).
5.131
Data on ‘quality achievement’ is communicated by practices to PCTs by means of computer links. The operation of the QOF is reliant largely on the honesty of the contracting practice. Some checks will be made to prevent fraud, but there will be a large element of trust in the operation of the system. PCTs will undertake annual reviews of all contracting practices, using trained assessors. Among the assessors will be GPs, PCT managers and patient representatives. ScHARR has advised the DoH on the procedures to be followed at such reviews. The DoH has issued preliminary guidance to PCTs on the recruitment of assessors. Practices will be required to submit evidence in advance of the review. Assessors will have access to medical records in order to check achievement against the QOF. Inspection of the records will be subject to a code of practice. It seems likely that the inspection will be limited in extent and purpose, as was the case with post-payment verification, which I referred to in
. It is not intended that concerns about a doctor’s performance should be dealt with at an annual review.
5.132
The linking of payment to indicators of quality modifies the previous system whereby payment was more closely related to the number of patients on a GP’s list. The change will not, however, result in any loss of income (in the short term at least) for practices which retain large lists and do not participate in the QOF. The DoH has guaranteed that no practice will suffer a loss of income as a result of the changes to the GMS Contract.
5.133
The Contract is in its early days and it is impossible to assess with any confidence the impact it is likely to have on the quality of patient care. There is some concern that the fact that practices will be encouraged to concentrate their efforts on meeting the quality indicators identified in the Contract might lead to neglect of important aspects of care (such as continuity of care) that are not included. Moreover, the quality indicators do not cover some of the most important aspects of ‘doctoring’ such as consultation skills and accuracy of diagnosis. The Contract should have the effect of increasing significantly the amount of data available to PCTs about practices which participate in the QOF. It remains to be seen whether that data will be of real use in assessing the quality of care given to patients. The annual review will provide an opportunity for PCTs to get inside GP practices and to examine certain aspects of them. The value of this exercise will depend on the precise form the reviews take and on the skills and expertise of the assessors concerned. It is not clear at present how closely practices will be scrutinised. Another unknown factor is the extent, if any, to which practices where the standards of care may be poor will choose to participate in the QOF and the provision of additional services.
5.134
It is expected that PCTs will seek to measure performance on PMS contracts by reference to the same framework as under the new GMS Contract. Since PMS contracts will continue to be negotiated locally, the effect of this remains to be seen.
Maintaining Quality


========================================================================
CHAPTER SIX - Complaints and Discipline prior to April 1996
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
6.1
I have already observed that one element of the local governance of general practitioners (GPs) was the disciplinary process initiated and executed at local level. Soon after the inception of the Inquiry, I learned that, following complaints by patients, Shipman had been disciplined on two occasions by the primary care organisations responsible for Tameside, in 1990 and 1993. Before describing the circumstances giving rise to those complaints and the disciplinary proceedings that followed, I shall explain the legislative and procedural background at the relevant time.
CHAPTER SIX - Complaints and Discipline prior to April 1996
General Practitioners' Terms of Service


========================================================================
CHAPTER SEVEN - Complaints and Discipline after 1996
========================================================================

--- The 1996 Disciplinary Procedures ---
7.36
As I have explained, whereas, under the pre-1996 procedures, complaints that amounted to a breach of the GP’s terms of service were directly linked to disciplinary procedures before a medical service committee, from April 1996 this was no longer the case. The National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Amendment Regulations 1996 came into force at the same time as the 1996 complaints procedures. HAs (and later PCTs) could arrange disciplinary proceedings in any matter (apparently amounting to a breach of the GP’s terms of service) that, in their opinion, was serious enough to warrant disciplinary action. From 1996, decisions on whether to initiate proceedings were taken by a committee of the HA or PCT, usually known as the reference committee. If it became necessary to hold a disciplinary hearing, a medical disciplinary committee would be provided by an adjacent HA or PCT so as to provide a degree of independence from the HA or PCT which was, in effect, the complainant or prosecutor. A rather cumbersome adversarial procedure would be followed. However, in practice, such proceedings became very rare. Miss Horsfall told the Inquiry that, over a period of seven years, only one doctor had been referred to a disciplinary panel in Tameside, and he and one other doctor had been reported directly to the General Medical Council (GMC). Nationally, there was a dramatic reduction in the number of disciplinary proceedings held. Whereas, in the latter years of the old regime, annually there had been between 325 and 552 GPs found in breach of their terms of service, between 1997 and 2003 the corresponding figures were between three and twelve. This reduction was in no way foreseen. Mr David Laverick, who was Chief Executive of the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA) at the time of the transition, told the Inquiry that it had been anticipated that the numbers would remain the same as before, and that the FHSAA had planned for about 400 findings annually. The 2002/2003 Annual Report of the Council on Tribunals described many substantive and procedural shortcomings that had been revealed by their observations of the working of medical disciplinary committees. Several of these originated from the fact that so few hearings were in fact being held. Specifically, inconsistencies in the rules were exploited by medical defence organisations, and deliberation and decision-making were often laboured and unstructured.
7.37
There seem to be at least two reasons for the marked reduction in numbers of hearings. First, it was not possible for a HA or PCT to take disciplinary proceedings in respect of any matter arising from a patient complaint unless and until the complaints procedures had been completed. If a complaint went to independent review or to the Health Service Ombudsman, the process could take a long time. When it was completed, the HA or PCT could not use the evidence already given to the IRP but had to ask the complainant and his/her witnesses, if any, to give evidence again. Not all were willing to co-operate so long after the event. This procedure was necessary out of fairness to the doctor who, previously, might not even have heard the complainant’s evidence, let alone had the opportunity to challenge it directly.
7.38
The second, and perhaps more important, reason for the decline in disciplinary proceedings was that there had been a change of culture. There is now a general view that it is preferable that a doctor whose conduct or performance has been in some way unacceptable should be helped to improve rather than be subjected to punishment. In
, I described the ways in which HAs (and more recently PCTs) developed committees or groups whose function was to ensure that any concern about a practitioner, however it was brought to the notice of the HA, was adequately addressed. To a very large extent, the activities of such committees or groups had replaced disciplinary proceedings at local level even before the introduction of the list management procedures that PCTs can now invoke to deal with more serious or intractable problems with GPs. In
, I also described the list management powers that PCTs have had since April 2002. These enable (and in some limited circumstances require) a PCT to suspend or remove a doctor from the PCT’s list or to impose conditions on the doctor’s continuing inclusion.
7.39
It was an inevitable consequence of the sharp reduction in disciplinary proceedings that very few appeals were made to the FHSAA and, later, the FHSAA (Special Health Authority) and, in consequence of that reduction, very few doctors have been reported by that body to the GMC. After 1996, the usual mechanism for the reporting of a doctor to the GMC was either by means of a direct complaint by a patient or representative or by the HA or PCT itself if it took the view that remedial measures it had itself applied had not been, and were not likely to be, successful. Among those responsible for the administration of disciplinary measures, their demise does not appear to have given rise to significant dissatisfaction. However, it does appear that some patients or their representatives who pursued a complaint against a doctor remained dissatisfied even though their complaints may have been upheld, because their perception was that the doctor had not been held accountable. To some extent, this problem arose because complainants were not entitled to be informed (and, in practice, were not informed) about any remedial measures that the doctor might have been required to undergo as the result of an IRP’s report. However, it may be that there is a fundamental problem with the 1996 complaints procedures in that they do not provide any clear focus or objective. Before 1996, the objective was at least clear, unsatisfactory though it may have been: it was to punish the doctor who breached his/her terms of service. Since 1996, the objectives have been to
‘satisfy the complainant’
and to learn from mistakes. So far as the complainant is concerned, there is no redress other than perhaps an apology. I shall return to the issue of redress later in this Chapter.
The Power to Suspend a General Practitioner from NHS Practice
7.40
One unsatisfactory aspect of the 1996 disciplinary procedures was brought into sharp focus in 1998, when the WPHA was advised by the Greater Manchester Police (GMP) that Shipman was under investigation for the murder of a patient, Mrs Kathleen Grundy, that a number of other sudden deaths gave rise to suspicion and that Shipman was thought to be a risk to his patients. Shipman had not at that stage been arrested or charged with any offence. He was practising, as usual, from 21 Market Street, Hyde. On 14th
August 1998, Detective Superintendent Bernard Postles (later Detective Chief Superintendent), the officer in charge of the investigation into Shipman, requested that the WPHA take steps to suspend Shipman from practice. He also contacted the GMC but was informed that that body had no power to suspend a doctor during the investigation of a criminal offence.
7.41
The WPHA itself did not have the power to suspend Shipman either. The procedure under the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunals) Regulations 1992, as amended, was for the WPHA to apply to the NHS Tribunal, which did have the power to impose interim suspension, pending the hearing of an application by the WPHA for removal of Shipman’s name from their list. Liaison between the WPHA’s solicitor and the Clerk to the NHS Tribunal revealed that the NHS Tribunal would require a written application supported by evidence from the police, including witness statements. The police were unwilling to reveal such information at that time, as disclosure to Shipman might prejudice their investigations. Further communications between the WPHA and the Clerk to the NHS Tribunal resulted in a formal application being made on 21st
August, supported by a summary of the position and letters in which the GMP explained the reasons for its
‘mounting concerns’
about the safety of Shipman’s patients. The procedure required a hearing before the Tribunal. Shipman had to be given 14 days’ notice of a hearing; in fact the hearing was fixed for 29th
7.42
The police decided to act and arrested Shipman on 7th
September. He was charged with murder and forgery and was remanded in custody. His patients were now safe, although the GMP feared that an application for bail might succeed. In any event, the WPHA wished to take over the management of Shipman’s practice, as the consortium to which Shipman belonged was having difficulty in finding locum doctors to provide services to patients. Both the GMP and the WPHA wished to pursue the application to the NHS Tribunal. Further evidence was lodged, on affidavit
7.43
A hearing took place before the Tribunal in London on 29th
September. An application to adjourn the proceedings, made on Shipman’s behalf, was refused
The Tribunal’s decision was reserved and was delivered, in writing, on 15th
October. The Tribunal had decided to suspend Shipman from the list of practitioners providing general medical services to the WPHA. However, the decision did not take legal effect until the expiry of a further 14 days, during which time Shipman was entitled to lodge an appeal. In fact, he did not do so and the order took effect from 29th
October 1998. Both the WPHA and the GMP were deeply dissatisfied that it had taken ten weeks to obtain an effective order.
7.44
The difficulties experienced by the WPHA and the GMP in this case led directly to a decision by the GMC to seek extended powers of interim suspension, which it now has. Also, the Health and Social Care Act 2001 abolished the NHS Tribunal and granted to HAs (later PCTs) the power to suspend and remove a GP from their lists. A PCT can take action only in respect of its own list. If appropriate, a PCT can refer a case to the FHSAA (a new body created in December 2001), which can impose national disqualification.
Reactions to the 1996 Complaints Procedures
Research into the Operation of the 1996 Complaints Procedures

--- Introduction ---
7.1
As I indicated in the last Chapter, the Government’s proposals for new procedures for handling patient complaints in the NHS were published in March 1995. The procedures were introduced in April 1996. In this Chapter, I shall describe the 1996 procedures, as they applied to complaints about general practitioners (GPs), and will summarise the evidence received by the Inquiry as to how they worked in practice. I shall also discuss the shortcomings of the 1996 procedures and consider the Government’s recent proposals for reform.
7.2
In the last Chapter, I described the operation of three complaints which resulted in disciplinary proceedings being taken against Shipman under the pre-1996 procedures. This Chapter will not contain any similar descriptions. So far as was known to the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA), only one complaint against Shipman was made in the years 1996 to 1998. The development and operation of the 1996 complaints procedures and the changes to disciplinary procedures that came about after 1996 are of interest to the Inquiry because they form the link between the pre-1996 procedures and a new set of procedures, parts of which have been introduced in July 2004 and parts of which are still under discussion. It is my intention to make recommendations about those aspects of the new procedures that are still to be settled.
CHAPTER SEVEN - Complaints and Discipline after 1996
The 1996 Complaints Procedures


========================================================================
CHAPTER EIGHT - Raising Concerns about Shipman
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
8.1
The scale of Shipman’s crimes and the long period over which they were perpetrated suggest, at first sight, that his behaviour must inevitably have raised concerns and suspicions among those who worked closely with him. Surely such people as medical colleagues, other healthcare professionals and members of his practice staff must have realised that something was wrong and reported it? What about those lay people - friends, families and neighbours - who had been involved in the aftermath of the deaths? Previous inquiries that have investigated criminal or other wrongful conduct by an individual or organisation have often heard evidence about complaints which had been made or concerns which had been expressed over the years and had gone unheeded, as a result of which the offending conduct was permitted to continue without check.
8.2
Surprisingly, however, this Inquiry’s investigations revealed no long history of complaints or concerns in Shipman’s case. That they did not is an indication both of the high regard in which Shipman was generally held and of his extraordinary ability to lie his way convincingly out of the most compromising situations.
8.3
In this Chapter, I shall consider the position of Shipman’s colleagues at the Donneybrook practice and examine whether they had any reason to suspect Shipman. The Inquiry has of course heard that, in 1998, a member of another practice, the late Dr Linda Reynolds, became suspicious about the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients. She and her colleagues at the Brooke Practice in Hyde decided that she should report their concerns to the Coroner. That report initiated the abortive police investigation of March 1998 which I examined in my Second Report. There were a few other people who also had their suspicions about Shipman. In this Chapter, I shall describe how those suspicions developed and what, if anything, those who had concerns felt able to do about them. I shall deal separately with the position of the practice staff and health professionals who worked with Shipman at the Market Street Surgery in
Chapter 9
CHAPTER EIGHT - Raising Concerns about Shipman
The Doctors at the Donneybrook Practice


========================================================================
CHAPTER NINE - Raising Concerns: the Role of the Practice Staff
========================================================================

--- The Staff of the Market Street Surgery ---
9.3
When it first became known that Shipman was under investigation for forgery and murder, the staff employed at his surgery - like many of his patients - remained loyal to him. At that time, they believed that Shipman was the victim of a terrible mistake. With the widening of the police investigation and Shipman’s subsequent arrest, the surgery became the focus of public attention. A locum was appointed and the practice and its staff continued to function. However, public anger mounted, particularly after Shipman’s conviction for murder in January 2000. Strangers visited the surgery and abused the staff. The windows of the surgery were broken and the practice received hundreds of abusive telephone calls after the surgery telephone number appeared in at least one national newspaper. Even when away from work, members of staff were liable to be recognised and subjected to ostracism, harassment and abuse. Underlying all these events appeared to be a general assumption that those who worked at Shipman’s surgery must have known that Shipman was killing his patients.
9.4
If the surgery staff had indeed been aware of what Shipman was doing and, for some reason, chose to remain silent and to allow his criminal activities to continue, that would plainly be a very serious matter. If, on the other hand, the staff were completely unaware of what was happening, it is important for their sake that this is stated clearly and unequivocally. Even if the evidence shows that staff did not know of Shipman’s criminal activities, the question still arises whether, given the information available to them, they should at least have realised that something was amiss and taken action to bring it to the attention of the appropriate authorities. With these issues in mind, the Inquiry has examined the information available to individual members of staff at the time and their state of knowledge over the relevant period.
The Members of Staff
9.5
At the time of his move to the Market Street Surgery in August 1992, Shipman took with him three members of staff from the Donneybrook practice. They were Mrs Judith Cocker (receptionist), Mrs Alison Massey (receptionist) and Sister Gillian Morgan (practice nurse). He recruited Mrs Carol Chapman, one of his patients, as an additional receptionist. Mrs Margaret Walker (computer operator), who had also worked at the Donneybrook practice for a short time, joined the Market Street Surgery in August 1993 when the new computer was installed. All those members of staff remained in employment at the Market Street Surgery up to the time of Shipman’s arrest in September 1998 and beyond.
9.6
Other staff were employed at the surgery for part of the period in question. Mrs Lee Leech worked there between September 1993 and June 1994, mainly entering patient histories onto the new computer. She also worked as a part-time receptionist for approximately six months in 1995 in the absence, first of Mrs Chapman, and then of Mrs Massey. Mrs Jayne Kenyon was employed as a receptionist from the beginning of 1995 until August 1996. After Mrs Kenyon’s departure, Shipman’s wife, Mrs Primrose Shipman, worked as a part-time receptionist at the practice, covering staff holidays and sickness and some Saturday mornings until the time of Shipman’s arrest. Ms Susan Elliot deputised for Sister Morgan while the latter was on maternity leave in 1995.
9.7
There were also a number of other professionals who were attached to the surgery. Mrs Alison Worthington, a health visitor, was based at the premises from 1995 and had an office upstairs. She spent short periods of time there each day. She had little to do with the practice, save that she held a weekly vaccinations clinic for babies there. Mr Colton Reid, a counsellor, held sessions at the surgery for about ten hours a week until some time in 1995. His wife, Mrs Madeleine Reid, a midwife, ran an antenatal clinic at the surgery once a week throughout Shipman’s time there.
9.8
Mrs Chapman, Mrs Cocker, Mrs Leech, Mrs Kenyon, Mrs Massey and Sister Morgan gave oral evidence during the Phase Two, Stage Four hearings. Mrs Shipman had given evidence during Phase One. Mrs Walker, Ms Elliot, Mrs Worthington and Mr and Mrs Reid provided statements to the Inquiry.
9.9
It is necessary to consider the evidence relating to the various members or groups of members of staff separately, since the nature and extent of their respective knowledge about deaths of patients differed according to their individual roles.
The Reception Staff
9.10
Between them, Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker provided full-time cover for the reception desk. They had an arrangement whereby each would work mornings (8am until 1pm) one week and afternoons (1pm until about 6pm) the next. A third receptionist was on duty from about 10am until approximately 2pm. Until the end of 1994, this was usually Mrs Massey. From the beginning of 1995 until August 1996, Mrs Kenyon worked this shift. Meanwhile, Mrs Massey’s duties changed somewhat and her hours were extended. She was then based for part of her time in an upstairs office, although she continued to assist at the reception desk as and when necessary. The receptionists worked Saturday mornings on a rota system although, towards the end of Shipman’s time at the surgery, Mrs Shipman covered most Saturday mornings.
9.11
The reception staff were responsible for answering the telephone, booking appointments for patients with Shipman, Sister Morgan and Mrs Reid, arranging for Shipman to visit patients at home and recording requests for repeat and acute prescriptions. They also liaised with other agencies, such as hospitals, Social Services and the ambulance service. They would type letters and file such items as consultants’ letters and test results in patients’ medical records. Once the medical records became computerised in 1993, the receptionists were responsible for entering information (which had been previously identified by Shipman) from such items onto the computer record before filing them. From 1997, Mrs Chapman had the title of ‘building manager’ and was responsible for such matters as arranging any maintenance work which Shipman decided was necessary. Mrs Cocker’s special responsibility was to keep records of visits made by the deputising service and of out of hours visits made by Shipman. In 1997, her title changed to that of ‘senior receptionist’.
9.12
Members of staff told the Inquiry that, during the working day, the staff were kept very busy, dealing with patients and with various other duties. The main opportunity for social contact occurred at lunchtime when members of staff tended to congregate at the reception desk to eat their meals. Even then, patients sometimes came in and the telephone might ring. The receptionist who was working the afternoon shift would often arrive a little early so as to eat her meal with other members of staff. Messages would be passed and news exchanged. Sometimes, Shipman would join his staff for lunch before leaving for his visits.
9.13
When a patient died and Shipman certified the cause of death, he would complete the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and place it in an envelope. He would then hand it to the reception staff who would keep it in a designated place at the reception desk until someone - usually a member or members of the patient’s family - came to collect it. When members of a deceased patient’s family came to collect the MCCD, the reception staff would offer their condolences. If the relatives were upset, the receptionists would attempt to arrange for them to see Shipman. After a death, the reception staff would take out the patient’s medical records and enter on the computer record the fact that the death had occurred. They would then place the medical records in a box ready for delivery to the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA) (formerly Tameside Family Health Services Authority (FHSA)). Also in the box would be the medical records of patients who had left the practice for other reasons. When the box became full, Mrs Chapman would deliver the box to the WPHA’s Hyde office, which was on her way home. She estimated that this happened about once every six or eight weeks.
9.14
When a patient died in the community, the practice might be informed of the death in the first instance by a relative of the patient, by the staff of the residential home in which the patient had lived, by the deputising service (if the death occurred out of hours) or by the police or a coroner’s officer. News of a death would usually be communicated to the reception staff. Sometimes, Shipman himself would tell them, when he returned from his visits, that a patient had died. On some occasions, he would ring from a patient’s home to say that the patient had died. At times, the first the reception staff would know of a death would be when Shipman handed them the MCCD for collection by the patient’s relatives. News of deaths which had occurred would be passed from one receptionist to another as they went on and off duty. Both Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker accepted in evidence that they would have come to know about the vast majority (if not all) of the deaths of Shipman’s patients which had occurred in the community within a short time of the death. By contrast, they would not necessarily be told of a death which had occurred in hospital until some time after it had occurred. If the relatives did not inform the practice of a death in hospital, the first intimation would be when formal notification was received from the hospital some time later.
9.15
The receptionists would receive requests from patients for Shipman to visit. They would record such requests in the practice visits book and, latterly, also on a visit request form. When a request for a visit was received, the receptionist taking the message would also get out the patient’s medical records and put them in a designated place ready for collection by Shipman. When the visit request forms came into use, they would be wrapped around the records. On his return from a visit, Shipman would usually enter a note of the visit in the computer record, then give the medical records back to the reception staff. He would inform them of any patients he intended to visit again and of the period within which the further visit was to be made. A member of staff would then enter the patient’s name and the word ‘revisit’ in the visits book for the appropriate date. The medical records for those patients to be revisited and for any other pre-booked visits for that day were taken out and put ready for collection first thing each morning.
9.16
A receptionist working the morning shift would therefore be aware of most of the visits to be made by Shipman that day. She might not know about visits arranged by the colleague who worked with her for part of the morning shift. Nor would she generally be on duty when Shipman returned to the surgery after making his visits. The receptionist on the afternoon shift would not necessarily know which patients Shipman was due to visit. Mrs Chapman said that she would usually look to see where he was going and at what time he was likely to return to the surgery. Mrs Cocker said that she would do this sometimes, but not always.
Mrs Carol Chapman
9.17
Mrs Chapman left school at 15 and underwent no formal vocational training of any kind. She had various jobs, all of an administrative/clerical type. Before beginning work at the Market Street Surgery in 1992, she had no previous experience of work in a medical setting. It is of significance that Mrs Chapman’s husband had died suddenly of a heart attack at the age of 34. He had had no history of heart problems. The experience of that death had made Mrs Chapman only too well aware that death can occur suddenly and without warning.
9.18
A most remarkable and distressing feature of Mrs Chapman’s recruitment to the Market Street Surgery is that, by the time Shipman invited her to work for him, he had already killed her aunt, Mrs Mary Winterbottom (in September 1984), and her mother, Mrs Nellie Bardsley (in December 1987). Shipman had claimed to have found Mrs Winterbottom dead and he had told the family that Mrs Bardsley had died in his presence while he was telephoning for an ambulance. Mrs Chapman told the Inquiry that she had had no suspicions whatever about these deaths. Indeed, if she had harboured any suspicions, it is inconceivable that she would have agreed to work for Shipman.
9.19
Mrs Chapman and other members of the practice staff were questioned in detail by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry about the deaths of Shipman’s patients. In particular, they were asked about:
the number of deaths which occurred, particularly deaths in the community
the fact that clusters of deaths occurred from time to time. Sometimes, two deaths occurred on one day; on other occasions, several deaths occurred within a short period.
the fact that five deaths had occurred at the surgery premises over a period of three and a half years
the fact that it was not unusual for deaths to be discovered shortly after Shipman had visited, or apparently by Shipman himself when he arrived at a patient’s house. Nor was it unusual for Shipman to be present when a patient died.
the fact that many of the deaths occurred suddenly in patients who had previously appeared to be reasonably fit and active.
9.20
Mrs Chapman was adamant that she had not thought there was anything odd or unusual about any of these features. She knew that many of Shipman’s patients were elderly and ill and, if a death occurred, she would assume that the patient had been more unwell than she had thought. Even when she heard of the death of a younger, fitter person, the experience of her husband’s death caused her to accept it as something that happened from time to time. She said that she accepted events as they occurred. She did not attempt to analyse the circumstances of each death, nor did she detect that any patterns were emerging. Until 1998, she was not aware that the number of deaths in the practice was in any way abnormal. She did not believe that she had seen the practice newsletter of March 1997, which recorded the occurrence of 63 deaths over the previous 12 months. However, she said that it would not have surprised her if she had. Mrs Chapman told the Inquiry that she was aware that Shipman would sometimes visit patients without an appointment if he was not too busy, just to see how they were. She did not think that he did this frequently, nor did she find it in any way unusual.
9.21
Mrs Chapman was on duty at the time of three of the five deaths which occurred on the surgery premises, those of Miss Joan Harding (on 4th
January 1994), Mrs Dora Ashton (on 26th
September 1995) and Mrs Ivy Lomas (on 29th
May 1997). I have found that Shipman killed all three. Mrs Chapman said that Miss Harding looked poorly on the day of her death. She was not suspicious about her sudden death. In the case of the second death, Shipman told her that Mrs Ashton was not well and that he wanted her to go to hospital but she was refusing to do so. He asked Mrs Chapman to telephone Mrs Ashton’s son and get him to try to persuade her. Mrs Chapman did this and went into the examination room to tell Mrs Ashton. She found her dead. She then went to tell Shipman the news and got the impression, when she did so, that he already knew. She was distressed at the death as Mrs Ashton had been a friend of her mother. She did not reflect on Shipman’s apparent knowledge of the death until after he had come under suspicion. On the third occasion, Shipman called Mrs Chapman into his consulting room and told her that Mrs Lomas had died. Mrs Chapman then attempted to make contact with Mrs Lomas’ son and, having failed to do so, called the police. The police officer who attended raised no concerns about the death. Mrs Chapman told the Inquiry that she saw nothing unusual or suspicious in the fact that these deaths occurred on the surgery premises. She assumed that it was something that happened from time to time.
9.22
Mrs Chapman was asked about a comment which she had written on an internal practice document in late January 1996. Mrs Massey had been preparing a new job description for Mrs Chapman. She had given the draft job description to Mrs Chapman for her comments on the list of duties which should be included in the document. Mrs Chapman wrote on the top of the document:
‘Can’t think of anything else except finding dead bodies in examination rooms.’
The comment plainly referred to the death of Mrs Ashton whom, as I have said, Mrs Chapman had found dead in the examination room three months previously. In a written statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Chapman said that the comment was an example of the
‘black sense of humour within the surgery’
. In oral evidence, she said that it was ‘just our (
i.e. the staff’s
) way of dealing with things’. She said that the comment might have appeared flippant, but that ‘you have to deal with things like deaths in a surgery’. She suggested that she might have felt particularly ‘down’ at the time she wrote the comment. She did not think that, when writing it, she had in her mind that there was anything ‘funny’ (in the sense of ‘odd’) about the death. I accept that evidence and indeed, I do not believe that, if Mrs Chapman had had any real suspicions about Mrs Ashton’s death at the time, she would have written the comment in the way she did, especially since Mrs Ashton had been a friend of her mother.
9.23
There were other deaths which had a particular significance for Mrs Chapman. Mrs Elsie Hannible, who was Mrs Chapman’s aunt, died in July 1996. I have found that Shipman killed her. Shipman informed Mrs Chapman of the death on his return to the surgery that day, although it was some time later (probably at Mrs Hannible’s funeral) that Mrs Chapman learned that he had been present at the death. Far from finding that odd, she says that by that time she was beginning to think that it was the norm. Mrs Irene Chapman, Mrs Carol Chapman’s mother-in-law, died on 7th
March 1998. I have found that Shipman killed her. Shipman told Mrs Chapman that he had visited her mother-in-law and found her unwell. When he returned later in the day, it was to find her dead. Neither the death of Mrs Hannible nor that of Mrs Irene Chapman excited Mrs Carol Chapman’s suspicions.
9.24
The death of Mrs Mavis Pickup, on 22nd
September 1997, shocked and upset Mrs Chapman. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Pickup. Mrs Chapman had spoken to Mrs Pickup a few hours before her death, when Mrs Pickup had been distressed, but not apparently ill. When Shipman told her of Mrs Pickup’s death, Mrs Chapman expressed surprise and observed that, when she had spoken to Mrs Pickup, ‘she was only crying’. She told the Inquiry that she was seeking a medical explanation from Shipman for what had happened. She did not consider the possibility that Shipman might have been involved in the death. Mrs Chapman was also very shocked to hear of the death of Miss Maureen Ward (who was only 57) on 18th
February 1998. Shipman was convicted of Miss Ward’s murder. Mrs Chapman had seen Miss Ward at the surgery the day before her death and exchanged a joke with her. When Shipman told Mrs Chapman of the death, she was annoyed and turned her back on him. She told the Inquiry that she was angry with Shipman, not because she suspected him of being responsible for the death, but because he had been the bearer of the bad news. She was angry that Miss Ward had died at a time when, as I have explained in
Chapter 8
, she had so much to live for. Mrs Chapman’s annoyance with Shipman deepened when he gave one version of the circumstances of his involvement in the aftermath of Miss Ward’s death to her and another to other members of staff. When Mrs Chapman pointed this out, Shipman suggested that it was she who was in error. She believed the error was his. Despite her annoyance, however, she put the difference down to confusion or misunderstanding and it did not arouse her suspicions.
Mrs Judith Cocker
9.25
Mrs Cocker left school at the age of 16 or 17. She underwent no formal vocational training. Subsequently, she worked in various capacities, mainly of a clerical and secretarial nature. In about September 1988, she obtained part-time employment as a receptionist with the Donneybrook practice. There, she was one of six or seven receptionists, working for seven doctors. She carried out general reception duties. Mrs Cocker said that, while at the Donneybrook practice, she became aware on occasion that a death had occurred. However, she got no impression of the frequency with which this happened, or of the circumstances in which deaths took place. She had a general impression that most deaths occurred in hospital, rather than at home. She did not specifically remember the deaths of any of Shipman’s patients during that period.
9.26
Once at the Market Street Surgery, Mrs Cocker - like Mrs Chapman - says she accepted events as they occurred. The number and pattern of deaths did not strike her as abnormal or in any way suspicious. Over the years, the proportion of deaths occurring in hospital decreased. However, Mrs Cocker says it never occurred to her that an abnormal number of patients were dying at home. She was aware from what she was told by patients, and by Shipman himself, that many elderly people did not wish to be admitted to hospital but preferred to be cared for, and to die, at home. She was aware that Shipman liked to keep his patients living at home for as long as possible and she therefore did not find it surprising that they died at home.
9.27
Mrs Cocker recalled the circumstances of two deaths in particular. The first was that of Mr John Stone on 24th
April 1996 and the second was that of Mrs Elsie Cheetham on 25th
April 1997. I have found that Shipman was responsible for both deaths. Shipman visited Mr Stone and it seems that he must have telephoned the surgery and asked Mrs Cocker to inform Mr Stone’s son, Mr Ronald Stone, that his father had died. Shipman’s claim (which Mrs Cocker does not recall) was that, when he arrived, Mr John Stone was already dead. Mrs Cocker did remember telephoning Mr Ronald Stone (whom she knew) and telling him of his father’s death. Almost exactly a year later, Mrs Cocker took a call from Mrs Cheetham, who said that she was having a ‘funny do’ and requested a visit from Shipman. Mrs Cocker contacted Shipman via his pager. Shortly afterwards, he telephoned the surgery and told Mrs Cocker that Mrs Cheetham was dead. Mrs Cocker informed the family of the death. On the same day, Mrs Cocker took another telephone call from Shipman, informing her that Mrs Jean Lilley had died. When asked by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry whether the fact that she had received two such telephone calls on one day had struck her as an odd coincidence, Mrs Cocker said she had ‘never thought anything about it’. She had just accepted what Shipman said at face value because she trusted him.
Mrs Lee Leech
9.28
Mrs Leech was a qualified teacher. She obtained employment at the Market Street Surgery as a result of her friendship with Mrs Shipman. She had no previous experience of working in a medical setting. During her first period of employment, she worked mainly in a small room some distance from the reception desk. If that room was unavailable, she would use a computer anywhere in the building, sometimes in an upstairs room. She helped out occasionally on the reception desk but, apart from that, had little contact with what was going on there. During the second period for which she worked at the surgery, Mrs Leech carried out basic reception duties. She had little recollection of the procedures which followed a death.
9.29
During her two periods of employment at the practice, two deaths occurred on the surgery premises. Mrs Leech was at work on the morning that Miss Harding died. (For a brief account of the circumstances of Miss Harding’s death, see
paragraph 9.57
.) Mrs Leech knew that Sister Morgan had assisted in the attempt to resuscitate Miss Harding. She described how Sister Morgan, in particular, seemed shocked by the death, which suggested to Mrs Leech that it must have been an unusual event. Later, she was told of a second death in the surgery, probably that of Mrs Bertha Moss, whom I have found that Shipman also killed. She remembers a sense of surprise that another person had died on the premises, although she was not at all suspicious. She had not regarded Miss Harding’s death as in any way suspicious, so had no reason to be suspicious about the death of Mrs Moss.
9.30
Of the other deaths which occurred during her period of employment, Mrs Leech did not have much recollection. She did not get to know many of the patients personally and knew little of their state of health. She did not recall feeling any surprise at the number of deaths. Nor does she remember being told of occasions when there was a proximity in time between Shipman’s visit and the time of the patient’s death. She assumed from observation that most of Shipman’s patients were elderly and ill. She thought many of them might have been suffering from employment-related conditions. She said that none of the permanent staff appeared concerned at the number or circumstances of the deaths and she took her lead from them.
Mrs Jayne Kenyon
9.31
After leaving school, Mrs Kenyon worked as an assistant in three chemist’s shops. The last of these was the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, next to the Market Street Surgery. While working there, a vacancy for a receptionist arose at the surgery and Mrs Kenyon successfully applied for the job. She performed duties similar to those of Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker. During her time at the surgery, she gained a Diploma in Medical Reception Services, awarded by the Association of Medical Secretaries, Practice Managers, Administrators and Receptionists (AMSPAR).
9.32
Mrs Kenyon agreed that, during her time at the practice, the reception staff would have known about most of the deaths that happened, particularly those in the community. She recalled that there were occasions when a relative would telephone the surgery to report a death and would say that Shipman had visited earlier on the day the death occurred. Sometimes, Shipman would tell the staff that he had been present when a patient died. She said that she would probably have assumed that the patient had wanted a visit because s/he was ill and that the illness had caused the death. However, she had little recollection of her thought processes at the time. She had no idea of the number of patients who were dying and nothing with which to compare that number. She did not remember any discussion among the staff about the fact that the number of deaths was high. She saw no pattern in the deaths.
9.33
Mrs Kenyon was on duty when Mrs Moss died at the surgery premises on 13th
June 1995. She remembered little of the events surrounding the death. She was not asked to call an ambulance and did not question this as she assumed that Shipman knew what he was doing. She thought that she would have discussed the death with other members of staff afterwards. However, no one expressed any concerns and she assumed that patients did sometimes die in doctors’ surgeries. She did not remember being told that this was the second death which had occurred on the surgery premises.
9.34
Mrs Kenyon was also at work when Mrs Ashton died at the surgery three months later. She saw nothing surprising in the fact that two deaths had occurred on the premises within a short time. A third death, that of Mrs Edith Brady, occurred on the surgery premises during the period of Mrs Kenyon’s employment. It took place shortly before her wedding when Mrs Kenyon was having a few days off to make preparations. She did not return to work until three weeks later and could not recall being told of Mrs Brady’s death.
9.35
When her employment at the Market Street Surgery was terminated through lack of funding, Mrs Kenyon went to work for two single-handed practices. At one practice, she entered data onto a computer. At the other, she worked as a receptionist. Looking back, she now recognises that fewer deaths occurred at those practices than at the Market Street practice and that more of the deaths occurred in hospital. However, neither the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients, nor the fact that so many occurred at home, struck her as unusual at the time.
The Practice Manager
Mrs Alison Massey
9.36
After leaving school, Mrs Massey attended secretarial college and thereafter worked in various capacities, mainly secretarial and administrative. In May 1991, she started part-time work as a receptionist at the Donneybrook practice. Prior to that time, she had no experience of working in a medical setting. While at Donneybrook, Mrs Massey carried out general reception duties. She had little contact with Shipman.
9.37
After the move to the Market Street Surgery, Mrs Massey continued to work as a receptionist, carrying out similar duties to those of Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker. She was not on duty when Shipman returned from his visits, except when she was covering for one of the other members of staff during holiday periods. Mrs Massey was appointed practice manager in early 1994. Initially, her duties remained unchanged but she gradually assumed greater responsibility for administrative work within the practice. She obtained an AMSPAR Diploma in Practice Management in 1996. However, Shipman continued to take all the significant decisions. Indeed, towards the end of his time at the practice, Mrs Massey was becoming somewhat dissatisfied with the level of responsibility that was given to her. As she began to exchange views with other practice managers, she realised that they were playing a more active role in the running of their practices than she was permitted.
9.38
From time to time, Mrs Massey became involved in audit activities. One of the audits she carried out, in 1997, entailed looking at the reasons why patients had left the practice. The intention was to find out from those who had transferred to another practice within the same area why they had chosen to do so. In the course of the audit, it was necessary for Mrs Massey to ascertain how many patients over a period of six months had left the practice by reason of death. A computer printout was obtained; it seems that Mrs Massey must have done this. The printout contained 31 names, 29 of which clearly related to patients who had died. It was not wholly clear from the document whether or not the other two patients were dead. Mrs Massey said that 29 deaths would not have seemed a high number to her as she would have had nothing with which to compare it.
9.39
Another of Mrs Massey’s responsibilities was the production of practice newsletters. She said that it was Shipman’s idea to record the number of births and deaths in the newsletter. He seemed to think that people would be interested. She was responsible for incorporating the numbers into the newsletters. She said that, although she now realises that the numbers of deaths were high, they had not struck her as such at the time. Nor had she noticed that the numbers appeared to be rising.
9.40
Mrs Massey had a clear recollection of the death of Miss Mary Andrew, on 8th
April 1993. I have found that Shipman killed Miss Andrew. She had telephoned the surgery and reported to Mrs Massey that she had a pain at the top of her back. A short time later, Shipman returned to the surgery and told Mrs Massey that Miss Andrew had died. Mrs Massey understood that the cause of death was a heart attack. She was shocked and upset and expressed her surprise to Shipman. On looking back, she remembers him ‘smirking’ and has the impression that he was laughing at her shock. However, she said that, at the time, the focus of her concern was that she might not have treated Miss Andrew’s call with sufficient urgency. She had no suspicion that Shipman might not have acted properly. After that incident, Mrs Massey said that she was very careful when dealing with patients complaining of pains. If she had any doubts, she would consult Shipman about what to do.
9.41
Mrs Massey told the Inquiry that, even after she had ceased to spend all her working time as a receptionist, she would still have known about the majority of deaths which occurred at patients’ homes. Like Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker, Mrs Massey noticed no striking or unusual association between Shipman’s visits and the deaths of patients. Nor was she surprised at the occurrence of deaths on the surgery premises; she knew of four out of the five at the time. She was at work at the time of one of those deaths, that of Mrs Brady. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Brady. At Shipman’s request, Mrs Massey accompanied him into the examination room where Mrs Brady was lying dead. Shipman pressed Mrs Brady’s chest with both of his hands for a short time. Mrs Massey understood that he was attempting resuscitation. She was shocked at the sight of Mrs Brady’s body but harboured no suspicions. She was unaware at the time that Shipman had told Mrs Brady’s family that Mrs Massey had helped him to administer artificial resuscitation. She learned this during evidence given at the inquest into Mrs Brady’s death, held in 2001. Until that time, Mrs Massey had always had nagging suspicions that, despite his conviction, Shipman might not be guilty. The evidence she heard at the inquest convinced her of his guilt.
9.42
Mrs Massey could not remember a death, other than that of Mrs Brady, at which she was aware that Shipman had been present. She did not know that he had a habit of visiting patients unannounced and was surprised when she subsequently became aware of this fact.
The Computer Operator
Mrs Margaret Walker
9.43
Mrs Walker had worked at the Donneybrook practice for a period of 12 months between 1989 and 1990. For the first six months, she carried out general clerical duties. Latterly, she worked as a computer operator. Before starting work at the Donneybrook practice, Mrs Walker had been employed by the local council and in a number of part-time positions with other employers. After leaving the Donneybrook practice, she had a period off work due to ill health and then obtained clerical jobs, first with the Tameside FHSA and then in a travel agency.
9.44
After joining the Market Street Surgery in 1993, Mrs Walker’s duties included printing repeat prescriptions, typing such documents as medical reports, creating computer records for new patients, entering information from consultants’ letters into computer records and collating information for use in audits. Initially, Mrs Walker worked from 10am until 1 or 2pm. Over time, her hours were extended to 9am until 2pm. She worked in an upstairs room at the surgery. She occasionally assisted on the reception desk when the practice was short-staffed.
9.45
The practice computer was linked to the WPHA computer system. When a patient died or transferred to another practice, the WPHA would remove the patient’s name from the practice list. On being notified of the removal, Mrs Walker would print off the latest version of the patient’s computer record and place it with the patient’s other medical records ready for despatch to the WPHA. She estimated that she printed out about 85% of the final computer records. Mrs Massey did the rest. In addition, Mrs Walker and Mrs Massey shared the task of ascertaining from information held on computer the numbers of patient deaths for inclusion in the practice newsletters.
9.46
By virtue of her involvement with these tasks, Mrs Walker was in a position to gain an overview of the number of deaths which occurred and their approximate frequency. She pointed out, however, that she would often be unaware of the circumstances surrounding a death or of the fact that Shipman had visited a patient shortly before the death was discovered. Occasionally, Shipman would observe to her that he had found a patient dead in a chair or in bed, but Mrs Walker said that these were isolated comments and she noticed no particular pattern to the deaths. Furthermore, she was not in a position to compare the number of deaths occurring at the Market Street Surgery with those at any other practice.
9.47
Nor did Mrs Walker set out to monitor the level of deaths within the practice. She did, however, notice that there were two ‘peaks’ during her employment at the practice when the number of deaths occurring appeared higher than at other times. I shall refer to these ‘peaks’ in more detail below.
The Practice Nurse
Sister Gillian Morgan
9.48
Sister Morgan qualified as a registered general nurse in 1983. Before working with Shipman, she had become his patient in 1984. She worked first on an acute medical admissions ward for the elderly and then at a hospital for the elderly. She then had two years’ absence from work through sickness, after which she trained as an occupational health nurse. However, she was unable to get a job in that field and, in September 1988, she was appointed as the practice nurse for the Donneybrook practice. At first, she provided nursing services to four of the seven doctors at the practice, including Shipman. Subsequently, two more nurses joined the practice and the work was shared between the three of them.
9.49
Sister Morgan’s work included screening for coronary heart disease and asthma, applying dressings, taking blood pressures and blood samples and performing other nursing duties. The practice was a busy one. Sister Morgan saw Shipman on a regular basis, both casually and in order to discuss individual patients as necessary. She found him the most approachable of the doctors at the Donneybrook practice.
9.50
After the move to the Market Street Surgery, Sister Morgan ran chronic disease clinics for the management of hypertension, heart disease, asthma and diabetes. She also ran a ‘MOT clinic’, carrying out general health checks on patients aged over 30. The rest of her time was spent giving injections, taking blood samples, taking cervical smears, applying dressings and carrying out other nursing tasks. She had her own room, which was down the corridor from the reception desk, near to Shipman’s consultation room. She worked a 24 hour week, mainly in the mornings but with one late shift, usually on a Friday.
9.51
Sister Morgan had frequent contact with the reception staff. She would liaise with them about the making of appointments and other administrative matters. She saw Mrs Massey and Mrs Walker daily and sometimes ate lunch with the other staff in the reception area. On other occasions, she had a sandwich in her room. She saw Shipman every day. On most mornings, she had to see him in relation to a query about a patient or some other topic. She had coffee with him after surgery once or twice a week.
9.52
Between 1996 and 1998, Sister Morgan studied for a Master of Arts (MA) degree in Independent Practice (Nursing). She spent one day a week at Leeds University and one morning a week on study leave. At other times, she worked at the surgery as usual. On completing her degree course, Sister Morgan underwent an assessment of her clinical competence. This was carried out by Dr Alan Banks, then Medical Adviser at the WPHA. Following the assessment, she was appointed a nurse practitioner. In his assessment report, Dr Banks recorded the fact that a significant part of Sister Morgan’s work consisted of taking a history from a patient, making an examination and a provisional diagnosis, arranging investigations and treatment and referring the patient as necessary. Sister Morgan told the Inquiry that she would make her own judgements about diagnoses, investigations, treatment and referrals. She would then make suggestions to Shipman as to how the patient should be managed. He would either accept her assessment or see the patient for himself and reach his own conclusion. As a nurse, Sister Morgan did not have the authority to sign a prescription, to order certain types of investigation or to refer a patient, other than to a dietician or chiropodist. Accordingly, it was necessary for Shipman to be involved in any decisions relating to these matters.
9.53
Sister Morgan told the Inquiry that it had never occurred to her that Shipman’s medical records were in any way deficient. There appeared to be enough information there for her to see what had happened previously. Since Shipman left the practice, she has had the opportunity of seeing the notes of other doctors and comparing them with his. She now thinks Shipman’s notes ‘probably were brief’. She emphasised that they were adequate for her purposes. They were not, however, adequate for all those who used them. Mrs Massey recalled that some locums who worked at the practice had difficulty in ascertaining patients’ medical histories because Shipman’s notes were either illegible or incomplete. Mrs Massey said that she and other staff assumed that Shipman carried a lot of information in his head, since he did not appear to write much down.
9.54
Sister Morgan remembered little about deaths which occurred while she worked at the Donneybrook practice. She did not get to know the individual patients there in the same way as she did at the Market Street Surgery. She could remember no formal system by which she was notified of a death. She told the Inquiry that she did not feel that she had got any clear impression of the number of people who were dying, the frequency with which deaths occurred or the causes of patients’ deaths. Nor did she get any impression of how many people died in hospital. While at the Donneybrook practice, an unfortunate incident occurred when the practice sent an invitation to a patient to see one of the nurses. The patient had died some time before. The relatives were upset and angry. From that time on, Sister Morgan resolved to do her best to ensure that this type of mistake did not happen again.
9.55
Once at the Market Street Surgery, Sister Morgan tried to ensure that she was informed of the death of any patient under her care. The receptionists would inform her of the deaths of patients on the chronic disease registers. They would leave messages in her diary. When she had been away from the surgery for a period, she would ask whether anyone had died in her absence. She would also see envelopes containing MCCDs at the reception desk and would know then that a death had occurred. She felt - but did not know for certain - that she heard about most deaths in the practice by one means or another. She said that she often did not know the circumstances of a death, just the fact that a patient had died. At times, she would hear more details from other members of the practice staff. Sister Morgan said that she did not find it surprising when the patients she was monitoring died of a cause associated with their chronic disease. She said that, if a patient had chronic disease, the likelihood was that s/he had developed a condition which had caused the death. It all seemed very plausible to her. Sister Morgan would not have been surprised to hear that a patient had died on the same day as a visit by Shipman if the reason for his visit was that the patient was ill. Nor did she detect any pattern to the deaths, e.g. that they tended to have sudden causes, rather than to result from chronic conditions such as terminal cancer. The patients who died tended to have high-risk factors for conditions causing sudden death. She did not recall ever being told that Shipman had discovered a patient dead or that a patient had died in his presence. She was aware of only one incident, when Shipman had left the patient for a short time and gone back to find her dead. That was the death of Mrs Irene Turner, which is described at
paragraphs 9.63-9.65
below.
9.56
Sister Morgan said that she was able neither to form an impression of the overall number of deaths, nor to say whether the number of deaths in the practice was unusually high. When planning an audit (probably in 1993), Shipman told Sister Morgan that the practice had approximately 40 births and 40 deaths a year. WPHA records show that Shipman had 46 patient deaths in 1993. The number of births is likely to have been significantly less. The numbers of deaths for 1995, 1996 and 1997 were significantly larger. Sister Morgan did not recall seeing the numbers of deaths set out in the practice newsletters and said that, even if she had, they would not have meant much to her. She said that, even now, she has no idea how many deaths per thousand patients could be expected each year in a general practice.
9.57
Sister Morgan was involved in the events surrounding the death of Miss Harding, who died on 4th
January 1994. Miss Harding’s was the first of the five deaths which occurred at the Market Street Surgery premises. Shipman came into Sister Morgan’s office and said that he needed her. He told her that a patient had collapsed. She accompanied him to his examination room. Miss Harding was lying there, pallid and motionless. Shipman instructed Sister Morgan to perform cardiac massage while he attempted mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. They continued for several minutes before Shipman indicated that they should stop. Sister Morgan believed this decision was correct as there were no signs of life. Shipman felt Miss Harding’s pulse but Sister Morgan does not recall whether he looked at her pupils. She does not recall him using a stethoscope. Sister Morgan remembered, when asked by the Inquiry, that resuscitation equipment comprising a bag containing a bag and mask and an airway for resuscitation was kept at the surgery, together with a supply of adrenaline. She said that at the time she was on ‘automatic pilot’ so it did not strike her as surprising that Shipman was not using this equipment. Subsequently, when she was asked to give a statement about the death to the police in 1998, she wondered why it had not occurred to her to go and get the equipment herself. In the event, Shipman had appeared to have no difficulty in establishing an airway. Prior to this time, Sister Morgan had performed about four resuscitations following cardiac arrests. She had had training in resuscitation during her occupational health course and an update after her arrival at the Market Street Surgery.
9.58
Sister Morgan had no suspicions about Miss Harding’s death and no doubts that the resuscitation attempt had been genuine. An ambulance had been called for Miss Harding but was later cancelled. Sister Morgan had only a vague recollection of this. She said that she would not have been surprised if Shipman had ceased his efforts to resuscitate Miss Harding before an ambulance (which would have taken between 10 and 20 minutes to reach the surgery) had arrived, as they were making no progress. Dr John Grenville, who gave evidence during Phase One of the Inquiry, disagreed. He said that it would have made no sense to have started resuscitation and then to have ceased before the ambulance arrived. It would, of course, make sense if, as I have found, the resuscitation was a sham, designed to convince Sister Morgan and others that Shipman had made a genuine attempt to save Miss Harding’s life.
9.59
In evidence, Sister Morgan told the Inquiry that she and Shipman discussed the death later that same morning. She asked him if she had done the cardiac massage correctly. She did not recall any discussion about the failure to use the resuscitation equipment. In evidence, she seemed at first to suggest that she had not thought about this failure from the time of the incident itself until giving her police statement in 1998. However, afterwards, she suggested that it might have occurred to her later when she ‘pondered on it, maybe that night’. She believed that, if she had thought about the failure to use the resuscitation equipment and had not mentioned it to Shipman, it would be because she was busy with other things and had overlooked doing so.
9.60
It seems to me unlikely that Sister Morgan ever considered the failure to use resuscitation equipment until she came to give her police statement, or possibly even later. If she had given the matter any thought at the time, it seems highly likely that she would have discussed it with Shipman and that she would have been concerned to ensure that no such failure occurred again.
9.61
Sister Morgan understood that Miss Harding had appeared ill when she arrived at the surgery and that she had died of a coronary thrombosis. She said that she would have expected such a death to be reported to the coroner and was unaware that it had not been. She knew that a death had occurred on the premises at the Donneybrook practice during her time there so she did not regard such a death as particularly unusual. She was not aware that the patient who had died at the Donneybrook practice, Mrs Mary Hamer, had been a patient of Shipman.
9.62
Sister Morgan was also at work when Mrs Ashton died at the surgery. Sister Morgan played no part in the events surrounding the death and believes that she heard about it later that same day from Mrs Chapman. She did not wonder why no resuscitation had been attempted and she said that she was unaware that no ambulance had been called. She was absent from the surgery on maternity leave or holiday at the time when the other three deaths occurred there. Sister Morgan said that she did not count up the deaths which had occurred on the surgery premises, nor did she consider them in their totality. The deaths were spread over three and a half years. She did not give any thought as to whether adequate resuscitation techniques had been used on each occasion. She assumed that Shipman would have done what was appropriate at the time.
9.63
In a statement made to the Inquiry, Sister Morgan mentioned three deaths in particular which had caused her some initial surprise. However, she said that in each case she was able to marry up the fact of the death with some other information that made it seem part of a natural process. The first of the deaths was that of Mrs Turner on Thursday, 11th
July 1996. Shipman was convicted of her murder. Mrs Turner, who was a diabetic, telephoned the surgery on the morning of her death. Sister Morgan spoke to her. She says that Mrs Turner told her that she had been vomiting for several days and had stopped taking the medication she had been prescribed for her diabetes. Mrs Turner’s family told the police that the problem was that Mrs Turner had a cold and was bringing up phlegm and occasionally being sick. They said she was concerned that she was bringing up her medication and telephoned the surgery to ask for advice. Sister Morgan was adamant that Mrs Turner had told her that she had stopped taking her medication several days before. This would have been contrary to the instructions which Sister Morgan gave to diabetics, namely that if they were unwell (particularly if suffering from vomiting and diarrhoea) they should telephone the surgery and should not stop their medication until they had received advice. Sister Morgan says that she told Mrs Turner she should have contacted the surgery earlier. She went on to suggest that Shipman should visit Mrs Turner.
9.64
Shipman visited later the same day. Sister Morgan recalled seeing him after that visit. He told her that he suspected that Mrs Turner had a ‘water infection’ and that he had brought a urine sample back to the surgery for testing. She thinks that Shipman also told her that Mrs Turner was poorly and should have gone into hospital. Sister Morgan believes she learned of Mrs Turner’s death on the following Monday, 15th
July. She was aware that Shipman had gone back to Mrs Turner’s house on 11th
July and found her dead. She does not remember being told the cause of the death. She says that she was taken aback by it. She worried that she had ‘missed something’. She also wondered whether, if Mrs Turner had followed her instructions, she would still be alive. She was concerned that she might not have communicated the instructions adequately to Mrs Turner and subsequently made sure that she emphasised the importance of following her instructions when talking to diabetics.
9.65
Sister Morgan said that, although she was concerned that she herself might have missed something, she had no such concerns about Shipman. It did not occur to her that, in leaving Mrs Turner, Shipman might have underestimated the seriousness of her condition. She said that all the care that she had ever seen him provide had been appropriate, so there was no reason for her to doubt him on that occasion.
9.66
The second death mentioned by Sister Morgan was that of Miss Ward, which, as I have said, occurred on 18th
February 1998. Sister Morgan saw Miss Ward on 5th
February. She gave her inoculations needed for a foreign cruise which she was about to take. She was told of Miss Ward’s death later, possibly at a staff meeting which took place the day after the death. Sister Morgan thought what a shame it was that Miss Ward had not been able to go on her holiday. She learned that Miss Ward had died of ‘cancer with secondaries’. It did not occur to her that it would be unusual for someone to be fit and looking forward to a holiday one day and dead as a result of cancer with secondaries within a fortnight. Other members of the practice staff were, of course, aware that Miss Ward had been into the surgery only the day before her death and had appeared in good health then. It is clear that Miss Ward’s death was a topic of discussion among the staff and, although Sister Morgan does not remember being told about her recent visit to the surgery, it is likely that she was. In that event, the suddenness of her death would have been even more striking and unusual.
9.67
Thirdly, Sister Morgan referred to the death of Mrs Margaret Waldron on 6th
March 1998. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Waldron. On 4th
March, Mrs Waldron, who was 65 and, according to Sister Morgan, ‘a very glamorous lady’, went to see Sister Morgan in connection with her cholesterol level. Sister Morgan remembered that Mrs Waldron mentioned also that she had backache. Sister Morgan therefore prepared a prescription for a pain-relieving drug and took it for Shipman to sign. Sister Morgan was later told that Mrs Waldron had died of a heart attack. She told the Inquiry that she knew that backache could be an atypical sign of a heart attack and that a high cholesterol level was a risk factor. She said she went on to consider her own actions and whether she could have altered the outcome in any way. She said that she did not follow that consideration through and ask herself whether, in not investigating Mrs Waldron’s complaint of back symptoms, Shipman himself might have been at fault.
9.68
In fact, at the time that she saw Sister Morgan, Mrs Waldron had been suffering from low back pain and sciatica for three days. That is evident from a letter which Mrs Waldron wrote at the time and from a conversation she had with a friend just before visiting the surgery. Sister Morgan did not think that the site of the pain or the presence of sciatica was mentioned to her, even though she would have posed specific questions about both these matters. However, Mrs Waldron was a state registered nurse and an articulate woman. It is inconceivable that she would not have given an accurate history in response to Sister Morgan’s questions. It is clear that she would have said that the pain was in her lower back and/or leg. That being the case, Mrs Waldron’s symptoms could not sensibly have been linked with her subsequent heart attack.
The Other Healthcare Professionals
9.69
The other healthcare professionals attached to the Market Street Surgery (including Ms Elliot who deputised briefly for Sister Morgan in 1995) had no detailed knowledge of events within the practice, or of the number of patient deaths occurring. Insofar as they had any dealings with Shipman, they were impressed with what they saw. They also referred in their witness statements to the fact that they were aware of the high regard in which Shipman was held.
9.70
For the sake of completeness, I should mention Mrs Marion Gilchrist, the district nurse assigned to Shipman’s practice from April 1995 until after his arrest in 1998. She was not employed directly by Shipman but by the Tameside and Glossop Community and Priority Services NHS Trust. However, she worked very closely with Shipman. She met him at least once a week and may have communicated with him more frequently. She formed a very favourable view of Shipman. She found that he knew his patients and their extended families and circumstances very well. He visited patients frequently and went to a lot of trouble and appeared to care genuinely for them. She was particularly impressed by the terminal care that he provided. She would not be aware of the deaths of many patients unless they were those for whom she was providing nursing care. Usually, they would be quite poorly. She was never surprised by the death of any of Shipman’s patients; nor did she ever suspect that he might have harmed a patient. She said that had she had any suspicions, she would have raised them with her team leaders. I should briefly mention that Mrs Gilchrist suggested that financial considerations could operate to discourage the raising of concerns. She made this suggestion in the context of fundholding, saying that she and her colleagues were warned that if a consortium of GPs became unhappy with the district nursing service that she and her colleagues provided, it would be entitled to seek those services from an alternative local provider. I can see how this could operate on the mind of a district nurse who was undecided about whether to raise a concern that s/he had about a GP. It would operate far more strongly, of course, if the nurse were directly employed by the GP.
The Practice Staff’s Awareness of the Number of Deaths
9.71
In a statement made to the Inquiry, Mrs Walker said that she thought that she noticed the first ‘peak’ in the level of deaths perhaps a year or two after she started work at the practice. That would have been in 1994 or 1995. Records held by the WPHA show that Shipman had 58 patient deaths in 1995 - up from 37 deaths the previous year. I have found that he killed at least 30 patients in 1995. It seems likely, therefore, that Mrs Walker may have noted the first ‘peak’ some time during 1995. The WPHA records show that Shipman had 48 patient deaths in 1996 and 57 (possibly 59) in 1997. I have found that he killed at least 37 patients in 1997. It may well be that the second ‘peak’ referred to by Mrs Walker occurred some time during 1997.
9.72
Mrs Walker described one or two incidents - probably at the times of the ‘peaks’ of which she spoke - when she recalled wondering why so many deaths were occurring. She said that she wondered whether Shipman could be ‘missing something in his diagnoses’. She said that her husband recalled her posing this question to him on one occasion. One incident she remembered had happened at her birthday celebration at the surgery on 15th
July 1997. Shipman returned, having visited a patient who had died. This would have been Mrs Muriel Grimshaw, who was found dead on 15th
July, having died the previous day. Shipman was convicted of her murder. Mrs Walker recalled a feeling of embarrassment when the news of the death was announced. She cannot now remember whether the embarrassment was on Shipman’s part or her own. No one else present appeared to recall this incident.
9.73
Mrs Walker remembered observing to her husband once that another patient had died that day. He replied, ‘You do work in a doctor’s surgery’, suggesting that deaths were only to be expected given the nature of her work. She accepted this explanation and her concern receded for the time being. On each occasion when Mrs Walker contemplated the possibility that deaths might be due to some omission on Shipman’s part, she dismissed the notion. He was held in high esteem by patients, the consultants to whom he referred patients appeared to confirm the diagnoses he had made and others praised his knowledge and abilities.
9.74
In her statement, Mrs Walker referred to light-hearted comments among members of the surgery staff about the apparent association between the large earrings which Mrs Chapman liked to wear (and which Shipman disliked) and the occurrence of a death. According to Mrs Chapman, the association had first been made by Shipman and was subsequently referred to whenever a death occurred. Mrs Heather De-Rome, the daughter of Mrs Eileen Robinson and herself one of Shipman’s patients, recalled an occasion when Mrs Chapman came in during a consultation with Shipman to tell him that a patient had died. Shipman referred to Mrs Chapman’s earrings and linked them with the death; this was clearly a running joke between the two. Eventually, Mrs Chapman said that the comments began to ‘get to’ her. After Mrs Elizabeth Battersby died, in December 1997, Mrs Chapman did not wear any earrings for a week.
9.75
Mrs Walker emphasised that the fact that comments were made did not indicate that the staff had any real concerns about the deaths. I accept this and, indeed, the fact that such remarks were made - and to Shipman - demonstrates, in my judgement, the absence of any real concerns. Rather, the comments were, on the part of the staff at least, an example of the sort of black humour often resorted to by those who have to deal with the fact of death on a regular basis. For Shipman, of course, it was quite another matter.
9.76
Mrs Walker also described an occasion when, having read a book entitled
Mort
, she joked with Shipman that it would be a good name for him. He appeared to take her suggestion in good part. Other members of staff have also suggested that Shipman may occasionally have been referred to as ‘Dr Death’ and ‘The Grim Reaper’. Mrs Leech recalled Mrs Chapman using the latter term when she visited the surgery some time after she left. This could have been at any time up to Shipman’s arrest. She said there had been a lot of deaths in the practice and she remembers Mrs Chapman making a jocular remark. Mrs Chapman does not remember using the term and no one else has any recollection of this incident. The evidence about the use of such names by surgery staff is not entirely clear but, even if they were used, I am confident that they were not intended seriously to imply that Shipman was criminally responsible for the deaths of his patients.
9.77
In the early part of 1998, things began to change. Mrs Chapman said that, by 1998, the staff had begun to notice the number of deaths which were occurring and that ‘eyebrows would be raised’ when somebody died. It is clear that there was discussion among some members of staff at least about the number of deaths. Mrs Chapman said that she thought that Shipman might be getting a little bit tired. She considered the possibility that this might be causing him to ‘miss something’ in his diagnoses. She says she did not voice that thought to others. Whether she did or not, it is clear that the same idea had occurred to both Mrs Walker and Mrs Massey. The belief that Shipman was getting tired might have been supported by the fact that he was known to be seeking a partner in the practice in the early part of 1998. It might therefore have been thought that he felt in need of assistance in managing his workload.
9.78
Mrs Chapman, Mrs Massey and Mrs Walker spoke of an occasion, probably in February 1998, when the subject of the number of deaths was brought up in the presence of Mrs Shipman. Mrs Walker and Mrs Massey were present at the time. Mrs Massey said that Mrs Chapman was also present although Mrs Chapman believed that she was not. She did, however, recall that the conversation was reported to her later. Mrs Massey said that the staff were puzzled and were questioning why so many patients were dying. Mrs Shipman shrugged her shoulders and remarked that Shipman was having (or had had) what she termed ‘a run of bad luck’. The surgery appointments sheets show that Mrs Shipman covered for Mrs Cocker on the mornings of 19th, 20th
and 23rd
February 1998. In the ten days before 19th
February, there had been five deaths. Miss Ward had died on 18th
February. It seems likely that the conversation referred to took place at around this time. Mrs Chapman was working in the afternoons that week. That would explain why she does not recall being present. The fact that Mrs Cocker was absent during this period would also explain why she recalled nothing of this discussion.
9.79
Sister Morgan told the Inquiry that, at various times when there had been a run of deaths, members of the practice staff would pass comment on this, usually associating it with the fact that it was winter or with a ’flu outbreak. However, she recalled no other discussions about the number of deaths occurring at the practice, even in 1998. She was not present at the time of the conversation involving Mrs Shipman. She said it had never occurred to her that Shipman might be failing his patients in any way, whether as a result of tiredness or otherwise. Sister Morgan expressed doubt that any such discussions had taken place at all before the police investigation began in August 1998. If there had been such discussions, she felt that Mrs Walker and Mrs Cocker (and, she would have hoped, Mrs Massey and Mrs Chapman) would have told her about them. However, it is clear from Mrs Chapman’s evidence that this would not have been the case. She told the Inquiry that the other staff would not include Sister Morgan in any such discussions because of her loyalty to Shipman (‘she would never hear anything said against him’) and because she was ‘very, very sensitive’. The fact that Sister Morgan was unaware that the deaths were under discussion, therefore, does not mean that no such discussions took place.
9.80
Indeed, it is clear that Mrs Walker, Mrs Chapman and Mrs Massey were experiencing some concerns about the number of deaths by February 1998. I accept, however, that their concerns were unformulated and amounted to no more than a consideration of the possibility that Shipman might, through tiredness or some other cause, have been omitting to diagnose potentially fatal conditions. They had no suspicion that anything was seriously amiss. If they had, Mrs Walker and Mrs Massey would not have broached the subject with Mrs Shipman. In the event, the high level of deaths continued for less than five weeks after the time when their conversation with Mrs Shipman is likely to have occurred. During that time ten more patients died. I have found that eight of them were killed by Shipman. After 24th
March, the rate of deaths dropped. I have found that the reason for that was that Shipman became aware of the first police investigation which had resulted from the report of Dr Linda Reynolds to the Coroner. In the three months that followed, there were only three deaths which occurred at a patient’s home. Insofar as the staff had been concerned, they must have derived considerable reassurance from the slowing of the death rate.
How Shipman Was Viewed
Before Shipman’s Arrest
9.81
Mrs Chapman and Mrs Cocker had been patients of Shipman before their employment with him started. They had a high regard for his skills and believed him to be a good and caring doctor. Mrs Cocker, Mrs Massey and Sister Morgan were happy to move with him from the Donneybrook practice to the Market Street Surgery and to stay with him throughout his time there. It is clear that he must have been a good employer and that the surgery was a pleasant place in which to work. Of the three lay members of staff, it seems that Mrs Cocker got on with Shipman best. She shared jokes with him and she was sympathetic when he became ‘nowty’ (i.e. short-tempered or irritable). Mrs Chapman was less forbearing. It is plain that she got the impression that Shipman regarded what she termed ‘the hired help’ as intellectually inferior to himself and that he would seek to demonstrate their inferiority from time to time by using complex medical terminology. Mrs Massey regarded Shipman with respect and had a good working relationship with him. However, she had begun to feel some resentment that he would not allow her to manage the practice in any true sense. Mrs Walker also seemed to have a good relationship with Shipman and was able to tease him. However, she was careful not to overstep the mark.
9.82
Of all the staff, Sister Morgan had the closest relationship with Shipman. She had a very high regard for his abilities, as both a patient and a fellow professional. She had the opportunity of seeing him with patients and of observing his rapport with them. She found him approachable when she took queries to him about individual patients and receptive to her ideas about treatment and other matters. He encouraged her to develop her skills and supported her in her attempts to obtain further professional qualifications.
9.83
All the staff trusted Shipman as an individual and as a professional. All were aware of the high regard in which he was held by his patients and by the community at large. He appeared well respected also by his medical colleagues and by the local medical community generally.
After Shipman’s Arrest and Conviction
9.84
Mrs Chapman described how, after Shipman had been arrested and the practice had been taken over by a locum, she soon noticed that the death rate dropped markedly. Patients died in hospital or nursing homes. Mrs Chapman could not remember a death which had occurred at a patient’s home after Shipman’s departure. Patients tended to be bedbound in the period immediately before death. She began to realise the significance of the fall in the death rate. Also, as the practice staff began to make statements to the police and to discuss the circumstances of various deaths among themselves, she noticed a pattern of association between deaths and visits from Shipman. Sister Morgan said that she did not notice any difference in the number or pattern of deaths after Shipman left the practice. She said that she was struggling to remain at work at the time and could not take in the significance of any changes which occurred.
9.85
On 12th
October 1998, Mrs Chapman made a statement to the police about the death of Mrs Ashton. The following day, she telephoned the police to express her concerns about Mrs Pickup’s death. In the same telephone call, or a second telephone call made within minutes of the first, Mrs Chapman also told the police that she was worried about the death of her mother, Mrs Bardsley. She told the Inquiry that she reported her mother’s death to the police following a conversation with Mr Peter Wagstaff. He had told her some details about the death of his mother, Mrs Kathleen Wagstaff, which had occurred during a visit from Shipman. Mrs Chapman was struck by the similarity between the circumstances of Mrs Wagstaff’s death and that of her own mother. She realised for the first time that what was being suggested about Shipman might actually be true. Although she could not remember the date of that conversation, it seems likely that it took place shortly before 13th
October 1998.
9.86
As I have mentioned, the same realisation did not come to Mrs Massey until much later, at the inquest of Mrs Brady in 2001. Like Mrs Chapman, she has now come to terms with the fact of Shipman’s guilt. Mrs Walker, Mrs Cocker and Sister Morgan are unable to do so, even now. Their difficulty is in reconciling the caring doctor whom they liked and trusted with the calculating killer the evidence shows him to have been.
Introduction

--- Introduction ---
9.1
General practices are focal points for the provision of primary medical care. That care may be provided by general practitioners (GPs) as well as by a range of other healthcare professionals including midwives, health visitors, counsellors, district nurses and practice nurses. These other healthcare professionals will typically be employed by a primary care trust (PCT) or other healthcare trust or, in the case of a practice nurse, by the practice itself. In addition, there will be practice managers and administrative/clerical staff, in general employed direct by the practice, whose task it is to organise and manage the smooth running of the practice.
9.2
In this Chapter, I shall first examine the staffing arrangements in Shipman’s practice at 21 Market Street, together with the extent to which his staff were, or should have been, aware of or alerted to his criminal activities. I shall then go on to consider the channels of communication open to staff for the purpose of reporting any concerns they may have about members of the practice in which they work or about other healthcare professionals employed there.
CHAPTER NINE - Raising Concerns: the Role of the Practice Staff
The Staff of the Market Street Surgery


========================================================================
CHAPTER TEN - Raising Concerns: the Death of Mrs Renate Overton Revisited
========================================================================

--- The Way Forward ---
9.128
I agree with those who say that every GP practice should have a written policy setting out the procedure to be followed by a member of the practice staff who wishes to raise concerns about any matter, in particular about the clinical practice or conduct of a healthcare professional within the practice. The draft policy that has been developed by the DoH and PCaW seems an excellent starting point. However, a written policy is effective only if staff are aware of it and have the confidence to follow its guidance.
9.129
The first stage of any such procedure should be for staff to raise any concerns they may have within the practice. However, it is not enough just to include an exhortation to do so in a written policy. Staff will be discouraged from bringing forward their concerns within the practice if they find that, when they do so, they are met with lack of interest, irritation or even outright hostility, and that no steps are taken to act upon the concerns. Much will depend upon the attitude of the doctors in the practice. If they show that they positively value the observations and criticisms of staff, there will be a much more open culture within the practice and it will be much easier for staff to raise a serious concern if one arises. It seems to me that the kind of practical arrangements described by Mrs Webdale would be a useful model. It should become the norm for every untoward incident or concern, whether minor or serious, to be brought to the attention of those responsible for managing the practice.
9.130
The practice policy should give staff the name and contact details of an individual at the PCT to whom the staff can take any concerns that they feel unable to raise within the practice. It seems to me clear that the ‘second port of call’ for concerns should be the PCT, rather than another organisation such as the LMC. It is the PCT which has responsibility for clinical governance within primary care; if there are problems with doctors or other healthcare professionals within a practice, it is important that the PCT is aware of them. This is particularly important if issues of patient safety arise. The recent Report of the independent investigation into how the NHS handled allegations about the conduct of Clifford Ayling (the Ayling Report) highlighted the ‘ambiguous role’ played by the local LMC in that case. The Ayling Report emphasised that it was not the role of LMCs to act on information which suggested that patient safety was being compromised. That was the role of the PCT or the relevant professional regulatory body. I would suggest that the guidance within a written policy should make clear, not only that the appropriate ‘second port of call’ should be the PCT, but also why it is important that the PCT should be made aware of concerns.
9.131
Occasionally, a healthcare professional or other member of staff may have a concern that is so sensitive that it would be difficult to raise it locally. Concerns of the kind that staff might have had about Shipman would be an example. It would have taken a great deal of courage for a member of staff to have raised concerns with the WPHA about Shipman’s death rates. Access to advice from an organisation well away from the area would make the prospect of making a report much less daunting. To provide for this situation, the policy should contain details of organisations, such as PCaW, from which staff can obtain free independent advice. If the ‘single portal’ or ‘clearing house’ for the signposting of complaints and concerns, which I have referred to elsewhere in this Report, is created, the policy should set out the contact details for that also.
9.132
Practices should be encouraged to train their staff in the procedures set out in their policy and to reinforce that training regularly. It should form part of the induction process for new staff. The policy itself should be reviewed and updated (e.g. by ensuring that the named contacts and contact details are still current) at regular intervals; as Mrs Webdale said, it should be a ‘living document’.
9.133
In addition to any training given by GP practices, PCTs should provide information and training about whistleblowing policies direct to practice staff. The training should be placed in the context of general clinical governance issues. Staff should be made aware of the important role they can play in promoting clinical governance within their practices and in protecting patients. PCTs should designate at least one individual to act as a contact for practice staff who have concerns to communicate. Every effort should be made to ensure that the designated individuals are personally known to practice staff. It would help if there could be an element of continuity so that staff did not continually have to deal with different individuals. The designated individuals should not merely act as recipients for concerns, but should also offer general support and advice to practice staff.
9.134
Special arrangements should be made for staff in single-handed and small practices. The written policies for such practices should refer to the particular difficulties which staff in such practices might face in voicing concerns and should recognise that they might prefer to raise their concerns with the PCT, rather than internally, in the first instance. Extra efforts should be made to promote links between the PCT and the staff of single-handed and small practices and to involve the latter in training and other events. I note that the Ayling Report referred to the need for PCTs to pay particular attention to developing and supporting the independence of practice managers in single-handed practices. I would endorse this recommendation, but would also like to see it extended to other staff within GP practices - in particular, practice nurses.
9.135
In order to reduce the problems caused by isolation, initiatives that promote the ‘cross-fertilisation’ of staff between one GP practice and another should be encouraged wherever possible. I have in mind here the arrangements mentioned by Mrs Webdale for the sharing of staff and the mentoring and peer support schemes that exist in some areas. The dissemination of ideas and information between staff in different GP practices should, it seems to me, increase the capacity of staff to recognise behaviour and clinical practice that fall completely outside the norm.
9.136
At the Inquiry, the issue arose as to whether practice staff who raise genuine concerns about their GP employer are adequately protected from reprisals by the provisions of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA). I describe the provisions of the PIDA in
Chapter 11
. Although practice staff technically enjoy the protection of the Act, there are two potential problems. The first is that the PIDA requires a whistleblower to raise his/her concerns within the employer’s organisation before raising them outside. If the whistleblower goes straight to an outside body, much of the protection of the PIDA will be lost. This provision is really designed to discourage whistleblowers from ‘going public’ before they have raised their concerns internally. However, the protection of the PIDA is not lost if the whistleblower raises his/her concerns with a person or body that the employer has suggested as a suitable recipient for those concerns. Thus, if a GP practice’s whistleblowing policy suggested the PCT as a suitable recipient, the protection of the PIDA would not be lost if the staff member raised his/her concerns with a PCT employee. The same should apply in the event that a ‘single portal’ or ‘clearing house’ were to be set up. If it is thought that there is any doubt about the application of the principle I have mentioned, then I suggest that the PIDA should be amended to clarify this.
9.137
The second problem is a more general one. Any protection provided by the PIDA will be ineffective if the staff member raises a concern about someone within the practice (for example a doctor or practice nurse) and if, as a result, the working relationships within the practice break down. The right to retain the employment is then an empty one. I think that the provisions of the PIDA were drafted with large organisations, rather than small ones, in mind. I do not think that it would be practicable to amend the PIDA to remedy this problem. However, in the event that a staff member ‘blows the whistle’ on a practice and cannot continue to work there, the PCT should, in my view, assist the employee to find a post in another practice wherever possible.
9.138
Whether or not it would be sensible or practical for PCTs to collect ‘exit questionnaires’ from staff leaving GP practices I am not sure. The only way to find out would be to run a number of pilot schemes and assess the results. It does not seem to me that this would be difficult to organise. However, I would have thought that, if PCTs ensured that there was a member of their own staff whose responsibility it was to maintain relationships with practice staff, staff with problems would naturally turn to the PCT for help and there would be no need for questionnaires.
9.139
I agree with Dr William Reith who, speaking on behalf of the Royal College of General Practitioners, emphasised the need for concerns to be properly followed up by PCTs. His comments reflected the concerns of many, namely that, if practice staff see a consistent pattern whereby no action is taken in respect of concerns that are raised, that will inevitably discourage them from reporting concerns in future. There are other reasons why concerns expressed by practice staff should be properly investigated and acted upon. A member of the staff of a GP practice is likely to think long and hard before bringing a concern to the PCT; it is not a step that s/he is likely to take lightly. He or she is likely to be one of the few people who work closely with the doctor or other healthcare professional concerned and who would be in a position to become aware of poor clinical practice or aberrant behaviour. While it is of course possible that his/her concerns may be unfounded, they may well be justified and, in the interests of good clinical governance, it is vital that they are taken seriously and subjected to proper investigation. I shall say more about how I believe PCTs should respond to such concerns later in this Report.
The Raising of Concerns by Practice Staff
CHAPTER TEN - Raising Concerns: the Death of Mrs Renate Overton Revisited

--- Introduction ---
10.1
In October 2003, the Inquiry heard further evidence concerning the case of Mrs Renate Overton, about which oral evidence had previously been heard in December 2002. The case is described in detail in the First and Third Reports.
10.2
Mrs Overton was admitted unconscious to Tameside General Hospital on the evening of Friday, 18th
February 1994. Shipman had given her a lethal overdose of diamorphine, having attended her home following a report that she was suffering an asthma attack. She never regained consciousness after his intervention and she died in hospital on 21st
April 1995. Many doctors and staff at the hospital believed that there had been something wrong with her treatment. They thought that Mrs Overton’s collapse had been provoked by an overdose of 20mg morphine, which was inappropriate for an asthmatic. They understood that Shipman had injected the drug intravenously as a ‘stat’ or bolus dose, that is, a dose given quickly and ‘in one go’. Notwithstanding their belief that the collapse was due to inappropriate treatment by Shipman, their concerns were not reported and no investigation was therefore initiated.
10.3
In the Third Report, I concluded that, if there was any duty to report, that duty fell upon Dr Murtaza Husaini, the consultant cardiologist, and Dr Ceri Brown, the consultant anaesthetist, who, in the early stages following Mrs Overton’s admission, were jointly responsible for her care. I concluded that no such duty lay on the nursing staff or the junior doctors. They knew that the consultants were aware of the circumstances and they were entitled to expect them to take appropriate action.
10.4
At the time of writing the Third Report, I deferred the question of whether Dr Husaini and Dr Brown were under a duty to report their concerns about Mrs Overton’s case and whether they should be criticised for their failure to do so. It was clearly appropriate that I should consider those questions after gaining further understanding of the nature of the duty as promulgated by the General Medical Council (GMC), of the options for reporting available to the two consultants and of the culture within the medical profession at the time, matters which the Inquiry was to consider in the Stage Four hearings. During those hearings, both doctors were given, but declined, the opportunity to give further evidence. They were, of course, by that time aware of my findings in the Third Report. They were represented at the relevant hearings and put forward witnesses whose evidence the Inquiry agreed to consider.
10.5
Questions also remain as to what would have happened if Dr Husaini and Dr Brown had reported their concerns. Would the facts have been investigated fully either locally or by the GMC? Would the seriousness of Shipman’s conduct towards Mrs Overton have been recognised and would there have been any further investigation that might have uncovered his other criminal conduct? Would Shipman have been deterred from killing merely by the fact of any investigation that was undertaken? These questions are linked with the question as to what would have happened if Dr David Bee, consultant pathologist, had reported more carefully following his conduct of an autopsy on Mrs Overton’s body in 1995 and had Mr Peter Revington, HM Coroner for Greater Manchester South, decided to hold an inquest. Their conduct was fully considered in
Chapter 13 of the Third Report
Was There a Duty to Report?


========================================================================
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Raising Concerns: the Way Forward
========================================================================

--- The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 ---
The Objectives of the Act
11.23
The PIDA came into force on 2nd
July 1999. The preamble describes it as:
‘An Act to protect individuals who make certain disclosures of information in the public interest; to allow such individuals to bring action in respect of victimisation; and for connected purposes’
11.24
The PIDA offers protection from dismissal and victimisation to workers who raise genuine concerns about ‘malpractice’ in the workplace. This protection forms part of employment legislation but the PIDA had a far broader underlying purpose than the extension of employees’ rights to protection from victimisation. It was seen as a valuable tool to promote openness and good governance. It was intended to help to ensure that organisations responded to disclosures by addressing the concern raised (the ‘message’), rather than by focussing attention on the person who had raised that concern (the ‘messenger’). It was envisaged that the PIDA would make it more likely that organisations would resist the temptation to cover up serious malpractice. According to PCaW, these wider implications for governance and their relevance across all sectors of the workplace meant that the legislation received broad support from the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors and other key professional groups.
11.25
The PIDA (like the best whistleblowing policies) is designed to reassure employees that it is safe and acceptable for them to raise their concerns within their organisation. If this is achieved and the raising of concerns internally becomes the norm, management will often receive early warning of malpractice and will have the opportunity to investigate and put matters right. Even where early warning is not given, a later report may lead to the detection of those responsible and the knowledge that malpractice is likely to be reported will, in any event, act as a deterrent to wrongdoing. The accountability of those responsible for the organisation will be improved. Furthermore, if management fails to act on receipt of a concern that is later seen to be well founded, management can be held to account. If the raising of concerns becomes the norm, there is less likelihood of a breakdown in the relationship between employer and employee when a report is made, even if the report turns out to be ill-founded. This point was made by Mrs Pauline Webdale, Fellow and previous national Chairman, Association of Medical Secretaries, Practice Managers, Administrators and Receptionists (AMSPAR), as I explained in
. Thus, the policy of the PIDA is to encourage internal reporting but, where there is good reason to doubt that internal reporting will suffice and the employee makes his/her report to a regulator or even more publicly, the protection afforded by the PIDA will not necessarily be lost.
The Tiered Regime of the Act
11.26
The provisions of the PIDA are incorporated into the Employment Rights Act 1996 (ERA), by amendment to a number of sections of the ERA, mainly sections 43 and 47. The PIDA creates a three tiered disclosure regime under which employees dismissed for having reported a concern are entitled to have their dismissal automatically treated as unfair if the report meets certain criteria laid down in the PIDA. Those criteria become progressively harder to satisfy according to the remoteness of the person to whom the concern is reported from the organisation about which the concern is raised.
The Classes of Person Protected
11.27
The PIDA affords protection to all
‘workers’
within the definition set out in section 230(3) of the ERA. It also extends that definition (in circumstances where their terms or place of work are not under their own control) to agency workers and independent contractors and to GPs contracted under General Medical Services Contracts. It has, therefore, very broad application.
The Nature of the Protection
11.28
The PIDA confers on workers the right not to be subjected by their employers to any
‘detriment’
on the ground of their having made a disclosure that is protected by the provisions of the PIDA (a
‘protected disclosure’
). Where a worker suffers such detriment, and/or is dismissed for having made a protected disclosure, s/he has certain enhanced rights in bringing a claim before an employment tribunal. A worker is automatically to be regarded as having been unfairly dismissed if the sole or principal reason for dismissal is that s/he made a protected disclosure. Awards of compensation are based on the losses suffered and there is no upper limit. Aggravated damages can also be awarded. The employee may also, within seven days of dismissal, seek interim relief so that his/her employment continues or is deemed to continue until the full hearing of the claim by an employment tribunal. No qualifying periods or age limits restrict the application of the protection. The protection is available whether or not the information disclosed is confidential and whatever the geographical location of the reported malpractice.
Qualifying Disclosures
11.29
Under the PIDA, only what is termed a
‘qualifying disclosure’
has the potential to be a protected disclosure. In order for a disclosure to be a qualifying disclosure, it is first necessary for the worker making it to have a
‘reasonable belief’
(reasonable suspicion will not suffice) that his/her disclosure
‘tends to show’
(and not merely to suggest) that one or more of the following types of malpractice has taken place, is taking place or is likely to take place. The types of malpractice, which may overlap, are:
an actual or apprehended breach of the criminal law or of
‘any legal obligation to which a person is subject’
a miscarriage of justice
a danger to health and safety
damage to the environment
the deliberate concealment of any such malpractice.
Protected Disclosures
Disclosures to Employers and Related Disclosures
11.30
The first ‘tier’ of disclosure at which the PIDA affords protection covers those disclosures made to the worker’s employer, those made to a person authorised by the employer’s whistleblowing policy to receive them directly and those made to the person with
‘legal responsibility’
for the malpractice in question. The meaning of the phrase
‘legal responsibility’
is uncertain, as I shall explain below.
11.31
Because the object of the PIDA is to offer the maximum encouragement to the raising of concerns within the organisation responsible, the evidential burden on the employee seeking to make a first tier disclosure is set at a fairly low level and the disclosure quite readily becomes protected. The same ready protection extends to disclosures made to a Minister of the Crown, where the worker’s employer is either an individual appointed under any enactment by a Minister, or a body, any of whose members are so appointed. This would apply to the case where a worker employed by a public body subject to Ministerial appointment (e.g. the NHS or a primary care trust (PCT)) ‘blows the whistle’ directly to the Secretary of State (SoS) for Health (or, more likely in practice, to a senior official at the Department of Health (DoH)).
11.32
Such qualifying disclosures become protected disclosures provided that they are made
‘in good faith’
. The question whether or not a protected disclosure is made
‘in good faith’
is a question of fact for the employment tribunal to decide. There is no statutory definition of the phrase, although the Court of Appeal has recently held (in the case of
Street v Derbyshire Unemployed Workers’ Centre
1
) that
‘in good faith’
requires that the predominant motivation for the making of the report was the public interest. A person whose predominant motive is, for example, personal dislike would not be entitled to the protection of the PIDA, even though the information disclosed was truthful and accurate and was about the commission of a serious crime. If, therefore, a member of the practice staff employed by Shipman had reported concerns about his conduct, she would not have enjoyed the protection of the PIDA if her main reason for making the report had been personal dislike of Shipman. This is despite the overwhelming public interest in the disclosure that he might be murdering patients. I shall discuss this problem further below.
Disclosures to External Regulators
11.33
The second ‘tier’ of disclosure covers the protection to be afforded to qualifying disclosures made to certain external regulators and similar bodies or, using the words of section 43F of the ERA, to persons
‘prescribed by an order made by the Secretary of State
(
for Trade and Industry
)
for the purposes of this section’
(
‘prescribed persons’
). The object of the PIDA is to offer only slightly less encouragement to concerns raised in this way than to concerns raised within the organisation responsible. These
‘prescribed persons’
- all external regulators - include bodies such as the Financial Services Authority, the Health and Safety Executive, the General Social Care Council and the Environment Agency. They do not include the General Medical Council (GMC) or the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (known as the Healthcare Commission).
11.34
Before a disclosure made to an external regulator can be protected under the PIDA, the worker making the disclosure is required not only to have acted
‘in good faith’
; s/he must also have had a
‘reasonable belief’
, first, that the information disclosed or allegations made were
‘substantially true’
and, second, that the disclosure fell within the description of the kinds of disclosure that the
‘prescribed person’
was authorised to receive. I have already mentioned that, before a disclosure can gain even the status of a qualifying disclosure, it is necessary for the worker to have a
‘reasonable belief’
that his/her disclosure
‘tends to show’
one or more of the various types of malpractice. Under the second tier, the reasonable belief must be that the information is
‘substantially true’
, a higher threshold than for the first tier, where the additional requirement before a qualifying disclosure becomes a protected disclosure is, as I have said, only that the disclosure should have been made in good faith. I shall return to this issue below.
Wider Disclosures
11.35
The third ‘tier’ of disclosures covers those qualifying disclosures that do not fall into either of the above categories. I shall refer to them as ‘wider disclosures’. They may include disclosures to the media or to regulators that are not
‘prescribed persons’
, such as the GMC at the present time. For such disclosures to attract the protection of the PIDA, the worker must satisfy quite onerous requirements, additional to those required in the case of disclosures to
‘prescribed persons’
. The first additional requirement (which can be fulfilled in any one or more of three alternative ways) is satisfied where:
the worker reasonably believes that s/he will be subjected to a detriment at the hands of his/her employer if s/he makes the disclosure either to that employer, to a person authorised by that employer to receive it, to the person responsible for the malpractice or to a
‘prescribed person’
where there is no
‘prescribed person’
to whom the disclosure could be made (e.g. because no person is prescribed to receive disclosures of that description), or the worker reasonably believes that relevant evidence will be concealed or destroyed if s/he makes the disclosure to his/her employer
where the worker has previously disclosed substantially the same information to any of the persons listed at (a).
11.36
Broadly speaking, therefore, this first additional requirement depends on the worker either having the reasonable belief that his/her employer will ‘respond badly’ to the disclosure or having already unsuccessfully raised his/her concern (provided it has been made through the proper channels or there are no proper channels through which to take it).
11.37
The second additional requirement for a wider disclosure is that the person making the disclosure does not do so for personal gain. Thus a disclosure made to the press for financial reward would not be protected.
11.38
The third and final additional requirement for a wider disclosure is that it must be reasonable, in all the circumstances, for the worker to have made the disclosure. In determining this question of reasonableness, regard has to be had to:
the identity of the person to whom the disclosure is made
the seriousness of the matter at issue
whether the malpractice is at an end or is likely to recur
whether the disclosure puts the employer in breach of a duty of confidentiality owed to another person and (in a case where the person concerned has previously disclosed substantially the same information to any of the persons listed at (a) in
paragraph 11.35
above) whether s/he did so in compliance with a procedure authorised by his/her employer.
11.39
Where wider disclosures are of what are described as
‘exceptionally serious failures’
, the requirements at (a) to (c) in
paragraph 11.35
do not have to be satisfied. The other requirements do, however, have to be satisfied and, when determining the question of reasonableness, particular regard is to be paid to the identity of the person to whom the disclosure is made. By way of illustration, a report to the GMC of concern about a serious continuing risk to patient safety where the worker has previously raised the concern internally would be more likely to be protected than a first-time disclosure to the press of a minor concern not involving public safety.
Contractual Duties of Confidentiality
11.40
Many contracts of employment contain express confidentiality clauses; in many others a duty is implied. When parties to an employment contract fall into dispute and reach agreement over the terms for the dissolution of their relationship, there is often a clause in the agreement (a ‘severance agreement’) to keep its terms confidential. Such confidentiality clauses are usually perfectly proper. However, the PIDA provides that a provision in any agreement between a worker and an employer shall be void insofar as it purports to preclude the worker from making a protected disclosure. The PIDA therefore covers all agreements between employers and workers and is not limited to contracts of employment. It also covers severance agreements.
Disclosure to Legal Advisers
11.41
These are fully protected. However, I think it unlikely that many cases will arise out of disclosure to a legal adviser because, in the nature of things, such disclosures are confidential and are therefore unlikely to result in dismissal or other detriment.
The Impact of the Act
11.42
Mr Dehn told the Inquiry that the PIDA is working well and that it has had a significant beneficial effect. Since its enactment, many employers have become more aware of the need to develop and put in place good, robust whistleblowing policies that embody the features I shall shortly describe. Employers are now more aware that it is legitimate for their employees to raise concerns, that they need to be circumspect about how they handle concerns when raised and that ‘if it goes wrong they may have to pay’. In this way, the balance of power has been somewhat redressed.
11.43
Mr Dehn was keen to emphasise the deterrent effect of a good, robust written policy setting out the procedure to be followed when raising and dealing with a concern. He spoke of ‘early evidence’ that such policies are having that effect. He told the Inquiry that a wrongdoer is more likely to commit malpractice if s/he suspects that his/her peers and colleagues will not know what to do, or will be too afraid to act, if and when they become aware that malpractice is being committed.
Employment Tribunals
11.44
According to information collated by PCaW in 2003, the public register of employment tribunal applications suggested that some 1200 claims under the provisions of the PIDA were registered in the first three years after the PIDA came into force. These claims had led to one Court of Appeal decision, one Scottish Court of Session decision, six decisions of the Employment Appeal Tribunal and about 100 full decisions of employment tribunals. I have mentioned already the later Court of Appeal case of
Street v Derbyshire Unemployed Workers’ Centre
. These are substantial numbers. They confirm the need for employees to be protected in this way. The concerns raised by those who brought claims ranged from quite trivial matters to serious crimes and grave dangers. The reprisals suffered also covered a wide spectrum. While the majority of the cases involved the raising of concerns internally, employment tribunals readily regarded disclosures to regulators as protected. Five public disclosures - including two to the media - were also held to merit protection. Aggravated damages have been awarded in several cases and, in one case, compensation of £50,000 was given for injury to feelings. While the largest tribunal award by 2003 was £805,000, PCaW suggested that several cases had been settled for more than £1m.
11.45
Mr Dehn was at pains to emphasise, however, that neither the number of employment tribunal decisions nor the sums awarded are the correct measures of the success of the PIDA, the primary purpose of which was to create a culture where employees would feel able to raise genuine concerns in a constructive way and where employers would address properly any real danger or risk.
Changing Attitudes and the Development of Whistleblowing Policies
11.46
Mr Dehn told the Inquiry that the PIDA has provided a major stimulus for organisations to introduce their own whistleblowing policies. Such policies can be a very useful and positive tool for ‘corporate governance’ and ‘risk management’ and they are viewed favourably by employers’ and employees’ organisations. The key elements of such policies, as described by PCaW and as endorsed by the Nolan Committee, are:
a clear statement that malpractice is taken seriously in the organisation
an indication of the kinds of matter regarded as malpractice
respect for the confidentiality of staff raising concerns, if they want it
affording the opportunity to raise concerns outside the line management structure
indicating the way in which concerns may, if necessary, properly be raised outside the organisation
affording access to confidential advice from an independent charity
giving staff of contracting firms access to the organisation’s whistleblowing policy
imposing penalties for malicious false allegations
effective promotion of the policy.
11.47
According to PCaW, there have been some good recent local government initiatives and larger private organisations are becoming more interested and involved. There is, however, still a lack of awareness of the legislation in small and medium-sized institutions. Of the large Governmental organisations, the NHS apparently has the greatest awareness; at
paragraphs 11.66-11.73
, I will deal specifically with the raising of concerns in the NHS. The position is probably very much the same in large commercial and industrial organisations. Awareness is variable in Government Departments other than the DoH but is quite high in local government.
11.48
Although progress is being made, Mr Dehn told the Inquiry that he believes that it will take a generation or more to achieve a real change in attitude. Clearly, PCaW has an important long-term role to play.
11.49
Several contributors to the Inquiry seminars confirmed that, although attitudes towards people who raise concerns are improving, there is still a long way to go. Mrs Webdale said that one of the main comments from her membership was that there was a lot of work still to be done to make people brave enough to ‘put their head above the parapet’.
1
[2004] EWCA Civ 964.
Public Concern at Work
Raising Concerns in the Health Sector

--- Introduction ---
11.1
Chapters 8
and
9
, I have considered how various people did or did not come to suspect that Shipman might be killing his patients and what, if anything, those with concerns felt able to do about raising them. I have also considered in
the position of two doctors who did not suspect that Shipman was deliberately doing anything wrong but who believed that he had given an inappropriate dose of morphine to a patient, with disastrous results. They did not report their concerns to anyone in authority.
11.2
I have concluded that, before March 1998, when the late Dr Linda Reynolds reported her concerns and those of her partners about the death rate among Shipman’s patients, very few people had had any concerns about him. Mr David Bambroffe and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe were concerned and Mrs Bambroffe had mentioned their concerns to Dr Susan Booth. That communication contributed to the raising of anxieties within the Brooke Practice which led, some time later, to Dr Reynolds’ report to the Coroner. The only other person who had attempted to raise a concern was Mrs Christine Simpson, who tried to alert her manager, Mrs Janet Schofield. However, her concerns were expressed rather obliquely and Mrs Schofield did not realise what Mrs Simpson was trying to tell her. Mrs Simpson had hesitated before speaking to Mrs Schofield because she feared that people would think she was ‘mad’ for harbouring suspicions about a respected general practitioner (GP). When her first attempt met with no response, she did not broach the subject directly again but did make comments linking Shipman’s name with deaths at Ogden Court. The two home helps, Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross, were concerned about Shipman but did not feel able to say anything. They did not know to whom to turn and were concerned that, if they did speak out, they would not be taken seriously. Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver who had become suspicious about the deaths of several of his customers, did not mention his concerns to anyone because he did not know where to raise them. Also, he was afraid of the possible legal consequences if it should turn out that he was wrong.
11.3
The apprehension and anxiety felt by these individuals typify the reaction of others who have found themselves in the position of wishing to report a concern. In this Chapter, I shall examine the steps that have been taken over the last decade or so to improve the position of people who have a concern and wish to raise it but who hesitate to do so for some reason. I shall also consider what further steps, if any, should be taken.
Terminology
11.4
In this Chapter, I have tried to avoid using the term ‘whistleblowing’. Typically, a person is said to have ‘blown the whistle’ if s/he has brought to the attention of the authorities or of the public some form of illicit behaviour which has been perpetrated by or within the organisation in which s/he is employed or with which s/he is in some other way connected. Frequently, the ‘whistleblower’ will make his/her disclosure to a journalist and it will be reported in the media. There may be a number of reasons why the ‘whistleblower’ has made his/her disclosure outside - rather than within - the organisation. He or she may have reported the behaviour within the organisation previously, but with no result. He or she may fear (perhaps because the illicit behaviour was being perpetrated by senior members of the organisation) that there would be no point in making a report inside the organisation; s/he may even be fearful of the consequences of making such a report. The essential feature of ‘whistleblowing’, however, is that the person making the report has chosen for some reason to take that report outside the organisation to which one would have expected the report to have been directed. Usually, there is little doubt in the mind of the ‘whistleblower’ that the information s/he has is true; his/her energies are directed at ensuring that the information is made known to those who are in a position to right the wrong of which s/he complains.
11.5
The term ‘whistleblower’ is, therefore, a convenient shorthand way of describing the person who brings information about some form of misbehaviour to the attention of those outside his/her organisation. None of the people to whom I have referred at
paragraph 11.2
could properly have been termed ‘whistleblowers’ had they taken their concerns to the police, the primary care organisation or (in the case of Mrs Foley and Mrs Simpson) to their employers. Mrs Bambroffe was not ‘blowing the whistle’ when she voiced her concerns to Dr Booth; nor was Dr Reynolds when she made her report to the Coroner. Mrs Simpson was not ‘whistleblowing’ when she spoke to her line manager of her concerns. None of those persons worked within the same organisation as Shipman; they were merely voicing their concerns to those who they felt were the appropriate authorities.
11.6
Another feature which set those people apart from the typical ‘whistleblower’ was the fact that most of them were far from confident that their concerns were justified. They were not seeking to make a complaint or to air a grievance about something that they knew to be wrong. Indeed, one of the factors that inhibited them from speaking out was their concern that they might be proved to be wrong and their fear of the consequences of such an error.
11.7
The public generally becomes aware of an incident of ‘whistleblowing’ when things have gone wrong - usually when the ‘whistleblower’ has been dismissed from his/her employment for breach of his/her duty of confidentiality or has suffered some other detriment. In some cases involving national security, ‘whistleblowers’ have even been prosecuted. When it appears that the ‘whistleblower’ has been motivated by genuine and well-founded concerns, public opinion tends to support the ‘whistleblower’ and the feeling is that s/he has done his/her public duty. Nevertheless, the message that emerges from media reports of ‘whistleblowing’ cases is in essence a negative one; namely that those who put their heads above the parapet and dare to speak out are liable to be penalised in some way. I do not think it is helpful to confuse that negative message with a discussion of how people with genuine and legitimate concerns affecting the public interest can be helped to bring forward those concerns in a responsible and effective manner.
11.8
I recognise that the meaning of the term ‘whistleblower’ has recently been extended somewhat. It is now sometimes used to describe a person who reports his/her concerns within the organisation to which those concerns refer, or even to describe a member of the public who raises concerns about a person or organisation with which s/he has no personal connection at all. It is used also to describe the raising of concerns which are less serious in nature than those that have formed the basis of the most celebrated ‘whistleblowing’ cases. Many of the witnesses to the Inquiry used the term ‘whistleblowing’ virtually synonymously with ‘the raising of concerns’.
11.9
I propose to avoid using the expression ‘whistleblowing’ wherever possible. However, the term has come into such general use that many organisations now have what they call ‘whistleblowing’ policies, which are really policies to assist employees to ‘raise concerns’ in an appropriate way, giving them an assurance that they will be taken seriously and will not be victimised as a result of their action. Because the term ‘whistleblowing’ is used in this way by some, I will occasionally have to use it myself in this Chapter, as I did in
. Otherwise, I shall not.
Serving the Public Interest
11.10
The raising of genuinely held concerns about issues of public importance is to be encouraged. The public interest may be served in many different ways, such as by the prevention or detection of crime, by the prevention of accidents or by the protection of the public purse. I have already mentioned some natural barriers to the raising of concerns encountered by those who harboured concerns about Shipman. Others include the fear of being seen as a troublemaker or ‘maverick’, the fear of recriminations and a feeling of impotence grounded in the belief that, even if the report is made, nothing will be done about it. There may be a concern that making a report might lead to proceedings for defamation. There may be anxiety that the report of a concern will be interpreted as an attack on an individual or body whereas no such attack may be intended. There may be a fear that the group or team of which the person to be criticised is a member will rally round him/her and will ostracise the person who has raised the concern.
11.11
Such fears may be well founded. As I will explain later in this Chapter, the experience of Dr Stephen Bolsin, the consultant anaesthetist who tried unsuccessfully to report his concerns about the high mortality rate among paediatric cardiac patients at the Bristol Royal Infirmary (BRI) in the late 1980s and early 1990s, demonstrates how serious the consequences of raising concerns can be. His decision to cease practice in the UK and to set up practice in Australia resulted, at least in part, from the response to his attempts to raise his concerns. In my view, individuals must be encouraged to raise their honest concerns; they need to know how to do it and they need to have the confidence that, if they do, those concerns will be taken seriously and that they will not be victimised in any way.
11.12
It is now generally recognised that the raising of a concern within the organisation in which it arises is usually preferable to more public disclosure. There are several reasons for this. There is a proper public interest in ensuring that genuinely confidential information is kept confidential. There is also a real public interest in promoting the internal accountability of organisations. Of course, some mistakes and misdeeds are so important that it is only right that the general public should be made fully aware of them; there are, however, many occasions when it would be preferable, in the public interest, that the organisation responsible for an error should be able to correct it and learn from it without any outside involvement. Disclosure to the press can attract a disproportionate degree of publicity with adverse consequences for all. The organisation is ‘put on the back foot’ by the unexpected disclosure and can become defensive and secretive. There is a tendency for attention to be focussed on the messenger rather than on the message and the ‘whistleblower’ may suffer reprisals. In brief, no one benefits.
11.13
The task of devising a system is relatively easy. The real challenge is in developing a culture where every member of a group, team, department or profession feels a sense of responsibility for the actions of the others. Where what is in issue is a question of poor clinical performance, that sense of responsibility may lead, first, to an attempt to assist the person who is performing badly to improve, but should extend, if necessary, to making an official report to an appropriate person. There is also a need to develop a culture in which, when a concern is raised about the conduct or practice of one member of a group, the rest of the group does not ‘close ranks’ and ostracise the person who has spoken out. In the last few years, real attempts have been made to improve the position of people who raise concerns.
The Evidence
11.14
The Inquiry received a large number of statements, articles and other documentary material from many sources on the topic of raising concerns. A questionnaire was sent to a number of local authorities and other organisations requesting details of their policies and practices. Many responses annexed copies of the relevant body’s whistleblowing policy. Several witnesses and participants in seminars held by the Inquiry described the procedures for raising concerns within their organisations. Some explained their own experience of raising a concern. An important contribution was made by Mr Guy Dehn, Director of Public Concern at Work (PCaW), an organisation which, as I shall explain below, has done a great deal of work to promote a legal and cultural climate in which people feel confident to raise their concerns. He gave oral evidence to the Inquiry, and the Deputy Director of PCaW, Ms Anna Myers, attended the Inquiry seminars in January 2004.
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Raising Concerns: the Way Forward

--- Concerns Felt by Others ---
11.119
So far I have dealt mainly with the position of employees. Nevertheless, as I explained at the beginning of this Chapter, some of the constraints on disclosure by employees apply also to others whose concerns do not arise in the employment context. For example, although the concerns of Mr Shaw and Mr and Mrs Bambroffe arose in the course of their work, they had no employer to whom they could take them. Mr and Mrs Bambroffe had a professional association but they cannot have thought it appropriate to discuss their anxieties with its officers.
11.120
The fear of litigation operated on the minds of at least two of the people who had concerns about Shipman. Mr Shaw and Dr Reynolds both feared the prospect of potentially ruinous defamation proceedings if they were to ‘speak out’. At the time when they became concerned, of course, the very idea that Shipman might have been killing his patients would have been considered unthinkable by most members of the public. Also, much of the evidence that has since been uncovered was not available to either of them. They had no way, therefore, of taking further steps to refute or confirm their suspicions. Nor was it their responsibility to do so. All they wished to do - and all they could reasonably be expected to do - was to bring their suspicions to the attention of the proper authorities and to leave it to them to investigate.
11.121
In fact, neither Mr Shaw nor Dr Reynolds need have feared an action for defamation. However, they would not have known that without legal advice. They need have had no fear for two reasons. First, if they had confined themselves to saying that which was in fact true, they would have had no need to worry, because statements that are true cannot be defamatory. If Dr Reynolds had provided the statistics of the number of cremation certificates that she and her partners had been asked to sign for Shipman, who had a patient list of 3000 patients, and those that she and her partners asked other doctors to sign, in respect of their list of 8000 patients, she would not have needed to make any allegation of wrongdoing against Shipman, even though the implication behind her report would have been clear. The facts alleged would have been plainly true. Mr Shaw’s information was less demonstrably true because what he was concerned about was not the number of patients who were dying but the fact that they did not appear to have been ill beforehand. The truth of those facts would have been more difficult to demonstrate although, in the event, we now know that he was right.
11.122
Second, even if Dr Reynolds and Mr Shaw had not been at all sure of the truth of the facts, they could have successfully defended an action for defamation, provided that they had raised their concerns in an appropriate quarter and had not been actuated by malice. They could have relied upon the defence of qualified privilege. The defence of qualified privilege applies when the person making the communication does so because s/he has some legal, social or moral interest or duty to make it and where the person to whom it is made has some corresponding interest or duty to receive it. The defence classically avails those who report concerns to the police or to other investigatory or regulatory bodies. The defence is available even where it turns out that the information communicated is untrue. In order to strike a balance between encouraging the fulfilment of the duty and discouraging the malicious making of unfounded complaints, the defence is not available where the making of the communication is actuated by malice or improper motive.
11.123
Had Mr Shaw reported his concerns to an appropriate body, he would have done so out of a sense of moral obligation. Dr Reynolds considered herself to be under a professional duty to make the report that she did and, in view of the nature of the information to be communicated in each case, no one would seriously doubt the existence of the duty. Mr Shaw might have needed advice about the suitable recipients of the information, i.e. those organisations with a duty to receive it. The GMC, the West Pennine Health Authority, the Coroner and the police all come to mind. In Dr Reynolds’ case, another appropriate recipient might have been the medical referee of the crematorium at which the bodies of many of Shipman’s former patients had been cremated. Dr Reynolds consulted her defence organisation. Neither Mr Shaw nor Dr Reynolds need have feared the suggestion that they were actuated by malice or improper motive and nor would others in this situation. Moreover, the House of Lords has stated that judges and juries should
‘be very slow to draw the inference that a defendant was so far actuated by improper motives as to deprive him of the protection of the privilege unless they are satisfied that he did not believe that what he said or wrote was true or that he was indifferent to its truth or falsity’
(in the case of
Horrocks v Lowe
3
). In short, a person who feels under a duty to raise a concern and does so as a result of honestly held suspicions need not fear an action in defamation, provided that care is taken in making the report to the right quarter. For that, some people, such as Mr Shaw, may need advice. Such advice should be made readily available.
11.124
I mention in passing that the protection that the common law gives against proceedings in defamation is rather wider than that given under the PIDA to workers who have suffered a detriment on account of making a disclosure. The effect of the decision in
Horrocks
to which I have referred, is that, at common law, if it appears that the person making the allegation had mixed motives, judges and juries should not closely scrutinise those motives to ascertain which was predominant. Instead, they should concentrate on whether the person believed in the truth of what s/he said. If the words
were removed from the PIDA, the test under the PIDA would be brought more closely into line with the test for ‘malice’ in defamation proceedings. It would seem to me to be desirable that the tests should be as close as possible so that a person thinking of making a report can be safely advised about his/her position in respect of both types of proceedings. It would also bring the test to be applied under the PIDA closer to the terms of many whistleblowing policies currently in force.
The Availability of Advice
11.125
I have said that people who are contemplating making a report or disclosure need advice on how to go about it for reassurance and so as to avoid, so far as possible, any adverse consequences. If there is a policy governing the raising of concerns in operation at the place of work, that should provide all that is needed. If there is not, there may be other sources of help and advice connected with the workplace, such as a trade union or professional association. However, there is a
residuum
of cases in which there is no or no appropriate source of advice. The problem is exemplified by Mr Shaw, who had no employer and no professional association to advise him. Another type of case arises where the information to be divulged is so sensitive in the locality in which it arises that the person concerned is unwilling to speak to anyone in that area. A number of witnesses told the Inquiry that, if they had had concerns about Shipman, they would not have felt able to talk to anyone in Tameside because Shipman was so well known and respected. These witnesses told the Inquiry that what they needed was an organisation upon whose confidentiality they could rely utterly, which was in a position to give them sound advice and which was completely unconnected with the subject of their concerns or the area in which they arose. Those requirements seem to me to be entirely reasonable.
11.126
How and by whom should such advice be given? PCaW provides this kind of advice and is prepared to give advice to callers about all manner of problems related to the raising of concerns. A caller will not be turned away because s/he is not an employee raising concerns about events occurring in the workplace. However, at present, PCaW is not very well known and money would have to be spent on publicising its services if it were to be able to fulfil the need I have identified. I confess that I had not heard of the organisation before this Inquiry began. Another factor is that it is a charity and I am not sure that it would be fair to impose upon it a duty to advise any member of the public about the raising of any concern outside the field of interest that it has taken upon itself. It could certainly not be expected to fund the necessary publicity. However, I do not doubt its ability to give sound advice, in confidence and in a helpful and supportive way.
11.127
If financial support can be provided and if PCaW is willing, then it could undertake this function. If not, the need will have to be met in some other way by some other organisation. In a different context, the Inquiry has considered the idea that there should be a ‘single portal’ for the signposting of all complaints about the healthcare system. In the event that a ‘single portal’ is set up for that purpose, I envisage that it would direct persons seeking advice to PCaW or whichever organisation is to undertake the function I have described.
3
[1975] AC 135, 150.
Improving the Position for the Future

--- Raising Concerns in the Health Sector ---
The History
11.50
To modern eyes, it seems obvious that a culture in all healthcare organisations that encourages the reporting of concerns would carry with it great benefits. The readiness of staff to draw attention to errors or ‘near misses’ by doctors and nurses, and the facility for them to do so, could have a major impact upon patient safety and upon the quality of care provided. However, those benefits have not always been generally appreciated. In
, I described how, in 1994, the culture within the medical profession was not conducive to the raising of concerns by one doctor about another. The Inquiry also heard evidence about the way in which nurses or more junior staff might be ignored or even victimised if they reported malpractice or poor performance by a colleague or doctor. In the early 1990s, the GMC had made plain to doctors where their duty lay; it was to make a report in any case where poor practice or performance might affect patient safety. Yet, as I was to hear from numerous witnesses, the GMC message was not really heeded. Thus, although things may have improved in the aftermath of Shipman’s convictions and of the Public Inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the BRI (the Bristol Inquiry), there is still room for improvement. As I explained in
, Dr Gerard Panting, Communications and Policy Director at the Medical Protection Society, lectures to groups of doctors on ethical issues and is often surprised by the degree of ignorance displayed in relation to such issues.
11.51
Within the NHS also, there has been a move in the direction of greater openness, although it seems originally to have come about, not as the result of concerns about patient safety, but because doctors felt that they were being inhibited from speaking publicly about their concerns over the running of the NHS. In 1993, the NHS Management Executive published guidance entitled ‘Guidance for Staff on Relations with the Public and the Media’. This guidance was intended to address the concerns of hospital doctors who felt that their complaints about political interference in health matters were being stifled by confidentiality clauses in their employment contracts. The guidance represented the first formal attempt by the DoH to give guidance to NHS employers and staff about how staff should go about raising matters of concern, but it was less than ideal. Mr Dehn explained that the procedures to be adopted under the guidance were long and exhausting. The guidance did not make clear what employees should do when they wanted to make a disclosure; nor did it offer them any degree of comfort about what might happen to them if they did so. It did not make clear that the options were to say nothing, to make an internal disclosure or to make an external disclosure.
11.52
Moreover, the procedure for raising concerns described in the guidance was akin to a grievance procedure. The procedure had an adversarial feel to it, which was the opposite of what was wanted. The person raising the concern was the ‘owner’ of it and was identified with it. In other words, the issue for the employer was ‘Is this grievance made out?’ rather than, as it should have been, ‘What do we need to know about this concern? How do we remedy it? What can we learn from it?’ The PCaW view is that employers have to encourage their employees to communicate their concerns to someone within the organisation who is able to assess those concerns and act if appropriate. The employee should not normally have to do any more than raise the concern. It must be emphasised that it is ‘concerns’ and not ‘complaints’ or ‘grievances’ that are being raised.
11.53
Mr Dehn said that this period (by which I understood him to mean the early 1990s) was a time of great activity in the NHS. There were probably several reasons for it but, in brief, the initiative taken by the DoH in 1993 was not followed up. The then Chief Executive of the NHS said in a letter introducing the 1993 guidance that
‘a sustained effort is required to ensure that these guidelines
i.e. those that made up the
guidance
are carried through, both in spirit and in detail at local level’
. In May 1995, the Nolan Committee’s First Report recorded that the Audit Commission had found that none of the 17 NHS bodies they had visited was promoting a whistleblowing scheme, as the 1993 guidance had recommended. The Audit Commission had also found that one third of NHS staff interviewed said that they would not raise a serious concern if they had one, for fear of losing their jobs.
11.54
The Nolan Committee’s First Report recommended that every NHS body that had not already done so should allocate to an official or to a board member the duty of investigating staff concerns about propriety which had been raised in confidence. It recommended that staff should be able, where necessary, to make complaints outside the normal line management chain and, when doing so, should be guaranteed confidentiality. If they were dissatisfied with the response they received, they should also have a clear route for raising concerns about propriety with the sponsor department, i.e. the DoH.
11.55
According to PCaW, the Nolan Committee’s Second Report, published in May 1996, reminded NHS bodies of this advice and provided a checklist for use by NHS trust boards to assess how far they were complying with their obligations.
11.56
Fresh DoH guidance was issued on 27th
August 1999, following the coming into force of the PIDA. Health Service Circular 1999/198 recommended revision of existing whistleblowing policies in accordance with the PIDA and stated in terms what was expected by Ministers. The Circular read:
‘Ministers expect a climate of openness and dialogue in the NHS, a culture and environment everywhere in the NHS which encourages staff to feel able to raise concerns about healthcare matters sensibly and responsibly without fear of victimisation. The Public Interest Disclosure Act provides fresh impetus for further action.’
11.57
The Circular required positive action by NHS trusts and health authorities. In line with what had been said in the Nolan Committee’s First Report, senior managers or non-executive directors were to be given specific responsibility for addressing concerns that were raised in confidence and had - because of their sensitive nature - to be dealt with outside the usual line management chain. Guidance had to be made available to staff to enable them to raise any concerns they might have had about health care, reasonably and responsibly and with the right people. A clear commitment had to be given that concerns would be taken seriously and would be properly investigated. There should also be an unequivocal guarantee that staff raising concerns reasonably and responsibly would be protected from victimisation. Enclosed with the Circular was a resource pack produced by PCaW. This included a copy of the PIDA and a toolkit, comprising an introductory explanatory booklet and a number of case studies, an implementation guide, a computer disk containing educational and promotional materials and other material including checklists. The initiative was in the spirit of the legislation and was welcomed by PCaW.
The Bristol Inquiry Report
11.58
Further impetus towards a culture of open reporting within the NHS came from the Report of the Bristol Inquiry. The Bristol Inquiry began in October 1998 and its Report was published in July 2001. It was set up to inquire into the management of the care of children receiving complex cardiac surgical services at the BRI between 1984 and 1995 and relevant related issues. It was to establish what action had been taken to deal with concerns that had been raised about the services and to identify any failure to take appropriate action.
11.59
The Bristol Inquiry Report concluded that standards in the relevant areas of clinical practice at the BRI had fallen below what was acceptable. Over a period of about four years, from 1991 to 1995, about one third of all the children who underwent open-heart surgery had received less than adequate care. The shortcomings had been recognised by some, in particular Dr Bolsin, a consultant anaesthetist at the Hospital. His attempts to raise his concerns about the standards in the Hospital’s paediatric cardiac unit and the poor outcomes had fallen on deaf ears. He first wrote to the Chief Executive of the Hospital Trust, Dr John Roylance, in 1990. This initial,
‘rather oblique’
(as the Bristol Inquiry Report described it) approach to Dr Roylance was rebuffed. Thereafter, Dr Bolsin spoke to others including Mr James Wisheart, the relevant consultant in charge, and colleagues within Dr Bolsin’s specialty. Later, Dr Bolsin spoke or wrote to anaesthetic colleagues outside the Hospital, to his Hospital peer group among the newly appointed consultants in a number of specialties including surgery, and finally to the management of the Hospital Trust and of the DoH. According to the Bristol Inquiry Report, the difficulties he encountered revealed
‘both the territorial loyalties and boundaries within the culture of medicine and of the NHS, and also the realities of power and influence’
. The manner of Dr Bolsin’s approach was criticised by his colleagues, and, according to the Bristol Inquiry Report, he seems to have antagonised both senior management and senior medical figures at an early stage. Thereafter, he felt that he had to take a more circuitous route to make his concerns known. He was not alone in having difficulty in getting a response from Dr Roylance and Mr Wisheart. The Bristol Inquiry Report concluded that
‘while Dr Bolsin’s actions may not always have been the wisest, and sometimes he gave mixed signals he persisted and he was right to do so’
11.60
The Bristol Inquiry Report noted that the systems and hierarchical
‘club culture’
in place at the time (and still said to be
‘too prevalent’
at the time of publication of the Bristol Inquiry Report) were such as to make open discussion and review of outcome data difficult. Staff were not encouraged to share their concerns or to speak openly. Nursing staff were let down by this culture, which excluded them. Those who tried to raise concerns found it hard to have their voices heard. I note that, in a different context, similar findings were made by the Inquiry into the case of the gynaecologist Rodney Ledward.
11.61
The Bristol Inquiry Report concluded that there was a need in any organisation to have in place systems that allow it to learn and develop; a key feature of such systems should be that all involved must feel able to be open about their work and about the work of colleagues. The Bristol Inquiry Report and the related proceedings before the GMC have, I believe, had an important effect upon attitudes within the NHS. The culture is changing but it is a slow process.
The UNISON and Public Concern at Work Survey
11.62
In May 2003, the public services trade union UNISON published the results of a survey of its members, reporting their experience and levels of awareness of whistleblowing procedures in the NHS. PCaW helped to design the survey, the responses to which were analysed by an academic statistician.
11.63
About 50% of UNISON members did not even know whether their hospital or NHS trust had a whistleblowing policy and about 30% said that their trust would not want to be told if there was a major problem. Unfortunately, of those who had raised concerns, one third had suffered some personal
‘comeback’
(not elaborated upon), although one half felt their concerns had been dealt with reasonably. At first sight, these results can only be described as disappointing.
11.64
Mr Dehn’s attitude was, however, optimistic, and he was encouraged by the significant improvement in awareness and positive experiences of whistleblowing, as compared with the position when he had first become involved. Most encouraging was the fact that 90% of UNISON members who had had a concern over the previous three years had felt able to raise that concern. This was particularly encouraging because the membership of UNISON is populated by a large number of junior staff. One quarter said that the culture had improved over the previous three years.
11.65
I suspect that these results are significantly better than would generally be expected of results in the workplace outside the NHS. This strongly suggests to me that, when such policies are vigorously and enthusiastically promoted, the benefits can swiftly become apparent. As Mr Dehn said, the message is that, where time is invested in the setting up and administration of a well-designed whistleblowing procedure, that investment is repaid by an improvement in the culture of the organisation. According to PCaW, the media emphasised the negative but not the positive elements of the survey results.
Public Concern at Work and the NHS: the Current Position
11.66
Mr Dehn told the Inquiry that, since PCaW had been established, 515 of the 3846 expressions of concern received had been from the healthcare and care sectors. In the years 2000, 2001 and 2002, PCaW had received, respectively, 78, 87 and 73 concerns from persons employed in those sectors. There had been a marked increase after 1999, which Mr Dehn ascribed to the Bristol Inquiry and Shipman's arrest in 1998 and conviction in 2000.
11.67
According to Mr Dehn, many NHS organisations now encourage their staff to raise concerns and offer them access to independent advice. Staff are also told that, if, for any reason, they are unwilling to report a concern within the organisation where it has arisen, they may raise it externally.
11.68
In July 2003, the DoH sent a circular letter to the directors of human resources of all NHS trusts, PCTs, strategic health authorities (SHAs) and special health authorities, reminding them of the guidance in Health Service Circular 1999/198. The letter drew attention to the UNISON and PCaW survey and reminded the organisations of the need to introduce and promote a whistleblowing policy for staff. It enclosed a policy pack (in electronic form), produced in partnership with PCaW, which was designed to help NHS bodies to draft a suitable policy. It said that the Government expected organisations to foster a climate of openness.
11.69
Clearly, the DoH and PCaW have been working closely together on the introduction of whistleblowing policies within the NHS. At present, the development of whistleblowing policies is still primarily regarded as a human resources function. I can understand how that comes about; the human resources department will be responsible for drafting the policy and incorporating it into employment contracts. Also, the policy will be intended to cover many different types of concern besides those relating to clinical treatment. However, the purposes of the policy include ensuring that staff feel able to report concerns about clinical treatment, that any such concerns are properly investigated and that lessons are learned. Preparing the policy is a human resources function but making it work should be, as Mr Dehn suggested, an aspect of clinical governance. PCaW welcomed the fact that the reporting of concerns about clinical matters was increasingly being used as a clinical governance tool. PCaW would also like the DoH to give directions rather than exhortations to NHS bodies about the introduction of whistleblowing policies. It would, I think, be sensible if circulars or directions about raising concerns were sent to clinical governance leads and medical directors, as well as to the human resources directors of NHS bodies. These suggestions would help foster the culture of openness about clinical errors and shortcomings that the DoH is seeking to promote.
Primary Care
11.70
Primary medical care is provided by GPs and also by a range of other healthcare professionals such as midwives, health visitors, counsellors and district nurses. These other healthcare professionals are usually employed by the local PCT or community health trust. Practice nurses are usually employed by the GP practice itself. In addition, there will be practice managers and administrative/clerical staff, whose task it is to organise and manage the smooth running of the practice. In general, they are employed directly by the practice. In
, I described some of the difficulties that such staff face if they wish to raise a concern about something that is happening within the practice.
11.71
Historically, PCaW was involved only rarely with the primary care sector. Mrs Webdale had, until recently, not heard of the organisation despite her involvement in AMSPAR and the fact that she is very much in the vanguard of GP practice management. In 2003, the PCaW advice line received about 15 calls in relation to primary care, of which at least three concerned single-handed practice.
11.72
However, at the time of the Inquiry’s seminars, the DoH and PCaW were working together on the preparation of guidance for GPs on how to develop and implement a whistleblowing policy for healthcare professionals and other staff in their practice. The Inquiry has now seen a draft of that guidance and of the whistleblowing policy contained in it. The draft policy embodies most of the key elements identified in
paragraph 11.46
above. I have described it in more detail in
. Staff are advised that, if they are unable to raise the concern internally, or if it has not been dealt with properly, they should approach a named contact at the PCT. The draft policy is clear and reassuring in tone. It contains contact details for PCaW and also mentions that free independent advice may be available from the trade union or professional organisation to which the member of staff belongs.
11.73
It will in my view undoubtedly be beneficial for the raising of concerns to be publicised and promoted in primary care, as it has been in secondary care. It seems to me that the same broad principles should apply in primary care as apply in secondary care. Practice staff at all levels should feel confident that their employment structure allows them to raise concerns without fear of detriment. However, the complex and differing employment/partnership relationships that exist in primary care are not conducive to clarity or certainty about lines of disclosure. As I have already suggested, the option of disclosure to the PCT (or to the GMC) could be written into the whistleblowing policy of a GP practice (the effect of which would be to afford maximum protection to disclosures to those bodies).
Private Healthcare Organisations
11.74
Ms Beverley Cole, transitional project manager of the National Care Standards Commission (NCSC), said that staff working in private care homes, hospitals and clinics often experience even greater difficulty in voicing concerns because they have no PCT to go to. It was a big leap for them to go directly to the NCSC, whose responsibilities included the regulation and inspection of private healthcare organisations, a role now undertaken by the Healthcare Commission.
11.75
Fewer than 5% of referrals to PCaW emanate from private healthcare organisations. When someone from the private sector contacts PCaW with a concern, it is sometimes difficult for PCaW to advise. Very few private hospitals have a whistleblowing policy and this means that it can be difficult for PCaW to give clear advice.
11.76
In my view, staff working in the private sector should have the same opportunity to raise concerns without fear of retribution as staff within the NHS. Also, the same culture of openness should be fostered in non-NHS healthcare organisations as within the NHS. The Healthcare Commission could require all private healthcare organisations to have a clear written policy for the raising of concerns as a condition of registration. The position of staff working in the private sector could be improved if the Healthcare Commission were to be included as a
for the purpose of receiving expressions of concern about the private healthcare sector, as well as under the NHS.
The Professional Obligation of Doctors
11.77
The case of Mrs Renate Overton brought to light important questions concerning the duty of a doctor who has concerns about the professional conduct or performance of a colleague, where patient safety may be at risk. My First Report contains my decision about Shipman’s involvement in Mrs Overton’s death. My Third Report contains an examination of the roles played by the various agencies and individuals who became involved in the case from the time Shipman administered the lethal dose of diamorphine in February 1994.
of this Report deals with the question of whether two consultants at Tameside General Hospital should have reported their concerns about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton.
11.78
As I explained in , in the early 1990s, the GMC made plain the duty of a doctor to report to an appropriate person or body any concern about the conduct or performance of a colleague that might have an impact on patient safety. The current guidance to doctors appears in the latest (May 2001) edition of ‘Good Medical Practice’, which is provided to all doctors by the GMC. It says:
‘Conduct or performance of colleagues
26. You must protect patients from risk of harm posed by another doctor’s, or other healthcare professional’s, conduct, performance or health, including problems arising from alcohol or other substance abuse. The safety of patients must come first at all times. Where there are serious concerns about a colleague’s performance, health or conduct, it is essential that steps are taken without delay to investigate the concerns, to establish whether they are well-founded, and to protect patients.
27. If you have grounds to believe that a doctor or other healthcare professional may be putting patients at risk, you must give an honest explanation of your concerns to an appropriate person from the employing authority, such as the medical director, nursing director or chief executive, or the director of public health, or an officer of your local medical committee, following any procedures set by the employer. If there are no appropriate local systems, or local systems cannot resolve the problem, and you remain concerned about the safety of patients, you should inform the relevant regulatory body. If you are not sure what to do, discuss your concerns with an impartial colleague or contact your defence body, a professional organisation or the GMC for advice.
28. If you have management responsibilities you should ensure that mechanisms are in place through which colleagues can raise concerns about risks to patients.’
11.79
The guidance is clear in that it leaves doctors in no doubt about their obligation to report concerns about another health professional. It could usefully be updated to mention that other recipients for the expressions of concerns could include the clinical governance lead and/or other officers of a PCT. It seems to me that the important thing now is to ensure that doctors accept where their duty lies and act accordingly. In
, I explored in some detail the reasons why doctors have been reluctant to report concerns about colleagues, even in the face of clear advice that they should. Historically, the culture has been that it is ‘not done’. The Inquiry was told that there has been a significant change of culture and attitude since 1994 and that doctors are now far more likely to comply with their duty to report. I have not received evidence directly on that issue but such evidence as has touched upon it suggests that the old culture lingers on. As I have mentioned, the change of attitude was ascribed to, among other things, learning from the events revealed to the Bristol Inquiry. However, the Bristol Inquiry Report itself suggested that the
‘club culture’
still prevailed to some extent in 2001. There is other evidence that confirms that this is so. Reports prepared for the GMC by a firm of management consultants (described further in
) suggest that, within the GMC, there is still scepticism about the level of reporting of concerns about doctors. Evidence submitted to the Inquiry by the British Medical Association Junior Doctors Committee suggested that junior doctors are unwilling to raise concerns about a consultant because of the fear that consultants might block their juniors’ career progression. It is inevitable that deeply engrained attitudes take a long time to change. In my view, it is important that young doctors are imbued with the new culture from the start. But it is also vital that the leaders of the profession consistently put the message across to the present generation of doctors.
The Position of Nurses
11.80
Evidence given to the Inquiry suggests that nurses have faced particular difficulty in reporting concerns about doctors, although they have found it rather easier to report concerns about members of their own profession. Both the Bristol Inquiry Report and the Ledward Inquiry Report said that the culture in medicine inhibited the proper reporting of concerns by nurses about doctors. Most of the nurses who gave evidence about Mrs Overton’s case said that, in the past, they would have found it very difficult to raise a concern about the conduct or performance of a doctor. The position was now easier, they said, and either they would report a concern to their line manager, or they would seek guidance from the Nursing and Midwifery Council as to what they should do.
11.81
Mr Ian Hargreaves, retired Regional Director of the Royal College of Nursing (RCN), giving evidence in October 2003, said that he still remained concerned about the continuing existence of a culture in hospitals that discouraged the raising of concerns, although he had noticed improvement over the year or so prior to his retirement in the spring of 2003. He had noticed that NHS trusts and the managers within them showed a greater acceptance of the raising of concerns openly. Although his impression was that change was happening at the top of organisations, he was unsure ‘how embedded it is ... at the front line ... and that is where some of the problems arise’. There are at least two reasons that might explain why the message is not getting through despite the efforts to bring about change. First, it may well be that the perception ‘at the front line’ is that policies and procedures are regarded as ‘fine words’, which do not reflect the approach that will be taken in practice. The fear of retribution may still be real. Second, it may be that some people remain to be convinced of the benefits of the new openness in terms of improving patient care.
11.82
The RCN has set up a 24 hour helpline in order to advise nurses who wish to know how to raise concerns. This is regarded as an important element of the support it provides for its members. The College also publishes guidance on raising concerns and offers professional counselling, where needed. From that perspective, therefore, nurses are well supported.
11.83
Mr Hargreaves said that the experience of the RCN is that the raising of concerns can be followed by disadvantage in at least two forms. Usually, such disadvantage comes from the doctor who has been complained about, who may refuse to work with the nurse and/or demand the nurse’s transfer. Sometimes, nurses who have raised concerns become the subject of investigation themselves because they may have delayed before reporting and/or because they may be said to have participated in the conduct which was the subject of concern. In such situations, it has been suggested, there is the possibility that, if healthcare professionals witness dangerous practice once and do nothing about it, ‘they too have an interest in any subsequent cover-up’. Thus, it may not be surprising if there is a reluctance to raise concerns.
11.84
Mr Hargreaves said that, despite the assistance that the RCN is able to give, the anecdotal evidence received is that it is still very difficult for a nurse to challenge poor practice by a doctor. He said that he still knew of consultants who could put ‘fear and trepidation’ into nurses and who sometimes used that power to impose their will on the rest of the team, though not necessarily to hide poor clinical practice. He told the Inquiry that nurses who complain about hospital doctors are often moved on to another position, away from the doctors about whom they have raised a concern. This, he said, is counter-productive. It does not resolve the concern about the doctor and it also acts as a disincentive to other nurses who might find themselves in a similar position. First, the nurse’s concern is not addressed and, second s/he loses her position. Plainly this kind of situation ought not to arise, although I can see that, sometimes, working relationships within a clinical team may become very difficult following the raising of a concern about poor practice. It seems to me that, where a concern has been raised honestly, every effort should be made to encourage the parties to ‘mend their fences’. If that cannot be done, someone will have to move but there should not be a presumption that it is always the nurse. Even less should there be a presumption that it should be the one who raised the concern rather than the one whose conduct gave rise to it. In any event, there must be seen to be a proper, fair and thorough investigation of the concerns.
11.85
Although much of Mr Hargreaves’ experience was with nurses employed in a hospital setting, he also knew of instances where practice nurses had raised concerns about their GP employer. In a single-handed practice, that might mean that they could no longer work with their employer. He said that there was evidence, even in a group practice, that if a nurse raises concerns about one partner, the reaction of the other partners is to ‘wrap themselves round that partner’ with the aim of preserving the partnership.
A Study of Community Nurses
11.86
A paper published in the Medical Law Review in the summer of 2001
2
revealed the results of a study undertaken in March 2000 of the level of awareness among 70 community nurses in Sheffield of the legal protection afforded to whistleblowers. The community nurses in Sheffield are not in a direct line-management relationship with GPs and it was thought that this might have encouraged openness in the reporting of concerns.
11.87
Nearly one third of the nurses questioned said that at some stage during their career they had had concerns about a GP’s performance to the extent they felt patients were at risk, yet over half of them had not reported those concerns. Of the 41% who had reported the concern, no action was taken in more than half of the cases. Only 61% of nurses said that they would report a concern about ‘risky’ GP performance. Even among those who said that they would report a concern, there was little clarity about the correct reporting procedures. I share the author’s concern that this has worrying implications for patient safety.
The Position of Local Authorities
11.88
In the last few years, according to PCaW, local authorities have shown considerable interest in the development of whistleblowing policies. The Inquiry sought and obtained a large number of such policies; two, in particular, from local bodies which provide home support services (Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council Home and Support Service) and warden-controlled accommodation (the New Charter Housing Trust). Each policy meets the criteria I have outlined. Each also offers reassurance that the employer is genuinely interested in receiving reports of concern and states that the worker will be kept informed of progress of any inquiry into the concern and action taken. The Tameside policy states:
‘As a Home & Community Support Worker you have a duty to report any concerns you may have in the provision of the service to our service users. These could be provided by colleagues, private/voluntary workers, others.
We cannot ignore any form of abuse that would affect the well-being of our service users.
If you have any concerns:-
Procedure
1) Ring the office and inform a Manager.
2) Write a short summary of events in your diary - day, date and the incident. Write the name of the Manager you have spoken to.
(This information will assist you at a later date if you need to make a statement).
This will then be actioned, you will be kept informed of the situation and the outcome.’
11.89
Without hearing extensive and detailed evidence from employees of these and other organisations, it is impossible to assess how well understood and how well implemented these policies are. However, some evidence received from witnesses with responsibility for the operation of these policies indicates that there has been a significant change in attitudes towards the raising of concerns within the last few years.
2
Julia Burrows. ‘Telling Tales and Saving Lives: Whistleblowing - The Role of Professional Colleagues in Protecting Patients from Dangerous Doctors’, Medical Law Review, 9, Summer 2001, pp. 110-129.
The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998

--- Improving the Position for the Future ---
11.90
It appears to me that the position of any person seeking to raise a concern is now very much better than it was even six years ago, when the PIDA was passed. I think that the PIDA has been of great value, both in the relief it has provided for individuals and also in changing general attitudes. However, I am sure that more remains to be done. Mr Dehn told the Inquiry that the operation of the PIDA had been found to be less than perfect in some respects and it was intended that its operation should be reviewed with a view to introducing amendments. That being so, I propose to make some suggestions as to how the PIDA should be amended.
Possible Changes to the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998
11.91
It is perhaps worth saying again that the object of any legislation of this kind must be to encourage persons to bring forward genuinely held concerns where the bringing forward of those concerns, whether subsequently found to be right or wrong, is in the public interest.
Use of the Word ‘Disclosure’
11.92
As I have said, the PIDA refers generally to the making of
‘disclosures’
. To my mind, the use of that word conveys the presumption that the ‘disclosed’ facts are true. What is in fact happening is that concerns or information (that may be true or false) are being ‘reported’. I would suggest that thought be given to the possible substitution of the word ‘report’ for the words
‘disclose’
‘disclosure’
Extension of the Categories of Persons Prescribed under Section 43F
11.93
In the context of raising a concern about a doctor or nurse or other healthcare worker, it is not satisfactory that a
‘disclosure’
or report made to the GMC or to the Healthcare Commission does not attract second tier protection. If and when the legislation is amended, I suggest that the Healthcare Commission, all the healthcare regulators and possibly even the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence) should be included in the list under section 43F of the Act. I note that the Ledward Inquiry Report recommended that second tier protection should be given to workers reporting a doctor to the GMC.
Good Faith
11.94
As I have explained above, no disclosure (except a disclosure made to a legal adviser in the course of obtaining legal advice) can be a qualifying disclosure unless it is made
. When Mr Dehn gave evidence, in September 2003, he was asked about his understanding of that phrase. His response suggested that PCaW generally advised that
‘good faith’
equated to honesty. He said:
‘I think two things - and this was an issue that came up slightly with the discussion after the Bristol Inquiry reported - is that the good faith test or the reference to good faith was very much certainly in my understanding - subject to what you and the Chairman would say - is in the narrow legal meaning of “good faith”, as in honesty or an absence of predominant or improper motive rather than in this sort of slightly more common meaning of “good faith” meaning sort of “virtuous”. So we generally say that the phrase “good faith” if we are speaking to a public audience is we equate that with honesty. In other words, it is a disclosure that is made honestly.’
11.95
The first point to make is that the proper question for the employment tribunal to ask will always have to be framed in the words of the statute. At present, the question will be ‘Was the complainant acting in good faith?’ and not ‘Did the complainant act honestly?’ or ‘Did the complainant have mixed motives?’
11.96
The question of the meaning of
in the context of the PIDA arose in the recent case of
to which I referred earlier. The facts were as follows. In January 2001, the Derbyshire Unemployed Workers’ Centre dismissed the appellant, Mrs Frances Muriel Street, from her employment as an administrator. She had made an allegation that the manager of the Centre had committed a fraud on the Centre by spending time on other projects when he should have been working in the interests of the Centre and that he had spent money on other projects which should have been applied for the benefit of the Centre. Following a disciplinary interview, Mrs Street was dismissed for
‘gross misconduct’
‘breach of trust’
on the basis of her
‘unfounded and libellous’
allegations against the manager and because she had refused to co-operate with an investigation into her allegations. Mrs Street’s internal appeal against dismissal was unsuccessful. She applied to an employment tribunal (ET) alleging that she had been unfairly dismissed. She claimed that, because they fell within the protection of the PIDA, the circumstances of her dismissal entitled her to claim that it had been ‘automatically’ unfair. One of the disclosures had been made internally and for that Mrs Street claimed first tier protection. Another was made to the treasurer of the local Borough Council; that person was not a
and so, in order to gain the protection of the PIDA, Mrs Street had to satisfy the third tier requirements.
11.97
The ET dismissed Mrs Street’s claim for interim relief and ‘automatic protection’, although her ‘ordinary’ unfair dismissal claim (i.e. that not attracting automatic protection) was allowed to continue. None of her disclosures was, it was found, protected by the PIDA. The ET held, in relation to the external disclosures, that Mrs Street had reasonably believed that:
her disclosures tended to show that the manager had failed to comply with his legal obligations
they were substantially true
they were not made for personal gain
she would be subject to a detriment if she reported the matter to her employer.
11.98
The ET also held that it had been reasonable in all the circumstances for her to make the disclosures. Nonetheless, her claim failed because the ET found that Mrs Street had not made her disclosures in
‘good faith’
. It found that Mrs Street had been motivated by her personal antagonism towards the manager of the Centre. There was evidence that, in one of her disclosures, Mrs Street had made a passing reference to something about the manager which she knew to be untrue. So she had successfully overcome all the hurdles, save for the one relating to
‘good faith’
, which applied to both the first tier and third tier disclosures. Mrs Street’s appeals to the Employment Appeal Tribunal (EAT) and to the Court of Appeal were dismissed.
11.99
Mrs Street’s argument before the Court of Appeal was that the phrase
meant no more than ‘honestly’. As she had proved that she had had a reasonable belief in the substantial truth of her allegations, the requirement of
‘good faith’
was satisfied. It would, it was argued, subvert the purpose of the PIDA to hold otherwise. The employers, seeking to uphold the decision of the ET and the EAT, argued that the requirement for
‘good faith’
was an additional requirement over and above the need to show a reasonable belief that the allegations were substantially true. The phrase
must be taken to impose an additional requirement, otherwise it would not have been included in the statute.
11.100
PCaW was allowed, as an interested party, to make written submissions. The main thrust of those submissions, which supported Mrs Street’s argument, was that it would seriously damage the working of the PIDA if ulterior motivation - in particular the promotion of a grudge - were to prevent a finding of
‘good faith’
and result in the loss of statutory protection. PCaW argued that motives other than the ‘pure’ desire to promote the public interest are often present when disclosures or allegations are made. The Court should not concern itself with the motive of the messenger but should concentrate on the message and whether there was a reasonable belief in its truth. The purpose of the legislation was to encourage people to bring forward their allegations in the public interest; the fact that they might have mixed or ulterior motives should not matter. PCaW submitted, in the alternative, that an ulterior motive should operate to vitiate
‘good faith’
only where it was the predominant motive and/or was ‘wicked’ or ‘malicious’.
11.101
Counsel for Mrs Street adopted these submissions as an alternative to his main submission, arguing that the presence of an ulterior motive should indicate lack of
‘good faith’
only if it were the predominant motive.
11.102
The Court of Appeal accepted the employer’s submission and held that the words
‘good faith’
must require something more than a reasonable belief in the substantial truth of the allegation and something more than ‘honesty’. The purpose of the PIDA, it emphasised, was the protection of those who make certain disclosures and were motivated by ‘the public interest’. The preamble to the PIDA was cited. That says that the PIDA exists to protect those who make certain disclosures of information in the public interest. The phrasing suggests that the PIDA exists to protect ‘individuals’ who act in the public interest. I observe that it does not say that the PIDA is to protect individuals who disclose information, the disclosure of which is in the public interest. If it had done so, Mrs Street might have been on stronger ground before the Court of Appeal.
11.103
In the Court of Appeal, Lord Justice Auld observed that the draftsman had plainly contemplated that, although a disclosure might have been made with a reasonable belief that it was true, it would not qualify for protection if it had not been made
. He said that,
‘shorn of context’
, the words
do have a
‘core meaning of honesty’
. However,
had to be construed in the context of the PIDA. Having considered and drawn comparison with the law of defamation, where the defence of qualified privilege can be defeated by the presence of malice, Auld LJ concluded that the words
required that the dominant or predominant purpose of the worker had to be that for which the statute was passed, namely, the disclosure of information in the public interest. If another purpose was dominant, good faith would be absent.
11.104
In a concurring judgement, Lord Justice Wall stated that
‘good faith’
is a question of motivation and observed that,
‘as a matter of general human experience, a person may well honestly believe something to be true, but, as in the instant case, be motivated by personal antagonism when disclosing it to someone else’
. He went on to define the extent to which mixed motivation should undermine the protection afforded by the PIDA, at the same time acknowledging that the question for the ET will always be ‘Was the complainant acting in good faith?’ and not ‘Did the complainant have mixed motives?’ He said that the primary purpose for the disclosure of the relevant information should be to remedy the wrong that is occurring or has occurred (or, presumably, to prevent that which may be about to occur). Alternatively, the primary purpose must, at the very least, be to bring the information to the attention of a third party in an attempt to ensure that steps are taken to remedy the wrong. In answering the question whether
‘good faith’
was present, Wall LJ said that ETs must be free to conclude that a worker had mixed motives and was not, therefore, acting
. It would be open to them to conclude - though they would not be bound to do so - that a worker was not acting
if his/her predominant motivation was not the remedial or preventive purpose described above.
11.105
The Court of Appeal quoted with approval the following words from the EAT decision:
‘It is not, in our view, the purpose of the Public Interest Disclosure Act to allow grudges to be promoted and disclosures to be made in order to advance personal antagonism. It is ... to be used in order to promote the public interest. The advancement of a grudge is inimical to that purpose.’
The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal. It seems to me the decision was plainly right as a matter of law. As I have explained, the preamble to the PIDA shows that it was intended to protect those who act (by disclosing information) in the public interest; it is not designed to protect those who disclose information, the disclosure of which is in the public interest. The Act plainly intends that protection will be provided only if the person making the disclosure is motivated by a desire to promote the public interest or, as the Court of Appeal has now held, if the person has that as a predominant motive. The position of PCaW, based on its extensive experience of advising people who are considering whether to make a disclosure, is that such people often have mixed motives but should be encouraged to make their disclosure, if it is in the public interest that it be made. In other words, if disclosure is in the public interest, it should not matter whether the person making the disclosure has mixed (or, possibly, even malicious) motives.
11.106
I can see the force of PCaW’s argument. If employers are able to explore and impugn the motives of the ‘messenger’, when trying to justify having taken action against him/her, many ‘messages’ will not come to light because organisations like PCaW will have to advise those who come to them for advice that, if their motives can be impugned, they may not be protected by the PIDA. The Court of Appeal emphasised that someone in Mrs Street’s situation was not totally without remedy; she lost the ‘automatic protection’ of the PIDA but retained the right to argue that, in all the circumstances, her dismissal had been unfair. That is undoubtedly so, but anyone advising her before she made her disclosure would have had to give very cautious advice. The effect of receiving that cautious advice might well have meant that she would have kept quiet. This would be unfortunate if the information affected, for example, patient safety in a healthcare setting. It is clear that, prior to the decision in
Street
at least, PCaW did not advise those who sought its advice that the presence of mixed motives would defeat a claim to automatic protection under the legislation.
11.107
It also appears that some organisations operate a policy which guarantees their employees greater protection than is, in fact, provided by the PIDA. Mr Alan Turner, consultant urologist and, since 1993, Medical Director of Peterborough Hospitals NHS Trust, provided the Inquiry with a copy of the whistleblowing policy operated by his Trust. Its language does not have the clarity that would be desirable in an Act of Parliament but its message is tolerably clear. It says:
‘No disciplinary action will be taken against someone who makes a disclosure in good faith regardless of whether or not it is substantiated. (Of course, we do not extend this assurance to someone who maliciously raises a matter they know to be untrue).’
The phrase
in that context, juxtaposed with the state of mind of a person who
‘maliciously raises a matter’
s/he knows to be untrue, would not appear to require the absence of mixed motives that the PIDA has been held to require.
The policy of the New Charter Housing Trust contains the following paragraph, which again goes further than the PIDA:
‘If it is discovered you have abused this confidential reporting process and have maliciously or in bad faith or without reasonable belief raised unfounded allegations, we will treat this as a very serious disciplinary matter. No-one who comes forward in good faith and/or with a reasonable belief has anything to fear even if it turns out that their concerns were unfounded.’
Although the words
appear in that policy, it would seem that a person with ‘mixed motives’ would not have
‘anything to fear’
so long as s/he had
‘a reasonable belief’
, even if his/her concerns were unfounded.
11.108
It seems to me that the assurances given in these two policies are pitched to give the level of protection that the PIDA ought to give - and that PCaW would like it to give - but does not. I think that there should be public discussion about whether the words
ought to appear in the PIDA. In my view, they could properly be omitted. The three tiered regime of the PIDA, with its incrementally exacting requirements, should afford sufficient discouragement to those minded maliciously to raise baseless concerns. I think that it would be appropriate also if the preamble to the PIDA made it plain that the purpose of the PIDA is to protect persons disclosing information, the disclosure of which is in the public interest. That would serve to focus attention on the message rather than the messenger. The public interest would be served, even in cases where the motives of the messenger might not have been entirely altruistic.
Reasonable Suspicion and Reasonable Belief
11.109
I have already explained that, before any disclosure can become a qualifying disclosure, it is necessary for the worker making disclosure to have a
that the information tends to show that an act falling into one or more of the listed categories of malpractice has been, is being or is likely to be committed. Reasonable suspicion of that is not enough.
11.110
It seems to me that this requirement also may operate against the public interest, especially in cases where the worker has access to incomplete or secondhand information. I am concerned that, in order to make a disclosure even to his/her employer, a worker has to be in the position where s/he could say, for example, ‘I believe that this disclosure tends to show that a crime has been committed and my belief is reasonable.’ As can be seen in
, if this threshold were applied to workers having the state of mind of Mr Shaw, Mr and Mrs Bambroffe, Mrs Foley, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Simpson, I doubt that they would confidently have been able to cross that threshold. Moreover, I do not think that anyone answering a call on the PCaW helpline could confidently have assured any of those persons (had they been
) that their state of mind was such that they were guaranteed protection.
11.111
The onus should not, in my view, be on an individual to establish
in the case of internal disclosures and disclosures to external regulators. The public interest would, in my view, be best served by substituting ‘suspicion’ for ‘belief’. The Tameside Families Support Group suggested this and I agree with its suggestion.
11.112
I am also of the view that to apply the
test to reports of concern to
sets the threshold for protection too high. In determining whether disclosures to
attract protection, this test requires a
that the information disclosed and any allegation contained in it is
. This may be desirable and appropriate when the information is a matter of firsthand observation but the position is different when the information is secondhand, perhaps a strong rumour or suspicion. The individual concerned might well not be in a position to say that s/he reasonably believes
‘that the information disclosed, and any allegation contained in it’
is
, although s/he might strongly suspect that to be the case and that suspicion might well warrant investigation. In an area where the natural tendency will be for people to ‘sit tight’ or ‘keep quiet’ I take the view that to apply as a threshold ‘reasonable belief in substantial truth’ will result in the regulators remaining unaware of cases of which they should be aware.
11.113
The third
test, applicable, for example, to disclosures to the media, depends on the worker having the
that his employer will ‘respond badly’ to the allegation, before an external disclosure (other than to a regulator) becomes protected. I do not regard this as being so onerous. It is far less exacting to expect a worker to be able to explain the basis for a belief about the likely response of his/her employer than it is to require justification of a belief about a state of affairs of which s/he may have only partial knowledge or understanding.
Internal Disclosures
11.114
As I have explained, the PIDA affords protection most readily to disclosures made to the worker’s employer, to a person authorised by the employer’s whistleblowing policy to receive them directly or to the person with
for the malpractice in question. In my view, these provisions leave some employees in a difficult position. In particular, I have in mind employees in very small organisations. There may be no whistleblowing policy or it may be impossible in practice for an employee to raise a concern directly with the employer. There may be no person or organisation that appears to have any legal responsibility for the malpractice in question. Take, for example, the position of a nurse who is directly employed by a GP practice and who becomes suspicious that one of the GPs in the practice is guilty of irresponsible prescribing of controlled drugs to patients. The practice nurse may well not want to raise his/her concerns directly with the practice but deserves, it seems to me, a high level of protection if s/he wishes to report those concerns to the PCT. It is arguable - but far from certain - that such protection exists under the PIDA. It could be said that the PCT has
for the GP’s acts because it has a duty of quality imposed by the Health Act 1999 in respect of the services provided by the GP. However, the argument might well fail. Protection under the PIDA would be very unlikely to be available where the concern was that the GP was prescribing controlled drugs irresponsibly for him/herself.
11.115
The problem could be resolved in the particular example I have given by imposing a requirement that each GP practice have a policy authorising disclosures to be made directly to the PCT. That is desirable and, indeed, it is contemplated by the draft policy to which I refer in
paragraph 11.72
. However, there may be other situations in which the problem cannot be resolved so easily. I have in mind, for example, the position of an employee in a small firm or business who begins to suspect that his/her employer may be defrauding clients. He or she is likely to feel unable to raise the matter within the firm, yet may not feel sufficiently certain to make a report to the police. A report made to a trade or professional organisation would attract protection under the PIDA only at the third tier, with all the additional hurdles that must be overcome before protection is secured. A possible but unwieldy option would be for the range of
‘protected persons’
to be extended. The preferable solution - and I suggest this for consideration only - may be to consider requiring all employers to specify a third party recipient for expressions of concern. Provision could be made to allow third tier disclosures by employees of employers who did not take this step to be treated as second tier disclosures. I recognise that this suggestion is outside my Terms of Reference but, if the PIDA is to be reviewed, it occurs to me that it might help for such a provision to be included.
Reporting Concerns in Relation to Linked Organisations
11.116
It will sometimes happen that an employee in one healthcare organisation develops concerns about the conduct or performance of a healthcare professional in another organisation. The most common situation will probably be where a concern arises in a hospital about the care provided by a GP or
vice versa
. The case of Mrs Overton is an example. A hospital employee who is concerned about the treatment provided to a patient by a GP will or should know of the policy for raising concerns operating within the hospital but may not know of the policy operating within the PCT or GP practice by which the patient has been treated. In cases such as this, there will not usually be any anxiety about loss of employment or fear of any other kind of retribution; the only problem may be one of ignorance or confusion as to what to do.
11.117
I suggest that policies for raising concerns, certainly in the healthcare sector, should in future be capable of being used for the raising of concerns by and about persons who do not share common employment. One example has been the recent development in Hyde, whereby, following the publication of the Inquiry’s Third Report, which dealt with Shipman’s unlawful killing of Mrs Overton, the local PCT and the local Hospital Trust have joined forces to devise a very useful policy. In essence, the policy provides that a concern should be raised initially within the organisation of the employee who has the concern. The concern is then assessed by a member of senior management within that organisation. If the concern is considered well founded, it will be passed on to the organisation employing the person about whom concern has been expressed. That organisation will investigate the concerns but the directors of both organisations should agree the action to be taken, including disciplinary action. I suggest that other NHS trusts and PCTs should develop such policies. On a wider footing, it would be sensible for employees in general to be told that, if they have concerns about persons employed by another organisation and do not know what to do, they should seek advice from their own employers. Not everyone can have reciprocal arrangements.
Self-Reporting and the No-Blame Culture
11.118
There has in recent years been a move within the NHS to encourage doctors and nurses to report any incident in which they have made an error resulting in harm or giving rise to a
‘near miss’
. The idea is to promote an atmosphere of openness in which, instead of seeking to blame someone who has made a mistake, the organisation will seek to learn from its mistakes. In many ways, this is the ideal situation and, if it were to come to pass, there would be very little need for the reporting of concerns. However, the evidence I have heard suggests that we are a long way from that ideal at present. In this context, I should say that I have already explained the proposed
‘duty of candour’
in
. I have not analysed the topic in detail but I share the concerns of the GMC and of the RCN.
Concerns Felt by Others


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWELVE - Clinical Governance
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
12.1
I have already said in
that clinical governance is the means by which it is intended that NHS organisations should discharge the duty of quality imposed by the Health Act 1999. The theory of clinical governance developed from the initiative of corporate governance which originated in the early 1990s as a means of addressing unacceptably low standards in the world of business. It was heralded in the White Paper ‘The New NHS’, published in December 1997. At that time, there was a recognition on the part of Government that standards of care in the NHS were very variable and that this was leading not only to harm to patients, but also to loss of confidence on the part of the public. Clinical governance was to address that problem.
12.2
Clinical governance is defined by the Department of Health (DoH) as:
‘... a framework through which National Health Service organisations are accountable for continuously improving the quality of their services and safeguarding high standards of care by creating an environment in which excellence in clinical care will flourish’
12.3
I personally did not find that definition easy to understand and it does not seem surprising that, in the early days at least, there was a great deal of confusion and uncertainty in the medical profession about the concept of clinical governance and about what it would mean in practice. Some general practitioners (GPs) were suspicious about its purpose (believing it to be an attack on their independent contractor status) and hostile to its introduction. These feelings were heightened by the speed with which it was implemented and by the changes to the organisation of primary care which were occurring at the same time.
12.4
I hope that my own understanding of the concept of clinical governance has improved in the last few months. For those who are still unfamiliar with it, I shall attempt, not to define it, which seems to me well nigh impossible, but to describe it. Clinical governance is a system for improving the standard of clinical practice in the NHS and for protecting the public from unacceptable standards of care. The system comprises several different types of activity which should all fit together into a framework. This integrated system has replaced the previously disparate and fragmented approaches to the improvement of quality of care. The different types of activity include continuing education, the introduction and maintenance of good management systems, the promotion of clinical effectiveness, clinical audit, risk management, research and development and the fostering of an ethos of openness and accountability. Some of these activities are developmental in nature, such as continuing education and the dissemination of good practice. Risk management, by which organisations seek to analyse untoward events and learn from them, is another example of a developmental activity. Other activities are of a monitoring or supervisory nature; for example, organisations are required to collect data and information about the care being provided by their clinicians. This should enable the organisation to detect poor performance so that it may be corrected, but data collection should also draw attention to good performance and therefore have a developmental effect. Yet other activities are designed to encourage clinicians to monitor themselves, with the intention that this should provide the opportunity and incentive to improve clinical performance. For example, clinicians are provided with data about their own performance and that of their team or group; they are also encouraged to audit their own activities and those of their colleagues.
12.5
DoH guidance published in 1999 required NHS trusts and primary care organisations (PCOs) to identify clinical governance leads (who were to be clinicians) and to set up appropriate structures for overseeing clinical governance within their organisations. Once the primary care trusts (PCTs) came into existence, they appointed their own clinical governance leads and sub-committees. Many of these clinical governance leads were local GP volunteers, who were uncertain of their precise role and lines of accountability. Some found their dual role as members of the local medical community and part of the PCT ‘establishment’ difficult to reconcile. Others were uncertain about how they could seek to promote good clinical governance without any ‘teeth’. There were, however, many within the medical profession who welcomed the emphasis on quality that clinical governance brought and who viewed positively the opportunity of working with PCT managers to raise local standards.
CHAPTER TWELVE - Clinical Governance
Structures and Systems


========================================================================
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - Single-Handed Practitioners
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
13.1
For the last six years of his career as a general practitioner (GP), Shipman worked ‘single-handed’ from premises at 21 Market Street, Hyde. After his conviction for the murder of 15 of his patients in January 2000, there were many calls for a move away from single-handed practice. These murders had been committed over a period of three years and it was suggested that Shipman would not have escaped detection over such a long period had he been working in a group practice; his partners or working colleagues would have recognised that something was amiss. Alternatively, the very fact of having to work in close proximity to colleagues as part of a team would have served as a deterrent to him.
13.2
This feeling that there was ‘safety in numbers’ was reflected in the result of research conducted by Market & Opinion Research International (MORI) for the General Medical Council (GMC) in April 2000
. It reported a feeling that
‘doctors in group practices to some extent regulate each other’
, a view that was later echoed in the responses to a questionnaire sent by the Inquiry to 15 randomly chosen primary care trusts (PCTs). That same year, the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) spoke of continuing concern about the lack of accountability to close colleagues of single-handed GPs and of GPs who worked within a group but who nevertheless operated separate patient lists. It was said that there was safety in the informal mutual supervision of the members of a group practice, with teams of professionals working together to ensure each other’s continuing development
. By contrast, there were real dangers of professional isolation for single-handed GPs.
13.3
Although it seems to be generally recognised that many single-handed practitioners practise alone for perfectly proper reasons, I also detect a suspicion, in some quarters, that those who engage in single-handed practice do so from less satisfactory motives. I think that there is a view that some seek to avoid group practice, fearing that scrutiny of their work by colleagues would result in the exposure of their clinical or other inadequacies. Another suspicion is that they may have character traits which make them difficult professional partners and possibly also poor doctors. Doctors with something to hide - be it criminal behaviour or clinical incompetence - will, so the feeling goes, naturally seek to hide themselves away in single-handed practice. The suggestion is that Shipman might have been an example of this.
13.4
The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Dr Michael Taylor, Chairman of the Small Practices Association (SPA). SPA is a national body for single-handed and small practices. It has a wide range of functions. These include a representative and political remit. It carries out surveys, research and data collection. It also issues written guidance to its members on continuing professional development and on subjects, such as complaints procedures, which may give rise to particular difficulties for small practices. Its mission statement is that it exists
‘to improve the quality of care for patients in small practices’
. Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, told the Inquiry seminars that some of the best work on developing clinical governance for single-handed and small practices has been done by SPA. I found Dr Taylor’s evidence helpful.
13.5
I also heard evidence from Dr Hugh Whyte, senior medical officer, Directorate of Health Policy and Planning, Scottish Executive Health Department, about the position of small and single-handed practices in Scotland. Several witnesses, called to give evidence mainly on other subjects, provided their views on certain aspects of single-handed practice. As mentioned above, the Inquiry sent a questionnaire to 15 randomly chosen PCTs, seeking information about their attitudes towards single-handed practice and about any special arrangements they made for such practices. The problems of clinical governance in single-handed practice were discussed at the Inquiry seminars. I also considered a large volume of written material, mainly comprising articles from the medical journals and statements from interested bodies, such as the RCGP.
13.6
In this Chapter I shall summarise the evidence the Inquiry received relating to these issues and I shall consider the ways in which the perceived drawbacks of single-handed practice may be mitigated.
‘Views on Erasure and Restoration of Doctors - General Public Consultation conducted for the General Medical Council’, April 2000.
‘The Future of Professionally Led Regulation for General Practice - a Discussion Document issued in conjunction with and on behalf of The Royal College of General Practitioners, The General Practitioners Committee of the British Medical Association and the Joint Committee on Postgraduate Training for General Practice’.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - Single-Handed Practitioners
Definitions, Statistics and Trends


========================================================================
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - The Monitoring of Mortality Rates among the Patients of General Practitioners
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
14.1
At the time when Shipman was in practice, there was no system in place for monitoring mortality rates among the patients of general practitioners (GPs). There is not - and never has been - any requirement that primary care organisations (PCOs) should monitor mortality rates at GP or GP practice level. Nor is any such monitoring carried out by any national body, such as the Department of Health (DoH).
14.2
When the scale of Shipman’s crimes became evident, many people were surprised that no system of monitoring GP patient mortality rates was in operation. It was suggested that, had such a system existed, it might have alerted the authorities, years before Shipman’s eventual detection, to the fact that there was an unexplained excess of deaths among his patients.
14.3
In this Chapter, I shall consider the feasibility of setting up a system for the routine monitoring of mortality rates among the patients of GPs. I shall discuss the potential benefits of introducing a system for monitoring mortality rates, and shall consider also the problems that might be encountered by anyone seeking to set up such a system.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - The Monitoring of Mortality Rates among the Patients of General Practitioners
The Analysis of Mortality Data before Shipman's Arrest

--- The Work of Dr Paul Aylin and His Team ---
14.28
The report prepared by Dr Aylin and his team is on the Inquiry’s website. Their work is well described in the published account to which I have already referred. I shall refer here to some of the main points of the system which they have devised.
Data Linkage
14.29
As I have already explained, in the past, the absence of any national system of linking mortality data held by the ONS to the GP or GP practice with whom the deceased person had been registered made it difficult to collate the data necessary to carry out an analysis of mortality rates among the patients of GPs. Even if a link was made, the resultant data was likely to be incomplete and, probably, inaccurate. Dr Aylin and his team carried out a pilot exercise aimed at linking national death registration records to the GP patient list data for five former HAs, including the WPHA. A special computer program was used to link ONS mortality data for the years from 1993 to 1999 with anonymised patient list data. Deaths were linked to the GP with whom the deceased person was registered, using patients’ NHS numbers, date of birth, gender and postcode. The NHS Information Authority provided Dr Aylin and his team with patient list sizes for every GP and GP practice in the five HA areas during the years from 1993 to 2000. The data divided the patient population into three age bands (0-64, 65-74 and 75 and over). These age bands were broad, but constituted the best information available for the period.
14.30
The overall degree of success in linking death registration records to patient lists varied between each of the five HA areas. There was a low success rate (no more than 60%) for the WPHA up to 1999. This apparently resulted from loss of data at the time when two former FHSAs merged to create the WPHA. In general, the linkage improved markedly after 1997, when individual patient NHS numbers first became available. Dr Aylin told the Inquiry that this improvement suggested that data linkage in any future monitoring exercise would be more successful. The overall success rate in linking records was 92%. In 2000, it was 98%-99%.
14.31
Since 2000, the DoH has been working on the provision of a single database containing information on every deceased NHS patient, including the identity of the GP or GP practice with whom the patient was registered and the cause of death. The database is to be held by the NHS Information Authority. It has already been tested by several PCTs and it seems likely, as Dr Aylin suggested, to provide better linkage and more accurate data than was available to Dr Aylin and his team when they carried out their analysis.
14.32
When the pilot linkage exercise was carried out by Dr Aylin and his team, the patient list data for GPs whose practices were near the boundary of a HA area appeared to be incomplete. This was probably because some of the patients of those GPs lived in the areas of neighbouring HAs. The data relating to such a patient would be contained in the database for the HA area in which s/he lived. In an attempt to overcome the problem of incomplete data, Dr Aylin and his team excluded from their analysis those GP practices with patient list sizes of fewer than 1000 patients for any of the years from 1993 to 1999. They did so on the assumption that those practices’ patient lists must be incomplete. However, exclusion of some practices is not a solution which could be adopted for a national system of monitoring mortality rates. Dr Aylin emphasised that, in order to avoid the problem in the future, it would be necessary to have a national system of data linkage.
14.33
Dr Aylin and his team chose to look at annual death rates, rather than death rates over a shorter period. This was primarily because of the small number of deaths involved. Another factor was the delay between the occurrence and registration of a death and the compilation of mortality statistics nationally. In the past, there has been a considerable time lag (amounting to several months) before the relevant mortality data was available and could have been linked with patient list data. This would have meant that monitoring would have had to take place several months in arrears. Dr Goldblatt said that it should be possible in the future to obtain information about 97% - possibly more - of deaths within about two weeks of the death occurring. This would mean that analysis of mortality statistics could take place much earlier than would previously have been possible. Dr Mohammed suggested undertaking analyses on a six-monthly or quarterly basis. Dr Aylin said that this would be possible under his system. However, he would not advise more frequent analysis in view of the small numbers of deaths involved.
The System of Prospective Monitoring
14.34
Dr Aylin and his team developed a system that could be used to monitor mortality rates prospectively. The system was intended to be a screening tool for the purpose of identifying units which appeared to have mortality rates higher than would be expected. Dr Aylin and his team described the system as a ‘surveillance’ system. Dr Spiegelhalter observed at the seminar that surveillance would act as an ‘automatic whistleblowing procedure’ which would alert people to the fact that something might be going wrong. Once such a signal had sounded, a decision would then have to be taken as to what, if any, action was needed in response to it, in order to detect whether there was a problem with poor clinical practice affecting death rates or even with potential criminal activity. He distinguished the ‘surveillance’ of mortality data from the ‘monitoring’ of mortality data. The latter, he suggested, would be undertaken as part of the monitoring of a pool of information which could be examined and used for the purpose of quality improvement. Clearly, both ‘surveillance’ and ‘monitoring’ fulfil useful functions. Rather than attempting to distinguish between ‘surveillance’ and ‘monitoring’ throughout this Chapter, I shall use the word ‘monitoring’ to describe both.
14.35
The distinctive feature of prospective monitoring is that it involves monitoring continuously over time, rather than taking a single snapshot look and comparing performance at one time point. Data is accumulated over time and the analysis is repeated at every time point. This has particular benefits when viewing the small numbers of deaths among patients of GPs. The aim is to detect unusual variation in the underlying mortality rate of any unit (e.g. of an individual GP) as soon as possible after it has occurred.
14.36
It should be noted that the analysis carried out by Dr Aylin and his team related to the deaths of all patients registered with the relevant GPs, not just to those deaths which the GPs had certified. The number of deaths for each GP was compared with the number of deaths which could be expected among the total patient population for that GP. It was not possible to perform an analysis by reference to the number of deaths certified by each GP. This is because there was no comparison patient population available by which to calculate the number of deaths which each GP could be expected to certify.
Statistical Process Control Charts
14.37
The method developed by Dr Aylin was derived from statistical process control (SPC) which was originally developed for use in the quality control of industrial processes. It is based on the recognition that the outputs of even the most stable and perfectly tuned production process will inevitably show some variation (known as common cause variation). This common cause variation means that, even under ideal conditions, a group of similar doctors will never match one another’s performance from one period to the next.
14.38
In developing a system of monitoring, it is important to be able to distinguish ‘common cause’ variation from variation that has occurred as a result of a ‘special cause’. A special cause is a factor extrinsic to the normal functioning of the process being monitored, which gives rise to variation over and above the common cause variation that can inevitably be expected in any stable process. Common causes will be responsible for most of the variation observed in a monitoring system and will produce ‘background noise’ in the monitoring of a stable process. Ideally, the monitoring system should be designed to ‘signal’ the fact that variation due to some special cause has or might have occurred and to indicate that steps should be taken to identify the special cause.
14.39
SPC charts were designed to detect and signal the point when an industrial process goes from being stable, in control and exhibiting only common cause variation to being unstable, out of control and exhibiting special cause variation. The degree of common cause variation may be acceptable. If it is not, action on the underlying process will be necessary to eliminate or reduce it. If the process becomes unstable - because there is some special cause variation - an investigation will be necessary in order to determine what special cause is responsible for the variation. That special cause must then be addressed as necessary. Special cause variation is not necessarily a bad thing; whether it is good or bad is a matter for judgement depending on the circumstances of the particular case.
14.40
SPC charts are created with ‘control limits’, representing the upper and lower limits of common cause variation. Suitable limits, like the limits for any diagnostic test, must balance the disadvantage of erroneously signalling that a special cause is present when it is not (i.e. a false positive) and the disadvantage that would result from failing to detect the presence of a special cause (i.e. a false negative). Control limits with high specificity (i.e. capable of discriminating to a high level) are the most appropriate.
14.41
The system of monitoring advocated by Dr Aylin and his team is similar to that described above, in that it aims to identify and signal when a GP’s mortality rates appear to be subject to (special cause) variation over and above that variation which would be common to all GPs with similar features. The application of SPC charts involves defining when mortality rates may be considered acceptable or ‘in control’ and when they are deemed to have become unacceptable or ‘out of control’.
14.42
Plotted on the SPC chart is the value of the chart statistic, which represents the difference between the observed outcomes (i.e. the annual mortality rates) for the relevant unit (in this case a GP or GP practice) and the outcomes which would be expected if the GP or GP practice was performing acceptably. The chart statistic is plotted against time. A pre-defined alarm threshold is set. All the time the chart statistic stays below that threshold, the mortality rates of the GP are considered to be in control and showing common cause variation only. However, if the chart statistic crosses the alarm threshold, it signals that there may be some factor affecting the GP or GP practice which has caused the mortality rate to become unstable or out of control and to exhibit special cause variation. The signal should then be followed up and investigated in order to find an explanation for it.
14.43
The earliest type of SPC chart is known as the Shewhart control chart (named after Walter Shewhart, who first devised it). By convention, the control limits on a Shewhart chart are set in such a way that 99.8% of the common cause variation would fall within these limits. A sequence of observed outcomes over time is plotted on the chart and when, at any time point, the observed outcome goes above the upper control limit or below the lower control limit, the chart signals that there is special cause variation. The chart statistic on a Shewhart chart is independent at each time point. It does not depend on or reflect historical data. There is no accumulation of previous values of the chart statistic. There is, therefore, no accumulation of evidence of any unusual variations that may have occurred over a number of time points.
Cumulative Sum Charts
14.44
By contrast, the type of SPC chart used by Dr Aylin and his team (known as a cumulative sum (CUSUM) chart) adds in ‘new’ observations to the previous value of the chart statistic. Thus, each observation is based on both historical and new observations. The reason why Dr Aylin and his colleagues used this approach was that they believed that what was needed was a system that would detect substandard or aberrant practice over a period of time. The effects of such substandard or aberrant practice may not be evident at a single time point. They may become obvious only when evidence of performance over an extended period is accumulated and considered. I have already mentioned that, in the report of his clinical audit, Professor Baker had recognised the potential benefits of monitoring cumulative mortality rates and had recommended that the possibility of using a cumulative method of monitoring should be investigated.
Variation
14.45
One of the problems with transferring the technique of monitoring used in an industrial process control setting to a healthcare setting is that the process going on within a GP practice is very much more complex than an industrial process. As a consequence, the extent of intrinsic variation (common cause variation) is typically quite large. It therefore becomes very important to identify variation which is intrinsic and to distinguish it from the special cause variation which the monitoring is designed to detect.
14.46
When comparing the mortality rates for the patients of GPs from year to year, there are likely to be considerable differences between individual GPs and even between the mortality rates for patients of the same GP from year to year. These differences can be caused by several types of variation.
The Type of Variation that the Monitoring System Is Designed to Detect
14.47
When setting up a monitoring system, it is necessary to identify in advance the particular type of variation that the monitoring is intended to detect. In the case of the monitoring of mortality rates, monitoring is intended to detect unusual variations in the mortality rate or special cause variation. Such special cause variation would occur, for example, in the presence of criminal behaviour such as Shipman’s or where poor quality of care by a GP was giving rise to an increased mortality rate among his/her patients. Special cause variation of this kind will exist in the case of only a small number of GPs. When monitoring mortality rates, the object is to ensure that the GPs who are subject to special cause variation are the ones who signal. It is also important to ensure, insofar as it is possible to do so, that their signals are not obscured by ‘background noise’ from other types of common cause variation.
14.48
In order to eliminate (or, at least, to reduce) the effect of variations other than those resulting from systematic difference between GPs, it is necessary to recognise the types of variation that are inevitable and to use statistical methods to quantify and adjust for those types of variation. Dr Aylin and his team attempted to quantify and to adjust for a number of different types of common cause variation that, if not adjusted for, would potentially have had an effect on mortality rates. Dr Best described those types of variation to the Inquiry.
Chance Variations
14.49
The first type of common cause variation that Dr Best described was the type that occurs entirely randomly, as a matter of chance. The number of deaths among the patients of a GP will vary from year to year, purely as a matter of chance. There are statistical methods, which Dr Aylin and his team employed, of adjusting for the effects of chance.
Case Mix
14.50
The second type of common cause variation is known as ‘case mix’. Case mix factors are factors associated with a GP’s patient population which are known to have an effect on mortality rates. The most obvious such factors are age and gender. If no adjustment were made for age, GPs with elderly patient populations would be likely to signal as having higher than expected mortality rates whereas, when the age of their patient population was taken into account, their mortality rates might be within a normal distribution. In addition, a GP with significantly more elderly male patients than elderly female patients would be expected to have a higher mortality rate than one with equal numbers of elderly male and female patients. Another case mix factor known to have an effect on mortality is socio-economic deprivation. If no adjustment is made for that factor, GPs with a deprived population would be more likely to signal.
14.51
Dr Best emphasised that care must be taken when making adjustments for known case mix factors. Adjustments should be made only for factors that are beyond the control of the GP. Otherwise, adjustment might have the effect of masking important variations caused by systematic factors within the GP’s practice, which are the very type of variations that the monitoring system is intended to detect. In this context, other participants in the seminar mentioned the dilemma as to whether to adjust for socio-economic deprivation. Mrs Catherine Scott, Specialist in Public Health, Croydon PCT, said that patients in deprived areas may not currently receive the health care they need. This can happen because of a shortage of GPs in deprived areas or for other reasons which might be associated with variations in GP performance or poor clinical practice. These are matters which, in the interests of public health, the PCT might wish to have highlighted, rather than to risk their being masked. Mrs Scott said that, in 2003, her PCT had prepared two sets of mortality data, one adjusted for socio-economic deprivation and one not. The intention was to see how useful the figures proved to be.
14.52
As mentioned earlier in this Chapter, because of the lack of data held by the NHS about patients registered with particular GPs and GP practices during the years from 1993 to 1999, Dr Aylin and his team were only able to adjust for age within three broad age bands (0-64, 65-74 and 75 and over). They used an indirect standardisation method to estimate the expected number of deaths for each GP and GP practice. They had no information on gender or on socio-economic deprivation. Thus, their adjustment was not as sensitive as they would have wished.
Variations Due to External Factors
14.53
Another type of common cause variation which must be taken into account is that caused by external factors unrelated to case mix. An example of this would be the effect of a known event such as a ’flu epidemic, or a spell of particularly harsh weather, either of which could cause a sudden increase in mortality rates.
Variations Due to Unaccounted-for Factors
14.54
A fourth type of common cause variation is attributable to factors not otherwise accounted for. Even after allowing for the effects of chance, for known case mix and for external factors, there may be other factors which could be expected to affect a GP’s mortality rate but which are not known to the people carrying out the monitoring. The individual unknown factors may be small, but their combined effect may lead to significant variations. Indeed, work carried out by Dr Aylin and his team suggested that the variation in mortality rates at GP level caused by unaccounted-for factors was about twice that which would be expected as a result of chance variations alone. Dr Best explained that unaccounted-for factors are important but are often ignored by those conducting monitoring of this kind. She described the method which Dr Aylin and his team used to adjust for this type of variation. It is unnecessary to describe it in detail. However, it is perhaps worth noting that Dr Best considered that there was a need for further work to be done in this area before a monitoring system was implemented.
The Incidence of False Alarms
14.55
When SPC charts are used in an industrial setting, they are used to monitor only a single process at a time. They have also been used for public health and surgical monitoring but, even then, such monitoring has involved only one or two processes at a time. This is very different from a national system for monitoring the mortality rates among the patients of all GPs or GP practices simultaneously. The fact that multiple units (rather than just one unit) are being monitored over time will increase the chances of getting a signal. It will also increase the chance of getting false alarms. It is obviously desirable to reduce the number of false alarms since they will divert attention and resources away from the true alarms that really require investigation. Over time, a large number of false alarms with no positive results would bring the whole monitoring system into disrepute.
14.56
It is important to define exactly what is meant by a ‘false alarm’. A statistical false alarm will occur when a GP’s patient mortality rate triggers an alarm but the rate is in fact in control and is not exhibiting special cause variation. By contrast, a statistical true alarm occurs where the signal is valid, i.e. the mortality rate
higher than would be expected after appropriate adjustments have been made for common cause variation. Many statistical true alarms will be medical false alarms, in that there will be an acceptable clinical explanation for the fact that the patient mortality rate of a GP or GP practice is statistically out of control. There will, therefore, be no reason for concern. A case such as that of Shipman would, however, be both a statistical and a medical true alarm since the mortality rate was indeed out of control and this was due to a special cause variation, namely his criminality.
14.57
The alarm threshold should be set in such a way that the number of statistical false alarms is minimised while, at the same time, the system remains sensitive to true alarms from unstable units which are really exhibiting special cause variation. Dr Aylin and his team ran computer simulations to calculate the false discovery rate (i.e. the proportion of signals occurring before a given time point that will be statistical false alarms) and the successful discovery rate (i.e. the proportion of unstable units exhibiting special cause variation that will be successfully detected before the same time point). They carried out the simulations using different alarm thresholds. They suggested that the false and successful discovery rates could form part of a cost benefit calculation to assist in setting an appropriate alarm threshold for a monitoring system. They suggested also that factors to be taken into account in making such a cost benefit calculation might include the importance attached to detecting GPs whose mortality rates showed special cause variation, relative to the importance attached to avoiding false alarms. The resource implications associated with investigating the cause of alarms would also be a relevant factor.
14.58
Dr Aylin and his team explained that it would be possible to ‘tune’ a CUSUM chart by identifying two (or possibly more) different thresholds. For example, a lower threshold would pick up a lower level excess of mortality rates and would constitute an ‘early warning’, signalling a GP whose mortality rate was at the extreme end of the normal distribution of mortality rates for GPs. This might merit a low-level investigation. A higher threshold might also be set, with a view to sounding an alarm if the mortality rates of a GP became divergent from the normal distribution. A more detailed investigation might then be undertaken. The charts could thus be ‘tuned’ in such a way as to meet the goal of the monitoring exercise. For the purpose of illustrating the application of their SPC charts, Dr Aylin and his team used two different thresholds.
The Results of the Analyses Carried Out by Dr Aylin and His Team
14.59
Dr Aylin and his team used their CUSUM charts to examine mortality data for 1009 GPs (including Shipman) who practised in the five HA areas during the years 1993 to 1999. The data used was, of course, past data, although Dr Aylin and his colleagues looked at what the charts would have revealed had they been viewed contemporaneously. Data was available only as far back as 1993, so no account could be taken of any excess deaths among Shipman’s patients prior to that time.
14.60
The CUSUM chart for Shipman shows that his chart statistic was above zero for 1993 indicating that he had had a greater number of deaths than would have been expected. It fell in 1994, which suggested that he had fewer deaths than expected in that year, given the age distribution of his patients. In fact, the Inquiry found that he killed 11 patients that year, but he might have had few other patient deaths. Thereafter, the chart statistic rose steadily as the excess deaths accumulated. At the lower of the two thresholds set by Dr Aylin and his team, Shipman would have triggered the alarm first during 1996. At the higher of the two thresholds, he would have triggered it first during 1997. He would have continued to signal up to 2000, despite the fact that he ceased practice in September 1998. This is because his GP practice code was taken over by a locum and Shipman’s historical data continued to exert an effect. However, after the time when the locum started, a fall in the chart statistic was evident.
14.61
Dr Marshall told the Inquiry that the appearance of the chart for the period after the arrival of the locum in September 1998 highlighted two issues. First, the fact that Shipman’s GP practice code had been passed from one doctor to another would not normally be known to the person or body carrying out the monitoring. This could lead to misleading results if monitoring continued. It would clearly be desirable that where, as in this instance, a single-handed practitioner is replaced by another doctor, there should be a change of GP practice code, so that monitoring could be restarted.
14.62
The second issue was what to do when a GP signalled. In this instance, the practice had continued to signal, despite the fact that the special cause variation (i.e. Shipman’s criminality) had been removed and the mortality rate had returned to being in control. One option was that, once an acceptable explanation for a signal had been found, the chart should be re-set at zero. That would have the effect of ‘wiping the slate clean’ and the GP would then have a fresh start. The alternative would be to re-set the chart to some value greater than zero. The effect of that would be to put the GP ‘on probation’. The latter approach would make a chart more sensitive to sustained excess mortality.
14.63
For illustrative purposes, Dr Aylin and his team assumed that 5% of GPs would show special cause variation. This of course does not mean that they were assuming that 5% of GPs have excess mortality rates because of criminality or poor clinical practice. They may have a statistical excess of deaths for quite innocent reasons, for example because many of their patients live in nursing homes or because they care for patients being treated in a local hospice. Again for illustrative purposes, Dr Aylin and his team set two different alarm thresholds for detecting GPs with special cause variation. Shipman was one of 33 GPs out of the 1009 monitored who would have signalled during the period of monitoring between 1993 and 1999 if the lower threshold was applied. At the lower threshold, Dr Aylin and his team calculated from their computer simulations that the false discovery rate would be 5.2%. That would mean that 5.2% of the 33 signals were likely to be statistical false alarms. They also calculated that the successful discovery rate was 96.6%. That meant that the system had a 96.6% chance of correctly identifying any GP whose mortality rate was subject to special cause variation.
14.64
If the alarm threshold were set at a higher level, then only 12 GPs (including Shipman) would have signalled. Dr Aylin and his team calculated from their computer simulations that the higher threshold had a false discovery rate of less than 0.01%. It could therefore be expected that only a tiny proportion of signals would be statistical false alarms. There is, therefore, a trade-off in setting different alarm thresholds. A low alarm threshold would have the effect of identifying a larger number of GPs who appeared to show special cause variation and would need to be investigated; some of those signals would turn out to be statistical false alarms. A higher threshold would identify a smaller number of GPs and would have a very low statistical false alarm rate. However, it might miss some GPs who would merit investigation because they had an excess of deaths.
The Lessons to Be Learned from the Work
14.65
Dr Aylin concluded by saying that the work carried out by himself and his team demonstrated that CUSUM charts could be used to monitor patient mortality rates at GP level and that they would have been capable of detecting Shipman if they had been in use at the relevant time. However, detection of excess mortality rates among the patients of GPs (unless very large indeed) would be impossible from an analysis at PCT level or higher. He recognised that, in reality, patients of group practices may receive treatment from more than one GP, so that monitoring at GP practice level might be more appropriate than at the level of an individual GP. However, he acknowledged that it would be more difficult to detect an unusual mortality pattern attributable to an individual GP if monitoring was being done at GP practice level, rather than at individual GP level. I shall return to this topic later in this Chapter.
14.66
Dr Aylin emphasised that CUSUM charts can highlight unusual patterns of mortality but cannot themselves shed any light on the reasons for them. That must be an issue for investigation. He also observed that, if monitoring is to be undertaken, there must be some infrastructure to undertake the necessary investigations. There would be no point in running the CUSUM charts and taking no notice of the signals that they produced. He suggested that those responsible for investigating the signals would need to have the necessary information to enable them to investigate effectively. He thought that PCTs would be best suited to this task. Others do not agree with this, as I shall explain.
14.67
Dr Aylin and members of his team told the Inquiry that, when they looked at the mortality data of the 1009 GPs, there was an enormous degree of variation between them. That variation was greater than would be expected by chance alone and was only partially explained by case mix factors such as age, gender and socio-economic deprivation. Dr Aylin and his team attributed the high degree of variation in part to the poor quality of some of the historical data available to them. I have already mentioned that the data available in the future is likely to be of very much higher quality. Another factor was the inadequacy of the available information about case mix factors, which meant that a proper adjustment for case mix factors could not be made. Dr Aylin said that there is now more detailed data available. Data by electoral ward is available and can be linked with census data to give better adjustments for age, gender and socio-economic factors. Another very important element which was likely to have contributed to the variation in mortality rates was the unaccounted-for factors to which I have already referred. Dr Aylin said that a key message was that the variation caused by these factors must be adequately taken into account in any monitoring system that is implemented. It seems to me that, if a prototype system were devised and put into operation, much could be learned about variation from the experience gathered in the first year or two.
14.68
Dr Aylin said that it would be possible to set the CUSUM charts to detect either very high levels of mortality within a short time of their occurrence or more consistently low levels of mortality over a longer period of time. Dr Best observed that the crucial element needed to give the necessary flexibility to detect different types of outcome was good quality data, not only data relating to actual deaths, but good quality ‘denominator data’, i.e. information relating to the patient population being used to calculate the number of expected deaths. The denominator data is used to calculate the chart statistic for the CUSUM control chart. She said that this denominator data was likely to improve in the future, particularly with the introduction of electronic patient records. Dr Aylin also emphasised that, in statistical analysis, the denominator data was as important as the data relating to observed deaths. Dr Spiegelhalter agreed that the same statistical process could be used to detect both sudden changes in mortality rates and more gradual changes. It was just a matter of tuning the system to be ‘interested’ in different types of variation.
The Inquiry's Approach
The Possible Framework for a Monitoring System


========================================================================
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The General Medical Council
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
15.1
Chapter 2
, the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference require it, by reference to the case of Harold Shipman, to enquire into the performance of the functions of those statutory bodies, authorities, other organisations and individuals with responsibility for monitoring primary care provision and to recommend what steps, if any, should be taken to protect patients in the future. A fundamental and essential part of the monitoring of primary care provision is the business of deciding whether any doctor practising as a general practitioner (GP) is fit to continue to do so. That task is carried out by the General Medical Council (GMC), the regulatory and disciplinary body of the medical profession in the UK.
15.2
The GMC is a statutory body with responsibility for the registration of all doctors. There are two aspects to the duty of registration: one is maintaining the register; the other is deciding who shall be on it. Deciding who shall be on the register involves first laying down the educational standards to be achieved before an individual can be admitted to the register. It also involves deciding whether a doctor’s name should be erased from the register or whether his/her registration should be suspended because s/he is considered to be unfit to practise as a doctor. The GMC has the power to remove doctors from the register or to suspend their registration and, as an adjunct to that power, can also restrict the registration of an individual doctor, in effect imposing conditions under which the doctor is permitted to continue to practise. The GMC exercises its powers of erasure, suspension and restriction through its ‘fitness to practise (FTP) procedures’, with which the following Chapters of this Report are concerned.
15.3
It is clear that, under its Terms of Reference, the Inquiry must examine the GMC’s role as the regulatory and disciplinary body for persons already practising as GPs. However, it did not appear to me that Parliament intended the Inquiry to examine, at least as anything other than background, the means by which a person becomes a GP or the standards to be achieved before that can happen. The Inquiry is not, therefore, concerned with the GMC’s educational responsibilities.
15.4
Shipman was admitted to the medical register in August 1971 and practised as a GP for over 22 years between 1974 and 1998. During that time, he was reported to the GMC for various forms of alleged misconduct on three occasions, in 1976, 1985 and 1994, prior to the police investigation which resulted in his conviction for murder. On each occasion, after considering the circumstances or allegations in the light of the procedures in force at the relevant times, the GMC decided to allow him to continue in practice without restriction. Plainly, the Inquiry was expected to examine those allegations, circumstances and procedures and to consider the decisions of the GMC that affected Shipman. Out of fairness to the GMC, it was obviously necessary to examine the procedures in operation at the various times when complaints were made and to consider the decisions affecting Shipman in the context of the culture of the times and against the background of the way in which the GMC usually decided such cases at those times.
15.5
However, the Inquiry also has to make recommendations for the protection of patients in future. The procedures that were in force when Shipman was last reported to the GMC have changed a great deal; indeed, as I shall explain, they have been in an almost constant state of development and change since the mid-1990s. The GMC has very recently introduced a completely new regime of FTP procedures. In order to make recommendations for the protection of patients in future, the Inquiry has had to examine the development of the FTP procedures and the GMC’s ‘track record’ of operating them. It must also consider the new procedures, for which there exists, as yet, no operational ‘track record’.
15.6
The Terms of Reference require the Inquiry to consider the actions of all those involved in monitoring primary care provision
‘by reference to the case of Harold Shipman’
. Shipman was, as is now known, a serial murderer of his patients. However, it would be simplistic to suggest that the Inquiry was expected only to make recommendations about how to protect patients from being murdered by their GPs. Shipman was many other things besides a murderer. He was also a liar and a cheat. He forged prescriptions, falsified medical records and practised various other forms of dishonesty. In the 1970s, he misused pethidine, a controlled drug, by obtaining it unlawfully and administering it to himself; he was, for a time, addicted to or dependent upon that drug. Throughout his entire time in general practice, he flouted the statutory regulations relating to the keeping and usage of controlled drugs. There is also evidence that he was reckless or careless when prescribing or administering drugs. On one occasion, it was found that he had failed to attend a patient who needed admission to hospital. Thus, to consider the GMC’s procedures
‘by reference to the case of Harold Shipman’
requires consideration of the GMC’s procedures as they affect doctors exhibiting a wide range of problems, including misconduct, ill health due to drug addiction or dependence and substandard clinical performance. For that reason, the examination which follows must necessarily be wide-ranging and detailed.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The General Medical Council
History


========================================================================
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976
========================================================================

--- The General Medical Council's Procedures in 1976 ---
The Power of the General Medical Council to Act in Respect of a Conviction
16.4
In 1976, the GMC was governed by the Medical Act 1956, as amended by the Medical Act 1969 (the 1956 Act). At that time, the only FTP procedures in operation were the conduct procedures. The health procedures were not introduced until 1980 and the performance procedures did not come into effect until 1997.
16.5
In 1976, the amended section 33 of the 1956 Act provided:
‘(1)Where a fully registered person -
(a) is found by the Disciplinary Committee to have been convicted (whether while so registered or not) in the United Kingdom or the Republic of Ireland or any of the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man of a criminal offence; or
(b) is judged by the Disciplinary Committee to have been (whether while so registered or not) guilty of serious professional misconduct,
the Committee may, if they think fit, direct that his name shall be erased from the register or that his registration therein shall be suspended (that is to say, shall not have effect) during such period not exceeding twelve months as may be specified in the direction.’
The Disciplinary Committee (DC) of the GMC therefore had jurisdiction under section 33 to take disciplinary action in respect of a criminal conviction or in respect of conduct amounting to serious professional misconduct (SPM). The procedures for dealing with conviction cases and with cases involving complaints of SPM (‘conduct cases’) were different. Shipman came before the GMC by reason of his conviction. I shall, therefore, confine my description of the GMC procedures at the time largely to the procedures relating to conviction cases.
16.6
It should be noted that, in 1976, the term
‘convicted ... of a criminal offence’
did not include a finding of guilt in respect of which a doctor was placed on probation or was discharged conditionally or absolutely. Nor did it include a criminal offence for which a doctor had been cautioned by the police, despite the fact that a police caution would not have been administered in the absence of an admission of guilt.
16.7
The GMC’s primary source of information about convictions was the police, who were required by a Home Office Circular of 1973 to report to the GMC convictions which might reflect on a doctor’s suitability to continue in his/her profession. In particular, the police were required to report offences involving violence, indecency, dishonesty, alcohol or drugs. Although the police were not obliged to report findings of guilt where a doctor had been made the subject of a probation order or a discharge (and where there was, therefore, no ‘conviction’), Mr Gray told the Inquiry that, in practice, they usually did so. If a finding of guilt in respect of which a probation order or discharge had been imposed was brought to the GMC’s attention, the GMC might elect to proceed by treating the matter as a complaint of SPM.
16.8
All conviction cases, other than those for minor motoring offences not involving alcohol, drugs or injury to others, were referred by the GMC staff to the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC). The PeCC was the predecessor of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC). It had the task of deciding which cases should go forward ‘for inquiry’ (i.e. for hearing) by the DC. The DC was the equivalent of the present Professional Conduct Committee (PCC).
16.9
The General Medical Council Disciplinary Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1970 (the 1970 Rules) provided that cases involving convictions should be submitted by the Registrar to the President of the GMC or to a member (‘screener’) nominated by him. However, in practice, the President and the staff had an arrangement whereby all cases of conviction (save the most serious, which went to the President) were referred by staff directly to the PeCC without the intervention of the President/screener. When notification of a conviction came into the GMC office, the staff would usually attempt to obtain information about the circumstances of the offence for which the doctor had been convicted. This information would most commonly come from the police or the Home Office. When the staff considered that there was sufficient information, the case would be placed on the agenda for the next meeting of the PeCC. Meetings of the PeCC took place three times a year.
The Penal Cases Committee
16.10
The PeCC consisted of the President of the GMC (or a member of the GMC nominated by him) who chaired the Committee, together with one elected, medically qualified (‘medical’) member of the GMC, one lay member and three medical members drawn from the GMC’s Branch Councils for England and Wales, Scotland and Ireland respectively. In April 1976, Sir John (later Lord) Richardson, a consultant physician, was President. Other members of the PeCC were Professor (later Professor Sir) William Trethowan (a consultant psychiatrist), Dr Derek Llewellyn (a general practitioner (GP) from the England and Wales Branch), Dr William Fulton (a GP from the Scotland Branch) and Dr Thomas Murphy (Ireland Branch). The lay member, Miss Ruth Cohen, had retired the previous year and had not yet been replaced. The legal quorum was three. The PeCC was advised by a legal assessor, who was present at all its meetings.
16.11
By rule 6(1) of the 1970 Rules, the PeCC, having considered a case, was required to determine either:
‘(a) that no inquiry shall be held in the case by the Disciplinary Committee, or
(b) that the matter in question shall, in whole or in part, be referred to the Disciplinary Committee for inquiry either at the next meeting of that Committee or at such future meeting as the Penal Cases Committee or the President may determine’
The Inquiry was told that no written criteria existed to guide members of the PeCC in deciding whether a case should be referred to the DC. Mr Gray told the Inquiry that he did not believe that any criteria were necessary. He was of the view that the group of people involved was so small and their involvement in the work so regular that they knew upon what principles to act. The 1970 Rules themselves provided no criteria; they appear to have given the PeCC an unfettered discretion. I shall return to the issue of principles and criteria later.
16.12
Rule 6(3) provided that:
‘Before coming to a determination the Penal Cases Committee may if they think fit cause to be made such further investigations, or obtain such advice or assistance from the Solicitor or Counsel instructed by him, as they may consider requisite.’
16.13
The first possible outcome of a case considered by the PeCC was a referral to the DC for inquiry at a public hearing. The second possible outcome was no referral to the DC. The third possible outcome was a request for further information or legal advice. If such a request was made, the PeCC would adjourn consideration of the case until the information or advice had been obtained. It was also possible, in certain circumstances, for the PeCC to make a ‘provisional determination’. This option was not relevant to Shipman’s case and I shall not, therefore, consider it further. It is important to note that the PeCC had no power to suspend a doctor’s registration pending determination of his/her case by the DC, even if the doctor appeared to pose a danger to patients. Nor did it have any power to impose conditions on a doctor’s registration.
16.14
I shall now consider briefly the various possible outcomes.
Referral to the Disciplinary Committee for Hearing
16.15
If the PeCC decided to refer a case to the DC, the doctor would be notified of that fact, and of the matters to be considered by the DC and the arrangements for the hearing. He or she would be given the opportunity of submitting evidence to the DC.
No Referral to the Disciplinary Committee
16.16
If the PeCC decided not to refer a case to the DC, the 1970 Rules required the Registrar to inform the doctor of the decision of the PeCC in such terms as the PeCC might direct. On occasion, the PeCC used this provision to direct that a letter be sent to the doctor concerned, warning him/her about his/her future conduct. The January 1976 edition of the GMC publication ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline’ (known as the Blue Book) set out a description of some circumstances in which warning letters would be sent:
‘Warning Letters
Not every conviction or allegation of professional misconduct necessitates an immediate reference to the Disciplinary Committee for formal inquiry, although repeated offences may do so. It is the usual practice to send warning letters to a doctor who has been convicted for the first time of offences such as driving a motor car when under the influence of drink, or whose professional conduct appears to have fallen below the proper standards, in order that the doctor may reconsider his habits and conduct.’
It seems to me that one would not have expected, on reading this passage from the Blue Book, that a warning letter would be used in a case as serious as one involving multiple offences of obtaining controlled drugs, illegally and dishonestly, in the context of professional practice.
16.17
Mr Gray explained that, in general, warning letters were sent by the PeCC in conviction cases, rather than in conduct cases. This was because, in conduct cases, the misconduct would not usually have been proved by that stage. Thus, a letter warning a doctor about his/her conduct would not have been appropriate. The exception to this would be if the doctor had admitted the misconduct, for example if s/he had been charged with criminal offences and had pleaded guilty but had been conditionally discharged so that s/he had not, technically, been ‘convicted’. Mr Gray told the Inquiry that a ‘hierarchy’ of warning letters had developed, depending on the PeCC’s view about the seriousness of the doctor’s behaviour. The Inquiry’s examination of the outcomes of cases dealt with by the PeCC at its meetings in the mid-1970s showed that warning letters of various degrees of severity were considered appropriate for a variety of offences. For example, the PeCC gave instructions in a case of theft/shoplifting for a ‘letter of disapproval’ to be sent, in a case of drink driving for a ‘warning letter’, in the case of a failure to provide a specimen of blood or urine and of theft of a credit card for a ‘severe warning letter’ and, in another similar case, a ‘strong warning letter’. However, no criteria were developed and no written guidance prepared.
16.18
The 1970 Rules provided that, where a decision had been taken not to send a case to the DC and the GMC subsequently received notification of a further conviction or a complaint of SPM against the same doctor, it was open to the GMC to deal with both the previous conviction and the new conviction or complaint of misconduct together, as if the earlier decision not to refer to the DC had not been made.
Request for Further Information
16.19
As I have indicated, the 1970 Rules gave the PeCC the power, if it thought fit, to cause further investigations to be made, or to obtain legal advice, before taking a final decision. This would plainly be a useful power if members felt it impossible to make a decision without obtaining a further piece of information or clarifying their legal position. However, the Inquiry’s examination of cases involving convictions for drug-related offences considered by the PeCC in the mid- to late 1970s suggests that the power to adjourn for further investigations was being used for a rather different purpose, namely to exercise a degree of continuing supervision over a doctor who had been abusing alcohol or drugs. I shall discuss this use of the power to adjourn in greater detail later in this Chapter.
16.20
The PeCC sat in private and made its decisions on the basis of written evidence and submissions. It dealt with a large caseload at each meeting, often as many as 30 or 40 cases. No witnesses were called to give evidence. The doctor who was the subject of the proceedings was not invited to attend. In the case of a complaint alleging SPM, the PeCC would usually have before it a response from the doctor, explaining his/her conduct. The 1970 Rules required that, before a case involving a complaint alleging SPM was sent to the PeCC, the doctor should be given the opportunity to furnish such an explanation. In conviction cases, however, there was no requirement at that time to invite the doctor to provide an explanation unless and until the case had been referred by the PeCC to the DC. The reason for this lay in the different procedures for dealing with convictions and complaints. In cases involving an allegation of SPM, the explanation given by a doctor for his/her conduct might be a relevant factor to be taken into account by the PeCC when deciding whether that conduct amounted or might amount to SPM. However, a conviction was treated by the GMC as conclusive evidence that the doctor was guilty of the offence of which s/he had been convicted. The 1970 Rules, therefore, reflected the intention that any explanation from the doctor relating to the circumstances of his/her conviction should, in general, be relevant only to the issue of what sanction was to be imposed by the DC. Despite the fact that there was no requirement in the Rules that a doctor should be asked to provide an explanation in a conviction case before the case was considered by the PeCC, the Inquiry’s examination of the files of drug-related conviction cases dealt with by the PeCC in the mid- to late 1970s shows that doctors were often asked to provide an explanation and most did so. Indeed, in several cases where it appears that no such request was made, the doctor nevertheless proffered an explanation.
16.21
The minutes of the PeCC contained only a bare recital of the decisions reached. The PeCC was not required to give any reasons for its decisions.
The Disciplinary Committee
16.22
The DC consisted of the President (or another member of the GMC nominated by him), together with 18 other members of the GMC, at least six of whom were elected medical members and at least two of whom were lay members. The legal quorum was five. By 1976, it was no longer the practice (as had been the case until 1973) for the President to chair both the PeCC and the DC. Instead, the President chaired the PeCC, and the DC was chaired by a medical member, Mr (later Sir) Robert Wright, who had been nominated for this purpose by the President. The DC was advised by a legal assessor. Its hearings were held in public save in exceptional circumstances. Its deliberations were, however, conducted in private. Hearings of the DC were reported in the press and in public journals. Its procedures resembled in many respects those of a criminal court. Doctors who were the subject of proceedings before the DC were invited to, and usually did, attend the hearing. In general, they were legally represented, usually by solicitors and counsel instructed by their medical defence organisations. The doctor could give evidence and call witnesses. The DC’s caseload for a single meeting was such that it could give more lengthy and detailed consideration to each case than could the PeCC.
16.23
In a conduct case, the allegations (or some of them) might be denied and the DC might hold a full hearing. The DC would have to make findings of fact and decide whether the facts which it had found proved amounted to SPM. If so, the DC would go on to consider the appropriate sanction. In a conviction case, the DC would be concerned only to establish the gravity of the offence and to take account of any mitigating circumstances, before imposing a sanction. It was common for testimonials and other evidence about the doctor’s character to be adduced by those representing him/her. The DC would take account of any adverse finding against the doctor which had been made by the DC in the past.
16.24
There were four courses of action open to the DC at the conclusion of a hearing in a conviction case or following a finding of SPM. The first was to admonish the doctor and conclude the case. The second was to postpone judgement, thereby effectively placing the doctor ‘on probation’. Postponement could be
sine die
or to some specified future date or meeting of the DC. The third possible course was to direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended for a period not exceeding 12 months. The fourth option was to direct erasure of the doctor’s name from the medical register.
16.25
I shall now consider briefly those four courses of action.
Admonishment and Conclusion of the Case
16.26
Admonishment by the DC would constitute a public warning. It might be reported in the press. It would form part of the doctor’s FTP history. If an enquiry was subsequently made about that history, the enquirer should have been informed about the warning or supplied with a copy of the relevant DC minutes in which it was recorded.
Postponement of Judgement
16.27
Although the 1970 Rules provided for the postponement of judgement by the DC, they did not give any guidance as to the circumstances in which the power to postpone should be exercised. Assistance could, however, be derived from the Blue Book current at the time. The January 1976 edition stated:
‘The primary duty of the Disciplinary Committee is to protect the public. In any case the Committee must therefore first consider whether the public interest requires it to remove the doctor’s name from the Register, or to suspend his registration. Subject however to this overriding duty to the public the Committee considers what is in the best interests of the doctor himself. Largely for this reason the Council has evolved a system of postponing judgment, especially in relation to offences arising from abuse of drink or drugs, in order that the doctor may satisfy the Disciplinary Committee that he is able to conduct himself properly and to overcome any addiction to alcohol or drugs. In severe cases of addiction, however, the Committee may consider it necessary to order suspension while the doctor undergoes treatment.’
The Blue Book went on:
‘Postponement of Judgment
In any case where judgment is postponed, the doctor’s name remains on the Register during the period of postponement. When postponing judgment to a later meeting the Committee normally intimates that the doctor will be expected before his next appearance to furnish the names of professional colleagues and other persons of standing to whom the Council may apply for information, to be given in confidence, concerning his habits and conduct since the previous hearing. The replies received from these referees, together with any other evidence as to the doctor’s conduct, are then taken into account when the Committee resumes consideration of the case. If the information is satisfactory, the case will then normally be concluded. If however the evidence is not satisfactory, judgment may be postponed for a further period, or the Committee may direct suspension or erasure.’
It should be noted that the Blue Book referred only to the DC, it made no reference to the fact that the PeCC might use its power to adjourn in order to postpone judgement on a doctor who had abused alcohol or drugs.
16.28
I shall discuss the use of the DC’s power to postpone judgement at greater length later in this Chapter.
Suspension
16.29
In cases where the DC had elected to suspend a doctor’s registration, it was open to it to resume consideration of the case before the end of the period of suspension. It could then, if it considered it appropriate, extend the original period of suspension or order erasure. Before resuming consideration of the case, the DC could, as when postponing judgement, ask the doctor to give the names of referees from whom information might be sought as to his/her habits and conduct since the suspension had been imposed. This information would be taken into account when the DC resumed consideration of the case. The Blue Book made clear that only if there was evidence that the doctor had not conducted him/herself properly, or that s/he was addicted to drink or drugs and had not responded to treatment, was the DC likely to order further suspension or to direct erasure at a resumed hearing. Again, it should be noted that, when the DC resumed consideration of a case following a period of suspension, the GMC staff did not attempt to find out about the doctor’s conduct from an independent source. The doctor produced his/her own referees. Usually, in a case in which the doctor had been convicted of offences in connection with drugs of addiction, s/he would be expected to produce one or more reports from the consultant psychiatrist in charge of his/her treatment.
Erasure
16.30
The most severe sanction which could be imposed by the DC was erasure of a doctor’s name from the medical register. No guidance appears to have been issued as to what type of case might warrant erasure and what factors might appropriately be considered in mitigation of the offence or conduct. If imposed, erasure prevented a doctor from practising and remained effective unless and until the doctor made a successful application for restoration of his/her name to the register. An application to restore could be made once ten months had elapsed after the original erasure order took effect. If the first application for restoration was unsuccessful, a further period of ten months had to elapse before another application could be made. There was no limit on the number of applications for restoration that could be made. The January 1976 edition of the Blue Book pointed out that:
‘The names of many doctors which have been erased have subsequently been restored to the Register, after an interval.’
16.31
It was clear, therefore, that erasure was not necessarily intended to be permanent. The Blue Book explained that the DC examined every application to restore on its merits, having regard, among other considerations, to the nature and gravity of the original offence, the length of time since erasure and the conduct of the applicant in the interval.
Differences between the Proceedings and Powers of the Disciplinary Committee and of the Penal Cases Committee
16.32
To summarise, the main differences between the proceedings and powers of the PeCC and those of the DC were that the DC held a formal hearing in public and the PeCC held a meeting in private. The doctor usually attended and was represented at a hearing before the DC; indeed, it would be likely to create a poor impression if s/he did not attend. The doctor was not invited to attend meetings of the PeCC. Nor was s/he represented at such meetings. The PeCC made its decision on the basis of written material only. A hearing before the DC was likely to be reported in the press and any person making a specific enquiry of the GMC should have been told the outcome. The proceedings of the PeCC were confidential. The DC had the power of erasure and suspension; the PeCC did not.
Offences Involving Drugs and Dishonesty
16.33
The January 1976 edition of the Blue Book set out examples of certain kinds of offence and of types of professional misconduct which had in the past given rise to disciplinary action by the GMC. This was intended as guidance to doctors about what type of behaviour was unacceptable. The Blue Book made clear that the examples were not exhaustive. The issues of whether a particular course of conduct amounted to SPM, and of the gravity of a conviction, were, it was said, matters to be determined by the DC after considering the evidence in each individual case. There was no suggestion that the PeCC should concern itself with such issues.
16.34
The examples given in the Blue Book which are relevant to Shipman’s case include the following:
‘(iii) Abuse of controlled drugs
Disciplinary proceedings have been taken in cases in which a doctor has been found to have prescribed or supplied drugs of addiction or dependence otherwise than in the course of bona fide treatment.
Disciplinary proceedings have also been taken against doctors convicted of offences involving drugs which were committed in order to gratify the doctor’s own addiction, or where a doctor has been convicted for driving or being in charge of a motor vehicle when under the influence of a drug or has treated patients when under the influence of drugs.’
‘(vii) Offences involving dishonesty, indecency or violence
Disciplinary proceedings have been instituted against doctors convicted of criminal deception (obtaining money or goods by false pretences), forgery, fraud, theft, indecent behaviour or assault. A particularly serious view is taken of such offences if committed in the course of a doctor’s professional duties or against his patients or colleagues.’
Shipman’s case involved the prescription of controlled drugs otherwise than in the course of
bona fide
treatment, allied with offences of criminal deception and forgery, perpetrated over a significant period of time and committed to gratify his own addiction or dependence. The reader of the Blue Book might well have expected that a
‘particularly serious view’
would be taken of such conduct.
The Report of the Merrison Committee
16.35
In 1975, the Report of the Committee of Inquiry chaired by Dr (later Sir) Alec Merrison into the Regulation of the Medical Profession (the Merrison Report) was published. For some time before publication of the Merrison Report, there had been mounting concern about the capacity of the existing regulatory system to deal adequately with the problem of sick doctors. The problem was twofold. First, the GMC could act only if a doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence or if s/he was found guilty of SPM. Even then, the sanctions available to the DC were limited. For example, the GMC considered itself powerless to act where a doctor was known to be a chronic alcoholic (and thus a risk to patients) but had not been convicted of a criminal offence and had not committed any act amounting to SPM. Thus, it was felt that the existing procedures failed to provide adequate protection for patients.
16.36
The other problem was that, in cases where it was possible to use the GMC’s disciplinary procedures to deal with sick doctors, those procedures were punitive in nature and, in the case of proceedings before the DC, were conducted in public. Many people felt that this was an inappropriate - even an inhumane - way of dealing with doctors who were suffering from a physical or mental illness. Mrs Jean Robinson, who later became a lay member of the GMC, said of this period:
‘There was great uneasiness that doctors who were unable to cope because of mental or physical illness - some in a pathetic state - had in the past been hauled up before a public hearing which was the equivalent of a criminal trial. I myself thought it outrageous that the body which set the standard for medical confidentiality was not preserving it for doctors themselves, by allowing them private hearing and supervision for health problems (such as mental illness) ...’
16.37
Sir Donald Irvine, who was a member of the GMC from 1979 and President between 1995 and 2002, told the Inquiry that, in the 1970s, there was serious under-reporting by doctors of colleagues who were known to be a risk to patients because of an illness. The prime cause of that under-reporting was the threat of GMC action against the sick doctor, which could only (at least officially) be punitive. There were also concerns about the local arrangements for dealing with sick doctors which were, according to Sir Donald, ‘patchy, ill co-ordinated and largely ineffective’.
16.38
The Merrison Committee had before it no reliable statistics showing the size of the problem but was confident that it was
‘not small’
. The GMC had given evidence to the Committee to the effect that the largest category of cases of psychiatric illness arose from an addiction to drink or drugs which was
‘associated with’
‘accentuated the results of some other concurrent personality disorder’
16.39
The Merrison Committee had no doubt that there was an urgent need for the GMC to be given powers to deal with sick doctors. Its Report stated:
‘The need for the GMC to have power to control the right to practise of sick doctors is so overwhelming and so obvious that it seems to us amazing that the GMC has continued for so long without such a power. There are very sick doctors, and by no means all of them have enough insight into their condition to retire from practice before they endanger their patients. Those who do continue to practise can be completely stopped from doing so only if they commit a criminal offence or do something which constitutes serious professional misconduct. That is not a rational way of ordering matters.’
16.40
The Merrison Committee recommended the establishment of a Health Committee (HC) and arrangements for a stage of ‘conciliation’ before a formal hearing by the HC. The purpose of this conciliation would be to give a doctor the opportunity to agree to an examination by an expert and to enter into voluntary undertakings as an alternative to the case proceeding to a formal hearing. If the doctor complied with his/her undertakings, there would be no need for a formal hearing by the HC. The hope was that many doctors would be capable of rehabilitation. The Merrison Committee recommended that, if rehabilitation failed, the HC should have power to impose conditions on, or to suspend, registration. However, the Merrison Committee did not recommend that the sanction of erasure of a doctor’s name from the register should be available to the HC. The GMC’s health procedures, modelled on the recommendations contained in the Merrison Report, were introduced by the Medical Act 1978 and came into effect in August 1980.
16.41
The Merrison Committee emphasised, in its general discussion of the GMC’s FTP procedures, the underlying purpose of those procedures:
‘The GMC’s actions towards those unfit to practise should be directed to the protection of the patient, not the punishment of the doctor. This should, in our view, be the case even where the question of his fitness to practise arises on account of professional misconduct. For a doctor to have his name erased from the register, and to be in effect deprived of his livelihood, is a very serious penalty, but that it is a penalty is a side effect rather than a purpose of regulation ... certainly an atmosphere of punishment may ... discourage members of the profession or of the public from notifying the GMC of matters which ought to be brought to its attention; especially, for example, of mental illness which also involved professional misconduct ...’
16.42
Shipman’s case was dealt with by the GMC in 1976. Sir Donald Irvine observed that, by then, there was a
‘huge sense of relief’
in the medical profession at the prospect of the introduction of more satisfactory ways of dealing with sick doctors. In particular, it was felt that, once the new health procedures were introduced, doctors would be more confident about reporting colleagues who were a risk to their patients and in need of help.
16.43
Dr Llewellyn told the Inquiry that, as a member of the PeCC, he had regarded the introduction of the health procedures as ‘essential’. Without them, the PeCC would sometimes have no choice but to refer a sick doctor to the DC. This, he said, ‘could often only harm the doctor’. He said that, when the health procedures came in, the profession felt much easier because doctors were ‘being treated fairly’.
16.44
Once the health procedures were introduced in 1980, the GMC was able formally and openly to adopt a rehabilitative approach to cases in which a doctor’s criminal behaviour or misconduct appeared to result from physical or mental illness. In 1976, preparations were being made for the forthcoming changes. This was a time of transition for the GMC. The events connected with its handling of Shipman’s case must be viewed in that context.
16.45
Mr Alan Howes, who was involved with the conduct procedures more or less continuously between June 1980 and 1994, told the Inquiry that it was difficult, looking back, to put oneself into the context of the time immediately following the publication of the Merrison Report. The Report had just averted a huge threatened revolt within the medical profession in connection with the GMC’s proposal to impose an annual retention fee. Mr Howes said that ‘anything the GMC did in those days so far as the profession was concerned was certainly treading on eggshells’. He said that the work of the GMC FTP committees at that time had to be viewed in this context. He also said that such issues as ‘protecting the public interest’ were not in the forefront of people’s minds in the 1970s. I interpose to say that, if that is right, it should not have been the case. It appears from the passage I have cited at
paragraph 16.41
that the protection of patients was certainly at the forefront of the minds of those on the Merrison Committee. Indeed, the Blue Book said that the primary duty of the GMC was to protect the public.
16.46
Mr Howes went on to say that, in the late 1970s, the GMC’s FTP committees were ‘struggling with a process which everybody knew was not working satisfactorily for sick doctors’. The GMC was waiting for new legislation to introduce the health procedures and, in the meantime, the PeCC (and probably the DC too) was struggling to do the best it could with cases with a health element. He said that, once members of the PeCC saw that a doctor’s problems were rooted in an illness, they would have focussed on the illness, not on other factors of the case, unless they saw them as extremely relevant to the doctor’s current or future medical condition.
16.47
The Merrison Committee had also recommended that the PeCC should be replaced by a Complaints Committee. Its main function would be
‘to consider, on the information available, whether prima facie evidence had been assembled that a doctor was not fit to practise’
. As the final filter of complaints, the Complaints Committee would not hold hearings but would either
‘refer cases for further action or direct that the matter be closed, arranging for all interested parties to be informed in either case’
. The Merrison Committee did not appear to envisage that the Complaints Committee would make substantive decisions or impose sanctions. It would, however, be given the power to order temporary suspension of a doctor’s registration where the doctor posed a serious danger to the public. In the event, the PeCC was replaced by the PPC which, as I will later explain, continued, as the PeCC had done, to adjudicate on cases to a limited extent. The Merrison Report also recommended that the GMC should establish a small investigating unit to collect evidence in connection with complaints made against doctors.
Standards, Thresholds and Criteria
16.48
Although the 1956 Act and the 1970 Rules provided a very wide discretion as to the manner in which the GMC performed its disciplinary function, and although no standards or criteria were formally laid down for the exercise of that discretion, it does appear that some underlying principles existed to guide the DC and the PeCC. As I have explained, the Blue Book said that the primary duty of the GMC was to protect the public; subject to that overriding duty, the DC would consider what was in the best interests of the doctor concerned.
The Primary Duty to Protect the Public
16.49
Plainly, the protection of the public (and, in particular, of patients) was, or should have been, an important criterion for consideration by both the PeCC and the DC. If no public or patient protection issues arose, both Committees would be free to give priority to the doctor’s own best interests. In a case where the doctor was, or appeared to be, addicted to drugs, the Committees would, no doubt, wish to consider how s/he should best be rehabilitated. In the case of the PeCC, it would be relevant to consider whether it was in the doctor’s best interests to be dealt with sooner and in private, rather than later and in public. Common sense would dictate that it would almost always be better for the doctor to be dealt with sooner and in private. However, if the PeCC were to be loyal to the GMC’s primary duty, it would have to take proper steps to find out whether the doctor’s continuance in practice did or might present any risk to patients or the public. It would seem to me obvious that, if any such risk existed, the case ought to have been referred to the DC for the possible application of the wider range of sanctions available to that Committee. Yet there was a fundamental problem for the PeCC in considering the issue of risk and patient protection. The PeCC reached its decisions on the basis of outline information only. It might decide to refer a case to the DC
‘for inquiry’
. The understanding was that only at that inquiry stage would the full facts become known. Only at that stage would the doctor appear before members of the GMC and only then would the DC have an opportunity to make a full assessment of whether the doctor did or might present a risk to patients. Thus, if the PeCC were to decide to deal with a case itself, there would be a danger that it would reach a conclusion based on incomplete and inadequate information.
The Seriousness of the Offence or Complaint
16.50
As with any body involved in operating a disciplinary process, the PeCC was concerned about the seriousness of the misconduct with which it had to deal. In deciding whether to refer a case to the DC
‘for inquiry’
, the PeCC would take into account the seriousness of the allegation of misconduct or of the convictions under consideration. There were no written standards, thresholds or criteria, nor even any guidelines, to assist members of the PeCC in assessing seriousness. The passage from the January 1976 edition of the Blue Book, which I quoted at
paragraph 16.16
, seemed to be saying (although not with complete clarity) that some single convictions or allegations of misconduct would be serious enough to warrant referral; others would not. However, if an offence was repeated, the case might be referred to the DC even though a single offence of the same nature would not be. It is not clear whether that meant that the case would be more likely to be referred if the doctor were convicted, on one occasion, of multiple offences than if s/he had made repeated appearances before the courts. Also, the Blue Book gave no indication of how serious the offence or series of offences must be before referral would be warranted. Bearing in mind that the powers of the DC to impose any sanction on a doctor for misconduct (where no conviction was recorded) were limited to cases in which the DC found the doctor guilty of SPM, it seems to me that the only sensible threshold for referral, in a conduct case, would have been whether there existed a reasonable prospect of establishing SPM. In later years, when the GMC did have some written criteria, that was the threshold standard of seriousness for referral to a disciplinary hearing. By analogy, it seems to me that, in respect of convictions, the only sensible measure of seriousness would have been whether the conduct underlying the convictions was of a seriousness equivalent to conduct which could amount to SPM.
16.51
However, even if such a standard had been explicitly laid down, it would not have been easy to apply in practice. The Inquiry has been told that opinions on what amounts to SPM can differ quite widely. In
Chapter 17
, I shall describe how, in the context of a discussion about the operation of the PCC (the successor to the DC) during the years in which he was a member, Sir Donald told the Inquiry that debates about whether conduct amounted to SPM gave rise on occasion to strong disagreement and generated much ‘heat’ and ‘emotion’. In the 1970s, there was very little guidance as to what kinds of conduct did or did not amount to SPM. That has remained the case ever since.
16.52
In due course, I shall examine the extent to which the PeCC applied any consistent criteria of seriousness when deciding whether or not to refer a case to the DC. As I shall show, analysis of the cases examined by the Inquiry shows that many conviction cases were not referred by the PeCC to the DC despite the fact that, on any view, the underlying conduct was serious. Shipman’s is a case in point. Convictions involving multiple offences of obtaining controlled drugs by deception (which must necessarily have entailed dishonest conduct) must, in my view, have been sufficiently serious to require referral. Moreover, the material published by the GMC at the time would have caused both doctors and public alike to expect that they would be referred. Yet some such cases were referred to the DC; some were not.
16.53
Many cases of doctors convicted of drug-related offences were indeed referred by the PeCC to the DC. At the PeCC meeting held in January 1976, of the 14 cases of doctors convicted of drugs offences, nine were referred to the DC, and one was adjourned to the next meeting, when it was adjourned again and eventually closed without referral to the DC. The outcome of the other four cases is not known but it does not appear that they were referred to the DC. At the PeCC meeting of April 1976 (at which Shipman’s case was considered), of the nine drug-related conviction cases, only one was referred to the DC. The rest (save for one, of which the outcome is not known) were either adjourned or were closed with a warning letter.
16.54
Examination of the facts of the cases considered at the January and April 1976 meetings of the PeCC suggests that it was not the seriousness of the conduct underlying the offences that determined whether a case was referred to the DC. For example, five of the doctors referred to the DC by the PeCC at its January 1976 meeting had been convicted of controlled drugs offences, committed over a significant period of time. All had become addicted to the drug in question. In each case, there appeared to have been an element of dishonesty in the obtaining of the drug. On the other hand, the cases of three other doctors and of Shipman himself involved convictions for offences of a similar degree of seriousness and yet were not referred to the DC by the PeCC at its April 1976 meeting.
16.55
An examination of the files in these cases suggests that the factor that made the difference was whether the doctor produced some evidence that s/he was undergoing psychiatric treatment or was at least under some form of medical supervision. In 1976, as I have indicated, there was no requirement in the Rules that a doctor convicted of offences should be asked for his/her explanation of the circumstances of the offence(s) for which s/he had been convicted before the PeCC met to consider his/her case. However, the practice of asking such doctors for their explanation and of giving them the opportunity to produce medical and other evidence before the PeCC hearing was growing. As we shall see, Shipman himself was given that opportunity and took it. I can see that, to some extent, the PeCC was taking account of its duty to protect patients; it was relying upon the material supplied by the doctor to assess whether the doctor was fit to practise. However, it appears from the cases that the Inquiry has examined that, if any helpful material was produced, the PeCC would very readily be prepared to conclude that the doctor was not a risk to the public and could be allowed to continue in practice, subject either to a period of continued medical supervision (which would be achieved by adjourning consideration of the case to a later meeting) or by closing the case with a warning.
The Maintenance of the Honour and Reputation of the Medical Profession
16.56
Dr Llewellyn told the Inquiry that, in deciding whether or not to refer a case to the DC, the PeCC would also consider whether the doctor’s conduct had brought the profession into disrepute. I would have expected it to do so, as the GMC has always recognised the importance of maintaining the honour and reputation of the medical profession and the confidence of the public in the profession and in the GMC’s regulation of it. One of the reasons why the DC (later the PCC) has always sat in public and has always allowed publication of its decisions has been to maintain public confidence in the performance of its disciplinary function. Where a doctor has been convicted of criminal offences, the facts underlying the convictions are in the public domain. They may not have received the attention of the national press but they will be known in the locality in which the doctor lives and/or practises and are highly likely to have come to the attention of his/her patients. Assuming that the GMC handles the doctor’s case in a way which properly protects the public and the doctor’s patients, the confidence of the public in the GMC will be enhanced by publication of the decision. If such a conviction case is dealt with in private, there is a danger that members of the public who know about the conviction will think that the GMC has done nothing.
The Penal Cases Committee’s Use of the Power to Adjourn
16.57
I have mentioned that the PeCC’s power to adjourn a case was given for the purpose of allowing it to make further investigations or to obtain legal advice. However, it is clear from the cases the Inquiry has examined that the power was sometimes used in order to exercise a degree of control over a doctor who had been abusing alcohol or controlled drugs. The case might thereby remain under the jurisdiction of the PeCC for a year or more. Sometimes, the PeCC would adjourn a case more than once, even when there was evidence on the second or subsequent occasion that the doctor had relapsed. In a case where the doctor had not yet sought psychiatric treatment, the PeCC would sometimes direct that s/he should do so and would adjourn the case to a later meeting, requiring a report to be produced from a psychiatrist for consideration on that occasion. If the doctor was already under the care of a psychiatrist, the PeCC would express its expectation that the doctor would remain under medical supervision during the period of adjournment. The doctor would usually be asked to provide the GMC with the name of the supervising psychiatrist and with the names of other professional colleagues who could provide confidential information about his/her progress. If the doctor failed to co-operate with the GMC or relapsed into drug taking or alcohol abuse, the possibility of referring the case to the DC remained open. However, as will appear from the following two examples, the focus of the PeCC appears to have been upon the rehabilitation of the doctor.
Dr JA 04
16.58
In the case of Dr JA 04, the doctor had been convicted, in the mid-1970s, of obtaining morphine by deception, apparently for his own use. He was dealt with at the Crown Court and asked to have a large number of offences taken into consideration. As soon as his offences had come to the attention of the police, he had obtained psychiatric treatment and was able to put a report before the Judge when being sentenced. He was fined. The case came before the PeCC. Plainly, the underlying conduct was serious enough to warrant referral to the DC. At the time when his case came before the PeCC, the doctor was practising as a GP and was under psychiatric supervision. He had parted company with his former partner and had been practising as a single-handed GP. He was seeking another partner. I would have thought that the fact that he was practising alone gave rise to a risk to patients. However, the PeCC adjourned consideration of his case for eight months, saying that he was to remain under medical supervision. In the interim period, the doctor was, of course, free to practise and the supervision was of his state of health, not of his practice. There appears to have been an assumption that there was no risk to the doctor’s patients.
16.59
At the time it next considered the case, the PeCC had before it material which ought to have given rise to concern for the welfare of the doctor’s patients. The doctor’s own letter gave a glowing account of his rehabilitation. He had acquired a new partner who, he said, had been made
‘fully aware’
of his conviction. All was going well, he said, in every respect. However, the new partner told the GMC that, although Dr JA 04 had told him, at an early stage, that he had been convicted of a drugs offence, he had deceived him as to the true extent of his criminality, of which the partner had only just become aware. This had caused difficulties between them. Also, the partner said that Dr JA 04 had put a prepared reference for the GMC before him for signature. The partner had refused to sign it because the contents were not true. He expressed concern about Dr JA 04’s state of health and was not able to offer a
‘proven opinion’
about whether or not Dr JA 04 had given up the use of drugs. Also, the report of the treating psychiatrist was quite guarded about the truth of the doctor’s claim to be off drugs and about the prognosis for rehabilitation. Some favourable references were received from medical colleagues, but they appeared to be friends of the doctor. In addition, the GMC had received a letter from a practitioner holding an important medical office in the locality in which the doctor practised. This letter had expressed concern on the part of the local medical community that the doctor had been convicted of a serious offence and yet the GMC had
‘taken no notice’
. This material should, in my view, have rung a loud alarm bell about the safety of the doctor’s patients. However, the case was still not referred to the DC but was adjourned again by the PeCC on the same terms as before. On the next occasion the PeCC considered reports and references which, again, were by no means wholly supportive. One referee asserted that the doctor was still taking drugs and expressed the view that, for his own good and for the reputation of the medical profession in the area in which he practised, the doctor should be temporarily erased from the medical register. Notwithstanding that, the PeCC adjourned the case for a further year. The Inquiry has not been able to discover how this case was eventually resolved.
16.60
Mr Howes told the Inquiry that it was difficult for him to understand why the PeCC had not referred this case to the DC at the time of its second or third consideration of the case, in view of the ambivalent reports it had received. I feel bound to observe that, on the material before it, the PeCC cannot have been satisfied that the doctor was not still using morphine or that he was not a risk to patients. In my opinion, this case demonstrates a failure by the PeCC to give proper weight to the need to protect the doctor’s patients. The case should have been referred to the DC on the first occasion and, if not then, certainly when it came back before the PeCC on the second occasion. It seems that, once the PeCC had decided to keep the case to itself and to go down the ‘rehabilitation route’, there was a reluctance to depart from that course and little weight was given to the concerns being expressed about the doctor’s conduct.
16.61
In respect of the concerns expressed by the local medical community that the GMC appeared to have taken no notice of this case, Mr Howes agreed that dealing with the case in private might have damaged the GMC’s credibility. I must observe that, if the public had known how the GMC was dealing with that case, its credibility would not have been enhanced.
Dr JA 08
16.62
In another case (that of Dr JA 08), the doctor had been convicted, in the mid-1970s, of obtaining pethidine by deception. He had been self-administering the drug in large quantities, up to 1000mg per day. His case came before the PeCC. The psychiatric report, prepared for the criminal proceedings by a former colleague of the doctor, said that the doctor was not addicted to the drug and was fit to practise without any restriction on his prescribing rights. In fact, when the PeCC first considered the case, the doctor had already relapsed and was again taking large amounts of pethidine daily. In other words, the psychiatrist’s report did not reflect the position as it was by the time of the PeCC’s meeting. However, the PeCC was unaware of that fact and adjourned Dr JA 08’s case to its next meeting, which was to take place three months later. Meanwhile, the doctor was still practising as a GP. A month after the PeCC’s first consideration of his case, he was admitted to a psychiatric hospital. Shortly before the meeting of the PeCC at which his case was due to be considered for the second time, the hospital psychiatrist reported to the GMC that the doctor could soon return to work, provided that he had no access to pethidine. At that meeting, the PeCC learned that the doctor had in fact already relapsed at the time of its earlier decision. However, it adjourned the case again, this time for a year, to give the doctor
‘a further opportunity to rehabilitate’
. He was free to resume general practice, with no restriction on his access to pethidine. A year later, the case was concluded, without a referral to the DC, on the basis of a further report provided by the psychiatrist who had been a colleague of Dr JA 08. The report was favourable but that psychiatrist’s previous report had turned out to be inaccurate; it had advised that the doctor was fit to practise without restriction when, in fact, he was not. Yet, the PeCC acted upon the favourable opinion of the same psychiatrist. In so doing, it appears to me that the PeCC did not have the safety of patients at the forefront of its collective mind.
The Propriety and Wisdom of the Practice of Repeated Adjournments
16.63
When Mr Gray was first asked in evidence to the Inquiry about the PeCC’s use of its power to adjourn for further investigation, he said that he did not recall the PeCC ever using the power in order to keep a doctor under surveillance. If the PeCC had felt that were necessary, it would have been better, he said, to refer the doctor to the DC. However, having read the papers in some of the cases decided by the PeCC in the mid-1970s, Mr Gray accepted that it had in fact been quite common practice for the PeCC to adjourn and, in effect, to put a doctor under compulsion to seek treatment and to produce reports at a later meeting of the PeCC.
16.64
Mr Howes commented on the cases heard by the PeCC in the 1970s. He said that it seemed to him that the PeCC had been using the power to adjourn in order to see whether a doctor who was under medical treatment or supervision would sustain the improvement s/he had made over a period. He described it as a ‘lighter touch’ than putting the doctor ‘on probation’, as the DC might have done. He thought it had been appropriate for the power to adjourn for further investigations to be used in this way, provided that it was short-term. He said:
‘If the Penal Cases Committee wanted to get more information or a better picture of the doctor before deciding whether to refer to the Disciplinary Committee I think that was reasonable. If they were to do it for year after year, for example, that would be inappropriate.’
16.65
Mr Howes observed that the PeCC and the DC, in using their powers to adjourn and postpone, were in effect ‘playing at being a Health Committee’. This was at a time when the Merrison Committee had made its recommendations and the health procedures were in the course of preparation. They had not come into effect.
16.66
Leading Counsel to the Inquiry suggested to Mr Howes that the function of the PeCC in relation to a conviction case was to look at the conviction, to assess its gravity and to decide whether it should go to the DC. The DC was the Committee charged with imposing the appropriate sanction. That being the case, she suggested that it was not the function of the PeCC to adjourn a case for the purpose of keeping a doctor under supervision, let alone repeatedly to bring the doctor back on adjourned hearings. Mr Howes agreed that, considered today, the suggestion was ‘obviously a valid one’. However, he pointed out that, at the time, there appeared to have been no objections from the GMC’s legal assessors. Nor had there been any objection from the medical defence organisations. In fact, as I pointed out, it was highly unlikely that the medical defence organisations would have objected as, so far as those indemnified by them were concerned, an adjournment by the PeCC would be preferable to a referral to the DC. Leading Counsel had not suggested to Mr Howes that the practice of making repeated orders to adjourn was unlawful; she had suggested only that it was not the PeCC’s function to keep a doctor under prolonged supervision. The practice of adjourning so as to effect supervision might also have been unlawful but that was not the point. The point was that the practice as followed was not appropriate for the PeCC.
16.67
In the two cases I have described, I can clearly recognise the desire of the PeCC to help the doctor towards rehabilitation. However, I cannot detect the application of the supposed precondition to the GMC’s freedom to do that, namely the principle that the primary duty of the GMC was to protect patients. A doctor who had been abusing controlled drugs had surely presented a risk to patients in the past. The PeCC did not seek to find out whether any harm had been suffered; I can see that such enquiries might sometimes be difficult to undertake. But, while there remained a risk of a relapse into drug taking, there must have remained some risk to patients. In my view, to allow a GP who was at risk of a relapse to continue in practice, without any real supervision, plainly exposed patients to risk of harm. It seems to me that these decisions by the PeCC to adjourn final consideration left patients at risk.
The Use of Warning Letters by the Penal Cases Committee
16.68
It seemed to me, on reading rule 6(1) of the 1970 Rules, that the function of the PeCC was to act as a filter, determining which cases should go through to the DC and which should not. However, it is clear that the powers of the PeCC were wide enough to allow it to close a case with the issue of a warning and that the GMC considered that it was proper for the PeCC to do so where appropriate. There was no internal guidance as to when that course would be appropriate. The passage in the January 1976 edition of the Blue Book, which I quoted at
paragraph 16.16
, suggested that it would not be used in cases of any real gravity. Yet it is clear from some of the cases examined by the Inquiry that warning letters were used by the PeCC in cases where the doctor had been convicted of quite serious controlled drugs offences.
Dr JA 18
16.69
In one case (that of Dr JA 18), the doctor had admitted a series of about 125 offences of obtaining controlled drugs (dexamphetamine) by deception, for his own use, over a period of at least two and a half years. He had issued prescriptions in the names of patients, presented them to the pharmacy and kept the drugs for himself. It appears that, at court, he claimed that he had taken the drugs only in order to give himself the energy to work on the building of surgery premises for the new practice he had recently set up. He claimed that he had never been dependent on the drugs and had given them up as soon as he was seen by the police. He had also sought psychiatric help. He was conditionally discharged by the court but was reported to the GMC. After receiving a very favourable psychiatric report, which said that the doctor had a strong personality and was determined to stay off drugs, the PeCC closed his case with a warning letter. This case bears strong similarities to that of Shipman and was dealt with in a similar way. Unfortunately, it is not easy to see what criteria were applied as the PeCC did not record the reasons for its decisions. It does not appear from the file that the PeCC had any independent information about any possible risk to patients. From the file, it appears that the only detailed information available to the PeCC was provided by the doctor and the treating psychiatrist. When it was asked for information about the case, the Home Office Drugs Branch had said only that the case was
‘simply one of a practitioner obtaining drugs for his own consumption’
16.70
The doctor’s explanation, written on his behalf by Hempsons, solicitors to the Medical Defence Union (MDU), painted a picture that might, in itself, have given rise to some concerns for the welfare of his patients. Among other things, it was said that, at times, while he was building the new surgery, the doctor had been staying up all night, several nights a week, to do the building work and was running the practice during the day. He had taken the drugs to help him to cope with these strains. If this account was true, I find it hard to imagine what kind of condition he must have been in during the day. However, when the doctor’s account and that of the psychiatrist are read together, they paint an even more worrying picture. It was said that the doctor had begun taking drugs five years earlier, while in partnership with another GP, from whom he had parted the following year. The psychiatrist attributed this parting to no more than a personality clash but the other GP was not asked for his/her account. That was before any question of building work arose. The doctor told the psychiatrist that, during the building work, he was taking about 120mg of the drug per day. He claimed that he had not been aware of any
‘perceptual distortion’
on taking the drugs and had not felt any
‘let down’
on cessation. He had not taken the drugs for pleasure, only for this
‘strictly functional purpose’
(by which I understand him to mean to help him to cope during the building works). However, he had not stopped taking them (or obtaining them unlawfully) when the building work was finished, although he claimed to have reduced his dosage to about 60mg a day. There was no material before the PeCC from which it could have checked the truth of that assertion. The doctor’s justification for his continued consumption was the need to renovate his home in his free time while running the practice during the day. I feel bound to wonder how the PeCC could have concluded that this case did not need to go to the DC. Before reaching any conclusion about this case, I would have wished to question the accuracy of the doctor’s accounts and his judgement in treating patients while subjecting himself to the punishing regime he had described. To achieve that, the case would have had to go to the DC.
Conclusions about the Criteria Applied by the Penal Cases Committee
16.71
It appears to me that, in the cases of doctors convicted of controlled drugs offences, the seriousness of the underlying conduct and of the dishonesty involved was not regarded by the PeCC as an important factor in deciding whether a case should be referred to the DC. It seems that, if any information was available to the PeCC from which it could conclude that there was an expectation of rehabilitation, the case would be closed with a warning letter and that, if the evidence suggested even a prospect of rehabilitation, the case would be adjourned to another meeting in the expectation that the doctor would remain in contact with his/her psychiatrist. No enquiries were made as to whether the doctor’s drug addiction had had any adverse effect on his/her patients in the past. The police investigation would be unlikely to cover such matters. It is clear to me that, although the issue of patient protection may have been considered, the PeCC was very easily satisfied that there was no risk. In practice, the interests of the doctor in rehabilitation were not merely taken into account but were allowed to predominate.
The Approach of the Disciplinary Committee to Cases Involving Drug-Related Convictions
16.72
Examination of the files of those drug-related conviction cases that were referred to the DC shows that that Committee was very unlikely indeed to suspend a doctor from practice and even more unlikely to erase him/her from the medical register. A far more likely outcome was the postponement of the decision to a subsequent meeting, or even several postponements spanning a period of as much as two or three years. Such cases would then be closed with or without an admonishment. When a case was postponed, the doctor would be required to produce reports describing his/her treatment and progress and naming referees of whom enquiry could be made. It should be noted that, when seeking information about the progress made by a doctor who had been addicted to drugs, the GMC staff were not instructed to obtain reports from an independent source. The psychiatrist treating the doctor was usually asked to report and the doctor was asked to name referees of his/her own choosing. Among the cases examined by the Inquiry, I have found none in which the DC had concluded at a resumed hearing that the information about the doctor was sufficiently unsatisfactory to warrant suspension or erasure. From the cases examined, of which some examples are given below, it appears to me that the DC’s objective was to postpone a decision in the case until such time as the doctor was rehabilitated. Throughout the process, the doctor was permitted to practise and was subject to only minimal supervision.
Dr JA 09
16.73
In the case of Dr JA 09, the doctor was convicted of a series of offences of obtaining morphine and pethidine by deception. She had issued prescriptions in the names of patients, had presented them herself and had kept the drugs for her own use. The offences spanned a period of about 14 months. In the mid-1970s, the PeCC referred the case to the DC and the case came on for hearing two months later. It appears that a psychiatric report was produced, although this is no longer available. The minutes of the DC meeting record that the case was postponed for four months. The doctor was told that her conduct gave rise to a
‘potential source of danger to your patients’
. I interpose to say that this expression was often used in decisions of the DC, from which I infer that it was indeed the view of the GMC at that time that a doctor who took drugs presented a risk to patients. The decision to adjourn was taken in order to allow the doctor to demonstrate that she was responding to treatment and would be able to fulfil the assurances of good behaviour she had given. At the next meeting, it emerged that the doctor had not kept up her medical treatment. The minutes do not record what material was before the DC but they do record that the doctor was exhorted to seek medical treatment immediately and to continue with it regularly. Notwithstanding the doctor’s failure to keep up her treatment, the case was adjourned, this time for 12 months. Nothing more was said about the risk to patients and no steps were taken to ensure that the doctor’s patients were not harmed. A year later, the DC learned that the doctor had not maintained regular contact with a psychiatrist in the intervening period. Again, the minutes do not record what information was available to the DC. Notwithstanding the doctor’s failure in that regard, her case was adjourned for another year. She was advised that it was
‘in her best interests’
to consult a psychiatrist regularly. Again, nothing was said about her patients and no steps were taken to protect them. The Inquiry has been unable to find out what happened to this case. The doctor’s name does not appear in the minutes of the DC for the following year. It may be that she had died or retired. It seems unlikely that she was suspended or erased by the DC, as such an outcome would surely have been recorded in the minutes. This doctor was allowed to practise for well over a year, possibly longer, in circumstances where she must have presented some risk to patients.
Dr JA 11
16.74
In the case of Dr JA 11, the doctor was convicted of offences of failing to record in his controlled drugs register (CDR) quantities of Palfium that he had purchased on requisition. He was fined £25. In the mid-1970s, the PeCC referred the case to the DC. In a sense, this was a technical breach of the record keeping requirements of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 1973; it did not involve dishonesty. It appears that the doctor was taking the drug himself. The DC adjourned the case so that a psychiatric report could be obtained. At its next meeting, the case was closed. The minutes do not record what information was available or why that decision was reached. Nor is there any reference at either stage to the risk to patients.
Dr JA 10
16.75
In the case of Dr JA 10, the doctor was convicted of dishonestly obtaining Dexedrine by issuing prescriptions in the names of patients who did not need and did not receive the drug. He was also convicted of offences in connection with his failure to keep a CDR. His conduct had persisted for nearly a year. At a meeting of the PeCC in the mid-1970s, the case was referred to the DC. Two months later, the DC postponed the case for four months, requiring the doctor to identify his treating psychiatrist and other referees. The minutes refer to his dishonesty and to the risk to patients arising from his conduct. At the next meeting, the case was adjourned for a further four months on a similar basis. In the November, the case was closed; the doctor was not admonished.
Dr JA 12
16.76
In the mid-1970s, Dr JA 12 was convicted of obtaining drugs by deception and asked for 25 similar offences to be taken into consideration. It appears, therefore, that his course of conduct had extended over several months. His case was referred to the DC and came on for hearing two months later. It was adjourned for a year and the doctor was required to provide the names of his psychiatrist and referees. The following year, the DC considered a report from a psychiatrist who said that the doctor was fit to practise but recommended a further period of supervision. However, the DC decided to conclude the case, advising the doctor to continue with his supervision. It was not in a position to find out whether the doctor did do so or not.
General Comment
16.77
There are a number of common threads running through the cases of this era involving doctors who had been abusing controlled drugs. These are apparent not only in the cases I have described but also in other cases examined by the Inquiry. The first is that it appears to me that the DC used its power to postpone judgement in order to assist in the rehabilitation of doctors who had committed criminal offences as the result of a drug addiction. However, the extent to which the DC could provide adequate protection for patients in the meantime was very limited. I accept that it had no power to impose conditions on the doctor’s right to continue in practice. However, it generally achieved the co-operation of the doctor in accepting treatment through the implicit threat of suspension or erasure if s/he failed to co-operate and it could have done far more to protect patients by requiring undertakings from a doctor as the price of not being suspended.
16.78
The second is that, when postponing or adjourning a case to allow an opportunity for rehabilitation, the PeCC and the DC always left it to the doctor concerned to choose the psychiatrist who would provide the report at the end of the period of postponement or adjournment. The GMC made no attempt to assemble a list of approved psychiatrists, of whose independence the GMC could be satisfied, and who could be instructed to examine the doctor and to report to the GMC. There was no requirement that a doctor’s assertion that s/he had ceased taking drugs should ever be put to an objective test, as, for example, by urine analysis, although occasionally this would be done. All was taken on trust. No doubt that trust was well placed in many cases but it would be surprising if it always was.
16.79
The choice of referee was also left entirely to the doctor, who was free to request assistance from friends. As we have seen, some doctors would actually prepare a draft reference for a colleague to sign. The referee did not have to state the nature of his/her relationship to the doctor (although s/he sometimes did), or say to what extent s/he had had the opportunity to observe the doctor during the period of adjournment.
16.80
The degree of ‘supervision’ which took place during a period of adjournment or postponement was very light and was not, in my view, sufficient to protect patients. The only requirement was to ‘remain under the supervision of’ a psychiatrist. This would usually involve only limited, occasional contact. As I have said, the GMC did not at this time have the power to impose conditions and requirements that it acquired later under the health procedures. However, it could have assumed those powers had it wished to do so by inviting a doctor to give undertakings or to consent to conditions and requirements as an alternative to suspension or erasure. I have in mind such conditions as not working in general practice, working only in a supervised post and not possessing or prescribing controlled drugs. Another possible safeguard would have been a requirement that a partner or senior colleague should be asked to maintain a watch over the doctor and to provide regular reports to the GMC.
16.81
The other common thread running through all these cases is the complete absence of any attempt by the GMC to find out whether the doctor’s drug taking habit had in fact given rise to any problems for patients. No enquiries were made to see whether complaints had been made to practices, hospitals or family practitioner committees (FPCs). The GMC would have no idea whether a doctor might have been sued for negligence as a result of incidents caused by his/her drug dependence. Even where the reports available suggested underlying problems within a doctor’s practice, no enquiry was made. This again suggests that, at least in cases involving a doctor convicted of drugs offences, the protection of patients did not rank very high in the considerations of the GMC.
The Shipman Case

--- Introduction ---
16.1
Following Shipman’s conviction, in January 2000, on 15 counts of murder (carried out by injecting each of his victims with an overdose of diamorphine, an opiate drug), it came to light that, in 1976, he had been convicted of a series of offences in connection with another opiate drug, pethidine. These offences included not only unlawful possession of the drug but also obtaining pethidine by deception and forgery. The offences had been committed over a period of about 14 months. Many people, shocked at this discovery, suggested that the General Medical Council (GMC) ought to have erased Shipman’s name from the medical register in 1976. It was said that, if the GMC had ‘struck him off’ the register then, Shipman would not have been able to perpetrate his later crimes. In fact, he had been permitted to continue practising. It has not, so far as I am aware, been suggested that the GMC should have recognised Shipman as a potential murderer, only that he should have been dealt with much more severely for the offences he had committed at that time.
16.2
In this Chapter, I shall describe the disciplinary procedures operated by the GMC in 1976 and will consider the way in which Shipman’s case was handled. So far as I am able, I shall examine the reasons why it was handled as it was. Because I wished to set the handling of Shipman’s case in context, the Inquiry sought disclosure of the files of all the drug-related cases considered by the GMC’s fitness to practise (FTP) committees in the years 1975 to 1980. I wished to examine cases of a similar type to Shipman’s, so as to see whether the way in which his case was dealt with was in any way exceptional. I also wished to understand the policy considerations that lay behind the decision in his case and to gain some insight into the criteria applied by the GMC when considering cases involving drug-related offences. After examining these issues, I shall explain my conclusions about the reasonableness of the GMC’s decision in Shipman’s case.
The General Medical Council Staff in Post in 1976
16.3
In 1976, the GMC’s administrative staff was headed by the Registrar, Mr Martin Draper. It seems that he had been at the GMC from about 1950 or 1951. In 1976, Mr Robert Gray was Assistant (later Deputy) Registrar. He had previously worked in colonial, then university, administration. He had joined the GMC in November 1971. From that time until about June 1976, and from a date in 1980 until his retirement in February 1988, Mr Gray was Head of the GMC’s Discipline Division. In that capacity, he was responsible, under the supervision of the Registrar, for dealing with administrative matters relating to the disciplinary procedures of the GMC. Also working in the Discipline Division was an administrative assistant, Mr Adrian Williams (who was employed between December 1970 and May 1977), and a second administrative assistant, who has not been identified. The Discipline Division also had secretarial and typing staff. Mr Gray gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Mr Williams provided a witness statement. Mr Draper’s state of health was such that he could not assist the Inquiry by providing a statement or attending to give evidence. He died in August 2004.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976
The General Medical Council's Procedures in 1976


========================================================================
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - Serious Professional Misconduct and Seriously Deficient Performance: Problems of Definition
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
17.1
Chapter 15
, I explained that the General Medical Council (GMC) conduct or disciplinary procedures were, for many years, founded on the issue of whether the doctor concerned had been guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM). The meaning of that phrase had been defined in general terms from time to time. However, the Inquiry was told that opinions about what types of conduct amounted to SPM varied considerably and that the debate between eminent members of the medical profession as to whether the conduct of a doctor in a particular case amounted to SPM could become both heated and emotional. As SPM was the basis of the conduct procedures, it is apparent that, if views about what amounted to SPM differed, then the standards that were applied by the GMC must have been inconsistent and its decisions unfair to some doctors. The corollary of that unfairness is that some decisions on misconduct must have been too lenient and may have failed to provide adequate protection for patients and the public. It is of vital importance that any disciplinary process should be based upon standards that can be applied consistently in all cases.
17.2
The GMC performance procedures, which were introduced in 1997, were founded on the issue of whether the professional performance of the doctor in question had been ‘seriously deficient’. Although the history of cases under the performance procedures was much shorter than that of cases under the conduct procedures, it appears that there were difficulties with the definition and recognition of seriously deficient performance (SDP), as there were with SPM. The absence of any clear definition of, and standards for, SDP gave rise to the same problems as I outlined above. These problems were of such importance that I propose to devote this Chapter to a discussion of them and their histories.
17.3
I shall not discuss the concept of serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of a physical or mental condition, which was the foundation of the GMC health procedures, as this does not appear to have given rise to similar difficulties.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - Serious Professional Misconduct and Seriously Deficient Performance: Problems of Definition
Serious Professional Misconduct

--- Serious Professional Misconduct ---
‘Infamous Conduct in a Professional Respect’
17.4
The term
‘serious professional misconduct’
was substituted by the Medical Act 1969 for the phrase
‘infamous conduct in a professional respect’
, which had appeared in the previous legislation.
17.5
In 1894,
‘infamous conduct in a professional respect’
had been defined by Lord Justice Lopes in
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration
in the following terms:
‘If a medical man in the pursuit of his profession has done something with regard to it which will be reasonably regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by his professional brethren of good repute and competency, then it is open to the General Medical Council, if that be shown, to say that he has been guilty of infamous conduct in a professional respect.’
17.6
In 1930, Lord Justice Scrutton stated in
R v General Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom
that:
‘... “infamous conduct” ... means no more than serious misconduct judged according to the rules written or unwritten governing the profession’
The Blue Book
17.7
For many years, ending in 1993, the GMC provided to all doctors on the medical register a guide to its functions, procedures and disciplinary jurisdiction. This guide was known as the ‘Blue Book’. It described the more common types of misconduct which had in the past been regarded as grounds for disciplinary proceedings. In the main, they related to what might be termed ‘wilful’ or deliberate misconduct (e.g. termination of pregnancy in contravention of the law, drug abuse, canvassing for patients) or breach of medical ethics (e.g. abuse of professional confidence). Disregard of professional responsibilities to a patient (e.g. by failing to visit or to provide treatment for a patient when necessary) was also mentioned.
17.8
All editions of the Blue Book from 1975 (the earliest in the Inquiry’s possession) to 1993 set out the two definitions I have quoted above and stated that, in proposing the substitution of the expression
‘serious professional misconduct’
for
‘infamous conduct in a professional respect’
, the GMC had intended that the phrases should have the same significance.
17.9
The Blue Book made clear that the question whether any particular course of conduct amounted to SPM was one which fell to be determined by the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) after considering the evidence in an individual case. It emphasised that the categories of misconduct described within it could not be regarded as exhaustive. It stated (I quote from the final edition, published in December 1993):
‘Any abuse by doctors of any of the privileges and the opportunities afforded to them, or any grave dereliction of professional duty or serious breach of medical ethics, may give rise to a charge of serious professional misconduct.’
17.10
The 1985 edition of the Blue Book had included for the first time a statement of the standard of medical care that the public was entitled to expect. It stated:
‘The public are entitled to expect that a registered medical practitioner will afford and maintain a good standard of medical care. This includes:
(a) conscientious assessment of the history, symptoms and signs of a patient’s condition;
(b) sufficiently thorough professional attention, examination and, where necessary, diagnostic investigation;
(c) competent and considerate professional management;
(d) appropriate and prompt action upon evidence suggesting the existence of a condition requiring urgent medical intervention; and
(e) readiness, where the circumstances so warrant, to consult appropriate professional colleagues.’
17.11
It seems that this statement had been formulated following the notorious case of Alfie Winn, which had been heard by the PCC in March 1983. In 1982, Alfie Winn, who was eight, became ill with vomiting and a high temperature. His general practitioner (GP) was called and attended three hours later. He asked Alfie to open his mouth. The boy seemed comatose and his mother said, ‘He can’t hear you.’ The doctor replied, ‘If he can’t be bothered to open his bloody mouth, I shall not bloody well look at him.’ He prescribed an antibiotic. Two hours later, the family called an ambulance and Alfie was taken to hospital. He died four days later of meningitis. The PCC found the facts proved and regarded the doctor’s behaviour as falling below acceptable standards. Nevertheless, it considered that there had been no SPM. The doctor went on to be found guilty of SPM by the PCC in a different case the following year. During the intervening period, he had continued to practise.
17.12
Following these events, there were demands that the GMC should reduce its threshold for taking disciplinary action to ‘professional misconduct’, without the requirement that such misconduct should be ‘serious’. The GMC set up a Working Group, which reported in 1984 that it could find no justification for lowering the threshold of SPM. The GMC instead proposed the formulation of detailed guidance on the circumstances in which failure to provide a sufficient standard of medical care might give rise to SPM. The statement contained in the 1985 Blue Book was the result. However, that statement constituted advice only, and a failure to meet the standards set out in the statement did not thereafter automatically give rise to disciplinary action by the GMC. Nor was the statement particularly detailed. The statement remained unchanged throughout the remaining period for which the Blue Book was published.
The Case of
Doughty
17.13
In the case of
Doughty v General Dental Council
, an appeal from a decision of the General Dental Council (GDC) heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 1987, the Privy Council defined SPM as:
‘... conduct connected with his profession in which the dentist concerned has fallen short, by omission or commission, of the standards of conduct expected among dentists and that such falling short as is established should be serious’
17.14
The Privy Council said that the test that had been applied by the GDC (and which the Privy Council implicitly approved) was that:
‘... judged by proper professional standards in the light of the objective facts about the individual patients that were presented in evidence to the Committee, the dental treatments criticised as unnecessary would be treatments that no dentist of reasonable skill exercising reasonable care would carry out’
17.15
The Privy Council observed further that the relevant Committee of the GDC was particularly well qualified to reach a view on whether the relevant misconduct was serious. It made clear that the findings against the appellant did not import any moral stigma. Nevertheless, the failures found were of a kind which the GDC had been entitled to consider sufficiently serious to warrant erasure of the dentist’s name from the register.
17.16
The observation that the profession (in the
Doughty
case, the dental profession, but in other instances the medical profession) is particularly well qualified to judge what is and is not ‘serious’ has been repeated often in the courts. The problem is that, save in the most obvious cases, there was no agreement within the profession about what type of conduct was capable of amounting (or did amount) to SPM. In 1988, Mrs Jean Robinson, a lay member of the GMC who sat at various times on both the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) and the PCC, observed in her monograph, ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
4
, that there were frequently a number of different medical views as to whether a particular case might or might not amount to SPM. As I shall explain in
Chapter 20
, Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute (PSI), and her colleagues observed similar divergences of view when they attended meetings of the PPC in 1999 and 2000. Sir Donald Irvine, President of the GMC between 1995 and 2002, told the Inquiry that, in his experience of the PCC, the most contentious and difficult parts of the decision-making process were the issues of whether a doctor’s conduct (based on facts which had been admitted by the doctor or proved to the satisfaction of the PCC) amounted to SPM and, if so, what sanction should be imposed. He said that those were the issues that generated the ‘heat’ and the ‘emotion’ among members of the PCC panels when debating their decisions. These issues presented particular difficulties in cases involving allegations about poor treatment or substandard clinical practice. I shall discuss those difficulties later in this Chapter.
‘Good Medical Practice’
17.17
In the mid-1990s, there was concern that the Blue Book was too negative, concerned as it was with ‘bad doctors’. There was a desire to develop instead a more positive statement defining good practice. This gave rise to the development of a list of 14 ‘Duties of a Doctor’, contained within a booklet, ‘Good Medical Practice’. The booklet, which was issued in 1995 to all doctors on the register, set out the basic principles of good medical practice, and was described as
‘guidance’
. Later editions of ‘Good Medical Practice’ made a clear link between its contents and the fitness to practise (FTP) procedures. The edition of July 1998 stated:
‘If serious problems arise which call your registration into question, these are the standards against which you will be judged.’
The third and most recent version of ‘Good Medical Practice’, published in May 2001, is at
Appendix G
of this Report. The first page of the publication warns:
‘Serious or persistent failures to meet the standards in this booklet may put your registration at risk.’
17.18
The Blue Book had been intended to be read by doctors, not by members of the public. Indeed, members of the GMC staff were discouraged from sending copies of the Blue Book to members of the public for fear they would ‘scour’ it to find examples of misconduct which a doctor might have committed. Mr Antony Townsend, Deputy Head, later Head, of the Conduct Section between 1994 and 1998, said that this discouragement was ‘a reflection of the culture at the time’. By contrast, ‘Good Medical Practice’ was made available to the public. Plainly, it was not intended that a single departure from the standards set out in ‘Good Medical Practice’ would necessarily be the subject of disciplinary action. The difficulty for those reading the publication in the disciplinary context - whether they were doctors, members of the public or others - was to know how
‘serious’
or
‘persistent’
a departure from the standards had to be before it would amount to SPM.
17.19
Professor Allen told the Inquiry that, while ‘Good Medical Practice’ was ‘absolutely fine’ for the purposes for which it was intended, it was not suitable for use as guidance about what might or might not amount to SPM. She said:
‘... “Good Medical Practice” is a mixture of things which really must not be transgressed and which would be very serious, and other points which are, for example, being polite to your patients. This on its own could not raise an issue which ought to affect a doctor’s registration presumably; so that you’ve within “Good Medical Practice” a lot of different things at different levels of seriousness.’
What was needed, she said, was detailed guidance for those making decisions, with examples of different types of case which might reach different thresholds, thus creating a ‘hierarchy of seriousness’.
17.20
Mr Townsend agreed that it would not be the case that a breach of one of the standards in ‘Good Medical Practice’ would necessarily lead to disciplinary action by the GMC. He told the Inquiry:
‘... although “Good Medical Practice” was explicit, very explicit I think, about the principles of being a good doctor, what it did not and, indeed, probably could not do was define precisely how serious a departure from those principles was required before registration was called into question. That is a very difficult issue which the Council and many others have been grappling
with
for a long time.’
17.21
A number of witnesses spoke with enthusiasm of the ‘change of culture’ which was signalled by the publication of ‘Good Medical Practice’. Sir Donald, who had been a member of the Working Group which produced the document, described it as
‘a consensus statement that brought professional and patient views on the qualities of a doctor together for the first time’
17.22
Mr Townsend told the Inquiry that ‘Good Medical Practice’ laid much greater emphasis on patients’ interests and on doctors’ competence. It set out what he called ‘patient-centred expectations’. He said that there had been a debate at the time of its publication about whether to continue to issue the Blue Book in parallel with ‘Good Medical Practice’ but it had been decided that this would ‘perpetuate the old regime’ whereby ‘the focus was upon unacceptable behaviour rather than the delivery of patient care’.
17.23
As a member of the GMC staff, Mr Alan Howes, who was involved with the Conduct Section in one capacity or another more or less continuously between 1980 and 1995, said that he had found the Blue Book useful as a guide to the type of behaviour that could lead to disciplinary proceedings. ‘Good Medical Practice’ was harder to use in that way and indeed was not intended to be used for that purpose. He felt that the GMC had ‘lost something’ with the replacement of the Blue Book by ‘Good Medical Practice’, despite the fact that he could see the benefits of the latter. No document equivalent to the Blue Book has been produced since 1993. ‘Good Medical Practice’, in its updated form, remains the GMC’s main source of guidance as to the type of conduct that might come within the definition of SPM.
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook
17.24
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook produced by the GMC advised screeners that, in reaching a view on whether a complaint was so serious as to raise an issue of SPM, the screener (whether medical or lay) should assess the information provided in the complaint against the following criteria:
‘• The gravity of the doctor’s act or omission.
• Whether there is more than one event or alleged victim.
• The extent of the risk to patients or the public.
• Whether the doctor appears to have acted deliberately, recklessly, accidentally, or in bad faith.
• Whether the doctor may have neglected or disregarded his or her professional responsibilities.
• Whether there have been any previous complaints to the GMC about the doctor which, taken with the current complaint, suggest a course of conduct which could amount to spm.’
This advice was helpful but there was still no guidance about how grave an act or omission had to be before it could amount to SPM. Nor was any guidance given as to the weight to be attached to the various criteria listed or as to the approach which should be taken if one or more of the criteria were satisfied.
Further Guidance
17.25
Further guidance as to the meaning of SPM appeared elsewhere. In ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’, published in November 1997 and directed at members of the public, the GMC defined SPM as
‘conduct which makes us question whether a doctor should be allowed to practise medicine without restriction’
. In a document entitled ‘The Conduct Procedures of the General Medical Council’, issued by the GMC Fitness to Practise Directorate in July 2000, SPM was defined as
‘behaviour so serious it would justify restricting the doctor’s right to hold registration’
. The problem with both those definitions was that they gave no clue as to the type of behaviour which was considered by the GMC as being serious enough to justify restricting a doctor’s right to practise medicine or to hold registration.
The 1999 Report of the Professional Conduct Committee Working Group
17.26
Shortly after the establishment of the GMC Fitness to Practise Policy Committee (FPPC) in 1997, the Committee set up a Working Group to report on the activities of the PCC. One of the matters which the PCC Working Group considered was whether there should be any attempt to define SPM more precisely. One of the reasons for setting up the Working Group had been public criticism of some PCC decisions on the grounds that they were inappropriate or inconsistent. The report of the PCC Working Group recognised that the lack of a
‘definitive interpretation’
of SPM was a factor which increased the risk of inconsistent decision-making by the PCC.
17.27
The PCC Working Group considered that a major advantage of the concept of SPM was its flexibility. It considered that the concept could be interpreted according to changing circumstances and expectations. The only alternative was, the PCC Working Group considered, to have a code of conduct, specifying every single offence with which a doctor might be charged. Members of the PCC Working Group did not believe that a code of conduct would offer any real benefits. On the contrary, they felt it would have significant disadvantages. In particular, they thought it would lead to
‘interminable legal wrangling’
about whether the details of the alleged misconduct in an individual case fitted the circumstances defined in the code.
17.28
The PCC Working Group noted that SPM was sometimes described as being
‘conduct ... so serious as to call into question a doctor’s registration’
. Its report observed:
‘While that is technically accurate, it is a circular statement which gives no real clue as to the kind of misconduct likely to be involved.’
I wholly agree with the observation that this description or definition of SPM was unhelpful because of its circularity. The definition immediately provoked the questions ‘And how serious is that?’ and also ‘What do you mean by “call into question”?’ Unfortunately, the GMC’s new FTP procedures will depend on just such a circular definition.
17.29
The PCC Working Group noted that the courts’ interpretation of SPM was:
‘... a serious falling short from the proper standards of conduct to be expected of doctors, or, in clinical matters at least ... action or inaction by a doctor of a serious kind for which no doctor of reasonable skill exercising reasonable care would be responsible ...’
The reference here was to the interpretation of SPM set out in the case of
Doughty
: see
paragraph 17.13
. The PCC Working Group observed that the definition
‘left unanswered’
the questions of what the standards were at any one time and of what was meant by
‘serious’
17.30
The PCC Working Group commented that one
‘unintended consequence’
of substituting ‘Good Medical Practice’ for the Blue Book might have been
‘a loss of clarity outside the GMC about the meaning of SPM’
. It commended the 1998 GMC publication ‘Maintaining Good Medical Practice’, which gave guidance to doctors and managers on what to do when they discovered poor practice. The publication contained examples (financial fraud, making false statements, indecency, etc.) which would justify the referral of a doctor to the GMC. The Working Group felt that the types of conduct mentioned in that publication provided a
‘useful overview’
of SPM. However, my own view is that, although the 1998 guidance was better than nothing, it was not adequate because it was far too general. It was not surprising that many cases were reported to the GMC which the GMC considered were insufficiently serious to warrant action.
17.31
The PCC Working Group concluded that SPM should continue to be closely related to the need for a doctor’s registration to be removed or restricted. It dismissed the possibility of widening the PCC’s jurisdiction to include less serious offences, or of retaining the offence of SPM but introducing a new offence of lesser gravity, such as ‘unacceptable conduct’. The Working Group observed that there was no point in the PCC hearing a case if the doctor’s registration was not in question. The reason for that was that the statutory process (i.e. the quasi-criminal hearing) existed in order to ensure that a doctor was not removed from practice without due cause. Cases of lesser gravity, where the doctor’s livelihood was not at stake, were, the Working Group observed,
‘best dealt with in other ways’
The Revision of ‘Good Medical Practice’ in 2001
17.32
In May 2001, ‘Good Medical Practice’ was being revised for the second time. A draft had been prepared and consultation had taken place. Two medical organisations had raised concerns about some of the changes and additions to the text. They argued that the guidance was too vague and that it should include explicit and measurable standards if it were to be used as a template against which doctors would be assessed. Non-medical groups, however, either supported the standards and principles set out in the draft or argued for a more assertive statement on the need for doctors to comply with the guidance in all but exceptional circumstances. Neither the medical nor the non-medical groups argued that every complaint about a contravention of the guidance, however minor, should lead to action by the GMC. However, the consultation exposed a difference in views about the point at which a failure to meet standards should be regarded as unacceptable and, therefore, as potentially warranting action on registration.
17.33
As a consequence of this difference of views, and following discussion at a Council Meeting in May 2001, it was decided that it would be helpful to draw up a series of examples or indicators of SPM to complement the guidance in ‘Good Medical Practice’. This work was to be taken forward by the FPPC and the Standards Committee; it was intended that they should work together to produce examples of conduct which would call a doctor’s registration into question. It was suggested that one example might be a statement that doctors must be honest and trustworthy and that a criminal conviction for theft would call a doctor’s registration into question. It was hoped that the production of examples or indicators would meet some of the concerns which had been expressed during consultation on the revised edition of ‘Good Medical Practice’. However, it appears that no examples of the type which had been envisaged were produced. When, in May 2004, the Inquiry asked the GMC (through its solicitors) what had been the result of the initiative and whether it had given rise to any guidance, the GMC replied that the work had been
‘taken forward’
and was
‘reflected’
in the draft case examiner decision form which was at that time being prepared for use after the introduction of the new FTP procedures, and in the draft document, ‘The Investigation Stage Test - Guidance on Criteria and Thresholds’, which had been prepared for the use of case examiners appointed to work under the new procedures. Copies of both were provided. The draft document has now been replaced by a further draft document, ‘Making decisions on cases at the end of the investigation stage: Guidance for Case Examiners and the Investigation Committee’, which was produced by the GMC in September 2004 (the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance). I shall refer to the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance again below and shall describe it more fully in
Chapter 25
Guidance for the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
17.34
Notes produced by the GMC for the use of members of the PPC, current in January 2002, stated that the GMC regarded SPM as
‘behaviour which may raise issues about the doctor’s registration and fitness to continue to practise’
. Here again, the GMC was using a definition or description of SPM which was circular in nature. The definition gave no clue as to what sort of behaviour might raise issues about registration or fitness to continue to practise. In any event, this particular wording might well give rise to misunderstanding. It could easily convey the idea that SPM was confined to behaviour for which the doctor might be struck off the register.
Guidance for Screeners
17.35
The Screeners’ Handbook of November 2002 contained no specific guidance about the meaning of SPM. However, a description of SPM appeared on the screening decision form (SDF), the standard form which was at that time used by GMC staff and screeners during the pre-screening and screening processes. It is not clear whether the description appeared on the SDF as originally drafted in 1999, but it had certainly been included on the form for the previous three or four years. It related to conduct other than sexual assault or indecency, violence, dishonesty and certain types of dysfunctional behaviour. It was intended that those categories of conduct should be regarded by the screeners as automatically capable of amounting to SPM or as ‘SPM by definition’.
17.36
The description of SPM which appeared on the SDF stated:
‘SPM is action or inaction by a doctor of a serious kind of which no doctor of reasonable skill and exercising reasonable care would be responsible.’
Quite apart from the problems of
syntax and clarity of expression
, this description (which was derived from the interpretation of SPM in the case of
Doughty
) was not very helpful in that it was not appropriate for application to many of the classes of conduct which might potentially amount to SPM. It related solely to cases of substandard clinical practice. For such cases, the test proposed was similar to that applied by the courts when deciding civil claims for negligence made against doctors. It incorporated an additional element, not present within the definition of clinical negligence applied by the courts, namely that the action or inaction by the doctor had to be
‘of a serious kind’
. But there was no guidance as to how serious the negligence had to be before it could amount to SPM. The screener was left to apply his/her own view of seriousness.
A Collection of Case Reports
17.37
At the Inquiry hearings, Sir Donald Irvine said that, when he was President, the idea of publishing case reports or case studies had been discussed. The idea was to illustrate by example the kinds of conduct that would and would not amount to SPM. It may be that Sir Donald had in mind the work to which I have already referred and which it had been intended should be undertaken by the FPPC and the Standards Committee. He said that, in the event, the work had not been carried out, a fact which he regarded as a matter for regret.
17.38
At the Inquiry hearings in December 2003, Professor Sir Graeme Catto, current President, and Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive, said that the GMC intended to publish a collection of case reports in February 2004. As I understood it, these were to be summaries of cases in which the decision taken by a PCC panel was regarded as good and as an example to be followed. I had hoped that these summaries would provide useful examples of the kind of conduct which did or did not amount to SPM, and also guidance on appropriate sanctions. In the event, publication of the case reports was delayed until September 2004, when five ‘case studies’ were published. They were disappointing and gave little or no useful guidance as to the threshold of seriousness at which conduct might be regarded as amounting to SPM, or be such as to warrant action on registration. I shall refer to the case studies in greater detail in
Chapter 21
The New Fitness to Practise Procedures
17.39
As I have mentioned, under the new FTP procedures, the test to be applied when deciding whether action on a doctor’s registration is required will not be whether the doctor has been guilty of SPM, but whether his/her fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. This test gives rise to the same problems of circularity as the definition of SPM to which I referred at
paragraph 17.28
. How are doctors, patients or others to judge what degree of impairment will, in the view of the GMC, justify ‘action on a doctor’s registration’? The answer is that, unless they are given comprehensive guidance on standards, they will guess. Within the GMC, how are caseworkers, case managers, case examiners and FTP panel members to make judgements about whether action on registration is justified? The answer is that, unless they are given comprehensive guidance on standards, they will apply their own individual views and the result will be inconsistent decisions with all the adverse consequences that they bring. The GMC has undoubtedly recognised the need for guidance and, as I have said, has produced draft guidance (the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance) for case examiners, who will have to decide whether a case should be referred to a FTP panel. It sets out a number of circumstances in which a question of fitness to practise is likely to arise. A few examples are given. It is a step in the right direction. Coupled with the regular publication of case reports, such guidance might provide a basis for more consistent and transparent decision-making. As I shall later explain, however, I believe that more must be done to establish standards that are understood and accepted by society as a whole.
Poor Treatment and Substandard Clinical Practice
17.40
As I have explained, it is clear that there has often been considerable difference of opinion as to whether the facts established in a particular case amounted to, or were capable of amounting to, SPM. This difference of opinion has been particularly marked in cases involving allegations of poor treatment and/or substandard clinical practice. I recognise that there will always be a risk that two tribunals will reach different conclusions based on the same facts; that is why clear guidance is essential.
17.41
In the past, as I have said, the emphasis of the Blue Book was on what might be termed ‘wilful’ or deliberate misconduct and on breach of medical ethics. It was unusual for the GMC to take disciplinary action in respect of substandard clinical practice. Mr Townsend told the Inquiry that, while he was at the GMC, he did a small survey which showed that, in the late 1960s, only 5% of cases reaching the PCC had anything to do with clinical care. He said that cases referred to the PCC:
‘... were nearly always about behavioural matters, about whether a person was a fit person to be a registered medical practitioner as distinct from whether they were competent to undertake the right kinds of treatment’
Speaking of the same era, Mr Howes referred to the ‘old-fashioned’ forms of misconduct with which the GMC would have been concerned then, ‘such as advertising and abortion and adultery: the three As’.
17.42
Early editions of the Blue Book had, as I have said, referred to the possibility that disciplinary proceedings might be instituted in a case where a doctor appeared to have seriously disregarded his/her professional responsibility to his/her patients or to have neglected his/her professional duties, for example by failing to visit or to provide treatment for a patient when it was necessary. Substandard treatment - in the absence of misconduct involving a conscious decision by the doctor to act as s/he did, knowing of the possible or likely consequences - was not, however, mentioned. The 1977 edition of the Blue Book specifically stated that the GMC was
‘not concerned with errors in diagnosis or treatment’
17.43
In the 1983 edition, that statement was amplified. The relevant passage then stated:
‘The Council is not ordinarily concerned with errors in diagnosis or treatment, or with the kind of matters which give rise to action in the civil courts for negligence, unless the doctor’s conduct in the case has involved such a disregard of his professional responsibility to his patients or such a neglect of his professional duties as to raise a question of serious professional misconduct. A question of serious professional misconduct may also arise from a complaint or information about the conduct of a doctor which suggests that he has endangered the welfare of patients by persisting in independent practice of a branch of medicine in which he does not have the appropriate knowledge and skill and has not acquired the experience which is necessary.’
17.44
In the 1985 edition of the Blue Book, there was the addition of the statement of the standards of medical care that the public was entitled to expect. I have referred to that statement at
paragraph 17.10
. As I have said, the statement constituted guidance only, and a failure to meet the standards did not automatically give rise to disciplinary action by the GMC.
17.45
Mr Howes said that, during the 1980s, it became more common for cases of substandard treatment to be reported to the GMC. This type of complaint was more of a ‘grey area’ than complaints about other forms of misconduct. Mr Howes’ interpretation of the approach taken by the GMC during the 1980s and early 1990s was that:
‘... if you
i.e. the doctor
try your very best and your very best happens not to be good enough, then that is not serious professional misconduct. Serious professional misconduct is neglecting to do what you ought to have done or in some cases doing what you should not have done.’
17.46
In 1994, Mr Howes compiled what he has described as ‘the beginnings of a training manual’ (the 1994 Training Manual). No similar document had been produced in the Conduct Section previously and Mr Howes, who was by that time Head of the Section and was aware that he would be moving to another Section in the near future, compiled this document in order to pass on his knowledge and experience for the benefit of new staff joining the Section. He explained in evidence that he did not regard it as a finished document, but had envisaged that it would be improved and overhauled from time to time and would eventually be audited by someone and given a more formal status. He assumed that the 1994 Training Manual must have been approved at the time - at least in general terms - by his immediate superior, but had no clear recollection about this. The Training Manual is a valuable document since it provides a summary of the operation of GMC procedures in 1994, as perceived by Mr Howes, who was then a very senior and experienced member of staff. Generally, the witnesses agreed that it accurately represented the practice and thinking of the time. However, as I shall explain, some doubt was expressed about the description of the GMC’s approach to cases of poor treatment and substandard practice contained in it. It was suggested that the 1994 Training Manual might not accurately reflect the approach taken by the GMC to such cases.
17.47
The 1994 Training Manual stated:
‘We cannot investigate complaints of failure to diagnose, or failure to give what the complainant considers to be correct and appropriate treatment, or complaints about evident or alleged errors in treatment, which have allegedly resulted in damage to the patient. Such matters come into the category of medical negligence, which it is more appropriate for a patient to pursue in the civil courts, particularly if the patient wants financial redress (which we cannot give). Those matters are not, however, regarded as serious misbehaviour by the doctor concerned, such as might justify action by the Council.’
‘The types of case relating to treatment which
may
emphasis in the original
justify disciplinary procedures by the Council include cases where a doctor has allegedly failed to visit a patient when necessary, or failed to conduct an appropriate examination, or failed to conduct or arrange appropriate examinations, or absented himself/herself from his/her practice or post when the doctor was supposed to be on duty, or has been drunk on duty, or has been guilty of some other culpable failure in relation to his or her responsibilities towards one or more patients.’
The 1994 Training Manual also stated:
‘Experience shows that few complaints about treatment would actually be serious enough even if sustained to raise any question of serious professional misconduct.’
17.48
The wording of the 1994 Training Manual suggested a very restrictive approach to complaints about poor treatment and substandard clinical practice. A clear distinction appeared to be drawn between
‘errors in treatment’
on the one hand and
‘culpable failure’
in relation to professional responsibilities for patients on the other. The idea that SPM must involve some element of ‘wilful’ or, at least ‘reckless’, misconduct appeared to be perpetuated. The 1994 Training Manual appeared to suggest that falling below reasonable standards of care (as opposed to wilfully refusing to give any care at all) would not of itself amount to SPM.
17.49
Despite the fact that he was responsible for compiling the 1994 Training Manual, Mr Howes did not believe that these extracts truly reflected the thinking of the GMC as it was in 1994. He said that, at that time, the GMC often dealt with complaints about doctors failing to treat and giving incorrect treatment. However, ‘errors’ were not matters for the GMC. Mr Howes appeared confident that GMC staff and members had been able to distinguish between cases which might involve SPM and those which could never do so. He did, however, agree with me that, on occasion, it was difficult to decide whether an ‘error’ was ‘culpable’ on the one hand (and, therefore, capable of constituting SPM) or ‘excusable’ (therefore not amounting to SPM) on the other. Dr Krishna Korlipara, who has been an elected member of the GMC since 1984 and was a medical screener between 1998 and 2004, also said that the extracts from the 1994 Training Manual did not tally with his understanding of the tests which were being applied at the time.
17.50
In December 1995, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council delivered judgement in the case of
McCandless v General Medical Council
5
. The PCC had found Dr McCandless, a GP, guilty of SPM and had directed that his name should be erased from the register. The charges had alleged errors of diagnosis in relation to three patients and a failure to refer them to hospital. Two patients had died and one had been found to be seriously ill at the time of her eventual admission to hospital. The PCC had found that the care provided by the doctor
‘fell deplorably short of the standard which patients are entitled to expect from their general practitioners’
. On appeal, the PCC’s findings of fact were accepted by Dr McCandless and it was also accepted that he had been negligent. However, it was argued on his behalf that poor treatment was not enough to amount to SPM. It was said that SPM meant conduct that was
‘morally blameworthy’
. This could not be determined simply by deciding whether the treatment measured up to an objective standard. The doctor might have been doing his best. He might have been overworked. It was argued that it was necessary to look at why the doctor gave the treatment he did. Counsel for Dr McCandless submitted that if the treatment fell short of a reasonable standard because he had been, for example, too lazy or drunk to examine the patient properly, then he would be guilty of misconduct. But not if he had made an honest mistake.
17.51
The Privy Council took the view that the legal authorities dealing with
‘infamous conduct in a professional respect’
were of little assistance in the interpretation of SPM. It said that moral blameworthiness was not a necessary ingredient of SPM. Lord Hoffmann observed:
‘... the public has higher expectations of doctors and members of other self-governing professions. Their governing bodies are under a corresponding duty to protect the public against the genially incompetent as well as the deliberate wrongdoers.’
The Privy Council applied the objective test referred to in
Doughty
(see ), saying that it was applicable to doctors as much as to dentists. That being the case, the appeal in
McCandless
failed.
17.52
Mr Townsend told the Inquiry that he believed that GMC procedures had been designed to deal with questions of professional behaviour and had not really been designed to deal with questions involving treatment. He said that there was no doubt that the GMC could act if, for example, a GP refused to visit a patient where there was sufficient evidence that someone needed a visit. He said that, over a period of years (even decades), the GMC had been ‘pushing at the margins’ of SPM to try to include substandard care. He said that the guidance contained in the 1994 Training Manual had been ‘at the cautious end’ of the interpretation of the Blue Book. However, at that time, the GMC was becoming less cautious. Mr Townsend made the point that it was because the GMC procedures were not really suitable to deal with substandard care that the performance procedures were introduced. As I have explained, under the performance procedures, the GMC could take action if the standard of professional performance of a doctor was seriously deficient. However, the advent of the performance procedures did not entirely solve the problem of which Mr Townsend spoke. There had to be a pattern of failure (or possibly of serious failure) to comply with relevant professional standards before SDP could be established. Where there was such a pattern, action under the performance procedures was appropriate. However, where the matter complained of appeared to be a single incident, the performance procedures were not appropriate and the issue was still whether the incident complained of amounted, or was capable of amounting, to SPM. Most complaints to the GMC came from private individuals as isolated incidents. Unless enquiries were made of the doctor’s employer or primary care organisation (PCO) (which they rarely were), the GMC was not in a position to know whether the complaint was part of a pattern of similar incidents which might be sufficient to trigger the performance procedures.
17.53
There is no doubt that, during the early and mid-1990s, some complaints involving what might be termed ‘errors’ were judged by the GMC to amount to SPM. In
Chapter 21
, I have referred to a few examples of such cases, all involving the administration of manifestly excessive doses of drugs. It is clear that, in other cases, where the ‘error’ was not so obvious, there was uncertainty as to whether the doctor’s conduct crossed the threshold of SPM. From 1995, it was possible to look at the doctor’s behaviour against the background of the standards set out in ‘Good Medical Practice’. However, as I have already said, a departure from those standards did not necessarily amount to SPM. The difficulty still lay in defining precisely how serious such a departure had to be before disciplinary action was appropriate.
[1894] 1 QB 750.
[1930] 1 KB 562.
[1988] AC 164.
4
Robinson, Jean (1988) ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’. London: Health Rights.
5
[1996] 1 WLR 167.
Seriously Deficient Performance


========================================================================
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: Initial Stages Conducted by the Administrative Staff
========================================================================

--- Ascertaining the Identity of a Doctor Who Is the Subject of a Complaint ---
18.204
One of the first tasks which the GMC staff undertake when a complaint is received is to seek to establish the identity of any doctor named or described in the complaint, by reference to the medical register. This is not necessarily as simple as it sounds. It may appear surprising that a complainant should not be able to identify a doctor about whom s/he is complaining. However, it is not unusual for a patient in a hospital to be unaware of the identity of the doctors who treat him/her, nor for a patient attending a ‘walk-in’ clinic to be similarly unaware. Nor is it uncommon for a complainant to supply a name to the GMC which turns out to be wholly or partially incorrect. Identification can also be a problem where there are several doctors on the register with the same or a very similar name. It is rare for a member of the public to be in a position to quote a doctor’s GMC registration number, which might be necessary to identify the doctor positively in these circumstances.
The Work of the Policy Studies Institute
18.205
When Professor Allen and her team first began their studies of the GMC procedures, they noted that a significant proportion of the doctors against whom complaints had been made had never been identified by reference to the GMC’s medical register. Plainly, if the GMC’s procedures were to be thoroughly examined for racial bias, it was important that the doctors complained about should be identified. A good system of identification is also necessary if the GMC is to fulfil its public protection duties. The 1996 PSI Report recommended that the GMC should enter and store on computer, for the purposes of monitoring, full details of the doctors about whom complaints had been made and that those details should be matched and linked with the medical register.
18.206
Despite this, the 2003 PSI Paper pointed out that there had in fact been an increase since 1997 in the proportion of doctors complained about whose identity had not been established by the GMC. In 1997, complaints were made against 2485 doctors, of whom 377 (15%) were not identified. By 2001, the number of doctors complained of had risen to 3999, of whom no fewer than 1019 (just over 25%) had not been identified. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that the GMC’s explanation for the increase in unidentified doctors was that it was thought unnecessary to identify doctors in cases which were closed by the administrative staff and which the GMC considered could never raise a question of SPM or SDP. Professor Allen and her colleagues noted with surprise that the GMC’s categorisation of the complaints made against 22% of the unidentified doctors (in cases where there had been a categorisation of the complaint) had been
‘dishonesty/criminality’
. A fairly high proportion of complaints in this category had not been sent to a medical screener. I find it worrying that so many doctors remained unidentified, especially in cases involving allegations of dishonesty or criminality. It is also a matter for concern that they were not referred to the medical screeners. Moreover, in each year, about 10% of the doctors who had not been identified had been reported to the GMC by public bodies. This was particularly surprising because it is hard to imagine that a public body would make a complaint about a doctor without being aware of the doctor’s identity.
The Problems Caused by the Failure to Identify Doctors
18.207
Since Professor Allen and her colleagues were looking at the possibility that racial bias might play a part in decisions made by the GMC, the failure to identify doctors was of particular concern. In their various analyses, they had looked at the country of qualification of all doctors who were the subject of complaints to the GMC. They had then compared the outcomes of the complaints against those who qualified in the UK with the outcomes of the complaints against those who had qualified overseas. Failure to identify a doctor meant that the country of qualification of the doctor could not be identified. Professor Allen and her colleagues were concerned that no similar analysis of cases would be possible in the future if doctors and their countries of qualification were not identified.
18.208
There are other consequences of the failure to establish the identity of a doctor against whom a complaint is made. First, it means that the GMC cannot ascertain whether the doctor has any previous history of complaints made to the GMC about him/her or of disciplinary action taken against him/her. Yet there will be many cases where knowledge of a doctor’s FTP history might cause the current complaint to be viewed in a different light. Second, it means that the complaint cannot be retrieved in the future if another complaint against the same doctor is received. Third, it might be that the complaint involves a person who is not on the GMC’s register but is masquerading as a doctor. If no attempt is made to check that the person complained about appears on the register, the fact that s/he is an impostor will never be known.
Possible Reasons for the Failure to Identify Doctors
18.209
In his evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Scott suggested two possible reasons for the apparently high number of unidentified doctors. First, he suggested that the doctor’s identity might in fact be known but the name might just not have been recorded on the GMC database. I find it surprising that this could occur since I should have thought that the name of the doctor was a vital piece of information for reference purposes. The omission to record a name on the database may have serious consequences since it will be impossible to make a link with another complaint about the same doctor in the future. There does not seem to me to be any excuse for a failure to record on the computer database the identity of a doctor if it is known.
18.210
Second, Mr Scott said that a significant proportion of communications received by the GMC were not complaints against doctors but were pieces of correspondence raising issues which, if a doctor were involved, could become a complaint. Quite a high proportion of those did not involve a doctor at all. I can see that, in those circumstances, it would not be necessary (or, in some cases, possible) to link the subject of the complaint with a name on the medical register. However, the complaints referred to by Professor Allen (particularly those involving
‘dishonesty/criminality’
and the reports from public bodies) must have involved allegations against the doctors concerned; they cannot have been just general correspondence.
18.211
Mr Scott said that there was a procedure to be followed when trying to identify a doctor. The extent to which that procedure was implemented depended on the potential seriousness of the issue that had been reported. If it was of sufficient seriousness to be a potential candidate for the FTP procedures, staff would go to some lengths to identify the doctor. If the complaint did not, on the face of it, raise an issue that would fall within the FTP procedures, then correspondingly less effort would be devoted to trying to identify the doctor. That approach does not sound unreasonable but it does not account for the failure to identify doctors about whom the complaint was of
‘dishonesty/criminality’
. Moreover, examination of a few individual cases suggests that abandonment of an attempt to identify a doctor may sometimes be premature.
Specific Cases
18.212
The Inquiry examined two cases that illustrated the problems arising from a failure to identify a doctor about whom a complaint has been made. Both were closed by casework managers in late 2003.
Dr KC 02
18.213
In the first case (that of Dr KC 02), the complainant had undergone laser eye treatment at a private clinic. She alleged that, as a consequence of the treatment, she had suffered scarring to her eye. She was complaining of distortion of vision. In a letter to the complainant’s GP, written after he had been notified of the complainant’s dissatisfaction, the person who performed the treatment (whom the complainant understood to be a doctor) had claimed that the complainant had been warned of the risks of a poor outcome before undergoing the treatment. The complainant said that she had not been warned. She had initially directed her complaint to the General Optical Council, which had forwarded the complaint to the GMC since the subject of the complaint appeared to be a doctor.
18.214
The case was closed by GMC staff on the ground that local complaints procedures had not been exhausted. In a letter written by a casework assistant, the complainant was advised to refer her complaint to the Medical Director or Chief Executive of the clinic where she had received her treatment. The letter also suggested that she might wish to copy her complaint to the NCSC, which would monitor the handling of the complaint.
18.215
The complainant had given the name of the person who had treated her. The name was an unusual one. Yet the caseworker who dealt with the complaint had not been able to match the name with that of a doctor appearing on the medical register. It appeared to me that this immediately raised the possibility that the person who had treated the complainant had not been a doctor at all. Of course, it might be, as Mr Marshall suggested, that the complainant had spelled the name wrongly and that this was why the name could not be found on the medical register. However, it was impossible to be sure.
18.216
Mr Marshall said that, once a decision had been taken that the GMC would not be proceeding in the case, it would have been an unnecessary expenditure of resources to attempt to identify the doctor. I can understand that, in some cases, it might not be worthwhile expending resources in this way. However, in this case, where the GMC had the address of the clinic where the treatment had been given, the task of ascertaining the doctor’s details would have been relatively simple. If that was not done, the possibility remained that the person who had performed the treatment was not a doctor at all.
18.217
If the person who treated the complainant had been an impostor, pretending to be a qualified doctor when he was not, he would have been liable to prosecution. Given that the role of the GMC is to protect patients, I should have thought it would have a keen interest in detecting and initiating action against any person who impersonated a doctor. If, an enquiry having been made of the clinic, it had appeared that the person who had treated the complainant was not on the medical register, the next step would have been to report the case to the police for investigation. Indeed, had the doctor not been on the register, that fact should have triggered investigations into the clinic, its recruitment policy and its staffing arrangements. The GMC itself could not have carried out such investigations but could presumably have asked the NCSC to do so.
18.218
The complaint was primarily one of negligent treatment. Even if the treatment itself had not been negligent, then there might have been a negligent failure to inform the complainant of the risks associated with the treatment. Both would be serious matters. If the subject of the complaint was indeed a doctor, the failure to identify him made it impossible for the GMC to ascertain whether there had been any previous complaints against him. It is possible that there had been a history of past complaints of a similar nature. In addition, if the GMC received another complaint of a similar nature about the doctor in the future, there would be no means by which that complaint could be linked with the previous one.
18.219
Mr Marshall pointed out that the failure to identify a doctor was not an unusual occurrence. Often, the name of the doctor was a common one and the problem lay in ascertaining which doctor of that name was involved in the complaint. Because the situation that arose in this case was commonplace, this case would not necessarily have ‘rung alarm bells’ with the caseworker. Having looked at the case afresh, Mr Marshall recognised the possibility that the ‘doctor’ might not in fact have been registered. He felt that the GMC should look at its processes with a view to setting out criteria for the circumstances in which more vigorous attempts should be made to identify a doctor about whom a complaint had been made.
18.220
This complaint concerned treatment in a private clinic, into which members of the public could walk without referral by, or advice from, a GP. Patients in those circumstances are particularly vulnerable and I should have thought that the GMC should be especially rigorous in protecting them. I find it concerning that the GMC’s processes allowed the question of whether or not the person who treated the complainant was a
doctor to go unanswered. I note also that the complaint was referred to the clinic’s complaints procedures at a time when the GMC was in no position properly to assess the seriousness of the complaint or whether the doctor (if doctor he was) presented any danger to patients attending the clinic for treatment in the future. Nor did the GMC have any knowledge of the complaints procedures in operation at the clinic or whether they were likely to identify a possible threat to patient safety, if such a threat existed.
18.221
Moreover, the onus of initiating the complaints procedure was on the complainant. She had already indicated that she had been unable to get a satisfactory response to her complaint from the clinic. It would not perhaps have been surprising if she had been unwilling to make another approach. If the GMC had forwarded her complaint direct to the clinic and had made it clear that it would be following the matter up to discover the outcome, the burden would have been removed from the complainant and there would, I should have thought, have been a greater chance of her complaint being taken seriously.
18.222
This case provided an interesting insight into the GMC’s attitude to the gathering of information. During his evidence about this case, Mr Marshall made the point that it would be onerous for the GMC, and potentially disappointing for complainants, if the GMC were to enter into ‘lengthy correspondence’ with complainants in order to try to establish the identity of a doctor in such a case as this, where the GMC was not going to take the case forward. Plainly, it had not occurred to Mr Marshall that the GMC itself might take the initiative and might seek information from a third party, in this case the clinic. It seemed to be the case that ‘investigation’, to members of the GMC staff, was essentially confined to seeking information either from the complainant or from the doctor against whom the complaint had been made. This was perhaps not surprising, since it reflected what had, in general, been the practice in the past.
Dr KC 05
18.223
In the case of Dr KC 05, a member of the public wrote to the GMC, saying that she had undergone, at a private hospital, an orthopaedic operation which had had a very unsatisfactory outcome. The nature of the unsatisfactory outcome was unspecified. She was pursuing a claim for negligence against the surgeon concerned but wanted the issue of his fitness to practise to be considered by an appropriate authority. She did not name the surgeon involved or the hospital.
18.224
The case was closed by a casework manager and the complainant was advised to contact the Medical Director or Chief Executive of the hospital concerned and to ask him/her to look into the issues. She was told that she could return to the GMC if she was dissatisfied with the response. In this case also, it was suggested that the complainant might copy her complaint to the NCSC. She was not asked for the surgeon’s name and the GMC did not establish his identity. The casework manager who closed the case had no idea whether the surgeon had a history of complaints of a similar nature or a record of disciplinary action against him. The complaint of a poor outcome to the complainant’s operation might or might not have been justified. If there had been a poor outcome, it might or might not have been as a result of substandard treatment on the surgeon’s part. If it was, that substandard treatment might or might not have amounted to SPM. If there had been a previous history of similarly substandard practice, the opportunity of linking that history to this complaint (and possibly of discovering a pattern of SDP) was lost. Similarly, if a further complaint of the same type were received in the future, there would be no way of linking it with this one.
18.225
Mr Marshall said that he thought it would have been preferable if the GMC’s letter to the complainant had specifically asked her to provide the surgeon’s details so that checks could be carried out. He said, ‘I think we hope that this particular complainant may come back to us.’ I do not believe that the complainant would have understood from the letter which she received that an immediate return to the GMC was an option. The letter merely suggested that she could contact the GMC again if she was dissatisfied with the response she received from the hospital. Mr Marshall pointed out that an unsatisfactory outcome to an operation might not necessarily raise any issues affecting the doctor’s practice and that, if there were such issues, they might not be at the appropriate threshold for the GMC to become involved, at least in the first instance. I accept that entirely, of course. The problem, it seems to me, is that, at the time the decision to close the case was taken, the GMC did not have the information necessary to make these judgements.
Comment
18.226
If the GMC is to be in a position to link a doctor against whom a complaint is made with any past FTP history which s/he may have and with any such history that s/he might acquire in the future, it is vital that a full and accurate record is maintained of the details of that doctor. I accept of course that, on occasion (particularly where the complaint relates to hospital treatment), it may not be possible to identify the doctor concerned. I also accept that there will be cases where no issue of patient safety could possibly arise or where there are other circumstances which mean that it would be a complete waste of resources to go to elaborate lengths to identify a doctor about whom a complaint has been made. However, it seems to me to be an entirely different matter where, as in the two examples I have cited, potential issues of patient safety do arise and complaints are being closed not because there is no substance in them, but because the GMC prefers to leave the task of investigating and assessing the seriousness of the complaint to local complaints procedures. In both cases, the task of ascertaining the identity of the doctor should have been perfectly simple. In both cases, the existence of a history of similar complaints could have been very significant.
18.227
Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that he thought that the GMC needed to reconsider its policy in relation to cases that were closed for referral to local procedures. In particular, there needed to be consideration of whether more energy should be expended on identifying the doctor. The Inquiry has been told that, since its hearings, the GMC has taken steps to address the problem of unidentified doctors and, certainly, the FTP Investigation Manual of May 2004 laid more emphasis than did previous similar publications on the importance of identifying a doctor against whom a complaint was made. I do not know how successful the measures taken by the GMC have been. It seems to me surprising, however, that the GMC did not appear to appreciate - until the Inquiry drew attention to the fact - the implications for patient safety consequent upon its failure to establish the identity of such a high proportion of the doctors about whom complaints were made.
Some Problems with Cases Closed by General Medical Council Staff

--- The Initial Processing of Conduct Cases under the 'Old' Procedures ---
18.13
The old conduct procedures were governed by the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988 (the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules). In December 2003, the relevant instructions for staff were contained in the April 2003 edition of the FTP Casework Manual. Subsequently, new instructions were issued and were contained in the FTP Investigation Manual, the first version of which came into effect in May 2004. The FTP Investigation Manual included changes to the procedures for dealing with complaints which had been introduced after the Inquiry’s hearings. Most of those changes related to new arrangements for the exchange of information between the GMC and the employers and PCOs of doctors in respect of whom complaints had been made to the GMC. I shall describe those new arrangements, which were introduced as a result of concerns expressed by the Inquiry, later in this Chapter.
18.14
In the course of the decision-making process, members of staff used specially designed standard forms to guide and record their decisions.
The Practice in December 2003
The First Steps
18.15
I shall deal first with the procedure for handling complaints involving allegations of SPM and other communications about doctors (I shall refer to them collectively as ‘complaints’), as described by the witnesses in December 2003. The procedure for handling information about convictions was different and I shall describe it later in this Chapter.
18.16
When a complaint was first received, some preliminary information was entered by hand onto a case direction form (CDF) by a casework assistant. The CDF was designed to provide a record of the procedural steps taken, of the preliminary decisions made and of instructions issued about the future conduct of the case. Details of the case were entered onto the GMC’s database, which was updated as the case progressed.
18.17
A number of standard procedures would then be carried out. If the complaint related to a named doctor, attempts would be made to confirm his/her identity by reference to the GMC’s medical register. This was not always possible, for reasons that I shall explain later in this Chapter. If the doctor could be identified, a search of the GMC’s database would be made in order to ascertain whether s/he had previously been reported to the GMC. The results of the search, together with the nature and outcome of any previous complaints found, would be recorded on the CDF. A search was also made to see whether the complainant had made previous complaints to the GMC. The case would then undergo an initial ‘triage’ by a casework manager.
Triage
18.18
The triage was an initial assessment, undertaken by casework managers in order to determine which cases could be closed immediately and which should be taken forward. The casework manager might decide that a communication was not a complaint at all but was an item of general correspondence. If so, it would be filtered out at the triage stage. The casework manager might be unable to take a final decision about the disposal of the complaint. He or she might require further information before doing so, in which case s/he would pass the case to a caseworker and give any necessary instructions and advice on what was to be done. The casework manager would identify cases that needed to be dealt with urgently for some reason and would give appropriate instructions to the designated caseworker. Where the casework manager felt that there was sufficient information on which to base a decision, s/he would proceed to decide whether the case should be referred to a medical screener.
18.19
There were two other matters that the casework manager would be looking out for at that stage. First, s/he would seek to identify cases where urgent interim action (e.g. suspension of the doctor from practice) appeared necessary for the protection of patients or otherwise in the public interest. After 2000, decisions about interim action were taken by the Interim Orders Committee (IOC). Members of staff could not refer a case direct to the IOC. The case had to go to a medical screener first. The casework manager would ensure that a case where interim action might be necessary went to a medical screener as soon as possible. Second, if the complaint raised a question as to whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by his/her physical or mental condition and this was the primary concern, the casework manager would forward the complaint to the Health Section. Subject to those matters, the casework manager would use the first part of the standard screening decision form (SDF) as a guide when making his/her decision and would record on the SDF the various steps in the decision-making process. The SDF was used to record decisions taken by staff as to whether a case should be referred to a medical screener. It also recorded the decisions taken by medical and lay screeners.
The Decision Whether or Not to Refer a Case to a Medical Screener
18.20
Rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules provided:
‘(1) Where a complaint in writing or information in writing is received by the Registrar and it appears to him that a question arises whether the conduct of a practitioner constitutes serious professional misconduct the Registrar shall submit the matter to the President.’
18.21
The functions of the Registrar, as set out in rule 6, were fulfilled by members of the GMC staff on his behalf. The medical screeners assumed the screening role previously performed by the President. In the case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte Toth
, Mr Justice Lightman described the role of the Registrar (in practice the GMC staff) in relation to rule 6 thus:
‘At the first stage, the Registrar has a ministerial role: so long as there is a complaint (which connotes the making of some form of charge against a practitioner), the complaint is in writing and on its face the complaint raises a real question whether the conduct of a practitioner constitutes serious professional misconduct, he is duty bound to refer the matter to the screener.’
18.22
The first section of the SDF set out a long list of circumstances in which the GMC had decided that it would be appropriate for a casework manager to take a preliminary decision not to refer the case to a medical screener. These circumstances arose when:
the complaint was not about a doctor
the complaint related only to a minor motoring offence not involving drugs or alcohol
the events complained of had occurred more than five years previously
the complaint related only to fees charged for private treatment/service
the complaint related only to a delay of less than six months in providing a single medical report
the doctor’s profession was incidental to the matter, e.g. a dispute between neighbours, one of whom happened to be a doctor
the complaint related only to objections to the contents of medical reports or records where there was no suggestion that the doctor had acted unreasonably
the ‘complaint’ was in fact an irrational/incoherent enquiry
the complaint related only to patently frivolous/trivial non-clinical matters, e.g. the doctor was a few minutes late for a routine appointment
the complaint related only to the fact that the doctor failed to take up a post following a verbal agreement to do so but gave two weeks’ notice or more
the complaint came from a third party where it was clear that the principal party did not want to pursue the matter, and there was no other reason for proceeding
the complaint related only to a doctor’s immigration status
the complaint related only to the level or quality of service provided by a healthcare organisation where there was no suggestion that the doctor was directly responsible
the complaint related only to removal from a GP list where there was no suggestion that the doctor’s decision was unfair or contravened GMC guidelines
the complaint related only to practice or departmental disputes where there was no suggestion that patients were being put at risk
the complaint related only to failures in local complaints handling procedures
the correspondence was a copy letter which did not specifically request GMC action
the correspondent was explicitly seeking only an apology
the complaint was anonymous and there was no reason to suspect that the doctor was an immediate threat to patients.
18.23
If any of these circumstances were judged to apply, the casework manager would close the case unless there was some other reason why the case should be considered by a medical screener. Any such reasons had to be recorded on the SDF. In deciding whether there was some other reason for referral to a medical screener, the casework manager would consider whether there was any cause to suspect that the doctor might be dangerous. The FTP Casework Manual gave guidance on the circumstances when this might arise, stating that a case should not be closed where it appeared to involve:
‘a. persistent clinical errors;
b. persistent failure to provide appropriate treatment/care;
c. any single very serious clinical error or failure to provide appropriate care;
d. any conduct which would fall into the category “SPM by definition” ... ’
I shall explain the category ‘SPM by definition’ in
Chapter 19
18.24
The FTP Casework Manual made it clear that casework managers should be prepared to
‘exercise discretion’
when assessing a case which did not meet any of the criteria set out above, but which nevertheless seemed to raise questions about whether the doctor was dangerous.
Referral Back for Local Action
18.25
If none of the circumstances listed at
paragraph 18.22(a)-(s)
applied, the casework manager would then go on to consider the source of the complaint. The casework manager would consider whether the complaint came from a private individual or from a person acting in a public capacity. A person acting in a public capacity was defined in the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules as:
‘... an officer of a Health Authority, Health Board, Common Services Agency or Board of Governors of a hospital, or of a Local or Area Medical Committee or Family Practitioner Committee, or of a Hospital Medical Staff Committee or body exercising similar functions, or of a Licensing Body (that is, a University or other body granting primary United Kingdom qualifications), acting as such, or of a Government Department or local or public authority, or any person holding judicial office, or any officer attached to a Court, or the Solicitor to the Council’
In practice, the ‘person acting in a public capacity’ was usually a NHS trust or PCT. For convenience, I shall use the term ‘public body’ or ‘referring body’ instead of ‘a person acting in a public capacity’.
18.26
If the complaint came from a public body, the casework manager would consider whether it appeared that all ‘local procedures’ had been exhausted before the complaint was referred to the GMC. If, for example, a PCT was reporting a doctor who was said to be practising to a generally poor standard, the GMC would expect the PCT to have attempted some form of remedial action (using its performance procedures) before referring the case on. If it appeared that local procedures had not, or might not have, been fully exhausted, the casework manager would contact the referring body and discuss how the case should be handled. The FTP Casework Manual stated:
‘Where there is any question of an immediate danger to patients, the GMC may need to act. In other cases, efforts should be made to establish what local measures have been tried in order to resolve the doctor’s problems - including whether the NCAA
National Clinical Assessment Authority
have been involved. One possible result of this type of discussion is that the referrer will withdraw the referral and take other measures locally first before referring back to the GMC if necessary.’
18.27
The reference to the NCAA suggests that the requirement for public bodies to exhaust all local procedures before the GMC would take action applied primarily to cases involving potential poor performance by a doctor. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that, sometimes, a three-way discussion took place between the GMC, the NCAA and the referring body. He said that, in all cases where the complaint came from a public body (not just where there was uncertainty as to whether local procedures had been exhausted), there was personal contact with the referring body in order to discuss how the case should be dealt with.
18.28
Where the complaint came from a private individual, the casework manager would consider whether that person had made use of any available complaints procedures before approaching the GMC. In general, the GMC would not consider a complaint from a private individual unless local complaints procedures had been exhausted. If the complaint related to a doctor working in the NHS, the casework manager had to consider whether there was any reason to believe that the complainant had referred the matter to the appropriate NHS complaints body and had exhausted that body’s complaints procedures before making a complaint to the GMC. If the complaint related to a doctor in private practice, the individual would be expected to have made use of any available complaints procedures, including reference to the National Care Standards Commission (NCSC, now part of the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection, which is known as the Healthcare Commission). There were other local complaints procedures to which certain complainants were expected to direct their complaints in certain circumstances, but I shall refer only to those relating to NHS and private treatment. If it did not appear that the individual had made use of the available complaints procedures, the case would be closed at that stage unless there was any cause to suspect that the doctor was dangerous. If there was no cause to suspect that s/he was dangerous, the complainant would be advised to direct the complaint to the appropriate complaints handling body.
18.29
It should be noted that the test applied by the staff at this stage (in cases where it appeared that the local complaints procedures had not been exhausted) was not whether (in the words of rule 6)
‘a question arises whether the conduct of a practitioner constitutes serious professional misconduct’
. The test applied by the staff was the higher test of whether there was cause to suspect that the doctor was dangerous. In other words, even if a question did arise as to whether the conduct of a practitioner amounted to SPM, the case would be closed unless there was cause to suspect that s/he was dangerous. It appears to me that the practice that I have outlined above was unlawful, given the mandatory wording of rule 6. The criteria which GMC staff were instructed to use when deciding whether there was any cause to suspect that the doctor was dangerous are set out at
paragraph 18.23
. I shall discuss the practice of referring complaints back to local complaints procedures in greater detail later in this Chapter.
18.30
Communication with an individual complainant at this stage, and at all other times up to and including the consideration of a case by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) and its referral to the PCC, would in general be by letter. It would be unusual for the GMC to initiate any telephone contact.
18.31
If there was evidence that the local complaints procedures had been used and exhausted, or if they were not available because the relevant time limits had expired, the casework manager would go on to consider the next stage in the decision-making process. The FTP Casework Manual advised that, if the individual concerned had referred his/her complaint to local complaints procedures but was dissatisfied with its progress through those procedures, the GMC should usually take the complaint forward, rather than try to force the individual to persevere with a process with which s/he was unhappy.
Initial Screening
18.32
At this point, the casework manager had the option of submitting the case to a medical screener for what was known as ‘initial screening’. This was a fast track system for cases which the GMC staff believed could not amount to SPM or seriously deficient performance (SDP) but where the complaint was about treatment or other matters involving clinical judgement, so that some input from a medical practitioner was considered necessary before a final decision to close the case could be taken. If the medical screener agreed that the case should be closed, the confirmation of a lay screener was necessary before this could be done. I shall consider this process of initial screening when I go on to examine the screening process in
Chapter 19
Preparation of the Case for Referral to the Medical Screener
18.33
If a case passed through the initial triage (and initial screening, where appropriate) and was to be taken forward, it was allocated to a caseworker who would then be responsible for preparing the case for consideration by a medical screener. The casework manager would have given an indication of any preparatory steps to be taken. Mr Marshall said that these steps might include the obtaining of medical records or an expert opinion, if it were obvious that these were required. The caseworker would write to the complainant (if a private individual) and would seek his/her consent to disclose the details of his/her complaint to the doctor who was the subject of the complaint. If consent was forthcoming, the complaint would be disclosed and the doctor’s response invited. If not, the case would be closed unless, as the FTP Casework Manual stated,
‘the public interest requires that ...
the GMC
... pursue the case irrespective of the enquirer’s loss of interest’
. Consent to disclose was presumed when a complaint was made by a public body.
18.34
The caseworker would also assess the available evidence and would consider whether there was any further information which could be obtained that would be of assistance to the medical screener in deciding what action to take in respect of the complaint. I shall deal with the gathering of information before screening in more detail later in this Chapter.
18.35
Before submitting the case to the medical screener, the caseworker would prepare a memorandum, summarising the nature of the allegation, the evidence available in support and, usually, the views of the caseworker as to the appropriate course of action. If the caseworker’s view was that the case was likely to be sent to the PPC, s/he would prepare a draft letter to be approved by the medical screener and then sent to the doctor after screening. The letter would inform the doctor of the charges which s/he might have to face.
Later Closure of a Case
18.36
It sometimes happened that the first communication received by the GMC did not make clear the precise nature of the complaint. Clarification might have been needed in order to ascertain this. Once the matter had been clarified, closure of the case might have been appropriate on one of the grounds set out at
paragraph 18.22(a)-(s)
. Closure of the case might also have been appropriate for other reasons which had become known or had arisen while the complaint was under consideration. Accordingly, it was possible for staff to close a case without reference to a medical screener at any stage after the initial assessment or triage and before screening. The grounds for doing so were (in addition to those referred to at
paragraph 18.22(a)-(s)
) that:
the complaint had been withdrawn
the doctor could not be identified despite all reasonable efforts to identify him/her
the doctor had died
there had been no response from the doctor and his/her name had been erased from the register under section 30(5) of the Medical Act 1983, whereby the name of a doctor who fails to respond within six months to an enquiry about his/her address may be erased.
18.37
In the past, the staff would also close a case when the complainant refused to provide a statutory declaration in support of his/her complaint. A statutory declaration is a formal affirmation that the contents of a written statement are true. It must be made in the presence of a solicitor or of a person within other limited categories. However, the GMC’s requirement for a statutory declaration in support of a complaint was abolished in November 2002. It applied only to private individuals. No statutory declaration was required from a person acting in a public capacity.
Earlier Practice
18.38
The system for the initial stages of processing conduct cases which I have described above was of relatively recent origin. Until the late 1990s, the way in which cases were processed was far less structured. Little data was stored on computer and staff did not have available to them the detailed guidance and the standard forms which were developed during the period between 1999 and 2003.
Changes in Practice after December 2003
18.39
Some changes in office practice have occurred since the Inquiry hearings. As I have said, in May 2004, the FTP Casework Manual was replaced by the FTP Investigation Manual. At the same time, the standard CDF and SDF were replaced by the initial processing and assessment form. It is unnecessary for me to refer in any detail to the contents of these documents, which will be superseded by new guidance and forms prepared for the use of staff when implementing the new FTP procedures.
[2000] 1 WLR 2209.
Sources of Reports about Doctors
The Procedure for Dealing with Convictions

--- Advice to Refer a Complaint to Local Complaints Procedures ---
18.47
I have said that, in general, the GMC was not in the past prepared to consider a complaint from a private individual about medical treatment unless and until any complaints procedures available locally had been exhausted. Instead, complainants would be advised to pursue the complaint through local procedures. Until October or November 2002, the policy did not extend to complaints about private treatment, only to complaints relating to NHS treatment. After that time, however, complaints about private treatment were also referred back to the complaints procedures of the private doctors or organisations concerned.
Criticism of the Policy
18.48
The policy has been the subject of controversy for many years. In 1988, Mrs Jean Robinson, then a lay member of the GMC, drew attention to it in her publication ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
. She complained that the
‘hidden policy’
of the GMC for the previous 15 years had been that complaints about NHS treatment made by private individuals were not considered by a GMC screener but were instead referred straight back to the complainant with advice to pursue the complaint through NHS complaints procedures. The GMC would consider such complaints only if they had been investigated and found proved by a NHS authority. Instead of deciding itself in which cases it should act, the GMC relied on NHS authorities to report, at the conclusion of the complaints procedures, any case which appeared to them serious enough to warrant the attention of the GMC. Mrs Robinson expressed concern that this policy was adopted in all cases involving NHS complaints, no matter how serious the allegation against the doctor and no matter whether a question of SPM did or did not arise. Mrs Robinson questioned whether the policy complied with the GMC’s Rules. The relevant rule was rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, the terms of which I set out at
paragraph 18.20
18.49
Mrs Robinson observed that there were arrangements in place for reports to be made to the GMC by NHS authorities in the case of complaints against GPs, but not in respect of complaints against hospital doctors. She pointed out that, at the time she was writing, NHS hospital complaints procedures were unsatisfactory and rarely resulted in a report to the GMC. She said that, as a result,
‘hospital doctors have been largely immune from GMC action on clinical standards’
. Mrs Robinson was also critical of the procedures for dealing with complaints against GPs. I have described in
the complaints procedures which were in force at the time when Mrs Robinson was writing and it is clear that her criticisms were justified.
18.50
Briefly, the position was that complaints about a breach by a GP of his/her terms of service were heard by medical service committees (MSCs) of family practitioner committees (FPCs). Reports of all cases in which a breach had been found proved were sent to the Secretary of State for Health (SoS), who would report appropriate cases to the GMC, after taking the advice of the Medical Advisory Committee. From 1992, the SoS delegated his/her powers to the Family Health Services Appeal Unit (FHSAU) and, from 1996, the FHSAU’s functions were exercised by the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA) (later the FHSAA (Special Health Authority)). The Department of Health (DoH) issued a list of criteria setting out the types of case that should be reported to the GMC. These were cases involving a neglect or disregard of professional responsibilities to patients, cases where there had been a NHS Tribunal decision that a doctor’s name should be removed from the FPC’s medical list, and other cases involving irregular certification, improper charging or claims for fees or canvassing or gaining of patients by unethical means. In addition, advice was given to consider reporting cases of misconduct which had been
‘seriously prejudicial to the medical care of patients’
. There was also reference to the possibility that cases of dishonesty by doctors might amount to SPM and should be reported. After 1992, family health services authorities (FHSAs), the successors to FPCs, were encouraged to report appropriate cases directly to the GMC (rather than to rely on the FHSAU/FHSAA to do so).
18.51
Despite the list of criteria issued by the DoH, which was in existence at the time of Mrs Robinson’s concern, it was not at all clear that all proven complaints that might amount to SPM would necessarily find their way back to the GMC. Mrs Robinson’s contention was that the chances of a GP being reported to the GMC following a complaint to his/her FPC were slim. She pointed out that NHS complaints procedures could take a long time to be completed. Even if a complaint was eventually referred back to the GMC after completion of the procedures, there was often a long delay before this occurred. A doctor who was dangerously incompetent might have caused further damage to patients while the complaint was being processed.
18.52
Mrs Robinson pointed out that some patients and their families might be unequal to the task of pursuing a complaint through NHS complaints procedures and some might find that they were already outside the time limit (then only eight weeks) for doing so. Some might not realise that it was necessary for them to follow the formal complaints procedures (as opposed to the informal conciliation procedures which were being encouraged at the time) in order to have any prospect at all of their cases being referred back to the GMC. At the time when Mrs Robinson was writing, the standard letters written by the GMC to complainants advised them that they could bring their complaints back to the GMC at the conclusion of the NHS complaints process. Previous versions of the letter had not contained that information. Mrs Robinson said that the standard letter had been amended at her insistence. Recipients of earlier versions of the letter might, however, have believed that they could not approach the GMC again, even if they had received no satisfaction from local complaints procedures.
18.53
The effect of the GMC’s policy was to make it likely that some cases of seriously substandard clinical practice would not be considered by the GMC. This could occur because complainants, disappointed at the initial response from the GMC, gave up and did not pursue their cases further. But, even if they pursued their complaint locally, it could founder in a number of ways. If the complaint was found proved, it might not be referred to the GMC by the relevant NHS authority. Even if it were referred back to the GMC, two to three years might have passed, after which time witnesses might be no longer available or might be unwilling to give their evidence for a second time. In such cases, disciplinary action by the GMC would be impossible. Furthermore, throughout that time, the doctor would have been free to treat patients.
18.54
Mrs Robinson observed that the GMC sought to justify its policy by reference to the stringent time limits within which complaints against GPs had to be made. It was said that, by the time the GMC had considered and rejected a complaint, the complainant might have lost the opportunity to complain locally. It was therefore better for him/her, the GMC suggested, to be referred to the local procedures immediately. Mrs Robinson pointed out that it would be perfectly possible for the GMC to refer a complaint to a medical screener for consideration, while at the same time writing to the complainant to inform him/her of the time limits for making a complaint locally. Thus, the complainant’s position could be satisfactorily safeguarded. When Mrs Robinson’s suggestion was put to Mr Howes, who was employed in the Conduct Section more or less continuously between 1980 and 1994, he told the Inquiry that the perception within the GMC at the time Mrs Robinson was writing was, rightly or wrongly, that to start two procedures simultaneously would have been a ‘nonsense’ and unfair to doctors. I feel bound to observe that it does not appear to have been uppermost in the GMC’s mind that what was required was a procedure that would best protect patients, while also being fair to doctors. In any event, it appears that the GMC sometimes did allow two sets of procedures to be in operation at the same time. Mr Townsend, Head of the Conduct Section from 1994 until 1998, told the Inquiry that there were occasions when NHS authorities reported to the GMC serious cases with which they were currently dealing in their complaints procedures. The GMC kept open the possibility of starting its own procedures to run in parallel with local procedures if the public interest demanded it. It may be that the situation described by Mr Townsend did not apply in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Evidence to the Wilson Committee
18.55
Until 1993, and despite the serious concerns raised by Mrs Robinson, the system continued whereby a member of staff would direct complaints about NHS treatment back to complainants without referring them to a medical screener. GMC statistics show that, in the year to 31st
August 1993, 160 complaints (i.e. about 10% of all complaints received by the GMC) were dealt with in this way. In July 1993, a pilot scheme was introduced whereby such complaints were referred to a medical screener for consideration, rather than being immediately referred back to the complainant by members of the GMC staff. At the time the change was made, the reason behind it was said (in the Annual Report of the PPC presented to the Council in November 1993) to be that the time limits within which complaints could be made to NHS bodies had been relaxed, giving more time for the GMC to deal with complaints. This was plainly not the reason, as the change in time limits had taken place in 1990 and extended the time limits only from eight to thirteen weeks. In any event, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the change of system resulted from the fact that, in 1993, the GMC was invited to submit evidence to the Independent Review Committee, chaired by Professor (later Sir) Alan Wilson (the Wilson Committee). The Wilson Committee was considering reform of the NHS complaints procedures. The preparation of evidence for submission to the Wilson Committee caused members of the GMC to reflect on its existing practice of allowing members of staff to refer cases back to complainants without the intervention of the medical screeners, and to change it. It may be that the change resulted from concerns as to whether the policy then in operation complied with the GMC’s Rules. In my view, it did not. Rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules required the Registrar (in practice, a member of staff) to send to the President (medical screener) any complaint which appeared to raise a question of SPM. It was not for members of staff to close such cases themselves after advising complainants to use local procedures.
18.56
In September 1993, the PPC sent a memorandum of evidence to the Wilson Committee on behalf of the GMC. The memorandum discussed the GMC’s policy of referring complaints to the NHS complaints procedures, a policy which was described by the PPC as
‘helpful to complainants’
. The memorandum described how complainants to the GMC were informed, where appropriate, of the existence of the NHS complaints procedures and were offered the opportunity of using those procedures and/or of writing again to the GMC. It observed that the majority of such complaints then proceeded under the NHS complaints procedures. In fact, the PPC had no means of knowing that. The GMC took no steps to find out what subsequently happened to cases which had been referred back to complainants. All the PPC could have known was that the majority of complainants did not approach the GMC again.
18.57
The memorandum made clear that the GMC wanted to retain the ability, if it regarded it as appropriate to do so, to proceed with a complaint that was reported to it, without referring it to local complaints procedures. It would do that, it was claimed, if the complaint seemed to raise a question of SPM or of serious impairment of health that the GMC had a statutory duty to consider and act upon. That statement of current practice was not accurate because, as I have indicated, staff did not refer to medical screeners all complaints from individuals that appeared to raise a question of SPM but only those in which the local complaints procedures had been completed. If the local complaints procedure had not been completed, the case would be accepted into the GMC procedures only if it appeared to the GMC that the doctor was a risk to the public.
18.58
The PPC expressed concern to the Wilson Committee that NHS bodies were not referring to the GMC all cases which should have been referred. The memorandum pointed out that only one or two complaints which had been decided by MSCs had been referred direct to the GMC by FHSAs. FHSAs sometimes dealt with serious MSC cases without referring them to the FHSAU. Only one case which had been dealt with by the NHS Tribunal had been reported to the GMC in three years. Referrals from hospital authorities had been in single figures in 1990, 1991 and 1992. The memorandum said that the GMC had been expressing concern since 1987 at the small numbers of doctors being reported by hospital authorities. In evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Townsend said that the lack of effective disciplinary procedures in hospitals was a source of concern during his time in the Conduct Section between 1994 and 1998. Hospital doctors tended to be dismissed for misconduct without a referral to the GMC. Moreover, he said that there was concern within the GMC that the policy of requiring complaints to be directed to local complaints procedures put the onus on complainants and NHS authorities to trigger the revival of the cases at the GMC. It was felt that this was inconsistent with the GMC’s stated purpose, which was to protect the public interest.
18.59
The PPC’s memorandum to the Wilson Committee also referred to the delays (said to be as long as three years on occasion) which could occur before a complaint about NHS treatment was resolved locally and its outcome reported to the GMC. Reference was made to the adverse effects on the evidence available to the GMC and examples of particularly lengthy delays were given. The memorandum referred to repeated representations which had been made by the GMC over a period of 17 years about excessive delays in NHS complaints procedures and about the effects of those delays. During that time, the memorandum said, the delays had got worse, not better.
18.60
The memorandum asked the Wilson Committee to consider means of avoiding protracted delays. The PPC requested that FHSAs should be reminded of their duty to refer appropriate cases to the GMC. There was also a request that mechanisms should be established for the reporting to the GMC of cases involving hospital doctors where it appeared that a question of SPM arose.
18.61
It is clear that, by 1993 at least (and probably long before), the GMC fully recognised the deficiencies of the NHS complaints procedures. It was also recognised that, as a result of those deficiencies, cases of SPM that should have been referred back to the GMC were not reaching it. Those cases that were eventually referred to the GMC, after passing through the NHS complaints procedures, were not arriving until long after the events to which the complaints related. Yet, despite the fact that Mrs Robinson had, in 1988, drawn its attention to the effect of the deficiencies, the GMC had persisted in its policy of sending cases back for referral into local procedures without considering whether or not they raised a question of SPM. Even in 1993, when the effects of the deficiencies of the complaints system were plainly recognised, there does not seem to have been any recognition of the fact that some complaints which had come to the GMC and been referred back to the complainant might not have gone into the NHS complaints procedures at all and may consequently have been lost to the regulatory system altogether.
The Change of Practice in 1993
18.62
The change of practice, which was first piloted in July 1993 and continued thereafter, meant that all complaints about NHS treatment were referred in the first instance to a medical screener. When the change was made, it was said to be intended that the medical screener would decide whether the complaint raised a question of SPM and that only if s/he thought that it did not would the complainant be advised to direct the complaint to local complaints procedures. That intention was expressed in the Annual Report of the PPC, presented to the Council in November 1993. Had that intention been put into effect, GMC practice would then have been in compliance with rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules.
18.63
Despite the contents of that Annual Report, it is clear from the findings of the PSI, which carried out an analysis of complaints received by the GMC in the 12 month period from September 1993, that the intention claimed in the Annual Report had not been carried into effect. The PSI team found that medical screeners were applying a threshold higher than SPM for the retention of cases by the GMC. In describing the procedures, the 1996 PSI Report stated:
‘... it should be noted here that the GMC receives frequent complaints which it feels should more appropriately be dealt with initially by other bodies, for example, Family Health Services Authority ... a Health Authority, an NHS Trust, the Prison Medical Service or the Mental Health Act Commission. The question of whether there is a
prima facie
case of serious professional misconduct may or may not arise in these cases, but the GMC does not usually pursue a complaint in these circumstances but suggests that the complainant takes it up initially with “a more appropriate body”. The discretion of the medical screener is exercised in cases where it is felt that there could be risk to the public if the GMC failed to initiate action at the same time as suggesting that the complaint should be made to another authority.’
18.64
It seems that the PSI team had been told that the test being applied by the screeners was not whether a complaint raised a question of SPM but whether it gave rise to a risk to the public. Provided that no such risk was considered to arise, the complainant would be advised to direct the complaint to the local complaints procedures, whether or not the case raised a question of SPM. The concurrence of a lay screener was not required when a medical screener agreed that a case should be referred back to be pursued through local procedures. This was because the case was not classified as having been formally rejected by the GMC. It should have been so classified because, in reality, the case had been closed. Of course, there was a possibility that the complainant might bring the case back but, if s/he did not, the GMC would do nothing more. The effect of this incorrect classification was that the possibility that the lay screener might decide that the case should remain in the GMC was lost. In short, the only change that had occurred as a result of the consideration of the GMC’s procedures undertaken at the time of the submission to the Wilson Committee was that the ‘risk to the public’ test was applied by screeners, rather than by GMC staff. No doubt many Council members believed (relying on the 1993 Annual Report) that the procedures in operation were compliant with rule 6. In fact, they were not, because the medical screeners were not applying the correct statutory test. The medical screeners were members of the GMC and should have realised that the reality was that the process was not as described in the Annual Report and was not compliant with the Rules. I shall refer further to the findings of the PSI team later in this Chapter.
18.65
If there had indeed been a change in the test to be applied as from about November 1993, one might have expected to see a significant reduction in the proportion of complaints being referred back to complainants with advice to pursue them through local procedures. However, such figures as are available suggest that there was no such reduction. In the year to August 1992, the GMC received information about 1300 convictions and complaints; 185 of those were referred back to be pursued through local procedures. In the year to August 1993, 1612 convictions and complaints were received, of which 160 were referred back. In 1994, 1626 convictions and complaints were received and 192 cases were referred back to be pursued through local complaints procedures. These figures would tend to confirm that the test applied before and after November 1993 was the ‘risk to the public’ test and that the medical screeners took broadly the same view on risk as the staff had done before the change.
18.66
The practice of referring a case back to be pursued through local procedures unless the facts suggested that there was a risk to the public seems to have operated even where the doctor had a previous finding of SPM against him/her. In one case examined by the Inquiry, Dr JG 03 was convicted of perverting the course of justice and was later found guilty of SPM. He had given a contraindicated drug to an asthmatic patient in the early 1990s and had lied at the coroner’s inquest, claiming that he was unaware from the records that the patient suffered from asthma. It was later discovered that he had falsified the records and he was prosecuted. The GMC dealt with both matters and imposed conditions on his registration for one year. A further complaint was received about this doctor seven years later, but the complainant was advised to pursue the complaint through local complaints procedures. There is no sign in the GMC file that the progress or outcome at local level of the more recent complaint was followed up.
The Guidance Contained in the 1994 Training Manual
18.67
The Training Manual, which was compiled in 1994 by Mr Howes (the 1994 Training Manual), stated that NHS treatment (or lack of it) was primarily the responsibility of the local NHS authority and that complainants should be advised
‘
in the first instance
’
) to direct their complaints to the appropriate health authority (HA) or FHSA. The 1994 Training Manual gave a number of reasons for this procedure. The first related to the time limits governing local complaints procedures. If an individual was to have his/her complaint considered under those procedures, s/he had to move fairly quickly. The second reason was the speed with which local investigations could begin, even if (as was acknowledged) they took
‘some time to complete’
. Mr Howes said that the reference to the speed with which local investigations could begin related to the time when a doctor would be notified of a complaint which had been made against him/her. Under NHS procedures, s/he would be notified early on, in accordance with specified time limits. Under the GMC procedures at that time, the doctor would not be notified (and the ‘investigation’ would not start) until the medical screener had taken a decision to refer the case to the PPC. That, it was said, could take
‘some time’
. In fact, at this period, there was no significant delay within the early stages of the GMC procedures. This was an attempt to use the possibility of delay at the GMC as a justification for sending the case into local procedures. In addition, the FHSA or HA would have, it was said, much greater access to potential witnesses and relevant records. The 1994 Training Manual also made the point that complaints about hospital treatment often involved many factors (e.g. the behaviour of nurses) which lay outside the province of the GMC.
18.68
The 1994 Training Manual reminded staff that complainants were under no obligation to make a complaint first to the local body, although this was said to be
‘in most respects desirable and appropriate’
. If a complainant insisted that his/her complaint should be considered by the GMC before being referred to local complaints procedures, the case should be referred to a medical screener for a decision on whether the GMC should
‘intervene’
18.69
In describing the action to be taken when a complaint was reported to the GMC after completion of the NHS complaints procedure, the 1994 Training Manual acknowledged that such cases might reach the GMC as long as two or three years after the events which had given rise to them. By that time, the patient concerned had sometimes died. Since, if the complaint were to be referred to the PCC, a further hearing would be required, the fact that the patient was not available to give evidence could obviously cause difficulty in a case which depended on his/her evidence. It might not be possible for such a case to proceed.
18.70
The 1994 Training Manual made clear that, when a complaint had been referred to the GMC by a FHSA or a HA, following completion of its complaints procedures, the GMC would almost always take some form of action, whether by referring the cases to the PPC (and, possibly, from there to the PCC) or by issuing a warning to the doctor. In cases where there had been an adverse finding by a MSC, if it was the first time that a doctor had been found in breach of his/her terms of service and the doctor had no known previous disciplinary history, the 1994 Training Manual indicated that the case could probably be dealt with by means of a warning. In a second or subsequent case, however, formal disciplinary action might be justified, depending on the circumstances of the case and whether evidence was still available. However, when the adverse findings of two MSCs concerning Shipman were referred to the GMC by the FHSAU in 1994, no action at all was taken. I shall describe what happened on that occasion in
18.71
After 1993, when a complaint about NHS treatment was received and the GMC staff considered it appropriate to refer it back to be pursued through local complaints procedures, the staff would submit to the medical screener a memorandum (much shorter and less detailed than that usually provided when a case was to be screened), setting out the reasons for recommending that the complaint should be referred to local NHS complaints procedures. Attached to the memorandum would be a draft standard letter to the complainant. Examples of the standard letters in use in 1994 were contained in the 1994 Training Manual. The letter would inform complainants that primary responsibility for considering complaints about treatment (or lack of treatment) lay with the local NHS body. It would suggest that the complainant should make his/her complaint in the first instance to the appropriate NHS body. The letter would advise the complainant of the time limit for local complaints and would enclose a photocopy of the complainant’s original letter to the GMC, so that the complainant could use it, if s/he wished, when writing to the relevant NHS complaints body. The letter would inform the complainant that, if his/her complaint were upheld, an official report would automatically be sent to the GMC if
‘it is considered
i.e. by the NHS
that subsequent disciplinary action by the Council may be justified’
. The complainant would be told that s/he might write again to the GMC when the investigation by the local complaints body was complete. At that point, the screener would be willing to consider the matter further, even if the complaint had not been upheld. The letter stated:
‘The Council does not usually consider a case until after any appropriate local investigation, because there are practical and legal difficulties about holding two inquiries into the same events at the same time.’
18.72
It might have been undesirable and wasteful of resources to have two concurrent enquiries (and it may have been considered ‘unfair to doctors’) but I am unsure what the
‘legal difficulties’
would have been. The letter went on to tell the complainant that if there was some
‘particular reason’
why s/he did not wish to complain to the relevant NHS authority, or if the authority was for some reason not able to investigate the matter, s/he could write again to the GMC which would consider the complaint further. The telephone number of a service providing general advice on making a complaint about a NHS doctor was given.
18.73
Although the letter was helpful in tone and content, it nevertheless placed the onus for pursuing the complaint through the NHS complaints procedures squarely on the complainant. This was at a time when the GMC was fully aware of the shortcomings of the local complaints procedures and of the fact that few cases found their way back to the GMC after being referred to those procedures. The letter contained no suggestion that the GMC might itself pass on the complaint to the NHS complaints body concerned. Nor was there any follow-up procedure to ensure that a complaint had been reported to the appropriate authority or to ascertain the outcome. The complaint might have been about unacceptable clinical practice which, if repeated, could have caused harm to other patients. Yet, if the complainant chose not to pursue the complaint further, the NHS body responsible for the doctor (in the case of a GP, the FHSA) might have remained wholly unaware that an incident had occurred or that patients might be at risk from the doctor. The GMC would take no steps to inform it.
18.74
The 1996 PSI Report recommended that the GMC should review its role and responsibilities when dealing with cases where complainants were advised to direct their complaints to a local NHS body. It made the point that the GMC would often not be in a position to know, at the stage when the advice was given, whether the complaint was likely to amount to SPM. The PSI team examined a sample of 134 complaints in which, during the year to August 1994, the GMC had advised complainants to refer their complaints to a more appropriate body. They found that the complaints included complaints about dissatisfaction with treatment, about failure to take steps to make a diagnosis and about failure to diagnose and treat patients. One was an allegation of ‘criminal irresponsibility’ resulting in the death of a patient. The fact that these complaints (particularly one such as the last-mentioned) had not been pursued immediately by the GMC was a source of understandable concern to the PSI team.
18.75
Professor Allen, who led the PSI team, told the Inquiry that she and her colleagues were concerned that these cases appeared sometimes to be ‘lost’ to the GMC. They noted the onus being put on patients and their families to pursue the complaints. If they decided not to pursue them, the complaints would just disappear. The PSI team also expressed concern at the failure of the GMC to follow up complaints so as to ascertain their outcome.
18.76
In 1996, the NHS procedures governing complaints about GPs changed. The procedures in operation from 1996 are described in
. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that, under the pre-1996 procedures, the process of making a complaint about a GP locally was relatively easy. The complainant would complain to the FHSA. The complaint would be logged and considered and, if it appeared to relate to a breach of terms of service, it would be referred to the chairman of the MSC and the process would be underway. Under the 1996 procedures, however, complaints went to the GP practice in the first instance and many were ‘resolved’ there. The PCO would have no idea what the nature of the complaint or the ‘resolution’ was. The process of securing an independent review panel (IRP) hearing under the new procedures was, she said, ‘incredibly convoluted’, as a result of which comparatively few hearings were held. Professor Allen believed that some patients were discouraged from complaining because of the requirement to approach the GP practice first, a concern that was highlighted in the research carried out in the late 1990s, which I described in
. In short, complaints about a GP were not investigated by a NHS body; the PCO had neither the power nor the resources to do so.
18.77
After 1st
April 1996, the NHS complaints procedures were, for the first time, separated from the disciplinary procedures for GPs. Previously, a patient complaint might lead to a finding of a breach of the GP’s terms of service and to a sanction. After 1996, even if the findings of an IRP hearing showed that a GP had been in breach of his/her terms of service, disciplinary proceedings would not automatically follow. The disciplinary process was cumbersome and very few disciplinary hearings took place at all. Also, there was a change of culture and PCOs preferred to take a remedial approach to any shortcomings in a GP’s practice. After 1996, the effect of GMC policy was, therefore, to refer a doctor from a system designed to discipline doctors where appropriate (i.e. the GMC procedures) to a complaints system, the primary purpose of which was to ‘resolve’ the complaint, preferably by conciliation. Any recognised shortcomings in the doctor’s practice were likely to be dealt with (if at all) by remediation rather than disciplinary action and the prospects of a prompt referral back to the GMC were remote. The illogicality of that situation, and its even greater potential for allowing complaints to be ‘lost’, does not appear to have been appreciated by the GMC.
18.78
At the time of the production of the Screeners’ Handbook in 1997, medical screeners (rather than the GMC staff) were still being required to consider what should happen to complaints where the likely outcome was referral to NHS complaints procedures. The Screeners’ Handbook contained the following advice:
‘If, in a complaint about NHS treatment and after appropriate inquiries have been made, it appears that
a. The pursuit of the complaint through the NHS procedures would be the most effective way to produce information which the GMC requires to consider the case further and without which further GMC action would be difficult or impossible, or
b. There is no immediate threat to patient safety and it would be fairer to the doctor not to make him or her face two sets of proceedings simultaneously,
the screener may decide that the complainant should be asked to consider making a complaint through the NHS complaints procedures (or to continue to pursue one already lodged), and invited to approach the GMC once that process has been completed, whatever the outcome.’
18.79
It is to be noted, first, that the test to be applied by the medical screeners was one of
‘no immediate threat to patient safety’
. This was similar to the test which had previously been applied by the medical screeners, namely whether there could be a risk to the public if the GMC did not act immediately. Second, it is clear to me from the evidence, particularly that of Dr Korlipara, that the screeners assumed that the pursuit of a complaint through NHS complaints procedures would, in all cases which did not reveal an
‘immediate threat to patient safety’
, be the most effective way to deal with the case.
18.80
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook described a change in practice that was said to have been initiated following the 1996 PSI Report. If a case was
‘deferred’
, by advising the complainant to pursue it through local NHS complaints procedures, the medical screener was now to set a date for review of the case. If nothing more had been heard of the case by that date, GMC staff were to write to the complainant and to attempt to establish whether local complaints procedures had been completed and, if so, with what result. On receipt of the reply, a decision would be made whether to take the case forward under GMC procedures or, if the lay screener agreed, to close the case. If the complainant did not reply, efforts were to be made to persuade him/her to provide further evidence, failing which the case would be closed. The purpose of this change was to ensure there was a positive decision to close a case, rather than it just being left in limbo with no attempt to follow it up after it had been referred back to the complainant.
18.81
Mr Townsend described the change of practice and the reasons behind it. He said that there was an appreciation within the GMC that the way its procedures had worked previously had made them seem
‘more like a complaints procedure than a public interest protection procedure’
. He had left the Conduct Section in 1998 and was unable to say what the impact of the new practice had been. At some point shortly afterwards, the new practice of setting a review date and following up complaints appears to have fallen into disuse. This may have been in 1999 when, as I shall explain, a decision was taken that cases of this type should no longer be referred to the medical screener save in certain limited circumstances.
Guidance to the Public
18.82
In November 1997, the GMC issued ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’, a leaflet designed to inform the public about its procedures. Under the heading ‘What to do if you have a problem with your doctor’, the leaflet explained, in simple terms, the procedures for making a complaint about NHS services locally. It went on to say:
‘However, you can complain to us even if you don’t complain to your health authority or GP first. Please contact us if you would like more information about our complaints procedures, or if you want to discuss a particular problem in confidence. Our staff are experienced in dealing with complaints and will give you unbiased advice.’
This advice (which is reproduced in the current version of the same publication) seems surprising since GMC policy continued to be that complaints about NHS treatment should be referred back to be pursued through local complaints procedures unless there was an immediate threat to patient safety. Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the leaflet was intended to be helpful but had the unintended effect of giving individuals the impression that the GMC would look at ‘almost any problem’ with a doctor, no matter what it was. He said that the leaflet resulted from ‘a genuine lack of clarity within the organisation about how to position itself in relation to other systems and in particular the NHS complaints system’.
A Further Change in Practice
18.83
In March 1999, there was another change in practice, as a result of advice given by Professor Allen and her colleagues. They suggested that the workload of the medical screeners (which was very heavy in the mid-1990s) could be made lighter by reducing the number of cases referred unnecessarily to them. They therefore suggested that those cases that were then being referred by the medical screeners automatically to local NHS complaints procedures should, in the future, be dealt with by GMC staff. Such cases should be referred to a medical screener only if the doctor was thought to pose a risk to the public. This change was implemented in March 1999 and has continued ever since. As I have said, the criterion that must now be applied by GMC staff is whether there is cause to suspect that the doctor might be dangerous. In 2000, GMC staff advised complainants in 897 cases (20% of all complaints received in that year) to direct their complaints to local procedures. In 2001 (the last year for which a figure is available) complainants in 998 cases (18.7% of all complaints received) were so advised by members of the GMC staff.
18.84
It is clear that the practice operated by the GMC after 1999 perpetuated breaches of rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules. The practice returned, in effect, to that followed before 1993. According to Mr Scott, the GMC had realised in 1993 that the practice of allowing staff to take the decision to advise complainants to use local procedures, without first asking a screener to consider the case, must be changed. It is not clear whether it was also realised that the practice did not comply with the Rules. Possibly the members did not realise this, as they do not appear to have appreciated that, even after the change, the practice was still not compliant since the screeners were not applying the correct statutory test. In fact, it seems that the GMC collectively thought that the screeners were applying the right test (see above), but the screeners must have known that they were not. In any event, in 1999, the GMC accepted Professor Allen’s suggestion to revert to the old practice. Professor Allen and her team are not to be blamed for offering that advice. They were not lawyers. They were simply seeking to help the GMC to deal with its workload. No one seems to have considered whether the new practice was compliant with the Rules.
Complaints about Private Treatment
18.85
In October or November 2002, the practice of advising complainants to direct their complaints initially to local complaints procedures was extended to include complaints about private treatment. This meant that patients who claimed to have received substandard treatment in private hospitals, clinics and practices or from individual private doctors were from that time advised by the GMC (in the absence of any reason to suspect that the doctor in question was an immediate danger to patients) to direct their complaints to the complaints procedures of those organisations or doctors. The Inquiry has heard no evidence about private complaints procedures. However, it seems to me that the quality and effectiveness of those procedures is likely to be extremely variable. Some of the larger providers of private health care may have well-developed complaints procedures. Other providers may not. Some complaints procedures may lack independence, particularly if the doctor practises alone or within a small organisation. It is true that, since its establishment in 2002, the NCSC (now part of the Healthcare Commission) has had responsibility for monitoring and regulating private health care, including complaints procedures. If a complainant experiences problems with the complaints procedure of a private organisation or doctor, s/he can report the matter to the Healthcare Commission. He or she could also return to the GMC. However, the onus is once again on the patient to initiate such action and to persevere if at first s/he does not succeed. Otherwise, his/her complaint will be lost to the regulatory system altogether.
Subsequent Developments
18.86
As I have said, it appears that the practice of following up the progress of complaints which had been referred back to local complaints procedures was discontinued at some point, probably in March 1999. There was no mention in the November 2002 or the April 2003 editions of the FTP Casework Manual of any review or follow-up procedure. When he gave evidence to the Inquiry in December 2003, Mr Marshall said that the only follow-up would be if the GMC were to receive a further complaint about the doctor. In that event, the original complaint would be retrieved and the new complaint considered in the light of it. However, as I shall explain, many of the doctors who have been the subject of complaints which have been closed by the GMC staff were never identified by the GMC. That being the case, there would be no possibility of complaints against them being reactivated if a later complaint about the same doctor were to be received.
Evidence about the Policy from Members and Staff at the General Medical Council
18.87
Dr Korlipara said that, in his view, it was ‘only right’ (save in a case where a GP was considered dangerous) that local complaints procedures should be completed before the GMC took a decision whether to act. PCTs could use their knowledge of the doctor to put the complaint in context. If necessary, the patient could be protected by immediate GMC action. Where that was not necessary, the GMC would be assisted by not having to ‘go through the procedures locally’. By this, I think that Dr Korlipara meant that the GMC would not have to undertake local investigations. If the case were referred back to the GMC, it could speedily arrive at a decision (on the basis of any investigation which had been carried out locally) as to whether there were issues of SPM which required further action. Dr Korlipara recognised that the NHS complaints procedure might be long-drawn-out but, nevertheless, felt that it was ‘far more commonsensical and fair’ that complaints should, wherever possible, be investigated and remedied locally. He said that the GMC should investigate only those complaints which were of such gravity that patient protection was seriously compromised or there was imminent danger to patients. If there was delay, Dr Korlipara said it was for ‘some other agencies’ (I take that to mean the bodies dealing with complaints) to expedite their processes so that patients did not suffer.
18.88
Dr Korlipara agreed that the system put a burden on patients. He accepted that, if a complaint were to be directed back to a local complaints procedure, it would be preferable from the patient’s point of view if the GMC were to make direct contact with the local PCT, NHS trust or other complaints handling body, rather than leaving it to the complainant to do so. He did not know whether the GMC had ever considered doing this.
18.89
Other witnesses also supported the need for local investigation of complaints. For example, Mr Howes spoke of the complexity of some complaints reaching the GMC; they involved not only criticism of the treatment provided by a doctor, which was a matter for the GMC, but also such problems as hospital waiting lists and complaints about the conduct of nurses and other healthcare professionals. His preference was for a system where all complaints relating to treatment were handled speedily and well at a local level and where relevant concerns arising from those complaints were reported to the GMC.
18.90
Sir Graeme Catto thought that most complaints about clinical treatment could be more effectively and conveniently investigated locally but was concerned to ensure that the GMC was kept informed and was given the opportunity to provide any relevant information it might have. He was also anxious to preserve the existing position whereby members of the public were advised that they could bring any complaint or concern directly to the GMC if they preferred to do so.
18.91
By the time Mr Scott gave evidence, the GMC was aware of the Inquiry’s concerns about the practice of referring cases back to local complaints procedures. He said that the GMC was ‘considering whether instead of sending it (
i.e. a complaint
) back with a suggestion that they (
i.e. complainants
) take it elsewhere that we might do that job on their behalf, subject, of course, to their agreement that we should do so’. After the Inquiry hearings, the GMC announced that, from May 2004, it would discuss at an early stage certain complaints (broadly speaking, those where the way forward was not clear) with the doctor’s employer or PCO. If, following that discussion, the GMC decided not to proceed with the complaint itself, but considered that it should be dealt with locally, it would (provided the complainant agreed) refer the case direct to the doctor’s employer or PCO.
18.92
It is not known how this initiative has worked in practice. However, if it were to result in cases being directly referred by the GMC to local complaints procedures, rather than the onus being placed on complainants to do this, this should at least remove the potential for complaints to be lost between the GMC and the local complaints body. That would be a considerable advance. However, it is likely that certain problems would still persist. First, if the complaint were referred into local patient complaints procedures, the onus would still remain on the complainant to pursue it to a conclusion. Second, patient complaints procedures - with their emphasis on patient satisfaction - are not, it seems to me, a suitable means of dealing with allegations which have a bearing on a doctor’s ability to treat patients safely. They are unlikely to result in a prompt and thorough investigation of the circumstances of the case. Third, it still does not appear that any provision exists for follow-up by the GMC once a complaint has been referred to a local complaints body. It seems to me that the GMC should have a mechanism by which it can be satisfied that complaints which it has passed to other bodies for investigation or other action are being properly and expeditiously dealt with. This is particularly important in relation to complaints about treatment in the private sector.
18.93
In July 2004, a significant change was made to the second stage of the NHS complaints procedures. Instead of there being a possibility of the complaint proceeding to an IRP, a complainant dissatisfied with the outcome of the first stage of the procedure can now refer the case to the Healthcare Commission. That body will consider the case and may, if it considers it appropriate, carry out its own investigation before reaching its conclusions. In some cases, there will be oral hearing. It is anticipated that there will also be changes to the first stage of the NHS complaints procedures insofar as they relate to GPs. The reference of complaints to an independent body with investigative powers at the second stage ought to improve NHS complaints handling. As the GMC will have a working relationship with the Healthcare Commission, it should, in the future, be easier for the GMC to keep a close watch on the progress of complaints going through local procedures.
18.94
I shall refer further to the GMC’s intentions in relation to holding early discussions with doctors’ employers and PCOs later in this Chapter.
A Complaint about Shipman: Mr J
18.95
, I described the way in which a complaint against Shipman, made in August 1985, about his treatment of a patient, Mr J, who had recently died, was handled by the MSC of the FPC. It was rejected without an oral hearing. In fact, a letter of complaint was also sent to the GMC at about the same time as the complaint was lodged with the FPC.
18.96
The letter, written by Mr Steven Rawlinson, Mr J’s closest friend, on behalf of Mr J’s mother, complained about Shipman’s clinical treatment of Mr J and alleged that Shipman had breached Mr J’s medical confidentiality by speaking about his condition to Mr and Mrs G, who were also patients of Shipman. It was a detailed letter, covering four pages of typescript, and closed with the words
‘I await the outcome of your investigation’
. I mention that because it demonstrates what some members of the public expected (and probably still expect) of the GMC, namely that it will investigate their complaint. After a reminder from Mr Rawlinson, a member of the GMC staff replied, advising that the complaint should be pursued through local procedures. The letter did not advise Mr Rawlinson to contact the GMC again if he was dissatisfied with the outcome of the local procedures, although it did say that it was open to him to write again to the GMC on completion of the NHS procedures. In fact, Mr Rawlinson and Mrs J had already initiated a complaint locally.
18.97
The MSC did not have jurisdiction to deal with the allegation of breach of confidentiality, as such a matter was not covered by GPs’ terms of service. Only the GMC could deal with that allegation. This was recognised by the GMC staff and the letter to Mr Rawlinson promised a further communication about that part of his complaint. The member of staff also wrote an internal memorandum suggesting that the issue of confidentiality should be referred to the President, who was at that time acting as medical screener. However, she drew attention to the fact that it might be difficult for Mr Rawlinson to produce evidence of the breach of confidence as he had said that Mr and Mrs G might be unwilling to give evidence against Shipman. The outcome was that a letter went to Mr Rawlinson advising him that it would be possible for the GMC to take proceedings against Shipman only if both he and Mr and Mrs G were to provide statutory declarations supporting the complaint. Mr Rawlinson now has no recollection of receiving that letter but I think it likely that he did and that he and Mrs J realised that there would be no prospect of persuading Mr and Mrs G to provide a statutory declaration supporting the complaint. That complaint went no further.
18.98
The GMC’s handling of the complaint about clinical treatment was typical of the response that the GMC would have given to such a complaint over a very long period of time. Indeed, the approach would not have been markedly different if the complaint had been made in 2003. The complaint was one which, on investigation, might or might not have revealed conduct amounting to SPM. The GMC did not investigate it at all but advised the use of local procedures. As I have explained in
, it is not clear how thoroughly the complaint was investigated locally. The complainant had no power to obtain documents. The complaint covered treatment over a substantial period of time but it is not clear whether the MSC waived the time limit and considered events that occurred more than eight weeks before the date of the complaint. I think it probable it did not. The complaint was rejected without an oral hearing. The basis of the decision is not clear, save that it appears that the MSC did not think that Shipman’s treatment had contributed to Mr J’s death. I cannot say what would have been the outcome if the case had been properly investigated and had not been affected by problems of time limits. In short, the GMC referred the case back into a procedure that was far from satisfactory. Shipman’s treatment of Mr J may have been seriously substandard and such as to render him guilty of SPM. We will never know.
Other Case Files
18.99
The Inquiry obtained the papers relating to the last five cases which had been closed by GMC staff prior to 30th
September 2003, where complainants had been advised to refer their complaints to NHS complaints procedures. The Inquiry also obtained the papers in the last five cases prior to 30th
September 2003 where complainants had been advised to refer their complaints to private complaints procedures. Three of the latter cases caused me some concern. I shall discuss them later in this Chapter: see
paragraphs 18.181-18.184
18.213-18.227
. The other complaints raised issues which appeared appropriate for referral to local procedures. Whether or not that referral took place, however, was left entirely in the hands of the complainant in each case. The GMC had no means of checking that this had been done.
18.100
I regret to say that I am critical of the GMC’s policy towards complaints about medical treatment made by private individuals. As I have explained, the practice by which such complaints were handled did not comply with rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules. But it is not the fact that the practice was unlawful which concerns me most. What most concerns me is that the policy of the GMC in respect of complaints from private individuals had the effect of virtually forcing complainants to go through local complaints procedures unless the complaint appeared to be so serious that the GMC considered that doctor presented an immediate risk to patients. The GMC has been turning away many cases without considering whether the conduct alleged might amount to SPM. It has been requiring complainants to go through a local process which requires determination and persistence and which, moreover, is not likely to result in a thorough investigation of the facts.
18.101
The GMC’s claim that it is better for local procedures to be used because local NHS organisations can provide a better opportunity for investigation flies in the face of reality. The complaints procedures on which the GMC has been content to rely have suffered from a number of defects. Those defects have been well known to members and staff of the GMC for decades. Mr Howes said in evidence:
‘I do not know anybody who thinks highly of any of the past NHS systems or existing NHS systems for dealing with complaints and concerns.’
18.102
It must have been clear that the inevitable result of the defects in the system was that many cases where the fitness to practise of a doctor was in doubt would not return to the GMC. The implications for patient safety should have been obvious. Until relatively recently, the PCOs had no power to restrict a doctor’s practice, the powers of the NHS Tribunal were rarely exercised and hospital disciplinary systems were known to be ineffective. The fact that cases of potential SPM were not getting to the GMC meant that doctors who were unfit to practise were continuing to treat patients. To the Inquiry’s knowledge, the position was particularly difficult in the field of primary care. I have already mentioned the limited role of PCOs in the handling of complaints against GPs. Often, they were not aware of a complaint and, even if they were, they had no official investigatory role. Only in a small minority of cases was there any possibility of a case being referred back to the GMC. Those were cases in which an independent review took place, the report was seriously critical of the doctor and the PCO was sufficiently concerned to refer the case onwards to the GMC rather than attempting remedial measures of its own. Also, there was a small number of incidents which, for some reason or another, came to a PCO’s attention and were directly investigated by it. Such an investigation might result in a referral to the GMC. But the great majority of complaints would follow the ‘usual procedures’ and would never be investigated at all. I shall not comment further on the position in respect of hospital cases, as the Inquiry has not examined them in detail. I accept of course that the GMC has no control over the quality of NHS complaints procedures or of those in the private sector. Yet, notwithstanding its knowledge that the procedures were defective and that it had no power to do anything about that, the GMC persisted, over a period of many years, in requiring complainants to ‘exhaust’ their local remedies.
18.103
In my view, the GMC policy that I have described amounted to a failure of its duty. The GMC accepted and dealt with the most serious cases but consistently failed complainants who reported matters which might well have involved SPM, but which did not, in the opinion of the GMC, give rise to an obvious risk to patient safety. This policy did not honour the GMC’s primary duty to protect patients. It is clear from the evidence that a significant factor underlying the policy was the desire to be ‘fair to doctors’; in practice, the effect was to protect doctors from the investigation of complaints and from the possibility of disciplinary action. The policy also enabled the GMC to avoid handling a substantial number of cases which it would otherwise have had to deal with. And, in addition to all that, the policy resulted in a practice that was manifestly in breach of rule 6 and therefore unlawful.
18.104
I can well understand the GMC’s view that many complaints about doctors are, in principle, best investigated locally. Indeed, if the local resources were satisfactory, if the procedures were reasonably speedy and did not rely on the complainant to pursue the complaint and if there were proper, reliable mechanisms for referring cases to the GMC when appropriate, I would agree that a system which provided for initial investigation locally would be ideal. However, as the GMC recognises, local resources are not satisfactory, procedures are not reasonably speedy and the onus is always on the complainant to pursue the complaint. Nonetheless, the GMC has maintained its policy over many years. Part of the problem has undoubtedly been that the GMC has never had an adequate in-house investigating facility. As I explained in
Chapter 16
and as I shall explain further below, in the past, the GMC has only ever fully investigated a case in preparation for a disciplinary hearing. But another aspect of the problem has been the GMC’s uncertainty and ambivalence about its role and about its position in relation to NHS complaints procedures. It seems to me that the GMC does not really want to receive a wide range of ‘raw’ complaints; it prefers to receive reports from other organisations which have already gathered and evaluated the evidence. Then, it is easy for the GMC to decide whether any FTP procedures should follow and to carry out such further investigation as it considers necessary before the hearing. But, as we have seen, the GMC still holds itself out to the public at large as the primary recipient of all complaints about doctors.
18.105
In my view, the GMC really will have to make its mind up where it stands. One option is that it should receive only those complaints which other bodies (whether NHS or private) think should be referred - either in an uninvestigated state because they are obviously very serious or after investigation because they appear to the investigating body to raise a question about the doctor’s fitness to practise. The other possibility is that it carries on as now, opening its doors to all comers. If it decides to do that, it really must give proper consideration to every complaint. It must investigate it to the extent necessary to see whether action should be taken. It is not acceptable, in my view, for the GMC to seek to keep a foot in both camps: offering to receive all complaints and then selecting for investigation only those which raise the most obvious concerns about the safety of patients.
18.106
The GMC has suggested that the problem might be resolved by the creation of a ‘single portal’, which, as I understand the suggestion, would provide advice to potential complainants about where to direct their complaints. It does appear that quite a number of complaints are directed to the wrong place or are received by bodies that are not complaints handling bodies at all. For example, Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive and Medical Director of the NCAA, said that it receives quite a number. Members of staff always seek to help a complainant to identify the right destination for his/her complaint or concern and sometimes contact the appropriate body to facilitate the complaint’s progress. There are real attractions in this suggestion and I shall consider it in greater detail later in this Report. However, even if such a facility were to be introduced, it would still be necessary for the GMC to clarify its own role, not only in its own mind but also in the minds of the public.
Audit
Investigating the Circumstances of a Complaint

--- Some Problems with Cases Closed by General Medical Council Staff ---
18.179
Under the old procedures, about 65% of the complaints and other communications received by the GMC’s Screening Section were dealt with by members of the GMC’s administrative staff, who were authorised to close them without reference to a medical screener. It was the casework managers who took the decision whether to close a case or to refer it to a medical screener. It was also the casework managers who decided what, if any, further information was required before a case was submitted to a medical screener. The casework managers worked to instructions set out in the FTP Casework (later the FTP Investigation) Manual and other documents.
18.180
As I have previously explained, the Inquiry requested and obtained from the GMC the last five cases prior to 30th
September 2003 which had been closed by GMC staff and in which the complainants had been advised to refer their complaints to local NHS complaints procedures. The Inquiry also requested and obtained the last five cases prior to the same date where complainants had been advised to refer their complaints to private complaints procedures. I shall refer later in this Chapter to two of the latter cases, those of Dr KC 02 and Dr KC 05, where the doctors who were the subjects of the complaints had not been identified. I express my concerns about those cases at
paragraphs 18.213-18.227
Dr KC 03
18.181
Another within this group of five cases was that of Dr KC 03. The complaint in that case was that Dr KC 03 had sent to the complainant the results of certain medical tests, carried out in the course of the (private) treatment of a member of the complainant’s family, without providing any explanation of the results. It was said that when the complainant spoke to Dr KC 03 and requested an explanation, the doctor had been abrasive and rude. The complainant asked that the doctor should be reprimanded. The case was closed by a GMC casework manager on the ground that it would be more appropriately dealt with under local complaints procedures.
18.182
Standing alone, that decision could not be criticised. However, there had been two earlier complaints made against the doctor. The first had concerned the doctor’s employment practices. The second alleged that the doctor’s performance in private practice gave cause for concern. In connection with the second complaint, the GMC had written to the doctor, informing him that the medical screener was considering referring the doctor for a performance assessment and seeking his observations. (This letter was written under rule 5 of the General Medical Council (Professional Performance) Rules Order of Council 1997, a provision which was repealed in 2002.) The doctor submitted an extensive reply on the basis of which the medical screener decided that an assessment would not be necessary, given the doctor’s insight into his problems and his ongoing attempts to address them.
18.183
Mr Marshall explained that, when the most recent complaint against the doctor was triaged, the casework manager should have been aware that previous complaints had been made about the doctor since this was noted on the CDF. However, he said that it was not clear from the relevant documents whether the casework manager had referred to the papers relating to the previous complaints before making a decision on the current one. Mr Marshall would have expected this to be done in view of the fact that one of the previous complaints had given enough cause for concern for a rule 5 letter to be sent. The most recent complaint cast doubt on the belief that the doctor was addressing his problems successfully. Mr Marshall said that, if the casework manager had been aware of the previous complaint, he should at least have checked with the doctor’s current employers or colleagues to ascertain whether there were any ongoing concerns about his practice. After the case came to light, as a result of the Inquiry’s investigations, Mr Marshall caused it to be reopened so that the GMC could make appropriate enquiries.
18.184
This was a case where a previous complaint which was plainly of relevance to the one under consideration was probably not examined. As a result, the potential significance of the subsequent complaint was not recognised and the case was closed. It is of particular concern that the GMC should have failed to make appropriate enquiries in a case involving possible performance problems with a doctor in private practice. Such problems are less likely to come to light and be dealt with in a private setting than within NHS structures. When they are revealed, therefore, they should be given especially careful consideration.
Dr KE 05
18.185
When examining GMC files relating to doctors who had been the subject of disciplinary action for drug abuse, the Inquiry, by chance, came across a number of cases where other complaints against the same doctors had been closed by members of the GMC staff. One example of such a case was that of Dr KE 05, a GP. The GMC received a letter from a HA, expressing concern about Dr KE 05’s high level of prescribing of morphine. Following Shipman’s conviction, the Medical Adviser to the HA had carried out an analysis of the prescribing of morphine by doctors in the area. This had shown that Dr KE 05 had been prescribing over ten times more morphine than the average amount prescribed by other doctors/GP practices in the area. The Medical Adviser reported that a rumour had been circulating that the doctor had had ‘dealings’ with drug addicts. The doctor had since left the area covered by the HA in question.
18.186
The GMC requested further information from the HA, and this was provided. Eleven months later, the GMC sent a ‘holding’ letter. After a further 11 months (and almost two years after the original complaint), a member of the GMC staff wrote asking for
‘any additional documentation’
relating to the complaint. This kind of delay was fairly common in cases that were dealt with by the GMC at that time. It seems that this letter was written following a Screening Case Review which had resulted in a recommendation that, because of its subject matter, the case should be progressed
‘as a matter of priority’
. The HA responded promptly, saying that it had no further documentation in its possession. Shortly afterwards, the case was closed on the ground that it was a complaint from a third party
‘where it is clear that the principal party does not want to pursue the matter, and no other reason for proceeding’
18.187
One striking feature of this case was the absence of any investigation by the GMC. The only action initiated by the caseworker was to ask for information and documentation from the HA which had raised the concern. There appeared to have been no real understanding of the type of documentation or information that would have been of assistance. Clearly, what was required was prescribing data relating to the doctor’s past and current prescribing. If the HA did not have the data, it could have been obtained from the Prescription Pricing Authority (PPA). If the request had been made quickly enough, prescription forms could also have been obtained from the PPA. No attempt was made to do this. Moreover, there was no attempt to find out where, and in what circumstances, the doctor was working at the time he was reported to the GMC or to contact his current employers or PCO.
18.188
The GMC might not have been the appropriate body to undertake an investigation of this kind. It might have been better done by the Home Office Drugs Inspectorate. If that was the case, there was no recognition of that fact and no attempt to direct the case to the proper quarter. Instead, the GMC acted as the passive recipient of information and, when the complainant appeared to have no more information to offer, the case was closed. The fact that a member of the GMC staff considered that there was
‘no other reason for proceeding’
in a case involving the possible unlawful supply of controlled drugs is extremely worrying.
18.189
Dr Korlipara acknowledged to the Inquiry that there had been a ‘serious lapse’ in this case. Subsequent to it, in his capacity as a medical screener, he had had to consider a further complaint against Dr KE 05. This had involved an allegation of substandard clinical practice and was not drug-related. Dr Korlipara was informed by GMC staff at the time of screening that there had been two previous complaints against the doctor. The first in time had been referred to a medical screener; Dr Korlipara saw the papers relating to that complaint and did not consider it relevant to the one he was considering. On being told that the second previous complaint (the morphine case) had been closed by GMC staff, Dr Korlipara did not look at it. Thus, he remained unaware of the complaint about possible over-prescribing of morphine until he reviewed the file for the purpose of making a written statement to the Inquiry.
18.190
The practice of not considering cases which had previously been closed by GMC staff caused me some concern. I do not criticise Dr Korlipara personally for his failure to look at the earlier complaint. I have no doubt that he was following the usual practice. However, many cases were closed by casework managers, not because they contained no allegation of substance, but because they had not yet passed through the local complaints procedures. The majority of cases closed for that reason would have involved allegations of poor treatment or substandard clinical practice. It seems to me desirable that the person performing the screening function (in future, a case examiner) should have the fullest possible picture of the history of any previous dealings which the doctor may have had with the GMC’s FTP procedures before taking a decision as to whether a case should go forward. In this context, I was concerned to hear that, at one stage in the 1990s, the GMC had embarked upon the process of disposing of the documentation relating to old complaints that had been closed. Fortunately, the process was discontinued. I can well understand the desire to clear out old documents to make space for new ones. However, it does seem to me that information about all complaints about a doctor should be retained (in some form) while that doctor remains on the register.
18.191
Returning to the complaint against Dr KE 05 of possible over-prescribing of morphine, Mr Marshall said that the decision to close the case was ‘clearly wrong’. The member of staff who had taken the decision no longer worked for the GMC. Since the matter came to light, the case had been reopened and enquiries instituted. Mr Marshall described as ‘minimal’ the possibility that at the time when he gave his evidence, a decision to close the case would have been taken in the same circumstances. This was, first, because casework managers were better trained. Second, he said that the system of triage which had operated since October 2002 meant that new cases were considered by a relatively senior member of staff (a casework manager) at an early stage. The casework manager would give instructions about action to be taken, together with the timescale within which that action should be completed. In all cases where complaints had been referred by healthcare providers, staff had been instructed to contact the referring body to discuss how the case should be dealt with. In addition, weekly meetings between caseworkers and their casework manager were held, at which all ‘live’ cases were discussed, priorities agreed and weekly objectives set. Mr Marshall also said that the audit procedures for cases handled by the Screening Section, to which I have already referred, should assist in eliminating any potential inconsistencies and errors made in the closure of cases at an administrative level.
Dr KH 02
18.192
An error or omission by a member of the GMC staff which results in a failure to obtain or take note of relevant information about a doctor may have an important effect upon the course of any subsequent proceedings. One such case of an error by a member of staff came to light by chance as the result of the Inquiry’s consideration of a case (that of Dr KH 02) that had entered the health procedures. In the late 1990s, a complaint was received about Dr KH 02 to the effect that he had been drunk at work. The medical screener, Dr Korlipara, referred him into the health procedures. Unbeknown to Dr Korlipara, a few months before this complaint had been received, the GMC had been notified that Dr KH 02 had recently been convicted of the unlawful possession of cannabis and cocaine. Had Dr Korlipara known of these convictions, it is likely that his decision would have been different and that the case would have been referred to the PPC. In the event, the doctor’s progress in the health procedures had not been good and, at the time when this error came to light, during the Inquiry hearings in 2003, his future in medicine was in doubt.
Dr JN 01
18.193
Another case which gave rise to concerns about actions taken by GMC staff was that of Dr JN 01. A HA informed the GMC of concerns relating to Dr JN 01, a GP, who was said to be issuing, in suspicious circumstances, large numbers of NHS and private prescriptions for benzodiazepines and other drugs. Subsequently, the HA sent to the GMC information from one pharmacy which showed that the doctor had issued 329 private prescriptions for benzodiazepines over a ten-month period. The HA sent the GMC a dossier of evidence relating to Dr JN 01’s prescribing and also to two further complaints (one of theft from a patient) which had been made about him.
18.194
Before the case was referred to the GMC, investigations had been undertaken by the police and by the PPA Pharmaceutical Fraud Team (PPAPFT). On receipt of the referral, the GMC took no action itself but awaited the outcome of the other investigations. A GMC caseworker met a representative from the PPAPFT. After that, it was decided to await further information from the PPAPFT before considering what to do next. The GMC file contained conflicting information as to whether the police investigation was continuing. However, the GMC made no direct contact with the police, despite the fact that the GMC had a team of staff whose task was specifically to liaise with the police. Mr Marshall said that he thought that the failure to refer the case to the specialist team occurred because the case was referred initially as a complaint of ‘strange prescribing’, rather than as a conviction case.
18.195
Seven months after the report was received by the GMC, the case was closed administratively. This did not mean that it was necessarily at an end. Instead, the intention of the GMC apparently was that it would be reviewed monthly and that regular enquiries would be made of the PPAPFT to ascertain what stage its investigation had reached. The GMC’s computer system permitted a case to be ‘flagged’ for action periodically. However, it appears that this was not done. Two months later, following an enquiry from the HA, the GMC wrote to the PPAPFT, asking about progress. After a further four months, the PPAPFT informed the GMC that it had concluded its investigations. Four months later, the GMC was told that the local PCT (which had by this time replaced the HA as the PCO) was considering evidence collected by the PPAPFT and was making further enquiries about the doctor. The GMC still took no further action and the case remained closed until it came to light a few months later as a result of the Inquiry’s request for documents.
18.196
Mr Marshall acknowledged that the handling of the case by the GMC had been deficient at two points. First, he said that the case should not have been closed administratively. That closure had resulted in a failure to chase up the PPAPFT for information. Second, after contact with the PCT, no further action was taken. The explanation was, he said, ‘that we (
i.e. the GMC
) have either consciously made a decision that we have had three stabs at this and this is the last time we are going to bother ourselves to do it, or it has simply disappeared from view as other priorities took over’. He said that, if the case had not been closed, it would have been reviewed every week by the casework manager and a caseworker. Because the case was closed, it was not subjected to that routine review and was not the ‘nagging irritation’ it would - because of its age - have been at such meetings. The impression I received was that it was probably to avoid that ‘nagging irritation’ that the case was closed in the first instance.
18.197
Once the failure to follow up the case came to light as a result of the Inquiry’s investigations, the case was reopened. Mr Marshall said that the GMC had obtained a full update from the PCT, which continued to monitor the doctor. Officers of the PCT had told the GMC that they did not feel that patients were at risk as a result of the doctor remaining on the register and being allowed to practise unrestricted. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that he thought that the GMC needed to ask more questions of the PCT. In particular, it needed to find out whether any explanation had ever been obtained for the ‘strange lurch in prescribing activity’ that had occurred. It also needed to know what the position was in relation to the other two outstanding complaints against the doctor.
18.198
Mr Marshall said that it would not have been appropriate under the old FTP procedures for the GMC to have undertaken any investigation of its own (e.g. by instructing its solicitors to investigate) at or before the screening stage. In any event, he did not think that the solicitors would have had the powers necessary to mount an investigation of this kind. Unless an investigation had been undertaken by another body and an explanation for the doctor’s prescribing habits identified, it would, he said, have been difficult for charges against the doctor to be formulated by the GMC. It would not have been clear to the GMC what the doctor should be charged with, since it was not known whether the prescribing was the result of criminality or incompetence or was entirely innocent.
18.199
The handling of this case gave rise to a number of concerns. I can well understand the difficulty the GMC faces where other bodies are engaged in investigations, particularly where the doctor concerned is unaware that those investigations are going on. It is obviously important that the GMC does not prejudice the outcome of other investigations, in particular police investigations. It is also important, however, that the GMC has a clear picture of which organisation(s) is/are investigating and which issues they are investigating. It is in my view extraordinary, in the present case, that the GMC had no contact with the police and that it neither requested nor obtained a copy of any report prepared at the conclusion of the police investigation. It might be that the GMC staff assumed that the police had decided not to prosecute the doctor. However, that fact would not mean that there were no issues that the GMC ought to address. Nor did the GMC obtain any report on the evidence collected by the PPAPFT. There seemed to be no recognition of the fact that the PPAPFT investigation would be concerned only with potential fraud on the NHS (and, therefore, only with the NHS prescriptions issued by the doctor), not with the doctor’s private prescribing.
18.200
The failure by the GMC to investigate rendered it entirely dependent on the result of investigations carried out by other bodies. If, as appeared to be the case here, those results were inconclusive, it seems that the GMC regarded itself as powerless to act. This was despite the fact that the purpose of disciplinary proceedings by the GMC - to ascertain whether the doctor is fit to practise, and to protect patients - is wholly different from the purpose of the other investigations which were undertaken. Mr Marshall suggested that the problems of dealing with a case such as this would be ameliorated by the introduction of the new FTP procedures.
18.201
Another obvious concern was the premature closure of the case. The purpose of that closure may have been to avoid the very procedures which had been designed to ensure that cases were not overlooked and left inactive for long periods. The system of flagging a case for review did not appear to have been implemented. The effect was that, had it not been for the Inquiry bringing the case to light, it might have lain dormant indefinitely, despite its potential seriousness. Even when it was brought to the GMC’s attention, it did not appear that the GMC was intending to embark upon any investigation of the case. Rather it seemed content to let the PCT continue its attempts to resolve it. This is despite the fact that the evidence of the private prescriptions alone must, at the very least, have raised doubts about this doctor’s fitness to practise.
18.202
I do recognise that every organisation makes mistakes. The Inquiry has not carried out an audit of cases closed by casework managers; it has examined only a few cases, which have come to its attention by chance. It is possible that the Inquiry has, by chance, alighted upon isolated incidents of poor practice. However, the results of the audit exercise recently begun, which I described at
paragraph 18.46
, would suggest that errors and poor practice are not uncommon. It is comforting to know that some audit is now taking place. However, while mistakes are still being found, I wonder whether the audit should not become a review and should encompass all decisions rather than only a proportion of them. It seems to me that correct decisions in these cases are important to patient safety.
18.203
The cases I have described also illustrate the real problems caused by the lack of any investigation by the GMC. Within the small selection of cases examined by the Inquiry, two potentially serious cases were found, both involving allegations of improper prescribing of controlled drugs. Both were closed without any investigation by the GMC. Either or both of those doctors could pose a continuing risk to patients.
Communications with Doctors' Employers and Primary Care Organisations
Ascertaining the Identity of a Doctor Who Is the Subject of a Complaint

--- Audit ---
18.43
In the period from 1996 to 2001, the annual number of convictions reported and complaints received by the GMC rose from about 1500 or 1600 to 4500. The GMC office had considerable difficulty in managing this increased workload and this resulted in lengthy delays in dealing with cases. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that, by 2000, it had been recognised that the GMC had no effective way of managing cases. It was reliant on caseworkers to report any problems that arose. Many of the cases in the system had been open for a long time without any real action being taken on them. An exercise, known as the Case Review Audit and Management Information Project, was undertaken. Mr Marshall managed the Project for 12 months. In effect, it amounted to a ‘spring clean’ of open cases. It involved considering whether further action was necessary and reviewing cases. As a result of the exercise, many cases were closed. At the same time, an audit process was instituted, whereby 10% of cases processed by the GMC staff were audited in an attempt to discover whether proper procedures had been followed and whether those procedures could be improved. That work led to the implementation of a structured work flow procedure for screening and to the preparation of the FTP Casework Manual and of other instructions for caseworkers. In time, the case review element of the Project ceased, as the backlog of open cases was dealt with. However, audit continued and was carried out by a newly formed Fitness to Practise Directorate (FPD) audit team.
18.44
In July 2000, service standards came into effect for the first time. These service standards identified periods within which certain elements of the FTP procedures should be completed. Targets for completion of cases within the service standards were set and regular reports of performance against the standards were required by the Council.
18.45
From January 2003, the FPD audit team carried out audits of random samples of cases at four different stages of progress. These were described as ‘screening audits’ (presumably because they were audits of work done in the Screening Section). They did not, however, relate to the work of the screeners. One hundred and ten cases every four weeks were selected for audit. The purpose of the audit was to check that all the appropriate procedural steps had been taken. In particular, a check was made to ensure that service standards had been met, that the case file had been well ordered and that the database had been appropriately maintained to reflect the progress of the investigation. If errors were found, auditors identified any appropriate corrective action which should be taken, and the execution of that corrective action was also the subject of audit.
18.46
Decisions to close a case at the triage stage were also audited and any errors taken up with the relevant casework manager. Until the end of 2003, 10% of cases closed at triage were audited. This was subsequently increased to 50%. During December 2003, 144 cases were closed at triage. One half (72) of those cases were audited. Four cases were identified as having been closed incorrectly (although, in one case, after further discussion with the casework manager, it was decided that his action had been justified). Three cases were reopened. Two of those cases had been inappropriately referred back to local complaints procedures. One (a sensitive case involving a complaint by a father whose children had been removed from his care after a court hearing at which the doctors complained of had given expert evidence) had been closed on the ground that the complainant was not suggesting the doctors had acted unreasonably. In fact, although it appears that he had not said this in so many words, it was clear that he was alleging unreasonableness. There were nine further cases where an inappropriate reason for closure had been recorded on the SDF, although the auditor was satisfied that the closure was justified for other reasons. It occurred to me that, in view of the fact that three of the 72 cases examined were found to have been incorrectly closed, it would have been wise to examine the other 72. However, I do not think that that was done.
Advice to Refer a Complaint to Local Complaints Procedures

--- Investigating the Circumstances of a Complaint ---
Complaints from Public Bodies and Private Individuals
18.107
The extent and quality of evidence available when a complaint comes to the GMC from a public body is, in general, very different from that which is provided by a private individual. A complaint from a private individual might consist of a letter only. The letter might not be very full or articulate. It might not deal with all the relevant issues. It might not contain details of available witnesses or of other supporting evidence. By contrast, a complaint from a public body is likely to have been preceded by some sort of investigation or inquiry. The letter of complaint will usually set out the issues clearly. It will often be supported by a body of evidence. It may be accompanied by a report of an IRP (or, under the new arrangements for the second stage of the complaints procedures, a Healthcare Commission panel) which has made findings against the doctor. The quality and extent of local investigations may be very variable. Nevertheless, it has hitherto been the practice of the GMC to rely on the evidence collected by local bodies without - certainly at the early stages of its procedures - undertaking any additional investigations of its own.
18.108
A private individual who makes a complaint about a doctor to the GMC will usually lack the necessary resources to carry out his/her own investigation. He or she will therefore expect that the GMC will conduct a thorough investigation of the complaint and that only when all the relevant information is known will the GMC make an informed decision as to what, if any, action is required in respect of the doctor. In other words, there is an expectation that the GMC will fulfil the function usually performed by an organisation which is designed and equipped to handle and adjudicate upon complaints from members of the public. The reality, however, is rather different.
The Meaning of ‘Investigation’
18.109
It is important to define what I mean by the term ‘investigation’. By ‘investigation’, I mean the gathering of information and evidence relating to the circumstances giving rise to a complaint. Such an investigation might involve:
asking questions of the complainant and obtaining a statement from him/her
discovering from the complainant the identity of any potential witnesses (e.g. friends and family of the complainant with knowledge of the circumstances), and obtaining statements from them
obtaining any relevant medical records, test results and other documents
obtaining documentary evidence about other investigations such as transcripts of inquests and (in the past) reports of IRP hearings
obtaining a statement from the doctor complained of and from any witness of fact whom s/he may put forward
obtaining evidence from an expert in the relevant specialty
obtaining the comments of the complainant (and possibly other witnesses) on the account given by the doctor and his/her witnesses and vice versa
initiating other enquiries, e.g. checking facts which have been asserted by the complainant or the doctor with third parties and/or with existing documentation.
18.110
Investigation is a task which requires considerable expertise, particularly where the matter to be investigated involves complex medical procedures or issues. Investigation can also require a degree of determination, inquisitiveness and perseverance in order to ascertain what happened or, where there is a conflict of evidence, in order to identify precisely where the differences between the accounts given by the various witnesses lie.
18.111
The Report of the Merrison Committee, to which I have already referred, was published in 1975. The Report discussed the issue of investigation. It pointed out that, in the early period of the GMC’s history, there were only three circumstances in which the GMC would take action in respect of reports that a doctor had been guilty of SPM. The first was when it received information about the alleged misconduct from a public body. The second was when it received information about the alleged misconduct from another source and when that information included all the evidence required for the GMC’s purposes. The third circumstance was when there was a complainant (usually a private individual) who was prepared to assemble the evidence him/herself and to present it at a hearing of the Disciplinary Committee (the predecessor of the PCC). The Merrison Report also pointed out that, during the previous ten to fifteen years, the GMC had taken the view that, if it continued to limit its activity as previously, some types of professional misconduct that gave rise to public criticism would not be dealt with. It had therefore started to collect evidence itself and to prosecute in certain types of case. The Merrison Committee expressed the view that this action was
‘entirely justified’
and should be continued
‘in the interest both of the public and of the profession’
18.112
The Merrison Report therefore recommended that the GMC should set up a small unit, possibly under the supervision of a medically qualified official, to investigate allegations against doctors. This was because the Merrison Committee considered it important that the GMC should be able to
‘... assess as quickly as possible which complaints are substantial so that action, including the dismissal of unfounded allegations, can be taken without undue delay’
. The Merrison Committee recommended that the investigation unit should operate under the personal direction of the President, who would supervise the early stages of the FTP procedures and would act as the screener. The investigation unit would be used principally for the investigation of complaints from private individuals. Its role would be to establish
‘in a preliminary and neutral way’
the facts of the case. Because members of the Merrison Committee considered that points of difficulty could often be better elucidated by a personal interview than by an exchange of letters, they suggested that discussions should take place between a representative of the investigation unit and the doctor involved and between the representative and other parties to the complaint. At the end of the investigation, the investigation unit should submit a report to the President, who would then take the decision whether the case should be either dismissed or taken further.
18.113
These recommendations, which seem to me to be eminently sensible, were never implemented. In 1988, Mrs Robinson expressed surprise that the GMC did not have its own investigation unit, and contrasted the position of the GMC with that of the Ombudsman, who had a permanent staff of experienced investigators. In 1988, as was the case until very recently, private firms of solicitors retained by the GMC would investigate and prepare cases for hearing by the PCC. The solicitors employed trained investigators, including former police officers. The Inquiry has been told, and I have no reason to doubt, that the GMC’s solicitors have, in the past, carried out some extensive and very thorough investigations in preparation for PCC hearings. The cases arising out of the Bristol Royal Infirmary paediatric cardiology deaths were cited as examples of this. However, it was rare for the GMC’s solicitors to be involved in gathering information about the circumstances of a complaint at a time before the complaint had been referred by the PPC for hearing by the PCC.
18.114
As the Merrison Committee recognised, the need for investigation by the GMC arose primarily in connection with complaints made by private individuals. As I have said, most complaints by private individuals about NHS treatment would be referred back to local complaints procedures for investigation. However, that would still leave complaints about private treatment (until recently), together with complaints which fell outside the time limits for local complaints procedures or those which for other reasons could not be dealt with by means of local complaints procedures.
The Lack of Investigative Powers
18.115
Until 2000, the GMC had no power to compel the production of documents or the provision of information until a case had been referred by the PPC to the PCC. Mr Howes, who was employed by the GMC between 1977 and 2002, did not think that anyone had ever put forward a proposal that the GMC should be given power to act earlier. I can only assume that that was because it was never really contemplated that investigations (other than seeking the doctor’s response to the complaint made against him/her) would be carried out at a stage in the proceedings earlier than the time of referral to the PCC.
18.116
The 1994 Training Manual compiled by Mr Howes set out the position at that time:
‘So far as sufficiency of the evidence is concerned, this is largely a matter of common sense, rather than law. For example, if a complaint alleges that a doctor has breached professional confidence in a letter sent to the complainant’s employer, the Council will need to see a copy of that letter, so as to be reassured that the doctor did in fact write such a letter, and that it did indeed contain confidential information concerning the medical history, condition and/or treatment of the person concerned. We will also need information from the complainant about the circumstances which led to the letter being sent. Therefore, if the complainant is not able to produce a copy of the letter in question, the view taken by the preliminary screener will normally be that the evidence is insufficient to justify disciplinary proceedings against the doctor, regardless of the gravity of the allegation. The onus to produce evidence is almost entirely on the complainant, and not on the GMC, because the GMC does not have much by way of investigative powers at the preliminary stage of the procedures; its powers of subpoena are confined to cases being heard by the PCC or Health Committee. Thus for example, in the hypothetical breach of confidence case mentioned above, the Council would have no means of obtaining a copy of the letter giving rise to the complaint, nor does the Council have access to a doctor’s medical records.’
18.117
In that passage, there appears to be a fundamental confusion between the GMC’s lack of
‘investigative powers’
during the preliminary stages and its ability to investigate at all. Mr Scott agreed that such confusion existed in the minds of some GMC staff and members. It is true, as I have said, that the GMC had no power to compel disclosure of documents or the provision of information until a decision had been taken to refer a complaint to the PCC. But, regardless of its lack of such a power, there would have been nothing, in the example given in the passage above, to prevent a member of the GMC’s staff from asking the complainant’s employer for a copy of the letter. It might have been provided voluntarily. Mr Howes said that the GMC would have expected the complainant to get a copy of the letter from his/her employer. If s/he could not produce the letter, he said that ‘one would wonder why’. When asked why the GMC could not itself have made that sort of enquiry, he replied:
‘Well, the Council could, but the Council, if you like, is not there to make out the complainant’s case. The Council is supposed to be impartial and, therefore, certainly at that time, the thinking was that we should be impartial. There was no part of our job to assist a doctor with his defence against a charge and it was no part of our job to go overboard and make the case out for the complainant. The complainant had to make out the
case
, we would then if we said there was a
case take it on board and do the rest and we would pay for the costs of the case ... in front of the Disciplinary Committee, etc. We were prepared to take on a case once the complainant if you like had done their bit and made out a case.’
18.118
At a later stage, Mr Howes said:
‘... we did not really regard it as our job in those days to help the complainant any more than it was our job to help the doctor with his defence. If the complainant wished to bring a complaint against the doctor then the law allowed them to do that with certain limits, and it was our job to adjudicate on that complaint and I think we concentrated on that aspect. That is not the way the GMC looks at these matters now, but I think that is the way it was looked at then.’
18.119
There were, however, circumstances in which the GMC was prepared to initiate investigations at an early stage, despite its lack of power and the usual expectation that the complainant would provide the evidence. This is illustrated in the next paragraph of the 1994 Training Manual:
‘In a very small number of cases, however, the medical preliminary screener may consider, on the advice of the office, that the matters alleged are so serious that a thorough informal investigation should be carried out locally by the Council’s solicitors, who will then attempt to investigate the case and take statements, in so far as potential witnesses are prepared to cooperate. However, because the resources of the Council’s Solicitors are limited, it is not possible to investigate many cases of potential serious professional misconduct in this way; screeners usually limit them to cases of considerable public interest.’
18.120
If investigations could be undertaken on some occasions, then the absence of powers was plainly not considered to be a complete bar. However, it is plain that a decision had been taken to restrict investigations to serious cases, in particular those with a high public profile. When asked for examples of cases when an investigation might be mounted, Mr Howes cited complaints of irresponsible prescribing to addicts or multiple allegations of indecency against a doctor.
18.121
Mr Townsend agreed that there was probably some confusion of thought between the absence of a power to compel people to co-operate and the inability to investigate at all. He felt that the fact that there was a real difficulty if people did not co-operate tended to make staff disinclined to attempt to investigate. The view that it was the complainant’s responsibility to assemble the evidence in support of his/her complaint was another factor. He agreed that, in the ‘large majority of cases’, the onus was on the individual complainant to provide the evidence necessary to demonstrate a
case of SPM. That individual would not be interviewed by GMC staff nor, save in exceptional circumstances, would other potential witnesses be approached or interviewed. Instead, the complainant him/herself would be encouraged to obtain statements from any potential witnesses.
18.122
Some witnesses at the Inquiry mentioned the fact that the Rules did not confer on medical screeners in conduct cases any specific power to investigate. The PPC, together with screeners dealing with cases where the health of the doctor was in issue (health screeners) and medical screeners dealing with performance cases, were given a specific power. It was suggested that this absence of a specific power might have discouraged staff and screeners from undertaking investigations. I do not see how this can be the case. It is clear that, if a case was considered sufficiently serious and/or high profile, investigations were undertaken. Screeners did on occasion cause further information (e.g. expert opinion) to be obtained. The absence of a specific power did not prevent them from doing this. Moreover, I was not told that there had ever been any attempt to seek such a power. It seems to me that the lack of investigation was attributable mainly to a feeling that it was for the complainant (not the GMC) to substantiate his/her complaint. The absence of any power to compel production of documents and information cannot have helped. However, that could no doubt have been rectified had it been considered necessary or desirable to do so.
18.123
The 1996 PSI Report drew attention to the lack of investigation. It suggested that the GMC should consider carrying out some investigation before a case went to a medical screener or, if not then, after screening and pending consideration by the PPC. At that time, it was not the practice even to seek the response of the doctor to a complaint made against him/her before the complaint was screened. The Report suggested that, at a minimum, this should be done where there appeared to be the possibility of a
case of SPM. That change was instituted shortly afterwards. The Report also raised the possibility of seeking further evidence, over and above the response of the doctor. Some years later, in about 2000, the GMC extended its ‘investigatory’ procedures by inviting the complainant to comment upon the doctor’s response to, or explanation of, the matters alleged. However, it did not and never has routinely undertaken any other form of evidence gathering such as the taking of witness statements during the preliminary stages.
18.124
As the 1994 Training Manual had made clear, when a private individual made a complaint to the GMC, s/he bore responsibility for gathering the necessary evidence in support of the allegation. The 1996 PSI Report showed that, in a significant proportion (22%) of cases in which the GMC took no action, the reason for lack of action was that the GMC had requested further evidence from the complainant but had received no response. If no response was received from a complainant, there was usually no follow-up request. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that she thought that complainants might have found such requests for further evidence intimidating. She and her colleagues were concerned at the onus being put on complainants and at the fact that complaints involving SPM might have been lost. It was for that reason that the PSI team had recommended that the GMC should consider carrying out investigations itself.
18.125
The PSI team had other concerns about the lack of investigation by the GMC of complaints made by private individuals. The 1996 PSI Report showed that by far the single most important factor in determining whether or not a complaint was acted upon by the GMC was whether the complaint came from a public body or from a private individual. In the year to August 1994, 66% of doctors referred to the PPC, and 72% of doctors who were referred by the PPC to the PCC, had been referred by public bodies. The 2000 PSI Report produced similar results. Complaints made by private individuals against doctors were referred by medical screeners to the PPC relatively rarely: 5% of such complaints were referred in 1997, 6% in 1998 and 13% in 1999.
18.126
Professor Allen and her colleagues recognised that the disparities in outcome between complaints coming from private individuals and those from public bodies could reflect the fact that complaints made by public bodies were for some reason intrinsically more serious than those made by private individuals. If that were so, it would not be surprising that a greater proportion progressed further than the screening stage. However, they urged caution in assuming that this was the reason for the different outcomes. They believed that the differences in outcome might instead be caused by differences in the quantity and quality of evidence provided by public bodies, when compared with that provided by private individuals. If this were correct, the effect of the GMC’s failure to investigate complaints would have been that some complaints from private individuals which should have been the subject of disciplinary action by the GMC were being rejected because of lack of evidence.
18.127
Mr Townsend agreed that the disparities in outcome between complaints made by public bodies and those made by private individuals were, in part, accounted for by the fact that a public body would have gathered more evidence than would a private individual. Moreover, that evidence would have been sifted. A judgement would have been taken on the probity of the evidence. Another factor was, he thought, the series of hurdles which a private individual had to overcome. These included (until November 2002) the requirement for a statutory declaration to be provided. He felt that these hurdles might have discouraged an individual from taking his/her complaint forward.
18.128
It seems to me entirely understandable that virtually all complaints received from a public body should be found by the GMC to require some sort of disciplinary action. The allegations would already have been investigated and a judgement made that the allegation was serious enough to refer to the GMC. However, it is a matter of concern that the GMC has not been prepared to undertake a
‘preliminary and neutral’
investigation of complaints made by private individuals. I fear that many valid complaints will have been closed because of the failure to investigate. I recognise that to undertake such investigations would have been a costly exercise for the GMC. However, I have the clear impression that cost was not the only reason why such investigations were not undertaken. The impression I received was that complaints from individuals were suspected of being, in some way, unreliable, at least unless and until the complainant could produce sufficient evidence to amount to a
case of SPM, backed - until November 2002 - by a statutory declaration. Also, there was resistance to any action which might be seen as ‘assisting complainants’ and, therefore, as ‘unfair to doctors’.
18.129
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook referred to the fact that, in more complicated cases, the GMC’s solicitors might be asked to obtain evidence before a case was screened. They could interview witnesses and, although they had no power to compel the production of evidence at that stage, it was said that they were
‘frequently able to secure the co-operation of individuals and authorities through personal contact’
. It does not appear that this was often done. The option of obtaining expert advice before screening was also discussed.
18.130
The version of the FTP Casework Manual published in April 2003 emphasised that the amount of evidence required by the screeners was
‘minimal’
. They simply needed to have enough information to understand what the allegation was. Caseworkers were enjoined to have this
‘very firmly in mind’
when deciding what information should be collected before screening. The
‘menu of evidence-collection options’
open to caseworkers at this stage included the following:
disclosing the complaint to the doctor and inviting comments. (This practice of disclosing a complaint to a doctor before screening was, as I have said, introduced in response to the recommendation made in the 1996 PSI Report.)
disclosing the doctor’s comments to the complainant, giving the opportunity for further comment. (This practice was introduced in July 2000 in anticipation of the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998. Prior to that, neither the medical screener nor the PPC had had any comments from the complainant in relation to the doctor’s response to the complaint.)
if the complainant provided further comments, disclosing those comments to the doctor for his/her further observations
obtaining medical records in an appropriate case
making enquiries with the doctor’s employers or PCO. (I shall deal with this option later in this Chapter.)
seeking evidence or statements from potential witnesses by correspondence or through the GMC’s solicitors. (This was said to be necessary in some cases to clarify the nature of the allegations against the doctor. However, staff were cautioned against holding up a screener’s decision by
‘chasing evidence required only at a later stage’
.)
seeking an expert medical opinion in cases involving issues which appeared
‘very complex and unusual’
and where there was no form of medical opinion already included with the complaint.
18.131
It is clear from the contents of the April 2003 FTP Casework Manual that the aim at this stage of the GMC procedures was not to conduct a thorough investigation of the circumstances of the complaint. Rather it was to ensure that the medical screener had the
‘minimal’
evidence required for his/her purposes, i.e. for the purpose of deciding whether the complaint raised a question of SPM.
18.132
There were a number of problems with this approach. First, that evidence which was regarded by a member of the GMC staff as
‘minimal’
but adequate might be regarded by a medical screener as insufficient to found a
case of SPM. The case might, therefore, fail at the screening hurdle when, had more evidence been available, this would not have happened. Second, in a case involving allegations of substandard clinical practice, it is essential to establish the factual basis first, in order that any expert opinion obtained (and that any opinion formed by the medical screener) should not be based upon a misunderstanding of the facts. Third, in the absence of the full facts, a screener might be tempted to make assumptions about what had occurred. Fourth, the complaint, as initially recounted by the individual concerned, might not have been immediately recognisable as serious; this might have become evident only if the complaint had been properly investigated.
18.133
In December 2003, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that, in general, there was still limited evidence gathering prior to a screening decision. He observed that the existing procedures appeared a ‘paradox’. A complaint was screened, referred to the PPC, referred on to the PCC, charges were formulated, and only at that point did the GMC set about finding evidence to support the charges. He referred to this process as ‘putting the cart before the horse’. He went on to say:
‘The more rational way may be to gather such evidence as appears to you to be relevant and then you formulate the charges accordingly. That has been an impediment I think to progress throughout the 1990s, which will not be fully resolved until new procedures come into play ... .’
18.134
That reference to the new procedures, and the changes that would come about as a result, was echoed by other witnesses from the GMC. I shall consider the new procedures, and their implication for investigation of complaints, in
. However, I cannot understand why, having recognised the deficiencies in their existing procedures, the GMC felt it necessary to wait for the introduction of the new procedures before instituting proper investigative procedures.
18.135
In 2003, the GMC began to recruit a team of solicitors, paralegals and support staff. Mr Scott said that he had expected that, when complete, the team would number about 20 people in all. Mr Scott did not suggest, at the time he gave evidence in December 2003, that the job of the team was to gather evidence about complaints in the early stages. Rather, the team appeared to be assuming the role previously carried out by private firms of solicitors who had been retained by the GMC to prepare cases for hearing by the PCC and, possibly, the role of counsel who had previously presented the cases to the PCC. In 2004, the GMC has advertised with a view to recruiting investigators and I assume that these people will be used to investigate cases under the new procedures.
Statutory Declarations
18.136
For many years, the GMC Rules required complaints made by private individuals (but not those made by persons acting in a public capacity), together with statements from witnesses in support of such complaints, to be supported by statutory declarations. The purpose of this requirement was to establish the
bona fides
of the complainant and his/her witnesses. It was also intended to deter the making of malicious complaints. However, its effect, as the GMC eventually recognised, was to deter genuine ones. In general, complainants were asked to provide one or more statutory declaration immediately after a decision had been taken by the medical screener that a complaint should be taken forward. If no statutory declaration was provided, the referral to the PPC would not proceed. In the case of the complaint about Shipman in respect of Mr J, the complainant was told that both the complainant’s evidence and that of the principal witnesses would have to be supported by statutory declaration. In general, the complainant was required to make the necessary arrangements and to bear the cost of providing the statutory declaration. If the complainant was able to draw up the statement him/herself, the cost of swearing it was relatively modest. If, however, the complaint was more complex and the complainant required the assistance of a solicitor to draft a statement, the cost would be substantial enough to deter many people. The very fact of having to approach a solicitor to have a statement sworn may have been intimidating to some. In the 1996 PSI Report, Professor Allen and her colleagues recommended that the requirement for a statutory declaration should be reviewed.
18.137
It is clear from the 1994 Training Manual that the GMC staff were well aware of the financial and other burdens placed on complainants in connection with the obtaining of a statutory declaration. They sought, wherever possible, to advise and assist complainants in order to keep expense to a minimum. However, there was recognition that, in most cases, it would be necessary for complainants to approach a solicitor in order for the statutory declaration to be obtained. In later years, financial assistance was available to complainants in certain circumstances. However, they had to ask for it and many were unaware that this was possible. The witnesses agreed that the requirement for a statutory declaration had had the effect of discouraging some complainants from pursuing their complaints. Mr Howes accepted in evidence that ‘many, many complainants’ had not provided statutory declarations when required to do so. He said that he and other members of staff had not wanted the requirement for a statutory declaration to be an undue barrier to making a complaint but it had been part of the Rules and it was not for the staff to try to bypass the requirement. Nor, he said, did the staff have any authority to say to every single complainant that the GMC would authorise and pay for the declaration. He said:
‘... I think we were all the time pushing at the boundaries of how we could help people and in how many cases we could perhaps find money to help them and so on. But it was a question of pushing back the boundaries, particularly as there was a strong feeling I think that on the medical side of the argument that we should not be helping complainants at all in this way.’
18.138
He said that the GMC was ‘walking the tightrope between the public interest and the professional interest’. It was there to sit in judgement on a complaint, not to help the complainant or to ‘side with’ the doctor. If the staff bent over backwards to make sure a complainant’s case was supported, the view of the medical profession might be that the GMC was clearly siding with complainants all the time. Doctors would question how they could get a fair hearing at the GMC. He said that one had to be seen to be fair and also, from the complainant’s point of view, had to be seen not to be putting an ‘absolutely insurmountable barrier’ in his/her way. He went on:
‘... every time that the Procedure Rules were in front of the Council for some sort of amendment, this is the sort of issue that would be raised, is it not about time we took away our insistence that they make sworn statements and this argument would then be in front of the Council and people would stand up, some of them saying, “I think we should continue with sworn statements,” and others saying, “No, this is quite wrong and it is a terrible burden on complainants and unnecessary.”
So you would get this argument and then the latest outcome was that they should not be - this requirement should at last be taken away and that was relatively recently. Until then the argument had always been
won
from the other angle.
I am not saying it was always profession against lay, but I think probably the argument was very much one of “Is this fair to the doctor?” against “Is this fair to the complainant?” ’
Mr Howes said that the GMC was ‘in an impossible position’. He went on to say that he thought things gradually improved and that the GMC now gave much more help to complainants.
18.139
The fact that many complainants failed to provide a statutory declaration must inevitably have meant that cases of potential SPM were lost to the system. In addition, it is clear that the requirement must have created the impression, in the eyes of many complainants, that the GMC was not prepared to take the complaint seriously or to ‘trouble’ the doctor with it until evidence of a very high standard had been produced. In short, it gave the impression that the GMC was ‘on the doctor’s side’.
18.140
The requirement for a statutory declaration was eventually abolished in November 2002.
18.141
It is evident that, up to now, the GMC has done little to investigate complaints made to it unless and until those complaints have been referred by the PPC to the PCC. At that point, solicitors retained by the GMC have taken over preparation of the case for hearing. The complaint has then been subjected to investigation by someone with a degree of independence and some expertise in investigation. In a very few (usually high profile) cases, investigations have been put in train at an earlier stage. The vast majority of complaints - in particular those made by private individuals and those relating to substandard clinical practice - have been closed well before that point. They have been closed without any personal contact with the complainant and without any attempt to elucidate the complaint or to find evidence that might support or refute it. In a treatment case, medical records may have been obtained and, in a complex case, expert evidence sought. Where the facts were very uncertain, however, expert evidence might be of limited assistance unless and until the facts were clearer. It seems likely, as Professor Allen and her colleagues believed, that complaints which would have amounted to SPM have been screened out as a result of lack of investigation.
18.142
The fact is that the GMC’s policy has been to refer complaints about medical treatment back for local investigation by NHS bodies, in effect relying on those bodies to do the investigation for it. Until the NHS body provided the evidence to the GMC as a package, the GMC was unlikely to act. The wisdom of pursuing this policy was obviously questionable because, as the GMC itself has recognised, the quality of local investigation was very variable and much depended on the determination of the complainant to reach a proper resolution of the issues rather than a fudging of them. There is no way of knowing how many cases that should have been dealt with by the GMC were not.
18.143
The idea that the GMC should establish an investigation unit to gather evidence about complaints at an early stage in its process is not a new one. The Merrison Committee recommended this step almost 30 years ago. Like Mrs Robinson in 1988, I was extremely surprised in 2003 to learn that, until very recently, the GMC had had no in-house investigative expertise.
18.144
It seems to me that there are a number of reasons why the GMC has not undertaken any investigation of complaints at the pre-screening stage. Part of the explanation lies, I believe, in the history to which I referred at
paragraph 18.111
. In the past, a private individual who wanted to bring a complaint against a doctor bore the entire responsibility for assembling the necessary evidence and for presenting the case at a hearing. More recently, although complainants still had the right to present cases before the PCC if they chose, the more usual arrangement was for the GMC to ‘take over’ complaints once they had been referred to the PCC. The GMC would then be responsible for preparing the case and presenting it at the hearing; the complainant’s role would be that of a witness only. However, the principle that it was for the complainant to establish the basis of the case at the outset, by providing the necessary evidence, lingered on. There does not appear to have been any real appreciation of the difficulties this caused for complainants. Nor was there any recognition of the fact that, if a complainant was unable or unwilling to take the necessary steps to assemble the evidence, this might mean that a complaint of real substance was lost to the regulatory process, with a concomitant risk to the public and to patients.
18.145
There was also the view that it was the GMC’s role to act as independent arbiter, not to assist in gathering evidence to support one party to the complaint or the other. It seems to have been thought that to investigate a complaint was in some way ‘anti-doctor’. In an organisation where most members are elected by the profession, a member who advocated the robust investigation of all complaints might have been unpopular with his/her constituents. I have the clear impression that some members took a view that was protective of the interests of doctors and would have opposed investigation of complaints on principle. There seems to have been a failure to recognise that an investigation of the circumstances surrounding a complaint should not be partisan. Its purpose should have been, as the Merrison Committee recognised, to enquire into the facts
‘in a preliminary and neutral way’
. Moreover, the notion that it would be ‘unfair’ to doctors for the GMC to undertake an investigation of complaints failed to take account of the imbalance in the relationship between the complainant and the doctor about whom the complaint had been made. The former lacked the resources to investigate; the latter was generally supported by expertise and funding from his/her medical defence organisation and had ready access to expert medical opinion.
18.146
I believe that another reason for the failure to investigate has been the issue of resources. Investigation is an expensive process and if all, or most, complaints from private individuals had been subjected to a reasonable level of investigation, this would have placed a considerable burden on the medical profession. A GMC member who voted in favour of employing a team of investigators might well have lost his/her seat on the Council. There has also been a lack of investigative expertise among existing GMC staff and, indeed, an apparent lack of understanding of how an investigation should be undertaken.
18.147
Another reason is the problem that I have mentioned before, namely the lack of clarity about the GMC’s role. If the GMC had made it clear that its function was to consider only serious complaints which had already been identified and investigated by others, and that it was not prepared to undertake any investigations unless there was no other body available to do so, that might have represented a perfectly reasonable position for a regulatory body to take. Such a stance would have thrown into sharper focus the patchy quality of investigations carried out by NHS organisations and the virtual absence of any local investigation of complaints about a GP. But, instead, the GMC has at all times held itself out as a willing recipient of complaints direct from members of the public. I have in mind such publications as ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’ and its successor, ‘Referring a doctor to the GMC - a Guide for Patients’. Although, at times, these publications made oblique references to the limited jurisdiction of the GMC, the general impression they conveyed was that the GMC would receive and investigate any complaint about a doctor and would also give advice. Many complainants to the GMC, as we have seen, have been sent away to make use of local procedures. Those members of the public who were not dealt with in that way have expected that their complaints would be properly investigated and determined. They have never been told by the GMC that it is not prepared to do this. Indeed, many individuals whose complaints have in the past been rejected by the GMC will have had no idea that the only action which the GMC took in relation to their complaint was to show it to a medical screener who screened it out. For many years, there has been a gulf between public perception of the GMC as a proactive investigator of complaints against doctors and the reality. The GMC has failed to recognise this gulf or, if it has recognised it, has failed to take any action to bridge it. Moreover, it has failed to recognise that its lack of investigation has meant that some complaints which might have amounted to SPM have failed, with potentially serious implications for patient safety.
18.148
The Inquiry has been told that, under the new FTP procedures, things will be different and complaints will be investigated properly before a decision is made whether to take them forward or to reject them. I shall discuss the GMC’s assertions about the future in
, when I examine its proposed arrangements for the new ‘investigation stage’.

--- Introduction ---
18.1
I have already explained that the General Medical Council’s (GMC’s) old conduct procedures dealt with doctors who had been convicted of criminal offences and those who were alleged to have been guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM). All complaints about a doctor’s conduct and all information that a doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence received by the GMC were considered first by members of the administrative staff. I have already explained in
that complaints made to the GMC underwent a series of filtering processes. As a result of those filtering processes, the vast majority of cases were closed without reaching the stage of a public hearing by the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC).
18.2
The first of those filtering processes was conducted by the administrative staff, who applied various set criteria in order to determine whether a case should be closed at that initial stage or whether it should advance into the fitness to practise (FTP) procedures. In 2003, members of the administrative staff were responsible for closing 65% of the 3821 complaints about doctors’ conduct or performance which were received by the GMC in that year. In view of the fact that so many cases were closed at this early stage, as a result of decisions taken by the administrative staff, it was clearly important for the Inquiry to examine the processes undertaken by the staff and the criteria on which their decisions were based.
18.3
In this Chapter, I shall describe briefly the processes undertaken by the administrative staff on receipt of a complaint or report about a doctor. I shall consider the circumstances in which members of staff were in the past permitted to close a case and the criteria which they were required to apply. I shall also look at the procedure for dealing with information about convictions. I shall examine the extent to which the decisions made by members of staff were subjected to audit.
18.4
I shall then proceed to consider some specific issues arising from the processes undertaken by members of staff. In particular, I shall be considering the policy of the GMC, which was current for many years, of instructing its staff to advise complainants that they should pursue their concerns through local complaints procedures. I shall also consider whether there was any, or any adequate, follow-up of such cases by the GMC. I shall go on to consider whether complaints and reports to the GMC have in the past been properly investigated. I shall consider whether there has in the past been an adequate exchange of information between the GMC and the employers and primary care organisations (PCOs) of doctors in respect of whom complaints have been made. Finally, I shall examine some problems which have arisen in connection with decisions to close cases, by reference to some individual cases which have been dealt with by the staff. To enable me to do this, the Inquiry obtained and examined a small number of cases which had recently been closed by members of the administrative staff. The intention behind examining these cases was to gain some insight into how the processes described by the GMC worked in practice.
Witnesses
18.5
The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Mr Alan Howes (who was employed by the GMC between 1977 and 2002 and was Head of the Conduct Section from 1987 to 1994), from Mr Antony Townsend (Deputy Head, later Head, of the Conduct Section from 1994 to 1998), Mr Finlay Scott (Chief Executive of the GMC since 1994) and Mr Neil Marshall (Head of the Screening Section since March 2002). Professor Sir Graeme Catto (current President of the GMC), Dr Krishna Korlipara (a member of the GMC since 1984 and a medical screener from 1998 until 2004) and Professor Isobel Allen (Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute (PSI)) also gave relevant evidence.
The Screening Section
18.6
Information about convictions, together with all complaints and communications about doctors, were dealt with initially by the Screening Section. The exception was when the information or complaint clearly related to issues affecting the health of a doctor. Those cases were directed straight to the Health Section. The Inquiry was told that, as at December 2003, the staff of the Screening Section consisted of three casework managers, 29 caseworkers, 11 casework assistants and a secretary. A caseworker had the primary day-to-day responsibility for each case, with guidance from casework managers and administrative support from casework assistants.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: Initial Stages Conducted by the Administrative Staff


========================================================================
CHAPTER NINETEEN - The General Medical Council's Conduct Procedures: Screening
========================================================================

--- Some Problems with the Screening Process ---
19.173
As I have already explained, the judicial reviews have provided examples of cases in which screeners have applied the wrong screening test and have taken irrelevant considerations into account. It appears that those errors were made as the result of ignorance of the correct test and the considerations relevant to it. However, in the course of its investigations, the Inquiry has also become aware of a number of situations in which screeners have been unwilling to abide by internal GMC decisions.
‘Serious Professional Misconduct by Definition’
The General Medical Council Agrees to Automatic Referral to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
19.174
As I have explained, Professor Allen and her colleagues were anxious to promote changes in the GMC procedures which would secure greater consistency in decision-making. Accordingly, in the period before the start of their follow-up study in 1999, Professor Allen agreed with the GMC that there were a number of categories of cases which should ‘by definition’ be regarded by the medical screeners as SPM. The categories to which it was agreed that this approach should apply were complaints about dishonesty, about dysfunctional behaviour (e.g. abusive behaviour, soliciting money from patients, persisting in practice when the carrier of an infectious disease, etc.), about sexual assault and indecency and about violence. Cases falling within these categories were to be referred automatically by the medical screener to the PPC, unless the medical screener considered that one of two exceptions applied. These exceptions were, first, where the doctor was terminally ill and not in active practice and, second, when there was no tenable basis for taking action because the complainant had declined reasonable requests for further information, there was no probative evidence to support the allegation(s) (or any prospect of obtaining any) or the complaint was self-evidently untrue or irrational. The types of behaviour which amounted to ‘SPM by definition’ were clearly indicated on the SDFs which were introduced at that time to assist screeners in the decision-making process.
The Impact of Automatic Referral
19.175
The introduction of the ‘SPM by definition’ categories led initially to a dramatic increase in the number of complaints of dishonesty, dysfunctional behaviour, sexual assault and indecency, and violence referred by the medical screeners to the PPC. In 1997 and 1998, only about half of all complaints about dishonesty and criminality referred to the medical screeners - and far fewer complaints relating to the other categories of ‘SPM by definition’- had been referred by the medical screeners to the PPC. By contrast, during the period from July to December 1999, 93% of all cases within the ‘SPM by definition’ categories were referred to the PPC. In the other 7% of cases, the reason given by the medical screeners for not referring the case was that
‘there was no probative evidence to support the allegation nor any prospect of obtaining any’
19.176
The 2000 PSI Report welcomed the consistency of approach which the introduction of the ‘SPM by definition’ categories had produced. Indeed, it suggested that there was an argument in favour of the GMC staff referring all complaints of dishonesty, dysfunctional behaviour, sexual assault and indecency and violence straight to the PPC on receipt, without any intervention at all by the medical screener. Professor Allen and her colleagues pointed out that, for such cases, consideration by both the medical screener and the PPC seemed to be an unnecessary duplication of effort. It also caused delays, which were a cause of concern, particularly when a case appeared to raise a question of risk to the public.
A Surprising Retreat
19.177
As I have said, the GMC had agreed to the introduction of ‘SPM by definition’ and suitable SDFs had been designed by the PSI team in consultation with the GMC. Mr Scott said that there had been a ‘very strong commitment’ to ‘SPM by definition’ and ‘huge enthusiasm’ about implementing the new procedure. In July 2000, a meeting of the Council considered the 2000 PSI Report. The briefing papers for the meeting referred to cases of ‘SPM by definition’ and indicated that such cases would normally be referred by the medical screeners to the PPC. This and other changes had, it was said,
‘produced substantial improvement in the robustness of the procedures’
. Anyone reading those papers would have understood that the system whereby certain types of complaints were regarded by definition as constituting SPM and were referred to the PPC more or less automatically was in operation and producing benefits.
19.178
The same impression would have been gained by anyone reading the November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook, which stated:
‘In cases where the alleged behaviour is characterised as SPM by definition - and assuming that the screener agrees with the categorisation - the screener would have no choice but to refer the case on (rather than close it), unless exceptionally the low evidential test is not met.’
19.179
When they undertook their work in 2002, Professor Allen and her colleagues understandably assumed that virtually 100% of cases in the ‘SPM by definition’ category and all convictions (save those specifically excepted) would have been referred by the medical screeners to the PPC. As far as they were aware, the system was still in operation as agreed with the GMC in early 1999 and they had not been informed otherwise. It was with surprise, therefore, that they discovered that, in the dishonesty/criminality category, only 47% of cases which had gone to the medical screeners in 2000 had been referred to the PPC, rising to 74% in 2001. In both years, a fifth of the cases that had not been referred to the PPC had been screened out on the ground that they did not raise a question of SPM. This is hardly consistent with their being categorised as ‘SPM by definition’. In addition, 19% of cases in the dishonesty/criminality category in 2000 and 7% in 2001 had been referred by screeners to the health procedures. In the dysfunctional behaviour category, only about 70% of cases seen by the medical screeners had been referred by them to the PPC in 2000 and 2001. Again, this proportion fell significantly short of the almost 100% which had been expected.
19.180
When Professor Allen asked about these findings, members of the GMC staff explained that there had been a change of practice in mid-2001. From that time, she was told, there was no longer a requirement that complaints falling within the ‘SPM by definition’ category should be referred to the PPC in the absence of overwhelming reasons why this should not be done. Instead, medical screeners had been using their own discretion when deciding whether or not to refer such cases to the PPC. The contents of the SDF had even been changed to facilitate this. It is clear from the statistics that, even in 2000, medical screeners (or some medical screeners at least) had not in fact been implementing the policy in accordance with the agreement reached the year before.
19.181
Professor Allen told the Inquiry that the change of practice had seemed to her ‘such an extraordinary thing to do’. Automatic referral had been an agreed policy. She had asked the GMC for an explanation for the change but had not been given one. She was, however, told that the change of practice would be reversed so as to restore the system which had been agreed upon in March 1999.
19.182
Dr Korlipara, a member of the GMC and a medical screener between 1998 and 2004, was asked about this change of practice. When he was shown the categories of conduct which it had been agreed should be treated as ‘SPM by definition’, he said that, if a screener was satisfied as to the strength of the allegation and if there was
evidence to support the allegation, the screener had to refer such cases to the PPC. If one of those categories applied, he said, ‘There is no question at all, they would go to the PPC.’ However, when asked about the specific example of theft, Dr Korlipara said that there were circumstances in which he had decided that a case of theft need not go to the PPC. The example he gave was:
‘If it was a small amount of money or National Health resources which is, you know, taking paracetamol or something like that having been stolen, which is technically correct, I may not take the issue further.’
19.183
He said that he would exercise some discretion in order to distinguish between the ‘frivolous’ and the ‘rather more serious’. Dr Korlipara did not appear to appreciate that, by doing this, he was undermining the procedure laid down for screening complaints that had been identified as amounting to ‘SPM by definition’. Nor, apparently, did he appreciate that this could be a source of unfairness to doctors. If a doctor’s case was screened by one of Dr Korlipara’s colleagues, who was adhering to the ‘SPM by definition’ rule, that case would be sent to the PPC; if, however, the same doctor’s case was screened by Dr Korlipara, it would be closed. Dr Korlipara’s response also failed to take account of the fact that different people might take very different views about whether the theft of money (even a small amount of money), or the theft of drugs from the NHS, could ever be regarded as ‘frivolous’. Indeed, the ‘SPM by definition’ procedure was aimed at reducing the inconsistency flowing from the fact that individuals may have differing views about the approach to be adopted to certain types of misconduct, including dishonesty.
19.184
It appears that there was what Mr Finlay Scott, the GMC’s Chief Executive, termed a period of ‘incomplete compliance’ with the ‘SPM by definition’ procedure by medical screeners. During that time, medical screeners (or some of them) were not sending all the cases within the relevant categories to the PPC. The medical screeners then indicated to members of the GMC staff that they wanted the SDF changed, and the GMC staff complied. Those changes were made without the knowledge of the Council or the FPPC and without the knowledge of Mr Scott. The first he knew of it was early in 2003, when Professor Allen drew his attention to what had occurred.
19.185
The changes to the SDF consisted of moving various types of conduct from the list of types of misconduct to be regarded as ‘SPM by definition’ and placing them in the list of types of conduct which might raise an issue of SPM. In the latter (‘SPM by discretion’) case, the screener would be permitted to exercise his/her discretion in deciding whether the conduct did raise an issue of SPM. The types of misconduct which were moved from one list to another were:
in the category ‘dishonesty’
false certifications
false reporting
false claims about effectiveness of treatment
in the category ‘dysfunctional conduct’
abusive behaviour
driving under the influence of alcohol/drugs (where there had been no conviction)
failure to report dysfunctional colleagues
soliciting money from patients.
The provision of a misleading reference, which had previously been designated as a type of conduct to be regarded as ‘SPM by definition’, did not appear at all on the new version of the SDF.
The Reasons for the Retreat
19.186
In March 2003, after the change in the agreed policy on ‘SPM by definition’ had come to light, Mr Neil Marshall, who had been the Head of the Screening Section since March 2002, prepared a briefing paper for a meeting of the FPPC. He advanced two reasons for the change of practice. First, he said that the screeners had felt that some cases falling into the categories of conduct designated as ‘SPM by definition’ might form part of a pattern of poor performance, so that a referral to the performance procedures would be more appropriate than referral down the conduct route. If screeners were constrained to refer cases to the PPC, the opportunity of referring for a performance assessment would be lost since the PPC could not make such a referral. I can see that ‘abusive behaviour’ might possibly be part of a wider pattern of poor performance. However, I must say that I cannot see how such behaviour as soliciting money from patients, false certifications, false reporting and false claims about effectiveness of treatment could ever be considered as examples of SDP.
19.187
Second, the screeners had, it was said, been concerned at the loss of their discretion to close cases involving complaints about these categories of behaviour on the grounds that the complaints did not raise a question of SPM. I must say that I find it very worrying that any medical screener should have considered that allegations of conduct such as soliciting money from patients, making false claims about the effectiveness of treatment or writing false certificates or reports could ever fail to raise a question of SPM. This is especially so since all the medical screeners were required to do was to refer such cases automatically to the PPC. The PPC provided another filtering process before a case went to the PCC. The screeners were not required to make a final judgement as to whether the conduct complained of amounted to SPM or required a public airing before the PCC.
19.188
Mr Marshall’s paper set out the history of what had occurred and the steps that were to be taken to reinstate the agreed policy. In that paper, the issue of the medical screeners’ concern about loss of discretion was further illustrated:
‘... the Screeners felt that they had lost the discretion to close cases where the allegation, as stated by the complainant, might well be very serious, but where other relevant information seemed to suggest that the doctor’s failings had been of a less serious nature. The example often quoted was where allegations of indecency made by the complainant seemed to the Screeners to be more a case of poor communication as to the reasons for an intimate examination being carried out.’
19.189
As it happens, indecency was not one of the types of behaviour that was removed from the list on the SDF of misconduct to be regarded as amounting to ‘SPM by definition’. Nevertheless, it seems clear that, on occasion, screeners rejected such claims on the grounds that they did not amount to SPM. To dismiss an allegation of indecency as a problem of
‘poor communication’
, without hearing evidence from the doctor and from the patient, seems highly unsafe. In effect, a screener who refuses to refer such a case to the PPC is making a value judgement about the truth of, and about the weight to be attached to, the complainant’s complaint and the doctor’s response. That is not the function of a screener. Mr Scott told the Inquiry that, although he did not have the full facts, the conversations he had had with medical screeners suggested that they would have sought to exercise discretion in ‘probably quite a small number of instances’ of complaints of indecency. However, the GMC’s FTP statistics for 2002 show that, of 65 cases involving allegations of sexual assault and indecency against doctors considered by the screeners, no fewer than 25 were closed by them. The other 40 such cases were referred by the screeners to the PPC. In 2003, 17 out of 40 such cases were closed by the screeners.
19.190
Mr Scott referred to an ‘understandable frustration’ on the part of the screeners at being part of a ‘mechanical processing system’ and the wish of those individuals to ‘add value’ by exercising their discretion. Mr Scott observed that there had been a tendency for screeners (especially those who had been used to sitting on the PCC) to ‘slip into’ the weighing of evidence and, in effect, to step beyond their role as screeners. He said that there was also a danger that medical screeners, who were experienced doctors (and, therefore, experienced decision-makers), would ‘reach into their own experience’ to see whether there might be ‘an alternative explanation’ for the conduct complained of. He did not believe that this was in any sense motivated by ‘a positive desire to explain it away’ but he thought there might be a ‘subconscious influence there’. He was not able to say whether the ‘subconscious influence’ invariably operated in favour of the doctor against whom the complaint had been made.
Restoring the Status Quo?
19.191
Mr Marshall’s paper revealed that, at a meeting of the screeners held after receipt of the 2003 PSI Paper, there was a division of opinion among them about whether the changes to the categories of behaviour which had been designated as ‘SPM by definition’ (i.e. the removal of the types of conduct listed at
paragraph 19.185
) should be reversed. The matter was put to the FPPC, with a recommendation that all the categories of behaviour listed at
paragraph 19.185
should be reinstated as ‘SPM by definition’. In March 2003, a decision was taken to reinstate the policy which had originally been agreed in March 1999.
19.192
In fact, in August 2003, when the SDF was amended, only some of the types of behaviour listed at
paragraph 19.185
were reinstated as ‘SPM by definition’. Despite the decision of the FPPC, certain types of conduct (i.e. abusive behaviour, driving under the influence of alcohol/drugs, failure to report dysfunctional colleagues and soliciting money from patients) were left in the ‘SPM by discretion’ category. The offence of providing a misleading reference was not replaced in either the ‘SPM by discretion’ or the ‘SPM by definition’ category. That was the position at the time of the Inquiry hearings in December 2003.
19.193
In March 2004, the full Council was asked, in effect, to ratify the FPPC’s decision to restore the policy in relation to ‘SPM by definition’ and to agree the types of complaint or allegation that should, for the purposes of screening, be regarded as ‘SPM by definition’. The briefing paper for the Council stated:
‘In mid-2001, changes were made to the SDFs and several sub-categories were removed from SPM by definition. However, in March 2003, the former Fitness to Practise Policy Committee, following discussion at a screeners meeting, restored the 1997
presumably 1999
position.’
19.194
In fact, as I have said, the 1999 position had not been
‘restored’
, since five of the types of behaviour which had in 1999 been classified as ‘SPM by definition’ were no longer so classified. There might have been a good reason why some of the categories were not restored, although I cannot think of any reason why soliciting money from patients or providing a misleading reference could ever fail to raise a question of SPM. However, the concern is that the Council was under the mistaken belief that the
status quo
had been restored when it had not.
19.195
This briefing paper made clear that the category of ‘SPM by definition’ applied only for the purpose of screening, and did not apply to the PPC or the PCC. Thus, it remained possible for the PPC to decline to refer to the PCC a case involving conduct amounting to ‘SPM by definition’. The Council proceeded to approve the list of cases to be regarded as ‘SPM by definition’, thereby affirming the list set out in the August 2003 SDF.
Observations
19.196
Mr Scott told the Inquiry that he had three concerns about the manner in which the policy agreed in March 1999 had been changed unofficially. First, he felt that the change had been a retrograde step. Given the fact that there was concern about possible bias within the GMC, he felt that it was necessary for the organisation to ‘seize every opportunity to place itself above suspicion’. He said that he ‘deeply regretted’ that an opportunity to do this had been missed during the period for which the policy had been unofficially changed.
19.197
Second, Mr Scott said that he felt that he had failed in communicating to other members of the GMC staff the importance that he attributed to the SDF as originally conceived and to the concept of ‘SPM by definition’. He had been involved in the drafting of the SDF and felt strongly about it. Third, Mr Scott was disappointed that it was not, as he put it, ‘so blindingly obvious to everyone’ that the categories designated in the original SDF were (as they were described) types of behaviour which, by definition, must amount to SPM.
19.198
I can well understand Mr Scott’s concerns. Bearing in mind that it was the inconsistencies in screeners’ decisions that led to the introduction of the concept of ‘SPM by definition’, the unilateral decision of the screeners to revert to the old practice of exercising discretion in such cases calls into question their suitability as decision-makers in a disciplinary process where consistency of standards and treatment is essential.
Random Distribution of Cases to Medical Screeners
19.199
With effect from January 1997, the GMC had agreed with the PSI team to implement a system of random distribution of cases to screeners. The reason was to eliminate any possibility of bias in allocation. Removal of this bias would permit reliable analysis of screening decisions. Under this system, cases were to be allocated to screeners on the basis of the final two digits of the doctor’s GMC registration number.
19.200
When Professor Allen and her colleagues began to carry out their analyses in 1999, no one told them that the agreed system was not being fully applied. However, it soon became obvious that it was not. Moreover, some screeners were screening a lot more cases than others. Professor Allen and her colleagues were given no clear explanation as to why the system was not being applied. Nor were they told what system of distribution was in fact being applied. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that it ‘was difficult to get a straight answer’ about the matter.
19.201
After discussions between the PSI team and the GMC, it was agreed that, from January 2000, a ‘cab rank’ system of distribution of cases to screeners would be undertaken, in an attempt to eliminate any possibility of bias in allocation. The PSI team recommended that a continuing check should be kept to ensure this was being done. The 2003 PSI Paper showed that the new arrangements for allocation had not had the effect of equalising the numbers of cases dealt with by each medical screener. In 2001, the two most active screeners dealt with twice as many cases as the two least active screeners. Pausing there, I do not see how that could easily be avoided without causing delay; some screeners would have more time to devote to the task than others. However, provided that some sort of ‘cab rank’ system of distribution was being faithfully implemented, the fact that the distribution between screeners was numerically unequal would not affect its randomness. The PSI team carried out no check to ensure that the distribution of cases to screeners was being operated on a random basis. It was assured by the GMC that that was so.
19.202
It was left to the members of the PSI team to find out for themselves in 1999 that the agreed system of distribution was not being implemented. If they had not carried out their work, everyone (except those immediately concerned with the allocation of cases) would have assumed - wrongly - that the system of distribution by GMC registration number was being operated faithfully and that the distribution was random.
19.203
Mr Scott said that, in the past, cases had tended to be allocated according to the specialty of the medical screener. For example, a GP would deal with complaints against GPs. When the new system was introduced, the medical screeners (or some of them) were unhappy, as they thought it more appropriate to continue with the old system. Medical screeners therefore asked to be given certain types of case. They passed cases between themselves. Some undertook more work than others. All these factors led to anomalies in the operation of the new system. Mr Scott said that there was ‘a lack of understanding’, on the part of those involved, of the reason behind the change of system.
Assessment of the Seriousness of the Allegations Contained in a Complaint
19.204
I have said that the 2000 PSI Report contained an analysis of medical screeners’ assessments of the seriousness of the allegations in the complaints screened by them between July and December 1999. That analysis revealed significant variations between individual medical screeners in their assessment of seriousness. The analysis was made possible by the inclusion on the SDFs used by screeners of a section where the medical screener was asked to indicate his/her assessment of the seriousness of the case, using a four-point scale.
19.205
Subsequently, this section of the SDF was removed. It seems that this occurred at the same time as the changes were made to the categories of behaviour which were designated on the SDF as ‘SPM by definition’. That would have been in mid-2001.
19.206
Mr Scott told the Inquiry that he had not been aware at the time that this change had occurred. He did not know how it had come about but did not think that it would have been as a result of unilateral action on the part of members of the GMC staff. Although it is not entirely clear, it seems highly likely that the change came about as a result of the wishes of the medical screeners (or some of them). It is difficult to see who else could have initiated it. It appears that, for some reason, they must have thought that the assessment of seriousness was unnecessary or unhelpful and must, therefore, have suggested to the staff that the relevant section should be removed from the SDF. Mr Scott said that he thought it would have been appropriate for the GMC to have discussed with Professor Allen in advance the likely impact that the change would have on subsequent data collection and analysis.
19.207
The removal of the relevant section of the SDF has had the effect of preventing the type of retrospective analysis which was carried out by the PSI team in 2000. It has also prevented the GMC from conducting any continuing internal audit of screeners’ assessments of ‘seriousness’ during the relevant period. It has, of course, been possible to carry out audits or analyses of the outcomes of screeners’ decisions, e.g. of the proportions of cases closed by individual screeners or referred to the PPC. However, cases can be closed for a number of reasons not related to the seriousness of the behaviour alleged.
19.208
The apparent inconsistencies in the assessments of seriousness by individual screeners revealed by the PSI analysis in 2000 were marked. I should have thought that the GMC would have wanted to carry out further analyses to see whether a greater degree of consistency had been achieved, for example, as a result of the introduction of the ‘cab rank’ system of allocation. I would also have thought that assessments of seriousness would be highly relevant to the development of standards and criteria which Professor Allen and her colleagues had called for in each of the PSI Reports.
19.209
Each of the three changes mentioned above was introduced for very good reasons and with the approval of the GMC. One objective was to ensure that the PSI research would produce useful results. Professor Allen’s brief was to discover whether or not there was any racial bias within the GMC procedures. That, in itself, was an important objective and it is disappointing that the screeners should have had so little understanding of or respect for that objective as to sabotage it in the way they did. However, the changes were also intended to have, and would have had, a wider beneficial effect. The introduction of ‘SPM by definition’ should have produced greater consistency of decision-making, to the benefit of all doctors who might be the subject of complaints to the GMC. Random allocation of cases to screeners would have enabled the GMC to scrutinise the work of different screeners and to identify outliers for self-correction or further training. The recording of degrees of seriousness would have had a similar beneficial effect and would also, as I have said, have formed a useful basis for work on standards and criteria. It is not only disappointing, but also worrying, that an important stage of the conduct procedures was being undertaken by a group of people who had no collective appreciation of the purposes and advantages of the changes introduced and who were prepared to give instructions to staff to alter the systems without referral to the appropriate committee or to Council.
19.210
It is also disappointing that the staff who received instructions to change the system from that which had been agreed should have bowed to the wishes of the medical screeners without drawing these wishes to the attention of Mr Scott. However, I do recognise that, in an organisation such as the GMC, it would be difficult for members of staff to question the propriety of an instruction given by a group of Council members.
19.211
These incidents do, however, clearly demonstrate that the GMC has been unable to control the exercise of discretion by medical screeners. It may be that the history of screening, founded in the exercise of a personal discretion by the President and perpetuated to some extent by the presidential selection of screeners for appointment, explains their attitude. It may be, as Mr Scott suggested, that medical screeners, being experienced decision-makers, were not prepared to take part in a process that allowed as little exercise of discretion as screening should. It seems that the GMC has now realised that screening by members wishing to exercise an autonomous discretion is not appropriate.
19.212
Another feature that I find disappointing is the lack of candour displayed by the GMC when Professor Allen discovered that agreed systems either had not been fully implemented or had not remained in force. I sensed that Professor Allen felt rather embarrassed at having to report to the Inquiry that she had not been told that the agreed systems were not in force and that, when she found out about this, she had been given no explanation.
19.213
A further cause for concern is the fact that the Chief Executive of the GMC was obviously not aware of what was happening in such an important area of its FTP procedures. Members did not know that the directions given with proper authority were not being carried out. That this can happen (more than once) makes it difficult to place reliance on policy statements of the GMC. One cannot be sure that the declared policy is actually being carried out. I have said that the GMC is about to introduce new FTP procedures. The role of screening will be undertaken by case examiners, who will be susceptible to management in a way that screeners were not. However, concerns will remain that there may be a gap between what the GMC decides should be done and what happens in practice.
Developments in the Screening Process since 1998
The Inquiry's Examination of Cases

--- The Role of the Screener from the 1970s until 1996 ---
The 1970s
The Treatment of Convictions
19.8
Rule 5 of the General Medical Council Disciplinary Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1970 (the 1970 Rules) provided that all criminal convictions (save those excepted by a direction of the PeCC) should be referred by the Registrar to the President. The PeCC made an exception for minor motoring offences not involving the abuse of alcohol or drugs; no action was, therefore, taken in relation to such convictions. They were not required to go forward for screening by the President.
19.9
In practice, despite the requirement in the 1970 Rules that all convictions (save excepted convictions) should be referred to the President, it appears that this did not happen. Mr Robert Gray, Assistant Registrar in 1976, when the GMC considered Shipman’s conviction, told the Inquiry that he thought that, by that time, the then President, Sir John (later Lord) Richardson, had arranged with members of the GMC staff that only the most serious convictions should be referred to him. These would include convictions for which a custodial sentence had been imposed and second or third drink driving convictions. The purpose of referring the most serious convictions was not, as I understand it, because there was any doubt as to whether they should be referred to the PeCC; rather, it was because the President wanted to be kept informed about such cases. Other convictions (save for excepted convictions) were to be referred by staff direct to the PeCC. The effect of these arrangements was that all criminal convictions (save for minor motoring offences) were automatically referred for consideration by the PeCC.
The Treatment of Conduct Cases
19.10
By rule 5(1) of the 1970 Rules, the Registrar was also required to refer to the President any complaint made in writing that appeared to him to raise a question as to whether the conduct of the doctor in question constituted SPM. Such cases would be referred to by the GMC as ‘conduct cases’. Rule 5(1) of the 1970 Rules was the forerunner of rule 6 of the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988 (the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules), the operation of which I discussed in the last Chapter.
19.11
Rule 5(2) of the 1970 Rules provided that, in a conduct case and
‘unless it appears to him that the matter need not proceed further’
, the President should set in motion the disciplinary procedures. The question whether a case did or did not
‘need’
to proceed further - and of how to interpret the word
‘need’
- was for the President to decide. The Rules contained no criteria to be applied when making the decision. It seems to me that it was implicit in the Rules that, notwithstanding the fact that the Registrar had referred the case for screening (and must therefore have considered that it raised a question whether the doctor’s conduct amounted to SPM), the President might take the view that the complaint could not, in fact, amount to SPM. In that event, there would be no
‘need’
for the matter to proceed. Other types of consideration spring to mind; for example, if the doctor complained about had already retired from practice, that might provide a sensible reason why there was no
‘need’
for the complaint to proceed. The presence or absence of a ‘
need’
for a case not to proceed further continued to be the test to be applied by medical screeners until August 2000. The test allowed the President/medical screener a wide discretion. Despite the fact that the wording of the test was framed so as to require a case to proceed unless there was a reason why it should not, a high proportion of cases were screened out. This suggests that the screeners might have applied the test in reverse - by screening a case out unless there was an identifiable reason for allowing it to proceed. Evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that the test was indeed applied in reverse. Mr Antony Townsend, Deputy Head, then Head, of the Conduct Section between 1994 and 1998, told the Inquiry that, until the mid-1990s, the ‘old view’ had been that a reason had to be found for referring a case to the PPC.
After Screening
19.12
If the President/medical screener decided that a case
‘need not proceed further’
, the case was closed and no further action was taken. No ‘second opinion’ was sought. If s/he considered that the case should go forward, rule 5(2) of the 1970 Rules required him/her to direct the Registrar to write to the doctor, notifying him/her
‘of the receipt of a complaint or information, and stating the matters which appear to raise a question whether the practitioner had committed’
SPM. The complainant (if there was one and if s/he was a private individual) would be required to provide a statutory declaration and that would be sent to the doctor. The doctor would be informed of the date of the next meeting of the PeCC and would be invited to submit an explanation of his/her conduct. Once these steps had been taken, the President/medical screener would refer the case to the PeCC.
The Screeners
19.13
Until 1973, it was normal practice for the President not only to deal with the screening of cases but also to chair the PeCC and the DC. Lord Cohen of Birkenhead, President from 1961 until 1973, fulfilled all three roles until he fell ill in about July 1973. After that time, Professor Sir Denis Hill, a prominent member of the GMC, was appointed by the President to act as medical screener. Two other members of the GMC also chaired meetings of the DC.
19.14
Over the years, there had been dissatisfaction in some quarters about the arrangement whereby the President decided whether a complaint should be referred to the PeCC, then adjudicated on the same complaint at the PeCC and again at the DC. In 1973, the GMC accepted that it was undesirable for the President to continue to fulfil all three roles. Thereafter, the new President, Sir John Richardson, chaired the DC and Sir Denis was again appointed to act as medical screener and to chair the PeCC. In 1975, the President resumed the roles of medical screener and Chairman of the PeCC. He delegated chairmanship of the DC to another member of the GMC, Mr (later Sir) Robert Wright.
19.15
In 1975, the Merrison Committee recommended that the preliminary sifting (i.e. screening) of cases should be undertaken by the President, assisted by GMC staff and by the proposed investigation unit which I mentioned in
Chapter 18
. The reason for entrusting the task to the President was, the Committee said,
‘the vital nature of the initial sifting task’
. The Committee also recommended that the President should be a member of the new Complaints Committee (subsequently entitled the PPC), which was to replace the PeCC. This was so that the President’s knowledge of a case, derived from his previous screening of it, could be available to the PPC. The Committee recommended that a person other than the President should chair the DC (which was to become the PCC).
The 1980s
The Health Procedures
19.16
The Medical Act 1978, together with the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1980 (the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules), brought into effect many of the changes recommended by the Merrison Committee.
19.17
At the same time, the General Medical Council Health Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1980 (the 1980 Health Rules) came into effect and governed the operation of the new health procedures. They provided that the Council should appoint the President or some other GMC member to undertake the initial consideration (i.e. screening) of cases which raised a question whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. If the President chose to chair the Health Committee (HC), or if for other reasons he did not wish to be appointed as screener for health cases, he was to nominate another member of the GMC for appointment by the Council. The person fulfilling this screening role, who would be medically qualified, became known as a ‘health screener’.
19.18
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules provided that, in any conviction or conduct case where it appeared to the President/medical screener that the doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition, the President/medical screener should direct the Registrar to inform the doctor of the fact and to invite the doctor to furnish medical evidence of his/her fitness to practise. That evidence would then be available to the PPC when it considered the case. The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules also permitted the President/medical screener in such a case to remit the case to the health screener for action under the voluntary health procedures.
The Treatment of Convictions
19.19
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules required the Registrar to refer all convictions to the President/medical screener save for those (i.e. minor motoring offences not involving the abuse of alcohol or drugs) which the PPC had directed need not be referred. In principle, the President/medical screener was required to refer to the PPC every conviction case which had been referred to him. It was, however, open to him to remit a case to the health screener for action under the voluntary health procedures as an alternative to referring the case to the PPC.
19.20
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules introduced an arrangement whereby doctors in conviction cases were invited at an early stage to submit their observations to the GMC. Those observations were then put before the President/medical screener at the time the case was screened. Where the doctor had submitted medical evidence, this might give rise to the case being remitted to the health screener rather than being referred to the PPC. Doctors in conduct cases were not asked for their observations until after the case had been screened so that, in general, the President/medical screener would not have the doctor’s response to the complaint made against him/her.
The Screeners
19.21
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules provided that the President should continue to perform the role of medical screener as before. However, if the President chose to sit either on the PCC or on the new HC or if, for other reasons, the President did not wish to undertake the screening of cases, it was open to him to
‘nominate some other member for appointment’
by the Council as medical screener. Later, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules provided that the Council
‘shall appoint’
the person nominated by the President. In effect, therefore, the appointment was in the hands of the President. The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules also provided that the President could nominate (and the Council was required to appoint) other members of the GMC to act as additional medical screeners in cases where the President or the appointed medical screener was unable to act.
19.22
In 1980, Sir Robert Wright became President. He chaired the PCC until his death in 1981. Sir Denis Hill was again appointed medical screener, both for conduct cases and for cases being dealt with under the new health procedures. He chaired the PPC. In February 1982, Sir John (later Lord) Walton became President. From the beginning of his Presidency until November 1984, he chaired the HC. Initially, Sir Denis continued as screener and Chairman of the PPC. Following the death of Sir Denis in May 1982, the President nominated Dr John Fry, a general practitioner (GP), as medical screener for conduct cases. Dr Fry also chaired the PPC. In November 1984, Sir John ceased to be a member of the HC and became screener for both the conduct and the health procedures. He was assisted by the previous medical screener, Dr Fry. Sir John also chaired the PPC. In November 1987, Dr Steel was appointed as an additional medical screener. Sir John was the last President to act as medical screener.
19.23
Sir Robert (later Lord) Kilpatrick succeeded to the Presidency in February 1989. He chose to chair the PCC. Dr Fry was appointed medical screener, assisted by Dr Steel and Dr (later Dame) Beulah Bewley. Dr Fry also chaired the PPC. From about this time, the medical screener for conduct cases became known as the ‘principal’ medical screener, in order to differentiate him/her from the additional medical screeners. It is apparent that, at least until this time, screening had been the province of very few members of the GMC and all involved had been personally selected by the President of the day.
Chapter XV Procedures
19.24
I have said that, under the 1970 Rules, if the medical screener decided that the complaint need not proceed further, it would be closed. That was also the case under the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules. In May 1981, an informal mechanism for warning a doctor about his/her conduct was introduced. This was intended to permit the GMC to mark its disapproval of conduct that fell short of SPM but was, nevertheless, regarded as unacceptable. The relevant procedures appeared in Chapter XV of the revised version of the GMC Standing Orders published in August 1981.
19.25
The procedures could be used if the medical screener decided that the complaint need not proceed to the PPC but nevertheless considered that the doctor appeared to have behaved in a manner that could not be regarded as acceptable professional conduct. The medical screener also had to be satisfied that the matter was not trivial and that it was desirable, in the public interest, or in order to maintain the reputation of the medical profession, that the GMC should act. In the Annual Report presented to the Council by the PPC in November 1993, the Chapter XV procedures were described as being
‘designed as remedial - to encourage a doctor to review what may have led to a complaint, and preventive - to give advice aimed at avoiding recurrence in future of similar conduct’
19.26
Before taking action under the Chapter XV procedures, the medical screener was required to consult two members of the PPC: one medical member, who was engaged in the same specialty as the doctor in question, and one lay member. If the doctor’s conduct had not already been the subject of an investigation by a court, medical service committee (MSC) or statutory tribunal, the members consulted had to be satisfied of the adequacy of the evidence. Although it was not required by the GMC Rules, the practice was that, when the relevant complaint came from a private individual, the complainant would be asked to submit a statutory declaration before the Chapter XV procedures were started. If a preliminary decision was taken that the Chapter XV procedures should be invoked, the doctor’s observations were invited. The letter seeking the doctor’s observations made clear that no formal disciplinary proceedings were contemplated in respect of the matter about which observations were being sought. The initiation of the procedure effectively ruled out, therefore, the possibility of disciplinary action, even if the doctor’s response was unsatisfactory.
19.27
Once the doctor’s observations were received (or if s/he did not respond), it was open to the medical screener, with the agreement of the other two members, to direct that a letter should be sent to the doctor, containing such advice as the members (including the medical screener) thought fit. The letter would inform the doctor that, if another complaint were to be received subsequently, the present case would be reviewed. If an enquiry about the doctor’s fitness to practise was made to the GMC subsequently, the fact that s/he had received a Chapter XV letter would not be disclosed.
19.28
The Chapter XV procedures could not be used where there had been no previous finding of fact and where the doctor did not accept that there was any foundation for the complaint. In those circumstances, there was nothing the GMC could do, since, when embarking on the Chapter XV procedures, the medical screener would have already decided that formal disciplinary procedures were not appropriate.
19.29
Statistics relating to the number of cases in which action under Chapter XV was taken were reported by the PPC annually to the Council. The statistics show that the Chapter XV procedures were used extensively, particularly in dealing with complaints of poor treatment or substandard clinical practice and with complaints involving allegations relating to the doctor’s personal behaviour. Although, until 1985, the number of cases in which Chapter XV letters were sent remained below 20 a year, the numbers increased markedly thereafter. In the year to 31st
August 1994 and in 1995, 6% of all doctors in respect of whom the GMC received complaints were sent Chapter XV letters. In 1997, 10% of cases screened (i.e. 192 cases) were the subject of Chapter XV action.
The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules
19.30
The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules left the screening test unchanged. The relevant provision was rule 6(3) which provided:
‘Unless it appears to the President
i.e. the medical screener
that the matter need not proceed further, he shall direct the Registrar to write to the practitioner
a) Notifying him of the receipt of a complaint or information and stating the matters which appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct ...’
The Period from 1990 to 1996
The Introduction of Lay Screeners
19.31
Until 1990, members of the GMC who were not medically qualified were not involved in the screening process. In 1990, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were amended to provide for the nomination by the President (and appointment by the Council) of a non-medical member of the GMC to act as a lay screener. In May 1990, Mr (later Sir) Roger Sims was appointed as a lay screener. In November 1991, he was joined by Sir Maurice Shock. Sir Maurice was later replaced by Professor Christine Chapman. The lay screeners did not screen cases alone. They were required to consider only those conduct cases where the medical screener had made a preliminary decision to close the case. If the lay screener did not agree with that decision, a discussion would take place between the two screeners. Ultimately, if no agreement was possible, the case would be referred to the PPC despite the views of the medical screener. Once the performance procedures were introduced in 1997, lay screeners were involved also in screening cases in which the medical screener had made a preliminary decision that the case did not raise a question either of SPM or of seriously deficient performance (SDP). It is perhaps surprising that lay screeners never played any part in the screening of convictions, particularly since, after May 1990, screeners were given a rather wider discretion in connection with their treatment of convictions: see
paragraph 19.33
. I shall discuss the role of lay screeners more fully later in this Chapter.
The Medical Screeners
19.32
In November 1992, Dr Steel replaced Dr Fry as principal medical screener for conduct cases and as Chairman of the PPC. Dr Bewley continued to act as an additional medical screener. Dr Michael Wilson was also appointed as an additional medical screener for conduct cases. In September 1995, Sir Donald Irvine became President of the GMC. The screening arrangements continued as before.
The Treatment of Convictions
19.33
In May 1990, the PPC made a direction giving the medical screeners further discretion in relation to convictions. The direction authorised the medical screeners to exercise their discretion in deciding whether to refer to the PPC convictions which related to any offences committed more than five years before notification to the GMC. Discretion was also given to the medical screeners not to refer a conviction to the PPC if the offence was:
‘... an extremely minor offence which was not ostensibly related to any aspect of the doctor’s professional practice and did not involve conduct likely to bring the medical profession in general into disrepute’
19.34
In January 1995, the PPC endorsed the direction issued in May 1990. However, the terms of the direction were slightly different from those of May 1990. On this occasion, the medical screeners were given authority to exercise their discretion when deciding whether or not to refer to the PPC:
‘... convictions of minor offences not ostensibly related to a doctor’s professional practice, nor involving a degree of dishonesty such as to bring disrepute upon the medical profession’
19.35
In June 1997, a Note was produced for the guidance of new members of the PPC. The Note stated that the PPC had agreed that
‘minor motoring offences such as speeding’
need not be referred to it (in fact, it had directed that such cases should not even be referred to the medical screener), but that
‘other convictions must be referred’
. In fact, this Note, which was designed to be for the benefit of members of the PPC and was not apparently directed to screeners, was not consistent with the 1995 direction. By that direction, screeners had been given a discretion not to refer to the PPC other types of minor convictions, including some minor cases of dishonesty which they judged insufficient to
‘bring disrepute upon the medical profession’
. This may have resulted in members of the PPC having the impression that they were receiving all conviction cases (except minor motoring offences) when in fact they were not.
The Lack of Information about Screening Processes
The Extent of Knowledge among Members of the General Medical Council
19.36
It is evident from what I have said that, up to this time, very few members of the GMC had been involved in the screening process. The process took place in private and was shrouded in a degree of secrecy. Mr Townsend told the Inquiry that screening ‘had traditionally been the preserve of only a very few people’. The Council itself had ‘really very limited information’ about how the screening function was undertaken.
19.37
In 1988, Mrs Jean Robinson, then a lay member of the GMC, expressed concern about the lack of information about the screening process in her publication ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
. She said:
‘From the time I was appointed to the GMC, and was elected to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee, I was asking for further details of rejected cases.
I seemed to be the only member of Council who wanted to know. My request for basic information about the majority of complaints the Council received was sometimes interpreted as distrust of the Screener, who is always an eminent and respected doctor. My view is that I do not care if the Angel Gabriel is Preliminary Screener. Members of the Council and the public have a right to know what kind of complaints the Council receives, whether some kinds are increasing or decreasing, and which get further investigation and which do not.’
Mrs Robinson was concerned also at the lack of lay involvement in screening decisions and at the absence of anyone within the GMC with the power to review or query screening decisions.
19.38
The lack of lay involvement in screening was addressed, as I have said, in 1990, when a non-medical member of the GMC was, for the first time, appointed as a lay screener. However, other members of the GMC continued to receive little information about the screening process. They did not see cases which had been ‘screened out’. The GMC had agreed no criteria for the guidance of screeners when deciding which cases should and should not go forward. There was no internal audit or review of the quality of screening decisions. The only hard information available to members consisted of the statistics relating to the cases dealt with by the GMC, which were published on an annual basis. These statistics shed no light on the seriousness of individual allegations. They did, however, show that the proportion of complaints referred by the screeners to the PPC was small. During the period from 1993 to 1995, no more than 15% of the complaints received by the GMC each year (all of which were at that time referred to a medical screener) were referred by the medical screener to the PPC.
The Information Given to Complainants
19.39
Until 1988, the Professional Conduct Rules did not specify whether complainants should receive notification of the fact that their complaint had been screened out or, if so, what information they should be given. The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules provided that a complainant should be notified of a decision by the President/medical screener not to refer his/her complaint to the PPC. However, complainants were to have no right of access to any document related to the case that had been submitted to the GMC by any other person. Moreover, they were not to be entitled to any explanation of the reasons for the decision not to refer, if the President/medical screener directed that no explanation should be given. This power to refuse to give an explanation continued until 2000, when the Rules were changed: see
paragraph 19.118
. In practice, after 1988, complainants were usually given some explanation of why their case had not been referred to the PPC, although it was not always very comprehensive.
19.40
Neither doctors nor complainants have ever had any right of appeal against, or review of, a decision of a screener, save by means of judicial review. That is an expensive process and one which may be intimidating to many. It was not until 1997 that judicial review was used to challenge a screening decision. Then, for the first time, some light was thrown onto the screening process and screeners were given some idea of whether they were approaching their task in the correct way. For the first time, the GMC gave its screeners authoritative guidance. By the time several cases had gone to judicial review, the GMC and the public were able to gain some insight into the way in which the task was being performed and the criteria, if any, that were being applied.
The Approach to the Screening Process
19.41
I have referred in
Chapter 18
to the Training Manual compiled in 1994 by Mr Alan Howes, who worked in the Conduct Section more or less continuously between 1980 and 1994 and was Head of the Section from 1987 until 1994. The 1994 Training Manual was intended to provide training material for new staff in the Section after Mr Howes’ move from there in 1994. It provides a useful insight into the practices of the time. Part of the 1994 Training Manual set out guidance on initial procedures and on the role of the preliminary (i.e. medical) screener, based on an internal guidance note for new screeners. That guidance note is no longer available.
19.42
The guidance in the 1994 Training Manual stated that, when assessing whether an individual complaint raised any question of SPM, the staff and screeners had to consider two questions:
‘(i) Does the behaviour which is the subject of the complaint relate to the doctor’s professional work or position?
(ii) Is the alleged behaviour so serious that it might justify taking action in relation to the doctor’s registration?’
If the answer to both questions was ‘yes’, the 1994 Training Manual advised that the case was
‘potentially one which falls within the Council’s jurisdiction’
. No guidance was given on the criteria to be used when assessing seriousness.
19.43
The 1994 Training Manual went on to say that it was then necessary for screeners to
‘look at the case forensically, i.e. to consider whether
the available evidence in the case
emphasis in original
would be sufficient to justify referring the matter for a formal inquiry’
. It observed that the issue of sufficiency of evidence was
‘largely a matter of common sense, rather than law’
. The 1994 Training Manual then proceeded to discuss the issue of evidence in a passage which I have already quoted in
Chapter 18
. In short, the guidance in the Training Manual appears to have created a much ‘finer filter’ than was envisaged by rule 6(3), which required the screener to refer a case to the PPC
‘unless it appears to
him/her
that the matter need not proceed further ...’
A Report about Shipman: the Cases of Mr W and Mrs B
19.44
, I described the two complaints made locally about Shipman in 1990 and 1992. In the first, relating to Mr W, the Tameside MSC found Shipman to be in breach of his terms of service; he was warned to comply more closely with them in future. He had made a serious error in prescribing an excessive amount of Epilim to an epileptic patient. The MSC’s finding was not reported to the GMC at the time it was made. In 1993, another MSC found Shipman to be in breach of his terms of service again, this time in respect of an elderly stroke patient, Mrs B. In 1992, he had refused to visit her in response to a request from her relatives and the MSC found that he had not put himself in a position to exercise proper professional judgement about the need for a visit. The case was referred to the Family Health Services Appeal Unit (FHSAU). In May 1994, Shipman was warned again and a recommended withholding of his remuneration of £800 was confirmed. Shipman now had two MSC findings against him. The FHSAU reported Shipman to the GMC and sent the GMC all the papers.
19.45
The GMC papers show that a caseworker prepared a detailed memorandum for submission, first to Mr Howes and then to Dr Steel, the principal medical screener. The memorandum noted Shipman’s convictions in 1976 and the fact that he had been warned by the GMC on that occasion. It set out the facts of both of the more recent cases. In respect of the second case, that of Mrs B, the summary stated that the facts were in issue. The relatives were saying one thing and Shipman another. The summary did not, however, record that the MSC had preferred the evidence of the relatives or why they had done so, matters that were clearly stated in the papers. The MSC had found that Shipman had failed to put himself in a position to find out whether Mrs B needed a visit. The caseworker said that, in view of the disputed evidence, s/he was quite sure that the case would
‘not be a candidate for action within the Rules’
. Later, s/he expressed the view that it would be
‘virtually impossible’
to take such action. Nor would there be
‘very much point’
in taking action under the Chapter XV procedures; Shipman would only repeat his version of events. The caseworker also noted, however, that it would be unusual for the GMC to do nothing in a case where the MSC had recommended a withholding of £800, which, I infer, was considered at that time to be a substantial sum and to be indicative of a serious breach of the GP’s terms of service.
19.46
Mr Howes wrote on the memorandum:
‘The earlier case is too old for us to act now. The more recent case revolves round evidence which is now obscured by time. It would be difficult to unravel this at this stage. An error of judgment clearly occurred, but the MSC have now dealt with the matter and that seems to me to be sufficient.’
19.47
Dr Steel noted:
‘I am in agreement First case is too late and minor second case is borderline Nothing
short word indecipherable, possibly ‘in’
Chapter XV. The latter would be flawed because of lack of admission. Agree no action.’
19.48
At this time, the GMC was preparing for the introduction of performance procedures and was seeking to discover how many cases might arise. In this connection, Dr Steel appears to have completed a performance assessment form relating to the report about Shipman. The form asked three questions. The first was
‘Is there evidence of seriously deficient performance?’
To that, Dr Steel answered
‘yes’
. The second asked,
‘If so, is there evidence of a pattern of poor performance (as opposed to isolated incidents)?’
To that, Dr Steel answered
‘yes - only 2’
. The third asked whether there was also evidence of SPM pointing to conduct proceedings rather than performance action. To that, Dr Steel answered in the negative.
19.49
The case did not go to the PPC. In my view, it should have done. First, although Dr Steel said on the performance assessment form that the case did not show evidence of SPM, he had said in his screening decision that Shipman’s conduct in the case of Mrs B was
‘borderline’
. That must, in my view, mean that some people would take the view that it did amount to SPM. It seems to me certainly arguable that the facts found by the MSC in the case of Mrs B fell into the category of cases described in the early editions of the Blue Book (the GMC’s professional discipline guide) as a serious disregard of professional responsibility or a neglect of a professional duty. The examples of this given in the Blue Book were of failing to visit or to provide treatment for a patient when it was necessary to do so. Moreover, the reliance on the conflict of evidence as a reason not to proceed was quite unsatisfactory. Even recognising that, at the time, it appears to have been thought correct for screeners to consider the strength of the evidence, the medical screener’s decision was plainly wrong. There had been no evidential difficulty for the MSC and there was no reason to suppose that there would be an evidential problem for the GMC if it chose to act. However, the case was closed. I cannot see from the file any sign that closure was agreed by a lay screener as was required by the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules.
Developments in the Screening Process from 1996 to 1997

--- Developments in the Screening Process since 1998 ---
19.82
Additional medical screeners were appointed, making a total of seven in post during most of 1998 and 1999.
Toth
The Complaint
19.83
Despite the advice given in the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, it is clear that some screeners at least did not apply the tests it set out. In March 1998, a medical screener considered a complaint by the father of Wilfred Toth, a five year old boy who suffered from glycogen storage disease. Wilfred had become hypoglycaemic and his father, Mr Arpad Toth, had called the family’s GP, Dr Jarman, who made a home visit. Mr Toth alleged that he and his partner had told Dr Jarman of Wilfred’s condition and of their opinion that he was in urgent need of intravenous glucose. Dr Jarman failed to administer glucose and instead treated Wilfred with sedative drugs. Dr Jarman later denied that he had been informed of Wilfred’s condition or of his need for intravenous glucose. Mr Toth alleged that his untreated condition led to Wilfred’s death a week later. Mr Toth had complained in the first instance to the local Family Health Services Authority (FHSA). A MSC hearing had followed, at which the MSC found Dr Jarman in breach of his terms of service in failing to take account of Mr Toth’s knowledge of Wilfred’s condition. No sanction was imposed. Some time later, a claim for damages in respect of Wilfred’s death was settled on payment by Dr Jarman of the sum of £10,500, a sum which implies an admission of full liability. Mr Toth complained to the GMC about Dr Jarman’s conduct.
The Screening Decision
19.84
Having considered the papers, the medical screener decided not to refer the case to the PPC. A lay screener confirmed that decision. A letter was written to Mr Toth (on 23rd
March 1998, i.e. within a year of the production of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook) explaining the decision:
‘There is a clear conflict of evidence between your version of events and that of Dr Jarman’s
sic
on the
matter of disclosure of the need for intravenous glucose
. The standard of proof which the GMC works to, by law, is that of beyond reasonable doubt ... Therefore, unless you are able to provide further evidence of a legal standard ... the members have concluded that there is no prospect of your allegations being proved to the required standard, and no further action can be taken.’
I interpose to say that either the medical and lay screeners or the caseworker who drafted the letter, or possibly all three, seem to have been unaware of the contents of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook insofar as it related to the approach which screeners should take where there existed a conflict of evidence. If aware of it, they had not heeded its contents. Mr Toth made further representations but, four months later, the same medical screener made a second decision confirming the first decision. On that occasion, the lay screener was not consulted.
The Judicial Review
19.85
Mr Toth sought permission to apply for judicial review in respect of both decisions. The GMC obtained legal advice on the application. The advice was received in August 1998 and was to the effect that the screeners had not followed the correct procedure in making their first decision. It was not the role of the screeners to resolve conflicts of evidence. Moreover, the medical screener had had no jurisdiction to reconsider the complaint after the first decision had been made. Nor, as the Judge subsequently found, was the second decision valid, since no lay screener had concurred in it. Having received that advice, the GMC consented to an order quashing the decisions and directing a reconsideration of the case by a different medical screener. The case went before the High Court because Dr Jarman objected to the reopening of his case on the grounds that it would be unfair to him. Judgement in the case was given in June 2000.
19.86
The Judge, Mr Justice Lightman, considered the meaning of the words used in rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules to describe the duty of the screener. That duty was, as I have said, to decide whether the matter
. He contrasted that duty with the function of the PPC, which was, by section 42(2) of the Medical Act 1983, to decide whether the case
‘ought to be referred for inquiry by the Professional Conduct Committee or the Health Committee’
. He said that the screener’s role was:
‘... to decide whether a negative state of affairs exists, namely whether the complaint need not proceed further (as in the ordinary course it would) to the PPC: the only conclusion on the merits of the complaint required of him before he allows the complainant to proceed is that (as the screener is required to inform the practitioner) the matters stated “appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct” ’
19.87
The Judge construed the ‘need’ referred to in rule 6(3) as being ‘the need to honour the legitimate expectation that complaints (in the absence of some special and sufficient reason) will proceed through the PPC to the PCC’. He went on to say:
‘The absence of “need”, of which the screener must be satisfied before he can halt the normal course of the complaint to the PCC, connotes the absence of any practical reason for the complaint so proceeding and that for the complaint to proceed to the PCC would serve no useful purpose. There may be no need because there is nothing which in law amounts to a complaint; because the formal verification
i.e. the statutory declaration
is lacking; because the matters complained of (even if established) cannot amount to serious professional misconduct; because the complainant withdraws the complaint; or because the practitioner has already ceased to be registered. Wider questions as to the prospects of success of the complaint as to whether the complainant is acting oppressively or as to the justice of the investigation proceeding further do not lie within the screener’s remit. So far as they may go to the issue whether the complaint ought to proceed they fall within the remit of the PPC. It is not for the screener to arrogate to himself the role of the PPC and decide whether the complaint ought to proceed further, still less to arrogate to himself the role of the PCC and weigh up conflicting evidence or judge the prospects of success. He must respect the role assigned by the Rules to the PPC (for which the PPC is armed with investigative powers) and recognise that his duty is only to act as a preliminary filter before the more substantive role as filter is exercised by the PPC.’
19.88
He observed further:
‘In the exercise of their respective jurisdictions the screener and PPC should be particularly slow in halting a complaint against a practitioner who continues to practise; as opposed to one who has since retired, for the paramount consideration must be the public’s protection in respect of those continuing to practise; and they should at all times bear in mind the role of the HC whenever questions arise of impairment of fitness to practise by reason of physical or mental condition.’
19.89
The Judge’s conclusion, in the end, was that it would not be unfair to Dr Jarman if the screener’s decision were set aside and Mr Toth’s complaint were reopened. However, the importance of the case lay in the Judge’s analysis of rule 6(3) and of the screening function. In effect, it threw retrospective light on the process of screening as it had been carried out during the past 30 years, and possibly even longer. It demonstrated that screeners had exceeded their powers when they had based their decision on their view of whether the complaint amounted to SPM (as opposed to whether it could do so) and of whether the evidence was sufficient to prove the case. That is not to criticise them personally. They were not lawyers. They had been doing the job as others had done it before them. But it is surprising that, until 1997, nobody in the GMC had apparently felt handicapped by the absence of any guidance as to how screeners should approach their important task.
19.90
Following the decision in
Toth
, which was handed down in June 2000, the screening test was changed in August 2000: see
paragraph 19.120
. However, no corresponding change was made to the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook. Mr Robert Nicholls, a lay member of the GMC who was Chairman of the PPC between November 1999 and June 2003, told the Inquiry that it was his impression that the proportion of cases referred by the screeners to the PPC increased after the decision in
Toth
because screeners became more cautious about closing cases. That impression is not borne out by the statistics. It is true that the GMC statistics show that the proportion of cases referred by screeners to the PPC rose from 30% in 1999 to 39% in 2000. However, the proportions dropped back again to 27% and 25% in 2001 and 2002. In 2003, 33% of cases were referred. However, the numbers of referrals went up from 466 in 2000 to 600 in 2001. It may be that it was this increase in numbers which gave Mr Nicholls the impression that the proportion of cases referred had increased.
Further Work by the Policy Studies Institute in 1998
19.91
In 1998, Professor Allen and her colleagues were commissioned to carry out a follow-up study. Before starting that follow-up study, they conducted an ‘intervention phase’, during which they advised the GMC on certain changes of procedure which should be introduced, including changes to the screening procedures. The idea of the intervention phase was to identify changes which should be made to the procedures before the PSI team carried out the research which was to form the basis of its 2000 Report.
19.92
In an attempt to cut down the screeners’ workload and to avoid duplication of effort, it was agreed that, from March 1999, screeners should not be sent cases which were considered by the GMC to be clearly outside its remit. Instead, those cases would be dealt with by the GMC staff without reference to a screener. This process of ‘filtering out’ cases by the GMC staff had the effect of increasing (in fact, almost doubling) the proportion of cases referred to screeners which were sent on by them to the PPC. The PSI’s figures show that, in 1999, the screeners referred 25% of the doctors they dealt with to the PPC; in 2000, the proportion was 22%. In 1997 and 1998, the figures had been about 11% and 12%. In the GMC FTP statistics for 1999, this increase was attributed in part to a change in the approach to evidence, which, it was said, had taken place in March 1999, as a result of legal advice (possibly advice received in connection with the case of
Toth
). From March 1999, screeners no longer considered whether there was
‘sufficient evidence to substantiate the allegation’
. Instead, they
‘could decide to close a case only if there was no prospect of obtaining probative evidence’
. There does not appear to have been any amendment of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook to reflect this changed approach. However, if such a change of approach had been instituted in March 1999, it might have contributed to the increased proportion of cases referred by screeners to the PPC.
19.93
In September 1998, it was agreed between the GMC and the PSI team that, unless there appeared to be a risk to the public, screeners should be sent cases only when there was sufficient information available to enable them to make a substantive decision. Members of the administrative staff, rather than the screeners, would assume primary responsibility for identifying any further information that was required and for obtaining it. Only when that had been done would the case be submitted to the medical screener, if appropriate. It was also agreed that, in the absence of a perceived risk to the public, cases involving doctors whose identities had not been established would not be sent to the medical screeners. Before 1998, virtually all complaints received by the GMC were referred to the medical screeners. As a result of these various changes, the percentage of complaints received by the GMC which were referred to the medical screeners decreased. The PSI’s figures show that, in 2001, only 41% of complaints went to the medical screeners. The GMC’s own figures reveal that the percentage dropped to about 35% in 2003.
19.94
In addition, the GMC agreed that a more structured approach to screening should be adopted. Standard forms, to be known as screening decision forms (SDFs), were designed by the PSI team in consultation with the GMC. The SDFs were intended for use by caseworkers and screeners as a prompt to ensure that they followed the essential steps of the decision-making process. They were intended also to be a record of that process and, thus, a tool for analysis in the future. It was hoped that they would promote clarity, consistency and transparency.
19.95
The structure of the SDFs divided complaints into four main categories, namely:
complaints which were suitable for closure by GMC staff without reference to a medical screener
reports of convictions, which were to be referred by medical screeners to the PPC except when they were referred into the health procedures
complaints which ‘by definition’ raised issues of SPM (‘SPM by definition’ cases). These comprised complaints involving dishonesty, dysfunctional conduct, sexual assault or indecency and violence. A requirement was introduced that all such complaints should be referred automatically by medical screeners to the PPC unless the screener felt that there were overwhelming reasons for not doing so.
complaints which required the exercise of discretion on the part of the screeners in deciding whether or not they should be referred to the PPC or to the performance procedures (‘SPM or SDP by discretion’ cases).
19.96
Cases falling within category (d) were, in the main, complaints about poor treatment/substandard clinical practice. Screeners were permitted to exercise their discretion in deciding whether to refer such cases to the PPC. The purpose of the introduction of ‘SPM by definition’ was to reduce the proportion of complaints in respect of which screeners were permitted to exercise discretion and, thereby, to promote consistency and to guard against bias and accusations of bias. I shall describe the history of the operation of the ‘SPM by definition’ category later in this Chapter.
19.97
The SDFs also required medical screeners to record, in relation to those cases referred to them, an assessment of whether they believed that there was a current or imminent risk to the public arising from the complaint or conviction. The primary reason for this was to assist in the decision whether an interim order (suspending or imposing conditions on a doctor’s registration pending his/her appearance before a FTP committee) might be necessary. At the time the SDFs were first introduced, medical screeners were also required to record their assessment of the seriousness of the doctor’s alleged conduct using a four-point scale. This assessment was intended to form the basis for analysis of screening decisions in the future. If the medical screeners decided that a case did not raise an issue of SPM or SDP, they were required to record their reasons on the SDF.
The 2000 Policy Studies Institute Report
The Analysis of Screening Decisions
19.98
Initially, GMC staff and screeners had difficulty in getting into the habit of recording the relevant data on the SDFs. The 2000 PSI Report described the introduction of the SDFs as
‘a painful process’
. There was a four-month ‘pilot exercise’ in the early part of 1999. The SDFs were then brought into use on a permanent basis. In the early part of 2000, Professor Allen and her colleagues analysed the contents of the SDFs completed by the medical screeners during the period from 1st
July to 31st
December 1999.
19.99
The PSI team analysed 792 SDFs which had been completed during that six-month period. By that time, the number of medical screeners was seven. The analysis revealed significant variations between the medical screeners in the outcomes of their screening. One medical screener referred 10% of cases that s/he screened to the PPC, while another referred 36%. This suggested that the threshold at which medical screeners felt it appropriate to refer a case on to the PPC differed from screener to screener.
19.100
The analysis also demonstrated striking differences between medical screeners’ assessments of risk and seriousness. Two medical screeners considered that there was a current or an imminent risk to the public in one third or more of the ‘SPM by definition’ cases they screened, while two others considered that there was no risk at all in any of the cases they dealt with. In relation to ‘SPM by discretion’ cases, two of the medical screeners (the same two who had identified a risk in a high proportion of ‘SPM by definition’ cases) considered that more than 40% of cases they screened posed a risk. By contrast, three screeners thought that less than 10% of their cases posed a risk. One medical screener rated nearly 90% of ‘SPM by definition’ cases that s/he screened as
‘very serious’
, while another assessed only 20% of such cases as
‘very serious’
. Classification by medical screeners of ‘SPM by discretion’ cases as
‘not at all serious’
ranged between 28% of the cases handled by one medical screener and 70% of cases screened by another.
19.101
It was difficult to draw any firm conclusions from the variations observed because, as became evident during the PSI study, the distribution of cases to screeners was not random. Thus, the differences could have been explained by bias in the distribution of cases, i.e. by some screeners deliberately being given a greater number of serious cases than others. It could also have been that, by chance, certain screeners were allocated cases of a higher degree of risk and seriousness than those allocated to other screeners. However, the PSI team regarded it as unlikely that either of those possibilities could alone have accounted for the wide range of assessments which they observed. They regarded it as likely that the variations were at least partly due to the fact that different screeners were applying different standards and criteria when judging ‘seriousness’ and ‘risk’.
The Need for Agreed Standards and Criteria
19.102
The marked variations between screeners in terms of the outcomes of the cases screened, and the extent to which they differed in their assessments of the risk and seriousness of cases, caused Professor Allen and her colleagues to reiterate the need (which they had identified in their first Report) for all those involved in the GMC’s FTP procedures to have a common understanding of the standards, criteria and thresholds to be applied at the various stages of the procedures. They believed that the lack of any such common understanding had led to inconsistency in the past. The analysis of SDFs which they had conducted suggested that screeners were applying their own personal interpretations of the threshold for SPM. As a result, cases which might have been referred to the PPC by one screener were considered not to raise an issue of SPM by another. This lack of consistency applied equally to decisions of the PPC, as I shall explain in
19.103
The PSI team identified a need for detailed guidance that could be understood both by doctors and by the general public. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that, while the GMC’s publication ‘Good Medical Practice’ was ‘absolutely fine’ for the purposes for which it was intended, it was not suitable for use as guidance about what might or might not amount to SPM. She said:
‘... “Good Medical Practice” is a mixture of things which really must not be transgressed and which would be very serious and other points which are, for example, being polite to your patients. This on its own could not raise an issue which ought to affect a doctor’s registration presumably; so that you’ve within “Good Medical Practice” a lot of different things at different levels of seriousness ...’
19.104
What was needed, she said, was detailed guidance for those making decisions, with examples of different types of case which might reach different thresholds, thus creating a ‘hierarchy of seriousness’. The 2000 PSI Report recommended that:
‘The GMC should ensure that all those involved in the fitness to practise procedures have a common understanding of what does and does not constitute serious professional misconduct. Guidelines should be drawn up to ensure that a clear and agreed definition can be put into operation by all GMC staff, screeners and members of committees. These guidelines should make clear a) what factors should be taken into account in determining the outcome of cases; b) what standards should be applied in reaching decisions; c) at what point cases “reach the threshold of serious professional misconduct” and represent a departure from the standards of conduct expected of doctors “sufficiently serious to call into question a doctor’s registration”.’
19.105
The PSI team recognised that the existing confusion and inconsistency about the threshold for SPM gave rise to problems not only within the GMC. It also presented a difficulty for members of the public and public bodies who might wish to make a complaint against a doctor. Accordingly, the 2000 PSI Report recommended that:
‘The GMC should develop clear protocols defining the types of cases which do and do not come within the jurisdiction of its fitness to practise procedures. These should be made public and should be available to anyone who wishes to complain about a doctor.’
19.106
Professor Allen told the Inquiry that it was clear that there was confusion both inside and outside the GMC about the types of case that were suitable for referral to the GMC. This was why she and her colleagues thought it appropriate for there to be clear protocols, setting out what was and was not likely to raise an issue of SPM or SDP. This would assist the GMC by relieving it of the burden of a lot of inappropriate complaints. It would also spare members of the public the disappointment of having their complaints rejected.
Problems with Complaints about Poor Treatment and Substandard Clinical Practice
19.107
Professor Allen and her colleagues considered that particular problems existed in applying the concept of SPM to complaints about poor treatment and substandard clinical practice. I agree with that view. SPM is an appropriate expression when the conduct in question comprises, for example, indecent assault, fraud or the dishonest acquisition of controlled drugs. In the context of clinical practice, the word ‘misconduct’ seems to imply a deliberately or recklessly wrongful act or omission. However, the law is clear that negligence, if serious enough, can amount to SPM. It seems to me that such an expression as ‘deficient clinical practice’ would more comfortably embrace failures which included acts or omissions that were negligent, as well as those which were deliberate or reckless.
19.108
Professor Allen reported that, during the period from 1997 to 1999, complaints about poor treatment and clinical practice accounted for about 70% of all the complaints that came to the GMC. She told the Inquiry that there was room for different interpretations where allegations about treatment and clinical practice were concerned. Different interpretations resulted in inconsistency. At the time of writing its 2000 Report, the PSI team found
‘undoubted confusion and inconsistency’
in the way that such complaints were handled. Professor Allen and her colleagues therefore recommended that clinical failures should be graded on a hierarchical scale, ranging from those which could never give rise to a question of SPM to those which would always do so. Criteria should be established by which the seriousness of a complaint should be measured. They believed that these steps would result in a much greater consistency of approach to complaints about clinical treatment.
The Reasons Given by Medical Screeners for Their Decisions
19.109
Some limited insight into the approaches of different medical screeners was given by their recorded reasons for concluding that a case did not raise an issue of SPM. Some wrote only brief comments; others gave much more detailed reasons. The most common reason (given in 26% of cases) for screening out a case was that there was
‘no evidence of serious professional misconduct’
. Usually, no further reason was given. In 10% of cases, the reason given was that the case did not reach the
‘threshold of SPM’
. In some cases, no further explanation was given and it was consequently not clear on what basis the medical screener had made his/her judgement.
19.110
The second most common reason (20% of cases) for screening out a case was that the treatment or management of a patient had been
‘reasonable’
‘appropriate’
. Medical screeners who gave this reason often offered a clear account of the factors that they had taken into account. By this time, the practice had been instituted of seeking a response to a complaint from the doctor complained of before the screening stage. Medical screeners who gave ‘reasonableness’ or ‘appropriateness’ as their reason for rejecting a complaint often referred to the doctor’s response.
The Relevance of the Quantity and Quality of Evidence to Screening Decisions
19.111
As I have already said, the 1996 PSI Report had shown that by far the single most important factor in determining whether a complaint went forward for action by the GMC was whether the complaint came from a public body or from a private individual. Complaints from public bodies were much less likely than those from private individuals to result in a screening outcome of no SPM or SDP or of insufficient evidence.
19.112
The analysis of screening decisions in the years 1997, 1998 and 1999 carried out by the PSI team showed that this pattern was continuing. Professor Allen and her colleagues pointed out that complaints from public bodies usually contained far more evidence than those from members of the public. This was because those complaints were likely to have been subject to some form of previous investigation or inquiry, whereas the GMC would not, in general, have taken any steps to investigate a complaint made by a private individual. The result was that medical screeners were usually judging complaints from the two different sources on the basis of very different material. The PSI team noted that medical screeners were required only to decide whether a complaint raised an issue of SPM. In other words, if the allegation (if true) would amount to SPM, the case should go forward to the PPC. The PSI team suggested that medical screeners might have attached more weight to the greater level of evidence presented by public bodies than to the apparently less well-supported allegations made by members of the public, despite the fact that the complaints from the two different sources might have raised similar issues. Also, many complaints from public bodies related to matters in respect of which there had already been findings made against the doctor by another body, such as an independent review panel (IRP). The PSI team suggested that these findings might, in some circumstances, have been regarded by medical screeners as adding weight to their judgement that a complaint raised an issue of SPM.
19.113
I can see why the PSI team was concerned about these findings and thought that they might show that medical screeners were attaching weight to the amount and orderliness of the evidence available. That would have been wrong. However, I do not think that it should be assumed that they were doing that. It seems to me likely that a higher proportion of cases referred by public bodies would be of a serious nature, simply because the public body had exercised an informed judgement about whether the case should be reported to the GMC. However, I can also see that, if the screeners had become accustomed to seeing well-prepared cases reported by public bodies giving rise to serious issues, there would have been a danger that they would underestimate the seriousness of the allegations contained in poorly prepared cases coming from private individuals. They may also have been fortified by the judgements of other bodies although, it must be said, they did not always follow them. It seems to me that the real problem was that the GMC did not investigate complaints that came in a ‘raw’ uninvestigated state. Such evidence as was available from private individuals was likely to be scanty and might well be poorly presented. It is not at all surprising that more of such cases should fail at the screening stage.
A Change in the Chapter XV Procedures
19.114
In 1999, the Fitness to Practise Policy Committee (FPPC) of the GMC decided that use of the Chapter XV procedures should be discontinued. Documents considered at the relevant meeting recorded that the reason for this was that the
‘rather cumbersome process’
could take
‘several months to reach a conclusion’
. This was undoubtedly the case. However, Professor Allen and her colleagues noted in the 2000 PSI Report that it had been clear for some time that some cases which raised issues of SPM had not been referred to the PPC but were instead being dealt with under Chapter XV. They said that the FPPC had shared their concern about this, and that this concern had been a factor in the decision to discontinue the Chapter XV procedures. The fact that the medical screeners might have been using Chapter XV procedures to deal with cases that raised issues of SPM would be particularly concerning as, for the Chapter XV procedures to have been invoked in the first place, these must have been cases in which the evidence was not disputed by the doctor concerned. Such cases should plainly have been referred to the PPC.
19.115
The July 2000 Standing Orders contained a revised version of Chapter XV. This provided for cases where the medical screener considered that the doctor’s conduct or professional performance did not raise a question of SPM or SDP but where the conduct appeared to fall short of acceptable standards as laid down in ‘Good Medical Practice’ or other published GMC guidance and where it was desirable in the public interest that the doctor should be given advice. In such cases, the revised version of Chapter XV provided that the medical screener should consult a lay screener on the question of whether the doctor should be given advice and, if so, on the terms of the advice to be given. If the screeners decided to send a letter of advice, this was done. There was no opportunity, as there had been under the old Chapter XV procedures, for the doctor to object. Letters of advice were confidential, save that complainants were told that a letter had been sent and were informed of the terms of the letter. A letter of advice did not form part of the doctor’s FTP history, either for internal GMC purposes or in response to an external enquiry about the doctor’s FTP history.
Other Changes Occurring in 1999
19.116
In November 1999, during the time that the PSI team was carrying out its study, Dr Steel retired as a medical screener and as Chairman of the PPC. Meanwhile, the GMC had decided, in anticipation of the coming into force in October 2000 of the Human Rights Act 1998, that the functions of the screeners and the PPC should be separated. From November 1999, screeners (medical, health and lay) were no longer eligible to sit on the PPC or to attend meetings of the PCC as observers. The President was to be the Chairman of the PPC or, if he chose not to act in that capacity, some other GMC member was to be appointed by him. Mr Nicholls became acting Chairman of the PPC on Dr Steel’s retirement. His appointment as Chairman was confirmed in January 2000. In August 2000, the Rules were changed to reflect the changes in constitution which had already been put in place. From November 1999, the role of ‘principal screener’ was abolished and all medical screeners were instead given equal status.
After the 2000 Policy Studies Institute Report
19.117
The 2000 PSI Report was considered at a Council meeting on 11th
and 12th
July 2000. The briefing paper prepared for the meeting noted that the changes which had been made to the screening process in response to the 1996 PSI Report had
‘produced substantial improvements in the robustness of the procedures’
. No direct mention was made of the variations between screeners’ decisions which had been revealed by the analysis of the SDFs reported in the 2000 PSI Report. Nor was there any specific mention of the recommendation which had been central to the 2000 PSI Report, namely that it was essential, in order to achieve consistency and fairness, that standards, criteria and thresholds should be agreed and applied by all those charged with making decisions about what constituted SPM. The briefing papers for the Council meeting did, however, acknowledge that the 2000 PSI Report had concluded that GMC processes did
‘not match the principles of good decision making’
and that there were
‘anomalies in outcomes identified in the quantitative analysis’
. Members of the Council were invited to agree that the recommendations contained in the 2000 PSI Report should be addressed by the FPPC as a matter of urgency. I shall consider later in this Report what, if any, progress has been made on the central recommendation relating to the establishment of commonly agreed standards.
19.118
Also in July 2000, the GMC introduced a procedure whereby, before a complaint was screened, the doctor’s response to the complaint was disclosed to the complainant and the complainant’s comments on the doctor’s response were invited. Since 1997, screeners had had the complaint and (usually) the doctor’s response, but had had no comment on the doctor’s response from the complainant. This could have had a somewhat one-sided effect. From July 2000, a practice was introduced whereby the complainant was invited to comment and any comments submitted by him/her were sent to the doctor for his/her further observations. The complainant’s comments, as well as the doctor’s further observations, would be made available to the medical screener. At about the same time, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were changed to remove the power of the medical screener to direct that an explanation should not be given to a complainant of a decision to reject his/her complaint.
19.119
In August 2000, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were amended to provide that the GMC should appoint to act as medical screeners the President (unless he wished to sit on the PPC, the PCC or the HC or for any other reason did not wish to act as a medical screener) and
‘such other medical members of the Council as the President shall nominate’
. The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules (as amended) also required the President to nominate (and the Council to appoint) the lay screeners.
A Change in the Screening Test
19.120
I have already said that, after the judgement in
Toth
had been delivered in June 2000, steps were taken to amend the statutory screening test. This was effected on 3rd
August 2000, when rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules was amended to read:
‘The medical screener shall refer to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee every case submitted to him under this rule unless -
(a) he decides that a question as to whether the practitioner’s conduct constitutes serious professional misconduct does not arise, and a lay member appointed under rule 4(5) agrees ...’
The only other exceptions to the general rule were cases in which no statutory declaration had been provided by the complainant and cases referred by the medical screener to the health procedures. These cases did not have to be referred to the PPC.
19.121
It does not appear that this important change in the screening test was reflected in any amendment of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook. It seems that either the screeners must have continued to use the Handbook (despite the fact that it was by this time out of date in a number of respects) or that the Handbook must have fallen into disuse. Subsequent events suggest that the screeners (or some of them) were probably unaware of the change in the rule 6(3) test which had occurred in August 2000.
Holmes
19.122
The case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte Holmes and others
6
was decided by Mr Justice Ouseley on 27th
April 2001. It concerned applications for judicial review, challenging,
, decisions by medical and lay screeners and by the PPC.
The Complaints
19.123
The case concerned complaints by the partner, Ms Caryl Nancy Holmes, and the parents (I shall refer to the three of them as ‘the claimants’) of Mr Derrick Marcus Dean, who died on 26th
July 1995, aged 34, from a colloid cyst on the brain. The complaints related to the standard of care given to Mr Dean by his GP, Dr Rahman, and by a deputising doctor, Dr Sengupta. Mr Dean had seen Dr Rahman at his surgery two days before his death. On the evening before he died, he had been seen at his home by Dr Sengupta. He had subsequently been admitted to hospital where he died. The precise nature of the failure of the standard of care alleged by the claimants is not clear from the judgement. It seems likely that the claimants alleged failure by both doctors to appreciate the seriousness of Mr Dean’s condition.
19.124
Ms Holmes made a complaint against Dr Sengupta to the FHSA. A complaint was added later against Dr Rahman. In March 1996, the MSC decided that Dr Sengupta had breached his terms of service but that Dr Rahman had not. Ms Holmes appealed to the Secretary of State (SoS) for Wales against the decision in Dr Rahman’s case. In June or July 1998, the SoS for Wales notified the claimants that he had allowed the appeal and had found that Dr Rahman had breached his terms of service. The SoS for Wales directed that Dr Rahman’s case should be referred to the GMC. The claimants then requested the GMC to consider Dr Sengupta’s conduct also. Thus the GMC was seized of two complaints, both backed by a finding of a breach of terms of service. I do not know whether the breach by one doctor was more serious than that by the other, although it appears that the punishments imposed were different.
19.125
Some time between January and March 1999, the complaint against Dr Rahman was considered by three screeners: two medical screeners and one lay screener. They decided that the case should not be referred to the PPC. Dr Sengupta’s case was considered by the same medical screeners and by a lay screener. In Dr Sengupta’s case, the medical screeners decided that the case should not proceed. However, the lay screener disagreed and the case was therefore referred to the PPC. On 9th
September 1999, the PPC decided that the complaint against Dr Sengupta should not proceed to the PCC. The claimants challenged that decision of the PPC; I shall deal with that part of the case in
. They also challenged the decisions of the screeners in Dr Rahman’s case.
The Decision of the Screeners in Dr Rahman’s Case
19.126
At some stage, probably in the course of the judicial review proceedings, the GMC disclosed a number of documents that shed light on the reasons for the screeners’ decision in Dr Rahman’s case. The first was a note from a caseworker, which had probably formed part of the memorandum usually prepared by members of staff for the assistance of the screeners. In the note, the caseworker observed:
‘Dr Rahman has been punished more harshly than Dr Sengupta. Though he should have arranged some follow up for Mr Dean, I do not think his actions constitute SPM and recommend no action in his case.’
19.127
There was then an annotated comment from the lay screener, indicating her agreement with the observations of the caseworker. There was also a comment from a medical screener, Professor Thomas, who wrote:
‘I think it is very difficult for us to consider a case which has not been referred to us and although this turned out to be a brain tumour neither hearing has considered this a serious breach (withholding £500). I would value the view of a GP. These events were three years ago - no history of either doctor? I am inclined to no action. In any case if we took one and not the other I think the Welsh Office
i.e. the Office of the SoS for Wales
would be rather surprised. Would Dr Steel kindly review. Many thanks.’
19.128
I pause to note that the three years’ delay in Dr Rahman’s case was attributable almost entirely to the time taken (from August 1995 to June 1998) for the complaint to pass through the NHS complaints procedures. The remaining period of six months or so was attributable either to a delay on the part of the Welsh Office in referring Dr Rahman’s case to the GMC or to the time taken by the GMC in dealing with the complaint. I cannot see why the delay should have been relevant to the screening test. Nor do I understand why it would be difficult to consider either case on account of the way in which it had been referred. Nor is the reaction of the Welsh Office a relevant consideration. In short, the first medical screener did not appear to have in mind the relevant considerations.
19.129
Dr Steel was the principal medical screener at the time and a GP. It was common for him to be consulted when another medical screener was uncertain how to proceed. He reviewed the case and commented:
‘This is a lengthy read. I agree no action, not SPM as Coloid
sic
cyst is a very difficult diagnosis and Dr Rahman was GP with MRCP
Membership of the Royal College of Physicians
. I especially note the letter from hospital 2 weeks before the final consultation and I note original (?) case was no breach. Dr R & Dr S reprimand only. Happy to discuss.’
Quite apart from the fact that Dr Steel appears to have reached a concluded view that Dr Rahman’s treatment did not in fact amount to SPM, rather than expressing a view as to whether or not it could do so, he appears to have made two other serious errors. First, it cannot be relevant that a doctor is or is not a Member of the Royal College of Physicians. Second, it cannot be relevant that a MSC had decided in Dr Rahman’s case that there was no breach. That decision had been shown to be wrong by the subsequent decision of the SoS for Wales. It appears that Dr Steel was still exercising a wide discretion when screening cases and did not have in mind the advice given in the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook.
19.130
The decision was taken to close the case. A letter to the Welsh Office dated 8th
March 1999 was drafted but, it seems, was never sent. This letter included the following passage:
‘The members
i.e. the screeners
have carefully reviewed the actions of both Dr Rahman and Dr Sengupta in this matter. The members accept that there were shortcomings in the care that Mr Dean received from both doctors. However, they are satisfied that they are not of the gravity of serious professional misconduct and could not, therefore, justify the restriction or removal of their right to practice
sic
medicine.
The members have asked me to explain that a single error in the treatment or management of a patient’s condition does not usually constitute serious professional misconduct. Only in cases where it can be shown that the doctor has seriously neglected or disregarded his or her professional responsibilities to a patient could issues of serious professional misconduct or seriously deficient performance arise.’
19.131
The decision not to proceed with the case against Dr Rahman was communicated to the claimants by a letter dated 22nd
October 1999. They had been informed about the decision of the PPC in relation to Dr Sengupta three weeks earlier. The claimants, through their solicitors, then attempted to obtain the documents relating to the taking of the decisions. Those attempts continued until the end of July 2000 when,
‘with profuse apologies’
, the GMC wrote saying that the minutes of the PPC were not discloseable. It is not clear whether the documents to which I have referred above were disclosed at that stage or later. The GMC’s decision was not communicated to Dr Rahman himself until 29th
December 1999. It is not known when the Welsh Office was notified, but it seems that, at some time, the SoS for Wales became aware of the decision.
19.132
The letter from the GMC to the claimants said:
‘The members have considered the case against Dr Rahman very carefully and understand that Mr Dean had seen him a number of times regarding his headaches. The members were satisfied that Dr Rahman’s actions were reasonable in the circumstances prior to July 1995.
The members accept the findings of the Welsh Office in respect of Dr Rahman’s consultation on 24 July 1995. However, the members did not feel that the errors made on this occasion constituted serious professional misconduct.
They have asked me to explain that an issue of serious professional misconduct can arise where there is evidence that a doctor has seriously neglected or disregarded his or her professional responsibilities towards a patient. However, a complaint about an alleged error by a doctor while treating a patient - even where the alleged error has had tragic consequences - does not in itself raise an issue of serious professional misconduct.’
The Judicial Review
19.133
On 26th
October 2000, the claimants issued judicial review proceedings, challenging the GMC’s decisions in relation to both doctors. The doctors were joined in the proceedings as interested parties. Grounds of opposition were filed by the GMC and the doctors. In December 2000, the claimants were granted permission to apply to the Court for judicial review. That was about six months after the decision in the case of
Toth
. Very shortly after, the GMC informed the doctors’ solicitors that it was minded to concede the claim because of doubts as to the lawfulness of the decisions of the screeners (in Dr Rahman’s case) and of the PPC (in that of Dr Sengupta). Subsequently, the GMC decided to consent to the quashing of the two decisions on the grounds that, in reaching those decisions, the wrong legal tests had been applied. A consent order was agreed between the GMC and the claimants. The doctors opposed the application. The hearing therefore took an unusual form, with the GMC and the claimants arguing that the decisions of the GMC were wrong and should be quashed and the doctors contending that the correct legal tests had been applied by the screeners and the PPC.
19.134
In his judgement, Ouseley J adopted the analysis of the legislative framework contained in the judgement of Lightman J in the case of
Toth
. Counsel for the GMC argued that the decisions of the screeners had not been compliant with the language of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules. He submitted that the documents from which I have quoted, in particular the draft letter to the Welsh Office, were not couched in
‘the language of preliminary consideration’
, but contained expressions of judgement. Thus, in the letter to the claimants, it had been indicated that the screeners accepted the findings of the Welsh Office in respect of Dr Rahman’s consultation on 24th
July 1995 but
‘did not feel that the errors made on this occasion constituted serious professional misconduct’
. In the draft letter to the Welsh Office, the screeners were said to
‘accept that there were shortcomings in the care that Mr Dean received from both doctors’
, but to be
‘satisfied’
that these shortcomings were
‘not of the gravity of serious professional misconduct and could not, therefore, justify the restriction or removal of their
i.e. Dr Rahman’s
right to practice
sic
medicine’
19.135
Ouseley J inferred that the caseworker who wrote the letters would have been informed of the basis of the decision by the screeners and would have reflected it faithfully in her letters. He noted that the GMC had produced no evidence that the correct test had been applied, observing that
‘if there had been clear evidence of the test being consistently applied ... I would have had it, even if the individual case itself could not be remembered’
. He concluded that the decision in Dr Rahman’s case was probably arrived at by applying the wrong test. It was probable, he said, that the medical screeners reached the conclusion that Dr Rahman’s actions did not constitute SPM, rather than the conclusion that the actions of Dr Rahman were incapable of constituting SPM. In the Judge’s view, the terms of the letters sent by the GMC contained explicit judgements as to the quality of the acts as not constituting SPM, rather than judgements as to whether they were capable of doing so. Ouseley J went on to deal with the documents disclosed by the GMC:
‘The caseworker’s reference and the annotations by Professor Thomas and Dr Steel cannot be dismissed as simple annotations when one is trying to reach a conclusion as a matter of fact as to the basis upon which the decision making body reached its decision. Not merely do they not contradict the approach which is clear from the letter of 22nd
October 1999, they support the inference which I have drawn. None of the material brings in the true test.’
It is most discouraging to realise that, as recently as 1999, errors as fundamental as this were being made by the GMC. Not only had the screeners applied the wrong test, but the administrative staff had apparently not noticed the errors and had not queried the reasons when drafting the letters.
19.136
It appears to me that these errors were not isolated failings in the application of the Rules to given situations but were indicative of a fundamental misunderstanding of the Rules and of the functions of a screener on the part of the medical screeners. I am driven to the conclusion that, in screening cases before 1999, the screeners habitually applied the wrong test. It also appears to me to be likely that screeners often took into account completely irrelevant factors. These endemic failings underline the need not only for the training of screeners, which was recognised by Mr Roger Henderson QC for the GMC at the Inquiry, but also for clear and agreed standards, criteria and thresholds to be promulgated. I recognise that it is not easy to ensure consistency of approach by different people undertaking a task such as screening. However, in the interests of fairness and consistency, it is obvious that preliminary decisions should be made in a structured way and reasons given so that they can be audited and analysed. The case of
Holmes
shows that, as recently as 1999, the GMC’s screening work was seriously flawed.
Woods
The Complaint
19.137
The case of
Woods v General Medical Council
7
came before the High Court in June 2002, although the material events took place in 2001. The claimant was the mother of a baby boy who had died and whose body had been sent for post-mortem examination to the Alder Hey Children’s Hospital. Some of his organs had been retained without the claimant’s consent. Following the publication, on 30th
January 2001, of the Report of the Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital Inquiry (the Alder Hey Inquiry Report), the names of certain doctors who had been criticised in that Report were reported to the GMC. The medical and lay screeners decided not to refer the cases of two of the doctors to the PPC. The reason given by the GMC for these decisions was that the Alder Hey Inquiry Report did not raise issues of SPM relating to the two doctors. The claimant brought proceedings by way of judicial review, challenging the decision of the screeners. She also challenged the decisions of the PPC in respect of nine other doctors who had been referred by the screeners to the PPC but had not been referred on by the PPC to the PCC.
19.138
It is not clear when the relevant screening decisions were taken. However, solicitors for the claimant sought an explanation of them and the GMC’s letter of explanation (which was undated) arrived on or about 16th
August 2001. That was more than a year after rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules had been amended to change the screening test.
The Judicial Review
19.139
Leave to apply for judicial review was granted and the case proceeded to a hearing before Mr Justice Burton. The medical screener had provided a witness statement describing the process and reasoning by which he had reached his decision. That witness statement had been approved by the lay screener. The witness statement made clear that there had initially been disagreement between the screeners. The medical screener had been confident that the case did not raise an issue of SPM or SDP. The lay screener had disagreed with that view. After lengthy discussions, they had agreed that the case should not go to the PPC. The Judge observed that there was nothing wrong or unusual about the fact that there had been disagreement between two independent-minded screeners. He noted, however, that the eventual agreement was said to have been reached by the lay screener
‘on balance’
although it was also said that both screeners had, in the end, been
‘convinced’
of its correctness.
19.140
From the medical screener’s witness statement, it was clear that he had applied the screening test that had been in force before August 2000. He described the medical screener’s role as being to decide whether a complaint
. The lay screener appears to have accepted that that was the test that he had also applied. Burton J drew attention to the fact that the change to rule 6(3) since the case of
Toth
had removed the reference to the word
in the screening test and that the question of whether it appeared to the screener that the matter
had gone. That had been the old rule. As to the test that should be applied, the Judge observed that it appeared to him significant that, in practice, the screening process led to the formulation (by the medical screener, or by the staff, on the instructions of the medical screener) of a charge or allegation. The charge or allegation was then sent to the PPC for consideration. The medical screener had, therefore, to be satisfied that a charge could be laid. It appeared to Burton J that the decision to be made by the medical screener at that stage might simply be
‘whether there is no arguable case’
. Burton J also observed that, although the ‘old’ test had been a narrow one, it might have been said to
‘allow for an element of subjectivity or proportionality’
. By contrast, the ‘new’ test was
‘effectively, no arguable case’
. It was clear that the wrong test had been applied. Burton J was not satisfied that, had the correct test been applied, the screeners would necessarily have reached the same decision. He therefore directed that the case should be reconsidered by the screeners, applying the correct test.
19.141
It is obviously a matter of concern that it was possible for two screeners, in the middle of 2001, to apply the old screening test so many months after it had been replaced. This was despite the regular screeners’ meetings and training sessions which the Inquiry was told had been taking place since 1997. The hearing in this case took place in June 2002. The date of the medical screener’s witness statement does not appear in the judgement. It may be that it was prepared some time before the hearing took place. However, it seems clear that it cannot have occurred to either the medical or the lay screener at any stage up to the time of the hearing in June 2002 that the statement was based on a fundamental error as to the screening test to be applied. The medical screener in question had been appointed a medical screener in July 2000, the month before the new screening test came into effect. He was said by the Judge to have screened over 400 cases by June 2002. Presumably, he had applied the wrong test in all those 400 cases. In many cases, it may be that the error would have had no effect on the outcome. However, it seems likely that there would have been many cases where the error might have made the difference between a complaint being referred to the PPC and being closed at the screening stage.
19.142
It seems to me that, if these two screeners were both under a misapprehension as to the correct test to apply, it is unlikely that they were the only two in that position. It is also likely that others within the GMC would have read the medical screener’s witness statement; yet it appears that no one noticed the error. There was not, of course, an up-to-date Screeners’ Handbook at the time. I have not been shown any guidance for screeners which was available at this time. One might have expected that having had to concede the errors made in
Toth
Holmes
would have been a chastening experience for the GMC. One might have thought that, having sought and obtained an amendment of the Rules to effect a change in the test to be applied by screeners, the GMC would have given a high priority to the education and training of screeners so as to enable them to apply the test correctly and consistently. Yet it appears that this was not done.
Further Work by the Policy Studies Institute
19.143
In further work undertaken during 2002, Professor Allen and her colleagues analysed the outcomes of screening decisions made during the period from 1999 to 2001. The results appeared in their 2003 Paper. They compared the outcomes for individual screeners. This exercise showed variations in outcome as between medical screeners, with two
‘hawks’
sending an average of 30% of cases screened over the three years to the PPC and two
‘doves’
sending an average of less than 20%. Professor Allen and her colleagues had previously recommended that a system of random distribution of cases to screeners should be put in place. They were told that, as a result of that recommendation, a
‘cab rank’
system of distribution of cases to the screeners had been in operation from the beginning of 2000. From that time, there should not have been any difference in the types or seriousness of cases handled by each individual medical screener. The PSI team suggested that, if it was indeed the fact that the distribution of cases was entirely random, the variations in outcome amounted to evidence that the medical screeners were not all applying the same standards and criteria to their decision-making.
19.144
The PSI research was directed primarily at identifying any differences between the treatment by the GMC of doctors who had qualified in the UK and the treatment of those who had qualified overseas and, if any such differences were apparent, at analysing the possible reasons for those differences. Professor Allen and her colleagues identified differences in the treatment of the two groups but had difficulty in analysing the reasons for those differences because there
was
‘no discernible common agreement on the criteria and threshold to be applied in reaching a judgment on the seriousness or gravity of cases’
. They pointed out that this lack of a common agreement had led to problems in ensuring consistency. These problems extended both to the treatment of different cases within the same stage (e.g. screening) of the conduct procedures and to the treatment of cases at different stages of the procedures (e.g. as between the screening and PPC stages). The PSI team referred back to the recommendations contained in its 2000 Report and observed that the continuing differences between the outcomes of FTP cases involving doctors who had qualified in the UK and those who had qualified overseas suggested that the development of guidelines to be used in the decision-making process was
‘a matter of priority’
19.145
As I have said, during their research, Professor Allen and her colleagues had primarily been concerned to discover whether there was any racial bias in the GMC’s FTP procedures. Plainly, if there was inconsistency in decision-making, it would be impossible for them to reach any reliable conclusions on that issue. However, consistency in decision-making is also important more generally in the interests of fairness to every doctor who is the subject of complaint. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that, on the available evidence, it could not be asserted that every doctor was treated by the GMC in the same way by reference to the same criteria and the same standards. This was because there were no generally agreed or applied criteria or standards. I would add that consistency is also important from the point of view of patient protection. If there is a ‘right’ threshold at which action should be taken, the public may be exposed to risk if action is not taken at that threshold in some cases. Also, unless the threshold is clearly stated, the public will feel aggrieved when the lack of clarity leads to inconsistency in decision-making.
Another Change in the Screening Test
19.146
On 1st
November 2002, following the decision in
Woods
, the screening test was changed again. Rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules was amended to read:
‘The medical screener shall refer to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee a case submitted to him ... if he is satisfied from the material available in relation to the case that it is properly arguable that the practitioner’s conduct constitutes serious professional misconduct.’
Dr Midha told the Inquiry that this test altered the ‘presumption’ upon which screening decisions would be made. I think that he meant that whereas, before November 2002, a case had to be referred to the PPC unless the screeners agreed that no question of SPM arose (a negative test), under the new rule, the screener had to be positively satisfied that it was arguable that the doctor’s conduct constituted SPM. In fact, the change was very slight. The language had changed but the threshold to be crossed before the case was referred to the PPC remained very low. Put another way, if carried out in accordance with the Rules, screening remained, as had always been the intention, a very coarse filter.
19.147
Also on 1st
November 2002, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were amended to remove the requirement for a complainant to provide a statutory declaration in support of his/her complaint.
The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook
19.148
On this occasion, a new Screeners’ Handbook (the November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook) was issued at the same time as the change in the screening test. This was the Handbook that was in use at the time of the Inquiry hearings in December 2003. It incorporated an
aide memoire
on the interpretation of the new screening test. Screeners were advised that they should first ask whether it was properly arguable that the alleged misconduct was capable of constituting SPM. In answering the first question, screeners were advised that:
‘i It should be assumed the allegation is true;
ii An assessment should be made of the allegation’s seriousness not credibility;
iii The argument does not need to be likely to prevail before the PCC;
iv The issue is properly arguable if a claim can reasonably be made that the practitioner’s behaviour fell seriously short of the standards of conduct expected among doctors.’
19.149
Screeners were told that, if they were of the view that it was properly arguable that the alleged misconduct was capable of constituting SPM, they should then consider whether it was properly arguable from the material available in relation to the case that the practitioner had committed SPM. In considering this question, screeners were urged to remember that:
‘(i) This question addresses the factual allegations;
(ii) It identifies possibilities not probabilities;
(iii) It is based on the identification of a possibility less than any real or realistic prospect of the allegation being sustained;
(iv) Properly arguable means reasonably arguable. An allegation is not properly arguable if it is absurd, frivolous, vexatious or repeats an earlier allegation (whether made by the same or different complainants);
(v) Conflicts of evidence should not normally be resolved;
(vi) Implausible accounts unsupported by other evidence can legitimately be rejected.’
19.150
Screeners were cautioned that the evidential element of the test did not establish a
‘high hurdle against the progress of a case’
. They were told that they must not make any attempt to resolve conflicts of evidence. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook stated:
‘There will be very few cases where the allegation(s) against the doctor are either fanciful, incredible or incapable of being supported by the evidence.’
19.151
that the November 2002 and April 2003 versions of the FTP Casework Manual and the May 2004 FTP Investigation Manual advised that the amount of evidence required by the screeners was
19.152
In deciding whether conduct was or was not capable of amounting to SPM, screeners were told that they should bear in mind the relevant GMC guidance when exercising their discretion whether to close a case or to refer it to the PPC. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook stated that staff would ensure that the screeners’ attention was drawn to the appropriate guidance. In many cases, the ‘guidance’ would be the relevant passage from ‘Good Medical Practice’. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook made it clear that deviation from the published guidance would not necessarily give rise to issues of SPM. It stated:
‘The key will be the degree and/or nature of deviation from that guidance.’
The Handbook further advised (in language that came perilously close to encouraging the screener to make a ‘judgement’ on the evidence) that:
‘Screeners should bear in mind that if they determine that a doctor deviated from best practice, as set out in our guidance, but not by so much as to call his or her registration into question, a closing letter containing advice to the doctor may be the logical outcome.’
19.153
The Handbook contained no criteria by which screeners were to assess the
‘degree’
or the
‘nature’
of the deviation from the relevant guidance that would be sufficient to call a doctor’s registration into question. In my view, the use of the expression ‘to call the doctor’s registration into question’ may have caused some confusion, in that it might have suggested to some screeners that the conduct had to be so serious as to give rise to the possibility of erasure from the register. In fact, if SPM were proved, the PCC could impose lesser forms of sanction than erasure, including the imposition of conditions. In the recent past, it became increasingly common for the GMC to use the concept of conduct which was ‘serious enough to call registration into question’ as an equivalent of SPM. In my view, the use of this expression did not help screeners to decide whether the conduct amounted to SPM.
19.154
In making a decision on a case, the November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook advised that a medical screener had a number of options. First, s/he could (with the agreement of a lay screener) close the case. If s/he decided that that course was appropriate, s/he could elect to send a letter to the doctor, giving advice as to his/her future conduct. Second, the medical screener could refer the case to the PPC. Third, if the medical screener believed that there were grounds to suggest that the standard of the doctor’s professional performance might have been seriously deficient, s/he could refer the case for a performance assessment. I shall discuss that option further in
Chapter 24
. Fourth, the medical screener could refer the case to the health procedures.
19.155
A fifth option for the medical screener was to request further information. However, screeners were advised that they should do this only in circumstances when further information was necessary in order to clarify what the allegation was. Screeners were warned not to request further evidence that was not necessary for this purpose. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook stated that, if they did, and evidence was obtained in response to their request:
‘... we
leave ourselves open to the charge that the screeners, in seeking evidence, must have intended to take that evidence into account in making their decision and that in doing so they went beyond their legal powers and applied the wrong test (by weighing the evidence)’
19.156
I understand entirely why the GMC wished to discourage requests for further evidence about an allegation. However, it would have been unfortunate if screeners had been discouraged from asking that staff should find out, for example, whether other complaints of a similar nature had come to the attention of the doctor’s employer or the primary care organisation on whose list s/he was included. Complaints should not be considered in isolation; additional information might well show that an apparently isolated complaint of poor clinical practice was in fact a sign of SDP. However, it may be that, in the future, the GMC will obtain such information as a matter of routine, at least in certain cases. I shall return to this issue later.
19.157
The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook advised that, once a decision had been made to refer a case to the PPC, the medical screener should not request that further information be obtained before the case proceeded. By making the decision, the medical screener had fulfilled his/her role and had no further part in directing the case. It was open to the medical screener, in exceptional cases, to request a second opinion from another medical screener or to call for a case conference of several screeners. However, screeners were enjoined to exercise these options only when
‘absolutely necessary’
, since they would have the effect of prolonging the screening process. Under the GMC’s service standards, screeners had two weeks to consider each file and come to a decision. In exceptional cases (i.e. those which were highly complex or which contained large amounts of information or documentation), screeners could agree with GMC staff a longer timescale for an individual decision. Medical screeners were also advised that they should consider whether it was necessary to take steps to protect the public interest by suspending or imposing conditions on a doctor’s registration, pending the final determination of his/her case. If they believed that it was necessary to take such steps, they were required to refer the case to the Interim Orders Committee.
19.158
The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook advised that a SDF should be completed and the screener should give clear reasons for his/her decision. Those reasons should relate solely to the test which screeners were required to apply. If a case was to be closed, the medical screener should approve the letters to be sent to the complainant and the doctor. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook reminded medical screeners that the explanations to the various parties should be identically worded, except where technical terms might need to be explained to a complainant.
19.159
The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook made clear that one of the functions of caseworkers and case managers in the Screening Section was to ensure that screeners’ decisions were made in accordance with the law and with the statutory process. An agreed protocol was attached to the Handbook, setting out the circumstances in which it would be appropriate for a member of staff to ask a screener to reconsider a decision which might have been made for reasons which were not legally defensible. This might arise if the medical screener requested that staff should obtain information that was not necessary for the purpose of the screening decision. More frequently, it would arise if the reasons for the decision given by the medical screener demonstrated that s/he had taken into account matters which should not have formed part of the decision-making process. An example would be if it was clear that the screener had ‘weighed up’ the evidence or had speculated about how the PPC or PCC might dispose of the case. The protocol pointed out that a decision taken in these circumstances might be vulnerable to challenge by judicial review. In a case where there was real concern about the potential for judicial review, the protocol suggested that the advice of the GMC’s solicitors might have to be sought before a final decision was taken on the case. This was, no doubt, intended to avoid a repetition of the situation in
Toth
and in
Holmes
, where it was immediately evident to the GMC’s advisers that the decisions of the screeners were unsustainable.
19.160
On 1st
November 2002, rule 5(1) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules was amended to read:
‘Where information in writing is received by the Registrar from which it appears to him that a practitioner has been convicted of a criminal offence in the British Islands or has been convicted of an offence elsewhere which, if committed in England or Wales, would constitute an offence
(a) in a case of conviction for an offence which the Registrar considers to be a minor motoring offence the case shall not proceed further;
(b) in a case of conviction where a custodial sentence has been imposed (but excepting any case where the sentence was suspended), the Registrar may refer the case direct to the Professional Conduct Committee for inquiry unless it is his opinion that such direct referral would not be in the public interest;
(c) in any other case of conviction including any case which the Registrar has determined not to refer direct to the Professional Conduct Committee under rule 5(1)(b), the Registrar shall refer the case to the medical screener.’
This change gave explicit legislative authority to the longstanding direction by the PPC that convictions for minor motoring offences need not be referred to the PPC or, indeed, to a medical screener. The amended rule appears to have created an expectation that convictions leading to an immediate custodial sentence would usually be referred directly to the PCC and that all others, save those for minor motoring offences, would be referred to a medical screener.
19.161
The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook dealt with the screening of convictions. It stated:
‘A subset of conduct cases relate to doctors convicted of a criminal offence ... When we receive notification of a conviction, staff will refer the case to a screener (unless the doctor in question was imprisoned, in which case the matter will be referred direct to the PCC), who must in turn refer it to the PPC unless:
a. it appears to the screener that the doctor’s fitness to practise may be seriously impaired by a physical or mental condition and that action under the health procedures should be taken in preference to action under the conduct procedures; or
b. the conviction is for a minor motoring offence (not involving the use of alcohol or other drugs), or a conviction for a minor offence not involving dishonesty.’
The Problem of Finding Out How Conviction Cases Were Dealt With
19.162
There is a real problem in discovering the number and nature of convictions reported to the GMC and in tracing how those convictions have been dealt with. In the GMC’s annual FTP statistics, cases dealt with by medical screeners are divided into broad categories. There is no separate ‘conviction’ category. Some of the categories (e.g. dishonesty, sexual assault/indecency and violence) will presumably include both conviction cases and conduct cases. It is not possible, on reading the statistics, to distinguish between the two. In 2003, 28 cases involving allegations of dishonesty against doctors were closed by screeners, out of 125 such cases considered. It may be that in none of the 28 cases had the doctor been convicted of a criminal offence. It may be that a sizeable proportion had been convicted. It is impossible to tell from the annual FTP statistics. It was only when cases were referred to the PPC that the GMC statistics identified the number of conviction cases dealt with and their outcome. In my view, this is unsatisfactory. It is important for members of the GMC and the wider public to know exactly how the GMC deals with doctors convicted of criminal offences. Transparency is particularly important where concerns exist, as they do, about the disparity of treatment between different groups of doctors.
Remission of Cases to the Health Screener
19.163
Since the introduction of the health procedures in 1980, the Professional Conduct Rules have permitted medical screeners, in both conviction and conduct cases, to remit an appropriate case to a health screener to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures, as an alternative to referring the case to the PPC. A large proportion of the cases where this course of action is considered involve abuse by a doctor of alcohol or controlled drugs.
19.164
According to the GMC annual FTP statistics, in 2001, the medical screeners remitted 31 cases (out of 2235 cases screened) to the health screener. In 2002, 13 out of 2239 cases were so remitted. In 2002, 13 out of 1884 doctors whose cases were dealt with by the medical screeners were referred into the health procedures. In 2003, the figure was seven out of 1304 doctors. It is not possible to say how many of these cases (if any) involved convictions. In any event, it is clear that in the recent past, the medical screeners have referred only a small proportion of cases into the health procedures.
Audit of Screening Decisions
19.165
While carrying out the work preparatory to their 1996 Report, Professor Allen and her colleagues had advised that screeners should receive training and should be provided with information about the results of cases they had screened. This had not happened up to that time. In response to that recommendation, regular meetings of screeners and screening casework managers were instituted. These were used to discuss issues of common interest arising from the screening process, as well as specific screening cases, suitably anonymised. In addition, training sessions and workshops for screeners and screening caseworkers were introduced.
19.166
From about the end of 2002 or the beginning of 2003, screeners began to receive statistics about their own screening outcomes. The statistics showed how many cases the screener had closed and how many s/he had referred to the PPC. Screeners were able to compare this information with anonymised information about the screening outcomes of colleagues. The object of this was to inform individual screeners and also to enable the GMC staff to identify screeners who appeared to be outliers in some way. When the new system was introduced, it was intended that, if an outlier was identified, an explanation would be sought and any necessary remedial action taken. The Inquiry has no information about whether such action has been taken in respect of any screener. Screeners were also informed of the outcomes of the PPC’s consideration of cases they had referred there.
19.167
In September 2002, Mr Blake Dobson joined the GMC. He was given responsibility for developing a programme for auditing GMC casework which could be applied to both the existing and the new FTP procedures. In January 2003, Mr Dobson became Head of the FPD Audit Team. The Team consists of three caseworkers and an administrative assistant, as well as Mr Dobson.
19.168
In August 2003, the audit of screening decision-making began. A random sample of two cases per medical screener was audited each month. The audit involved examination of the caseworker’s memorandum to the screener and of the screening memorandum setting out the screener’s decision and any other comments made by the screener on the file. The auditors also checked that the relevant part of the SDF had been correctly completed and was consistent with the screening decision.
19.169
A check was made to ensure that the reasons for the decision accorded with the screening test to be applied. If there was evidence which suggested that the basis of the decision was questionable - because the screener appeared to have applied the wrong test, for example, or because s/he had taken into account matters which should not have formed part of the decision - the file was referred to Mr Dobson and, if he had concerns, it was passed to the Director of the FPD.
19.170
This procedure was a most welcome development. Until its introduction, scrutiny of a screener’s decision would occur only if proceedings for judicial review were taken. However, the scrutiny was still not complete. It checked that the reasons given complied with the legal test (which was plainly important) but it did not involve any evaluation of whether the decision itself was correct in all the circumstances of the case.
19.171
More recently, in May 2004, the Fitness to Practise Committee set up an Investigation Audit Sub-Group, with a view to establishing and developing a programme of audit for the investigation stage of the new FTP procedures.
19.172
There was, in the past, discussion about the appraisal of screeners. These discussions were not taken forward, largely because of the imminent changes in the arrangements for screening.
6
[2001] EWHC 321 (Admin).
7
[2002] EWHC 1484 (Admin).
Some Problems with the Screening Process

--- Introduction ---
19.1
, I described how, under the ‘old’ conduct procedures, when complaints and reports of convictions were received by the General Medical Council (GMC), they were subjected to a filtering process which was carried out by members of the GMC staff, exercising the legal powers of the Registrar. Only about 35% of cases survived that initial filtering process. I shall now consider the next step in the conduct procedures, which was known as ‘screening’.
19.2
From the end of the nineteenth century, GMC Rules stipulated that convictions and complaints referred to the GMC should undergo initial consideration in order to determine whether or not they should be referred on for further action. Individuals who performed this function became known as ‘screeners’. For many years, the President of the GMC, who was always a prominent member of the medical profession, acted as the sole screener. If, for any reason, he was unable or unwilling to do so, he would nominate another medically qualified member of the GMC to take his place. Complaints were few and it was possible for one man to consider them all. Conduct that the President regarded as potentially ‘infamous in any professional respect’ (later serious professional misconduct (SPM)) would go forward to a disciplinary hearing. The President himself would chair that disciplinary hearing. By virtue of his dual roles, the President of the GMC was, in effect, the arbiter of what conduct was and was not acceptable in a member of the medical profession. That this degree of power and influence should be reposed in one individual seems extraordinary to modern eyes. Of course, the system has changed but, in examining the functions of the present day screener, it is helpful to understand the origin of the role.
19.3
Over recent decades, as I shall describe, the number of screeners increased. The President ceased to undertake this role, which was thereafter performed by several individuals. After 1990, lay people participated in the screening process. Until July 2003, the Rules provided that only members of the GMC could act as screeners. When the size of the GMC was reduced, in July 2003, that changed; after that time, it was possible for non-members to be appointed to act as screeners. From mid-2004, the existing screeners were replaced by case examiners, who had been appointed for the purposes of the new fitness to practise (FTP) procedures. The intention was that they should fulfil the roles of screeners pending the introduction of the new procedures.
19.4
Cases referred on by the screeners went for further consideration to one of the GMC’s FTP committees. Until 1980, that committee was the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC); after 1980, it was the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC). The function of the PPC was to decide whether a case should go to the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) (formerly the Disciplinary Committee (DC)) for a disciplinary hearing.
19.5
The importance of the screener’s role as a filter was demonstrated by the statistics produced by the GMC. Screeners were responsible for ‘screening out’ a large proportion of the cases referred to them. In most years from 1987 to 1998, between 82% and 89% of cases referred to screeners were screened out and closed. The public was not generally aware of this. The screening process took place in private and, as I shall explain, was not open to scrutiny by anyone, not even by other members of the GMC.
19.6
In this Chapter, I shall examine the role of the medically qualified and ‘lay’ screeners and the developments in the screening process which took place over the years. I shall discuss the tests applied by the screeners at various times and the guidance which was available to assist them when applying those tests. I shall discuss some individual screening decisions, including that relating to complaints against Shipman which were reported to the GMC in 1994 and some of those which have been the subject of proceedings for judicial review. I shall consider the light shed on the screening process by the work undertaken by the Policy Studies Institute (PSI). I shall also consider some specific problems which have arisen in connection with the screening process.
19.7
The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Dr Krishna Korlipara, who was a medically qualified screener dealing with conduct and performance cases (a ‘medical screener’) from 1998 to 2004, and from Dr Arun Midha, who is not medically qualified and was appointed a ‘lay’ screener in July 2001. Dr Robin Steel, a medical screener between 1987 and 1999, and Dr Joan Trowell, who was appointed a medical screener in 1999, provided witness statements to the Inquiry. Mr Blake Dobson, Head of Casework for the GMC’s Fitness to Practise Directorate (FPD) and Head of the FPD Audit Team, also provided a witness statement. Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster PSI, provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence. During the late 1990s, she and a team of colleagues examined several aspects of the GMC’s work, including the screening process.
CHAPTER NINETEEN - The General Medical Council's Conduct Procedures: Screening
The Role of the Screener from the 1970s until 1996

--- The Inquiry's Examination of Cases ---
19.214
In order to examine how the screening process worked in practice, the Inquiry decided to examine a number of individual case files. Requests were made for production of the files in the five or ten most recent cases in various categories. Most of these requests related to the decisions of Dr Korlipara, who had been suggested by the GMC as a witness suitable to describe and deal with screening issues. In this section of this Chapter, I shall comment upon those decisions, sometimes individually, sometimes collectively. I shall begin with a general account of Dr Korlipara’s evidence.
The Evidence of Dr Krishna Korlipara
19.215
Dr Korlipara, a practising GP, has been an elected member of the GMC since 1984 and was a medical screener between 1998 and 2004. During his time on the GMC, he has sat on several Committees, including the PPC and the PCC. When he started as a medical screener, he ‘shadowed’ Dr Steel, who acted as his mentor. Dr Steel reviewed and discussed with Dr Korlipara some of Dr Korlipara’s early screening decisions and Dr Korlipara was also able to read the files in some of the cases in which Dr Steel had made the screening decision.
19.216
For the first few months after Dr Korlipara began screening, the workload was heavy. In some weeks, he would deal with 18 to 20 cases. However, the workload then diminished, no doubt as a result of the measures introduced on the advice of Professor Allen and her colleagues and of the appointment of further medical screeners. It has continued to reduce since. In 1998, there were no target times for turning round screening decisions. As I have indicated, these were later introduced.
19.217
In his oral evidence, Dr Korlipara explained how he used the SDF to guide his decision-making. He agreed that the form had had the effect of directing screeners to make decisions in an orderly fashion. He also claimed that the SDF had:
‘... helped to introduce consistency so that there is common understanding to all the screeners of the various criteria to be looked at before making a decision and to that extent, it has removed the different screeners working to the different possible criteria’
19.218
There seemed to be two problems with this claim. First, while the SDFs no doubt assisted in ensuring that screeners applied their minds to the correct questions in the correct order, they contained no standards or criteria to be applied when making a decision. The SDF contained a definition of SPM (see
paragraph 19.220
) and of SDP. It reminded screeners that they should not take into account the weight of the evidence or the intent of the doctor when reaching a decision on whether the case raised a question of SPM. It also offered assistance in assessing whether it would be appropriate for a case to proceed by way of the performance (as opposed to the conduct) procedures. A number of features that might have been indicative of SDP were listed on the form. However, there were no standards or criteria by which to judge whether an allegation amounted to SPM.
19.219
The second problem is that the 2000 PSI Report and the 2003 PSI Paper have shown that there were wide variations in the outcomes of cases between screeners in 1999, 2000 and 2001, i.e. after the introduction of the SDFs. Dr Korlipara acknowledged that the ‘clear message’ of the 2000 PSI Report had been that there was a lack of consistency between screeners. He said that he was anxious that consistency should be improved. He suggested that this could be done by more training, more agreed criteria and regular audits of screening decisions. He said that progress in these matters had been slower than he would have liked. He said that it was hoped that a measure of consistency would be introduced with the advent of the new case examiners.
19.220
The definition of SPM included on the SDF was:
‘... action or inaction by a doctor of a serious kind of which no doctor of reasonable skill and exercising reasonable care would be responsible’
Dr Korlipara described it as ‘a good working definition’. However, he felt that SPM went ‘a little way beyond that’. He would use the definition ‘only as the starting basis’. He told the Inquiry that:
have to ask ourselves whether the doctor’s conduct is so serious departing from acceptable conduct that it seriously compromises the ethical standard that the profession has accepted and is so
un
acceptable that the registration of the doctor, in theory, ought to be in some way affected’
19.221
I have sympathy with Dr Korlipara’s attempt to define SPM; it is not easy. The definition of SPM in the SDF is appropriate only in cases of alleged substandard treatment and, in such cases, the definition is not unhelpful. However, SPM embraces many different types of misconduct, of which providing substandard treatment is only one. I can understand why Dr Korlipara would wish to describe SPM differently. The description given by Dr Korlipara of the test which he would apply when screening a case suggested that he was still (in December 2003) making decisions of the kind condemned as wrong in
, i.e. by deciding whether the alleged conduct
did
amount to SPM, as opposed to whether it was
arguable
that it did. This is not a matter of personal criticism. It merely illustrates the very real problem faced by the screeners who had no standards, criteria and thresholds to apply when making their decisions. Dr Korlipara was a very experienced member of the GMC and had been a screener for five years. If he was not applying the correct test, it seems likely that there were other, less experienced, screeners who, despite the training they had undergone, had still not fully understood their role and were also operating a screening threshold higher than that permitted by the Rules.
Initial Screening Decisions
19.222
I mentioned in
that, under the procedures in operation as at December 2003, a casework manager had the option of submitting a case to a medical screener at an early stage for initial screening. This fast track system was used for cases which did not appear to the GMC staff to raise a question of SPM or SDP but where the complaint was about the adequacy or inadequacy of treatment or about the exercise of clinical judgement, so that some input from a medically qualified person was considered necessary before a final decision to close the case was taken. If the medical screener agreed that the case should be closed, the confirmation of a lay screener was necessary before this could be done.
19.223
In order for a case to be dealt with in this way, it had to fall within one of the categories set out in Section B of the SDF. These were as follows:
the patient was demanding specific treatment/drugs and there was no suggestion that the doctor had acted unreasonably
the patient was complaining simply on the basis that s/he was still ill and there was no suggestion that the doctor had acted unreasonably
the patient was complaining about the side effects of treatment, where these were within acknowledged parameters and there was no suggestion that the doctor had misled the patient
the patient was (only) asking the GMC to intervene in his/her treatment/care
the complaint was about (only) the cosmetic outcome/failure of cosmetic surgery
the complaint was about conflicting diagnoses, where there was no suggestion that the doctor had acted unreasonably
the complaint was about a single and isolated error, and there was no risk that the error would lead to a serious/untoward outcome for the patient
the complaint was about a failure to visit, where there had been no risk of a serious/untoward outcome for the patient and an appropriate alternative had been suggested.
19.224
The Inquiry requested the production of the files in the last five cases before 30th
September 2003 that Dr Korlipara had screened out on an initial assessment of their merits. The GMC was able to find only three cases that had been dealt with by Dr Korlipara in this way during the previous 12 months. One of these, KD 01, did not in fact appear to have been an initial screening decision at all. The complaint had been received by the GMC in June 2001. The complainant had at first been advised to direct his complaint to local complaints procedures. He would not accept that advice, as he was dissatisfied with the way his complaint had been dealt with at local level. The complaint came back to the GMC and was closed by a caseworker in error in October 2001. It was reopened in February 2002 and medical records and other information were sought. The complaint was seen first by Dr Korlipara in October 2002. At that stage, he asked for an expert opinion. When that was available in November 2002, he closed the case (with the agreement of a lay screener) on the ground that it did not amount to SPM or SDP. Its closure was not, therefore, for one of the reasons set out in Section B of the SDF.
Dr KD 02
19.225
The other two cases related to cosmetic treatment. In the first (KD 02), the complainant was dissatisfied with the outcome of laser treatment she had undergone for facial capillaries. The letter of complaint did not allege substandard procedures or any worsening of her condition. It complained essentially of a breach of contract. If the complainant’s account was true, the doctor’s conduct was not entirely satisfactory. However, in my view, the decision to close the case was reasonable.
Dr KD 03
19.226
The other case concerned a Dr KD 03, against whom two complaints had been received, two years apart. In the first complaint, the complainant said that she had requested liposuction to improve the shape of her abdomen but, on the advice of the surgeon, had undergone an abdominoplasty (a procedure colloquially known as a ‘tummy tuck’). She was dissatisfied with the outcome. She alleged that there was no improvement in the shape of her abdomen and that its appearance was worse by reason of the scarring. The doctor had said that, after the operation, she would have thin white scars, whereas, in fact, as she claimed, she had an unsightly purple scar running from one side of her abdomen to the other. A year after the operation, the doctor had agreed that the outcome had been ‘not as planned’ and had offered to carry out liposuction, free of charge. However, the complainant would have been obliged to pay the hospital charges. A letter written on the doctor’s behalf said that the operation in dispute had been successful and that the only really satisfactory way forward was for the patient to lose weight by dieting. In any event, it was said, the doctor had counselled the patient about the ‘realistic outcomes’ of the surgery. There were, therefore, two contentious issues: first, whether the outcome was outside the range of what would be regarded as acceptable, and second, whether the doctor had warned the patient of the realistic outcomes or whether, as she claimed, he had told her she would have ‘thin white scars’.
19.227
I have mentioned earlier that one of the grounds listed on the SDF that might justify the closure of a case at an early stage was that ‘the complaint was about (only) the cosmetic outcome/failure of cosmetic surgery’. That was the ground on which the medical screener (not Dr Korlipara) was invited to consider the closure of this case. The medical screener closed the case on that basis, saying that it:
‘... falls completely outside the jurisdiction of the GMC. The outcome of a procedure in medicine can never be guaranteed. It appears that the doctor acted reasonably and has now offered to rectify the situation. If
the patient is
unhappy I suggest she approaches the Management of the local hospital.’
19.228
The lay screener agreed that the case should be closed. The letter informing the patient of the decision did not say that the complaint had been rejected because it fell within a category of cases that the GMC had already decided, as a matter of principle, could not give rise to a complaint of SPM. Instead, it informed the complainant that the screeners had found
‘nothing to indicate that
the doctor
seriously neglected or disregarded his professional responsibilities towards you. It appears that
the doctor
discussed all your options with you and obtained your informed consent before proceeding with the operation.’
19.229
In short, the screeners had decided that the case did not in fact disclose evidence of SPM. The statutory provision at the time of the screening decision required that the case should proceed to the PPC unless the screeners decided that a question of SPM did not arise. It appears to me that a question of SPM clearly did arise. First, the decision to advise upon the operation might have been quite wrong or the technique by which it was performed might have been entirely incorrect. Also, there was a dispute about whether the doctor had advised the patient about ‘realistic outcomes’ or whether he had told her that she would have ‘thin white scars’. If the doctor had given over-optimistic advice which had induced the patient to embark on surgery, that should, I think, have raised a question of SPM. Moreover, the decision to close the case was reached on the basis that the account advanced on the doctor’s behalf was to be preferred to that of the complainant. It had been made plain in the case of
that screeners should not attempt to resolve conflicts of evidence. Leading Counsel to the Inquiry asked Dr Korlipara whether, in cases of this kind, it was the practice to ask the complainant to provide a photograph of the outcome. That would at least enable the GMC to obtain an opinion as to whether the result fell outside what was reasonable. It appears that photographs are sometimes available and sometimes not but it is not usual practice to request them in cosmetic cases.
19.230
Leading Counsel was also anxious to discover why it was the GMC’s policy that complaints that concerned only the cosmetic outcome of cosmetic surgery were to be closed. Dr Korlipara said that he did not know why this category of cases was included on the list of cases to be closed but said that, as he understood it, screeners could exercise discretion and keep open a cosmetic case if they thought fit. He thought that perhaps this category of cases ought to be removed from the list. During the writing of this Report, the Inquiry team noticed that the wording of the relevant provision of the SDF had been changed at some time between July 2000 and August 2001. The version of the SDF in use in July 2000 stated that a complaint might be closed if
‘the complaint is about (only) the cosmetic outcome/failure of cosmetic surgery and there is no indication that the care delivered was substandard’
. By August 2001, the last clause had been deleted. Thus, screeners were encouraged to close cases without any real consideration of the issues, simply on the ground that the complaint related to the outcome of cosmetic surgery. It is clear that Dr Korlipara was aware that he could keep a case open if he thought fit. However, the change in the wording would result in a tendency for more cosmetic cases to be closed at an early stage than would have been the case before the change was effected.
19.231
When invited to comment on the merits of the decision itself, Dr Korlipara said that, if he had been the medical screener, he would have reached the same conclusion. He could not believe that any surgeon would have told the patient that she would be left with only thin white scars; that simply could not be guaranteed. The difficulty with that reply is that what was said was precisely the matter in issue in this case. When that was pointed out, Dr Korlipara expressed the view that, even if the doctor had unwisely made promises that he could not fulfil, it would not necessarily amount to SPM or SDP. I interpose to say, ‘perhaps not necessarily’, but at least it would raise a question of SPM. Dr Korlipara was then asked what his reaction would have been if a doctor had deliberately overstated the prospects of success in a cosmetic procedure with the intention of gaining private business. His response to that was that the idea ‘would stop him in his tracks’. I infer from that answer that Dr Korlipara would have regarded that as a very serious matter; he had not apparently thought of the case in that way. Yet, on the basis of the information available to the GMC at the time the case was closed, that could quite possibly have been the position. Dr Korlipara was then asked (hypothetically) whether it would have made any difference to his view of the case if he had known that the hospital had had a number of other similar complaints about the doctor. That, he said, would have ‘turned the case on its head’. It has not been the practice of the GMC to make such enquiries of local employers or primary care trusts (PCTs). Dr Korlipara appeared to accept that, in this type of case, there might be a case for making enquiries of the authorities in the locality in which the doctor practised.
19.232
The second complaint involving Dr KD 03 came from a patient who had undergone the removal of a facial lesion. He was dissatisfied with the outcome. The case was closed, following a decision by Dr Korlipara, with which the lay screener agreed, that the case involved only the cosmetic outcome or failure of cosmetic surgery and that there was
‘nothing in the complaint which raises an issue of SPM/SDP’
. Interestingly, in the light of the previous complaint, this complainant also alleged that the doctor had advised him that he would be left with a ‘faint white scar’. In his written statement to the Inquiry, Dr Korlipara said that he was informed of the earlier complaint when considering the later complaint. In that event, he appears not to have noticed the rather striking similarity between the two cases. In the second case, the patient complained that instead of a ‘faint white scar’ one centimetre long, he had been left with a scar that was 1.6cm long and 1.5mm wide, which he described as a ‘thick red indentation’. It appeared from correspondence enclosed with the complaint that the patient had had a photograph of the scarring taken; he had sent it to the doctor when he had complained to him. Yet there is no sign that the GMC asked to see a copy of the photograph. The complainant also said that he had taken the advice of another cosmetic surgeon, who was going to carry out remedial surgery. Apparently, this surgeon had said that the original result had been poor as the result of the operation not being performed in a ‘good enough sterile environment’. In his statement to the Inquiry, Dr Korlipara said that he closed the case because he considered it to be an unjustified and trivial complaint. How he came to form the view that it was either unjustified or trivial on the material before him is not clear. He added that he saw nothing in the earlier complaint that caused him to change his mind on the second one. However, it is clear from his comments on the earlier case that his understanding of the issues was very limited.
19.233
The two cases involving Dr KD 03 give rise to real concern in my mind about the attitude of the GMC towards complaints that are ‘about (only) the cosmetic outcome/failure of cosmetic surgery’. I recognise the possibility that unjustified complaints might be made by patients with unrealistic hopes and expectations. However, that apart, it seems to me that there are good reasons to examine complaints about cosmetic surgery with particular care. Much cosmetic surgery and cosmetic treatment is carried out in the private sector. There is a real danger that the advertising material used by providers of such surgery and treatment may not always be accompanied by appropriate counselling about realistic expectations. It is, as I understand it, well known that some cosmetic surgery clinics are operated by doctors with no special training as plastic surgeons. Often, the patient will not have been referred to the clinic by a GP or other doctor; s/he might well have walked in ‘off the street’. The local handling of complaints by some small private providers is likely to be less than ideal. Some patients who undergo plastic surgery may be emotionally vulnerable. In my view, complaints from patients who have undergone private cosmetic surgery should be scrutinised with particular care. They should certainly not be subject to virtually automatic closure, as has evidently been the case in the past.
Cases Dealt with under the Chapter XV Procedures
19.234
The Inquiry requested papers in the last five cases before 30th
September 2003 where Dr Korlipara had dealt with the case under the Chapter XV procedures. These case files, when examined, showed, first, that the caseworkers concerned were expressing appropriate and tenable views about the cases in question. Four of Dr Korlipara’s decisions seemed to me to be reasonable, at least so long as the allegation was considered in isolation; the allegation, standing alone, could not arguably have constituted SPM. In two of the four cases, the doctor had failed to explain his diagnosis and treatment to the patient; in each case, he was advised to do so in the future. In a third case, the doctor had failed to ‘write up’ the patient’s need for pain relief; as a result, the patient was left in pain for some hours. The doctor was reminded of the guidance on making an adequate assessment of a patient’s condition and the need to keep a careful record of treatment. In the fourth case, the doctor was advised to be more polite to patients.
19.235
However, because it has not been the GMC’s practice to make local enquiries about any other complaints against or concerns about the doctor, there remains some uncertainty in my mind as to whether it was appropriate to close these four cases with a letter of advice. For example, in the fourth case, KF 04, the complainant had alleged that the doctor had changed his medication without explaining that he was doing so or why. The new medication had given rise to a number of unpleasant side effects. Having read the medical notes, Dr Korlipara thought that the change in medication was not unreasonable and felt that a failure to give a sufficient explanation could not amount to SPM. Standing alone, that decision seems reasonable. However, it seems to me that, for the proper protection of patients, some enquiry should have been made of the PCT to ascertain whether there were any concerns about the doctor’s practice. It is possible that the PCT would have been aware of other concerns which, taken with this one (of which it might well have been unaware), could have raised a question of SDP.
19.236
In one of these five cases, KF 03, I feel some concern about the fact that the case was closed. The complaint came from an employee of an insurance company. The insurance company had received a claim under a policy on the life of one of Dr KF 03’s patients who had recently died. Because the deceased’s family would not agree to the disclosure of the deceased patient’s medical records, Dr KF 03 had been asked to provide a medical report to the insurance company. In his report, the doctor described the deceased’s medical history, as taken from the records. The description included a reference to an admission to hospital in the late 1990s following a drug overdose, and reference to the deceased’s addiction to diazepam which, it was said, had been heavy since a few years earlier when he had lost his job. It appears that either of these two references would have entitled the insurance company to avoid the policy. In respect of the drug overdose, Dr KF 03 was asked by the insurance company if he could say what drug had been taken. He replied that in fact this had been an
‘overdose’
of alcohol. He apologised for his earlier
‘error’
but did not explain why he had made that error or why he was now able to correct it. It is clear from his letter that he had spoken to members of the family about the circumstances of the
‘overdose’
since providing his original report. The letter of correction did not explain what information he was now relying on. The doctor did not refer to the hospital discharge letter which would have been written very shortly after the overdose. One would expect such a letter to specify the nature of the substance taken. Some months later, the doctor wrote to the insurance company again, volunteering the information that there had been another mistake in his original report. The deceased had apparently not been heavily addicted to diazepam until a year later than the doctor had previously reported, when he lost his job. The doctor apologised again. Again, he did not explain how he had come to make the earlier error or why he was now able to correct it. He did not make any reference to the medical records. The insurance company took the view that the doctor had acted dishonestly (by seeking to support the relatives’ claim under the policy) or, at the very least, had been very careless when writing his initial report.
19.237
When the GMC notified the doctor about the complaint, his medical defence organisation wrote denying any intent on the doctor’s part to deceive. The GMC caseworker was concerned about the allegations of fraud, which, if proved, would plainly be serious. He pointed out to the medical screener that the GMC had been unable to examine the deceased patient’s records. The caseworker noted a conflict between the allegation and the doctor’s denial. Dr Korlipara took the view that it was not for the GMC to investigate the possibility of fraud; that was for the police. The insurance company had decided not to report the case to the police. It had decided to refuse to pay out under the policy. However, it appears that there were other grounds for the insurance company to take this course, which did not depend on the truth of the doctor’s ‘corrections’. Dr Korlipara decided to deal with the case on the basis that there was no evidence of fraud and that the doctor should be advised to be more careful in future when writing such reports. I can see that there was no direct evidence of fraud but there was a real suspicion of it and that should have been a matter of concern to the GMC. Many organisations, not only insurance companies, have to rely on the probity of medical reports and the GMC claims that it takes allegations of dishonesty very seriously. In my view, the GMC should be concerned when presented with evidence of something as suspicious as this. It seems to me that the attitude of the GMC to such a case should be to discuss ways and means to investigate the truth of the matter. It is not sufficient in my view simply to say that the case should be closed. I think this case should have been sent to the PPC for discussion about how best to proceed. Legal advice would have been required as to the possibility of obtaining the medical records, which might well have disclosed the truth of the matter. This case - and others to which I refer - seems to me to demonstrate a lack of determination on the part of the GMC to get at the truth. In general, it seems to have had a preference for leaving others to investigate and, if there was no one else prepared to do so, was content to leave even a potentially serious case uninvestigated.
Dr Korlipara’s Screening Decisions
19.238
The Inquiry asked for disclosure of the papers in the last ten cases closed by Dr Korlipara before 30th
September 2003. None of these cases gave rise to serious concern. However, it seems to me that, in the interests of patient protection, enquiries should have been made locally in some of those cases, in order to ascertain whether there were any other concerns of a similar or related nature about the doctor’s practice or performance. An example is the case of Dr KE 10.
Dr KE 10
19.239
In the case of Dr KE 10, to which I refer in
, it was alleged that the doctor had failed to diagnose the patient’s terminal condition and had failed to provide her with adequate pain relief. In particular, it was said that the doctor had relied too heavily on telephone consultations instead of visits. The complaint had been pursued locally and an IRP had made a number of criticisms of the doctor, none of which would have amounted to SPM. However, if there had been other complaints or concerns about this doctor, it is possible that an issue of SDP would have arisen. To find that out, it would have been necessary to make local enquiries. In any event, it would seem to me to be appropriate for the GMC to find out what, if anything, the local PCT was doing about the criticisms made in the IRP report. In cases like this, I think that the GMC should have taken a more active role in the protection of patients, instead of simply closing the case because, standing alone, the allegations did not, in its view, amount to SPM or SDP. The GMC’s attitude was that there was no need to intervene because the PCT was under a duty to act upon the IRP report and the GMC was entitled to assume that that had happened. I do not think that the GMC could reasonably have had confidence that the PCT would have taken action. A telephone call from the GMC enquiring what was known about the doctor and what steps had been taken in the light of the IRP report would have had three beneficial effects. First, it would have enabled the GMC to satisfy itself whether there was a history of complaints or concerns which might suggest SDP. Second, if the PCT had not done anything about the IRP report, the call from the GMC would probably have had a salutary effect. Third, if the PCT had taken appropriate steps, the GMC could have told the complainant that, although it was not going to take action itself, it had satisfied itself that the PCT had matters in hand. It does not enhance the public perception of the GMC if it takes no action at all in a case in which another body, such as an IRP, has found grounds for criticism.
Dr JA 40
19.240
In addition to the ten cases mentioned in which the papers had been supplied pursuant to a specific request, the Inquiry came across another case, that of Dr JA 40, in which Dr Korlipara had screened out a complaint. The Inquiry first saw papers relating to this doctor because he had been convicted of drugs offences in the early 1980s. At that time, his case was dealt with at the GMC by the PPC, which closed the matter with a warning letter recommending continued medical supervision. A complaint against Dr JA 40 was received in the late 1990s, relating to his alleged failure to appreciate the severity of the condition of a small baby and to admit him immediately to hospital. At the time, the doctor was working for a deputising service. In essence, the mother complained that the doctor had been called out and had examined the baby who, according to the mother, was obviously ill; his breathing was abnormal. The doctor had said that there was nothing seriously amiss, that the baby had a ‘sniffle’ and had advised taking the baby to the GP in the morning. The mother had insisted that the baby must go to hospital and, somewhat reluctantly, the doctor had agreed and arrangements had been made for his admission. The mother said that, because the doctor had been so reassuring, she had decided that she would take the baby to hospital after she had made arrangements for the care of her other child. When the baby was admitted to hospital, about two hours later, he was found to be very seriously ill. Fortunately, he made a full recovery.
19.241
The doctor gave a different account of the consultation. He said that, on first receiving notice of the mother’s concern about the baby, he had advised that she should be told to take the child to the local Accident and Emergency Department. He claimed that he believed that that was to be done. (The mother completely denied that.) He said that he nonetheless went to the house and found that the mother had waited for his arrival. After examining the baby, he agreed with the mother that the baby should be admitted to hospital. He did not make a definite diagnosis but he did not think that there was any emergency. He arranged admission and offered the mother an ambulance but she said that she wished to make childcare arrangements and would take the baby to hospital herself. He claimed that the baby’s condition did not deteriorate severely until later. The mother agreed that the baby’s condition had deteriorated further after the doctor’s departure.
19.242
Dr Korlipara decided that the case should be closed because, he said, the doctor had acted reasonably and competently. He said that it was clear that the baby’s condition had deteriorated after the doctor had left. In evidence to the Inquiry, when it was put to him that he had gone beyond his real function as a screener and had resolved the dispute between the complainant and the doctor, he said that there was a sufficient basis of undisputed evidence to exonerate the doctor from criticism. In my view, there was not. Quite apart from the dispute about whether the doctor did in fact advise that the mother should be told to take the child to hospital even before he had visited, there was a further dispute as to whether the doctor had realised that the child was ill. If he had not, and if the child was admitted to hospital only because the mother had insisted, that might well amount to a serious failure or error of judgement on the doctor’s part. In my view, Dr Korlipara resolved the conflict of evidence in the doctor’s favour. He ought to have asked himself whether the allegation, if true, might amount to SPM. The case should have gone through to the PPC. This is another example of a medical screener going beyond his/her proper remit.
19.243
In this case too, as in several others, the GMC should have made local enquiries. On the file, there is an indication (as there was in the case of Dr KE 03) that the deputising service was not prepared to continue to employ the doctor. It should have been asked why. It might have taken that view because it was seriously concerned about the doctor’s handling of this particular case; it might have had more general concerns about him. In the interests of patient protection, the GMC should have found out.
The Lay Screeners
19.244
Before describing a further group of cases examined by the Inquiry, i.e. those involving lay screeners, it may be helpful if I say a little more about the lay screeners’ role. Screening by lay members of the GMC was introduced in 1990. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook described their role thus:
‘Their role is to ensure that the medical screeners, in judging doctors’ behaviour against the values and standards of the profession, do not accept a lower standard than would be acceptable to society at large. The profession, through the medical screeners, regulates itself, but needs the confirmation of the public - in the shape of the lay screeners - that appropriate and generally acceptable standards are being applied.’
19.245
Lay screeners are not required to participate in the screening of every case. Instead, they are involved only in those cases where the medical screener has decided that the case should not proceed further. As I have explained at
paragraph 19.31
, lay members were also involved in the ‘old’ Chapter XV procedures which were in operation until 1999.
The Statutory Provision
19.246
By the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) (Amendment) Rules 1990, rule 10(2) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules was amended to read:
‘Subject to the foregoing rules
including rule 6(3)
and to paragraph (4)
which related to notification of a complainant, an informant and the doctor
the President
may direct the Registrar to refer any case relating to conduct to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ... Provided that the President shall not decide not to refer a complaint to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee except with the concurrence of the lay member appointed under rule 4(5)
i.e. the lay screener
.’
The Nature and Extent of the Involvement of Lay Screeners
19.247
The 1996 PSI Report described the involvement of the lay screeners. In a case where a medical screener had decided that the case need not proceed further, the papers in the case, including the medical screener’s comments, were passed to the lay screener. As I have said, the medical screener’s comments might have been confined to a single word, indicating agreement with the contents of the memorandum on the case written by the GMC staff. They might have been more extensive. The lay screener would then confirm the decision of the medical screener or indicate his/her disagreement with it. If the lay screener disagreed with a decision, there would usually be a discussion between the two screeners. The lay screener might accept the medical screener’s views and agree that the case should be closed. He or she might ask for further information to be obtained before a final decision was taken. The lay screener might (prior to 1999) suggest that the ‘old’ Chapter XV procedures should be invoked, as an alternative to closing the case immediately. If, however, after discussion, the lay screener remained of the view that the case should be referred to the PPC, this would be done.
19.248
There were limitations on the involvement of lay screeners. They played no part in the screening of conviction cases. Nor did the Rules ever require lay screeners to be involved before a decision was taken to remit cases to a health screener as an alternative to referring it to the PPC. Decisions as to whether a case should proceed along the conduct route to the PPC or by means of the voluntary health procedures were very significant. It was true that referral to the voluntary health procedures meant that a case was not being closed by the GMC at that stage. However, the effect of such a referral was to remove the possibility of the doctor’s name being erased from the register.
19.249
Moreover, lay screeners have never been involved in cases in which the medical screener or a member of the GMC staff had decided that a complainant should be advised to pursue his/her complaint by means of local complaints procedures. Until 1993, and after March 1999, such decisions were dealt with by GMC staff without the involvement of medical screeners. In
, I expressed my view that that practice was not compliant with the provisions of rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules. Between 1993 and 1999, there was a change of policy, whereby cases which might previously have been identified by the GMC staff as suitable to be pursued by means of local complaints procedures were first referred to a medical screener. Even then, however, lay screeners were not involved in the decision to refer such cases back to complainants to be pursued through local procedures. Apparently, this was because such cases were deemed not to be ‘closed’, but merely to have been deferred with the possibility that they might at some point be referred back into the GMC procedures. Thus, the thinking must have been that the medical screener had not made a substantive decision not to refer the complaint to the PPC. To all intents and purposes, however, cases that were referred back to be pursued through local procedures were ‘closed’, since no steps were taken to follow up their progress. Only if the complainant or a NHS body chose to refer them back to the GMC would they be reconsidered. It seems to me that the failure to seek the concurrence of the lay screener in such cases was probably a breach of rule 10(2).
19.250
In 2000, Professor Allen and her colleagues analysed the data contained on 792 SDFs completed during the second six months of 1999. Lay screeners were required to state on the SDF whether they agreed with the medical screener’s decision. If they did not, they were required to give their reasons. The PSI team found that lay screeners had agreed with the medical screener’s decision in almost 98% of the 423 cases in which a lay screener had been involved. Lay screeners had disagreed with the medical screener in only ten cases. At the time, four lay screeners carried out most of the work. The interventions of one of the four had accounted for half of those ten cases.
19.251
In August 2000, when the screening test was changed (see
), the amended rule made it clear that a medical screener must refer to the PPC every case submitted to him/her unless s/he decided (and the lay screener agreed) that a question as to whether the doctor’s conduct constituted SPM did not arise. The exceptions to this general rule were when a complainant who was a private individual had failed to provide a statutory declaration, and where a case was referred by the medical screener into the health procedures. By that time, GMC staff (not screeners) were responsible for making the decision to advise complainants to refer cases to local complaints procedures.
A Change in the Statutory Provision
19.252
In November 2002, when the screening test was changed again, a new rule 6(3A), dealing with the role of the lay screener, was introduced into the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules:
‘The medical screener shall seek the advice of a lay member appointed under rule 4(5) in relation to any case submitted to him under paragraph (1) which he does not propose to refer to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee, and he shall direct that no further action be taken in the case only if the lay member so consulted agrees.’
The effect of this change appeared to be that there would be consultation before the decision was made, rather than the medical screener making the decision first and the lay screener agreeing or disagreeing with it. It seemed to imply that the medical screener would make direct contact with the lay screener when s/he was proposing to make a decision to close a case. However, as I shall explain below, that does not appear to have happened in all cases.
The Evidence of Dr Arun Midha
19.253
The Inquiry heard evidence from Dr Midha, who has been a member of the GMC since November 2000 and was a lay screener from July 2001. Dr Midha explained that he dealt with the screening of cases in his spare time, in the evenings and at weekends. He applied the same test as did the medical screeners. He said that his practice was not to discuss the case with the medical screener before making his decision; lay screeners were given the opportunity to speak to medical screeners before making a decision, but he did not choose to do so. He first considered the memorandum written by the caseworker and he used that to guide him through the file. Having identified the principal allegations and issues and the relevant evidence, he would then read the medical screener’s recommendations. He would then make his decision. If he required an expert opinion, he would request that a report be obtained. If he had doubts about whether a case should be referred to the PPC, he would err on the side of caution and refer it. If he disagreed with the recommendation of the medical screener, he would communicate this fact to the caseworker by telephone or email. He would also communicate with the medical screener by email or ask the caseworker to contact the medical screener to inform him/her that the case would have to go forward to the PPC. He would provide reasons for his decision. He would do this as a matter of courtesy. However, he would not discuss his decision with the medical screener. This practice is rather different from that observed by the PSI team and described in their 2000 Report. It is also rather different from that apparently envisaged by rule 6(3A) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules.
19.254
In his witness statement, Dr Midha said that the most usual reason for disagreement with the medical screener concerned differences in judgement on whether an allegation was sufficiently serious to reach the threshold of seriousness in the screening test for SPM or SDP. In the past, medical and lay screeners worked in teams, with the same medical and lay screeners adjudicating on the same cases. By December 2003, however, distribution to the lay screeners was random so Dr Midha saw cases from all the medical screeners. He said that he had observed a ‘slight variance’ in the way that different medical screeners perceived what was and was not ‘serious’. However, he felt that it would be difficult to set identifiable thresholds of seriousness. He did, however, acknowledge that guidelines identifying features that would aggravate or mitigate seriousness might be of value.
19.255
Dr Midha felt that the screening process had its limitations. Under the old system, as it was in December 2003, screeners had limited information on which to make decisions in some cases. He thought that there needed to be ‘much more opportunity to investigate, to get much more in-depth information’. He recognised that there could be ‘opportunities missed’ because of lack of investigation. He hoped that more investigation would be possible under the new FTP procedures.
An Analysis of Recent Screening Decisions
19.256
Mr Marshall, Head of the GMC’s Screening Section, had carried out an analysis of screening decisions taken in the 12 months to 30th
September 2003. During that time, conduct and performance cases involving 1300 doctors had been screened by the medical screeners. Of those, the cases involving 750 doctors had been referred to a lay screener with a recommendation that the case should be closed. The lay screeners disagreed with the medical screeners in the cases of 50 doctors (i.e. almost 7% of cases dealt with by lay screeners). That is a rather higher incidence of disagreement between medical and lay screeners than had occurred during the six-month period in 1999 that was analysed by the PSI team: see
paragraph 19.250
. It suggests that lay screeners were more willing to disagree with the views of medical screeners in the period from 2002 to 2003 than had been the case in 1999.
Cases Considered by the Inquiry
19.257
The Inquiry requested that the GMC provide the papers in the last five cases before 30th
September 2003 in which a lay screener had disagreed with the decision of a medical screener. In the event, it became clear that the cases provided were not the last five in which that had occurred; they had all been dealt with some time previously. It may be that they were the last five cases where the lay screener had disagreed with the medical screener’s decision and where the case had already been dealt with by the PPC.
19.258
The lay screener in four of the five cases was Dr Midha. Four of the five complaints related to allegations of poor treatment and/or substandard practice, which were said to have caused the patients’ deaths. All four involved complex medical issues. The fifth case was an allegation of breach of confidentiality. Four cases were subsequently closed by the PPC; the fifth was referred by the PPC to the PCC but the referral was subsequently cancelled. However, in four of the five cases, the PPC was sufficiently concerned to send a letter of advice or a warning letter to at least one of the doctors concerned. It seems to me that, in each case, the lay screener had been right to intervene; there was a real issue for discussion and decision by the PPC. In one, which concerned an allegation against an anaesthetist, the medical screener, who was a GP, wished to close the case without obtaining any independent expert evidence on an issue of anaesthetic practice. He relied on the opinion expressed in the report of an investigation carried out by the hospital employing the anaesthetist. Dr Midha asked for an independent expert report, which expressed a different opinion from that of the hospital report. The case went to the PPC, which, in the event, closed the case. Dr Midha told the Inquiry that he thought it was useful for the PPC to discuss such cases. I agree with him and, in my view, the GMC would not have been doing its job properly if that case had been closed without obtaining an independent expert report and discussing the case fully. It appears to me that there is real value in the role of the lay screener. I have the impression, however, that it must sometimes be difficult for lay screeners to take issue with a medical screener, particularly as there are no standards or criteria by which to judge whether it is arguable that the conduct constitutes SPM.

--- Developments in the Screening Process from 1996 to 1997 ---
A Cultural Change
19.50
Mr Townsend said that, prior to the second half of the 1990s, the ‘old view’ had been that reasons had to be found for referring a case to the PPC. This would suggest that, instead of a presumption that a case would go forward unless it appeared to the medical screener that it
‘need not’
proceed further (as provided for by the Rules), the presumption was that a case would not go forward unless there was a positive need for it to do so. It appears that the handling of the report in 1994 about Shipman’s conduct in the cases of Mr W and Mrs B was an example of this approach. Mr Townsend said that that view changed in the mid-1990s. He attributed the change in part to the publication of ‘Good Medical Practice’ in 1995, which he thought had represented a ‘cultural change’. This cultural change had, he said, led to a ‘greater willingness’ on the part of both GMC staff and screeners to allow cases to go forward to the next stage, rather than ruling them out immediately. I am not sure whether that view is borne out by the statistics. Until 1999, of those doctors referred to the screeners, the percentage that were referred on by them to the PPC remained steady at no more than 15%. The proportion referred to the PPC rose sharply (to 25%) in 1999 and again the next year, but that followed (and may be explained by) a significant reduction in the number of cases referred to the medical screeners, with many more cases being closed by the GMC staff. There were other factors also which would have had the effect of increasing the proportion of cases referred to the PPC by screeners in 1999.
19.51
Mr Townsend also said that, in the mid-1990s, there had been a ‘review of the legal basis of screening’, prompted partly by the formal challenge of a screening decision by means of judicial review and partly by consideration in the GMC office. I think it highly likely that the judicial review to which Mr Townsend referred was the case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte White
. I shall discuss the decision in that case, which was given in March 1997, later in this Chapter.
The 1996 Policy Studies Institute Report
The Practical Arrangements
19.52
I have already referred to research carried out by the PSI. The PSI team, led by Professor Allen, carried out an analysis of cases dealt with by the GMC during the 12 months from September 1993, which was reported in the 1996 PSI Report. At the time of that Report, screening was carried out by three medical screeners, Dr Steel, Dr Bewley and Dr Wilson. Most of their screening work was carried out at their homes or practice premises, not at the GMC offices. They would fit their screening work around their other professional commitments. The PSI team found that the principal screener, Dr Steel, dealt with 60% of referrals to screeners during the 12 months for which they analysed data. The GMC statistics showed that there were 2294 referrals to screeners in that period (that figure included some cases which were referred to a medical screener more than once). On that basis, Dr Steel must have dealt with about 1376 referrals. Some cases would have been very straightforward. However, in others, there might have been a considerable amount of detail. This obviously represented a very substantial workload, over and above Dr Steel’s work as a GP and his commitments as a member of the GMC and Chairman of the PPC. The other screeners handled about 30% and 10% of referrals respectively. Usually, only one of the medical screeners saw each case. Sometimes, however, a medical screener would seek a second opinion from another medical screener or from another medically qualified GMC member whose specialty was relevant to the complaint. As principal medical screener, Dr Steel would give advice and guidance to the other medical screeners, both generally and in relation to specific cases. He would also act as a mentor to new medical screeners.
19.53
A medical screener would receive the case papers, together with a memorandum prepared by the GMC staff. In the case of a complaint from a private individual, the papers might consist of only a single letter. There might or might not be any supporting evidence. If the complaint was from a public body, it might contain a large bundle of evidence collected during a local investigation, together with a report of a MSC hearing. The PSI team noted that the GMC staff would often write long memoranda, containing many comments and giving very clear views about the way in which the case should be handled. I interpose to say that the caseworker had done so in the 1994 case involving Shipman. The screener would record his/her decision on the top sheet of the case papers. The decision might consist of a single word, denoting agreement with the course of action proposed in the memorandum. On occasions, the screener might write a longer comment, giving reasons for his/her decision. In the 1994 Shipman case, Dr Steel gave brief, but intelligible, reasons. There was no obligation for a medical screener to state his/her reasons and, in many cases, they did not. There was no standard form for the screener’s response.
Possible Screening Outcomes
19.54
The 1996 PSI Report explained that, if the medical screener was able to make a decision on the information available, there was a range of possible outcomes. First, the medical screener might decide that the complaint raised a
case of SPM and should be referred to the PPC. Second, s/he might decide that the complaint did not raise a
case of SPM but that the doctor’s behaviour nevertheless appeared to have fallen below acceptable standards. In that event, the medical screener might decide that a letter of advice should be sent to the doctor in accordance with the Chapter XV provisions; I have already described the procedure for this. Third, the medical screener might decide that the complaint did not raise a
case of SPM and that no further action should be taken in relation to it; in this event, the case would be referred to a lay screener. Only if the lay screener confirmed the decision of the medical screener to take no further action would the case be closed. If the lay screener disagreed with the medical screener, the case would be referred on to the PPC.
19.55
The analysis carried out by the PSI team in the late summer of 1995 showed that just over half the cases dealt with by the screeners during the year to 31st
August 1994 had resulted in one of the three outcomes I have described. The remainder of the cases referred to the medical screeners had been dealt with in a variety of other ways. There was a significant proportion of cases in which a medical screener had approved the recommendation of the GMC staff that a complainant should be advised to direct his/her complaint to NHS or other local complaints procedures. At the time of the PSI research, there was also a sizeable proportion of cases in which the medical screeners had felt unable to make a decision. In such cases, the medical screener would request the staff to seek further information or would ask for the papers to be shown to another screener or a medical expert. Decisions as to whether further information was required were, at this time, left to the medical screeners, rather than being taken by the staff at an early stage. Requests for further information were often made by GMC staff to complainants and sometimes went unheeded. As I explained in
, Professor Allen and her colleagues were worried that cases were getting ‘lost’, particularly when the onus was placed on complainants to take their cases back to local complaints procedures or to provide further information.
19.56
If there appeared to be an issue relating to the doctor’s health, a medical screener might send the case to a health screener, who would advise whether it was suitable to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures. If it was adjudged suitable, it was open to the medical screener to remit the case to the health screener. This course did not require the agreement of a lay screener.
19.57
If the medical screener judged that a case warranted no further action, s/he would often approve a draft letter of response to the complainant, which would have already been prepared by a caseworker. If the case was judged suitable for referral to the PPC, the caseworker would write to the complainant (if s/he was a private individual), asking him/her to provide at least one statutory declaration in support of his/her evidence. Upon receipt of the statutory declaration, a letter would then be written to the doctor (pursuant to rule 6 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules), notifying him/her of the receipt of the complaint and setting out details of the charges that s/he would face before the PPC. At the time of the PSI Report in 1996, that would be the first time that the doctor had been informed by the GMC of the complaint and had been asked to respond to the complaint. At the time of the screening decision, the screener would not usually have before him/her any response from the doctor. If, however, the referral to the GMC had been preceded by a local investigation, it is likely that the doctor’s response to the allegations would appear in the papers relating to that investigation. In those circumstances, it would be available to the screeners.
The Outcomes of Cases Handled by Different Medical Screeners
19.58
The PSI team examined the outcomes of cases handled by individual medical screeners. The principal medical screener, Dr Steel, had been the only medical screener in 67% of the cases that went forward to the PPC. Comparable figures for the other two screeners were 14% and 6%, respectively. (These percentages do not add up to 100% since some cases had been seen by two - even all three - medical screeners.) In fact Dr Steel had been involved at some stage of the screening process in 77% of the cases which went to the PPC. There was clearly extensive reliance by the other screeners on his advice. Professor Allen and her colleagues concluded, from the discussions they had had with screeners and staff, that cases that appeared more serious were sent to Dr Steel, as principal medical screener. By reason of their seriousness, those cases would be more likely to be referred to the PPC. Thus, it was not surprising that Dr Steel had referred a higher percentage of cases to the PPC than might have been expected had the cases been distributed randomly between screeners.
Reasons for Rejecting a Case
19.59
I have said at
paragraph 19.54
that one of the possible outcomes of the screening process was said to be that the medical screener would decide that the complaint did not raise a
case of SPM and that no further action should be taken in relation to it; in this event, the case would be referred to a lay screener. The PSI team was told by members of the GMC staff that there were two distinct grounds on which a complaint might be rejected by the screeners as ‘not SPM’. The first was where the complaint was judged insufficiently serious or as not relating to professional misconduct (i.e. not occurring in a professional context). The second was where the allegation, if made out, would have been capable of amounting to SPM, but there was, in the screeners’ view, insufficient supporting evidence to enable it to be proved. The PSI team observed that, when noting their decisions on cases, screeners rarely commented on the seriousness of the complaint or on the quality of the evidence.
19.60
The Annual Reports of the PPC show that, in 1997, screeners rejected 54% of the 1919 cases referred to them on the grounds that they were
‘Not SPM/SDP’
and 18% on the grounds of
‘Insufficient evidence SPM/SDP’
. Of the 1203 cases involving allegations of poor treatment, 57% were rejected on the grounds of
‘Not SPM/SDP’
and 20% on the grounds of
‘Insufficient evidence SPM/SDP’
. Of the 142 decisions made by screeners in cases involving allegations of dishonesty and criminality, 23% were rejected as
‘Not SPM/SDP’
and 11% on the grounds of
‘Insufficient evidence SPM/SDP’
. The 1998 statistics show that the screeners rejected 28% of the cases referred to them on the grounds of insufficient evidence of SPM or SDP.
The Criteria Used by Screeners
19.61
Professor Allen and her colleagues noted that there were no guidelines or written criteria for assessing the seriousness or gravity of a complaint, or for assessing the adequacy or weight of the evidence in support of it. In an attempt to establish how the screeners were making their decisions, they discussed with GMC staff and screeners what criteria the screeners were using in order to determine whether a complaint raised a
case of SPM. The discussions revealed that SPM was generally regarded as having a
‘high threshold’
, although some people regarded the threshold as higher than did others. The PSI team reported that there was a
‘consensus’
that a decision was reached by:
‘(a) ... considering the nature of the allegation and assessing its seriousness or gravity, (b) weighing up the amount, type and nature of the evidence, with particular attention to whether there are witnesses or other corroboration, (c) looking at the past relevant history of the doctor concerned and (d) always bearing in mind that the doctor’s fitness to practise is under consideration with the ultimate sanction being the removal of the doctor’s registration’
Other factors considered by some (but not all) of those involved were:
‘(e) the importance of assessing the extent to which there was risk to patients or to the public, and (f) whether the action or actions were committed deliberately or with intent rather than by accident or default’
It would appear from this that some members of staff or screeners did not have in mind the GMC’s primary duty of protecting patients.
19.62
Professor Allen and her colleagues noted that it was clear from the criteria identified by members of staff and screeners that the weight and quality of the evidence was generally believed to be an important factor in determining whether a complaint raised a
case of SPM. They noted also that some of the people to whom they had spoken gave more weight than others to the question of whether the allegation
‘would stand up in a court of law and could be proved beyond all reasonable doubt’
. They believed that this emphasis on the weight and quality of the evidence might have accounted, at least in part, for the rejection by screeners of a high proportion of complaints from private individuals. In cases brought by such individuals, the evidence was likely to have been sparse, and less well ordered and presented than evidence produced by public bodies. There might have been no witness statements or other corroboration.
19.63
Professor Allen and her colleagues recommended the development of guidelines about what constituted SPM, both generally and in particular types of case. They recommended that a
‘hierarchy of gravity’
should be developed for each category of behaviour that might amount to SPM. They also suggested that the GMC should develop and put into use a method of demonstrating how screening and other decision-making had been carried out in a particular case. The object of these recommendations and suggestions was, first of all, to promote consistency in the treatment of all complaints at all stages of the decision-making process. The PSI team was also anxious that the GMC should be in a position to demonstrate, if called upon to do so, precisely how - and by reference to what criteria - a particular decision had been reached. In other words, the PSI team wanted the GMC’s decision-making to be made more ‘transparent’. Only in that way would the GMC be able effectively to defend itself against any allegation of bias, whether racial or otherwise. The PSI Report noted, however, that there was
‘no enthusiasm’
among those whom they had interviewed for developing such written guidelines or criteria or for applying techniques of structured decision-making.
Changes to the Arrangements for Screening following the 1996 Report
19.64
The 1996 PSI Report recommended a number of changes to the arrangements for appointing and training medical and lay screeners. In particular, it recommended increasing the number and diversity of background of the medical screeners. It suggested appointing as medical screeners some doctors who had dedicated time available to carry out the task of screening, i.e. who would not have to fit in screening around other professional commitments. It also recommended the introduction of training and refresher courses for all screeners and of feedback to them of information about the results of their screening.
19.65
In November 1996, two new medical screeners, Dr (later Professor) Hilary Thomas and Dr Pearl Hettiaratchy, were appointed. Another lay screener, Mrs Rani Atma, was appointed in February 1997. This increase in numbers was partly in response to the recommendations contained in the 1996 PSI Report and partly because of an anticipated increase in the screeners’ caseload. The performance procedures were to be introduced in July 1997 and it was recognised that this would place further demands on the screeners, in particular the medical screeners.
White
19.66
In March 1997, the first judicial review of a screening decision took place in the case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte White
. The case arose out of the death of a young child who suffered from
spina bifida
. In September 1993, when the child was about 12 months old, he became unwell and his parents took him to hospital. It was thought that he had a urinary infection. He had been vomiting and was dehydrated. He was kept in overnight and was allowed home late the next day. The day after that, his condition deteriorated and his parents summoned their GP. He arrived at about 3pm, examined the child, observed that the child’s chest was
‘a bit noisy’
, advised that he should take Calpol and fluids and promised to revisit the next day. Shortly after the GP’s departure, the child’s condition deteriorated further. The child was taken to hospital but died at about 4pm. The cause of death was bronchopneumonia.
19.67
In due course, the parents made a complaint about the GP to the GMC. Initially, they were advised to pursue their complaint locally, but the time for so doing had expired. Then the GMC wrote asking if the parents really wished to pursue their complaint. They did; their medical expert considered that the GP’s failure to realise that the child was critically ill at 3pm amounted to
‘gross professional misconduct’
. The case was referred to Dr Steel, who screened the case out. The letter explaining his decision, written in November 1995, said that, before disciplinary action could be justified, there had to be clear evidence (to the standard required by a criminal court) that the doctor had failed to put himself in a position to assess the child’s condition, or evidence that he had deliberately disregarded his responsibilities to the child in some way. As it appeared that the doctor had examined the child and had exercised his clinical judgement, the screener took the view that there was no evidence of SPM. On 3rd
January 1996 (which, I observe, was shortly after the decision of the Privy Council in
, to which I referred in
), the parents’ solicitors replied saying that the screener’s approach was wrong. Their point was that negligence, if serious enough, could amount to SPM. The doctor had examined the child but had failed to realise that the child was dying, although the signs must have been obvious. A month later, the GMC replied, saying that the case had been reconsidered but that this had led to the same conclusion as previously. Errors in diagnosis, made in good faith, did not of themselves raise an issue of SPM. The fact that the child had died within a
‘certain’
period following examination could not, of itself, be regarded as evidence of SPM. Mr Justice Collins, who heard the application for judicial review, was critical of that reply because, as he observed, it suggested that negligence
per se
, in the absence of bad faith, could not raise an issue of SPM. That was wrong and he could understand why the parents had sought judicial review.
19.68
In the course of the proceedings for judicial review, the caseworker’s memorandum was produced; in it, the caseworker had expressed the view that, as it was clear that the doctor had examined the child, it could not be said that he had failed to put himself in a position to assess the child or had deliberately disregarded his responsibilities to him. Mr Townsend, who was then the Head of the Conduct Section, noted on the file that, unless the doctor should
‘beyond doubt’
have made an immediate referral to hospital, no question of SPM arose. (I interpose to observe that it appears from this that Mr Townsend was of the view that the screening process was intended to apply a very fine filter and that only clear cases of SPM should be referred to the PPC.) The note of Dr Steel’s screening decision said that he agreed with Mr Townsend. This was a one-off failed clinical judgement. He continued:
‘It can be seen in hindsight the baby was poorly but there is no evidence that the doctor disregarded responsibilities.’
19.69
In an affidavit sworn for the judicial review proceedings, Dr Steel set out all the criteria that he generally took into account in deciding cases at the screening stage. He then applied those criteria to the facts of the case and said that he had formed the view that the doctor had made an error of clinical judgement, which might give rise to a claim in negligence. However, although he was
‘well aware’
that negligence might be so serious as to amount to SPM, in his judgement this was not such a case. The Judge accepted that Dr Steel had approached the matter in the way he described in his affidavit, despite the fact that this was not the way in which his views had been represented in correspondence. He decided that the approach did not disclose an error of law and dismissed the application for judicial review.
19.70
It is worth noting that rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, which governed the screener’s decision, was not analysed in the judgement. It does not appear that the applicant’s case was based upon the GMC’s failure to apply the correct statutory test. Rather, the argument was that the screener had wrongly directed himself that negligence, however serious, could not amount to SPM. Once the Judge was persuaded that the screener had not thought that and had applied his mind to the seriousness of the negligence, the case was over. It was not until the case of
that the meaning of rule 6 came under scrutiny at judicial review.
19.71
In July 1997, the GMC issued, for the first time, a Screeners’ Handbook (the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook). According to the Annual Report of the PPC, presented to the Council in May 1997, the Handbook was intended to
‘set out explicit, published criteria for the main screening decisions’
. Presumably, it was intended to meet the PSI recommendations. Its production was timed to coincide with the introduction of the new performance procedures. The Preface, written by Dr Steel, indicated that the purpose of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook was to assist the GMC in its work and to explain to those outside the GMC the principles which were applied by screeners when making decisions. Mr Townsend, who was Head of the Conduct Section at the time the Handbook was published, said that the fact that the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook was a public document was a ‘noticeable change’, part of a move by the then President of the GMC, Sir Donald Irvine, to ‘open up’ the GMC’s decision-making processes. It seems to me, having read the judgement in the case of
White
, in which extracts from Dr Steel’s affidavit are cited, that the contents of the Handbook were to some extent informed by that case.
19.72
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook explained the framework within which the screeners worked. It emphasised that:
‘Complaints are screened out rather than in, that is, the fitness to practise procedures are based on the premise that the GMC will take action, but, if it cannot, it must justify not doing so.’
Mr Townsend observed that the Handbook reflected the change in the approach to screening which I have already mentioned. He said:
‘... previously, at least psychologically I think, the question had been “Does the complaint jump over the first hurdle to enable it to proceed to the PPC?” That was replaced with the view, which I think is reflected quite clearly in the first edition of the Screeners’ Handbook, that there had to be cogent and explained reasons why a case was not to proceed; in other words, that the screening was a coarse sieve simply to get rid of the complete non-starters as distinct from a more sophisticated filter.’
19.73
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook gave guidance on the order in which issues of health, conduct and performance should be considered by the screeners and on the various steps open to screeners to obtain further information or advice or expert opinion before taking a decision. The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook advised:
‘In each case, the medical screener’s initial task is to consider whether a question of spm arises in relation to a doctor’s conduct. The GMC’s Rules state that a case which appears to raise a question of spm shall normally be referred to the PPC.’
The reference to the
‘GMC’s Rules’
is presumably a reference to rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules and to the fact that a case should be referred to the PPC unless it appeared to the medical screener that it
. Rule 6 is not quoted in the Handbook.
19.74
Screeners were advised that, in order to keep abreast of what the PCC considered to be SPM, they should read the minutes of the PCC as they were published. They were also advised that they should be aware of any Privy Council decisions concerning the meaning of SPM. (It was not long since the important decision in
.) They were further advised to assess the information provided in the complaint against the following criteria:
These were most of the criteria that had appeared in Dr Steel’s affidavit in the case of
White
and which had, in effect, been approved by the Judge (although without his having considered the statutory provision). Dr Steel had also included
‘the detail and nature of the evidence and the length of time since the relevant events occurred’
. Those were not included as criteria in the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook. The Handbook contained no guidance about how grave a negligent act or omission had to be before it was capable of amounting to SPM. Nor was any guidance given as to the relative weight to be attached to the various criteria listed above.
19.75
It was noted that the existence of previous complaints, incapable of substantiation, should not be taken into account. Previous complaints could be taken into account only if, for example, they indicated that the complainant was malicious or disturbed, or if they indicated that the doctor might be the subject of some form of vendetta. They could also be taken into account if they had already been the subject of formal GMC disciplinary action. Thus an unsubstantiated complaint of indecent assault would be left out of account if a second complaint of a similar nature were received. There does not appear to have been any recognition of the possibility that an unsubstantiated account might be true or any realisation that the receipt of more than one complaint of a similar nature, even if unsubstantiated, ought to give rise to concern.
19.76
Screeners were advised that, if a question of SPM arose, if the case complied with the necessary procedural requirements (one such requirement would be the provision by a complainant of a statutory declaration) and if no further evidence in support was required at the screening stage, the case should be referred to the PPC as soon as possible. There were two circumstances when that should not be done. The first of these was where referral to the PPC should, for some good reason, be deferred and this could be done without harm to the public interest. Deferral would be appropriate, for example, where a case was to be referred back to local complaints procedures or for investigation by the police or some other organisation. The second circumstance was that some wholly exceptional reason existed why the PPC did not need to consider the complaint. This might arise where the doctor was terminally ill or where there was a risk that the bringing of disciplinary proceedings would amount to an abuse of process.
19.77
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook also dealt with the situation where a screener found that a case raised a question of SPM but that there was insufficient evidence to support the allegation. In this connection, screeners were advised:
‘... it is not the role of the screener to attempt to decide whether any, or all, of the facts alleged in a case are true. It is for the PCC alone to make findings of fact.
It is not possible to lay down precise criteria about the type, the quantity or the apparent quality of evidence required to justify referral of a complaint to the PPC, as that will inevitably depend on the nature and circumstances of each case. In many cases it will be sufficient to inform the complainant what further information or evidence (which may simply be a sworn statement) appears to be required, and ask the complainant to provide it.
In all cases where it appears to the screener that a question of spm arises the screener must bear in mind that:
• The Rules simply require that it must appear to the screener that there is a “question whether the practitioner has committed spm”.
• The screener should not, at the screening stage, attempt to resolve conflicts of evidence between the doctor and the complainant.
• The PPC has the power to adjourn a case for further evidence, and evidence may also be obtained following referral of a case by the PPC to the PCC.
• If in doubt, and if further inquiries or consultation with other screeners cannot resolve the doubt, the case should be referred to the PPC.’
19.78
It appears that the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook recognised that Dr Steel’s inclusion (in his affidavit in
White
) of the consideration of the detail and nature of the evidence as one of his criteria had been wrong. Screeners were advised that complaints involving allegations that were obviously irrational, or self-evidently untrue, need not be taken forward, even if a question of SPM would arise if the allegations were true. However, screeners were also reminded that they must not, in any other circumstances, attempt to decide whether any, or all, of the facts complained of were true. They were warned that if there was
any
doubt at all’
as to the rationality of an allegation, the case should be considered as one which appeared to require action by the GMC, but where there was insufficient evidence to proceed at that stage. Further evidence should then be sought until it became clear whether or not there was a valid issue about the doctor’s fitness to practise for the GMC to consider.
19.79
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook stated that, where further information was requested from a complainant and the request had not been complied with, there should be an effort to persuade the complainant to provide the necessary information, bearing in mind that GMC action might be necessary to protect other patients or the public and that the complainant might not be the only person affected. This advice reflected the concerns of the PSI team that complaints were being ‘lost’ because of the failure on the part of complainants to respond to requests by the GMC to provide further information.
19.80
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook also signalled a change of procedure in relation to the informing of doctors about complaints made against them. Up to 1997, doctors were not in general informed of complaints unless and until a decision had been taken to refer a case to the PPC and (in the case of a complaint by a private individual) unless and until a statutory declaration had been obtained from the complainant. At that stage, the doctor would be invited to submit any explanation s/he had to offer. (The position in relation to convictions was different: see
paragraph 19.20
.) The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook advised that screeners were to decide, at an early stage, whether a complaint should be copied to the doctor. In most cases, that would be done before a decision was taken whether to refer the case to the PPC. The effect of this was that, from 1997, screeners would often have the doctor’s response to a complaint available to them when considering a complaint. At that time, there was no opportunity for the complainant to see and comment on the doctor’s response. A complaint would not be copied to the doctor before screening if it was clear from the outset that the case should be referred to the PPC. In that event, the doctor would be informed about the complaint and asked for his/her response at the same time as s/he was notified that the case had been referred to the PPC.
19.81
The contents of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook make it plain that the GMC had recognised that, in the past, the screening process had not been carried out in accordance with the Rules. The filter applied had been far too fine; too many cases had been ‘screened out’. The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook represented a real attempt to change that culture. However, it appears that some aspects of the advice that were designed to change the culture were either ignored or quickly fell into disuse. Moreover, there was no attempt to keep the advice up to date and to remind screeners of the principles on which they should act. Despite the many important changes that took place in the following years, the Inquiry has been told that no further version of the Screeners’ Handbook was produced until as late as November 2002.
18th
March 1997 (unreported).
18th
March 1997 (unreported).


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
========================================================================

--- Later Developments ---
The 2003 Policy Studies Institute Paper
20.176
Professor Allen and her colleagues analysed the outcomes of cases referred to the PPC during the period from 1999 to 2001. The results were published in their 2003 Paper.
20.177
The proportion of all doctors whose cases were referred by the PPC to the PCC had increased markedly, from 30% of all cases considered by the PPC in 1997 and 31% in 1998, to 41% in 1999 and 2000. The proportion dropped again to 34% in 2001. The proportion of UK qualifiers sent by the PPC to the PCC was much lower than the proportion of overseas qualifiers in all five years.
20.178
Over the years 1999, 2000 and 2001, the PPC had sent fewer than half of the doctors who had been convicted of criminal offences (other than drink driving) to the PCC. In all three years 1999, 2000 and 2001, the proportion of overseas qualifiers with convictions referred by the PPC to the PCC was considerably higher than that of UK qualifiers. This was puzzling since one might have expected the PPC to adopt a consistent approach when dealing with doctors who had committed criminal offences. Once again, a greater proportion of UK qualifiers than of overseas qualifiers was referred to the health procedures, raising the possibility that overseas qualifiers were being treated unfairly as compared with those who had qualified in the UK.
20.179
On this occasion, the PSI team had been commissioned by the GMC to carry out a purely quantitative analysis. Professor Allen and her colleagues did not carry out any qualitative analysis, such as an analysis of the reasons given by the PPC for its decisions. They were unable to find any explanation for the anomalies. The continuing disproportionate referral rates of overseas qualifiers who had been convicted of criminal offences were particularly difficult to explain. In its 2003 Paper, the PSI team warned that, until there were some objective measures, which could demonstrate that the disproportionate referral rates had occurred for good reason and were fair and reasonable, the GMC remained open to accusations of bias. The 2003 Paper reiterated the need for commonly agreed criteria and thresholds to be applied when reaching judgements about the seriousness of cases and about how they should be dealt with.
20.180
Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that the contents of the 2003 PSI Paper were very disappointing for the GMC. There was still no explanation for the disparities revealed by the analysis carried out by the PSI team. This was, of course, not surprising since, on this occasion, the PSI team had been commissioned to carry out only a statistical analysis of the cases dealt with during the relevant period. It had conducted no further research into the decision-making processes. Nor had the GMC itself carried out any such research. And, despite all the changes, the people making decisions on behalf of the GMC - of whom there were by this time hundreds - still had no standards and criteria to use in the process. What the analysis showed was that there was a continuing problem which needed addressing. The difference in treatment of convictions in particular needed an explanation. Mr Nicholls said that the PPC’s view was that research should be undertaken in order to explore the reasons for the apparent disparities. Now that the PPC recorded reasons for its decisions, he said that it would be possible to carry out a retrospective study. In addition to that, there was a need for continuing monitoring and audit.
Changes in the Treatment of Convictions
20.181
On the face of it, the proportion of conviction cases referred by the PPC to the PCC seems remarkably low. As I have also explained, the PSI research highlighted a disparity between UK and overseas qualifiers in the treatment of cases where doctors had been convicted of criminal offences. The PSI team was concerned about both sets of findings.
20.182
It is true that the numbers of convictions (other than drink driving cases) referred to the PPC were small (23 in 1997, 32 in 1998 and 31 in 1999). The GMC’s procedures permitted more minor convictions to be filtered out by GMC staff (in the case of minor motoring offences) and (in the case of other minor offences) by the medical screeners, so that they would not have reached the PPC. As I have said in
, the medical screeners had for many years been authorised to use their discretion in deciding whether to refer cases relating to offences committed more than five years before notification to the GMC. The medical screeners had also been given discretion not to refer convictions for minor offences not ostensibly related to a doctor’s professional practice, nor involving a degree of dishonesty such as to bring disrepute upon the medical profession. In addition, the ‘conviction’ cases considered by the PPC did not include cases in which an absolute or conditional discharge had been imposed by the courts. Given that the PPC would not be called upon to adjudicate on the types of case described above, it must follow that the conviction cases which the PPC was deciding not to refer to the PCC were for offences of a higher degree of seriousness.
20.183
Mr Nicholls said that there were some minor convictions (he described them as ‘one-offs’) where the Court had imposed a very low sentence and where the PPC might take the view that a warning letter was sufficient. A document describing the GMC’s conduct procedures, published in July 2000, suggested that first convictions for ‘shoplifting’ would be dealt with by way of a warning letter or a letter of advice. This was presumably the type of case to which Mr Nicholls was referring.
20.184
I interpose to say that it does appear that, in the past, the GMC has tended to assess the gravity of a doctor’s conduct by reference to the penalty imposed by the court. When sitting as a judge (and, before that, when appearing in court as counsel), I have heard pleas in mitigation made on behalf of doctors convicted of criminal offences, in which the court has been urged to treat the doctor leniently because his/her career - or even life - is said to be in ruins as a result of the action that will inevitably be taken by the GMC as a result of his/her conviction. The implication is that the doctor will lose his/her livelihood and will face professional disgrace. Faced with that kind of plea in mitigation, it is not surprising if a court feels constrained to impose a more lenient sentence than might otherwise be thought appropriate. The court would no doubt be surprised to learn that the GMC had later taken a lenient view of the case because the judge had imposed a lenient sentence. It seems to me that the sentence passed by the criminal court is of very limited relevance to the seriousness of the doctor’s conduct from the GMC’s point of view. What should matter to the GMC is the doctor’s fitness to practise as a doctor and whether s/he represents a risk to patients. Those are not the issues on which the Court will have focussed. I will return to this subject later in this Report.
20.185
As I have said, the PSI team had recommended that all convictions (save those for drink driving) should be referred directly to the PCC without the intervention of the screeners or the PPC. This recommendation was not adopted. Instead, a far more limited rule was brought into force. In November 2002, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were amended so as to permit all convictions where an immediate (i.e. not suspended) custodial sentence had been imposed to be referred by the Registrar direct to the PCC unless he was of the opinion that such a direct referral would not be in the public interest.
20.186
Mr Scott explained that the GMC had not moved immediately to a full implementation of the PSI team’s recommendation because of resistance from some members of the Council. Their belief was that there should be an opportunity for the exercise of discretion (presumably by the PPC and, to a lesser extent, by the medical screeners), even in cases where doctors had been convicted of criminal offences. Mr Scott said that, in the light of this opposition, it had been possible to make progress only in stages, rather than in one leap. He told the Inquiry that his personal view was that the GMC should move as rapidly as possible to a position whereby all save the most minor convictions were referred to the PCC (or, in the future, to a FTP panel). However, the decision was not for him but for elected members. Mr Scott said that he had no doubt that the GMC would ‘continue to shift the boundaries’ and would in time implement the recommendation of the PSI team. Meanwhile, in addressing the question of why all convictions had not previously been referred routinely to the PCC, Mr Scott said:
‘... I do not think I can honestly explain that except in the terms that decision makers exercised a discretion they were entitled to exercise and they made decisions that others might not have done’
20.187
If the PPC had had a good track record for exercising its discretion consistently and in a way that was appropriate in the public interest, I might have been able to understand why the GMC did not wish to move to the position recommended by the PSI team. I can see why it might be felt that not every single case in which a doctor had been convicted should go to the PCC. However, this was not so. The GMC could see from the statistics produced by the PSI team that a substantial proportion of the more serious conviction cases were not being referred to the PCC. In other words, it was clear that the PPC was not referring a lot of cases that should have been referred. Rather than allowing this state of affairs to continue, the GMC should, in my view, have laid down some clear rules as to which convictions should be referred and which need not be. As it was, the GMC allowed the
to continue and did not even provide any guidance or criteria for the PPC, let alone a clear rule. Two problems resulted from this. First, there was a real potential for unfairness as between doctors. Second (as examination of the cases reveals), cases which, in the interests of the public, of the honour of the medical profession and of the reputation of the GMC, ought to have had public hearings did not.
20.188
It was clear to me, from an examination of some of the case files produced to the Inquiry, why the PPC failed to refer conviction cases that ought to have been referred. The PPC had a tendency to focus on the circumstances of the doctor rather than on the seriousness of the offence. Of course, the circumstances of the doctor should be taken into account by the PCC when deciding upon a penalty, but not by the PPC. Take, for example, a case in which a doctor has stolen money while working in a hospital. Instead of focussing on the facts underlying the conviction and deciding whether the conduct was serious enough to warrant referral, the PPC tended to focus on aspects of mitigation. It might have taken into account the fact that the doctor was under stress, was over-worked or had personal problems. It might have received testimonials as to the doctor’s clinical abilities. On those grounds, the PPC might well have decided not to refer the case. In fact, the correct approach would have been to examine the conduct which had given rise to the conviction, decide whether it warranted referral and leave issues of mitigation to the PCC. Not only would such an approach have been correct in law, but it would also have ensured that the public (or that section of the public that was aware of the case) would have known how the GMC had dealt with the doctor and why it had dealt with him/her as it had. The difficulty for the PPC was that they had no standards to apply when considering whether the case ought to be referred.
20.189
Under the new FTP procedures, it appears that some discretion will be exercised by the office staff, case examiners and, possibly, the Investigation Committee (IC), in relation to some types of conviction. They will be able to decide, in some instances, whether or not a conviction case should go forward to a public hearing before a FTP panel. I shall describe the proposals for the treatment of convictions under the new FTP procedures in
The Recent Statistics
20.190
In its 2000 Report, the PSI team had asked why such a high proportion of cases (two thirds during its observations of meetings before November 1999 and over half after November 1999) which had been referred by screeners to the PPC were not referred to the PCC. The GMC’s annual FTP statistics show that only 35% of those doctors who were dealt with by the PPC in 2002 were referred to the PCC. In 2003, the percentage of doctors referred by the PPC to the PCC was 30%.
20.191
Mr Nicholls said that he did not find the proportion of cases sent to the PCC surprising. The screeners were operating a low threshold, particularly after the judicial reviews (presumably those in the cases of
), when there was ‘more nervousness’ about their ‘limited powers’. The PPC, on the other hand, was looking at whether there was a realistic prospect of proving SPM. Mr Nicholls pointed out that, in many cases which were not referred to the PCC, the PPC took ‘some action in the interests of the public against the doctor’ by sending a warning letter or a letter of advice. In 2002, 43% of doctors dealt with by the PPC were sent a warning letter or a letter of advice. In 2003, the figure was 44%. In 2002, 61% of conviction cases were dealt with by way of a warning letter or a letter of advice. In 2003, the total was 65%. Some of these would be drink driving cases, but it seems that other convictions were also dealt with in this way. Warning letters and letters of advice must also have been sent in conduct cases where some or all of the facts had been proved or admitted by the doctor concerned or were beyond dispute. It seems to me that the explanation for the high proportion of cases not sent through to the PCC probably lay in the continued unwillingness of the PPC to confine itself to an assessment of the appropriate issues and in its tendency to take mitigating factors into account.
20.192
In evidence, Mr Nicholls was asked about the fact that, in 2002, the PPC had referred to the PCC only 23 (28%) of the 82 cases of sexual assault and indecency that had been referred to it by screeners. These were not cases where there had been a conviction, since convictions were listed separately in the annual FTP statistics. Mr Nicholls thought that the most likely reason for a decision not to refer was the difficulty of establishing the allegations to the criminal standard of proof required by the PCC. However, he pointed out that warning letters had been sent in 21 of the sexual assault or indecency cases. Since warning letters are sent only in cases where the allegation has been proved or admitted or is beyond dispute, it is difficult to see how evidential difficulties could account for the fact that those cases were not referred. Revised figures recently produced by the GMC (based on the number of doctors about whom allegations had been received, rather than on the number of individual allegations) show that 33% of the 51 doctors against whom allegations of sexual assault or indecency had been made were referred to the PCC in 2002. The figure for 2003 was 30%. Letters of warning or advice were sent to 45% of doctors against whom allegations of sexual assault or indecency had been made in 2002 and to 39% of such doctors in 2003.
20.193
Mr Nicholls was also asked about the fact that, on the basis of the figures available at the time, it seems that, in 2002, the PPC had referred only 38 (55%) of the 69 dishonesty cases (again non-convictions) to the PCC. In 15 such cases (22%), a warning letter had been sent and, in eight cases, a letter of advice. Again, Mr Nicholls suggested that, since there had been no conviction in these cases, there might have been evidential problems in satisfying the criminal standard of proof. However, this could not account for cases in which a warning letter had been sent. Mr Nicholls said that there would be some ‘very minor’ offences in the dishonesty category. The revised figures show that 45% of doctors who faced allegations of dishonesty in 2002 were referred by the PPC to the PCC in 2002 and that 35% were referred in 2003. In 2002, 43% of such doctors were dealt with by way of a warning letter or a letter of advice. In 2003, that figure was 57%.
The Case of Holmes
The Cancellation by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee of Hearings before the Professional Conduct Committee

--- The Case of Holmes ---
20.161
, I outlined the circumstances of the case of
, which was decided by Mr Justice Ouseley in April 2001. It concerned applications for judicial review challenging,
, decisions of the medical and lay screeners in respect of a complaint against Dr M M Rahman and a decision of the PPC relating to a complaint against Dr S Sengupta. The Judge quashed all the decisions. I discussed the decision in Dr Rahman’s case in
. I shall now consider the Judge’s decision in Dr Sengupta’s case. This case was also considered by the Court of Appeal in October 2002
20.162
20.163
Following Mr Dean’s death, Ms Holmes complained to the local FHSA about both doctors. In March 1996, a MSC concluded that Dr Sengupta had breached his terms of service but Dr Rahman had not. Ms Holmes appealed to the SoS for Wales against the decision in respect of Dr Rahman. The appeal was allowed and, in June or July 1998, the SoS for Wales directed that the complaint against Dr Rahman should be referred to the GMC. In July 1998, the claimants made a complaint to the GMC against Dr Sengupta. Some time in early 1999, the principal medical screener, Dr Steel, and another medical screener, Professor Hilary Thomas, decided that the complaints against both Dr Sengupta and Dr Rahman should not be referred to the PPC; a lay screener agreed in the case of Dr Rahman. His case was closed and, as I explained in
, that decision was later quashed on judicial review. However, in Dr Sengupta’s case, the lay screener disagreed with the medical screeners’ view and Dr Sengupta’s case was therefore referred to the PPC.
The Decision of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
20.164
The PPC considered the complaint against Dr Sengupta on 9th
September 1999. The meeting was chaired by Dr Steel. This must have been one of the last cases where a PPC panel was chaired by the person who had also been responsible for screening the complaint. Until November 1999, this was a very frequent occurrence but, to modern eyes, was obviously unsatisfactory. A person in that position could hardly be expected to approach the case with an open mind and the chance that s/he would change his/her mind and support the referral of the case to the PCC must have been remote. Professor Allen had observed at this time that there was very little discussion of a case after the Chairman had introduced it. Not surprisingly, the PPC decided not to refer Dr Sengupta’s case to the PCC but, instead, to send Dr Sengupta a warning letter. The minute recording the PPC’s decision stated:
‘W/L
i.e. a warning letter
on the basis that this is a single case, patient had been seen very recently in hospital, doctor offered review in 12 hours and condition difficult for GP to diagnose. But Ctte did not accept he’d carried out an adequate examination and also were critical of the fact that his assessment was not documented. Letter should also say Ctte reinforced decision of MSC.’
20.165
Subsequently, the GMC wrote to the claimants’ solicitors and to Dr Sengupta, informing them of the decision of the PPC. The letter to the claimants’ solicitors, written by a caseworker, stated that the PPC had decided that it would not be necessary to refer the case to the PCC for further consideration of the doctor’s fitness to practise. It went on:
‘The Committee concurred with the view of the original Medical Service Committee which found that Dr Sengupta had not placed himself in an adequate position to make a clinical judgement and that the record keeping of the consultation with Mr Dean was poor.
They felt that Dr Sengupta did not give due regard to Mr Dean’s prior medical history and that his actions were inadequate in the circumstances.
However, the Committee took into account that this was a single case and that Mr Dean had recently been seen in hospital. They noted that Dr Sengupta had offered to review Mr Dean’s condition in 12 hours and the condition which Mr Dean had was, of itself difficult to diagnose.
The Committee felt having regard to all these circumstances that this matter did not reach the threshold of serious professional misconduct.’
20.166
The letter went on to say that the Committee had asked the author of the letter to explain that the Committee had a duty to examine the doctor’s individual actions and that an error or omission (even where this had had serious consequences) might not
‘justify the revocation of a doctor’s license
to practise permanently’
. The letter stated that Dr Sengupta had been reminded of his professional obligations and had been warned that the matter might be reconsidered should the GMC receive any further information about his practice in the next three years. The reference to three years suggests that it was contemplated that it might be taken into account in future performance (rather than conduct) proceedings. As I have explained, a two-year limit operated for the revival of conduct matters, but it seems that the GMC operated an unofficial cut-off of 3 years for performance allegations.
The Judicial Review Process
20.167
The claimants issued judicial review proceedings, challenging the GMC’s decisions in relation to both doctors. The doctors were joined in the proceedings as interested parties. Grounds of opposition were filed by the GMC and the doctors. In December 2000, the claimants were granted permission to apply for judicial review. That was about six months after the decision in
and 13 days before the decision in
Richards
, which was delivered on 18th
December 2000. Very shortly after, the GMC informed the doctors’ solicitors that it was minded to concede the claim because of doubts as to the lawfulness of the decisions of the screeners (in Dr Rahman’s case) and of the PPC (in that of Dr Sengupta). Subsequently, the GMC decided to consent to the quashing of the two decisions on the ground that, in reaching those decisions, the wrong legal tests had been applied. A consent order was agreed between the GMC and the claimants. The doctors opposed the application at a hearing before Ouseley J. As I have said previously, this gave rise to an unusual form of hearing.
20.168
The reasons why the GMC agreed that the decision in Dr Sengupta’s case was unsustainable were set out in a witness statement provided by a representative of the GMC’s solicitors. He said that the letter to the claimants’ solicitors and the doctor was in
‘PCC language’
. It echoed the test of the PCC and did not appear to be consistent with the test to be applied by the PPC. It indicated that the PPC had reached conclusions or findings as to the errors that Dr Sengupta had made. The witness statement continued:
‘It suggests that they
i.e. the PPC
then reached a conclusion that these errors did not reach the level of serious professional misconduct. They did not ask themselves whether there was a “question” of whether that level was reached, or whether it was arguable that it might have been reached. They reached a definitive conclusion.’
20.169
The witness statement went on to cite the reference in the GMC’s letter to the power to revoke a doctor’s licence to practise
‘permanently’
. It observed:
‘This is troubling since it does not appear that the PPC has considered the power to affect the right to practise temporarily or conditionally or the power to impose a lesser sanction (such as a reprimand).’
20.170
Ouseley J noted that he had received no evidence from the GMC about the tests which had been applied by the screeners or the PPC. He observed:
‘... if there had been clear evidence of a test being consistently applied with the relevant distinctions between the roles of the various bodies being routinely observed, I would have had it, even if the individual case itself could not be remembered. I attach weight, but not determinative weight, to the position of the GMC, knowing its decision makers and the language which is used by them, being unable to support the decisions in this case as positively showing that the correct approach had been adopted.’
20.171
It was clear from the position taken by the GMC that it had recognised that its decision-makers had not adopted the correct approach. I refer back to the observations of Professor Allen and her colleagues that GMC decision-makers appeared to have no clear idea of their role or of the tests that they should be applying.
20.172
Ouseley J said that he was not persuaded that the part of the letter which I have quoted at
paragraph 20.165
, taken in isolation, evidenced an error of law. Nor was there any impermissible finding of fact, since the PPC had taken the case against the doctor at its highest. However, that left the
‘seriously troubling’
matter of the use of the word
‘permanently’
. He said:
‘... I do consider that the language shows that the range of conduct capable of constituting serious professional misconduct was unduly narrowed because other and lesser penalties exist for serious professional misconduct which are relevant to the judgment of the quality of conduct as capable of constituting serious professional misconduct.’
20.173
As a result, Ouseley J concluded that there had been an error of law and quashed the PPC’s decision. Dr Sengupta applied to the Court of Appeal for permission to appeal against the Judge’s decision. Permission was initially refused but was subsequently granted at an oral hearing.
The Court of Appeal Hearing
20.174
Before the hearing of the appeal, the GMC filed a Respondent’s Notice contending, as an additional reason for upholding the Judge’s decision (which had, of course, been to quash the decision of the PPC), that the statement in the GMC’s letter that the PPC
‘felt that having regard to all the circumstances that this matter did not reach the threshold of serious professional misconduct’
set the threshold too high. Ouseley J had rejected that contention. The GMC also conceded that the entirety of the letter was couched in terms of decision-making on the merits of the case. In my view, it is greatly to the credit of the GMC and its legal team that it adopted this approach in the Court of Appeal. The GMC was in effect inviting the Court to hold that the PPC had been wrong in two respects and not only in the one respect found by the Judge.
20.175
Giving judgement in the Court of Appeal, Lord Justice Parker said:
‘... the terms of that
i.e. the GMC’s
letter, read as a whole, are consistent only with the PPC having applied the wrong legal test in reaching its decision, in that (a) it regarded itself as having a fact-finding role, and (b) it treated the range of “serious professional misconduct” as being restricted to conduct which would attract “permanent” erasure from the register of practitioners, and in doing so left out of account conduct which would justify a lesser penalty’
He accepted the GMC’s submission that the Judge had been in error in not concluding that the PPC had assumed a fact-finding role. Also, in his view, the use of the word
‘permanently’
was consistent only with the PPC having misdirected itself as to its true role. The other members of the Court of Appeal agreed with Parker LJ and Dr Sengupta’s appeal was dismissed. The mistakes made by the PPC in the case of
were of a fundamental nature. The errors revealed in the case of
Richards
had not been isolated.
[2002] EWCA CIV 1838.
Two More Cases of Judicial Review
Later Developments

--- The Functions and Powers of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ---
20.17
Section 13(2) of the Medical Act 1978 (which came into force in August 1980) defined the functions of the PPC. It stated:
‘It shall be the duty of the Committee to decide whether any case referred to them for consideration in which a practitioner is alleged to be liable to have his name erased ... or his registration suspended or made subject to conditions ... ought to be referred for inquiry by the Professional Conduct Committee or the Health Committee.’
This subsection was reproduced in section 42(2) of the Medical Act 1983 and continued unchanged thereafter.
20.18
Rule 11(1) of the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1980 (the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules) provided:
‘Where a case has been referred to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ... that Committee shall consider the case and, subject to these rules, determine:
(a) that the case be referred to the Professional Conduct Committee for inquiry, or
(b) that the case shall be referred to the Health Committee for inquiry, or
(c) that the case shall not be referred to either Committee.’
20.19
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules also gave the PPC the power to adjourn a case for further investigations to be made, or in order to obtain legal advice before making its determination. These provisions were reproduced in the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988 (the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules) and remained virtually unchanged thereafter.
20.20
No criteria were ever stated in the Medical Acts or in the Rules for the guidance of the PPC when deciding whether a case
‘ought to be referred’
to the PCC or the HC or to neither. It is to be noted that the wording of rule 6(3) of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules (later rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules) which governed the decisions of screeners was very similar to that of section 13(2) of the Medical Act 1978, later section 42(2) of the Medical Act 1983. Rule 6(3) provided:
i.e. the medical sc
r
eener
that the matter need not proceed further he shall direct the Registrar to write to the practitioner ... stating the matters which appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct.’
20.21
As I shall later explain, the similarity between the wording of rule 6(3) and section 42(2) led Professor Allen to conclude that there was no real difference between the two filtering processes carried out by the screeners and the PPC. One decided whether a matter
and the other decided whether it
‘ought to be referred’
to the PCC. The distinction appeared to be a fine one.
20.22
At the time of the introduction of the performance procedures in 1997, the PPC was not given the power to refer a case to the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP). Nor was it able to refer a doctor for a performance assessment or for consideration to be given by a medical screener to the possibility of directing such an assessment. That represented a significant gap in the powers of the PPC. Mr Nicholls said that the lack of such powers had ‘caused quite a lot of heart searching in the PPC’ during his time as Chairman.
The Composition of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
The Possible Outcomes of the Consideration of a Case by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee

--- The Composition of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ---
20.7
The composition of the PPC was governed successively by the General Medical Council (Constitution of Fitness to Practise Committees) Rules Order of Council 1980, 1986 and 1996 (the Constitution Rules). Between 1980 and 1996, the PPC was composed of the Chairman, eight medical members and two lay members of the GMC (i.e. 11 members in all). With the exception of the President of the GMC, members were not permitted to sit concurrently on more than one of the GMC’s FTP committees (i.e., at that time, the PPC, the PCC and the Health Committee (HC)).
20.8
Until 2000, the Constitution Rules provided that the President (or the medical member nominated by him and appointed by the Council to act as medical screener in his place) should chair the PPC. In practice, save for a period between 1984 and 1989, when the President acted as medical screener and chaired the PPC, the PPC was chaired by the medical screener appointed in the President’s place. That medical screener came to be known as the ‘principal’ medical screener to distinguish him/her from the additional medical screeners who were appointed to assist in the screening process.
20.9
Other members of the PPC were elected by the Council annually. As more medical screeners (and, from 1990, lay screeners) were appointed, it was usual for at least some of them also to be members of the PPC. Medical and lay screeners who were not elected members of the PPC were nevertheless invited to attend meetings of the PPC as observers. Although they had no vote, they might be called upon to address the PPC in relation to cases that they had screened. The legal quorum of the PPC was five.
20.10
The medical member of the GMC appointed to screen cases which raised a question whether a doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition was known as the health screener. By 1984, it was established practice for the health screener, if s/he was not an elected member of the PPC, to attend PPC meetings in order to advise upon cases where the health of a doctor was in issue. In 1986, the Constitution Rules were amended to provide that the health screener should automatically become a member of the PPC unless s/he had already been elected as such.
20.11
In 1994, the Constitution Rules were further amended to provide for the situation where fewer than five members were available to attend a meeting of the PPC, so that a legal quorum could not be achieved. The President was given the power to appoint temporarily to the PPC any member of the GMC who would have been eligible to stand for election to the PPC. In 1996, membership of the PPC was reduced from 11 (including the Chairman) to seven, although the quorum remained five. Five members of the PPC were to be medical members and two were to be lay members. The Constitution Rules continued to provide that the PPC should be chaired by the President or, if he chose not to act in that capacity, by the medical screener appointed in his place. If the Chairman of the PPC was not available to chair a meeting, the President had the power to appoint another member of the PPC to act as Chairman.
20.12
From 1996, the Constitution Rules no longer obliged the health screener to be a member of the PPC. However, notes produced by the GMC in June 1997 for the use of new members of the PPC indicated that, in practice, the principal health screener was treated as an
ex officio
member of the PPC. The second health screener attended meetings as an observer. The legal quorum continued to be five, to include at least one lay member. As the workload of the PPC increased, further GMC members were co-opted to sit on the PPC, using the power which had been conferred on the President in 1994. In addition, ‘observer’ screeners were sometimes called upon to deputise for members of the PPC who were absent, so as to ensure that there was a legal quorum.
20.13
In November 1999, the GMC decided, in anticipation of the coming into force in October 2000 of the Human Rights Act 1998, that the functions of the screeners and of the PPC should be separated. From November 1999, screeners (medical, health and lay) were no longer eligible for election to the PPC. Medical and lay screeners no longer attended meetings as observers. The Chairman of the PPC was to be the President or, if he chose not to act in that capacity, some other GMC member appointed by him. Mr Nicholls, a former lay screener, became acting Chairman of the PPC in November 1999. His appointment was confirmed in January 2000. In August 2000, the Constitution Rules were amended to reflect the changes which had already been put in place. Although the health screeners were no longer eligible for election to the PPC, at least one of them continued to attend meetings of the PPC whenever possible, to offer advice in cases where the health of a doctor was in issue. The health screeners had no vote.
20.14
As I have explained in
, in 2000, the GMC was given the power to co-opt non-GMC members, both medical and lay, to sit on its FTP committees. A pool of such persons, who were known first as ‘adjudicators’, then as ‘associates’, was soon recruited. Also in 2000, the Constitution Rules were further amended to give the President power (subject to the approval of the Council) to appoint a member of the PPC as Deputy Chairman, to perform the duties of Chairman in the Chairman’s absence. This power, together with the power to co-opt onto the PPC other members of the GMC and associates, made it possible for differently constituted panels of the PPC to sit far more frequently than would have been feasible when it had a small static membership. In November 2002, the quorum of the PPC was reduced to three, to include one medical and one lay member.
Meetings of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
20.15
The PPC met in private and considered only documentary evidence and written submissions. Neither the complainant nor the doctor was invited to attend its meetings. An exception to that general rule existed between 1980 and 2000, during which period the PPC had the power to suspend or impose conditions on a doctor’s registration pending his/her appearance before the PCC or the HC. In such cases, the doctor would be notified in advance if the PPC was considering making an interim order. He or she (and/or his/her representative) was then entitled to attend the meeting at which his/her case was considered and to make representations on whether or not an interim order should be made.
20.16
From its inception in 1980, the PPC was always advised during its meetings by a legal assessor, who was appointed by the GMC and had to be a barrister, advocate or solicitor of at least ten years’ standing. In practice, the role was usually filled by a junior barrister with significantly more than ten years in practice, by a Queen’s Counsel or by a retired judge. It was the duty of the legal assessor to advise on any questions of law which might be referred to him/her by the PPC. The legal assessor also had a duty to inform the PPC immediately of any irregularity in the conduct of proceedings before the PPC which might come to his/her knowledge and to advise the PPC on his/her own initiative where it appeared to him/her that, but for such advice, there was a possibility of a mistake of law being made. There was no requirement (as was the case with legal advice given by a legal assessor to the PCC) that that advice (and any refusal by the PPC to accept it) should be made known to the doctor or to a complainant. Until the early part of 2000 at least, one or more representatives of the GMC’s solicitors also attended meetings of the PPC in an advisory capacity. However, it seems that their attendance was subsequently discontinued. Members of the GMC staff also attended meetings in order to provide secretarial and other administrative support.
The Functions and Powers of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee

--- Introduction ---
20.1
From 1951, General Medical Council (GMC) Rules provided for a further filtering process, to take place after that carried out by the screeners, as described in the last Chapter. Under the old fitness to practise (FTP) procedures, all complaints and reports of convictions which survived the filtering processes carried out by the GMC staff and by the screeners had to pass through a third filtering process if they were to be referred for a public disciplinary hearing. Before 1951, this third filtering process was carried out informally. Between 1951 and August 1980, the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC) assumed responsibility for the third filtering process. In August 1980, the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) replaced the PeCC and carried out the same function. Until 1980, the GMC committee responsible for holding public hearings in disciplinary cases was the Disciplinary Committee (DC). In 1980, the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) replaced the DC.
20.2
In this Chapter, I shall describe the powers and functions of the PPC. I shall discuss the test applied by the PPC when deciding whether it should or should not refer a case to the PCC, and the guidance that was available to members of the PPC to assist them when making such decisions. I shall consider the evidence about how the PPC operated in practice. In particular, I shall examine some decisions of the PPC which have been the subject of judicial review. I shall also examine the decisions in a number of cases dealt with by the PPC, in respect of which files have been obtained by the Inquiry. I shall consider the light shed on the operation of the PPC by the work undertaken by the Policy Studies Institute (PSI). No complaint relating to Shipman ever reached the PPC. However, the operation of the PPC over the last 24 years is an important indicator of how the GMC conducted its FTP procedures in the past and is, therefore, of relevance to the Inquiry’s task of making recommendations for the protection of patients in the future. As in previous Chapters, I shall focus particularly on evidence relating to patient protection.
20.3
Dr Robin Steel was a medical member of the GMC from 1984, an additional medical screener from 1987 and the principal medical screener and Chairman of the PPC between June 1992 and November 1999, when he retired from the GMC. He provided a witness statement but was not well enough to attend to give oral evidence to the Inquiry. Mr Robert Nicholls, a lay member of the GMC and Chairman of the PPC from November 1999 until June 2003, provided a written statement and also gave oral evidence. In addition, the Inquiry heard oral evidence from other witnesses with knowledge of the PPC, including Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster PSI. In the course of her research into the conduct procedures, Professor Allen observed 11 meetings of the PPC between June 1999 and January 2000.
The Annual Reports of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
20.4
From 1981, the PPC was required by GMC Standing Orders to present a report on its activities to the full Council of the GMC at least once a year. By convention, the Annual Reports also covered the activities of the screeners. For many years, the Reports contained information (sometimes very detailed) about the numbers and types of complaints received by the GMC and about the outcome of those complaints at the pre-screening, screening and PPC stages. The Annual Reports also gave information about recent changes in practice and procedure. They provide a very useful source of information about the early stages of the GMC conduct procedures during the 1980s and the early 1990s.
20.5
During the late 1990s, the form of the PPC’s Annual Reports changed. They contained less information about practice, procedures and outcomes for specific types of case. Instead, they became more concerned with statistical information. After 2001, the Annual Report of the PPC was subsumed into a document containing statistics for the conduct, health and performance procedures (the annual FTP statistics). The same annual FTP statistics also contain data about performance against service standards.
20.6
The Annual Reports did not contain reference to, or discussion of, any standards, criteria or tests being applied by staff, screeners or the members of the PPC when making decisions about the disposal of a case.
CHAPTER TWENTY - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Preliminary Proceedings Committee

--- The Approach Adopted by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in Some Specific Types of Case ---
Conviction Cases Generally
20.60
In June 1997, a Note was produced for the guidance of new members of the PPC. It set out the test that members of the PPC should apply when deciding whether to refer a conviction to the PCC. It stated:
‘The PPC must decide whether to refer a conviction to the PCC if the conviction is serious enough to justify a public inquiry which might lead to removal or restriction of the doctor’s registration.’
Leaving aside the problems of syntax, this guidance cannot have been helpful to PPC members. It really amounts to no more than saying that ‘the PCC ought to refer a conviction to the PCC if it thinks that it ought to do so’. No guidance was given as to how serious the conviction had to be
‘to justify a public inquiry which might lead to removal or restriction of the doctor’s registration’
. On reading this guidance, any new member of the PPC would surely have wished to know how serious the conviction had to be to justify such a public inquiry. In the absence of any guidance setting out criteria and standards and illustrating them by examples, members of the PPC would be left to take decisions on the basis of their differing personal perceptions as to when it would be appropriate to refer a conviction to the PCC.
Cases Involving Allegations of Potential Serious Professional Misconduct
20.61
As I have mentioned, the Annual Reports of the PPC did not discuss the standards and criteria which should be applied by the PPC when deciding whether a case
to the PCC. In June 1997, the Note for new members of the PPC, to which I have referred previously, advised that the question for the PPC was not whether a doctor had committed SPM. Instead, it had to decide whether a
question of SPM arose. If the PPC decided that a
question of SPM did arise, it then had to decide whether all, or only some, of the allegations against the doctor should be referred to the PCC. The Note observed that there was
‘no absolute definition’
of what constituted SPM. It quoted the definition given by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the case of
, namely:
‘... “conduct connected with his profession in which the dentist
the Note substituted the word ‘doctor’
concerned has fallen short, by omission or commission, of the standards of conduct expected among dentists
doctors
, and that such falling short as is established should be serious” ’
20.62
The Note went on:
‘The following three questions are relevant to decisions about referral to the PCC: whether to refer all, or only some, of the allegations against the doctor; whether there is sufficient evidence for the allegations to be proved - the GMC’s Solicitor may be asked to advise; and whether to review referral if, after seeing the witnesses, the GMC’s Solicitor advises that the evidence is insufficient to come up to proof. For example, allegations about incidents which are more than 3-4 years old might be difficult to prove for practical and/or legal reasons; the PCC does not receive the documents which go to the PPC - the allegations must be proved by the oral testimony of witnesses.’
20.63
The Note also gave examples of the circumstances in which the PPC might send a warning letter to a doctor, rather than referring his/her case to the PCC. One such example was:
‘Where a Medical Service Committee case reveals failures which are admitted or regretted by the doctor but are not considered by the PPC as sufficiently serious to justify restricting or removing the doctor’s registration, when seen in the context of the whole career.’
That example implies that the PPC would not necessarily confine its consideration to the case before it, but would view the case in the context of the doctor’s
‘whole career’
. However, it is not clear what, if anything, the PPC would have known about the doctor’s
‘whole career’
20.64
The PPC would have had a limited amount of information about any previous involvement of the doctor in the GMC’s FTP procedures. Legal advice received by the GMC in 1998 suggested that the PPC should have been informed of any previous complaint or report about the doctor to the GMC which had resulted in a sanction being imposed by the PCC, the HC or the CPP. It should also have been informed of a previous complaint which had resulted in the sending of a warning or cautionary letter by the PPC, or in the referral of the doctor’s case by the PPC to the HC. It would not have been made aware of a doctor’s previous involvement in the voluntary health procedures or performance procedures. The PPC would have had no information about cases that had resulted in an ‘acquittal’ before the PCC, even where the facts which formed the basis of the allegation(s) had been proved and the ‘acquittal’ resulted from a finding that, although unacceptable, the doctor’s conduct did not amount to SPM. Nor would the PPC have had any information about a case where the PPC had decided to take no action, unless the earlier case had been ‘revived’ within the two-year period stipulated under the Rules. The PPC would have no access to any information about previous complaints relating to the doctor that had not been referred by the medical screener to the PPC, even where a Chapter XV letter had been sent to the doctor. The PPC was not entitled to information about any case that had previously been referred by the PPC to the PCC but had not yet been heard. Even such information as should have been available would have been put before the PPC only if the GMC data retrieval systems had enabled the relevant papers to be traced, if previous case papers had not been thrown away and if the doctor had been properly identified in any previous complaints about him/her. Even if the systems worked as they should, the information would not necessarily have provided a complete picture of the doctor’s
‘whole career’
in terms of any involvement which s/he had previously had with the GMC’s FTP procedures.
20.65
In assessing the extent to which the PPC would have been able to consider the doctor’s
‘whole career’
, it is important also to consider how much the PPC would have known about any complaints made about the doctor in the locality in which s/he practised. When a doctor’s employer or PCO referred to the GMC a case where there had been a medical service committee (MSC) or independent review panel (IRP) hearing or other disciplinary proceedings, the information given to the GMC by the employer or PCO sometimes included details of previous similar incidents involving the same doctor which had not been the subject of a previous referral to the GMC. The information might or might not contain details of previous complaints or concerns about the doctor which had not been the subject of a formal hearing. As I have explained in
, it was not in the past the practice of the GMC, when a complaint was made by a private individual, to make specific enquiries of the doctor’s employer or PCO about previous complaints or problems in relation to the doctor. Even if such enquiries had been made, an employer or a PCO would not necessarily have been aware of a MSC or IRP hearing or other disciplinary proceedings which had occurred while the doctor was working in another area, nor about previous complaints which had been made, or concerns which had been expressed about the doctor. There is no one source from which information about a doctor’s
‘whole career’
can be obtained.
20.66
It is difficult to see, therefore, how the GMC could have claimed that the PPC was able to view a case in the context of the doctor’s
‘whole career’
. If the PPC’s view were to be based solely on information held by the GMC, it might well have been incomplete. It appears that it was the PPC’s practice to receive testimonials and references submitted by the doctor. I must confess to feeling some concern at that. First, such background material was not relevant to a consideration of the question whether the evidence showed a
question of SPM. Second, if background information was to be considered, it should have been balanced. That relating to past complaints or concerns should have been complete and information relating to the doctor’s general attitude and ability should have been available from someone independent of him/her. Golden opinions from patients unconnected with the issues before the PPC should not have been received by it. They could have served only to obscure the question to be decided. Moreover, their only effect could have been to influence the PPC in the doctor’s favour.
20.67
Later, the GMC produced a document entitled ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ for members of the PPC. The Inquiry has the version which was current in January 2002. The document addressed a number of practical and administrative questions. It also provided general information about the FTP procedures and about the courses of action open to the PPC when making its decisions. However, it contained little guidance which would have assisted in making these decisions. It described SPM in these terms:
‘There is no statutory definition of serious professional misconduct but we describe it as behaviour which may raise issues about the doctor’s registration and fitness to continue to practise.’
The inadequecy of this guidance is obvious and accounts for much of the confusion and disagreement about SPM among members of the PPC which was observed by Professor Allen and her colleagues, to which I shall refer at
paragraph 20.94
The Workload of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in the 1990s

--- The 2000 Policy Studies Institute Report ---
20.70
The PSI team carried out a detailed analysis of the numbers and types of cases dealt with by the PPC during the years 1997, 1998 and 1999. The results were set out in its 2000 Report. It also examined the outcomes of those cases. Its primary purpose in carrying out this exercise was to discover whether there was any difference between the treatment of cases involving doctors who had qualified overseas and the treatment of those involving UK and Irish (for convenience, I shall refer to both as ‘UK’) qualifiers. However, its findings had much wider implications.
Unexplained Differences in the Referral Rates of UK and Overseas Qualifiers
20.71
In 1997, 30% of the cases considered by the PPC were referred on by the PPC to the PCC. By 1999, this figure had risen to 40%. Throughout the period 1997 to 1999, consistently higher proportions of doctors who had qualified overseas compared to those who had qualified in the UK were referred by the PPC to the PCC. In 1999, 33% of the UK qualifiers whose cases came before the PPC were referred to the PCC, whereas 54% of overseas qualifiers were referred. The overall pattern of referrals gave rise, therefore, to the possibility that overseas qualifiers were being treated unfairly.
20.72
Of the doctors whose cases were considered by the PPC in 1997, 39% received a cautionary letter or a letter of advice. In 1998 and 1999, the proportions were 49% and 41%, respectively. In 1998 and 1999 (but not 1997), UK qualifiers were more likely than their overseas counterparts to receive a letter of caution or advice, rather than being referred to the PCC. In addition, UK qualifiers were significantly more likely than overseas qualifiers to be referred into the voluntary health procedures. Part of the explanation for this was the fact that many convictions dealt with by the PPC were for drink driving offences and UK qualifiers were twice as likely as overseas qualifiers to have been convicted of such offences. However, that could not account entirely for the disparity. These disparities again raised the possibility that overseas qualifiers were being discriminated against by the PPC.
20.73
There was no obvious explanation for the disparities. During the course of the same study, the PSI team had discovered similar disparities in the decisions made by screeners. However, it had found a possible explanation for the higher proportion of overseas qualifiers referred to the PPC by screeners. It could be explained by the fact that cases referred to the GMC by public bodies (in which overseas qualifiers were twice as likely as UK qualifiers to be the subject of complaint) were in general more likely to be referred by screeners to the PPC than were cases originating from private individuals. Thus, it could have been the fact that a case had been referred by a public body (rather than the fact that it concerned an overseas qualifier) that accounted for its referral by the screeners to the PPC.
20.74
The same explanation could not account for the marked disparities in outcome once a case reached the PPC. Like the screeners, the PPC was more likely to refer on to the PCC cases originating from public bodies than cases from private individuals. However, among cases originating from public bodies, the PPC sent a significantly higher proportion of cases involving overseas qualifiers (55% of such cases considered by the PPC in 1999) than of those involving UK qualifiers (36% in 1999). Even among cases originating from private individuals, there was a difference in the proportion of cases referred by the PPC to the PCC when overseas and UK qualifiers were compared. Similar differences were seen in the way the PPC dealt with every category of complaint (e.g. complaints about dishonesty or criminality and about poor treatment or substandard clinical practice, etc.). Since, at that time, the PPC gave no reasons for its decisions, it was impossible for the PSI team to say why these differences were occurring.
Unexplained Differences in the Treatment of UK and Overseas Qualifiers Convicted of Criminal Offences
20.75
The PSI team examined the pattern of referral for convictions. This was important because greater uniformity of treatment might have been expected when the PPC was dealing with doctors who had been convicted of criminal offences, as opposed to doctors who had been accused of a variety of other types of misconduct. In the period from 1997 to 1999, between 17% and 23% of all the cases dealt with by the PPC were conviction cases. A substantial proportion of those convictions were for offences of drink driving. UK qualifiers represented a higher proportion of conviction cases than their overseas counterparts in all three years, both for drink driving and for other offences.
20.76
In 1997, 13% of conviction cases were sent by the PPC to the PCC. The figures for 1998 and 1999 were 16% and 29%, respectively. If drink driving cases were left out of the calculation, the proportion of conviction cases referred by the PPC to the PCC rose to 35% of cases considered by the PPC in 1997, 28% in 1998 and 58% in 1999. With or without drink driving cases, a significantly higher proportion of overseas qualifiers with convictions were referred by the PPC to the PCC than of their UK counterparts. In 1999, the proportion of UK qualifiers with convictions (other than for drink driving) referred by the PPC to the PCC was 38%; for overseas qualifiers, the proportion was 85%. This represented a marked disparity between the treatment of UK and overseas qualifiers.
20.77
In 1997, 41% of conviction cases dealt with by the PPC were referred into the voluntary health procedures. In 1998 and 1999, the proportions were 15% and 24%. There was a change of procedure for drink driving cases in 1998. The effect of that was that some doctors who would previously have been referred by the PPC into the voluntary health procedures were instead referred into those procedures at an earlier stage, so that their cases never reached the PPC. When drink driving cases were left out of account, the proportions of conviction cases referred into the voluntary health procedures were 22% in 1997, 19% in 1998 and 19% in 1999. Significantly higher proportions of UK qualifiers than of overseas qualifiers were referred to the voluntary health procedures in all years.
20.78
In 1997, 35% of conviction cases resulted in a cautionary letter or letter of advice. In 1998 and 1999, the figures were 63% and 45%. When drink driving cases were excluded, the figures were 22%, 44% and 19%. Significantly higher proportions of UK qualifiers than of overseas qualifiers were sent letters of advice or cautionary letters in all years. Again, these results gave rise to the possibility of unequal treatment of UK and overseas qualifiers.
20.79
The PSI team acknowledged that it was possible that the offences for which overseas qualifiers had been convicted might have been more serious than the offences committed by UK qualifiers. This would explain the apparent disparities in treatment between the two groups. However, since the PPC did not give reasons for its decisions, it was impossible to confirm this. Nor was it possible to rule out the possibility that racial bias had caused the disparities. The presence of racial bias, on the evidence available, could not be proved or disproved. The PSI team observed that a detailed analysis of individual cases would be necessary in order to discover why convictions which, from the brief description that appeared on the GMC’s database, sounded similar had nevertheless been treated differently. So far as the Inquiry is aware, no such analysis has been undertaken.
The Treatment of Conviction Cases Generally
20.80
The PSI team had concerns about the way in which the PPC dealt generally with conviction cases, quite apart from the unexplained disparities between the treatment of UK qualifiers and that of their overseas counterparts. In its 2001 Report, the PSI team drew attention to the variation in the pattern of outcomes in conviction cases from year to year. In 1997, as I have said, 35% of all convictions (excluding drink driving convictions) considered by the PPC had been referred to the PCC; in 1999, the proportion was 58%. This represented a considerable variation for which there was no apparent explanation. The PSI team suggested that a detailed analysis of the type mentioned above might assist in explaining why such variations were occurring.
20.81
The PSI team was concerned that its own analysis demonstrated a general lack of consistency in dealing with convictions. The 2000 PSI Report observed that, for the sake of consistency, as well as to prevent bias, it was essential that no discretion should be applied in deciding whether a conviction should be referred to the PCC. The Report therefore recommended that all convictions referred to the PPC, other than drink driving convictions, should automatically be referred on to the PCC. It observed that there was a need to ensure efficiency and speed in dealing with convictions, since such cases might be considered automatically to call into question a doctor’s registration.
20.82
Professor Allen, who led the PSI team, told the Inquiry that she and her colleagues were very concerned about the number of convictions that were not being referred by the PPC to the PCC. There were anomalies for which they could find no explanation, either from the statistics or from their observations of the PPC at work. Professor Allen said that her personal opinion was that any conviction, save for a minor road traffic offence or a drink driving conviction, had implications for a doctor’s fitness to practise. She also expressed the view that, if a policy were adopted of referring all conviction cases to the PCC, that would prevent the need to justify minutely why one conviction should be sent to the PCC and another not.
The Need for the Preliminary Proceedings Committee to Give Reasons
20.83
Professor Allen and her colleagues concluded the relevant section of their 2000 Report by saying that there was an urgent need for the PPC to make explicit its reasons for referring cases to the PCC and for other decisions. In the absence of explicit reasons, there were
‘unexplained differences’
between the outcomes for UK and overseas qualifiers at this stage of the conduct procedures. This recommendation was implemented shortly afterwards, when the PPC adopted the practice of agreeing the key reasons for its decisions at the time those decisions were made. So far as the Inquiry is aware, there has been no subsequent analysis of the PPC’s decisions, by reference to those reasons.
Analysis of the Conduct of Meetings of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
The Observations
20.84
During the period between June 1999 and January 2000, Professor Allen and her colleagues observed 11 meetings of the PPC. In November 1999, as I have explained, there were significant changes to the composition of the PPC. Prior to that time, the PPC had been chaired by Dr Steel, the principal medical screener. Three other screeners (two medical screeners and one lay screener) were members of the PPC. Other screeners were invited to attend meetings of the PPC as observers and might be called upon to comment on cases that they had screened. Screeners who were not members of the PPC did not necessarily attend all its meetings, so that it was a matter of chance whether a screener was present to comment on his/her own screening decision. ‘Observer’ screeners were sometimes called upon to deputise for members of the PPC who were absent and thus to ensure that there was a quorum, which was then five. If that was not possible, other members of the GMC were called upon to deputise on an
ad hoc
basis.
20.85
From November 1999, screeners were no longer eligible for election to the PPC and no longer attended its meetings. The new Chairman of the PPC was Mr Nicholls, a lay member of the GMC and a former lay screener. None of the other members of the newly constituted PPC had any experience of screening.
20.86
Professor Allen and her colleagues noted that the papers in cases coming to the PPC frequently ran to hundreds of pages, including medical records and reports of previous hearings by NHS and other bodies. No summary of the case was provided, save for the letter to the doctor outlining the allegations against him/her. Nor did PPC members receive the screening decision form or the memorandum prepared by a caseworker for the screeners’ assistance. The PPC would usually have the doctor’s response to the complaint, often in the form of a letter from the doctor’s medical defence organisation or solicitors. Other documents would sometimes be enclosed with the response. It was not unusual for the responses submitted by doctors to be received only shortly before the PPC meeting. Members of the PPC would often have to read a batch of such responses (together with any other material supplied) on the day of the meeting. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that this could often be an ‘enormous amount’ of further evidence and information. It must have been very difficult for members to absorb the new material and to place it in the context of each individual case. At that time, a complainant (whether a public body or a private individual) had no right to see or comment on the doctor’s response to the complaint. Thus, there was no opportunity for a complainant to correct any inaccuracies in the doctor’s account or to deal with any additional questions raised by him/her.
20.87
Professor Allen and a colleague attended six meetings of the PPC before November 1999 and five meetings thereafter. They did not see the same combination of members andco-opted members sitting on the PPC more than once. They analysed the meeting papers in advance and recorded
verbatim
accounts of the discussions. They then analysed various features of the discussions at the meetings. They interviewed the Chairman and eight members or co-opted members of the PPC as it was constituted before November 1999.
Consistency, Transparency and Fairness
20.88
In carrying out their analyses, Professor Allen and her colleagues looked to see whether the PPC was applying the principles of good decision-making and was achieving its objectives of consistency, transparency and fairness. In May 1996, the GMC had publicly committed itself to these principles. It had said:
‘We are committed to a system of self-regulation which is open and accountable; and to developing procedures and processes that are fair, objective, transparent and free from discrimination.’
20.89
The principles were:
consistency
• there should be agreement on the criteria to be applied in reaching a decision
• the criteria used in considering each case should always be the same
• they should be applied within each meeting by each member for each case in the same way
• they should be applied across meetings in the same way
transparency
• it should be clear how the criteria have been applied in reaching a decision
• the reasons for each decision should be clearly stated
fairness
• each case should be treated by giving due consideration to all pieces of evidence
• each case should be assessed on its merits
• it should be made clear what weight has been applied to the different pieces of evidence.’
20.90
The analyses carried out by the PSI team related both to the process of decision-making and to the content of the PPC’s deliberations.
The Conduct of Meetings
20.91
Professor Allen and her colleagues observed that, before the significant changes to its constitution in November 1999, the PPC usually dealt with between 30 and 50 cases at each meeting. Half of the cases were dealt with in three minutes or less; 76% of cases were concluded in five minutes or less. Only 10% took ten minutes or more. After November 1999, only 13% of cases were concluded in three minutes or less and 29% in five minutes or less; 47% of cases occupied ten minutes or more. These timings did not include hearings relating to interim orders, which could take far longer, as I have explained above.
20.92
At least part of the explanation for the increase in the time taken over each case after November 1999 lay in the way in which the discussions about individual cases were conducted. The 2000 PSI Report noted that, before November 1999, participation in a discussion about an individual case was limited to the Chairman (who would introduce each case) and only one or two others. Some members were invited to participate in discussions to a greater extent than others. After November 1999, meetings were run in a more structured way that encouraged much greater and more equal participation from all members of the PPC. In general, every member was asked for his/her view in relation to every case under consideration. Inevitably, this increased the length of time spent on cases but it did mean that the opinions of all members were canvassed. Before November 1999, decisions would often be made without taking a vote, even when there was dissent about what the outcome of a case should be. It was more common for the Chairman to put forward a proposed outcome, leaving it to the dissenters to voice their disagreement if they chose. After November 1999, votes were taken more frequently.
20.93
The observations and analyses of the PSI team demonstrated that few discussions within the PPC, whether they took place before or after November 1999, adhered to the principles of good decision-making to which the GMC had previously committed itself. There was an absence of commonly agreed and applied criteria. It was often impossible to tell why some cases were referred to the PCC and others were not. This was particularly so in cases of poor treatment and substandard clinical practice, but it was also true of convictions and other cases involving dishonesty and dysfunctional personal behaviour which had been designated ‘SPM by definition’ for screening purposes. Many of those cases were not referred by the PPC to the PCC.
20.94
The PSI team observed confusion and disagreement about what constituted SPM and what the threshold for SPM should be. It was suggested by some members of the PPC that
‘For spm there has to be some evidence of recklessness and the action should be unreasonable ...’
. There were widely differing views of what was and was not
‘unreasonable’
. Members of the PPC brought to the discussions their own views about the standards to be expected of a ‘reasonable doctor’ and individual members clearly applied different standards. There was also divergence of opinion about accepted margins of error. There was a tendency to speculate about why someone might have done something. Characteristics or behaviour were attributed to a doctor for which there was no evidence. Members of the PPC would speculate on how certain situations might have arisen when there was no evidence upon which to base such speculations.
20.95
One recurrent point of disagreement was whether the fact that a doctor’s conduct had led to a poor outcome for a patient was relevant to the issue of whether that conduct amounted to SPM. The 2000 PSI Report quoted one exchange on this topic:
‘Member 1: “The outcome is totally irrelevant. Get rid of the idea that it is more serious if the patient dies than if he didn’t.”
Member 2: “It does matter to the patient if the outcome is death. It is the duty of a doctor to sort out the urgent and important.” ’
20.96
Considerable difficulty was experienced in dealing with expert opinion. Sometimes, the papers in a case contained expert reports obtained in the course of investigation of the complaint by another body; sometimes, the doctor produced expert evidence in support of his/her defence. In other cases, the screeners had called for an expert opinion. The experts were sometimes GMC members and sometimes not. On occasion, the experts disagreed with each other. Professor Allen and her colleagues observed real difficulty on the part of members of the PPC in knowing what weight to give to the views of the experts and how to approach a conflict in the expert evidence. Sometimes, the PPC would decide in accordance with one expert view, rather than another, without it being clear why one view had prevailed. The position became even more complicated when there was a practitioner in the relevant field at the meeting. It was a matter of chance whether there was such a practitioner present at a meeting. In any event, the weight that was given to a practitioner member’s expertise varied between meetings.
Lack of Understanding of the Processes
20.97
Members of the PPC often expressed uncertainty over GMC procedures and processes. Sometimes, members did not appear to appreciate that it was not open to them to refer a case into the performance procedures. There was a lack of understanding, on the part of some, of the difference between the voluntary health procedures and the HC. There was also uncertainty about the circumstances in which a doctor should be offered the opportunity of voluntary erasure of his/her name from the register. There were other areas of uncertainty among members which contributed to the difficulty in decision-making.
20.98
The possible existence of mitigating circumstances (e.g. systems failures, poor management, practice in a deprived area, a large patient list) were mentioned frequently in discussions. The fact that a doctor had apologised or acknowledged some fault was frequently mentioned. The PSI team noted:
‘... it was clear that members were often looking for explanations of a doctor’s behaviour. These could be directly related to the circumstances of the doctors themselves or could be related to the circumstances in which they found themselves working. They were certainly taken into account when differences of opinion occurred within a committee, particularly in relation to treatment/sub-standard clinical practice cases.’
Considering the Strength of the Evidence
20.99
One theme which, according to Professor Allen and her colleagues, was
‘never far beneath the surface’
in many of the PPC’s discussions was the issue of whether the extent and nature of the evidence was such that the case would ‘run’ at the PCC. They observed lengthy discussions about the amount of evidence needed to send a case to the PCC. Sometimes, during these discussions, there were disagreements between members of the PPC and the legal assessor. The latter would advise that it was the PPC’s function only to ensure that there was a
case and that the PPC should not attempt to resolve differences or conflicts of evidence during the course of its deliberations on whether a case should be referred to the PCC or not. Members were unhappy about this. Despite the legal advice, members tended to discuss the sufficiency of, and conflicts in, the evidence. Later in this Chapter, I shall refer to the judicial review case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte Richards
, which illustrates the problem described by Professor Allen. In that case, the PPC had plainly discussed the conflicts of evidence and had resolved them in the doctor’s favour, in circumstances in which the decision should have been to refer the case to the PCC.
20.100
Professor Allen told the Inquiry that she had been surprised at the extent to which the PPC discussed the likely prospects of success at the PCC. In particular, she was concerned about the emphasis on evidence. As I have explained, it was not at that time the GMC’s practice to collect evidence (save for the response of a doctor and any evidence s/he might care to volunteer) relating to a complaint unless and until the case had been referred by the PPC to the PCC. Once a case had been referred to the PCC, there was an opportunity for the GMC’s solicitors to gather more evidence in preparation for the hearing. Professor Allen said that she was concerned that the PPC was sometimes looking at cases on the basis of very limited information, and was making decisions about the adequacy of the evidence at a time when it was in no position to know whether it would be possible to collect further evidence in the future.
Analysis of Outcomes and Conclusions
20.101
The analysis by the PSI team of the outcomes of PPC meetings showed that there was a marked difference between the outcomes of those that took place before and those that took place after November 1999. In the period from June to November 1999, 35% of cases considered by the PPC were referred to the PCC. Between November 1999 and January 2000, 47% were referred. The reason for this appeared to be that the post-November 1999 PPC operated a lower threshold for referring cases to the PCC. However, the 2000 PSI Report observed that it was unclear, in respect of either period, what that threshold was. The PPC, as constituted after November 1999, was more likely than its predecessor to refer cases to the PCC if there was an unresolved conflict of evidence or if the case was thought to raise an issue of SPM, even where the evidence did not appear substantial. It was less likely than the earlier PPC to decide that there was insufficient evidence to refer a case to the PCC. Otherwise, the same problems and uncertainties continued to characterise discussions of the PPC, even after November 1999. The 2000 PSI Report commented that,
‘even with the greater length of discussions and the more structured approach of the new committee, there are still large areas of obscurity in the decision-making process of the PPC’
20.102
The 2000 PSI Report observed that the main question left unanswered was why such a small proportion of cases considered by the PPC was referred to the PCC. The Report posed this question:
‘If a screener considers that a case raises an issue of serious professional misconduct, what is it that happens at the PPC to result in two thirds of cases considered before November 1999 and over half the cases considered after November 1999 being reassessed as not raising an issue of serious professional misconduct?’
20.103
It is clear, as I observed in
paragraph 20.21
, that Professor Allen was of the view that the test to be applied by the screeners was virtually the same as that to be applied by the PPC.
20.104
The 2000 PSI Report went on to refer to the absence of any agreed standards against which a decision could be made whether or not conduct amounted to SPM. It observed:
‘The problem which arose time and again in PPC discussions was that there was no consensus on what these standards were, particularly in relation to matters of clinical practice, and there was no agreement on the threshold of seriousness. There is clearly a need for guidelines to be established so that consistency, transparency and fairness can be demonstrated at all stages of the GMC conduct procedures.’
20.105
The PSI team questioned whether the PPC was an appropriate forum for discussing whether poor treatment or substandard clinical practice cases raised issues of SPM. It pointed to the lack of consistency, both in the composition of the PPC (with different combinations of people attending every meeting) and in the availability of expertise among its members.
20.106
Finally, the 2000 PSI Report recommended that the GMC should clarify the differences between the role and function of the PPC and the role and function of screeners. It observed that the roles and functions of both appeared to be very similar. It was suggested that, if the PPC was intended to apply different tests and criteria for onward referral of cases from those applied by the screeners, those tests and criteria should be defined and guidance should be given on how they should be applied. Indeed, it was suggested that the GMC should consider whether it needed to maintain the separate functions of screeners and the PPC at all. I mentioned earlier that it would be usual for the screeners and the PPC to have the same amount of information before them. In the past, there had been one significant difference: the PPC would have the doctor’s explanation whereas the screener would not. That difference was removed in 1997. It may have been envisaged originally that the PPC would use its power to adjourn for investigations to be made so as to put itself in a better position than the screeners. In practice, however, this was almost never done.
20.107
The descriptions of what happened at meetings of the PPC and the discussions described by Professor Allen are strongly reminiscent of some of the evidence heard at the Inquiry. Some of the witnesses, when asked to explain a decision in a particular case, would speculate about why the doctor concerned might have acted as s/he had, often seeking to find an acceptable explanation for what had happened. It was clear that, if there had been a
in the evidence available (as there often was in cases considered by the PPC, because so little evidence was gathered at the preliminary stages of the process), the decision-maker would fill the gap with assumptions, which were invariably favourable to the doctor against whom the allegation was made. Doctors asked by the Inquiry to express an opinion - about, for example, Shipman’s conduct in the case of Mrs Renate Overton - would give a view based, in part, on speculation about what might have happened or why Shipman might have acted as he did. These were not speculations about how serious the implications of his conduct might be; they were attempts to proffer an explanation of his conduct that would render it acceptable or, at any rate, less serious. The Inquiry was told about similar tendencies which had surfaced in debates at meetings of the Medical Advisory Committee, as I described in
. To a lawyer, the inclusion of such irrelevant material in the consideration of a case is obviously wrong. Yet it appears that, to many doctors, this is not obvious.
20.108
More generally, the analysis carried out by the PSI team into the operation of the PPC presents a depressing picture of inconsistency and lack of transparency. For important decisions such as those made by the PPC to be made on incomplete information by people who acted upon their personal views, without the benefit of any kind of framework of standards or criteria - or even a collection of old cases from which to see how decisions had been made in the past - seems to me to be a recipe for unfairness of outcome. It is plain that the GMC was not, at this time, achieving its objectives of consistency, transparency and fairness in decision-making. It may be that, on some occasions, the inconsistency resulted in unfairness to doctors. However, on some occasions, it must have resulted in a failure to protect patients.
[2001] Lloyd’s Rep Med 47.
The Differing Roles of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee and the Screeners: the Case of Toth


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Professional Conduct Committee
========================================================================

--- The Procedure at a Hearing before the Professional Conduct Committee ---
21.10
The procedure to be adopted by the PCC at the hearing of a case was set out in Schedule 4 to the 1983 Act (formerly Schedule 4 to the Medical Act 1978) and in the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988 (the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules). The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules largely reproduced the provisions which had previously been contained in the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1980. I shall summarise the procedure as it was at the time of the Inquiry’s hearings in November and December 2003.
A Public Hearing
21.11
The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules required that, save in exceptional circumstances, the proceedings of the PCC should be held in public. Panel members could, however, deliberate (i.e. discuss their findings and their decisions on sanction, together with any other matters that arose in the course of the hearing) in private.
The Role of the Legal Assessor
21.12
I referred in
to the role and duties of the legal assessor. Members of PCC panels were advised at hearings by a legal assessor. Any advice given to the PCC panel by the legal assessor had to be tendered in the presence of the parties attending the hearing or their representatives. The legal assessor was permitted to accompany members of the PCC panel while they deliberated in private and to give advice as appropriate. However, the legal assessor was required to inform the parties or their representatives publicly of any advice given (and of any question which had given rise to that advice) as soon as possible after the advice had been provided. The advice given to the parties by the legal assessor had to be recorded and a copy of the record given to every party or representative. If members of a PCC panel did not accept the advice of the legal assessor, a record had to be made of the question referred to him/her, the advice given and the refusal to accept the advice, together with the reasons for refusing it. A copy of that record had to be given to every party, or person representing a party, at the hearing.
The Quasi-Criminal Proceedings
21.13
The procedures of a PCC panel resembled those of a criminal court. The hearing was adversarial rather than inquisitorial. In other words, the two sides competed, each side seeking to persuade the panel of the truth of its evidence and the soundness of its contentions. The ‘prosecution case’ (whether a complaint or a conviction) was usually presented by a solicitor or counsel instructed by the GMC. Under the old procedures (and in a conduct case only), it was open to a complainant, whether personally or through a legal representative, to conduct his/her own case. This was sometimes done, but it was more usual, where the complainant was a private individual, for the GMC to ‘take over’ the complaint and to conduct the case at the hearing before the PCC panel. Doctors appearing before a PCC panel were usually legally represented, in general through their medical defence organisations.
Evidence
21.14
Witnesses could be subpoenaed and evidence was given on oath. Rule 50 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules provided that the PCC could receive oral, documentary or other evidence of any fact or matter which appeared to it relevant to its inquiry into the case before it. Rule 50 was subject to the proviso that, where any evidence was tendered that would not be admissible in criminal proceedings in England, it should not be received unless, after consultation with the legal assessor, the PCC was satisfied that its duty of making due inquiry into the case before it made the reception of that evidence desirable. I referred in
to the observations of Mr Justice Sullivan in the case of
about the way in which he would have expected the PCC to exercise its discretion in admitting evidence which would otherwise have been inadmissible. Sullivan J pointed out that the PCC is not in precisely the same position as a criminal court. It has an important investigatory and regulatory role in the public interest and must, therefore, take into account the public interest in having complaints thoroughly investigated. However, it seems to me, from an examination of the case of
and of other cases I have looked at, that, whatever the PCC’s attitude to inadmissible evidence, the view of those making decisions at the earlier stages of the FTP procedures was that, if evidence was hearsay, it was unlikely to be received by the PCC or, if received, it would be accorded little weight. It is possible that some had experienced this approach when sitting on the PCC in the past.
21.15
Rule 50(4) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules gave the PCC power to cause any person to be called as a witness in any proceedings before it, whether or not the parties consented. The PCC also had power to put questions to any witness itself or through the legal assessor. The doctor was entitled to give oral evidence but was under no obligation to do so.
Conviction Cases
21.16
In a conviction case, once the conviction had been proved (usually by production of the certificate of conviction), the facts giving rise to it did not have to be proved at the hearing. The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules permitted the GMC’s representative to adduce evidence about the circumstances leading up to the conviction and about the character and previous history of the doctor.
21.17
The words ‘previous history’ were a reference to the doctor’s FTP history, i.e. any previous sanction imposed on the doctor by the PCC, the Health Committee (HC) or the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP). The PCC would, of course, have no information relating to such matters as past complaints to the GMC about the doctor which had been closed by the GMC staff, or which had been closed by the screeners or rejected by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC). Nor would the PCC have any information about past complaints to, or disciplinary action by, any NHS body, unless the complaint or action had been directly connected with the subject matter of the conviction or complaint with which the PCC was currently dealing. The result was that the PCC might well have an incomplete picture of the doctor’s past history.
21.18
The doctor or his/her representative was then entitled to address the PCC by way of mitigation and to adduce his/her own evidence about the circumstances leading up to the conviction and about his/her character and previous history. The doctor might give evidence him/herself but was not obliged to do so and, in practice, often did not do so. It was usual for the doctor to submit testimonials from patients and/or colleagues. The ISG, which, as I said, was first produced in 2001, contained a warning that care should be taken when drawing inferences from such testimonials. It warned, in particular, that some testimonials were written by persons who believed that the doctor concerned was not guilty of the misconduct alleged; the validity of such an opinion was plainly questionable if the doctor had since been found guilty. Also, the ISG warned that there might be cultural reasons for the absence of testimonials. Panel members should not assume that testimonials would not be available if requested.
21.19
The PCC panel would then proceed to consider the question of sanction. I shall return to the imposition of sanctions later in this Chapter.
Conduct Cases
21.20
In a conduct case, the doctor would face a charge, or series of charges, each containing one or more factual allegations. Some allegations or whole charges might be admitted and others denied. All might be admitted or all denied.
The ‘Prosecution Case’
21.21
The GMC’s representative (or the complainant) would adduce evidence of the facts alleged which had not been admitted by the doctor.
Submission of No Case
21.22
As in a criminal trial, at the close of the ‘prosecution case’, it was open to the doctor to submit that no sufficient evidence had been adduced in respect of any or all of the facts which were in dispute, so that the PCC panel could not find those facts proved. The doctor might also submit that, in respect of any charge, the facts about which evidence had been adduced or which had been admitted were insufficient to support a finding of SPM. The GMC’s representative (or the complainant) then had an opportunity of answering the submission and the doctor had an opportunity to reply. The PCC panel would then determine whether the doctor’s submission should be upheld. If the submission was upheld, the finding of the PCC panel would be that the doctor was not guilty of SPM in respect of the matters to which the relevant charge related.
The ‘Defence Case’
21.23
If the doctor made no submission (or if s/he made a submission but it was unsuccessful), s/he (usually through his/her representative) then had the opportunity to address the PCC panel concerning any charge which remained outstanding and could at that stage adduce evidence, whether oral or documentary, in his/her defence. As I have said, it was open to the doctor to give evidence him/herself.
Further Evidence and Submissions
21.24
At the close of the evidence called by or on behalf of the doctor, the GMC’s representative (or the complainant) could, with the permission of the PCC panel, adduce evidence to rebut any evidence that had been adduced by the doctor. The GMC’s representative (or the complainant) was then permitted to address the PCC panel. The doctor (or his/her representative) had the final word. At this stage, the parties’ submissions would be directed at persuading the PCC panel what findings it should make in relation to the facts which formed the basis of the allegations against the doctor and in relation to whether those facts which the PCC panel might find proved or were admitted would be insufficient to support a finding of SPM. Those were the two issues which the PCC panel was required to resolve at this stage of the proceedings.
The Panel’s Decision on the Facts and on Insufficiency
21.25
Those two issues were identified in rule 27(2) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, which required the PCC to consider and determine, in respect of each charge:
‘(i) which, if any, of the remaining facts alleged in the charge and not admitted by the practitioner have been proved to their satisfaction, and
(ii) whether such facts as have been so found proved or admitted would be insufficient to support a finding of serious professional misconduct ...’
21.26
The PCC panel was first required to reach a decision on the facts. Although the Rules did not specify the standard of proof to be applied, in practice the GMC has always taken the view that factual allegations must be proved to the criminal standard of proof, i.e. that members of the PCC panel should be satisfied so that they are sure that the facts are as alleged. There is Privy Council authority to support the view that the criminal standard of proof is appropriate in disciplinary cases. In
Bhandari v Advocates Committee
, the Privy Council held that the criminal standard of proof was appropriate in proceedings against an advocate who was alleged to have deliberately deceived and misled the Court. Again, in the case of
McAllister v General Medical Council
, the Privy Council drew a distinction between cases in which the allegation being considered by the disciplinary body amounted to a serious criminal charge (in which case the standard of proof should be that of a criminal trial) and one where it did not. In the latter case, it was
‘neither necessary nor desirable’
that the charge should be proved according to the standards and procedures of a criminal trial. What mattered was that the proceedings should be fair to the doctor in all respects.
21.27
Rule 52(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules set out the system of voting. A bare majority of the PCC panel was sufficient for a decision. If the votes were equal, the rule provided that the question must be deemed to have been resolved in favour of the doctor. If the PCC panel found that none of the facts alleged in the charge had been proved to the required standard, a finding of ‘not guilty’ would be made.
21.28
It should be noted that there is not and never has been any requirement for the PCC to give reasons for its findings of fact. Reasons are now required for conclusions but not for the findings of primary fact.
21.29
Sub-paragraph (ii) of rule 27(2) required that the PCC panel should then consider and determine, not whether the facts which had been proved or admitted amounted to SPM, but whether they were
‘insufficient to support a finding’
of SPM. At this stage, the PCC panel was asked to make a decision (the insufficiency decision) on the basis of the available evidence and, if it decided that the facts proved would be insufficient to support a finding of SPM, the proceedings were at an end. If the PCC panel decided that the facts would not be insufficient to support a finding of SPM, the case would continue. However, there would not yet have been a decision by the PCC panel that the facts which it had found proved or which were admitted did amount to SPM.
21.30
This insufficiency decision was taken in the absence of any information about the doctor’s past FTP history. It was possible that a PCC panel might have found, for example, that a doctor had failed to attend a patient who was in need of treatment but that the facts were
‘insufficient to support a finding’
of SPM. That would be unfortunate if, in fact, the doctor had previously been warned about a similar failure. A repetition of such misconduct would have been more serious than an isolated occurrence. It seems to me that this process of making a preliminary decision as to whether the facts were
‘insufficient to support a finding’
of SPM required a very careful direction by the legal assessor. The direction should have been that the PCC panel should not find the facts
‘insufficient to support a finding’
of SPM unless it was satisfied that, even if relevant information were later to be presented which was seriously adverse to the doctor, it would still not find that the facts proved or admitted amounted to SPM. In other words, the insufficiency decision should have been taken on the assumption that, when set in context, the doctor’s conduct might appear far more serious than it did at the time the decision was being made. I am pleased to see that, under the new procedures, a FTP panel will not be required to make this preliminary insufficiency decision, which, to my mind, was both difficult and rather artificial and was likely to lead to cases being dismissed when they should not have been. In my view, it is doubtful whether panel members understood and applied the legal assessor’s direction correctly. Also, I cannot see why there was any need for the insufficiency decision. It seems to me that it merely provided another hurdle for the prosecution and another bite at the cherry for the defence.
Evidence and Findings on the Issue of Serious Professional Misconduct
21.31
Rule 28 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules provided that, where a PCC panel found the facts, or some of the facts, alleged in a charge proved or admitted (and, presumably, that they were not insufficient to support a finding of SPM), it should then invite the GMC’s representative (or the complainant) to address it:
‘... as to the circumstances leading to those facts, the extent to which such facts are indicative of serious professional misconduct on the part of the practitioner, and as to the character and previous history of the practitioner. The Solicitor or the complainant may adduce oral or documentary evidence to support an address under this rule.’
21.32
The doctor (or his/her representative) was then invited to address the PCC panel in mitigation and to adduce evidence in support if desired. After that, the PCC panel would deliberate again. It would consider whether the facts proved did amount to SPM and, if so, what sanction should be imposed. In my view, these were both matters of judgement for the PCC panel, rather than a matter of proof. However, there are indications in the GMC documents that some people were of the view that SPM must be proved
‘beyond reasonable doubt’
. For example, in a document entitled ‘Establishing the appropriate standard of proof for GMC hearings into conduct, performance and health: key issues for consideration’, produced by the King’s Fund in October 2000, which was designed to form a framework for discussion about the appropriate standard of proof to be applied at FTP hearings, it was said that the standard of proof might be applied at any of three stages: when making findings of fact, when assessing whether the facts amounted to SPM and when deciding the penalty if SPM was proved. In my view, only the facts were a matter for ‘proof’; the other issues were matters of judgement. In a Consultation Paper in March 2001, the GMC said that opinions differed on whether the criminal standard of proof should apply to the decision whether the facts found proved amounted to SPM and to sanction. I understand that the GMC now takes the view that only the facts need be proved to the criminal standard, and that whether the facts which have been found proved amount to SPM is a matter of judgement.
21.33
Having found the facts (or some of them) proved, the PCC panel might have come to the conclusion that the doctor’s behaviour amounted to professional misconduct of a nature which was unacceptable, but not so unacceptable as to amount to SPM. In that event, the panel could take no action. It could not itself issue a warning. It could not remit the case to the PPC with a view to a warning letter or letter of advice being issued. In those circumstances, the PCC panel (and, therefore, the GMC) was, to all intents and purposes, powerless to act. It was pointed out in the report of the PCC Working Group in 1999 that, pursuant to rule 34, a PCC panel could, if it wished, comment on the doctor’s conduct, even if it had found that the conduct did not amount to SPM. Of course, that was right; the panel could comment. However, such a comment did not amount to an official warning or reprimand and would not form part of the doctor’s FTP history. I note that, under the new procedures, a FTP panel will have the power to issue a warning in cases in which it finds that a doctor’s fitness to practise is not impaired.
The Effect of Mitigation
21.34
The practice, as permitted by rule 28 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, of receiving evidence about the doctor’s background at the stage before the PCC panel decided whether the doctor’s conduct amounted to SPM caused me considerable concern. It seems to me highly likely to have led to the PCC panel, when deciding whether the doctor was guilty of SPM, taking into account material which was, as a matter of logic and principle, irrelevant to that issue. Any evidence (including, of course, evidence in mitigation) which affected the seriousness of the conduct under consideration was relevant to the question of whether that conduct amounted to SPM. It is right also that, in making a judgement about whether the doctor’s actions amounted to SPM, those actions had to be viewed in context. Evidence of context would usually have been introduced during the first stage of the evidence. After the decisions on the facts and on insufficiency had been made, evidence relating to other matters might well have been introduced. For example, following a finding that the doctor had breached a patient’s confidentiality, it would have been appropriate for the PCC panel to hear evidence that, on a previous occasion, the doctor had been found guilty by a PCC of similar misconduct. That would have made the breach of confidence under consideration more serious. However, evidence that the doctor had been found guilty by the PCC of misconduct arising from a serious prescribing error would not have been relevant to the seriousness of the breach of confidence under consideration. It would have made it neither more nor less serious. Nor would the fact that the doctor had not been the subject of any previous complaint to the GMC have made the breach of confidence more or less serious.
21.35
Similarly, some forms of evidence in mitigation were relevant to the seriousness of the misconduct in question and others were not. For example, the fact that a doctor had apologised to the patient immediately after the breach of confidence occurred would have been relevant to the seriousness of the misconduct. But the fact that many of the doctor’s patients found him/her to be attentive, caring and sympathetic would not. Such evidence about the doctor’s character would have been relevant only to sanction. Rule 28, however, permitted the doctor to put before the PCC panel, not only any mitigation relating to the offence that s/he had not advanced earlier, but also purely personal mitigation, which might well have been quite irrelevant to the issue of SPM. For example, it was very common for the doctor to produce testimonials from patients and colleagues about his/her general abilities and character. Those matters might well have been relevant to sanction but they were quite irrelevant to the question of whether the doctor was guilty of SPM. Taking such material into account could have resulted in a finding that the same conduct amounted to SPM in the case of one doctor and not in another. When considering whether the conduct which had been proved amounted to SPM, the PCC panel should, as a matter of principle, have focussed only upon the seriousness of the conduct. Yet I have seen decisions in which it is apparent that, in deciding whether the doctor was guilty of SPM, the PCC panel took into account purely personal mitigation from testimonials.
21.36
A case in point was
Kissen
, which was decided by a PCC panel early in 2004. The PCC panel found that, over a period of months, the doctor (a general practitioner (GP)) had failed adequately to examine his patient and had failed to heed the complaints of symptoms made by the patient herself and by members of her family. He had attributed the patient’s condition (which was, in fact, lung cancer, with symptoms of significant weight loss and the coughing of blood) to rhinitis, aggravated by psychosomatic factors. He admitted that his conduct had been inappropriate, not in the patient’s best interests and below the standard of care to be expected of a registered medical practitioner. He denied that his conduct had been irresponsible but the PCC panel found that it had been. However, notwithstanding that finding, the PCC panel found that the conduct did not amount to SPM. In reaching that conclusion, the PCC panel took into account (in addition to some relevant mitigating factors relating to the misconduct itself) some factors amounting to no more than purely personal mitigation. These included a number of testimonials saying that the doctor was a good and caring practitioner. It mentioned the doctor’s insight into his failings and the fact that he had taken steps to remedy his deficiencies. All of these matters would have been relevant to the issue of sanction, but were quite irrelevant to the issue of whether the conduct had amounted to SPM.
21.37
I do not criticise PCC panellists who took such material into account. Rule 28 permitted such material to be put before them and it was natural that they would be influenced by it. They were not lawyers. Moreover, the practice of taking irrelevant personal mitigation into account when deciding whether conduct amounted to SPM was encouraged by some decisions of the Privy Council. In the case of
Rao v General Medical Council
, a PCC panel had imposed conditions on the doctor’s registration following a finding of SPM. The doctor had failed to visit a patient in circumstances when he should have done so; he had questioned the patient’s wife over the telephone, had concluded that there was nothing seriously wrong, and had offered reassurance. In fact, the patient’s wife had reported symptoms of cyanosis and the patient was very ill and died during the night. The PCC panel found that the doctor had made a
‘fundamental error’
which was not compatible with good medical practice; in its view, that error amounted to SPM. The doctor appealed to the Privy Council, alleging that the PCC panel had been wrong to find him guilty of SPM. He admitted that he had acted negligently but contended that his negligence was not such as could amount to SPM. He contended that the advice given to the panel by the legal assessor had been misleading as to what might constitute SPM in the context of the case. The Privy Council considered, first, the role of the legal assessor and, then, what was required for a finding of SPM in the context of a case of negligent treatment. In that context, two passages were cited from the Privy Council case of
Preiss v General Dental Council
. The first was the passage at paragraph 28 of the judgement in that case, which stated:
‘It is settled that serious professional misconduct does not require moral turpitude. Gross professional negligence can fall within it. Something more is required than a degree of negligence enough to give rise to civil liability but not calling for the opprobrium that inevitably attaches to the disciplinary offence.’
21.38
In the judgement in
Rao
, this citation from paragraph 28 of
Preiss
was followed immediately by a passage taken from paragraph 29 of the judgement in
Preiss
as follows:
‘That for every professional man whose career spans, as this appellant’s has many years and many clients, there is likely to be at least one case in which for reasons good and bad everything goes wrong - and that this was his, with no suggestion that it was in any way representative of his otherwise unblemished record’
Rao
, this passage was cited as if it were part of the judgement of the Court. In fact it was not; it was a quotation from the submission of Counsel for Mr Preiss, in which the Privy Council thought that
‘there was some force’
. The citation in
Rao
of that extract from paragraph 29 of
Preiss
immediately after the passage from paragraph 28 of
Preiss
, which deals with the seriousness of negligence which might amount to SPM, seems to suggest that the Privy Council in
Preiss
was saying that an unblemished record was relevant to the issue of whether the conduct in question amounted to SPM. In fact, the Privy Council was saying no such thing. However, there was no discussion of that issue at that point in
Rao
, and the judgement moved on to consider whether the advice given by the legal assessor was confusing or wrong. The finding was that the advice was ambiguous and misleading and may have undermined the validity of the PCC panel’s decision.
21.39
The Privy Council in
Rao
then listed the factors which the PCC panel should have taken into account in deciding whether the conduct amounted to SPM. It was said that the PCC panel should have started from the premise that this was a borderline case of SPM based upon a single incident. The decision continued:
‘There was undoubted negligence but something more was required to constitute serious professional misconduct and to attach the stigma of such a finding to a doctor of some 25 years standing with a hitherto unblemished career.’
21.40
In the event, their Lordships were not convinced that, if the legal advice had been correct, the PCC panel would inevitably have decided that the conduct amounted to SPM. They considered that the PCC panel’s finding of SPM should be set aside. The words that I have quoted above seem to imply that it would be proper for the PCC, in deciding whether the misconduct amounted to SPM, to take into account the doctor’s 25 years’ standing with an unblemished record. In my view, if the Privy Council was suggesting that personal mitigation was relevant to the issue of whether conduct amounted to SPM, that would be contrary to general principle. As I have said, personal mitigation is relevant to sanction but should not, as a matter of principle, affect whether the conduct proved in a particular case amounts to SPM.
21.41
The decision in the case of
Rao
does not clearly say that an
‘unblemished career’
should be taken into account when considering whether or not conduct amounts to SPM, although it does imply it. I thought it necessary to draw attention to this point because, four months after
Rao
, in
Silver v General Medical Council
, the Privy Council explicitly stated that a past good record should be taken into account when considering whether misconduct amounted to SPM. In the case of
Silver
, the PCC panel found the doctor guilty of SPM and imposed conditions for a period of 12 months. The allegation, which the PCC panel found proved, was that the doctor had persistently failed, over a period of nine days, to visit an elderly patient who was in need of care and, eventually, of referral to hospital. The doctor was a sole practitioner. It was found that the failure to visit arose from serious managerial, organisational and communications failures within the practice. In short, despite several requests to the practice for a visit - not only from the patient’s family but also from other healthcare professionals - Dr Silver never received the message and never attended the patient. The PCC panel found that, as a sole practitioner with responsibility for management of the practice, he was responsible for these failures and that they amounted to SPM.
21.42
The doctor appealed on several grounds, most of which need not be mentioned as they were not successful. The ground which succeeded, and which is relevant to the point under present discussion, was that the conduct found proved did not amount to SPM and that the PCC panel’s approach had been
‘heavy handed and unfair’
. It was said that the conduct was an isolated lapse and that there was no allegation against the doctor of a broad-ranging nature. It appears from its decision that the PCC panel had considered the seriousness of the conduct, had concluded that it amounted to SPM and had then gone on to consider various matters in mitigation. The first was that the doctor worked in a deprived area where it was difficult to get staff. That mitigation was clearly relevant to the gravity of the misconduct. Second, the PCC panel mentioned that the doctor had a large list of patients whom he had served for 40 years as a sole practitioner. It may be that the size of the doctor’s list could be a factor to be taken into account in mitigation of the offence if he was under-staffed and over-stretched. However, it is clear that the fact that he had been a sole practitioner in the area for 40 years was purely personal mitigation. Third, the PCC panel mentioned that this was the first complaint recorded against the doctor and that he had produced a large number of testimonials. That was purely personal mitigation. Despite the mitigation, however, the PCC panel found the doctor guilty of SPM.
21.43
Far from criticising the PCC panel for taking personal mitigation into account at this stage, the Privy Council held that the PCC panel had paid insufficient attention to the personal mitigation in deciding whether the misconduct amounted to SPM. In giving the judgement of the Judicial Committee, Sir Philip Otton said that it was
‘axiomatic’
that, once the findings of fact had been made, all the relevant circumstances must be considered
before
a finding of SPM could be made. That of course was right. However, their Lordships went on to say that, in their view, all the mitigation was relevant to the decision on SPM.
21.44
In support of this proposition, their Lordships cited a passage from the case of
Roylance v General Medical Council
, which discussed the constituent elements of SPM and referred back to the case of
8
, which I cited in
. The passage from
Roylance
says nothing about mitigating factors. Their Lordships then cited the same passage from paragraph 28 of the judgement in
Preiss
and ran it together with the same extract from Counsel’s submission quoted in paragraph 29, which I have quoted above. Once again, as in
Rao
, by running these two passages together, the Privy Council implied that
Preiss
was authority for the proposition that evidence of good past record was relevant to the question of whether certain conduct amounted to SPM. However, examination of the report of
Preiss
shows that the Privy Council was not saying that. At paragraph 28 of that case, Lord Cooke of Thorndon said, as I have cited, that SPM does not require moral turpitude, that gross negligence can amount to SPM and that something more is required than the degree of negligence that can give rise to civil liability. That is indisputably right. However, in paragraph 29, Lord Cooke turned to the question of sanction and it was in that context that he observed that Counsel’s submission (about the man of many years’ standing who has one case where everything goes wrong) had
‘some force’
. It is clear that he was saying that evidence of long and blameless service was relevant to sanction. That is plainly right. However, it appears to me that, in both
Rao
Silver
, the citation from
Preiss
was taken out of context and was misunderstood. In my view, when asking the question whether an incident or specific course of conduct amounts to SPM, the fact that the doctor had been otherwise blameless for 10, 20 or 40 years was irrelevant. It was, however, highly relevant to what sanction should be applied if it was decided the conduct did amount to SPM.
21.45
Finally, in the case of
Silver
the Privy Council cited its own decision in
Rao
. However, as I have just said, that decision too was based upon a misreading or misinterpretation of what Lord Cooke had said in
Preiss
. In neither
Rao
nor
Silver
did the Judicial Committee expressly rely on the GMC Rules as permitting a practice that would otherwise be contrary to principle; it either implied (in
Rao
) or stated (in
Silver
) that personal mitigation was relevant to whether conduct amounted to SPM. With great respect to the eminent members of the Judicial Committee, I must say that, in my judgement, the decisions (insofar as they relate to that issue) in
Silver
Rao
are wrong.
21.46
Under the old FTP procedures, PCC panels received all sorts of material in mitigation before they decided whether the doctor’s conduct amounted to SPM. Taking into account material which was irrelevant to the issue ‘muddied the waters’ and inevitably resulted in cases of serious misconduct being excused because the doctor had a good past record. This must have resulted in some doctors who were in fact guilty of SPM avoiding a finding to that effect, with obvious implications for patient safety. It must also have caused great distress to patients and families who will have had the impression that the misconduct which had been demonstrated was somehow acceptable to the GMC. Such poor decisions reduce public confidence in the GMC and lead to allegations that it is ‘too soft on doctors’.
21.47
This problem of taking irrelevant mitigation into account should not arise under the new procedures, where the question for the FTP panel will not be whether the conduct found proved was serious enough to amount to SPM but whether, in all the circumstances, the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired and, if it is, whether the impairment is sufficient to justify action on registration. Thus the panel must take a view ‘in the round’ of the doctor’s fitness to practise and all mitigation is relevant.
Cases in Which the Health of the Doctor Was in Issue
21.48
Schedule 4, paragraph 4 to the Medical Act 1983 reproduced the provisions of Schedule 4, paragraph 4 to the Medical Act 1978. It dealt with the situation where, during the course of a PCC hearing, a question arose as to whether a doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. When such a question arose, the PCC panel had power to refer the question to the HC for determination. The doctor would be medically examined and the HC, having considered the results of the examination, would form a judgement about whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired. If, in the HC’s judgement, there was no serious impairment, it was required to certify its opinion to the PCC. The PCC panel would then resume its consideration of the case and dispose of it. If, on the other hand, the HC’s judgement was that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her condition, the HC was required to certify its opinion to the PCC and then to proceed to dispose of the case. The PCC would then cease to exercise its functions in relation to the case. By referring a case to the HC for its opinion, therefore, the PCC did not necessarily lose its jurisdiction over a case. If no serious impairment of fitness to practise was found, the PCC could proceed to deal with the case. The PCC had no power to refer a case to a health screener to be dealt with by means of the voluntary health procedures.
21.49
The relationship between the PCC and the HC is well illustrated by the Privy Council case of
Crabbie v General Medical Council
. A PCC panel decided to erase Dr Crabbie’s name from the register following her conviction for offences of causing death by dangerous driving and drink driving, for which she had been sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. Before the PCC panel, evidence was adduced that Dr Crabbie’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of ill health, namely alcohol dependency. It was contended on her behalf that the PCC panel should refer her case to the HC. The PCC panel declined to do so, saying that the convictions were so serious that the sanctions available to the HC were not adequate to protect the public; the case was so serious that only erasure was appropriate. The doctor appealed to the Privy Council, contending that the PCC panel had erred in refusing to refer the case to the HC and that, in any event, the sanction of erasure was wrong in principle and manifestly too severe. It was said that the case should have been dealt with by the imposition of conditions that would have ensured that the doctor could not resume medical practice until she was fit to do so. The Privy Council advised that the appeal should be dismissed. The PCC panel’s reasoning disclosed no error of law and its conclusion was plainly open to it. The Privy Council expressed the view that, as the HC had no power to direct erasure, the PCC should not refer a case to the HC if erasure was
‘a serious possibility’
, notwithstanding the fact that there was good evidence that the doctor’s fitness to practise was impaired by reason of ill health.
Cases in Which the Performance of the Doctor Was in Issue
21.50
It should be noted also that, on the introduction of the performance procedures in 1997, the PCC was given no power to refer a case to the CPP. Nor was it given any specific power to direct that a doctor should undergo a performance assessment. In practice, this was sometimes achieved by making the undergoing of a performance assessment a condition of continued registration. If the assessment revealed that the doctor’s performance was seriously deficient, the PCC panel could not direct that the doctor should be monitored by the CPP or by a performance case co-ordinator under a voluntary statement of requirements. However, the assessment could be of value in that it might have assisted the PCC panel in forming a view about any conditions that should be attached to the doctor’s registration when s/he was brought back before the panel. However, the lack of a power to refer the case to the CPP (in the way that it could refer a doctor to the HC) was a
in the powers of the PCC. This will be remedied under the new procedures where a FTP panel will be able to direct a performance assessment and act upon it.
Postponement of Determination
21.51
Once a PCC panel had decided that a doctor was guilty of SPM, or that the fact of a conviction had been admitted or proved, it would go on to consider, first, whether it was necessary and appropriate to postpone its determination on whether to impose a sanction. It could, if its members thought fit, postpone its determination to some future date in order to obtain and consider further evidence about the doctor’s conduct. It is not clear to me how frequently this power was used. Such documents as I have seen suggest that it was very rarely used in the late 1990s. Where a decision was postponed, the PCC panel might invite the doctor to provide the names of professional colleagues and
‘other persons of standing’
to whom the GMC could apply for confidential information as to their knowledge of the doctor’s conduct since the time of the original hearing. If the PCC panel decided that no postponement was necessary, it would then go on to consider whether a sanction was appropriate.
Conclusion of the Case without Sanction
21.52
If the PCC panel decided that no postponement was necessary, it then had to go on to consider whether it was sufficient to make no direction and to conclude the case. If it decided that question in the affirmative, it might decide to issue a reprimand. A reprimand was not a
‘direction’
but, in some GMC documents, it was described as a
‘sanction’
Issuing a Reprimand
21.53
Until recently, the term used was an ‘admonishment’ but, in 1999, the term was changed to a ‘reprimand’, as the word ‘admonishment’ was considered somewhat old-fashioned. The power to admonish was contained in rule 34 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, which provided:
‘The Chairman shall announce any finding, determination, direction, or revocation of the Committee under these rules in such terms as the Committee may approve and, where the announcement is one that a conviction has been proved or that the practitioner has been judged guilty of serious professional misconduct but the Committee do not propose to make any direction, may, without prejudice to the terms in which any other announcement may be made, include any expression of the Committee’s admonition in respect of the practitioner’s behaviour giving rise to the charge or charges in question.’
21.54
A reprimand did not affect a doctor’s registration. However, having been given at a public hearing, the reprimand was in the public domain and, if a specific enquiry was made about a doctor’s FTP history, the fact that the doctor had been reprimanded should have been disclosed by the GMC.
21.55
The status of a reprimand was not entirely clear. It could not sensibly be regarded as ‘action on registration’. The PPC’s
, which I described in
, advised members of the PPC that SPM might be considered in the context of conduct
‘so grave as potentially to call into question a practitioner’s registration whether indefinitely, temporarily or conditionally’
. That raised the question whether, when the PPC was considering whether or not to send a case through to the PCC, it should have had in mind that, while no restriction of the doctor’s registration was likely to be contemplated by the PCC panel, the panel might well have considered that a reprimand would have been appropriate. If so, should the case have been referred to the PCC? Mr Robert Nicholls, former Chairman of the PPC, said that, for the PPC, the test was whether the relevant conduct had the potential to warrant conditional registration, suspension or erasure. Although it was recognised that a reprimand might be the outcome of a referral to the PCC, that possibility was not in the minds of members of the PPC when deciding whether to refer the case on. It appears that, if the PPC thought that a reprimand would suffice, it would issue a warning letter itself. Such a course avoided the risk, in borderline cases, that the doctor might be found ‘not guilty’ of SPM, with the result that the PCC would then be unable to issue a warning or reprimand. I can see the logic of that approach in conduct cases. However, in conviction cases, the PCC would definitely have jurisdiction to impose a sanction, if it thought it appropriate to do so, and it should, in my view, have been for the PCC, rather than for the PPC, to decide on sanction. In any event, the conviction would already have been in the public domain and the public had a legitimate interest in knowing how doctors convicted of criminal offences were dealt with by the GMC and why.
21.56
The 2003 ISG, which, as I have said, was produced for the assistance of PCC panellists, advised that a reprimand might be considered where most of the following factors were present:
‘• Evidence that behaviour would not have caused direct or indirect patient harm.
• Insight into failings.
• Isolated incident which was not deliberate.
• Genuine expression of regret/apologies.
• Action under duress.
• Previous good history.
• No repetition of behaviour since incident.
• Rehabilitative/corrective steps taken.
• Relevant and appropriate references and testimonials.’
The 2003 ISG emphasised that the list of factors was not exhaustive. In my view, all these factors were undoubtedly relevant to the issue of sanction. However, it was safe to take such matters into account only where there was a reasonable evidential basis for them. It might well have been unsafe for a PCC panel to accept, without corroborative evidence, that, for example, the incident was an isolated lapse or that there had been no repetition of the conduct since the incident. In the past, it seemed to be assumed that these things were so in the absence of evidence to the contrary. There was rarely any investigation and there was rarely, if ever, any evidence about them. They usually depended upon the assertion of counsel - made, no doubt, in good faith. It appears to me, from the cases that I have read, that assumptions were readily made in the doctor’s favour, without any satisfactory evidential basis.
21.57
In considering how the GMC might have treated Shipman if his conduct in the case of Mrs Renate Overton had been reported to the GMC (see
), the Inquiry examined a number of other cases which had been reported to the GMC in the mid-1990s and in which a drug overdose had been given with serious or fatal consequences. One such was the case of Dr JM 03, who was given a
‘severe’
reprimand at the conclusion of the PCC hearing.
Dr JM 03
21.58
The doctor was a specialist registrar in anaesthesia. Late one evening, she was called upon to provide post-operative analgesia using a device known as an Abbott Provider. The doctor was unfamiliar with the equipment and re-set it wrongly (and unnecessarily) so that the patient received ten times the appropriate dose of the drug, which was fentanyl. The effect was fatal. The case was reported to the GMC but could not progress for some time because other proceedings were current. The police investigated the death but decided not to prosecute the doctor. The Coroner’s inquest concluded with a verdict of unlawful killing. The Health and Safety Executive successfully prosecuted the hospital trust under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 for its failure to provide the doctor with adequate training in the use of the Abbott Provider. The trust was not able to discipline the doctor because, by the time the prosecution was over, she had left its employment.
21.59
In due course, the case was referred for hearing by the PCC. The allegations were that the doctor had embarked on the use of the Abbott Provider although she was unfamiliar with it; she did not seek the advice of a senior or more experienced colleague; nor did she obtain the instruction manual; she re-set the Provider when there was no need for her to do so. When she checked its operation, she failed to realise that she had miscalculated the dosage. She knew (or should have known) that to re-set the device incorrectly created a risk that the patient would receive a fatal dose. The facts of the case and the various criticisms were all admitted. The doctor expressly admitted that her actions had been reckless and irresponsible. The PCC panel found her guilty of SPM. In mitigation, it took account of the frankness of the doctor’s admissions. A number of testimonials had been produced and the PCC panel found that the doctor was a
‘caring and conscientious doctor held in high regard’
. The PCC panel also took into account the failure of the trust to provide the doctor with adequate training in the use of the Abbott Provider, as evidenced by its conviction. The PCC panel also expressed the view that a confusing method of describing the contents of solutions of drugs might have contributed to the doctor’s error. The PCC panel said that the doctor had learned a great deal from the incident, which represented a single mistake in an otherwise unblemished career. In the particular circumstances, this decision seems to me to have been an acceptable use of the power of reprimand, although some might argue that a period of conditional registration with a requirement to undergo an educational programme might have been more appropriate.
Sanctions
21.60
If a PCC panel decided that it would not be sufficient to conclude a case without any sanction being imposed on the doctor, it then had to consider which of the available sanctions to impose.
Sanctions: Their Purpose
21.61
The GMC states that the purpose of the sanctions is not to be punitive. Rather, their purpose is to protect the public interest although, in fulfilling this purpose, they may have an incidental punitive effect. The ‘public interest’ includes not only the protection of patients, but also the maintenance of public confidence in the medical profession and the declaring and upholding of proper standards of conduct.
21.62
The 2003 ISG stated that the
‘public interest’
might also include
‘the doctor’s return to work if he or she possesses certain skills, competencies, or knowledge, for example expertise in a particular area, or language skills’
. The 2003 ISG also advised that, in deciding what sanctions to impose, the PCC panel should apply the
‘principle of proportionality’
, weighing the interests of the public against those of the doctor, which latter interests include
‘returning immediately to unrestricted practice or after a period of retraining’
. In addition, the 2003 ISG advised that the PCC panel would need to consider any mitigation in relation to the seriousness of the behaviour in question.
Sanctions: the Order in Which They Were Considered
21.63
Rule 31 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules stated that a PCC panel should first consider and determine whether it was sufficient to direct that the doctor’s registration should be conditional on his/her compliance, for a maximum period of three years, with such requirements as the PCC panel might think fit to impose for the protection of the public or in his/her own interests. This sanction is usually known as ‘conditional registration’. If the PCC panel decided that it was not sufficient to impose conditions on the doctor’s registration, it had next to consider and determine whether it was sufficient to direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended for a maximum period not exceeding 12 months. If the PCC panel did not consider suspension to be sufficient, it then had to direct erasure of the doctor’s name from the register. A PCC panel was, therefore, required to consider the available sanctions in reverse order of severity. The first it would consider was conditional registration.
The Sanction of Conditional Registration
21.64
As I have said, a PCC panel might make a doctor’s registration conditional on his/her compliance with stated requirements for a period not exceeding three years in the first instance, renewable for periods of up to 12 months thereafter. The purpose of conditional registration is to enable a doctor to remedy any deficiencies in his/her practice while, in the meantime, protecting the public or the doctor from harm. The 2003 ISG stated that conditional registration would be appropriate
‘where there is evidence of incompetence or significant shortcomings in the doctor’s practice but where the Committee can be satisfied that there is potential for the doctor to respond positively to retraining’
. This guidance seemed to suggest that the imposition of conditions on a doctor’s registration was appropriate in cases in which the proven misconduct was tantamount to seriously deficient performance (SDP). It seems to me that the PCC panels must sometimes have had difficulty in distinguishing between professional misconduct and deficient performance. However, the evidence on which a PCC panel acted was not an assessment of the doctor’s overall performance, but an account of one - or at most a few - specific incident(s). The PCC panel was unlikely to have a full picture of the doctor’s competence or shortcomings. In the future, the use of a performance assessment (possibly an abridged version of the present lengthy and expensive assessment) will be a useful tool for a FTP panel at this stage of the process.
21.65
The 2003 ISG advised that conditional registration might be an appropriate sanction when most or all of the following factors were apparent:
‘• No evidence of harmful deep-seated personality or attitudinal problems.
• Identifiable areas of doctor’s practice in need of assessment or retraining.
• No evidence of general incompetence.
• Potential and willingness to respond positively to retraining.
• Patients will not be put in danger either directly or indirectly as a result of conditional registration itself.
• The conditions will protect patients during the period they are in force.
• It is possible to formulate appropriate and practical conditions to impose on registration.’
The 2003 ISG made clear that the list of factors was not exhaustive.
21.66
Conditions may impose exacting and far-reaching restrictions on a doctor’s practice (e.g. s/he may not be permitted to practise, save under the supervision of another registered doctor) or may be far less onerous (e.g. s/he may have to take and follow guidance about a particular aspect of his/her practice).
Resumed Hearings
21.67
In a case where a PCC panel had imposed conditions on a doctor’s registration, it was open to it, when announcing its decision, to announce also that it would resume consideration of the case at a hearing to be held before the expiration of the period of conditional registration. At the resumed hearing, the PCC panel could decide to revoke the conditions previously made, to vary them, or to impose a further period of conditional registration not exceeding 12 months. A resumed hearing would have afforded an opportunity to ‘take stock’ of the progress made by the doctor during the period since the conditions had been imposed and of considering whether the doctor had reached the stage of being fit to practise unrestricted.
21.68
The 2001 ISG made no mention of holding a resumed hearing in a case where conditions had been imposed on a doctor’s registration. It might be that resumed hearings were not held, or were not held often in cases where conditional registration had been imposed. Resumed hearings were mentioned in the 2001 ISG only in connection with suspension. However, the 2003 ISG mentioned a resumed hearing as a possibility in a case where conditions had been imposed on registration, although the emphasis was still on resumed hearings in cases of suspension.
21.69
If no resumed hearing was held, it appears that, at the conclusion of the period of conditional registration, the conditions simply lapsed and the doctor returned to unrestricted practice without more ado. I appreciate that to convene a resumed hearing would have been an additional drain on resources. However, I do think that it would have been of value to hold a resumed hearing. It would have focussed the mind of the doctor on what s/he would be expected to have achieved by the time of the resumed hearing. It would also have given the PCC panel some insight into the practical operation of the sanction it had imposed. In that way, PCC panels would have learned what worked well or less well as remediation for particular kinds of problem.
21.70
If the PCC panel did not announce that it intended to resume consideration of a case in which conditions had been imposed on a doctor’s registration, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules nevertheless permitted the case to be referred back to the PCC panel if information came to light about the conduct or conviction of the doctor since the original hearing or if it appeared that the doctor was not complying with the original conditions. The PCC panel could then consider whether the period of conditional registration should be extended, or the conditions varied or revoked, or whether the doctor’s registration should be suspended or his/her name erased from the register. If an intimation had been given at the original hearing that the hearing would be resumed, the case could be brought back earlier than intended if relevant information was received.
21.71
It is clear that there are advantages in imposing conditions on a doctor’s registration. They are the only means of enforcing remedial action with the prospect of achieving a result that is beneficial both to the doctor and, in the longer term, to the public. The disadvantages are that allowing a doctor to practise under conditions may expose the public to a potential risk. First, the doctor is usually allowed to practise while undergoing part-time re-education. The public may be at risk while that process is underway. It can be difficult for the GMC to monitor the doctor’s compliance with conditions. Second, unless the doctor is assessed at the end of the period, there is no certainty that the exercise has been effective. Full-time remedial training for a concentrated period with assessment at the end would, in some cases, be a much more effective process - but very expensive. Third, it seems to me that the GMC should make it plain, in words and by its actions, that, if the doctor cannot demonstrate that the objectives underlying the conditions have been satisfactorily achieved, erasure will follow.
Cases Where Conditions Were Imposed on the Doctor’s Registration
21.72
While examining cases that were relevant to the case of Mrs Overton, the Inquiry came across some examples of cases in which conditions had been imposed.
Dr JC 02
21.73
One such was the case of Dr JC 02, who was brought before the PCC in the early 1990s following two incidents in which he had (negligently) administered an overdose of diamorphine. Both patients had died. The Coroner had returned verdicts of misadventure in both cases and, on the second occasion, a medical service committee (MSC) had found the doctor in breach of his terms of service. The PCC found SPM proved but the sanction was the imposition of conditions for eight months with a requirement that the doctor should undergo retraining in the use of
‘therapeutics’
and should not prescribe or possess diamorphine. At the end of the period, there was to be a resumed hearing at which the doctor was to produce certificates and references to demonstrate that he had undergone retraining. At the resumed hearing, the doctor was referred to the Health Committee.
Dr JG 03
21.74
In another case, that of Dr JG 03, which was heard in the mid-1990s and to which I referred in
, the PCC panel imposed a period of conditional registration following the doctor’s conviction for perverting the course of justice and a finding of SPM. The events had taken place three years earlier. The doctor had been consulted by a patient who suffered from asthma. At the time, her asthma was not troubling her but she had been experiencing palpitations. The doctor prescribed propranolol, a drug which is contraindicated for asthmatics. The following day, the patient suffered a very severe attack of breathlessness and died. The doctor was told what had happened. He then made a number of changes in the computerised medical records, removing several references to the patient’s history of asthma. In the course of the investigation that followed and when giving evidence at the inquest, he claimed that he had been unaware that the patient suffered from asthma. He claimed that he had had access only to the handwritten records on the day in question; he had not been able to read his partner’s writing and had not recognised any reference to asthma. Later, it was found that he had falsified the computer records; he was prosecuted, convicted and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment.
21.75
During the course of the investigation, evidence emerged that the doctor had falsified medical records on another occasion, in order to cover up an error that had been the subject of a separate complaint to the local MSC. However, the GMC did not take proceedings in respect of the earlier occasion; it considered only the prescribing error resulting in the death of the asthmatic patient and the conviction for perverting the course of justice. The PCC panel found that the doctor’s care of the patient had fallen deplorably short of a reasonable standard and amounted to SPM. Because of the period of imprisonment served and other factors regarded as mitigating the severity of the offence, it decided to impose conditions on the doctor’s registration for one year. The doctor was required to consult with his Regional Adviser in General Practice, to undergo an assessment of his consultation skills, history taking and physical examination and to follow the advice of the Regional Adviser about remedying any deficiencies in knowledge and history taking and about keeping accurate and contemporaneous records.
21.76
Dr Korlipara told the Inquiry that, although he had sat on the PCC panel which heard this case, he had no recollection of it. He was surprised that the PCC panel had imposed conditions and said that it would have been more usual to direct erasure or at the very least a long period of suspension. I interpose to say that the longest period of suspension available is a year. Dr Korlipara agreed that dishonesty could not be rectified by retraining. The PCC panel reviewed this case at a resumed hearing 11 months after the first hearing. It received correspondence from the regional adviser who said that the doctor had made satisfactory progress. The doctor was then allowed to practise unrestricted.
21.77
As a footnote to this case, about seven years later, the GMC became aware of a further complaint about Dr JG 03, who was said to have failed to diagnose meningitis in a young baby. The case was closed by the office staff because the local complaints procedures had not yet been completed. There is no indication on the file that any steps were taken to monitor or follow up the progress of the local complaint. Dr Korlipara agreed that the GMC ought to pursue such complaints proactively in the case of a doctor with a serious disciplinary history such as Dr JG 03.
21.78
In my view, the imposition of conditions in the case of Dr JG 03 was inappropriate. I find it hard to accept that the PCC panel members could have had at the forefront of their minds the need to protect the public. There were serious concerns about the doctor’s honesty. I believe that many members of the public would consider that dishonesty of this kind demonstrates an unfitness to practise because the doctor cannot be trusted. I recognise that attitudes might have hardened since it was discovered that Shipman habitually falsified medical records. But, even without that, I think that the public feels that it should be able to trust doctors - not always to avoid making mistakes but at least, when one is made, not to lie about it. Sir Donald Irvine told the Inquiry that, in his view, the GMC should seek to reach consensus with the public about appropriate sanctions. It seems to me that that would be a sensible course in respect of all sanctions but especially in respect of cases of dishonesty. Dr Korlipara agreed that a dialogue with the public about such issues would be helpful.
Dr JM 04
21.79
The case of Dr JM 04 also involved a serious prescribing error but, in his case, there was no attempt to ‘cover up’. The doctor was called out to see a patient who was suffering from severe pain. The doctor diagnosed renal colic and, despite the fact that the patient said that his pain had subsided, administered 75mg Voltarol and 30mg diamorphine intramuscularly. This was a gross overdose and the patient died about an hour later, owing to morphine toxicity. The police investigated the death. They were unable to find either a prescription for 30mg diamorphine or an entry in the practice controlled drugs register. In the doctor’s bag at his home, they found three 30mg ampoules and one 10mg ampoule of diamorphine, as well as other drugs and a copy of the British National Formulary. It would appear therefore that the doctor kept a supply of diamorphine and had used some from his stock on the patient who had died. He had not complied with the statutory requirements governing its use. The doctor was charged and convicted of manslaughter and was sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years.
21.80
Shortly after the GMC was notified about the conviction, it was discovered that Dr JM 04 had been the subject of another complaint, which had been handled locally. This incident had occurred only a few weeks after the prescribing error. He had failed to attend a patient who was ill and complaining of sweating; the patient had died of pneumonia shortly afterwards. The local health authority (HA) had taken disciplinary proceedings, at which the mother of the deceased patient had given evidence. The doctor had been found in breach of his terms of service. The mother was willing to sign a statement for the GMC but said that she would find it too distressing to repeat her oral evidence at a PCC hearing. The decision was taken at the GMC that it would be inappropriate to issue a
subpoena
to compel her attendance and that no action should be taken on the second complaint. I interpose to say that it does not appear that any attempt was made to visit the mother or even to speak to her on the telephone to explain to her the importance of her presence before the PCC and the consequences of her refusal to give oral evidence. In any event, the GMC could have applied to the PCC panel for her evidence to be admitted in written form; the PCC panel could have accepted it. Rule 50(1) of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee Rules 1988 provided that the PCC might receive oral, documentary or other evidence of any fact which appeared to them to be relevant to its inquiry into the case before it. Further, insofar as any evidence was tendered which would not have been admissible in criminal proceedings in England (and written statements of evidence are not usually admissible), the PCC could not receive it unless, after consideration, it was satisfied that its duty of making due inquiry made reception of that evidence desirable. Thus, rule 50 could have been used to found an application to introduce the written evidence of the mother of the deceased patient in this case. As it was, the panel considered only the allegation relating to the administration of diamorphine.
21.81
The PCC panel found that the doctor’s actions in administering 30mg diamorphine had been highly irresponsible. The doctor’s explanation, advanced through counsel, was that he had qualified abroad, in a country where diamorphine was not generally used; therefore he was unfamiliar with its properties. He had been very anxious to relieve the patient’s pain and had thought that the dose he gave was appropriate. Many testimonials were produced and the panel found that the doctor was a
‘caring GP who had made a tragic error’
. It was, of course, quite unaware of the findings of the local MSC in respect of the second incident. The PCC panel imposed conditions on the doctor’s registration for a period of 12 months. These were conditions of general supervision, of notification of where he would be practising and of providing reports on his performance to the GMC. There was no specific condition with regard to his right to prescribe controlled drugs or to any retraining in their use.
21.82
Dr Korlipara said that the PCC panel’s decision in this case had been ‘sympathetic’ and that erasure or a ‘long’ period of suspension would have been more usual. He sought to justify the PCC panel’s decision on the basis that this was believed to be an isolated error in the career of a good doctor. (The GMC knew that it was not but the PCC panel was not told.) Dr Korlipara mentioned that the error of dosage would never have happened had it not been that the doctor was so caring and so anxious to relieve the patient’s pain. The PCC panel had sought to protect the public by arranging supervision. He did not think it would have been necessary or appropriate for the GMC to investigate any possible concerns about the doctor’s practice of keeping diamorphine in his bag (although apparently not being accustomed to using it) and about his non-compliance with the statutory requirements. That, he said, was a matter for the local NHS bodies.
21.83
Soon after the PCC panel’s decision was announced, the GMC received a letter from a colleague of Dr JM 04. He was able to impart information about the circumstances surrounding the administration of diamorphine that had led to the conviction and also cast doubt on the accuracy of some of the matters advanced in mitigation. If this information was true, it would have put a different complexion on the case and the outcome might well have been different. As I have said, it has not been the GMC’s practice to contact employers or colleagues as part of its investigation.
21.84
I wish to make three observations. First, there appears to be a real possibility that the PCC panel dealt with this case on the basis of incomplete information about the circumstances of the misconduct underlying the conviction and unjustifiably favourable mitigation. The result may well have been the imposition of a sanction that did not adequately protect the public or the doctor’s future patients. Second, it seems to me that it would be sensible, especially in conviction cases, for the GMC to make enquiries of the partners or colleagues of the doctor and of his/her employer or primary care trust. Otherwise, the GMC cannot set the facts of the conviction in context. Nor is it in a position to check the veracity of matters advanced in mitigation by counsel on instructions. Third, in my view, it would be preferable for a PCC panel, when considering the imposition of conditional registration, to invite the doctor to give evidence. I do not see how a panel can adequately assess the doctor’s attitude towards his/her misconduct and his/her commitment to retraining on the basis of an address by an advocate.
Ghosh
21.85
The importance of hearing evidence from a doctor during PCC hearings was recognised by the GMC in the case of
Ghosh v General Medical Council
10
. Dr Ghosh was found guilty of SPM in April 1998 on charges of failure to visit patients when necessary. The PCC panel imposed conditions for two years. Excellent arrangements were made for Dr Ghosh’s re-education under the supervision of the Associate Dean of Postgraduate GP education. She was placed in a practice where the partners were willing to supervise her. However, there were soon signs that Dr Ghosh did not accept the need for supervision or for any change in her attitude and, in due course, it became apparent that she was not complying with the conditions imposed. Moreover a serious complaint was received in July 1999 that the doctor had not attended a patient whom she had promised to attend and who was in urgent need of attention. Soon afterwards, Dr Ghosh went abroad for two and a half months without warning the practice. Both the practice and the Associate Dean abandoned their attempts to supervise her. The Associate Dean wrote to the GMC urging it to bring the case back for review earlier than the date originally envisaged for the resumed hearing. In October 1999, the HA by which Dr Ghosh had been employed during her period of supervision dismissed her for gross misconduct in respect of the incident in July 1999. Dr Ghosh then asked the GMC for permission to work in various settings and complained that the Associate Dean would not help her
‘because she was ill’
. She repeatedly failed to provide the GMC with information about her activities.
21.86
In October 2000, Dr Ghosh came back before a PCC panel. She appeared by counsel and did not give evidence. It was claimed on her behalf that she had taken appropriate steps to re-educate herself. By way of example, she produced a letter from a doctor who said that she had attended antenatal clinics as an observer during August, September and October 1999. When it was pointed out that, for much of that time, she had been abroad, it was said on her behalf that the doctor who had written the letter had made a mistake about the dates; however, she had begun attending the clinic on her return to this country and was still doing so. The PCC panel asked counsel what evidence there was of this attendance and counsel said that she was relying upon her instructions. The PCC panel indicated that that was not evidence and there followed some discussion about whether Dr Ghosh would testify. She did not do so. It is clear from the reasons given by the PCC panel for its decision that this failure on her part was a significant factor in its decision to reject Dr Ghosh’s claims and to erase her name from the register. Dr Ghosh appealed against the erasure to the Privy Council, without success.
21.87
It is, I think, generally recognised that conditions requiring retraining are likely to succeed only if the doctor is genuinely committed to them. I repeat that, in my view, the PCC panel (and, indeed, other committees or panels empowered to impose conditions) should have required a doctor to answer its questions personally before deciding to impose conditions. I suspect that, in the case of Dr Ghosh, it would have been clear that she was not minded to co-operate. In such a case, if immediate erasure were thought inappropriate and conditions were the only possible course, it would surely have been preferable to arrange an early review of the case rather than leave matters for as long as two years. There is no evidence that Dr Ghosh practised in breach of her conditions but there must have been a risk that she would do so after the arrangements for supervision had broken down.
Dr JF 02
21.88
Finally in this section dealing with conditional registration, I must mention the case of Dr JF 02. The GMC received two complaints about this doctor in the early 1990s. One alleged an inappropriate internal examination, for which no chaperone was offered; the other alleged the administration of a gross overdose of diamorphine (100mg) shortly before the patient was despatched to hospital in an ambulance. The patient went into respiratory arrest but was resuscitated on arrival at hospital. Both matters were referred to a medical screener who requested immediate and urgent action in the case of the overdose and directed that the female complainant in the case of inappropriate examination should be asked to provide a statutory declaration. A letter of request was sent but no reply was received and, apart from a reference to the fact that the doctor disputed the allegation, there is no further record of this complaint in the file. In the light of subsequent events, the seriousness of the consequence of not following up that complaint will be understood.
21.89
The diamorphine complaint was referred to the PPC and the doctor was informed. His solicitors submitted his explanation, which was that he needed strong pain relief for the patient; he went to the pharmacy and asked for morphine or something similar. He was provided with diamorphine, which he had never used before. He checked the drug information leaflet and must have misread it, as he gave too much. The PPC sent the case to the PCC. Five months after the complaint had been recorded by the GMC, the doctor was found guilty of SPM and was placed on conditional registration for a period of six months, during which time he was to pursue a structured programme of retraining in the use of controlled drugs. At the end of the period of conditional registration, the doctor was free to practise without restriction, having apparently completed his retraining.
21.90
Only two months later, the GMC received a complaint that Dr JF 02 had carried out an inappropriate internal examination on an elderly female patient. However, the GMC decided to take no action because it considered that the main issue was whether the doctor had obtained valid consent before examining the patient. The GMC wrote to the HA which had reported the matter, suggesting that the patient should take civil action through the courts and that, if it were established that the doctor had not obtained consent, it would be open to the patient to renew her complaint to the GMC. Pausing in the history there, that seems to me a wholly inappropriate response to such a complaint. The GMC should have investigated the allegation even if it had stood alone; the need to do so was even greater in view of the earlier allegation of an inappropriate examination received the previous year. The GMC now had two potential allegations of sexual misconduct, from apparently unrelated sources, and neither was investigated.
21.91
About two years later, the HA in whose area the doctor practised wrote expressing concern about a number of matters relating to Dr JF 02. His prescribing was said to show a
‘seriously deficient pattern of performance’
. He had been prescribing methadone inappropriately for addicts and was also prescribing benzodiazepines to young patients over long periods. A GMC memorandum noted that these concerns might amount to SPM. However, three other complaints forwarded by the HA were thought not to raise questions of SPM and were screened out. These related to rudeness, excessive physical contact with a patient, performing an examination in an aggressive way and refusing to give assistance to a girl involved in a car accident. The HA wrote expressing its disappointment at the decisions to screen these complaints out, said that it was concerned about the welfare of patients and gave details of another specific concern. This related to a female patient, with whom it was alleged that Dr JF 02 was having a
‘non-professional relationship’
; he was supplying her with prescriptions for large amounts of benzodiazepines and opiate analgesics including Oramorph solution. The PPC referred to the PCC the allegations of irresponsible prescribing of methadone. At the same time, the HA informed the GMC that Dr JF 02 had been charged with nine counts of indecent assault and 30 counts of obtaining drugs by deception. Soon afterwards, the doctor was suspended from the HA’s list by the NHS Tribunal on an interim basis.
21.92
The PCC hearing was deferred pending the outcome of the criminal proceedings, which were concluded ten months later. The doctor was found guilty of one count of indecent assault and then pleaded guilty to five counts of theft of drugs. He was sentenced to eight months’ imprisonment for indecent assault and four months’ imprisonment for theft, both sentences to be suspended for two years. All remaining charges were ‘left on the file’. That meant that they would not proceed further unless, because of some exceptional and unforeseen circumstance, the court decided that they should proceed. There was, of course, no bar on the GMC hearing evidence in relation to them and, in particular, in relation to the allegations of indecent assault, each of which must have raised a question of SPM. However, the GMC did not do so.
21.93
Shortly after the doctor’s conviction, the HA intimated that further complaints about him were to be forwarded and expressed concern about the delay that had already occurred and about the length of time it might take to bring all these matters to the PCC. It urged the GMC to take immediate action. Mr Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, admitted in a letter to the HA that the GMC
‘could have done better’
and promised that the case would be considered at the next meeting of the PPC. The following month, the HA sent details of the additional concerns. These included an allegation that the police had found pornographic material at the doctor’s home and surgery. The PPC considered the issue of interim suspension at its next meeting (this was before the Interim Orders Committee (IOC) was established) but did not make an order. The case did not come before the PCC until five months later. Then, the only matters before the PCC panel were the convictions and the allegation of irresponsible prescribing of methadone to addicts. On this latter charge, a PCC panel found SPM proved. The sanction imposed in respect of the convictions and the finding of SPM was suspension for 12 months.
21.94
I must make two observations. First, even on the basis of the material before the PCC panel, this decision seems unduly lenient. The doctor was dealt with for indecency, dishonesty and irresponsible prescribing of controlled drugs. I would have thought that only erasure could provide adequate protection for the public. I think that, if such a decision were to be made today, the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)) would refer the case to the High Court as being unduly lenient. However, the CRHP/CHRE did not exist at that time. Second, the GMC had made no attempt to resolve all the other complaints made and concerns expressed about this doctor. Several complaints had been screened out because, standing alone, they could not amount to SPM. Others, such as the allegations of indecent assault, which had not been tried at court, were simply not dealt with. It may be - I cannot say - that, if the evidence of all the other matters had been put to the PCC panel, the doctor might have been acquitted on all of them, in which case he was dealt with on a proper basis. However, in the light of subsequent events, it seems very likely that, if further charges had been put, there would have been further findings amounting to SPM. It seems to me that the GMC knowingly dealt with this doctor on the basis of incomplete information. The process by which complaints were considered in isolation, and were screened out if they could not, of themselves, amount to SPM, did not provide adequate protection to patients. A doctor who behaves unacceptably on three occasions (as for example by being rude or aggressive to a patient) may not be guilty of SPM on each individual occasion but, when all three allegations are considered together, his/her misconduct must surely be viewed in a much more serious light.
21.95
A PCC panel reviewed the case at a resumed hearing a year later and declared that it was not satisfied that it would be safe to allow the doctor to return to unrestricted practice. It imposed conditions on his registration for 12 months. The doctor was permitted to practise only under the general supervision of another doctor and was not to prescribe drugs of addiction or their substitutes to patients he knew or suspected to be drug addicts.
21.96
A year later, the NHS Tribunal made a final order, removing the doctor from all NHS lists. The Tribunal considered a wide variety of allegations, including sexual assaults, sexually inappropriate behaviour, keeping obscene videos in his surgery, rudeness and arrogance, dishonesty and clinical incompetence, both generally and specifically with regard to the treatment of drug dependency. The NHS Tribunal found that Dr JF 02 was an
‘irremediably bad doctor’
who should not be allowed to treat NHS patients. It should be noted that most of the allegations considered by the NHS Tribunal had been reported to the GMC. I have read the decision of the NHS Tribunal. It is clear that it heard a great deal of evidence and approached each allegation with care. Its findings are clearly explained and appear to me to be fully justified on the evidence. More importantly, because of its willingness to hear all the matters together, the Tribunal was able to gain a holistic view of the doctor’s conduct, practice and character. By dealing with allegations in a piecemeal fashion, the GMC had not been able to do that. Following the decision of the NHS Tribunal, the doctor remained free to practise in the private sector.
21.97
Subsequently, the PCC panel resumed its consideration of Dr JF 02’s case. It found that the doctor had been unable to practise in the NHS owing to the ruling of the Tribunal. He was not in breach of the conditions previously imposed by the PCC panel. He was placed on conditional registration for a further 12 months. It appears that, the following year, the doctor obtained work in a cosmetic surgery clinic in the private sector. Subsequently, the clinic reported concerns about him to the National Care Standards Commission. These concerns related to the doctor’s poor standards of hygiene and inappropriate sexual behaviour. The substance of these concerns was brought to the attention of the PCC panel when it reconsidered Dr JF 02’s case at the expiration of his period of conditional registration. Nonetheless, the PCC panel decided to renew the conditional registration for another year, during which the doctor was to undergo an assessment of his performance. He remained free to practise in the private sector.
21.98
In a witness statement made for the Inquiry, Sir Donald Irvine described this as
‘an appalling case in which the GMC has failed and continues to fail to protect the public properly’
. I agree. I am pleased to report that, subsequently, the PCC granted Dr JF 02’s application for voluntary erasure from the register. I would not envisage that any application for restoration would succeed.
The Sanction of Suspension
21.99
As I have explained, if it did not consider that the imposition of conditions on a doctor’s registration was sufficient, a PCC panel had next to consider whether it would be sufficient to direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended for a period not exceeding 12 months.
21.100
Suspension normally took effect 28 days after the date of the PCC’s order, unless the doctor exercised his/her right of appeal to the High Court (until 2003, the Privy Council). However, if a PCC panel decided to impose a period of suspension or to erase the doctor’s registration and if it appeared to the PCC panel that there might be reasons (either in the public interest or in the interest of the doctor) for imposing immediate suspension, it had the power to do this, provided that it invited representations on the question before making its decision.
21.101
The 2003 ISG advised that suspension could be used to
‘send out a signal’
to the doctor, to the profession and to the public about what was regarded as unacceptable behaviour. The 2003 ISG pointed out that suspension had a punitive effect, in that it prevented the doctor from practising and, therefore, from earning a living as a doctor during the period of suspension. The 2003 ISG continued:
‘It is likely to be appropriate for misconduct that is serious, but not so serious as to justify erasure (for example where there may have been acknowledgement of fault and where the Committee is satisfied that the behaviour or incident is unlikely to be repeated). The length of the suspension may be up to 12 months and is a matter for the Committee’s discretion, depending on the gravity of the particular case.’
As a signal, suspension may be effective, but as a sanction it may be counter-productive. Unless the doctor has undergone a programme of re-education or has otherwise used the time productively, s/he will emerge from suspension de-skilled, demoralised and probably a less effective doctor than s/he was when originally suspended.
21.102
The 2003 ISG advised that suspension might be appropriate when some or all of the following factors were apparent:
‘A serious incident of misconduct but where a lesser sanction is not sufficient.
Not fundamentally incompatible with continuing to be a registered doctor.
No evidence of harmful deep-seated personality or attitudinal problems.
No evidence of repetition of behaviour since incident.
Committee satisfied that doctor has insight and does not pose a significant risk of repeated behaviour.’
The 2003 ISG made clear that the list of factors was not exhaustive.
Resumed Hearings
21.103
As with conditional registration, when a PCC panel suspended a doctor, it could state, when announcing its decision, that it would resume consideration of the case before the end of the period of suspension. The 2003 ISG did not envisage that a resumed hearing would be necessary in every case. It stated:
‘In some cases, it may be self-evident that following the period of suspension, there will be no value in seeing the doctor again. However in most cases where a period of suspension is imposed, the Committee may need to be reassured that the doctor has a continuing commitment to practise as a doctor; has fully appreciated the gravity of the offence; has not re-offended, and has maintained his or her skills and knowledge.’
21.104
I would have thought that it would have been a rare case of suspension in which it was not appropriate to review the position at the end of the period of suspension. I also think it appropriate that any disciplinary panel should have the opportunity to question the doctor personally, in addition to receiving any written reports. Of course, doctors cannot be compelled to give evidence but there should be an expectation that they will submit to questioning and that adverse inferences might be drawn from a refusal to do so.
21.105
At the resumed hearing, a PCC panel had the power to direct that the period of suspension should be extended for a further period, not exceeding a period of 12 months, from the time when it would otherwise expire. It was also open to the PCC panel to impose a period (not exceeding three years) of conditional registration or, if it did not regard either of the previous alternatives as sufficient, to direct that the doctor’s name should be erased from the register. Cases could be brought back to the PCC panel where no intimation of a resumed hearing had been given, or in advance of the intended date for the resumed hearing, in circumstances similar to those which applied to conditional registration.
21.106
The 2003 ISG advised that there might be cases where a PCC panel might wish to impose a period of suspension and, at the same time, to direct a resumed hearing and to recommend the type of educational programme the doctor might undergo, or the action s/he might wish to take, during the period of his/her suspension. This could be a potentially useful tool if the objectives were made clear at the start and if, at the resumed hearing, there were to be proper evidence about what had been achieved. However, the wording of the 2003 ISG, which suggested that the PCC panel might recommend an educational programme that the doctor
‘might undergo’
or an action that the doctor
‘might wish to undertake’
, does not sound as if it was intended that there should be a clear objective which the doctor was expected to achieve or that the consequences of failure might be serious.
Cases Where the Doctor’s Registration Was Suspended
21.107
I have said that the Inquiry had an interest in cases in which doctors were found to have been dishonest. The Inquiry also had a particular interest in cases in which doctors had fabricated medical records to cover up misconduct. Shipman did this on many occasions. The Inquiry examined some such cases and found that the sanction imposed was sometimes a period of suspension.
Dr JF 04 and Dr JF 03
21.108
The linked cases of Dr JF 04 and Dr JF 03 are an example of this. Dr JF 04 and Dr JF 03 were husband and wife and were in practice together. In the early 1990s, a complaint was made to the local Family Health Services Authority (FHSA) that Dr JF 04 (the husband) had, a short time earlier, failed properly to examine patient A and had failed to refer her for specialist investigation. Also, he had allegedly been rude to the patient. Later that year, when the complaint was under investigation, Dr JF 04 produced to the FHSA patient records that had been falsified by both Dr JF 04 and Dr JF 03 for the purpose of misleading the FHSA in its investigation. Shortly after receipt of the first complaint, another complaint was received by the FHSA on behalf of patient B, who alleged that both doctors had failed to examine the patient properly, had failed to ascertain the cause of his symptoms and had failed to refer him for specialist investigation when his condition required such referral. Later that year, when the complaint was being investigated by the FHSA, the doctors produced records that had been falsified by them both for the purpose of misleading the FHSA.
21.109
Both doctors were referred by the PPC to the PCC and their cases were heard over two years after they had first been referred to the GMC. Some of the allegations (including the falsification of records) were admitted and others were found proved. Some allegations were found not proved. A PCC panel found both doctors guilty of SPM. After the receipt of material in mitigation (which included a large number of testimonial letters from patients), both doctors were suspended from practice for three months. Pausing there, I think that this decision would strike many members of the public as unduly lenient. Indeed, in her statement to the Inquiry, Dr Trowell expressed the view that these doctors’ names should have been erased from the register. She felt that the PCC panel must have been very impressed by the mitigation advanced since it imposed only three months’ suspension. As we shall see, the mitigation was not all that it seemed to be.
21.110
As I have explained, suspension normally took effect 28 days after the date of the order, unless the doctor exercised his/her right of appeal to the High Court (then the Privy Council). The wife did not appeal and ‘served’ her period of suspension. The husband appealed to the Privy Council, thereby deferring his suspension. The appeal was withdrawn in the month in which his wife’s period of suspension expired and the withdrawal was accepted by the Privy Council in July. It is clear that this was a tactical appeal, designed to ensure that the two partners were suspended at different times.
21.111
A few weeks after the PCC hearing, the GMC received information that some of the testimonial letters presented to the PCC panel had been obtained in dubious circumstances. In one case, there was evidence that the wife had asked a patient to write a letter at her dictation, without explaining why it was needed. When the patient returned to the surgery to express concern about this, the husband told her that it would not be used. In fact it was. There were six other cases in which different complaints were made. In one, the patient complained that the wife had composed the letter and the patient had felt
‘pushed’
into writing it; in another, the patient had agreed to write a letter of support, at the wife’s request, but was not told why it was wanted. These complaints came before the PPC three months after the expiration of the wife’s suspension. Presumably the screener must have thought that they raised a question of SPM. The husband admitted the allegation against him and apologised that he had not heeded the request of the patient who had asked to withdraw her letter. So far as I can see from the file, the wife did not reply to the letter informing her of the allegations.
21.112
The PPC panel decided not to refer the new complaints to the PCC. Instead, it directed that a letter of warning should be sent to the wife and a cautionary letter should be sent to the husband. In his Inquiry statement, Dr Robin Steel, who was Chairman of the PPC at the time, said that the PPC would not have sent the complaints on to the PCC because it would have thought it most unlikely that the PCC would wish to take any additional action on registration, bearing in mind that it had already imposed a three-month suspension. He also stated that all the testimonials submitted by the doctors had been
‘investigated’
and only a small proportion turned out to have been obtained in dubious circumstances. This case leaves me with the impression that these two dishonest doctors ran rings around the GMC.
Dr JP 01
21.113
Another case in which a PCC panel imposed a period of suspension upon a doctor found guilty of substandard practice and dishonesty was that of Dr JP 01. The doctor had failed to carry out an adequate examination of a patient in 2000. The patient was subsequently admitted to hospital and died. The doctor failed to make a contemporaneous note of his examination and later made false entries in the records in relation to that occasion and to a previous consultation some 16 months earlier. At the hearing in 2003, the PCC panel found that the doctor’s actions were irresponsible, dishonest and intended to mislead. He was found guilty of SPM and suspended from practice for six months. Here again, I think the public would feel that this sanction was unduly lenient. My own view is that the public needs protection from this kind of doctor who cannot be trusted. In any event, I believe that there is a need for the public to be consulted about the appropriate sanctions for misconduct, particularly those involving dishonesty.
The Sanction of Erasure
21.114
The most serious sanction available to the PCC is erasure of a doctor’s name from the medical register. The 2003 ISG advised that erasure from the register was appropriate where this was the only means of protecting patients and maintaining public confidence in the medical profession. It advised that erasure was likely to be appropriate when the behaviour in question was
‘fundamentally incompatible with being a doctor’
and involved any of the following:
‘• Serious departure from the relevant professional standards as set out in Good Medical Practice.
• Doing serious harm to others (patients or otherwise), either deliberately or through incompetence and particularly where there is a continuing risk to patients.
• Abuse of position/trust (particularly involving vulnerable patients) or violation of the rights of patients.
• Dishonesty (especially where persistent and covered up).
• Persistent lack of insight into seriousness of actions or consequences.’
Once again, the 2003 ISG emphasised that the list of factors was not exhaustive.
Cases Where the Doctor’s Name Was Erased from the Register
21.115
I wish to discuss a few cases in which a PCC panel directed erasure from the medical register. Some of these cases were appealed to the Privy Council - some successfully, some not. These cases have been selected because they deal with issues that are of particular interest to the Inquiry in view of similarities to some aspects of Shipman’s behaviour. I stress that the Inquiry has not undertaken a systematic review of PCC decisions. With that
caveat
, however, I must observe that it is difficult to detect any consistent thread of seriousness or mitigating factors that explain why one case was dealt with by erasure while another resulted in suspension or the imposition of conditions. The impression is one of inconsistency. This was recognised by the PCC Working Group in its report of 1999.
Dr JM 08
21.116
I mentioned earlier that, because of the case of Mrs Overton, the Inquiry was particularly interested in cases in which a doctor had administered an overdose of an opiate drug. One case brought to the Inquiry’s attention in this context was that of Dr JM 08. While working for a deputising service in 2000, Dr JM 08 had been called to see a patient suffering from lung cancer and bronchopneumonia. He administered 45mg morphine to the patient, who had never previously been given that drug. This was a grossly excessive dose. The patient died two hours later and the autopsy found that morphine poisoning was one of the causes of death. The police investigated the death but decided not to prosecute; they reported the case to the GMC. The PPC referred the case to the PCC and also to the IOC. About three months later, the IOC made an order imposing interim conditions on the doctor’s practice. These included requirements not to work as a locum or in a single-handed practice and not to undertake out of hours work. The intention was obviously to ensure a degree of supervision of the doctor’s work. He was to inform any employer of the conditions. At a review hearing three months later, the doctor claimed that he had not worked at all since the interim order was made. In fact, as it emerged at the next review hearing three months later, that was untrue. He had done locum work at a single-handed practice and had performed out of hours work. Rather surprisingly, the IOC did not impose interim suspension but allowed the doctor to continue working, subject to conditions as before.
21.117
At the substantive hearing by a PCC panel, which took place about 19 months after the case had been referred to the PCC by the PPC, the doctor was found guilty of SPM and his name was erased from the register. It is clear from the decision that a major factor in the PCC panel’s reasoning was the doctor’s contempt for the order made by the IOC and his willingness to mislead the GMC.
Manzur
21.118
Some of the cases where PCC panels directed erasure of a doctor’s name from the register were cases involving allegations of dishonesty. One such was the case of
Manzur v General Medical Council
11
. In that case, the doctor had pleaded guilty in the Magistrates’ Court in May 2000 to five charges of false accounting and asked for five more to be taken into consideration. He had dishonestly obtained money from the local HA. He was fined £7500. At the GMC, his case was referred to the PCC. The PCC panel took a serious view of this misconduct and, after taking account of the mitigation advanced, decided to erase the doctor’s name from the register. He appealed to the Privy Council on the ground that the sanction was too severe, particularly in the light of his long unblemished record and the many positive aspects of his career. Importantly, the Privy Council was told that there had been no criticism of his treatment of patients or apparent doubts about his ability. The Privy Council allowed the appeal and substituted a period of suspension for three months.
Dey
21.119
The facts of the case of
Dey v General Medical Council
12
were not unlike those of
Manzur
, although there was an additional feature, in that patient records had been falsified. In
Dey
, the doctor had been convicted in the Magistrates’ Court of multiple charges of false accounting and two charges of obtaining money by deception. He had submitted to the HA applications for payment for health screening tests which he claimed to have carried out but had not. He was paid £7.10 for each test. Apparently, he had done this on over a thousand occasions. He had also made entries in patients’ records, presumably recording health screening tests that had not taken place. A PCC panel erased his name from the register and the doctor appealed to the Privy Council, contending that the PCC had failed to have proper regard to the purpose of disciplinary proceedings, which was to protect the public and to maintain standards in the profession. It was claimed that it was wrong for the GMC to impose a further penalty when he had already been punished by the Court. The appeal failed. The Privy Council held that the PCC panel had been entitled to take the view that the doctor’s conduct had undermined the confidence of the HA in the integrity of practitioners and that this reflected on the standards and reputation of the profession as a whole. Moreover, the falsification of records had placed patients at risk. The sanction was not excessive.
Gulati
21.120
Gulati v General Medical Council
13
, the doctor had pleaded guilty to two charges involving the production of false medical reports for use in making fraudulent accident claims against insurance companies. A PCC panel erased him from the register and he appealed. In dismissing the appeal, the Privy Council said that the order of erasure was required in the public interest.
Bijl
21.121
The Inquiry also looked at some cases involving poor clinical practice where the PCC panel made an order for erasure. In the case of
Bijl v General Medical Council
14
, the Privy Council overturned the decision of a PCC panel to erase the doctor’s name from the register. The doctor, a consultant urologist, had carried out ‘keyhole’ surgery to remove a kidney stone. The operation proved more difficult than expected and the patient lost a lot of blood. Transfusions were given and the anaesthetist gave advice about the abandonment of the operation. Eventually, the operation was abandoned because the patient was in a very poor state. Despite the patient’s poor condition, the surgeon left the hospital and went home. Shortly afterwards, the patient suffered a severe haemorrhage. The surgeon could not be contacted. Another surgeon was found and he clamped the site of the bleeding so that the patient’s condition was stabilised. However, the patient died two days later.
21.122
The first surgeon appeared before a PCC panel, charged with two offences: failing to abandon the operation at an appropriate time and leaving the patient while she was in an unstable condition. The PCC panel found that the surgeon was guilty of SPM and directed erasure. It took the view that the surgeon’s decision to leave the hospital was
‘seriously irresponsible and a grave neglect of proper professional standards’
. It also considered that he lacked insight, which the Privy Council understood to relate to his attitude that it was his job to remove the kidney stone and the anaesthetist’s job to keep the patient alive. It appears that there was also concern about the surgeon’s failure to communicate adequately with other members of the team. Pausing there, it seems to me that the decision to erase was reasonable.
21.123
Indeed, the Privy Council did not say that it was not. However, after reminding its members of the traditional circumspection with which their jurisdiction to overrule the PCC in matters of judgement had usually been exercised, it nevertheless allowed the appeal. It did so because it felt that it was not
‘necessary’
to erase the doctor’s name in this particular case. It said that the PCC was
‘rightly concerned with public confidence in the profession and its procedures for dealing with doctors who lapse from professional standards’
. But, it continued,
‘this should not be carried to the extent of feeling it necessary to sacrifice the career of an otherwise competent and useful doctor who presents no danger to the public in order to satisfy a demand for blame and punishment’
. It cited a passage from ‘A Commitment to Quality, A Quest for Excellence’, which was a statement made on behalf of the Government, the medical profession and the NHS, in which it was said that:
‘The Government, the medical profession and the NHS pledge ... without lessening commitment to safety and public accountability of services, to recognise that honest failure should not be responded to primarily by blame and retribution but by learning and by a drive to reduce risks for future patients.’
21.124
No doubt all that is relevant and wise, but I cannot see that there was any evidence in the case of
Bijl
that the PCC panel had acted in order to
‘satisfy a demand for blame and punishment’
. It is not for me to say who was right about Mr Bijl and who was wrong. Decisions of this kind are based upon the collective judgement of the individual members of the PCC panel or the constituent members of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. However, it is clear that differently constituted panels of the PCC will reach different conclusions about similar facts and, it appears, so will different constitutions of the Privy Council. At present, there is, in my view, far too much room for the exercise of discretion. Too much depends on impression and the differing attitudes of individual groups of decision-makers. In my view, there is an urgent need for more structured guidance in the way such decisions are taken.
[1956] 3 All ER 742.
[1993] AC 388.
[2003] Lloyd’s Rep Med 62.
[2001] 1 WLR 1926.
[2003] Lloyd’s Rep Med 333.
[1999] Lloyd’s Rep Med 139.
8
[2002] 1 WLR 3104.
10
[2001] 1 WLR 1915.
11
[2002] 64 BMLR 68.
12
[2002] Lloyd’s Rep Med 68.
13
[2001] 61 BMLR 146.
14
[2001] Lloyd’s Rep Med 60.
The Function and Powers of the Professional Conduct Committee

--- Recent Developments ---
21.147
During late 2003 and 2004, there were two developments in the way in which the GMC sought to provide guidance for its decision-makers.
The Determination Audit Sub Group
21.148
The first of these developments was the formation of the Determination Audit Sub Group (DASG). Its function was to monitor the decisions of FTP committees, to identify learning points to be fed into training sessions, to advise the President of issues arising from FTP decisions (including concerns about inappropriate decisions) and to report to the Fitness to Practise Committee at regular intervals. At its inception, the DASG comprised three experienced Council members, one of whom was a legally qualified lay member. I am unsure of the present constitution; the legally qualified lay member has recently become a judge and has left the GMC. In any event, it seems to me that the formation of the DASG was a most welcome development. There had hitherto been no systematic analysis of FTP committee decisions (save for the ‘one-off’ review by the PCC Working Group) and no attempt to correct or learn from decisions or practices that were unsatisfactory.
21.149
The early fruits of the DASG’s labours were reported in the first edition of a new GMC publication, the Fitness to Practise Bulletin, published in May 2004. The Bulletin contains other information besides the DASG report. It will be published three or four times a year and is targeted at FTP panellists. This too is a welcome development. It is clear that the process of monitoring has led to the recognition of a number of the same problems with FTP decisions as I have noticed in the cases I have read, some of which I have mentioned in this Report. For example, the DASG reported that in some cases in which the outcome had ‘appeared surprising’, the reasons given by PCC panels were inadequate and did not explain the conclusions reached. It advised that adequate and legally justifiable reasons must be given. Another example was a reference to the tendency of some PCC panels to assume that, if they had not been told that a doctor had an adverse FTP history, s/he must have had a
‘previously unblemished career’
. The DASG report advised that this must not be assumed, as the GMC does not have access to full information.
21.150
The main thrust of the DASG report, however, was to advise that panels hearing FTP cases must ensure that their decisions (both on what amounted to SPM or SDP and on sanctions) conform to GMC standards and policy. It said:
‘Although panels exercise their judgment in making decisions they must do so within the framework set out by the Council. The determination of policy and the setting of standards is a matter for the Council; when reaching decisions on serious professional misconduct, panels must have regard to the Council’s policy/standards.’
21.151
So far so good. I am delighted to see this recognition by the GMC that a framework of standards must be adhered to. The DASG report then went on to explain where this guidance was to be found. The primary source was the GMC publication ‘Good Medical Practice’. In addition, it was said, the GMC had provided guidance on a number of other discrete topics, such as consent, confidentiality, research, the use of slimming drugs, intimate examinations, serious communicable diseases and several more. Lawyers presenting the GMC’s case at hearings have been instructed to draw the panel’s attention to any guidance relevant to the issues before the panel.
21.152
That is all very well so far as it goes. However, it does not go far enough. The GMC did not publish any material by which either doctors or FTP panellists could recognise a case of SPM or SDP when they saw one. In other words, there was no guidance on thresholds, and nothing by which anyone could tell where the line should be drawn. In
, I described how ‘Good Medical Practice’ came to be written and how it superseded the old ‘Blue Books’. The Blue Books used to give a few examples of the kind of conduct that would result in disciplinary action. However, these were limited in scope. I also explained that the purpose of ‘Good Medical Practice’ was to be ‘positive’ and to encourage good practice; it was to avoid focussing in a negative way on bad practice. It had at one stage been suggested that both booklets should be published but, in the event, the Blue Books were discontinued because the GMC wished to focus on its positive message. I mentioned the opinions of some senior GMC staff who said that, although they understood why these changes had been made, they felt that some clarity had been lost about the kind of circumstances in which a doctor might be disciplined. I quoted the opinion of Professor Allen, who said that ‘Good Medical Practice’ was ‘absolutely fine’ for the purposes for which it had been written but of no real assistance when it came to defining or recognising SPM.
21.153
Recent editions of ‘Good Medical Practice’ give this warning to doctors:
‘serious or persistent failures to meet the standards in this booklet may put your registration at risk’
. But that is all that is said. Nor is the other guidance I have mentioned any more explicit. Some sources make no reference at all to disciplinary matters. Others give a general warning that certain conduct, for example giving treatment without consent, may result in a challenge in the courts or a complaint to an employer or the GMC. The strongest advice is given in connection with the trading of human organs, where it is said that involvement in such practice will render the doctor
‘liable to disciplinary proceedings’
. It is true that some of the medical Royal Colleges have published more specialised guidance which applies the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’ to the specialty concerned. The Royal College of General Practitioners has done so and has included a number of examples of excellent practice and, by way of contrast, of unacceptable practice. But it is not the function of the Royal Colleges to advise about misconduct and deficient performance or fitness to practise. It is for the GMC, as the regulatory body responsible for the FTP procedures, to do this. As I have said, there was nothing from which anyone could gauge whether what a doctor had done was likely to be categorised as SPM or SDP or whether, in the future, it will be found that his/her fitness to practise is impaired. This problem must be tackled.
The Publication of Case Studies
21.154
I had thought that the GMC had recognised the need for much more specific guidance about the threshold for SPM and SDP. At the Inquiry hearings, Sir Donald Irvine said that, at the time when the performance procedures were being set up, when he was President, the idea of publishing case studies had been discussed. The idea would have been to illustrate by example the kinds of conduct that would and would not amount to SPM. He thought this was a good idea and regretted that it had not been done at that time. He mentioned how useful he had found the anonymised case summaries that are published periodically by the medical defence organisations and also said that, on occasion, when he had had to look at a law report, he had found that being able to read the detail had ‘brought the case alive’. He thought such summaries would be very helpful for members of GMC committees who had to decide whether conduct amounted to SPM.
21.155
In evidence, Sir Graeme Catto echoed Sir Donald’s view and expressed enthusiasm for the idea of publishing a series of case reports. On that subject he said:
‘It is, I think, a deficiency on our part that we talk about being a learning organisation and helping to get the public and the profession to be aware of the problems arising in medical practice and yet we have been pretty deficient in doing that. I know that Sir Donald was keen to do that. I am absolutely determined that it will happen.’
21.156
In December 2003, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the case studies (or at least the first set of them) would be published in February 2004. As I understood it, these were to be summaries of cases in which the decision taken by a PCC panel was regarded as good and was an example to be followed. I hoped that these would provide useful examples of the kind of conduct which did or did not amount to SPM and also guidance on appropriate sanctions. I thought that they would enable those sitting on PCC panels to ‘get their eye in’ as to what, in the past, had been regarded as a good decision and why. On sanction, I hoped that the studies would not only help on issues of proportionality but would also illustrate the weight that had been attached to various mitigating factors. I hoped that their production would mark a real advance towards consistency in decision-making.
21.157
The first group of ‘case studies’ was published in September 2004. I regret to say that they are a great disappointment. First, there are only five of them and they are very limited in range. Two relate to a failure to obtain consent, two involve dishonesty and the other was a case of breach of confidentiality. The ‘studies’ are so brief as to be almost useless. For example, in one of the two cases of dishonesty, the doctor was convicted of nine counts of obtaining money by deception by making
‘repeated fraudulent insurance claims’
and was sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment. Her name was erased from the register. We are not told the nature of any dishonest misrepresentations made or whether the claims were connected with the doctor’s professional practice. We do not even know the total sum involved - it might have been enormous. Nor do we know the period over which the offences were committed. We are given some unimportant information about the doctor’s failure to answer to police bail. In deciding to erase the doctor’s name, the PCC panel said that
‘there can be no place in the medical profession for dishonest doctors, especially where the deceit is repeated’
21.158
If the message to be conveyed to the reader of these ‘studies’ is that persistent dishonesty involving substantial sums of money will result in erasure, the reader is likely to be puzzled by the outcome of the other case of dishonesty described, in which the doctor was not erased but was suspended for a year. In that case, the doctor, a GP, dishonestly obtained nearly £36,000. He received a ‘notional’ rent from his HA for a flat within his surgery premises. He also let the flat to a tenant and kept the rental, so receiving two rents from one flat. It appears that he was not prosecuted but we do not know whether this was because his conduct was not reported to the police or whether it was because they took the view that his conduct was not criminal. The conduct might have been criminal; one cannot tell. In any event, it was obviously dishonest conduct and disgraceful for a doctor. Apparently, the PCC panel took the view that his behaviour had been
‘dishonest, misleading and a contravention of the NHS General Medical Services statement of fees and allowances’
. I do not see how anyone reading these case studies is to understand why it was appropriate for the doctor in one case to be struck off and in the other to be suspended. If the reasoning in the first case were correct, there would have been
‘no place in the medical profession’
for the doctor in the second case. I assume that there are good reasons for the difference, apart from the fact that one doctor was prosecuted and one was not. Otherwise, both could not have been advanced as examples of appropriate sanctions.
21.159
I am puzzled as to why it should have taken so long to produce these case studies and why they should have been so inadequate when they arrived. In December 2003, the President had plainly recognised the need for them and his enthusiasm was manifest. In
Chapter 27
, I have suggested how case studies should be prepared. The essentials are that the facts found should be summarised so that the reader can understand why the panel found that they amounted to SPM. The mitigation should be summarised so that the reader can understand why the panel decided as it did on sanction. This work still needs to be done, despite the advent of the new procedures. The new FTP panels will have to consider whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired and whether the impairment is of such a degree as to justify action on registration. The wording of the test is changing but the kind of behaviour that panels will have to consider will not change. The old cases will still serve as a useful guide on impairment and sanction. The process of collecting case studies should then continue under the new procedures.
The Professional Conduct Committee Working Group
Restoration to the Medical Register

--- Introduction ---
21.1
As I have explained, under the old fitness to practise (FTP) procedures, the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) was the disciplinary committee of the General Medical Council (GMC). In this Chapter, I shall describe the function and powers of the PCC and will examine its procedures and the sanctions available to it. I shall consider some of the PCC’s decisions on sanction, particularly as they relate to issues of interest and concern to the Inquiry. I shall consider the review of the PCC procedures and decisions undertaken by a Working Group in 1999. I shall consider the impact of decisions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (and more recently of the High Court) upon the operation of the PCC. I shall also examine other recent developments, including changes to the arrangements for restoration to the register. In conclusion, I shall discuss some of the major difficulties which have been encountered by the PCC in the past and how those difficulties might be dealt with in the future.
21.2
Professor Sir Graeme Catto (President of the GMC), Mr Finlay Scott (Chief Executive) and Sir Donald Irvine (immediate past President) all gave evidence in relation to some of the issues under discussion in this Chapter. Dr Krishna Korlipara, who has been a member of the GMC since 1984 and was a member of the PCC at various times between 1984 and 1997, also gave evidence. Dr Joan Trowell, Chairman of the Fitness to Practise Committee, provided a witness statement. Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute (PSI), and her team undertook an analysis of outcomes of PCC cases, the results of which appeared in their 1996 and 2000 Reports and in their 2003 Paper. In writing this Chapter, I have drawn upon their work and also upon many documents disclosed by the GMC. Among these documents were the Report of the PCC Working Group produced in May 1999 and the Indicative Sanctions Guidance (ISG), first published in 2001 and updated in 2003 and again in 2004. This guidance was designed to assist members of the PCC in reaching consistent decisions on sanction and is intended to provide similar assistance to members of FTP panels under the new procedures.
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Professional Conduct Committee
The Composition of the Professional Conduct Committee

--- Appeals and Referrals ---
Appeals by a Doctor
21.172
Appeals from decisions of the PCC were governed by section 40 of the 1983 Act. Until April 2003, a doctor who was the subject of a finding of SPM or a direction for erasure, for suspension or for conditional registration (or variation of the conditions imposed by a direction for conditional registration) had a right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. After April 2003, any appeal lay to the High Court.
21.173
In the past, the process of appeal to the Privy Council resulted in the provision of helpful statements of principle and approach but did not lead to the development of a jurisprudence on the determination of issues relating to SPM or sanction. Until about 2000, it was the policy of the Privy Council to show a great degree of deference to the professional expertise and experience of the PCC. That deference appeared to lessen in later years, possibly because of the coming into force in October 2000 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The number of appeals heard since that time has not permitted the development of a coherent framework of principles. Nor, as yet, has the process of appeals to the High Court. It is very early days.
Referrals by the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals
21.174
Under the provisions of section 29 of the National Health Service Reform and Health Care Professions Act 2002, the CRHP/CHRE had, from April 2003, the power to refer to the High Court a
‘relevant decision’
of the PCC. Section 29(4) provides that the Council could do this if it considered that:
‘(a) a relevant decision falling within subsection (1) has been unduly lenient, whether as to any finding of professional misconduct or fitness to practise on the part of the practitioner concerned (or lack of such a finding), or as to any penalty imposed, or both, or
(b) a relevant decision falling within subsection (2) should not have been made,
and that it would be desirable for the protection of members of the public for the Council to take action under this section...’
21.175
Section 29(1)(a) to (h) lists the directions and determinations made by the various disciplinary bodies to which the section applies. At (c) and (d) it includes directions made by the PCC and CPP of the GMC. They are therefore ‘relevant decisions’. Section 29(2)(a) provides that section 29 also applies to:
‘a final decision of the relevant committee not to take any disciplinary measure under the provision referred to in whichever of paragraphs (a) to (h) of subsection (1) applies’
The expression
‘disciplinary measure’
is not defined by the Act. The Act provides that, if a case is referred for hearing by the High Court, it is to be treated as an appeal by the CRHP/CHRE.
Appeals against an Unduly Lenient Sanction
21.176
At the time of writing, only a few appeals have been heard. However, two cases, that of
Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals v General Medical Council and Solanke
15
Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals v Nursing and Midwifery Council and Truscott
16
show how the Court is likely to approach its task in appeals against sanction. In both, the CRHP/CHRE appealed on the basis that the sanction imposed by the regulatory body was unduly lenient. In both cases, the Court made plain that, when considering whether a decision had been unduly lenient, it would apply the same test as is applied by the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) when considering, on the application of the Attorney General, whether a sentence passed by a criminal court is too lenient. The test is whether the sanction imposed is outside the range of sanctions which the tribunal, applying its mind to all the factors relevant to its jurisdiction, could reasonably consider appropriate. The Court will also require to be satisfied that intervention is
‘desirable for protection of members of the public’
. However, as Collins J observed in the case of
Truscott
, that will usually follow if the sanction is found to be unduly lenient.
21.177
Solanke
, the GMC had found the doctor guilty of SPM. He had become involved in a sexual relationship with a patient; moreover the patient suffered from depression and was rather vulnerable. The matter came to light some time after the relationship was apparently over, when the woman told another GP about it. The doctor admitted the truth of the allegation. The woman did not wish to be involved in disciplinary proceedings and the GMC had no information about when or how the relationship had begun. The doctor was also guilty of another form of misconduct. He had falsified his own birth certificate and, during his medical career, had used a
curriculum vitae
which represented that he was six years younger than he really was.
21.178
At the PCC hearing, the doctor gave evidence but was not asked any questions about how the improper sexual relationship had started. He said only that it had started and finished by mutual consent. It had lasted about six months. At the time, he said, his marriage had broken down and his wife was denying him access to his children. He acknowledged that his relationship with the patient had been wrong and said that he had taken counselling subsequently. The PCC found SPM proved and imposed a period of suspension of three months. It said that it took into account the fact that the doctor had not worked for six months as he had been suspended by the practice where he had worked.
21.179
On appeal by the CRHP/CHRE, Leveson J first established the test that should be applied and then concluded that, on the material available, he regarded the sanction imposed as lenient. His impression was that he could not say that it was unduly lenient. However, in the course of the judgement, Leveson J was critical of the GMC for the paucity of the information it had collected about the circumstances relating to this misconduct. He pointed out that it was difficult to make a reliable estimate of the risk that the doctor might repeat this kind of conduct without having some insight into the detailed circumstances in which the relationship had started and finished. The fact that the woman had been unwilling to provide information did not excuse the GMC from its duty to investigate the case properly. Although its options were limited by her refusal, it did have the opportunity to question the doctor when he gave evidence. Neither counsel for the GMC nor the members of the PCC panel had asked him about these important patient protection issues and the PCC panel had not put itself in a position to make a judgement about them. Leveson J considered whether the information available was so inadequate that he was unable to say whether the sanction had been unduly lenient, in which case he would allow the appeal and send the case back for re-hearing. He recognised that there would be no obligation on the doctor to submit to questioning for a second time. He decided that, in the circumstances, he would not send the case back for further investigation. He found that the sanction was not unduly lenient and dismissed the appeal.
21.180
Leveson J also discussed the origin and purpose of the ISG and expressed the view that this was very useful. He made clear that, if the point arose, the ISG would not be binding on the Court. Nor did he think that it would be appropriate for the Court to suggest modifications of the ISG. However, he did think that the CRHP/CHRE was in an admirable position to take part in the process of revising the ISG.
21.181
The events giving rise to the disciplinary proceedings against Mr Truscott, a paediatric nurse, took place when he was working on a ward devoted to the care of adolescent patients of both sexes. While on night duty, he ‘surfed’ the internet on six separate occasions and accessed a number of sites providing pornographic material. He was dismissed from his position and reported to the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC). The police decided not to prosecute, apparently because it could not be shown that the material he had accessed was ‘child pornography’ or whether the photographs were in fact of adults who were made to look like children. Some of the material appeared to show naked children but they were not engaged in sexual acts. Another difficulty was that it was not clear how many sites the nurse had deliberately accessed and how many had been opened to him by the ‘cascading’ effect. In any event, whether the pornography showed adults or children, Mr Truscott’s conduct clearly amounted to misconduct and the NMC found it to be so. It decided to caution him for his behaviour. The CRHP/CHRE appealed on the ground that this was unduly lenient and that only erasure could provide sufficient protection for the public. The principles underlying the approach of Collins J were the same as those to be expounded by Leveson J a few weeks later in
Solanke
. Collins J held that it was not clear that Mr Truscott had broken the law; nor was it clear which sites he had deliberately accessed. In those circumstances, he considered that the sanction imposed was lenient but not unduly so.
21.182
The CRHP/CHRE appealed this decision. Their concern was that, regardless of whether or not Mr Truscott had deliberately accessed the sites which showed or appeared to show naked children, the fact that he had an unhealthy interest in pornography and was prepared to view it while working on an adolescent ward gave rise to concern about patient safety. The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal. It approved the test applied by Collins J and said that this was a case in which it was right to show some deference to the views of the Committee of the disciplinary body, which had not made any error of principle.
21.183
I can understand why the CRHP/CHRE felt that this sanction was unduly lenient. The problem was that the case had never been put against Mr Truscott on the basis that his interest in pornographic pictures of people who looked like children even if they were adult meant that he presented a risk to his adolescent patients. A great deal of emphasis was laid on the question of whether or not he had broken the law. This is also the emphasis in the GMC’s recent amendment to the ISG. This makes it plain that PCC panels should consider erasure for doctors found guilty of child pornography offences. I can see why the guidance has been drafted in that way; usually a concern about accessing pornography will arise as a result of a prosecution. However, as in Mr Truscott’s case, there was no prosecution. Should that be determinative of the outcome of disciplinary proceedings? From the point of view of a disciplinary body whose duty is to protect the public, the fact that the doctor has or has not been convicted is surely not the main question. The main question must be whether the healthcare professional’s conduct shows that s/he is a risk to patients.
The Right to Appeal against an Acquittal
21.184
The position relating to the right of the CRHP/CHRE to appeal against an acquittal of a doctor on a charge of SPM has proved to be rather more problematical. In the case of
Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals v General Medical Council and Ruscillo
17
, the doctor was charged with SPM. He admitted that he had been involved in an emotional and sexual relationship with a patient.The particulars of the charge had included an allegation that the patient had
‘significant psychiatric problems’
and was therefore
‘particularly vulnerable’
. It was further alleged that the doctor was aware of the patient’s history. However, at the hearing, the GMC applied to amend the charge so that it was limited to a history of
‘psychiatric problems’
, rather than
‘significant psychiatric problems’
, and to omit the references to the patient being
‘particularly vulnerable’
and to the doctor’s knowledge of the history. The head of charge was duly amended and then admitted by the doctor. The only head of charge that remained in dispute was that the doctor’s actions had been
‘inappropriate’
,
‘an abuse of the doctor-patient relationship’
,
‘not in the best interests’
of the patient and had been
‘likely to bring the medical profession into disrepute’
. The GMC called no witnesses and the doctor chose not to give evidence. The PCC panel found that the disputed head of charge was
‘not proved in its entirety’
in that none of the allegations was made out. In announcing the panel’s decision, the Chairman of the PCC made reference to a lack of evidence in the case. The panel found that the facts that had been admitted were insufficient to support a finding of SPM. The case against the doctor was, therefore, concluded. It emerged after the PCC hearing that medical records could have been made available which would have supplied the evidence necessary to prove the additional aspects of the charge and that the doctor’s partners had been willing and available to give evidence before the PCC panel but had not been called. In other words, there was a concern that the case had been under-prosecuted. The CRHP/CHRE appealed to the High Court. On behalf of the doctor, a preliminary issue was raised; it was contended that section 29 did not provide for an appeal against a decision to find a doctor not guilty of SPM. The CRHP contended that it did. On the hearing of this preliminary issue, Leveson J held that a
‘relevant decision’
within section 29 was not restricted to a decision as to the appropriate sanction, but included a decision to acquit a doctor of SPM.
21.185
The appeals in the cases of
Ruscillo
Truscott
18
were heard together and the judgements were handed down in October 2004. The Court of Appeal held that, under section 29, the Council had the power to refer to the Court a decision of the PCC to acquit the doctor of SPM. However, the Court construed the words
‘decision of the relevant Committee not to take any disciplinary measure’
in s29(2)(a) as meaning a decision not to impose a penalty or sanction. Thus, the scope of the section was, the Court said, limited to those cases in which a relevant decision has been unduly lenient whether because the findings of professional misconduct are inadequate or because the penalty does not adequately reflect the findings of professional misconduct that have been made, or both. In short, the Council will have the power to refer an acquittal to the Court only if the ‘findings of professional misconduct are inadequate’. So, in the case of
Ruscillo
, where the Council took the view that the case had been under-prosecuted, there was the power of referral.
21.186
For the sake of completeness, I mention the most recent decision under section 29 of the 2002 Act. This was
Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals v General Medical Council and Leeper
19
. The Court held that the sanction imposed (the imposition of conditions on the doctor’s registration) was unduly lenient and that the doctor should have been suspended. The doctor had admitted that his conduct in involving himself in an inappropriate sexual relationship with a patient had amounted to SPM. The case is of interest in that the Judge, Mr Justice Collins, made some observations about the extent of disclosure which must be given to the CRHP/CHRE in cases where the evidence has been presented to the PCC as an agreed statement of facts. That had been done in this case. The CRHP/CHRE wanted to satisfy itself that the agreed statement of facts adequately reflected the gravity of the doctor’s misconduct - in other words, it wanted to be sure that the case had not been under-prosecuted. The GMC had been reluctant to disclose the original statements of the principal witnesses for reasons of confidentiality. The Judge said that the GMC must disclose them. In the event, once they had been examined, it was not alleged that the case had been under-prosecuted; the agreed statement of facts was fair to both sides. The point is that the CRHP/CHRE must be able to check that that is so.
21.187
The institution of the process of appeals under section 29 is to be welcomed. It will provide a mechanism for over-ruling decisions on sanction that are outside the band of what was reasonable in the circumstances. Although the Court of Appeal has stated in
Ruscillo
that section 29 gives the CRHP/CHRE the power to refer an acquittal to the Court, it observed that the section had not been well drafted. It is apparent from the judgement that the construction of the section gave rise to real difficulty. It seems to me that, when the opportunity arises, section 29 should be amended to make plain beyond argument that the CRHP/CHRE has the power to refer to the Court any decision of a disciplinary committee or panel that it considers to be wrong and in respect of which it considers that it ought to take action, in the interest of patient protection.
15
[2004] EWHC 944 (Admin).
16
[2004] EWHC 585 (Admin).
17
[2004] EWHC 527 (Admin).
18
[2004] EWCA Civ 1356.
19
[2004] EWHC 1850 (Admin).
Discussion


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO - The General Medical Council's Health Procedures
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
22.1
I have already explained how, in the 1960s and early 1970s, there was increasing concern about the ability of the existing regulatory system to deal adequately with the problem of doctors whose fitness to practise was impaired by ill health. The General Medical Council (GMC) had no power to deal with a doctor who was sick, unless s/he had been convicted of a criminal offence or was guilty of conduct that would amount to serious professional misconduct (SPM). Patients were not adequately protected against, for example, the chronic alcoholic who had not been convicted of a criminal offence and who, despite presenting an obvious risk to patients, had not been guilty of any misconduct which would have been considered by the GMC as falling within the definition of SPM.
22.2
The other problem was that, in cases where it was possible to use the GMC’s disciplinary procedures to deal with a sick doctor, those procedures were punitive in nature and offered no mechanism for supervising a doctor, for supporting his/her attempts to rehabilitate or for placing restrictions on his/her practice during the rehabilitation process. Disciplinary hearings were conducted in public and afforded the doctor no medical confidentiality. Many people felt that this type of public hearing was an inappropriate - even inhumane - way of dealing with doctors who were suffering from a physical or mental illness. There was reluctance on the part of doctors to report colleagues who were known to be a risk to patients by reason of their illness. This reluctance was attributed, in part at least, to the inadequate means available for dealing with sick doctors.
22.3
In its Report, published in 1975, the Committee of Inquiry into the Regulation of the Medical Profession, chaired by Dr (later Sir) Alec Merrison (the Merrison Committee), recommended the establishment of the arrangements that were to become known as the GMC’s ‘health procedures’. The health procedures were introduced in the Medical Act 1978 (the 1978 Act) and came into operation in August 1980. The relevant provisions were later set out in the Medical Act 1983 (the 1983 Act). Over the period for which they were in force, they changed little. In this Chapter, I shall describe the procedures as they operated in December 2003, at the time of the relevant Inquiry hearings. Where there had been significant changes between the introduction of the procedures and December 2003, I shall describe those changes.
The Procedures in Outline
22.4
Health cases were handled by the GMC’s Health Section. The health procedures included two distinct processes for dealing with doctors whose fitness to practise was, or might be, seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. The first process was commonly known as the ‘voluntary’ health procedures. The purpose of the voluntary health procedures was to protect the public from doctors whose fitness to practise was seriously impaired on health grounds and to help the doctors concerned to follow a programme of medical supervision and rehabilitation.
22.5
Under the voluntary health procedures, the GMC received medical evidence on the condition of the doctor under consideration. If the evidence revealed that the doctor was suffering from a serious impairment of health, as a result of which s/he was not fit to practise or was fit to practise only subject to medical supervision, limitations on his/her practice and/or other conditions, the doctor might then be invited to give undertakings based on any recommendations made by the medical examiners who had provided the medical evidence. The undertakings would relate to such matters as the acceptance of medical supervision, abstention from alcohol or drugs (if appropriate) and any limitations on the doctor’s professional practice that were deemed necessary. If the doctor agreed to the proposed undertakings, and complied with them, his/her case would be managed, supervised and reviewed regularly without the need for a formal hearing. If the doctor made a good recovery from the impairing condition, s/he would be released in due course from his/her undertakings and would be free to resume practice unsupervised and without restriction.
22.6
The second process occurred if a doctor decided to challenge the need for a medical examination or if s/he refused to accept medical supervision or any proposed limitations on his/her practice or if his/her health deteriorated or if s/he breached any undertakings previously given. In that event, his/her case would be referred to the Health Committee (HC), which had the power to suspend, or impose conditions on, the doctor’s registration. The HC had no power to erase a doctor’s registration but could, in certain circumstances, suspend a doctor’s registration indefinitely.
22.7
At the time of the Merrison Report, it was thought that the largest category of case likely to be dealt with under the new health procedures was that arising from the abuse of alcohol and other drugs. That indeed proved to be correct and, for many years after their introduction, the number of cases referred to the health procedures that fell within this category was as high as 75% to 80%. Sometimes, the alcohol or drug abuse was combined with some other psychiatric condition. Dr Sheila Mann, a consultant psychiatrist, who was a member of the GMC from 1996 until July 2003 and was a health screener from 1996 until 2004, told the Inquiry that her impression was that about half the cases dealt with by the Health Section involved substance misuse in one way or another. Few cases involving purely physical impairment were referred to the GMC. A doctor suffering from such a condition is likely to have insight into the effect of his/her condition on his/her fitness to practise and to cease voluntarily to practise if s/he realises that this is appropriate. By contrast, a doctor suffering from a psychiatric illness, or abusing alcohol or drugs, may continue to practise when unfit to do so.
22.8
The Inquiry was interested in the health procedures for a number of reasons. First, the Inquiry was concerned to see how the GMC had handled cases involving the abuse of drugs or alcohol, especially those involving an element of misconduct, such as dishonesty. It was necessary for the Inquiry to consider how Shipman would have been dealt with if the health procedures had been in operation when his case was considered by the GMC. I wished to see what happened to such cases in practice. I wished to assess whether the health procedures have afforded sufficient protection for patients. I shall also look at some of the changes currently proposed for the treatment of cases with a health element under the new fitness to practise (FTP) procedures.
22.9
As well as receiving oral evidence from Dr Mann, the Inquiry heard from Mr Alan Howes, who was employed by the GMC between 1977 and 2002 and was Head of the Health Section from August 1985 until October 1986 and from 1997 until April 2001, and from Miss Jackie Smith, who has been employed by the GMC since 1998 and was a senior caseworker in the Health Section from January to September 1998 and Head of the Health Section from April 2002 until May 2003. Evidence about the health procedures was also given by Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, by Professor Sir Graeme Catto, the current President, and by Sir Donald Irvine, the immediate past President.
22.10
From 1981, the health screener and the HC were required by GMC Standing Orders to present Reports on their activities to the full Council at least once a year. For many years, these Annual Reports contained a great deal of information about the cases dealt with in the Health Section, about problems that had been encountered and about changes in practice and procedure. They provided very useful information about the development and operation of the health procedures during the 1980s and 1990s. More recently, the Annual Reports have been subsumed into the GMC’s annual FTP statistics and are less informative.
22.11
Between 1998 and 1999, a team from the Department of Public Health Science, King’s College London, and the Nuffield Institute for Health, University of Leeds (the King’s College team), carried out an evaluation of the GMC’s health procedures. The results of the evaluation were reported to the GMC in November 1999. I shall refer to this report as the 1999 Evaluation Report. The evaluation had been commissioned as part of an initiative by the then President, Sir Donald Irvine, to subject the GMC’s FTP procedures to independent review. The evaluation involved a retrospective review of the GMC’s management of health cases. The review was based on case notes relating to doctors who had been referred to the Health Section between 1980 and 1996. The King’s College team carried out a quantitative study of the 771 cases for which case notes were available. The team also examined a random sample of reports submitted to the GMC by medical supervisors in the cases of 40 doctors who had been placed under medical supervision in the period 1989 to 1996 and whose cases had been concluded. The 1999 Evaluation Report provided a useful insight into the operation of the health procedures during the late 1990s and I shall refer to its contents in the course of this Chapter.
22.12
The first formal internal GMC guidance document dealing with the health procedures was entitled ‘Health Screening: Guidance for Screeners and Health Section Staff’. It was produced in November 1999. I shall refer to it as ‘the 1999 Guidance’. It was prepared at a time when the findings of the King’s College team would have been known to the GMC. It no doubt reflected changes in practice introduced as a result of those findings. The 1999 Guidance (although out of date in some respects) was still in use in December 2003, when the Inquiry heard oral evidence about the operation of the health procedures.
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO - The General Medical Council's Health Procedures
Local Procedures for Dealing with Concerns about Doctors' Health


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY THREE - How the General Medical Council Deals with Cases of Drug Abuse
========================================================================

--- The General Medical Council's Approach to Cases of Drug Abuse ---
23.35
As I have said, in the past, the GMC’s approach to drug abusing doctors has been to facilitate rehabilitation so that, once the doctor’s condition is successfully treated, his/her compulsion to obtain drugs disappears and it can be expected that the doctor will revert to his/her normal patterns of behaviour. Thereafter, once a reasonable period has been allowed to pass, during which the danger of a relapse recedes, the point is reached where it can safely be said that the doctor is fit to resume unsupervised practice. The successful rehabilitation into practice of many doctors who have been through the GMC’s voluntary health procedures can legitimately be used to justify the approach taken. That approach has been endorsed by Parliament in the Medical Act 1978 and in subsequent legislation. Although doctors suffering from other types of ill health are also dealt with under the health procedures, it was envisaged from the first that the procedures would be used to rehabilitate drug abusing doctors.
23.36
It is clear from Mr Scott’s evidence to the Inquiry that the old approach is no longer acceptable. The GMC now recognises that it must have available its full armoury of sanctions when dealing with doctors convicted of drugs offences. The assumptions that used to be made, that the best course in all such cases was referral into the voluntary health procedures, has gone. I hope that the GMC will take the same view about cases in which allegations of a similar nature are made, but where, for one reason or another, there is no conviction or caution.
23.37
Two questions now arise for consideration. How is the GMC to investigate cases involving drug abuse so as to ensure that those who have to take important decisions on sanction have all the relevant information available? What are the criteria that should be applied when deciding upon sanction?
Common Factors in Cases of Drug Abuse
23.38
Before considering those two questions, it may be helpful to outline the types of misconduct which have to be considered. The facts and circumstances vary from case to case, but there are a number of features that are typical of such cases. It is common for a GP to obtain supplies by prescribing controlled drugs in the names of patients who do not need them. The doctor presents the prescription at a pharmacy and collects the drugs, telling the pharmacist that s/he will deliver them to the patient’s home, but in fact keeping them back for him/herself. Shipman did that. Sometimes, the GP prescribes in the names of non-existent patients and collects the drugs from the pharmacy, purporting either to be that patient or to be acting on that patient’s behalf. Sometimes, the doctor enters into a collusive relationship with a patient, prescribing more drugs than the patient needs. The patient collects the drugs and gives part of the consignment to the doctor. In some cases, the GP orders the controlled drugs from a pharmacy or wholesaler on requisition or signed order, falsely representing that the drugs are for practice stock. He or she will avoid making any entry in the practice controlled drugs register and will keep the drugs for him/herself. Shipman did that. Doctors who work in hospitals have a greater opportunity than GPs to steal drugs from a stock cupboard. Others will prescribe drugs for hospital patients who do not need them and will take possession of the drugs when they have been delivered to the ward. Such methods were referred to in research carried out by the National Addiction Centre and published in 1991
, based on examination of the medical records of all doctors who had been treated for alcohol and drug misuse at the Maudsley and Bethlem Royal Hospitals over the previous 20 years. All these methods involve dishonesty in the course of practice.
23.39
The facts that drug abuse very often leads to dishonesty and that dishonesty in doctors is a serious matter must not be allowed to obscure the fundamental problem caused by drug abuse. Dr Douglas Fowlie, Consultant Psychiatrist, Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust, and an eminent member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, has had a special interest in substance abuse for many years. His evidence to the Inquiry stressed that one of the important effects of drug taking is the way in which the person’s perceptions of the world and his/her general values are distorted. He said:
‘It is important to be aware ... that one of the facets of an illness of dependence is a selectively distorted perception of one’s own behaviour. As a dependence escalates, the priority of the individual is obtaining the next fix of the drink or the drug. This is the overwhelming priority and other factors external to this diminish in their importance. When the perceptions become distorted, a lack of insight develops, and the illness can cause a distortion of what the previously non-dependent individual regarded as right and wrong.’
23.40
Such distorted perception no doubt explains the behaviour of doctors who think that it is acceptable to use dishonest means to obtain drugs. It also explains the conduct of those who treat patients while under the influence of drugs or while craving another dose. Presumably, doctors who do this persuade themselves that it is acceptable for them to treat patients shortly after taking a mind-affecting drug. Their perception of their own abilities and of their patient’s best interests is badly distorted. Whether such distorted perceptions persist after the dependence has ceased, I do not know.
23.41
The facts of some of the cases I have read demonstrate how the misuse of controlled drugs can have a direct impact on patient safety. In the case of Dr JO 09, the doctor injected the patient with water and kept for him/herself the controlled drug prescribed for the patient. I have read a report of a doctor who kept falling asleep at work, even during consultations. In another case about which I read, a junior doctor was found collapsed on a hospital ward, having injected himself with a controlled drug while on duty. Shipman collapsed on several occasions when in practice in Todmorden. This was diagnosed at the time as being due to ‘idiopathic epilepsy’ but was in fact a consequence of his addiction. In these cases, the implications for patient safety are highly visible. In other situations, the risks to patients are less easy to observe. However, the judgement of a doctor must always be suspect when the craving for controlled drugs is dominant in his/her mind.
23.42
There can be no doubt that doctors who are misusing drugs present a substantial risk to patient safety. It seems to be universally accepted that any doctor who is thought to be taking drugs should not be allowed to practise and that any doctor who has only recently given up the habit must be supervised so that any relapse will soon be recognised.
Dishonesty in Cases of Drug Abuse
23.43
The element of dishonesty which is almost invariably present in this category of case also has important implications for patient safety. It is clear from ‘Good Medical Practice’ that the GMC regards the honesty and integrity of a doctor as being of fundamental importance. Sir Donald Irvine, President from 1995 to 2002, said at the Inquiry seminars that honesty is one of the fundamental tenets of the relationship between doctor and patient and that it is essential to the integrity of the clinical process. In his witness statement to the Inquiry, Sir Donald said that the starting point for the GMC’s consideration of cases involving dishonesty must be that dishonesty amounts to a dereliction of a basic duty and constitutes serious professional misconduct; his view was that, in the absence of remarkably good reasons in mitigation, it should lead to erasure of the doctor’s name from the medical register.
23.44
At that stage, Sir Donald was speaking about cases of dishonesty in general, not in the specific context of drug abuse. He said that there was an
‘unresolved issue’
in addiction cases, where dishonesty could be said to be secondary to the addictive habit itself. He said that there was a need for wider debate on the issue of dishonesty in that context, which could be clarified by a broader consensus on sanctions to be reached between the public and the medical profession. I agree, and I hope that this Chapter may provide further stimulus for such debate.
23.45
This
‘unresolved issue’
involves what is apparently the almost unanimous view of psychiatrists from whom the Inquiry received evidence that dishonesty in the context of drug abuse is ‘all part of the illness’ and a natural concomitant of the abuse. In
, I explained this belief and quoted the evidence of Dr Fowlie. Briefly, the theory is that dishonesty in the context of drug addiction in a doctor is not indicative of a fundamentally dishonest personality. On the contrary, the need to obtain the drug of addiction is so overwhelming that it becomes a compulsion and the person, who would normally be quite honest, behaves dishonestly only for the purpose of obtaining drugs. If the drug dependence is cured, the dishonesty will disappear.
23.46
The Inquiry wished, if possible, to explore how far that theory could properly be taken. Should it apply in all cases? If not, in which cases should it not apply? These questions were to some extent prompted by consideration of the case of Shipman. He acted dishonestly in order to obtain pethidine in the 1970s. When his misconduct had been detected, he was treated and cured of his dependency. Yet, as I found in my First Report, Shipman remained deeply dishonest after that time. In the First Report, I described a number of the ways in which this manifested itself. He used many dishonest methods to obtain diamorphine with which to kill his patients. He frequently lied to the families of patients about the circumstances of the deaths of those he had killed. He made false entries in patients’ medical records to provide natural explanations for the deaths he had caused. Those acts of dishonesty were related to the killing of patients. But he was dishonest in other contexts too. In the immediate aftermath of the discovery of his drug dependence in 1975, he was deceitful in a job application. He did not tell the Durham Area Health Authority that he was facing prosecution when applying for a post in child health. He disclosed his conviction only because he was advised to do so by the consultant psychiatrist who was treating him and did so only after he had been offered the job. Of course, I accept that Shipman’s may have been a completely exceptional personality. However, his case does justify asking the question whether there is a risk that the dishonesty practised to feed a drug habit is likely to endure beyond the end of that habit. Does the risk that such dishonesty will continue render the doctor permanently untrustworthy and unfit to practise as a doctor?
23.47
One witness suggested to the Inquiry that, once a person has resorted to dishonest conduct - especially if that conduct has been repeated on several occasions - it may become a habit or ‘life-skill’ and s/he may be dishonest again in other contexts in the future. The thinking was that, once a doctor has been dishonest in order to obtain drugs, s/he cannot be trusted in future and is, therefore, generally unfit to practise medicine, at least without close supervision. It is suggested that such a person, when faced with a clinical situation requiring probity and integrity, could not be relied upon to display those qualities. If s/he makes an error, for example, s/he would be more likely to seek to cover up what had happened than to be open about it. This may be correct but there is no evidence to suggest that it is. At one stage in the Inquiry, I thought it would be useful to focus attention on dishonesty in the context of drug abuse by doctors. Having heard all the evidence, I no longer think it will be profitable to do so. Dishonesty, it seems to me, is only one component of the dysfunctional character of the drug abusing doctor.
23.48
Because Shipman was a known case of a person who did not fit the generally accepted theory that dishonesty will disappear when dependence is cured, it occurred to me that there might be other exceptions to that rule and, if so, it would be important to be able to recognise them, in other words to recognise those doctors in which dishonesty is just a concomitant of drug abuse and those in which it is more deeply rooted. Those doctors might be regarded as unfit to remain as doctors.
23.49
In considering how far the basic theory about dishonesty can be taken, it appears to me that there are a number of important questions to ask. Does the manner in which the dependence develops have any bearing on the extent to which the dishonesty will resolve when the dependence is cured? It seems to me that it might. There must be a stage at which the doctor begins to take a drug but is not yet addicted to or even dependent upon it. If the means used at that stage are dishonest, can it be said that the dishonesty is a concomitant of dependence? It would seem to me that it cannot. I recognise that some doctors suffer from organic illnesses for which they are prescribed strong analgesic drugs, sometimes including opioids. They should not become addicted to those drugs if their consumption is properly supervised, although it may be that some do. I suspect that there are few doctors (or people) who become addicted in such circumstances. There will also be some cases in which the doctor self-medicates unwisely in the context of a psychiatric disorder such as depression. I can see how, in the context of illness, the doctor’s judgement may be affected and s/he may not take the sensible course of seeking independent medical advice. There will be other cases where self-medication begins during a period of personal distress resulting from an experience such as bereavement or marriage breakdown. In such cases, the doctor’s control mechanisms have broken down and s/he may stray into behaviour which, in ordinary circumstances, s/he would recognise as wrong and would avoid. I imagine that some doctors in that kind of situation begin to self-medicate with something like a benzodiazepine and that some then ‘graduate’ onto more addictive drugs such as opioids. I must confess that I find it quite hard to accept that there is any excuse, in that kind of situation, for a doctor to progress to the self-medication of opioids. However great the personal distress, I would have thought that any doctor who is not actually ill would recognise the danger of stepping over that line and into conduct which is not only inappropriate but also almost bound to entail dishonesty.
23.50
In addition to those cases where there is a more or less understandable explanation for the commencement of the habit, it seems to me that there must be a number of cases where there is no satisfactory explanation for the doctor beginning to take drugs. Nowadays, quite a lot of people take drugs for recreation. In those cases, there must be a ‘lead-in’ period where the doctor is exercising ‘free will’ in deciding to ‘experiment’ with drugs. His or her judgement is not at that time overborne by craving. It seems to me that a doctor, who should know of the dangers of taking addictive drugs, should not simply be regarded as an innocent ‘victim’ of the drug. I would have thought it unwise to assume that doctors who were prepared to obtain drugs by dishonest means at a time when they were not yet dependent would necessarily revert to honest behaviour when cured of their dependence. I also suspect that many drug abusing doctors, having been ‘found out’, advance false explanations of the circumstances in which their dependence began. They seek to provide an ‘acceptable’ explanation for their dishonest behaviour. In my view, the circumstances in which the doctor became addicted are always worthy of exploration.
23.51
Second, the depth or strength of the dependence or addiction may vary greatly. I accept that some are so deeply affected that obtaining their ‘next fix’ becomes an obsession which drives out all other thoughts. However, in many of the cases I have read, the doctor was not addicted to that extent. Shipman was a case in point. He was able to give up using pethidine at times. For example, when he went away on holiday it appears that he managed without it. I have seen medical reports in which it is said that he was ‘habituated’ to the drug but not deeply addicted. Dishonesty in such cases cannot be explained on the grounds of compulsion or irresistible craving.
Evidence Obtained by the Inquiry
23.52
To assist with the understanding of the issues surrounding drug abuse in doctors and how the GMC should deal with it, the Inquiry obtained expert evidence from Dr Andrew Johns, Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley NHS Trust, who has considerable experience in the psychiatry of addiction. Dr Johns’ evidence dealt with the issues of substance misuse by doctors, the risks posed by a rehabilitated doctor, the likelihood of relapse into drug taking and assessing the risk of relapse. His views were similar to those expressed by Dr Fowlie. Dr Johns said that ‘dishonesty’ is not a fixed personality trait but is a form of behaviour which could be used to achieve a range of diverse ends and which could have a range of causes. He said that it would be a mistake, therefore, to suppose that dishonest behaviour by an individual in one context necessarily predicted dishonest behaviour by that individual in an entirely different context. Once the drug addiction is treated, the ‘imperative’ to forge prescriptions or to steal drugs is substantially reduced. A number of participants at the seminar agreed with that view.
23.53
Dr Johns said doctors with drug and alcohol problems who receive appropriate treatment ‘do well’. He referred to data from the USA, cited in the 1991 paper to which I referred in
paragraph 23.38
, which showed that, with proper rehabilitation, 75% of such doctors were practising and drug-free at follow-up periods of between two and eight years. The data demonstrates a creditably high success rate for the treatment of drug abusing doctors. However, it also means that no fewer than 25% of doctors returned to drug taking within eight years.
23.54
Dr Johns said that it would be extremely difficult to assess the risk of future criminal behaviour in an individual case of a drug abusing doctor because of the difficulties in predicting human behaviour. He said that a risk factor could be anything which had a statistical association to a future event and, although steps could be taken to analyse risk, it could not be accurately predicted. He said that he did not have any personal experience of a doctor whom he had treated for drug misuse and who had later been discovered to have committed a criminal offence. He said that he suspected that the proportion of doctors who, having committed an offence of dishonesty in connection with drug misuse, went on to commit a further offence of dishonesty was extremely low. I think he was referring to doctors other than who relapsed into drug taking. I do not think he was asserting that the incidence of further dishonesty was low; I think he accepted that he would not usually be aware of what happened to his patients after they had been discharged from his care.
23.55
At the Inquiry’s seminars, Dr Fowlie repeated and enlarged upon what he had said in his witness statement. He said that, during treatment for the addiction, ‘clarification’ of the dishonest behaviour is an ‘important therapeutic weapon’. If the individual is able to confront his/her dishonest behaviour, that is, he said, a good prognostic indicator. I take that to mean that the prospects for full and permanent rehabilitation are enhanced if the doctor has fully accepted that s/he was dishonest and that this dishonesty was unacceptable. The converse might well suggest that doctors who continue to make false excuses for themselves (such as ‘I started to self-medicate because of a back injury’- which was an explanation advanced by Shipman) are less likely to do well.
23.56
This evidence seems to me to point to two conclusions. First, even if a drug abusing doctor is treated and appears to have been rehabilitated, there is a risk of relapse of the order of 25% over a period between two and eight years afterwards. It may be that more research should be undertaken into the incidence of relapse among drug abusing doctors. Second, the extent to which dishonesty associated with drug abuse may be ‘excused’ as being a part of the illness and may be expected to resolve once the dependence has been cured may depend upon at least two factors, the strength or depth of the addiction and the extent to which the doctor has fully understood and ‘confronted’ his/her own dishonesty. Putting forward false excuses for how it all started might be a bad indicator.
Brooke D, Edwards G, Taylor C (1991). ‘Addiction as an occupational hazard: 144 doctors with drug and alcohol problems’, British Journal of Addiction, Vol 86: pp 1011-1016.
Two Cases Considered by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in November 2002
What Should the General Medical Council's Approach Be in Drug Abuse Cases?

--- Introduction ---
23.1
, I described how the General Medical Council (GMC) dealt with the report it received of Shipman’s convictions in February 1976. Those convictions were for a series of offences of unlawful possession of pethidine, dishonestly obtaining pethidine and forgery of prescriptions for pethidine. He had been dishonestly obtaining large quantities of pethidine in Todmorden for a period of about 18 months before he was eventually detected. He claimed that he had obtained the drug to satisfy his own habit and, having considered all the evidence, I am satisfied that that was indeed the case. When the convictions were reported to the GMC, the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC) decided to close the case with a warning to Shipman not to repeat his previous misconduct.
23.2
Following Shipman’s convictions for murder in January 2000, there was considerable public disquiet when it became known that he had previously been convicted of controlled drugs offences. A number of the relatives of his victims expressed the view that a doctor who has misused controlled drugs, as Shipman had, should never again be allowed to practise medicine, at least not without appropriate monitoring and supervision.
23.3
In the light of the public disquiet expressed about the way in which the GMC permitted Shipman to continue in practice following his conviction, I wanted to examine how the GMC had handled cases similar to his over the past 30 years. My discussion will be confined to cases where a doctor has misused controlled drugs by consuming them him/herself. I shall not deal with the situation where the doctor has prescribed irresponsibly for patients or non-patients or has otherwise been involved in the supply of drugs to others. Quite different considerations apply to that sort of case.
23.4
, I concluded that the PeCC’s approach to Shipman’s case was typical of its approach to similar cases at that time. The GMC took what amounted to a rehabilitative approach to such cases although the health procedures were not then in place. I described the health procedures, which came into effect in 1980, in
Chapter 22
. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that, since 1980, virtually all cases involving the misuse of controlled drugs have been dealt with through those procedures. Dr Sheila Mann, a health screener from 1998 until 2004, told the Inquiry in December 2003 that, if Shipman’s case had come to the GMC then, he would almost certainly have been referred into the voluntary health procedures. However, the Inquiry became aware of evidence that suggests that the GMC may have recently begun to take a different approach to some cases of this type. The Inquiry has come across one case involving a doctor convicted of drugs offences who was dealt with through the conduct procedures rather than being referred into the voluntary health procedures, despite there being some evidence that he had a related psychiatric problem. The result was that the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) erased the doctor’s name from the register. There may be other such cases of which I am not aware. Thus it cannot be assumed that, if Shipman were to have been convicted in late 2002 or 2003, he would necessarily have been dealt with in the voluntary health procedures. Moreover, as I shall explain in
, under the new fitness to practise (FTP) procedures, convictions for offences connected with drug abuse are likely to be referred to a FTP panel. The panel will have the power to impose conditions upon the doctor’s practice or to refer the doctor into the voluntary health procedures but it will have other sanctions available to it.
23.5
In this Chapter, I propose to examine the recent case in which the drug abusing doctor was erased from the register and the circumstances in which it came to be dealt with as it was. I shall consider another case of a similar kind which, at almost the same time, was referred into the voluntary health procedures. I shall then examine the rationale behind the GMC’s approach to cases of this kind and will consider what, in my view, the approach should be under the new procedures. These questions are of particular importance because the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference require me to recommend any changes that I consider necessary for the protection of patients in the future.
23.6
Drug abuse is a significant problem in the medical profession, although the precise extent of it is not known. Moreover, the problem is unlikely to decrease. Professor Sir Michael Rawlins, former Chairman, Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, and current Chairman, National Institute for Clinical Excellence, spoke at one of the Inquiry’s seminars of the significant problem of misuse of controlled drugs by students, including medical students. Surveys suggest that cannabis is used by between 10% and 20% of pre-registration house officers and ‘Ecstasy’ by between 5% and 10%. This is a ‘grave worry for the future’ because, according to Sir Michael, as these doctors progress in their careers they will have much greater and easier access to ‘more nasty drugs’ than the rest of the population has.
CHAPTER TWENTY THREE - How the General Medical Council Deals with Cases of Drug Abuse


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR - The General Medical Council's Performance Procedures
========================================================================

--- The Process for Dealing with Complaints about Performance ---
24.21
The General Medical Council (Professional Performance) Rules Order of Council 1997 (the 1997 Performance Rules) came into force in July 1997. They set out the process to be followed when a complaint was made or information was received (I shall use the term ‘complaint’ to describe both) about a doctor’s performance. Broadly, the process consisted of the following stages:
staff in the Screening Section considered the complaint
the complaint was screened by a medical screener
if the case proceeded beyond screening, the doctor was invited to undergo a performance assessment
if the doctor did not agree to a performance assessment, the Assessment Referral Committee (ARC) would consider the case and decide whether a performance assessment was necessary
if the doctor agreed to a performance assessment, or if the ARC directed an assessment, a case co-ordinator would be appointed
the case co-ordinator would appoint an assessment team, of which one member was the lead assessor
the assessment was carried out and a report was written. The lead assessor was responsible for this
the performance assessment report was considered by the case co-ordinator and, if s/he thought that the contents of the report warranted it, s/he would draw up a statement of requirements for remedial action over a specified period
the doctor was invited to agree to undertake the remedial action set out in the statement of requirements
once the period of remedial action was at an end, the doctor would undergo further assessment.
24.22
In certain circumstances, the case might be referred to the CPP, which would consider the case and would decide whether to direct a performance assessment (if one had not already been carried out) or to impose a sanction on the doctor.
24.23
I shall deal with the various stages in the process separately. I shall describe the process which was in place in late 2003, when the Inquiry heard evidence about the performance procedures.
The Source of Complaints about Performance
24.24
First, I should say something about the complaints received by the GMC in relation to doctors’ performance. Most complaints about performance come from doctors’ employers (usually NHS trusts) or PCOs. Typically, those NHS organisations will have been attempting for some time to resolve the doctor’s problems by means of local procedures, but will have been unsuccessful in doing so. They will usually refer a performance issue to the GMC when they believe that the doctor’s deficiencies are so serious that only GMC action on registration will be sufficient to deal with the problem. Alternatively, the doctor may have been unwilling to participate in local remedial action. Sometimes, a NHS body has not had the opportunity to deal with the problem: for example, when a doctor has been employed as a locum and has moved on elsewhere.
24.25
Complaints about performance are sometimes made by postgraduate deans, tutors and advisers, or by a doctor’s medical colleagues. Some are also received from patients, although patients’ complaints often relate to isolated incidents, rather than to patterns of behaviour. It may be impossible for anyone to know whether the incident complained of, if true, was an isolated lapse or a manifestation of wider performance problems. As I have explained in
, until recently, it was not the practice of the GMC, upon receipt of a complaint from a private individual, to make enquiries of the doctor’s employer or PCO in order to see whether there had been any other complaints or concerns relating to the doctor. Thus, it is likely that many complaints to the GMC, which were in fact manifestations of wider performance problems, have been screened out because they were neither serious enough to amount to SPM nor (so far as the GMC knew) part of a pattern which might amount to SDP. It is to be hoped that the arrangements which the Inquiry has been told are now in place for discussions between the GMC and doctors’ employers and PCOs at an early stage after receipt of a complaint will lead to greater recognition of the value of patient complaints in revealing evidence of problems with performance.
24.26
Some complaints from patients and a doctor’s medical colleagues relate to the performance of doctors in the private sector. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that she could not herself recall a referral from an employer in the private sector, although she could not say that this had never occurred. If it is the case that no or very few such referrals are received, this gives rise to some cause for concern, as it seems unlikely that deficient performance occurs only within the NHS. I can envisage reasons why a commercial organisation might not wish its doctors to become involved with the GMC performance procedures. There might be a fear that the good name of the organisation will be affected if it becomes known that a doctor has been employed about whose performance serious concerns had arisen. Such an organisation might be unwilling to allow the GMC to undertake an assessment of the doctor at his/her place of work. It might simply be easier to dismiss the doctor and to be rid of the problem. This is a cause for concern because, if doctors whose performance gives rise to concern are not reported, they are free to move on and may cause problems for other patients and other organisations.
Consideration of a Complaint by the Staff in the Screening Section
24.27
In recent years, the first stage of the procedures following receipt of a complaint into the Screening Section was for a casework manager to assess,
, whether there was any prospect of the complaint being resolved by means of local action. In a potential performance case, the casework manager would wish to ascertain whether local performance procedures had been used and whether there had been any consultation with the NCAA. The November 2002 and April 2003 editions of the FTP Casework Manual (the Casework Manual), prepared for the assistance of staff in the Screening Section, advised that, if it was
‘not entirely clear’
that local procedures had been exhausted, casework managers should, at the triage stage, contact the referring body to discuss how the case should be handled. Where there was
‘any question of an immediate danger to patients’
, the Casework Manual advised that
‘the GMC may need to act’
. The Casework Manual went on to observe that one possible result of such discussion with a referring body was that the referrer would withdraw the referral and take other measures locally before referring back to the GMC if necessary.
24.28
Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that the GMC sometimes received referrals from NHS bodies that wished to put the GMC
‘on notice’
that they had got a difficulty with a doctor, but did not consider it necessary to invoke the GMC’s conduct or performance procedures at that stage. In other cases, he said that it might be less clear whether the referring body wanted GMC action or not. In that event, GMC staff would contact the referring body and discuss the various options. This might have led to a three-way discussion between the GMC, the referring body and the NCAA. Usually, the initial discussions with the referring body were conducted by telephone. However, on occasion, it might be necessary to have a meeting. Mr Marshall observed:
‘I think what we want to achieve by that is to be perfectly happy that all the organisations involved in looking at a particular doctor know what their role is, know the way the thing is going to be taken forward and know exactly what safeguards we might put in place in the meantime.’
24.29
Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that, until the middle of 2001, GMC staff classified cases as ‘performance’ or ‘conduct’ cases at an early stage. Cases that were classified as ‘performance cases’ were dealt with by a performance screening team and then, if appropriate, the performance assessment team. Cases classified as ‘conduct cases’ were processed within the Screening Section (which was then part of the Conduct and Screening Section). Mr Marshall said that decisions on classification were made
‘too early’
and that had
‘led to one or two cases perhaps ending up in the wrong route’
. In mid-2001, a decision was taken to postpone classification until a later stage and to
‘leave that decision to the screener’
Screening
24.30
After mid-2001, all cases were screened in the same place (the Screening Section). Complaints that suggested that the standard of a doctor’s performance might have been seriously deficient were considered by a medical screener. As I have said earlier, medical screeners were also responsible for considering complaints of potential SPM. Once a decision had been taken by the screeners, cases which had been ‘screened in’ progressed along one of the health, conduct or performance paths. This classification of cases resulted in what the GMC called ‘the silo effect’. Once a case was allocated to one set of procedures, it could not always be moved into a different set, even if it transpired later that another set of procedures might have been more appropriate. Under the new FTP procedures, the silo effect should be avoided as, although different methodologies will be used in dealing with the conduct, health and performance aspects of cases, FTP panels will be able to consider all the evidence relating to a doctor at the same time.
The Decision to Be Made by the Screeners
24.31
Rule 5(1)(c) of the 1997 Performance Rules provided that the medical screener should take no action in connection with a case unless the complaint was in writing and unless it:
‘suggests to the medical screener that -
(i) the standard of the practitioner’s professional performance may have been seriously deficient; and
(ii) it may be appropriate to take action ...’
The words
‘may be’
were amended in November 2002 to read
‘is’
. Also in November 2002, rule 5 was further amended to provide that the medical screener should take no action in respect of a complaint or information received by the GMC five years or more after the events giving rise to it, unless, in his/her opinion, the public interest
‘requires’
action
‘in the exceptional circumstances of the case’
. That amendment had the effect of introducing into the performance procedures a ‘limitation period’ similar to that which was introduced at the same time for the conduct procedures.
24.32
The
‘action’
which the medical screener had to decide whether or not to take consisted of the issuing of an invitation to the doctor to undergo a performance assessment. The threshold for issuing an invitation to a doctor to undergo an assessment was a low one. The complaint had to
‘suggest’
to the medical screener that the standard of the doctor’s conduct
‘may have been seriously deficient’
and the complaint had to
‘suggest’
to the medical screener that it was (until November 2002,
‘may be’
) ‘appropriate’ to take action.
The ‘Rule 5 Letter’
24.33
Until November 2002, before making a final decision whether to invite a doctor to undergo a performance assessment, it was necessary to give him/her notice of the fact that such a course was being considered and to afford him/her an opportunity to submit any observations s/he might have. A ‘rule 5 letter’ would be sent to the doctor, together with copies of the complaint and of any previous complaint(s) to be taken into account (see
paragraph 24.36
) and a copy of any statutory declaration (if the complainant was a private individual). The medical screener would then take any observations submitted by the doctor into account when reaching his/her decision whether an assessment should take place. The 1997 Performance Rules provided no opportunity for the complainant (whether a private individual or a public body) to respond to the doctor’s observations. Sometimes, receipt of the doctor’s observations resulted in a change of mind on the part of the medical screener. For example, in 2000, out of 126 cases in which a ‘rule 5 letter’ had been sent, medical screeners decided not to pursue 12 cases after receipt of the doctor’s observations. In November 2002, an amendment to the 1997 Performance Rules removed the obligation to seek preliminary observations from the doctor and the ‘rule 5 letter’ was no longer required.
The Power to Seek Further Information
24.34
Rule 5(2) of the 1997 Performance Rules provided that, for the purposes of considering a case, the medical screener might seek information about or observations on the case from any person who, in the opinion of the medical screener, might assist him/her in deciding whether there might be reason to believe that the standard of the doctor’s professional performance had been seriously deficient. Thus, it was open to the medical screener to initiate enquiries to assist him/her in making the decision as to whether the case should proceed to an assessment. This was in contrast with the position in a case of potential SPM, where the medical screener had no such specific power.
The Involvement of a Lay Screener
24.35
Rule 5(6) of the 1997 Performance Rules required that, before a decision was taken by the medical screener that no action was needed, a lay screener should be consulted and should agree. If the lay screener did not agree that no action needed to be taken, an invitation to undergo a performance assessment had to be issued.
Consideration of an Earlier Complaint
24.36
Where the screeners decided to take no action in relation to a complaint, rule 4 of the 1997 Performance Rules provided that the complaint might nonetheless be taken into account by a medical screener in connection with the consideration of any subsequent complaint, with a view to determining whether
‘together they indicate a pattern of professional performance which is seriously deficient’
. However, when considering a subsequent complaint, an earlier complaint could be taken into account only if, at the time that the doctor was notified that no further action was to be taken in relation to it, s/he was sent a statement informing him/her that the earlier complaint might be taken into account if in the future a further complaint was received. A copy of that statement had to be sent to the person or body who made the earlier complaint, together with an explanation of the reason why a decision had been made to take no action in relation to that complaint. The 1997 Performance Rules imposed no time limit after which an earlier complaint could not be considered. This was in contradistinction to the position where complaints of misconduct or reports of convictions were not acted upon immediately; they could be revived only within two years of the decision to take no action. It seems that, from the first, however, the GMC operated an informal ‘cut-off period’ of three years for performance cases.
24.37
At the time that the performance procedures came into operation, the first Handbook for screeners, the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, was produced. The Handbook advised medical screeners that a complaint should be treated as a potential performance case only after the medical screener had concluded, first, that referral to the health procedures was not justified and, second, that the case should not be pursued as a case of SPM. A lay screener had to endorse the second conclusion. Only then could the medical screener go on to consider whether there was evidence of SDP. If there was, the medical screener should consider action under the performance procedures. It was open to medical screeners, exercising their powers under rule 5(2) of the 1997 Performance Rules, to ask the GMC staff to make enquiries to establish if the complaint was an isolated one or if there was a pattern of concern locally about the doctor. The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook suggested that information might be obtained from the medical adviser or chief executive of a GP’s PCO, from the medical director of a NHS trust, from a senior medical executive of an employing organisation, from the chairman or secretary of the LMC or from the chairman of the medical staff of a hospital. The Handbook emphasised the need for
‘tact and discretion’
and for confidentiality when making such enquiries. The doctor concerned was to be informed of the complaint before such enquiries were made. It was to be explained to the person from whom information was being sought that the GMC was simply making preliminary enquiries and that no decision about possible GMC action had yet been taken. Any approach made, and the outcome, was to be recorded. All this seems very sensible. However, the evidence I have heard suggests that it did not happen in practice. Until May 2004, when a single complaint was received (which was not serious enough in itself to raise a question of SPM), it was closed without any enquiries being made of local organisations with a view to finding out whether or not there were other concerns about the doctor. I discussed this problem in
and recorded the reaction of Dr Korlipara to the suggestion that such enquiries should be made. In short, he thought that it was not for the GMC to go ‘fishing’ for information from which to construct a case against a doctor. From May 2004, the GMC has announced its intention, in certain circumstances, to consult with employers and primary care trusts (PCTs) at an early stage after receiving a complaint.
24.38
In deciding whether a complaint should be taken forward, screeners were advised to consider:
‘•Is there good evidence relating to the doctor’s performance since 1 July 1997, that the doctor may be repeatedly or persistently failing to comply with the professional standards appropriate to the work the doctor is doing?
•Does that evidence suggest that there may be a pattern of deficient performance, as opposed to evidence only of one or two incidents of deficient performance, which could be isolated lapses?
•Are the alleged deficiencies so serious that, if they cannot otherwise be resolved, there might be grounds for suspending or imposing conditions on the doctor’s registration?’
24.39
Screeners were enjoined to be
‘particularly concerned’
where the evidence suggested that the standard of the doctor’s professional performance might be placing patients in jeopardy, or where the doctor was repeatedly and persistently failing to comply with the GMC’s guidance in ‘Good Medical Practice’.
24.40
The Screeners’ Handbook advised medical screeners that, in a case where the allegations contained in the complaint did not, in the medical screener’s view, warrant action under the performance procedures (the example given in the Handbook being an
‘isolated lapse’
in performance with no
‘pattern’
of SDP), informal action under Chapter XV of the GMC’s Standing Orders might be appropriate. I described the Chapter XV procedures in
Screening Decision Forms
24.41
, in 1999, the screeners began to use screening decision forms (SDFs) which had been designed by the Policy Studies Institute (PSI) in consultation with the GMC. The purpose of the SDFs was to introduce greater structure and consistency into the screening process.
24.42
The version of the SDF in use from June 1999 until August 2001 contained this advice to screeners:
‘SDP is normally indicated by a repeated or persistent failure to comply with relevant professional standards.’
24.43
After August 2001, the advice was changed to read:
‘SDP is normally indicated by a pattern of serious failure to comply with relevant professional Standards.’
I was concerned about that change, at least if it was taken literally by screeners. Surely a single
‘serious failure to comply with relevant professional standards’
would warrant action under the conduct procedures, as it would raise a question of SPM. The difference between SDP and SPM was that SDP might be evidenced by a series of failures which, taken individually, would not warrant action but which would do so when considered collectively. The new guidance appeared to import a requirement of both seriousness and repetition before SDP could arise. It seemed to me that this might not afford adequate protection for patients.
24.44
However, this change in language might not have had any adverse effect upon the decisions of medical screeners because, at the same time, other advice was given which appeared not to suggest the need for seriousness as well as repetition. From August 2001, the SDF contained a list of criteria which, it stated, were
‘not exhaustive but may be an indicator of sdp’
. The medical screener was invited to tick all those criteria that applied to the complaint being screened. The criteria were:
a tendency to use inappropriate techniques
a lack of basic knowledge/poor judgement
a lack of familiarity with basic clinical/administrative procedures
a failure to keep up-to-date records
a lack of insight
a range of inadequacies, namely:
outdated techniques
attitude
inadequate practice arrangements
concerns over referral rates
poor record keeping
inadequate hygiene arrangements.
24.45
The medical screener then had to decide whether the case raised an issue of SPM (in which case it should have been referred to the Preliminary Proceedings Committee) or whether there was a suggestion that there might have been SDP (in which case an invitation to undergo a performance assessment should have been sent). If the medical screener could not judge whether either was applicable, further information might be required. If the medical screener believed that the case raised issues of both SPM and SDP, s/he had to declare whether, in his/her view, the case should proceed by way of the conduct or the performance procedures. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook (and the subsequent April 2003 version which was still in use at the time of the Inquiry hearings) observed that, in many cases, this would be
‘a fine judgement’
. If the medical screener decided that the case raised no issues of SPM or SDP, the agreement of a lay screener had to be obtained before the case was closed.
Invitation to the Doctor to Undergo a Performance Assessment
24.46
If the medical screener decided that the case should proceed, the 1997 Performance Rules required the doctor to be informed of the fact. Until November 2002, under the provisions of rule 6, the doctor (who would already be aware of the complaint and of the fact that an invitation to undergo assessment was being considered, having received the ‘rule 5 letter’) would be sent a statement setting out the reasons why the medical screener considered that an assessment was necessary. He or she would also be sent a copy of any further information which had been obtained as a result of any further enquiries initiated by the medical screener and taken into account by the medical screener when making his/her decision. Until November 2002, the 1997 Performance Rules provided that the complainant should not be sent the medical screener’s statement or any of the information referred to above.
24.47
From November 2002, when the ‘rule 5 letter’ was abolished, the letter sent after the medical screener’s decision could be the doctor’s first notification that a complaint had been made to the GMC about his/her performance. The amended rule 6 required the doctor to be sent all the information which would previously have been enclosed with the ‘rule 5 letter’, together with the invitation to undergo assessment sent in accordance with rule 6.
24.48
The doctor would then be invited to agree within 28 days (until November 2002, the period was 14 days) to an assessment being carried out and to submit within the same period any observations that s/he might wish to make on the case. If the doctor agreed to the carrying out of a performance assessment, the case would be passed to the Performance Section, where arrangements for the assessment would be put in train. If the doctor did not agree to an assessment within the specified period, the medical screener could refer the case to the ARC. Alternatively, having considered the doctor’s observations or other information, the medical screener might decide (subject to the agreement of the lay screener) that no further action needed to be taken in connection with the case. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that she was not aware of a case where a medical screener had changed his/her original decision at this stage.
Consideration of the Case by the Assessment Referral Committee
24.49
The 1997 Performance Rules provided that a referral to the ARC might be reversed if the doctor subsequently agreed that an assessment should be carried out or if the medical screener subsequently received information which caused him/her (with the agreement of the lay screener) to decide that no further action needed to be taken in connection with the case. However, if the referral was not reversed, the ARC would proceed to consider the case.
The Composition of the Assessment Referral Committee
24.50
The composition of the ARC was governed by the General Medical Council (Constitution of Fitness to Practise Committees) Rules Order of Council 1996 (the 1996 Constitution Rules), as amended. It comprised 17 members. It was chaired by the President, or some other member of the GMC appointed by him. Two members were appointed by the President to act as Deputy Chairmen. The appointments made by the President had to be approved by the full Council. The remaining 14 members were elected annually. From August 2000, medical and lay screeners were not eligible for election to the ARC. The total membership of the ARC comprised 13 medical and four lay members. Until November 2002, the legal quorum for the ARC was five, including at least one lay member. After that time, the quorum was three and had to include at least one medical and one lay member.
The Provision of Legal and Medical Advice
24.51
The ARC sat with a legal assessor and with at least one specialist adviser appointed by the Chairman from a panel appointed by the GMC. At least one of the specialist advisers had to be a person who was practising or had practised in the specialty in which the doctor whose performance was under scrutiny generally practised. The function of the specialist adviser was to advise the ARC on the medical issues before it. He or she would give advice on any question referred to him/her by the ARC. In addition, s/he could give advice on his/her own initiative if it appeared to him/her that, but for such advice, there was a possibility of a mistake being made, either in judging the medical significance of any information before the ARC or because of the absence of information. The advice of the specialist adviser had to be given in the presence of the doctor and his/her representative, if they attended the hearing. If the advice was given after the ARC had begun to deliberate as to its findings, the specialist adviser was required to inform the doctor what advice had been given in his/her absence.
The Functions of the Assessment Referral Committee
24.52
Mr Howes said that that the original purpose of the ARC had been to provide a safeguard against the GMC becoming ‘trigger happy’ and sending doctors for assessment when the evidence did not justify it. The task of the ARC was not to determine whether or not a doctor’s performance was seriously deficient. Rather, its functions under rule 15 of the 1997 Performance Rules were to decide whether the standard of a doctor’s performance
‘may have been seriously deficient’
and, if so, to decide whether an assessment
‘needs to be carried out’
. This test appeared to set a slightly higher threshold than that set by the screening test, which required that the complaint should
‘suggest’
to the screener that the doctor’s performance might have been seriously deficient and that
‘it is
formerly
‘may be’
appropriate to take action’
. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that the test for the ARC (in contrast to that applied by the screeners) was twofold. If the ARC decided that a doctor’s performance might have been seriously deficient, it then had to ask whether, ‘despite that’, it ‘would not want to assess this particular doctor’.
The Procedure at a Hearing before the Assessment Referral Committee
24.53
At a hearing before the ARC, the GMC was represented by a solicitor or counsel. Both the complainant and the doctor were also entitled to be represented. Before the hearing, members of the ARC would receive copies of the document sent to the doctor under the provisions of rule 6 (previously rules 5 and 6) and of any observations from, or further correspondence with, the doctor.
24.54
Hearings of the ARC were held in private. The ARC might obtain any information in writing, or call any person to give oral evidence, which it considered might assist it in carrying out its functions. The complainant could give evidence and s/he or his/her representative could address the ARC. The complainant was not, however, entitled to hear the other evidence adduced before the ARC. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that most performance cases arose as a result of referrals from public bodies. The referring body would be invited to send a representative to the hearing before the ARC. It was not, however, usual for that representative to give evidence. Mr Marshall observed that the GMC would ‘make the most vigorous argument it can that the case should proceed, referring to the papers in hand’. He said that it was ‘very rare’ for the referring body to have anything to add to the papers which the GMC already had. The doctor might give evidence. Except for the complainant, the doctor and any person whom the ARC chose to call, no one else was permitted to give oral evidence. It seems to me to be unfortunate that the complainant (usually the representative of a public body) was not permitted to hear what the doctor had to say. He or she was the person most likely to have detailed knowledge of the case and to know whether or not what the doctor had said was reasonable or was capable of being refuted. It seems to me that that person should have been present throughout the hearing so that, if appropriate, s/he could communicate with the GMC representative.
24.55
If, at the conclusion of the evidence, the ARC decided that a performance assessment needed to be carried out, it would direct that an assessment should be conducted and the case would immediately pass to the Performance Section for the appropriate arrangements to be made.
24.56
If the ARC decided that no assessment was necessary, the case would be closed. A decision by the majority of members was taken as the decision of the ARC. If the votes were equal, the Chairman had an additional casting vote. The ARC was not required to give reasons for its decisions and, if it found in favour of the doctor, did not do so. This absence of reasons gave rise to a considerable amount of concern on the part of NHS bodies who were given no explanation of why a decision (contrary to that of the medical screener) had been taken not to take action in a case which they had regarded as serious enough to refer to the GMC. I shall return to this topic later in this Chapter.
The Performance Assessment
The Appointment of a Case Co-ordinator
24.57
Once it had been decided that a performance assessment should be carried out, the 1997 Performance Rules required the appointment of a case co-ordinator. Until July 2003, the case co-ordinator had to be a medical member of the GMC. In practice, the GMC authorised two of the medical screeners to act in that capacity. The first performance case co-ordinators were Dr Robin Steel (the principal medical screener) and Professor Hilary Thomas. In March 2004, two of the recently appointed medically qualified case examiners were appointed as performance case co-ordinators, pending the introduction of the new FTP procedures. The first function of a case co-ordinator was to appoint the members of the Assessment Panel which was to carry out the performance assessment. Panel members were appointed from the list of performance assessors who had been authorised by the GMC to carry out performance assessments.
Performance Assessors
24.58
Performance assessors are not members of the GMC. They are medically qualified and lay people who have been selected and trained by the GMC to act as assessors. Initially, 400 people (250 medical and 150 lay) were selected, of whom only half were trained immediately. Others were trained as the need for more people to participate in assessments increased. Performance assessors receive intensive training (including a five-day residential course) in their role. After their initial training, they receive ongoing training and support at workshops and other events. In addition, assessors who are not on the GMC’s list have also been appointed on an
basis to assist with individual assessments. Both Sir Donald Irvine and Dame Lesley Southgate emphasised the value of the participation by lay people in the assessment process.
The Assessment Panel
24.59
Members of staff in the Performance Section would send to the doctor a ‘portfolio’ to complete. The doctor would be asked to provide a description of the nature of his/her practice, an account of his/her professional training and experience and other details. The staff would then attempt to identify suitable members for the Assessment Panel. The case co-ordinator would approve the constitution of the Assessment Panel and would formally appoint the panel members before the assessment took place.
24.60
Under the 1997 Performance Rules, Assessment Panels had to consist of two doctors and a lay person, with a doctor as the lead assessor. The lead assessor would be a doctor from the same specialty as the doctor being assessed. From November 2002, the Rules provided that, where an assessment was to include
‘structured tests of the doctor’s professional knowledge and skills’
(which, as I shall explain, usually constitute Phase II of the assessment), the case co-ordinator could appoint one or more additional members to the Assessment Panel. Those members would be involved in the assessment only for the purpose of assessing the doctor’s performance in those tests. The appointment of additional members for this purpose ensured that the assessment of the doctor’s performance in Phase II was approached with a fresh eye and without any preconceptions based on his/her performance in Phase I.
The Work of the Assessment Panel
24.61
The Assessment Panel would be provided with all the relevant papers in the case, including the original complaint and the doctor’s observations on it. The Assessment Panel would tailor the way in which it carried out the assessment to the individual circumstances of the doctor being assessed. The ‘portfolio’ completed by the doctor assisted in this process. During the assessment, performance assessors might act alone or in different combinations.
24.62
Phase I of the performance assessment was known as the ‘peer review’. It usually occupied about two and a half days. The performance assessors would interview the doctor, usually on several occasions. On at least one such occasion, the doctor had to be interviewed by all members of the Panel together. The doctor was entitled to be accompanied at interviews with the performance assessors, save when details of particular cases of named patients were being discussed. Panel members would also interview the complainant (if s/he agreed) or, if the complainant was (as was usually the case) a public body, they would interview a representative of that body and possibly the members of staff with direct knowledge of the matters giving rise to the concerns or complaint. The Assessment Panel would visit the doctor at his/her place of work (if applicable) and would inspect a number (usually about 50) of sample sets of his/her medical records. From those records, the Panel would select certain cases which would subsequently form the basis of detailed discussions with the doctor. They might also observe how the doctor conducted consultations with patients. If the complaint related to a hospital doctor’s surgical skills, the performance assessors might observe him/her at work in the operating theatre. Performance assessors would also speak to a doctor’s colleagues and to others with firsthand knowledge of the doctor’s performance; these might be nurses, practice staff (if the doctor was a GP) or senior managers (if the doctor worked in a hospital). The 1997 Performance Rules provided that the doctor might nominate no more than five persons whom s/he wished to be interviewed in the course of the assessment and the Assessment Panel was required to make reasonable efforts to ensure that those persons were interviewed by at least one Panel member. During the assessment, performance assessors might act alone or in different combinations. As the assessment progressed, the assessors would enter their comments in a specially designed database. They graded each entry as ‘acceptable’, ‘cause for concern’ or ‘unacceptable’. ‘Acceptable’ meant that the evidence demonstrated that the doctor’s performance was consistently above the standard for fitness to practise. ‘Cause for concern’ meant that there was evidence that suggested the performance might not be acceptable but there was not sufficient evidence to suggest SDP. ‘Unacceptable’ indicated that there was evidence of SDP.
24.63
The 1997 Performance Rules required the Assessment Panel to disclose to the doctor any written information or opinion received by the Panel which the Panel believed might influence its assessment, and to give the doctor an opportunity of commenting on it. The practice was that all interviews with third parties were transcribed. In the past, transcriptions of third party interviews were not always made available to the doctor while the assessment was in progress. Following the judgement in the case of
Sadler v General Medical Council
, given in July 2003, it became clear that this must be done, so that the doctor could have an opportunity to comment on the content of those interviews before the final assessment report was prepared.
24.64
Phase II of the performance assessment consisted of tests of competence which were designed to suit the doctor’s specialty. Phase II consisted of a test of knowledge, a simulated surgery with trained actors playing the role of patients, and objective structured clinical examinations (OSCEs), whereby the doctor was placed in certain clinical situations to which s/he had to react. The GMC has recently opened a new assessment centre for the assessment of doctors coming to practise in the UK from overseas. Mr Scott told the Inquiry that it was intended that the assessment centre should also be used in the future to conduct Phase II of performance assessments.
24.65
The doctor’s scores on the Phase II tests were assessed against a control group of doctors in the same specialty who had completed the same tests. The minimum scores for the tests were deliberately set low, well below those that would be attained by the vast majority of doctors. For example, 75% of GPs would have scored 85% or above in the knowledge test but the score that gave rise to a ‘cause for concern’ in the assessment was set at 68.8%. Similarly, 75% of GPs would score over 72% in the simulated surgery tests, whereas the score that gave rise to ‘cause for concern’ in the assessment was set at only 50%. In the OSCEs, 75% of GPs would score over 80%, but the score giving rise to ‘cause for concern’ was set at 70%
24.66
The doctor was asked to proceed to Phase II only if, as a result of Phase I, the Assessment Panel considered that there was a potential problem with the doctor’s performance. If the Assessment Panel agreed at the conclusion of Phase I that the doctor’s performance was not seriously deficient and that nothing would be gained by proceeding to Phase II, the assessment would be halted there. At the Inquiry, there was some discussion about whether it would be sensible to reverse the order in which the two Phases were conducted. Phase I was very ‘resource-intensive’ and, therefore, very expensive. It could often take quite a long time to set it up and, as a result, delays occurred. Phase I also depended to a very large degree on subjective judgements about the reliability of observations made by interviewees. On the other hand, Phase II was more objective. The argument for change was that, if a doctor performed well (or even adequately) in the objective tests, the Panel might well be able to reach the conclusion that no real concerns arose. If s/he performed inadequately, s/he would have to complete the assessment process (the present Phase I). Such a change would produce savings in both cost and time. It seemed to me that the most important consideration was whether the taking of the Phase II objective tests would provide a reliable indicator on the basis of which it would be safe to make a decision to discontinue the process. Dame Lesley Southgate was of the view that it would not be safe. She said that a doctor cannot perform well unless s/he has a sound knowledge base. However, the converse is not true; a doctor with a sound knowledge base can still perform badly. It appears, therefore, that there is no easy answer to problems of resources resulting from the Phase I assessment.
24.67
In the past, there were very severe delays in carrying out assessments and in producing the reports. In August 2001, a service standard was introduced with a target of completing an assessment within five months of the doctor having agreed to, or been directed to, undergo it. However, assessments could still take longer to complete, particularly if it was difficult to find suitable assessors who were available.
24.68
The form of the performance assessment was reviewed from time to time. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that, from a time shortly before she gave evidence, the practice had been to conduct more case-based discussions with the doctor and to cut down on the number of interviews with third parties. Recent experience had suggested that the reliability of third party interviews and/or the impartiality with which they were recorded might be successfully attacked by the doctor at a hearing before the CPP. Suspicions had arisen that some complaints had been made as the result of a particular doctor being made the scapegoat for a problem within a department or even as the result of racial discrimination. It is clear that the accounts given by members of staff or patients to an Assessment Panel cannot be subjected to cross-examination and there must be a danger that the Panel might be less than objective in its judgements. Where judgements are based on what the doctor him/herself said about his/her cases, these risks would be much reduced. Also, the results of Phase II, being calibrated by reference to the performance of a large number of doctors, would provide objective and reliable material.
24.69
The 1997 Performance Rules required all members of the Assessment Panel to meet together during the assessment to review its progress. They were then required to meet again to consider the conclusions to be reached on the assessment and the content of their report.
24.70
Once completed, the performance assessment report was sent to the case co-ordinator unless the assessment was carried out in accordance with the direction of the CPP (see
paragraph 24.93
, in which case the report was sent to the CPP. The report had to include the opinion of the Assessment Panel on some or all of the following matters, namely whether:
‘(a) the standard of the practitioner’s professional performance has been seriously deficient;
(b) the standard of the practitioner’s professional performance is likely to be improved by remedial action;
(c) the practitioner should limit his professional practice, or cease professional practice;
(d) no further action needs to be taken on the Report.’
24.71
An Assessment Panel was required to give its reasons for the opinions expressed. If members of the Panel disagreed, the 1997 Performance Rules required that the report should include a statement of any dissenting opinion and the reasons for it.
Failure to Co-operate with an Assessment Panel
24.72
If a doctor did not co-operate with the Assessment Panel, his/her case would be referred to the CPP. Sometimes, it was not easy to know whether the doctor was failing to co-operate or whether there was some genuine difficulty giving rise to that impression. It was not unusual for a doctor to assert that s/he was ill while the performance assessment was going on. In those circumstances, the case co-ordinator had to make a judgement as to whether the doctor’s conduct in reality amounted to a deliberate failure to co-operate or whether the assessment should be postponed to allow his/her health to improve. It was recognised that being the subject of assessment can be extremely stressful and that this might have a genuine effect upon a doctor’s health. If necessary, the case could be referred to the CPP and the CPP could consider referring the case to the Health Committee (HC). Miss Smith said that staff in the Performance Section tried ‘not to leave cases lingering for months on end without resolution’.
Consideration of the Performance Assessment Report
Seeking the Doctor’s Observations on the Assessment Report
24.73
When the case co-ordinator received the assessment report, s/he was required to send a copy to the doctor, together with an invitation to submit written observations on it within 21 days. At the expiration of that period, the case co-ordinator had to consider the report and any observations submitted by the doctor. It should be noted that the 1997 Performance Rules specifically provided that the complainant should not receive a copy of the assessment report. This was the case even though the complainant was usually the doctor’s employer or PCO and might have been able to make observations every bit as germane to the issues as those of the doctor.
The Decision Made by the Case Co-ordinator: No Further Action
24.74
In making his/her decision on the appropriate course of action to be adopted after receipt of the assessment report, the case co-ordinator was not bound by the Assessment Panel’s opinion, although it would form a central part of his/her consideration. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that case co-ordinators did sometimes take a different view from that of the Assessment Panel. The Inquiry has seen the papers in one such case, that of Dr KA 05. However, Miss Smith observed that it did not happen very often.
24.75
The case co-ordinator had three options open to him/her. The first option was to close the case without further action. If the case co-ordinator was of the opinion that no further action should be taken in the case, s/he was required to consult a lay adviser before closing the case. A lay adviser was a lay member of the GMC appointed to act for this purpose. Only if the lay adviser agreed could the case be closed without further action. If the lay adviser did not agree with the case co-ordinator, the case co-ordinator had to refer the case to the CPP together with a copy of the performance assessment report, a statement of his/her opinion and a statement of the opinion of the lay adviser. A decision by a case co-ordinator (and agreed by a lay adviser) to take no further action was likely to arise only when the Assessment Panel had reported that the doctor’s performance had not been seriously deficient. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that it was her impression that it was unusual for an Assessment Panel to find that the doctor’s performance had not been seriously deficient. However, the GMC’s FTP statistics do not entirely bear this out. In 2002, 21% of assessments resulted in a finding that the doctor’s performance was acceptable. In 2003, the figure was 31%. Dame Lesley Southgate told the Inquiry at the seminars that it sometimes appeared that complaints of poor performance against a doctor had been made as the result of victimisation of one sort or another, rather than because his/her performance was deficient.
24.76
When an Assessment Panel reported that there had been practice which, although unacceptable, did not in the Panel’s view amount to SDP, Miss Smith said that the case co-ordinator would have no option but to close the case. She said that no other action would be taken. The effect of this was that the doctor’s employers or PCO (and, if s/he was a GP, other members of the practice) would not be informed of any continuing concerns about the doctor’s unacceptable practice, as revealed by the performance assessment, or given any advice about the steps they might take to deal with it.
The Decision Taken by the Case Co-ordinator: Referral to the Committee on Professional Performance
24.77
The second option open to the case co-ordinator was to refer the case to the CPP. Rule 25 of the 1997 Performance Rules required a case co-ordinator to refer a case to the CPP if, at any stage after an assessment had been carried out, s/he was of the opinion that it was necessary for the protection of members of the public or would be in the best interests of the practitioner for a direction for suspension or for conditional registration to be made.
24.78
The case co-ordinator would usually refer a case to the CPP if the Assessment Panel had reported that there were serious deficiencies in the doctor’s performance which were unlikely to be improved by remedial action. In certain circumstances, the case co-ordinator might decide to refer a case, despite the Panel’s view that remedial action was likely to be effective.
The Decision Taken by the Case Co-ordinator: a Statement of Requirements
24.79
The third option for the case co-ordinator was to formulate a written statement of requirements, with which the doctor would be invited to agree to comply. The doctor’s agreement would usually include an agreement to take certain specific steps to remedy identified deficiencies. It might also involve agreeing to limitations being placed on his/her practice. In considering whether to deal with a case by way of a statement of requirements, a case co-ordinator would consider whether a statement of requirements would sufficiently protect patients. A statement of requirements was, the Inquiry was told, unlikely to be considered where the doctor did not admit the Assessment Panel’s findings or where s/he showed limited insight into his/her deficiencies. Miss Smith said that the presence or absence of insight and the seriousness of the problems identified were the two most important factors she would have expected a case co-ordinator to have in mind when deciding whether a statement of requirements was appropriate.
The Statement of Requirements
24.80
If the case co-ordinator decided that a statement of requirements was appropriate, s/he would proceed to draw it up and send it to the doctor. The statement had to be based on the findings and opinion in the performance assessment report and might, as the case co-ordinator deemed appropriate, include any or all of the following matters:
‘(a) the aspects of the practitioner’s professional performance which he is required to improve;
(b) the standard of professional performance which the practitioner is required to achieve;
(c) the aspects of the arrangements for the running of his professional practice which the practitioner is required to improve;
(d) the limitations which the practitioner is required to impose on his professional practice’
24.81
The statement might require the doctor to undertake training in some aspect of his/her practice and might also specify limitations on his/her practice, to which the doctor had to agree. The statement also had to set out the date on which the doctor was expected to have fulfilled any requirements and the period for which the statement of requirements was to have effect. It was also required to include a provision that further assessment was to be carried out after the date on which the doctor was expected to have fulfilled the requirements. That date had to be no later than a year from the date on which the doctor agreed to comply with the statement of requirements.
24.82
The 1997 Performance Rules provided that, where the doctor agreed to comply with the statement of requirements, s/he must signify his/her agreement in writing within 14 days and must undertake to comply with the statement of requirements and to undergo reassessment after the date on which s/he was expected to have fulfilled the requirements. The doctor was also required to agree to his/her employer or professional partner or
‘any organisation or person with whom s/he has a professional relationship’
being told by the GMC of his/her agreement to comply with the statement of requirements and of the nature of those requirements. It appears that patients were not deemed to be included in the classes of persons with whom the doctor had
‘a professional relationship’
, so that they would not be informed automatically. However, the doctor had to agree to the GMC disclosing the information to any person who made a specific enquiry about his/her registration. This rule was designed to ensure that doctors who were dealt with by way of a statement of requirements entered into voluntarily were put on a par with doctors who were the subject of directions made by the CPP. Such directions would be discloseable in response to enquiries about the doctor’s fitness to practise. So, a patient who ‘got wind’ of the imposition of requirements could find out about them but patients were not automatically told. As I have said, the doctor’s employers, partners and the PCT were not entitled to see the performance assessment report itself. This applied even where the doctor had agreed to a statement of requirements. If a doctor did not signify within 14 days his/her written agreement to comply with the statement of requirements, the case co-ordinator would refer the case to the CPP.
Compliance with the Statement of Requirements
24.83
Once the doctor had undertaken to comply with the stated requirements, it was up to the doctor him/herself to address any deficiencies that had been identified and to arrange to undergo any necessary retraining or education. He or she was expected to liaise with the regional postgraduate dean or with the regional director of postgraduate education for this purpose. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that it could be difficult for doctors to make these arrangements. Locums could experience particular difficulty obtaining the support necessary to fulfil the requirements. I shall refer to these difficulties later in this Chapter. Miss Smith also told the Inquiry that it was customary for a case co-ordinator to require a quarterly report on the progress of the doctor from a person assisting in his/her re-education programme, to ascertain whether the doctor was complying with the requirements.
24.84
Rule 25 of the 1997 Performance Rules required the case co-ordinator to refer a case to the CPP if, in his/her opinion, the doctor was failing to comply with the requirements set out in the statement of requirements or if s/he was failing to benefit from and was unlikely to benefit from any education or training which s/he was undertaking in accordance with the statement of requirements.
24.85
The case co-ordinator was also required to refer a case to the CPP where s/he was of the opinion that the practitioner’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. A case co-ordinator had no power to refer the doctor direct to the HC or into the voluntary health procedures.
Modification of the Statement of Requirements
24.86
The 1997 Performance Rules permitted the case co-ordinator to modify the statement of requirements with the agreement of the doctor. If the doctor did not agree to such modification, the case co-ordinator could refer the case to the CPP or could notify the doctor that the original statement of requirements would continue to have effect.
Further Assessment of the Doctor’s Performance
24.87
The 1997 Performance Rules also provided for a further assessment to be carried out at the end of the period covered by the statement of requirements. A second Assessment Panel was appointed by the case co-ordinator as before. This assessment would focus on the deficiencies identified in the first Assessment Panel report and on the requirements contained in the statement.
24.88
The task of the second Assessment Panel was to assess whether the doctor had satisfactorily fulfilled the requirements of the statement and whether, as a result, the standard of his/her performance had improved sufficiently to enable the Assessment Panel to suggest that no further action should be taken. In the course of the second assessment, the Assessment Panel was required to interview the doctor and to consider any information about, or observations on, the case which were received from anyone who had assisted the doctor with any advice, education or training in connection with any remedial action taken by the doctor during the period of the statement of requirements. The report of the Assessment Panel was then sent to the case co-ordinator.
24.89
On receipt of the second Assessment Panel report, the case co-ordinator was required to decide, as before, whether to refer the case to the CPP, to take no further action in the case (only with the agreement of a lay adviser) or to seek the doctor’s agreement to a second statement of requirements. Miss Smith said that, in her experience, if a second Assessment Panel felt that the doctor had not demonstrated that s/he had improved, the case co-ordinator would be reluctant to agree another statement of requirements and would be more inclined to refer the case to the CPP. If, however, some progress had been made, the case co-ordinator might give the doctor more time to make further improvements. The 1997 Performance Rules provided for the possibility of a third assessment to be arranged in the same way as previously described.
Consideration of the Case by the Committee on Professional Performance
24.90
The 1997 Performance Rules provided for the reversal of a referral to the CPP in an appropriate case, e.g. if the doctor changed his/her mind and agreed to an assessment, or if the case co-ordinator received information which caused him/her to believe that it was no longer necessary for the CPP to hold an inquiry into the case. However, if the referral was not reversed, the CPP would proceed to consider the case.
The Composition of the Committee on Professional Performance
24.91
The composition of the CPP was governed by the 1996 Constitution Rules as amended. The CPP consisted of 26 members. It was chaired by the President or by a GMC member appointed by him. Two members were appointed by the President as Deputy Chairmen. The remaining 23 members were elected annually. The total membership of the CPP comprised 21 medical members and five lay members. The President’s appointments were required to be approved by the Council. The CPP sat in panels. Until November 2002, the legal quorum for a CPP panel was five, including at least one lay member. In November 2002, the quorum was reduced to three, including at least one medical and one lay member. From 2000, non-members of the GMC (known as associates) were permitted to sit on the CPP and did so regularly. After July 2003, it was unusual for a member of the GMC to sit on a CPP panel. CPP panels sat with a legal assessor and with at least one specialist adviser.
24.92
The 1997 Performance Rules provided that the proceedings of the CPP should be held in private, unless the doctor requested that they be held in public. This rarely happened. If a hearing was held in public, it was open to the CPP to direct that confidential medical information about any individual should be received in private. In 2000, consideration was given to a change whereby the CPP would sit in public but, after consideration, no such change was thought appropriate. Some information about cases in which the CPP found the standard of a doctor’s performance to have been seriously deficient were published from the inception of the procedures. In addition, after July 2003, the minutes of CPP hearings were published.
Assessment Hearings
24.93
Hearings by the CPP might occur where no assessment had been carried out. In a case where no order for an assessment had previously been made by the CPP (i.e. if the doctor had originally agreed to the assessment, then failed to co-operate, or if the ARC had directed the assessment and the doctor had not co-operated), the CPP had to decide whether to direct that an assessment should be carried out. The procedure for such hearings (known as ‘assessment hearings’) was similar to that for hearings by the ARC. If the CPP had previously directed that an assessment should be undertaken and the doctor had failed to co-operate, it was open to the CPP to suspend or to attach conditions to his/her registration. In such a case, the hearing was similar to that of the ARC, save that there was no opportunity for the complainant to give evidence. That was because the requirement for an assessment had already been established; the question at issue was why the doctor had not complied with the requirements of the Assessment Panel. Miss Smith said that she was aware of one case when, following an assessment hearing on the grounds of a doctor’s failure to co-operate with an Assessment Panel, the CPP had decided that an assessment was not necessary. It was not clear why this decision had been taken as, at that time, reasons were not given for the CPP’s decisions. Subsequently, the CPP began to give reasons for its decisions in cases where it found the doctor’s performance to be seriously deficient. More recently, it extended the giving of reasons to all cases, whatever the finding.
Performance Hearings
24.94
Hearings before the CPP might also occur when a performance assessment had been carried out and had revealed deficiencies which were so serious that the case co-ordinator considered it appropriate to refer the case to the CPP, or where a lay adviser disagreed with a case co-ordinator’s decision to take no action after a performance assessment had been carried out. These hearings were known as ‘performance hearings’. Other circumstances in which a performance hearing might take place were where the doctor had failed to agree to comply with a statement of requirements or a modified statement of requirements, or where the case co-ordinator was of the opinion that s/he was not benefiting, or was not likely to benefit, from any education or training s/he was undergoing or where the case co-ordinator believed there might be some health problem.
24.95
So far, I have mentioned only the circumstances in which a case might be referred to the CPP by a case co-ordinator. The 1997 Performance Rules also provided for a doctor to refer his/her own case to the CPP. When a performance assessment had been ordered by the ARC, the doctor could request that the standard of his/her professional performance should be considered by the CPP.
24.96
At a performance hearing, the complainant could be represented and could give evidence and address the CPP. However, the complainant was not entitled to hear other evidence given to the CPP. The GMC’s representative was also permitted to call evidence including, usually, evidence from the lead assessor of the Assessment Panel.
24.97
The 1997 Performance Rules stated that, in advance of the hearing, the GMC should provide the doctor with copies of reports, written statements and other documents in the case. The GMC was required to inform the doctor whether or not it intended to call the author of a report, written statement or other document to give oral evidence at the hearing. The doctor then had the opportunity to make further written observations on the case and to indicate to the GMC if s/he wished the author of any of the documents sent to him/her to be called to give evidence. If the doctor wished the author of any relevant documents to be called, arrangements would be made for that person to attend the hearing. The 1997 Performance Rules provided that the lead performance assessor should be treated as the author of the performance assessment report. If s/he was not available to give evidence at the hearing, the case co-ordinator would decide which of the other members of the Assessment Panel should be called to give evidence in the lead assessor’s place. The CPP might itself obtain information in writing or call any person to give oral evidence where it considered this would assist it in carrying out its functions. The doctor might give oral evidence and might call witnesses. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that, in one recent case, the doctor had called 36 witnesses who had been responsible for writing documents relevant to the doctor’s case.
The Decision of the Committee on Professional Performance
24.98
The CPP would then decide whether it found the standard of the doctor’s performance to have been seriously deficient. If the CPP found that there had been no SDP, the case was closed. There was no power to do anything if the doctor’s conduct was found to have been deficient but not, in the view of the CPP, to such an extent as to amount to SDP. Mr Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, acknowledged in evidence that this was unsatisfactory. In
, I will discuss the way in which it is proposed to solve this problem under the new FTP procedures.
24.99
The 1997 Performance Rules provided that the decision of the majority of the CPP who were present constituted a decision of the CPP. If the votes were equal, the decision should be in favour of the doctor. The CPP was not required to give reasons for its decision and did not generally do so when it decided that the doctor’s performance had not been seriously deficient. This failure to give reasons was the subject of criticism and the practice has recently been changed. I shall return to this issue later in this Chapter.
24.100
If, having heard the evidence in the case, the CPP took the view that the doctor had or might have been guilty of SPM (as well as or instead of SDP) and that erasure of his/her registration might, therefore, be appropriate, it had no power to refer the case to the PCC. Miss Smith acknowledged that this was ‘unsatisfactory’. This difficulty will be solved under the new FTP procedures, as erasure will be available in cases with a performance element.
24.101
If the CPP made a finding of SDP, it would then go on to consider the appropriate sanction. The CPP had no power, once a finding of SDP had been made, to take no action. Nor could it issue a reprimand. It had to impose one of two sanctions: suspension or conditional registration.
24.102
Suspension of a doctor’s registration, if imposed, had to be for a specified period not exceeding 12 months. Alternatively, the CPP could impose conditions on the doctor’s registration for a period not exceeding three years. In an appropriate case, the CPP could order that a suspension should take effect immediately. The CPP had no power to direct erasure, but, as I have explained, it had the power, in certain circumstances, to direct indefinite suspension.
Remedial Action after the Decision of the Committee on Professional Performance
24.103
If conditions on registration or suspension were imposed, it was for the doctor to initiate action, with the assistance of the postgraduate dean or postgraduate tutor in general practice, to arrange any necessary re-education or training. No supervision was exercised to ensure either that this was done or that it was done promptly. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that, as at December 2003, no regular report on the doctor’s progress was required by the CPP, as was the case when a doctor was dealt with by means of a voluntary statement of requirements. Miss Smith said that the GMC tended to have more contact with a doctor who was practising under a voluntary statement of requirements than with a doctor who was practising under conditions imposed by the CPP. The role of the case co-ordinator was, she said, limited once a case had been referred to the CPP. Sometimes, a person who was supervising the doctor might contact the GMC unprompted. This was usually when things were not going well. In the majority of cases, however, nothing was heard about the doctor’s progress until the staff asked for information from the supervisor, or from the local postgraduate dean or postgraduate tutor in general practice, in preparation for a resumed hearing before the CPP. Miss Smith agreed that it would have been a better safeguard if, in a case which had been dealt with by the CPP, there had to be quarterly reports. Alternatively, perhaps, a case co-ordinator could have been appointed within the GMC to supervise the remedial arrangements. Bearing in mind that the CPP dealt with the more serious cases and the cases where the doctor was unwilling to co-operate, it seems strange that the supervision should have been less close following an order made by the CPP than in a case where there was a statement of requirements. In my view, this anomaly requires attention.
24.104
The Inquiry received some evidence about the problems that arose when the GMC imposed conditions upon a doctor’s registration and the postgraduate deaneries were expected to provide support and remediation. First, I noted a study
of the process and outcomes of referrals from the GMC and health authorities to deaneries over a period of two years. In summary, it was found that, although the information provided to the deanery by the GMC was usually adequate and timely, the GMC sometimes required action that was not appropriate or feasible. Also, in the majority of cases, the cost of remedial training and education had to be borne by the deanery concerned. Letters received by the Inquiry in early 2004 from two different deaneries tended to confirm that these problems still remained. One acting Regional Director of Postgraduate Education told the Inquiry that, when the GMC imposed conditions on a GP, the GP was left to make his/her arrangements with the deanery. It was felt that the doctor’s PCT should take an active part in making arrangements and should provide the necessary funding. This deanery felt well equipped to undertake educational remediation but was not prepared to engage in remediation connected with problems of health, attitude or personal circumstances. Another postgraduate dean spoke of similar problems. He confirmed that doctors were left to make their own arrangements for remediation. He said that it was difficult to provide the right environment for remediation and to find doctors willing to undertake the work of supervision and mentoring. He mentioned concerns about exposing patients to poorly performing doctors who might have personality and other problems. Remediation had to be undertaken by experienced doctors, who were already busy with their own practices and had to engage locums to cover the time they spent away from their patients. Remediation is necessarily expensive and funding can be a problem, particularly if the doctor is a locum without an established relationship with a PCT prepared to take responsibility. Notwithstanding these difficulties, this deanery had embarked on a programme of recruitment and training of doctors in training practices who would be willing and able to undertake this work. I had the impression, certainly from these respondents, that the spirit of the deaneries was very willing but the resources were scarcer than needed.
24.105
When the CPP suspended or imposed conditions on a doctor’s registration, the 1997 Performance Rules required the CPP to state that it would resume consideration of the case at a hearing (a ‘resumed hearing’) before the end of the period of suspension or conditional registration. The CPP was required to specify what information it would require at the resumed hearing and whether a further assessment should be carried out before the resumed hearing. In practice (and unlike the position where a statement of requirements had been agreed), further assessments were not always required by the CPP. Miss Smith told the Inquiry that it was not unusual for the CPP to direct that some form of assessment should take place but neither was it a particularly frequent occurrence. If a doctor had been suspended, the CPP would expect him/her to have taken steps to remedy the deficiencies in his/her practice before the resumed hearing. The steps the doctor would have been able to take would necessarily be limited by the fact that s/he had not been able to practise during that period. I draw attention to the fact that the CPP was required to hold a resumed hearing before the end of a period of suspension or conditional registration whereas the PCC was not obliged to do so and often did not do so. The Inquiry was told (and has seen an example of one case where it occurred) that, on occasion, a doctor who had previously failed Phase II of the performance assessment (i.e. the tests of knowledge and skills) would be required by the CPP to undergo a Phase II reassessment before being allowed to resume practice.
24.106
The CPP might bring the resumed hearing forward, for example if the doctor was not complying with the conditions imposed on his/her registration. Before the resumed hearing, the 1997 Performance Rules provided for the distribution to the doctor and members of the CPP of any relevant documents which had come into existence since the previous hearing (e.g. a further performance assessment report) and for the doctor to be given the opportunity to request that the author of any relevant document should be called to give evidence at the resumed hearing. The procedure for the hearing was similar to that for the original hearing, save that there was no provision for the complainant to give evidence. At a resumed hearing, the CPP had the power to extend a period of conditional registration for up to three years, to revoke or vary any of the conditions previously imposed or to direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended for up to 12 months. Where the doctor had been suspended at the original hearing, the CPP could extend the period of suspension for up to 12 months or impose a period of conditional registration for up to three years. In a case where the CPP had already directed periods of suspension lasting at least two years, the CPP could make a direction for indefinite suspension. Such a direction might be reviewed at the request of the doctor, but not before two years after the date on which the direction took effect and not more than once every two years thereafter. In this way, the CPP acquired what amounted almost to a power of erasure.
Referral of a Case to the Health Committee
24.107
The CPP had the power to refer a case to the HC. The doctor would be medically examined and the HC, having considered the results of the examination, would form a judgement about whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. If, in the HC’s judgement, there was no serious impairment, it was required to certify its opinion to the CPP. The CPP panel would then resume its consideration of the case and dispose of it. If, on the other hand, the HC’s judgement was that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her condition, the HC was required to certify its opinion to the CPP and then to proceed to dispose of the case. The CPP would then cease to exercise its functions in relation to the case. By referring a case to the HC for its opinion, therefore, the CPP did not necessarily lose its jurisdiction over a case. If no serious impairment of fitness to practise was found, the CPP could proceed to deal with the case. The CPP had no power to refer a case to a health screener to be dealt with by means of the voluntary health procedures. The ARC had a similar power to refer a case to the HC.
Interim Orders
24.108
Until 2000, there was no provision for the making of an interim order of suspension or for the imposition of interim conditions on registration in a performance case. From August 2000, medical screeners, case co-ordinators, the ARC and the CPP had the power to refer a case to the Interim Orders Committee (IOC) if it appeared to any of them that the IOC might wish to make an interim order. At the same time, the CPP was given the power to amend an order made by the IOC.
Appeals
24.109
Appeals from decisions of the CPP were governed by section 40 of the Medical Act 1983. Until April 2003, a doctor who was the subject of a direction for suspension or for conditional registration (or variation of the conditions imposed by a direction for conditional registration) had a right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. After April 2003, appeals lay to the High Court. Until 2003, an appeal lay on a question of law only. In 2003, that restriction was removed.
[2003] 1 WLR 2259.
Southgate L, Campbell M, Cox J, Foulkes J, Jolly B, McCrorie P, Tombleson P (2001) ‘The General Medical Council’s Performance Procedures: the development and implementation of tests of competence with examples from general practice’, Medical Education, Vol 35 (Suppl. 1): pp 20–28.
Bahrami J and Evans A (2002) ‘Underperforming doctors in general practice: a survey of referrals to UK Deaneries’, British Journal of General Practice, pp 892–896.
The Legislative Framework
The Operation of the Performance Procedures


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE - The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures
========================================================================

--- The Future ---
24.200
Notwithstanding the modification to which I have just referred in the final report, the work of the Review Group will be of great potential value to the GMC as it enters the era of its new FTP procedures. One of the points raised in its report and also stressed to the Inquiry by Mr Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, is that many of the doctors who will in future be referred to the GMC on account of poor performance will already have been through some form of local assessment and attempts at remediation. At present, a doctor whose practice gives rise to cause for concern may undergo an assessment either by his/her local NHS body (along the lines of the assessment designed by the NCAA) and/or, possibly, by the NCAA itself. Following that assessment, the doctor may well undertake a programme of remediation, which may entail practising under supervision and/or extensive contact with a postgraduate dean. If those measures fail, the doctor may well be reported to the GMC.
24.201
In the past, when a doctor was reported to the GMC, there had to be a completely new assessment. The local or NCAA assessment was not suitable as a basis for GMC performance procedures. It was not designed to withstand the kind of legal challenge which the GMC assessments had to weather. I do not say that in any sense of criticism. I was impressed by the evidence of Professor Scotland, who explained the NCAA’s holistic approach to performance assessment. The NCAA recognises that the doctor may have health, personal or personality problems, or problems in his/her working environment. An assessment based on NCAA principles has three main elements: occupational health, behaviour and clinical practice. In short, the purpose of the assessment is to find out what is wrong and why, with a view to making things better. It is not designed to enable a decision to be made on objective criteria as to whether the doctor’s performance is seriously deficient; nor would it, in future, provide a basis on which a FTP panel could decide whether the doctor was fit to practise.
24.202
The GMC has recognised that, for a variety of reasons, it is undesirable that a doctor should have to undergo repeated assessments. They are costly, time-consuming and very stressful. Sir Graeme Catto told the Inquiry that the GMC was currently engaged in discussions with the NCAA about the development of a single form of assessment which would suffice for all purposes. I do not know whether this will be feasible. Plainly, a single process would be preferable for many reasons, if it can be so devised as to achieve all its desired ends. I would think that a staged or modular process whereby information is gathered along the way might provide the answer. Both Sir Graeme Catto and Mr Scott said that the modular accumulation of evidence in support of a performance case was under consideration; at the time of the Inquiry’s hearings, discussions were taking place with the NCAA about a common protocol for the collection of evidence and about the standardisation of performance assessments.
24.203
When performance problems first come to light, the primary aim must be to assess and rectify them at local level. I would have thought that all three elements of the NCAA assessment should be an essential feature of any process that seeks to resolve or ameliorate the doctor’s problems. I have the impression that they form a better basis from which to devise remedial measures than the GMC procedures and that the GMC procedures do not lend themselves particularly well to that process. I may be wrong about that; it may be that the difficulties in devising suitable remedial measures have arisen because GMC Assessment Panels and members of CPP panels have not been expert in devising remediation, whereas NCAA advisers and postgraduates deans are. If a NCAA type of assessment might eventually form part of the evidence on which the GMC will wish to rely, it will have to be undertaken to a high standard and according to agreed protocols. It should incorporate some of the methodology of Dame Lesley Southgate’s work. Assuming that such an assessment protocol could be devised, I do not think that local NHS bodies can be expected to carry out the assessment without support and advice. I am convinced of the need for the NCAA (or a body very like it) to provide such advice and support. I would think also that some expert assistance would be needed in evaluating the results and in devising appropriate remediation. Remediation must involve the postgraduate deaneries, in liaison with the local NHS body. The deaneries have expertise in this area which a local NHS body will not have. Also, the deaneries should be encouraged to set up courses and to provide placements within practices where the necessary expertise is available for supervision and mentoring. The local NHS body should be responsible for funding the remediation and the overall supervision of the doctor’s progress, to be effected through close attention to clinical governance measures. It may need to use its list management powers if the doctor is unwilling to co-operate or makes no progress with his/her remediation.
24.204
If all goes well and the doctor improves, the GMC need never become involved. But, if the remedial measures fail or if they are ‘deemed to fail’ because the doctor does not co-operate, then the GMC must take over and must decide whether the doctor is fit to practise. By this time, there should be a dossier of evidence on the doctor, comprising the initial assessments and reports from those involved in the doctor’s remediation and supervision. Provided these records and reports are of a sufficiently high standard, I do not see why they should not form part of the evidence on which the GMC relies. However, I do not think they would be enough. I think that, at this stage, there would be a need for some objective testing of the doctor that would, of itself, withstand legal challenge. I would have thought that the existing Phase II tests would have a part to play. Whether there would have to be something more, I could not say. It seems to me that what is wanted at this stage is material that is as objective as possible. I would have thought that, if a doctor were to fail those objective tests, which might be set, for a GP, at the level of summative assessment, it would be appropriate to suspend the doctor forthwith unless and until s/he had passed those tests to a satisfactory level. If there were other concerns, as there might well be, the case would have to proceed to a FTP panel, where the GMC would have to present a mixture of factual and opinion evidence so as to provide a sufficiently clear picture of the doctor to allow an objective judgement to be made.
24.205
Dame Lesley told the Inquiry that she understood that the GMC would like to divest itself of responsibility for carrying out performance assessments. Under the modular or cumulative approach I have described, the GMC would not, in any event, be involved with the early assessments carried out by local NHS bodies. It might have to do assessments of doctors working in the private sector for whom there would be no other mechanism. It would seem to me to be sensible for the GMC to retain control over the final stage. If it does not, it would at least have to set the standards to be applied at that stage and to ensure that the procedures were quality assured. Whoever is to carry out assessments, it seems to me that there is an urgent need for a process which is very largely objective and which cannot be affected by allegations of bias or an attack on the procedures adopted by the assessment team. I would have thought that for a GP at least, summative assessment would provide a balanced examination and a standard that any GP might be expected to achieve.
24.206
Another problem which the GMC must face is that of decision-making by panels. It must decide on the standards to be applied generally when performance issues are raised. In the past, the standards to be applied were incorporated in the assessment itself. The assessment included an opinion as to whether the doctor’s performance was ‘seriously deficient’. This made the CPP’s task relatively straightforward. Sir Donald Irvine, who sat on some of the earliest performance cases, said that:
‘It was a matter of hearing the evidence, of asking questions about the assessment . . . but not of actually trying to “second guess” the assessment.’
Then, he said, the process became complicated, partly because of the
Krippendorf
case. A line of questioning developed where there was a tendency for the CPP to try to run a second assessment. It seemed that it became possible for the CPP panel to apply a lower threshold than the assessors themselves which, Sir Donald said, ‘could not be right’. Dame Lesley Southgate spoke of her concern (and I sensed her frustration) at the way in which the results of assessments based upon the instruments devised by her team, which she likened to a pointillist picture, were ‘picked at’ by the lawyers with the result that the CPP could lose sight of the main picture and find the doctor’s performance to be acceptable when, in her view, the assessment had clearly and objectively shown that it was not. The loss of a few ‘points’ from the assessment should not have this effect. However, if a major criticism in the assessment is shown to be unjustified, the panel might conclude that what remains is insufficient for an adverse finding. What the panel must not do is to apply different standards from those applied in the assessment.
24.207
In future, when the issue for the FTP panel is not whether SDP has been proved but whether
‘fitness to practise is impaired to such a degree as to justify action on registration’
, FTP panels are going to be completely at sea unless a proper structure is provided for them. SDP was not a simple or wholly objective concept, although the use of the assessment instrument provided useful criteria. Moreover, the assessors received training, although it must be admitted that they did not always carry out the assessment as they should have done. If the present assessment instrument is no longer to be used, those criteria and the expertise of the assessors will be lost. Even assuming that a standardised format for local assessment could be introduced, it cannot contain judgements that the GMC could rely on; the FTP panel would have to use it only as a source of evidence. Members of the FTP panel will have to make their own judgements. If those judgements are to be fair, consistent and reliable, they will have to be guided by clear standards and criteria. The problem for the FTP panel may also be complicated by the inclusion of health and conduct issues. If standards and criteria are not provided, there will be unfairness to doctors and a potential failure to protect patients.
24.208
Mr Scott spoke at the Inquiry about the GMC’s future attitude to attempts at remediation. He said that the
‘short message’
from the GMC was now that
‘remediation is still very important, but not for us’
. As I understood it, he was saying that the days were over when the GMC would impose conditions involving remediation as a form of support for the doctor or as a ‘carrot’ to encourage improvement. In future, that stage should be completed locally before the case reaches the GMC. The GMC should be using its power to suspend or impose conditions on a doctor more as a ‘stick’ to force the doctor to reform or else be struck off. That would represent a considerable change on the part of the GMC from the philosophy which has guided it in the past. Sir Donald told the Inquiry that, in the early days, the performance procedures were ‘doctor-centred’. Indeed, he had seen the CPP ‘bending over backwards to save the doctor’. There was great emphasis on remediation. He did not object to that but thought that too great an emphasis on remediation could ‘distort the decision about public protection’. Mr Scott’s view was plainly influenced by the contents of the Performance Procedures Review Group’s draft report. In view of the apparent change of view evident in the final report, it is not certain whether the GMC’s attitude to remediation will change in the future.
24.209
In my view, the change of philosophy suggested in the Review Group’s draft report was attractive. It should not be the function of a regulator to provide help and support; that is an important function but it should be for others. The function of a regulator should be to decide who is fit to be on the register and who is not. However, it may not be easy for the GMC to avoid involvement in remediation. Local procedures will not produce a ‘perfect’ set of results. Not every case referred to the GMC will warrant either suspension or erasure. Indeed, if it did, it would almost certainly mean that not enough cases were being referred to the GMC. Moreover, if local provision for support and remediation remains patchy, there will be some cases where the GMC will feel obliged to give a further opportunity for change. However, that said, it does seem to me that the change in philosophy is sensible and it is to be hoped that it will be possible to put it into effect.
24.210
At present, it is not entirely clear how cases of deficient performance will be handled when the new procedures come into force. It is apparent that the GMC has developments in mind besides the procedural changes which are about to occur. In my view, if the GMC is to continue to impose conditions aimed at remediation on the registration of a doctor whose performance has been found to be deficient to a serious degree, it must tackle the shortcomings to which I have referred in my discussion of the five case files. In particular, it must accept responsibility not for arranging the remediation itself but for ensuring that progress is being made and that the doctor is not just waiting ‘in limbo’ for something to happen. It must also, in my view, ensure that an adequate assessment of the doctor’s performance is made before conditions are lifted and the doctor is permitted to practise unrestricted.
The Performance Procedures Review Group
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE - The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR - The General Medical Council's Performance Procedures
========================================================================

--- Introduction ---
24.1
In July 1997, the General Medical Council (GMC) introduced its performance procedures, which enabled it to take disciplinary action in respect of doctors whose professional performance was seriously deficient. In this Chapter, I propose to examine the origin of these procedures, the way in which they were brought into operation and the way in which they worked until recently. I shall consider a number of problems which arose in their operation. Finally, I shall consider a few cases which the Inquiry has examined. As I shall explain, these procedures were not brought into effect until just over a year before Shipman was arrested and, in effect, ceased practice. None of the reports that the GMC received about Shipman would have been likely to result in a referral into the performance procedures, even if they had existed at the time. The procedures are, however, relevant to the Inquiry’s remit for two reasons. First, they formed an important part of the GMC’s armoury in protecting patients against doctors who might cause them harm. Second, the new fitness to practise (FTP) procedures will underpin the GMC’s revalidation of doctors. The way in which issues of poor performance are handled within the new FTP procedures is plainly important in that context, and the only guide currently available as to how performance issues will be handled in future is how they have been handled in the past.
24.2
In the 1980s, there was increasing concern about the competence of some doctors and about the inability (or, as some saw it, the unwillingness) of the GMC to deal with issues of competence by means of its conduct procedures. Outside the GMC, the case of Alfie Winn (see
) in 1982 had resulted in attempts by Mr Nigel Spearing MP to introduce a Private Member’s Bill establishing an offence of ‘professional misconduct’, with a threshold lower than that for serious professional misconduct (SPM). The GMC was successful in opposing those attempts and the Bill failed. However, even within the GMC, some members who sat on the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) were becoming increasingly concerned about cases where, although SPM was not proved, there was nevertheless evidence of poor practice. The GMC was powerless to act in such a case.
24.3
Although Mr Spearing’s Bill failed, his attempts led directly to the establishment, in 1987, of a GMC working party, which was charged with the task of considering the need for competence procedures, as an adjunct to the existing conduct and health procedures of the GMC. The working party reported in 1989. It recommended that the GMC should give consideration to the establishment of competence procedures and that proposals for such procedures should be formulated as a basis for discussion with the profession and with other bodies. A year later, a decision was taken to establish a further working party to
‘consider arrangements for the identification and handling of serious deficiency in a doctor’s professional performance and to make recommendations’
24.4
Sir Donald Irvine, who was a member of the GMC in 1979 and its President from 1995 to 2002, described in his book, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’
, the unwillingness on the part of some within the GMC to tackle the problems of incompetence and poor performance. He spoke of the pressure being put on the GMC by the Government of the time to
‘grip the question of the incompetent doctor and grip it soon’
. If the GMC did not do so, it was told, the Government itself would act through Parliament. Sir Donald concluded this part of the history:
‘... the received wisdom today is that the GMC’s decision to go with what was to become the performance procedures in the 1990s was as a result of strongly pro-active action. It was not. Such action had to be dragged out of the Council, as many of the medical members glanced over their shoulders, perhaps quite understandably, at what their colleagues might say in other places, such as the craft committees of the BMA
British Medical Association
24.5
In May 1992, the working party, which had been set up two years before under the Chairmanship of the President of the GMC, Sir Robert (later Lord) Kilpatrick, reported. It recommended the establishment of performance procedures modelled on the relatively new health procedures. The performance procedures were designed to deal with cases where a doctor’s behaviour or actions seemed to suggest a pattern of seriously deficient performance (SDP) that could not be dealt with effectively under the existing conduct and health procedures. A novel element in the performance procedures was to be the performance assessment, which would be designed to identify gaps in a doctor’s knowledge and skills and to assess whether these were capable of remediation. At that time, it was envisaged that most doctors entering the performance procedures would be dealt with by means of voluntary procedures (as in the health procedures) and would eventually return to unrestricted practice after a period of remedial action. In the event that a doctor failed to co-operate, or that his/her performance failed to improve after remedial action, a FTP committee of the GMC (subsequently titled the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP)) would be able - as a last resort - to suspend or impose conditions on the doctor’s registration.
24.6
The proposals of the working party, which were adopted by the GMC, met with considerable opposition within the profession. There was anxiety about the prospect of testing doctors’ clinical knowledge or skills. There was a suggestion from those representing hospital doctors that the performance procedures should not apply to them, since any problems with performance could be dealt with by their employers, in conjunction with the BMA or the relevant medical Royal College. Eventually, however, there was a general acceptance within the profession that the performance procedures were necessary and must apply to all doctors.
24.7
Primary legislation was required for the establishment of the procedures. The necessary Parliamentary time was found in December 1995 and the Medical (Professional Performance) Act 1995 (the 1995 Act) was passed, making the necessary amendments to the Medical Act 1983. In the meantime, work had begun on developing the instruments to be used in the performance assessments. Following the passage of the 1995 Act, a further 18 months passed before the performance procedures eventually came into operation on 1st
July 1997.
24.8
Sir Donald told the Inquiry that he had believed that the performance procedures would close a ‘gaping hole’ in the GMC’s procedures, a hole which he had observed ‘time and time again’ when sitting on the PCC. He said:
‘... you would find that facts could not be proved, or you could not arrive at a decision about serious professional misconduct, but you knew perfectly well from what you had seen in the evidence, the records you may have looked at and so on ... that the doctor just should not be practising’
He said that, as a general practitioner (GP), he knew about the ‘sizeable volume’ of people who either should ‘have some attention given’ to their practice or should not be practising at all. He had seen the introduction of the procedures as a way of strengthening local processes and procedures. He had had ‘high expectations’ of them.
The Distinction between ‘Performance’ and ‘Competence’
24.9
I have described how, in the first instance, the suggestion was that the GMC should establish ‘competence procedures’. Within a short time, however, the emphasis had changed from ‘competence’ to ‘professional performance’ and the procedures, when eventually they came into effect, were concerned with performance, rather than competence.
24.10
‘Competence’ describes knowledge and skills, i.e. what the doctor ‘can do’. ‘Performance’ describes what the doctor does within actual practice, i.e. what s/he ‘does do’. A doctor who does not possess the requisite knowledge and skills can never perform well. However, a doctor may be competent (i.e. s/he may possess the requisite knowledge and skills) but, nevertheless, his/her attitude and behaviour may be such that his/her performance is - at least on occasion - deficient. Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, explained at an Inquiry seminar that, sometimes, doctors who ‘can do’ have a problem about whether they ‘will do’. She said that problems of attitude, which sometimes stem from an arrogant personality, can be very difficult to cure. The performance procedures were designed to deal with these wider problems, as well as with incompetence.
24.11
The change of focus from competence to performance had implications for the collection of the evidence necessary to prove SDP. A doctor’s competence can be assessed by testing his/her current knowledge and by observing his/her current clinical skills. If the doctor is still in practice, his/her current performance can be assessed by observing him/her consulting with or treating patients and by reviewing and discussing medical records in current cases. However, if a doctor is for some reason no longer practising (for example, if s/he has been suspended) or if s/he is working in a specialty different from that in which s/he was working at the time of the original complaint against him/her, the only available measure of his/her ‘performance’ is not what s/he ‘does’ but what s/he ‘has done’.
Local Mechanisms for Dealing with Poor Performance
24.12
At the time when the GMC’s performance procedures came into operation, local NHS bodies - in particular, primary care organisations (PCOs) - had very limited mechanisms for dealing with poor performance. If a PCO had concerns about a GP’s performance, it might seek the co-operation of the local medical committee (LMC) in invoking the informal ‘Three Wise Men’ procedure and try to resolve the problem in that way. If a patient complained about a ‘performance’ issue, that might be the subject of an independent review panel (IRP) hearing. If a PCO believed that a GP had breached his/her terms of service, there was the possibility of disciplinary action although, after 1996, such action became very rare. In any event, both IRP hearings and disciplinary proceedings were primarily designed to deal with single incidents giving rise to complaints, rather than with repeated incidents which might suggest a pattern of poor performance.
24.13
Following the introduction of the GMC’s performance procedures, NHS organisations were encouraged, by the Department of Health, to set up their own procedures for dealing with poorly performing doctors. One reason for this was that the GMC’s procedures were designed to deal only with doctors whose performance was ‘seriously’ deficient. It was recognised from the first that there would be doctors performing at an unacceptable standard who would not reach the GMC threshold, but in respect of whom it was necessary to take some action to protect patients. In
, I described the local procedures that have been developed by PCOs since 1998. The process of development is continuing.
24.14
In order to assist NHS organisations to deal with problems of poor performance, in April 2001, the National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA) was established. It provides a support and advice service, and also carries out performance assessments in a limited number of cases where these are deemed necessary. These assessments are aimed at establishing whether a doctor is fit to work in the setting in which s/he is currently working. The assessment may result in a recommendation that the doctor should work in a different setting. It may recommend some form of remedial action. The NCAA is not a regulatory body and cannot itself take disciplinary action or impose sanctions. However, it can refer a doctor to the GMC, if, for example, serious concerns arise during an assessment, particularly if they affect patient safety. It may also advise the doctor’s employer or PCO as to whether a referral by them to the GMC is appropriate.
The Development of the Instruments for Performance Assessment by the General Medical Council
24.15
When the GMC decided that it wished to introduce performance procedures, it was recognised that it would be necessary to devise some form of objective assessment of a doctor’s performance. Such assessment would have to be fair and decisions based upon it would have to stand up to legal challenge. In 1994, the then President of the GMC (Lord Kilpatrick) invited Dame Lesley Southgate, who was then Chief Examiner of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP), to lead a group which would be responsible for the development of a method and a set of instruments for the assessment of performance. No such methods or instruments had at that time been developed in any other part of the world. Dame Lesley assembled a team, drawn mainly from the medical Royal Colleges, and, over a period of three years, produced the method and instruments which were to form the basis of the GMC performance procedures. When published later, this work gained worldwide recognition. The method and instruments of assessment have been described as ‘state of the art’ and ‘the leading edge of direct assessment of performance’. They provide for a very thorough assessment and are, as an almost inevitable consequence, expensive to undertake.
24.16
As I shall later explain in greater detail, the assessment of performance falls into two phases. Phase I comprises a review of the doctor’s performance at his/her place of work undertaken by a team of assessors. If, at the end of Phase I, the team is not satisfied with the doctor’s performance, the doctor will undergo Phase II, which comprises a series of objective tests.
24.17
The Inquiry heard oral evidence about the performance procedures from Mr Alan Howes (Head of the Performance Section from 1995 until April 2001), Mr Neil Marshall (Head of the Performance Section from April 2001 until March 2002) and Miss Jackie Smith (a casework manager in the Performance Section from November 2001 until April 2002 and thereafter Head of the Performance Section). Sir Donald Irvine (President of the GMC at the time of the introduction of the performance procedures), Professor Sir Graeme Catto (the current President), Mr Finlay Scott (Chief Executive of the GMC since 1994) and Dr Krishna Korlipara (a member of the GMC and a medical screener since 1998) also gave relevant evidence. Professor David Hatch, Chairman of the CPP, provided a witness statement.
Irvine, Donald (2003) ‘The Doctors’ Tale’. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical Press.
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR - The General Medical Council's Performance Procedures


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE - The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures
========================================================================

--- The Adjudication Stage ---
25.267
I shall now consider the processes undertaken at the adjudication stage. I shall begin by examining the composition of the FTP panels which will hear allegations that have been referred to the adjudication stage.
Fitness to Practise Panels
The Composition of the Panel
25.268
As I have already said, GMC members will not be eligible to sit on FTP panels. However, the panels will work within an organisational and policy framework established and supported by the GMC. Panels will be composed of associates, some medically qualified and some not. They will be appointed, selected and trained by the GMC, which will also manage, monitor and appraise their performance. Continued service as a member of a FTP panel will depend on performance being satisfactory.
25.269
Panels will be chaired by panellists who have undergone assessment and have been appointed to act as chairmen. Chairmen may be medical or lay. At the Inquiry seminars, there was some discussion about the wisdom of having a legally qualified chairman. I discussed this issue in
and also drew attention to the recommendation of Miss Jean Ritchie QC in her report into the conduct of Rodney Ledward. She expressed the view that the chairmen of PCC panels should be legally qualified. Plainly, FTP panels need legal advice and expertise. In the past, this has been provided by a legal assessor and, in the immediate future at least, it is intended that this should remain the case. Some legal assessors are no doubt very good. I have also seen transcripts of advice given by legal assessors that has been unclear or even frankly wrong. Even if the legal assessor is completely competent, there are limitations on the role s/he can play. He or she cannot direct the course of the FTP panel’s deliberations so as to ensure that matters are considered in a logical order and that only evidence relevant to the issue under consideration is taken into account. It is difficult to teach these skills to a non-legal chairman who may sit on a GMC panel only a few times in a year. Also, as I observed in
, the GMC has to teach its chairmen how to conduct a hearing and what to say at each stage of the proceedings. Such matters would be second nature to a legally qualified person.
25.270
In November 2001, the Council agreed (by 36 votes to 35) that, under the new procedures, FTP panels hearing conduct cases which met appropriate criteria should have a legally qualified chairman. It was envisaged that a legally qualified chairman would be appointed in long or complex cases, in cases involving many difficult legal or procedural issues and in certain high profile or particularly controversial cases. A decision as to whether a legal chairman should be appointed would be taken at the case management stage. Internal GMC documents show that the November 2001 decision was still extant a year later. In May 2003, Council agreed that, if a legally qualified chairman was appointed to chair a hearing of a conduct case, a legal assessor should also be appointed. Since May 2003, it appears that the intention to use legally qualified chairmen has been abandoned. Sir Graeme Catto told the Inquiry that the GMC had discussed the idea of using legal chairmen in the recent past and had decided to ‘leave that option open’. He said that some associates eligible to sit on PCC panels were legally qualified; he did not know whether any of them have ever chaired a panel.
25.271
My view on this issue is that, if the GMC retains control of the adjudication stage, it should enrol some legally qualified chairmen and should try them out, starting with the more complex cases. If they are found to be a success, the practice could be extended. It seems to me that the new procedures are bound to throw up new legal points. Some of them might well be complex. The presence of a legally qualified chairman might help to ensure that decisions on such points were right, from the start. If the idea were taken up of having a corps of panellists who would sit on cases from all the healthcare regulatory bodies, it would be possible to have full-time legally qualified chairmen.
25.272
In addition to a legal assessor, FTP panels may, in a case involving a health or performance element, receive advice from one or more specialist health advisers or specialist performance advisers selected by the Registrar from a panel maintained for the purpose. A legal quorum for the FTP panel will be three, including at least one lay and one medical panellist. GMC staff will act as secretaries and clerks to the FTP panels. The September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists suggests that a doctor will be able to apply for a specialist adviser to be appointed in a case including allegations of misconduct. I think this must be intended to provide panellists with advice about the practice and standards to be expected within a particular medical specialty.
Notice of Referral to a Fitness to Practise Panel
25.273
Following a decision to refer a doctor to a FTP panel, s/he will be sent a notice of referral containing certain specified information. The November 2004 Rules provide that the allegation(s) and the facts on which it/they are based must be particularised. The 2003 draft Rules had merely required them to be summarised. It is a fundamental rule of natural justice that a person facing any form of disciplinary process must have adequate notice of the charges s/he is to face. If a doctor is facing a specific allegation of misconduct, it is vital that s/he is told exactly what is alleged. However, it does appear to me that, in some types of case (for example, one that depends to a large extent upon a performance or health assessment), it would be sufficient if the doctor were to be told (adopting the words of the adjudication stage test proposed by the GMC) that it was alleged that his/her fitness to practise was impaired (to a degree justifying action on registration) by reason of the matters contained in the assessment report. Even in conduct cases, I doubt that the degree of particularity that appears to have been given in the past is necessary for the giving of proper notice to the doctor. Reading some PCC decisions, it appears that the proceedings have been broken down into the consideration of every single element which must be proved in order to support the allegation of SPM. I do wonder whether this is really necessary; it fosters the impression that these are criminal proceedings, whereas they are not.
25.274
The Guidance accompanying the July 2004 draft Rules stated (and the passage appears also in the Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules):
‘Where appropriate, the GMC will also notify the practitioner of the outcome it will be seeking at the relevant hearing.’
25.275
This process is not provided for in the Rules. The thinking is that it will be helpful and fair to doctors. In effect it lets them know the worst that could happen to them. I can see that an indication that the GMC is not seeking erasure or suspension might encourage a doctor to make admissions, secure in the knowledge that the worst that can happen is the imposition of conditions or restrictions. He or she might even be able to negotiate a set of conditions which could be entered into voluntarily. However, it does seem to me that there are real disadvantages in such a practice. In the first place, once the GMC has pitched its desired outcome at a certain level - say, the imposition of conditions - it will be extremely difficult for a FTP panel to impose a more serious sanction. The effect will be to tie the panel’s hands. Second, an early indication of the desired outcome is likely to colour preparations for the hearing by both the doctor and the GMC. If the FTP panel were determined to take a different view, there would be the potential for unfairness to the doctor. Third, I remind the reader that, when the GMC was thinking about the form of its new procedures, it wished to create some real separation between the adjudication and investigation functions. It chose to keep the investigation function in-house and the FTP panels were supposed to have some real independence. In fact, they have precious little. Panellists are to be selected, appointed, trained, issued with guidance, appraised and possibly dismissed by the GMC. If, in addition, the GMC seeks effectively to impose an upper limit on the sanction available in an individual case, the independence of FTP panels will be further reduced.
25.276
Moreover, it appears that the present proposals may go beyond the giving of an indication as to what sanction the GMC will seek.
‘Outcome’
could include the giving of undertakings which might be accepted without any findings of fact or decision about impairment of fitness to practise. I have already expressed my views about the need, in the public interest, for clarity in the resolution of cases involving misconduct, convictions and determinations.
25.277
I think that the GMC should think again about this whole idea. I do not think that any indication of the GMC’s preferred outcome should be given in advance of the hearing. It would create an expectation on the part of the doctor which, if not fulfilled, would be unfair to him/her and which, if fulfilled, may not provide adequate protection for patients. Moreover, it may be that, if the case is contested, it becomes more serious as the evidence unfolds. If the GMC is to put forward its views on the appropriate outcome, this should, in my view, be done, as it has been done in the recent past, at the hearing before the FTP panel. If this course is followed, it should be made clear to all that the GMC is only making a submission and that the FTP panel is under no obligation to heed it.
25.278
The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules is silent on the question of who at the GMC is to decide what outcome the GMC will be seeking in any individual case (although the Registrar is given responsibility for serving the notice of referral). I do not know who it is intended should decide where the desired outcome is to be pitched. I am not aware of any provision in the Rules relating to the old or the new procedures that entitles any particular person or panel or committee to make such decisions. If a decision of this importance is to be made, the person or body making it should be formally authorised to do so on the GMC’s behalf and proper criteria for such decisions should be agreed and published.
25.279
The September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists gives no advice about how FTP panellists should approach cases where the GMC has given an indication of the desired outcome. Indeed, it does not mention the fact that such an indication might be given. These are important matters on which guidance should surely be given.
Evidence Gathering
25.280
The November 2004 Rules do not appear to contain any specific provision for further investigation of a case after referral to a FTP panel. The Guidance which accompanies the November 2004 Rules says that, before sending out a notice of referral, the Registrar will undertake such further investigations (including instructing solicitors to procure witness statements and other documentary evidence) as are necessary for the satisfactory presentation of the GMC’s case at the hearing. In my view, there should be enshrined in the Rules a specific power to investigate further. This should empower the GMC to require the production of any evidence, documentary or otherwise, in the event that anyone might seek to impede such investigations.
Case Management
25.281
In the past, considerable problems arose with the arrangements for hearings before PCC panels. There was no formal mechanism for case management. As a consequence, there were no proper arrangements for disclosure of evidence and no reliable means of ascertaining the likely length of cases or of scheduling them at times when the parties and witnesses were available. This led to the frequent adjournment of cases, with consequent inconvenience, delay, expense and, no doubt, distress both to witnesses and to the doctors concerned. In the recent past, some informal management of cases referred to a PCC panel was undertaken. However, participation was entirely voluntary. A very welcome aspect of the new procedures is the introduction of a formal system of case management with pre-hearing case management reviews.
25.282
The case management provisions apply to initial referrals to a FTP panel and also to subsequent hearings to review a case (where a doctor’s registration has been suspended or made subject to conditions) and to applications for restoration of a doctor’s registration. The case management reviews will be conducted by a legally qualified Case Manager. The November 2004 Rules provide that the Case Manager should act independently of the parties. He or she is to be a quasi-judicial figure, who will be contracted part-time by the GMC to deal with case management reviews. Case management reviews will usually take place by telephone conference. The Case Manager will give directions to secure the
‘just, expeditious and effective’
running of the hearing before the FTP panel.
25.283
The November 2004 Rules set out detailed provisions for one or more case management reviews in advance of a FTP panel hearing. The provisions (which have been extensively revised since they first appeared in the 2003 draft Rules) cover such matters as the disclosure of documents, exchange of witness statements, exchange of expert evidence, and exchange of skeleton arguments. They also cover the provision of time estimates and suggested dates for hearings. They provide for the parties to state whether the health of the doctor is to be raised as an issue and for the doctor to give prior notification of the extent to which facts and evidence are admitted. There is provision for the Case Manager to direct the parties to provide a statement of agreed facts in a case where an allegation is admitted. In short, the case management provisions should enable the parties and members of the FTP panel to prepare properly for hearings, should avoid the unnecessary attendance of witnesses and should reduce to a minimum the frequent adjournments which were in the past made necessary by the late disclosure of important evidence.
25.284
The November 2004 Rules also provide for certain ‘automatic’ directions to take effect in the absence of any direction by a Case Manager or of agreement by the parties to the contrary. These are applicable to hearings by both FTP and IC panels. These directions require each party not less than 28 days before the date of the hearing to provide to the other party a list of every document which s/he proposes to introduce as evidence, together with a copy of every document which the other party has not previously received. They also require each party to notify the other, within 14 days of receiving the list, whether or not s/he requires any person to attend to give oral evidence in relation to the subject matter or making of any document. Even where one party notifies the other that s/he requires a person to attend, the IC or FTP panel has discretion to dispense with the need for oral evidence in certain circumstances.
25.285
The November 2004 Rules provide that a FTP panel may draw such inferences as it considers appropriate in respect of the failure by a party to comply with directions issued by the Case Manager. There had been concern that the case management provisions would have no ‘teeth’, since there was no sanction available if directions were not complied with. It was suggested that the risk that adverse inferences might be drawn from the result of non-compliance should be a deterrent. It was also suggested that a party who failed to comply might be penalised in costs. However, it appears that the idea of imposing a penalty on costs has not been adopted; instead, the drawing of adverse inferences is to be allowed. The Guidance which accompanies the November 2004 Rules states that failure to comply with the directions of the Case Manager might lead, not only to the drawing of adverse inferences, but also to evidence not being admitted at the FTP panel hearing. That provision is not in the Rules, although I suppose it might be said that an IC or FTP panel has a discretion to refuse to admit any evidence for good reason. I am rather concerned about the provision that an adverse inference may be drawn against a party who has failed to comply with a case management order. I would have thought that it would be proper to do that only in a most exceptional case, where a flagrant refusal to comply is consistent only with the desire to conceal a particular piece of evidence. In general, I would have thought it dangerous to draw adverse inferences from what may be no more than a failure to comply due to incompetence and disorganisation. One must not lose sight of the objective of the proceedings, which is to arrive at the truth. I think that a penalty in costs would usually be more appropriate. That can sometimes teach an incompetent solicitor to do better in future. If such a penalty were available against a doctor, it would have also to be available against the GMC.
25.286
Taken as a whole, I regard these new case management provisions as a very good idea. However, their effectiveness will be directly related to the amount of effort that is put into them by the Case Managers. In the course of my work as a judge, I have seen many case management orders which simply follow a standard form and are not adequately tailored to the specific circumstances of the case. That is a danger where automatic directions are allowed to operate or where the parties are allowed to agree an order. Good case management requires that the judge (or Case Manager) has the time and inclination to read the papers thoroughly, to get a clear grasp of the issues, to ask a lot of questions about the way in which the case is to be presented and to make orders that will ensure that the parties are ready with their evidence and that no one is taken by surprise. I hope that these provisions will have the desired effect. The work of Case Managers should be audited to ascertain the extent to which they achieve their objective of avoiding adjournments, disrupted hearings and the unnecessary attendance of witnesses.
25.287
The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules suggests that case management reviews may not be necessary for cases which rely to a large extent on health or performance assessments. I recognise that the GMC has a good deal of experience of such cases. However, I must say that the impression I have, from reading the transcripts of one or two performance cases, is that a case management review would have been most helpful. Miss Jackie Smith, Head of the Performance Section, told the Inquiry about one performance case in which the doctor had called 36 witnesses. I would have thought that robust case management might have helped to avoid such a situation.
The Hearing: the Parties
25.288
The November 2004 Rules state that the ‘parties’ to a hearing before a FTP panel are the GMC and the doctor, or their respective representatives. Under the new procedures, it will no longer be open to the maker of an allegation to present the ‘prosecution case’. Doctors are expected to attend hearings. They are entitled to be represented by counsel or a solicitor, or by a representative of their professional organisation, or, in certain circumstances, by a member of their family or another person. The GMC will be represented by the Presenting Officer. If the doctor does not appear, the FTP panel may, in certain circumstances, proceed to hear the case in his/her absence.
The Hearing: Public or Private
The 2003 Proposals
25.289
The 2003 draft Rules provided that, except where considering a health allegation (and in certain other special circumstances), a FTP panel must sit in public. The Guidance which accompanied the 2003 draft Rules, however, stated that, where a FTP panel was considering an allegation of adverse health or of deficient performance, the presumption was that the case should be heard in private. The proposals at that stage, therefore, created uncertainty as to whether it was intended that a case involving an allegation of deficient performance should be heard in public or in private. This topic had been the subject of debate within the GMC for some time.
The 2004 Position
25.290
The November 2004 Rules provide that hearings before a FTP panel should in general take place in public. They provide that a hearing before a FTP panel should be in private when the panel is considering a doctor’s physical or mental health. They also provide that it should be open to a FTP panel, in certain circumstances, to hold a public hearing in a health case. Such public hearings are likely to be unusual.
25.291
A FTP panel may, of course, engage in private deliberations (i.e. discussions about the decisions it has to make or about other issues relevant to a case) at any stage of a hearing.
The Hearing: Standard of Proof
25.292
The November 2004 Rules are silent on the standard of proof to be applied by FTP panels. The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states:
‘Where it is making a finding on disputed facts, the panel must be sure of its decision.
That means that the criminal standard of proof is applied to findings of fact
The issue of whether the practitioner’s fitness to practise is impaired, and the imposition of a sanction, or warning, are matters of professional judgment.’
25.293
The Guidance goes on to deal with decisions relating to sanction:
‘The panel must be sure that any proposed action (whether to close a case with or without a warning, or to impose a sanction on the doctor’s registration) is sufficient to protect patients and the public interest, failing which it must consider taking action against the practitioner’s registration or imposing a more severe sanction, as appropriate.’
25.294
Both IC and FTP panels may, where it would be just to do so, consider and determine together two or more allegations against the same doctor within the same category or the separate categories of impairment listed in section 35C(2)(a)-(e). They may also consider and determine together allegations against two or more doctors. The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states:
‘Hearings will, therefore, be holistic, in that allegations will be brought forward based on the totality of the evidence obtained during the investigation stage (including, where appropriate, health and performance assessment reports) and may comprise a combination of allegations relating to a doctor’s health, performance or conduct, or based on a caution, conviction or determination.’
25.295
In a recent letter to the Inquiry, the GMC observed that it would not be possible to approach the issue of standard of proof, as in the past, on the basis that it was determined by the category of case being heard. The letter stated:
‘... the GMC appreciates that there are practical issues to be resolved and is therefore in discussion regarding its approach to the standard of proof and the way in which hearings will operate in this respect.’
25.296
Mr Scott told the Inquiry that hearings would not be labelled ‘health’, ‘conduct’, ‘performance’, ‘conviction’ or ‘determination’. Instead, hearings will deal with allegations of various kinds, side by side. There will not be different processes according to the nature of the allegation made. Mr Scott gave the example of a performance case where a complaint had been made about a specific incident or incidents. He said that, if evidence could be adduced to support the complaint, then the subject matter of the complaint could be asserted as a fact and the criminal standard of proof would apply to the making of a decision as to the truth or otherwise of that fact. If, however, the evidence to support the complaint was not available, the subject matter of the complaint could be used merely as a ‘trigger’ to carry out a performance assessment and would not feature in the list of charges. The relevant evidence before the FTP panel would then be the assessment report and the criminal standard of proof would not apply.
25.297
The issue of what standard of proof should be applied in GMC proceedings is a thorny problem. The GMC has always maintained that, out of fairness to the doctor, the criminal standard of proof must be applied to findings of fact in conduct cases. In
, I observed that it seems something of a paradox that the GMC should insist on the criminal standard of proof and yet allow findings of fact to be made on a bare majority decision. I suggested that the civil standard was more appropriate in proceedings which had the protection of patients and the public interest as their primary objectives. In the case of
, the Court observed that the appropriate standard of proof in a performance case was the civil standard. Under the new procedures, a FTP panel may have to decide issues of conduct, performance and possibly health during the same hearing. It would be quite a tall order for them to direct themselves properly as to the different standards of proof, especially without the guidance of a legally qualified chairman. In my view, the appropriate standard of proof within a protective jurisdiction is the civil standard. In proceedings affecting the welfare and safety of children, the civil standard of proof is applied, notwithstanding the facts that the allegation considered might also amount to a criminal offence and the consequence of an adverse finding might well be the loss of contact with a child. I shall recommend that the GMC adopts the civil standard of proof for all cases, except, perhaps, those allegations of misconduct which also amount to a serious criminal offence, for which cases the criminal standard of proof would arguably be appropriate.
The Hearing: Procedure
25.298
The procedure to be followed at a hearing of a FTP panel was set out in the 2003 draft Rules but has been extensively revised since. I do not propose to set out the procedure in detail. Its main elements, as they appear in the November 2004 Rules, can be summarised briefly.
Evidence about the Facts
25.299
Following any preliminary legal arguments, the doctor will indicate whether s/he wishes to make any admissions. Where facts are in dispute, the Presenting Officer will open the case for the GMC and may adduce evidence and call witnesses in support of the case. As at present, witnesses will give evidence on oath or will affirm. They can be compelled to attend.
The Admission of Hearsay and Other Inadmissible Evidence
25.300
There is no significant change to the rule governing the admissibility of evidence. The November 2004 Rules provide that an IC panel or FTP panel may:
‘... admit any evidence they consider fair and relevant to the case before them, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a court of law’
That provision is subject to a proviso:
‘Where evidence would not be admissible in criminal proceedings in England, the Committee or Panel shall not admit such evidence unless, on the advice of the Legal Assessor, they are satisfied that their duty of making due inquiry into the case before them makes its admission desirable.’
This provision is very similar to the equivalent rule under the old procedures. I hope that, in the future, FTP panels will be more ready to admit hearsay evidence than they have been in the past.
Vulnerable Witnesses
25.301
A welcome development is the rule providing for the treatment of vulnerable witnesses, including young people and witnesses who claim to have been the victim of a doctor’s sexual misconduct. The rule enables an IC or FTP panel to use such measures as video links, pre-recorded evidence, interpreters or intermediaries, screens and the hearing of evidence in private to assist such witnesses. A doctor who is unrepresented will not be permitted to cross-examine a witness who claims to have been a victim of sexual misconduct by him/her without the written consent of the witness. Instead, the doctor (or, failing that, the GMC) must appoint a legally qualified person to cross-examine on his/her behalf. The FTP or IC panel must take into account the advice of the legal assessor and any representations from the parties in relation to the treatment of vulnerable witnesses.
Inquisitorial or Adversarial Proceedings
25.302
Historically, proceedings before the PCC panel were adversarial in nature. Recently, there has been some discussion about the possibility of adopting a more inquisitorial procedure, whereby it would be open to panellists to explore areas of evidence not covered by the parties’ advocates.
25.303
In its 2001 Consultation Paper, the GMC said:
‘There is a concern that PCC hearings are oppressive and upsetting, particularly to witnesses. Although a move to a more inquisitorial procedure would not negate the need for the evidence of witnesses to be thoroughly tested, it is arguable that a less adversarial approach would create a greater sense of an impartial investigation of the facts and achieve the same results, while causing less distress to those questioned. Any changes would have to safeguard the rights of doctors to defend themselves fully. The GMC’s preferred direction is towards a more inquisitorial model, and it intends to commission work, drawing, where appropriate, on best practice elsewhere, to explore the possibility of developing an inquisitorial process for the PCC which would not compromise the doctor’s right to a fair hearing.’
25.304
The proposed move to a more inquisitorial process was supported by a large majority of respondents to the 2001 Consultation Paper, both medical and lay.
25.305
Following the consultation process, the GMC examined some examples of inquisitorial processes, but concluded that the existing style of PCC hearings should be retained. In coming to that conclusion, the GMC emphasised the extent to which members of the PCC were involved in questioning witnesses. Indeed, it suggested that the process before the GMC was not (as it appeared to have accepted in its 2001 Consultation Paper) purely adversarial, but was instead
‘hybrid’
, in that it incorporated both adversarial and inquisitorial elements.
25.306
In fact, while FTP panellists are able to ask some questions, they are not encouraged to allow their questions to range too widely. The September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists advises that
‘the purpose of the Panel’s questions is to seek clarification, not to cross-examine the doctor or witness’
. The intention seems to be that panellists should ask questions only to clarify issues that have already been raised. In my view, this is a pity. I have seen examples of cases before PCC panels in which the advocates on both sides had failed to explore an issue which was of real importance. An example was the case of
, in which the doctor had admitted to the PCC having an improper relationship with a vulnerable patient and that he was, therefore, guilty of SPM. Neither counsel had sought to explore the circumstances in which the relationship had begun. This was plainly an important issue. The outcome of the case was the imposition of a sanction that appeared to the CRHP/CHRE, to be unduly lenient. It appealed to the High Court. The Judge held that, on the basis of the information available, the decision was at the lenient end of the spectrum but not unduly lenient. He pointed out, however, that the case had not been properly investigated and that no questions had been asked at the hearing about how the relationship had begun. This was, the Judge said, ‘a serious failing’. Had it been regarded as acceptable for panellists to explore issues for themselves, this might have occurred in the case of
and all the relevant facts might well have emerged.
25.307
In my view, there should be a change of policy on this issue. I do not suggest that GMC proceedings should become purely inquisitorial. However, I do think that they should become more inquisitorial in that panellists should be encouraged to ask questions and to explore issues which they think are of relevance, even if it appears that the parties do not intend to do so. The objective of the hearing is, after all, to enable the panel to reach the right decision for the protection of patients and the public.
Submissions Made and Evidence Adduced by the Doctor
25.308
At the conclusion of the GMC’s evidence, the doctor may submit to the FTP panel that the evidence which has been adduced is insufficient to enable the panel to find the facts proved, or to support a finding of impairment of fitness to practise. If such a submission of ‘no case’ is made, the FTP panel must consider and announce its decision whether to uphold the doctor’s submissions. If no submission is made, or if a submission fails, the doctor may then open his/her case and may adduce evidence and call witnesses in support of it. The chairman of the FTP panel will then ask the specialist adviser(s), if any, to give any advice on the medical issues. The legal assessor may be invited to give advice on points of law.
The Panel’s Findings of Fact
25.309
The FTP panel will then consider the evidence and announce its findings on the facts. The May 2004 draft Rules provided that, save in exceptional circumstances, a FTP panel should not be required to give reasons for its findings of fact. That provision did not appear in the July 2004 draft Rules, nor does it appear in the November 2004 Rules. It was not at first clear to me whether this change in the Rules meant that FTP panels would always give reasons or whether it merely indicated that the GMC no longer considered that the issue needed to be covered by the Rules. I hoped that the former was the case because it is important, in the interests of transparency, that the parties and the public understand why a FTP panel has decided as it has at all stages of the proceedings. However, the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists says that panels will not normally be required to give reasons for findings of fact unless it is necessary to do so. Examples given are when it is necessary to
‘clarify the finding of fact’
‘in other exceptional circumstances’
. I do not think this is at all satisfactory. It is important, as I have just said, that the parties and the public should understand why decisions have been reached. I do not suggest that elaborate explanations should be given. Nor should it be necessary for the panel to deal with every single disputed fact. However, panels ought to explain their findings on the crucial factual issues and it should be possible for this to be done in a few sentences. I can see that this would be easier for a legally qualified chairman than for one who is not.
Evidence and Findings on the Issue of Fitness to Practise
25.310
A FTP panel will have the power, under rule 17(4), before making a determination whether a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, to direct a health or performance assessment. This is a welcome development and means that a FTP panel will be able to get a more rounded picture of the doctor than at present. On receipt of the assessment report, the FTP panel may then proceed to consider and determine the allegation or may, under rule 17(5)(b), refer the allegation back to the Registrar for referral to the case examiners so that they can consider whether it would be appropriate for the doctor to be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings.
25.311
This latter provision causes me some concern. It is obviously useful that a FTP panel should be able to obtain the assessment but it would be thoroughly unsatisfactory if, having received the assessment, the panel could avoid making findings of fact or a decision whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. That appears to be the effect of the provision I have just mentioned. So, for example, in a case where a doctor has been convicted of offences of dishonesty in the context of drug addiction, there will be a referral to a FTP panel but the panel, on receiving a health assessment, might send the case back for voluntary undertakings without there being any finding of impaired fitness to practise. This really will not do. If the GMC is to regain the confidence of the public, it must be seen to be taking appropriate action. Once seized of a case, a FTP panel must reach a decision. It could still send the case for voluntary undertakings if it thought that that was appropriate after deciding that there was impairment of a degree justifying action on registration. However, in my view, the better course would be for the FTP panel to impose conditions itself and to have the same supervisory arrangements for conditions imposed by a FTP panel as for voluntary undertakings.
25.312
Apart from exercising its power to order a health or performance assessment, the FTP may also receive any further evidence and hear any further submissions from the parties as to whether, on the basis of any facts found proved, the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired.
25.313
The 2003 draft Rules specifically provided for FTP panels to receive evidence about a doctor’s past history before making a finding in relation to impairment of his/her fitness to practise. The Guidance which accompanied the 2003 draft Rules stated that the Presenting Officer would be able to adduce evidence about previous warnings issued by the IC and findings by a FTP panel that the doctor’s fitness to practise was impaired. This was at the stage after the FTP panel had made its findings of fact and before it made a decision as to the doctor’s fitness to practise.
25.314
By contrast, there is no explicit provision in the November 2004 Rules which requires a FTP panel to take into account a doctor’s FTP history. The Guidance which accompanies the November 2004 Rules is silent on this point, as is also the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists. This omission is puzzling as it surely cannot be intended that FTP panels should not consider this information. It may be that the GMC had concluded that there is no need to make provision for it in the Rules. There was such a provision in the General Medical Council Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988, under the old procedures, and there is a provision in the November 2004 Rules governing the procedure of IC panels when considering warnings. Why is there no such provision for FTP panels? It might have been omitted by mistake, but then one would have expected to see reference to consideration of the doctor’s past history in the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists. But it is not there either. I think it should be spelled out exactly what previous history (if any) the FTP panel will look at and at what stage.
25.315
, I mentioned my concern that PCC panels often took purely personal mitigation into account when deciding whether a case of SPM had been proved. I explained my view that such personal mitigation was quite irrelevant to the issues of SPM, but that PPC panels might have been misled by the decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the case of
, which was based upon a misunderstanding of what had been said in the case of
. This problem should not arise under the new procedures because purely personal mitigation will be relevant to the issue of whether a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. The whole picture will be relevant including past misconduct, past problems of health or performance and personal mitigation.
The Test to Be Applied
25.316
When it has received the further relevant evidence, the FTP panel will deliberate and will announce its findings on impairment of fitness to practise. It must give reasons for its decision. Rule 17(2)(k) of the November 2004 Rules requires a finding as to whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is ‘impaired’. The rule does not add the words ‘to a degree justifying action on registration’. The rule correctly reflects the statutory test in section 35D of the 1983 Act. Inconsistently with that, the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists says that FTP panels will decide whether fitness to practise is impaired
‘to a degree justifying action on registration’
. This kind of inconsistency is very confusing. The position is this. The first task of the FTP panel is to decide whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. I have suggested a test that it should apply. If it finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is not impaired, the panel will usually take no further action although it may, under section 35D(3), give the doctor a warning as to his/her future conduct or performance. If the FTP panel decides that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, it should then go on to decide (under rule 17(2)(l)) what sanction to impose. It is at that stage that the panel must decide whether the impairment is such as to justify action on registration. Although the draft Guidance advises panellists that they may (in wholly exceptional circumstances) decide that fitness to practise is impaired and yet take no action, I find it hard to imagine circumstances in which that would be appropriate if the FTP panel found that the impairment of fitness to practise was of a degree justifying action on registration. What the FTP panel can do if it finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, but not to a degree such as to justify action on registration, is not entirely clear. I will return to this point very shortly.
The Hearing: Consideration of Sanctions or Other Action
25.317
If the FTP panel finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, it will then receive further evidence and will hear any further submissions from the parties about the appropriate sanction, if any, to be imposed. At any stage before making its decision as to sanction or warning, the FTP panel may adjourn for further information or reports to be obtained in order to assist it in exercising its function. The Presenting Officer and the doctor’s representative are expected to refer to the relevant part(s) of the GMC’s Indicative Sanctions Guidance for Fitness to Practise Panels. The FTP panel chairman will again invite the specialist adviser(s), if any, and the legal assessor, to provide advice on the medical and legal issues.
25.318
The FTP panel will then consider and announce its decision whether to impose a sanction or a warning or to
‘take into account’
undertakings that have been offered. It must give reasons for its decision. Decisions of the FTP panel are taken by a simple majority. No abstentions are permitted and there is no casting vote. Where the votes are equal, the FTP panel must decide the issue under consideration in the doctor’s favour. The only exceptions to this latter rule occur when a FTP panel is considering a submission of ‘no case’ or where a FTP panel is considering an application to restore a doctor’s name to the register, in which case the issue must be resolved against the doctor where the votes are equal.
25.319
Section 35D(2) of the 1983 Act provides that, where a FTP panel finds that a person’s fitness to practise is impaired, it may if it thinks fit:
‘(a) except in a health case, direct that the person’s name shall be erased from the register;
(b) direct that his registration in the register shall be suspended ... during such period not exceeding twelve months as may be specified in the direction; or
(c) direct that his registration shall be conditional on his compliance, during such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the direction, with such requirements so specified as the Panel think fit to impose for the protection of members of the public or in his interests’
25.320
These sanctions are the same as those that were available to the PCC. In addition, the PCC had a specific additional power to admonish a doctor in a case where it had found the doctor guilty of SPM but had decided to take no action. After 1999, the term ‘reprimand’ was used instead of the rather old-fashioned ‘admonishment’. A significant change from the past is that, whereas erasure was not available as a sanction to the CPP in a performance case (although indefinite suspension was, in certain circumstances), it will be possible for a FTP panel to direct that the name of a doctor should be erased from the register if it finds his/her fitness to practise impaired by reason of deficient professional performance. The power to impose a sanction is discretionary and it is therefore open to a FTP panel to take no action even after a finding that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. As I have said, I find it difficult to imagine circumstances in which that would be appropriate.
25.321
A doctor is entitled to appeal to the High Court against a decision of a FTP panel. The FTP panel’s determination will not usually take effect until the period for an appeal to be lodged (28 days) expires, or until the appeal itself has been determined. Where a FTP panel considers it necessary for the protection of members of the public, or in the interests of the public or the doctor, it may impose an order of suspension or conditions that will take effect immediately. The power to impose immediate conditions on a doctor’s registration is new and welcome.
Warnings
25.322
As I have noted earlier, section 35D(3) provides that, where a FTP panel finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is not impaired, it may nevertheless issue a warning about his/her future conduct or performance. I can understand why this provision has been inserted. It would be appropriate in a case in which the doctor had done something wrong, possibly making a prescribing error or missing a diagnosis (so that his/her fitness to practise had at the relevant time been impaired), but had taken immediate steps to rectify his/her shortcomings so that, by the time the case came before the FTP panel, his/her fitness to practise was no longer impaired. The September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists suggests that a warning may be given where there is significant cause for concern after a performance assessment. I have already expressed my reservations about the usefulness of that procedure, if there is to be no form of follow-up.
25.323
Strangely, section 35D does not give the FTP panel the power to issue a warning where it has found an impairment. This
must surely be unintentional and must be remedied. It is absurd that the FTP panel may find that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, although not to a degree justifying action on registration, but that it could not then issue a warning. I think that the GMC has become confused because it forgets that the statutory test is ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ not ‘impairment to a degree justifying action on registration’. For the avoidance of doubt, I repeat that, in my view the scheme should be as follows:
if the panel finds no impairment it will either take no action or may give a warning under section 35D(3)
if the panel finds impairment falling short of that justifying action on registration, it should be able to issue a warning and may exceptionally take no action
if the panel finds an impairment justifying action on registration, it should impose one of the three sanctions in the statute.
Written Undertakings
25.324
Rule 17(2)(m) of the July 2004 draft Rules introduced a new provision which has been reproduced in the November 2004 Rules. A FTP panel may
‘take into account’
any written undertakings (including undertakings relating to limitations on his/her practice) entered into by the doctor which the FTP panel considers to be sufficient to protect patients and the public interest. The doctor must expressly agree that the undertakings (save any relating exclusively to his/her health) should be disclosed to his/her employer or PCO, to any prospective employer or PCO and to any enquirer.
25.325
It is not quite clear to me what is meant by
‘take into account’
. Does it mean that, when considering what sanction to impose after a finding of impairment of fitness to practise has been made, the FTP panel may decide that the undertakings offered would provide an adequate degree of protection and that no other action is necessary? If so, that would be reasonable, provided that there were adequate supervision of compliance with the conditions and that a breach of them were to be regarded as every bit as seriously as a breach of conditions imposed by the FTP panel itself. At present, there is no provision in the 1983 Act or the November 2004 Rules for the supervision of a doctor who is subject to such undertakings or for cases where undertakings have been given to be brought back to the FTP panel for routine review or for reconsideration in the event of a breach of undertaking. Nor does it appear that the GMC would have any ‘teeth’ with which to deal with a breach. No doubt those matters could be rectified and, if this procedure is to be used, they must be. However, I cannot see any real reason why a FTP panel should ever need to
‘take into account’
undertakings when considering sanction. If the FTP panel has heard the evidence, it can impose appropriate conditions itself and the existing Rules make provision for review and for action in the event of any breach.
25.326
It is not clear from the Rules whether this provision is intended to have the limited application that I have just described. The positioning of the relevant provision within the November 2004 Rules and the contents of the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists suggests that this will be the case. However, the possibility occurs to me that it might be intended to
‘take into account’
or accept undertakings from a doctor at an earlier stage in the proceedings. The provision is wide enough to permit that. If that were done, the FTP panel might never reach the stage of making findings of fact or deciding whether there was an impairment of fitness to practise. That would not be at all satisfactory. I have already explained why essential findings should not be ‘fudged’. There must be a clear basis on which the GMC acts. Otherwise there can be no proper protection of the public interest.
Publication of Panel Decisions
25.327
A decision reached by a FTP panel, together with reasons, will be notified to the doctor, to his/her employer or PCO and to any person or body which brought the allegation to the GMC’s attention. In addition, it will be published on the GMC’s website. The only exception is that confidential information about a doctor’s health will not be made public.
Review Hearings
25.328
The Guidance which accompanied the July 2004 draft Rules stated that an order for suspension or for the imposition of conditions would be reviewed by a FTP panel prior to the end of the period for which the suspension or conditions were imposed. The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states that such an order will
‘generally’
be reviewed. In my view, there should have to be quite exceptional reasons for not holding a review hearing. There is no provision in the Rules for the date of a review hearing to be fixed at the original FTP panel hearing, as was the practice under the old procedures in a health or performance case. Review hearings are extremely important, as they are the ‘teeth’ behind the sanctions other than erasure. If a doctor thinks that a period of suspension or conditional registration will simply expire and that s/he will automatically be allowed to return to unrestricted practice, there will be cases in which the remediation objective behind the imposition of suspension or conditions will not be achieved and patients will be put at risk.
The 2003 Proposals
25.329
The 2003 draft Rules provided for the appointment of a case examiner to assist the FTP panel in carrying out its investigations and with preparing evidence for a review hearing. The appointed case examiner was to be responsible,
, for procuring evidence and for inviting the doctor to undergo a health assessment or directing a performance assessment as appropriate.
The 2004 Position
25.330
These arrangements were changed by the May 2004 draft Rules (reproduced in the November 2004 Rules), with the result that all these functions are now to be undertaken by the GMC staff, not by case examiners. I assume that this change was made as part of the attempt by the GMC to mitigate the effect of the significant increase to the workload of case examiners caused by the introduction, in the May 2004 draft Rules, of the double-handling of cases by case examiners. In my view, the 2003 proposals were better and should be reinstated.
25.331
It seems to me that what is required is that someone should be responsible for keeping a watchful eye on the progress of any doctor subject to conditions during the operative period. When examining the old procedures, I came across cases in which conditions had been imposed, including supervised practice and a package of remedial measures, but in which nothing at all had happened for several months. Someone in the GMC should be keeping watch to ensure that the doctor adheres to the conditions imposed and, where appropriate, should request regular progress reports. When the end of the period of suspension or conditional registration approaches and preparations are to be made for a review hearing, it seems to me that, in virtually every case, there should be some sort of independent assessment of those aspects of the doctor’s performance or health that had given rise to the original finding of impairment of fitness to practise. In the past, the GMC has often released a doctor from conditions on the basis of a report from someone involved in his/her remediation. I am by no means convinced of the adequacy of some of these reports as a basis for ending supervision. Those who have been involved in facilitating a doctor’s remediation are not always best placed to assess its resuIts. We all like to think that we have done a good job and there is a grave danger that a report from someone who has been involved will present an unduly sanguine view of the doctor’s progress. In any event, such a person is unlikely to have undertaken any objective, measurable assessment of the doctor’s performance or competence. In my view, there should be something more patently independent and objective.
Early Review Hearings
25.332
There is also provision for an ‘early review hearing’. The 2003 draft Rules provided that such a hearing could be held on the application of the doctor, if a case examiner so directed. In addition, the 2003 draft Rules provided that a case examiner should be able to direct an early review hearing where information was received that suggested that such a hearing was
‘desirable’
. The May 2004 draft Rules gave the power to direct an early hearing to the Registrar (i.e. the GMC staff) rather than to a case examiner. A direction for an early review hearing was to be made when the Registrar was of the opinion that it was
‘desirable’
to do so. This remains the case under the November 2004 Rules. The right of the doctor to request an early review was retained. However, the July 2004 draft Rules omitted the reference to an application by the doctor for an early review and it was not restored in the November 2004 Rules.
25.333
The provision that there should be an early review when the Registrar (in practice a member of staff) thinks it
‘desirable’
is very vague. There is no requirement that there must be an early review in the event of a breach of a condition or undertaking. Also, it appears that the whole system will be reactive; it will depend upon someone reporting to the GMC that a problem has arisen. It does not appear that anyone in the GMC will be ‘keeping watch’. There is no provision even for a supervisor to submit a regular report.
The Procedure on a Review Hearing
25.334
The doctor must be given at least 28 days’ notice of a review hearing and must be provided with certain specified information, including any new evidence. The doctor will be required to indicate whether s/he wishes to attend the hearing. If s/he does not attend, s/he will have an opportunity to make written representations.
25.335
At the review hearing, the Presenting Officer representing the GMC will inform the FTP panel of the background to the case and of the sanction previously imposed. He or she will direct the FTP panel’s attention to any relevant evidence, including transcripts of previous hearings. The 2003 draft Rules provided that both the GMC and the doctor should be permitted to call or produce evidence. However, the May 2004 draft Rules would have permitted only the doctor to adduce evidence and call witnesses, making the hearing a one-sided process. The July 2004 draft Rules contained a provision permitting the GMC to adduce evidence also and to call witnesses in relation to the doctor’s fitness to practise. The November 2004 Rules also permit evidence to be called by the GMC about any failure on the part of the doctor to comply with a condition previously imposed upon his/her registration. That is most welcome. After the GMC’s evidence, the doctor may present his/her case, may adduce evidence and call witnesses in support of it. The FTP panel will then receive further evidence and hear submissions as to whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired or whether s/he has failed to comply with any condition imposed on his/her registration.
25.336
The FTP panel must then consider and announce its finding on the question of the doctor’s fitness to practise and in relation to any alleged breaches of conditions. This procedure is good in principle although, as I have said, in my view, there ought to be some up-to-date independent objective evidence about the doctor’s fitness to practise.
25.337
The FTP panel may then receive further evidence and hear any further submissions from the parties about its disposition of the case and must then consider and announce its decision as to the appropriate direction. It will be open to the FTP panel at this point to
‘take into account’
any written undertakings entered into by the doctor in the same circumstances as I have described previously.
25.338
The various courses of action open to a FTP panel at this point are set out in section 35D of the 1983 Act and vary according to the direction that was originally made by the panel. Where a FTP panel has given a direction that a doctor’s registration should be suspended, it is open to the FTP panel at a review hearing to direct that the period of suspension should be extended for a specified period not exceeding 12 months at a time. It is also open to the FTP panel, except in a health case, to direct erasure of the doctor’s name from the register. The FTP panel may also direct that the doctor’s registration should, from the expiry of the current period of suspension, be conditional upon compliance with specified requirements for a period not exceeding three years.
25.339
, I discussed the problems that could be created by a period of suspension. If the suspension had been ordered as a ‘sharp rap on the knuckles’ for a doctor who had been guilty of some form of misconduct which did not affect his/her clinical practice, it might not have been inappropriate for the doctor to be permitted automatically to resume practice when the period of suspension expired. However, if suspension were imposed on account of poor performance, ill health or a form of misconduct which did affect clinical practice, the effect of suspension might be that the doctor was even more unfit to practise at the end of the period than at the beginning. He or she would have been ‘out of practice’ in both senses of the expression. Sometimes, the panel imposing the suspension would advise the doctor as to what remedial steps s/he should take while suspended. But it was thought, rightly in my view, that no conditions could lawfully be imposed during a period of suspension so supervision was not appropriate.
25.340
Under the new procedures, it seems unlikely that suspension will be ordered in any case unless there is quite a serious degree of impairment of fitness to practise. It is not possible to impose conditions during the period of suspension, although FTP panels might sensibly advise doctors as to the remediation they think it appropriate that they should undertake while suspended. It seems to me that no doctor who has been suspended should ever be allowed to resume practice without undergoing some form of assessment. In my view, it is not sufficient to impose conditions at the expiration of the period of suspension. Conditions will almost certainly be required, but they should be imposed after the doctor has successfully passed an assessment of basic competence.
25.341
Where the original direction was for conditional registration, the FTP panel at a review hearing may direct erasure (except in a health case), direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended, for a maximum period of 12 months, or direct that the period of conditional registration should be extended for a period of not more than three years. It is also open to the FTP panel to revoke its original direction or to revoke or vary any of the conditions imposed by the direction for the remainder of the current period of conditional registration. Where a doctor has failed to comply with a condition on registration, a FTP panel may, except in a health case, only direct erasure of the doctor’s name from the register or direct that the doctor’s registration should be suspended.
25.342
I have already mentioned some of my concerns about what might be described as the ‘business end’ of the new FTP procedures. The mere imposition of conditions or suspension is not enough to protect the public from a doctor whose fitness to practise is impaired. There must be proper supervision and adequate assessment of the doctor before s/he is allowed to return to unrestricted practice. I do not think it is satisfactory for a long period of conditions to be imposed, as this means that the doctor can disappear from sight and practise under very little supervision. The GMC might think that a doctor will be supervised locally by his/her PCO. However, in my view, the GMC should take responsibility. Also, a relatively early date for a review hearing before a FTP panel might well have the effect of focussing the doctor’s mind on his/her remediation. In my view, periods of conditional registration should not usually exceed 12 months initially. A renewed period may well be necessary but the shorter initial period will at least mean that the doctor is brought back for review within a reasonable time.
25.343
I have already expressed my concern also that there is no provision in the Rules for the regular monitoring or surveillance of a doctor who is subject to a direction for conditional registration imposed by a FTP panel. In other words, the doctor is less well supervised than s/he would have been under the old voluntary health or performance procedures. This is a serious gap and means that conditions imposed by a FTP panel may well be significantly less onerous than for a doctor in voluntary procedures. (Of course, I recognise that the new arrangements for voluntary undertakings in cases with a health or performance element may be rather more lax in future, when they will be under the control of staff rather than the health screeners and performance case co-ordinators who were able to bring expertise and continuity to their work. That remains to be seen.) However, there seems to be no sense in devising a system which is manifestly less stringent in cases where conditions are imposed by a FTP panel than when undertakings are entered into voluntarily. In my view, a professional supervisor should be appointed in every case where a doctor is practising under conditions, and that professional supervisor should provide regular feedback to the GMC. There should be a medical supervisor in all health cases and s/he should be expected to operate to the standards that were required under the old voluntary health procedures. Also, in my view, some form of independent assessment must be made before conditions are lifted.
Applications to Restore a Doctor’s Registration
25.344
The 2003 draft Rules set out the procedure to be adopted when a doctor whose name has been erased from the register applies for restoration. They provided for a case examiner to be appointed to consider and prepare the evidence to be placed before the FTP panel at a restoration hearing. He or she was to have the same powers to procure expert and other evidence as in relation to a review hearing. These arrangements were changed by the May 2004 draft Rules and the changed regime is reflected in the November 2004 Rules. The staff - and not case examiners - will carry out the functions that were previously to be carried out by the case examiners. I think that that is a retrograde step. I can see no reason of principle why case examiners should not be required to undertake this work; they are manifestly better qualified to do so than GMC staff. I can only conclude that the reason for the change was to reduce the workload of case examiners.
25.345
The November 2004 Rules contain no requirement that a performance or health assessment should be carried out automatically in the case of every application to restore. The staff may direct an assessment of performance or health; it is open also to the FTP panel which hears the application to direct an assessment before making its decision. In my view, it should be mandatory for a doctor to undergo an assessment of every aspect of his/her fitness to practise before his/her application to restore is heard. Since the amendment to the 1983 Act effected in 2000, the doctor will inevitably have been off the register and away from clinical practice for an appreciable time - five years if the erasure was not voluntary.
25.346
The procedure at a restoration hearing is similar to that at a review hearing, save that the decision to be taken by the FTP panel is whether to grant or refuse the application to restore. The FTP panel must give reasons for its decision. In an appropriate case, it may make a direction suspending indefinitely the applicant’s right to make further applications for restoration. It is not open to the FTP panel to restore the doctor to the register subject to conditions. I understand that the GMC believes that FTP panels might restore applicants too readily if the option to restore with conditions is available. It also takes the view that, if there are doubts about a doctor’s fitness to practise, the decision should be to refuse restoration. I understand that point of view. But the time must come where a panel thinks it appropriate to restore but where a period of supervision would be a wise safeguard. I recommend that every doctor restored to the register after erasure should have a mentor, who undertakes to monitor his/her progress and to report to the GMC.
25.347
Decisions of FTP panels will be subject to appeal by a doctor and to judicial review on the application of a complainant. In addition, the CRHP/CHRE will be able to refer a decision of a FTP panel to the High Court in certain circumstances. The GMC has pointed out that it has no power to appeal decisions made by FTP panels. The GMC says that it wishes to have the ability to question those decisions that do not appear adequately to protect the public interest. In a briefing paper for the May 2004 Council meeting, it was pointed out that the GMC could invite the CRHP/CHRE to mount an appeal on its behalf; however, it was suggested that that was not a satisfactory alternative to being able to act itself.
25.348
As a consequence, the GMC agreed at its May 2004 meeting that, subject to further work on mechanisms and to consultation, it should request further legislation to enable the GMC to appeal to the High Court against decisions of FTP panels which it considered unduly lenient, either as to sanction or as to whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was impaired on the facts found. In my view, such a power would be inappropriate and is in any event quite unnecessary. It would be inappropriate because the GMC continues to exercise a very close degree of control over FTP panels. It is unnecessary because the CRHP/CHRE has the power and the resources to mount an appeal. If the GMC is concerned about a decision being unduly lenient, it can invite the CRHP/CHRE to take action; indeed, it has already adopted this course in a recent case. The GMC is under a duty to co-operate with the CRHP/CHRE and this seems to me to be an obvious area for such co-operation.

--- The Investigation Stage ---
25.109
I shall now examine the various processes involved in the investigation stage. In particular, I shall consider the activities undertaken by the GMC staff, by the case examiners and by the IC.
The Purpose of the Investigation Stage
25.110
It is important to note at the outset that, as I have previously explained, the term ‘investigation’ in this context is not intended to mean a process of evidence gathering. The ‘investigation’ to be undertaken during the investigation stage of the FTP procedures is the determination of whether a case should be referred to a FTP panel. However, the process of evidence gathering may be one of the activities carried out during the investigation stage.
The Preliminary Sift of Cases by Administrative Staff
25.111
Under the old procedures, members of the GMC staff (exercising the legal powers of the Registrar) carried out an initial filtering exercise. They closed cases that fell into certain categories which had been identified by the GMC as not giving rise to an issue falling within its remit. Under the new procedures, the first step in the process of dealing with allegations reported or referred to the GMC will be a similar initial sifting exercise.
25.112
Under rule 4 of the November 2004 Rules, the staff will be required to refer for consideration by a medical and a lay case examiner an
‘allegation’
which they consider
‘falls within’
section 35C(2) of the 1983 Act. Section 35C(2), to which I have previously referred, states that:
‘A person’s fitness to practise shall be regarded as “impaired” for the purposes of this Act by reason only of -
(a) misconduct;
(b) deficient professional performance;
(c) a conviction or caution in the British Islands for a criminal offence, or a conviction elsewhere for an offence which, if committed in England and Wales, would constitute a criminal offence;
(d) adverse physical or mental health; or
(e) a determination by a body in the United Kingdom responsible under any enactment for the regulation of a health or social care profession to the effect that his fitness to practise as a member of that profession is impaired, or a determination by a regulatory body elsewhere to the same effect.’
25.113
Whether or not the staff consider that a case
‘falls within’
section 35C(2) seems a rather odd ‘test’ to apply. From the words of the rule itself, it is not clear to what extent the staff are to be required to consider whether the allegation is capable of amounting to an ‘impairment’. If they are, the test would impose a much higher threshold than was imposed under the old conduct procedures, when the Registrar (or member of staff) had to refer a case to a medical screener if it raised a question of SPM. If the staff are required only to consider whether the information contains an
‘allegation’
of the types listed in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e), the threshold will be similar to that under the old procedures, and would be appropriate.
25.114
The draft Investigation Manual Version 2, dated November 2004 (the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual), produced for the guidance of the GMC staff, shows the intended scope of the Registrar’s discretion (or that of the staff exercising his legal powers). A staff member should close a case only on specific grounds. Broadly speaking, the staff members should have concluded that the allegation does not raise a question of any of the factors listed at paragraphs (a) to (e) of section 35C(2) of the 1983 Act.
25.115
It appears that the GMC intends that the ‘test’ at this initial stage should be similar to the test under the old procedures. It is to be hoped that a form of words might be found so that the Rules more clearly express the GMC’s intention. I suggest that the rule might be amended to state: ‘... where the Registrar considers that the allegation raises a question whether the doctor has been guilty of misconduct, his/her professional performance has been deficient, s/he has been subject to a conviction, caution or determination or has suffered or is suffering adverse physical or mental health (i.e. the factors listed at paragraphs (a) to (e) of section 35C(2) of the 1983 Act)’. The public would then know what test the GMC was applying at this stage.
The Diversion of Cases to Local Complaints Procedures
25.116
At this point, it is necessary to consider what, if any, steps will be taken by staff at this stage of the new procedures to direct cases into local complaints procedures. In the past, as I explain in
, many cases have been closed by GMC staff because the complaint related to treatment under the NHS or in the private sector and it appeared that local complaints procedures either had not been used at all or had not been pursued to their conclusion. Before closing a case and advising a complainant to direct his/her complaint to local complaints procedures, the staff did not consider (as the Rules required them to do) whether the case raised a question of SPM. The GMC staff would advise a complainant to pursue his/her complaint through local complaints procedures and would close the case, unless the staff had reason to believe that the doctor was dangerous or the complainant insisted on the complaint being considered by the GMC.
25.117
Two concerns arose out of this practice. The first was that it put the onus onto the complainant to take matters forward. Second, the GMC did not follow matters up and seek to find out whether the complaint had been pursued locally; there was therefore a danger that some complaints that might have amounted to SPM were lost to the regulatory system. Those concerns were put to the witnesses from the GMC who gave evidence to the Inquiry. They were asked why the GMC did not take responsibility, in an appropriate case, for passing the case to the relevant complaints body, instead of leaving it to the complainant. They were also asked why the GMC did not follow up such cases to ensure that they were not lost. In evidence to the Inquiry, Sir Graeme Catto said that the issue was ‘rising to the top of our (
) agenda’.
25.118
These issues are not expressly dealt with in the November 2004 Rules, the Guidance accompanying them, the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual or the initial processing and assessment form (IPA). The IPA sets out every step of the investigation stage and, if it were the intention of the GMC to close cases because local procedures had not been exhausted, I would have expected the IPA to identify the stage at which that should be done and to specify the criteria to be applied. The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states:
‘... the Registrar may ... advise the maker of the allegation about other means of resolution (such as the NHS complaints procedure) or refer the allegation directly to another body for consideration’
25.119
However, the context of this passage suggests that this advice is only to be given if the member of staff has already decided that the case does not fall within the jurisdiction of the GMC. To give such advice in those circumstances would be entirely appropriate. The criteria set out in the IPA for making the decision as to closure seem to me to have been drafted so as to ensure that all matters that do fall within the GMC’s jurisdiction are accepted into the system. It looks as though the GMC has accepted that the old practice about which the Inquiry expressed concern is to be discontinued under the new procedures. I recognise that that will lead to an increased workload for the GMC but it is clearly the right decision.
25.120
It might be said that it would be reasonable for the GMC to advise the makers of allegations about the existence of alternative means of resolution even in cases where the allegation did fall within the GMC’s jurisdiction. Provided that the maker of the allegation was not put under pressure and freely consented to take his/her allegation to a local NHS body, what could be the harm in that? In my view, it would not be a good idea to offer such advice. At the present time, local NHS complaints procedures are not appropriate for many cases in which patient protection issues arise; for example, there are at present no adequate facilities for investigating a complaint about a general practitioner (GP) at the first stage of the NHS complaints procedures. Now that the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (known as the Healthcare Commission) is responsible for the second stage, such facilities are available then, but I do not think it would be right to suggest that a complainant take that route in order for the allegation to be investigated.
25.121
The November 2004 draft Investigation Manual describes a procedure by which cases which have been referred to the GMC by a public body may be referred into a local procedure. The GMC staff should contact the referring body to discuss the best way forward. This is entirely appropriate.
Informal Dialogue
25.122
During the Inquiry hearings, there was discussion about the need for the GMC, on receipt of a complaint (particularly one coming from a private individual), to contact the doctor’s employer or primary care organisation (PCO) in order to ascertain whether there were any local concerns about the doctor. This had never been the GMC’s practice in the past. As I explained in
, some GMC members thought that such a practice would be unfair to doctors. However, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the GMC intended to consider introducing such a practice.
25.123
After the Inquiry hearings, the GMC announced that, from May 2004, it would henceforth be operating a new policy for handling complaints at the initial stages of the FTP procedures. The intention was to discuss most complaints with the doctor’s employers (which term I understand to include PCOs and others with whom the doctor is contracted to provide medical services). The purpose of these discussions would be, first, to discover whether the complaint was an isolated matter or an example of a wider concern about the doctor which had been recognised locally and, second, to inform those with local clinical governance responsibilities that the GMC was considering a complaint about the doctor. I understand that this change was put into effect under the old procedures and that it yielded useful information. The GMC has informed the Inquiry that, between May 2004 and September 2004, early disclosure to doctors’ employers was made in 87% of cases. The remaining 13% were cases where the complaints made could not raise an issue for the GMC.
25.124
The position under the new procedures appears in the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual. In Stream 1 cases (those that will definitely require full investigation), the staff member will not enter into informal dialogue with the doctor’s employer; in Stream 2 cases (those where it is not immediately clear whether or not a full investigation will be needed), dialogue will take place. The consent of the complainant to that disclosure will be required and the doctor will be informed. At a later stage, there will be formal disclosure of the allegation to the employer or PCO in both Stream 1 and Stream 2 cases, although this will be by letter and it is recognised that the employer or PCO might not respond.
25.125
Reports in the medical press have suggested that the new arrangements have been greeted with dismay by doctors. It has been said that the informal disclosure to employers and PCOs of the fact that a complaint has been made is ‘unfair to doctors’ since employers will be liable to draw adverse conclusions from the fact that a complaint has been made. At the time of writing, it had been reported that at least two medical defence organisations were challenging the right of the GMC to request a doctor’s employment details for the purpose of contacting his/her employers to discuss a complaint made against him/her at a stage earlier than the time for formal disclosure to employers.
25.126
I do hope that the GMC will not be deflected from making these enquiries. The obtaining of information from an employer or PCO is an essential part of the investigation. Moreover, I do not think that the fears voiced in the medical press have real foundation. I very much doubt that an employer or PCO will draw an adverse conclusion from the fact that an allegation has been made, unless it tends to confirm concerns that the employer or PCO already feels. If that is the position, it is right that the employer or PCO is made aware of the new allegation, in the interests of patient safety, and that the GMC is aware of the other pre-existing concerns. In
, I recommend that this procedure should be enshrined in the Rules and that the GMC should have the power to require the doctor to provide any information necessary to permit these communications to take place.
25.127
I shall now consider what, under the new procedures, the GMC proposes to do by way of evidence gathering. I have described in earlier Chapters how, under the old procedures, the GMC generally did little in the way of evidence gathering unless and until a decision had been taken to refer a case to the PCC for a hearing. As a consequence, a decision whether or not to refer a case to the PPC or the PCC would sometimes be taken on the basis of insufficient evidence and was in the past usually made without information about any previous concerns which might have arisen locally about the doctor’s conduct or performance. I have already mentioned that, in its 2001 Consultation Paper, the GMC identified one of the weaknesses of the old FTP procedures as the limited investigation (in the sense of evidence gathering) carried out before a decision was made about what to do with a case. Mr Scott acknowledged this weakness in his evidence to the Inquiry when he observed that the old procedures put ‘the cart before the horse’ in that a decision was taken whether a case should be referred to the PCC before the necessary evidence had been gathered.
25.128
The 2003 draft Rules gave the Registrar the power, before referring a case to the IC or to a case examiner, to carry out such further investigations as in his opinion were appropriate. The Guidance that accompanied the 2003 draft Rules stated that these investigations might include writing to the doctor’s employers and obtaining witness statements. Under the 2003 draft Rules, case examiners and the IC were also to have the power to carry out, or to direct the staff to carry out, further enquiries into cases, over and above the investigations already carried out by staff.
25.129
Despite the powers contained in the 2003 draft Rules, there was little in the other documents which the Inquiry had seen, before the GMC witnesses gave evidence in November and December 2003, to suggest that the GMC intended significantly to increase its evidence gathering activities at the investigation stage. Nevertheless, Mr Scott was adamant that, under the new FTP procedures, the approach would be quite different from that previously adopted. The GMC staff would, he said, undertake evidence gathering. Mr Scott referred to the fact that the GMC was in the process of assembling a team of in-house lawyers, who would undertake evidence gathering. However, it was clear that the intention at the time he gave evidence was for the in-house lawyers to undertake investigations after a case had been referred to a FTP panel and not before; Mr Scott did not seek to say otherwise. He pointed out that some members of the existing office staff also had the potential to undertake investigative work. Mr Scott said that the case examiners would have a key role in directing what evidence gathering should be undertaken and in judging whether the evidence that had been collected was sufficient to enable them to reach a decision. The case examiners (unlike screeners in the old procedures) were to have powers to undertake and direct evidence gathering. Mr Scott emphasised to the Inquiry the ‘profound nature’ of this change which, he said, would ensure that
‘the mindset’
of those operating the procedures would be ‘fundamentally different’ as a result.
25.130
Under the November 2004 Rules, the Registrar may, before deciding whether to refer a case to the case examiners, carry out such investigations as in his opinion are appropriate to the consideration of whether or not the allegation falls within section 35C(2) of the 1983 Act or of the doctor’s fitness to practise. The Guidance that accompanies the November 2004 Rules suggests, by way of example, that the Registrar (personally or by his staff) may make enquiries of the doctor’s employer in order to investigate whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. The draft document ‘Making decisions on cases at the end of the investigation stage: Guidance for Case Examiners and the Investigation Committee’, produced by the GMC in September 2004 (the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance), states that initial investigations will be carried out by staff (with the assistance of lawyers where required), for example, in cases where there is insufficient evidence to establish whether the allegation falls within the GMC’s jurisdiction or where further information is required to see if a pattern of behaviour may be established. It is said that such investigations may include making enquiries of the doctor’s employer, colleagues or others, or obtaining medical reports or other documentation. I refer at
paragraphs 25.153-25.154
to the arrangements for evidence gathering which are now envisaged.
25.131
After a decision has been taken to refer a case to the case examiners, the November 2004 Rules require the Registrar to carry out any investigations which, in his opinion, are appropriate to the consideration of the allegation by the case examiners. Such investigations may be carried out whether or not any investigations have been conducted prior to that stage. Surprisingly, in the light of what was said at the Inquiry’s hearings about the key role which case examiners were to play in directing the process of evidence gathering and the fundamental change which would result, the May 2004 draft Rules omitted the power included in the 2003 draft Rules for case examiners to make enquiries into a case, or to direct the staff to make such enquiries. That power has not been restored by subsequent versions of the Rules. I do not know the reason for this omission.
25.132
The November 2004 draft Investigation Manual says that case examiners will be asked to approve an investigation plan and may wish to give instructions as to further forms of investigation to be carried out. It appears therefore that the investigations will be instigated and carried out by the staff, but that case examiners should be able to give instructions, at least from the time when a case has been referred to them. That power is not reflected in the Rules. It should be; the case examiners should have the power to direct investigations.
Disclosure to the Doctor’s Employer or Primary Care Organisation of the Fact that a Complaint Has Been Made
25.133
I shall now consider the point in the investigation stage process where the GMC is obliged to give formal notice to a doctor’s employer or PCO that an allegation has been made about him/her.
Mandatory Disclosure: the 2003 Position
25.134
I have already explained in
that, after 2000, the GMC was required, in certain circumstances, to disclose the fact that it was investigating a complaint against a doctor to the Department of Health (DoH), and to any person or body by whom the doctor was employed or by whom s/he was contracted to provide services. Those circumstances arose once the GMC had made a decision to refer the doctor to the PPC, to invite him/her to agree to an assessment of his/her professional performance or to invite him/her to agree to undergo medical examination. In other words, disclosure took place after screening of a complaint and then only if the complaint was to go forward. Although referral of a case to the IOC was not included in the list of triggers for disclosure, the Inquiry was told that it was treated as such.
25.135
With the impending introduction of the new FTP procedures, the GMC had to consider at what point in the new procedures it would be appropriate for disclosure to take place. Under the 2003 draft Rules, disclosure would have been mandatory when the earliest of the following events occurred: referral of a case to an IOC for decision, referral of an allegation to a FTP panel, the making of a direction that a performance assessment should be carried out, the issuing of an invitation to a doctor to enter into voluntary undertakings or the issuing of a warning to a doctor. The inclusion of the last of these events as a trigger for disclosure suggests that it was contemplated at that time that the decision to issue a warning (rather than to refer a case to a FTP panel) might be taken before notifying (and, presumably, before obtaining background information from) the doctor’s employer or PCO. That would seem to be another example of ‘putting the cart before the horse’, because the information available from an employer might have been such that a warning was insufficient to meet the seriousness of the case. It should be noted that, in a ‘health case’, the invitation to undergo a medical examination would not, under the 2003 draft Rules, have triggered disclosure; instead, the relevant trigger would have been the invitation to enter into voluntary undertakings under the equivalent of the old voluntary health procedures.
25.136
The effect of these new provisions would have been that, in many instances, disclosure would have taken place later under the new FTP procedures than had been the case since 2000 under the old procedures. It is not clear whether the GMC had intended this to be the consequence of the proposed changes or whether the effect was accidental. It would certainly have been an unfortunate retreat from the post-2000 position. It would have meant that the GMC could have been in possession of relevant information for several weeks or months without disclosing that information to the relevant person or body.
25.137
As a result of evidence given to the Inquiry which indicated that the proposals would not command public confidence or support, of reservations expressed by the DoH and of an apparent recognition of its own obligation to provide timely information for the purposes of clinical governance, the GMC reconsidered its original proposals which, it was conceded, were
‘clearly flawed’
. At a Council meeting held in November 2003, it was decided that disclosure should be brought forward to the point under the new procedures where the Registrar (in practice, a member of staff) or a case examiner took a decision that the complaint or other concern justified investigation.
Mandatory Disclosure: the 2004 Position
25.138
The May 2004 draft Rules therefore provided that a further event which would trigger disclosure should be a decision by the Registrar (in practice, a member of staff) to carry out or direct investigations before or after making the decision to refer a case to the case examiners. This would still have been unsatisfactory. This trigger would have been dependent entirely on whether or not any investigations were undertaken. If (as was invariably the case in the past) they were not, the doctor’s employer or PCO would not be informed of the complaint at that stage. Even assuming that, in the future, the staff were to carry out investigations in most cases, there would almost certainly remain some cases in which there would be none. For example, when the fact that a doctor has been convicted of a criminal offence is reported, it will be open to the Registrar (or the staff, exercising his legal powers) to refer the conviction direct to a FTP panel. However, in some cases, he may not do so and will instead refer it to a case examiner. If, as he well might, he does so without carrying out any investigations, the duty to disclose would not have arisen, under the May 2004 draft Rules, until after the case examiner had made his/her decision.
25.139
Another change was that, under the May 2004 draft Rules, an invitation to undergo a health assessment was also to trigger disclosure. The issuing of an invitation to enter into voluntary undertakings remained in the list of triggering events although, since this would always be preceded by a health or performance assessment, it could never be the earliest event.
25.140
The July 2004 draft Rules contained further changes to the list of events that would trigger disclosure. These were reproduced in the November 2004 Rules. The issuing of a warning has been removed from the list. Instead, disclosure will have to take place at the earlier stage of referral of an allegation for consideration by the case examiners. This is a welcome change. It gives greater certainty and means that disclosure will, in general, take place earlier than would have been the case under the old procedures. Referral to case examiners is a step that will always happen in a case which is not closed by the staff at the initial stage, save when a conviction case is referred direct to a FTP panel, and such referral is also a triggering event. If pre-referral investigation takes place, this will bring forward the disclosure process. The issuing of an invitation to a doctor to enter into voluntary undertakings has been removed from the list of triggering events.
25.141
I have described in earlier Chapters the treatment of conviction cases under the old FTP procedures. Convictions for minor motoring offences were not referred to the medical screeners and did not proceed beyond the office staff. In November 2002, the Registrar was given power to refer convictions for offences in respect of which an immediate sentence of imprisonment had been imposed directly to the PCC unless, in his opinion, such direct referral would not be in the public interest. All other conviction cases were referred to a medical screener and most of those cases were referred by the medical screeners to the PPC. In 2003, the PPC referred to the PCC less than a third of the doctors convicted of criminal offences whose cases had been referred to it. In
, I mentioned the need, recognised by Mr Scott when he gave evidence to the Inquiry, for the GMC to make its treatment of conviction cases more consistent.
25.142
The 2003 draft Rules contained what amounted to a retreat from the post-November 2002 position. They provided that, in a case where a conviction had resulted in the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment, the Registrar
‘may’
refer the allegation directly to a FTP panel. The Guidance which accompanied the 2003 draft Rules said that the Registrar was required to refer a conviction directly to a FTP panel where the doctor had received an immediate custodial sentence and where he
‘considers it in the public interest to do so’
. This would have reversed the presumption which had existed since November 2002 that all convictions resulting in an immediate sentence of imprisonment would be referred to a FTP panel unless such a referral would not be in the public interest.
25.143
The May 2004 draft Rules (the provisions remain virtually unchanged in the November 2004 Rules) altered the position once again. The Registrar will now be required to refer directly to a FTP panel any conviction case which results in the imposition of a custodial sentence, whether immediate or suspended. This is a welcome change. It makes for greater certainty in that limited class of case. So far as any other conviction is concerned, the Registrar will be required to refer it direct to a FTP panel
‘unless he is of the opinion that it ought to be referred to a medical and a lay Case Examiner for consideration’
. Although this latter provision creates a presumption in favour of referral, it gives a very wide discretion to the Registrar.
25.144
In September 2004, the GMC produced guidance (which was annexed to the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance) to members of staff and case examiners as to how they should deal with police cautions and with convictions which had not resulted in the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment. Members of staff are advised that they should refer direct to a FTP panel any case where the doctor has been convicted of a ‘serious arrestable offence’ within the meaning of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, of a racially motivated offence, of an offence involving child pornography, of an offence under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (as amended) and of any offence involving an element of dishonesty. The guidance states that there is
‘a presumption that the nature of these convictions means that the case will automatically reach the investigation stage test’
25.145
At the other end of the scale, members of staff are advised that they may, unless the case has any exceptional aggravating factors, close cases which involve only a conviction for fixed penalty motoring offences, offences committed in the UK which are dealt with by substantially similar procedures, equivalent offences committed abroad and for offences whose
‘main ingredient’
is the unlawful parking of a motor vehicle.
25.146
The guidance to staff states that all convictions (and, it seems also to be intended although it is not expressly stated, police cautions) not falling within any of the categories that I have previously described should be referred to case examiners. Case examiners should apply the investigation stage test in the same way as when dealing with non-conviction cases. They are advised that they must consider the seriousness of the case and that they are entitled to consider the doctor’s fitness to practise
‘in the round’
. Where there has been an assessment of the doctor’s health (e.g. following a drink driving conviction), case examiners may authorise the staff to invite the doctor to agree voluntary undertakings. However, case examiners are reminded that, where there is a realistic prospect of erasure, the case must be referred to a FTP panel.
25.147
It appears to me that this guidance is clear and appropriate. I particularly welcome the guidance that all offences involving an element of dishonesty should be referred to a FTP panel. Case examiners may need guidance as to the kind of case in which there is a realistic prospect of erasure. Also, the guidance ought perhaps to make it plain that cautions are always to be dealt with in the same way as convictions. In my view, it should also be made plain that convictions resulting in a conditional discharge should be treated in the same way.
25.148
In my view, this guidance should be placed in the public domain. The question of whether a doctor convicted of a criminal offence should face a FTP panel is one in which members of the public have a legitimate interest. They should have the opportunity of contributing to a debate about which cases should be referred to a FTP panel and which should not. Moreover, the way in which the system operates in future should be transparent. The GMC should publish statistics showing a breakdown of the types of criminal offence and caution reported to the GMC and the outcomes of the decisions whether or not to refer such cases to a FTP panel and the reasons for the decisions taken. I suggest that the statistics should also show the final decisions taken by FTP panels in conviction and caution cases, so that it is possible to see clearly how the GMC deals with conviction and caution cases from beginning to end.
Closure of Cases by the Office Staff
25.149
When the Registrar decides not to refer an allegation to the case examiners, he (in practice, the staff exercising his powers) must notify the doctor, together with any person who brought the allegation to the attention of the GMC, of his decision and of the reasons for it.
Notification of the Doctor
25.150
The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states that the GMC will disclose to the doctor
‘all complaints that are not wholly frivolous’
. Whether or not there has been prior disclosure of the allegation to the doctor, the November 2004 Rules require the Registrar, as soon as is reasonably practicable after referral of an allegation for consideration by the case examiners (or referral to a FTP panel in the case of a conviction which the Registrar refers direct to the adjudication stage), to write to the doctor, informing him/her of the allegation made against him/her and stating the matters which appear to raise a question as to whether his/her fitness to practise is impaired. The Guidance states that, if the Registrar intends to disclose the allegation to the doctor’s employer or PCO before taking a decision whether to refer it to the case examiners, the doctor must be told of that intention. The doctor should also be sent copies of any documents received by the GMC in support of the allegation. The doctor will be invited to respond to the allegation by written representations within 28 days and will be informed that any representations received from him/her will be disclosed, where appropriate, to the maker of the allegation (if any) for comment. The July 2004 draft Rules provided (and the November 2004 Rules also provide) that disclosure of the doctor’s representations to the maker of the allegation will be made only
‘where appropriate’
. It is not clear in what circumstances it is envisaged that it would not be appropriate to make such disclosure.
25.151
There is no provision in the Rules requiring that the maker of an allegation should be shown the doctor’s response and, if so, at what point in the proceedings. In evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Scott said that, in some cases, it would be evident from the first that an allegation should proceed. If the Rules required that the maker of the allegation should be invited to provide comments before referral of the case to a case examiner or to a FTP panel, this might cause delay. He said that it was better to leave the decision whether to invite comments from the maker of the allegation in the hands of the Registrar or case examiners. I can see that that would be sensible where it was clear that the case was to proceed, whatever the response of the maker of the allegation were to be. However, if there were any doubt about whether the case should proceed, it seems to me to be necessary to obtain the comments of the maker of the allegation before a decision is made. When giving evidence, Mr Scott gave an undertaking that comments would be invited from the maker of the allegation in any case where there might be doubt about whether to send the case to a FTP panel. I note that the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual instructs caseworkers to disclose to the maker of the allegation the doctor’s comments on those parts of the allegations that have come from him/her. This appears to give effect to Mr Scott’s undertaking to the Inquiry. However, as I have said, the requirement to make disclosure to the maker of the allegation has not been incorporated into the Rules. I think it would be preferable for this to be done. Mr Scott said that it would be too difficult to include this provision in the Rules without tying the GMC to seeking the complainant’s comments in every case; that, he said, would cause unnecessary delay. However, I think that, with a little ingenuity, it could be managed.
Further Evidence Gathering
25.152
I have already said that, under the November 2004 Rules, after a decision has been taken to refer a case to a case examiner, the Registrar will be required to carry out such investigations as in his/her opinion are appropriate to the consideration of the allegation by the case examiners. In particular, the Registrar (or the staff, exercising his powers) will at this point be able to direct that an assessment of a doctor’s performance or health should be carried out. This provision first appeared in the May 2004 draft Rules. Previously, and at the time of the Inquiry hearings, it had been intended that the power to direct a health assessment should be exercised only by a medically qualified case examiner or the IC. It had been suggested that the IC might not wish to delegate (at least in the short term) even to a medically qualified case examiner the decision whether to direct a performance assessment. I shall discuss this new power conferred on the Registrar when I deal with the arrangements for dealing with cases involving issues of health and performance.
25.153
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance states that cases will be allocated to ‘investigation teams’ (each comprising a lawyer, an investigation manager, a number of investigation officers and case examiners). The draft Guidance says that regular team meetings will be held, at which decisions will be taken about the investigations required and progress will be reviewed. Lawyers (both in-house and external) will carry out certain investigations and will advise on those required. In a letter to the Inquiry, the GMC has said that the investigation of cases will be
‘a lawyer-led process’
. The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance says that such investigations may include obtaining witness statements and expert reports, as well as directing health or performance assessments.
25.154
The GMC says that it intends to employ staff, both legal and non-legal, to carry out evidence gathering at the investigation stage. Since the Inquiry’s hearings, I have seen advertisements in the newspapers seeking staff to carry out investigative work. This is a most welcome development. I do hope that a culture will be established within the GMC of proactive investigation, carried out with real determination and inquisitiveness - rather than by following a set protocol, at the end of which the investigation is regarded as complete, regardless of whether the issues have been ‘bottomed’. I would hope also that an early opportunity will be taken to restore to the case examiners the power, which was proposed under the 2003 draft Rules, to direct that any investigations which they deem necessary should be carried out.
Consideration of Cases by Case Examiners
25.155
I shall now turn to examine the process by which the case examiners will consider cases and make decisions upon them.
25.156
During 2003 and 2004, the GMC was engaged in devising guidance for the use of case examiners and (latterly) of IC panels. The Inquiry has seen three drafts of such guidance. These are the 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance and the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance, to which I have already referred, together with the draft document, ‘The Investigation Stage Test - Guidance on Criteria and Thresholds’, produced by the GMC in June 2004 (the June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance).
25.157
The Inquiry has also seen drafts, produced in 2003 and in June and September 2004, of the case examiner decision forms (CEDFs) to be used by case examiners when recording their decisions.
25.158
The GMC told the Inquiry that it intended to pilot the Guidance and CEDFs during a trial period in October 2004, after which they will be amended further as necessary.
25.159
The test to be applied at the end of the investigation stage will, as I have said, be whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. The impairment might arise by reason of misconduct, deficient professional performance or adverse health, or as a result of a conviction or caution or as a result of a determination by another professional regulatory body. I have already discussed the problems that arise in connection with this test and my ideas as to how these problems might be rectified and I shall not repeat my observations here.
Guidance on the Approach to Be Applied
25.160
The November 2004 Rules contain no criteria to be used by case examiners when applying the investigation stage test. However, some insight into the approach that case examiners are expected to adopt can be gleaned from the 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance, the June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance and the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance.
Cases Which Give Rise to a Presumption of Impaired Fitness to Practise
25.161
Case examiners will first of all have to evaluate whether an allegation is serious enough to indicate that the doctor’s fitness to practise may be impaired to a degree justifying action on the doctor’s registration. The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance advises that certain categories of conduct, namely sexual assault or indecency, violence, improper sexual/emotional relationships and dishonesty, should be referred by case examiners to a FTP panel unless there are
‘exceptional reasons’
for not doing so. These categories of conduct are the categories which had previously constituted ‘SPM by definition’, save that ‘dysfunctional conduct’ has now been replaced by the narrower category of ‘improper sexual/emotional relationships’. In such cases, there will be a presumption of impaired fitness to practise and, therefore, no need to consider the issue of seriousness.
25.162
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance advises that, where case examiners consider that there is no realistic prospect of establishing a case evidentially, they should not
‘normally’
close the case without first obtaining legal advice. Case examiners are advised to record on the CEDF the reasons for their decision, referring specifically to any legal advice received.
25.163
The June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance had advised case examiners that they should not
‘normally’
consider any arguments in mitigation raised by the doctor when considering whether to refer a case involving these categories of conduct to a FTP panel. However, that advice was omitted from the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance. I am concerned about that omission because I think the advice is important. It is clear from cases examined under the old procedures that the screeners often used to take mitigating factors into account quite inappropriately.
Considerations of Seriousness
25.164
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance then sets out the approach to be adopted in other cases (usually involving complaints about a doctor’s clinical practice), where there may be serious or persistent failures to meet the standards in ‘Good Medical Practice’ which raise an issue of impaired fitness to practise. It advises that not all failures to meet standards will involve an impairment of fitness to practise of a degree sufficient to justify action on the doctor’s registration. When considering whether the impairment is of such a degree, case examiners are advised that they should consider both the nature and the seriousness of the allegations. They will need to consider also the persistent and serious nature of any failures to meet the standards in ‘Good Medical Practice’. The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance then sets out a number of circumstances in which a question of fitness to practise is likely to arise. These are:
• ‘A doctor’s performance has harmed patients or put patients at risk of harm’
• ‘A doctor has shown a deliberate or reckless disregard of clinical responsibilities towards patients’
• ‘A doctor has abused a patient’s trust or violated a patient’s autonomy or other fundamental rights’
• ‘A doctor has behaved dishonestly, fraudulently or in a way designed to mislead or harm others’
• ‘The doctor’s behaviour was such that public confidence in doctors generally might be undermined if the GMC did not take action’
• ‘A doctor’s health is compromising patient safety.’
25.165
This list of circumstances is helpful. However, it seems to me that case examiners need some specific examples by which to gauge whether the threshold is crossed in the particular case under consideration. What is required is a comprehensive set of case examples showing where the threshold should lie.
25.166
If the case examiners consider (taking into account all the above) that the allegation is of sufficient seriousness to have the potential to justify action on registration, they must then consider whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing the case evidentially.
Consideration of the Evidence
25.167
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance sets out advice on how case examiners should approach the question of whether there is a ‘realistic prospect’ of establishing, in an individual case, that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to the required degree. The advice is in terms almost identical to those in the
which was first produced in January 2001 for the guidance of the PPC (although the
spoke of a
‘real’
, rather than a
‘realistic’
prospect). The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance includes a reminder that the criminal standard of proof applies in cases heard by a FTP panel.
25.168
The advice contained in the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance that case examiners should not
‘normally’
close a case for evidential reasons without obtaining legal advice appears to extend only to cases which carry a presumption of impaired fitness to practise. It seems that, in all other cases (most of which will be cases involving allegations about clinical practice), case examiners will be free to form their own views about evidential issues, guided by the modified
25.169
Assessing the weight of evidence is essentially a legal process and can be quite difficult for non-lawyers. It may be that, in cases involving evidential issues, case examiners will seek the advice of the lawyers in their investigation teams. However, I find it worrying that they are not specifically advised to do so. It seems to me also that the modified
aide memo
ire may be unhelpful in some respects. The reminder that the standard of proof is the criminal standard is likely to create the impression that, if the evidence is disputed by the doctor, the allegation will not be capable of proof, whereas, in fact, if the FTP panel believes the account given by the maker of the allegation, it might find the allegation proved.
25.170
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance also offers advice about the circumstances in which case examiners should consider whether a warning might be appropriate. I shall refer to that advice later in this Chapter.
The Possible Outcomes of the Consideration of a Case by the Case Examiners
25.171
The November 2004 Rules provide that medical and lay case examiners will have a number of options when deciding how to dispose of a case which is referred to them. First, they may direct that the case should not proceed further. It seems that, if the case examiners direct that a case should not proceed further, it will be open to them also to direct that a letter of advice should be sent to the doctor. This option is not mentioned in the Rules or in the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance. I shall consider this issue further below.
25.172
Second, the case examiners may decide to issue a warning to the doctor or to refer the allegation to the IC for an oral hearing, with a view to a warning being issued. I shall discuss that option further below. Third, the case examiners may refer the allegation for determination by a FTP panel. I shall deal with the procedure following such a referral later in this Chapter. Finally, the case examiners may recommend that the doctor should be invited to comply with undertakings following an assessment of his/her performance or health directed by a member of the GMC staff. If such an invitation is issued and if the doctor confirms that s/he is prepared to comply with such undertakings, the case examiners will cease consideration of the case and the case will then be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings. I shall deal with this option later in this Chapter.
25.173
Both case examiners must agree on how the case should be dealt with. In the absence of agreement, the case will automatically be referred to the IC.
Letters of Advice
25.174
I have explained in
how, under the old FTP procedures, it was open to a medical screener, having taken a decision not to refer a case to the PPC, to send a letter of advice to a doctor under Chapter XV of GMC Standing Orders. The PPC also sent warning letters and letters of advice in some cases which it had decided not to refer to the PCC for a hearing.
25.175
The 2003 draft Rules contained no specific provision for the sending of a letter of advice in a case which a case examiner had decided should not proceed further. Nevertheless, the Guidance which accompanied the 2003 draft Rules stated:
‘Where a case is concluded with no further action, the Committee
the IC
or Case Examiner may issue advice about the practitioner’s future practice or behaviour in such terms as they see fit.’
25.176
The 2003 draft CEDF contained a section in which a case examiner was to record his/her decision whether or not to issue a letter of advice, together with reasons for the decision. The 2003 draft CEDF suggested that a letter of advice would probably be appropriate where a case examiner was
‘satisfied that the case does not meet the investigation stage test and does not warrant a warning’
. Three examples were suggested of circumstances in which it might be appropriate to send a letter of advice. The first example was where there had been a
‘minor breach in professional standards’
, such as unreasonable delay in sending a promised medical report. The second example was where the doctor had been convicted of a
‘minor criminal offence (such as breach of the peace)’
. The third example was where the
‘issues’
had
‘been resolved locally to the satisfaction of the parties’
‘confirmation of any advice given locally would be useful’
. The FPPC’s paper which was considered by the Council at its meeting in November 2002 had suggested that the terms of any letter of advice sent to a doctor should be disclosed only to the doctor and to the complainant. The letter would not be disclosed to the doctor’s employer or PCO. Nor would it be disclosed to anyone who subsequently enquired about the doctor’s registration status. It was, however, intended that a letter of advice (together with any complaints against the doctor received locally) would be considered as part of the appraisal process.
25.177
The May and July 2004 draft Rules also contained no provision for the sending of letters of advice. Nor do the November 2004 Rules. The June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance and the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance make no mention of letters of advice. All references to letters of advice have also been removed from the June and September 2004 drafts of the CEDF. The June 2004 draft CEDF did request a case examiner, if s/he had decided that a case should not proceed further, to note the main points to be covered in the letter to be sent to the doctor. It seemed possible that case examiners would be instructed by the GMC that they might include in those points some form of advice to the doctor as to his/her future conduct. That section has been omitted from the September 2004 draft CEDF, which is much shorter than previous versions.
25.178
In a letter to the Inquiry, the GMC has stated:
‘... it will of course remain open to the GMC to provide advice to a doctor in any terms that it considers appropriate when no formal action (including a warning) is required, but to do so is considered desirable in the interests of maintaining good professional standards. It is anticipated that this power will be used only very sparingly and the GMC is considering how best to reflect this in its internal guidance to staff including Case Examiners.’
25.179
It appears, therefore, that, despite the fact that all reference to letters of advice has been removed from the draft CEDFs and Guidance, it is contemplated that, on occasion, cases will be dealt with by sending a letter of advice. Whether this power will be used sparingly in future remains to be seen. Under the old procedures, many such letters were sent.
25.180
There is nothing intrinsically wrong with the sending of a letter of advice; indeed, it may be a good idea, provided that it is not allowed to become a ‘soft option’ and an alternative to referring a case which, in reality, satisfies the investigation stage test and should therefore be referred to a FTP panel. But, if it is thought to be of value to retain letters of advice, the option should be written into the Rules and proper criteria should be agreed and established for the sending of such letters. Their use should be audited, so as to ensure that they are being used appropriately. It is not acceptable to start the new procedures with part of the process going on outside the Rules. If letters of advice are to be retained, they may - indeed should - be of relevance to the process of revalidation. It would be unfair to doctors if there were inconsistency of treatment in the sending of letters of advice. In the 2001 Consultation Paper, the GMC singled out the lack of transparency in relation to letters of advice as one of the weaknesses of the old system. The present uncertainty has done nothing to remove the obscurity of the old arrangements.
25.181
A novel feature of the new FTP procedures is the mechanism for issuing formal warnings to doctors at the investigation stage. Section 35C(6) of the 1983 Act provides that, if the IC decides that a case ought not to be considered by a FTP panel, it may issue a warning to the practitioner about his/her future conduct or performance. Because there is no express statutory test to be applied to the question of whether a case
‘ought not’
to be considered by a FTP panel, the circumstances in which a warning may lawfully be given are not clear from the statute.
The Circumstances in Which a Warning May Be Issued
25.182
The GMC’s intention is that a warning will be available where an allegation does not, in the view of the case examiners or the IC, warrant referral to a FTP panel, but where there is evidence to suggest that the doctor’s behaviour or performance has fallen below acceptable standards to a degree warranting formal censure by the GMC. The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance states:
‘There will also be cases that demonstrate significant departures from
Good Medical Practice
not so serious as to warrant action on a doctor’s registration but requiring a formal response from the GMC in the interests of maintaining good professional standards and public confidence in doctors. The appropriate response in these types of cases will be a warning.’
25.183
A warning will
‘remain valid’
for a period of five years. No decision has yet been made by the GMC about whether a warning should ever be regarded as ‘spent’ (and, therefore, not discloseable) after five years. The fact that a warning has been issued will be disclosed to the doctor’s current employer or PCO and to the person or body who brought the allegation to the attention of the GMC. In addition, it will be disclosed to any prospective employer. It will also be disclosed to any enquirer during the period of the warning’s validity. As I understand the position, an ‘enquirer’ would have to make a specific enquiry about whether a doctor had a FTP history (not just whether s/he was registered or whether there were restrictions on his/her registration) before the fact of the warning would be revealed. At a meeting of the Council in July 2004, Mr Scott told members how office staff provide such information. They answer only each question specifically asked and do not volunteer any additional information.
The 2003 Guidance
25.184
The 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance advised case examiners to consider four questions when deciding whether a warning was appropriate. These were:
‘a. Was the doctor’s conduct incompatible with his standing as a doctor?’
The 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance suggested that a warning might be appropriate following conviction for certain categories of criminal offence (e.g. an isolated incident of shoplifting), where the offence had not taken place in a professional context.
‘b. Has the doctor failed to address concerns raised by local management?’
It was suggested that a warning might be
‘a means of underlying
the seriousness of the concerns and stressing that any misconduct must not be repeated’
‘c. Is there a need to flag up our concerns with the doctor’s employer(s)?’
The 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance suggested that the fact that a warning would be disclosed to the doctor’s employer(s) would have the effect of
‘ensuring that employers are aware that aspects of the doctor’s practice may need to be monitored’
‘d. Are there any identifiable areas of a doctor’s practice in need of assessment or retraining?’
25.185
The 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance went on to state:
‘A departure from Good Medical Practice may be viewed as sufficiently significant to justify a warning where it is serious enough for us to mark the fact that the doctor’s behaviour was unacceptable and must not happen again, but that it would be disproportionate to take action against the doctor’s registration.’
25.186
At the Inquiry’s hearings, it was suggested to witnesses from the GMC (in particular, Sir Graeme Catto and Mr Scott) by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry that the new power to issue formal warnings might make it tempting for case examiners or the IC, in a case where they were uncertain whether a FTP panel would find the facts proved, to opt for the ‘bird in the hand’ and to issue a warning in a case that ought really to be referred to a FTP panel. This possibility did not appear to have occurred to any of the witnesses previously, although it did appear to the Inquiry to be an obvious danger.
The 2004 Guidance
25.187
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance makes clear that a warning should be considered only where the case examiners have already decided that the investigation stage test has not been met. Moreover, case examiners are advised that, where they consider that allegations are
‘borderline between action on registration and a warning’
, the presumption should be that the allegations should be referred to a FTP panel. It seems to me that this draft Guidance, if adhered to, satisfactorily deals with the Inquiry’s concern.
25.188
The June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance advised also that, where case examiners had decided that the allegations met the investigation stage test, they should not permit any mitigating factors to persuade them to issue a warning, instead of referring the case to a FTP panel. Rather, it should be left to the FTP panel to consider any mitigating factors and the appropriate circumstances. I considered that to be a welcome change in the advice because, as I mentioned earlier, the Inquiry’s examination of cases under the old procedures showed that screeners and the PPC often took mitigation into account when they should not have done. However, the advice has been omitted from the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance. Indeed, the only reference to mitigation occurs when case examiners are advised that, once it has been established that the investigation stage test has not been met, they should consider all the evidence (including mitigation) when deciding whether or not to issue a warning. In my view, the advice on mitigation given in the June 2004 Guidance should be reinstated. The GMC must be alert to the potential problem that the case examiners may take mitigating factors into account inappropriately. They should monitor case examiners’ decisions to ensure that they are not mistakenly taking mitigating factors into account and issuing warnings in cases that should have gone to a FTP panel. This is important in the interests of protecting patients.
25.189
The September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance makes no reference to the four questions which the 2003 draft Guidance had suggested the case examiners should consider when deciding whether a warning was appropriate. Nor does it give any further guidance on how a decision whether or not to issue a warning should be approached. The June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance had included a few examples of the types of case which might attract a warning. These were brief and contained no detail. They have been omitted from the September 2004 draft CE/IC Guidance. In my view, they should be reinstated because the provision of examples is always helpful. However, what is really needed is not these brief examples but more detailed case studies, covering a much wider range of topics and demonstrating, by the use of more than one case of a similar nature, where the dividing line has been - properly - drawn and why.
Procedure: Notice to the Doctor: the 2003 Proposals
25.190
The 2003 draft Rules set out an elaborate procedure for the issuing of warnings. Where the IC or a case examiner considered that a warning might be appropriate, the doctor would be given notice that a warning was being considered and would be informed of his/her right to make representations in writing. Although the 2003 draft Rules were silent on the point, it appeared that, if no representations were received, or if the doctor indicated that s/he was prepared to accept the warning, a written warning would be issued. If the doctor contended that a warning should not be issued, his/her representations would be considered by an IC panel or a case examiner, and a decision would then be taken as to whether an oral hearing, to determine whether the warning should be issued, was desirable. The question of whether there should be an oral hearing was a matter for a case examiner or the IC panel; there was no right to such a hearing.
Procedures: Notice to the Doctor: the 2004 Position
25.191
Under the May 2004 draft Rules, the provisions for the issuing of warnings were simplified. There was to be no opportunity for the doctor to make written representations specifically on the question of whether a warning should be issued. Presumably, it was intended that the case examiners would take into account, when making their decision, any written representations which had been submitted by the doctor when s/he had first been invited to comment on the allegation made against him/her. Doctors still had no right to insist on an oral hearing.
25.192
The July 2004 draft Rules (which are reproduced in this respect by the November 2004 Rules) reinstated the opportunity for a doctor to make written representations once the case examiners have indicated that they are considering issuing a warning. The case examiners must consider those written representations when deciding how to deal with the case. The July 2004 draft Rules conferred for the first time a right on a doctor to an oral hearing if s/he chose. This change was intended to meet the concerns of doctors about the new warning procedures. The right to a hearing has been retained in the November 2004 Rules.
The Case Examiners’ Decision
25.193
Once the doctor’s written representations have been received (or if s/he does not respond to the invitation to provide representations), the case examiners have three options for dealing with the case. The first option is to issue a warning to the doctor. The November 2004 Rules provide that, if the case examiners are satisfied that the allegation
‘ought not to be considered by a FTP Panel’
and if the doctor does not make any representations, or if it appears from his/her representations that s/he has not contested the facts upon which the allegation is based, the case examiners may, if they think fit, issue a warning to the doctor.
25.194
The second option is to refer the doctor for an oral hearing before the IC. Case examiners must exercise this option if the doctor requests an oral hearing before the IC, or if they consider it appropriate for some other reason to refer the case for an oral hearing. The third option (which is not explicitly set out in the relevant rule but must, I think, be open to case examiners) is to direct that the case should not proceed further. A direction that a case should not proceed further may be made if it is clear that the doctor is disputing the facts and if the case examiners do not consider, having taken into account the doctor’s representations, that it is appropriate to refer the case to the IC for an oral hearing.
25.195
It should be noted that there is no provision for the maker of the allegation to be notified of the fact that a warning is being considered. Nor is there any provision for the maker of the allegation to be shown, or asked to comment on, the doctor’s written representations as to whether a warning should be issued.
25.196
The process by which a warning may be issued following the decision by a case examiner that that would be an appropriate course is potentially complex, time-consuming and expensive. It may result in a hearing before an IC panel which is virtually as resource-intensive as a full hearing before a FTP panel. It may even result in a FTP panel hearing, if new evidence emerges at the IC panel hearing. I shall make some comments and suggestions about this procedure when I have completed my description of all the processes by which a warning may be given during the investigation stage.
Cases Dealt with by the Investigation Committee
25.197
I have explained that, under the November 2004 Rules, IC panels will deal with only two categories of case. The first category consists of cases where the two case examiners have been unable to agree. The second consists of oral hearings for the purpose of deciding whether a warning should be issued.
25.198
The GMC will maintain a list of medical and lay associates, who will be eligible to act as IC panellists. As I have already explained at
paragraph 25.90
, although, under the Constitution Rules 2004, GMC members will be eligible to sit on IC panels, it is not yet certain whether they will in fact do so. There is a division of opinion among Council members about whether this is appropriate. Whatever the long-term outcome of that debate, IC panels will be chaired by panellists who have undergone assessment and have been appointed for the purpose. Chairmen of panels may be medical or lay. The legal quorum of an IC panel will be three, including a medical and a lay panellist.
25.199
Decisions of IC panels are to be reached by a simple majority. If the votes are equal, the decision will go in favour of the doctor. IC panels will sit with a legal assessor when considering warnings.
Cases Where the Case Examiners Have Disagreed
25.200
In cases where the case examiners have been unable to agree, an IC panel will decide the case in private and on paper. Neither the maker of the allegation nor the doctor will have the right to attend or to be represented. The panel may adopt one of five courses of action.
25.201
First, the panel may determine that the allegation should not proceed further. It seems that, if it makes such a determination, it will have the option of sending a letter of advice to the doctor in the same way as the PPC frequently did under the old procedures. I have already expressed concern that there is no mention in the Rules about letters of advice. If they are to be sent, the circumstances in which this will happen should be set out in the Rules and there should be clear criteria for the circumstances in which this will be done.
25.202
The second option open to the IC panel will be to issue a warning to the doctor without an oral hearing. Where a warning is being considered, the doctor will be given the same opportunity to provide written representations about the issue as if the case examiners had initiated the warning process. The IC panel will then have the option, where the doctor has made no representations or has not contested the facts, of issuing a written warning without a hearing. The third option that the IC panel will have is to decide that an oral hearing should be held in front of a differently constituted panel of the IC. That panel would then decide whether a warning should be issued. Fourth, the IC panel may refer the allegation for determination by a FTP panel. The fifth option arises where the case examiners have failed to agree whether to recommend that a doctor should be invited to comply with undertakings following a performance or health assessment. In that event, the IC panel may determine that the doctor should be invited to comply with such undertakings as the panel thinks fit.
25.203
The November 2004 Rules give the IC no power to direct that any investigations should be carried out, or to adjourn for investigations to be carried out, when dealing with a case where the case examiners have disagreed. Under the old procedures, the PPC had the power to adjourn for further investigations. Furthermore, an IC panel has no power to direct a health or performance assessment in such cases. In my view, the IC should have these powers and I shall recommend that they be provided.
Oral Hearings for the Purpose of Deciding Whether to Issue a Warning
25.204
The 2003 draft Rules provided that an oral hearing held by an IC panel for the purpose of deciding whether to issue a formal warning was to be conducted in private. As for the procedure to be adopted at such a hearing, the 2003 draft Rules would have permitted the Presenting Officer (i.e. the person presenting the case for the GMC, usually a solicitor or counsel) to outline the allegations against the doctor, but not to adduce any evidence. By contrast, the doctor or his/her representative was to have the right to adduce oral or documentary evidence and to address the panel on the appropriate outcome. The 2003 draft Rules provided no opportunity for the Presenting Officer to make further submissions about the evidence adduced by the doctor or about any representations that had been made on the doctor’s behalf. The draft 2003 Rules specifically stated that the maker of an allegation had no right to appear before the IC panel and, indeed, the relevant person or body would almost certainly have been unaware that the oral hearing was being held or, indeed, that the possibility of issuing a warning was being contemplated. The IC panel was to be required to give only
‘brief reasons’
for its decision, which would have been communicated subsequently to the maker of the allegation.
25.205
At the time of the Inquiry’s hearings, I had some concern about the proposal to hold these oral hearings in private. A significant - and very welcome - change introduced by the May 2004 draft Rules (and reproduced in the November 2004 Rules) is that oral hearings in relation to warnings are now to be held in public. I was also concerned at the proposed procedure at such hearings, which was to be wholly one-sided, with only the doctor being permitted to adduce evidence. This arrangement was changed by the May 2004 draft Rules, which would have permitted the Presenting Officer to adduce any relevant oral or documentary evidence and to make further submissions after the doctor had given his/her evidence. This would have disposed of most of the concerns I had about the one-sided nature of the process. If there had been provision for the maker of the allegation to attend the hearing, to give evidence if appropriate and otherwise to provide information to the Presenting Officer, my concerns on that score would have been completely allayed.
25.206
The July 2004 draft Rules (reproduced in the November 2004 Rules) introduced yet further changes. Now, the Rules provide that, once the Presenting Officer has outlined the allegation and the facts upon which it is based, the doctor may respond to the allegation. Both the Presenting Officer and the doctor may adduce any relevant oral or documentary evidence only
‘where the Committee considers such evidence is desirable to enable it to discharge its functions’
. The Presenting Officer may then make such further submissions as the IC panel shall allow.
25.207
The effect of these changes is that it is now wholly within the discretion of an IC panel to decide whether or not oral evidence is called or documentary evidence is admitted. The nature and extent of the evidence to be admitted or called is also within the panel’s discretion. The Guidance which accompanies the November 2004 Rules states that:
‘... there is a presumption that evidence will not be received, and this is at the discretion of the Committee
i.e. the IC panel
considering the case. As the Committee has no power to impose a sanction which will affect the practitioner’s registration, it will generally be the case that the practitioner’s rights, and the public interest, will adequately be served by a summary hearing of this kind.’
25.208
The maker of the allegation will have no right to be notified of the hearing although it is possible that s/he will be called by the GMC to give evidence, if the IC panel permits this.
25.209
In contrast with the position where the IC panel is seized of a case because the case examiners have disagreed, the IC panel may, before reaching its decision, adjourn for further investigations to be carried out, including an assessment of a doctor’s health or performance.
25.210
At the conclusion of the oral hearing, the panel can issue a warning or determine that the case should not proceed further. A third option, which arises where new information adduced into evidence at the hearing indicates that to do so would be appropriate, is to refer the allegation for determination by a FTP panel. However, it seems likely that that would be a rare occurrence if it is not intended that evidence should usually be called.
25.211
The Guidance accompanying the November 2004 Rules states that any disputes of fact at an oral hearing relating to a warning will be decided on the basis of the civil standard of proof. Once it has reached its decision, the IC panel must announce the decision and give its reasons (the November 2004 Rules require
‘reasons’
‘brief reasons’
) for that decision.
25.212
At the moment, it is impossible to know how these procedures will work in practice. If disputes of fact are to be resolved, the IC panel will have to receive oral and documentary evidence. It is to be hoped that panels will not make findings of fact on the basis of representations alone. If evidence is to be heard, it must be heard from both sides. The presumption that evidence will not be received gives rise to practical problems. If it is not expected that evidence will be heard, witnesses will not be warned to attend the hearing. Of course, the doctor is likely to be there, but it would be quite wrong for the IC panel to allow the doctor to give evidence when the GMC had not even arranged for its witnesses to attend. On the other hand, it would obviously be unsatisfactory if witnesses were to be required to attend, only to find that the IC panel would not permit them to give evidence. It may be that there will have to be a preliminary hearing before the same IC panel to determine what the issues are and whether oral and documentary evidence will be received. It seems to me that, even if oral evidence is not to be heard, the maker of the allegation ought to be entitled to attend. Without the presence of that person, the Presenting Officer may have no one from whom to obtain information in relation to the representations made on the doctor’s behalf and the procedure will inevitably be one-sided. Such a process would not, in my view, provide adequate protection for patients and the public interest.
25.213
These proposed arrangements for the giving of warnings create a potentially complex, time-consuming and expensive procedure. Although it is said that the oral hearing will be more
‘summary’
than that which takes place before a FTP panel, that will not necessarily be so. If evidence is to be admitted, there will be very little difference. It is said that this more
‘summary’
procedure is appropriate and not unfair because the sanction that might be applied does not affect the doctor’s registration. That is true, but a warning is a serious matter, will be disclosed to enquirers and in effect goes into the public domain. The GMC says that warnings will ‘feed into’ the revalidation process, although it is not clear to me at what stage that will happen or what effect a warning would have on whether or not a doctor was revalidated. I note, as a matter of interest, that the 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance and the June 2004 draft Case Examiner Guidance advised case examiners that a warning should be regarded as a
‘serious sanction’
or a
‘serious matter’
. The more recent Guidance omits that advice. Nonetheless, it seems to me that the issue of a warning that is disclosed to anyone who enquires is a serious matter and the fact that the GMC wishes to give doctors the right to an oral hearing shows that it recognises that. The giving of a warning is also an important matter from the public point of view. The GMC has recognised that, by deciding that oral hearings in connection with warnings should take place in public.
25.214
paragraphs 25.56-25.58
above that, in my view, the GMC’s investigation stage test has been set at the wrong level. Errors of principle such as this usually give rise to practical problems. In my view, the GMC’s present difficulties with the issue of warnings within the investigation stage illustrate that problem. If the GMC were to adopt the investigation stage test that I have proposed at
paragraph 25.63
, all cases that might warrant a warning would automatically go through to a FTP panel. The case examiners and IC would be applying their minds to objective criteria and not trying to guess what sanction might be imposed. If the case did not pass the investigation stage test, the case would be closed, with or without a letter of advice. There would be no warnings at the investigation stage and no need to devise a special
‘summary’
procedure with discretion to admit evidence and all the practical problems that will create.
25.215
It seems to me that the practical problems of the proposed oral hearings are very significant. If the discretionary question of whether evidence is to be received is to be decided by the IC panel in every individual case, there will have to be a preliminary hearing in every case. This will have to take place before the same IC panel as will sit on the substantive hearing; a discretionary decision on the admissibility of evidence cannot be taken by a case manager. The expense will be considerable. The only other option is to have a full hearing in every case. I quite understand the disadvantages in that, especially since there is (theoretically at least) the possibility that, at the end of such a hearing, the case might be referred by the IC panel to a FTP panel, which might involve a rehearing of the same evidence.
25.216
If the GMC decides to maintain its present position, a number of problems arise, apart from the ones I have already mentioned. I fear that the complexity of the procedure will result in a lot of borderline cases foundering with no action being taken. Case examiners may be tempted not to send cases for an oral hearing if there is a significant dispute of fact, particularly if it is known that the IC has a lot of work.
25.217
If the present provisions are to be implemented, it is essential that their operation be properly audited. It will be necessary to collect statistics to show how many cases are closed after the invitation for written representations on the giving of a warning has been issued, i.e. without any action being taken. The GMC should analyse which types of case are being dealt with by way of warning and whether this is appropriate. Under the old procedures, letters of advice and warnings were often issued in cases which should have proceeded to a hearing.
25.218
I do hope that the GMC will consider these observations about the giving of warnings within the investigation stage, together with my concerns about the investigation stage test. The two are closely related and both problems could be resolved in the way I have suggested.
Cases Where the Doctor’s Fitness to Practise Is or Might Be Impaired by Adverse Health
25.219
At present, it is envisaged that arrangements which are in many respects similar to the old voluntary health procedures will continue under the new procedures. However, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the treatment of some health cases would be very different. He said that cases where the issues were only about impairment of health might be dealt with separately under a procedure akin to the old voluntary health procedures. However, health cases with ‘complicating factors’ would not. If, for example, a doctor had convictions for drug offences, then, despite the fact that the case involved health issues, it would have to go to a FTP panel. It would then be open to the FTP panel to direct that the doctor be referred back to the investigation stage to be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings. When asked how he envisaged that a case such as that of Shipman in 1976 would be dealt with under the new procedures, Mr Scott said that the case would go to a FTP panel. The doctor might thereafter be invited to give voluntary undertakings. I shall comment on this proposed procedure shortly.
25.220
The 2003 draft Rules provided that the power to direct that an assessment of a doctor’s health should be carried out would lie with the IC or a case examiner. They would exercise the power in a case where a question arose as to whether a doctor’s fitness to practise might be impaired by adverse health.
25.221
The 2003 draft Rules provided that, if the assessment(s) showed that the doctor was (or might be expected in the future to be) not fit to practise, or not fit to practise save on a limited basis or under supervision, or both, the IC panel or a case examiner might then direct the Registrar to invite the doctor voluntarily to undertake to comply with certain conditions, which might include limitations on his/her practice. If the doctor gave the necessary undertakings, the IC panel or case examiner (if satisfied that the undertakings were being observed) would postpone further action on the case. The 2003 draft Rules would have given the IC panel or case examiner power to appoint one or more medical practitioners to supervise the doctor and to provide reports as necessary. The IC panel or case examiner would also have had power under the 2003 draft Rules to direct a further health assessment in order to determine whether it was necessary for the doctor to remain under the supervision of the IC panel or case examiner. The IC panel or a case examiner would also have been given power to invite the doctor to agree to the variation of the conditions with which s/he had undertaken to comply and, when appropriate, to release the doctor from his/her undertakings. If the doctor refused to co-operate, or failed to comply with his/her undertakings or if his/her health deteriorated, the 2003 draft Rules would have given the IC panel or case examiner the power to refer him/her to a FTP panel.
25.222
All these arrangements would have been very similar to the arrangements under the old voluntary health procedures. The 2003 draft Rules gave the powers previously exercised by health screeners to both the IC and case examiners. In practice, however, it seems likely that the IC would have delegated one or more medically qualified case examiners to assume the role filled, under the old procedures, by the health screeners.
25.223
The May 2004 draft Rules removed the power to direct a health assessment from both the IC and the case examiners and placed it instead with the Registrar (in practice, the GMC staff). The only exception is that an IC panel may order a health assessment before taking a decision at an oral hearing relating to the issue of a warning. No explanation for this very important change (which has been retained in the November 2004 Rules) is apparent from the documents the Inquiry has seen and it appears that its objective must have been to reduce the workload of the case examiners and, thus, to reduce the number of additional case examiners who would be required to deal with the new arrangements for the double-handling of cases by both a medical and a lay case examiner. Another possible objective was to bring decisions to direct health assessments under staff control so that they could be subjected to financial restraints and service targets. With great respect to the staff - and I entirely accept that they are competent and hardworking and that some of them are very experienced - I cannot think that anyone could have reached a positive conclusion that the quality of decision-making by staff would be better than that by case examiners. Certainly, I am not aware of any evidence upon which such a view might be founded. In short, I cannot think of any reason of principle for making this change.
25.224
The sequence of events contemplated under the November 2004 Rules appears to be that the staff will direct a health assessment after a decision has been taken to refer a case to a case examiner. The staff may or may not confer with a case examiner before doing so. There is no requirement that they should. Presumably, if a case examiner thinks that there should be a health assessment, s/he will be able to request that one should be directed but s/he will not be able to insist. In my view, this rule should be changed so that case examiners (and an IC panel) can direct that a health assessment should be carried out. Indeed, it seems to me that, except in a case where an issue of health obviously arises and where it is clear from what branch of medicine the practitioner who is to carry out an assessment should come, the decision whether to order a health assessment and by whom it should be carried out should always be taken by a medically qualified case examiner rather than by a member of staff who is not medically qualified.
25.225
If the doctor fails to submit to or comply with an assessment of his/her health, the Registrar (or the staff exercising his legal powers) may refer the allegation for determination by a FTP panel. There is no requirement to consult with a case examiner before this is done. The FTP panel may then determine whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired and, if it is, may take appropriate action.
25.226
The May 2004 draft Rules implied (although they did not specifically provide) that, once the report of a health assessment had been received, the staff would, as a matter of course, refer the report to the case examiners. Under the July 2004 draft Rules (and now the November 2004 Rules), however, the Registrar (in practice, the staff) is given a discretion whether or not to refer an assessment report to a medical and a lay case examiner and need do so only if s/he considers it
to do so.
25.227
I assume that the fact that the staff will have a discretion whether or not to refer an assessment report to the case examiners means that they can close the case if it appears to them that the assessment report discloses no evidence that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. The staff never made this kind of decision before. I am concerned about it. In my view, if a case warrants a health assessment, it also warrants a decision by a medically qualified case examiner. It may be that the July 2004 draft Rules and the November 2004 Rules have created a situation that was not intended. The Rules also suggest that the Registrar (or member of staff) can direct an assessment only after s/he has decided to refer the case to the case examiners. If, when the assessment report is available, it is not shown to the case examiners, it is difficult to see how the latter can conclude the case. In my view, this rule should be changed. If a case is to be closed on the basis of a health assessment received, the decision should be taken by case examiners, one of whom will be medically qualified, or by an IC panel.
25.228
If the staff refer the assessment report to the case examiners and the case examiners take the view that the doctor is not fit to practise, or is not fit to practise except on a limited basis or under supervision or both, or that the doctor has some condition which (though in remission at the time of assessment) may be expected to make him/her unfit to practise in the future, the case examiners may recommend that the doctor should be invited to comply with undertakings. The November 2004 Rules provide for case examiners - not the staff - to make the decision that undertakings should be offered. If the case examiners recommend that undertakings are appropriate, the Registrar (in practice, the staff) will write to the doctor, inviting him/her to agree to comply with the undertakings specified by the case examiners. If the doctor confirms that s/he is prepared to comply with undertakings, the case examiners must
‘cease consideration’
of the allegation.
25.229
If, when they consider the assessment report, the case examiners agree that undertakings are inappropriate or inadequate for the protection of the public, they have power under the November 2004 Rules to refer the case to a FTP panel. The July 2004 draft Rules provided (and the provision has been retained in the November 2004 Rules) that a doctor should not be offered the opportunity to give voluntary undertakings where there is a realistic prospect that, if the allegation were referred to a FTP panel, his/her name would be erased from the register. This provision is designed to give effect to the observations of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the case of
Chapters 21
23
. If the case examiners cannot agree between themselves whether the case should be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings, it will automatically be referred to an IC panel.
25.230
The May 2004 draft Rules provided (as do the November 2004 Rules) that it should be the Registrar (in practice, the GMC staff), and not the case examiners, who is responsible, in a case where medical supervision is required, for selecting the medical practitioners to act as supervisors and for requesting progress reports as necessary. There is no indication that those progress reports will have to be referred to case examiners. The staff will also assume responsibility for directing that further assessments should be carried out as and when necessary. The November 2004 Rules (like the July 2004 draft Rules) do not provide for any input from the case examiners into that decision. Again, it would appear that these changes in the arrangements are intended to reduce the workload of the case examiners.
25.231
Moreover, if a doctor fails to give the undertakings sought, or if his/her health deteriorates, or if information is received that otherwise gives rise to further concern regarding the doctor’s fitness to practise, it is the Registrar (in practice, the GMC staff) who will have a discretion to refer the allegation for determination by a FTP panel. There is no requirement to consult with the case examiners before doing so. Decisions as to whether undertakings should be varied or should cease to apply will, however, be taken by case examiners.
25.232
I am very concerned about these arrangements. It is entirely appropriate that the staff should undertake the making of the practical arrangements for the medical and professional supervision of a doctor who is subject of voluntary undertakings, but it cannot be right that the overall responsibility for the doctor’s progress should remain with a staff member. Under the old health procedures, a health screener was responsible for all decisions and provided professional expertise and continuity of attention. In
, I reported the evidence of Dr Sheila Mann, who was a health screener from 1996 to 2004. I described the improvements to the health procedures that had been effected within the last few years. I thought (and I think that Dr Mann thought) that the new procedures would operate much as they had done in the past. Dr Mann said that it had been intended that one of the first batch of case examiners appointed should be a psychiatrist, in order to maintain continuity within the health procedures. However, as at December 2003, it had not been possible to recruit a suitable candidate. As a consequence, Dr Mann was concerned that there would not be a sufficient period of overlap to enable her to pass on the benefit of her experience to the new appointee. In March 2004, two of the recently appointed case examiners (one a professor of psychiatry) were appointed health screeners pending the introduction of the new FTP procedures. It is to be hoped that there was an opportunity for them to learn from Dr Mann’s experience. However, as I have said, their future role will be very different from that of a former health screener. It is profoundly disappointing that the GMC should have abandoned its original plans, not, so far as I can see, for reasons of principle but for reasons of expediency. I hope that the GMC will think again. From what I heard from the evidence of Dr Mann, I am quite satisfied that a considerable degree of professional expertise is required in the interpretation of assessment reports. Also, some of the decisions to be taken are of a difficult and delicate nature. They affect the safety of patients and of the public. With all due respect to the staff members, whose competence I do not in any way seek to impugn, these decisions must be taken by appropriately qualified medical practitioners.
Cases with a Performance Element
25.233
The new procedures for dealing with cases where an allegation suggests that a doctor’s professional performance is deficient are essentially very similar to those for dealing with health cases. In December 2003, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that he could not imagine that what were then termed the ‘performance procedures’ would operate in anything like the same way in the future as they had in the past. He said that, following a challenge to a doctor’s fitness to practise, a case examiner would consider whether it was necessary or appropriate to order a review of the doctor’s performance. If a performance assessment were undertaken and if the assessment report showed deficiencies in performance and the doctor accepted a statement of requirements, the case would go into ‘consensual disposal’ and would not go to a FTP panel unless the doctor was uncooperative. The arrangements for ‘consensual disposal’ would be very similar to the old voluntary performance procedures. It appears that what Mr Scott had in mind when he said that the performance procedures would be different in the future was not that the practical arrangements would be different but that the underlying philosophy would change. During their evidence to the Inquiry, both Mr Scott and Sir Graeme Catto voiced the intention that the GMC should move away from focussing on the remediation of doctors referred to it and should instead direct its attention towards ‘cases where restriction on registration was appropriate’.
25.234
As with health cases, the power to take a decision to direct an assessment of a doctor’s performance will, under the November 2004 Rules, lie with the Registrar (in practice, GMC staff) and not, as it would have done under the 2003 draft Rules, with the case examiners or the IC. This is a particularly significant change since, at the time when the new FTP procedures were being formulated, there was doubt about whether the IC would delegate the power to make that decision even to a medically qualified case examiner. It was anticipated that the IC would retain for itself the power to decide whether a performance assessment should be undertaken, at least in some cases. It was intended, however, that, in time, the IC would delegate such decisions to one or more case examiners. That was the situation which appears to have been envisaged by Mr Scott, when he gave evidence to the Inquiry. He spoke as if the case examiners would be taking these decisions. However, their job description did not mention this function.
25.235
Prior to the May 2004 draft Rules, it was the intention that the IC would assign medically qualified case examiners to take over the role played by the performance case co-ordinators in the old performance procedures. Once a performance assessment had been undertaken and had concluded that a doctor was not fit to practise or not fit to practise save on a limited basis or under supervision or both, a case examiner would have taken over the management of the case. Under the 2003 proposals, the voluntary performance procedures would have remained much the same as under the old procedures, save for some simplification of the procedures by eliminating referrals to, and hearings by, the Assessment Referral Committee.
25.236
This approach has now been changed and, under the November 2004 Rules, the power to direct a performance assessment will lie with the Registrar (in practice, the GMC staff). Indeed, neither case examiners nor the IC will have any power to order such an assessment save only that an IC panel may order a performance assessment before taking a decision at an oral hearing relating to the issuing of a warning. The powers and function of the staff and case examiners are virtually the same where a performance assessment has been undertaken as when an assessment of health has been carried out. The only difference is that, where a doctor fails to comply with the reasonable requirements of the performance assessment team, the staff will have the power (without consultation with case examiners) to refer the case to a FTP panel for consideration of suspension of the doctor’s registration or of the imposition of conditions on his/her registration.
25.237
One possible outcome of a case where a performance assessment has been carried out will be the issuing of a warning. A warning is likely to be considered by the case examiners in a case where an assessment report raises a significant cause for concern about a doctor’s practice but not concerns of such magnitude as to warrant referral to a FTP panel. I am concerned about this proposal. Logically, if there is significant cause for concern, the case will have passed the investigation stage test that I have proposed and will warrant referral to a FTP panel. The case examiners or IC could, as an alternative to referral to a FTP panel, invite the doctor to agree to voluntary undertakings. Such a course would be preferable to the issue of a warning. If a warning is issued, there will be no one to follow up the cause for concern and to see whether the doctor has done anything to rectify his/her shortcomings. It may be said that the warning will be communicated to the employer or PCO who will then be responsible for supervision. That may be so and it may be well done or not. However, the GMC will have relinquished responsibility, notwithstanding the existence of ‘significant cause for concern’.
25.238
Under the November 2004 Rules, in cases where a performance assessment has been carried out and where voluntary undertakings are given, the GMC staff will take over many of the functions which, under the old procedures, were exercised by medically qualified performance case co-ordinators. This is a very significant departure from the old arrangements and from those proposed in 2003. It is likely to have a considerable impact on the future operation of the performance procedures.
25.239
I have already expressed my concern about the changes to the health procedures which I believe will be detrimental to the quality of supervision provided by the GMC. The same concerns arise, for much the same reasons, in respect of the changes to the performance procedures. The professional expertise applied and the continuity of case management by medically qualified case co-ordinators, which were good features under the old procedures, will be lost. I am particularly concerned at the prospect that the staff will be able to close a case without referring it to case examiners. But that is not the only problem. I see from the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual that it is intended that there should be a team of staff dedicated to the provision of performance assessments. So be it. Arranging an assessment is an appropriate function for the staff. Deciding whether there should be one is another matter. Assessments are expensive and a staff member might be put under pressure not to order an assessment for financial reasons. Indeed, there are real reasons to fear that that might be so. The November 2004 draft Investigation Manual refers to
‘performance against service targets’
in respect of both health and performance assessments.
Disclosure of an Assessment Report to a Doctor’s Employer or Primary Care Organisation
25.240
One very welcome development that was introduced in the May 2004 draft Rules was a requirement that, on receipt of the report of an assessment of a doctor’s performance, the Registrar should send a copy, not only to the doctor him/herself but also to any person by whom the doctor was employed to provide medical services or with whom s/he had an arrangement to do so. Concern had been expressed at the Inquiry’s hearings (and by the Performance Procedures Review Group, chaired by Dame Deirdre Hine, which reported to the GMC in April 2004) that this information was not given to those persons and bodies with local responsibility for doctors. The report of the Review Group had observed that a performance assessment report
‘cannot be regarded as a private document between the GMC and the doctor’
. Receipt of the assessment report would have enabled employers and PCOs to have a better understanding of the nature and extent of the doctor’s problems and to make an informed decision about the steps they should take to deal with those problems.
25.241
However, this provision was omitted from the July 2004 draft Rules and does not appear in the November 2004 Rules. In its place is a much more limited provision, whereby details of any relevant undertaking (save any relating exclusively to the doctor’s health) will be disclosed to employers and PCOs and to any enquirer. This was done under the old procedures. There is now no mention of disclosure of assessment reports to employers and others. The proposal appears to have been dropped.
25.242
This is extremely disappointing. It is difficult to see how local NHS bodies can properly discharge their clinical governance obligations if they do not have access to this kind of information about the doctors for whom they are responsible. I have found no reference to this change of direction in the briefing papers distributed to Council members prior to the meeting in July 2004 at which the July 2004 draft Rules were approved. I know of no explanation for the change. I can see that information about undertakings is of some value but it cannot compare with the usefulness of the assessment report itself.
Cancellations of Referrals to a Fitness to Practise Panel
25.243
, in 2002, 20% of all referrals by the PPC to the PCC were subsequently cancelled by the PPC. Under the old FTP procedures, a decision to cancel required the agreement of the PPC. The complainant had to be consulted about the proposal to cancel; however, this was done only if the complainant was a private individual and not if the case had been referred to the GMC by a public body.
25.244
It is obviously important that cases that have been properly referred for a disciplinary hearing should not be cancelled without good reason.
25.245
Under the 2003 draft Rules, where the Presenting Officer (usually a solicitor or counsel instructed by the GMC to present the case before the FTP panel) considered, in the light of any evidence which had become available to him/her, that the fitness to practise of a doctor whose case had been referred to a FTP panel or an IOP was not impaired or that, for some other reason, the proceedings before the panel should not be held, s/he could have asked the IC or a case examiner to reconsider the case with a view to cancelling the referral to a FTP panel. It would have been open to the IC, had it wished, to delegate to a case examiner the task of deciding whether the referral of a case should be cancelled. No notice of the request to cancel a referral had to be given, either to the doctor or to the maker of the allegation. Nor was any guidance given as to how the task should be undertaken.
25.246
The May and July draft 2004 Rules contained significant changes to the proposed arrangements for the cancellation of a referral to a FTP panel or an IOP and these have been retained (with some further alteration) in rule 28 of the November 2004 Rules. A decision to cancel a referral is now to be initiated, not by the Presenting Officer, but by the Registrar (in practice, a member of the GMC staff). That member of staff may refer the case for a decision to any member of the IC (i.e. presumably, under the new arrangements for the composition of the IC, any person whose name appears on the list of persons eligible to sit on an IC panel, including some members of the GMC) or to the President. Those persons will be able to act alone and without consultation with others. The discretion given to them will be very wide. The November 2004 Rules permit a decision to cancel a hearing to be made,
, if evidence becomes available (the May 2004 draft Rules would have required that the evidence be
‘new’
but the July 2004 draft Rules and the November 2004 Rules removed that requirement) that suggests that a doctor’s fitness to practise is not impaired or
‘if it appears that for some other reason, the hearing before the Panel should not be held’
. There is still no requirement to notify the maker of an allegation that a cancellation is being considered, still less to consult him/her on whether this should be done. Once the decision has been made, rule 28 requires the Registrar to serve notice of the decision, together with the reasons for it, on the doctor and the maker of the allegation.
25.247
I am very concerned about this new rule for several reasons. First, the grounds on which the discretion exists to cancel a case are extremely wide. They could cover almost any eventuality. For that reason, the power of cancellation is open to abuse. It might be used where somebody (either a member of the administrative staff or a GMC member or another case examiner) is of the opinion that the case examiners’ decision to refer a particular case to a FTP panel was wrong. Provided that a member of staff is willing to initiate the request (and it might be difficult for him/her to refuse if asked), any IC panellist will be able to cancel a referral with no formality whatsoever, without consulting any other member and without even notifying the maker of the allegation. I am concerned that GMC staff, worried about a backlog of FTP panel hearings or about some difficulty in arranging a hearing date or the attendance of witnesses, might invite an IC panellist to cancel a hearing. It is even more worrying to think that it might become known which panellists were prepared to comply with such requests so that they could be ‘hand-picked’.
25.248
In a recent letter to the Inquiry, the GMC said that the power of cancellation would be used
‘in a small proportion of cases’
where the GMC’s lawyers had advised that the case had no merit and that the hearing should not proceed. However, the Rules, as currently drafted, do not provide that the initiative to cancel a hearing should come from a lawyer, as the 2003 draft Rules did. It seems, therefore, that it must now be envisaged that a cancellation could be initiated by a non-legal member of staff. I am unsure what was meant by the assurance that the power of cancellation would be used in only a small proportion of cases. It was used in as many as 20% in 2002. I can see that improved investigation in the early stages should result in there being fewer cases where evidential problems arise after referral to a FTP panel. However, it remains to be seen how many cancellations will occur under the new procedures.
25.249
In my view, this rule should be changed. Cancellation of the hearing of a case that has been properly referred should not be undertaken lightly; nor should it be done in obscurity. Such decisions should be taken by a panel of the IC after careful consideration and the reasons for the decision should be formally recorded. The reasons given should be specific to the case and should not be general or formulaic. Both the doctor and the person making the allegation should be notified some time before the meeting at which the matter is to be considered and should be told why cancellation is to be considered. They should have the opportunity to make representations.
25.250
Whether the GMC adopts the changes I have suggested or resolves to continue with the arrangements it has currently made, there must be very careful monitoring and audit of the numbers of cancellations applied for and granted and the reasons for the decisions. These numbers and the reasons (anonymised as appropriate) should be placed in the public domain on an annual basis. In the past, the number of cases cancelled after referral did not usually feature in the GMC’s annual FTP statistics. That was not acceptable as it provided an incomplete picture of what was actually happening.
Consensual Disposal of All Categories of Case
25.251
At its meeting in May 2004, the Council agreed that the GMC should request legislation to enable it to deal with all categories of case by means of ‘consensual disposal arrangements’, i.e. by the doctor giving voluntary undertakings about his/her future conduct or practice. Under the existing Rules governing the new procedures, such consensual disposal will be available only in cases involving a health or performance element. However, if the new proposal is brought into effect, conviction, caution and determination cases - as well as allegations of misconduct - could be disposed of by means of voluntary undertakings. The GMC is to ask the DoH to effect the necessary amendment to the legislation by way of an order under section 60 of the Health Act 1999. Meanwhile, there is to be consultation and detailed work is to be carried out on how such consensual disposal might operate.
25.252
It may be premature for me to comment but I think it would be helpful if I expressed my concerns about this proposal. My first concern is that cases dependent upon reports of convictions, determinations by another regulatory body and allegations of misconduct must, in my view, be dealt with in the public domain. I fear that ‘consensual disposal’ may take place in private. Second, I am concerned, particularly in respect of allegations of misconduct, that there may be no adequate resolution of the issues in dispute. In health and performance cases, there will be assessment reports which set out the nature and extent of the doctor’s impairment of fitness to practise. This will not be so in a case of misconduct. Insofar as there is a dispute about the facts, there is a real danger that the factual issues will be ‘fudged’ by the GMC accepting the doctor’s account of events, including all the mitigation. It may do so in order to avoid the cost and effort of a contested hearing. It may accept proffered undertakings - much as happened in some cases under the voluntary health procedures - on the ground that it is better for the public to be protected by voluntary undertakings than to take the risk that a FTP panel might find that the doctor’s fitness to practise was not impaired or not sufficiently impaired to warrant the imposition of conditions on his/her registration. In my view, the GMC should proceed with extreme caution down the route to consensual disposal in all types of case, at least if the intention is, as I understand it to be, to operate such procedures in the investigation stage.
25.253
If there is to be consensual disposal in cases of misconduct, conviction and determination, there must be a hearing before a FTP panel sitting in public. In effect, such disposal must take place at the adjudication stage and not as part of the investigation stage. In conviction and determination cases, the FTP panel should be made fully aware of the underlying circumstances. The way in which this could be done might vary according to the nature of the proceedings. There might be a transcript of the previous proceedings. A police officer might give evidence of the circumstances of a conviction. In misconduct cases, there should be an agreed statement of facts on which the maker of the allegation should be entitled to comment in writing. The FTP panel should see both the statement and the representations so that, if it appeared that there was a significant dispute of fact, a full hearing could be held. The agreed statement should be put in the public domain. The FTP panel should have all relevant facts in the GMC’s possession, including of course any previous FTP record. The FTP panel should satisfy itself that the proposed undertakings are sufficient to protect the public and to reflect the gravity of any offence. Afterwards, the doctor’s compliance with his/her undertakings should be monitored and there should be provision for returning the case to the FTP panel in the event of a breach. However, this procedure would differ very little from the procedure now followed, where the doctor makes admissions and conditions are imposed.
Revival of Allegations
25.254
Under the old procedures, conviction cases and cases involving complaints about a doctor’s conduct which had been closed by the screeners or by the PPC could be ‘revived’ if the GMC subsequently received notice of another conviction or complaint about the same doctor. The Rules provided for a ‘limitation period’ of two years, after which an earlier report or complaint could not be revived. In
, I questioned whether such a comparatively short period adequately protected patients. Cases involving complaints about performance could also be revived; no limitation period was specified in the Rules but, in practice, the GMC operated a ‘cut-off’ after three years.
25.255
In November 2001, when the new procedures were being developed, it was agreed by Council that it should be possible for a complaint closed at the initial stages of the procedures to be revived in the event of a new complaint being received. However, no such a provision appeared in the 2003 draft Rules, or in any subsequent draft. The November 2004 Rules make no specific provision for revival of allegations.
25.256
It seems to me that there should be proper provision for the revival of allegations previously closed. One can readily imagine circumstances in which an allegation which seemed relatively minor at the time it was considered assumes greater significance when another similar complaint is received subsequently. This is particularly so in cases involving allegations of deficient performance. It is important in the interests of patient protection that the GMC should, in those circumstances, be able to look at the picture as a whole, rather than being artificially limited to consideration of the subsequent allegation only. If there is to be revival of closed allegations in certain circumstances, it is important that the relevant provisions are contained in the Rules - not least so that doctors may be aware of the possibility of an allegation against them being reopened and of the circumstances in which this might be done. It is, in my view, entirely appropriate that there should be a limitation period after which it should not, save in wholly exceptional circumstances and in the interests of patient protection, be appropriate to reopen a previous complaint. I would suggest that that period should be significantly greater than the two or three years previously operated. I would suggest a period of five years.
Review of Investigation Stage Decisions
The 2003 Draft Rules
25.257
Under the 2003 draft Rules, IC panels and case examiners were to have the power to review one of their own decisions to refer or not to refer a case to a FTP panel or to dispose of the case by means of a warning. Such a review was to take place only where new evidence or information had become available which made such a review desirable for the protection of members of the public or otherwise in the public interest. The doctor was to be consulted and the IC panel or the case examiner was to take into account the doctor’s interests, in addition to the public interest. There was no provision in the 2003 draft Rules for the maker of the allegation to be consulted about the proposal to review a decision - not even a previous decision to refer the case to a FTP panel - even though that person might have been in a position to comment on the new evidence or information and would plainly have had an interest in knowing that a review was to take place.
Discussion at the Inquiry
25.258
There was some discussion at the Inquiry seminars in January 2004 about the need for a speedy means of review of decisions taken at the investigation stage. In the past, the great majority of cases reported to the GMC have been closed at a preliminary stage and in private, and it is anticipated that that will continue under the new procedures. It was thought, therefore, that, if public dissatisfaction were to be avoided, there should be some means of reviewing decisions to close cases taken at a preliminary stage. There was a large measure of agreement that such a review should be available both to the maker of the allegation and to the doctor concerned. However, most participants were of the view that the right of a doctor or maker of an allegation to seek a review should be circumscribed in some way. It was feared that, if doctors and complainants had an automatic right of appeal, the GMC would be inundated with unmeritorious applications. I can see the force of that. However, the Inquiry heard that, in the Canadian Province of Québec, any complainant who is dissatisfied with the preliminary decision of the body performing the equivalent ‘screening’ function to that of the investigation stage of the new procedures (the Inquiry Division of the Collège des Médecins du Québec) is entitled to a review by a review panel. Apparently, there is no problem with inundation there. It appears that, if a decision is taken at the ‘screening’ stage not to refer a case to a disciplinary hearing, the complainant receives a letter setting out the reasons for the decision in detail. I suspect that it is because the complainant receives a full and detailed explanation of the reasons for the decision that there are not too many unmeritorious applications for review.
25.259
The proposed provisions governing reviews changed in 2004. The July 2004 draft Rules removed the power of review from IC panels and case examiners and limited the decisions that will be susceptible to review. This remains the position under the November 2004 Rules. They provide that the President (and only the President) may review a decision not to refer an allegation to a FTP panel, a decision to issue a warning, or a decision by the case examiners to accept a doctor’s voluntary undertakings following a health or performance assessment. There can be no review of a decision by an IC panel or case examiner to refer a case to a FTP panel. Nor, as I read the Rules, may the President review a decision by the Registrar (or member of staff) not to refer a case to a case examiner.
25.260
There are only two grounds on which a review will be granted. One is that there is information that the GMC has erred in its administrative handling of the case and a review is necessary in the public interest. The second is that there is new evidence or information which makes such review necessary for the protection of the public or for the prevention of injustice to the doctor, or that a review is otherwise necessary in the public interest. It follows that any doctor or maker of an allegation whose request for a review does not fall within those narrow limits but who is nevertheless dissatisfied with the decision will have to apply for judicial review. I am disappointed that the GMC has not felt able to act upon the experience of the Collège des Médecins du Québec, Montreal, and to offer an unfettered right to a review. If, as the GMC intends, makers of allegations which are not going to proceed to a hearing will receive a full letter of explanation of the decision, together with a copy of the CEDF, it would seem that there would be no real danger of an inundation.
25.261
The doctor and the maker of the allegation must be notified of a decision by the President to review a case and must be provided, where appropriate, with copies of any new evidence received. The November 2004 Rules require that their representations on the proposed review must be sought. Where the President decides to review a decision, he may determine that the original decision should stand or he may refer the allegation to two case examiners for consideration as if it were an allegation being considered by them for the first time.
25.262
The decision on a review must be notified to the doctor concerned and to the maker of the allegation, together with any other person whom the Registrar considers to have an interest in receiving notification.
25.263
These new arrangements are in some respects a definite improvement on the 2003 proposals. The fact that the maker of the allegation is now involved in this process is a most welcome change. Also, the decision has been taken away from the IC or a case examiner. To have left it in their hands would not have been satisfactory, as there would have been no ‘fresh look’ at the case. Another improvement is that it is not possible under these provisions to review a decision to refer an allegation to a FTP panel. That is welcome, although it may increase the danger of surreptitious cancellations, about which I expressed my concern in
paragraph 25.247
. I am, however, concerned about the provision that the President alone should exercise these powers personally. There are two reasons for this: one of principle, one of practicality. There would be much to be said for giving the power of review to someone outside the GMC. It would allay public concern that the GMC is a ‘closed shop’ and protects doctors. It would also provide a useful means of external audit. The second reason is that the role of President is already extremely demanding and I do wonder whether it is sensible to impose upon him this additional burden. The amount of work that will be involved is, as yet, uncertain. Some case files are several inches thick. If the President is to reach a personal decision in each case, as opposed to ratifying a decision suggested by a member of staff, he will have to read the whole case file, possibly including close examination of medical records or a performance assessment report. He might find himself driven to delegate the task to others.
25.264
As I mentioned above, it appears that the present provisions do not allow for a review to right an error made by a member of staff in rejecting an allegation at the earliest stage, before referral to a case examiner. If so, this
should be remedied.
The Roles of the Investigation Committee and of the Case Examiners

--- The Tests to Be Applied ---
The Concept of Impairment of Fitness to Practise
25.41
One of the GMC’s main objectives in introducing its new procedures has been to leave behind the compartmentalised approach that had developed under the old procedures for historical reasons. The conduct procedures were the foundation of the GMC’s disciplinary processes. The health procedures and the performance procedures were added in 1980 and 1997, respectively. Although it was possible, in some circumstances, for a doctor to be transferred from one set of procedures to another, a case could not be handled within more than one set of procedures at any one time. Understandably, the GMC wanted to overcome this difficulty. The solution it arrived at was to adopt the concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ as a doctor. This concept, which, as I have said, is embodied in the 1983 Act, forms the foundation of the tests to be applied by decision-makers at both stages of the GMC’s new procedures.
Definition of the Term
25.42
The advantage of the concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ is that it is capable of embracing any or all of the types of problem that the GMC habitually encounters, i.e. misconduct (including breaches of the criminal law leading to convictions or cautions), deficient professional performance, adverse health and determinations.
25.43
The disadvantage of the concept is that it is not at all clear what it means. The concept is not defined in the 1983 Act or in the Rules which are to govern the operation of the new procedures. The only relevant legislative provision is at section 35C of the 1983 Act, where it is said that a doctor’s fitness to practise shall be regarded as ‘impaired’ by reason only of misconduct, deficient professional performance, a conviction or caution, adverse physical or mental health or a determination. That section imposes a limitation upon the routes by which a doctor’s fitness to practise might be found to be impaired, but it does not help in understanding what an impairment of fitness to practise is. I have said elsewhere in this Report that the expressions ‘serious professional misconduct’ (SPM) and ‘seriously deficient performance’ (SDP) were difficult to define or even to recognise. I believe that even greater difficulty will be encountered with ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ unless it is clearly defined.
25.44
The question whether a doctor is fit to practise as a doctor may mean many different things in different contexts. If a doctor is suffering from ill health (for example, severe depression), one might say that s/he is not fit to practise because his/her concentration is so affected that s/he cannot make effective decisions on diagnosis and treatment; s/he presents a risk to patients. If a doctor’s performance is found to be deficient (for example, because s/he has ‘botched’ one or more operations), one might say that s/he is not fit to practise because s/he cannot provide an adequate standard of care to patients and exposes them to risk of harm. If a doctor has been found guilty of offences of indecency, one might say that s/he is not fit to practise because there is a risk that s/he will act indecently towards patients. If a doctor is found guilty of an insurance fraud, one might say that s/he is unfit to practise because s/he is a disgrace to the profession and has brought it into disrepute. Similar considerations might apply to the doctor found guilty of causing death by dangerous driving while drunk. In either of the last two cases, the doctor might be first class so far as his/her clinical practice is concerned. If a doctor has forged prescriptions to obtain controlled drugs for his/her own use, one might say that s/he is unfit to practise because s/he might at any time be under the influence of drugs and unable to make sensible decisions about diagnosis and treatment and/or because s/he is dishonest and cannot be trusted. If a doctor were to give private information to a newspaper about a patient who was a well-known personality, one might say that the doctor was not fit to practise because s/he had breached confidentiality, one of the fundamental tenets of the profession. Another such tenet is the requirement that patients should consent to treatment. A doctor who conducted a research project without obtaining the informed consent of the patients might be said to be unfit to practise.
25.45
The examples I have given are cases where the conclusion might well be that the doctor is completely unfit to practise. However, the concept of an ‘impairment’ of fitness to practise introduces a difficulty. One dictionary definition of ‘impairment’ is ‘damaged; injured; made less effective; devalued’. Doctors usually use the word in connection with an impairment of function, for example, impaired hearing or impaired mobility. In those contexts it simply means ‘reduction’. Some of the ways by which ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ may be demonstrated under section 35C lend themselves easily to the concept of impairment in the sense of ‘reduced’. For example, if a doctor’s performance is deficient, one might well say that his/her fitness to practise is ‘impaired’. The concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ may also be quite apposite in cases of ill health. But, in most cases of misconduct and convictions, ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ is not a helpful concept. For example, if a doctor has been found guilty of the theft of a pair of shoes from a shop, s/he has been found to be dishonest. Some might say that this has nothing to do with his/her fitness to practise medicine. Others might say that s/he is a disgrace to the profession and is completely unfit to practise. The one thing that you could not sensibly say is that his/her fitness to practise medicine is ‘impaired’. I take another example, this time involving clinical practice. If a doctor has been found to have falsified medical records, some might say that s/he is unfit to practise because s/he cannot be trusted. Some might say that s/he is a disgrace to the profession. Others might take a less serious view and observe that, although this kind of behaviour is to be deprecated, it does not affect the doctor’s fitness to practise. Although different people might take differing views about the seriousness and relevance of the misconduct, I do not think that anyone would think of saying that the doctor’s fitness to practise was ‘impaired’.
25.46
So, although I can well understand why the GMC has adopted the all-embracing concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’, and although I recognise its major advantage, it does have disadvantages. It is not easy to define; it means different things in different circumstances and, in some circumstances, it is almost without meaning. Some concepts are difficult to define but relatively easy to recognise when found. It is often said that elephants fall into this category but I have never understood why; definition cannot be too difficult. However, I fear that an ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ will be not only difficult to define but also not easy to recognise, because (unlike recognising an elephant) recognising ‘impaired fitness to practise’ involves making a value judgement.
25.47
Even in cases in which the concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ is obviously appropriate, such as cases of ill health or deficient performance, it will not be every slight impairment that gives rise to the need for intervention by the GMC. If there are gradations of impairment, what level will justify the referring of a case through the procedural stages and at what level will action on registration be justified? All those involved in the FTP procedures will know that not every impairment of fitness to practise will justify action by the GMC. To take an extreme example, one might say that if a doctor goes to work suffering from a headache, his/her fitness to practise may be impaired but no one is going to suggest that the GMC should intervene. The GMC can provide guidance for its staff, case examiners and panellists, but how is the public to understand why a decision was taken and how can the courts decide whether a decision was reasonable if the test is as amorphous as ‘impairment of fitness to practise’? There is, in my view, a need for a test which the public understands and by which the courts can judge whether a decision was lawful in the sense of complying with the test.
25.48
Another potential problem arises with the time when fitness to practise is measured or assessed. The 1983 Act permits a FTP panel to take action on registration if it finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. That implies that the impairment must be present at the time of the hearing. So, if a doctor has committed a serious act of misconduct a year ago, does that indicate that his/her fitness to practise is currently impaired? I understand that the GMC has been advised that, although section 35D(2) of the 1983 Act refers to a finding that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, present impairment of fitness to practise can be founded on past matters. That seems sensible. The doctor’s current fitness to practise must be gauged partly by his/her past conduct or performance. It must also be judged by reference to how s/he is likely to behave or perform in the future. Having said that, I think that there will be arguments about the extent to which a past (serious) misdemeanour makes a doctor’s fitness to practise impaired at the present time. It would be most unsatisfactory if a doctor was able, by delaying the hearing of a case, to reduce the risk of a finding that his/her fitness to practise was impaired.
25.49
I have made these observations about the concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’, not because I am going to suggest that the GMC should abandon it but to draw attention to some of the problems of decision-making that will be inherent in the new procedures and which, I think, the GMC must take steps to resolve.
25.50
I think it will be helpful, in the resolution of the problems that I am about to outline, if I analyse the reasons why a decision-maker might conclude that a doctor is unfit to practise or that his/her fitness to practise is impaired. In the examples I discussed above, four reasons for unfitness recurred. They were (a) that the doctor presented a risk to patients, (b) that the doctor had brought the profession into disrepute, (c) that the doctor had breached one of the fundamental tenets of the profession and (d) that the doctor’s integrity could not be relied upon. Lack of integrity might or might not involve a risk to patients. It might or might not bring the profession into disrepute. It might be regarded as a fundamental tenet of the profession. I think it right to include it as a separate reason why a doctor might be regarded as unfit to practise, because it is relevant even when it arises in a way that is quite unrelated to the doctor’s work as a doctor.
The Investigation Stage Test
25.51
The new FTP procedures will begin with the receipt of an allegation. Allegations will be sifted by GMC staff and not all will be referred into the investigation stage. I shall consider that sifting process later in this Chapter. If an allegation survives the preliminary sift, it will be referred (except in the case of some convictions) to case examiners. It is convenient at this stage to discuss the test that the case examiners (and, when the case examiners cannot agree, the IC) will apply at the conclusion of the investigation stage in deciding whether to refer a case to a FTP panel.
25.52
Section 35C(4) of the 1983 Act provides that the IC shall investigate an allegation and decide whether it should be referred to a FTP panel. The section does not specify what test should be applied at that stage. Nor do the November 2004 Rules or any of the drafts which preceded them. This is surprising because it was the lack of a clear straightforward test that gave rise to problems under the old procedures. The problems were lack of clarity about which cases should go through the various filtering processes, and inconsistency of decisions. If the new procedures are to be transparent and are to produce consistent decisions, there should be a clear statutory test for each stage of the process. If there is not, there will be a danger that cases may be filtered out that ought to go forward. If that happens, patients are not adequately protected.
25.53
The test which the GMC has decided should be applied at the end of the investigation stage is whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. Action on registration means erasure, suspension or the imposition of conditions upon the doctor’s right to practise.
25.54
In the course of the Inquiry hearings, I expressed some concern that the test to be applied by those making decisions at various stages of the FTP procedures made no mention of the protection of patients. It seemed to me that the test focussed exclusively on the sanction to be applied to the doctor and not at all upon the nature and gravity of his/her actions or their effect upon patients. In an apparent attempt to meet those concerns, the GMC added a preamble to the investigation stage test, which appears in various guidance documents:
‘The Investigation Committee or case examiners must have in mind the GMC’s duty to act in the public interest which includes the protection of patients and maintaining public confidence in the profession, in considering whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration.’
What I actually had in mind was a test that incorporated the protection of patients as an integral part of the test.
25.55
In any event, the investigation stage test as presently formulated seems to me to give rise to a number of problems.
A Problem of Principle
25.56
As a matter of principle, in any legal process, if there is to be a preliminary process which seeks to filter out cases which should not go through to final adjudication, the test applied to that process should have the effect of filtering out only those cases which, taken at their highest, could not satisfy the test to be imposed at the final stage. In a disciplinary process, the preliminary process should, as a matter of principle, filter out only those cases that, taken at their highest, cannot satisfy the test for disciplinary action.
25.57
The test for disciplinary action under the 1983 Act is whether the practitioner’s fitness to practise is impaired. If it is, the FTP panel has jurisdiction to take action on registration. As a matter of principle, therefore, the preliminary screening process should allow through any case in which it is possible (or, if it is preferred, realistically possible) for there to be a finding of impairment to practise. Because ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ is so imprecise a concept, that screening test would set a very low threshold and would result in a lot of very minor cases being referred through to a FTP panel. I think it must have been in order to avoid that result that the GMC set the investigation stage test at a much higher threshold. It will allow through only those cases in which there is a realistic prospect of a finding of impairment sufficient to justify action on registration.
25.58
I can understand why the GMC would wish to set this higher threshold. It is in no one’s interest to have a lot of trivial cases going through to a FTP panel hearing, at the end of which there is no possibility of action being taken on registration. But, in attempting to do this, the GMC has, in my view, created problems of construction and of circularity of definition which deprive the investigation stage test of clarity and which will result in lack of transparency of decision-making.
A Problem of Construction
25.59
The test as currently stated poses a problem of construction. Does it mean:
that the decision-maker has to decide whether, in his/her opinion, what is alleged, if proved, shows that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration and that the evidence available is such that there is a realistic prospect of proving what is alleged; or
that the decision-maker has to decide whether there is a realistic prospect that a FTP panel will find that what is alleged shows that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration and also whether the evidence available is such that there is a realistic prospect of proving what is alleged?
25.60
At the moment, the test does not distinguish between these two possibilities. It is not clear whether the decision-maker is supposed to make a personal judgement about the gravity of the matters alleged or whether the process is one of assessing what the view of a FTP panel might be. That ought to be clarified. However, in my view, neither is satisfactory because both involve the making of a value judgement (either firsthand or secondhand) about the fitness to practise of the doctor if what is alleged about the doctor is proved. A preliminary decision such as the decision to be made at the end of the investigation stage should involve as little value judgement as possible; it should be based, so far as possible, upon an objectively ascertainable threshold.
The Problem of Circularity
25.61
A further problem with the investigation stage test as currently drafted is that it is circular. The case examiner or IC must make a judgement about whether the matters alleged appear to show an impairment of fitness to practise such as would justify action on registration. So, for example, in a case involving an allegation of misconduct, the test involves consideration of whether what the doctor appears to have done is serious enough to justify action on registration. That question immediately prompts a second question, namely: how serious does what s/he has done have to be before it is serious enough to justify action on registration? And the only answer available to that second question is that it has to be serious enough to justify action on registration. We have come full circle. There is no benchmark, no objective standard. The answer to ‘how serious does it have to be?’ involves a purely subjective judgement by the decision-maker. I accept, of course, that some element of discretionary judgement will always be required in decisions of this kind; decision-makers often have to decide upon which side of a threshold a particular case falls. The problem here is that there are no thresholds. This means that decisions at the investigation stage can never be adequately tested. The decision-making process can never be transparent.
What Should Be Done?
25.62
I suggest that the GMC should think again about the investigation stage test. Because I recognise that it is easy to criticise the work of others and less easy to suggest better ways of doing things, I have tried to devise a test that will be clear and will depend, not upon an open-ended value judgement (whether at firsthand or secondhand), but upon some more objective criteria.
25.63
The test I propose has two stages. The object of the first stage of the test will be for the decision-maker to decide whether the allegation, if proved, might show that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. At the second stage, s/he will have to consider the adequacy of the evidence. At the first stage, I have related ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ to the underlying reasons why the doctor’s fitness to practise might be impaired, which I identified earlier. These reasons are that s/he is a risk to patients, that s/he has brought the profession into disrepute, that s/he has breached one of the fundamental tenets of the profession or that his/her integrity cannot be relied upon. Those concepts are far easier to recognise than ‘impairment of fitness to practise’. So, the two stages are:
1. Is there one or more than one allegation of misconduct, deficient professional performance or adverse health and/or one or more than one report of a conviction, caution or determination which, if proved or admitted, might show that the doctor:
has in the past acted and/or is liable in the future to act so as to put a patient or patients at unwarranted risk of harm; and/or
has in the past brought and/or is liable in the future to bring the medical profession into disrepute; and/or
has in the past committed a breach (other than one which is trivial) of one of the fundamental tenets of the medical profession and/or is liable to do so in the future; and/or
has in the past acted dishonestly and/or is liable to act dishonestly in the future.
If so:
2. Is the available evidence such that there is a realistic prospect of proving the allegation?
25.64
I would suggest that a doctor should be regarded as ‘liable to’ act in a certain way if a reasonable and well-informed person would consider, in the light of what is known about the allegation and about the doctor’s past and present circumstances, that there is a real risk that s/he might act in that way. The evidence of a single past event might be serious enough, standing alone, to satisfy the investigation stage test. For example, evidence that a doctor had harmed a patient, as Shipman was believed to have harmed Mrs Renate Overton, by giving her an inappropriate dose of morphine (see
), would satisfy the test. Evidence of a less serious error, for example, the kind of prescribing error that Shipman made in the case of Mr W (see
), might not be sufficient standing alone, but would be sufficient if coupled with other evidence that suggested that the doctor was liable to make careless mistakes. Evidence of poor communication skills, contained in a performance assessment report, might well pass the test, even if there was no significant past incident in which harm had been caused; it might pass on the basis that the doctor was liable to cause unwarranted harm in the future. I would suggest that ‘unwarranted risk of harm’ should be defined as a risk of harm over and above that which would be expected to arise from the advice or treatment had it been given or administered with reasonable skill and care. Insofar as there is no agreement on the fundamental tenets of the medical profession (some of which appear in ‘Duties of a Doctor’), a list could be developed and agreed.
25.65
In my view, the application of that two-stage test would give case examiners and the IC something more objective to focus upon than ‘impairment of fitness to practise’. It would avoid those people having to ‘second guess’ the view that the FTP might take about the need to take action on registration and it should also avoid trivial cases being sent through to the FTP panel. Finally, I think also that it would satisfy the public’s reasonable expectation about the kind of case that ought to go through to a FTP panel. If correctly applied, it should ensure that all those cases that ought to proceed (for reasons of patient protection) do in fact proceed to a FTP panel.
The Adjudication Stage Test
25.66
At the present time, the test to be applied by the FTP panel is simply framed in the words of the statute. The statutory test is whether or not the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. It is not, as the GMC’s Guidance to Panellists suggests, whether or not the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. I suspect that FTP panels will have great difficulty in applying the statutory test in a consistent way. The test requires a value judgement that is not underpinned by any objective criteria. Nowadays, where a statute gives a decision-maker a discretion, it usually provides a list of the kind of things that should be taken into account.
25.67
In devising an adjudication stage test (to be applied by FTP panels under Rule 17(2)(k)), I have tried to focus the panel’s mind on its true purpose. I suggest that:
Do our findings of fact in respect of the doctor’s misconduct, deficient professional performance, adverse health, conviction, caution or determination show that his/her fitness to practise is impaired in the sense that s/he:
has in the past acted and/or is liable in the future to act so as to put a patient or patients at unwarranted risk of harm; and/or
has in the past brought and/or is liable in the future to bring the medical profession into disrepute; and/or
has in the past breached and/or is liable in the future to breach one of the fundamental tenets of the medical profession; and/or
has in the past acted dishonestly and/or is liable to act dishonestly in the future.
25.68
If the FTP panel finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, it should go on to consider sanction under Rule 17(2)(n). It is at this stage (and not before) that the statutory scheme requires the FTP panel to consider whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. At this stage, I suggest that the panel asks itself:
Would a reasonable and well-informed member of the public conclude that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to the extent that, in the interests of patient protection and/or of the maintenance of public confidence and of standards in the medical profession, the doctor’s registration should be erased or suspended or have conditions imposed upon it?
In a case which depends wholly or mainly on findings in relation to the doctor’s ill health, erasure will not be available. I have incorporated into the second limb of the test the view that would be taken by an informed member of the public because I am firmly of the view that the standards, criteria and thresholds that are to be applied by FTP panels must be acceptable to society as a whole. That they have not been in the past has been one of the major causes for public criticism and lack of confidence in the GMC.
25.69
I hope that the GMC will give serious consideration to these proposed tests. When a final decision has been taken, the tests for both the investigation and the adjudication stages should be enshrined in legislation. There are several reasons why this should be done. The GMC should be able to say that the tests to be applied have been sanctioned by Parliament. The public should know that the GMC is applying the law of the land and not just a formula of its own making. It should not be possible for the GMC to change the tests to be applied without proper consultation and without the approval of Parliament. Furthermore, it is important that there should be statutory tests by reference to which the courts can examine any decision, whether on judicial review in respect of the investigation stage decision or on appeal from the decision of a FTP panel.
Section 35C of the Medical Act 1983 and the Ways of Proving Impairment
25.70
It will be seen that, in drafting the tests that I have proposed for the investigation and adjudication stages, I have adopted the five categories of allegation by means of which, under section 35C of the 1983 Act, an impairment of fitness to practise may be demonstrated. However, in my view, there is a
in these five categories. There is a category of allegation which does not fall easily within the range of ‘deficient professional performance’ or of ‘misconduct’. Misconduct, as I explained in
, generally connotes behaviour which has been undertaken deliberately or recklessly. In order to give the GMC jurisdiction to deal with cases of serious negligence which put patients at risk, the bounds of SPM were extended to embrace negligent acts or omissions, usually arising in a clinical context, provided that they were sufficiently serious. However, to describe some of these cases as ‘misconduct’ required some ‘stretching’ of the use of the language. A typical example might be that of a doctor who gave a gross overdose of a dangerous drug. He or she might have done so because s/he was very careless about the size of ampoule s/he picked up or because s/he had not bothered to find out the correct dosage. Another example might be operating on the wrong arm, leg or kidney. Such cases of serious negligence might equally well - or even more appropriately - be described as cases of ‘deficient clinical practice’. With the advent of the performance procedures came the concept of SDP. This was usually characterised by a pattern of unacceptable clinical practice, although it could relate to organisational or behavioural problems. Such a pattern might result from ignorance, from a failure to keep up to date, from laziness, from poor health or from a concatenation of social or professional difficulties. So, there were then two concepts, SPM and SDP, neither of which comfortably accommodated a case of serious negligence such as that I described above. Such a case could not sensibly be termed SPM; nor, if it was a ‘one-off’ incident, could it possibly amount to SDP. Under the old procedures, there was a real danger that such cases would fall through the net and would be closed at a preliminary stage.
25.71
Unfortunately, section 35C has perpetuated this problem. There is still no place for the isolated or nearly isolated serious error, committed not deliberately or recklessly, but negligently. Nor is there a place for a case of two or three ‘lower level’ incidents which do not demonstrate the ‘pattern’ necessary to constitute deficient performance but which may nonetheless put patients at risk. It seems to me to be obvious that such cases ought to enter the FTP procedures because they could be cases of impairment of fitness to practise. I suggest that, if the legislation is to be amended, a further category should be added to the means by which impairment may be proved, namely ‘deficient clinical practice’, which could relate to one or more than one incident. The aim would be to ensure that the ‘routes’ to impairment of fitness to practise embrace all the circumstances which might put patients at risk.
25.72
So far in this Chapter, I have discussed the broad issues relating to the new procedures. I have made certain suggestions for change. I shall now move on to consider, in some detail, the provisions under which the new procedures will operate in the immediatefuture.
The Separation of Functions within the Fitness to Practise Procedures

--- The Operation of the New Procedures: a Summary ---
25.18
Under the new procedures, cases will be dealt with in two stages: the investigation stage and the adjudication stage. The new section 35C(4) of the 1983 Act, as amended, provides that, when an allegation is received by the GMC that the fitness to practise of a doctor is impaired, the GMC’s Investigation Committee (IC) shall investigate the allegation and decide whether it should be considered by a FTP panel. Under section 35C(2), a doctor’s fitness to practise shall be regarded as impaired by reason only of misconduct, deficient professional performance, conviction or caution, adverse physical or mental health or by reason of a determination of another relevant professional regulatory body to the effect that his/her fitness to practise is impaired. For brevity, I shall refer to this last ground as ‘a determination’.
25.19
As I have said, the purpose of the investigation stage is to decide whether an allegation should be considered by a FTP panel. The 1983 Act does not lay down a test to be applied when making this decision. Nor do the Rules. However, the GMC has decided that this test (the investigation stage test) should be whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. Only cases which satisfy the investigation stage test will progress to the adjudication stage.
25.20
Decisions at various points during the investigation stage will be made (depending upon the circumstances of the case) by members of the GMC staff (who will, as under the old procedures, carry out a preliminary ‘sift’ of cases), by medical and lay persons contracted to work for the GMC (to be known as case examiners), and by panels of the IC. It is likely that the vast majority of cases reported to the GMC will not progress beyond the investigation stage.
25.21
If, at the investigation stage, it is decided that the case should not be considered by a FTP panel, a decision may be made either to warn the doctor about his/her future conduct or performance or to close the case. There will also be cases involving a health or performance element where the investigation stage test is satisfied, but where the case will nevertheless not proceed to the adjudication stage. Such cases will be dealt with by the doctor giving voluntary undertakings in the same way as was previously possible under the voluntary health and performance procedures. The GMC is considering the possibility of extending the availability of voluntary undertakings to all categories of case; I shall discuss this proposal later in this Chapter. Cases dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings will remain in the investigation stage, with the possibility of being referred to the adjudication stage if, at any point, the doctor concerned fails to accept or co-operate with the voluntary arrangements or if his/her health or performance deteriorates or otherwise gives rise to further concern about his/her fitness to practise. It should be noted that all this is subject to the qualification that there may be changes to the future arrangements for cases involving issues of health or performance as a result of the recent report of the Performance Procedures Review Group (to which I referred in
) and of any recommendations which may be made by the Working Group currently undertaking a review of the old health procedures.
25.22
Cases referred to the adjudication stage will be heard by a FTP panel. The new section 35D of the 1983 Act provides the powers for a FTP panel to restrict or remove a doctor’s registration if it finds that his/her fitness to practise is impaired. FTP panels are to replace the committee panels which previously dealt with issues of fitness to practise, namely panels of the PCC, the Health Committee (HC) and the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP). FTP panels will be composed of persons who are not members of the GMC but who have been appointed, selected and trained by the GMC for their role as panellists. Many of the associates who have, since 2000, been appointed by the GMC to sit on panels of its FTP committees will in the future sit on FTP panels. A FTP panel’s task will be to decide whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. If a FTP panel finds that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, it will then have to decide on the appropriate sanction to be imposed or on any other action to be taken.
25.23
There will be a separate Interim Orders Panel (IOP) for considering cases where it may be appropriate to impose an interim order restricting or suspending a doctor’s right to practise pending investigation and determination of his/her case. This will replace the Interim Orders Committee (IOC) which, since its inception in 2000, has dealt with such cases.
Preparations for Change

--- The Roles of the Investigation Committee and of the Case Examiners ---
25.73
Before describing the various processes comprised within the investigation stage, I shall first explain the roles currently envisaged for the IC and the case examiners. This will also involve a discussion about the GMC’s intentions with regard to the involvement of lay people in decisions made at the investigation stage.
The Investigation Committee
The Functions and Composition of the Investigation Committee: the 2003 Position
25.74
The new section 35C(4) of the 1983 Act requires the IC to investigate every allegation made to the GMC that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. However, it was never intended that the IC should itself make the decision about how to deal with the allegation in every case. Section 35CC of the 1983 Act, therefore, provides that Rules may be made, enabling the Registrar (in practice, members of the GMC staff exercising his legal powers) or any other officer of the GMC (in practice, the new case examiners) to exercise the functions of the IC, whether generally or in relation to such classes of case as may be specified in the Rules.
25.75
Until very recently, the GMC had intended that the IC should play a pivotal role in the investigation stage, not only in the making of decisions in relation to individual cases (its ‘casework function’), but also in the supervision and management of the investigation stage as a whole (its ‘governance function’).
25.76
At a meeting held in October 2003, the Council considered a briefing paper dealing with the proposals for the purpose, functions, structure and membership of the new IC. These proposals were said to be subject to the general review of the role of GMC committees and their working methods which was then going on. At the meeting, the Council took the formal decision that the IC should perform both a governance function and a casework function. It was also decided that the IC should be composed of nine members of the GMC who would volunteer for membership. An election would take place only if there were more volunteers than places. The intention was that the nine members would discharge the IC’s governance function. It was also plainly envisaged that some (if not all) of the nine members of the IC would sit on IC panels to deal with decision-making in individual cases. It was proposed that the IC should have the power, where necessary, to co-opt additional panellists from the list of trained panellists who had been appointed by the GMC. In other words, it was proposed that decision-making on individual cases was to be undertaken by a mixture of GMC members and non-members. The IC’s governance function would be exercised exclusively by GMC members. There would be an overlap of IC members performing both functions. It seems from the minutes of the meeting that these proposals were accepted in principle.
25.77
The IC’s governance function was to involve overseeing the investigation stage and defining the criteria to be applied by case examiners, GMC staff and IC panels when making decisions in individual cases. The IC was also to review all aspects of the decisions made at the investigation stage and was to put in place and supervise an appropriate quality assurance and audit process. It was to agree service standards for the processing of cases and was to review and monitor performance against those standards. It was to review the numbers and types of cases dealt with at the investigation stage and to ensure that the relevant processes were working effectively and efficiently. It was to report regularly to the Council on the operation of the investigation stage.
25.78
It was originally intended that, as part of its governance function, the IC should have the power to decide on the extent to which it was appropriate to delegate its casework function to case examiners and to other GMC staff. The 2003 draft Rules provided that decisions about how an individual case should be dealt with could be taken either by the IC or by case examiners. The intention was that the IC would decide the extent to which it was prepared to delegate its decision-making powers at any given time. The expectation was that it would begin by delegating only a limited range of decisions to case examiners but that, over time, the extent of delegation would increase as the IC gained confidence in the abilities of the case examiners to take appropriate decisions. However, it was agreed at the October 2003 meeting that the delegation of casework should
‘develop quickly’
25.79
At the time of the Council meeting in October 2003, it was not clear to what extent case examiners would be authorised to take decisions in individual cases. A briefing paper presented to the Council at that meeting suggested that
‘a minimum starting position’
should be that decisions that had not required the involvement of the PPC under the old procedures should not require the involvement of the IC under the new procedures. The briefing paper referred to the
‘clear advantages’
of delegating decision-making to case examiners in
‘the vast majority of cases’
. It plainly contemplated that most decision-making would be done by individual case examiners. The briefing paper went on:
‘It would deliver efficiency and flexibility and would help to meet one of the key themes of the Fitness to Practise review - streamlining and speeding-up the process. It would also limit the resources required to service a fully functioning casework committee. The Committee
i.e. the IC
would set the protocols and policy for making decisions on cases and would monitor and review the outcomes on cases.’
25.80
Under the arrangements envisaged in October 2003, the IC's power would have been formidable, given the supervisory role that it was intended the IC should have and the fact that it was to be responsible for setting the criteria for decision-making within the whole of the investigation stage. It would also have had the power to decide which cases or types of case it was prepared to delegate to case examiners and which it preferred to keep exclusively within its own control.
The Functions and Composition of the Investigation Committee: the 2004 Position
25.81
I have described above the proposals for the functions and composition of the IC that were current at the conclusion of the Inquiry’s hearings in December 2003. However, by the middle of 2004, those proposals had changed completely. The GMC received legal advice to the effect that, under section 35CC(1) of the 1983 Act, it is the Council itself - not the IC - which has the power to delegate the IC’s decision-making functions to case examiners and other staff. Furthermore, the precise extent of the delegation should, so the GMC was advised, be set out in the relevant Rules. In the event, having considered the matter, the GMC found it impossible to identify for inclusion in the Rules any specific classes of case in which it considered that responsibility for decision-making could be delegated by the Council to case examiners.
25.82
As a result, the GMC revised the arrangements for the investigation stage. It decided that case examiners should be given specific powers by the Rules to take decisions in the majority of cases. It decided that the decision-making role of the IC should be confined to only two types of case, i.e. those where the case examiners disagreed and those in which it was necessary to hold an oral hearing in order to decide whether to issue a warning. I will discuss these types of case later in this chapter. As a consequence, the likely caseload of the IC was reduced. The proposed reduction in the IC’s casework function in turn led to a reconsideration of its composition and proposed governance function. At the July 2004 Council meeting, the Fitness to Practise Committee made recommendations to the Council about these matters.
25.83
The Fitness to Practise Committee proposed that the IC should have no governance role and that responsibility for overseeing the investigation stage should instead devolve to the Fitness to Practise Committee itself. It proposed that the IC should be constituted as a casework committee only. Under these proposed new arrangements, the IC would not, as had previously been intended, have a static membership of nine GMC members. Instead, it would consist solely of panels which would have a ‘floating membership’. Panels would be convened specifically to make decisions in individual cases. It was proposed that the panels should be drawn primarily from a pool of GMC members who would volunteer for the purpose. Those GMC members would have to undergo training and assessment. Associates would also be co-opted to sit on IC panels as and when necessary. In order to preserve the separation of functions, it was proposed that those persons who were selected and appointed to sit as panellists should be required to opt to sit on either IC panels or FTP panels; they would not be permitted to sit on both.
25.84
The Fitness to Practise Committee considered that, in view of the IC’s involvement with casework, it would be inappropriate for it to undertake any audit or review of decisions in individual cases. It proposed, therefore, that audit and review should be undertaken by the Fitness to Practise Committee. The Fitness to Practise Committee would then have an overarching responsibility for co-ordinating and monitoring the operation of both the investigation and the adjudication stages of the new procedures. That idea seems also to raise a problem of separation of functions. The description of the first model for separating the investigation and adjudication functions set out in the 2001 Consultation Paper had specifically provided for the investigation and adjudication stages to have separate arrangements for
‘reporting and accountability’
paragraph 25.29
25.85
The Fitness to Practise Committee outlined an alternative arrangement, whereby the IC would retain a static membership of GMC members who would be responsible for governance of the investigation stage (including audit and review of decisions), but who would delegate casework to panels of associates. However, its preference was for the model I have previously described.
25.86
When the proposals put forward by the Fitness to Practise Committee were discussed by the Council at its July 2004 meeting, there was considerable difference of opinion among those present. It was said that the IC (which is established by statute) was being ‘downgraded’ into ‘just a casework committee’, while the Fitness to Practise Committee (which is not a statutory committee) took over the governance functions which it had always been intended that the IC should undertake. A number of Council members supported a suggestion that, far from losing its governance role, the IC should assume entire responsibility for the supervision of the new FTP procedures (i.e. governance of both the investigation and the adjudication stages), with the current Fitness to Practise Committee becoming redundant. This would, of course, have the effect of extending the role of the IC well beyond that which had originally been envisaged for it. Other Council members pointed out that to give to the IC, which has a statutory responsibility for casework at the investigation stage, a supervisory role over the FTP panels responsible for decision-making at the adjudication stage would completely negate the principle of separation of functions. Nevertheless, some Council members advocated this solution. An alternative view was that the IC should retain, in addition to its casework function, a limited governance role involving responsibility for auditing and training case examiners.
25.87
The Fitness to Practise Committee also expressed the view that membership of the Fitness to Practise Committee and of IC panels should be mutually exclusive, because of the potential conflict of interests that might arise if the same individual were involved with the making of decisions in individual cases and with the audit and quality assurance of those decisions. Some Council members agreed with this view and expressed reservations about the principle of having Council members involved both in casework (as members of IC panels) and in a governance role (as members of the Fitness to Practise Committee). It was suggested that it would be more appropriate for IC casework to be undertaken only by associates. There was, however, no agreement about this matter.
25.88
The debate did, however, result in a limited amount of agreement. The minute recording that agreement states:
‘Fitness to Practise: Investigation Committe
11. Council agreed that there should be three groups of functions, namely:
Policy, audit, oversight and other governance functions, covering both investigation and adjudication.
Investigation casework.
Adjudication casework.
12. The aim was to have a single committee with governance responsibilities, overseeing investigation casework and adjudication casework. For both investigation casework and adjudication casework, group decision making and hearings should be undertaken by panels. Council recognised that the aim of a single committee could not be achieved within the law as it stood. Until the Medical Act 1983 could be amended, responsibilities should be:
Policy, audit and oversight - Fitness to Practise Committee
Investigation casework - Investigation Committee (meeting as panes) and case examiners.
Adjudication casework - fitness to practise panels and interim orders panels.’
25.89
For the present, the General Medical Council (Constitution of Panels and Investigation Committee) Rules 2004 (the Constitution Rules 2004) provide that membership of the IC shall comprise medical and lay panellists (including at least one person taken from the list of panellists eligible to sit as Chairman of a panel) selected by the Registrar to sit on a particular occasion. Members of the GMC may act as IC panellists. The IC will have no static membership. The legal quorum for an IC panel will be three, comprising the Chairman (who may be medically qualified or lay), together with one medical and one lay panellist.
25.90
It is not clear whether the IC will ultimately assume the functions of the
‘single committee’
referred to in the minute. No agreement about that was reached at the July 2004 Council meeting. Nor was any decision reached on the issue of whether IC panels would be composed of a mixture of GMC members and associates, or only of associates. A recent letter written by the GMC to the Inquiry stated that, although the November 2004 Rules permit Council members to sit on IC panels, the
‘operational intention’
is for the panels to be composed of appointed associates. It is not clear whose
‘operational intention’
this is, since there does not appear to have been any Council decision to this effect.
25.91
These late changes to the new procedures appear to have been forced upon the GMC as the result of its failure to understand the effect of the amending legislation which it had asked for. This gives the impression that the GMC had not given sufficient thought to how the new procedures were to work before it asked for legislation to be drafted.
25.92
The original proposals would have given rise to an unsatisfactory position. The IC would have been enormously powerful. Not only would it have been responsible for the policy of the investigation stage decisions, including standard-setting, it would itself have made many of the casework decisions and would have been responsible for the supervision of the case examiners and the audit of all investigation stage decisions. Self-audit is not acceptable, as has now apparently been recognised.
25.93
For the moment, it appears that the powers of the IC will be limited to taking decisions on individual cases. The functions of governance, supervision, audit, standard-setting and the issuing of guidance to staff and case examiners in respect of the investigation stage will be passed to the Fitness to Practise Committee. It will place a very considerable burden on that Committee but at least - for the time being - the functions of decision-making and governance will be separated.
25.94
At present, it is not clear what the GMC’s ultimate intention is. At the meeting in July 2004, it was suggested that the IC should have responsibility for the adjudication stage. I do not think that that is now intended, although there were some GMC members who thought it appropriate. The position for the future is not entirely clear and this degree of uncertainty at a time when the new procedures are actually coming into effect is unfortunate.
25.95
In my view, the functions of the IC should be, as they apparently will be in the immediate future, limited to casework. It is not appropriate that any committee should have total responsibility for all aspects of the investigation stage of the FTP procedures, even down to auditing its own decisions. To give one small committee complete control of the whole investigation stage carries risks. However, it is equally unsatisfactory for one committee to have control of the governance of the investigation stage and the adjudication stage, as was recognised in the 2001 Consultation Paper. I realise that this might give rise to difficulties for the new GMC with only 35 members.
25.96
At present, it appears to be the intention that, after amendment of the 1983 Act, one committee will have responsibility for the governance of both the investigation and adjudication stages. It appears that the Fitness to Practise Committee considers that, if two committees are involved in governance of the different stages, there will be confusion and inconsistency. I can see that it is desirable that the same group of people should set the standards, criteria and thresholds applicable to both stages; these must be compatible. However, it seems to me that the supervision and audit of the two stages should be separate, first because the power of the single committee over the whole process would be too great - some checks and balances are desirable - and, second, because the GMC claims that it wishes to maintain some separation between the investigation and adjudication functions.
Case Examiners
25.97
The introduction of case examiners is an integral feature of the new procedures. In 2003, the GMC appointed five people (three medically qualified and two lay) to fulfil the role of case examiners. Further case examiners have been appointed subsequently and the GMC has advertised for more. When the first case examiners were appointed, it was expected that the new procedures would be in place by the spring of 2004. In March 2004, when it had become clear that the introduction of the new procedures was going to be delayed, the GMC appointed the case examiners to act as screeners for conduct and performance cases under the old procedures. In addition, two of the medically qualified case examiners were appointed to act as health screeners and two were appointed to act as performance case co-ordinators. These arrangements were to continue until the new FTP procedures came into operation. The appointment of the case examiners as screeners was made subject to the case examiners being mentored by existing screeners and subject to 100% of their work being audited by GMC staff. It was expected that, by the end of June 2004, the previous screeners would have ceased to carry out their screening duties and that the case examiners would have assumed total responsibility for screening.
25.98
The case examiners are contracted to work for the GMC for a minimum of eight days a month and, when working, are based at the GMC’s offices. They will be trained, directed and appraised by the GMC and, as I have said, their work will be subject to audit. During the selection process, considerable emphasis was placed on the need for analytical abilities, for a capacity to undertake high level decision-making and for an ability to exercise impartial and independent judgement. Medically qualified candidates were required to have been in active practice within the last three years and to be
‘participating in revalidation’
. The job specification for case examiners stated that they should have the
‘ability to carry out an investigatory appraisal to establish facts’
25.99
It seems to me that there are a number of potential advantages attaching to the appointment of case examiners to undertake the functions formerly carried out by screeners. First, the case examiners will be working in dedicated time. Screeners had to fit their GMC duties into the interstices of days already occupied with a busy medical practice or a demanding job. Also, because the work will be done at the GMC’s premises, there should be much closer communication between case examiners and staff and between case examiners. Screeners worked from home and communication was less easy. Case examiners will be employed by the GMC and can be required to carry out their duties in a particular way. They could, for example, be given instructions that all cases of a certain category must be referred to a FTP panel. This was not possible with screeners; they were members of the GMC and could not be required to conform to instructions. I described in
the way in which some medical screeners sabotaged the GMC’s efforts to encourage consistency of treatment at the screening stage by creating categories of misconduct which would be ‘SPM by definition’ and which should automatically have been referred by screeners to the PPC. It seems that the screeners persuaded members of staff to change the standard documents so as to circumvent the system that had been agreed. It seems highly unlikely that employed case examiners would be able to do that and, if they did, they would be at risk of disciplinary action. Another advantage is that case examiners will have only one set of functions. Screeners had often had experience of sitting on the PPC or the PCC in the past and it seems that they were sometimes unwilling or unable to confine themselves to their screening role.
25.100
The only potential disadvantage of the use of case examiners appears to be that there is a danger that they might be insufficiently independent; they might be too closely directed by GMC members or committees and might not be permitted to use their professional judgement. Also, they might have too little ‘say’ in how a case is investigated. I hope that these problems will not occur, as the appointment of case examiners provides potential for real improvement over the old procedures. It is essential that standards and criteria should be set and guidance given but, within those parameters, case examiners should be able to exercise their professional judgement.
Lay Involvement in Decision-Making
25.101
One striking feature of the 2003 proposals was that they would have allowed a single, medically qualified case examiner to close a case without consultation with - or the agreement of - a lay colleague. That arrangement represented an important departure from the principle - which had been accepted by the GMC in 1990 - that no case which raised a question of SPM (or, from 1997, SDP) should be closed by a medically qualified screener without the agreement of a lay screener. Before the introduction of lay screeners in 1990, there had been concern on the part of many about the lack of lay involvement in the screening process.
25.102
During the initial consultation on the new FTP procedures, concern was expressed about the absence, under the proposals then being considered, of any requirement that a lay person should confirm a preliminary decision to close a case taken by a single medically qualified case examiner. Concern was also expressed by some individuals and organisations that the proposed model would place too much responsibility in the hands of one individual. Despite those concerns, the GMC did not change its position. The FTP Review Group’s paper, which was considered by the Council at its November 2001 meeting, pointed out that ‘double-handling’ of cases (whereby cases which a medically qualified screener had made a preliminary decision to close were also considered by a lay case examiner) would require significant additional resources. It was estimated that case examiners would close 2000 cases a year. The effect of double-handling cases where there had been a preliminary decision to close the case would, it was said, be to produce 2000 extra screener transactions a year and almost to double the number of case examiners required. Case examiners are an expensive resource and the appointment of an increased number of case examiners would represent a significant additional cost to the GMC. It was also suggested that double-handling of cases by case examiners would cause delay. The paper suggested that no decision should be taken on the point at that time. Instead, the FTP Review Group concluded that the
‘best approach’
would be not to make a decision about lay involvement then but instead to
‘allow the detailed processes to evolve with experience’
. That suggestion was adopted and the issue was shelved for the time being.
25.103
The GMC’s internal paper, ‘Review of Fitness to Practise: The New Model’, of October 2002 (the version dated 22nd
November 2002) did not directly address the issue of lay input into decisions by case examiners to close cases. Instead, it referred to the
‘important principle’
that all cases, save those closed by the GMC office staff, should be considered by
‘two experienced people’
. The implicit suggestion appeared to be that the objections both to a lack of lay involvement and to the involvement of only one person in the decision-making process could be met by the fact that most cases would be considered by an
‘experienced and appropriately senior member of staff’
in addition to a case examiner. The paper proposed that, if the member of staff and the case examiner disagreed, the case should be referred to another case examiner (not necessarily one of the lay case examiners). The paper went on to propose that the IC might wish to
‘insist’
that it should see any case where there was disagreement or doubt. These proposed arrangements for cases where a member of staff and a case examiner disagreed about the way to dispose of a case were not set out in the 2003 draft Rules. Nor were they mentioned in the draft Guidance accompanying the 2003 draft Rules or in the draft Guidance for case examiners, ‘Investigation Stage Test - Guidance for Case Examiners’, produced by the GMC in late 2003 (the 2003 draft Case Examiner Guidance). It seems, in fact, that the arrangements proposed in November 2002 (whereby a case could be referred to the IC for a ‘second opinion’) had been dropped by that time and that a decision had been taken that a single medically qualified case examiner was to be permitted, in a case delegated by the IC, to take a decision to close a case without first securing the agreement of any other person. Similarly, a single lay case examiner was to be permitted to take a decision without any input from a medically qualified person.
25.104
I find it depressing to observe that, over the period of more than two years during which the new procedures were being developed, the GMC did not appear to recognise or accept the fundamental requirement for lay involvement in all cases that might be closed without referral to a FTP panel. Of course, one is sympathetic to problems of money and resources but there are some things that are so obviously necessary that they simply have to be done, whatever the cost. First, there was a shelving of the problem and then, a year later, an attempt to find a solution that was plainly unsatisfactory. Later still, that attempt was abandoned and the lack of lay involvement was ignored. Given the GMC’s earlier commitment to greater lay involvement, it seems to me extraordinary that the removal of lay input into such important decisions could ever have been contemplated.
25.105
At the Inquiry’s hearings in December, Sir Graeme Catto and Mr Scott were asked about the absence of any lay input into a decision by a medically qualified case examiner to close a case. Sir Graeme said that one of the factors which had influenced the decision had been the delay that had in the past been caused by passing cases between different people within the GMC. However, case examiners will be working in the GMC’s offices, so it is hard to see why it should have been thought that delay would arise. Sir Graeme also said that it had been thought that case examiners, who would be contracted to work for the GMC in dedicated time, would be more professional and focussed than the existing screeners, who had to fit in their screening activities between their other commitments. That hardly meets the point that a medically qualified case examiner will bring a medical perspective to the case and that a lay perspective is also needed. Nor does it meet the point that more than one person should be involved in a decision to close a case. However, in the course of their evidence, both Sir Graeme and Mr Scott indicated that the GMC was prepared to look again at the issue. This it has now done and it appears that its members have belatedly recognised that the proposed arrangements were unacceptable and would not have commanded the confidence of the public.
25.106
The May 2004 draft Rules provided (as the November 2004 Rules provide) that all cases which survive the preliminary sift by the GMC staff will be considered by two case examiners, one medical and one lay. This is a most welcome move and, in fact, provides greater lay involvement than under the old procedures. The involvement of a second case examiner is not confined to, as previously, cases where a medically qualified case examiner had taken a decision to close the case or was contemplating such a decision. Instead, lay case examiners are to be involved in the consideration of every case that reaches the stage of being referred to a case examiner. Thus, the arrangement has even greater resource implications than the arrangement that had been contemplated in November 2001, when it was thought that the double-handling of the cases where a preliminary decision to close had been taken would almost double the number of case examiners required. If all other aspects of the new FTP procedures had remained the same as had been proposed in 2003, significantly more case examiners would have been needed. However, as I shall explain, changes to other aspects of the new procedures were also introduced in the May 2004 draft Rules (most notably to the arrangements for dealing with cases with a health or performance element and, at the adjudication stage, for preparing cases for review and restoration hearings). These changes appear likely to have the effect of reducing significantly the workload of the case examiners in relation to those aspects.
25.107
The changes in the role of the IC that I have already mentioned will also have a significant impact on the role of the case examiners. Under the November 2004 Rules, a case will be referred to the IC only if the two case examiners who consider it cannot agree or in the event of an oral hearing being necessary before a decision is taken whether or not to issue a warning. As a consequence, in the vast majority of cases (certainly in the vast majority of cases involving allegations of misconduct), the case examiners will take the decision whether or not to refer a case to a FTP panel. The case examiners will, therefore, have a central and most important role.
25.108
As I have said, the current provision for the involvement of lay case examiners in all decisions (save in those cases closed by staff) provide for much greater lay involvement than under the old procedures. I recognise that the resource implications must be considerable. In my view, lay involvement in all decisions is likely to result in improved quality of decision-making. My understanding is that the lay case examiners will play a full and equal part in decision-making and that their scrutiny of a case will not necessarily take place after that of the medically qualified case examiner. I hope that that will be so. If a lay person examines a case file in the knowledge that a medical person has already reached the conclusion that the case should be closed, his/her thought processes may be distorted. There is a danger that the lay person will subconsciously defer to the view of the medical person. If the lay person examines the case without any preconceptions, his/her decisions are likely to be of greater value in the drive towards public protection. In my view, this increase in lay involvement is likely to engender a greater degree of public confidence.
The Tests to Be Applied
The Investigation Stage

--- The Separation of Functions within the Fitness to Practise Procedures ---
25.24
I shall now consider one of the principles which, according to the GMC, has underlain the development of its new FTP procedures, namely the separation of functions within those procedures.
25.25
In the past, the GMC’s FTP procedures comprised two distinct functions. The first was (broadly speaking) to decide whether there was evidence that raised a question about a doctor’s conduct, performance or health, which should be referred to a FTP committee or into the voluntary health or performance procedures, and to make any appropriate referral. This first function was comparable to the role of a prosecution service. The second function consisted of the hearing and determination of cases by a FTP committee. This function was comparable to the role of a court or tribunal and required administrative and other support. Initially, in its proposals for change, the GMC called the two functions the
‘prosecution’
and the
‘determination’
functions. Later, it adopted the terms
‘investigation’
‘adjudication’
functions. It should be noted that, in this context, the term
‘investigation’
refers to an investigation as to whether a case should be referred to a FTP panel, and not to
‘investigation’
in the sense of evidence gathering. In other words, it does not denote
‘investigation’
in the sense that most people would understand the term. The term
‘investigation’
is also something of a misnomer because the investigation stage of the new GMC procedures includes a decision (or adjudication) as to whether the case is sufficiently serious to be referred to a FTP panel.
25.26
Historically, the same GMC members could be involved in both functions; sometimes, they could even be involved in both functions relating to the same case. Until the early 1970s, for example, the President acted as medical screener and chaired the Penal Cases Committee (the predecessor of the PPC); those roles were both part of the first
‘prosecution’
‘investigation’
function. The President could also chair the Disciplinary Committee (the predecessor of the PCC) which carried out the second
‘determination’
‘adjudication’
function. In practice, this ceased to happen in 1973, although it was permitted by the Rules until 1980, when the Rules were changed to restrict the President’s decision-making role to either screening and Chairmanship of the PPC or Chairmanship of the PCC and/or the HC. The Rules were also amended to provide that no member of the GMC should sit on a case at the PCC, the HC or the CPP if s/he had previously been involved in making a decision in the case at an earlier stage, for example by screening the case or being a member of the PPC which had considered the case.
25.27
By 2000, the GMC had decided that the time had come to separate the two functions more clearly. This decision was, in part, prompted by the coming into force, in October 2000, of the Human Rights Act 1998, which incorporated into UK law the entitlement of a person to
‘a fair and public hearing ... by an independent and impartial tribunal’
in the determination of his/her civil rights and obligations. However, the GMC had also become convinced that the existing arrangements gave rise to an appearance of unfairness. Doctors, it was said, perceived that the same organisation was both prosecuting them and sitting in judgement on them, and they considered that to be unfair. The GMC decided, therefore, that there was a need for the functions to be separated, so that everyone involved in complaints about doctors would be able to see that the organisation and the people making the final decision on a case were different from those who had taken the decision that it should be heard and from those representing any of the interested parties.
25.28
The GMC raised its proposal to separate the two functions in a Consultation Document, ‘The Structure, Constitution and Governance of the GMC’, published in October 2000. The proposal received general support.
25.29
In its 2001 Consultation Paper, the GMC put forward four possible models by which separation of the two functions might be achieved. The first model involved the retention by the GMC of both functions, although those functions would be carried out quite separately by different groups of personnel within the GMC. The intention was that the staff, management, legal support and records of the two groups would be located in two
‘distinct organisational structures’
with separate arrangements for
. The 2001 Consultation Paper referred to the view of the supporters of this model that both investigation and adjudication functions were crucial to a regulatory body and that
‘to hive off one or both of them would weaken professionally-led regulation by severing the feedback loops between fitness to practise and standards and education’
. The advantage of this model was said to be that:
‘Professional ownership of the decision-making process is retained at all stages, and for some supporters of this model, it is the retention of ownership that defines professionally-led regulation.’
25.30
The weakness of the model was said (in the 2001 Consultation Paper) to be the fact that decisions taken in both the investigation and adjudication stages would continue to be identified with the GMC. In addition, the arrangement might not have the appearance of fairness. The 2001 Consultation Paper acknowledged that there was a
‘risk’
that the model would not
‘go far enough’
to reassure the GMC’s critics. However, the 2001 Consultation Paper also made clear that this model was the one preferred by the GMC.
25.31
The second model - and the GMC’s second preference - was an arrangement whereby the GMC would retain the investigation function, with the adjudication function being
‘contracted by the GMC to a completely independent, outside organisation’
. It was suggested that, in this model, it was
‘the GMC, as guardian of standards and guarantor of the public interest, which should identify cases potentially raising questions about doctors’ fitness to practise but that the decisions on those cases should be made by another organisation’
. The strength of this model was said to be the absolute separation that it created between the investigation and adjudication functions. It was suggested that the adoption of this model would absolve the GMC from blame when controversial decisions were made and might insulate the GMC from the disproportionate damage to confidence in the organisation and in
‘professionally-led regulation’
caused by occasional controversial outcomes in FTP cases. It was suggested also that, with this model, the public might have greater confidence that decisions were being made purely on the merits of a case. The most obvious weakness of the model was said to be that the GMC would lose control over decisions concerning individual doctors and might still be perceived as responsible for the outcome. Furthermore, the fact that another organisation was ultimately responsible for the outcome of FTP cases might, it was suggested, undermine confidence in the GMC. Other disadvantages of the model were said to be the considerable resource implications involved and the fact that accountability might be weakened. I interpose at this stage to say that, in my view, the GMC was right to recognise the advantages of this model, although it also noted some drawbacks. In
Chapter 27,
I recommend that the GMC adopts this model, in order to achieve the separation of function which is, in effect, required by the Human Rights Act 1998.
25.32
The third model (described in the 2001 Consultation Paper as the
‘mirror image’
of the second model) was an arrangement whereby the GMC would retain the adjudication function, but not the investigation function. GMC members and others appointed by the GMC would sit on FTP committees and GMC staff would be responsible for organising and servicing those committees. An outside organisation would be responsible for the initial stage of sifting complaints and referrals and deciding which cases raised questions about doctors’ fitness to practise and should proceed. The 2001 Consultation Paper expressed the view that, by adopting this model, the GMC
‘would be taking the view that its core business concerned only the final determination of the small proportion of cases which reached the stage of a committee hearing’
. It identified a risk that
‘the links between fitness to practise and other core GMC functions would be weakened’
. I interpose to say that the 2001 Consultation Paper did not explain how those links operate and how the risk of weakening would arise. This is not clear - to me at least. The 2001 Consultation Paper declared that the process of investigation, in particular decisions about which cases to investigate, must be
‘rooted in the GMC’s own values’
. The possibility that accountability would be weakened by the involvement of two organisations in the FTP procedures was also mentioned. In the 2001 Consultation Paper, the GMC expressed the view that
‘hiving off the investigation function’
would
‘seriously weaken public confidence in the organisation as protector of the public interest’
. It was said to be
‘essential to confidence in professionally-led regulation’
that the GMC should be seen to
‘act vigorously on questions about doctors’ fitness to practise’
. However much another organisation tried to base its approach on the profession’s values and ethical standards as embodied in the GMC, it was said, it would always be
‘at one remove’
25.33
The fourth model would have delegated both the investigation and adjudication functions to separate outside organisations. A complaint would be investigated by one body and brought before another for adjudication. The GMC would have no involvement in either stage beyond, possibly, acting as the recipient for complaints before handing them on to the outside body for investigation. The 2001 Consultation Paper pointed out that this model would effectively end the GMC’s involvement in fitness to practise. It suggested that it
‘would be a clear statement that it
no longer had a role in policing unfit doctors’
. The 2001 Consultation Paper suggested that the model would
‘lack coherence and credibility and would not meet the expectations of either the public or the profession regarding what was expected of a professional regulatory body concerned with medicine’
25.34
The vast majority of medical organisations and individuals who responded to the 2001 Consultation Paper favoured the first model, i.e. the retention by the GMC of both the investigative and the adjudication functions. Patients’ representatives were marginally in favour of the first model, with several preferring the second model.
25.35
In the event, the new FTP procedures appear to be based largely on the first model described. The GMC will retain responsibility for the investigation function. It will carry out the preliminary sifting of cases and will be responsible for the decision whether or not a case should go forward for a full hearing. The preliminary sift will be carried out by the GMC staff and the decisions as to whether or not those cases which survive the sift go forward to a full hearing will be taken by case examiners, who will be medical and lay people, contracted to work for the GMC on a part-time basis. Some such decisions will be taken by the IC.
25.36
The decision-making at FTP panel hearings will be undertaken by associates, both medically qualified and lay, who will not be members of the GMC but who will have been selected and appointed by the GMC to sit on those panels. Members of the GMC will not sit on FTP panels, although some of the panellists will be former members. Over 200 associates have already been appointed to sit on panels and, since 2000, they have sat on panels of the old FTP committees. Further panellists will be appointed as and when necessary. Panellists are expected to commit at least 20 days a year to their work for the GMC. They are selected for appointment against specific criteria and after an open competition. Appointment is subject to a two-day training programme. The training and evaluation of panellists is undertaken by the GMC. The GMC provides guidance for panellists on the approach to sanctions and other matters and will continue to do so. It is intended that panellists, once appointed, will undergo regular appraisal and performance management, to be undertaken by the GMC. In the event that concerns arise about a panellist’s suitability to continue to sit on a panel, a sub-group of the Fitness to Practise Committee will consider those concerns and may, if it thinks fit, terminate a panellist’s appointment. If the GMC considers that a FTP panel has reached an inappropriate decision, the chairman of the panel may be given advice, presumably about where s/he and his/her panel have gone wrong. Members of the GMC staff will retain responsibility for organising and administering adjudication hearings and for choosing panel members to sit in individual cases.
25.37
The GMC started from the premise that it would be right to separate the investigation and adjudication functions. There were good, sound reasons for wishing to achieve that end. Yet this has not happened. The GMC has kept complete control over the investigative function which it has extended so that it encompasses some decisions on final disposal other than closure (the giving of warnings and the acceptance of voluntary undertakings) but it has not relinquished control of adjudication. Under the new procedures, it will have almost exactly the same degree of control over adjudication as under the old. For many years, PCC panels comprised GMC members only. However, by 2000, the pressure of work on the GMC was such that it was obliged to recruit extra people to serve as panellists alongside GMC members. As I have explained, from 2003, when the number of GMC members was reduced to 35, FTP committee panels were, in the main, composed entirely of associates. This situation is to be carried through into the new procedures. So, despite the GMC’s recognition of the need for some separation of functions and some independence at the adjudication stage, nothing is going to change.
25.38
The GMC has retained very close control over the adjudication process. It has the power to select and appoint FTP panellists. It will train them, appraise them and provide them with guidance; it may dismiss them. It must not be thought that I am suggesting that training, appraisal and guidance are not required; they are. But nor must it be thought that there is any separation of functions just because the panellists are not members of the GMC. The GMC cannot control the outcome in a particular case, although, as I have said, it will ‘advise’ a panel chairman when it considers that a FTP panel has erred. Also, as I shall later explain, it has indicated, in recent draft Guidance, that it intends to inform doctors whose cases are referred to a FTP panel what outcome it is seeking in their cases; thus, it would appear, the GMC hopes to be able to influence the way in which the case is dealt with (or at least the sanction which is to be imposed) by the FTP panel.
25.39
Furthermore, it appears that at least some GMC members would have liked to retain an even more substantial degree of control over the outcome of individual cases. At a meeting of the Council in May 2004, it was proposed that the GMC should (subject to further work and consultation) request further legislation to introduce a system whereby the GMC had to ratify decisions of its FTP panels before those decisions came into effect. It was explained that the object was to give the GMC the opportunity to intervene when it regarded a decision as
‘clearly perverse’
, to reject the decision and to refer the case to another FTP panel for re-hearing. The proposal was supported by the President, and Mr Scott spoke in its favour. A number of Council members pointed out that a system whereby the GMC could, within its own procedures, ratify or reject a decision of a FTP panel would be entirely inconsistent with the concept of separation of the investigation and adjudication functions. In the event, the proposal was abandoned and a decision was made instead to seek legislation enabling the GMC to appeal to the High Court against decisions of its FTP panels. However, the mere fact that a system of ratification could have been given serious consideration demonstrates that some within the GMC do not appear fully to understand the concept of separation of the two functions.
25.40
I have a further concern about the position of FTP panellists. Adjudication is a skill which needs regular practice. It is sometimes said that a judge or tribunal member is ‘as good as how often s/he sits’. I am concerned that panellists may sit for as little as 20 days a year. They will have little opportunity to develop real expertise. Also, the fact that there will be 200 or more panellists at any one time means that there are likely to be real problems with ensuring consistency of decision-making. It has occurred to me that other healthcare regulators must also have to appoint and train panellists for their FTP procedures. I have wondered whether it might be feasible to appoint a body of full-time or nearly full-time panellists who could sit on panels of all the healthcare regulatory bodies. This would provide a measure of independence from any one particular body, such as the GMC, and would also ensure that panellists developed experience and expertise.
The Operation of the New Procedures: a Summary

--- Introduction ---
25.1
In the preceding Chapters, I have described in some detail the General Medical Council’s (GMC’s) fitness to practise (FTP) procedures as they have operated over the years since Shipman’s case was considered by the GMC in 1976. It will be apparent that there have been many changes during that time, not least the introduction of the health and performance procedures. The conduct procedures, including the GMC’s way of dealing with doctors convicted of criminal offences, have undergone evolutionary, but not radical, change. For some years, beginning in the late 1990s, the GMC has been aware that its procedures were not satisfactory, and were in need of fundamental change. By November 2003, when the focus of the Inquiry hearings was on the GMC, the process of change was well underway and it was expected that the ‘new’ procedures would be brought into effect by the spring of 2004. In the event, there was some delay and the relevant Rules came into effect only recently, on 1st
November 2004.
25.2
In this Chapter, I propose to examine the way in which the new procedures are expected to operate. As will be apparent from this Chapter, the proposals have changed considerably even during the period in which the Inquiry has been focussing its attention upon them. However, at a Council meeting on 15th
September 2004, the GMC approved the draft Rules which were to form the basis of the new procedures. With the exception of a few minor changes, those draft Rules were identical to the Rules which came into force in November. It is by reference to the November 2004 Rules that I shall discuss the operation of the new procedures. However, to some extent, my work is likely to become out of date even as I write, because it is almost inevitable that some changes will be made to the new procedures as the result of early experience.
25.3
It is, in my view, important that the Inquiry considers the new procedures in detail. The Inquiry has identified various shortcomings in the way in which the old procedures operated. In some respects, they did not provide adequate protection for patients. Some cases that should have entered the procedures were closed by the administrative staff at the initial stage. In general, there was no investigation in the early stages, so that the potential seriousness of some allegations was not fully appreciated and others, although obviously serious, foundered. Some cases were closed at the screening stage or by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) as a result of the wrong application of the appropriate tests or the application of the wrong tests. Lack of standards, criteria and thresholds for decision-making produced inconsistent outcomes. Any of these shortcomings can give rise to a danger that a doctor who presents a risk to patients is not detected and dealt with. Another problem with the old procedures was that they lacked transparency. In the modern world, the public expects and is entitled to see what is being done by a regulatory body and to understand why. For those reasons, it is important that the Inquiry examines the extent to which the new procedures will correct the shortcomings of the old.
25.4
I also regard it as important to see how the proposals for the new procedures have developed over the last three years. As will become apparent, there have been many changes of direction: some quite minor, some major. In the context of the development of new procedures, some changes are inevitable. Some have led to improved proposals that will result in greater consistency and openness, and will provide improved patient protection. Those changes have been made in part as the result of consultation and in part as the result of the GMC’s awareness of the evidence given to this Inquiry. Other changes appear to me to have been retrograde. It is important, in my view, to examine those changes and to try to understand why the GMC has made them. If the GMC has made a change that results in reduced patient protection or reduced transparency, that is a cause for concern, as it might suggest that the GMC has not fully accepted the need to improve patient protection and transparency. It raises the risk that further such change might occur in the future.
25.5
At times in this Chapter, I suggest that the GMC should consider doing things in a different way. It may be said that it is not part of my remit to make detailed recommendations about internal matters. In my view, it is within my remit. If I had come to the conclusion that I should recommend that the GMC should lose its FTP function altogether, there would be no point in making detailed suggestions for change. However, as I have not, I think it is necessary to descend into the particulars of those aspects of the new procedures that I consider do not provide adequate protection for patients. I make these suggestions in a constructive spirit in the hope that they will be given serious consideration by the GMC and also because they might be useful to the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)), in seeking to promote patient protection and transparency across all the healthcare regulatory systems.
25.6
As before, all references to the old procedures are made in the past tense and I shall speak of the new procedures as if they will come into force in the future.


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY SIX - Revalidation
========================================================================

--- Developments since Early 2004 ---
26.159
Since the conclusion of the hearings in December 2003 and the seminars in January 2004, the GMC has continued to provide the Inquiry with documents relating to a number of issues, including revalidation. As might be expected, there have been developments. I have already referred to work done by the RCGP and the NCGST.
26.160
In March 2004, there took place the first meeting of a joint working group set up between the GMC, the RCGP, the BMA and the NHS Modernisation Agency, the purpose of which was to consider ways of improving clinical governance in primary care. At this meeting, the joint working group agreed its Terms of Reference, which were to consider how clinical governance mechanisms within primary care can identify emerging poor practice and deal with it in a way that protects patients. Also, the joint working group was to consider how clinical governance mechanisms could support doctors working in primary care in the collection of objective, practice-based data, from which evidence to support revalidation could be drawn. One of the issues discussed at the first meeting was the need for clarification of the various standards and guidance documents currently in existence and for the development of a ‘checklist tool’ that made clear what practice parameters are not acceptable. It was said that the ‘Revalidation Toolkit’, developed by the RCGP in Scotland, might provide a useful template for use throughout the UK. There was reference to the need to link clinical governance data in primary care to an individual doctor. As I have indicated before, much data is practice-based and does not provide useful information about an individual. There was also a call for greater consistency of application of clinical governance systems throughout the country. It was thought that PCOs would benefit from the creation of local clinical governance support groups, which would have a role in reviewing information known locally about doctors and in reporting to the clinical governance lead any concerns about a doctor. The view was expressed that the local clinical governance support groups would benefit from lay input, perhaps through the inclusion of the chairman of the relevant local patient group. It was thought that such groups might advise the clinical governance lead about the position of individual doctors seeking a certificate for the purposes of revalidation. Also, they might advise on remedial action.
26.161
I appreciate that this joint working group was concerned mainly to devise ways of improving clinical governance. However, it seemed to me that it could make a valuable contribution to the process of revalidation. If it could develop some standardised means of collecting and presenting ‘hard’ clinical governance data, there would be a greater prospect that under-performing and dysfunctional doctors would be detected. The clinical governance certificate could become more of a positive assurance of fitness to practise, rather than a negative statement that ‘nothing adverse is known’. The certificate would have far greater value in revalidation, and revalidation could then provide a better reassurance for patients. The process of appraisal would also be enhanced. The joint working group also agreed that detailed criteria, standards and evidence for GPs (and doctors in other specialties) should be developed and could then be used to support the revalidation process. The medical Royal Colleges were to take a leading role in this work.
26.162
Pausing there, these developments seemed to me to be most encouraging. Many of the concerns that I had felt about the current proposals for the revalidation of GPs were to be constructively addressed. The joint working group was to have its second meeting in May or June 2004. The Inquiry has not received a copy of the minutes of a second meeting. However, in November 2004, the Inquiry did receive a note of the first meeting of a sub-group of the joint working group, which had taken place on 26th
August 2004. I shall describe its contents shortly.
26.163
Meanwhile, at its Council meeting in May 2004, the GMC was asked to approve a draft for a document to be entitled ‘The Policy Framework for Revalidation: a Position Paper’ (the draft Position Paper). This was to be published in July 2004. I do not intend to summarise its contents other than to say that it described the GMC’s current policy on revalidation broadly as I have described it in this Chapter. At the meeting, there was detailed discussion of the draft Position Paper. Some of the discussion related to concerns about matters that had been omitted from the draft Position Paper. In particular, Professor Pringle drew attention to the issues discussed at the first meeting of the joint working group and expressed regret that those ideas had not been reflected in the draft Position Paper. There was no reference in the draft Position Paper to the development of standardised means of collecting data or to improving the range of clinical governance data relating to individuals rather than GP practices. Nor was there any reference to the idea that a clinical governance support group, including a lay element, might assist and advise the clinical governance lead with decisions on certification and related issues. Professor Pringle proposed that these changes should be mentioned in the Position Paper, when published. The result was a modification of the draft Position Paper so as to presage some scrutiny of evidence at a local level. How or by whom this scrutiny was to be conducted was not made clear.
26.164
At the meeting in May, Professor Pringle pointed out that there was a need for the GMC to ‘reactivate’ the medical Royal Colleges and to encourage them to get on with the work of preparing detailed standards, criteria and evidence to be used in connection with revalidation. This is painstaking work and cannot be achieved in a short time. Concern was expressed that it would not be completed by the time revalidation was launched in 2005. I have already referred to the progress that has been made by the RCGP in this regard. This work is important as it will underlie not only the decisions taken at the second stage of the revalidation process but also the scrutiny of the small sample of cases that will be scrutinised for quality assurance purposes.
26.165
The Position Paper was published in July and was followed by the publication of draft Rules and Guidance in September. These were accompanied by a letter, inviting comments and suggestions. It appears to me that the draft Rules are uncontroversial. They provide a legal framework for what the GMC intends to do. However, the 2004 Revalidation draft Guidance contained a few new developments. In particular, the GMC has now created the concept of a
‘GMC approved environment’
. This concept was mentioned in the April 2003 Prospectus although it was described differently. This is a working environment in which clinical governance procedures are applied and doctors have to undergo periodic appraisal. Doctors working in such an environment will be eligible to revalidate through the clinical governance and appraisal route. The concept of the
‘GMC approved environment’
is also to be used in connection with doctors who have a restricted licence to practise (i.e. doctors who are licensed only to work in GMC approved environments). Already there is a long list of private healthcare providers who have been provisionally approved for these purposes and it is said that the list may be extended in future. How rigorous the approval procedures have been, I have no idea. The result of this change is that there will be very few doctors in clinical practice who will have to take the independent route to revalidation.
26.166
On 10th
November 2004, very shortly before delivery of this Report was due, the Inquiry received from the GMC a note of a meeting of the sub-group of the joint working group of the GMC, the RCGP, the BMA and the NHS Modernisation Agency which had taken place on 26th
August 2004 and to which I have already referred. I have previously reported on the first meeting of the joint working group, which took place in March 2004. The note revealed that the proposals for the provision of a clinical governance certificate had advanced some way. It appears that the discussions at the meeting related to those proposals and that it was not the function of the sub-group to make decisions. However, some points appear to have been agreed. The meaning of the note is not entirely clear to me. It will have been prepared for the benefit of those who attended the meeting and who would understand the context of the discussion. I may have misunderstood it to some extent. In some respects, the content of the note has been clarified by the receipt, on 11th
November 2004, of a letter from Sir Liam Donaldson, the CMO.
26.167
The note of the meeting of 26th
August 2004 made plain that it would be for the NHS to decide how to
‘deliver local certification’
. Further work would be required, but the group (I assume that means the sub-group) and the bodies represented would work together to ensure readiness for the introduction of revalidation. Under the heading
‘Local Support Groups’
, it was said that the NHS Modernisation Agency was continuing to work on
‘defining the nature of local support groups’
. It was also said that
‘local certification groups’
would consist of three people drawn from the certifying organisation, such as a PCO. One of the members of the certificating group would be a lay person, presumably an employee or officer or board member of the PCO. The certifying organisation would decide who those individuals would be. I am not sure whether a
‘local support group’
is the same as a
‘local certification group’
. As I reported in
paragraph 26.160
, the joint working group, which met in March 2004, discussed the possibility of local clinical governance support groups reviewing information known locally about doctors and reporting any concerns about a doctor to clinical governance leads. This type of group would have some lay input. That seemed to be a different group from a ‘local certification group’, the name of which suggested that it would be responsible for signing the clinical governance certificate.
26.168
The sub-group welcomed the work being done on tools and guidance and said that it was for the NHS to produce this in conjunction with partners such as the medical Royal Colleges. The need for consistency throughout the UK was stressed. It was stated that the guidance should be generic and potentially applicable to all specialties and all four countries of the UK. It was also stated that the publication of documentation on local certification should be co-ordinated. This paragraph of the note does not appear to relate to the work done by the RCGP and NCGST to which I referred in
paragraph 26.138
. The RCGP’s work was concerned with the evidence that should be produced by GPs for the purposes of CPD, appraisal and revalidation. The NCGST’s work sought to identify the minimum items of evidence that a GP would have to produce to allow a clinical governance lead to sign a clinical governance certificate.
26.169
The note recorded that the GMC’s formal guidance on licensing and revalidation would state what information about doctors would be required from local certification. The GMC envisaged that local certification would have two components. There would be certification of participation in appraisal and certification of the absence of
‘unresolved significant concerns’
. Because those providing the certificates would need to understand the significance of the document they were signing, additional information would be provided. In respect of participation in appraisal, certification would confirm five points, namely, that appraisal had taken place; that the process had produced an agreed personal development plan; that the process had been carried out and signed off by a trained appraiser; that the process had been
‘informed by validated data about the doctor’s actual practice’
, and that local clinical governance processes including appraisal were quality assured. It is not clear to me what was meant by the process being
‘informed by validated data’
; nor am I sure to what extent the clinical governance processes are to be quality assured.
26.170
In respect of the certificate relating to:
‘unresolved significant concerns, certification would confirm that:
i. There are no locally-known concerns about the doctor’s health.
ii. There are no locally-known concerns about the doctor’s probity.
iii. There are no local disciplinary procedures in progress.
iv. There have been no relevant disciplinary findings locally over the specified period.’
These were quite specific requirements and it appeared that the certificate would not provide any general assertion about the doctor’s fitness to practise or even the absence of concerns about other matters.
26.171
The note of the meeting recorded that it had been agreed that the information that would
‘underpin local certification’
should be
‘derived from clinical governance and verifiable data’
. I do not know what that means. If the clinical governance certificate were to deal with only the four specific items listed above, it would not be dependent on information
‘derived from clinical
governance’
or on
‘verifiable data’
. The health and probity certificates could never be more than assertions that the NHS body knew of nothing that would call the doctor’s health or probity into question. The third and fourth items were simply matters of record. I cannot see what role
‘verifiable data’
could play. The note said that the information (that would underpin local certification) should enable certificating organisations to identify concerns about a doctor’s practice. Where such concerns exist, appropriate action should be taken locally and information should be shared with other bodies, such as the GMC, where applicable. It was agreed that the NCGST would produce detailed working specifications on how local certification might work.
26.172
In the light of this document, some matters seemed tolerably clear. The clinical governance certificate would be negative in nature. In effect, it would say only that nothing adverse was known in four specific respects: health, probity, current local disciplinary procedures and local disciplinary findings within the revalidation period, usually five years. Mr Brearley’s wish that
concern about the doctor should be brought to the GMC’s attention had not been addressed. What was meant by
‘disciplinary procedures’
in the context of general practice was not clear. As I have said, disciplinary proceedings hardly exist today in general practice; they have been replaced by list management powers. Does the term
‘disciplinary procedures’
include the exercise of list management powers? It was however tolerably clear that a complaint from a patient that was under investigation and had, for example, been referred to the Healthcare Commission would not prevent the completion of a clinical governance certificate. Nor, presumably, would the knowledge that the doctor was being sued for damages in respect of the death of a patient, unless there were also local disciplinary procedures in train.
26.173
It seemed to me that, if revalidation were to be reliant on local clinical governance systems, the person or group providing the clinical governance certificate should be required to consider the totality of the clinical governance data available in respect of a doctor before signing the certificate which was to form the basis of revalidation. The certificate should not be based on only a few discrete aspects of that data. A member of the public who was told that a person or group had provided a certificate saying that there were
‘no unresolved significant concerns’
about a doctor would not understand that what was being certified was only that there had been and were no disciplinary proceedings against the doctor and no concerns about his/her health or probity. He or she would understand the certificate to mean that there were no concerns about complaints which had been made about the doctor and were as yet unresolved, no concerns about his/her general prescribing practice or prescribing of controlled drugs, no concernsabout his/her lack of participation in audit - indeed that there were
‘no unresolved significant concerns’
about the doctor at all. I believe a member of the public would expect - and would be entitled to expect - the person or group to review all the information available before reaching a conclusion as to whether or not to sign this important document. If the effect of the clinical governance certificate is limited to a statement that, so far as is known, the doctor has no health problems, is not dishonest and has had no involvement in disciplinary proceedings, the public should be made aware that this is the case.
26.174
What was not clear to me after reading the note of the sub-group was whether or not it was intended that there would be any local scrutiny of a doctor’s evidence by a clinical governance lead (as was contemplated by the NCGST) or by a local clinical governance support group or local certification group. If that was not to take place, it would mean that there was to be no evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise. That is, as I have observed, a fundamental statutory requirement for revalidation.
26.175
The CMO’s letter, dated 10th
November 2004, has shed further light on the proposals for revalidation, which now appear to be the joint proposals of the GMC and the DoH. In his letter, the CMO declared that, in his view,
‘firstly, the culture and process of clinical governance are now strongly embedded in local NHS organisations and, secondly, appraisal of NHS doctors is now well established’
. I am not sure upon what evidence the CMO has reached these conclusions. They are very different from the views expressed by his deputy, Professor Halligan (and by others), at the Inquiry seminars in January 2004 to which I referred at
paragraph 26.90
above. Certainly, the Inquiry has received no evidence from the DoH (or elsewhere) to support this change of view. Of course, it may be that the CMO is speaking about the position in the hospital service. The Inquiry is concerned only with general practice.
26.176
The CMO then explained that, because he had reached these conclusions, the DoH
‘would endorse the General Medical Council’s principle that local “certification” would provide an explicit assurance about the doctor’s practice at the point of revalidation’
. He continued:
‘There must be an explicit and positive confirmation that doctors’ practice-based evidence really is being reviewed through annual appraisal, operating within an environment subject to clinical governance. There would be explicit, rather than implicit, local certification (delivered by the clinical governance lead or the medical director or chief executive, as appropriate, for the most senior doctors) covering two components - that the doctor had been appraised and that there were no unresolved local concerns that might call into question the doctor’s fitness to practise.
In the case of participation in appraisal, explicit certification would confirm that:
a. Appraisal had taken place;
b. The appraisal process had produced an agreed Personal Development Plan;
c. The appraisal process had been carried out, and signed off, by a trained appraiser;
d. The appraisal process had been informed by verifiable data about the doctor’s actual practice;
e. Local clinical governance processes - including appraisal - were quality assured.
In the case of the absence of significant unresolved concerns, explicit certification would confirm that:
a. There are no locally-known concerns about the doctor’s health;
b. There are no locally-known concerns about the doctor’s probity;
c. There are no local disciplinary procedures in progress;
d. There have been no relevant disciplinary findings over the specified period.’
26.177
It now appears that the position is that the first stage of revalidation, which all doctors will be required to undergo, will comprise the submission of personal information (including declarations as to health and probity) to the GMC and the provision of a clinical governance certificate comprising the listed assertions about the doctor’s participation in appraisal as well as those about health, probity and disciplinary proceedings. It does now appear clear that it is the intention of both the GMC and the DoH that revalidation will not comprise an evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise. As I have said, appraisal as currently carried out for GPs cannot provide such an evaluation.
26.178
It may be that it is intended that appraisal will be ‘toughened up’. Indeed, I have read in the periodical ‘Doctor’ as recently as 5th
November 2004 that
‘GP appraisals are set to get tougher to ensure problem doctors are flagged up during revalidation’
. It was said that
‘a source close to the Department of Health said discussions were going on about how appraisal could be monitored to ensure it was stringent enough to allow revalidation to pick up problem doctors’
. The same article reported differing views from sections of the profession. Some thought that ‘toughening up’ would be a good idea; others thought that appraisal should not be used as a tool for picking up poor performance. However, it appears from the CMO’s letter to me that he is satisfied that appraisal is already an adequate foundation upon which to base revalidation. I regret to say that I cannot agree.
The Revalidation Proposals at the Time of the Inquiry Hearings
An Important Concern

--- A Change of Direction ---
26.56
Until April 2003, an informed member of the general public who had been following the development of the GMC’s proposals for revalidation would have thought that the GMC intended to be directly responsible for the revalidation of all doctors and that the process would involve an evaluation of the individual doctor’s fitness to practise, undertaken by a revalidation group (usually a local revalidation group), of which at least one member would be a lay person. The perception would have been that the twin purposes of revalidation were to be to protect patients and the public from under-performing doctors and to improve the quality of health care generally. However, in April 2003, that informed member of the public would have discovered that the GMC’s plans had changed, that it had abandoned the idea of evaluation of individual doctors by revalidation groups and that it now intended to revalidate, in most cases without further scrutiny, all doctors who had undergone five consecutive annual appraisals - or, in fact, fewer than five at the beginning of the revalidation cycle.
The Prospectus of April 2003
26.57
In April 2003, the GMC issued a document which it has since termed a ‘Prospectus’, but which was in fact a booklet issued to all doctors on the medical register. The Prospectus was entitled ‘A Licence to Practise & Revalidation’ and it was intended to inform doctors how revalidation was going to work in practice. The Prospectus was designed to enable doctors to start making preparations for revalidation. The purpose of revalidation was explained; it was to modernise the system of regulation and to increase public confidence. The aim was to ensure that doctors were up to date and fit to practise throughout their careers. Doctors were advised to
‘start thinking now’
about how they would collect the information that would demonstrate to the GMC that they were fit to practise. The GMC said that, during 2004, it would ask all doctors on the register whether they wanted a licence to practise. If they did, a licence would be granted by the end of 2004, after which time it would be unlawful to practise without a licence. The licence granted would be a general one, not related to any particular specialty. The register, which is a public document, would state whether the doctor held a licence to practise.
26.58
The Prospectus said that revalidation of those doctors who had been granted licences to practise would begin in April 2005 and that, in order to retain his/her licence to practise, every doctor would have to be revalidated at some stage over the following five years. Revalidation would require the doctor personally to show the GMC that s/he had been practising medicine in accordance with the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’, as applied to the doctor’s specialty. The Prospectus stated that the GMC would not seek to prescribe exactly what information a doctor should collect for this purpose. Indeed, the GMC had formed the view (apparently on the basis of legal advice which it had received) that it did not have the legal powers to do so. I interpose to say that I find that surprising in view of the powers that it will have when sections 29A to 29J of the 1983 Act (as amended) come into force; but that is what was said. The information the doctor was to provide would have to cover all headings in ‘Good Medical Practice’. It would be up to each individual doctor to decide how s/he would demonstrate to the GMC that s/he was fit to practise.
26.59
The Prospectus explained that there were to be two possible routes to revalidation: the
‘appraisal route’
‘independent route’
. In order to take the
‘appraisal route’
, the doctor would have to show the GMC that s/he worked in a
‘managed environment’
and had
‘participated in an annual appraisal system’
. For an appraisal to be acceptable to the GMC, it would have to be based on the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’ and
‘be operated within a quality assurance system’
. It was said that the GMC believed that
‘full participation in annual appraisal’
, with
‘completed supporting documentation’
, during the revalidation cycle was
‘a powerful indicator of a doctor’s current fitness to practise’
26.60
It seems that the GMC had arrived at this state of belief despite the fact that the second pilot study had shown that in only 32% of cases had the perusal of the completed appraisal forms been sufficient to allow a decision to be made that the doctor was fit to practise. Yet the Prospectus asserted that the GMC believed that merely taking part in annual appraisal (for the purpose of which appraisal forms were completed) would provide a powerful indicator that the doctor was fit to practise. It is not clear on what evidence this belief was based.
26.61
The Prospectus explained that doctors working in a variety of NHS settings, including GPs working under a General Medical Services (GMS) Contract, would be able to consider themselves as working within a
‘managed environment’
for the purpose of revalidation. The justification for that was that GPs were participating in a scheme of annual appraisal with quality assurance. However, it does not seem to me that GP principals, who are independent contractors, can be said to work in a
‘managed environment’
within the ordinary meaning of that term. The Prospectus said that, for those doctors who were already subject to appraisal, there was nothing additional that they needed to do to prepare for revalidation. They should not have to collect any data for revalidation over and above that which they would be required to record and keep for appraisal and other local systems. Provided doctors were confident that, by the time they came to be revalidated, they would have had at least one appraisal, they need do nothing more. The Prospectus made clear that the GMC would not usually ask to see the folder of evidence that a doctor had prepared for appraisal. However, the GMC might wish to examine a sample of such folders.
26.62
The Prospectus then outlined the independent route to revalidation. This might apply to doctors working outside mainstream health care, those with ‘portfolio’ practices or those taking a career break or working overseas. For such doctors, the onus would be on them to produce evidence to show that they were adopting the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’ and were undertaking appropriate continuing professional development. Acceptable evidence would include
‘appropriate quality indicators’
, where necessary supported by other data and information. The Prospectus explained that the GMC was developing a range of tools to help doctors who wanted to provide independent evidence for use in the revalidation process. These would include self-declaration forms to cover the ‘Probity’ and ‘Health’ headings of ‘Good Medical Practice’. Also, there would be a patient satisfaction questionnaire to cover the heading ‘Relationships with patients’ and a professional colleague survey which could be used for the heading ‘Working with colleagues’. The Prospectus said that the evidence would be reviewed in a way which would be
‘as efficient, effective and proportionate to the aims of the process as possible’
. The GMC did say that it would not normally ask the doctor to provide all the information used to support evidence of practice quality.
26.63
The Prospectus advised doctors that they would be given notice in due course of what was required of them and when. It also indicated that the GMC intended to carry out
‘appropriate testing’
before revalidation began in 2005. It was not made clear to what this
‘testing’
referred.
26.64
The Prospectus also provided an explanation of the processes which would follow if the doctor failed to provide sufficient or adequate information, and described the circumstances in which a doctor’s licence to practise might be withdrawn. It explained that, if the information initially provided by the doctor was thought to be insufficient, the GMC would ask for further information. If, thereafter, it was considered that the information was
‘inadequate’
the GMC would assess the doctor’s case to see if there was:
‘. . . positive evidence that you
are not fit to practise.
If there is not we will revalidate you and your licence to practise will remain valid. If there is we will refer you to the appropriate fitness to practise procedure. The process will be bound by statutory rules and you will have the right to appeal against our decision.’
And later:
‘We will only withdraw your licence if ... a fitness to practise panel directs that your registration should be suspended or erased.’
26.65
The Prospectus did not explain how the stage between the initial consideration of information and the final stage of referral into the FTP procedures would be carried out. I feel bound to draw attention to the difference between the language used to address doctors and that later used to explain revalidation to the public. Doctors were told that they would be revalidated unless there was positive evidence that they were unfit to practise. The public was told that, to secure revalidation, a doctor would have to demonstrate that s/he was up to date and fit to practise.
26.66
This explanation was followed by a section headed
‘Questions and Answers’
. One question asked how the proposed system of revalidation compared with assurance systems outside medicine. In the answer, the Prospectus stated that there was a
‘good professional comparison’
with the periodic formal reassessment that airline pilots must undergo if they wish to retain their licence. It was said that this process was analogous in several ways to the new arrangements for doctors. First, it promoted the idea of regular confirmation of fitness to practise. Second, the purpose of reassessing pilots is, it was said, to ensure that they have remained good pilots, not to find out if they are bad pilots. There were more appropriate local and rapid ways of identifying bad pilots. Third, it was said that no airline would rely only on periodic reassessments; airlines have their own local management procedures to assess their pilots’ suitability for specific work. In one respect, this comparison between doctors and pilots is particularly apposite; both doctors and airline pilots take our lives in their hands when working. I can see also that there may be other similarities between the revalidation of doctors and the formal assessments undergone by pilots. However, the answer in the Prospectus did not mention an important distinction between the two processes, namely that pilots have to undergo a series of competence tests in the course of periodic assessment, whereas revalidation, as proposed in the prospectus, would not involve any such testing.
26.67
Another question and answer dealt with the role of lay persons. It will be recalled that, under the arrangements envisaged up to the end of the second pilot study, undertaken in April 2002, at least one member of the local revalidation group was to be a lay person. The Prospectus of April 2003 explained that lay people would be involved at two levels,
‘in both the design of the systems and their operation’
. It appears that the reference to lay input to the design was a reference to the fact that lay people had been involved in the development of ‘Good Medical Practice’ and in
‘shaping policy on revalidation’
. It was clear that lay involvement in the appraisal route to revalidation was to be limited to the fact that
‘Appraisal systems based on
require doctors to reflect on the quality of their relationship with patients.’
It was said that
‘Doctors may use questionnaires completed by patients as a means of giving us information about the quality of their professional practice.’
Presumably, this related to doctors who were seeking revalidation via the independent route. Third, it was noted that
‘The quality of doctors’ relationships with patients will also be considered as part of clinical governance systems.’
Finally, it was said that lay people would monitor the GMC’s processes; how they would do so was not explained. It was said that decision panels considering individual cases would have a lay member. I think that these would be the panels which were to hear appeals against licensing decisions. It was said that the GMC’s Patients’ Reference Group would
‘regularly consider the revalidation process’
. What seems clear is that there was to be no routine lay involvement in the decision whether to revalidate an individual doctor. In short, there had been a retreat from the earlier commitment to active lay involvement in that process.
26.68
Thus it appeared that, by early 2003, not only had the GMC rejected the idea that revalidation should, for most doctors, be based on evaluation by local revalidation groups, it had also moved to a position where, as it was put in the medical press at the time, for doctors working in the NHS,
‘five satisfactory appraisals equals revalidation’
. Indeed, in the early years, only one appraisal might equal revalidation. How and why the GMC had moved to this position was not made clear.
26.69
The implications of the change must be understood. The GMC had moved from evaluation by a revalidation group of an individual doctor’s fitness to practise by means of examination of evidence (be it the contents of his/her folder or the completed set of appraisal forms) to a position where there was to be no individual evaluation at all but, instead, an assumption that, if the doctor had been through the appraisal process, s/he must be up to date and fit to practise.
Reactions to the New Proposals
26.70
Between April 2003 and the time when the GMC was due to give evidence to the Inquiry, there was considerable discussion in the medical press about the new proposals. By and large, doctors seemed content with the proposals although some objections were raised from within the profession. For example, an article which appeared in the periodical ‘Doctor’, on 17th
July 2003, reported that Professor Pringle, then Chairman of the RCGP and a member of the GMC, had warned that revalidation under the current proposals would not achieve what it purported to achieve. He said that it would not offer the public protection from poor or under-performing doctors. It would only
‘create an illusion’
of protection.
26.71
During the second half of 2003, the Inquiry received a good deal of evidence about the appraisal of GPs, which had been introduced in the spring of 2002. By the time of the Inquiry hearings, one cycle of appraisal of GP principals should have been completed. The Inquiry heard evidence from a number of witnesses, in particular from Dr Chisholm, and also from Dr Reith, who gave evidence and attended the Inquiry seminars on behalf of the RCGP. I have referred to their evidence in
Chapter 12
. Both were enthusiasts for the concept of the appraisal of GPs - indeed of all doctors - but they expressed concern about the use of appraisal as the foundation for revalidation. The more I heard, the more concerned I became at the prospect that revalidation was to depend so heavily on appraisal.
26.72
The main concern that the witnesses expressed, the validity of which I came to accept, was that the appraisal of GPs had been designed for purely formative purposes; it was intended that it would provide for doctors an opportunity, in dedicated time, to think and talk about their practice and, by means of this process, to improve it. It had not been intended to provide any form of assessment or evaluation of the doctor. Appraisers were not intended to, and had not been trained to, form any judgement about an appraisee’s fitness to practise. Appraisal was to be based upon (although not limited to) a confidential discussion based on a folder of documents produced by the doctor. The appraiser’s role was to stimulate self-examination by the appraisee in circumstances of complete confidentiality and to help the appraisee to plan his/her future professional development. GPs being appraised were to feel free to raise concerns about themselves or their practices without any fear that they would be ‘judged’ upon them, let alone that they would be reported. Only if serious concerns arose would the appraiser stop the appraisal and report his/her concerns to the PCO. That was the only circumstance in which a GP could ‘fail’ an appraisal. If appraisal were now to be used for the purposes of assessment or evaluation, GPs might not be frank and open with their appraiser and the formative value of appraisal would be lost. GPs had initially been suspicious about the whole idea of appraisal and had accepted it only when satisfied of its formative nature.
26.73
The second concern was that the arrangements for the appraisal of GPs were consistent with its formative purpose and were not appropriate for an assessment or evaluation. The contents of the folder of information upon which the appraisal was based were selected entirely by the doctor being appraised. There was no list of documents that the doctor had to produce. Nor was there, in any of the areas examined by the Inquiry, any direct input by the PCO into the appraisal process of data collected from clinical governance activity. A doctor could submit such data if s/he had it and wanted to submit it but, if s/he preferred not to, there was no obligation to do so. In any event, as I explained in
Chapter 12
PCOs have very little clinical governance data that relates to an individual doctor; in the main, it relates to the GP practice as a whole. A further problem was that PCOs would not necessarily tell an appraiser if they had any particular concern about a doctor. As a result, a PCO might be aware of a serious complaint against the appraisee; the appraisee might or might not raise it for discussion with the appraiser but, if s/he did not, the appraiser would remain in ignorance of it.
26.74
During the hearings, I had the opportunity to examine some anonymised completed appraisal forms provided by the Tameside and Glossop Primary Care Trust (PCT). The amount and type of information contained on the forms produced was very variable but, in some cases, it was sparse and could never have provided a basis for an evaluation of fitness to practise, even if the appraiser had been qualified and trained to carry out that task. A further concern was that, apart from the section of Form 4 on which were set out the doctor’s training needs for the coming year, some PCOs (including the Tameside PCT) did not receive any of the appraisal forms. It had apparently been intended that they should receive copies of Form 4 (which should contain a summary of the appraisal discussion) but it became clear in the course of the Inquiry’s evidence that this was not happening in some areas. Moreover, it had never been envisaged that PCOs would see the contents of the doctor’s folder and the evidence to the Inquiry was that they did not do so. Thus, although appraisal was said to be a part of clinical governance, many PCOs had no input and received very little output.
26.75
Yet another concern related to the variable arrangements made by different PCTs when introducing appraisal. In some places, many GPs had not yet been appraised; in others, they had been appraised, but the quality of appraisal as between PCTs appeared to be variable. Selection processes for appraisers were also variable; in some places, PCTs had insisted that only accredited GP trainers could act as appraisers; in others the PCT had simply called for volunteers. Appraisers underwent training but it was very brief and often provided little more than an introduction to the documentation. Some PCTs provided additional support and training; others did not. Certainly, there had been no attempt at teaching appraisers how to evaluate a doctor’s fitness to practise. Indeed, this is hardly surprising as that was not the purpose of the exercise. Appraisers were advised that, in the unlikely event that a serious concern arose about a doctor’s fitness to practise, the appraisal should be discontinued and the concerns reported to the PCT. How serious the concern would have to be before the appraiser took that action was not clear. Advice issued by the DoH suggests that it would be appropriate to discontinue appraisal if it appeared that the doctor's conduct, health or performance posed a threat to patients. The Inquiry has not heard of any case in which an appraisal has been stopped for that reason.
26.76
I agreed with those witnesses, including Dr Reith, Dr Chisholm and Professor Richard Baker, who told the Inquiry that this process of appraisal would not be an appropriate basis for revalidation. It could not be compared with the kind of appraisal that I know takes place in many employment situations, where an employee is appraised by a senior person who is in possession of a good deal of information about the employee’s performance during the previous year. Nor did it appear to me that GP appraisal could be considered a suitable substitute for the scrutiny of a doctor’s folder by a local revalidation group. It seemed to me that, under the arrangements described in the Prospectus of April 2003, the GMC had, in effect, delegated responsibility for revalidation of GPs to appraisers, who were not expected and were not equipped to carry out an evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise. The GMC was not intending to examine the doctors’ folders and it was not clear from the Prospectus whether it would examine the appraisal forms. It subsequently became clear that there was no intention to examine the forms. In short, there was to be no
‘evaluation’
, as required by the imminent amendments to the 1983 Act. It appeared to me that, instead, the GMC was going to renew, virtually automatically, the licence to practise of any doctor seeking revalidation provided that his/her appraisal had not been stopped on account of serious concerns having arisen about his/her fitness to practise. I became concerned that such a system would offer no greater protection to patients than that afforded by existing systems and that, therefore, the public could not reasonably have confidence in revalidation as then proposed.
When and Why Did the General Medical Council Change Direction?
26.77
The Inquiry invited the GMC to provide a witness statement dealing with its proposals for revalidation. The GMC submitted a written statement from Mr Brearley. Shortly before the Inquiry hearings reached the stage at which revalidation was to be discussed, the GMC announced an important modification to its previous proposals. This was the addition of a requirement that a doctor seeking revalidation should produce a ‘clinical governance certificate’, signed by a senior officer of the organisation employing the doctor or, in the case of a GP, by an officer (probably the clinical governance lead) of his/her PCO. The certificate would state that there were no (or no significant) unresolved concerns about the doctor, arising out of clinical governance procedures. There was still left in place the basic proposal that, for doctors working in a
‘managed environment’
, revalidation would be based upon appraisal. I shall discuss this modification of the GMC’s proposals later in this Chapter. For the moment, I shall attempt to focus upon the course of events in the months preceding April 2003 and the reasons for the change of direction.
26.78
Mr Brearley’s witness statement did not explain the events that had led to the publication of the new proposals in April 2003. Accordingly, I examined the briefing papers and minutes of the Council meetings that took place during this period. I could find no paper dealing with proposals for the revalidation process or any reference to a proposal for change during the period between September 2002 and April 2003. The minutes of Council meetings during this period contain no reference to a decision to change the arrangements previously proposed. It seems that the decision may have been taken at a special internal conference in February 2003. I have seen no record of the discussion which took place there.
26.79
Dame Lesley Southgate told the Inquiry that the RTG, of which she was a member, had been disbanded. She did not say when this had happened. She seemed very reticent on this topic and I did not press her about it but she did say that she thought that the group had been disbanded because it had been ‘parting company’ with the GMC on the direction revalidation was to take. Mr Brearley said that the further work which it had been planned that the RTG should undertake after the second pilot study was not undertaken because of the GMC’s increasing interest in using clinical governance processes for revalidation and a ‘slight change of direction with regard to evaluation of evidence’.
26.80
Dr Chisholm told the Inquiry that the GPC of the BMA had been extremely supportive of the GMC’s early proposals for revalidation based upon scrutiny of the doctor’s folder. It had worked with the RCGP to produce the booklet ‘Good Medical Practice for General Practitioners’, which was to form the basis of the standards to be applied by those undertaking the revalidation evaluation. When asked about appraisal, he said that he and his Committee were strongly supportive of appraisal and were anxious to see it well resourced and implemented. However, he expressed reservations about the nature of the direct linkage between appraisal and revalidation that had been GMC policy since publication of the Prospectus in April 2003. He then volunteered that he thought that there were two reasons why the GMC had changed its policy. First, he thought that the GMC had found the concept of in-depth revalidation to be ‘rather daunting in terms of the complexity of the task’. Second, he said that there was ‘really quite strong enthusiasm from the BMA representatives of the hospital doctors to go down the route of five satisfactory appraisals being the way to revalidate’. He added that, at the last GMC meeting he had attended (which would have been the last meeting of the ‘old’ GMC of 104 members on 20th
and 21st
May 2003), Professor Pringle had ‘made a very trenchant attack on the way in which appraisal and revalidation were now to be linked’. Dr Chisholm added that the debate was now over and that the April 2003 proposals were to be the ‘way forward’. He accepted that this represented a considerable shift from the GMC’s earlier proposals. Later in his evidence, he said that there had been voluble opposition to the original proposals and that the GMC had been concerned at their resource implications. When asked whether the opposition had been less voluble from GPs than from hospital consultants and junior hospital doctors, he said that he thought that it had, although he was more confident in saying that about the leaders of the GPs (who had been strongly supportive of the GMC’s original proposals) than about the rank and file. He said that many GPs might not thank the RCGP and the GPC for campaigning for ‘a more complex and thoroughgoing system’. When asked whether the leaders of the profession should give a lead to doctors and encourage them to accept the need for a real evaluation as part of the revalidation process, he said that several leaders of the profession had spoken out both in public and in private against the new proposals but that the ‘floor’ of the GMC had been against them, including the voices of some medical Royal Colleges (but not the RCGP) and of the BMA.
26.81
Mr Brearley gave oral evidence on behalf of the GMC in relation to the question of the change of direction. The thrust of his evidence was that the Prospectus of April 2003 did not represent a major change of direction at all. The underlying principles were exactly as they had been before. There had been a slight change of direction which had been made solely in order to achieve improvements to revalidation. The new arrangements were, he said, better than the old ones would have been.
26.82
In his written statement, dated 5th
December 2003, Mr Brearley said that the pilot studies of 2001 and 2002 had revealed certain
‘weaknesses’
in the arrangements that were then contemplated. These were that:
despite regular local review, formal scrutiny of the folders would take place only once every five years
the scrutiny would normally take place without the doctor being present
there would be no obvious link to clinical governance
it was doubtful that the system would be cost-effective.
26.83
With great respect to Mr Brearley, I find the first three of these supposed
‘weaknesses’
wholly unconvincing as reasons for abandoning the earlier proposals. I can see that an assessment by a local revalidation group of the doctor’s folder or appraisal forms that took place more frequently than once every five years might be better than what had originally been planned, but I cannot see that to remove all formal scrutiny would be an improvement. As to the second ‘weakness’, I can see that an assessment by a local revalidation group that was attended by the doctor might be better than one from which s/he was absent. But to abandon the assessment by a local revalidation group altogether would not remove that ‘weakness’. Instead, it would throw away such benefits as would accrue from an assessment in the absence of the doctor. And it cannot sensibly be suggested that a wholly private and formative appraisal process can replace the objective scrutiny that would have taken place under the original proposals. Nor can I accept the third ‘weakness’, namely that the original proposals did not involve an
‘obvious link to clinical governance’
. Indeed they did, to the extent that it was intended that the folder, on which both appraisal and revalidation were to be based, would contain information which came from clinical governance procedures. However, as I have pointed out, for individual GPs, this link was limited because there was and is not a great deal of ‘hard’ data from clinical governance. Under the original proposals, at least the contents of the doctor’s folder would have been seen by people responsible for making an evaluation whereas, under the new proposals, there was and is to be no evaluation of that material at all.
26.84
As to the fourth ‘weakness’, I have already mentioned the cost benefit analysis of revalidation as a whole, which had been attempted in 2001 and had shown that it was not possible to evaluate the benefits. So far as I am aware, no analysis has ever been carried out of the ‘value’ of the use of local revalidation groups, as opposed to the ‘value’ of any other method of revalidation. I entirely accept that it would be a difficult exercise. The cost of using revalidation groups to examine the folders was known from the analysis carried out in 2001. It might well have been cheaper if appraisal forms only had been looked at. If what this ‘weakness’ amounted to was that the GMC came to the conclusion that the use of revalidation groups was too expensive, then I could understand that point of view. What I cannot understand or accept is that the abandonment of the local revalidation groups in favour of appraisal could be seen as an improvement in itself and could achieve a greater - or even a similar - degree of protection for patients.
26.85
In oral evidence, Leading Counsel to the Inquiry took Mr Brearley through the Consultation Paper of 2000 and the results of the two pilot studies. Mr Brearley said that the pilot studies had highlighted a number of problems. He mentioned some of those problems. He said that the pilot studies had been small, and that, because of the limited number and range of practice of the doctors involved, it had not been possible to assess the sensitivity of the method of evaluation being used. I see the logic of that and accept that the pilot studies left a degree of uncertainty. However, as I pointed out, further pilot studies could have been carried out. Mr Brearley mentioned that there was no ‘gold standard’ against which to measure the effectiveness of the process of scrutiny. I agree, but I think that it would have been possible - although expensive - to devise an objective test, possibly by subjecting a group of doctors to the type of assessment used by the GMC in its performance procedures and comparing the results with an evaluation of their folders or appraisal forms. In short, although I could see that the pilot studies had not demonstrated conclusively that the proposed method would be effective, this was not a reason for abandoning the local revalidation groups at that stage.
26.86
Mr Brearley said that the second pilot study had demonstrated that examination of the appraisal forms alone would not be a sufficient basis for evaluation. Revalidation groups would also have needed to see the underlying documents contained in the doctors’ folders. He accepted that the second pilot study had been of value in that it had shown what kind of information was useful for the purposes of making an evaluation of fitness to practise. He made the point, in relation to the current proposals (under which revalidation is based upon the completion of appraisal), that what had been learned from the pilot study could be used to improve appraisal, by ensuring that the right kind of information was included in the appraisal process. However, he accepted that the GMC had never sought to prescribe what information ought to go into appraisal; that, he said, was the role of the medical Royal Colleges. He hoped to see development along those lines and was sure that appraisal would improve over time.
26.87
As I have said, Mr Brearley said that there had been ‘a slight change of direction with regard to evaluation of evidence’. He was asked whether there had been any resistance to the original proposals from the profession. He replied that doctors felt under tremendous pressure; medicine was a very stressful occupation and there were high alcoholism and suicide rates. Also there was a high drop-out rate. Any additional burden would make things worse. He added that appraisal had been made a contractual requirement and doctors had been promised dedicated time for it and for the necessary preparations. However, this had not been provided and all the work had to be done in the doctors’ own time. Be that as it may, I cannot see that submitting the appraisal forms or the folder - already prepared - to a revalidation group imposes any significant burden additional to that imposed by the requirement to undergo appraisal.
26.88
Mr Brearley then said that the decision to change from revalidation groups to reliance upon appraisal and clinical governance had come about because of the rapid development of clinical governance. He said that clinical governance had been in its infancy when the process using revalidation groups had been designed. He accepted that, in the Consultation Paper of 2000, the GMC had talked about the advent of clinical governance and that it had concluded then that both clinical governance and revalidation as separate entities were necessary for patient protection. The Consultation Paper had said that neither would be sufficient without the other. Leading Counsel to the Inquiry suggested that it was somewhat disingenuous for the GMC to claim that it was the progress of clinical governance and appraisal that had removed the need for separate evaluation for the purposes of revalidation and had allowed the GMC to change its proposals and make revalidation dependent upon appraisal. Mr Brearley rejected that suggestion and asserted that, in 2000, the role of clinical governance had been unclear; it was only recently that the GMC had seen what part clinical governance could play and would play in the future when it reached its full potential.
26.89
When Leading Counsel suggested that the GMC had made a substantial shift in direction, Mr Brearley suggested that she was making ‘terribly heavy weather’ of it. He asserted that the system that the GMC now proposed would be better than the one previously planned. When asked in what respects, he said that the new system brought in clinical governance information that would not otherwise have been available. Under the original revalidation plans, he said, some of the information held by the NHS trust or PCO would not have gone into the doctor’s folder and would not have been considered by the revalidation group because what went into the folder was a matter for the doctor. However, he agreed that it had been the original intention that someone from the NHS trust or PCO, who would have knowledge of the doctor, should be on the revalidation group. But, he said, it would have been impracticable to arrange that in all cases. I can see that that might have been so. However, it does not seem to me that it would have been difficult to build into the original revalidation group system a requirement that the NHS trust or PCO should provide clinical governance data. In fact, it would also have been possible, had it been thought desirable, to ask the NHS trust or PCO to provide a clinical governance certificate as well.
26.90
When asked whether the GMC was now confident that appraisal and clinical governance were working well all over the country to the extent that it was safe to rely upon them for revalidation, Mr Brearley said that the GMC must assume that they were because the law of the land required it to be so. However, the evidence received by the Inquiry has shown that clinical governance and appraisal are not working well everywhere. I have already referred to the evidence received by the Inquiry in relation to appraisal. Evidence from the Commission for Health Improvement showed that clinical governance was operating patchily and the September 2003 Report of the National Audit Office showed a similar picture. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Aidan Halligan, Deputy CMO for England and Director of Clinical Governance for the NHS, said that clinical governance was not yet embedded in primary care. Mr Brearley himself had said in evidence that data collection in hospitals was ‘a nightmare’. When reminded of that, he observed that data collection was only a part of clinical governance. That I accept, but it seems to me that no one who has considered the available evidence could conclude that clinical governance and appraisal were working well over the whole country. Indeed, Mr Brearley himself accepted that appraisal and clinical governance were not working perfectly but said that they were much improved and he was confident that they would continue to improve. He may be right, but it is difficult to understand how, at the time when the GMC decided to move away from its plans for evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise, based on scrutiny of appraisal forms or folders, to a system that relied on taking part in appraisal and the provision of a clinical governance certificate, it could have had confidence in the operation of clinical governance or appraisal. As I shall shortly explain, the GMC was, in fact, well aware of the limitations of appraisal and clinical governance.
26.91
When Mr Brearley was asked to comment on the reasons given by Dr Chisholm for the GMC’s change of stance, he repeated that none of those reasons was the principal reason. The principal reason was that the new model was better. Had the GMC found the prospect of organising individual scrutiny of folders to be daunting? Mr Brearley’s answer was ‘yes’, that it was a big task but that was not a problem. However, there was no point in the GMC doing something separate just so that it could claim ownership of the system. If clinical governance could provide a better system, there was no point in the GMC pursuing its own system. Had there been any opposition from the profession? Mr Brearley said that there had been opposition from some members of the profession because of the demands upon their time. Had cost been a factor? Mr Brearley said that it had to some extent because it is the doctors’ money that the GMC spends and revalidation groups would be expensive. But he said that, if revalidation groups had been the only way of doing the job properly, the GMC would have funded them. However, if it was not necessary to spend that money, it was sensible not to do so.
26.92
Sir Graeme Catto and Mr Scott were also asked about the apparent change of stance. They too said that this was not a substantial change but a ‘modification’ or ‘refinement’ of the previous plans. There had, they said, been a recognition that reliance on clinical governance would be a better way of achieving the aims and objectives of revalidation. I must say that the move away from an arrangement whereby the evidence relating to the individual doctor seeking revalidation would be assessed by a revalidation group and the doctor’s fitness to practise would be evaluated, to an arrangement where the doctor is assumed to be fit to practise if s/he has undergone appraisal and there are said to be no significant unresolved concerns about his/her practice, seems to me to be a major change. Moreover, it seems to me that, provided that the material on which the assessment was based was adequate, the former arrangement would have a much better prospect of ascertaining whether a doctor was or was not fit to practise and would, therefore, afford a greater degree of protection for patients.
Further Evidence after the Inquiry Hearings
26.93
However, further evidence was later discovered which threw light on the GMC’s thinking on revalidation in the period between September 2002 and April 2003. In evidence, Mr Brearley mentioned that the GMC had commissioned management consultants (in fact, an organisation known as SHM Productions Ltd (SHM)) to undertake a study of how revalidation and recertification were carried out in other countries. A copy of SHM’s study was submitted to the Inquiry in December 2003. On reading it, the Inquiry team found that it contained a reference to earlier reports on revalidation. Those were duly requested. The second (March 2003) report arrived shortly afterwards. A further request was made for the first report and this arrived in February 2004.
The First SHM Report
26.94
SHM’s first report was dated December 2002. It was entitled ‘GMC revalidation proposal - identifying key issues and alternatives’. The introductory section recorded that, because revalidation had
‘far reaching implications both for the organisation and for the profession as a whole ... it is necessary to step back and consider what the potential pitfalls may be’
. This would require detailed evaluation and analysis (phase two) which would be carried out by SHM the following year (2003). For the present, there would be an overview of the major issues and a discussion of the key areas of contention. The report would address five questions:
‘• What is the current context for revalidation?
• Which models have been used for professional revalidation and regulation elsewhere?
• What precisely is the current proposal for revalidation?
• What alternative models should be considered?
• What are the next steps that constitute the body of the work required in phase two?’
26.95
Four key
‘areas’
of revalidation were identified, by reference to which the SHM analysis was to be carried out. These were:
‘1. What evidence should doctors provide for review?
The inputs.
2. How should the evaluation be carried out?
The review process.
3. How can the ‘hearts and minds’ of doctors be captured?
Doctor buy-in.
4. How can the public be reassured and made to feel “safe”?
Public buy-in.
26.96
The report described the activities undertaken by SHM during the first phase of the project. These included a review of GMC documentation, a review of externally published information about revalidation, telephone interviews with GMC members and staff, and a review of alternative models in operation abroad. These reviews had been followed by a discussion between the SHM team and the GMC revalidation team. I shall summarise the report’s conclusions.
26.97
The report concluded that there was general acceptance on all sides that some form of revalidation was required, but there was considerable divergence of opinion among GMC members and staff about the form it should take. Areas of agreement listed were that:
some form of revalidation was necessary and desirable
the model adopted must be simple to implement
the model adopted must be agreed by doctors and patient groups
reviewing folders of evidence from 100% of doctors was not feasible owing to costs and resources
the current thinking was that some sort of link with appraisal was inevitable, but there was concern that the
‘platform’
offered by appraisal was
‘patchy at best and very shaky at worst’
the key risks were of trying to do too much too soon or of panicking and doing too little. Either would damage the GMC’s credibility
no model could claim to prevent ‘another Shipman’
communication and understanding were key issues, for both doctors and the public.
26.98
It was reported that there was little agreement about what revalidation could achieve. There were strong views and diverging opinions on almost all aspects of the revalidation proposals from the objectives down to the criteria for success. These were analysed in some detail. For example, in relation to the question of what should be seen as the chief motivation towards revalidation, it was said that some saw revalidation as having emerged from the need to ensure that the public had confidence in doctors; others saw revalidation as having arisen as a result of Government pressure following high profile misconduct cases such as Shipman’s; and yet others saw it as part of a worldwide trend towards modernisation of professional regulation. This was followed by a discussion about the advantages of presenting revalidation in a positive rather than a negative light. However, the point was made that to present revalidation as a means of ensuring high professional standards was somewhat undermined by the fact that revalidation would present only a
‘very low bar’
for doctors to achieve. The report recorded the comment by one person interviewed that revalidation was
‘merely an assessment of basic proficiency’
26.99
Another important topic discussed in some detail was the linkage between appraisal and revalidation. It was said that there was general agreement that
‘some sort of link’
was necessary. There were two main arguments in support of a link. First, the use of the same material for both processes would minimise the workload for doctors. Second, the link would ensure that appraisal was given
‘an edge’
; some of those interviewed expressed disapproval of the idea that appraisal should be purely developmental; one said,
‘it is a form of assessment ... if it is purely chatting it is no use at all’
. There then followed a comprehensive list of concerns about using appraisal for the purpose of revalidation. These concerns must have been expressed during the interviews with GMC members and staff. They bear a strong resemblance to the kind of concerns that the Inquiry heard when receiving evidence about appraisal and its proposed link with revalidation. For example, concern was expressed about the
‘immaturity’
of appraisal and about the patchy way in which it was operating. Doubts were also expressed about the ability of appraisal to pick up a bad doctor. Also mentioned was the dichotomy between the formative nature of appraisal and its use in the process of revalidation, which should be summative (i.e. pass/fail) in nature. It was said that appraisal had been presented as formative and supportive, while the Government saw it as a means of performance management. Doubts were expressed about the abilities of appraisers and the rigour with which appraisals would be carried out. One interviewee expressed a fear that under-performing doctors would be allowed to continue in practice on the basis of
‘anything for a quiet life’
. There was no incentive for an appraiser to report poor performance; such a report would be bound to
‘ruffle feathers’
and to damage professional relationships. It was said that, historically, there had been
‘a cultural problem of doctors reporting their colleagues’
. One interviewee observed that employers might be unwilling to bring forward doctors who were not performing well, as they might think that it was
‘better to “contain” a bad doctor than have no doctor at all’
. Also, the issue of consistency of quality of appraisal was raised, and of the materials on which appraisal was based. Some interviewees expressed concern about the lack of lay involvement in appraisal which might lead to a perception by the public that revalidation would take place inside the
‘club’
. Another point was that it might appear that the whole revalidation process was being passed over to employers and that the GMC was
‘admitting defeat’
. If the GMC was to rely on employers, it would have to ensure that the employers’ systems were
‘strong’
. This section of the report concluded with the observation that these objections were a
‘significant catalogue’
which could not and should not be
‘dismissed lightly’
26.100
Another section of the report discussed the process by which the evidence provided by doctors should be reviewed for the purposes of revalidation and who should take part in that review. Some interviewees believed that it was critical that there must be active lay involvement. There was considerable divergence of view as to what the role of the GMC should be in the review; at the extremes, some thought that it should be wholly responsible for the revalidation process and others thought that it should limit itself to the quality assurance of a process to be carried out at local level. The role of employers was also discussed and an interesting range of views recorded. For example, it was suggested that employers could play a useful role in acting as the
‘early warning system’
for identifying poorly performing doctors before they were identified through the revalidation process. Also, they could help by providing the GMC with the information which was required from doctors for the purposes of revalidation. However, concern was expressed that employers could not be relied upon to report
‘at-risk’
doctors. That would require a
‘considerable change of culture’
. Too often, it was said, NHS trusts allowed a poorly performing doctor to move on from post to post without reporting him/her to the GMC.
26.101
The next section of the report discussed various possible ‘models’ for revalidation. First, approaches in other countries and professions were considered. The mechanisms used were classified as
‘soft’
(i.e. those with a developmental focus) and
‘hard’
(i.e. those which depended upon assessment or testing). I note that the column relating to pilots in this country records that they are subject to the
‘hardest’
mechanism, namely
‘testing’
. I mention that because, in its Prospectus published a few months later, in April 2003, the GMC suggested, as I have previously mentioned, that there was
‘a good professional comparison’
between its new proposals for the revalidation of doctors and the periodic reassessments undergone by airline pilots.
26.102
The report then listed seven possible models for the revalidation of doctors. These consisted of one model which was said to be
‘currently under consideration’
, three possible models which had already been discarded and three more models which had emerged from discussions between SHM and the GMC and which were said to be worthy of further examination. In respect of each model, an attempt was made to describe how it would work in practice, and to assess its potential acceptability to doctors and patients, its feasibility and cost. Assumptions had had to be made but these had been based upon discussions with GMC staff.
26.103
The model
‘currently under consideration’
was not one of the models that had been tested in the pilot studies; nor was it the model that was to emerge in April 2003. Under this model, doctors were to provide Form 4 (including their personal development plan) from their appraisal documentation (although not their folders and not Forms 1 to 3). They were also to provide one
‘Ramsey-type questionnaire’
during each five-year cycle. The GMC described a
‘Ramsey-type questionnaire’
as a patient satisfaction or peer review questionnaire. The evidence (presumably Form 4 and the questionnaire) was to be
‘reviewed’
by the GMC. How that was to be done was not stated. If the evidence was satisfactory, the doctor would be revalidated. If not, the doctor might be asked to provide further information or might be referred to a revalidation group. Revalidation groups (which would be made up of lay people and doctors) could request further information and could refer an
‘at-risk’
doctor into the FTP procedures. This model was assessed as having
‘medium’
acceptability to doctors, but to be likely to command
‘low’
public confidence, since most members of the public would themselves have
‘some experience of appraisals themselves which leads them to be cynical about their value as an input to revalidation’
. It was said that the feasibility of this model was
‘low’
because of the resource implications for the GMC of a review of all doctors’ evidence. Finally, the costs were assessed as
‘high’
26.104
There then followed consideration of the original model, involving the examination by revalidation groups of the folders compiled by doctors. This had already been discarded. Its acceptability to doctors and the level of public confidence it was likely to command were assessed as
‘medium’
but feasibility to the GMC was
‘very low’
on account of the resource implications. The costs were assessed as
‘high’
26.105
The next model (also already discarded) would have involved written and/or practical tests. These were to include a multiple choice test of knowledge. The tests might be supplemented by patient satisfaction and peer assessment questionnaires. Acceptability to doctors was assessed as
‘v low’
, as doctors
‘generally do not welcome the concept of their knowledge being put to the test’
. On the other hand, public confidence in the model was likely to be
‘high’
because
‘the public likes the rigour implied by a test (many currently assume that, like pilots, doctors have to take tests on a regular basis)’
. It was said that the GMC would regard feasibility as
‘low’
because a very large range of tests would be required to cover a wide range of specialised areas of practice. Costs were assessed as
‘medium’
. It appears to me likely that this model was discounted as being too ‘hard’.
26.106
Also already discarded was a model that was based upon evidence of continuing professional development. This would have involved spot checks to ensure compliance with agreed plans. Although acceptability to doctors and to the GMC was assessed as
‘high’
, it was considered that public confidence would be
‘low’
since the public would think it was
‘both cosy and ineffective’
. It appears to me that this model must have been discarded as too ‘soft’.
26.107
Next came what was called the
‘self-revalidation model’
. This was described thus:
‘Local employers would use an ongoing range of measures including appraisal and peer/patient
word omitted but probably questionnaires
(working to GMC standards) in order to identify individuals
i.e. doctors
at risk. These cases would be referred to the GMC annually (and as required throughout the year) who would then employ FTP procedures if necessary. GMC would also exercise quality control on the appraisal process and carry out statistically valid spot checks on individual doctors. In addition, every five years doctors would be required to put together evidence of having met CPD
i.e. continuing professional development
requirements along with summaries of their appraisals which would be spot-checked by the GMC. The local systems are primarily focused on detection (via appraisal, observation, working relationships, patient questionnaires, etc.), while the GMC’s focus is on action.’
26.108
It was thought that acceptability to doctors would be
‘medium’
, as would be the level of public confidence it was likely to command; the GMC would rate feasibility as
‘high’
and the costs would be
‘low’
. The main risks identified in this model were the doubts as to whether appraisal would be sufficiently rigorous, and whether local systems would be sufficiently robust and consistent. I note that acceptability to the public was assessed as
‘medium’
. This model depended heavily on appraisal and the report had already observed that the public might well be cynical about the value of appraisal. Indeed the other model that depended on appraisal had been given a
‘low’
public acceptability rating.
26.109
The sixth option was called the
‘questionnaire model’
, under which doctors would have to submit peer and patient questionnaires annually. Doctors identified as being at
‘some moderate risk’
would have to submit additional information, similar to the original folders of evidence, or undergo
‘structured interviews ... by trained peers’
. Any doctors considered to be at risk would be referred into the FTP procedures. It was considered that this model would have
‘medium’
acceptability to doctors but would command a
‘high’
degree of public confidence (in particular on account of patient involvement in the questionnaires and the fact that doctors would be assessed by their peers). Feasibility for the GMC would be
‘medium’
and costs would be
‘low’
. It was noted that this model was used elsewhere but was untried in the UK. I observe that all the models save one were untested in the UK.
26.110
Finally, there was an
‘assessment model’
. Doctors would undergo a formal assessment based on
‘multiple inputs’
such as peer and patient questionnaires, interview, observation (presumably of clinical practice) and CPD. These would be carried out locally. If additional information were required, it would be submitted to a revalidation group. The GMC’s role would be to provide quality assurance through an
‘examine the examiner mechanism’
. It was thought that this would have
‘low’
acceptability to doctors, who would resist any form of assessment. However, it was noted that there was evidence from other industries that, over time, professionals came to accept, and even welcome, the objectivity of such mechanisms. Public confidence in such a model was likely to be
‘high’
. Feasibility for the GMC would be
‘medium’
, as most of the responsibility would be carried at local level. Costs would be
‘high’
. Risks would include lack of consistency and a doubt about the robustness of local processes. The human resource implications might deter employers and doctors.
26.111
I have set out these options in some detail to demonstrate, first, that this report sought to consider various options in an objective way. However, what is notable is that there was no attempt to assess the efficacy of the various methods in evaluating fitness to practise. Nor did the report consider which model would afford the best patient protection. The report was about acceptability and public confidence, not efficacy.
26.112
Finally, the report considered what steps should be taken next. In essence, it advocated further and more detailed research and analysis and posed a number of highly pertinent questions for the GMC to consider. It did not point towards any of the possible models as the most appropriate. That was for the future.
26.113
The report shows that, in December 2002, the GMC was considering a wide range of options for revalidation. It does not appear that, at that time, it had a clear view of the way in which it intended to proceed. It is apparent that, by then, the idea of a link between revalidation and appraisal was already under consideration. However, there were those within the GMC who did not regard that link as appropriate or satisfactory - at least if appraisal was to remain a formative and supportive process. There were concerns as to whether appraisal, and local processes in general, were robust enough to form a basis for revalidation. At the heart of these concerns was plainly a doubt as to whether revalidation based on appraisal would provide an adequate indicator of a doctor’s fitness to practise and a sufficient protection for patients. The GMC’s 2000 Consultation Paper had listed first among the benefits of revalidation that it would protect patients
‘from poorly performing doctors - who will be identified as early as possible’
. Clearly, there were doubts on the part of some within the GMC as to whether revalidation based on appraisal would be capable of fulfilling this purpose.
The Second SHM Report
26.114
SHM reported again three months later in March 2003. By that time, the GMC had made the decision that revalidation should, in most cases, be linked to appraisal and the Prospectus of April 2003 was in the course of production. There was no detailed discussion in the report of the model that the GMC had decided to adopt. Instead, the purposes of the report were to identify key issues within revalidation which remained to be resolved, to discuss the role of the GMC within the revalidation process and to advise the GMC on how to communicate its revalidation policy and effectively to get across its
‘key messages’
to doctors, partner organisations, the press and the general public. Many of the GMC’s subsequent statements on the issue of revalidation appear to have had their origins in the advice contained within this report.
26.115
The report referred to the divergence of opinions which had been expressed at the time of SHM’s first report about what revalidation could and should do. It reported that there was now a
‘high level of definitive agreement’
within the GMC about the purpose of revalidation, although there was
‘considerable uncertainty from other quarters’
. The GMC had now defined revalidation as being designed to
‘increase confidence in the Register’
by
‘ensuring that doctors are up to date and fit to practise’
. In other words, it was intended to be
‘a proportionate system which quality assures the register’
. It was not intended to quality assure individual doctors. The report stated that the production of this definition had led to
‘confusion and dispute’
among a minority of stakeholder groups which had believed that revalidation should be designed to detect poorly performing doctors. The report indicated that it was
‘one of the key tenets of revalidation’
that it was not intended to identify poor performance and that it had never been suggested in the GMC’s communication about revalidation that this was the case. In fact, as I have said, the detection of poorly performing doctors had been listed in the GMC’s 2000 Consultation Paper as the first of a number of benefits that would accrue to patients as a result of revalidation. It was not surprising, therefore, that some people were confused and disappointed by the definition of revalidation which had been disseminated by the GMC in early 2003. The report did not refer to the definition of revalidation contained in the amendment to the 1983 Act which had recently been passed; this stated, as I have said, that revalidation was an
‘evaluation of a medical practitioner’s fitness to practise’
. This seems very different from the concept of ‘quality assurance of the register’ which was being propounded by the GMC in March 2003.
26.116
The report recorded greater support for linking appraisal to revalidation than had been the case at the time of SHM’s first report, although some people gave their support
‘grudgingly’
. There was a feeling that doctors would have to accept that there was an element of performance management in appraisal. Some took a
‘more defeatist approach’
, acknowledging that there was
‘no realistic alternative’
to appraisal. There was reference to concern about the training of appraisers and the content of the appraisal process, together with the fact that there was no guarantee of independence or lack of bias. The report drew attention to the fact that the precise role to be played by lay people in revalidation had still not been agreed. The GMC’s move away from lay involvement in revalidation groups which would scrutinise the evidence of individual doctors had been
‘met with some cynicism’
. However, SHM was optimistic that the proposals for lay involvement in the ways currently being considered by the GMC would gain support with time.
26.117
The report went on to discuss quality assurance of the revalidation system, noting that responsibility for the quality assurance of various aspects of the system rested with different organisations. I shall revert to that part of the report later in this Chapter. For the moment, I mention only that the report identified two
‘important risks’
of the sharing of responsibility for quality assurance among different organisations. It suggested that it was
‘almost inevitable’
that
‘gaps’
‘emerge between the boundaries of different responsibilities’
. It pointed out that the consequences of evidence or judgements falling through these gaps could be very grave indeed. It also referred to the absence of any
‘clear overall responsible body or mechanism for providing overarching governance and co-ordination’
26.118
I wish to make two observations about the SHM reports and the GMC’s decision to change direction. First, it seems clear to me that there was a recognition within the GMC that the new proposal was indeed a significant shift rather than a ‘slight change of direction’ or a ‘refinement’ of the earlier proposals. Second, the GMC changed direction notwithstanding the warnings that it had been given (in the first SHM report) about the shortcomings, perceived within the GMC itself, of appraisal as a basis for revalidation and (in the second SHM report) about the
‘important risks’
inherent in a system which divided responsibility for quality assurance between so many organisations.
The Development of the General Medical Council's Proposals for Revalidation up to the End of 2002

--- The Revalidation Proposals at the Time of the Inquiry Hearings ---
The Thinking behind the Proposals
26.119
I mentioned earlier that, shortly before the Inquiry hearings relating to the GMC began, the GMC had modified its plans for the revalidation of doctors working in a
. In the Prospectus of April 2003, it was said that such doctors could choose the ‘appraisal route’. They would have to show that they had successfully completed their annual appraisals. However, by late 2003 (probably as a result of evidence which had been given to the Inquiry), the GMC had recognised that evidence from the doctor alone that s/he had participated in appraisal would not be sufficient to generate the necessary confidence in revalidation. It therefore opened negotiations with the DoH for the provision of direct corroboration of that participation. At that stage, it was intended that the ‘corroboration’ should consist of a certificate to be signed by the clinical governance lead, chief executive or medical director of the
‘managed organisation’
in which the doctor worked. The certification would be to the effect that the doctor had participated in appraisal and that
‘no concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise have arisen locally through clinical governance systems’
. These terms were set out in the briefing papers for the Council meeting on 25th
November 2003, at which the new arrangements were to be discussed. In the event, the draft of a proposed clinical governance certificate (described by Mr Brearley at the time as ‘the bare bones of a deal’) was delivered by the DoH to the GMC during the course of that meeting and the proposed terms (which were, as I shall explain, rather different from those referred to above) were agreed then. In future, the appraisal route was to be known as the ‘appraisal and clinical governance route’.
26.120
Mr Brearley gave evidence to the Inquiry about the GMC’s plans. From the outset, Mr Brearley stressed that it was not possible for the GMC, as keeper of the medical register, to monitor the day-to-day performance of all doctors. It had to work in conjunction with local processes. I think he had in mind local clinical governance processes including appraisal. He said that there had been a change of culture in the medical profession and that doctors were now more prepared to recognise that a colleague might not be performing adequately and to accept responsibility for that, by seeking to help that colleague but also, if necessary, by reporting him/her. As I understood him, Mr Brearley considered that, in this new atmosphere, clinical governance would be more effective at detecting poorly performing and dysfunctional doctors.
26.121
Mr Brearley described revalidation as the ‘fulfilment of a professional duty’. He said that everyone readily agreed that there was a professional duty on every doctor ‘to maintain one’s standard of practice and to keep up to date’. This had led to the need for a formal statement to be made to patients that the doctor was up to date and fit to practise. This was, he said, a way of ‘quality assuring the medical register’ that would give patients a basis for making an informed choice of doctor. He accepted that, if the register was to contain only the names of people who were up to date and fit to practise, there had to be a means of detecting those doctors who were not fit to practise. That would be done, he said, when the doctor came to revalidation, if the dysfunctional practice had not already been detected and dealt with by the operation of clinical governance measures. It would be hoped and believed that most dysfunctional practice would be picked up well before it had persisted for as long as five years.
The Appraisal Element in Revalidation
26.122
Leading Counsel to the Inquiry wished to explore with Mr Brearley how the GMC thought that the new proposals would meet the objectives of revalidation. She reminded him of the objectives of revalidation as set out in the Consultation Paper of 2000. She was seeking to discover how appraisal could provide the necessary evaluation of fitness to practise that was required, when the appraisal of GPs was a purely formative process, with no specific requirements as to what material the doctor had to provide in his/her folder and no objective tests of any kind. The Inquiry had heard ideas from a number of other witnesses of how appraisal might be made more objective and more effective as a means of detecting dysfunctional practice. Counsel suggested that methods of assessment such as observation of doctors’ consultations with patients, reviews of medical records, consideration of audit and of mortality statistics and discussion about complaints might be effective. Mr Brearley observed that many witnesses to the Inquiry had ‘hobby horses’ to ride and confessed that he had one or two of his own. But, he said, none of these methods of assessment had been validated by research. His personal preference was for patient and peer questionnaires. He described these, as operated by the American Board of Internal Medicine, and explained the results of some research carried out. His enthusiasm was manifest. When Mr Brearley was asked whether the GMC intended that questionnaires would be a part of the revalidation process when it came into force in 2005, he said that they would not be for doctors coming through the ‘appraisal and clinical governance route’, at least until the stage had been reached when a concern had been raised about the doctor being revalidated. If a concern was raised either as the result of appraisal or on account of the fact that the doctor was unable to obtain the necessary clinical governance certificate, such questionnaires (together with reviews of medical records and observations of consultations) might be used for the purpose of the more detailed examination required at that stage. He thought it highly desirable that questionnaires should be used by all doctors coming through the ‘independent route’.
26.123
On the question of whether the GMC could specify what information should be included in the folder that would form the basis of appraisal, Mr Brearley explained that the GMC had taken legal advice in the early days of the discussions about revalidation and had, as I have said, been told that it could not prescribe exactly what type of information should be submitted for the purposes of revalidation. I can see that the GMC cannot prescribe what information must be provided for the purposes of appraisal; that must be a matter for the employer or ‘main contractor’, the NHS. However, the amendments to the 1983 Act give the GMC very wide powers to require the supply of information or the production of documents for the purposes of revalidation. I hope that the GMC will not hesitate to set out what it thinks is appropriate. It could ask the NHS to ensure that certain categories of information are provided for appraisal purposes. That material would then be available for the GMC if and when it wishes to scrutinise some doctors’ folders.
26.124
Leading Counsel then turned to ask Mr Brearley whether, when first planning how the revalidation process should be undertaken, the GMC had thought that GPs might find any particular difficulty in collecting data to put in the folders. At that time, it was expected that the folder would be used for appraisal and revalidation purposes. He said that no such difficulty had been perceived. GP practices already had quite good data collection systems; indeed, he thought the systems for data collection in general practice were rather better than those available in hospitals, which, as I have said, he described as ‘a nightmare’. Now that it was proposed that revalidation should be based on appraisal, Counsel wanted to know whether the GMC was concerned about the robustness of GP appraisal. It was carried out by another GP, who did not require any particular accreditation, and it was based on material selected by the doctor him/herself. These factors did not appear to give rise to any concern in the mind of the GMC. Indeed, Mr Brearley’s view was that GPs had gone about appraisal in a very thorough way and its introduction had been rather more successful for GPs than it had been in hospitals. For example, he said, many people carrying out appraisal in hospitals had had no training at all. Yet, despite that, it is apparently intended that doctors working in hospitals should be able to achieve revalidation by means of the appraisal and clinical governance route.
26.125
Mr Brearley said that the GMC was confident that appraisal for GPs could be made into a robust process. It was a rapidly developing and well resourced activity which was a statutory requirement for NHS trusts. He saw no reason why there should not be mandatory elements to appraisal; indeed, he said that the GMC would be in favour of that. Mr Brearley had in mind some of the elements described in the ‘Revalidation Toolkit’, published by the RCGP in Scotland.
26.126
Mr Brearley said that he believed - and the evidence I have heard leads me also to believe - that the great majority of GPs take appraisal very seriously and put a great deal of effort into it. For such doctors, it is very beneficial. The difficulty is how to deal with the small proportion of doctors who wish to conceal deficiencies in performance, ill health problems or other problems from the appraiser. Appraisers cannot probe into potential problem areas about which they have no information. Mr Brearley agreed that it would be helpful if some types of information had to be produced and if PCOs were entitled and expected to provide clinical governance information (including information about complaints and concerns) direct to the appraiser, as well as to the appraisee.
26.127
It appeared that Mr Brearley and the GMC agreed with the general proposition that the introduction of some mandatory elements and the provision of some mandatory types of information would give structure to appraisal and would make it more effective as a foundation for revalidation. There are several possible elements, including observed or videotaped consultations with patients, patient and peer questionnaires, reviews of medical records and, possibly, knowledge tests (which nowadays can be undertaken on-line). There are several types of information that PCOs could provide to appraisers, such as prescribing data and records of complaints or concerns about the doctor. However, any instructions to change the format of appraisal would have to go from the DoH to the NHS bodies affected.
The Role of the Clinical Governance Certificate
26.128
As I have said, in the briefing papers for the November 2003 Council meeting, GMC members were told that the clinical governance certificate was designed to provide corroboration that appraisal had taken place and that no concerns about the doctor had arisen locally through clinical governance systems. However, it became apparent that that was not how Mr Brearley saw the certificate. He told the Inquiry that it might even be that PCOs would have sufficient information about the doctors on their lists to enable them to provide a clinical governance certificate that would be capable of standing alone as a basis for revalidation. Under the new GMS Contract, which came into force in April 2004, he said, a PCO is able to go into the practice premises and obtain all sorts of information useful for clinical governance purposes. Mr Brearley said that he would almost go so far as to say that the judgement that a PCO could make about a doctor might be sufficient for revalidation purposes, even without appraisal. If the PCO was not willing to provide the clinical governance certificate, the doctor would not be revalidated and would have to go through more detailed scrutiny by the GMC. In short, to his mind, it might be quite satisfactory for revalidation to be based upon local clinical governance activities. I had difficulty in reconciling that view with the emphasis that the GMC had laid on appraisal as the basis for revalidation since the publication of the April 2003 Prospectus. However, it was not Mr Brearley’s view that appraisal should play no part at all in the process of revalidation. He said that it was to play a limited, but important, role in the summative process of revalidation, because appraisers would be required to stop the appraisal if ‘important unresolved concerns’ about the doctor’s practice arose during the process. He also used the expression ‘major concerns’. However, in Mr Brearley’s view, the main summative tool was to be the clinical governance certificate.
26.129
This ‘downgrading’ of the importance of appraisal within the revalidation process represented a considerable change of emphasis from the ‘appraisal route’ which had been described in the April 2003 Prospectus. In that document, the GMC had declared that it believed that
‘full participation in annual appraisal, with completed supporting documentation, during the revalidation cycle, is a powerful indicator of the doctor’s current fitness to practise’
. As I have observed previously, the reasons for that belief were never explained. It appeared from Mr Brearley’s evidence that the GMC no longer regarded appraisal as a powerful indicator of fitness to practise, but believed that the clinical governance certificate was; appraisal was by then regarded as just an additional safety net.
The Terms of the Clinical Governance Certificate
26.130
In the course of Mr Brearley’s evidence, Leading Counsel to the Inquiry sought to investigate the adequacy of the terms of the proposed clinical governance certificate. This was not an easy issue for Mr Brearley to deal with, because the idea had arisen very recently and the terms of the certificate had not yet been finalised. Mr Brearley signed his written statement of evidence on 5th
December 2003 and gave oral evidence on 17th
December. In his written statement, Mr Brearley said that what the GMC wanted was
‘confirmation that no concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise have arisen through clinical governance processes’
. At that time, the proposal (which had been received by the GMC at its meeting on 25th
November) was that the chief executive, medical director or clinical governance lead of the relevant NHS body would certify that:
‘a Appraisal had been carried out and signed off by a trained appraiser
b The appraisal had produced an agreed personal development plan
c The process had included validated data
d The process was robust
e There were no concerns about the doctor’s probity or health
f There were no disciplinary processes under way
g There were no relevant disciplinary findings.’
26.131
As Leading Counsel took Mr Brearley through this list, it became apparent that some of the statements were problematical, at least in the context of GP appraisal. Under the existing arrangements, the certifier could not know whether any validated data had been included in the appraisal. The PCO is not entitled to see the folder of documents produced by the doctor for the purposes of appraisal. Nor could the certifier say whether the individual appraisal had been
‘robust’
. It would have taken place in private and the discussions which formed the basis of the appraisal would have been confidential to the appraiser and the appraisee. There was some discussion about whether item
‘d’
related to the robustness of the whole process of appraisal as operated by the particular NHS trust or PCO, or whether it was intended to refer to the robustness of the individual appraisal. If the former, the fact that (as was at that time the intention) the trust’s processes had been quality assured by the new Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission) would have been sufficient to enable the certifier to state that the
‘process was robust’
. If the latter, the certifier would have no basis of knowledge on which to rely. The certifier would know whether the appraiser had been trained but little else. The certificate as to probity and health would, Mr Brearley explained, be in addition to the self-declarations that would be required of all doctors when applying for revalidation. Thus, the clinical governance certificate would provide some support for the self-declaration, although, as Mr Brearley observed, the signatory could sign only on the basis that there was no information to the contrary. As for
‘f’
‘g’
, Mr Brearley, who is not a GP, accepted that, if disciplinary processes were almost unknown in primary care (as has been the case since 1996, although there are now the new list management powers), then no information would be available in respect of these items. He stressed that what the GMC wanted to know was whether there were any concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise.
26.132
As I have explained, the briefing papers for the Council meeting on 25th
November 2003 had recommended that the GMC should seek a certificate
‘to the effect that the doctor has indeed participated in appraisal, and that no concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise have arisen locally through clinical governance systems’
, although, elsewhere in the briefing paper, there was a reference to
‘significant unresolved concerns’
. When asked to look at the briefing papers, Mr Brearley immediately recognised that there was not a good match between what the GMC had wanted and what had actually been proposed by the DoH (see
paragraphs 26.130-26.131
). The minutes of the meeting recorded that the GMC should seek a certificate declaring that there were
‘no significant unresolved concerns’
about the doctor. Mr Brearley was puzzled as he could not remember there being any discussion about the introduction of the phrase
‘significant unresolved’
. He did not know how those words had come to be introduced. He said that he thought that the GMC ought to be told about
concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise and that the GMC would then want to know how, if at all, they had been resolved. He said that the Registration Committee, of which he is Chairman, would not feel inhibited from putting forward proposals to reflect the original intention that the GMC should be told about
concerns. The Inquiry heard nothing more about this until November 2004 although the draft Guidance which the GMC published in September 2004 (see
paragraph 26.142
) states, at different points, that the clinical governance certificate is to certify that there are
‘no significant unresolved concerns’
‘no unresolved local concerns’
about the doctor’s fitness to practise. Neither wording contained in the Guidance accords with Mr Brearley’s wishes.
26.133
Moreover, both wordings could give rise to difficult decisions for the certifier. What does
‘significant’
mean in this context? It is not clear; this was one of Mr Brearley’s objections. Second, what does
‘unresolved’
mean? Does it mean completely unresolved or does it cover cases where a problem has arisen and steps have been taken to resolve it but it is not yet clear whether those steps have been completely successful? One can see immediately the possibility that different thresholds might be applied by different people. I think that Mr Brearley was sensible when he said that he and his Committee wanted the GMC to be told about
concerns.
26.134
Quite apart from those difficulties, it appeared to me that reliance on a certificate for which only one person was responsible would be problematical. First, there would be the problem of personal bias, in favour of or against the doctor seeking revalidation. It must be recognised that local medical communities are small; GPs know each other and often have personal and social relationships as well as their professional ties. A clinical governance lead is likely to be a GP who may well have practised in the locality; indeed, s/he may still be doing so on a part-time basis. It is asking a lot to expect such a person to refuse to sign a certificate for a colleague or a friend. Conversely, there would almost certainly be some GPs in the area about whom the clinical governance lead had formed a generally poor impression. Would such a person be treated fairly? It seemed to me that, if reliance were to be placed on a clinical governance certificate, responsibility should be shared by more than one person. If real importance were to be attached to the certificate - and it were not to be just corroboration that appraisal has taken place - the dangers of leaving the process in the hands of one person would be manifest.
26.135
Finally, the value of a clinical governance certificate must depend to a very large extent on the quality of the clinical governance arrangements in the area in which the individual doctor is practising. The evidence I have heard leads me to conclude that there is some way to go before clinical governance is fully implemented in primary care. Put another way, the quality of clinical governance cannot be relied on in all places.
The Effectiveness of the Post-November 2003 Proposals
26.136
The addition of a clinical governance certificate to the requirements for revalidation by the appraisal route was a step in the right direction, although only a modest one. The post-November 2003 proposals were still dependent upon appraisal. Appraisal in its present form cannot provide an evaluation of fitness to practise. The clinical governance certificate would be of uncertain value because of its terminology, the circumstances in which it would be signed and above all because of the variability of the quality of the clinical governance activities underlying it. In an area with good clinical governance provision, with a clinical governance lead who was objective, conscientious and impartial and who applied a low threshold to the expression
‘no significant unresolved concerns’
, the certificate would be of value. However, even then it could provide only a negative assurance. Revalidation is supposed to give positive reassurance based on evaluation of fitness to practise. In effect, under the November 2003 proposals, the overwhelming majority of doctors would be ‘revalidated’ without having gone through a process of revalidation, within the meaning of that term in the amended Medical Act. For the great majority of doctors, the process would depend upon the operation of local clinical governance procedures which would take place whether or not there was a process of revalidation. For the great majority of doctors and their patients, revalidation would provide very little value over and above the monitoring systems that had been put in place by the NHS. The GMC might provide some added value by quality assuring clinical governance procedures through its scrutiny of a proportion of folders kept by doctors for the purposes of appraisal, to which process I shall refer below. However, that would not give much comfort to the average patient who wants to know whether his/her doctor is up to date and fit to practise.
Further Work of Development
26.137
Since the Inquiry hearings, work on the development of the revalidation process has, of course, continued. The Inquiry has become aware of two different, but related, strands of work. In August 2004, the RCGP produced a consultation document entitled ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: a Tool for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’. It sets out proposals for the content of the folders that GPs should keep for these three joint purposes. It seeks to establish the standards for such folders and the evidence they should contain. It is based on the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’. It seems to me to be a very useful document. If adopted it would ensure that the material in the doctor’s folder was capable of providing a basis for evaluation of fitness to practise. For example, in section 3, which is concerned with good clinical care, the doctor would be required to produce evidence of clinical audit and significant event audit. The evidence to be produced would be not just a statement that the audit had taken place; it would have to include some actual audit reports and some response to or commentary on what had been learned from the process. I would hope that that would include an explanation of the role that the individual doctor had played in the audit, as audits are often a joint effort. To be of value for revalidation, the content of the reports would have to be read; it would not be sufficient merely to check that an audit had been done.
26.138
The Inquiry has also received a document prepared by the NHS Clinical Governance Support Team Expert Group (NCGST), entitled ‘Defining the evidence for Revalidation - supporting the Royal College of General Practitioners’. The purpose of this work was to identify the minimum evidence that should be regarded as essential to allow a clinical governance lead to sign the clinical governance certificate for a GP. It appears that it was envisaged that the evidence would be assessed and ‘signed off’ quite independently from the appraisal process. The evidence would then be available for use during appraisal if the doctor wished. The work of the NCGST is also useful although its proposals are rather ‘softer’ than those of the RCGP. For example, under the section dealing with clinical audit, this document recommends that the doctor should provide a
‘resume of his/her engagement with audit, giving examples’
. It is made clear that this would not require the doctor to generate his/her own audits but would require that s/he be able to describe how his/her practice has developed as a result of audit outcomes. In short, there is no need to produce an audit report. For significant event audit, the doctor is to produce
‘evidence of meaningful participation’
. It is not clear to me whether that would require production of the reports. So, the requirements in respect of audit would be less demanding than under the RCGP proposals. Another example of the difference between the two sets of proposals is that, in the section dealing with relationships with patients, the RCGP proposes that the doctor should submit the practice’s complaints procedures, copies of all complaints involving the doctor and evidence that any learning needs have been met. The corresponding section of the NCGST document suggests production of the complaints procedure and a list of complaints received and subsequent action taken. The RCGP proposal provides evidence that, if scrutinised, is much more revealing of the doctor’s actual standard of performance. A third example of the difference relates to the way in which patient records should be reviewed. The RCGP calls for a standardised audit conducted by an independent colleague to demonstrate the appropriate quality of the doctor’s clinical records. The NCGST suggests (at least initially) self-audit of records for legibility and accuracy to standards set by the RCGP. Here again, the evidence suggested by the RCGP would be more useful for the purpose of evaluation of fitness to practise than that suggested by the NCGST.
26.139
The work of these two groups represented a major advance on the stage that had been reached at the time of the Inquiry hearings. It appeared that the issue of a NHS clinical governance certificate might involve some positive evaluation of fitness to practise. I would welcome a positive process of evaluation of a doctor’s folder. However, I was concerned about two aspects of the proposals as they seemed to be envisaged. First, the minimum content of the folder as suggested by the NCGST would not be very demanding or very revealing of the quality of the doctor’s practice. It is, as I have said, far less revealing than the contents as proposed by the RCGP would be. Second, I did not think it either fair or appropriate to expect a clinical governance lead to carry out the scrutiny of folders alone. It would put an intolerable burden on that individual, both in terms of workload and responsibility and, ultimately, in terms of accountability, in the event that a decision to sign a certificate turned out to be wrong. He or she could not be expected to exercise the necessary degree of independence of judgement about doctors whom s/he might well know personally as friends or colleagues. There would be a real danger of bias and inconsistency. If such an assessment is to be carried out it should, in my view, be carried out by a small group, which should include (as well as the clinical governance lead) a lay person and a GP who is not from the same area and has no personal knowledge of the doctor to be assessed.
General Medical Council Internal Procedures
The First Stage of Revalidation
26.140
At the time of the Inquiry’s hearings in December 2003, the proposed procedure to be followed by the GMC when handling applications for revalidation was this. The doctor would be expected to submit a completed application form, providing some basic information about him/herself. He or she would have to provide a description of his/her practice during the last five years, or since the last revalidation, if revalidation had been granted for a period shorter than five years. If seeking revalidation by the clinical governance and appraisal route, s/he would have to aver that s/he had undergone appraisal within a system based on the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’ and would have had to enclose a completed Form 4 from appraisal. He or she would have to provide self-certification of his/her health and probity.
26.141
The GMC would examine all applications for the purpose of identifying the doctor as being one who had been called for revalidation. The contents of the application would be checked to ensure that each requirement had been fulfilled. That would not entail reading the content. Mr Scott said that it was anticipated that there would be some electronic scrutiny of the documents designed to pick up unexpected answers. So, for example, in the certificate of probity, if a ‘yes’ answer appeared where a ‘no’ answer was expected, the system would draw attention to that doctor and the matter would be looked into in more depth. It had not yet been finally decided whether electronic means would be used. In the second SHM report of March 2003, which contained advice to the GMC about scrutiny and quality assurance, it had been anticipated that this initial scrutiny (which would be done in all cases) would be carried out by junior office staff. When asked how the doctor’s appraisal Form 4 was to be examined, Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the GMC had not yet made up its mind about these processes and that it intended to conduct further pilot studies because the original pilot studies had related to a different process entirely. The Inquiry has not been told of any further studies, although, of course, some may have taken place.
26.142
These proposed arrangements have now been modified, although only slightly. In a document entitled ‘Licensing and Revalidation Formal Guidance for Doctors (draft)’, dated September 2004 (the 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance), it is explained that doctors should normally make their applications via a secure internet connection direct to the GMC. Doctors working in a
must provide a description of their practice, demonstrate participation in appraisal
‘mapped against the headings of
and completion of an agreed Personal Development Plan’
, provide a statement declaring eligibility for local certification and provide evidence of health and probity. The statement of eligibility will require the doctor to identify the employer or PCO who will be responsible for the clinical governance certificate. The declaration as to health will be signed by the doctor him/herself and must be countersigned by another licensed doctor. It appears that the doctor will not be required to submit appraisal Form 4 although the Guidance is not wholly clear on this point. In evidence to the Inquiry, Sir Graeme Catto described Form 4 as the ‘absolute minimum’ that the GMC would expect to receive.
26.143
The 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance states that the information submitted must be
‘capable of independent verification’
. The application will be examined to see that it is complete and that it demonstrates that the doctor is working in an approved environment. If the application is in order, the GMC will apply for a clinical governance certificate from the employer or PCO. If the certificate is satisfactory, most doctors will be revalidated at this stage. Doctors are warned that they may be required to submit a folder of information
‘relating to the headings of
. This could be either because the GMC wishes to scrutinise the doctor’s folder for quality control purposes or because some doubts have arisen as to the doctor’s fitness to practise, presumably as the result of the health or probity declarations or the request for a clinical governance certificate.
The Second Stage of Revalidation
26.144
The 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance contains some information about what will happen at the second stage of the revalidation process if the evidence that the doctor has submitted is
‘insufficient or raises a question about fitness to practise’
. It is said that one or more actions might be taken. The doctor might be asked to provide further specific information or evidence. Further evidence might be sought through the use of secondary tools, such as peer and patient questionnaires or observation of practice. The doctor’s evidence could be referred to a Registration Decisions Panel for advice. Finally, the doctor could be referred to the GMC’s FTP procedures for investigation. It is also said that if a doctor is
‘required or permitted’
to submit his/her folder,
‘specially trained experts will review the folder, taking into account any relevant specialty-specific standards defined by the medical Royal Colleges or other authoritative bodies’
. The
‘experts’
will prepare a summary report, which will be considered by a Registrations Decisions Panel, which will recommend to the Registrar what action should be taken.
26.145
I must express some concern about the imprecision of these arrangements. It is not clear whether action will be taken in every case. That is left open; action might or might not be taken. I can see that it would be difficult to be precise about exactly what further information might be required; that must depend upon the nature of the insufficiency identified or the question that has arisen about the doctor’s fitness to practise. However, if further evidence is submitted, it is not clear who is to examine it and to judge its adequacy or what standards are to be applied. Not in every case will evidence be referred to a Registration Decisions Panel for advice. If a doctor’s evidence is to be submitted to a Registration Decisions Panel, by what standards is the Panel to advise? As I understand the position, only doctors’ folders (and not other evidence), are to be reviewed by the
‘experts’
. It is not clear whether these will be experts who are medically qualified and practising in the specialty to which the doctor belongs or whether they are to be ‘expert’ in scrutinising folders. It is possible that these second stage procedures will be robust but it is not clear that they will be. The robustness of the second stage is crucial to the revalidation process. If a doctor who fails at the first stage is revalidated at the second stage without careful individual evaluation of his/her fitness to practise, the whole process will be without value.
The Third Stage of Revalidation
26.146
The third stage will apply only to those doctors who have been referred into the FTP procedures as the result of their failure to satisfy a Registration Decisions Panel. I anticipate that most of those cases will be doctors whose performance has given rise to concern. I can see that there might be a few cases who are referred for health reasons or because concerns have arisen about some aspect of the doctor’s conduct. However, as I say, in the main, poor performance will more usually be the reason.
26.147
When a doctor is referred into the FTP procedures on account of concerns about performance, s/he will usually be required to undergo a full GMC performance assessment. I described that process in
. Briefly, it comprises two phases. Phase I is a peer review. Phase II comprises three forms of objective assessment: a knowledge test, a simulated surgery and objective structured clinical examinations, placing the doctor in certain clinical situations to which s/he has to react. For GPs, the standard of the objective tests is calibrated at the level required for entry to general practice, known as summative assessment. Sir Donald Irvine told the Inquiry that he thinks that that standard is too low. He would like to see the performance assessment calibrated to the standard required by the RCGP for its Membership by assessment. Dame Lesley Southgate, who is a member of the Postgraduate Medical Education Training Board (PMETB), which is shortly to assume responsibility for overseeing the training of GPs, said that the intention was to devise a common standard for entry to general practice and for Membership of the RCGP. The standard for entry to general practice would be raised to some degree. Under the old FTP procedures, when a performance assessment revealed SDP but it was considered that the standard of the doctor’s performance was likely to be improved by remedial action, the doctor would usually be invited to agree to a ‘statement of requirements’. In the future, s/he will be invited to agree to voluntary undertakings. The statement of requirements usually comprised some requirements for re-education and they might also contain a requirement for supervision and impose some restrictions on the doctor’s practice. My understanding is that, in the future, if the doctor who has failed the performance assessment accepts the proposed voluntary undertakings, s/he will be revalidated on those terms. The revalidation may be for a shorter period than the usual five years. Thus, the revalidated doctor will not be ‘up to date and fit to practise’ but will be practising under conditions. Mr Brearley said that this would be acceptable because the conditions will ensure that the doctor is not a risk to patients. I have no reason to say that he is not right about that. However, I must observe that a member of the public who understood that his/her doctor had been revalidated (and was therefore up to date and fit to practise) might be surprised to learn that the doctor was practising under restrictions and conditions that had been imposed in the interests of patient safety.
26.148
If a doctor who is offered voluntary undertakings declines to accept them or if the GMC member of staff (probably a case examiner) responsible takes the view that voluntary undertakings are not appropriate, the doctor will be referred to a FTP panel. There will then be a hearing at which it will be decided whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired and, if so, whether it is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. The FTP panel may decide to erase or suspend the doctor from the register, in which case s/he will not be revalidated, or may decide to impose conditions, in which case the doctor will be revalidated but must practise in accordance with the conditions.
26.149
As I understand the new procedures, a FTP panel in a performance case will operate to the same standards as the former CPP. In theory, that is the standard by which the performance assessment has been conducted, i.e. the standard required for admission to general practice. Sir Donald told the Inquiry that, when the performance procedures were first brought in, that was what happened. If the doctor had ‘failed the assessment’, the CPP would take action on registration. Quite apart from the fact that he felt that the official standard was too low, he expressed concern, echoed by Dame Lesley, that, over the last few years, there had been some slippage of standards. Doctors were able to attack the findings of the first phase of the assessment (or some of them) and the panels of the CPP had to form a view as to the validity of the criticism in the assessment report. The result, said Sir Donald, was that CPP panels applied their own views as to what was acceptable. This resulted in doctors whose performance was (in Sir Donald’s view) quite unacceptable being allowed to continue in practice. Sir Graeme himself described the standards applied in the performance procedures as ‘remarkably low’. That view confirmed the impression I myself had gathered from the files that I read. Sir Donald observed that, if such panels were to provide the ‘baseline’ for revalidation, it was vital to establish appropriate standards of practice and performance. Otherwise, revalidation would be meaningless as a means of protecting the public. I agree with him.
26.150
It seems to me that it is essential that agreed standards are laid down for the use of FTP panels in a form in which they can be readily applied. The GMC is able to establish standards for entry into the profession and the medical Royal Colleges, and the PMETB establishes standards for entry onto specialist registers. Nowadays, examination for these purposes is not limited to a written test. There are various forms of performance assessment, for example in the GPs’ summative assessment. In my view, if revalidation is to command public confidence, it must have a ‘baseline’ which is capable of being objectively applied and within a reasonable period of time. In
, I explained how there could sometimes be a delay of several years before performance procedures were completed. Meanwhile the doctor remained in practice unless s/he was obviously unfit. I think that there must be a clear threshold below which a doctor would be ‘taken off the road’ until s/he had improved and had been reassessed as performing at a satisfactory level.
The Relevance of a Doctor’s Fitness to Practise History
26.151
It is not clear from the 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance at what point in the revalidation process it is intended that a doctor’s FTP history with the GMC should be considered. Nor is it clear how, if at all, a FTP history will affect the outcome of the revalidation process. The Guidance refers to the introduction under the new FTP procedures of a system of warnings, which will be issued by the GMC where there has been a significant departure from ‘Good Medical Practice’ which is not so serious as to justify action on a doctor’s registration. The Guidance states that the GMC
‘will want to see evidence that the problems which gave rise to the warning have been addressed by the time of the doctor’s next revalidation’
. The Guidance also indicates that, where necessary, the doctor’s revalidation date will be brought forward to ensure that problems have been addressed promptly. If they have not, it is said, the doctor’s registration may be at risk. However, it is not clear at what stage evidence about the doctor’s compliance with the terms of a warning will be sought, whether the evidence will be sought from the doctor him/herself or from some other person or body, what the nature of the evidence required is likely to be, by whom it will be scrutinised and against what standard. If a warning is to have any significance at all within the revalidation process, it will be necessary for independent, objective evidence of compliance with the terms of the warning to be sought and for that evidence to be scrutinised to an agreed standard by a competent (probably medically qualified) person or by a group of people, both medically qualified and lay.
26.152
The 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance states that the GMC may also wish to bring forward a doctor’s revalidation date if s/he has been practising subject to conditions or undertakings under the FTP procedures or if s/he has resumed practice after a period of suspension or erasure. That said, it is not clear what, if any, effect the doctor’s FTP history will have on the outcome of the revalidation process. Nor is it clear whether the doctor will be required to provide additional evidence over and above the basic documentation that must be provided by all doctors. It seems likely that, if additional evidence is to be required from a doctor who has been given a warning, it will also be required from doctors who are or have been subjected to other sanctions and to undertakings. In that event, the same questions arise about the nature and source of that evidence and how it is to be scrutinised. Another uncertainty is whether, when an application to revalidate is received by the GMC, any check will be made to ascertain whether there is any allegation against the doctor that is currently being investigated under the FTP procedures and, if so, what the procedure for dealing with the application to revalidate will be.
Quality Assurance
26.153
I mentioned earlier that the second SHM report contained some proposals in relation to quality assurance. Several areas were identified where quality assurance intervention was required. The first of these was
‘setting the specialty-specific standards by which doctors’ fitness to practise will be assessed’
. In fact, the model which the GMC had by that time decided upon involved no ‘assessment’. However, it was (and still is) intended that the medical Royal Colleges should set standards, evidence and criteria against which the doctors’ evidence should be measured. The second area was assuring the standards and planning local systems designed to identify and take action on performance and conduct issues. This was to be the responsibility of NHS trusts. Responsibility for ensuring the quality of appraisal systems and for clinical governance generally (the third area) was to lie with the Healthcare Commission and equivalent bodies in other parts of the UK. The GMC was to be responsible for scrutinising the revalidation evidence produced by doctors. It was envisaged that this would probably consist of a quick check in every case to ensure that doctors had complied with the obligation to submit evidence and that the documentation was complete. In most cases, that would be the only scrutiny. It seems that that advice has been largely accepted. I have already noted, at paragraph 26.117, that the second SHM report warned the GMC about the risks inherent in shared accountability for quality assurance.
26.154
The second SHM report also recommended a more detailed scrutiny of a sample of evidence. In evidence, Sir Graeme and Mr Scott said that the GMC intended to quality assure the first (external) stage of revalidation by taking a small sample of doctors who would otherwise be revalidated and subjecting their applications to detailed scrutiny. The report suggested a sample of 1.4% for doctors working in a ‘managed environment’. Mr Scott told the Inquiry that the GMC was ‘revisiting the sampling model’; he expected the percentage of cases sampled to be larger than originally suggested. The objective will be to see whether, within that sample, detailed scrutiny produces the same decision as the ‘appraisal and clinical governance route’. More recently, the GMC has said that, in addition to taking a sample of cases with no specific risk factors, it intends to scrutinise a larger sample of doctors taken from groups which present known risk factors. The GMC has not said what these risk factors are to be.
26.155
When asked how this detailed scrutiny was to be conducted, Sir Graeme said that the GMC would want to see the original documents in the doctor’s folder, which should contain some verifiable information derived from clinical governance activities and collected by the PCO. Other documents might originate from within the doctor’s practice, rather than from the PCO. The GMC would want to see them all. At the time of the Inquiry hearings, the GMC had not decided who was to carry out the scrutiny. According to the 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance, the GMC has decided that this scrutiny is to be carried out by
‘specially trained experts’
. No further detail has been given.
What Value Is Added by Revalidation?
26.156
In the course of evidence, I made the point to Mr Brearley that, if dysfunctional practice is to be detected by clinical governance procedures which are in continuous operation, and appraisal will provide a formative experience and ‘safety net’ once a year, there seemed little role left for revalidation as a separate process. What ‘added value’ did it provide? Mr Brearley’s first point was that it would focus the mind of the officer of the NHS trust or PCO who had to decide whether s/he could properly sign a clinical governance certificate, saying that there were no (or no significant) unresolved concerns about the doctor. I could see the force of that, although the extent to which his/her mind would be focussed would depend upon the extent to which that officer were to be held accountable if s/he provided a ‘sign-off’ and it later transpired that his/her judgement about the nature or seriousness of a known concern was wrong. If the consequences for the officer were to be serious, I could see that having to sign the certificate would focus the mind. But if nothing much were to happen when a judgement to issue the certificate turned out to be wrong, then officers would soon discover that, and the ‘mind-focussing’ effect might be limited. Later in his evidence, Mr Brearley made a related point about the added value of revalidation, which I think is rather stronger. He said that, if the clinical governance lead of a PCT heard about a concern which did not seem particularly serious, s/he would be more inclined to take action upon it and try to resolve it, if s/he knew that in, say, two years’ time, s/he would have to decide whether s/he could sign the clinical governance certificate for that doctor. That, I think, would add some value.
26.157
In relation to the issue of added value, Mr Brearley also suggested that, by undertaking the process of revalidation, the GMC was ‘quality assuring’ the medical register. This was a reference to the definition of revalidation which, according to the second SHM report, had been promulgated by the GMC in early 2003. People will be able to look at the register, he said, and know that their doctor has been through a process and is fit to practise. It does not seem to me that, for the patients of NHS doctors, that provides much by way of added value. If revalidation is to be dependent on clinical governance, the real reassurance that patients will want is that clinical governance is working well and is detecting under-performing doctors. The fact of revalidation adds virtually nothing. However, for the patients of doctors who cannot take the ‘appraisal and clinical governance route’, revalidation could give real reassurance provided that the GMC puts in place an adequate method of scrutiny and evaluation. The same could be said for doctors who, although eligible to undergo revalidation through the ‘appraisal and clinical governance route’, fail to do so and have to undergo further scrutiny by the GMC. Again, the reassurance is of value only if the methods are good enough.
26.158
Mr Brearley also said that revalidation would have an independent value because, by undertaking quality assurance procedures - by means of the in-depth scrutiny of a sample of doctors who would otherwise be revalidated automatically on receipt of the clinical governance certificate - the GMC would find out whether clinical governance was really working and detecting dysfunctional practice. I could see the force of that point too. Of course, all depends on the thoroughness of the quality assurance mechanisms.
A Change of Direction
Developments since Early 2004

--- Introduction ---
26.1
, once a doctor qualifies to have his/her name entered on the medical register, s/he is entitled to practise medicine and to remain on the register unless and until such time as his/her name is suspended or erased from it. For many years, doctors have been under a professional duty to maintain their professional competence. However, there has been no means of ensuring that they do so and no sanction for failing to do so, unless and until the doctor’s fitness to practise is called into question as a result of a complaint to the General Medical Council (GMC). In 1998, in the wake of at least two high profile cases in which doctors were seen to have been practising at unacceptably low standards over a period of time, there was a move within the GMC to introduce a requirement for some form of periodic assessment by which a doctor’s fitness to remain on the medical register could be reviewed. This concept was developed and the GMC now proposes to introduce, in 2005, a requirement that all doctors wishing to retain a licence to practise must, every five years, undergo a process by which their entitlement to practise is ‘revalidated’. It is said that the process of revalidation will require doctors to demonstrate on a regular basis that they are ‘up to date and fit to practise’.
26.2
Revalidation is of considerable interest to the Inquiry. I have explained in this Report how the systems by which the NHS monitored the practice of general practitioners (GPs) during the period of more than 20 years in which Shipman worked as a GP failed to detect that he was obtaining large amounts of diamorphine illicitly and killing his patients. The GMC, as regulator of the medical profession, did not at that time undertake any routine monitoring of doctors; its role in the monitoring process was confined to reacting to complaints. It received no complaints that could have led it to suspect that Shipman might be killing his patients. Since 1998, there have been many changes within the NHS. I have described some of them in
. In 1999, the NHS introduced clinical governance, which I described in
. When these changes have had time to settle down and to develop to their full potential, they should result in much-improved monitoring of doctors’ performance, with the twin benefits of detecting the development of substandard performance and the raising of standards generally. The GMC is now to introduce revalidation, which, as I have said, should involve a periodic demonstration of the individual’s fitness to practise.
26.3
In this Chapter, I propose to examine the GMC’s proposals for revalidation, the way in which revalidation will be linked to clinical governance and the potential that the two processes will have for the detection of poor or aberrant clinical performance. I am in no doubt that the problems caused by poorly performing doctors are significant. As Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, said at the Inquiry seminars: ‘There are poorly performing doctors out there who are harming patients’. Professor Sir Graeme Catto, President of the GMC, speaking of the purposes for which revalidation was to be introduced, said that the performance of at least 90% of doctors gave rise to no concerns; that suggests that there is or could be a problem of poor performance with as many as 10%. That estimate may be on the high side; others mentioned a figure of 5% or even 3% of doctors whose performance gives rise to problems. Whichever figure is the more accurate, the problem is not insignificant. As I explained in
, the methods of identifying poor performance through local clinical governance procedures are limited. Revalidation could provide a significant additional means of achieving that end.
26.4
Plainly, any system of revalidation of registration must have wider aims than merely the detection of the activities of a mass murderer practising as a GP. However, as a broad brush test, it is pertinent to consider whether, if revalidation as currently proposed had been in force during the 1980s and 1990s, it would have brought Shipman's activities to light. My overall objective in the Inquiry is to make recommendations for change to bring about the provision of interlinking systems of monitoring and regulation which will detect not only doctors who deliberately harm their patients but also those who harm them for other reasons such as incompetence, ill health or an unwillingness to keep up to date. I have already made recommendations for the reform of death certification and coroners’ investigations. I have also made recommendations for the strengthening of the rules relating to the use of controlled drugs. I believe that those recommendations, if implemented, could help in the detection of dysfunctionality. Now, I wish to examine the part that could be played by revalidation. If revalidation were to consist of a periodic assessment of a doctor’s competence and fitness to practise, it could make a huge contribution to safeguarding the public against the incompetent and out of date doctor. Whether it would catch another Shipman may be a different matter. It might make a contribution, as one part of the interlinked systems. As well as considering its potential benefits, I wish to examine whether revalidation, as currently proposed, will in fact achieve the purpose for which it is intended.
26.5
The GMC’s principal witness on the issues relating to revalidation was Mr Stephen Brearley, a consultant general and vascular surgeon, a GMC member and the Chairman of the Registration Committee. Sir Graeme, and Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, also gave evidence about revalidation. Sir Donald Irvine, immediate past President, spoke on the subject during his evidence and made contributions at the Inquiry seminars. Dr Malcolm Lewis, a GP and Chair, Welsh Branch of the GMC, represented the GMC at the seminars. Other important contributions to the debate about revalidation came from Dame Lesley, Dr John Grenville (a GP, who represented the British Medical Association (BMA) at the seminars), Dr William Reith (a GP, on behalf of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP)) and Dr John Chisholm (a GP and Chairman of the General Practitioners Committee (GPC) of the BMA).
CHAPTER TWENTY SIX - Revalidation

--- Whither Revalidation? ---
26.188
It is not clear from the documents recently provided by the GMC whether its plans for revalidation are settled. It is fair to say that there has been a recognition that revalidation will evolve over time but it appears, from the 2004 draft Revalidation Guidance that the GMC does not expect to make any significant changes to its proposals in the near future. In my view, that is a pity, because the present proposals do not meet the requirements that were outlined so clearly in the Consultation Paper of 2000. Nor in my view will they satisfy the statutory definition of revalidation, which is an
26.189
It appears that the GMC has set its face against undertaking an individual evaluation of every doctor. However, that is what the statute requires. In the early days, the GMC took the view that it could not delegate that function; it rejected the suggestion that the medical Royal Colleges might offer an alternative route to revalidation. It has now accepted that it can delegate everything other than the final decision to revalidate. The statute does not appear to forbid delegation. However, it does require an evaluation of an individual doctor’s fitness to practise.
26.190
Quite apart from the statute, the GMC has always promised the public an individual evaluation of fitness to practise. In my view, its present proposals do not fulfil that promise. I propose to set out my ideas for how both the statute and the promise could be satisfied - only in the context of general practice, because that is the limit of my remit. My proposals would satisfy the GMC’s wish to link revalidation closely with clinical governance. They would also, I believe, avoid doing serious damage to the formative nature of appraisal.
26.191
In my view, the main platform for revalidation should be the preparation by each doctor of a folder of evidence which demonstrates what the doctor has been doing in the last five years. Some of the contents of the folder would have to be specifically laid down and would be compulsory. They would include data derived from clinical governance. These would include, for example, prescribing data and records of complaints or concerns including any report from the Healthcare Commission or a GMC or NCAA assessment. I hope that, in the future, more information of that kind will be available to PCOs. Other compulsory items would originate within the doctor’s own practice. These should, in my view, be much along the lines proposed by the RCGP in its consultation paper. For example, there should be a record of the CPD activities the doctor has undertaken. A copy of appraisal Form 4, a patient satisfaction questionnaire, the results of a clinical audit and some significant event audits should all be included. In addition, there could be a video recording of the doctor in consultation with patients. I would also suggest that the folder should include a certificate to show the successful completion of a knowledge test. I shall say a little more about that below. Of course, it would be open to each doctor to include additional material besides the compulsory items. The doctor’s NHS contract of employment or contract for services would have to require the production of these compulsory items.
26.192
The preparation of the folder would take place over a five-year period. Its development could be discussed privately and in confidence during the annual appraisal, and advice could be given as to what more needed to be done. The appraiser would be entitled to see all the material, with the result that the appraisal would be of greater value; the doctor would not be able to conceal any problems. It would seem to me to be sensible if appraisers were to encourage doctors to produce one of the specific compulsory elements each year, for example a video recording or a patient satisfaction questionnaire, so that the appraisal could focus on a discussion of that topic.
26.193
At revalidation, the folder would be scrutinised - not by the GMC, but by a local group based within the PCO and probably chaired by the clinical governance lead. I do not claim this idea as mine; it is that suggested by the joint working group. I think it is a very good suggestion. The scrutinising group should, in my view, include a lay person from outside the PCO and a GP from another area, not personally known to the doctor under consideration. That GP should be accredited by the RCGP as an assessor to standards approved by the GMC. Scrutiny should not be undertaken by a single person; nor should a panel be drawn only from members or employees of the PCO. A positive addition could be that the doctor might be invited to attend the meeting. This would overcome one of the
of the GMC’s original plans identified by Mr Brearley. That group would make an individual evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise, based upon standards to be set by the RCGP and approved by the GMC. If the local group were satisfied, it would recommend revalidation to the GMC; if it were not, the GMC would take over and proceed to the second stage.
26.194
I do not think that these arrangements would impose an undue burden on PCTs. On average, they have about 100 GPs each. That would mean evaluating about 20 GPs per year and some locums; I am not sure how many of those there would be. I would have thought that that would be manageable. However, there are several ways in which the numbers might be reduced by permitting alternative routes to revalidation. For example, the Membership by assessment of performance of the RCGP requires a high standard of performance. Any doctor who achieves that in the five-year period should, in my view, be automatically revalidated. If the RCGP were to devise a ‘refresher assessment’ (which could no doubt be approved by the GMC as a proxy for revalidation), I would expect that some doctors would take that route. I think, also, that GPs who are approved trainers could properly be automatically revalidated. Trainers have to be reassessed to a high standard of performance every three years. They could not possibly go through that process successfully if they were not fit for revalidation. Another possibility would be to exempt a GP from revalidation during the first five years after passing the summative assessment. That too would reduce the number of doctors that had to be scrutinised by the group. If it were thought that this proposal would still impose too much of a burden, I suggest that consideration should be given to stretching the revalidation period from five years to seven. Another alternative would be to keep the five-year period for GPs over the age of 50 and allow a longer period between revalidations for doctors under that age. In short, I think it is vital that there should be an individual evaluation of each doctor and I think that the burden that this would impose on individual PCOs could be made tolerable. I advance no proposals about the revalidation of doctors in the hospital service or the private sector.
26.195
So far as the second stage is concerned, the GMC must ensure that this is transparent and rigorous. It should ensure that there is adequate lay involvement. Above all, it must not permit a doctor who has failed to be revalidated at the first stage to be revalidated ‘by default’ at the second stage. At present, the uncertain nature of the steps to be taken makes that a real possibility. The GMC must ensure also that the standards by which second stage decisions are to be taken are clear and understood by all, including doctors and the public.
26.196
I have already expressed my concern about the low standards of the old performance procedures, which would, but for the advent of the new FTP procedures, have generally underpinned revalidation. The GMC has not said that the standards of deficient performance that will justify action on registration under the new procedures will be any higher than those in operation before. These standards are too low and do not provide adequate protection for patients. In my view, they must be raised if revalidation is ever to have credibility.
26.197
I said that I wished to mention the use of knowledge tests. The evidence received by the Inquiry is to the effect that no doctor can function well unless his/her knowledge base is adequate and kept up to date, but the fact that the knowledge base is satisfactory is not, in itself, a guarantee that the doctor is practising well. This second factor is often used as a reason for not including any form of knowledge test in the revalidation process. In my view, that is not a satisfactory reason for excluding a knowledge test although it is a good reason for not basing revalidation solely upon such a test. I think that the real reason why so many people seem to veer away from the idea of knowledge tests is that they believe that doctors will not accept them. I cannot believe that there could be any rational opposition to what I am proposing. Nowadays, knowledge tests can be taken on-line and in private. The doctor can find out in the privacy of his/her own study whether his/her knowledge base is satisfactory. If it is, that will provide the doctor with a degree of comfort and might also draw attention to any areas in which a gap has been revealed. I am sure that most doctors who do not do well would wish to remedy the situation. Such a doctor can take another test - and yet another if necessary - until s/he reaches a satisfactory standard. If a doctor cannot bring his/her knowledge base up to standard within five years, surely s/he should not be practising. In my view, there should be a mandatory requirement to produce a certificate of satisfactory completion of a knowledge test taken at some time within the five-year period.
26.198
Clearly, the changes that I have proposed are not entirely a matter for the GMC. They call for the close involvement of the DoH. They would require consultation and I dare say that they would give rise to some consternation in the profession. I do not think that they need to. I believe that the profession has accepted that the public is entitled to the reassurance that doctors are up to date and fit to practise and I believe all those who are intellectually honest, which I believe to be the great majority, will recognise that, if that assurance is to be given, it must have a more solid base than that which is currently contemplated.
Could Revalidation Catch 'Another Shipman'?


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN - Proposals for Change
========================================================================

--- Proposals for Change Affecting the General Medical Council ---
The Fitness to Practise Procedures
27.200
, I explained why it had been necessary for the Inquiry to examine the GMC’s proposals for its new FTP procedures in some detail. I said that my examination of the old FTP procedures had identified a number of shortcomings and that it was important to find out whether those shortcomings would be remedied under the new procedures. In the course of
, I reported my view that some of the defects of the old procedures had been remedied but that, in other important respects, the old shortcomings were to be perpetuated. I also found that some changes had been retrograde. I have already made a number of suggestions as to how the new FTP procedures might be improved. I have made these detailed recommendations because the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference require me to make such recommendations as I consider necessary for the protection of patients in future and because I do not intend to recommend that the GMC should be deprived of its FTP function. In this section of this Chapter, I shall draw together those recommendations. In some cases, I shall only refer back to the passage at which the original recommendation was made.
The General Medical Council’s Role in the Wider Regulatory Framework
27.201
, I referred to the ambiguity in the GMC’s perception of its role in the wider regulatory framework. In the past, it encouraged the public to see it as a repository for all complaints about doctors but did not have the resources to investigate all the complaints it received. The result was that it sought to divest itself of many complaints that had not already been investigated by other bodies, often without even considering whether they raised a question of SPM. In effect, it was behaving as if it were a secondary referral body rather than an initial recipient of complaints. It does appear that this problem may have been resolved. First, the GMC has taken on a substantial number of investigators and should be in a position to deal with all allegations that it receives which fall within its jurisdiction. Second, as I have said at
paragraphs 25.118-25.119
, it appears that the GMC will no longer close cases, and advise complainants that they should pursue their complaints through local complaints procedures, before it has decided whether or not the allegation falls within its jurisdiction. It will give advice to that effect only after it has decided that the case does not fall within its jurisdiction. If that is indeed the case, it will be satisfactory.
27.202
It is inevitable that there will be complaints that are directed to the wrong destination. No doubt the GMC will continue to receive some that do not fall within its jurisdiction and other organisations will receive complaints and concerns which ought to be directed to the GMC. As I have said, the GMC has suggested that there should be a ‘single portal’ to assist persons who wish to make a complaint or raise a concern in directing that complaint or concern to the correct complaints handling body. This seems to be a good idea and, as I have already said, the Healthcare Commission is considering various options for the provision of such a service. However, the number of misdirected complaints would, I think, be reduced if the GMC were to ensure that its publications contained accurate and readily understandable guidance as to the types of case that do and do not fall within its remit.
27.203
The GMC has said that, where a case is referred to it by a person acting on behalf of a public body (usually an employer or a PCO), it may suggest that that body investigates the allegation before the GMC takes over the case. This may be done even though the allegation does, or might, fall within the GMC’s jurisdiction. However, I presume that this procedure would not be followed if the case required urgent interim action by the GMC. This procedure is acceptable provided that the other body, the employer or PCO, is content to investigate it and has the expertise and resources to do so and provided also that the GMC does not lose sight of the case. The GMC has said that it recognises the importance of bringing such cases back for further consideration after they have been investigated. In fact, the GMC should be able to use its influence with the PCT or NHS body to ensure that the investigation progresses satisfactorily. As these procedures will be new to GMC staff, I recommend that their operation should be audited, especially in the early days. As I understand it, it is not the GMC’s intention that this procedure should be applied to allegations made by private individuals. That would not be acceptable in my view.
Separation of Functions
27.204
, I reported that, despite the GMC having recognised the need for separation of the investigation and adjudication functions, both the investigation and the adjudication stages of the new FTP procedures are still to be under the control of the GMC.
27.205
At the investigation stage, there is a casework function, which will be undertaken mainly by members of the GMC staff and case examiners. The Investigation Committee (IC) will also undertake some casework in cases where the case examiners disagree and in cases where there is an oral hearing to decide whether to issue a warning. The IC’s casework will be carried out by panels. At the moment, the Rules allow GMC members (as well as associates) to sit on IC panels. However, the GMC has told the Inquiry that the ‘operational intention’ is that they should not. If it is indeed intended that membership of IC panels should be limited to non-members of the GMC, the Rules should be amended to reflect that. There are also governance functions within the investigation stage. These include the setting of standards, criteria and thresholds, general supervision of the investigation stage and audit of the casework done by members of staff and case examiners and of decisions taken by IC panels. It was originally intended that the IC would undertake all these governance functions, in addition to its casework function. Recently, however, it has been recognised by some within the GMC that this would not be appropriate. In the immediate future, the governance functions relating to the investigation stage will be undertaken by the Fitness to Practise Committee. As I explained in
, there is uncertainty about the future role of the IC. Whatever the eventual outcome, in my view, there must be complete separation of the casework function and governance function. It is inappropriate for one committee to have complete control of all aspects of the investigation stage.
27.206
The adjudication stage presents much greater problems of separation of function. The GMC initially considered hiving off the adjudication stage altogether but decided against it, preferring to keep both adjudication and investigation within the GMC and intending to introduce a measure of separation by using only non-members of the GMC for its adjudication stage casework. However, it appears to me that there is no real separation at all. As I have observed, under the present proposals, the GMC will select the FTP panellists (both for inclusion on the list of panellists and for inclusion on a panel in an individual case), train them, provide them with guidance, audit their decisions, appraise their work, and call them in for discussions about decisions with which it disagrees; it will also have the power to dismiss them if dissatisfied. The GMC is also proposing that, in future, it will or might indicate to a doctor, in advance of a hearing, the outcome that the GMC will seek in his/her case. If done, that might well have the effect of restricting FTP panels to the sanction sought by the GMC. Even without such a restricting indication, panellists will have very little independence. The GMC will also select the legal assessors and any specialist advisers or assessors who may be required. In 2000, the GMC rightly recognised that, under the Human Rights Act 1998, doctors were entitled to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal. I think that, in the future, it might well be alleged against the GMC that its FTP panels are not independent of the ‘prosecuting’ authority. Whether that allegation were to come from a dissatisfied doctor or a dissatisfied complainant does not really matter. The process would be much more satisfactory from the points of view of both patient protection and fairness to doctors if separation were to be achieved.
27.207
I realise that a great deal of effort has gone into the selection and training of the FTP panellists but I regret to say that I do not think the present arrangements are satisfactory. I must recommend that some mechanism be found for the appointment, training and management of both lay and medically qualified FTP panellists by a body that is independent of the GMC. That body would also have to provide administrative support for hearings. I recommend that consideration should be given to the idea of appointing panellists who could sit full-time or nearly full-time on disciplinary or FTP panels for all healthcare regulators. They would acquire far greater experience than GMC panellists currently can. If this idea were adopted, it would be possible to have full-time legally qualified chairmen. The GMC should also divest itself of the right to appoint legal assessors; in any event, if legally qualified chairmen were to be used, legal assessors would not be required. Legally qualified chairmen could also undertake case management work. In any event, it would not be appropriate for the GMC to appoint case managers.
27.208
Precisely how this separation should be achieved, I cannot say. I have heard no evidence about the way in which other regulatory bodies arrange matters. It occurs to me that the other healthcare regulators may also have a need for independent panellists. It may be possible to set up a joint facility. I had thought that the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals, now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE), might be able to undertake this function but, on reflection, I do not think that it could. I think that there would be a conflict between its role of appealing unduly lenient decisions and a responsibility for appointment of the panels whose decisions it might wish to appeal. Having ruled the CRHP/CHRE out, I am unsure which other existing body could undertake the task. However, I consider that some way must be found because this is the only means by which the GMC can avoid the charge of being prosecutor and judge in the same case.
27.209
Hiving off the adjudication function would not deprive the GMC of all interest in the adjudication process. The GMC would still be involved in the development of standards, criteria and thresholds for all stages of the process, including the adjudication stage. It would also be able to monitor the outcomes of cases and thereby to inform itself of the need for any adjustment in the standards, criteria and thresholds. At
paragraphs 27.213-27.230
below, I shall discuss the possible methods for the development of standards, criteria and thresholds.
27.210
If adjudication were to be hived off, as I have recommended, some of the recommendations that follow will be irrelevant. I shall make them nonetheless, in the event that this is not done.
The Statutory Tests
27.211
At paragraphs
25.41-25.69
, I explained why I consider that the statutory test for the adjudication stage and the GMC’s formulation of the investigation stage test will both give rise to difficulties of operation. I do not propose to repeat those reasons here or to restate what I think should be done to alleviate those difficulties. I recommend that the tests I have suggested be adopted.
A New Route to Impairment of Fitness to Practise
27.212
At paragraphs
25.70-25.71
, I have explained why I consider that it would be desirable for section 35C of the Medical Act 1983 (the 1983 Act) to be amended to add a further route by which there might be a finding of impairment of fitness to practise. This would be ‘deficient clinical practice’ and would be designed to cover those cases which involve, say, one or two incidents of negligence or poor clinical practice which do not amount to misconduct and which also do not show the pattern of poor clinical performance which is necessary in order to trigger a performance assessment. I recommend that that change should be made on the next occasion when the 1983 Act is amended.
Standards, Criteria and Thresholds
The Need
27.213
The need for the setting of standards, criteria and thresholds to be applied by those taking decisions at each stage of the GMC’s FTP procedures runs as a thread through almost all of the last ten Chapters of this Report. Indeed, as I have said earlier in this Chapter, the need for agreed thresholds for the standards of professional conduct and medical care goes beyond the GMC. Patients should know what they are entitled to expect from the healthcare system. Those are the standards by which patient complaints should be judged. People working in healthcare management - and I include those working in PCOs - need standards by which they can decide whether they should take disciplinary action against a doctor or invoke their list management powers. At the moment, such managers have to make up their own minds about whether the conduct or practice under consideration is acceptable or not. They have to make up their own minds whether unacceptable conduct or practice is serious enough to justify a report to the GMC.
27.214
Elsewhere in this Report, I have referred to the occasions on which the GMC has been urged to formulate standards, criteria and thresholds for use by its decision-makers. In 1996, 2000 and 2003, Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute, urged the GMC to produce agreed standards, criteria and thresholds by which decision-makers could determine whether a set of facts amounted to SPM. Until recently, the response of the GMC has been that, at least until 2000, all decisions about SPM or SDP were being taken by highly qualified and experienced members of the GMC. There was no need for them to have standards, criteria or thresholds because they could recognise SPM and SDP when they saw them. They were also able to apply the appropriate tests at the preliminary stages of the FTP procedures. I cannot accept that that was so. In
, I described the difficulties that had arisen in defining SPM. I reported that Sir Donald Irvine, who had very long experience as a member of the GMC, culminating in six years as its President, had said that disputes about whether a particular set of facts amounted to SPM gave rise to much ‘heat’ and ‘emotion’. In addition, the need for standards, criteria and thresholds has been underlined by the many occasions on which, in this Report, I have drawn attention to inconsistency in decision-making at every stage of the old FTP procedures.
27.215
SPM and SDP as concepts have now disappeared, but I am convinced that the concept of ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ will be even more difficult to define and recognise. I accept that most doctors may believe themselves to be able to recognise impairment but, in doing so, they are applying their own personal standards. They are not applying agreed standards and, unless standards, criteria and thresholds can be agreed, decisions on ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ will be inconsistent, as decisions on SPM were in the past. There will be no diminution in the ‘heat’ and ‘emotion’ of the debate or in inconsistency of outcome unless and until there are some agreed standards.
27.216
The GMC also argues that it provides standards and criteria in its publication ‘Good Medical Practice’. Its stance is that departures from those standards might result in referral into the FTP procedures, with the possibility of action on registration. Yet it is clear that not every departure from the standards in ‘Good Medical Practice’ will result in referral into those procedures. The problem is that no one knows how serious a departure from ‘Good Medical Practice’ has to be before disciplinary action will be taken or action on registration will follow.
27.217
Another objection raised by the GMC to the suggestion that it should prepare agreed standards, criteria and thresholds for approaching decisions about SPM was that the process of doing so was difficult to the point of impossibility. SPM, the GMC argued (and I paraphrase) was capable of covering a very wide range of conduct and practice. It was not possible to devise a threshold for every single circumstance in which SPM might be found. I agree that the task in respect of SPM in the past would not have been an easy one. The task for the future, in respect of ‘an impairment of fitness to practise’ and ‘an impairment of fitness to practise to a degree justifying action on registration’ will be even more difficult. But just because it is difficult does not mean that it must not be tackled. The new FTP procedures have now come into operation and decision-makers will have very little help in deciding on which side of the various ‘lines’ a case will fall. The GMC has produced some draft guidance for case examiners and panellists at the investigation stage and for panellists at the adjudication stage. This guidance is in many respects sensible and helpful; it identifies relevant factors for decision-makers to take into account. But it does not go far enough; it does not help them to decide where to draw the line. They are still left to apply their own personal standards.
27.218
At the Inquiry hearings in December 2003, Sir Graeme Catto and Mr Scott said that it was the GMC’s intention to provide a series of ‘case reports’ which would contain examples of circumstances in which SPM had or had not been found in the past. It was hoped that these would prove useful for decision-makers in the future. As I reported in
, nine months later, five very brief case studies were published. These are so brief as to be ‘unfit for purpose’. In addition, two of the five appear to be mutually inconsistent.
27.219
, I have suggested tests for the investigation and adjudication stages which would, if adopted, make the task of decision-makers easier. These tests would help decision-makers to analyse the allegation or the established facts to see whether what is alleged would, if proved or admitted, amount to impairment of fitness to practise. However, I do not suggest that the new tests will remove the need for standards, criteria and thresholds. If the existing guidance, the case studies and my proposed tests are all that is to be provided (and these last may be rejected by the GMC), I foresee real problems of inconsistency at each stage of the process because individuals will be applying their own personal standards.
27.220
In the area of guidance on the imposition of sanctions, the GMC has made some progress, in that it has published Indicative Sanctions Guidance (ISG). This is helpful; it provides a general idea of what kind of sanction is appropriate where certain features are present in a case. The guidance is particularly helpful where it descends into the detail of how to approach a particular class of case. However, although the ISG is helpful, in my view, panellists need more help. I recognise that there is now a means by which any decision on sanction can be appealed, either because it is too severe or because it is unduly lenient. However, I think the GMC would agree that it would not wish to rely upon the appeal process in order to establish a proper framework for the imposition of sanctions. I am sure that it would agree that it would be preferable if the decisions were right in the first place.
27.221
I have said enough about the need for the development of agreed standards, criteria and thresholds. I accept that the task of development is not easy. I have observed earlier in this Report that it is easier to criticise the work of others than to propose a better way. I do wish to be constructive. It appears to me that there are two possible ways of approaching the problem of standard and threshold setting.
27.222
One method would involve analysing a number of sets of circumstances (topics) that might be expected to arise in FTP procedures and envisaging gradations of increasingly serious examples of conduct or practice within that topic and deciding where the thresholds should lie. I did not know whether this idea would be feasible. Accordingly, the Inquiry invited Professor Baker to produce a paper setting out his ideas about how the task of analysing topics and setting standards, criteria and thresholds might be tackled. His work has now been published on the Inquiry website. I shall summarise his suggestions as briefly as I can.
Professor Baker’s Paper
27.223
Professor Baker envisages that research would have to be done into the likelihood that certain features in a particular case are valid indicators of a doctor’s fitness to practise. Conduct of the research would require the collection of evidence from a wide variety of sources. The starting point would have to be actual cases in which decisions had been made, either by the GMC or by NHS trusts, about allegations of misconduct, etc. There would have to be systematic follow-up of such cases to find evidence of the likelihood of further complaints or problems associated with particular categories of complaints. There would also have to be comparisons between doctors with selected characteristics who have or have not had complaints made about them. In addition to evidence derived from actual cases, Professor Baker suggests that further information would also be required about public expectations and about the ethical codes of healthcare professionals, including international codes. When all this information and evidence has been assembled, some means would have to be found of combining it so as to produce a set of standards and criteria suitable for use in medical regulation. That process would involve the making of value judgements. Accordingly, in Professor Baker’s view, the public and healthcare managers should be involved, as well as members of the medical profession.
27.224
Professor Baker then considers a number of options by which this process might be undertaken. He discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the various methods, including their validity, feasibility and cost. He considers options for the scope of the standards and criteria, for example, whether the scope should be limited to the issues covered by ‘Good Medical Practice’ or whether it should cover issues raised in wider consultation within and outside the GMC. Another set of options relates to the classes of people who might be involved in the standard-setting process. He assumes that the GMC will be at the heart of the process but considers the advantages and disadvantages of involving other groups. He examines various options for discussion and decision-making in the standard-setting groups. He considers different options for the testing and updating of the standards and criteria that would result from the initial standard-setting process. Professor Baker does not say which of these various options should be adopted, although he expresses a preference for processes which involve a wide range of consultation, as he considers that the results would be more likely to attract and retain public confidence.
27.225
Finally, Professor Baker gives some hypothetical examples of the way in which standards might be set on various specific topics, all taken from the principles set out in ‘Good Medical Practice’. These include establishing a clinical history, taking suitable and prompt action, keeping clear records, taking part in audit, dealing with patients who decline to take part in teaching or research, raising concerns about fellow healthcare professionals and the duty of honesty in record keeping, document preparation and certification. The resulting hypothetical standards do not demonstrate actual thresholds but they do produce categories of conduct which are to be regarded as ‘acceptable’, ‘unacceptable’ and ‘seriously unacceptable’. It seems to me that, if standards of this kind could be produced for a large number of topics, the task of decision-makers both within and without the GMC would be made very much easier.
An Alternative Approach: the Use of Case Summaries
27.226
Another possible approach would be to use a collection of case summaries, in which decisions that are agreed to be ‘correct’ could be collated into topic groups and published. Such collections of cases would not seek to define thresholds but would, rather, seek to illustrate where the threshold had been (correctly) set on other occasions. It would be necessary to have examples that fall on either side of any dividing line so that the decision-maker is able to ‘get his/her eye in’ as to which side of the line the particular case under consideration should fall. This is a process which is used extensively in legal work. For example, there exist two encyclopaedias on employment law, containing a large number of case summaries from which practitioners and decision-makers can develop a ‘feel’ for whether a dismissal has been fair or unfair. There is a book containing cases about road traffic accidents; the decision-maker can ‘get his/her eye in’ about whether, in a particular set of circumstances, a driver, cyclist or pedestrian has been negligent. There are encyclopaedias on sentencing in criminal cases and on awards of damages in personal injury cases. None of these case collections seeks to provide the ‘right answer’ in any particular case because the facts of all cases are different and because there must be an element of discretion for the decision-maker. But they do enable practitioners and decision-makers to ‘get their eye in’.
27.227
Because it is important that the GMC decision-makers should have guidance on thresholds for use at both the investigation and the adjudication stages, the preparation of the case summaries would entail the examination of quite a large number of cases which had come into the FTP procedures. For a start, all the cases entering the procedures during a three-month period might be examined. All would be anonymised and the available information summarised using a standard template so that different cases could be readily compared one with another. After the investigation stage decision had been taken, all cases would be considered by a group of assessors who would decide whether, in their view, the decision taken was ‘correct’. Cases with ‘incorrect’ decisions would be discarded; cases with ‘correct’ decisions would be used as guidance on the investigation stage test. Cases which had gone before FTP panels would also be considered by the group of assessors. If a decision on ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ and/or ‘impairment of fitness to practise to a degree justifying action on registration’ was considered ‘incorrect’, the case would be discarded. Those cases with ‘correct’ decisions would be used as guidance. The assessment group would also consider any sanctions imposed or decisions not to impose a sanction. Once again, ‘incorrect’ or inappropriate decisions would be discarded and ‘correct ones’ would be kept as guidance. As more cases were collected, it would be possible to divide them into groups and subgroups relating to different types of commonly occurring case. For example, it would not be long before there were groups of cases involving the abuse of drugs, dishonesty, indecency and improper relationships with patients. In due course, there would be groups of cases of many different types, including health and performance cases.
27.228
If this approach were to be adopted, the assessment group should, in my view, comprise some doctors, other healthcare professionals, healthcare managers and some lay people from a variety of backgrounds. In
, I mentioned the Sentencing Advisory Panel, which advises the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) on sentencing policy. Some of its members are judges, barristers and solicitors but there is also a strong non-legal membership. I have in mind a comparable mixture of medical and lay members. I would expect the GMC to have a major voice within the group but the objective would be to reach a consensus acceptable to both the medical profession and the public.
The Way Forward
27.229
It is not my intention to recommend either the use of Professor Baker’s suggested method or the alternative method of collecting case summaries. It seems to me that the advantage of Professor Baker’s method is that the results would be soundly based in scientific evidence. The major disadvantage is that I think it would take a long time to produce results that could be used by decision-makers. The advantage of the case summary method is that it would be easier to set up and results could be expected in a shorter time. The results would be based on actual cases and would therefore soon provide guidance on the kinds of case that crop up regularly. The GMC Presenting Officers and the doctors’ representatives would soon become familiar with the published case studies and would be able to draw a FTP panel’s attention to any that were comparable to the case under consideration. Panellists would not be expected to become familiar with all the case summaries. Such case summaries would also be useful for the courts when dealing with appeals. The GMC might have other ideas about how this work should be done. Yet more ideas might come from other quarters. I hope that there will be a debate about the best way forward. However, it is vital that this problem must not be shelved. Some way must be found - soon - to provide guidance on standards, criteria and thresholds so that decision-makers will be able to reach reasonably consistent decisions at both the investigation and the adjudication stages.
27.230
It appears to me that, whatever method of standard setting is to be adopted, a panel or group of people will be required. This is essential if the public is to have confidence in the results. It seems to me that the CRHP/CHRE could play an important role here. Indeed, it may be that it would welcome the opportunity to facilitate the setting of standards across the whole field of healthcare regulation. Many of the issues that arise in GMC cases, such as dishonesty, indecency, breach of confidentiality and failure to obtain proper informed consent, must arise in other contexts. I recommend that the CRHP/CHRE be invited to set up a panel of professional and lay people, similar in nature to the Sentencing Advisory Panel, which would be the vehicle for whatever method of standard setting is eventually adopted. It could remain in existence and review standards periodically.
Standards in Relation to Performance Procedures
27.231
In the passage above, I have discussed the need for the setting of standards in respect of many aspects of misconduct and clinical practice. In the past, the problem has been lack of agreement as to what amounted to SPM. However, a different problem arose in respect of the GMC’s performance procedures. There, a standard had been set. The GMC performance assessment tools (for GPs) are calibrated against the standard of summative assessment, the process used to assess whether a doctor’s competence and performance are adequate for him/her to be admitted to general practice. The problem is that, in the past, panels of the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP) appear on occasion to have applied their own personal standards (rather than the standard at which the performance assessment tools are set) when considering whether a doctor’s performance was seriously deficient. I have mentioned more than once in this Report the fact that the standards applied within the GMC’s performance procedures have been very low. I shall not quote the evidence relating to this again. There is no indication of an intention to raise them under the new FTP procedures. This low standard will, to a very large extent, underpin revalidation. In my view, for reasons of patient protection, there is an urgent need for this standard to be raised. There can be no justification for judging the performance of an experienced GP by a standard lower than the equivalent of the standard set for admission to general practice. I do not know how this problem should be solved but I recommend that the GMC should give urgent attention to it. Unless this is done, patients will be left at risk and revalidation will be without value.
The Preliminary Sift: the Test for Jurisdiction
27.232
At
paragraph 25.115
, I have expressed the view that the rule which sets out the test to be applied by the Registrar (or by a member of the GMC staff, exercising his legal powers) on receipt of an allegation should be amended to give greater clarity. I have suggested an appropriate wording. It may be that there is no confusion within the GMC about the meaning of the rule. However, the meaning of the words should be clear to all. There is a need for decisions taken at this stage to be audited to ensure that the test is being correctly applied. I also recommend that criminal cases in which a doctor has been conditionally discharged should be treated as convictions.
Advising the Makers of an Allegation to Use Local Complaints Procedures
27.233
At
paragraphs 25.116-25.120
, I discussed the practice (which, so far as I know, was followed until the termination of the old FTP procedures) of closing cases in which local complaints procedures had not been exhausted, without considering whether they raised a question of SPM. I have said that, in my view, this practice was not only unlawful but also not in the interests of patient protection. I had hoped to see a clear and unequivocal statement that the practice had been abandoned under the new procedures. No clear statement has been made. As I have said, I have examined the Rules, the draft Guidance, the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual and the initial processing and assessment form. The only reference to the giving of advice about the use of local complaints procedures appears in a context which suggests that such advice will be given only in cases in which the GMC has already decided that the case does not fall within its remit. I would feel completely reassured by that state of affairs, were it not for the fact that there was no reference to this practice under the old Rules. The practice went on ‘outside the Rules’ and was followed in hundreds of cases every year. I want to give the GMC the benefit of the doubt. I want to conclude that the GMC has indeed abandoned this bad practice under the new FTP procedures. I do not feel that, at present, I can do so with confidence. It would have been quite possible for the GMC to put an immediate stop to the practice at any stage; no legislation would have been required. I hope that this practice has stopped with effect from 1st
November 2004. However, there is a danger that the practice will linger on because staff are so used to it. I recommend that there should be an audit of the reasons why cases are closed and of cases where consideration by the GMC is deferred. That audit should take place quite frequently.
Preliminary Discussions and Disclosure to Employers and Primary Care Organisations
27.234
At
paragraphs 25.122-25.126
, I discussed the practice, introduced in May 2004, whereby the GMC communicates informally with employers and PCOs before deciding what action, if any, should be taken in response to an allegation. Such communications should be an important source of information to the GMC. The idea of adopting this procedure was discussed in evidence at the Inquiry hearing when Mr Scott said that the GMC would consider it. He has since reported to Council that the practice is yielding useful information. I have noted that it has been reported that some of the medical defence organisations have objected to this new procedure but, as the November 2004 draft Investigation Manual provides for staff to communicate in this way, I assume that the GMC has decided that it should continue. I recommend that the Rules be amended to make formal provision for this practice, and to give the GMC power to require from the doctor the necessary details to enable it to make such a communication.
The Power to Direct Investigations
27.235
I recommend that case examiners should have the power to direct that particular investigations should be undertaken. They would have had that power under the 2003 draft Rules. Under the November 2004 Rules, the power to direct investigations lies solely with the Registrar, which, in practice, means that it lies with the GMC staff. I also recommend that IC panels hearing cases where the case examiners have disagreed should have the power to direct investigations.
27.236
I recommend that case examiners, who are not lawyers, should be given advice about two matters. They should not take into account mitigation advanced by or on behalf of the doctor. It is not relevant to their decision at the investigation stage: see
paragraph 25.163
. Also, they should be advised to consult a lawyer if they are in any doubt as to whether there is a realistic prospect of proving the allegation: see
paragraph 25.169
Performance and Health Assessments
27.237
The November 2004 Rules provide that the Registrar may direct a performance and/or health assessment during the investigation stage. I recommend that case examiners and the IC should also have that power. I do not know what the policy will be for directing such assessments. I know that a full performance assessment is expensive and time-consuming. The Inquiry heard evidence that the GMC was considering the possibility of devising an abridged assessment and there were also suggestions that the work of assessment might be undertaken on a modular basis or that it might be ‘outsourced’. I do not know what developments there have been in these respects. In my view, it would be highly desirable for there to be an abridged form of assessment which could be used as a screening tool to detect whether there is a problem with the doctor’s performance, rather than seeking to measure the extent of it, as the full assessment does. I would have thought that an adaptation of the Professional and Linguistic Assessment Board test, or possibly a modified version of Phase II of the current performance assessment, might suffice. In my view, such an abridged assessment should be ordered in any case in which an allegation is made which potentially calls into question the doctor’s clinical practice, either because there are one or more allegations of bad clinical practice (such as perhaps a prescribing error) or because there are allegations that raise more general issues of poor performance. If the work has not already been undertaken, I recommend that the GMC should develop an abridged performance assessment and should use it as a screening tool. The GMC will, of course, also need a full performance assessment tool, on which to rely as evidence to place before a FTP panel. In order to avoid multiple assessments, I also recommend that the GMC should investigate the development of a modular assessment: see
paragraphs 24.200-24.205
27.238
As I explained at
paragraphs 25.240-25.241
, the draft Rules published in May 2004 would have provided that, on receipt of the report of an assessment of a doctor’s performance, the Registrar should send a copy to the doctor’s employer or PCO. The effect of this would have been to ensure that those with responsibility for clinical governance were fully aware of any problems of performance which might affect the doctor’s fitness to practise and which thus might have an impact on the safety of patients. However, the provision does not appear in the November 2004 Rules and it appears that it has been dropped.
27.239
I do not see how local NHS bodies can properly discharge their clinical governance obligations if they do not have access to this kind of information about the doctors for whom they are responsible. I therefore recommend that the provision should be reinstated as soon as possible.
Criteria for Letters of Advice
27.240
At
paragraphs 25.174-25.180
, I observed that the circumstances in which letters of advice were to be sent to doctors under the new procedures had remained as obscure as they were under the old procedures. The GMC recognised the need for greater transparency in this respect but has not made any changes to improve the position. I recommend that criteria for the sending of letters of advice should now be prepared and the power to send letters of advice should be incorporated into the Rules. The need for transparency is related to patient safety. If there are no clear criteria for the sending of letters of advice, there is a danger that this procedure will be adopted in cases which should be dealt with more severely; in other words, it may be used as a ‘soft option’. The use of letters of advice should be audited to ensure that this does not happen.
The Issuing of Warnings at the Investigation Stage
27.241
At
paragraphs 25.181-25.196
25.204-25.218
, I have discussed the difficulties which I think will arise in connection with the GMC’s proposals to issue warnings at the investigation stage. I fear that the proposed procedures for a ‘summary’ oral hearing will be almost unworkable. I recommend that the GMC should reconsider these proposals in the light of my observations. I think that, in most cases in which a warning might be given at the investigation stage, it would be more appropriate for there to be a full hearing before a FTP panel which should decide whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. In the event that the GMC decides to proceed with its proposals as planned, I consider it important that the issuing of warnings by case examiners and the IC should regularly be audited. In particular, the question of whether it would have been more appropriate for the case to proceed to a FTP panel should be considered. There should also be audit of those cases in which an invitation is issued to a doctor to make written representations about the giving of a warning but where, on receipt of the representations, no further action is taken after receipt of the doctor’s representations.
The Procedure for Cancellation
27.242
At
paragraphs 25.243-25.250
, I reported on the GMC’s proposals for the cancellation of cases which have already been referred to a FTP panel. These provisions lack transparency and are open to abuse. I recommend that they be changed in the way that I have suggested, so that decisions on cancellation should be taken by panels of the IC and the reasons for the cancellation formally recorded. Both applications to cancel and cancellation decisions must be monitored and audited, and the reasons for the applications and decisions should be scrutinised with a view to steps being taken to minimise the number of cases in which referrals are subsequently cancelled. The number of cancellations and the reasons should be published in the GMC’s annual report.
Consensual Procedures
27.243
At
paragraphs 25.251-25.253
, I have sounded a note of caution about the GMC’s intention to introduce consensual procedures for cases other than those raising problems of adverse health or deficient performance. There is a danger that such procedures might lead to the ‘fudging’ of factual issues. Such procedures could be open to abuse, as I explained in
. I recommend that, if the GMC pursues its present intention to extend consensual procedures to all categories of cases, the disposal of such cases should take place in public at the adjudication stage and not in private as part of the investigation stage.
27.244
At
paragraphs 25.254-25.256
I mentioned that the practice of ‘reviving’ closed cases was to be discontinued under the new procedures. I recommend that there should now be proper provision, enshrined in the Rules, whereby closed allegations can be revived. I have suggested that the usual ‘cut-off’ period should be five years but that it should be possible, in exceptional circumstances and in the interests of patient protection, to reopen a case at any time.
27.245
At
paragraphs 25.257-25.264
, I have welcomed the GMC’s proposal to introduce a review of investigation stage decisions, albeit only in limited circumstances. However, I recommend that the review should be carried out not by the President of the GMC, as is currently proposed, but by an independent external commissioner, appointed for the purpose. The commissioner could be appointed by the SoS. I also recommend that the right to a review should be extended to decisions of members of staff to reject an allegation rather than refer it to a case examiner.
Voluntary Undertakings in Cases with a Health Element
27.246
, I have expressed a number of concerns about the way in which the giving of voluntary undertakings in cases with a health element will operate in future. First, at
paragraphs 25.223
, I lament the decision to remove responsibility for the operation of many aspects of the voluntary procedures from case examiners to GMC staff, who are not medically qualified. Under the 2003 draft Rules, it appeared that the voluntary procedures would be operated very much as they had been under the old health procedures, with an appropriately medically qualified case examiner taking over all the responsibilities formerly held by the health screeners. Those old arrangements were working well and it seems to me wrong to change them without good reason. I recommend that the GMC reverts to its original intention in this respect and employs one or two case examiners suitably qualified to carry out the former role of the health screeners. I recommend that the November 2004 Rules should be amended so as to provide that the arrangements for the obtaining and consideration of health assessments and for the management and supervision of doctors who are the subject of voluntary undertakings relating to health should be directed by a medically qualified case examiner. If a case is to be closed on the basis of a health assessment, the decision should be taken by two case examiners, one medically qualified and one lay and, if they disagree, by an IC panel.
27.247
If that recommendation were to be accepted, my only other recommendations in respect of cases involving a health element concern various issues arising out of supervision and the cessation of supervision. As these issues arise both in cases which will be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings and in cases where conditions are imposed by a FTP panel, I shall deal with them later in this Chapter.
Voluntary Undertakings in Cases with a Performance Element
27.248
At
paragraphs 25.238-25.239
, I expressed my regret that most of the functions that used to be performed by medically qualified performance case co-ordinators will now be carried out by GMC staff, who are not medically qualified, rather than by medically qualified case examiners. Under the 2003 draft Rules, the functions of case co-ordinators were to be transferred to case examiners but, in 2004, most of them were transferred to members of staff. In
, I have explained why I regard that change as retrograde. I recommend that the November 2004 Rules should be amended so as to provide that the arrangements for the obtaining and consideration of performance assessments and for the management and supervision of doctors who are the subject of voluntary undertakings relating to performance should be directed by a medically qualified case examiner, who should fulfil the functions previously carried out by a performance case co-ordinator. If a case is to be closed on the basis of a performance assessment, the decision should be taken by two case examiners, one medically qualified and one lay and, if they disagree, by an IC panel.
27.249
In evidence, the Inquiry was told that, in the future, the GMC intended to concentrate on regulation and not to become involved in the long-term remediation of doctors whose performance was deficient. I am not sure whether that remains the GMC’s intention. It appeared to me to be an appropriate change of approach.
The Adjudication Stage
Fitness to Practise Panels and Procedures at Panel Hearings
27.250
I recommend that there should be an explicit power in the Rules to allow the GMC to undertake any further investigations it thinks necessary after a case has been referred to a FTP panel and before the hearing. Such a power may be implicit but the position should be clear.
27.251
I have already recommended that the GMC should think again about its decision to retain control of the adjudication stage and should divest itself of the right to appoint, train and manage panellists. However, in the event that the GMC resolves to continue on its present course, I have some recommendations to make in respect of the adjudication stage.
27.252
I have welcomed the introduction of case management provisions, although I must point out that it is inappropriate that the GMC should have responsibility for ‘management’ of case managers. I recommend that the committee charged with governance of the adjudication stage should audit the work of case managers to ensure that the orders made are adequately tailored to the needs of individual cases and to achieve the desired effect. I recommend also that case management should apply to cases with a performance element.
27.253
For reasons I explained in
paragraph 25.285
, I recommend that panellists should be advised to exercise caution about drawing adverse inferences from the failure to comply with case management orders.
27.254
In the event that the GMC decides to continue to be responsible for adjudication, notwithstanding my recommendation that it should be hived off, I recommend that the GMC should appoint a number of legally qualified chairmen who should, as an experiment or pilot scheme, preside over the more complex FTP hearings. The results of the pilot scheme should be scrutinised to see whether there are benefits in terms of the improved conduct of hearings, more consistent outcomes, improved reasons and fewer appeals.
27.255
I recommend that, as part of their training, FTP panellists should be advised about their discretion to admit hearsay evidence and other forms of evidence not admissible in a criminal trial. Panels have had such a discretionary power for many years but the evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that it was not used as flexibly or frequently as it should have been. Panellists should also be advised, during training, that it is entirely appropriate for them to intervene and ask questions if they feel that any issue is not being adequately explored. The proceedings should not be strictly adversarial; the FTP panel has an inquisitorial function.
27.256
I recommend that the GMC should reopen its debate about the standard of proof to be applied by FTP panels. The GMC has recognised that, in the future, FTP panels will sometimes have to consider allegations of misconduct and deficient performance at the same hearing. The application of different standards of proof may cause difficulty. Also, there should be full recognition that the GMC’s primary function is to exercise a protective jurisdiction and not a punitive one. That means that the civil standard of proof will usually be appropriate. I recommend that the GMC should introduce the civil standard of proof for all FTP decisions. However, I do accept that it is arguable that, for allegations which also amount to a criminal offence, the criminal standard of proof may be appropriate.
27.257
For reasons that I explained at
paragraphs 25.274-25.279
, I recommend that the GMC should abandon its intention to inform the doctor of the desired outcome of a case in advance of the hearing. It is not inappropriate for a GMC representative to make a submission as to outcome after the evidence has been heard, but it must be plain that this is only a submission and cannot in any way bind the panel.
27.258
For the reasons given in
paragraph 25.309
I recommend that FTP panels should be required to give brief reasons for their main findings of fact.
27.259
At
paragraph 25.310
, I noted that, before deciding whether a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, a FTP panel will have the power to order a health or performance assessment. That power arises under rule 17(4). I welcomed that development. However, I expressed concern that, under rule 17(5)(b), on receipt of the assessment report, the FTP panel is empowered (without deciding whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired or even without making findings of fact) to send the case back to the investigation stage so that case examiners can consider whether it would be appropriate for the doctor to be dealt with by way of voluntary undertakings. I said that such a course would not be satisfactory and explained why. Rule 17(5)(b) deprives the proceedings of transparency. I recommend that rule 17(5)(b) be revoked.
27.260
At
paragraphs 25.313-25.315
, I drew attention to the fact that there is no specific provision in the November 2004 Rules which requires or enables a FTP panel to take into account a doctor’s FTP history when considering the issues of impairment of fitness to practise and of sanction. The 2003 draft Rules had included such a provision. The omission in the November 2004 Rules is puzzling since it surely cannot be intended that FTP panels should not consider this information. It is all the more surprising since the rules governing the procedure of IC panels specifically empower them to take into account a doctor’s FTP history with the GMC or any other regulatory body when deciding whether to issue a warning. I recommend that rule 17(2)(j) should be amended to make clear what types of further evidence should be received before the panel decides whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. In my view, that should include evidence of the doctor’s FTP history. I had also envisaged that it would include any evidence the doctor wished to advance in mitigation, including purely personal mitigation. Also, rule 17(2)(l) should be amended to make clear what categories of evidence might be received after a finding of impairment of fitness to practise but before determination of sanction. I do not know what further evidence the GMC contemplates might be admitted at this stage.
27.261
At
paragraph 25.316
, I referred to the inconsistency between, on the one hand, the provisions of section 35D of the 1983 Act and rule 17(2)(k) of the November 2004 Rules and, on the other hand, the contents of the September 2004 draft Guidance for Panellists. The draft Guidance must be corrected as it will confuse panellists. I have also referred to what I consider to be the illogicality of the various outcomes open to a FTP panel. As I have explained, the November 2004 Rules require a FTP panel to decide whether the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. If the FTP panel decides that his/her fitness to practise is
not
impaired, the FTP panel has the power, under the 1983 Act, to give the doctor a warning as to his/her future conduct or performance. Although at first sight this appears odd, I can understand that a warning might be appropriate in a case where a doctor has done something wrong in the past but where the panel considers that there is no current impairment of fitness to practise. However, if the FTP panel finds that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired, it has no power to issue a warning. The options open to it in that event are to take no action at all, or to take action on the doctor’s registration - by imposing conditions on or suspending registration, or by erasing the doctor’s name from the register. I recommend that the legislation be amended to permit a panel to issue a warning where it has found an impairment but one that is not of a degree justifying action on registration.
27.262
At
paragraphs 25.324-25.326
, I referred to the new provision (rule 17(2)(m)) which would permit a FTP panel to ‘take into account’ any written undertakings (including undertakings relating to limitations on his/her practice) entered into by the doctor which the FTP panel considered to be sufficient to protect patients and the public interest. I said that it was not clear to me at what point in the proceedings it was intended that such undertakings should be taken into account. If the FTP panel were to take undertakings into account at the stage of deciding what sanction to impose (e.g. by accepting the undertakings rather than imposing formal conditions), that might be acceptable provided that there was provision within the Rules for supervision of the doctor to ensure compliance with the undertakings and for dealing with a breach. There would also have to be provision for review hearings in cases where undertakings had been given. At present, there is no such provision and I recommend that, if rule 17(2)(m) is to be retained, the Rules should be amended as a matter of urgency to include such provision. If there is no means of ascertaining whether a doctor is complying with undertakings which s/he has given and no means of dealing with him/her if s/he is not, patients cannot be adequately protected. That said, I do not see the necessity for undertakings to be given at the sanction stage. By that time, the FTP panel will have made its findings in relation to impairment of fitness to practise and action on registration and will have heard evidence and/or submissions. It will be in a position to impose conditions of its own choosing. If it does so, provision for review hearings and for action in the event of breach are contained within the existing Rules. I cannot see anything to be gained by the new provision and I recommend that the best course of action is for rule 17(2)(m) to be revoked.
27.263
My concern is that it may be intended that undertakings should be ‘taken into account’ by a FTP panel before it has made findings of fact and/or a decision on impairment of fitness to practise. The provision is wide enough to permit this. That could lead to the ‘fudging’ of these important issues and would be most unsatisfactory. I recommend that, if it is to be retained, the rule should be redrafted to make clear that undertakings can be taken into account only at the stage of deciding on sanction after findings of fact and of impairment of fitness to practise have been made.
The Need for Supervision
27.264
I recommend that, throughout the period that a doctor’s registration is subject to conditions, someone within the GMC (I would suggest a case examiner) should take responsibility for monitoring the doctor’s progress and for ensuring, so far as is possible, that s/he is complying with the conditions imposed. That is vital for the protection of patients. I further recommend that, in every case where a doctor is continuing to practise subject to conditions, a professional supervisor should be appointed to oversee the doctor’s progress. I recommend that such professional supervisors should be in direct contact with the case examiner appointed by the GMC and should be required (like medical supervisors under the old voluntary health procedures) to provide regular written reports on the doctor’s progress and on his/her compliance with conditions and restrictions on practice. I consider that the direct contribution of the professional supervisor would enhance the quality of the overall supervision and thus reduce the risk to patients of allowing such doctors to continue in work. In a case where the doctor’s health is an issue, a medical supervisor should be appointed as under the old voluntary health procedures.
27.265
Any breach of a condition imposed by a FTP panel (save for the most minor breach) should result in the doctor being brought back before the panel so that consideration can be given to imposing a sanction which affords a greater degree of protection to the public.
27.266
So far, I have referred to the need for supervision of doctors who are subject to conditions imposed by a FTP panel. However, the same considerations apply to doctors who have given voluntary undertakings or had undertakings ‘taken into account’ by a FTP panel. Where the case raises issues of health, the doctor should be subject to medical supervision as under the old voluntary health procedures. In all cases where voluntary undertakings are in place and the doctor is continuing to practise, a professional supervisor should be appointed. I recommend that such professional supervisors should be in direct contact with the case examiner appointed by the GMC, even in health cases where, in the past, the arrangement has been for a professional supervisor to be in indirect contact only, through the medical supervisor.
27.267
The most recent guidance from the GMC suggests that, where a period of suspension of or conditions on registration has been imposed, there will
be one or more review hearings at which the FTP panel may,
, extend the period of suspension or conditional registration or revoke or vary the conditions or permit the doctor to resume unrestricted practice at the expiry of the period of suspension or conditional registration. Review hearings are extremely important. They are the ‘teeth’ behind the sanctions other than erasure and should focus the doctor’s mind on the need to undertake any necessary remediation. I recommend that the Rules should be amended to ensure that there is at least one review hearing in all such cases, unless there are exceptional reasons why no hearing should take place. The period within which the first review hearing is to be held should be set at the original hearing and should be within a reasonably short period (no more than a year in a case where conditions have been imposed); this will enable the FTP panel to ensure that the doctor is complying with his/her conditions and making progress. A second review hearing can then be fixed for a time near to the expiry of the period of conditional registration at which the fitness of the doctor to return to unrestricted practice can be considered. There should be an expectation that the doctor will give evidence and answer questions from the FTP panel.
27.268
The November 2004 Rules provide that the Registrar (in practice, the staff exercising his legal powers) may carry out any necessary investigation and obtain any expert or other evidence that he considers necessary in preparation for a review hearing. He may also invite the doctor to undergo an assessment of his/her performance or health. Under the 2003 draft Rules, these functions would have been carried out by a designated case examiner. I recommend that the arrangements set out in the 2003 draft Rules should be reinstated. The kind of investigations to be undertaken (in particular, the commissioning and consideration of expert reports and assessments) should be undertaken by medically qualified case examiners. Of course, they will require the support of staff in administering the arrangements but a case examiner should take the decision about the type and extent of evidence that will be required by the FTP panel at the review hearing. If, as I have suggested, the case examiners are to have responsibility for monitoring the progress of doctors who are subject to conditions, it will be even more appropriate for them to direct the preparations for review hearings.
27.269
In the past, doctors have been permitted to return to practice after the expiry of a period of suspension or conditional registration without any further hearing of their cases by a panel of the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC). Sometimes, the doctor has been released from conditions on registration on the basis of a report from the person overseeing his/her remediation. It has not been unusual for the PCC and the CPP to allow a doctor to return to unrestricted practice without any objective assessment being made to ensure that the deficiencies which led to the original sanction being imposed have been cured and that the doctor is indeed fit to practise. Under the November 2004 Rules, as I have said, the Registrar has the power to invite the doctor to undergo a performance or health assessment but there is no requirement that the Registrar should do so. In my view, this is unsatisfactory and does not afford adequate protection for patients.
27.270
I recommend that, in all but exceptional cases, a doctor whose registration has been suspended should be required to undertake an objective assessment of his/her fitness to practise before being permitted to return to practice. The kind of exceptional circumstances I envisage are where the doctor has been subject to a short period of suspension which was intended to be a ‘sharp rap on the knuckles’ for an incident of misconduct which did not affect his/her clinical competence or performance. In all other cases, it is likely that the doctor will have been found to have a serious impairment of fitness to practise and that the period out of practice will have rendered him/her even less fit to practise than hitherto. An assessment is, therefore, imperative. That assessment should be considered by a FTP panel and a decision taken as to the doctor’s fitness to practise. Even when a doctor who has been the subject of a suspension is deemed fit to return to practice, it will in most cases be appropriate for him/her to be subject to conditions (in particular a condition of professional supervision) for a period after s/he resumes practice and for a further hearing to be fixed at which his/her progress in practice can be considered and a decision taken as to whether s/he is fit to practise unrestricted.
27.271
Where a doctor has been subject to conditions on his/her registration, s/he should be required to undertake an objective assessment of his/her fitness to practise before being permitted to return to unrestricted practice. That assessment should be considered by a FTP panel at a review hearing in the way that I have described above.
27.272
The nature of the assessment will vary according to the aspects of the doctor’s performance, health or conduct that gave rise to the suspension or conditions. It will not necessarily be the full performance assessment although, in cases where there has been a multiplicity of deficiencies, this may be necessary. In a case where the doctor’s competence has been deficient, it may be appropriate for him/her to undertake an assessment comprising all or part of Phase II of the performance assessment. Where a doctor has been required to undergo a specific type of retraining, an assessment based on his/her competence and performance in that particular area of practice might be suitable. What is essential is that the doctor should not be allowed to return to unrestricted practice unless and until the deficiencies which led to action being taken on his/her registration have been successfully addressed and s/he meets an acceptable standard of practice. At present, the appropriate standard for GPs is that set for summative assessment; it is to that standard that the performance assessment instruments are calibrated.
27.273
If a doctor undergoes an assessment to ascertain whether s/he is fit to resume practice or unrestricted practice and the assessment reveals that s/he does not meet the required standard, it is undesirable that s/he should ‘limp on’ with repeated periods of conditional registration. The time will come when it becomes apparent that the doctor is unlikely ever to meet the standard for unrestricted practice. At the time of the Inquiry hearings, the GMC appeared to have recognised that, if a doctor has been given a chance to improve and is unable or unwilling to do so, the GMC’s primary duty to protect patients requires that it should remove him/her from practice. I am uncertain whether or not this remains GMC policy. I thought that that was the right policy and recommend that it should be adopted. In cases of this type, it might be necessary to commission a new full assessment with a view to the doctor’s erasure. I do not suggest that this policy should be adopted in respect of impairment caused by adverse health. In such cases, erasure is rightly not available and indefinite suspension may be appropriate.
27.274
It is, in my view, important that the same standards of supervision, review and reassessment should apply in cases in which voluntary undertakings have been accepted or ‘taken into account’ by a FTP panel as apply where conditions have been imposed. Any breach of such undertakings should be referred to a FTP panel; that should happen now, although the Inquiry heard evidence that it does not always happen when it should. There should be a reassessment before voluntary undertakings are allowed to lapse. Moreover, voluntary undertakings should not be allowed to continue in force and be renewed indefinitely. The time should come when enough opportunity for improvement has been given. In my view, if undertakings have been given at the investigation stage, it should be for the case examiner to decide when the time has come for the doctor to be referred to a FTP panel with a view to further action being taken.
Applications for Restoration to the Register
27.275
The 2003 draft Rules provided for a case examiner to be appointed to consider and prepare the evidence to be placed before a FTP panel at the hearing of a doctor’s application for restoration to the register. The case examiner was to have the same powers to procure expert and other evidence as in relation to a review hearing. Subsequently, these proposed arrangements underwent change and, under the November 2004 Rules, the functions which were previously to have been undertaken by case examiners will be given to members of the GMC staff. I recommend that the arrangements contemplated under the 2003 draft Rules should be reinstated. I do so for the same reasons as I have previously outlined in relation to review hearings. Preparation will include the commissioning of an appropriate assessment dealing with the doctor’s fitness to resume practice and may also involve obtaining other expert evidence. It might also involve the consideration of complex evidence relating to the events giving rise to the original erasure. All these functions, it seems to me, require the input of a case examiner, preferably one who is medically qualified. Support from the administrative (and probably legal) staff of the GMC staff will obviously be needed, but the preparations for the hearing should in my view be directed by a case examiner.
27.276
My understanding is that, since 2000, every doctor whose application for restoration to the register has reached the second stage of the procedure has been required to submit to an assessment for the purpose of satisfying the PCC panel as to his/her good character, professional competence and health. I entirely agree that it is essential that there should be an independent objective assessment of the doctor’s fitness to practise. This should be directed in part at the deficiencies which led to his/her original erasure but must also take into account that, even if the problem was not one of poor performance, following a period of more than five years out of clinical practice, his/her competence and clinical skills must also be in doubt. The assessment must, therefore, be directed at every aspect of fitness to practise and the doctor should not be restored unless s/he has met the required standard. Panels considering restoration need guidance as to the standards and criteria to be applied. I recommend this be provided through a collection of case summaries.
27.277
I understand the reasons why the GMC has decided against the automatic imposition of conditions on the registration of a doctor who has been restored to the register and I do not propose to recommend that course. Instead, I recommend that, as an additional safeguard for patients, doctors who are restored to the register should be required to have a mentor whose task it will be to monitor their progress in practice and to report to the GMC on their progress. I suggest that those reports should be considered by the case examiner appointed to deal with the restoration application. If it appears from the mentor’s reports that further problems are arising, s/he will be able to take appropriate action within the FTP procedures.
Cases Involving Drug Abuse
27.278
Chapter 23
, I have discussed the need for a more searching examination of the circumstances underlying allegations of drug abuse by doctors, and convictions for offences related to drug abuse. I have said that any factual disputes must be resolved and that there must be a more thorough investigation of how the doctor’s drug abuse began. I also recommend that the GMC should commission research into the outcomes of the cases of those doctors who have gone through the GMC health procedures. In past cases, the GMC has access to a pool of valuable information. The research might well inform the development of new or improved methods of supervision; the GMC would be able to find out what had worked best in the past. Also, by finding out which drug abusing doctors had relapsed or had otherwise not ‘done well’, the GMC would gain valuable insight into the characteristics of drug abusing doctors.
Transparency
27.279
I have said that it is important that the GMC’s processes should be transparent. Doctors, those representing them and the public should be able to understand exactly what the GMC does and why. There are several respects in which the present arrangements should be improved. First, there are some matters that should be covered in the Rules but are not. Examples include the tests that are to be applied at each stage of the process and the provisions for the issue of letters of advice. I recommend that every aspect of the procedures in which either doctors or makers of allegations have a direct interest should appear in the Rules. So far as purely internal procedures are concerned, I can see that it would be impractical and restrictive if every aspect of the procedures had to be enshrined in the Rules. However, that is not to say that the internal procedures should be shrouded from the eyes of the public. They must not be. I recommend that the GMC should publish a FTP manual containing all its relevant Rules and guidance for panellists, case examiners and staff and any relevant Standing Orders. This would include such documents as the ISG and the standard forms used by staff and case examiners when recording their decisions. It may be sensible for this to be produced in loose leaf form so that it can be amended periodically. It could also go on the GMC‘s website so that it could readily be accessed by anyone who needs to use it.
27.280
At various points in this Report, I have mentioned the need for clear statistical information to be provided by the GMC. For example, at
paragraph 25.148
, I said that the way in which reports of convictions are dealt with should be made clear to the public. Other categories of information that should be made public in a clear and comprehensible form are the numbers of cancellations of referrals to a FTP panel and reviews of decisions made at the end of the investigation stage. I recommend that the GMC should publish an annual report which should amount to a transparent statement of the year’s activities in relation to the FTP procedures and revalidation.
Revalidation
27.281
, I expressed my concern and dissatisfaction about the GMC’s current proposals for revalidation. The GMC has told the public that revalidation will require every doctor to demonstrate that s/he is up to date and fit to practise. Section 29A of the 1983 Act imposes a duty on the GMC to make regulations providing for the revalidation of doctors. At section 29A, revalidation is defined as an
of a doctor’s fitness to practise. I have explained that the process that the GMC intends to use for revalidation does not entail an evaluation of fitness to practise. In my view, this process is not fit for the purpose for which it is intended.
27.282
At
paragraphs 26.191-26.197
, I have set out some suggestions for the way in which the revalidation of GPs could be carried out. In brief, I suggest that the folders of evidence that all doctors working in the NHS have to compile for the purposes of appraisal should be examined by a panel of at least three assessors. One would be the clinical governance lead of the doctor’s PCT. Another would be a GP from another area, accredited by the RCGP as an assessor to standards approved by the GMC. The third would be a lay person. The folder would have to include certain specific items of evidence, to be determined by the GMC in consultation with the RCGP. I have also proposed that there should be various ‘proxy’ methods of achieving revalidation.
Recommendation Relating to the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence
27.283
At
paragraph 21.187
, I observed that the provisions of section 29 of the National Health Service Reform and Health Care Professions Act 2002 had given rise to considerable difficulty of construction in the case of
. I recommend that, on the first occasion that the Act is to be amended, the opportunity should be taken to clarify that the Act provides for the CRHP/CHRE to appeal against ‘acquittals’ or findings of ‘no impairment of fitness to practise’ as well as in respect of sanctions which it believes were unduly lenient. There should in the future be a review of the powers of the CRHP/CHRE with a view to ascertaining whether any extension of its powers and functions is necessary in order to enable it to act effectively to ensure that patients are sufficiently protected by the GMC.
The Culture within the General Medical Council
27.284
In considering what recommendations I should make for the protection of patients in the future, I have had to consider whether, in my view, the GMC should retain responsibility for the conduct of the FTP procedures which, as I explained in
, form an integral part of the present systems of monitoring and supervision of doctors, including GPs. These are the procedures by which the GMC should protect patients from dysfunctional doctors, i.e. doctors who, by reason of their misconduct, adverse health or deficient performance, put patients at risk of harm. The Inquiry has received evidence and submissions from some quarters suggesting that the GMC should no longer carry out that function. It has been suggested that the GMC does not have the protection of patients as its first priority; it is said that, rather, its priority is to safeguard the interests of the medical profession. I have already indicated that it is not my intention to recommend that the GMC should be deprived of its FTP function. It is important that I explain my reasons for reaching that conclusion.
27.285
The words that have appeared in the top right-hand corner of virtually every communication disseminated by the GMC in the recent past are ‘Protecting Patients - Guiding Doctors’. In modern parlance, this has been the GMC’s ‘strapline’. The words are intended to encapsulate the aims and philosophy of the GMC. I understand they may shortly be changed, although I do not know what form of words is proposed. Those aims and philosophy should have applied to all the GMC’s activities but they were perhaps of greatest relevance to the operation of the FTP procedures. In this Report, I have described the FTP procedures as they have been operated over the last 30 years. I have sought to examine the extent to which their operation has protected patients in accordance with the GMC’s primary purpose. For those who have had the patience and endurance to read
Chapters 15 to 24
, it will come as no surprise that I have reached the conclusion that the GMC has not, in the past, succeeded in that primary purpose. Instead, it has, to a significant degree, acted in the interests of doctors. Of course, I accept that the GMC also has a duty towards doctors; it must be fair in all its dealings with them. But, in the past, the balance has been wrong and, as I have illustrated, the imbalance was due to a culture within the GMC, a set of attitudes and an approach that put what was seen as being ‘fair to doctors’ ahead of what was necessary to protect patients.
Chapters 15 to 24
contain many examples of the way in which this culture operated. I do not propose to repeat them here.
27.286
It is important for the Inquiry to consider whether the culture within the GMC has changed. The GMC’s corporate attitudes and culture are fundamental to its capacity to function in the best interests of patients and of the public, as it is under a duty to do. It is also important that the GMC should recognise the shortcomings of its old FTP procedures and its inability to detect doctors whose practice was either aberrant or substandard. If, at the GMC, there had not been some change of culture and a recognition of the need for change, I would have had little hesitation in advising the SoS that he must make provision for some other way of dealing with doctors whose fitness to practise had been called into question. However, the need for changes to the FTP procedures was recognised, as was the need for an improved method of detecting aberrant behaviour and poor performance. Also, for reasons that I shall explain, I think that there has been some change of attitude and culture, although that change is by no means complete.
27.287
It is clear that the GMC did not recognise the need for change without some prompting from outside. The emergence of a number of medical scandals during the late 1990s must have played a significant part in the development of a resolve to reform. I have no doubt that there were, in the GMC, some who had for many years wished to see a change of both culture and practice. However, scandals such as those involving Shipman, Ledward, Green and others appear to have had the effect of bringing the majority within the GMC to the view that reform was necessary. Since that time, the GMC has been in a state of transition.
27.288
The transition has comprised three major reforms. First, the GMC’s constitution was changed with effect from July 2003. The Council was reduced in size from 104 to 35 members and the proportion of lay members was increased from 25% to 40%. However, elected medical members still wield an overall majority. I shall return to constitutional issues later. The second main reform was the development and introduction of the new FTP procedures, which came into effect on 1st
November 2004. The third was the development of the process of revalidation, which is due to come into effect in April 2005. The practical effects of the new FTP procedures and revalidation cannot yet be known. In addition to making preparations for those major reforms, during the last five years, the GMC has introduced some more modest changes to its FTP procedures. These were not dependent upon the introduction of the new procedures. I shall list a few because the circumstances in which these changes were introduced is of some significance in considering the extent of the culture change during the last five years.
27.289
In late 1999, the GMC discontinued the practice whereby medical screeners could also sit on the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC); thereafter, screeners could not fulfil both functions. It appears that this change was made in anticipation of the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998, which was to take place in October 2000. In 2000, the GMC took greatly increased powers to make interim orders suspending or imposing conditions on a doctor’s registration in a case in which it is necessary for the protection of members of the public, or in the public interest or in the interests of the doctor concerned. This change was made because the GMC had been unable to take action to suspend Shipman from the register in August 1998, when he was under investigation for murdering his patients. At about the same time, in 2000, legislation was also introduced to require the GMC to disclose certain adverse information about doctors to employers and PCOs. Hitherto, the GMC had been reluctant to disclose such information as it had been thought that this might be unfair to doctors. The Government had insisted upon this change; as the major employer of doctors, the NHS wanted the information. No doubt that change too was precipitated, in part at least, by Shipman’s case.
27.290
In November 2002, the rule requiring a complaint from a private individual to be supported by a statutory declaration was abolished. That change had been recommended by Professor Allen and her colleagues in 1996. Mr Alan Howes, who was employed by the GMC between 1977 and 2002 and was Head of the Conduct Section from 1987 to 1994, told the Inquiry that there had been tension on this issue between some members of the Council who wanted the rule to be abolished and other members who wanted to keep the rule for the protection of doctors against false or frivolous complaints. It had taken a long time for the majority to accept the need for abolition. In the same month, November 2002, the Registrar was given power to send reports of serious convictions straight to a PCC panel, unless there were public interest reasons for not doing so. Previously, such cases had had to be considered by a screener and the PPC. This change had been recommended by Professor Allen in 2000.
27.291
In May 2004, the GMC introduced the practice of having an informal dialogue with the employer or relevant PCO in respect of doctors about whom complaints had been received. This had never previously been done and was perceived by some to be unfair to doctors since it involved disclosing to the employer or PCO the fact that a complaint had been received. Mr Neil Marshall, who has been employed by the GMC since 1996, told the Inquiry that, between December 1998 and April 2000, there had been a debate within the GMC about the seeking of background information about a doctor. He said that it had become apparent that, by not carrying out such searches, the GMC might be failing in its duty to protect the public. Eventually, it was decided that discussions should take place, but only in ‘more performance-like cases’. It was clear from the evidence, however, that it was common for no such discussion to take place. It appears that the change was made as the result of evidence given to this Inquiry. Another change was made as the result of observations made at Inquiry hearings. Until recently, doctors charged with or convicted of a criminal offence had not been required to report the fact to the GMC. The GMC now requires doctors to report these matters and a doctor would be guilty of professional misconduct if s/he failed to do so. A further example of a change brought about as the result of evidence given to the Inquiry relates to the identification of doctors against whom complaints have been made. In 2003, Professor Allen and her colleagues reported that 25% of doctors about whom complaints had been made in 2001 had never been identified. That meant that the GMC was unable to ascertain whether the doctor had a previous FTP history and that, if another similar complaint about the same doctor were to be received, the two could not be linked. The GMC could not even confirm that the ‘doctor’ complained of was in fact on the medical register. At the Inquiry’s hearings, Mr Marshall acknowledged that the GMC should consider making more effort to ascertain the identity of doctors against whom complaints were made. It was clear from the evidence that, in some cases, all that was required was a telephone call. The Inquiry has been told that, since the hearings in December 2003, the GMC has taken steps to improve its systems for identifying doctors reported to it.
27.292
All those changes were for the better. They improved the position of complainants and the ability of the FTP procedures to protect patients. To some extent, the GMC is to be congratulated on making those changes. However, the disappointing feature is that all the changes appear to have been made as a reaction to some form of external pressure or advice. None of them appears to have been made because the GMC realised for itself that it was not acting in the best interests of patients and the public. Those changes do not demonstrate that there has been much of a change of culture within the GMC.
27.293
During the same period, the GMC failed to make a number of changes which, in my view, it would have made if it had had patient protection at the forefront of its collective mind. I shall mention four. Until very recently, the GMC has not employed staff for the purpose of investigating complaints or allegations against doctors. In general, in a conduct case, it has accepted the complaint, obtained the doctor’s response, obtained the complainant’s response to the doctor’s response and then decided whether to send the case through to the PCC for hearing. Thereafter, if the case was to go forward to the PCC, it would be investigated. As Mr Scott observed at the Inquiry, that was to ‘put the cart before the horse’. The GMC knew that this was the practice and should have realised that it was not satisfactory in the interests of patient protection. As a consequence of the practice, it was inevitable that some complaints against doctors would fail at the early stages for lack of investigation. Professor Allen had made this point in 1996. It is true that the GMC did not have statutory powers to compel the production of evidence before the stage when a case was referred to the PCC; but that was no bar to investigation. Only now, under the new FTP procedures, is it intended that the GMC should investigate cases at an early stage.
27.294
My second example relates to the GMC’s practice of closing complaints from private individuals and advising the complainant to use local complaints procedures; this was done without considering whether the complaint raised an issue of SPM and in the knowledge that NHS complaints procedures were profoundly unsatisfactory. It was a practice that plainly disadvantaged complainants and reduced the ability of the GMC to protect patients by dealing promptly with all potential allegations of SPM. Mrs Jean Robinson, formerly a lay member of the GMC, had, in 1988, drawn attention to the practice and its effects. Professor Allen had drawn attention to it again in 1996 and pointed out that some of the complaints being redirected were of a serious nature. It was not stopped, although it could have been stopped at any time as it was not sanctioned by the Rules; indeed, it was a breach of the Rules. Far from being stopped, in November 2002, the practice was extended to complaints about treatment in the private sector. The practice was the subject of discussion and some criticism at the Inquiry in December 2003. The briefing papers for the Council meeting in July 2004 suggest that the practice was still in operation at that date. So far as I am aware, it remained in operation until the demise of the old FTP procedures at the end of October 2004.
27.295
My third example relates to the GMC’s unwillingness to establish agreed standards, criteria and thresholds by which the FTP procedures, and particularly the old conduct procedures, could operate. Professor Allen and her colleagues drew attention to the need for them in their Reports of 1996 and 2000 and in their Paper of 2003. They made it plain that the absence of standards was resulting in inconsistency of decision-making and lack of transparency. The implications for patient safety were obvious. No real progress has been made.
27.296
Finally, I refer to the disclosure of information relating to a doctor’s registration status to persons making enquiry of the GMC. I described at
paragraphs 27.174-27.178
how this information is imparted. I explained that, at the Council meeting of July 2004, Mr Scott explained that information was imparted only in response to specific questions, and that 999 out of 1000 callers asked only whether the doctor was registered. No further questions were usually asked. No member of Council made any observation about this. Nobody remarked that it appeared therefore that many prospective employers were receiving incomplete information about the registration status of the doctors they were about to employ. They were putting down the telephone having assured themselves that the doctor was registered, but they had not discovered whether the doctor was subject to conditions or even whether s/he had a recent FTP history. Similarly, it did not appear to be appreciated that members of the public might not be getting the information they were seeking. In short, nobody seems to have noticed that the way the GMC handles these enquiries is not in the best interests of patient protection.
27.297
My examination of the events of the last five years leads me to conclude that, although the GMC has made a number of beneficial changes, its culture has not altered radically. However, the GMC would have me believe that, insofar as there ever was any need for a change in culture, it has already occurred. In his opening submission to the Inquiry, made in November 2003, Leading Counsel for the GMC, Mr Roger Henderson QC, accepted on the GMC’s behalf that, in many ways, its FTP procedures had not been as they should have been. There had been problems of inflexibility, inadequacies of training and guidance and resulting inconsistency of decision-making. It was, I think, accepted that these shortcomings must at times have resulted in the GMC failing to act in the best interests of patients and for their protection. Mr Henderson acknowledged that some cases had been closed that should not have been closed. However, he did not volunteer any acceptance that there had been anything fundamentally wrong with the GMC’s attitudes or culture. The thrust of the evidence presented to the Inquiry by the GMC was that its priorities were clear; its primary duty was to protect patients and that is what it was doing.
27.298
The most important transitions effected in the last few years have been the preparations for the introduction of the new FTP procedures and of revalidation. I turn to consider whether the GMC’s approach to those important innovations demonstrates a change of culture and attitude.
27.299
, I examined the development of the proposals for the new FTP procedures in detail - some might say in too much detail. I wished to understand the thinking behind that development. The GMC’s vision for the future procedures was clearly set out in its Consultation Paper published in 2001. That paper demonstrated a firm commitment to FTP procedures that would operate for the protection of patients, without compromising the need to be fair to doctors. On the basis of that document, I would have said that there had indeed been a change in the culture of the GMC. However, the translation of the vision into reality has been, in some respects, disappointing. As I explained in my conclusions to
, I found that there had been no consistent transition from the initial vision to the implementation of the new procedures. The major change is that the old ‘silos’ of the conduct, health and performance procedures have gone and are to be replaced by a single basis for the GMC’s powers to erase, suspend or impose conditions on a doctor’s registration, namely ‘impairment of fitness to practise’. There have been many other changes, some for the better, some for the worse. There has been a good deal of ‘chopping and changing’ in the detail of the proposals and it is often hard to see any coherent principle behind the changes. The GMC has adopted a number of suggestions that have been made in evidence to the Inquiry. It has reacted positively to some of the criticisms and concerns about which the GMC witnesses were asked. But I do not feel confident that the GMC has maintained the clarity of purpose that it exhibited at the time it published its Consultation Paper in 2001. I do not feel confident that there is currently a determination that the new procedures will be operated with the primary objective of protecting patients.
27.300
Examination of the development of the GMC’s proposals for revalidation leads me to a similar conclusion. In
, I described how, in the late 1990s, the GMC recognised that, in order to protect patients adequately, it must take proactive steps to identify under-performing doctors, instead of waiting for someone to make a complaint or allegation. It set out its principles with clarity in the Consultation Paper of 2000. This was another seminal document, setting out proposals that were manifestly designed to protect patients. Again, on the basis of that document, I would have said that the GMC had changed its culture. But again, implementation has been a disappointment; there has been a retreat from the early ideals. Revalidation was to involve the evaluation of the fitness to practise of every individual doctor who wished to hold a licence to practise. A method was devised and pilot studies were carried out. Then it became apparent that the task of evaluating every doctor every five years was more daunting than had been thought. The process would be expensive and the doctors would have to pay for it. Moreover, the proposals were unpopular with a powerful section of the profession. So the GMC retreated from its earlier vision and devised a system that it calls ‘revalidation’ but which does not involve any evaluation of the individual doctor’s fitness to practise, certainly so far as GPs are concerned. I know that that retreat caused dissent within the GMC but it was accepted by the majority. I am driven to the conclusion that, for the majority of GMC members, the old culture of protecting the interests of doctors still lingers on.
27.301
It is not possible for me to understand the internal dynamics of the GMC. I can see from the transcripts of the public discussions in Council that there is sometimes a lively debate. That is, of course, as it should be. I do not know and cannot tell when or why the GMC takes some of its decisions. For example, in 2003, the GMC decided that, under the new FTP procedures, when a performance assessment report was obtained, it would be sent to the doctor’s employer or PCO. At some time, that decision has been reversed; it will not now happen. That is a retrograde decision but I do not know when or why it was taken. Similarly with the decision to allow FTP cases to be cancelled on the say-so of a single member of the IC, to which I referred at
paragraphs 25.243-25.250
. I do not know when or why that decision was taken. In short, I do not know what goes on but I do gain the impression that the old culture has not entirely disappeared.
27.302
Why then have I not recommended to the SoS that the GMC should no longer be responsible for the FTP procedures? In fact, I have recommended that responsibility for the adjudication stage should be hived off to an independent organisation. However, I have recommended that because it is inappropriate for the GMC to control both the investigation and the adjudication stages of the process. I would have made that recommendation even if there had been no suggestion that the GMC’s culture could be criticised. There are four reasons why I have not recommended that the GMC should cease to be responsible for the FTP function.
27.303
First, fitness to practise and revalidation are closely linked. Revalidation and registration are closely linked. It is preferable therefore that fitness to practise and registration should be under the control of the same body. I do not consider that my Terms of Reference permit me to consider whether the GMC might lose its responsibility for registration (or indeed for setting the standards for admission to the register and all the educational responsibilities that accompany that function). That would, in effect, be to recommend the abolition of the GMC. I could not do that. This is a Public Inquiry, not a Royal Commission on the regulation of the medical profession. If I were to recommend the detachment of the FTP function, it would create practical difficulties for the future, although I do not think they would be insurmountable.
27.304
Second, the task of creating a body to take over the FTP function would not be an easy one. If improvements to the GMC could be effected, so that it acted more consistently in the interests of patients and the public, that would seem to me to be a preferable course to take.
27.305
So far, I have given two reasons; both are negative. There are some positive reasons for my conclusion. The GMC has just introduced a new set of FTP procedures. I do not know how well they will operate in the interests of patient protection. Broadly speaking, the new procedures are an improvement on the old. Change has been in the right direction. No doubt the new procedures will be changed in some respects during the next few years in the light of experience. It seems to me to be sensible that the new procedures should be allowed to develop and to settle down before their adequacy and fitness for purpose is judged. It will be important to see whether any future changes move in the right direction.
27.306
There is a major reason to hope and expect that change for the better might continue. The CRHP/CHRE may be expected to play an important role in the further development of the new FTP procedures. The CRHP/CHRE is a new body; it came into existence in 2003 as the result of a recommendation of Professor (now Sir) Ian Kennedy in his Bristol Inquiry Report. The CRHP/CHRE has already made its mark by exercising its power to refer to the High Court any decision of the GMC which it considers to be unduly lenient and which should be reviewed in the public interest. It also has the power to refer to the High Court cases in which a doctor has been ‘acquitted’ of SPM and it will in the future have the power, in some circumstances, to refer cases in which a FTP panel’s failure to find that a doctor’s fitness to practise was impaired, or its failure to find impairment of a degree justifying action on registration, was ‘unduly lenient’. However, the CRHP/CHRE’s powers are not limited to referring individual decisions to the Court. It has wide powers of oversight of the GMC’s FTP function. It can audit outcomes of cases; it can examine processes and it can require rule changes. That is not to say that the CRHP/CHRE could or should attempt to ‘manage’ the GMC. That would be impractical and inappropriate. But the fact that it exists and that it has shown that it intends to use its powers will, I believe, have an important effect on the GMC. The GMC must know that, if it fails to act in the best interests of patients and the public, the CRHP/CHRE will intervene. Moreover, this Inquiry has shed a great deal of light on GMC practices, particularly on those that are not usually open to public scrutiny. I hope that what the Inquiry has revealed will help the CRHP/CHRE in that it will know where to look to see how well the GMC is doing its job.
27.307
The Inquiry has revealed many shortcomings in the GMC’s operation of its old FTP procedures. How the new procedures will operate in practice it is not possible to say. In my view it is important, in the public interest, that, in about three or four years’ time, there should be a thorough review of the operation of the new procedures, to be carried out by an independent organisation. It seems to me that that task should be undertaken by or on the instructions of the CRHP/CHRE. The cost should, in my view, be borne by public funds. That review should not be limited to consideration of administrative systems, but should be empowered to examine casework decisions at all levels as well.
27.308
I would like to believe that the GMC’s culture would continue to change in the right direction by virtue of its own momentum. However, I do not feel confident that it will do so. I am sure that there are many people within the GMC, both members and staff, who want to see the regulation of the medical profession based on the principles of ‘patient-centred’ medicine and public protection. Indeed, I think it is likely that all members are theoretically in favour of those principles. The problem seems to be that, when specific issues arise, opposing views are taken and, as in the past, the balance sometimes tips in favour of the interests of doctors.
27.309
, I observed that, for an organisation like the GMC, issues are bound to arise in which there is a conflict between the interests of doctors and those of patients and of the public. Members have to deal with that conflict. To do their work properly as members of a regulatory body, they have to put the public interest first. That is very difficult for a member who depends for his/her position on an electorate of doctors. I am sure that some manage to do it. I think that others find it more difficult. At present, the GMC is effectively controlled by elected members. It seems to me that one of the fundamental problems for the GMC is the perception, shared by many doctors, that it is supposed to be ‘representing’ them. It is not; it is regulating them. It may be that this perception goes back to the 1970s, when the profession objected to being asked to pay an annual retention fee and raised the cry of ‘no taxation without representation’. If the profession perceives that the GMC is supposed to represent it, that would explain why some GMC members tend to adopt a representative role. In fact, the medical profession has a very effective representative body in the BMA; it does not need - and should not have - two.
27.310
I have come to the conclusion that one of the reasons why the GMC has not been able to rid itself of the old culture lies within its constitution and the overall majority of elected ‘representative’ members. I think that the GMC should look again at its constitution. I know that the constitution was changed as recently as July 2003. I realise that further upheaval would be unwelcome. However, my considered view is that it is not appropriate that the GMC should be dominated by elected members. It should certainly be dominated by medical members; I am not suggesting that there should be any increase in the proportion of lay members. But I do suggest that there should be more appointed medical members - people who are not beholden to an electorate and do not see themselves in the position of representatives of the profession. Rather, they should see themselves as servants of the public interest.
27.311
Accordingly, I recommend that the constitution be reconsidered. It occurs to me that the sharp reduction in size that occurred in 2003 might have gone a little too far. The GMC may wish to consider whether it needs a few more medical members than it has. It needs medical members for many tasks that cannot be carried out by lay people, such as the development of policies and medical guidance. That is not a recommendation, merely a suggestion. As Sir Donald Irvine observed, it may be preferable for the GMC to ‘hire’ the medical expertise it needs from the experts in particular fields. What I do recommend, however, is that the balance of the Council should be changed so that the elected members do not have an overall majority.
27.312
I also recommend that medical and lay members who are to be appointed (by the Privy Council) should be selected for nomination to the Privy Council by the Public Appointments Commission following open competition. It would seem sensible for the universities and medical Royal Colleges to have the right to nominate medically qualified candidates for consideration. However, the competition should also be open to medically qualified persons who wish to put themselves forward. I have seen, from the DoH prospectus inviting applications for the position of lay membership in 2003, the emphasis that was laid - quite rightly - on the lay members’ duty to safeguard the public interest. I would like to see the same emphasis on the public interest applied to the appointment of medical members.
27.313
During the course of the evidence, concern was expressed about the number of lay members who have a background in health service management. In
, I expressed the view that it would be desirable that lay members should come from a wide range of backgrounds.
Public Accountability
27.314
In the past, the GMC has been accountable to the public only in very general terms. It has had a duty to regulate the medical profession in the best interests of patients and the public. However, there has been no person or body to whom the GMC has been directly accountable. Since 2003, the CRHP/CHRE has had the power to oversee and correct some aspects of the GMC’s work. The GMC itself recognised and drew the Inquiry’s attention to the fact that, although the GMC derives its powers from Parliament, it is not directly accountable to Parliament for the way in which it exercises its powers. The GMC suggested that it might be appropriate if it were to be directly accountable. I think that that is a good idea. I have in mind that the GMC would be required to publish an annual report of its activities, which could be scrutinised by a Select Committee. For this to be a worthwhile exercise, the report would have to contain specified categories of information, including statistical information, in a form that was readily understandable and, in effect, transparent.
The Availability of Information about Doctors

--- Proposals for Change Affecting NHS Arrangements for Primary Care ---
Changes and Reforms to Date
27.5
In 1997, the Government embarked upon a fundamental review of the operation of the NHS. One of the main aims underlying that review was to place a greater emphasis on quality of care. The corollary of that aim was that patients should not be exposed to avoidable risk at the hands of healthcare professionals. In the course of this Report, I have referred to several of the initiatives considered and the changes which have been brought about. I shall not describe those in detail here. It seems to me that, in the long term, the development of clinical governance, which I described in
, could, if carried through with determination and adequate resources, have the greatest beneficial effect of all the changes I have examined.
27.6
Another notable development was the change in the structure of the bodies with responsibility for the provision of primary care. Primary care trusts (PCTs) are small organisations, small enough to enable their staff and those GPs who are directly involved in their work to develop personal knowledge of the GPs on their list. PCTs have many new powers. They are entitled to require far more information about a doctor before they decide whether to admit him/her to their lists than used to be the case, including information about his/her involvement in criminal or disciplinary proceedings. They have new powers enabling them to deal with dysfunctional doctors themselves, without having to rely on the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (Special Health Authority) or the GMC. They can remove or suspend doctors from their lists or impose conditions upon their continued inclusion. They are required to undertake clinical governance activities and are being encouraged to set up systems for the detection of poor performance and other forms of dysfunctionality in a GP before such shortcomings give rise to a serious risk of harm to patients.
27.7
One aspect of the thinking behind the change from health authorities (HAs) to PCTs was that local practitioners would now be closely involved in the work of the PCT and in making policy decisions affecting local medical services. It is usual for the Chairman of the Professional Executive Committee (PEC) of a PCT to be a GP. The PCT’s Clinical Governance Lead is also likely to be a local GP. These arrangements have both advantages and disadvantages. One advantage should be an increased sense of involvement and ‘ownership’. As a result, the feelings of tension and division between GPs and the bodies responsible for their monitoring and supervision should be reduced. A significant disadvantage is that there is a potential for conflict of interest for those GPs who are both local practitioners and PCT officers. There is, in any event, an element of conflict between the roles that the PCT has to fulfil: sometimes offering support, sometimes having to act as an inspectorate.
27.8
PCTs have their problems. They are very new and have not yet had time to develop a corporate memory. Many of their staff have very little experience of the kind of quasi-managerial and supervisory functions that they have to perform. One of the problems inherent in the smallness of PCTs is that staff have to cover a wide range of functions and are unlikely ever to acquire real expertise in some aspects of their work; they will not have the opportunity to learn by regular experience. Some PCTs have found it helpful to band together into groups for some purposes. Another problem is that, because there are a lot of PCTs (over 300 in England alone), there are many different ways of doing things; standards are variable. Some PCTs appear to have difficulty in making their resources cover all the functions they are supposed to perform. My overall impression is that there is a real determination to make the new systems work well. I hope that PCTs will be given the chance to settle down; there was a period of almost constant change in primary care organisation for several years before the millennium and for a couple of years after. In my view, further structural change should be avoided for a while at least. PCTs need the opportunity to develop expertise and confidence in using their new powers. I think also that the exchange of ideas and the dissemination of good practice could help to ensure that high standards are developed uniformly across the country.
Areas in Which Further Change Is Needed
27.9
I mentioned earlier that clinical governance, if carried through with determination and adequately resourced, could make a very substantial difference to patient safety and to the quality of patient care. There are five particular aspects of clinical governance in its widest sense in respect of which I propose to make recommendations. These are the handling of patient complaints against GPs and of concerns expressed by medical colleagues, fellow healthcare professionals and others, disciplinary proceedings, the use of prescribing information, the use of mortality statistics and appraisal. The other main area in which I wish to make recommendations for change is in the provision of information, both for internal NHS purposes and to patients. I shall also make a number of miscellaneous recommendations about ways in which PCTs might improve patient protection and bring about an improvement in the quality of care provided by GPs.
27.10
Ideas for change covering these broad areas of interest were included in a Consultation Paper issued by the Inquiry in October 2003, entitled ‘Safeguarding Patients: Topics for Consideration at the Stage Four Seminars’. These topics were the subject of discussion at the Inquiry’s seminars held in January 2004. Details of these seminars are given in
and I shall refer to some of the discussions which took place at the seminars, and the points raised by respondents to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper, in the course of this Chapter.
Handling Complaints and Concerns
27.11
Several issues relating to complaints were raised in the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper. Many organisations and individuals responded. By the time of the seminars, several more issues had been raised, some by respondents to the Consultation Paper, others by the Inquiry itself as the result of evidence recently received. In this section of this Chapter, I shall discuss a number of these issues. In this discussion, I shall assume that the reader has read
Chapters 6
of this Report and is familiar with the systems in operation at the present time.
27.12
, the Government has consulted extensively about the reform of the NHS complaints procedures. By the time the Inquiry seminars took place, draft Complaints Regulations had been circulated for consultation purposes. These draft Complaints Regulations proposed changes to both the first and the second stages of the procedures. In general, I considered that the arrangements set out in the draft Complaints Regulations were sensible and helpful and would lead to a substantial improvement in the complaints process as it operates in primary care.
27.13
One of the main provisions in the draft Complaints Regulations was the transfer of responsibility for the second stage of the complaints procedures from independent review panels (IRPs) to the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission). That proposal met with general support and the Government was anxious to implement the change. Accordingly, in July 2004, a new set of Regulations, the National Health Service (Complaints) Regulations 2004 (the 2004 Complaints Regulations), came into operation. These effected changes to the second stage of the complaints procedures but, so far as GP practices were concerned, left the first stage of the procedures as it was. The Inquiry was advised that it was the Government’s intention to reform the first stage of the complaints procedures insofar as it affected GP practices after receipt of the Reports of this Inquiry and of the Neale and Ayling Inquiries. I was content with that arrangement. However, as a result of the separation of the new arrangements for the two stages of the complaints procedures, the present position and the interconnection between the two stages is perhaps a little confusing. I am confident that that situation will be remedied in the near future.
27.14
I will now deal with a number of different issues that arise in connection with the reform of the complaints procedures.
Who Should Receive Complaints?
27.15
At present, a person wishing to make a complaint about a GP has to make it, in the first instance, to the practice within which the GP works. Evidence received by the Inquiry and published research suggests that many people who wish to make a complaint are discouraged from doing so by the prospect of having to ‘face’ a member of staff or a doctor at the practice about which the complaint is to be made. In its Consultation Paper, the Inquiry asked whether such complainants should have the option of lodging their complaints with the PCT, rather than with the GP practice. Some respondents said that a choice would be welcomed by patients for the reason mentioned above. Those who were not in favour of choice preferred to keep the
, whereby all complaints relating to primary care are handled in the first instance by the practice. Two main reasons were advanced in favour of that arrangement. First, it was said that, if a practice is allowed to handle the complaint, there is a better prospect that the relationship of trust and confidence between patient and doctor will be maintained. Second, it was said that many complaints in primary care relate to purely administrative matters and/or are extremely trivial; most can be satisfactorily resolved by the practice. It would overwhelm PCTs if they had to deal with large numbers of such complaints. However, by the time of the seminars, the Government had indicated, in the draft Complaints Regulations, its intention to allow patients to choose whether to complain to the GP practice or to the PCT.
27.16
It seems to me that the need for patient choice in this respect has been demonstrated by the findings in the research undertaken by the Public Law Project and in the York Report, to which I referred in
. Those findings were that many patients were unwilling to complain directly to the doctor’s practice. If confirmation of that is needed, it is to be found in evidence given to the Inquiry. I recognise the importance of retaining the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient where possible, and I also accept that many minor complaints can be dealt with quickly and satisfactorily by a practice manager. However, if patients are being discouraged from making a complaint by the requirement to make it directly to the practice, they must be given an alternative. Those who are prepared to make their complaints directly to the practice will continue to do so and it is to be hoped that many such complaints will be resolved quickly and easily without damage to the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient. However, those patients who do not wish to do so - for whatever reason - should, in my view, be able to lodge their complaint with the PCT and, if they wish, to avoid being obliged to enter into direct correspondence or discussion with the practice concerned. I think it likely that it will be the rather more serious complaints - those involving personal criticism of the doctor and/or the clinical care provided - which will be lodged with the PCT. I am not suggesting that this will always occur but I think this is the way in which most patients will behave. Accordingly, I do not think that the result of this change will be that PCTs will be swamped by trivial complaints. Nor do I think that this arrangement will be damaging to the relationship between doctor and patient. If the complaint relates to an administrative matter or some other minor problem, I would expect the PCT to facilitate a solution with a view to maintaining or restoring that relationship.
27.17
It is, in my view, desirable that, at the first stage of the procedures, GP practices should continue to deal with most of the complaints that patients bring directly to them. Steps should be taken to improve the standards by which such complaints are handled. The research suggests that the quality of complaints handling within general practice is very variable. GP practices should be helped to adopt a positive attitude towards complaints and to train their staff to handle complaints in an appropriate way.
When Must a Complaint Be Made?
27.18
Under the 1996 complaints procedures, a complaint had to be made within six months of the events complained about. Under the draft Complaints Regulations, this period would be extended to 12 months, with the possibility of further extension in some circumstances. In my view, that proposal was sensible. It effectively recognised that complainants may be ill or bereaved and may not be in a fit state to contemplate lodging a complaint until a considerable time after the events in question. Doctors should have good contemporaneous notes of all consultations and, thus, should not be seriously disadvantaged by the extension of the period. Although one does not wish to encourage delay, 12 months seems to me a more reasonable period to allow. I hope that that change will be incorporated into the next set of Complaints Regulations.
The Reporting of Complaints to Primary Care Trusts
27.19
One of the issues raised in the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper concerned the lack of information available to PCTs about the nature of complaints received by a GP practice and about the way in which they are handled and resolved. This type of information is important for several reasons connected with the PCT’s responsibilities for clinical governance. First, the way in which complaints are handled by GP practices is or should be a matter of interest and concern to the PCT. It is an important indicator of the quality of the relationship that the doctors within the practice have with their patients. Second, as Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive and Medical Director of the National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA), said at the seminars, the number and nature of the complaints received by a GP practice is likely to be an indicator of the quality of service it is providing. If either a practice or a particular doctor attracts a number of complaints - especially if those complaints are of a similar nature - alarm bells should begin to ring. At present, as I explained in
, PCTs find out only how many complaints are lodged at a practice and know nothing of the content of those complaints unless the complainant proceeds to the second stage. Moreover, the PCT receives information about complaints by way of an annual return, not in ‘real time’ as the complaints are made. Many respondents to the Consultation Paper favoured the provision of more information to the PCT at more regular intervals.
27.20
By the time the issue was discussed at the seminars, it was known that the Government proposed to make changes that would give PCTs improved information about complaints and a discretion to decide how frequently they would require it to be provided. The draft Complaints Regulations would require primary care providers (i.e. GP practices) to provide PCTs with information about complaints at intervals to be specified by the individual PCT. The information would have to include the number of complaints received and their subject matter and would have to specify how the complaints had been handled, including the outcome. The PCT would be required to prepare a quarterly report containing this information for consideration by the PCT Board. At the seminars, there was discussion about the frequency with which GP practices should have to supply the information to their PCT. Some seminar participants thought that complaints should be reported to PCTs as they were made and should not be ‘saved up’ for periodic reports. Also, the view was expressed that the actual letter of complaint (if the complaint was a written one) or the practice’s record of it (if it had been made orally) should be sent to the PCT. Mrs Pauline Webdale, representing the Association of Medical Secretaries, Practice Managers, Administrators and Receptionists (AMSPAR), told the seminars that, at the GP practice where she worked, all complaints were copied to the PCT soon after receipt. This gave rise to very little extra work. The practice did not receive many complaints in a year. My understanding is that the average figure over the whole country is about one complaint per GP per year.
27.21
I am impressed by the arguments in favour of the immediate reporting to the PCT of complaints received by a GP practice. I can see that, for some clinical governance purposes, a periodic report (say, quarterly) would be adequate. However, in one respect, immediate reporting would offer a distinct advantage. If the complaint were of a serious nature, the PCT would be able to intervene and to take over the handling of the complaint. I think that it must be recognised that, where a complaint is handled within a GP practice, the prime objective will usually be to ‘satisfy’ the complainant, in the sense of resolving the complaint in such a way that s/he will not be disposed to take the matter further. Seen in a positive light, that might be described as ‘maintaining the doctor/patient relationship’. Seen from another angle, it might amount to ‘back covering’. It is asking a lot to expect the complaints manager or a member of a GP practice with responsibility for handling complaints to deal objectively with serious allegations relating to misconduct or incompetence made against a member of a small practice team. In my view, in the unlikely event that a potentially serious complaint will, in future, be made directly to a GP practice (rather than to the PCT), it would be preferable for the PCT to ‘call the complaint in’ and to take it over from the practice. That could be done only if complaints are reported immediately and if the PCT sees the actual complaint or, if it has been made orally, a full account of it, as recorded by the practice.
27.22
Such a proposal could give rise to issues of patient confidentiality. However, in my view, these could be resolved. The patient could be asked to consent to the disclosure to the PCT of the letter or record of complaint. In the unlikely event of a refusal to consent, the letter of complaint could be anonymised and, if the PCT thought it desirable to call the complaint in, it could write to the complainant through the practice, to explain why it wished to investigate the complaint. If the patient refused, which I think would be unlikely, the PCT might well be unable to proceed with its investigation. However, depending on the subject matter of the complaint, it might wish to examine other information which was available about the doctor or to institute its own enquiries to ascertain whether there had been any other incidents of a similar nature reported in respect of the doctor. At least, the PCT would be aware of the fact that a complaint had been made and would be alert to any further complaint of a similar nature. Thus, it would be assisted in its clinical governance role.
27.23
Accordingly, I recommend that draft regulation 30 of the draft Complaints Regulations should be amended to require primary care providers to report all complaints to the PCT within, say, two working days of their receipt. The report should comprise the original letter or record of the complaint. It should also be open to a PCT to require delivery of a copy of any correspondence between the practice and the complainant, including the practice’s letter of explanation. The PCT should then log the complaint for clinical governance purposes and, if it considers that clinical governance issues arise, the complaint should be ‘called in’ for investigation by the PCT.
Primary Care Trusts’ Responsibility for the Investigation of Complaints
27.24
As I have said, I envisage that, in future, most complaints of any gravity will be made direct to the PCT, rather than to the GP practice concerned. The investigation and attempted resolution of complaints will be a new function for PCTs. Until now, they have handled complaints only administratively. Complaints managers have ‘smoothed the way’ for patients making a complaint to a GP practice; they have arranged conciliation and, when necessary, they have made the arrangements for independent review. If the draft Complaints Regulations are enacted (as I hope they will be, with some amendment), PCTs will be responsible for some investigations at the first stage of the complaints procedures. If those investigations are not done thoroughly and objectively, the changes currently proposed will not bring the improvements hoped for. Indeed, in relation to complaints received in the hospital service, the Department of Health (DoH) has recognised that good investigation is essential, both out of fairness to both parties to the complaint and for the purpose of learning from experience. In the DoH’s framework document, ‘Maintaining High Professional Standards in the NHS’, published in December 2003, the importance of prompt, thorough investigation of complaints against, and concerns about, hospital doctors is recognised. In each case, a case manager and a case investigator are to be appointed. It is obvious that comparable arrangements must be made for the prompt and thorough investigation of complaints received by PCTs. In my view, the provision of such arrangements is the single most important issue to be tackled in the reform of the complaints procedures.
The Purpose of Investigation
27.25
I ought perhaps to explain what I mean by the investigation of a complaint. By ‘investigation’, I mean the gathering of information and evidence relating to the circumstances giving rise to the complaint. Such an investigation might involve asking questions of the complainant and obtaining a statement from him/her, discovering from the complainant the identity of any potential witnesses and taking statements from them, obtaining a statement from the doctor complained of and from any witnesses whom s/he may put forward, obtaining the comments of the complainant (and possibly of other witnesses) about the account given by the doctor and
, and initiating other enquiries (e.g. checking assertions made by the complainant or the doctor with third parties and/or with existing documentation). In the case of a complaint about clinical treatment, an investigation might also involve obtaining any relevant medical records, test results and other documents and obtaining evidence from an expert in the relevant specialty.
27.26
Regulation 20 of the draft Complaints Regulations requires the complaints manager of a PCT to investigate a complaint
‘to the extent necessary and in the manner which appears to him most appropriate to resolve it speedily and efficiently’
. The complaints manager may request the production of information or documents to enable him/her to consider the complaint properly. No doubt it is intended that guidance will be made available to PCTs and their complaints managers as to how to go about the investigation of complaints. However, I am concerned to see that the words of the draft regulation mention only one purpose behind the investigation, namely the ‘resolution’ of the complaint. Nothing is said about the need to find out what happened and to establish the facts. Nor is there any reference to using the investigation of a complaint as a learning exercise, for the detection of misconduct or poor practice, or for the improvement of services. I would like to see statutory recognition of the importance of the proper investigation of complaints to the processes of clinical governance and of monitoring the quality of health care. I also believe that, if PCTs were to approach their new duties in a spirit of learning through investigation, the outcome would be greater patient satisfaction. At present, many complainants feel that they must fight to have their complaint investigated properly. They want to feel that they can tell the NHS that something has gone wrong, in the knowledge that the matter will be fully looked into. I am sure that the Government recognises that the NHS should be able to provide a complaints procedure that does not require the patient to ‘do battle’. If the new arrangements are to provide improved patient satisfaction and better learning processes, there must be thorough investigation.
The First Triage
27.27
The Inquiry was concerned to discover how complaints might best be approached so as to satisfy patients and detect poor practice. It appeared to the Inquiry that not all complaints would give rise to issues of misconduct or poor practice or to other issues which have a bearing on the quality of care or patient safety; some complaints might arise from a purely private grievance. I envisage that many ‘private grievance complaints’ will be of a fairly minor nature and will be made directly to the practice. However, it is likely that, under the new arrangements, some will be made to the PCT. The Inquiry invited discussion about whether it would be possible for a PCT to sort out which complaints it should investigate thoroughly for ‘clinical governance’ reasons and to differentiate them from (‘private grievance’) complaints which could properly be handled only with a view to providing ‘resolution’ for the complainant.
27.28
There was general agreement at the Inquiry’s seminars that some sort of ‘triage’ of complaints would be helpful, although some participants felt that the line between the two types of complaint would not be easy to draw and that a complaint about a ‘private grievance’ matter might, on further examination, turn out to be indicative of more serious problems within the practice. For example, a complaint that the doctor had been late in arriving at the surgery and had kept the complainant (and possibly others) waiting for an unreasonable time is not likely to give rise to patient safety issues. The desired outcome is probably an explanation and an apology, coupled with an assurance that steps have been taken to ensure that the problem will not arise again. However, the point was made that, if complaints of this nature recurred, they might indicate that there was a problem with the doctor. I can see that. Nonetheless, I think that it will not be difficult for a PCT complaints manager to recognise a single complaint that gives rise or might give rise to clinical governance concerns when s/he sees it. ‘Private grievance complaints’ of the kind I have just described would not fall within this category, unless the complaints manager became aware of repeated complaints of a similar nature against the same doctor, in which case there would be grounds for investigating further. My reference to ‘repeated complaints’ implies that the complaint should be viewed in the context of any previous complaints or concerns which had been raised about the doctor, and this must be done. Sometimes, those previous complaints or concerns will have been wholly different and will have no relevance to the complaint under consideration. At times, however, previous complaints and concerns might be highly relevant.
27.29
Professor Scotland was of the view that there would have to be clinical input into any triage decisions to be made by a PCT. I think that he felt that complaints managers would not always recognise patient safety issues. My own impression of, say, Miss Andrea Horsfall (Complaints Service Manager, Oldham PCT) and Mrs Janet Parkinson (Consumer Liaison Manager, former West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA)), both of whom gave oral evidence to the Inquiry, is that they would be perfectly capable of recognising when a complaint raised a clinical governance issue or, at the very least, would recognise when they needed clinical advice before taking a decision. I think that, with appropriate training, they could undertake the first triage quite safely and with the assistance of advice when needed. However, I accept that Professor Scotland has greater experience of complaints managers than I have. In any event, I agree with him that the process of triage would be important and that whoever undertook it would have to be appropriately experienced and to have access to relevant clinical advice.
27.30
The first triage process would therefore result in the division of complaints into those involving purely ‘private grievances’ and those which required investigation by the PCT.
Investigation and Handling of ‘Private Grievance Complaints’
27.31
At present, complaints managers have no experience in the investigation of complaints. However, I think that, with some training, PCT staff who have been accustomed to dealing with complaints administratively could be equipped to handle those types of complaint which do not give rise to patient safety or clinical governance issues. Complaints which give rise to purely private grievances will, in general, require only liaison with the GP practice or, if that fails, conciliation. The objectives should be the satisfaction of the patient and, where possible, restoration of the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient.
Investigation and Handling of ‘Clinical Governance Complaints’
The Second Triage
27.32
‘Clinical governance complaints’ must be investigated with the twin objectives of patient protection and satisfaction and fairness to doctors. PCTs will also wish to ensure that they have a full understanding of the events underlying the complaint in order to comply with their duty in respect of the quality of care provided within their areas. Such complaints will vary greatly in their complexity and potential seriousness. They should not be handled by a complaints manager, but should be referred to a small group formed for the purpose of handling complaints and concerns which raise clinical governance issues. The group might comprise two or three people - for example, the Medical Director or Clinical Governance Lead, a senior non-medical officer of the PCT and a lay member of the PCT Board. The group will have to consider the case (the ‘second triage’) and decide how it is to be handled. There should be accountability for this process at a high level.
27.33
The first decision will have to be whether the complaint is to be investigated by or on behalf of the PCT itself or whether it would be appropriate for it to be referred immediately to some other body, such as the police, the GMC or the NCAA. If the police decide to investigate, the PCT should put its own investigation ‘on hold’. It might be necessary for the PCT to take immediate action for the protection of patients (e.g. by suspending the doctor from its list) or to ask the GMC to take such action. Discussion with the GMC might result in the GMC taking the case over or it might be decided that the complaint should be investigated by or on behalf of the PCT in the first instance. Similarly, with a case that clearly raised issues of poor performance, the NCAA might decide to carry out an assessment of the doctor or it might advise the PCT how to carry out its own assessment. If the complaint or concern suggests that the doctor may have a health problem, the PCT may wish to invite the doctor to be medically examined. Each of these courses of action should result in clarification of the way in which the PCT is to take the complaint forward. As at the first triage, the complaint must be considered in the context of any previous complaints or concerns about the doctor and in the context of the clinical governance information held by the PCT about him/her.
27.34
There is, however, a very important class of complaint, where the first priority must be to establish what actually happened. It is in dealing with this type of case that PCTs will face their greatest challenge.
Who Should Investigate a ‘Clinical Governance Complaint’?
27.35
In evidence to the Inquiry, in responses to the Consultation Paper and at the seminars, there was a significant body of opinion expressing the view that, at present, most PCTs lack the resources and the expertise to carry out an effective investigation of a complex or potentially serious complaint.
27.36
Ms Linda Charlton, Director of Investigations, Office of the Health Service Ombudsman for England, said that her experience in the Ombudsman’s office suggested that such investigative work as was currently carried out by PCTs was of very variable quality. Dr Malcolm Lewis, representing the GMC at the seminars, agreed with that view and said that cases reaching the GMC from PCTs showed a wide variation in depth of analysis.
27.37
There was a general view that, being small organisations, PCTs would not have a sufficiently frequent need for a skilled investigator to justify employing anyone in that capacity. It would not be satisfactory to assign the task to someone with many other duties to perform, as s/he would not acquire sufficient experience to carry out the task effectively. However, the contrary view was also expressed. Some PCTs felt that they were able to carry out effective investigation. It appears that, on the occasions when the need arises, such investigation would be carried out by the Medical Director or a Medical Adviser. My clear impression is that most Medical Directors and Advisers do not have the necessary skills. But, in any event, these officers have a very wide range of duties and it would not be feasible to expect them to focus on an investigation to the extent that is necessary once an investigation is underway.
27.38
During the hearings, several PCT employees and officers were asked to consider how they would go about investigating a hypothetical case, based broadly on the concerns that might have been reported (if any had been) about the circumstances of the admission to hospital of Mrs Renate Overton; I wrote about Mrs Overton’s death in both the First and Third Reports, as well as in
of this Report. The reported concern would have been that a GP had administered to a 46 year old asthmatic patient 20mg morphine, by injection, as a result of which the patient was deeply unconscious and unlikely to recover. A consultant at the hospital was of the view that the administration of such a quantity of morphine had been
‘highly unusual, even dangerous’
. A complaint or expression of concern of this nature would not be easy to investigate well. It is not necessary here to discuss the suggestions that were made by the witnesses as to how they would have approached the task; suffice it to say that it is plain to me that such an investigation should be undertaken by an investigator who is not only trained in the techniques of investigation and case analysis but is also independent to the extent that his/her view of the GP concerned is not coloured by knowledge of the GP’s reputation. It is vital that the investigator should adopt an objective and analytical approach and should not automatically accept the account of any witness, including the GP concerned, without testing its reliability against all the other available evidence.
27.39
The need for independence was demonstrated in my Second Report, where I described the approach of Dr Alan Banks, then Medical Adviser to the WPHA, to the task of examining the medical records of some of Shipman’s deceased patients, with a view to ascertaining whether or not there was a pattern of ‘common features’ in the deaths. Dr Banks knew Shipman and held him in high regard. As a consequence, he failed to see the unusual features which characterised the deaths and which were evident from the medical records. He could not open his mind to the possibility that Shipman might have deliberately harmed a patient or even that he might have given him/her substandard care. A good investigator must have his/her mind open to all possibilities.
27.40
In some PCTs, such investigative work as must occasionally be done is carried out by the committee or group with responsibility for considering how to deal with concerns about a doctor’s poor performance. It seems to me that these committees or groups may be well fitted for deciding whether an assessment of a doctor’s performance should be undertaken (possibly by or under the guidance of the NCAA), and for considering what should be done when an assessment has been undertaken. However, the functions of assessment and investigation are different. If a PCT seeks advice from the NCAA about how to investigate, say, an adverse incident, the NCAA will do what it can to help by making suggestions. There is, at present, no NHS body with comparable functions in respect of investigation to those of the NCAA in respect of assessment. It does not seem to me that it would be satisfactory to assign the duty of investigating ‘clinical governance complaints’ of any potential gravity to a committee or group within the PCT, even if there were a suitable advisory body available.
27.41
I do not think that the staff of an individual PCT are likely to be satisfactory as investigators of complaints involving disputes of fact, issues of clinical judgement or potentially serious medical errors. At the seminars, there was a general consensus that the investigation of a complaint of any potential seriousness should be undertaken by a person or small team that was dedicated to the task. There was almost universal acceptance that individual PCTs were too small, and that their need for the service would arise too infrequently, to justify the employment of such a team.
Involving Other Bodies in the Investigation of a ‘Clinical Governance Complaint’
27.42
Respondents to the Consultation Paper had been asked to consider whether there should be an outside body which would have responsibility for advising PCTs on investigations and which could, in particularly difficult cases, take over the investigation itself. Various bodies were suggested for consideration: strategic health authorities (SHAs), the NCAA, the Healthcare Commission and the medical Royal College rapid response teams. Views were also sought on whether a new body, independent of the NHS, should be established to receive and investigate complaints.
27.43
A number of respondents suggested that complex complaints should be dealt with outside the PCT. Some said that complaints should be investigated at SHA level, although others said that SHAs did not yet have sufficient investigative experience. Yet others thought that SHAs would not have the necessary independence. At the seminars, Mrs Flora Goldhill, representing the DoH, said that, although SHAs might be able to offer advice, it would not be in keeping with their functions to have responsibility for the direct conduct of an investigation.
27.44
Some respondents, including the Consumers’ Association (now known as Which?), suggested that the Health Service Ombudsman might investigate complaints. The Ombudsman’s office was perceived as being completely independent and its investigative work was recognised to be of a high quality. Ms Charlton said that, although it might be appropriate for some complaints to go directly to the Health Service Ombudsman, the great majority of complaints should be investigated at local level.
27.45
Some respondents thought that it might be appropriate for the Healthcare Commission to be involved in the investigation of complaints. However, by the time of the seminars, the Government had announced its intention that the Healthcare Commission should be responsible for the second stage of the NHS complaints procedures. Accordingly, it seems inappropriate that it should be involved at the first stage. I shall return to the role of the Healthcare Commission later in this Chapter.
How Should Specialised Investigative Skills Be Provided for Primary Care Trusts?
27.46
Ms Charlton suggested that proper investigative procedures could be put in place at local level, but only if PCTs were to join together, possibly across the area covered by each SHA, to pool investigative resources. She agreed that, if there was a high turnover of staff in a PCT, this would result in a lack of continuity of expertise. The pooling of resources would lessen the impact of this. Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester, also supported the idea of pooling resources and suggested that the ideal team might consist of a manager, a nurse or physician assistant and a doctor. The team should be able to call on external advisers when necessary. He thought that PCTs would need to be in groups of at least six to provide those resources. It emerged that the Health Service Ombudsman’s investigative team (which is of course much larger than would be required for a group of PCTs) comprises lay investigators. Ms Charlton said that, in recruiting for the team, the Health Service Ombudsman looks for people with experience in dealing with large quantities of information, with good analytical skills and with the ability to speak confidently to doctors and complainants about the issues involved. The investigators have access to independent clinical advice as and when necessary. The investigators collect and analyse the evidence and write a report setting out conclusions and recommendations. Ms Charlton thought that it would be preferable for the investigation of complaints on behalf of PCTs to be carried out by lay persons with access to clinical advice, rather than by clinicians. She stressed that it was important from the public’s point of view that the investigation of doctors should not be carried out by doctors. Dr John Grenville, who represented the British Medical Association (BMA) at the seminars, agreed that investigations should be carried out by lay persons, but said that the provision of expert clinical advice, specifically relevant to the area(s) of complaint, was vitally important. Mrs Goldhill, for the DoH, agreed that it was essential that PCTs should have access to high quality investigative skills and said that the pooling of resources by individual PCTs might be a sensible solution.
27.47
There was general agreement that investigators must be properly trained. Mrs Goldhill spoke of the steps to be taken by the DoH to develop such training and mentioned a programme run by Middlesex University. She also said that the DoH was working on a good practice toolkit for the handling of primary care complaints.
27.48
Another reason advanced in support of the idea that PCTs should band together to provide an investigation team was that it would reduce the problem created by the perceived conflict of interest if a PCT were to investigate (as it would otherwise have to do) a complaint against a GP on its own list. The potential conflict was said to arise out of the dual role of providing support and assistance to GPs on the one hand and investigating or ‘policing’ GPs on the other. However, the problem could be more acute than that. The Inquiry has become aware of instances when the GP under investigation has been a member of the PCT’s PEC - even the Chairman - or of the PCT’s performance group. There is plainly a direct conflict there. Professor Scotland said that the pooling of investigative resources by groups of PCTs would reduce any potential problem of a conflict of interest. I agree, and add that it would also increase the independence and objectivity of the investigation.
27.49
I think that the best course will be for groups of PCTs to set up joint investigative teams. I express no view as to how many PCTs should band together; much will depend on the size of the PCTs and the geographical configuration of the group. I say nothing about the constitution of the team, save that it appears to me that it would be sensible for the DoH to take advice from persons such as the Health Service Ombudsman who have experience of this function and to disseminate that advice to PCTs.
The Conduct of the Investigation of a ‘Clinical Governance Complaint’
27.50
In my view, where it appears to the person or group responsible for carrying out the second triage within the PCT that there is uncertainty about the events giving rise to the complaint, because there is a conflict between the account of events given by the doctor and the complainant, or for some other reason, the complaint should be referred to the inter-PCT investigation team. It should be the task of that team to carry out an investigation along the lines described at
paragraph 27.25
. Its objective should be to reach a conclusion as to what happened and to set out the evidence and conclusions in a report which should be delivered to the PCT on whose list the doctor’s name is included. There may be cases in which it is quite impossible for the investigators to reach a conclusion about what happened because there is a conflict of evidence. In that event, they must say so in their report.
Deciding Where the Truth Lies in a ‘Clinical Governance Complaint’
27.51
At the seminars, there was discussion about how disputed facts should be resolved once an investigation had been carried out by or under the auspices of the PCT. One option was that an oral hearing should be held locally and a panel should decide where the truth lay and make the necessary findings of fact. As I explained in
, that is what used to happen before 1996. All complaints that appeared to amount to a breach of the GP’s terms of service were heard by a medical service committee (MSC) of the family practitioner committee (FPC) or, later, the family health services authority (FHSA). The MSC was able to resolve any factual disputes. Since 1996, there has been no facility to resolve disputes of fact at the first stage of the complaints procedures. This may well account for at least some of the dissatisfaction felt by complainants. If the doctor gives a different account of events from that of the complainant, it is likely that the practice complaints manager or another member of the practice will accept the doctor’s version and will seek to ‘resolve’ the complaint on that basis. When such complaints are investigated by an inter-PCT team as I have suggested, it is to be hoped that the investigators will be less likely to display any such bias. Indeed, a team of investigators serving a group of PCTs might be expected to approach a complaint with a greater degree of independence than would an officer of an individual PCT. However, there may be circumstances in which a dispute of fact is crucial to the resolution of the complaint and where it is impossible to make a fair determination of the issue without hearing oral evidence.
Acting on the Investigation Report Where There Are Unresolved Factual Disputes
27.52
At the seminars, the view was expressed that it would not be appropriate to convene an oral hearing locally during the first stage of the complaints procedures. It was said that the experience was too stressful. Others favoured oral hearings because they enabled those involved to hear all the evidence. It was said that, if a hearing was held, the PCT should present the complaint to the hearing, rather than leave the complainant to ‘prosecute’ the complaint. However, I have come to the conclusion that there should not be an oral hearing locally at the first stage. If the report of the investigating team is inconclusive because of a dispute of evidence, the case should, in my view, be referred to the Healthcare Commission, under the power which will, I hope, be included in the amended draft Complaints Regulations which the Government intends to implement in the near future. Later in this Chapter, I shall discuss a provision in the draft Complaints Regulations whereby a PCT would be able to refer a complaint to the Healthcare Commission at any point in the first stage of the complaints procedures.
Acting on the Investigation Report Where All Factual Disputes Have Been Resolved
27.53
When the investigation report is complete, it should be considered by the PCT at a high level. I suggest that it would be appropriate for this to be done by the same group that carried out the second triage. The report should be viewed in the context of the doctor’s past history. The PCT may wish to take action. It may be appropriate at that stage to refer the matter to the GMC. Referral to the NCAA may be appropriate. If a systems failure has been revealed, referral to the Healthcare Commission might be the best course. On the other hand, the report may reveal misconduct or deficient performance, but not of a sufficiently serious nature as to warrant referral to another body. The PCT might feel able to deal with the matter itself, either through its performance panel or by invoking its list management powers or the disciplinary powers that I shall recommend that PCTs be given. It might wish to liaise with the local deanery about the provision of supervision or retraining for the doctor. The point was made that there was a need for clearer standards to be established for onward referral and it was suggested that protocols should be devised for the guidance of the PCT.
27.54
Meanwhile, it is, of course, important that the complainant is kept fully informed about the progress of the investigation and, save to the extent that disclosure would breach the doctor’s medical confidentiality, that s/he should be fully informed of the outcome of the investigation and the steps to be taken as a result. If the investigation and decision as to how to proceed could be carried out thoroughly and with a reasonable degree of expedition, it would, in my view, remove many of the causes for dissatisfaction inherent in the present arrangements for the handling of complaints. It would also enable prompt steps to be taken in those cases which raise patient protection issues.
Refusal to Proceed with the Investigation of a Clinical Governance Complaint If There Are to Be Concurrent Proceedings
27.55
The draft Complaints Regulations provide for the circumstances in which a NHS body might refuse to proceed with the investigation of a complaint where other forms of proceedings are or might be taking place at the same time. One such other form of proceeding is a civil action for damages.
27.56
, I mentioned that, under the 1996 complaints procedures, a complaint could not be accepted for independent review if the complainant intended to institute legal proceedings or, presumably, if s/he had already done so. In evidence to the Inquiry, Miss Horsfall said that she felt this was sometimes unfair. In my view, not only is it unfair but it is inappropriate.
27.57
Although one of the purposes of a complaints procedure is to ‘satisfy the complainant’, a much more important purpose is to find out what has happened and to decide whether there is a need to take any steps necessary for the protection of patients. Whenever an adverse event has occurred which raises issues of patient safety, the responsible organisation should conduct an internal investigation for that purpose. I cannot see that the position should be different just because a complaint has been made. If a PCT becomes aware of an adverse event affecting a patient, it should investigate the event whether or not a complaint is made by or on behalf of the patient. That should be done whether or not any person has expressed an intention to take legal proceedings.
27.58
Under the draft Complaints Regulations, it was provided that concurrent legal proceedings would not be a complete bar to the investigation of a NHS complaint at the first stage of the complaints procedures. However, NHS bodies would, in certain circumstances, be able to decide not to begin or continue with an investigation. A complaint which was also to be the subject of a civil action was to be designated a
‘complex complaint’
. Draft regulation 18 allowed the relevant NHS body to investigate a
‘complex complaint’
if it considered that to do so would not
‘compromise or prejudice the concurrent investigation’
. Also, a NHS body could discontinue the investigation of a
‘complex complaint’
if it considered that
‘to continue would compromise or prejudice the concurrent investigation’
. That meant, for example, that if the widow of a patient of a GP intended to sue the GP in respect of the death of her husband, the PCT would be able to refuse to investigate a complaint lodged by the widow in connection with the death. In my view, that is not entirely satisfactory because it might prevent the PCT from carrying out its clinical governance duties. I am aware that, so far as complaints about secondary care are concerned, the 2004 Complaints Regulations (to which I referred in
) prevent a NHS body from investigating any complaint if there are any concurrent legal proceedings. For the same reason, that seems to me to be quite unsatisfactory.
27.59
If a PCT learns of an adverse incident (either because a complaint is received or in any other way), it should investigate and it should offer to disclose the substance of the report of the investigation to the patient or next of kin, whether or not a complaint has been made and whether or not the doctor is to be sued. The PCT should investigate for clinical governance reasons and should take whatever action is necessary in the interests of patient safety. It should not bow to any pressure not to investigate from the medical defence organisation which indemnifies the GP and which might have an interest in suppressing the information that would come out in an investigation. I hope that the Government will think again about this issue and will decide that a complaint should always be investigated, even where legal proceedings are intimated or underway. I strongly recommend that the fact that such proceedings are proposed or have begun should not be a bar to the investigation of a complaint.
27.60
, the fact that a NHS body was taking disciplinary proceedings against a doctor would not, under the draft Complaints Regulations, have precluded the furtherance of a complaint brought by a patient. However, the existence of proposed or actual disciplinary proceedings in relation to the substance of the complaint will, under the 2004 Complaints Regulations, now cause a complaint (in relation to secondary care) to be excluded from the operation of the Regulations. In my view, neither the provision in the draft Complaints Regulations nor that in the 2004 Complaints Regulations is satisfactory. If disciplinary proceedings relating to the subject matter of the complaint are contemplated, that presupposes that the event in question has already been investigated. In my view, the complainant should see the substance of the report of the investigation on which the disciplinary proceedings are to be based.
27.61
The draft Complaints Regulations also provide that the NHS body receiving the complaint may defer or discontinue the investigation of a complaint if the matter is being investigated by the police, a regulatory body, a statutory inquiry or some other process. I would accept that, sometimes, in such situations, a NHS body may have to defer its own investigation into a complaint or concern, but it should never lose sight of its duty to find out what has happened and to take whatever action is necessary for the protection of the patients of the doctor concerned. It should also, in my view, provide such information to a complainant as is consistent with the need, if any, for confidentiality in the public interest. I hope that the DoH will redraft these provisions to reflect the principles I have enunciated.
The Role of the Healthcare Commission in the Investigation and Determination of ‘Clinical Governance Complaints’
27.62
As I have said, in its Consultation Paper, the Inquiry raised the possibility of complaints being investigated by or with the advice of the Healthcare Commission. From December 2003, it became known that the Healthcare Commission would be responsible for the second stage of the complaints procedure, and it took over that role with effect from 30th
July 2004. How these procedures are working in practice, it is too early to say. The Healthcare Commission is a new organisation with many wide-ranging responsibilities, which are designed to encourage improvement in the provision of health care. In order to fulfil its responsibilities for the second stage review, the Healthcare Commission has set up a Complaints Department employing about 70 investigators.
27.63
The view was expressed at the Inquiry’s seminars that the resolution of purely ‘private grievance complaints’ might be a waste of the Healthcare Commission’s resources. Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, who had been appointed as Complaints Lead of the Healthcare Commission in advance of the implementation of the reform of the second stage of the complaints procedures, was asked about this. She said that, under what was then draft regulation 23, the Healthcare Commission would not be bound to accept all complaints and, if it appeared that the complaint had been properly handled at the first stage, the request for a review might be refused. I understood from this that, if the complaint was of a minor ‘private grievance’ nature, the Healthcare Commission might well decline to consider it. On the other hand, if it appeared that the complaint had not been properly handled at the first stage by the GP practice and/or the PCT, the Healthcare Commission might well accept the case with a view to correcting the complaints handling procedures. In those circumstances, it might be appropriate for a ‘private grievance complaint’ to be considered. In any event, the Healthcare Commission should be well placed to ensure that any lessons that can be learned from its part in the resolution of patient complaints are properly disseminated.
27.64
Under regulation 16 of the 2004 Complaints Regulations, the Healthcare Commission can, on receipt of a complaint, follow one of several different courses, including (as I have said) taking no action. It will be able to refer a complaint back to the first stage of the complaints procedure with recommendations for further action, or to investigate the complaint itself (with or without a panel hearing) or to refer the complaint to a regulator. I expect that the power to refer a complaint to a panel will be used mainly in cases where it is necessary to resolve a conflict of fact by hearing oral evidence.
27.65
Under draft regulation 19, it was proposed that PCTs should have the power to refer a complaint (which they were handling at the first stage) to the Healthcare Commission at any time, provided that the complainant and the Healthcare Commission consented. This proposal has not been incorporated into the 2004 Complaints Regulations but I hope that it will be included in the new Regulations. In my view, it is a very good idea, because the Healthcare Commission’s investigating facility could be deployed in the first stage of the complaints procedures in difficult cases, as well as (under the arrangements recently introduced) on second stage reviews of less complex cases. It would be particularly appropriate for a case to be referred upwards either if it was necessary to determine a factual dispute or if the complaint was particularly complex, difficult or serious. A referral to the Healthcare Commission should be capable of being made at any point in the first stage of the complaints procedures. That would mean that a complaint could be referred at the time of the second triage, if it was clear that the issues were complex. For example, the complaint might involve issues relating to both primary and secondary care. The referral might also take place later if the inter-PCT investigation team discovered that the complaint raised more complex issues than had been appreciated.
27.66
Alternatively, as I said at
paragraph 27.52
, referral might take place when the inter-PCT team found that it could not reach a conclusion because there remained unresolved disputes of fact. The Healthcare Commission would have the facility to carry out further investigation to the extent necessary and, if appropriate, to set up a panel to hear oral evidence about the facts in dispute and to decide where the truth lay.
27.67
On the face of it, referral to the Healthcare Commission would seem to be an ideal way of dealing with complex investigations and with those requiring an oral hearing. Not only would the Healthcare Commission have the necessary resources and expertise, it would also be seen to be independent. However, Mrs Dimond told the seminars that the primary purpose of the provision in draft regulation 19 was to allow the PCT to refer a case during the first stage of the complaints procedures where the complainant had ‘lost faith’ in the local NHS system, rather than to allow it to pass on cases that were beyond the expertise of the PCT. Indeed, she seemed surprised at the suggestion that cases might be referred because of such a lack of expertise. However, she did say that the Healthcare Commission would probably accept referrals from a PCT where the PCT lacked the necessary expertise to investigate. I hope that the Healthcare Commission will be prepared to accept such cases and that it will have the resources necessary to deal with them.
27.68
One potential disadvantage of sending complex complaints and complaints requiring an oral hearing to the Healthcare Commission during the first stage would be that there would then be no second stage or ‘appeal’ available to the complainant. In my view, that should not matter, because the complainant would already have been able to take advantage of the resources and independence of the Healthcare Commission. Moreover, if s/he remained dissatisfied, recourse to the Health Service Ombudsman would be a possibility. Some complainants might not see matters in that light. Nonetheless, I consider this the best way forward.
27.69
At the seminars, there was some discussion about the form of the oral hearings that should take place during the second stage of the new complaints procedures as they are at present. The draft Complaints Regulations provided for the Healthcare Commission to refer a complaint for hearing by a panel of lay people in an appropriate case. At the seminars, Mrs Dimond said that a case would be sent for a hearing by a panel only if the complainant was ‘comfortable with that option’. I was concerned to hear that. In my view, a decision to convene a panel should be taken by the Healthcare Commission (after consultation with those involved); the complainant should not be allowed to exercise a veto. The Healthcare Commission has a duty to be fair to the doctor as well as to the complainant, and there is a public interest to be served in finding out the truth. I am pleased to see that the 2004 Complaints Regulations now provide for the decision whether to refer a complaint to a panel to be taken by the Healthcare Commission after consultation with the parties.
27.70
Mrs Dimond also said that, if a panel was convened, it would adopt an inquisitorial, rather than an adversarial, approach. That, I think, is sensible. She said that it would be open to the complainant to request that the doctor be excluded whilst s/he was giving evidence. I hope that that does not mean that, if such a request was made, it would necessarily be granted. If so, I would be concerned about that. Such decisions should be for the panel, after hearing the views of both parties. The complainant should not, in my view, have the right to dictate whether the other party is present during the evidence. However, perhaps this problem will not often arise. Mrs Joyce Robins, who represented Patient Concern at the seminars, said that one of the most unsatisfactory aspects of the IRP process was that complainants were not allowed to hear what the doctor had to say. I would favour a general rule that both parties should be permitted to hear the other’s evidence and that of the other witnesses. What should, in my view, be avoided is adversarial cross-examination.
27.71
I was also rather concerned to hear from Mrs Dimond that the Healthcare Commission might encourage conciliation in cases in which there was a conflict of fact. Mrs Robins was strongly opposed to such an idea. She said that, where there was a conflict of evidence, a determination of the facts was required. I entirely agree with her. It will be impossible for a PCT to know what, if any, action it should take in order to protect patients unless there has been a hearing in order to determine the factual basis of the events giving rise to a ‘clinical governance complaint’.
Private Sector Complaints
27.72
Another issue relating to the Healthcare Commission was raised at the seminars by Ms Beverley Cole, representing the National Care Standards Commission (NCSC). She was concerned about the handling of complaints made in the private sector. The NCSC has now been subsumed into the Healthcare Commission. Although the NCSC has jurisdiction to investigate complaints about service provision in the private sector, its powers are limited to complaints that amount to a breach of the relevant Regulations or a failure to comply with specified minimum standards. As Ms Cole agreed, the only recourse for some patients who have been treated in the private sector is to complain to the GMC. However, as the Inquiry has discovered in the context of its examination of the GMC’s old fitness to practise (FTP) procedures, the GMC’s attitude to a complaint about treatment in the private sector was, after the establishment of the NCSC in 2002, to advise the complainant to make use of the local complaints procedures if these had not been exhausted. If the local procedures had not been exhausted, the GMC would accept the complaint only if it appeared that the doctor might be a danger to patients or the public or if the complainant insisted on pursuing his/her complaint through the GMC. I have already made it clear that that was not, in my view, a satisfactory state of affairs. No doubt the large private healthcare organisations have systems for the investigation of complaints. How well they operate, I do not know. However, I have grave doubts whether all small commercial organisations, such as slimming clinics or cosmetic surgery clinics, will have adequate systems for handling patient complaints. It seems to me that it might be difficult for a patient dissatisfied with treatment provided by a small private organisation - or, worse, a single private practitioner - to have his/her complaint adequately investigated. Complainants in the private sector are at another disadvantage; they do not have access to the Health Service Ombudsman.
27.73
What the position will be under the GMC’s new FTP procedures is not completely clear. The available guidance relating to the new FTP procedures suggests that all complaints which do not obviously fall outside the GMC’s remit will be accepted for investigation. However, that was ostensibly the position under the old FTP procedures, but it was not the practice. I have carefully examined the Rules governing the new procedures and all the related guidance and instruction of which I am aware. It appears to me that the GMC has decided to discontinue its former practice of advising complainants to pursue their complaints through local procedures. I hope that I am right in reaching that conclusion.
27.74
It seems to me that it would be highly desirable for the complaints handling systems in the private sector to be aligned as closely as possible with those in the NHS, so that a complainant who did not receive satisfaction from a private sector body can proceed to a second stage conducted by the Healthcare Commission. Then, the Healthcare Commission could investigate the matter properly, if appropriate. I would also like it to be able to accept and investigate expressions of concern (for example, from colleagues) arising about doctors working in the private sector, other than those concerns which manifestly require the attention of the GMC. I realise that the Healthcare Commission has been charged with a wide range of functions and that it probably has to manage on limited resources. Nonetheless, I hope that, in future, it will be able to develop as an independent centre of expertise in medical investigation.
Should There Be a New Independent Complaints Handling Body?
27.75
Because the Inquiry was aware that there was some dissatisfaction with the way that complaints are handled within the NHS, by private sector providers and at the GMC, the Consultation Paper raised the question whether there should be a new independent complaints handling body to deal with all complaints within the NHS and private sector. Those complaints which, in the view of the complaints body, warranted the attention of the GMC could be referred to it after investigation. There was little support among respondents to the Consultation Paper or participants at the seminars for the idea of creating a new independent complaints handling body. The main reason for the lack of enthusiasm was that there has recently been a great deal of structural change in the NHS and there is a widely held view that there should be fewer bodies and organisations in the healthcare system rather than more. I agree with that view. I also think it preferable that most complaints should be handled locally so that there can be local investigation and, where appropriate, local corrective measures.
Should There Be a New Independent Inspectorate?
27.76
Two respondents to the Consultation Paper, Dr William Pickering and Mr Patrick Tierney, suggested that an independent inspectorate should be established to investigate poor clinical practice revealed through complaints and monitoring. They envisaged that the inspectorate would cover both the public and private sectors. When this idea was circulated for discussion, it received very little support, particularly because it was perceived that the creation of such a body would entail significant reorganisation, or even the abolition, of existing bodies such as the Healthcare Commission, the NCAA and the GMC. A number of participants at the seminars thought that the Healthcare Commission would develop its inspectorate role and would take on the functions envisaged by Dr Pickering and Mr Tierney. I have already expressed the hope that the Healthcare Commission will be able to develop its investigative functions so as to provide expertise and independence, which are, I think, the qualities that Dr Pickering and Mr Tierney wish to see. Of course, if it should transpire over the next few years that the Healthcare Commission does not provide the thorough and independent investigations that it is hoped it will, then it would, I think, be necessary to consider an alternative solution. But, in my view, the Healthcare Commission must be given the opportunity to develop these important functions.
Handling Concerns
27.77
One of the features of the 1996 system of complaints handling which struck me as anomalous and potentially unsatisfactory was that complaints lodged by a patient or his/her representative were in the past handled differently from concerns expressed about a GP by, for example, a fellow healthcare professional. The subject matter of a complaint and that of a concern might be identical; the only distinction between the two would have been the identities of the people who conveyed the information. But the method of handling was quite different. Whereas a concern would in general be referred straight to the PCT committee or group with responsibility for considering how to deal with concerns about a doctor’s poor performance, a patient complaint might not even be known to the PCT if it was ‘resolved’ at practice level. Until July 2004, it would go to the PCT only if the complainant wished to apply for independent review. Since July 2004, however, it has been possible for a complaint to by-pass the PCT entirely and to go straight from the local resolution first stage directly to the Healthcare Commission. At the Inquiry seminars, there was wide acceptance that it is illogical to treat a patient complaint differently from a concern expressed by someone else.
27.78
If and when PCTs have full information about patient complaints and receive the more serious ones directly, this disparity of treatment should disappear. If PCTs or groups of them have access to a team of investigators, it will be possible to refer both complaints and concerns to them. Also, if it is envisaged that the Healthcare Commission is to play any significant role in the investigation of complex, difficult or potentially serious complaints, it should also be able to undertake the investigation of concerns that raise difficult or potentially serious issues. At the moment, the draft Complaints Regulations anticipate that a PCT will be able to refer a patient complaint to the Healthcare Commission (with the patient’s and Healthcare Commission’s consent). However, the Healthcare Commission cannot accept a reference that does not originate as a patient complaint unless the reference comes from the Secretary of State for Health (SoS). If it is to be intended that the Healthcare Commission should develop investigative expertise for the benefit of the whole healthcare system, I would suggest that consideration should be given to amending the legislation to permit the Healthcare Commission to accept a concern referred to it by a PCT (or other healthcare body) without the need for a reference from the SoS.
The Standards by Which Complaints Are to Be Determined
27.79
One of the (probably unforeseen) consequences of the dissociation of disciplinary proceedings from patient complaints in 1996 was the loss of any (even partially) objective standard by which a complaint could be judged. Before 1996, a complaint was upheld if the doctor was found to have breached his/her terms of service. The sanction imposed depended upon the gravity of the breach and the doctor’s past record. To some extent, the MSC had to exercise discretion as to whether a breach had occurred, for example when considering whether the doctor had provided all the services reasonably to be expected of a GP in the circumstances. However, at least there was a legal framework within which the decision was taken.
27.80
From 1996, disciplinary proceedings could be taken for alleged breaches of the terms of service but, in fact, they hardly ever were. Complaints could be lodged in respect of all matters, whether or not they were covered by the GP’s terms of service. However, there was no framework at all to help the GP practice complaints manager or the IRP to decide whether to ‘uphold’ the complaint, or to help the convenor to decide whether to convene a IRP. It might be that some IRP members who had formerly sat on MSCs still applied the standards of the terms of service where possible. Since April 2004, when the new General Medical Services (GMS) Contract came into effect, there have not even been terms of service to act as a background framework. In effect, a complaint is upheld if the decision-makers think it should be. At the first stage, the lack of any objective standards or even guidelines must make the task of the practice complaints manager or supervising partner in a GP practice extremely difficult. It is always hard to be objective when judging a close colleague but it must be much more difficult in the absence of any standards.
27.81
Now that many decisions about complaints will be taken by PCTs and by the Healthcare Commission, it is to be expected that decision-makers will have greater independence of mind than practice managers and, possibly, than local IRPs. However, in my view, they will need standards by which to decide whether or not a complaint should be upheld. In the past, I suspect that this issue has sometimes been ‘fudged’ because it has not always been necessary to make a positive decision to uphold or reject the complaint; it has sometimes been sufficient to ‘satisfy’ the complainant. If, as is contemplated in the DoH publication ‘Making Amends’, there is to be provision for financial redress, a definite decision will have to be made. It ought to be made whether or not redress is available.
27.82
It is disappointing that the draft Complaints Regulations and the 2004 Complaints Regulations have not attempted to grapple with this issue. In my view, it must be tackled. There must be, at the very least, a standard against which a complaint can be judged. Patients should know what their reasonable expectations are and should be entitled to have their complaints upheld when those reasonable expectations have not been met. I have mentioned elsewhere in this Report the need for standards by which the GMC can decide whether and, if so, how it should take action against a doctor. There is also a need for standards by which PCTs and other NHS bodies can decide whether they should invoke their list management or disciplinary powers or whether they ought to refer the doctor to the GMC. At the moment, all the people who take these important decisions have to do so simply on the basis of what they think is right. There is an urgent need for standards to be established for all these purposes. It seems to me that this should be a task for the Healthcare Commission, in conjunction with the GMC and the DoH, after consultation with patient groups and the wider public. The standards pertaining to patient complaints and those by which PCTs and other NHS trusts should make their decisions should not be set in isolation. They must fit together with the threshold by reference to which the GMC will accept and act upon allegations so as to form a comprehensive framework. I shall return to the issue of standards later in this Chapter.
Support for Complainants: the ‘Single Portal’
27.83
It seems to be generally acknowledged that there is some confusion in the public mind as to how to go about making a complaint about a healthcare matter. Many people are under the impression that any complaint about a doctor should properly be addressed to the GMC. In fact, under its old FTP procedures, the GMC would accept only complaints that were (broadly speaking) sufficiently serious to raise a question of serious professional misconduct (SPM), seriously deficient performance (SDP) or seriously impaired fitness to practise due to ill health. Even then, as I have said, if there were local complaints procedures available, the complainant would be advised to pursue the complaint by means of those, unless the doctor was thought to be dangerous or the complainant insisted on his/her complaint being dealt with by the GMC. In future, under its new FTP procedures, the GMC will have a single criterion for acceptance of a complaint or concern, namely that an allegation has been made that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. Fitness to practise is to be regarded as impaired only by reason of misconduct, deficient professional performance, a conviction or caution, adverse physical or mental health or an adverse determination by another regulatory body. I think that many people will have difficulty in making up their minds whether the matters of which they wish to complain will fall within the GMC’s remit. I think that, unless this remit is explained in ordinary language, it will be difficult for healthcare professionals and healthcare managers - let alone members of the public - to decide whether a case should be sent to the GMC. The fact is that the GMC is not the appropriate recipient for many minor complaints about a doctor.
27.84
It is clear that there is a good deal of confusion about the right place to direct a complaint about a doctor. The Inquiry was told that the NCAA and the Health Service Ombudsman both receive complaints about doctors direct from the public. No doubt there are many other organisations that do so. A patient who asks advice from either the NCAA or the Health Service Ombudsman about where and how to complain will be directed to the appropriate destination, although the question is not always an easy one to answer, particularly where the complaint involves more than one aspect of a patient’s treatment. However, many complainants who think that they know where to lodge their complaints in fact send them to the wrong places. A similar problem exists for persons who wish to make a confidential report relating to some sort of suspected malpractice about which they are concerned. I described the problems they face in
. No doubt a sustained programme of public education could improve the position for complainants and those who wish to report a concern, but the problem is bound to persist to some extent.
27.85
In the course of the Inquiry, the GMC suggested a possible solution to this problem. It proposed that there should be a ‘single portal’ or gateway to which anyone who was in doubt about where to lodge a complaint could direct his/her complaint. Any complaint that was directed to the wrong quarter could be referred to the ‘single portal’. Advice could be given as to the appropriate destination for the complaint to be received and handled. In other words, the ‘single portal’ would act as a signpost indicating the appropriate direction of a complaint. Although concerns were expressed about the practicalities of this idea, there was virtually universal acceptance at the seminars that, if it could be made to work, it would be a great improvement on the present position.
27.86
Miss Isabel Nisbet was seconded from the GMC to carry out a project on behalf of the Healthcare Commission and the GMC, namely to examine the feasibility of establishing a means of directing patients and others with concerns or complaints about health care towards the most appropriate route to pursue them. In November 2004, Miss Nisbet presented various options to the Healthcare Commission’s Commissioners for the provision of such a service. Briefly, the main options outlined were these:
a website (or single web-based source), giving up-to-date information about complaints procedures in a form that would enable the enquirer to be guided to the most suitable route by a series of questions
a website, as in (a), but with a facility to pass the enquirer to the right place by means of email or customised links to the relevant complaints handling bodies (both local and national) and to potential sources of advice and support
a website with links, as in (a) and (b), but also with an interactive link to answer enquiries by advisers and intermediaries
a website with links, as in (a) and (b), but also with an interactive link to answer enquiries by members of the general public
an arrangement as in (d), but expanded to provide advice to complainants, as well as information to help them to select the appropriate route for their complaint.
27.87
While (a) provided the cheapest of the available options, Miss Nisbet acknowledged that it had the obvious disadvantage that about half the population do not have access to the internet and would not, therefore, be able to avail themselves of this facility. Miss Nisbet recognised that some patients’ organisations would be disappointed if a website of this kind were the only outcome of the project. She observed that most of the patients’ organisations which she had contacted had favoured option (d), in addition to web-based information. They had said that patients, many of whom are elderly, valued contact with a human voice - for example, through a telephone helpline - rather than with a website or an automated message system. When discussing option (e), Miss Nisbet observed that the Independent Complaints Advocacy Service in England (ICAS) provides information and advice and she questioned what would be gained by replicating or replacing the services provided by ICAS. She suggested that options (a) and (b) should be developed. She also suggested that options (c) and (d) should be considered further, with a view to providing a service in conjunction with a patients’ organisation or by strengthening an existing helpline facility. The Healthcare Commission has informed the Inquiry that it does not propose to take any decisions on the various options until after the publication of the Inquiry’s Report.
27.88
In my view, no solution which depends, in the first instance, upon access to a website will be satisfactory. As Miss Nisbet observed, only half the population would have access to it. In addition to any web-based information, with or without interactive links to answer enquiries, there must, in my view, be a telephone helpline with a live human voice to speak to. Otherwise, half the population is unlikely to receive the help it needs. The group without access is likely to include a large proportion of elderly or vulnerable people - the very group most in need of help. I am not opposed to the idea of a website providing information; that might suffice for some purposes. However, in my view, there must be a helpline as well. Miss Nisbet raised the question whether, as ICAS provides information and advice, there is any need to provide advice as well as information about the right destination for a complaint. In my view there is. Very few people who have a problem on their minds about something that has happened at hospital or at their GP’s surgery are likely to think that they need an advocacy service. What is needed is a service that not only advises people who have already decided to complain or to raise a concern where to lodge their complaint or concern, but also gives information to people who are uncertain whether or not they wish to complain or raise a concern about where to find the advice that they need. I do not suggest that the single portal service should provide the latter kind of advice but it should be able to refer the caller to, for example, a patients’ organisation, an organisation such as Public Concern at Work (which can provide legal advice about the consequences of raising a concern) or possibly to ICAS. I think it would be helpful if, in addition to providing advice about the right destination for a complaint, the single portal service were prepared to forward the complaint to the appropriate body. Whatever form the single portal takes, it must be extensively advertised. It needs to be as well known as NHS Direct and the Samaritans.
Support for Complainants: after the Community Health Councils
27.89
Chapters 6
, for many years until 2003, Community Health Councils (CHCs) provided advice and support for persons wishing to pursue a complaint. Before 1996, the CHC would correspond with the FPC or FHSA on the complainant’s behalf, would advise on the preparation of the complaint for a MSC hearing and would accompany the complainant at the hearing, acting as adviser throughout. From 1996, the CHC would, on request, assist in lodging a complaint or requesting an independent review. It would also correspond with the HA/PCT making the arrangements for an IRP hearing and would attend and support the complainant at the hearing. Evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that many CHCs did this work well and that their work was greatly appreciated.
27.90
, I also described the provisions that have more recently been made for advising and supporting patients who wish to make a complaint. I said that I did not know how well those arrangements were working. I suggest that an independent review be commissioned into the operation of these arrangements about two years after the new Complaints Regulations come into force in their entirety with a view to ascertaining whether patients are receiving appropriate advice and support and correcting any deficiencies that may be revealed.
Disciplinary Procedures in the Context of Clinical Governance
27.91
, I explained that disciplinary proceedings against GPs at local level fell largely into disuse soon after the introduction, in 1996, of the new complaints procedures. In some places, they were still occasionally used. Their operation depended upon establishing a breach of the GP’s terms of service. With the introduction of the new GMS Contract in April 2004, terms of service have ceased to exist. They have been replaced by contractual arrangements. However, as I explained in
, from December 2001, PCTs have had new powers of list management. A PCT can remove or suspend a GP from its medical performers’ list or impose conditions upon his/her inclusion on the list. There is no power to order a withholding of remuneration; nor is there an official power to administer warnings or reprimands.
27.92
Respondents to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper were asked whether they thought it was appropriate that PCTs should be able to deal with misconduct, deficient practice or poor performance falling below the threshold operated by the GMC or below the threshold at which the PCT would exercise its list management powers. They were invited to consider whether disciplinary procedures should be developed at local level to deal with such cases. Views were also sought on the categories of case in which it would be appropriate for local disciplinary proceedings to be invoked and, in particular, whether there should be a code of conduct or code of patients’ rights, breach of which might give rise to disciplinary proceedings.
27.93
The majority of respondents to the Consultation Paper thought that there was a gap in the powers available to PCTs. There was a substantial degree of support for the idea that PCTs should have a wide range of sanctions available to them. A number of respondents to the Consultation Paper and participants at the seminars suggested that the range of penalties available to the PCT should include ‘constructive penalties’ (e.g. a requirement that the doctor undergo specific retraining), rather than punitive measures. The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain suggested that a wide range of options should be made available to PCTs. Examples given were the issuing to GPs of advice letters containing good practice guidance, advice visits, mentoring, retraining and obtaining written undertakings from doctors. It was suggested that early intervention might serve to prevent a more serious outcome.
27.94
In its response to the Consultation Paper, the GMC said that the gap that had been identified in the regulatory system would be narrowed under the GMC’s new FTP procedures, which will provide for the issuing of a warning to a doctor where there has been a significant departure from the principles contained in the GMC publication ‘Good Medical Practice’ or where a GMC performance assessment has indicated cause for concern, but where the GMC does not consider that action on registration is warranted. However, there would still remain a category of cases which might not reach the GMC or which might fall below the threshold for the issuing of a warning. Those cases, the GMC said, should be addressed by PCTs at local level. Mrs Robins, representing Patient Concern, thought that the PCTs’ powers should be extended and that the most central and significant problem with the current system was that the PCT does not have the power to impose sanctions to deal with minor matters.
27.95
At the seminars, a hypothetical example was considered in order to allow examination of the adequacy of the PCT’s powers. It was supposed that the Healthcare Commission had investigated a patient complaint and had made a recommendation to the PCT that it should require the doctor to undergo retraining. If the doctor failed to co-operate with the PCT’s request that s/he should retrain, the only sanction available to the PCT would be to direct the removal of the doctor from the list, contingent upon his/her continuing refusal to retrain. It was suggested that, in the case of a failure to co-operate with a recommendation for retraining, the exercising of list management powers might be somewhat draconian and that, in practice, the PCT’s list management powers would be imposed only in serious cases. I do not think it would be draconian to impose contingent removal on a doctor who was refusing to co-operate in retraining. It would be an effective means of persuasion as well as protection for patients. However, I can envisage cases in which the gravity of the circumstances would fall below the ‘list management’ threshold and where a lesser sanction might be appropriate.
27.96
Professor Scotland said that there was a need for an extension of the PCTs’ powers and stressed that there was a need in particular for a less ‘long-winded’ disciplinary process to be used in the case of less serious matters. It was acknowledged that procedural complexity was one reason why formal disciplinary hearings had largely fallen into disuse after 1996. Professor Scotland suggested that a system of warnings could be implemented by PCTs along similar lines to the system of warnings which exists in the context of an employer/employee relationship. He suggested that there could be gradations of warning, starting initially with advice given off the record, followed by the giving of oral advice, which would be recorded, and finally written advice. He thought that the PCT list should be able to record information on warnings.
27.97
The idea of introducing a system of warnings received widespread support at the seminars. Dr Grenville, for the BMA, welcomed the proposal. He made the point that the complaints system, prior to 1996, permitted PCOs to issue warnings and that the medical profession had been content with that system. Sir Donald Irvine, former President of the GMC, also supported the proposal. He said that the nature of the relationship between PCTs and contracting GPs had been a longstanding problem. By that, I think he meant that PCTs were responsible for GPs but did not have the disciplinary powers of an employer. However, he said that he had known of PCTs which had struck the right balance in the relationship and had been able to give warnings about matters requiring attention. Mr Martin Staniforth, Deputy Director of Human Resources at the DoH, was also aware of instances of PCTs acting informally to warn GPs about their behaviour and he supported the proposal for a system of warnings to be introduced.
27.98
Professor Scotland emphasised that there would still be a need for a thorough investigation and that, where there was a conflict in the evidence, it would be necessary to make findings of fact. There was general agreement among participants that that would be necessary. According to Professor Scotland, the worst thing that can happen is that concerns are not ‘bottomed out’.
27.99
Mrs Robins suggested that, if a warning system were introduced, the more serious level of warning ought to be made public and should even be posted in the surgery. Dr Grenville did not agree with that. He said that the effect upon the doctor might be very serious. He said that the medical profession has a high suicide rate and that it would be necessary to carry out research into the impact on doctors of publishing such warnings. Dr William Reith, who represented the RCGP at the seminars, said that it was important that the individual patient complainant should be made aware of the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings, whether or not the wider public was made aware.
27.100
A number of participants at the seminars said that it would be appropriate for PCTs to have the power to impose financial penalties on contracting GPs. Professor Baker thought that the imposition of financial penalties would be of particular use in dealing with dysfunctional practices as well as with individual GPs. Mrs Robins agreed with that view and said that the imposition of a financial penalty would act as an enormous incentive for a practice to ensure that the problem, whatever it was, was addressed. Dr Grenville said that the imposition of financial penalties would not necessarily lead to a service improvement and that, in his experience, the imposition of financial penalties under the pre-1996 complaints system had not influenced the behaviour of ‘problem’ doctors. He thought that the most important goal was proper service delivery and that, where problems were identified, it was more important to focus on putting that right. Professor Scotland thought that the imposition of financial penalties might be appropriate in the case of administrative failings but that other forms of sanction (for example warnings, linked to a requirement to undergo retraining) would be a more appropriate way of dealing with performance. He also said that the imposition of a financial penalty should be recorded on the PCT list.
27.101
It was suggested by one respondent to the Consultation Paper that involvement in disciplinary procedures should be reported as part of GP appraisal and that the cause of the problem should be addressed in the doctor’s personal development plan. A number of participants at the seminars agreed that the disciplinary procedures should be linked with the appraisal system, but that that process should not replace the taking of action at local level by the PCT.
27.102
I can see advantages in PCTs having a wide range of sanctions available to them once they have conducted an investigation into a complaint or concern and found that it was justified, although not so serious as to merit the use of their list management powers or referral to the GMC or some other body. It seems wrong that a PCT should not have the widest range of sanctions available to deal with the situation as it has found it to be. I would favour the extension of the PCTs’ powers to include both warnings and financial penalties. That is not to say that I think that PCTs should spend their time conducting disciplinary or list management proceedings if they can deal with matters in a simpler way which is both constructive and effective. I agree with Dr Grenville that the most important aim is to improve clinical performance. I think that PCTs should concentrate on bringing about improvement through the giving of advice - probably by the Clinical Governance Lead - rather than by seeking to punish minor shortcomings. If a doctor will not respond to advice about a matter that needs correction (for example, by undergoing some remedial training) then, in my view, the PCT should use its list management powers to ‘persuade’ him/her to do so. If s/he is still uncooperative, the PCT should use its stronger powers. I hope that PCTs will gain confidence in using their list management powers. Parliament has bestowed them and it must have intended that they should be used.
The Use of Prescribing Information as a Clinical Governance Tool
27.103
In my Fourth Report, I made a number of recommendations about the ways in which the accuracy and completeness of prescribing information could be improved so as to provide a more valuable tool for the purposes of clinical governance. I shall not repeat those recommendations in detail here. I suggested that every doctor working in general practice should use his/her own prescription pad and that the practice of allowing trainees and locums to use the pad of one of the GP principals in the practice should be stopped. In that way, each prescription could accurately be attributed to an individual doctor. I also suggested ways in which the ‘blurring’ of prescribing data by the issuing of repeat prescriptions could be avoided. In respect of controlled drugs prescribing, I made recommendations that a special prescription form should be introduced and that private prescribing should also be done on the special form so that it could be included in the analysis carried out by the Prescription Pricing Authority. If those measures are adopted, it should be possible for a PCT to obtain a complete and accurate picture of each doctor’s prescribing practice; thus, the PCT will be better able to detect abnormal prescribing. Also, the data available to individual doctors will enable them to undertake a more satisfactory audit of their own prescribing practice.
27.104
In my view, special attention should also be paid to the prescribing of controlled drugs by all doctors. Doctors who have had a problem of drug misuse in the past or who are suspected to have a current problem should be subjected to particularly close scrutiny. Not only should their prescribing data be examined carefully but attention should be paid to information held in the controlled drugs registers (CDRs) kept by pharmacies. In the Fourth Report, I recommended the establishment of a controlled drugs inspectorate. One of its functions would be the scrutiny of CDRs to detect abnormal prescribing of controlled drugs and abnormal conduct by doctors, such as collecting from a pharmacy controlled drugs which have been prescribed for patients. The inspectorate and the PCT would be able to liaise if either had a concern about an individual doctor’s prescribing of controlled drugs. I hope that the Government will act upon these recommendations.
The Use of Mortality Data as a Clinical Governance Tool
A National System of Monitoring
27.105
, I described how the Inquiry commissioned a study of the feasibility of using mortality statistics to detect abnormalities which might indicate that a doctor was failing to provide an adequate standard of clinical care for his/her patients or even that s/he was deliberately harming them. I also described the discussion that took place at a special seminar held by the Inquiry in October 2003. The conclusion reached at the end of that seminar was that it would be desirable to operate a national system for the monitoring of mortality rates in general practice. I agree with that view. It seems to me that such a system (particularly if coupled with the reform of the systems of death certification and investigation that I have recommended in my Third Report) would be likely to deter a doctor from criminal activities such as those of Shipman. Even if it did not, it would greatly improve the chances of detecting those activities. Apart from those potential benefits, however, I believe that the collection and analysis of GP patient mortality data are necessary parts of the clinical governance process and that a greater understanding of that data can only have a beneficial effect on the quality of patient care.
27.106
I recognise that there are practical difficulties in the way of setting up a satisfactory system, in particular the difficulty of linking an individual patient death with an individual GP. However, I recommend that work should be undertaken to find ways of doing this. The DoH will have to take the lead. Some ideas were suggested at the seminar and I am optimistic that, with a will, a way will be found. Once that has been done, I recommend that a pilot scheme for national monitoring be undertaken, along the lines discussed at the seminar. Any national monitoring system must be supported by a proper system of investigating those cases where a doctor’s patient mortality rates signal as being above the norm. Those investigations must be well organised, consistent and objective. They cannot be left to individual PCTs, although much of the local knowledge which will inform such investigations will be available from the PCTs.
27.107
At the time of the seminar, it was envisaged that a central analytical unit for carrying out monitoring would be operated by the Healthcare Commission and that investigations would be carried out by local Healthcare Commission offices, in conjunction with the relevant PCT. Since then, it seems that the Healthcare Commission’s intentions - both as to the housing of a central analytical unit and as to the establishment of local offices - may have changed. If so, national monitoring and analysis will have to be carried out by another body (probably under the auspices of the DoH), with investigation being done by the skilled inter-PCT investigative teams to which I have previously referred in connection with the investigation of complaints and concerns.
Practice Death Registers
27.108
As I have said, I am of the view that data relating to patient deaths would be of value for clinical governance purposes. The Inquiry was told that some GP practices keep a deaths record or register in which a full copy of each Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) issued is maintained. That seems to me to be good practice and would, among other things, provide the material needed for an audit of deaths. Discussion of such material might be a useful topic at appraisal. In my Third Report, I recommended the reform of death certification. If my proposals are accepted, the form that would be completed by a GP following a death would contain a great deal more information than is currently contained in a MCCD. Such forms would provide an even more useful basis for an audit of deaths and would be an extremely valuable resource in the event that an investigation into a GP’s patient mortality rate had to be undertaken as a result of routine monitoring of mortality rates. For patient deaths that occur in hospital or elsewhere, for which the GP does not complete a MCCD, equivalent information should be entered in the register.
Review of the Medical Records of Deceased Patients
27.109
The Inquiry was told on a number of occasions that the examination or review of a GP’s medical records is a valuable tool in the assessment of the quality of clinical care and the detection of substandard clinical performance. The process plays an important part in the assessment procedures for the purposes of authorisation as a GP trainer and for Membership by assessment of the RCGP. It could play a part in appraisal. However, I do not think that it will generally be feasible for PCTs to undertake such record reviews themselves; for one thing, there would be problems of patient confidentiality. Nonetheless, it seems to me that use could be made of the records of deceased patients for such purposes. The records of deceased patients are sent to the PCT. It would not be at all difficult for PCTs to review such records. It would be easy for the patient’s identity to be removed by one member of staff and for the review to be carried out by a different person, who would of course have to be suitably qualified. It would be necessary to ensure that a full set of records was sent to the PCT, including any records kept only on a computer. The use that would be made of this tool would depend upon the resources that the PCT could apply to the task. Ideally, each doctor should be subject to a periodic review of one or two sets of records, relating to patients who were cared for in the community up to the time of their deaths. My experience on this Inquiry suggests that the care provided to patients in the last few months of life would be a particularly good indicator of the general standard of care offered by the doctor. If resources did not stretch to a periodic review of a few records of all doctors, the process could be limited to those doctors whose performance gave rise to concern in some other respect.
Appraisal in the Context of Clinical Governance
27.110
I described the present system of appraisal of GPs in
I explained the way in which the GMC’s proposals for revalidation came, at least for a period, to rest entirely on the ‘successful’ completion of appraisal. In my view, that situation was unacceptable. It has now changed in that, in addition to the ‘successful’ completion of appraisal, a GP seeking revalidation will also be required to produce a clinical governance certificate. I have made recommendations about the way in which I think revalidation should develop. I now wish to discuss the future of appraisal, primarily in the context of clinical governance, but remembering all the while the role that it is expected to play in revalidation.
27.111
First, it seems to me that it is essential that the purpose of appraisal should be clear. Is it intended to be a purely formative process or is it intended to be multi-purpose - part formative, part summative, part performance management? In industry and in many employment situations, there is no difficulty about appraisal having several purposes. As I understand it, appraisal of doctors in the hospital service, at least for those in training grades, is intended to be a performance management tool. It is based upon information collected by the employer, and the employer can in large measure dictate the areas covered by that information and the topics to be discussed at appraisal. I believe that it was the DoH’s original intention that the appraisal of GPs should be similar and should have both a formative and a summative function. As Dr John Chisholm, Chairman, General Practitioners Committee, BMA, told the Inquiry, even those negotiating on behalf of the doctors expected that appraisal would be based upon hard information provided by the PCT from clinical governance sources. In the event, as it has come to be operated, it is a purely formative process. It is based on material chosen by the appraisee. Much, even all, of that material may not be capable of being verified. It seems to me that, as a formative tool, it is as good as the individual doctor wants it to be. If s/he wants it to be searching, it can be; but if s/he wants it to be little more than a cosy chat about areas of practice that s/he is quite confident about, that can be engineered. I do not suggest that many doctors do that. Indeed, I have the impression that most of them want to make positive use of the opportunity that appraisal offers. But, if appraisal is to be used to any extent as a summative tool, it must be capable of detecting that small group of doctors who have something to hide. It must be a much less ‘soft’ process than it is at present.
27.112
So, somebody must decide whether appraisal is to be a clinical governance tool (in which case it must be ‘toughened up’) or whether it is to be a purely private opportunity for personal professional development. I have no strong personal view. I can see the benefit of a purely formative session with a colleague, provided that the colleague is someone with high standards, worth learning from. On the other hand, appraisal is a costly business and I wonder whether the money is being well spent, at least unless there can be some guarantee of the quality of the appraiser’s contribution. The expenditure of the time and money might be more readily justified if the appraisal were to be based on specific information capable of being verified. It might be more readily justified if more information came out of appraisal for the benefit of the PCT’s clinical governance function. These are issues for others, not for me. If I were to recommend that appraisal should contain a summative element, I cannot say whether that would be practicable. I do not know whether the profession would accept such a change. I do not know whether doctors would be prepared to act as appraisers if that were their function. I do not know whether the Government would wish to insist on such a change.
27.113
All I can say is that, if appraisal is to remain as it is - an essentially private matter between appraiser and appraisee, based upon material selected by the appraisee - then it must not be regarded as a clinical governance tool. It will be capable of helping a PCT to decide what types of continuing professional development it should provide. That is all. It must not be regarded as being capable of making any useful contribution to the process of revalidation. Revalidation must depend upon something else.
27.114
If the Government and the profession were to decide that appraisal should be ‘toughened up’ so that it is capable of being used as a clinical governance tool, then I would have a number of suggestions to make as to how that might be done. These ideas come from witnesses to the Inquiry, participants in the seminars and sometimes from published documents such as the Revalidation Toolkit published by the RCGP for Scotland and the recent Consultation Document, ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: a Tool for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’, also published by the RCGP.
27.115
On that basis, I would recommend first that appraisers must be more thoroughly trained and should be accredited following some form of test or assessment. They would have to be trained to evaluate the appraisee’s fitness to practise. GPs should be appraised by an appraiser from another PCT. Second, the standards by which a doctor either ‘successfully completes’ or fails the appraisal must be specified. At the moment, appraisal is ‘successfully completed’ unless serious concerns arise and the appraiser stops the process. It is not clear how serious the concern has to be before that happens. Third, all appraisals should be based upon a core of verifiable information supplied to both parties by the PCT. That would not mean that the doctor could not introduce other material in addition; but there would have to be a compulsory core. The list of essentials would have to be agreed nationally. Important categories would be prescribing information, information about complaints, continuing professional development activity, mortality statistics (if a monitoring system is introduced) and audit results. I also consider that it would be appropriate for one particular type of activity to be undertaken and discussed in each year. Given that revalidation will generally take place every five years, there could be a cycle of five different activities. One should be a video film of patient consultations. Another should be a patient satisfaction survey. I am unsure of the value of peer review questionnaires in the context of general practice. If research shows that they are of value, they could be included. Another activity should be a review and discussion of a selection of patient records. Another could be the discussion of a report about a critical or untoward incident and another a discussion about a clinical audit report. In my view, it is important that the whole of Form 4 (the summary of the discussion and the personal development plan) should be made available to those at the PCT responsible for clinical governance. I understand that the DoH intends to ensure that this is done.
27.116
If those changes were made to appraisal, there may be some justification for regarding the process as an evaluation of fitness to practise, such as would provide an adequate basis for revalidation. Whether that is a good idea or whether it is preferable to keep appraisal and revalidation apart, I cannot say.
Miscellaneous Proposals
The Use by Primary Care Trusts of Their List Management Powers
27.117
The list management powers of PCTs are new and the evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that some PCTs are uncertain about when and whether they should be used. At
paragraph 5.72
, I suggested that it would be useful if the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (Special Health Authority), whose powers are soon to be transferred to the NHS Litigation Authority, were to collect and analyse the information relating to the use of these powers by PCTs. I thought that it would also be useful if PCTs were required to indicate why they had used their powers in each case. Such analysis would assist the DoH in providing guidance to PCTs about the types of circumstance in which they might properly use their powers. Also, it would draw attention to those PCTs that were using their powers either much more or much less than the average.
Practice Accreditation Schemes
27.118
paragraphs 5.111-5.119
, I described various practice accreditation schemes in operation in England and in Scotland. I expressed the view that it would be valuable if all GP practices could be encouraged to achieve accreditation, as it is intended they should do in Scotland. As remuneration under the new GMS Contract is based upon a series of financial incentives, it seems to me that it would be sensible to provide a financial incentive for the achievement of practice accreditation by means of an accreditation scheme similar to that operated by the RCGP in Scotland. I recommend that the Government consider the feasibility of such an incentive scheme.
Support for Single-Handed and Small Practices
27.119
paragraphs 9.134-9.135
, I wrote about the particular problems of practice staff working in small or single-handed practices. They face problems of isolation; they may not recognise aberrant behaviour or practice in a healthcare professional because they are used to it and do not realise that it is unusual. I have suggested ways in which PCTs could help to reduce the effects of isolation.
27.120
Chapter 13
, I discussed the problems which can be faced by small and single-handed practices. I described a number of initiatives that are already being taken in some parts of the country to resolve or mitigate those problems. I do not propose to repeat that discussion here. At
paragraphs 13.69-13.70
, I recommended that a more positive approach should be taken to the problems of small practices. The doctors running such practices should be given more support and encouragement and, in return, more should be expected of them in terms of group activity and mutual supervision. I suggested that there should be a pooling of ideas, a willingness to examine the way in which things are done in other countries, such as the Netherlands, and a determination to solve the problems. I recommend that the DoH take responsibility for this initiative.
The Recruitment and Appointment of General Practitioners
27.121
Under current procedures, the extent of the involvement of a PCT in filling a GP practice vacancy varies according to the type of post. The PCT is responsible for recruiting to single-handed practices and salaried posts but, if the vacancy is within an existing partnership, the practice itself selects a candidate, subject to inclusion on the PCT’s list. The question was posed in the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper as to whether a PCT should have input into the selection process for a vacancy in a group practice and, if so, how and to what extent. As I reported at
paragraphs 5.50-5.53
, PCTs are entitled to refuse to admit a doctor to their medical lists on specified grounds.
27.122
Those respondents to the Consultation Paper and participants at the relevant seminar who supported the idea of PCT involvement in the recruitment and appointment of GPs did so for two main reasons: first, because PCTs are responsible for clinical governance and will, therefore, be to some extent accountable for the actions of the doctor appointed and, second, because they felt that GP practices did not have the necessary human resources expertise to recruit and appoint satisfactorily. It was suggested that the necessary expertise might be provided by the PCT, or even the SHA.
27.123
Professor Martin Roland, Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre, and Professor of General Practice, University of Manchester, emphasised that there were two separate issues relevant to the PCT’s involvement in GP appointments. The first was the responsibility which PCTs have for ensuring that only competent doctors are appointed to their lists. The second issue was the role that should be played by the PCT in the appointment of a doctor to a GP practice. Dr Grenville, representing the BMA, also made this distinction and expressed the view that external standards should be set (for example, governing the requirements for acquiring a licence to practise and for joining a PCT’s list), but that, provided a candidate met those requirements, the decision to appoint should be made by the GP practice concerned.
27.124
There was a consensus at the seminar that the role of PCTs in the appointment and recruitment process should be limited to providing advice. Respondents to the Consultation Paper (including the RCGP) emphasised that professional partnership involves close personal and financial relationships and that, ultimately, the decision as to who should be admitted to a GP practice must be taken by the existing members.
27.125
There was, however, widespread support for the proposal that PCTs should provide human resources expertise and advice. The Inquiry heard about some initiatives at PCT level; for example, at the seminar, Ms Fiona Freedland, Legal Director, Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), described the arrangement in City and Hackney PCT, where a GP vacancy officer had been appointed to help practices which were having difficulty in filling their vacancies. Mrs Webdale, representing AMSPAR, said that, in her experience, many GPs did not have the necessary skills to recruit effectively; however, some did not recognise this and were unwilling to seek help. Dr Reith, representing the RCGP, agreed that GPs were not experienced in recruitment and needed human resources advice. Although he did not believe that a PCT should be able to compel a practice to accept such advice against its will, he recognised that PCTs had a responsibility to ensure that proper recruitment processes were implemented; he accepted that there would be a place for ‘robust discussion’ between a PCT and a GP practice which was reluctant to accept such advice.
27.126
Professor Baker thought that it would be helpful for practices to have input from the PCT in the drawing up of a job description and specification. He suggested that the PCT could also help in sifting applications and in preparing a shortlist. This seems to me a good idea if, given the current shortage of GPs, it is possible to compile a shortlist. Professor Baker also suggested that, at that point, the PCT could check whether any of the candidates were unsuitable before interviews took place. I can see the value of undertaking some of the suitability checks before the interview stage. At present, PCTs might object that it would be too time-consuming to make all the necessary checks for several applicants for a vacancy. However, if the GMC were to put more information about doctors on its website (as I shall recommend that it should) and if a central database of information about doctors were to be created (as I shall also recommend), it would be quick, easy and worthwhile to make these checks before the interview stage.
27.127
The view of Patient Concern was that, in order to ensure an appropriate balance of skills and mix of expertise in a particular PCT area, a PCT representative should be included on the panel which interviewed applicants for a GP post. Dr Reith said that he would not object to PCT involvement in an advisory capacity at the shortlisting or interview stages. In its written response to the Consultation Paper, South West Kent PCT expressed the view that a PCT member should be present during the interview process, but that his/her role should be limited to observing the proceedings. Another respondent to the Consultation Paper suggested that there should be professional input from the PCT at the point of shortlisting and lay input at the interviewing stage.
27.128
In my view, PCTs should be willing and able to provide advice on good recruitment practice and should also be willing to offer support in drafting a job specification and advertisements. If the response to an advertised vacancy is such as to give rise to the need for a shortlist, no doubt many practices would welcome help in sifting applications. As I have said, I think it would be useful if preliminary checks on suitability could be made before the interview stage. I would not think it desirable to take up references before a selection had been made. Nor do I think it appropriate that the PCT should play any part in the interview process unless requested by the practice to do so. Selection of the right person from among the suitably qualified candidates must be a matter for the practice concerned.
27.129
I also think that it would be sensible if a standard reference form were developed for use in connection with appointments to GP practices. It is not sufficient for a reference to comprise a general statement that the doctor has been satisfactory. Also, in my view, PCTs should insist that a reference be obtained from the previous employer or PCT. In the case of a previous PCT, the reference should be signed by the Medical Director or Clinical Governance Lead, i.e. the person who has access to the clinical governance information held about that doctor.
Involvement of Lay People in the Recruitment of General Practitioners
27.130
The Inquiry’s Consultation Paper also raised the issue of whether patients should be involved in the process of selection of GPs and, if so, to what extent. It was suggested that there might be patient representation on interview panels. Views were also sought on the type of patient representation; for example, one or more patients at the relevant practice could be involved, or members of the local Patients Forum or some other representative group.
27.131
The Inquiry became aware of examples of patient involvement in the recruitment of GPs. The Clinical Governance Review of Harlow PCT, undertaken by the Commission for Healthcare Improvement (CHI) in 2003, reported patient and public involvement in many trust activities, including participation in the recruitment of GPs.
27.132
Respondents to the Consultation Paper were divided on the issue of patient involvement. Some respondents were wholly opposed to the idea. Others welcomed the idea in theory but saw practical difficulties. Many respondents felt that patient involvement was important. A number saw a role for the new Patients Forums, which could be involved directly in the recruitment process, or could at least be consulted on priorities before the practice embarked on the selection process. Others thought that a lay member of the PCT should provide lay input. AMSPAR suggested the setting up of new patient groups covering several PCTs.
27.133
Some respondents thought that it would be helpful to have lay input at the stage of shortlisting candidates, while others felt that the most appropriate stage was at interview and that the interviewing panel should include a lay representative. One suggestion was for all shortlisted candidates to meet informally with a group of patients who would give feedback to the interviewing panel. However, there was opposition to this idea on the grounds that it did not give much insight into the quality of a candidate’s clinical practice. The need for members of the practice to make the ultimate decision about who was to be admitted was again emphasised.
27.134
There was a general view that lay participants would require training in selection and would need to be knowledgeable about issues in general practice. Professor Baker suggested in his written response that low level indirect involvement might be appropriate. Patients at a practice could be consulted about preferences: for example, whether patients would like a woman doctor to be recruited in what had hitherto been an all-male practice. Dr Grenville, representing the BMA, raised a number of potential problems with lay participation. He said that it might be difficult to find a patient or patients who were truly representative of the practice patient list. He gave as an example of the problem the patient representative who had a specific issue on which s/he felt strongly: for example, s/he might want a doctor who would always prescribe antibiotics for a cold, whereas other patients might want a doctor who would not expose patients unnecessarily to the dangers of antibiotics. Like Professor Baker, Dr Grenville was in favour of indirect patient input. He thought that patient participation groups could helpfully inform a practice of broad areas of concern to patients; that information could then be taken into account in recruitment.
27.135
Ms Freedland, representing AvMA, stressed that the overriding imperative from the patient perspective is that the doctor be safe, and that other considerations are necessarily secondary to patient safety. She suggested that patient involvement would be of most use in assessing the doctor’s communication and interpersonal skills. She thought that it would be helpful to have a patient at the interview so as, for example, to test the candidate’s ability to explain to a patient in simple language a complicated diagnosis or prognosis and treatment plan. Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, was supportive of exploring innovative interviewing techniques such as that proposed by Ms Freedland. She observed that lay assessors for the GMC’s performance procedures currently test communication skills in a similar way with considerable success. She said that, in certain geographical areas (such as the inner cities where many people do not speak English), the attitude of the doctor is paramount in providing good care to patients. She added that it is important to observe candidates in practical situations, interacting with patients. Professor Aidan Halligan, Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England and Director of Clinical Governance for the NHS, also supported the proposal and said that the principle of patient participation was a very legitimate one and should be welcomed. Dr Reith pointed out that doctors entering general practice would already have undergone summative testing of their communication skills. Dr Grenville thought that communication skills were central to the work of GPs and that their communication skills should be tested on a regular basis. He envisaged that, in the future, GPs would have a portfolio of videotaped consultations which could be used in applying for a new post. Sir Donald Irvine thought that communication skills would be better tested as part of revalidation, for example, by using videotaped consultations.
27.136
Dr Reith and Dr Sarah Wilson, Director of Public Health and Medical Director, Trent SHA, thought that it would be helpful for research to be carried out to see if patient involvement improved the recruitment process. They thought it should not be built into the process ‘for the sake of it’. I think that such research would be a good idea, although it would depend upon the availability of funding for such a project.
27.137
My conclusion about this debate is that there should not be any attempt to be prescriptive about whether or how lay people should participate in the process of selection. I agree with Professor Baker and Dr Grenville that practices really ought to canvass and take account of the views of their patients about the kind of doctor the practice needs. However, I would be opposed to the imposition of any particular format or process by which lay people should be involved in selection. There are obviously a lot of different ideas in circulation. If any GP practice wishes to adopt any of these ideas it should be free to do so, but I do not think it should be under pressure to do so. I must say that I am attracted by the idea that material used in the revalidation process (such as a videotape of consultations) should also be used in the recruitment process. Indeed, it may be that, in the future, doctors will be expected to produce a good deal of clinical governance material for the benefit of a prospective employer or partner.
General Practitioners’ Personal Files
27.138
Evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that, at least in the past, it has been the practice for a primary care organisation (PCO) to keep information about individual GPs in different files, dealing with specific topics (such as complaints, remuneration or practice profile), rather than keeping a single file containing everything relating to an individual GP. It may be that the recognition of the importance of clinical governance has led to the adoption of a different practice. For the avoidance of doubt, it seems to me essential that every PCT should keep a separate file (whether on paper or in electronic form) which holds everything in relation to that doctor, or at least everything that could have any possible relevance to clinical governance. A reliable and comprehensive source of information might in certain circumstances be useful to the PCT officer or group responsible for signing the clinical governance certificate for the purposes of revalidation. If a doctor moves from one PCT to another, that file (or a copy of it) should be sent to the new PCT. It should not be possible for doctors with a poor clinical governance record to move on and leave it behind. PCTs should also keep files on doctors who have been admitted to their lists and who work as locums in the area. It might be helpful if the DoH were to establish national criteria for the content of such files.
The Raising of Concerns
Facilitating the Raising of Concerns by Staff in General Practice
27.139
paragraphs 9.128-9.139
, I discussed the need for arrangements to support members of GP practice staff who wish to raise a concern about any matter arising within the practice, in particular about the clinical practice or conduct of a healthcare professional within the practice. I do not propose to repeat the detail of that discussion here. Suffice it to say that I recommend that every practice should have a written policy, setting out the procedure to be followed by a member of the practice staff who wishes to raise concerns, in particular concerns about the clinical practice or conduct of a healthcare professional within the practice. I also recommend that staff should be encouraged to bring forward any concerns they may have openly, routinely and without fear of criticism. However, I recognise that circumstances may arise in which a member of the practice staff feels unable to raise his/her concern within the practice. In readiness for such occasions, I suggested that PCTs should designate a member of staff to act as a point of contact for all practice staff. The contact details for that person should appear in practice ‘whistleblowing’ policies. He or she should make him/herself known to all the practice staff working within the PCT area. If the ‘single portal’ is created, in whatever form, the policy should set out contact details of that also. PCTs should also ensure, through training, that practice staff understand the importance of reporting concerns and know how to do so.
Facilitating the Raising of Concerns by Staff in the Private Sector
27.140
I recommend that the Healthcare Commission should require all private healthcare organisations to have a clear written policy for the raising of concerns. I also recommend that the Healthcare Commission and the GMC should be ‘prescribed persons’ for the purpose of receiving expressions of concern under the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA), about any healthcare matters, whether arising in the public or the private sector.
Support at a National Level for Those Who Wish to Raise Concerns about Health Care
27.141
, I discussed the provision of support and advice for those who wish to raise concerns about any aspect of health care. I made a number of recommendations about possible amendments to the PIDA, in particular at paragraphs
11.91-11.115
. I shall not repeat the discussion relating to those recommendations here. I also recommended, at
paragraph 11.117
, that policies for raising concerns in the healthcare sector should be capable of being used in relation to persons who do not share common employment. For example, a doctor or nurse working in a hospital should have a route by which to raise a concern about a GP and
. A doctor or nurse working in the private sector should have a route by which to raise a concern about the practice of a healthcare professional working in the NHS and
. I also recommended that there should be some provision (probably a telephone helpline) to enable any person, whether working within health care or not, to obtain advice about the best way to raise a concern about a healthcare matter and about the legal implications of so doing. In my view, this should be provided on a national basis. I have not made any recommendation as to the means by which this should be provided. However, it seems to me that it might be possible to link this helpline with the ‘single portal’ which is under consideration and which I mentioned at
paragraphs 27.85-27.88
above.

--- The Availability of Information about Doctors ---
Information Available to Employers and Primary Care Organisations
27.142
One of the issues discussed at some length during the Inquiry was the difficulty experienced by PCTs in verifying information about doctors who apply to join their lists. I listed the checks to be made at
paragraph 5.43
. One of the witnesses described the process of obtaining this information as a ‘real chase-round’. Even the process of checking registration at the GMC, the Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) and the NHS Counter Fraud and Security Management Service can take a good deal of time. Several PCT staff suggested that a more co-ordinated method of making these checks would be very welcome.
27.143
Quite apart from the information that can be gleaned from those three sources, there exists an enormous amount of other information about doctors which would be of value to PCTs and to potential employers. At the moment, there is no way in which such persons or bodies can find out all they would like to know about an applicant for a post or for admission to a list. For example, they will receive a reference from one, or maybe two, previous employers or PCTs but they will have no idea whether there are other employers by whom the doctor may have been dismissed or disciplined. They cannot find out whether a complaint has been made or even a series of complaints. In the Report of the independent investigation into how the NHS handled allegations about the conduct of Clifford Ayling (the Ayling Report), the problem of drawing together and tracking records of separate complaints about the same doctor was highlighted. A similar concern was expressed in the Report of the investigation conducted by CHI into the various complaints made about the GP, Peter Green.
27.144
During the Inquiry, the idea emerged that there should be a central database of information about every doctor working in the UK. This would not be open to the public, but would be accessible to the officers of NHS bodies and to accredited employers in the private sector, as well as to other bodies with a legitimate interest, such as the Healthcare Commission, the GMC, the NCAA and the DoH. Several different classes of information would be fed in.These would include the current records held by the GMC (including any FTP history), although it might be more convenient to create a link to the GMC website, the contents of which I will discuss below.The database would have to contain information provided by the CRB or be linked electronically to that organisation. CRB information would include details of convictions (including those resulting in an absolute or conditional discharge) and cautions; the existence of other, more sensitive, information could be ‘flagged’ so that further enquiries could be made. In addition, the database would contain information from the NHS Counter Fraud and Security Management Service, a record of any disciplinary action by employers, the details of any list management action by PCTs, any adverse reports prepared following the investigation of a complaint, any adverse findings by a Healthcare Commission panel or by the Health Service Ombudsman and any findings of negligence in clinical negligence actions and settlements of clinical negligence claims above a pre-determined level of damages. The level of damages should be set at a low threshold, say £5000, so as to catch cases involving the deaths of children, where the damages are unlikely to exceed about £11,000 on full liability and may well be settled for less than full value. In addition, an entry would be made in respect of every post taken up by a doctor in employment, thereby creating a running
. For self-employed doctors, an entry would have to be made for each GP practice or deputising service for which the doctor worked. The identity of the doctor’s medical defence organisation (if any) could be included. Also, if the doctor had any financial interests which should be declared, they too could be incorporated. Doctors would be able to access their own entries to check the accuracy of the information held.
27.145
I would suggest that private sector employers should be required to provide relevant information. The Healthcare Commission could require this as a condition of registration. Also, deputising services should be required to provide information to the PCT with which they are contracted and would then be entitled to access to the information on the database, again through the relevant PCT.
27.146
The NHS has already made a start on the collection of information about individual doctors working in the hospital service through the use of NHS Occupational Health Smart Cards. I would have thought that this provision could usefully be extended to doctors working in primary care and that the categories of information that the cards contain might be extended to include those that I have mentioned above.
27.147
At the seminars, there was also discussion about whether unsubstantiated allegations should be included on the central database. Not surprisingly, opinions differed. The view was expressed that it would be grossly unfair to include such material. Others thought that, in the light of cases like that of Peter Green, where a number of unsubstantiated complaints had been received but not co-ordinated, it would be in the interests of patient safety if such information were to be included on the database. During the Inquiry hearings, there was discussion about evidence being given to the Independent Inquiry arising from the Soham Murders, chaired by Sir Michael Bichard. The gist of this discussion was that, if Humberside Police had retained information about unsubstantiated complaints against Ian Huntley and had passed them to Cambridgeshire Police when they made their pre-employment enquiries, Huntley would probably not have been employed at Soham Community College and Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman might not have died. Those contributors to the debate who had previously objected to the gathering of information about unsubstantiated complaints or concerns immediately realised that such material might be of great importance to patient protection. The view was that such material should not be entered into the central database, but that the entry should be flagged to indicate that confidential material was held by a named body. Disclosure of that information would have to depend upon who was asking about it and for what purpose, and questions of access would have to be determined at a high level.
27.148
Not only would such a central database make it far simpler for an employer or PCT to conduct pre-employment or pre-admission checks, the reliability of those checks would be greatly enhanced. The great majority of doctors would have nothing to fear; their entries would contain no more than their qualifications and their
. However, those doctors who cause problems, and who move on from place to place causing more problems, would very soon be identified.
27.149
The question arose as to who should keep this database. To be useful it should cover the whole of the UK and should include doctors who work in the NHS, in the private sector and in both. That being so, it seems to me that it would have to be funded by Government and a suitable host would have to be found. The Healthcare Commission would seem to be a suitable candidate. It might even fit in with the Commission’s own plans for information systems.
Further Information to Be Provided to Primary Care Organisations
27.150
, I described the information that GPs now have to provide when seeking admission to a PCT list. This includes information about convictions, cautions, various types of disciplinary or FTP findings and ongoing proceedings. Doctors already on a PCT list are under an obligation to inform the PCT about any new relevant information. At the Inquiry, there was some discussion about whether other categories of information should be included, in particular information about clinical negligence claims.
27.151
The debate generated some heat. On the one hand, it was said that a clinical negligence claim was just another way of making a complaint or raising a concern and was of real importance for clinical governance purposes. On the other hand, it was said that many clinical negligence claims are brought which have no merit at all and that, therefore, they should not be reported to the PCT or recorded in any way. It was said that, in many cases, a letter before action was written and then the matter did not proceed further. It was also argued that some clinical negligence claims were settled for quite large sums even though there was no merit in them; this was done for commercial reasons, to avoid costs. My long experience of personal injury litigation teaches me that that is not so. Offers of settlement are often made, it is true, to buy off the risk that the action will succeed but not where it is judged that there is no risk.
27.152
In my view, civil actions are analogous to complaints and concerns. It would be illogical to retain records of complaints and concerns because their clinical governance importance is recognised, and to ignore clinical negligence claims. The fact that the allegations made in some such claims may have little merit seems to me to be unimportant. Some complaints have little merit but that is not a reason for disregarding them; the value of investigating them is recognised. If a record were to be kept of those clinical negligence claims which resulted in a finding of negligence (of which there are very few) and those which were settled for £5000 or above, I do not think any injustice would be done and the PCT would have useful and relevant information on its file. That information should also appear on the central database, if created.
27.153
I consider also that it would be appropriate for PCTs to be given notice when an action is brought. In my view, the trigger for notifying the PCT about a civil action should be the receipt (either by the doctor or by his/her medical defence organisation, or that organisation’s legal representatives) of a letter of claim which complies with the requirements of the pre-action protocol in the Civil Procedure Rules. Such letters are sent only where there is a serious intention to proceed. In my view, doctors should be under a duty to notify any PCT to whose list they have been admitted of the fact that such a letter of claim has been received and the gist of the allegation made. They should also be required to report the outcome.
27.154
As I have said, there is an ongoing requirement under the provisions of the National Health Service (Performers List) Regulations 2004 on doctors to make relevant declarations to their PCTs. In my view, failure to do so, and to do so accurately, should amount to misconduct of sufficient gravity to warrant referral to the GMC.
Information Available to the Public and Patients
27.155
During the Inquiry, there was discussion about how much information about doctors should be made available to the public and to the doctors’ patients. This was appropriate in the context of an Inquiry into the activities of a doctor who, 24 years before it was discovered that he was a murderer, had been convicted of a series of offences of dishonesty in connection with his dependence upon a controlled drug. It is entirely natural that the relatives of Shipman’s victims should say, ‘If only we had known.’
27.156
The information available to patients and prospective patients about an individual GP is very limited under the present system. The public may become aware of a doctor’s criminal convictions or about disciplinary matters through press coverage. However, there is no means by which comprehensive information can be obtained. At the time of the Inquiry hearings, the GMC would, in answer to a specific enquiry, provide information to members of the public about current conditions on a doctor’s registration and on any previous disciplinary findings. However, that information was not - and still is not - available on the GMC website and will be provided only in response to specific enquiries by telephone. At the seminars, Dr Lewis, representing the GMC, said that the GMC did not at that time have an established strategy on disclosure but was in the process of developing such a strategy through public and professional consultation. That has now taken place and I shall describe the new GMC policy on disclosure later in this Chapter.
The Principle of Disclosure
27.157
Respondents to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper were asked whether patients and prospective patients should be provided with more information about their GPs to enable them to make an informed choice in deciding whether to consult a doctor and whether to submit to treatment by him/her. Respondents were asked what information should be available including, as examples, previous criminal convictions, disciplinary findings and current or past restrictions on a doctor’s licence to practise. Respondents were also asked to comment on how the information should be provided to patients.
27.158
Respondents to the Consultation Paper and participants at the seminars were divided on the principle of whether more information should be provided to patients. One of the strongest advocates for complete openness was Sir Donald Irvine. He said that the issue was one of patient autonomy; patients are entitled to have access to information which is already in the public domain. Sir Donald said that he was aware of two cases in which patients had become aware of a doctor’s history after a problem had arisen; they had been angry that information had previously been withheld from them and that they had been denied the opportunity to make a decision in the knowledge of all the facts. The patients had been left with a feeling that there had been a ‘cover up’. A number of other seminar participants agreed with that view, including Professor Halligan, Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England and Director for Clinical Governance for the NHS. He said that the need to inform patients and to allow them to make up their own minds about how and from whom they receive treatment arose out of the privileged position of doctors and the trust that patients necessarily place in a doctor.
27.159
A large number of respondents to the Consultation Paper expressed the opposing view. Their argument was that it was for the GMC, a PCT or a doctor’s employer to decide whether a doctor was fit for practice and that patients should be able to rely on those bodies to fulfil their respective roles. There was (or should be) no need for patients to receive further information about their doctors. The BMA said in its written response to the Consultation Paper that patients should be reassured that minimum standards apply, which reduce as far as possible the chances of patients coming into contact with a GP who might cause them harm. In that context, it was said that the GMC and PCTs should be more robust in their approach to their respective roles of licensing and appointing doctors. Mr Michael Summers, Chairman of the Patients Association, agreed that the responsibility to ensure fitness to practise lay with the GMC and the PCTs. He thought that providing further information might cause patients to worry, which would be particularly damaging to those patients who live in parts of the country where it is not possible to change doctors. With due respect to Mr Summers, it seems to me that the issue is not only one of choosing a doctor. If the only GP to whom a female patient has access is a male one who has been convicted of indecent assault, she might wish to be accompanied when consulting him.
27.160
A number of respondents pointed to practical problems associated with the provision of information. Dr Grenville, who represented the BMA, said that the mere knowledge of an event would be insufficient to give the patient informed choice and that the patient would need to be able to ask and get satisfactory answers to questions about a doctor’s history. He said that, in practical terms, this would be very difficult to achieve. I see the force of that argument. Some respondents thought that providing some types of information would make it impossible for a GP to continue practising, because patients would be unwilling to be treated by that doctor. My reaction is that, if the doctor’s past record is so bad, perhaps the patients might be right and s/he ought not to be practising at all.
27.161
Professor Roland said that he had been involved in research into the impact of providing information to the public. The research was aimed specifically at providing information on quality of care. It had shown that publishing the information had made more of an impact on doctors and healthcare managers than on patients. Although he acknowledged that releasing details of, for example, a doctor’s criminal convictions might cause patients to refuse to be treated by that doctor, the research suggested that this would not be the case. Ms Freedland agreed, saying that she did not think that the provision of information to patients about a GP would necessarily lead to an exodus of patients. In its written response to the Consultation Paper, CHI said that it thought there was a need for further research on the impact of sharing such information with patients.
27.162
During the course of receiving evidence, the Inquiry was told about the case of a doctor who had been convicted of the manslaughter of a patient and, as a condition of his registration, was required to undergo a period of supervised practice. A suitable supervisor was found but he and other members of the practice decided that they could not keep their patients in ignorance of the situation. A letter was sent to patients setting out the doctor’s history, describing the remediation programme he was undergoing and explaining the precautions that were being taken to protect patients. The patients’ reaction was good; it appears that they were willing to consult the doctor.
Categories of Information to which Patients Should Have Access
27.163
There are several categories of information to which patients might wish to have access, including criminal convictions and ongoing criminal matters, a doctor’s GMC FTP history and ongoing FTP matters, action taken on the doctor’s inclusion on the PCT list and findings of clinical negligence. There was broad agreement that information about existing restrictions on a doctor’s licence to practise should be available.
27.164
A number of respondents to the Consultation Paper and participants at the seminars thought that the guiding principle should be that any information that has at any time been in the public domain should be available to patients. However, that principle is less easy to apply than it is to enunciate. Criminal convictions are in the public domain at the time they occur but the public soon forgets about them. After some years, they are deemed to be ‘spent’ under the provisions of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (the 1974 Act). The 1974 Act is designed to allow persons convicted of offences to put the past behind them. Such persons are not in general required to disclose spent offences when applying for jobs. There are, however, certain exceptions to this general rule, one of which extends to work concerned with the provision of health services. Doctors are required to declare any convictions they may have in response to questions from a prospective employer or PCO.
27.165
Of those respondents who thought that the public should have access to information about criminal convictions, some believed that access to such information should be available throughout a doctor’s career. Others felt that the information should be available only until the conviction was spent, as defined by the 1974 Act. One respondent thought that there was a need for flexibility about past events and that information about past events should be made available only if it was ‘too material/significant not to be shared with patients’. I can see the force of that but think that such a scheme would lead to uncertainty and endless argument. There was broad support among seminar participants for the proposition that matters that were under investigation should not form part of the information available to patients until findings of fact had been made.
27.166
There was some support among respondents to the Consultation Paper for the proposition that information about the outcome of successful clinical negligence claims against a doctor should be accessible to patients. Some findings of clinical negligence against doctors enter the public domain because civil courts generally sit in public and the findings of a judge in a clinical negligence action are publicly available. However, there was some opposition to this idea. It was said that the cases of clinical negligence that go into the public domain are a minority, and that disclosure of them would therefore be unrepresentative and misleading. It is quite usual for the worst cases of negligence to be settled privately with no public hearing. Also, a claim for damages might fail, not because the doctor was not negligent but because the negligence did not have the consequences alleged. Finally, it was said that negligence on the part of a doctor is often part of a more wide-ranging failure and the contribution of the doctor is difficult to determine.
27.167
Dr Reith suggested that it would be sensible to canvass the views of patients on the sort of information they thought they ought to have.
Methods of Making Information Available
27.168
A variety of different methods of providing information to patients was suggested in the written responses to the Consultation Paper and at the seminars. One respondent argued that the information should be provided proactively so that all patients received it, not only the few who had sufficient determination to seek it out. Another respondent took the opposite view and thought that the information should be provided only to patients who made a specific application for the information. Moreover, that respondent thought that the request for information would have to be justified; in other words, reasons should be given for making the request.
27.169
At the seminars, Dr Wilson said that it would be better if the information were provided to patients on a one-to-one basis by someone at the PCT or from the GP practice, rather than by way of a letter. It seems to me that that ideal would be difficult to meet. Dame Lesley Southgate said that doctors themselves should have the responsibility for providing information about restrictions on their practice. She suggested that one method would be for a joint letter to be agreed between the Chief Executive of the PCT and the doctor, setting out the information that should be disclosed as well as the steps that were being taken to ensure that patients were not put at risk, together with any other matters that might be appropriate in an individual case. Dame Lesley agreed that such a system would be more effective in the case of a GP working at one practice than, for example, in the case of a locum doctor or a doctor working for a deputising service.
27.170
Another possibility is for the relevant information to appear on a website, to which patients and members of the public generally would have access, as is provided in a number of overseas jurisdictions.
International Perspective
27.171
As part of his presentation to the Inquiry, Dr Rocco Gerace, Registrar, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, Toronto, spoke about the website which is operated by the College. Patients can obtain from the website details of a doctor’s referral to the College Disciplinary Committee together with any findings made by the Committee. The College is currently seeking legislative change in order to permit publication of undertakings provided by doctors in cases which do not come before the Disciplinary Committee.
27.172
Dr Gerace said that various categories of information are kept in the public domain for different periods. Findings of the Disciplinary Committee relating to sexual abuse on the part of a doctor, for example, would remain on the record throughout the doctor’s career. For lesser findings, there are fixed periods during which the information will be available, and, for certain categories of activity, the Registrar has a discretion as to how long the information should remain on the website. If a doctor were to go into the equivalent of the old GMC health procedures, then the fact that s/he was in the health procedures would not go on the website, but any restrictions on his/her practice would be published and would remain on the website while the restrictions were in force. I think the practice in Ontario might be worth copying.
27.173
Dr Perry Pugno, Director, Division of Medical Education, American Academy of Family Physicians, said that, in the USA, a number of resources providing information on a doctor’s fitness to practise were available to members of the public. The State Medical Boards run websites which provide details of disciplinary action against doctors, criminal convictions and other information, such as the status of a doctor’s licence to practise. In addition, a number of websites exist which are operated on a commercial basis and contain similar material. One example mentioned by Dr Pugno was ‘Choice Trust’, which covers the whole of the USA. The website is partially funded by advertising, and the basic service of establishing a doctor’s administrative details is free, but a charge is made for information about a doctor’s disciplinary history. Dr Pugno said that the information on the commercially run websites is not wholly accurate and, for example, in his own case, some of the practice addresses listed on ‘Choice Trust’ were incorrect and more than five years out of date.
Information Currently Made Available by the General Medical Council
27.174
At the present time, the only official provider of information about a doctor is the GMC. At the time of writing, only information which is on the medical register is available to the public, although, for reasons which I will shortly explain, that may well change in the near future. Of course, anyone who is prepared to use a search facility on the internet will be able to discover a great deal more.
27.175
There are two means of access to information held on the medical register. Some information appears on the GMC website. Alternatively, an enquirer can either telephone or email the GMC. I suppose it must also be possible to write. The website contains very limited information. If the doctor is currently registered and if there are no conditions attached to registration, his/her entry will appear on the website. The entry provides basic factual information, states whether the registration is full, limited or provisional and specifies any specialist register to which the doctor has been admitted. If there are any conditions attached to the doctor’s registration, the website will indicate that it is not possible to display an entry that matches the request but that this does not mean that the doctor is not registered. A telephone number is provided as well as an email address so that further enquiries may be made.
27.176
If the enquirer telephones the number provided and asks about the doctor’s registration, s/he will be told whether or not the doctor is registered and whether the registration is full, limited or provisional. Even if the doctor has conditions attached to his/her registration, the caller might well be told that the doctor is ‘fully registered’. That means only that the registration is not provisional or limited. If a lay caller had heard that his/her doctor was or might be subject to conditions and was telephoning to check whether that was so, the statement that the doctor was ‘fully registered’ might give a misleading impression, even though it would in fact be true. Only if the enquirer asks a specific question, such as whether the doctor has been suspended or whether s/he is subject to conditions, will the enquirer be told of any such matters. The GMC does not volunteer a full account of the doctor’s registration status; it waits for the enquirer to ask. Indeed, the person who answers the telephone is able to provide only the level of information that appears on the website. If the enquirer wishes to ask any further questions, s/he is passed to someone else, apparently in another department. The experience of a member of the Inquiry staff who made a registration enquiry (on my instructions) about a doctor whose registration was subject to conditions was that she was kept waiting and that it was necessary for her to be quite persistent in order to obtain the information requested. Indeed, it appeared doubtful that she would ever have been given the information at all if she had not been able to quote the doctor’s GMC number. Initially, when she gave the doctor’s (correct) name, she was told that no doctor of that name was registered. When she volunteered the doctor’s registration number, she was advised that the doctor was registered but his name was hyphenated on the GMC database.
27.177
It seems to me that this process is unhelpful to the public. All information about a doctor’s registration is in the public domain and it should be made readily available. For those who wish to access the website, the full information including any history of erasure, suspension, conditions and warnings should be shown. For those who prefer to telephone, the full information should be volunteered, without the enquirer having to ask specific questions. I had hoped that, by now, the GMC would have recognised that this should be done. When Professor Sir Graeme Catto, President of the GMC, gave evidence to the Inquiry in December 2003, he said that, in his view, for the GMC to decline to make available anything that is already in the public domain was a ‘weakish stance from which to start’. He accepted that it was not satisfactory that an enquirer had to ask the right questions before s/he would receive full information. However, at the end of October 2004, there had been no change in the amount of information available on the website and no change to the practice of requiring enquirers to ask specific questions before they would be told the full details in respect of the doctor’s registration. I hope that that change will be made very soon.
27.178
As I have said, conditions imposed upon a doctor’s registration are matters in the public domain. In the past, if conditions were imposed by the Health Committee, only the restrictions upon the doctor’s practice were recorded on the register and any conditions of a medical nature were not. That seems appropriate, as any conditions relating to the doctor’s health (such as a condition that s/he submit to medical supervision) should, I think, be treated as confidential, at least so far as the public is concerned. For the future, under the new FTP procedures, I envisage that any conditions on registration (other than those relating to medical matters) imposed by a FTP panel will appear in the doctor’s entry in the register. However, it seems to me that conditions and restrictions entered into voluntarily ought also to appear in the register. A statement of requirements or a set of voluntary undertakings agreed following a performance assessment is, in reality, every bit as much a ‘condition on registration’ as a set of conditions imposed by a FTP committee or panel. If the doctor will not agree to the undertakings, s/he will be referred to a FTP panel. The undertakings would be proposed in the first place only if the view had been taken that the doctor could not safely practise without restriction. Similarly, if the doctor voluntarily accepts a series of undertakings on account of his/her ill health, they are, in effect, conditions on registration. It is verging on sophistry to suggest that restrictions accepted voluntarily are not conditions on registration. I note that the report of the Performance Procedures Review Group suggested that restrictions agreed following a performance assessment should be treated as conditions on registration. In my view, it should be a condition of acceptance of voluntary undertakings that they are to be treated as the equivalent of conditions imposed.
Imminent Changes to General Medical Council Practice
27.179
When Sir Graeme Catto gave evidence to the Inquiry in December 2003, he said that the GMC intended to consult publicly in 2004 on questions of public disclosure. That consultation has now taken place and the results were considered at a meeting of the GMC in July 2004. Several new principles of disclosure were established. I do not think that these changes have yet been put into operation but I think that they must be imminent.
27.180
First, it was decided that, as a general principle, all information that has been in the public domain should be disclosed to any enquirer. That would include any aspect of the FTP procedures that has been in the public domain, even including the fact that a doctor has been charged with SPM but has been acquitted. Second, as a general principle, historical information that has not been placed in the public domain should be disclosed only in limited, defined circumstances, to the police, a coroner or
‘an official inquiry’
. Third, it was agreed that information that has been in the public domain but is no longer of relevance to the doctor’s registration should be disclosed for as long as the doctor remains on the register. The transcript of the meeting shows that it was agreed that this type of information should be disclosed to enquirers but that the answer should be accompanied by an explanation that the information is no longer of relevance to the doctor’s registration.
27.181
The fourth resolution was that any finding of SPM, whether or not that had been followed by the imposition of a sanction, should be disclosed to enquirers. This should continue for as long as the doctor remains on the register. The fifth decision concerned information relating to the findings of fact that had been made against the doctor but had not resulted in a finding of SPM. After some discussion, it was agreed that such information would be provided to enquirers but that it must be set in context so that it would not reflect unfairly on the doctor. It was pointed out that this would be easy in respect of recent and future findings because reasons are now given, whereas, in the past, they were not and it would be difficult to put the information into context. Sixth, it was agreed that, where there had been findings of ‘not guilty’ and no findings ‘in relation to the allegation’, the information would be disclosed to enquirers but, again, it would be put in context.
27.182
Seventh, it was agreed that, if a warning were to be issued in the future under the new FTP procedures, it should be disclosed to a prospective employer at any time during the following five years. The Council decided to postpone its decision about whether warnings should remain on the doctor’s record indefinitely for some purposes, including enquiries from potential employers. Finally, the Council decided that, during the first five-year period after the issue of a warning, it should be disclosed to any enquirer, not only to prospective employers.
27.183
It appears therefore that, in future, the GMC will give full replies to questions about a doctor’s past FTP history. However, it appears that the Council did not question the present practice of giving only the amount of information expressly requested. Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive and Registrar of the GMC, told the meeting that the GMC received about 1000 registration enquiries each day but that 999 of them went no further than finding out whether the doctor was currently registered. It does not appear to have occurred to the Council that this suggests that many prospective employers (or PCOs) are not finding out whether the doctor whose application they are considering has a FTP history, or even whether s/he is subject to current conditions. I find this very worrying. Evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that pre-employment checks are made by clerical staff. It would be quite possible to give such staff a list of questions that must be asked, but it appears from Mr Scott’s advice to the Council that this is not being done. It seems to me that there ought to be much more information on the website and that, in the interests of clinical governance, much more information should be volunteered to telephone enquirers whether or not they ask the right questions.
Recommended Framework for General Medical Council Disclosure
27.184
I recommend that the GMC should adopt a policy of tiered disclosure. It may already have such a policy; if so, my recommendation is that it should be modified in the following way.
The First Tier
27.185
The first tier of disclosure should relate to information which is relevant to the doctor’s current registration status together with certain limited information about his/her past FTP history. First-tier information should be posted on the GMC website and should also be volunteered to anyone who requests registration information, regardless of the questions asked.
27.186
The information to be disclosed in respect of the doctor’s current registration status should include not only those conditions imposed by a FTP panel but also those voluntarily accepted by the doctor, save those that relate to the doctor’s medical condition or supervision. It should also include the existence of any interim orders in effect. When the provisions for revalidation come into force in 2005, information about a doctor’s registration status should include the year in which the doctor is due to be revalidated and, when s/he has been revalidated, the term for which the revalidation will be effective. Thus, it should be possible to see from the register whether the doctor has been revalidated in the year in which revalidation was due.
27.187
The preparation of a list of additional items of information that should be disclosed at the first tier will require public consultation. I shall not attempt to provide a definitive list. However, in my view there are some essentials, which I shall enumerate.
27.188
If a doctor has been erased from the medical register and restored, those facts and the circumstances behind them must be included. If the erasure was voluntary, that can be stated. If it was ordered by a FTP panel, that must appear, together with the underlying reason, in summary form. For example, the doctor was erased following his/her conviction for an offence of manslaughter at the XXX Crown Court. The date of erasure should be given. The date of the restoration should be given. In a case of erasure following a finding of SPM, the nature of the misconduct should be explained, for example, ‘irresponsible prescribing of controlled drugs’ or ‘indecency with patients’. In my view, such information should be available for as long as the doctor remains on the register.
27.189
The fact that a doctor has been erased from the register and the reasons for it should be accessible to the public at the first-tier level for a limited period after erasure even if the doctor has not applied and may never apply for restoration. Now that the minimum period that must elapse before an application for restoration can be made is five years, I would suggest that such information should be available for seven years after erasure.
27.190
The fact that a doctor has been suspended from the register should be disclosed at the first tier, not only during the period of suspension, but for a period afterwards. I would suggest that a period of, say, seven years might be appropriate. The fact that conditions have been imposed should also be disclosed. The period of time for which these should remain on the register ought, in my view, to depend upon whether the condition related to some requirement for retraining (in which case a fairly short period would suffice) or whether it entailed some restriction on the circumstances in which the doctor was permitted to practise, in which case a longer period would be appropriate.
27.191
The fact that a warning has been given should be disclosed at the first tier. I would suggest that an appropriate period for disclosure would be five years. A brief explanation for the reason should be given: for example, a warning was given after an assessment of performance, or a warning was given following the receipt of a report of a conviction for stealing goods to the value of £20 from a shop.
27.192
Past convictions should, in my view, be disclosed at the first-tier regardless of the sanction, if any, imposed by the GMC. The period for which this information should stay at first-tier level should, I suggest, follow the periods laid down in the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.
27.193
In respect of any past FTP history or convictions, when the period of first tier disclosure has expired, a note should appear on the doctor’s website entry to the effect that there is further information about the doctor which can be obtained (in effect at the second tier) by telephoning the GMC number. Any person seeking first-tier disclosure by telephone should be told if there is any further information which may be disclosed at the second tier.
The Second Tier
27.194
Disclosure at the second tier should be to people who make a specific request for information about a doctor’s past FTP history. They should not be asked to identify themselves; nor should they be required to justify their request. The information should be imparted without more ado to anyone seeking either further or full information about the doctor’s FTP history. I do hope that the GMC will instruct its staff to be forthcoming with information rather than waiting for specific questions to be asked. This must not be a game of ‘Twenty Questions’.
27.195
At its meeting in July 2004, the GMC accepted as a general principle that it must provide all information about a doctor that has at any time been in the public domain. It has not yet decided what to do about warnings after the expiry of five years. I think that the GMC’s decisions were sensible. I quite understand the concerns of Council members that some items of past information should, for reasons of fairness, be put into context. This applies particularly to cases in which the doctor has been found not guilty of an allegation of misconduct but the fact that s/he was charged is in the public domain. It seems to me obvious that information that has been in the public domain should be provided by the GMC for as long as the doctor remains on the register.
27.196
The effect of the second tier would be that any person who was contemplating joining the list of a particular GP or who knew that s/he was about to be referred to a particular consultant would be able to find out what s/he needed to know to make an informed choice, at least so far as any history with the GMC was concerned. For example, if this system had been in operation when Shipman was in practice, anybody thinking of joining his list who had looked him up on the website would have seen that his current registration status was full and unrestricted and that he had no recent disciplinary history. However, they would have been alerted to the fact that there was something more to be known about him and would, by telephoning the GMC, have been able to find out about his convictions in 1976. I think that this arrangement provides a reasonable balance between the interests of the doctor in being able to put the past behind him/her (which would be difficult if full information remained on the website indefinitely) and the right of the public and patients to find out, if they are prepared to make a telephone call, everything that has at one time been in the public domain.
The Third Tier
27.197
The GMC has identified a number of types of information that should be disclosed only to a limited class of persons who have a need to know about it in the public interest. These classes of information must, I think, be matters that have never been in the public domain. I think that this approach is entirely reasonable. I would call disclosure of this confidential information to a limited class of persons third-tier disclosure. If my recommendations for a central database were accepted, it would be appropriate for the GMC to ‘flag’ the names of doctors about whom confidential information was held.
Information That Ought to Be Given to Patients of a Practice
27.198
So far, I have discussed only information that should be made available to any member of the public who wishes to obtain it. However, there are some situations in which, in my view, a positive duty to impart information arises. I mentioned above the action taken by a GP practice which had taken on, for supervision and remediation, a doctor previously convicted of manslaughter. The action taken was, in my view, exemplary. The circumstances were rather unusual and it might be said that it would obviously have been wrong to allow the doctor into the practice without informing the patients. However, in my view, the good practice adopted in that case should apply to all cases in which a doctor is subject to conditions on his/her practice. It should also, I think, apply when a doctor has resumed practice following a period of suspension or erasure. In my view, the practice should send a letter of explanation to all patients. The draft should be approved by the PCT. Patients should have the opportunity to refuse to be treated by a doctor who is subject to conditions or has previously been suspended or erased. However, the experience of the practice to which I have referred suggests that they will not necessarily do so.
27.199
It is not part of my remit to make recommendations in respect of doctors working in hospitals. However, having read of the circumstances that arose in the case of
, I will permit myself to observe that any patient who is to be operated on by a doctor who is subject to conditions should, in my view, be told about them and should be told what arrangements are proposed for the supervision of the operation. This information should not be imparted at a late stage when the patient is asked to sign the consent form. It should be given at a time when the patient can, without throwing all his/her personal arrangements into chaos, exercise a choice not to consent to that doctor carrying out the operation.
Proposals for Change Affecting NHS Arrangements for Primary Care
Proposals for Change Affecting the General Medical Council

--- Introduction ---
27.1
In this Report, I have examined the procedures that were in force within the NHS for the monitoring of general practitioners (GPs) during the whole of Shipman’s career. I have also examined the procedures for the handling of complaints against GPs and the way in which concerns raised about a doctor were received and dealt with. My general conclusion has been that those procedures for monitoring were not such as could have been expected to pick up malpractice by a GP in the absence of a complaint drawing direct attention to that malpractice. I have also reported that, until the report made to the Coroner by the late Dr Linda Reynolds in March 1998, no complaints were made or concerns expressed to the authorities about Shipman such as might have given rise to the suspicion that Shipman was killing patients. I have concluded that, even if complaints had been made or concerns raised which might possibly have given rise to such suspicion, it is unlikely that an investigation would have taken place that might have uncovered Shipman’s criminality. The system appears to have operated on the assumption that all doctors were essentially decent and strove to do their best for patients; a few would commit some form of misconduct and some might fail to provide an adequate standard of care. Those would be reported to an appropriate authority and would be dealt with. Shipman’s was not the only case that demonstrated that these assumptions could not be made. Nor was his the first.
27.2
In the second half of the 1990s, the Government, the General Medical Council (GMC) and the medical profession had to come to terms with the unpalatable truth that the existing systems for monitoring the conduct and performance of doctors had failed to detect a number of severely dysfunctional practitioners. The public had been badly let down. Some realised that it must follow that the existing systems were also failing to detect dysfunctionality which was of a less serious kind but which might nonetheless put patients at risk of harm. Many people recognised that the whole system had to be overhauled.
27.3
The Inquiry’s Terms of Reference conclude by requiring me to make such recommendations for change as I consider are necessary for the protection of patients. To that end, the Inquiry has sought to trace the progress of the overhaul of the systems and procedures by which patients should be protected from dysfunctional doctors. Because Shipman was a GP, the Inquiry was required to focus on the systems and procedures in operation in primary care. My general conclusion is that the overhaul has proceeded a long way, although it is not yet complete. The will to achieve change has been variable. In an organisation as huge and complex as the NHS and in a profession as large as medicine, that is not surprising. My overall impression is that there has been considerable will to bring about change within the Government and in some professional organisations, notably the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). There has been substantial change within the GMC since 1998 and there is about to be more. However, in some quarters of the profession, there has been a disappointing reluctance to recognise the need for change. The view is too often heard that there is no point in change designed to ‘catch another Shipman’ because there will never be another one. Some within the profession have not recognised that the need for change goes far wider than that.
27.4
In this Chapter, I propose to consider how far the overhaul has proceeded and to make recommendations for its further progress in the interests of patient protection. Some of these proposals will be quite detailed while others will be of a more general nature, as I have already made a number of detailed recommendations in the preceding Chapters.
CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN - Proposals for Change


========================================================================
APPENDIX B - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 19th-30th January 2004
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX A - Participants in Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry and Their Representatives ---
Counsel to the Inquiry
Miss Caroline Swift QC
Mr Christopher Melton QC
Mr Anthony Mazzag
Mr Michael Jones
instructed by Mr Henry Palin, Solicitor to the Inquiry
Participants
Representatives
Dr Ceri Brown
Dr Murtaza Husaini
Mr David Pittaway QC, instructed by Mr Chris Horsefield, Beachcroft Wansbroughs Solicitors, Leeds
Department of Health
Mr James Maxwell-Scott, instructed by Mr Barrie McKay, Treasury Solicitor’s Office
General Medical Council
Mr Roger Henderson QC, Miss Beverley Lang QC and Mr Adam Heppinstall, instructed by Mr Tom Rider and Mr Matthew Lohn, Field Fisher Waterhouse Solicitors, London
Ms Katharine Gollop, instructed by The Royal College of Nursing Legal Department, Leeds
Mrs Janet Schofield
Mr Peter Southeran, Beachcroft Wansbroughs Solicitors, Manchester
Surgery Staff at 21 Market Street, Hyde
Mrs Kate Oldfield, Davis Blank Furniss Solicitors, Manchester
Tameside Families Support Group
Mr Richard Lissack QC, Mr Andrew Spink QC, Mr Paul Gilroy and Miss Harriet Jerram, instructed by Ms Ann Alexander, Alexander Harris Solicitors, Altrincham, Cheshire
Tameside and Glossop Primary Care Trust
Tameside General Hospital
West Pennine Health Authority
Mr Gerard McDermott QC, Mr David Eccles and Mr Philip Holmes, instructed by Mr Charles Howorth, George Davies Solicitors, Manchester
APPENDICES
APPENDIX B - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 19th-30th January 2004


========================================================================
APPENDIX A - Participants in Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry and Their Representatives
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX B - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 19th-30th January 2004 ---
Organisations
Representatives(s)
Action against Medical Accidents
Ms Fiona Freedland, Legal Director
Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs
Professor Sir Michael Rawlins DL, Former Chairman; Chairman of the National Institute for Clinical Excellence; Registered Medical Practitioner, Newcastle upon Tyne
American Academy of Family Physicians, USA
Dr Perry Pugno, Director, Division of Medical Education
Association for Nurse Prescribing
Mrs Stephanie Farr, Member; Head of Service (Children) for Castlepoint and Rochford Primary Care Trust
Association of Medical Secretaries, Practice Managers, Administrators and Receptionists
Mrs Pauline Webdale, Fellow and Previous National Chairman
Dr John Grenville, General Practitioner, Derbyshire
Collège des Médecins du Québec, Montréal, Canada
Dr André Jacques, Director, Practice Enhancement Division
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, Toronto
Dr Rocco Gerace, Registrar
Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (Healthcare Commission)
Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, Complaints Lead
Consumers’ Association (now known as Which?)
Mrs Frances Blunden, Principal Policy Adviser
Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence)
Mr Sandy Forrest, Director
Mrs Debbie Mellor, Head of Employment Policy Branch, HR Directorate
Mrs Flora Goldhill, Improving Patient Experience Programme Manager
Mr Martin Staniforth, Deputy Director of Human Resources
Dr Kit Harling, Director of NHS Plus
Dr Malcolm Lewis, Chair, Welsh Branch of Council, Registration Committee, Preliminary Proceedings and Professional Conduct Committees, Appointed Medical Screener, General Medical Council; Regional Sub-Dean and Director of Postgraduate Education for General Practice in Wales; Principal in General Practice, Swansea
Mr Robin Macleod, Lay Member, General Medical Council; Clinical and Strategic Governance Reviewer for the Commission for Health Improvement; Lecturer at Newcastle University Medical School, Retired Chief Executive of North Cumbria Health Authority
National Care Standards Commission
Ms Beverley Cole, Transitional Project Manager; Acute Services Manager, Private & Voluntary Healthcare
Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive and Medical Director
National Counselling Service for Sick Doctors
Dr Jolyon Oxley, Honorary Secretary
Office of the Health Service Ombudsman
Ms Linda Charlton, Director of Investigations
Patients Association
Mr Michael Summers, Chairman
Patient Concern
Mrs Joyce Robins, Co-Director
Ms Anna Myers, Deputy Director
Royal College of General Practitioners
Dr William Reith, former Honorary Secretary; Principal in General Practice, Westburn Medical Group, Aberdeen
Royal College of Nursing
Mrs Sue Antrobus, Director, Royal College of Nursing Political Leadership Programme, North West Region
Royal College of Psychiatrists
Dr Douglas Fowlie, Consultant Psychiatrist, North Aberdeenshire
Trent Strategic Health Authority
Dr Sarah Wilson, Director of Public Health and Medical Director
Individual Participants
Positions Held
Professor Richard Baker OBE
Director, Clinical Governance Research & Development Unit, University of Leicester
Professor Aidan Halligan
Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England; Director of Clinical Governance for the NHS
Sir Donald Irvine CBE
President, General Medical Council 1995-2002
Dr Andrew Johns
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley NHS Trust
Professor David Newble
Professor of Medical Education, Head of Department of Medical Education, Director of Learning and Teaching, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sheffield
Mr Ronald Paterson
Health and Disability Commissioner, New Zealand
Professor Martin Roland CBE
Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre; Professor of General Practice (University of Manchester) and Principal in General Practice, Rusholme Health Centre, Manchester
Professor Dame Lesley Southgate DBE
Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London
Professor Chris van Weel
Head of Department of General Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
APPENDIX A - Participants in Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry and Their Representatives
APPENDIX C - Respondents to the Inquiry's Stage Four Consultation Paper


========================================================================
APPENDIX B - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 19th-30th January 2004
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX C - Respondents to the Inquiry's Stage Four Consultation Paper ---
Author (if named)
Mr Peter Walsh, Chief Executive
Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland
Chief Constable William Rae, Honorary Secretary
Mrs Pauline Webdale, Fellow & Previous National Chairman
Ms Barbara Stuttle, Chair
Avon, Gloucestershire & Wiltshire Strategic Health Authority
Dr M Durkin, Director of Clinical Quality
Barnsley Primary Care Trust
Dr Joan Miller, Consultant in Public Health
Billericay, Brentwood & Wickford Primary Care Trust
Mr David Gibbins, Director of Modernisation and Commissioning
Birkenhead & Wallasey Primary Care Trust
Mr John South, Director of Primary Care
Ms Sally Watson, Director of Political & Representational Activities
Burntwood, Lichfield & Tamworth Primary Care Trust
Calderdale Primary Care Trust
Ms Ruth Lumb, Clinical Governance Manager
Cheshire & Merseyside Strategic Health Authority
Dr Iqbal Sram, Assistant Director, Clinical Performance
Cheshire West Primary Care Trust
Dr Maureen Swanson, Medical Adviser & Clinical Governance Lead
City & Hackney GP Appraisers Workshop
Dr Christopher Derrett
Committee of General Practice Education Directors
Dr Pat Lane, Chair
Commission for Healthcare Audit & Inspection (Healthcare Commission)
Commission for Health Improvement
Dr Jocelyn Cornwell, Acting Chief Executive
Mrs Frances Blunden, Principal Policy Adviser - Health
Cumbria & Lancashire Strategic Health Authority
Dr Stephen Ward, Medical Advisor, Primary Care
Daventry & South Northants Primary Care Trust
Ms Julia Squire, Chief Executive
Mrs Janet Walden, Head of Inquiries & Investigations Unit
Dorset & Somerset Strategic Health Authority
Sir Ian Carruthers OBE, Chief Executive
East Hampshire Primary Care Trust
Dr John Hughes, Chair, Professional Executive Committee
East Kent Coastal Teaching Primary Care Trust
Ms Cathy Bolton, Corporate Business Manager
East Staffordshire Primary Care Trust
Ms Kay Edwards
East Sussex, Brighton & Hove Primary Care Support Services
Mr Derek Billett, Principal Manager Governance)
Eastern Leicester Primary Care Trust
Miss Carolyn Clifton, Chief Executive, Ms Madeleine Dent, PCT Board Secretary
Epping Forest Primary Care Trust
Mr Aidan Thomas, Chief Executive
Essex Strategic Health Authority
Mr Terry Hanafin, Chief Executive
Greater Manchester Strategic Health Authority
Messrs George Davies, Solicitors
Greater Manchester Police
Mrs Sandra Pope, Force Solicitor
Health and Law Foundation
Dr James Caveney Sharp, Director of Health and Medical Law
Independent Doctors Forum
Dr Martin Scurr, Chairman
Institute of Healthcare Management
Ms Rosey Foster, Deputy Chief Executive
Joint Committee on Postgraduate Training for General Practitioners
Dr John Toby, Chairman
Kent & Medway Strategic Health Authority
Ms Candy Morris, Chief Executive
Luton Primary Care Trust
Ms Tonia Parsons, Acting Director of Commissioning & Health Improvement
Maidstone Weald Primary Care Trust
Dr Caroline Jessel, Medical Clinical Governance Lead
Marie Curie Cancer Care
Dr Teresa Tate, Medical Adviser
Medical Council on Alcohol
Dr G E Ratcliffe, Medical Director
Medical Defence Union
Ms Mary-Lou Nesbitt, Head of Governmental & External Relations
Medical & Dental Defence Union of Scotland
Dr I G Simpson, Chief Executive & Secretary
Medical Protection Society
Dr Gerard Panting, Communications & Policy Director
Morecambe Bay Local Medical Committee
Mr David Noblett, Chief Executive & Secretary
Medicines Commission
Ms Sue Jones, Secretary
National Association of GP Co-operatives
Dr Jamie MacLeod, Secretary; General Practitioner
National Association of Primary Care Educators
Dr John C Howard
Mr Ron Kerr, Chief Executive
Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive & Medical Director
National Patient Safety Agency
Ms Sue Osborn/Ms Sue Williams, Joint Chief Executive
New Forest Primary Care Trust
NHS Education for Scotland (Scottish GP Appraisal Scheme)
Dr Johnstone Shaw, National GP Appraisal Co-ordinator
NHS Education for Scotland (West of Scotland Region)
Professor Stuart Murray
Norfolk, Suffolk & Cambridgeshire Strategic Health Authority
Ms Sandra Corry, Programme Lead - Clinical Governance
North Devon Primary Care Trust
Dr Ian Jack, Chairman of Executive Committee
North East London Strategic Health Authority
Ms Sheila Adam, Director of Public Health
Dr Ben Essex, Medical Adviser
Mr Rigo Pizarro, Assistant Director for Primary Care
North & East Yorkshire & Northern Lincolnshire Strategic Health Authority
Mr David Johnson, Chief Executive
North Lincolnshire Primary Care Trust
Dr Brian Crompton, Clinical Governance/Medical Director
North Sheffield Primary Care Trust
Dr Paul Schatzberger, Director of Primary Care Medicine
North Stoke Primary Care Trust
Mrs Sue Noyce
Office for National Statistics
Mr John Pullinger, Executive Director
Plymouth Primary Care Trust
Dr Peter Williams, Chair, Professional Executive Committee
Rotherham Primary Care Trust
Dr John Radford, Director of Public Health
Royal College of Anaesthetists
Mr Charles McLaughlan, Director of Professional Standards
Royal College of General Practitioners, Scotland
Royal College of Midwives
Miss Louise Silverton, Deputy General Secretary
Ms Lynn Young, Primary Health Care Adviser
Royal College of Physicians
Dr Christopher Evans, Invited Service Review Officer
Royal College of Physicians & Surgeons of Glasgow
Dr K R Paterson, Honorary Secretary
Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh
Dr Andrew Fairbairn, Registrar
Royal College of Radiologists
Mr Andrew Hall, Chief Executive
Royal College of Surgeons Edinburgh
Dr J A R Smith, President
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
Miss Mandie Lavin, Director of Fitness to Practise & Legal Affairs
Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care
Dr Graham Strang, Medical Adviser
Scottish Executive (Health Department)
Mr Richie Malloch, General Medical Services
Sheffield South East Primary Care Trust
Dr Paul Redgrave, Director of Public Health
Sheffield West Primary Care Trust
Dr John Poyser, Chairman, Professional Executive Committee
Shropshire County and Telford & Wrekin Primary Care Trusts
Dr Anthony Rathbone, Primary Care Medical Adviser
Small Practices Association
Dr Michael Taylor, Chairman
South East London Strategic Health Authority
Mr Duncan Selbie, Chief Executive
South Leeds Primary Care Trust
Dr Mark Williamson, Medical Director
South Liverpool Primary Care Trust
Mr T B Penn, Head of FHS Support
South West Kent Primary Care Trust
Mr Steve Ford, Chief Executive
South West Peninsula Strategic Health Authority
Ms Thelma Holland, Chief Executive
South Yorkshire Strategic Health Authority
Dr Colin Hardisty, Medical Adviser
Southampton City Primary Care Trust
Dr David Paynton, Chair of Professional Executive Committee
Southend on Sea Primary Care Trust
Mr Neil Smillie, Associate Director of Primary Care & Commissioning
Southport & Formby Primary Care Trust
Ms Jane Beenstock, Chief Executive
Staffordshire Moorlands Primary Care Trust
Ms Denise Frost
St Albans & Harpenden Primary Care Trust
Ms Sue Brassington, Clinical Governance Manager
St Helens Primary Care Trust
Ms Morag P Day, Chief Executive
Surrey & Sussex Strategic Health Authority
Dr Diana Grice, Medical Director & Director of Public Health
Thurrock Primary Care Trust
Mr Gary Scott, Deputy Chief Executive
Dr Sarah Harriet Wilson, Director of Public Health and Medical Director
University of Wales College of Medicine
Dr Phil Matthews, Deputy Director of Postgraduate Education for General Practice
Welsh Assembly Government
Mrs Ann Lloyd, Director, NHS Wales
Witham, Braintree & Halstead Care Trust
Dr Paul Zollinger-Read, Chief Executive
Individuals
Position Held/Reason for Interest in the Inquiry
Ms Mitzi Blennerhassett
Dr Michael J Dawson
GP Tutor, Shropshire; GP Principal
Dr John Grenville
General Practitioner, Derbyshire
Dr John Harding Price
Dr G R Harlow
Mrs Georgina Harrison
Mr John Hexter
Former Chemist Inspection Officer, Thames Valley Police
Dr Graham A W Hornett
General Practitioner
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist & Honorary Senior Lecturer, South London & Maudsley NHS Trust
Dr A J McDonald
GP Tutor, North Birmingham & General Practitioner
Dr Jacqueline Ann Moulton
District Child Protection Officer (retired)
Dr William G Pickering
Dr Brian Vishnu Rambihar
GP Principal/Partner
Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College, London
Mr Alan Stears
Senior Inspector, Home Office Drugs Branch Inspectorate (retired)
Dr Thelma Thomas
General Practitioner
Mr Patrick Tierney
Son of Mrs Angela Tierney
Dr Michael Udal
General Practitioner Principal (retired)
Professor Tim van Zwanenberg
Professor of Postgraduate General Practice & Director of Postgraduate General Practice Education, University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Mr Richard Wakeford and Dr Mei Ling Denney
Educational Adviser, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge
Educational Lead for Appraisal, Greater Peterborough Primary Care Partnership
APPENDIX D - Appraisal Forms for General Practitioners Working in the NHS


========================================================================
APPENDIX C - Respondents to the Inquiry's Stage Four Consultation Paper
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX D - Appraisal Forms for General Practitioners Working in the NHS ---
Click here to view the Appraisal Forms for General Practitioners Working in the NHS
APPENDIX E - 'Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care' Reproduced with Permission from The Lancet


========================================================================
APPENDIX D - Appraisal Forms for General Practitioners Working in the NHS
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX E - 'Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care' Reproduced with Permission from The Lancet ---
Click here to view ‘Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care’ Reproduced with Permission from The Lancet
APPENDIX F - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 13th-14th October 2003


========================================================================
APPENDIX E - 'Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care' Reproduced with Permission from The Lancet
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX F - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 13th-14th October 2003 ---
Representative(s)
Adur, Arun and Worthing Primary Care Trust
Ms Julie Billett, Multi-Disciplinary Public Health Specialist Trainee
Professor Gwyn Bevan, member of the Transition Team (seconded from Director of the Office for Information on Healthcare Performance, Commission for Health Improvement)
Croydon Primary Care Trust
Mrs Catherine Scott, Specialist in Public Health
Dr John Fox, Director of Statistics
Institute of Public Health
Dr David Spiegelhalter, Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge
Leicestershire Health Informatics Service
Dr Hanna Blackledge, Public Health Analyst
Dr Peter Goldblatt, Chief Medical Statistician
Dr Maureen Baker CBE, Honorary Secretary
Northern Ireland General Practice Mortality Regional Group
Dr Kathryn Booth, Chair
Dr Paul Aylin
Clinical Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology & Public Health, Imperial College School of Medicine, Science & Technology, London
Dr Nicky Best
Senior Lecturer in Statistics, Imperial College School of Medicine, Science & Technology, London
Dr Alex Bottle
Researcher, Imperial College School of Medicine, Science & Technology, London
Dr Mohammed A Mohammed
Senior Research Fellow, Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, University of Birmingham
Dr Christopher Roberts
Senior Lecturer in Medical Statistics, School of Epidemiology and Health Sciences, University of Manchester
APPENDIX G - 'Good Medical Practice' A General Medical Council Booklet

---  ---
Sorry, we were unable to retrieve the page you requested.
The requested page [0] could not be found.
If you continue to receive this error, please
contact us
explaining how the problem occured.


========================================================================
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Raising Concerns: the Way Forward
========================================================================

--- Correction to paragraph 10.26 ---
Correction
Please note the following correction to The Shipman Inquiry - Fifth Report, Safeguarding Patients: Lessons from the Past - Proposals for the Future.
Correction to paragraph 10.26:
The statement in paragraph 10.26 that Dr Dunn wrote a favourable reference for Dr Irani is incorrect. Dr Dunn did not write a reference for Dr Irani. The Professional Conduct Committee of the GMC found Dr Dunn guilty of serious professional misconduct on account of his failure to take appropriate steps to investigate a number of concerns expressed to him about the professional performance of Dr Irani.
An apology has been issued to Dr Dunn.
March 2005:
LONDON: THE STATIONERY OFFICE
Causation

--- The Fifth Report ---
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
SUMMARY
RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTERS ONE to TWENTY SEVEN
FOREWORD

---  ---
Mae’r datganiad ym mharagraff 10.26 bod Mr Dunn wedi ysgrifennu geirda ffafriol i Dr Irani yn anghywir. Ni wnaeth Mr Dunn ysgrifennu geirda i Dr Irani. Canfu Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol y GMC bod Dr Dunn yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol yn sgil ei fethiant i gymryd camau priodol i ymchwilio i nifer o bryderon a fynegwyd iddo ynghylch perfformiad proffesiynol Dr Irani.
Mae ymddiheuriad wedi’i roi i Dr Dunn.
Achosiaeth
Fersiwn Argraffedig
PENNOD UN AR DDEG - Codi Pryderon: y Ffordd Ymlaen

---  ---
Cynnwys
CRYNODEB
CRYNODEB

--- The Fifth Report ---
CHAPTER ONE - Introduction

--- FOREWORD ---
The Fifth Report

--- FOREWORD ---
This Report deals with the Fourth Stage of Phase Two of the Inquiry. It covers those parts of my Terms of Reference which required me, by reference to the case of Harold Shipman, to enquire into the performance of the functions of those statutory bodies, authorities, other organisations and individuals with responsibility for monitoring primary care provision and to recommend what steps, if any, should be taken to protect patients in the future.
The Inquiry has examined the powers and functions of the primary care organisations which administered general medical services during the years between 1974, when Shipman commenced work as a general practitioner (GP) and 1998, when he ceased practice following his arrest on suspicion of murder. I have also considered the important changes made since 1998 in the arrangements for the monitoring of GPs and the introduction of measures for the remediation of any deficiencies uncovered by such monitoring.
The General Medical Council (GMC) is the body responsible for keeping the register of all doctors practising in the UK. Only the GMC has the power to erase a doctor’s name from the medical register. It can also suspend the doctor from practice or impose conditions upon his/her registration. It exercises these powers through its ‘fitness to practise’ procedures. The GMC’s powers are the ‘teeth’ by which all other monitoring processes can ultimately be enforced. It follows that the GMC plays an essential part in the monitoring of GPs and in the protection of patients from doctors who might harm them either deliberately, recklessly or by reason of some deficiency in their practice. The Inquiry has examined the way in which the GMC has operated its fitness to practise procedures from the 1970s until the present day and has considered the proposals for the new procedures which have just come into operation. I have also examined the GMC’s proposals for the revalidation of doctors, due to come into effect in 2005.
During this stage, the Inquiry has received an enormous amount of documentary evidence, including 386 witness statements and 126 responses to the Consultation Paper, ‘Safeguarding Patients’, which was issued in October 2003. Ideas for change were discussed at seminars held in January 2004. I am grateful to all those who provided statements of evidence or written responses and to those who attended the hearings and seminars in person. I must mention particularly the participants from overseas who made presentations to the Inquiry explaining how doctors are monitored in their countries. All these contributions have been of value to me and have, I believe, enabled me to reach conclusions that are soundly based in evidence.
The publication of this Report marks the end of the Inquiry’s examination of the wider issues associated with Shipman’s activities, although it is my intention to publish a further short Report dealing with Shipman’s activities while working at Pontefract General Infirmary between 1970 and 1974. It is, therefore, appropriate at this stage for me to express my thanks to all those who have worked on the Inquiry. Those who remain have worked together for almost four years and my debt of gratitude to them is immense. The administrative team, led, until recently, by Oonagh McIntosh, has provided not only a smooth-running internal machine but also the Inquiry’s interface with witnesses and the public, particularly the families of Shipman’s victims. If they have found that the Inquiry has treated them with sympathy and consideration, I have Oonagh and her team to thank for it. Henry Palin, Solicitor and Secretary to the Inquiry and his assistant, Ita Langan, have managed all the investigations, the document handling and the publication of the Reports. Their dedication has been unswerving and their contribution immense. At one time, their team comprised about fifteen solicitors and paralegals. Three have stayed to the end: Martin Beckett, Tony Kitson and Thomas Thwaites. I am grateful to them not only for their staying power but for the care and thoroughness of their work, which has been vital to the Inquiry’s processes. Allan Dyde, a retired detective inspector who knew Hyde well, joined the team for six weeks in February 2001 and proved so useful that we could not let him go. The IT team has been indispensible to what was an (almost) paper-free Inquiry. Helen Whitehorn has taken much (if not quite all) of the stress out of preparing the Reports for publication. Aneez Esmail has, throughout the Inquiry, been an invaluable source of advice and inspiration. Finally, I am indebted to Counsel, Caroline Swift QC, Christopher Melton QC, Anthony Mazzag and Michael Jones. I recognise that the Inquiry has lasted longer and has kept them from their practices for longer than any of us expected. I appreciate the hard work and very long hours that all members of the legal team have put in. The Inquiry has taken over their lives and they have put up with that with unfailing cheerfulness. I have enjoyed their company and their friendship. I wish them all well as they return to ‘normal life’.
The subject matter of this Inquiry was such that the enormity of Shipman’s crimes, his breach of trust and the effect that these had on the families of his victims and the people of Hyde were never far from my mind. In the early stages, my first concern was to give the families the answers they needed. However, as the ambit of the Inquiry’s work widened to include an examination of death certification, controlled drugs regulation and the monitoring of GPs, I came to realise that the Inquiry could turn the tragedy of Shipman’s criminality into something of benefit to society in the future. Whether the Inquiry succeeds in that respect is for the judgement of others. If it fails, it has not been for want of trying.

--- SUMMARY ---
The Framework of General Practice
The Circumstances of Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice in 1977
Monitoring Systems during Shipman's Years in General Practice
Shipman in the 1980s and Early 1990s
The Adequacy of Local Monitoring
Developments since Shipman's Arrest in 1998
Patient Complaints and the Disciplining of General Practitioners
Raising Concerns
The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976
The General Medical Council's 'Old' Fitness to Practise Procedures
The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures

--- Introduction ---
1.
At the time this Inquiry was set up in January 2001, it was known that Shipman had murdered 15 patients during the years 1995 to 1998. It was also suspected that he might have killed others over a much longer period. When, at the end of his trial, it came to light that, in 1976, Shipman had been convicted of offences of forgery, of unlawful possession of pethidine and of obtaining pethidine by deception, many people began to ask how it was that he had been able to return to unsupervised general practice in 1977, just over a year later. They also wondered how it was that his repeated killing of patients had escaped the notice of the authorities responsible for general practitioners (GPs) such as him. One of the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference required me to look into
‘the performance of the functions of those statutory bodies, authorities, other organisations and individuals with responsibility for monitoring primary care provision ... and to recommend what steps, if any, should be taken to protect patients in the future’
. I interpreted the word ‘monitoring’ in its broadest sense, as I am confident was the intention of Parliament.
2.
By the time the Inquiry was ready to embark upon hearings relating to this aspect of its work in 2003, the First Report had already been published. I had found that, between 1975 and 1998, Shipman had killed no fewer than 215 patients. Thus, in order to comply with its Terms of Reference, the Inquiry has had to examine the provisions for the monitoring of GPs working in the NHS over a period of 23 years. That included examination of the powers of the primary care organisations (PCOs) responsible for the administration of general practice during that period, their involvement in the selection of GPs to fill practice vacancies, the monitoring tools (if any) that were available to them, the regulations governing the disciplining of GPs and the methods by which patient complaints about GPs were handled. As well as considering how the systems operated in general, the Inquiry had to examine how they operated in respect of Shipman. One question of particular interest to the Inquiry was whether anybody had harboured any suspicions about him and, if so, how easy it was for them to raise their concerns effectively with an appropriate authority. The Inquiry was also interested to discover whether it was feasible for PCOs to monitor the death rates of the patients of GPs and whether any PCOs in fact did so.
3.
In addition to examining the systems operating within the NHS, the Inquiry also scrutinised the operation of the fitness to practise (FTP) procedures of the General Medical Council (GMC) over the same period of 23 years. The FTP procedures are an integral part of the monitoring of all doctors. The GMC is the only body which can erase or suspend a doctor’s right to practise medicine in the UK; it can also impose conditions on a doctor’s right to practise. The GMC’s FTP procedures are, in effect, the ‘teeth’ behind all the other monitoring and disciplinary systems. As well as considering how the GMC’s FTP procedures worked in general, the Inquiry has examined how the GMC dealt with Shipman in 1976, when he was reported to it following his conviction for the drug-related offences to which I have already referred. The outcome was that Shipman was given a warning as to his future conduct and he was thereafter free to continue in practice. I have also examined how the GMC handled cases of drug abusing doctors after the introduction of its ‘health procedures’ in 1980. Shipman was also reported to the GMC in respect of less serious matters in 1985 and 1994 and I have described what happened on those occasions.
4.
Because the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference also require me to make recommendations for the better protection of patients in the future, the Inquiry has had to examine the systems for monitoring GPs in place at the present time and those that are envisaged for the future. In order to do that, it has been necessary to look at the developments in the arrangements for primary care and for the regulation of the profession which have taken place since 1998, when Shipman ceased practice. It has been a period of great and rapid change. Change is still continuing. Also, the GMC’s FTP procedures have recently been overhauled and the GMC has been developing its proposals for the revalidation of the registration of all doctors practising in the UK. Revalidation is due to be introduced in April 2005. To some extent, the Inquiry has been focussing on a changing picture. However, that has not prevented me from reaching conclusions and making recommendations which will, I believe, help to achieve the Inquiry’s primary aim of seeking to ensure that, in the future, the behaviour of a seriously dysfunctional doctor like Shipman would not remain undetected for so long.

--- The Framework of General Practice ---
5.
The NHS came into being in 1948 and, from that time, general medical services have been provided and administered locally by PCOs. I shall confine my description to those that have existed in England during the relevant period. The composition and functions of PCOs have changed from time to time over the years. In 1974, when Shipman first entered general practice, general medical services were administered by family practitioner committees (FPCs). Today, the local bodies responsible are the primary care trusts (PCTs). There are about 300 PCTs in England. PCTs are responsible for the provision of all primary care services, including general medical services.
6.
There are about 34,500 GPs in active practice in England today. Most of them are self-employed independent contractors, although some are employed directly by PCTs or others. Traditionally, GPs have been fiercely protective of their self-employed status, their independence and their clinical autonomy. General medical services are provided under a contract (the General Medical Services (GMS) Contract), the terms of which are negotiated - and from time to time renegotiated - between the Government and representatives of the profession. The GMS Contract provides for the remuneration of GPs and for various allowances for the running of a practice. Until the mid-1960s, many GPs were single-handed practitioners. A new GMS Contract, which came into effect in 1966, provided incentives for GPs to join together into larger groups and to improve their premises and employ more staff. This Contract marked the beginning of modern team-based general practice. All GMS Contracts until that of 2004 also imposed upon GPs a number of personal duties, known as the terms of service. One important duty was to tender to their patients all necessary and appropriate personal medical services of the type usually provided by GPs.
7.
During almost the whole period of Shipman’s practice as a GP, from 1974 to 1998, the role of PCOs was primarily that of provider and facilitator of GP services to the population. FPCs continued in operation until 1990 when they were replaced by family health services authorities (FHSAs). These, in turn, were replaced by health authorities (HAs) in 1996. HAs were abolished in 2002 and were replaced by PCTs. FPCs did not exercise a supervisory role over GPs; their functions were purely administrative. Only in the 1990s did FHSAs and HAs begin to exercise a monitoring or quasi-management role in respect of the GPs practising in their area. The powers of the PCOs to monitor and ‘manage’ GPs have increased markedly over the last ten years and, today, PCTs are responsible not only for the provision of general medical services but also for putting in place arrangements for monitoring and improving the quality of health care provided. In order to fulfil their responsibilities, PCTs have been given a wide range of powers, some of which I shall describe later.

--- The Circumstances of Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice in 1977 ---
8.
From the inception of the NHS, one of the important functions of PCOs has been to keep a list (formerly known as the
medical list)
of all GPs practising in the area. Before any doctor is entitled to practise as a GP in a particular locality, s/he must be admitted to the list held by the relevant PCO. In 1977, when Shipman was appointed to the Donneybrook practice, the keeping of the medical list was a purely administrative task. Apart from ensuring that the doctor was on the medical register, the FPC was not required or empowered to make any further checks on the suitability of the doctor for work in general practice before admitting him/her to the list. A doctor could be removed from the list only if s/he had ceased to be a registered practitioner, had failed to provide medical services for six months or had been erased or suspended from the medical register by the GMC. PCOs could make representations to the NHS Tribunal seeking a doctor’s removal from its list on the grounds that s/he prejudiced the efficiency of the services it provided. This was a cumbersome process and not much used.
9.
Until 2000, if a vacancy arose in an existing general practice, the local PCO played a very limited role in filling it. If notified of a vacancy by the remaining partners in the practice, the PCO would apply to the Medical Practices Committee (MPC), a national body whose function was to ensure the equitable distribution of GPs throughout the country. If the MPC agreed that a replacement doctor was needed, it was entirely a matter for the partners in the practice to select a replacement. If the successful candidate was not already on the medical list of the relevant FPC, s/he would apply for admission to the medical list and, provided s/he was on the medical register, s/he would be admitted to the list and would be free to take up the post.
10.
In February 1976, following the detection four months earlier of his controlled drugs offences, Shipman took up a post with the Durham Area Health Authority in the field of child health. In April 1976, the GMC considered his case and decided to allow to him to continue in practice. In the summer of 1977, he applied for a vacancy at the Donneybrook practice in Hyde, Greater Manchester. At the interview, he admitted to members of the practice that he had had a drug problem in the past, but he was able to assure them (as was true) that the GMC had not thought it necessary to erase or suspend him from the medical register. Nor had the Home Secretary imposed any restrictions on Shipman’s prescribing rights, as had been open to him under section 12 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The partners were disarmed by Shipman’s apparent frankness about his past difficulties and impressed by his enthusiasm and his recent experience in the field of child health. They made enquiries of the GMC and of the Home Office and ascertained that Shipman was free to practise without restriction. They spoke to one of the psychiatrists who had treated him and were told that Shipman had had a problem which had been satisfactorily resolved. They spoke to a partner in his former practice who, although angry at the fact that Shipman had stolen or misappropriated pethidine from the practice, spoke highly of his abilities as a doctor. They may have spoken to his employers. If they did, they would doubtless have received an encouraging account of his progress and would have learned that there appeared to have been no recurrence of his former drug problem. Following these enquiries, the members of the Donneybrook practice decided to offer Shipman the vacancy. They considered that it was reasonable to rely on the GMC’s judgement that Shipman was fit to practise medicine. I do not criticise them for that.
11.
Shipman applied for inclusion on the medical list held by the Tameside FPC. An enquiry was made of the GMC to ensure that he was registered. The GMC’s response indicated that Shipman was fully registered. The FPC was not told of Shipman’s recent involvement with the GMC. Indeed, even if the GMC had been specifically asked whether Shipman had had any previous involvement with the GMC, the FPC would not have been told about that involvement. Shipman had been dealt with by the GMC in private and the fact that that he had received a warning would have been treated by the GMC as confidential.
12.
Shipman was then admitted to the medical list of the Tameside FPC, the officers of which were completely unaware that he had been convicted of controlled drugs offences some 20 months earlier. They and their successors remained in ignorance of that fact throughout the period that Shipman was in practice in Tameside. Even if they had known of the convictions, they would not have been able to refuse Shipman admission to the medical list in 1977. He was on the medical register; he was entitled to practise and was entitled to be admitted to the list. The Tameside FPC is not to be criticised for admitting him to its medical list. Nor can members of the Donneybrook practice be criticised for failing to tell the Tameside FPC about Shipman’s past history. The limited role played by FPCs at that time meant that it simply did not occur to anyone at the practice that the FPC had an interest in receiving this information.

--- Monitoring Systems during Shipman's Years in General Practice ---
13.
In the 1970s and 1980s, as I have said, the FPCs were purely administrative organisations. They had no management role. Nor did they have any responsibility for professional competence or quality of care. Those were matters left entirely to the profession. At a local level, elected committees of GPs (local medical committees (LMCs)) assumed responsibility for maintaining professional standards and had responsibility for adjudicating on such matters as excessive prescribing, failure to exercise reasonable care when issuing medical certificates and failing to keep proper medical records. These issues were regarded as matters to be regulated by the medical profession, not by the PCOs. LMCs also had a formal statutory role in disciplinary and complaints procedures involving GPs. Nationally, the GMC was responsible for regulating the conduct of doctors on its register. During this period, there was a recognition in some quarters (notably the Royal College of General Practitioners) that standards of care among GPs were, in general, extremely variable, and, in the case of some, unacceptably low. Some members of the profession began to take steps aimed at raising standards. Meanwhile, the FPCs lacked the necessary powers to undertake any systematic monitoring of clinical performance or of the quality of services offered by GPs.
14.
There was, however, one way in which a PCO might become aware that a doctor was not practising to an acceptable standard. A complaint about substandard practice might be made by or on behalf of a patient. Until 1996, patients’ complaints were directed to the PCO. Thus, the PCO became aware of complaints as they were made and could, if it chose, undertake some analysis of those complaints and, by that means, identify ‘problem doctors’. The complaints and disciplinary systems were linked so that it was possible, in some cases, for a PCO to initiate disciplinary measures when a complaint was upheld. However, detecting poor practice by means of complaints was a purely reactive process. During the 1970s and 1980s, there was very little proactive monitoring of GPs that might have been capable of detecting malpractice or poor performance. The Regional Medical Service (RMS) employed doctors known as regional medical officers (RMOs) who visited all GPs in their area. Each GP might expect a visit about every two years. The RMOs’ role was largely pastoral although they had the power to inspect GPs’ controlled drugs registers (CDRs) and their arrangements for storing controlled drugs. Theoretically, they could inspect medical records but it appears that, by the mid-1960s, this power had fallen into disuse. In 1991, the RMS ceased to have any responsibility for GPs.
15.
In November 1987, the Government published a White Paper, ‘Promoting Better Health’, which contained a number of proposals designed to improve the range and quality of primary care services. FPCs were given increased responsibilities and a ‘managerial’ role. In an attempt to enhance the managerial role, the new FHSAs, which came into existence in 1990, had fewer GP members than the FPCs and those members were appointed by the regional health authorities instead of (as had hitherto been the case) by the LMCs. FHSAs were required to employ medical advisers independent of the local medical profession who could provide expert clinical advice. New GPs’ terms of service required doctors to be more active in the field of preventive medicine and contained other provisions aimed at improving the quality of primary care services. FPCs were encouraged to set targets for the provision of special services such as vaccination, immunisation and cervical screening. Incentive payments were made if targets were achieved. Also, the Prescription Pricing Authority began to analyse data collected from the prescriptions issued by GPs. These data analyses were sent to FHSAs, whose medical advisers visited GPs and discussed their prescribing practice. Later, FHSAs began to employ specialist pharmaceutical advisers for this purpose. Initially, this exercise was designed to bring about a reduction in the cost of drugs prescribed; GPs were to be persuaded to prescribe the cheaper generic equivalents of the more expensive proprietary drugs they had formerly used. Before long, the objective shifted and medical and pharmaceutical advisers focussed their attention on trying to ensure that doctors prescribed rationally and well.
16.
In the early 1990s, the Government began to encourage medical or clinical audit, a process by which doctors analyse data drawn from various aspects of their clinical practice and, it is intended, use the results to improve their practices. Incentive payments were offered to doctors who would take part. Clinical audit can reveal a good deal about the quality and standards of the care provided by the doctor. However, the doctors would not allow officers of the PCO to see the results of their audits. The process was wholly formative; that means that it was to be regarded as a learning experience and was not to be used as a means of inspection or testing. Audit results were confidential and were reported annually to the FHSA only in an aggregated, anonymised form.
17.
During the period up to 1998, considerable progress was made by the PCOs (first the FHSAs and, from 1996, the HAs) in the collection of information about GP practices and in encouraging GPs, by means of financial incentives, to improve the range and quality of their services. Nevertheless, there were still considerable limitations on the ability of the PCOs to deal with those GPs who were not amenable to change. Medical and pharmaceutical advisers had limited powers and had to proceed by way of persuasion and the use of influence. After 1996, there was a change in the system for dealing with patient complaints. From that time, complaints were made direct to GP practices and HAs might remain completely unaware that a complaint had been made. Consequently, they had less opportunity to gain intelligence about poor practice in their area. The complaints and disciplinary systems operated separately. Disciplinary action involved a cumbersome process and was seldom initiated. HAs still had only limited powers to remove a doctor from their lists. By 1998, local arrangements for dealing with poorly performing doctors, which came into existence after the introduction by the GMC of its performance procedures in 1997, were in general only in the planning stages.

--- Shipman in the 1980s and Early 1990s ---
Shipman’s Time at the Donneybrook Practice
18.
Throughout the 1980s, Shipman had practised at the Donneybrook practice, which was then described as a ‘group practice’. In fact, the Donneybrook practice was not what would now be described as a group practice, i.e. one in which the doctors share the care of the patients on their joint list. Most of the doctors in the Donneybrook practice, including Shipman, had their own list of patients. They cared for each other’s patients only under mutual arrangements for half days, holidays and out of hours cover. They did not become familiar with the health or problems of each other’s patients. The other doctors in the practice had little opportunity to form an opinion about the quality of care provided by Shipman and no reason at all to suppose that he might be harming his patients deliberately.
19.
In late 1991, Shipman decided to leave the Donneybrook practice and to set up as a single-handed practitioner. Although, strictly speaking, he did not need the permission of the Tameside FHSA to do so, he did need its approval and support because it could have withheld the financial allowances he needed to set up the new practice premises. However, support was readily forthcoming. Shipman was held in high regard at the FHSA. He was well known to officers of the FHSA; he had been a member of its predecessor PCO, the Tameside FPC, for several years while secretary of the LMC. He was not universally liked; many people regarded him as arrogant and ‘prickly’. But there was no reason to believe that he was providing other than a high standard of care for his patients and certainly no reason to think that he might be killing them. Moreover, as there were no other small or single-handed practices in Hyde, it was thought that the new practice would provide appropriate diversity of service. On 1st
January 1992, Shipman set up as a sole practitioner, still working from rooms within Donneybrook House, where the Donneybrook practice had been situated. His new surgery premises at 21 Market Street, Hyde, were not ready for occupation until August 1992.
Shipman’s Clinical Practice
20.
Shipman gave the appearance of being a competent doctor. He was enthusiastic about preventive medicine and undertook regular clinical audit. He seemed to be modern and progressive and was well liked by his patients. It is possible (as some have suggested) that he created an appearance of greater professional competence that he in fact possessed. Whether or not that was so, it is unlikely that routine examination of the limited amount of data available to the PCOs during the time he was in practice would have raised any concerns about his competence or professional conduct. Although complaints were made to the Tameside PCO about Shipman in 1985, 1990 and 1992, they were not such as to raise serious doubts about his overall competence or conduct and they would certainly have raised no suspicions about his criminality. Most conventional monitoring techniques would, therefore, have failed to identify him as a dysfunctional doctor.
21.
The only respect in which Shipman was an ‘outlier’ was in relation to his prescribing practice. He prescribed expensive drugs. For a time, he would not comply with requests to prescribe generic drugs rather than the more expensive proprietary brands. Also, he was enthusiastic about the effect of statins (lipid-lowering drugs), which had only recently appeared on the market. They were expensive and many doctors doubted their efficacy. Shipman insisted on prescribing them. Time has shown that his confidence in them was well placed. When tackled by medical or pharmaceutical advisers about his use of expensive drugs, Shipman was always able to justify his prescribing practice by reference to published research. There was no concern about the quality of his prescribing - only about the cost.
Shipman’s Vulnerable Points
22.
The two aspects of Shipman’s activities which rendered him most vulnerable to detection were his acquisition of large quantities of diamorphine, which he used to kill his patients, and the high number of deaths among his patients.
Shipman’s Acquisition of Diamorphine
23.
As I have said, during the period for which Shipman was in practice, RMOs and, later, medical advisers had the power to inspect GPs’ CDRs and their arrangements for storing controlled drugs. When asked whether he kept a CDR, Shipman replied that he did not and had no reason to do so, since he did not keep a supply of controlled drugs for emergency use. There was no reason to doubt the truth of that assertion. It was not unusual for a GP to elect not to maintain a stock of controlled drugs. In fact, as is now known, Shipman did keep a stock of diamorphine and used it to kill patients. There was no means by which the RMOs or medical advisers could have known this.
24.
Shipman did, however, prescribe controlled drugs for patients. His prescribing of controlled drugs did not give rise to concern. The limited amount of prescribing data available in the 1980s and early 1990s - and the fact that, until 1992, Shipman’s data was included within the data for the whole Donneybrook practice - would have made any abnormality in his prescribing practices difficult, if not impossible, to detect. In the years after November 1993, Shipman obtained diamorphine by prescribing it for patients who did not in reality require it, by removing it from the houses of patients who had died of cancer or by collecting it on behalf of terminally ill patients and keeping some or all of the drug for himself. None of these methods of acquisition would have been likely to be detected by monitoring of his prescribing and the Tameside PCOs had no means of knowing about them. Nor, prior to Shipman’s conviction, did PCOs routinely undertake monitoring specifically directed at GPs’ prescribing of controlled drugs. On one occasion, a pharmacy consultant (not an employee of the FHSA) noticed that he appeared to be prescribing large amounts of diamorphine; when she asked about this (not because of any concern or suspicion, but so that she could plan the future drugs budget), Shipman explained that the drug was needed for a terminally ill patient. He produced the medical records to demonstrate that this was so. The consultant had no reason to suspect that he might be stealing diamorphine from patients and using it to kill. Nor did the Tameside PCOs.
25.
In my Fourth Report, I made recommendations which would make it far more difficult for a doctor or other healthcare professional to obtain illicit supplies of controlled drugs and which would also make it more likely that a doctor who succeeded in obtaining drugs illicitly would be detected. Monitoring of GPs’ prescribing of controlled drugs, using the techniques now available, should also be of assistance, and I have recommended that doctors who have had a drug problem in the past or who are suspected to have a current problem should be subjected to particularly close scrutiny.
The Number of Patient Deaths
26.
Before 1998, it was not the practice of PCOs to monitor the death rates among patients of individual GPs. There was no requirement that they should do so and there would have been considerable practical difficulties. Had monitoring been carried out, Shipman’s excess patient deaths would have become evident, probably in the 1980s but certainly in the 1990s. However, there can be no criticism of the PCOs in Tameside for not having undertaken this type of monitoring. There is still no system of routinely monitoring GP patient deaths. The task of devising such a system is not straightforward. It involves the linkage of large amounts of data and complex statistical analysis. To be effective, it must be done on a national basis.
27.
I have examined the feasibility of setting up a national monitoring system. The Inquiry commissioned Dr Paul Aylin, Clinical Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, to carry out research into the desirability and feasibility of such a system. Dr Aylin and his team prepared a report and gave a presentation of their work to the Inquiry. The topic was then discussed at a two-day seminar attended by experts in the field and representatives of most of the organisations that would be involved in the development and operation of such a system. On the basis of Dr Aylin’s work and of discussions at the seminar, I have concluded that a national system of monitoring GP patient mortality rates (particularly if coupled with the reform of the systems of death certification and investigation I recommended in my Third Report) would be likely to deter a doctor from criminal activities such as those of Shipman. Even if it did not, it would greatly improve the chances of detecting such activities. I also believe that the collection and analysis of GP patient mortality data would have a beneficial effect on the quality of patient care. I have therefore recommended that the DoH should take the lead in developing a national system for monitoring GP patient mortality rates.

--- The Adequacy of Local Monitoring ---
28.
I have considered the arrangements for the monitoring and supervision of doctors that were in place in Tameside during the time that Shipman practised there. I have also compared the arrangements in Tameside with those in operation elsewhere. Having carried out that exercise, I have concluded that the performance of the PCOs in Tameside was typical of that of most PCOs up and down the country at the time. There were areas where other PCOs had taken innovative steps, not taken in Tameside, in an attempt to raise standards and to identify doctors who were performing poorly. However, it is clear that the Tameside PCOs discharged their duties conscientiously and properly. They cannot be criticised just because they may not have been in the vanguard. They were doing all that was required of them.
29.
In a written submission to the Inquiry, the Tameside Families Support Group referred to the bewilderment of its members that, during the period when Shipman practised in Hyde, the State should apparently have abdicated its responsibility for monitoring GPs. I can understand that sentiment. Viewed through today’s eyes, it seems extraordinary that, until less than a decade ago, the PCOs should have had so few powers to regulate GPs’ behaviour.
30.
The explanation lies, I think, in the historical status of GPs as independent contractors. That status has imposed constraints on attempts by successive PCOs to control and supervise GPs effectively. Until recently, GPs could be compelled to comply with their terms of service but no more. In the early part of the period during which Shipman was in practice, there was a strong belief, apparently shared by Government, that the medical profession itself provided the best (indeed the only) means of imposing high standards of clinical care and professional conduct on doctors and of monitoring those standards. It was believed that it would do so rigorously. Hence, matters of professional concern arising locally were left to be determined by LMCs, with the GMC as ultimate arbiter of fitness to practise. This belief, which was fostered by the profession, was difficult to challenge in an area involving questions of professional expertise.
31.
It is clear that, by the 1980s, there was a realisation on the part of Government that, if consistency of service and standards among GP practices was to be achieved, some element of management by PCOs must be introduced. The matter could no longer be left to the profession. The process of change began in the mid-1980s and has continued ever since. It has been accompanied by a growing recognition of the importance of tackling poor performance among GPs. As I shall go on to describe, there have been considerable developments in the arrangements for monitoring GPs since 1998. Until that time, progress was slow and, in retrospect, it is natural to wish that the process of change had started sooner. However, the fact that it did not, cannot in my view, be attributed to fault on the part of any person or organisation.

--- Developments since Shipman's Arrest in 1998 ---
The New National Bodies
32.
Since Shipman’s arrest, there have been radical changes within the NHS. On a national level, there has been the imposition on NHS bodies of the duty of quality to which I referred earlier, the introduction of National Service Frameworks and the development of core standards of service. The Commission for Health Improvement was set up to inspect the performance of local NHS bodies. In 2004, its functions were taken over by the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection, now known as the Healthcare Commission. The National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA) was set up to provide local NHS bodies with advice and support in the detection and assessment of substandard performance by NHS doctors and in the remediation of any problems detected.
The New Local Bodies
33.
At a local level, HAs (which were quite large organisations) were replaced by PCTs. These much smaller organisations have a wide range of powers. The Inquiry is concerned only with those powers that relate to the monitoring and supervision of GPs. Each PCT has a limited number of GPs on its list (usually about 100 plus some locums) and should therefore be able to develop a close knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. PCTs now have much more information available to them when considering whether to admit a doctor to their lists. They have the right to refuse to admit a doctor to the list in certain circumstances. They also have a wide range of ‘list management powers’, by which they can remove or suspend GPs from their lists or impose conditions upon their continued inclusion. These powers are new and the evidence suggests that, as yet, they are not being fully exercised in all areas. However, these powers enable PCTs to take effective action for the protection of patients. They are no longer entirely dependent upon other bodies such as the NHS Tribunal (now abolished) or the GMC to do so on their behalf.
Attempts to Improve Standards
34.
A variety of quality marker schemes has been developed, by which GPs and GP practices can work in order to improve services, and also to demonstrate that they have achieved high standards of practice organisation, individual competence and/or performance. Participation in these quality marker schemes is voluntary. It is obviously to be encouraged as it can serve only to raise standards. Another innovation has been the new GMS Contract, which came into operation in April 2004 and which introduces a system of financial incentives to encourage practices to achieve certain quality standards. The new GMS Contract requires GP practices (not individual doctors) to sign up to it. The GMS Contract is in its early days and it is impossible to assess with any confidence the impact it is likely to have on the quality of patient care. Another unknown factor is the extent, if any, to which practices where the standards of care are poor will attempt to raise standards in order to qualify for the financial incentives that are available under the GMS Contract.
Clinical Governance
35.
Also at a local level, there is a new framework of monitoring, known as clinical governance. I describe this initiative in
. Very briefly, in the context of primary care, it is intended that it should consist of an integrated system of different types of activity, all aimed at improving quality of care. One part of the system involves the collection and analysis of data relating to doctors’ clinical practice both by the PCT and within general practices. At the moment, the types of data available are limited, the accuracy of the data is imperfect and the structures for making use of the data require further development. There are particular difficulties in attributing data to individual doctors, as opposed to GP practices. Clinical governance will not reach its full potential until it includes the collection of data relating to individual doctors. It is clear from the evidence I have heard that there is some way to go before clinical governance is fully implemented in primary care. In my view, the real obstacle to implementing clinical governance is the position of GPs as independent contractors and the consequent inability of PCTs to ‘manage’ them for clinical governance purposes. This is not to say that GPs should lose their independence and self-employed status. However, it seems to me that PCTs may need to be given greater powers if they are to discharge their clinical governance responsibilities effectively and if they are to be accountable for discharging the duty of quality placed upon them. They will also need leadership and determination if they are to make quality their first priority and to root out substandard practice.
36.
In my view, if properly developed and well resourced, clinical governance could provide the most effective means of achieving two important aims. First, it could enable PCTs to detect poorly performing or dysfunctional GPs on their lists. Second, it could have the beneficial effect of helping doctors who are performing satisfactorily or well to do even better.
Appraisal
37.
Annual appraisal is now mandatory for all GPs. The Inquiry heard a considerable amount of evidence about the way in which appraisal is carried out and about its proposed link with revalidation, which I shall refer to later in this Summary. It is clear that appraisal has had some positive effects; it gives GPs an opportunity to talk with a colleague about themselves, their practices and their personal development needs. However, appraisal does not constitute an evaluation or assessment of the appraisee’s performance; it is not intended to do so. It yields little information that can assist the PCT in its clinical governance function. It might help the PCT to decide what types of continuing professional development should be provided for local GPs, but that is all. As currently constituted, appraisal cannot be regarded as a clinical governance tool. I have recommended that there should be clarity about the purpose that appraisal is intended to serve and that, once clarity has been achieved, steps should be taken to ensure that appraisal fulfils its purpose as effectively as possible.
Single-Handed and Small Practices
38.
Because Shipman was practising as a single-handed practitioner for the last six years of his professional life, the period in which he killed most of his victims, there have been calls from some quarters for single-handed practice to be phased out. It is true that I have found that the greatest concentration of Shipman’s killings occurred when he was in single-handed practice, but I have also found that he killed 71 patients while he was at the Donneybrook practice. As I have already explained, however, that was not a ‘group practice’ as the term is now ordinarily understood.
39.
The Inquiry has examined the particular problems of isolation that may be associated with single-handed practice and has also considered the benefits that such practice may bring to patients. First, many patients prefer small or single-handed practices because the doctors are able to provide continuity of care. Second, for geographical and demographic reasons, the system cannot manage without small and single-handed practices. Therefore, I have concluded that the focus of endeavour should be, not on reducing further the number of small practices in existence, but on improving the services that they provide and, in particular, removing the causes and mitigating the effects of isolation. In
, I discuss some of the ways in which this might be achieved.

--- The Availability of Information about Doctors ---
40.
I have already mentioned that, throughout the period during which Shipman was in practice, the PCOs in Tameside were unaware of his past convictions for drug-related offences and his subsequent referral to the GMC. Since 1998, steps have been taken to increase the amount of information available to PCTs about doctors who are on, or who apply to join, their lists. GPs are now required, when applying for admission to a list, to make declarations about,
, previous or current involvement in criminal proceedings, in disciplinary proceedings by the GMC or a regulatory body elsewhere, in list management action taken by another PCT and in disciplinary action by a previous employer. GPs already on the list have had to make ‘catch up’ declarations and have an ongoing duty to report any such involvement to their PCT. In addition, PCTs are obliged to make certain checks before admitting doctors to their lists and doctors are now required to provide enhanced criminal record certificates when applying for admission to a list. In 2005, there is to be a ‘catch up’ exercise for the provision of criminal record certificates by GPs already on PCT lists. The additional information now available to PCTs enables them to make more informed decisions about whether to admit a doctor to their lists and also makes it possible for them to keep a watchful eye on those doctors who have a past disciplinary or criminal history. Since 2000, the GMC has had a statutory duty to disclose to a doctor’s employer or PCO the fact that a complaint or report about a doctor received by the GMC has reached a certain point in its FTP procedures. Cases that are rejected at an early stage need not be notified. Nevertheless the introduction of this duty means that the PCOs receive information about doctors’ involvement with the GMC that was not previously available to them.
41.
Despite these improvements, there are still gaps in the PCTs’ information about doctors. PCTs are largely dependent on applicants on the list being truthful about their disciplinary histories. They have no information about complaints made or concerns raised about a doctor which have not resulted in disciplinary or list management action or which have not been investigated or substantiated. They have no information about clinical negligence claims that may have resulted in a finding against the doctor or in a settlement for a significant amount of damages. Recent reports into the activities of two GPs, Clifford Ayling and Peter Green, have illustrated the difficulty (and also the crucial importance to patient safety) of being able to draw together and track the records relating to separate but similar complaints raised about the same doctor. This exercise can be even more difficult when doctors have a peripatetic working pattern. As well as the fact that the information available to PCOs may be incomplete, the task of collecting what is available can be inconvenient and time-consuming.
42.
In order properly to fulfil their clinical governance responsibilities and to provide adequate protection for patients, PCTs need to be able to access as much information as possible about the doctors who are on or who might apply to join their lists. Other bodies - such as the Healthcare Commission, the GMC, the NCAA and the Department of Health (DoH) - also need access to this information. I have therefore recommended the creation of a central database of information about every doctor in the UK. This would contain certain categories of information and would also be linked to sources from which additional relevant information could be obtained. The existence of sensitive information that is not in the public domain could be ‘flagged’, so that further enquiries could be made when necessary. The database would be accessible to NHS bodies, accredited private sector employers and other organisations with a legitimate interest. Doctors would be able to access their own entries to check the accuracy of the information held.
43.
Not only would such a central database make it far simpler for an employer or PCO to conduct pre-employment or pre-admission checks, but the reliability of those checks would be greatly enhanced. The great majority of doctors would have nothing to fear; their entries would contain no more than their qualifications and their
. However, those doctors who cause problems, and who move on from place to place causing more problems, would very soon be identified, thus enabling appropriate action to be taken to protect patients.
Information Available to the Public and to Patients
44.
During the Inquiry, there was discussion about how much information about doctors should be made available to the public and to patients. This was appropriate in the context of an Inquiry into the activities of a doctor who, 24 years before being convicted of murder, had been convicted of a series of criminal offences in connection with his dependence upon a controlled drug. It is entirely natural that the relatives and friends of Shipman’s victims should say ‘If only we had known.’
45.
The information available to patients and prospective patients about an individual GP is very limited under the present system. The public may become aware of a doctor’s criminal convictions or involvement in disciplinary matters through press coverage or ‘on the grapevine’. However, there is no means by which comprehensive information can be obtained. In my view, such information should be readily available to anyone who seeks it.
46.
I have recommended two measures to address this need. First, I recommend that the GMC operates a system of tiered disclosure. This would mean that current and recent information about a doctor’s disciplinary record with the GMC (including information about any criminal convictions reported to the GMC), together with information about the doctor’s registration and revalidation status, should be accessible on the GMC’s website or to anyone requesting the information from the GMC by telephone or other means. After a period, some (but not all) of that information would be removed from the website and would be replaced by a note, indicating that further information was available by telephoning the GMC. All that information would remain available to anyone requesting it for as long as the doctor remained in practice. In Shipman’s case, this would have meant that a prospective patient viewing his entry on the GMC’s website in 1997 or 1998 would have been alerted to the fact that there was something more to be known about him and would, by telephoning the GMC, have been able to find out about his convictions in 1976. Alternatively, if s/he had telephoned the GMC in the first place, the information would have been available by that means. I think that this arrangement provides a reasonable balance between the interests of the doctor in being able to put the past behind him/her (which would be difficult if full information remained on the website indefinitely) and the right of the public and patients to find out everything about the doctor that has at one time or another been in the public domain.
47.
The second measure I recommend relates to information to be given to patients when a doctor resumes work at a GP practice after a period of suspension or erasure or where conditions have been imposed on his/her registration. In those circumstances, the practice should send a letter of explanation to all patients. The draft letter should be approved by the PCT. Patients should have the opportunity to refuse to be treated by a doctor who is subject to conditions or who has resumed work after suspension or erasure. They are entitled to make an informed choice about this important matter.

--- Patient Complaints and the Disciplining of General Practitioners ---
The System prior to April 1996
48.
I have already explained that, until 1996, complaints made by or on behalf of patients would go to the PCO. If the complaint amounted to an allegation that the doctor had breached one of his/her terms of service, it would often be referred to a medical services committee (MSC), a disciplinary committee administered by the PCO. The MSC would decide (with or without an oral hearing) whether the GP had breached his/her terms of service and would recommend what action should be taken. In the event that a breach was found, the FPC could administer a warning or withhold remuneration from the doctor up to a maximum amount of £500. If the FPC believed that a more severe penalty was indicated, it could make recommendations to the Secretary of State (SoS) for Health and Social Security (later the SoS for Health) or make representations to the NHS Tribunal seeking removal of the doctor from the medical list. At that time, therefore, the system of dealing with patients’ complaints was linked directly with the disciplinary powers of the PCO, backed by the SoS, the NHS Tribunal and, ultimately, by the GMC.
49.
However, the system for handling complaints was far from ideal. There was no independent investigation of the complaint; it was left to the complainant to gather the evidence and present the case. There were a number of technical rules that disadvantaged complainants. A complaint had to be brought within a very short time after the events complained of; hearsay evidence was often not admitted. Doctors, who were usually represented by their medical defence organisation, often appeared to be at an advantage. However, at least there was a mechanism by which complaints could be aired and decided. Also, there was a standard (i.e. that set in the terms of service) against which complaints could be judged. Disciplinary measures could be taken if the doctor was found in breach of his/her terms of service and, if the matter was serious enough, it could be reported to the NHS Tribunal or the GMC.
Complaints against Shipman
50.
Shipman was the subject of three formal complaints which were referred to a MSC, one in 1985, one in 1990 and one in 1992. I have described in
the events giving rise to those complaints and their course and outcome. The first complaint was dismissed by the MSC without a hearing. In response to the second complaint, Shipman admitted that he had breached his terms of service. The MSC issued a warning. On the third occasion, Shipman disputed the circumstances, whereupon the MSC held an oral hearing and found against him. On that occasion, the sum of £800 was withheld from his remuneration and he was again warned to comply more closely with his terms of service. The handling of all three complaints illustrates some of the shortcomings of the system in operation during the years before 1996. In particular, it illustrates the problems which could arise when the complainant was expected to assemble the evidence in support of the complaint and yet had neither the power nor the resources to do so.
51.
Bearing in mind that Shipman was an established serial killer of his patients, it seems remarkable that such complaints as were made about him in the years between 1977 and 1996 were not of a more serious nature. No complaint was received about his treatment of, or failure to treat, any patient whom he had in fact killed. Even if they had been investigated in great detail, the three complaints to which I have referred would not have thrown any light on Shipman’s true character as a murderer. With the benefit of my knowledge of Shipman’s habitual dishonesty, I have detected signs of dishonest behaviour in two of the cases. However, such signs were by no means obvious and it is not surprising that they were not detected at the time.
52.
The Family Health Services Appeal Authority, on behalf of the SoS for Health, decided to refer the 1990 and 1992 complaints to the GMC. However, the GMC took the view that the two matters did not give rise to a question of serious professional misconduct (SPM) and declined to take any further action. In my view, even if the GMC had decided to take action, the most that would have happened is that Shipman would have been given a further warning. It is most unlikely that Shipman’s name would have been either erased or suspended from the medical register or that any further enquiries would have been made that could have revealed his true nature.
The System after April 1996
53.
In 1996, the arrangements for handling complaints made by or on behalf of patients were changed. Thereafter, complaints about GPs had to be made direct to the GP practice concerned. Following this change, if the complaint was ‘resolved’ at that stage, possibly by an apology and an assurance that there would be no repetition of whatever had given dissatisfaction, the PCO might never know that a complaint had been made. In some cases, the PCO might be involved in arranging conciliation between the doctor and the patient. This may have been a satisfactory system for some, although research suggests that many patients were reluctant to make a complaint direct to the practice of the doctor concerned. Also, it appears that some practices were not as open and helpful in handling complaints as they should have been.
54.
If the complaint was not resolved to the complainant’s satisfaction at this stage, s/he could proceed to the second stage of the procedures. At that stage, the PCO would become aware of the complaint and what it was about. However, the PCO was still not responsible for investigating the complaint. Instead, if a ‘convenor’ (usually a non-executive member of the PCO Board) decided that the complaint required resolution, the PCO would set up an independent review panel (IRP), which would conduct a hearing designed to find out whether the complaint was justified. There were no standards by which the complaint was to be judged. Nor could an IRP impose, or even recommend the imposition of, any sanctions upon the doctor. The IRP would write a report of its findings for submission to the PCO, which could, if it wished, take disciplinary action against the doctor. In other words, the handling of complaints was no longer directly connected to the disciplinary procedures for doctors. Although, in theory, PCOs could still bring disciplinary proceedings against doctors for alleged breaches of their terms of service, in practice they rarely did.
55.
In my view, the arrangements for handling patients’ complaints against GPs after 1996 became even less effective as a means of detecting malpractice or poor performance than the previous arrangements had been. However, so far as is known, no complaints of any significance were made against Shipman between 1996 and 1998, despite the fact that, during this period, he was killing so frequently; he killed 30 patients in 1996, 37 in 1997 and 18 in 1998 before he was eventually detected.
Recent Changes to the System
56.
The system for handling patient complaints within the NHS is in a state of transition. The second stage of the procedures has been changed recently. Instead of complaints being heard by IRPs, they are now referred to the Healthcare Commission. The Healthcare Commission has the resources to investigate complaints and to arrange an oral hearing before a panel. It is independent of the NHS. The first stage of the complaints procedures except as it affects GP practices has also been changed. However, the first stage of the procedures for GP practices remains the same as it has been since 1996. The Government intends to reform it but is awaiting publication of this Report before doing so. I hope that my recommendations in that regard will be taken into account.
The Future
57.
, I have made detailed recommendations about the way in which complaints from patients and their representatives should be handled. I do not propose to rehearse them here. Instead, I shall summarise the main points. The complaints system should be directed at giving satisfaction to the person making the complaint, wherever possible, at securing patient safety and at being fair to doctors about whom complaints are made.
58.
For this reason, it is important to differentiate at an early stage between those complaints which are relatively minor in nature and relate to purely ‘private grievance’ matters and those which have a relevance to clinical governance, i.e. those that might indicate that a doctor has placed a patient at risk or has delivered a poor standard of care. Complaints in the first category can be dealt with by way of conciliation and mediation, with the object of restoring, if possible, the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient. Those in the second category should be taken over by the PCT and dealt with in such a way as to further its clinical governance responsibilities.
59.
The Government proposes that, under the first stage of the new GP complaints procedure, patients should be given a choice where to lodge their complaint: at the GP practice concerned or with the PCT. I welcome this change and agree that patients should be given this choice. In order to enable PCTs to monitor the complaints lodged with practices and to identify any that raise clinical governance issues, I have recommended that GP practices should be required to report to the PCT all complaints within a short time of receipt. The PCT can then ‘call in’ those complaints which have or might have a relevance to clinical governance. Since the average number of complaints received is one complaint per GP per annum (and many of these are likely to be ‘private grievance’ complaints), the number of ‘clinical governance complaints’ to be dealt with by a PCT in any one year is not likely to be large.
60.
As I have already explained, previous complaints systems have made no proper provision for the investigation of a complaint. In my view, the provision of arrangements for the prompt and thorough investigation of ‘clinical governance complaints’ is the single most important issue to be tackled in the reform of the complaints procedures. PCTs are not equipped to carry out such investigations themselves. If proper investigations are to be carried out, skilled and experienced investigators will be required. A single PCT would not have a sufficiently frequent need for an investigator to justify employing anyone full-time in that capacity.
61.
I have therefore recommended that groups of PCTs should set up joint investigative teams and that ‘clinical governance complaints’ (save those which do not involve serious issues of patient safety and where the underlying facts giving rise to the complaint are clear and undisputed) should be referred to the investigation team so that it can carry out an investigation and report back to the PCT. If the investigation becomes more complex than was at first thought (e.g. because it concerns both primary and secondary care), it should be referred to the Healthcare Commission. I have also recommended that, if the result of the investigation is inconclusive because there is a dispute of evidence (e.g. if the doctor and the patient disagree about the events giving rise to the complaint), the complaint should be referred to the Healthcare Commission for an oral hearing before a panel. Once the outcome of the investigation (with or without a hearing) is known, the PCT will be in a position to decide what action to take. It should have a firm basis of fact on which to act.
62.
I have also recommended that concerns expressed about a GP by someone other than a patient or a patient’s representative (e.g. by a fellow healthcare professional) should be dealt with in the same way as patient complaints. Such concerns should be investigated (where necessary) by the inter-PCT investigation team or, in a case raising difficult or complex issues, by the Healthcare Commission. I have also recommended that complaints handling systems in the private sector should be aligned as closely as possible with those in the NHS.
63.
One of the (probably unforeseen) consequences of the dissociation of disciplinary proceedings from patient complaints in 1996 was the loss of any (even partially) objective standard by which a complaint could be judged. Before 1996, a complaint was upheld if the doctor was found to have breached his/her terms of service. The sanction imposed depended upon the gravity of the breach and the doctor’s past record. After 1996, however, disciplinary proceedings could be instituted for alleged breaches of the doctor’s terms of service but rarely were. Complaints could be lodged in respect of all matters, whether or not they were covered by the GP’s terms of service. From April 2004, when the new GMS Contract came into effect, there have not even been terms of service to act as a background framework. In effect, a complaint is upheld if the decision-makers think it should be. There is no standard by which it is to be judged.
64.
As a result, there is no means by which patients can know what their reasonable expectations are and whether those expectations have been met. There is an urgent need for standards which can be applied by PCTs, by other NHS bodies and by the Healthcare Commission in dealing with complaints. I have therefore recommended that objective standards, by reference to which complaints can be judged, should be established as a matter of urgency.
Support for Complainants
65.
It is clear that there is a good deal of confusion about the right place to direct a complaint about a doctor. Many complainants think, erroneously, that they know where to lodge their complaints and send them to the wrong place. Some do not know where to direct them. A similar problem exists for people who wish to make a confidential report relating to some sort of suspected malpractice about which they are concerned. No doubt a sustained programme of public education could improve the position for complainants and those who wish to report a concern, but the problem is bound to persist to some extent.
66.
In the course of the Inquiry, the GMC suggested a possible solution to this problem. It proposed that there should be a ‘single portal’ which people wishing to make a complaint could approach. Advice could be given as to the appropriate destination for the complaint to be received and handled. In other words, the ‘single portal’ would act as a signpost, indicating the appropriate direction for the complaint. Since the Inquiry hearings, the Healthcare Commission and the GMC have commissioned some preliminary work on the various options for providing such a service.
67.
In my view, what is needed is a service that fulfils two functions. It should advise people who have already decided to complain or to raise a concern where to lodge their complaint or concern. It should also inform people who are uncertain whether or not they wish to complain or raise a concern where they can find the advice that they need. For that purpose, there should be a telephone helpline, as well as access by means of a website. I think it would be helpful also if, in addition to providing advice about the right destination for a complaint, the ‘single portal’ service were to be prepared to forward the complaint to the appropriate body if the complainant wished that to be done. Whatever form the ‘single portal’ takes, it must be extensively advertised. It needs to be as well known as NHS Direct and the Samaritans.
68.
For many years, until 2003, Community Health Councils (CHCs) provided advice and support for people wishing to pursue a complaint. The abolition of the CHCs in 2003 was met with widespread expressions of dismay, particularly from organisations representing patients’ interests. Two new services, the Patient Advice and Liaison Services (PALS) and the Independent Complaints Advocacy Service (ICAS) were formed. PALS does not provide independent support for a complainant. It would be inappropriate for it to do so, as it is staffed by NHS employees. However, ICAS is intended to provide independent advice and assistance.
69.
The Inquiry has received no evidence about how ICAS is functioning. From the information on its website, it seems likely that it will provide support for complainants throughout the complaints process. There is a need for complainants and potential complainants to have access to free, independent and well-informed advice. It is not sufficient that a complainant is told how to proceed. He or she needs someone with whom to discuss the issues and the merits of the complaint. He or she needs advice about whether, and exactly how, to proceed. He or she needs someone to support him/her at a hearing, if any. If ICAS is indeed able to provide such advice and support, its work is very much to be encouraged.
70.
Accordingly, I have recommended that, about two years after the new arrangements for complaints come into force in their entirety, an independent body should be commissioned to review the operation of the new arrangements for advising and supporting patients who wish to make a complaint. Any deficiencies identified by that review should be corrected.
Disciplinary Procedures
71.
As I have already explained, with the introduction of the new GMS Contract in April 2004, GPs’ terms of service have ceased to exist. They have been replaced by contractual arrangements which are made with a GP practice, rather than with an individual GP. However, PCTs now have powers of list management. A PCT can remove or suspend a GP from its list or impose conditions upon his/her inclusion on the list. There is no power to order a withholding of remuneration; nor is there an official power to administer warnings or reprimands. This seems to me to be a
in the PCTs’ powers.
72.
I can see advantages in PCTs having a wide range of sanctions available to them once they have conducted an investigation into a complaint or concern and found that it is justified, although not so serious as to merit the use of their list management powers or referral to the GMC or some other body. It seems wrong, in those circumstances, that the PCT should be powerless to act. I have therefore recommended that the powers of PCTs should be extended so as to enable them to issue warnings to GPs and to impose financial penalties in respect of misconduct, poor professional performance or deficient clinical practice. That is not to say that I think that PCTs should spend their time conducting disciplinary proceedings if they can deal with the matter in a simpler way which is both constructive and effective. After all, the most important aim is to improve clinical performance.

--- Raising Concerns ---
The Raising of Concerns by Medical Colleagues
73.
It has always been possible for a doctor who was concerned about the treatment given to a patient by another doctor to report his/her concerns about that treatment to an appropriate authority. However, many doctors were not prepared to do that; they had been ‘brought up’ to regard it as improper to criticise or deprecate the conduct of a fellow professional. The culture was that it was ‘not done’. However, by the early 1990s, the GMC had made clear that it was the duty of a doctor to report to an appropriate authority any concern s/he had about another doctor’s treatment of a patient if the concern gave rise to issues of patient safety. The evidence heard by the Inquiry suggests that, although the GMC had made this quite clear by 1993 at the latest, many doctors were reluctant to make such reports. The old culture lingered on. The Inquiry was told that the culture had not changed until the events that had occurred at Bristol Royal Infirmary came to light. The GMC took disciplinary action against doctors who had failed to act on information and reports that the death rate among paediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery at the Hospital was abnormally high. I was told that events in Bristol had had a salutary effect on the profession, which now recognised that its duty to protect patients had to override loyalty to colleagues. However, in his report of the Inquiry into those events, published in 2001, Professor (now Sir) Ian Kennedy suggested that the old culture among doctors was still alive at that time. Evidence received by this Inquiry suggests that, in some quarters, it survives even today.
The Case of Mrs Renate Overton
74.
The evidence received by this Inquiry focussed upon the culture in the mid-1990s. In 1994, Shipman gave a gross overdose of diamorphine to a 46 year old patient, Mrs Renate Overton. Mrs Overton suffered from asthma and had called Shipman out because she was suffering an attack. Diamorphine - and indeed any opiate drug - is contraindicated for asthmatics. Shipman injected her with diamorphine with, I am quite satisfied, the intention of killing her. Mrs Overton became unconscious and went into respiratory and cardiac arrest. Her daughter, Mrs Sharon Carrington, who was in the house, was summoned by Shipman and called an ambulance, which arrived in time for the paramedics to prevent Mrs Overton’s death. Mrs Overton was admitted to Tameside General Hospital where she remained, in a persistent vegetative state, until her death 14 months later.
75.
Information received from the paramedics, Mrs Overton’s daughter and Shipman suggested that Mrs Overton had received a large dose of either morphine or diamorphine, apparently given as a ‘bolus’ dose, meaning that it was given all at once rather than gradually, as would be the usual way. Members of both the medical and the nursing staff at the hospital believed that Shipman had been wrong to give Mrs Overton an opiate drug in any quantity (because she was asthmatic) but that the error was the more serious because it appeared that the dose was excessive and had been given too quickly. In short, they realised that Mrs Overton’s condition was due to Shipman’s actions although they never for a moment suspected that he might have harmed her deliberately. No member of staff reported these events to an appropriate authority with a view to an investigation into Shipman’s conduct being carried out.
76.
I examined the events surrounding Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital in some detail in my Third Report. I concluded that, if there was any responsibility to report these events, it lay upon the two consultants in charge of Mrs Overton’s care at the time of her admission. The junior doctors and nursing staff were entitled to rely on the consultants to act appropriately. The consultants were Dr Ceri Brown, a consultant anaesthetist, and Dr Murtaza Husaini, a consultant cardiologist, who shared responsibility for the hospital’s intensive care unit. Dr Brown admitted that he had not made any report about Shipman’s role in Mrs Overton’s collapse. Dr Husaini said that he had recognised his duty to do so and had in fact made a report to, among other people, the Chief Executive designate of the NHS Trust responsible for the hospital. I found that he had not. I deferred consideration of whether these two doctors should be criticised for their failure to make a report until the final stage of the Inquiry, when I would receive evidence about the advice given by the GMC, the way in which doctors understood that advice and the culture within the profession at the material time.
77.
Having heard the evidence, I have concluded that, in 1994, no doctor should have been unaware of his/her ethical duty to report to an appropriate authority any concerns s/he may have had about the conduct of another doctor, if that conduct gave rise to issues of patient safety. Shipman’s conduct plainly did give rise to such concerns and should have been reported. I considered Dr Brown’s explanations for why he had not made such a report, as he admitted that he had not. First, he believed that the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse were so uncertain that he could not reasonably act. I rejected that contention. It was clear from a witness statement that Dr Brown gave to the police in 1999 that it was his view that Shipman’s management of Mrs Overton had been ‘highly unusual, even dangerous’. Second, Dr Brown said that he believed the only possible route open to him was to make a complaint to the GMC. However, he did not think it appropriate to do so; he thought that the GMC would not accept a complaint unless and until it had been more thoroughly investigated than this one was. As I shall explain, I do not think that belief was without foundation and I can understand why he would have hesitated to make a report about a GP to that quarter. Dr Brown said that he did not know to whom he could make a report about a GP within the local NHS arrangements. He knew what the procedures were for raising a concern within the hospital but this potential complaint concerned a GP, not a hospital doctor. The procedures were different and he did not know what they were. I can accept that he did not know what the procedures were but cannot accept that that was an excuse for not reporting his concerns. Dr Brown was a member of the Medical Defence Union (MDU), which operates a helpline for members who face ethical problems. If he had not thought of discussing the problem with the Chief Executive designate or Medical Director designate of the NHS Trust (either of whom would have been an appropriate recipient for his concern), Dr Brown should have consulted the MDU which, I am satisfied, would have given him sound advice.
78.
Dr Brown also said that professional etiquette played a part in his decision not to make a report. He felt that there was a tension between the duty to report a colleague’s misconduct and the need to avoid an accusation against a colleague that might turn out to be false. He said that he was worried that, if he made a report, the GMC might criticise him for disparaging Shipman. I accept that Dr Brown genuinely held these reservations about professional etiquette. Finally, Dr Brown said that he felt that he ought to honour the wishes of Mrs Overton’s family that no complaint should be made against Shipman. Dr Brown had told Mrs Overton’s brother (Dr Michael Overton, a GP) that Mrs Overton had been given morphine, despite the fact that she was known to be asthmatic. He had, he said, put the family in a position to make a complaint or bring a claim if they chose to do so. I reject that as an explanation. Dr Brown did not give Dr Overton the full facts as known to him; he did not tell Dr Overton what he believed to be the size of the morphine dose; nor did he say that it had apparently been given as a bolus dose. Dr Brown certainly became aware that Mrs Overton’s family did not intend to make a complaint or a claim. He knew therefore that, if anyone were to instigate an investigation into Shipman’s conduct, it would have to be himself or Dr Husaini.
79.
I have concluded that both Dr Husaini and Dr Brown must be criticised for their failure to report Shipman’s actions in respect of Mrs Overton. However, my criticism is tempered because I accept that the culture within the profession at the time, in 1994, was that to report a colleague was ‘not done’. Many doctors throughout the country would have failed to act, as these two doctors did.
80.
I found that, if Shipman had been reported at this time, it is possible, although unlikely, that the true nature of his actions in respect of Mrs Overton would have been discovered. I found that, if a complaint had been made locally, the investigative procedures would have been unlikely to uncover the truth. It is unlikely that Shipman would have been reported to the police. Similarly, if the complaint had been reported to the GMC, it is unlikely that the facts and background would have been thoroughly investigated. It is likely that the GMC would have taken the view that Shipman had made an error. Having reviewed a number of cases in which the GMC dealt with doctors who had made serious errors in prescribing or administering dangerous drugs, I concluded that it was most unlikely that Shipman would have been erased from the medical register. The most beneficial effect, so far as his potential victims were concerned, would have been that he might well have ceased killing for a time and some lives might have been saved. I cannot say how many or whose.
81.
A decade has passed since Dr Brown and Dr Husaini failed to report Shipman. As I have said, there are signs that the culture of mutual self-protection has changed since then, although the process is by no means complete. It is inevitable that deeply ingrained attitudes take a long time to change. In my view, it is important that young doctors are imbued with the new culture from the start. But it is also vital that the leaders of the profession consistently put the message across to the present generation of doctors. There can be no room today for the protection of colleagues where the safety and welfare of patients is at issue. I believe that the willingness of one healthcare professional to take responsibility for raising concerns about the conduct, performance or health of another could make a greater potential contribution to patient safety than any other single factor.
Concerns about Shipman
82.
Shipman’s position as a respected doctor, his ability to lie convincingly and the degree of trust placed in him by his patients and their families meant that surprisingly few people had any concerns at all about the number of his patients who were dying or about the circumstances of their deaths. The vast majority of the bereaved relatives and friends of Shipman’s victims had no suspicions whatever about the deaths at the time. They were frequently surprised at the suddenness with which a death had occurred but, in general, they accepted Shipman’s explanation without question. Those very few who had misgivings were not concerned about the possibility of
criminal
behaviour; more usually, the concerns were that Shipman might have given substandard care - perhaps by failing to attempt resuscitation or to summon an ambulance, or by leaving a dying patient alone. Sometimes, the concerns amounted only to a general feeling of unease that there was something ‘not quite right’ about a death. But, until Shipman was under investigation for the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, none of the bereaved relatives and friends reported their concerns to the authorities. Some were intimidated at the prospect of questioning the actions of a doctor; others were persuaded by members of their families that their worries were unfounded. Several have told the Inquiry that they did not know to whom they could take their concerns. There were, however, a few individuals who became suspicious of Shipman.
The Concerns of Mrs Christine Simpson
83.
Mrs Christine Simpson was one of those individuals. She was the resident manager of Ogden Court, a sheltered housing development in Hyde, which was then under the administration of the Manchester & District Housing Association. Between 1988 and 1998, Shipman killed nine residents of Ogden Court. Mrs Simpson became increasingly concerned about the suddenness of the deaths and about their proximity to visits from Shipman. She became suspicious that he might be killing his patients. In 1995 or 1996, she decided to mention her concerns to her line manager, Mrs Janet Schofield. Mrs Simpson was diffident about doing this and I accept that she conveyed her concerns in a rather oblique way. I am satisfied, however, that, when speaking to Mrs Schofield, she linked the deaths with visits by Shipman and gave what she believed to be a clear indication of her concern that all was not as it should be. I am satisfied also that Mrs Schofield dismissed Mrs Simpson’s concerns. Her view was that Mrs Simpson was a somewhat difficult personality, with a negative attitude to authority. She did not question Mrs Simpson about her concerns, nor did she take them further. While Mrs Simpson did not raise her concerns again in any formal manner, I am satisfied that she referred to them in conversation with Mrs Schofield by means of comments linking Shipman’s name with deaths at Ogden Court. On occasion, she probably used the name ‘Dr Death’ to describe Shipman.
84.
As a manager, Mrs Schofield should have been alert to the kind of oblique message of concern that Mrs Simpson was trying to convey to her, and she should have taken any such concerns seriously. If, after discussion, it appeared that there was any possibility that the concerns might be well founded, she should have taken them forward. I think Mrs Schofield’s attitude towards Mrs Simpson inhibited her willingness or ability to listen carefully to what Mrs Simpson was telling her and to think about its implications. However, the concerns which Mrs Simpson was trying to raise were quite extraordinary and would probably have seemed to many to be preposterous. A friend to whom Mrs Simpson voiced her concerns advised her not to mention them to anyone else because people would say she was ‘mad’. The friend was perceptive; Mrs Schofield attributed Mrs Simpson’s concerns to an ‘obsession’ with death. My criticism of Mrs Schofield is muted. She did not listen carefully to Mrs Simpson’s attempts to raise her concerns. That was due in part to her own personality and to her attitude towards Mrs Simpson. But I think also that her attitude was understandably affected by the belief that any suggestion that a doctor might deliberately be harming his patients was unthinkable.
The Concerns of Others
85.
Mrs Dorothy Foley, Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross, Mr John Shaw and Mrs Shirley Harrison all had suspicions about Shipman. Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross worked as home helps for Tameside Social Services. They became concerned when three of their elderly clients died (two in 1986 and one in 1989) during, or shortly after, a visit from Shipman. They heard similar tales from other home helps. Mr Shaw ran a taxi service in Hyde. A lot of his customers were elderly people who had regular transport arrangements with him. He got to know many of them and they became personal friends. Over the years between 1992 and 1998, Mr Shaw noticed that several of his customers died very unexpectedly; they were all patients of Shipman. He gradually came to suspect that Shipman was killing his patients. Mrs Harrison also came to suspect Shipman of murder. Following the death of her aunt, Mrs Erla Copeland, in January 1996, Mrs Harrison harboured the suspicion that Shipman had ‘helped her aunt to die’. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Copeland. Mrs Harrison thought he had done this in order to save her aunt from suffering. Twenty months later, a neighbour of hers, Mrs Mavis Pickup, was found dead a few hours after Shipman had visited. Although Mrs Pickup had recently been bereaved, she had appeared to be in good health. Mrs Harrison became very suspicious but also felt that she was ‘reading too much into everything’.
86.
There must not be a word of criticism of these people for what, on the face of it, appears to be failure to raise serious concerns in the appropriate quarter. These people did not fail to act because they were irresponsible; they failed to act because they felt ‘disempowered’. The culture at the time was such that they feared that their concerns would not be taken seriously but would be dismissed as irrational. Some of them feared that they might be wrong to harbour suspicions about Shipman and that, if they spoke out, the consequences for them would be serious. Some of them had no one to whom they could turn for independent and confidential advice. In my view, this need must be addressed.
87.
Two other people who came to suspect Shipman of killing his patients were Mr David and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, funeral directors in Hyde. I have described in my Second Report how their suspicions arose. For some time, they delayed telling anyone outside their family about their concerns. They were afraid that they might be wrong; they were worried that they might not be taken seriously. Mr and Mrs Bambroffe said that they would have been more confident in reporting their concerns if there had been an independent organisation which they could have approached confidentially. In February 1998, Mrs Bambroffe expressed her concerns to Dr Susan Booth, one of the GPs at the Brooke Practice, Hyde. Dr Booth reported those concerns to some of her partners. Meanwhile, the late Dr Linda Reynolds, also a member of the Brooke Practice, became aware that there appeared to be a high death rate among Shipman’s patients. In March 1998, it was decided that Dr Reynolds should report her concerns, and those of her partners, to the Coroner. He passed the information to the police. Unfortunately, the first police investigation resulted in the conclusion that the concerns were without foundation.
88.
Since 1998, there has been a considerable change of attitude towards those who wish to raise a concern about some aspect of health care. All NHS bodies now have a ‘whistleblowing’ policy which advises employees how to raise a concern and gives an assurance that concerns will be given serious consideration and that there will be no victimisation even if the concern turns out to be unfounded. The Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA) provides a measure of protection against victimisation for all employees who raise concerns. Also, independent advice is now provided by a charitable body, Public Concern at Work. Nevertheless, more needs to be done. I have recommended that there should be some provision (probably a telephone helpline) to enable any person, whether working within health care or not, to obtain advice about the best way to raise a concern about a healthcare matter and about the legal implications of doing so. In my view, this should be provided on a national basis. I have not made any recommendation as to the means by which it should be provided. However, it seems to me that it might be possible to link the helpline with the ‘single portal’ which I have already mentioned. I have also recommended amendments to the PIDA which would afford greater protection to employees who report their concerns.
Shipman’s Practice Staff
89.
, I have considered the position of the administrative staff at Shipman’s practice at 21 Market Street, Hyde. They worked in close proximity to him during the years in which he was killing patients very frequently. Many people have suggested that these members of staff must have known what he was doing. I am quite satisfied that they did not know. They did not harbour any suspicions about the number of deaths. Nor did they realise that it was unusual for deaths to occur on surgery premises. There is to be no criticism of them. They are themselves victims of Shipman’s breach of trust.
90.
The position of Sister Gillian Morgan, the practice nurse, is slightly different. I am quite satisfied that she did not suspect that Shipman was harming his patients. She did not question the number of deaths among Shipman’s patients. Her professional relationship with Shipman was one of deference. That was not at all uncommon at the time. Moreover, I think she is, by nature, not a curious or questioning person. A number of events occurred which, had she been of a more questioning nature, would have caused her to feel a sense of unease. One such was the death of Miss Joan Harding, whom Shipman killed in the surgery. He required Sister Morgan to ‘help’ him to resuscitate Miss Harding at a time when she was already dead. This was a charade so far as Shipman was concerned but a genuine attempt for Sister Morgan. Yet Sister Morgan did not question the fact that Shipman did not fetch or ask her to fetch the resuscitation equipment that was available at the surgery. Nor, in early 1998, did Sister Morgan question the strange features connected with the sudden deaths of Miss Maureen Ward and Mrs Margaret Waldron. I repeat that I entirely accept that Sister Morgan did not suspect Shipman. She deferred to him professionally and did not question what he told her. Had she shown greater curiosity and independence of mind, she might have acted as a deterrent to Shipman. He might have been wary of her. I think it important for the future that all healthcare professionals recognise, as a duty, the fact that they should view the actions and performance of fellow professionals with independence of mind and professional objectivity.
The Concerns of Practice Staff Generally
91.
I have found that Shipman’s practice staff had no concerns about him or his clinical practice. However, practice staff may be uniquely well placed to notice signs of poor clinical practice by a doctor or other healthcare professionals with whom they work. They may become aware of complaints from patients, locums and others with whom they have dealings. They may observe instances of poor practice or aberrant behaviour for themselves. They may become aware of failures of organisation within the practice (e.g. poor record keeping) which might put patients at risk. Yet staff employed in GP practices can experience particular difficulty in raising any concerns of this nature. GP practices are small organisations and there may be conflicts of loyalty and a reluctance to bring criticism about one member of the practice to the attention of his/her colleagues. The smaller the practice, the greater the problems are likely to be. In a single-handed GP practice, for example, there is likely to be no one within the practice to whom a member of staff could voice a concern about his/her employer. These problems are exacerbated by the fact that the staff of GP practices often function in isolation, both from staff in other practices and from the local PCO. They may have no experience of working in another practice. They may have no idea which procedures are usual and which are entirely outside the norm. They may be uncertain whom to turn to for advice.
92.
In order to address these problems, I have recommended that every GP practice should have a written policy setting out the procedure to be followed by any member of the practice staff who wishes to raise a concern, in particular a concern about the clinical practice or conduct of a healthcare professional within the practice. I have also made recommendations about the steps that should be taken by PCTs in order to lessen the isolation of practice staff (in particular, those working in single-handed and small practices) and to facilitate the raising of any concerns they may have.

--- The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976 ---
93.
In 1976, the GMC had the power to erase or suspend the registration of any doctor convicted of a criminal offence. The police were required to report to the GMC any convictions that might reflect on a doctor’s suitability to practise medicine. Reports of such convictions were submitted for consideration to the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC), which sat in private and whose function was to decide whether the case should be referred ‘for inquiry’ to the Disciplinary Committee (DC). The DC sat in public and wielded the powers of erasure and suspension. At this time, the health procedures had not come into operation, although the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Regulation of the Medical Profession, chaired by Dr (later Sir) Alec Merrison (the Merrison Report), which recommended the introduction of health procedures, had been published in 1975.
94.
Shipman had been convicted of three offences of dishonestly obtaining a controlled drug (pethidine) by deception, two cases of forgery of a NHS prescription and three cases of unlawful possession of a controlled drug. He had also asked for 74 similar offences to be taken into consideration. This course of criminal conduct had covered a period of almost 14 months. At the Halifax Magistrates’ Court, he had been fined and ordered to pay compensation. By the time his case came to be considered by the PeCC, Shipman had undergone treatment at a psychiatric hospital in York, apparently for an addiction to or dependence upon pethidine. The psychiatrist who had treated him there reported favourably upon his progress. Since Shipman’s discharge from hospital, he had found work in the field of child health in County Durham. A report from his employer said that he was doing well in his new position. The psychiatrist responsible for his care following his discharge from hospital also reported favourably. Solicitors for the MDU, the medical defence organisation to which Shipman belonged, submitted these reports to the GMC for consideration by the PeCC. In April 1976, the PeCC decided that there was no need for Shipman’s case to be referred to the DC for a public hearing. It decided to close his case with a warning against any repetition of his former misconduct.
95.
That decision has given rise to much public concern and some criticism. The Inquiry examined other cases of a similar nature to see how the GMC generally dealt with them at that time. Such cases were and still are by no means rare. It is clear to me, as I have explained in
, that, in 1976, the GMC’s policy in respect of a doctor who had been abusing drugs was to allow the doctor to continue in practice while attempting to secure his/her rehabilitation. The PeCC had the power to adjourn cases before deciding whether or not to refer them to the DC. I found that it often exercised its power to adjourn for the purpose of giving the doctor an opportunity to seek psychiatric treatment. The cases that were referred to the DC were, in general, those in which the doctor had not sought treatment or had not produced medical evidence about such treatment. Those cases that were referred to the DC were only very rarely dealt with by suspension of registration. The DC had the power to postpone judgement and it frequently exercised that power (sometimes several times in the same case) to give the doctor the chance to obtain treatment and to produce evidence of having done so. Meanwhile, the doctor would remain in practice. Both the PeCC and the DC took the view that acts of dishonesty committed in association with drug abuse were not indicative of general dishonesty but were ‘all part of the illness’ of drug dependence. In short, the GMC dealt with Shipman much as it dealt with other doctors reported for similar offences at that time.
96.
, I have concluded that, in approaching such cases as it did, the GMC focussed too much on the interests of the doctors and not sufficiently on the public interest and the need for patients to be protected from drug abusing doctors. I recognise that, in the years between the publication of the Merrison Report and the introduction of the health procedures in 1980, the GMC was in a difficult position. The need for the health procedures was recognised but they did not yet exist. It is not surprising therefore that the PeCC and the DC tried to fill the gap by the use of their powers to adjourn or postpone. It seems to me that the problem was that they did not manage to strike the right balance. The Merrison Committee had proposed health procedures whereby patients could be protected at the same time as the doctor was rehabilitated. That was to be achieved by placing conditions and restrictions upon the doctor’s practice and by requiring him/her to accept supervision. However, both the PeCC and the DC appear to have been determined to provide an opportunity for rehabilitation, even though they were not in a position to provide adequate protection for the public by imposing conditions, restrictions and/or supervision. In fact, in my view, they could have done far more than they did to protect the public by giving a doctor the option of accepting undertakings, with suspension as the alternative. That was not done. The result was that the GMC placed too much weight on the interest of the doctor in rehabilitation and too little on the need of the public to be protected from a doctor who had not yet been shown to have recovered from the addiction or dependence that had led him/her into criminal conduct.
97.
I make other criticisms of the GMC’s handling of Shipman’s case, which are set out in
. In particular, I criticise the fact that the GMC made so little attempt to investigate the background to Shipman’s case. However, I recognise that, even if Shipman’s case had been handled as I think it should have been, it is unlikely that the outcome would have been very different from the actual outcome. I accept that Shipman’s registration would probably not have been suspended and that his name would certainly not have been erased from the medical register. He would probably have been put ‘on probation’ for a few years at most. There is no evidence that he ever relapsed into his former habit of drug abuse.
98.
The GMC’s decision to warn Shipman rather than to suspend him or to erase his name from the register must be set in the context of the practices and philosophy of the time. First, it was the GMC’s practice to deal with drug abusing doctors by helping them towards rehabilitation rather than suspending or erasing their registration. It had not been publicly criticised for that. Indeed, it appears that the Government of the day accepted the philosophy underlying the Merrison Report and its recommendations for the creation of health procedures. These recommendations were implemented in the Medical Act 1978 and came into force in 1980. The philosophy was that sick doctors, including those who abused drugs, must be helped towards rehabilitation in a way that provided adequate protection for patients. My criticism of the GMC is not that they adopted a rehabilitative approach, only that, in pursuing it, they gave insufficient weight to the need to protect patients until the process of rehabilitation could be clearly demonstrated to be complete. After the GMC’s health procedures came into operation in 1980, the same rehabilitative approach continued. It seems that it has never, until now, been called into question. If the current policy gives rise to public concern, there must be an open debate about how drug abusing doctors should be dealt with.
99.
In my view the GMC cannot be criticised for failing to foresee that Shipman’s foray into the abuse of pethidine might be the forerunner of something far more serious. In short, I reject any suggestion that, if the GMC procedures had been satisfactory, Shipman’s later criminality could have been prevented and many lives saved. It is possible that a period of ‘probation’ might have delayed the resumption of his illegal use of drugs on patients and might have saved the lives of one or two of his victims. I am quite satisfied, however, that ‘probation’ and the medical supervision that would have accompanied it would not have had any profound or lasting effect upon his future conduct.

--- The General Medical Council's 'Old' Fitness to Practise Procedures ---
100.
As I have said, the GMC is the only body that can erase or suspend a doctor’s right to practise in the UK. It can also impose conditions on a doctor’s registration. If the GMC takes any of these steps, it is said to be ‘taking action on the doctor’s registration’. Under the ‘old’ FTP procedures, which operated until 1st
November 2004, the GMC was empowered to take action on a doctor’s registration only if s/he had been found guilty of SPM, if his/her professional performance had been found to be seriously deficient or if his/her fitness to practise was found to be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. Under the ‘new’ FTP procedures, the circumstances in which the GMC will be able to take action are different and I shall return to those in due course. Under the old FTP procedures, cases of SPM were dealt with under the conduct procedures. Cases of seriously deficient performance (SDP) were dealt with under the performance procedures, which were introduced in July 1997, and cases of serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of ill health were dealt with under the health procedures which, as I have said, were introduced in 1980.
101.
The GMC has accepted that some aspects of the old procedures were unsatisfactory. On the day on which the Inquiry’s oral hearings turned to examine the work of the GMC, Leading Counsel for the GMC, Mr Roger Henderson QC, made frank admissions in relation to many of the shortcomings that had become evident during the Inquiry’s investigations. He accepted that the GMC’s FTP procedures had failed in many respects to meet the reasonable expectations of patients and the public. His message to the Inquiry was that the deficiencies had been recognised and were being addressed. He spoke of the paramount duty of the GMC to safeguard patient protection, while having due regard for the interests of doctors. At the time he spoke, the GMC was in the process of developing the new FTP procedures that have now been introduced.
102.
Despite the concessions made on behalf of the GMC and despite the fact that the old FTP procedures have recently been replaced, it has been important for the Inquiry to examine their operation in some detail, together with the attitudes and ethos which has underlain their operation. It has been necessary for me to form a view as to whether the GMC will, in the event, be willing and able to ensure that all will indeed be different in the future. It is axiomatic that the best indicator of future attitude and performance is past attitude and performance. As part of its investigation, the Inquiry sought and obtained a large number of files relating to cases dealt with in the FTP procedures between the 1970s and 2003. The Inquiry has not carried out an audit of cases during the relevant period but the examination of the case files has afforded a valuable insight into the way in which the procedures have operated in practice.
103.
Where a complaint or report was made about a doctor and it appeared that his/her fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition, the matter could be referred to a ‘health screener’ for consideration. There were usually two health screeners at any one time. They were members of the GMC and generally, although not invariably, consultant psychiatrists. If the health screener agreed that there was evidence of serious impairment of fitness to practise, the doctor would usually be invited to undergo medical examinations. If those examinations confirmed that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by ill health, the doctor would be invited to give undertakings as to his/her future conduct. He or she would be required to submit to medical supervision. In a case involving dependence on drugs or alcohol, s/he might be required to undertake to abstain from the relevant substance. Often, restrictions would be placed on the doctor’s practice. If the doctor agreed to give the undertakings, s/he would be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures, where s/he would remain for a period, usually at least two years, until the health screener was satisfied that it was safe for the doctor to practise without restriction. If the doctor did not agree to appropriate undertakings, s/he would be referred to the Health Committee, which had the power to suspend the doctor’s registration or to impose restrictions on it. The doctor would then be supervised for a period and his/her case would be reviewed.
104.
In general, it seems to me that these procedures worked well, particularly after the late 1990s, when an independent evaluation of the health procedures was commissioned by the GMC. That evaluation revealed the need for improvements in the arrangements for medical supervision and for dealing with doctors who failed to comply with their voluntary undertakings. In short, it showed that the voluntary health procedures needed ‘tightening up’. The GMC acted on the recommendations made and is, in my view, deserving of congratulation for its action both in commissioning the evaluation and in responding so positively to it.
105.
Nevertheless, I have some concerns about the way in which doctors who had been abusing drugs were referred more or less automatically into the voluntary health procedures. When the health procedures came into operation, it became the almost invariable practice to refer doctors convicted of drugs offences (and those doctors accused of misconduct in relation to the use or theft of controlled drugs) into the health procedures. This was not the case if the doctor had been found to be prescribing irresponsibly or supplying drugs illegally to patients or others; however, it was the practice if the drugs had been obtained for his/her own use. In my judgement, this practice has not always operated in the best interests of patient protection.
106.
, I have explained my conclusion that there are some cases in which it is appropriate to treat doctors who are dependent on drugs as being ill and in need of treatment and rehabilitation, but that there are also some cases in which such a rehabilitative approach is not appropriate and does not provide adequate protection for patients. I have described the GMC’s readiness to conclude, without close examination, that a doctor was a ‘victim’ of addiction. As a rule, the GMC did not investigate the background to cases of drug abuse and, in particular, the effect that the drug abuse had had on the doctor’s patients and on his/her clinical practice generally. Often, the GMC did not carry out any adequate assessment of the risk that the doctor posed to patient safety. I have seen some cases in which the GMC referred a doctor into the health procedures without making any findings of fact as to the nature or extent of the drug-related misconduct alleged and in circumstances where the doctor him/herself was denying that s/he had a ‘drug problem’ at all. I have made recommendations in respect of these issues in
The Conduct Procedures
107.
The GMC receives many complaints and reports about doctors. The number has increased markedly over the last ten years or so. In 1994, the GMC received about 1600 complaints and reports. In 2003, the figure was about 4000. These communications cover a wide range of topics; not all amount to a complaint against a doctor. Some complaints are very minor. Plainly, a regulatory body such as the GMC must have some process for determining which complaints fall, or might fall, within its jurisdiction and which should be rejected or directed elsewhere.
108.
Under the old procedures, the body charged with the power to take action on registration was the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC), which would hold a public hearing and, if the doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence or if SPM was proved or admitted, would decide whether action on registration was necessary. Before a case reached the PCC, however, it had to pass through three filtering processes. The first of these was an initial sift carried out by GMC staff; the second was the ‘screening’ process which, until recently, was carried out by medically qualified and lay members of the GMC. The third filtering process was consideration of the case by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC). All three processes were carried out in private. Only a very small proportion (no more than about 5%) of cases survived the three filtering processes and reached the PCC. In 2003, at least 65% of complaints were closed at the stage of the initial sift by GMC staff.
109.
The way in which the filtering processes operated under the old FTP procedures had an important bearing on patient protection. If cases were filtered out which should or might have warranted action on a doctor’s registration, the fact that that doctor was continuing to practise unrestricted might have put patients at risk. For that and other reasons, the Inquiry examined the operation of each filtering process in considerable detail. The results of that examination are set out in
Chapters 18 to 20
The Meaning of Serious Professional Misconduct
110.
I describe, in
, the difficulties that have been experienced over the years in defining and recognising SPM. As this was for some decades the basis of the GMC’s jurisdiction, it was plainly important, in the interests of consistency and transparency, that all decision-makers should have a clear and agreed view as to what SPM was. Yet the GMC has never formulated agreed standards, criteria and thresholds by reference to which decisions about what was and was not SPM could be taken. The problem became more acute over the years. Until the early 1990s, the GMC was mainly concerned with cases of misconduct involving dishonesty, drug abuse, indecency, improper relationships with patients and breach of confidence. The GMC would also consider allegations that a doctor had disregarded his/her professional obligations, for example, by failing or refusing to visit a patient or to provide necessary treatment. In effect, the GMC was concerned with cases involving wilful, deliberate or reckless misconduct. At that time, the GMC did not generally concern itself with allegations of incompetence or negligence, even serious negligence. It regarded those as a matter for the civil courts. However, following a decision of the Privy Council in 1987, it became clear that acts of negligence, if serious enough, could amount to SPM. The number of allegations of that kind received by the GMC has increased steadily over the years. This increase led to more problems arising from the difficulty in defining and recognising SPM. First, the concept of negligence, even if serious, does not fit comfortably with that of ‘serious professional misconduct’. Second, there was an even greater need for standards, criteria and thresholds to be set for deciding such cases. The GMC has been advised of this on several occasions. It is true that, in 1995 the GMC produced a booklet entitled ‘Good Medical Practice’, which sets out the standards to be expected of a doctor. That booklet is very good so far as it goes. It sets out the standards to which doctors should aspire, but it says nothing about the standards below which a doctor must expect to face disciplinary proceedings. No agreed standards, criteria and thresholds for SPM had been established at the time when the old conduct procedures became defunct in November 2004. As a consequence, the operation of the conduct procedures was beset by inconsistent decisions.
The Initial Sift by the Administrative Staff
111.
, I have described the initial administrative procedures by which complaints received by the GMC were ‘sifted’ by GMC staff with the intention of eliminating those which clearly did not fall within the GMC’s jurisdiction because they did not ‘raise a question of SPM’. I found that this sifting process was defective in some important respects. Many cases were ‘closed’ without the GMC having considered whether the allegation might raise a question of SPM. If it appeared that the complainant had not pursued any available local complaints procedures to their conclusion, the GMC would not accept the case unless it appeared that the doctor was a danger to patients. That was not the correct statutory test and many cases must have been rejected or closed that ought to have been accepted. The fact that it would have been open to the complainant to return to the GMC when the local procedures were exhausted was no answer to the criticism, not least because many did not in fact return. The GMC was not providing proper protection to patients; instead, it was putting the onus back onto complainants to pursue their allegations elsewhere. Furthermore, the GMC was well aware of the defects of the NHS complaints procedures, to which I have already referred. PCOs had no facilities for the investigation of complaints and it was left to complainants themselves to assemble the necessary evidence.
112.
The GMC itself did little to investigate those complaints which survived the initial sift. It had no in-house investigation unit and, in general, it would not send a case to its solicitors for investigation unless and until it had passed through all three filtering processes and had been referred to the PCC. Many complaints (in particular, those made by private individuals and those relating to substandard clinical practice) had been filtered out before that point, some for lack of investigation.
113.
Further defects at the early stage were the GMC’s unwillingness to make any enquiries in order to discover background information about the doctor. The GMC would receive a complaint, consider it and, provided that the local complaints procedures had been exhausted and the allegation raised a question of SPM, accept it. However, no further information would be sought before the case was submitted to the screening stage. Until recently, the GMC’s attitude towards the collection of information from employers and PCOs was that it was not its task to make out a complaint against the doctor; that would be unfair to doctors. The GMC’s role was to give the complainant the opportunity to advance his/her complaint and no more. This attitude did not adequately protect patients or the public interest.
The Screening Stage
114.
The next stage of the conduct procedures, which I describe in
, was the screening process. Historically, screening was the province of the President but, during the period with which I have been concerned, he delegated the task to other, personally chosen, colleagues at the GMC. Until 1990, all screening was carried out by medically qualified members but, after that time, lay members played an important role. In general, a case could not be closed at the screening stage without the agreement of a lay screener.
115.
The statutory test for screeners was, for many years, very imprecise. The screener was required to refer a case onwards to the PPC, unless it appeared to him/her that the matter ‘need not proceed further’. As, for many years, no guidance was provided as to the circumstances in which the matter ‘need not proceed further’, the result was that screeners exercised a largely subjective discretion about which cases should proceed and which should be closed. I heard evidence that, until the mid-1990s, the usual approach of screeners was to close cases unless there was a positive reason for them to proceed. In other words, the statutory test was ‘reversed’. I was told that this attitude changed gradually from the mid-1990s onwards. However, in a series of cases of judicial review beginning in 1997, it became apparent that screeners were still not applying the correct statutory test. In 1997, the GMC produced a handbook of guidance for screeners but, even after that, there were cases of judicial review which revealed that the screeners had closed cases because they had formed a concluded view that the case did not amount to SPM, rather than applying the correct statutory test. Screeners did not always prove to be receptive to guidance. As some screeners also sat on the PPC and the PCC, it appears that, on some occasions, they took a broad view as to whether the case would result in a finding of SPM if it went to the PCC and, if they thought that it would not, they would close it. This approach must have resulted in the closure of many cases which should have proceeded at least to the next stage of the FTP procedures. It was suggested by the GMC that the screeners were anxious to bring the full value of their experience and expertise to the task of screening and found it difficult to accept that the test should not involve the exercise of a wide discretion. That may be so, but the way in which the screening process operated for many years was not satisfactory and did not operate for the protection of patients.
116.
In recent years, real attempts were made to introduce some consistency into the screening process by the use of standard forms that guided the decision-making process. Training was introduced and more guidance was available. Nevertheless, as I describe in
, these efforts were not entirely successful and there was a resistance on the part of certain screeners at least to some of the changes that had been introduced with the aim of promoting consistency in screening decisions.
Consideration by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
117.
, I describe the procedures of the PPC. This Committee comprised members of the GMC and, for many years, was chaired by the principal medical screener. This dual role seems clearly unsatisfactory to modern eyes. However, it was regarded as appropriate until 1999, when Dr Robin Steel, who had held that dual role for several years, retired from the GMC. The Human Rights Act 1998 was due to come into force the following year. No doubt that forthcoming event provided an impetus for change.
118.
The statutory function of the PPC was to decide whether a case ‘ought to be referred for inquiry’, to the PCC or to the Health Committee. If not, the case would be closed, although a warning might be given if the facts of the case were not in dispute. The test to be applied by the PPC was very imprecise. It was also not very different from the test applied at the screening stage, which was, as I have said, that the case should proceed unless the screener was of the view that it ‘need not proceed further’. Neither the statutory Rules nor GMC guidance provided any criteria by which the PPC was to decide whether or not the case ‘ought to be referred’ onwards. The result was that the PPC exercised a wide discretion just as the screeners did.
119.
Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute (PSI) was commissioned by the GMC on several occasions to carry out research into its conduct procedures. The object of the research was to investigate the possible existence of racial bias within the procedures. She and her colleagues were given complete access to the GMC’s files and she pointed out to the Inquiry that there were not many organisations which would have agreed to afford such open access and would have allowed publication of the results. I agree that the GMC’s decision to commission and publish this research was greatly to its credit. In the course of Professor Allen’s work, which began in the mid-1990s, she and her colleagues made a large number of recommendations about steps that the GMC should take to improve both its administration of the conduct procedures and its decision-making processes. The GMC accepted and acted upon many, although not all, of those recommendations, with considerable beneficial effect.
120.
Professor Allen and her colleagues examined the decisions of the PPC made in the years 1997, 1998 and 1999. They set out their findings in a report written in 2000. They expressed concern about a number of matters. In particular, they found that there were unexplained inconsistencies between decisions of the PPC. They recommended that the PPC should give reasons for its decisions, which it had not done hitherto. That suggestion was adopted soon afterwards.
121.
Professor Allen and her team observed a series of 11 meetings of the PPC between June 1999 and January 2000. Their 2000 Report was critical of many aspects of the PPC’s decision-making process. In brief, the processes lacked consistency, transparency and fairness. The Report noted that there was substantial confusion and disagreement between members about what constituted SPM and what the threshold for SPM should be. Views differed widely. Members tended to speculate about why someone had acted as they had or how certain situations had arisen, when there was no evidence on which to base such speculation. Members had difficulty in dealing with expert evidence. If two conflicting expert views were before the PPC, members might accept one or the other for no clear reason. Some members did not have a clear understanding of the GMC’s FTP procedures or of the powers open to them. Professor Allen was also concerned about the frequency with which cases were closed because it did not appear to members of the PPC that there was sufficient evidence to support the allegation. At that stage, of course, no steps had been taken to gather the available evidence.
122.
The main cause for concern about the decision-making processes of the PPC was its propensity to reach a conclusion about whether the allegation did in fact amount to SPM, rather than to limit itself to deciding whether the case ought to proceed to the PCC. In reaching such conclusions, the PPC was arrogating to itself the function of the PCC. In
, I have reported on two cases of judicial review in which decisions of the PPC were subject to criticism. In both cases, the High Court pointed out that it was not the function of the PPC to resolve conflicts of evidence. That was for the PCC. I cannot say whether these cases of judicial review were representative of the general standard of PPC decisions at the time, although they did accord with the observations of the PSI team. Certainly, the mistakes made were of a very fundamental nature. I have been driven to the conclusion that decisions of the PPC not to refer cases to the PCC were wrong in a significant number of cases and that these cases give rise to a real cause for concern that the PPC was far too much influenced by its desire to be ‘fair to doctors’ and far too little concerned about the protection of patients and the public.
123.
Following the 2000 Report of the PSI team and other developments that occurred at about the same time, there were attempts to improve decision-making within the PPC. Guidance was issued and an
developed with a view to directing the minds of members to the correct issues. It is difficult to know how successful these measures were in the absence of a complete audit of PPC decisions. However, a Paper produced by the PSI team in 2003 drew attention to apparent inconsistencies in the way in which the PPC had dealt with conviction cases in the period from 1999 to 2001. In
, I have referred to the striking difference in the PPC’s treatment at a meeting in November 2002 of two cases that had many similar features. Such differences are not surprising, given the lack of standards, criteria and thresholds to which I have already referred.
The Operation of the Professional Conduct Committee
124.
, I consider the operation of the PCC. Under the old procedures, this was the Committee that could impose erasure, suspension or conditional registration following a finding of SPM. Until 2000, the PCC comprised 30 members of the GMC and sat in panels for which the quorum was five members, including one lay member. From 2000, the GMC acquired the power to co-opt non-members (associates) onto PCC panels. This step was necessary as the PCC’s caseload had increased markedly and it made it possible for multiple panels of the PCC to sit simultaneously. Also, the quorum was reduced to three, to include at least one lay and one medical member. The procedure to be followed at the hearing was akin to that of a criminal trial, although there was a general discretion to admit evidence that would not usually be admissible at a criminal trial (such as hearsay evidence) if its admission was desirable in the light of the PCC’s duty to ‘make due inquiry’. The evidence suggests that the discretion was not often used. The standard of proof to be applied to findings of fact was the criminal standard of proof. The chairman of the panel was not legally qualified and the panel received legal advice from a legal assessor.
125.
In conviction cases, the PCC had the power to erase, suspend or impose conditions upon the doctor’s registration. In conduct cases, the powers arose only after the panel had found that the doctor had been guilty of SPM. The panel would first decide what facts it found proved or admitted and would then consider whether they amounted to SPM. As I have said, there have never been any agreed standards, criteria and thresholds by which cases of SPM were to be judged. Sir Donald Irvine, immediate past President of the GMC, who had long experience of sitting on PCC panels, said that disputes about what amounted to SPM gave rise to much ‘heat’ and ‘emotion’. The absence of standards was bound to lead to inconsistent decisions.
126.
For many years, there was no official guidance about the imposition of sanctions for the use of members of PCC panels. In 1999, an internal Working Group reviewed all decisions on sanction made by the PCC over a ten-year period. The review was undertaken partly on account of concern within the GMC about public and media criticism of PCC decisions as being inappropriate or inconsistent with previous decisions. One of the tasks of the Working Group was to ascertain whether there was or appeared to be any inconsistency of the approach of the PCC to sanction. The Working Group found instances where it appeared that an inappropriate sanction had been imposed or where there had been apparent inconsistency. However, its work was hampered by the absence of anything other than brief explanations by PCC panels of their decisions. It was impossible in many cases to tell whether a decision had been genuinely aberrant or whether there had been some exceptional mitigation which had not been made explicit in the decision given by the PCC panel. The review clearly gave rise to some concern and the Working Group recommended the development of a statement about sanctions. This led, in 2001, to the production of Indicative Sanctions Guidance for panel members. This guidance (which has since been updated) is helpful, although it has its limitations. A recent internal review of PCC panel decisions revealed some outcomes that ‘appeared surprising’. However, as in 1999, the failure of panels to give detailed reasons for their decisions made it impossible to know whether these outcomes resulted from aberrant decisions or had been justified by the circumstances of the case.
127.
Historically, doctors had the right to appeal to the Privy Council in respect of findings of SPM and sanctions that were alleged to be too severe. In 2003, that right of appeal was transferred to the High Court. At the same time, the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)) acquired the right to refer to the High Court any sanction which it considered was unduly lenient or any acquittal on a charge of SPM which it considered was wrong. The CRHP/CHRE can act only if it considers that it is necessary to do so in the public interest. This is a most welcome innovation and the CRHP/CHRE has already made its mark by referring a number of cases to the High Court. The existence of this right of referral on behalf of the public interest can only result in improved decisions by the PCC or, under the new procedures, by FTP panels.
The Performance Procedures
128.
The performance procedures which I describe in
, were introduced in 1997. Like the health procedures, they could operate on a voluntary or a compulsory basis. When information was received suggesting that a doctor’s performance might be deficient, the doctor was invited to undergo a performance assessment. The methods and instruments used in GMC’s performance assessment enjoy worldwide renown. They provide for a very thorough assessment and are, as an almost inevitable consequence, expensive and time-consuming to undertake. The assessment comprised two phases. The first consisted of a peer review undertaken by a team of assessors. The second comprised a series of objective tests which, in the case of GPs, were calibrated at the level of performance which new entrants to general practice must achieve. Doctors falling below an acceptable level of performance might be invited to agree to a voluntary statement of requirements as to their future practice. This might include requirements for retraining or supervision. It might also include restrictions on the circumstances in which the doctor was allowed to practise. If the doctor declined to agree the statement of requirements, or if his/her deficiencies were regarded as too serious to be dealt with by voluntary measures, the doctor was referred to the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP). If, following a hearing, the CPP found that the doctor’s professional performance was seriously deficient, it could suspend the doctor from the register or impose conditions upon the doctor’s registration. In the latter case, a period of supervision would follow after which there might be one or more resumed hearings. The objective would be that the doctor’s performance should improve to the extent that s/he could practise safely without restriction.
129.
My main concern about the operation of these procedures was that the evidence suggested that the standards of performance imposed by the CPP were very low (lower than the standard at which the second phase of the performance assessment was calibrated) and did not always provide adequate protection for patients and the public. I was also concerned that doctors were not always supervised as well as they should have been and were sometimes allowed to resume unrestricted practice without having produced adequate evidence of improvement. I have made recommendations about these matters in the context of the new FTP procedures.

--- The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures ---
130.
, in which I describe the development of the new procedures and the way in which I believe they will operate, is almost 100 pages in length. It is difficult to summarise succinctly and readers who wish to understand the detail will have to refer to that Chapter. Here I shall only describe the procedures in very broad outline.
131.
In 2001, the GMC set out its vision for the new FTP procedures. They were firmly based on the ideal of instituting procedures that would provide proper protection for patients without sacrificing the need to be fair to doctors. My general conclusion has been that, in implementing the new procedures, the GMC has to some extent lost sight of its earlier vision. In developing the new procedures, there has been a good deal of ‘chopping and changing’. It has been difficult to recognise the principles underlying many of the changes.
132.
An important innovation is the amalgamation of the old conduct, health and performance procedures into one set of FTP procedures. There will be only one type of hearing, a FTP panel hearing. Allegations of different types (for example, conduct and performance) against the same doctor will be capable of being heard at the same time. Under the provisions of the Medical Act 1983, as amended, the basis of the GMC’s jurisdiction will be a finding that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. Impairment of fitness to practise can be demonstrated only by evidence of misconduct, deficient professional performance, convictions or cautions, adverse health or a determination by another regulatory body that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired.
133.
The term ‘impairment of fitness to practise’ is, in my view, non-specific and, although the statute limits the ways in which impairment may be demonstrated, it does not define the term or set any standard by which doctors are to be judged. The problems of definition and recognition, which beset the GMC in its decisions based on SPM, will, in my view, be not only perpetuated but increased. There is an urgent need for the GMC to formulate standards, criteria and thresholds by which impairment of fitness to practise is to be judged. Failure to provide such standards will result in inconsistency of decision-making, unfairness, lack of transparency and a failure to provide adequate protection for patients. I have made recommendations with regard to the formulation of such standards, criteria and thresholds.
134.
The preliminary stages of the FTP procedures have been simplified. The GMC staff will carry out the preliminary sift to remove cases which do not fall within the GMC’s jurisdiction. It appears that some of the defects of the old procedures at this stage have been removed, although careful audit of the closure of cases will be required to ensure that this is so. In particular, it appears that the GMC will not close allegations made by private individuals just because the local complaints procedures have not been exhausted. Also, the GMC is now willing to make enquiries of employers and PCOs before deciding whether a case should be rejected at the initial stage.
135.
When a case has been accepted into the FTP procedures, there should now be a greatly improved investigation of the facts. The GMC has recruited a team of investigators to work on the initial evidence-gathering process. They will have the advantage of advice from a team of in-house lawyers. It will be possible at this stage to order a medical examination (if health issues arise) and/or a performance assessment. When the evidence has been gathered, the case will be submitted for decision at what is called the ‘investigation stage’. The purpose of the process is to decide whether the case should proceed to a hearing before a FTP panel. The case will be submitted to two case examiners, who are contracted to work for the GMC on a part-time basis. One case examiner will be medically qualified; one will be a lay person. If the case examiners agree that the case should proceed to a hearing, they can so direct. If they agree that the case should be closed, they can so direct. If they disagree as to the outcome, the case will be referred to a panel of the Investigation Committee (IC). Case examiners and IC panels will also have powers to issue warnings. The procedures proposed for the issuing of warnings are complex and less than satisfactory. I have recommended that they should be reconsidered.
136.
There has unfortunately been some confusion of thought about the formulation of the test (the investigation stage test) to be applied by case examiners and IC panels when deciding whether a case should be referred to a FTP panel. Whereas the jurisdiction of the GMC is based upon an impairment of fitness to practise, the investigation stage test, which is a preliminary sifting test, is said to be ‘whether there is a realistic prospect of establishing that the doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration’. This test is obviously set inappropriately high for a preliminary test. I have made recommendations that I hope will assist in the resolution of this problem.
137.
When it first resolved to introduce new FTP procedures, the GMC recognised that it would be desirable to separate the ‘investigation function’ (that is, the stage up to and including the taking of the investigation stage decision) from the ‘adjudication function’, which will comprise the FTP panel hearing and any preparations for it. It was recognised that, since the passage of the Human Rights Act 1998, the GMC might be vulnerable to criticism if it appeared to be both the prosecutor and the judge in the same case. It considered hiving off one or other of the two functions. In the event, it decided not to hive off either. It considers that it has provided a sufficient separation of function by ensuring that the FTP panels in the adjudication stage will comprise non-members of the GMC.
138.
However, in my view, that will not suffice. The GMC will select the FTP panellists, train them, appraise them, call them in for advice if their decisions do not meet with approval and, in the final analysis, dismiss them if unsatisfactory. In short, FTP panellists will not be at all independent of the GMC. I have recommended that some mechanism should be found for the appointment, training and management of both lay and medically qualified FTP panellists, as well as for the administration of FTP panel hearings, by a body independent of the GMC. By that means, there will be effective separation of the investigation and adjudication functions.
139.
, I have made a large number of other recommendations in relation to the new procedures. My overall conclusion is that, with the amendments I have suggested, they are capable of providing a much improved method of protecting patients from doctors who might harm them. The success of the new procedures depends to a large extent upon the will and determination of the GMC to make them operate for the benefit of patients rather than, as the old procedures often operated, for the benefit of doctors.

--- Revalidation ---
140.
In 2000, in the wake of a number of medical scandals and tragedies, of which the case of Shipman was one, the GMC resolved to introduce a quite revolutionary method of monitoring doctors. It issued a Consultation Paper setting out its visionary ideas. Instead of reacting to complaints made by patients and employers, the GMC was going to take proactive steps to ensure that all doctors on the medical register remained up to date and fit to practise. This would give an assurance to the public that any doctor whose performance was substandard or whose conduct was dysfunctional would be detected as early as possible. Doctors who wished to practise medicine would, in addition to being on the medical register, have to hold a licence to practise. That licence would have to be ‘revalidated’ every five years. This would be achieved by requiring the doctor to undergo an evaluation of his/her fitness to practise. I have described the development of the GMC’s plans for revalidation in
141.
The Consultation Paper was well received and the GMC commissioned work on the development of plans for implementation. The plans were based on the preparation by each doctor of a folder of evidence which would demonstrate how s/he was practising. The preparation of these folders, it was thought, would not impose an undue burden on doctors because, under the new clinical governance arrangements to be introduced within the NHS, all doctors would have to keep such folders for the purpose of their annual appraisal. The folders would serve both purposes. For revalidation, the folders would be examined by a ‘local revalidation group’, which would apply standards appropriate to the doctor’s specialty, approved by the GMC. The implementation plans, which included the conduct of a pilot scheme in 2001, went quite well.
142.
In April 2002, a second pilot scheme was conducted, the purpose of which was to see whether the forms used in doctors’ appraisals might be used instead of their folders of evidence. That pilot scheme was less successful. It became apparent that revalidation as then envisaged would be an expensive process and would impose a considerable administrative burden on the GMC. It also emerged that the proposals were unpopular with important sections of the medical profession. Nonetheless, the amendment to the Medical Act 1983 which would require the GMC to undertake revalidation was passed in December 2002; it was to come into force at a later date. Under the new legislative provision, revalidation was defined as an ‘evaluation of a medical practitioner’s fitness to practise’.
143.
In early 2003, the GMC abandoned its plans for evaluation by a revalidation group of an individual doctor’s fitness to practise by means of examination of evidence. Instead, the GMC decided that the mere fact that the doctor had taken part in appraisal was to be deemed sufficient to justify revalidation. Evidence received by the Inquiry suggested that appraisal for GPs was a purely formative process, not capable of providing an evaluation of fitness to practise. Moreover, it had been only recently introduced and the standards to which it was being carried out were variable. Many witnesses expressed the view that it was not a satisfactory basis for revalidation. Appraisal clearly did not involve an evaluation of fitness to practise. In my view, the GMC’s change of direction was made, not for reasons of principle but of expediency.
144.
In November 2003, the GMC announced that, in addition to showing that s/he had successfully taken part in appraisal, the doctor would have to produce a ‘clinical governance certificate’ by which the doctor’s employer or PCO would certify that the doctor had been appraised and that there were no (or no significant) unresolved concerns arising from clinical governance activity. In my view, the addition of this certificate was an improvement on the previous position but revalidation would still not involve an evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise. A doctor would be appraised ‘successfully’ unless serious concerns about his/her fitness to practise were noticed. Also, the clinical governance certificate was to be a negative certificate, saying only that nothing adverse was known. In short, the process still would not provide the positive evaluation of fitness to practise required by the legislation and which the GMC had said that it would provide.
145.
That was the position at the time of the Inquiry’s seminars in January 2004. The Inquiry has continued to receive written evidence since then. During the spring and summer of 2004, it appeared that proposals were being discussed between the various interest groups (including the GMC and the NHS) which might result in some strengthening of the revalidation proposals. However, on 11th
November 2004, the Inquiry received a letter from the Chief Medical Officer, from which it is clear that the DoH and the GMC have agreed that revalidation will depend upon participation in appraisal and a clinical governance certificate which is essentially negative. The certificate will confirm the doctor’s participation in appraisal and will state (if appropriate) that there are no locally known concerns about the doctor’s health or probity, no local disciplinary procedures in progress and that there have been no relevant disciplinary findings since the last revalidation. The certificate will contain no general statement that the doctor is the subject of ‘no concerns’ or ‘no significant unresolved concerns’ locally. The arrangements will not provide an evaluation of fitness to practise. It is important that the public should appreciate this and should realise that revalidation will not provide the assurance that was hoped for. I have made recommendations which would, if adopted, ensure that revalidation does provide an evaluation of fitness to practise.
146.
I have a further concern about the revalidation proposals. Any doctor who ‘fails’ to be revalidated at the first stage of the process will be subjected to additional scrutiny within the GMC. At the moment, it is not clear exactly how the second stage of the process will work. The proposals lack transparency. However, what is clear is that no doctor will be deprived of his/her licence to practise unless a FTP panel finds that his/her fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying suspension or erasure from the medical register. Thus, even a doctor whose fitness to practise is sufficiently impaired to warrant the imposition of conditions upon his/her registration will be revalidated. In general, doctors who have failed revalidation at the first two stages will be referred to a FTP panel if it appears, on assessment, that their professional performance is deficient or that there are conduct or health problems. Under the standards of the old procedures, professional performance had to be seriously deficient before any action would be taken on registration. Those standards were very low; the President of the GMC, Professor Sir Graeme Catto, described them in evidence to the Inquiry as ‘remarkably low’. Thus, the bottom line is that a doctor will fail to be revalidated only if his/her professional performance is ‘remarkably’ poor. I do not think that this is a satisfactory state of affairs.

--- The Culture within the General Medical Council ---
147.
As I have already said, the culture within the GMC and its attitude towards its duty to act in the public interest and to protect patients lies at the heart of the future success of the new FTP procedures. Indeed, it lies at the heart of the even more fundamental question of whether the GMC should retain responsibility for the conduct of the FTP procedures. With these procedures, the GMC should protect patients from dysfunctional doctors, who, by reason of their misconduct, ill health or poor performance, put patients at risk of harm. The Inquiry has received evidence and submissions from some quarters suggesting that the GMC should no longer carry out that function. It has been suggested that the GMC does not have the protection of patients as its first priority; its priority is the interests of the medical profession. I have decided not to recommend that the GMC should be deprived of its FTP function. I wish to explain my reasons for reaching that conclusion.
148.
Having examined the evidence, I have been driven to the conclusion that the GMC has not, in the past, succeeded in its primary purpose of protecting patients. Instead it has, to a very significant degree, acted in the interests of doctors. Of course, I accept that the GMC also has a duty towards doctors; it must be fair in all its dealings with them. But, in the past, the balance has been wrong and, in my view, the imbalance was due to a culture within the GMC, a set of attitudes and an approach that put what was seen as being ‘fair to doctors’ ahead of protecting patients.
149.
contain many examples of the way in which this culture operated. I do not propose to repeat them here. Until about five years ago, not only did the GMC fail to operate its FTP procedures in the best interests of patients but it appears that a majority of its members did not even realise that anything was seriously amiss. However, at about that time, there was a recognition of a need for change. If there had not been, and if there had been no significant change during the last five years, I would have had little hesitation in advising the SoS that he must make provision for some other way of dealing with doctors whose fitness to practise was called into question. It is clear that the GMC did not open its collective eyes to its own shortcomings without some prompting from outside. The emergence into the public domain of a number of medical scandals during the late 1990s must have played a significant part in the development of a resolve to reform. I have no doubt that there were, in the GMC, some who had for many years wished to see a change of culture and practice. The scandals of Bristol, Ledward, Shipman, Green and possibly others had the effect of bringing the majority within the GMC to the view that some reform was necessary. Since that time, the GMC has been in a state of transition.
150.
This state of transition included the development of the new FTP procedures, which came into effect on 1st
November 2004, and the process of revalidation, which is due to come into effect in April 2005. Those processes of change have, until very recently, been theoretical. They have comprised preparations for the future. However, some practical changes have taken place during the past five years. These were changes that were not dependent upon the introduction of the new procedures. I have listed some of these in
. The conclusion that I reach there is that these changes were improvements upon past practice. They improved the position of complainants and the ability of the system to protect patients. To some extent, the GMC is to be congratulated on making those changes. However, the disappointing feature is that all these changes appear to me to have been made as a reaction to some form of external pressure. Those changes do not demonstrate that there has been a change of culture within the GMC.
151.
During the same period, the GMC failed to make a number of changes which, in my view, it would have made if it had had patient protection at the forefront of its collective mind. In
, I have mentioned four. I shall not describe them here. However, my examination of the events of the last five years leads me to conclude that, although the GMC has been in a state of transition and has made a number of beneficial changes, it has not radically changed its culture.
152.
The most important transitions effected in the last few years have been the preparations for the introduction of the new procedures and revalidation. Does the GMC’s approach to those important changes demonstrate a change of culture and attitude? In
, I examined the development of the proposals for the new FTP procedures in detail in an attempt to understand the thinking behind that development. The GMC’s vision for the future procedures was clearly set out in the Consultation Paper published in 2001. That paper demonstrated a firm commitment to FTP procedures that would operate for the protection of patients without compromising the need to be fair to doctors. On the basis of that document, I would have said that there had indeed been a change in the culture of the GMC. However, the translation of the vision into reality has been in some respects disappointing. In my conclusions to
, I found that there had been no consistent development from the initial vision to the final product. The major change is the creation of a unified set of procedures. There have been many other changes, some for the better, some for the worse. The GMC has adopted a number of suggestions that have been made in evidence to the Inquiry. It has reacted positively to some of the criticisms and concerns about which the GMC witnesses were asked. But I do not feel confident that the GMC has maintained the clarity of purpose that it exhibited in 2001. I do not feel confident that there is currently a coherent policy that the new procedures will be operated with the primary objective of protecting patients.
153.
Examination of the development of the GMC’s proposals for revalidation leads to a similar conclusion. I have described those proposals above and have expressed my view that they are not satisfactory. They do not provide adequate protection for patients. In the early days, the GMC had visionary plans but, when it came to implementation, there was a retreat. That retreat caused dissent within the GMC but it was accepted by the majority. I am driven to the conclusion that, for the majority of GMC members, the old culture of protecting the interests of doctors still lingers on.
154.
I have reached two conclusions. The first is that the GMC as a body does not seem to be proactive in the interests of patient protection. It will often (although not always) take appropriate action when the need to do so has been pointed out to it but it does not see such things for itself. The second conclusion is that, when there is a conflict between the interests of ‘being fair to doctors’ or doing ‘what the profession thinks is right’ and the interests of patient protection, the majority sometimes takes the doctors’ view. I am not saying that that is always the case, but revalidation is an important illustration of the point.
155.
Why then have I not recommended to the SoS that the GMC should no longer be responsible for the FTP procedures? In fact, I have recommended that responsibility for the adjudication stage should be transferred to an independent organisation. However, I have recommended that because it is inappropriate for the GMC to control both the investigation and adjudication stages of the procedures. I would have made that recommendation even if there had been no suggestion that the GMC’s culture could be criticised. I have not recommended that the GMC should cease to be responsible for fitness to practise for four reasons.
156.
First, fitness to practise and revalidation are closely linked. Revalidation and registration are closely linked. It is preferable therefore that fitness to practise and registration should be under the control of the same body. I do not consider that my Terms of Reference permit me to consider whether the GMC might lose its responsibility for registration (or indeed for setting the standards for admission and all the educational responsibilities that accompany that function). That would, in effect, be to recommend the abolition of the GMC. I could not do that. This is a Public Inquiry, not a Royal Commission on the regulation of the medical profession. If I were to recommend the detachment of the FTP procedures, it would create practical difficulties for the future, although I do not think they would be insurmountable.
157.
158.
So far, I have given two reasons; both are negative. However, there are some positive reasons for my conclusion. The GMC has changed during the past few years. It has carried through a new set of FTP procedures and it is about to introduce a form of re-licensure called revalidation. My conclusions are that these matters have not been handled as well as the public was entitled to expect, but that does not negate the fact that there has been some change in the right direction. It is important that that direction of change should continue.
159.
There is a major reason to expect that change for the better might continue, namely the CRHP/CHRE. This is a new body but it has already made its mark by reason of its power to refer to the High Court any decision of the GMC which it considers to be unduly lenient and which it considers should be reviewed for the protection of members of the public. However, the CRHP/CHRE also has wide powers of oversight of the GMC’s FTP function. It can audit outcomes of cases; it can examine processes and require rule changes. Its existence will, I believe, have an important effect on the GMC. The GMC knows that, if it fails to act in the best interests of patients and the public, the CRHP/CHRE will intervene. Moreover, this Inquiry has shed a great deal of light on GMC practices, particularly on those that are not usually open to public scrutiny. I hope that what the Inquiry has revealed will help the CRHP/CHRE in that it will know where to look to see whether or not the GMC is doing its job well. I have recommended that there should in the future be a review of the powers of the CRHP/CHRE with a view to ascertaining whether any extension of its powers and functions is necessary in order to enable it to act effectively to ensure that patients are sufficiently protected by the GMC.
160.
How the new FTP procedures will operate in practice it is not possible to say. In my view, it is important in the public interest that, in about three or four years’ time, there should be a thorough review of the operation of the new procedures, to be carried out by an independent organisation. I have recommended that that task should be undertaken by or on the instructions of the CRHP/CHRE. The cost should, in my view, be borne by public funds. That review should not be limited to consideration of administrative systems, but should be empowered to examine casework decisions at all levels as well.
161.
I would like to believe that the GMC’s culture will continue to change in the right direction by virtue of its own momentum. However, I do not feel confident that it will do so. I am sure that there are many people within the GMC, both members and staff, who want to see the regulation of the medical profession based on the principles of ‘patient-centred’ medicine and public protection. Indeed, I think it is likely that all members are theoretically in favour of those principles. The problem seems to be that, when specific issues arise, opposing views are taken and, as in the past, the balance tends to tip in favour of the interests of doctors.
162.
For an organisation like the GMC, issues are bound to arise in which there is a conflict between the interests of doctors and those of patients and of the public. Members have to deal with that conflict. To do their work properly as members of a regulatory body, they have to put the public interest first. That is very difficult for a member who depends for his/her position on an electorate of doctors. I am sure that some manage to do it. I think that others find it more difficult. At present, the GMC is effectively controlled by elected members. It seems to me that one of the fundamental problems for the GMC is the perception, shared by many doctors, that it is supposed to be ‘representing’ them. It is not; it is regulating them. It may be that this perception goes back to the 1970s, when the profession objected to being asked to pay an annual retention fee and raised the cry of ‘no taxation without representation’. If the profession perceives that the GMC is supposed to represent it, that would explain why some GMC members tend to adopt a representative role. In fact, the medical profession has a very effective representative body in the British Medical Association; it does not need - and should not have - two.
163.
I have come to the conclusion that one of the reasons why the GMC is not able to rid itself of the old culture lies within its constitution and the overall majority of elected ‘representative’ members. I think that the GMC should look again at its constitution. I know that the constitution was changed as recently as July 2003. I realise that further upheaval would be unwelcome. However, my considered view is that it is not appropriate that the GMC should be dominated by elected members. It should certainly be dominated by medical members; I am not suggesting that there should be any increase in the proportion of lay members. But I do suggest that there should be more appointed medical members, people who are not beholden to an electorate and who do not see themselves in the position of representatives of the profession. Rather, they should see themselves as servants of the public interest. Accordingly, I have recommended that the GMC’s constitution be reconsidered.
164.
I have also recommended that medical and lay members that are to be appointed (by the Privy Council) should be selected for nomination to the Privy Council by the Public Appointments Commission following open competition. It would seem sensible for the Universities and medical Royal Colleges to have the right to nominate medically qualified candidates for consideration. However, the competition should also be open to medically qualified persons who wish to put themselves forward. I have seen, from the DoH prospectus inviting applications for the position of lay membership in 2003, the emphasis that was laid - quite rightly - on the lay members’ duty to safeguard the public interest. I would like to see the same emphasis on the public interest applied to the appointment of medical members.
165.
In the past, the GMC has been accountable to the public only in very general terms. It has had a duty to regulate the medical profession in the best interests of patients and the public. However, there has been no person or body to whom the GMC has been directly accountable. Since April 2003, the CRHP/CHRE has had the power to oversee and correct some aspects of the GMC’s work. The GMC itself recognised and drew the Inquiry’s attention to the fact that, although the GMC derives its powers from Parliament, it is not directly accountable to Parliament for the way in which it exercises its powers. The GMC suggested that it might be appropriate if it were to be directly accountable. I think that that is a good idea. I have in mind that the GMC should be required to publish an annual report of its activities, which could be scrutinised by a Parliamentary Select Committee. For this to be a worthwhile exercise, the report would have to contain specified categories of information, including statistical information, in a form that was readily understandable and, in effect, transparent.
166.
In the course of this long Report, I have on many occasions been critical of the GMC, its procedures and its attitudes. I realise that the fact that this Inquiry has been conducted in public and that my Report will be in the public domain must make those criticisms even more unwelcome than they would have been if made in private. Indeed, I recognise that their effect is likely to be bruising. It has not been my intention to be hurtful or indeed to be critical of any individual at the GMC. My criticisms have been of the corporate body and its collective actions. I have made a large number of recommendations affecting the GMC and I realise that some of them will be unwelcome. However, I hope that it will be accepted that they have been made in a constructive spirit and with the intention of helping the GMC to achieve its primary purpose of protecting patients.

--- Conclusions ---
167.
In this Stage of the Inquiry, I have examined the parts that are or could be played by Government, the GMC, the Healthcare Commission, the CRHP/CHRE, NHS organisations, practice staff, patients and members of the public in protecting patients who might be at risk from an aberrant or poorly performing GP. In this Report, I have made a large number of recommendations which, together with the recommendations in my Third and Fourth Reports, are designed to extend and improve the existing framework of protective systems. In this Report, I have suggested improvements to clinical governance systems; in particular I have stressed the need for the proper investigation of complaints and the need for a system of monitoring mortality statistics. I have recommended ways in which the protective role of PCTs can be enhanced, for example by providing them with improved information about the doctors on, or seeking admission to, their lists. I have made recommendations that will provide patients with more information about their doctors and will enable them to exercise some, albeit limited, degree of choice. I have made recommendations designed to ensure that the GMC’s new FTP procedures will work effectively for the protection of patients and will also be fair to doctors. Finally, I have suggested a way in which revalidation could be made to comply with the requirements of the Medical Act 1983 and to fulfil the high aspirations of those who have sought to promote it.
168.
To some extent, these recommendations are bound to give rise to tension and conflict between the interests of those affected by them. However, I am confident that there is a large body of opinion both within and outside the medical profession that will recognise the need for all those involved to work together and to pull in the same direction. In making these recommendations, I have striven to achieve three things: first, that, if ever there were to be another potential Shipman, he would be detected very quickly; second, that the prospects of detecting all forms of aberrant behaviour or substandard performance by doctors should be enhanced and, third, that the good quality of care provided by the large majority of doctors should have scope and opportunity for continued further improvement.

--- RECOMMENDATIONS ---
General Practitioners' Personal Files
The General Medical Council

--- RECOMMENDATIONS ---
This Summary contains only a brief statement of each of my recommendations. To understand the reasoning behind each recommendation, the reader must refer to the Chapter(s) in which the evidence relating to it is described and the paragraph(s) of
in which the issues are discussed. The relevant references accompany each recommendation or set of linked recommendations.

--- Handling Complaints and Concerns ---
The Lodging of Complaints
I endorse the provision contained in the draft National Health Service (Complaints) Regulations (the draft Complaints Regulations), whereby patients and their representatives who wish to make a complaint against a general practitioner (GP) will be permitted to choose whether to lodge that complaint with the GP practice concerned or with the local primary care trust (PCT). I recommend that the time limit for lodging a complaint be extended from six to twelve months.
paragraphs 27.15-27.16
paragraph 27.18
Steps should be taken to improve the standard of complaints handling by GP practices.
paragraph 27.17
Draft regulation 30 of the draft Complaints Regulations, which would require GP practices to provide PCTs with limited information about complaints received by the practice at intervals to be specified by the PCT, should be amended. GP practices should be required to report all complaints to the PCT within, say, two working days of their receipt. The report should comprise the original letter of complaint or, if the complaint was made orally, the practice’s record of the complaint. The PCT should log the complaint for clinical governance purposes and, if it considers that the complaint raises clinical governance issues, it should ‘call in’ the complaint for investigation.
paragraphs 27.19-27.23
The Investigation of Complaints
There should be statutory recognition of the importance of the proper investigation of complaints to the processes of clinical governance and of monitoring the quality of health care.
paragraph 27.26
On receipt by a PCT of a complaint about a GP, a ‘triage’ (the first triage) of the complaint should be conducted by a member of the PCT’s staff who is appropriately trained and experienced and has access to relevant clinical advice. The object of the first triage should be to assess whether the complaint arises from a purely private grievance or raises clinical governance issues.
paragraphs 27.27-27.30
‘Private Grievance Complaints’
‘Private grievance complaints’ should be dealt with by appropriately trained PCT staff. The objectives in dealing with such complaints should be the satisfaction of the patient and, where possible, restoration of the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient.
paragraph 27.31
‘Clinical governance complaints’ should be investigated with the dual objectives of patient protection and satisfaction and of fairness to doctors. They should be referred for a further triage (the second triage) to a small group comprising two or three people - for example, the Medical Director or Clinical Governance Lead, a senior non-medical officer of the PCT and a lay member of the PCT Board. The object of the second triage should be to decide whether the complaint is to be investigated by or on behalf of the PCT or whether it should instead be referred to some other body, such as the police, the General Medical Council (GMC) or the National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA).
paragraphs 27.32-27.33
The Investigation of ‘Clinical Governance Complaints’
The investigation of ‘clinical governance complaints’ should not be undertaken by PCT staff. Instead, groups of PCTs should set up joint teams of investigators, who should be properly trained in the techniques of investigation and should adopt an objective and analytical approach, keeping their minds open to all possibilities.
paragraphs 27.35-27.49
All ‘clinical governance complaints’ (save those which do not involve serious issues of patient safety and where the underlying facts giving rise to the complaint are clear and undisputed) should be referred to the inter-PCT investigation team. The objects of the investigation should be to reach a conclusion as to what happened and to set out the evidence and conclusions in a report which should go to the PCT with responsibility for the doctor. If the investigators are unable to reach a conclusion about what happened because there is an unresolved conflict of evidence, they should say so in their report.
paragraph 27.50
Acting on the Investigation Report
On receipt of the investigation report, the PCT group which carried out the second triage should consider what action to take. It might be appropriate to refer the matter to another body, such as the GMC or the NCAA. Alternatively, it might be appropriate for the PCT to take action itself, e.g. by invoking its list management powers. If the report of the investigation team is inconclusive, because of a conflict of evidence, the case should be referred to the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission), under a power which should be included in the amended draft Complaints Regulations when implemented.
paragraphs 27.52-27.54
The Effect of Concurrent Proceedings
Neither an intention on the part of the complainant to take legal proceedings, nor the fact that such proceedings have begun, should be a bar to the investigation by a NHS body of a complaint. In circumstances where the NHS body is taking disciplinary proceedings relating to the subject matter of the complaint against the person complained of, a complainant should be entitled to see the substance of the report of the investigation on which the disciplinary proceedings are to be based and should not merely be informed that the investigation of his/her complaint is to be deferred or discontinued.
In some circumstances, it may be necessary for a NHS body to defer or discontinue its own investigation of a complaint if the matter is being investigated by the police, a regulatory body, a statutory inquiry or some other process. However, a NHS body should never lose sight of its duty to find out what has happened and to take whatever action is necessary for the protection of the patients of the doctor concerned. It should also provide such information to the complainant as is consistent with the need, if any, for confidentiality in the public interest. The relevant provisions of the draft Complaints Regulations should be amended to reflect these principles.
paragraphs 27.55-27.61
The Role of the Healthcare Commission
The draft Complaints Regulations, when implemented, should include a power enabling PCTs to refer a complaint to the Healthcare Commission for investigation at any point during the first stage of the complaints procedures. Cases raising difficult or complex issues or involving issues relating to both primary and secondary care might be referred to the Healthcare Commission for investigation at the time of the second triage, or later if the investigation by the inter-PCT investigation team raises more complex issues than were initially apparent. Referral to the Healthcare Commission should also take place in cases where an inter-PCT investigation team has found that it cannot reach a conclusion because there remain unresolved disputes of fact. The purpose of the referral would be for the Healthcare Commission to carry out any further necessary investigation and, if appropriate, to set up a panel to hear oral evidence about the facts in dispute and to decide where the truth lay.
paragraphs 27.52
27.62-27.71
Complaints in the Private Sector
Complaints procedures in the private sector should be aligned as closely as possible with those in the NHS, so that a complainant who does not receive a satisfactory response to his/her complaint from a private sector body can proceed to a second stage of the complaints procedures to be conducted by the Healthcare Commission.
paragraphs 27.72-27.74
Concerns expressed about a GP by someone other than a patient or patient’s representative (e.g. by a fellow healthcare professional) should be dealt with in the same way as patient complaints. Such concerns should be investigated (where necessary) by the inter-PCT investigation team or, in a case raising difficult or complex issues, by the Healthcare Commission. Consideration should be given to amending the relevant provisions of the draft Complaints Regulations to permit the Healthcare Commission to accept and investigate concerns referred to it by a PCT or other healthcare body without the need for a reference from the Secretary of State for Health.
paragraphs 27.77-27.78
Standards
Objective standards, by reference to which complaints can be judged, should be established as a matter of urgency. These standards should be applied by those making the decision whether to uphold or reject a complaint and by PCTs and other NHS bodies when deciding what action to take in respect of a doctor against whom a complaint has been upheld. When established, the standards by reference to which complaints are dealt with must fit together with the threshold by reference to which the GMC will accept and act upon allegations, so as to form a comprehensive framework.
paragraphs 27.79-27.82
The ‘Single Portal’
In order to ensure that, so far as possible, complaints and concerns about health care reach the appropriate destinations, there should be a ‘single portal’ by which complaints or concerns can be directed or redirected to the appropriate quarter. This service should also provide information about the various advice services available to persons who are considering whether and/or how to complain or raise a concern, including advice services for persons who are concerned about the legal implications of raising a concern.
paragraphs 27.83-27.88
The New Arrangements
About two years after the Complaints Regulations come into force in their entirety, an independent review should be commissioned into the operation of the new arrangements for advising and supporting patients who wish to make a complaint. Any deficiencies identified by that review should be corrected.
paragraphs 27.89-27.90

--- Disciplinary Procedures ---
The powers of PCTs should be extended so as to enable them to issue warnings to GPs and to impose financial penalties on GPs in respect of misconduct, deficient professional performance or deficient clinical practice which falls below the thresholds for referral to the GMC or exercise of the PCT’s list management powers.
paragraphs 27.91-27.102

--- The Use of Prescribing Information as a Clinical Governance Tool ---
Steps should be taken to ensure that every prescription generated by a GP can be accurately attributed to an individual doctor. Only then will the data resulting from the monitoring of prescribing information constitute a reliable clinical governance tool.
Regular monitoring of GPs’ prescribing should be undertaken by PCTs. Special attention should be paid to the prescribing of controlled drugs. Doctors who have had a problem of drug misuse in the past or who are suspected of having a current problem should be subjected to particularly close scrutiny. When a restriction is placed on a doctor’s prescribing powers, this information must be made available (preferably by electronic means) to those who need to know, especially pharmacists.
(Fourth Report,
Chapters 5
of this Report and
paragraphs 27.103-27.104

--- The Use of Mortality Data as a Clinical Governance Tool ---
The Department of Health (DoH) must take the lead in developing a national system for monitoring GP patient mortality rates. The system should be supported by a well-organised, consistent and objective means of investigating those cases where a GP’s patient mortality rates signal as being above the norm.
paragraphs 27.105-27.107
Every GP practice should keep a death register in which particulars of the deaths of patients of the practice should be recorded for use in audit and for other purposes.
paragraph 27.108
PCTs should undertake reviews of the medical records of deceased patients, either on a routine periodic basis (if resources permit) or on a targeted basis limited to those GPs whose performance gives rise to concern.
paragraph 27.109

--- Appraisal in the Context of Clinical Governance ---
The purpose of GP appraisal must be made clear. A decision must be taken as to whether it is intended to be a purely formative (i.e. educational) process or whether it is intended to serve several purposes: part formative, part summative (i.e. pass/fail) and/or part performance management.
If appraisal is intended to be a clinical governance tool, it must be ‘toughened up’. If that is to be done, the following steps will be necessary. Appraisers should be more thoroughly trained and should be accredited following some form of test or assessment. Appraisers should be trained to evaluate the appraisee’s fitness to practise. GPs should be appraised by GPs from another PCT. Standards should be specified, by which a GP ‘successfully completes’ or ‘fails’ the appraisal. All appraisals should be based on a nationally agreed core of verifiable information supplied by the PCT to both the appraiser and the appraisee.
paragraphs 27.110-27.116

--- The Use by Primary Care Trusts of Their List Management Powers ---
The Family Health Services Appeal Authority (Special Health Authority) or its proposed successor, the NHS Litigation Authority, should collect and analyse information relating to the use made by PCTs of their list management powers. Such analysis would assist the DoH in providing guidance to PCTs about the types of circumstance in which they might properly use their powers.
paragraph 27.117

--- Practice Accreditation Schemes ---
The Government should consider the feasibility of providing a financial incentive for the achievement of GP practice accreditation by means of an accreditation scheme similar to that operated by the Royal College of General Practitioners in Scotland.
paragraph 27.118

--- Support for Single-Handed and Small Practices ---
The policy of the DoH and of PCTs should be to focus on the resolution of the problems inherent in single-handed and small practices. More support and encouragement should be given to GPs running single-handed and small practices. In return, more should be expected of such GPs in terms of group activity and mutual supervision. The DoH should take responsibility for these initiatives.
Chapters 9
paragraphs 27.119-27.120

--- The Recruitment and Appointment of General Practitioners ---
PCTs should be willing and able to provide advice to GP practices on good recruitment practice and should also be willing to offer support in drafting job specifications and advertisements. They should be prepared, if requested, to assist in sifting applications (if multiple applications are received) and in making the necessary checks on applicants before the interview stage, so as to exclude in advance any applicants who are unsuitable. However, this latter exercise may be too much of a burden for PCTs unless and until the Inquiry’s recommendations for greater information to be placed on the GMC’s website and for the creation of a central database of information about doctors (see below) are implemented.
paragraphs 27.121-27.128
A standard reference form should be developed for use in connection with appointments to GP practices. PCTs should insist that a reference is obtained from the doctor’s previous employer or PCT. In the case of a PCT, the reference should be signed by the Medical Director or Clinical Governance Lead.
paragraph 27.129
When recruiting a new member, GP practices should canvass and take account of the views of their patients about the kind of doctor the practice needs.
paragraphs 27.130-27.137

--- General Practitioners' Personal Files ---
PCTs should keep a separate file for each individual GP on their lists. That file should hold all material relating to the doctor which could have any possible relevance to clinical governance. If a doctor moves from one PCT to another, the file (or a copy of it) should be sent to the new PCT. It might be helpful if the DoH were to establish national criteria for the content of the files to be kept by PCTs.
paragraph 27.138

--- The Raising of Concerns ---
Every GP practice should have a written policy, setting out the procedure to be followed by a member of the practice staff who wishes to raise concerns, in particular concerns about the clinical practice or conduct of a healthcare professional within the practice. Staff should be encouraged to bring forward any concerns they may have openly, routinely and without fear of criticism. In the event that a member of the staff of a GP practice feels unable to raise his/her concern within the practice, s/he should be able to approach a person designated by the PCT for the purpose. The contact details of that person should appear in the written policy. The designated person should make him/herself known to all practice staff working in the PCT area. PCTs should ensure, through training, that practice staff understand the importance of reporting concerns and know how to do so.
The written policy should contain details of organisations from which staff can obtain free independent advice. If the ‘single portal’ is created, in whatever form, the policy should set out contact details of that also.
paragraph 27.139
The Healthcare Commission should require all private healthcare organisations to have a clear written policy for the raising of concerns. Steps should be taken to foster in the private sector the same culture of openness that is being encouraged in the NHS.
paragraph 27.140
Consideration should be given to amending the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 in order to give greater protection to persons disclosing information, the disclosure of which is in the public interest.
Written policies setting out procedures for raising concerns in the healthcare sector should be capable of being used in relation to persons who do not share a common employment.
There should be some national provision (probably a telephone helpline) to enable any person, whether working within health care or not, to obtain advice about the best way to raise a concern about a healthcare matter and about the legal implications of doing so. It might be possible to link this helpline with the ‘single portal’ previously referred to.
paragraph 27.141

--- The Availability of Information about Doctors ---
There should be a central database containing information about every doctor working in the UK. This should be accessible to the officers of NHS bodies and to accredited employers in the private sector, as well as to other bodies with a legitimate interest, such as the Healthcare Commission, the GMC, the NCAA and the DoH.
The database would contain, or provide links to, information held by the GMC, the Criminal Records Bureau (CRB) and the NHS Counter Fraud and Security Management Service. It would also contain records of disciplinary action by employers, details of list management action by PCTs, any adverse reports following the investigation of a complaint, any adverse findings by a Healthcare Commission panel or by the Healthcare Ombudsman and details of any findings of negligence in a clinical negligence action and settlement of a clinical negligence claim above a pre-determined level of damages. It should also contain certain other information. Doctors would be able to access their own entries to check the accuracy of the information held.
Private sector employers should be required to provide relevant information as a condition of registration with the Healthcare Commission. Deputising services should also be required to provide information and should be able to access the database through the relevant PCT.
Information about unsubstantiated allegations or concerns should not be included on the central database. Instead, the doctor’s entry on the database should be flagged to indicate that confidential information is held by a named body. Access to that information would depend on who was asking for it and for what purpose and would have to be determined at a high level.
paragraphs 27.142-27.149
GPs should be required to disclose to the relevant PCO the fact that a clinical negligence claim has been brought against them, the gist of the allegation made and, when the time comes, the outcome of the claim. A failure by a doctor to make full declarations to a PCO as required by the National Health Service (Performers Lists) Regulations 2004 should be regarded as misconduct of sufficient gravity to warrant referral to the GMC.
paragraphs 27.150-27.154
The GMC should adopt a policy of tiered disclosure to apply to all persons seeking information about a doctor.
The first tier should relate to information which is relevant to the doctor’s current registration status, together with certain information about his/her past fitness to practise (FTP) history. First-tier information should be posted on the GMC website and should also be disclosed to anyone who requests information about the doctor’s registration. The periods of time for which information should remain at the first tier should depend on the nature of the information. When the relevant period expires, the information should be removed from the website. It should be replaced by a note indicating that there is further information which can be obtained by telephoning the GMC. That information should then be available at the second tier.
Disclosure of information at the second tier should be made to any person who makes a request about a doctor’s FTP history. All information which has at any time been in the public domain should remain available to enquirers at the second tier for as long as the doctor remains on the register.
paragraphs 27.155-27.197
Information That Should Be Given to Patients of a Practice
In all cases where a GP’s registration is subject to conditions, or where s/he has resumed practice after a period of suspension or erasure, patients of any practice in which the GP works should be told. A letter of explanation which has been approved by the PCT should be sent to all patients. Patients should have the opportunity to refuse to be treated by a doctor who is subject to conditions or who has previously been subject to an order for suspension or erasure.
paragraphs 27.198-27.199


========================================================================
CHAPTER ONE - Introduction
========================================================================

--- The General Medical Council ---
The GMC should ensure that its publications contain accurate and readily understandable guidance as to the types of case that do and do not fall within the remit of its FTP procedures.
Chapters 18
25
paragraph 27.201-27.202
There must be complete separation of the GMC’s casework and governance functions at the investigation stage of the new FTP procedures and this must be reflected in the Rules.
paragraph 27.205
The adjudication stage of the FTP procedures must be undertaken by a body independent of the GMC. This body should appoint and train lay and medically qualified panellists and take on the task of appointing case managers, legal assessors (if they are still necessary) and any necessary specialist advisers. It should also provide administrative support for hearings.
paragraphs 27.206-27.209
Consideration should be given to appointing a body of full-time, or nearly full-time, panellists who could sit on the FTP panels of all the healthcare regulatory bodies.
paragraph 27.207
The GMC should adopt clear, objective tests to be applied by decision-makers at the investigation and adjudication stages of the FTP procedures. The tests that I recommend are set out at
paragraphs 25.63
25.67-25.68
. The tests should be incorporated into the Medical Act 1983 and/or the Rules. The draft Guidance for FTP panellists should be amended so that it is consistent with the provisions of Section 35D of the Medical Act 1983 and rule 17(2)(k) of the General Medical Council (Fitness to Practise) Rules Order of Council 2004 (the November 2004 Rules).
paragraphs 27.211
The Medical Act 1983 should be amended to add a further route by which there might be a finding of impairment of fitness to practise, namely ‘deficient clinical practice’.
paragraph 27.212
Urgent steps should be taken to develop standards, criteria and thresholds so that decision-makers will be able to reach reasonably consistent decisions at both the investigation and the adjudication stages of the FTP procedures and on restoration applications.
Chapters 17-25
paragraphs 27.213-27.229
The Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)) should be invited to set up a panel of professional and lay people (similar in nature to the Sentencing Advisory Panel) which should assist in the process of developing the necessary standards, criteria and thresholds.
paragraph 27.230
Steps should be taken to ensure that FTP panels determining cases in which issues of deficient professional performance arise apply a standard which is no lower than that set for admission to general practice.
paragraph 27.231
Rule 4 of the November 2004 Rules, which sets out the test to be applied by the Registrar on receipt of an allegation, should be amended to give greater clarity. The test that I recommend is set out at
paragraph 27.232
Preliminary Discussions with and Disclosure to Employers and Primary Care Organisations
The November 2004 Rules should be amended to make formal provision for the GMC routinely to communicate with employers and with primary care organisations (PCOs) before deciding what action should be taken in response to an allegation and giving the GMC power to require from the doctor the necessary details to enable it to make such communication. Communication should take place in all cases other than in the case of an allegation which is so serious that it obviously requires further investigation or in the case of an allegation which is plainly outside the GMC’s remit.
Chapters 18
25
paragraph 27.234
Where a doctor has committed a criminal offence in respect of which a court has imposed a conditional discharge, that offence should be dealt with by the GMC in the same way as if it were a criminal conviction.
Chapters 18
25
paragraph 27.232
The November 2004 Rules should be amended so as to give case examiners, and Investigation Committee (IC) panels in cases where the case examiners have disagreed, the power to direct investigations.
paragraph 27.235)
Case examiners should be advised that they should not take mitigation into account when making their decisions and that they should consult a lawyer if they are in any doubt as to whether the available evidence is such that there is a realistic prospect of proving the allegation.
paragraph 27.236
The November 2004 Rules should be amended to give case examiners, and IC panels in cases where the case examiners have disagreed, the power to direct that an assessment of a doctor’s performance and/or health should be carried out.
paragraph 27.237
The GMC should develop an abridged performance assessment to be used as a screening tool in any case in which an allegation is made which potentially calls into question the quality of a doctor’s clinical practice.
paragraph 27.237
In order to avoid doctors undergoing multiple performance assessments, the GMC should investigate the development of a modular assessment.
paragraph 27.237
The November 2004 Rules should be amended to include a provision whereby reports of performance assessments should be disclosed by the GMC to doctors’ employers or PCOs as soon as possible after receipt.
Chapters 24
25
paragraphs 27.238-27.239
The power to send letters of advice should be incorporated into the Rules and clear criteria for the sending of such letters should be prepared.
paragraph 27.240
The GMC should reconsider its proposals for the issuing of warnings at the investigation stage.
paragraph 27.241
The Procedure for Cancelling Hearings before a Fitness to Practise Panel
Rule 28 of the November 2004 Rules, which provides for the cancellation of hearings before a FTP panel, should be amended so as to provide that a decision to cancel must be taken by an IC panel and that the reasons for the cancellation must be formally recorded. Both the doctor and the maker of the allegation should be notified in advance of the fact that cancellation is being considered and both should have the opportunity to make representations.
There should be regular monitoring and audit of the number of applications to cancel FTP panel hearings and of decisions to cancel and the reasons for those applications and decisions. Those reasons should be scrutinised with a view to taking steps to minimise the number of cases in which referrals are subsequently cancelled. The number and reasons should be placed in the public domain on an annual basis.
Chapters 20
25
paragraph 27.242
If the GMC pursues its present intention to extend the use of voluntary undertakings to cases other than those raising issues of adverse health or deficient performance, the disposal of such cases should take place in public at the adjudication stage and not in private as part of the investigation stage.
paragraph 27.243
Revival of Closed Allegations
The November 2004 Rules should be amended to make provision for the revival of closed allegations. The usual ‘cut-off’ period should be five years but it should be possible, in exceptional circumstances and in the interests of patient protection, to reopen a case at any time.
paragraph 27.244
Reviews of investigation stage decisions should be carried out by an independent external commissioner. The circumstances in which a review may take place should be extended to cover decisions of the Registrar to reject an allegation rather than to refer it to a case examiner.
paragraph 27.245
The November 2004 Rules should be amended so as to provide that the arrangements for the obtaining and consideration of health assessments and for the management and supervision of doctors who are the subject of voluntary undertakings relating to health should be directed by a medically qualified case examiner, who should fulfil the functions previously carried out by a health screener. If a case is to be closed on the basis of a health assessment, the decision should be taken by two case examiners, one medically qualified and one lay, and, if they disagree, by an IC panel.
paragraph 27.246
The November 2004 Rules should be amended so as to provide that the arrangements for the obtaining and consideration of performance assessments and for the management and supervision of doctors who are the subject of voluntary undertakings relating to performance should be directed by a medically qualified case examiner, who should fulfil the functions previously carried out by a performance case co-ordinator. If a case is to be closed on the basis of a performance assessment, the decision should be taken by two case examiners, one medically qualified and one lay, and, if they disagree, by an IC panel.
paragraph 27.248
Investigation
There should be an explicit power in the Rules to allow the GMC to undertake any further investigations it considers necessary after a case has been referred to a FTP panel and before the panel hearing.
paragraph 27.250
In the event that the GMC retains control of the adjudication stage, the GMC committee charged with governance of the adjudication stage should audit the work of case managers. Case management should apply to cases with a performance element.
paragraph 27.252
FTP panellists should be warned that they should exercise caution about drawing adverse inferences from a failure to comply with case management orders.
paragraph 27.253
Legally Qualified Chairmen
In the event that the GMC retains control of the adjudication stage, it should appoint a number of legally qualified chairmen who should, as an experiment or pilot, preside over the more complex FTP panel hearings. The results of the pilot scheme should be scrutinised to see whether there are benefits, whether in terms of the improved conduct of hearings, more consistent outcomes, improved reasons and/or fewer appeals.
paragraph 27.254
As part of their training, FTP panellists should be advised about their discretion to admit hearsay evidence and other forms of evidence not admissible in a criminal trial. Panellists should also be advised, during training, that it is entirely appropriate for them to intervene during FTP panel hearings and to ask questions if they feel that any issue is not being adequately explored.
25
paragraph 27.255
Standard of Proof
The GMC should reopen its debate about the standard of proof to be applied by FTP panels. The civil standard of proof is appropriate in a protective jurisdiction. It is arguable that the criminal standard of proof is appropriate in a case where the allegations of misconduct amount to a serious criminal offence.
25
paragraph 27.256
Notification of the Proposed Outcome of a Hearing
The GMC should abandon its intention to notify doctors, at the same time as sending notice of referral of their case to a FTP panel, of the outcome it will be seeking at the FTP panel hearing.
paragraph 27.257
Reasons for Findings of Fact
FTP panels should be required to give brief reasons for their main findings of fact.
25
paragraph 27.258
Referral of a Case after a Health or Performance Assessment
Rule 17(5)(b) of the November 2004 Rules (which permits a FTP panel, on receipt of a report of a health or performance assessment, to refer the allegation back into the investigation stage for consideration of voluntary undertakings) should be revoked.
paragraph 27.259
Evidence to Be Received
Rule 17(2)(j) of the November 2004 Rules should be amended to make clear what types of further evidence should be received before a FTP panel decides whether a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired. That evidence should include the doctor’s previous FTP history with the GMC or any other regulatory body. Rule 17(2)(l) should be amended to make clear what categories of evidence might be received after a finding of impairment of fitness to practise but before determination of sanction.
paragraph 27.260
The Medical Act 1983 should be amended to permit a FTP panel to issue a warning in a case where it has found that a doctor’s fitness to practise is impaired but not to a degree justifying action on registration.
paragraph 27.261
Undertakings
Rule 17(2)(m) of the November 2004 Rules, which permits a FTP panel to take into account written undertakings entered into by a doctor when deciding how to deal with the doctor’s case, should be revoked. If it is to be retained, the rule should be amended to make clear that undertakings can be taken into account only at the stage of deciding on sanction, after findings of fact and a decision about impairment of fitness to practise have been made. In that event also, provision should be made within the Rules for supervision of the doctor to ensure compliance with undertakings, for the holding of review hearings in cases where a doctor has given undertakings and for dealing with a breach of an undertaking.
paragraphs 27.262-27.263
Throughout the period that a doctor’s registration is subject to conditions imposed by a FTP panel or to voluntary undertakings, someone within the GMC (preferably a case examiner) should take responsibility for monitoring the doctor’s progress and for ensuring, so far as possible, that s/he is complying with the conditions imposed or undertakings given.
In every case where a doctor is continuing to practise subject to conditions or voluntary undertakings, a professional supervisor should be appointed to oversee and report on the doctor’s progress and on his/her compliance with the conditions or undertakings. In a case where a doctor’s health is an issue, a medical supervisor should be appointed.
Any breach of a condition imposed by a FTP panel or of a voluntary undertaking (save for the most minor breach) should result in the doctor being referred back (or referred) to a FTP panel so that consideration can be given to imposing a sanction which affords a greater degree of protection to the public.
paragraphs 27.264-27.266
The November 2004 Rules should be amended to ensure that there is at least one review hearing in all cases where a period of suspension or conditions on registration have been imposed, unless there are exceptional reasons why no such hearing should take place.
The arrangements set out in the draft General Medical Council (Fitness to Practise) Rules 2003 (the 2003 draft Rules), whereby any necessary gathering of evidence in preparation for a review hearing would be undertaken by a specially appointed case examiner, should be reinstated.
In all but exceptional cases, a doctor whose registration has been suspended should be required to undergo an objective assessment of his/her fitness to practise before being permitted to return to practice. That assessment should be considered by a FTP panel at a review hearing and a decision should be taken as to the doctor’s fitness to practise. A doctor who has been the subject of conditions on his/her registration should be required to go through the same process. Doctors who are the subject of voluntary undertakings should also be required to undergo such an assessment before their undertakings are permitted to lapse.
The GMC’s primary role should be one, not of remediation of doctors, but of protection of patients. If a doctor who is subject to conditions or voluntary undertakings undergoes an assessment in the circumstances described above, and the assessment reveals that s/he does not meet the required standard, consideration should be given to taking the steps necessary to remove the doctor from practice. He or she should not be permitted to ‘limp on’ with repeated periods of conditional registration and no real hope of meeting the standard for unrestricted practice.
Chapters 22
24
25
paragraphs 27.249
27.267-27.274
Applications for Restoration to the Medical Register
The arrangements set out in the 2003 draft Rules, whereby any necessary gathering of evidence in preparation for a restoration hearing should be undertaken by a specially appointed case examiner, should be reinstated.
Every doctor whose application for restoration to the register has reached the second stage of the procedure should be required to undergo an objective assessment of every aspect of his/her fitness to practise. The doctor should not be restored to the register unless s/he has met the required standard.
Doctors who are restored to the register should be required to have a mentor whose task it will be to monitor, and report to the GMC on, their progress in practice.
Chapters 24
25
paragraphs 27.275-27.277
Cases involving Drug Abuse
A thorough investigation of the circumstances underlying allegations of misconduct involving drug abuse should be conducted. The full facts should be established, including the circumstances in which the abuse began.
The GMC should commission research into drug abusing doctors and the outcomes of their cases following supervision under the health procedures.
paragraph 27.278
Every aspect of the FTP procedures in which either doctors or makers of allegations have a direct interest should be set out in the Rules. In addition, the GMC should publish a FTP manual, containing all its relevant Rules and its guidance for panellists, case examiners and staff, together with any relevant Standing Orders.
Clear statistical information should be collected and published by the GMC. The GMC should publish an annual report which should amount to a transparent statement of the year’s activities in respect of the FTP procedures.
paragraphs 27.279-27.280
The GMC should carry out audits of various specific aspects of its procedures, in addition to its other routine auditing activities.
paragraphs 27.203
The arrangements for revalidation should be amended so that revalidation comprises, as required by section 29A of the Medical Act 1983, an evaluation of an individual doctor’s fitness to practise.
paragraphs 27.281-27.282
The annual report referred to at 101 above should include clear statistical information about the number of applications for revalidation and their outcomes. It should amount to a transparent statement of the year’s revalidation activities.
paragraph 27.280
).
Independent Review
In three to four years’ time, there should be a thorough review of the operation of the new FTP procedures, to be carried out by an independent organisation. This task should be undertaken by or on the instructions of the CRHP/CHRE.
paragraph 27.307
Constitution
The GMC’s constitution should be reconsidered, with a view to changing its balance, so that elected medical members do not have an overall majority. Medical and lay members who are to be appointed (by the Privy Council) should be selected for nomination to the Privy Council by the Public Appointments Commission following open competition.
paragraphs 27.310-27.312
The GMC should be directly accountable to Parliament and should publish an annual report which should be scrutinised by a Parliamentary Select Committee.
paragraph 27.314
The Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence
Section 29 of the National Health Service Reform and Health Care Professions Act 2002 should be amended so as to clarify that the Act provides for the CRHP/CHRE to appeal against ‘acquittals’ and findings of ‘no impairment of fitness to practise’, as well as in respect of sanctions which it believes were unduly lenient.
There should in the future be a review of the powers of the CRHP/CHRE with a view to ascertaining whether any extension of its powers and functions is necessary in order to enable it to act effectively to ensure that patients are sufficiently protected by the GMC.
paragraph 27.283

--- Introduction ---
1.1
At the time this Inquiry was set up in January 2001, it was known that Harold Shipman had murdered 15 women patients during the years 1995 to 1998. It was also suspected that he might have killed others over a much longer period. When, at the end of his trial, it came to light that, in 1976, Shipman had been convicted of offences of forgery and obtaining pethidine by deception, many people, particularly the bereaved, began to ask how it was that Shipman had been able to return to unsupervised general practice in 1977, just over a year later. They also wondered how it was that his repeated killing of patients had escaped the notice of the authorities responsible for general practitioners (GPs) such as him. One of the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference required me to look into
. I interpreted the word ‘monitoring’ in its broadest sense, as I am confident that that was the intention of Parliament.
1.2
By the time the Inquiry was ready to embark upon the hearings in connection with this aspect of its work, in 2003, I had already published the First Report, in which I found that Shipman had killed no fewer than 215 patients over the period from 1975 to 1998. Thus, in order to comply with the Terms of Reference, the Inquiry had to examine the provisions for the monitoring of GPs working in the NHS over a period of 23 years. That included consideration of the operation of the General Medical Council’s (GMC’s) fitness to practise (FTP) procedures during that period because those procedures are an integral part of the monitoring of all doctors, including GPs working in the NHS. As will be seen from this Report, during almost the whole period of Shipman’s practice as a GP, the role of NHS bodies at a local level was primarily that of provider and facilitator of GP services to the population. They did not exercise a supervisory role over GPs, who were not employees but independent contractors. Only in the 1990s did family health services authorities and health authorities begin to exercise a monitoring or quasi-management role in respect of the GPs practising in their area.
1.3
Because the Terms of Reference require me to make recommendations for the better protection of patients in the future, the Inquiry also had to examine the monitoring systems in place at the present time and those that are envisaged for the future. I have found that the changes that began in the early 1990s gathered pace, at first gradually and then at an increasing rate. There must have been many reasons for this, not least a change of Government in 1997. However, a series of medical tragedies and scandals, of which that of Shipman was perhaps the most significant, undoubtedly provided a major impetus for change to the arrangements for monitoring GPs within the NHS. Other changes have taken place within the NHS as a whole, as well as within the GMC. These changes too have occurred, at least in part, as a response to tragedies and scandals and the investigations and inquiries that followed.
1.4
In effect, a revolution has taken place in the last six or seven years. The policy underlying these changes can be summed up very briefly. It has been recognised that, in the provision of medical services, there must be far greater accountability to patients and to the public in general. There is now, throughout the NHS, a duty to monitor and improve the quality of healthcare provided. Accountability also means that there must be much greater openness with the public and patients.
1.5
The main mechanism by which the duty to provide care of an acceptable quality is fulfilled is known as ‘clinical governance’, a concept to which I shall return on many occasions in this Report. Local NHS bodies - in England these are called primary care trusts (PCTs) - now have a range of methods by which they can monitor the performance of the doctors within their remit, rewarding those who are doing well, and helping those who are doing less well to do better. Now, in the final analysis, they also have the power to remove from the medical list for the locality those who are unwilling to provide - or are incapable of providing - an adequate service.
1.6
As part of the revolution, a number of new NHS bodies have come into existence in recent years. An example is the National Clinical Assessment Authority, which carries out assessments of doctors who are thought to be performing poorly. It also advises PCTs and hospital trusts that wish to carry out their own assessments of a doctor’s performance. The Commission for Health Improvement was formed to monitor the performance of all NHS bodies, such as PCTs. However, after only a brief period of existence, this body has now been disbanded and its functions, somewhat modified, have been assumed by the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection, now known as the Healthcare Commission. The National Patient Safety Agency has been formed with a remit to learn from clinical accidents and errors. These new bodies all have a role to play in the monitoring of doctors and the improvement of the quality of care which is to be provided within the NHS.
1.7
The revolution is not complete and change continues at what seems a dizzying pace. Even within the short period since the Inquiry’s hearings in the summer and autumn of 2003, significant changes have been made or announced. The Department of Health has made some changes to the way in which complaints by patients about health service provision are handled; more changes are to be expected after the publication of this Report. The GMC has very recently introduced its new FTP procedures and has announced its proposals for the revalidation of doctors on the UK register of medical practitioners, to be introduced in April 2005.
1.8
If all or most of these changes are designed to bring about improvements that should ensure the better protection of patients in the future, it might be thought that there is no need for an Inquiry such as this to make any further recommendations. Is there anything more that the Inquiry needs to recommend? As will be seen, although it is indeed my view that most of the changes introduced and proposed are for the benefit of patients, there does remain more to be done.
1.9
During the Inquiry, I have received evidence from many doctors and have read quite widely from the medical press. I have become aware that some doctors have welcomed the changes of which I have spoken. Many have not. That does not in the least surprise me. The extent of change and the speed with which it has been effected must have been profoundly unsettling for many. I know that some feel embattled by what they perceive as over-regulation, loss of professional independence, interference in their clinical work and damage to their relationships with patients. There is resentment that the ‘powers that be’ have overreacted to the Shipman case; it is said that the profession is being held to blame and will be punished for the actions of ‘a murderer who just happened to be a doctor’. I know that, in some quarters of the profession, there is concern and anxiety about the Inquiry. I suppose that it is feared that the Inquiry will recommend yet further demands, restrictions, testing, inspection and general ‘shaking-up’. I understand and sympathise with those fears and hope to allay them.
1.10
I think it would be a mistake for the medical profession to regard Shipman as ‘a murderer who just happened to be a doctor’. He was a doctor - and in many ways not a bad one - who perverted his skill, knowledge and the trust of his patients to evil ends. It was the fact that he was a doctor that enabled him to do what he did. In his Pioneer Lecture, given to honour Sir Donald Irvine, at the Forum on Quality in Healthcare on 13th
January 2004, Professor Richard Baker said:
‘Since beginning to investigate Shipman in 2000, I have been trying to understand how it was that he could kill so many patients without detection. There were, of course, some system failures, but it has been impossible to avoid the question as to why the system weaknesses were tolerated to the extent that Shipman was able to murder not merely one or two patients, but over 200. The conclusion I have come to is that all doctors, and not general practitioners alone, share responsibility for creating the circumstances that enabled Shipman to be so successful a killer.’
I think that what Professor Baker had in mind was the culture of mutual self protection within the profession and the attitude of paternalism towards patients and those outside the profession. This culture and attitude are no longer acceptable and are disappearing. They are being replaced by the culture of patient-centred medicine. Nonetheless, they linger on. But, in my opinion, no right-thinking doctor would seek to defend them today.
1.11
I recognise that the overwhelming majority of doctors are trustworthy, competent, hardworking and justly proud of their profession. Shipman was certainly not one of that majority. He breached the trust of his patients and fellow professionals to a greater extent than any other doctor is known ever to have done. Of course, it would be wrong to impose upon the whole profession regulatory requirements designed only to catch a mass murderer. Doctors who murder their patients are, fortunately, extremely rare. Others have been detected and it is not unknown for healthcare professionals, such as nurses, to use their position of trust to kill their patients. It would be folly to assume that there have not been others who have not been detected or that there will never be any similar instances in the future. No right-thinking doctor would wish a colleague who deliberately harms a patient to go undetected or to remain in practice.
1.12
Not all doctors who harm their patients intend to do so, as Shipman did. Some are reckless as to whether they cause harm. Among those, I would include doctors who indecently assault their patients. Such doctors seek their own gratification and, while not positively wishing to harm their patients, are reckless as to whether they in fact do so. One has only to read the newspapers to see that such cases are by no means uncommon. Another form of recklessness as to patient safety is seen in doctors who continue in practice while under the influence of alcohol or mind-affecting drugs. All right-thinking doctors would agree that such colleagues should be stopped from practising until they have ceased such self-abuse.
1.13
There are also doctors who harm patients because they were inadequately trained or have failed to keep their knowledge up to date or because they have a personal, medical or psychiatric problem which affects their ability to provide safe care for their patients. They may be personally trustworthy and conscientious and yet cause harm unwittingly. Again, all right-thinking members of the profession would agree that steps must be taken to protect patients of such doctors from harm while the doctor undergoes treatment or remediation. I think they would also agree that, if the problem proves intractable, the doctor will have to give up practice or be prevented from continuing.
1.14
It is with these categories of doctor that the Inquiry is concerned, not with the great majority, who, as I have said, are trustworthy, competent and hardworking. Nobody suggests that there are many doctors in these categories, even when all are put together. There is no definitive view as to the extent of the problem. During the Inquiry, various suggestions have been made - some based on research, some little more than guesstimates - as to the proportion of practising doctors whose performance gives rise to an unacceptable risk of harm to patients. It could be as many as 5%; it may be as little as 1%. Professor Sir Graeme Catto, President of the GMC, suggested that there might be up to 10% about whose practice there was cause for some concern. Even if the proportion of unsafe doctors were as low as 1%, that would mean that there would be about 1000 unsafe doctors practising in the UK. Such doctors, if allowed to continue in practice, not only harm patients but do a disproportionate amount of damage to the reputation of the profession. It is primarily upon the weeding out of those unsafe doctors that the recommendations of the Inquiry will focus.
1.15
It may be said that, if the Inquiry is interested only in protecting patients from unsafe doctors, it should have focussed on those doctors alone and should not have considered provisions that affect
all
GPs. In my view, protecting patients from harm must be approached in two ways. There must be measures designed to identify those who are not performing to an acceptable standard and there must also be measures that will help doctors who are performing satisfactorily to improve with time and experience and not slide backwards. The system must seek to ensure that all who enter general practice are competent to do so and that they remain so. At the moment, it cannot be said with confidence that all practising GPs were competent at the time of entry; the overwhelming majority will have been, but only since 1998 have GPs been required to prove their competence by successfully undergoing summative assessment. A GP’s standard of practice ought theoretically to rise as s/he progresses, as s/he adds the benefit of experience to his/her basic knowledge and skills. But, the human condition being what it is, as time passes, some doctors’ performance goes downhill rather than up. Medicine is a rapidly developing field and not all doctors keep up to date. Others deteriorate owing to a variety of personal and professional difficulties. It seems to me that the best way to prevent doctors from falling below the level of acceptable performance and to improve the standard of patient care generally is to provide facilities and opportunities for continuous professional development and to require that those opportunities are taken. My view is that those opportunities should be provided in a formative way and not in an atmosphere of criticism or inspection. That does not mean that the process of continuing education should not be challenging. Surely no right-thinking doctor would disagree.
1.16
Although the Inquiry’s aim is to protect patients, I do recognise that the measures to be recommended must be proportionate to the importance of the aims. The aims are important. Even so, there are other considerations which also are very important, perhaps, arguably, even more important. The measures must not damage the good and trusting relationships that exist between millions of patients and their doctors. They must not deprive GPs of all independence or seek to impose uniformity; I have not recommended that GPs should lose their self-employed status. Nor must the measures go too far in taking doctors away from their primary function of giving clinical care to patients. I am conscious that many GPs complain about the burden of ‘form-filling’ which, they say, reduces the time they can give to patients. I can see that the requirements of clinical governance and appraisal entail a good deal of non-clinical work. Many doctors feel that such time is well spent; no doubt others disagree. I have tried to ensure that the proposals I have made will not entail further significant increase in the non-clinical work that GPs have to undertake.
1.17
One of the most important ways in which patients can be protected from unsafe doctors is by the thorough investigation of complaints made by and on behalf of patients and also of concerns expressed by fellow professionals. There has, in the past, been a perception in the minds of some doctors that patients who complain are troublemakers. I know from personal experience that it can be very wounding to receive an unwarranted complaint. It is also natural that the person who is the object of the complaint is likely to see it as unwarranted, even though others might not agree. It is well recognised by complaints handling bodies that there are some habitual or vexatious complainers; the evidence I received suggests that they are a tiny minority. My view, at the end of the Inquiry, is that much can be learned from complaints and expressions of concern from patients and fellow professionals. Not only will unsafe doctors be identified but poor practice can be detected, providing an opportunity for improvement. Systems failures might also be discovered and lessons learned for the future. I recognise that the investigation of complaints and concerns is a very uncomfortable experience. However, I think that all doctors - and all professional people - must accept it, not only because such an investigation is the right of the patient or client but also as a learning experience and as an important means of uncovering substandard care and protecting patients from unsafe doctors.
1.18
I have associated the expression of concern about a doctor by a fellow professional with patient complaints. In my view, they should be so associated because the subject matter might well be the same. I also think that the willingness of one healthcare professional to take responsibility for raising concerns about the conduct, performance or health of another could make a greater potential contribution to the safety of patients than any other single factor. I consider that very few unsafe doctors would escape notice by a fellow professional provided that all healthcare professionals accepted a sense of common responsibility for quality and safety.
1.19
During the Inquiry, the expression ‘no-blame culture’ has often been used. A current view is that, when a medical mishap occurs, it is more important to learn a lesson so that a repetition of the event may be avoided than to punish the doctor or healthcare professional whose actions have led to the mishap. Put in that way, the principle seems sound. The proponents of this view often claim that most mishaps are due to systems failures rather than personal error. It would be wrong to punish a doctor for the failure of the system in which s/he had to work. Again, put in that way, the principle is sound. However, I do not accept that these views are wholly right. Over the 30 years of my professional life, I have dealt with thousands of cases of accident and injury, suffered on the road, in the workplace and in the course of medical and dental treatment. That wealth of experience leads me to believe that, while some mishaps are caused purely by a personal lack of care or personal incompetence and some are caused purely by a systems failure, the majority are caused by a combination of personal and system factors. Of course, justice requires that no doctor should be held responsible for matters beyond his/her personal control. However, in my view, justice and the safety of patients require that doctors - and other healthcare professionals - should be held to account if they have failed in a respect which lies within their proper sphere. When things go wrong, there must be a proper investigation and identification of the cause. Only then can there be a proper opportunity to learn from the event. A systems failure can only be corrected when it is identified. Only then, if personal error is found, can steps be taken, by disciplinary action or re-education, to safeguard patients in future. Some people call this ‘a culture of fair blame’. I would say that what is needed is investigation, justice, learning and protection.
1.20
On a separate but related topic, I am firmly of the view that the profession must accept an even greater degree of openness with patients than has yet been given. The profession and patients have come a long way since the days when the doctor told the patient what was s/he was going to do and the patient accepted it with gratitude but little understanding. As all doctors know, patients have changed. On average, they are better educated and better informed and have greater understanding than ever before. Also, they are less deferential and more questioning. They expect (and deserve) a partnership of equality. Many expect to have full access to their records and to read for themselves the consultant’s report on their recent referral. Gone are the days when any doctor would think of writing a personal comment in a patient’s record in the belief that it would be seen only by another doctor.
1.21
All these changes are good and most doctors recognise them as such. However, patients are now calling for even greater openness. Although it may be said that there is little opportunity to ‘choose’ a doctor within the NHS, patients want to make as much of an informed choice as possible and, even if they cannot choose, they want to have their eyes open. Patients want to be able to trust their own doctor implicitly with their health, their welfare and their secrets. Patient surveys show that, in general, they do have that trust, despite the tragedies and scandals of the 1990s. But the same surveys show that the public believes that there are some badly behaved and incompetent doctors who have been allowed to continue practising by the ‘powers that be’. Patients want to know that their own doctor is not one of those. They want to know more about their doctor’s qualifications, experience and competence. They feel entitled to know if their doctor has been in trouble with the criminal law or with the GMC. They want to know if their doctor has been found wanting on an assessment of performance and has had conditions placed upon his/her registration. In the USA and Canada, such information is routinely provided to the public on websites supported by either licensing authorities or professional colleges. In my view, more such information should now be made available in this country. It may be that some doctors will feel that publication of such information would entail a loss of privacy and would restrict a doctor’s ability to put the problems of the past behind and move on. That may be so. However, my own view is that doctors must demonstrate that they have not acted in such a way as to call into question their patients’ trust.
1.22
Those are the ideas and principles which underlie the recommendations in this Report. For those who accept these principles, any changes which might be made as a consequence of my recommendations would cause no surprise, concern or dismay. The Inquiry has been fortunate to hear evidence and receive contributions from many eminent doctors and academics. Most of the ideas and principles I have propounded come from these forward-thinking leaders of the profession. Many of these ideas are already widely accepted within the profession and are seen to bring benefits to patients, the profession and society as a whole. But not all doctors see things in the same way. In a profession as large as medicine, that is not surprising. However, I believe that, with strong and effective leadership, the whole profession will come to accept these ideas as the way to maintain high standards and the trust and confidence of patients.

--- CHAPTER TWO - The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry ---
Terms of Reference
The Approach of the Inquiry
The Inquiry's Own Consultations
Before the Oral Hearings
The Oral Hearings
The Seminars
The Structure of This Report
The Effect of the Evidence
Terms of Reference


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWO - The Conduct of Phase Two, Stage Four of the Inquiry
========================================================================

--- The Subject Matter ---
2.2
During Stage Four, the Inquiry examined the arrangements for monitoring general practitioners (GPs) which were in place between 1974 and 1998, when Shipman was in general practice. This examination included consideration of the following:
the adequacy of the monitoring arrangements operated by primary care oganisations (PCOs) and other bodies, and their efficacy in detecting poor clinical practice or aberrant behaviour
the role of patient complaints within the monitoring system and the adequacy of the systems for dealing with patient complaints over the relevant period
the role within the monitoring system of concerns about GPs which are raised by colleagues, by other healthcare professionals and by members of the public, and the adequacy of the steps which have been taken in the past to facilitate the raising of such concerns
the operation of the regulatory and disciplinary systems which form an integral part of the overall monitoring process and the extent to which those systems have in the past worked effectively to support and reinforce local monitoring arrangements.

--- The Approach of the Inquiry ---
2.3
The Inquiry examined these topics in the light of all the information which it has accumulated about Shipman’s crimes, about his medical practice, about his previous history of drug abuse and about the complaints made and the disciplinary action taken against him during the course of his career.
2.4
The Inquiry then proceeded to consider the changes to the systems that have occurred since 1998, as well as those planned for the future. Throughout Stage Four, I have approached the task of assessing the effectiveness and adequacy of these various systems - past, present and future - by reference to the duty imposed upon me by the Inquiry’s Terms of Reference to make any recommendations that I regard as being necessary for the future protection of patients. In order to understand the degree of protection afforded by the various systems, it has been necessary to look at the whole regulatory framework governing the work of GPs.

--- Evidence ---
2.5
I shall deal separately with the evidence collected by the Inquiry in relation to each of the topics listed above. A total of 386 witness statements and approximately 52,430 pages of documents have been scanned into the Inquiry’s image database in connection with Stage Four.
Families
2.6
When providing their Inquiry witness statements for Phase One, the relatives and friends of Shipman’s patients were invited to give their suggestions for changes to existing systems which, if effected, might provide additional safeguards for patients in the future. Many responded to this invitation and made helpful and constructive suggestions as to how the various systems might be improved. I have considered all those written suggestions and, during the course of the Stage Four hearings, the Inquiry received further evidence, both oral and written, from a number of relatives and friends of patients whom Shipman had killed.
Monitoring Arrangements
Local Monitoring Arrangements
2.7
The Inquiry’s primary purpose in examining local monitoring arrangements was to consider whether there had been any failure on the part of the PCOs which had responsibility for primary care in Tameside during the period for which Shipman was in practice there. This entailed undertaking an examination of the arrangements that were in operation locally and comparing those local arrangements with the arrangements that were in place in other parts of the country during the same period. It also involved assessing whether those arrangements that were in place should have alerted the PCOs to the fact that Shipman’s practice was unusual or aberrant in some way or that he was an ‘outlier’ in any respect.
Primary Care Organisations and Other Local Bodies
2.8
The Inquiry received evidence from officers of the successive PCOs which had responsibility for primary care in Tameside. The PCOs which had this responsibility in the past were the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee (FPC), the Tameside Family Health Services Authority (FHSA) and the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA). The body with current responsibility is the Tameside and Glossop Primary Care Trust (PCT).
2.9
Written and oral evidence was received from administrative officers and medical advisers who had formerly been employed by the Tameside FPC, the Tameside FHSA and the WPHA. These witnesses described the monitoring arrangements that were in place during Shipman’s career and explained, by reference to contemporaneous documents contained in the files on Shipman held by the PCOs, what the various arrangements had revealed about Shipman’s practice. The Inquiry also heard oral evidence from the Chief Executive and Medical Director of the Tameside and Glossop PCT about the monitoring arrangements which are currently in place and the developments which have occurred since 1998, when Shipman ceased practice.
2.10
In order to compare the performance of the various Tameside PCOs with that of their counterparts in other areas, the Inquiry circulated a questionnaire to a number of randomly selected strategic health authorities (SHAs) in England and Wales. The questionnaire asked detailed questions about the monitoring arrangements that had been in place over the previous 25 years. Nineteen responses were received from SHAs and PCOs (to whom the questionnaire had been passed by the relevant SHA) in different areas of England and Wales. Representatives of four of the respondent bodies were invited to provide further evidence and two of those representatives, together with the Medical Director of another local PCT, attended to give oral evidence about past and current monitoring arrangements in their areas.
2.11
In addition, the Inquiry received evidence from representatives of other local organisations, including the West Pennine (formerly Tameside and Glossop) Local Medical Committee (of which Shipman had in the past been secretary), and from doctors who had been employed by the former Regional Medical Service.
Monitoring of Prescribing by General Practitioners
2.12
Shipman acquired drugs to feed his own drug abusing habit in 1974 and 1975 and, virtually throughout his career in general practice, to kill patients. During the later years of his time in practice, some monitoring of GPs’ prescribing was carried out locally. The Inquiry examined in detail the results of the monitoring of Shipman’s prescribing and heard evidence about this from pharmaceutical advisers who had formerly been employed by the Tameside FHSA and the WPHA as well as from a pharmacy consultant who had been employed by the fundholding consortium of which Shipman was for some time a member.
2.13
In my Fourth Report, written at the conclusion of Phase Two, Stage Three (‘Stage Three’) of the Inquiry’s hearings, I recommended measures which would make it far more difficult for a doctor or other healthcare professional to obtain illicit supplies of controlled drugs, and which would also make it more likely that a doctor who succeeded in obtaining drugs illicitly would be detected. One of the measures which has a valuable role to play is the monitoring of GPs’ prescribing of controlled drugs. The evidence that the Inquiry received in Stage Three has informed my views on this topic. During the Stage Four hearings, the Inquiry received a written statement from Mr Barry Lloyd, Prescribing Information Consultant, who is retained by the National Prescribing Centre and the Prescription Pricing Authority (PPA) to develop and provide training in the use of prescribing information systems. Mr Lloyd attended the Inquiry office and gave a demonstration of the use of the ePACT.net system which is now used for the monitoring of prescribing. The Inquiry also heard oral evidence on this topic from Mr Michael Siswick, of the PPA.
The Appointment of General Practitioners
2.14
In 1977, Shipman was appointed to the Donneybrook practice in Hyde. This appointment was made at a time when he had been working outside general practice for over 18 months, following his dismissal from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, Todmorden, in late 1975. His dismissal had occurred after the discovery that he had been illicitly obtaining and abusing controlled drugs. The Inquiry examined the circumstances of Shipman’s appointment to the Donneybrook practice and of his admission to the medical list of the Tameside FPC. The Inquiry considered in particular whether the Tameside FPC knew of his previous history and, if not, whether it should have made enquiries which would have revealed that history. The role in the appointment process played by members of the Donneybrook practice was also considered.
2.15
Witness statements were obtained from seven members and former members of the Donneybrook practice, and all but two gave oral evidence. The Inquiry had previously obtained evidence from three of Shipman’s former partners at the Abraham Ormerod practice for the purposes of its Phase One investigations. In addition, the Inquiry received evidence from other witnesses who had knowledge of the arrangements for GP appointments that were in operation in 1977. These included the Chairman of the former Medical Practices Committee, the body which was at that time responsible for ensuring an equitable distribution of GPs across the whole of England and Wales. The Inquiry also received written statements from a former administrator of the Calderdale FPC (which had responsibility for primary care in Todmorden at the time Shipman was in practice there), from two inspectors of the Home Office Drugs Branch (who had been involved in the detection of Shipman’s drug offences), from a representative of the West Yorkshire Police and from a former employee of the General Medical Council (GMC). These witnesses gave evidence about the information that would have been provided to a person making an enquiry in 1977 to one of those organisations about Shipman’s previous history of drug abuse or about the criminal and disciplinary proceedings resulting therefrom.
The Wider Picture
Evidence from National Bodies
2.16
The Inquiry received a detailed witness statement from Sir Nigel Crisp, Permanent Secretary of the Department of Health (DoH) and Chief Executive of the NHS in England, describing the development of the arrangements for the monitoring of GPs from the 1970s to date. Sir Nigel gave oral evidence to the Inquiry and outlined the further changes that were planned for the future. These further changes included those resulting from the new General Medical Services (GMS) Contract (introduced in April 2004), together with a new requirement (to be introduced by the GMC in 2005) that all doctors should undergo periodic revalidation. The DoH provided a considerable amount of further written evidence, both in response to specific requests by the Inquiry and generally. In addition, representatives of the DoH participated in the Inquiry’s seminars.
2.17
Dr John Chisholm (Chairman, General Practitioners Committee, British Medical Association (BMA)) and Dr William Reith (former Chairman, Scottish Council of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP)) attended to give evidence about a range of matters, including the plans for the future revalidation of doctors. Professor Alastair Scotland (Chief Executive and Medical Director, National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA)) and Dr Linda Patterson (Medical Director, former Commission for Health Improvement (CHI)) gave evidence about the role and functions of their respective organisations. Dr Reith and Professor Scotland attended some of the Inquiry’s seminars, as did Dr John Grenville, representing the BMA. Professor Aidan Halligan, Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England and Director of Clinical Governance for the NHS, also participated in some of the seminars.
2.18
The Inquiry received written statements and other communications in connection with this part of its investigation from a wide variety of organisations, including the National Patient Safety Agency (NPSA), the Audit Commission, the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission), the Patients Association, Patient Concern, the Association of Community Health Councils, the Commission for Public and Patient Involvement in Health, the Joint Committee on Postgraduate Training for General Practice, Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), the National Association of Primary Care Educators UK and a number of postgraduate deaneries. Representatives of the Patients Association, of Patient Concern and of AvMA attended those of the Inquiry’s seminars at which the topic of monitoring and related issues were discussed. Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, former President of the RCGP and the person responsible for designing the assessment instruments used in the GMC’s performance procedures, also attended some of the seminars.
Evidence from Academics
2.19
In connection with the topic of monitoring GPs, the Inquiry commissioned two reports from academic experts. The first, written by Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester, addressed a number of specific issues identified by the Inquiry. The second, which constituted an overview of past, current and future arrangements for monitoring the quality of care provided by GPs, was written by Professor Martin Roland (Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre, University of Manchester), Professor Martin Marshall (Professor of General Practice, University of Manchester), and Dr Jonathan Shapiro (Director, ‘Policy. Development. Partnership.’ and Senior Fellow, University of Birmingham). Both Professor Baker and Professor Roland attended some of the Inquiry’s seminars and Professor Baker also gave oral evidence.
2.20
At the time of the Inquiry’s hearings, the new system for appraising GPs had recently come into operation. It was important for the Inquiry to examine how appraisal was being carried out and to examine both its relationship with local monitoring and clinical governance systems and its intended linkage with revalidation. Several witnesses gave evidence about their own experiences of appraisal in general practice or in hospital or other settings. In addition, the Inquiry received a written statement from Dr Vikram Tanna, Appraisal Lead, Tameside and Glossop PCT, and heard oral evidence from two witnesses who were responsible for organising GP appraisal on behalf of their PCTs; one of the witnesses was himself a GP appraiser. The Inquiry also received from the Tameside and Glossop PCT a number of anonymised completed appraisal forms.
Dealing with Poor Performance and Serious Untoward Incidents
2.21
A further questionnaire, relating to the arrangements made by PCOs for dealing with doctors whose professional performance gives rise to concerns, was circulated to a random selection of 24 PCOs in England and Wales, all of whom responded. The Inquiry also distributed a questionnaire to six SHAs (all of whom responded), seeking information about their systems for dealing with serious untoward incidents.
Single-Handed Practice
2.22
After Shipman’s conviction in January 2000, there were many calls for a move away from single-handed practice. It was suggested that Shipman would not have escaped detection over such a long period had he been working in a group practice. It was, therefore, necessary for the Inquiry to consider whether it was easier for Shipman to carry out his crimes because of the arrangements that existed in the practices where he worked and, also, to consider the merits and drawbacks of single-handed practice.
2.23
The Small Practices Association is a national body representing the interests of single-handed and small practices and its Chairman, Dr Michael Taylor, gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. I also heard oral evidence from Dr Hugh Whyte, Senior Medical Officer, Directorate of Health Policy and Planning, Scottish Executive Health Department, about the position of small and single-handed practices in Scotland. The Inquiry also received a statement from Mrs Ann Lloyd, Director of the NHS Wales Department of the National Assembly for Wales, dealing with the Assembly’s policy on single-handed medical practitioners.
2.24
Several witnesses called to give evidence on other topics provided their views and experience of small and single-handed practices. The Inquiry sent a questionnaire to 15 randomly chosen PCTs, seeking information about their attitudes towards such practices and about any special arrangements they made to support them. The DoH provided relevant policy and statistical material.
Monitoring Mortality Rates
2.25
One aspect of monitoring which assumed particular significance after the discovery of Shipman’s crimes was the monitoring of mortality rates. No monitoring of the mortality rates among Shipman’s patients had been carried out prior to his investigation and arrest. The Inquiry received written evidence from a number of former members of staff of the WPHA about the statistical information relating to GP patients and GP patient deaths held by the WPHA during the period of Shipman’s practice and about the uses to which that information was put. The evidence also related to the analyses of Shipman’s mortality rates which had been carried out by the WPHA after Shipman’s arrest in September 1998. The Inquiry also considered the clinical audit of Shipman’s practice which was carried out by Professor Baker. At the conclusion of the report on the results of his clinical audit, Professor Baker had recommended that the systems for monitoring GPs should be reviewed and extended to include routine monitoring of GP patient mortality rates.
2.26
The Inquiry had first to consider whether the successive PCOs with responsibility for Tameside had been at fault in not instituting any monitoring system during the period of Shipman’s practice there. In order to discover what, if any, steps PCOs in other parts of the country had taken to monitor mortality rates, the Inquiry distributed a questionnaire to all SHAs in England and health authorities (HAs) in Wales, requesting information. Responses were received from all 33 SHAs and HAs. Following receipt of the responses, the Inquiry sought and obtained further evidence from a number of PCOs which had undertaken analyses of mortality rates in the recent past. The Inquiry also obtained written evidence from NHS bodies in Northern Ireland and Scotland about steps which were being taken to develop monitoring systems in their areas.
2.27
The Inquiry commissioned Dr Paul Aylin, Clinical Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College School of Science, Technology and Medicine, to report on the feasibility of setting up a national monitoring system for GPs and to advise on an appropriate method of analysis. Dr Aylin and a team of colleagues from Imperial College carried out the necessary work and prepared a written report. In July 2003, they gave a presentation of their work to the Inquiry.
2.28
In October 2003, Dr Aylin’s work, together with wider issues relating to the monitoring of GP patient mortality rates, was discussed at a two-day seminar, which was attended by a number of experts in the field, together with representatives of the BMA, the RCGP and the former CHI. Also participating in the seminars were three representatives from PCOs who had experience of monitoring and/or investigating GP patient mortality rates. Dr Kathryn Booth (Chair, Northern Ireland General Practice Mortality Regional Group) and Dr Mohammed A Mohammed (Senior Research Fellow, Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, University of Birmingham) told the seminar about the pilot project for monitoring mortality rates which was then being undertaken by the Eastern Health and Social Services Board in Northern Ireland.
Patient Complaints and Local Disciplinary Procedures
2.29
The Inquiry’s first purpose in considering the patient complaints and disciplinary procedures was to examine Shipman’s involvement in those procedures and to consider whether the subject matter of any complaints made against him should have alerted those who operated the procedures to his criminality. It was also necessary to consider the part played by the complaints and disciplinary procedures within the wider context of the arrangements for monitoring and, more recently, for clinical governance. The examination of detailed evidence relating to the operation of these procedures by reference to a number of particular cases was helpful to me when I came to formulate my proposals for change.
2.30
The Inquiry received information from the WPHA relating to the complaints made to the PCOs responsible for Tameside about Shipman between 1977 and 1996. Shipman had twice been disciplined following patient complaints, once by the Tameside FPC in 1990 and once by the Tameside FHSA in 1993. Those two cases were also reported to the GMC. An earlier complaint to the Tameside FPC in 1985 had been dismissed. Mr Steven Rawlinson, a friend of the deceased patient whose death was the subject of the 1985 complaint, gave oral evidence. The mother of the deceased patient provided a written statement. Mr William Greenwood, then Assistant Administrator at Tameside FPC, later Assistant Director of Primary Care, WPHA, gave oral evidence about his experience of the local operation of the procedures, including his involvement in the complaints brought against Shipman. Statements were provided by ten members and former chairmen of the medical service committees that adjudicated on those complaints and five of them - some medical and some lay - gave oral evidence.
2.31
Miss Andrea Horsfall, formerly Deputy Consumer Liaison Manager, WPHA, gave oral evidence about her experience of the procedures that were in place after 1st
April 1996. As a result of the changes in procedures, the WPHA had less involvement in the resolution of patient complaints than previously and there were far fewer disciplinary hearings. Mr Geoffrey Lamb, a former senior convenor at the WPHA, provided a statement about his involvement in the procedures that followed unsuccessful local resolution of a complaint.
2.32
Mr David Laverick, former Chief Executive of the Family Health Services Appeals Authority, gave oral evidence and supplied statistical information about the later stages of the disciplinary processes. His evidence on that topic was supplemented by witness statements from Mr Brian Hubbard (a junior colleague of Mr Laverick), Mr Paul Burns (Mr Laverick’s successor as Chief Executive) and Dr William Miller (former Chairman of the Medical Advisory Committee).
2.33
The Inquiry also received 14 responses to a questionnaire sent by the Inquiry to a number of healthcare organisations on the subject of complaints, in particular complaints about GPs. The questionnaire asked - among other things - what changes they would like to see made to the existing NHS complaints procedures. Representatives of the RCGP, the BMA, the DoH, the National Care Standards Commission (NCSC, now part of the Healthcare Commission), the Association of Medical Secretaries, Practice Managers, Administrators and Receptionists (AMSPAR), the Consumers’ Association (now known as Which?), the Office of the Health Service Ombudsman, the NCAA, the Healthcare Commission and the GMC attended a seminar dealing with patient complaints and the investigation of complaints.
2.34
The scale and number of Shipman’s crimes and the long period over which they were perpetrated raised the possibility that concerns might have been raised about his activities in the past and that those concerns might have gone unheeded by the authorities. The Inquiry set out to discover whether there had been anyone who had felt such concerns and, if so, whether they had made their concerns known. In the event, it was clear that very few people had harboured any suspicion at all about Shipman. In the case of those few people who had, the Inquiry wished to establish whether they had voiced their concerns and, if so, why those concerns had not been acted on. If there were people who had had concerns, but had not voiced them, I wanted to establish why that was so and to explore ways in which such people could, in the future, be encouraged to come forward.
2.35
The Inquiry focussed on several specific groups of people who might have had particular reason to become concerned about Shipman’s activities.
Families and Friends
2.36
The first of these were the relatives and friends of Shipman’s victims. When providing their Inquiry witness statements for Phase One, in connection with the Inquiry’s investigation of the deaths of Shipman’s patients, relatives and other witnesses were asked whether they had had any concerns about the death in question. In preparation for Stage Four, those witness statements were examined again and the witnesses who had said they had had concerns at the time the death occurred were asked to provide further information. Witnesses were asked to explain why (if such was the case) they had not voiced their concerns at the time. They were asked whether they would have known to whom they should take those concerns. They were also asked to suggest ideas for change which might make it easier for people to bring forward similar concerns in the future.
Members of the Donneybrook Practice
2.37
The next group that the Inquiry considered were the members of the Donneybrook practice, where Shipman killed at least 71 patients between 1977 and 1990. I have already referred to their evidence earlier in this Chapter.
Members of the Practice Staff
2.38
The third group which the Inquiry considered was Shipman’s practice staff. They had worked in close proximity to him at the Market Street Surgery and it was clearly important to ascertain whether any members of staff had known or suspected anything of his criminal activities. Members of the practice staff had provided a considerable amount of background evidence to the Inquiry for the purposes of its Phase One investigations. In preparation for Stage Four, they were shown schedules containing details about the deaths of patients of the practice and were asked what, if anything, they could recall about those deaths. Lengthy witness statements were provided by Sister Gillian Morgan (nurse practitioner), Mrs Alison Massey (practice manager), Mrs Carol Chapman (receptionist), and Mrs Judith Cocker (receptionist). Two other members of staff, who had worked at the practice for short periods, also provided witness statements. All these witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Mrs Margaret Walker (computer operator) had emigrated by the time of the Inquiry hearings. She had provided a very detailed witness statement before her departure. Another witness, who had worked temporarily as a nurse at the practice, provided a written statement.
Other Healthcare Professionals
2.39
The Inquiry also obtained written evidence from three other healthcare professionals, who had been based part-time at the Market Street Surgery, but had had little involvement with the day-to-day running of the practice. The evidence of Mrs Marion Gilchrist, the district nurse attached to Shipman’s practice between 1995 and 1998, was heard by the Inquiry during Stage Three. The evidence of Mrs Ethel Dooley and Mrs Barbara Sunderland, district nurses who occasionally stood in for Mrs Gilchrist, was also heard during that stage.
Others Who Had Concerns
2.40
The Inquiry received evidence, both oral and written, relating to suspicions about Shipman which had arisen in the minds of Mrs Christine Simpson (resident manager of Ogden Court, a sheltered housing development in Hyde), Mr John Shaw (a local taxi driver), Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross (home helps) and Mrs Shirley Harrison (relative of one of Shipman’s victims and neighbour of another). Mr Shaw, Mrs Foley, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Harrison had told nobody in authority of their concerns. However, Mrs Simpson told the Inquiry that she had informed her line manager, Mrs Janet Schofield, a housing officer employed by the Manchester and District Housing Association (now part of the Harvest Housing Group), of her concerns. Mrs Schofield did not accept that Mrs Simpson had communicated this information and Mrs Schofield gave oral evidence about the matter to the Inquiry.
2.41
During Phase Two, Stage One (which related to the first and unsuccessful police investigation into the deaths of Shipman’s patients), the Inquiry heard evidence about the mounting concerns of Mr David Bambroffe and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, which had led eventually to Mrs Bambroffe communicating those concerns to Dr Susan Booth of the Brooke Practice. That communication had the effect of heightening the concerns already felt by the late Dr Linda Reynolds, another member of the Brooke Practice. In March 1998, she reported her concerns, and those of her partners, to the local Coroner and thus initiated the first police investigation. Mr and Mrs Bambroffe, together with Mr Nigel Reynolds (Dr Reynolds’ widower) gave oral evidence in Stage Two; they provided further witness evidence for the purposes of Stage Four, in which they set out their views about steps which might be taken to make it easier for those who had concerns to bring them to the attention of the appropriate authorities.
Concerns of Colleagues
2.42
The case of Mrs Renate Overton, which I deal with in
, featured prominently in the First and Third Reports and oral evidence surrounding the circumstances of her death and its aftermath were heard in December 2002. In my Third Report, I found that two consultants at Tameside General Hospital (Dr Ceri Brown and Dr Murtaza Husaini) had been aware in February 1994 that Shipman had administered (they believed negligently, rather than deliberately as I found in my First Report) an overdose of morphine or diamorphine to Mrs Overton such as to cause severe brain damage which led, 14 months later, to her death. They had not reported the matter to anyone in authority. At the time of writing the Third Report, I deferred the question of whether they were under a duty to report their concerns about Mrs Overton’s case and whether they should be criticised for their failure to do so. I decided that I should consider those questions after the Stage Four hearings at which evidence was to be received on wider issues concerning the duty to report, the options for reporting available to the two consultants and the culture within the medical profession at the time. At the same time, I heard some evidence about the change in culture since then.
2.43
I had already heard, during Stage Two, evidence on those topics from the two consultants themselves and from other members of the medical, nursing and administrative staff at the Tameside General Hospital. For the Stage Four hearings, the Inquiry gathered evidence from a variety of other sources. The Medical Directors of three trusts responsible for hospitals comparable in size to Tameside General Hospital gave oral evidence. The solicitors representing the two consultants supplied witness statements from Professor Alan Aitkenhead, Professor of Anaesthesia, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham and Dr John Givans, a retired GP who does consultancy work for the Medical Defence Union. Both gave oral evidence. The medical defence organisations and the BMA provided written contributions and Dr Gerard Panting, of the Medical Protection Society, also gave oral evidence. The two consultants declined the opportunity to give further evidence although they were represented at the hearings.
The Wider Picture
2.44
The Inquiry received written and oral evidence from the organisation Public Concern at Work (PCaW), which offers help and encouragement to organisations (in particular NHS organisations) that wish to create and foster a culture in which staff feel safe to raise concerns. It has also set up and administers a telephone helpline that provides free confidential legal advice and practical assistance to individuals who are considering raising concerns. Mr Guy Dehn, Director, PCaW, gave oral evidence to the Inquiry about the development over recent years of measures to encourage people with genuine concerns about malpractice to make their concerns known, and to protect those who take such action from suffering detriment as a result.
Concerns of Practice Staff and Healthcare Professionals
2.45
I wished to understand the difficulties faced by GP practice staff and healthcare professionals who have concerns (in particular, concerns relating to poor clinical practice or other behaviour which might pose a risk to patients) about doctors and other healthcare professionals, and to explore ways of reducing those difficulties. Mr Dehn addressed these issues in his evidence and the Inquiry also heard evidence from Mr Ian Hargreaves, retired Regional Director, Royal College of Nursing (RCN), and Mrs Debra Davies, Counter-fraud and Performance Manager of the former Iechyd Morgannwg HA. Relevant evidence was also received from a number of organisations, including AMSPAR, the British Association of Medical Managers, the Consumers’ Association (now known as Which?), the Nursing and Midwifery Council, the Community Practitioners’ and Health Visitors’ Association and the Association of Chief Police Officers. Mr Simon Bennett, of the DoH, provided a witness statement dealing with these matters, which were also discussed at a seminar attended by, among others, representatives from PCaW, AMSPAR, the RCN and the DoH.
Concerns of Home Helps, Wardens of Sheltered Housing Developments and Residential Care Assistants
2.46
Home helps, wardens of sheltered housing developments, residential care assistants and those in other similar employment may be in a position to observe poor clinical practice or other behaviour by doctors and other healthcare professionals that might put patients at risk. The Inquiry wished to explore the arrangements in place for the bringing forward of such concerns. The Inquiry obtained from 14 local authorities examples of the ‘whistleblowing’ policies currently in place for employees in the fields mentioned above. The Inquiry also received written and oral evidence from persons with responsibility for organising home help and warden services in the Tameside area and in other parts of Manchester. Further written evidence was provided by a number of organisations, including the NCSC, the Care Standards Inspectorate for Wales, the Care Commission (Scotland), the Local Government Management Board, UNISON and Age Concern.
The Areas of Interest for the Inquiry
2.47
The final topics to be considered by the Inquiry were the fitness to practise (FTP) procedures operated by the GMC, the body which is responsible for the registration of doctors and which plays a central part in the regulation of the profession, and the GMC’s future plans for the revalidation of doctors. The Inquiry’s interest in the GMC’s FTP procedures arose in a number of different ways. First, it was necessary for the Inquiry to examine the GMC’s treatment of Shipman in 1976, when his conviction for drug offences was reported to it, and to decide whether that treatment was, by the standards of the time, adequate and appropriate. Many people had expressed the view that to deal with a doctor convicted of drugs offences by means of a warning letter was inappropriate and had not provided adequate protection to patients. I had to consider whether Shipman’s case was a ‘one-off’ or whether it was, in fact, typical of the way in which cases of that kind were dealt with at the time.
2.48
In 1976, the procedures later developed by the GMC for dealing with sick doctors (the health procedures) were not in operation. They were introduced in 1980 and were aimed primarily at the rehabilitation of the doctor concerned. The Inquiry was told that, had they been in force at the time of Shipman’s referral to the GMC, Shipman would have been dealt with under those procedures because he had been diagnosed as having a drug dependency. It was, therefore, necessary for the Inquiry to examine the operation of the health procedures from their inception in 1980 to date, in order to ascertain whether the outcome of Shipman’s case would have been different if he had been dealt with under the health procedures. I also had to consider whether the way in which the GMC has in the past dealt with drug abusing doctors like Shipman has afforded adequate protection to patients.
2.49
It was also necessary for the Inquiry to consider whether it would have been more appropriate for drug abusing doctors (particularly those who, like Shipman, had been convicted of serious criminal offences) to have been dealt with by means of the GMC’s procedures for disciplining doctors who have, or might have, been guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM) (the conduct procedures) as an alternative to (or as an adjunct to) dealing with them under the health procedures. This necessarily involved an examination of the operation of the GMC’s conduct procedures.
2.50
The regulatory and disciplinary procedures operated by the GMC form an integral part of the overall monitoring system. If a complaint is received by a PCO about a GP’s conduct or performance, or if the results of routine local monitoring suggest that s/he is performing poorly, the doctor might be referred to the GMC with a view to action being taken on the doctor’s registration. The threat of action on registration provides the ‘teeth’ for the local monitoring process and the effectiveness or otherwise of the GMC’s FTP procedures may be determinative of the success of local monitoring arrangements. If the GMC does not act, or responds inadequately and, as a result, a doctor who presents a risk to patients is permitted to continue in practice, the monitoring process as a whole is undermined. This interdependence of local systems and those of the GMC provided an additional reason for the Inquiry to examine the GMC’s health and conduct procedures, and also its performance procedures, into which doctors whose professional performance has been identified locally as deficient may be referred. The Inquiry has also explored the interrelationship between NHS GP complaints and disciplinary procedures and the FTP procedures operated by the GMC. In particular, the Inquiry considered two complaints about Shipman that were reported both to the local NHS authorities and to the GMC and examined how those complaints were handled by those bodies. The Inquiry has considered the need for interlinking standards, criteria and thresholds to be applied by decision-makers locally and by those involved in making decisions at the various stages of the GMC’s FTP procedures.
2.51
From 2005, the GMC intends to introduce a requirement for every doctor to undergo periodic revalidation as a condition of continuing to hold a licence to practise. Revalidation is defined in the Medical Act 1983 (as amended) as an
. The introduction of the requirement for revalidation will give the GMC a direct responsibility for the monitoring of doctors, including GPs. If the effect of revalidation were that every doctor on the register were to be required to demonstrate an acceptable and objectively measurable standard of competence and performance, this would be a highly significant addition to the current monitoring arrangements for GPs. The development of the proposals for revalidation has, therefore, been of considerable interest to the Inquiry. I have considered the different proposals for carrying out the revalidation process which have been put forward by the GMC over recent years, with a view to determining whether the various models proposed would give patients adequate protection against incompetent, poorly performing and aberrant doctors.
2.52
It is intended that those doctors whose fitness to practise is in doubt (and who cannot, therefore, be revalidated in the usual way) will be referred into the GMC’s FTP procedures (frequently, but not invariably, in the form of a case with a performance element). Thus, the FTP procedures will underpin the revalidation process. However rigorous the initial process of evaluating doctors for the purposes of revalidation might be, it would be rendered useless if the FTP procedures were to operate so as to allow doctors who had not attained the required standard of competence and performance to remain in practice. The interrelation between revalidation and the FTP procedures, therefore, provided an additional reason for the Inquiry to examine the effectiveness of those procedures.
2.53
The case of Mrs Overton also raised issues relating to the GMC. One of the reasons advanced by Dr Brown for not having reported the incident was that the GMC would not have acted on such a complaint. He did not think he had sufficient information on which to base a complaint. He was also worried that, if he made a report, the GMC might criticise him for disparaging Shipman. In order to enable me properly to assess the weight of this piece of evidence, it was necessary for the Inquiry to examine how cases of serious, apparently ‘one off’, incidents such as that involving Mrs Overton would have been dealt with by the GMC in the early and mid-1990s. The facts of the case of Mrs Overton were also used by the Inquiry to test how an incident of that type would have been dealt with by the GMC (as well as by local NHS bodies) in the more recent past.
2.54
Two further issues relating to the GMC arose directly in Shipman’s case. The first of these was the inability of the GMC, when Shipman was under investigation for murder - and even after his arrest - to take any steps to suspend him from practice. Under the arrangements then in place, the GMC was powerless to take action until he had been convicted of murder, over a year later. The second issue related to the provision of information about Shipman’s previous history. The PCOs responsible for the provision of primary care in Tameside remained unaware of Shipman’s previous history until the time of the second police investigation in August 1998. Most of his patients had no idea that he had previously been reported to the GMC for drug abuse. These factors have led me to consider whether information of this kind held by the GMC should be made more readily available to NHS bodies and other organisations with an interest in knowing, and also to patients.
2.55
The GMC has recently introduced new FTP procedures. In line with the requirement placed upon me to make any recommendations I believe necessary for the protection of patients, I regarded it as appropriate to examine the proposed new procedures and to consider the extent to which they provide adequate protection for patients.
Witnesses from the General Medical Council
2.56
The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Mr Robert Gray, who was Assistant Registrar of the GMC in 1976 and had been involved in processing the report against Shipman. Another member of the administrative staff at the time provided a written statement. Oral evidence was also given by Dr Derek Llewellyn, a member of the Penal Cases Committee (PeCC) which decided to close Shipman’s case and send him a warning letter, rather than referring the case for a public hearing before the Disciplinary Committee. Dr Ronald Bryson, one of the consultant psychiatrists on whose evidence the PeCC relied when making its decision, provided written evidence.
2.57
The witnesses who gave evidence relating to more recent events were in general chosen by the GMC, after consultation with the Inquiry. Two former members of the administrative staff, one of whom had been employed by the GMC between 1977 and 2002, gave oral evidence about practice and procedures in the 1980s and 1990s. Two senior current members of the administrative staff described the practice and procedures which had been in operation more recently. Several former and current members of the GMC, both medically qualified (‘medical’) and non-medically qualified (‘lay’), provided written evidence. Oral evidence was given by Dr Krishna Korlipara (current medical member and former medical screener), Dr Sheila Mann (former medical member and health screener), Mr Stephen Brearley (current medical member, who explained the GMC’s plans for revalidation) and Mr Robert Nicholls and Dr Arun Midha (both current lay members). Professor Sir Graeme Catto, current President, and Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive and Registrar, also gave evidence, both separately and together. Dr Malcolm Lewis (current medical member and former medical screener) and Mr Robin Macleod (current lay member) represented the GMC at the Inquiry’s seminars.
Other Witnesses
2.58
Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute, has carried out a considerable amount of research, commissioned by the GMC, into the operation of its FTP procedures, in particular its conduct procedures. With colleagues, she produced two highly detailed Reports based on her research, one in 1996 and one in 2000, together with a further Paper in 2003. She attended the Inquiry to give oral evidence. Sir Donald Irvine, immediate past President of the GMC, provided a considerable amount of written evidence (including his book, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, published in 2003) and gave oral evidence in relation to the GMC’s FTP procedures, its plans for revalidation, and other issues relevant to Stage Four. Several other witnesses gave written statements, among them Miss Isabel Nisbet, then seconded to the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)). She explained the role of the CRHP/CHRE in overseeing the regulatory functions of the GMC. Mr Sandy Forrest, Director of the CRHP/CHRE, attended two of the Inquiry’s seminars. Detective Chief Superintendent Bernard Postles (now retired) and Mrs Jan Forster, formerly Director of Primary Care, WPHA, provided witness statements dealing with their attempts between August and October 1998 to secure Shipman’s suspension from practice.
Drug Abusing Doctors
2.59
As I have explained, the Inquiry wished to examine whether the way in which the GMC has dealt with drug abusing doctors in the past provided adequate protection for patients and to consider whether it would be appropriate for it to deal with such doctors differently in the future. The Inquiry commissioned a report from Dr Andrew Johns, Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, South London and Maudsley NHS Trust, who has special expertise in the subject of substance abuse. The report dealt with the issues of substance misuse by doctors, the risks posed by a rehabilitated doctor, the likelihood of relapse into drug taking and assessing the risk of relapse. Dr Douglas Fowlie, Consultant Psychiatrist, Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust, provided a witness statement, dealing with his experience of treating and supervising doctors, and of advising the GMC, in cases of substance abuse, Dr Johns, Dr Fowlie, Professor Sir Michael Rawlins (former Chairman, Advisory Council on Drug Misuse), Dr Kit Harling (Director of NHS Plus, DoH) and Dr Jolyon Oxley (Honorary Secretary, National Counselling Service for Sick Doctors) participated in one of the Inquiry’s seminars at which this topic was discussed.
Case Files
2.60
In order to compare the handling of Shipman’s case in 1976 with that of other similar cases reported to the GMC during the mid- to late 1970s, and subsequently under the health procedures, the Inquiry sought and obtained a large number of files concerning drug-related cases dealt with by the GMC. The Inquiry was primarily concerned with cases where the doctor had obtained drugs for his/her own use, rather than those where there were allegations of irresponsible prescribing, the illicit supply of drugs to others or conduct of that nature. The Inquiry also obtained case files relating to cases (both drug-related and not) where the doctor’s honesty had been in issue. In order to examine the way in which the GMC would have dealt with the case of Mrs Overton, had it been reported, the Inquiry obtained some files relating to cases involving allegations of clinical negligence or poor clinical practice in connection with the prescribing and administration of drugs which had been reported to the GMC in the mid-1990s and subsequently. Witnesses from the GMC were asked to comment on the contents of some of the case files both in writing and in their oral evidence.
2.61
The Inquiry also sought and obtained files in a small number of recent cases falling within certain categories and chosen at random. The object of this was to illustrate the working of various aspects of the GMC’s FTP procedures as they were in 2003. Relevant witnesses were asked to comment on the contents of the case files both in writing and orally.
2.62
The Inquiry has not undertaken any detailed audit of cases dealt with by the GMC. However, the case files have been used to illustrate the way in which the FTP procedures worked in practice at various times of their operation. They have provided a valuable insight into the operation of the procedures which are not in general open to public scrutiny. I refer to some of the cases in
Chapters 16 to 24
of this Report. Also referred to are published decisions of the Professional Conduct Committee and decisions of the Privy Council and the High Court relating to appeals against decisions of the GMC’s FTP committees and applications for judicial review of decisions made by the GMC. Where the circumstances of the case under discussion are not in the public domain, the doctors involved have been given code numbers and some details (such as dates) have been omitted so as to preserve confidentiality.
Additional Evidence
2.63
The Inquiry received responses to a questionnaire which had been circulated by Alexander Harris, the solicitors representing the Tameside Families Support Group, to those families and friends of Shipman’s patients for whom they act. The questionnaire sought views on,
, the GMC’s handling of Shipman’s case in 1976 and the way in which doctors convicted of drugs offences should be dealt with. The Inquiry itself wrote to a range of organisations, asking for their views. Thirty one responses were received. In addition, the Inquiry issued questionnaires to a random selection of PCTs, enquiring about their experience of dealing with the GMC; six responded.
Documentary Evidence
2.64
The evidence to which I have referred above does not, of course, represent the whole picture. In addition, I have been able to examine and consider documents from the following sources.
The West Pennine Health Authority and Its Predecessors
2.65
Very shortly after the establishment of the Inquiry in 2001, the WPHA provided files of its documents relating to the monitoring activities of the PCOs during Shipman’s time in practice there. Some of these documents were of a general nature and some related specifically to Shipman. Since the initial delivery of documents, the WPHA has responded to requests from the Inquiry to provide further documents and other information.
The Department of Health
2.66
The DoH provided a considerable amount of background material, including consultation documents, Government White Papers, circulars, reports, guidance and directions, covering the period from the 1970s to the time when Shipman ceased practice and beyond. This has enabled me to put in context the various arrangements in place in Tameside, and to understand the development of the arrangements for regulating GPs over the last 30 years or so. The Inquiry also obtained a limited number of documents which survived from the time when the Regional Medical Service had responsibility for visiting GPs.
The Royal College of General Practitioners
2.67
The RCGP provided the Inquiry with documentation recording its involvement in the developments in the arrangements for regulating GPs, which has plainly been extremely significant. Documents relating to the RCGP’s various quality awards and markers and to its proposals for the appraisal and revalidation processes have also been supplied.
2.68
Annexed to Mr Scott’s various witness statements were approximately 9000 pages of documents relating to the operation of the GMC’s FTP procedures. Subsequently, the GMC has provided a large amount of further documentation, some at the specific request of the Inquiry and some on its own initiative. Included among these documents have been the briefing papers, minutes and transcripts relating to recent meetings of the Council.
Other Organisations
2.69
In addition, I have received a wealth of documentation from other organisations, notably the NCAA, CHI, the NPSA, the BMA and PCaW.
Academic and Professional Journals and Other Professional Publications
2.70
With the assistance of the Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, Dr Aneez Esmail, the Inquiry team collected, from academic and professional journals and other publications, a large amount of published literature dealing with,
, the regulation and disciplinary systems for GPs, tools for the monitoring and evaluation of GPs, GP appraisal, proposals for the revalidation of doctors, the raising of concerns, NHS complaints systems, the monitoring of GP patient mortality rates and the operation of the GMC’s FTP procedures. I have referred to some of this literature in the course of this Report.
2.71
The period for which the Inquiry has been considering these topics has been a time of change for the profession, with the introduction of GP appraisal and of the GMC’s new FTP procedures, the creation of new bodies (such as the Healthcare Commission and the CRHP/CHRE), the development of recently created organisations (such as the NCAA and the NPSA), the introduction of the new GMS Contract and the impending introduction of revalidation. All these changes have been debated and discussed in the professional publications which are produced regularly. These publications have provided a useful insight into the attitude of members of the profession to the various developments that have been effected or proposed.

--- The Inquiry's Own Consultations ---
2.72
In preparing for Stage Four, the Inquiry began by seeking the views of a large number of organisations and individuals who were thought likely to have an interest in some or all of the topics to be considered during Stage Four. As a result of these and subsequent enquiries, the Inquiry was able to identify those persons and organisations who might be able to provide evidence and other material which would assist the Inquiry. In addition, as I have already mentioned, the Inquiry has issued various questionnaires and requests for information and documents.
2.73
During the Stage Four hearings, the Inquiry published a Consultation Paper, ‘Safeguarding Patients: Topics for Consideration at the Stage Four Seminars’. The purpose of the Consultation Paper was to provide a focus both for written responses and for discussion at a series of seminars held by the Inquiry in January 2004. The Inquiry received written responses from 95 individuals and organisations. The views expressed in those responses were considered and discussed at the seminars.
2.74
The seminars covered six different topics and extended over eight days. Participating in the seminars were representatives of organisations and individuals with an interest and expertise in the topics under discussion. I have mentioned above many of those who participated. Many of the views expressed during the Inquiry’s consultation process are referred to in this Report.
The International Perspective
2.75
One of the seminars, lasting two days, was devoted to a discussion of the systems in five other jurisdictions. Dr Perry Pugno (Director, Division of Medical Education, American Academy of Family Physicians, USA) told the Inquiry about the current arrangements for the monitoring and recertifying of family doctors in the USA, together with changes to the recertification process planned for the future. He also described the operation of the National Practitioner Data Bank, a publicly accessible database of information about family practitioners. On the second day of the seminar, he described the way in which complaints against family doctors are processed in the USA. Dr André Jacques (Director, Practice Enhancement Division, Collège des Médecins du Québec, Montréal, Canada) told the Inquiry about the systems for monitoring the performance of family practitioners used in the province of Québec. He also described the regulatory role of the College. Dr Rocco Gerace (Registrar, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, Toronto, Canada) described the systems of monitoring of family physicians in operation in the province of Ontario, together with the plans for the Maintenance and Enhancement of Physician Performance programme, a system of revalidation, to be introduced in the future. Dr Gerace also spoke about the regulatory role of the College. Mr Ronald Paterson (Health and Disability Commissioner, New Zealand) described the system for dealing with patient complaints in New Zealand and, in particular, his own role as an independent investigator of complaints about individual healthcare professionals and healthcare systems. Professor Chris van Weel (Head of Department of General Practice and Social Medicine, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands) spoke about the arrangements for regulating general practice in his country. Professor Baker and Professor David Newble (Professor of Medical Education, Head of Department of Medical Education, Director of Learning and Teaching, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sheffield) each attended one day of this seminar.

--- Before the Oral Hearings ---
The Arrangements for the Distribution of Evidence
2.76
The arrangements for the distribution of evidence were the same for Stage Four as for Phase One. They are described at
paragraphs 3.17
and 3.18 of my First Report. As in Phase One, all the evidence available to the Inquiry was released into the public domain by means of the Inquiry website except where material had to be redacted to respect confidentiality or to protect the identity of individuals not directly concerned with Shipman.
The Public Meeting
2.77
On Monday, 17th
March 2003, the Inquiry held a Public Meeting, at which I explained the arrangements for Stages Three and Four of Phase Two.
Representation
2.78
Before and after the Public Meeting, I granted leave to various individuals and organisations to be represented before the Inquiry during the Stage Four hearings and, for some, recommended funding for that representation at public expense. A list of participants in Stage Four and their representation can be seen at
Appendix A
of this Report.
Salmon Letters
2.79
Before the Stage Four hearings began, the Solicitor to the Inquiry, Mr Henry Palin, sent letters (known as ‘Salmon letters’) to those persons and organisations whose conduct might be the subject of criticism by the Inquiry. The potential criticisms were clearly identified in those letters.
2.80
In the event that any further potential criticisms came to light at or after the hearings, these were the subject of further Salmon letters. Recipients of Salmon letters were given the opportunity to respond to the potential criticisms in writing, as well as in the course of their oral evidence at the hearings.
Broadcasting
2.81
I had given permission for the Stages One, Two and Three hearings to be broadcast in accordance with a protocol which had been prepared by the Inquiry and was designed to ensure that Inquiry material would not be misused. That protocol was slightly amended in September 2002. Those arrangements caused no difficulties during Stages One, Two or Three and I received no representations suggesting that they should be discontinued. I therefore gave permission to recognised organisations to broadcast during Stage Four, provided that they complied with the slightly amended protocol, clarifying the broadcasters’ duties in respect of websites. During Stage Four, I received and granted six applications from witnesses that their evidence should not be broadcast. I also directed that certain parts of the evidence relating to the way in which the GMC had handled individual cases should not be broadcast and that the public screens should not be used for the display of documents during those parts of the hearings when those cases were being discussed. This was in order to respect the confidentiality of the doctors who were the subjects of those cases.

--- The Oral Hearings ---
2.82
The oral hearings were held in the Council Chamber at Manchester Town Hall. The Stage Four hearings took place between Monday, 14th
July 2003 and Thursday, 18th
December 2003.
2.83
The arrangements for the oral hearings, and for the publication of evidence, were the same as for the Phase One hearings. They are described at
paragraphs 3.28
to 3.36 of my First Report. The public gallery at the Town Hall remained open, and transcripts and other documents were posted on the Inquiry’s website after each day’s hearing.
2.84
Volunteers from Tameside Victim Support Witness Service attended to assist family witnesses and three other witnesses when they attended to give evidence at the Stage Four hearings, but were not required during the remainder of these hearings. I remain most grateful to Tameside Victim Support Witness Service for all the assistance they have given during the course of the Inquiry.
2.85
In general, witnesses who gave oral evidence during the Stage Four hearings were called by Counsel to the Inquiry. However, in the interests of fairness, those witnesses who had received Salmon letters were given the opportunity of making an opening statement of their evidence in response to questions by their own counsel or solicitor, before being questioned by Counsel to the Inquiry. None of the recipients of Salmon letters in Stage Four availed themselves of this opportunity.
Submissions
2.86
Following the conclusion of the Stage Four hearings the representatives of those individuals and organisations who had been granted representation made written submissions. Counsel to the Inquiry also produced written submissions relating to certain specific issues. I offered an opportunity to all representatives to make representations that I should hear oral submissions but received no such representations. Although I have not, in the course of this Report, made many direct references to the written submissions received, I have considered them with care and have taken them fully into account when reaching my conclusions.

--- The Seminars ---
2.87
The seminars were held in the Council Chamber at Manchester Town Hall on Monday 19th
, Tuesday 20th
, Thursday 22nd
, Friday 23rd
, Monday 26th
, Tuesday 27th
, Thursday 29th
and Friday 30th
January 2004. A total of 37 participants took part in the discussions at the various seminars. A list of seminar participants can be seen at
Appendix B
to this Report. Those discussions were led by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry. Although structured, the discussions were significantly less formal than the oral evidence given during the usual Inquiry hearings.
2.88
Participants in the seminars had submitted written responses to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper in advance and expanded on those responses during the course of the seminars. Persons attending the seminars as observers were able to raise points through Counsel for the consideration of seminar participants. After the seminars, the Inquiry received a number of further responses, both from participants who wished to confirm or revise views previously expressed, and from people who had attended the seminars, or who had become aware of the discussions that had taken place, and wanted to contribute their own opinions. A list of respondents to the Consultation Paper appears at
Appendix C
to this Report.
2.89
I found the seminars, and indeed the whole consultation process undertaken by the Inquiry, extremely valuable in clarifying my thoughts and helping me to formulate my recommendations for the future.

--- The Structure of This Report ---
2.90
Chapters 3
of this Report, I shall describe the arrangements for administering and monitoring the provision of primary care during the period of Shipman’s time in general practice, between 1974 and 1998. I shall also consider the circumstances of Shipman’s appointment to the Donneybrook practice and of his move to single-handed practice in 1992. In
, I shall consider the changes to the arrangements for administering and monitoring the provision of primary care which have occurred since 1998.
2.91
will cover the system for dealing with complaints about GPs prior to 1996 and the way in which complaints against Shipman, made in 1985, 1990 and 1992, were handled. In
, I shall discuss the patient complaints system which has been in operation since 1996 and the new system which has now been partially introduced.
2.92
The subject of
, 9, 10 and 11 is the raising of concerns.
describes the experience of those few people who had concerns about the deaths of Shipman’s patients.
examines whether the staff at Shipman’s practice knew of, or had reason to suspect, his criminal activities.
also looks at the position of practice staff, and at the difficulties which they may face in bringing forward any concerns they might have about doctors and other healthcare professionals within the practice.
is devoted to issues connected with the death of Mrs Overton.
deals with general issues relating to the raising of concerns in the employment context and in other circumstances and to steps that might be taken to provide further protection for persons who wish to bring forward genuine concerns.
2.93
, I describe the current arrangements for clinical governance and the limitations of those arrangements.
deals with the position of single-handed practitioners and the steps which should be taken to avoid them becoming professionally isolated.
2.94
contains a discussion of the feasibility and desirability of the monitoring of GP patient mortality rates, the experience of those bodies which have undertaken such monitoring in the past and the way in which it might be organised in the future.
2.95
provides an introduction to the section of the Report dealing with the GMC’s FTP procedures and its plans for revalidation. In
, I shall examine the GMC’s handling of the report of Shipman’s conviction for drug-related offences in 1976.
deals with the difficulties of defining the concepts of SPM and seriously deficient performance, on which the old conduct and performance procedures were based.
2.96
, I examine the processing of complaints undertaken by the administrative staff of the GMC which has, in the recent past, resulted in 65% of cases being rejected at that early stage. In
Chapters 19
to 22, I examine the screening process, the work of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee and the Professional Conduct Committee and the operation of the GMC’s health procedures. In
, I consider the way in which the GMC has dealt with drug abusing doctors in the past and the changes which I consider should be made in the future.
contains an examination of the operation of the GMC’s performance procedures.
considers the new FTP procedures and, in
, I examine the GMC’s proposals for the revalidation of doctors.
sets out my proposals for change.


========================================================================
CHAPTER THREE - The Appointment of General Practitioners and the Administration of General Practice prior to 1980: Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice
========================================================================

--- The Effect of the Evidence ---
2.97
In Stage Four, the Inquiry has covered a wide range of issues and has received an enormous amount of evidence. In this Report, I have set out some parts of the evidence in detail but, in general, I have recorded only my observations and conclusions based on all that I have heard and read. The evidence is available on the Inquiry’s website for those who wish to read it. I am conscious that there are some aspects of the evidence to which I have referred only briefly. For example, I have scarcely mentioned the fascinating presentations received at the international seminars. This does not mean that they have not been of value or that they have not influenced my thinking; they have. It means only that I have had to be selective. This Report is already long and has taken several months to write. I would not have wished to delay its publication any longer.

--- CHAPTER THREE - The Appointment of General Practitioners and the Administration of General Practice prior to 1980: Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice ---
From 1974: the Structure and Functions of the Family Practitioner Committees
Shipman's Appointment to the Donneybrook Practice

--- The Wider Professional Regulatory Framework ---
3.4
Today, there are approximately 34,500 GPs in active practice. Most work wholly within the NHS. A few practise privately. Many NHS practitioners perform a small amount of private work in addition to their NHS work. The NHS bodies which, over the years, have had responsibility for the provision of primary health care (and to which I shall refer collectively as ‘primary care organisations’ (PCOs)) have never had any responsibility for GPs working in the private sector.
3.5
Until recently, the only organisation with the power to regulate doctors practising in the private sector was the General Medical Council (GMC). The GMC was established under the Medical Act 1858. In order to be entitled to practise, a doctor must appear on the medical register held by the GMC. The GMC is required by Parliament to ensure that those admitted to the register are competent. Until November 2004, it was required also to take action on a doctor’s registration when, following a complaint, that doctor was shown to have become unfit to practise by reason of serious professional misconduct, serious impairment of health or seriously deficient performance. Under new procedures introduced in November 2004, it will take action on a doctor's registration if it is satisfied that his/her fitness to practise is impaired to a degree justifying action on registration. It is the GMC alone that can remove a doctor’s right to practise anywhere in the UK. It can do so whether the doctor practises in the NHS or in the private sector.
Local Medical Committees
3.6
Locally elected committees of GPs (known as local medical committees (LMCs)) have had statutory recognition since 1911. Their original purpose was to give GPs a voice in the administration of general practice. In fact, the wide range of functions exercised by LMCs means that they have more than just a voice. Members of a LMC, in particular the secretary and chairman, can wield considerable power and influence. First and foremost, LMCs are political groupings, which represent the interests of local GPs in consultations and discussions with PCOs. They provide advice and support to local practitioners. LMCs also have a formal statutory role in disciplinary and complaints procedures involving GPs. They have the power to nominate representatives to membership of certain committees, including disciplinary committees. They have a statutory right to be consulted on a wide range of issues affecting GPs. They can also be a valuable source of information and intelligence to the PCOs.
3.7
Members of a LMC may, by virtue of their position, be appointed members of PCOs. Shipman was secretary of the LMC for Tameside between 1981 or 1982 and 1988. As a representative of the LMC, he had a place for some time on the Executive Board of the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee (FPC), the PCO which at that time had responsibility for Tameside.
3.8
Mr William Greenwood, Assistant Administrator (later Deputy General Manager) of the Tameside FPC from 1983 until 1990, gave oral evidence. In the 1970s, he had held more junior posts at the Tameside FPC and acknowledged that his firsthand knowledge of this period was limited. He recalled that, in some circumstances, the LMC and the FPC would work together to resolve matters of mutual concern. However, the LMC was vigilant in protecting GPs against any perceived interference by the FPC in professional matters. On occasions, FPC staff had wished to carry out surveys asking questions of GPs. The LMC would not co-operate in the surveys. It resisted any attempt by the FPC to ‘step out of the mould of administrators’.

--- Before 1974 ---
3.9
The National Health Service Act 1946 placed responsibility for the provision of general medical services (together with pharmaceutical services, dental services and ophthalmic services) with 117 executive councils. For the purpose of this Report, I am concerned only with medical services, which were to be provided by GPs. From the inception of the NHS in 1948, GPs enjoyed the status of self-employed professionals providing services under a national contract, the General Medical Services (GMS) Contract. As independent contractors, rather than direct employees, their relationship with the NHS was very different from that of doctors employed in secondary care (i.e. hospitals) within the NHS.
3.10
The GMS Contract is an agreement between GPs and the Government about arrangements for the supply of medical services. Until April 2004, the responsibilities of GPs were set out in terms of service, breach of which could result in disciplinary action. Payment for services was governed by the Statement of Fees and Allowances (the ‘Red Book’), published by the Secretary of State for Health (SoS) after negotiation with the profession. Both the terms of service and the Red Book were subject to review from time to time.
3.11
In the early years, most GPs were single-handed practitioners. Standards of practice were extremely variable. Practice premises were frequently inadequate. Remuneration was based entirely on the number of patients on a GP’s list. This gave rise to competition for patients which did not necessarily lead to an improvement in quality of care.
3.12
In 1966, a new GMS Contract brought major changes to general practice. Under the new Contract, contributions were paid by the NHS towards the cost of providing practice premises and of employing practice staff. A new group practice allowance was introduced, together with payments for out of hours work. The effect of these changes was to encourage GPs to improve the range - and, to some extent at least, the quality - of services provided. Group practices were formed and modern health centres, with improved facilities, were built. The new system of funding for GPs had a significant impact on the relationship between general practice and the NHS. It meant that GPs became to some extent financially reliant on the FPCs. Some say that the 1966 Contract marked the beginning of modern, team-based general practice.

--- The Regional Medical Service ---
3.28
The RMS consisted of medical and supporting administrative staff employed by the DHSS and based in six divisions in England. Each division was headed by a senior medical officer who was designated a divisional medical officer. The divisional medical officer was supported by a number of regional medical officers (RMOs). The RMOs had two distinct functions. First, they provided medical opinions for DHSS benefit schemes. Their other role was to advise and generally to liaise with GPs. They made visits to every GP on a regular basis, usually once every one or two years. These visits were mainly of a routine pastoral nature. A wide range of issues affecting the organisation of general practice in the area was discussed. Visits were also used to carry out inspections of practice premises and to discuss GPs’ prescribing habits. RMOs advised GPs on their duties in respect of controlled drugs and were authorised by the SoS to inspect their controlled drugs registers (CDRs) and stocks of controlled drugs. Until the 1960s, RMOs would examine clinical records to ensure that they were being maintained properly. That practice had fallen into disuse by the mid-1960s.
3.29
Since RMOs were, at one time, virtually the only direct link between GPs and the DHSS, the information collected at practice visits provided a potentially valuable insight into the way general practice was functioning on the ground. Information in the form of regular reports (not reports of individual practice visits) was passed by the RMOs to divisional medical officers for dissemination within the DHSS. There was no formal arrangement for communicating this information to the relevant FPC for each area. Some RMOs made a practice of liaising closely with their local FPCs, but this did not always happen.
3.30
In the course of his/her dealings with a GP, a RMO might be alerted to the possibility that the GP was prescribing excessively, or that s/he was failing to exercise reasonable care when issuing medical certificates or that s/he was not keeping proper medical records. In any of those circumstances, disciplinary proceedings could result. If that happened, the SoS would refer the matter for adjudication, not to the FPC, but to the LMC. This was because such issues as medical certification, record keeping and prescribing were regarded as matters to be regulated by the medical profession, not by those responsible for administration. The LMC would then report its findings and recommendations to the SoS, who would decide on an appropriate penalty. If a withholding of remuneration was directed, the SoS would instruct the FPC to put this into effect. Other than this purely administrative action, the FPC had no part to play in these disciplinary processes. The evidence given to the Inquiry suggests that, in fact, these processes were rarely invoked.


========================================================================
CHAPTER FOUR - The Monitoring of General Practitioners from 1980 to 1998: the Arrangements for Monitoring in Tameside
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
The Role of the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee
3.54
The involvement of a FPC in the process of appointing a doctor to replace a member of an existing practice was extremely limited. Its role was purely administrative. The FPC acted as little more than a conduit for the provision of information to the MPC. The function of the MPC was purely to ensure that patients in all parts of the country had reasonable access to a GP. It was not concerned with issues of quality of care. Neither the FPC nor the MPC sought, or would have expected to be provided with, any qualitative evidence about the competence or performance of a GP applying to replace a member of an existing practice. Even when dealing with other types of vacancy - where the FPC and MPC were more actively involved in the selection process - no information about such matters as disciplinary findings or criminal convictions would have been available to them. Those were matters solely between doctors and their regulatory body, the GMC. It was the GMC’s task, not that of the FPC, to decide whether a doctor was fit to treat patients. The role of the Tameside FPC in the appointment of Shipman must be viewed in this context.
The Role of the Members of the Donneybrook Practice
3.55
At Shipman’s interview, the members of the Donneybrook practice were impressed by his enthusiasm, his energy and his interest in child health. They were (with the possible exception of Dr Napier) disarmed by his apparent frankness about his past history and convinced by his assurances that his problems were now behind him. They had some sympathy with the predicament in which he claimed to have found himself at his former practice.
3.56
Dr Roberts had learned from the GMC that Shipman was registered without restriction. It was clear, therefore, that the GMC, which was assumed to have considered the full facts of his case, took the view that he was fit to practise. It is not, in my view, surprising that the members of the Donneybrook practice should have been prepared to accept the GMC’s view without question. From the Home Office, Dr Roberts had ascertained that no restriction had been placed on Shipman’s prescribing, as would have been possible following his conviction for drug offences in February 1976. This would have tended to suggest that he was not thought to be at particular risk of misusing controlled drugs in the future. Furthermore, the message from the psychiatrist who had treated Shipman was extremely positive; it was to the effect that Shipman had had a problem which had been satisfactorily resolved. A partner in the practice from which he had been dismissed spoke well of his abilities as a GP. The information provided by his employers, for whom he had been working for 18 months or so, would also have been encouraging. Those who were aware of Shipman's intention not to carry controlled drugs in the future no doubt found that reassuring.
3.57
In my view, the members of the Donneybrook practice cannot be criticised for their decision to give him a chance by recruiting him. It may be that they were to some extent influenced by the lack of other suitable candidates for the vacancy. However, Dr Roberts emphasised that there was no question of ‘making do’; the feeling was that Shipman would be a positive asset to the practice. I note that no one appears to have considered what patients might think about the appointment of a doctor with Shipman’s past history. That would have been typical of attitudes at the time.
3.58
It is clear that those members of the Donneybrook practice who were aware of Shipman’s previous dishonesty did not focus on that aspect of his conduct. Insofar as they were concerned about his conduct and behaviour in the future, it was the risk of a relapse into drug taking, not a perpetuation of his former dishonest behaviour, that they feared. In my judgement, they cannot be criticised for their failure to attach more significance to the fact that Shipman had been convicted of offences of dishonesty. Even now, dishonest conduct by a doctor, undertaken in order to obtain drugs illicitly, is regarded by many as ‘just part of the illness’. In my view, it was reasonable for them to follow the lead given by the GMC in regarding Shipman as fit to practise, notwithstanding his past dishonesty.
Should the Family Practitioner Committee Have Been Told?
3.59
None of the members of the Donneybrook practice considered telling the FPC of Shipman’s history, or seeking the advice of the FPC about whether it was wise to appoint a former (albeit apparently reformed) drug addict to the practice. In his capacity as secretary of the LMC, Dr Roberts had regular meetings with the administrator of the FPC, with whom he had a good personal relationship. However, the possibility of consulting the administrator about Shipman’s appointment did not occur to him. Dr Roberts considered the role of the FPC to be facilitative only. He would not have seen it as the function of staff at the FPC to advise. He would not have thought to notify them of Shipman’s past history. Indeed, he said that he would not have known what the FPC would do with that information, if it had been given. Dr Roberts’ attitude accurately reflects the evidence I have heard and read about the somewhat distant relationship between GP practices and FPCs in the 1970s. Mr Greenwood did not seek to criticise members of the Donneybrook practice for not having notified the FPC about Shipman’s past. Indeed, his evidence emphasised the limited part which the FPC played in the appointment process. I am satisfied that no criticism can be levelled at members of the Donneybrook practice in respect of their failure to inform the FPC about Shipman’s past history.
Should Arrangements Have Been Made for Shipman to Be Supervised?
3.60
Once Shipman started at the Donneybrook practice, no arrangements were made for exercising any form of supervision over him or for monitoring his clinical practice. Should members of the Donneybrook practice be criticised for that failure? Dr Roberts said that this was not the way things were done in 1977. Monitoring and supervision of GPs was not part of the culture of the time. This assertion derives some support from the fact that the GMC itself had no power to order restrictions or conditions on practice at that time. Supervision of a colleague would undoubtedly have caused practical difficulties since members of the practice were busy, worked independently of each other and had full lists. If they had believed that Shipman required supervision, he would not have been taken on. As I have said, the risk which Shipman’s colleagues would have had in mind would be that of a relapse into drug taking. Certainly, Dr Smith, as senior partner and GP to Shipman and his family, was aware of the need to ensure that Shipman did not revert to his drug taking habits. However, Dr Smith observed no sign of renewed drug taking and noted that Shipman was working well and appeared to have plenty of outside interests.
3.61
I think that, insofar as they considered the matter, the members of the practice would have thought that they would be alert to signs of any recurrence of Shipman’s drug taking, so that, if it occurred, they would notice and could take appropriate action. In the event, there is no evidence that Shipman ever returned to taking drugs after his time in Todmorden. In my view, the members of the Donneybrook practice cannot be criticised for not having arranged any monitoring or supervision for Shipman. They would have had no idea how to go about this. It had not been suggested by the GMC or Shipman’s psychiatrist that supervision was necessary. Such an arrangement might have been construed as showing a lack of confidence in Shipman’s rehabilitation. The authorities (the GMC and the Home Office) had decided that Shipman was fit to practise without restrictions on his prescribing. His colleagues relied on that. Judged by the standards of the time, their conduct was, in my view, entirely reasonable.
The Effects of Non-Disclosure
3.62
As I have said, members of the Donneybrook practice did not inform the Tameside FPC about Shipman’s past. Nor did the information that Shipman was required to provide in support of his application to join its list include any information about his disciplinary or criminal record. That was not the fault of the FPC, which was merely following the prescribed procedures. It was not thought appropriate or necessary in the 1970s for FPCs to be provided with such information. Given its restricted function, that is perhaps not surprising.
3.63
The effect was that it was not until 1998, when the police investigation into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy was underway, that the West Pennine Health Authority, which had by that time succeeded to the responsibilities of the Tameside FPC, became aware of Shipman’s convictions. Thus, throughout the 21 years of their association with Shipman, the various bodies responsible for the provision of primary care in Tameside believed that they were dealing with a professional man of probity. They were unaware that there might be special reasons for maintaining a close watch on Shipman and, in particular, on his prescribing of controlled drugs.
3.64
The importance of PCOs having ready access to full information about the past history of GPs who apply to join - or who are already included on - their lists is a matter to which I shall return later in this Report.

--- From 1980 to 1990 ---
Changes in Structures
4.2
The Health Services Act 1980 gave the Secretary of State for Health and Social Security (SoS) power to dispense with area health authorities (AHAs) in some areas, and to replace them with district health authorities (DHAs). In 1982, the AHAs were abolished and responsibility for the family practitioner committees (FPCs) passed to the DHAs. The Tameside DHA replaced the Tameside and Glossop AHA. In 1985, the FPCs became autonomous authorities, independent of the DHAs and directly accountable, first to the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) and, from July 1988, to the Department of Health (DoH). From the late 1980s, the FPCs had a more active role in planning the organisation and development of primary healthcare services.
4.3
From 1985, the FPCs were fully responsible for the provision and management of general medical services in their area, although they had limited tools at their disposal with which to control the quality of those services. Nevertheless, they made use of those they had. Mr William Greenwood, Assistant Administrator (later Deputy General Manager) of the Tameside FPC from 1983 until 1990, told the Inquiry that, by the mid- to late 1980s, he had instituted a system of regular reviews of the log of complaints about GPs kept by the FPC. He recalled one instance when those reviews revealed a pattern of complaints from patients of a certain practice who were having difficulty in getting appointments within a reasonable time. That resulted in Mr Greenwood visiting the practice in question to discuss the problem. Discussions of this type would often result in an agreed solution. However, unless a GP was in breach of his/her terms of service, the FPC was entirely reliant on its powers of influence and persuasion to effect change. It could take no action to compel a GP to comply. The inability of the FPC effectively to control entry to, and removal from, its medical list gave rise to particular frustration, all the more so since members of the public tended to assume that the FPC was capable of exercising a much greater degree of control over GPs than was in fact the case.
‘Promoting Better Health’
4.4
In the mid-1980s, the Government carried out a review of primary healthcare services, which culminated in the publication, in November 1987, of a White Paper, ‘Promoting Better Health’. The White Paper contained a large number of proposals designed to improve the standard of primary care provision. The Government intended that FPCs should become the means of securing improvements in the level, quality and cost-effectiveness of local services. Their responsibilities were to be extended and their managerial role strengthened. For example, FPCs were to be given a role in encouraging effective and economical prescribing. In addition, FPCs (in collaboration with DHAs) were to set targets for measures (e.g. vaccination, immunisation and screening for cervical cancer) designed to prevent disease. Financial incentives were to be available to GPs who met those targets and who participated in other initiatives designed to promote health. These proposals marked the beginning of the widescale use of financial incentives as a means of persuading GPs to improve the standard and quality of their services. Sir Nigel Crisp, Permanent Secretary of the DoH and Chief Executive of the NHS in England, gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. He described how financial incentives have been used to secure the co-operation of independent contractor GPs, which would not otherwise be forthcoming. As I shall describe in
, the new (2004) General Medical Services Contract makes extensive use of financial incentives to encourage improvements in quality.
4.5
From the late 1980s, senior staff at the FPCs were no longer known as ‘administrators’. Instead, they became ‘managers’. The number of staff employed by the FPCs began to increase. Personnel with a wide variety of skills were recruited to assist FPCs in developing their new management role. Performance reviews of FPCs by Ministers and senior officials of the DoH were introduced. Computerised systems to facilitate the recall of patients for immunisation and screening were installed by FPCs. The scene was set for the start of a process of change which has continued to the present day.
4.6
In April 1990, amendments to the National Health Service (General Medical and Pharmaceutical Services) Regulations 1974 (the 1974 Regulations) came into force. The terms of service set out the framework within which GPs operated. The amendments to the terms of service put into effect many of the proposals which had been contained in ‘Promoting Better Health’. In particular:
The general requirement in the 1974 terms of service that GPs should render to their patients ‘all necessary and appropriate personal medical services’ was expanded to include,
, the giving of appropriate advice in connection with general health and the offering of various kinds of vaccination and immunisation.
A new term of service obliged GPs to obtain the approval of the FPC for the times and places they proposed to be available for consultation by patients.
Another new term of service required GPs to answer oral or written enquiries from the FPC about prescribing or referrals to other NHS services. Such enquiries could relate to one prescription or referral, or could be more general in nature. FPCs were required to appoint medical advisers to assist them in carrying out such enquiries. These advisers were to be independent of the local medical profession.
There were requirements for GPs to offer a consultation and examination to newly registered patients, to patients who had not been seen for the last three years and (annually) to patients aged 75 and over.
GPs were placed under an obligation to take reasonable care to satisfy themselves that any person employed to assist them was suitably qualified and competent. FPCs were given power to issue guidance to assist GPs in assessing qualifications, experience and competence. However, the assessment itself was a matter for the GP alone.
There were a number of provisions requiring GPs to provide information (including an Annual Report containing specified information) to FPCs.
As from 1st
April 1991, any GP attaining the age of 70 was to be removed from the medical list.
The arrangements for remuneration of GPs were amended to include various types of incentive payments.
‘Working for Patients’
4.7
Meanwhile, in January 1989, the Government had published another White Paper, ‘Working for Patients’, heralding important changes to the arrangements (in particular the funding arrangements) for primary health care. An important objective of the changes was to strengthen the management role of FPCs yet further.
4.8
The 1989 White Paper proposed that the composition of FPCs should be changed significantly. Membership of a FPC was to be reduced from 31 (including the chairman) to 11. The chairman was to be appointed by the SoS. The proportion of professional members was to be reduced, and those professional members who remained were to be appointed by regional health authorities (RHAs) to act in a personal, rather than a representative, capacity. One of the purposes of this change was to distance the FPC from the professionals whose contracts it was responsible for managing. Chief executives (who were also to be members of the FPC) were to be appointed, at a higher salary than had hitherto been paid to the senior staff of a FPC.
4.9
Larger GP practices were to have the option of holding their own budgets (‘fundholding’). From those budgets they would have to meet the cost of obtaining a range of hospital services for patients, as well as the cost of employing practice staff and improving practice premises and prescribing costs.
4.10
Changes were proposed also in the arrangements for non-fundholding practices. For the first time, cash limits were introduced for infrastructure costs, i.e. the costs of developing and improving practice premises, employing practice staff and acquiring computer equipment. In addition, non-fundholding practices were to be allocated indicative prescribing amounts (IPAs). These were notional, rather than actual, budgets: hence the term ‘indicative’. They were to be calculated by reference to past prescribing costs and to the average costs incurred by practices in similar circumstances. One of the aims behind these proposals was to make GPs more careful about their use of resources and to encourage savings where possible.
4.11
The 1989 White Paper also expressed the Government’s intention of establishing a system of medical audit in general practice.
The Implementation of ‘Working for Patients’
4.12
The proposals contained in the 1989 White Paper were substantially brought into effect by the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990. In September 1990 family health services authorities (FHSAs) replaced FPCs. They were to be accountable to the RHAs. Thus, the new Tameside FHSA was accountable to the North West RHA. The purpose of the change was to relieve the DoH of direct involvement in local management and to bring responsibility for primary health care and hospital services together at a strategic level, thus making it possible to co-ordinate policy initiatives spanning both services.

--- The Arrangements Elsewhere ---
4.98
I have described the arrangements for monitoring GPs which were in place in Tameside during the period when Shipman practised there. In order to discover how those arrangements compared with those in force elsewhere, the Inquiry sent questionnaires to a number of strategic health authorities in England and Wales, chosen at random, requesting detailed information about the systems which were in place in their areas during the time Shipman was in practice.
4.99
The responses to these questionnaires revealed that the arrangements in Tameside were very typical of those implemented in the majority of areas from which responses were received. The approach to the monitoring of prescribing was similar in most areas. In general, PCOs relied chiefly on patient complaints and expressions of concern to reveal poor practice. Many of the responses referred to the fact that FHSA/HA managers had no access to the audits performed by individual practices. A few managers had developed protocols whereby serious concerns arising out of audit activity would be notified to them. Only one of the PCOs which responded to the questionnaire reported that it had carried out routine inspections of GPs’ medical records. Most said that, as in Tameside, records were examined only when a complaint was being investigated. As I have said, most HAs began to operate the new local performance procedures from 1998 onwards.
4.100
A few HAs had developed additional strategies aimed at improving the quality of care and identifying problem GPs. Starting in about 1996, some areas had developed performance indicators against which practices were measured. Some (e.g. Sheffield FHSA/HA) carried out regular audits of chronic disease management, which the Inquiry was told were helpful in identifying doctors who were performing poorly. One PCO reported carrying out examinations of deceased patients’ records in order to investigate concerns which had arisen about GPs’ performance. One HA monitored the numbers of patients transferring from one GP practice to another while continuing to live at the same address. Such a move might well indicate dissatisfaction with the patient’s original practice. If a spate of such transfers was observed, this would suggest that there was a problem with the practice which required investigation.
4.101
Many of the responses stressed the limitations which were placed on the ability of FHSAs and HAs to monitor and manage GPs as a result of GPs’ independent contractor status and the need to prove a breach of the terms of service before any local disciplinary action could be taken.


========================================================================
CHAPTER FIVE - Developments in the Arrangements for Monitoring General Practitioners since 1998
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
The Tameside Family Practitioner Committee
4.102
It seems to me that, during the period from 1997 to 1990, Tameside FPC was doing all that it could - within the very limited ambit of activity available to it - to identify and deal with concerns which might arise about the GPs on its list. It had neither the power nor the resources to do more. The information that the Inquiry has obtained from other areas confirms this view.
4.103
As I have already indicated, I do not consider that any criticism can be made of the RMOs responsible for visiting the Donneybrook practice between 1977 and 1990. There is no reason to believe that they would have been aware of Shipman’s prescribing of opiates. Nor can any criticism be attached to their failure to inspect his medical records. The practice of inspecting medical records had fallen into disuse well before Shipman arrived in Hyde. Even if the records had been inspected, it is, on balance, unlikely that they would have revealed anything other than the fact that Shipman was not a particularly diligent record keeper.
The Tameside Family Health Services Authority and the West Pennine Health Authority
4.104
It is clear from the evidence that the Tameside FHSA/WPHA discharged its duties in relation to the control and supervision of GPs conscientiously and properly. I am confident that the members of its staff had a genuine desire to improve the quality of GP practice in its area and made good use of the powers given to them in furtherance of this objective. It seems from the responses to the Inquiry’s questionnaire that the performance of the Tameside FHSA/WPHA was typical of that of most PCOs up and down the country. There were areas (South Yorkshire was one) where the HA had taken innovative steps in an attempt to raise standards and identify doctors who were performing poorly. However, the PCOs in Tameside cannot be criticised for not having been in the vanguard. They were doing all that was required of them.
4.105
In many respects, the data collected about Shipman’s practice would have given a positive picture of his competence and performance. Only in the area of prescribing was Shipman perceived as an outlier. Even then, the problem arose from his rigid views (which he was able to justify) about the beneficial effects of certain expensive drugs. There was no question of his prescribing being substandard in any way. Unless his prescribing of diamorphine was high enough to show up amidst his other prescribing (as it plainly was when Ms Abdulezer spoke to him), it would not have been detected in the absence of routine monitoring of the prescribing of controlled drugs. Such routine monitoring was not carried out widely, if at all. It is significant in that context that no training was given nationally on this topic until after Shipman’s conviction in 2000.
4.106
Tameside FHSA/WPHA was typical in examining GPs’ medical records only in connection with complaints about a GP. Other than that, there would have been no occasion to inspect Shipman’s records. Examination of the records of some of Shipman’s living patients might have shown little of note, save that the records were of generally poor quality. Careful inspection of his deceased patients’ notes might have raised concerns. Tameside FHSA/WPHA was entirely typical in not having a system of examining deceased patients’ notes in the absence of specific concerns.
4.107
Tameside FHSA/WPHA appears to have made arrangements for clinical audit which were entirely typical of those of other PCOs. In particular, it had no powers to compel a practice to conduct audits, let alone an audit of any particular activity. An audit of the deaths of Shipman’s patients in 1995, 1996 or 1997 would have revealed a real cause for concern and might have led to the discovery of his crimes. However, WPHA is not to be criticised for the fact that this did not happen.
4.108
I have referred to the criticism made of the Tameside FPC and its successors that it failed to unearth and act upon proper and full information as to the true nature and extent of Shipman’s criminal past. It is difficult to see how the PCOs could have gone about obtaining this information. First of all, they were unaware that there was anything to find out in Shipman’s case. They would therefore have had to institute a system of investigating the past history of every GP on their medical list. This would have been fiercely resisted by the profession and would have been unlikely to have the support of the DHSS/DoH. So far as the Inquiry is aware, this was not an exercise that was undertaken anywhere else. In my view, those responsible for the provision of primary care in Tameside cannot be criticised for failing to undertake it.
4.109
In its written submission to the Inquiry, the Tameside Families Support Group referred to the bewilderment of its members that, during the period when Shipman practised in Hyde, the State should have abdicated its responsibility for monitoring GPs. I can understand that sentiment. Viewed through today’s eyes, it seems extraordinary that, until less than a decade ago, the PCOs should have had so few powers to regulate GPs’ behaviour.
4.110
The explanation lies, I think, in the historical status of GPs as independent contractors. That status has imposed constraints on attempts by successive PCOs to control and supervise GPs effectively. Until recently, GPs could be compelled to comply with their terms of service but no more. GP practices are small businesses providing services for which the PCOs pay. During the early part of the period with which we are concerned, there was a strong belief, apparently shared by Government, that the profession provided the best (indeed the only) means of imposing high standards of clinical care and professional conduct on doctors and of monitoring those standards. It was believed that it would do so rigorously. Hence, matters of professional concern arising locally were left to be determined by LMCs with the GMC as the ultimate arbiter of fitness to practise. This belief, which was fostered by the profession, was difficult to challenge in an area involving the need for professional expertise.
4.111
It is clear that, by the 1980s (possibly before), there was a realisation that, if consistency of service and standards among GP practices was to be achieved, some element of management by PCOs must be introduced. The matter could no longer be left to the profession. The process of change began in the mid-1980s and has continued ever since. It has been accompanied by a growing recognition of the importance of tackling poor performance among GPs. As I shall describe in
, there have been considerable developments in the arrangements for monitoring GPs since 1998. Until that time, progress was slow and, in retrospect, it is natural to wish that the process of change had started sooner. However, the fact that it did not cannot, in my view, be attributed to fault on the part of any person or organisation.

--- CHAPTER FIVE - Developments in the Arrangements for Monitoring General Practitioners since 1998 ---
Quality

--- The Devolution of Power to the Primary Care Trusts ---
5.5
The publication of a White Paper, ‘The New NHS’, in December 1997 heralded a fundamental re-organisation of the NHS. There was to be a greater emphasis on quality of care. Clearly defined standards of care were to be produced, against which the performance of NHS organisations would be measured. Responsibility for meeting those standards was to be devolved locally, with doctors and nurses playing a key role in making decisions about the services to be provided in their areas.
5.6
GP fundholding had encouraged some GP practices to extend the range of their services and to develop different ways of commissioning services so as to benefit patients. In the White Paper, the Government signalled its intention to do away with fundholding by individual GP practices. However, the intention was to build on, and develop further, the work which had already been started by local clinicians.
5.7
Practice-based fundholding was abolished by the Health Act 1999. In July 2001, in a publication entitled ‘Shifting the Balance of Power within the NHS’, the Government announced that responsibility for the management, development and integration of all primary care services (medical, dental, pharmaceutical and optical) in England was to pass from the health authorities (HAs) to a network of newly created primary care trusts (PCTs), covering the whole of the country.
5.8
April 2002, the 95 existing HAs were abolished and 28 new HAs were created in their place. The area covered by the former West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA) became part of the new Greater Manchester HA. Shortly afterwards, HAs were renamed strategic health authorities (SHAs).
5.9
Also in April 2002, 302 (now increased to 303) new PCTs were created. From that time, the PCTs have had responsibility for improving the health of the community in their areas and for commissioning secondary (i.e. hospital) care, as well as for the provision of primary care services. Meanwhile, the SHAs have been made responsible for creating a coherent strategic framework for the development of NHS services in their areas. They are also responsible for managing the performance of PCTs and NHS trusts against agreed business plans and a national set of priorities. In turn, SHAs account to the Secretary of State for Health (SoS) for the performance of the NHS in their areas.

--- Quality ---
5.10
I have already mentioned that the 1997 White Paper promised that greater emphasis would be placed in the future on quality of care. One manifestation of this new emphasis was to be a new statutory duty of quality.
The Duty of Quality
5.11
Section 18 of the Health Act 1999 imposed a duty upon every HA, PCT and NHS trust:
‘... to put and keep in place arrangements for the purpose of monitoring and improving the quality of health care which it provides to individuals’
The words ‘health care’ were defined by the Act (as amended) as:
‘... services for or in connection with the prevention, diagnosis or treatment of illness and the environment in which such services are provided’
5.12
It was intended that the ‘duty of quality’ should have the effect of focussing the attention of PCTs on devising ways in which to monitor and improve the quality of care provided by GPs in their areas.
5.13
The means by which the duty of quality was to be discharged was ‘clinical governance’, a new concept which essentially involved the setting up of structures and systems designed to secure and improve the quality of care. It was to apply to all NHS bodies. I shall discuss the concept of clinical governance at greater length in
5.14
As part of their clinical governance arrangements, PCTs continue to monitor GPs’ prescribing and continue also to encourage and facilitate audit by GP practices. In addition, all GPs practising in the NHS are now required to participate in annual appraisals. These are organised by their PCTs and conducted in the main by fellow GPs, usually practising within the same PCT. I shall deal with the monitoring of prescribing, audit and appraisal, together with other steps that have been taken by PCTs to implement clinical governance, in
Standards and Guidelines
5.15
Following the publication of the 1997 White Paper, there was for the first time an attempt to define national clinical standards, by means of National Service Frameworks (NSFs) and by the establishment, in 1999, of the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). NSFs were developed with the aim of identifying the essential ingredients of good clinical service provision for certain disease groups and patient populations (e.g. for cancer, mental health, coronary heart disease, etc.). The aim was to reduce unacceptable variations in care and standards of treatment across the country. The role of NICE was to develop evidence-based clinical guidelines for the care and treatment of patients with specific diseases or conditions, and to assess and evaluate new and existing medicines, treatment and interventional procedures by reference to cost and clinical effectiveness.
5.16
More recently, in February 2004, the Department of Health (DoH) published a Consultation Paper, ‘Standards for Better Health’, seeking views on a set of proposed core standards governing the quality of health care provided by all NHS bodies in England. The paper also set out proposed developmental standards designed to encourage a rise in the overall quality of health care in the long term. In July 2004, the DoH published its proposals in a document entitled ‘National Standards, Local Action: Health and Social Care Standards and Planning’. This document is aimed primarily at those who have responsibility for planning and commissioning the delivery of services in the years 2005-2008. It sets out the standards that must be achieved immediately as ‘core standards’ and the ‘developmental standards’ which should be achieved during the coming years.
The Commission for Health Improvement
5.17
The Health Act 1999 also established the Commission for Health Improvement (CHI), a non-departmental public body, independent of the NHS. CHI assumed full powers in April 2000. It was given responsibility for reviewing and reporting on the clinical governance arrangements made by NHS trusts and PCTs. It was also given the task of monitoring arrangements for national services, including compliance with NSFs. CHI was abolished by the Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Act 2003 and, with effect from April 2004, its functions have been subsumed into those of its successor the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission). I shall describe the role of CHI and of the Healthcare Commission in

--- Changes in the Arrangements for General Practice ---
5.18
In the past, GPs have usually practised as principals (i.e. with their own lists of patients) within group practices or single-handed. They have been independent contractors, providing general medical services (GMS) in accordance with a standard national contract. A new GMS Contract came into force in April 2004. There have, of course, always been GP non-principals, who have provided locum services on a full-time or a part-time basis. In addition, over recent years, many GPs have been employed (again on both a full-time and a part-time basis) by deputising services to provide care outside the usual GP surgery hours.
5.19
As a result of provisions contained in the National Health Service (Primary Care) Act 1997, it has become possible for GPs to work within a variety of more flexible arrangements. Now, a significant proportion - approximately 40% - of all GPs provide services under contracts for personal medical services (PMS). The advantage of PMS contracts is that they are individually negotiated and can be tailored to suit the GP practice concerned, as well as the needs of the PCT. It is open to a PCT (subject, of course, to negotiation with the practice) to insert terms into a PMS contract, setting quality standards and giving the PCT additional control over the way in which services are provided.
5.20
Many GPs who do not wish to take on the risks, responsibilities and/or commitment of partnership or single-handed practice are now employed by GP practices or by PCTs. The latter arrangement has advantages for a PCT, which is able to deploy a GP in its employment to practices or areas in need of an additional doctor on a temporary or long-term basis. PCTs have a greater degree of control over the activities and quality of practice of a directly employed doctor than they can exert upon a doctor providing GMS.

--- Dealing with Poor Performance ---
The Development of Local Performance Procedures
5.76
the introduction, in July 1997, of the GMC’s performance procedures and the power which the GMC then acquired to suspend or impose conditions upon the registration of a doctor whose professional performance was found to be seriously deficient. The GMC would take action only in respect of those doctors whose performance was so seriously deficient as to call into question the doctor’s registration. This was a very high threshold. It was recognised from the first that there would be doctors performing at an unacceptable standard who would not reach the GMC threshold but who nevertheless represented a real risk to patients. Local procedures had to be developed, therefore, to enable PCOs (then the HAs) to deal with such doctors.
5.77
In addition, the GMC would invoke its performance procedures only in respect of performance after 1st
July 1997. Evidence of performance before that date, however unacceptable, could not be relied upon. The effect of this provision was that HAs were unable to refer to the GMC those GPs whose performance had been causing problems for years. Instead, they had to wait until sufficient post-July 1997 evidence could be accumulated. In the meantime, they were left to deal with poor standards of care by means of their own local procedures.
5.78
In 1997, the DoH commissioned the School of Health and Related Research at Sheffield University (ScHARR) to formulate guidance to assist HAs in developing arrangements for supporting GPs whose performance was giving cause for concern. The ScHARR guidance was published in September 1997. It was directed primarily at assisting HAs in tackling performance which was giving rise to some concerns, but not to concerns of such magnitude that a referral to the GMC was obviously appropriate. Unlike the GMC procedures, the guidance covered concerns about the performance of GP practices, as well as about that of individual GPs. The guidance recognised that there would be a few GPs whose performance was so poor that referral to the GMC would be necessary. However, it stressed that a HA making a referral to the GMC would have to demonstrate that it had first done all in its power to improve performance through the giving of appropriate support.
5.79
The ScHARR guidance gave advice about how, once a GP had been identified as under-performing, a HA could best support and assist him/her to raise his/her standard of performance to an acceptable level. The guidance emphasised,
, the need:
properly to diagnose the underlying problems which were causing the GP to perform poorly, and to address them
to consider a wide range of possible interventions. These might include remedial or additional education and/or training, mentoring, measures to improve practice infrastructure (e.g. the provision of additional support staff, staff training or improved facilities), together with measures to address any health problems the doctor might have.
to set up a clear management process, led by a senior manager, for responding to concerns about possible under-performance and for co-ordinating the response to those concerns, together with any necessary intervention or other action.
5.80
With the assistance of the ScHARR, pilot procedures for identifying and managing poor performance among GPs were developed and tested at six sites in the North West of England. One of these pilots was established by what was then the Manchester HA. A ‘performance panel’ was set up, comprising representatives from the HA, the LMC, the local community health councils and the local postgraduate education department. The panel considered cases where the HA had received expressions of concern about a GP from a minimum of three sources. The panel defined a ‘concern’ as a statement made by or on behalf of a patient, or by a professional, which suggested that a doctor’s performance might fall below acceptable standards. Concerns might also come from HA staff as a result of information which was in their possession. The panel would then consider the concerns alongside background information about the doctor held by the HA. It would decide whether the evidence satisfied its criteria for poor performance. If the criteria were satisfied, two members of the panel would visit the GP by prior arrangement to discuss the concerns. The visiting team would then report back to the panel and a decision would be taken as to what, if any, action was necessary.
5.81
Action, if taken, would usually involve the preparation of a ‘contract’, incorporating a practice development plan and a timetable for implementation. The HA would arrange and fund a trained GP mentor to give support to the doctor if s/he wanted it. The HA might also provide administrative support and assistance if this were required. If a serious deficiency were identified, if the doctor failed to co-operate or if no improvement were effected, the doctor would be referred to the GMC.
5.82
From 1998, in the wake of the pilot projects, HAs began to set up similar arrangements. They approached their task in different ways. For example, some HAs responded (like the Manchester panel) to concerns brought to them by third parties. Others sought to identify doctors who might be performing poorly from the data routinely available to them. Not surprisingly, HAs experienced problems in investigating and assessing concerns about poor performance and in devising and implementing remedial measures once poor performance had been identified. This was new territory for the PCOs and there was uncertainty about how to operate the new procedures.
The National Clinical Assessment Authority
5.83
These problems were addressed in a Consultation Paper, ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’, published by the DoH in 1999. The paper proposed the establishment of a number of assessment and support centres, run jointly by the NHS and the profession. The centres would provide advice to NHS bodies on handling concerns about doctors (both hospital doctors and GPs), would carry out assessments with a view to identifying the nature and seriousness of any problem and would make recommendations for action. It would then be for the local employer (or the HA, in the case of a GP) to implement the recommendations and to provide any support and take any remedial action required. It was hoped that the development of assessment and support centres would allow specialist expertise to be developed and would replace the need for individual NHS bodies to carry out their own assessments of performance. In the past, these local assessments (mainly performed by NHS trusts) had proved very variable in quality.
5.84
The National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA) was set up in April 2001. Its form was different in some respects from the model described in ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’. In particular, the proposal for local centres (which had been opposed by the profession on the grounds that they would resemble ‘boot camps’) was dropped. Instead, there was to be an administrative centre in London (there is now also one in Wales), with personnel located around the country. The NCAA is at present a special health authority, covering England and Wales, but not Scotland or (currently at least) Northern Ireland. It now deals with dental, as well as medical, practice in the NHS and in the prison and defence medical services. It does not cover the private sector. Under new arrangements, announced by the Government in the summer of 2004, the NCAA is to be subsumed into the National Patient Safety Agency, of which it will be a separate division.
5.85
Although its form was not as planned, the purpose of the NCAA remained similar to that originally envisaged. It was to provide a performance assessment and support service to assist NHS employers and HAs in resolving problems of poor performance. It receives referrals from a variety of sources, mainly NHS trusts and PCTs. As at the end of September 2004, the NCAA had received 1438 referrals. Since 2001, many PCOs have sought the advice of the NCAA. That advice is provided by a team of advisers. The advisers are senior clinicians or managers, located around the country, each covering certain SHA areas. The advisers liaise directly with the PCO and advise on the management of individual cases. If local resolution of the concerns cannot be achieved, the NCAA may agree to undertake an assessment of the doctor’s performance. The decision whether or not to undertake such an assessment is for the NCAA to make. A PCO cannot compel the NCAA to intervene. From December 2001, GPs’ terms of service were amended to impose a duty on a doctor to co-operate with an assessment by the NCAA when requested to do so by his/her PCO (now the PCT). Under the National Health Service (General Medical Services Contracts) Regulations 2004 (the 2004 Regulations), it is the duty of a practice entering into a GMS Contract to ensure that a doctor working in the practice co-operates with an assessment by the NCAA when requested to do so by the PCT.
5.86
The NCAA assessment is formative (i.e. educational), not summative (i.e. ‘pass or fail’). Assessments are directed at ascertaining whether the doctor is ‘fit for purpose’, i.e. fit for work in the setting in which s/he is currently working. If a doctor is not ‘fit for purpose’, s/he may nevertheless be competent to work in a different setting. The problem may, for example, be that s/he does not fit into the team at his/her place of work. Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive and Medical Director of the NCAA, emphasised that ‘fitness for purpose’ is a very different concept from that of ‘fitness to practise’, i.e. fitness to practise as a doctor in any setting. Performance assessments carried out by the GMC are directed at fitness to practise, not fitness to practise in a specific setting. NCAA assessments are carried out by trained medical and lay assessors. The Inquiry has been provided with a report of a specimen assessment for information purposes. The first element of every assessment is an occupational health assessment. Its purpose is to ensure that the doctor is fit to go through the rest of the assessment. It also addresses the question of whether there are any features of the doctor’s health which might impact on his/her ability to practise effectively in his/her current setting, or which might have an effect on his/her general wellbeing. The second element is an occupational psychology assessment, directed at exploring the doctor’s preferred behaviours at work. Professor Scotland said that this was a particularly valuable exercise. It is his experience that, when a doctor is performing poorly, there is invariably a behavioural element which is playing a part. The assessment for GPs includes an assessment of basic knowledge, using a test developed by the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP). There is also a day’s practice visit, which includes inspection of a sample of medical records and observation of the doctor in consultation.
5.87
A full report of the assessment, with recommendations, is sent to the doctor and the referring PCT. The NCAA will then work with both to assist in the development of a practical action plan to address the assessors’ findings. The NCAA cannot compel compliance with its recommendations but, if a PCT neglects to implement them, the NCAA can raise the matter with the relevant SHA or with the DoH. It can also refer a doctor to the GMC if his/her performance appears to be putting patients at risk. Occasionally, the NCAA has felt it necessary to suspend an assessment in order to make an urgent referral to the GMC.
5.88
The PCT retains responsibility for resolving the problem and for putting in place any necessary remedial or supportive measures. This is usually done in conjunction with the postgraduate deans who are responsible for the provision of postgraduate medical education in their areas. Funding for such measures can be a problem, especially given the small size of PCTs. Professor Scotland told the Inquiry about steps which were being taken in an attempt to obtain funding from other sources to assist the PCTs in discharging this responsibility.
Current Local Procedures
5.89
Since PCTs replaced the HAs, responsibility for local performance procedures has devolved upon them. It is now customary for PCTs to adopt a two-stage process. The first stage is usually conducted by a committee or group of persons, including officers, managers and board members of the PCT and at least one representative of the LMC. Other people with appropriate expertise (e.g. a pharmaceutical adviser) may be co-opted as necessary. In Tameside and Glossop PCT, the relevant body is known as the Contractor Monitoring Group. The Group’s function has been to discuss and consider the reports of independent review panels (which were abolished in July 2004), together with complaints and expressions of concern about GPs and GP practices, and to consider these against a background of ‘hard’ information available to the PCT. Dr Jeffery Moysey, one of Shipman’s former colleagues at the Donneybrook practice and vice-chairman of the LMC which serves Tameside, is a member of the Contractor Monitoring Group. He described how the Group discussed ‘often rather intuitive, and often subjective concerns’ about the performance of practitioners. He felt this was important as, in the future, this information might fit together and ‘build up a jigsaw puzzle’ which would alert the Group to aberrant behaviour by a GP. Having considered all the relevant information, the Group will then devise local action plans to support the GP and to assist him/her in achieving a higher standard of performance. If these efforts prove unsuccessful, or if there is a history of poor performance which has not been addressed, the doctor will be referred to a performance panel. Tameside and Glossop PCT also has a ‘fast track’ procedure for use when there are immediate and urgent issues of concern.
5.90
A PCT will either have its own performance panel or will share a panel with one or more other PCTs. Tameside and Glossop PCT has a panel comprising its Chief Executive, Clinical Governance Lead and Medical Director, three LMC representatives and a lay board member. The PEC Chairman also chairs the performance panel. The panel makes a preliminary visit to a doctor about whom concerns have been raised. Following that visit, the panel will decide whether an assessment is necessary. If an assessment takes place, it will result in a report and recommendations. The panel will then seek the doctor’s co-operation in complying with the recommendations. If that co-operation is not forthcoming or if the remedial action recommended has no effect, the doctor will be referred to the NCAA or the GMC.
Problems with the Current System
5.91
Concerns have been expressed (for example, by Professor Roland and his colleagues in their report to the Inquiry) that panels serving only one PCT may see performance cases only rarely and may, therefore, be unable to accumulate sufficient expertise in dealing with such cases. There is also the problem of lack of independence and potential conflict of interest. Professor Roland advocates that performance panels should cover a larger area than that of one PCT or that there should be cross-cover between PCTs. There is also scope for inconsistency between panels in different areas of the country. Mr Michael Newton, Head of Performance Management, South Yorkshire SHA, and a NCAA adviser, told the Inquiry that the quality of local assessors and assessments was variable. There are no common standards against which local assessments are carried out. He believes that issues of performance are better and more quickly dealt with by small groups than by large performance panels. He favoured the establishment of teams of properly trained assessors who would carry out assessments on behalf of a number of PCTs. They would carry out assessments to a common protocol to ensure consistency. Mr Newton has been involved in the establishment of a local assessment service available to PCTs in South Yorkshire. A protocol has been produced and the scheme has been adopted in other areas. Mr Newton emphasised that an assessment team should provide a technical, professional service, which identifies concerns and makes recommendations for remedial action. It is then for the PCT to decide what action should follow. Moreover, he said that it was essential for a PCT to satisfy itself about the evidence of poor performance. It might, at some future date, have to take a decision to remove or contingently remove a doctor from its list on the basis of that evidence. It is essential, therefore, that it has confidence in the evidence on which it is to rely.
5.92
The NCAA has carried out work with the aim of developing a method for local assessment of a doctor about whom there is a concern. In doing so, the NCAA has responded to requests from PCTs for guidance on how to set about conducting assessments themselves or in conjunction with other PCTs. The NCAA has reservations about whether it is practical for PCTs to carry out such assessments. It points out that the process of evidence gathering is complex and time-consuming. Assessors must be of a high calibre, carefully selected and well trained. There must be a system of quality assurance. If an assessment is not done to a high standard, it may not achieve its objective and may be open to challenge. The NCAA believes that the process of setting up and managing local assessments
‘poses formidable and perhaps insurmountable challenges for a single PCT, or small groupings of PCTs, undertaking an assessment only very rarely’
. It advises that any PCT considering undertaking local assessment should seek advice from the NCAA before proceeding. It may be that an assessment is inappropriate and that a local investigation, or referral to the GMC, is required.
5.93
An alternative to a local assessment is an assessment by the NCAA. In fact, the NCAA has carried out relatively few assessments during the period of its existence. In the three and a half years between April 2001 and September 2004, the NCAA carried out 87 full assessments. Of those, 36 were assessments of GPs. Much of the NCAA’s activity during this period was focussed on problems with hospital doctors, particularly those under suspension. Most requests for help from PCTs have been dealt with by giving advice, by supporting PCTs in the use of their local procedures and by assisting in resolving disputes. I have no doubt that the NCAA is a valuable source of advice and assistance to PCTs. One of its real strengths is its independence from PCTs and other NHS bodies, as well as from the doctor about whom concerns have been raised. Another is the enthusiasm and commitment of its Medical Director, Professor Scotland.
5.94
There has been disappointment on the part of some that the NCAA has not carried out more assessments. However, Professor Scotland said that the fact that comparatively few assessments had been carried out was not related to lack of time or resources. He said that the NCAA had carried out assessments in all those cases in which it considered that an assessment would be useful and appropriate. In the vast majority of cases, it had been possible to deal with the problem without the need for a full assessment.
5.95
It is theoretically possible for a GP who is eventually referred to the GMC to undergo three separate assessments - one conducted locally, one by the NCAA and a third by the GMC. This may not occur frequently, but it is certainly not unusual for a doctor to be assessed twice. This is wasteful of resources, as well as being unduly demanding and stressful for the doctor. Moreover, it can lead to very substantial delays, during which the doctor may continue in practice, with consequent risk to patient safety. Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, drew attention to this problem. She emphasised the need for systematic collection of evidence locally. She said that local assessments should be carried out with the assistance of the deaneries and a decision taken as to whether remedial action seemed possible. She felt that the NCAA could assist with these local processes and could set national standards for the way evidence was gathered. If a judgement were taken that remedial action was likely to be unsuccessful, the GMC or some other body with the requisite experience could undertake a full assessment.
5.96
I shall deal with the potential for duplication between assessments by the NCAA and the GMC later in this Report. As for duplication with local procedures, there seems to be a move towards supporting and improving local performance procedures in order to enable PCTs to resolve their problems themselves, with advice - but not necessarily intervention - from the NCAA. Whether that move will produce assessments of a sufficiently high and consistent standard remains to be seen.
5.97
Particular problems arise with locum doctors. They may operate in the area of more than one PCT. They may not work in one place long enough for a pattern of substandard practice to be recognised and acted upon. The results of substandard practice may not be discovered until after their departure. If problems are experienced with a locum, a practice may not be inclined to employ him/her again. Having taken that decision, members of the practice may be inclined not to bring the locum’s performance to the attention of the PCT. Even if they do, the PCT may be unwilling to take on the difficult task of investigating the doctor’s poor performance. It may have little evidence on which to do so, especially if the locum has moved on to another area. If the matter is investigated and a need for remedial action is identified, it may be difficult for the PCT to arrange the necessary action. Problems of funding may also arise.


========================================================================
CHAPTER SIX - Complaints and Discipline prior to April 1996
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
5.135
In this Chapter, I have described briefly some of the major developments in the arrangements for monitoring GPs that have occurred since Shipman’s arrest in September 1998. There have been other changes too, which I shall refer to later in this Report. Some of these developments have occurred as a direct result of Shipman’s crimes, although their application extends much further than an attempt to protect patients against a murderous doctor. It is clear that the landscape in which general practice is conducted now is significantly different from that of six years ago. There have also been alterations in the way that many GPs work. The increase in the number of GPs in direct employment with PCTs and working under PMS contracts has given PCTs more ability to ‘manage’ them. How successfully that will be achieved remains uncertain. In any event, there is still a large population of GPs working as independent contractors and not readily susceptible to the management or control of the PCT. It remains to be seen whether the new GMS Contract will give PCTs greater opportunities for monitoring and regulating the quality of primary medical care and, if it does, whether those opportunities will be used effectively. PCTs now have access to more information about GPs and are more likely to be aware of doctors who are aberrant in some way. In an extreme case, they can remove a doctor from their list. It seems to me that, at least in theory, all these changes are for the good. However, they impose an immense burden upon PCTs, which are, as I have said, small and ‘young’ organisations. It is likely, in my view, that the success attending these new measures will be variable.
5.136
If these new measures had been in operation during the time when Shipman was practising, would he have been prevented or deterred from killing patients or would he have been detected if he had done so? Certainly, the PCT would have known about his background and could have refused him admission to the list. It could have imposed conditions upon his inclusion which would have allowed close supervision of his practice in respect of controlled drugs. However, I do not think it likely that such arrangements would have deterred Shipman from killing. Nor would the current arrangements have greatly enhanced the prospects of his detection. In subsequent Chapters, I shall consider whether there are other measures which should be taken to monitor GPs. In particular, I shall consider how a complaint or concern about a doctor should be investigated and whether, once an aberrant doctor has been identified, adequate steps are being taken to restrict his/her professional activities or remove him/her from practice, and thus to prevent unacceptable risk to patients.

--- CHAPTER SIX - Complaints and Discipline prior to April 1996 ---
The Framework of the Complaints and Disciplinary System
Complaints Made against Shipman: 1985 to 1993
Recognition of the Need for Change

--- General Practitioners' Terms of Service ---
6.2
Chapters 3 and 4
, between 1974 and September 1990, family practitioner committees (FPCs) were responsible for administering the arrangements for primary care. In September 1990, FPCs were replaced by family health services authorities (FHSAs). GPs were not in a direct contractual relationship with the FPC or FHSA but operated instead under the General Medical Services (GMS) Contract, a national agreement with Government. The FPC/FHSA administered the local operation of the GMS Contract. Under the provisions of the National Health Service (General Medical and Pharmaceutical Services) Regulations 1974 (the 1974 Regulations), the arrangements made by FPCs (later the FHSAs) with doctors for the provision of general medical services had to incorporate the GPs’ terms of service.
6.3
The GPs’ terms of service covered a wide range of topics, but in the specific context of complaints they provided as follows:
‘General
3. Where a decision whether any, and if so what, action is to be taken under these terms of service requires the exercise of professional judgement, a doctor shall in reaching that decision not be expected to exercise a higher degree of skill, knowledge and care than general practitioners as a class may reasonably be expected to exercise.’
This paragraph set the standard by which the doctor’s conduct was to be judged as that reasonably to be expected of the reasonably competent GP.
6.4
The terms of service relevant to the subject matter of the complaints made against Shipman were as follows:
‘Service to Patients
13. Subject to paragraph 3, a doctor shall render to his patients all necessary and appropriate personal medical services of the type usually provided by general medical practitioners. He shall do so at his practice premises or, if the condition of the patient so requires, elsewhere in his practice area or at the place where the patient was residing when accepted by the doctor ... the doctor shall not be required to visit and treat the patient at any other place. Such services include arrangements for referring patients as necessary to any other services provided under the Health Service Acts and advice to enable them to take advantage of the local authority social services ...
14. A doctor shall, unless prevented by an emergency, attend and treat any patie
n
t who attends for the purpose at the places and during the hours for the time being approved by the Committee ...’
‘Records
30. A doctor shall -
(a) keep adequate records of the illnesses and treatment of his patients on forms supplied to him for the purpose by the Committee, and
(b) forward such records to the Committee on request as soon as possible, and
(c) within 14 days of being informed by the Committee of the death of a person on his list and in any case not later than one month of otherwise learning of such a death, forward the records relating to that person to the Committee.’
6.5
The wording above is taken from the 1974 Regulations but it remained essentially unchanged in the later Regulations. In April 1990, some changes were made to the 1974 Regulations upon the coming into force of the National Health Service (General Medical and Pharmaceutical Services) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 1989. However, these changes were not of significance for the purposes of this Chapter. The National Health Service (General Medical Services) Regulations 1992 consolidated and amended the 1974 Regulations and set out new terms of service which were also largely unchanged.

--- The Framework of the Complaints and Disciplinary System ---
6.6
By the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Regulations 1974 (the 1974 Service Committees Regulations), FPCs (and later FHSAs) were required to set up service committees for each contractor service to investigate complaints of alleged failures to comply with the terms of service. The 1974 Service Committees Regulations were the subject of numerous amendments, particularly by the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Amendment Regulations 1990. The National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Regulations 1992 consolidated the earlier Regulations and amendments and made further amendments. These Regulations governed complaints received after 1st
April 1992 and continued in force until 1996.
Informal Procedures
6.7
Not every complaint received by a FPC/FHSA contained an allegation capable of amounting to a breach of a GP’s terms of service. Complaints not containing such allegations could not be referred to a service committee but they might be amenable to informal resolution, by discussion between the parties, which would have the effect of restoring the relationship of trust and confidence between doctor and patient. Some complaints, even those which might amount to an allegation of a breach of terms of service, were not apparently very serious and it might appear inappropriate for them to lead to formal disciplinary proceedings. In such cases, an officer of the FPC/FHSA might seek to resolve the complaint informally through discussion, provided that the complainant consented. Prior to 1990, there were no centrally or officially directed informal complaints procedures. Different areas had different arrangements which had evolved locally.
6.8
The position changed in 1990. On 7th
March 1990, the Secretary of State for Health (SoS) gave directions to FPCs to establish conciliation processes. The procedure to be followed depended on the apparent seriousness of the patient’s complaint. For less serious matters, an officer of the FPC (after September 1990, the FHSA) would try to resolve the problem in correspondence. For more serious cases, the matter could be referred to conciliation. Lay conciliators were appointed who were accountable to the FPC/FHSA, and each FPC/FHSA, after consultation with the local medical committee (LMC) for its area, drew up a list of professional advisers to whom the lay conciliators would have access. Guidance was given as to the types of case that were not suitable for these informal procedures and should be dealt with by the more formal medical service committee (MSC) procedure. Potentially serious breaches of terms of service were to go to the MSC. These included such complaints as an allegation of a failure to respond to a patient’s repeated requests to visit, an allegation that the doctor had failed to relieve severe pain in terminal illness or a complaint that the patient had been unable to contact the doctor.
Formal Procedures
Dealing with a Complaint
6.9
If a complaint against a GP was received from, or related to, a patient who was or had been entitled to receive general medical services from a GP on the FPC/FHSA’s list, and if the complaint appeared to amount to a potential breach of the GP’s terms of service, it would be referred to the chairman of the FPC/FHSA’s MSC. As a rule, the complaint had to be made by the patient or by another with the patient’s authority. However, if the patient had died or was under the age of 16 or was incapable, by reason of old age, sickness or other infirmity, of making the complaint him/herself, a complaint could be made by another person. Complaints had to be made within eight weeks (from 1990, 13 weeks) of the event giving rise to the complaint, unless the MSC was satisfied that the failure to give notice of the complaint in time was occasioned by illness or other reasonable cause and provided also that the GP or the SoS consented to the investigation of the complaint out of time. From 1992, the functions of the SoS were delegated to the Family Health Services Appeal Unit (FHSAU).
6.10
Although no such specific procedure existed before 1990, if, after 1990, the substance of the complaint did not sufficiently appear from the written statement of the complainant, the FPC/FHSA had to request the complainant to provide such further particulars as the FPC/FHSA reasonably required.
6.11
The MSC consisted of a chairman, three lay members of the FPC/FHSA and three practitioner members appointed by the LMC for the area. In practice, in Tameside, the LMC nominees were LMC members. The position of chairman could not be filled by a doctor, so, in practice, chairmen were lay members of the FPC. Another lay member of the committee would be designated as deputy chairman.
6.12
A decision whether a complaint should be accepted for investigation was taken by the chairman of the MSC. If s/he decided that the complaint disclosed reasonable grounds to believe that the doctor had breached his/her terms of service, an officer of the FPC/FHSA would send to the GP the written statements of complaint and (after 1990) details of the terms of service alleged to have been breached. The GP had to submit his/her written response within four weeks, or longer if agreed by the MSC. Where a response was received from the GP, the FPC/FHSA copied this to the complainant and invited his/her written observations within 14 days, or longer if agreed.
6.13
The chairman of the MSC would then decide whether an oral hearing should take place. In general, an oral hearing would be directed where there was an apparent conflict of evidence between the complainant and the GP. If there was no such conflict, the chairman could direct that the matter be considered by the MSC without an oral hearing. An officer of the FPC/FHSA would usually seek to ensure that any relevant medical records were available. He or she would also give notice to the parties (i.e. the complainant and the GP) of the meeting of the MSC at which the matter was to be considered and of particulars of the breaches alleged. If there was to be an oral hearing, the parties were required to submit any documentary evidence and the names of any witnesses. It was a matter for the parties what evidence was adduced.
The Medical Service Committee Hearing
6.14
A meeting of the MSC would be convened to deal with the consideration of one or more complaints. All members of the committee might attend but often this proved impossible. After 1990, the quorum required to hear a complaint was a chairman (or deputy), two lay members and two medical members. Before 1990, three members could constitute a quorum, provided that there was at least one lay and one medical member present. A duly authorised officer of the LMC could attend. One or two authorised officers of the FPC/FHSA would attend to assist the committee. The complaint might be dealt with on the papers or after an oral hearing. Oral hearings were conducted on an adversarial basis and followed the procedure of a civil trial. They were held in private but the parties could attend until the deliberation stage was reached. A party could be accompanied by someone to assist in the presentation of the case but, if that other person was a barrister or a solicitor, s/he could not address the committee or question witnesses. Usually, a representative of the GP’s medical defence organisation would appear on his/her behalf. Sometimes, the complainant had the assistance of someone from the local Community Health Council (CHC). The role of advising and supporting complainants throughout the whole complaints process, was an adjunct to the CHCs’ main function, which was to provide a focus for public consultation on a wide range of health issues. However, it was a role that many CHCs appear to have filled very effectively.
6.15
If a new allegation, relevant to the complaint under consideration, was introduced in the course of the hearing, the chairman had to decide whether it should be admitted. Such a new complaint could be admitted only if it had been made within the time limit. If a new complaint was admitted out of time, the whole proceedings were liable to be declared void on appeal.
6.16
After the evidence and the submissions of the parties (if any), the committee would deliberate on its findings of fact and conclusions as to whether there had been a breach. Until this stage, members of the committee would have been told nothing of the GP’s past disciplinary record. If they found that a breach had occurred, they would be told of any breaches found against the doctor in any MSC report made within the preceding six years before being asked to consider what penalty to recommend to the FPC/FHSA. At the end of the proceedings, the committee would instruct an officer of the FPC/FHSA to write a report on the evidence, findings and recommendation as to penalty, if any.
6.17
If a party failed to attend, the case might be adjourned but it could be concluded without a hearing. After 1990, if the complainant refused to attend or failed to confirm that s/he intended to attend, the MSC could report on the complaint without holding a hearing. Unless the GP consented to disposal without a hearing, however, the report could not contain any recommendation adverse to him/her.
6.18
For cases in which the FPC/FHSA itself wished to bring a complaint against a GP, the matter could be referred to the MSC of another FPC/FHSA. This would usually arise where the complaint did not affect a specific patient, e.g. in a case of fraud. This arrangement was also available in cases in which it was thought desirable for other reasons. An example would be if the GP complained against was a member of the MSC or was personally known to members of the MSC for the area in which s/he practised.
6.19
The MSC was not bound by the strict rules of evidence. The Department of Health and Social Security (from 1988, the Department of Health (DoH)) issued guidance notes about various matters, including the admissibility and weight of certain types of evidence. In summary, the MSC had a broad discretion as to whether it should hear or look at any particular evidence and what weight to attach to it.
The Medical Service Committee Report and Penalties
6.20
Prior to 1990, the MSC’s report had to state its findings of fact and the inferences drawn. From 1990, the report additionally had to provide the committee’s reasons for drawing such inferences. The report was presented to the FPC/FHSA. If the MSC found that the doctor was in breach of his/her terms of service, the MSC might recommend that previous breaches of the doctor’s terms of service should be taken into account. After 1992, the report also had to contain details of the material evidence received, all findings of fact, the reasons for any inferences drawn and the recommendations for action by the FHSA.
6.21
The FPC/FHSA considered the report. It was bound by the MSC’s findings of fact and had to give reasons for any departure from its recommendations. On penalty, the FPC/FHSA could, in accordance with the Regulations:
impose a limit on the number of patients included in the GP’s list. This would be recommended where it was concluded that the doctor was, because of his/her large list, unable to give an adequate service to all the patients on his/her list
(before 1990) recommend to the SoS that the GP should pay any expenses incurred by the patient by reason of the breach of terms of service and/or that an amount should be withheld from his/her remuneration; (from 1990) itself determine that the GP should pay any expenses incurred by reason of the breach of terms of service and/or determine that an amount not in excess of £500 should be withheld from the GP; in relation to amounts in excess of £500, even after 1990, the FPC/FHSA could only recommend to the SoS, and could not determine, that there should be a withholding
make representations to the NHS Tribunal that the continued inclusion of the GP in its medical list would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the services in question; in other words, recommend that the GP be removed from the medical list
(before 1990) recommend to the SoS that the GP should receive a warning to comply with his/her terms of service more closely in the future; (from 1990) itself determine that s/he should receive such warning
(from 1992) send any documents connected to the complaint to the General Medical Council (GMC). Prior to 1992, this had been considered unnecessary because the SoS was supposed to report appropriate MSC cases to the GMC on the recommendation of a body known as the Medical Advisory Committee (MAC), which I shall describe below. Guidance notes issued to FHSAs by the DoH had appended to them guidance, previously drawn up for the MAC, as to the types of case that should be reported. The guidance for the MAC referred to the April 1987 edition of the GMC publication ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline’ (known as the Blue Book; see
), but also made clear that any misconduct regarded as
should be reported.
Appeals to the Secretary of State for Health
6.22
Both the doctor and the complainant had a right of appeal to the SoS in respect of any adverse determination. Thus, either party could appeal against a finding that a breach had or had not occurred, against a decision on the extension of a time limit or against a sanction imposed by the FPC/FHSA. In 1992, the SoS devolved those appellate functions to the FHSAU, which was set up at the Yorkshire Regional Health Authority. This body would also hear cases that were referred to it because the recommended sanction was a withholding of over £500 and required endorsement by the SoS. On 1st
April 1995, the FHSAU was established as a Special Health Authority and changed its name to the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA); in November 2001 its name changed to the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (Special Health Authority) (FHSAA (SHA)).
6.23
The SoS’s delegated functions were exercised by an officer of the FHSAU or, later, the FHSAA and FHSAA (SHA). In practice, therefore, appeals were determined by the Chief Executive or his/her deputy. If the Chief Executive was of the view that it was necessary to resolve conflicts of evidence, s/he could appoint a panel to conduct an oral hearing. The panel would comprise a barrister or solicitor as chairman and two doctors, one from a panel nominated by the British Medical Association (BMA). The panel conducted the oral hearing but reported back with a recommendation as to whether or not there had been a breach; the Chief Executive or his/her deputy made the final decision.
6.24
The Chief Executive had the power to seek advice and a recommendation from the MAC and was specifically required to do so in the case of specified failures to comply with terms of service (broadly speaking, those involving the exercise of clinical judgement). According to Mr David Laverick, who was Chief Executive of the FHSAA from 1st
October 1995 until 31st
August 2001, it was his practice always to involve the MAC although his predecessors probably did so, according to his evidence, only when specifically required to do so by the Regulations. The MAC comprised six members, who were appointed by the SoS. The Chairman and his/her deputy were to be doctors of no less than ten years’ standing, selected by the SoS after consultation with the BMA. Of the remaining five members, three were chosen from a BMA panel of about 24 doctors and the others from a panel selected by the SoS.
6.25
When Mr Laverick arrived in post, he was concerned about what appeared to him to be inconsistencies in the recommendations made by the MAC in apparently comparable cases. He was also concerned that the doctors on the MAC seemed to see themselves as advocates for the GP under review. As a result, Mr Laverick sought to introduce guidance as to the amount to be withheld in different types of case. For a very minor first breach of the terms of service, he suggested that the appropriate penalty would be about £250. Where there was a relatively serious first breach, the figure would be around £750-£1000. In relation to second or third breaches or cases with a clear lack of care or disregard for the NHS, Mr Laverick suggested that the penalty should be a recovery in the range of £1500-£3000 depending on the circumstances. After the introduction of the guidelines, Mr Laverick said that the recommendations of the MAC became more consistent and he felt able to follow them in about 90% of cases.
6.26
In some cases the FHSAU/FHSAA would refer cases to the GMC. Mr Laverick’s recollection was that, when he arrived in 1995, there were criteria in place which had originated from the GMC, whereby the FHSAA was to notify the GMC of any finding of a breach of what was then paragraph 12 of the terms of service (the obligation to provide personal medical services of the type usually provided by GPs) and also of any withholding of more than £750. After his arrival, Mr Laverick had discussions with representatives of the GMC at which he sought to enlarge, in the face of some opposition from the doctors’ representatives, the categories of case that were being reported beyond those cases where there had been a finding of a breach of terms of service. His view was that a wider range of cases involving clinical shortcomings should be reported. He said that his view prevailed and that, thereafter, the FHSAA reported cases involving such issues as a doctor’s failure to recognise the limits of his/her professional competence, to keep professional skills and knowledge up to date, to keep adequate patient records, to take an adequate history or to perform a competent physical examination.
Appeals to the Health Service Ombudsman
6.27
In 1973, the office of the Health Service Ombudsman (also known as the Health Service Commissioner) was created. The Health Service Ombudsman looks into complaints made by or on behalf of people who have suffered because of unsatisfactory treatment or service by the NHS. He or she is independent of the NHS and the Government and his/her services are free. However, until 1st
April 1996, the Ombudsman had no jurisdiction over complaints about GPs.

--- Complaints Made against Shipman: 1985 to 1993 ---
6.28
The Inquiry investigated complaints made against Shipman primarily in an attempt to see whether the system of complaints in operation at the material times was capable of revealing or providing clues about his criminal activities. As will be seen, I have concluded that none of the complaints that were determined by a MSC provided much of a clue as to Shipman’s true nature. However, I have decided to set out the circumstances of these complaints because their examination illustrates some of the shortcomings of the system and also throws light on what is needed in any system for the satisfactory handling of complaints.
6.29
The Inquiry asked the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA) to provide all its records relating to complaints made against Shipman. The WPHA sent files relating to 18 cases and logs recording the bare details of ten more. However, on examination, most of these were found not to be complaints against Shipman personally. Some were complaints about his staff; some were complaints made by his patients but relating to their treatment by other doctors. One, set out in a letter from Miss Beatrice Clee, was not a complaint at all but a request for advice about the various drugs Shipman had prescribed for her. Of those complaints which were directed against Shipman himself, some were resolved through the informal procedures. There was very little information on file and the Inquiry has not sought to look into those cases. However, there were three complaints against Shipman that had been referred to a MSC, as they related to an alleged breach of his terms of service. I shall describe these three cases below.
The Case of Mr J
6.30
Two related complaints were brought by the mother of a patient of Shipman, Mr J, who had died from pulmonary fibrosis in July 1985 at the age of 29. The first related to the treatment provided by Shipman between 1977 and the patient’s death in 1985; the second alleged a breach of patient confidentiality. I shall refer to Mr J’s mother as Mrs J.
6.31
In her letter of complaint, dated 16th
August 1985, which had been drafted at her request by Mr Steven Rawlinson, Mr J’s closest friend, Mrs J said that her son had been registered with Shipman since 1977. Mr J had been a self-employed bricklayer and had enjoyed good health except that he suffered from a troublesome cough, particularly in winter. She alleged that Mr J consulted Shipman on two occasions in 1984 (once in the summer and once in December), complaining of breathlessness. Shipman had told him that his problem was ‘all in his mind’. Her son had consulted Shipman again in February 1985, when a chest x-ray had been arranged. On arrival at the clinic where the x-ray was to be taken, the technician had asked Mr J whether he actually had a chest condition. When Mr J said that he did, the technician remarked that the letter of referral said that it was psychosomatic. Following the x-ray, Shipman had advised Mr J that, apart from a couple of white patches, the lungs were normal. Mrs J said that her son’s health had deteriorated from that time; his cough had continued and he had lost weight.
6.32
Mrs J said that, in May 1985, her son had noticed blood in his sputum and had returned to see Shipman, who prescribed an antibiotic and an asthma inhaler. She said that her son had insisted on a more thorough examination and Shipman had reluctantly agreed to refer him to a consultant chest physician at the local hospital. An appointment was offered for 22nd
July 1985. In early June, Mrs J, deeply concerned about her son’s deteriorating health, had contacted Shipman and it was agreed that a private appointment with the consultant should be arranged. At that appointment, on 20th
June, the consultant expressed concern about Mr J, took various samples for tests and, a few days later, admitted Mr J to hospital. Mrs J understood that, at the time of admission, the diagnosis was unclear, but tuberculosis and viral pneumonia were mentioned as possibilities. After a week in hospital, no positive diagnosis had been made but Mr J’s condition appeared to have stabilised and he was discharged home on 2nd
July. By 9th
July, he had relapsed and was readmitted, obviously very ill. Various tests were carried out. On 19th
July, Mr J underwent a bronchoscopy and biopsy. He died very shortly afterwards.
6.33
Mrs J expressed the opinion that Shipman had been negligent. She did not provide particulars of that allegation but asked a number of questions from which it is apparent that she was concerned that Shipman had not examined her son sufficiently thoroughly, had underestimated the seriousness of his condition and had regarded it as psychosomatic. This had resulted in a delay in treatment. She was also concerned that, when agreeing to refer her son to a chest physician, Shipman had not asked for an expedited appointment.
6.34
Mrs J also alleged that, on a social occasion while her son was in hospital, Shipman had divulged confidential information about his condition to a couple - I shall call them Mr and Mrs G - who were patients of his and also friends of Mr J. The allegation was that Shipman had told Mr and Mrs G that Mr J might have tuberculosis. Mrs G was pregnant and had visited Mr J in hospital. Mrs J said that she thought Mr and Mrs G would be unwilling to provide evidence of this, as they remained on Shipman’s list. This complaint, which Shipman later denied, fell outside the remit of the MSC; its proper destination was the GMC. I shall say no more about it, save to observe that it is not satisfactory for a complainant to have to take two related complaints to two different bodies.
6.35
On 3rd
September 1985, the Chairman of the Tameside MSC considered the papers and decided that they disclosed reasonable grounds for complaint. An officer of the FPC sent the complaint to Shipman for his response. Shipman responded by letter dated 10th
September 1985. Papers recovered by the Inquiry from Shipman’s surgery show that, before submitting his response, Shipman had taken the advice of his regional Medical Defence Union representative on the content of his draft response. He was warned that, in view of the conflicts of evidence between his account and that of Mr J’s mother, he should expect to be summoned to an oral hearing.
6.36
Shipman’s response began with a brief account of past history. He referred to consultations in January and March 1979, and on 13th
June and 26th
September 1980. None of those consultations related to a chest condition. He then recounted the history of the chest condition, beginning with a consultation on 15th
April 1985. This was a detailed account and gives every appearance of having been extracted from clinical records. The account was silent as to whether there had been any consultations at all between 1980 and 1984 or one in February 1985, but the implication was that there had not been.
6.37
Shipman said that, on 15th
April 1985, Mr J had complained of breathlessness. A diagnosis of bronchitis was made and an antibiotic prescribed. Shipman arranged a chest x-ray for the next day. It would appear that this was the consultation which Mr J’s mother thought had taken place in the February. Shipman denied that he had said that Mr J’s condition was ‘psychosomatic’ but agreed that he did sometimes advise patients that wheeziness could be exacerbated by anxiety. Shipman said that the x-ray showed active infection and a further course of antibiotics was prescribed on 7th
May. On review on 21st
May, Shipman found that Mr J was wheezy, had a cough and had lost a stone in weight in three months. Lung function testing showed a peak flow rate (PFR) of 300 litres per minute (which is very poor for a man of Mr J’s age). Shipman prescribed a Ventolin inhaler and arranged various tests for 24th
May. In his response, Shipman described the results of these tests, which appeared to include blood and urine tests but no further x-ray, and claimed that the results were very suggestive of a chest infection; he said that he had wondered whether Mr J had tuberculosis.
6.38
Shipman said that Mr J attended again on 4th
June and, because he was no better, Shipman decided to refer him to a chest physician. The referral letter, dated 6th
June, said that Mr J had presented early the previous month (that would be in May) with a tight wheezy chest and a cough productive of green phlegm. On review after a course of antibiotics, the finding was of wheezy expiratory rhonchi and a PFR of only 300. (There was no mention of the weight loss.) He had prescribed Ventolin and said that he had arranged an x-ray, the result of which was compatible with active chest infection. (That was misleading; the x-ray had been taken in April.) He said that at the
‘recent’
review, the PFR had
‘crept’
up to 500 litres per minute but, he wrote,
‘the obvious question is have we got a young man who has asthma or is this the remains of a chest infection?’
I note three interesting features of this letter. Shipman misled the consultant as to the history, stating that he had first seen Mr J in early May and had arranged the x-ray in late May. He had not; those events occurred in April. Second, he made no reference to weight loss, which might well have been a sign of a progressive condition. Third, there was no hint in the letter that Shipman suspected tuberculosis or any other condition requiring urgent attention. The letter positively suggested a non-urgent situation.
6.39
Shipman then stated that on 14th
June 1985, at the request of Mr J’s mother, he had arranged a private consultation with a consultant. In fact, he used the same (misleading) referral letter as before. The consultation took place on 20th
June and, on that day, the consultant notified Shipman that his diagnosis was that Mr J had bronchiectasis with minimal airway obstruction. The consultant prescribed a broad-spectrum antibiotic and advised Mr J to continue with the inhaler. A fuller letter from the consultant followed, dated 2nd
July, recording complaints of breathlessness over seven years, with copious expectoration, worse during the winter months. The letter also mentioned the loss of two stone in weight. From the letter, it appears that, after the consultation, the consultant examined a chest x-ray (probably the one taken on 16th
April) and thought that its appearance raised a diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. Mr J was to be admitted for further investigation.
6.40
Shipman’s response completed the history by reference to two hospital discharge letters. The first, dated 8th
July, reported that Mr J’s diagnosis remained unclear, although it was believed that he had a chronic bronchiectasis. His symptoms had improved while he was in hospital and he had been discharged home. However, Mr J had relapsed a few days after discharge and had been readmitted on 11th
July. The second hospital discharge letter, written after Mr J’s death, informed Shipman that Mr J had died of diffuse idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The letter showed that no firm diagnosis had been made until after a biopsy had been carried out.
6.41
Shipman’s response included the suggestion that Mr J had been considered as a possible AIDS sufferer and implied that barrier nursing techniques had been put into effect for that reason. The inclusion of this reference to AIDS appears to me to be wholly unnecessary and can only have been designed to cause distress or offence. The discharge letter makes it plain that the tests for AIDS were negative. There is no reference to barrier nursing techniques in the discharge letter, and it appears from elsewhere in his response that Shipman himself believed that, if barrier nursing was in use, it was on account of the possibility of tuberculosis and not AIDS. In any event, barrier nursing was not used for patients with AIDS, even in 1985.
6.42
Finally, Shipman said that he had fulfilled his terms of service. He had examined Mr J on a number of occasions. He had arranged a chest x-ray, made a working diagnosis and given treatment; subsequently, when the patient had not improved, he had referred appropriately. He pointed out that the serious and terminal nature of Mr J’s illness had not been apparent until his second admission to hospital. Shipman appended a description of diffuse idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, the condition from which Mr J had died.
6.43
In response to Shipman’s letter, Mrs J sent a lengthy reply, again drafted by Mr Rawlinson. For present purposes, I need only refer to a few points from it to make it clear that she felt that there were issues to be tried. She repeated that her son had consulted Shipman about his chest before 15th
April and suggested that the MSC should obtain not only her son’s clinical records, but also the surgery appointments sheets. She repeated that it was Shipman’s opinion that her son’s problems were ‘all in his mind’; this had been a running joke between him and Mr Rawlinson. She drew attention to Shipman’s claim that he had suspected tuberculosis in late May and yet had not requested an urgent appointment with the consultant. She noted the inaccuracy of Shipman’s claim to the consultant that he had first seen Mr J in early May when, by his own account, he had first seen him on 15th
April. She appended a report from the consultant, which outlined the history and the autopsy findings and expressed the opinion that Mr J’s idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis had developed over a few years. The consultant said that it was a very rare condition in the young; in his long career, he had never seen a case in one so young. He said that there was no satisfactory treatment for the condition, although steroids had been tried.
6.44
The Chairman of the MSC then considered all the available correspondence and gave his opinion that a hearing of the case was not necessary. He was not required to give reasons for that decision and it appears that he did not do so. Unfortunately, the full FPC file is no longer available and it has not been possible for the Inquiry to see what issues were drawn to the Chairman’s attention. In particular, it is not clear whether or not any consideration was given to the fact that some of the allegations related to a period more than eight weeks before the lodging of the complaint or whether that fact influenced the decision reached.
6.45
At some time after that, but before the case came before the MSC for decision, Mr J’s mother sent a further letter in which she said that it would be
‘interesting’
to know what had happened to her son’s medical records for the period September 1980 to April 1985 (about which period Shipman’s response had been silent).
6.46
At the meeting of the MSC on 4th
December 1985, the Committee comprised Mr Jack Millin (its acting chairman), Mrs Joyce Howarth, Mr Peter Jackson, Dr Thomas Cooksey, Dr Terry Hughes (who was not a medical doctor but an engineer), Dr Winston Jackson and Dr Dennis Milner. The minutes of the meeting record that three cases were considered, two (including that of Mr J) without an oral hearing and one after a full oral hearing. The minute of Mr J’s case said that the MSC received the correspondence relating to the complaint, considered the case and resolved that a report be prepared for the FPC, recommending that the complaint be dismissed.
6.47
The report, which was drafted by Mr William Greenwood, then Assistant Administrator at the Tameside FPC, listed all the material before the Committee. At paragraph 17, the report stated that the Committee had had available the patient’s medical records. It was recorded that after
‘very careful’
consideration of all these items, the MSC had agreed with the previous decision of the Chairman of the MSC that a hearing of the case was not necessary. No reasons were given for that conclusion.
6.48
Mr Greenwood then accurately set out the test to be applied in considering the main complaint, saying that the MSC had to consider whether or not Shipman had exercised due skill and care in arriving at a diagnosis and whether he had placed himself in a position where he could reasonably exercise that skill. The report then recorded the findings of fact. The MSC recorded the periods for which Mr J had been Shipman’s patient but made no reference to any consultations in 1984 or 1985, prior to 15th
April 1985, despite Mrs J’s insistence that he had consulted Shipman during this time. The report then set out a brief résumé of the history, taken, it was said, from the medical records. The account followed that given in Shipman’s response. The conclusion was that there had been no unreasonable delay in Shipman’s treatment of Mr J. There was no reference to Mr J’s failure to improve with treatment or to his weight loss. Nor was it mentioned that Shipman had not asked for an urgent appointment although he apparently suspected tuberculosis. The Committee found that Shipman had exercised reasonable judgement; he had arranged an x-ray and had referred the patient for a consultant opinion. The Committee plainly regarded the unusual nature of the condition and the difficulty of diagnosis as important factors. It was said that there was no mention in the notes that Shipman considered the illness to be psychosomatic in nature. The Committee concluded that there had been no breach of terms of service.
Evidence at the Inquiry
6.49
Mr Rawlinson gave evidence to the Inquiry. He said that he had been dissatisfied with the result of the complaint and thought that it should have been upheld. He agreed that, at the time, he had been very distressed about the death and very angry. He now realises that helping Mrs J to make her complaint was a means of venting his anger. He is an intelligent man and I think he recognises that he might not have been as objective at that time as he would normally be. He expressed his opinion, held at the time, that the MSC was a closed club, which would protect the doctors from criticism. He added that, on re-reading the papers at the time of the Inquiry, he still had the same impression.
6.50
Mr Rawlinson went through what he now remembered of the details of his friend’s illness and confirmed the accuracy of what had been stated in the original complaint. He repeated his concern about Shipman’s apparent unwillingness to take Mr J’s condition seriously and the delay in obtaining a consultant’s appointment and setting in train further investigations.
6.51
He was asked whether he was aware of the time limits that meant that, unless special permission had been given, the MSC would have been unable to look into matters that had occurred more than eight weeks before the date of the complaint. He said that he was not and he now thinks that he and Mrs J were not told about that rule. However, it is not possible to check whether he is right about that, as the only parts of the FPC file to have survived are those documents provided to the MSC.
6.52
Mr Rawlinson also expressed the view that Mrs J and he were not kept sufficiently abreast of what was going on. They did not know how the complaints procedure worked. They did not know what medical records were available and to what extent they were looked at. There was no attempt to clarify the issues; the process seemed to be: complaint - response - reply. They had expected that the MSC would itself investigate what had happened. Mr Rawlinson had made suggestions about the conduct of the investigation (including obtaining the surgery appointments sheets and Mr J’s medical records) and had not realised that investigation was left to the parties. He felt it would have been valuable to have had an oral hearing. He also said that he did not know that it would have been possible to appeal against the MSC’s decision. However, I think it is likely that he would have been made aware of that. I think it likely that Mrs J was advised of that at the time she was informed of the decision. That would be the usual procedure and I think it likely that Mr Greenwood would have followed it. It is not possible to check this point because part of the file is no longer available.
Evidence from Members of the Medical Service Committee
6.53
The Inquiry sought to find out why the Chairman of the MSC had decided not to hold an oral hearing and why the Committee sitting on 4th
December had decided to ratify that decision. The official report threw no light on those issues. The Inquiry also sought to discover more about the Committee’s reasoning and the way in which it had handled the case.
6.54
It seems likely that the Chairman of the Tameside FPC, Mr Basil Sabine, who was also the Chairman of the MSC, probably took the initial decision not to order an oral hearing. Mr Sabine is now deceased. He was not able to attend the MSC meeting on 4th
December and, in his absence, the meeting was chaired by Mr Millin (who was too unwell to provide evidence to the Inquiry). Of the other members of the MSC, the Inquiry was able to locate Mr Jackson, Mrs Howarth, Dr Jackson, Dr Milner and Dr Cooksey. All five provided witness statements; Mr Jackson and Dr Cooksey gave oral evidence.
6.55
Dr Cooksey said that there was usually an oral hearing if there were disputes of fact. In his written evidence, he said that, on reading this case, it appeared to him that the issues were clear and it would not have surprised him that the Chairman had decided not to hold an oral hearing. When giving oral evidence to the Inquiry, he accepted that there was an issue between the parties as to whether Shipman had seen Mr J with reference to his chest complaint before April 1985. He also appeared to accept that there was an issue about whether, if Shipman suspected that Mr J might have tuberculosis, it was reasonable to refer him to a consultant on a non-urgent basis. However, he said that he thought that the Committee had taken the view that, whatever had been done, it would not have made any difference to the outcome. This, he thought, might have had a bearing on its decision. If that were so, it would mean that the Committee had addressed its mind to the wrong question, as the test was whether what Shipman had done was reasonable, not whether reasonable treatment would have made any difference to the outcome. When asked about the degree of care with which the MSC had considered the non-oral cases (of which there were two on 4th
December as well as an oral hearing), Dr Cooksey said that the MSC was ‘supporting the decision of the Chairman who had decided that this was the right course of action’. He accepted that the main business of the day was the third case, which was to have an oral hearing. I feel bound to observe that I myself would have found it difficult, in one day’s work (and it is not clear whether the Committee sat for the whole day or only half), to give
‘very careful’
consideration to all the material and records in this case, another one like it and yet another in which there was to be an oral hearing, even if I had read the papers in advance.
6.56
Mr Jackson, a solicitor, was a lay member of the MSC. He said he did not know why the Chairman had decided in advance not to hold an oral hearing. However, he did say that the MSC would not look at allegations relating to events occurring more than eight weeks before the date of complaint, unless an application to extend time had been agreed or granted. He made the point that the Committee’s report stated that there were no entries in the records showing that Shipman thought the problem was psychosomatic. That is so, but it was pointed out to him that the report did not deal with the question of whether there were any entries at all during the earlier period. Mr Jackson’s response to that was that any consultations in the earlier period were ‘out of time’. He also pointed out the difficulty of deciding the case on hearsay evidence. He explained that the mother would not have been able to give direct evidence of what Shipman had said; Shipman had denied saying that he had treated the condition as psychosomatic. However, hearsay evidence of what a deceased person has been heard to say is often received; to refuse to hear it might cause real injustice. The weight to be attached to it must be carefully considered. If the records had contained entries in 1984 relating to a cough or shortness of breath, and if there was no sufficient record of examination and observations, the Committee might have inferred that the hearsay evidence was correct. There was no bar to receiving such evidence and, indeed, the DoH notes of guidance, to which I have already referred, specifically mentioned that hearsay evidence could be admitted, subject to warnings about the weight that should be attached to it.
6.57
Dr Jackson, one of the medical members, said in his statement to the Inquiry that he did not know why it had been decided not to hold an oral hearing. Most cases had one. He speculated that the decision might have been taken to avoid further distress for the mother. Dr Milner said in his witness statement that he was unable to say why the decision had been taken.
6.58
In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Howarth said that she could not remember the case but, from reading the papers, she thought there were several reasons why the MSC would have decided to ratify the previous decision not to hold an oral hearing and to dismiss the complaint. She thought that the evidence about what had happened at earlier consultations would have been regarded as hearsay. The notes contained no reference to Shipman’s belief that the problem was psychosomatic. I have already commented on those points. She also thought that it appeared that there were no consultations during the earlier period (although, in fact, it is not clear whether there were or were not). She pointed out that it appeared that Mr J had been able to continue at work and therefore it was reasonable to infer that he had not been seriously ill until towards the end, when Shipman’s actions, as recorded in the notes, were clear and seemed appropriate. She mentioned that the condition was very rare and difficult to diagnose. That may have been so but the question for the MSC was not whether Shipman should have diagnosed the condition but whether he had provided proper medical care on each occasion when he had seen the patient.
6.59
Given the incomplete information and material available to me, I cannot reach any conclusion as to whether this complaint was, in fact, properly handled. However, I am left with a number of concerns. I do not know whether Mrs J was advised about the time limits. In my view, she should have been so advised and told of the possibility of applying for leave to extend the scope of the complaint. It may be that she was advised and decided not to apply or that she applied and permission was not granted. It is possible that she applied, permission was granted and the complaint included the events of 1984. If so, the decision did not deal adequately with this earlier period. It seems to me that there should have been an oral hearing, even though some of the evidence would have been hearsay. There were clear conflicts of evidence about Shipman’s attitude and his reluctance to refer Mr J to a consultant. If an oral hearing had been held, the Committee might have paid more attention to the allegation that Shipman claimed to have suspected tuberculosis in late May but did not seek an urgent appointment with the consultant. It appears that at least one member of the Committee (possibly more) regarded his role as one of supporting the Chairman’s decision. It may be that some members of the MSC did not understand the question they should have been asking and that they took into account irrelevant considerations.
6.60
Mrs J and Mr Rawlinson were dissatisfied with the process and the outcome and, so far as the process is concerned, this is understandable. In criticising the process, I am not criticising the individuals concerned. They were doing things in the usual way. But the process does not seem to have been designed to provide the complainant with an understanding of what had happened. There was no investigation of this complaint and no attempt to sort out the issues and see what evidence was required or available to deal with each issue. If someone had asked Mr Rawlinson what delay he was complaining about, he would have included his concern about the alleged inactivity during 1984 and early 1985. Someone would have had to explain that, under the rules, the MSC could not look into that unless leave was sought and granted. I would have expected it to be granted. Someone should have looked at the records and made plain in the decision what entries, if any, there were in 1984. If there were none, and Mrs J continued to say that her son had visited Shipman in that year, the surgery appointments sheets could surely have been obtained. At the end of the day, the whole question of whether Mr J consulted Shipman at all in 1984 was left in the air.
6.61
Mr Rawlinson also felt there was a lack of independence on the part of the MSC. At the time of this complaint, Shipman was secretary of the LMC and he had held that position since about 1981. As secretary, he was automatically a member of the FPC. In Tameside at that time (although this was not a requirement of the Regulations), all members of the MSC were also members of the FPC. Thus, Shipman was a colleague of all of the members of the FPC and the MSC, both lay and medical. Dr Cooksey said that he served on the LMC from the late 1960s until 1994 and was chairman from 1977 until 1983. During his term as chairman, he worked with Shipman as secretary. Dr Jackson said that he was chairman of the LMC for two years in the 1980s, although he was not sure whether he still held that position in December 1985. In view of the dates of Dr Cooksey’s chairmanship, it seems entirely possible that Dr Jackson was indeed chairman of the LMC at the time of the hearing. Mr Greenwood told the Inquiry that he had thought it inappropriate that the conduct of a local GP should be reviewed by his/her local colleagues. I agree. It is not surprising that Mr Rawlinson felt that the MSC was a closed shop. Even if the members were scrupulously fair, there was no appearance of independence.
The Case of Mr W
6.62
In 1990, a complaint was made about Shipman’s treatment of a patient whom I shall call Mr W. He was aged 39 and suffered from epilepsy. He also had learning difficulties although he lived an independent life. No doubt it was on account of those difficulties that the complaint was brought on his behalf by his sister, Mrs L. By letter dated 6th
January 1990, Mrs L reported that her brother had been diagnosed with epilepsy and had been advised by a consultant at the local hospital in 1986 that he should take ten tablets a day of Epilim 200mg. It appears that Shipman had, in fact, always prescribed eight tablets a day but nothing turns on that point. On 14th
November 1989, Shipman had issued a repeat prescription for Epilim but, instead of prescribing 200mg tablets, he had prescribed 500mg tablets, to be taken at the usual rate of eight per day. On 7th
or 8th
December, having consumed 76 of the 500mg tablets, apparently over a period of nine days, Mr W fell downstairs. Some days later, Mrs L found him in a very poorly state, sitting in a chair. It appears that he had become incontinent and had developed ‘bedsores’. He and his partner, who also had learning difficulties, had been unable to summon help. He was admitted to hospital where he still remained three weeks later.
6.63
The complaint was directed to the Tameside FPC. In September 1990, the FPC’s functions were transferred to the Tameside FHSA which continued to deal with the complaint. The Chairman of the MSC instructed the FPC to seek Shipman’s response to the complaint. Shipman responded in July 1990. He admitted that he had made an error and said that he could not understand how it had happened; he had had Mr W’s notes in front of him when writing the prescription. He thought perhaps he had been distracted. He drew attention to the failure of the dispensing pharmacist to notice the error. He reported that Mr W had now recovered from the episode and had been transferred to sheltered accommodation, which was more suited to his needs. He also explained that the practice had recently become fully computerised and that, in future, once the correct dosage had been entered, errors of this type should not occur, as the repeat prescription would be prepared from data within the system.
6.64
Shipman’s response was sent to Mrs L’s solicitor who replied, challenging various aspects of Shipman’s response, although none of the areas of dispute was material to the determination of the complaint. Although, initially, the Chairman of the MSC was of the view that there would have to be an oral hearing, in the end it was agreed that this would not be necessary. On 12th
December 1990, the case was dealt with at a meeting of the MSC which was not attended by either party. Inevitably, Shipman was found to be in breach of paragraph 13 of the terms of service. The report of the hearing concluded with a recommendation that Shipman should be warned to comply with his terms of service more closely in the future but there was no recommendation for a withholding of remuneration. This was the first time that Shipman had been found in breach of his terms of service. This finding and recommendation were accepted by the FHSA. Shipman did not appeal against the finding or the warning. The SoS was notified and endorsed the steps taken by the FHSA. Shipman was notified to this effect on 20th
March 1991. The case was not reported to the GMC.
6.65
I make only two comments about this very simple case. First, it took almost a year to bring the matter to a conclusion. That is longer than is desirable. Second, it shows how, if steps have to be taken to discipline a doctor, an adversarial system that focusses on standards that have to be met by a doctor has the potential to provide a suitable means of discovering the facts on which disciplinary action is to be based.
6.66
In view of Mr Rawlinson’s complaint that, in 1985, the MSC seemed to be a closed shop, I have considered the degree of independence of the MSC from Shipman in 1990. I note that, in the letters informing the members of the Committee of the date on which the complaint would be dealt with, members were warned to consider whether they ought to disqualify themselves. They were told not to sit if they had an interest in the question to be determined or had some association with any of the parties. The letter advised that
‘personal friendship or close business or social relations would disqualify but not - by themselves - mere acquaintance or official contacts’
. In 1990, Shipman was no longer secretary of the LMC; he had resigned in 1988. He was no longer a member of the FPC which had, in any event, been replaced by the FHSA. However, he had been secretary of the LMC and on the FPC for about seven years and he must have been well known to many current members of the FHSA and MSC. Major Robin Tarr, a member of the MSC which heard the complaint in respect of Mr W, said that he knew Shipman from the FPC and that, when they first met, Shipman had invited him to look round the Donneybrook practice, to see how a general practice worked. He had found the visit very useful. He said that his acquaintance with Shipman had not affected his decision in the case. Mr Jackson, who chaired the MSC, said that Shipman had a good reputation in the area and was not regarded as careless. He had known Shipman through sitting on another FPC committee of which they were both members and, although he regarded him as a bit of a maverick, he and other lay committee members had been impressed by him.
6.67
In the light of the advice they were given, I do not criticise the members of the MSC who decided not to disqualify themselves. However, I think that, in the interests of ensuring that justice was done and seen to be done, it would have been preferable if there had been a policy that, when a GP member (or recent former member) of the FPC/FHSA was due to come before the MSC, the case should be transferred to the MSC of a neighbouring FPC/FHSA. Indeed, one might go further and say that it would be preferable that any disciplinary action against a GP should be determined by people from another district who have no personal knowledge of him/her. Such a policy would avoid the danger that any dissatisfaction on the part of a disappointed complainant might focus on the lack of impartiality of the tribunal. In this case, the complainant might have taken the view that the penalty was too lenient.
The Case of Mrs B
6.68
On 4th
March 1992, Mr B made a complaint in respect of medical services provided to his wife on Wednesday, 26th
February 1992. Mrs B was an elderly woman and a patient of Dr Jeffery Moysey, a colleague of Shipman at the Donneybrook practice. Dr Moysey and Shipman had an arrangement whereby they covered for each other on half days. On Wednesdays, Dr Moysey worked until about 10.30am, after which time Shipman covered for him.
6.69
In the letter of complaint, Mr B said that his wife had been ill on Sunday, 23rd
February. Dr Moysey had visited on the Monday and had diagnosed a stroke. He had promised to call back ‘in a couple of days’. He had also promised to arrange for a consultant domiciliary visit and for district nurses to attend. A nurse had attended on 24th, 25th
and 26th
February. On Wednesday, 26th
February, Mrs B’s condition had worsened and the family had expected a visit from Dr Moysey. When he had not arrived by midday, her son (Mr B’s stepson) had telephoned the surgery to ask for a visit. He had told the receptionist that Mrs B’s condition was worse; he was to say at the MSC hearing that he thought she had had another stroke. The receptionist had said that it was Dr Moysey’s half day but that Shipman was covering for him, and that a message would be passed to him as soon as he came in. A short while later, the receptionist had telephoned Mrs B’s home and told Mrs B’s son that Shipman had returned but had said that it was not necessary to visit, as Dr Moysey had seen Mrs B two days before. Mrs B’s son had repeated his request for a visit, stressing (as he was to say at the hearing) that his mother’s condition had deteriorated. He also was to say at the hearing that he had mentioned that she was a heavy woman and was incontinent and that they were having difficulty in lifting her. The receptionist went to speak to Shipman again but reported to Mrs B’s son that he refused to come out as it would not be right for him to ‘go over’ Dr Moysey’s decision that there was no need for Mrs B to be admitted to hospital. A while later, the family had called an ambulance and Mrs B was taken to hospital.
6.70
Shipman’s response to the complaint was robust. He agreed that he had been deputising for Dr Moysey on the day in question and that he had received a request to visit Mrs B. However, he said that he had made a careful note of the request and the action he took. He enclosed a copy of the note, said to have been made at the time, which read:
‘Telephone message request for visit.
Seen JOM
Dr Moysey
23.2 92 CVA
Domiciliary Arranged
Dr Moysey to visit 48 hours ? today
Visit because husband unable to cope as elderly
NO worse than seen by Dr Moysey
Visit arranged for mane
the next morning
For Dr Moysey to reassess’
6.71
Shipman asserted that he had not been told that Mrs B’s condition had deteriorated. In his view, the complaint had arisen because there had been a misunderstanding about when Dr Moysey would revisit. He denied that he was in breach of his terms of service.
6.72
Dr Moysey’s response, so far as is relevant for present purposes, was that, when visiting on 24th
February, he had found that Mrs B had had a slight stroke from which she appeared to be recovering. He had made suitable arrangements for her care at home. He had not made any definite arrangement to revisit but had said he would call later in the week. On the Thursday after his half day, one of the receptionists had informed him that Mrs B had been taken into hospital and that there was no need to visit her at home. He denied that he was in breach of his terms of service.
6.73
After some initial clarification of the issues, the complaint was transferred to the MSC of the Manchester FHSA because Dr Moysey was a member of the Tameside MSC. A hearing was ordered and took place on 8th
September 1993. Both doctors were alleged to be in breach of paragraph 13 of their terms of service. Mr B was represented by the secretary of the Tameside and Glossop CHC.
6.74
Mr B gave evidence and expanded upon his written complaint. In particular, he provided a clear description of the deterioration in his wife’s condition that had occurred on the morning of 26th
February. He also explained how it was that the family had not telephoned the surgery until shortly after noon. They had been expecting Dr Moysey to attend; he had said he would call ‘in a couple of days’. Mr S, Mrs B’s son, also gave evidence and provided more detail of the conversations he had had with the receptionist on 26th
February. He asserted that his mother’s condition had deteriorated that day and that he had explained that to the receptionist. He said that the receptionist had reported back that Shipman would not come out because Dr Moysey had seen Mrs B two days earlier and it would not be right to ‘go over’ his opinion that she did not need to be admitted to hospital.
6.75
Dr Moysey gave evidence. He confirmed his written statement. He gave a very full account of his examination of Mrs B and the reasons why he had decided on the Monday that Mrs B should remain at home. He explained the arrangements he had made and his plans for her future management. He described the arrangement he had with Shipman and said that he had never sought to restrict the way in which Shipman treated his (Dr Moysey’s) patients.
6.76
Shipman gave evidence. He confirmed his written statement and said that he could not remember the incident at all. He was dependent upon the note he had made. He said that he had not spoken directly to Mr S because the reception staff were very experienced; he had felt he could rely on the receptionist to report accurately what had been said. He said that it was his usual practice to ask the receptionist to find out whether or not there had been any deterioration in a patient’s condition. He said that, according to what he had heard from the receptionist, there had been no deterioration in Mrs B’s condition. He suggested that the receptionist might have ‘overstepped the mark and misinterpreted’ the family’s request for a visit and said that he would accept responsibility for that. He said that he had not been able to ask the receptionist to attend the hearing because he had been unable to identify which receptionist had taken the message and, in any event, once the message was passed to the doctor, it became his responsibility. He had not produced the practice visits book, in which requests for visits were recorded, and said that he was not sure whether it was still available, 18 months after the event. He was unable to explain why the receptionist should have quoted medical ethics to Mr S. He agreed that, if a relative said there was a deterioration in the patient’s condition, the doctor should visit. He said that he believed he had put himself in a position to make a clinical judgement but agreed that, if the evidence of the family was to be believed, he had not done so. He declined to make a closing submission.
6.77
The MSC found that Dr Moysey was not in breach of his terms of service. In the case of Shipman, they preferred the evidence of Mr B and Mr S to that of Shipman. The MSC noted Shipman’s failure to produce the visits book (which they thought should have been kept safe as soon as the complaint was received) or to call the receptionist to give evidence before the MSC. The MSC found that Shipman had twice refused to attend Mrs B on 26th
February and, before doing so, had not placed himself in a position to make a proper professional judgement. He was in breach of paragraph 13 of his terms of service. After hearing about the previous breach in the case of Mr W, in 1989, the MSC recommended that £800 remuneration should be withheld and that Shipman should be warned to comply more closely with his terms of service in future.
6.78
In its decision, the Committee mentioned Shipman’s written note in connection with Mrs B (which by implication they had found was not accurate) but did not comment on whether it might be deliberately misleading, as opposed to genuinely mistaken. Shipman had claimed that he had made the note contemporaneously. It stated unequivocally that there had been no deterioration. With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that Shipman had done, in this case, what he is now known to have done in many cases; he had made a false and self-serving record. At first, it seemed to me that the MSC must have regarded the note as false. However, on further reflection, it appears likely that it might have thought that Shipman genuinely misheard or misunderstood what the receptionist said to him and that the fault on his part was not to speak either to Dr Moysey, to ascertain whether he intended to visit later that day, or to Mr S directly, so as to put himself in a position to make a judgement as to the need for a visit. In other words, it seems that the Committee did not necessarily find him guilty of a deliberate refusal to visit or of a deliberate fabrication of a false note.
6.79
Mrs Elsie Gilliland, the Chairman of the MSC, who presided at the hearing, remembered that her view was that Shipman had made no attempt to assess the patient. She said that the Committee had been sceptical of Shipman’s failure to call the receptionist or to produce the visits book, and thought his excuses for not doing so were not very satisfactory. She also said that members of the Committee were conscious of the possibility that Shipman had looked at the visits book and knew that it did not support his case. She could not go so far as to say that she thought he was being dishonest. I can well understand her thought processes.
6.80
The recommendations of the Manchester MSC were accepted by the Tameside FHSA. Shipman did not appeal against the finding or the penalty. On 22nd
October 1993, notice of the result was sent to the FHSAU and, on 26th
May 1994, the penalty was confirmed by the Chief Executive on behalf of the SoS. In accordance with the powers, conferred by the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Regulations 1992, that I mentioned earlier in this Chapter, the case of Mrs B was sent to the GMC, together with the papers in the case of Mr W.
6.81
The GMC papers show that the GMC decided to take no action. It was of the view that the case of Mr W was too old to reopen and that the case of Mrs B would be difficult to investigate because Shipman had not made an admission. The GMC seems to have thought that it would not be possible to make a finding as to Shipman’s conduct, despite the fact that the MSC had been able to do so. The view was that the case demonstrated only poor performance rather than serious professional misconduct. I shall deal in detail with the GMC’s handling of this case in
6.82
I note that the proceedings took 18 months to be brought to a hearing. No doubt some of this delay was due to the need to transfer the case from Tameside to Manchester. But, even so, the delay was far too long. This case is a good example of the weakness of the MSC system, in which the Committee had no power to call for documents or summon witnesses. The system did not provide for an independent investigation of the facts but left the parties to carry out their own investigation, to the extent that they were either willing or able to do so. In this case, an independent investigator would have been able to take possession of the visits book, which was likely to have contained the best contemporaneous record of what Mr S had said to the receptionist. Also, such an investigator would have been able to identify the receptionist. It is inconceivable that the receptionists would not have recognised the writing in the visits book.
6.83
In the event, I am confident that the MSC reached the right conclusion. However, it did not, for understandable reasons, detect that Shipman had made a false record in an attempt to pass off his own shortcoming as a misunderstanding by the receptionist or between him and the receptionist. Had all the evidence been available, greater insight into Shipman’s conduct would have been gained.
Observations on the Three Complaints
6.84
Bearing in mind that Shipman was an established serial killer of his patients, it seems remarkable that such complaints as were made about him in the years between 1977 and 1996 were not of a more serious nature. No complaint was received about his treatment or failure to treat any patient whom he had in fact killed. Even if they had been investigated in great detail, the three complaints that I have just described would not have thrown any light on Shipman’s true character as a murderer. With the benefit of my knowledge of Shipman’s habitual dishonesty, I have detected signs of dishonest behaviour in the cases of Mr J and Mrs B. However, such signs were by no means obvious and it is not surprising that they were not detected at the time.
6.85
The only case of which I am aware which could have led to a complaint that might have resulted in the detection of Shipman’s true nature was that of Mrs Renate Overton. Shipman injected her with an overdose of diamorphine in February 1994 but she survived, in a persistent vegetative state, until April 1995. As I have already recorded in the First and Third Reports and as I shall mention again in
of this Report, the medical staff at Tameside General Hospital were aware that Shipman had administered a dangerous dose of opiate. It was not suspected that he had acted deliberately. Mrs Overton’s family was alerted to the possibility that Shipman had been negligent. However, no complaint was made.
6.86
The handling of the three complaints illustrates some of the shortcomings of the system in operation during the years before 1996. First, they show that, at least where there was to be an oral hearing, there might well be unacceptable delay. Second, the case of Mr J illustrates the difficulties that could arise from the imposition of time limits. Third, the cases illustrate the problems which could occur when it was left to the parties to investigate and prepare the case and to decide what evidence should be presented. Doctors had the benefit of assistance from skilled advisers from their medical defence organisation but complainants did not. They might have the advice of a representative of the CHC but, if not, they would be seriously disadvantaged. Even with such advice, a complainant might well feel disadvantaged in presenting the case. More serious than that was the complainant’s lack of resources of investigation. Mrs J suggested the production of documents that might help her to prove her case but had neither the power nor the resources to obtain them. Finally, the case of Mrs J and Mr W illustrate the problems that can arise where the composition of the committee does not give the appearance of complete impartiality.
6.87
As I shall explain, it was not only complainants who felt a degree of dissatisfaction with the pre-1996 procedures. Many doctors found the proceedings very stressful, particularly as they were disciplinary proceedings which might well result in punishment or even referral to the GMC. It is possible that Shipman found them stressful and it does appear that, during the currency of the cases of Mr J and Mr W, Shipman reduced the frequency with which he killed patients. In the 12 months before September 1985 when he was notified of the complaint against him in the case of Mr J, Shipman killed 13 patients and I suspect him of killing a further five. He did not kill at all during the four months between notification and the conclusion of the case on 4th
December 1985. In the following month, between 17th
December 1985 and 7th
January 1986, he killed four patients. Similarly, in connection with the case of Mr W, Shipman killed only one patient during the period of about ten months of the currency of the proceedings. He killed again very soon after they had been concluded. The proceedings in the case of Mrs B were very protracted. In the remaining nine months of 1992 after notification of the complaint, Shipman killed only one patient. However, in the first eight months of 1993, before the hearing in September, Shipman killed 13 patients and I suspect him in respect of another.
6.88
I do not know whether this change in the pattern of Shipman’s killing was in any way related to the currency of disciplinary proceedings. I mention the possibility because, in my First Report, I suggested other possible reasons for the variations in the rate of killings. The Inquiry had not then fully investigated the complaints against Shipman and I had not appreciated that the proceedings might have had a deterrent effect.


========================================================================
CHAPTER SEVEN - Complaints and Discipline after 1996
========================================================================

--- Recognition of the Need for Change ---
6.89
In considering these three complaints, I have drawn attention to a number of shortcomings in the MSC system. These shortcomings are typical of the kind of criticism that was being widely expressed about the complaints system in the early 1990s. In June 1993, the SoS appointed an Independent Review Committee under the chairmanship of Professor (later Sir) Alan Wilson, Vice-Chancellor of Leeds University. Its Terms of Reference were:
‘To review the procedures for the making and handling of complaints by NHS patients and their families in the United Kingdom, and the costs and benefits of alternatives to current procedures, and to make recommendations to the Secretary of State for Health and other health ministers.’
6.90
The Wilson Report, entitled ‘Being Heard’, was published in May 1994. It said that the existing arrangements for handling complaints were too complex, too lengthy and too confrontational. MSC reports often failed to give a satisfactory explanation of the decision reached. The requirement that a complaint must constitute a breach of the terms of service was too restrictive. The system appeared to be biased in favour of the GP. The time bars were too technical and restrictive.
6.91
The Report recommended radical changes. The Government invited reactions to and comments upon the Wilson Report before issuing its own response, entitled ‘Acting on Complaints’, in March 1995. Public response was largely favourable and the Government accepted virtually all the recommendations of the Wilson Report. It proposed new procedures which were to come into force on 1st
April 1996. I shall describe the recommendations of the Wilson Report and the Government’s proposals for change in the next Chapter.

--- CHAPTER SEVEN - Complaints and Discipline after 1996 ---
The 1996 Disciplinary Procedures
Commitment to Reform: Consultation
Disciplinary Procedures after April 2004

--- The 1996 Complaints Procedures ---
The Wilson Report
7.3
The Government proposals were based upon the principles expounded in the Wilson Report ‘Being Heard’, which was published in May 1994, and adopted many of its procedural recommendations. The Report stated that the principles underlying a complaints procedure should be responsiveness, quality enhancement, cost-effectiveness, accessibility, impartiality, simplicity, speed, confidentiality and accountability. The Report stressed that there was a need to draw a clear distinction between complaints and disciplinary procedures. Complaints should not necessarily result in disciplinary action although, if a disciplinary issue emerged, the issue should be passed to family health services authority (FHSA) management for it to determine whether disciplinary action was appropriate. It was said that the degree of investigation into a complaint ought to be governed by the wishes of the complainant but that those responsible for the management of the doctor concerned might need to undertake further investigation for management or disciplinary purposes.
7.4
The Report recommended that every complaint should be handled first by the organisation against which it was made and second, if necessary, by an external body. Every organisation should have a complaints manager, who would be responsible for handling the complaint. In general practice, this person would most often be the practice manager or a partner in the practice. An initial response to the complaint should be made very quickly, within 48 hours of receipt, and would be aimed at satisfying the complainant by providing either an explanation or an apology, as appropriate. If necessary, that should be followed by an investigation and/or an offer of conciliation, following which a written response would be provided. If the complainant was dissatisfied with that response, the complaint should be considered by a senior officer of the responsible trust. That person should have a range of options available, such as conciliation, personal discussion with the complainant, further more detailed investigation, taking independent advice on clinical matters or, in effect as a last resort, establishing an independent inquiry.
The Government Proposals
7.5
In announcing its proposals, the Government stated that it wished to ensure
‘maximum commonality’
of procedures throughout the NHS. The philosophy underlying the complaints process was that it was to be a
‘learning process’
. To that end, complaints were to be completely separated from disciplinary proceedings. If it appeared that disciplinary action was appropriate in relation to the circumstances underlying a complaint made by or on behalf of a patient, the disciplinary proceedings would begin only after the complaints procedures were completed.
7.6
The 1996 complaints procedures were to have two stages within the NHS. The first stage would be conducted by the NHS body that had provided the service from which the complaint arose. Complaints against GPs were to be handled, at the first stage, by the practice. Conciliation was to be available as an adjunct to the first stage of the complaints process. If a complainant was dissatisfied with the outcome of a complaint about a GP, s/he could move to the second stage and seek an independent review. He or she would apply to a ‘convenor’, who would usually be a non-executive director of the health authority (HA), who would decide whether to grant a review. If a review was granted, it would be heard by a panel of three non-medical persons. The report of the panel would be sent to the chief executive of the HA, who would send copies to various involved parties, including the chairman of the HA. A complainant who had exhausted these two stages but remained dissatisfied could resort to the Health Service Ombudsman (also known as the Health Service Commissioner). Advance guidance on the implementation of the new procedures was distributed to all NHS bodies in October 1995.
The Legislation and Guidance
7.7
The legislation governing the 1996 complaints procedures came into force on 1st
April 1996, the same date as the creation of the unitary HAs which combined the functions of the district HAs (which previously had responsibility for secondary care) and the FHSAs (which previously had responsibility for the provision of primary care). The requirements for GPs to operate practice-based procedures were brought into effect by amendment of the GPs’ terms of service in the National Health Service (General Medical Services) Amendment Regulations 1996. The arrangements that HAs were required to make for the provision of conciliation services and for the appointment of convenors and independent review panels (IRPs) were set out in directions issued by the Secretary of State for Health (SoS). The new disciplinary arrangements were to be found in the National Health Service (Service Committees and Tribunal) Amendment Regulations 1996. At the outset, guidance was issued to HAs, convenors and GPs as to the way in which they were to carry out their new functions.
The First Stage
7.8
For complaints against GPs, each practice was to develop its own practice-based complaints procedures. The way in which the complaint was to be handled was left largely to the discretion of the practice. The only mandatory provisions were that the practice had to nominate a person to administer the procedures; it had to provide information for patients about how the procedures operated; and it had to acknowledge a complaint within two working days and provide an
‘explanation’
within ten working days of receipt of the complaint. In all other respects, the detailed operation of the procedures was for the practice to decide. The written guidance provided advice on best practice and GPs were encouraged to seek the assistance of the HA if in doubt. The policy was to encourage practices to devise procedures that would work well for them and their patients. It was stressed that every member of the practice team involved in the circumstances giving rise to the complaint had also to be involved in responding to the complaint and had to be prepared to co-operate in handling a complaint. It seems to have been assumed that all GPs would take their duties seriously and in the spirit of
‘learning’
that underlay the new procedures.
7.9
The guidance suggested that the person nominated to be in charge should be the practice manager or one of the partners, although some other person might be appointed. If the complaints manager was not a doctor, one of the doctors should be an
‘overseeing partner’
. Advice was given as to the information to be made available to patients. Standard letters and forms for record keeping were proposed for adoption or adaptation. Practices were advised of the need to keep good records of complaints. It was intended that these would enable the practice to ensure that it was using the resolution of complaints as a learning process. The practice might be required to provide information to the HA in the event that a complaint was not resolved at practice level, but practices were assured that they would not be required to produce their records to the HA.
7.10
The practice’s initial response to a complaint should be to arrange an interview, either face to face or by telephone, between the complaints manager and the complainant. Much good advice was given about the right approach. The complaints manager should then
‘investigate’
the complaint. The guidance said that this
‘may include establishing the facts by talking to practitioners or staff involved’
That was all the advice given on this crucial aspect of the process. It was suggested that, if necessary, advice might be sought from the practitioner’s defence organisation, the local medical committee (LMC) or the HA’s complaints manager. The practice complaints manager should then discuss his/her
‘findings’
with the overseeing partner to decide upon the response, which might be a letter of
explanation
or an offer of a meeting. If it was thought that conciliation might be appropriate, the HA should be approached. Advice was given as to the tone and content of a letter of explanation. This should include information about the next stage of the complaints procedure. Finally, suggestions were made about how practices should learn from the complaints received.
7.11
Under the heading
‘Helpful Hints’
, practices were advised to encourage patients who intended to complain to do so within a reasonable time after the relevant events, but it was suggested that practices should adopt a flexible approach to late complaints. If a complainant appeared unwilling to lodge his/her complaint with the practice, s/he should be given information about the appropriate contact at the HA and the Community Health Council (CHC). I have described the role of the CHC in
7.12
It was thought that small or single-handed practices might have difficulty in setting up an adequate complaints handling process. Several possible solutions to this problem were suggested. The practice might join with other practices to operate the complaints system together or a practice might ask the LMC to nominate a member who would assist with the process. A further possible solution would be to offer complainants the services of a HA lay conciliator. I mention in passing that Shipman did not take up any of those suggestions. He appointed himself as complaints manager and the practice nurse, Sister Gillian Morgan, as his deputy. The practice’s written complaints procedure said that clinical complaints would be handled by Shipman
‘or by another GP’
. However, there was no other GP in the practice and Sister Morgan was not aware of any arrangement with another practice for the handling of complaints.
The Second Stage
7.13
If a complainant remained dissatisfied at the end of the first stage, s/he could apply, within 28 days, for an independent review. In considering whether to grant a review, the convenor would establish the precise nature of the complainant’s remaining grievances. The convenor had first to consider whether the initial complaint had been made within the time allowed. Complaints were to be made within six months of the events complained of, or within six months of the discovery of the facts to be complained of and, in any case, within 12 months of the occurrence of the events. However, convenors could exercise discretion to allow a complaint to proceed if the delay was not unreasonable and if it was still possible to investigate the complaint satisfactorily. Before reaching a decision, the convenor had to consult with the person who would be the chairman of the review panel (IRP) if the application was granted. The chairman was a lay person selected from a list nominated by the SoS. If the complaint involved issues of clinical judgement, the convenor was supposed to seek the advice of a suitably qualified clinical adviser. It should be noted that, although the convenor had to consult with the proposed chairman, and possibly with a suitably qualified clinical adviser, s/he did not actually investigate the complaint.
7.14
Guidance was issued as to the approach convenors should take. An application should be refused if it appeared that the local resolution process had achieved all that could be hoped for and that a panel could add no further value, if further conciliation seemed appropriate or if the complainant had begun or had expressed an intention to begin a claim for damages. In practice, only a small proportion of applications for independent review were granted. According to national figures provided by the Department of Health (DoH), in the years between 1996 and 2001, there were between 1040 and 1430 applications made annually, of which between 219 and 341 were granted. The overall percentage allowed was between 22% and 23%. In Tameside, where between 14 and 24 requests were made annually over the same period, the percentages were not dissimilar, although in one year, only one request was granted out of 23 requests made. Any complainant who was dissatisfied by the refusal to grant a review could ask the Health Service Ombudsman to consider the matter.
7.15
If the application for independent review was granted, the convenor would establish the terms of reference for the panel. A panel would be convened by an officer of the HA
The independent lay Chairman would already have been identified. Another independent lay person would be selected from the list of SoS nominees. The convenor would be the third member. If the complaint related to matters of clinical judgement, two independent clinical assessors selected from a list nominated by the SoS would be appointed to advise the panel.
7.16
Miss Andrea Horsfall was Deputy Consumer Liaison Manager for the WPHA and is now Complaints Manager for the Oldham Primary Care Trust (PCT). She told the Inquiry that she was responsible for making the practical arrangements for IRP hearings and would prepare a bundle of relevant documents on the instructions of the Chairman. Asked whether any further investigation ever took place in advance of the hearing, Miss Horsfall said that, on occasion, the Chairman would direct that a particular witness should be asked to attend to give evidence (although no witness could be compelled to attend). The witness would not be interviewed in advance but would be sent an explanation of what the case was about so that s/he would know what s/he would be asked about. It appears that, although relevant documents were assembled and witnesses invited, there was no investigation of the issues raised by the complaint.
7.17
The hearing before the IRP took place in private. The procedure to be followed was not laid down. The intention was that it should be informal, flexible and non-confrontational. The procedure should be adapted to suit the occasion and the issues to be considered. Sometimes the complainant would be accompanied by a friend or (until the abolition of CHCs in December 2003) a representative of the CHC. The doctor would usually be accompanied by a representative of his/her defence organisation. Either participant could be accompanied by a lawyer, but the lawyer was not permitted to act as an advocate. It appears that many panels chose to interview witnesses in the absence of the opposing party, although this was a matter for the discretion of the panel. Miss Horsfall said that, in her experience, it was usual for the complainant to be asked first to give his/her account of events and to explain why s/he remained dissatisfied with the outcome of the complaint. The panel would ask questions. Then any witnesses the complainant had brought would give their accounts and be questioned. After that, the complainant and his/her witnesses would leave the room and the doctor complained against would come in to give his/her account, followed by any witnesses s/he had brought. Any witnesses asked to attend by the Chairman would then give evidence. A full note of the evidence given would be taken by an administrator from the HA - Miss Horsfall often attended for this purpose - and the proceedings were recorded ‘as a back-up’. At the end of the evidence, there would be a brief discussion between the panel members and possibly the assessors, if any. The assessors would then retire to write their report(s) on the clinical issues. The panel would disband.
7.18
The assessors’ report(s) (if any) and the notes of evidence would be supplied to the Chairman, who would write a draft report to be circulated to the other members for agreement or amendment. The report had to contain the relevant findings of fact and the panel’s opinion (with reasons) on the complaint, having regard to the findings of fact. The panel was not obliged to accept the report of the assessors on clinical issues but, if it did not, it had to give reasons for its disagreement. The report could contain suggestions for improvements in the services provided by the practitioner concerned. It could not include any recommendation that disciplinary proceedings should be taken. However, Miss Horsfall said that, sometimes, panels expressed themselves quite strongly and their views would be clear. The report was sent to the Chief Executive of the HA, who had to distribute it to a list of interested parties.
7.19
If the complainant was dissatisfied with the IRP’s report, s/he could apply to the Health Service Ombudsman, whose powers were extended in 1996 to include the investigation of complaints against GPs and complaints involving the exercise of clinical judgement.
7.20
From April 2002, PCTs took over responsibility for primary care from HAs and assumed the relevant functions under the complaints procedures. The procedures that came into effect in 1996 remained in operation until the coming into force of the National Health Service (Complaints) Regulations 2004 (the 2004 Complaints Regulations) on 30th
July 2004.

--- Reactions to the 1996 Complaints Procedures ---
The Medical Law Review
7.21
Some criticisms of the 1996 complaints procedures were voiced at an early stage after their introduction. In 1997, Ms Diane Longley wrote an article in the
Medical Law Review
. She recognised that the new procedures had not been in force for long and that teething troubles were to be expected. However, her main criticism was that the new system was flawed because it was not sufficiently independent of the NHS. First, she noted that convenors were non-executive directors of the HAs and not therefore independent of them. Moreover, their role was not an easy one; they had a wide element of discretion, to be exercised in consultation with the person selected to be the chairman of the IRP. If the application was granted, the IRP was formally a committee of the HA and the presence of the convenor on the panel might give rise to an appearance of in-built bias.
7.22
Ms Longley also drew attention to the need for a complaints system that covered all aspects of the health service, as, she observed, many complaints arose out of the interaction of several different agencies. Although the new procedures for primary and secondary care were similar, they were not connected. It would be difficult for a patient to complain about treatment that spanned more than one NHS body.
7.23
Ms Longley extolled the virtues of the systems operated in the Australian state of New South Wales and in New Zealand, suggesting that they offered a holistic approach to healthcare complaints and true independence from healthcare providers. The New Zealand system is based upon a statutory code of patients’ rights. This provides broadly stated standards for the provision of services against which complaints can be assessed and judged by the Health and Disability Commissioner. I was able to read some of the decisions of the current Commissioner, Mr Ronald Paterson, who attended the Inquiry seminars. Because he gives fully reasoned decisions, it has been possible to develop certain standards to be applied in specific types of case or situation. His decisions can, where appropriate, be referred to the relevant professional disciplinary body.
Evidence to the Inquiry of Reactions to the New Procedures
7.24
The Inquiry heard evidence that the 1996 procedures did not bring complete satisfaction. Miss Horsfall was responsible, among other things, for advising general practices about complaints, for arranging conciliation services and for administering the independent reviews. She said that she thought that the 1996 complaints procedures were much better than the previous ones. They were far less stressful for everyone, largely because they were no longer linked to discipline. However, she became aware that complainants were reluctant to complain about their GP directly to the practice. She thought that some were deterred from complaining at all on account of this. Some feared that they might be removed from the doctor’s list if they lodged a complaint. If a complainant contacted the HA, the staff had to advise the complainant to make the complaint to the practice. Usually, staff would try to smooth the path for the complainant, possibly by suggesting that the complaint be put in writing or by proposing conciliation. Miss Horsfall had found that conciliation was extremely useful in a wide range of complaints, including some involving issues relating to clinical treatment, as many complainants were only seeking an apology.
7.25
Miss Horsfall also expressed concern that the new system was still ‘patient driven’, as the old one had been. It was up to the complainant to take matters forward to the second stage. There was no one who would take the complaint over and advance it, if the complainant did not want to pursue it. She thought that some complainants gave up, even though they were not satisfied. This was so even where the allegation was of a nature which could raise serious concerns about the competence of the doctor.
7.26
One of Miss Horsfall’s major concerns related to the information that was available to the HA. The HA regarded complaints as an important source of knowledge about the GPs in its area. Under the old system, all complaints came direct to the FHSA. Under the new system most complaints were made direct to the GP practice. The practice only had to inform the HA how many complaints had been received in the past year. It did not have to give any information about the subject matter of a complaint or the way in which it had been resolved. The HA found out about few complaints. If a complainant contacted the HA, s/he might or might not tell Miss Horsfall what the complaint was about. Only in a few cases did Miss Horsfall find out at that stage whom the complaint was against and what it was about. If Miss Horsfall was asked to arrange conciliation, she would find out whom the complaint was against and would receive the practice’s records relating to the complaint for transmission to the conciliator but, officially, she was not allowed to use that information. If the complainant proceeded to the second stage, the HA would find out what the complaint was about. Miss Horsfall’s concern was that the HA did not have a complete picture of complaints in the area. Since 2002, when PCTs took over responsibility for the provision of primary care and the administration of the second stage of complaints procedures in their area, the same problems have remained. Miss Horsfall said that, nowadays, the collection of information about complaints is an important aspect of clinical governance. She thought that practices should be required to provide information about complaints to PCTs much more frequently than annually and should have to include copies of the complaint and the final letter of explanation.
7.27
Miss Horsfall also had reservations about the criteria for determining whether or not there should be an independent review. She thought they were too narrow and that this resulted in dissatisfaction on the part of complainants. She was particularly unhappy about the effect of the rule that complainants were not allowed to proceed to the second stage if they intended to sue for damages. Her instructions were to ask complainants about this. If a complainant said s/he intended to sue, the application would be refused.
7.28
The Inquiry also heard evidence that there was dissatisfaction in some places (although not in Tameside) with the way in which convenors carried out their duties. The question was also raised at the Inquiry about whether convenors might be influenced against the convening of an IRP by the knowledge that it would put the HA of which they were directors to some expense. I was told that a review would cost the HA about £1500 to £2000. The guidance that was issued recognised that cost might operate as a disincentive to recommending independent review, expressly stating that cost should not be taken into account.
7.29
Miss Horsfall told the Inquiry that although she had reservations about the rules and guidance under which the convenors had to operate, she considered that Mr Geoffrey Lamb, the convenor for the WPHA, applied the guidelines fairly and with the utmost care. There was no suspicion in her mind that he might ever have rejected an application because of the expense that would be incurred by the HA if it were granted.
7.30
Miss Horsfall thought that complainants were generally satisfied with the conduct of IRP hearings. Complainants often said that they had found the experience less stressful than they had expected. Dr John Givans, who had considerable experience of representing GPs at panel hearings on behalf of the Medical Defence Union, said that many of his clients were dissatisfied because they did not have the opportunity to hear the complainant’s evidence. This was particularly unsatisfactory in cases where there was a conflict of evidence about what had happened and the panel had to decide between one version and another. He understood that many complainants also expressed a similar view.
7.31
Miss Horsfall said that some complainants were pleased with the outcome of their reviews and some were disappointed. Some were dissatisfied because there had been no sanction against the doctor, even though the complaint had been upheld.
7.32
Miss Horsfall said that it was not always possible to complete the IRP process within the target timescale of three months. Examination of data published by the DoH in September 2003 shows that, in the year 2002-2003, IRP action was concluded outside target times in about 55% of cases.
7.33
When the IRP’s report was received, the HA (and later the PCT) would decide what action, if any, should be taken to remedy any problems identified by the panel. However, the IRP had no power to insist that the HA/PCT take any action to implement the recommendations or to deal with the GP’s shortcomings in any way.
7.34
It is interesting to note that, for the two and a half year period during which Shipman practised while the 1996 complaints procedures were in place, the WPHA became aware of only one complaint made against him and, in line with practice at the time, no details of that were supplied by him. The evidence suggests that, in fact, at least three complaints were made to the practice over that period. Forms described as ‘Complaint Control Sheets’ relating to two complaints were stapled into Shipman’s complaints book, which was recovered from the surgery after his arrest. The first was an oral complaint about the wording used by Shipman in a hospital referral letter. The Complaint Control Sheet described Shipman as the
‘Investigating Officer’
and recorded that, after a meeting, the complainant had been happy with the outcome. The second was a detailed oral complaint about a member of the practice staff refusing to provide information about surgery times. The complainant had subsequently declined to be seen and it was recorded that the complaint would be dealt with as and when a formal complaint was received. A third complaint was not recorded on a Complaint Control Sheet at all. All that is available is a copy of a letter sent by Shipman from which it is possible to glean that the patient had complained about his refusal to undertake her maternity care if she wanted a home delivery. The outcome of the complaint is not known.
7.35
It is a matter of some concern that, if there is no external supervision of complaints, a practitioner might be able to mollify a complainant on a false basis, for example, by claiming that what had happened was an unfortunate outcome but was something that did happen from time to time. Another possibility is that a doctor might make an apparently sincere apology for, say, a prescribing error, which satisfied the patient but did nothing to correct the doctor’s poor practice. Or, as apparently happened with Shipman, the information supplied by the practice to the HA or PCT about the number of complaints received could be inaccurate.
Longley D (1997) ‘Complaints after Wilson; another case of too little too late?’, Medical Law Review, 5, Summer 1997, pp. 172-192.

--- Research into the Operation of the 1996 Complaints Procedures ---
The Public Law Project
7.45
In July 1997, the Public Law Project commenced research into the operation of the 1996 complaints procedures from the perspective of health service users. Its report, entitled ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, was published in September 1999.
7.46
Local resolution was reported to be generally satisfactory in practices that were committed to the process but less good with defensive practitioners who merely
‘played
the game’
. A number of concerns were expressed. First, it was apparent from an examination of the decisions of convenors that many practices did not operate fair procedures; many failed to investigate the complaint adequately or to give an adequate explanation at the end of the process. In 47% of the cases examined, the convenor had sent the case back for a further attempt at local resolution. There were also more fundamental concerns. The local procedures failed to take account of the imbalance of power inherent in the relationship between healthcare professional and patient. It was very difficult for patients to challenge the organisation that had treated them. The procedures whereby an organisation investigated its own conduct or performance were unlikely to be impartial. Local NHS complaints procedures were not accountable to any external body. These problems were particularly acute in the primary care sector, where the need to bring the complaint directly to the practice acted as a deterrent to complaining. The handling of a complaint by a small organisation could become uncomfortably personalised. Patients feared retribution such as being removed from the practice list. Some were sceptical about whether they would receive honest or impartial explanations. It was felt that there was a need for complainants to be able to take their grievances to an independent authority which would assume responsibility for overseeing any investigation.
7.47
Concern was expressed about the inability of the new procedures (particularly at a local level) to deal adequately with complaints that raised serious questions about performance, conduct or competence, such as might place patients at risk. One of the major problems was the inadequacy of the investigation of the complaint. Not only did the complaints manager not always have the necessary skills, there was often a defensive attitude which amounted to
‘collective back-covering’
. It was in this area in particular that there was a need for independence and competence in the handling of complaints.
7.48
Convenors were seen to be less than independent and were perceived as
‘insiders’
of the NHS. Nearly 50% of all the convenors interviewed said that they felt compromised by their role as a non-executive director of the HA. Some had insufficient experience or training to fulfil their functions satisfactorily.
7.49
The conduct of IRP hearings was also unsatisfactory. It was reported that most panels opted to hear the participants separately. Many complainants felt dissatisfied that they had not been able to hear the doctor’s explanation. There was also a feeling that some panels and assessors were biased towards the NHS. Sometimes, IRP chairmen lacked the necessary skills to function well.
7.50
The report highlighted the problem, mentioned by Miss Horsfall in evidence to the Inquiry, that HAs and PCTs were unable to monitor the handling of primary care complaints because they had little information about them. This had led to a loss of accountability of practitioners. The authors also reported that the commitment of NHS organisations to using the complaints process as an instrument of change was variable. Not all made much effort to implement IRP recommendations. Concern was expressed about the effect of the dissociation of discipline and complaints procedures. It was noted that there had been a marked decline in the number of disciplinary proceedings taken in primary care. It appeared that there was a preference for dealing with shortcomings by retraining and skill improvement. It was suggested that the drawback to this was the lack of any sanction. There was an appearance that healthcare professionals were not accountable.
7.51
The report concluded with a number of recommendations. I shall highlight five. First, it was said that primary care patients should be able to complain directly to an officer who was independent of the practice and who would have responsibility for overseeing the investigation of the complaint. Second, it was suggested that the DoH should develop a framework for fast tracking complaints that raised serious questions about performance, conduct or competence which put patients at risk. Such complaints should be considered by a ‘screener’ who would decide whether they should be referred immediately to more formal investigatory or remedial processes. Third, the second stage of the process should be conducted under the auspices of a regional, rather than a local, NHS body, to increase independence and efficiency. Fourth, guidance should be disseminated for the conduct of IRPs to improve fairness and transparency. Finally, accountability should be improved by the provision of information about primary care complaints to HAs, by permitting IRPs to recommend disciplinary action and by keeping complainants informed of the outcome of disciplinary action.
7.52
In my view, this research was well conducted, reached careful conclusions and recommended sensible measures. Although it did not result in any immediate action, it may well have stimulated the commissioning of further research and may have influenced Government thinking.
Report on the Research Undertaken by the York Health Economics Consortium
7.53
In 1999, the Government commissioned the York Health Economics Consortium to undertake research into the operation of the NHS complaints procedures. The Consortium published its report (the York Report) in March 2001. As with the work of the Public Law Project, this research appears to have been well conducted. It was, however, more widely based and surveyed the experience of all types of people who operated the procedures as well as those who used them. The findings bear a remarkable similarity to those of ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, although, as I shall explain, the recommendations were far less radical.
7.54
Among complainants, there was a high level of dissatisfaction in respect of local resolution and the second stage. At local level, only about one third of complainants were satisfied with the process. Dissatisfaction related to the handling of the complaints, the time taken, unfairness and bias, stressfulness and outcome. Patient interest groups emphasised the difficulty that many patients experienced in complaining directly to a service provider. There were reports of patients being removed from a practice list following a complaint. Specific criticisms related to unhelpful, aggressive or arrogant attitudes of staff, poor communication and lack of information and support. At the second stage, only a quarter were satisfied. Dissatisfaction again related to delay, unfairness and bias, stressfulness and outcome. Only 13% were satisfied with outcome. The main complaint about the second stage was of lack of independence.
7.55
Among NHS staff who had been the subject of a complaint, there was a high level of satisfaction. Most thought the complaint against them had been handled well and that the process had been fair and unbiased. Some complained that they had not been kept sufficiently informed of progress. In my view, the stark difference between the satisfaction levels of those complaining and those complained against is very significant. It strongly suggests that the procedures were weighted against complainants.
7.56
In the eyes of most of those involved in the operation of the procedures the view was that they were superior to those in force before 1996. However, the need for improvement was recognised, in particular in respect of the independence of those involved in the second stage. Some of those involved thought that the second stage procedures were too time-consuming and expensive. Some thought that the performance targets were difficult to meet. IRP members wanted better training and feedback.
7.57
The York Report discussed the policy implications of the findings and made many specific recommendations. In relation to primary care services, the recommendations were developmental rather than radical. The main thrust of the proposals was to ensure that complaints handling at local level was given a higher priority. It was suggested that complainants must be offered the opportunity to complain otherwise than directly to the practice. This was to be achieved by encouraging practices to work together to share information and to offer support in providing acceptable procedures. There should be less discretion afforded to practice complaints managers about how complaints should be handled. Wider use should be made of conciliation. There should be a named individual in each PCT, to whom complainants would have access, with responsibility to
‘handle complaints about member practices’
. Also it was proposed that PCTs should receive more information about complaints, including the causes of complaints and the action taken or proposed to prevent a recurrence. PCT boards should receive a quarterly report on complaints and should take responsibility for ensuring that agreed actions were implemented. The quarterly report should be disseminated to local patients’ organisations. Consideration should be given to the development of a National Service Framework for the management of complaints.
7.58
Proposals for improvement of the second stage related mainly to increased independence of convenors and panels. The second stage should be conducted at a regional or sub-regional level. Consideration should be given to increased powers for panels, for example to summon witnesses and take evidence. Improved training should be provided for all those operating the second stage. The Health Service Ombudsman should be asked to consider how to operate a fast track procedure whereby, in appropriate cases, the second stage would be conducted by the Ombudsman. The board of the relevant NHS body should take active responsibility for ensuring that, following the receipt of an IRP report, an action plan was produced and the action implemented.
Report of the Commission for Health Improvement into the Case of Peter Green
7.59
In August 2001, the Commission for Health Improvement (CHI) published a report of its investigation into the conduct of a GP, Peter Green, who had been convicted in July 2000 of sexual assaults on a number of patients. The report
criticised
‘an NHS culture that did not listen to complaints or treat them inquisitively’
‘an NHS complaints system failing to detect issues of professional misconduct or criminal activity’
over a number of years. Concerns about Green’s conduct had been raised with a variety of different bodies on no fewer than 23 occasions between 1985 and 1997. These included the FHSA, doctors at Green’s practice, the GMC and the police. The complaints had not been logged or cross-referenced and the pattern had not been noticed.
7.60
The CHI report focussed on the systems failures and did not make specific recommendations for the reform of the complaints procedures. However, it described a telling example of the way in which local procedures can fail completely if the attitude of the practice is not open and fair. One of Green’s victims made a complaint to the practice in 1996. After
, the official response was that there was
‘no evidence that Dr Green was guilty of any professional misconduct or that he had motives other than to benefit you
the complainant
in his treatment of you’
Of course, there was evidence of professional misconduct - from the complainant - but the practice had not taken it sufficiently seriously and had apparently accepted Green’s explanation of what had occurred.

--- Commitment to Reform: Consultation ---
Statements of Intent
7.61
In July 2000, the Government published ‘The NHS Plan, A plan for investment, A plan for reform’ (the NHS Plan), which contained its proposals for the modernisation of all aspects of the health service. The NHS Plan included an undertaking to reform the complaints procedures and also to improve the information and assistance to be available to patients. It announced the future formation of the Patient Advocacy (later to be changed to ‘Advice’) and Liaison Service (PALS), which, it was said, would
‘steer patients and families towards the complaints process where necessary’
and would take over the functions then performed by the CHCs in supporting complainants. CHCs provided free advice and support for complainants at all stages of the complaints procedures. CHCs would draft and deal with correspondence, would advise about the issues raised and would accompany the complainant at any hearing. The evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that many did their work well and that their services were much appreciated, not only by complainants but also by those with responsibility for administering the procedures, such as Miss Horsfall.
7.62
In September 2001, the Government published a Consultation Paper entitled ‘Reforming the NHS Complaints Procedure: a listening document’. The consultation took place shortly after the publication of the Report of the Public Inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary 1984-1995. The Consultation Paper explained that it was the Government’s intention to improve the accountability of the NHS and to give patients and the public a greater role in shaping health care. The Consultation Paper summarised the findings of the York Report and sought views on its recommendations. Some specific questions were posed for discussion. The Government promised to listen to patients’ views. Consultation closed in October 2001.
7.63
Also in September 2001, a second Consultation Paper was published, entitled ‘Involving Patients and the Public in Healthcare. A Discussion Document’. The principal measures proposed were the formation of the Commission for Patient and Public Involvement in Health (CPPIH), which would have an overarching and co-ordinating responsibility for patient involvement in the health service. Two new bodies would be formed, PALS and a locally based Independent Complaints Advocacy Service (ICAS). A Patients Forum would be set up in every NHS trust. The remit of the Patients Forums would be to monitor and review the quality of local services from the perspective of patients. CHCs would be abolished. The two new services, PALS and ICAS, would, in the words of the Consultation Paper,
‘be a key means of ensuring that patients’ concerns would be dealt with rapidly and to everyone’s satisfaction’
The intention was that PALS would be able to provide on-the-spot advice and help to patients in the resolution of a wide variety of problems. ICAS would provide assistance to patients in advancing a complaint. The proposal to abolish the CHCs was met with widespread expressions of dismay, particularly from organisations representing patients’ interests.
7.64
In ‘Delivering the NHS Plan’, published in April 2002, the Government announced its intention to form the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission), which would, among many other functions, have responsibility for the independent scrutiny of healthcare complaints.
After the Community Health Councils
7.65
The abolition of the CHCs proceeded more or less as planned and a branch of PALS was set up in each area. PALS advisers are NHS employees; they may be employed by a hospital trust or a PCT and, in some areas, PALS may serve both the primary and the secondary sectors. PALS is intended to give advice about a wide range of problems that a patient might encounter within the NHS; it is not limited to advice about complaints. A PALS adviser might tell a patient how to go about lodging a complaint and might advise him/her how to obtain the support of ICAS. PALS does not provide independent support for a complainant. It would be inappropriate for it to do so, as those who run the service are NHS employees.
7.66
In May 2003, the Association of CHCs published a preliminary survey of the accessibility and efficacy of PALS. I recognise at the outset that this survey was undertaken by one of the bodies that was being supplanted by PALS. It might reasonably be said that the Association had a point of view to promote. However, I have no reason to suppose that its data is inaccurate. The survey showed that the provision of the new service was very patchy. Of 100 sample calls made to the switchboards of 100 different NHS trusts, requesting access to PALS, only 51 calls resulted in a personal response. The rest were either not connected to PALS or were met by an answerphone response. This survey was conducted in the early days after PALS was set up. It is to be hoped that there has been some improvement during the last 18 months.
7.67
ICAS has taken a little longer to set up. As its name implies, ICAS is intended to be independent of the NHS. Contracts for ICAS provision were being signed when Sir Nigel Crisp, Chief Executive of the NHS in England, gave evidence to the Inquiry in July 2003. ICAS services are currently commissioned centrally by the CPPIH and are provided by Citizens’ Advice or similar organisations. In July 2004, the Government announced its intention to abolish the CPPIH and, at present, it is not clear to me who will be responsible for the commissioning of ICAS services. When the Inquiry was hearing oral evidence, ICAS was in its infancy and the precise ambit of its functions was not yet clear. In July 2004, however, according to the CPPIH website, ICAS could offer to
‘help clients identify the options for taking forward their complaint/s about NHS services’
‘make sure lessons from users’ experiences of the NHS are fed back into the service and to those responsible for scrutinising the NHS’
It cannot, however, help with complaints about private healthcare treatment or services that arise outside the NHS, nor can it assist complainants who are pursuing or intend to pursue litigation concerning a complaint about NHS services.
7.68
The Inquiry has not received evidence as to how ICAS is functioning. It seems likely from information currently on its website that it will in fact provide support for complainants throughout the complaints process. There is a need for complainants to have access to free, independent and well-informed advice. It is not sufficient that a complainant is told how to proceed. He or she needs someone with whom to discuss the issues and the merits of the complaint. He or she needs advice about whether, and exactly how, to proceed. He or she needs someone to support him/her at a hearing, if any. If ICAS is indeed able to provide such advice and support, its work is to be very much encouraged.
The Government Proposals for Complaints Procedures
7.69
In February 2003, the Government’s proposals for reform of the complaints procedures were published in ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’. This document acknowledged all the defects of the existing system that had been highlighted in the research and which had, apparently, been confirmed during the consultation exercise. These included difficulty in pursuing complaints, delays, negative attitudes by those operating the procedures, lack of fairness, lack of support, lack of independence at the review stage, lack of redress and a failure to use feedback from complaints to improve services.
7.70
The essential proposals were to improve the operation of the local procedures, to reform the second stage radically and to improve the mechanisms for learning from complaints. It was recognised that, if local procedures were to be improved, there would have to be a change of attitude in some of those operating the procedures. In particular, it was said that complaints should be valued as an aid to learning and improving the quality of service; they should be dealt with positively and willingly, not defensively. The proposal was to bring about this change of attitude by improved training and development programmes. Also, patients who wished to complain were to be given improved information and greater support.
7.71
I feel bound to observe that it would be a fine thing if attitudes towards complaints could readily be changed by training and education. I think that they can be improved but that change will be a long and gradual process. First, I have the impression that, for many doctors, a hostile attitude to complaints is deeply embedded. In the medical press, it is not uncommon to find opinions that most complainants are obsessive and their complaints unfounded. Second, it is human nature to be defensive when criticised. Being on the receiving end of a complaint can be distressing, irritating and very time-consuming. That is not to say that the effort to bring about change in attitudes is not worth making. I think it is. In respect of the second stage, ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’ proposed that the independent review should be carried out, not under the auspices of the local PCT, but by what is now the Healthcare Commission. This organisation would be seen to be independent and efficient. It would be able to identify what was required to put matters right and would also ensure that lessons were learned where mistakes had been made. Third, complaints and their resolution should become an integral part of the systems of quality control in the NHS. Overall responsibility for complaints handling would rest with senior management. Information derived from complaints would be used for clinical governance purposes.
Proposals to Include the Provision of Redress for Justified Complaints
7.72
I referred earlier to the lack of any redress for complainants whose complaint is found to have been justified. At present, and indeed under the draft National Health Service (Complaints) Regulations (the draft Complaints Regulations) setting out the proposed new complaints procedures, if a complaint is upheld, the complainant should receive an apology and an explanation of what has occurred. There is no possibility of even limited financial redress. Historically in this country, there has been a complete separation between the making of a complaint and the seeking of financial redress. Financial redress can be obtained only by legal action in the courts and, consequently, only in cases in which the claimant can prove damage due to a breach of the legal duty of care owed to the patient by the doctor or the organisation. As I mentioned earlier, any patient who decides to take legal action is, at present, barred from pursuing a complaint to the second stage and can expect no assistance from ICAS.
Consolatory Payments
7.73
A complaints procedure that cannot provide any financial redress is unlikely to give satisfaction in many cases. Indeed, it is my understanding that some financial redress is usual nowadays for complaints against other professionals; certainly the procedures operated by both solicitors and barristers provide limited financial compensation. When a patient complains about a doctor, there will be times when all that s/he wants is an apology or to find out what has happened or reassurance that steps have been taken to prevent the recurrence of the problem that gave rise to the complaint. Sometimes, a complainant will feel that that reassurance can be provided only if the doctor complained of is subjected to some disciplinary process, possibly even amounting to erasure from the medical register. Sometimes, a complainant will want - and should be entitled to - an apology, an explanation, or a reassurance that lessons have been learned, and some, albeit modest, redress.
7.74
In his Annual Report for 2000-2001, the Health Service Ombudsman reported that NHS bodies had found themselves in difficulty when they wished to make a small consolatory payment, for example, to a person who had suffered some injustice, because they could not do so under NHS rules. A payment could be made only if the person involved was able to demonstrate financial loss, or if the NHS body was found guilty of maladministration. The Ombudsman suggested that the rules should permit the payment of a modest sum in acknowledgement of delay or
‘botheration’
and make plain that such a payment does not amount to an admission of liability. Such a rule would, in his view, be more in keeping with a modern NHS. The Ombudsman said that he had raised this point with the SoS in connection with a particular complaint but the SoS was apparently unwilling to consider any change on the basis that consolatory payments would divert funds from patient care. The Ombudsman pointed out that, in principle, the rule against consolatory payments applies not only to the NHS, but also to central and local Government, both of which, the Ombudsman claimed, were willing to make consolatory payments
In my view, the opinion of the Health Service Ombudsman was interesting and valuable. He was in a uniquely good position to estimate the value of consolatory payments in achieving satisfaction for complainants.
‘Making Amends’
7.75
In June 2003, the Chief Medical Officer published ‘Making Amends’, a Consultation Paper setting out proposals for reforming the approach to clinical negligence in the NHS. I do not intend to describe the content of the Paper in any detail. In essence, it sets out a long-term strategy to improve health care by learning from mistakes and to provide a holistic response to patients who complain about an adverse event in health care. The paper recognises the need for patients who have suffered an adverse consequence as the result of something ‘going wrong’ to receive an apology, a frank explanation of what has happened, remedial treatment and care and, where appropriate, financial compensation. My understanding is that the financial compensation envisaged would be much larger than a consolatory payment but much less than the damages that would be awarded by the courts.
7.76
The thinking behind the proposals is that a system that provides these four elements will, in the long term, ensure that the NHS focusses on the prevention of harm and the reduction of risks so that the quality of care is improved and the level of medical error is reduced. Also, the proposals should lead to a better co-ordinated response to harm resulting from inadequate health care. A reduction in the level of medical error would mean that fewer patients would have cause to sue the NHS and a better response to harm would mean that fewer patients would wish to sue, because their complaints would have been properly dealt with without recourse to action in the civil courts. Not unnaturally, there is a hope that the high cost of clinical negligence claims will eventually be reduced.
7.77
The Consultation Paper focusses mainly on the suggestion for a NHS redress scheme, which is described in some detail, although it also suggests some changes in the law of tort in relation to clinical negligence claims. The scheme for redress would be available in cases where harm has been suffered as the result of serious shortcomings in the standard of care, where the harm could have been avoided and where the adverse outcome was not the result of the natural progression of an illness. At present, the proposal relates only to the secondary care sector, although, if successful, it is hoped to extend it to primary care.
7.78
The Consultation Paper stresses the need for the thorough investigation of all adverse events and the duty on healthcare professionals and managers to provide an honest explanation to patients about what has gone wrong. One particular recommendation relates to a
‘duty
of candour’
of healthcare professionals. It is suggested that there should be a legal duty upon such professionals to inform patients where they become aware of a possible negligent act or omission. The paper also suggests that, concomitant with the duty of candour, there should be an exemption from disciplinary action by employers or professional regulatory bodies for those reporting adverse events
‘except where the healthcare professional has committed a criminal offence or it would not be safe for the professional to continue to treat patients’
7.79
In its response to ‘Making Amends’ the GMC pointed out that doctors are already under a professional duty to give patients a frank explanation when things have gone wrong. This is wider than the suggested duty to tell patients when the doctor thinks there might have been negligence. Also, the GMC suggested that a legal duty would be difficult to police and would, therefore, be undesirable. The GMC would prefer a professional duty. As for the suggested exemption from disciplinary action, the GMC reminded the Government of the policy enunciated in ‘A Commitment to Quality, A Quest for Excellence: A statement on behalf of the Government, the medical profession and the NHS’, published in June 2001. In that document, the Government and the profession had agreed that, without lessening the commitment to quality and the accountability to the public, honest failure by a healthcare professional should not be dealt with primarily by blame and retribution but by learning from mistakes. However, as the GMC pointed out in its response, the exemption from disciplinary action now being proposed went beyond the commitment in the joint statement of policy and would be incompatible with the GMC’s own statutory duty to take appropriate action (possibly including disciplinary action) when a complaint is received. Mr Ian Hargreaves, retired Regional Director, Royal College of Nursing, also told the Inquiry that he considered the idea of exemption from disciplinary action undesirable in the case of any healthcare professional.
7.80
The consultation period allowed in ‘Making Amends’ expired in October 2003 but, at the time of writing in late 2004, the Government has not announced how it intends to proceed.
Proposals for Reform of the 1996 Complaints Procedures
7.81
In July 2003, when the Inquiry embarked upon the Stage Four hearings, which covered all issues relating to the monitoring of GPs, the Government had not yet produced any firm proposals for change to the complaints procedures. The Stage Four hearings included an investigation of the operation of the complaints handling system. In October 2003, the Inquiry published a Consultation Paper, entitled ‘Safeguarding Patients: Topics for Consideration at the Stage Four Seminars’, which was designed to elicit responses to, and provoke discussion of, ideas that had occurred to the Inquiry team during the investigative stage and the first few weeks of the hearings. The issues and responses were to form the basis for discussion at the seminars to be held in January 2004. Five of the topics raised in the Consultation Paper related to patient complaints.
7.82
In December 2003, the DoH published detailed proposals for change in the form of the draft Complaints Regulations. By this time, the Inquiry had already heard evidence about patient complaints but, fortunately, the draft Complaints Regulations were published before the seminars took place. It appears that the Government had continued to ‘listen’ to reactions to its outline proposals, because the detailed proposals in the draft Complaints Regulations contained some important developments. The major reform presaged in ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’ (i.e. the transfer of the second stage review to the Healthcare Commission) was provided for in Part IV of the draft Complaints Regulations. However, in respect of the first stage, it appears to have been recognised that negative attitudes towards complaints prevalent in some NHS organisations could not be changed within a reasonable timespan by education and training alone.
7.83
The Health and Social Care (Community Health and Standards) Act 2003 was passed and provided for the creation of the Healthcare Commission, which came into existence in April 2004. As the proposal to transfer the second stage of the complaints procedure to the Healthcare Commission had been widely welcomed and it was becoming increasingly difficult to operate the IRP system, the Government was anxious to bring the provisions governing the second stage into effect. However, the proposals for the first stage of the procedures had not met with such wide and complete approval. In particular, some reservations about them were expressed at the Inquiry’s seminars and it was known that this Inquiry would make relevant recommendations. The Government also wished to await the Reports of two other Inquiries (the Neale and Ayling Inquiries) that would have a direct bearing on complaints issues. Accordingly, in April 2004, the DoH informed this Inquiry that regulations governing the transfer of the second stage to the Healthcare Commission would be made in July 2004. It was also stated that the implementation of any changes to the first stage of the procedures would be deferred pending the Reports of all three Inquiries. The regulations made would consolidate and rationalise the various existing Regulations governing the first stage. I am grateful for the opportunity to have my recommendations taken into account before the forthcoming legislation is finalised. I shall discuss the issues raised in greater detail in
. The reports of the Neale and Ayling Inquiries were published in September 2004.
7.84
As I have explained, the 2004 Complaints Regulations came into force on 30th
July 2004. There are two main parts to the Regulations. The first part covers the handling and consideration of complaints (i.e. the first stage) by NHS bodies but it does not cover providers of primary care (where the previous Regulations therefore still apply). A ‘NHS body’ means a strategic health authority, a NHS trust, a PCT or a special health authority. In the context of this Report, a ‘primary care provider’ means a GP practice. The second part covers the handling and consideration of complaints by the Healthcare Commission (i.e. the second stage) and applies to complaints about providers of primary care as well as complaints about other bodies. I shall discuss the second part in detail in
7.85
The draft Complaints Regulations would require primary care providers, as before, to appoint a complaints manager to take responsibility for the investigation of any complaint received by that body. However, in the context of primary care, the proposal now is that patients should have the option of complaining either to the PCT or to the primary care provider. Complaints made to the practice would be investigated by the practice, as now. Complaints made to the PCT would be investigated by the PCT. I think the introduction of this choice would be welcomed by many patients for the reasons already discussed. Most patients would find it easier to complain to the PCT, particularly in respect of matters involving personal criticism of a doctor.
7.86
A number of other changes were proposed in the draft Complaints Regulations and some, though not all, have been introduced for NHS bodies by the 2004 Complaints Regulations. The time limits for making a complaint were to be extended from six months to one year but they have been kept at six months for NHS bodies. I am not sure whether this preservation of the
was intended to be temporary, pending publication of the Reports of the three Inquiries. As I shall explain in
, it is my view that the period should be 12 months. Some of the restrictive rules, which provided that complaints could not in certain circumstances proceed, were to be modified under the draft Complaints Regulations, but these modifications have not been made by the 2004 Complaints Regulations. First, under the 1996 procedures, a complainant who intended to take legal proceedings could not be granted an independent review. Under the draft Complaints Regulations, the complaints manager of the NHS body to whom the complaint was made was to consider, in consultation with the complainant, how the complaint should be handled. He or she could investigate the complaint provided that s/he considered that the NHS investigation would not compromise or prejudice the concurrent proceedings. Under the 2004 Complaints Regulations, however, any complaint against a NHS body about which the complainant has stated that s/he intends to take legal proceedings is excluded from the operation of the Regulations. Similarly, the fact that a NHS body was taking disciplinary proceedings against a doctor would not, under the draft Regulations, have precluded the furtherance of the patient’s complaint; however, the existence of proposed or actual disciplinary proceedings in relation to the substance of the complaint will, under the 2004 Complaints Regulations, now cause that complaint to be excluded from the operation of the Regulations. In my view that is not satisfactory and I shall make recommendations on this topic in
7.87
One welcome change proposed in the draft Complaints Regulations has been introduced covering the application of the first stage to complaints about NHS bodies. The categories of person allowed to complain have been extended under the 2004 Complaints Regulations. Formerly, the only persons permitted to complain were patients, former patients and such other persons as could properly represent the interests of patients and former patients who could not pursue a complaint for themselves. Now, any person (or the representative of such a person) who is affected by or likely to be affected by the action, omission or decision of a NHS body or primary care provider would be able to lodge a complaint. This is a welcome change.
7.88
Another proposed change that I welcome is the provision to be made for ‘complex’ complaints. Nowadays, many complaints involve more than one NHS body. Until now, it has not been possible to make a single complaint about the conduct or performance of more than one NHS body or indeed the liaison - or lack of it - between two NHS bodies. This problem was highlighted in Ms Longley’s article in the Medical Law Review in 1996 referred to earlier in this Chapter.
7.89
The 2004 Complaints Regulations impose upon the complaints manager of the NHS body who receives the complaint the duty to investigate it
. The draft Complaints Regulations would impose the same obligation on the primary care provider. If some complaints about a primary care provider are to be directed to the PCT (as I hope they will be), the proposal gives rise to potential difficulties owing to the lack of training, expertise and resources of PCTs to handle complaints well. I shall discuss these difficulties in more detail in
. To some extent these potential difficulties seemed to have been recognised by Government, as the draft Complaints Regulations provided that, where it appeared appropriate, the complaints manager of the NHS body or primary care provider handling the complaint could refer it directly to the Healthcare Commission or to the Health Service Ombudsman. Such a referral could be made only with the consent of the complainant and of the Healthcare Commission or the Health Service Ombudsman. This provision seemed also to be designed to meet the concern expressed in the Public Law Project report that there has, in the past, been inadequate provision for the rapid resolution of complaints that gave rise to serious concerns about conduct or performance and that might bring about the risk of harm to patients. In effect, this provision would have allowed for a complaint to be fast tracked to and investigated by the Healthcare Commission or the Health Service Ombudsman. This seemed to be a welcome proposal, although I was concerned to hear from Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, Complaints and Helpline Project Lead at the Healthcare Commission, that this provision was, in fact, intended primarily to allow a referral in cases in which the complainant had ‘lost faith’ in the NHS procedures. I note that it is not in the 2004 Complaints Regulations. I will discuss this further in

--- Disciplinary Procedures after April 2004 ---
7.90
paragraphs 7.36-7.38
, I explained why in 1996 disciplinary proceedings against GPs at local level fell into disuse immediately after the introduction of the new complaints procedures. They were still used occasionally, however, and their operation still depended upon establishing a breach of the GP’s terms of service. As I have explained in
with the introduction of the new General Medical Services Contract in April 2004, terms of service have ceased to exist. In their place, the National Health Service (General Medical Services Contracts) Regulations 2004 (the 2004 Regulations) have introduced a wide range of contractual conditions and obligations. Services will be provided under a contract between the PCT and the practice, not between the PCT and the individual doctor. There are conditions relating to the constitution of the practice. Obligations on the practice include, for example, a requirement that the practice carries out its duties with reasonable skill and care, and practices must co-operate with the investigation of complaints.
7.91
Paragraphs 110 to 120 of Schedule 6 to the 2004 Regulations provide powers for the PCT to deal with breaches of conditions or obligations. These are quite separate powers from the list management powers I have already described in
. Under the 2004 Regulations, the PCT may, in some circumstances, terminate the contract with the practice. For example, it may do so if it finds that the practice provided false information in respect of certain important matters when entering into the contract. Also, the PCT may terminate the contract if the practice’s financial situation puts the PCT at risk of material financial loss. The PCT has the power to issue a remedial notice if the practice breaches an obligation which is capable of being remedied and is not of such importance as to warrant termination. For example, a failure to provide a practice leaflet might be dealt with by a remedial notice. In the case of a breach which has occurred and cannot now be remedied (such as a failure to visit a patient in circumstances in which a visit was required), the PCT may serve a notice on the practice requiring it not to repeat the breach. The PCT may terminate the contract for repeated breaches or repeated failures to heed notices if it is satisfied that the cumulative effect of the breaches is such that it would be prejudicial to the efficiency of the services for the contract to continue. The PCT also has the power, where appropriate, to impose sanctions on a practice. For example, it might terminate or suspend the provision by a practice of certain specific services, such as, for example, child health surveillance. It may also withhold or deduct monies payable under the contract.
7.92
There is no formal procedure laid down which must be followed before a contract can be terminated or a sanction imposed. However, if it is reasonably practicable to do so, the PCT must consult with the LMC when it is considering termination of a contract or the imposition of a sanction. Also, the PCT must give notice in writing of its intention to terminate the contract or impose a sanction and the practice then has 28 days in which to invoke the NHS disputes resolution procedure before the termination or sanction takes effect. If the disputes resolution procedure is invoked, the termination or sanction would not normally take effect until the conclusion of that procedure. However, the PCT can terminate the contract or impose the sanction before that stage is reached if it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so to protect the safety of patients or to protect itself from material financial loss.
7.93
These powers, combined with their list management powers, mean that PCTs do now have quite extensive powers, at least on paper, to insist on the provision of appropriate services and to dispense with the services of practices that cannot provide them. It is too early to say how these new powers will work in practice. I do fear that there will be some tension between a PCT’s wish to dispense with services that are not up to standard and the need to provide GP services to the population at a time when there is a shortage of GPs. The problem is likely to be particularly acute in areas which are not attractive to or popular with GPs. However, in my view, it is better that the powers are in place, even if they are not used as effectively as the PCT might wish, than that they do not exist at all.

--- Conclusions ---
7.94
So far as complaints procedures are concerned, it has been recognised that the arrangements that have existed since 1996 were in need of change. From the perspective of this Inquiry, it appears to me that there are several vital improvements to be made. One is that PCTs should have full information about all complaints received about a GP, not only those that proceed to the second stage of the procedure. Such information is a vital component of clinical governance. Another is that complainants should have the option of making a complaint about their GP or the practice to the PCT and should not be obliged to ‘face’ the doctor or the practice staff directly. Third, there is a real need to ensure that PCTs have the responsibility and the resources to investigate the more serious complaints adequately, including those involving an allegation of substandard clinical care. It seems to me that, in the past, complaints have not been ‘bottomed’ because there has been no one responsible for and capable of conducting an independent investigation. Complainants have lacked resources and know-how and it is not always in the doctors’ interests to ensure the production of all the available evidence. I welcome the decision to transfer the conduct of the second stage of a complaint to the Healthcare Commission, which is setting up a team of investigators. I hope that the Healthcare Commission will develop real expertise in investigation. However, the existence of an investigative team at the Healthcare Commission will not remove the need for PCTs to have their own facilities available. Finally, I am convinced of the need for the provision of appropriate support for complainants at all stages of the process. I shall make my recommendations for change to the complaints procedures in

--- CHAPTER EIGHT - Raising Concerns about Shipman ---
The Concerns of Mr John Shaw
The Concerns of Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross
The Concerns of Mrs Shirley Harrison
The Concerns of Mr David and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe
The Concerns of Dr Linda Reynolds
The Concerns of Bereaved Families and Friends


========================================================================
CHAPTER EIGHT - Raising Concerns about Shipman
========================================================================

--- The Doctors at the Donneybrook Practice ---
8.4
I have already described, in
, the circumstances in which Shipman came to join the Donneybrook practice in 1977. I have found that no criticism can be levelled against the members of the practice who appointed him, whether in relation to their initial decision to appoint or to the fact that, having been appointed, Shipman was not made the subject of any special supervision.
8.5
Nevertheless, Shipman was a member of the Donneybrook practice for almost 15 years. I have found that, during that time, he killed at least 71 patients. The question must arise as to whether his colleagues should have been alerted to the number and circumstances of the deaths of Shipman’s patients or to any other unusual features of his practice.
8.6
The Inquiry heard evidence from Dr John Smith, Dr Geoffrey Bills, Dr Geoffrey Roberts, Dr Ian Napier and Dr Jeffery Moysey. Dr Derek Carroll and Dr William Bennett provided statements.
8.7
The way in which the Donneybrook practice was arranged, with each doctor (save for Dr Bills and Dr Carroll) operating a single list, meant that patients of one doctor would rarely be seen by the other doctors in the practice. It would happen only if the patient’s usual doctor was on holiday, if the patient required treatment out of hours, if a consultation was required on the doctor’s half day off or at times of illness and in other exceptional circumstances. Therefore, in general, members of the practice neither got to know patients registered with their colleagues, nor their medical histories. When a colleague’s patient died, this would not have had the same impact on other members of the practice as if the care of that patient had been shared.
8.8
Moreover, there were no formal means by which members of the practice were informed about the deaths of patients registered with other members. They would have no involvement in the certification of the cause of death or the certification for the purposes of cremation. Each member had his own book of Medical Certificates of Cause of Death (MCCDs), so would not see how many MCCDs Shipman had issued. In general, other members of the practice would become aware of the death of one of Shipman’s patients only if the practice staff talked about it or if Shipman specifically mentioned it.
8.9
Nor would members of the practice have any information about the total number of deaths among Shipman’s patients or in the practice as a whole. I have found that the annual number of killings during Shipman’s period at the Donneybrook practice was variable. I found that, in 1989, he killed 12 patients; in some years (1977, 1980, 1982 and 1991), he may not have killed at all. Certainly he was not killing with the same frequency as in his last years at the Market Street Surgery. Even if they had been aware that a death had occurred, Shipman’s colleagues would not have known anything about the circumstances of the death (e.g. whether Shipman had been present or had visited shortly before) unless Shipman had volunteered this information. During Shipman’s time at the practice, there was no process of reviewing deaths. An examination of Shipman’s killings by the Inquiry revealed that few of the deaths were likely to have come to the attention of his colleagues. None of those cases would have given real cause for concern. None of the doctors remembered the death of Mrs Mary Hamer, which occurred in the surgery of the Donneybrook practice. I found that Shipman killed her. In the past, there had been other deaths at the surgery with which Shipman had not been involved. There was, therefore, no reason for Mrs Hamer’s death to be regarded with particular suspicion.
8.10
None of Shipman’s former colleagues at the Donneybrook practice had any concerns about the number or circumstances of deaths among Shipman’s patients. No such concerns had been expressed to them by others. Dr Roberts, who covered Shipman’s patients on his half days, said that he saw nothing odd in Shipman’s medical records or his pattern of visiting. He was not aware that a number of patients had died in Shipman’s presence. He said that, if he had known that, he would have been surprised. Dr Moysey, who covered Shipman’s half days after Dr Roberts left the practice, saw nothing unusual in Shipman’s records or prescribed treatments.
8.11
Dr Roberts regarded Shipman as hardworking and observed that he appeared to get on well with patients, colleagues and staff. He exhibited no unusual behaviour. Dr Smith recalled that Shipman had a good medical knowledge and always kept himself up to date. Dr Napier observed that there were no concerns about Shipman’s honesty or competence. He was well regarded by clinicians and proactive in disease prevention. His professional conduct ‘seemed exemplary’. None of the doctors felt that Shipman had an especially isolated personality when at the Donneybrook practice.
8.12
There were a few negative comments about Shipman. Dr Moysey and Dr Napier observed that he was ‘mercurial’. Dr Smith recalled that he sometimes fell out with the practice staff. Dr Bills felt that he was theatrical, as if always presenting an image. He felt that Shipman exaggerated the seriousness of his patients’ illnesses so as to make more of an impression when he was able to ‘cure’ them. Dr Carroll agreed with this view. Dr Bills also noticed that Shipman was somewhat insensitive when speaking of patients who were terminally ill. He also said that Shipman impressed patients, who ‘thought he was marvellous’. He commented that the social workers and health visitors with whom Shipman came into contact were more impressed with his prowess than were the district nurses who worked with him.
8.13
None of the doctors observed any sign of relapse by Shipman into his previous drug taking habits. Nor did they have any recollection of problems with Shipman’s prescribing during his time at Donneybrook. In 1989, one of Shipman’s colleagues, Dr William Bennett, suffered a coronary thrombosis in the surgery. Shipman administered an injection which Dr Bennett believed to contain 10mg morphine. Dr Bennett did not question where the morphine came from, nor did Dr Napier, who was told about the incident afterwards. They were just grateful that Shipman had taken the correct action. By then, it was 12 years or so since Shipman had joined the practice. It seems there had been no further discussion about the keeping of controlled drugs. If Dr Bennett and Dr Napier had thought about where Shipman had got the morphine for the injection (which they did not), they would no doubt have assumed that he was now keeping a small quantity of controlled drugs for emergencies. Those members of the practice who kept a stock of controlled drugs maintained their own controlled drugs registers (CDRs). There was no shared CDR and there would have been no reason for one member of the practice to inspect another member’s CDR.
8.14
Most of his colleagues were surprised when Shipman announced his impending departure from the Donneybrook practice. Dr Napier believed that Shipman was frustrated at the slow pace of change within the practice. He took Shipman aside and pointed out the disadvantages of moving to single-handed practice.
8.15
It is not in my view surprising that Shipman’s colleagues at the Donneybrook practice were unaware of his criminal activities and had no reason to suspect that his practice was in any way unusual. The structure of the practice meant that they knew little of each other’s clinical activities. No concerns had been expressed to them about Shipman. There were no unusual features to attract their attention. Indeed, the information which they received about Shipman’s practice was generally favourable. It is clear in my view that they had no suspicions at the time and I am satisfied that they cannot be criticised for that.
8.16
Dr Napier told the Inquiry that arrangements within the practice which had been introduced since Shipman’s departure would make it more likely that behaviour such as his would be detected. The doctors now have shared lists. The fact that the care of patients is shared leads to discussion between the doctors about diagnosis and treatment. They are more likely to notice if a patient dies unexpectedly. They share one book of MCCDs, which is open to inspection by all. The medical records are computerised and of better quality. Members of the practice have meetings at which they review significant events (including deaths) and perform risk assessments. Similar developments have taken place in many other practices over the same period. Later in this Report, I shall discuss the effect of such changes.

--- The Concerns of Mrs Christine Simpson ---
8.17
Mrs Christine Simpson was the resident manager of Ogden Court from about 1987 until 2002. Her husband, Mr Alan (sometimes known as Sam) Simpson worked as a gardener and cleaner at Ogden Court and at other similar properties in the area.
Ogden Court
8.18
Ogden Court was one of a large number of properties owned by the Manchester and District Housing Association (the Housing Association). Ogden Court was a sheltered housing development (or sheltered housing ‘scheme’), providing 42 flats for rent, together with various communal facilities for the use of residents. Most of the residents of Ogden Court were elderly. Some were entirely independent, while others received a high level of care provided by Social Services or members of their family. All residents had access to a 24 hour emergency call facility.
Mrs Simpson’s Duties
8.19
Mrs Simpson lived in a flat on the ground floor of the main building at Ogden Court. Her role was that of a ‘good neighbour’ to the residents of Ogden Court. She was required to make a daily check on their welfare and to liaise with the Housing Association in order to ensure that any necessary works of maintenance, repair and adaptation were carried out. She was also responsible for facilitating the residents’ access to professional care from agencies such as Social Services, for ensuring that the premises were kept safe and for organising regular social activities for the residents. Her husband told the Inquiry that she formed close relationships with the residents, who were happy to confide their problems and worries to her.
The Management of Ogden Court
8.20
The primary function of the Housing Association in relation to Ogden Court was as landlord with responsibility for the allocation and letting of the flats, the collection of rents, the arranging of necessary works of maintenance, repair and adaptation, the resolution of disputes between tenants and other matters of that kind.
8.21
From 1985 until her retirement in March 2003, Mrs Janet Schofield worked for the Housing Association as a housing officer. Until 1993, she was employed full-time; thereafter she worked part-time only. She had responsibility for Ogden Court for various periods between 1987 and 2001. She could not remember precisely when those periods were, as her duties changed frequently. For part of this time, she had a job share arrangement so that responsibility for Ogden Court was shared between herself and another member of staff. For a period from April 1996, Mrs Schofield alone assumed responsibility for dealing with Ogden Court. Documents in the possession of the Inquiry would suggest that Mrs Schofield’s active involvement with Ogden Court may have ceased in late 1998/early 1999.
8.22
Mrs Schofield managed about 800-1000 residential units on behalf of the Housing Association. She held monthly liaison meetings with the resident managers of all the sheltered housing schemes for which she had responsibility. Discussions at her meetings with Mrs Simpson centred on issues relating to the fabric of the premises at Ogden Court and to Mrs Simpson’s employment. In addition, there would be discussions about the dependency levels of individual residents and the extent to which they might require additional care from Social Services or transfer to alternative accommodation such as a residential care home. Recent deaths were noted, and forthcoming and existing vacancies (‘voids’) discussed. Minutes of liaison meetings were kept by Mrs Schofield and forwarded to Mrs Simpson. The Inquiry has seen the minutes of meetings between Mrs Schofield and Mrs Simpson which took place between December 1996 and May 1998. The minutes of earlier meetings are no longer available. In addition to visiting Ogden Court for meetings, Mrs Schofield would visit two or three times a month in order to see residents.
8.23
Between meetings, there was frequent telephone contact between Mrs Simpson, Mrs Schofield and other staff at the Housing Association, in the course of which Mrs Simpson would report day-to-day problems as they arose. She would report the deaths of residents as they occurred, since these would give rise to voids.
Deaths at Ogden Court
8.24
The Inquiry has found that nine residents of Ogden Court were killed by Shipman. They were:
Mrs Alice Prestwich, who died, aged 69, on 20th
October 1988
Mr John Charlton, who died, aged 81, on 16th
October 1989
Mrs Alice Kennedy, who died, aged 88, on 9th
January 1995
Mrs Muriel Ward, who died, aged 87, on 24th
October 1995
Mrs Gladys Saunders, who died, aged 82, on 17th
June 1996
Mr Samuel Mills, who died, aged 89, on 23rd
November 1996
Mrs Betty Royston, who died, aged 70, on 4th
February 1997
Mr James King, who died, aged 83, on 24th
December 1997
Miss Maureen Ward, who died, aged 57, on 18th
February 1998.
8.25
Mrs Simpson co-operated fully with Phase One of the Inquiry, providing a number of statements in connection with the various deaths. She has been unwell for some time and retired from work in 2002 on health grounds. After she was requested to give evidence in Phase Two, the Inquiry received medical evidence to the effect that attendance at the Inquiry would be detrimental to her health. In those circumstances, she was not required to attend to give evidence. She did provide a detailed witness statement, however, setting out her recollection of the events surrounding the deaths and her developing suspicions of Shipman’s involvement in them.
Mrs Alice Prestwich
8.26
The first death, that of Mrs Prestwich, occurred on 20th
October 1988. Mrs Prestwich had requested a visit from Shipman because her legs (Mrs Simpson recalled it was her knees) were swollen and painful. Shipman summoned Mrs Simpson and told her that Mrs Prestwich had died a few minutes earlier, while he was examining her. Despite the suddenness of the death, Mrs Simpson said she had no suspicions about it. She did, however, regard Shipman’s attitude to the death as flippant, casual and inappropriate to the circumstances.
Mr John Charlton
8.27
Mr Charlton’s death occurred a year later on 16th
October 1989. Shipman, who had visited Mr Charlton unannounced (probably in response to an informal request for a visit made by his family through the Donneybrook practice nurse), called at Mrs Simpson’s flat and said he needed to telephone for an ambulance to take Mr Charlton, who was very ill, to hospital. Shipman asked Mrs Simpson to go to Mr Charlton’s flat. There, she found Mr Charlton lying flat on his back on his bed. He was dead. Mrs Simpson said she found it strange that Mr Charlton should have died in that position. He had been experiencing breathing problems and had taken to sleeping in a reclining chair rather than in bed. She was not convinced that Mr Charlton had died a natural death and wondered whether Shipman might have assisted in it in some way, by arrangement with Mr Charlton.
Mrs Alice Kennedy
8.28
More than five years then passed before the death of Mrs Kennedy on 9th
January 1995. Shipman called on her, apparently unannounced. He later telephoned Mrs Kennedy’s daughter, Mrs Patricia Higgins, to express concern that Mrs Kennedy did not seem well. When Mrs Higgins visited her mother later in the day, she found Mrs Kennedy dead in her chair. Mrs Kennedy had suffered from Parkinson’s disease and was quite frail. Mrs Simpson said that she did not find the fact of the death suspicious in itself. It was the knowledge that Shipman had been present shortly before the death was discovered which made her suspect that he might have been responsible for it.
8.29
Mrs Simpson said that, by this time, it had also become clear to her that the deaths of Shipman’s patients followed a different pattern from those of other residents at Ogden Court. Usually, deaths were preceded by a period of decline, with a gradual loss of independence and a need for a greater degree of care from Social Services and/or family members. In most cases, death would occur in hospital. On those occasions when a resident died at Ogden Court, it would be known beforehand that death was imminent. By contrast, Shipman’s patients died suddenly and at a time when he was, or had recently been, in physical proximity to them.
Mrs Muriel Ward
8.30
Mrs Ward died on 24th
October 1995. She had fallen and fractured her hip two months previously and had suffered a deep vein thrombosis while recovering in hospital. At the time of her death, she was back at home and making good progress. Shipman visited her to take a blood sample just as her daughter, Miss Maureen Ward, was leaving for the shops. When she returned about half an hour later, she found her mother dead in her chair. Mrs Simpson said that it was once again the fact that Shipman had visited Mrs Ward so recently before the discovery of her death that caused her to suspect that the death had not been natural.
Mrs Gladys Saunders
8.31
Mrs Saunders died about eight months later on 17th
June 1996. She had been discharged from hospital ten days before she died, following an episode of diverticular disease. She appeared to Mrs Simpson to be in good health and spirits, although she had complained to others about weakness and ‘flutters’ in her heart. She had asked Shipman to make a home visit. He did so and later called on Mrs Simpson and informed her that Mrs Saunders was dying. Mrs Simpson accompanied Shipman to Mrs Saunders’ flat. She believed that Mrs Saunders took her last breath just as they arrived. Mrs Simpson said that she was convinced at the time that Shipman had killed Mrs Saunders.
Mr Samuel Mills
8.32
On 23rd
November 1996, Mr Mills died. Mrs Simpson was not at Ogden Court at the time. Mr Mills was suffering from cancer of the prostate and had become very frail. On the morning of his death (a Saturday), he felt unwell and asked Mr Simpson (in Mrs Simpson’s absence) to request a visit from Shipman. Shipman duly visited and, while with Mr Mills, he summoned the mobile warden service used by Ogden Court when Mrs Simpson was unavailable, saying that Mr Mills was dying. The warden arrived to find Mr Mills lying on the floor, obviously dying. Shortly afterwards, Shipman appeared and pronounced him dead. Mrs Simpson arrived back a little later and made contact with members of Mr Mills’ family. She said that the position in which Mr Mills was lying did not appear natural, causing her to believe that Shipman was once again responsible for the death.
Mrs Betty Royston
8.33
The circumstances in which the death of Mrs Royston was discovered, on 5th
February 1997, caused Mrs Simpson’s suspicions to be aroused yet again. She discovered Mrs Royston dead that morning. Mrs Royston was lying neatly on the floor. Her spectacles (which she always wore) were on the back of the settee. Shipman had, at the request of Mrs Royston’s son, Mr Alan Royston, visited Mrs Royston the day before. On discovering the death, Mrs Simpson telephoned Shipman’s surgery. Shipman was not immediately available so Mrs Simpson left a message with a receptionist. She then telephoned the police to report the death. This was the usual policy when a death was sudden and the deceased person’s general practitioner (GP) was not available. Police records show that the call was made at 8.39am. The message received was:
‘MRS BETTY ROYSTON, HAS BEEN FOUND ON THE LIVING ROOM FLOOR BY WARDEN. APPEARS TO HAVE BEEN THERE ALL NIGHT. PLEASE ATTEND WARDEN’S OFFICE.’
Mrs Simpson said she thought the police would investigate the death and Shipman would finally be caught out.
8.34
However, before the police arrived, Shipman appeared. He was cross when Mrs Simpson told him that she had summoned the police. He went with her to see Mrs Royston, felt for Mrs Royston’s pulse, confirmed that she was dead and told Mrs Simpson that he would be able to issue a death certificate as he had seen Mrs Royston the previous evening. He then left, having been present for only a short time. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Simpson said that the police never came. She believed that Shipman must have telephoned them and told them that their attendance was not necessary. She said that she did not feel able to contact the police again and tell them that she disagreed with Shipman.
8.35
In fact, Mrs Simpson’s recollection was at fault there. Police records show that Police Constable (PC) Donna Jones attended Ogden Court with a colleague, arriving at 8.58am. In a statement made in January 1999, PC Jones said that she spoke to Mrs Simpson. At 9am she sent a message to the police Area Operations Room, saying that it would appear that Mrs Royston’s GP, Shipman, would issue a death certificate. That information must have come from Mrs Simpson, who had only just received it from Shipman himself. The police then attempted to contact Shipman at his surgery. He was with a patient at the time but subsequently a receptionist confirmed that he would be issuing a death certificate. The police left Ogden Court shortly afterwards.
8.36
It seems that, on this occasion, Mrs Simpson was presented with an opportunity to voice her concerns about Mrs Royston’s death to the police in Shipman’s absence. It may be that she lacked the confidence to do so in the face of Shipman’s assertion that he would sign a death certificate. She may have been taken aback by the police’s ready acceptance that a death certificate was to be issued and that no investigation was therefore necessary.
8.37
Another possible explanation for Mrs Simpson’s failure to voice her concerns to the police on this occasion would be that those concerns were not as great as she now believes them to have been. However, a conversation which she had with Mrs Royston’s son supports her assertion that she was indeed suspicious of Shipman at the time. Mrs Simpson said that when Mr Royston arrived at his mother’s flat, he was immediately suspicious and expressed the view that there was
‘something not right’
about the death. She described how she did not disagree with his suggestion. She believed that he was going to tackle Shipman. She felt it appropriate that, as Mrs Royston’s son, he should be the one to take the matter further.
8.38
Mr Royston has given two statements to the Inquiry. His wife has also provided a statement. Mr Royston confirmed that a number of features about the death - including his mother’s position and that of her spectacles - struck him as odd. He began to wonder if Mrs Royston had died in Shipman’s presence and if Shipman had left her because he did not want to deal with the aftermath of the death. Mr Royston recalled having a conversation with Mrs Simpson. He believed that this took place some days after his mother’s death rather than on the day itself, as Mrs Simpson suggests. He asked Mrs Simpson (in what he called a
‘tongue and cheek way’
) whether Shipman could have
‘bumped off’
his mother and whether Mrs Simpson thought Shipman might be a
‘serial granny killer’
. He said that Mrs Simpson’s face changed and she told him that several people had died after Shipman had been to visit them. She also said that she had discussed the matter with her husband but felt that no one would believe her if she said anything to anyone else. Her remarks caused Mr Royston to wonder whether Shipman had killed Mrs Royston. He talked the matter over with work colleagues and members of his family. They could not believe that Shipman had killed Mrs Royston. Although Mr Royston continued to have lingering concerns about the circumstances of the death, he did not seriously consider telling anyone in authority about those concerns until he heard that Shipman was under investigation. He contacted the police shortly afterwards, on 21st
August 1998.
Mr James King
8.39
Mr King died on Christmas Eve 1997. Mrs Simpson said that, despite his age, he was in good general health. On the day of his death, however, he had complained of feeling
‘woozy’
, by which she understood that he was experiencing dizzy spells. She did not think anything was seriously wrong. Mr King told her that he had asked Shipman to visit. This was very unusual for him. Shipman visited in response to Mr King’s request. Shortly afterwards, Mr King’s daughter found him dead in his chair. The suddenness of Mr King’s death, and the fact that it occurred so soon after a visit from Shipman, caused Mrs Simpson to believe that Shipman had killed again.
Miss Maureen Ward
8.40
On 18th
February 1998, Shipman called at Mrs Simpson’s flat and told her that he had found Miss Maureen Ward (the daughter of Mrs Muriel Ward) dead. Miss Ward was only 57 years old and had stayed on at Ogden Court after her mother’s death. She had previously undergone treatment for cancer but, immediately before her death, had appeared well. She was planning a holiday and looking forward to moving house in the near future. It was evident to Mrs Simpson, when she accompanied Shipman to Miss Ward’s flat, that Miss Ward had been engaged upon her usual daily activities until something had interrupted her. Mrs Simpson was shocked at Miss Ward’s death and told Shipman so. He informed her that Miss Ward had been suffering from a brain tumour which had caused her death. Mrs Simpson could not believe that Miss Ward would have been planning so enthusiastically for the future if she had believed that she did not have long to live. Once again, she believed that Shipman was responsible for the death.
Mr Simpson’s Evidence
8.41
Mr Simpson gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. He confirmed that his wife had come to believe that Shipman was killing his patients. At first, she had discussed with him the possibility that Shipman might have an arrangement with his patients to assist them to die when their quality of life became poor. At some time, however, she had ceased to believe that the patients had acquiesced in their deaths. Mr Simpson could not remember when this change of mind occurred. He did recall that, when Mrs Saunders died in June 1996, Mrs Simpson could not believe that she would have wanted to take her own life. Mr Simpson himself recognised the close association between Shipman’s visits and the deaths. He believed that they might have occurred with the patients’ consent. He told the Inquiry that he just could not accept that Shipman could be killing his patients without their consent, as there appeared to be no reason for him to do so. He was unsuccessful in persuading Mrs Simpson to share his view. Gradually, over a period of time, she became depressed. At the time, she blamed other problems for her depression. In retrospect, however, Mr Simpson believes that her concerns about the deaths of Shipman’s patients were a significant factor.
The Communication of Concerns to Third Parties
8.42
Mrs Simpson and her husband described two occasions (in addition to the conversation with Mr Royston which I have already described) when she voiced her concerns to persons outside her immediate family. On one such occasion, she spoke of her suspicions to a respected friend of many years’ standing. The friend worked in a medical practice and was a patient of Shipman. She advised Mrs Simpson to say nothing about her suspicions because people would say she
‘was mad’
8.43
The other person in whom Mrs Simpson claimed to have confided was Mrs Schofield. She says that she raised her concerns at the end of one of her regular liaison meetings with Mrs Schofield. Mr Simpson remembered it being decided that his wife should tell ‘management’ of her concerns about the deaths. He did not recall when this was. Mrs Simpson herself believed that she spoke to Mrs Schofield after the death of Mrs Ward, i.e. some time after 24th
October 1995. That would have been about three years before Shipman’s eventual arrest. Mr Simpson thought that the timing sounded about right. He did not know precisely what was said but would have expected Mrs Simpson to give a clear account of her suspicions and of the events that had given rise to them.
8.44
In her witness statement, Mrs Simpson related how she could not bring herself to say that she suspected that Shipman was murdering people. She thought that she mentioned Shipman by name and told Mrs Schofield that:
‘... there had been a number of deaths where the circumstances of the deaths had been odd and I was suspicious and concerned. I expressed my concern in general rather than specific terms. I said that patients were dying after visits from the doctor and that other people had started to talk about it as well.’
According to her husband, Mrs Simpson was hoping to obtain some guidance as to what to do or an assurance that Mrs Schofield would assume responsibility for taking her concerns forward. Instead, Mrs Schofield gave no reaction and asked no questions. She made no suggestion as to what Mrs Simpson could or should do. Mrs Simpson had the impression that Mrs Schofield was not taking her seriously. In a sense, she appears to have found Mrs Schofield’s lack of response reassuring, at least in the short term. However, she said that, when Mrs Saunders died the following June, she ceased to feel reassured and felt that she had been right to be suspicious.
8.45
Mrs Simpson recalled that Mrs Schofield made some notes about her concerns but that, when she received the minutes of the relevant meeting, she does not remember seeing any reference to them. As I have already said, minutes of meetings from this period are no longer available. Even if they were, I would not find it surprising that such a sensitive matter was not recorded. I can also understand why Mrs Simpson would not necessarily have pressed for them to be recorded subsequently. She would not have wanted her concerns to be seen by others at the Housing Association, particularly if, by then, she had been to some extent reassured by Mrs Schofield’s attitude and believed that her suspicions might be unfounded.
8.46
Mrs Simpson said that she did not think that she mentioned her concerns again to Mrs Schofield. Mrs Schofield never referred to the topic. Mrs Simpson did not know what else to do. She considered consulting a solicitor but did not think she would be taken seriously since she had no direct evidence to support such a serious allegation. So far as she was aware, no one shared her concerns. She was worried about being proved wrong. She was of course aware of the good reputation that Shipman enjoyed among his patients and the wider community.
8.47
On 14th
October 1998, Mrs Simpson gave a statement to the police about the death of Mrs Royston. She told the interviewing officer that Shipman had been involved in nine deaths at Ogden Court and supplied details. On 21st
October 1998, she was interviewed in connection with those deaths and described to the police her developing suspicions.
Mrs Schofield’s Evidence
8.48
Mrs Schofield gave oral evidence. She denied that Mrs Simpson expressed concerns to her at any stage about the deaths of Shipman’s patients. She told the Inquiry that, if Mrs Simpson had done so, she would have reported the matter to her superiors. She thought that, if Mrs Simpson had had concerns, she would have expressed them clearly and directly and that, if those concerns had not been acted on, she would have pursued them. Mrs Schofield was adamant that this was never done. She had no recollection of any concern being raised about the death of Mrs Ward. She says she would have remembered this, because she had had previous dealings with the Wards and knew them.
8.49
Mrs Schofield gave three statements to the Inquiry. In the first two, she said that she did recall Mrs Simpson referring to Shipman as ‘Dr Death’ on a few occasions over the years she had worked with her. She said that, on at least some of those occasions, Mrs Simpson had linked the mention of a visit from ‘Dr Death’ with the occurrence of a void. The implication was that a void had been or would be caused by a death following a visit from Shipman. Mrs Schofield said that she did not take these comments seriously. She just thought that deaths were inevitable among elderly people.
8.50
When making her third statement, signed only three days before she attended to give evidence, Mrs Schofield changed her evidence somewhat. She said that the phrase ‘Dr Death’ was not used by Mrs Simpson to describe any specific individual. Mrs Schofield suggested that the term was used generally when speaking of a void caused by a death. She said that she had heard other people speak about Shipman as ‘Dr Death’, but only after Shipman was known to be under investigation, i.e. after mid-August 1998.
8.51
Mrs Schofield’s oral evidence about these references was very confused. At times, she suggested that she did recall Mrs Simpson using the name ‘Dr Death’ in connection with Shipman. However, she said that she believed this was after Shipman came under investigation in 1998. It is not clear when this would have been, as Mrs Simpson stopped working some time before July 1998 and does not appear to have returned until about October. (Her precise dates of absence cannot be ascertained.) At other times, Mrs Schofield suggested that Mrs Simpson might have used the name ‘Dr Death’ just to indicate that a death had occurred. She made the point that the words which she was trying to recall were spoken several years ago so her recollection was hazy.
8.52
In the course of her oral evidence, Mrs Schofield said that, after Shipman’s arrest, the police had telephoned her to ask whether it was true that people used to call Shipman ‘Dr Death’. She said that she had told them, ‘That’s true, they did.’ She explained that she thought she said this because, by that time, the name ‘Dr Death’ was being used to describe Shipman by people in Hyde and by the newspapers. That explanation was, of course, unsatisfactory since the purpose of the police enquiry would plainly have been to find out what was being said before the investigations into Shipman started, not afterwards.
8.53
In the event, however, the purpose and nature of the police enquiry were quite different from that suggested by Mrs Schofield. After she had given evidence, the Inquiry obtained the police record of a telephone conversation which took place on 15th
February 1999. A police officer had been tasked to contact Mrs Schofield in order to investigate Mrs Simpson’s assertion, made in a police statement dated 21st
October 1998, that she had spoken to Mrs Schofield about her suspicions at about the time of Mrs Ward’s death. The record states:
‘... ON MONDAY 15
TH
FEBRUARY 1999 AT 3PM I SPOKE TO JANET SCHOFIELD WHO IS A HOUSING OFFICER WITH MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT HOUSING OFFICE ... MRS SCHOFIELD STATED THAT SHE DID NOT FEEL CONFIDENT ENOUGH TO MAKE A STATEMENT IN REGARDS TO ANY CONVERSATION THAT SHE HAD HAD WITH N762 SIMPSON RE THE DEATH OF MURIAL
WARD AS SHE COULD NOT REMEMBER IF ONE ACTUALLY TOOK PLACE, SHE DOES HOWEVER STATE THAT ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS COMMENTS WERE MADE BY CHRISTINE SIMPSON IN REGARDS TO THE NUMBER OF DEATHS THAT WERE OCCURRING AT OGDEN COURT WHILST DR SHIPMAN WAS PRESENT. MRS SCHOFIELD CANNOT BE ANYMORE SPECIFIC IN REGARDS TO THE CONTENTS OF THESE COMMENTS OR THE TIMES AND DATES THEY WERE MADE, THUS A STATEMENT HAS NOT BEEN TAKEN FROM HER AT THIS TIME
Mrs Schofield was offered an opportunity to comment on the record but chose not to do so. The contents of this record make it clear that Mrs Simpson did make comments linking Shipman’s presence at Ogden Court with deaths that had occurred there. It also makes clear that those comments were made, not once, but on several occasions.
8.54
Mrs Schofield was an experienced housing officer and I have no reason to doubt that she fulfilled her duties in a conscientious and professional manner. She acknowledged that she was not a curious or enquiring person. Indeed, she came across as a somewhat detached and distant character. It was perhaps significant that, despite her close connections with Ogden Court over a period of years, she had never sought to find out how many residents there were killed by Shipman, and took no interest in Shipman’s trial. One of the counts of which Shipman was convicted related to Miss Ward, who was known to Mrs Schofield. In oral evidence, she observed, ‘quite honestly, it wasn’t of ... interest to me’.
8.55
Although I have not seen Mrs Simpson, it is plain from the evidence I have heard and read that she was a very different character. Mrs Schofield herself acknowledged that Mrs Simpson made an excellent job of managing Ogden Court. She was competent, capable, professional and committed to the welfare of ‘her’ residents. Her determination to achieve the best for them led on occasion to tension between herself and her employers.
8.56
Mrs Schofield’s perception was that Mrs Simpson was a somewhat difficult personality, with a negative attitude to authority in general and to her employers in particular. This view was plainly shared by another officer of the Housing Association, who referred in his report of an appraisal conducted in December 1994 to Mrs Simpson’s
‘confrontational approach’
. Other documents record her feelings of isolation and her complaint that she did not receive adequate support from the Housing Association, together with her belief that her employers regarded their sheltered housing schemes
‘more or less just as other properties and tenants’
. It is also clear that she became frustrated at the lack of continuity in the housing officers with whom she had to deal. These factors no doubt presented greater challenges to Mrs Schofield when dealing with Mrs Simpson than she encountered in her dealings with other resident managers.
8.57
In addition, it seems that Mrs Simpson exhibited signs of stress and anxiety, certainly in the years leading up to 1998, when she suffered a ‘breakdown’ and was off work for several months. She had a number of problems, some of which she discussed with Mrs Schofield at their monthly meetings. One was the fact that she lived on site at Ogden Court, with a consequent lack of privacy and constant responsibility for the residents. She and Mrs Schofield discussed the possibility of her acquiring a property elsewhere to which she could escape at weekends. They also discussed practical ways of combating her feelings of isolation.
8.58
In evidence, Mrs Schofield described Mrs Simpson in somewhat unsympathetic terms. She said she was a ‘complex personality’ with a ‘strange way of looking at things’. She was ‘obsessed with death’- her own and those of residents. She was said to be ‘preoccupied with death ... it almost became a fixation with her’. In short, Mrs Schofield believed Mrs Simpson to be a difficult and somewhat hysterical personality. I am satisfied that that belief (whether justified or not) would have coloured Mrs Schofield’s view of anything Mrs Simpson reported to her. Indeed, in her second statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Schofield herself observed:
‘... I think it is fair to say that because Christine was so negative and could get a bee in her bonnet about lots of things, I did often take what she told me with a grain of sand. Christine’s negativity appeared to be often directed at authority figures and I think I would have regarded her comments about Shipman with that in mind.’
8.59
I am entirely satisfied that, despite the inaccuracy of her recollection of the circumstances surrounding Mrs Royston’s death, the essential features of Mrs Simpson’s evidence are both true and accurate. I accept that she did develop suspicions about Shipman and that, on at least one occasion, she voiced them to Mrs Schofield. Whether she did so as early as October 1995 is, in my view, less certain. It may be that it was after the death of Mrs Saunders that Mrs Simpson became really concerned about the possibility of murder. It may have been then that she decided to speak to Mrs Schofield. In any event, I am satisfied that they first spoke about the matter in 1995 or 1996.
8.60
Both Mrs Schofield and Mr Simpson expressed the view in evidence that, if Mrs Simpson had voiced concerns to Mrs Schofield, she would have been likely to do so in a clear and direct manner. That would have been typical of her usual approach. However, Mrs Simpson herself said that she could not bring herself to do so. She said that she expressed her concerns in general, rather than specific, terms. I am satisfied, however, that, when speaking to Mrs Schofield, she linked the deaths with visits by Shipman and that she gave what she believed to be a clear indication of her concern that all was not as it should be.
8.61
In my view, Mrs Simpson’s uncharacteristically oblique approach was not recognised by Mrs Schofield as a concern upon which she was expected to act. I say this for two reasons. First, I am satisfied that it would have required a clear and unequivocal statement that Shipman might have harmed a specific resident before Mrs Schofield would have recognised that she had a duty to act. If more general concerns were expressed, I do not think that she would have encouraged Mrs Simpson to elaborate further. She would not have questioned Mrs Simpson as to what might lie behind a more oblique statement and have attempted to draw from her the real cause of her concerns. Such an approach would not have accorded with Mrs Schofield’s personality. Second, I am confident that Mrs Schofield would have dismissed Mrs Simpson’s concerns, if expressed generally, as part of the latter’s morbid fixation with death. It may, of course, be that Mrs Simpson’s fears about the deaths of Shipman’s patients lay at the root of her expressions of concern about death generally, but Mrs Schofield would not have realised that. She would no doubt have dismissed Mrs Simpson’s concerns as another of her ‘strange’ ideas. Even if Mrs Simpson had stated her fears directly and clearly, it is possible that Mrs Schofield would have dismissed them as a manifestation of Mrs Simpson’s personality. However, if they had been voiced obliquely, it would have been far easier for her to do so.
8.62
While Mrs Simpson did not bring up her concerns again in any ‘formal’ manner, I am satisfied that she referred to them in conversation with Mrs Schofield by means of comments linking Shipman’s name with deaths at Ogden Court. She probably used the name ‘Dr Death’ to describe Shipman on occasion. Again, given her views about Mrs Simpson and the fact that the latter had other concerns and problems of which she also spoke, it is not in my view surprising that Mrs Schofield did not regard these continuing references as being significant. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that they were made and that they indicated a continuing and growing concern on Mrs Simpson’s part.
8.63
Mrs Schofield pointed to a number of routes within the Housing Association and the local authority by which Mrs Simpson might have taken her concerns further if she had been dissatisfied that no action had been taken by Mrs Schofield herself. I can well understand why Mrs Simpson would have regarded it as inappropriate to raise such serious concerns in any of these ways. It is in my view natural that she should have preferred to mention the topic to her line manager, whom she had known for some time, in a ‘low key’ way at the end of an informal meeting. I think she was in effect ‘testing the water’ to see what reaction she got. She was also no doubt hoping that Mrs Schofield would enquire further into her concerns and pass them on for investigation. When she met with no discernible reaction, she lost confidence and felt unable to mention them again, other than by oblique references. The fact that Mrs Simpson did not pursue her concerns by any of the routes suggested by Mrs Schofield does not, to my mind, in any way suggest that she did not express her concerns to Mrs Schofield in the first place. I am satisfied that she did and also that, in view of Mrs Schofield’s reaction, her actions were entirely understandable. Mrs Simpson cannot be blamed for not having taken her concerns any further.
8.64
Should Mrs Schofield be criticised for her failure to recognise that Mrs Simpson was trying to convey to her a real concern that Shipman might be killing his patients? In order to judge this fairly, I must put from my mind the unattractive features of Mrs Schofield’s evidence to the Inquiry. It is unfortunate, in my view, that Mrs Schofield sought to deny that Mrs Simpson had ever raised concerns about Shipman and particularly unattractive that, in oral evidence, she should seek to put a different construction on words she had used quite unequivocally in her written statements. However, her lack of frankness to the Inquiry, unattractive though it is, must not affect my judgement as to her failure to respond to Mrs Simpson’s concerns at the time.
8.65
In my view, a manager in Mrs Schofield’s position should have been alert to the kind of oblique message of concern that Mrs Simpson tried to convey to her and should have taken any such concerns seriously. If, after discussion, it appeared that there was any possibility that the concerns might be well founded, the manager should have taken them forward.
8.66
Mrs Schofield did not realise that Mrs Simpson was trying to raise a concern with her. I have said that Mrs Schofield is not a very curious person. I think also that she did not particularly like Mrs Simpson. She found her difficult to deal with and did not fully recognise her undoubted commitment to the welfare of the elderly people for whom she had some responsibility. I think Mrs Schofield’s attitude towards Mrs Simpson inhibited her willingness or ability to listen carefully to what Mrs Simpson was telling her and to think about its implications. I think Mrs Schofield was dismissive of Mrs Simpson’s ‘message’ and attributed it to an obsession with death. However, the concerns which Mrs Simpson was trying to raise were quite extraordinary and would probably have seemed to many to be preposterous. The friend to whom Mrs Simpson voiced her concerns advised her not to mention them to anyone else because people would say she was ‘mad’. The friend was perceptive; Mrs Schofield attributed Mrs Simpson’s concerns to an obsession with death. Today, we know that Shipman was a killer and that concerns about him were well founded; before his crimes were uncovered, any suspicion of him was, to many, virtually unthinkable.
8.67
My criticism of Mrs Schofield is muted. She did not listen carefully to Mrs Simpson’s attempts to raise her concerns. That was due in part to her own personality and her attitude towards Mrs Simpson. But I think also that her attitude was understandably affected by the belief that any suggestion that a doctor might be harming his patients was unthinkable.

--- The Concerns of Mr John Shaw ---
8.68
Mr John Shaw was a self-employed taxi driver in Hyde for about ten years beginning in 1988. Most of his working life had been spent in engineering, although, as a young man, he had served for two short periods in the police force. Mr Shaw gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.
8.69
In August 1998, following press coverage of the fact that Shipman was under investigation by the police for forgery of a patient’s will, Mr Shaw contacted the police and expressed concern about the deaths of 21 people (most of them former customers of his) whom he believed to have been patients of Shipman. I have found that Shipman killed 19 of the 21 people identified by Mr Shaw, namely:
Mrs Rene Sparkes, who died, aged 72, on 7th
October 1992
Miss Joan Harding, who died, aged 82, on 4th
January 1994
Mrs Maria West, who died, aged 81, on 6th
March 1995
Mrs Netta Ashcroft, who died, aged 71, on 7th
March 1995
Mrs Ada Hilton, who died, aged 88, on 12th
July 1995
Mr Sidney Smith, who died, aged 76, on 30th
August 1996
Mrs Millicent Garside, who died, aged 76, on 23rd
October 1996
Mr Thomas Cheetham, who died, aged 78, on 4th
December 1996
Mr Kenneth Smith, who died, aged 73, on 17th
December 1996
Mrs Irene Brooder, who died, aged 76, on 20th
January 1997
Mrs Lizzie Adams, who died, aged 77, on 28th
Mrs Elsie Cheetham, who died, aged 76, on 25th
April 1997
Miss Lena Slater, who died, aged 68, on 2nd
May 1997
Mrs Florence Lewis, who died, aged 79, on 10th
November 1997
Mrs Norah Nuttall, who died, aged 64, on 26th
January 1998
February 1998
Mrs Margaret Waldron, who died, aged 65, on 6th
March 1998
Miss Ada Warburton, who died, aged 77, on 20th
March 1998.
The other two persons identified by Mr Shaw were not, in fact, patients of Shipman and he was not implicated in their deaths.
8.70
Many of Mr Shaw’s customers were elderly people who had regular bookings with him. Some travelled with him so frequently that they became personal friends of his. When one of his customers died, Mr Shaw would usually hear about the death from a relative of the customer, who would telephone and tell him why he need not pick up the customer any more. Often, he would be told something about the circumstances of the death. As time went on, he began to notice that a pattern was developing. The common factor in each case was that Shipman had been the dead person’s GP. Mr Shaw told the Inquiry:
‘I couldn’t believe what my suspicions were. My suspicions were so fantastic that I just couldn’t ... I couldn’t grasp what was going on in my own mind.’
He began to make a point, when he was told about a death, of asking who the deceased’s GP had been. He had a card index system of customers and, in it, he began to note down details of the deaths about which he had suspicions.
8.71
Mr Shaw said that the suspicions of which he spoke arose first following the death of Mrs Ashcroft in March 1995. By that time, four of his customers who had been patients of Shipman had died and he had begun to suspect that Shipman might have killed them. In October 1996, another of his customers, Mrs Garside, died. A relative told Mr Shaw that Shipman had given her an injection before her death. By this time, Mr Shaw’s concerns were so great that he wanted to inform Mrs Garside’s relatives, whom he knew, of his belief that Shipman had murdered her. However, he felt unable to say anything.
8.72
Mr Shaw explained that he did not say anything about his concerns because he was beginning to question his own mental state. He felt that, if he did speak, nobody would believe him and others might also question his mental state. He feared being wrong and that this could lead to him being sued for libel and losing everything he had. His wife too was fearful of the consequences if he spoke out and were proved wrong.
8.73
Another factor was the respect in which Shipman was held in the local community, and his popularity. On one occasion, Mr Shaw warned a customer who was planning to visit Shipman not to go alone. He told the Inquiry that he received a sharp rebuff and was told he was ‘paranoid’. The customer concerned dropped him ‘like a hot potato’ and did not book him again. Such was Shipman’s popularity that patients were clamouring to get onto his list. Mr Shaw also pointed out that other people who knew about the deaths did not appear to share his suspicions.
8.74
Mr Shaw felt unable to go to the police with his concerns because he had no direct evidence about the deaths, only hearsay accounts. Moreover, these were often not even firsthand hearsay accounts, but secondhand or even thirdhand. He considered going to the General Medical Council whom he understood to have some responsibility for doctors. However, he had no confidence that his concerns would be taken seriously. He did not know of any other organisation which had responsibility for monitoring or controlling GPs. Even if he had known of the role of the Health Authority, he would not have felt able to approach it as he would have assumed that (like other professions) the medical profession would have ‘closed ranks’ in the face of a complaint from outside. Mr Shaw felt he had nowhere to go with his concerns.
8.75
When asked what might have persuaded him to come forward, Mr Shaw said that he would have felt able to report his concerns only to an unbiased and independent organisation that had no connection with the medical profession and dealt with reports from people with concerns and with matters relating to sudden, unexplained deaths. He said that he would have felt able to approach an organisation for advice about how to go about reporting his concerns, provided that the organisation had been well publicised and that it operated on a national - not a local - basis. He would have felt uncomfortable about reporting his concern or requesting advice locally, because Shipman was so well known and highly regarded. He therefore believed it to be of vital importance that any organisation for the use of people like himself should be geographically remote and independent.
8.76
Mr Shaw was a member of the public with no obligation to bring his concerns to the attention of the authorities. Yet he had valuable information to give - information which, if properly considered and investigated, could have led to Shipman’s earlier detection. It is important that persons such as Mr Shaw should feel able to bring forward any genuine and serious concerns which they may have, secure in the knowledge that those concerns will be objectively and independently examined and that persons airing the concerns will not be penalised as a result of their action in voicing them.

--- The Concerns of Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross ---
8.77
Mrs Dorothy Foley and Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross were employed as home helps by Tameside Social Services. Mrs Foley worked as a home help from 1985 until she became a resident warden of sheltered accommodation in 1992. Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross were home helps for Miss Mona White, Mrs Mary Tomlin and Mr George Vizor. The Inquiry has found that Shipman killed all three of them. Both Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross gave written statements to the Inquiry about the deaths. In addition, Mrs Foley gave oral evidence.
The Death of Miss Mona White
8.78
Miss White died on 15th
September 1986. Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross saw her standing at her front door at about midday on the day of her death. She said that she was waiting for Shipman to visit and was concerned because he had not arrived. They assured her that he would arrive soon and went on their way. They both recalled that Miss White did not look ill. Had she seemed ill, the home helps would not have left her alone to wait. A short time later, Mrs Shawcross saw Shipman near to Miss White’s flat. She asked him whether Miss White’s problem was with her heart. Shipman replied that it was and that he had given her an injection for her pain. Mrs Shawcross returned to see Miss White about 20 minutes later. She found the door unlocked. She went inside and found Miss White sitting upright in her usual chair. She looked as though she was sleeping. Mrs Shawcross was unable to wake Miss White and realised that she had died. Mrs Shawcross ran to Mrs Foley’s house, which was nearby, and together they returned to Miss White’s flat. By that time, Shipman had returned. Shipman made no attempt at resuscitation. This was the first death that Mrs Foley had encountered in the course of her work as a home help. She said that she did not have any particular concerns about the death although she did think that it was very sudden.
The Death of Mrs Mary Tomlin
8.79
Mrs Tomlin died just over three weeks later, on 7th
October 1986. Mrs Foley and Mrs Shawcross had visited Mrs Tomlin on the day of her death. They arrived at her flat just before lunchtime and found her unwell. She was sitting up in bed. When asked by the police, in the course of their investigations after Shipman’s arrest, neither Mrs Foley nor Mrs Shawcross was able to remember what exactly had been wrong with her. Mrs Tomlin told them that she was expecting a visit from Shipman. Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley stayed for a while and chatted. Mrs Tomlin seemed quite cheerful and was looking forward to Shipman’s visit. After a short time, the home helps left to continue with their rounds. Shortly afterwards, Mrs Foley saw Shipman go into Mrs Tomlin’s flat. About ten minutes later, she made her way to the flat and was met by Shipman. He said to her, ‘Go and put the kettle on, we’ll ring the family, she’s going.’ Mrs Foley asked Shipman what he meant, to which he replied, ‘She’s going, I’ll just go and have a look at her.’ Shipman then went into the bedroom and Mrs Foley went into the living room. Shortly afterwards, Shipman came through into the living room and told Mrs Foley that Mrs Tomlin was dead. Shipman said that Mrs Tomlin had been a very poorly and lonely lady and that every day had been a ‘bonus’. He did not summon an ambulance. Nor did he make any attempt at resuscitation.
8.80
Mrs Foley said that, after Mrs Tomlin’s death, she had a strong feeling that ‘something was not right’ about her death and that of Miss White. Mrs Shawcross shared her views. Mrs Foley believed that Shipman was a good doctor so did not think that medical incompetence was the explanation. It crossed her mind that Shipman was trying to give his patients ‘a perfect death’. However, she was aware that neither Miss White nor Mrs Tomlin had been suffering from any terminal illness.
The Death of Mr George Vizor
8.81
Three years then passed before the death of Mr Vizor on 18th
October 1989. Mrs Shawcross visited him at home on the day of his death. She thought that he did not look well and requested a visit from Shipman. When Mrs Shawcross had done her jobs for Mr Vizor, she left him alone as usual. She did not think he was so unwell that he needed someone to stay with him. At about midday, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley were visiting another client near to Mr Vizor’s home and Mrs Shawcross told Mrs Foley that Shipman was due to visit Mr Vizor. They agreed to call in on Mr Vizor later.
8.82
Some time later, Mrs Shawcross saw Shipman getting into his car, which was parked outside Mr Vizor’s flat, and driving away. About 15 to 20 minutes after that, Mrs Shawcross and Mrs Foley went to Mr Vizor’s flat. The door was locked but, through the glass panel, Mrs Shawcross could see the lower half of Mr Vizor’s body on the floor in the doorway between the living room and the hallway. At the time, she thought that he must have got up to see the doctor out and then collapsed on his way back into the living room. Mrs Shawcross summoned the warden and the three ladies went into the flat. They examined Mr Vizor’s body and concluded that he was dead.
8.83
During the time between Mrs Tomlin’s death and that of Mr Vizor, Mrs Foley became aware of the deaths of other patients of Shipman. Other home helps would remark that one of their clients had died and Mrs Foley said that she would ‘automatically’ ask whether Shipman had been there. Sometimes, a home help would remark that Shipman had given her client an injection before the death. Mrs Foley would speculate with her colleagues about whether Shipman was causing the deaths.
8.84
After Mr Vizor’s death, Mrs Foley’s suspicions were heightened once again. She and Mrs Shawcross talked about their concerns. However, she does not recall that they had any specific discussion regarding what they might do about those concerns. Mrs Foley explained that, if home helps had concerns about their clients, they were instructed to report them to their line manager. However, she had never felt that she could use this channel to voice her concerns about Shipman. She would not have expected her word to be believed against that of a doctor.
8.85
Mrs Foley said that, if the same thing happened now, she would voice her concerns. This is partly because of her previous experience and partly because she is now more confident. She would raise her concerns with her line manager. If there were an organisation to which she could voice her concerns in private, she would use that. She mentioned an existing organisation which staff can telephone if they believe an elderly person may be the subject of abuse. The organisation ensures that there is someone who will listen and will look into the concerns, whether the caller is right or wrong. She said that employees are now trained to bring forward any concerns that they have. Outside the employment structure, Mrs Foley said she would like to see an independent body which she could telephone and which would investigate her concerns on a confidential basis. She emphasised that such a body should be entirely independent and remote from the locality in which the concerns arose.

--- The Concerns of Mrs Shirley Harrison ---
8.86
Mrs Shirley Harrison is the niece of Mrs Erla Copeland. She was also a neighbour of Mrs Mavis Pickup. I found that Shipman killed both Mrs Copeland and Mrs Pickup. Mrs Harrison gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.
The Death of Mrs Erla Copeland
8.87
Mrs Copeland died on 11th
January 1996. Mrs Harrison’s mother, Mrs Dorothy Proctor, found Mrs Copeland dead, sitting in her usual armchair. Shipman was known to have visited shortly before her death. He came to the house after the death and said that he had not been expecting Mrs Copeland to die. He then proceeded to certify the death as being due to
‘natural causes’
8.88
Mrs Harrison explained that, in the months leading up to Mrs Copeland’s death, Shipman had led the family to believe that she was terminally ill, although they now realise that this was not the case. Following the death, Mrs Harrison and other members of her family thought that Shipman might have helped Mrs Copeland to die in view of the circumstances in which her body was found. However, they believed that Shipman had saved Mrs Copeland from a lot of suffering and so came to terms with her death and with Shipman’s possible involvement in it. Mrs Harrison said that she had spoken to a friend about her belief that Shipman had been involved in the death but the friend warned her to be very careful about what she was suggesting because Shipman was a well-respected GP.
The Death of Mrs Mavis Pickup
8.89
On 22nd
September 1997, Mrs Pickup died. A neighbour had discovered the death several hours after a visit from Shipman. The neighbour alerted Mrs Harrison to the death and she went into Mrs Pickup’s house. She saw Mrs Pickup lying on her back on the kitchen floor, dead. Following that death, Mrs Harrison became very troubled. She realised that the circumstances surrounding the death of Mrs Pickup were very similar to those of her aunt’s death. She believed that Shipman had killed Mrs Pickup. She told the Inquiry that she was ‘in turmoil’ because, although she had real concerns, she also felt she was reading too much into everything. She spoke to members of her family who continued to believe that the death of Mrs Copeland had been a ‘mercy killing’. They pointed out that they were not in a position to know what Mrs Pickup’s state of health had been before her death. Mrs Harrison did not mention her concerns to anyone else. Following Shipman’s conviction for murder, she said she was ‘riddled with guilt’ at not having come forward with her concerns sooner.
8.90
Mrs Harrison did not know who was responsible for managing or monitoring GPs. The only people to whom it had occurred to her to talk were her vicar and her doctor. However, she was afraid of being wrong and did not approach either. She said that she would have been reluctant to approach her doctor, as criticising one doctor to another doctor would not have been ‘ideal’. She felt that someone outside the profession was necessary.
8.91
Mrs Harrison felt that, if a well-publicised independent advice service had existed, to which she could have expressed her concerns, it would have been easier for her to come forward. She would not, however, have felt able to report Shipman within the Tameside area and it would have been necessary for the service to be outside the immediate locality, e.g. covering the whole of Manchester. She thought it possible that she would have reported her concerns about Mrs Pickup’s death if the public were encouraged to take their concerns to the Coroner Service. However, she felt that it would have taken her time to make the decision to do so.
8.92
Like Mr Shaw, Mrs Harrison had been concerned that, if she voiced her suspicions and they proved to be wrong, she would be in serious trouble. In order for her to come forward, she would have needed to be confident that, provided that her concerns were genuine, she would not be penalised for raising them, even if they proved to be unfounded. Like Mr Shaw, she identified the necessary characteristics of an organisation set up to receive concerns, or to give advice about the voicing of concerns, as being independence, distance from the immediate locality and a high profile with the public.

--- The Concerns of Mr David and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe ---
8.93
Mr David and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe are funeral directors who work in the family business, Frank Massey & Son, Funeral Directors (Masseys). Mrs Bambroffe’s father, Mr Alan Massey, also works in the business although he handed over day-to-day control to his daughter and son-in-law in about 1996.
8.94
In the course of their work, Mr and Mrs Bambroffe dealt with the deaths of many people who had been Shipman’s patients. Over time, they developed a growing awareness that there were odd features about some of those deaths. Mr Bambroffe, who joined the business in 1996, soon began to notice that Shipman’s patients often died alone while sitting up, dressed in their day clothes and showing no sign of having been ill. This was not the normal pattern. Usually, death occurred in bed with the patient surrounded by his/her family and the paraphernalia of illness. Mr and Mrs Bambroffe discussed these matters and began to notice other strange features. They realised, for example, that Shipman often seemed to be present at or about the time of the death. In a witness statement, Mrs Bambroffe told the Inquiry that she never really formed a firm view about the reason for the different circumstances of the deaths of Shipman’s patients. She just knew that something was ‘not right’. On the other hand, she was aware that Shipman was widely respected as a good doctor. He was her own GP and she had faith and confidence in him. In late 1997 or early 1998, Mr and Mrs Bambroffe mentioned their concerns to Mrs Bambroffe’s parents. Mr Massey, who had known Shipman for years, did not share their anxiety.
8.95
Mr and Mrs Bambroffe were very concerned about making an accusation against Shipman. They were afraid of being wrong. They thought they might not be taken seriously. They thought that people might think they were mad. Mrs Bambroffe was also aware that, if they raised a concern about a death, post-mortem examinations might be carried out. She did not wish to cause unnecessary distress to families, should her concerns turn out to be wrong.
8.96
In February 1998, however, Mrs Bambroffe mentioned her concerns to Dr Susan Booth, a member of the Brooke Practice. Members of the Brooke Practice, including Dr Booth, often signed Form C cremation certificates for Shipman. The full sequence of events thereafter is set out in my Second Report. Suffice it to say here that Mrs Bambroffe’s action in speaking to Dr Booth was an important factor in the subsequent decision by Dr Reynolds to report her concerns about Shipman to Mr John Pollard, HM Coroner for the Greater Manchester South District. That in turn led to the first police investigation into Shipman, which failed to detect his criminal activity.
8.97
Mr and Mrs Bambroffe said they would have been more confident in reporting their concerns if there had been an organisation which they could have approached on a confidential basis and which they knew would have taken them seriously.

--- The Concerns of Dr Linda Reynolds ---
8.98
Mr Nigel Reynolds, the widower of the late Dr Reynolds, gave oral evidence during the Stage One hearings and afterwards provided further written evidence. He explained that his wife’s greatest fear in reporting her concerns was fear of the consequences of making an unfounded accusation. In particular, she had discussed with him the possibility of a libel action being brought, which would have ruined them financially. He felt that help and advice should be made available to a person in his wife’s position. Mr Reynolds also considered that there might be a need for a central body to whom doctors could report any concerns about their colleagues. That central body could then make a judgement about the legitimacy of those fears and decide whether the matter should be taken forward.

--- The Concerns of Bereaved Families and Friends ---
8.99
The vast majority of the bereaved relatives and friends of Shipman’s victims had no suspicions whatever about the deaths at the time. They were frequently surprised at the suddenness with which the death had occurred but, in general, accepted Shipman’s explanation without question. There were, however, those who did have concerns. These misgivings rarely related to the possibility of
behaviour; more usually, the concerns were that Shipman might have given substandard care - perhaps by failing to attempt resuscitation or to summon an ambulance or by leaving a dying patient alone. Sometimes, the concerns amounted only to a general feeling of unease that there was something ‘not quite right’ about a death. A few individuals sought an interview with Shipman to discuss their worries. But, until Shipman was under investigation for Mrs Kathleen Grundy’s death, none of the bereaved relatives and friends reported their concerns to the authorities. Some were intimidated at the prospect of questioning the actions of a doctor; others were persuaded by members of their families that their worries were unfounded. Several have told the Inquiry that they did not know to whom they should take their concerns.

--- Conclusions ---
8.100
As I have said, remarkably few people had any concerns about Shipman and the circumstances in which his patients died. In this Chapter, I have described the difficulties faced by those who did have such concerns and the conditions that they believe might have made it easier for them to report those concerns. There must be not a word of criticism of these people for what, on the face of it, appears to be failure to raise serious concerns in the appropriate quarter. These people did not fail to act because they were irresponsible; they did not act because they felt ‘disempowered’. The culture of the time was such that they feared that their concerns would not be taken seriously but would be dismissed as irrational. Some of them feared that they might be wrong to harbour suspicions about Shipman, and that, if they did, the consequences for them would be serious. Some of them had no one to whom they could turn for independent and confidential advice. In
, I shall consider what steps might be taken to assist people who have genuine concerns about health professionals to bring those concerns forward for investigation by the appropriate authorities.


========================================================================
CHAPTER NINE - Raising Concerns: the Role of the Practice Staff
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
The Lay Members of Staff
9.87
I am quite satisfied that none of the administrative staff had any knowledge or suspicion of Shipman’s criminal activities. Up to and beyond the time of his arrest, the staff admired him and trusted him implicitly. If Mrs Chapman or Mrs Cocker had had any suspicions about him, I think it unlikely that they would have remained as his patients. If Mrs Massey and Mrs Walker had had any concerns that Shipman might be responsible for the high number of patient deaths they had noticed, it seems to me that the last person they would have mentioned it to (apart from Shipman himself) would have been Mrs Shipman. That the staff should have had such difficulty in coming to terms with the reality of Shipman’s guilt is also consistent with their claims that their trust and confidence in him had been complete. Mrs Chapman was the first to accept that the allegations were true; she was the one whose relatives he had killed.
9.88
The practice staff are not to be criticised for their failure to realise that there was anything seriously amiss. They had no knowledge or experience of how many deaths might be expected in a general practice the size of Shipman’s. Even those who had worked at the Donneybrook practice had no awareness of what was usual and unusual. When the deaths were occurring, the staff had no contact with others working in similar circumstances with whom they might have discussed an apparent increase in patient deaths. They knew that Shipman had quite a lot of elderly, ill patients. They knew that it was his declared policy to allow them to stay at home and die at home, rather than to be admitted to hospital. If reassurance had been required, they would have gained it from their realisation that Shipman appeared to be uniformly admired and respected. They personally had every reason to trust Shipman and they did not have the knowledge or experience to evaluate him professionally. There must be an end, once and for all, to any suggestion that the practice staff ‘must have known’. They did not. Nor could they reasonably have been expected to.
The Practice Nurse and District Nurse
9.89
I must consider the positions of Sister Morgan and Mrs Gilchrist separately. This is not because I am of the opinion that they were suspicious of Shipman; indeed I am quite satisfied that they were not. I consider them separately because, by reason of their professional training, knowledge and experience, they were in a better position to evaluate Shipman’s conduct than were the lay members of staff.
9.90
I can deal very briefly with Mrs Gilchrist. Although she worked quite closely with Shipman, she was not part of the surgery team and would not have been aware of the frequency with which his patients were dying. Many of the patients Shipman killed were in reasonably good health; certainly they were not sufficiently unwell to require Mrs Gilchrist’s services. Mrs Gilchrist was not present when a death occurred in the surgery. She did not take her lunch break in the surgery and share the news of the day with the practice staff. I find it wholly unsurprising that she had no suspicions about Shipman’s conduct.
9.91
Sister Morgan was in a different position. Not only was she a very highly qualified nurse, she worked in extremely close contact with Shipman throughout the period in which he killed most frequently. I accept without hesitation that she did not suspect him of wrongdoing. The question is whether she ought to have done, or at any rate whether she ought to have realised that all was not as it should have been.
9.92
From the evidence I have heard in Stage Four of the Inquiry, I have formed the view that an experienced nurse is often well placed to observe professional misconduct or poor performance by a doctor with whom s/he works. This is particularly so where the nurse is present during consultations, or works, for example, in an operating theatre. I accept that Sister Morgan did not often work alongside Shipman in that way. I have no doubt at all also that, whenever Sister Morgan was present at a consultation, Shipman’s conduct would have been impeccable.
9.93
There were a few occasions on which I would have expected a nurse in Sister Morgan’s position to feel a sense of unease about events within the practice. One was the occasion of Miss Harding’s death, in January 1994, when Shipman required her to help with resuscitation and yet did not ask her or anyone else to fetch the resuscitation equipment. She said that, being utterly absorbed in what she was doing, she did not think of calling for it herself. I accept that she did not, and do not criticise her for that, although I would have expected a nurse in her position at least to realise immediately afterwards that full use had not been made of the available resources. I would certainly have expected her to feel some concern about this and to discuss it with Shipman. I do not think she ever did.
9.94
I accept that, after Miss Harding’s death, Sister Morgan asked Shipman whether she had carried out her part of the resuscitation procedure correctly. Indeed, that she should do so seems to be illustrative of her relationship with Shipman. I think the relationship was one of master and pupil; he would lead and she would follow; he was to teach and she to learn. She might suggest a course of action but he would decide. To some extent, this is inevitable in a professional relationship between a doctor and a nurse, where the doctor must take overall responsibility for decisions. However, I have the clear impression that this professional relationship was more ‘unequal’ than many such. I think that the inequality stemmed partly from the fact that it was a ‘one-to-one’ arrangement. Most doctors work with several nurses and most nurses with several different doctors. However, I think the main cause of this inequality was the personalities of Shipman and Sister Morgan. Shipman had a strongly dominant personality. Sister Morgan admired and respected him very deeply. He inculcated admiration quite deliberately; I think that admiration was expected of employees. Indeed, I think it unlikely that anyone who did not admire Shipman would have stayed long in his employment. Sister Morgan, on the other hand, is not, in my view, a strongly independent personality. I think she was content to follow Shipman’s guidance at all times. I do not suggest that she was not a competent, conscientious and hardworking nurse; I think she was. However, I do not think there would have been any circumstances where she would have thought that her own opinion was correct and that Shipman’s might be wrong. That being so, I find it unsurprising that Sister Morgan should have questioned her own contribution to the resuscitation of Miss Harding but not Shipman’s organisation of it.
9.95
The death of Mrs Turner in July 1996 was another occasion when Sister Morgan might have felt a sense of unease. On this occasion, too, Sister Morgan questioned whether she had given sufficiently clear instructions to Mrs Turner about seeking advice before stopping her medication. She did not question whether Shipman had failed to appreciate how ill Mrs Turner apparently was when he left her to return to the surgery.
9.96
I think also that Sister Morgan must lack the degree of curiosity that most people have. In about 1993, Shipman told her that, in the practice, they could expect approximately 40 births and 40 deaths each year. Sister Morgan had no idea what the usual death rate was. She did not notice that, in each ensuing year, there were far more than 40 deaths in the practice. I do not find that wholly surprising; the number of deaths might not be a matter of particular interest. But I do find it surprising that, after Shipman had been arrested, charged and eventually convicted of multiple murder - murder committed almost under her nose - Sister Morgan has still not found out what the usual death rate is.
9.97
In my view, Sister Morgan’s lack of curiosity explains her failure to notice the strange features of two deaths that occurred in early 1998. I find it remarkable that Sister Morgan did not realise that it was strange that Miss Ward could apparently die of cancer with secondaries when, to Sister Morgan’s personal knowledge, she had been in the surgery two weeks earlier for pre-holiday inoculations. In fact, it is likely, in my view, that Sister Morgan was aware that Miss Ward had been in the surgery only the day before her death. I am not saying that so sudden a death from secondary cancer is impossible, but it must be an unusual occurrence. I would have expected Sister Morgan to wish to discuss that death with Shipman. Nowadays, in most practices, such a death would be the subject of a ‘significant event audit’, where the clinical team would discuss the adequacy of the treatment provided. In a single-handed practice, I would expect it to be the norm for the doctor to discuss such an event with his/her nurse. What is more, after her experience at Leeds University while studying for her MA, I would have expected Sister Morgan to know that such was the usual practice. Yet it appears that, if there was any discussion, it can have taken place at only a superficial level.
9.98
The second death that should, in my view, have puzzled Sister Morgan was that of Mrs Waldron. I am afraid that I am unable to accept Sister Morgan’s evidence that, after Mrs Waldron’s death, she came to the conclusion that the back pain of which Mrs Waldron had complained a day or two before her death must have been a sign of developing heart trouble. I am quite satisfied that, if Sister Morgan had asked about the site of Mrs Waldron’s back pain, as I think she probably did, Mrs Waldron would have told her that it was in her lumbar spine. Sister Morgan cannot have thought that this was a sign of heart trouble. I am driven to the conclusion that Sister Morgan has persuaded herself of that explanation while preparing for her appearance at the Inquiry. I do not suggest that she has done so dishonestly, merely that she has sought for and found an acceptable explanation for her own thought processes. However, the explanation does not bear examination. I have come to the conclusion that Sister Morgan did not think carefully or independently about Mrs Waldron’s death. I think that she did what she always did about anything that Shipman said; she accepted what he said without question or independent thought.
9.99
I repeat that I accept that Sister Morgan did not suspect Shipman of wrongdoing. I criticise her only to the extent that I do not think that she applied independent or objective thought to events within the practice that ought to have puzzled her but did not. I do not suggest that, had she thought more carefully, she would have realised that Shipman was killing his patients. I think that that would have been too great a step to contemplate. However, had she shown greater curiosity and independence of mind, she might have acted as a deterrent to Shipman. He might have been wary of her. As it was, I think it likely that he recognised that she always deferred to him professionally and knew that she would not question what he told her.
9.100
I do not think that such an unequal relationship would be likely to arise between a doctor and a nurse in a group practice. There, as a rule, there are several doctors sharing the assistance of several nurses. It is unlikely that a one-to-one professional relationship, such as existed between Shipman and Sister Morgan, would ever arise. I regard such relationships as unsatisfactory. They tend to deprive both parties of the professional objectivity that is fostered by working with a number of colleagues. There is another factor present in the relationship between a GP and his/her practice nurse: they are employer and employee. This is in contrast with the position in a hospital setting, where doctors and nurses are all employed by the NHS trust or hospital authorities and the doctors do not have the power of dismissal. In general practice, the nurse’s dependence on the doctor for her employment is likely to make it even more difficult for her challenge the doctor.
The Lasting Effects
9.101
The effects on members of Shipman’s practice staff have been profound and lasting. Several have suffered from recurrent ill health in the period since his crimes became known. Neither Mrs Chapman nor Mrs Cocker is working at present. Mrs Walker has moved to another country. Mrs Massey has moved to a different type of work. Both she and Mrs Chapman feel that they have been used and their trust utterly betrayed by Shipman. As a result of the hostility she has encountered, Mrs Cocker feels unable to go alone into the town centre of Hyde. Sister Morgan told the Inquiry that the events of the past few years have had a serious impact on her personal and professional life.
9.102
The lives of all the staff who worked for Shipman have indeed been changed irrevocably as a result of his crimes. Further damage has been done by the distressing accusations made against them to the effect that they ‘must have known’ of Shipman’s criminal actions at the time. I hope that the fact that I have found those accusations to be wholly unfounded may assist in dispelling any doubts which remain in the minds of some people.

--- The Raising of Concerns by Practice Staff ---
9.103
I have found that Shipman’s practice staff had no significant concerns about him or his clinical practice. Yet, in other circumstances, practice staff may be uniquely well placed to notice signs of poor clinical practice by a doctor or other healthcare professionals with whom they work. They may become aware of complaints from patients, locums and others with whom they have dealings. They may observe instances of poor practice or aberrant behaviour for themselves. They may become aware of failures of organisation within the practice (e.g. poor record keeping) which might put patients at risk. The Inquiry was anxious to discover how easy it would be for a member of staff of a GP practice who possessed this sort of information to report it.
The Problems Faced by Practice Staff
9.104
The Inquiry was told that staff employed in GP practices can experience particular difficulty in raising concerns about the performance of healthcare professionals within the practice. GP practices are small organisations and there may be conflicts of loyalties and a reluctance to bring criticism about one member of the practice to the attention of his/her colleagues. This reluctance is likely to be increased where a lay member of staff has concerns about clinical care. He or she may well feel unable to challenge the actions of a healthcare professional, believing that his/her concerns may prove to be unfounded and fearing the consequences. There may also be a perception (whether justified or not) that, if a concern is raised, the doctors will ‘close ranks’, with the result that the concerns will go unheeded. Members of staff may be worried that, if they voice their concerns, their relationships with their employers and colleagues will be irretrievably damaged. The smaller the practice, the greater these problems are likely to be. In a single-handed GP practice, for example, there is likely to be no one within the practice to whom a member of staff could voice a concern about his/her employer. In a serious case, where the doctor’s fitness to practise may be in doubt, the raising of concerns could have a direct impact on the livelihoods of those employed in the practice.
9.105
These problems are exacerbated by the fact that the staff of GP practices often function in isolation, both from staff in other practices and from the local primary care organisation (PCO). They may have no experience of working in another practice. They may have no idea what procedures are usual and what are entirely outside the norm. They may be uncertain whom to turn to for advice.
9.106
The problems that I have identified were discussed at one of the Inquiry’s seminars. Mrs Pauline Webdale represented AMSPAR at the seminar. She is a practice manager herself and, in addition, has experience in advising AMSPAR members how to raise concerns. She confirmed that doctors can often be reluctant to deal with complaints or concerns about a colleague. In those circumstances, it can be necessary for staff to go outside the practice in order to get their concerns dealt with. Staff who are contemplating such action are often concerned that they may be branded as ‘troublemakers’ as a result of their actions.
9.107
There are signs of a greater awareness on the part of practice staff of their role in protecting patients. Ms Anna Myers, Deputy Director, Public Concern at Work (PCaW), told the Inquiry that it was her impression, from enquiries she had received at PCaW, that the knowledge of Shipman’s activities, and of the criminal activities of other GPs, had made practice staff ‘very alive’ to the fact that it was important to raise with their local PCT any concerns that they might have.
The Need for a Change of Culture
9.108
Mrs Webdale hoped that, in the future, the culture within general practice would change so that more concerns could be dealt with internally, without the necessity to approach an outside organisation. In the practice Mrs Webdale manages, staff are encouraged to report anything that they feel is ‘untoward’. Forms are provided for staff to complete. These forms are used to record the occurrence of all sorts of incidents, including matters affecting health and safety or encounters between members of staff and disgruntled patients. Forms are also completed following more serious incidents, such as a mistake made by a locum or an assistant GP. Mrs Webdale thought that the practice of routinely recording and reporting minor matters encouraged and facilitated the reporting of more significant concerns when the need arose.
9.109
Ms Myers endorsed this approach, observing that, if there was a culture whereby concerns were raised on a daily basis as they occurred, this would remove any sense that the raising of concerns was ‘deviant behaviour’. Mrs Debbie Mellor, representing the Department of Health (DoH), emphasised that what the DoH was aiming to do was to achieve an open culture, in which it was accepted practice for people to raise their concerns.
9.110
Mrs Webdale also spoke of the importance of ensuring that all members of the staff within a GP practice - including the most junior - feel that their views are of value. She described efforts to introduce a less hierarchical structure within practices, whereby junior members of staff did not regard the doctors as ‘untouchable’ but, instead, felt able to exchange opinions with them.
Raising Concerns Outside the Practice
9.111
At the seminar, there was a general view that the ideal situation was one where members of staff, whatever their status, felt able to raise concerns openly within the practice. However, even if the culture changes in the way suggested, there will still be times when it is not feasible for members of staff to raise their concerns within the practice, particularly a single-handed practice. For example, had Shipman’s staff had concerns about the deaths of his patients, it would hardly have been possible for them to raise those concerns with Shipman himself. They would have had to have gone outside the practice.
9.112
When Shipman’s staff were asked what they would have done if they had felt concerns about Shipman, the receptionists said that they would have spoken to Mrs Massey as practice manager. Had that not been possible for any reason, they would have thought it appropriate to approach the WPHA direct. Mrs Massey said that she would have gone to the WPHA although, at the time, she would not have known which member of staff at the WPHA to contact. She would have appreciated a closer relationship with a member of staff whom she got to know and felt confident in approaching. She said that she could also see an advantage in having an independent body from which a member of staff could get initial advice as to whether and how to proceed and where to direct a concern.
9.113
Sister Morgan would have been in a rather better position. Had she had any concerns, she could have spoken to her clinical adviser, or a nursing adviser at the WPHA. Her professional body, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN), was also available to give advice and support. The PCT in whose area Sister Morgan was working at the time she gave evidence to the Inquiry did not employ a nursing adviser, so Sister Morgan had no identifiable contact there. However, the RCN would have advised her on whom to approach and would have accompanied her to any interview if necessary.
9.114
The other healthcare professionals had their own channels of communication and support. Mrs Gilchrist, for example, could have approached both the RCN and her own employers (through her line manager) if she had had any concerns.
9.115
Mrs Webdale said that if she, as a practice manager, had a concern about a doctor in the practice, or if such concerns were reported to her, she would involve the local medical committee (LMC) or PCT. If the concern was of a sensitive nature - such as an allegation of drug abuse by a doctor - she would go to the LMC. She felt that PCTs were, as yet, ill-equipped to deal with concerns of this kind. When facing potentially sensitive issues, it was important to have a relationship with the person in whom one was confiding. She had not yet been able to form the necessary relationships with staff at her PCT. She had considerable confidence in the Clinical Governance Lead there, but said that he had a ‘huge’ remit and could not do everything. It was for that reason that she would have approached the LMC.
9.116
Other participants at the seminars considered that PCTs were not perceived by staff as being sufficiently approachable. This may be because they are relatively new organisations, have experienced a high turnover of staff and because practice staff have not yet had the time to form relationships with staff at the PCTs. In addition, however, it was said that PCT staff have a wide range of responsibilities and sometimes cannot manage them all.
Addressing the Problems Faced by Practice Staff
A Practice ‘Whistleblowing’ Policy
9.117
Ms Myers said that, in her view, the correct approach was for PCTs to help GPs to understand the value of encouraging staff to raise concerns within the practice whenever possible. However, practice staff should be told that, if they felt unable to raise their concerns internally, they should approach a named individual at the PCT. That individual might be the Clinical Governance Lead, or someone else. She believed that practices should regard the PCT as a ‘safety net’, not as the first port of call for a member of staff who had concerns. She agreed that it would be helpful if the named individual at the PCT was known to practice staff before the need to approach the individual arose. She said that she was not suggesting that a member of staff should be prevented from approaching a different individual at the PCT whom s/he felt more confident about talking to but, for those who did not know whom to approach, a name should be provided.
9.118
Mrs Webdale emphasised that each GP practice should have a written ‘whistleblowing’ policy, setting out the steps that should be taken by staff who wished to raise a concern. She said that it should be a ‘living document’, which developed over time and of which everyone in the practice was aware. It seems that many practices have no such policy. In September 2003, Dr Linda Patterson, then Medical Director of the Commission for Health Improvement (CHI), told the Inquiry that CHI had found that there were ‘significant gaps’ in the application of PCT whistleblowing procedures to GP practices and staff. Among the practices CHI had reviewed at that time, only 24% had reported having a whistleblowing policy. CHI believed that more should be done by PCTs to ensure that GPs and their staff were aware of the procedures to be followed. The RCN also expressed the view that PCTs had a responsibility for ensuring that GPs were aware of the mechanisms available to them to raise concerns about professional practice.
9.119
At the time of the Inquiry’s seminars, the DoH was working with PCaW on the preparation of guidance for GPs on how to develop and implement a whistleblowing policy for healthcare professionals and other staff in their practice. The Inquiry has now seen a draft of that guidance and of the whistleblowing policy contained in it.
9.120
The draft policy assures staff that the practice welcomes genuine concerns and is committed to dealing with them responsibly, openly and professionally. It emphasises that staff should raise concerns while they are
‘just concerns’
, rather than wait until the level of concern escalates. It assures staff who may wish to raise genuine concerns that they will not lose their jobs or suffer retribution as a result of doing so. Nor will they be asked to provide proof that their concerns are well founded. The draft policy encourages the bringing forward of concerns openly. It sets out in general terms what will happen after a concern is raised and stresses that a person raising a concern will, insofar as is possible, be kept informed of what is being done in response to the concern.
9.121
The draft policy suggests that a member of staff should raise a concern with his/her line manager. If that is inappropriate for some reason, or has not proved effective, the draft policy advises an approach to the practice manager or to a named GP within the practice. Staff are advised that, if they are unable to raise the concern internally, or if it has not been dealt with properly, they should approach a named contact at the PCT. Contact details are given. The draft policy is clear and reassuring in tone. It contains contact details for PCaW and also mentions that free independent advice may be available from the trade union or professional organisation to which the member of staff belongs.
9.122
The guidance to GPs suggests that a draft policy should be prepared and discussed at a staff meeting after which a practice policy should be agreed. There should be liaison with the PCT. Staff should be briefed on the content of the policy and a poster, reinforcing the message, should be displayed. Employment contracts should be amended as necessary to harmonise with the whistleblowing policy.
Training
9.123
Mrs Webdale emphasised the need for general practice staff to be trained, not only so that they were familiar with the procedure to be followed if they wished to raise a concern, but also so that they were aware of wider clinical governance issues. AMSPAR produces an induction pack for new staff which, if implemented properly at practice level, provides a comprehensive grounding for new staff. It includes the topic of raising concerns. Mrs Webdale said that the training for new staff now covers a much broader range of issues than was the case in the past. This includes clinical governance issues, which she regarded as very important. Mrs Webdale also contributes to educational events for GP practice staff, at the invitation of PCTs. She sometimes goes into practices to provide on-site training. She felt that more GP practices were recognising the value of good training for their administrative staff.
Closer Links with the Primary Care Trusts and with Staff from Other Practices
9.124
I have mentioned the problem of isolation of staff, both from other practices and from staff at the PCTs. Staff may feel that they have no one whom they can consult about their concerns. At the seminar, Mrs Webdale described the directory covering the area of the Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire Strategic Health Authority. This contains the names of practice managers and staff who possess particular expertise on different topics upon which staff might need advice. With the assistance of the directory, practice staff are in a position to consult someone with experience in the relevant field. The fields of expertise listed in the directory include the raising of concerns. Mrs Webdale also spoke of arrangements for the sharing of staff between practices.
9.125
Mrs Sue Antrobus, representing the RCN, emphasised the importance of PCTs establishing networks of practice nurses. Dr Grenville felt that it was also important to promote links between practice nurses and district nurses. Dr Patterson described to the Inquiry various steps that she believed could be taken by PCTs in order to strengthen their links with GP practice staff. These included the provision of occupational health facilities and of arrangements for mentoring and peer support.
9.126
Some respondents to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper felt that a major problem lay in the fact that practice staff were employed by GPs, rather than by the PCTs. GPs were sometimes reluctant to release staff to attend training and clinical governance meetings. As a consequence, it could be difficult for PCTs to form relationships with practice staff. Mrs Stephanie Farr, Head of Service (Children), Castle Point and Rochford PCT, said that her PCT was trying to encourage contact with practice staff but that practices were not always co-operative. Dr Grenville said that, in his area, there was a practice managers’ group in each PCT, which met on a regular basis. His impression was that the role of the PCOs in training administrative staff had diminished with the advent of the PCTs, largely because the PCTs had so many functions to fulfil. He hoped that this role would be revived in time. Mr Robin Macleod, representing the General Medical Council, said that, in some areas, PCTs did not have the money to fund staff training.
The Role of the Primary Care Trust in Supporting Practice Staff
9.127
The position of a member of staff who voices a concern may become untenable, especially within a small or single-handed practice. The making of a complaint or the raising of a concern about either a doctor or a colleague may well destroy the working relationship within the practice. Mrs Webdale observed that the ‘ideal’ would be for practice staff to be employed by PCTs direct, but this was not a realistic prospect. However, if a member of staff were forced to leave a practice as a result of having raised concerns, she said that she thought that the PCT should support him/her in finding another job. She said that she was aware of some staff who had preferred to leave their posts, rather than to raise a concern about the practice in which they worked. She felt that PCTs should take steps to find out why a member of staff had left a practice. One possibility would be to design questionnaires to be completed and submitted to the PCT by staff leaving GP practices. These
questionnaires
could be collated and, if any trend emerged in relation to a particular practice, this could be followed up. Mrs Webdale felt that the exercise might contribute to the PCT’s understanding of staff training needs and, also, to its ability to recognise when staff at a practice required help and support. By contrast, Dr Grenville, for the British Medical Association, believed that such a process would be unwieldy. He suggested that it would be better for PCTs to concentrate on encouraging practices to take steps themselves to find out why members of staff were leaving. It would then be for the practice to take action to eliminate any problems that were revealed.

--- CHAPTER TEN - Raising Concerns: the Death of Mrs Renate Overton Revisited ---
Evidence of How the Duty to Report Actually Operated in the NHS in 1994
A Final Consideration of the Positions of Dr Brown and Dr Husaini
Correction to paragraph 10.26


========================================================================
CHAPTER TEN - Raising Concerns: the Death of Mrs Renate Overton Revisited
========================================================================

--- Was There a Duty to Report? ---
Dr Husaini’s Position
10.6
When he gave evidence in December 2002, Dr Husaini acknowledged that, as a consultant in charge of Mrs Overton’s care, he was under a duty to report to a relevant authority his concerns about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton. He said that he realised that this treatment had been quite unorthodox and showed that Shipman might be a danger to patients. In fact, he claimed that he had been so concerned that, in 1994, he had reported the facts to Mr Revington, to Mr Roger Butterworth (Chief Executive designate of the NHS Trust responsible for Tameside General Hospital), to Mrs Lynn Nuttall (the Trust’s Business Manager) and to Mr Charles Howorth (then legal adviser to the North West Regional Health Authority). For reasons that are fully set out in the Third Report, I rejected his evidence and found that he had not reported his concerns to anyone. His claim having been rejected, it follows that he must be criticised for having failed to do that which he acknowledged to be his duty. However, this criticism must be viewed in the light of the culture and practice of the time.
Dr Brown’s Position
10.7
Dr Brown agreed that he had not reported Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton to anyone in authority. He gave several reasons why he had not done so. First, he asserted that, at the time when Mrs Overton was under his care, he believed that the circumstances of her collapse were so uncertain that he could not reasonably act. I rejected that contention. I found that his state of mind was encapsulated in the words of a witness statement that he made to the police at the beginning of 1999, in which he said of his opinion in 1994:
‘It was my opinion at the time that the patient’s initial management by the general practitioner was highly unusual, even dangerous. If the initial diagnosis of an asthmatic attack was correct, it was treated appropriately with the nebulisers. Intravenous Morphine plays no part in the management of patients with asthma outside the hospital. There is a statement in the notes by the admitting physician that she
Mrs Overton
may have had chest pain, although this contradicts the clear statement of the casualty officer that she had no chest pain prior to her collapse. While intravenous Morphine has a place in the management of acute myocardial infarction (heart attack) I have always understood that it should be given intravenously, in small amounts, with time between doses to assess the affect
of the drug. In addition, it would be essential to monitor the heart rate and blood pressure of the patient in order to detect any signs of a cardiovascular collapse. In my experience of managing patients who have developed wheeze following a heart attack, I have never seen a dose of 20mg of Morphine used. I should add that I am familiar with the administration and effects of Morphine because in my work as an anaesthetist I regularly administer Morphine intravenously to patients undergoing surgery. I am also familiar with the use of Morphine post-operatively in patient-controlled analgesia pumps and it is common for these pumps only to allow 1mg of Morphine to be given at a time with five minutes elapsing between doses of Morphine.’
10.8
Second, Dr Brown also said that he believed the only possible route open to him was to make a complaint to the GMC. He was unaware of any local NHS procedure or mechanism for pursuing a complaint against a general practitioner (GP). He did not think he could report the matter to the GMC because he did not think he had sufficient information on which to base a complaint to that body. He did not think that the hospital notes were enough.
10.9
Third, Dr Brown also said that considerations of professional etiquette played a part in his decision not to make a report. He said that, as part of their training, doctors are taught to be very slow to criticise other doctors or to pass opinions on them. He felt that there was a tension between a duty to report a colleague’s misconduct and the need to avoid an accusation against a colleague that might turn out to be false. He said that he was worried that, if he made a report, the GMC might criticise him for disparaging Shipman. In the Third Report, I accepted that Dr Brown genuinely held these reservations about medical etiquette. His decision to telephone the Medical Defence Union (MDU) for advice before giving the police a statement about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton confirms that. As recently as 1999, he was hesitant about criticising a fellow practitioner, even one who had been arrested for murder.
10.10
Fourth, Dr Brown said that he felt that he ought to honour the wishes of Mrs Overton’s family that no complaint should be made against Shipman. As I explained in the Third Report, Dr Brown had told Dr Michael Overton, Mrs Overton’s brother, that Shipman had given morphine to his sister. Dr Overton, who is a GP, knew that it was wrong to give an opiate drug to an asthmatic. However, Dr Brown agreed that he had not told Dr Overton how much morphine he understood had been given or that what was given had apparently been injected as a ‘stat’ or bolus dose. He contended that he had said enough to enable the family to decide whether they wanted to proceed with a complaint. He said that, if they had been anxious to proceed, he could have provided more information. They had decided not to make a complaint and Dr Brown considered that it was therefore reasonable for him to do nothing further. In the Third Report, I expressed concern that Dr Brown had not given the Overton family enough information to allow them to make an informed decision as to whether to proceed with a complaint.
10.11
Each of Dr Brown’s explanations must be considered in the light of both the culture and the framework for reporting concerns at the time of Mrs Overton’s death.
Guidance from the General Medical Council: the Nature of the Duty to Report
10.12
I shall consider first what the GMC had to say in its publications about the duty of a doctor to report the conduct of a colleague. It appears that this duty has evolved in two relevant respects over the past 30 years. First, 30 years ago, it was unusual for the GMC to take disciplinary action in respect of poor clinical practice. In general, the GMC would take disciplinary action only against doctors who appeared to have been guilty of misconduct. Mr Alan Howes, an officer of the GMC between 1977 and 2002, said that the most common forms of misconduct were known as ‘the three As’, denoting ‘advertising, abortion and adultery’. Nowadays, many doctors appearing before the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) of the GMC face charges relating to their clinical practice. Second, there is now a clear obligation on doctors to report a colleague who presents or might present a risk to patients whereas, in the past, that duty was less clear and the emphasis was on avoiding the unjustified denigration of colleagues.
10.13
For many years until about 1995, the GMC provided to all doctors on the register a guide to GMC functions, procedures and disciplinary jurisdiction. This guide was known as the ‘Blue Book’. Theoretically, all doctors should have read the Blue Book in order to keep abreast of any changes in the advice given or the requirements imposed upon them by their regulatory body. However, evidence to the Inquiry suggests that most doctors did not do so. Some did not read it at all; others would give it a cursory glance and take in only the main messages.
10.14
As I shall explain in
, historically the GMC regarded itself as being under a duty to protect the public by taking disciplinary proceedings against doctors guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM). The Blue Book of 1971, entitled ‘GMC Professional Discipline’, provided guidance as to the kinds of offences and professional misconduct that might lead to disciplinary proceedings. The emphasis was on misconduct and breaches of medical ethics, rather than on bad clinical practice. It stressed that the question of whether a particular course of conduct amounted to SPM was a matter to be decided by the Disciplinary Committee of the GMC (the predecessor of the PCC) on the evidence in that particular case. The categories of misconduct described were not to be regarded as exhaustive. It concluded, in words that remained largely unchanged in December 1993:
‘Any abuse by a doctor of any of the privileges and opportunities afforded to him, or any grave dereliction of professional duty or serious breach of medical ethics, may give rise to a charge of serious professional misconduct.’
10.15
During the 1970s, there was very little change in the guidance contained in the Blue Book. Advice against deprecating the skill, knowledge, qualifications or service of a colleague appeared in the section dealing with advertising and canvassing. Such advice was aimed at preventing doctors seeking to enlarge their own practices by denigrating the practices of others.
10.16
In August 1977, the new edition of the Blue Book, entitled ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline’, was published. In a section headed
‘Neglect or disregard of personal responsibilities’
it was stated that the GMC might institute disciplinary proceedings:
‘... when a doctor appears seriously to have disregarded his professional duties to his patients, for example, by failing to visit or to provide treatment for a patient when necessary. ... The Council is not concerned with errors in treatment or diagnosis.’
The message seemed to be that the GMC would take action on clinical matters, but only those entailing a conscious decision by the doctor to act as s/he did, in the knowledge of the likely consequences. Negligence, even if gross, would not give rise to disciplinary action. The concluding words in that section might well have been interpreted to exclude the administration of a dangerous overdose of medication, administered in good faith but with gross negligence.
10.17
In 1983, the corresponding passage in the Blue Book was altered so as to enlarge the areas of clinical treatment where action might be taken. It read:
‘The Council is not ordinarily concerned with errors in diagnosis or treatment, or with the kind of matters which give rise to action in the civil courts for negligence, unless the doctor’s conduct in the case has involved such a disregard of his professional responsibility to his patients or such a neglect of his professional duties as to raise a question of serious professional misconduct.’
The message had not substantially changed, however. Moreover, there was a difficulty for practitioners in that the advice was circular. The GMC was saying that it would act on cases of SPM but that errors in diagnosis and treatment would be subject to disciplinary action only if they were serious enough to raise a question of SPM. Practitioners must have wondered how serious cases had to be before the GMC would become involved.
10.18
The 1985 Blue Book contained a new feature, which was a statement of the standards of medical care that the public was entitled to expect. This was no doubt of assistance to practitioners. However, it was clearly not intended that a failure properly to meet these standards would give rise to SPM proceedings before the GMC. It would not surprise me if doctors still remained in doubt as to what types of clinical mishap were capable of amounting to SPM.
10.19
In 1983, the BBC Television programme ‘That’s Life’ had broadcast an item highly critical of members of the medical profession for having failed to report concerns relating to incompetent laser treatment given by a doctor to patients. Many GMC members were angry with the BBC for having broadcast the programme. The GMC nevertheless accepted the recommendation of its Executive Committee that the GMC should inform doctors in the next GMC Annual Report that
‘there may be circumstances in which it would be the responsibility of doctors to report to the Council evidence which may be regarded as raising a question of serious professional misconduct by a professional colleague’
. Thereafter, the April 1987 edition of the Blue Book set out for the first time the ethical obligation of a doctor to report a professional colleague who it was thought might have committed SPM or might have been suffering from serious impairment of health. The Blue Book pointed out that:
‘... a doctor has a duty, where the circumstances so warrant, to inform an appropriate body about a professional colleague whose behaviour may have raised a question of serious professional misconduct, or whose fitness to practise may be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. Similarly, a doctor may also comment on the professional performance of a colleague in respect of whom he acts as a referee.’
10.20
I should observe that, more than ten years earlier, the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Regulation of the Medical Profession (the Merrison Committee) had suggested that doctors who had information giving them good reason to believe that the conduct of another doctor was putting patients at risk were under an ethical duty to act on that information.
10.21
In December 1990, in the GMC Annual Report, Dr (later Sir) Donald Irvine, then Chairman of the GMC Standards Committee, announced a further shift in the GMC’s approach to the reporting of concerns about colleagues. He acknowledged that passages in past editions of the Blue Book, about the disparagement of colleagues, might have discouraged a doctor from making well-founded criticisms of colleagues or from reporting possible misdemeanours. Sir Donald went on to explain that the Standards Committee proposed that the focus of the GMC’s guidance should be altered in order to emphasise the duty of doctors to take appropriate action when a colleague’s performance might be deficient. The warning against disparagement was to be given a secondary place. The GMC approved the new guidance, which was then incorporated in the February 1991 Blue Book. It said:
‘Doctors are frequently called upon to express a view about a colleague’s professional practice. This may, for example, happen in the course of a medical audit or peer review procedure, or when a doctor is asked to give a reference about a colleague. It may also occur in a less direct and explicit way when a patient seeks a second opinion, specialist advice or an alternative form of treatment. Honest comment is entirely acceptable in such circumstances, provided that it is carefully considered and can be justified, that it is offered in good faith and that it is intended to promote the best interests of patients.
Further, it is any doctor’s duty, where the circumstances so warrant, to inform an appropriate person or body about a colleague whose professional conduct or fitness to practise may be called in question or whose professional performance appears to be in some way deficient. Arrangements exist to deal with such problems, and they must be used in order to ensure that high standards of medical practice are maintained.
However, gratuitous and unsustainable comment which, whether directly or by implication, sets out to undermine trust in a professional colleague’s knowledge or skills is unethical.’
10.22
The change widened the duty to report. Whereas previously the duty had arisen only in the case of concern about behaviour that might amount to SPM or serious impairment of fitness to practise, it now included a duty to report a doctor
‘whose professional performance appears to be in some way deficient’
. This seemed to involve a far lower threshold for reporting. It was suggested to the Inquiry that, if doctors had followed this advice to the letter, they would be reporting their colleagues very frequently. It may be that the words were wider than was intended. It seems to me that the passage intended to convey that deficient performance should be reported only
‘where the circumstances so warrant’
. Although the passage might have left doctors in doubt about where the threshold for reporting lay, it was at least clear that the duty was an important one and, if a doctor was in doubt about whether the duty arose, it was always open to him or her to take advice. The passage made clear that it was gratuitous, unsustainable comment made with the intention of undermining trust in a colleague that would be regarded as unethical.
10.23
The passage did not give explicit guidance as to who was
‘an appropriate person or body’
to whom a report should be made. Nor did it describe the arrangements that existed for dealing with any concerns reported. No doubt that was because the
‘appropriate person or body’
would vary according to the circumstances. So would the
‘arrangements’
. It may well be that guidance on those matters was not necessary; doctors could very easily take advice, if in doubt, from their medical defence organisation.
10.24
As I have said, this new guidance was incorporated in the February 1991 Blue Book. Subsequent issues, published in April and May 1992 and in January and December 1993, contained no changes of significance. The December 1993 edition was current at the time of the hospitalisation and death of Mrs Overton.
Attempts to Publicise and Explain the New Guidance
10.25
It appears that the new guidance probably received some publicity in the press. In August 1992, the GMC issued a document entitled ‘Form of Response to Press Inquiries’ which emphasised the importance of doctors reporting colleagues whose conduct was putting patients at risk and warned that doctors who did not follow the guidance might have to answer to the GMC. It is unclear what provoked the production of this document or how widely it was published, if at all.
10.26
The message was confirmed the following year. On 15th
July 1993, the GMC issued a press release arising out of the case of Dr Behrooz Sohrab Irani, a locum consultant anaesthetist whom the PCC had found guilty of SPM in connection with his dangerous management of a patient who had suffered serious brain damage under his care. The evidence showed that Dr Sean Dunn, Chairman of the Anaesthetics Division of the NHS trust which managed the hospital where Dr Irani had worked, had received earlier reports of poor practice by Dr Irani but had not acted upon them. Although aware of these reports, Dr Dunn had written a favourable reference for Dr Irani, enabling him to get a job elsewhere. The press release of July 1993 concluded:
‘Finally, there are appropriate procedures for response to reports of evident and dangerous incompetence; doctors have a duty to activate those procedures promptly, in the interests of the safety of patients, where such cases arise.’
An errata relating to this paragraph was published in March 2005. The errata appears at the end of this chapter, or can be viewed by
clicking here
10.27
Dr Dunn was charged with SPM and his case was heard by the PCC in March 1994. He was found guilty. The decision was a warning to doctors that, if they had reason to believe that a colleague’s conduct or professional performance posed a danger to patients, they were under a duty to act on that belief. Doctors were advised that, before taking action, they should do their best to establish the facts. References should be carefully considered and should be issued in good faith. If the doctor was in doubt about a colleague, it would be unethical to provide a reference. There was another reminder that procedures existed for responding to reports of evident and dangerous incompetence. The decision concluded:
‘At all times patient safety must take precedence over all other concerns, including understandable reticence to bring a colleague’s career into question.’
10.28
The Dunn case was reported in the news section of the British Medical Journal. The relevant article quoted the concluding words from the GMC decision. According to the article,
‘The GMC used Dr Dunn’s case to send a message to the profession about its duty to protect patients even if this means reporting a colleague or refusing to give a reference.’
Dr Gerard Panting, Communications and Policy Director at the Medical Protection Society, said that the case served to emphasise the need to ensure that doctors took positive action when they saw that patients were at risk. Other evidence given to the Inquiry suggests that the main message received by the profession from the case of Dr Dunn related to the need for honesty and accuracy in the giving of references.
10.29
While, in my judgement, the position of the GMC had been made clear in 1991, certainly any doctor who kept up to date by reading the Blue Book and the medical press should have been aware, by July 1993 at the latest, that s/he was under a professional obligation to report to an appropriate authority any concerns that s/he might have that a colleague had been guilty of SPM or that the colleague’s practice had put patients at risk of harm. I recognise that some doctors might not have read the relevant publications. But, whether or not they in fact knew of it, all doctors should have known they were under that duty from that time. I recognise too that doctors might not have had a very clear idea in their minds about what sort of conduct amounted to SPM. However, I do think that all doctors should be able to recognise what types of conduct are putting patients at risk of harm. It was that kind of conduct which was in issue in Mrs Overton’s case. She had, after all, suffered the most serious harm possible short of immediate death and her treatment was regarded by Dr Brown as
10.30
Although the GMC’s position as to the existence of the duty of a doctor to report concerns about colleagues had now been made clear to the profession, no specific guidance had been given as to where a report should be lodged. So far as the GMC was concerned, it would always advise that reports of conduct that could not amount to SPM should be pursued locally; if arising out of treatment within the NHS, this should be done by the local NHS body. Even reports of conduct that might amount to SPM would be sent back by GMC staff or screeners to be dealt with locally, unless the report was of conduct that was perceived as giving rise to a risk to the public. I shall deal with this topic at greater length in
10.31
The GMC might well have thought it unnecessary to advise doctors about their local NHS procedures. It was reasonable to assume that a doctor working in the NHS would know about the local procedures relevant to his/her work. Perhaps the GMC should not have assumed that all doctors would know about the local procedures relevant to those parts of the NHS in which they did not work. For example, a GP might not know about the procedures governing hospital doctors and
. However, the GMC might reasonably have supposed that a doctor who knew that s/he ought to make a report would be able to find out to whom it should be made.

--- Evidence of How the Duty to Report Actually Operated in the NHS in 1994 ---
10.32
It was submitted on behalf of Dr Brown that, even though a doctor’s duty might have been made clear by the GMC, the practice within NHS hospitals in 1994 did not reflect the GMC guidance. It was argued that, at that time, the culture was such that many doctors in Dr Brown’s position would not have reported their concerns about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton. The Inquiry gathered evidence on these issues from a variety of sources. Already, during Stage Two, there had been evidence from the medical, nursing and administrative staff at Tameside General Hospital. In the Stage Four hearings, the area of enquiry was extended to include the practice within the Trusts responsible for three hospitals comparable in size to Tameside General Hospital. The Medical Directors of these Trusts gave evidence. They were Mr Alan Turner (consultant urologist and Medical Director since 1993 of Peterborough Hospitals NHS Trust), Dr Christopher Bateman (Medical Director from 1994 until 1996 at St Richard’s Hospital, Chichester) and Mr Ian Harrison (consultant in general surgery at Southport Hospital, Merseyside, and Medical Director of Southport and Ormskirk NHS Trust since 1991).
10.33
On the same issues, the solicitors representing Dr Brown and Dr Husaini supplied witness statements from Professor Alan Aitkenhead and Dr John Givans. Professor Aitkenhead is Professor of Anaesthesia at Queen’s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham; he has experience of advising claimants and defendants in clinical negligence claims and also of sitting on the MDU Cases Committee, which decides whether clinical negligence actions against MDU members should be defended or settled. Dr Givans qualified as a doctor in 1958; after a period in the Army, he was in general practice for 25 years, retiring in 1991. He had served on a medical service committee (MSC) for about ten years from 1973. He had been a full-time secretary of two local medical committees (LMCs). Since retiring from general practice, he has done consultancy work for the MDU, assisting doctors appearing before MSCs or, more recently, independent review panels. He has remained, therefore, in contact with the mainstream of clinical general practice.
10.34
The medical defence organisations and the British Medical Association provided written evidence. Dr Panting also gave oral evidence.
Awareness of the Duty to Report
10.35
It was generally agreed by the witnesses giving evidence in Stage Four that the climate of reporting concerns about the clinical practice of colleagues in 1994 was dramatically different from what it is today. Doctors are now much more aware of their duty to report concerns than they then were and are much more willing to do so. Mr Turner thought that the change began with the Irani and Dunn cases but that a more far-reaching effect was caused by the publicity surrounding the GMC’s action against Dr John Roylance, Chief Executive Officer of the United Bristol Healthcare NHS Trust, for his failure, over a long period, to act upon concerns about the high failure rate of paediatric heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary. Awareness of events in Bristol began following the death of a young child, Joshua Loveday, in January 1995, but the GMC hearing after which Dr Roylance was erased from the medical register was not concluded until 1998. Dr Givans said that doctors did not understand that they had a duty to report until about 1996. Until then, they tended to presume that their colleagues had acted in good faith and to give them the benefit of any doubt that existed in a particular case.
10.36
Mr Butterworth, who was, as I have said, Chief Executive designate of the NHS Trust responsible for Tameside General Hospital, said that it was unusual for a member of the hospital staff to report a concern about a GP. Nevertheless, in 1994, a serious incident such as that involving Mrs Overton should have been reported. If, however, the overdose had been perceived by those treating Mrs Overton as a ‘genuine mistake’, it might not have been reported; Mr Butterworth added that, in those circumstances, it might not be reported, even today. Nor would the incident be reported (in 1994 or even today) if the consequences were not serious. As the consequences were serious in Mrs Overton’s case, Mr Butterworth said that, in 1994, he ‘would have expected to have been told’.
10.37
Mr Timothy Dunningham, who was a consultant orthopaedic surgeon at Tameside General Hospital in 1994 and later became its Medical Director, said that he knew of no instance where a hospital (or hospital doctor) had made an official criticism of the conduct of a GP. It was more usual for the patient or family to pursue any concerns.
10.38
Dr Panting said that doctors with a particular interest in ethical issues had always known that they were under a duty to report a colleague where there was a problem that threatened patient care. But that was not so in the case of the profession at large. Many doctors were not familiar with, or interested in, issues connected with medical ethics. Medical ethics were not taught, as they ought to be, as part of the undergraduate course; nor were they usually taught during the post-registration year. A young doctor would hear his/her seniors discussing ethical issues but s/he might well hear attitudes that were not right. When faced with a question such as whether or not to report a colleague, if a doctor did not ask the advice of his/her medical defence organisation, there was a danger that s/he would rely not on the Blue Book, but on more general ‘handed-down’ values. Dr Panting himself lectures to groups of doctors on ethical issues and is often surprised at the degree of ignorance displayed. Moreover, the pronouncements about the duty to report made in the late 1980s and early 1990s were not very newsworthy. He did not think that the cases of Dr Irani and Dr Dunn had had a great impact. He also had understood that the real message of Dr Dunn’s case was about giving honest references, not about reporting bad practice. Dr Panting said that the number of doctors who read the Blue Book was probably quite small. Mr Turner, Professor Aitkenhead and Dr Givans agreed. Only Dr Bateman said that he thought that every consultant should and would have read it. Mr Harrison said that most doctors would have ‘browsed’ the Blue Book for a short time but that would be all.
10.39
Professor Aitkenhead said that, both before and after 1987 (when the Blue Book set out the obligation for the first time), most consultants would have been aware that their duty was to report concerns about colleagues whose behaviour raised a question of SPM or whose fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. However, in 1994, unless it was clear that ‘gross negligence’ had occurred, or that there was a pattern of poor performance, a doctor would not have been expected to make a report about poor clinical treatment given by a colleague. The perceived inadequacies would be discussed informally with the doctor or at audit meetings at which the doctor might or might not be present, in the hope that the failings would be identified and steps taken to avoid recurrence. Of course, such options would not be available to a hospital doctor who was concerned about the performance of a GP. Dr Givans said that, even by 1994, the guidance published by the GMC had not been effective in altering the culture that had previously prevailed so as to ensure that reports were made to an appropriate authority.
The Fear of Being Accused of Disparagement
10.40
It seemed to me, from a reading of the various relevant editions of the Blue Book, that the advice against disparagement of another doctor was mainly (if not exclusively) directed against the evil of enticing patients away from a colleague. If that was the case, then it did not appear to me that the advice could ever have acted as a deterrent to a doctor who was thinking of reporting to an appropriate authority genuine concerns about a colleague, affecting patient safety.
10.41
Dr Bateman and Dr Panting both agreed that the advice against disparagement could not have had a discouraging effect on a doctor who was minded to report a genuine concern in 1994. Dr Panting said that, in earlier years, the advice in the Blue Book had had the effect of discouraging some doctors.
10.42
Professor Aitkenhead said that he did not see the warnings against disparagement as having been a major obstacle to reporting poor treatment, but they had discouraged some doctors. Dr Givans said that, before about 1996, all doctors were imbued with a culture that emphasised the dangers of criticising the professional performance of a colleague in the absence of firsthand evidence to support such criticism.
10.43
My view is that a careful reading of the Blue Book should never have discouraged a doctor from reporting concerns about a colleague to an appropriate authority, certainly not after 1991. However, on the evidence, I accept that in fact it did discourage some doctors. That was why, in December 1990, Dr (later Sir) Donald Irvine had announced the shift in focus of the GMC advice. If it is true that very few doctors read the Blue Book with any diligence, it is perhaps not surprising that old-fashioned ideas about the disparagement of a colleague, learned as a student or young house officer, remained current long after they had been rejected by the GMC. In my judgement, since 1991, the advice in the Blue Book about the duty to report concerns affecting patient safety has been clear. It seems likely, however, that the culture against reporting persisted somewhat longer, possibly because so few doctors read the Blue Book and instead retained in their minds the ideas adopted during their early training.
The ‘One-Off’ or ‘Genuine’ Mistake
10.44
On many occasions during the course of the Inquiry, witnesses said that a doctor would be unwilling to report a colleague who had made a mistake if it appeared that what had taken place was a ‘one-off’ or ‘genuine’ error. The argument is that all doctors make mistakes sometimes; a ‘one-off’ mistake connotes the type of mistake that does not represent part of a series or pattern of mistakes. A ‘genuine’ mistake connotes an error that does not arise from a fundamental problem with the doctor’s practice but is of a type that any doctor might occasionally make, despite the exercise of all reasonable care. It is the kind of error that causes doctors to be forgiving and to say, ‘There, but for the grace of God, go I.’
10.45
It is understandable that a doctor will be reluctant to report a colleague for an error that the doctor thinks s/he might him/herself have made. However, if a doctor is considering whether or not to report a concern and is going to make a judgement about whether the mistake was a ‘one-off’ or ‘genuine’ one, s/he is likely to need more information than is usually available. Yet it appears that doctors often assume that the missing information would confirm that the mistake was ‘one-off’ or ‘genuine’, even though the known facts are neutral or might even suggest otherwise. In other words, the benefit of the doubt arising from the missing information is given to the doctor.
10.46
Even the doctors giving evidence to the Inquiry displayed this kind of approach. In his written evidence, Mr Turner observed that Shipman’s
‘mistake’
when treating Mrs Overton might have been a
‘one-off’
. He said that, so far as he was aware, this was a single episode. Accordingly, he himself might have decided not to report it. Similarly, Dr Bateman said that, if the doctor enjoyed a good reputation and if it was thought to be the first time such an incident had occurred, he would not have expected the case to be reported. He explained that ‘one’s first inclination’ was to think that the doctor had made a ‘one-off’ mistake. The doctor would have been given the benefit of the doubt.
10.47
Professor Aitkenhead said that, around the time of the incident involving Mrs Overton, the perception that the incident might have been a ‘one-off mistake’ would have had a significant bearing on a doctor’s decision whether to report. If there was evidence of an error or an instance of poor practice by a doctor who was thought to have a good track record as a competent and caring doctor, there would have been a tendency not to report, but instead to give the benefit of the doubt to the doctor. That might also have been so even where the doctor who was considering whether or not to report had no knowledge at all about the other doctor’s general performance.
10.48
Dr Givans said that, if a doctor believed there had been a ‘genuine one-off’ accident involving a hitherto well-respected clinician, the culture in 1994 was not to report. In the course of his evidence, Dr Givans - in common with other doctors - drew attention to potential
lacunae
and inconsistencies regarding the collapse and admission of Mrs Overton in order to explain why Dr Brown’s decision not to report was reasonable. It was clear from what he said that he was displaying the approach which I have described above. He put on the known facts the construction of events most favourable to the doctor. Dr Givans recognised the danger of a culture in which doctors take it upon themselves to decide that a matter does not require investigation on the grounds that they themselves, without even asking for the account of the colleague whose conduct is at issue, have concluded that s/he is not blameworthy. However, he told the Inquiry that this was ‘a fact of life’.
10.49
Professor Aitkenhead suggested that it would be far too onerous to expect doctors to report all errors. As I understand his evidence, he was suggesting that it was reasonable for a doctor to make his/her own assessment of whether the mistake was serious enough to warrant reporting. He produced a French academic article, illustrating that what he said was well known to all people who work in intensive care units (ICUs), namely, that about 8% of admissions to an ICU result from an error in medical treatment. In the majority of such cases, he said, the receiving staff would be aware of that fact. They could not be expected to report all such cases. I accept that a doctor considering whether to report has to make some judgement as to the seriousness of what has happened, although if the mistake has resulted in an admission to an ICU, it must be serious, almost by definition. Moreover, these days, local reporting of the incident would be mandatory. What the doctor must certainly not do, in my opinion, is to base the decision whether or not to report on assumptions or speculation about issues on which s/he has no evidence.
The Insufficiency of Evidence
10.50
Dr Brown claimed that one of the reasons he did not report Shipman was that he did not have enough information to do so; he did not think that the hospital notes were sufficient for the purpose. I must confess that, before hearing the evidence in Stage Four, I was unimpressed by that argument. I believed that he would have known that it would be sufficient for him to report his concerns to an appropriate authority, which would then decide whether to investigate and pursue them. However, it became clear to me during Stage Four that the Tameside Family Health Services Authority (FHSA), which was at that time responsible for primary care in the area, would have expected to be presented with the evidence in support of such concerns and would have carried out little or no investigation of them. Nor would the GMC have carried out such investigation unless and until a decision was made by the PPC to refer the case to the PCC.
10.51
Dr Panting found it understandable that a doctor in the position of Dr Brown might hesitate to report a concern because of a feeling that he did not have enough of a ‘handle on the facts’. However, he said that the true obligation was to decide whether he had reasonable grounds to think that there was a problem, in which case he should report what he knew to the appropriate authority.
10.52
Mr Harrison thought that, in 1994, a doctor would have had to feel very sure of his ground before reporting a colleague to the GMC. Dr Givans said that doctors were ‘terrified’ of being involved with the GMC and were wary of possible criticism. He also said that a doctor would need ‘solid evidence which would stand up in court’ before going to the GMC. According to Professor Aitkenhead, ‘very, very few’ doctors in Dr Brown’s position in 1994 would have made a report directly to the GMC. Even if it was thought that there had been gross negligence, it was exceptionally unusual for doctors to report each other to the GMC, unless acting in an official capacity such as that of Medical Director of a NHS trust.
10.53
I have now heard a great deal of evidence about the GMC procedures over the last 30 years and I do accept that there is some foundation for the belief that the GMC would have expected the case to have been investigated before it would have been willing to pursue it. It would not have been sufficient for Dr Brown simply to outline his concerns. However, I do not accept that there would have been any reason for a doctor to fear that s/he would be criticised for reporting a case that had not been fully investigated. If Dr Brown had written a letter containing the kind of detailed and clear opinion that he provided for the police in 1999, it is likely that the GMC would have accepted the case and embarked upon its procedures, the first stage of which would have been to obtain Shipman’s response. Having said that, I do accept that the GMC would not have undertaken any further investigation of the facts unless and until its Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) had decided, on the basis of Dr Brown’s statement and Shipman’s response, that the case ought to be referred to the PCC.
Local Procedures
10.54
Dr Brown told the Inquiry that he thought the only way in which he could report Shipman was to write to the GMC. He was not aware of any local procedures by which a concern could be raised by a hospital consultant about a GP. In 1994, at Tameside General Hospital, there was no formal mechanism for reporting concerns about the actions of a GP. However, Mr Butterworth said that, if any report about a local GP had been brought to him or to the Medical Director designate, he would have made enquiries of the FHSA as to the appropriate way to proceed. I do not think Mr Butterworth would have expected one of his consultants to prepare a fully investigated case before telling him about a concern. Mr Turner said that if Dr Brown had been at the hospital in Peterborough and had reported his concerns about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton, he (Mr Turner) would have taken matters forward. I do not think any consultant reporting a concern in this way could reasonably have felt in any danger of being accused of disparagement.
10.55
I accept that Dr Brown did not know by what mechanism such a concern could be investigated. I also accept that many hospital consultants would have been in a similar position of ignorance. However, I cannot accept that it would have been difficult for any doctor to find out this kind of information. A doctor could ask his/her medical defence organisation for advice and would have been advised as to his/her duty (in a way that accurately reflected the GMC’s position) and would have been told how s/he could go about making a report either to the GMC or through local mechanisms. Also, it must have been obvious to Dr Brown that he could have sought practical advice in discussion with consultant colleagues. I was amazed by the evidence of Dr Husaini and Dr Brown, who both said that they did not even discuss Mrs Overton’s case with each other, let alone the issue of what should be done about reporting concerns which, apparently, they both felt. An obvious source of advice within the Trust would have been the Medical Director designate.
10.56
It seems to me that, however uncertain Dr Brown might have been about having sufficient evidence with which to make a report to the GMC, no such difficulty would have arisen in respect of a report made to the appropriate medical authority in the locality.
10.57
In mitigation of Dr Brown’s position, I accept that it was very unusual for a hospital consultant to raise a concern about a GP. It seems that there was a view that a hospital doctor did not have the same sense of responsibility for the actions of a GP as s/he had for a colleague in the hospital. Dr Bateman could remember no case in 20 years of practice in which a hospital doctor had reported concerns about a GP to the relevant primary care organisation. It appears that, in 1994, the chances of a hospital consultant reporting a concern about a GP’s treatment of a patient were even lower than the chances of him/her reporting a colleague in the hospital, despite the fact that the duty to do so was clear.
The Views of Other Doctors as to Whether Dr Brown Should Have Reported His Concerns in 1994
10.58
Several doctors expressed a view about whether they thought a doctor in the position of Dr Brown should have reported his concerns about Shipman in 1994. In the main, their view was that he should have done so.
10.59
In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Turner said that, in 1994, he would not have expected most consultants in the position of Dr Brown and Dr Husaini to report their concerns, although they might have done so informally. In oral evidence, he said that, having reflected upon Dr Brown’s description, in his police statement, of his state of mind in 1994, and upon the fact that the injection appeared to have been given as a bolus dose, he would have expected Dr Brown to have reported his concerns.
10.60
Mr Dunningham said that, if he had been on duty at the time of Mrs Overton’s collapse in 1994, he would have ‘taken matters further’. He would have been sure that Shipman could not have thought that 20mg morphine was an acceptable dose for Mrs Overton in the circumstances. Any doctor would have known that such an amount of morphine should not be given intravenously to a patient with asthma. This was a very serious mistake. He could not have understood or condoned the giving of 20mg as a bolus intravenous injection. Although he found it difficult to discard the benefit of hindsight, he maintained that had he been in Dr Husaini’s or Dr Brown’s position, he would have reported his concerns about Shipman, initially by discussing it with the Medical Director designate or a senior colleague. However, he also said that, had the outcome of any discussion with colleagues been a general consensus that nothing should be done, he considered that it was reasonable, given the culture of the time, to do no more than inform Dr Overton of the circumstances.
10.61
Despite his evidence about the action he would have taken, Mr Dunningham said that he found that Dr Brown’s decision to do nothing was understandable. However, when he gave this opinion, Mr Dunningham was under the impression that Dr Brown had explained his concerns fully to Dr Overton and had felt that he need do nothing more. What his view would have been had he been aware of the limited information that Dr Brown gave to Dr Overton, I do not know. Even on the basis of his understanding of the position, Mr Dunningham recognised that Dr Brown’s decision to leave the issue of whether to complain with the family was fraught with danger. First, the family might decide to take the matter no further. Second, there was a risk that Shipman might, through negligence (the most likely explanation for his conduct that would have been considered at the time), do the same thing again. Mr Dunningham said that the decision was nevertheless understandable, in the light of the relationship that existed at that time between GPs and consultants. He thought that Dr Brown was entitled to respect the family’s view by leaving the matter there; this was a course that the majority of doctors at the time would have followed.
10.62
Mr Harrison said that, in 1994, he would not have expected a consultant to report a single error on the part of a colleague. There was, he said, a tolerance of errors as long as they were not persistent. When he had read the brief written account provided to him by the Inquiry of the circumstances surrounding Mrs Overton’s admission, he had entertained some doubts as to what had occurred; he had wondered whether Mrs Overton had in fact had an asthma attack or whether she might have suffered chest pain as the result of left ventricular failure. He had wondered exactly what was meant by a bolus injection. In other words, when he first looked at the facts of the case, he thought that Dr Brown might have seen Shipman’s actions as not unreasonable. However, in oral evidence, he said that if it was Dr Brown’s view that Shipman’s management had been
(the phrase used in his police statement), he should have discussed the matter with colleagues within the hospital to seek confirmation that his interpretation was correct. If it was, then action would have been appropriate and Dr Brown could have taken advice from his Medical Director designate.
10.63
Dr Givans agreed that most people would have taken the view that Shipman’s management of Mrs Overton was
. Dr Givans accepted that the guidance from the GMC imposed a duty on a doctor to report his/her concerns in such circumstances, but he maintained that many doctors sharing Dr Brown’s view would have failed to comply with that duty in 1994. Dr Givans said that many consultants would have acted as Dr Brown did. The culture on reporting was that ‘one just did not do it’. Dr Givans was not saying that this attitude was right, just that it was prevalent.
10.64
Professor Aitkenhead said that he would not have expected the circumstances of Mrs Overton’s collapse to be reported. He took a different view about the appropriateness of Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton from that expressed by all other medical witnesses to the Inquiry. He regarded the administration of 20mg morphine to Mrs Overton as not necessarily wrong. I think he is mistaken in that respect; I am quite satisfied, from all the evidence I have heard, that the administration of such a dose to an asthmatic patient by a GP in the patient’s home would be dangerous. Professor Aitkenhead’s view on that issue was, however, bound to affect his opinion about Dr Brown’s decision not to report Shipman.
Informing the Family
10.65
In the Third Report, I found that Dr Brown’s admitted failure to tell Dr Overton of the suggested dose and mode of administration of the morphine amounted to a withholding of important information. This information would have been highly relevant to the family’s decision whether or not to make a complaint about Shipman. I was surprised by and critical of this failure.
10.66
This withholding of information was condemned by most of those who gave evidence in Stage Four. Dr Panting said that he would have expected a doctor in Dr Brown’s position to have provided the family with all relevant information so that they were fully informed as to what had given rise to his concern. Mr Turner agreed, although he said he had come across cases in other hospitals where that had not taken place. Dr Bateman agreed that the best policy towards families is openness, so that they acquire a full understanding of events. Dr Givans expressed surprise that Dr Brown did not draw the morphine dosage to Dr Overton’s attention. Mr Harrison said that a doctor should explain all the important elements of his/her concern about the treatment in order to enable a relative to make a proper judgement as to how to proceed.
10.67
Professor Aitkenhead said that a doctor should not tell a family that a mistake had occurred and then minimise it, or omit components of the treatment which compounded or were an important part of the mistake. However, he also told the Inquiry that, in 1994, the tenor of the advice given by hospital employers and the medical defence organisations was that doctors should not admit to or seek to attribute blame when a mishap occurred. Doctors would be advised to withhold from relatives information as to the mechanism of injury which might point more towards fault than against it. The advice was that it would be appropriate to do no more than to suggest to relatives that they might wish to complain about what had happened. The effect of this attitude was that relevant information suggesting liability or fault on the part of a hospital or doctor was sometimes withheld from the families and never became known to them. That evidence accords with my own experience of clinical negligence work at the Bar in the 1980s and early 1990s. Professor Aitkenhead acknowledged that the situation in 1994 was unsatisfactory. He said that the problem still persists, although to a lesser extent. That evidence accords with my more recent experience of clinical negligence work while on the Bench in the late 1990s. Professor Aitkenhead said that in 1994 doctors were afraid that disciplinary action might be taken against them if they made adverse comments about the treatment provided by their hospitals. He could not identify any case in which this had occurred but believed that there had been such incidents. The perception was that a doctor might be penalised, for example by the withholding of discretionary merit award points, if s/he said something that caused the hospital to suffer financial loss through a clinical negligence claim.
10.68
Professor Aitkenhead told the Inquiry that it was common for a hint to be given to a patient’s family by a doctor that a matter should be investigated, without specifically criticising a colleague’s actions. In the context of Mrs Overton’s case, he suggested that it would have been reasonable to have told a fellow doctor, such as Dr Overton, only that morphine had been given to an asthmatic and then to have left that doctor to decide whether to ask any more questions. This was so even though the fellow doctor might well infer, from the limited information given, that there were no other causes for concern.
10.69
In my view, the dropping of hints, or the giving of incomplete information, is and was completely unacceptable. All patients and relatives are entitled to a full factual account of the treatment given and the events that have occurred. If a doctor believes that a colleague has made a serious mistake, s/he should explain the basis of his/her concern to the patient or relatives. If s/he feels uncertain as to whether the treatment was wrong but believes that it might have been, s/he should give a clear indication to the patient or relatives that some doctors would take the view that a mistake had been made and that it would be appropriate to take advice. Having said that, I accept that the practice of dropping a hint was common in 1994.
10.70
In the Third Report, I expressed some surprise that Dr Brown did not record the extent of his concern in Mrs Overton’s hospital notes. I was particularly concerned because the reason he gave for not doing so seemed to be based on the need to protect the doctor or hospital rather than to assist the patient. Dr Brown’s view that he should not do so did not, however, surprise Dr Panting. Had he been asked to advise Dr Brown, he would have advised against recording his concerns in the notes as it would have served no useful purpose. Dr Bateman agreed and said he would have expected only a factual account to be written. I can see that, provided the concern was passed on by the doctor, it might serve no purpose to record the nature of the concern in the hospital notes. What is really to be deprecated is the failure fully to inform the family, as I have set out in the preceding paragraph.

--- A Final Consideration of the Positions of Dr Brown and Dr Husaini ---
10.71
At the beginning of this Chapter, I summarised Dr Brown’s suggested reasons for not reporting his concerns. I now return to evaluate them in the light of the evidence I have heard. I have already said that Dr Brown’s state of mind soon after Mrs Overton’s admission was that Shipman’s treatment of her had been
. It had plainly had a disastrous effect.
10.72
It is clear from the evidence that Dr Brown was, and should have known that he was, under a duty to report to an appropriate authority any concern of a serious nature affecting the safety of patients. In my judgement, Dr Brown’s concern about Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton fell into this category. Dr Brown has never claimed that he was unaware of the existence of this duty, rather he considered that it did not apply to him in the particular circumstances. It was enough, in his view, that he had given information to the family and left it to them to make a complaint if they chose to do so.
10.73
Dr Brown did not, however, provide the family with the full information necessary for them to make an informed decision as to whether they wished to make a complaint. He told Dr Overton only that Shipman had given Mrs Overton some morphine. He enquired whether Dr Overton appreciated the significance of giving morphine to an asthmatic patient. Dr Overton said that he did. Dr Overton was not told that Shipman had apparently given 20mg, a wholly inappropriate dose, or that he appeared to have given it as a ‘stat’ or bolus dose. In my judgement, if Dr Brown thought it appropriate to pass to Dr Overton the responsibility of deciding whether Shipman’s conduct should be looked into, he should have ensured that Dr Overton was fully informed. In criticising Dr Brown in this respect, I recognise that, at the time, there were some doctors, probably many, who would have acted as he did.
10.74
However, in my view, it was not acceptable for Dr Brown to excuse himself from his own duty by passing the decision to Dr Overton, certainly not once he realised that the Overton family had decided to do nothing. By that stage, Dr Brown knew or should have known that it was up to him and Dr Husaini to take any action that was required. I accept that it was reasonable for Dr Brown to take into account the family’s wishes but, even if the family had expressed a strong wish that no action should be taken, Dr Brown could not be absolved from all responsibility. As Dr Husaini has recognised, the circumstances gave rise to a duty to report. Both Dr Husaini and Dr Brown were aware that Shipman’s treatment of Mrs Overton was unacceptable and had gravely injured her. They knew nothing about what Shipman thought about the treatment he had given. He might have mistakenly picked up the wrong ampoule. But, for all they knew, he might have been under the impression that 20mg morphine was appropriate treatment for an asthmatic patient apparently suffering from chest pain. If he was under that impression, his patients were at risk of serious harm. In those circumstances, the duty lay jointly on Dr Husaini and Dr Brown to make a report to an appropriate authority. The right course would have been for one of them to speak to Dr Overton and to explain why, notwithstanding the family’s decision not to complain, the consultants felt unable to let the matter pass, on patient safety grounds. I think it likely that, had such a conversation taken place, Dr Overton and Mrs Sharon Carrington, Mrs Overton’s daughter, would have agreed to co-operate, so long as Mrs Overton’s parents were not required to be involved.
10.75
What would have been an appropriate authority to which the doctors could have reported their concerns? It is clear that there were two possibilities. The consultants could have made a report to the GMC or they could have made one locally in Tameside. I can well understand Dr Brown’s reluctance to make a report to the GMC. For one thing, he might have been uncertain whether an error of the kind he believed had been made would amount to SPM. Also, I accept that doctors believed (not unreasonably) that, before they could properly approach the GMC, they had to investigate the facts fully and present a case, rather than just report a concern without something more to back it up. I accept that it would have been difficult, and indeed probably inappropriate, for Dr Brown and Dr Husaini personally to undertake any further investigation of Shipman’s conduct. I also accept that some doctors hesitated to report a colleague to the GMC because they feared that they might be accused of disparagement. I have said that any doctor who took an interest in ethical matters and kept himself up to date would have known that there was no danger of that, provided the report was made in good faith. However, I accept that Dr Brown held that outdated view. Taking these factors into account, I would not criticise Dr Brown and Dr Husaini for not having taken their concerns direct to the GMC, if they had reported them locally.
10.76
However, there was no local report. None of the explanations advanced by Dr Brown amounts to a real excuse for that. Dr Husaini claimed that he did make a report to Mr Butterworth. In fact, I have found that he did not, but it is clear that Mr Butterworth would have been an appropriate person to whom such a complaint could have been made. If Dr Brown was at a loss regarding to whom he should speak in Tameside, he could have asked the MDU for advice. MDU staff could have explained to him the local arrangements for the disciplining of GPs. They might have told him that, in order to lodge a formal complaint, it was necessary to identify a complainant and that, in the light of the family’s attitude, that might have presented a problem. They might well have advised him to speak to the Medical Director of his own Trust or to approach the FHSA or the LMC. They would certainly not have left him without a lead. They would have assured him that, provided his concerns were genuine, as they plainly were, he was under a duty to act and would not be accused of disparagement; nor would he be expected to have carried out a full investigation. In short, I am critical of both Dr Husaini and Dr Brown for their failure to make any attempt to report their concerns to an appropriate person or body in Tameside. The fact that neither of them telephoned their medical defence organisation for advice convinces me that they did not even give the matter serious consideration.
10.77
My criticism of these doctors is tempered by the evidence that I have heard about the actual practice of reporting concerns in NHS hospitals in 1994. Quite simply, the culture was that it was ‘not done’. The leadership of the profession, over a substantial period of time, is responsible for that culture. By 1994, both Dr Brown and Dr Husaini had been qualified as doctors for many years. For the bulk of their professional lives, it had been normal practice to turn a blind eye to the faults of colleagues. In my early career at the Bar, it was extremely difficult to find a medical expert who would give evidence which was critical of a colleague, even though the treatment complained of was grossly negligent and even though the two doctors were not acquainted. The evidence I have heard is, therefore, consistent with my own experience. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the GMC took active steps to change this culture of mutual protection. It might be said with some force that it could and should have acted sooner. However, starting around 1987, it did begin to act. A minority of doctors responded. Some had already recognised the duty that was by then clearly promulgated. But many did not. Many members of the profession were, and perhaps still are, very conservative. Their deeply rooted
mores
were not to be changed overnight and it required the tragedy at the Bristol Royal Infirmary to bring the message home. So, although I am critical of Dr Brown and Dr Husaini for their failure to comply with their professional duty to report a doctor whose conduct gave rise to a danger to patient safety, I moderate my criticism by accepting that, in 1994, a majority of doctors in this country would probably have acted in a similar way.
10.78
There remains one outstanding issue concerning Dr Brown. For reasons explained above, I am critical of him for failing to give Dr Overton a full account of his concerns. He gave ‘a hint’ but not a proper explanation. However, I temper that criticism because I accept that, in 1994, it was common practice to withhold relevant information about mishaps from patients and relatives. Such conduct was not acceptable but I recognise that many doctors, possibly a majority, would have acted in the same way. Some might well not have mentioned it at all.
10.79
Finally, I turn to the position of Dr Husaini. In the Third Report, I was severely critical of the evidence that he gave. He sought to persuade me that he had reported his concerns but I am quite satisfied that he did not. I think that by the time he came to provide his witness statement to this Inquiry, Dr Husaini felt embarrassed or ashamed about his failure to report his concerns. I accept that Dr Husaini cared very much about what had happened to Mrs Overton and he did a great deal to help and support her family during her 14 month stay on ward 17. I think that, when Dr Husaini realised how serious Shipman’s conduct towards Mrs Overton had been, he persuaded himself that he had reported his concerns appropriately but that others had failed to act upon them. In not reporting his concerns at the time, as he should have done, he acted in the way that many other doctors would have done at that time.

--- Causation ---
The Immediate Consequences of a Report of Concern
10.80
Had Dr Brown or Dr Husaini reported their concerns to Mr Butterworth or to the Medical Director designate or to some other person in a senior position, such as Mrs Linda Lloyd, the Hospital’s Director of Operations, then, in all likelihood, the report would have been passed to the Tameside FHSA. Mr Butterworth said that he did not know what the arrangements were for investigating a concern about a GP but he explained how he would have gone about finding out. As it would immediately have appeared that the allegation involved a potential breach of Shipman’s terms of service, the report would probably have led to MSC proceedings, provided that a suitable complainant could be identified. I have already said that, if the consultants had explained to the Overton family their decision to report Shipman, a member of the family might well have been prepared to co-operate by acting as complainant. However, if they had not, there might have been a difficulty in finding a suitable complainant. If Dr Brown had been willing to act as complainant, the MSC might have been prepared to accept him. If not, it would have been possible for the Tameside FHSA to act as complainant itself, in which event the case would have been transferred to the MSC of an adjacent FHSA. I acknowledge that such a course of action would have been unusual. If no satisfactory solution had presented itself to the FHSA, the decision might well have been taken to report the case straight to the GMC.
10.81
The case might also have reached the GMC by other routes. The consultants might have reported to that body direct or the case might have been referred there after the MSC hearing via the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA). A further possibility is that, if an inquest had been held after Mrs Overton’s death in 1995, the Coroner might have reported Shipman’s role in the matter to the GMC.
Shipman’s Likely Response
10.82
By whatever route the case had been reported, and whether to the FHSA or to the GMC, it is necessary to consider what Shipman’s likely response would have been and how convincing it would have appeared. To answer this question, it is helpful to look again at the note Shipman made in Mrs Overton’s medical records concerning her admission to hospital:
‘V
visit
Called at 8.50.
arrived 9.15 - Acute Asthma
given nebuliser
Pulmicort nebul. × 1
Ventolin nebul × 5ml.
BP 150/100. HR 120/m
Resp > 30.
After nebuliser A/E = BS good
not cyanosed
Approx 9.30 collapsed C/O chest
pain sweating + pulse thready
given IV diamorphine 10mg stat (only
dose in bag)
Settled then ?arrested
Laid down ECM × 5
Daughter called
MTM/established patient
ECM/not cyanosed
pupils dilated fixed
Ambulance called. pupils dilated
ECM/maintained
MTM/
15 mins Ambulance crew IV Adrenaline
IV Lignocaine. Intubated pink
pupils fixed dilated’
Then, continued on a separate sheet:
‘H/R. established output OK
illegible
No respiration established
TGH
CAS S/N informed of arrival
× diagnosis + Rx’
10.83
I am quite sure that in making this note, which was uncharacteristically detailed for him, Shipman was seeking to paint a picture which was consistent both with the circumstances as Mrs Carrington knew them and with his having provided appropriate care to Mrs Overton in difficult circumstances. I think it most likely that his explanation would have been along the following lines. He would have said that he had attended Mrs Overton and had treated her acute asthma attack appropriately with a nebuliser, achieving good relief from her symptoms. Some time later, but while he was still with her, Mrs Overton had begun to complain of chest pain. Shipman would have said that, knowing (as he would have claimed he did) that Mrs Overton had some coronary heart disease, he believed that her chest pain was due to a cardiac episode and was unrelated to her asthma. As the pain seemed severe and as Mrs Overton appeared very distressed, he had decided to administer some diamorphine. He had with him only one ampoule, containing 10mg. He made it up and administered some of it intravenously. He would probably have said that he did not administer all 10mg but had paused to observe its effect, which was satisfactory, for a few moments until Mrs Overton had suddenly collapsed. He had realised that she had stopped breathing and he could find no pulse. He had run to call Mrs Carrington and the two of them had started resuscitation. If asked why he had given as much as 10mg of diamorphine, he might well have said that he was unsure how much he had in fact given although he knew that he had not given the whole dose. He might well have claimed to be unsure of the amount given owing to the shock of Mrs Overton’s sudden collapse. He might well have said that he had recorded that he had given 10mg in order to account for the use of the ampoule. He had used the word
‘stat’
to indicate that he had given the dose ‘there and then’ as opposed to having prescribed it for future use.
10.84
If the circumstances had been appropriately investigated, Shipman would have found himself in serious difficulty defending his conduct. In particular, although he would have been able to refer to a recent (probably fabricated) entry in Mrs Overton’s medical record suggesting that she had had cardiac symptoms on 10th
February 1994, a battery of tests following her admission to hospital showed that she had not suffered a recent heart attack. Moreover, the autopsy in 1995 revealed no ischaemic heart disease. Thus, an investigation in 1994 would have cast doubt on Shipman’s claim that Mrs Overton had had a heart attack and, if the investigation had continued into 1995, it would have demonstrated that Mrs Overton could not have had any cardiac episode at all. Second, Shipman’s claim that he had given less than the recorded 10mg of diamorphine would have come under scrutiny. Why say that the 10mg ampoule was the
‘only dose in bag’
if he had administered only a part of the available ampoule? The excuse of
‘only dose in bag’
appears to be an explanation for giving 10mg. Why say he gave it as a
‘stat’
dose? Third, if Mrs Carrington had made a statement, it would have been known that Shipman had administered something to Mrs Overton after she had collapsed and was unconscious. What could that have been? His record is silent on the subject. If he were to claim that Naloxone or adrenaline had been given (either of which would have been appropriate), he would have to explain why this was not mentioned in the notes. Finally, the terrible outcome suffered by Mrs Overton was absolutely consistent with her having been given a gross overdose of diamorphine.
The Case before the Medical Service Committee
10.85
I have already said that, if one of the consultants had explained the situation fully to Dr Overton and had said that he must make a report even if the family did not, I think the family would probably have co-operated. A case would have been mounted against Shipman and I think it likely that an oral hearing by the MSC would have been ordered. It is possible that Shipman would have ‘put his hands up’ and suggested that he had inadvertently given more diamorphine than he should have done. He had done this in 1990 when a complaint about an error in the prescribing of anti-convulsant medication had been made on behalf of one of his patients, Mr W. In that case, the MSC dealt with the matter without an oral hearing. However, in Mrs Overton’s case, taking into account the discrepancy between the account Shipman would have given (based on the entry he made in the GP records), and what was recorded in the hospital records, it is likely that the Chairman of the MSC would have ordered a hearing. This would probably have taken place in early 1995. It might have occurred before Mrs Overton died, in which case the results of the autopsy would not have been available. Shipman would have been charged with a failure to render Mrs Overton all necessary and appropriate personal medical services of the type usually provided by GPs, a breach of paragraph 12 of the terms of service set out in Schedule 2 to the NHS (General Medical Services) Regulations 1992. There would have been no evidential difficulty if Mrs Carrington had given evidence and if one of the consultants (probably Dr Brown on account of his relevant expertise) had provided expert opinion as to Shipman’s conduct. It might also have been sensible for the family to have asked for one or more of the staff on duty at the time of Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital to be called to give evidence as to what Shipman had said and how the hospital records had come to be made.
10.86
It is possible that the MSC might have accepted Shipman’s account and acquitted him of any breach of the terms of service. However, given the problems that would have been faced by Shipman, as outlined above, I think it likely that he would have been found to be in breach of paragraph 12. I think it likely that the conclusion of the MSC would have been that Shipman had made a serious error and had given an overdose of diamorphine, owing either to carelessness or to lack of knowledge of its effect. I do not think it at all likely that the MSC would have suspected him of causing deliberate harm. Nor do I think it would have gone into the question of where he had acquired the diamorphine. Many doctors carry diamorphine in their bags as a matter of course. They buy it on requisition from a pharmacy and keep their own controlled drugs registers (CDRs). The concern would have been over his clinical competence rather than his observance of the regulations relating to controlled drugs. That Shipman was carrying a 10mg ampoule of diamorphine in his bag would not have aroused any concern.
10.87
Nor am I convinced that the MSC would have formed the view that Shipman had prepared a false record, either in relation to the entry prior to 18th
February 1994 in which he claimed Mrs Overton had reported cardiac symptoms or in relation to the occasion of her collapse. It might have done. If it had, obviously it would have formed a much more serious view than otherwise. On balance, I think it unlikely that it would have made such a finding unless the evidence was crystal clear; it would have been unwilling to make such a finding if there was any plausible explanation for the discrepancies between Shipman’s record and the facts as it had found them to be.
10.88
When considering what penalty to recommend, the MSC would have been informed that two other findings had been made against Shipman within the last five years. These cases are described in detail in
. The MSC would have been told of the findings in the case of Mr W and Mrs B. The case of Mr W involved the prescribing of the wrong amount of anti-convulsant medication, an error which had caused significant harm. For that breach of his terms of service, Shipman had been warned but there had been no financial penalty. In the case of Mrs B, Shipman had failed to visit the patient when he should have done. He was warned and a withholding of £800 from his remuneration had been ordered. As a result, I am sure that a significant withholding in excess of £1000 would have been made in Mrs Overton’s case and would have been upheld by the FHSAA after advice from the Medical Advisory Committee. I think the likelihood also is that the case would then have been referred to the GMC. That would not have come about until late 1995 at the earliest, and more likely well into 1996.
10.89
Without family support for pursuing the case, the position would have been more complex. In Dr Givans’ considerable experience, very few cases were brought before the MSC by persons other than the patient him/herself or a member of his/her immediate family. However, occasionally a complaint was made to the FHSA by a third party (for instance, a community nurse). In such cases, the FHSA took over the role of complainant in accordance with the procedure I have described in
. Thus, while it would have been possible to proceed without the participation of the family, particularly that of Mrs Carrington, it is less likely that the complaint would have proceeded before a MSC.
The Inquest
10.90
Had there been an inquest, informed by an appropriate autopsy report which would have recorded the potential role of opiates in Mrs Overton’s death, Mr Revington would have heard evidence about the circumstances of the death. This might have included evidence from Dr Brown and Dr Husaini. It is too speculative to say what would have been the verdict of the Coroner or the jury. However, there is a real possibility that the Coroner might have taken the view that the death had been caused by Shipman’s action in administering an overdose of diamorphine. If so, it would have been open to him to refer Shipman to the GMC. Whether he would have done so, I find it impossible to say. Examination of some of the cases comparable to Mrs Overton’s case, which were considered by the GMC at about the same time, reveals that coroners did not always refer such cases to the GMC, even where there had apparently been gross negligence.
10.91
I consider, first, what would have happened if Dr Brown had reported Shipman to the GMC and it had decided to consider the case rather than to advise Dr Brown to report the matter locally. The relevant GMC procedures are dealt with in
Chapters 18-21
. The first stage would have been for the report to be considered by a member of the office staff. I am satisfied that, since it was being brought by a senior doctor, the case would then have been passed to a medical screener. It is likely that, before the screener considered the case, Dr Brown’s report would have been sent to Shipman and his response sought. There would not have been any other investigation by the GMC. Internal Guidance from 1994 reflected the rarity of the cases in which the GMC undertook any investigative role. The Guidance stated:
‘The onus to produce evidence is almost entirely on the complainant, and not on the GMC, because the GMC does not have much by way of investigative powers at the preliminary stage of the procedures; its powers of subpoena are confined to cases being heard by the PCC or Health Committee.’
Then, in the next paragraph, it stated that:
‘In a very small number of cases, however, the medical preliminary screener may consider, on the advice of the office, that the matters alleged are so serious that a thorough informal investigation should be carried out locally by the Council’s solicitors, who will then attempt to investigate the case and take statements, insofar as potential witnesses are prepared to co-operate.’
10.92
It then pointed out that it was not possible, because of limited resources, to investigate many cases of potential SPM in this way. Thus, and this is consistent with what Dr Brown thought, as well as what the MDU and other organisations were advising, if any investigation or evidence gathering was to be done, it had to be done locally and would not be done by the GMC, at least not during the early stages.
10.93
Thus, the documents before the medical screener would probably have been limited to Dr Brown’s letter of complaint and Shipman’s response to it. The GMC might have asked Dr Brown to send the hospital notes and Shipman would probably have sent the relevant extracts from Mrs Overton’s GP records. Dr Krishna Korlipara, who was a GMC medical screener from 1998 until 2004 and gave oral evidence to the Inquiry in November 2003, was of the view that Shipman’s case would have been passed by the medical screener to the PPC. I accept that that would probably have occurred. Dr Korlipara also said that the PPC would have referred the case on to the PCC. He may be right, although, in the course of Stage Four, I have seen some cases that have been closed by the PPC which were every bit as serious as this one would appear to have been. For example, in the case of Dr JK 07, which was considered by the GMC in the late 1990s, there was compelling evidence that the doctor had injected an overdose of lignocaine (a local anaesthetic given before an operative procedure) and that this had caused the death of a young patient. The GMC obtained medical evidence from an eminent professor in anaesthesia (who was also a member of the GMC) which expressed the view that the dose given was unacceptably large and suggested that the doctor had been guilty of SPM. However, the PPC decided that it was not necessary to refer the matter to the PCC and issued a warning to the doctor as to his future practice I will describe the case in greater detail in
10.94
Although I am uncertain about it, I do accept that Mrs Overton’s case might well have gone through to the PCC. Had it reached the GMC after an adverse finding by the MSC or after criticism by the Coroner, the case would have been quite likely to go through to the PCC. Would there have been a finding of SPM? Dr Korlipara said that he thought there would have been and that there was a possibility that Shipman might have been erased from the register. Alternatively, he said, there might have been a period of suspension, or conditions might have been imposed, restricting Shipman’s freedom to prescribe controlled drugs.
10.95
Assuming that the case had been sent to the PCC for hearing (in which case the GMC solicitors would have undertaken any further investigation they considered necessary, in preparation for the hearing), I cannot predict whether there would have been a finding of SPM. It is possible that there would have been. However, if there had been, I do not think it would have resulted in erasure. I reach that conclusion after scrutinising a number of similar cases dealt with by the GMC at about this time. The following cases are, in my view, relevant.
10.96
Over a period of two years in the early 1990s, Dr JC 02, a GP, caused the deaths of two patients by administering excessive doses of diamorphine. Both deaths led to inquests. The first death was apparently caused by the doctor having given 15mg diamorphine. At the inquest, the Coroner suggested to the doctor that he (the Coroner) had received expert evidence that the appropriate dose was between 5 and 10mg. The doctor said that he remembered a conversation with a GP in Scotland who had advised him never to give less than 15mg as a smaller dose would ‘only irritate the patient’. The Coroner returned a verdict of death by misadventure but did not refer the case to the GMC. About 12 months after the first inquest, the same doctor came before the same Coroner. This time, the doctor reported having administered 20mg diamorphine. The Coroner reminded the doctor that he had in the past had occasion to admonish him about his injudicious use of diamorphine and the doctor said that he would never use it again. The Coroner returned a second verdict of death by misadventure and referred the case to the GMC. The case came before the PCC and the doctor was found guilty of SPM. He was made subject to eight months’ conditional registration with the requirement that he should not prescribe or possess diamorphine and should undergo retraining in the use of
. When his case was considered by the PCC, after the expiry of the eight-month period, the case was referred to the Health Committee, which later found the doctor’s fitness to practise to be impaired by reason of ill health and imposed further conditions on his freedom to practise.
10.97
In the early 1990s, a consultant orthopaedic surgeon reported to the GMC a GP, Dr JF 02, who had given 100mg diamorphine to a patient who then suffered a respiratory arrest. The patient was successfully resuscitated. The case came before the PCC and, following a finding that he was guilty of SPM, the doctor’s registration was made subject to conditions for a period of six months. He was required to pursue a structured programme of retraining in the use of scheduled and controlled drugs. At the hearing, it was accepted by the PCC that this had been an isolated incident. In fact, an unrelated complaint of indecent assault, made at about the same time against the same doctor, had foundered because the complainant had not supported the complaint with a statutory declaration as was necessary at that time.
10.98
In the early 1990s, Dr JG 03 gave propranolol to a young female asthmatic patient with the result that she died following respiratory depression. At the inquest, the doctor produced and relied on falsified computerised medical records. The purpose of falsification had plainly been to mislead any subsequent investigation into his conduct. There was a verdict of accidental death and the police became involved. The doctor was charged with manslaughter and perverting the course of justice in respect of the falsified records. He was acquitted of manslaughter but convicted of perverting the course of justice and was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. On reference to the GMC, the PCC found that the doctor’s care of the patient had fallen deplorably short of a reasonable standard and found him guilty of SPM but, because of the period of imprisonment served and other factors regarded as mitigating the severity of the offence, he was made subject to one year’s conditional registration. The conditions were that he should undergo assessment by and follow guidance (about the keeping of full, accurate and contemporaneous medical records) from his Regional Adviser in General Practice. The Inquiry did not come across any case similar to that of Mrs Overton, in which the doctor had been erased, although in one case the doctor was erased after failing to comply with conditions imposed on his registration, following a similar episode.
The Overall Effect of Reporting Shipman
10.99
I have already said that I think it unlikely that the true extent of Shipman’s criminality would have come to light, or even have been suspected, as the result of any report by Dr Brown or Dr Husaini. Nor do I think that a report or a referral to the GMC would have resulted in Shipman being erased from the medical register. He would have been free to continue in practice with or without a short interlude of suspension or of restricted practice. However, a period of suspension would necessarily have led to some curtailment of his criminal conduct, as would the imposition of a condition not to prescribe or administer controlled drugs. It would have been much more difficult and risky for him to obtain illicit supplies of diamorphine, his preferred drug. Indeed, if notice of any restriction were to have been properly circulated he might have had great difficulty in obtaining a supply.
10.100
In the First Report, I drew attention to the fact that Shipman did not kill for a period of three months after Mrs Overton’s admission to hospital. In my view, if any disciplinary processes had begun, this period of abstinence would probably have been lengthened. There would have been a beneficial effect, even if the processes had not resulted in any penalty or restrictions upon his registration. I think it likely that Shipman would have stopped killing for a significant time. However, I cannot say for how long.
10.101
A finding of a breach of his terms of service would, I think, have had some salutary effect on Shipman. I think even this would not have been great, as MSC proceedings are held in private and relatively few people would have been aware of the proceedings and the finding. There might have been some talk in the town and this might have taken the shine off his reputation. It is unlikely that people would have realised the seriousness of what he had done. It appears that the findings against Shipman in the case of Mr W and Mrs B did not significantly harm his reputation. They were, of course, much less serious than the complaint in respect of Mrs Overton. It is possible that the MSC complaint about his prescribing an excessive quantity of anti-convulsant medication for Mr W contributed to the slowing of his criminal activity in 1990 and his complete abstinence in 1991, although in the First Report I have identified at least one other possible reason for these features. It does not seem, however, that the MSC complaint about his treatment of Mrs B had any lasting effect on his behaviour; during 1993, he regularly obtained single diamorphine ampoules to replenish the stocks he needed to kill his patients. A complaint in 1994 about his treatment of Mrs Overton might have had a more salutary effect. First, he had killed her. Second, he had done so using diamorphine. Third, this would have followed quite shortly after the other complaints.
10.102
If Shipman had been criticised by the Coroner at an inquest into Mrs Overton’s death in 1995, the effect on his future course of conduct might have been very significant. Inquests are held in public and are usually reported in local newspapers. If the Coroner had made it plain that Shipman had given Mrs Overton a dangerous dose of diamorphine, several things might have happened. First, Shipman’s reputation would have been dented to some extent. Some of his patients, some of his patients’ relatives, his staff and some of his colleagues might have been a little less trusting of him than they otherwise would have been. Fellow GPs, when asked to sign cremation Forms C, might have been more careful when endorsing his opinion as to the cause of death. Mrs Ghislaine Brant, the pharmacist at the premises next door to Shipman’s surgery from where he obtained most of his supplies, might have reflected upon Shipman’s use of 30mg ampoules of diamorphine in 1993 and she might have resolved to scrutinise his prescriptions more carefully in future. His staff might have been less trusting of him if and when, from 1995, the death rate in his practice increased significantly. It is not possible to say whether these suspicions would ever have been enough to lead to his detection. I think it likely that Mr David and Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, the funeral directors who came to suspect Shipman of killing his patients, would have felt more confident about raising their concerns and might have done so rather sooner than they did. If they had mentioned their concerns earlier, the members of the Brooke Practice might have realised sooner than they did that the death rate among Shipman’s patients was abnormally high and might have made their report to the Coroner sooner than they did. If, when the West Pennine Health Authority became aware of a police investigation, it had also known of the outcome of the MSC hearing in relation to Mrs Overton, Dr Banks’ approach to the examination of medical records might have been more open-minded and the result might have been different. The greatest effect in my view would have come from Shipman’s awareness that he was not completely trusted, as he had been before. That, I think, would have made him more careful and would have restricted the number of patients he felt confident to kill. In short, I believe that publicity or any kind of disciplinary action or even the threat of it would have had a restricting effect on Shipman and lives would have been saved. I cannot say how many.


========================================================================
CHAPTER ELEVEN - Raising Concerns: the Way Forward
========================================================================

--- Public Concern at Work ---
The Organisation
11.15
PCaW, which was established in 1993, is a small limited company with charitable status. It offers help and encouragement to organisations (in particular the NHS) that wish to create and foster a culture in which staff feel safe to raise concerns. It gives advice on the relevant law. It provides materials (such as draft policies) and consultancy and training services relating to the raising of concerns and to accountability within organisations. It seeks to influence public policy by the conduct of research and by the publication of articles. It has also set up and administers a telephone helpline that provides free, confidential legal advice and practical assistance to individuals who are unsure how to raise concerns about malpractice, particularly malpractice in the workplace. The service is available to all employees, although a number of leading employers, including the NHS, have begun to take out subscriptions to the service. This subscription scheme was introduced by PCaW to help employers to demonstrate their commitment to the active promotion of whistleblowing policies. PCaW does not play any part in investigating or pursuing those concerns, although it will, if requested, pass on concerns to the appropriate recipient and assist callers in drafting and communicating concerns, if requested to do so.
11.16
Mr Dehn has been personally responsible for much of the progress that has been achieved by PCaW in improving the position of those who wish to raise concerns. He is a barrister and assisted in the drafting of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA), which provides a measure of protection from victimisation by employers of those who have raised a concern.
11.17
As its name implies, PCaW focusses its attention on the raising of concerns about activity in the workplace. In fact, much of the evidence heard by the Inquiry about the raising of concerns related to problems that had arisen in the workplace. This is not surprising. First, the great majority of incidents that might give rise to concern about public safety are in some way connected to the workplace. Second, it is employees who are most likely to become aware of such incidents and it is they who have the most to lose if the concern that they raise is not favourably received.
Factors Influencing the Raising of Concerns
11.18
Mr Dehn confirmed to the Inquiry the causes for anxiety that are widespread among people who are thinking of reporting a concern. Among these are included the factors that I have already mentioned, namely, uncertainty as to how to go about making a report, as well as a fear that the report will not be taken seriously and that nothing will be done about it. Also, he spoke of the worry that there will be some sort of reprisal or detriment at work, either from management or from colleagues.
The Genesis of the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998
11.19
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, when Mr Dehn was working as the Legal Officer to the National Consumer Council, he had to consider the reports of a number of public or judicial Inquiries into major disasters. He saw that, in almost all cases, those Inquiries had found that employees had been aware of the danger that was looming but either had been too frightened to raise their concerns or had raised their concerns in the wrong way or with the wrong person. They had lacked the necessary confidence and/or knowledge to voice their concerns effectively. Examples included the Clapham rail crash (where the Hidden Inquiry heard that an inspector had not raised his concern because he did not want to ‘rock the boat’), the Piper Alpha disaster (where the Cullen Inquiry concluded that employees did not want to put their continued employment in jeopardy through raising a safety issue which might embarrass management) and the Zeebrugge ferry sinking (where the Sheen Inquiry found that staff had raised concerns but had done so ‘with the wrong people in the wrong way so that nothing was done about it’). Similar conclusions had been drawn from reports on financial scandals. In all these cases, there had been a failure of effective communication between staff and management. Mr Dehn formed the view that communication breakdown was likely to have been a relevant factor in many other accidents which had caused death or serious injury, and in many frauds which had resulted in financial loss but which had not, because of their more modest scale, justified a public or judicial inquiry. It was these thoughts that led to the formation of PCaW in 1993.
11.20
Soon afterwards, as Mr Dehn told the Inquiry, the Nolan Committee on Standards in Public Life (the Nolan Committee) and the Audit Commission also became interested in the issue. The Nolan Committee’s Second Report said:
‘All organisations face the risks of things going wrong or of unknowingly harbouring malpractice. Part of the duty of identifying such a situation and taking remedial action may lie with the regulatory or funding body. But the regulator is usually in the role of detective, determining responsibility after the crime has been discovered. Encouraging a culture of openness within an organisation will help: prevention is better than cure. Yet it is striking that in the few cases where things have gone badly wrong in local public spending bodies, it has frequently been the tip-off to the press or the local Member of Parliament - sometimes anonymous, sometimes not - which has prompted the regulators into action. Placing staff in a position where they feel driven to approach the media to ventilate concerns is unsatisfactory both for the staff member and the organisation.’
11.21
These views - which I share - summarise the purpose of the legislation that was to follow. That purpose was not to encourage employees with concerns to broadcast them. It was to ensure, through legislation, that employees would feel sufficiently confident to raise their concerns internally. The object was to encourage external disclosure only where internal disclosure was inappropriate.
11.22
The idea of a legislative framework to encourage employees to raise public interest concerns, and to protect those who did so from adverse consequences, was first raised in Parliament in 1995 in a ‘ten minute rule’ Bill, drafted by PCaW and the Campaign for Freedom of Information (CFOI). The Bill received broad support but got no further. In 1996, a Private Member’s Bill with the same object was unsuccessful, although it had been strongly supported inside and outside Parliament. The Rt Hon Tony Blair MP, then Leader of the Opposition and now Prime Minister, pledged that a future Labour Government would introduce legislation with these objectives. Within a few weeks of the election of the Labour Government in 1997, PCaW and the CFOI were asked by Ministers to promote the Bill again, this time through the Private Members’ ballot. A Conservative MP, Mr Richard Shepherd, a supporter of the earlier Bills, was successful in the ballot and introduced the Bill which was later to become the PIDA.

--- Conclusions ---
11.128
The value of the honest raising of concerns within the healthcare services should not, in my view, be underestimated. Together with patient complaints, of which I shall say more later in this Report, it provides an important source of information about clinical performance and has a vital role to play in clinical governance. The culture that for many years effectively prevented the raising of such concerns is changing but the old attitudes have not yet by any means died out. It is important, in my view, that those in positions of leadership, whether in managerial positions or at the head of the professions, should be committed to openness of reporting, not only by endorsing policies and the like but by practising what they preach.
11.129
I have already suggested a number of ways in which the momentum for change can be kept up. I have suggested amendments to the PIDA which would, if implemented, strengthen the position of those who raise concerns. I shall not repeat those suggestions here. I have also suggested that policies for the raising of concerns across different sections of the healthcare services should be promulgated. I have called for the provision of an advice service available to any person, whether or not a healthcare professional, so as to provide the advice, encouragement and reassurance necessary for them to bring forward concerns which it is in the public interest to report.

--- CHAPTER TWELVE - Clinical Governance ---
The Implementation of Clinical Governance by Primary Care Trusts
Monitoring of Clinical Governance Arrangements


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWELVE - Clinical Governance
========================================================================

--- Structures and Systems ---
12.6
At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Aidan Halligan, Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England and Director of Clinical Governance for the NHS, emphasised that the essence of clinical governance was ‘a system of accountability for care’. Delivery of clinical governance was, he said, dependent on ‘architectural artifices’: structures, processes, mechanisms and clear accountability arrangements.
12.7
It is, of course, evident that good governance - of whatever organisation - requires sound structures and well-designed systems. If there are no effective lines of management accountability, for example, no one will take responsibility when things go wrong. If no proper complaints system is in place, complaints will go unrecorded and potentially valuable information about poor practice or outcomes will be lost. If an organisation has no whistleblowing policy, staff may be deterred from reporting colleagues who may be guilty of dishonesty or incompetence. An absence of a system of financial checks may result in widespread fraud.
12.8
However, sound structures and systems are not, on their own, enough to secure good governance. A complaints system is of no value unless those who are intended to use it (customers, clients, patients, etc.) know of its existence and unless staff within the organisation are trained to operate it effectively. A whistleblowing policy will not be used unless staff are made aware of it and are confident that, if they voice their concerns, those concerns will be taken seriously and the organisation will deal with them fairly. It is essential to ensure that clinical governance extends to every layer of a NHS organisation so that all members of the organisation are putting into practice the systems intended to promote quality.
12.9
In the context of primary care, this means extending the systems, not only to the level of PCT staff, individual GPs and other healthcare professionals, but also to members of staff of all general practices in the area. Under the new General Medical Services (GMS) Contract, contracting practices are required to have in place an effective system of clinical governance.

--- The Implementation of Clinical Governance by Primary Care Trusts ---
12.10
At first, the term ‘clinical governance’ may have sounded alien; however, its translation into practical action often proved rather less daunting than had been expected. Some of the methods used were not new - for example, the monitoring of complaints against GPs, the production of data comparing the performance of one GP practice with others in the area, the encouragement of clinical audit and the monitoring of prescribing. The effect of clinical governance was to bring together these initiatives (and many others) into one coherent policy. There were, however, novel areas to be tackled, notably the implementation of the guidance contained in the new National Service Frameworks (NSFs) and issued by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). In the early days of clinical governance, the development of strategies to monitor and improve adherence to this guidance was a major priority for the PCTs.
12.11
Recent evidence suggests that PCTs are using a wide variety of strategies to monitor and improve the quality of care locally. In this Chapter, I shall discuss a number of those in most common use. In doing so, I shall consider how (if at all) those strategies might have a beneficial effect on quality of care. I shall also consider the extent (if any) to which each of the various strategies described gives rise to meaningful information that might be of assistance to a PCT in assessing whether an individual GP is giving an acceptable standard of care to patients.
12.12
The strategies which I shall examine are:
monitoring of GPs’ prescribing
monitoring of GPs’ referrals
monitoring of performance indicators and/or comparative data about the performance of general practices
monitoring of data collected in connection with the new GMS Contract
practice visits
practice accreditation
monitoring and analysis of patient complaints
operation of systems for identifying and dealing with poorly performing GPs
clinical audit
risk management
significant event review
appraisal.
(a) Monitoring of General Practitioners’ Prescribing
12.13
, I described briefly the ePACT.net system, which is used by PCTs to monitor GPs’ prescribing. This monitoring is carried out primarily in order to enable the medical and pharmaceutical advisers employed by PCTs to offer advice to GPs about the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of the drugs they prescribe. However, prescribing data might reveal defects in the quality of a doctor’s prescribing. For example, it might show that s/he frequently prescribes drugs that have been replaced by better alternatives or that are inferior to newer drugs which are available. It might show that the doctor is prescribing drugs that are known to be of limited clinical value, such as nasal decongestants. The data might show that a doctor is prescribing significantly less than the average quantities of drugs used in cardiovascular disease. All these circumstances might be indicative of defects in a doctor’s prescribing practice. They might also indicate a poor standard of care going beyond the issue of prescribing. For example, a doctor who persistently prescribes drugs which have been replaced by more effective alternatives may be out of date in other areas of his/her practice.
12.14
The data might even suggest the possibility of criminal activity (e.g. if a very high level of benzodiazepines were being prescribed on a regular basis). PCTs are now advised to run quarterly analyses for prescribing of opiates, benzodiazepines and amphetamines by every GP in their area. The analyses can be carried out by means of simple techniques, using the ePACT.net system. The range of drugs for which these techniques are available is expanding as new problems, involving different drugs, come to light. Of course, prescribing data can only highlight a pattern of prescribing which appears unusual. It cannot afford an explanation for the unusual pattern. The data requires interpretation in the light of local factors and of the circumstances of the individual patient(s) for whom the drugs were prescribed, before a judgement can be reached.
12.15
The monitoring of prescribing practice began primarily as a tool of financial management. However, it has now developed into a part of clinical governance. As I have said, it can raise questions about the quality of a doctor’s prescribing. Those questions can lead in turn to consideration of the doctor’s performance more generally. If a problem is identified, it may be capable of being remedied by the provision of advice and information. It may be more complex and require, for example, referral to the PCT’s performance procedures. In either case, it can provide a valuable source of information about quality of care.
Problems with Prescribing Data
12.16
In the past, the value of prescribing data was reduced by the fact that it was available only at practice level. It was not possible to obtain data for an individual doctor, unless that doctor was a single-handed practitioner. If a doctor was a member of a large group practice, his/her prescribing pattern would have had to be very unusual indeed in order to be evident from the data relating to the practice as a whole. More often, any problems with the quality of the prescribing of an individual member of the practice would have been obscured by the data relating to others.
12.17
Analysis of prescribing at the level of an individual prescriber is now possible. Each prescriber within a GP practice has an individual prescriber code printed on his/her prescription forms. The Prescription Pricing Authority (PPA) now produces data referable to individual prescribers. The accuracy of the data is, however, reduced if (as has been common in the past) members of a GP practice use prescription pads belonging to other members of the practice. A further problem which became evident during the course of the Stage Three seminars was that a computer generated prescription issued by one doctor might, if the computer were programmed in a certain way, carry the name of the doctor with whom the patient was registered (or, under the new GMS Contract, the patient’s preferred doctor), rather than that of the doctor who had prescribed the medication. This can be prevented by adjustment of the computer but, in order for this to be done, the practice must first be aware of the problem and the need to avoid it. I have recommended in the Fourth Report that all prescribers should use only their own prescription pads, marked with their own professional registration numbers, so that all prescribing can be correctly attributed to the clinician responsible for it.
12.18
Problems also arise with repeat prescriptions. It is common for members of a GP practice to check and sign repeat prescriptions for the whole practice on a rota basis. The doctor who signs the prescription may not, therefore, be the doctor who originally prescribed the drug in question. He or she will have had no real clinical input into the choice of medication. This has the inevitable effect of rendering the prescribing data for the whole practice inaccurate. It could have the effect of obscuring an unusual pattern of prescribing by one member of a practice. Some practices, alert to this problem, have taken steps to avoid it in the past but many have not.
12.19
At the Stage Three seminars, Dr Jim Smith, Chief Pharmaceutical Officer for England, DoH, explained that a new system of dealing with repeat prescriptions had been successfully piloted in several areas and would soon be put into general operation. Under this system, a doctor who wishes to prescribe medication on a long-term basis will write a prescription to provide for periodic dispensing over a period of up to a year. The patient will leave the prescription at the pharmacy of his/her choice, will collect the drugs every few weeks and need not return to the surgery until the expiry of the prescription. The pharmacist will be responsible for reviewing the appropriateness of the continuing supplies dispensed under the prescription during its currency. Not only will this system save a great deal of time for GPs, it will also allow greater accuracy of the prescribing data because the whole quantity supplied under the prescription will be attributed to the doctor who made the original decision.
12.20
Another problem is the use by non-principals, such as locums and GP registrars (i.e. trainees), of prescription pads belonging to GP principals. These non-principals do not at present have their own individual prescriber codes. Instead, they are required to endorse their prescriptions with a red ‘T’ (locums) or ‘D’ (registrars) to differentiate themselves from the principal whose prescription pad they are using. There is no means of identifying which non-principal is the prescriber. Consequently, no individual prescribing data is available for an individual locum and there is, therefore, no way of ascertaining whether his/her prescribing practices are in any way unusual. Furthermore, the use of their prescribing pads by others has the effect of ‘blurring’ the data relating to GP principals.
12.21
Steps are being taken to change these arrangements. It is hoped that, in the future, locums, deputies and other non-principals will be allocated their own unique prescriber codes. This should greatly enhance the opportunity to detect aberrant prescribing by a GP non-principal. However, it will be up to the PCT on whose list the locum is included to take responsibility for monitoring his/her prescribing and for any follow-up action which may be necessary.
12.22
Another difficulty is that the data currently available may not reveal a complete picture of an individual doctor’s prescribing. If s/he issues any private prescriptions those will not be included within the data. This is a serious
that can result in excessive or aberrant prescribing by a doctor remaining undiscovered. In my Fourth Report, I recommended that all prescriptions, whether NHS or private, should go to the PPA for processing and should be included within the prescribing data available to PCTs. This seems to me vital if PCTs are to have the information about prescribing which they need for the purposes of discharging their clinical governance responsibilities.
12.23
Current prescribing data does not necessarily reflect the prescribing practice of individual doctors and cannot, therefore, provide reliable information about the quality of practice of an individual doctor. Only if the various changes that I have described are implemented will it be possible to use it as a reliable source of information for clinical governance purposes.
(b) Monitoring of General Practitioners’ Referrals
12.24
There seemed to be general agreement among witnesses and participants in the Inquiry’s seminars that data about GPs’ referrals to other services (in particular, hospital services) was both unreliable and difficult to interpret. It is not clear what, if any, correlation there is between referral patterns and quality of care. That being the case, the usefulness of referral data is plainly limited. Also, it is available only at practice level, so gives rise to problems similar to those already mentioned in connection with past prescribing data.
(c) Monitoring of Performance Indicators and/or Comparative Data about the Performance of General Practices
12.25
Since the mid-1990s, some PCOs have developed a range of performance indicators, compiled from the data available to them. They have compared the indicators as between practices within their own areas and practices elsewhere. They have used the results in different ways. I have previously mentioned in
that such indicators have sometimes been used as a trigger for investigations into the performance of certain doctors.
12.26
Many experts have doubts about the use of performance indicators as a means of assessing quality. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Martin Roland, Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre and Professor of General Practice, University of Manchester, referred to his experiences on the Manchester Performance Panel. The Panel responded to concerns expressed about doctors, rather than (as was done elsewhere) using performance indicators to identify potential cases of poor performance. Professor Roland felt that experience had shown that the approach of the Manchester Panel was probably the right one. He pointed out that the types of problem the Panel identified (e.g. poor communication within a practice, poor teamwork, inability to work with others, poor communication with patients and poor management) were the most difficult issues to identify by means of routine data.
12.27
Dr Sarah Wilson, Director of Public Health and Medical Director, Trent Strategic Health Authority (SHA), said that, before attending the Inquiry’s seminars, she had contacted the PCTs in her area to find out what clinical governance arrangements they had in place. Some had developed very sophisticated performance indicator sets, using such indicators as prescribing data, mortality rates, immunisation rates, screening uptake rates and complaints. They operate a ‘traffic light’ system whereby a GP who has a ‘red light’ (indicating that s/he is an outlier) on more than a certain number of indicators is targeted for enquiries to be made. Dr Wilson asked the clinical governance leads of the PCTs that operate this system whether there was any correlation between the incidence of a lot of ‘red traffic lights’ and a perception within the local health community that the performance of the doctor in question was poor. They told her that the only indicator which gave rise to such a correlation was an excess of complaints against a doctor. Dr Wilson said that there was a real concern that clinical governance leads were doing a great deal of work in developing indicator sets using data which was never intended for the purpose of determining the quality of care given by an individual doctor. Ms Fiona Freedland, Legal Director, Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), and a non-executive director of Hackney PCT, expressed doubt, based on her own experience of the use of performance indicators, about the extent to which there was any correlation between such indicators and the competence of a GP.
12.28
Professor Dame Lesley Southgate, Professor of Primary Care and Medical Education, University College London, and Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research Development Unit, University of Leicester, also referred to the limitations of the data currently available to PCTs. Such limitations exist even when the data is used to examine quality of care at practice - rather than individual doctor - level. For example, Dame Lesley mentioned problems with handling the data and with using data collected for one purpose to fulfil a different purpose. The problem becomes much more acute when an attempt is made to use the data to assess the quality of care given by an individual doctor.
12.29
Both Dame Lesley and Professor Baker pointed out that indicators and other similar data provide no information about such matters as a GP’s communication skills, relationships with patients and clinical care. All these matters are vital to an assessment of quality of care.
(d) Monitoring of Data Collected in Connection with the New General Medical Services Contract
12.30
In order to discharge their responsibility for administering payments under the new GMS Contract, PCTs are obliged to collect a large quantity of data from individual GP practices. Some of this data is similar to that collected previously in connection with targets for certain types of preventive treatment and qualification for financial incentives. According to Professor Roland, however, the new GMS Contract will ‘alter radically’ (by which I understand him to mean materially increase) the information available to PCTs about the quality of care being provided in practices operating under GMS Contracts. There will be the same framework of assessment for practices providing personal medical services (PMS). It is not yet clear whether individual PCTs will have the expertise or resources necessary to analyse the huge amount of data that will be available to them, and to use it to improve quality of care.
12.31
The data collected is practice-based and is not, except in the case of a single-handed practice, referable to an individual GP. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Roland pointed out that the GMS Contract is deliberately aimed at practice level which is, in many instances, an appropriate level at which to consider patient care. He gave the example of an individual doctor who may be poor at managing diabetes, but has a first class nurse who takes responsibility for managing diabetic patients. Those patients will get good care from the practice, notwithstanding the weakness of the individual doctor, and that is what matters. Provision of data at practice level is therefore entirely appropriate for the purposes of the GMS Contract. However, that same data cannot be used to evaluate the quality of care given by an individual doctor within the practice.
12.32
Participation in the GMS Contract’s quality and outcomes framework (QOF) is voluntary, although failure to participate will mean that a practice will not qualify for additional payments under the GMS Contract. It remains to be seen whether many practices will choose not to participate in the QOF or will do so only to a limited extent. For those practices which choose this course, little or no data will be available. I suppose, however, that the very fact that a GP practice declines to participate in the QOF - or participates only to a limited extent - may in itself raise questions about the standard of care offered by that practice and may cause a PCT to subject it to closer scrutiny.
(e) Practice Visits
12.33
The clinical governance leads of many PCTs have developed a system of regular, routine practice visits. Ms Freedland spoke about the importance of these visits. First, they enable the clinical governance lead to form a relationship with GPs and to encourage a greater sense of ‘ownership’ of clinical governance by the profession. They have the additional benefit of enabling the clinical governance lead to observe such features as arrangements for storage of medicine and vaccinations and for infection control and the cleanliness of the surgery. They offer an opportunity to ask questions of practice staff about the procedures and policies in operation. Dr Wilson said that visiting GP practices in a systematic way is what clinical governance leads would like to do. By visiting, they can get ‘a real sense of the practice’.
12.34
The form that clinical governance visits take - and, indeed, whether they take place at all - depends on the co-operation of the practice in question. Ms Freedland said that there were ‘a couple of GPs’ in her PCT who had denied access to the clinical governance lead. On the whole, however, the system of visiting had worked well. Dr Wilson said that, in her area, there had been problems in the past about gaining access, but these had largely been resolved. On occasions, practice staff and practice managers had taken the initiative and arranged a visit from the PCT. Clinical governance leads (usually members of the local professional community) were conveying the message that the PCT was not there to ‘beat up’ GPs, but to give support and assistance. This approach appeared to have had the desired effect.
12.35
While the fact that such visits are taking place is clearly to be welcomed, it seems to me that the approach which Dr Wilson described must limit the extent to which a visiting clinical governance lead can ‘challenge’ members of the practice about data relating to the practice which the PCT holds or, indeed, about any other aspect of its activities. To do so would hardly be consistent with the PCT’s stated role of a giver of support and assistance. This was well illustrated in the evidence of Dr Michael Taylor, Chairman of the Small Practices Association and Clinical Governance Lead, Heywood and Middleton PCT. He said that, if he visits a practice in his PCT, members of the practice know that he is never there in anything other than a supportive capacity. If he has concerns about a colleague, he has in place arrangements with neighbouring PCTs and they will carry out any necessary investigation. Nevertheless, it seems to me that there must be an intermediate stage - where no positive concerns have yet arisen but probing questions need to be asked - at which it is difficult for a PCT to maintain its wholly supportive stance. In such circumstances, the position of a clinical governance lead, usually a local GP, must be particularly difficult. At the seminars, Professor Halligan observed that clinical governance visits could have ‘perverse consequences’. They could, he said, ‘reinforce subversive behaviour by amplifying a culture of fear’. He said that the value of such visits had consequently been ‘patchy’. He emphasised the need for a change of culture.
12.36
I am surprised and disappointed that an annual visit by officials of a PCT to a GP practice should be viewed with such suspicion - even fear - by some. It is plainly unsatisfactory that a practice should decline to permit a clinical governance visit at all. There must be a concern that those practices which are unwilling for visits to take place are the very ones where standards of care may be unacceptably low. Their failure to permit a visit has the effect of thwarting the PCT’s attempts to discharge its clinical governance responsibilities.
12.37
that PCTs will undertake annual reviews of the performance of all contracting practices under the arrangements for the new GMS Contract. These reviews will include a visit to the practice premises and discussions with the contractor. They will be obligatory. Practices providing PMS are already reviewed annually. Quite how these reviews will dovetail with the clinical governance visits - and whether they will, in time, replace them altogether - is not yet clear. Nor, as I have previously observed, is it clear how closely practices will be scrutinised in the course of a review.
(f) Practice Accreditation
12.38
As I have already explained in
, practice accreditation also offers an opportunity for a practice visit and for assessment of the practice against set criteria. Under the model in use in South Yorkshire, Leicestershire and Lincolnshire, there is full involvement of the PCT, which can use the information gained during the process of preparation for the assessment, and in the course of the assessment itself, for the purposes of clinical governance. Although the assessment is practice-based, there are, as I have explained, aspects of it which would shed light on the practice of an individual doctor.
(g) Monitoring and Analysis of Patient Complaints
12.39
At present, there are, as I have already mentioned, constraints upon the ability of PCTs to monitor and analyse complaints made about GPs and to use them effectively for clinical governance purposes. A PCT does not have a full picture of the nature and subject matter of the complaints made by patients about a doctor. A practice might ‘fob off’ a complaining patient or the patient might abandon his/her complaint and the PCT might never hear of it. In addition, there may be many incidents which are indicative of a poor standard of care but which are not the subject of complaints. This is particularly so under the present system, where patients may be deterred from complaining by the requirement that they should first direct their complaint to the doctor or practice concerned. (In the future, they will be able to choose whether to lodge their complaint with the practice or the PCT.) Nevertheless, it is clear that, despite the limitations upon the information available to them, PCTs find complaints a valuable indicator of the performance of a doctor and use them as a monitoring tool. Complaints by patients can, of course, provide an insight into such matters as a GP’s communication skills (or lack of them), his/her relationships with patients and the quality of his/her care. These are all aspects of a doctor’s practice on which performance indicators can shed no light. Moreover, many complaints can be linked clearly with an individual doctor.
12.40
I identified in
some of the gaps which remain in the information available to PCTs about the GPs on their list. The gaps relate to previous complaints and expressions of concern about a GP and to his/her involvement in proceedings for clinical negligence. Some of this information may be highly relevant to the quality of care being given by a doctor.
12.41
If a PCT is to have an effective system of clinical governance, it is essential that any complaint which has a bearing on quality of care is thoroughly and effectively investigated. If there has been a lapse in the quality of care, action should be taken as soon as possible to minimise or eliminate the risk that such a lapse might occur again. The present patient complaints system makes it difficult, if not impossible, for PCTs to do this.
(h) Operation of Systems for Identifying and Dealing with Poorly Performing General Practitioners
12.42
, some PCTs use data routinely collected by them in order to identify doctors who may be performing poorly. Others activate their performance procedures only in response to expressions of concern from healthcare professionals and others. Some PCTs have taken active steps (e.g. by means of distributing leaflets) to increase awareness, on the part of healthcare professionals and other staff working in primary care, of the importance of making known any concerns which they may have about the performance of GPs. PCTs should have in place effective systems for investigating concerns when raised and for assessing performance. Remedying poor performance when identified (if necessary, by removing from practice a doctor who is providing an inadequate standard of care) is a vital part of clinical governance.
12.43
the progress being made in establishing local procedures for dealing with poorly performing doctors. It is plain that the quality of local procedures (in particular, local assessments of doctors’ performance) is variable at present and that further development is required in order to make them fully effective.
(i) Clinical Audit
12.44
the development of clinical audit in primary care. Audit is now organised by PCT sub-committees. They co-ordinate exercises, covering the whole PCT, to audit certain topics in which the PCT or local profession has a special interest. Individual practices will also carry out their own audits on subjects of particular interest to them.
12.45
Clinical audit has the potential to enable doctors to review their practices and outcomes and compare them with those of their peers. As a result, improvements can be planned and implemented and then reviewed in the same way. Audit can be a valuable tool for learning and for improving quality. The new GMS Contract makes no specific provision for audit. The thinking appears to be that the collection of data required to demonstrate quality achievement under the QOF will, in effect, amount to audit and will be rewarded by payments under the Contract.
12.46
As I have said previously, however, participation in the QOF is not obligatory. In the NHS Plan, published in 2000, the Government announced its intention of making participation in clinical audit compulsory for all doctors employed in or under contract to the NHS. This has not yet been implemented.The Inquiry understands that there are GP practices (albeit, in all probability, only a small number) which still do not undertake clinical audit.
12.47
While audit can be a means of improving quality in individual practices and can provide general information to the PCT, it is of limited, if any, use as a monitoring tool. There is no obligation on practices to share their audit results with the PCT. If they do so, it is likely that the results will be seen only by clinicians on the audit sub-committee. Any wider circulation will be on an anonymised basis, often with the results aggregated across the PCT, rather than by reference to individual practices. The audit results will usually reflect the performance of the practice as a whole and not (unless it is a single-handed practice) that of an individual doctor.
12.48
At the Inquiry’s seminars, Sir Donald Irvine, former President of the General Medical Council (GMC), lamented the failure to make full use of clinical audit by employing the results to assess and improve doctors’ performance. Professor Halligan agreed, saying:
‘Sir Donald said very eloquently that 500 million
pounds
had been invested in audit, to what benefit? ... the closure did not happen. The event was carried out, the audit was carried out, the tabulation and qualification was performed but did it change anything? So people lost confidence in that process.’
12.49
Despite these concerns, there appear to be no plans to change significantly the arrangements for clinical audit in the future. As I shall explain later in this Chapter, practice audits may form part of the evidence produced by a doctor at appraisal. However, there is no obligation on him/her to produce them. Under the present arrangements for appraisal, if an appraisee refers to an audit which his/her practice has conducted, but does not produce the audit itself, the appraiser has no power to call for it.
(j) Risk Management
12.50
The introduction of clinical governance has provided an impetus for developing systems for risk assessment and risk management within NHS organisations. In the context of secondary care, systems were initially focussed on reducing the risks of litigation resulting from adverse clinical events. There was also a move to reduce financial risk in both primary and secondary care settings. More recently, there has been greater emphasis on local risk assessment and risk management as part of the clinical governance framework.
12.51
Risk can take many forms, clinical and non-clinical, and risk can be managed in a large number of different ways. It is arguable that all initiatives which a PCT takes to improve the quality of clinical care should also have the effect of reducing risk to patients. However, a primary focus of attention within the area of risk management has been the development of mechanisms designed to ensure that adverse incidents are reported and analysed, that lessons are learned from them and that appropriate changes to practice are made in order to minimise the risk of recurrence.
12.52
The importance of such mechanisms was discussed in ‘An organisation with a memory’, the report of an expert group chaired by the Chief Medical Officer, which was published in 2000. The report suggested that over 850,000 adverse healthcare events (i.e. events or omissions arising during clinical care and causing physical or psychological injury) occurred annually to patients in NHS hospitals in the UK. These events were costing billions of pounds in compensation payments and additional hospital stays, quite apart from the human misery and wider economic costs associated with them. The report recognised also that some types of adverse event (sometimes the most serious) recurred over and over again, without lessons being learned from past experience. Most of the data in the report was drawn from secondary care. The authors acknowledged that little was known about the situation in primary care where incident-reporting systems appeared to be poorly developed. This was despite the fact that primary care accounted for the great majority of NHS patient contacts and that adverse events could and did occur in the primary care setting, with serious consequences for individual patients. In addition, the report noted that, in all NHS organisations, there was no systematic reporting of ‘near misses’.
12.53
In 2001, the DoH publication ‘Building a safer NHS for patients’ set out the Government’s plans for promoting patient safety. Central to those plans was the creation of a new special health authority, the National Patient Safety Agency (NPSA). It was to provide a central point for the collection of information about adverse events and near misses (known today by the collective term ‘patient safety incidents’) and for the analysis of the cause of the most serious incidents and of any patterns and trends which emerged. The NPSA was also to disseminate the lessons learned from past incidents throughout NHS organisations and to have an advisory and educational role. Local systems for reporting patient safety incidents were also to be instituted. Emphasis was placed on promoting a culture of reporting and patient safety within NHS organisations. This culture was termed elsewhere in the document
‘an open, no-blame reporting culture’
12.54
The NPSA was established in 2001 and has now started to put in place the National Reporting and Learning System (NRLS) to receive reports of patient safety incidents from NHS organisations (including PCTs) and staff, patients and carers. The NRLS is not yet fully operational and, as yet, has had little impact on primary care. It is planned that, in due course, the NRLS will also receive relevant information from other organisations (e.g. the Health and Safety Executive) which collect safety data. Reporting will be voluntary and confidential. All reports received by the NPSA will have the names of patients and staff, and other identifying data not required for the purposes of learning, removed. There will be no investigation of the individual cases reported. No data from the NPSA systems will be available for use in disciplinary actions. The sole purpose of the collection of the data is to learn from past incidents and to develop strategies for improving patient safety.
12.55
In parallel with the national system, local NHS organisations are expected to have systems in place for collecting data on patient safety incidents. The aim is to have fully integrated local and national systems to enable NHS staff and others to report incidents directly to the NPSA. SHAs already have mechanisms in place for the reporting of serious untoward incidents. Hospitals have developed systems for the reporting of patient safety incidents. Within a hospital setting, there is relatively little opportunity for incidents to go unreported. Several members of staff may be aware of them, complaints may be made to the hospital authorities, and litigation (to which the NHS trust responsible for the hospital is likely to be a party) may follow. The position is very different with primary care. GPs work in settings that are physically separate from PCTs. In general, they employ their own staff. The current system is that patient complaints are directed in the first instance to the practice and may never come to the attention of the PCT. If civil proceedings are brought against a GP, they will be dealt with by his/her medical defence organisation. Claimants will be represented by a variety of firms of solicitors. The PCT will not be a party to the litigation. There is no requirement for a GP to inform PCTs of any claim which has been intimated or brought against him/her. Thus, there is much greater potential for a PCT to remain unaware of a patient safety incident involving a GP on its list. In 1994, the PCO for Tameside did not become aware of the fact that Mrs Renate Overton had been admitted to Tameside General Hospital in an unconscious state and that the doctors at the hospital believed that her condition was attributable to a serious error made by Shipman in administering an overdose of an opiate drug. If such an incident were to occur today, it is likely that it would be reported (on an anonymous basis) to the NPSA. However, there is no system which would guarantee that the incident and the identity of the doctor would be drawn to the attention of the PCT.
12.56
The Inquiry was told that PCTs are in the process of developing systems for the reporting and analysis of patient safety incidents. At present, there is no requirement on a GP to report incidents (even serious untoward incidents) to his/her PCT or to the relevant SHA. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Dr Wilson referred to her own experience of operating her SHA’s serious untoward incident reporting system. She said that the circumstances giving rise to a civil claim against a hospital doctor had almost always been reported previously to the SHA. By contrast, she could remember only one serious untoward incident being reported from the primary care sector. She said that it made her ‘nervous’ that she knew exactly where there was likely to be litigation in secondary care and the mental health trusts, but had no such knowledge about primary care. Ms Freedland said that she had found, when sitting on the clinical governance sub-committee of her PCT, a general ignorance of the fact that GPs were involved in adverse incidents at all. She also reported a conversation with a GP who had said:
‘ ‘‘I sat trying to work out this week how many adverse incidents I had had in my particular practice. I sat down with a black notebook this week and I recorded 48 potential adverse incidents. I was so depressed I decided no longer to log them. When I thought about it, I am not sure what an adverse incident is or a serious untoward incident.’’ ’
12.57
Ms Freedland said that a knowledge of such matters had been instilled into doctors working in the acute sector but not in general practice. She was concerned as to who was responsible for getting the message across to GPs, particularly given the PCTs’ clinical governance role. Dame Lesley Southgate pointed out that many adverse incidents which occur in the context of primary care (e.g. failure to diagnose meningitis or cancer) are very serious. Yet, even when litigation has taken place, PCTs may remain unaware that these incidents have occurred.
12.58
The gathering of information about patient safety incidents (including near misses) and their cause is critical to risk management and to clinical governance. It is clear that, in the primary care setting, there is a great deal of work to do to encourage GPs, other healthcare professionals and practice staff to report relevant incidents. Even so, there may be a reluctance on the part of some to report an incident which reflects badly on their own professional performance or that of a member of their team. It is important, therefore, that PCTs are given access to information about such incidents which is available from other sources, such as patient complaints. Only if they have a full picture of incidents occurring in their areas will they be able to take appropriate steps to prevent such incidents from recurring. It will also then be possible for them to fulfil the obligation which will no doubt be placed upon them in the future to report all relevant incidents to the NPSA.
(k) Significant Event Review
12.59
Significant event review (also known as significant event audit or analysis or critical incident review, audit or analysis) is a process whereby a group of doctors (usually, but not always, from the same practice) or (less commonly) a multidisciplinary team or group discusses significant events which have occurred in the course of its practice(s) and the lessons which can be learned from those events. The event need not have been negative or had a poor outcome. It may have demonstrated good practice from which participants in the review can learn. If the event was a negative one, the participants may want to discuss whether things could have been done differently and, if so, whether a better outcome could have been achieved. In general, significant event reviews are confidential in order to encourage participants to speak frankly. Usually, some record is made of the content of the discussion taking place at the review.
12.60
The new GMS Contract offers a financial reward to practices which have undertaken a minimum of six significant event reviews in the previous three years. A further reward is available if the practice has undertaken a minimum of 12 significant event reviews in the previous three years, which include (if these have occurred) any death occurring on the practice premises, two new cancer diagnoses, two deaths where terminal care has taken place at home, one patient complaint, one suicide and one sectioning under the Mental Health Act. Previously, there had been no financial incentive for significant event review and only about 10% of GP practices were thought to carry out significant event review. That proportion may well rise following the inclusion of incentives in the Contract.
12.61
A number of witnesses to the Inquiry spoke of the value of significant event review as a learning exercise. Dr William Reith (former chair of the Scottish Council of the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP)) said that the RCGP considered it such an important and helpful technique that, under the criteria for the Quality Practice Award, practices were encouraged to undertake reviews involving all members and employees. Professor Baker told the Inquiry that little formal research into the utility of significant event audit had been undertaken but those who had used the technique were positive about its impact.
12.62
At the Inquiry’s seminars, Dame Lesley Southgate observed that, if Shipman had sat down with her and talked about some of the deaths of his patients, it would rapidly have become evident to her that there was something odd about them. The circumstances of many of the deaths were so very different from her own experience that this would have been immediately apparent to her. Sir Donald Irvine agreed that analysis of the deaths in discussion with a peer would have been the process most likely to have led to Shipman’s discovery.
12.63
However, the value of significant event review must depend upon the amount of relevant information available to the review participants. An analysis of a death without the relevant medical records is likely to be of far less value than one where the records are available for inspection. The value of significant event review is also dependent upon the personalities of the respective participants and the extent to which they are able and willing to approach whatever information is available in an analytical manner and, if necessary, to question what they are told. As I pointed out during the evidence, the discussions between Shipman and the Form C doctors (i.e. the doctors who acted as second certifiers for the purposes of cremation) could have been viewed as ‘significant event reviews’ of the relevant patient’s death. Yet those discussions resulted in the Form C doctors accepting unquestioningly what Shipman told them, even when there were unusual features about the deaths which should have been clearly apparent from the cremation Forms B completed by Shipman. Those discussions took place between Shipman and GP peers. Within a single-handed GP practice team, the inequality of status between the doctor and other participants in a significant event review would make it difficult for the latter to raise questions about the doctor’s conduct. Certainly, it is difficult to imagine that Sister Gillian Morgan, Shipman’s practice nurse, would have questioned Shipman’s conduct in the course of a review of the circumstances surrounding the death of one of his patients, or that a lay member of his staff would have felt able to do so. Some single-handed practitioners join together in groups for the purpose of significant event review. In those circumstances, other participants are dependent on the information brought to the review by the doctor whose event is being discussed. If the participants are open and honest, the review can be a valuable learning experience for all. If, however, a participant is determined to conceal his/her poor performance or criminality, it is unlikely that this would be detected.
12.64
The fact that significant event review is confidential means that, while a PCT may become aware that it is occurring, it has no access to information about the content of reviews under the new GMS Contract. PCTs will be entitled to check practices’ review reports for the purpose of confirming that the relevant QOF indicators have been met. However, it seems highly unlikely that the reports will contain anything more than the bare information necessary for the purposes of confirmation.
12.65
Like clinical audit, significant event review cannot be regarded as a monitoring tool. It can be a valuable means by which individuals and teams can learn from past experience. Thus, it can assist in improving quality. However, it provides no information to the PCT about the quality of practice of an individual doctor.
(l) Appraisal
The Introduction of Compulsory Appraisal for General Practitioners
12.66
Until recently, neither GPs nor hospital consultants had been routinely required to undergo appraisal. This was in contrast to other NHS healthcare professionals, who were subject to annual appraisal. The only GPs who had had experience of appraisal were those who held posts outside general practice, e.g. in universities, where appraisal was the norm. In addition, some general practices operated their own in-house appraisal procedures.
12.67
, I have described how, in the late 1990s, successive high profile cases of poor clinical performance had given rise to public concern about the arrangements then in place for identifying and eliminating incompetent and aberrant clinical practice. In addition, there was concern about the extent to which doctors were keeping their medical knowledge up to date. At that time, financial incentives were available for GPs who undertook continuing professional development. Most GPs attempted to keep abreast of new developments by attending lectures and other events. However, an individual GP’s decision to attend certain educational events and not others would often be governed by such factors as geographical convenience, rather than by any coherent and structured plan to develop his/her knowledge or expertise in a particular area of practice. Choice of event would also be governed by personal preference for a topic, as opposed to remedying areas of weakness. Furthermore, those responsible for providing continuing education were not necessarily aware of the precise needs to which that education should be directed. Some groups of doctors, such as locums, found it particularly difficult to get access to continuing professional education.
12.68
In 1999, the DoH published ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’, a Consultation Paper on preventing, recognising and dealing with poor clinical performance of doctors in the NHS in England. The paper proposed that appraisal should be made compulsory for all doctors working in the NHS, including GPs. The primary aim of appraisal was to assist in planning the individual’s developmental and educational needs. However, it was also intended to assist in the recognition of poor performance. The Consultation Paper stated:
‘It is not the primary aim of appraisal to scrutinise doctors to see if they are performing poorly but rather to help them consolidate and improve on good performance aiming towards excellence. However, it can help to recognise at an early stage developing poor performance or ill health which may be affecting practice.’
The Consultation Paper also observed that:
‘A comprehensive appraisal by the NHS employer
the Paper made it clear that this term was intended to include PCOs
is essential in enabling the NHS to fulfil its statutory duty of quality through clinical governance.’
12.69
In addition, the Consultation Paper linked appraisal with the revalidation process to be introduced by the GMC. Appraisal was to provide ‘a core of information’ for revalidation. I shall discuss the relationship between appraisal and revalidation in
. For the present, I shall consider appraisal solely in the context of clinical governance.
12.70
Appraisal for NHS consultants was introduced in 2001. From April 2002, participation in the appraisal scheme set up by their PCO was mandatory for all GP principals providing GMS and PMS. The vast majority of, if not all, GP principals have now been appraised at least once. A programme of appraising GP non-principals has started.
The Nature and Purpose of Appraisal
12.71
Appraisal can have a number of different aims and can be conducted in a variety of ways, depending on the purpose it is to serve. The way in which the appraisal of GPs is conducted will determine, to some extent at least, the value of the process for clinical governance purposes. It is, therefore, necessary to examine the stated purposes of GP appraisal and the way that appraisal is currently being carried out.
12.72
Appraisal usually takes place in a hierarchical employment setting. The appraiser is frequently the appraisee’s line manager. The appraiser will have knowledge (often firsthand knowledge) about the appraisee’s past performance. The appraisal may consist of a formal evaluation or assessment of a person’s past performance, together with the setting of targets for performance in the future. Such a process could involve questioning the appraisee about aspects of his/her past performance and seeking an explanation for performance which appears to fall below the standard expected. The appraisal might identify ways in which the appraisee’s performance could be improved and his/her career developed in the future. This type of appraisal has a clear performance management function.
12.73
Professor Baker described to the Inquiry his own experience of appraisal in a university setting. He said that, as an appraiser of junior members of his team, he would be familiar with their work. The purpose of the appraisal would be to look at the appraisee’s plans for the previous year and to discuss with him/her what elements had been achieved and where difficulties had arisen. If the team member had been performing inadequately or was presenting problems of any kind, Professor Baker would have been aware of this before the appraisal. He would have dealt with those issues as they arose. He would not wait for the appraisal to raise them. However, at the appraisal, he would seek to explore the appraisee’s understanding of what had happened and of his/her situation because, if there was a gap between the reality of what had occurred and the appraisee’s perception of it, there would be a serious management problem which he would have to address. If, on the other hand, the appraisee showed insight into his/her problems, and was working hard to improve, the focus of the appraisal would be on assisting him/her in that. Although the process described by Professor Baker was rather different from the appraisal process previously described, it was also directed at performance management.
12.74
The appraisal process described in ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’ appeared to have elements of performance management. It was described thus:
‘The employer will wish to appraise an individual’s performance in their post as well as their participation in local clinical governance activities and these two strands will tie in specifically to a health organisation’s accountability to achieve high standards of quality. An employer will wish to ensure that the doctor adheres to the standards laid out in the
Duties of a doctor: good medical practice
document. However, the process will need to be strongly supported by information from external peer review so that judgements can be made about how the doctor’s local practice compares to his or her peers nationally as well as to best and excellent practice.’
12.75
The Consultation Paper made clear that the appraisal mechanisms described in it were intended to apply to independent contractor GPs, as well as to employed doctors.
12.76
When appraisal for GPs was proposed, there was considerable concern within the profession. There was a fear that appraisals would be used to ‘police’ doctors and that they would in reality be performance assessments which would result in judgements being made about GPs’ competence. There was resistance to the use of appraisal as a management tool by the PCOs. The nature of GP appraisal, as finally agreed between the DoH and the profession, was very different from that which had been feared and, indeed, from the description set out in ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’. It is described in DoH literature as:
‘... a professional process of constructive dialogue, in which the doctor being appraised has a formal structured opportunity to reflect on his or her work and to consider how his or her effectiveness might be improved’
‘... a formative
i.e. educational
and a developmental process. It is about identifying development needs, not performance management.’
12.77
As will become apparent when I come to describe the way in which GP appraisal is being conducted, it involves no objective scrutiny of past performance. It is not possible to ‘fail’ an appraisal. It is possible that something may occur during appraisal which causes an appraiser to have concerns about an appraisee’s performance. An obvious example would be if, at the appraisal, the appraisee appeared to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Appraisers are instructed that, if they have serious concerns, they should suspend the appraisal. DoH guidance advises:
‘It would be exceptional for serious concerns about performance to be first raised in an appraisal. The appraisal itself should be formative. However, both the appraiser and appraisee need to recognise that as registered medical practitioners they must protect patients when they believe that a colleague’s health, conduct or performance poses a threat to patients ...’
12.78
In such cases, appraisers are advised to refer the matter immediately to the senior clinician/clinical governance lead and the PCT chief executive to take appropriate action. The matter should then be dealt with under the PCT’s procedures for dealing with concerns about performance. The Inquiry is not aware of any appraisal which has so far resulted in serious concerns about performance being raised by an appraiser in this way.
12.79
Dr John Chisholm, Chairman of the General Practitioners Committee (GPC), British Medical Association (BMA), told the Inquiry that the character of appraisal in general practice was slightly different from that in hospital where there is ‘more of an element of performance review as well as pure appraisal about the process’. He said that both the GPC and the RCGP had felt that the ‘confusion’ of performance review with ‘pure appraisal’ was ‘unhelpful’ and had wanted to ‘maintain the purity of appraisal as a developmental tool’.
The Appraisal Process in England
12.80
Appraisal has followed a different course in England from that in other parts of the UK. In England, unlike Wales and Scotland, there has been no central system for implementing appraisal. Instead, each PCT has been left to make its own arrangements, subject to guidance issued by the DoH after negotiation with the profession. Each PCT is responsible for organising annual appraisals of all GPs, principals and non-principals, on its list.
12.81
In England, the appraisal of a GP is usually carried out by another GP from the same PCT. However, in some PCTs, appraisals have been carried out by nurses, midwives, even practice managers. The appointment of appraisers has been conducted differently from area to area. Some PCTs have selected appraisers from among the GP trainers in the area. Such appraisers will have experience of training and issues relating to professional education. They will also have attained the high standards of practice necessary for approval as GP trainers. In other areas, volunteers willing to act as appraisers have been sought and all those putting their names forward have been accepted. Some PCTs have had to ‘trawl’ local GPs in order to find candidates willing to act as appraisers. Others have selected appraisers from those who expressed interest in the job.
12.82
Appraisers undergo a day’s (sometimes two days’) initial training, during which they view a video, familiarise themselves with the relevant documentation and perform role-playing exercises. Initially, training was organised by the National Clinical Governance Support Team (NCGST) and provided by a private company. Subsequently, some PCTs have organised further training events, workshops, meetings and support groups to enable appraisers to discuss progress and any problems they may have encountered. In other areas, appraisers have received little support and only the initial training. Some PCTs have also given training to potential appraisees. Responsibility for the provision of appraiser training has now devolved to the postgraduate deaneries.
12.83
The Inquiry was told that some PCTs have allowed appraisees to choose their own appraiser from the list of appraisers in the area. Others have appointed a member of each group practice in their area as an appraiser. That appraiser has then appraised all the other members of his/her own practice. In most areas, however, appraisers have been allocated so that they are not paired with members of the same practice, or with relatives or close friends. Nevertheless, within a small professional community such as that covered by a PCT, it is inevitable that most appraisers and appraisees will at
least
know each other. It appears that most PCTs have operated a system whereby appraisers have been allocated to appraisees by the person appointed by the PCT to organise the appraisal process. If an appraisee objects to the appraiser allocated, the usual arrangement is that s/he can request a change. In most - but, it appears, not all - PCTs, both appraisers and appraisees are paid to participate. The rates of payment vary. In Tameside, each is paid £300, to cover preparation time as well as time spent on the appraisal itself.
12.84
Second and subsequent appraisals may or may not be carried out by the same appraiser. The Inquiry heard of several PCTs which planned to maintain, where possible, the same appraisers for a second - or even a third - year although, in the future, there was to be some rotation of appraisers to preserve the distance between appraiser and appraisee.
12.85
The appraisal process uses five standard forms which appear at
Appendix D
to this Report. The first two, to be completed by the appraisee, seek basic details about the appraisee (name, registered address, current posts, etc.) and information about his/her current medical activities. Form 3, entitled ‘Material for Appraisal’, constitutes the basis of the appraisal. It is organised under nine broad headings, namely Good Clinical Care, Maintaining Good Medical Practice, Relationships with Patients, Working with Colleagues, Teaching and Training, Probity, Management Activity, Research, Health. Seven of these headings are taken from those in the RCGP’s publication ‘Good Medical Practice for General Practitioners’, a document which is based on the GMC publication ‘Good Medical Practice’. The wording under each heading differs but, typically, Form 3 invites the appraisee to give a commentary on his/her work:
identifying the main strengths and weaknesses in each area
stating how his/her performance in each area has improved since the last appraisal (or over the previous year)
giving his/her view of his/her continuing development needs
giving a summary of factors which constrain him/her in achieving what s/he aims for.
12.86
Suggestions are made as to the documentation which an appraisee might refer to and supply in connection with his/her answers. For example, under the question relating to what the appraisee thinks are the main strengths and weaknesses of his/her clinical practice, the suggestions are:
‘... up-to-date audit data (as appropriate); prescribing analyses (if applicable); PCT clinical governance reviews (as appropriate); relevant clinical guidelines you use; records of any significant event audits or critical incident reports; any complaints and records of their investigation; any reflective diary you keep about these events; any plaudits you have received; any ‘‘in-house’’ or personal monitoring materials you use; references or feedback from colleagues’
12.87
The DoH guidance which accompanies Form 3 states that the appraisee is
‘invited’
to submit documents in support of what is said on the form. The appraisee is not, it is said, expected to
‘prove’
his/her assertions about his/her work, but the appraiser will probably want to
‘test’
some of those assertions through discussion and the documents will help both appraiser and appraisee. There is, however, no obligation to produce any particular document or class of documents. Moreover, the relevance of a document to the discussion at appraisal seems likely to be determined by the information which the appraisee chooses to include on Form 3.
12.88
The DoH guidance also advises appraisees to prepare a folder containing a set of all the documents, information, evidence and data collected for the purpose of the appraisal process. The appraisee should also prepare an outline personal development plan, setting out key development objectives and ways in which these objectives are to be addressed. This folder should be sent to the appraiser at least two weeks before the appraisal, to allow sufficient time for preparation. This can be done confidentially on-line, using the NHS Appraisal Toolkit.
12.89
The Inquiry heard that the amount of documentation provided by appraisees varies widely. According to Dr Robert Ashworth, a GP appraiser from Bradford South and West PCT (who, at the time when he gave evidence in September 2003, had conducted 21 appraisals), some GPs offer ‘virtually nothing - maybe a few certificates of attendance at courses’. Others produce large amounts of information about courses attended, prescribing, referrals, significant incidents, complaints and other matters relating to their practices. Dr Ashworth had sought to encourage those who had produced little material to collect more in the future and was hoping that this would bear fruit in the second round of appraisals. However, he said that he could do no more than encourage appraisees to collect more evidence. Appraisers have no power to insist on the production of evidence.
12.90
When making the appointment for an appraisal, Dr Ashworth tells the doctors he is to appraise what they should do in preparation, i.e. complete Forms 1, 2 and 3 and gather the necessary evidence. He encourages them to deliver the forms and evidence to him well in advance of the appraisal date, so that he can read them and note any points he wishes to raise at the appraisal. He has received the completed forms in advance in every case, but only in about half of cases did he receive any supporting evidence in advance. Again, he felt that he could not insist on this. Mrs Chris Page, Head of Service Redesign, Bebington and West Wirral PCT, who is in charge of the appraisal process for her PCT, agreed that, if a GP declined to produce documents, there was nothing that the appraiser (or, indeed, the PCT, if it became aware of the situation) could do.
12.91
Dr Chisholm explained that the wording in the DoH guidance, which ‘invites’ (rather than ‘requires’) the appraisee to provide documentation, was consciously chosen. The DoH and the GPC of the BMA had been aware during their negotiations that the profession did not view the introduction of appraisal with any enthusiasm and that, in order to get GPs to ‘buy in’ to the process, it was necessary to adopt a ‘softly softly’ approach. He hoped that a trusting relationship would develop between appraisers and appraisees which would enable appraisers to seek documentary evidence which was not at first proffered voluntarily.
12.92
The appraisal itself should be centred on the information contained within the appraisee’s folder, on the contents of Form 3 and (for all but the first appraisal) on the progress which has been made on achieving the objectives set out in the appraisee’s personal development plan (PDP). The appraisee should also be invited to raise any specific issues which s/he wishes to discuss. At the conclusion of the appraisal, the appraiser and appraisee should agree a summary of the appraisal discussion and of any action which it has been agreed should be taken. This should be recorded on Form 4. The appraisee then updates his/her PDP, using a standard template. It is open to an appraiser, if s/he so wishes, to complete Form 5, giving a confidential account of the appraisal interview. This is intended to inform the next appraisal. It is confidential and should be kept by the appraiser. Its completion is entirely optional.
12.93
In the vast majority of, if not all, cases, the result of appraisal will be the completion of Form 4 and the production of a PDP. The exception would be if serious concerns were identified, in which case the appraisal should be suspended and the concerns reported, as previously described. If an appraisee failed entirely to co-operate with the appraisal process, such that it was impossible to have a meaningful discussion, then, presumably, the appraiser would suspend the appraisal process and report this fact to the PCT, although the Inquiry has seen no specific guidance to deal with this situation. The more difficult problem would arise where minimal co-operation is given. It is not at all clear how limited an appraisee’s co-operation must be, or how little information must be provided, before it can be said that no meaningful appraisal has taken place.
12.94
Following appraisal, it is up to individual GPs to ensure that they address the needs set out in their PDPs. DoH guidance advises that an appraiser and appraisee should make arrangements to speak or meet at least once during the course of the year following appraisal. They should spend about half an hour reviewing progress on the appraisee’s agreed actions and his/her PDP. However, research has suggested that this rarely happens in practice.
Information Resulting from the Appraisal Process
12.95
The appraisal itself is confidential. Only the appraiser and appraisee are privy to what passes between them. Only the two of them see the folder prepared by the appraisee and the forms (1, 2 and 3) completed by him/her.
12.96
DoH guidance states that a copy of the completed
‘appraisal summary statement’
(by which is meant Form 4) should be sent, together with the appraisee’s PDP, to the senior clinician or clinical governance lead of the relevant PCT and to the PCT chief executive. In practice, this does not always happen. The Inquiry heard that, in some PCTs at least, the chief executive does not see Forms 4. Dr Ashworth’s PCT does not receive copies of Form 4, just PDPs. Mrs Page reported that her PCT had agreed with local GPs that the PCT would receive only the PDP and the ‘sign-off sheet’ of Form 4 (i.e. the sheet containing the signed declaration that Form 4 is an accurate summary of the appraisal discussion), but not the summary itself. Sometimes, appraisers send the whole set of appraisal forms to the PCT.
12.97
If completed fully, Form 4 should give some insight at least into what passed during the appraisal. It should identify those areas where improvement or development is perceived to be needed and the action plan to address that need. The Inquiry obtained a small number of anonymised Forms 4 from the first appraisal round organised by Tameside and Glossop PCT. These contained varying amounts of detail. In one example, typical entries were (under the heading Good Clinical Care):
‘Commentary: Good clinical care
Action agreed: Maintain standards’
and (under the heading Maintaining Good Medical Practice):
‘Commentary: Good medical practice
Action agreed: Maintain standards’
12.98
It may be, as one witness suggested, that those entries were made after a searching appraisal at which the appraiser had taken all necessary steps to satisfy him/herself that the appraisee was practising to a high standard. On the other hand, the appraisal may have been perfunctory and the appraiser may merely have accepted, without more, the appraisee’s own assertion that s/he was performing well in the relevant areas. The completed Form 4 gives no information about what was discussed at the appraisal. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Halligan said that the contents of this Form 4 did not enable the PCT to make any judgement about the adequacy of the appraisal or the robustness of the process, or indeed the standard of the practitioner being appraised. He suggested that the DoH guidance may be ‘too soft’ and said that this would be addressed. Some of the Forms 4 supplied to the Inquiry were more detailed than the one referred to above. Even so, little indication could be gleaned from them about the quality of the appraisal which had been carried out.
12.99
Senior clinicians or clinical governance leads of PCTs are required to submit annually to the PCT chief executive an aggregated and anonymised report based on the limited information which they receive about appraisals. This report should be discussed at board level. It should deal with emerging training and development needs and organisational service issues requiring action or investment. It should also review the operation of the appraisal process.
Information Contributing to the Appraisal Process
12.100
In an employment setting, an appraiser, who is likely to have some managerial responsibility for the appraisee, will have a background of knowledge about the appraisee and his/her performance. He or she will also have access to information from the appraisee’s colleagues. The appraiser will, therefore, have hard information on which to base the discussion at appraisal. This is not the case with an appraisal conducted by a GP peer (unless, as happens in some areas, the appraiser is a member of the same practice). A GP appraiser from another practice may or may not have some general knowledge about the appraisee’s practice and reputation. He or she will certainly have some knowledge about local conditions and problems affecting general practice. However, unless provided with it by a third party, s/he will have no data about the appraisee’s performance, other than that which the appraisee chooses to produce. This gives an appraiser limited material on which to base the appraisal, particularly if the appraisee discloses little or no data beforehand. In those circumstances, the agenda for the appraisal will inevitably be set by the appraisee, rather than the appraiser.
12.101
The DoH guidance stated that it was
‘intended that most of the documentary evidence will be supplied by the PCT as part of the regular monitoring of organisational performance undertaken by the Trust’
. The documentary evidence referred to would presumably include such information as prescribing data, data on hospital referrals, performance indicators and data about complaints and disciplinary proceedings, all of which would be within the PCT’s possession. What the guidance did not make clear was whether the evidence referred to was that which would have been already supplied to the appraisee as part of the PCT’s ongoing clinical governance arrangements and would (or should) be included in his/her appraisal folder, or whether it was envisaged that the PCT would supply the relevant material direct to appraisers. Sir Nigel Crisp, Permanent Secretary of the DoH and Chief Executive of the NHS in England, told the Inquiry that he would expect PCTs to provide appraisers with any information which the PCTs thought was relevant. Current guidance to GPs which accompanies the appraisal forms states, in relation to documentation:
‘Your PCT may be able to help with some material’
12.102
It is clear that, whatever the original intention of the DoH may have been, there has been no general provision of information by PCTs to appraisers. Dr Ashworth said that, in his area, the PCT gave no information to appraisers. He said that any move to provide such information ‘would ... be frowned upon by the GPs’. He pointed out that GPs are not used to being appraised and, for appraisal to develop successfully, they need to feel that it is a confidential, developmental process. If ‘outside agencies’ were to provide or receive information relating to the appraisal, the development of the appraisal process could, he suggested, be jeopardised. Mrs Page said that there was no routine provision of information by her PCT. However, in three cases, where there had been concerns or difficulties of which the PCT was aware and which could have impacted on the appraisee’s performance, the appraiser had been given a limited amount of information. The primary purpose of this had been to enable the appraiser to ask relevant questions and see whether any further support from the PCT was needed. Mr Julian Hartley, Chief Executive, Tameside and Glossop PCT, was also aware of one example in his PCT where the GP to be appraised had previously expressed concerns about workload and about managing the practice; the appraiser had been made aware of those concerns before the appraisal took place. Dr Robert Queenborough, Medical Director, Trafford North and Trafford South PCTs, said that no information was routinely provided by his PCTs. Indeed, there would be resistance from some appraisers to the idea of using PCT data as a basis for appraisal. He said that their attitude would be that GPs were independent contractors and that it was entirely a matter for the appraiser and the appraisee what went into appraisal.
12.103
Dr Taylor, who was in charge of appraisal for Heywood and Middleton PCT, said that he could see no difficulty in his PCT informing appraisers about such matters as the fact that an appraisee was an outlier in the prescribing of controlled drugs. However, he did not appear to believe that appraisers should be made aware of such matters as complaints or adverse disciplinary findings affecting an appraisee. Dr Linda Patterson, former Medical Director, Commission for Health Improvement (CHI), said that there was a need to discuss information about such matters as complaints at appraisal. The purpose of appraisal was to help the doctor become a better doctor so that s/he could give better care to patients. Once appraisal was viewed in that light, she thought that it became clear that such matters should be discussed. However, guidance issued by the BMA specifically prohibits discussion of complaints under investigation during the appraisal process.
12.104
Dr Chisholm told the Inquiry that he felt that the availability of information was an essential underpinning of good quality appraisal. He believed that, in accordance with the DoH guidance, to which I have already referred, PCTs should provide to both the appraiser and the appraisee information about such matters as prescribing, referrals and complaints, for use at the appraisal. Indeed, he said that he was disappointed to learn that this was not happening, since it had been intended by those involved in negotiations about the arrangements for appraisal that it should. The provision of this type of information might, he said, lead to an appraiser asking ‘probing questions’ during the appraisal. Sir Donald Irvine observed that the quality of the appraisal process was very largely dependent upon the quality of evidence on which it was based.
12.105
Some of the information which might usefully be discussed at appraisal (e.g. practice audits and significant event reviews, complaints logs, practice protocols) will be within the possession of the practice, and the PCT will not have access to it. An appraisee might or might not choose to produce these documents. Similarly, s/he might or might not include in his/her folder documents, such as prescribing data, which the PCT will also have. As I have already explained, there is no requirement that s/he should produce any of this documentation at the appraisal. At the conclusion of the appraisal, the PCT will have no means of knowing on what information the appraisal was based. The PCT receives no list of documents produced. Nor, even if it were aware of what documents had been available at the appraisal, would the PCT have any means of knowing which of those documents had been the subject of discussion at the appraisal meeting.
Quality Assurance of Appraisal
12.106
The Inquiry was told that quality assurance of the appraisal process was to be carried out by the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (known as the Healthcare Commission). According to Dr Patterson, it was likely to cover such issues as whether appraisers had been trained and whether clinical outcomes data had been available and used in the course of appraisal. It was not envisaged that there would be any inspection of appraisal folders. It was difficult therefore to know how those carrying out the process would know what evidence had been available and used at appraisal. More recently, the Inquiry has been informed by the Healthcare Commission that the Commission expects to carry out periodic reviews of various aspects of the appraisal process. This will be done as part of its overall programme of themed reviews. The Commission has made clear, however, that its reviews
‘could not be regarded as a comprehensive quality assurance system for the appraisal process for doctors’
12.107
More recently, it has been reported that the Healthcare Commission intends to consider how to assess appraisal systems as part of a general evaluation of its general review of PCTs. A consultation document is due to be produced shortly before publication of this Report.
12.108
A report by the National Association of Primary Care Educators (NAPCE), commissioned by the RCGP and published in October 2003, refers to the difficulty faced by those seeking to monitor the appraisal process:
‘The processes involved in GP appraisal are complicated, and the status of GPs as independent practitioners in an appraisal system administered by PCTs makes observation and monitoring the system even more challenging. GP appraisal is never going to be easy to monitor.’
12.109
The report suggests that one means of quality assurance would be to evaluate appraisals by seeking the views of appraisers and appraisees on how the appraisal went and monitoring the outcomes. Dr Malcolm Lewis, Director of Postgraduate Education, University of Wales College of Medicine, is in charge of appraisal in Wales. He told the Inquiry that the Welsh appraisal process has internal quality assurance mechanisms, including the sampling and matching of Forms 3 and 4. The opportunity of seeing and assessing the content of Form 3 (which should contain a list of the documentation brought to the appraisal by the appraisee) would give helpful information about the extent to which the appraiser had prepared for the appraisal and about the information available to the appraiser. It would not, however, provide any information about the content of any discussion which took place during the appraisal. It is difficult to see how a confidential meeting of this kind can be effectively quality assured.
Views of Appraisal
12.110
It is clear that there is an initial perception that appraisal has had some positive effects. Some GPs have pointed out that it is the first opportunity they have had to talk about themselves, their practices and their personal development needs since the end of their training. This is particularly valuable at a time when there is concern about the isolation of and pressure upon GPs. The preparation for appraisal, if done conscientiously, compels GPs to consider their strengths and weaknesses and how they wish to develop their practices. The appraisal itself offers an opportunity to sit down in ‘protected time’ and have a professional dialogue about issues affecting the appraisee’s practice. Many found this an enjoyable experience. The experience may well have real benefits for non-principals, especially locums, who can suffer from particular problems of isolation.
12.111
For PCTs, one benefit of appraisal is that it gives them valuable information about the training and development needs of GPs and enables them to plan for the future. It also informs the deaneries and others involved in local GP postgraduate education of the areas where educational input is required. Dr Ashworth stressed the value of this and the potential for developing training targeted at meeting the needs of local GPs, as well as at the priorities of PCTs. Mrs Page hoped that appraisal would offer an opportunity for PCTs to build up supportive relationships with GPs. Of course, much will depend upon whether the educational needs of GPs, as identified by the appraisal process, can successfully be met.
12.112
The lack of any central system for implementing appraisal has meant that there has been a corresponding lack of consistency in the arrangements made by different PCTs. There have been wide variations in the financial resources provided for appraisal and in the approaches adopted, for example, to the selection and support of GP appraisers. It seems inevitable that there will have also been wide variations in the quality of appraisals, as a result both of the differing abilities and approaches of appraisers and of the level of co-operation of appraisees. Some GPs have been very reluctant to participate.
12.113
So far, the information which has been available to appraisers has come solely from appraisees. Sometimes, very little information has been provided. The agenda for the appraisal is more or less entirely set by the appraisee. ‘In a sense’, as one witness put it, appraisers are ‘at the mercy of the appraisee.’ The School of Health and Related Research, University of Sheffield (ScHARR), which advised the DoH on the implementation of appraisal, originally suggested that PCTs might wish to nominate topics for discussion at appraisal, either with individual GPs or across the board. This appears to have happened to only a very limited extent, e.g. where specific concerns already existed about a GP to be appraised. A further difficulty is that much of the information produced by an appraisee (in common with data which is held by the PCT) is practice-based, rather than referable to the individual doctor being appraised.
12.114
I have already mentioned the failure of PCTs to provide data to appraisers for use at the appraisal meeting. Even if such data were provided, it is not clear precisely how appraisers would be expected to use it. In what detail would they be expected to read it? Would they, as Dr Chisholm suggested, be expected to study it and ask ‘probing questions’ about its content? Would GP appraisers be prepared to take on such a role? Would they be accountable if it subsequently became clear that they had failed to spot vital clues which should have suggested that the appraisee was harming his/her patients? Would appraisers be happy to accept such accountability? How would appraisees react to being asked ‘probing questions’ by their colleagues? These are questions which will require resolution in the future if it is intended that appraisal should be based on objective data provided by the PCT.
12.115
The PCTs’ position in the appraisal process highlights some of the ambiguities which they face in relation to clinical governance issues generally. The PCT organises the process and funds it. It is the PCT which has the duty of quality to discharge yet it receives a limited amount of information from the appraisal process, has little or no control over appraisers and has no means of assessing the quality of the appraisal which has taken place. There are no standards or criteria against which an appraisee’s past performance is judged. A PCT can, therefore, have no confidence that an appraisee who has been ‘successfully’ appraised has attained a certain standard of practice. Indeed, the Inquiry heard evidence from the Medical Director of one PCT that at least one doctor who was currently being investigated by the PCT for poor performance had been appraised without any concerns being raised by the appraiser.
12.116
Professor Roland raised a different problem. He pointed out that the involvement of PCTs in the appraisal process might have the effect of preventing appraisees from being frank about any weaknesses they might have. While I can appreciate that this may be so, the same can presumably be said of any appraisal which takes place in an employment context. However, as Professor Roland and others have said, the position would be exacerbated if there were to be a direct link between appraisal and revalidation and thus between appraisal and a GP’s continuing licence to practise. Witnesses have pointed out that a link between appraisal and revalidation might also be a source of concern to potential appraisers, who might be unwilling to become involved in a process that might, in theory at least, lead to a colleague losing his/her right to practise.
Future Changes to the Appraisal Process
12.117
Appraisal is in its infancy and it is too early to predict precisely how it will develop. As I have already mentioned, the RCGP has commissioned a report from the NAPCE, which contained some exploratory research on quality standards for GP appraisal. The NAPCE report makes a number of suggestions for action, including:
the establishment of more rigorous processes for appraiser selection and training
the provision of continuing support and development for appraisers, including a system of regional appraisal support units for appraisers
ways to address the problem of inadequate appraisers
the introduction of a system whereby appraisers are appraised by GPs from outside their own PCTs
the agreement of a standard national written contract between appraisers and PCTs
the provision of training for appraisees.
12.118
In addition, in July 2003, ScHARR reported on the arrangements for extending appraisal to non-principals, who may well experience some difficulty in accumulating evidence for the purposes of appraisal. Recently, the NCGST and the RCGP have carried out work on drawing up a list of evidence to be produced by GPs. The results of the NCGST’s work have recently been published in a document, ‘Defining the evidence for Revalidation - supporting the Royal College of General Practitioners’, written by the NCGST Expert Group. As its name suggests, the document is primarily concerned with revalidation and seeks to identify the minimum number of items of evidence that its authors regard as essential to allow local clinical governance certification for revalidation purposes. It seems to be envisaged that these same items of evidence (together with any others that the appraisee may wish to volunteer) may also, if the appraisee so wishes, form the basis of appraisal.
12.119
In August 2004, the RCGP published a consultation document, ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: A Tool for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’. The purpose of the document is to set out proposals for the evidence that GPs may wish to gather to demonstrate their professional standards, to use for the purpose of appraisal and to submit for assessment for the purposes of revalidation. I shall discuss the evidence identified in each of these documents in
. Suffice it to say for the present that type of evidence set out by the NCGST Expert Group appears somewhat ‘softer’ than that proposed by the RCGP. An example of this is that the RCGP proposes the submission of a standardised audit conducted by an independent colleague that demonstrates the appropriate quality of the doctor’s clinical records; by contrast, the NCGST Expert Group suggests that a self-reported audit of records would be acceptable. Similarly, the RCGP proposes that GPs should produce copies of all complaints involving the doctor, together with evidence that any learning needs identified have been met, whereas the NCGST document suggests that the doctor should produce only a list of complaints received and of subsequent action taken.
12.120
Recently, the DoH has commissioned further work on the progress of GP appraisal; this is shortly to be published and further guidance on the appraisal process is also expected to be published imminently. The DoH has informed the Inquiry that it will be taking steps in the future to ensure that all PCTs have sight of appraisal Form 4 in its entirety, as well as the appraisee’s PDP.
12.121
As to the approach to be adopted in the future, Mr Michael Warner, former Project Director, Avon, Gloucestershire and Wiltshire SHA, stressed the need to appraise past performance and to highlight strengths and weaknesses in past performance in order to form an appropriate development plan for the future. He felt that PCTs had to work towards a more systematic and robust system of appraisal. Under such a system, the PCT would collate all the information about the GP, sit down with him/her and go through a formal appraisal process of that information. He observed that the chief executive of the PCT was ultimately accountable if poor performance led to poor service and felt that this accountability should be reflected in the appraisal process. He said that PCTs were beginning to realise that they must link past performance and future development but they were ‘struggling’ to make that link. He suspected that such a move would not be welcomed by the profession, although he felt that some GPs would be sympathetic. He advocated a sensitive approach, with the profession and PCTs working in partnership. Dr Queenborough also felt that the appraisal process was likely to become more like performance management in time. Dr Patterson said that there must be some accountability for performance within the appraisal process. She spoke of her own experience of appraisal in a hospital setting which she found a very positive experience. She said that there must be an element of performance management.
12.122
I have previously referred to the fact that DoH guidance had described GP appraisal as
‘formative’
. In its response to the Inquiry’s Consultation Paper, however, the DoH stated that appraisal
‘has both summative
i.e. pass/fail
and formative elements’
. At the Inquiry’s seminars, Professor Halligan said that it should be possible to ‘fail’ appraisal by falling below the standards which had been accepted and received. He observed that there was no point in having a process that everyone passes. However, it was not clear whether, by ‘failing’, he was referring to the situation already referred to (where an appraiser has concerns serious enough to warrant suspending the appraisal) or whether he had in mind something less serious (e.g. inadequacy of documentary material, failure to comply with a PDP, or other concerns falling short of ‘serious’ but nevertheless requiring investigation).
12.123
Although it seems likely that many PCTs would welcome an approach which more closely resembles performance management, such a shift of emphasis would plainly be resisted by many within the profession. And, since the vast majority of appraisals will continue to be conducted by GP appraisers, it is difficult to see how such an approach could be enforced. The reality may well be that any performance management function exercised by PCTs will have to take place in a context other than appraisal, while appraisal remains aimed wholly at encouraging continuing professional development and seeking to ensure that it is occurring. The latter approach plainly has a part to play in the maintenance of standards. However, it produces little, if any, useful information about the performance and competence of individual doctors.

--- Monitoring of Clinical Governance Arrangements ---
12.124
I have already explained that, over the past few years, considerable attempts have been made within NHS organisations to establish appropriate structures and systems designed to promote good clinical governance. Those attempts have been monitored by CHI. Between 2000 and April 2004, CHI carried out a programme of local reviews of clinical governance arrangements in NHS trusts and PCTs. Each review resulted in a report which was published on CHI’s website. Every review involved a visit, lasting a week, to the PCT by a team of reviewers. The team comprised about ten people, including a CHI employee (who managed the review), a doctor, a nurse, a manager, an allied healthcare professional, a representative of Social Services and a lay person. The review covered all the services provided by the PCT, including medical services. Before the visit, the PCT would be requested to submit a large amount of information (written policies, protocols, strategies, minutes of meetings and other data) to CHI. That information would be analysed in preparation for the visit.
12.125
Also before the visit took place, CHI would hold a meeting in the locality of the PCT and invite members of the public in order to get some background information about the way in which the PCT was viewed by patients, carers and other interested parties. CHI would also have access to patient surveys conducted in some areas. CHI would seek views on the PCT from such bodies as the relevant SHA, local NHS trusts and Social Services.
12.126
Reviews of PCTs were based on what Dr Patterson described as ‘the seven components of clinical governance’. These were:
patient involvement
staffing and staff management
education and training
clinical effectiveness
use of information.
12.127
Visiting teams would also look at the ‘patient experience’ and at the PCT’s strategic capacity for developing and improving clinical governance. Dr Patterson explained that this latter element depended largely on the quality of leadership and the culture within the PCT being reviewed.
12.128
The visiting team would examine the strategies and policies which the PCT had in place under each of the seven components and would assess how they operated on the ground. Dr Patterson gave the example of risk management. A review team would want to know if the PCT had a strategy for risk management. It would then want to see how that strategy was translated into policies and procedures and, more importantly, whether it was understood by frontline staff. Where possible, staff of the PCT would be asked how they would deal with specific incidents and how they had dealt with actual incidents in the past. Thus, the CHI team would hope to discover whether the structures and systems which the PCT claimed to have in place were working effectively in practice.
12.129
In the course of the visit, the review team would spend time at the PCT offices, interviewing managers and staff and discussing the systems in operation. The team would also conduct approximately six visits to GP practices. It would attempt to choose practices of different types (e.g. urban and rural, single-handed and large group). It would look out for such obvious matters as cleanliness within the practice surgery and whether appropriate information leaflets were displayed. However, the purpose of the visit was not to look at the quality of care given by the individual practice. It was primarily to ascertain whether the PCT had an appropriate quality framework in place that was operational at practice level. The extent to which CHI was able to gather information about the way in which PCT systems and policies were working on the ground was necessarily limited by time and other factors. Its inspection would not detect poor clinical practice by individual doctors.
12.130
After the visit, a written report would be prepared, setting out CHI’s assessment of the PCT’s systems under each of the seven components of clinical governance. A PCT’s performance in relation to each of the seven components would be scored by the reviewing team on a four-point scale. The report would set out CHI’s recommendations for future action. These recommendations were in the main directed at the setting up of new systems or the improvement of existing systems. Some recommendations related to the provision of education and training. Recommendations were not (and, indeed, were not intended to be) directed at the actual quality of clinical care being provided by GP practices. However, compliance with the recommendations might well have had the effect of improving the quality of care. An example would be a recommendation under the ‘clinical effectiveness’ component. This requires that PCTs should have systems in place for ensuring that treatment given is based on the best available evidence, e.g. from research, literature or local or national guidelines (including NSFs and NICE guidelines). A recommendation that a PCT should develop a system for disseminating to all GP practices new evidence about best practice might result in changes in treatment on the part of some GPs and a consequent improvement in patient care. It would not, of course, have this effect on all. The CHI report would also set out areas of notable practice by PCTs and practice from which CHI believed that the rest of the NHS could learn. Following receipt of the report, PCTs were expected to produce action plans identifying the steps they proposed to take to comply with CHI’s recommendations. SHAs were then responsible for overseeing compliance with these action plans by PCTs.
12.131
The conduct of CHI reviews was extremely resource-intensive. Initially, it was intended that CHI would operate a rolling programme of inspections, returning to each organisation every few years or so. This proved impractical. Over the four years of its operation, CHI carried out 377 reviews, including 86 reviews of English and Welsh PCOs.
The Healthcare Commission
12.132
CHI’s functions have now been transferred to the Healthcare Commission which is, in the short term, continuing with reviews of PCTs. In the longer term, however, it is intended that no routine clinical governance reviews should be conducted. Instead, the Healthcare Commission will carry out themed reviews of the provision of health care which will be conducted by reference to standards laid down by Government and more detailed criteria which the Healthcare Commission will itself develop. The reviews will be conducted by collecting, analysing and screening data (so-called ‘intelligent information’) generated by NHS bodies. The relative levels of performance of different bodies will be assessed. For those which appear to be performing less well, there will be further reviews to diagnose problems and identify any necessary remedial action. For those which appear to be performing well, there will be further reviews with a view to identifying the factors which enable them to perform well and to communicating those factors to others. There will be no comprehensive visiting programme.
12.133
So far as clinical governance is concerned, the proposed reviews will give only limited information about whether systems and policies are being implemented on the ground. Inevitably, the Healthcare Commission will be looking primarily at institutional arrangements and systems, not the practice of individual doctors.

--- Conclusions ---
12.134
Dr Patterson told the Inquiry that the reviews of PCTs by CHI completed at the time she gave evidence in September 2003 had revealed that they were ‘struggling’ to implement arrangements for clinical governance. As I have said, PCTs are small organisations, with a wide range of functions and a competing set of priorities. They have had little time to set up comprehensive structures and systems. Their problems have been compounded by the fact that they are not, as Dr Patterson pointed out, operating within ‘a managed environment’ so far as GP practices are concerned. They are not dealing with a cohesive group of employees whose behaviour they can direct. Instead, they are dealing with a number of small, geographically separate and independent organisations. Dr Patterson said that CHI had found a ‘nervousness’ on the part of the PCTs and a lack of clarity about what their management role was in relation to GPs. There is less of a problem with doctors working under PMS contracts. But for doctors working under the GMS Contract, there were, in Dr Patterson’s view, ‘some structural and cultural barriers’ to implementing clinical governance arrangements across a PCT. She anticipated that this might change under the new GMS Contract.
12.135
In September 2003, the National Audit Office (NAO) published a progress report, ‘Achieving Improvements through Clinical Governance’, on the implementation of clinical governance by NHS trusts. The report did not deal with primary care. Given that the PCTs had been created only relatively recently, it was thought premature to report on them. Within NHS acute, mental health and ambulance trusts, the NAO found that the introduction of clinical governance had had
‘many beneficial impacts’
. However, progress in its implementation was
‘patchy’
, varying between trusts, within trusts and between the components of clinical governance. It seems highly likely that the implementation of clinical governance in PCTs is similarly - if not even more - patchy. This was acknowledged by Professor Halligan at the Inquiry’s seminars when he said that clinical governance was not yet ‘embedded’ in primary care. Dame Lesley Southgate pointed out that PCTs are young organisations which are constantly changing and developing. She said that it is impossible to reach a conclusion about consistency or lack of consistency between PCTs since not enough is known about their activities. Professor Baker felt, on the basis of his own observations, that there were differences in the ways in which different PCTs had embraced clinical governance. He felt that this was largely a question of leadership and that it depended on the attitude of the clinical governance lead and chief executive of the PCT. Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute, said that some PCT medical advisers interpreted governance in terms of discipline while others regarded their role as ‘much more educative’. Professor Halligan also stressed the importance of leadership in the effective implementation of clinical governance arrangements. More recently, in a letter to the Inquiry dated 10th
November 2004, Sir Liam Donaldson, Chief Medical Officer, has stated his belief that the culture and process of clinical governance are now
‘strongly embedded in local NHS organisations’
. I do not know on what evidence that statement is based. It seems unlikely that there has been a significant advance since January 2004, when Sir Liam’s colleague and other witnesses commented on the position of clinical governance in primary care.
12.136
It seems to me clear that there is indeed some way to go before clinical governance is fully implemented in primary care. I have explained also that some of the tools being used at present by PCTs in the implementation process have limitations with regard to the extent to which they can be used for clinical governance purposes. However, I do not wish to appear negative about the efforts that PCTs are currently making. Any steps taken with a view to improving the quality of patient care are to be welcomed. With time, the focussing of effort on a coherent strategy for improving quality of care must be of benefit to patients. I am merely attempting to draw attention to the difficulties currently faced by PCTs in implementing clinical governance.
12.137
In my view, the real obstacle to implementing clinical governance is that identified by Dr Patterson, namely the position of GPs as independent contractors and the consequent inability of PCTs to ‘manage’ them for clinical governance purposes. The tension is well illustrated by the debate over appraisal and the form which it should take. The PCTs are accountable for quality and feel the need to find ways of monitoring and assessing the quality of care being given by GPs. The profession fears ‘policing’ by the PCTs and consequent loss of clinical freedom. There is some confusion over accountability, particularly the accountability of clinical governance leads who, as local GPs, often have ‘a foot in both camps’. Many of them have tried to adopt a ‘softly softly’ approach, attempting to promote a supportive climate and to encourage ‘ownership’ of clinical governance by the profession. The difficulty comes with those general practices which are unwilling to embrace the principles of clinical governance and where problems of poor standards of care might exist. A PCT may be virtually powerless to act if, for example, a practice will not allow a clinical governance visit to take place. It seems to me that PCTs may need to be given greater powers if they are to discharge their clinical governance responsibilities effectively and are to be accountable for discharging the duty of quality placed upon them. They will also need leadership and determination to make quality their first priority and to root out substandard practice.
12.138
Clinical governance is primarily about systems. At present, it yields little information about individual doctors. It produces even less information about such matters as a doctor’s medical knowledge or consultation skills (i.e. whether s/he is skilled at eliciting the information necessary to take a history, at making a diagnosis and deciding with the patient what should be done). These are the aspects of care which matter most to patients and are absolutely fundamental to the quality and safety of medical care. It seems to me that, in primary care at least, the focus of clinical governance should move away from organisational systems and instead be directed towards the gathering and use of information about the performance of individual practices and practitioners.
12.139
In my view, if properly developed and well resourced, clinical governance could provide the most effective means of achieving two important aims. First, it could enable PCTs to detect poorly performing or dysfunctional GPs on their lists. It could also help practices to discover any problems or weaknesses among their own number. Second, it could have the beneficial effect of helping doctors who are performing satisfactorily to do even better. At the moment, I do not think it is achieving these ends, for two main reasons.
12.140
First, as I have said, the amount of information available that relates to individual doctors is very small. Most data relates to practices and not individuals. Even prescribing data is not as sharply defined as it should be. Clinical governance will not reach its full potential until it entails the collection of data relating to individual doctors. Data relating to say six or seven practitioners may well conceal real deficiencies about an individual. Much more effort must go into the collection of data relating to individuals. This could include prescribing data, referral data and complaints. Patient satisfaction surveys should seek reactions to individual doctors and not just to the service provided by the practice. If and when mortality statistics can be analysed, they should be included. I am sure that there are other possibilities which I have not thought of.
12.141
Second, clinical governance should be given a much higher profile in the PCT. My understanding is that, at present, the clinical governance lead is usually a GP who has an interest in the subject and undertakes it on a part-time basis. I can see the value of a clinical governance lead remaining in clinical practice. However, it does not seem to me to be satisfactory that s/he should just ‘pick up’ what there is to be learned about clinical governance as the result of experience. There should be opportunities for clinical governance leads to share experience and to learn what more can be done and how. Also, if the experience of clinical governance leads shows that they need greater powers, they should be given them. To use a colloquial term, the process needs ‘beefing up’.
12.142
I said that I would consider whether, if clinical governance had been in operation in the mid-1990s, it would have been capable of detecting Shipman’s criminal activities. The short answer is that clinical governance as operated at present would not have done. If an analysis of mortality statistics could have been included, it obviously would have done; the death rates among his patients were noticeably high. I cannot think of any other clinical governance tool that would definitely have detected his crimes. Clinical audit might have done so, if the right topic had been chosen. Significant event review, focussed on a sudden death, particularly a death in the surgery, might well have done. I cannot be certain. If clinical governance were to operate in conjunction with improved death investigation and certification (as recommended in my Third Report) and improved regulation of the use of controlled drugs (as recommended in my Fourth Report) then I think the prospects of detection would be quite high. Even more important, perhaps, would be the deterrent effect of these measures.
12.143
Having said that, I do not think that clinical governance will ever be the method of choice for detecting deliberate malpractice. Those who deliberately do wrong usually take steps to cover their tracks. The usefulness of clinical governance is to be found, in my view, in what it discovers about doctors who are not performing badly on purpose and who may be quite unaware that their clinical performance is poor. Just because clinical governance would not necessarily ‘catch another Shipman’ does not mean that it is not thoroughly worthwhile.

--- CHAPTER THIRTEEN - Single-Handed Practitioners ---
Shipman
Government Policy
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Single-Handed Practice
Mitigating the Problems of Single-Handed Practice


========================================================================
CHAPTER THIRTEEN - Single-Handed Practitioners
========================================================================

--- Definitions, Statistics and Trends ---
Definition of Single-Handed Practice
13.7
The term ‘single-handed practice’ is not a term of art. It can be applied to describe practitioners working under many differing arrangements. The Department of Health (DoH) defines a single-handed GP as one who has no partners, although s/he may have an assistant or a GP registrar. Another definition of a single-handed practice, referred to in the RCGP paper, is:
‘a practice in which all the patients are registered with one general practitioner, contracted by the relevant health authority and who is responsible for those patients 24 hours a day and 365 days per year, although the practitioner is able to access other health professionals, including general practitioners, in order to discharge the contractual responsibilities’
13.8
Dr Taylor’s evidence was consistent with this definition. According to him, ‘A single-handed practice is a group of patients registered with a GP principal who receives funding for those patients.’ Essentially, what distinguishes the single-handed practitioner is the fact that s/he has his/her own patient list. Although some of his/her patients may be treated by an assistant at the practice, the single-handed GP does not share with other doctors the care of patients in a shared list.
13.9
In some single-handed practices, there may be only one doctor regularly working at the practice, with locums standing in during sickness or holidays. This is the model that most members of the public would identify as a single-handed practice. In others, the doctor may have a part-time or full-time salaried GP registrar or assistant to help. Elsewhere, although these are now apparently few, there are practices in which GPs have their own patient lists but share staff, premises and other facilities. Although they would regard themselves (and would be regarded by the profession and the DoH) as single-handed, they would probably not be regarded as such by most members of the general public. Dr Taylor described several other variations on the theme.
13.10
A small practice is defined by SPA as a practice that has either fewer than 7000 patients or fewer than four GP principals. Again, this is not a term of art. Shipman was never in a small practice (rather than a single-handed practice) but some of the evidence I have considered suggests that certain problems are common to both single-handed and small practices.
The Typical Profile of a Single-Handed General Practitioner
13.11
Dr Taylor identified four groups of single-handed GPs. Not all single-handed GPs would fall into one of these groups but the four groups account for a large proportion of the total. The first group comprises doctors who came to the UK from the Indian sub-continent in the 1960s and 1970s and who never went into group practice. The majority of these doctors serve deprived inner-city areas; many are soon to retire. Second is a group of younger doctors from Western Europe, in particular the Benelux countries, who are accustomed to and enjoy single-handed practice, which is the norm in their home countries. A third group comprises doctors who find themselves in single-handed practice after a partnership split. The fourth group is what was described by Dr Taylor as the ‘small is beautiful’ group, among whose number Dr Taylor would probably count himself. Those in this group prefer single-handed practice, believing that it gives them the opportunity to treat their patients in the ‘holistic’ way most appropriate to their needs. Of course, doctors in any one or more of the first three groups may also be in the fourth. The practices tend to be located in deprived inner-city areas. Some are in rural localities that could not support more than one doctor.
Numbers
13.12
The number of single-handed practitioners in England is gradually declining. In 1952, about 43% of GPs were single-handed. By 1993, there were only 2888 single-handed GPs out of a GP population of 25,968. In 1998, there were more than 200 fewer (2683) out of a substantially increased GP population of 27,392. By 2003, the respective figures were 2504 out of a total of 28,568. Thus, over that 11 year period, the percentage of single-handed GPs in the GP population fell from about 11% to less than 9%. These figures do not distinguish between ‘pure’ single-handed GPs and those GPs who are in a group practice with their own patient lists. The GP population referred to is the population of ‘unrestricted principals and equivalents’ (UPEs), a DoH term that excludes groups such as restricted principals, assistant GPs and salaried doctors.
13.13
Women doctors and young doctors are under-represented among single-handed GPs. Over 50% of single-handed GPs are over 50, compared with 25% of GPs as a whole. Only 11% are under 40, compared with 40% of GPs as a whole. Only 15% of single-handed GPs are women, compared with 27% of GPs as a whole
The Decline in Numbers
13.14
According to Dr Taylor, the decline in numbers began in the 1960s and seems likely to continue. It is largely attributable to fiscal, practical and administrative considerations that give group practice a broader appeal to most aspiring GPs.
13.15
In the early 1960s, the view was prevalent that single-handed general practice was inhibiting the development of good clinical practice. Consequently, in 1966, a financial incentive in the form of the Group Practice Allowance (GPA) was introduced, in order to encourage the formation of group practices. The GPA achieved its goal and the number of single-handed GPs consequently declined. The GPA was abolished in around 1990 when fundholding was introduced. In its early stages, fundholding was not in effect available to single-handed GPs and small practices, and the additional allowances paid for such services as chronic disease management were not easily achievable by single-handed GPs, who would not usually have possessed the necessary infrastructure or staffing levels.
13.16
Mr William Greenwood told the Inquiry that, in 1980, when he was working as the Assistant Administrator at the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee (FPC), there would be between 20 and 40 applications for a vacancy in a single-handed practice whereas now there are only three or four. Dr Taylor suggested that applications are ‘astonishingly few’. There are several reasons why the shift away from single-handed practice appears to be continuing. First, aspiring young GPs are most likely to train in a group practice (only 2% of GP training is delivered in small or single-handed practices) and are therefore likely to seek a position in the kind of practice with which they are familiar. It has also been suggested that young doctors find the practical arrangements in group practice more satisfying. They may also find them more flexible and less personally demanding. Finally, many single-handed GPs began practising in the 1960s and 1970s and have reached or are approaching retirement.
13.17
It also appears to me, from the responses to the Inquiry’s questionnaire, that PCTs generally discourage the continuance of single-handed practice. When a single-handed GP retires or gives up his/her practice, the PCT will encourage a merger with another practice. The justification for this attitude towards single-handed practice is said to be that group practice provides better patient care. However, it may be that pragmatic considerations play a part. First, it must be easier for PCTs to manage a smaller number of practices, even though the number of doctors overall may be the same. In written evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester, suggested that single-handed practices may be unpopular with PCTs because they present greater management challenges and cost. Dr Taylor also spoke of the significant expense of putting a new single-handed GP into an established single-handed practice. The departing practitioner may well not have kept the premises and equipment up to date and significant sums may be incurred in ‘refreshing’ them. These sums are avoided when the patient list is absorbed into an existing group practice, as are the costs of advertising and appointing a new single-handed GP, which would otherwise fall onto the PCT. Expenditure on premises and equipment will be greater still where a new single-handed practice is formed (as with Shipman in 1992).
13.18
There is now an additional reason why the decline in the number of single-handed practitioners is likely to continue. Under the old General Medical Services (GMS) Contract, every GP in a group practice had his/her own list of patients, even though s/he might share the care of those patients with his/her partners. If the practice broke up, a GP could take his/her list of patients to form a single-handed practice. Under the new GMS Contract, which came into force in April 2004, patients are registered with the GP practice and not with an individual GP. In future, if a GP leaves a partnership, s/he will not be able to take his/her patients to form a new practice.
13.19
For all these reasons, it appears that the number of single-handed GPs will continue to decline. However, it seems to me likely that there will always be a need for some.
Wylie AM et al (1999) ‘Single-handed practices - their contribution to an undergraduate teaching network in the first year of the new curriculum’, Medical Education, Vol 33: pp 531-536.
Lunt N et al (1997) ‘Staying single in the 1990s: single-handed practitioners in the new National Health Service’, Social Science & Medicine, Vol 45(3): pp 341-349.

--- Shipman ---
Todmorden
13.20
As I have described in my First Report, Shipman joined the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre in Todmorden in early 1974. There were between 9000 and 12,000 patients registered with the practice, which comprised five partners, including Shipman. Each partner had his/her own list of patients. It is not now clear to what extent Shipman inherited the list of his predecessor, who had just retired from practice. It seems that Shipman was expected to build up his own list. The partners were, therefore, single-handed within the definition mentioned above although their patients probably regarded the practice as a single unit.
13.21
In my First Report, I found that, while in Todmorden, Shipman unlawfully killed one patient, Mrs Eva Lyons. She was probably a patient on his list. She was terminally ill and Shipman visited her frequently in the period leading up to her death. She died late one evening after Shipman had called to attend to her. She was in quite severe pain and Shipman gave her an injection of a drug, which resulted in her death within a few minutes. Her death was expected and, even had she been registered with another doctor, it is unlikely that that doctor would have seen any cause for concern. I found that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that he had killed six others, all of whom were probably his patients. I also found in my First Report that there was an occasion in August 1974 when Shipman probably did inject Mrs (now Professor) Elaine Oswald, a 25 year old female patient, with an opiate, causing her to suffer respiratory arrest. I did not feel able to reach any positive conclusion as to his motive. However, I thought it highly unlikely that he had any intention to kill her or to cause her serious harm. She too was his patient.
13.22
When in Todmorden, Shipman also flouted the legal requirements governing the keeping of the practice’s controlled drugs register, for which he had responsibility. He amassed large quantities of pethidine for his own use. Thus, in Todmorden, Shipman was neither deterred nor detected by such ‘mutual supervision’ as existed where the doctors worked together in the same premises, sharing the services of staff. It is perhaps revealing that it was a member of staff at the local pharmacy who eventually ‘blew the whistle’ to Shipman’s partners about his acquisition of excessive quantities of pethidine. The courses of action open to her might have been less clear cut had Shipman been the only doctor working in the practice.
The Donneybrook Practice
13.23
In October 1977, Shipman joined the Donneybrook practice, Hyde, where there were seven doctors. Five of the seven had their own patient list and two shared a list. Shipman inherited the list of Dr John Bennett. The five doctors organised themselves into two groups for the purpose of providing cover for their half days off. For the first three years or so, Shipman and Dr Geoffrey Roberts provided half day cover for each other. After Dr Roberts left the practice, Shipman made the same reciprocal arrangements, first with Dr Wojciech Kucharczyk and then with Dr Jeffery Moysey. In addition, a doctor would be responsible for all the patients registered with the practice when he was on duty in the evenings, at weekends and over bank holidays. The system was that each of the members of the practice provided out of hours cover on a rota. When on evening duty, a doctor was responsible for providing cover from 5.30pm or 6pm until about 11pm, after which telephone calls were diverted to the deputising service used by the practice. The deputising service would then respond to all calls made until 8 or 8.30 the following morning. The charges made by the deputising service for dealing with calls received by them from 11pm onwards were shared between all the partners in the practice. Before 11pm, telephone calls made to the surgery were transferred to the home of the doctor on duty. That doctor could choose to have calls diverted to the deputising service earlier than 11pm but, if he chose to do so, he would be financially responsible for the charges of the deputising service for responding to those calls.
13.24
The general financial and administrative arrangements remained essentially those of a partnership until 1st
January 1992, from which time, having announced his intention to move, Shipman ran a completely separate single-handed practice from within the shared premises. When he announced his intention to move in 1991, one of his partners thought that he was moving to single-handed practice because of his ‘individualistic’ approach to his work. He also thought that Shipman wanted to be free to practise without any interference from others; it was suggested that he used to show signs of irritation when colleagues or staff disagreed with him. Dr Graham Bennett worked in a neighbouring practice and signed cremation Forms C on several occasions when Shipman had certified the cause of death and completed a cremation Form B. He said that he considered it inevitable, given his character, that Shipman would go into single-handed practice where he would have his ‘own little empire’ and would not be overlooked.
13.25
During his years at the Donneybrook practice, Shipman killed 71 patients and I found that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that he killed 30 more. It is likely that all were on his patient list. At no stage did any of his partners suspect what he was doing.
The Market Street Surgery
13.26
In August 1992, Shipman moved with some of the staff from the Donneybrook practice to new surgery premises at 21 Market Street, Hyde. To the annoyance and financial detriment of his former partners, he took with him his patient list. That list was to grow so large that, at the end of 1997, Shipman was setting in train the process for recruiting a partner. Between 1992 and 1998, Shipman enjoyed an excellent reputation as an attentive, caring doctor. In the six years before his arrest, he killed 143 patients and there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that he killed eight more.
13.27
It is clear, therefore, that Shipman was, to all intents and purposes, a single-handed practitioner throughout his professional life as a GP. Although there may have been some degree of mutual awareness, at the Donneybrook practice, of what other doctors within the practice were doing, this would only rarely extend to knowledge of the medical history or circumstances of the patients of another doctor. Thus it is not surprising that the other doctors in the Donneybrook practice noticed nothing unusual about the deaths of Shipman’s patients. Concern that Shipman might have evaded detection because he practised alone may have some foundation. Later in this Chapter, I shall consider whether the mutual supervision that may be expected in a group practice with shared patient lists would have had a significant effect upon Shipman’s course of conduct.

--- Government Policy ---
13.28
Concerns about single-handed GPs are not recent. In the mid-1990s, there were statements in the medical press quoting representatives of the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts, who said that the days of the single-handed GP were numbered. Single-handed GPs, it was said, could not be expected to provide the kind of services required of them, given the burden on primary care and the need to develop practice teams offering a range of professional expertise and facilities.
13.29
At times, Government policy has seemed to favour a move away from single-handed practice, on the assumption that this would lead to improved standards of patient care by reducing the ‘clinical isolation’ said to be experienced by doctors practising alone. One of the proposals contained in ‘The NHS Plan, A plan for investment, A plan for reform’ (the NHS Plan), which was presented to Parliament in July 2000, was that special contractual arrangements were needed for single-handed GPs. According to paragraphs 8.10 and 8.11:
‘It is particularly important to be able to confirm that single-handed practices are offering high standards, because although most single-handed GPs work hard and are committed to their patients, they tend to operate in relative clinical isolation. They do not have the ready support from colleagues enjoyed by GPs in larger practices. The current “red book” contract is a particularly poor mechanism for protecting quality standards in these practices.
For this reason, new contractual quality standards will be introduced for single-handed practices. This will either be done through a negotiated change to the “red book”, or if this proves not to be possible, a new national Personal Medical Services contract will be introduced into which all single-handed practices will be transferred by 2004. The role of primary care groups and primary care trusts in promoting and auditing clinical governance will also help reduce isolation and encourage co-operation between GPs.’
Then, on 3rd
July 2002, the Prime Minister, the Rt Hon Tony Blair MP, said in the House of Commons:
‘There has been a move over time away from single-handed practices so as to improve the quality of care that people receive. That has been based on a great deal of evidence over a long time.’
13.30
This announcement caused disquiet in the medical profession, which did not accept that such evidence existed. Within a short time, there was a ‘softening’ of the policy line. On 17th
October 2002, the then Secretary of State for Health, the Rt Hon Alan Milburn MP, told the publication ‘Doctor’ that the future for smaller practices was ‘positive’ and that this would be recognised in the new GMS Contract. The new GMS Contract does not impose any special restrictions or requirements on single-handed GPs. It leaves it up to individual practices, including single-handed practices, to decide how best to design their arrangements so as to meet local needs. It sets out to reward high quality of care by remunerating GPs in accordance with their performance, which is to be measured against a number of quality markers. Although SPA welcomes the focus on quality of care, there is disappointment that there is to be no specific reward for continuity of care.
13.31
At the Inquiry seminars, held in January 2004, it was said that there was still a perception in some quarters that single-handed practice is discouraged. Indeed, I got this impression myself from the evidence of some PCT officers. In response, the Deputy Chief Medical Officer for England, Professor Aidan Halligan, made it clear that the DoH was not actively encouraging PCTs to persuade single-handed GPs to move into multi-handed practice. In written evidence to the Inquiry, the DoH stated that the policy now is that the future for single-handed practice is
‘safe’
. Small practices will be encouraged to co-operate with each other so as to ensure the provision of a full range of services to patients. Improved PCT support, for example by the provision of practice nurses and experienced practice staff, will help to improve the quality of service offered by those practices. I should add that PCTs now also have list management powers which give them a greater ability to deal with all problem GPs, including single-handed GPs. In short, single-handed practice is here to stay and will not be allowed to be the poor relation of primary care.

--- The Advantages and Disadvantages of Single-Handed Practice ---
13.32
The general perception of the public and of the medical profession appears to be that single-handed practice is popular with patients because it provides continuity of personal medical care. The general perception among the medical profession is that single-handed practice does not provide as high a quality of care as is delivered by group practice.
Objective Measurements of Clinical Performance
13.33
A review of the literature over the past decade suggests that there is no good evidence that the clinical performance of single-handed GPs is inferior to that of their colleagues in group practice. It appears that no single type of practice can claim a monopoly over high quality care
and that there is no association between practice size and quality of care
. Differing sizes of practice are recognised to have differing strengths and weaknesses. In those instances where the data would appear to suggest that group practice provides better care, the disparities disappear when adjustments are made for patients’ age, sex and social deprivation. In any event, it might be expected that research would suggest that group practices provide a better standard of care than do single-handed practices, because the performance and other indicators used to assess practices are based largely on the numbers of patients who receive particular forms of treatment (such as immunisation, cervical cytology or regular chronic disease management) and do not reflect the less quantifiable advantages of single-handed practice, such as those associated with continuity of care.
Practice Size
13.34
The witness evidence generally supports the view that there is no association between practice size and quality of care. At the Inquiry seminars, Professor Martin Roland, Director, National Primary Care Research and Development Centre, Professor of General Practice (University of Manchester) and Principal in General Practice, Rusholme Health Centre, Manchester, said that single-handed GPs are represented among those who provide very high standards of care as well as among those at the other end of the spectrum. Sir Donald Irvine, President of the GMC between 1995 and 2002, told the Inquiry:
‘... some SHPs
single-handed practices
have quite the best arrangements for clinical governance that one could wish to see. The assumption that smallness or single-handedness cannot be equated with quality is just not true.’
Dr John Grenville, representing the British Medical Association, told an Inquiry seminar that there are some ‘incredibly good’ single-handed practices, with very high standards of clinical governance.
Chronic Disease Management
13.35
Chronic disease management is often cited as an area of general practice in which the group practice model is inherently preferable to the single-handed model. Nowadays, it is expected that chronic diseases, such as diabetes, heart disease and hypertension, will be managed as part of primary care, with only occasional hospital referral. The expectation is that a group practice will have a GP with a special interest in the relevant field and that s/he will run clinics, often in conjunction with a (specialist) practice nurse. According to Mr Mike Newton, Head of Performance Management, South Yorkshire Strategic Health Authority (SHA), setting up such a clinic puts significant demands on a single-handed GP, who may not have any special interest in the management of the relevant disease and whose practice nurse may be part-time. The problem could be remedied, if thought desirable, by the single-handed doctor referring patients with a chronic disease to a clinic run by an adjacent practice.
13.36
Dr Taylor said that treating patients at clinics held for the monitoring of specific conditions does not fit comfortably with the ‘holistic’ ethos of the small practice. He described this as ‘providing care for patients who have diseases, rather than care for the diseases that people have’. He also gave an illustration of the type of case in which chronic disease management might be better in a single-handed practice. He said that, when treating a patient with rheumatoid arthritis, it is very useful for the doctor to be familiar with the family dynamics. If s/he is, it becomes easier to treat the patient in a way that enables him/her to cope with the situation, rather than just treating the symptoms of his/her disease. A single-handed GP is more likely to have the relevant knowledge, according to Dr Taylor, and is also less likely to make an unnecessary hospital referral, because s/he will be confident in his/her knowledge that the family dynamics will allow the patient to be treated at home. I envisage that the proponents of the clinic system would say that the doctor running the clinic would gain the relevant knowledge within a short time of starting to see the patient.
13.37
Other witnesses supported Dr Taylor’s views about holistic care. Dr Whyte said that the type of practice advocated by Dr Taylor is widely regarded as very desirable, if not optimal. The point is also made that specialisation for GPs should not be taken too far. In primary care, where the GP has to be able to deal with a wide range of conditions and presentations and where s/he is effectively the gatekeeper for the secondary care system, the skills of the generalist must be maintained. It is clear that both sides in this debate are able to make valid points in support of their respective contentions.
Patient Preference and Continuity of Care
13.38
There is a considerable body of evidence to suggest that patients like single-handed or small practices. In a 1995 study
, patients were reported to prefer smaller practices, practices with personal list systems and non-training practices. Another more recent study confirmed this preference; smaller practices were regarded as being more accessible and achieved higher levels of patient satisfaction
. There is other evidence suggesting that continuity of care leads to high levels of patient satisfaction. The Audit Commission Report of 2000, entitled ‘A focus on general practice in England’, confirms that continuity of care tends to be better in small practices and is valued by patients. The PCT responses to the Inquiry’s questionnaire also suggest that patients like single-handed GPs. According to Mr Newton, they are especially popular with the elderly.
13.39
There was anecdotal evidence from Mr Newton that single-handed GPs tend to attract a greater number of complaints than do their colleagues. Neither SPA, the GMC nor any of the medical defence organisations was able to provide statistical evidence on the point. In 1996, the Medical Defence Union (MDU) published a pamphlet on complaints that suggested that single-handed GPs attracted a smaller relative proportion of complaints than their colleagues in group practice. However, the MDU has explained that the work on which that suggestion was based was not valid statistically because it took into account only complaints against those GPs whom the MDU knew to be single-handed (which was not all).
13.40
It is almost axiomatic that it is easier to achieve continuity of care in a practice where each patient is assigned to a particular doctor. The smaller the practice, the fewer the number of doctors who are likely to see the patient. Dr Taylor describes continuity of care as ‘an important measurable component of holism’. He suggested that, according to evidence from US studies, continuity of care is associated with a reduced number of hospital referrals. That may or may not be a good sign.
13.41
According to Dr Taylor, continuity of care leads to increased levels of trust and reduced levels of patient anxiety. These factors enable the patient, who regularly sees a familiar face that s/he can trust, to take an active and informed interest in his/her own treatment. I can see how this can lead to improved patient care, provided that the trust in the doctor is not misplaced. I accept that continuity of care can, and often does, offer real benefits in terms of quality of care and also gives rise to high levels of patient satisfaction.
13.42
However, it seems to me that there are some real disadvantages stemming from a continuous one-to-one doctor/patient relationship. First, the patient may come to place unwarranted trust and confidence in the doctor. Shipman illustrates the point. He had a one-to-one relationship with his patients. He offered them a high level of continuity of care. There was never any difficulty in getting an appointment to see him or in arranging a home visit. Only on rare occasions was there a locum in his place. He was greatly admired and respected - even loved - by his patients. As a result, he enjoyed the absolute trust of many of his patients (and of their families) and so the threshold at which patients or families might have questioned his actions or advice (already high in the doctor/patient relationship) was even higher than usual. He was able to perpetrate a colossal abuse of trust without arousing any suspicion. Of course, I accept that Shipman was a most unusual case, but over-confidence in a doctor may easily result in an inability to question his/her actions and opinions when they ought in fact to be questioned.
13.43
Second, there is a quite different type of problem that may be associated with continuity of care. This is the danger of overlooking a disease of insidious onset, where the doctor sees the patient regularly and fails to notice and take heed of gradually developing signs. Third, patients who repeatedly see the same doctor and no other have no experience against which to compare their consultations. This problem is illustrated by the experiences of the patients of Clifford Ayling, who in many cases did not know whether the intimate examinations that they underwent were ‘normal’. Ayling was a single-handed GP who was convicted in December 2000 of 12 counts of indecent assault, relating to ten female patients, and was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment. Fourth, patients do not have any ‘yardstick’ by which to measure the competence of their GP, if they do not see how their health and illnesses are managed by other doctors.
Isolation
13.44
When discussing the advantages and disadvantages of single-handed practice, many witnesses and contributors to the Inquiry seminars suggested that single-handed practitioners tended to be ‘isolated’. This term connotes a lack of involvement with one’s peers and a failure to keep up to date with current practice. According to Dr Taylor, there is no evidence to suggest that single-handed practitioners are any more isolated than their colleagues. Dr William Reith, a GP principal in Aberdeen and former Chairman of the Scottish Council of the RCGP, told the Inquiry that there are many doctors who work in larger practices who are professionally isolated and feel unable to discuss matters with colleagues. I accept what both say but I would have thought that common sense would indicate that the dangers of isolation were greater in single-handed than in group practice. Moreover, if a doctor in a group practice becomes ‘isolated’ in this way, the problem is more likely to be observed by colleagues.
13.45
Dr Roger Freedman, medical adviser to the Tameside Family Health Services Authority from November 1991 until August 1993, was later involved in the work of the Manchester Performance Panel, which was established in the late 1990s to assess and, if appropriate, remedy the performance of doctors about whom concern was expressed. In the first two years of its operation, the Panel considered the performance of 14 GP principals and one locum. Three of the principals were single-handed GPs and none was in a partnership of more than three. Dr Freedman confirmed that there are some excellent single-handed GPs but felt that problems arise where the less good are in single-handed practice; the lack of peer contact can mean that they are unaware that their clinical and managerial standards are slipping. The problem, he suggested, is lack of insight.
13.46
I observe that Shipman did not show any sign of professional isolation. He became involved in organisations outside the practice. While at the Donneybrook practice, he was an area surgeon for the local St John Ambulance, secretary of the Tameside and Glossop Local Medical Committee and a member of the Tameside FPC. When working at Market Street, he regularly attended professional development events, was active in local medical politics and was an enthusiastic member, latterly treasurer, of the West Pennine SPA. Shipman was also known to be keen on introducing new ideas to the Donneybrook practice. The Market Street practice was regarded by the WPHA as being innovative and advanced. At Market Street, Shipman and his staff performed regular medical audits, which impressed the WPHA Primary Care Clinical Audit Group (WPPCCAG). The following comment was made in January 1998 after a practice audit visit by a member of the WPPCCAG:
‘Great to see a single-handed enthusiastic GP with a rolling programme of audit. Practice nurse also very enthusiastic and takes part in audit. We think it would be very useful for you to have an audit assistant and hope you follow this up. Keep up the good work.’
This comment is indicative of the way in which his participation was regarded.
13.47
, I described the ways in which PCTs seek to carry out their duty of clinical governance of GPs. Some of these methods involve the collection and/or scrutiny of data relating to the doctor’s practice. With a group practice, much of the data collected relates to the practice as a whole and cannot be attributed to the performance of any single doctor. Examples are data relating to immunisation and cervical cytology. Some kinds of data, for example prescribing data, are supposed to relate to an individual doctor but, because doctors use each others’ prescription pads, the data becomes ‘blurred’ and does not provide a clear picture of an individual doctor’s practice or performance. When data is supplied by a single-handed GP, it relates only to that doctor and the picture provided to the PCT is clearer than that available for a group practice.
13.48
Some clinical governance activities are undertaken within group practices. For example, it is common practice for the partners in a group practice to discuss prescribing data. Discussion between the doctors may reveal anomalous practice by one member of the group that might well not be picked up by PCT monitoring. A single practitioner may choose to scrutinise his/her own prescribing data; many GPs now regard ‘self-audit’ as good practice. However, if a single-handed practitioner chooses not to examine his/her personal data, there is no one to ensure that it is done. If a single-handed GP chooses to ignore any problems that the data might reveal, there is no one to insist that the problems be dealt with.
13.49
Other forms of clinical governance can operate effectively only in a group. An example is significant event review or audit, a process whereby a group of doctors and other healthcare professionals discuss the care that was provided shortly before a patient’s death or some other event - usually (although not always) an adverse event. The objective is to analyse the care provided with a view to learning lessons either from the mistakes made or from the success achieved. In a single-handed practice, there is often no one with whom the doctor can have a challenging discussion. The practice nurse might well feel unable to criticise the doctor’s treatment of a patient; a peer view is necessary. Significant event review was not commonly undertaken when Shipman was in practice. If it had been, and if he had worked in a group practice, this form of review might have been effective in detecting Shipman’s unlawful killing. If Shipman had had professional colleagues who were entitled to scrutinise his account of a patient’s death and the management decisions he had taken, I think it would have provided a real deterrent to him and a greatly improved prospect of detection of his misconduct if it had continued.
13.50
Other forms of audit are more effective in a group setting than within single-handed practice. Although, for over ten years, it has been official Government policy to encourage audit within general practice and funding has been provided to reward it, audit activity is essentially private to the practice to which it relates. Thus, the results of an audit of patient deaths in a particular period would remain confidential to the practice, even if those results were to reveal serious deficiencies of care. In 1998, Shipman claimed to have carried out an audit of deaths occurring in his practice in the first three months of the year. In fact he had done no such thing. In the context of a group practice, the fact that an audit is carried out will be known to all partners and the results will be available to all. If they give rise to concern, there is a far greater prospect that action will be taken to remedy the problem than if the problem is known only to the single-handed doctor. Although such audits may not be widely practised, there is published evidence that they are or can be of value.
Individual Responsibility and Accountability
13.51
Dr Taylor suggested that, in single-handed practice, there is a much greater degree of accountability and responsibility for patient care. The doctor is individually responsible for the care of every patient and cannot pass on responsibility to anyone else. Thus, in his view, a doctor is more likely to address and resolve a problem of patient care than to sit back, in the hope or expectation that more positive action will be taken by a colleague at some later date. I can see the force of that argument. I can also see how a doctor who shares the responsibility for a patient’s care with other doctors might be reluctant to recommend treatment that has not been initiated by any of his/her colleagues when the patient has presented in the past with the same symptoms. There may be a natural tendency to ‘go along with’ the majority view, even though that course may not be correct.
13.52
The exclusive responsibility described by Dr Taylor also carries with it the disadvantage that the doctor’s treatment will never come under the type of informal discussion and peer review that takes place every day in practices where patient care is shared.
Management and Administration
13.53
I have already mentioned that one of the reasons given for the declining numbers of applicants for single-handed posts is the preference of young doctors for the environment of a group practice. Professor Baker suggested that economies of scale and the sharing of the clinical workload make group practice attractive to doctors. PCT respondents to the Inquiry questionnaire raised concerns about poor working infrastructure, premises and recruitment arrangements in single-handed practices.
13.54
Studies have also shown that single-handed practices tend to be less well developed than group practices and may be slower to install modern facilities. This would not necessarily mean that they provided a lower standard of care. However, one study showed that single-handed practices had greater difficulties than group practices in, for example, the recruitment and retention of a practice nurse. Other areas of concern were computerisation and general management
. Mr Newton’s personal experience confirmed the existence of this type of problem in single-handed practices. Responses to the survey of PCTs suggested that single-handed practitioners encountered greater difficulties in providing out of hours cover although this should cease to be a problem after January 2005 when PCTs assume responsibility for the provision of out of hours care. Mr Newton said that managing a practice single-handed and trying to keep abreast of developments in clinical treatment imposed a heavy burden on GPs, especially as they approached retirement age.
Complaints
13.55
, I described the system of handling complaints against GPs that has been in operation since 1996. I mentioned the particular difficulties experienced by patients who, at present, are obliged to lodge their complaint directly with the GP practice concerned. The patient feels embarrassed and will often decide not to complain rather than confront the doctor or the practice staff. The problem is exacerbated if the complaint is about a single-handed practitioner. The September 1999 report by the Public Law Project, entitled ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, to which I referred in
, mentioned the desirability of having a ‘buffer’ between the person complaining and the person complained about. This buffer is absent in the single-handed practice, where the staff are likely to feel a strong sense of loyalty to their employer. The need for a patient to be able to take a complaint to a person or body unconnected with the practice is clear, in my view, throughout general practice but is that much greater when the complaint is about a single-handed GP.
Reporting Concerns and Staff Complaints
13.56
I have also explained, in
, that it is difficult in any general practice for a member of staff to raise a concern about the conduct, health or performance of a GP in the practice. Raising a serious concern may well in effect signal the end of the relationship. Those problems are accentuated in small and single-handed practices.
Roland M et al (2001) ‘Identifying predictors of high quality care in English general practice: observational study’, BMJ, Vol 323: p 784.
Majeed A et al (2003) ‘Association between practice size and quality of care of patients with ischaemic heart disease: cross sectional study’, BMJ, Vol 326: p 371.
Baker R and Streatfield J (1995) ‘What type of general practice do patients prefer? Exploration of practice characteristics influencing patient satisfaction’, British Journal of General Practice, Vol 45: p 654.
Roland et al. ‘Identifying predictors of high quality care in English general practice: observational study’, BMJ 2001; 323:784.
Leese B and Bosanquet N (1995) ‘Change in general practice and its effects on service provision in areas with different socio-economic characteristics’, BMJ, Vol 311: pp 546-550.

--- Mitigating the Problems of Single-Handed Practice ---
13.57
It will be clear from the above that the main problems associated with single-handed practice are the absence of peer review, the risk of clinical isolation and the danger of abuse by the doctor of the trust implicit in the continuity of care. I shall now examine the mechanisms that may be used to alleviate these problems.
Clinical Governance and Clinical Audit
13.58
According to the RCGP, with the advent of PCTs, the problems of isolation in general practice are being reduced. PCTs are smaller, more local organisations than their predecessor health authorities (HAs). They are closer to the practices for which they have a responsibility. Greater involvement with the PCT has resulted in more frequent meetings with colleagues and more collaboration at PCT level. The extent to which this occurs no doubt varies from place to place. Mechanisms are in place to require single-handed GPs to participate in clinical governance and appraisal. I am of the view that appraisal and revalidation could have substantial value if they really assured continuing competence and fitness to practise. Single-handed GPs may also participate in peer support schemes. Dr Reith explained to the Inquiry how significant event review can be undertaken in the context of single-handed practice.
13.59
According to Mr Michael Warner, former Project Director, Avon, Gloucestershire and Wiltshire SHA, it became standard practice during the late 1990s in his SHA for single-handed GPs to share their results and to discuss their audits with each other. This was overseen by the Medical Audit Advisory Group.
13.60
Dr Taylor’s practice seeks to reduce any danger of isolation by an association with two other small practices in the district. The three practices have separate patient lists but they share some members of staff. The doctors operate a rota for emergency and out of hours work and have a joint database of patient records to facilitate the working of the rota. They also use these shared computerised records for the purpose of collective clinical audit and prescribing analyses. Dr Taylor said that more small practices were co-operating in this way since clinical governance and clinical audit were introduced. Many small or single-handed practices close for half a day each week to carry out significant event review.
13.61
The Inquiry was told of one ‘Small Doctors Group’ whose members met to discuss their practices. I got the impression that, although their initiative was regarded by the SHA as a positive step, their practices were very disparate and the meetings did not provide any rigorous contribution to clinical governance.
13.62
Professor Baker recognised the potential for such local initiatives to enhance clinical governance in single-handed practice. I think he was right, however, when he said that the success of such initiatives depended upon someone recognising where action was needed and being determined to lead a group of practitioners down the right path. Those who are most likely to recognise where action is needed are single-handed GPs themselves but they may have the least time available to initiate it.
13.63
At the moment, involvement in group activities such as I have described is not only voluntary, it is not even universally available. Even where it is available, the products of collaboration - such as the results of joint audit - are not verifiable. According to the RCGP, all doctors should be accountable, primarily to their patients, and, more widely, to the NHS and to the public. I agree that they should, but the fact is that at the moment they are not. At present, it is quite possible for any GP, perhaps especially the single-handed GP, to avoid participation in joint activity and/or to mislead his/her colleagues or peers. I can well imagine how Shipman would have selected a number of ‘significant events’ for review in a way that would have shown him only in the most favourable light. Under most of the collaborative arrangements I have heard about, there would be no possibility that he would be required to offer a particular death for significant event review.
13.64
In the Report of the independent investigation into how the NHS handled allegations about the conduct of Clifford Ayling concern was expressed that GPs still practise in isolated situations where there is no immediate mentoring, either formal or informal. Acknowledging that there will always be single-handed GPs, it specifically recommended that PCTs should develop support programmes for single-handed GPs, to be agreed with each single-handed practitioner and with the SHA. Such programmes should pay special attention to managing the risks of isolation associated with single-handed practice. Implementation should be monitored by the SHA and should form part of the regular Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission) review of the PCT. I would agree with this proposal and would only add that the programmes should provide a real element of mutual supervision as well as support.
13.65
Mr Greenwood told the Inquiry that PCTs in several areas promote improved management in single-handed practices by encouraging the sharing of practice staff, practice managers and nursing staff. In this way, small practices can benefit from a range of expertise and services, which they would otherwise not be able to afford. Some PCTs will also pay a ‘locum allowance’ to enable single-handed GPs to engage a replacement doctor while attending continuing professional development events. Recognising the management difficulties often experienced by single-handed or small practices, Manchester HA established a Small Practice Adviser Scheme. This involves two very experienced practice managers working with a number of small practices to provide advice and support in practice organisation. Mr Newton told the Inquiry that, in areas of social deprivation, where significant PCT input may be required, a PCT might fund the appointment of a salaried doctor and nurse to assist a single-handed GP.
13.66
The Inquiry heard evidence about steps that have been taken to accommodate the needs of single-handed GPs working in very isolated areas in Scotland (e.g. the Highlands and Islands). Historically, they were unable to obtain regular time off and encountered problems of social and professional isolation. Under the 1991 GMS Contract, an ‘associates’ allowance’ was successfully introduced in such areas to fund the employment of an ‘associate’ GP. Dr Whyte told the Inquiry that more than two thirds of rural practices have made use of such schemes, which allow the employment of associates, shared between two or three practices, so as to allow the single-handed GP time off for holidays, sickness and continuing professional development. In fact, I take the view that any arrangement whereby doctors, nurses or members of staff from outside the practice are brought in on a regular basis has the advantage of bringing a ‘fresh pair of eyes’ and of enabling comparisons with practice elsewhere to be made. It could also enable a PCT to be informed of any problems or shortcomings with the practice.
The Netherlands
13.67
Single-handed practice has been the traditional model for delivery of primary care in the Netherlands, although this is now changing. Over time, and in an
way, single-handed GPs have grouped together in ways intended to improve quality of care. The historical basis for this co-operation in so-called
‘quality circles’
or peer review groups began about 20 years ago when there was an obligation for every single-handed GP to organise his/her practice into a larger group for the provision of out of hours care. Grouping of practices developed to meet this objective and gradually the same group took on a role in continuing medical education. According to Professor Baker, clinical audit meetings are held at which attendance is compulsory. Groups of practitioners, led by trained facilitators, review their clinical performance by reference to data submitted by individual practices.

--- Conclusions ---
13.68
It seems to me that single-handed practices vary in much the same way as do group practices. Some of each are good, bad or indifferent. Certainly, group practices do not have a monopoly on high quality patient care. Small and single-handed practices have their devotees, particularly among those who seek a personal relationship with their GP and who value the continuity of care which this provides. The number of small practices may be diminishing for a variety of reasons. However, there are still a significant number of them and this is likely to be the position for the foreseeable future.
13.69
That being so, it seems to me that the policy of the DoH and of PCTs should be to focus on the resolution of the problems inherent in single-handed or small practices rather than to try to reduce the numbers of them in existence. I know that the DoH says that it has no such policy but I have the clear impression that such a policy exists in the regions, if not in Whitehall. It is typified by the attitude that single-handed practices are a problem and that the NHS would be better off without them. As I have said, the numbers are likely to decline with time in any event.
13.70
I have already described a number of the problems that are inherent in single-handed and small practices. I have also described a number of initiatives that are already being undertaken in an attempt to resolve or mitigate those problems. To my mind, the important thing now is that, for the sake of the patients registered with them, single-handed practitioners should be given more support and encouragement. In return, more should be asked of them in terms of group activity and mutual supervision. It is not for me to suggest how this should best be achieved. The current initiatives are patchy and uncoordinated. I do not suggest that there is a ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution to these problems. The needs of small practices in Cornwall may be very different from those in Central Manchester. What is needed, in my view, is a pooling of ideas, a willingness to examine the ways in which things are done in other places, such as the Netherlands, and a determination to solve the problems.
13.71
I turn to consider what significance, if any, attaches to the fact that Shipman was always technically a single-handed practitioner and never worked in a group practice with a shared patient list. Did this make it easier for him to escape detection? Did he feel more confident that his crimes would go undetected? First, I observe that Shipman killed at least 71 patients when he was at the Donneybrook practice and that his colleagues at the practice were, through no fault of theirs, unaware of what was going on. This confirms my belief that a devious and aberrant doctor is not significantly more likely to be deterred or detected just because s/he is in partnership and/or working under the same roof with other doctors. I suspect that it was Shipman’s general character rather a feeling of likely detection if he were to remain that caused him to move from the Donneybrook practice. Second, I believe that if the Donneybrook practice had been a true group practice with shared lists, Shipman probably would have felt less confident that he would escape detection. If his fellow doctors had had some involvement in the treatment of those who were to become his victims, he would have felt less confident in making up false medical histories and they might have become suspicious if unusual patterns had developed. Much depends on what would have been the actual arrangements and the extent to which there would have been true mutual supervision or monitoring. Of course, that leaves open the question whether, if that had been the situation, Shipman would ever have applied for the position or remained there for so long - he might well not have done.
13.72
In my view, the fact that Shipman had his own patient list, and was free from the informal supervision and monitoring that accompanies the sharing of patient lists, did mean that he was less likely to be deterred or detected. However, the availability of other more formal methods of monitoring, through clinical governance, could have had a similar effect. If resources and ingenuity were to be applied to the problem, clinical governance methods of monitoring could be applied to single-handed and small practices, as well as to larger group practices. I do not think that the fact that Shipman was a single-handed practitioner should be used as a reason for preventing GPs from practising alone.

--- CHAPTER FOURTEEN - The Monitoring of Mortality Rates among the Patients of General Practitioners ---
The Analysis of Mortality Data after Shipman's Arrest
The Work of Dr Paul Aylin and His Team
Recent Work on Analysing and Investigating Mortality Rates
Future Investigations
Potential Problems with Monitoring
Other Possible Statistical Approaches
The Concerns of the Profession
The Potential Advantages of a Monitoring System


========================================================================
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - The Monitoring of Mortality Rates among the Patients of General Practitioners
========================================================================

--- The Analysis of Mortality Data before Shipman's Arrest ---
In England and Wales Generally
14.4
The Inquiry team wanted to know what steps, if any, had been taken by PCOs in the past to monitor mortality rates among the patients of GPs in their areas. Accordingly, in August 2002, the Inquiry distributed a questionnaire to all strategic health authorities (SHAs) in England and health authorities (HAs) in Wales, requesting information about any monitoring of mortality rates which had been undertaken by the PCOs in their areas in the past, or was being undertaken currently. The responses to this questionnaire revealed that, before Shipman’s arrest in 1998, there had been very few attempts by PCOs to collect and analyse GP patient mortality data of any kind. Those few attempts that had been made had been directed, not to detecting abnormal mortality rates, but to examining deaths from specific diseases or conditions or, in one case, to providing data to GPs about the deaths of their patients in order to enable them to carry out significant event reviews of those deaths. The Inquiry was told that, in some PCO areas, attempts to analyse mortality data had met with little success, largely because of problems with data linkage.
In the West Pennine Area
14.5
Neither the West Pennine Health Authority (WPHA) nor its predecessors, the Tameside Family Practitioner Committee and the Tameside Family Health Services Authority (FHSA), had undertaken any monitoring of the mortality rates among the patients of GPs on their list prior to Shipman’s arrest. As I have explained, that was entirely typical of the vast majority of PCOs in England and Wales at that time. There can be no criticism of the WPHA for the fact that it did not undertake any monitoring of this kind.
The Reasons Why Monitoring Was Not Undertaken
14.6
There are a number of reasons why PCOs did not monitor GP patient mortality rates. First, as I have said, there was no requirement for them to do so. Nor were they advised that monitoring of this kind might be of value. It seems likely that most PCOs never even considered the possibility of doing so. It is doubtful that it would have occurred to anyone before Shipman’s activities came to light that a GP might be guilty of criminality or neglect on such a scale that it would result in an observable excess mortality rate for patients of his/her practice. As I have said, those PCOs which attempted to collect and analyse mortality data did so for purposes other than monitoring the numbers of deaths.
14.7
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) holds mortality data collected from death certificates. That data includes details such as cause and place of death, together (except in the case of deaths certified by a coroner) with the name of the doctor who certified the cause of death. The ONS mortality data does not include the name of the GP or GP practice with whom the deceased person was registered.
14.8
Individual PCOs hold lists of patients registered with GPs and GP practices in their areas. In order to collect data about the deaths of patients registered with an individual GP or GP practice, it is necessary, under the present system, to link the data held by the ONS with data stored in the PCO systems.
14.9
I have mentioned that there were problems with data linkage. These problems arose from the absence of any national system linking the fact or details of a person’s death to the GP practice with which that person had been registered. It was possible for a PCO to make the link in an individual case if it wished to do so, by matching ONS mortality data with its own patient list data. However, the task of matching the data from these different sources was laborious and time-consuming. Also, its success depended on the accuracy of the information contained in the PCO system. The Inquiry was told by Dr Peter Goldblatt, Chief Medical Statistician, ONS, that, even now, the accuracy of the data on PCO systems varies widely from area to area. There is a problem in some areas with inflation of lists, i.e. the inclusion on GP patient lists of the names of people who are no longer patients of the GP practice on whose list their name appears. The Inquiry was told that, in some urban areas with a mobile population, there is list inflation by as much as 15% to 20%. Also, the data on a PCO system includes only information relating to patients living within that area. It does not include information about patients who live outside the area but are registered with a GP in the area. Thus, the information on a PCO’s system about the patient lists of GPs practising near to the area boundaries of the PCO tends to be incomplete.
14.10
As I have said, the problems with data linkage caused difficulties in the past for some PCOs which attempted to collect or analyse mortality data for GPs in their areas. It no doubt had the effect of deterring others from making the attempt at all. Until 1998, PCOs confined themselves in general to conducting analyses which examined deaths from specific causes among resident populations at electoral ward level. The data for such analyses was readily available and no complex linkage was required. The WPHA carried out this type of analysis with the aim of identifying any socio-economic, environmental or other factors that might be affecting death rates.

--- The Analysis of Mortality Data after Shipman's Arrest ---
By the West Pennine Health Authority
14.11
After Shipman’s arrest and after it became clear that he might have killed a large number of his patients, the WPHA conducted various analyses of the mortality rates among his patients. The object of these analyses was, first, to discover the likely extent of his criminality and, second, to ascertain whether it would have been evident that Shipman’s mortality rates were excessive if those rates had been monitored during the period of his criminality. The task of linking the data used in these analyses was difficult and time-consuming.
14.12
The analyses showed that, in several years, Shipman had a statistically significant excess number of deaths. However, when the analyses were focussed on the deaths of patients which had occurred at the patient’s home or on the deaths among his elderly female patients, there was a statistically significant excess of deaths among these groups of patients in most years from 1992 to 1998.
14.13
In April 1999, the WPHA submitted to the DoH a report on the policy implications for the NHS arising from what was then known about Shipman’s activities. In that report, the WPHA recommended that routine monitoring of GP patient mortality rates should be introduced and that the value of such monitoring should be tested. The report acknowledged that there might be difficulties in interpreting apparent excesses in the mortality rates of the patients of individual GPs. However, it suggested that such excesses might give an indication that more in-depth investigation was warranted in the case of a particular GP. The monitoring of mortality rates might, it was suggested, form part of
‘the overall performance assessment framework’
By Other Primary Care Organisations
14.14
Shipman’s arrest and conviction caused a number of other PCOs to consider conducting some form of analysis of mortality rates among patients of the GPs in their areas. Some PCOs carried out a ‘one-off’ exercise. Others were more ambitious and attempted to develop systems of monitoring mortality rates on an ongoing basis. A few developed systems for gathering and analysing mortality data which was then fed back to GPs, as part of a collection of performance indicators. Following receipt of the responses to its original questionnaire, the Inquiry sought and obtained further information from some PCOs which had undertaken analysis of mortality statistics over the last few years. Their accounts of their experiences were very illuminating and I shall refer to some of them later in this Chapter.
By Professor Richard Baker
14.15
Following Shipman’s convictions for murder in January 2000, the Chief Medical Officer, Professor (now Sir) Liam Donaldson, commissioned a clinical audit of Shipman’s practice. The audit was carried out by Professor Richard Baker, Director, Clinical Governance Research and Development Unit, University of Leicester. Professor Baker first analysed the pattern of deaths in respect of which Shipman had issued a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). As I explained in my First Report, a GP will generally be in a position to issue a MCCD only when a patient has died in the community (i.e. at home or in a care home) and where the death does not have to be reported to a coroner. If a patient dies in hospital, the MCCD will usually be issued by a hospital doctor. The process of issuing a MCCD is often termed ‘certifying the death’.
14.16
Professor Baker carried out two analyses. His first analysis involved comparing the number and various features of the MCCDs issued annually by Shipman with those of the MCCDs issued annually by two control groups of other GPs who had been in practice at the same time and in the same localities (i.e. Todmorden and Hyde) as Shipman, and whose patients had similar socio-economic characteristics.
14.17
Professor Baker’s second analysis compared the annual number of deaths which had occurred among persons who had been patients of Shipman from 1987 onwards (not just those patients whose deaths Shipman had certified) with the annual number of deaths that could have been expected to have occurred among that patient population. Shipman’s patients were identified by means of the patient list data held by the WPHA. The ONS performed the necessary linkage of that data with information about deaths. The number of expected deaths was calculated by reference to figures which were provided by the ONS and which related to deaths among the population of the local (Tameside) district and of a group of districts sharing population and socio-economic characteristics similar to those of Tameside, and also by reference to deaths among the general population of England and Wales.
14.18
Professor Baker’s analyses indicated that, while practising in Todmorden and Hyde, Shipman had issued an ‘excess’ total number of 236 MCCDs relating to deaths occurring at the patient’s home or on his practice premises. This figure was very similar to the number of deaths that I found had been caused by Shipman during his time in Todmorden and Hyde.
14.19
At the conclusion of the report on the results of his clinical audit, Professor Baker made a number of recommendations. Among these was a recommendation that systems for the monitoring of GPs should be reviewed and extended to include routine monitoring of mortality rates among their patients. He pointed out that Shipman’s case had demonstrated that, in the absence of the monitoring of mortality rates, it was possible for a GP with a sustained excess rate of mortality among his/her patients to go undetected for many years. However, Professor Baker acknowledged that there were a number of difficulties with the monitoring of mortality rates. The first was their inherent variability. The second was the fact that, under normal circumstances, many of a GP’s patients will die at a time when they are not under his/her management. The most common example of this is when a patient dies in hospital. Professor Baker suggested that his clinical audit had highlighted some factors that might improve the ability of monitoring systems to detect abnormal mortality rates or criminal activity. He also suggested that the monitoring of the number of deaths certified by GPs - rather than the mortality rates among their registered patients - would be more indicative of the GP’s clinical activities. He also referred to the potential value of analysing the excess cumulative mortality rate of GPs so that all excess deaths of a GP throughout his/her career would be assessed, not just those occurring in individual years.
14.20
Professor Baker went on to point out that the collection of data resulting from the monitoring of mortality rates would not of itself be sufficient. There would have to be a regular review of the findings. He said that one argument against the monitoring of mortality rates was that it would require too great an investment of time and other resources and that GPs were already over-stretched. It might, he said, also be contended that such monitoring was unnecessary, since cases such as Shipman’s were exceptionally rare. It might also be said that individuals determined on murder would adopt strategies to avoid detection. Nevertheless, he believed that steps should be taken to introduce a system of monitoring mortality rates.
The Response of the Department of Health
14.21
February 2000, immediately following Shipman’s conviction, the then Secretary of State for Health, the Rt Hon Alan Milburn MP, made a statement to the House of Commons, in which he announced that the DoH was working with the ONS
‘to find new and better ways of monitoring deaths of GPs’ patients’
. Since then, the DoH has been considering the feasibility and practicability of collecting and using mortality data to monitor deaths of patients at GP or GP practice level. I shall refer to the outcome of the work undertaken by the DoH later in this Chapter.

--- The Inquiry's Approach ---
14.22
It was evident to me from an early stage that the Inquiry had to examine the possibility of setting up a system for the routine monitoring of mortality rates among the patients of GPs. I wanted to discover whether, using existing data sources, it would be possible to provide complete and accurate information on which such monitoring could be based. I also wanted to find out whether such monitoring would be capable of identifying abnormalities in mortality rates and, if so, at what level (i.e. GP, GP practice or primary care trust (PCT) level) it would be capable of doing so. If routine monitoring was likely to be capable of detecting abnormalities at any level, I wanted to know who would be best placed to organise such monitoring and by what method it could best be done. In order to assist me in answering these questions, it was clear that the Inquiry needed the services of an expert.
The Commissioning of Work from Dr Paul Aylin and His Team
14.23
The Inquiry team commissioned Dr Paul Aylin, Clinical Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, to carry out the necessary work and to report. Dr Aylin was a consultant to the Public Inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary (the Bristol Royal Infirmary Inquiry) and had previously been employed by the ONS as a medical statistician. He assembled a team, all from Imperial College, consisting of Dr Nicky Best (Senior Lecturer in Statistics), Dr Alex Bottle (Researcher) and Dr Clare Marshall (Lecturer in Statistics). Dr Aylin and his team were asked to determine:
if there was any benefit in monitoring mortality data at local level
at what level (i.e. GP, GP practice or PCO) such monitoring should be conducted
how the monitoring should be done
what method of analysis would be appropriate
at what point there should be concern about the patient mortality rate of the unit (i.e. GP, GP practice or PCO) being monitored
who should do the monitoring.
14.24
Dr Aylin and his team prepared a report and, in July 2003, gave a presentation of their work to the Inquiry. An account of their work has subsequently been published in The Lancet
and is at
Appendix E
The Inquiry’s Seminar
14.25
The work of Dr Aylin and his team, together with wider issues relating to the monitoring of GP patient mortality rates, was discussed at a two-day seminar held by the Inquiry in October 2003. Participating in that seminar were a number of experts in the field. As well as Dr Aylin and his team, there were Dr John Fox (Director of Statistics, DoH), Dr David Spiegelhalter (Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit), Dr Mohammed A Mohammed (Senior Research Fellow, Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, University of Birmingham), Dr Christopher Roberts (Senior Lecturer in Medical Statistics, School of Epidemiology and Health Sciences, University of Manchester) and Dr Goldblatt. In addition, the seminar was attended by Professor Baker, Dr Maureen Baker (representing the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP)), Dr John Grenville (representing the British Medical Association (BMA)) and Professor Gwyn Bevan (then Acting Head of Information, Commission for Health Improvement (CHI) and a member of the transition team for the new Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission)). In addition, the Inquiry invited to the seminar representatives from a number of PCOs who had experience of carrying out work involving the analysis of mortality rates among the patients of GPs or GP practices. A full list of seminar participants is at
Appendix F
14.26
Participants in the seminar submitted written material in advance and expanded on that material during the course of discussions at the seminar. The discussions were led by Leading Counsel to the Inquiry. The seminar produced a very interesting discussion about the benefits that might accrue from the monitoring of mortality data, and about the problems that might be associated both with the monitoring process and with the investigation that must necessarily follow the detection of any apparent abnormality. The discussion concluded, as will become clear, with an encouraging degree of consensus on the way forward.
14.27
I am most grateful to Dr Aylin and his colleagues for the work that they have done for the Inquiry. It is innovative and, as I had hoped, it has made a real contribution to the debate about the feasibility and the value of setting up a system for the routine monitoring of mortality rates among the patients of GPs. The work of Dr Aylin and his team appears to have been well received by their peers and was the subject of much praise at the seminar.
Aylin P, Best N, Bottle A, Marshall C (2003) ‘Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care’, The Lancet, Vol 362: pp 485-491.

--- The Possible Framework for a Monitoring System ---
The Need for Analysis to Be Performed by a Central Unit
14.69
There was agreement at the seminar that the collection and linkage of data should be performed centrally. Dr Aylin said that the quality of the data contained on the current NHS system varied from area to area and there were still difficulties with patients who lived in one area but were registered with a GP practice in another area. The data would be more accurate if it were collected countrywide. Dr Goldblatt, of the ONS, agreed that there was a ‘huge variability’ in the quality of the patient list data available for different parts of the country. If the quality of mortality data was to be comparable in all areas, there must be a national system for linking data and for feeding it back to those responsible for clinical governance locally, i.e. the PCTs. As I have said, the DoH plans that the database should be held by the NHS Information Authority.
14.70
Dr Aylin believed that analysis of the data could be undertaken efficiently and relatively cheaply by a small national unit. He suggested that many PCTs would not have the expertise necessary to carry out this task. The results of the analysis at the central unit could be fed back to PCTs, which would in turn pass on the results to individual GP practices. Dr Spiegelhalter agreed and said that central analysis of mortality data and dissemination of the results would be valuable in terms of efficiency and would also enable guidance to be given on the interpretation of the results of the analysis. Dr Fox told the Inquiry that the DoH had no plans to undertake any analysis of mortality data itself. At the time of the seminar, it was envisaged that this would be done by the new Healthcare Commission.
The Importance of Local Knowledge
14.71
Dr Aylin and Professor Baker both emphasised that PCTs must examine the results of the central analysis themselves and monitor them. It would not be sufficient for them merely to pass the results back to GP practices. Of course, the PCTs would know that a high mortality rate does not necessarily indicate that a doctor is failing in some way. Still less is it indicative of criminal activity. In most cases, the high rate will be explained by some characteristic of the doctor’s practice or of his/her patient population. An obvious example would be a doctor who cared for patients in a local hospice or in one or more local care homes. The death rates among such patients might well account for a higher death rate among patients of the GP than would be expected in a practice where patients did not have these characteristics. This type of information specific to a GP practice is not likely to be available outside the immediate locality and may become known to a PCT only after discussions with the GP or GP practice concerned.
14.72
Professor Baker said that he expected that the first two or three years after the introduction of a monitoring system would be spent accumulating a lot of additional knowledge about practices and their patient populations. This would be a very important phase. Once the knowledge had been acquired, monitoring would move into a rather different phase of long-term observation. Professor Baker said that he hoped the point would be reached where all practices - not just those which had been flagged up as being statistically abnormal in some way - would be able to explain their mortality rate by reference to their patient populations.
The Part to Be Played by the Healthcare Commission
14.73
At the Inquiry’s seminar, Professor Bevan and Dr Spiegelhalter spoke about the part which it was envisaged the Healthcare Commission might play in any future system of monitoring the mortality rates among GP patients. As I have explained, Professor Bevan was a member of the transition team which was working on the development of the future arrangements for the Healthcare Commission. Dr Spiegelhalter was an expert adviser to the Performance Assessment Subcommittee of the CHI; the CHI formerly carried out many of the functions which are now to be performed by the Healthcare Commission. Professor Bevan said that it was expected that monitoring and surveillance of mortality rates, as well as of other indicators, would be carried out at a central analytical unit run by the Healthcare Commission. The results of the monitoring would be shared with PCTs and GP practices. Professor Bevan described how it was expected that the ‘beating heart’ of the Healthcare Commission would be a system of local offices. It was expected that these local offices would cover the areas of the SHAs. Professor Bevan said that discussions at the CHI had suggested that one of the key roles of the local Healthcare Commission offices would be to apply their local knowledge to the questions thrown up by the central analysis of data.
14.74
If the central analytical unit identified a statistical abnormality (whether in relation to mortality rates or any other indicator), it would inform the local Healthcare Commission office and the relevant PCT. The local office would examine any data (including clinical governance data) it held about the relevant GP or GP practice. The PCT would do the same. The findings would be shared. In the rare cases where no plausible explanation was found for the abnormality, the Healthcare Commission would conduct a targeted investigation. He suggested that its response would probably be tailored according to its assessment of the capacity of the individual PCT to carry out its own investigations. Dr Spiegelhalter thought that the usual pattern was likely to be that the routine monitoring of various indicators would result in a number of problem areas affecting a GP or GP practice arising simultaneously, giving rise to the need for investigation. However, it was possible that a single indicator (such as mortality rates) would exhibit striking variation and would of itself require investigation.
14.75
Dr Fox told the Inquiry that the description given by Professor Bevan and Dr Spiegelhalter was in accordance with the DoH’s understanding of the likely arrangements for the Healthcare Commission.
14.76
Professor Bevan stressed that the primary function of the Healthcare Commission would be quality improvement. However if, in the course of its monitoring, the Commission were to find that something was seriously wrong, plainly it would have to act. He thought that the combination of monitoring and surveillance (see
paragraph 14.34
) would be ‘quite a tricky balance to strike’. Dr Spiegelhalter hoped that the balance could be struck. He envisaged the DoH rapidly making mortality data available. The Healthcare Commission would then monitor the data, using a highly organised surveillance procedure. The results of that procedure would then be presented in a simple and informative way to PCTs and GP practices.
14.77
This was the position at the time of the Inquiry’s seminars, in January 2004. In July 2004, the Inquiry wrote to the Healthcare Commission, asking for updated information about the role it was to play in the monitoring of GP patient mortality rates. In October 2004, the Healthcare Commission responded by saying the monitoring of the mortality rates was to
‘be available’
through the DoH’s National Programme for Information Technology, while routine assessment of individual GP rates would be the responsibility of the PCTs. It seems, therefore, that it is not at present intended that the Healthcare Commission should house the central analytical unit envisaged by Professor Bevan and Dr Spiegelhalter at the time of the seminars. It is not clear to me whether it is envisaged that the DoH would undertake the central analysis of mortality data or whether its function would, as Dr Fox suggested be confined to the provision of linked mortality data. Nor is it clear whether the Healthcare Commission is to have the system of local offices described by Professor Bevan. In a recent letter to the Inquiry, the Healthcare Commission referred to its intention to
‘manage relationships at local level’
and to
‘engage with local stakeholders’
. It also referred to an intention to test a variety of ways of
‘achieving the objectives for local presence’
. There was no mention of establishing local offices. Thus, there is uncertainty about which body would carry out any necessary investigation consequent upon the monitoring of mortality rates.
14.78
It is disappointing that the arrangements for the monitoring and analysis of mortality data that were envisaged at the time of the Inquiry seminar have not progressed. Indeed there is now uncertainty as to whether this function is to be carried out at all and, if so, by whom. It is also unclear who might be responsible for the investigation of the cause and significance of any data that lies outside the norm.

--- Recent Work on Analysing and Investigating Mortality Rates ---
The Pilot Project Undertaken by the Northern Ireland Eastern Health and Social Services Board
14.79
The Inquiry requested and received information about one pilot project that was being undertaken in Northern Ireland to develop a system for monitoring general practice mortality rates. The pilot project, which was being undertaken by a team from the Eastern Health and Social Services Board (the Eastern HSS Board), was conducted in association with the Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, University of Birmingham. At the Inquiry’s seminar, Dr Kathryn Booth, Chair of the Northern Ireland GP Practice Mortality Regional Group, and Dr Mohammed, who assisted with the pilot project, gave further details of the project.
14.80
The Northern Ireland Central Service Agency established a database and provided each of the four Northern Ireland HSS Boards with mortality data for the GP practices in their area. Each HSS Board carried out its own pilot project. As I have said, the Inquiry heard about that conducted by the Eastern HSS Board.
14.81
The Eastern HSS Board team used Shewhart control charts to identify GP practices with adjusted mortality rates which were in excess of the upper control limit or below the lower control limit of the charts and were therefore exhibiting special cause variation. A longitudinal control chart was used to compare the mortality rate of four GP practices with their past mortality rates and with Northern Ireland average mortality rates over a period of eight years. Dr Mohammed explained that this latter technique avoided problems with case mix factors and showed changes in the pattern of mortality within an individual practice over time.
14.82
Dr Mohammed explained that, before the Eastern HSS Board pilot project started, there was great concern within the medical profession about the ultimate aim of the work. There was also concern about the possible publication of mortality data and about the way in which that data would be interpreted by patients and by the public. Dr Booth observed that, in particular, there was a fear that the data would be presented to the public in the form of rankings. She said that another fear was that, if a practice was shown to be an outlier, members of the practice might not be allowed to contribute to any investigation into why its mortality rates fell ‘outside the tramlines’ and might have their names ‘blackened’ among their peers or with the public without having an opportunity to explain the apparent abnormality. The Eastern HSS Board team addressed the concerns of the profession by holding a series of seminars for GPs, patients’ representatives and representatives from coroners’ offices at the beginning of its pilot project. Members of the team sought to reassure those concerned that the object of the pilot project was primarily to improve the quality of health care. They had managed to secure support from GPs’ representatives. Dr Booth said that some fears were still expressed in the course of practice visits conducted by those working on the pilot project, although both she and Dr Mohammed felt that progress had been made in persuading the profession of the value of the project.
14.83
If the mortality rate of a GP practice appeared to be exhibiting special cause variation, the Eastern HSS Board team used a pyramid model of investigation, which had been adapted from industry, in order to discover why this had occurred. The first stage of the investigation involved checking the existing data with the Central Service Agency and with the practice itself. A visit was arranged and, in advance of that visit, the practice was provided with all the data on which the team’s analysis had been based. The practice was asked to carry out a check to validate the data.
14.84
The second stage of the investigation process was to check patient case mix. Members of the Eastern HSS Board team prepared information derived from the basic data about patient deaths and adjusted it for case mix factors such as age, gender and socio-economic deprivation. They would explain to the practice the adjustments they had made. Members of the practice, using their own local knowledge, would then have an opportunity to challenge those adjustments if they considered that they were inappropriate in some way. The team would invite members of the practice concerned to identify any characteristics of the practice, or of its patient population, that they considered might have had an effect on its mortality rates.
14.85
During a practice visit, members of the Eastern HSS Board team made use of a piece of software called a ‘data mining tool’, contained on a laptop computer. This enabled them to access a wealth of information, comparing the data for the practice year by year and also comparing the practice statistics with the Northern Ireland average. All this information was sent to the practice in advance of the visit. Before the visit, the team would analyse the data in an attempt to generate a hypothesis to explain the high (or low) mortality rates of the practice. The team would not disclose its hypothesis to the practice, since one of the purposes of the visit was to see whether the practice itself could explain the reasons for its special cause variation.
14.86
In each case where an investigation was undertaken, the team was satisfied by the end of the second stage of the investigation that the special cause variation was related to data and/or case mix factors. Dr Mohammed said that the team had not foreseen the impact of residence in nursing homes on mortality rates. This had become evident only in discussions with the practices concerned. He regarded local knowledge as the key to the investigation process. He gave two examples of this. In one case, a practice had had a very low mortality rate for at least three of the years analysed; that mortality rate suddenly jumped up and then levelled off again. A preliminary investigation revealed that, during the first period of the analysis, the practice had been serving a university population, so that its patients were in general very young. The university then closed and the practice began to attract older patients, which explained the higher mortality rate. A second practice had a very high mortality rate which was decreasing over a period. Investigation of this revealed that the mortality rate was dropping because the practice had at one point had a very high proportion of patients who were resident in nursing homes but had subsequently stopped taking such patients. The proportion of patients who were resident in nursing homes had, therefore, dropped - hence the decrease in mortality rates.
14.87
In none of the cases which it investigated was it necessary for the Eastern HSS Board team to proceed beyond the second stage of the pyramid model of investigation. Had it proceeded to the third stage, this would have involved checking practice resources. It would have been necessary to discover from the practice and the PCT whether the practice had any specific problem with resources (e.g. poor access to cardiac surgery) which might have affected its mortality rate. If this third stage had failed to reveal an explanation for the excess, the team would have proceeded to the fourth stage of the pyramid model. This would have consisted of checking the process of care, i.e. looking at the processes of care adopted by the practice and by other agencies when treating particular groups of patients in the practice. It might, for example, have involved considering protocols in use in the practice for treating various patient groups. The fifth stage would have been reached if none of the preceding stages had provided a plausible explanation for the excess in mortality rates. It would have involved a formal investigation of the GP concerned.
14.88
Dr Mohammed said that the Eastern HSS Board’s investigations were designed to generate knowledge in a systematic way. Once data was found to explain the special cause variation, the investigation was halted. As I have said, the explanations were generally dependent on local knowledge. Dr Mohammed said that, if a continuous monitoring system were implemented, those operating it would not necessarily wish to investigate every occasion when a unit crossed the control limit. If resources for investigation were limited, it might be appropriate to prioritise by investigating only those units whose chart statistics were most distant from the control limits.
The West Midlands Investigation
14.89
As I have said, the work undertaken by Dr Aylin and his team revealed that, had their monitoring system been in operation at the relevant time, 12 GPs (including Shipman) would have signalled at the higher of the thresholds applied. Having been informed of that fact, the Inquiry decided that the DoH and the PCTs on whose lists the 11 other GPs were now included should be notified of the fact that they had signalled. That would enable the PCTs to undertake any investigations they considered appropriate in order to ascertain the reason for the apparent excess in mortality rates.
14.90
Two of the investigations arising from this notification were of particular interest to the Inquiry. The first was carried out in the West Midlands by a team from Shropshire County and Telford and Wrekin PCTs, with technical assistance from Dr Mohammed (the West Midlands team). The investigation was reported subsequently in the British Medical Journal
14.91
The West Midlands team used the pyramid model of investigation which I have already described. Its first step was to check the data. The second was to check the patient case mix of the two GPs being investigated. Before starting its investigation, the West Midlands team informed the two GPs of what it was doing. The team then obtained the raw data used by Dr Aylin and his colleagues, together with the results of their analyses. The team also obtained additional information about where each death had occurred. By this means, they were able to see how many deaths had occurred in nursing homes. The team then formulated a preliminary working hypothesis that the excess of deaths might be caused by the fact that, at the relevant time, both GPs had a significant number of patients who were resident in nursing homes. Patients admitted to nursing homes are known to have a high mortality rate.
14.92
The West Midlands team held discussions with the two GPs and with the local primary care medical adviser, who had responsibility for GP performance. Members of the team examined administrative data from the practices of the two GPs. They compared the excess mortality rates for each GP with the number of deaths among their patients that had occurred in nursing homes. They carried out various analyses of the data. On the basis of their investigations, they concluded that the high mortality rates of the two GPs were attributable to a ‘nursing home effect’. They judged that it was not necessary to proceed to the third stage of the pyramid model.
The West Sussex Investigation
14.93
The second investigation was conducted by Adur, Arun and Worthing PCT into five GPs, one from its own area and four from other PCTs in the West Sussex area. The investigating team provided a copy of its report to the Inquiry and Ms Julie Billett, Associate Public Health Specialist, spoke about it at the Inquiry’s seminar.
14.94
The investigation was undertaken without the knowledge of the GPs in question. Ms Billett said that this was because of the background to the investigation, the possibility of negative publicity and the concerns that might have been generated locally had the fact of the investigation become known. The first part of the investigation consisted of a statistical analysis, using local data to make more refined adjustments for age and gender than had been possible in Dr Aylin’s analysis. The PCT’s statistical analysis, which covered only the year in which each of the GPs first signalled, confirmed that the five GPs did indeed have statistically significant excess mortality rates when compared with the age and gender specific mortality rates for West Sussex in the same years. The second part of the investigation consisted of a review of the medical records for the patients whose deaths had been certified by each of the five GPs in the year that s/he signalled. In the case of two of the GPs, problems were experienced in identifying from the patient medical records evidence of the medical condition which the GPs had certified as being the cause of the patient’s death. Those problems were attributed to serious inadequacies of the patient medical records. Indeed, such were the inadequacies of the records that the reviewers suggested that the practices might have failed to include the most recent computerised records when returning the records to the PCT after the patients’ deaths. An alternative explanation was that a parallel set of notes might have been held in the nursing or residential homes in which some of the patients had resided. As a result of the gaps in the medical records, there were some concerns about the GPs’ management of chronic disease. It was not established in the course of the investigation whether any other records did in fact exist. Subsequently, one of the GPs explained in a letter that his practice had been paperless for some years and that he had
‘felt it unnecessary to produce a full paper discharge summary from the computer for a deceased patient’
14.95
At the conclusion of the investigation, the PCT decided that the likeliest explanation for the GPs’ higher than expected mortality rates was that a significant proportion of their patient populations were nursing or residential home residents, with correspondingly high rates of mortality. At that stage, the fact that they had been the subject of an investigation was revealed to the GPs. It was left to the Directors of Public Health and the Clinical Governance Leads for the relevant PCTs to take up with the doctors the issues about record keeping and chronic disease management which had been identified during the course of the investigation.
Mohammed MA, Rathbone A, Myers P, Patel D, Onions H, Stevens A (2004) ‘An investigation into general practitioners associated with high patient mortality flagged up through the Shipman Inquiry: retrospective analysis of routine data’. British Medical Journal, Vol 328: pp 1474-1477.

--- Future Investigations ---
14.96
Adur, Arun and Worthing PCT had to devise the whole process of investigation for itself. Ms Billett said that one of the difficulties was knowing where the investigation should stop. She told the Inquiry that it would be of great assistance if there was some clear guidance available to PCTs on a structure and a process to be followed when conducting investigations. There was general agreement at the seminar that such guidance was required. Professor Baker supported the development of a structured protocol. He suggested that the potential outcomes of an investigation might be, first, that there was a satisfactory clinical explanation for the apparently abnormal findings. That outcome would require no further action. The second possible outcome might be that there was a problem with the performance of a GP or GP practice; that might result in the provision of support or remediation or in the use of disciplinary procedures. The third possible outcome might be the identification of possible criminal behaviour. Professor Baker suggested that there must be clarity about the point which an investigation had reached and why it had reached that point. He suggested that the police should have some input into the formulation of a protocol. They should advise at what point they might wish to become involved in an investigation. Dr Grenville, representing the BMA, suggested that the medical defence organisations should also be consulted in connection with the formulation of an investigation protocol.
14.97
Dr Fox, for the DoH, suggested that there were two different types of investigation that might result from monitoring mortality rates. The first would occur in the context of local routine prospective monitoring when a PCT or a GP practice was looking at data in a ‘learning, improving mode’. This type of investigation would be very different from that which would occur when a PCT had been alerted to the fact that there might be a ‘problem’ with a practice. Dr Fox suggested that different guidelines were needed to deal with those two types of investigation. He emphasised the importance, when a formal investigation was to be undertaken, of identifying the question which it was intended that the investigation should answer. Without that, it would be impossible to know when the question had been answered and when the investigation should be halted. Dr Fox anticipated that formal investigations would be undertaken fairly rarely. He was concerned that individuals would be involved in such investigations infrequently and would not be in a position to gain any experience of how to handle them. He suggested that it would be important to develop a bank of knowledge about how such investigations should be carried out.
14.98
Doubts were expressed about whether PCTs, which are small organisations with many other responsibilities, would have the necessary resources and expertise to conduct the investigations which would become necessary as a result of GPs signalling within a monitoring system. Ms Billett felt that the task of investigation should be undertaken by PCTs, which could bring to the task their understanding of the local factors that could influence the mortality rates of a GP practice or of an individual GP. However, she doubted whether all PCTs would have the capacity to undertake the task. The exercise had been useful for her PCT, in that it had identified problems with two GPs and had highlighted the importance of preserving the quality and integrity of the PCT’s historical data systems. However, it had occupied a considerable amount of time and resources.
14.99
Professor Baker believed that an investigation of this complexity was likely to be beyond the ability of most PCTs. He accepted the value of local knowledge but felt that there was a danger of becoming focussed solely on a local explanation, rather than adopting a wider and more objective view. He suggested that local input should be blended with accumulated regional or national experience, so as to ensure that expertise and objectivity were brought to investigations. Dr Grenville referred to the high turnover of staff in PCTs and suggested that it was likely to be difficult for individual PCTs to build up the pool of expertise that would be required to undertake such investigations.
14.100
The alternative to a local investigation would be investigation by an external body. The most likely candidate appeared to be the Healthcare Commission. Ms Billett said that an investigation by an external body was likely to be perceived by GPs as more threatening. However, how such an investigation was received would depend on the way in which it was conducted. Both she and Mrs Scott agreed that their PCTs would want to have an input into any such investigation which affected a GP in their area.
14.101
In my view, it is important that real expertise and objectivity should be brought to such investigations. I recognise the need for PCTs to be involved, so that use may be made of their local knowledge. However, I do not think it would be appropriate, either in principle or in practice, for PCTs to have primary responsibility for a formal investigation into a doctor who had signalled within a monitoring system. As Professor Baker said, not only would they not have the necessary skills or sufficient opportunity to develop them, they might also lack objectivity. There would be a danger that local knowledge and reputation might be given too great a prominence and might be seen to provide an innocent explanation for figures which should give rise to real concern. I express no view as to who should be responsible for the conduct of such investigations. I do not know how frequently they will be required. If it transpires that they are rare, as Dr Fox anticipates, a small national team should suffice, possibly organised by the Healthcare Commission. If, on the other hand, it is found that such investigations are required quite frequently, it may well be necessary to provide a facility on a regional basis. If so, those responsible in the regions must work to common methods and protocols. The existence of national or regional expertise would also provide a source of advice for PCTs who came across the possibility of a problem when collecting data in the ‘learning, improving mode’ mentioned by Dr Fox.
After an Investigation
14.102
Dr Spiegelhalter raised the issue of what would happen after an investigation had discovered an acceptable clinical explanation for excess mortality. If monitoring continued and the high mortality rate persisted, there would at some point be another signal. A decision would then have to be taken as to whether to investigate again (which could well be a waste of resources and upsetting for the doctor concerned) or to assume that the explanation previously identified satisfactorily accounted for the continued excess (which might be a false assumption). He said that decisions would have to be taken about the approach to be adopted in such circumstances.
14.103
I agree that careful consideration would have to be given to such a case. I would have thought that the right approach would be for a second (and possibly more experienced) investigator to review the first investigation, in the light of the fact that the high mortality rate appeared to have persisted. If s/he were satisfied with the methodology and conclusion of the first investigation and considered that the explanation then accepted also accounted for the continuance of the high mortality rate, it should not be necessary to embark upon a second investigation. However, a second investigation would have to take place if any concern remained after the review. In any event, such a review should not be undertaken locally, for the reasons I have already given.

--- Potential Problems with Monitoring ---
14.104
At the seminar, there was discussion about some of the problems that might be associated with monitoring mortality rates.
The Practicability of Monitoring at Individual General Practitioner Level
14.105
During the whole of the period covered by the analysis carried out by Dr Aylin and his team, Shipman (and, subsequently, the locum who replaced him) was practising single-handed. The analysis showed that he would have signalled during that period. However, the question then arose whether, if he had been a member of a larger GP practice (as he was until 1992), his excess deaths would have caused the practice to signal.
14.106
Dr Aylin told the Inquiry that, if excess deaths caused by one doctor were to be subsumed within a large GP practice, they would inevitably become much more difficult to detect. He said that it would be possible to tune the CUSUM chart to pick up differences in mortality rates within a practice caused by a single doctor. However, if the alarm threshold were to be set at a level that would pick up such differences, this would result in a large number of statistical false alarms. Dr Aylin said that, with better data and with better adjustment for case mix and for unaccounted-for factors than had been possible in the statistical analysis carried out by himself and his team, it might be possible to pick up, in the mortality data for a practice of six doctors, an excess of 25 deaths caused annually by a single GP. This would be a large excess; Shipman had an excess of 25 deaths during only three years of his practice.
14.107
Dr Aylin pointed out that, if avoidable deaths were being caused by practice systems which were affecting more than one doctor, an excess mortality rate might show up more readily. He suggested that, from the point of view of quality of care delivered to patients, a GP practice was a reasonable unit of analysis. However, in terms of detecting excess mortality attributable to the actions of a single GP within the practice, it is plain that it is a blunt instrument. While I agree with Dr Aylin that monitoring of mortality rates at GP practice level may have some value, it seems to me that, in order to be sufficiently sensitive to detect an excess of deaths caused by the activities of a single GP, monitoring must be at individual GP level. Monitoring at individual GP - rather than GP practice - level would also enable a GP to be tracked throughout his/her career. This is important because of the increasing tendency of GPs to move between practices.
14.108
If monitoring at individual GP level is to be undertaken, two conditions must be met. First, there is a need to link the actual care of a patient to a named GP, so that, when the patient dies, the death can sensibly be counted as being ‘attributable’ to that GP for monitoring purposes. A merely administrative allocation of patients to a particular GP would be valueless. Second, it must be possible to calculate a total patient population for each GP. This could be done by making a link between named patients and that GP, or by allocating a proportion of the practice patient population to the GP by reference to information such as the number of sessions worked by the GP.
14.109
Recent changes to the arrangements for general practice have made it difficult to link a patient to an individual GP. Under the new General Medical Services Contract (and under the personal medical services contracts which have recently been introduced), patients are now to be registered with a GP practice and not with an individual GP. Thus it will not be possible, on the basis of the available data, to link a deceased patient with an individual GP for monitoring purposes. Even before the recent changes, the link between a patient and the doctor with whom s/he was registered might have been misleading, since patients might have been registered with one doctor, but their care might have been shared by other doctors within the practice. This type of shared care has become more common in recent years.
14.110
Professor Baker told the Inquiry that he could envisage the possibility of requiring some allocation of patients by a GP practice so that there would be a named GP for each individual patient. However, he felt that this might be ‘asking rather a lot’ of some practices and patients. He believed that it should be possible to estimate with some confidence the proportion of patients within a practice that an individual GP was caring for, by reference to the patterns of work of members of GPs within the practice. In the longer term, he suggested that improved electronic information systems (including electronic patient records) might enable the number of patients being cared for by an individual GP to be measured directly. He pointed out that, even now, almost all consultations between a patient and a healthcare professional within a practice are recorded electronically. If anonymised data were made available, it would be possible to determine the proportion of consultations between an individual patient and each GP within the practice and to allocate patients to named GPs on the basis of those proportions. It would also be possible to obtain information about the activities of locums who had been employed within the practice. Professor Baker pointed out that this system would also enable precise adjustments to be made to reflect the age and gender of patients allocated to a particular GP. Dr Aylin endorsed Professor Baker’s idea of focussing on the number of consultations between a patient and an individual GP in order to determine that GP’s patient population.
14.111
Some potential drawbacks to Professor Baker’s approach were mentioned at the seminar. Dr Goldblatt believed that, if information about patient consultations had to be collected before mortality data could be analysed, this would introduce a delay into the monitoring system. Dr Fox was concerned that the provision of information about patient consultations would impose an undue burden on GP practices at a time when the DoH is attempting to reduce that burden.
14.112
Professor Bevan observed that, if the information about patient consultations was being collected for the purpose of monitoring mortality rates with the sole intention of ‘spotting another Shipman’, it would be difficult to justify. However, the information might have a broader purpose to serve in the context of monitoring and of improvements in the quality of care. He said that there had been concern within the CHI about the ‘massive gap’ in the statistical information available about general practice. This was in contrast to the amount of information available in relation to hospital care. He pointed out that 90% of patient contact takes place at general practice level. He said that there might be the potential for setting up databases to collect the relevant data as part of a wider move to improve the quality of care in general practice.
14.113
Professor Baker mentioned that there were in existence at least two schemes whereby groups of practices operating similar computer systems had undertaken to collect and share data relating to a range of issues. He said that those schemes enabled searches to be conducted of databases containing information about contacts of up to a million patients with doctors and nurses. Dr Baker told the Inquiry about a number of projects being undertaken by the RCGP. She said that work was being done on a method by which data could be automatically extracted from a GP practice’s computer system without any action by the practice being necessary.
14.114
If there is to be effective monitoring of mortality rates at individual GP level, some way must be found to make a real linkage between an individual patient registered with a practice and a named GP within that practice. That must be based upon the care actually provided and not on any administrative factor. I agree with Professor Baker that it should be possible to do this by reference to actual patient contact. There will, of course, be many young, healthy patients who rarely consult their doctors and who may have to be notionally allocated to one member of the practice. However, allocation would have to be reviewed periodically so that, if a patient began to require regular care, s/he could be reallocated if necessary to the doctor providing it. I should have thought that it would be possible to do that. I should also have thought that it would be helpful to a GP’s understanding of his/her own practice to have access to data about the patients whom s/he treats and their characteristics. From what Professor Bevan told the Inquiry, it appears that the data might have a wider use than just in the monitoring of mortality rates. It seems to me also that, with the advances in technology about which the Inquiry has heard, it should be possible to collect the necessary data without placing an undue burden on practices. I hope that such measures will be explored because I am firmly of the view that analysis of the collective mortality statistics of a group practice will be a very blunt instrument indeed in detecting either poor clinical practice or criminality.
14.115
Over recent years, there has been an increase in the number of locums providing care. There has also been an increase in the use of out of hours services. This will continue with the changes to the arrangements to the provision of out of hours services due in January 2005. At the seminar, Dr Aylin was asked whether he had considered how the mortality rates of locum GPs and out of hours services might be monitored. He explained that the difficulties lay, not in the statistical issues, but in collecting the necessary data linking a death with a particular locum or out of hours agency, and in determining the total number of patients cared for by that locum or agency. He suggested that it might be possible to monitor the mortality rates of patients being cared for by an out of hours agency. The patient population being cared for by such an agency could be determined by reference to the GP practices which used the agency. If a monitoring system were to be introduced, it would be necessary to explore the different possibilities for collecting this data.
Where to Set the Threshold
14.116
Another problem which was identified at the seminar was knowing where to set the alarm threshold, so as not to cause a large number of false alarms.
14.117
Dr Aylin said that he and his team had tried not to be ‘too explicit’ about where the threshold should be set. He said that one strength of the CUSUM methods was that the false and successful discovery rates could be calculated so that those setting the alarm threshold would know how the chart was likely to perform. That meant that the thresholds were not chosen arbitrarily. Dr Mohammed pointed out that, under Dr Aylin’s proposed method, the calculation of the false and successful discovery rates depended on an assumption that the mortality rates of 5% of the GPs and GP practices being examined are out of control. He observed that, in reality, we do not know how many units are out of control. He suggested that the calculations were useful for the purposes of illustration but could not resolve the fundamental problem that the proportion of GPs with an excess mortality rate is not known. Dr Goldblatt made a similar point. Dr Best and Dr Aylin agreed that statistical calculations should not dictate where the thresholds were set. They should merely inform the selection of thresholds by others. It would be necessary to take into account practical considerations relating to resources and to the types and number of investigations which it was thought appropriate to carry out. Dr Aylin observed that the number of true and false medical alarms signalling under the monitoring system would inform, on an ongoing basis, the decision as to where to set the alarm thresholds.
When Would Shipman Have Signalled?
14.118
Some concern had been expressed before the seminar about the fact that, on the basis of the statistical analysis conducted by Dr Aylin and his team, it appeared that Shipman would have signalled only in 1996. The time lag in collecting the relevant data would have meant that the signal could not have been detected until late 1997. This would not have been long before March 1998 when the late Dr Linda Reynolds reported her suspicions about Shipman. Her report gave rise to the first - and unsuccessful - police investigation. Doubts were expressed about the value of a monitoring system which would have taken so long to detect Shipman.
14.119
When asked about this, Dr Aylin pointed out that the period covered by his analysis had started only in 1993. Had the analysis been in operation for the whole of the period when Shipman was in practice, he could have been expected to signal much earlier. Also, the poor quality of the data and the limited adjustment for case mix factors made it less easy to detect an unusual pattern of deaths. It seems to me that, with improved data quality, finer adjustment for case mix factors and the use of the cumulative method, a serial killer or a doctor who habitually neglected his/her patients would signal within a reasonable time. However, it must be recognised that a doctor who killed a patient only occasionally, or who hastened the deaths of patients by only a short period, would not be detected by such a monitoring system.
14.120
At the presentation of their work to the Inquiry by Dr Aylin and his team in July 2003, Dr Aylin suggested that, statistically, every GP would signal at one time or another under his system. This suggestion caused a considerable amount of concern. At the seminar, he explained that his comment had been made in the context of monitoring for an infinite time period in the future. He had calculated that, using the thresholds employed in his analysis, 1.5% of GPs might signal purely by chance over a 50 year period. It would, therefore, take several thousand years for every GP being monitored to signal as a result of chance alone.
The Effect on Mortality Rates of Residence in a Care Home
14.121
The outcomes of the investigations in Northern Ireland, the West Midlands and West Sussex that I have described all highlighted the relationship between the mortality rates among patients of a GP or GP practice and the number of those patients who are resident in nursing homes. This effect may extend to patients living in residential homes also. The fact that a patient is resident in a nursing home suggests that s/he is in a poorer state of health and has a higher level of dependency than a patient in a residential home. The Inquiry was told, however, that this is not always the case; sometimes, practical considerations govern the admission of a patient to one type of home or another. For the purposes of this discussion, I shall refer to nursing and residential homes collectively as ‘care homes’ and assume that residence in either has an effect on mortality rates.
14.122
If the pattern of the three investigations is followed, it seems likely that many statistical true alarms will be accounted for by the fact that a higher than average proportion of the patient population of the GP under investigation is resident in care homes. Investigation of these alarms will, therefore, inevitably result in the unnecessary expenditure of resources.
14.123
One way of avoiding this would be to make a case mix adjustment in order to account for the number of patients of a GP who are resident in care homes. There are at least three problems with that approach. One problem is that adjustment might mask the existence of a high mortality rate of which the authorities should be aware. It is possible that a doctor might be responsible - through lack of care or criminal activity - for the deaths of patients in a care home. If an adjustment were to be made for care home residents, an excess mortality rate from that cause might not be detected. The second problem is that admission to a care home can, to an extent at least, be influenced by a GP. As I have said, there are dangers in adjusting for a case mix factor that is within the control of the subject of the monitoring. The third problem relates to the collection of the necessary data to enable an accurate adjustment to be made. Dr Farhang Tahzib, Director of Public Health, Adur, Arun and Worthing PCT, suggested that the fact that a patient had been admitted to a care home should be recorded on the NHS central data system. He suggested that this might be done by linking information from care homes and from the National Care Standards Commission (now part of the Healthcare Commission) with the NHS system. Such information would enable the number of patients registered with every GP who were resident in care homes to be ascertained. Ms Billett suggested that the information should also be sent to GP practices, which may be unaware that one of their patients had been admitted to a care home.
14.124
In theory, this seemed to be a good idea. However, Dr Goldblatt doubted whether it would be possible to collect the data in the way suggested by Dr Tahzib. He said that the designation of care homes as nursing or as residential homes could change quite frequently and suddenly, so that it would be difficult to keep data up to date. Also, patients were admitted to care homes for different periods of time. Some were admitted for short periods of respite care. Others were admitted only a short time before their death. Some patients moved between homes in different PCT areas. Dr Grenville confirmed these points and added that some hospital wards were very much akin to nursing homes, although they would not be categorised as such.
14.125
Mrs Scott, of Croydon PCT, said that, when preparing comparative data on GP patient mortality rates, her PCT had excluded deaths which had occurred in care homes. It was felt to be inappropriate to compare practices which had large patient populations living in care homes with practices which had no or few care home residents. The PCT had good information about the number of care home beds and about which GPs cared for patients in the different homes. The PCT was able to identify deaths which occurred in care homes. It was considering setting up a system for analysing deaths in care homes. Mrs Scott said that the main difficulty was the frequent change in the designation of care homes - even of individual beds within care homes. She said that it would require a lot of local knowledge and careful monitoring to deal with these changes.
14.126
Dr Aylin told the Inquiry that it would never be possible to adjust for all aspects of case mix. He said that the fact that it would not be possible to adjust for every single eventuality did not prevent an analysis being performed on the basis of the available data. He suggested that there might be a case for performing analyses with and without adjustment for residents in care homes.
14.127
I should have thought that it would be feasible to collect data about persons admitted to care homes. It may be possible to identify those admitted on a wholly temporary basis, e.g. for the purpose of convalescence or respite care. I should have thought also that it would be helpful to GP practices and to PCTs to have information about the number of patients resident in care homes and also in other institutions such as hospices. Ways of analysing and comparing the mortality rates of residents in care homes and other types of institution could no doubt be devised. A first step would be to investigate with the Healthcare Commission precisely what information it holds and how up to date it is.

--- Other Possible Statistical Approaches ---
14.128
At the seminar, there was some discussion about different statistical methods that might be used in the analysis of mortality rates and that might have advantages over the use of the CUSUM charts advocated by Dr Aylin and his team. I shall deal with these very briefly.
14.129
The first discussion related to the relative merits of Shewhart control charts and CUSUM charts. Dr Aylin’s main reason for favouring CUSUM charts was, as I have said, their ability to accumulate historical data. He also pointed to their efficiency in determining gradual, sustained rises in mortality and large and sudden deviations in mortality. Dr Mohammed, who favoured the use of Shewhart charts, pointed out that the longitudinal control charts showing the mortality rates of a single practice revealed evidence of the historical performance of that practice. He referred to the transparency of Shewhart control charts and the ease with which they could be understood.
14.130
Dr Roberts’ view was that the fact that CUSUM charts used information from the past meant that they were better predictors of what would happen in the future. Dr Spiegelhalter also favoured the use of CUSUM charts for use in a central monitoring system. He agreed with Dr Aylin about the importance of accumulating historical data. He also favoured the more formal technique for setting alarm thresholds advocated by Dr Aylin and his team, rather than what he described as the ‘rule of thumb’ used to set the control limits for Shewhart charts. However, Dr Spiegelhalter favoured a slightly different approach to the use of historical data.
14.131
When plotting their annual chart statistic, Dr Aylin and his colleagues simply added up the outcomes from previous years and kept adding year by year. The effect of this was to give equal weight to historical and recent observations. An alternative approach would be to adjust previous outcomes so as to give more weight to more recent data and less weight to data in previous years. Dr Aylin and his team did not attempt to do this, since it was not clear by how much it would be appropriate to downweight information from the past.
14.132
Dr Spiegelhalter said that his preference was to discount historical data gradually. The effect of that would be to accord most weight to the most recent information and to give less weight as data became older. He advocated a gradual discounting, so as not to precipitate a sudden change by the removal of historical data.
14.133
Dr Spiegelhalter emphasised that a monitoring system need not be confined to using one statistical method. Different methods could be used for different purposes and to present the data to different groups of people. He suggested that the system devised by Dr Aylin and his team would be the most suitable for use as a quality assurance tool. It could be used centrally for monitoring large numbers of units and could provide warnings which would then be passed down to those who were to investigate them. In other words, the system could be used for surveillance purposes.
14.134
Dr Spiegelhalter suggested that, when the data was supplied to PCTs and practices, it should be presented clearly and simply. This might be best done by means of Shewhart charts. Dr Spiegelhalter said that it would be possible to move between the two statistical methods and thus to have multiple views of the data. No extra resources would be required. Dr Aylin agreed that CUSUM charts were not appropriate for feeding back direct to GPs. Other methods of presenting the information would have to be adopted.
14.135
Another issue arose in relation to the treatment on a CUSUM chart of a GP who, for a period, has a low mortality rate. The CUSUM chart is set at zero, so that if the mortality rate of a GP is less than that which would be expected, the chart statistic is plotted at zero. It is not allowed to go below zero and to build up credit by registering negative values. This is in distinction to the sequential probability ratio method for which Dr Spiegelhalter had originally expressed a preference. Under that method, the chart statistic builds up ‘credit’. The danger is that it might build up too much credit so that, if the mortality rate of a practice increased, it would take longer for the practice to signal, because the deterioration would to some extent be compensated for by the previous good performance. Dr Spiegelhalter said that, when using the sequential probability ratio method, he had found that the building up of credit was a real problem and led to a lack of sensitivity. While the sequential probability ratio method had some advantages in his view, he now felt that the CUSUM chart was preferable. He also favoured the approach advocated by Dr Aylin and his team of using computer simulations and actual past data to work out the false and true discovery rates and of then leaving the decision as to where the threshold should be set to those responsible for running the monitoring system.
14.136
Dr Spiegelhalter suggested that there should be a pilot scheme to design the system, to set the thresholds and to fine-tune the way it works. He suggested that the pilot scheme should use data that resembled as closely as possible the data that would eventually be used. Once the system was implemented, it would be necessary to monitor its use closely and to adjust it as necessary.
14.137
Dr Spiegelhalter said that he would be very concerned at the suggestion, which had been put forward by some, that the monitoring of mortality rates should be left to visual comparisons of crude mortality data by PCTs. He spoke of his experience in the Bristol Royal Infirmary Inquiry and said that the hospital involved had been ‘awash with data’, with plenty of opportunity for visual comparison, but nothing had been done about the information shown by the data. A formal system was, in his view, required. Professor Baker expressed the view that a visual comparison would not be sufficiently sensitive or reliable. It was likely, he thought, to miss some information.

--- The Concerns of the Profession ---
14.138
A number of participants in the seminar suggested that many GPs find the idea that the mortality rates of their patients might be monitored very threatening. Dr Grenville, representing the BMA, made the point that, if ‘entirely blameless’ GPs were to be over-investigated, this would have an adverse effect on morale and, ultimately, on patient care. I have already mentioned the concerns of members of the medical profession about the work that has been undertaken in Northern Ireland.
14.139
Dr Booth mentioned that there had been particular concern in Northern Ireland that mortality data would be presented to the public in the form of rankings or league tables. There was general agreement at the seminar that the publication of rankings of GPs by mortality rates would be inappropriate and unhelpful. Dr Aylin pointed out that simple ranking can be dangerous. It inevitably means that one practice is at the bottom of the league table and is labelled ‘worst’. It would be necessary to have some understanding of the distribution of mortality between GPs, in order to detect whether a practice was a true outlier, or whether it represented merely the tail of a normal distribution. Professor Baker and Dr Spiegelhalter agreed that rankings would be unhelpful. Dr Spiegelhalter said that there were other means by which divergent cases could be clearly spotlighted.
14.140
Dr Aylin and his team did, however, believe that rankings of mortality rates for GPs in a PCT area - appropriately adjusted for case mix factors - could have a use in communicating comparative information about mortality data to GPs, provided the rankings were presented in an appropriate way. Typically this would be done graphically by presenting individual GPs’ mortality rates with a range of values (known as confidence intervals) within which their mortality rates were likely to vary.
14.141
Rankings of this kind are already produced in some areas. Mrs Scott told the Inquiry that her PCT provides comparative information about 60 or 70 performance indicators to GP practices in its area on an annual basis. For the last few years, mortality data has been one of the indicators. A practice’s indicators are discussed at annual clinical governance visits.
14.142
I can well understand why GPs would feel that the publication of rankings of GPs’ mortality rates might be misleading, unfair and damaging to doctors’ morale and patient care. In my view, it should not happen. The data should be presented to GPs and GP practices as in a scientific study, with an explanation of the methodology and its limitations and the confidence intervals that apply. Then, assuming that GPs are able to understand and interpret the material in that form, it should be of real value to them for their clinical governance purposes at both an individual and a practice level.

--- The Potential Advantages of a Monitoring System ---
14.143
Since the issue of monitoring mortality rates has gained prominence in the wake of Shipman’s activities, it is perhaps not surprising that there is a perception that the only purpose of such monitoring is to ‘catch another Shipman’. However, those who are in favour of setting up a system of monitoring argue that it would have benefits extending well beyond the detection - and possible deterrence - of a murderous doctor.
14.144
There was agreement among participants at the seminar that the process of monitoring mortality data could have two distinct and separate uses. The first of these was quality improvement. Professor Baker believed that, if mortality data were available and GP practices had the necessary expertise to understand the data and to learn from it, it should be possible to use the data for local quality improvement purposes. The second use of monitoring would be for quality assurance purposes. This would involve the use of the data to observe abnormalities which could indicate a performance problem, or even criminal activity.
14.145
Dr Mohammed could not give any specific examples of improvements in quality of care that had occurred as a result of the Eastern HSS Board project, although, of course, it was early days. He suggested, however, that monitoring would assist in understanding the factors that contribute to an excess in mortality. This might result in an improvement in the quality of care and might potentially also identify criminal behaviour. He would like a monitoring system to look at both high and low mortality rates. He believed that this might lead to identification of good - as well as poor - practice and might make the process less threatening to the medical profession. Dr Aylin confirmed that it would be possible, using CUSUM charts, to look at both high and low mortality rates.
14.146
Dr Grenville observed that the monitoring of mortality rates could serve a dual purpose. It could be a ‘powerful tool for improving practice’. At the same time, it might also be a tool for detecting ‘another Shipman’ should one appear. Dr Grenville felt that quality improvement should be the primary aim, with the detection of criminality as a ‘by-product’. He wanted to ensure that monitoring provided ‘the most benefit for the most people’. He felt that it would do this by improving practice. He cited as an example the situation which might arise if monitoring showed that a practice had an excess of deaths due to cardiovascular disease. He said that that information might lead to consideration of changes which should be made to primary and secondary strategies for the prevention of cardiovascular disease within the practice and within the area. If, in the process of using mortality data to improve the lot of patients, it was also possible to detect poor practice or instances (which he believed would be very rare) of criminal practice, Dr Grenville said that he would be delighted. His concern about setting up a monitoring system was that, once it was in operation, it might encourage a false belief that it would inevitably catch ‘the next Shipman’. He did not think that it would necessarily do so, since, if a doctor was minded in the future to act in the same way as Shipman, s/he was unlikely to do it in the same setting of general practice. However, with that proviso, Dr Grenville could see real benefits in monitoring mortality rates.
14.147
Professor Baker felt that there was real value in GP practices receiving their own mortality data and having available the necessary information to enable them to compare their own data with that of other practices. He suggested that if, for example, a GP practice found that it was having more cardiovascular deaths than could be expected from the figures for other practices, this could be ‘a good trigger’ for them to look at how they were treating patients with risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Dr Baker, representing the RCGP, agreed with Professor Baker about the benefits of practices having an understanding of their own mortality rates. She believed that a system of monitoring mortality rates might act as a deterrent to a potential criminal. However, she also expressed the view that such a system would not necessarily be effective in detecting the activities of locums or doctors engaged in out of hours work and would not, therefore, necessarily detect criminality on the part of a doctor working in those fields.
14.148
Some reservations were expressed about the extent to which the behaviour of GPs had the potential to influence the mortality rates of their patients. Dr Goldblatt pointed out that many diseases and causes of mortality are closely linked to socio-economic and other factors (e.g. the treatment received by a patient in hospital or the care received in a nursing home or the compliance of the patient with treatment) which are outside the control of the patient’s GP. Some conditions are not amenable to treatment at all. It seems to me likely also that some deaths may have contributory factors that lie many years in the past, before the deceased became a patient at the GP practice with which s/he was registered at the time of his/her death.
14.149
Dr Goldblatt made the point that each individual GP has only a few deaths per thousand patients annually and only a relatively small proportion of the conditions causing those deaths are amenable to treatment or to intervention by the GP. It is only that small proportion of annual deaths which can be related to GP performance. Dr Goldblatt said that he believed that the monitoring of mortality rates among GP patients was of value, but it had to be recognised that a high level of mortality within a practice might be caused, not by the quality of care within that practice, but by some extraneous factor. He believed that the monitoring of general practice had to be complemented by the monitoring of other institutions and organisations.
14.150
Dr Roberts expressed some doubt, based on his experience of clinical trials in primary care, about the extent to which a variation in GPs’ behaviour (e.g. by improving their practice) was capable of influencing the outcome for patients. He acknowledged that it might be useful for a GP to look at the deaths in his/her practice and, having seen for example that the practice had a number of deaths from substance misuse, to consider changing its system of dealing with substance misuse. However, he pointed out that that was not ‘a statistical observation’, by which I think he meant that it was not necessary to conduct any analysis of mortality rates in order to make the observation. Nevertheless, I suppose that an examination of mortality data might cause a practice to focus on deaths which had occurred and on the causes of those deaths in a way that it might not otherwise do. That was, as I understand it, the point that was being made by Professor Baker and by Dr Baker.
14.151
Professor Baker said at the end of the seminar that he felt optimistic about the capability of a monitoring system to combine both the quality improvement and quality assurance roles. He firmly believed that the monitoring of information about mortality was likely to be important to local quality improvement activities. He observed that quality could be measured only if there were several different ways of measuring it. This is because quality of health care is such a complex and confusing concept. Mortality, although not a very sensitive measure of quality, is, he said, an important one. It should be part of any overall scheme to assess quality. Professor Baker believed, from what he had heard at the seminar, that it would be possible to have a system which could detect doctors with high and clinically unexplainable mortality rates and could also help doctors and primary healthcare teams to consider the mortality patterns among their population and to plan their key policies. He went on to say:
‘I do not think it is possible for us to tell the public, let alone relatives of Shipman’s victims, that we are unable to detect and will be unable to detect in the future a doctor who murders a large number of patients. I do not think that is sustainable.’

--- Conclusions ---
14.152
Several participants in the Inquiry’s seminars observed that if, in the future, there were another doctor with a criminal intent similar to that of Shipman, s/he was unlikely to pursue his/her criminal behaviour in the same way as Shipman did. That being the case, it was said there was no guarantee that a system of routine monitoring of mortality rates among GPs’ patients would ‘catch another Shipman’.
14.153
I recognise, of course, that a system of routine monitoring of mortality rates would not, on its own, provide any guarantee that patients would be protected against a homicidal doctor. I also agree with those who have emphasised the importance, if a system of routine monitoring is to be introduced, of ensuring that PCTs, the medical profession and the public are not lulled into a false sense of security, whereby they believe that the system of monitoring itself will afford adequate protection for patients. Routine monitoring of mortality statistics would be only one element of that protection. I have already made detailed recommendations for the reform of the systems of death certification and investigation, which I believe would provide significant protection. Indeed, it is my view that the introduction of those reforms, coupled with a system of monitoring of mortality statistics would together provide a real deterrent to misconduct, as well as a greatly improved opportunity to detect the activity of a doctor such as Shipman. For example, if the results of monitoring had been available when Dr Reynolds made her report to the Coroner, it would have been possible to ascertain immediately whether Shipman had an abnormally high mortality rate. If the information that I have suggested should be collected for death certification had also been available, it would have then been possible to pick up the abnormalities in the pattern of deaths among his patients even if they had not already come to light as a result of routine monitoring. In short, it seems to me that, if routine monitoring of mortality rates were shown to be workable, its introduction must be seriously considered.
14.154
Of course, the case for routine monitoring would be even stronger if it were shown that the monitoring of mortality rates would have benefits over and above the possibility of detecting aberrant or criminal behaviour. Quite apart from any other consideration, if GPs were able to see that the data derived from monitoring mortality rates was making a positive contribution to the quality of patient care within their own practices - and possibly more widely - the process of monitoring would appear less threatening than might otherwise be the case. It seems to me, as a lay person, that Professor Baker and others must be right when they say that it is important for GPs and GP practices to have access to, and to be able to interpret and understand, their mortality data. Of course, mortality data is not the only - or necessarily the strongest - indicator of the quality of patient care. Nevertheless, it is an important indicator and must in my view form part of the data which should be collected in the course of clinical governance.
14.155
I recognise that there are practical difficulties in the way of setting up a satisfactory system of monitoring mortality statistics. The greatest of these seems to be the problem of providing a reliable method of linking an individual patient with an individual GP. My suspicion is that, unless that can be done, a monitoring system might be too blunt a tool to be worthwhile. However, I am optimistic that, with a will, it could be done. I agree with Professor Baker that it is simply not acceptable to say to the public - and particularly to the families of Shipman’s victims - that it cannot be done or that it is not worth doing. In my view, Dr Aylin and his team have shown that it can be done and I am satisfied, having heard the views of the seminar participants, that it will be worth doing.
14.156
In my view, the analysis of mortality data is important. The value of this process was acknowledged by all participants at the seminar, although the difficulties which lie ahead were recognised. There was also agreement that the work must be done centrally. In my view, the DoH must now make provision for it to be done. At the seminar there was also agreement that the investigation of the cause and significance of outlying data should be undertaken locally but that it required considerable expertise. Such investigations must be well organised, consistent and objective. Unless such cases can be properly examined, the system will not be useful and may cause concern and resentment. It was not envisaged that an individual PCT should undertake this function. PCTs could not be expected to develop the necessary expertise, as the need for such investigations will arise only rarely. If the Healthcare Commission does not, after all, intend to set up local or regional bases, I think the work of investigation may have to be assigned to the inter-PCT investigation teams, which, in
, I recommend should be set up for the purpose of investigating complaints and concerns. That would probably not be the ideal solution but, if training could be provided and a protocol for such investigations could be developed, I think the arrangement would be adequate.

--- CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The General Medical Council ---
Various Functions
Present Structure
The 'Old' Fitness to Practise Procedures in Outline
Criticism of the General Medical Council and the Movement for Reform


========================================================================
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - The General Medical Council
========================================================================

--- History ---
Objectives
15.7
The GMC was created by the Medical Act 1858. The current statute governing its constitution, functions and practices is the Medical Act 1983, as amended (the 1983 Act). Originally, the principal purpose of the GMC was to rationalise the many different forms of medical qualification then in existence and to distinguish properly qualified medical practitioners from the large number of unqualified persons who held themselves out as offering medical services. The early GMC was also given a limited disciplinary role whereby it could erase from the medical register any doctor found guilty of
. From early times, there was some recognition that the underlying objective of the GMC should be to protect the public from ‘rogue’ doctors. However, in recent times, that objective has been much more clearly spelled out and the GMC now accepts that the protection of patients and the public must be its paramount objective. Very recently, that objective has been given statutory recognition. By section 1A of the 1983 Act, as amended in 2002, the main objective of the GMC in exercising its functions is
‘to protect, promote and maintain the health and safety of the public’
. The Charity Commissioners, in granting charitable status to the GMC in 2001, defined its purpose as being
‘to protect, promote and maintain the health and safety of the community by ensuring proper standards in the practice of medicine’
. Those statements of purpose are applicable to both of the GMC’s main functions, i.e. the setting of educational standards and the exercise of its disciplinary role through the FTP procedures.
15.8
Initially, the GMC comprised 24 members (collectively termed ‘the Council’), most of whom were nominated by the medical Royal Colleges and the universities. A few were chosen by the Privy Council. All were medically qualified. The numbers increased to 29 in 1886 and, from 1926, it became the practice of the Privy Council to choose at least one non-medical (‘lay’) member. By 1950, the GMC had 50 members, of whom three were lay members. The method of selection and appointment changed with the coming into force of the Medical Act 1978, since which time a majority of members has been elected by doctors on the medical register. Also at that time, the number of GMC members increased. By 1989, the number had grown to 102. In June 2003, there were 104 members of whom 54 were elected, 25 were appointed by the universities and the medical Royal Colleges and 25 were nominated by the Queen on the advice of the Privy Council. By law, a majority of nominated members must be persons who are not medically qualified but, in recent years, the practice has been for the Privy Council to advise that all nominated members should be lay members. All elected and appointed members are registered doctors.
15.9
In July 2003, the number of Council members was reduced to 35, comprising 19 elected medical members, two appointed medical members and 14 nominated lay members. This change was brought about as it was recognised that effective decision-making was almost impossible for a group with 104 members. This change has had the effect of increasing the proportion of lay members on the Council from about 25% to 40%.
Development: the Merrison Committee
15.10
The change to a largely elected membership came about as the result of the recommendations of a Committee set up in 1972, under the chairmanship of Dr (later Sir) Alec Merrison (the Merrison Committee). Until the late 1960s, the GMC was financed by a single registration fee paid by each doctor at the time of registration. By the 1960s, the GMC’s activities and expenditure had increased and it required increased income. It decided to impose an annual retention fee on all doctors. This led to insurrection. Many doctors refused to pay the annual fee; they argued that there should be ‘no taxation without representation’. The GMC threatened them with erasure. The Government was concerned at the prospect of losing a large number of NHS doctors. At the time, there were other issues dividing the GMC from various professional bodies, such as the British Medical Association and several of the Royal Colleges. In order to give proper consideration to all these issues, the Government set up the Merrison Committee. Its Terms of Reference required the Committee:
‘To consider what changes need to be made in the existing provisions for the regulation of the medical profession; what functions should be assigned to the body charged with the responsibility for its regulation; and how that body should be constituted to enable it to discharge its functions most effectively; and to make recommendations
15.11
The Merrison Committee reported in 1975, with two main proposals. It suggested that the profession should have the right to elect a majority of the members of the GMC, a change which was, as I have said, effected by the Medical Act 1978. Today, the majority of members of the GMC are still elected by medical practitioners. This change no doubt resolved the discontent within the profession; there was now to be taxation but with representation. However, the dominance in a regulatory body of an elected group, with an electorate to serve, inevitably gives rise to conflicts of interests and objectives. Those members elected by the profession must, at least to some extent, have the interests of their electors at heart. At times, the interests of doctors and of the public may lie in different directions. Yet, as I have explained, the main objective of the GMC should be
‘to protect, promote and maintain the health and safety of the public’
. Financial matters must sometimes give rise to a potential conflict between interests and objectives. The GMC is still funded by an annual retention fee payable by all doctors. By far the greatest item of expenditure in the GMC budget is the FTP procedures. The number and variety of cases going through the FTP procedures has increased enormously in recent years. The appointment of suitably educated, experienced and trained staff and panel members sufficient to administer the FTP procedures must have led to an increased financial burden.
15.12
The Merrison Committee also proposed reforms to the FTP procedures, based upon a clear statement of philosophy that these procedures were to be designed to protect patients rather than to punish doctors. In particular, it recommended new procedures for supporting and rehabilitating doctors who were unfit to practise by reason of ill health. I shall describe these procedures in
. Whether the GMC has struck the right balance between protecting patients and supporting and rehabilitating doctors (rather than punishing them) is an issue to which I will return in subsequent Chapters.
15.13
The Merrison Committee recommended that the GMC should be statutorily charged with the duty of promoting high standards of professional conduct. The relevant powers were provided by the Medical Act 1978. The Committee also considered the possibility that the GMC might undertake some form of periodic ‘re-licensure’ of doctors. The position then was (and still is) that, once a doctor had qualified, it was taken for granted that s/he remained fit to practise unless and until found to be unfit as the result of FTP proceedings. Those proceedings could be initiated only following the receipt by the GMC of a complaint or report about the doctor. Re-licensure would have entailed some periodic reassessment of fitness to practise. The Merrison Committee considered any recommendations in respect of re-licensure to be beyond its remit and the presumption that a doctor will remain fit to practise throughout his/her career has, therefore, continued. However, that situation is about to change under proposals that doctors’ registration should be periodically ‘revalidated’. It is proposed that, once every five years, every doctor who wishes to continue to hold a licence to practise will have to demonstrate to the GMC that s/he is ‘up to date and fit to practise’ in his/her chosen field. I shall describe those proposals in

--- Various Functions ---
15.14
As I have said, the GMC function which is of most direct interest to the Inquiry is the conduct of the FTP procedures. The revalidation of the doctors’ registration is also a matter of interest. However, for the sake of completeness and lest it be thought that I am unaware of the important work done by the GMC in other fields, I shall describe its other functions very briefly before describing (also briefly at this stage) the various FTP procedures. Those other functions are:
the setting of standards of professional competence and conduct
the registration of doctors
the promotion of high standards in the training and education of doctors.
The Setting of Standards of Professional Competence and Conduct
15.15
The Committee on Standards of Professional Conduct and on Medical Ethics (the Standards Committee) is responsible for the GMC’s work in setting standards of competence and conduct. It seeks to define the principles that underlie good professional practice, to apply those principles to new and developing situations and circumstances, and to advise the GMC on guidance which should be issued as a whole.
15.16
From its early days, the GMC provided guidance to doctors about unacceptable conduct. Until the early 1990s, the guidance largely comprised warnings about the kind of misconduct that might lead to disciplinary action by the GMC. The GMC no longer does this. Since 1995, the emphasis has changed and the GMC has sought to provide positive advice about standards of good practice and ethics. The Standards Committee has also produced, and the GMC has promulgated, a number of other sets of guidance of both a general and a specific nature.
15.17
In 1995, the GMC issued the first edition of the publication ‘Good Medical Practice’, which contained a statement of the principles characterising good medical practice, together with an exposition of the ‘Duties of a Doctor’. I understand that doctors find this publication extremely helpful and that it has been adopted or adapted for use in many other countries. ‘Good Medical Practice’ is now in its third edition and is undergoing further revision. It is said to provide the standards against which doctors will be judged if their registration is called into question under the FTP procedures. The principles and duties set out in ‘Good Medical Practice’ are said to form the basis of the
‘professional contract between doctors and their patients’
. While I readily accept that ‘Good Medical Practice’ provides the standards against which a doctor is judged, it is aspirational in nature. It does not provide - whether for doctors, healthcare managers or patients - clear guidance about the standards the doctor must achieve if s/he is to avoid criticism or action on registration under the FTP procedures.
The Registration of Doctors
15.18
Section 2 of the 1983 Act provides that the Registrar shall keep two registers of medical practitioners. The first comprises the names of doctors who are fully registered and the second contains the names of doctors who are entitled to provisional or limited registration. Provisional registration allows newly qualified doctors to undertake the general clinical training needed for full registration. A doctor who is provisionally registered is entitled to work only in certain specified settings. Doctors holding limited registration may work only under the supervision of a fully registered doctor and in certain specified types of post. It is a criminal offence for any person knowingly to hold him/herself out as being a registered medical practitioner if s/he is not in fact so registered. The GMC also operates a third register, known as the specialist register, inclusion in which is a prerequisite for appointment to a substantive or honorary NHS consultant post.
15.19
The present position is that, in general, once registered, a doctor is entitled to remain on the register unless his/her name is removed by order of a FTP panel. In the future, it is the GMC’s intention to issue a licence to practise to all doctors who wish to exercise the rights and privileges of the profession. Thereafter, the GMC will require all doctors who wish to retain their licence to practise to undergo revalidation. This process will be introduced in 2005, but will take several years to be fully effective.
The Promotion of High Standards in the Training and Education of Doctors
15.20
Under section 5(1) of the 1983 Act, the Education Committee of the GMC has the general functions of promoting high standards and of co-ordinating all stages of medical education. In 1993, the Committee issued the publication ‘Tomorrow’s Doctors - Recommendations on Undergraduate Medical Education’, which contained recommendations for the implementation of a new curriculum in medical schools in the UK. In 2002, a revised version of this work was published, describing what was expected of all medical graduates. The Committee has also published a number of treatises, including a review of the periods of ‘apprenticeship’ which follow the completion of a medical degree, namely the pre-registration year and the year spent as a senior house officer.
15.21
The statutory basis of the FTP procedures is to be found in Part V of the 1983 Act. In the past, there have been three separate types of FTP procedure:
the conduct procedures, which were the successors of the original disciplinary procedures of the GMC
the health procedures, introduced by the Medical Act 1978, following the recommendations of the Merrison Committee. They came into operation in 1980 and were designed to deal with doctors whose fitness to practise was impaired by ill health
the performance procedures, which came into operation in July 1997, and were designed to deal with doctors whose professional performance was found to be seriously deficient.
15.22
Throughout this Report, I shall refer to those procedures as the ‘old’ FTP procedures and will use the past tense to describe them. I shall describe the FTP procedures which have recently been introduced as the ‘new’ procedures and will refer to them in the future tense.

--- Present Structure ---
15.23
I have already explained that the GMC comprises 35 members, of whom 21 are registered medical practitioners and 14 are non-medical or lay members. The President, who is both leader and figurehead, is elected by the members for a period not exceeding seven years and is always an eminent member of the medical profession. The present incumbent is Professor Sir Graeme Catto, a distinguished consultant physician whose current appointments include Dean of Guy’s, King’s College and St Thomas’ Hospitals Medical and Dental School, Vice-Principal, King’s College London, and Professor of Medicine and Pro-Vice-Chancellor, University of London.
15.24
The 19 elected medical members are chosen by several different geographical ‘constituencies’ of doctors. Two medical members are appointed by the universities with medical schools and the medical Royal Colleges. The lay members, nominated by the Privy Council, are drawn from a variety of backgrounds. During the hearings, Leading Counsel for the Tameside Families Support Group (TFSG) drew attention to the fact that a significant number of lay members had a professional background in NHS management or administration. It was suggested that they were not really ‘lay’ people who could represent and safeguard the interests of the general public and of patients in particular. As a result of their professional backgrounds, they would be steeped in the culture of the medical profession and of NHS management. The GMC, in reply, suggested that it was appropriate for some lay members to have a background in health administration; this gave them an understanding of the quite complex structures of the NHS which was invaluable to them in their GMC role. In any event, said the GMC, the lay members were all extremely independent, whatever their background, and were very conscious of their duty to safeguard the interests of patients and the public.
15.25
I do not feel able to express any concluded view on this interesting difference of opinion. I see the advantage of having a knowledge of existing NHS procedures. Such knowledge will be very useful to a GMC member. The knowledge can be acquired, but that takes time. It also appears to me, from the evidence I have heard from and about lay members, that some of them are very independent in their thinking, notwithstanding their healthcare background. Dr Arun Midha, who has been a member of the GMC since November 2000 and was a lay screener from July 2001 until 2004, is a case in point. Dr Midha is not a medical doctor; his academic qualifications lie in the fields of social studies and business administration. He is Associate Director (Business and Planning) of the School of Postgraduate Medical and Dental Education, University of Wales College of Medicine. Before taking up that role, he held management and advisory positions with Health Promotion Wales and the Welsh Combined Centres for Public Health (Division of Public Health). Between May 1994 and January 2002, he was Programme Manager for the public health medicine training scheme in Wales. In the past, he has been a non-executive director of an ambulance trust and the lay chair of the NHS complaints panel in Wales. Although he is not medically qualified, therefore, it can be seen that Dr Midha has a background in the field of health care. Yet it was apparent from his decisions in the FTP procedures that he applied his mind in a completely independent way. On the other hand, I can understand the concerns expressed by the TFSG. Even if the lay members who have worked mainly in NHS management are in fact independent, their backgrounds may create the impression that they are ‘members of the same club’ as the doctors. They may not bring a fresh eye to their scrutiny of GMC practices and procedures. It is vital that lay members should be people of an independent mind, able and determined to safeguard the interests of the public, including patients. I think that lay members should come from a range of different backgrounds. It may be that, in the past, the mix has been rather too heavily weighted towards the NHS professionals. I think that the GMC recognised the force of the points made by the TFSG and I hope that in future it will be possible to ensure that there is an appropriate mix of backgrounds among the lay members.
15.26
The Council meets about six times a year to discuss and decide major issues of policy. However, much of the work of policy development is carried out by committees or by working groups formed by those committees. I have already mentioned the Education Committee and the Standards Committee. These committees are composed mainly of GMC members, although some also have co-opted members. There are other committees whose functions range over fitness to practise, registration, finance and resources, audit and race, equality and diversity. There is also a ‘Patient and Public Reference Group’, comprising members of the GMC and others, who represent the interests of patients and consumers. For example, the Patients Association, the Consumers’ Association (now known as Which?) and the Patients Forum are represented on it. The object of this Group is to allow continuing consultation between the GMC and patient groups on policy issues.
15.27
A considerable body of administrative staff supports the day-to-day work of the GMC. At the head is the Chief Executive and Registrar. The present incumbent of this post is Mr Finlay Scott. Below him are the Directors in charge of four directorates, dealing with fitness to practise, registration and education, corporate affairs and policy, and resources.
15.28
The Fitness to Practise Directorate is divided into a number of Sections, each dealing with a different aspect of FTP work and headed by a senior member of staff. These senior staff are not medically qualified; they usually have a background in administration - many of them in the Civil Service or quasi-governmental bodies. The handling of the thousands of individual cases reported to the GMC every year is undertaken by teams of caseworkers under the leadership and supervision of casework managers. Again, these members of staff do not usually have any medical qualifications. Most are graduates. In addition, there are secretarial and junior administrative staff.
15.29
In the past, important aspects of the preliminary work in the processing of an individual case were undertaken by medical or lay members of the Council. In the conduct procedures, for example, complaints of misconduct were referred by office staff to a ‘medical screener’ (a medically qualified member of the Council), who would decide whether or not the complaint should proceed to the next stage of the procedures. This was a sifting process. If the medical screener decided that the case ought not to proceed to the next stage, it would be closed, provided that a ‘lay screener’ agreed. In health cases, a ‘health screener’, a medical member of the Council (usually one who practised in psychiatry), was responsible for the supervision of a doctor who was subject to restrictions on his/her practice. In the performance procedures, a medical member of the GMC was appointed as a case co-ordinator. He or she would take important preliminary decisions, which might include the drafting of a statement of requirements for re-education or remediation that the doctor might agree to undertake.
15.30
In future, under the new FTP procedures, it is likely that individual medical members of the GMC will not generally be responsible for any of the preliminary stages of the FTP procedures, as they have been in the past. Insofar as sifting functions require medical expertise, they will be undertaken by medically qualified members of staff, to be known as case examiners. Members of the GMC will be mainly concerned with issues of policy and governance. They will carry much less responsibility than before for decisions on individual cases.
15.31
In the past, five committees were responsible for deciding cases brought under the three types of FTP procedures. These were the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) and the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) (conduct procedures), the Health Committee (HC) (health procedures), and the Assessment Referral Committee and the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP) (performance procedures). In addition, the Interim Orders Committee, created in 2000, had the task of deciding whether it was necessary to suspend a doctor’s registration or to impose conditions on his/her registration pending a final decision on his/her case.
15.32
Panels of the various FTP committees traditionally comprised only members of the appropriate committee; for example, a panel of the HC would comprise sufficient members of that Committee to make a quorum. However, the number of FTP cases increased and it became necessary for multiple panels of FTP committees to sit simultaneously in order to reduce the long delays which were occurring before cases were heard. In order to make this possible, in 2000, the GMC sought and obtained the power to co-opt non-GMC members to sit on its FTP committees. The persons co-opted were known first as ‘adjudicators’, then as ‘associates’. A large number of ‘associates’ (both medical and lay) were recruited to sit on FTP committee panels. When the number of GMC members was reduced in 2003, many retiring members were appointed as associates. By mid-2004, GMC members were no longer sitting on panels save in exceptional circumstances; instead, panels were composed entirely of associates. In future, under the new procedures, GMC members will be ineligible to sit on FTP panels, although they will be eligible to sit on panels of the new Investigation Committee. Whether they will, in fact, do so is as yet uncertain. All other panels will be composed of non-GMC members who have undergone training and assessment.

--- The 'Old' Fitness to Practise Procedures in Outline ---
15.33
The ‘old’ FTP procedures were governed by a range of statutory and internal, non-statutory provisions. The primary legislation was contained in Part V of the 1983 Act. However, each set of procedures had its own set of statutory Rules. In the past, the GMC had difficulty in obtaining amendments to the Rules or securing the passage of new secondary legislation. However, the provisions of section 60 of the Health Act 1999 enabled the GMC to secure much more speedy amendment of the Medical Act and the introduction of secondary legislation. Section 60 enabled the Department of Health to make certain amendments to primary legislation, including the 1983 Act, by Order in Council. Such an Order is subject to affirmative resolution in both Houses of Parliament. The making of regulations and rules under the 1983 Act in relation to FTP procedures and revalidation is a matter for the GMC itself, but they have to be approved by Order of the Privy Council. The GMC also has a set of internal Standing Orders, comprising procedures that have been approved by the full Council. Some of these dealt with aspects of the FTP procedures. In addition, there are internal processes and guidance governing the way in which the GMC handles individual cases. It is not clear to me to what extent these internal processes and guidance have been expressly approved by the full Council. They may be approved by the Fitness to Practise Committee or may possibly be made under powers delegated to the Chief Executive.
15.34
As I have already explained, the three separate FTP procedures were introduced at different times and to fulfil different perceived needs. Some form of disciplinary procedure to deal with misconduct has existed for as long as the GMC itself, although many changes have been made over the years. For many years, the conduct procedures dealt with doctors who had been convicted of criminal offences and with those who were alleged to be guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM). The health procedures came into effect in 1980 to meet the need to protect the public against doctors who were unfit to practise on account of ill health, while at the same time treating such doctors in a non-punitive and supportive way so as to help them to recover and to be rehabilitated into full practice. The performance procedures were introduced in 1997 and were intended to give the GMC the power to deal with doctors whose standard of professional performance was seriously deficient but whose poor performance could not be categorised as SPM.
15.35
The concept of SPM has given rise to considerable difficulty in interpretation. In
, I shall discuss the meaning of SPM and the various attempts that were made over the years to define it. For the moment, suffice it to say that a wide variety of different forms of misbehaviour might amount to SPM. Often, these related to the doctor’s dealings with his/her patients (for example, sexual misconduct), but behaviour which brought the medical profession into disrepute or which undermined public confidence might also amount to SPM even though it did not directly involve patients. For example, dishonesty in research might amount to SPM. In connection with clinical treatment, it had long been recognised that the wilful neglect of clinical responsibilities, such as a refusal to provide treatment when necessary, might amount to SPM. But negligent, as opposed to wilful, failures in connection with clinical treatment might also amount to SPM provided that the failure in question was sufficiently serious. It seemed to be assumed that members of the GMC would recognise a case of SPM when they came across it although, in fact, the evidence suggests that the issue of whether conduct amounted to SPM gave rise to frequent differences of opinion.
15.36
Similarly, there was no accepted definition of what was meant by seriously deficient performance (SDP). As with SPM, it seemed to be assumed that members would recognise it when they came across it. As with SPM, the lack of any authoritative definition gave rise to difficulties and differences of opinion. I shall discuss the meaning of SDP in
15.37
All complaints, allegations and expressions of concern reaching the GMC were considered first by a case manager. He or she would follow detailed instructions when considering whether the matter should be closed at that initial stage or whether it should advance into the FTP procedures. If s/he decided that the case was to proceed, s/he would send it either to a medical screener or, if it was clear that the case involved issues of ill health, directly to a health screener. The medical screener would consider whether the case raised any FTP issue, be it SPM, SDP or serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of ill health. If s/he thought that it did, the case would be transferred to the appropriate Section. If s/he thought that no such issues were raised and that the case should be closed, a lay screener would examine the papers. If the lay screener agreed that the case should be closed, it would be. From that stage onwards, the procedures differed.
15.38
If either the medical or lay screener decided that a question of SPM had arisen, the case was handled in the Conduct Section and went to the PPC, which decided whether the case should proceed to a hearing before a panel of the PCC. Hearings before the PCC took place in public. If the PCC panel found the doctor guilty of SPM, it had the power to administer a reprimand, to impose conditions on the doctor’s registration (such as practising under supervision or undertaking further training), to suspend the doctor from practice for up to a year or to erase his/her name from the medical register.
15.39
When a case was referred to the Health Section (by either a caseworker or a screener), it would be considered by a health screener. In the past, two medical members of the GMC acted as health screeners. From March 2004, two medically qualified case examiners were appointed to act as health screeners in place of the GMC members who had previously fulfilled this function. A very large proportion of all cases dealt with in the health procedures involved psychiatric problems of one sort or another. The health screener would write to the doctor inviting him/her to be examined by at least two medical examiners, usually psychiatrists. On receipt of the examination reports, the health screener would decide whether the doctor’s fitness to practise appeared to be seriously impaired and, if so, s/he would devise a list of conditions (based on the recommendations contained in the examination reports) to which the doctor would be invited to agree. These might include restrictions on the circumstances of practice (such as not practising single-handed) and would always include a requirement that the doctor submit to medical supervision. If the doctor was continuing to practise, there would be a requirement that a professional supervisor should be appointed.
15.40
If the doctor agreed to the proposed conditions, the doctor was said to enter the ‘voluntary’ health procedures. He or she accepted the conditions and the health screener oversaw their operation, seeking periodic reports from the medical supervisor. If and when satisfied that it was appropriate to do so, the health screener might vary the conditions or terminate them, leaving the doctor free to practise. If the doctor did not accept the conditions thought appropriate by the health screener, or if the doctor refused to be examined at all, or was unfit to agree to conditions, the health screener might decide to refer the case to the HC, which had the power to impose conditions upon the doctor’s registration (in effect, the same kind of conditions as the health screener would have suggested) or to suspend him/her from practice for up to a year. The HC sat in private. It did not have the power to erase a doctor from the medical register although it could renew and extend either conditions or suspension. In certain circumstances, it could make a direction that a doctor’s registration should be suspended indefinitely.
15.41
The performance procedures were similar in operation to the health procedures in that they might be entered voluntarily or might operate by compulsion. When it appeared to a medical screener that a doctor’s professional performance might have been seriously deficient and that it was appropriate to take action, s/he might invite the doctor to agree to an assessment of his/her performance by an Assessment Panel. If the doctor agreed, the case would be passed to the Performance Section, where arrangements for the assessment would be put in motion. A case co-ordinator would be appointed. In the past, two medically qualified members of the GMC acted as case co-ordinators. From March 2004, two medically qualified case examiners were appointed to act as case co-ordinators in place of the GMC members who had previously fulfilled this function.
15.42
The Assessment Panel would comprise one lay and two medically qualified assessors, one of whom practised in the same (or a similar) specialty as the doctor under scrutiny. One medical assessor would be appointed as the lead assessor. An assessment might take some months to arrange and complete. When the assessors had submitted their report, the case co-ordinator would decide whether the doctor’s performance appeared to be seriously deficient. If so, s/he might devise a statement of requirements to which the doctor was invited to agree. The statement might require the doctor to undertake training in some aspects of his/her practice and might specify limitations (e.g. a requirement to practise under supervision) on his/her practice. If the doctor accepted the statement of requirements, s/he would enter the ‘voluntary’ performance procedures. The case co-ordinator would require periodic progress reports and, in due course, would arrange for a reassessment to be carried out. If all was satisfactory, the case co-ordinator might decide that the doctor should be free to practise without restriction. If the doctor failed to agree to or comply with the statement of requirements, or refused to co-operate in some other way, or if the case co-ordinator did not think that voluntary procedures were suitable, the case was referred to a panel of the CPP. The panel usually sat in private. If the panel decided that the doctor’s performance had been seriously deficient, it might impose conditions on the doctor’s registration or suspend the doctor from practice for up to a year. It had no power to erase a doctor’s name from the medical register. Both conditions and suspension could be renewed and extended. In certain circumstances, a CPP panel could make a direction for indefinite suspension of a doctor’s registration.
The ‘Silo Effect’
15.43
Because the three different FTP procedures came into existence at different times, they operated separately and independently of each other. Although, in some limited circumstances, it was possible for a doctor to be transferred from one set of procedures to another, a case could not be handled within more than one set of procedures at any one time. Thus, if a doctor presented with problems that included conduct, performance and health issues, a decision had to be taken as to where they were to be handled. The GMC referred to this as the ‘silo effect’. The new FTP procedures have been designed to overcome this fundamental difficulty. It is intended that all cases will be investigated using flexible powers to obtain evidence of various kinds, including expert opinion about clinical practice, medical or psychiatric reports on the doctor’s health, and performance assessment reports. If conduct issues arise, they will usually be determined by a FTP panel but the panel will also be able to consider any issues of performance or health which remain in dispute or which require the imposition of conditions or other sanction.

--- Criticism of the General Medical Council and the Movement for Reform ---
External Criticism
15.44
In his book, ‘The Doctors’ Tale‘
, Sir Donald Irvine (a member of the GMC from 1979 and its President from 1995 until 2002) described how the GMC came under increasing criticism from many quarters from the 1980s onwards. In his Reith Lectures of 1980, entitled ‘Unmasking Medicine’, Professor (now Sir) Ian Kennedy, currently Chairman of the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission), was deeply critical of the GMC. He doubted that medical self-regulation would be adequate by the end of the twentieth century. He observed that, although the GMC had a duty to protect the public interest, it had no method of consulting with the public. He alleged that it dismissed far too many complaints about doctors without adequate investigation or public scrutiny. He considered that the GMC was not properly held to account by the Privy Council. He was concerned that the GMC’s approach to its disciplinary procedures was governed by the amount of money it was prepared to spend on them. He suggested regular re-registration in place of the presumption that a doctor, once qualified, remained fit to practise unless and until it had been proved, on receipt of specific complaint, that s/he was unfit. He also suggested that there should be an inspectorate that would be able to look into all aspects of a doctor’s professional practice. He observed that specific guidelines would be needed as to what constituted good practice.
15.45
Another voice of criticism was that of Mrs Jean Robinson, one-time Chairman of the Patients Association and a lay member of the GMC. In 1988, she published a monograph in which she was deeply critical of the opacity of the GMC procedures and of their failure to do anything to protect patients from the poor clinical performance of incompetent doctors. Professor Rudolf Klein, of the University of Bath, criticised the GMC’s reactive approach to complaints of misconduct and its complete failure to tackle the problems of poor performance.
15.46
In 1989, the British Medical Journal published a series of articles by Mr Richard Smith, then an editorial assistant. These were severely critical of the GMC. It was said that the GMC was too large and its membership too old and too conservative. It was too interested in internal issues and was not sufficiently concerned about issues of medical education and clinical incompetence. Also, it should have been (but was not) seen to be serving the public interest; instead, it complained when criticised in the media.
15.47
One might summarise those criticisms by saying that the GMC was ‘doctor-centred’. It appeared to assume that all doctors were good, competent and conscientious until proved otherwise. It would deal with the profession’s ‘bad apples’ for the sake of the profession. It would do so in its own way and did not welcome scrutiny. Its procedures were designed to be fair to doctors and to ensure that no doctor would lose his/her right to practise without very good cause. It did not focus on the reasonable expectations of the public and it did not see itself as having a duty to ensure that all members of the medical profession were willing and able to provide a proper professional service.
15.48
Since the time when this criticism was at its height, the GMC has made considerable efforts to change. The development of the performance procedures in the early 1990s, and the improvements in the health procedures, which I shall describe later, are examples of this. In ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, Sir Donald Irvine described his election to the Presidency on a ‘reforming ticket’. He won the election but explained that the road to reform was not always easy. To some extent, events were to push the GMC forward. The tragedies of the Shipman case, the events surrounding the failure of paediatric heart surgery at Bristol Royal Infirmary and the case of Rodney Ledward (a consultant gynaecologist, whose lack of skill had caused injury to many of his patients over a period of 15 years or so) were important agents of change in the late 1990s. However, even before then, an expression of concern about the possibility of racial bias within the GMC had led to a wide-ranging examination of the GMC’s internal procedures and to many important procedural changes.
15.49
In 1994, an analysis of the nature and outcome of cases considered by the PCC over a ten-year period was brought to the attention of the GMC. This analysis appeared to suggest that doctors from the ethnic minorities were more likely to be brought before the PCC than were white doctors. To its great credit, the GMC decided that these concerns must be fully investigated. The GMC instructed the Policy Studies Institute (PSI) to do the work and gave the PSI team full access to all the relevant material that was available.
15.50
Allegations of racial bias are completely outside the Inquiry’s remit. However, allegations that the GMC is biased towards doctors are not. The Inquiry is aware that there is a public perception that the GMC often favours the doctor as opposed to the complainant in its decision-making processes. This is an allegation of bias in another form. The work of the PSI team was to shed a great deal of light upon the procedures of the GMC. Those procedures are of interest to the Inquiry. Only if the GMC’s procedures were thorough, fair and transparent would it be possible to say whether there was bias against complainants and whether patients were being properly protected from the actions of doctors reported to the GMC for alleged misconduct or incompetence.
15.51
The purpose of the PSI study was, first, to look for evidence of racial bias in the existing GMC procedures and processes and, second, to consider whether any changes should be made to minimise the risk of racial bias in the future. The study was confined to the GMC’s conduct procedures. The study team was led by Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster PSI. Initially, Professor Allen and her colleagues analysed complaints made to the GMC against doctors in the 12 month period to August 1994. A Report (the 1996 PSI Report), setting out their findings and recommendations for change, was presented to the Racial Equality Group of the GMC in November 1995 and published in 1996.
15.52
The PSI team had considerable difficulty in carrying out its work. It found that the GMC data was largely recorded by hand. There was no reliable log or database of past complaints. The way in which complaints were classified made it difficult to analyse their seriousness. Papers relating to past complaints were stored in the same files as enquiries, general correspondence and press cuttings. Papers relating to an individual doctor were not necessarily filed together. An analysis carried out by the PSI team cast doubt upon the accuracy of statistics previously produced by the GMC. As a consequence of these difficulties, the 1996 PSI Report made detailed recommendations about steps which should be taken to establish a reliable and accurate database of complaints. The Report also made many observations and recommendations about the GMC’s procedures for handling complaints. I shall refer to some of these in the Chapters that follow.
15.53
On the issue of racial bias, Professor Allen and her colleagues reported that they found
‘no evidence of any overt racial discrimination or bias in either the procedures or the processes relating to conduct’
. Nor did they find evidence of any form of overt racial discrimination or bias in any interview or informal encounter with GMC staff or members or in any written comment found on the GMC files. Nevertheless, the statistical analysis carried out by the PSI team clearly showed that doctors who had qualified overseas or who had a name which suggested that they belonged to an ethnic minority were more likely than those who had qualified in the UK or Ireland or who had an English or European name to be referred on through the FTP procedures, as opposed to having their case closed at an early stage. The major difference between the groups was found in the proportion of each group referred by the PPC for a hearing before the PCC. These differences could not be satisfactorily explained because of the opacity of the GMC processes.
15.54
The 1996 PSI Report made clear that the fact that there were differences in outcome between the two groups did not of itself mean that there was racial bias within the GMC. It might just have been that the complaints against overseas qualifiers and those from non-English/European countries were more serious than those against members of the other groups. However, the possibility of bias could not be ruled out. The main conclusion of the Report was that, unless all the GMC procedures for handling complaints against doctors were transparent and open, it would not be possible to demonstrate that there had been no bias. The Report recommended a number of steps that the GMC should take in order to make its procedures more open, transparent and consistent. I shall discuss those recommendations later in this Report.
15.55
In 1998, the GMC commissioned a follow-up study from the PSI, which resulted in a further Report. The aim of this follow-up study was to identify any factors which might explain differences in the representation of overseas qualified doctors at the various stages of the GMC conduct procedures. Before beginning its follow-up study, the PSI team recommended some immediate changes to the GMC procedures. These were designed to streamline the screening process and to improve the transparency and consistency of decision-making. I shall describe these changes in
. The PSI team carried out a quantitative analysis of complaints received by the GMC in the calendar years 1997, 1998 and 1999, and examined the results for evidence of racial bias. In addition, the study examined the screening process, including the effects of the changes to the process which had been introduced by the GMC on the advice of the PSI team. The study also examined the decision-making processes of the PPC.
15.56
By the time the follow-up study began, the GMC had made considerable progress in implementing the recommendations contained in the 1996 PSI Report. In particular, its data collection system had been computerised and the process of tracking complaints had been made much easier. However, the number of complaints received by the GMC annually had increased markedly and considerable delays were occurring in the processing of complaints. At this time, the GMC had a relatively small staff, many of whom had been employed for a long time. Skills had been passed on by personal contact and mentoring and the GMC had not at that stage developed systems which would enable it to enlarge its staff and train new personnel to deal with this increased workload.
15.57
The analysis performed by the PSI team showed that, in all three years studied, there was an unexplained discrepancy between the number of UK qualified doctors referred to the PCC by the PPC and the number of overseas qualified doctors so referred. For example, in 1999, of the cases referred to the PPC, the proportion of UK qualifiers sent by the PPC for hearing at the PCC was 33%, whereas the proportion of overseas qualifiers sent was 54%. Professor Allen and her colleagues could not account for that difference. They noted that, since the PPC did not keep a contemporaneous record of its deliberations and gave no reasons for its decisions, no firm conclusions could be reached. There were also significant, unexplained differences between UK and overseas qualifiers in the outcomes of cases heard by the PCC.
15.58
The 2000 PSI Report made a number of recommendations, which I shall discuss in later Chapters. For the moment, it suffices to say that the general thrust was that, in order to provide consistency and transparency in GMC decisions, there was an urgent need for the development of standards and criteria. In particular, there was a need for a clear definition and an agreed interpretation of SPM.
15.59
In 2002, Professor Allen and her colleagues were commissioned to carry out further work for the GMC. They conducted a preliminary analysis of the data relating to complaints received by the GMC in 1999, 2000 and 2001. Their findings were set out in a Paper. The analysis showed marked differences between the relative proportions of UK and overseas qualified doctors referred to the PPC by individual medical screeners. Some screeners referred equal proportions of UK qualifiers and overseas qualifiers, whereas other screeners referred three times as many overseas qualifiers as UK qualifiers. As the distribution of cases to the screeners was said to be random, it appeared that the screeners must be applying different standards. Again, the proportion of overseas qualifiers referred by the PPC to the PCC was higher than that of the UK qualifiers. There were also continuing differences between UK qualifiers and overseas qualifiers in the outcomes of cases heard by the PCC. Once again, Professor Allen and her colleagues observed that it was possible that the complaints received about overseas qualifiers had been more serious than those about their UK counterparts. That would explain the disproportionate referral rates and the differences in outcomes. But, in the absence of objective criteria against which decisions could be measured, it was still impossible to demonstrate this.
15.60
Thus, in three studies, conducted over a period of nine years, the PSI found unexplained differences in the treatment by the GMC of overseas qualifiers as compared with UK qualifiers; the overseas qualifiers were more severely dealt with. This may or may not indicate that there is racial bias within the GMC. The importance of these findings, from the Inquiry’s point of view, is that the procedures are lacking in transparency. It ought to be possible to refute a suggestion of bias if it can be demonstrated that decisions are taken according to objective criteria and by the consistent application of established standards. Professor Allen has repeatedly advised the GMC that it will be unable to refute the allegations of racial bias unless and until it develops objective standards and criteria. It seems to me to follow that, without such standards and criteria, the GMC will be unable to satisfy the public that it is complying with its duty to protect patients.

--- Recognition of the Need for Change ---
15.61
I have mentioned that a number of events occurred in the late 1990s (Bristol, Ledward, Shipman) which appeared to give rise to a collective public loss of confidence in the medical profession in general. I say ‘collective’ and ‘in general’ because it does not seem to me that there was any loss of confidence by individuals in the doctors who were treating them personally. Both Government and the GMC recognised the need for radical change. This has resulted in a programme of reform on three fronts. First, the constitution of the GMC has been changed; as I have already noted, the large unwieldy Council of 104 members has been reduced to one of 35 members and the proportion of lay members has been increased. Second, the GMC announced its intention to overhaul its FTP procedures. The new procedures have recently come into force. Third, the GMC intends to introduce, in 2005, a system of re-licensure to be known as revalidation. I shall discuss the proposals for the FTP procedures and revalidation in greater detail in later Chapters.
15.62
Other changes have very recently been made to the regulatory landscape. In 2004, the Healthcare Commission came into being, with responsibility for the supervision of the function of NHS bodies and private medicine. It is also responsible for the ‘second stage’ of patients’ complaints about NHS doctors and services. Although this body will not have any direct involvement in the regulation of doctors by the GMC, it could well have an indirect effect. For example, it might refer to the GMC cases it has investigated through its involvement with the complaints procedures and where it has found cause for concern about the fitness to practise of a doctor.
15.63
Of more direct effect on the regulatory landscape was the creation in 2003 of the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence (CRHP/CHRE)). This body has an overarching responsibility for the regulators of healthcare professionals, including, of course, the GMC. The powers of the CRHP/CHRE include the power to investigate and report on the performance by regulators of their functions, and to make recommendations for change. It can also give directions requiring a regulatory body to make specified rules if it considers that it would be desirable to do so for the protection of members of the public. Section 28 of the National Health Service Reform and Health Care Professions Act 2002 also gives the Secretary of State for Health powers to make regulations enabling the CRHP/CHRE to investigate complaints from individuals about the way in which a regulatory body has exercised any of its functions. The CRHP/CHRE also has the power to appeal against certain decisions of regulatory bodies that appear to be unduly lenient where it would be desirable, for the protection of the public, for the CRHP/CHRE to take action. Appeals by the CRHP/CHRE lie to the High Court. This is a wholly new concept in the field of professional regulation. Whereas, previously, only an individual aggrieved at a decision of the GMC had had the right to challenge that decision, an appeal now lies, in effect, on behalf of the public interest.
From the Horse’s Mouth
15.64
In the following Chapters, I shall examine the GMC’s old FTP procedures in some detail. I shall examine not only how those procedures were supposed to work but also how they operated in practice. I shall also examine in some detail the GMC’s proposals for the future, in particular the new FTP procedures and revalidation. As will soon become apparent, I will be critical of many aspects of the GMC’s work in the past.
15.65
The GMC’s stance at the Inquiry was not that it has, at all times, been perfect. Very realistically, those representing the GMC recognised that there has been much to criticise. On the day on which the Inquiry turned to examine the work of the GMC, its Leading Counsel, Mr Roger Henderson QC, made frank admissions in relation to many of the shortcomings which had become evident in the course of the Inquiry’s investigations. He accepted that the GMC procedures had failed in many respects to meet the reasonable expectations of the public and patients. His message to the Inquiry was that these deficiencies had been recognised and addressed. He spoke of the paramount duty of the GMC to safeguard patients’ interests, while having due regard for the interests of doctors.
15.66
I welcomed Mr Henderson’s admissions, which were clearly made with the authority of the GMC at the highest level. I recognise that they were made in the hope that the Inquiry’s criticisms might be muted or even silenced in the light of the GMC’s recognition of its past faults. They were nonetheless welcome for that. They are important and I propose to summarise them.
15.67
First, in respect of operational matters, Mr Henderson admitted that there had been unacceptable delay in dealing with complaints and concerns about doctors. He accepted that the GMC had failed adequately to investigate complaints and had failed to follow up complaints that had been referred to other bodies for investigation. He accepted that cases had been closed which should not have been closed.
15.68
Second, in respect of the quality of decision-making, Mr Henderson accepted that there had been a lack of consistency and that the quality of decisions had been variable. He accepted that the approach had been ‘idiosyncratic rather than systematic’ and the resulting disparity between the outcomes of cases ‘unacceptable’. Mr Henderson attributed the lack of consistency, in part, to the ‘absence of satisfactorily planned and structured training’. He said:
‘It may have been thought invidious for elected Council members to require training whether as screeners, members of the PPC or of the PCC. Such an old-fashioned approach is long outmoded and is recognised as being wholly out of keeping with the needs of today and tomorrow. The philosophy of voluntary, well-meaning, judgmental concern can be no substitute for suitable training of suitably qualified people guided by systematised, coherent and carefully planned procedures enshrined in clear text on the subject of appropriate supervision and audit.’
15.69
Mr Henderson drew attention, very properly, to the attempts that had been made to provide training and guidance for those making decisions but accepted that they had not been sufficient. He said that the GMC now recognised the need for structured training for decision-makers. While I accept and agree with all that Mr Henderson said about training and guidance, I observe that he did not mention the need for clear standards and criteria as the basis for decisions.
15.70
Mr Henderson suggested that another cause of inconsistency and poor quality in decision-making was the fact that it had not in the past been the practice for GMC panels or committees to give reasons for their decisions. He said that ‘the giving of reasons is salutary’. He said (and I agree) that the discipline of having to give reasons improves the decision-making process. He pointed out, in defence of the GMC’s failure to give reasons in the past, that the Privy Council had, until recently, approved its practice. That had now changed, although Mr Henderson conceded that, even in recent times, the reasons given were not always what they should be.
15.71
So far as screening decisions were concerned, Mr Henderson admitted that there had been disparity between outcomes. He attributed this to a failure by the GMC to
appreciate the true nature of the screening process until advised about it by Mr Justice Lightman
in the case of
in 2000. Until then, Mr Henderson said, screeners had wished to bring their professional judgement to bear on cases in a way that was, in fact, inappropriate. He accepted that too many cases had been ‘screened out’. When referring to some of the cases which the Inquiry had examined and had found to contain inconsistent decisions, he concluded:
‘With the benefit of proper audit and consistent training, there should have been a consistent set of results leading to more Committee decisions comprised of persons who, in turn, would, by training and documentation, have avoided some of the problems which some of those chosen cases reveal.’
15.72
Mr Henderson also acknowledged that there had been insufficient audit of GMC decisions. Indeed, he accepted that such audit of decisions as had occurred (and that had occurred only in recent years) had been ‘in character more enumerative than qualitative’. In other words, audit had looked at how many cases had been dealt with, not whether they had been properly decided. He agreed that that was not good enough and that proper audit was now required. The lack of transparency in GMC decisions was now, he said, being addressed.
15.73
Mr Henderson’s message to the Inquiry was that the failings of the past have been recognised and addressed. The new FTP procedures would resolve not only the difficulties caused by the ‘silo effect’ of the separate procedures but would also ensure that cases were properly investigated and eventually resolved by decisions taken by persons who were qualified and trained for the task.


========================================================================
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
15.74
Since Stage Four of the Inquiry began, there has been some speculation in the newspapers, particularly in the medical press, that the Shipman Inquiry might ‘bring down’ the GMC. It was suggested that I might recommend the ‘abolition’ of the GMC. Such speculation was ill informed. Before Stage Four began, I set out the issues that the Inquiry would examine. The future existence of the GMC was not among them. The Inquiry published a Consultation Paper in October 2003, in which the views of respondents were sought on a wide range of issues. Those issues did not include the ‘abolition’ of the GMC or the ending of self-regulation for the medical profession. It is unthinkable that I would make such wide-ranging recommendations without giving proper notice.
15.75
The Inquiry’s Terms of Reference are wide and certainly require me to examine the GMC’s performance of its FTP functions. They are, I think, wide enough to permit me - indeed to require me - to consider whether those functions should be carried out in a different way or even by a different body. They are wide enough, I think, to permit me to suggest that the GMC should organise itself in a different way, so that it might better fulfil its primary duty to protect patients. What they do not permit, in my view, is any consideration of whether the GMC should continue to exist or whether self-regulation of doctors should be ended. In my view, if those matters are to be considered, the task must be undertaken by a body charged with examination of all the GMC’s functions. This Inquiry has focussed on the FTP procedures and on revalidation. The GMC has other important functions, which this Inquiry has not touched upon.
15.76
I have just referred to the ‘self-regulation’ of the medical profession. Throughout its evidence and in its submissions to the Inquiry, the GMC has been at pains to point out that the regulation of the profession is now a complex operation in which many other bodies play a part. These include the NHS bodies which employ or contract with doctors, the Healthcare Commission which has wide-ranging responsibility for the audit and inspection of healthcare services and the CRHP/CHRE. The GMC says, and I accept, that it must work in partnership with those other bodies. The GMC is dependent upon other bodies (and patients and other healthcare professionals) reporting to it their complaints and concerns about doctors. Nonetheless, the GMC plays the key role as the keeper of the register. The GMC decides who can practise as a doctor and who cannot.
15.77
In recent years, the GMC has been the subject of much public criticism, most of it stemming from the way in which it has dealt with or failed to deal with doctors who have been guilty of some form of misconduct. The FTP procedures are the public face of the GMC and the most likely point of contact with the GMC for ordinary members of the public. The fact is that the public has come to regard the GMC with suspicion and distrust because it perceives that the GMC acts, not in the interests of patients, but in the interests of doctors. Indeed, many members of the public have the impression that the GMC is a representative body, akin to a trade union. Paradoxically, the GMC also comes in for criticism from the profession, where the perception is that the GMC is unfair to doctors and too hard on them. These issues of ‘ethos and attitudes’ go to the heart of whether the GMC is in fact acting, as it claims to act, in the interests of patient protection. Consideration of these issues has required a careful and detailed review of what the GMC does and how it operates in practice.
15.78
Examination of the ethos and attitudes of the GMC has been a vital part of the Inquiry’s work. However, practical matters are also important. A body cannot work effectively for the protection of patients if its procedures and practices are inefficient. One of the criticisms levelled against the GMC is that there has at times been unacceptable delay in dealing with complaints and in bringing doctors before a disciplinary committee. Mr Scott and Mr Antony Townsend, who was Head of the Conduct Section from 1993 to 1995, accepted that until the mid-1990s, the GMC’s administrative systems were old-fashioned and inadequate. Much has been done to improve them and to reduce the delay that previously occurred. The GMC now operates according to service standards.
15.79
Besides examining attitudes and procedures, the Inquiry has had to consider the FTP procedures themselves and whether they are effective as a means of protecting patients from doctors who misbehave or fail to practise at an acceptable level. Much of the Inquiry’s investigation was designed to discover that. Before that investigation had even begun, the GMC had recognised that its current procedures were not effective and that they must be changed. As the Inquiry was doing its work, the GMC was developing its new FTP procedures. They have now been introduced.
15.80
In its evidence and submissions to the Inquiry, the GMC sought to assure the Inquiry (and indeed the public) that the new FTP procedures will be very different from the old. I hope that they will. But, in seeking to make recommendations for the better protection of patients in the future, I must form a view as to whether the GMC will, in the event, be willing and able to ensure that all is indeed different. It is axiomatic that the best indicator of future attitude and performance is past attitude and performance. Changes of practice and performance are, of course, possible, as the GMC has already demonstrated. Changes of attitude are more difficult to bring about. In the following Chapters, I shall set out in detail how the FTP procedures have worked in the past and the conclusions I have reached about the ethos of the GMC in the past. I shall also consider the evidence relating to the way in which the new procedures have been developed and are likely to operate in the future. I shall consider whether that evidence demonstrates a change of ethos within the GMC. Finally I shall consider what steps or further steps should be taken by the GMC to ensure that patients and the public receive the protection they deserve from doctors who, for one reason or another, are not practising as they should.

--- CHAPTER SIXTEEN - The General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case in 1976 ---
Possible Criticisms of the General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case

--- The Shipman Case ---
16.82
Against that background, I shall turn now to consider the GMC’s handling of Shipman’s case. I described Shipman’s abuse of controlled drugs in Todmorden briefly in my First Report and at greater length in my Fourth Report. For present purposes, I shall confine my account to those matters which had, or might have had, a bearing on the GMC’s handling of his case.
The General Medical Council Is Notified of Shipman’s Convictions
16.83
Shipman was convicted and sentenced at the Halifax Magistrates’ Court on 13th
February 1976. The GMC was informed of his conviction by a letter from the West Yorkshire Police (WYP) dated 8th
March 1976. To the letter was attached a schedule, setting out details of the offences of which Shipman had been convicted. These comprised three offences of dishonestly obtaining drugs by means of a criminal deception, two offences of forgery of a NHS prescription and three offences of unlawful possession of a controlled drug (pethidine). The schedule also recorded that 74 similar offences had been taken into consideration. Shipman had been fined £75 on each charge and ordered to pay £58.78 compensation to the local FPC, i.e. Calderdale FPC, on whose list he was included at that time.
16.84
No further details of the offences to be taken into consideration were given and it does not appear that the GMC ever sought or obtained a list. No details of the offences survive; the police and court files, which would have contained a list, have now been destroyed. However, it is clear from contemporaneous press reports that 67 of the 74 offences concerned the obtaining of pethidine by deception and that the remaining seven were offences of forgery.
16.85
The letter from the WYP, written in March, was the first intimation that the GMC had of Shipman’s involvement in criminal proceedings. Shipman had admitted the offences to the police and to an inspector from the Home Office Drugs Branch in November 1975, and was charged shortly afterwards. A doctor was under no obligation to inform the GMC of the fact that s/he had been charged with criminal offences, or indeed of his/her conviction when it occurred. Nor were the police under any duty to inform the GMC of a doctor’s involvement in criminal proceedings unless and until s/he had been convicted of an offence.
16.86
In 1976, advance warning of a doctor’s involvement in criminal proceedings before s/he was convicted of an offence would not have been of any practical benefit to the GMC. As I explain in
, it had no power to take interim action, e.g. by suspending the doctor’s registration or by imposing conditions on it. In 1980, the GMC acquired limited powers to make interim orders. The limited nature of those powers meant that, in 1998, the GMC was unable to suspend Shipman’s registration, despite the fact that he had been arrested on a charge of murder. In 2000, wider powers were conferred on the GMC, and a new Interim Orders Committee created, as a direct result of the public concern caused by the GMC’s inability to act in Shipman’s case.
The General Medical Council Requests Further Information
16.87
On receipt of the letter from the police, Mr Gray endorsed it with a note to Mr Williams, requesting him to ask both the police and the Home Office Drugs Branch for further particulars and then to
‘draft’
(by which I think he meant prepare the case by drafting a memorandum) for the April 1976 meeting of the PeCC. Mr Williams duly wrote to the WYP and to Mrs Susan Powrie at the Home Office Drugs Branch.
16.88
Mr Williams’ letter to the WYP requested
‘a brief account of the circumstances surrounding the offences’
. It concluded:
‘The Committee will be particularly concerned to know whether the drugs involved were improperly obtained by the practitioner for self-administration or for other purposes.’
Mr Gray explained to the Inquiry that, if Shipman had obtained drugs for the purpose of self-administration, this would mean that he had been dishonest, that he had used the drugs improperly and that he had abused his professional privileges. However, he would not have been regarded by the GMC as being a danger to the public in the same way as he would have been if he had supplied drugs to others. I shall refer to the effect of this distinction later in this Chapter.
The Response of the Police
16.89
The WYP responded by letter dated 22nd
March 1976, saying that it was
‘contrary to practice to supply extracts from police reports to outside bodies in cases such as this’
. The letter did, however, offer the officer in the case, Detective Sergeant (DS) George McKeating, for interview. He would not be permitted to sign a written statement but would be able to answer questions on any matters upon which he was competent to give evidence. The letter also indicated that DS McKeating would attend a hearing on receipt of a
. Details of the charges which would be levied for interviewing DS McKeating, and for his attendance at a hearing, were given.
16.90
Mr Gray said that some police forces were more co-operative than others in providing information. They were generally reluctant to provide information in writing about anything which had not been proved in a criminal court. Mr Williams thought that the response from the WYP was
‘a bit unusual’
. His recollection was that the police were usually more helpful than they had been in this case.
16.91
Detective Chief Inspector (DCI) Bryan Dent, of the WYP Drug Squad, provided a witness statement to the Inquiry. He was a young detective in the late 1970s, so had no personal knowledge of the procedures then in force. However, he had done some research and believed that the police would have been conscious at that time of the fact that interviews with an accused person were regarded as confidential to the criminal justice process. A recent decision in the courts had, he believed, led to a policy of refusing to release transcripts of interviews or reports and other exhibits which had come into the possession of the police during an investigation. However, supplementary information would be provided if an officer was interviewed. DCI Dent suggested that this was a means, in effect, of circumventing the embargo on releasing documents. While it was not the practice at that time for an officer to sign a statement recording what had been said at the interview, s/he would reiterate the contents of the statement if subsequently subpoenaed to give evidence at a hearing.
16.92
Mr Gray saw the letter from the WYP when it came in. He told the Inquiry that the offer to provide information, although kind, was not very helpful to GMC staff at this stage in the proceedings. It was clear that DS McKeating would not be permitted to sign a statement which could be put before the PeCC. If Mr Gray had interviewed DS McKeating and had taken notes, he could not, he said, have put those notes before the PeCC since they would not have been ‘evidence’. The PeCC did not hear oral evidence, so DS McKeating could not have been subpoenaed to attend before it. However, Mr Gray said that, if the case had been referred by the PeCC to the DC, DS McKeating would ‘almost certainly’ have been subpoenaed to attend and give evidence. In his witness statement, Mr Gray said that he could recall having had several telephone calls with police officers that had cast valuable light on the circumstances behind convictions. However, he did not telephone DS McKeating on this occasion.
16.93
It seems to me that, when considering a conviction case, it would always have been helpful to the PeCC and to the DC to have some background information from a police officer with personal knowledge of the case. A mere schedule of offences may not convey a very clear impression of the degree of misconduct. For example, the
modus operandi
of an offence is not always apparent from the schedule, and information about it may be very revealing. Also, the immediate response of a person when accused of an offence may often be revealing of his/her attitude towards it.
16.94
Mr Gray was asked whether he would have thought of interviewing DS McKeating and of submitting to the PeCC a note, setting out the evidence which the officer could be expected to give if he were called before the DC. Mr Gray replied that he had not regarded it as his function to do that and that no one had ever suggested that he should. His practice was to submit to the PeCC only ‘objective, good evidence’. He would have been concerned that, if he had summarised for the PeCC the evidence which the officer was expected to give and, in the event, the officer had not ‘come up to proof’ when giving evidence before the DC, he (i.e. Mr Gray) would be criticised. Mr Gray said that, in any event, there was enough information from the police and the Home Office to justify the staff in referring the case to the PeCC without seeking further evidence. He said that there was enough evidence also to justify the PeCC referring the case on to the DC if it had thought fit. Had the PeCC done so, any additional information which DS McKeating could have given would, Mr Gray said, have come to light when he was called to attend the DC hearing. That is so but, as the case was not referred to the DC, the evidence was never obtained.
16.95
The fact that any information coming from a police officer to the PeCC as a result of an interview conducted by a member of the GMC staff would have been hearsay (and therefore not, in Mr Gray’s view, ‘objective, good evidence’) does not seem to me to be a good reason for not obtaining it. If the hearsay evidence were favourable to the doctor, no harm would have been done to his/her interests; if it were damaging to him/her and the PeCC decided to refer the case to the DC, the officer could be called to give evidence and the doctor’s representatives would have the opportunity to challenge what s/he said. In any event, the PeCC was willing to accept a letter written by a solicitor representing the doctor, in which the doctor’s account was set out. Such a letter also constitutes hearsay evidence and would not be admissible in that form as evidence of the truth of its contents. So it appears that the PeCC was prepared to receive hearsay evidence of the doctor’s account but not of a police officer’s.
16.96
Mr Gray annotated the letter from the WYP with comments addressed to Mr Williams. The note read:
‘... Pl
please
speak. with previous pp
papers
(?one for solicitors)’
Mr Gray said that his note was suggesting that he and Mr Williams should discuss the possibility of asking the GMC’s solicitors to take a statement from the police officer. It is not clear how such a statement would have been used or at what stage in the proceedings, although, in view of Mr Gray’s evidence, it seems likely that it would have formed part of the preparation for a hearing before the DC rather than for submission to the PeCC. In the event, it does not appear that the suggested discussion ever took place, probably because a letter containing useful information was received from the Home Office Drugs Branch.
The Response of the Home Office
16.97
As I have said, Mr Williams had also written to Mrs Powrie at the Home Office Drugs Branch requesting
‘a brief account of the circumstances leading up to’
the offences, together with any additional information which might assist the PeCC when it considered the case in April. Mrs Powrie responded in a letter dated 25th
March 1976.
16.98
Mrs Powrie’s letter informed the GMC that Shipman had first come to the notice of the Home Office Drugs Branch in July 1975. In fact, this was incorrect; Shipman had first attracted its attention in January and February 1975, when it was observed that he had collected large quantities of pethidine from two local pharmacies. Enquiries were made at that time and it was decided to maintain a watch on him and to see if anything further came to light. This information never became known to the GMC. That said, it is unlikely that it would have had any effect upon the outcome of the case, even had the GMC been aware of it.
16.99
Mrs Powrie went on to say that, in July 1975, it had been discovered that Shipman was obtaining large and regular supplies of pethidine on written requisitions for use in his practice and on prescriptions for a patient. Shipman had always collected the prescriptions for the patient, who was suffering from terminal cancer. It had subsequently come to light that he was not keeping a register of supplies of controlled drugs, whereupon he had been informed of the statutory requirement to do so.
16.100
The letter went on to relate how, in September 1975, it had been reported that Shipman had resigned from his practice and had admitted his addiction to pethidine after his purchases of large amounts of the drug had come to the attention of one of his partners. It had transpired that Shipman had also been obtaining pethidine on prescription, ostensibly for patients, and the facts were communicated to the WYP. The letter explained that, in an interview with an inspector from the Home Office Drugs Branch and a police officer in November 1975, Shipman had admitted committing the offences. He had said that he had begun to take pethidine in April 1974. The letter stated that Shipman had been receiving treatment for his addiction from Dr (Ronald) Bryson at The Retreat, York, and Dr (Hugo) Milne of Lynfield Mount Hospital, Bradford.
16.101
I explained in my Fourth Report that, in 1976, the Home Secretary had the power to make a direction in respect of a doctor who had been convicted of an offence under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (MDA 1971). Under section 12 of the MDA 1971, the Home Secretary could direct that the doctor should be prohibited from possessing, supplying, prescribing or administering controlled drugs. Indeed, the Home Secretary still possesses the power to make a section 12 direction, although it has not been exercised for a decade or more. In her letter, Mrs Powrie indicated that the Home Office was considering whether action should be taken under section 12 of the MDA 1971. She said,
‘... we should be glad if in this connection you would let us know the view taken by the Penal Cases Committee’
. As I explained in the Fourth Report, the Home Office paid considerable attention to the attitude of the GMC when considering whether to make a section 12 direction, as the GMC had greater experience in the field of drug misuse by doctors than did the Home Office. The main interest and experience of the Home Office lay in uncovering the illegal supplying of drugs.
16.102
April 1976, Mr Williams responded to Mrs Powrie’s letter, promising to let her know in due course the decision taken by the PeCC. On the same day, he wrote to Shipman, informing him that his conviction had been reported to the GMC and telling him that a further communication would be sent to him when the PeCC had decided whether to take any action in relation to it. This was the standard letter sent to doctors in conviction cases and, sometimes, it was the only letter which they would receive before their case was considered by the PeCC. I have already explained that it was not the invariable practice of the GMC at the time to ask for an explanation from the doctor at this stage in the proceedings. As I have said, however, the Inquiry has seen that it was often done in drug-related cases.
16.103
Mr Williams then prepared a memorandum for the attention of Mr Gray. The memorandum was dated 1st
April 1976. Attached to the memorandum was the original letter from the WYP, together with the schedule of offences. It is probable that Mrs Powrie’s letter was also attached. Mr Williams referred to the letter from the WYP and the schedule of offences attached to it. He indicated that Shipman had been positively identified as a doctor on the medical register. He mentioned his request for further information from the WYP and the response which, he said,
‘made it clear that they are not prepared to provide any, short of being subpoenaed’
. This was not strictly correct, as the police had offered an interview with DS McKeating. It may be that Mr Williams realised that this would not be deemed appropriate and mentioned what he believed to be the only option likely to be acceptable. Mr Williams went on to say:
‘Fortunately Mrs Powrie of the Home Office (Drugs Branch) has furnished a useful and comprehensive account of the particular circumstances of the offences and the attitude taken by the police will not therefore be detrimental to the information that we can provide for the Penal Cases Committee.’
16.104
Mr Williams expressed uncertainty as to whether the total fine imposed on Shipman had been £225 or £600. Finally, he sought Mr Gray’s authority to send the item to the PeCC. Mr Gray endorsed the memorandum with a request that Mr Williams should telephone the Magistrates’ Court and find out how much Shipman had been fined. Mr Williams did so and learned that the total fine had been £600. I find it puzzling that Mr Gray should be concerned to find out how much Shipman had been fined and yet did not attempt to obtain a fuller account of Shipman’s criminal conduct. In any event, Mr Gray was satisfied that the information was sufficient to go to the PeCC. He told the Inquiry that the information provided by the Home Office constituted what seemed to him to be ‘a sufficiently complete story’. Accordingly, no further consideration was given to enlisting the assistance of the GMC’s solicitors to obtain further information from the police at that stage.
Limitations on the Investigations Made for the Purposes of the Penal Cases Committee
16.105
In a witness statement to the Inquiry, Mr Gray said that, with a conviction case, the GMC needed to:
‘... seek sufficient evidence of the circumstances
i.e. of the offences
to enable the Penal Cases Committee to assess the gravity of the case and the extent to which it revealed that the practitioner concerned was a danger to patients’
16.106
It seems to me that, if the PeCC had confined itself to making a decision on a broad brush basis as to whether or not a case should be referred to the DC on the grounds of either the gravity of the doctor’s conduct or the risk to patients or both, it would have been reasonable for it to limit the evidence it received in the way described by Mr Gray. In a case of a doctor convicted of multiple offences involving the dishonest obtaining of controlled drugs over a period of time as the result of drug addiction, the broad brush approach should always have led to a decision to refer the case to the DC on the grounds of gravity and risk to patients. However, as I have already explained, the PeCC did not always confine itself to that type of broad brush approach; it would sometimes decide that a rehabilitative approach should be taken and that the doctor need not be referred to the DC, despite the obvious seriousness of the offences of which s/he had been convicted. In short, it would take, not a filtering decision, but the substantive decision. Quite apart from the fact that such decisions do not appear to me to have been appropriate for what was supposed to be a filtering committee, such substantive decisions would have required careful consideration of all the evidence. The PeCC would not have had access to all the evidence that would have been available to the DC.
The Evidence of Detective Sergeant McKeating
16.107
In Shipman’s case, the PeCC did not have the evidence of DS McKeating that would have been available to the DC had the case been referred. If DS McKeating had been called to give evidence, he would have been able to explain Shipman’s
modus operandi
and the extent of his dishonesty. He would have been able to describe the offences taken into consideration by the Magistrates’ Court. DS McKeating would also have explained why, in some cases, Shipman had also been charged with forgery: on some occasions, Shipman had forged the signature of a staff member at the residential home where the patient lived. The patient was elderly and entitled to exemption from the prescription charge; if the patient had not appeared to claim exemption, the pharmacist would have wondered why. In my view, the forgery of a signature is a significant additional act of dishonesty over and above the dishonesty inherent in obtaining the drugs by deception. DS McKeating might also have mentioned Shipman’s rather cavalier attitude towards his offending, which had been revealed during the interview conducted by himself and the Home Office Drugs Branch inspector. When describing to his interviewers how much of one patient’s pethidine he had taken for himself, Shipman had said,
‘Shall we say half for her and half for me?’
DS McKeating might also have expressed the view which he gave to the Inquiry that, from his assessment of the appearance of the collapsed veins in Shipman’s arms, it appeared that Shipman had been injecting himself for much longer than the period covered by his known offending. DS McKeating told the Inquiry that it appeared to him that Shipman had been using drugs for about five years rather than the 14 months or so to which he had admitted.
16.108
What the DC would have made of this evidence is pure speculation. It may well be that Shipman (who would almost certainly have been present at the hearing) would have wished to challenge some of DS McKeating’s evidence and he might well have given evidence himself. That would have given the DC a far better opportunity to assess Shipman than was available to the PeCC.
Evidence of the Possible Impact of a Doctor’s Drug Taking on Patients
16.109
Another
in the information available to the PeCC was any evidence of whether Shipman’s addiction to pethidine had had any adverse effect upon his practice or patients. No enquiries were made by the GMC of Shipman’s former partners or of the Calderdale FPC. It appears that it was settled GMC practice not to make any such enquiries in cases where the doctor had been abusing the drugs by self-administration and was not known to have been supplying them to others. Mr Gray said that there was a distinction between improper prescribing to others on a large scale, where the doctor had fomented addiction in patients or had otherwise endangered them, and a case where a doctor had, like Shipman, self-administered drugs. In the latter case, the PeCC was more likely to take a ‘clinical’ view, i.e. to regard the doctor as sick and to hope that s/he could be cured. The focus in a case of self-administration would be on the doctor and (if psychiatric evidence was available) on the psychiatrists’ views of the case.
16.110
Mr Gray suggested to the Inquiry that it would have been difficult to obtain reliable evidence about whether a doctor’s drug taking had had any impact upon his patients. First, he suggested that it would have been difficult to find out, in the case of a GP, which FPC to contact. I found that hard to accept and, indeed, Mr Gray later agreed in evidence that it would have been possible to trace the appropriate FPC and to find out whether it had received any relevant complaints about the doctor. Second, he said that although, in Shipman’s case, it would have been possible to approach his former partners, they would probably have been ‘edgy’ about giving their views of Shipman because they would have known that the deprecation of colleagues was a disciplinary offence. When pressed about this, Mr Gray accepted that, if the GMC had approached Shipman’s former partners and had asked whether his drug taking had impacted on his performance as a doctor, and if the former partners had answered honestly, they could not have been in danger (or sensibly have been afraid of putting themselves in danger) of disciplinary action by voicing any concerns they might have had. Mr Gray conceded that there would have been nothing (apart, he said, from ‘the time factor’) to stop the GMC from putting that sort of question to a doctor’s colleagues as a matter of routine, in order to find out whether there were concerns that the doctor had presented a risk to patients. The ‘time factor’ referred to was the need to get cases onto the agenda for the next PeCC meeting. However, Mr Gray accepted that such enquiries could have been made. It is clear, however, that they were not. It was not usual practice to do so.
16.111
In his witness statement, Mr Gray suggested that, even if it had emerged that there had been problems about the quality of care that Shipman had given during his short career in general practice, it would not have been possible to prove that those problems had been occasioned by his abuse of pethidine. He sought to support his assertion by reference to the British National Formulary and the information contained therein about the speed at which the effects of pethidine wear off. He referred to the fact that there had been no complaint to the GMC during Shipman’s period in general practice about his treatment of patients and that there had been no report to the GMC of any medical service committee (MSC) proceedings against him. That was indeed the case. However, there could have been (although there were not) multiple complaints about Shipman to the FPC. There could even have been (although there were not) ongoing MSC proceedings in which it was alleged that he had been in breach of his terms of service. Since the GMC had not sought any information from the FPC, it could not have known whether or not there had been any complaints or whether there were any ongoing proceedings. All it could have been confident of was that, in respect of the period of approximately 19 months for which Shipman had been in general practice, no complaint about him was evident from the GMC’s own records.
16.112
As it happens, in Shipman’s case, an enquiry to the practice in Todmorden where he had worked would not have revealed any specific concerns about the safety of patients. Dr John Dacre, the senior partner, told the Inquiry that Shipman had been hardworking and that there had been no concerns about his competence. Dr Dacre was not aware that Shipman had unlawfully killed a patient in the terminal stages of cancer, as I have found he did. Nor did he know that Shipman had signed three Medical Certificates of Cause of Death in one day in circumstances which make me suspicious that Shipman was guilty of unlawful killing. Nor was he aware that Shipman had injected Mrs (now Professor) Elaine Oswald, a patient, with pethidine, shortly after she had taken some Diconal (prescribed by him), and that Mrs Oswald had suffered respiratory arrest as a result. It seems unlikely, even if the GMC staff had made enquiries of the practice, that they would have asked about Shipman’s health. It seems unlikely, therefore, that Dr Dacre would have volunteered that Shipman had had a number of blackouts in the last few months of his practice in Todmorden and that, for that reason, Shipman’s wife had been driving him when he visited patients. It is clear that the Calderdale FPC would have had no information about Shipman which they could have passed to the GMC, over and above that which they had been given by Shipman’s former practice. If DS McKeating had been asked about issues of patient welfare, he would have told the GMC that there was no evidence of any patient being deprived of pethidine that s/he required. Neither DS McKeating, Dr Dacre nor anyone from the Calderdale FPC would have been able to give the GMC any significant clue as to Shipman’s true character.
The General Medical Council Requests a Medical Report
16.113
The procedure in cases which Mr Gray considered ready to go before the PeCC was for the papers to be submitted first to the Registrar, Mr Draper. Accordingly, in Shipman’s case, Mr Gray endorsed on Mr Williams’ memorandum a note to Mr Draper, seeking his authorisation for the case to go to the PeCC. Mr Draper responded with a further note:
‘Yes, but in cases like these, I think it would be helpful to invite the practitioner’s observations and if he agrees, a confidential medical report? Do so now ...’
16.114
I have mentioned that, in conviction cases, a doctor would sometimes receive only a standard letter informing him/her of the fact that his/her conviction had been reported and was to be referred to the PeCC and promising a further communication when the PeCC had made its decision. Mr Gray said that a different letter, of the type suggested by Mr Draper, was sent when there was a suspicion that the doctor was an addict. In Shipman’s case, the Home Office letter had referred to his
‘addiction’
to pethidine and had mentioned that he had received treatment at The Retreat (a private hospital for the treatment of psychiatric disorders) and that he was being treated for his addiction by named doctors whom Mr Draper would probably have known to be consultant psychiatrists. It seemed likely, therefore, that this was the explanation for his suggestion that Shipman should be asked to provide a medical report. However, an examination of the files relating to drug-related conviction cases dealt with by the PeCC in the mid- to late 1970s does not reveal any consistent pattern of requests for the doctor’s explanation for the offence or
‘observations’
and/or for medical reports. There were conviction cases where there was evidence that the doctor was or might be addicted but where no explanation or medical reports were requested. There were other cases where there was no evidence of addiction, but where, nevertheless, the doctor was requested to provide an explanation. It is not clear on what basis the decision to request an explanation and/or medical evidence was made. In Shipman’s case, however, there was, as I have said, information that he had suffered from an addiction and was under medical care. Mr Draper obviously considered it appropriate to ask him to provide
‘observations’
and, if he agreed, a medical report.
16.115
Accordingly, Mr Gray wrote to Shipman on 6th
April 1976. He informed Shipman that the PeCC meeting was to be held on 28th
April 1976. He invited him to submit any observations which he had on the matter of his conviction and to arrange for the GMC to receive a confidential medical report on his current condition. The letter said that any documents received from Shipman would be placed before the PeCC, together with information about his conviction.
16.116
Mr Gray told the Inquiry that where, as here, it was evident from the information in the GMC’s possession that a doctor was already being treated for his/her addiction, it would be expected that any medical report requested by the GMC would come from the treating doctor. He did not recall that the GMC at that time (which was, as I have said, before the introduction of the health procedures) ever requested a doctor to submit to examination by a practitioner of the GMC’s choice. The GMC did not make any stipulation about the topics which should be covered in a medical report, or about the questions that should be answered by the reporting practitioner. Mr Gray said that it would have been possible to go back to the author and query something which had been said in a report. However, he did not recall this being done ‘because they were usually very good reports’. When asked whether there was ever any concern about possible lack of independence on the part of the practitioners who reported, he responded, ‘I would have thought absolutely none’. He said that, when a report came into the office, the staff would read it, but would not query it, as they were not doctors. It would be attached to the papers in the case and sent with them to the PeCC.
16.117
Shipman acknowledged Mr Gray’s letter, indicating that he had put the matter in the hands of Hempsons, the MDU solicitors. Hempsons sent a ‘holding letter’, promising to send Shipman’s observations as quickly as possible.
The Evidence Provided by Shipman
The Letter from Shipman’s Solicitors
16.118
In a letter dated 21st
April 1976, Hempsons set out Shipman’s observations about his conviction. Their letter indicated that Shipman’s age was at that time about 30. It suggested that Shipman
‘did not make the right decision in going into general practice and particularly into partnership with little experience particularly on the administrative side of general practice’
. It expanded on what was put forward as the background to Shipman’s drug abuse. The letter explained that Shipman had been put in charge of the ordering of controlled drugs for his practice. It was said that he had first administered pethidine to himself following a back strain, probably in the early part of 1974. (This appears to have been the first time it had been suggested that Shipman’s abuse of pethidine had started in response to back pain. It was almost certainly untrue, but it was - and, indeed, still is - not uncommon for doctors in his predicament to claim that their drug use began with legitimate self-administration for pain relief.) The letter gave an account of the events surrounding the detection of Shipman’s conduct and indicated that his partners had terminated his partnership immediately his drug abuse came to light. He had remained as a patient in The Retreat, in York, until 31st
December 1975. It was pointed out that Shipman had admitted his conduct to his partners when first taxed with it and had subsequently admitted it to the police.
16.119
Bringing matters up to date, the letter stated that Shipman had obtained employment as a clinical medical officer, a full-time appointment in child health, with the Durham Area Health Authority (AHA). The letter said that the appointment had been made with his employers’ full knowledge of the history of the matters set out in Hempsons’ letter. Shipman had moved with his family to County Durham and, on the advice of Dr Bryson and Dr Milne, continued to attend outpatient appointments.
16.120
With their letter, Hempsons enclosed a psychiatric report from Dr Bryson, dated 29th
January 1976, and one from Dr Milne, dated 26th
January 1976. Both reports had been prepared for the purposes of the Magistrates’ Court hearing. Both Dr Bryson and Dr Milne were highly experienced in their field. By 1976, Dr Bryson had practised at The Retreat for 25 years, 20 of them as a consultant psychiatrist. He had considerable experience of treating patients (including doctors and other professionals) who were suffering from alcohol and drug addiction. Dr Bryson provided two witness statements to the Inquiry, dealing with his treatment of Shipman and the contents of his report. He was not fit to attend the Inquiry to give oral evidence.
16.121
Dr Milne was a senior consultant psychiatrist and Director of the Regional Drug Unit for the Yorkshire Metropolitan area. He was not well enough to provide a statement to the Inquiry or to give oral evidence.
The Report of Dr Ronald Bryson
16.122
The report of Dr Bryson explained that he had first encountered Shipman when Shipman was admitted on 2nd
October 1975 as a voluntary patient to The Retreat. Shipman had been referred there by Dr Milne. The reason for his admission was the development of an addiction to pethidine. Dr Bryson pointed out, however, that there were some
‘unusual features’
to the addiction, which was
‘intermittent’
‘had not yet reached the stage of total compulsion and constant need’
. Withdrawal from pethidine had been instituted over a few days without complication.
16.123
Dr Bryson reported that, after withdrawal had been completed, it
‘became obvious’
that Shipman was suffering from
‘a moderately severe depressive or melancholic state’
. After discussion with Shipman and his wife, Dr Bryson had formed the view that this state had existed for
‘something like 18 months previously’
. Shipman had not, it was said, recognised his illness or sought medical attention. Dr Bryson described Shipman’s condition as
‘endogenous depression, that is a type of depression which arises from some internal usually biochemical disturbance of brain function, rather than is precipitated by psychologically upsetting events’
. He described
‘many characteristic features’
of the condition which, he said, Shipman had exhibited. Dr Bryson believed that the depressive disorder had probably pre-dated Shipman’s
‘attempt to keep going by unwise self-medication’
16.124
Dr Bryson went on to describe Shipman’s background and his
‘persistence and determination’
in overcoming family resistance in order to qualify in medicine. He had, it was said, found himself suited to general practice although he
‘worried a lot about it and tended to over-identify with patients and their problems’
16.125
After Shipman had been treated with anti-depressant medication, there had been, Dr Bryson said, a
‘dramatic improvement in his condition’
. He had
‘not looked back since that time’
. He had
‘very considerable insight into the nature of his illness’
. He had no cravings for pethidine and had not substituted
‘any other form of self-medication’
. Dr Bryson observed:
‘He has approached the problems of his future with great courage, common sense and determination, and I am impressed by the fact that he recognises the potential dangers in the future and is trying to take steps in his professional career to ensure that if he should ever become depressed, he does receive proper medical treatment, and he is also taking steps to ensure that he does not have ready access to drugs of potential danger to him.’
Dr Bryson regarded the chance of relapse into drug dependence as
‘extremely unlikely’
in view of the fact that:
‘... if he were ever to suffer a recurrence of his illness
i.e. depression
it would be immediately recognized, and secondly the strength of his basic personality is such that having experienced this series of events, he would have the strength of character and determination to avoid a repetition’
Dr Bryson recommended that Shipman should continue under psychiatric supervision,
‘even if at infrequent intervals’
, for several years. Arrangements had been made for this, with Shipman’s full co-operation.
16.126
Dr Bryson explained to the Inquiry in a witness statement that, having observed Shipman’s condition during the period of his withdrawal from pethidine, he had formed the view that Shipman had not been severely addicted. This view also derived support from Shipman’s claim that he had been able to abstain from the drug for intervals during the period of his dependency. Even if Dr Bryson had believed that Shipman had been severely addicted, however, he would not necessarily have regarded him as unfit to practise medicine for all time. His view would have depended on his patient’s underlying personality. Dr Bryson said that, had he been dealing with a patient who had been severely addicted and who had a weak personality, he would have considered a relapse highly probable and would have suggested a change of career. Shipman, however, had a strong personality and Dr Bryson did not believe that he had had
‘a full-blown addiction’
. As a consequence, Dr Bryson had felt that the possibility of a relapse into drug abuse was low. There was, he had recognised, a risk that this could occur if Shipman were to become depressed again. However, Dr Bryson had felt that Shipman had enough strength of personality, and enough support, to be able to deal with any further depression appropriately, rather than by self-medicating with pethidine.
16.127
Dr Bryson made no mention in his report of the effects of Shipman’s drug abuse on his practice. In a witness statement to the Inquiry, Dr Bryson referred to the importance of verifying information given by a drug abusing patient. He observed that, as a group, such patients are secretive and lack insight. However, he said that he did not contact Shipman’s former partners as he thought they would have been
‘quite guarded’
in what they told him and that, consequently, he was unlikely to glean any useful information. Dr Bryson had considerable experience of treating doctors for addiction. This had led him to believe that former partners of a doctor, if approached, were likely to be concerned about the effect of what they said on the good name of their practice and also to be influenced by a desire not to do anything to make a future in medicine impossible for their former colleague. I infer from that that Dr Bryson believed that information from such a source was unlikely to be reliable.
The Report of Dr Hugo Milne
16.128
In his report, Dr Milne recounted how he had seen Shipman after his initial admission to the Halifax Royal Infirmary, immediately after his drug abuse had been detected. He said that, at this time, Shipman had been
‘involved in the abuse of Pethidine to the extent of an addiction’
for about 18 months. Dr Milne had recommended admission to The Retreat. Subsequently, Dr Milne had discussed his case with Dr Bryson and had also seen the discharge summary prepared by Dr Bryson following Shipman’s discharge from The Retreat. He had interviewed Shipman and his wife on the day he wrote the report, 26th
January 1976.
16.129
Dr Milne said that, when he first interviewed Shipman in September 1975, he had become aware that Shipman had been suffering from a depressive illness for between 18 months and two years. Dr Milne believed that Shipman’s pethidine abuse and addiction were a direct result of that depressive illness. He acknowledged that depressive illness was an
‘unusual causation for an addiction’
but he had nevertheless been convinced of the accuracy of the diagnosis. The diagnosis had been confirmed by Dr Bryson. Dr Milne noted that, initially, Shipman was reluctant to accept his advice that he should be admitted to The Retreat, suggesting that he was
‘not good enough’
to be admitted to such a hospital and wishing instead to be admitted to the acute psychiatric unit. Dr Milne attributed this to
‘ideas of unworthiness and guilt’
which were part of his
‘depressive psychosis’
16.130
As well as the unusual nature of the cause of the addiction, Dr Milne noted that there was another unusual feature. Despite the prolonged period for which he had been abusing pethidine, Shipman had told Dr Milne that he had been able to stop his drug taking in order to take his family on holiday and in order to be fit to drive his car while on duty. In fact, as I have mentioned earlier, it is now clear that, at some time prior to the end of September 1975, Shipman had stopped driving and had thereafter relied on his wife to drive him when he visited patients at their homes. This was probably as a result of the ‘blackouts’ which he had begun to suffer earlier that year. Mrs Primrose Shipman told the Inquiry that she thought she had been driving her husband around for only a matter of weeks before he ceased to practise in Todmorden at the end of September 1975. It does not appear that Dr Milne was aware of this history; nor was the GMC.
16.131
Dr Milne suggested that conflict between Shipman and his partners at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre might possibly have contributed to Shipman’s depression which
‘in turn released his Pethidene
addiction’
. This seems to have been speculation on his part. Shipman had joined the practice only in March 1974 and his depression was said by Dr Milne to have been present for about 18 months to two years before the end of September 1975, when he first saw Dr Milne. If Dr Milne’s thesis was correct, Shipman’s conflict with his partners must have occurred immediately after his arrival in Todmorden since, according to his own account, he had started taking pethidine only five or six weeks later. Given the timescale, it is difficult to see how any problems in the relationship with his partners (even if such problems existed) could have made any significant contribution to Shipman’s depression or dependence on pethidine. It is not clear from the report whether Dr Milne appreciated how recently Shipman had entered general practice and how shortly after his arrival at Todmorden he had begun to obtain drugs illegally.
16.132
Dr Milne said that, when he had seen Shipman on 26th
January 1976, Shipman had been
‘greatly improved’
; there was no longer any evidence of depression and his wife confirmed that he had made a good recovery. Dr Milne reported that, at one stage, Shipman
‘did not consider his future within the Medical Profession’
, but both Dr Bryson and Dr Milne had advised him that
‘this would not be reasonable’
. Dr Milne said that, when he saw Shipman on the day he wrote his report, Shipman had told him that he had applied for and been offered a job with the Durham AHA. At that stage, he had not informed his prospective employers about his past history. Dr Milne had advised him to do so and Shipman had taken his advice. Meanwhile, Dr Milne had discussed with Dr Michael O’Brien, Area Medical Officer of the Durham AHA, the question of Shipman’s suitability for the job he had been offered. It had been agreed that the job offer would remain open, on the understanding that Shipman continued to see Dr Milne for
‘the necessary treatment’
in the future. Dr Milne’s report suggested that all these events had occurred on one day, 26th
January. Although possible, this seems unlikely and it may be that they occurred over a rather longer period than that suggested by his report.
16.133
Dr Milne recommended that the Magistrates’ Court should deal with Shipman by means of a conditional discharge with an undertaking to continue his treatment as an outpatient or by means of a probation order with a condition of treatment by Dr Milne. He suggested that a probation order, if imposed, should be for the maximum period of three years. It should be noted that, if Shipman had been dealt with in either of the ways suggested by Dr Milne, he would not have been the subject of a conviction: see
paragraph 16.6
. In that event, the police would not have been under a duty to report to the GMC the fact that Shipman had pleaded guilty to offences at the Magistrates’ Court, although, as I have said, in practice, they usually did. If the matter had come to the attention of the GMC, the GMC could not have dealt with it as a conviction. It would, however, have been open to the GMC to deal with it as an issue of SPM, had it chosen to do so.
16.134
Dr Milne had observed that there was
‘no suggestion’
that Shipman had been
‘unable to carry out his duties whilst on call because of the effects of Pethidine’
. In his report, Dr Milne had mentioned his discussions with Shipman and his wife. It seems unlikely that they would have volunteered information about any difficulties Shipman might have had in carrying out his duties. (It does not seem, for example, that they had told Dr Milne that, for some time, Shipman had not been driving as a result of blackouts.) Dr Milne also spoke of discussions with Dr Bryson and Dr O’Brien. Neither of them would have been in a position to know anything about the effects of Shipman’s drug abuse on his care of patients. Although it was strictly true, therefore, that there had been no suggestion to Dr Milne that Shipman’s patients had suffered as a result of his drug abuse, the reality was that he had not conducted any meaningful enquiry into the matter. It does not seem that Dr Milne spoke to Shipman’s partners or to the Calderdale FPC.
Further Evidence
16.135
Enclosed with a letter dated 26th
April 1976, which was delivered to the GMC by hand, Hempsons sent a letter from Dr O’Brien, containing information about Shipman’s progress in his new job. Dr O’Brien said that Shipman had started work on 2nd
February 1976, having obtained the job after interview and in open competition with other doctors. He said that the offer of the job had been made
‘subject to satisfactory medical clearance’
. He said that, at that stage, Shipman had had an interview with Dr O’Brien in which he had described his recent difficulties. It is difficult to see how that account fits in with the chronology of events described by Dr Milne but, as I have said, it may be that Dr Milne’s account of the timing of events was not completely accurate.
16.136
Dr O’Brien said that Shipman had told him that he had suffered from
‘an episode of profound depression’
, during which he had used pethidine. He had discussed with Shipman and his wife the fact that legal proceedings and involvement with the GMC would follow. Shipman was clearly aware of the difficulties that he faced but Dr O’Brien had formed the view that
‘he was capable of rehabilitation’
. Dr O’Brien said that he had discussed Shipman’s case with both Dr Bryson and Dr Milne, who had confirmed his judgement. He had therefore confirmed the offer of employment on condition that Shipman should continue to have follow-up care from Dr Milne.
16.137
Once Shipman began working for the AHA, Dr O’Brien had had no further professional contact with him but he said that he had kept
‘in close touch’
with professional colleagues in the district in which Shipman was working. He understood from them that Shipman had settled well into his new employment and was
‘well received by both patients and professional colleagues alike’
. He had received no evidence to suggest any recurrence of
‘his former difficulties’
. Dr O’Brien concluded by expressing the hope that the PeCC would be able to reach a judgement which would further Shipman’s rehabilitation.
16.138
On 27th
April 1976, Hempsons delivered by hand a further letter enclosing a further short report from Dr Milne, dated the previous day. Dr Milne reported that Shipman had seen him on several occasions since his discharge from The Retreat. Shipman was entirely happy in his new job and had shown no evidence of psychiatric abnormality. There was
‘no evidence whatsoever’
that he was abusing any form of drug. Dr Milne did not say whether he had carried out any urine tests or inspected Shipman for syringe marks. He concluded:
‘As far as I am concerned Dr Shipman is extremely well, and it would be to his advantage if he were to be allowed to continue in practice, and conversely it would be catastrophic if he were not to be allowed to continue in practice.
I shall continue to see him here regularly.’
16.139
It should be noted that although, in November 1975, Shipman had told DS McKeating and the Home Office Drugs Branch inspector that he had no intention of returning to general practice or of working in a situation where he could obtain pethidine, the GMC was never aware of this declaration of intent.
The Penal Cases Committee Meeting of 28th
April 1976
Preparations for the Meeting
16.140
Shipman’s case was considered at a meeting of the PeCC held on 28th
April 1976. Mr Gray was present at the meeting, as was Mr Williams. Not surprisingly, by the time of the Inquiry hearings, neither had any personal recollection of Shipman’s case. The minutes of the meeting are no longer available so it is not possible to say with certainty which members of the PeCC were present. The Inquiry was, however, able to contact Dr Llewellyn, who was known to have been a member of the PeCC in 1976. He could not recall whether he had been present at the meeting at which Shipman’s case was considered. However, very shortly before he was due to give evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Llewellyn discovered in his attic a bundle of papers relating to the meeting. From those papers, it was clear that he had indeed been present, although he still had no positive recollection of it. Dr Llewellyn said that meetings of the PeCC were generally well attended and he would have expected all six members to be present.
16.141
On 28th
April 1976, the PeCC was to consider 14 new conviction cases, including that of Shipman. In addition, there would have been some conduct cases and a number of cases which had come back to the PeCC after having been adjourned from a previous meeting. Examination of the minutes of meetings of the PeCC which took place in 1977 and 1978 (those for 1976 are not available) suggests that there could well have been approximately the same number of cases in those two categories as there were new conviction cases. Dr Llewellyn suggested that the bundle of papers for a meeting of the PeCC was usually about eight inches high.
16.142
Papers relating to the meetings of the PeCC were sent to members in several tranches. The first tranche would be despatched to their homes two weeks before the meeting. In Shipman’s case, it appears that the first tranche consisted of the original letter from the WYP, together with the schedule of offences which had been attached to it, and the letter from Mrs Powrie. There would then be a second tranche, containing the papers in cases which had not been included in the first tranche, together with some additional papers in cases which had formed part of the first tranche. In Shipman’s case, the additional papers in the second tranche consisted of Hempsons’ letter of 21st
April and two copies (presumably the duplication was an error) of the report from Dr Bryson. Some material (in Shipman’s case, the letter from Dr O’Brien and the second report from Dr Milne) would have arrived at the GMC office too late to be posted to members of the PeCC. These documents would be distributed on the day of the meeting and members would arrive early in order to be able to read the additional material. In Shipman’s case, that third tranche of documents also included Dr Milne’s first report, which had previously been omitted in error.
16.143
Dr Llewellyn explained that it was his practice, during the time when he had the papers for a meeting, to read them through, sometimes several times. He would annotate the papers with his provisional views as to how each case should be disposed of. In Shipman’s case, he had originally written
‘D.C.’
, meaning that it was his view that the case should be sent to the DC. He went on to say that, after he had read each successive tranche of papers, he would review his annotations. If his view about a case had changed as a result of the new material he had read, he would amend his annotation accordingly. He had not made any amendment in Shipman’s case and concluded, therefore, that he had not changed his provisional view up to the point when he went into the meeting.
The Decision-Making Process
16.144
In the event, contrary to Dr Llewellyn’s views as to how Shipman’s case should be dealt with, the PeCC decided not to refer the case to the DC. Instead the case was concluded. Dr Llewellyn crossed out his original annotation and wrote beside it the word
‘Close’
16.145
As I have explained, when Dr Llewellyn provided his first two witness statements to the Inquiry, he was not sure whether he had been at the meeting of the PeCC at which Shipman’s case was considered. He said that, if he had been there, he did not remember what his view of Shipman’s case had been. In his statements, he appeared supportive of the PeCC’s decision to close Shipman’s case and advanced various grounds on which the decision could be justified.
16.146
In his statements, Dr Llewellyn said that the task of the PeCC was to determine whether Shipman was fit to continue in practice. (I interpose to point out that such determination should in fact have been for the DC.) Dr Llewellyn explained the thinking behind the PeCC’s decision as follows. He noted that the charges were serious, but that Shipman had been convicted and punished for those. No patients were directly involved. He said that the PeCC would have considered that the sentence for Shipman’s convictions was adequate and would have gone on to consider his illness, i.e. his drug addiction and moderately severe depression. He mentioned the imminent introduction of the health procedures. Dr Llewellyn pointed out that Dr Milne and Dr Bryson were two eminent consultant psychiatrists. Shipman had been under their care for many months, including three months as an inpatient. They had been impressed by Shipman’s efforts to become rehabilitated. He had acquired a post in preventive medicine where he would not be required to prescribe for patients.
16.147
Dr Llewellyn also observed that the GMC was entitled to expect that the full circumstances of Shipman’s drug abuse (including any effect it might have had on patients) would have been ascertained by the Home Office Drugs Branch and by the two psychiatrists who had reported. Nothing untoward had emerged about his clinical performance. Dr Llewellyn said that there was no evidence that Shipman was generally dishonest. He suggested that the sentence of the court for his dishonesty was adequate.
16.148
Dr Llewellyn went on finally to say in his statements that the PeCC would have been aware that the trauma of a referral to the DC would have added to Shipman’s stress and, in a depressed patient, could precipitate further depression, even an attempt at suicide. The psychiatrists seemed to have controlled Shipman’s addiction and depressive illness. He was continuing to receive outpatient treatment. His new employer was aware of his history and was keeping a close eye on him. He observed that, as
‘a solution had been found locally’
, no purpose would have been served by a referral to the DC.
16.149
Once Dr Llewellyn had found the papers for the meeting, he realised, of course, that his provisional view of Shipman’s case had been that it should be referred to the DC. In his third witness statement, he referred to the annotation of his papers and said:
‘This suggests to me that at the Penal Cases Committee’s consideration of Shipman’s case, I may have been persuaded by my colleagues on the Committee that it was appropriate to close the case in the circumstances; or that during the consensus process my opinion was discounted.’
16.150
In oral evidence, Dr Llewellyn explained that members of the PeCC held different opinions about doctors who abused drugs. He explained that he regarded the possibility of rehabilitating drug taking doctors to return to the medical profession as ‘very slim’. He said:
‘Yes, there are some alcoholics that are cured, there are some drug addicts who are cured but I personally would always look sideways at them. That may be unfair but that is my personal view.’
16.151
Although Dr Llewellyn observed at one stage in his oral evidence that his own stance was that people who abused drugs were ‘highly untrustworthy’, it seems that he was speaking there of the time when the abuse was going on. He said later that he believed that the use of dishonest means to obtain drugs (e.g. by falsifying a prescription) during the period of abuse was ‘part of the illness’ and did not indicate a general propensity for dishonesty in other respects once the abuse had ceased. Dr Llewellyn said that that was why ‘we (
i.e. the PeCC
) ... did not really consider the dishonest aspects, rather the clinical aspects’. However, he said that he would be sceptical about whether the abuser had truly been cured of his/her drug habit.
16.152
Dr Llewellyn said that the message of the reports of both Dr Milne and Dr Bryson had been that the prognosis was good but that there was a need for a period of supervision lasting several years. He acknowledged that the only way that formal supervision could have been achieved was by sending the case to the DC. The DC had the power, if it chose, to postpone its decision, thereby putting a doctor ‘on probation’. He said that, having read Dr O’Brien’s letter, his view would have been that the news was encouraging but he would have been suspicious that Shipman might not comply with continued medical supervision by Dr Milne unless he was obliged to do so. He observed:
‘... the only supervision for a person who is manipulative is one that has teeth; continual reporting to a responsible body who
would have the mechanism to ensure that he came to them regularly and the power to punish him if he did not’
16.153
Obviously, it must have been difficult for Dr Llewellyn to disentangle his current views about Shipman’s case (formed with the knowledge of what has happened since) and the views which he held at the time. He acknowledged this frankly and said that there were many positive aspects to the material produced on Shipman’s behalf which might have caused him to have some ‘thoughts in his favour’ at the time. I think Dr Llewellyn’s point was that, while it is clear from his annotation that he was in favour of referring Shipman’s case to the DC when he went into the meeting, he might not have been as certain at the time that this was the only appropriate course, as his oral evidence about drug taking doctors might have suggested.
16.154
Dr Llewellyn explained that, during the time he was on the PeCC, there was never a vote. The process was one of consensus. Strong personalities gave the lead. Some cases would be dealt with very quickly; in others, there would be argument and, eventually, the Chairman would bring the discussion to a close and identify the view which he believed was held by the Committee or the majority thereof. If there were psychiatrists on the PeCC, they would have had strong views about Shipman’s suitability to return to work, views which it would have been difficult for others on the PeCC to rebut. In saying this, Dr Llewellyn echoed the view expressed by Mr Gray in his witness statement, where he referred to the fact that Professor Trethowan, a psychiatrist, was a member of the PeCC. Mr Gray observed that
‘he would I am sure have helped the Committee to conclude that the case as presented to them heralded no danger to the public’
16.155
The view of Dr Milne and Dr Bryson was that several years of further outpatient supervision was desirable. Dr Llewellyn agreed that, in order for the decision to close the case to have been taken by the PeCC, there must have been members of the Committee whose view was that no steps to compel Shipman’s compliance with supervision were necessary. Those members must have been happy to accept that Shipman would undergo such treatment voluntarily. Dr Llewellyn wondered whether, in fact, they had thought that far ahead. He thought that the primary reason why the majority of the PeCC had decided not to refer Shipman’s case to the DC was that they had felt that they could trust him.
16.156
It is hard to understand why, in the light of the recommendation for continued supervision contained in both psychiatric reports, the PeCC decided to close Shipman’s case with a warning. Dr Bryson, despite his view that Shipman had a strong personality and was facing the future with common sense and determination, thought that continued supervision was important. Dr Milne had recommended to the Magistrates’ Court that it should take a course (by imposing either a conditional discharge or a probation order) that would entail either an undertaking, or an actual requirement, to continue treatment with Dr Milne. This suggestion had been rejected by the Court. It may be that the PeCC took the view that the Magistrates had concluded that supervision was not necessary. If so, that might well have been a misunderstanding on its part, as it is entirely likely that the Magistrates wished to impose some punishment on Shipman and to recoup the loss he had caused to the public funds. A fine and compensation order could not be combined with a probation order. In the light of the recommendation in the medical reports for continued supervision, it seems to me that, if the PeCC had wished to promote the rehabilitation of the doctor and to provide some protection for patients, the proper course would have been to refer the case to the DC. That Committee could have used its powers of postponement if, on learning more of the facts of the case, it had thought it appropriate to do so.
Observations on the Decision-Making Process
16.157
Dr Llewellyn’s evidence cast useful light on the decision-making process of the PeCC. First, it appears that the PeCC regarded itself as having the function of deciding whether the doctor was fit to practise. I have already observed that that was the function of the DC and have expressed my concern that the PeCC did not confine itself to its filtering role but made substantive decisions in quite serious cases. When asked whether the PeCC should have confined itself to filtering cases, Dr Llewellyn said that that was ‘valid thinking’ and added that ‘everybody had their own views on that’. I infer from that that there were differing views about whether the practice of the PeCC in going beyond its filtering role was appropriate. Yet it appears that there was no official discussion about the issue, nor any guidance as to the kind of case which it would or would not be appropriate to refer to the DC. It is apparent from other parts of Dr Llewellyn’s evidence quoted above that members relied upon their own personal views and did not rely on sound professional judgement based on evidence. For example, I have in mind Dr Llewellyn’s personal views about the prospects of rehabilitation of a doctor addicted to drugs. It appears that others must have had different views. Some views might be based upon medical scientific evidence and others not. It does not seem to me to be satisfactory to allow decisions to be taken on the basis of differing personal views of this kind, any of which might prevail in a particular case.
After the Penal Cases Committee Meeting
The Letter to Shipman
16.158
After the meeting, Mr Williams prepared a memorandum for the attention of Mr Gray. This recorded that the PeCC had determined that Shipman’s case could be concluded. He continued:
‘Later in the proceedings it became evident that the Committee wished letters sent to those practitioners whose cases were concluded to contain some admonitory element.’
Mr Williams had drafted a letter to be sent to Shipman for approval by Mr Gray. Mr Gray made some revisions to the draft and sent it on for approval by the Registrar, Mr Draper. On 6th
May 1976, Mr Draper wrote to Shipman. After rehearsing details of the information considered by the PeCC, the letter went on:
‘The Committee instructed me to inform you that they take a grave view of offences arising out of an abuse of drugs and of offences involving dishonesty and to draw your attention to sections (iii) and (vii) on page 9 of the enclosed pamphlet. You would therefore be wise to assume that, if information relating to any further conviction of a similar nature should be received by the Council a charge would then be formulated against you on the basis of both the earlier and the later convictions and referred to the Disciplinary Committee of the Council for inquiry.’
‘enclosed pamphlet’
was the January 1976 edition of the Blue Book. The relevant sections were those quoted at
paragraph 16.34
16.159
Mr Gray said that the
‘admonitory element’
of the letter to Shipman was the threat of a public inquiry by the DC if Shipman re-offended. Both Mr Gray and Mr Williams observed that, judged by the standards of the time, the letter sent to Shipman was in ‘very strong terms’. The letter concluded by requesting a personal acknowledgement of receipt. Mr Gray explained that, if a doctor failed within six months to respond to a letter sent from the GMC by recorded delivery, his/her name could be erased from the register. This was (and, indeed, remains) a necessary power as it prevents a doctor from attempting to avoid disciplinary action by failing to respond to communications from the GMC. Shipman acknowledged the letter promptly and indicated that he understood its implications.
Communication with the Home Office
16.160
By a letter dated 3rd
May 1976, Mr Williams informed Mrs Powrie, of the Home Office Drugs Branch, of the decision taken by the PeCC in Shipman’s case. He said:
‘In all the circumstances, and particularly in the light of a number of reports received on the practitioner’s condition, the Committee determined that it would be sufficient to conclude the case.’
No mention was made of the fact that a warning letter had been sent to Shipman, since that was regarded as a private matter between the GMC and the doctor and was not disclosed to persons or bodies outside the GMC.
16.161
The original letter from the Home Office Drugs Branch had asked for the
‘view taken’
by the PeCC, not for its decision. I do not understand this to mean that the Home Office Drugs Branch wished to know what view the PeCC took about the need for a section 12 direction, only what the PeCC itself had decided to do. Mr Williams’ letter expressed no opinion about the appropriateness of a section 12 direction. In evidence, Mr Gray said that the 1956 Act did not require the GMC to be a party to action by the Home Office to restrict a doctor’s rights in relation to controlled drugs. He said that Mr Williams’ letter had informed the Home Office Drugs Branch what the PeCC had done with the case, which was what had been requested. Mr Gray did not think that the PeCC would have expressed any view about the possibility of restricting Shipman’s rights, although it seems to me likely that the Home Office Drugs Branch would infer, from its decision to close the case, that the PeCC did not think that it was necessary to restrict Shipman’s prescribing rights. At the time, the GMC itself had no power to impose any such restriction. The only way the GMC could stop a doctor from prescribing a particular type of drug was by the DC suspending his/her registration or erasing his/her name from the register. Mr Gray did not recall any attempt by the GMC to plug that gap in its powers by encouraging the Home Office to use the power which the Home Secretary possessed to make a section 12 direction.
16.162
By a letter dated 9th
July 1976, Mrs Powrie informed Mr Williams that the Home Office was not proposing to take any action in the case. As I have explained in my Fourth Report, shortly before this time, the Home Office had adopted a new policy whereby section 12 directions were considered appropriate only in cases where the doctor’s breach of the MDA 1971 entailed conduct which put the public at risk of harm. In effect, from about May or June 1976 onwards, section 12 directions were made only in cases where the doctor had supplied controlled drugs to addicts or had in some way caused the release of controlled drugs onto the ‘black market’. Directions were not made in cases where the doctor had been taking the drugs him/herself. The Home Office was unable to explain to the Inquiry the reason for this change of policy. It is possible that the change of policy came about as the result of the publication of the Merrison Report, with its emphasis on treating drug abusing doctors as ‘health cases’ requiring rehabilitation. If the Report was understood to suggest that doctors who self-administered drugs were not a risk to patients, that would have been an error. The Merrison Report recommended that the powers of the GMC should be extended so that it could protect patients by imposing conditions and restrictions on a drug abusing doctor while s/he was undergoing rehabilitation. It did not suggest that patients were not at risk from such doctors.
The Effect of the Decision of the Penal Cases Committee
16.163
The effect of the decision of the PeCC was that Shipman was free to practise medicine in any field appropriate to his skills. He was able to prescribe controlled drugs in just the same way as any other doctor and without any special ‘watch’ being kept on his prescribing. Most importantly, he was free to return to general practice as soon as a suitable post presented itself.
16.164
Shipman was under no compulsion to continue with outpatient supervision. It is not known if he did so or for how long. Dr Milne’s records are no longer available. Dr Geoffrey Roberts, a former member of the Donneybrook practice, told the Inquiry that he spoke to a psychiatrist (he was not sure whether it was Dr Bryson or Dr Milne) about Shipman’s application to join the practice. That would have been in the latter half of 1977, probably August or September. His recollection was that he had been told that Shipman had had an addiction problem, that he had been treated for depression but that he had by then finished his treatment. If Dr Roberts’ recollection is correct, it appears that Shipman was no longer under supervision at that time. Certainly the Inquiry has been unable to obtain any medical records that confirm the continuance of any treatment.
The Decision Not to Refer Shipman’s Case to the Disciplinary Committee
16.165
The GMC submitted to the Inquiry that the decision in Shipman’s case was reasonable and justifiable when judged against the practice and the standards of the time. It said that the PeCC had all the material it needed to make an informed decision. The psychiatric evidence showed that Shipman had recovered well and that the prognosis was excellent. Shipman had a job in which he would have no need to prescribe or use controlled drugs. The GMC suggested, therefore, that no useful purpose would have been served by referring the case to the DC.
16.166
The GMC also submitted that, even if the case had been referred to the DC, erasure would not have been considered appropriate. The likely outcome would have been an admonishment or postponement of judgement. The GMC said that, if the DC had postponed judgement, it is likely that the case would have been concluded within a year or so.
16.167
On the face of it, perhaps the most surprising feature of the GMC’s handling of Shipman’s case is that it was not referred to the DC. This seems to suggest that the case was not regarded as ‘serious enough’ to warrant referral although, as I have shown, other issues besides seriousness were taken into account by the PeCC when deciding whether a case should be referred. The availability of psychiatric reports and the content of those reports seem to have played a determinative role in the decision not to refer Shipman’s case.
16.168
It is instructive to consider what would have happened if Shipman’s case had been referred to the DC. Is it right, as the GMC suggests, that, even if the case had been referred, the outcome would have been much the same? To some extent this is speculative because the evidence available to the DC would probably have been different from that considered by the PeCC. DS McKeating might have given evidence throwing a more serious light on Shipman’s conduct. Shipman might have given evidence, either to refute, qualify or explain some aspect of DS McKeating’s evidence, or to underline some aspect of the psychiatric opinions. It is quite possible that, with the benefit of that additional evidence, the members of the DC would have formed a less favourable opinion of Shipman than did the PeCC.
16.169
Mr Gray was of the view that, if the case had been referred to the DC, the result would have been the postponement of a decision. As I have explained, postponement of a case by the DC generally appears to have led eventually to closure of the case with or without a reprimand. Mr Gray observed that it was ‘fortunate’ for Shipman that Mr Draper had decided that Shipman should be invited to provide a medical report. Had that invitation not been issued or accepted, Mr Gray believed that, on the basis of what had happened in other similar cases, the PeCC either would have adjourned the case for him to do so or would have referred the case on to the DC. If the case had been referred to the DC, the overwhelming likelihood is that the same medical evidence as was before the PeCC would have been collected by Shipman’s solicitors and sent to the GMC before the meeting of the DC. The outcome would have been postponement. In effect, Mr Gray was saying that Shipman was fortunate because, if he had not received the invitation to submit a medical report, he would have had to undergo the increased trauma of a public appearance; yet the eventual outcome would have been similar.
16.170
In his witness statement, Mr Williams said that Shipman’s was the sort of case that would generally have been referred to the DC. He thought that one reason it might not have been referred was the existence of favourable psychiatric reports. He believed that this must have been a
case. He found it difficult to say what might have happened had the matter been referred to the DC. He said that he was not always able to predict the decisions of the DC. He guessed that Shipman’s registration might have been suspended but emphasised that this was simply a guess.
16.171
Statistics provided for the Inquiry by Professor Isobel Allen, Emeritus Professor of Health and Social Policy, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute, and my own examination of drug-related cases dealt with by the DC in the late 1970s, suggest that it is extremely unlikely that Shipman would have been erased from the register. Suspension would have been a possibility but the cases examined suggest that it too would have been unlikely.
16.172
It seems to me that, to some extent, the outcome before the DC might well have depended upon the extent of any further investigation. If there had been little or no further investigation, the most likely outcome before the DC would have been very similar to what actually happened at the PeCC, namely closure with a reprimand. I have said that, if more evidence had been available, the DC might have taken a more serious view of Shipman’s conduct than did the PeCC and might have formed a less favourable view of his rehabilitation and prognosis. In that event, I think the likely outcome would have been postponement for a period of ‘probation’. As I have little doubt that Shipman would have behaved himself well while under observation, I agree with the GMC that it is likely that the case would have been concluded within a year or two at most.

--- Possible Criticisms of the General Medical Council's Handling of Shipman's Case ---
16.173
In examining the GMC procedures of 1976, I must be careful to avoid the benefit of hindsight and the knowledge that Shipman was to become a mass murderer. I shall consider his case as one of a drug abusing doctor about whom no later information is available.
The Failure by the General Medical Council to Erase Shipman’s Name from the Medical Register
16.174
I have already observed that, when the fact of Shipman’s previous convictions for drug offences became known, many people expressed the view that the GMC should have erased his name from the medical register in 1976. The combination of Shipman’s abuse of controlled drugs over many months and his dishonesty in acquiring the drugs should, it was said, have made it clear that he was unfit to practise. There were expressions of shock and surprise in the media and elsewhere that Shipman’s medical career should instead have been permitted to continue virtually without interruption.
16.175
In preparation for this part of the Inquiry, Alexander Harris, the solicitors representing the Tameside Families Support Group, circulated a questionnaire to those families and friends of Shipman’s victims for whom they act. The questionnaire sought views on,
, the GMC’s handling of Shipman’s case in 1976 and the way in which doctors convicted of drugs offences should generally be dealt with. The majority of those responding to the questionnaire believed that doctors in Shipman’s position should not be permitted to continue in practice. Several made the point that, since doctors inevitably have access to drugs, it is inappropriate for a doctor who has abused drugs in the past to continue in practice. Miss Suzanne Brock, the granddaughter of Mrs Edith Brock, held this view. She gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. She said that she considered that the GMC should have permanently erased Shipman’s name from the register in 1976 because of the continuing temptation to abuse controlled drugs that he would inevitably face if he remained in practice.
16.176
It does not appear to be generally known that there is a substantial number of doctors practising in the UK today who have, in the past, been addicted to drugs and who have committed drug-related criminal offences. The way in which Shipman’s case was handled was in many ways typical of the way in which most such cases have been dealt with over the past 25 or 30 years. In 1978, Parliament, acting on the recommendations of the Merrison Committee, effected the creation of the GMC health procedures. Since then, it has been official policy that, whenever possible, doctors who have become addicted to, or dependent on, drugs should be permitted to return to practice once rehabilitated. Such doctors have frequently resorted to dishonest means in order to obtain supplies of their chosen drug. Inevitably, therefore, many have convictions for criminal offences involving not only the unlawful obtaining or possession of drugs but also dishonesty. There has never been any suggestion that they should be treated differently from those who have no such convictions. As a result, they have been, in general, treated as ‘health cases’ and dealt with by way of the GMC’s health procedures, which, in accordance with the recommendations of the Merrison Committee, do not involve the possible sanction of erasure.
16.177
It may be that the need to have a sufficient number of doctors available to staff the NHS was a factor behind the policy adopted by Parliament in 1978. It may also be that it was recognised that the practice of medicine can be a stressful occupation and that, because of a doctor’s ready access to drugs, it gives rise to unusual temptations to abuse them. Presumably, when it passed the Medical Act 1978, Parliament was satisfied that many drug abusing doctors could be successfully rehabilitated and returned to practice without significant risk to patients. Whatever the underlying considerations, Parliament acted upon the recommendations of the Merrison Report in 1978 and the GMC’s health procedures came into effect in 1980. In 1976, it must have been evident that this would happen soon.
16.178
Despite the policy which has been in place for over 25 years, it seems that it is by no means universally accepted that drug abusing doctors are capable of rehabilitation and can go on to lead useful and valuable professional lives. The real problem is that there is a gap between the public perception of official policy and the reality. In my view, the public must be made aware that it has been the policy of the GMC to encourage and assist drug abusing doctors to rehabilitate and to return to unrestricted practice. The public must also be made aware that this policy has been endorsed by Parliament. If there is real and widespread concern about this policy - as seems to me likely - it must be brought into the open for public discussion and possible change. It may well be that, after examination of all the relevant evidence, the outcome of such a public debate would be the confirmation of current policy, with proper emphasis on patient protection during rehabilitation. It may also be that such debate would result in a general call for patients to be made aware of their doctor’s past history of drug abuse, so that they can make an informed choice as to whether they wish to be treated by him/her. I shall say more about these matters later in this Report.
The Failure of the General Medical Council to Suspend Shipman
16.179
The Inquiry is aware that some people took the view that, although it would have been unduly severe to erase Shipman’s name from the medical register, his registration should have been suspended until it was clear that it was safe for him to practise. Suspension was a sanction available to the GMC at the time. However, suspension was regarded as a punitive sanction rather than a rehabilitative one. I can understand why that was so, although I personally think that suspension need not necessarily be inconsistent with rehabilitation, provided that it is made plain to the doctor what is expected of him/her during the period of suspension. Depending on the nature of the doctor’s problem, that might be an intensive period of psychiatric treatment or, if appropriate, re-education in some field of medicine. However, Shipman had already undergone intensive psychiatric treatment. Moreover, at the time when his case was considered, he was practising in a field of medicine in which he was exposed to far less temptation to abuse drugs than while in general practice. I can understand why the GMC, which took a rehabilitative approach to cases such as his, should have regarded suspension as inappropriate.
The Failure by the General Medical Council to Place Conditions on Shipman’s Registration
16.180
Many of the families and friends of Shipman’s victims believed that, even if Shipman’s name had not been permanently erased from the register, his continued registration should have been subject to stringent conditions and he should have been closely monitored. Some said that such safeguards should have remained in place throughout the time he remained in practice. It was suggested that monitoring in cases such as his should have included random blood tests and regular medical examinations to check for other signs of a return to drug abuse. In addition, there should have been periodic inspections of prescriptions, medical records and other aspects of the doctor’s clinical practice. Suggested conditions on registration included prohibitions on prescribing or administering controlled drugs and on single-handed practice, together with requirements that the doctor should work only under close supervision or in a setting other than general practice. The Inquiry heard oral evidence from Mrs Theresa Deeley, the daughter of Mrs Edna Llewellyn, who felt that the GMC should have continued to monitor Shipman throughout his career after he had been allowed to return to practice. She said that, because of his past history of drug convictions, he should not have been allowed to work as a single-handed practitioner at any stage of his career. This view was shared by Mrs Sally Freeman, the daughter of Mrs Margaret Waldron, who added that Shipman should have been denied access to controlled drugs for the remainder of his career.
16.181
Other responses to the Alexander Harris questionnaire suggested that conditions on practice might have been imposed for lesser periods, ranging from two to ten years. Mrs Sheila Caldecott, the daughter of Mrs Angela Tierney, told the Inquiry that, if Shipman’s addiction had been caused by work-related stress, the GMC should have given serious consideration as to whether it was appropriate to allow him to return to general practice where he would have access to controlled drugs. She thought that Shipman should not have been allowed to continue in general practice but should instead have been confined to administrative or teaching posts without access to controlled drugs. She considered that a doctor such as Shipman might be allowed to return to general practice if, after a period of time, s/he could show that s/he had been successfully rehabilitated.
16.182
In fact, as I have explained, the GMC had no power in 1976 to impose conditions on Shipman’s registration, nor to undertake any monitoring of his progress or practice. The DC was able to exercise a limited degree of influence over a doctor by postponing judgement and I have already suggested that it could have done far more by seeking undertakings from doctors to cover the period of postponement of its judgement. However, even if such undertakings had been required and given, they would have been restricted in time to the period of postponement and could not have been kept in place for more than a year or two at the most. Short of erasing Shipman’s name from the register, the DC had no means of exercising any long-term control over him or his practice.
Collection and Verification of Evidence
16.183
It should, I hope, be apparent, from the cases I described earlier, that the way in which Shipman’s case was handled was not in any way exceptional for the time. The underlying approach to cases of drug addiction was to take such action as would encourage the doctor’s rehabilitation, provided that this created no obvious and immediate risk to patient safety. However, no enquiries were directed at discovering whether such a risk existed. If Shipman’s case appears to have been dealt with more ‘leniently’ than others of similar gravity, that is explained by the supportive content of the psychiatric reports and the report from his new employer.
16.184
Very little evidence about Shipman’s offences was collected before the case was put before the PeCC. Ideally, a committee making any decision on a case should have had a full picture of the facts. If a filtering decision only was to be made, it might have been reasonable to act on the basis of limited information, provided that there were clear guidelines about the type and gravity of case to be referred and that, where any doubt existed, it was resolved in favour of referring the case on to the next stage. However, if the PeCC were to be permitted to make a final decision on a case, other than one in which it was clear that no form of disciplinary action was appropriate, it needed a full picture of the facts. The justification for making so few enquiries about the circumstances of the case was that, if the case went to the DC, further enquiries would be made. However, the converse was that, if the PeCC decided to handle the case itself, no further enquiries would be made and conclusions would be reached on the basis of quite scanty information.
16.185
In Shipman’s case, no attempt was made to discover whether or not his addiction to pethidine had had any impact upon the clinical care of his patients. Also, when information was received from Shipman’s solicitors, it was taken on trust. I am not, of course, suggesting that the solicitors would have misrepresented their instructions but, as any judge or magistrate knows, matters advanced in mitigation by lawyers on instructions from a client must be subjected to some critical scrutiny. The PeCC did not even have Shipman there to ask him or his representatives any questions. Shipman was able to claim through his solicitors that he had begun taking pethidine following a back injury. This was not checked, despite the fact that he had not mentioned it to either psychiatrist. He also attributed the start of his ‘addiction’ to depression caused by being unsuited to general practice. He was never asked about this, nor did anyone seem to notice that his depression must have begun or worsened within a matter of weeks of his entry into general practice. He started working in Todmorden in March 1974 and he began obtaining pethidine within about six weeks.
16.186
The GMC has submitted that it would have been a disproportionate use of its resources to embark upon a full investigation of Shipman’s case. His case appeared to be quite unexceptional. That I accept and it would follow that, if Shipman’s case should have been more closely investigated, so should many others. However, to say that thorough investigation would not be justified seems to put a limit on the value of patient safety. The underlying principle was supposed to be that, in a drug addiction case, the GMC would adopt a rehabilitative course provided that there was no reason to believe that patients would be put at risk. I do not think that that precondition could be satisfied without a reasonably thorough investigation of the background facts and without some independent check on matters being advanced in mitigation. At the very least, there should have been enquiries made of the police officer in charge of the case, of Shipman’s partners and of the Calderdale FPC. The fact that such enquiries were not made suggests to me that the safety of patients was not the paramount consideration in this case or in other cases of this kind. The paramount consideration was the doctor’s rehabilitation,
contrary to what the GMC claimed at the time.
Reliance on Psychiatrists Selected by the Doctor
16.187
It is clear that, in cases of drug addiction, the GMC placed very considerable reliance on psychiatric reports. It was plainly right that it should do so, although, in my view, such reports should have been considered by the DC, in the context of full information about the case, and not by the PeCC. In general, and in Shipman’s case, these reports were provided by psychiatrists who had treated the doctor concerned. It does not appear that it occurred to anyone in the GMC to question the factual basis of such a report or the validity of the opinions expressed in it. However, uncritical reliance on any expert report is unwise. Some reports are much better than others. Some psychiatrists (and other expert witnesses) are more ‘independent’ and impartial than others. Indeed, I know from my own experience both at the Bar and on the Bench that, until recent years, many expert witnesses did not recognise it to be their primary duty to give an impartial opinion to the court - or, in this case, to the GMC. It was felt that, provided that the court - or the GMC - was not actually misled, the expert was free to put forward the best possible case for his/her client/patient. I think that, in later years, the GMC recognised this problem and, as I shall explain in
, it became the practice of the health screeners to instruct independent psychiatrists to report to the GMC.
16.188
In Shipman’s case (and in others that I examined), the GMC accepted reports that had been commissioned primarily for use in the criminal courts. In such circumstances, there must have been a temptation for the psychiatrist to say what s/he could that was favourable to the patient/client. I do not suggest that either Dr Milne or Dr Bryson was biased towards Shipman. However, it appears from the reports that both psychiatrists accepted Shipman’s account of events, without any real attempt to verify the facts. It is true that both psychiatrists had met and spoken to Mrs Shipman but it is unlikely that she would have provided an account substantially at variance with her husband’s, given the purpose to which the reports were to be put. It does not appear, on the face of the reports, that the psychiatrists had spoken to anyone else about the history. I say that not as a matter of criticism. My own experience suggests that it would not have been usual to do so in the 1970s, whereas today it would be. Nor does it appear, on the face of the reports, that Dr Milne carried out any objective test of Shipman’s assertion that he had given up pethidine. He may have conducted a test but, if he did, one might have expected it to be mentioned. Even if he did not, I am not critical of Dr Milne. Objective tests, such as urine tests, although available in the 1970s, were much less used then than now. Today, it would be most unusual for a psychiatrist to accept the word of a patient that s/he had given up a drug; it would be usual practice to carry out objective tests at times when the patient was not expecting to be tested.
16.189
It seems to me that, in the 1970s, the GMC accepted psychiatric reports, not only as opinion evidence, but also as a reliable statement of the facts recited. It appears to have assumed that the psychiatrist would have carried out any verification necessary. The extent to which this reliance was well placed must have been variable. In my view, a rather more sceptical approach would have been preferable, particularly in cases involving drug abusers, who are known often to be deceitful and whose cases might well have involved a degree of dishonesty. It is, of course, common practice for courts of law to receive and rely upon information in psychiatric reports. However, it is usual practice in the courts for a judge to scrutinise the factual basis upon which the expert opinion is based to see whether it is consistent with other sources of information. It seems to me that the GMC did not attempt such scrutiny. This may have been because the GMC dealt only with doctors and made the assumption (sometimes erroneously) that all were essentially honest. The courts, on the other hand, deal with all manner of people, many of whom are dishonest. It would have been possible for the GMC to investigate the truth of some of the facts asserted by Shipman and, no doubt, by other doctors in other cases. It would also have been possible for the GMC to write to reporting psychiatrists to invite them to cover various specific matters, to check the veracity of doctors’ assertions where practicable and to use random urine tests before reporting that a doctor was drug-free. It would also have been possible for the GMC to remind reporting psychiatrists of the purpose for which their reports were required and to warn them that their opinions might be relied on when taking decisions affecting the safety of patients and the public. Of course, this would all have taken time and cost money. Once again, the GMC’s willingness to act on material that had not been subjected to proper scrutiny suggests that public protection was not paramount.
16.190
Having said all that, I accept without reservation that the psychiatrists on whose reports the PeCC based its decision were essentially right in their prognosis that Shipman was unlikely to relapse into the habit of drug abuse. There is no evidence that he ever did so.
The General Medical Council’s Approach to Dishonesty
16.191
One of the assumptions underlying the GMC’s treatment of cases involving drug abuse was the theory that the dishonesty which often accompanies the unlawful procurement of controlled drugs is not a personal characteristic but represents a temporary departure from the doctor’s usual high standard of probity. It is an almost inevitable accompaniment to the drug abuse. The assumption is that, as soon as the overpowering need to obtain the drug has been conquered, any danger of further dishonest conduct will automatically disappear. This theory was lucidly explained by Dr Douglas Fowlie, who has been a consultant psychiatrist for many years. He said:
‘Dishonesty in the context of an escalating drug or alcohol dependence is different to dishonesty in the absence of a dependence on drugs or alcohol. Dishonesty in the context of an escalating dependence is not something that is the focus from the psychiatric perspective. Almost inevitably, an element of dishonesty will arise where a person has a dependence on a substance ...
It is important to be aware, when one is considering dishonesty in the presence of an escalating dependence, that one of the facets of an illness of dependence is a selectively distorted perception of one’s own behaviour. As a dependence escalates, the priority of the individual is obtaining the next fix of the drink or the drug. This is the overwhelming priority and other factors external to this diminish in their importance. When the perceptions become distorted, a lack of insight develops, and the illness can cause a distortion of what the previously non-dependent individual regarded as right and wrong. One of the features of a mental illness of dependence can be dishonesty. It would not be fair to say that a person who has a dependence on drugs or alcohol and engages in dishonest conduct as a result of that dependence is someone who should, as a matter of course, be regarded as a person with a propensity to dishonesty in the absence of such a dependence.’
16.192
That theory is not shared by everyone from whom the Inquiry heard. I shall discuss its validity with regard to drug abusing doctors in
. However, I accept that the theory explained by Dr Fowlie was widely accepted within the GMC in the 1970s and the way in which the GMC dealt with Shipman’s case must be seen in that light. I remain concerned that, in Shipman’s case, the theory was applied without detailed consideration of whether it was appropriate to do so in the individual case. If dishonesty is to be explained (and excused) by the compulsion to obtain drugs which results from the doctor’s addiction, it must surely be important to consider whether s/he really is addicted. If s/he is not really addicted and if s/he is able to give up drug taking at will, the doctor is surely not subject to the degree of compulsion which will excuse his/her dishonesty.
16.193
According to both the psychiatrists who reported on Shipman, his drug taking habit had not yet reached the stage of real dependence; he was able to give up taking the drug for periods: for example when on holiday. Notwithstanding that, the assumption seems to have been made by the PeCC that Shipman’s dishonesty was all ‘a part of the illness’. Here again, the PeCC’s thinking seems to have been focussed, not on patient protection, but on the welfare of the doctor.

--- Conclusions ---
16.194
I am satisfied that the GMC conducted Shipman’s case in a way that was typical of its conduct of such cases at that time. I have drawn attention to several respects in which the procedures and underlying assumptions of the day are to be criticised.
16.195
My main criticism is that the GMC failed to give adequate protection to the public when dealing with the cases of doctors who had been convicted of offences arising out of an addiction to controlled drugs. It is clear that its approach laid greater emphasis on the interests of the doctor than on ensuring the safety of patients. I recognise that, in the years between the publication of the Merrison Report and the introduction of the health procedures in 1980, the GMC was in a difficult position. The need for the health procedures was recognised but they did not yet exist. It is not surprising therefore that the PeCC and the DC tried to fill the gap by the use of their powers to adjourn or postpone. As Mr Howes put it, they were ‘playing at being a Health Committee’. It seems to me that the problem was that they did not manage to strike the right balance. The Merrison Committee had proposed health procedures whereby patients could be protected at the same time as the doctor was rehabilitated. That was to be achieved by placing conditions and restrictions upon the doctor’s practice and by requiring him/her to accept supervision. Like the Merrison Committee, the GMC considered that health issues should be dealt with in private. In the period between 1975 and 1980, the PeCC took upon itself the right to deal with cases in private rather than send them to the DC for public hearing. It did so because that was in the doctor’s best interests. Also, both the PeCC and the DC appear to have been determined to provide an opportunity for rehabilitation, even though they were not in a position to provide adequate protection for the public by imposing conditions, restrictions and/or supervision. In fact, in my view, they could have done far more than they did to protect the public by giving a doctor the option of accepting conditions, restrictions and/or supervision with suspension or erasure as the alternative. That was not done. The result was that the GMC gave too much weight to the interest of the doctor in rehabilitation and too little to the need of the public to be protected from a doctor who had not yet been shown to have recovered from the addiction or dependence that had led him/her into criminal conduct.
16.196
My second major criticism is that the GMC made so little attempt to investigate the background to Shipman’s case and others like it. In my view, a case such as Shipman’s should have been regarded as giving rise to the potential for risk to patients. The background should have been investigated with that in mind. The Merrison Report had suggested the creation of an investigating unit within the GMC. The GMC does not appear to have recognised the wisdom of that suggestion and did not undertake investigations, save in the small minority of cases that had to be prepared for a full disciplinary hearing. Instead of investigating, the GMC invited observations from the doctor and the opinions of experts and did nothing to question, scrutinise or check the assertions made on Shipman’s behalf.
16.197
I also consider that, in the period before the introduction of health procedures, a case such as Shipman’s should always have been referred to the DC. The PeCC did not have a full picture and should have been making decisions only on a broad brush basis. It should not have been making detailed assessments of psychiatric evidence. Those were functions properly assigned to the DC, which had a smaller caseload to consider at any one meeting, and fuller information before it. The DC also had the opportunity to see, and sometimes to hear, the doctor. The DC should always have given careful scrutiny to the content of psychiatric reports and should have looked critically at the accounts of events there recorded. These would underlie the expert opinion and, if inaccurate, would invalidate it. The GMC should have appreciated the need to obtain reports from psychiatrists independent of the doctor and should have laid down requirements as to the content of such reports.
16.198
I recognise that, even if Shipman’s case had been handled as I think it should have been, it is unlikely that the outcome would have been very different from the actual outcome. I accept that Shipman’s registration would probably not have been suspended and that his name would certainly not have been erased from the medical register. He would probably have been put ‘on probation’ for a few years at most.
16.199
I do not criticise the GMC for its decision not to suspend Shipman or to erase his name from the medical register. First, it was the GMC’s practice to deal with drug abusing doctors by helping them towards rehabilitation. It had not been publicly criticised for that. Members of the public were probably hardly aware of the prevailing policy; if they had been it is by no means clear that it would have been criticised. Far from being criticised, it appears that the Government of the day accepted the philosophy underlying the Merrison Report and its recommendations for the creation of health procedures. The philosophy was that sick doctors, including those who abused drugs, must be helped towards rehabilitation in a way that provided adequate protection for patients. That did not imply that the GMC’s existing rehabilitative approach was wrong in principle.
16.200
Nor, in my view, can the GMC be criticised for failing to foresee that Shipman’s foray into the abuse of pethidine might be the forerunner of something far more serious. In short, I reject any suggestion that, even if the GMC procedures had been satisfactory, they could have prevented Shipman’s later criminality and saved many lives. It is possible that a period of ‘probation’ might have delayed the resumption of his illegal use of drugs on patients and might have saved the lives of one or two of his victims. I am quite satisfied, however, that ‘probation’ and the limited medical supervision that would have accompanied it would not have had any profound effect upon his future conduct.


========================================================================
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN - Serious Professional Misconduct and Seriously Deficient Performance: Problems of Definition
========================================================================

--- Seriously Deficient Performance ---
17.54
The Medical (Professional Performance) Act 1995, which introduced the performance procedures, did not define the circumstances in which a doctor’s professional performance should be regarded as
‘seriously deficient’
. In the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, ‘performance’ was defined as
‘any professional work undertaken by the doctor, including medical administrative work’
. Screeners were advised to consider whether there was good evidence that the doctor might be
‘repeatedly or persistently failing to comply with the professional standards appropriate to the work’
s/he was doing. They were advised to consider whether there might be
‘a pattern of deficient performance’
as opposed to
‘evidence only of one or two incidents’
of deficient performance, which could be
‘isolated lapses’
17.55
In November 1997, the GMC published guidance, ‘When Your Professional Performance Is Questioned’, about the new performance procedures. The guidance stated:
‘‘Seriously deficient performance” is a new idea. We have defined it as “a departure from good professional practice, whether or not it is covered by specific GMC guidance, sufficiently serious to call into question a doctor’s registration”. This means that we will question your registration if we believe that you are, repeatedly or persistently, not meeting the professional standards appropriate to the work you are doing - especially if you might be putting patients at risk. This could include failure to follow the guidance in our booklet Good Medical Practice.’
17.56
Here again, the circular test was propounded. SDP was defined as a departure from good professional practice, sufficiently serious to call registration into question. But how serious was that? In giving judgement in the case of
Krippendorf v General Medical Council
in November 2000, the Privy Council observed that it saw no reason to criticise the general guidance given in that passage, provided that it was not regarded as exhaustive. It observed that the third sentence of the guidance should more accurately read:
‘This means that we will question your registration if we believe that you have been, repeatedly or persistently, not meeting the professional standards appropriate to the work you have been doing - especially if you might be putting patients at risk.’
In other words, the Privy Council was suggesting that action on registration should be based on an assessment of past - not current - performance. It seems that the guidance was subsequently changed to accord with this suggestion. In the later case of
, the Privy Council referred to the amended guidance:
‘Although in
the Board did not criticise the phrase “repeatedly or persistently” in the GMC’s guidance, it is important to bear in mind that that guidance is a generalisation seeking to cover a very wide range of professional performance. The professional demands made on a general practitioner are very different from those made on a consultant surgeon. A continuing failure to organise the efficient management of a general practice may (in a sufficiently bad case) amount to seriously deficient performance, but in the nature of things it must be assessed on very different evidence from that relating to shortcomings of technique in major surgery. It would plainly be contrary to the public interest if a sub-standard surgeon could not be dealt with by the CPP
Committee on Professional Performance
unless and until he had repeatedly made the same error in the course of similar operations, but as a general rule the GMC should not (and their Lordships have no reason to suppose they would) seek to aggregate a number of totally dissimilar incidents and alleged shortcomings in order to make out a case of seriously deficient performance against any practitioner.’
Here, it seems to me, the Privy Council usefully suggested that the application of a test for SDP should be approached in the context of the type of work being done. In my view, this was the right track to follow.
17.57
Also in the case of
Sadler
, the Privy Council indicated that it did not consider negligence to be a relevant or useful concept for consideration at a performance hearing before the CPP. It observed that SDP meant:
‘... a much wider concept since ... it can extend to such matters as poor record-keeping, poor maintenance of professional obligations of confidentiality, or even deficiencies (if serious and persistent) in consideration and courtesy towards patients. It does not depend on proof of causation of actionable loss. (On the other hand one isolated error of judgment by a surgeon might give rise to liability in negligence but would be unlikely, unless very serious indeed, to amount by itself to seriously deficient performance.)’
17.58
The 1999 version of the SDF completed by medical screeners stated that:
‘SDP is normally indicated by a repeated or persistent failure to comply with relevant professional standards ...’
However, in the August 2001 version of the SDF, the words
‘a repeated or persistent failure’
were replaced by the words
‘a pattern of serious failure’
. This change introduced the concept of
‘a pattern of serious failure’
as opposed merely to
‘repeated or persistent failure’
to comply with relevant standards. This is not just a matter of semantics, as the August 2001 wording suggested that the failures themselves must be serious as well as repeated. The August 2001 wording was reproduced in later versions of the SDF.
17.59
The August 2001 version of the SDF also contained a list of
‘criteria’
which, it was suggested, might assist medical screeners in assessing whether the conduct or the performance procedures were appropriate. The SDF made clear that the list of
‘criteria’
was not exhaustive, but stated that it (by which was presumably meant the presence of one or more of the
‘criteria’
) might be an indicator of SDP. The list of
‘criteria’
was as follows:
a doctor who has a tendency to use inappropriate techniques
a doctor who has failed to keep up to date records
a range of inadequacies:
inadequate hygiene arrangements.’
These
‘criteria’
were reproduced in later versions of the SDF. The
‘criteria’
were helpful only to the extent that they pointed to relevant considerations. The actual standards to be applied were still at large, for the individual screener to make up his/her own mind about.
17.60
Following the case of
, which I have mentioned above and which I shall describe in detail in
, the GMC sought amendment of section 55 (the interpretation section) of the Medical Act 1983. After December 2002, when the amendments came into force, the expression
‘professional performance’
included professional competence. However, it does not appear that this change was reflected in the guidance provided for screeners or more generally for members of Assessment Panels or panels of the CPP. The amendments also made clear that an assessment of a doctor’s professional performance might include an assessment of the doctor’s professional performance at any time prior to the assessment, as well as of his/her professional performance at the time of the assessment.
[2001] 1 WLR 1054.


========================================================================
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: Initial Stages Conducted by the Administrative Staff
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
17.61
It appears that, in the past, there has not been a clear and common understanding about the type and seriousness of misconduct or deficient professional performance which was likely to result in action on registration. This has given rise to difficulties, examples of which I will examine in the ensuing Chapters. The GMC is about to introduce its new FTP procedures. Although, in future, these will not operate in the separate ‘silos’ of conduct, health and performance, as they have done in the past, the decisions that will have to be made by FTP panels will still involve issues of misconduct, deficient performance and ill health. Indeed, in future, issues of misconduct and deficient performance are likely to arise together in the same case. It is, in my view, vital that the GMC should establish clear standards upon which these new procedures are to be based. This is important for a number of reasons.
17.62
First, it is obviously desirable and fair that doctors themselves should know what type of conduct or deficiency of performance is likely to result in action on their registration and that they should be able to regulate their behaviour accordingly. Of course, it is to be hoped that most doctors would aim rather higher in their professional life than just to avoid disciplinary action, but it is only fair that they should understand the circumstances in which they might fall foul of their professional regulatory body.
17.63
Second, if, as has been the case in the past, it is to remain open to patients, relatives and others who have complaints against doctors to refer them to the GMC, they must have a clear understanding of whether the GMC is the right body to deal with their complaints. If they do not, their complaints will be rejected by the GMC, they will become disappointed and frustrated and the GMC’s reputation will suffer.
17.64
Third, it is important that those with responsibility for referring cases to the GMC - such as doctors’ employers, PCOs, private healthcare bodies, other healthcare professionals and such bodies as the Commission for Healthcare Audit and Inspection (now known as the Healthcare Commission) - are aware of the types of case that they should refer. If they are not, they will refer the wrong cases or fail to refer the right ones, resources will be wasted and patients may be inadequately protected.
17.65
Fourth, once a case has reached the GMC, it is important that all those responsible for making decisions in the future should understand the standards to be applied and should apply them consistently. Otherwise, the system will be unfair both to the doctors against whom complaints are made and to those who make the complaints.
17.66
It is now some years since the GMC was advised that it should devise standards, criteria and thresholds for the consistent operation of its FTP procedures. Professor Allen and her colleagues so advised in 1996, 2000 and 2003. Yet the GMC has still not grasped the nettle. The problem will not go away with the new procedures; indeed, I think it will become even greater. I say at once that I recognise that the task of formulating standards, criteria and thresholds is not easy. However, it must be tackled and, in my view, the public must be involved in the process. The GMC will not command public confidence unless there is consensus about the standards that are to be applied. I shall discuss two possible approaches to the problem in

--- CHAPTER EIGHTEEN - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: Initial Stages Conducted by the Administrative Staff ---
The Initial Processing of Conduct Cases under the 'Old' Procedures

--- Sources of Reports about Doctors ---
Convictions
18.7
The GMC receives information about doctors who have been convicted of criminal offences, or who are the subject of ongoing criminal investigations or proceedings, from a number of sources. It employs a press cuttings agency to alert it to criminal cases involving doctors that are going through the courts or have resulted in convictions. Home Office Circulars require the police to report certain types of convictions to the GMC. In addition, a doctor’s involvement in criminal investigations or proceedings may be reported to the GMC by the Home Office Drugs Branch, by the doctor’s employers or PCO (in England, a primary care trust (PCT)), by a member of the public or by the doctor him/herself. These systems are not foolproof and, sometimes, there is a long delay between the date of a conviction and the time when the GMC is notified of it. Some convictions have been missed altogether.
18.8
In the past, there was no professional obligation on a doctor to inform the GMC of the fact that s/he had been convicted of a criminal offence or of the fact that s/he was the subject of a criminal investigation or of criminal proceedings. As I have explained in Chapter 5, general practitioners (GPs) have been required since December 2001 to declare such matters to the PCO on whose list they are included within seven days of the commencement of criminal investigations or proceedings, or of a criminal conviction. They have also been required to disclose,
, the fact that they have accepted a police caution or are subject to an investigation into their conduct by any licensing, regulatory or other body anywhere in the world. However, there has been no formal mechanism whereby PCTs would automatically inform the GMC when they received such a declaration. My understanding is that PCTs would do so if they thought it appropriate.
18.9
In September 2004, as a result of discussions which took place during the course of Mr Scott’s evidence to the Inquiry, the GMC decided that doctors should be placed under a professional duty to disclose to the GMC information about impending and past criminal and regulatory proceedings. The precise terms of the duty have not yet been finally decided but it is likely to include an obligation to disclose information about convictions and criminal charges brought against doctors (save for those in relation to certain minor motoring offences), about police cautions accepted and about proceedings brought against them by other regulatory bodies in the UK or elsewhere. The new duty is to be included in the next edition of ‘Good Medical Practice’. Failure to comply with the duty may result in disciplinary proceedings. This change is welcome and brings the medical profession in line with other professions, including barristers.
18.10
Until 1991, the term
excluded a finding of guilt in respect of which a doctor was placed on probation or was discharged conditionally or absolutely. After 1991, the exclusion applied only to findings of guilt where a conditional or absolute discharge was imposed. Such findings of guilt have, however, frequently been reported to the GMC by the police. It has then been open to the GMC, if it chose, to proceed with the case as if it were an allegation of SPM. On occasion, the fact that a doctor has accepted a police caution might also be reported to the GMC. If this occurred, the GMC might then elect to treat the report as an allegation of SPM. The new FTP procedures specifically provide that a police caution should be treated in the same way as a conviction. I shall recommend also that offences which have been dealt with by means of a conditional discharge should be treated in the same way as a conviction.
18.11
The GMC also receives complaints about the conduct of doctors from many sources, mainly from NHS trusts, from doctors’ employers, from patients and patients’ families and from other healthcare professionals. Some of these complaints are serious and it has been clear from the start that, if proved, they would amount to SPM under the old conduct procedures. Others are so trivial that, even taken at their highest, they could never warrant disciplinary action by the GMC or, indeed, by any other body. Many fall somewhere in between these extremes. Some complaints do not relate to a doctor’s medical practice at all, but to some personal matter involving the doctor.
Other Communications about Doctors
18.12
The GMC also receives some communications about doctors that cannot properly be termed ‘complaints’. These may be requests for information or questions about medical ethics. Some of the communications do not relate to doctors at all. Like any other public body, the GMC also receives some communications that are irrational or incoherent. All these communications must be considered by the staff and a decision taken as to whether they require positive action by the GMC. If the staff judge that they do not require any such action, they are ‘closed’ at this stage.

--- The Procedure for Dealing with Convictions ---
18.40
The procedure adopted when a conviction was notified to the GMC was rather different from the procedure following the making of a complaint about a doctor. The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules (as amended in November 2002) provided that all convictions, with the exception of two classes of case, must be referred to a medical screener. The first exception related to minor motoring convictions (i.e. motoring convictions not involving drugs or alcohol). Where information was received about a conviction which the Registrar considered to be a
‘minor motoring offence’
, the case should not proceed further. Such cases would be closed in the office without reference to a medical screener. The second exception related to conviction cases where a custodial sentence (but not a suspended sentence) had been imposed. After November 2002, these were referred direct to the PCC for hearing, unless the staff (exercising the powers of the Registrar) were of the opinion that a direct referral would not be in the public interest.
18.41
If, following a criminal investigation, no charges were brought or charges were dropped, or if a criminal trial resulted in an acquittal, the GMC might, nevertheless, wish to pursue the case if issues about the doctor’s fitness to practise had been raised in the course of the criminal investigation. This might also be the case if a criminal court had imposed an absolute or conditional discharge (which, as I have explained, would not have ranked as a ‘conviction’), or if the doctor had been cautioned for a criminal offence. In that event, the case would follow the same procedure as that for a complaint.
18.42
After 2000, on receipt by the GMC of information about a conviction, or about an ongoing criminal investigation or ongoing criminal proceedings affecting a doctor, a casework manager would give urgent consideration to whether it would be appropriate for the case to be referred to a medical screener for possible referral to the IOC. However, before 2000, the GMC had no power to make interim orders in respect of a doctor who was being investigated or was facing trial for a criminal offence. This
in the GMC’s powers was rectified as the direct result of the GMC’s inability to suspend Shipman from practice in 1998 when it was discovered that he was under investigation for murder. On reflection, it is surprising that, until Shipman’s case, the GMC had apparently not felt the need for such a power and had not previously requested its provision. I refer to this matter in more detail in

--- Communications with Doctors' Employers and Primary Care Organisations ---
18.149
There are three main reasons why it might be helpful for the GMC to communicate at an early stage in its processes with the employer of a doctor against whom a complaint has been made or with the PCO (now the PCT) on whose list the doctor appears. First, it would enable the GMC to discover whether the employer/PCT had any information about the doctor which might assist the GMC in assessing and dealing appropriately with the complaint which had been made to it. Second, it would alert the employer or PCT to the fact that there might be a problem with the doctor. Third, it would enable the GMC and the doctor’s employer or PCT to discuss and/or clarify which organisation should proceed to deal with the complaint and to carry out any necessary investigation. I shall deal with these three issues separately.
Obtaining Background Information about a Doctor
18.150
In the past, when a complaint about a doctor’s conduct, or notification of a conviction, was received by the GMC, it was not the practice to make any enquiries of the doctor’s employer or PCO in order to discover whether there had been any previous expressions of concern about him/her. When Shipman’s convictions were reported to the GMC in 1976, no enquiry was made of the Calderdale FPC in order to find out what its staff knew about Shipman, his abilities as a doctor or his drug abuse. It is clear from the evidence received by the Inquiry that it was not the practice at the time to make such enquiries. Under the old FTP procedures, it was not usual for any routine enquiry to be made when the GMC was notified that a doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence. If any enquiry was made, it was likely to relate to the circumstances of the offence (e.g. the level of alcohol in a case of drink driving or the amount of financial loss in a case involving a fraud on the NHS). It was unlikely to relate to the possible impact which the doctor’s criminality might have had on his/her practice.
18.151
So far as complaints about conduct are concerned, those that come from employers or PCTs will often be accompanied by some background information about the doctor and any past problems associated with him/her. Members of the public do not have access to that sort of information. Their complaints are likely to relate to single, often apparently isolated, incidents. In the past, however, the GMC took no steps routinely to seek background information about a doctor who was the subject of a complaint by a private individual.
18.152
At the time of their initial work at the GMC, Professor Allen and her colleagues were concerned at the lack of any contact with the doctor’s employer or PCO before a complaint against him/her was screened. Professor Allen told the Inquiry that it seemed to them that a ‘quick phone call’ to the medical adviser at the relevant PCO would have helped to put a complaint about a GP into perspective. It appeared to me that there were two ways in which background information about a doctor might have been very valuable. First, where the complaint was about a single episode involving conduct which, if proved, would amount to substandard clinical practice (although not, or not necessarily, SPM), it would be important to know whether the alleged incident was, so far as was known, a ‘one-off’ episode or whether there had been previous similar incidents of which the doctor’s employer or PCT was aware. If there had been, this might, in the past, have suggested that the doctor should be referred to the GMC’s performance procedures or, at the very least, that there should be some discussion between the GMC and the employer or PCT (and, possibly, the NCAA) about how the problem should be tackled.
18.153
The second way in which such background information might have been valuable was in assessing the potential seriousness of a complaint about a single incident. For example, a complaint might concern what appeared at first sight to be a ‘one-off’ error involving the use of a piece of equipment or a particular drug. The doctor might admit the error but might claim that, through no fault of his/her own, s/he was unfamiliar with the equipment or drug concerned. An enquiry of his/her employers or PCT might reveal an earlier similar incident with the same piece of equipment or drug. The information about the earlier incident would put the later one in an entirely different light. It might suggest a pattern of poor performance. However, it might also suggest a lack of concern for patient safety such as would amount to SPM.
18.154
The 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, published to coincide with the introduction of the performance procedures, specifically provided for enquiries to be made of employers and PCOs and of officials of local medical committees and the equivalent committees in hospitals. Such enquiries were, however, to be made only at the request of a medical screener. The suggestion was that they should be made in all cases unless it was clear from the outset what action should be taken under the FTP procedures or unless there appeared to be no basis for the GMC’s involvement in the complaint. Certain rules were to be observed. In particular, no approach was to be made to any person who was not already aware of the complaint unless the doctor who was the subject of it had first been informed of it. Furthermore, it was to be made clear to the person of whom enquiries were made that the GMC was simply making preliminary enquiries and that no decision about possible GMC action had been taken.
18.155
The contents of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook seemed to suggest that enquiries of employers would be made virtually as a matter of routine in any ‘borderline’ case involving a complaint of substandard clinical practice made by a private individual. It is clear, however, that this was not done. Indeed, cases where such enquiries were made appear to have been very much the exception rather than the rule.
18.156
One reason for the failure to follow the practice set out in the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook was that there was ambivalence about whether the GMC should be making such enquiries. I have already discussed this ambivalence in connection with the general issue of investigation. It was well illustrated in the evidence of Dr Korlipara. He was a medical screener between 1998 and 2004. He said that, following the publication of the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, there was general support for enquiries to be made, both to shed further light on a single complaint and to see whether that complaint was in fact part of a more general problem. The type of single complaint where further enquiries would be made was, he said, where the complaint was potentially ‘seriously unacceptable’ but where details were sketchy, so that further clarification was necessary. In other words, any enquiries of a doctor’s employer or PCO would not be made in order to inform a screener’s preliminary assessment of the complaint. Rather, they would be instituted after that preliminary assessment, if it appeared to the screener that the complaint had, of itself, the potential to amount to SPM or SDP.
18.157
Dr Korlipara was asked about a case (that of Dr KE 10) which illustrated this approach. A widower complained to the GMC about the treatment of his late wife by two GPs. He had previously pursued his complaint through the NHS complaints procedures. This had resulted, a year after the events complained of, in an IRP report which was critical of both doctors and of the organisation and management of their practice in a number of important respects. One of the doctors was subsequently granted voluntary erasure from the medical register so that, in the event, the GMC was left with the complaint in respect of Dr KE 10 only.
18.158
The complainant’s wife had been suffering from a terminal illness which presented late and in an unusual manner. It was not suggested that Dr KE 10 or his colleague had caused her death or that the course of the illness would have been changed had they behaved differently. Nor was it suggested that they should have correctly diagnosed the precise nature of the patient’s condition. An x-ray obtained by Dr KE 10, which might have been expected to show evidence of the condition if present, apparently showed only degenerative changes. However, the IRP found that Dr KE 10 had failed to keep clinical notes or records of an adequate standard, had failed to consider carrying out blood tests which would have been appropriate, and had refused reasonable requests for home visits. These failures, together with those of his colleague and of the practice generally, were said by the IRP to have contributed to the failure to recognise the seriousness of the patient’s condition and to treat it with appropriate pain relief.
18.159
Dr Korlipara screened the case and advised that it should be closed. He referred to the result of the x-ray and observed that Dr KE 10 was justified in reassuring the patient on the basis of the x-ray report. He was satisfied that the terminal nature of the patient’s condition could not have been appreciated until two days before her final admission to hospital. He did not comment on the specific findings of the IRP in respect of Dr KE 10, merely saying that his management of the patient’s condition did not raise issues of SPM or SDP. The lay screener agreed.
18.160
It is clear that, apart from the IRP report and related documentation, and a letter written on behalf of Dr KE 10 by his medical defence organisation, Dr Korlipara had no other information before him. In particular, there was no background information about the doctor from the PCT. This was despite the fact that the IRP report had raised concerns which might, I should have thought, have been part of wider performance issues. I also note that the complainant had suggested in his evidence to the IRP that there were wider problems with Dr KE 10. This suggestion might or might not have been correct, but it seems to me that it should at least have prompted some enquiries of the PCT.
18.161
In oral evidence, Dr Korlipara expanded upon his reasons for advising that this case should be closed. I shall refer to this decision further in
. Dr Korlipara was then asked about the failure to discover whether the PCT had any other concerns about the doctor’s performance. He took the opportunity to express his general views about the appropriateness of the GMC making enquiries of a PCT. He said:
‘... the GMC traditionally has received complaints. It has not instigated complaints other than if it has seen
them in
the press or in some public domain but, by and large, complaints have been referred to it and it has looked at the complaints and upon the merits of those complaints after careful analysis comes to a conclusion whether there are any issues that would indicate such standards, either in conduct or in performance, that fall so seriously short of acceptable good medical practice that further action on the doctor’s registration should be considered. If the answer is yes, the inquiry proceeds to the further stage. If the answer is no and it
an isolated complaint which of itself does not raise the spectre, we assume that in the case of National Health Service patients, which are either managed by the PCTs or its predecessors or the hospital trusts, they do have a duty and they would be doing their duty of informing us if they had any concerns unprompted.
... returning to the repeated question put to me as to whether the GMC should have initiated enquiries of its own of the PCT or the hospital trusts when the isolated complaint of itself really does not amount to any serious nature, I think it really takes it on to a newer level. People might describe it as fishing for further information of which the information
I think this should be ‘doctor’
against whom the complaint is made will have had no prior knowledge and yet which could be used in order to construct a case against a doctor. I am not really sure if the doctor’s advocates would find that as in accordance with the natural law of fairness.
Personally, I will have some difficulties unless some persuasive arguments are put to us in public that it is desirable and fair that additional information of which doctors have not been previously notified can be added to the complaints without the doctor having been made aware.’
18.162
In other words, Dr Korlipara was saying that it would not be fair to the doctor concerned to seek information from a PCT or NHS trust
a decision had been taken as to whether a complaint was likely to amount to SPM or SDP. If a decision was taken that it was likely to amount to SPM or SDP, further enquiries could be made. Otherwise, he suggested, it should be assumed that, had there been any concerns about the doctor, the PCT or the doctor’s employers would have reported them to the GMC.
18.163
The problem with that approach, it seemed to me, was twofold. First, the background information might be necessary in order to answer the initial question of whether the complaint was likely to amount to SPM or SDP. Second, it might be that the PCT was dealing with a number of complaints or concerns about a doctor but was unaware of a complaint which had been made to the GMC by a private individual. The PCT might not have got to the point of reporting the doctor to the GMC. The information held by the PCT might nevertheless be of value to the GMC when deciding what to do with the complaint which it had received. Moreover, given the fact that the PCTs are relatively new organisations it would, I think, be unsafe to assume that they will always have a clear idea of what concerns they should and should not report to the GMC. From the viewpoint of patient safety, it seems to me to be clearly desirable that the GMC should have as complete a picture as possible before taking a decision on how to deal with a complaint. In any event, if there is to be a sharing of the regulatory function between the GMC and local NHS bodies, there must, in my view, be sharing of information relevant to that function. The making of assumptions by one organisation about information which may or may not be held by another does not appear to me to be in the interests of patient safety.
18.164
Dr Korlipara said that it was clear that Dr KE 10 had had many deficiencies which, although they did not in his view amount to SDP, needed correction. He said it was also clear that the practice was dysfunctional in a number of respects. He had assumed that the PCT would have taken steps to deal with these problems. He said that it was not the GMC’s role to oversee the PCT, so that it would not in his view have been appropriate for him to institute any enquiry about what had been done to address the shortcomings of the doctor or his practice. It seems to me that, in taking this rather narrow view of the functions of the GMC, Dr Korlipara failed to give proper weight to the need to protect Dr KE 10’s patients. As the GMC is supposed to act in partnership with NHS bodies, it would surely have been sensible for an enquiry to be made about what steps, if any, had been taken to ensure that the doctor’s deficiencies, and those of the practice, were remedied. If none had been taken, a letter of enquiry coming from the GMC might well have acted as a prompt to the PCT.
18.165
Mr Marshall said that, during the period between December 1998 and April 2000, a debate was going on in the GMC about whether background information about doctors should be sought when a complaint was received. He said that, in the light of some past cases, it had become apparent that the GMC was possibly failing in its duty to protect the public if such enquiries were not made. However, some members felt that there were difficulties in making enquiries at an early stage since this would involve disclosing to a doctor’s employer or PCO the fact that a complaint had been made. It was eventually decided that discussions should take place only in certain cases, i.e. in those which were ‘more performance-like cases’. Mr Marshall’s evidence demonstrated the close link which was made with the GMC between the issues of seeking information about doctors from their employers and PCOs and of disclosing to those same persons or bodies the fact that a complaint about the doctor had been made to the GMC. The seeking of information was plainly in the interests of patient safety. The disclosure that a complaint was made was, however, perceived as unfair to doctors. His evidence also illustrates the existence of a conflict between the GMC’s duty to protect patients and its desire to be ‘fair to doctors’. It seems that, in that instance, the conflict was resolved by a compromise which went some way, but not far, towards the interest of patient protection.
Disclosure of the Fact that a Complaint Has Been Made
18.166
Early notification to a doctor’s employer or PCT of the fact that a complaint has been made to the GMC has the effect of alerting that person or body to possible problems with the doctor. In the past, there was no automatic disclosure to a doctor’s employer or PCO even when the complaint had been proved and the doctor had been the subject of disciplinary action by the GMC. Still less was there any disclosure of the fact that a complaint had been received and had been rejected or was in the process of being dealt with. NHS bodies would complain that the first that they knew of the fact that a doctor on their list or in their employment had been disciplined was when they read about it in the local newspaper. In December 1999, the GMC proposed in a consultation document that it should, in certain very limited circumstances, voluntarily disclose information about a doctor’s involvement in its FTP procedures to employers and others with a legitimate interest in receiving that information.
18.167
The Government, however, favoured the creation of a statutory duty on the GMC to provide timely information to NHS bodies about doctors whose fitness to practise was being formally considered. As a result, from 2000, the GMC was placed under a statutory duty to disclose to the DoH, and to any person or body by whom a doctor was employed or by whom s/he was contracted to provide services, any decision made by the GMC to refer the doctor to the PPC, to invite him/her to agree to an assessment of his/her professional performance or to invite him/her to agree to an assessment to determine whether his/her fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. In other words, disclosure was to take place after screening of the complaint if a decision had been taken that the complaint was to be taken forward. Although a decision to refer a case to the IOC was not included in the list of triggers for disclosure, the Inquiry was told that, in practice, such a decision was treated in the same way as the other decisions specified in the new statutory provision.
18.168
At the same time, the GMC was given the power to require persons to disclose any information or documents in their possession which appeared relevant to the GMC’s consideration of a case. This power could be used, in theory, to obtain information from NHS organisations, although one would have expected that such information would usually be provided voluntarily.
18.169
In addition, the GMC was given statutory power to disclose to any person information relevant to a doctor’s conduct, professional performance or fitness to practise which it considered it was in the public interest to disclose. This power might be used, for example, where enquiries were made by a prospective employer about a doctor who was being considered for employment. It also enabled the GMC, if it considered it to be in the public interest to do so, to inform a doctor’s employer or PCO of the fact that a complaint had been made against him/her, in advance of the stage in its procedures when it was obliged by statute to make the disclosure. This was important since, in some cases, a period of several weeks (or even longer) might elapse before a screening decision was made and the time for statutory disclosure was reached. In such cases, it might be desirable for the doctor’s employer or PCO to receive advance warning of the complaint that had been made.
18.170
In evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Scott said that requests by the GMC to employers or PCOs for background information about doctors against whom complaints had been lodged were sometimes made and sometimes not. Even at the post-screening stage, where the GMC was obliged to disclose information about a complaint that had been made, the disclosure was not invariably accompanied by a request by the GMC for information from the employer or PCO. Sometimes, an employer or a PCT would volunteer information about a doctor but this was not always done. Mr Marshall said that, in the case of convictions, employers and PCOs would be notified of the fact that convictions had been reported to the GMC at the time they were referred to the PPC. If the GMC had reason to believe that the employer or PCO might have relevant information, direct questions would be asked of it. Otherwise, the GMC would rely on the employer or PCO to volunteer any information that might be relevant.
18.171
Mr Scott said that, since there was, at the time he gave his evidence in December 2003, no requirement imposed on the GMC to make a disclosure to an employer or PCO immediately a complaint about a doctor had been received, there was ‘ambivalence’ on the GMC’s part about seeking background information at that stage. As a result, further information was sought only if ‘the decision-makers’ (by which I assume Mr Scott meant the screeners) said they did not have sufficient information to make their decision without such enquiries. The reason for the ‘ambivalence’ referred to by Mr Scott was that, if enquiries were made of an employer or PCO when a complaint was received, this would disclose the fact that a complaint had been received before the GMC was required by statute to make that disclosure. It was thought that this was unfair to the doctor concerned. As I have explained, it is clear that the GMC had the power to disclose at an earlier stage the fact that a complaint had been made, if it considered that it was in the public interest to make the disclosure for the purpose of obtaining information from the doctor’s employer or PCO. However, in most cases, it did not choose to use that power.
18.172
With the impending introduction of the new FTP procedures, the GMC had to reconsider the point at which its statutory duty to make disclosure of a complaint should arise. During the period for which the new procedures were under discussion, its proposals as to what stages of its procedures should trigger disclosure underwent considerable changes. I describe these changes - and the eventual outcome - in
. Broadly speaking, the obligation to disclose the complaint to a doctor’s employer or PCO will, in most cases, arise when the case is referred to a case examiner, who will fulfil a similar - but not identical - role to that of the current screeners.
18.173
Meanwhile, as I have explained, in May 2004, the GMC announced that it would thenceforth be making informal disclosure of the fact that complaints had been made in certain cases. The intention was to discuss certain complaints with the doctor’s employers and PCO at an early stage. The purpose of these discussions would be, first, to discover whether the complaint was an isolated matter or was part of wider local concerns about the doctor and, second, to inform those with local clinical governance responsibilities that the GMC had received a complaint about the doctor. It was not intended that such discussions would take place in every case. They would not be held in cases which, in the view of the GMC, clearly did not require action, nor in those cases where it was immediately clear, because of their seriousness, that the GMC must investigate.
18.174
The type of case in which discussions should take place is one where the allegation is not of itself (even if proved) serious enough to justify action on registration, but where the GMC’s view might be different if there were wider concerns at local level about the doctor’s practice. In such cases, the GMC will enter into a dialogue with the doctor’s employer before deciding whether to investigate further. If that dialogue discloses no wider concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise, the GMC might decide that it need not investigate further. It seems to me that these new arrangements should, if implemented consistently, bring about significant improvement in the GMC’s preliminary decision-making.
18.175
However, reports in the medical press have suggested that the new arrangements have been greeted with dismay by doctors. It has been said that the informal disclosure to employers and PCOs of the fact that a complaint has been made would be ‘unfair to doctors’ since employers would be liable to draw adverse conclusions from the fact that a complaint had been made against a doctor. At least two medical defence organisations are reported to have challenged the right of the GMC to ask a doctor to provide employment details for the purpose of enabling the GMC to contact his/her employers to discuss a complaint made against him/her before the time for statutory disclosure is reached. It remains to be seen whether the GMC will apply the new arrangements consistently in the face of such opposition from within the profession or whether it will apply them in only a minority of cases or whether, like the very similar arrangements that were described in the 1997 Screeners’ Handbook, the new arrangements will fall into disuse.
Deciding Which Organisation Should Deal with the Complaint
18.176
An early discussion between the GMC and a doctor’s employer or PCO about a complaint should enable a decision to be taken as to which organisation should assume responsibility for dealing with the complaint. I have referred at
paragraph 18.104
to the advantages, in an appropriate case, of a direct referral by the GMC to the local complaints body.
18.177
It is disappointing that the GMC, which has the protection of patients as its declared objective, has been content for so long to look at individual complaints in isolation. There seems to have been a failure fully to appreciate the effect that knowledge about a previous complaint might have on the evaluation of a later complaint. It also seems that there has been a view, illustrated by Dr Korlipara’s evidence, that it would be ‘unfair to doctors’ to seek background information which might, in some circumstances, be unfavourable to them. From the viewpoint of patient safety, it seems to me essential that, when a decision is being taken whether or not to institute disciplinary action, the person making the decision should have a full picture of all issues which may affect the doctor’s fitness to practise.
18.178
I welcome the intention, expressed by the GMC, that it should have informal discussions with doctors’ employers and PCOs at an early stage after a complaint has been received. If this is done, it should ensure that employers and PCOs are aware at an early stage of complaints made about doctors for whom they have a responsibility. This will alert them to possible problems with doctors and will enable them to take any necessary steps to protect patients. In addition, complaints can be a source of great distress and anxiety to doctors and it is important that their employers and PCOs are aware of the position so that they can offer any support and practical assistance which may be necessary. The arrangements should also enable the GMC to place a complaint in context and to be made aware if the problem complained of is part of a wider pattern of concerns or is more serious than it would first appear. I hope that the GMC will not be deflected from its present intention by opposition from the profession. I hope that it will use this option in the majority of cases, indeed in all save for those which are obviously trivial and which plainly do not give rise to any issues for the GMC or the local NHS body. I do not know whether the GMC intends to apply this policy to complaints about doctors working in the private sector. I hope that it will do so.


========================================================================
CHAPTER NINETEEN - The General Medical Council's Conduct Procedures: Screening
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
18.228
In this Chapter, I have examined the early stages of the GMC’s ‘old’ conduct procedures in some detail and have been very critical of some of the practices, and of the policies which have underlain their operation. It may be said that this detailed examination of how the procedures have worked has been pointless and the criticism misplaced, because the conduct procedures have been abolished; the new FTP procedures will be much better. However, in my view, it has been important to conduct this examination because it has provided the best opportunity to understand how the procedures actually operated in the past as opposed to how they were theoretically intended to operate. There was, as I have indicated, a considerable difference between the two. For the future, I have received evidence about how it is hoped and intended that the new procedures will operate. In the nature of things, there is bound to be some shortfall between the intentions and the reality. I needed to know about any shortfall in the past in order to assess how the new procedures might actually operate in future.
18.229
The evidence has also revealed much about the attitudes and approach of the GMC over the years. Although the GMC has recognised the need for change, not only of its procedures but also of some of its old attitudes, I have needed detailed evidence of the old attitudes if I am to form a view of the chances of success for the new regime.
18.230
My overwhelming impression of the staff employed in recent years is that they are conscientious and sympathetic to patients. They did not seem to me in any way dismissive of patients’ interests and concerns and I certainly detected no underlying desire to ‘do patients down’. But it does seem to me that the GMC, as an institution, has been incapable of devising and operating its procedures and policies from the viewpoint of patients and patient protection. This is a thread that runs through all the issues I have discussed above. When, at the Inquiry, a problem was drawn to the attention of a member of staff, the reaction was usually to see the point and to accept that a different approach was required. An example is the feature that I have just described: the failure to identify 25% of doctors about whom complaints were received. Yet the problems were not recognised by the organisation itself until they were pointed out. I am not sure why not. There are several possibilities.
18.231
I recognise that an organisation can become set in its ways and so used to doing things in a certain way that it fails to notice that there is anything wrong with its methods, procedures and attitudes. But this cannot be said of the GMC. In the last five years, the GMC has faced up to the fact that its FTP procedures are inadequate and that they require radical reform. It has spent a great deal of time and effort devising new procedures and consulting upon them. It claims to have recognised the need to place the protection of patients in the forefront of all it does. Yet it did not see that many aspects of its old FTP procedures required change - change that did not need an Act of Parliament or the expenditure of large amounts of money to bring about. A case in point was the practice of advising complainants to pursue local procedures and then just leaving them to get on with it. Mrs Robinson pointed out the difficulties and dangers of this practice in 1988. Yet it survived, little changed, for more than 15 years after that.
18.232
Another possibility, which I mention only to dismiss, is that members of the GMC staff do not have the intellectual resources to grapple with these problems. I have the impression that the GMC employs some extremely able staff. I do not think that is the problem. It is also apparent that leading members of the GMC, such as the current President, Sir Graeme Catto, and his predecessor, Sir Donald Irvine, are personally committed to providing FTP procedures that protect patients.
18.233
A further possibility, which I believe to be the root cause of the problem, is that there are inherent tensions between the interests of patients in having first class FTP procedures and the interests of the doctors who elect the majority of members of the GMC. There are two obvious sources of tension. One is money. The GMC is funded by doctors, and good FTP procedures, including good investigation, are an expensive business. The other is even more fundamental. I can understand and sympathise to some extent with the view of a doctor who asks why s/he should be expected to pay (and pay dearly) for a process that is designed primarily to protect the interests of another group (those of patients) which sometimes appear to be inimical to the doctor’s own interests. The answer, of course, is that, if the profession wants to be in charge of its own regulation, it must pay for it and it must do the job to the satisfaction of the community at large. If the profession is not prepared to do the job in a way that properly protects the public and does not want to pay for a first class process, the Government may eventually decide that the profession will have to give up self-regulation.
18.234
Another facet of the problem seems to me to be that many doctors perceive the GMC not as their regulator but as a representative body. This perception is fostered by the way in which the majority of members are elected by the profession. If the doctors elect the members and pay for the whole operation, one can see why they expect the GMC to conduct itself in a way that favours the interests of the profession. The practice of electing members began in the 1970s following a near revolt within the profession at the introduction of an annual retention fee. The cry was ‘no taxation without representation’: hence the misunderstanding as to the role of the GMC. A possible solution to this is that the GMC should not be dominated by elected members but by leaders of the profession who are not beholden to an electorate.
18.235
I mentioned also that one of the problems that appeared to beset the GMC was its internal confusion about its role and its relationship with patients and the public. It has given the public the impression, in particular in its leaflets ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’ and ‘Referring a doctor to the GMC - a Guide for Patients’, that it is a repository for all types of complaints and concerns about doctors. Yet its statutory powers and duties have been limited to dealing with complaints and concerns that give rise to a question of SPM, SDP or serious impairment to health. That was all the old FTP procedures were designed to do, although the GMC staff would also provide advice to callers. In this context and, as a further example of the way in which the GMC has reacted to concerns expressed by the Inquiry, I notice that a new - and more accurate - description of the GMC’s functions in respect of complaints and concerns has recently appeared on its website. When speaking of the old leaflets, Mr Scott said that there had been a lack of clarity in the GMC about where to position itself in relation to other systems, in particular the NHS complaints procedures. I wonder whether the ‘lack of clarity’ did not in reality represent a conflict of views between its members as to the function and purpose of the GMC’s FTP procedures.
18.236
I shall revert to these issues again in later Chapters, when discussing problems that have been detected in the operation of the later stages of the GMC’s conduct procedures. Their relevance, in case the reader is in doubt, is to the important question of whether the GMC will in fact bring a new approach and attitude to the new procedures or whether, like the leopard, it will be unable to change its spots.

--- Conclusions ---
19.259
As has been seen, the wording of the statutory test underlying the screening process has changed in recent years. However, in practice, the test has not really changed. Screening always was, or should have been, only a preliminary filter, designed to remove from the caseload those complaints which clearly could not give rise to disciplinary action. As I have said, for many years, the test appears to have been wrongly applied. Far more cases have been screened out than should have been. It is impossible to assess how many or what proportion of cases were closed by screeners which ought to have proceeded to the PPC. Of course, the fact that a case ought to have gone to the PPC does not necessarily mean that it should necessarily have gone through to the PCC; it would have been open to the PPC to close it. But screeners and the PPC had different functions and had different tests to apply. I shall consider the work of the PPC in
. The point I make here is that there seems to have been an ethos of early closure, which was, in my view, indicative of an unwillingness to give complaints against doctors the consideration that they deserved. The balance between protecting patients and being fair to doctors was weighted towards the interests of the doctors. In my view, so long as members of the GMC are elected by the profession, there will always be a danger that their ‘judicial’ decisions will be subconsciously biased towards the interests of their electorate.
19.260
I do not wish to suggest that individual screeners were not conscientious in carrying out their work. I think they were. The problem was that, for many years, they were left to use their own discretion as to how they approached the task. This was to a large extent because of the history of the way in which their role developed. For about 75 years, screening was the sole preserve of the leader of the profession, the President of the GMC. He decided what was and was not acceptable. Even in the 1970s, when the President ceased to hold all three key roles (i.e. medical screener, Chairman of the PeCC and Chairman of the DC), he nominated the screeners and chairmen of the various FTP committees and so could wield his influence vicariously. Until 2004, the President nominated the screeners and the GMC was obliged to appoint them. It seems to me that this association with the President may have inculcated in screeners the feeling that they were in a position to exercise discretion and to make decisions on the basis of their personal views to a far greater extent than the GMC Rules actually allowed them to do. When, as the result of judicial review, it was clear that the screeners had not been applying the Rules, the medical screeners (or some of them at least) were not willing to learn and to change their practice. Also, when the PSI and the GMC agreed on measures which would have produced greater consistency of results, the medical screeners (or some of them) sabotaged the new arrangements. It may be that there was some improvement in the quality and consistency of decision-making in the last year or two of the old FTP procedures. I cannot say. However, it seems to me fortunate that screening as such will disappear under the new procedures. The preliminary filtering process is to be carried out by case examiners, who will not be elected members of the GMC and, it is to be hoped, should not feel under any subconscious pressure to lean towards the protection of doctors. It is to be hoped that there will be a fresh start with clearly defined and commonly understood standards and criteria to be applied at each stage of the process.
19.261
I shall return to the issue of standards and criteria on more than one occasion in this Report. The absence of standards and criteria seems to me to underlie many of the problems faced by the GMC in the past. In each of the PSI Reports, Professor Allen and her colleagues recommended that standards and criteria should be developed, with a hierarchy of seriousness. Only when that was done, she said, would it be possible to achieve consistency and transparency of decision-making. I agree with her completely.
19.262
My other major concern, highlighted by this examination of the screening process, is the failure of the GMC to investigate cases thoroughly before the preliminary decisions are taken and, in particular, to make enquiries of the doctor’s employer or PCT. I noted in
that Dr Korlipara expressed the view that it was not part of the GMC’s function to try to make a case against the doctor. In my view, there is a world of difference between trying to make a case against a doctor and carrying out a thorough and impartial investigation.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ---
The Approach Adopted by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in Some Specific Types of Case
The Case of Richards
The Workload of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee from 2000 to 2003


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
========================================================================

--- The Possible Outcomes of the Consideration of a Case by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee ---
Referral to the Professional Conduct Committee
20.23
As I have said, the PPC had to decide whether a case
to the PCC. Until 1988, once the PPC had decided that a case ought to be referred to the PCC, rule 11(2) of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules applied. Rule 11(2) provided:
‘When referring a case to the Professional Conduct Committee the Preliminary Proceedings Committee shall indicate the convictions, or the matters which in their opinion appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct, to be so referred.’
The 1988 Professional Conduct Rules amended rule 11(2) to make clear that the
‘convictions’
‘matters’
indicated by the PPC were those which would form the basis of the charges which the doctor would have to answer at the hearing before the PCC.
Referral to the Health Committee
20.24
The 1980 Professional Conduct Rules provided that, if the PPC was considering referring a case to the HC, it could seek medical evidence about the doctor’s condition before taking the decision whether to refer, and could adjourn the case pending receipt of such evidence. Alternatively, the PPC could refer the case to the HC and invite the doctor to undergo medical examination(s) before the case came before the HC. When referring a doctor to the HC, the PPC was required to indicate the nature of the physical or mental condition(s) that made it appear to the PPC that the doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired.
20.25
If the PPC referred a case to the HC and the referral proved inappropriate for some reason (e.g. because, on examination, no health problem was identified), the HC had no jurisdiction to act, nor any power to send the case back to the PPC. In those circumstances, the GMC would be powerless to act. This was a
in its powers which was never remedied. In practice, however - no doubt because members of the PPC were aware of the potential problem - very few cases were referred by the PPC direct to the HC. The Inquiry was told that, on the rare occasions when a case was referred to the HC, medical evidence would invariably have been obtained before the referral was made.
Adjournment for Further Investigation
The Use of the Power to Adjourn in Conduct and Conviction Cases
20.26
It does not appear that the PPC’s power to adjourn for further investigations was used frequently for the purpose of instituting investigations about substantive issues relating to the conviction or conduct under consideration. This is surprising given that the amount of evidence put before the PPC seems, in most cases, to have been the same evidence as was put before the screener. The amount of evidence required for the screening decision was said to be ‘minimal’. I infer therefore that, in many cases, the amount of evidence put before the PPC will also have been minimal. The practice was that the PPC reached a decision to send a case to the PCC ‘for inquiry’ and formulated the charges that the doctor was to face on the basis of quite limited evidence. The file was then referred to the GMC’s solicitors to be prepared for the hearing; this process would sometimes involve evidence gathering. As Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, told the Inquiry, this involved ‘putting the cart before the horse’. The adverse consequences of late investigation are obvious. First, some cases were probably not referred to the PCC because their seriousness had not been fully appreciated and/or because the PPC had the impression that the evidence available would not be adequate. Second, it sometimes transpired that the evidence that was eventually gathered by the solicitors did not adequately support the charges that had already been formulated. This resulted in the dropping of some, or even all, of the charges against the doctor. On the other hand, the evidence collected might disclose that the allegations were rather more serious than had been thought and that the charges required amendment. Ideally, investigation should take place at an early stage. But, if it had not taken place at the very outset, it should, I would have thought, at least have taken place before the PPC reached its decision.
Adjournment in Health Cases
20.27
It was not uncommon for the PPC to adjourn a case in order to initiate investigations into a doctor’s health. There was a good reason for this.
20.28
If, at the screening stage, the medical screener did not refer the doctor to the PPC, but instead remitted the case to the health screener, the doctor might then be invited to agree to undergo medical examinations. If, as a result of those examinations, it appeared appropriate to the health screener, the doctor could be invited to enter into voluntary undertakings as to his/her future conduct and as to any restrictions on his/her practice that the health screener might deem necessary. The process of dealing with doctors by means of voluntary undertakings became known as the ‘voluntary health procedures’. I shall explain their operation in
. Provided that the doctor complied with his/her undertakings (and that his/her health did not deteriorate), s/he would not be required to attend a formal hearing and would not be at risk of suspension, which was the most serious sanction available in a ‘health case’.
20.29
By contrast, if a doctor was referred by the PPC to the HC, the voluntary health procedures were not available. The doctor would be subjected to a hearing before the HC that, although not held in public, was nevertheless formal in nature. He or she would, in theory at least, be at risk of suspension. Thus, a doctor who was referred by the PPC to the HC was in a disadvantaged position when compared with a doctor whose case had been remitted to the health screener by a medical screener. Recognising the potential unfairness of this, the PPC was concerned to prevent doctors from being disadvantaged in this way. Thus, in a case where it was considered that a doctor’s fitness to practise might be impaired through ill health, the PPC would use its power to adjourn the case for further investigation. It would then remit the case to the health screener. The health screener would arrange for the doctor to be medically examined and, depending on the contents of the examination reports, would assess the doctor’s suitability to be dealt with by means of the voluntary health procedures. If the doctor was considered suitable to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures, the PPC would adjourn the case
to allow this to be done. If the doctor proved for some reason unsuitable to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures (perhaps because no health problem was found or because s/he refused to enter into voluntary undertakings), the health screener would refer the case back to the PPC. The PPC was then able to consider the case again and decide how to deal with it. The options of referring the case to the PCC or to the HC were still open to it. This facility - whereby a case could be referred by the PPC to the health screener who could, if necessary, pass it back to the PPC - made it preferable for the PPC (save in very rare cases) to use its power to adjourn for investigation rather than referring the case to the HC.
20.30
I have said that, when a case was remitted to the health screener and was dealt with by means of the voluntary health procedures, the PPC would adjourn the case
. The Annual Report of the PPC presented to the Council in November 1985 indicated that, rather than leaving an adjourned case ‘in limbo’, a practice had by that time been developed whereby, at some later stage, the PPC would receive medical evidence and, if it thought fit, would then close the case. Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that, between September 1999 and May 2002, when he was on the PPC, it would receive regular reports on cases that had been adjourned
to the voluntary health procedures. This enabled cases to be formally closed by the PPC. In order to comply with the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, formal closure by the PPC was necessary if a case was not to be referred to the PCC or the HC. However, Mr Nicholls said that, from May 2002, there was a period of about nine months when reports on cases which had been adjourned
were not made to the PPC. Although Mr Nicholls was confident that the ‘loose ends’ were being ‘perfectly well tied up’ by the Health Section during that time, the PPC did not know the outcome of the adjourned cases and Mr Nicholls said that this was something he regretted. The practice of regular reporting to the PPC was, he said, subsequently reintroduced.
Decision Not to Refer
20.31
If the PPC decided not to refer a doctor to the PCC or to the HC, the Registrar (or the GMC staff exercising his legal powers) was required to inform both the doctor and the complainant (if any) of the decision in such terms as the PPC might direct.
Warning Letters
20.32
This provision was used on occasion to send a warning letter to a doctor, advising him/her about his/her future conduct. Initially, warning letters were sent mainly in conviction cases, many of them drink driving cases. A few warning letters were sent in cases involving allegations of serious professional misconduct (SPM). They were not used in cases where the facts giving rise to the complaint were disputed. In such cases, there would be no proven misconduct about which the doctor could be warned. Warning letters were used, therefore, only in cases where the doctor had admitted the allegations in whole or in part, or where the facts were proved or were beyond dispute. Over time, a hierarchy of different warning letters (termed ‘mild’, ‘standard’ and ‘strong’ or ‘severe’) developed. They were used extensively.
Cautionary Letters and Letters of Advice
20.33
In a case where the PPC had concerns about the doctor’s conduct but did not feel it appropriate to refer the case to the PCC and where there was no proof or admission of misconduct, the practice grew up of sending a ‘cautionary letter’ or a ‘letter of advice’. In the past, it appears that the two types of letter were rather different. A cautionary letter would inform the doctor that the papers relating to the complaint would be kept in the GMC’s records and would be looked into if the doctor were to be the subject of a similar complaint in the future. It would also advise the doctor as to his/her future conduct. Letters of advice merely made recommendations to the doctor about his/her future conduct. They often contained references to the publication ‘Good Medical Practice’ (after 1995), or to other GMC guidance. The Inquiry was told that, in recent years, the sending of cautionary letters had been discontinued. However, the PPC continued to send letters of advice in a large number of cases. In 2002, the PPC considered the cases of 546 doctors; it sent 234 letters of warning or advice. In 2003, the PPC sent letters of warning or advice to 185 of the 418 doctors whose cases it considered.
20.34
Mr Nicholls said that the increase in the number of letters of advice sent by the PPC reflected a greater appreciation by the GMC of its overall duty to attempt to raise standards of care generally. Instead of confining itself to the narrow range of very serious cases in which a doctor’s registration was in issue, there was a desire to take some action in less serious cases where there had been a departure from ‘Good Medical Practice’. This in itself is a laudable aim. However, I am uncertain how much can be achieved by the sending of a letter of advice in a case where the allegation has not been investigated and the doctor has not admitted any shortcoming.
The Treatment of Further Convictions or Allegations of Misconduct
20.35
Rule 14 of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules dealt with conviction cases in which the PPC had decided not to make a referral either to the PCC or to the HC, or in which the medical screener had decided not to refer the case to the PPC. If the GMC were subsequently to receive notice of another conviction or a complaint of misconduct concerning the same doctor, it was open to the President (or the medical screener appointed in his place) to direct that the earlier conviction should be referred to the PPC, together with the subsequent conviction or complaint. In that event, the earlier conviction would be dealt with afresh, as if the PPC or medical screener had not made the earlier decision, and the PPC might refer it to the PCC or to the HC. It was in the context of the forerunner of this rule that Shipman was warned in 1976 that any repetition of his misconduct was likely to result in the reconsideration of his convictions for drug-related offences.
20.36
In 1988, the rule was amended so as to apply also to cases where the original matter considered by the PPC or the medical screener had been a complaint about a doctor’s conduct, rather than a conviction. However, in such cases (but not where the original matter had been a conviction), the rule applied only if the subsequent complaint was notified within two years of the PPC’s or screener’s decision in the earlier matter. In 2000, the rule was changed again so as to apply the two-year limit to convictions, as well as to conduct cases. It appears to me that the two-year limit on the power to resurrect a closed case might not have provided adequate protection for patients. If, for example, Shipman had been convicted of further drugs offences (or had been found to have been abusing drugs) three - or even five - years after the case against him had been closed with a warning, I do not think it would have been satisfactory for the GMC to have dealt with him without being able to take account of the fact that the later problem represented a relapse into old habits.
20.37
At one time, as I have explained, the letters sent by the PPC sometimes warned the doctor that, although the PPC had decided not to refer the complaint to the PCC on the occasion in question, the complaint might be resurrected if the GMC received a further complaint or report about the doctor within two years. Mr Nicholls said that this was ‘very unpopular’. The view was that the two-year limit was in the Rules, so that there was no need to refer to it when writing to doctors and, in any event, nothing had been proved against the doctor concerned. Because of its unpopularity, the practice of including the ‘resurrection clause’ in letters was discontinued. Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that the intention of a letter of advice was to tell the doctor to ‘watch it’. He did not think that putting an ‘artificial time’ on the advice added anything. I can see that to put an ‘artificial time’ on the advice would not be sensible. However, the time was not artificial; it was a provision of the Rules. If, within a specified period, a doctor was at risk that a closed case might be resurrected, s/he ought to have been told not only of the risk but also of the period for which the risk would persist. It cannot be assumed that all doctors are familiar with the small print of the GMC’s Rules. I would have thought that any doctor who was not warned of the risk that a closed case might be resurrected would have had an argument for opposing its resurrection.
The Position before 2000
20.38
Section 13(3) of the Medical Act 1978 and rule 12 of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules gave the PPC the power to make an interim order suspending a doctor’s registration or making his/her registration conditional on his/her compliance with such requirements as the PPC thought fit to impose for the protection of members of the public or in the doctor’s own interests. Such an order could be made only after the PPC had decided that a case should be referred to the PCC or to the HC. An interim order had to be imposed for a specified period not exceeding two months. The PPC was given no power to renew the order after that period. Notice had to be given to the doctor that the PPC was considering making such an order and s/he had to be given the opportunity to be heard. Between 1980 and 1996, very little use was made by the PPC of its interim powers. Only four interim orders were made. The small number of such orders made seems very surprising. One would have expected that, over a period of 16 years, there would have been quite a lot of cases in which an interim order would have been needed for the protection of patients. I can see that the short period for which such an order could operate might have been less than satisfactory, but an order for two months would seem to be better than nothing. If an interim order had been made, the PCC could have been asked to expedite its hearing. However, it appears from the PPC’s Annual Reports that the PPC saw little need to make interim orders.
20.39
In 1996, the maximum period for which an interim order could be imposed was increased to six months and the PPC was given power to renew the order for up to three months. Thereafter, the use made by the PPC of the power to impose interim orders increased markedly. Five interim orders for suspension were made (in respect of three doctors) in 1997. Nine new interim suspension orders were made in 1998, together with one order imposing interim conditions and several renewed orders. In 1999, the number of new interim suspensions rose to thirteen, with nine new orders imposing interim conditions being made.
20.40
In the period from January until August 2000, the PPC made 17 new orders for the suspension of doctors’ registration, together with 15 new orders imposing interim conditions. In August 2000, the power to impose interim orders was removed from the PPC and given to the newly created Interim Orders Committee (IOC). After that, if it appeared to the PPC that the circumstances were such that the IOC might wish to make an interim order, whether for the suspension of registration or for the imposition of conditions on registration, the PPC was required to refer the case to the IOC.
The Circumstances Leading to the Creation of the Interim Orders Committee
20.41
The IOC was created as the direct result of the GMC’s inability to suspend Shipman’s registration when it was informed, in August 1998, by the Greater Manchester Police (GMP), that he was under investigation for murder.
20.42
The second (and successful) police investigation into the deaths of Shipman’s patients began in late July 1998. The first death to be investigated was that of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. On 10th
August 1998, the GMP learned for the first time that Shipman had convictions for offences involving controlled drugs. Four days later, enquiries were made of the GMC about Shipman. A member of the GMC staff confirmed that Shipman had previous convictions, but declined to give further details, save to say that the case had not proceeded to a disciplinary hearing. Later the same day, the results of the toxicological examination of the body of Mrs Grundy were received by the police. These revealed the presence of an opiate (possibly morphine) in her body tissues.
20.43
At that point, Detective Superintendent (Det Supt, later Detective Chief Superintendent) Bernard Postles, who was leading the police investigation, notified the GMC of the position by telephone and informed a member of staff of the concerns that he had about Shipman continuing in practice. Det Supt Postles was informed that the GMC could do nothing until Shipman had been convicted of a criminal offence. On 18th
August 1998, Det Supt Postles wrote to the GMC, setting out details of the ongoing investigation into Mrs Grundy’s death and inviting the GMC to take any action it considered appropriate. A member of the GMC staff responded by letter, requesting Det Supt Postles to keep the GMC informed of the progress of the investigation. It was apparent that no action was to be taken by the GMC and, indeed, its Rules at the time did not permit it to take interim action to suspend a doctor unless and until the doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence or a decision had been taken by the PPC to refer his/her case to the PCC or the HC.
20.44
By this time, it had become clear that Shipman might have killed other patients besides Mrs Grundy. Shipman was still practising and Det Supt Postles was becoming increasingly concerned about the safety of his patients. He was in contact with the West Pennine Health Authority, which was exploring the possibility of taking steps through the NHS Tribunal to suspend Shipman. It was not possible to achieve his suspension quickly by that means. Accordingly, Det Supt Postles decided that the only way to protect Shipman’s patients was to arrest him. This was done on 7th
September 1998, earlier than Det Supt Postles would have otherwise chosen to act. Shipman was remanded in custody from that time. Eventually, he was suspended from practice by the NHS Tribunal on 15th
October. The decision took effect on 29th
October. I have recounted in
the sequence of events that led to Shipman’s suspension.
20.45
Meanwhile, the police were compiling an antecedent history for Shipman, to be placed before the court. A telephone enquiry was made of the GMC as to whether any disciplinary action had been taken against Shipman as a consequence of his convictions in 1976. A member of the GMC staff replied that the GMC had no documentary record of Shipman’s case, but that the most likely course of action would have been for Shipman to have been issued with a warning letter. In fact, as is evident from
, the GMC did have a file containing documents relating to Shipman’s case in 1976. In January 2000, shortly before Shipman’s conviction and in response to a request by Mr Richard Henriques QC (now Mr Justice Henriques), Leading Counsel for the prosecution at Shipman’s trial, the GMC provided details from its files about its handling of Shipman’s conviction in 1976 and of complaints made to the GMC about Shipman in 1985 and 1994.
20.46
The inability of the GMC to take interim action in Shipman’s case was the cause of considerable embarrassment, both to it and to the Government. In November 1998, the GMC’s Fitness to Practise Policy Committee (FPPC) considered a paper relating to doctors charged with serious criminal offences. The paper made clear that the problem caused by the inability of the GMC to take interim measures in respect of such doctors was not a new one. The paper observed:
‘We often become aware of criminal proceedings, involving a doctor, before the matter goes to trial. Typically, a Health Authority or Trust will phone when a doctor is charged. There is frequently an expectation that the doctor’s registration will be suspended pending the outcome of the criminal case. We also become aware of cases from press cuttings, or direct from the doctor concerned ...
We have to explain that the Medical Act 1983 gives no power to intervene unless and until the doctor has been convicted.’
20.47
The paper acknowledged that it was impossible to make a reliable assessment of the number of cases in which this problem arose, since the GMC would not necessarily be aware of all cases where doctors were facing serious criminal charges. It was reported that, at the time the FPPC considered the paper, the GMC was aware of six current cases of this type. Two doctors (one of them Shipman) had been charged with murder and were in custody. Two doctors were known to be on bail and practising; one was charged with multiple offences of indecency against female patients, one with multiple offences of rape and indecent assault. A third doctor, who had been charged with an offence involving an indecent assault on a patient, was on bail and believed to be seeking work. The fourth doctor was on bail and believed to be seeking work; he had been charged with offences of rape, causing grievous bodily harm and making threats to kill. The four doctors who were on bail must have presented a serious risk to patients. The majority of the six doctors were general practitioners (GPs), since primary care organisations (PCOs) experienced more difficulty than hospital trusts in preventing doctors from practising. However, even if a hospital trust suspended a doctor, the doctor could simply move and practise elsewhere.
20.48
The paper observed that the GMC’s inability to suspend registration pending the trial of a doctor charged with serious offences:
‘... is beginning to appear unsatisfactory, whether considered from the point of view of the GMC, the Trust or health authority or, most importantly, the public interest’
20.49
The paper referred to the
‘risks’
of suspending a doctor in these circumstances. It pointed out that criminal proceedings could be protracted and that suspension might, therefore, last for up to a year or more. It might be thought
‘inherently undesirable’
for a doctor to be deprived of the means of earning his/her livelihood for such a long period and it might appear to be a
‘grave injustice’
if the doctor were eventually acquitted. The paper also mentioned that an order for interim suspension might be considered oppressive by the courts and could lay the GMC open to judicial review or to claims for compensation for loss of earnings and reputation. The paper did, however, note that the UK Central Council for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting (the predecessor of the Nursing and Midwifery Council) had power to impose interim suspension where it appeared necessary to do so as an interim measure for the protection of the public, or in the practitioner’s interests.
20.50
The paper noted that one option was to leave it to the courts to remand in custody doctors whom they considered a danger to the public. However, it was recognised that, even if a doctor were in custody, s/he could still enjoy some of the privileges of registration, such as prescribing. The paper suggested that, as a matter of principle, the GMC should not expect the courts to discharge its responsibility to protect the public interest. It therefore recommended that the FPPC should consider whether it was desirable to have wider powers of interim suspension.
20.51
This recommendation was adopted by the FPPC which resolved to seek legal advice on various related matters. That advice was received and there the matter appears to have rested until the end of 1999, when Shipman’s trial was drawing to a close. At that stage, discussions were opened with the Department of Health about what was to be done. A letter from Miss Isabel Nisbet, Head of the GMC’s Fitness to Practise Directorate, written in December 1999, mentioned other problems arising from the limitation on the GMC’s existing powers. She said:
‘... we regard it as very unsatisfactory that we have no power of interim suspension via the performance procedures for doctors about whose professional performance there are very serious concerns and who may be a danger to patients’
20.52
She observed that the GMC was obliged to pursue such cases through the conduct procedures in order to enable the PPC to consider the question of interim suspension. Presumably, that would not be possible in some cases. In any event, it was plainly unsatisfactory, since there was no mechanism then to get cases back into the performance procedures. Miss Nisbet also drew attention to the lack of any power to make an initial interim order within the voluntary health procedures, despite the fact that a doctor posed an ongoing threat to the safety of patients. She pointed out that, even when interim measures could be taken, the time periods allowed by the Rules meant that it was very unusual for the GMC to be able to impose interim suspension earlier than six to eight weeks after the time when it first became aware of a concern.
20.53
Miss Nisbet suggested ways in which the necessary powers might be given to the GMC. This could be done by amendment of the Rules or by the creation of a new committee with power to impose interim suspension when it appeared to be necessary for the protection of the public. This latter solution would require both primary and secondary legislation and was the solution favoured by the GMC.
20.54
Mr Scott told the Inquiry that, on 1st
February 2000, the day after Shipman’s conviction, there was a ‘heated discussion’ with the then Secretary of State for Health (SoS), the Rt Hon Alan Milburn MP. Mr Scott said that ‘it was being thought in some quarters that the GMC had an abhorrence of imposing interim suspension and that simply was not the case’. He said that the problem was that its powers were ‘inoperable’. He said that, prior to 1998, the GMC had not fully understood the limitation in its powers in relation to doctors who were involved in criminal proceedings. The GMC’s attention had instead been focussed on the problems caused by the period for which interim suspension could be imposed. As I have explained, until 1996, the maximum period was only two months. In 1996, this was increased to six months, with the opportunity to renew the order for up to three months thereafter. Mr Scott acknowledged that the GMC had not ‘spotted the problem’ of doctors who were subject to criminal investigation but had not yet been convicted. The result of the discussions with the SoS was the creation of the IOC in August 2000.
20.55
It seems to me surprising that, until 2000, the GMC did not take action to extend its powers to make interim orders so as to enable it to suspend the registration of a doctor under investigation for or charged with a serious criminal offence. The need for such a power should have been obvious as is demonstrated by the contents of the paper considered by the FPPC in November 1998 and in the snapshot of doctors facing serious criminal charges at that time. It is clear that, although the GMC was generally aware of the problem, it had not considered it necessary to take steps to protect patients from such doctors. In addition, the GMC was aware that it did not have the power to order initial interim suspension of a doctor in the health procedures (before a decision had been taken to refer him/her to the HC) or of a doctor who was being dealt with in the performance procedures. The Rules relating to the making of interim orders in the conduct procedures were changed in 1996 and it might have been expected that the GMC would have taken that opportunity to seek adequate powers to make whatever interim orders were necessary for the protection of patients. However, as Mr Scott observed, there was no recognition of the problem until it was thrown into relief in Shipman’s case.
20.56
Following Shipman’s conviction, urgent steps were taken by the GMC to erase his name from the register. This was done by the PCC on 11th
February 2000.
The Giving of Reasons for Decisions
20.57
Until 2000, the only record of a decision made by the PPC was a brief minute. The PPC did not formulate or record any considered reasons for its decisions. The minute would, therefore, contain, at most, only brief notes of points that had been made in discussion, in addition to a record of the decision. Minutes of the PPC were not made public.
20.58
Rule 16 of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules provided that, where the PPC had decided not to refer a case to the PCC or the HC, no complainant, informant or practitioner was to have any right of access to any documents relating to the case submitted to the GMC by any other person. Nor was the PPC to be required by a complainant, informant or practitioner to state reasons for its decision. That rule was reproduced in the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules. Despite the rule, it became the practice from about 2000 for the complainant and the doctor concerned to receive a letter, outlining the reasons for the PPC’s decision. Until that time, the reasons given in the letter had been based on the brief minute of the decision made in the course of the relevant meeting of the PPC. Since 2000, following a recommendation made by the PSI team, the practice was for members of the PPC to agree the key reasons for their decisions at the time those decisions were taken. Those reasons were recorded in writing by a member of the GMC staff. The recorded reasons were subsequently reviewed by the Chairman of the PPC and were authorised by him as an accurate report of the PPC’s decision. They then formed the basis of the letters sent to the doctor and the complainant.
Review of Decisions
20.59
Decisions of the PPC whether or not to refer a case to the PCC or the HC were, as I have said, made in private. The only means of challenge available to a complainant or doctor who was dissatisfied with the decision was judicial review. As I have already observed in
, this was an expensive and somewhat intimidating process which was little used until the late 1990s.

--- The Workload of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in the 1990s ---
20.68
During the early 1990s, the number of cases considered by the PPC rose gradually until, between 1994 and 1996, it was considering about 240 cases a year. During the period between 1994 and 1996, the PPC met about five times a year for up to a day each time. Occasional short extra meetings were necessary to consider urgent cases but there was rarely more than one such meeting a year. It is clear that the number of cases to be considered by the PPC at each of its meetings must have been very substantial.
20.69
After 1996, the increase in the use of its power to make interim orders had a significant effect on the PPC’s workload. Doctors threatened with the making of an interim order often exercised their right to a hearing. Such hearings took longer than the usual consideration of a case on paper. It was not unusual for a hearing to take one or two hours or more. These factors, combined with the increased number of cases referred to the PPC generally (over 300 referred in 1998 and over 400 in 1999), resulted in a sharp rise in the number of meetings and in the amount of work to be transacted at those meetings. Mr Nicholls said that, when he joined the PPC in September 1999, there were meetings on about two days each month. Each day’s meeting involved about a day to a day and a half’s reading in preparation. A large number of cases were considered at each meeting.

--- The Differing Roles of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee and the Screeners: the Case of Toth ---
20.109
The roles of the PPC and the screeners were discussed by Mr Justice Lightman in his judgement in the case of
. That judgement was delivered in June 2000. I outlined the facts of that case in
. The dispute in
related to two decisions of a medical screener. The case never reached the PPC. However, the Judge took the opportunity to give guidance on the respective roles of the screeners and the PPC.
20.110
The Judge observed that there was a difference in language between rule 6(3) of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, which governed the role of screeners, and section 42(2) of the Medical Act 1983, which governed the role of the PPC. He confirmed that it was an
‘obvious fact’
that the roles of the screener and the PPC could not be intended to duplicate each other and that
‘decisions are not intended to be made by the screener which the PPC (if necessary, after invoking their powers to investigate further) may be better equipped to make’
. The screener could filter out only those cases that it appeared to him/her
. The only conclusion on the merits of the complaint which was required of the screener before s/he allowed a complaint to proceed was that the matters stated
‘appear to raise a question’
whether the doctor had committed SPM. However, the PPC had the task of deciding whether the complaint
‘ought to proceed further’
. Although the Judge regarded it as obvious that the roles of the screener and the PPC could not be the same, Professor Allen had understood that there was no real difference between them and, to be fair to her, the wording of both tests was so general that her point of view was understandable.
20.111
The Judge went on to draw attention to two particular features of the GMC’s conduct procedures. First, he noted that the complainant had no right to see the doctor’s comments on the complaint or to see any other material that was put before the PPC. Second, he observed that the
‘central feature’
of the procedures was the investigation of complaints by the PCC. Only before the PCC, he noted, was there full disclosure of documents and evidence and a form of hearing whereby the complainant and the public could see, and be reassured by seeing, the proper examination of the merits of the complaint. He went on:
‘The PPC may examine whether the complaint has any real prospect of being established, and may itself conduct an investigation into its prospects, and may refuse to refer if satisfied that the real prospect is not present, but it must do so with the utmost caution bearing in mind the one-sided nature of its procedures under the Rules which provide that, whilst the practitioner is afforded access to the complaint and able to respond to it, the complainant has no right of access to or to make an informed reply to that response, and the limited material likely to be available before the PPC compared to that available before the PCC. It is not its role to resolve conflicts of evidence. There may be circumstances which entitle it to hold that the complaint should not proceed for other reasons, but the PPC must bear in mind its limited (filtering) role and must balance regard for the interests of the practitioner against the interests of the complainant and the public and the complainant and bear in mind the need for the reassurance of the complainant and the public that complaints are fully and properly investigated and that there is no cover-up. In the case of the PPC (as in case of the screener) any doubt should be resolved in favour of the investigation proceeding.’
20.112
The Judge observed that both the screener and the PPC should be particularly slow in halting a complaint against a doctor who continued to practise, as opposed to one who had since retired. The paramount consideration must, he said, be the protection of the public in respect of those continuing to practise.
After the 2000 Policy Studies Institute Report and the Case of
20.113
Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that, as a result of the recommendations contained in the 2000 PSI Report, various changes were made to the procedures of the PPC. Most important was the change to which I have already referred, whereby members of the PPC agreed the key reasons for their decisions, which were then minuted by a member of staff. In addition, a system was introduced whereby all cases referred to the PPC were accompanied by a screener memorandum setting out the reasons for the referral. Another change was that, from July 2000, the GMC's policy was that the doctor’s response to a complaint should be disclosed to the complainant, who was invited to provide comments before the case was screened. If the complainant provided comments, they were disclosed to the doctor for his/her further observations.
20.114
In his evidence to the Inquiry, Mr Nicholls said that he could understand how the suggestion that the PPC placed too much emphasis on the question of whether there was sufficient evidence for the case to ‘run’ at the PPC, contained in the 2000 PSI Report, came to be made. However, he suggested that the PPC’s approach was, to some extent at least, vindicated by the view expressed by Lightman J in
, namely that the PPC was entitled to examine whether the complaint had any real prospect of success. It is clear, however, from the case of
, which I shall discuss below and which concerned a decision of the PPC made in March 2000, that the PPC was going far beyond its remit in the way it considered the evidence in a case.
20.115
Mr Nicholls believed that the decision in
caused the PPC to adjourn more often for further investigations to be made. He felt that, before then, the PPC had not adjourned enough for that purpose. It is impossible to tell from the statistics whether this was the case.

--- The Case of Richards ---
20.116
was decided by Mr Justice Sullivan on 18th
December 2000. It concerned an application for judicial review of a decision of the PPC not to refer to the PCC a complaint made by Ms Joanne Richards.
20.117
The complaint related to the treatment of Ms Richards’ sister, Miss Jane Wetherell, by a GP, Dr S K Pathak. Miss Wetherell had died of a pulmonary embolism on 19th
January 1995, at the age of 36. She had had a number of risk factors for pulmonary embolism, including the fact that she was severely overweight, she was a smoker and she was taking the contraceptive pill. The complaint centred on a consultation with Dr Pathak which had taken place eight days before Miss Wetherell’s death. The issue was whether Miss Wetherell had complained or showed signs of breathlessness or breathing problems at that consultation. Ms Richards said that Miss Wetherell had told her that she had mentioned such symptoms to Dr Pathak. A colleague of Miss Wetherell said that Miss Wetherell had made an emergency appointment on the day of the consultation specifically to discuss her breathing problems. The colleague said that she had been present at the time the appointment was made and had heard Miss Wetherell complain to the receptionist that she could not breathe properly.
20.118
Dr Pathak gave evidence at the inquest into Miss Wetherell’s death. He denied that she had complained or shown evidence of breathing problems at the consultation. He said that she was complaining, not of breathlessness, but of nausea and ‘strong urine’. He had referred Miss Wetherell to hospital for an endocrinology report. It is clear that the report was to be preceded by tests. His medical note recorded that she had attended him for a
‘pill check’
20.119
In his summing-up to the jury, the Coroner observed that, had the patient complained to the doctor of breathlessness, the contraceptive pill should have been stopped. He commented on the inadequacy of Dr Pathak’s notes. At the judicial review, the Judge did not say what the outcome of the inquest had been. Following the inquest, Ms Richards complained to the local Family Health Services Authority (FHSA). The MSC rejected her complaint; it is not clear if there was a hearing at that stage but it seems unlikely. Ms Richards appealed. Her appeal was heard by an appeal panel, probably convened by the Family Health Services Appeal Authority (FHSAA). Dr Pathak again gave evidence, denying that there had been any mention of breathing problems at the consultation. During his evidence, he conceded that, in fact, Miss Wetherell had not attended him for a
‘pill check’
, as his note had stated. Rather, he said that she had attended a Well Woman Clinic run by his practice nurse. The nurse had referred Miss Wetherell to him, he said, because of the nausea she was suffering and because she was unable to lose weight.
20.120
Miss Wetherell’s sister had by this time obtained the hospital records, including the endocrinology report. On it were the letters
‘SOB’
, a common medical abbreviation for ‘shortness of breath’. A hospital witness said that it was highly probable that
‘SOB’
had formed part of the clinical details written by Dr Pathak on the form requesting that endocrinological tests should be carried out. Dr Pathak responded by saying that, at the time of the relevant consultation, he had had before him details of a consultation which Miss Wetherell had had with his wife (a partner in his general practice) in December 1994, when shortness of breath had been mentioned. It was probable, he said, that he had written
‘SOB’
on the request form as part of the past clinical history. He remained adamant that it had not been mentioned at the relevant consultation. The original request form was no longer available, having been destroyed by the hospital in accordance with normal procedure.
20.121
The appeal panel convened by the FHSAA, comprising a legally qualified chairman and two medically qualified members, heard evidence from 11 witnesses over four days. Dr Pathak was represented by counsel. The complainant was also represented. The appeal panel found that Miss Wetherell had made an emergency appointment and that she was significantly short of breath at the consultation. It also found that Dr Pathak’s clinical note was written after Miss Wetherell’s death when there had been a complaint, or when he believed that a complaint was likely to be made. The appeal panel found that Dr Pathak had been in breach of his terms of service in not referring Miss Wetherell to a consultant, although it considered this breach was
‘a minor one’
‘most serious’
aspect of the case, it found, was the attempt by Dr Pathak to cover up the breach. The appeal panel’s decision was given in June 1998, three and a half years after the death.
20.122
It appears that, as a result of the appeal panel’s findings, the FHSA then referred Dr Pathak’s case to the GMC. In addition, Ms Richards made complaints to the GMC about both Dr Pathak and his wife who, it was alleged, had been complicit in the falsifying of records. I shall deal only with the complaint against Dr S K Pathak.
The First Decision of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
20.123
The complaint went to the medical screener, who referred it to the PPC. The PPC considered it in June 1999. It may be that Professor Allen was present at the meeting at which the case was discussed. Following that meeting, a letter of decision was sent to Ms Richards. The letter pointed out that the appeal panel had made its judgement on the balance of probabilities, whereas the standard of proof at PCC hearings was
. The PPC had concluded that there was insufficient available evidence (and no likelihood of obtaining the necessary evidence) to give a reasonable prospect of proving the charge that the doctors had made alterations to the records and had misled, or sought to mislead, subsequent inquiries into the death.
20.124
The letter went on to express the concern of members of the PPC at Dr Pathak’s conduct in failing to refer Miss Wetherell to hospital; they took the view that he should have done this, whatever the way in which she had explained her symptoms to him. They also considered that his notes fell short of the standards they expected to see. However, the letter indicated that the PPC did not
‘consider that the circumstances were such as to warrant a public inquiry on the right of either doctor
i.e. Dr Pathak or his wife
to retain unrestricted registration as a doctor’
. Instead, the PCC had directed that Dr Pathak should be sent a letter advising him of the PPC’s concerns and warning him about his future conduct. In passing, I observe that this letter simply echoed the form of words used in the Note containing guidance for new members of the PPC which had been issued in June 1997; it would not have helped the complainant to understand why the case had been closed.
20.125
In July 1999, solicitors instructed by the complainant wrote to the GMC, contending that the decision of the PPC was not reasonable and setting out reasons. They invited the PPC to reverse its decision, failing which they said that an application would be made for judicial review. The GMC obtained legal advice which suggested that the decision of the PPC had been flawed. The GMC then agreed to a consent order, quashing the decision of the PPC. That order was approved by the Court in 1999. A statement of reasons was attached to the order, in which the parties (i.e. Ms Richards and the GMC) agreed that there were three reasons for quashing the decision. First, the PPC had applied the wrong test, in considering what was
‘the likelihood’
of obtaining sufficient evidence. Second, the way in which the PPC had assessed the evidence did not support the ultimate conclusion reached; the PPC must be inferred to have accepted the findings of the appeal panel and this was enough to
‘raise a question’
whether there had been SPM. Third, it was agreed that the PPC had misdirected itself on the evidence. There was some evidence that Dr Pathak had lied at the inquest, that he had fabricated Miss Wetherell’s medical notes to protect himself and that, contrary to his denials, Miss Wetherell had complained of shortness of breath at the relevant consultation. It was agreed that this evidence should have been sufficient to persuade the PPC that the complaint
‘raised a question of’
SPM. However, the PPC had failed to appreciate its relevance and importance. Anyone reading that statement of reasons would have inferred that the GMC had understood that the test the PPC should have been applying was whether the complaint
‘raised a question of’
SPM.
The Second Decision of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
20.126
The complaint was then remitted to a differently constituted panel of the PPC which was not told about the background of the case. In fact, since the previous PPC panel had considered the complaint, there had been a change of Chairman and of the membership of the PPC, as I have described at
paragraph 20.13
. The Chairman of the panel on the second occasion was Mr Nicholls.
20.127
Further submissions on behalf of both Ms Richards and Dr Pathak were made to the PPC; neither saw each other’s submissions before the PPC made its decision. The PPC panel met in March 2000. A decision letter was sent to the parties in April 2000. Briefly, the PPC concluded that, even if Miss Wetherell had complained of shortness of breath at the relevant consultation, that would not have been the key to diagnosis and outcome. It would have been possible for the condition to have been undetectable, regardless of any shortness of breath. The PPC considered Dr Pathak’s notes of the consultation to be genuine and adequate. (The appeal panel had, as I have said, concluded that the notes had been written after Miss Wetherell’s death, at a time when Dr Pathak knew that a complaint had been made or was likely to be made.)
20.128
In accordance with the recent changes of practice, the decision letter on this occasion was much fuller. It mentioned Ms Richards’ statement that Miss Wetherell had told her that she had complained of breathlessness at her consultation with Dr Pathak. It said that the statement was hearsay evidence and would, therefore, be inadmissible before the PCC. If it were admitted (the PCC had discretion to admit hearsay evidence if satisfied that its
‘duty of making due inquiry into’
the case made its reception
), it would probably not, the decision letter observed, be
‘given great weight’
. The letter said that, because of this, the PPC would not have expected the evidence of Ms Richards to make any difference to the overall outcome. In relation to the appearance of the letters
‘SOB’
on the endocrinology report, the decision letter said that members of the PPC had observed that, in their experience, it was very common for information to find its way into such reports by means other than the referring doctor writing it on the request form. The PPC did not, therefore, accept that the inclusion of
‘SOB’
on the report form in Miss Wetherell’s case meant that Dr Pathak had been aware of the symptoms of breathlessness at the time of the consultation. In view of the fact that the original request form was missing, and of the time that had elapsed since the relevant events, the PPC considered that there was no practical way of pursuing that issue further.
20.129
The decision letter indicated that the PPC did not accept that Dr Pathak had deliberately falsified Miss Wetherell’s medical notes and had misled subsequent inquiries into the events leading to the death. The letter observed that there was nothing to falsify. Moreover, in the absence of signs of shortness of breath at the consultation, no referral for specialist treatment was demanded. The PPC did not think it right to criticise Dr Pathak for his failure to make such a referral.
20.130
The decision letter stated that the PPC disagreed with the findings of the appeal panel. As I have said, that panel had sat for four days and heard evidence from 11 witnesses, including Dr Pathak himself. The letter concluded by stating that the material before the PPC:
‘... did not appear to raise a question whether the serious professional misconduct had been committed, taking into account (amongst other things) the criminal standard of proof to be applied by the PCC’
20.131
Before going further, I draw the reader’s attention to the way in which this second PPC panel had resolved every issue in favour of the doctor, even in the face of conclusions reached by the appeal panel after a four-day hearing. Also, any uncertainty in the mind of the PPC (e.g. about the appearance of
‘SOB’
on the endocrinology report) was resolved by the drawing of an inference favourable to the doctor.
20.132
That decision was the subject of an application for judicial review. In his judgement, Sullivan J referred to Lightman J’s decision in
, which had been given six months earlier.
20.133
In argument before Sullivan J, the GMC attacked the decision in
, arguing that the PPC had a much wider discretion to consider whether a complaint
‘ought to be referred for inquiry’
by the PCC than had been suggested by Lightman J. It was submitted that the PPC
‘had to get its sleeves rolled up’
, and had to look at the evidence and assess its weight in order to see if a complaint was properly arguable. In doing so, the PPC was entitled, so it was contended, to resolve conflicts of evidence, especially if the evidence was largely documentary and there was little prospect of its being supplemented by admissible oral evidence at a PCC hearing. In any event, it was argued, the second decision letter of the PPC complied with the guidance given by Lightman J in
20.134
Mr Nicholls provided a witness statement for use at the judicial review hearing. In it, he detailed his experience on the PPC. He had been a member of the PPC since September 1999 and had become its Chairman, as I have said, in November 1999, just over a year before the judicial review hearing. He said that, since becoming Chairman, he had chaired 13 meetings, over a total of 28 days, at which 314 decisions had been made. In addition, he had been involved in a further 89 decisions prior to becoming Chairman. Mr Nicholls also described the expertise and experience of the medical members of the PPC who had been present at the relevant meeting. He expanded on the reasons set out in the PPC’s decision letter. He explained that the question of whether Miss Wetherell had complained of, or presented with, shortness of breath at the consultation was a
‘secondary issue’
once the PPC had decided that
‘it was not in the least unreasonable’
for a pulmonary embolism not to have been detected or diagnosed. Even if she had been short of breath, it was said, there were not enough symptoms to make it reasonable to expect a referral to a specialist. The decision of members of the PPC (both medical and lay) had been unanimous.
20.135
Sullivan J agreed that the PPC should adopt the approach suggested by Lightman J in
, subject to two comments. First, Lightman J had said that the PPC should exercise
‘the utmost caution’
in deciding not to refer a complaint to the PCC on the basis that it had no real prospect of being established, having itself conducted a preliminary investigation into its prospects on the documents alone. Sullivan J suggested that, while caution was required, the need for
‘the utmost caution’
in every case might be debatable. However, he suggested that
‘the utmost caution’
necessary in a case such as
, where the PPC was disagreeing with the conclusion of another body with medical expertise, a conclusion that had been reached after a public hearing where oral evidence had been presented. Second, Sullivan J did not interpret Lightman J’s observation that it was not the PPC’s role to resolve conflicts of evidence as meaning that the PPC must never under any circumstances resolve any conflict of evidence. Sullivan J preferred to say that the PPC
‘should not normally seek to resolve substantial conflicts of evidence’
. To do so, he said, would be to go beyond its screening role and to usurp the function of the PCC.
20.136
Sullivan J observed that there was a public interest in having complaints of SPM thoroughly and openly investigated by the PCC at a public hearing. Meetings (such as those of the PPC) to consider documents in private might, he said, serve to maintain standards, but would not
‘ensure public confidence in the process’
. He drew attention to the number of cases dealt with at PPC meetings, which had been given by Mr Nicholls. The Judge accepted that the PPC’s decision in the
case had received particular care and attention. Nevertheless, he said that such a throughput of cases gave some indication of the level of scrutiny that the PPC was able to give to an individual complaint. This was in contrast to the four days of oral hearing before the appeal panel.
20.137
Sullivan J found that the PPC’s decision letter showed that the PPC had sought to resolve substantial conflicts of evidence. The PPC had concluded that the issue of whether Miss Wetherell was suffering from shortness of breath was not significant. That finding conflicted with the views of the Coroner, with Dr Pathak’s own evidence (which was that, if there had been a complaint of shortness of breath, he would have recorded it in his notes), with the conclusion of the appeal panel and (although the second PPC panel was not aware of it) with the view of the first PPC panel. He observed that he found it:
‘... impossible to understand how it
could reasonably have concluded not merely that it disagreed with these conclusions of the Coroner and the Health Authority
by which he must have meant the appeal panel
, but that the existence of these very different conclusions did not appear to raise a question for the PCC’
20.138
Sullivan J found the PPC’s conclusion that the records of the consultation were
‘both genuine and accurate’
even more difficult to understand. The Coroner had concluded that the notes were inadequate. The appeal panel had concluded that the notes did not record shortness of breath which was present at the time of the consultation. Dr Pathak had accepted that the note that Miss Wetherell had attended for a
‘pill check’
was inaccurate. The Judge said that he could not understand how any reasonable committee could have been so persuaded of the accuracy of the notes as to conclude that no question for the PCC was raised.
20.139
The appeal panel had also concluded (albeit on a balance of probabilities) that Miss Wetherell was significantly short of breath at her consultation with Dr Pathak. The PPC had disagreed with that conclusion. It had considered Ms Richards’ evidence and excluded it as hearsay. Sullivan J found that, although the evidence would have been inadmissible in law, the PCC could have chosen to use the discretion given to it under the Rules to receive the evidence. He observed:
‘... in exercising that discretion the PCC would no doubt bear in mind not merely the interests of the individual complainant and doctor, but also the public interest in having complaints thoroughly investigated. The PCC is not in precisely the same position as a criminal court. It has an important investigatory and regulatory role in the public interest ... Would the reception of this evidence be “desirable” in the interests of “making due inquiry”? In circumstances where firsthand evidence is not available because the patient has died and it is claimed that this is due to the doctor’s serious professional misconduct, it might well be in the interests of making due inquiry to admit hearsay evidence of what the patient is said to have told the doctor. The weight to be attributed to such evidence will of course depend upon all the circumstances, including the extent to which the evidence is contradicted or supported by other admissible evidence.’
20.140
In relation to the appearance of the letters
‘SOB’
on the endocrinology report, Sullivan J observed that the PPC had taken it upon itself to draw inferences (albeit on an incomplete review of the evidence) and to resolve a critical area of dispute. He noted that further information (which tended to undermine the PPC’s finding) had been obtained from the hospital since the PPC’s decision, and observed that this illustrated:
‘... the dangers of reaching final conclusions on highly contentious aspects of a complaint at a private meeting where neither party is present, and without making further investigation ...’
20.141
The Judge observed that it was perhaps because of the PPC’s expertise that it had
‘set out to answer the matters in dispute rather than decide whether there was a question for the PCC to answer’
. He concluded:
‘I understand the basis on which the members of the PPC reached their own (unanimous) conclusions as to clinical care and as to whether Miss Wetherell had told Dr S K Pathak about or displayed breathing difficulties. However, in the light of all of the evidence I do not understand how a body with a screening function, even one as expert as this PPC, could possibly have formed the opinion that the material before them under these two heads did not even “raise a question whether serious professional misconduct had been committed”.’
20.142
Sullivan J quashed the decision and remitted the case to a third PPC panel. Its consideration was to be conducted in the light of all the information then available, including information about the previous two decisions of the PPC.
Comment on the Case of
20.143
These two decisions of the PPC (one taken before the change of Chairmanship and one after) illustrate many of the problems of which Professor Allen and her colleagues wrote in the 2000 PSI Report and of which she spoke when giving evidence to the Inquiry. They demonstrate what happens when decisions are taken by a committee that has no clear understanding of its functions or of the limitations on its powers. They demonstrate what happens when decisions are taken in an unstructured way and without the benefit of objective standards and criteria which can be consistently applied. They illustrate what Professor Allen described and what I have observed to be a tendency to look for acceptable explanations for the doctor’s actions. When these two decisions are considered in conjunction with the 2000 PSI Report, the evidence of Professor Allen and other PPC cases examined by the Inquiry, it seems clear to me that the decisions in
were not just unfortunate - but isolated - errors. It is evident that decision-making in the PPC must have been defective for years, if not always.
20.144
There are a number of particular causes for concern. One is that a decision to close a case was sometimes taken on the basis that the evidence was hearsay and was therefore unlikely to be admitted by the PCC. As Sullivan J pointed out, the PCC had a discretion to admit hearsay evidence, even though, in general, it applied the rules of evidence applicable in a criminal trial. Whether it is appropriate for a disciplinary body charged with the protection of patients and the public to operate under the rules of criminal procedure is a different question to be dealt with later in this Report. However, it is worrying that the PPC should base a decision, even in part, on the assumption that the PCC would take little or no heed of hearsay evidence which it could have admitted had it thought fit.
20.145
Another particular cause for concern is that, in
, the GMC argued that it was appropriate that the PPC should
‘get its sleeves rolled up’
when considering cases. I infer from this that the GMC thought that the PPC should have a general role in resolving disputed evidence in FTP cases. As a screening body, it should not have done this usually and should never have done it where there was evidence, capable of belief, in support of the allegation. It is astonishing that the PPC should have thought it appropriate to do so in a case in which that exercise involved disagreeing with the conclusions of a medically qualified panel which had heard evidence over a period of four days.
After the Case of
20.146
Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that he remembered ‘some despair’ after the decision in
. I can understand why. To make one fundamental error of approach in dealing with an individual case would give rise to some embarrassment, but to make two in respect of the same case - in which there was such an abundance of good quality information - must indeed have created a sense of despair. Mr Nicholls recalled that there was another judicial review at about the same time. That would have been the case of
, with which I shall deal later in this Chapter. The claimants in that case were granted permission to apply for judicial review shortly before the judgement was delivered in the case of
Aide Memoire
20.147
In the light of the case of
, the GMC sought advice from counsel as to how the PPC should proceed in future. Counsel produced an
for the use of the PPC when making its decisions. The first version was available in January 2001. This reads as follows:
‘1. In conduct cases the PPC’s task is to decide whether, in its opinion, there is a real prospect of serious professional misconduct being established before the PCC. Serious professional misconduct may be considered in the context of conduct so grave as potentially to call into question a practitioner’s registration whether indefinitely, temporarily or conditionally.
2. The “real prospect” test applies to both the factual allegations and the question whether, if established, the facts would amount to serious professional misconduct. It reflects not a probability but rather a genuine (not remote or fanciful) possibility. It is in no-one’s interest for cases to be referred to the PCC when they are bound to fail, and the PPC may properly decline to refer such cases. On the other hand, cases which raise a genuine issue of serious professional misconduct are for the PCC to decide.
3. The following does not purport to be an exhaustive list, but in performing its task the PPC:
(1) should bear in mind that the standard of proof before the PCC will be the criminal standard (beyond a reasonable doubt);
(2) is entitled to assess the weight of the evidence;
(3) should not, however, normally seek to resolve substantial conflicts of evidence;
(4) should proceed with caution (given that, among other considerations, it is working from documents alone and does not generally have the benefit of the complainant’s response to any reply to the complaint submitted on behalf of the practitioner);
in fact, as I have said, GMC policy from July 2000 was that the complainant’s response should be obtained and put before the screeners
(5) should proceed with particular caution in reaching a decision to halt a complaint when the decision may be perceived as inconsistent with a decision made by another public body with medical personnel or input (for example, an NHS body, a Coroner or an Ombudsman) in relation to the same or substantially the same facts and, if it does reach such a decision, should give reasons for any apparent inconsistency;
(6) should be slower to halt a complaint against a practitioner who continues to practise than against one who does not;
(7) if in doubt, should consider invoking Rule 13 of the Procedure Rules
i.e. the power to cause further investigations to be made before reaching a decision
and in any event should lean in favour of allowing the complainant to proceed to the PCC; and
(8) should bear in mind that, whilst there is a public interest in medical practitioners not being harassed by unfounded complaints, there is also a public interest in the ventilation before the PCC in public of complaints which do have a real prospect of establishing serious professional misconduct.’
20.148
In March 2001, the
was amended slightly (and re-numbered) to include the following paragraph:
‘(8) before referring to the Health Committee, should consider any causal connection between the alleged misconduct and some potential serious mental or physical impairment and should be mindful of the PCC’s own power to refer; ...’
20.149
This first version of the
was approved by Mr Justice Burton in the later case of
, with a minor change in paragraph (4) to reflect the fact that there might not be a complainant in every case.
20.150
Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that he had found the definition of SPM contained in the 1997 Note (see
paragraph 20.61
), which had constituted the guidance to the PPC up to this time, ‘rather circular’. The difficulty centred on the word ‘serious’, the meaning of which was not clear. He said that, to a complainant, ‘serious’ might be the outcome of a case (i.e. whether the patient had died or suffered serious harm as a result of the doctor’s conduct). However, to the medical profession, ‘serious’ meant whether the doctor’s registration was going to be brought into question. He said that there were arguments in his early days on the PPC ‘about serious - serious for whom and for what?’ The
had settled those arguments. It was then clear, he said, that ‘serious’ meant ‘sufficiently bad, sufficiently below the standard you expect, sufficiently poor conduct to call the doctor’s registration into question’.
20.151
I can see that the
might have solved the particular problem that had concerned Mr Nicholls and some of his colleagues on the PPC but it did not tackle the other difficulty, namely knowing how serious a doctor’s misconduct or deficient performance has to be before it calls registration into question.
20.152
When asked what conduct he would regard as calling a doctor’s registration into question, Mr Nicholls said that he would look at ‘Good Medical Practice’, he would look at the occurrence, at the frequency of the conduct, at whether the incident was a ‘one-off’ or whether there was a pattern in the conduct. He would consider whether the conduct was so far below the standard expected of a doctor at that level as to raise questions about the doctor’s registration.
20.153
Mr Nicholls told the Inquiry that, after the introduction of the
in January 2001, he felt that the PPC did achieve greater consistency than the 2000 PSI Report had suggested was the case in 1999 and early 2000. However, he said that, under the GMC’s new FTP procedures, he would like to see ‘much more criteria-based decision processes’ which could then be monitored and quality assured. I understood him to be saying that he believed that the PPC had applied more consistent criteria since the
was introduced, but that this could not be demonstrated adequately. He welcomed the idea of guidelines to assist decision-makers but emphasised that there should be room for individual judgement within the process. He feared that, if there were not, the process would become ‘too mechanistic’. He felt that a return to a list of published criteria setting out the types of conduct which would lead the GMC to act against a doctor’s registration would be counter-productive and at odds with the GMC’s other functions of raising the overall standard of practice and of educating doctors for the future. He conceded that the disparities highlighted in the PSI research could not be explained even at the time when he gave evidence to the Inquiry in December 2003, because the GMC did not have the necessary data.
20.154
Mr Nicholls said that, following the production of the
, the PPC ‘hardly ever’ made a decision in conflict with that of an IRP which had received medical advice or with that of a coroner’s inquest. If it did, it had to show very clearly why it had done so.

--- The Workload of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee from 2000 to 2003 ---
20.155
It is clear from Mr Nicholls’ evidence in the case of
that the workload of the PPC in 2000 was very heavy indeed. He sat on 314 cases between November 1999 and the time when he made his witness statement for the hearing, which took place in December 2000. A large number of interim orders were made by the PPC in the period up to August 2000, at which time responsibility for making interim orders passed to the IOC. In 2000, the PPC considered 423 cases. In 2001, the number of cases considered by the PPC rose to 571 and the PPC sat for 35 days. In 2002, the PPC dealt with 610 cases over 35 days. Mr Nicholls said that the target set for the PPC was to deal with 20 cases at each meeting. The outcome for some of those cases would be very obvious and that would assist the PPC in achieving its target. However, the PPC missed its target quite often, as a result of which backlogs of cases built up. During this time, different panels of the PPC sat with different chairmen; use was made of co-opted GMC and associate members.
20.156
Mr Nicholls said that, at the time when he first joined the PPC, the time allowed for discussion of cases at meetings was too short to give proper consideration and judgement to some cases and, in particular, to the very difficult issue of whether a doctor’s conduct was sufficiently serious to call his/her registration into question. This view accords with the observations of Professor Allen and her colleagues contained in the 2000 PSI Report. Mr Nicholls said that the increase in the number of days’ sitting was, in part, to allow more time for the more difficult cases. In addition, the system for ordering the papers which were given to members of the PPC improved as a result of the recommendations of the PSI team. A system of indexing the papers was adopted, which made it easier for members to find their way round what might be a large file of papers. From July 2000, the screener’s memorandum, setting out the screener’s reasons for referring the case, was included in the papers. However, even with these improvements, Mr Nicholls said that it still took him between one and one and a half days to prepare for a day’s sitting.
20.157
That Mr Nicholls should mention that there was insufficient time for discussion of the difficult question of whether the conduct amounted to SPM suggests that the PPC was asking itself the wrong question. If, on seriousness, it had confined itself to considering whether the PCC might conclude that the conduct amounted to SPM, that would have reduced the need for long arguments. It seems to me that a useful convention for a committee such as the PPC may be that, if one member thinks that the conduct (if proved) could amount to SPM, the rest should accept that view and act upon it. A similar convention guides the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), when considering oral applications for permission to appeal against conviction or sentence. If one member of the Court thinks that leave should be granted, the others immediately acquiesce.

--- Two More Cases of Judicial Review ---
McNicholas
20.158
In March 2001, Mr Justice Sullivan, who had heard the case of
, heard a renewed application for permission to apply for judicial review of a decision of the PPC in the case of
R v General Medical Council ex parte McNicholas
. The case concerned complaints made against three doctors. I do not intend to describe the case in any detail because it did not establish any new principles. I mention it partly lest it be thought that I have focussed too closely on cases in which the GMC was found wanting and have not noticed those in which the GMC’s approach was found by the Court to be correct. The other reason for mentioning it is that the Judge affirmed that which I do not think has ever been in doubt, namely that the GMC is the arbiter of what does and does not amount to SPM. In short, the Judge refused permission to seek judicial review on the ground that the PPC’s decision had been taken lawfully. He found that it had not, as was alleged, resolved major conflicts of evidence; nor had it reached factual conclusions that were contrary to the findings of the Health Service Commissioner (and possibly an IRP) who had investigated the case. The Judge said that the case was to be distinguished from that of
because there was really no issue that the doctors had fallen short of the standard of care that a conscientious doctor would have provided in the circumstances. The remaining question was, he said
‘very much a matter for the professional judgment of the committee: was it arguable that their failures were so serious as to amount to serious professional misconduct’
20.159
The Judge pointed out that
‘not every error by a medical man’
amounted to SPM. The other bodies who had looked at the case had identified, at least in the case of two of the doctors,
‘particular and isolated errors rather than a course of conduct’
. The other bodies had been considering whether the standard of care given by the doctors fell short of the standard to be expected of a conscientious GP. It would have been perfectly possible to answer that question in the affirmative and yet at the same time to conclude that the failure was not such as to amount to SPM. That, the Judge said, was the reason for the PPC’s conclusion. He accepted that a differently constituted PPC might have taken a different view. That was not to say that it was not open to
‘this very expert committee’
to take the view that it did. He therefore refused permission to apply for judicial review.
20.160
I mention also the case of
, to which I referred at some length in
. That case concerned several doctors whose conduct was the subject of criticism in the report of the Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital Inquiry (the Alder Hey Inquiry). Mr Nicholls provided a witness statement in respect of the nine doctors whose cases had been considered and closed by the PPC. He referred to the
and asserted that the PPC had acted in accordance with its guidance. The Judge approved the advice given in the
and accepted that the PPC had indeed followed its guidance. In respect of all the decisions of the PPC, the application for judicial review failed.
13th
March 2001 (unreported).

--- The Cancellation by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee of Hearings before the Professional Conduct Committee ---
20.194
Rule 19 of the 1980 Professional Conduct Rules provided:
‘(1) Where, after a complaint or information has been referred to the Committee
i.e. the PCC
for inquiry, it appears to the President that the inquiry should not be held, he may after consultation with the members of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee who made the determination to hold the inquiry and in accordance with the opinion of those members or the majority of their opinions (including his own opinion) direct that the inquiry shall not be held ... Provided that in any case where there is a complainant the President shall, before he consults with members of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee as aforesaid, communicate or endeavour to communicate with the complainant with a view to obtaining the observations of the complainant as to whether the inquiry should be held.
(2) Where the opinions of the members of the Committee are equally divided the question shall be deemed to have been resolved in favour of the practitioner, and the President shall direct that the inquiry shall not be held.
(3) As soon as may be after the giving of any such direction the Solicitor
appointed by the GMC
shall give notice thereof to the practitioner and to the complainant (if any).’
In this connection, the function of the President could be exercised by the member appointed to act as medical screener in his stead.
20.195
In the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules, rule 19 was changed. From that time, the function of the President could be exercised by the member appointed to act as medical screener in the President’s place only if s/he had also been appointed Chairman of the PPC. The President (or the Chairman of the PPC) had to consult the PPC about a cancellation. However, the PPC was not required to meet for the purpose of this consultation. If the PPC agreed, the President (or the Chairman of the PPC) had the power to direct that the hearing by the PCC should not take place. In the event of the votes being equally divided, the President or Chairman of the PPC would have had an additional casting vote. The obligation to consult the complainant was preserved. In practice, however, this was done only if the complainant was a private individual. If the doctor had been referred to the GMC by a public body such as a NHS trust, that body would not have been consulted.
20.196
In 2000, the power to initiate the procedure for cancellation of a PCC hearing was given to the Chairman of the PPC. In November 2002, as I have said at
paragraph 20.185
, the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules were amended so as to permit all convictions where an immediate custodial sentence had been imposed to be referred by the Registrar direct to the PCC unless he was of the opinion that such a direct referral would not be in the public interest. At the same time, a new rule 19(3) was added:
‘Where, after the Registrar has referred a conviction to the Committee for inquiry, it appears to him that the inquiry should not be held, he may direct that the inquiry shall not be held.’
20.197
So far as the Inquiry is aware, no guidance was given or criteria set down as to the circumstances in which the Registrar or the GMC staff exercising his legal powers should use this power to cancel a PCC hearing in a conviction case which had been referred directly to the PCC by the Registrar or staff. I can see that it may be appropriate for a hearing by the PCC to be cancelled if a doctor’s appeal against a criminal conviction is allowed, or if the doctor dies or is found to be terminally ill. However, it is not clear whether it was intended that the power should be exercised in any other circumstances.
20.198
Nor does there appear to have been any indication of the criteria which the PPC should apply when deciding whether to cancel a hearing by the PCC in a conduct case. Such decisions were taken in private and did not need to be taken at a meeting although, in practice, it appears that cancellations were considered at, and recorded in the minutes of, meetings of the PPC.
20.199
For most years, no figures showing the number of cancelled PCC hearings appear in the GMC’s annual FTP statistics. At the Inquiry’s request, the GMC provided information about the number of cases where an initial referral by the PPC of a case for hearing by the PCC was subsequently cancelled under the provisions of rule 19. That information shows that the hearings in 13% of the cases referred by the PPC to the PCC in 2000 were subsequently cancelled. The subsequent figures are 15% of the cases referred to the PCC in 2001, 20% of those referred to the PCC in 2002 and (as at the beginning of August 2004) 11% of the case referred to the PCC in 2003.
20.200
The GMC provided a breakdown of the reasons for the cancellation of hearings as recorded in the relevant files. The most common reasons were said to be
‘unwilling/unreliable complainant or witness’
‘other evidential difficulties’
. In a significant proportion of cases, it was said that the expert reports which had been obtained did not support the case. In a few cases, the reason given was
‘new information’
and in two cases criminal appeals had succeeded. One doctor had died. There was one case (cancelled in 2000) where the reason given was
‘unlikely to reach the threshold of SPM’
. The information provided by the GMC showed that doctors sometimes requested that the hearing in their cases should be cancelled for evidential or other reasons. If a first request was refused, the doctor might renew his/her request at a later stage.
20.201
These statistics seem to me to require further consideration by the Council. It may be that a changed approach by the PPC (with less emphasis upon consideration of whether the evidence was likely to stand up before the PCC) resulted in the PPC passing through some cases which, on further examination by the GMC’s solicitors, were found to have serious evidential difficulties. If so, that would be reasonable although, if that were the case, it would underline the need for improved evidence gathering at an earlier stage of the process. However, 20% is a very high proportion of cases to be cancelled. The figures were not usually reported to the Council in the annual FTP statistics.
20.202
As many as 30 cases cancelled in 2002 were said to involve an unwilling complainant or witnesses. This might have been because of delay, because the complainant or witnesses had previously given evidence at another hearing, or because s/he felt intimidated in some way. One would have thought that the GMC would have been concerned that cases were being ‘lost’ because of unwilling complainants and witnesses and would have wanted to know what was behind this. It is possible that such witnesses might be assisted in the future by the vulnerable witnesses provisions which are proposed in the new FTP procedures. Better investigation earlier might also eliminate some cases which have no prospects of success. However, there is cause for concern because the proposals for cancelling cases are much more lax under the new FTP procedures. In my view, the full statistics should be published annually, showing clearly the percentage of cases referred which have subsequently been cancelled. The reasons for the cancellation, as well as the statistics, should be readily available. Research should be conducted into the reasons why cases are failing at this stage and steps should be taken to reduce such cases to a minimum.

--- The Inquiry's Examination of Cases ---
20.203
The Inquiry requested the disclosure of the files relating to certain classes of case considered by the PPC. The request related to three particular issues which the Inquiry had to address. First, the Inquiry wished to discover how, over the years, the GMC had handled the cases of doctors who had been convicted of controlled drugs offences (such as those of which Shipman had been convicted in 1976) and of those whose misconduct was thought to involve the abuse of controlled drugs. Many such cases were referred to the PPC. Second, the Inquiry wished to know how the GMC (and, in particular, the PPC) had handled cases of alleged substandard clinical treatment during the 1990s, when Shipman was reported to the GMC following two adverse findings by a MSC. In addition, the Inquiry was interested to discover how the PPC would have dealt with a complaint, if one had been made, arising out of the case of Mrs Renate Overton, which I described in
. The following discussion does not deal with all the case files disclosed. It focusses on those cases which have some similarity to the circumstances of Shipman’s referrals, or which raise an issue of patient protection of concern to the Inquiry.
Cases Involving Controlled Drugs
20.204
As will be seen, the general theme underlying all the cases involving the abuse of controlled drugs is that the PPC would refer the doctor into the voluntary health procedures, even if s/he had been guilty of quite serious misconduct affecting patient safety or welfare. One recent case, that of Dr JO 09, which is typical of the way in which the PPC dealt with drug abusing doctors, is described in
Dr JO 04
20.205
In most cases in which the PPC referred a doctor into the voluntary health procedures, there was some evidence of addiction or dependence such as would justify that referral. However, in the case of Dr JO 04, there was no evidence of addiction and no evidence which, to my eyes at least, could justify a referral into the voluntary health procedures. Yet that was the outcome. While working as a senior house officer at Hospital A, Dr JO 04’s conduct gave rise to a suspicion that he was stealing fentanyl and injecting himself. No action was taken at the time. The doctor left that hospital and started work at Hospital B. Some time later, a member of staff at Hospital A informed Hospital B of the concerns and suspicions that had arisen. A few months later, the doctor was confronted with these suspicions in an interview attended by a member of staff from each hospital. He admitted that he had abused fentanyl in the past although, he claimed, this had never compromised his care of patients. He refused to give a hair sample for testing, claiming that he had taken cannabis at a party four days earlier. He was suspended or sent on sick leave and reported to the GMC.
20.206
After initial consideration, the case was referred to a medical screener, who recommended that the case be referred to the PPC and the IOC. He observed that there were concerns about SPM and about patient safety. At the hearing before the IOC, counsel for the doctor said that the doctor had retracted his admission that he had abused fentanyl. His case was that he had once taken the drug on the tongue (not by injection) while at Hospital A, but any suggestion that he had used it over a period would be strongly denied. The IOC imposed conditions on the doctor’s registration for the protection of patients. It considered that there was
‘cogent and credible prima facie evidence of substance misuse’
. It is clear that there were in existence letters from witnesses from Hospital A where the drug abuse had occurred.
20.207
Later that week, the case came before the PPC, which adjourned the case for medical reports. The first medical report was a remarkable document in which the examiner went well beyond the giving of a medical opinion. First, he noted, quite properly, that the allegation of the abuse of fentanyl had been denied by Dr JO 04 and that no drugs had been detected on a recent hair test. However, the examiner then went on to discuss the strength of the evidence in relation to Dr JO 04’s past abuse of drugs. He mentioned the witness evidence from Hospital A and the fact that Dr JO 04 had avoided taking a hair test at Hospital B when offered the chance to demonstrate that he was drug-free. The examiner then went on to say that the evidence was
‘finely balanced’
but concluded, on the balance of probabilities and in the light of the doctor’s retraction of his admission, that the evidence was not sufficient to suggest that Dr JO 04 had a present or past problem with the misuse of drugs that would affect his ability to practise. However, Dr JO 04 had admitted to using cocaine in the past and the examiner considered that he should be kept under observation to ensure that he was not using substances illicitly.
20.208
Another medical report said that the examiner found it difficult to draw firm conclusions about Dr JO 04’s drug abuse. However, because of the high risk to patients that would arise if he were to abuse drugs, he recommended that the doctor should remain suspended until a full hearing could assess the evidence. A third report recommended medical supervision.
20.209
The minutes of the resumed consideration of this case by the PPC give rise to concern. First, there appears to have been discussion about the propriety of the conduct of the staff at Hospital A. It appears that they had been aware of concerns some time before Dr JO 04 had left Hospital A, but had nevertheless sanctioned his promotion within the hospital. The concerns had not been raised properly until Dr JO 04 had moved on to Hospital B. On the face of it, that did not appear satisfactory, but it was wholly irrelevant to the issue of whether Dr JO 04 had been abusing drugs and, if so, what should happen to him. The PPC then discussed the fact that there was not much evidence of drug abuse now that the admissions had been withdrawn. They noted that the admissions had been made without the benefit of legal advice. All the other evidence was said to be hearsay. The prospect of proving the allegations at the PCC was felt to be poor. The PPC noted that the medical examiners had recommended supervision. In fact, they had not. Only one had done so. Apparently, Dr JO 04 was willing to undergo supervision. One is bound to wonder why he should have done that, if he did not have and had never had a drug problem. The PPC’s decision was to adjourn
to enable the doctor to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures.
20.210
When giving evidence about this case, Mr Nicholls was asked to explain why the PPC had thought that the only evidence of drug abuse was (and presumably could only ever be) hearsay. He said that the PPC thought that the prospects of the case being proved at the PCC were very poor. There had been delay and no local investigation. When it was suggested that evidence would have been available about the circumstances in which the doctor had made his admission and the terms of his admission, Mr Nicholls said that he thought it would be a ‘hard struggle’ to obtain further evidence about the admission. He agreed that the effect of the PPC’s decision was that the issue of whether the doctor had been abusing drugs had never been resolved. He also accepted that there was no medical evidence that the doctor had any medical or psychiatric problem such as would justify referral into the voluntary health procedures. Mr Nicholls explained the PPC’s decision on the basis that there was a possibility that the doctor had been abusing drugs, so that it was preferable, in the interests of patient safety, that he should be made subject to some voluntary supervision than that the case against him should fail completely at the PCC.
20.211
I can see that the PPC’s solution must have appeared to be a pragmatic way of dealing with an evidential problem which, I am sure, it regarded as insuperable. However, this case shows the PPC misdirecting itself in several respects. First, the discussion about the conduct of the staff at Hospital A was quite irrelevant to the issues before the PPC. Second, its assessment of the availability and cogency of the evidence available was wrong. It was, incidentally, quite different from the assessment that had been made of the same evidence by the IOC. It is no personal criticism of Mr Nicholls or of any member of the PPC if I say that it appears to me that they did not understand the hearsay rule; they are not lawyers. But the trouble is that they made decisions based on their misunderstanding of that rule. The PPC should not have based its decisions on the strength or availability of evidence save in the most obvious and straightforward circumstances.
Dr JO 10
20.212
Another case which gives rise to some concern was that of Dr JO 10. The doctor was an anaesthetist who was found to have been abusing a variety of anaesthetic drugs. Initially, he took drugs left over from the clinical procedures in which he had taken part. He would order larger ampoules than were needed for the patients. Later, he took to drawing off part of the contents of an open ampoule and replacing what he had taken with water. Thus, the patients received less than they should have had. When eventually confronted about these matters, he admitted them. The case was referred to the GMC. The Medical Director of the hospital at which Dr JO 10 worked considered that patients had been put at risk not only because they had not received appropriate medication but also because the doctor had been under the influence of drugs while on duty.
20.213
No conviction had been recorded against the doctor. The case went to the medical screener as one of ‘SPM by definition’. The screener, very properly, referred it to the IOC and the PPC. The IOC imposed a series of interim conditions. When the case came for consideration by the PPC, there was a psychiatric report which said that the doctor had been self-administering drugs for over a year and was using between 10 and 15 injections per day; the size was not specified. However, the report said that the doctor was not suffering from any physical or any discernible psychiatric disorder. The prognosis was said to be good. The PPC referred the case into the voluntary health procedures. The Inquiry does not know what the reasons were for this decision. The doctor entered into voluntary undertakings as to the conditions under which he practised and the interim conditions imposed by the IOC were later revoked.
20.214
When giving evidence about this case, Mr Nicholls, who chaired the PPC panel which decided the case, said that he felt ‘uncomfortable’ about this decision. He now felt that it should have been referred to the PCC. He agreed that there was clear evidence of SPM and no evidential difficulties. In my view, he is right; the case should have been referred to the PCC. This doctor did not, on the evidence, have a health problem. His dishonesty was never addressed. Nor was his willingness to involve patients in his drug taking activities and to endanger patients while working under the influence of drugs. The PCC might or might not have thought it appropriate to impose conditions that would have required the doctor to undergo medical supervision. But the matter would have been considered openly and thoroughly in the presence of the doctor, instead of in a private procedure which is, by its nature, far less thorough and transparent.
Dr JO 06
20.215
Dr JO 06 stole prescription forms from the surgery at which he worked as a locum. He issued prescriptions for diazepam, in the names of fictitious patients, forging the signature of the GP from whom the prescriptions had been stolen. He was not prosecuted. It is not clear why not; it seems to have been suggested that there was no direct evidence but, in fact, the forged prescriptions were eventually recovered. Moreover, Dr JO 06 wrote to the doctor from whom he had stolen the prescriptions, admitting what he had done and apologising. In any event, the case was reported to the GMC and the medical screener, Dr Krishna Korlipara, referred the case to the PPC. On the first occasion on which the PPC considered the case, it received a psychiatric report, which said that the doctor was doing well. However, the PPC decided to obtain two more psychiatric reports. When these were available, the PPC reconsidered the case. The doctor had admitted to both psychiatrists that he had been addicted to benzodiazepines for about five years and had stolen prescription forms and forged another doctor’s signature in order to obtain supplies. Both psychiatrists were of the view that the doctor was fit to practise subject to medical supervision. The minute of the PPC’s decision records, first, that the doctor did not appear to pose a threat to patient safety but that it was in his own interests to continue medical supervision under the voluntary health procedures. It then recorded that, after taking into account the mitigating circumstances and the letters of support submitted on behalf of the doctor, it would be appropriate to send the doctor a warning letter and adjourn
to enable him to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures, where he was to be supervised by the psychiatrist who had provided the original report. That is what happened.
20.216
The case gives rise to concern because the PPC seems to have lost sight of its primary function. This was a bad case of dishonesty, which clearly amounted to SPM. Yet the PPC minute does not mention that. Instead, it seems to have focussed on the medical aspects and the mitigation submitted, including letters of support. Mr Nicholls did not chair the PPC panel on this occasion. However, he sought to assist the Inquiry by explaining what was likely to have been in the PPC’s mind. He said that the PPC would have considered the doctor’s dishonesty to be a symptom of his ill health. The PPC would have noted that his actions had had no adverse effect on patients and that he had displayed insight and was responding well to treatment. Mr Nicholls thought there might well have been evidential difficulties; he was under the impression that the prescriptions had been destroyed. It might be that one forged prescription had been destroyed but, certainly, there were three within the GMC files. It seems to me that this was a case in which there really could be no proper course of action for the PPC other than referral to the PCC. This was a clear case of SPM with no evidential difficulties. In disposing of the case, the PPC usurped the functions of the PCC.
Dr JO 05
20.217
The case of Dr JO 05 was quite similar although, in this case, the doctor was convicted of forging another doctor’s signature on a prescription in an attempt to obtain a supply of dihydrocodeine, to which she was addicted. The case was reported to the GMC and referred to the PPC. There was psychiatric evidence that the doctor had been addicted to the drug for many years. The medical evidence was that the doctor was fit to practise with the proviso that she could not prescribe. The PPC adjourned the case
to enable it to be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures. The minute of its decision does not make reference to the question of whether the conduct might amount to SPM. The determinative factor was that there was evidence of a health problem.
20.218
The approach in these last two cases seems to have been that, although the facts clearly amounted to SPM and there were no evidential problems, in the PPC’s view there was a better way of dealing with them. This approach may have seemed sensible and humane. I do not doubt that the PPC thought that it was taking proper account of patient safety. But, the PPC was using an unofficial procedure not sanctioned by the Rules. Also, before taking its decisions, the PPC had no evidence about whether, and if so to what extent, the doctors’ conduct had affected their clinical practice or had had any impact on their patients.
Cases Concerning Clinical Errors
20.219
I propose to discuss only two cases under this heading, both of which involved errors in the prescribing or administration of drugs. These cases are of interest to the Inquiry because of the possibility that Shipman might have been reported to the GMC in the mid-1990s with an allegation that he had administered to Mrs Overton a wholly inappropriate dose of morphine which had resulted in her suffering brain damage and remaining in a persistent vegetative state until her death 14 months later.
Dr JK 07
20.220
Dr JK 07, a locum consultant surgeon, administered an excessive dose of 2% lignocaine to a patient as a local anaesthetic prior to an operation. The patient died. The post-mortem examination did not include any toxicological tests. The death was attributed to the deceased’s longstanding condition of muscular dystrophy. The hospital trust was concerned about the death and undertook an internal investigation. It became apparent that there was a serious discrepancy between the amount of the drug that the nurses said had been given (13.5ml) and that which the doctor had recorded in the notes (5ml). The appropriate dose would have depended on the patient’s body weight. Yet it was clear that the doctor had made no attempt to have the patient weighed. Informally, the hospital trust sought expert advice. When available, this suggested that the dosage administered was excessive and might have caused the death. The local Coroner appeared reluctant to open an inquest so the trust reported the case to the GMC.
20.221
The GMC obtained an expert opinion from an eminent professor of paediatric anaesthesia, who was also a member of the GMC. He agreed with the conclusions of the experts consulted by the trust. He said that, if 13.5ml had been administered, that would be a gross overdose bearing in mind the deceased’s weight (which, it appears from the file, had been estimated by the parents at 4.5 stone, i.e. about 28kg). The expert expressed surprise at the doctor’s failure to weigh the patient, whose muscular dystrophy had resulted in reduced muscle mass. If only 5ml lignocaine had been administered, that would have been just above the maximum recommended dose for a person of the deceased’s weight. If 13.5ml had been given, that would have been wholly excessive and would have amounted to SPM.
20.222
The doctor was warned that the case was to be referred to the PPC. Three allegations were to be considered: the failure to weigh the patient; the administration of 13.5ml, which was excessive, and the making of a false entry in the clinical records to the effect that only 5ml had been given. Solicitors for Dr JK 07 replied to the GMC on their client’s behalf, saying that the doctor had made a genuine error in recording that he had given only 5ml; in fact he had given 10ml. He admitted that more than 10ml had been expended from the syringe but some had been wasted. I interpose to say that the nurses said that the doctor had been handed a syringe containing 10ml and had injected it all. They said that, a while later, he had asked for more; he had been given another 10ml and, when he had finished injecting, there was 6.5ml left. The doctor’s account was different. He claimed that, based on his estimate of the patient’s weight, he believed he could safely use up to 10ml of 2% lignocaine. He took a syringe containing 10ml and injected 5ml. During this procedure, some lignocaine was spilled; only 3.5ml was left. After a pause while the drug took effect, the operation began. It was obvious that the patient was in pain and the doctor then injected the remaining 3.5ml. The patient then appeared to be free of pain and the operation began again. Part way through the procedure, the patient again complained of pain and the doctor asked for more lignocaine. He was handed a syringe containing 10ml. On this occasion, the doctor was able to inject only about 0.5ml successfully and lost about 1.5ml through spillage. The operation recommenced. Once again, the patient complained and the doctor administered a further 1ml with further spillage of 0.5ml. The overall effect of the doctor’s account was that the patient had received 10ml and 3.5ml had been spilled.
20.223
It was said on the doctor’s behalf that, when making his note, the doctor had totalled the various small amounts injected but had forgotten about the first 5ml he had injected. He had recorded 5ml as the total amount injected when he should have put 10ml. When asked to write a report on the incident a few days later (for the purposes of the internal investigation), he had had his note before him and he had perpetuated his mistake. There had been no intention to mislead.
20.224
The case was considered by the PPC before the time when a minute was routinely made of the reasons for its decisions. Incredibly, as it seems to me, the PPC decided not to refer the case to the PCC, but to close it with a warning. The deceased’s family was outraged at the decision and asked for full reasons. The GMC’s reply explained that the caseworker had spoken to the Chairman of the PPC who had explained the decision on the basis that the PPC did not think the doctor’s errors were such as to justify the GMC in restricting or stopping his medical practice.
20.225
Dr Steel, who was Chairman of the PPC at the time of this decision, explained in a witness statement to the Inquiry that, in his view, this was a borderline case. He considered that the doctor had provided a satisfactory reason for having made an error in the medical notes. He had
‘admitted’
that he had given 10ml and that 13.5ml had been expended from the syringe (as the nurses claimed). The doctor had also acknowledged that he should have weighed the patient but he had made a
‘genuine assessment’
that the patient’s weight had been between 40 and 50kg. Dr Steel said that, in the circumstances, the PPC would have concluded that it was doubtful if the administration of 10ml was irresponsible.
20.226
Dr Joan Trowell, Chairman of the Fitness to Practise Committee, commented on this case in her written evidence to the Inquiry. She accepted that the case should have gone to the PCC for full investigation. She said that 10ml lignocaine would have been an excessive dose. However, she did not think that there was any real conflict of evidence between the doctor and the nurses; it was quite possible, she said, to lose as much as one third of the liquid during injection. I must observe that that may well be so, but it was not for members of the PPC to reach a judgement on that kind of issue without hearing the evidence. If, having heard the nurses and the doctor, the PCC had been unsure about the evidence of spillage, it would have been quite appropriate for it to take into account its knowledge of what could happen; but it was not appropriate for it to do so when there had been no examination of the evidence.
20.227
Sir Donald Irvine, President of the GMC from 1995 until 2002, also commented on this case and said that it was clear to him that the case should have been referred to the PCC. It seems to me a pity that the family did not take proceedings for judicial review. Had they done so, the application must, I think, have succeeded. The PPC had clearly gone beyond its function of considering whether the conduct complained of, if proved, might amount to SPM. On the basis of his so-called ‘admission’, the doctor had administered 10ml, which, according to the expert instructed by the GMC, would still have been double the maximum recommended dose. The expert had not been asked for his view on how serious an error the administration of 10ml would have been. It seems to me that the case clearly raised a question of SPM and that evidence was available to support the allegation that 13.5ml had been given, although it conflicted with what was being advanced on the doctor’s behalf. In any event, it was not for the PPC, but for the PCC, to decide whether the doctor’s ‘admission’ was in fact true. There was evidence from the nurses that he had administered 13.5ml and no one had investigated what the nurses would say about the claim that 3.5ml had been spilled and that the drug had been administered in several small amounts. Further, it was for the PCC, not the PPC, to decide whether to accept that the entry in the notes had been a genuine mistake or a deliberately false entry. Some might suggest that the doctor’s claim that he had forgotten about the first 5ml ampoule sounds rather implausible. After all, it must be a fairly unusual experience in the professional life of an individual surgeon that a patient dies on the operating table; the doctor must have had plenty of time to think over his actions, in the aftermath of the death. Yet he did not advance his explanation until he was facing the possibility of proceedings at the GMC. It is not for me to make a judgement about whether the entry in the notes was a genuine error. However, nor was it for the PPC to do so.
20.228
For the sake of completeness, I shall recount the further history of this case. In the light of the PPC’s decision, the family put further pressure on the Coroner to hold an inquest. The Coroner asked to see the GMC’s papers. Solicitors acting for the GMC suggested that the Deputy Coroner should obtain the relevant papers from the hospital trust. The solicitors disclosed the existence of Dr JK 07’s response and said that the GMC would seek the doctor’s consent to its disclosure. The GMC did not disclose the existence of the expert report but mentioned that it had been assisted by advice from its members. This was inappropriate, as the Deputy Coroner had made it clear that she was not minded at that time to accept the family’s assertion that the GMC had had evidence before it of clinical incompetence. In the event, the Coroner was persuaded to hold an inquest and the verdict was misadventure. The police investigated and, in due course, Dr JK 07 was charged with manslaughter. His defence was that, although he had been negligent, he had not been grossly so. He was acquitted of manslaughter but the trial Judge refused an order for costs, a decision which implies that the Judge’s view was that the defendant had brought the prosecution upon himself.
Dr JK 09
20.229
The complaint in the case of Dr JK 09 comprised an allegation that the doctor, a consultant urologist, had prescribed an excessive dose of an alpha-blocker, terazosin (Hytrin), as a result of which the patient died. The patient was admitted to hospital in the mid-1990s with a three-week history of breathlessness and problems with micturition. He subsequently developed an unproductive cough and breathlessness. A diagnosis was made of hypertensive heart failure for which he was prescribed medication. Six days later, his blood pressure and heart failure were better controlled but he was still complaining of difficulty in voiding urine. His medication was adjusted and he was referred to Dr JK 09. Nine days after the patient’s admission to hospital, Dr JK 09 reviewed him and prescribed 5mg Hytrin. The manufacturers recommend that the initial dose of this drug should not exceed 1mg and that the drug should be taken
‘before bedtime’
. When the pharmacist saw the prescription, she telephoned the ward to say that this was rather a high dose and that close monitoring of the patient’s blood pressure would be required following administration. The drug was not available until the next day. At 11am the following day, the patient was found collapsed. He had not been given any Hytrin and was not due to take it until ‘bedtime’. His heart rate was fast and irregular. Blood pressure was stable at 130/80. Treatment was commenced with digoxin. The patient appeared to recover. At 10.05pm, Hytrin was administered in accordance with the instructions of Dr JK 09. Within a short time, the patient’s blood pressure had fallen to dangerously low levels. He died a week later and the cause of death was found to be hypoxic organ damage due to drug induced hypotension. The coroner’s inquest recorded a verdict of misadventure and that the death was a consequence of the deceased having been prescribed a dose of Hytrin in excess of the recommended dose.
20.230
The deceased’s daughter made a complaint to the GMC and submitted the British National Formulary data sheet for Hytrin. Dr JK 09 was asked for his explanation and submitted a sworn affidavit in which he agreed that he had prescribed a dose in excess of the recommended dose but said that he had done so on the basis of a discussion he had had with the local representative of a drug company which supplied or manufactured it. He said he had been advised that this larger dose was being prescribed by doctors and that ‘serious side effects were rare’. He said that he could not substantiate this conversation but he would never have gone against the data sheet advice without having received guidance. He claimed that he had treated other patients with a 5mg dose without adverse effect. He also said that, subsequently, he had attended a conference of urologists, where a paper had been presented which reported on a study of 30 elderly men who had been treated with 5mg Hytrin daily. Two had experienced dizziness but, otherwise, there were no severe side effects. He had tried to contact the urologists who had presented the paper without success. Nor had he been able to obtain a copy of their paper. He produced an abstract of the paper from a British journal, but this did not mention the dosage used in the trial. Dr JK 09 also added that he had not been told about the collapse during the morning of the day it occurred. Had he been told, he would have said that the Hytrin should not be given, as it was only for the relief of urinary tract symptoms. He was also critical of the way in which the emergency following the administration of the drug had been handled. He was of the view that the patient should have been admitted to intensive care, whereas he had been treated by junior staff on the ward.
20.231
The case came before the PPC, which decided not to refer it to the PCC. The letter of explanation sent to the complainant explained the decision on the basis that the doctor
‘had acted in good faith in what he thought at the time would be
the patient’s
best interests, however,
has been warned that the Committee would take a serious view if further complaints of a similar nature were to be received’
20.232
In his statement to the Inquiry, Dr Steel said that this was a
‘borderline decision’
. He said that, after careful consideration, the PPC would have decided, on balance, that this isolated example of clinical misjudgement, for which the doctor had expressed regret, was not an appropriate case for referral to the PCC. The PPC would have used the clinical expertise of its own members when arriving at the decision.
20.233
Dr Trowell was of the view that the case should have been referred onwards. The GMC solicitors would then have had the opportunity to investigate further the various claims made by the doctor in his response. She expressed the view that, had this case come to the PPC after the case of
, rather than before, it would have been handled differently. She was also confident that, under the new FTP procedures, a case such as this would be fully investigated at an early stage before any decisions were taken.
20.234
It is clear, as Dr Trowell recognised, that, in this case, the PPC again exceeded its powers. It should have referred this case on so that the doctor’s various claims could be investigated. As it was, the PPC accepted them all as true and then formed a judgement about how the case should be dealt with. It should have considered whether the prescribing of a dose five times that which was recommended might amount to SPM. If it might (and, plainly, it could), the case should have been referred. The basic facts were admitted. It was for the PCC, not the PPC, to decide upon the truth of the doctor’s explanation and whether the doctor’s conduct did in fact amount to SPM.


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Professional Conduct Committee
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
20.235
The two cases of judicial review (
), to which I have referred, demonstrate clearly that, in those cases, the PPC exceeded its powers by reaching a concluded judgement on whether the matters alleged might amount to SPM and that, in the case of
, it also misdirected itself as to the meaning of SPM. In the case of
, the GMC plainly accepted the criticisms of the Court; indeed it actively sought them. However, in the evidence of its witnesses and its submission to the Inquiry, its stance was that the cases of judicial review were not representative of the general standard of PPC decisions. In any event, it was said that, after the
was produced for the guidance of PPC members, any problems there might have been had been resolved. I can see that it should not be said that the PPC habitually misdirected itself just because it was found to have done so in two cases of judicial review. But the problems in those cases were very fundamental. Three separate decisions were involved. In the nature of things, very few cases go to judicial review; the remedy was not used at all against the GMC until the late 1990s. It seems to me likely that the errors disclosed in the judicial review cases were typical of the PPC’s approach.
20.236
However, the cases of judicial review are not the only evidence available as to the quality of PPC decisions. Professor Allen and her team observed the operation of the PPC in a large number of cases and expressed their concern that members of the PPC did not appear to understand their role or the test they were to apply. The cases examined by the Inquiry also throw light on the operation of the PPC. PPC panels sat in private and there was no means of monitoring or auditing their outcomes. The judicial reviews and the few cases the Inquiry has looked at are the only glimpses afforded to the public of what happened there. The observations of the PSI team, the cases of judicial review and the Inquiry’s own evidence all present a similar picture. Together, these different sources of evidence lead me to the conclusion that, in making decisions, the PPC often exceeded its powers and applied the wrong legal test. Of course, I am not saying that the PPC was always wrong when it declined to refer a case on to the PCC. However, I am driven to the conclusion that it was wrong in a significant number of cases and that those cases give rise to a real cause for concern that the PPC has been far too much influenced by its desire to be ‘fair to doctors’ and far too little concerned about the protection of patients and the public.
20.237
Of particular concern to the Inquiry is the statistical evidence showing that many conviction cases (apparently of a quite serious nature) were closed by the PPC. The Inquiry has not examined these cases in detail but the figures are worrying and give rise to a fear that, in this respect also, the GMC has been failing to protect patients.
20.238
I am also concerned about the way in which some cases were referred by the PPC into the voluntary health procedures despite the fact that there was plainly evidence of conduct capable of amounting to SPM and no real evidence of ill health. I accept, of course, that referral into the voluntary health procedures may be a proper way - even the best way - of protecting patients and the public in some cases. However, in the case of Dr JO 04, that cannot be said. The truth about the doctor’s allegedly dishonest and unethical conduct was never established and there was no medical evidence that he was driven to obtain drugs by dishonest means as the result of an addiction. After a while under the voluntary health procedures, that doctor will doubtless have been free to practise without restriction and yet, for all anyone knows, he might be thoroughly dishonest.
20.239
It seems to me that there were several underlying causes for the failures of the PPC. First, the Committee’s statutory powers and duties were not clearly spelled out in the legislation. The PPC had to decide whether any case
by the PCC. The Rules provided only that, when referring a case to the PCC, it should indicate the matters which, in its opinion,
‘appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct’
. In
, I described the difficulty that had been experienced over a period of many years in defining and explaining SPM. It seems to me obvious that, for the purposes of ensuring consistency and fairness, the GMC, as a body, should have given careful consideration to the proper function of the PPC, when compared with the functions of the screeners and the PCC, and should have developed clear guidelines for its operation. It appears that, until 2001, when the
was produced, it was thought that no guidance was needed because members of the PPC were well-respected professionals and lay Council members who carried out their duties in a conscientious fashion. I do not doubt their conscientiousness but it is clear that their understanding of the nature of their function was flawed, probably because many of them acted at times as screeners, and at other times as members of the PCC, and confused their various roles. Moreover, the lack of guidance left individuals to form their own views on a wide range of topics, including, for example, the threshold for SPM and the role of hearsay evidence in GMC hearings.
20.240
Another serious underlying problem has been the absence of proper criteria for decision making. There has never been a concerted attempt to define thresholds for SPM, applicable for various forms of misconduct. At times, examples of what might or might not be regarded as SPM were given, but these were never more than a miscellaneous collection drawn from a wide variety of different types of conduct. There has never been what Professor Allen described as a ‘hierarchy’ of examples of misconduct from which thresholds could be established. Although the
no doubt assisted in directing the PPC’s mind to the sorts of questions it should have been asking (and in dissuading it from taking irrelevant considerations into account), it provided no assistance at all in deciding whether a case did or did not reach the required threshold for referral to the PCC. Until this problem is tackled, there will be difficulties with any decision-making person or body within the GMC.
20.241
Very shortly, the PPC will no longer exist. It may be said that, for that reason, there has been little point in examining its operation, since its past failures are of only historical interest. I do not accept that, for three reasons. In future, the PPC’s filtering functions will be performed mainly by case examiners, who will not be Council members but will be contracted to the GMC to undertake the work and will be directed and managed by Council members and staff. In theory, that seems a good idea; how it will work in practice remains to be seen. However, whenever case examiners disagree on whether a case should be referred to a FTP panel for a hearing, the IC will have to decide what should happen. To that extent, it will be the successor to the PPC. Second, until recently, members of PPC panels have always been members of the GMC. Examination of the ethos of the PPC is of relevance to my assessment of the ethos of the GMC as a whole and to my recommendations as to whether the GMC is willing to and capable of providing adequate protection for patients in the way it regulates doctors in the future. Third, in 1996, the GMC committed itself to the development of procedures and processes that would be fair, objective and transparent. Those were fine and appropriate words. It has been important to examine the actual decisions of the PPC, to discover how they have measured up to the GMC’s aspirations. The result of that examination suggests to me that there is a gulf between the aspiration and reality.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY ONE - The General Medical Council Conduct Procedures: the Professional Conduct Committee ---
The Procedure at a Hearing before the Professional Conduct Committee
Recent Developments
Appeals and Referrals

--- The Composition of the Professional Conduct Committee ---
21.3
From its inception in 1980, the composition of the PCC was governed successively by the General Medical Council (Constitution of Fitness to Practise Committees) Rules Order of Council (the Constitution Rules) 1980, 1986 and 1996. Between 1980 and 1986, the PCC was composed of the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, 16 medical members and two lay members of the GMC (i.e. 20 members in all). The legal quorum of the PCC was five. The Constitution Rules provided that no more than ten members of the PCC should be invited to sit on panels for the hearing of cases. Those invited to attend a panel hearing had to include either the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman or both, eight medical members and one lay member of the PCC. Subject to those requirements, panel members were to be chosen, so far as was practicable, in rotation from all the members of the PCC.
21.4
From 1980, the Constitution Rules permitted the President to choose whether to sit as Chairman of the PCC. If the President chose not to do so, he was required to appoint another member of the GMC as Chairman. Between 1980 and 1996, the Constitution Rules also required the President to appoint one member of the GMC as Deputy Chairman of the PCC. From 1980, any appointments to the Chairmanship and Deputy Chairmanship of the PCC were subject to the approval of the full Council. Members of the PCC (except for the Chairman and Deputy Chairman) were elected annually.
21.5
In 1986, 1987 and 1994, the Constitution Rules were amended to permit increases in the membership of the PCC. By 1994, the PCC had 34 members, comprising 26 medical members (including the Chairman and Deputy Chairman) and eight lay members. The number of members invited to sit on a hearing was reduced to eight. Two of those eight had to be lay members of the PCC. The legal quorum for a PCC panel was five, to include at least one lay member.
21.6
In 1994, the Constitution Rules were further amended to provide for the situation where insufficient members were available to achieve a quorum. The President was given the power to appoint temporarily to the PCC any member of the GMC who would have been eligible to stand for election to the PCC. In 1996, the Constitution Rules were again amended to reduce the membership of the PCC to 30. From that time, the President was required to appoint two members of the GMC as Deputy Chairmen, who would chair hearings in the absence of the Chairman. There had been a significant increase in the number of cases referred to the PCC during the mid-1990s and the appointment of an additional Deputy Chairman allowed a greater number of hearings to be conducted by differently constituted panels of the PCC. From 1996, the total membership of the PCC comprised 23 medical and seven lay members.
21.7
In 2000, the Constitution Rules were amended to reduce the legal quorum of a PCC panel to three, including at least one medical and one lay member. I have already explained that, also in 2000, the GMC was given the power to co-opt non-members or ‘associates’, both medically qualified and lay, to sit on its FTP committees. At that time, the PCC had a large backlog of cases and there were serious delays in bringing cases to the hearing stage. The appointment of a large number of associates made it possible for multiple panels of the PCC to sit simultaneously. In 2000, PCC panels sat for a total of 129 days. In 2001, that rose to 242 days and, in 2002, to 631 days. In 2003, the figure dropped slightly to 595 days. Since July 2003, when the number of Council members was reduced to 35, members have not sat on PCC panels unless it has proved impossible to find an adequate number of associates to do so.

--- The Function and Powers of the Professional Conduct Committee ---
21.8
The function of the PCC was to adjudicate on disciplinary cases.
Conviction and Conduct Cases
21.9
Section 7(1) of the Medical Act 1978 (which came into force in August 1980) set out the powers of the PCC. It provided:
‘Where a fully registered person -
(a) is found by the Professional Conduct Committee to have been convicted (whether while so registered or not) in the United Kingdom or any of the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man of a criminal offence; or
(b) is judged by the Professional Conduct Committee to have been (whether while so registered or not) guilty of serious professional misconduct;
the Committee may, if they think fit, direct -
(i) that his name shall be erased from the register;
(ii) that his registration in the register shall be suspended (that is to say, shall not have effect) during such period not exceeding twelve months as may be specified in the directions; or
(iii) that his registration shall be conditional on his compliance, during such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the direction, with such requirements so specified as the Committee think fit to impose for the protection of members of the public or in his interests.’
These powers were reproduced in section 36(1) of the Medical Act 1983 (the 1983 Act) and remained essentially unchanged. Thus, it was the function of the PCC to determine first whether a doctor referred to it had been guilty of serious professional misconduct (SPM) or had been convicted of a criminal offence. If so, it had to go on to consider what, if any, sanction was appropriate.

--- The Work of the Policy Studies Institute ---
21.125
In previous Chapters I have explained the background of the work of the PSI team and some aspects of its work. This work included an analysis of cases dealt with by the PCC. However, this was quantitative only. The PSI team did not carry out any observation of the PCC in action, as it did with the PPC. Nor did it undertake any analysis of the quality of decision-making of PCC panels.
The 1996 Report
21.126
In the research undertaken for the 1996 PSI Report, Professor Allen, who led the PSI team, and her colleagues found that, at the PCC, doctors who had qualified overseas were more likely than their UK counterparts to be found guilty of SPM. However, once found guilty, overseas qualifiers were more likely than UK qualifiers to be admonished or made the subject of conditional registration. The figures for suspension for both groups were very similar. Overseas qualifiers were only half as likely as UK qualifiers to be erased from the register.
21.127
The PSI team suggested a possible reason for the fact that more lenient treatment was apparently given by the PCC to overseas qualifiers found guilty of SPM. This was that the threshold of misconduct which a UK qualifier had to cross before his/her case was referred to the PCC might be higher than the threshold applicable to an overseas qualifier. If that were so, the complaints against UK qualifiers which reached the PCC (or some of those complaints) would be more serious than the complaints against overseas qualifiers and would thus be deserving of more serious sanctions. The PSI team observed that its findings would be consistent with that suggestion.
21.128
The PSI team advocated that a
‘rigorous analysis’
should be undertaken of cases where findings of SPM had been made by the PCC in recent years. It was hoped that such an analysis would assist in the development of clear guidelines about what constituted SPM, both in general and in particular instances.
The 2000 Report
21.129
An analysis of the outcomes of PCC cases undertaken for the 2000 PSI Report showed that, if convictions were left out of account, the proportion of cases heard by the PCC where the doctor was found guilty of SPM was 79% in 1997. This proportion rose to 85% in 1998 and fell to 78% in 1999. In 1997, a higher proportion of doctors who had qualified in the UK than of overseas qualifiers were found guilty of SPM; in 1998 and 1999, a significantly higher proportion of overseas qualifiers were found guilty. In 1998, 71% of UK qualifiers were found guilty of SPM in comparison with 100% of overseas qualifiers. In 1999, the proportions were 70% and 87%, respectively.
21.130
So far as sanctions were concerned, the PSI team found that, in 1997, complaints against UK and overseas qualifiers had fairly similar outcomes at the PCC. In 1998, similar proportions of UK and overseas qualifiers had their names erased from the register. In 1999, however, overseas qualifiers were in general penalised more severely. The PSI team observed that the pattern of outcomes was complex. It emphasised that the outcomes might well be related to the seriousness of the cases against the doctors concerned, rather than to any bias on the part of the PCC. However, it was impossible, without qualitative analysis, to be certain of this.
21.131
The PSI team noted that doctors in conviction cases were much more likely than those in conduct cases to have their names erased from the register. Since overseas qualifiers accounted for higher proportions of conviction cases at the PCC, this increased their representation among those doctors who were erased. The 2000 Report observed that, since the PCC appeared to regard convictions so seriously, the question arose of why more convictions were not referred by the PPC to the PCC.
21.132
The Report went on to say that the PCC represented a
‘much more transparent’
stage of the GMC procedures than the earlier stages. Nevertheless, it was still not always clear from the PCC’s deliberations why it considered that SPM was made out in some cases and not in others. The PSI team advocated a more
‘structured approach’
to the recording of reasons by PCC panels. The PSI research had shown
‘marked differences in outcome’
from year to year, which were difficult to explain in the absence of any statement of the criteria on which each case was judged. The PSI team pointed out that the composition of the PCC was different on most occasions when a PCC panel sat. Moreover, the composition was likely to be susceptible to even greater change in the near future, as the GMC recruited people from outside the membership of the GMC (i.e. associates) in an attempt to reduce the backlog of cases. The 2000 Report suggested that the GMC might wish to consider whether greater consistency would be introduced by restricting membership of the PCC to a small number of permanent, highly trained individuals.
21.133
The PSI team also identified the need for a close examination of the definition of SPM. It reiterated the need for a common understanding of what did and did not constitute SPM and for clear guidelines on the factors to be taken into account, and the standards to be applied, when making decisions. It stressed the importance of consistency at the level of the PCC, so that the criteria and standards applied at the final stages of the conduct procedures could be fed back through the earlier stages.
The 2003 Paper
21.134
In its 2003 Paper, the PSI team analysed the complaints considered by the PCC during the years 1999, 2000 and 2001. In 2000, the number of doctors who appeared before the PCC (excluding resumed cases and applications for restoration) rose to 101. There was a further rise in 2001 to 122.
21.135
The PSI team found that, in all three years, overseas qualifiers were more likely than UK qualifiers to be found guilty of SPM. In its previous work, it had found that the overall proportion of doctors whose names were erased from the register by the PCC rose from 25% in 1997 to 47% in 1998. It was said that a likely contributory factor to this rise was the increase in the number of conviction cases. The proportion of doctors erased had then fallen slightly (to 43% or 45%) in 1999. In the later analysis, a further fall was observed. In 2000, the proportion was 34%; in 2001, it was 26%. In 1999, erasure was directed in a significantly greater proportion of cases involving overseas qualifiers than of UK qualifiers. In 2000, the differential was less and, in 2001, a slightly greater proportion of UK qualifiers had their names erased. In all three years, UK qualifiers were more likely than overseas qualifiers to be admonished or reprimanded, while overseas qualifiers were more likely to be suspended or to have conditions put on their registration.
21.136
Doctors in conviction cases were more likely to have their names erased than those in other types of case. The proportion of convictions dealt with by erasure was usually over 80% (73% in 1999). However, in 2001, erasure was imposed in only half the conviction cases dealt with.
21.137
The analysis found continuing differences between the outcomes of cases involving UK qualifiers and those of overseas qualifiers at the PCC. The factors causing this could not be determined without a detailed analysis of the reasons for the decisions made by the PCC.

--- The Professional Conduct Committee Working Group ---
21.138
In May 1999, the PCC Working Group, which had been established by the Fitness to Practise Policy Committee, reported on the powers and practice of the PCC. The background to its work was concern within the GMC about public and media criticism of PCC decisions as being inappropriate or inconsistent with previous decisions. One of the tasks of the Working Group was to ascertain whether there was or appeared to be inconsistency in the way sanctions were applied by the PCC.
21.139
The Working Group reviewed all decisions on sanction made by the PCC over the period from 1988 to 1997. The report said that the decisions reviewed were cases where
‘SPM was found proved’
. It is possible that they also included convictions. The most common sanction (imposed in 37% of cases) was erasure of the doctor’s name from the register. The Working Group expressed surprise, however, that 20% of cases were concluded with an admonishment. Members of the Working Group believed that a finding of SPM should usually lead to the imposition of a sanction unless there were
‘strong mitigating factors’
21.140
The Working Group looked in particular at cases involving sexual misconduct (excluding consensual sexual relationships) and inadequate or inappropriate clinical care. It found that two thirds of proven sexual offences had resulted in erasure. In the remaining third, a very wide range of sanctions had been imposed by the PCC, including (in 7% of cases) an admonishment. In the case of clinical treatment, sanctions were very evenly distributed, with 26% resulting in erasure and 20% in admonishment.
21.141
The Working Group observed that the
‘bare statistics’
could not show why individual decisions had been made. Neither had members of the Working Group found the official minutes of the cases, made at the time, of much help. It was not at that time the practice to include in the determination at the end of a case any more than a very brief explanation of why a particular sanction had been imposed. The report observed:
‘There is therefore no sure way of knowing whether certain decisions which appear unexpected or inconsistent (such as merely admonishing a doctor for indecent behaviour with a patient) were genuinely aberrant, or whether there was some overwhelming mitigating factor which was not made explicit in the determination. So, while we have found no clear evidence of a pattern of inconsistent or inappropriate decision making, there is no doubt that the appearance of inconsistency and inappropriateness has sometimes been given.’
21.142
The report rejected as unworkable the idea of using sentencing tariffs. The Working Group thought that this approach was inappropriate because, in contrast to the criminal courts, the PCC was dealing, not with a number of clearly defined offences for which a ‘tariff’ could be specified, but with a single offence of SPM. Furthermore, the Working Group considered that a tariff approach would
‘place an undesirable restriction on the Committee’s discretion’
. Instead, the Working Group recommended the development of a statement about the purpose of the sanctions generally and of each sanction in particular. It suggested that this would be a useful training aid. It was this suggestion that led, two years later, in 2001, to the production of the first version of the ISG.
21.143
Also, in a further attempt to promote consistency of decision-making, the Working Group recommended the circulation of the minutes of every meeting of a PCC panel to all PCC members. It also recommended regular meetings of legal assessors, committee chairmen and members of committees. It recommended that screeners and members of the PPC and the PCC should also meet regularly. It suggested the preparation of a training handbook and mentioned
aides memoire
21.144
The Working Group also advised that the PCC should give a fuller explanation of its reasons. It observed that that would enable all those with an interest in the decision - the doctor, the complainant, the public and the profession - to know why the decision had been made. It would also enable a panel which might need to consider the doctor’s conduct in the future to have a fuller appreciation of the earlier panel’s thinking. The Working Group did not suggest that the PCC should give reasons for its findings of fact.
21.145
The views expressed by the Working Group are similar to those I expressed earlier, namely that there was an appearance of inconsistency between decisions of the PCC. It is plainly desirable that something should be done about this. It does not seem to me that intervention by the Privy Council (which, in later years, showed less deference to the judgements of the PCC than had formerly been the case) was able to help; it did not hear enough cases to establish a framework of sanctions. The same is likely to be true of the High Court, to which appeals are now directed. The development of the ISG has obviously been a step forward in the drive for consistency. However, the ISG focusses on what type of sanction is appropriate in what type of case and does not seek to provide specific examples of what has been thought appropriate in particular cases in the past. The Working Group report said that it would not be feasible to
‘make systematic use of precedents’
when reaching decisions on sanctions. The reasoning was that, because SPM covers so wide a range of possible forms of misconduct, it was not possible to categorise cases and to specify which sanctions were appropriate for which category of case.
21.146
I do not agree. The Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) is able to do so, when it lays down sentencing guidelines. True, it does so in the context of specific criminal offences. The position of a PCC panel is different from that of a judge imposing a sentence. A PCC panel has to impose sanctions in a wide variety of cases all amounting to SPM. However, the difference is more apparent than real. It appears to me that there are types of SPM which recur time and time again. Of course, the precise circumstances vary but there are a few underlying themes. It would, in my view, be quite possible to develop sanctions guidance that relates to specific types of misconduct. Of course, such guidance must not restrict the right of a panel to exercise its discretion on the facts of the individual case, any more than the Court of Appeal seeks to inhibit the right of a judge or recorder to take individual circumstances into account when sentencing.

--- Restoration to the Medical Register ---
21.160
Contrary to public perception, erasure does not necessarily mean the termination of a doctor’s professional practice for all time. The PCC has no power to impose permanent erasure or fixed terms of erasure. A direction that a doctor’s name should be erased from the register is always subject to a future application by the doctor for restoration to the register. Until August 2000, an application for restoration to the register could be made at any time after the expiration of ten months from the date of erasure. If an application was made and was unsuccessful, a further application for restoration could be made after a further ten months had elapsed. Applications for restoration could be renewed every ten months thereafter.
21.161
In 1999, the GMC recognised that there was considerable public concern that doctors were being restored to the register too soon and too easily. In the light of the concern about the issue of restoration, the PCC Working Group undertook a review of the outcomes of applications for restoration which had been dealt with by the PCC between 1988 and 1997. During that period, 131 doctors had been erased. In the same period, 35 doctors had been restored to the register out of 80 doctors who had applied. The Working Group undertook an analysis of the types of conduct or conviction that had led to the erasure of those doctors who had subsequently been restored. Ten of those doctors had originally been erased by reason of SPM arising from clinical treatment; four each had been erased for clinical fraud, improper relationships and sexual assault. Three doctors had been erased for drugs offences and a further three for fraud (other than clinical fraud). Two doctors had been erased for false claims to qualifications and two for soliciting money; one doctor had been erased for violence, one for abusive behaviour and one for theft.
21.162
The Working Group observed:
‘There is no question that, on the face of it, the decisions to restore some doctors appeared surprising. We felt generally that there was an appearance of inconsistency. To take just two examples, while the overwhelming majority of applicants erased for sexual assaults or indecent behaviour were not restored, four doctors guilty of behaviour of apparently similar gravity were restored. All four doctors erased for research fraud in the period were restored.’
21.163
The Working Group pointed out that any inferences from a review of this kind must be drawn very cautiously. There was no sure way of knowing why decisions were taken or what factors, other than the nature of the offence, might (quite properly) have been taken into account. This was because it had not been the PCC’s practice to provide any explanation at all about restoration decisions. The Working Group report observed that, as a result:
‘Unfortunately, we, and more importantly the doctor, complainant and public at the time, cannot know why. In this as in other areas, it is important that the Committee explain their reasoning whether they have decided to restore, or not to restore, the doctor.’
The Working Group recommended that PCC panels should provide an explanation of their decisions on all restoration applications, regardless of outcome. It appears that this is now done.
21.164
The review also showed that 17 out of 35 (i.e. almost half) of the doctors restored to the register had been restored within three years of erasure (seven had been restored within 17 months). Two thirds of doctors restored had been restored within three and a half years of erasure. The Working Group considered the case for recommending an extension of the minimum period of erasure before an application to restore could be made to, say, two years, but decided not to do so.
21.165
The Working Group went on to observe that a
‘perennial problem’
for the PCC had been the difficulty of establishing whether a doctor applying to be restored was fit to practise and, in particular, if his/her skills, knowledge and attitudes were satisfactory. Its members discussed the view held by some that the appropriate way to address that problem was to give the PCC the power to impose conditions on the registration of a doctor who was restored. Those conditions would be lifted only if and when the doctor had demonstrated that s/he was suitable to resume unrestricted practice. In the event, the Working Group decided not to recommend that the PCC should be given such a power. Its unanimous view was that, if the power were available, there would be a real risk that doctors might be restored who were not fit to practise. The report said:
‘There is a danger that a panel might pay insufficient regard to the gravity of the original offence by concentrating on the rehabilitation of the doctor rather than on the overriding public interest. If there is any reasonable doubt about a doctor’s fitness to practise, he or she should simply not be restored. We see this as a fundamentally important point.’
The Working Group therefore recommended that restoration should continue to be
‘all or nothing’
. However, it observed that an alternative way forward was to consider whether the GMC might employ the assessment methods which had been developed for the performance procedures in order to assess the skills, knowledge and attitudes of a doctor wishing to be restored. The Working Group recommended that further work should be done to explore the viability of that proposal.
21.166
In August 2000, the Medical Act 1983 was amended to provide that no application for restoration to the register could be made before the expiration of five years from the date of erasure or within 12 months of an unsuccessful application for restoration. Following a second unsuccessful application for restoration during the same period of erasure, the PCC was given power to direct that the right to make further applications should be suspended indefinitely. Such an order could be reviewed on a three-yearly basis. It seems to me that the case for a performance assessment including a knowledge test is even stronger now than it was in 1999. The competence of any doctor who has been away from practice for five years must be questionable.
21.167
Also in 2000, a new three-stage procedure for determination of applications for restoration to the register was introduced. The first stage required the PCC panel to decide (having regard to the reasons why the doctor’s name was erased from the register, to the application itself, to the doctor’s conduct since erasure and to any representations made to the PCC panel) whether the doctor’s name should be restored to the register, subject to his/her satisfying the PCC panel as to his/her good character, professional competence and health.
21.168
If the panel decided that question in the doctor’s favour, the second stage was for the PCC to decide what assessment the doctor should undergo for the purpose of satisfying the PCC panel as to his/her good character, professional competence and health and to order that the appropriate assessment should be carried out. The third stage of the process was for the PCC panel to consider the assessment report and to decide whether the doctor’s name should be restored to the register. This new procedure seems to me to be a very good idea. I do not know how it is working. Because all erasures since 2000 must operate for at least five years, it may be that relatively few applications for restoration are being made at the present time.
21.169
Until 2000, the minimum period of erasure was extraordinarily short. What sounded like a severe sanction might amount, in effect, to no more than a year’s ‘suspension’. It was certainly not the draconian punishment that the public believed it to be. The new minimum period of five years is, I believe, much more in line with what the public expects when a doctor’s name is erased. However, there must be a possibility, now that erasure means at least five years off the register, that FTP panels will be reluctant to impose it save in the most serious cases.
21.170
The Working Group drew attention to inconsistencies between the approach of different panels to the question of restoration. Panels need standards and criteria if they are to achieve consistency in decision-making. It should be possible to develop such criteria from actual decisions now that reasons are given for decisions. Again, the process should be to weed out inappropriate decisions and ones with inadequate reasons. The remainder should be collated and examined and could form the basis for the preparation of a set of standards and criteria. Reports or summaries of appropriate decisions would also help panel members to ‘get their eye in’.
21.171
The new three-stage procedure for restoration seems an excellent idea. I hope that an assessment will be ordered in all cases. I cannot imagine any case in which it would be appropriate to allow a doctor to return to practice after five years’ absence without requiring him/her to undergo an objective assessment. I can understand why the Working Group advised that restoration must be
‘all or nothing’
and set its face against any period of conditional registration. I wonder whether the same objection would be raised to the proposal that, on restoration to the register, a doctor must have a supervisor or mentor, approved by the GMC, who would be required to give an undertaking to bring to the GMC’s attention any concerns s/he has about the newly restored doctor’s practice, conduct, performance or health. I think that would be a good idea and I would hope that the knowledge that that would happen would not cause FTP panels to lower the threshold for restoration too far.


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO - The General Medical Council's Health Procedures
========================================================================

--- Discussion ---
21.188
It seems to me that there were a number of problems with the old procedures of the PCC. Some of these will or may be rectified under the new procedures. However, others may be perpetuated. I shall mention what appear to me to have been the major difficulties in the past.
Criminal Procedure
21.189
It has long been established that the PCC conducts its proceedings in the style of a criminal trial. The justification for this is that, because there is a possibility that the doctor will be erased from the register, proper safeguards must be provided so as to ensure fairness to the doctor. That is understandable. However, there is another important factor to be taken into account: the protection of the public. In some respects and on some occasions, these two factors are in conflict.
The Discretion to Receive ‘Inadmissible’ Evidence
21.190
In the past, the PCC usually insisted that any facts that the doctor did not admit should be proved by oral evidence. That was so even where the witness had given evidence and been cross-examined by or on behalf of the doctor on another occasion. It was so even though the PCC had a discretion to admit evidence that would not otherwise have been admissible, if satisfied that its
the case
‘makes its reception desirable’
. In the case of Dr JM 04, to which I referred earlier at
paragraphs 21.79-21.84
, the conflict of these two interests was resolved in favour of the doctor and against the interest of protecting patients. Dr JM 04 was facing charges before the PCC in respect of the administration of a gross overdose of diamorphine which had resulted in the patient’s death. He was convicted of manslaughter. Before the PCC hearing, the GMC discovered that the doctor had been the subject of another quite serious complaint, which had been dealt with locally, resulting in a finding of breach of terms of service. The allegation plainly gave rise to a question of SPM. As I have explained, the GMC decided not to take proceedings in respect of the second complaint because the main witness was unwilling to go through her evidence orally for a second time. She had already given evidence once and had been cross-examined during the local procedures. The GMC could have issued a
but decided that it would have been insensitive to do so; it could have sought to persuade the witness to change her mind; it could have invited the PCC panel to receive a record of what had been said at the MSC hearing. It might be that, in the absence of oral evidence, the PCC panel would not have found that the doctor’s conduct was to be criticised in respect of the second incident. So be it. The point is that the GMC did not try; it simply decided not to proceed on the second matter.
21.191
Under the new procedures, FTP panels will have a similar discretion to admit evidence which would not strictly be admissible at a criminal trial. It remains to be seen whether, in future, the GMC will be more ready than it has been in the past to invite panels to use these powers. It seems to me that what is needed is a greater determination to prosecute each case fully, bringing all the facts before the panel and not just those for which oral evidence is readily available.
21.192
During the hearings, I expressed my concern that the PCC always applied the criminal standard of proof when reaching conclusions on the facts. I was concerned that this high standard of proof might not be appropriate in a jurisdiction which had, as its primary purpose, the protection of the public from doctors who are not fit to practise. I had not at that stage noticed (as I have done since) that decisions of the PCC could be taken upon a bare majority of the panel. I had noticed that Miss Jean Ritchie QC, who conducted an Inquiry into the conduct of Rodney Ledward, had recommended that the civil standard of proof should be applied at PCC hearings. Ledward was a gynaecologist who, over the years, carried out a large number of ‘botched’ operations and caused his patients a great deal of harm. He was eventually erased from the medical register in September 1998. As I understand it, Miss Ritchie’s concern was that the public might not be adequately protected by a disciplinary body that could act only if the facts were proved to a very high standard of certainty. I share that concern.
21.193
In the light of Miss Ritchie’s recommendation, in 2000, the GMC held a conference to discuss the advisability of applying a ‘sliding civil standard’ of proof. That would mean that the PCC panel would have had to have been satisfied to a degree of probability that was appropriate to the gravity of the allegations under consideration and the seriousness of the likely sanction. In cases where the allegation amounted to a serious criminal offence, a higher standard of proof would be required than in one where the allegation was one of, say, gross negligence. The conference decided that the PCC should continue to apply the criminal standard of proof in all cases. It was thought that it would not be fair to deprive a doctor of his/her livelihood save on evidence that reached this high standard of proof. Thus, on the face of it, the concept of being fair to the doctor was to be allowed to override the need to protect the public.
21.194
However, the problem is not exactly as I had thought it to be. I had thought that there must have been many cases in which an allegation of SPM failed because the PCC was not satisfied that the facts had been proved to the criminal standard. However, in the course of his evidence to the Inquiry, Sir Donald Irvine said that, in his years on the PCC, he had found that the difficulties and disagreements arose, not over whether the facts were proved to the required standard, but over whether those proven facts constituted SPM. He also said that there was often disagreement on sanction. I found this most surprising. My experience as a judge presiding over jury trials leads me to believe that, when a group of people have to be satisfied of facts to a high standard of proof, there are often difficulties and disagreements. It seems to me that there are three possible explanations for the apparent absence of difficulty as reported by Sir Donald. One is that only cases where the evidence was very clear ever reached the PCC. Another is that the PCC panel was not actually applying the high standard of proof, but a lower standard. Another possibility, which is quite speculative, is that the high standard was being applied but that decisions were sometimes reached, not unanimously, but by a majority; under the GMC’s Rules a bare majority will suffice. As for this last possibility, the fact that a bare majority is enough is, in my view, not inappropriate in a ‘protective jurisdiction’. However, it is strange that the GMC should be so concerned about maintaining the high standard of proof in order to be fair to the doctor, when a finding can be made on the basis of a bare majority. Dealing only with the findings of fact, I would have thought there would have been greater protection for the doctor in requiring all members of the panel to be satisfied to the civil standard as to what the doctor has actually done than in permitting a decision to be made where (assuming a panel of five) three members of the panel were satisfied about a set of facts to the criminal standard but the other two might even think that the doctor had done nothing wrong at all.
21.195
It seems to me that the GMC should reopen its internal discussion about the application of standards of proof and should also consider the question of majority decisions. Good decision-making should, if possible, be unanimous. An attempt should always be made to reach unanimity, and only if it proves impossible should a majority decision be acceptable. In general, in a protective jurisdiction, the civil standard of proof will be appropriate. However, it is certainly arguable that it would be appropriate to retain the criminal standard of proof where the allegation amounts to a serious criminal offence.
A Legally Qualified Chairman
21.196
In her report into the Ledward case, Miss Ritchie recommended that PCC panels should be chaired by a circuit judge or an experienced recorder of the Crown Court. Her thinking was that this would ensure that the proceedings were carried out fairly and independently. It appears to me also that having an experienced lawyer as chairman of the panel would bring greater legal rigour to the determinations than does the advice of a legal assessor. For example, such a chairman would be able to ensure that the panel did not take irrelevant considerations into account and would be able to guide them more closely on such issues as the standard of proof.
21.197
Another advantage of a legally qualified chairman would be that s/he would have many years’ experience of the forensic process and would be far better able to respond appropriately to unexpected occurrences, which do sometimes happen. I have observed from some of the material used to assist PCC panellists and chairmen when sitting that it cannot be assumed that they will have any idea of what should be said or done in certain situations. They are provided with forms of words to use at the various stages of the process. There would be a real advantage, it seems to me, in having chairmen who know, from long experience, what to do and what sort of thing to say at each stage of the process. In future, FTP panels may have to consider a mixed bag of allegations, some relating to misconduct and some relating to deficient performance or even impairment of health. FTP panel hearings may be more complex in future. I fear that FTP panels may find it difficult to sort out what evidence is relevant to what issues and, as they may well have to do, to apply different standards of proof to different aspects of the case. The guidance of a legally qualified chairman would, I think, be invaluable.
21.198
I note that, as recently as May 2003, the GMC was considering the possibility of using a legally qualified chairman in the more complex cases, although this idea now seems to have been abandoned. It seems to me that that would be an eminently sensible way of proceeding. It may be found that the advantages are such that the practice could be extended to all but the most straightforward cases.
The General Medical Council’s Past Inability to Take a Holistic View
21.199
In the past, the GMC was prevented by its own procedures from taking a holistic view of doctors’ problems. A case had to be assigned to either the conduct, health or performance procedures. As the GMC well understands, the human condition does not lend itself to such compartmentalisation and many doctors present with a variety of different problems. I shall not dwell upon this past difficulty because I am optimistic that it will be resolved when the new procedures come into operation very shortly.
The Lack of Standards and Criteria
21.200
I cannot take the same optimistic view for the future as I return to discuss further the need for standards, criteria and thresholds for the operation of the FTP procedures. That they have been needed in the past is clear. Professor Allen advised about this in each of the PSI Reports. Her main concern was that there was no generally agreed perception of what amounted to SPM. In his evidence to the Inquiry, Sir Donald Irvine spoke about the differences of views among professionals on SPM. The same problem existed in relation to the concept of SDP. I have also referred to the view of the PCC Working Group that there was a need for greater consistency in the application of sanctions. Consistency of decision-making is necessary: first, in order to provide an appropriate degree of protection for patients, second, in order to be fair to doctors and third, to enable the GMC to command the confidence of the public and to uphold the reputation of the medical profession.
21.201
In its submission to the Inquiry, the GMC suggested that established standards, criteria and thresholds were neither appropriate nor necessary. They have not been necessary, it says, because the decision-makers of the past were experienced and well-respected members of the medical profession and were all members of the GMC. In essence, it is said, their judgement could be trusted. The GMC also suggests that the panellists of the present and future are and will be selected on merit and trained for the task. All that may be true but they are and will be all individuals and, however conscientious they are, they will reach inconsistent decisions unless guided by established standards, criteria and thresholds. The GMC has also suggested that established standards, criteria and thresholds are not appropriate because they inhibit the freedom of the decision-maker to take account of the individual circumstances of the doctor and the case. That is simply not so. No one is suggesting a mechanistic assessment which will result in cases being put into a specific pigeonhole. What is needed is a framework within which individual circumstances can be taken into account without producing unreasonable decisions. It appears from the DASG report in the first edition of the Fitness to Practice Bulletin, to which I referred in
paragraph 21.150
, that some members of the GMC are beginning to recognise this.
21.202
I am firmly of the view that established standards, criteria and thresholds have been needed in the past and will be needed every bit as much in the future, possibly even more so, because, as I shall explain in
, the tests to be applied under the new procedures are, if anything, more open to personal interpretation than those applied under the old ones. I am also firmly of the view that, if the GMC is to gain the trust and confidence of the public, members of the public and patients’ representatives must be actively involved in the setting of the standards, criteria and thresholds.
21.203
So far as sanctions are concerned, the ISG is clearly helpful and the publication of appropriately detailed case studies would also be useful. However, I do not think that such measures will be sufficient to restore public confidence in the GMC’s willingness and ability to apply appropriate sanctions to erring doctors. I recognise that, in formulating the ISG (and in developing new guidance on specific topics), the GMC does, to some extent, consult with patients’ representative bodies. However, in my view, what is needed is a consensus between the GMC and the public about the range of appropriate sanctions in the types of case that regularly recur. As a model for reaching consensus, I would urge the GMC to examine the operation of the Sentencing Advisory Panel, which provides advice to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) about particular types of case. The Panel comprises members from a wide range of backgrounds: judges, barristers, magistrates, academics and lay people. The Panel also consults more widely when it embarks on the consideration of each new topic. The Panel’s reports advance an agreed view which, by reason of its origin, commands the respect of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) which is, in effect, the standard-setting body for the decision-makers at first instance, the judiciary and magistracy. Such views should also command public confidence. The exercise of consultation enables the criminal justice professionals to understand the public viewpoint and
. It seems to me that this kind of process could easily be adapted so as to provide guidance to the GMC. It may be that a consultative council could be set up under the auspices of the CRHP/CHRE.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY TWO - The General Medical Council's Health Procedures ---
Sources of Reports about a Doctor's Ill Health
The Initial Process for Dealing with Reports about Health
The Voluntary Health Procedures
The Health Committee
The Operation of the Health Procedures
The Future of the Health Procedures

--- Local Procedures for Dealing with Concerns about Doctors' Health ---
22.13
If a doctor is ill and his/her employers or colleagues become aware that his/her illness is or may be affecting his/her fitness to practise, there will usually be some attempt to deal with the matter locally. A hospital trust may use its own occupational health facilities to arrange a medical examination and may then place any necessary restrictions on the doctor’s practice. For a general practitioner (GP) working as an independent contractor, however, the management of a health problem can be more difficult. Until recently, NHS primary care organisations (PCOs) had very limited powers to deal with sick doctors. Their recently acquired list management powers, however, mean that a primary care trust (PCT) is now able to remove or suspend a doctor from its list or to impose conditions on his/her continued inclusion on the list. This should make it possible for the PCT, in an appropriate case, to exert pressure on a doctor to accept medical advice and treatment and to restrict his/her practice as necessary.
22.14
Often, however, a GP’s illness may not be known to his/her PCT. It may be evident only to the other doctors in his/her practice (if any) and/or to his/her treating doctor (if any). Not all doctors have an established relationship with a GP. Some treat themselves. In those circumstances, the problem may not have been recognised at all or, if it has been, there may be attempts to contain the problem privately, without the knowledge or intervention of the PCT. There are various support groups in existence that offer assistance to doctors with health problems, in particular those who are abusing alcohol and drugs.
22.15
In many cases, health problems can be resolved locally, without the involvement of the GMC. There are cases, however, where the doctor lacks insight into his/her condition and/or persists in practising when unfit to do so, thereby putting patients at risk. This is the type of case in which action is required by the GMC. In some cases, a PCT or NHS trust may act in concert with the GMC.

--- Sources of Reports about a Doctor's Ill Health ---
22.16
The fact that a doctor is, or may be, suffering from a physical or mental condition serious enough to impair his/her fitness to practise may be brought to the attention of the GMC in one of a number of ways. It may be reported by a professional colleague of the doctor, by his/her employer or PCT or by a pharmacist, a patient or a member of the public. It might come from the National Clinical Assessment Authority (NCAA) as the result of its undertaking a performance assessment. On occasion, the report may come from the doctor him/herself or from a member of his/her family or his/her treating doctor. Often, the initial information will amount, not to a report, but to an enquiry about whether a report is appropriate. Sometimes, the information will be received by way of notification from the police that the doctor has been convicted of a criminal offence which might indicate the presence of an underlying health problem. The most common examples are drink driving convictions and convictions for drug-related offences. The fact that a doctor is, or may be, unwell may also come to light in the course of consideration of a doctor’s case under the GMC’s conduct or performance procedures.
22.17
The GMC becomes aware of only those cases which are referred to it. It has no means of knowing how many doctors with health problems are being managed locally and with what degree of success. The Inquiry was told that, in recent years, there had seemed to be a much higher level of awareness among members of the medical profession of their duty to report sick colleagues. As a consequence, there has been an increase in referrals to the GMC, together with an increase in enquiries about whether or not a referral should be made.
22.18
Dr Mann said that the usual point of contact for the GMC was the doctor’s partners (if the doctor was a GP) or his/her own GP or treating psychiatrist. There would sometimes be contact with the relevant local medical committee (LMC). It was less usual for a GP’s PCT to get in touch with the GMC. However, she said that medical directors of PCTs had become more involved recently. Dr Mann had had experience of two PCTs using their powers of list management to impose conditions on the inclusion on their lists of doctors who were suffering from health problems. She thought that this was an encouraging development. However, she had some concerns about the capacity of very small, isolated PCTs to deal with doctors’ health problems.

--- The Initial Process for Dealing with Reports about Health ---
22.19
The health procedures were governed successively by the General Medical Council Health Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1980 (the 1980 Health Rules) and the General Medical Council Health Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1987 (the 1987 Health Rules).
The Health Screeners
22.20
Rule 5(2) of the 1987 Health Rules required the GMC to appoint either the President or some other member of the GMC to screen cases which raised a question about a doctor’s health. If the President proposed to sit on the HC, or if for any other reason he did not wish to act as health screener, he was required to nominate another member of the GMC for appointment to the post. The 1987 Health Rules gave the President power to nominate a second member of the GMC to assist in the screening of health cases when, for any reason, the President or the health screener appointed in his stead was unable to act. In fact, an additional health screener had been appointed to assist the President since 1984.
22.21
In 1980, Professor Sir Denis Hill was appointed as screener, both for conduct and health cases. After Sir Denis’ death in May 1982, Dr Philip Connell took over responsibility for screening health (but not conduct) cases. In November 1984, the then President, Sir John (later Lord) Walton, became screener for both conduct and health cases. Sir John was the last President to act as a screener. He was assisted, in relation to health cases, by Dr Connell. In November 1987, Professor Neil Kessel was appointed to give further assistance with the screening of health cases. In February 1989, after the end of Sir John’s Presidency, Dr Connell became the health screener and Professor Kessel was appointed as additional health screener. In 1991, Dr Connell retired as health screener and was replaced by Professor Kessel. Dr Thomas Bewley was appointed as additional health screener. Professor Kessel retired in February 1995 and Dr Bewley took over, with Professor Andrew Sims as additional health screener. On Dr Bewley’s retirement in July 1996, Professor Sims succeeded him, and Dr Mann, then a new member of the GMC, was appointed as additional health screener. In 1999, Professor Sims retired as health screener and Dr Mann succeeded him. Dr Michael Wilson, a GP, was also appointed a health screener at that time. Dr Mann and Dr Wilson remained in post until some time in 2004. In the past, most of the health screeners were consultant psychiatrists. This reflected the fact that most of the doctors dealt with in the health procedures were suffering from psychiatric problems.
22.22
As will now be apparent, there had been relatively few people involved in the screening of health cases from the inception of the health procedures. The system was that the knowledge and experience of each successive health screener was passed to his/her more junior colleague. When Dr Mann was first appointed, she had no formal training for the role. She read the GMC’s literature about the health procedures and received advice from Professor Sims. At first, she assumed responsibility for the cases of doctors who were already in the voluntary health procedures and were under supervision, while Professor Sims dealt with new cases and with those to be referred to the HC. In that fashion, Dr Mann learned what the job of health screener entailed.
22.23
The role of the health screener was to direct action in new cases up to the point when the doctor was placed under medical supervision. The health screeners were then responsible for monitoring the doctor’s progress under supervision. They also directed the preparations for hearings before the HC and for resumed hearings. All decisions that had any bearing on how a health case should be handled were, in the past, taken by a health screener, although the administrative arrangements were undertaken by GMC staff. Under the new FTP procedures, it seems likely that the staff of the Health Section will assume a far greater degree of responsibility for decision-making in health and potential health cases. It seems that the responsibility for many of the decisions on the handling of cases will pass from medically qualified GMC members to staff who, although possibly very experienced, will not be medically qualified. I shall refer to these changes further in
Referral of a Case to the Health Screeners
Referral by the Office Staff
22.24
Rule 6(1) of the 1987 Health Rules provided that:
‘Where information in writing or a complaint in writing is received by the Registrar about any practitioner which raises a question whether the fitness to practise of the practitioner is seriously impaired by reason of his physical or mental condition, the Registrar shall submit the information to the President.’
The functions of the Registrar were, in practice, undertaken by the GMC staff, and those of the President by the health screeners.
22.25
Where the information or complaint (I shall refer to both as ‘information’ for brevity) received by the GMC plainly raised a health issue, it was dealt with by the Health Section. It might be received direct by the Health Section or it might be passed to the Health Section from the Conduct Screening Section. From April 2003, a triage system was in operation, whereby a casework manager would consider any written information received and make an initial assessment. He or she would then make a recommendation as to the appropriate action to be taken and would delegate responsibility for the day-to-day conduct of the case to a caseworker. The casework manager would consider whether the case might warrant the attention of the health screener with a view to referral to the Interim Orders Committee (IOC). He or she would also consider whether the case was a ‘clear cut’ health case or whether it had elements of conduct and/or performance, in which case it might have been appropriate for it to be referred in the first instance to a medical screener for conduct and performance cases. If neither of these courses of action appeared appropriate, the caseworker would prepare the case for submission to a health screener. The health screener would then decide whether the evidence raised a question of possible serious impairment of fitness to practise.
Referral by a Medical Screener
22.26
So far, I have dealt with cases which were immediately identified by the GMC staff as potential health cases. Some cases, however, came to the health screener via a medical screener. If, for example, a doctor had been convicted of a criminal offence, the General Medical Preliminary Proceedings Committee and Professional Conduct Committee (Procedure) Rules Order of Council 1988 as amended (the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules) required that the conviction (unless it was a minor motoring conviction) should be referred to a medical screener appointed to deal with conduct cases. Such a conviction might have a ‘health element’. In a case where there had been no conviction but where there was an allegation of misconduct, it might not be recognised immediately that there was, or might be, a health element in the case. There might be a number of elements to the case, of which health was only one. In all those circumstances, members of the GMC staff would first refer the case to the medical screener, who would then decide how the case should be dealt with.
22.27
Rule 7 of the 1988 Professional Conduct Rules gave the medical screener two options for dealing with a case in which it appeared to him/her that the fitness to practise of a doctor might be seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. The first option was to direct the staff to inform the doctor of the medical screener’s view about the possible impairment of fitness to practise through ill health and to invite the doctor to provide medical evidence for consideration by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC). Dr Mann said that, in practice, such a case would be referred to the health screener, who would arrange for the doctor to be examined by medical examiners from the GMC’s list. (I shall refer to the role and function of such medical examiners later in this Chapter.) It would then be open to the PPC, having considered the medical evidence and received the advice of the health screener, to refer the case to the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) for a disciplinary hearing, or to the health screener for action under the voluntary health procedures or to the HC.
22.28
The second option open to the medical screener was to remit the case to the health screener for action under the 1987 Health Rules as an alternative to referring the case to the PPC. Dr Mann said that this would be done when it appeared to the medical screener preferable that action should be taken under the health, rather than the conduct, procedures. According to the 1999 Guidance, a medical screener could refer a case into the voluntary health procedures without the concurrence of a lay screener, provided that no question of SPM arose. If a question of SPM arose but the medical screener was of the view that it was nevertheless in the public interest that the case should be transferred into the health procedures, this could be done, but only with the concurrence of a lay screener. There was no requirement for the lay screener to agree in a conviction case.
22.29
Dr Mann said that only ‘a very few’ cases reached the health screener by way of the medical screener. She said that, as well as receiving formal referrals, she would sometimes receive informal requests for advice from medical screeners as to whether the doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired because of health and whether it would be appropriate to obtain a medical report before a case was referred to the PPC.
Referral by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee
22.30
, it was common for a health screener to be present at PPC meetings at which conduct cases with a potential health element were considered. Usually, the health screener would advise whether a medical examination of the doctor appeared appropriate. If s/he advised that it did, and if the PPC decided to adopt that course, the health screener would arrange for the doctor to be invited to submit to medical examination and the PPC would adjourn consideration of the case for that purpose. Provided that the doctor agreed, the examination would take place and, if appropriate, the doctor would be invited to give voluntary undertakings. If the doctor agreed to do so, the health screener would report back to the PPC, which would then close the case under the conduct procedures. Referral to the voluntary health procedures formally occurred at the point when the doctor agreed the undertakings. If a doctor failed to co-operate with the examination, or refused to agree undertakings, the case would return to the PPC which would then consider what further action was necessary. The PPC might then refer the case to the PCC or to the HC.
Convictions for Drink Driving Offences
22.31
Until 1995, the PPC did not routinely request that doctors convicted of drink driving offences should be medically examined with a view to ascertaining whether their convictions resulted from addiction to alcohol. Instead, it would request the health screener to arrange a medical examination only in cases where the doctor’s alcohol level had been at least two and a half times in excess of the legal limit or where s/he had a previous drink driving conviction. By 1995, however, there was concern that there might be cases which did not fulfil either of these criteria but where the doctor might nevertheless be suffering from a health problem which would benefit from early intervention. Accordingly, from that time, the PPC adjourned the cases of all doctors who had been convicted of an offence of drink driving so that they could be medically examined. The results of those examinations revealed that some doctors who had been convicted of only one offence of drink driving and whose alcohol levels had been less than two and a half times the legal limit were nevertheless suffering from a seriously impairing condition.
22.32
In 1998, there was a change of procedure whereby the health screener would arrange for a medical examination before the case was considered by the PPC. It seems likely that, if it was clear from the report that the doctor had a health problem, the health screener would invite the doctor to give voluntary undertakings. If the position was not clear, or if the doctor was not willing to give undertakings, the case would be referred back to the PPC for decision.
22.33
Dr Mann said that the majority of doctors convicted of offences of drink driving were found to be fit to practise without restriction. However, about one third were found to have a health problem. Some of these were placed under supervision in the voluntary health procedures.
The Power of the Health Screener to Investigate
22.34
Under rule 6(3) of the 1987 Health Rules, once a case had been referred to him/her, the health screener had power to cause such inquiries to be made as s/he might think fit. Dr Mann said that she would sometimes suggest people whom the staff might contact to obtain information. She might even suggest writing to the doctor him/herself at that stage.
Consideration of a Case by the Health Screener
The Sufficiency of the Evidence
22.35
Dr Mann told the Inquiry that the first question the health screener had to consider was whether there was sufficient evidence that the doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired. She emphasised that there must be sufficient firsthand evidence.
22.36
Sometimes, the person (usually a doctor) who had originally reported the concern to the GMC was unwilling to supply evidence on which GMC action could be based. The relevant information had to be put in writing. In addition, until November 2002, in a case where information about a doctor’s health was received from a private individual, that information would not be submitted to a health screener unless and until a statutory declaration (i.e. a statement confirming the truth of the information, sworn in front of a solicitor or a member of certain other limited classes of person) had been provided. The rule applied even when the information came from a colleague of the doctor or from his/her treating doctor. In November 2002, as I have previously explained, the requirement for a statutory declaration was removed. Dr Mann said that this requirement had caused problems and was ‘quite troublesome’ for some members of the public. She said that she was ‘very glad’ that it had been removed.
22.37
Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, considerable concern was expressed in the Annual Reports of the health screener about the fact that some doctors were reluctant to co-operate by providing the information required by the GMC in the correct form. It seems likely that part of the problem was the requirement for a statutory declaration. The unwillingness of the GMC to carry out its own investigations and to gather evidence itself was no doubt also a factor. However, there seems also to have been a feeling on the part of some doctors that, once they had expressed their concerns to the GMC, they had ‘done their bit’ and they had no obligation to do more. In the 1991 Annual Report of the health screener, this attitude was condemned as
‘a failure of duty both to patients and to the sick doctor’
. Over the years, a significant number of cases were closed because of insufficient evidence.
22.38
The 1999 Evaluation Report revealed that, between 1981 and 1996, 10% of the 771 cases examined by the King’s College team had been closed because the GMC had considered that it had insufficient evidence to warrant instigating the health procedures. Examples were cases where there was no firsthand (as opposed to hearsay) evidence that patient safety was being compromised or where firsthand information was available, but it was not in the correct form. The Report showed that a significantly lower percentage of cases was closed for this reason during the period from 1989 to 1996 than in the earlier period from 1980 to 1988; 14% were closed during the period from 1980 to 1988, compared with 7% in the later period.
22.39
The King’s College team noted that, overall, one third of cases that had been closed owing to insufficient evidence subsequently returned to the GMC with a second health-related referral. The figure for such cases from the period 1989 to 1996 was almost 40%.
22.40
The 1999 Evaluation Report recommended that, once contact had been made by a person concerned about a doctor’s health, the GMC should be more proactive in following up the information (regularly if necessary) until it was sure that the doctor was not a risk to patients. The Report suggested that caseworkers might be sent out to talk to potential referrers about their concerns. It also recommended that more assistance and advice should be made available to potential referrers.
22.41
From the contents of the 1999 Guidance, it seems that the GMC took some steps to implement those recommendations. It appears that advice was given to referrers about making a statutory declaration. Sometimes, the GMC was able to arrange for the colleagues of a doctor who wished to give information about the doctor’s health to the GMC to avoid the need for a statutory declaration by channelling their reports through a hospital authority, a PCO or a LMC. However, informants did not always want to do this and the relevant organisations were sometimes unwilling to assist. In certain cases, referral through the GMC’s solicitors could be arranged or financial assistance made available to a private individual, to enable him/her to make a statutory declaration. A system of following up enquiries about referrals was developed.
22.42
The annual FTP statistics reveal that, from 1996, the percentage of cases closed on the grounds of insufficient evidence fluctuated widely. For example, in 1999, the statistics show that only one out of the 157 health cases referred was closed for this reason. In 2001, however, the figure was 30 out of 181 cases. The figures for 2002 and 2003 were 13 (out of 202 cases) and six (out of 143 cases) respectively. It is not known how many of these cases were later (or will in the future be) followed by a further health-related referral.
22.43
20
21
, relating to the conduct procedures, I discussed the consequences of the GMC’s unwillingness to gather evidence or to investigate complaints proactively until a very late stage in the disciplinary process. I expressed the view that this unwillingness probably resulted in the loss of some cases to the FTP procedures. It would appear that, at times and to some extent, a similar problem affected the health procedures. I had the impression from the evidence of Dr Mann that, once a case had been referred to her, she would instigate investigation. But it might well be that, on occasion, cases were closed for lack of firsthand evidence before they reached the health screener. It appears that the requirement for a statutory declaration was probably the cause of the problem in some cases. The stated justification for requiring a statutory declaration in the conduct procedures was to protect doctors from being harassed by unfounded or malicious complaints. I find it difficult to imagine why such measures should have been thought necessary within the health procedures, which are designed to protect the public and to assist the doctor without punishing him/her. Yet the requirement was retained until 2002.
The Seriousness of the Impairment
22.44
Another consideration for the screener was whether the information received raised a question of ‘serious’ impairment, rather than some mild form of illness. Some of the cases considered by the Inquiry showed that quite difficult issues could arise when the health screeners had to decide whether to ‘accept’ a case and direct a medical examination, or to close it. It does not appear that there has ever been any guidance on these issues. In the past, this probably did not matter, as such decisions were taken by one of two health screeners, who were very experienced. However, for the future, it seems to me that some guidance and criteria will be needed.
The Adequacy of Any Local Action Being Taken
22.45
Rule 6(4) of the 1987 Health Rules stated that, unless it appeared to the health screener that the matter
, s/he should set in motion the initial steps in the health procedures. Dr Mann said that, when considering whether there was a
for a case to proceed further, she was required to look at whether the problem had been, or could be, remedied by local action. Evidence of any actual or potential risk to patients would be a relevant consideration. If a doctor’s problems were being dealt with locally, she would consider whether the doctor was showing insight, whether s/he was accepting advice about treatment and about his/her fitness to practise and whether s/he was taking appropriate treatment and medication. Dr Mann said that, with a GP, the size of his/her practice was relevant. In a group practice, there was more chance of a problem being spotted and of arrangements being made if the doctor became unfit to practise. Dr Mann said that, in an ideal world, she would like to think that local measures would normally be sufficient for a doctor in stable employment. There were, however, problems with doctors who moved around. There was often no place where their problems could be consistently managed. The GMC would usually invite such a doctor to be medically examined. The GMC was in a better position than local organisations to deal with peripatetic doctors since it could organise supervision countrywide and could refer a doctor to the HC if s/he failed to keep in touch with his/her nominated supervisor.
22.46
The 1999 Evaluation Report revealed that, in the period between 1980 and 1996, 7% of cases referred to the health screener had been closed on the grounds that they were being adequately controlled by local measures. Twenty eight per cent of those cases had resulted in a subsequent health-related referral. There were far fewer second referrals (15% compared with 46%) among cases closed between 1989 and 1996 than among those closed between 1980 and 1988. However, the Report pointed out that there had, by 1999, been less time for a recurrence in cases closed more recently.
22.47
The 1999 Evaluation Report recommended that clear criteria and guidelines should be established to assist health screeners in assessing when a case was being controlled adequately by local measures and when GMC intervention was required. It was suggested that, if a case was to continue to be managed locally, a system of periodic monitoring by the GMC was necessary. The 1999 Evaluation Report was the second occasion when an external body had called upon the GMC to establish clear criteria and guidelines for the assistance of decision-makers. I have already mentioned in the Chapters dealing with the conduct procedures that Professor Isobel Allen called for the establishment of clear standards, criteria and thresholds, to be applied by decision-makers when dealing with conduct cases. The 1999 Guidance produced by the GMC included some sample cases to illustrate the type of problem that could be managed locally and the kind of case that should be referred to the GMC. Although the GMC maintained that the 1999 Guidance set out criteria, it does not seem to me that it did. The sample cases were no doubt helpful but they did not establish criteria for the health screeners to apply.
22.48
Following receipt of the 1999 Evaluation Report, the Health Section developed a system whereby it would follow up the case of a doctor who was being dealt with locally to ascertain that all was well. The follow-up might take place after two, four, or six months, depending on the seriousness of the case and how robust the local procedures were thought to be. Sometimes, there would be regular follow-up over a long period.
Referral to or Consultation with a Medical Screener
22.49
Dr Mann said that, if there was a conduct or performance aspect to a case which was referred directly to her as a health screener, she would refer the case to a medical screener. She might at the same time set the health procedures in motion by asking the staff to write to the doctor. In some cases, there was a dialogue (either face to face or on paper) between the medical and health screeners as to how a case should best be dealt with.
Interim Action
22.50
After the IOC was established in August 2000, it was also open to the health screener, in an appropriate case, to refer a doctor to that Committee. Before that time, the health screener had power to refer a case to the PPC for consideration of the making of an interim order, but only where a decision had already been made to refer the case to the HC and where the health screener thought that it might be desirable for an interim order to be made pending the HC’s consideration of the case. If the case was referred to the PPC for the purpose of an interim order, it was not open to the PPC to refer the doctor to the PCC; it could only proceed to the HC.
22.51
Dr Mann said that she had been ‘extremely grateful’ for the establishment of the IOC. Before it came into being, there was sometimes nothing she could do about doctors who were seriously ill, usually with psychotic disorders, but still in practice. Presumably, these were cases in which it was not appropriate for the doctor to be referred to the HC because s/he had not yet declined to co-operate with the voluntary procedures. I have observed, in connection with the conduct procedures, that it is surprising that, until 2000, the GMC took no steps to obtain comprehensive powers to make interim orders for the protection of the public. There must have been many cases in which the power would and should have been used. Yet it does not appear that the need for it was recognised until it was found that the GMC could do nothing to stop Shipman from practising although he was under investigation for murdering patients. From Dr Mann’s evidence, it appears that there was also a need for a flexible power to make interim orders in health cases. One would have thought that the GMC would have recognised this
in its powers before it did.
The Invitation to Undergo Medical Examination
22.52
If the health screener decided that the case should proceed, s/he was then required to direct the GMC staff to write to the doctor, notifying him/her that information had been received by the GMC which appeared to raise a question whether his/her fitness to practise was seriously impaired and indicating the nature of the alleged impairing condition. Dr Mann said that, sometimes, it was impossible to identify the impairing condition at that stage and it was necessary to use some general term of description such as ‘substance misuse’. The doctor would be invited to submit to examination by at least two medical examiners, to be chosen by the health screener, and to agree that such examiners should provide reports on his/her fitness to practise. The 1987 Health Rules allowed the doctor 14 days in which to respond to the invitation.
Medical Examiners Chosen by the General Medical Council
22.53
Medical examiners were chosen by the health screener from lists of doctors nominated for the purpose by professional organisations, including the medical Royal Colleges (primarily the Royal College of Psychiatrists) and various committees of the British Medical Association. They were usually of considerable seniority. The most common specialty from which medical examiners were drawn was psychiatry. Dr Mann said that the health screeners tried very hard to identify examiners who were appropriate for the particular condition suffered by the doctor. Cases of alcohol and drug addiction were dealt with by consultant psychiatrists, usually specialists in substance abuse. Examinations would take place in the doctor’s locality wherever possible.
Medical Examiners Nominated by the Doctor
22.54
Under the original procedure set out in rule 6(3)(c) of the 1980 Health Rules, the doctor was also informed that it was open to him/her to nominate other medical practitioners to examine him/her and to report to the health screener on his/her fitness to practise. These reports would be prepared at the GMC’s expense. In November 2002, the rule was changed to remove the right of a doctor to nominate other medical practitioners to examine him/her. Dr Mann said that the right had not been exercised to any great extent. She was not sure why it had been removed. She said that, in fact, it was still open to a doctor to nominate a medical examiner if s/he wished to do so. However, the GMC would not pay for the report.
Other Information Submitted by the Doctor
22.55
In addition, at the same time as s/he was invited to submit to medical examination, the doctor was invited to provide any submissions or to provide other evidence which s/he might wish to offer as to his/her fitness to practise. From November 2002, the Rules specifically provided that such
‘other evidence’
might include medical evidence. Even before that time, however, it was not unusual for the doctor to submit medical evidence to the GMC at this point in the process or, if the doctor was aware at the time of his/her referral to the GMC that s/he had been referred, even earlier. The medical evidence submitted by the doctor might consist, in a conviction case, of reports that had been prepared for the previous court hearing. Alternatively, it might consist of a report from a treating psychiatrist, or from the doctor’s GP. Dr Mann estimated that doctors produced medical evidence of their own in about a quarter of cases. She said that such evidence was taken into account by the health screeners. However, she told the Inquiry that, unless there was clear evidence that the doctor’s fitness to practise was not seriously impaired and that patients were not at risk, the doctor would be invited to undergo examination by examiners who had been chosen by the GMC, even if s/he had produced medical evidence of his/her own. The examiners chosen by the GMC would be familiar with the GMC’s requirements for the content of an examination report and would also provide objective assessments. She said that there had been occasions when a doctor had produced a report from a medical practitioner who was on the GMC’s list of medical examiners and where the GMC had accepted and acted on that evidence. In general, however, the GMC would want to obtain two independent reports.
Reports of Previous Medical Examinations
22.56
The information originally received by the GMC, notifying it of concerns about a doctor’s health, might include reports written by medical practitioners who had recently examined the doctor. The doctor might, for example, have undergone a medical examination arranged by his/her employers, who might have forwarded the report to the GMC.
22.57
Rule 6(4)(b)(ii) of the 1987 Health Rules provided that, in those circumstances, and if it appeared to the health screener that those reports afforded sufficient medical evidence that the doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition, the health screener should direct the staff to inform the doctor of that fact. In that event, the invitation to the doctor to submit to a medical examination would be dispensed with. Until November 2002, it was still open to the doctor, in these circumstances, to nominate his/her chosen practitioners to examine him/her and to prepare reports at the GMC’s expense, in addition to those submitted by the person or body who made the original referral.
Disclosure of Information to the Doctor
22.58
Rule 6(5) of the 1987 Health Rules provided that the health screener might direct the staff to send to the doctor, at the same time as notification that information about his/her health had been received, a summary of that information, together with copies of any reports from medical practitioners who had recently examined the doctor. This was routinely done. If the health screener considered that there was any material in the reports which was not relevant to the doctor’s current fitness to practise, or which it would not be in the doctor’s best interests to see, the Rules made it possible for that material to be excluded from the documents sent to the doctor. However, any material excluded in that way could not subsequently be put before the PPC or the HC.
22.59
Dr Mann said that she could not remember an occasion when evidence had been excluded under this provision. She thought that there was more openness now as regards the disclosure to patients of information about their condition than there had been when the Rules were originally drafted.
Warning the Doctor about the Consequences of a Refusal to Submit to Examination
22.60
Rule 6(4)(e) of the 1987 Health Rules introduced a new requirement, namely that the doctor should be informed that, if s/he refused to be examined, or if, having agreed, s/he subsequently failed to submit to medical examination, or if s/he did not reply within 28 days to the GMC’s communication, his/her case might be referred to the HC. This provision was presumably added with a view to providing additional encouragement to the doctor to give a positive and timely response to the invitation to submit to medical examination.
Disclosure to the Doctor’s Employer or Primary Care Organisation
22.61
By section 35(B) of the 1983 Act, which was inserted in August 2000, the GMC was required to disclose to any person in the UK by whom a doctor was employed to provide medical services, or with whom s/he had an arrangement to do so, the fact that the doctor was undergoing an investigation to determine whether his/her fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. The disclosure had to be made as soon as was reasonably practicable after the doctor had been invited to agree to submit to medical examination or had been notified that medical reports already received by the GMC appeared to provide evidence that his/her fitness to practise might be seriously impaired. Disclosure would therefore be made to a GP’s PCO. Before the duty to disclosure existed, it was possible for a doctor's employer or PCO (particularly the latter) not to be aware that a doctor was being dealt with in the voluntary health procedures. It is not clear to me whether disclosure should also have been made, as a matter of course, to other members of his/her practice. In fact, it seems to me that a GP’s partners might well be persons with whom the doctor has an arrangement to provide medical services. I would have thought a general practice partnership agreement would come within that rather wide provision. In any event, the GMC would have had the power to make disclosure to members of the practice under section 35(B)(2) on public interest grounds. However, it appears that the GMC does not, as a rule, inform the partners that the GP is undergoing investigation. In practice, a partner or employer or PCO will often have referred the case to the GMC and so will be fully aware of the situation. However, they may be unaware of a referral by a member of the public, a colleague of the doctor, or a treating medical practitioner.
22.62
Dr Mann observed that the duty to disclose had been a considerable improvement as far as employers and PCOs were concerned. However, she said that she would prefer the contact to be at local level (i.e. the doctor informing his/her employers or PCO about a health problem), rather than the GMC ‘sending down information from on high’. She believed that ‘the best way of ensuring that doctors remain fit to practise is that there is understanding of their needs and that they in turn are honest with their employer’.
22.63
I agree that open discussion of the matter between a doctor and his/her employer or PCO is greatly preferable to the employer or PCO being informed by a third party of the doctor’s problems. Nevertheless, in some cases, the nature of the doctor’s illness - together with concerns about its possible effects on his/her career - will inevitably mean that this will not happen. Disclosure by the GMC does at least mean that employers and PCOs can be aware of the problem at an early stage in the GMC’s proceedings and can take whatever steps they deem necessary to support the doctor and to safeguard patients. It seems to me highly desirable also that other members of a GP's practice should be fully aware of any report of health problems made to the GMC.
The Arrangements for Medical Examination
22.64
Rule 7 of the 1987 Health Rules provided that, if the doctor agreed to submit to examination by medical examiners nominated by the GMC, the Registrar (in practice, the GMC staff) would make arrangements for the examinations to take place. The medical examiners were to be sent the information received by the GMC and were to be asked to report, first, on the fitness of the doctor to engage in practice, either generally or on a limited basis, and, second, on their recommendations, if any, as to the management of his/her case. While the GMC would be responsible for arranging the medical examination in principle, practical details such as time and place had to be agreed between the doctor and the medical examiner. Problems could occur at this stage if the doctor failed to co-operate or to attend for appointments.
22.65
When preparing their reports, medical examiners were asked to contact the doctor’s GP and any other treating doctor. They were encouraged to interview an additional informant, such as the doctor’s spouse, a family member or a friend. This was not always possible; it might be that no one was available, or that the doctor would not consent to such an interview. Dr Mann said that the examination followed very much the pattern of an examination by a doctor of a new patient. However, the examiner’s attention was also directed to matters such as the risk to patients, the doctor’s fitness to practise and whether there was a serious impairment present. In a case involving the abuse of drugs, one of the medical examiners would carry out objective testing for the presence of drugs. The medical examiners would liaise between themselves to arrange how and by whom this should be done. The examiners did not normally see each other’s reports.
Acting on the Medical Evidence
The Content of the Medical Reports
22.66
Once completed, the reports of the medical examinations were forwarded to the GMC for consideration. In addition to the elements usually contained within a medical report, the medical examiners would set out their recommendations about such matters as the need for medical supervision, treatment and support. They would also, in an appropriate case, recommend what limitations should be imposed on the doctor’s practice. They might recommend that the doctor should cease practice for a period.
22.67
The 1999 Evaluation Report emphasised the need for GMC examiners, when reaching their conclusions about fitness to practise and when making their recommendations, to balance the interests of the individual doctor and the wider patient population. The impression of the King’s College team was that, on occasion, the perceived effects for the doctor might have been given
‘undue weight’
by examiners. If this impression was correct, it is worrying, because the primary objective of the health procedures must be to protect patients.
Disclosure of the Medical Reports to the Doctor
22.68
Rule 8 of the 1987 Health Rules required the health screener, when the reports of any medical examinations were available, to arrange for copies to be sent to the doctor concerned. It was open to the health screener to delete from the reports of the medical examiners chosen by the GMC any material which s/he considered irrelevant or not in the doctor’s best interest to see, subject to the fact that the material would then be excluded from subsequent consideration by the PPC, the HC or the IOC. However, during the period up to November 2002, when it was still open to the doctor him/herself to nominate medical practitioners to examine him/her and to report, the health screener could not delete any material from reports prepared by the examiners nominated by the doctor. Dr Mann said that, when material was deleted from the reports of medical examinations, the deletions would ‘nearly always’ relate to information provided to the medical examiners by third parties.
No Serious Impairment of Health
22.69
The medical examiners might agree that there was no serious impairment of the doctor’s fitness to practise. This happened most commonly in cases where the medical examination had taken place following a doctor’s conviction for a drink driving offence. It was not a common outcome in other types of case. When it happened, the health screener could take no further action and the case would usually be concluded. The exception was where the case had been referred for a medical examination from the conduct or performance procedures, when those procedures might resume.

--- The Voluntary Health Procedures ---
Where the Medical Examiners Agreed that a Doctor Was Unfit to Practise or Unfit to Practise without Conditions
22.70
The most common outcome of a medical examination was a finding that the doctor was fit to practise, subject to restrictions and conditions recommended by the medical examiners. Rule 8 of the 1987 Health Rules provided that, in a case where the medical examiners were unanimous in their view that the doctor was not fit to practise except on a limited basis or under medical supervision or both, the health screener should direct the staff to seek the doctor’s agreement to undertake voluntarily to comply with the recommendations contained in the reports as to the management of his/her case, including any limitations on his/her practice which might have been recommended. If the doctor was not considered by the medical examiners to be fit to practise, even on a limited basis, s/he would be asked to undertake to refrain from practice altogether.
22.71
Undertakings were of two kinds. The first kind comprised those that related to the medical treatment of the doctor’s condition. Undertakings of this kind might be to abstain from alcohol or to comply with tests for the presence of alcohol and other drugs. The second kind related to the doctor’s practice. These might include an undertaking not to perform any work as a locum or deputy or for a deputising service, or even an undertaking to refrain from practice altogether. In formulating the undertakings, the health screener would confine him/herself broadly to the contents of the examiners’ reports, but might add other undertakings as appropriate. The terms of the undertakings were usually derived from a list of ‘standard undertakings’ which had been developed by the GMC over time. They would be adapted as necessary to suit individual circumstances.
22.72
The 1980 Health Rules made no formal provision for the medical supervision of a doctor within the voluntary health procedures. From the first, however, medical supervision was one of the most important components of the voluntary health procedures and doctors were required to undertake to accept and co-operate with medical supervision. This remained a standard undertaking which was compulsory. Other compulsory undertakings were agreement (in a case of substance misuse) to undergo testing of samples of breath, blood, urine or hair for the presence of alcohol or drugs, and to allow the exchange of information between the medical supervisor and someone in the doctor’s workplace. If the doctor was not prepared to give one of the compulsory undertakings, his/her case would be referred to the HC. Dr Mann said that, if a doctor was working, it was normal to include a requirement that s/he should seek the prior approval of his/her supervisor before taking up a new post and should cease working immediately if so advised. She said that it was also important to ensure that the doctor was registered with a GP and that the medical supervisor was in a position to exchange information with that GP. Dr Mann said that there was sometimes some ‘negotiation’ over certain undertakings. However, she observed that the overriding concern was the protection of the public. Dr Mann said that the health screeners would often require an undertaking that GPs with health problems did not work in single-handed practice, but instead worked in a group or partnership arrangement.
22.73
From about 1997, it was compulsory for a doctor entering the voluntary health procedures to agree that undertakings relating to his/her practice could be disclosed to his/her employers and to anyone seeking information about his/her registration status. If s/he did not agree to such disclosure, his/her case would be referred to the HC. There was no requirement for undertakings relating to the doctor’s medical treatment to be disclosed and they were regarded as confidential. The purpose of the requirement for disclosure was to place doctors in the voluntary health procedures on a par with those who had been referred to the HC, and to ensure that members of the public and employers had access to the same information about both. All doctors who were already in the voluntary health procedures were asked to agree to disclosure. The disclosure, to employers and to members of the public making enquiry, of undertakings relating to the doctor’s practice is useful but it does not provide a complete picture. The letter of disclosure, examples of which the Inquiry has seen, might well leave an employer puzzled as to the nature of the doctor’s problem. However, as Dr Mann observed, it would be open to an employer to contact the person instructed to act as the doctor’s supervisor, although s/he would be able to disclose more information only with the doctor’s consent. It is, perhaps, more likely that an employer would speak directly to the doctor and insist that, if the doctor was to remain at work, full details of the problem must be disclosed.
22.74
Mr Howes said that he believed that, towards the end of his time in the Health Section in 2001, the GMC would have kept a doctor’s employers or PCO informed about progress and about undertakings relevant to practice. However, the GMC would not have notified a GP’s professional partners. He believed that the GMC would have relied on the medical supervisor to keep the doctor’s partners aware of what was happening. He pointed out that the partners might have been the original informants, in which case they would be well aware of the circumstances. Mr Howes observed, ‘By the time I left this work, our policy was to make sure that everybody who needed to know, knew - everyone who had a proper interest in knowing, knew.’
22.75
The 1987 Health Rules made it possible for the first time to invite a doctor to give an undertaking in circumstances where s/he had recovered from a recurring or episodic physical or mental condition which was in remission at the time of the examination, but which might, in the future, be expected adversely to affect his/her fitness to practise.
Where the Medical Examiners Disagreed
22.76
In a case where the medical examiners did not report unanimously, the health screener had to decide what arrangements for the management of the doctor’s case (including limitations on his/her practice) were appropriate
‘in the light of the balance of opinion in the reports’
. The doctor would then be invited to undertake to comply with those arrangements.
22.77
Dr Mann said that, on occasion, one medical examiner would say that a doctor was fit to practise and the other would say that s/he was not fit to practise. In those circumstances, she would ‘err on the side of caution’ and draft undertakings based on the report of the medical examiner who had expressed the view that the doctor was unfit to practise, hoping that the doctor would agree to them. If one medical practitioner recommended that the terms of the undertakings should be stricter than did the other, she would usually invite the doctor to agree to the stricter undertakings, with the possibility of a relaxation of their terms in time, if the doctor progressed satisfactorily.
The Doctor’s Response
Where the Doctor Gave Undertakings
22.78
If the doctor undertook to comply with the recommendations contained in the medical reports (or, where the medical reports were not unanimous, with those proposed by the health screener), the health screener might then, if satisfied that the undertakings were being observed, postpone further action on the case. The doctor was then in the voluntary health procedures. Once the doctor was within the voluntary health procedures, his/her case could not be referred back into the conduct or performance procedures.
Where the Doctor Declined to Co-operate
22.79
If the doctor did not agree to give undertakings, or failed to respond within the specified period, or if s/he refused or failed to comply with a medical examination by the medical examiners appointed by the GMC, the health screener might, if s/he thought fit, refer the case to the HC. In practice, few doctors declined to co-operate at this stage.
22.80
Until November 2002, there was an additional element to the process. Before making a referral to the HC, the health screener was required to consult with at least two other members of the GMC. The GMC maintained a panel of six members (‘the panel of six’) who were appointed for this purpose. Members of the panel (who could not also be members of the HC) were appointed by the President with the approval of the Council. Their views were not necessarily determinative of the health screener’s decision whether to refer a case to the HC, but the health screener was required to take account of those views in reaching his/her decision. If, however, the health screener considered that, in the public interest, it was urgent that the case should be referred to the HC, s/he had the power to give a provisional direction to that effect before consulting the other members.
22.81
Dr Mann said that consultation with the panel of six caused something of a delay. It did enable a health screener to get another opinion on the case, which was helpful. On the whole, however, it did not add anything to the procedures. The original purpose of the requirement to consult other members of the GMC had been, she said, to protect doctors against screeners who, the profession feared, would want to refer every case to the HC. In the event, the fears of the profession had not been justified. The panel of six was abolished in November 2002.
Where the Doctor Was Unfit to Give Undertakings
22.82
In some cases, the medical reports might reveal that the doctor was suffering from a condition (usually a psychiatric condition) which meant that s/he was not fit to give undertakings or could not be relied upon to comply with undertakings, even if given. In such a case, it was open to the health screener to refer the case to the HC without first seeking undertakings from the doctor.
Delays in Bringing Doctors under Supervision
22.83
The 1999 Evaluation Report expressed concern about the time taken from a report about a doctor’s health being received by the Health Section to the point when the doctor was placed under supervision. During the period from 1989 until 1996, it took a mean time of almost 50 weeks. Forty per cent of the doctors who were subsequently found to be unfit to practise unsupervised and unrestricted were known to be working at the time of referral. Some of those doctors were receiving treatment and might have been voluntarily restricting their practice, but many might not. The delay in bringing those doctors under supervision represented an obvious risk to patient safety. Until August 2000, however, when the IOC was established, the health screener had no power to refer a case to the PPC for the making of an interim order unless and until the decision had been taken to refer a doctor to the HC. That could not be done unless there was evidence of failure to co-operate or non-compliance by the doctor.
22.84
The 1999 Evaluation Report identified a number of factors that had contributed to the delays. In the initial stages, there was sometimes a need to await the outcome of police investigations or court proceedings. Another factor was the time taken by some people who reported doctors to the GMC to provide the information required of them. A third factor was the time taken by doctors to respond to communications from the GMC.
22.85
The King’s College team observed that, in some of the 40 sample cases which it examined in depth, the GMC had taken positive action to obtain information, sometimes by instructing its solicitors to investigate. However, in other cases, the GMC had waited for a complainant to make contact, rather than actively following up the complaint. Even when the GMC took positive action, this took a long time. The time permitted by the 1987 Health Rules for doctors to agree to examination (14 days) and to respond to the reports of the medical examiners (28 days) also slowed down the process. This was a matter which had been mentioned in the Annual Reports of the health screener as early as 1982. The 1999 Evaluation Report described how, on occasion, the GMC had delayed in appointing examiners and in dealing with problems which had arisen between examiners and doctors. Doctors had sometimes failed to respond promptly and had missed appointments. In four of the 40 cases, the reports of the medical examiners had not been received for as long as three to six months after the examination. There had also been difficulties and delays in appointing medical supervisors.
22.86
The 1999 Evaluation Report pointed out that doctors were free to practise during the period of referral into medical supervision and that patients might therefore be at risk during that time. It recommended that the GMC should introduce a computerised system for processing complaints and for recording the progress of each case through the health procedures. It also recommended that the GMC should follow up the initiation of the arrangements between doctors and examiners to ensure that appointments had been made and examinations had taken place. Examiners who exceeded the target times for submitting reports should be followed up. Also, if an examiner failed to provide requested information s/he should be required to do so. If the GMC found that an examiner persistently failed to meet target times or to provide required information, the use of that examiner should be discontinued. The GMC should monitor the quality of supervision provided and should replace a supervisor where supervision was poor.
22.87
In response to this Report, in July 2000, the GMC introduced service standards, which effectively tackled the problems of delay. These standards were updated in April 2003. The 2003 standards allowed about one month for screening, two months for examinations and two months for decisions to be taken. By then, either the doctor would have accepted voluntary undertakings or s/he would have been referred to the HC. Thus, within five months of receipt, a health case should either have been closed or action would have been taken. In December 2003, the GMC achieved this target in 86% of cases, just short of the target of 90% which it had set for itself. In the event that patients were thought to be at risk, there was the option of referring the case to the IOC. The 2003 service standards required all cases referred to the IOC to be heard within one month. These service standards had the effect of substantially ‘tightening up’ the health procedures.
Supervision of Doctors in the Voluntary Health Procedures
22.88
As I have said, the 1980 Health Rules contained no specific provision for the supervision of doctors who had entered the voluntary health procedures. In practice, however, doctors entering the voluntary health procedures were always required to undertake to accept medical supervision. Rule 9 of the 1987 Health Rules formalised this practice. It gave the health screener power, in a case which was being dealt with under the voluntary health procedures, to request one or more medical practitioners to supervise the management of the doctor’s case and to report if necessary on the doctor’s observance of his/her undertakings and on his/her fitness to practise. The purpose of this supervision was to satisfy the health screener that the doctor was observing his/her undertakings.
22.89
The health screener would select a suitable medical practitioner to supervise the doctor. The medical supervisor might be one of the practitioners who had examined the doctor on behalf of the GMC. He or she might be a practitioner who was already treating the doctor. The role of the medical supervisor was to monitor the doctor’s progress and fitness to practise and to report to the GMC. The medical supervisor was also required to ensure that the doctor was getting the support and treatment necessary to assist his/her recovery. The supervisor also had to ascertain whether the doctor was complying with his/her undertakings; s/he did this by carrying out tests for the presence of alcohol and drugs and by collecting information from independent informants and other treating doctors. The frequency of contact between the doctor and his/her medical supervisor was a matter for the supervisor him/herself.
22.90
If the doctor was continuing to practise, the GMC would require a professional supervisor to be appointed. The professional supervisor was selected by the doctor (in consultation, if applicable, with his/her employer). The GMC did not dictate who should fulfil this role. It was to be someone in a senior position who had personal experience of the doctor’s work. If the doctor was a GP, it could be the senior partner of the GP practice in which the doctor worked. Dr Mann said that it was easier to get objective feedback if a doctor was working in an organisation or in a hospital, because the doctor would be coming into contact with more people. If s/he was a GP, it was necessary to rely on partners, who might have mixed feelings about the doctor practising, or on a colleague in an organisation such as a LMC or PCT. That person would be working at a distance and would not have the same personal contact with the doctor. Dr Mann said that, if someone within a GP practice was willing to give information about the doctor’s progress, the information which s/he was able to give was likely to be valuable, since it would be based on close contact with the doctor.
22.91
It seems to me that the difficulty of obtaining reliable information about the doctor’s work represented a weakness in the old health procedures. The health screener really did need to have personal contact with someone who saw the doctor regularly. The screener needed to have some ‘feel’ for the level of concern which there was about the doctor’s practice. I can understand why the health screeners did not establish personal contact with the doctor under supervision; they needed to remain at arm’s length. However, the screeners did need a source of information close to the doctor and this was not always available.
22.92
In a case of substance abuse, the medical supervisor was expected to report to the GMC any lapse in the doctor’s behaviour which might affect his/her fitness to practise. The GMC would request progress reports. Dr Mann said that the first report was usually requested three to six months after the doctor was put under supervision. A second report was requested after a further period of about six months. Thereafter, the timing was variable according to circumstances and the recommendations of the medical supervisor. Sometimes, the GMC would receive an unsolicited report from a medical supervisor. This might give news of a change for the worse, but would sometimes inform the GMC of a change for the better and would suggest that the doctor’s undertakings should be relaxed. When the GMC requested a progress report, its letter of request would include a list of questions to be answered and the supervisor would be asked to collect information from various sources and to include that information in his/her report. The supervisor would also be asked for his/her views about whether the GMC should conclude the case, or whether the doctor required further monitoring.
22.93
Health screeners had no personal contact with the doctor concerned and were entirely reliant on the medical supervisors to keep in regular contact with the doctor, to collect information about him/her and to be rigorous in carrying out objective testing, where appropriate, for alcohol or drugs. The availability of testing of hair (which can reveal the presence of opiates as long as three months after ingestion) and the carrying out of random tests were, according to Dr Mann, valuable tools in the supervisory process. Usually, there would be no direct communication between the health screener and the professional supervisor. The latter would provide information to the medical supervisor.
22.94
Dr Mann emphasised that the role of the medical supervisor was an onerous, although rewarding, one. It involved a great deal of responsibility, both to the public and to the profession. It was not well paid. Dr Mann said that many medical practitioners regarded it as their duty to contribute to the wellbeing of the profession by acting as GMC supervisors. However, some doctors found it difficult to treat other doctors.
The Treating Doctor as Medical Supervisor
22.95
The 1999 Evaluation Report expressed concern about the fact that, in 22 out of the 40 cases in which the reports of medical supervisors were examined, the supervisor had been a practitioner who was already treating the doctor. The Report observed that this duality of roles increased the difficulty for a medical supervisor in balancing the interests of the doctor and of the wider patient population. It recommended that, save in exceptional circumstances, the GMC should not appoint a treating doctor as the medical supervisor.
22.96
Dr Mann said that most cases in the voluntary health procedures involved mental illness, alcoholism, drug abuse or a combination of more than one of these features. Usually, therefore, the medical supervisors would be psychiatrists. In general, the health screeners would try to appoint a medical supervisor who was not the treating psychiatrist. However, the position was rather different with cases of substance misuse. Dr Mann said that there had been much debate about the advantages and disadvantages of combining the roles of treating psychiatrist and medical supervisor in cases of substance misuse. The problem with combining the two roles was that the psychiatrist might be subject to a conflict of loyalties, as between the doctor, the GMC and the public. It might be difficult to cope with that conflict. The second problem was the feeling that a medical supervisor who was also the treating psychiatrist might not be truly independent.
22.97
Dr Mann explained that, on the other hand, there were distinct advantages in combining the two roles. First, there were comparatively few practitioners who specialised in substance misuse. General psychiatrists often lacked the necessary expertise and were not able to offer the same help and support to sick doctors, whether as treating psychiatrist or as supervisor. If the doctor was already receiving treatment from an expert in substance misuse, it was less wasteful of resources, and might be more beneficial to the doctor, to appoint that person as supervisor also. A second reason for combining the two roles was to ensure that all the information which should be communicated to the GMC was known to the supervisor. As I have explained, the medical supervisor was expected to report to the GMC any lapse in the doctor’s behaviour of which s/he was aware. If the supervisor was not the treating doctor, s/he would be reliant upon the treating doctor to pass on information about, for example, a return by the doctor to taking alcohol or drugs. Dr Mann said that it was easier for one person to have ‘all the reins in their hands’. Conversely, there could be a problem if the doctor under supervision did not confide fully in his/her treating doctor because that doctor also took a supervising role. I suspect that there is no perfect answer to this problem.
Problems with Medical Supervisors’ Reports
22.98
I have explained that the King’s College team examined a sample of reports submitted to the GMC by medical supervisors in the cases of 40 doctors who had been placed under medical supervision in the period 1989 to 1996. The 1999 Evaluation Report pointed out that the supervisors’ progress reports were the GMC’s principal source of information about the doctor’s fitness to practise.
22.99
Delay was one feature noted by the King’s College team. In 16 out of the 40 cases, one or more reports was explicitly described in the case notes as being late or having been the subject of repeated requests that it should be provided. In 18 cases, the first progress report was received more than two months after the time for which it had been requested. Delays had been caused by doctors failing to make arrangements with supervisors, by the time taken to obtain information from independent informants and by the time taken by supervisors in responding to requests for reports. There were also significant delays in the provision of subsequent progress reports. Because of the long intervals between reports, three out of the 40 cases had been concluded after only two reports from the medical supervisor had been received. In one case, no reports at all had been received.
22.100
In 16 of the 40 cases, significant information was missing from the supervisor’s report. This mainly related to the doctor’s fitness to practise, often because of a lack of information from an independent person about the doctor’s performance of his/her professional practice. Sometimes, supervisors were reluctant to approach the doctor’s colleagues. In some cases, there were no results of tests for the presence of alcohol or drugs, often because the supervisor was reluctant to conduct random testing. One supervisor observed that s/he did not wish to
‘act like a detective’
. Missing information was sometimes recorded in later reports, but this might be as long as 9 to 16 months later. Sometimes, it was never provided. One case was concluded after three years without the results of any testing having been received. The supervisor had repeatedly claimed that he was
‘working on an arrangement to carry out random testing’
. In a few cases where the relevant information was not available, the GMC had varied the doctor’s undertakings in an attempt to prevent risk to patients. Three of the sample cases had been closed without receipt of the requested information to support a conclusion that the doctor was fit to practise.
22.101
In 11 out of the 40 cases, the file disclosed dissatisfaction on the part of the health screener with the medical supervisor’s management of the doctor under supervision. There were references to problems with the content and timeliness of reports, to the supervisor’s failure to enforce the restrictions on the doctor’s practice and to breakdowns of communication or loss of contact between supervisors and doctors. In six of the 11 cases, the issue was an isolated incident, which was resolved. However, in five cases, there was more enduring concern or criticism. A change of supervisor was often considered in cases where there was dissatisfaction with the existing regime. However, no change was implemented in any case. The reason for this was sometimes the practical difficulties involved in finding a replacement supervisor. However, arguments presented by the supervisor and the doctor about the benefits of their continuing therapeutic relationship were often accepted as reasons for continuing an otherwise unsatisfactory supervisory relationship.
22.102
The 1999 Evaluation Report recommended that the GMC should actively pursue information which was not provided in supervisors’ reports and should reach clear agreements with supervisors about the undertaking of testing for alcohol and drugs. It also recommended that greater emphasis should be given to monitoring the quality of supervision and to replacing a supervisor who did not comply with the GMC’s requirements.
22.103
Mr Howes said that, in the early days of the health procedures, there was considerable reluctance on the part of medical supervisors to subject doctors to random drug testing for alcohol and other drugs. He said it ‘went against the grain’ for doctors to impose such procedures on their patients. There was also a degree of scepticism about the usefulness of such tests. More recently, however, the GMC had become much firmer with supervisors. If they did not co-operate, they were no longer used. Dr Mann agreed that the GMC was now much more rigorous in the requirements it made of supervisors. All supervisors in cases of substance abuse were required to ensure that objective testing for the presence of alcohol and other drugs was carried out periodically and to provide the GMC with the results of those tests. If they refused to do this, or if they did not comply with other GMC requirements, they could be removed from a specific case, or from the GMC’s list generally. Dr Mann said that this had happened ‘perhaps not as often as perhaps it should have done’, but it had happened from time to time. There was a greater insistence on progress reports being provided promptly and on the information which should be contained in such reports.
22.104
In addition, the GMC had established closer links with its supervisors and medical examiners. A leaflet explaining the role of the medical supervisor and his/her responsibility for managing a sick doctor had been produced. In October 1998, the first training day for medical supervisors and medical examiners was held. This was followed by a series of training days and workshops. Dr Mann said that the meetings with medical examiners and supervisors had provided a valuable opportunity to exchange views about problems and to discuss possible solutions to those problems. It had given ‘a sense of coherence’. There had been useful discussions about, for example, the advantages and disadvantages of appointing as medical supervisor a substance misuse specialist who was already treating the doctor. Dr Mann said that, over recent years, the GMC had moved towards appointing supervisors as a cohort of practitioners who understood the GMC’s procedures and who recognised that a slightly different approach was required when supervising a doctor from that which was usual when just treating the doctor. There had also been attempts to use medical examiners as supervisors in order to promote a greater understanding of the GMC’s procedures and requirements. At the time Dr Mann gave evidence to the Inquiry, in December 2003, there had been no meetings with medical examiners or supervisors for a year or so. The Health Section was waiting until the arrangements for dealing with health cases under the new procedures were clear before organising any further meetings.
Action on Receipt of a Medical Supervisor’s Progress Report
22.105
During the early stages of a doctor’s supervision, if it appeared from the medical supervisor’s report that s/he was complying with his/her undertakings and appeared to be making progress, the undertakings might be left unchanged.
Variation of the Doctor’s Undertakings
22.106
However, there might have been circumstances which made it appropriate for the undertakings to be relaxed or strengthened. Rule 9 of the 1987 Health Rules introduced a power to vary a doctor’s undertakings. If, as a result of a report from a medical supervisor or of information from another source, it appeared to the health screener that the terms of the doctor’s undertakings should be varied, the health screener could invite the doctor to agree to that.
22.107
Dr Mann said that, although each case was different, the normal pattern in an ‘average case’ was for undertakings to be relaxed gradually to give the doctor more freedom in his/her choice of job and, if his/her right to prescribe had been restricted, by relaxing that restriction. This type of relaxation might happen two or three times over a period of two years before the doctor was considered fit to practise unsupervised and unrestricted.
22.108
It is clear from the Annual Reports of the health screener that, in the early 1990s, the health screeners made use of their power to vary undertakings by making them more stringent. For example, the Annual Report for 1990 recorded that the first action of the health screeners after a breach of a doctor’s undertakings had been identified was to send
‘a firm letter’
to the doctor, tightening the restrictions on his/her practice. By the late 1990s, however, the GMC had come to believe that the powers to vary undertakings did not include the power to make them more stringent. Later, this view changed again and, where the circumstances made it appropriate, a doctor would be invited to agree undertakings that imposed greater requirements or restrictions on him/her than had originally been the case. Dr Mann said that the perceived inability to tighten an undertaking had been a limiting factor. The health screener might have wished to stop a doctor doing on-call work or from working as a locum but had been unable to make the necessary change without referring the doctor to the HC. This was a cumbersome and time-consuming process.
Cessation of the Doctor’s Undertakings
22.109
Rule 9 of the 1987 Health Rules also provided that the health screener might direct that the undertakings should no longer apply, thus bringing the period of the doctor’s supervision, and any limitations on his/her practice, to an end. The time at which this happened depended on the nature of the impairment. In cases of substance misuse, Dr Mann said that it would be unusual for a doctor to be released from his/her undertakings within two years after first being put under supervision. If the doctor suffered a recurrence of his/her problem or a relapse, the period of his/her supervision was likely to continue for as long as five years. Supervision might continue for the whole of the doctor’s professional life if, as sometimes happened, it appeared to be the fact of supervision (and the threat of action by the HC) that kept the doctor on the ‘straight and narrow’. More usually, as I have said, there would be a gradual relaxation of the limitations upon the doctor’s practice over a period of years before a final decision was taken that the doctor was fit to practise unsupervised.
22.110
The evaluation by the King’s College team of the 40 sample cases from the period 1989 to 1996, in which the doctors had been dealt with under the voluntary procedures, revealed two main criteria used by the health screener when assessing whether a doctor should be released from his/her undertakings and permitted to practise unsupervised. The first criterion was a substantial and consistent improvement in the doctor’s health, with evidence that the doctor had been abstinent from alcohol or drugs for a significant period of time (usually, two years). The second criterion was a proven record of the doctor’s ability to maintain good clinical performance. The 1999 Evaluation Report recorded, however, that the team’s examination of the sample cases suggested that, on occasions, cases had been concluded without substantial evidence of improvement or abstinence. Sometimes, they were concluded on the ‘condition’ (which would not have been enforceable) that the doctor should remain under the care of the medical supervisor. The King’s College team found that the average time for which a doctor remained under supervision during the period 1980 to 1996 was three and a half years. It seems to me that ‘proof’ that the doctor had maintained good clinical performance might, in some cases, be hard to find. I have mentioned that, for doctors who are not working in a managed employment environment, it might be difficult to find a professional supervisor who had close contact with the doctor. For example, if the professional supervisor of a GP were a colleague on the LMC or at the PCT, it might not have been possible for the health screener to obtain satisfactory information about the GP’s clinical performance.
The Statistics
22.111
Between 1980 and 1990, the number of doctors referred to the Health Section annually was in general between 40 and 60. Between 1991 and 1994, it varied between 71 and 87. In 1996, it reached three figures for the first time. A serious backlog of cases developed in 1996/1997 which necessitated the recruitment of additional staff. The number of referrals dealt with by the Health Section reached a peak of 188 in 2000 and 181 in 2001. In the last two years, the referral rate dropped; 104 doctors were referred in 2002 and 124 in 2003.
22.112
Meanwhile, the number of doctors under supervision has risen. Between 1985 and 1990, it remained steady at between 60 and 68. It rose to 78 in 1991 and, by 1995, had almost doubled to 147. By 1998, 202 doctors were under supervision. Since then, the number has changed little. The 2003 FTP statistics show that 212 doctors remained under supervision in the voluntary health procedures, of whom 54 were GPs. About 100 doctors remained under the jurisdiction of the HC.

--- The Health Committee ---
Referral to the Health Committee by the Health Screener
22.113
I have already said that a doctor could be referred to the HC if s/he refused to undergo, or failed to co-operate with, a medical examination or if s/he failed to agree to undertakings or was unfit to agree to or to comply with undertakings. In addition, s/he might be referred to the HC for breach of an undertaking or if his/her condition deteriorated.
22.114
If the health screener learned from the report of a medical supervisor, or by way of information from some other source, that the doctor had ceased to observe an undertaking previously given, the health screener might refer the case to the HC. From 1987, a referral could also be made if the doctor’s physical or mental condition had deteriorated. Until November 2002, referral to the HC was subject to consultation with two members of the ‘panel of six’. After that time, the health screener was able to initiate a referral without a requirement to consult. In practice, however, the health screener would usually consult with the doctor’s medical supervisor when deciding whether to refer a case to the HC.
22.115
The number of doctors referred to the HC annually was always relatively small. There were few referrals to the HC from the other FTP committees. Most referrals came from the health screener. The most common reason for a referral to the HC was a failure, at some point in the doctor’s time in the voluntary health procedures, to comply with his/her undertakings.
22.116
In the past, there had appeared to be reluctance on the part of the health screeners to respond to a breach of a doctor’s undertakings by referring the doctor to the HC. In the early 1990s, it was said in an Annual Report of the health screener that a doctor would be referred to the HC only if s/he persistently broke his/her undertakings. There was mention in the Annual Reports also of a perception on the part of the health screener that it was his role to prevent doctors from being referred to the HC. I can appreciate that the aim of the health screener should have been to achieve a doctor’s rehabilitation within the voluntary procedures wherever possible. However, the health screener should also have been prepared to refer to the HC a doctor who was not complying with conditions that had been imposed to assist in his/her recovery and/or for the purpose of protecting patients.
22.117
The King’s College team found that just over half of doctors identified as having been dealt with under the voluntary health procedures had been reported for breach of one or more of their undertakings. The 1999 Evaluation Report pointed out that this was likely to be an underestimate of the actual incidence of breach. A large proportion of the doctors reported to have breached their undertakings had been working at the time of the breach. Some had breached undertakings to seek the advice of their supervisor before taking up or applying for a post. Some had practised as a locum or single-handed GP in breach of an undertaking not to do so. The most commonly reported breach was of the undertaking by a doctor to abstain from, or limit his/her intake of, alcohol. The number of reported breaches was less in the period from 1989 to 1996 than in the period from 1980 until 1988. Over the whole period from 1980 to 1996, 73% of the doctors who breached one or more of their undertakings had been judged by the medical examiners as fit to practise with restrictions. The 1999 Evaluation Report drew attention to the potential risks to patients caused by doctors who were in practice but were failing to comply with their undertakings.
22.118
Mr Howes said that, during his second period in the Health Section (1997 to 2001), the health screeners had ‘tightened up considerably’ in respect of breaches. Even so, not every breach of an undertaking resulted in a referral to the HC. Mr Howes said that each case would have to be judged on the seriousness of the breach, whether patients were put at risk, whether the doctor had practised a deception, or whether s/he had immediately afterwards admitted the breach. The supervisor and the screener would come to a view about the seriousness of the breach.
22.119
Between 1980 and 1997, the number of doctors referred to the HC by health screeners in any one year never reached double figures. The most common reason for referral was breach of the doctor’s undertakings. In 1998, the number of doctors referred to the HC by the health screeners rose sharply to 21. Fourteen of those referrals were for breach of undertakings. Dr Mann said that she was not sure that there had been a conscious change of policy at that time. However, there was an awareness of concern about leniency and she thought that the health screeners had been ‘a little bit stricter’ when dealing with breaches of undertakings. She felt that, previously, the GMC had been ‘more easy going’ with supervision. In 1999, the health screeners referred 16 doctors to the HC; in 2000, they referred 37. The figures for 2001, 2002 and 2003 were 19, 21 and 17 respectively.
Referral from Other Fitness to Practise Committees
22.120
A case might be referred to the HC by the PCC, the Assessment Referral Committee (ARC), the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP) or the PPC.
22.121
As I explain in
, where, in the course of their consideration of a case, a question arose as to whether a doctor’s fitness to practise might be seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition, the PCC, the ARC and the CPP had power to refer the case in question to the HC for determination. The doctor would be examined and the HC, having considered the results of the examination, would certify its opinion to the relevant Committee. If the HC took the view that there was no serious impairment of fitness to practise due to ill health, the referring Committee would then resume its consideration of the case and would dispose of it. If, on the other hand, the HC’s opinion was that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired as the result of ill health, the HC would then deal with the case itself and the referring Committee would cease to exercise any functions in relation to the case. By referring a case to the HC for its opinion, the PCC, the ARC and the CPP did not necessarily lose their jurisdiction over the case. If no serious impairment was found, they could proceed to deal with it. None of these three Committees could refer a case to the voluntary health procedures.
22.122
The position was different with the PPC. The PPC, using its power to adjourn, was able to refer cases into the voluntary health procedures. It also had the power to refer cases direct to the HC. However, if it made such a referral and the referral proved inappropriate for some reason (e.g. because, on examination, no - or no serious - health problem was identified), the HC could not take action itself, nor could it refer the case back to the PPC. In such a case, the GMC was powerless to act, even if there was evidence of misconduct (or a conviction) which would have merited action under the conduct procedures.
The Procedure Which Was Adopted
22.123
Rules 11 and 12 of the 1987 Health Rules set out the procedure to be adopted when a decision had been taken to refer a case to the HC. Under rule 11, it was open to the health screener to invite the doctor to undergo medical examination before his/her case was considered by the HC. The medical examination would be conducted by one or more medical examiners selected by the GMC and, if the doctor chose, by a medical examiner selected by him/her. If the doctor agreed to be examined, the GMC staff would make the necessary arrangements. The object of this provision was to ensure that the HC had medical evidence when it came to consider the case. The health screener could take these steps, not only when s/he had taken the decision to refer the doctor’s case to the HC him/herself, but also when that decision had been taken by the CPP, the ARC, the PPC or the PCC.
22.124
Rule 12 required the Registrar to serve on the doctor a ‘notice of referral’, containing certain specified information. That information included an indication of the physical or mental condition by reason of which it was alleged that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired.
The Powers of the Health Committee
22.125
The powers of the HC were contained in section 37 of the 1983 Act, which virtually reproduced the provisions of section 8 of the 1978 Act. Section 37(1) provided:
‘Where the fitness to practise of a fully registered person is judged by the Health Committee to be seriously impaired by reason of his physical or mental condition, the Committee may, if they think fit, direct -
(a) that his registration in the register shall be suspended (that is to say shall not have effect) during such period not exceeding twelve months as may be specified in the direction; or
(b) that his registration shall be conditional on his compliance, during such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the direction, with such requirements so specified as the Committee think fit to impose for the protection of members of the public or in his interests.’
The Composition of the Health Committee
22.126
The composition of the HC was governed successively by the General Medical Council (Constitution of Fitness to Practise Committees) Rules Order of Council 1980, 1986 and 1996 (the Constitution Rules). Between 1980 and 1996, the HC was composed of the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, nine medical members and one lay member of the GMC (i.e. 12 members in all).
22.127
The 1980 and 1986 Constitution Rules provided that the President should choose whether he wished to chair the HC. If he chose not to do so, he was required to appoint another member of the GMC as Chairman. The President was also required to appoint a Deputy Chairman. Both appointments were subject to the approval of the Council. Other members of the HC were elected by the Council annually. The legal quorum of the HC was five.
22.128
In 1996, membership of the HC was reduced from 12 (including the Chairman) to nine. Seven members of the PPC were to be medical members and two were to be lay members. The Constitution Rules continued to provide that the HC should be chaired by the President or, if he chose not to act in that capacity, by another member of the GMC appointed in his place. If neither the Chairman nor the Deputy Chairman of the HC was available to chair a meeting, the President had the power to appoint another member of the HC to act as Chairman. From 1996, the legal quorum for the HC was five, including one lay member. In November 2002, the quorum was reduced to three, to include at least one medical and one lay member.
22.129
, in 2000, the GMC was given the power to co-opt non-GMC members, both medical and lay, to sit on its FTP committees. A pool of such persons, who were known first as ‘adjudicators’, then as ‘associates’, was recruited. Initially, associates would sit alongside GMC members of the HC on panels to consider cases. After July 2003, panels of the HC would usually consist entirely of associates.
Meetings of the Health Committee
22.130
The HC sat in private and was advised by a legal assessor and two medical assessors. In general, one of the medical assessors would be a practitioner from the doctor’s own specialty and the other would practise in the specialty relating to the physical or mental condition from which the doctor was alleged to be suffering. This assessor was usually a psychiatrist. The doctor was entitled to be present and might be legally represented. He or she might also be represented or accompanied by an officer of his/her medical defence organisation, or some other professional organisation of which s/he was a member, or by a member of his/her family, or by a friend, and might also be accompanied by his/her medical adviser. After 1987, the complainant (if any) was entitled to appear before the HC and to be represented. However, s/he was not entitled to receive any medical reports or information concerning the medical condition of the doctor which the GMC may have obtained, and was excluded from the hearing save for the purpose of giving evidence and hearing the HC’s decision. In practice, complainants rarely, if ever, appeared.
22.131
The GMC’s representative would then present the case and call witnesses to give oral evidence. The 1987 Health Rules introduced a provision enabling the doctor to request that the author of any document to be considered by the HC should be called as a witness. The complainant (if any) or his/her representative would be invited to address the HC. The doctor or his/her representative was then permitted to address the HC and to adduce evidence as to the doctor’s fitness to practise. The GMC’s representative would then be invited to address the HC, with the doctor or his/her representative having the last word.
Adjournment or Postponement
22.132
At the conclusion of the proceedings, the HC might adjourn the case in order to obtain further medical reports or other information as to the physical or mental condition of the doctor or in relation to his/her fitness to practise. If the HC did not think it appropriate to adjourn the case, it had to consider whether to postpone its finding as to the doctor’s fitness to practise. The power to postpone its finding was introduced by the 1987 Health Rules. The purpose of this power was to enable the HC to place a doctor ‘on probation’ on the basis of undertakings given by the doctor to the HC, thus avoiding the need to impose formal conditions or to suspend registration. It does not seem that this power was ever exercised.
22.133
If the HC did not consider it appropriate to adjourn the case or to postpone its finding, it had to consider and determine whether the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired by reason of his/her physical or mental condition. If the HC found no serious impairment of the doctor’s fitness to practise, it had no power to take any further action. The 1987 Health Rules provided that, in reaching its judgement, the HC should be entitled to regard as a current serious impairment not only the doctor’s current physical or mental condition but also a continuing and episodic condition, or a condition which, although currently in remission, might be expected to cause recurrence of serious impairment. In 2003, the HC found that there was no serious impairment of the doctor’s fitness to practise in 17 out of 141 cases.
22.134
In a case where the doctor had refused a medical examination or had failed to submit to examination, the HC was entitled, if it thought fit, to find that his/her fitness to practise was seriously impaired on the basis of the information which was available to the HC, together with the doctor’s refusal or failure to submit to examination.
22.135
If the HC judged that the doctor’s fitness to practise was seriously impaired, it had next to consider and determine whether it was sufficient to direct that the doctor’s registration should be conditional upon his/her compliance with such requirements as the HC might think fit to impose either for the protection of members of the public or in the doctor’s own interests. Such requirements would always include a condition that the doctor must accept medical supervision, and might also include limitations on the doctor’s practice and conditions relating to medical treatment. The doctor’s consent was required to any conditions relating to the medical management of his/her case. The HC was required to specify a period for which the conditional registration should last; the period could not exceed three years. If the HC decided that it was not sufficient to impose conditions on the doctor’s registration, it was required to direct that his/her registration should be suspended for a period not exceeding 12 months. In an appropriate case, the HC could order that the suspension should take place immediately, rather than being delayed until the expiration of the appeal period, or, if an appeal was lodged, until determination of the appeal. The HC had no power to refer a doctor back into the voluntary health procedures.
The Decision of the Health Committee
22.136
Decisions of the HC were taken on the basis of a simple majority. If the votes were equal, the question at issue had to be determined in favour of the doctor concerned. The 1987 Health Rules provided that the Chairman should announce the determination or determinations of the HC
‘in such terms as the Committee may approve’
. For many years, the HC gave no reasons for its decisions. More recently, the HC included in its decisions an indication of the condition that was seriously impairing the doctor’s fitness to practise, together with an explanation for the sanction imposed.
22.137
In a case where the HC had directed that the doctor’s registration should be suspended or made subject to conditions, it was required, when announcing its decision, also to indicate that it would resume consideration of the case before the end of the period of suspension or conditional registration. In preparation for the resumed hearing, the HC would require a report from the doctor’s medical supervisor and, possibly, from the treating doctor. The HC might also require the doctor to submit to further medical examination before the resumed hearing. The necessary arrangements for a resumed hearing were made by the GMC staff, acting under the instructions of the health screener. In the meantime, it was usual for the health screener to request interim reports from the doctor’s medical supervisor, together with the results of testing. If the health screener received information that the doctor was failing to comply with the conditions previously imposed on his/her registration or that there was a reason for varying the conditions, s/he might refer the case for an early resumption of the hearing.
22.138
When the HC had suspended a doctor’s registration, it could, at a resumed hearing, direct a further period of suspension not exceeding 12 months, to start immediately after the first period had expired. Alternatively, it could direct that the doctor’s registration be subject to conditions from the expiry of the period of suspension. It could direct that the conditions should remain in place for a period not exceeding three years.
22.139
Where the HC had imposed conditions on a doctor’s registration, it could, at a resumed hearing, direct that the period of conditional registration should be extended for a period of not more than 12 months at a time. The HC also had power, at a resumed hearing, to vary or revoke any of the conditions imposed. If the HC judged that the doctor had failed to comply with any of the conditions, it might direct that his/her registration should be suspended for a period not exceeding 12 months.
Indefinite Suspension
22.140
Over the years after the inception of the health procedures, the number of doctors under the jurisdiction of the HC increased steadily. Some doctors suffered from chronic conditions and were unlikely to be fit to return to practice for many years, if ever. Until 1996, the only course open to the HC when dealing with such doctors was to suspend them for 12 months, to bring them back for a review of their case towards the end of the period of suspension and then to suspend them again. This created an unnecessarily heavy workload for the HC, was wasteful of resources and could be very stressful for the doctor concerned. The HC explored various possible strategies for eliminating this problem; it proposed a form of shortened hearing and the use of conditional registration in place of suspension. It also suggested that it should have the power to impose longer periods of suspension. In 1996, the problem was solved when the HC acquired the power to suspend a doctor indefinitely. This power could be exercised when the doctor had already been suspended for two years or more. The doctor could apply for review of a direction for indefinite suspension, but not before two years after the date on which it took effect and then not more than once in any period of two years. The power to impose indefinite suspension enabled the HC to conclude some of its most intractable cases. Between 1996 and 2003, about 50 doctors were suspended indefinitely.
22.141
Appeals from decisions of the HC were governed by section 40 of the 1983 Act. Until April 2003, a doctor who was the subject of a direction for suspension or for conditional registration (or variation of the conditions imposed by a direction for conditional registration) had a right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. From April 2003, appeals lay to the High Court. Until 2003, an appeal lay on a question of law only. In 2003, that restriction was removed.

--- The Operation of the Health Procedures ---
Integration of the Health Procedures with the Other Fitness to Practise Procedures
22.142
Mr Howes said that it was a relatively rare occurrence for a doctor who was being dealt with in the voluntary health procedures to be the subject of a subsequent report of potential misconduct. If such a report was received, his own ‘instinct’ would have been to look for a health element, related to the doctor’s illness, which might have accounted for the alleged misconduct. If no such link had been apparent, he would have recommended conduct action. If there had appeared to be any linking factor, he said that he would have ‘left it to the health and conduct screeners to fight it out as to which route the case ought to go down’. It was very rare for a doctor to have a health and conduct case progressing at the same time.
22.143
If a case was progressing through the performance procedures and health concerns arose that warranted referral into the health procedures, the performance action would be ‘frozen’. Conversely, if a case gave rise to concerns about both health and performance, it would be assumed that the performance problems were health-related. There would not be a referral into the performance procedures. Once the doctor had regained his/her health, an attempt would be made to ease him/her back into practice after a programme of retraining organised by the local postgraduate dean but no performance assessment would be carried out.
Views about the Old Health Procedures
22.144
Dr Mann said that she certainly did not consider referral into the voluntary health procedures to be a ‘soft option’ compared with referral into the conduct procedures. The voluntary health procedures could last for years, even for the remainder of the doctor’s professional life. The undertakings were often quite stringent, with considerable obligations on the doctor to adhere to them. She said that at the back of everyone’s mind was the fact that, if the doctor did not adhere to the obligations under the voluntary procedures, then s/he could be referred to the HC which might lead to indefinite suspension.
22.145
Mr Howes emphasised that, at the time he worked in the Health Section, it did not appear to him that the voluntary health procedures were a ‘soft option’ when compared with the conduct procedures. He conceded that a doctor whose case was being dealt with under the voluntary health procedures was not at risk of erasure. However, he pointed out that, if a doctor was referred to the PCC, he might be admonished, judgement might be postponed or s/he might have his/her registration suspended for a short time. Even if his/her name were erased from the register, s/he might be restored ‘a couple of years later’ (this was at a time when the first application for restoration could be made ten months after erasure, so that even a doctor who made one unsuccessful application could still be restored on his/her second application within two years). By contrast, the HC had no power to admonish. Consequently, virtually every case where a serious impairment of fitness to practise was found resulted in the suspension of, or the imposition of conditions on, the doctor’s registration. In most cases, the doctor would come back before the HC on one or two occasions and would be dealt with by way of further suspension or conditions. Indefinite suspension had also been available latterly. Mr Howes said that he thought the HC was ‘quite a tough Committee now’. It had ‘learnt to bite the bullet’. He observed:
‘Even though it is comprised principally of doctors, they have learnt that they are not just treating a sick doctor, they are protecting the public and they grasped that fairly early on in the 1980s. It was a culture shock for a Committee of doctors but they grasped it fairly early on and learnt that it even helps the doctor to impose some sort of sanction in many cases.’
22.146
Dr Mann identified as one of the strengths of the health procedures the fact that they had been acceptable to a large number of (although not all) doctors whose health was at one time or another called into question. She felt that the procedures provided a real incentive to remain abstinent from drink or drugs because of the implications of suspension on a doctor’s livelihood. She also felt the GMC had developed a good network of competent specialists to examine and supervise sick doctors. It was also achieving a quick turnaround of cases.
22.147
Dr Mann perceived the main weakness of the health procedures to be their separation from issues of performance. There was a need to monitor both simultaneously. She said that it would be nice to have some ‘easy assessment’ of a doctor’s performance that could tie in with health and other issues. The GMC’s full performance assessments, although detailed and helpful, took a long time and were cumbersome and expensive in terms of both money and doctors’ time. She said that, if appraisal produced hard evidence about a doctor’s performance following assessment, that might solve the problem. However, it seems to me that the problem will not be solved in that way, at least so far as GPs are concerned. At present, the appraisal of GPs does not include any form of assessment.
22.148
Mr Howes said that the rehabilitation of sick doctors was a problem. If a doctor had been compelled to give up work as a result of his/her illness (whether voluntarily or as a result of suspension), s/he might be ‘rusty’ by the time s/he was fit to return to work. Often, a doctor would wish to change specialties at that point and might need to learn new skills in order to do so. Mr Howes said that the GMC was very conscious of the problem and would have liked to have seen a system (perhaps a NHS system) whereby such doctors could receive ‘refresher training’ in their own specialty, or be retrained in a different specialty. As it was, the GMC would rely on the postgraduate deans to devise
refresher schemes for doctors who were re-entering the same specialty as previously. The position of a doctor who wished to change specialty was more difficult. Over the years, the GMC has encouraged initiatives such as the introduction of local liaison advisers to support doctors in their rehabilitation and the provision of supernumerary posts without clinical responsibility for the retraining and rehabilitation of doctors recovering from a period of illness. However, these schemes can only cater for a few and there are still serious problems in managing the rehabilitation of doctors who have been absent from work for some time and have become de-skilled as a result.
22.149
Dr Mann said that the solution to the problem of rehabilitation varied from case to case. It depended on which part of the country the doctor was in. If a doctor was off work for some time, efforts would be made to organise a training programme. A hospital doctor might be able to take up a supernumerary post while being assessed. However, such a post was not always available and, even if it was, the supervision and assessment might not be of good quality. The local postgraduate deans might be involved but they were ‘under pressure’. It seems to me that the lack of any assessment to ensure that a doctor’s clinical performance and competence were satisfactory before s/he was allowed to return to practice after a period of ill health was a real
in the operation of the health procedures.

--- The Inquiry's Examination of Cases ---
22.150
As I have said, both Dr Mann and Mr Howes were of the view that the health procedures were working well, provided a proper degree of protection to patients and public and were not a ‘soft option’ for doctors. In order to test these views, the Inquiry considered a large number of files of cases which had entered the health procedures. Some were discussed during Dr Mann’s evidence. The Inquiry was, of course, interested in cases that bore some resemblance to that of Shipman in 1976. I particularly wished to explore the interaction of the conduct and health procedures in cases which involved elements of misconduct and ill health.
Cases Closed by the Health Screeners
22.151
The Inquiry considered sixteen cases which had been closed by Dr Mann between 2000 and 2003. None of those cases gave rise to any concern that a case had been closed without proper regard being paid to the need for public protection. I wish to mention only one case, that of Dr KI 01, because it illustrates the way in which conduct issues were often dealt with and demonstrates the potential unfairness to doctors which could arise through the operation of the procedures.
Dr KI 01
22.152
Dr KI 01 was a surgeon. On one occasion, he attended for work whilst under the influence of alcohol. He began to conduct an operation and it was soon apparent to the nursing staff that he was having difficulty in using the necessary tools and equipment. The nursing staff called for help but, before this arrived, the doctor had fallen onto an instrument trolley. He was removed from the theatre. The hospital trust instituted disciplinary hearings. The doctor did not dispute the allegation that he had been under the influence of drink. It was accepted that he had been under considerable stress both at home and at work. He had taken drink on this one occasion to help him to cope with stress. It appears that he did not have a chronic drink problem. He was given a final written warning and was allowed to return to work under closely supervised arrangements.
22.153
The trust also reported the case to the GMC. The case was perceived by the GMC to be a health rather than a conduct case and was referred to Dr Mann. There was contact between the GMC and the Medical Director of the hospital trust. The Medical Director did not wish the GMC to become involved. He considered that the trust had the situation well under control. Dr Mann was impressed by the measures being taken locally. She formed the view that the situation was indeed under control and that there were no patient protection reasons to institute the health procedures. She decided to close the case. When she was asked at the Inquiry hearings why she had not referred the case to the medical screener for consideration of the conduct issues, Dr Mann could not remember. That is not surprising, as she deals with many cases, but it does underline the wisdom of recording reasons for decisions at the time they are taken. At the Inquiry hearings, there was some discussion of why she might have decided not to refer the case to the medical screener. One possibility was that the doctor had already received a final written warning in the context of his employment and Dr Mann might have thought that there was little point in him being given another warning by the PPC or PCC. In any event, the result of Dr Mann’s decision was that the doctor avoided any disciplinary action by the GMC and escaped the possibility of a FTP record. If the case had been referred into the conduct procedures, the screener must surely have referred it to the PPC. Whether the PPC would have referred the case to the PCC or have closed the case with a warning letter or a letter of advice, I cannot say.
22.154
The point I want to make is that how a case is dealt with at the GMC is largely a matter of chance. If the case had been reported, not by the hospital trust, but by the patient who had found out what had happened, the case would almost certainly have been perceived initially as a conduct case. The medical screener might have consulted with Dr Mann as to whether a health issue arose. If Dr Mann had then arranged a medical examination or had consulted with the hospital trust, she would presumably have formed the view, as in fact she did, that there was no reason to institute health procedures. The case would have proceeded as a conduct issue and should, given its seriousness, have gone to the PPC. They might have issued a warning or they might have referred the case to the PCC. In that event, it seems likely that some sanction would have been imposed, probably a warning. The doctor would have had a FTP record. The potential for differences of treatment that depend not on the facts of the case, but upon matters of chance, is a cause for concern. Moreover, the recording of a warning, as a FTP history, may be important for patient protection. If a similar incident were to occur in future, it ought to be considered against the background of the first one.
Cases Handled within the Voluntary Procedures
Dr JB 08
22.155
The case of Dr JB 08 well illustrates the way in which, until the late 1990s, the health screeners were sometimes reluctant to refer cases to the HC notwithstanding repeated, serious breaches of undertakings. In the early 1980s, the doctor, a GP, was convicted of obtaining palfium tablets by deception and of unlawful possession of that drug. A large number of offences were taken into consideration by the court and it was apparent that the doctor had been taking these tablets himself over a substantial period of time. The case was considered by the PPC, which adjourned the case for 12 months on the first occasion, then adjourned for a further four months for medical reports. When received, the reports disclosed that the doctor was no longer dependent on palfium. The PPC then closed the case with a warning. I pause to observe that the facts of this case were similar to those of Shipman’s case. Although the health procedures were already in operation at this time, Dr JB 08 was not referred into them; his case was dealt in the same way as Shipman’s had been in 1976.
22.156
About three years later, the GMC received information from a PCO that suggested that the doctor might be suffering from mental illness and drug-related problems. It appears that he had recently given up practice. Nine months later, the GMC invited the doctor to undergo medical examination. Two reports were obtained from different medical examiners. They were delivered nearly a year apart in time. Both said that the doctor was unfit to practise owing to his abuse of alcohol and drugs. Just under two years after the PCO report, the doctor agreed to give undertakings. He was to place himself under supervision, to refrain from any form of medical practice and to abstain absolutely from alcohol and self-medication. Six months later, the first report from the medical supervisor was discouraging. The doctor was drinking alcohol and had been issuing prescriptions for tranquillisers, ostensibly for his cohabitee, but the supervisor thought that the doctor was taking at least some of them himself. It was clear that there were multiple breaches of the undertakings. The doctor was advised that he was to remain under supervision and would not be referred to the HC at that stage. The medical supervisor’s next report concluded that the doctor was complying with his undertakings but was unfit to practise on account of grossly impaired psychological functioning. Six months later, the supervisor reported that the doctor was drinking alcohol. Also, the doctor had been taking benzodiazepines prescribed by his GP as well as those prescribed by the medical supervisor; he had deceived his GP into prescribing them. Again, the health screener did not refer the case to the HC. There followed a further period of six years during which all save two of the supervisor’s reports showed that the doctor was continuing to breach his undertakings. Eventually, nearly ten years after the doctor’s problems had been reported by the PCO, the case was referred to the HC. The HC suspended him from practice and renewed the suspensions periodically until a few years ago, when it suspended him indefinitely.
22.157
I accept that there was no evidence that this doctor breached his undertaking not to practise medicine. Thus, there was no evidence that he was a risk to patients. However, it does appear to me that the health screener was very tolerant of the doctor’s repeated breaches. In my view, it would have been better if the doctor had been referred to the HC several years before he was. First, for his own sake, if he had been suspended, he would not have been able to prescribe drugs and one form of temptation would have been removed. Second, it seems to me that the GMC must not lose sight of its role as regulator. There is a danger that it will assume the role of treating doctor at one remove. Of course, as the Merrison Committee recognised, when recommending the institution of the health procedures, that the GMC must have humane ways of dealing with sick doctors. However, the GMC must find the right balance between the need for humanity and the proper role of a regulatory body. I can see that it may be difficult to do so.
Dr JE 02
22.158
The case of Dr JE 02 illustrates many of the difficulties which can be experienced by the GMC in operating the voluntary health procedures and highlights some of the shortcomings of those procedures.
22.159
Dr JE 02’s difficulties began in the early 1990s when he took to using controlled drugs, ostensibly to relieve stress, while working as a GP. He told his partners about this; they adjusted his workload and all appeared well. However, about two years later, one of his partners noticed that the doctor had been making a large number of entries in the practice’s controlled drugs register. The doctor denied that he had relapsed into drug taking but the partners were sufficiently concerned to report him to the GMC.
22.160
The complaint was passed to the health screener. The caseworker’s memorandum referred to the doctor’s denial of drug misuse and to the absence of any direct evidence of it. However, it appears that the health screener was suspicious and asked the doctor to submit to medical examination. The doctor agreed and the GMC obtained reports from two medical examiners. The first examiner found it difficult to reach a conclusion about recent drug abuse because of the lack of clear evidence. He observed,
‘the evidence favouring the view that he was resorting to opiates again ... is quite compelling’
. The examiner noted that the doctor’s usage of opiates, ostensibly for professional purposes, was ten times that of his partners. He concluded that Dr JE 02 probably had been abusing opiates and expressed the view that any misuse was not the product of, or associated with, any formal mental disorder. The examiner advised that the doctor was fit to practise subject to restrictions. The second examiner noted that there was little evidence of drug taking and that the urine tests were negative. He advised that the doctor was fit to practise without restrictions.
22.161
Thus, there was no agreement between the examiners as to whether Dr JE 02 had reverted to abusing opiates. When asked whether this issue should have been determined before it was decided how to proceed, Dr Mann expressed the view that she did not think that that would have achieved much. The evidence was uncertain, but the point was that there were real grounds for suspicion that the doctor had been abusing drugs. Therefore, the GMC would take the view that restrictions should be placed on the doctor for the protection of patients even though the facts had not been established. As I observed in the case of Dr JO 04, which I discussed in
, there were occasions when, despite the fact that it had not been established that they were dependent upon, or addicted to, drugs, doctors were dealt with under the voluntary health procedures. I can see that such an approach might be justified on the grounds of patient protection, although it seems to me that it could cause problems in the future. Dr Mann was asked what, in a case such as this, would have happened if the doctor, after initially agreeing to voluntary undertakings, had refused to abide by them. She said that she thought that the giving of undertakings would be taken as a tacit acceptance that the doctor had a drug problem. However, if the case had been referred to the HC for breach of the doctor’s undertakings, the HC would have had to decide whether there was a serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of a physical or mental condition. It seems to me very doubtful that a ‘tacit acceptance’ would have been sufficient to establish such an impairment. Also, if, at some later stage, the doctor had again been reported to the GMC, it would have been open to him to say that it had never previously been established that he had abused drugs, or that he had suffered from a serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of ill health.
22.162
In the event, the health screener asked Dr JE 02 to give voluntary undertakings, including undertakings (i) to refrain from all self-medication (ii) to comply fully with the controlled drugs regulations and (iii) not to engage in single-handed general practice. Noticeably absent was any restriction in relation to the doctor’s prescribing rights. Dr Mann explained to the Inquiry that, at the time when these undertakings were devised, there was some reluctance to divulge information about undertakings to the doctor’s colleagues. If a restriction had been placed on his prescribing rights, any doctor with whom he entered into partnership would have had to be told. She said that, at that time, to break a doctor’s confidentiality in this regard was a heinous crime. Patient protection had assumed a higher profile in more recent times.
22.163
The doctor agreed to provide the undertakings and a medical supervisor was appointed and supplied his first report six months later. The supervisor referred to the fact that Dr JE 02 had recently started work in a new GP practice and that the new partner knew nothing of the doctor’s previous health problems. In giving her evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Mann conceded that hiding the restrictions on the doctor’s practice from those who needed to know was a ‘foolish way’ of conducting supervision. With regard to the current position, Dr Mann said that a doctor would be expected to inform his/her partners of voluntary undertakings that s/he had given.
22.164
Not long after giving his undertakings, the doctor moved to a different locality. This made contact with the medical supervisor difficult and the health screener expressed concern about the infrequency of reports. Eventually, the supervisor suggested the appointment of a different supervisor nearer to the doctor’s place of work. Dr Mann made the point that too great a distance between medical supervisor and doctor lessened the chance of effective supervision. So, of course - as it seems to me - will frequent changes in supervisor. In this case, over the years, Dr JE 02 had no fewer than five supervisors; the changes occurred for various reasons. Dr Mann pointed out that this loss of continuity of care was a particular problem if the doctor was a locum and had no settled place of work.
22.165
Subsequently, the partner at Dr JE 02’s new practice wrote to the GMC, stating that the doctor had been ordering large quantities of diamorphine and had admitted to self-administering diamorphine and pethidine. The partner considered Dr JE 02 to be unfit to practise. Thus, at this stage, the doctor was in breach of his undertakings. This was not even pointed out to him when the GMC wrote to him about his relapse. Dr Mann was unable to explain this, since she was not the health screener at the time. However, she said that, at that time, referral to the HC was not often considered. Since she had been a health screener, it had been her practice not to refer a doctor to the HC for a single breach of an undertaking although if there was evidence of repeated breaches or of real deceit, she would do so. She added that, once a case was in the health procedures, there was no mechanism for referring it into the conduct procedures. The only way in which a doctor could get back into the conduct procedures was if another allegation of misconduct or a conviction was reported.
22.166
In the light of the doctor’s relapse, the health screener decided to appoint a specialist in drug addiction as medical supervisor. Dr Mann explained that this is now usual practice. The health screener also required the doctor to undertake to refrain from medical practice until permission to resume was given. The new supervisor’s first report stated that Dr JE 02 had admitted to opiate misuse for about four years and to the misappropriation of drugs from the GP practices at which he had worked. However, he claimed that he was now drug-free. The supervisor advised that Dr JE 02 was fit to practise, provided that he remained drug-free; the supervisor recommended the imposition of restrictions, namely that the doctor should not work in general practice or prescribe Schedule 2 drugs. Dr JE 02 later gave undertakings to that effect.
22.167
The supervisor’s next report was received over a year later. It reported that the doctor had received voluntary residential treatment for his drug problem. He was preparing for a new career in occupational health. A urine test had been positive for benzodiazepines but negative for opiates. The taking of benzodiazepines constituted another breach of the doctor’s undertakings, although possibly not a serious one. Five months later, the supervisor reported that the doctor had told him that the urine test had been positive because he had taken a single temazepam tablet to help him sleep the previous night. The supervisor wished to be released for geographical reasons.
22.168
Some months later, a new supervisor was appointed. He reported that the doctor was working in occupational medicine. There had been some suspicion that he had stolen a Cyclimorph tablet from a GP but this was denied. Supervision was to continue. The following year, the supervisor’s report was most promising. There had been full co-operation and excellent progress. The doctor was still working in occupational health. By this time, Dr Mann had become a health screener. She agreed to continue supervision with an additional requirement that the GMC should be able to disclose the existence of practice restrictions to any enquirer. Dr Mann explained that she had been keen to introduce this undertaking into all cases being dealt with in the voluntary health procedures.
22.169
Over a year elapsed before the medical supervisor submitted his next report. Dr Mann commented that the practice of allowing 12 months to elapse between reports has now stopped and the normal frequency is six months. The supervisor reported that Dr JE 02 was still making excellent progress and was fully complying with his supervision and undertakings. Drug testing was again negative. The supervisor advised relaxing the undertakings to allow Dr JE 02 to undertake locum posts. Dr Mann agreed.
22.170
A year later, the report was, once more, wholly favourable. The supervisor advised that the doctor was fit to practise and recommended that supervision should cease. After noting that the doctor had been drug-free for over two years and that there had been no problems when his undertakings had been relaxed, Dr Mann decided that supervision could end.
22.171
Unfortunately, however, Dr JE 02 suffered a relapse almost immediately afterwards. The former supervisor notified the GMC that Dr JE 02 had been misusing opiates and had been dismissed from his employment. The supervisor had taken the doctor back into care for out-patient assessment and possible treatment. A hair analysis was positive for both pethidine and dihydrocodeine. As the doctor was not subject to undertakings at that time, he was not in breach of any conditions on his registration. Dr Mann said that she was disappointed to learn of the doctor’s relapse. It appeared that he was able to resist substance misuse when external controls were in place but not otherwise. This was not uncommon, although the very short time interval in this case was unusual in Dr Mann’s experience. She noted that the doctor had been prescribed pethidine following surgery the previous year and thought that this might have been a factor in his relapse.
22.172
Medical examinations were arranged. However, before the reports were available, further evidence came to light about the extent of the doctor’s relapse. He had received a police caution for non-compliance with controlled drugs regulations. Also, the GMC received a copy of a report by the doctor’s treating psychiatrist. This advised that the doctor was co-operating with treatment, but would need indefinite supervision. The doctor was fit to practise, but should be prevented from writing prescriptions. After receipt of the two medical examiners’ reports, Dr Mann considered that the doctor was extremely vulnerable to further relapse, his prescribing rights should be restricted and he should be placed under medical supervision for the remainder of his working life.
22.173
The doctor gave voluntary undertakings and was placed under supervision. The first report from the medical supervisor was satisfactory. The second showed such good progress that the supervisor recommended that conditions and supervision should cease, save for informal voluntary contact. Dr Mann did not agree to this, in the light of the previous history. The most recent report showed that progress had been maintained. Again, it was suggested that supervision should cease. Again, Dr Mann had directed that it must continue. She told the Inquiry that she was doubtful that it would ever be possible to cease supervision in this case.
22.174
The case, which spans a period of ten years, illustrates some of the improvements that were made in the operation of the health procedures during that time. In the recent past, reports were obtained more frequently; more information was given to colleagues and employers and the health screeners were less tolerant than they had been of breaches of undertakings. There remained great emphasis on the rehabilitation of the doctor, but the protection of patients seemed to be given greater prominence.
22.175
The case also illustrates how the voluntary procedures can assist in keeping a doctor ‘on the rails’. The procedures provide support, but are backed by the threat of suspension if the doctor lapses or fails to co-operate. However, Dr Mann expressed the view that local management would be preferable for doctors who require long-term supervision and support. I agree with her. I do not think that the provision of long-term support is wholly appropriate for a regulator. I think that the GMC should seek to divest itself of this function, which should be taken over by local PCOs or employers. A PCO can impose conditions on a doctor’s practice and can provide a package of support and supervision. Provided that it is clear to the doctor that the package has the approval of the GMC and that failure to co-operate will result in a referral straight to the GMC’s HC, the local procedures should not be any less effective than the GMC’s voluntary procedures.
22.176
I realise, however, that if the doctor were peripatetic, the GMC would have to retain responsibility. In one of the cases examined by the Inquiry, that of Dr JK 03, the doctor was under supervision for nearly six years. During that time, he moved from hospital to hospital on three or four occasions. Continuity of supervision was difficult, even for the GMC, but it would have been almost impossible for a local NHS trust.
Dr JO 01
22.177
The case of Dr JO 01 was of interest to the Inquiry as it illustrates the way in which a local organisation can work effectively in concert with the GMC. The doctor, a GP, had admitted to his partners that he had been abusing alcohol and drugs for a period of 10 to 15 years. The Chief Executive of the PCT attended a meeting at the doctor’s practice and then investigated the extent of the problem by visiting practices at which the doctor had worked in the past. It appeared that the doctor had used prescriptions fraudulently to obtain his supplies of drugs. Also, there had been concern about his performance in both his present and previous practices. There were reports that, at times, he was ‘vague and disconnected’, he fell asleep during consultations, he wrote medical reports that did not make sense, he occasionally prescribed inappropriately and he sometimes spoke inappropriately to patients. The PCT retained the services of a consultant who specialised in addiction and who was also an approved GMC medical supervisor. With his help, a set of undertakings was agreed with the doctor. The undertakings were very similar to those that the GMC would have imposed in its voluntary procedures and included regular medical supervision.
22.178
Despite having set up this package of measures, the PCT reported the matter to the GMC. The case was referred to the health screener with a memorandum which pointed out that the local measures appeared to be
‘very robust’
. He or she suggested that, as the undertakings already in place were virtually identical to those which would be required by the GMC, it might not be necessary for the GMC to take action. However, the PCT became aware that the caseworker had expressed that view and they made plain that they wanted ‘GMC back-up’ as well. The screener agreed to accept the case into the voluntary health procedures despite the fact that it appeared that the local measures were appropriate. The GMC wrote to inform the doctor of this and advised him that he would be written to separately in respect of his apparently fraudulent use of prescriptions. In fact, no conduct proceedings ensued.
22.179
The GMC instructed two of its approved medical examiners to examine the doctor. They reached substantially the same conclusions as had the PCT’s consultant and recommended very similar measures. The doctor agreed to undertakings drafted by the health screener. These continued in force and were likely to do so for a considerable time. It seems to me that the PCT had done a very good job in respect of this doctor. However, I can well understand why it wished to have the ‘back-up’ of the GMC. The threat of suspension by the HC must be a real incentive to compliance. It seems to me that, in a case where reports have been submitted by an employer or PCO and appear to have come from examiners who are independent of the doctor concerned, it would be reasonable for the GMC to rely on the reports and to formulate undertakings for the doctor to agree on the basis of their contents. What should, in my view, be avoided is reliance on reports commissioned by or on behalf of the doctor.
Dr JO 02
22.180
The case of Dr JO 02 is of interest to the Inquiry because it involved allegations of quite serious misconduct coupled with concerns about the doctor’s dependence on drugs. It shows that, even in recent years, the GMC tended to focus upon the rehabilitation of the doctor and to assume that any misconduct was merely part of the drug problem and that there would be no recurrence once the doctor had been cured of his/her dependence.
22.181
The GMC received a report that the doctor had been cautioned by the police for being in unlawful possession of heroin and cannabis. The amounts were not large. The doctor subsequently admitted himself to a private nursing home where he underwent ‘detoxification’. Three months later, and before the GMC had taken any decision as to how the report of the caution was to be handled, the GMC received a letter from the woman with whom the doctor had lived for about eight years. She alleged that the doctor had been abusing hard drugs for a considerable time and had often been to work, in various hospitals (which she named), while under the influence of cocaine, crack cocaine and heroin. She expressed surprise that the doctor’s colleagues had not apparently noticed the signs of drug taking and wondered whether in fact they had noticed but had been unwilling to make any report. She also alleged that, although the doctor had recently undergone treatment, he had not given up drug taking; in fact, she said, he had taken crack cocaine on the very day he had left the nursing home. She said that he was now living with another doctor who was also under investigation by the GMC for similar addiction problems and for allegedly stealing drugs from hospitals. She also alleged that the doctor had been driving a motor car while under the influence of drugs and that she had witnessed many incidents of reckless or aggressive driving. She said that the doctor had been banned from driving for a time.
22.182
If these allegations were substantially true, it seems to me that the doctor might well have been guilty of SPM; he would have been attending work while under the influence of drugs. He would have been putting patients at risk. However, no one ever found out whether these allegations were true. The caseworker in the conduct section contacted Dr Mann to see whether the latter thought that the case should be referred into the health procedures. The caseworker was of the view that the caution alone might reach the SPM threshold. However, she thought that that misconduct might be considered as secondary to the doctor’s dependency problem. Admission to the health procedures might be appropriate. Dr Mann thought that the case should be dealt with as a health matter. She considered that the letter from the doctor’s former partner should be
‘viewed with circumspection’
. In her experience, former wives and partners often made false allegations after the breakdown of the relationship. In the event, the letter from the former partner was completely ignored. No attempt was made to find out whether there was any truth in it, despite the fact that some of the allegations could easily have been checked. In fact, there might have been some truth in the former partner’s tale because later, when medically examined, the doctor admitted that he had been abusing cocaine for seven years and heroin for one. Presumably, he had been working in various hospitals, as the former partner alleged, during that time.
22.183
In the event, the case was transferred into the voluntary health procedures. The doctor gave undertakings as required by Dr Mann and, at the time of the most recent report before she gave evidence, appeared to be doing well. He was about to begin vocational training with a view to becoming a GP. He remained under supervision. Dr Mann regarded his progress within the voluntary health procedures as indicative of success.
22.184
When Dr Mann was giving evidence before the Inquiry, Leading Counsel to the Inquiry asked her what steps had been taken by the GMC to find out whether any concerns had been expressed about the doctor and his performance at the hospitals at which he had worked. She replied that that was not a matter for her; her role had been to advise whether the health procedures were appropriate. I accept that that is so. She also said that medical examiners instructed by the GMC were expected to make enquiries about performance from people who had provided information to the GMC. She expressed surprise that no concerns appeared to have been reported about this doctor. She agreed that, if a hospital was concerned about the behaviour or performance of a locum, it might just not employ him/her again in the future, rather than investigate itself or initiate a report to the GMC. It seems to me quite clear that the answer to Counsel’s question was that no enquiries had been made about the doctor’s performance. That is apparent from the GMC file and from the medical examiners’ reports, which focus wholly on the doctor, his feelings about life and medical practice and his ‘dysfunctional relationship’ with his former partner. Dr Mann acknowledged that the GMC had perhaps not been as diligent as it might have been in collecting the relevant information.
22.185
It is not for me to judge whether the former partner’s letter was untruthful or even exaggerated. However, it does seem to me that the GMC failed to take any reasonable steps to investigate the quite serious allegations of misconduct, which clearly had implications for patient safety. I accept entirely that supervision within the health procedures provides a safeguard for patients. However, the GMC must not be surprised that the public does not have confidence in it if it sweeps aside allegations such as those made in this case without making any attempt to discover the truth.
Dr JO 07
22.186
This case was of interest to the Inquiry because the circumstances were quite similar to those of Shipman’s case in 1976. Dr JO 07’s addiction to drugs and her criminal conduct came to light a few years ago when a pharmacist noticed that the doctor had presented two private prescriptions for diamorphine within the same week. The police were informed and it was found that the doctor had stolen diamorphine from the hospital where she worked and had also obtained the drug by deception by the fraudulent use of prescriptions. She was prosecuted, apparently in respect of drugs obtained over a period of about a month. Thus, her conduct was not unlike that of Shipman, although his was known to have persisted for much longer than did hers. Also, the doctor reported her forthcoming court appearance to the GMC quite voluntarily. The Magistrates imposed a community punishment order and directed that the doctor should pay compensation.
22.187
At the GMC, the case was referred to the IOC. In preparation for the hearing, the doctor’s solicitors (instructed by her medical defence organisation) presented two psychiatric reports. These expressed the view that the doctor had begun using diamorphine while suffering from depression. There was no long history of substance abuse. The doctor was fit to practise, provided that she received psychiatric supervision and support. The IOC in effect accepted these reports and imposed conditions on the doctor’s registration for a period of 18 months. These comprised a requirement to submit to psychiatric supervision, to work only in supervised posts approved by her postgraduate dean and to notify all potential employers of the conditions under which she was practising. Six months later, the IOC reviewed the case and continued the restrictions. Soon afterwards, the doctor was advised that her case had been referred to the PPC. Her solicitors wrote to the GMC, asking that she should be dealt with through the health procedures and, when the case came up for consideration by the PPC, it adjourned it for consideration under the voluntary health procedures. A month later, the doctor was advised that her case would be dealt with under the voluntary health procedures. She had not been and, so far as I can see, never was examined by a medical examiner instructed by the GMC. She was invited to give undertakings to accept medical supervision, to confine her practice to posts approved by her postgraduate dean and not to prescribe drugs listed in Schedules 1 to 3 of the Misuse of Drugs Regulations 2001.The doctor gave the undertakings, the IOC order was revoked and, presumably, the conduct proceedings were closed. The medical supervisor’s first report, which was provided within three months, was wholly favourable. It was then just over a year since the doctor’s conviction. The second report, received six months later, suggested that the doctor could now practise without restriction. However, the health screener decided to maintain supervision for a further six months to monitor continued progress. That was the position at the time when the Inquiry obtained the file in 2003. It was clear that, if the next report were satisfactory, the doctor would be allowed to practise without restriction. That would be just over two years after her conviction.
22.188
This case is so similar to that of Shipman that it appears likely that the way in which it was handled is indicative of the way in which Shipman’s would have been treated if it had been reported in the recent past. The health procedures appear to have operated well. I note, however, that the PPC referred this case into the health procedures on the basis of reports submitted by the doctor’s medical defence organisation. Although this was permissible under the Rules, it was not an ideal way of proceeding. It will usually be preferable to obtain reports from the GMC's own approved examiners, in order to ensure independence, rather than to accept reports commissioned by or on behalf of the doctor.

--- The Future of the Health Procedures ---
The General Medical Council’s Internal Arrangements
22.189
At the time when she gave evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Mann was expecting to cease acting as a health screener within a few months. She said that she, her fellow health screener Dr Wilson and other colleagues in the GMC were concerned that the expertise that she and Dr Wilson had acquired could be lost. In the past, there had been continuity of health screeners, with the more junior screener learning from the senior screener and then taking over when the senior screener left. At the time Dr Mann gave evidence, the GMC was still attempting to recruit a consultant psychiatrist as a case examiner who would assume responsibility for health cases. However, it had not been successful in doing so and Dr Mann was concerned that there would not be an adequate period of overlap between the existing health screeners and the case examiner who, as she expected at that time, was to assume their role. Another problem was that many of the caseworkers who had experience of the health procedures had left in anticipation of a removal of the Health Section to the GMC’s new Manchester office. Dr Mann said that she and Dr Wilson were ‘very keen’ to make sure that the procedures which seemed to be ‘running more smoothly now than they were some years ago’ were not ‘cast back’.
22.190
I share Dr Mann’s concerns. In my view, she and her colleague have reason to be proud of the work they have done in the health procedures in recent years. I think that it would be a tragedy if the expertise which Dr Mann, Dr Wilson and their team of staff built up were to be lost. However, I have other concerns about the future. It now appears that the role of the health screener is not to be transferred to a case examiner at all. It appears that that role will, to a large extent, be assumed by members of the GMC staff. Such staff members would not, as I understand it, be medically qualified. They would certainly not be psychiatrists of good standing and long experience as the health screeners have generally been.

--- Conclusions ---
22.191
As I have indicated, in my view, the GMC has cause to be proud of the way in which the health procedures have operated in recent years. One of the reasons that they are as good as they are is that, in the late 1990s, the GMC invited an independent evaluation of the procedures as they were then operating and improved their procedures in the light of that evaluation. This evaluation, and the GMC’s response to it - for which, in my view, it is to be congratulated - demonstrates the value of an independent professional view. Careful examination of 40 sample cases demonstrated the problems that beset the health procedures at that time and allowed them to be corrected.
22.192
Another reason for the success of the procedures has been the expertise of the health screeners. They and their staff have been a small but stable group which has been able to develop consistency of practice and decision-making. I shall return in
to consider the way in which the health procedures will operate in future. However, I must say now that, if the expertise and experience of the team which was in place in late 2003 has been lost, it will take a long time to replace.
22.193
Having said that, it seems to me that there were a number of remaining weaknesses within the health procedures as operated up to 2004. First, the practice of referring a case of alleged drug abuse into the voluntary health procedures without the facts of the matter having been established was not satisfactory. It might have been convenient and it might have appeared to provide protection for patients in a case in which there was a risk that the PCC might find that the doctor was not guilty of the misconduct alleged. However, it led to a fudging of the issues. Establishing the true facts was necessary for several reasons. If the doctor entered voluntary health procedures without the facts having been established, it might have been impossible for the HC to act if the doctor breached his/her undertakings or if, following a relaxation of the conditions, the doctor then suffered a relapse. I shall say more about the need to establish a factual basis before dealing with a doctor within the voluntary health procedures in
22.194
There has until now been very little investigation of the extent to which a health problem of whatever kind has affected the doctor’s clinical practice and might do so in the future. Such information is vital if the conditions imposed on the doctor are to be accurately tailored to the risks they have to cover. Investigations of this kind might involve quite a lot of delving, especially if the doctor is a locum or has moved from post to post. At the Inquiry seminars, there was discussion about the provision of a central database which would, when it had been in operation for a few years, provide useful information about doctors’
curricula vitae
. Such a database would be very useful for enquiries of this nature. In the past, such enquiries as have been made have been left to medical examiners. It does not seem to me to be an appropriate function for them. They may not consider it to be appropriate to delve into the doctor’s past. In any event, they are likely to have limited resources.
22.195
There has been a lack of standards and criteria for deciding whether the doctor is suffering from a serious impairment of fitness to practise by reason of a physical or mental condition. Since such decisions have been taken mainly by one or other of the two very experienced health screeners, there does not appear to have been any great problem of inconsistency in the past. However, members of the HC would not have the same degree of experience as the health screeners. In any event, achieving consistency is not the only reason why there should be standards and criteria. They are also required in order to provide transparency. It ought to be possible to test the decision against a set of objective criteria so that its reasonableness can be demonstrated. If, under the new FTP procedures, decisions about whether fitness to practise is impaired by reason of adverse health are likely to be taken by a large number of panellists, case examiners and staff members, clear criteria will be urgently required.
22.196
It seems to me that, in recent years, the arrangements for medical supervision were satisfactory. However, the arrangements for professional supervision were less good. For a doctor who is allowed to practise subject to conditions, a professional supervisor is essential. He or she should be in frequent contact with the doctor concerned and should also have direct contact with the GMC decision-maker. In the past, contact has been indirect, through the medical supervisor. I think that the GMC decision-maker needs to have a good ‘handle’ on how the doctor is coping at work and how colleagues feel about working with him/her. Professional supervisors should have their role explained to them, as medical supervisors do.
22.197
The inability under the old procedures to consider performance at the same time as health problems was a difficulty but that should now be resolved under the new procedures. There will be some cases in which an assessment of both performance and health will be required before any decision is taken. The resource implications of such assessments are significant. At the moment, performance assessments are slow and expensive. There is a need for a quicker and less expensive assessment process. I wondered whether something along the lines of the NCAA assessment might be sufficient, at least to establish whether a problem exists. I can see that something more thorough might be required if evidence is to be put before a FTP panel to back up an allegation that there is sufficient impairment of fitness to practise to justify action on registration. I also think that a simple form of assessment should be developed for use when a doctor is about to return to practice after a period of suspension or restricted practice. The GMC has facilities for administering Professional and Linguistic Assessment Board (PLAB) tests. I wonder whether those facilities could be used for assessments of this kind.
22.198
For many years, the information provided to PCTs and to the partners of GPs involved with the health procedures was very limited. In recent years, the position has improved to some extent in that at least they are now told that the GMC is involved. However, the amount of information is still quite meagre. It seems to me that, if a doctor is to be allowed to practice notwithstanding that s/he has a problem (such as a drink or drug problem), it should be on condition that the doctor’s partners and PCT are given all the essential information; at the very least they must be told the diagnosis, the prognosis and the recommendations of the medical examiner. Partners are responsible for the practice’s patients and PCTs have clinical governance responsibility for the quality of care provided by the practice. It is not satisfactory for them to be dependent upon what information the doctor him/herself is prepared to divulge or what the medical supervisor is prepared to tell them.
22.199
For the future, the good management of doctors under supervision in the health procedures is essential. In the recent past, the procedures worked well, with health screeners and staff having their own roles. The system of referring doctors to the HC if they breached their undertakings was working well. I am concerned that the changed arrangements under the new procedures will create a risk that the standards established in the last few years might not be maintained. I urge the GMC to think again about the decision to use staff, rather than case examiners, for much of the management of doctors under health supervision.
22.200
One problem at least should be resolved as soon as the new procedures are in operation. Under the old procedures, when a doctor was convicted of criminal offences associated with a health problem, the GMC did not in general mark the serious nature of the conviction in the context of medical practice. Instead it dealt with such cases on a purely rehabilitative basis, by giving the doctor the benefit of the chance to rehabilitate under the voluntary health procedures. Convictions for drug abuse, for example, could have been sent to the PCC but, were in fact invariably referred into the voluntary health procedures. Thus, the public did not know what the GMC was doing about the doctor. This was not so much a weakness of the health procedures as a weakness in the way the GMC chose to deal with a certain type of case. Under the new procedures, most conviction cases should be referred to a FTP panel. There will be a public hearing and, if the doctor later has conditions imposed on his/her registration or is referred into the voluntary health procedures, at least the public will know that that has been done.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY THREE - How the General Medical Council Deals with Cases of Drug Abuse ---
The General Medical Council's Approach to Cases of Drug Abuse


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY THREE - How the General Medical Council Deals with Cases of Drug Abuse
========================================================================

--- Two Cases Considered by the Preliminary Proceedings Committee in November 2002 ---
A Change of Approach following the Case of
Crabbie
23.7
The meeting of the Preliminary Proceedings Committee (PPC) which took place in November 2002 was the second meeting after the Privy Council had delivered its judgement in the case of
. Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, told the Inquiry that this case should, in principle, have had an important effect on decisions made by the PPC.
23.8
Crabbie
, the doctor had been convicted of causing death by dangerous driving. It was a very bad case. She had driven a motor car while under the influence of drink and had collided head-on with another vehicle, killing one person and seriously injuring two others. She was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. Although there was evidence that her dependence on alcohol amounted to an illness, Dr Crabbie’s case was referred to the PCC and her name was erased because of the nature and gravity of the offence. It must inevitably have brought the profession into disrepute. Her appeal to the Privy Council was founded on the argument that the PCC should have referred her case to the Health Committee (HC) for the imposition of conditions on her registration. I interpose to point out that, had that been done, her name could not have been erased from the register. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council held that the PCC’s approach had been correct and its decision reasonable. The judgement was delivered on 23rd
September 2002.
23.9
The Privy Council added a rider to its judgement, to the effect that GMC decision-makers should not refer a case to the HC if there were any possibility that the doctor’s name might be erased from the register. At first sight, that seems no more than common sense, because, once a case had been referred into the health procedures, erasure would never be available and the GMC would have deprived itself of an important means of protecting the public. The judgement in
Crabbie
did not seek to affect the approach that the GMC had historically taken to any particular type of case. It did not seek to suggest that the GMC ought to be erasing more doctors from the register. It said only that, if erasure were a possibility, the case should go through the conduct procedures (in practice to the PCC) until erasure had been considered. If erasure were ruled out, the case could then, if appropriate, be referred to the HC. Mr Scott said that
Crabbie
should have important implications for the way in which such cases as Shipman’s were dealt with. He said that such convictions were so serious that they must give rise to a possibility of erasure and that all cases in which erasure was a possible sanction should, as a matter of principle, be referred to the PCC (under the old procedures) or to a FTP panel (under the new procedures). It should no longer be appropriate in any case in which erasure was a possibility to refer the doctor into the voluntary health procedures at a preliminary stage.
23.10
As Mr Scott conceded, this would have entailed a considerable difference of approach to cases involving drug abuse from that which had been taken previously. Mr Scott did not say that the new principle had already been put into effect under the existing procedures - only that the logic of the judgement in
Crabbie
would suggest that it should. Although Mr Scott confined his evidence on this issue to conviction cases, there could be no logical distinction between conviction cases and cases where there was an allegation of drug abuse involving dishonesty but where there had been no conviction.
23.11
At the November 2002 meeting of the PPC, two cases involving doctors convicted of offences of dishonesty in the context of drug abuse came up for consideration.
Rogers
23.12
In November 2001, Dr John Rogers, a general practitioner (GP), pleaded guilty to a series of offences of obtaining a Class A controlled drug by deception and of unlawful possession of Class A controlled drugs. He had obtained them for the purpose of self-administration. Those were the same offences of which Shipman had been convicted; other doctors whose cases I have examined in
had also committed similar offences. The Magistrates’ Court committed Dr Rogers to the Crown Court for sentence, a course which suggested that the Magistrates regarded their sentencing powers (a maximum of 12 months’ imprisonment) as inadequate. The Judge remarked that the offences amounted to a serious breach of the trust that the community placed in a GP. Dr Rogers had damaged his own reputation and that of the profession. He observed that no one else had been harmed by the doctor’s actions. The same remarks might well have been made in Shipman’s case in 1976 or, indeed, in any one of a large number of similar cases I have looked at. After noting that the doctor had been suffering from depression, the Judge imposed a suspended sentence of imprisonment.
23.13
At the GMC, Dr Rogers’ case was referred to the PPC which first considered it at a meeting in May 2002. One medical report, which had been prepared for the criminal proceedings, was already available. It expressed the view that Dr Rogers’ offending had been secondary to his longstanding depressive illness. The PPC adjourned the case for further medical reports, a typical decision for the PPC in this type of case. The case was next considered in November 2002, when two further medical reports were ready. Although these reports confirmed that the doctor had been suffering from depression at the time of the offences, at least one of the medical examiners felt unable to reach a clear diagnosis of the extent of Dr Rogers’ medical problem. The discussion of this case included consideration of the effect of the Privy Council’s observations in
Crabbie
on the instant case. The PPC formed the view that Dr Rogers’ convictions were sufficiently serious for there to be a possibility of erasure. Accordingly, the case was referred to the PCC.
23.14
This represented a new approach to convictions for drug-related offences. Instead of being referred into the voluntary health procedures, where the focus would be entirely upon rehabilitation, the case was - quite appropriately - to receive the detailed attention of a PCC panel, which would have all options, including erasure and referral to the HC, available to it. Not only that, but the hearing would be in public.
Dr JO 09
23.15
At the same meeting in November 2002, the PPC had to consider the case of Dr JO 09. He was a locum senior house officer. The previous year, suspicions had arisen at hospital A that he might be stealing pethidine but there was no proof of it. He moved to hospital B where it was noticed that he was apparently using pethidine on a number of patients in circumstances where it would not be usual practice to do so. On one occasion, the doctor was seen to swap syringes shortly before injecting a patient. He injected some of the liquid (which was supposed to be pethidine) and gave the syringe to a nurse with instructions to discard the remaining contents. She did not; instead she sent the liquid for analysis and it was found to be water. The doctor had stolen the pethidine he had prescribed (probably unnecessarily) for the patient and had injected the patient with a small quantity of water. The doctor was not reported to the police. I pause to observe that, when offences of dishonesty are discovered within NHS organisations, they are often not reported to the police. However, the doctor was reported to the GMC.
23.16
At the GMC, there was a difference of view between the screeners as to how the case should be handled. The health screener thought that the voluntary health procedures were appropriate but the medical screener wished to keep open the possibility of conduct proceedings. The GMC sought advice from its solicitors as to how it should proceed. The solicitor advised that the case should be referred to the PPC so that it could consider the medical reports and decide down which route the case should go. The case was referred to the PPC and also to the Interim Orders Committee (IOC), which imposed conditions on the doctor that would last for a period of 18 months. That was the maximum period for which the IOC could impose conditions. It often applied the maximum period, so that the order would cover the time that might elapse before the case could be dealt with substantively. The conditions on Dr JO 09 required him to remain under medical supervision, to refrain from self-medication, to restrict his medical practice to supervised posts in the NHS, not to work as a locum and to notify his supervising consultant or any prospective employer of the conditions under which he was practising. At its next meeting, the PPC adjourned its decision and ordered medical examination by two psychiatrists.
23.17
The medical reports were ready for consideration at the PPC meeting in November 2002. The first psychiatrist said that there was no need to refer the case into the voluntary health procedures; the existing restrictions imposed by the IOC were sufficient. He suggested that the doctor should undergo random testing for drugs. The second psychiatrist considered that the doctor was fit to practise subject to the restraints currently imposed by the IOC. There was no need to restrict his prescribing rights. The PPC
‘noted the allegations’
against the doctor, which were of theft, forgery of prescriptions and, in respect of the incident I described, depriving a patient of pethidine after it had been prescribed. It noted that both psychiatrists instructed by the GMC considered that the doctor required supervision. A further report from the psychiatrist who was treating the doctor stated that he was making good progress and was not using drugs of any kind. Somewhat surprisingly, in the light of the decision taken on the same day in the case of
Rogers
, the PPC decided that the case should not be referred to the PCC for inquiry. It decided instead that the doctor should be referred into the voluntary health procedures, saying that
‘there was no public interest argument for referring the allegation to the PCC’
. So, in that case, the usual practice of referring cases of this type into the voluntary health procedures was followed.
A Comparison of the Two Cases
23.18
It is of course axiomatic that decisions of the PPC must turn upon the facts of the individual case. I also recognise that, from the papers available to the Inquiry, it may not be possible for me to make such a detailed assessment of a case as is possible for the PPC. However, the GMC should aim for broad consistency of treatment between cases of a similar type and gravity. I shall now seek to compare and contrast the cases of
Rogers
and of Dr JO 09, in an attempt to understand why the same constitution of the PPC reached different decisions in respect of these two cases.
23.19
One criterion for the PPC must always be the seriousness of the doctor’s misconduct. An analysis of the misconduct of these two doctors shows great similarities. Assuming, as we must for present purposes, that Dr JO 09 would have been found guilty as charged by the PCC, both he and Dr Rogers had obtained controlled drugs of Class A by dishonest means. Both had done so, not on an isolated occasion, but over a period of time. The mechanisms by which they achieved their ends were different, but those differences were accounted for by the circumstances in which they worked. A doctor working in a hospital can take opportunities to steal drugs that have already been prescribed and dispensed. He or she may also have access to a drugs cupboard or store and be able to steal from stock. A GP cannot usually do that. GPs who obtain drugs illicitly generally do so by false prescribing. So the methods used by Dr Rogers and Dr JO 09 were different but both doctors had behaved dishonestly. It is not possible to say whether the amounts of the drug involved in the two cases were different but, that consideration apart, the gravity of the misconduct was, to my mind, very similar. There was an additional factor in the case of Dr JO 09 that was not present in the case of Dr Rogers. It was alleged that Dr JO 09 might have deprived a patient of a drug that s/he needed. There was also a suggestion that the patient had been subjected to an unnecessary injection, which, if true, might have amounted to a criminal assault. Certainly, it appeared that Dr JO 09 was prepared to involve patients in a way that did not arise in Dr Rogers’ case.
23.20
An examination of the medical evidence available shows that both doctors had a problem of drug dependence. In both cases, their misconduct was said to be related to the dependence. Although the reports in the case of Dr JO 09 appeared to focus in greater detail on rehabilitative measures, there was no reason, so far as I could see, to suppose that Dr Rogers was not capable of rehabilitation.
23.21
So far, it is difficult to see why one case gave rise to a possibility of erasure and must therefore be referred to the PCC and the other did not. However, there were some differences between the cases. One difference was that Dr Rogers had been convicted in the courts and his misconduct was, therefore, already proved. Dr JO 09’s guilt had not yet been proved; that would have been a matter for the PCC to decide. However, there appears to have been no shortage of evidence and, from the medical evidence, it appears that the doctor had accepted that he had a drug problem. The fact that there was proven misconduct in one case and not in the other could not justify different treatment. Another possible difference that might have been present in the minds of the PPC is that, because the case of
Rogers
had been aired publicly, he had brought the profession into disrepute. Dr JO 09 had not, because his alleged misconduct had not been reported to the police. But that difference could surely not justify the different treatment of these two doctors. The fact that the hospital authorities had chosen not to make a report to the police was Dr JO 09’s good fortune, but it did not mean that his misconduct, if proved, was any less serious than Dr Rogers’. In short, I cannot see how a proper analysis of the relevant issues in these two cases could have led to such different treatment.
The Outcomes
23.22
I turn to consider the two eventual outcomes. Dr JO 09 was referred into the voluntary health procedures. The allegations against him were never fully investigated and important issues were never resolved. We do not know whether or not he was guilty of the alleged misconduct. All the GMC proceedings took place in private. Dr JO 09 was not subjected to the stress and potential public disgrace that would have followed if, on referral to the PCC, he had been found guilty of the alleged misconduct. He entered the voluntary health procedures and restrictions were imposed on his practice. These were designed to protect the public and to facilitate the doctor’s rehabilitation. There is no evidence to suggest that, in his particular case, the conditions imposed did not provide adequate protection for the public.
23.23
Dr Rogers came before a PCC panel, which decided to erase his name from the medical register. In giving its reasons, the panel noted that the doctor had been suffering from a depressive illness at the time of his offences. It is clear from the case report that there was a medical opinion that the doctor’s offending had been
‘secondary to his illness’
. Nevertheless, the PCC panel said that it had formed the view that the doctor’s current state of health was not sufficiently impaired to warrant referral to the HC. The panel then turned to discuss the seriousness of his conduct, in particular his dishonesty. It said:
‘The Committee acknowledge you have not been subject to GMC procedures prior to this hearing. However, these factors do not detract from your inexcusable and dishonest behaviour. The Committee take a grave view of dishonesty in whatever form and disapproves of any action that undermines public confidence in the profession or compromises the trust that patients place in doctors. They have therefore been bound to consider most carefully whether the public interest demands that they should take action in respect of your registration.’
23.24
The PCC then considered the suitability of the less serious sanctions available to it and decided that Dr Rogers’ name must be erased. I pause to observe that, if Dr JO 09 had been found guilty as alleged, the words cited above would have been just as apposite to him as they were to Dr Rogers and, if a grave view should be taken of
‘dishonesty in whatever form’
, then a grave view should also have been taken of the allegations of dishonesty against Dr JO 09.
23.25
Dr Rogers appealed to the High Court on three grounds. All failed and only two are of interest in the present context. The first ground related to the way in which the PCC panel had dealt with the health issues. The Judge, Mr Justice Mitting, held that the panel’s decision not to refer the case to the HC had been taken at too early a stage of its deliberations. The Judge observed that, following the decision in the case of
Crabbie
, the PCC should not have considered a referral to the HC until after it had ruled out erasure as an appropriate sanction. It had in fact considered (and decided against) referral to the HC before considering erasure or any other sanction. However, the Judge held that this error had not vitiated the panel’s decision because it was clear that its reasons for imposing erasure were that the offences were so grave that the public interest demanded nothing less.
23.26
Dr Rogers also contended that erasure was too severe a sanction and was disproportionate to the gravity of his offences. The Judge upheld the PCC’s reasoning on that issue. He noted the PCC panel’s view that dishonesty was always serious in a doctor, especially where it undermined the trust placed in the doctor by the community. He drew attention to the various aggravating features of the case: not only were these offences of dishonesty, they involved Class A controlled drugs; they were not isolated offences; they were not peripheral to the doctor’s professional duties - indeed, they were committed in the course of his professional duties. I pause to observe that every one of those aggravating features was present in the allegations against Dr JO 09. Both cases involved a breach of trust. The Judge also mentioned the mitigating factors in Dr Rogers’ case, the absence of any previous record and the effect of the illness. He observed that the PCC panel had had to carry out a balancing exercise. It had not erred in law in reaching its conclusion. Indeed, Mitting J expressly stated that he agreed with the view of the PCC panel. It must be assumed that the GMC also agreed with the PCC panel’s decision. It had sought to uphold it on appeal.
23.27
Mitting J summarised the gravity of Dr Rogers’ case by saying that the offences demonstrated a clear abuse of the trust that is placed in any medical practitioner and a breach of the principles of good medical practice. He said that such conduct inevitably undermined the confidence which members of the public place in the profession. In my view, exactly the same could be said of the conduct of Dr JO 09, if proved, and of the conduct of Shipman and of countless other doctors who have, over the years, been referred privately into the voluntary health procedures.
23.28
It is not for me to say that the decision in
Rogers
was right or wrong. I seek only to draw attention to the different ways in which these two cases were handled and to the potential unfairness which can arise if the GMC does not have clear criteria for taking decisions. The November 2002 Screeners’ Handbook contained advice about the effect of the judgement in
Crabbie
. How great an effect that advice had on screeners (and on the PPC) is not clear. The Inquiry has not conducted an audit of cases but it appears that many doctors (save for a few like Dr Rogers) reported to the GMC for convictions for dishonesty associated with drug abuse during 2002, 2003 and early 2004 were dealt with under the old practice and were referred into the voluntary health procedures rather than being referred to the PCC. Yet, as soon as the new procedures are operative, it is intended that such doctors will be, as they should be in my view, referred to a FTP panel.
23.29
It appears to me that some general lessons can be learned from consideration of these two cases. The GMC has now recognised that doctors reported to the GMC for convictions arising out of drugs offences must be referred to a FTP panel. A definite instruction is to be given to that effect. However, allegations of conduct of that kind cannot be dealt with by rule of thumb. There must be individual consideration of the allegations and the evidence available to support them. What in my view must be made plain to decision-makers is that cases such as that of Dr JO 09 must not be referred into the voluntary health procedures without there having been any resolution of the factual issues. Allegations of misconduct should be determined, if not admitted, so that there can be a proper assessment of the seriousness of the doctor’s misconduct. Only then can a decision be taken as to whether, in the light of the medical evidence available and any other features in aggravation or mitigation, the doctor should be erased or suspended from the register or should be allowed to practise subject to conditions. Only then will any subsequent hearings involving the doctor be able to proceed on the basis of known facts rather than a medical history.
23.30
Second, these two cases underline the need for clear criteria to be developed for decision-taking. As I have shown, it is hard to detect any rational basis for the distinction drawn between them. I am concerned that the difference of treatment was due to the fact that in one case the doctor’s misconduct was already proved and in the other it was not. Also, it appears that considerable weight was attached to what the Judge had said when imposing sentence in the criminal court. What the Judge said was very sensible and appropriate but it seems that it served to underline to the GMC the seriousness of the case of
Rogers
. There was no equivalent statement in the case of Dr JO 09.
23.31
Third, in my view, allegations of misconduct such as arose in these two cases should be dealt with in public. The public has a legitimate interest in knowing what the doctor has done and what the GMC has decided to do about it. In my view, the GMC is failing the public if it deals with such cases in private. Moreover, the interests of the profession and of the GMC itself are better served by openness of treatment. Of course, the doctor is entitled to medical confidentiality. This can be achieved if the FTP panel considers the medical evidence in full but makes only brief reference to it in giving the reasons for its eventual conclusion.
The Limited Relevance of the Sentence Passed by the Criminal Court in a Conviction Case
23.32
Rogers
, to which I referred above, the Judge had imposed a suspended sentence of imprisonment. He plainly took a serious view of the case. It is possible that the fact that the doctor’s conviction had been met with a sentence of imprisonment was a factor which caused the PCC panel to take the course it did; this was not a factor which was mentioned in the panel’s decision, so I mention it as a possibility only.
23.33
It does appear that, in the past, the GMC’s assessment of the seriousness of the doctor’s misconduct, in cases where doctors have been convicted of controlled drugs offences, has been strongly influenced by sentence imposed by the criminal court. There has been little attempt to assess seriousness from the point of view of the impact or potential impact of the misconduct on the doctor’s practice. In
, I observed that, when Shipman’s convictions were reported to the GMC in 1976, the Registrar, Mr Martin Draper, would not allow the case to go to the PeCC until precise information was available about the amount of the fine and compensation orders imposed by the Magistrates’ Court. However, there was no investigation into the effect that Shipman’s drug abuse and dishonesty had had upon his clinical practice. That was typical of the way in which the GMC investigated such cases.
23.34
In my view, the sentence passed by the criminal court is of very limited relevance to the seriousness of the doctor’s misconduct from the point of view of the GMC. I can see that, as a very broad guideline, if the judge imposes a sentence of immediate imprisonment, it is reasonable to treat the case as serious. However, the converse should not be assumed. The fact that the court has imposed a very low penalty or even none at all should not lead the GMC to the conclusion that the case is not serious in the context of GMC proceedings. The GMC should, of course, pay heed to the factual findings of the court and/or to the factual basis for the sentence imposed. However, the role of the GMC in protecting patients involves different considerations from those taken into account by the criminal courts when passing sentence. For example, an offence of dishonesty or of indecency committed by a doctor will have implications in the context of medical practice that go well beyond the considerations that the courts will take into account. What may appear relatively trivial in the context of the general criminal law may be quite serious in the context of medical practice. The GMC should take care not to base its assessment of seriousness on the sentence passed by the court, particularly where the doctor has been sentenced by a Magistrates’ Court, where the reasons for passing sentence are not always fully explained. It must also be borne in mind that the court might have imposed a more lenient sentence than would otherwise have been considered because it had been said on the doctor’s behalf that he was likely to be ‘struck off’ by the GMC and that his career was in ruins.

--- What Should the General Medical Council's Approach Be in Drug Abuse Cases? ---
23.57
Throughout the period examined by the Inquiry, the GMC has focussed upon obtaining medical evidence to ascertain whether and how the doctor’s drug abuse was being treated and upon the prospects for rehabilitation. That approach should now change, in my view. I consider that it is essential that certain findings be made about the circumstances of the abuse. These findings must be made even in cases in which the doctor has been convicted of offences and his/her misconduct is therefore proved.
23.58
First, if the allegation of drug abuse is disputed, there must be a proper resolution of the dispute and the facts must be found. They must not be fudged. I was told that, in the past, if a doctor gave the voluntary undertakings required by the health screener, this would be regarded as an acknowledgement by the doctor that s/he did at least have a drug problem. I can understand why that short cut to the voluntary health procedures must have seemed attractive. It avoided the time and cost of an investigation, as well as the risk of a finding that the doctor was ‘not guilty’. However, the effect of taking such a course was that there were then no findings about the misconduct, if any, of which the doctor had been guilty. There was no assessment of the seriousness of that misconduct or of its implications for patient safety. It appears to me that it is almost impossible to form a proper view about whether a doctor is fit to practise medicine if serious allegations against him/her are left unresolved in this way.
23.59
Second, if it is found or admitted that the doctor has been abusing drugs, it should not be assumed that s/he has been the unfortunate victim of circumstances beyond his/her control. The GMC must attempt to find out when and how the abuse began. The doctor’s explanation of how s/he came to be addicted should be subjected to careful scrutiny and the story should be checked by consulting with people who were in contact with the doctor at the material time and, if appropriate, by examining medical records. The GMC should find out for how long the abuse has persisted and by what means the doctor obtained the drugs. It must discover what deceptions were practised and upon whom. There should be a proper assessment of the depth or strength of any addiction or dependence. If the doctor was able to manage without drugs at will or if s/he was withdrawn from them with more than usual ease, the conclusion might be that the doctor was not fully addicted. If so, the inference might be that the doctor was not subject to an overwhelming compulsion to obtain supplies and the decision-makers should be less ready to overlook any dishonesty of which the doctor has been guilty.
23.60
Third, there should be an examination of the way in which the doctor’s practice was affected. Were patients involved in the obtaining of drugs? How did the doctor behave while addicted? Was patient care affected? This kind of information might well affect the decision on sanction. In particular, if conditions were thought appropriate, such information would help the GMC to devise appropriate conditions. This kind of information would be gathered from the doctor’s colleagues and would have an additional beneficial effect in that it would enable the colleagues who would be responsible for the welfare of patients to identify those patients who had been at risk.
23.61
Finally, if and when it was suggested that the doctor was rehabilitated, there should be some assessment of the extent to which the doctor had regained insight and had fully accepted the seriousness of what s/he had done. In some of the medical reports I have seen, the psychiatrist has addressed that issue; in others, that factor does not seem to have been considered and the emphasis is on the period of time for which the doctor has been able to abstain from drugs. I am not saying that that is not important; it is, but there should be other considerations as well.
23.62
Undoubtedly, an assessment of the doctor’s health will be required and to that end one or two psychiatric reports will be required. However, the investigation of background factors should not be left to the psychiatrists. It would be unreasonable to ask them to undertake the kind of investigations that I am advocating. It may be necessary to examine patient and/or practice/hospital records, including the doctor’s own medical records. It may also be necessary to interview the doctor’s colleagues, practice staff and patients. These enquiries should be carried out by GMC investigators and the information gathered should be shared with the psychiatrists, as it may affect their opinion. For that reason, it will usually be inappropriate to accept a report from the doctor’s treating psychiatrist; s/he may not wish to delve into background matters in the way in which I am suggesting that the GMC should do. If all these steps are taken, the evidence should shed greater light on the risks that the doctor’s drug abuse has presented in the past and may present in the future.

--- Conclusions ---
23.63
It appears that the case of
triggered some reconsideration within the GMC as to how doctors convicted of drug offences should be dealt with. Mr Scott, at any rate, fully understood its implications in respect of convictions and I am sure that the GMC will have appreciated that those implications extend to cases in which unproven allegations of a similar nature have been made. The GMC has issued draft guidance that should ensure that doctors convicted of drugs offences will, under the new procedures, be referred to a FTP panel.
23.64
I have explained how cases of drug abuse should be investigated before they reach a hearing. These investigations must take place in both conviction cases and those involving an as yet unproven allegation. If those investigative steps are taken, the FTP panel will be in a much better position than decision-makers have ever been in in the past to decide whether the case warrants erasure or suspension or whether the imposition of conditions will be appropriate and will adequately protect the public and patients.
23.65
There is a thread running through many of the Chapters of this Report that deal with the GMC. It is that, if the GMC is to achieve an acceptable degree of consistency (and predictability, as doctors should know what is likely to happen to them if they transgress), it must establish some agreed standards, criteria and thresholds. By ‘agreed’, I mean not only agreed within the GMC (although that would be helpful), but agreed between the GMC and the public. There must be public discussion and debate about what is the right response to, and the right sanction for, the types of case that come up again and again. Doctors who commit drug abuse are but one example of the problem. Until this work on standards, criteria and thresholds is done, there will be continued dissatisfaction with, and criticism of, the GMC.
23.66
It is not for me to dictate how this should be done. I have suggested as one option a method of debate and consultation similar to that of the Sentencing Advisory Panel. In the case of
, Mr Justice Mitting suggested that reports of cases of that kind should be collected so that it would be possible to see in which types of situation other PCC panels (or judges) had thought erasure or suspension or conditions were appropriate. I agree that this should be done, although at the moment there are virtually no such decisions available. As such cases go through to FTP panels and decisions are made, they should, in my view, be collated into a body of case reports, available for future reference. That would serve two purposes. It should help to provide a measure of consistency between similar cases but it should also form a factual basis on which consultation could take place about what sanctions are appropriate in different types of case.
23.67
There should also be a debate within the GMC about the nature of the conditions that should be imposed when it is thought appropriate that a doctor who has been abusing drugs should be allowed to continue in practice. In the past, decisions about conditions have usually been taken by health screeners, who developed a good deal of expertise. In the future, such decisions will be taken by FTP panels and, where voluntary undertakings are concerned, by case examiners assisted by GMC staff. In any event, some very clear guidance will be necessary. I also consider that it would be beneficial if further research were to be done into the relapse rate of doctors who have been through the GMC health procedures. The American research quoted by Dr Johns suggests that there remains a significant risk of relapse after the two-year drug-free period which, in the past, the GMC has taken as a rough guide as to when a doctor should be allowed to resume unrestricted practice. It may be that the GMC health procedures have a greater success rate than the American methods. I do not know but I think that the GMC should find out. This could affect the length of time for which supervision is thought to be necessary.
23.68
In my Fourth Report, I discussed the power granted to the Home Secretary under section 12 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 to direct that the right of a medical practitioner to prescribe controlled drugs should be removed or restricted. In recent years, this power has fallen into disuse. It appears that the view has been taken that the GMC is better placed than the Home Office to assess the need for such restrictions to be imposed. I was told that the repeal of section 12 was under consideration. I recommended that, before taking any decision on the repeal of section 12, the Home Office should commission a review of the use which the GMC makes of its power to impose prescribing restrictions on doctors. From the cases that I have examined, I have the impression that the GMC does not often impose a condition preventing a doctor from prescribing or possessing controlled drugs. I repeat that there should be a review of the cases in which such restrictions are imposed.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR - The General Medical Council's Performance Procedures ---
The Process for Dealing with Complaints about Performance
Judicial Decisions on the Performance Procedures


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR - The General Medical Council's Performance Procedures
========================================================================

--- The Legislative Framework ---
24.18
The 1995 Act added a new section 36A to the Medical Act 1983. Section 36A provided:
‘... (1) Where the standard of professional performance of a fully registered person is found by the Committee on Professional Performance to have been seriously deficient, the Committee shall direct -
(a) that his registration in the register shall be suspended, (that is to say, shall not have effect) during such period not exceeding twelve months as may be specified in the direction; or
(b) that his registration shall be conditional on his compliance, during such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the direction, with the requirements so specified.’
24.19
It should be noted that the power to take action arose when the CPP found that the doctor’s performance had been (i.e. in the past) seriously deficient. The significance of these words was not to become apparent until a challenge to the CPP’s powers was raised in the case of
, to which I shall refer later. It should be noted that no power was given to the CPP to direct that a doctor’s name should be erased from the register. However, the CPP had the power, at the expiration of a period of suspension, to direct that the period of suspension should be extended for up to 12 months and, when a doctor had already been suspended for at least two years, the CPP then had the power to direct indefinite suspension. I shall discuss these sanctions in greater detail later in this Chapter.
24.20
It is important to note that the performance procedures applied only to a doctor’s performance after 1st
July 1997, the date on which the 1995 Act came into force. Evidence of poor performance prior to that date could not be used to support a complaint of poor performance against the doctor. The GMC decided (apparently on legal advice) that it was not possible, immediately after the introduction of the performance procedures, to deal with doctors about whom there had been longstanding concerns. Instead, it was necessary to wait until a body of evidence had been accumulated after 1st
July 1997 to support the contention that the doctor’s performance had been seriously deficient. This meant that the GMC’s performance procedures got off to a slow start. The legal advice received may have been correct, although I cannot see any statutory prohibition on the consideration of evidence of poor performance occurring before the commencement of the power to impose sanctions for SDP. I would have thought that the opposite view would, at least, have been arguable. Given that the purpose of the new procedures was the protection of patients, it was perhaps unnecessarily conservative for the GMC to take so narrow a view of the commencement provisions. In any event, it was expected that many doctors whose performance was thought to be seriously deficient would agree to enter into voluntary undertakings. Such doctors would be unlikely to mount a legal challenge to the GMC’s powers.

--- The Operation of the Performance Procedures ---
24.110
In May 1999 and May 2000, the Performance Section presented reports on the operation of the performance procedures to the full Council of the GMC. Thereafter, statistics relating to cases dealt with under the performance procedures have been included in the annual GMC FTP statistics.
The Numbers of Cases Dealt with under the Performance Procedures
24.111
As I have already mentioned, the performance procedures got off to a slow start. The first cases entered the procedures in the early part of 1998 and, during that year, the GMC initiated action under the performance procedures (the ‘initiation of action’ being at that time defined by the GMC as the sending of a ‘rule 5 letter’ to the doctor) in ten cases. In May 1999, nine doctors had agreed to be assessed or had been required by the ARC to undergo assessment. Only three full assessments had been completed. During 1999, action was initiated by the GMC in 26 cases.
24.112
In its 2000 Report, the PSI team expressed surprise that so few complaints about poor treatment or substandard clinical practice had been referred by screeners into the performance procedures. The PSI team carried out an analysis of the reasons given by medical screeners during the period from June to December 1999 for deciding that cases did not raise an issue of SDP. The common reason (given in 33% of cases) was that the case did not show any evidence of SDP. The second most frequent response (24% of cases) was that there was
‘no pattern of poor performance’
. The third most frequently given reason was that
‘the case showed only a single incident - and no pattern’
. This does not seem to have led to reconsideration of the practice whereby the GMC did not usually enquire locally about further concerns to ascertain whether any pattern did in fact exist. The 2000 PSI Report observed:
‘... screeners ... clearly felt restricted by the requirement for a case to show a pattern of poor performance before it could be referred under the performance procedures. Since most of the cases they saw related to single incidents, and no investigation had taken place to establish whether there was a pattern of poor performance, it was not surprising that this was the conclusion they came to.’
24.113
In 15% of cases examined by the PSI team, the reason given was that the complaint related to matters that had occurred before July 1997. It is clear, therefore, that, even two years later, the decision not to admit evidence of events before that date was still exerting an effect.
24.114
By March 2000, eight assessments had been completed. However, in 2000, the pace quickened markedly. During that year, action was initiated by the GMC in 126 cases. Twenty eight assessments were completed during that year. In 2001, action was initiated by the GMC in 70 cases and 57 performance assessments were completed. During 2002, action was initiated in 80 cases and 67 performance assessments were completed.
24.115
In November 2002, the requirement to send ‘rule 5 letters’ was removed. The point at which the GMC ‘initiated action’ was, therefore, redefined. Curiously, it was now defined as the point at which arrangements were made to set up an Assessment Panel. I say ‘curiously’ because the first action taken by the GMC in a case in which a screener had decided that an assessment was appropriate was to send the doctor an invitation to undergo assessment; one might have expected, therefore, that it would be the sending of that letter which would have been regarded as the initiation of action. The new definition might account for the apparent decrease in the number of cases in which action was initiated after November 2002. However, the recent figures do suggest that the number of cases entering the performance procedures had stabilised and may even have been decreasing. In 2003, the GMC initiated action in only 42 cases and the same number of performance assessments were carried out.
Delays
24.116
By 2000, there was considerable concern both within the GMC and outside about the delays in dealing with performance cases. This was at a time when the GMC was struggling to deal with a growing backlog of cases and its FTP procedures were under great pressure generally. Within the GMC, the delays in dealing with performance cases were attributed to the pressure of work in the office. Difficulty in obtaining the necessary evidence from referring bodies was also said to be a factor. Mr Howes told the Inquiry that, by the time the GMC’s performance procedures came into operation in July 1997, the GMC had been working on their development for several years. Local NHS bodies had not had the same period of preparation as the GMC and were not equipped to deal with issues of poor performance. He said that, with time, referring bodies became better and better at cataloguing the problems they were having with doctors and, as 1st
July 1997 receded, they were able to relate a longer history of problems in support of their concerns.
24.117
The Performance Section’s Annual Report, given to Council in May 2000, indicated that the problems of delay had been addressed by recruiting additional staff and by better liaison with referring NHS bodies. As I have said, it certainly appears that far more cases were dealt with in 2000 than previously.
Statistics Relating to the Assessment Referral Committee
24.118
The Annual Reports and annual FTP statistics also contained details about the activities of the ARC. The ARC considered seven cases between the inception of the performance procedures and 31st
March 2000. In all but one of the cases, the ARC decided that the doctor should be required to undergo an assessment. In the other case (heard prior to May 1999), the ARC concluded that the evidence of potential SDP after 1st
July 1997 was insufficient to justify an order that the doctor should be assessed. During 2000, the ARC received nine cases and directed that assessments should be undertaken in seven of those cases. The 2001 FTP statistics contain no information about the activities of the ARC. In 2002, 40 doctors were referred to the ARC. In 15 cases, the ARC directed a performance assessment. In 17 cases, it decided that no assessment was necessary. In a further eight cases, voluntary erasure was granted. In 2003, the ARC received 19 cases. In nine cases, the ARC directed a performance assessment. In four, it decided that no assessment was necessary. Voluntary erasure was granted in two cases and four cases were awaiting hearing at the time the statistics were compiled.
24.119
The statistics relating to hearings by the ARC reveal, first of all, that quite a large number of doctors refused to undergo performance assessments when requested to do so. This had not been anticipated when the performance procedures were introduced. Furthermore, they reveal a significant number of cases where the ARC decided not to direct that a performance assessment should take place.
24.120
Mr Marshall said that it was not for him to ‘second guess’ the decisions of the ARC, particularly since he was not present at most of the hearings and was not privy to the ARC’s discussions. However, he observed that it was ‘on the face of it surprising’ that, in 2002, more cases had been closed at this stage than had proceeded for assessment. This was particularly so since the test which should have been applied by the ARC was very similar to the screening test. Mr Marshall pointed out that the ARC often had more information (particularly from the doctor) available to it than did the screeners. An uncooperative doctor might not have responded to the invitation to submit observations to the medical screener. At a hearing before the ARC, however, s/he might give evidence and arguments would be put forward on his/her behalf, usually by a legal representative. As I have already mentioned, it was not usual for a complainant (or a representative of a complainant body) to be called to give evidence before the ARC. The hearing was, therefore, likely to be a one-sided process.
Statistics Relating to Assessment Panel Reports
24.121
Up to 2001, it was unusual for an Assessment Panel report to result in a finding that a doctor was fit to practise and that no GMC action was, therefore, necessary. Miss Smith’s impression was that this rarely happened. However, as I have already mentioned, the GMC FTP statistics for 2001, 2002 and 2003 show that such a finding became quite common. In 2001, 18 out of 57 (i.e. 32%) completed assessments resulted in a finding that the doctor’s performance was ‘acceptable’. In 2002, the figure was 14 out of 67 (i.e. 21%) of assessments. In 2003, 13 out of 42 (i.e. 31%) assessments resulted in a finding that the doctor’s performance was ‘acceptable’.
Statistics Relating to the Statement of Requirements
24.122
In 1999 and 2000, there were very few cases in which, following a performance assessment, a statement of requirements was agreed. Most cases were referred to the CPP. In 2001, a statement of requirements was agreed in six out of 57 cases (i.e. 11%) where a performance assessment had taken place. In 2002, the figure was eight out of 67 cases (i.e. 12%). In 2003, statements of requirements were agreed in 17 out of 42 cases (i.e. 40%).
Statistics Relating to the Committee on Professional Performance
24.123
Up to March 2000, the CPP had held five performance hearings and had in each case found the performance of the doctor to have been seriously deficient and had imposed a period of suspension of registration. In 2000, the CPP held four performance hearings. In each case, it made a finding of SDP. It imposed periods of suspension in two cases and imposed conditions on the registration of the other two doctors. In 2001, there were 23 performance hearings. In three cases, the CPP found the doctors’ performance to have been ‘acceptable’. In 20 cases, there was a finding of SDP. In seven cases, suspension was imposed and 13 resulted in the imposition of conditions on the doctors’ registration. In 2002, there were 27 performance hearings. In nine cases, the doctor’s performance was found to have been ‘acceptable’. Of the remaining 18 cases, where SDP was found, seven resulted in suspension and 11 in conditions being imposed on the doctor’s registration. In 2003, out of 21 performance hearings, the CPP found the doctor’s performance ‘acceptable’ in two. Four cases resulted in suspension and 12 in the imposition of conditions on registration. Of the remaining three, two were adjourned and one resulted in voluntary erasure.
24.124
Miss Smith told the Inquiry that she could not speculate upon why the CPP had found the doctor’s performance ‘acceptable’ in such a significant proportion (33%) of cases during 2002. However, she said that, in her experience, there was considerable dispute at hearings about not only the original complaint but also the report of the Assessment Panel and the way the assessment had been carried out. The length of CPP hearings had increased over the years. She mentioned the recent case, to which I have referred, where the doctor had called no fewer than 36 witnesses.
Statistics Relating to Suspensions
24.125
Information provided to the Inquiry by the GMC reveals that 21 doctors were suspended from practice by the CPP between 1998 and the end of 2003. Of those 21 doctors, five have been indefinitely suspended, ten remain under suspension and two are now practising without restriction. Four have since been erased; three took voluntary erasure and one was erased for failure to respond to correspondence sent to his/her registered address.
Statistics Relating to the Making of Interim Orders in Performance Cases
24.126
During 2002, 18 cases classified as ‘performance cases’ were referred to the IOC. Mr Marshall pointed out that this classification was probably made retrospectively since, if a case was referred to the IOC by a medical screener at an early stage, it would not necessarily be clear at that time whether it was a conduct, a performance or a health case. The statistics show that six referrals to the IOC were made by performance case co-ordinators and one each by the ARC and the CPP. The other ten must, presumably, have been made by medical screeners. Mr Marshall told the Inquiry that he suspected that a higher percentage of performance cases than of conduct cases were referred to the IOC. The figure of 18 cases referred in 2002 represented 23% of cases referred to the performance procedures and 32% of those cases where the GMC had initiated action by writing a rule 5 letter.

--- Judicial Decisions on the Performance Procedures ---
24.127
In November 2000, the Privy Council gave judgement in the case of
. This was an appeal by a doctor from a determination of the CPP that the standard of her professional performance had been seriously deficient and a direction that her registration should be suspended for a period of 12 months with immediate effect.
24.128
From October 1996 until January 1998 (when she was suspended), Dr Manjula Krippendorf worked in the UK as a consultant in community paediatrics. She had obtained a certificate of full registration from the GMC in October 1996. Prior to that time, she had been working abroad in specialties which were different from, but related to, community paediatrics. In 1998, one of her former employers, a NHS trust, complained to the GMC about the techniques employed by Dr Krippendorf in administering BCG vaccines to 227 children during an immunisation programme in September 1997. These techniques had led, it was said, to an unusually high incidence of side effects. The same NHS trust also complained about Dr Krippendorf’s role as consultant paediatrician in two potential child protection cases. The complaints gave rise to an invitation by the GMC to Dr Krippendorf to undergo a performance assessment, to which she agreed.
24.129
Delivering the judgement of the Privy Council, Sir Christopher Slade said that the performance assessment had been directed primarily at assessing Dr Krippendorf’s professional competence in a number of areas of work, falling within what the Assessment Panel had perceived to have been her various job descriptions since 1997. The Assessment Panel had assessed her on the work which
‘might come a community paediatrician’s way’
within the post in which she had been employed at the time when the complaint against her was made. The Assessment Panel had expressed the view that community paediatrics required a knowledge of, and experience in, general and developmental paediatrics. The Assessment Panel had regarded clinical competence as essential when responsibility was taken for clinical care. The Assessment Panel had found that Dr Krippendorf did not possess the necessary knowledge and experience. They had tested her in basic life support techniques and had found that she demonstrated an inability to perform them. However, there was apparently no evidence that she had ever been required to use such techniques during the course of her work in the UK. During Phase I of the assessment, interviews had been carried out in places where Dr Krippendorf had worked, medical records had been examined and case discussions had taken place. Phase II had consisted of objective tests of paediatric knowledge and practice.
24.130
At the conclusion of the assessment, the Assessment Panel stated in its report that the standard of Dr Krippendorf’s professional performance had been seriously deficient, that the standard of her professional performance as a paediatrician was likely to be improved only with full retraining in general paediatrics, as well as in any specific specialty such as community paediatrics, and that she should limit her professional practice to non-clinical work. The assessment report indicated that, even within that sphere, she required retraining.
24.131
At the hearing before the CPP, counsel for the GMC indicated that, the performance assessment having taken place, the GMC would not be relying on the original complaints made against Dr Krippendorf. At the request of Dr Krippendorf’s representative, the Director of Public Health who had made the original complaint (and from whom the GMC had obtained a statement) was called to give evidence. When giving her own evidence, Dr Krippendorf admitted that, judged on the basis on which the assessment was carried out, she had not passed. She also expressed her intention to do no clinical work in the future, except in the field of public health. She accepted that, even before working in that field, she should undergo retraining in some aspects of the work, as suggested by the Assessment Panel. She appealed the decision of the CPP on the ground that the Assessment Panel had not approached its function in the correct way.
The Judgement of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
24.132
The Privy Council found that the assessment report demonstrated that the Assessment Panel had made a basic error in its approach to its functions. Section 11(1) of the 1997 Performance Rules required the Assessment Panel to
‘adopt such procedures as appear to them to be necessary having regard to the nature of the practitioner’s work to assess the standard of his professional performance’
. This, the Privy Council pointed out, reflected the wording of section 36A of the Medical Act 1983, which indicated that it was the past professional performance - not the professional competence - of the practitioner in the work which s/he had actually been doing to which the Assessment Panel and the CPP should direct their attention.
24.133
It went on to observe that:
‘... everything in the Rules suggests that it is the duty of the CPP and the Panel to have regard to the track record of the practitioner in the work which he has actually been doing. It is not their function to conduct an examination equivalent to that of a student’s examination board. Theoretical questions are relevant only insofar as the answers may throw light on the practitioner’s professional performance in the specific areas of work which he has actually been doing.’
24.134
This had not been the approach adopted by the Assessment Panel when assessing Dr Krippendorf. Moreover, the assessment report had included no investigation of and no findings in connection with the original complaint about Dr Krippendorf’s injection techniques. No explanation was given for that. The Assessment Panel had regarded the complaint merely as a ‘backdrop’ to its report. It considered that the complaint had triggered the setting up of the assessment, but that it had no further relevance from the perspective of the Assessment Panel. The Privy Council also observed that Dr Krippendorf had been asked many questions about her professional competence in dealing with the kind of problems that a general paediatrician might come across in the course of practice in the UK, without regard to whether she had ever had to deal with them in the course of her actual work. The judgement continued:
‘Their Lordships would accept that on occasions questions directed to a practitioner’s knowledge and clinical skills may throw light on his professional performance in work which he has actually been doing, in cases where there is reason to suspect that his performance in such work may have been seriously deficient. In their Lordships’ opinion, however, the questions directed to and answered by the appellant
Dr Krippendorf
in the Portfolio were of far too extensive and detailed a nature properly to constitute part of the basis on which the Panel were entitled to reach their conclusion.’
24.135
In reaching its decision, the CPP had stated that it had not relied on the original complaint against Dr Krippendorf, but instead had focussed on the evidence in the assessment report. As I have said, the Privy Council found that report to be flawed. The first reason for that was the fact that the Panel had failed to assess Dr Krippendorf’s professional performance by reference to the work she had actually been doing since 1997. The second reason was the failure of the report to deal with the original complaint. The judgement said:
‘Their Lordships do not go so far as to hold that in every case the complaint which triggers an assessment requires investigation by the Panel and the CPP. On the facts of the present case, however, the complaints should, in their Lordships’ opinion, have been investigated because nothing related more directly to the standard of the appellant’s actual professional performance over the relevant period. The failure of both the Panel and the CPP to investigate the complaints reflects their erroneous concentration on her professional competence, rather than her actual professional performance. ...
In the context of fairness, their Lordships add that, in their opinion, in the particular circumstances of this case, fairness demanded that the appellant should be given a proper opportunity to refute, if she could, the serious complaints which directly related to her professional performance and had led to the assessment.’
24.136
The Privy Council concluded that the CPP had misdirected itself in law in reaching its determination. It advised that the appeal should be allowed and that the determination of the CPP should be quashed.
24.137
caused consternation at the GMC. Mr Scott told the Inquiry that he and his colleagues were ‘somewhat flummoxed’ to be told that the GMC should be investigating the initial complaints, rather than launching into an investigation by way of a performance assessment. Sir Donald Irvine said that the effect of the
case was ‘profoundly unsettling’. After this decision had been delivered, work on performance assessments was held back to enable some adjustments to be made. In December 2002, the Medical Act 1983 (Amendment) Order 2002 came into force. It introduced into the Medical Act 1983 a provision that
‘“professional performance” includes a medical practitioner’s professional competence’
. It also made clear that an assessment of a doctor’s professional performance might include an assessment of a doctor’s professional performance at any time prior to the assessment, as well as an assessment of the standard of his/her professional performance at the time of the assessment. It was intended that this should put paid to the problems that had arisen in
24.138
concerned an appeal to the Privy Council by Mr Anthony Peter Sadler, a consultant in obstetrics and gynaecology, against a determination by the CPP, in July 2002, that the standard of his professional performance had been seriously deficient in the area of good operative care. The CPP imposed conditions on his registration, requiring him not to undertake any major gynaecological surgery, to undertake an appropriate remedial training and assessment programme if he wished to return to major gynaecological surgery and to notify the GMC promptly of any professional appointment that he undertook.
24.139
In December 1997, the Medical Director of the NHS trust responsible for the hospital where Mr Sadler worked had complained to the GMC about various matters, including a number of specific incidents which had occurred during surgery performed by Mr Sadler. These included two incidents of severe post-operative bleeding. By the time of the complaint, Mr Sadler had been suspended from his post.
The Report of the Assessment Panel
24.140
Having considered the case, the medical screener directed that Mr Sadler should be invited to undergo a performance assessment. Mr Sadler declined the invitation but the ARC directed that an assessment should take place. The Assessment Panel found that there were severe deficiencies in his obstetric and gynaecological practice, but recommended that he should undergo targeted retraining and supervision, with limited restrictions on his practice. Accordingly, the performance case co-ordinator drew up a statement of requirements with which Mr Sadler undertook to comply. After a period of delay, he embarked upon a period of retraining at a hospital in Bristol. Shortly afterwards, he began to operate under supervision. On the third day, he severed a patient’s right ureter while carrying out an abdominal hysterectomy. As a result of this, his retraining placement was terminated. He was unable to obtain another placement and could not, therefore, comply with the statement of requirements. The case co-ordinator referred the case to the CPP.
24.141
The performance assessment report (which had been prepared before the decision of the Privy Council in the case of
) did not concentrate on the five surgical cases identified in the original complaint. Instead, it relied largely on interviews, especially with staff at the hospital where the incidents had occurred. Mr Sadler had no opportunity of challenging the third party interviews during the preparation of the assessment report, as he was not given transcripts of those interviews until some time afterwards.
The Hearing before the Committee on Professional Performance
24.142
At the hearing before the CPP, evidence was called in connection with three of the surgical cases mentioned in the original complaint and also in relation to the incident which had occurred during Mr Sadler’s retraining placement. I shall call these four cases the ‘index cases’. Evidence about the assessment report was also called. The hearing occupied 16 days. On the 15th
day, the legal assessor advised the CPP that it should not rely on the contents or conclusions of the assessment report, or on anything adverse to Mr Sadler in the third party interviews. This was because the assessment report was flawed in some of the same respects as had been the assessment report in
. In particular, it did not distinguish between past performance and competence and did not subject the index cases to close scrutiny. In addition, Mr Sadler had had no opportunity to challenge the third party interviews on which the report relied. The CPP took the legal assessor’s advice and its decision, therefore, depended on the evidence relating to the index cases.
24.143
The CPP expressed its overall conclusions thus:
‘The Committee find that in ... Cases 1, 2 and 5, and in Case A
i.e. the index cases
you did not meet the professional standard appropriate to the work you were doing. The Committee are sure that these cases disclosed deficiencies in your surgical practise
and that these deficiencies, whether considered individually or cumulatively, were serious. Each of them discloses a worrying reliance upon unsafe surgical techniques which form no part of the normal practise
followed at the relevant time by surgeons in this country.’
The Judgement of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
24.144
Before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the decision of the CPP was attacked on a number of grounds. In particular, it was submitted that index cases could not constitute a ‘pattern’ of seriously deficient behaviour. Reference was made to the definition of SDP contained in the publication ‘When Your Professional Performance Is Questioned’. The November 1997 edition stated:
‘“Seriously deficient performance” is a new idea. We have defined it as “a departure from good professional practice, whether or not it is covered by specific GMC guidance, sufficiently serious to call into question a doctor’s registration”. This means that we will question your registration if we believe that you are, repeatedly or persistently, not meeting the professional standards appropriate to the work you are doing - especially if you might be putting patients at risk. This could include failure to follow the guidance in our booklet Good Medical Practice.’
24.145
The Privy Council rejected the submission that the index cases could not constitute a pattern of behaviour which came within the definition of SDP, saying:
the Board did not criticise the phrase “repeatedly or persistently” in the GMC’s guidance, it is important to bear in mind that that guidance is a generalisation seeking to cover a very wide range of professional performance. The professional demands made on a general practitioner are very different from those made on a consultant surgeon. A continuing failure to organise the efficient management of a general practice may (in a sufficiently bad case) amount to seriously deficient performance, but in the nature of things it must be assessed on very different evidence from that relating to shortcomings of technique in major surgery. It would plainly be contrary to the public interest if a sub-standard surgeon could not be dealt with by the CPP unless and until he had repeatedly made the same error in the course of similar operations. But as a general rule the GMC should not (and their Lordships have no reason to suppose they would) seek to aggregate a number of totally dissimilar incidents and alleged shortcomings in order to make out a case of seriously deficient performance against any practitioner.’
24.146
The Privy Council concluded that the CPP’s decision was justified and recommended that the appeal be dismissed. It made the following observations on the judgement in
‘But without casting any doubt on the decision their Lordships feel that the distinction between competence and performance, drawn in
, should not be taken too far. It is important that any assessment panel should have proper regard to the complaint or other information which originally set the assessment in motion. But in most cases there is an obvious correlation between competence and performance. Moreover the assessment panel is concerned, not only with assessing past professional performance, but also with what needs to be done to improve a practitioner’s performance, both in the public interest and in the practitioner’s own best interests ... The process of assessment must include forming a view as to the standard of past performance, but if it is to achieve its objectives the process must not be restricted to that sort of backward-looking exercise.’
And
‘... their Lordships think it right to reiterate that the process of assessment involves not only the examination of past performance but also assessment and planning (in all but the worst cases) for improvement and rehabilitation. Many assessments and statements of requirements lead to a satisfactory outcome, and a formal hearing before the CPP proves to be unnecessary. Their Lordships do not wish to send out a message that assessment by an assessment panel should be regarded as solely, or even primarily, designed as a process of collecting evidence in order to establish a prima facie case against a practitioner. Where a formal hearing before the CPP is unavoidable parts of the assessment panel’s report may still be inapposite to the determination of the first question that the CPP has to decide; but the whole report is likely to be relevant to the subsequent issue of disposal if it arises.’
The Standard of Proof
24.147
, the legal assessor had said when advising the CPP:
‘The burden of proving seriously deficient performance rests on the Council throughout, as is conceded and you should not make such a finding unless you are sure on the evidence that such was the case.’
24.148
In opening the case of
to the CPP, the GMC’s counsel had indicated that the appropriate standard of proof was the criminal standard of proof and that the legal assessor in
had advised the CPP in appropriate terms. Before the Privy Council, counsel for the GMC did not seek to put forward a lesser standard of proof, but sought guidance on the appropriate standard of proof for future cases. In giving such guidance, the Privy Council said this:
‘The function of the CPP is not penal. It is to protect the public and to rehabilitate (if possible) practitioners whose professional standards have fallen too low. In the first of its tasks (that is deciding whether the standard of a practitioner’s performance has been seriously deficient) the CPP has to ascertain the primary facts (which in many cases may not be seriously in doubt) and then to exercise their judgment (in the case of some but not all the members of the CPP, their professional judgment as experienced doctors). In this exercise the standard of proof of the primary facts ought not, in the generality of cases, to be an issue which gives rise to much difficulty. So far as it is a material issue the standard should in their Lordships’ view, in the generality of cases, be the ordinary civil standard of proof. There may be exceptional cases (probably cases in which the practitioner is fortunate to be facing the CPP rather than the Professional Conduct Committee) in which a heightened civil standard might be appropriate ...’
24.149
The Privy Council went on to echo what had previously been said by the Privy Council in the case of
‘In charges brought against a doctor where the events giving rise to the charges would also found serious criminal charges it may be appropriate that the onus and standards of proof should be those applicable to a criminal trial. However there will be many cases, where the charges which a doctor has to face before the committee could not be the subject of serious or any criminal charges at all. The committee is composed entirely of medical men and women learned in their profession and to require that every charge of professional misconduct has to be proved to them just as though they were a jury of laymen is, in their Lordships’ view, neither necessary nor desirable. What is of prime importance is that the charge and the conduct of the proceedings should be fair to the doctor in question in all respects.’
24.150
The Privy Council pointed out that the passage from
McAllister
was not wholly apposite to a committee which must now have at least one lay member but, subject to that qualification, they observed that the passage applied still more strongly to a hearing before the CPP than to a hearing before the PCC. It should be noted that the Privy Council’s remarks on standard of proof were made at a time when a finding of SDP could not result in erasure. It is possible that its view might have been different if erasure had been available, as it will be in future.
24.151
Before leaving the case of
, I wish to draw attention to the position, highlighted by the facts of the case, of patients who are treated by doctors whose performance either has been found to be seriously deficient or has given rise to serious concerns and who are operating under the terms of a statement of requirements. It is not clear to me whether patients are told the full facts about the status of a doctor who is about to operate on them. In 1999, the Performance Issues Working Group (PIWG) (under the Chairmanship of Professor Hatch) was examining various issues including
‘consent to treatment in cases where the treatment is to be given by a doctor receiving remedial training following a performance assessment’
. The PIWG recommended to Council that patients must be given sufficient information to enable them to give informed consent to treatment by a doctor undergoing retraining. The PIWG drafted some sample letters that might be sent to patients. At its meeting in November 1999, the GMC decided that further work should be done on these issues. It appears that no further progress has been made. In
, I have made a recommendation about the provision to patients of information relating to doctors undergoing retraining.

--- The Inquiry's Examination of Cases ---
24.152
In addition to the cases of
, the Inquiry examined the files, provided by the GMC, of five cases considered by the CPP since 2000. They are useful as they illustrate a number of the difficulties the GMC has experienced in connection with the operation of the performance procedures, and they provide a basis for discussion about possible improvements in the procedures. The main problems are those of delay, the complexity of the procedures and the difficulty in arranging remediation. The cases also give rise to concern about the absence, in some cases, of any formal assessment before the doctor was allowed to resume unrestricted practice. In discussing these cases, I am anxious to preserve the anonymity of the doctors concerned. For that reason, I have not quoted the dates upon which the main events took place. However, the timespan covered by the proceedings is a matter of importance. I have therefore explained the chronology by reference to the time that elapsed from the time of the first report to the GMC.
The Cases KA 01 to KA 05
Dr KA 01
24.153
In the case of Dr KA 01, who was a single-handed GP, the PCO reported concerns about the doctor’s general performance to the GMC. Clinical governance assessments had identified his performance as ‘seriously deficient’. Numerous complaints about him had been received from colleagues and patients. It was thought that prescribing errors of a serious kind were putting patients at risk of harm. The case was screened into the performance procedures and, three months after the first report, the doctor agreed to assessment. The assessment report was ready at the eight-month stage. It concluded that the doctor’s performance was seriously deficient. In particular, I note that the doctor failed all three elements of Phase II. Dame Lesley Southgate told the Inquiry that a doctor cannot be performing well if s/he does not have an adequate knowledge base.
24.154
However, the assessment report expressed the view that the doctor was aware of his deficiencies and was keen to remedy them. The Assessment Panel thought remediation could be effective. It proposed a series of undertakings, which would have left the GP practising, although not alone. He was to have a mentor and was to work in various ways towards improvement of his systems of work. He was to be reassessed in 12 months’ time. He agreed to the undertakings. However, the PCO was less than happy about the arrangements. It was now almost a year since the case had been referred to the GMC and its officers were very worried about the prospect of delay for another 12 months when, they said,
‘every day he is doing harm’
. Very properly, the GMC case co-ordinator referred the case to the CPP.
24.155
A hearing followed; it took place 14 months after the initial complaint. The doctor’s performance was found to be seriously deficient in six respects and he was made subject to conditions for two years. Essentially, the doctor was to continue in practice (although not alone) and was to become involved in a variety of remedial activities. Two of these, which were of considerable importance, involved following advice on retraining to be given by the postgraduate dean and the Clinical Governance Lead of the PCO. After the hearing, a salaried partner was employed to work in the doctor’s practice. However, nine months later (23 months from the initial report), the GMC discovered that the doctor had not contacted either the postgraduate dean or the Clinical Governance Lead. The following month, the doctor was asked for an explanation for this; he said that he had thought that these persons would get in touch with him. He was sent a ‘mild’ letter of warning.
24.156
Just over a year later (that is three years and one month from the initial complaint), it was discovered that the doctor had not been complying with the condition that required him to accept the advice of the postgraduate dean and Clinical Governance Lead. It seems that he was referred to the IOC, which made an order suspending him from practice with immediate effect. The following month, there was a resumed hearing by the CPP, as the two years since conditions were originally imposed was about to expire. The doctor did not attend the hearing. The CPP panel received some evidence that he had co-operated in his remediation. However, it was not satisfied that his clinical practice had improved. The CPP panel decided that the doctor continued to present a risk to patient safety and that it would not be sufficient for the protection of the public to impose conditions on his registration. Therefore, the doctor’s registration was suspended for a period of 12 months. At the resumed hearing, which would take place shortly before the expiry of the suspension, the doctor would be able to present evidence of steps taken to remedy his deficiencies.
24.157
This history shows that the doctor had practised for a period of three years after being reported to the GMC. Throughout that time, he had presented a risk to patient safety. The case has highlighted the need for the GMC to take some proactive steps to ensure that, at the very least, a doctor who is subject to conditions is complying with them. Even that would not be a guarantee that s/he was not practising at a seriously deficient level, but at least it would afford a degree of patient protection. Under the old FTP procedures, when a doctor accepted a voluntary statement of requirements, the GMC required a quarterly report of progress. I hope that the GMC now recognises the need for a similar arrangement to be made in cases where conditions are imposed by a committee or panel, rather than agreed voluntarily. However, I am not sure that this has been recognised, as I can see no provision for supervision in the new procedures. The GMC says, and I well understand its point, that it is not responsible for making the arrangements necessary for compliance with a doctor’s conditions; that must be for the doctor him/herself. However, in the interests of patient protection, the GMC must be made aware of whether the doctor is complying because, if s/he is not, s/he should be brought back for more stringent measures to be considered. It seems to me that this case also calls into question the wisdom of imposing conditions for as long as two (or even three) years without any intermediate hearing. It might sound as though the imposition of conditions for three years is a tougher sanction than conditions for one year; but, if the effect were to be to leave the doctor to practise at a seriously deficient level for three years, the sanction would in fact be inadequate and would leave the public at risk.
Dr KA 02
24.158
A PCO reported to the GMC a wide variety of concerns about Dr KA 02, a GP. These included concerns about clinical competence and judgement, unreliability in relation to out of hours duties, poor hygiene within the surgery premises, breaches of patient confidentiality, lack of audit, failure to undertake continuing education, disregard of controlled drugs regulations and lack of insight in respect of his shortcomings. Almost a year later, the GMC invited the doctor to undergo assessment, to which he agreed. Phase I took place 14 months after the initial report. The assessment presented considerable difficulties because the doctor had left his former single-handed practice and had taken employment in another practice. This had been terminated and, at the time of the assessment, the doctor had only about 56 patients. The report of Phase I expressed many concerns about the clinical care provided. Phase II was not completed until ten months later because of the doctor’s ill health. The doctor failed some aspects of the tests rather badly but his combined results were just acceptable. The assessment report was produced two and a half years after the original concerns had been reported. The Assessment Panel concluded that the doctor’s performance was seriously deficient in a significant number of respects and recommended that he should not practise unsupervised until he had completed a period of defined remedial training under the guidance of a suitably trained GP. The doctor accepted the report and recommendations.
24.159
Despite the doctor’s acceptance, the case was (appropriately) referred to the CPP and a hearing took place two years and eight months after the initial report. The doctor’s performance was found to be seriously deficient and conditions were imposed for 12 months. Principally, the doctor was permitted to work only under the supervision of a GP trainer in a training practice; he was not to work for a deputising service. He had to seek the advice of the postgraduate dean and was required to provide the GMC with information about his activities. As is usual with CPP cases, there was no feedback about progress; Miss Smith told the Inquiry that feedback usually came in only if things were not going well.
24.160
At the resumed hearing, three years and eight months after the initial report, the conditions were renewed for a further six months; at the next hearing, they were revoked. The CPP said that it felt that there was sufficient evidence of improvement to warrant that decision, although no further assessment had been carried out. Presumably, the CPP had received a report from the supervisor. Also, the doctor had signed an undertaking not to practise single-handed. No doubt that undertaking was given voluntarily. However, I do not see how it could be enforceable.
24.161
At the Inquiry hearings, I expressed concern that a doctor whose registration had been subject to conditions should have the conditions removed without any further formal assessment. In the case of a voluntary statement of requirements, the Rules required a second assessment before the restrictions were lifted. This was not so with conditions imposed by the CPP. In its final submissions to the Inquiry, the GMC accepted that the arrangements under the old procedures gave an appearance of inconsistency and that conditions or restrictions should not be lifted without adequate evidence that this was appropriate. I can see that, in some cases, a formal assessment might not be necessary: for example, where a doctor has worked under close supervision and there is a detailed report from his/her supervisor. However, where the supervision has been of a mentoring or advisory nature, I am concerned that the supervisor might not be in a position to provide a sufficiently detailed view of the doctor’s progress to permit a safe decision to be made to remove the conditions. Also, I would have thought that, where a doctor has failed any aspect of the Phase II tests, s/he should be required to retake them and should not be free to practise without restriction unless and until the results are satisfactory.
Dr KA 03
24.162
The concerns expressed about Dr KA 03, a GP, related to a variety of problems, some of which sounded rather more like misconduct than poor performance. For example, it appeared that a large number of patients had been removed from the doctor’s cervical cytology recall system and there was concern that this had been done, not for clinical reasons, but to allow the doctor to meet a particular target (which would, I think, trigger a payment). However, there were also concerns about his prescribing practices, particularly in relation to controlled drugs, and his management of repeat prescribing. It appeared that much of the clinical activity within the practice was dictated by the doctor’s wife who was the practice manager. After some discussion between Mr Howes and a medical screener, it was agreed that further, more detailed, information should be obtained. However, owing to an ‘oversight’, that was not done and the case went back to the medical screener seven months after the initial report. The screener decided that this was a performance case. Three months later, the doctor agreed to be assessed. Phase I took place just over a year after the initial complaint and Phase II another two months after that. The report was produced 18 months after the initial complaint. The report described the doctor’s performance as unacceptable in several respects and as being a
‘cause for concern’
in others. The doctor failed two of the three tests in Phase II. The Assessment Panel nonetheless considered that the doctor should be allowed to continue to practise, provided that he was supervised, that he did not take on any more patients and that there was a development plan for his re-education. Also, the doctor was to be required to improve his surgery premises. The doctor did not accept the assessment report and the case was referred to the CPP for hearing.
24.163
The CPP panel hearing took place three months after production of the assessment report. The CPP panel found that the doctor’s performance was seriously deficient in several important respects. I note, with some interest, that this finding was made notwithstanding the reception of a large number of testimonials and a patients’ petition in support of the doctor. I mention this because it demonstrates that patients may not be aware of deficiencies in their doctor’s performance. Also, I think they are sometimes, possibly often, willing to write a letter of support without bringing all their critical faculties into play. The CPP rejected the Assessment Panel’s suggestions for remediation as impracticable and suspended the doctor’s registration for a year. In the meantime, it was suggested that the doctor should take the advice of the director of postgraduate education about the steps to be taken to remedy his deficiencies. A year later, the doctor was allowed to practise under conditions. He was to work in supervised practice. He was not to work for a deputising service. He could prescribe benzodiazepines and other controlled drugs only with the agreement of his supervisor. The doctor was told that, before these conditions could be lifted, he would be required to undergo reassessment or, alternatively, to show that he had passed the examination for Membership of the RCGP. Nine months later, the doctor underwent the Membership examination but failed. He also retook the Phase II tests. He scored just above the minimum in two of the three tests and narrowly failed the third. Four months later, at a hearing, the CPP received reports on the doctor’s progress and stated that it was satisfied that
‘the public are now sufficiently protected’
for it to remove the restrictions on registration.
24.164
This case gives rise to two matters of interest. The first raises the question of what test the CPP ought to have applied before deciding whether to remove restrictions. The Medical Act 1983 did not specify the test that should be applied at this stage. However, the jurisdiction of the GMC in performance cases was based upon ‘seriously deficient’ performance. Did this mean that if, on later consideration of the case of a doctor whose performance had earlier been found to be seriously deficient, it was found that his/her standard of performance had risen to just above the level of ‘seriously deficient’, the restrictions had to be lifted, even though his/her performance still gave rise to some concerns for patient welfare? The test apparently applied in the case of Dr KA 03 was not the ‘seriously deficient’ test; it was said to be a higher test of ‘sufficient protection for the public’. That seems a more sensible and satisfactory test, but whether it would withstand a legal challenge from a doctor I am not sure. In any event, I am not sure whether the CPP consciously considered what test it should apply; it may be that the panel just thought that the conditions should be lifted.
24.165
The second matter of interest is that the CPP found that the doctor had passed the higher test of ‘sufficient public protection’ notwithstanding his poor showing in the Phase II reassessment. These are objective tests set at a level where most doctors would pass easily. If this was the best that this doctor could do after a fairly intensive period of remediation and study for the RCGP Membership examination, it does not inspire confidence in his performance after a return to unrestricted practice. In short, this case shows that, at least in some cases, the performance procedures could only seek to lift seriously deficient doctors off the bottom rung of the performance ladder onto a rung just above that level. This is of considerable importance in the context of the revalidation of doctors, a subject to which I shall return later in this Report.
Dr KA 04
24.166
Dr KA 04 was a GP working in a deprived area and had a very large patient list. The PCO expressed concerns about him which were very serious and covered many aspects of patient care, including prescribing, clinical knowledge, record keeping, note taking, history taking, physical examination, communication skills and liaison with other agencies. It was also said that he signed blank prescriptions and gave them to his staff to write repeat prescriptions. Four months after the initial complaint, the doctor agreed to undergo assessment. However, shortly afterwards, he was taken ill and remained off work for five months. An Assessment Panel was appointed four months after that and the assessment was not completed until 15 months after the initial complaint. The doctor failed two of the Phase II tests and passed one. Production of the report took another two months. The Panel reported that the doctor’s performance had been seriously deficient and that this had been inevitable because of the conditions under which he had been practising. However, the Assessment Panel was now of the view that the doctor’s performance was no longer seriously deficient. It listed some respects in which the doctor’s performance still gave rise to concern. The doctor did not respond when sent a copy of the report. The case co-ordinator felt that there was insufficient evidence that the doctor’s performance was no longer seriously deficient and referred the case to the CPP.
24.167
The hearing took place two years and one month after the initial report. During that time, the doctor had been practising, save for the five months of his ill health. The CPP panel found the doctor’s performance to have been seriously deficient. In particular it said that his record keeping was an
‘impenetrable jumble’
and that, bearing in mind the extensive use made of locums within the practice, this put patients at risk. Records were not the only cause for concern; the doctor’s assessment of patients’ condition and his provision of investigations and treatment were unsatisfactory. The CPP panel imposed conditions on the doctor’s registration for 12 months. In summary, these required him to establish relations with a mentor and the local Clinical Governance Lead and to work with them on a programme of continuing education and remediation. He was to heed the advice of the PCO about the size of his list and about arrangements for the staffing of his practice.
24.168
Nearly six months later (i.e. two and half years after it had reported its concerns about Dr KA 04), the PCO wrote to the GMC, expressing further concerns. The letter said that there were huge gaps in the doctor’s knowledge and that he seemed unable to improve. Patients were at risk. The PCO was consulting the NCAA and was taking steps to find out whether the doctor had a medical problem. Soon afterwards, the PCO exercised its new list management powers and stopped the doctor from practising as a GP. The doctor was then to work in a new specialty.
24.169
At the resumed hearing (just over three years after the initial complaint), the CPP panel considered whether to refer the doctor to the HC but decided there was insufficient evidence to do so. It considered that the doctor had made efforts to comply with his conditions but had been unable to do so owing to difficult circumstances. It imposed new conditions for a period of nine months. In essence, the doctor was to practise only under supervision and in his new specialty. At a further hearing nine months later (just under four years after the initial complaint), it appears that there was a substantial measure of agreement between the lawyers representing the doctor and those representing the GMC. This covered both the evidence and the proposed condition which was that, for a period of three years, the doctor was to practise only in his new specialty. There was no requirement for supervision or for reassessment. The CPP panel agreed to deal with the case on the basis of this agreed condition, although its members expressed some reservations about the limited nature of the evidence that the doctor was capable of practising to the necessary standard in this new specialty. Thus, Dr KA 04 was free to practise unsupervised within his new specialty for the following three years. That period has not yet expired.
24.170
I have two concerns about this case. First, the doctor was allowed to practise in his new specialty without having undergone any formal assessment of his competence or even a retake of the Phase II tests which he had previously failed. That had not been required, despite the fact that there was cause to suspect that his performance in that regard would not have improved. Second, provided that the doctor complied with the condition that he should practise only within his new specialty, it seemed likely that the restriction would be removed at the expiration of the three-year period. He would then be free to practise again in any capacity in which he could find employment. I do wonder whether the public has been adequately protected in this case.
Dr KA 05
24.171
This is the only one of the five cases examined by the Inquiry that did not relate to a GP. For that reason, I shall not describe it in any detail. It is also the only one of the five cases in which the CPP found that the doctor’s performance was not seriously deficient, even though that had been the conclusion of the Assessment Panel.
24.172
Dr KA 05 was a locum orthopaedic surgeon. He had been the subject of a report from Hospital P to the GMC in the mid-1990s. It was said that he had carried out an operation particularly badly. A report by a group of ‘Three Wise Men’ also mentioned that he was said to upset nurses, patients and medical staff. The following year, another report was received from a patient, enclosing a letter from a different hospital (Hospital G), expressing concern about the doctor’s surgical practice and also saying that his employment had been terminated because of several complaints about his attitude and behaviour. At this time, the performance procedures had not been brought into effect and the case was eventually dealt with two to three years after the first report to the GMC by a letter of advice under the Chapter XV procedures.
24.173
Some time later, a further expression of concern was received from another hospital, Hospital J. I shall refer to this as the index complaint. Its content was very similar to the previous ones. There were concerns about the complication rates and infection rates following surgery; there were also concerns about the doctor’s ‘attitude’ and working relationships. The report mentioned that the reference that had come from a hospital at which the doctor had previously worked (Hospital B) was favourable as to his technical competence but mentioned difficulties in professional relationships. That means that there had been problems over working relationships at four different hospitals. However, the GMC had, from the outset of the performance procedures, taken the view that it could only consider matters arising since July 1997.
24.174
Following further initial enquiries, the doctor was invited to undergo assessment and he agreed. That was eight months after receipt of the index complaint. Owing to a shortage of lead assessors in orthopaedics, the assessment did not take place for another year. By that time, the doctor had moved on, not once but twice. First, he had worked at Hospital T and he suggested that two colleagues there should be interviewed by the Panel. However, when his placement came to an end and he moved back to Hospital B, he did not wish the two colleagues from Hospital T to be interviewed. The assessment took place at Hospital J and at Hospital T. Another six months passed before the report was ready and was sent to the doctor. The original complaints about infection and complication rates at Hospital J seemed to have disappeared into the background. The infection rates might have been due to a dressings technique used by the nurses, and the complications rate was not so different from that of another doctor as to allow any adverse conclusion to be drawn. Now the focus of criticism was on the doctor’s poor working relationships. He was arrogant and ‘talked down’ to subordinates. Similar concerns were expressed by staff from Hospital T and there was also a complaint that he had taken on surgery beyond his capability despite being advised not to. The doctor had denied that there were relationship problems and claimed that, at Hospital J, he had antagonised the nurses by making justifiable criticisms of their dressings techniques. Any other complaints of that nature were, he said, unwarranted. The doctor had passed all the Phase II tests, albeit with some
‘worrying gaps’
in knowledge and other concerns. The report said of the doctor that
‘within well defined and ... limited areas of trauma ... and orthopaedics he is knowledgeable and technically competent’
. The assessment report concluded that the doctor was
‘unsuitable for independent consultant practice’
. The case co-ordinator decided to refer the case to the CPP.
24.175
At the hearing, which occurred two and a half years after the index complaint, the CPP panel found that there was insufficient evidence for a conclusion that the doctor’s performance was seriously deficient. The CPP did not give reasons for that conclusion. However, the GMC provided the Inquiry with a full transcript of the hearing so I have been able to form a view of what happened. Very briefly, it was clear that the Assessment Panel had not fully understood what was required of it and it had not complied with a number of formal requirements. It was far from clear what view it had formed about the doctor’s overall performance. Second, it was clear that the evidence of surgical incompetence either was not extensive or else had not been properly investigated. It did not amount to much and the doctor was able to offer a reasonable explanation for the circumstances in which it was said he had taken on a task beyond his expertise. The doctor maintained that the complaints about personality problems were due, in effect, to prejudice against him, as a locum. None of the staff members who had spoken to the assessors about this was called to give evidence and it appears that the CPP panel felt that there was something in the doctor’s explanation. It was not, of course, aware that similar complaints had been made about him some years previously, before the performance procedures came into operation.
24.176
I have given this account because I want to take the opportunity to make some observations about the conduct of this hearing which I hope will be of value for the future. My comments are not intended to imply that the CPP panel reached the wrong conclusion. My impression from reading the transcript is that the GMC was ‘wrong-footed’ in two respects. First, the Assessment Panel had made a number of technical mistakes in the completion of the assessment process. This allowed the doctor’s counsel to make valid criticisms which to some extent discredited the GMC’s case. Yet I am not sure that these technical criticisms actually had much to do with the merits of the case. They just seemed to. Plainly, it is important that assessors are properly trained and do not make technical errors. Also, the GMC did not call any of the witnesses who had made allegations about the doctor’s behavioural problems; the CPP received the written assessment report and heard the live evidence of two of the assessors. I realise that it would be impracticable and highly undesirable for the GMC to call every person who had provided information to the assessors. However, not calling any of those witnesses ‘live’ enabled the doctor to claim that the witnesses had been biased against him without there being any opportunity for the CPP panel to judge for itself whether that was so.
24.177
Dame Lesley Southgate expressed concern to the Inquiry about the way in which the lawyers who represent doctors before the CPP can ‘pick holes’ in the performance assessments. She compared the assessment to a pointillist picture comprising thousands of small dots. Each statement or point in the assessment was a dot which went to make up the whole picture. If the lawyers were able to remove some of the dots in the assessment, it would lose its strength and credibility, just as the picture would become unintelligible if some of the dots of paint were removed. I understand her concern although I do not share it. Lawyers must be able to attack evidence on behalf of their clients. If all they succeed in doing is to remove a few dots, the CPP panel should still be able to see and understand the picture. But, if the lawyers succeed in removing a whole swathe of dots, then the validity of the assessment may be undermined.
24.178
I mention these forensic difficulties because it seems to me that, under the new procedures, the GMC may have to present rather complex cases to a FTP panel. It is possible that, in future, a single hearing may have to consider allegations of misconduct and deficient performance and problems of health. If the panel is to consider cases in a holistic way, the investigation of the facts, the preparation of evidence and the management of its presentation will all become more difficult than at present. I shall return to these topics later in this Report.
Further Comments on the Five Cases
24.179
All these cases illustrate the problems of delay. The GMC has said that it recognises delay has been a problem and that, in the recent past, it provided better resources for the performance procedures. I have no reason to doubt that that was so. The Performance Procedures Working Group, which reported in April 2004 and to which I shall refer later in this Chapter, drew attention to concerns about delay and urged that further attempts should be made to reduce delays which occurred for reasons which were within the GMC’s control. It seems to me that there is always likely to be an element of delay in performance cases, even with improved resources. If so, patients may be at risk from doctors whose shortcomings have been recognised locally but not yet proved to the GMC. Patients can be protected by interim measures to suspend or impose conditions on a doctor’s registration and, as I have said, after 2000, the IOC made interim orders in performance cases. I note, however, that in none of the five cases examined by the Inquiry was there a referral to the IOC before the full assessment. I can see that, in the absence of hard evidence of harm to patients, the IOC might be reluctant to order interim suspension. It occurred to me that, once it has been decided that a doctor should be assessed, the sooner s/he underwent the Phase II objective assessment, the sooner the IOC would be in a position to make an informed interim decision. I take as an example the case of Dr KA 01. The PCT had expressed real concern for patient safety. The doctor carried on practising. In the event, he failed all three of the Phase II tests. Perhaps, in cases where the local organisation is concerned about patient safety, there should be a rapid referral to a Phase II centre and automatic referral to the IOC if the doctor fails any part of the test.
24.180
The case of Dr KA 01 led indirectly to a discussion at the Inquiry’s seminars about the use of PCT list management powers. In that case, the PCT must have been very worried when, ten months after the CPP hearing, so little had happened. It had reported its concerns; the doctor had been assessed and the concerns had been found to be valid. Yet, two years later, the only real change was that there was an additional doctor working in the practice. It might also be said that Dr KA 01 had been made fully aware of his deficiencies. However, in other respects, nothing had happened to ensure that the doctor did not make the same kind of errors as he had been making in the past.
24.181
At the seminars, there was some discussion about whether a PCT in the position of that one should use the list management powers which it had had since 2002 to suspend or remove a doctor from its list, in the interests of protecting patients. The view was expressed that a PCT would hesitate to do so where the GMC, the professional regulatory body, had considered the case and had decided upon a different course. The PCT would tend to defer to the GMC’s view. That is understandable, particularly in a case like that of Dr KA 01, where the PCT was not even in existence when its predecessor had referred the doctor to the GMC. However, the view was expressed by several participants that PCTs should be prepared to use their own powers and to exercise their discretion if the remedies offered by the GMC appeared less than adequate. I note that, in the case of Dr KA 04, the PCO did stop a doctor from providing GP services. He had been through the GMC performance procedures and conditions had been imposed on his registration. The PCO remained worried about patient safety and used its own powers. I think that is appropriate. Parliament has provided these powers, presumably because it has recognised that local bodies sometimes have a closer view of what is going on than a national body and are better able to assess the needs of their own communities.

--- The Performance Procedures Review Group ---
24.182
In November 2002, the Fitness to Practise Policy Committee established the Performance Procedures Review Group, chaired by Dame Deirdre Hine, former Chief Medical Officer for Wales and former Chairman of the Commission for Health Improvement, to carry out a review of the performance procedures. The Review Group presented a draft report in November 2003 and its final report in April 2004. Members of the Review Group included Professor Alastair Scotland, Chief Executive and Medical Director of the NCAA, and Dame Lesley Southgate.
24.183
The final report of the Review Group noted that the GMC’s performance procedures represented a
‘major step forward in the modernisation of medical regulation’
. It went on:
‘For the first time, the GMC had at its disposal reliable and internationally recognised tools to assess, fairly, consistently and accurately, the standard of a doctor’s professional performance in any major branch of medicine. The achievements of the procedures as they stand are considerable.’
24.184
It was noted that, with the introduction of the new FTP procedures, the present performance procedures would cease to exist. The remit of the Review Group was to consider whether the original objectives of the procedures needed to be amended and to make recommendations for the future consideration of performance issues and the use of the assessment instruments.
24.185
The Review Group explained that, before the introduction of the performance procedures, it had been expected that most doctors would be dealt with by way of voluntary procedures (modelled on the existing health procedures) so that the CPP would be a
‘committee of last resort’
. It had been assumed that most doctors referred to the procedures would be capable of remediation and would be able to return to unrestricted practice after a period of targeted re-education or training. It had also been assumed that doctors would be willing to undergo remediation and would agree to a voluntary statement of requirements for this purpose. Another assumption had been that most referrals would involve hospital consultants who had failed to keep up with the latest techniques, or doctors at early stages of their careers, whose problems could readily be
‘nipped in the bud’
. In the event, these assumptions were not borne out once the procedures were introduced.
24.186
The Review Group considered that the most striking feature of the data which it had collected was the very small number of cases between 1998 and 2002 (15) in which a statement of requirements had been agreed. The Review Group observed that it was not clear whether this was because of a lack of cases in which a statement of requirements would have been appropriate, or because case co-ordinators had been unwilling to offer statements of requirements or because of a reluctance on the part of doctors to accept statements of requirements. However, the majority of cases went to the CPP for decision. It suggested that there was some evidence that the performance cases coming to the GMC were complicated by the doctors’ reluctance to take advice or to seek help.
24.187
The Review Group drew attention to the number of cases in 2001 and 2002 in which a decision by a medical screener that a doctor should be invited to undergo a performance assessment had been overturned by the ARC. Its final report identified two possible reasons for this. First, the screening threshold might be too low, as a result of which ‘weak’ cases had been referred for assessment. Second, the fact that the doctor was able to give oral evidence before the ARC, it was suggested, might lead to a decision which was
‘reasonable at the screening stage’
being
‘rightly set aside when a fuller picture becomes clear’
. The draft report had suggested a third reason, namely that, as the complainant might not always appear at the ARC hearing, the decision might sometimes have been made not to assess a doctor in circumstances where, had the full picture been known, it would have been more appropriate to have undertaken such an assessment. Given the fact that it is not intended that the new FTP procedures should contain any equivalent of the ARC, the Review Group did not proceed to consider which of the possible explanations was the most likely. However, it might be valuable to analyse the reasons why screening decisions were overturned by the ARC. It might be that the effect of a ‘one-sided hearing’ (without the benefit of the complainant’s evidence) tends to produce a particular result. If so, such hearings should be avoided in future.
24.188
The Review Group also referred to the increase in the length of performance hearings by the CPP. The average length of a performance hearing was two days in 1999 and over three days in 2002. The CPP panel sat for 15 days in 2000, 54 days in 2001, 120 days in 2002 and 90 days up to September 2003. The
case alone took 16 days.
24.189
The Review Group referred to the part played by the GMC’s FTP procedures in the wider framework for protecting patients. It highlighted a perception that the performance procedures did not provide adequate feedback to those with local responsibility for doctors. In particular, it drew attention to the fact that performance assessment reports were not made available to a doctor’s employer or PCO. The Review Group criticised this approach, saying:
‘If an assessment report reveals that a doctor has serious performance problems, it is important that the organisation responsible for managing the doctor locally should see the assessment report. It cannot be regarded as a private document between the GMC and the doctor.’
24.190
The Review Group expressed no concluded view as to whether assessment reports should be disclosed to employers or PCOs in cases where the doctor’s performance was found not to be seriously deficient, or where deficiencies which were not deemed serious enough to justify action on registration, but were nevertheless sufficient to warrant the issuing of a warning, had been disclosed. The Review Group recommended that the GMC should give further consideration to these issues. In my view, all assessment reports should be disclosed to employers and PCOs.
24.191
The Review Group also mentioned the failure of the ARC and the CPP to give reasons for decisions which went in favour of a doctor. Its draft report had observed that, even where reasons were given, they were
‘too sparse to enable proper understanding of the position’
. The Review Group observed that the publication, from 1st
July 2003, of CPP decisions on the GMC’s website was
‘a step forward’
. However, it considered that further measures needed to be taken in order to ensure effective feedback. It observed:
‘... it is essential that the GMC gives reasons for every decision it makes on fitness to practise, including decisions not to take any action. An employer’s role is made harder if no information is available to explain why apparently serious concerns have not been taken forward.’
The GMC has accepted that recommendation and, in the recent past, it was the practice of the CPP to give reasons for all its decisions.
24.192
The Review Group referred also to the fact that hearings of the CPP were held in private, unless the doctor requested a public hearing. It expressed the view that performance hearings should normally be held in public, unless the CPP panel decided otherwise. In its draft report, the Review Group had observed that
‘private hearings are not compatible with openness, transparency and accountability’
24.193
The Review Group went on to address the issue of evidence. The report pointed out that (unlike the situation that existed when the performance procedures were first introduced) doctors who are referred to the GMC in the future are likely to have been through some sort of local remedial process which has been deemed to have failed. The report raised the question of whether the GMC should be able to use evidence that might be available from other sources at the time of referral. Hitherto, such evidence had played little part once a decision to undertake a GMC assessment had been made. The report stated:
‘... the intention
this presumably refers to an intention on the part of the GMC
is to move towards a model where reliable information gathered locally or by other organisations, is more systematically considered and plays a greater part in the GMC’s overall investigation and assessment of a doctor’s fitness to practise’.
Such an approach would, the report pointed out, avoid duplication of time, resources and effort. It would also be consistent with a
‘team approach’
to protecting patients and maintaining standards.
24.194
The Review Group suggested that potential sources of evidence which might be used by the GMC would be complaints (whether substantiated locally or not), reports of IRP hearings or Ombudsman’s investigations or other such findings, results of
‘routine or exceptional audits’
and reports of assessments carried out by the NCAA or equivalent bodies in other parts of the UK. Mention was also made of the fact that, in the future, assessments following the model of the NCAA might also be carried out at a local level. The Review Group referred to the distinction between the summative (i.e. pass/fail) character of the performance procedures (which, notwithstanding their emphasis on remediation, could result in suspension and would in the future have the potential to end in erasure) and the formative (i.e. educational) nature of the local performance procedures and intervention by the NCAA. The latter were aimed at remedial action. Nonetheless, the report suggested that it should be possible, where evidence was already available, to
‘build’
a picture of performance in the round, making use of that evidence. The Review Group considered that any evidence used in this way must be attributable to the performance of the individual doctor (and not teams or systems), must be obtained and presented fairly, must be robust and reliable and must be used to achieve fair and consistent judgements across all the areas in ‘Good Medical Practice’. In order to ensure that those criteria were fulfilled, the report suggested that:
‘... employers and local bodies will need clear guidance (either from the GMC or through “centres of excellence” identified or created to disseminate best practice) about how to ensure that their processes led to evidence which meets these standards. ...
Obviously, such a process would take time, effort and resources.’
24.195
The Review Group considered that the
‘direction of travel’
should be to move towards the use of local evidence wherever possible. Only where the local evidence was insufficient or inappropriate should the GMC use its own assessment instruments to investigate the doctor’s performance further. The Review Group considered that, in the long term, it would be preferable for a single national body to undertake all assessments to defined national standards. It did not attempt to address the question of who should do this.
24.196
The report pointed out that the performance procedures had, from their inception, emphasised remediation far more than was customary in the conduct procedures. It observed:
‘The fact that spm could lead to erasure whilst sdp could not, sent a powerful signal in its own right.’
The Review Group observed that, when the procedures were devised:
‘... remediation was rightly made a central theme of the policy model, both because it was desirable to achieve a professional consensus on the fledgling procedures, and because there was an almost complete absence of structured, local arrangements to support doctors in difficulty’
24.197
The Review Group recognised that, in future, most doctors referred to the GMC with performance problems will have undergone a remedial process which has failed, or will be deemed to have failed. The Review Group noted that some people had suggested that the GMC should dispense entirely with any ambition to enable poor practice to be remedied and should instead focus exclusively on what action needs to be taken to protect the public. Nevertheless, the Review Group believed that there were
‘sound reasons’
for the GMC to retain remediation as an aim and thus to retain the facility to offer a voluntary route for dealing with performance concerns. The report suggested that, most importantly, such a voluntary route provided an incentive for a doctor to co-operate with the process. The Review Group believed that, if the GMC simply abolished the existing voluntary procedures, the result would be that every doctor referred to the GMC with a serious performance problem would contest the process at every stage. This would involve significant cost and delay. The Review Group believed that, even if such an approach could be justified in terms of proportionality (which it believed it could not), such delay would not be in the public interest and would be an extremely ineffective use of resources.
24.198
In its draft report, the Review Group had stated that, nevertheless,
‘the emphasis should always be on patient protection’
. This should be so particularly when the voluntary route was considered inappropriate and a case had been referred to a hearing. While remediation should not be ruled out, it was said that the objective of the CPP (in future, a FTP panel) should primarily be to decide what action needed to be taken to protect patients and the public in a case where a finding was made that the doctor’s fitness to practise was impaired. This seemed to imply that, once remediation within the voluntary procedures had been ruled out, the focus should shift away from attempts to remediate the doctor and should, instead, be directed at removing him/her from practice either temporarily or permanently. As I shall explain later in this Chapter, this was the thrust of Mr Scott’s oral evidence on this topic.
24.199
In the final report of the Review Group, the relevant passage had been modified and no longer appeared to suggest any change of focus away from remediation.


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE - The General Medical Council's New Fitness to Practise Procedures
========================================================================

--- Preparations for Change ---
25.7
In 1997, the Fitness to Practise Policy Committee (FPPC) of the GMC was established. It was chaired by the then President, Sir Donald Irvine. The functions of the FPPC included responsibility for reviewing the statutory framework governing the FTP procedures and for making proposals for amendment where appropriate.
25.8
The FPPC set up several working groups, including the Professional Conduct Committee (PCC) Working Group, to which I referred in
, and the Screening and PPC Working Group. The reports of both Working Groups became available in 1999. Following the publication of those reports, and the debate which they provoked, the FPPC produced a discussion document, seeking ideas for changes to the FTP procedures. The discussion document sought views from members of the GMC on a wide range of issues, including the purpose of the GMC’s FTP procedures, appropriate sanctions, interim orders, restoration to the register, the possible integration of the conduct, health and performance procedures and the operation of the FTP procedures generally.
25.9
In March 2001, the GMC issued a Consultation Paper, ‘Acting fairly to protect patients: reform of the GMC’s fitness to practise procedures’ (the 2001 Consultation Paper), which set out a number of options for reform of the FTP procedures and sought views on them. It also set out some principles that it was considered should underlie the development of the new procedures, together with criteria by which they were to be judged. The criteria required that the procedures must be,
, fair, objective, transparent, free from discrimination, effective, prompt, proportionate, understandable, compatible with the Human Rights Act 1998 and regarded with confidence by the public and the profession.
25.10
The 2001 Consultation Paper identified those features which the GMC perceived as the strengths of the old FTP procedures. The first of these was that enquiries which were
‘obviously trivial or incoherent’
‘not relevant to the role of the GMC’
could be dealt with quickly within the GMC office. Second, it was said that the recently acquired (in 2000) powers to impose interim suspension or conditions on registration pending investigation and determination of a complaint against a doctor meant that the GMC could act quickly when it appeared that a doctor was a danger to the public or to him/herself. Third, the 2001 Consultation Paper pointed out that the new performance procedures permitted investigations to proceed along a formal, but voluntary, route, with the co-operation of the doctor, so that the doctor’s problems could be investigated and, if possible, put right
‘without the delay and expense of the doctor having to appear before a committee simply to agree points which have already been conceded’
25.11
The 2001 Consultation Paper also identified certain disadvantages of the old conduct and performance procedures. First, there was limited investigation before a decision was made on what to do with a case. Second, it was said that the tests applied when determining whether a case should proceed had very low thresholds. It was suggested that this might result in
‘groundless cases’
being referred to the PCC. As well as the thresholds being very low, it was suggested that the tests applied to conduct cases at each of the various filtering stages (by the office staff, the screener and the PPC) were very similar, which raised the question of whether all three stages were needed. Fourth, it was said that the decision on how to take a case forward (especially the choice between the conduct and performance routes) was taken at a very early stage and could not later be reversed, even when further evidence would have made that desirable. Finally, the 2001 Consultation Paper observed that the arrangements for issuing letters of advice to doctors lacked transparency and were not regarded as fair or effective by complainants or doctors.
25.12
The 2001 Consultation Paper also acknowledged that the old procedures did not satisfy most of the criteria by which it had suggested that the new procedures should be judged. It observed that the processes involved in the existing FTP procedures could be slow and cumbersome and involved considerable duplication of effort by GMC members and office staff. They also lacked transparency. It referred to successive judicial reviews of conduct cases in which, it was said, the tests to be applied in the early stages had been interpreted as allowing very little discrimination to decision-makers, with the result that those stages were not effectively sifting out the cases which should not be considered fully by the PCC. The FTP procedures did not, the 2001 Consultation Paper suggested, command the confidence of the public or of doctors. A new approach was required
‘which builds on the strengths of the existing system but which addresses its structural weaknesses’
. I am not sure that the weaknesses identified were exclusively structural. However, it is clear that the GMC was contemplating radical change.
25.13
In May 2001, the Fitness to Practise Review Group (the FTP Review Group) reported the results of the consultation process to the full Council. Detailed proposals were then developed and a paper (which appears to have been produced by the FTP Review Group) was considered by the Council at its meeting in November 2001. At that meeting, a number of important decisions of principle were taken relating to the new procedures; I shall refer to some of these in due course. During 2002, there were further discussions within the GMC about the detail of the proposals for reform. Those discussions resulted in the production of an internal discussion paper, ‘Review of Fitness to Practise: The New Model’, in October 2002. That paper subsequently underwent amendment; the version in the Inquiry's possession is dated 22nd
November 2002. A further paper produced by the FPPC was discussed by the Council at its meeting in November 2002. Some amendments were made to the proposals at that stage.
25.14
Before the new procedures could be adopted, changes to the legislation were required. Accordingly, in December 2002, the GMC obtained certain amendments to the Medical Act 1983 (the 1983 Act). These were effected by the Medical Act 1983 (Amendment) Order 2002. New Rules were also needed. Accordingly, in July 2003, the GMC published the draft General Medical Council (Fitness to Practise) Rules 2003 (the 2003 draft Rules), with accompanying Guidance. A period of consultation on the 2003 draft Rules followed. That period of consultation finished at the end of October 2003.
25.15
In November and December 2003, witnesses from the GMC gave oral evidence to the Inquiry. Some of them - in particular Mr Finlay Scott, Chief Executive, and Professor Sir Graeme Catto, President - gave evidence about the new procedures. As I have said, it had been intended that the new procedures would be in place by the spring of 2004. By the time of the Inquiry hearings, however, it was clear that their introduction was going to be delayed. In the early part of 2004, the GMC reviewed its proposals for the new procedures. This review was carried out partly in response to concerns about the original proposals that had been raised at the Inquiry and partly as a result of issues that had emerged from the consultation process. The review resulted in important changes to the new procedures which, in turn, necessitated substantial changes to the 2003 draft Rules. In May 2004, the GMC published a revised version of the draft Rules (the May 2004 draft Rules), together with further Guidance. A short period of consultation on the May 2004 draft Rules followed.
25.16
In July 2004, the GMC published a third version of the draft Rules (the July 2004 draft Rules). They were accompanied by further Guidance. The July 2004 draft Rules contained further significant changes to the proposed new procedures. A fourth version of the draft Rules followed in September 2004. These contained only minor changes to the July 2004 draft Rules. They were accompanied by yet further Guidance. The September 2004 draft Rules (with a few further minor changes) were adopted by the GMC at its Council meeting on 15th
September 2004 and came into effect, as I have said, on 1st
November 2004. I shall refer to this fourth version as the November 2004 Rules.
25.17
During the five years for which the new procedures have been under discussion, there have been a number of fundamental changes to the arrangements proposed. I do not intend to trace all those changes in detail. Instead, I shall discuss the new procedures as they were proposed in 2003, when the first set of draft Rules was produced. I shall then examine the very different procedures now proposed. Before doing so, I shall summarise briefly the way in which the new procedures are intended to operate.

--- Interim Orders ---
25.265
paragraph 25.23
, IOPs will take the place of the old IOC. The November 2004 Rules provide that it will be open to the Registrar at any stage to refer an allegation to an IOP for consideration of the making of an interim order. A single case examiner may direct the Registrar to refer a case to an IOP. The November 2004 Rules do not contain any similar power for the IC. However, the Guidance accompanying the draft Rules suggests that it will be open to the IC to make a
‘recommendation’
that a case should be referred.
25.266
Hearings before an IOP will generally be in private, unless the doctor requests otherwise, or the IOP considers it appropriate for one of a number of reasons to hear the case in public. An IOP may impose an interim order for a period of up to 18 months. Orders will be subject to periodic review.


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY SIX - Revalidation
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
25.349
In the course of this long Chapter, I have expressed my views about the GMC’s proposals for its new FTP procedures. It is clear that, in some areas, the new procedures will be a significant improvement on the old and, in other areas, the reverse appears to me to be the case. I do not propose, at this stage, to repeat the detailed observations that I have made as I have gone along. Instead, I want to stand back and examine the new procedures in the round.
25.350
, I reported at some length the opening submissions to the Inquiry of Mr Roger Henderson QC on the GMC’s behalf. I shall not repeat them here. Their gist was an acceptance that there was much that had been unsatisfactory under the old procedures. However, I was urged to accept, those were the ‘bad old days’ and it would all be different in the future. This was also the message to the Inquiry from the GMC witnesses, in particular from the President and the Chief Executive. I have no hesitation in accepting the sincerity of their expressions of intention. However, I have grave reservations about the willingness and ability of the GMC as presently constituted to change its ways.
25.351
I regret to say that my overall reaction to the way in which the new procedures have been developed is one of disappointment. Although, in the early days, at the time of the 2001 Consultation Paper, there was every indication that the GMC had a vision of what it wanted to achieve, that vision has been lost. I do not believe that that vision, or the purpose or principles that underpinned it, have been translated into the new procedures.
25.352
The GMC knows what the fundamental purpose of its FTP procedures is or should be. It was clearly set out in the 2001 Consultation Paper. The fundamental purpose was said to be to promote and safeguard the public interest, which involved individual patient protection, the maintenance of public confidence in the profession and declaring and upholding proper standards of conduct. In my view, if that fundamental purpose is to be met, there are some basic principles that should be applied; for example, subject to the requirements of medical confidentiality, everything that the GMC does must be capable of scrutiny; it must be transparent. The work that the GMC does must be thorough, careful and of high quality. That means that every aspect of the FTP procedures must be properly resourced. Each process must be undertaken by persons who are suitably qualified and properly trained to carry it out. In the interests of fairness and of the proper maintenance of standards, procedures must be followed and decisions made in a consistent, transparent manner. Those are the broad principles that should have been followed in developing the GMC’s approach to its new procedures. They should not have been forgotten right to the end.
25.353
The criteria for evaluating the proposals that were enunciated in the 2001 Consultation Paper reflect those principles but they have not been met. By way of illustration, one such criterion was compliance with the Human Rights Act 1998, and the GMC said that it was
‘in no doubt’
that it was necessary, in order to demonstrate that its procedures were fair, to separate the investigation and adjudication functions. Not only would this ensure compliance with the Human Rights Act 1998, but it would foster public confidence and it would satisfy those doctors who felt that it was unfair that they should be prosecuted and judged by the same body. The GMC talked about this idea and then decided - in effect - to abandon it. Members could not bring themselves to relinquish part of the process. It seems that their justification for this was that they believed that no one else could undertake either of the functions as well as they could. And yet, this was a body that had been the subject of severe public criticism on many grounds and which had embarked on reform, apparently because it had recognised the force of that criticism.
25.354
There is one issue of importance that was present in the minds of GMC members at an early stage and from which they have not resiled. That was the need to abolish the separate procedures for conduct, health and performance and to create a unified set of procedures for all types of case. That they have done and I do not think that anyone doubts that this was the right thing to do. The appropriate legislative changes went through in 2002. Since then, there has been no real sign of an overall plan carried through to fruition. There was the publication of the 2003 draft Rules, which contained some improvements on the old procedures and the retention or introduction of many unsatisfactory features. Since then, the GMC has responded to criticism from a variety of quarters, including this Inquiry. It has made some improvements. Many of the criticisms related to matters that the GMC might have been expected to have seen for itself, if it had formulated an overall vision of how it wanted its new procedures to operate. For example, it is amazing to me that the GMC should have resiled from its commitment, under the old procedures, to the involvement of lay persons in the preliminary processes for sifting complaints.
25.355
Such improvements as have come about since 2003 have been made in a piecemeal fashion and in response to criticism. But, unfortunately, not all the changes that have been made since the 2003 draft Rules have been for the better. Some provisions of the 2003 draft Rules have been changed for the worse. I have in mind in particular the changes to the role of the case examiners. In 2003, it was intended that they should fulfil a variety of functions, mainly during the investigation stage, but also including involvement in the supervision of doctors subject to voluntary undertakings and in the preparation of the cases of doctors subject to conditions, suspension and erasure who were coming up for a review or restoration hearing before a FTP panel. I am unaware of any criticism of the proposals that case examiners should fulfil those functions; indeed, I personally thought them satisfactory. Many of these functions have now been taken away from case examiners and have been given to members of staff who are not well qualified to carry them out. As I have said earlier in this Chapter, I cannot think of any reason of principle for those changes and am driven to the conclusion that they have been made for reasons of expediency. Another example of a change for the worse is the new provision for the cancellation of referrals to a FTP panel; the new arrangements are open to abuse and are not even remotely transparent. A third example is the arrangements for the issue of letters of advice. The lack of any clear criteria for their issue was identified as a defect under the old procedures. Yet, after an initial proposed improvement, the informal arrangements proposed have all the defects of the previous system.
25.356
One particular concern that I must mention is the lack of transparency in the way in which the new procedures have been developed. The draft Rules have been changed from time to time and new guidance has been issued to accompany new sets of Rules. There is, of course, nothing wrong with that. It is understandable that the GMC’s thinking has developed over time and as a result of consultation. Yet, there has been very little public discussion at the GMC about the thinking behind the changes; nor are the reasons apparent from briefing papers prepared for the use of members at Council meetings. I have no doubt that the changing proposals have been fully discussed by the Fitness to Practise Committee and I accept that it is entirely proper that it should meet in private. However, it must have been very difficult for doctors, medical defence organisations, health administrators and the public (as it has been for the Inquiry), to trace the development of the procedures and to understand what has been decided and why. Indeed, even now that the new procedures are in operation, it is still difficult to find out exactly how they are going to operate. It must be apparent from this Chapter that it has not been easy for the Inquiry to piece the picture together. In my view, there is an urgent need for a handbook containing all the Rules, all the guidance currently in operation and any standards, criteria and thresholds to be applied when making decisions. The handbook should also give a clear and complete account of what can happen at each stage of the procedures. Moreover, the GMC must ensure that the guidance it issues is in conformity with the Rules and the underlying provisions of the 1983 Act. The handbook should be readily available and should be accessible on the GMC website.
25.357
The result of all the changes to the draft Rules is that the new procedures are much like a curate’s egg: they are good in parts and not good in others. I have made a lot of suggestions about alterations that would, in my view, be for the better. I make them in a constructive spirit. I hope that some - if not all - of them will be adopted. But the process of change has been tortuous and piecemeal. It is discouraging, as it indicates to me that, even now, at the start of the new era, there is no real commitment to the underlying principles of good regulation. In short, I am not convinced that the leopard has changed its spots or ever will.

--- CHAPTER TWENTY SIX - Revalidation ---
Whither Revalidation?

--- The Development of the General Medical Council's Proposals for Revalidation up to the End of 2002 ---
26.6
The possibility of requiring doctors to undergo some sort of periodic reassessment of their fitness to practise was first raised in the 1970s. In 1975, the Merrison Committee, whose Report I mentioned in
, referred to a growing interest in linking continued registration with periodic tests of competence. However, the Committee took the view that the issue lay outside its Terms of Reference. It passed on the evidence that it had received on the topic to another committee, which had been set up by the medical profession under the Chairmanship of Sir Anthony Alment, to review,
the existing methods of ensuring the maintenance of standards of continuing competence to practise. The Report of the Alment Committee, entitled ‘Competence to Practise’, published in 1976, stressed the importance of doctors keeping their practice up to date and accepted that there might be considerable value in some form of re-licensure. However, it concluded that there was no evidence to justify the introduction of re-licensure as a compulsory requirement. It was thought that
‘a system of licensing for all could not be based upon measurements satisfactory enough to justify it’
. The Report recommended that, instead, doctors should be encouraged to keep up to date voluntarily. In short, the Alment Report concluded that there were insuperable practical difficulties in the way of any form of revalidation. Those members of the GMC who are currently charged with the responsibility of developing proposals for revalidation might be forgiven for thinking that perhaps the Alment Committee was right.
26.7
Proposals for re-licensure surfaced again in 1998 in the immediate aftermath of the GMC hearings of allegations of serious professional misconduct against three doctors, arising out of concerns about the paediatric cardiac service at the Bristol Royal Infirmary. Sir Donald, then President of the GMC, describes in his book, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’
, how the idea developed. He said that, by June 1998, there was a growing awareness of
‘the clear public expectation that medical regulation should include measures to assure patients that consultants, and general practitioners, continue to perform effectively throughout their working lives’
26.8
At that time, Sir Donald had in mind the introduction of some form of revalidation only for those doctors who practised unsupervised, i.e. consultants and GP principals. He envisaged that revalidation would operate in conjunction with the basic strategies for securing and maintaining good medical practice, which included the setting of clear general and specific standards, effective local clinical governance and effective local and central arrangements for dealing with poor practice. He suggested that the current specialist register (which contained the names of those doctors entitled to practise in unsupervised positions in the various secondary care specialisms) was not ‘fit for purpose’ if there was no check on the doctors’ continuing fitness to practise over many years. He suggested that revalidation should take place at five-year intervals. At a meeting of the leaders of the profession, held in August 1998, there was general agreement that the idea was sound in principle; however, reservations were expressed about how revalidation was to be achieved in practice.
26.9
In the ensuing months, the debate about revalidation got underway within the profession at large. Support was not universal. There was perhaps a further stimulus towards action - at least within the GMC - when Rodney Ledward was struck off the medical register at the end of September 1998. He had been practising as a consultant gynaecologist in Kent. His incompetence (manifested by an unusually high complication rate following operative procedures) had been evident to some for many years, but no action had been taken to prevent him from practising. As it happens, September 1998 was also the month in which Shipman was arrested on suspicion of the murder of Mrs Kathleen Grundy.
26.10
Revalidation was discussed at a meeting of the GMC in November 1998 but no firm decision was taken about what should be done. However, at a special conference held in February 1999, the GMC decided, by a very substantial majority, to introduce revalidation. It also decided that revalidation should apply to all doctors, not only to consultants and GP principals. It was further decided that revalidation should be linked directly with registration; in other words, no revalidation would mean no licence to practise. However, the GMC also decided that no doctor would be refused a licence to practise unless and until s/he had been through the GMC’s performance procedures and had been found unfit to practise by a panel of the Committee on Professional Performance (CPP). I described the operation of the performance procedures in
. In February 1999, these procedures were still relatively new, having been introduced in July 1997.
26.11
There was discussion at the special conference in February 1999 about how revalidation was to be carried out. It was expected that most would achieve revalidation without difficulty and that only a tiny proportion would fall to be dealt with under the performance procedures. According to Sir Donald, in ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, the original proposal, set out in the paper prepared for discussion at the conference,
‘introduced the idea of a staged model - local profiling, regular review, assessment and external quality assurance’
. Powerful voices spoke against any form of ‘examination’ as the basis of revalidation. There was general agreement that revalidation should dovetail with local clinical governance procedures. The Chief Medical Officer (CMO) for England, Professor (later Sir) Liam Donaldson, made an important contribution to the debate and was supportive of the principles behind revalidation. He was at that time closely involved with the development of clinical governance within the NHS. He said that he saw revalidation as
‘an important piece of the overall framework of quality in the NHS which ... must be put in place’
. Sir Donald described how Professor Donaldson spoke of
‘the strong interdependence between professional self-regulation - of which this
revalidation
was an important part - and clinical governance and the statutory duty of quality within the NHS’
. He also spoke of the potential of revalidation for improving quality of practice. It was envisaged that revalidation, properly implemented, would achieve two objectives: the weeding out of poorly performing doctors so as to protect patients, and the enhancement of performance in others.
26.12
There was another aspirational contribution to this debate that I particularly wish to mention. Professor David Hatch, Consultant Anaesthetist at the Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, said that, in his 30 years of practice:
‘... nobody has given me an opportunity to demonstrate that I am fit to practise and up to date. I would welcome the opportunity to try to show that to the parents of the children I anaesthetise and the children themselves in some cases. I would hope that the Register, available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, would be the instrument for doing that. I hope that people will look up the Register, and the fact that I am on it will indicate that I am safe to anaesthetise their children.’
It appears that not all members of the GMC shared this positive approach to revalidation. But those who did not were in the minority and, as I have said, the proposals were carried and revalidation was on its way.
Developing the Practical Arrangements
26.13
A Revalidation Steering Group (RSG) was formed by the GMC to devise plans for the implementation of revalidation. Its aim was to produce fully developed proposals for discussion within two years. The target date for implementation was 2002. The RSG first reported to the GMC at a Council meeting in May 1999. The RSG recommended that revalidation should be based on the principles set out in the GMC publication ‘Good Medical Practice’. As I understand the outline proposals at that time, it was intended that work would be done to compile a ‘local profile’ of a doctor’s performance. Although the term ‘profiling’ was not explained, I take it to mean that the essential requirements for doctors of each particular type would be analysed, standards would be set and a means devised of assessing the individual doctor against the essential requirements. In that way, each doctor would be subjected to an individual judgement, based on material or evidence that s/he would produce. The precise way in which this was to be achieved was not at that time specified in any detail. More detailed development work was to take place. Meanwhile in May 1999, it was also envisaged that if, during the process of revalidation, any concerns arose about a doctor’s performance, there should be an opportunity for local remedial action, followed, if necessary, by referral to the GMC’s fitness to practise (FTP) procedures and action on registration (i.e. the imposition of conditions on or suspension of registration). The RSG stressed that the development of revalidation must be co-ordinated with that of clinical governance, which was then still in its infancy. At the same meeting, Council agreed that there should be full public consultation about the development of revalidation, based on the RSG proposals.
26.14
The RSG continued its work. It sought the advice of Dame Lesley, who had led the team responsible for developing the assessment instruments used by the GMC in its performance procedures. Dame Lesley provided advice and, together with Professor Mike Pringle (then Chairman, RCGP), set out their ideas in a paper published in the British Medical Journal (BMJ) in October 1999
. Dame Lesley and Professor Pringle envisaged that doctors would have to be revalidated in each aspect of the work they undertook. For each large specialty, there would be a number of local or regional revalidation groups. A small specialty might need only one revalidation group to serve the whole country. The membership of the groups would include representatives of the specialty concerned, the local professional organisation, the public and doctors in health service management. Members of the groups would be trained by national professional organisations, usually the medical Royal Colleges. These organisations would be recognised by the GMC for that purpose and also for the purpose of setting the standards that the doctors in each specialty would have to meet. A doctor would apply for revalidation to the revalidation group appropriate to his/her specialty. The group would examine the evidence submitted and would make a decision whether or not to recommend revalidation. The group would seek evidence of a safe standard of practice. The work of the revalidation groups would be monitored and quality assured by the relevant Royal College. Work would have to be done to ensure that consistent standards were applied nationally.
26.15
The BMJ paper also set out in some detail the kind of material that might have to be submitted with the application. This, it was said, would vary from specialty to specialty. The requirements must not place too great a burden on doctors. In all cases, there should be
‘an extended curriculum vitae’
, in which the doctor would describe the nature of his/her education, experience and clinical practice. This document would set out details of the continuing medical education undertaken by the doctor. Dame Lesley and Professor Pringle also discussed the possibility of using material collected for clinical governance purposes but stressed that much development work would have to be done before this could be used. The BMJ paper also suggested that some doctors might wish to take a different route to revalidation, for example, by submitting themselves to the peer review accreditation schemes operated by some of the Royal Colleges. The RCGP’s schemes for gaining Fellowship or Membership of the College by assessment of performance were mentioned as particular examples. These programmes set a higher standard than the basic standard of competence which it was envisaged would apply to the revalidation process. It was suggested that doctors who were able to demonstrate that they had achieved and were maintaining those higher standards should be entitled to rely upon them for revalidation.
26.16
In November 1999, the RSG reported again to Council. Broadly speaking, its recommendations reflected the ideas described by Dame Lesley and Professor Pringle in their BMJ paper. The RSG recommended that revalidation should be based initially on the ‘profiling’ of the doctor’s practice, based on evidence collected in the locality where the doctor worked. That evidence would be scrutinised by the doctor’s peers and by
‘informed lay people’
who would then make a judgement whether to recommend revalidation or referral into the GMC’s FTP procedures. The RSG recommended that the local processes upon which revalidation was to be founded should be supportive of continuous improvement and should not be restricted to identifying unacceptable practice.
The General Medical Council Consultation Paper of June 2000
26.17
In June 2000, the GMC published a Consultation Paper, ‘Revalidating Doctors, ensuring standards, securing the future’. The Consultation Paper set out the philosophy behind revalidation and drew attention to the benefits it would bring. It would benefit patients by protecting them from poorly performing doctors, by promoting good medical practice and by making the register a valid indicator of current fitness to practise. It would also increase patients’ confidence in doctors by giving them the assurance that doctors were regularly submitting evidence of competence. Revalidation would also benefit doctors; it would help good doctors to be even better; it would help doctors with weaknesses to correct them and it would enable doctors to defend themselves better against unfounded criticisms about their fitness to practise. Finally, it would benefit the employers of doctors by providing an assurance that the doctors they employed were fit to practise and by providing an additional mechanism to identify and deal with poor performance. The Consultation Paper described the wider context of reform of which revalidation was a part. It mentioned a gradual change in culture that had taken place in the recent past, including the promotion of quality improvement and of openness and honesty about mistakes and poor performance. There was reference to the development of explicit standards of practice by the GMC and to the introduction of clinical governance arrangements. There was particular reference to appraisal as a means by which employers could monitor whether doctors were complying with their contractual obligations. It was said that revalidation of doctors’ registration and appraisal were
‘complementary professional and managerial functions’
, which required a common core of information about professional performance. The GMC’s proposals on revalidation were, it was said, designed to make the best use of this common core of information.
26.18
Before describing the process by which revalidation was to be carried out, the Consultation Paper described the
‘Principles of Revalidation’
. In summary, these were that it must be effective (i.e. it must sort out those who were fit to practise from those who were not); it must be locally based whilst reflecting the doctor’s practice by reference to national standards; it must be transparent, comprehensive, thorough, proportionate to the risks posed by poorly performing doctors, fair, non-discriminatory, consistent and verifiable. By ‘verifiable’ was meant that the information used for making a judgement about a doctor’s fitness to practise must be susceptible to audit. It was also said that revalidation must be as simple as was consistent with effectiveness and must build on, not duplicate, existing and planned arrangements; it must also be flexible, supportive and developmental, predictable (in the sense that it must not contain traps or ambushes) and properly resourced. The Consultation Paper also described the standards of good practice upon which revalidation would be based. The starting point for all doctors was to be ‘Good Medical Practice’, but more detailed standards were to be worked out for each of the specialties.
26.19
The Consultation Paper described the process of revalidation as it was then envisaged. The process would have three stages. The first stage consisted of the collection of the evidence on which the profiling of the doctor’s performance was to be based. Every doctor was to maintain a revalidation folder, which should contain current information from several sources to show how well s/he was practising. The information was likely to include results of audit, a record of continuing professional development, the views of a sample of patients and the views of a sample of working colleagues, including those who referred patients to the doctor or received referrals from him/her. It was said that the revalidation folder would usually be reviewed annually; any deficiencies would be identified by the reviewer and advice given about how the doctor might remedy those deficiencies. It was envisaged that, in the NHS - at least within the hospital setting - the annual review would be conducted through employers’ appraisal systems.
26.20
The second stage of the revalidation process would be an
‘assessment’
which would take place every five years, when the doctor’s revalidation folder would be assessed independently by a small revalidation group of doctors and lay people. The assessment would be made against standards laid down by the GMC and the medical Royal College of the relevant specialty. The revalidation group would have to satisfy itself that the doctor was fit to practise and, if so satisfied, would recommend revalidation to the GMC. The third stage of the revalidation process was the action to be taken by the GMC. Usually, that action would consist of revalidating the doctor’s register entry in accordance with the recommendation of the revalidation group. However, if the revalidation group considered that action on the doctor’s registration was necessary, the GMC would have to decide whether to invoke one of its FTP procedures, which might result in the doctor’s erasure or suspension or in conditions being imposed on his/her registration. It was made plain that if, at any stage in the five-year cycle, information came to light - as the result of clinical governance mechanisms or in any other way - which gave rise to serious concerns, these should be addressed immediately, usually by means of referring the doctor to local performance procedures but, in a bad case, by immediate referral to the GMC. The first and second stages of the revalidation process would be subject to external quality assurance. This was to ensure consistency, fairness and public safety.
26.21
In an important passage at paragraphs 20 and 21, the Consultation Paper explained that the quality assurance of medical care must involve several different bodies working together, of which the GMC was only one. The Consultation Paper stressed also that the intention was that clinical governance and revalidation would complement each other since
‘neither on its own would be sufficient to protect patients’
. It said that there was broad agreement between the various bodies involved that revalidation should use existing and proposed local systems (for example, appraisal in the NHS), rather than devising new arrangements that would have the effect of taking doctors away from their patients.
26.22
In later sections, the Consultation Paper set out in greater detail how the revalidation process would work in practice. The type of evidence which it was expected would appear in the revalidation folders was described and comments were invited. It was expected that much of the information required should be
‘generated as a by-product of quality assurance at their
i.e. doctors’
place of work’
. One suggestion was that information about patient complaints should be included. The Consultation Paper indicated that the GMC was working with other organisations to ensure that its requirements for the contents of the revalidation folder would be compatible with,
, the emerging arrangements for the appraisal of doctors within the NHS. The medical Royal Colleges were to provide more detailed guidance as to what would be expected for each specialty.
26.23
The Consultation Paper contained a substantial section dealing with the link between appraisal and revalidation. Views were sought on this issue. At that time, appraisal for doctors within the NHS was in an early stage of development. The appraiser was to be another doctor. The Consultation Paper stated that appraisal was to be a formative process in that it was intended to support doctors in maintaining and improving their professional performance. Appraisal would include, but would not be limited to, a review of the contents of the doctor’s revalidation folder. Any gaps in the revalidation folder should be identified and any deficiencies within the doctor’s practice which were identified should be addressed by the appraiser arranging for any necessary developmental or remedial action. That would give an opportunity for the deficiencies to be rectified before revalidation was due. One outcome of each annual appraisal should be a statement, which would go into the doctor’s revalidation folder, confirming that a satisfactory appraisal had taken place and identifying any developmental needs. In this way, revalidation, when it came, ought to be straightforward.
26.24
The detail of the appraisal discussion was to be confidential as between the appraiser and the appraisee. This was considered necessary since it would be damaging to the appraisal process if appraisees felt unwilling to raise issues for fear that to do so might damage their prospects of revalidation. The revalidation folder used for appraisal would not be confidential. The revalidation group would examine the information contained in the revalidation folder, together with any other information about the doctor available to it from other sources, and would assess the accuracy, significance and sufficiency of that information before reaching a decision whether the doctor had demonstrated his/her fitness to practise. The Consultation Paper observed that the relationship between appraisal and the five-year revalidation assessment would need to be reviewed as the processes of appraisal and revalidation evolved.
26.25
The Government supported the GMC’s proposals. Understandably, it was particularly anxious that those proposals should dovetail with NHS clinical governance arrangements and would not give rise to a lot of extra work for doctors. On 6th
July 2000, Mr John Denham MP, Minister of State at the Department of Health (DoH), told a Parliamentary Standing Committee:
‘We want to ensure that the system of revalidation on which the GMC has been working for some time fits well with the system of annual appraisal of doctors in the NHS and wider systems of clinical governance that we are putting in place. The systems must be seamless without duplication of time and effort in collecting information. I believe that the system that we are putting in place in the NHS will, if we get the details right, work effectively with the new measures from the GMC to introduce revalidation, which I welcome.’
26.26
The GMC received many responses to its Consultation Paper. Most respondents were supportive of the principles of revalidation and approved the proposed methods of collecting of information, the proposed content of the revalidation folders and the method of scrutiny. Various concerns were expressed. In particular, it was felt that doctors would need a good deal of guidance. Almost all respondents approved the idea of a link between appraisal and revalidation. Many stressed the need to ensure that the formative nature of appraisal was not lost. Many respondents were concerned about what revalidation was going to cost the GMC. It was suggested that the GMC should undertake a cost benefit analysis. There was also a suggestion that, before the GMC adopted the proposals, they should be tried out in pilot studies.
26.27
In short, the public consultation revealed no concerted opposition to the proposals. There was, however, some opposition from within the medical profession. Sir Donald said, in ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, that sections of the BMA were strongly opposed to the proposals. The opposition came particularly from the hospital consultants.
The First Pilot Study
26.28
The GMC decided to undertake a pilot study and this took place between February and April 2001 (the 2001 pilot study). It was conducted by a Revalidation Technical Group (RTG) which had been formed by the GMC. Its objective was to test the feasibility of using the revalidation folder as a means of evaluating a doctor’s fitness to practise. Volunteer doctors were asked to assemble and submit revalidation folders. The folders were considered and assessed by mock revalidation groups, each of which was designated to deal with the revalidation folders submitted by doctors of a specified specialty. The groups had three options open to them. The first was to state that they were of the opinion that the doctor was up to date and fit to practise and to recommend that s/he should be revalidated. The second was to state that they could not certify that s/he was up to date and fit to practise and did not, therefore, recommend revalidation. The third was to request further information from the doctor before making any recommendation.
26.29
Five of the mock revalidation groups looked at all the 20 revalidation folders which had been submitted by GPs. It was found that there was great variability in the depth of information provided by different doctors and also in the time they had taken to prepare their material. It took group members an average of 21 minutes each to read the contents of a revalidation folder and an average of 13 minutes for a group to consider it together and reach a decision. There was a substantial degree of consistency between the decisions of the five groups; indeed, if the decisions of one of the five groups were excluded altogether, there was a remarkable degree of consistency between the results of the remaining four. The results for the GPs’ groups showed that 86% of the recommendations were for revalidation; in only 11% of cases was further information requested and in only 3% was there a recommendation that the doctor should not be revalidated. I would have thought that those results were rather encouraging, especially as everyone involved was participating in a completely unfamiliar process. One might reasonably expect the process to improve and become quicker with repetition. The quality of material in the revalidation folders would improve as doctors gained a better idea of what was expected of them. More verifiable information would become available from clinical governance processes. Also, group members would gain in experience.
26.30
The RTG’s report of the pilot study was generally optimistic for the future. It included the following observation:
‘It is clear from the information generated by each panel
i.e. mock revalidation group
that there is a close correlation between positive recommendations for revalidation and those doctors who have been through appraisal. There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, such doctors tended to have to hand the kind of information required by revalidation and were therefore able to supply the data needed to make a positive recommendation despite the short timescale of the piloting programme. Secondly, revalidation groups expressed greater confidence in making a positive recommendation where they knew that the doctor had already been subject to a review and documentation from that review had been made available. Thirdly, groups were in general reluctant to make positive revalidation recommendations where there was no third party verification of the data presented by the doctor. Third party verification is not limited to appraisal but clearly having an appraisal is helpful in this respect.’
26.31
In the light of subsequent events, that passage merits further attention. First, at the time of this pilot study, GPs were not subject to appraisal; appraisal for consultants was introduced very shortly afterwards. The observation that the revalidation groups had been more confident to recommend revalidation for doctors who had been appraised must, therefore, have related to hospital doctors below consultant grade - in other words, doctors in training grades, who could truly be said to be working in a ‘managed environment’. All or most of the information used in their appraisals would have been provided by their employers and would be verifiable. Second, it appears that it was not only the fact that appraisal had taken place, but also the availability of the documentation from that appraisal, that gave confidence to the revalidation group. However, the statement that revalidation groups were reluctant to recommend revalidation unless the data presented by the doctor had been verified in some way is interesting and slightly puzzling. The revalidation groups had recommended revalidation in 86% of cases relating to GPs. It is difficult to see how much of the GPs’ data could have been verified. They had not yet been appraised and there was - and still is - very little clinical governance data emanating from primary care organisations (PCOs) that relates to an individual doctor. However, apart from being slightly puzzled, I am not at all surprised that a revalidation group would find comfort in the knowledge that at least some of the data it was considering had been verified in some way. It seems likely that another factor would be that doctors who had undergone appraisal would have a better idea of how to assemble a revalidation folder that gave a good picture of their practice.
The Cost Benefit Analysis
26.32
Following the 2001 pilot study, the GMC undertook a cost benefit analysis or, at least, did its best to do so. It found, not surprisingly, that it was relatively easy to assess the costs of implementing its proposals for the revalidation process. However, it was almost impossible to assess the benefits of revalidation. The benefits were not assessable in the short term; they would accrue over a long period of time. In any event, revalidation was only one aspect of the drive for improved quality and it would be impossible to ascribe any particular improvement to revalidation, as opposed to any other measure. The exercise enabled the GMC to find out how much it would cost to implement the proposals but was otherwise inconclusive.
26.33
The cost analysis showed that, following the introduction of revalidation, the total annual financial deficit to the GMC which would result from the introduction of revalidation could be as much as £14 million. First, there would be the annual operational cost of £9 million. Then there would be a sum of nearly £5 million which would result from the loss to the GMC of the annual retention fees (ARFs) paid by a substantial number of retired or non-practising doctors who, it was expected, would not choose to seek revalidation but would instead allow their registration to lapse. If some of those doctors transferred onto the supplementary list, for which a reduced ARF was payable, that £5 million loss would be reduced to some extent. So, the overall cost to the GMC would lie somewhere between £9 million and £14 million.
26.34
In addition, the human resource implications were assessed. Doctors would have to spend time preparing their revalidation folders; some would be taken away from clinical work to sit on revalidation groups; some would be involved with assessment of those found to be performing poorly. In all, it was thought that the revalidation proposals would require the annual full-time equivalent of 204 doctors.
Developments during 2001
26.35
During 2001, the GMC’s thinking moved in the direction of making a closer linkage between revalidation and appraisal. This closer linkage developed from discussions and correspondence that took place between Sir Donald, then President of the GMC, and representatives of the BMA. The relevant correspondence did not become available to the Inquiry until May 2004, about five months after the GMC witnesses had given evidence. It is welcome as it allows me to fill in a gap in the history.
26.36
The disclosed correspondence shows that, from some time before May 2001, Sir Donald had been in correspondence with the BMA about the revalidation of hospital consultants. I mentioned earlier that Sir Donald had described in his book, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, how the hospital consultants were opposed to the idea of revalidation. The opposition was channelled through the Central Consultants’ and Specialists’ Committee (CCSC) of the BMA. At this time, the GPC of the BMA was strongly supportive of the proposals, as was the RCGP.
26.37
May 2001, Sir Donald wrote to the then Chairman of the BMA, Dr Ian Bogle. It is clear that the letter was written against the background of the recent successful conclusion of the negotiations between the CCSC and the Government about the introduction of a requirement that all consultants working in the NHS should undergo annual appraisal. The Government had been determined to introduce this requirement and the consultants had not been enthusiastic about the idea. However, a deal had been struck, the details of which are of no concern to the Inquiry. Appraisal was to be based upon the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’. At this time, there had not as yet been any agreement about the appraisal of GPs. Sir Donald’s letter was about revalidation. He expressed his pleasure that the BMA was committed to the principle of revalidation. He went on to stress the importance of the Government’s investment in clinical governance, in particular the collection of data, audit and appraisal. He stressed that the GMC wanted to ensure that revalidation was built on clinical governance. The GMC wanted revalidation to be as simple as possible, consistent with effectiveness. The more effective the NHS’s clinical governance arrangements, he said,
‘the lighter the GMC’s touch can be’
. He then referred to the conclusion of the negotiations on appraisal for consultants and said:
‘Provided that this agreement is robustly and effectively implemented, NHS appraisal documentation will be the vehicle for revalidation for the great majority of NHS consultants. We would take the same approach with other groups of doctors who have appraisal systems. In particular, we look forward to receiving details, when they are agreed, of the outcome of negotiations in relation to appraisal for GPs, academic clinicians, doctors in training and locum doctors working in an institutional setting.
Once these arrangements are in place, which should be soon, it will be possible to put revalidation for the vast majority of doctors in the country on a sound operational footing.’
26.38
That letter does not suggest that the idea of assessment by local revalidation groups was to be abandoned and replaced by NHS appraisal. What Sir Donald was suggesting was that the material to be assessed should be the documents resulting from the appraisal (i.e. the forms completed by the appraiser and the appraisee, which I shall refer to as the ‘appraisal forms’), rather than the entire contents of the doctor’s revalidation folder.
26.39
Later in that same letter, Sir Donald spoke of the GMC’s intention to provide quality assurance of revalidation decisions by calling for a sample of doctors’ revalidation folders and having their contents scrutinised by GMC assessors. The purpose of this scrutiny would be to check on a random basis that the outcomes of appraisal were consistent with, and fully supported by, the underlying evidence on which they were based. Sir Donald also outlined the programme for the implementation of the revalidation proposals. At the meeting to take place later that month (May 2001), Council members were to be invited to agree that the Government should be approached about the legislative amendment that would be necessary in order to implement the proposals. It was hoped that the necessary legislation would be in force by about May 2002 and that revalidation would actually begin in 2004.
26.40
At its May 2001 Council meeting, the GMC considered a detailed description of the revalidation process and duly resolved to request the Government to put the necessary legislative framework in place, on the understanding that much detailed work remained to be done.
26.41
June 2001, Sir Donald wrote to Dr Peter Hawker, Chairman of the CCSC, in reply to a letter from Dr Hawker, which I have not seen. In this letter, Sir Donald repeated the undertaking he had given to Dr Bogle about the use of appraisal documentation as a vehicle for revalidation of NHS consultants. He said that it had not been possible to pilot the use of appraisal documentation in the 2001 pilot study because there had been no such documentation available. This was a reference to the fact that, at the time of the 2001 pilot study, only hospital doctors below consultant grades had undergone appraisal and no standardised forms had been produced for completion by appraisers and appraisees in the course of the appraisal process. Consultant appraisal was launched in April 2001 and appraisal documentation was to be considered in a further pilot study.
26.42
In October 2001, Mr Scott, Chief Executive of the GMC, wrote to Dr Bogle. He repeated the GMC’s assurance that, provided appraisal was
‘robustly and effectively’
implemented, appraisal documentation would be the vehicle for revalidation of the great majority of NHS consultants. Later in the same letter, Mr Scott clarified what written material would have to be produced by a doctor wishing to be revalidated. Each consultant would have to produce Forms 1 to 4 of the consultant appraisal documentation for each year of the revalidation period. I described these forms in
and specimen forms for use in GP appraisal are at
. Consultants would not be required routinely to produce the underlying documentation (i.e. the contents of their revalidation folders) but would have to do so on request. This might occur as part of the quality control sampling or if the revalidation group or the GMC needed
‘for other reasons to look in more depth before a decision on revalidation can be made’
. I infer from this letter that it was the intention of the GMC to receive a full set (i.e. Forms 1 to 4) of the completed appraisal forms, which would then be scrutinised by the revalidation group. If the revalidation group was in doubt about whether to recommend revalidation, it would call for the underlying documentation, i.e. the contents of the doctor’s revalidation folder.
26.43
The briefing papers circulated prior to the Council meeting in November 2001 contained a progress report, setting out the current position, as described above. The intention was to use for the purposes of the revalidation process the completed appraisal forms for all doctors who had undergone appraisal. Annex A to the briefing paper set out the state of development of the appraisal arrangements for various groups of doctors. In relation to NHS consultants, it was said that NHS appraisal would be the vehicle for revalidation provided that it was robustly and effectively implemented. The briefing paper described other ongoing work, including that with the medical Royal Colleges and their Faculties (i.e. sections dealing with small specialties), which were to develop the standards and criteria that would be imposed and the specific evidence that would be required to be produced by doctors within each specialty. A further pilot study was to be carried out. On a different topic, it was suggested that those doctors who were not in clinical practice (or not in full-time practice) should be eligible for revalidation if they were to submit the results of an assessment carried out at their own expense.
Taking Stock of the Position in 2001
26.44
It seems to me that the practical proposals for the revalidation process set out in the Consultation Paper had been well thought out. They were consistent with the underlying principles of revalidation. The 2001 pilot study had shown that revalidation by the review of folders was feasible, although the proposal for reviewing appraisal forms had not yet been tested. The methods envisaged for revalidation would be quite expensive to put into operation, in terms of both money and human resources. They would also impose a very substantial administrative burden on the GMC, a point to which I shall later return. The proposals complied with the requirements of the Government that there should be as little duplication of effort as possible between appraisal and revalidation. The doctor would prepare his/her folder of evidence for use in appraisal; that appraisal would be carried out either by an employer or under arrangements to be agreed for GPs, for which PCOs were to be responsible. The information within the doctor’s folder would, where possible, be drawn from that gathered in the process of clinical governance. The folder or the appraisal forms would be used again in revalidation although, in the majority of cases, the folder would not have to be produced.
26.45
It is true that there were some obvious imperfections and uncertainties. In 2001, consultant appraisal was in its early days, so it was not known how much information would be contained in appraisal forms and how reliable it would be. Clinical governance processes throughout the NHS were in their infancy and the amount of information available from such sources was small; but it might reasonably have been expected to improve in the future. Those who were aware of the position in general practice would have known that there was, at that time, very little ‘hard’ information available about an individual GP’s performance, unless s/he was a single-handed practitioner. Information was collected about GP practices, not about individual practitioners. Moreover, appraisal of GPs had not yet begun; it was scheduled to begin in 2002 but, in 2001, it was not known how it would work in practice. There was also a major concern as to whether appraisal would achieve its formative purpose if the same appraisal forms and folder of information were also to be used for revalidation purposes. Concerns of this nature were discussed within the profession and within the GMC.
26.46
One concern which does not appear to have been raised at this period was whether the standards of performance applied by the CPP in making findings on the issue of seriously deficient performance (SDP) were high enough to provide a satisfactory baseline for revalidation. It will be recalled that the GMC had decided at an early stage that any doctor who was not granted revalidation through the usual revalidation process would not be deprived of his/her licence to practise save as the result of a decision of one of its FTP committees. It must, I think, have been anticipated that the most likely form of FTP procedure that might result in the loss of a licence following an unsuccessful attempt to obtain revalidation would be the performance procedures. There was no discussion of whether the fact that a doctor’s performance had been found by the CPP not to be seriously deficient could properly be equated with the assurance to be given to the public that revalidation would mean that their doctor was ‘up to date and fit to practise’.
26.47
However, with the
caveats
mentioned above, it appears to me that the foundation for a system of revalidation that would command public confidence had been well laid.
Observations in the Report of the Bristol Inquiry
26.48
The Report of the Public Inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary between 1984 and 1995, ‘Learning from Bristol’, was published in July 2001. The GMC had given evidence to that Inquiry and had explained its proposals for revalidation. These met with the warm approval of the Inquiry Panel, chaired by Professor (now Sir) Ian Kennedy. The Report noted that revalidation involved
‘the submission of evidence to external assessors of continuing competence’
. If the doctor could not demonstrate continuing competence, his/her licence to practise would be called into question and ultimately withdrawn. It observed that the GMC’s proposals were at an advanced stage of development. The potential value of revalidation was already coming to be widely recognised by the public, as well as within most (although not all) of the healthcare professions. The Report recommended that revalidation should become mandatory for all healthcare professionals and that the necessary processes should be developed as soon as possible. The Report stressed the importance of external assessment in the revalidation process. The fact that there was some resistance within the healthcare professions must not, it was said, be allowed to stand in the way of progress. The Report observed that the public was entitled to the protection of an assurance that all healthcare professionals had reached agreed levels of competence.
26.49
The Report also discussed ways in which public confidence in the process of revalidation could be gained and retained. The Inquiry Panel plainly understood that the revalidation of doctors was to be carried out by revalidation groups or ‘revalidation teams’. The Report recommended that the revalidation team should include
‘an external presence’
, i.e. a person or member of an organisation external to the profession and to the employer. This was to be someone with an understanding of the public interest. The Report also suggested that there should be a mechanism for ensuring that the systems for revalidating healthcare professionals were integrated into other initiatives for protecting patients. It proposed that the task of co-ordinating these various systems should be a priority for the Council for the Regulation of Healthcare Professionals (now known as the Council for Healthcare Regulatory Excellence) which was to be established shortly.
The Second Pilot Study
26.50
The GMC’s second revalidation pilot study took place in April 2002. Again it was conducted by the RTG. The report setting out the results of the study was issued in September 2002. The purpose of the second study was to examine the quality of the linkage between the
‘outputs of appraisal systems’
and the information needed for the revalidation process. It was hoped that a better understanding would be gained of the documentation that would emerge from appraisal (i.e. the completed appraisal forms) and its capacity to demonstrate fitness to practise in accordance with ‘Good Medical Practice’. The study also sought to compare the capacity of the completed appraisal forms to demonstrate fitness to practise with the capacity of the underpinning evidence contained in the doctors’ folders to do so.
26.51
As I have said, consultant appraisal was introduced in April 2001 and, by April 2002, the process of appraising consultants was well underway. It is clear from the report of the second pilot study that the consultants’ appraisal forms were similar to those which were just coming into use for GPs. GP appraisal officially began in April 2002. However, at the time of preparation for the second pilot study, GP appraisal had not yet begun and it appears that the detail of the appraisal forms to be used had not yet been finally agreed. The pilot study comprised consideration by mock revalidation groups of appraisal forms submitted by hospital doctors who had recently undergone appraisal. A few GPs were also included, using appraisal forms that had been developed in Wales as part of a GP appraisal pilot project.
26.52
Some of the mock revalidation groups examined the underpinning evidence contained in the doctors’ folders, as well as the appraisal forms. Other groups just considered the appraisal forms. There were four forms. Form 1 provided factual background information about the doctor’s career and professional status. Form 2 described the doctor’s current professional activities. Form 3 comprised a list of the documents that were held in the doctor’s folder and a statement about any continuing professional development that the doctor had undergone in the previous year. Form 4 contained an agreed summary of the discussion that had taken place during the appraisal interview.
26.53
The findings of the pilot study were that, when the evidence contained in doctors’ folders was scrutinised by the revalidation group, it would have been sufficient to allow a positive revalidation decision in 69% of cases; in the remaining cases, more information would have been required. However, when only the appraisal forms were considered, the conclusions were that, although the forms were capable in some cases of providing sufficient insight into the doctor’s practice to form a sound basis for revalidation, they did not do so in the majority of cases. Only in 32% of cases could a positive revalidation decision have been made; in the remainder, more information would have been required. In particular, there were four specific areas of ‘Good Medical Practice’ in which there was often a shortage of information. These were ‘Working with colleagues’, ‘Relationships with patients’, ‘Health’ and ‘Probity’. Nevertheless, the overall conclusion of the report was that, if all four forms were completed and if Form 4 contained a summary of a
‘robust appraisal discussion’
, it could be adequate for the purposes of revalidation. In other words, provided that those conditions were satisfied, there would be no need for a revalidation group to examine the underpinning evidence from the doctor’s folder.
26.54
The report explained the RTG’s plans for further work. It intended first to work on ways in which the provision of information could be improved, particularly in the four areas of ‘Good Medical Practice’ that had been identified as giving rise to difficulties. Its work would include the development of a patient questionnaire and of a questionnaire dealing with relationships with colleagues. Then, it was proposed to conduct further pilot studies, using those improved types of information. After that, the RTG intended to focus on the internal GMC procedures for handling the different aspects of the revalidation process. These plans for further work were never taken forward because a halt was called and the RTG was disbanded - I am not sure when.
The Amending Legislation
26.55
In December 2002, the Medical Act 1983 (the 1983 Act) was amended by the addition of new sections 29A to 29J. These were to come into force on a date which has still to be appointed. Section 29A imposed a duty on the GMC to make regulations with respect to
‘licences to practise’
. The regulations were to cover the granting, refusal or withdrawal of a licence to practise and the
‘revalidation of a medical practitioner of a prescribed description as a condition of his continuing to hold a licence to practise’
. Revalidation was defined in the Act as an
. The new provisions appear to me to impose on the GMC a duty to make regulations empowering it to revalidate doctors, in the sense of carrying out an evaluation of a doctor’s fitness to practise. The legislation gave the GMC very wide powers to require the production of documents and the supply of information for the purpose of revalidation and, if a doctor failed to co-operate with the revalidation process, the GMC could withdraw his/her licence to practise. In the event that a doctor’s fitness to practise was thought to be impaired, s/he could be referred into the FTP procedures. The legislation was therefore in place for revalidation to be implemented in accordance with the arrangements described in the Consultation Paper of 2000.
Southgate, Lesley, Pringle, Mike (1999) ‘Revalidation in the United Kingdom: general principles based on experience in general practice’, BMJ, Vol 319.

--- An Important Concern ---
26.179
Throughout my examination of the GMC’s proposals for revalidation, I have felt some concern that the public was being led to expect more from revalidation than it could reasonably be expected to provide, in terms of reassurance about the competence of an individual doctor. It is important that patients and all other interested parties understand exactly what revalidation means and what its limitations are. Mrs Joyce Robins, who represented Patient Concern at the Inquiry seminars, made a plea that patients should be put fully in the picture and should be told what revalidation involves in practical terms and why it is deserving of public trust. It is important that revalidation is not ‘oversold’. There are three different, although related, foundations for my concern.
26.180
The first is that, if a member of the public is told that revalidation will ensure that his/her doctor is ‘up to date and fit to practise’, s/he will, I believe, have the impression that s/he can expect the doctor to be practising at a level of competence above the basic level of acceptability. The expression ‘up to date and fit to practise’ will, in the minds of most members of the public, convey the idea that the doctor is ‘fully up to speed’- not that s/he has just ‘passed muster’. Yet the position is that a doctor will be revalidated unless his/her conduct, performance or health is such that a FTP panel decides that it must take action upon the doctor’s registration. Even then, the doctor might be revalidated subject to restrictions and conditions upon his/her practice. In order to be refused revalidation on the grounds of poor performance, the doctor’s performance will have to be so seriously deficient that the FTP panel feels obliged to suspend or erase him/her.
26.181
I have already referred to the low standards that are applied in performance cases and have said that that low standard will form the baseline for revalidation. In the course of a discussion at a GMC Council meeting on 12th
May 2004, Mr Brearley remarked that doctors know that ‘if they participate in revalidation and they are really bad, their registration could be at stake’. The implication is that the doctor will fail to be revalidated only if s/he is ‘really bad’. The reality of the ‘remarkably low’ standard above which doctors will be revalidated does not square with the claim that revalidation gives an assurance that the doctor is ‘up to date and fit to practise’. In my view, there is a real danger that the public does not understand this.
26.182
In the course of his evidence, Mr Brearley explained that one of the purposes of revalidation was that patients should be able to make an informed choice about their doctor. They would be able to look at the register and see that their doctor had been revalidated. Yet Mr Brearley had also said that a doctor might be revalidated and yet be subject to restrictions on his practice, imposed by a FTP panel for the safety of patients. He considered that this provided an acceptable safeguard for the public because the conditions would ensure that the doctor could not practise in areas in which s/he might present a risk to patients. However, it seemed to me that, if patients were to be in a position to make an informed choice of doctor, they would need to know more than merely whether their doctor had been revalidated. Patients would need to know whether there were any restrictions upon the doctor’s practice and, if there were, they might need to know what they were and why they had been imposed. Mr Brearley’s reply to this was that it would not be right to reveal too much information about the doctor because this would lead to a disproportionate loss of confidence in him/her. He considered that, if the fact that a FTP panel had imposed a sanction were to go into the public domain and destroy confidence in the doctor so that s/he could not practise, FTP panels would be reluctant to impose those sanctions. From that evidence, it appeared that the public is to be told that the doctor, if revalidated, is up to date and fit to practise and they can have confidence in him/her. That would be most unsatisfactory because the reality might be that s/he is on the borderline of being unfit to practise. I was concerned about this. However, I see, from the draft Guidance recently published, that it is the GMC’s present intention that the medical register will include the information that the doctor has been revalidated subject to conditions. How much detail will be provided I do not know. The information is ‘in the public domain’ in that if an enquirer telephones the GMC and asks directly whether the doctor’s registration is subject to conditions, s/he will be told. In my view, this information should be readily available to the public from the GMC's website.
26.183
My second concern about the position of the public is that they are told that, in order to secure revalidation, the doctor must demonstrate to the GMC that s/he has been practising in accordance with the principles of ‘Good Medical Practice’. In fact, as I have explained, it is not at all clear that s/he will have to do any such thing. He or she will have to provide a description of his/her practice (in the sense of what s/he does, rather than how s/he does it), assert that s/he has undergone appraisal and make a declaration as to his/her health and probity. The GMC will then seek a clinical governance certificate, which may confirm that the doctor has taken part in appraisal and that there are no significant unresolved concerns relating to his/her fitness to practise. If given, the certificate asserts a negative; in effect nothing adverse is known. There has been no positive demonstration of the standard of the doctor’s practice. It is important that, if the present arrangements are to continue, the true position is made clear. It may be that it is intended in future to introduce some local scrutiny of the evidence in the doctor's folder. I cannot tell.
26.184
My third concern is that the public is being given the impression that doctors undergoing revalidation have to pass some sort of objective test. This is not positively suggested in official GMC publications, although the GMC came very close to it in the Prospectus of April 2003 when it drew a comparison between revalidation and the periodic assessments that airline pilots have to undergo. However, my real concern on this issue is that the GMC has, on more than one occasion, to my knowledge, made statements that suggest that revalidation will involve either a test or some form of thorough check of fitness to practise. Under the present proposals, it will not. During the GMC’s opening statement to the Inquiry, Leading Counsel for the GMC said that, in the process of revalidation, each and every doctor’s competence and performance would be ‘checked and rechecked’ so that the public could have the assurance that doctors were not merely entitled to treat them by virtue of not having been found wanting. Instead, patients would be able to know and have confidence that a positive decision had been made that registered medical practitioners were fit to practise and that the information upon which a judgement had been made to that effect had been objectively verified and corroborated within a quality assured system.
26.185
On another occasion, revalidation was compared with the MOT test for vehicles. The MOT vehicle test is an objective test of the roadworthiness of an individual vehicle. Various features of the vehicle are examined against specified standards. If it fails any part of the test, it fails the whole test. There is no such thing as a pass with conditions. Revalidation for doctors is quite different. The overwhelming majority will be revalidated on the basis of appraisal, which is not a test of fitness to practise and does not incorporate any detailed standards with thresholds by which it is possible to pass or fail. The only threshold by which the doctor can ultimately fail to be revalidated is, as I have said above, a very low one indeed. The point is that for most doctors the process is not a test at all and bears no resemblance to the MOT vehicle test.
26.186
Revalidation was described by Sir Graeme Catto as ‘a sort of MOT test for doctors’ in a BBC radio programme, ‘Down With ...’, broadcast on 12th
May 2004. The programme comprised a debate about whether the GMC was doing all it should to safeguard and protect the interests of the public and patients. Sir Graeme said that the standards of practice and care that patients are entitled to get from their doctors are set out in ‘Good Medical Practice’ and that the GMC aimed to ‘maintain and strengthen these high standards with a new system of revalidation - a kind of MOT for doctors’. Another contributor then spoke. This was Mr Alan Hartley, a member of the Patients Association and of the GMC’s Patient Reference Group. He said:
‘Approximately every five years, a doctor will be assessed as to his training and will have to show that he has kept up to date on training on new methods, so, from the public’s point of view, what it means is they will know that when a doctor has been revalidated that he is fully up to speed with the latest innovations and the latest treatments. A huge step forward.’
26.187
I interpose to draw attention to the way in which being ‘up to date and fit to practise’ was equated with being ‘fully up to speed’. A while later, Sir Graeme again referred to revalidation as the ‘MOT for doctors’. He expressed pride in the fact that no other country in the world had a system of time-limited licence dependent upon doctors demonstrating that they are up to date and fit to practise. To call revalidation a MOT for doctors is a catchword. It is easy for the listener to remember. I think that many people who heard that programme will have taken away the impression that revalidation is a test for doctors, just like the MOT. That is not a true impression.

--- Could Revalidation Catch 'Another Shipman'? ---
26.199
Early in this Chapter, I said that it would be instructive to consider whether a system of revalidation would be capable of detecting the severely dysfunctional behaviour of another Shipman. I was not suggesting that ‘catching another Shipman’ was to be the litmus test of whether revalidation was worthwhile or whether any particular set of proposals was appropriate. Revalidation should detect a far wider range of deficiencies and much less serious deficiencies than those seen in Shipman. If revalidation can pick up a ‘poorly performing doctor’ it ought, one might think, to be capable of picking up a grossly dysfunctional one. That is not necessarily so, because many under-performing or dysfunctional doctors do not realise that their practice is deficient and do not make any attempt to conceal their shortcomings. Shipman, on the other hand, knew what he was doing. He was quite capable of giving a good standard of care and very adept indeed at concealing the fact that he was killing his patients.
26.200
First, it is clear beyond argument that Shipman would have done well in appraisal, as it currently operates. He would have produced evidence that many aspects of his clinical care were of a high standard. He could have produced the results of audits; the topics would have been chosen by himself and he would not have conducted an audit into the mortality rate among his patients. He might well have produced his prescribing data; the main interest in that would have been his insistence on prescribing proprietary drugs at a time when doctors were being encouraged to use generic equivalents. Shipman’s prescribing of diamorphine was on the high side but he was not an outlier and, if any questions had been asked, he would have produced the records of one or two patients who were being nursed at home during their terminal illness. He would have talked confidently about his reasons for insisting on the freedom to prescribe as he thought best for his patients. He would have explained why he often prescribed statins at a time when many doctors doubted their efficacy. He could have shown that he had been running chronic disease clinics as long, I think, as had almost any other practice in the area. His patient satisfaction questionnaires would have shown, I think, almost 100% satisfaction in all aspects of his practice. A peer questionnaire might have revealed that he was not liked but it would not have revealed concerns about his practice. There were very few complaints about him after 1994 and none of significance. That is remarkable as in the last four years of practice he killed over 100 patients. There is no possibility that he could have ‘failed’ at appraisal. In fact, it is quite likely that he would have volunteered (and been accepted) as an appraiser.
26.201
There can be no doubt that the clinical governance lead or medical director of Shipman’s PCO would have signed his clinical governance certificate without a moment’s hesitation. Shipman would have been revalidated without difficulty under the proposals that will come into force in April 2005.
26.202
Could Shipman have been detected by revalidation as the GMC originally proposed to carry it out? I do not think so, unless the RCGP had laid down, and the GMC had approved, specific items of information that had to be included in the doctor’s folder and those items had included something that would have detected Shipman’s vulnerability. Of course, he would have been detected if there had been a requirement for an analysis of mortality rates, backed by verifiable data, but I think that would have been a very unlikely requirement. A more likely one would have been a requirement that some of his patient records be submitted to independent review. They would have been found to be of a poor quality generally and not capable of conveying an appropriate amount of information to colleagues. However, only if there had been a review of the records of deceased patients could his criminal behaviour have been detected. A careful review of the records of the recently deceased patients should have revealed real cause for concern, as I explained in my Third Report. However, I must say that I think it very unlikely that anyone would have thought it appropriate to require such a review for the purposes of revalidation.
26.203
Would it be possible for ‘another Shipman’ to be detected by clinical governance activities, as they might be expected to operate in the foreseeable future? I think that is a real possibility. I have referred to that in


========================================================================
CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN - Proposals for Change
========================================================================

--- Conclusions ---
26.204
When the GMC published its Consultation Paper in 2000, it had recognised the need to provide a mechanism to detect poorly performing and dysfunctional doctors without relying on a complaint from an aggrieved patient or a worried employer or PCO. It decided to require every doctor who wanted to practise to undergo a periodic evaluation of his/her fitness to practise. That would identify the doctors who were known to be, in Dame Lesley Southgate’s words, ‘out there harming patients’ but it was hoped also that the method by which this was to be achieved would raise the standards of medical practice generally. The GMC started out with sound principles, high aspirations and the best of intentions. Initial proposals were devised and tested but, by 2002, I think that the GMC had realised that the task was more difficult than had been expected. The initial proposals would have been expensive and would have imposed a considerable administrative burden on the GMC. Moreover, the proposals were very unpopular with large sections of the profession. The GMC changed direction. It abandoned the principle of evaluation of each individual doctor’s fitness to practise. It decided to base revalidation for the great majority of doctors upon the mere fact that they had taken part in an appraisal process conducted either by their employers or, for GPs, by a GP appraiser instructed by the doctor’s PCO. For GPs, at least, appraisal was and is a wholly formative process and, in my view, quite incapable of providing a basis for an evaluation of fitness to practise. The GMC made that change without conducting any study of the efficacy of appraisal as a means of identifying deficient performance. When the GMC made that change of direction, it knew, because it had been so advised by its management consultants, SHM, that there were many objections to the idea of linking revalidation to appraisal and that these amounted to a
which should not be
‘lightly dismissed’
. The change of direction was not slight; nor could it be described as a ‘refinement’ of the former proposals. In my view, that change of direction was substantial and it was made for reasons of expediency and not for reasons of principle.
26.205
About six months after this change of direction had been announced, the GMC felt constrained to attempt to improve its proposals. I am satisfied that it did so because of the evidence given to this Inquiry to the effect that appraisal could not provide a satisfactory basis for revalidation. It attempted to negotiate with the DoH an additional element, the clinical governance certificate, which was to provide an assurance to the GMC that there were, to the knowledge of the signatory, no significant unresolved concerns about the doctor’s fitness to practise. This, as I have said, was a step in the right direction. However, the clinical governance certificate as it is now to be provided is of very limited value and the GMC’s proposals still do not fulfil the essential requirement of revalidation, which is that it should be an evaluation of the doctor’s fitness to practise. The public cannot properly have confidence that a doctor who has been revalidated is ‘up to date and fit to practise’. That position may change in the future, if clinical governance improves, as everyone hopes that it will, and if the culture of one doctor’s reluctance to report another’s failings can be altered. Those changes may or may not come about. But if the GMC intends that revalidation should give the public a reassurance of real, as opposed to illusory, value it must accept that its present proposals are not adequate and must develop a system of revalidation which, at its first stage, entails a summative evaluation of each individual doctor’s fitness to practise.

--- Conclusions ---
27.315
In the course of this long Report, I have on many occasions been critical of the GMC, its procedures and its attitudes. I realise that the fact that this Inquiry has been conducted in public and that my Report will be in the public domain must make those criticisms even more unwelcome than they would have been if made in private. Indeed, I recognise that their effect is likely to be bruising. It has not been my intention to be hurtful or indeed to be critical of any individual at the GMC. My criticisms have been of the corporate body and its collective actions. I have made a large number of recommendations affecting the GMC and I realise that some of them will be unwelcome. However, I hope that it will be accepted that they have been made in a constructive spirit and with the intention of helping the GMC to achieve its primary purpose of ‘Protecting Patients - Guiding Doctors’.
27.316
In this Stage of the Inquiry, I have examined the parts that are or could be played by Government, the GMC, the Healthcare Commission, the CRHP/CHRE, NHS organisations, practice staff, patients and members of the public in protecting patients who might be at risk from an aberrant or poorly performing GP. In this Report, I have made a large number of recommendations which, together with the recommendations in my Third and Fourth Reports, are designed to extend and improve the existing framework of protective systems. In this Report, I have suggested improvements to clinical governance systems; in particular I have stressed the need for the proper investigation of complaints and the need for a system of monitoring mortality statistics. I have recommended ways in which the protective role of PCTs can be enhanced, for example by providing them with improved information about the doctors on or seeking admission to their lists. I have made recommendations that will provide patients with more information about their doctors and will enable them to exercise some, albeit limited, degree of choice. I have made recommendations designed to ensure that the GMC’s FTP procedures work effectively for the protection of patients and are also fair to doctors. Finally, I have suggested a way in which revalidation could be made to comply with the requirements of the 1983 Act and to fulfil the high aspirations of those who have sought to promote it.
27.317
To some extent, these recommendations are bound to give rise to tension and conflict between the interests of those affected by them. However, I am confident that there is a large body of opinion both within and outside the medical profession that will recognise the need for all those involved to work together and to pull in the same direction. In making these recommendations, I have striven to achieve three things: first, that, if ever there were to be another potential Shipman, he would be detected very quickly; second, that the prospects of detecting all forms of aberrant behaviour or substandard performance in doctors should be enhanced; and, third, that the good quality of care provided by the large majority of doctors should have scope and opportunity for continued improvement.


========================================================================
APPENDIX F - Participants in the Inquiry Seminars: 13th-14th October 2003
========================================================================

--- APPENDIX G - 'Good Medical Practice' A General Medical Council Booklet ---
Click here to view ‘Good Medical Practice’ A General Medical Council Booklet

---  ---
RHAGAIR
ARGYMHELLION
PENNOD UN - Cyflwyniad
PENNOD DAU - Cynnal Cyfnod Dau, Cam Pedwar yr Ymchwiliad
PENNOD TRI - Penodi Meddygon Teulu a Gweinyddu Meddygaeth Deuluol cyn 1980: Penodiad Shipman i Feddygfa Donneybrook
PENNOD PEDWAR - Monitro Meddygon Teulu o 1980 hyd at 1998: y Trefniadau ar gyfer Monitro yn Tameside
PENNOD PUMP - Datblygiadau yn y Trefniadau ar gyfer Monitro Meddygon Teulu er 1998
PENNOD CHWECH - Cwynion a Disgyblu cyn mis Ebrill 1996
PENNOD SAITH - Cwynion a Disgyblu ar ôl 1996
PENNOD WYTH - Codi Pryderon ynghylch Shipman
PENNOD NAW - Codi Pryderon: Rôl Staff y Feddygfa
PENNOD DEG - Codi Pryderon: Ailymweld â Marwolaeth Mrs Renate Overton
PENNOD DEUDDEG - Rheolaeth Glinigol
PENNOD TRI AR DDEG - Ymarferwyr ar eu Pennau'u Hunain
PENNOD PEDWAR AR DDEG - Monitro Cyfraddau Marwolaethau ymhlith Cleifion Meddygon Teulu
PENNOD PYMTHEG - Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
PENNOD UN AR BYMTHEG - Y Modd yr Ymdriniodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ag Achos Shipman ym 1976
PENNOD DAU AR BYMTHEG - Camymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol a Pherfformiad Diffygiol Difrifol: Problemau Diffinio
PENNOD DEUNAW - Gweithdrefnau Ymddygiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol: Camau Cychwynnol gan y Staff Gweinyddol
PENNOD PEDWAR AR BYMTHEG - Gweithdrefnau Ymddygiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol: Sgrinio
PENNOD UGAIN - Gweithdrefnau Ymddygiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol: y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
PENNOD UN AR HUGAIN - Gweithdrefnau Ymddygiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol: y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
PENNOD DAU AR HUGAIN - Gweithdrefnau Iechyd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
PENNOD TRI AR HUGAIN - Sut y Mae'r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn Delio ag Achosion o Gam-drin Cyffuriau
PENNOD PEDWAR AR HUGAIN - Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
PENNOD PUMP AR HUGAIN - Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Newydd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
PENNOD CHWECH AR HUGAIN - Ail-ddilysu
PENNOD SAITH AR HUGAIN - Cynigion ar gyfer Newid
ATODIADAU
RHAGAIR

---  ---
Pumed Adroddiad

---  ---
Mae’r Adroddiad hwn yn delio â Cham Pedwar o Gyfnod Dau yr Ymchwiliad. Mae’n cwmpasu’r rhannau hynny o’r Cylch Gwaith a oedd yn gofyn i mi, trwy gyfeirio at achos Harold Shipman, i ymchwilio i berfformiad swyddogaethau‘r cyrff statudol, awdurdodau, sefydliadau eraill a’r unigolion hynny â chyfrifoldeb am fonitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol ac i argymell pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol.
Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio pwerau a swyddogaethau‘r sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol a oedd yn gweinyddu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol yn ystod y blynyddoedd rhwng 1974, pan ddechreuodd Shipman weithio fel meddyg teulu, a 1998, pan roddodd y gorau i ymarfer yn dilyn ei arestio ar amheuaeth o lofruddiaeth. Rwyf wedi ystyried hefyd y newidiadau pwysig a wnaed er 1998 yn y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu a chyflwyno mesurau ar gyfer unioni unrhyw ddiffygion a ddatgelwyd gan fonitro felly.
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) yw’r corff sy’n gyfrifol am gadw’r gofrestr o’r holl feddygon sy’n ymarfer yn y DU. Dim ond y GMC sydd â’r grym i ddileu enw meddyg o’r gofrestr feddygol. Gall hefyd atal y meddyg rhag ymarfer neu bennu amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad. Mae’n arfer y pwerau hyn trwy ei weithdrefnau ‘addasrwydd i ymarfer’. Pwerau’r GMC yw’r ‘dannedd’ y gellir gorfodi’r holl brosesau monitro eraill yn y pen draw. Mae’n dilyn bod y GMC yn chwarae rhan hollbwysig wrth fonitro meddygon teulu ac wrth ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon a allai eu niweidio naill ai’n fwriadol, yn ddi-hid neu oherwydd rhyw ddiffyg arall yn eu hymarfer. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio’r modd y mae’r GMC wedi gweithredu’i weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer o’r 1970au hyd at heddiw, ac mae wedi ystyried y cynigion ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau newydd sydd newydd ddod ar waith. Rwyf hefyd wedi archwilio cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon, sydd i ddod i rym yn 2005.
Yn ystod y cam hwn, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi derbyn llawer iawn o dystiolaeth ddogfennol, gan gynnwys 386 o ddatganiadau tyst ac 126 o ymatebion i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, ‘Safeguarding Patients’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Hydref 2003. Trafodwyd syniadau ar gyfer newid mewn seminarau a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ionawr 2004. Rwy’n ddiolchgar i bawb a ddarparodd ddatganiadau tystiolaeth neu ymatebion ysgrifenedig, ac i’r rheiny a fynychodd y gwrandawiadau a’r seminarau yn bersonol. Mae’n rhaid i mi sôn yn benodol am y cyfranogwyr o dramor a wnaeth gyflwyniadau i’r Ymchwiliad yn esbonio’r modd y caiff meddygon eu monitro yn eu gwledydd nhw. Mae’r holl gyfraniadau hynny wedi bod yn werthfawr i mi ac maent, fe gredaf, wedi fy ngalluogi i ddod i gasgliadau sydd wedi’u seilio’n gadarn ar dystiolaeth.
Mae cyhoeddi’r Adroddiad hwn yn nodi diwedd archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad i’r materion ehangach sy’n gysylltiedig â gweithgareddau Shipman, er mai fy mwriad yw cyhoeddi Adroddiad byr arall yn delio â gweithgareddau Shipman tra’r oedd yn gweithio yn Pontefract General Infirmary rhwng 1970 a 1974. Mae’n briodol, felly, nawr i mi fynegi fy niolchgarwch i bawb sydd wedi gweithio ar yr Ymchwiliad. Mae’r rheiny sydd ar ôl wedi gweithio gyda’i gilydd am bron i bedair blynedd, a mawr iawn yw fy niolch iddynt. Mae’r tîm gweinyddol, dan arweiniad Oonagh McIntosh tan yn ddiweddar, wedi darparu peiriant mewnol sy’n rhedeg yn esmwyth, yn ogystal â rhyngwyneb yr Ymchwiliad â thystion a’r cyhoedd, yn enwedig teuluoedd dioddefwyr Shipman. Os cawsant fod yr Ymchwiliad wedi’u trin gan ddangos cydymdeimlad ac ystyriaeth, i Oonagh a’i thîm y dylwn ddiolch am hynny. Mae Henry Palin, Cyfreithiwr ac Ysgrifennydd i’r Ymchwiliad a’i gynorthwyydd, Ita Langan, wedi rheoli pob un o’r ymchwiliadau, wedi ymdrin â’r dogfennau a chyhoeddi’r Adroddiadau. Bu eu hymroddiad yn ddiwyro a’u cyfraniad yn un anferth. Ar un adeg, roedd eu tîm yn cynnwys rhyw bymtheg o gyfreithwyr a pharagyfreithwyr. Mae tri wedi aros hyd at y diwedd: Martin Beckett, Tony Kitson a Thomas Thwaites. Rwy’n ddiolchgar iddynt nid yn unig am eu dyfalwch ond am ofalwch a thrylwyredd eu gwaith, a fu’n hanfodol i brosesau’r Ymchwiliad. Ymunodd Allan Dyde, ditectif arolygydd wedi ymddeol a oedd yn adnabod Hyde yn dda, â’r tîm am chwe wythnos ym mis Chwefror 2001 ac roedd mor ddefnyddiol, ni allem adael iddo fynd. Mae’r tîm TG wedi bod yn anhepgor i’r hyn a oedd (bron) yn Ymchwiliad cwbl rydd o bapur. Mae Helen Whitehorn wedi tynnu llawer (os nad y cyfan) o’r straen allan o’r gwaith paratoi’r Adroddiadau ar gyfer eu cyhoeddi. Bu Aneez Esmail, gydol yr Ymchwiliad, yn ffynhonnell cyngor ac ysbrydoliaeth amhrisiadwy. Yn olaf, rwy’n ddyledus i’r Cwnsleriaid, Caroline Swift CF, Christopher Melton CF, Anthony Mazzag a Michael Jones. Rwy’n cydnabod bod yr Ymchwiliad wedi para am gyfnod hwy ac wedi’u cadw o’u hymarfer am gyfnod hwy nag yr oedd unrhyw un ohonom wedi disgwyl. Rwy’n gwerthfawrogi’r gwaith caled a’r oriau hir iawn a roddodd bob un o aelodau’r tîm cyfreithiol. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cymryd eu bywydau drosodd, ac maent hwythau wedi wynebu hynny â sirioldeb di-ball. Rwyf wedi mwynhau eu cwmni a’u cyfeillgarwch, a dymunaf yn dda i bob un ohonynt wrth iddynt ddychwelyd i ‘fywyd arferol’.
Roedd cynnwys yr Ymchwiliad hwn o’r fath natur nad oedd anfadrwydd troseddau Shipman, ei dor ymddiriedaeth a’r effaith a gafodd y rhain ar deuluoedd ei ddioddefwyr a phobl Hyde erioed ymhell o’m meddwl. Yn y cyfnodau cynnar, fy mhrif waith oedd rhoi’r atebion yr oedd arnynt eu hangen i’r teuluoedd. Fodd bynnag, wrth i gwmpasiad gwaith yr Ymchwiliad ehangu i gynnwys archwilio ardystio marwolaeth, rheoleiddio cyffuriau rheoledig a monitro meddygon teulu, deuthum i sylweddoli y gallai’r Ymchwiliad droi trasiedi troseddoldeb Shipman yn rhywbeth o fudd i’r gymdeithas yn y dyfodol. Pobl eraill sydd i farnu a fydd yr Ymchwiliad yn llwyddo yn hynny o beth. Os yw’n methu, nid diffyg ymgeisio fydd y rheswm am hynny.

---  ---
Cyflwyniad
Fframwaith Meddygaeth Deuluol
Amgylchiadau Penodi Shipman i Feddygfa Donneybrook ym 1997
Systemau Monitro yn ystod Blynyddoedd Shipman mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol
Shipman yn y 1980au ac ar Ddechrau'r 1990au
Digonolrwydd Monitro Lleol
Datblygiadau ers Arestio Shipman ym 1998
Argaeledd Gwybodaeth am Feddygon
Cwynion Cleifion a Disgyblu Meddygon Teulu
Mynegi Pryderon
Y Modd yr Ymdriniodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ag Achos Shipman ym 1976
'Hen' Weithdrefnau'r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ar gyfer Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Newydd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Ailddilysu
Y Diwylliant o fewn y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Casgliadau
Cyflwyniad

---  ---
Pan sefydlwyd yr Ymchwiliad hwn ym mis Ionawr 2001, roedd yn hysbys fod Shipman wedi llofruddio 15 o gleifion rhwng 1995 a 1998. Roedd amheuaeth hefyd y gallai fod wedi lladd pobl eraill dros gyfnod lawer yn hwy. Pan ddaeth i’r golwg, ar ddiwedd ei achos, fod Shipman, ym 1976, wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau o dwyll, meddu’n anghyfreithlon ar bethidin ac o gael gafael ar bethidin trwy dwyll, dechreuodd llawer o bobl ofyn sut yr oedd wedi gallu mynd yn ôl i ymarfer fel meddyg teulu ym 1977, ychydig dros flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach. Roedd pobl yn tybied yn ogystal sut yr oedd wedi gallu lladd cleifion dro ar ôl tro heb i’r awdurdodau a oedd yn gyfrifol am feddygon teulu fel yntau sylwi. Roedd un cylch gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad yn gofyn i mi edrych ar
‘berfformiad swyddogaethau’r cyrff statudol hynny, yr awdurdodau, sefydliadau eraill ac unigolion â chyfrifoldeb am fonitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol ... ac i argymell pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol’
. Dehonglais y gair ‘monitro’ yn ei ystyr ehangaf, ac rwyf yn hyderus mai dyna oedd bwriad y Senedd.
Erbyn yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad yn barod i gychwyn ar wrandawiadau’n ymwneud â’r agwedd hon ar ei waith yn 2003, roedd yr Adroddiad Cyntaf eisoes wedi’i gyhoeddi. Canfûm fod Shipman, rhwng 1975 a 1998, wedi lladd nid llai na 215 o gleifion. Felly, er mwyn cydymffurfio â’i Gylch Gorchwyl, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gorfod archwilio’r darpariaethau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu yn gweithio yn y GIG dros gyfnod o 23 blynedd. Roedd hynny’n cynnwys archwilio pwerau’r sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCO) yn gyfrifol am weinyddu meddygaeth deuluol yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, eu rhan wrth ddewis meddygon teulu i lenwi swyddi mewn meddygfeydd, yr offer monitro (os o gwbl) a oedd ar gael iddynt, y rheoliadau a oedd yn rheoli disgyblu meddygon teulu, a’r dulliau yr ymdriniwyd â chwynion cleifion am feddygon teulu. Yn ogystal ag ystyried sut yr oedd y systemau’n gweithredu’n gyffredinol, roedd yn rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio sut yr oeddent yn gweithredu mewn perthynas â Shipman. Un cwestiwn o ddiddordeb penodol i’r Ymchwiliad oedd pa un a oedd gan unrhyw un amheuon yn ei gylch ac os felly, pa mor hawdd yr oedd iddynt godi’u pryderon yn effeithiol gydag awdurdod priodol. Roedd diddordeb gan yr Ymchwiliad i ganfod a oedd yn ymarferol i PCO fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu, ac a wnaeth unrhyw PCO hynny mewn gwirionedd.
Yn ychwanegol at archwilio’r systemau gweithredu o fewn y GIG, fe wnaeth yr Ymchwiliad archwilio hefyd gweithdrefnau’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) ar gyfer addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) dros yr un cyfnod o 23 mlynedd. Mae’r gweithdrefnau FTP yn rhan annatod o fonitro pob meddyg. Y GMC yw’r unig gorff a all ddiddymu neu atal hawl meddyg i ymarfer meddygaeth yn y DU; fe all bennu amodau hefyd ar hawl y meddyg i ymarfer. Gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC, i bob pwrpas, yw’r ‘dannedd’ y tu ôl i bob system fonitro a disgyblu arall. Yn ogystal ag ystyried y modd yr oedd gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn gweithio’n gyffredinol, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio’r modd y deliodd y GMC â Shipman ym 1976, pan hysbyswyd y GMC yn ei gylch yn dilyn ei ddyfarnu’n euog am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau y cyfeiriais atynt eisoes. Y canlyniad oedd bod rhybudd wedi’i roi i Shipman ynglŷn â’i ymddygiad yn y dyfodol, ac wedi hynny, roedd yn rhydd i ymarfer fel meddyg teulu. Rwyf hefyd wedi archwilio’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achosion o feddygon yn camdrin cyffuriau ar ôl cyflwyno ei ‘weithdrefnau iechyd’ ym 1980. Hefyd, Hysbyswyd y GMC ynghylch Shipman mewn perthynas â materion llai difrifol ym 1985 a 1994, ac rwyf wedi disgrifio‘r hyn ddigwyddodd ar yr achlysuron hynny.
Oherwydd bod Cylch Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad y gofyn i mi hefyd wneud argymhellion ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn well yn y dyfodol, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gorfod archwilio’r systemau sydd ar waith ar hyn y bryd ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu, a’r rheiny a ragwelir ar gyfer y dyfodol. Er mwyn gwneud hynny’n iawn, bu’n angenrheidiol edrych ar y datblygiadau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer gofal sylfaenol ac ar gyfer rheoleiddio’r proffesiwn er 1998, pan stopiodd Shipman ymarfer. Bu’n gyfnod o newid mawr a chyflym. Mae’r newid yn parhau. Hefyd, ailwampiwyd gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn ddiweddar, ac mae’r GMC wedi bod yn datblygu’i gynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu cofrestriad pob meddyg sy’n ymarfer yn y DU. Bydd y dilysu’n cael ei gyflwyno ym mis Ebrill 2005. I ryw raddau, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi bod yn canolbwyntio ar ddarlun newidiol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw hynny wedi fy atal i rhag dod i gasgliadau a gwneud argymhellion a fydd, mi gredaf, yn helpu cyflawni prif nod yr Ymchwiliad, sef ceisio sicrhau, yn y dyfodol, na fyddai ymddygiad meddyg sy’n euog o gamymddwyn difrifol fel Shipman, yn cael gweithredu heb ei ganfod am gyhyd.

---  ---
Daeth y GIG i fodolaeth ym 1948, ac o’r amser hwnnw, mae gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol wedi cael eu darparu a’u gweinyddu yn lleol gan sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCO). Byddaf yn cyfyngu fy nisgrifiad i’r rheiny sydd wedi bodoli yn Lloegr yn ystod y cyfnod dan sylw. Mae cyfansoddiad a swyddogaethau PCO wedi newid o dro i dro dros y blynyddoedd. Ym 1974, pan ddechreuodd Shipman ymarfer fel meddyg teulu, roedd gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol yn cael eu gwasanaethu gan bwyllgorau ymarferwyr teulu (FPC). Heddiw, y cyrff lleol sy’n gyfrifol yw’r ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCT). Mae rhyw 300 o PCT yn Lloegr. Mae PCT yn gyfrifol am ddarparu pob gwasanaeth gofal sylfaenol, gan gynnwys gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol.
Mae rhyw 34,500 o feddygon teulu yn ymarfer yn Lloegr heddiw. Mae’r rhan fwyaf ohonynt yn gontractwyr annibynnol hunangyflogedig, er bod rhai’n cael eu cyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan PCT neu eraill. Yn draddodiadol, mae meddygon teulu wedi amddiffyn eu statws hunangyflogedig, eu hannibyniaeth a’u awtonomi clinigol yn chwyrn. Mae gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol yn cael eu darparu dan gontract (y Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS)), a thrafodir telerau’r contract hwnnw - a’u haildrafod o dro i dro - rhwng y Llywodraeth a chynrychiolwyr y proffesiwn. Mae’r Contract GMS yn darparu ar gyfer tâl meddygon teulu ac am lwfansau amrywiol am redeg meddygfa. Hyd at ganol y 1960au, roedd llawer o feddygon teulu’n ymarferwyr unigol. Roedd Contract GMS newydd, a ddaeth i rym ym 1966, yn rhoi cymhellion i feddygon teulu ymuno â’i gilydd mewn grwpiau mwy, ac i wella’u hadeiladau a chyflogi mwy o staff. Nododd y Contract hwn gychwyn meddygaeth deuluol fodern yn seiliedig ar dîm. Mae pob Contract GMS, hyd at Gontract 2004, yn pennu nifer o ddyletswyddau personol ar feddygon teulu yn ogystal, a gelwir hyn yn delerau gwasanaeth. Un ddyletswydd bwysig oedd rhoi i’w cleifion yr holl wasanaethau meddygol personol a oedd yn angenrheidiol ac yn briodol, o’r math a ddarperir fel arfer gan feddygon teulu.
Yn ystod y cyfnod cyfan bron pan fu Shipman yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu, o 1974 i 1998, rôl PCO yn bennaf oedd darparu a hwyluso gwasanaethau meddyg teulu i’r boblogaeth. Parhaodd FPC i weithredu hyd at 1990, pan gawsant eu disodli gan awdurdodau gwasanaethau iechyd teulu (FHSA). Cafodd y rhain, yn eu tro, eu disodli gan awdurdodau iechyd ym 1996. Diddymwyd Awdurdodau Iechyd yn 2002, a’u disodli gan PCT. Nid oedd gan FPC rôl oruchwyliol dros feddygon teulu; swyddogaethau gweinyddol yn unig oedd ganddynt. Dim ond yn y 1990au y dechreuodd FHSA ac Awdurdodau Iechyd arfer rôl fonitro neu lled-reoli mewn perthynas â meddygon teulu’n ymarfer yn eu hardal. Mae pwerau’r PCO i fonitro a ‘rheoli’ meddygon teulu wedi cynyddu’n sylweddol dros y deng mlynedd diwethaf, a heddiw, mae PCT yn gyfrifol nid yn unig am ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol, ond hefyd am roi trefniadau ar waith ar gyfer monitro a gwella ansawdd darparwyr gofal iechyd. Er mwyn cyflawni eu cyfrifoldebau, rhoddwyd ystod eang o bwerau i’r PCT, a byddaf yn disgrifio rhai ohonynt nes ymlaen.

---  ---
O ddyddiau cychwyn y GIG, un o swyddogaethau pwysig PCO fu cadw rhestr (a elwid yn rhestr feddygol yn flaenorol) o’r holl feddygon teulu yn ymarfer yn yr ardal. Cyn y gall unrhyw feddyg gael hawl i ymarfer fel meddyg teulu mewn ardal benodol, mae’n rhaid iddo/iddi gael ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr sy’n cael ei chadw gan y PCO perthnasol. Ym 1977, pan benodwyd Shipman i feddygfa Donneybrook, tasg weinyddol yn unig oedd cadw’r rhestr feddygol. Ac eithrio sicrhau bod y meddyg ar y rhestr feddygol, nid oedd yn ofynnol i’r FPC, ac nid oedd grym ganddo, i wneud unrhyw archwiliadau pellach ar addasrwydd y meddyg i weithio mewn meddygaeth deulu cyn ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr. Yr unig bryd y gellid dileu enw meddyg oddi ar y rhestr oedd pe bai wedi peidio â bod yn ymarferydd cofrestredig, pe bai’n methu darparu’r gwasanaethau meddygol am chwe mis, neu os oedd wedi cael ei ddileu/dileu o’r rhestr gan y GMC. Gallai PCOau wneud cynrychiolaethau i Dribiwnlys y GIG yn ceisio dileu meddyg o’i restrau ar y sail bod ef/hi yn niweidio effeithlonrwydd y gwasanaethau y mae’n eu darparu. Roedd hon yn broses feichus ac ni chafodd ei defnyddio’n aml.
Hyd at 2001, os oedd swydd wag yn codi mewn meddygfa deulu bresennol, byddai’r PCO lleol yn chwarae rôl gyfyngedig iawn wrth lenwi’r swydd honno. Pe bai’n cael ei hysbysu am swydd wag gan y partneriaid eraill yn y feddygfa, byddai’r PCO yn gwneud cais i’r Pwyllgor Arferion Meddygol (MPC), corff cenedlaethol â swyddogaeth i sicrhau dosbarthu meddygon teulu’n gyfartal ledled y wlad. Os oedd yr MPC yn cytuno bod angen meddyg amnewid, mater i’r partneriaid yn y feddygfa oedd dewis meddyg arall. Os nad oedd yr ymgeisydd llwyddiannus eisoes ar restr feddygol yr FPC perthnasol, byddai’n gwneud cais i gael ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr feddygol, a, cyhyd â’i fod/bod ar y rhestr feddygol, byddai’n cael ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr ac yn rhydd i gymryd y swydd.
Ym mis Chwefror 1976, ar ôl canfod ei droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig bedwar mis yn gynharach, cymerodd Shipman swydd gydag Awdurdod Iechyd Ardal Durham ym maes iechyd plant. Ym mis Ebrill 1976, ystyriodd y GMC ei achos a phenderfynu gadael iddo barhau i ymarfer. Yn haf 1977, ymgeisiodd am swydd ym meddygfa Donneybrook yn Hyde, Greater Manchester. Yn y cyfweliad, cyfaddefodd i aelodau’r feddygfa iddo gael problem cyffuriau yn y gorffennol, ond y gallai’u sicrhau nhw (ac roedd hynny’n wir) nad oedd y GMC yn teimlo bod angen ei ddileu neu’i atal o’r gofrestr feddygol. Nid oedd yr Ysgrifennydd Cartref ychwaith wedi pennu unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar hawliau rhagnodi Shipman, fel yr oedd yn agored iddo wneud dan adran 12 Deddf Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau 1971. Cafodd y partneriaid eu syfrdanu gan onestrwydd ymddangosiadol Shipman ynghylch ei anawsterau yn y gorffennol, ac fe wnaeth ei frwdfrydedd a’i brofiad diweddar ym maes iechyd plant greu argraff arnynt. Gwnaethant ymholiadau i’r GMC a’r Swyddfa Gartref, a chanfod bod Shipman yn rhydd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Fe wnaethant siarad ag un o’r seiciatryddion a fu’n ei drin, a dywedwyd wrthynt y bu problem gan Shipman, ond bod honno wedi’i datrys yn foddhaol. Fe wnaethant siarad â phartner yn ei hen feddygfa a wnaeth, er ei fod yn flin am y ffaith fod Shipman wedi dwyn neu gamddefnyddio pethidin o’i feddygfa, siarad yn uchel am ei alluoedd fel meddyg. Efallai eu bod wedi siarad â’i gyflogwyr. Os do, yn ddiau byddent wedi cael cofnod calonogol am ei gynnydd a byddent wedi dod i wybod nad oedd hen broblem gyffuriau Shipman wedi ailgodi. Yn dilyn yr ymholiadau hyn, penderfynodd aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook gynnig y swydd i Shipman. Roeddent o’r farn ei bod yn rhesymol i ddibynnu ar farn y GMC bod Shipman yn gymwys i ymarfer meddygaeth. Nid wyf yn eu beirniadu am hynny.
Fe wnaeth Shipman gais i gael ei gynnwys ar y rhestr feddygol a oedd yn cael ei chadw gan FPC Tameside. Gwnaethpwyd ymholiad i’r GMC i wneud yn siŵr ei fod wedi cofrestru. Dangosodd ymateb y GMC nad oedd Shipman wedi cofrestru’n llawn. Ni ddywedwyd wrth yr FPC am gysylltiad diweddar Shipman â’r GMC. Yn wir, hyd yn oed pe holwyd y GMC yn benodol a fu gan Shipman unrhyw gysylltiad blaenorol â’r GMC, ni fyddai’r FPC wedi cael gwybod am y cysylltiad hwnnw. Fe wnaeth y GMC ddelio â Shipman yn breifat, a byddai’r GMC wedi ymdrin yn gyfrinachol â’r ffaith iddo gael rhybudd.
Cafodd Shipman ei gynnwys wedyn ar restr feddygol FPC Tameside, lle’r oedd y swyddogion mewn anwybodaeth lwyr iddo gael ei farnu’n euog am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig 20 mis yn gynharach. Roeddent hwythau a’u holynwyr heb wybod am y ffaith honno gydol y cyfnod yr oedd Shipman yn ymarfer yn Tameside. Hyd yn oed pe byddent yn gwybod am yr euogfarnau, ni fyddent wedi gallu gwrthod cynnwys Shipman ar y rhestr feddygol ym 1977. Roedd ar y rhestr feddygol, roedd hawl ganddo ymarfer ac roedd hawl ganddo gael ei gynnwys ar y rhestr. Ni ddylid beirniadu FPC Tameside am ei gynnwys ar ei restr feddygol. Ni ellir beirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook ychwaith am beidio â dweud wrth FPC Tameside am hanes Shipman. Golygai’r rôl gyfyngedig a oedd gan FPC bryd hynny na wnaeth unrhyw un yn y feddygfa feddwl bod gan yr FPC ddiddordeb yn y wybodaeth hon.

---  ---
Yn y 1970au a’r 1980au, fel y dywedais, sefydliadau gweinyddol pur oedd yr FPC. Nid oedd rôl reoli ganddynt o gwbl. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw gyfrifoldeb am allu proffesiynol nag ansawdd gofal. Roedd y materion hynny’n cael eu gadael yn llwyr i’r proffesiwn. Ar lefel leol, roedd pwyllgorau etholedig o feddygon teulu (pwyllgorau meddygol lleol (LCM)) yn ysgwyddo cyfrifoldeb am gynnal safonau proffesiynol, ac roedd cyfrifoldeb ganddynt am farnu ynghylch materion fel gor-ragnodi, methu arfer gofal rhesymol wrth roi tystysgrifau meddygol a methu cadw cofnodion meddygol priodol. Ystyriwyd bod y rhain yn faterion y dylid eu rheoleiddio gan y proffesiwn meddygol, nid gan PCO. Roedd gan LMC rôl statudol ffurfiol hefyd mewn gweithdrefnau disgyblu a chwyno yn ymwneud â meddygon teulu. Yn genedlaethol, roedd y GMC yn gyfrifol am reoleiddio ymddygiad meddygon ar ei gofrestr. Yn ystod y cyfnod hwn, roedd rhai yn cydnabod (Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu yn nodedig) bod safonau gofal ymhlith meddygon teulu, yn gyffredinol, yn amrywiol tu hwnt, ac, yn achos rhai, yn annerbyniol o isel. Dechreuodd rhai aelodau o’r proffesiwn gymryd camau tuag at godi safonau. Yn y cyfamser, nid oedd y pwerau angenrheidiol gan yr FPC i ymgymryd ag unrhyw fonitro systematig o berfformiad clinigol neu o ansawdd y gwasanaethau’n cael eu cynnig gan feddygon teulu.
Roedd, fodd bynnag, un ffordd y gallai PCO ddod yn ymwybodol nad oedd meddyg yn ymarfer i safon dderbyniol. Efallai y byddai cwyn am arfer is-safonol yn cael ei gwneud gan neu ar ran claf. Hyd at 1996, roedd cwynion cleifion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PCO. Felly, daeth y PCO yn ymwybodol o’r cwynion yn cael eu gwneud ac fe allai, pe ddewisai, ddadansoddi rhywfaint ar y cwynion hynny, a chan hynny, nodi ‘meddygon trafferthus’. Roedd y systemau cwynion a disgyblu wedi’u cysylltu, ac felly roedd yn bosibl, mewn rhai achosion, i PCO ddechrau mesurau disgyblu pan fyddai cwyn yn cael ei chefnogi. Fodd bynnag, proses adweithiol lwyr oedd canfod ymarfer gwael trwy gwynion. Yn ystod y 1970au a’r 1980au, ychydig iawn o fonitro rhagweithiol o feddygon teulu a oedd yn cael ei wneud a allai ganfod camarfer neu berfformiad gwael. Roedd y gwasanaeth meddygol rhanbarthol (RMS) yn cyflogi meddygon a elwid yn swyddogion meddygol rhanbarthol (RMO) a fyddai’n ymweld â phob meddyg teulu yn eu hardal. Fe allai pob meddyg teulu ddisgwyl ymweliad bob rhyw ddwy flynedd. Rôl fugeiliol i raddau helaeth oedd gan yr RMO, er bod y grym ganddynt i archwilio cofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig (CDR) meddygon teulu, a’u trefniadau ar gyfer storio cyffuriau rheoledig. Yn ddamcaniaethol, fe allent archwilio cofnodion meddygol, ond ymddengys, erbyn canol y 1960au, bod y grym hwn wedi mynd allan o ddefnydd. Ym 1991, daeth cyfrifoldeb yr RMS am feddygon teulu i ben.
Ym mis Tachwedd 1987, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth Bapur Gwyn, ‘Hyrwyddo Iechyd Gwell’, a oedd yn cynnwys nifer o gynigion i wella ystod ac ansawdd gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol. Rhoddwyd mwy o gyfrifoldebau i FPCau ynghyd â rôl ‘reoli’. Mewn ymgais i wella’r rôl reoli, roedd gan yr FHSA newydd, a ddaeth i fodolaeth ym 1990, lai o aelodau’n feddygon teulu na’r FPC, a phenodwyd yr aelodau hynny gan yr awdurdodau iechyd rhanbarthol yn hytrach na (fel y bu hi cyn hynny) gan yr LMC. Roedd gofyniad ar yr FHSAau i gyflogi cynghorwyr meddygol a allai roi cyngor clinigol arbenigol yn annibynnol i’r proffesiwn meddygol lleol. Roedd telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu newydd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon fod yn fwy gweithredol ym maes meddygaeth ataliol, ac roeddent yn cynnwys darpariaethau eraill â’r nod o wella ansawdd gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol. Anogwyd FPC i osod targedau ar gyfer darparu gwasanaethau arbennig fel brechu, imiwneiddio a sgrinio serfigol. Roedd taliadau cymhellol yn cael eu gwneud os oedd targedau’n cael eu cyrraedd. Hefyd, dechreuodd yr Awdurdod Prisio Rhagnodion ddadansoddi data a gasglwyd o ragnodion a roddwyd gan feddygon teulu. Anfonwyd y dadansoddiadau data hyn at FHSA, a byddai eu cynghorwyr meddygol yn ymweld â meddygon teulu ac yn trafod eu harfer rhagnodi. Yn ddiweddarach, dechreuodd FHSA gyflogi cynghorwyr fferyllol arbenigol at y diben hwn. I gychwyn, bwriad yr ymarferiad hwn oedd lleihau cost cyffuriau’n cael eu rhagnodi; roedd meddygon teulu i’w perswadio i ragnodi cyffuriau generig cyfwerth rhatach na’r cyffuriau patent drutach yr oeddent wedi’u defnyddio’n flaenorol. Cyn bo hir, roedd yr amcan wedi newid, ac roedd ffocws sylw cynghorwyr meddygol a fferyllol ar geisio sicrhau bod meddygon yn rhagnodi’n rhesymegol ac yn dda.
Yn gynnar yn y 1990au, dechreuodd y Llywodraeth annog archwiliadau meddygol neu glinigol, sef proses a ddefnyddir gan feddygon i ddadansoddi data a dynnir o agweddau amrywiol ar eu harfer clinigol, a bwriedir i’r canlyniadau gael eu defnyddio i wella eu harferion. Cynigiwyd taliadau cymhellol i feddygon a allai gymryd rhan. Gall archwiliad meddygol ddatgelu cryn dipyn am ansawdd a safonau’r gofal a ddarperir gan y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r meddygon yn caniatáu i swyddogion y PCO weld canlyniadau eu harchwiliadau. Proses gwbl ffurfiannol oedd hi; mae hynny’n golygu yr edrychwyd arni fel profiad dysgu ac nid ei defnyddio fel modd o archwilio neu roi ar brawf. Roedd canlyniadau archwiliadau’n gyfrinachol, ac fe’u hadroddwyd yn flynyddol i’r FHSA mewn ffurf gydgasgledig a dienw’n unig.
Yn ystod y cyfnod hyd at 1998, gwnaethpwyd cryn gynnydd gan y PCO (yr FHSA yn gyntaf, ac, o 1996, yr Awdurdodau Iechyd) wrth gasglu gwybodaeth am feddygfeydd teulu ac wrth annog meddygon teulu, drwy gymhellion ariannol, i wella ystod ac ansawdd eu gwasanaethau. Serch hynny, roedd cryn gyfyngiadau o hyd ar allu’r PCOau i ddelio â’r meddygon teulu hynny nad oeddent yn barod i newid. Pwerau cyfyngedig oedd gan gynghorwyr meddygol a fferyllol, ac roedd rhaid iddynt fwrw ymlaen gan ddefnyddio perswâd a defnyddio dylanwad. Ar ôl 1996, bu newid yn y system ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion. O’r amser hwnnw, roedd cwynion yn cael eu gwneud yn uniongyrchol i feddygfeydd teulu, a gallai cwyn gael ei gwneud yn gwbl ddiarwybod i Awdurdodau Iechyd. O ganlyniad, roedd llai o gyfle ganddynt i gael gwybodaeth am arfer gwael yn eu hardal. Roedd y systemau cwynion a disgyblu yn gweithredu ar wahân. Roedd camau gweithredu disgyblu’n golygu proses feichus, ac anaml iawn y’u rhoddwyd ar waith. Nid oedd gan Awdurdodau Iechyd lawer o rym o hyd i ddileu meddyg o’u rhestrau. Erbyn 1998, roedd trefniadau lleol ar gyfer delio â meddygon yn perfformio’n wael, a ddaeth i fodolaeth ar ôl i’r GMC gyflwyno’i weithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1997, yn eu cyfnodau cynllunio’n unig yn gyffredinol.

---  ---
Amser Shipman ym Meddygfa Donneybrook
Gydol y 1980au, roedd Shipman wedi ymarfer ym meddygfa Donneybrook, a oedd yn cael ei disgrifio fel ‘meddygfa grŵp’ ar y pryd. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd meddygfa Donneybrook yn hyn a fyddai bellach yn cael ei galw’n feddygfa grŵp, h.y. un lle mae’r meddygon yn rhannu gofal y cleifion ar eu rhestr ar y cyd. Roedd gan y rhan fwyaf o’r meddygon ym meddygfa Donneybrook, gan gynnwys Shipman, eu rhestr eu hunain o gleifion. Byddent yn gofalu am gleifion ei gilydd dan drefniadau gan y naill a’r llall yn unig ar gyfer hanner diwrnodau, gwyliau a gwasanaeth allan o oriau. Ni fyddent yn dod yn gyfarwydd ag iechyd neu broblemau cleifion ei gilydd. Ychydig o gyfle yr oedd y meddygon eraill yn y feddygfa yn cael i lunio barn ynghylch ansawdd y gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan Shipman, ac nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw reswm o gwbl i dybio y gallai fod yn niweidio’i gleifion yn fwriadol.
Shipman yn Symud i Feddygfa Market Street
Ar ddiwedd 1991, penderfynodd Shipman adael meddygfa Donneybrook ac ymsefydlu fel ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun. Er, a bod yn fanwl gywir, nad oedd angen caniatâd FHSA Tameside arno i wneud hynny, roedd angen iddo gael ei ganiatâd a’i gefnogaeth, gan y gallai fod wedi atal y lwfansau ariannol yr oedd arno’u hangen i sefydlu’r feddygfa newydd. Fodd bynnag, roedd yr FHSA yn barod iawn ei gymorth, gan fod parch mawr i Shipman yno. Roedd swyddogion yr FHSA yn ei adnabod yn dda; bu’n aelod o’i PCO rhagflaenol, sef FPC Tameside, am nifer o flynyddoedd tra’n ysgrifennydd yr LMC. Ond nid oedd pawb yn hoff ohono; roedd rhai pobl yn ei ystyried yn ddyn trahaus a ‘phigog’. Ond nid oedd unrhyw reswm i gredu ei fod yn darparu unrhyw beth ond safon gofal uchel i’w gleifion, ac yn sicr nid oedd unrhyw reswm i gredu y gallai fod yn eu lladd. At hynny, gan nad oedd meddygfeydd bach neu unigol eraill yn Hyde, ystyriwyd y byddai’r feddygfa newydd yn darparu amrywiaeth gwasanaeth priodol. Ar 1 Ionawr 1992, ymsefydlodd Shipman fel ymarferydd unigol, gan barhau i weithio o ystafelloedd yn Donneybrook House, lle’r oedd meddygfa Donneybrook. Nid oedd adeilad ei feddygfa newydd yn 21 Market Street, Hyde, yn barod i symud iddynt tan fis Awst 1992.
Arfer Clinigol Shipman
Rhoddodd Shipman yr argraff ei fod yn feddyg galluog. Roedd yn frwdfrydig ynghylch meddygaeth ataliol a chynhaliai archwiliad clinigol cyson. Roedd i weld yn feddyg modern a blaengar, ac yr oedd ei gleifion yn ei hoffi. Mae’n bosibl (fel yr awgrymodd rhai) ei fod wedi creu argraff o allu proffesiynol mwy nag yr oedd ganddo mewn gwirionedd. Pa un a oedd hynny’n wir ai peidio, mae’n annhebygol y byddai archwiliad arferol o’r data cyfyngedig a oedd ar gael i’r PCO yn ystod y cyfnod yr oedd yn ymarfer wedi codi unrhyw bryderon ynghylch ei allu neu’i ymddygiad proffesiynol. Er bod cwynion wedi’u gwneud am Shipman i Tameside PCO ym 1985, 1990 a 1992, nid oeddent yn gŵynion a oedd yn codi amheuon difrifol ynghylch ei allu neu’i ymddygiad cyffredinol, ac yn sicr ni fyddent wedi codi amheuon ynghylch ei droseddoldeb. Byddai’r rhan fwyaf o dechnegau monitro confensiynol, felly, wedi methu â’i adnabod fel meddyg a oedd yn camarfer.
Rhagnodi Shipman
Yr unig fodd yr oedd Shipman yn ‘ystadegyn anarferol’ oedd mewn perthynas â’i arfer rhagnodi. Roedd yn rhagnodi cyffuriau drud. Am gyfnod, ni fyddai’n cydymffurfio â cheisiadau i ragnodi cyffuriau generig yn hytrach na’r brandiau patent drutach. Hefyd, roedd yn frwdfrydig ynghylch effaith statins (cyffuriau sy’n gostwng y lipidau), a oedd newydd ddod ar y farchnad. Roeddent yn ddrud, ac roedd llawer o feddygon yn amau eu heffeithiolrwydd. Mynnodd Shipman eu rhagnodi. Mae amser wedi dangos ei fod yn iawn i fod yn hyderus ynddynt. Pan gafodd ei holi gan gynghorwyr meddygol neu fferyllol ynghylch ei ddefnydd o gyffuriau drud, roedd Shipman bob amser yn gallu cyfiawnhau’i arfer rhagnodi trwy gyfeirio at ymchwil a oedd wedi’i gyhoeddi. Nid oedd unrhyw bryder ynghylch ansawdd ei ragnodi - ond yn hytrach y gost yn unig.
Pwyntiau Bregus Shipman
Y ddwy agwedd ar weithgareddau Shipman a fyddai wedi ei wneud yn fwy agored i gael ei ddatgelu oedd ei fod yn cael gafael ar feintiau mawr o ddiamorffin, a ddefnyddiodd i ladd ei gleifion, a’r nifer uchel o farwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion.
Shipman yn cael gafael ar Ddiamorffin
Fel y dywedais, yn ystod y cyfnod pan fu Shipman yn ymarfer, roedd gan swyddogion RMO, a chynghorwyr meddygol yn ddiweddarach, y pŵer i archwilio CDR meddygon teulu a’u trefniadau ar gyfer storio cyffuriau rheoledig. Pan ofynnwyd iddo a oedd yn cadw CDR, atebodd Shipman nad oedd yn gwneud hynny, ac nad oedd ganddo unrhyw reswm dros wneud, gan nad oedd yn cadw cyflenwad o gyffuriau rheoledig at ddefnydd argyfwng. Nid oedd unrhyw reswm i amau gwirionedd yr haeriad hwnnw. Nid oedd yn anghyffredin i feddyg teulu ddewis peidio â chadw stoc o gyffuriau rheoledig. Mewn gwirionedd, fel sy’n hysbys erbyn hyn, roedd Shipman yn cadw stoc o ddiamorffin ac yn ei ddefnyddio i ladd cleifion. Nid oedd unrhyw fodd y gallai’r swyddogion RMO neu gynghorwyr meddygol fod wedi gwybod hyn.
Fe wnaeth Shipman, fodd bynnag, ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig i gleifion. Ni wnaeth ei arfer rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig beri unrhyw bryder. Byddai swm cyfyngedig o ddata rhagnodi a oedd ar gael yn y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au - a’r ffaith fod data Shipman, hyd at 1992, wedi’i gynnwys yn y data ar gyfer meddygfa gyfan Donneybrook - wedi’i gwneud hi’n anodd, os nad yn amhosibl, i ganfod unrhyw afreoleidd-dra yn ei arferion rhagnodi. Yn y blynyddoedd ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1993, cafodd Shipman afael ar ddiamorffin trwy ei ragnodi i gleifion nad oedd ei angen arnynt mewn gwirionedd, trwy fynd ag ef o dai cleifion a oedd wedi marw o ganser, neu drwy ei gasglu ar ran cleifion â salwch terfynol a chadw rhywfaint o’r cyffur, neu’r cyffur cyfan, iddo’i hun. Nid yw’n debygol y byddai unrhyw un o’r dulliau caffael hyn wedi cael eu canfod trwy fonitro’i ragnodi, ac nid oedd gan PCOau Tameside unrhyw fodd o wybod amdanynt. Nid oedd PCOau ychwaith, cyn euogfarn Shipman, yn ymgymryd â monitro arferol wedi’i gyfeirio’n benodol at ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig gan feddygon teulu. Ar un achlysur, sylwodd un ymgynghorydd fferyllol (nid gweithiwr yr FHSA) ei fod i weld yn rhagnodi meintiau mawr o ddiamorffin; pan gafodd ei holi am hyn (nid oherwydd unrhyw bryder neu amheuaeth, ond er mwyn iddi allu cynllunio’r gyllideb cyffuriau yn y dyfodol), esboniodd Shipman bod angen y cyffur ar gyfer claf yn dioddef o salwch terfynol. Cyflwynodd y cofnodion meddygol i ddangos mai felly yr oedd. Nid oedd gan yr ymgynghorydd unrhyw reswm i amau y gallai fod yn dwyn diamorffin oddi wrth gleifion ac yn ei ddefnyddio i ladd. Ac felly hefyd PCOau Tameside.
Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, gwneuthum argymhellion a fyddai’n ei gwneud hi’n llawer anoddach i feddyg neu weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd arall i gael gafael ar gyflenwadau anghyfreithlon o gyffuriau rheoledig, ac a fyddai hefyd yn ei gwneud yn fwy tebygol y byddai meddyg a oedd yn llwyddo i gael cyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon yn cael ei ganfod. Dylai monitro arferion meddygon teulu wrth ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig, gan ddefnyddio’r technegau sydd ar gael nawr, fod o gymorth hefyd, ac rwyf wedi argymell y dylid cadw golwg fanwl yn benodol ar feddygon sydd wedi cael problem cyffuriau yn y gorffennol neu yr amheuir bod ganddynt broblem ar hyn o bryd.
Nifer Marwolaethau Cleifion
Cyn 1998, nid oedd yn arfer gan PCOau i fonitro’r cyfraddau marwolaeth ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu unigol. Nid oedd unrhyw ofyniad arnynt i wneud hynny a byddai anawsterau ymarferol sylweddol wedi codi. Pe bai monitro’n cael ei wneud, byddai nifer uchel y marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman wedi dod i’r amlwg, fwy na thebyg yn y 1980au ond yn sicr yn y 1990au. Fodd bynnag, ni ellir beirniadu’r PCO yn Tameside am beidio ag ymgymryd â’r math hwn o fonitro. Nid oes system o hyd ar gyfer monitro marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o arfer. Nid yw’r dasg o ddyfeisio system felly yn un hawdd. Mae’n golygu cysylltu meintiau mawr o ddata a dadansoddiad ystadegol cymhleth. I fod yn effeithiol, rhaid ei wneud yn genedlaethol.
Rwyf wedi archwilio ymarferoldeb sefydlu system fonitro genedlaethol. Fe wnaeth yr Ymchwiliad gomisiynu Dr Paul Aylin, Uwch Ddarlithydd Clinigol mewn Epidemioleg ac Iechyd Cyhoeddus, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, i wneud ymchwil i ddymunoldeb ac ymarferoldeb system felly. Fe wnaeth Dr Aylin a’i dîm baratoi adroddiad a rhoi cyflwyniad o’u gwaith i’r Ymchwiliad. Trafodwyd y pwnc wedyn mewn seminar deuddydd a fynychwyd gan arbenigwyr yn y maes a chynrychiolwyr y rhan fwyaf o’r sefydliadau a fyddai’n gysylltiedig â datblygu a gweithredu system felly. Ar sail gwaith Dr Aylin a thrafodaethau yn y seminar, deuthum i’r casgliad y byddai system genedlaethol o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu (yn enwedig o gysylltu hynny â diwygio’r systemau ardystio marwolaethau ac ymchwilio i farwolaethau a argymhellais yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad) yn debygol o atal meddyg rhag gweithgareddau troseddol fel rhai Shipman. Hyd yn oed pe na fyddai, byddai’n gwella’n fawr y cyfleoedd i ganfod gweithgareddau felly. Credaf hefyd y byddai casglu a dadansoddi data am gyfradd marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu yn cael effaith fuddiol ar ansawdd gofal cleifion. Rwyf felly wedi argymell y dylai’r Adran Iechyd gymryd yr awenau wrth ddatblygu system genedlaethol ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaeth cleifion meddygon teulu.

---  ---
Rwyf wedi ystyried y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro a goruchwylio meddygon a oedd ar waith yn Tameside yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Rwyf hefyd wedi cymharu’r trefniadau yn Tameside â’r rheiny ar waith mewn mannau eraill. Wedi gwneud yr ymarferiad hwnnw, deuthum i’r casgliad bod perfformiad y PCO yn Tameside yn nodweddiadol o berfformiad y rhan fwyaf o PCOau ar draws y wlad ar y pryd. Roedd ardaloedd eraill lle’r oedd PCOau eraill wedi cymryd camau arloesol, na chymerwyd yn Tameside, mewn ymgais i godi safonau a nodi meddygon a oedd yn perfformio’n wael. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg bod y PCOau yn Tameside wedi cyflawni’u dyletswyddau’n gydwybodol ac yn briodol. Ni ellir eu beirniadu am nad ydynt efallai wedi bod ar flaen y gad. Roeddent yn gwneud y cyfan a oedd yn ofynnol iddynt wneud.
Mewn cyflwyniad ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd Grŵp Cefnogi Teuluoedd Tameside at bensyfrdandod ei aelodau bod y Wlad i bob golwg, yn ystod y cyfnod pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer yn Hyde, wedi rhoi’r gorau i’w chyfrifoldeb am fonitro meddygon teulu. Gallaf ddeall y farn honno. O edrych ar y sefyllfa trwy lygaid heddiw, ymddengys yn hynod bod gan PCO, hyd at lai na ddegawd yn ôl, gyn lleied o bwerau i reoleiddio ymddygiad meddygon teulu.
Mae’r esboniad, mi gredaf, yn statws hanesyddol meddygon teulu fel contractwyr annibynnol. Mae’r statws wedi rhoi cyfyngiadau ar unrhyw ymdrechion gan PCOau olynol i reoli a goruchwylio meddygon teulu’n effeithiol. Hyd at yn ddiweddar, gellid gorfodi meddygon teulu i gydymffurfio â’u telerau gwasanaeth ond ddim mwy na hynny. Yn rhan gyntaf y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer, roedd cred gref, a’r Llywodraeth yn rhannu’r gred honno yn ôl pob golwg, mai’r proffesiwn meddygol ei hun oedd yn darparu’r modd gorau (ac yn wir, yr unig fodd) o bennu safonau uchel mewn gofal clinigol ac ymddygiad proffesiynol ymhlith meddygon a monitro’r safonau hynny. Credwyd y byddai’n gwneud hynny’n llym. Felly, roedd materion o bryder proffesiynol a oedd yn codi’n lleol yn cael eu gadael i’r LMC benderfynu yn eu cylch, gyda’r GMC fel cyflafareddwr addasrwydd i ymarfer yn y pen draw. Roedd y gred hon, a gafodd ei meithrin gan y proffesiwn, yn un anodd ei herio mewn maes a oedd yn golygu cwestiynau ynghylch arbenigedd proffesiynol.
Mae’n amlwg, erbyn y 1980au, bod y Llywodraeth wedi sylweddoli, os oedd cysondeb gwasanaeth a safonau i’w gyflawni mewn meddygfeydd teulu, roedd rhaid cyflwyno rhyw elfen o reolaeth gan PCO. Ni ellid gadael y mater i’r proffesiwn mwyach. Dechreuodd y broses newid yng nghanol y 1980au, ac mae wedi parhau byth ers hynny. Law yn llaw â hyn roedd adnabyddiaeth gynyddol o bwysigrwydd mynd i’r afael â pherfformiad gwael ymhlith meddygon teulu. Fel yr af ymlaen i ddisgrifio, bu cryn ddatblygiadau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu er 1998. Hyd at hynny, araf oedd unrhyw gynnydd, ac, o edrych yn ôl, mae’n naturiol i ddymuno y byddai’r broses newid wedi dechrau’n gynharach. Fodd bynnag, ni ellir yn fy marn i briodoli’r ffaith na wnaeth, i unrhyw fai ar ran unrhyw berson neu sefydliad.

---  ---
Y Cyrff Cenedlaethol Newydd
Ers arestio Shipman, bu newidiadau radical o fewn y GIG. Ar lefel genedlaethol, pennwyd dyletswydd ansawdd ar gyrff y GIG y cyfeiriais ati’n gynharach, cyflwynwyd Fframweithiau Gwasanaeth Cenedlaethol a datblygwyd safonau gwasanaeth craidd. Sefydlwyd y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd i archwilio perfformiad cyrff GIG lleol. Yn 2004, cymerwyd ei swyddogaethau drosodd gan y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd, a elwir yn y Gwasanaeth Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn. Sefydlwyd yr Awdurdod Asesiadau Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA) i roi cyngor a chymorth i gyrff y GIG yn lleol wrth ganfod ac asesu perfformiad is na’r safon gan feddygon GIG ac wrth ddatrys unrhyw broblemau yn cael eu canfod.
Y Cyrff Lleol Newydd
Ar lefel leol, disodlwyd Awdurdodau Iechyd (a oedd yn sefydliadau eithaf mawr) gan PCT. Mae ystod eang o bwerau gan y sefydliadau llawer llai hyn. Mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud yn unig â’r pwerau hynny sy’n ymwneud â monitro a goruchwylio meddygon teulu. Mae gan bob PCT nifer cyfyngedig o feddygon teulu ar ei restr (rhyw 100 a mwy o feddygon locwm fel arfer) a dylai felly allu datblygu gwybodaeth fanwl am eu cryfderau a’u gwendidau. Mae llawer mwy o wybodaeth ar gael i PCTau erbyn hyn wrth ystyried cynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestri ai peidio. Mae’r hawl ganddynt i wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar y rhestr mewn amgylchiadau penodol. Mae ganddynt ystod eang o ‘bwerau rheoli rhestr’ hefyd, sy’n eu galluogi i ddileu neu atal meddygon teulu o’u rhestrau, neu bennu amodau ar barhau i’w cynnwys. Mae’r pwerau hyn yn rai newydd, ac mae’r dystiolaeth yn awgrymu nad ydynt, hyd yn hyn, yn cael eu harfer yn llawn ym mhob ardal. Fodd bynnag, mae’r pwerau hyn yn galluogi PCT i gymryd camau gweithredu effeithiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Nid ydynt yn gwbl ddibynnol mwyach ar gyrff eraill fel Tribiwnlys y GIG (sydd wedi’i ddiddymu erbyn hyn) neu’r GMC i wneud hynny ar eu rhan.
Ymdrechion i Wella Safonau
Mae amrywiaeth o gynlluniau marcio safon wedi’i datblygu, y gall meddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu weithio tuag atynt er mwyn gwella gwasanaethau, a dangos hefyd eu bod wedi cyflawni safonau uchel o drefn yn y feddygfa, gallu a/neu berfformiad unigol. Gwirfoddol yw unrhyw gyfranogiad yn y cynlluniau marcio ansawdd hyn. Mae hyn i’w annog yn amlwg gan mai codi safonau a wna yn y pen draw. Datblygiad arall fu’r Contract GMS newydd, a ddaeth i rym ym mis Ebrill 2004 ac sy’n cyflwyno system o gymhellion ariannol i annog meddygfeydd i gyflawni safonau ansawdd penodol. Mae’r Contract GMS newydd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd teulu (nid meddygon unigol) i’w lofnodi. Mae’r Contract GMS yn ei ddyddiau cynnar, ac nid oes modd eto asesu gydag unrhyw lefel o hyder yr effaith y mae’n debygol o gael ar ansawdd gofal cleifion. Ffactor anhysbys arall yw’r graddau, os o gwbl, y bydd meddygfeydd lle mae safonau gofal yn wael, yn ceisio codi safonau er mwyn cymhwyso ar gyfer y cymhellion ariannol sydd ar gael dan y Contract GMS.
Rheolaeth Glinigol
Ar lefel leol hefyd, mae fframwaith monitro newydd, a elwir yn rheolaeth glinigol. Disgrifiaf y fenter hon ym Mhennod 12. Yn fyr iawn, yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol, y bwriad yw y dylai gynnwys system integredig o fathau gwahanol o weithgarwch, a phob un â’r nod o wella ansawdd gofal. Mae un rhan o’r sysytem yn cynnwys casglu a dadansoddi data yn ymwneud ag arfer clinigol meddygon gan y PCT ac o fewn meddygfeydd teulu. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r mathau o ddata sydd ar gael yn gyfyngedig, nid yw cywirdeb y data’n berffaith, ac mae’r strwythurau ar gyfer defnyddio’r data’n gofyn am eu datblygu ymhellach. Mae anawsterau penodol wrth briodoli data i feddygon unigol, yn hytrach na meddygfeydd teulu. Ni fydd rheolaeth glinigol yn cyrraedd ei photensial llawn nes ei bod yn cynnwys casglu data’n ymwneud â meddygon unigol. Mae’n amlwg o’r dystiolaeth a glywais fod tipyn o ffordd i fynd eto cyn gweithredu rheolaeth glinigol yn llawn mewn gofal sylfaenol. Yn fy marn i, y rhwystr go iawn i weithredu rheolaeth glinigol yw sefyllfa meddygon teulu fel contractwyr annibynnol ac anallu PCT o’r herwydd i’w ‘rheoli’ at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Nid yw hyn yn dweud y dylai meddygon teulu golli’u hannibyniaeth a’u statws hunangyflogedig. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi y gall fod angen rhoi mwy o bwerau fyth i PCTau os ydynt i gyflawni’u cyfrifoldebau rheolaeth glinigol yn effeithiol, ac os ydynt i fod yn atebol am gyflawni’r ddyletswydd ansawdd ar roddwyd iddynt. Bydd angen arweinyddiaeth a phenderfyniad arnynt hefyd os ydynt i wneud ansawdd yn flaenoriaeth gyntaf iddynt a dileu unrhyw ymarfer is na’r safon.
Yn fy marn i, o’i datblygu’n iawn a rhoi adnoddau da iddi, fe allai rheolaeth glinigol roi’r modd mwyaf effeithiol o gyflawni dwy nod bwysig. Yn gyntaf, fe allai alluogi PCTau i ganfod meddygon teulu ar eu rhestri sy’n perfformio’n wael neu’n camarfer. Yn ail, fe allai gael yr effaith lesol o helpu meddygon nad ydynt yn perfformio’n foddhaol neu’n dda i wneud hyd yn oed yn well.
Arfarniad
Mae arfarniad blynyddol yn orfodol erbyn hyn i bob meddyg teulu. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad gryn dipyn o dystiolaeth am y modd y caiff arfarniad ei gynnal a’i gysylltiad arfaethedig ag ail-ddilysu; byddaf yn cyfeirio at hyn yn ddiweddarach yn y crynodeb hwn. Mae’n amlwg bod arfarnu wedi cael rhai effeithiau cadarnhaol; mae’n rhoi cyfle i feddygon teulu siarad gyda chydweithwyr amdanynt eu hunain, eu harferion a’u hanghenion datblygiad proffesiynol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw arfarniad yn golygu gwerthusiad neu asesiad o berfformiad y sawl sy’n cael ei arfarnu; nid dyna yw’r bwriad. Mae’n rhoi ychydig o wybodaeth a all helpu’r PCT yn ei swyddogaeth rheolaeth glinigol. Fe all helpu’r PCT benderfynu pa fathau o ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus y dylid eu darparu ar gyfer meddygon teulu lleol, ond dyna’i gyd. Fel y maent ar hyn o bryd, ni ellir ystyried arfarniad fel arf rheolaeth glinigol. Rwyf wedi argymell y dylai fod eglurder ynghylch y diben mae arfarniad i fod i’w gyflawni, a, phan fydd eglurder wedi’i sicrhau, dylid cymryd camau i sicrhau bod yr arfarnu’n cyflawni’i ddiben mor effeithiol â phosibl.
Meddygfeydd Unigol a Meddygfeydd Bach
Gan fod Shipman yn ymarfer fel meddyg ar ei ben ei hun am chwe blynedd olaf ei fywyd proffesiynol, sef y cyfnod pan laddodd y rhan fwyaf o’i ddioddefwyr, bu galwadau gan rai i ddileu’n raddol y rheiny sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Mae’n wir fy mod wedi canfod mai pan oedd yn ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun y lladdodd Shipman y nifer fwyaf o gleifion, ond canfûm hefyd iddo ladd 71 o gleifion tra’r oedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Fel yr esboniais eisoes, fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn ‘feddygfa grŵp’ fel y deëllir y term yn arferol heddiw.
Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio problemau penodol ynysu y gellir eu cysylltu ag ymarfer unigol, ac mae hefyd wedi ystyried y buddion i gleifion yn sgil ymarfer felly. Yn gyntaf, mae’n well gan lawer o gleifion meddygfeydd bach neu unigol gan fod y meddygon yno’n gallu darparu parhad gofal. Yn ail, am resymau daearyddol a demograffig, ni all y system ddod i ben heb feddygfeydd bach ac unigol. Felly, deuthum i’r casgliad y dylai ffocws yr ymdrech fod, nid ar leihau nifer y meddygfeydd bach sy’n bodoli, ond yn hytrach ar wella’r gwasanaethau y maent yn eu darparu, ac, yn benodol, dileu achosion ynysu a lleddfu’r effeithiau. Ym Mhennod 13, rwy’n trafod rhai o’r ffyrdd y gellid cyflawni hyn.

---  ---
Gwybodaeth sydd ar Gael i Gyflogwyr a Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn, gydol y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer, nid oedd y PCOau yn Tameside yn ymwybodol o’i euogfarnau yn y gorffennol am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau a’i fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y GMC wedi hynny. Er 1998, mae camau wedi’u cymryd i gynyddu faint o wybodaeth sydd ar gael i PCT am feddygon sydd ar eu rhestrau, neu sy’n gwneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau. Bellach mae’n ofynnol i feddygon teulu, wrth wneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar restr, wneud datganiadau, ymhlith pethau eraill, ynghylch cysylltiad blaenorol neu gyfredol mewn achosion troseddol, mewn achosion disgyblu gan y GMC neu gorff rheoleiddio yn rhywle arall, mewn camau gweithredu rheoli rhestrau a gymerir gan PCT arall ac mewn camau gweithredu disgyblu gan gyn-gyflogwr. Mae meddygon teulu sydd eisoes ar y rhestr wedi gorfod gwneud datganiadau ‘dal i fyny’ ac mae dyletswydd barhaus ganddynt i adrodd am unrhyw gysylltiad felly i’w PCT. Hefyd, mae rhwymedigaeth ar PCTau i wneud rhai archwiliadau cyn derbyn meddygon i’w rhestrau, ac mae’n ofynnol i feddygon bellach ddarparu tystysgrifau cofnodion troseddol manylach wrth wneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar restr. Yn 2005, bydd ymarferiad ‘dal i fyny’ yn cael ei gynnal ar gyfer darparu tystysgrifau cofnodion troseddol gan feddygon teulu sydd eisoes ar restrau PCT. Mae’r wybodaeth ychwanegol sydd ar gael i PCTau erbyn hyn yn eu galluogi i wneud penderfyniadau mwy gwybodus ynghylch pa un i gynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestr ai peidio, ac yn ei gwneud hi’n bosibl hefyd iddynt gadw llygad fanwl ar y meddygon hynny sydd â hanes o droseddu neu o gael eu disgyblu yn y gorffennol. Er 2000, bu dyletswydd statudol gan y GMC i ddatgelu i gyflogwr meddyg neu PCO y ffaith bod cwyn neu adroddiad ynghylch meddyg a dderbyniwyd gan y GMC wedi cyrraedd pwynt penodol yn ei weithdrefnau FTP. Nid oes angen hysbysu ynghylch achosion sy’n cael eu gwrthod mewn cyfnod cynnar. Serch hynny, mae cyflwyno’r ddyletswydd hon yn golygu bod PCOau yn cael gwybodaeth am gysylltiad meddygon â’r GMC nad oedd ar gael iddynt yn flaenorol.
Er gwaetha’r gwelliannau hyn, mae bylchau o hyd yng ngwybodaeth PCTau am feddygon. Mae PCTau yn ddibynnol i raddau helaeth ar onestrwydd ymgeiswyr ar y rhestr ynghylch eu hanes disgyblu. Nid oes ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth am gŵynion a wnaed na phryderon a godwyd am feddyg nad ydynt wedi arwain at gamau disgyblu neu reoli rhestr, neu nas archwiliwyd iddynt na’u cadarnhau. Nid oes ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth am honiadau o esgeulustod clinigol a allai fod wedi arwain at ganfyddiad yn erbyn y meddyg neu mewn setliad ar gyfer iawndal sylweddol. Mae adroddiadau diweddar i weithgareddau dau feddyg teulu, Clifford Ayling a Peter Green, wedi dangos yr anhawster (a’r pwys mwyaf i ddiogelwch cleifion hefyd) o allu tynnu ynghyd ac olrhain y cofnodion yn ymwneud â chwynion ar wahân, ond cwynion tebyg, a godwyd ynghylch yr un meddyg. Gall yr ymarferiad hwn fod yn anoddach fyth pan fydd gan feddygon batrwm teithiol o weithio. Yn ogystal â’r ffaith y gall y wybodaeth sydd ar gael i PCOau fod yn anghyflawn, gall y dasg o gasglu’r hyn sydd ar gael fod yn anghyfleus ac yn llafurus.
Er mwyn cyflawni’n briodol eu cyfrifoldebau’n ymwneud â rheolaeth glinigol ac i roi diogelwch digonol i gleifion, mae angen i PCTau allu cael mynediad at gymaint o wybodaeth â phosibl am feddygon sydd ar eu rhestrau neu a all wneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau. Mae angen mynediad at y wybodaeth hon ar gyrff eraill hefyd - fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, y GMC, yr NCAA a’r Adran Iechyd. Argymhellais felly creu cronfa ddata ganolog o wybodaeth am bob meddyg yn y DU. Byddai hon yn cynnwys categorïau penodol o wybodaeth a byddai hefyd yn gysylltiedig â ffynonellau y gellid cael gwybodaeth berthnasol ychwanegol ohonynt. Gellid ‘nodi’ bodolaeth gwybodaeth sensitif nad yw’n wybodaeth gyhoeddus, fel bod modd gwneud ymholiadau pellach pan fydd angen. Byddai’r gronfa ddata ar gael i gyrff y GIG, cyflogwyr achrededig y sector preifat a sefydliadau eraill gyda diddordeb dilys. Byddai meddygon yn gallu cael mynediad at eu cofnodion eu hunain er mwyn gwirio cywirdeb y wybodaeth yn cael ei chadw.
Nid yn unig y byddai cronfa ddata ganolog felly yn ei gwneud yn symlach o lawer i gyflogwr neu PCO gynnal archwiliadau cyn-gyflogaeth neu cyn cynnwys meddygon ar eu rhestr, ond byddai dibynadwyedd yr archwiliadau hynny’n cael ei wella’n fawr. Ni fyddai gan y mwyafrif helaeth o feddygon unrhyw beth i boeni amdano; ni fyddai eu cofnodion yn cynnwys mwy na’u cymwysterau a’u
. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r meddygon hynny sy’n achosi problemau, ac sy’n symud ymlaen o le i le gan achosi mwy o broblemau, yn cael eu nodi’n fuan iawn, gan alluogi cymryd y camau gweithredu priodol i ddiogelu cleifion.
Gwybodaeth a oedd ar Gael i’r Cyhoedd ac i Gleifion
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, bu trafodaeth ynghylch faint o wybodaeth am feddygon ddylai fod ar gael i’r cyhoedd ac i gleifion. Roedd hyn yn briodol yng nghyd-destun Ymchwiliad i weithgareddau meddyg a oedd, 24 blynedd cyn ei ddyfarnu’n euog o lofruddiaeth, wedi’i gael yn euog o gyfres o droseddau mewn cysylltiad â’i ddibyniaeth ar gyffur rheoledig. Mae’n gwbl naturiol i berthnasau a ffrindiau dioddefwyr Shipman ddweud ‘O na bawn yn gwybod.’
Mae’r wybodaeth sydd ar gael i gleifion a darpar gleifion am feddyg teulu unigol yn gyfyngedig iawn dan y system bresennol. Fe all y cyhoedd ddod yn ymwybodol o euogfarnau troseddol meddyg neu’i gysylltiad â materion disgyblu drwy sylw yn y wasg neu ‘drwy si’. Fodd bynnag, nid oes unrhyw fodd y gellir cael gafael ar wybodaeth gynhwysfawr. Yn fy marn i, dylai gwybodaeth felly fod ar gael yn hawdd i unrhyw un sy’n gofyn amdani.
Argymhellais ddau fesur i ddelio â’r angen hwn. Yn gyntaf, rwyf yn argymell bod y GMC yn gweithredu system o ddatgelu mewn haenau. Byddai hyn yn golygu y dylai gwybodaeth bresennol a diweddar am gofnod disgyblu meddyg gyda’r GMC (gan gynnwys gwybodaeth am euogfarnau troseddol yr hysbysir y GMC yn eu cylch), ynghyd â gwybodaeth am gofrestriad a statws ail-ddilysu’r meddyg, fod ar gael ar wefan y GMC neu i unrhyw un sy’n gwneud cais am y wybodaeth gan y GMC dros y ffôn neu drwy ddull arall. Ar ôl cyfnod, byddai rhywfaint (ond nid y cyfan) o’r wybodaeth honno’n cael ei dileu o’r wefan a’i disodli gan nodyn, yn dweud bod rhagor o wybodaeth ar gael drwy ffonio’r GMC. Byddai’r holl wybodaeth honno’n parhau ar gael i unrhyw un a oedd yn gofyn amdani, gydol cyfnod y meddyg yn ymarfer. Yn achos Shipman, byddai hyn wedi golygu y byddai darpar glaf yn edrych ar ei gofnod ar wefan y GMC ym 1997 neu 1998 wedi’i ddeffro i’r ffaith bod rhagor o wybodaeth ar gael amdano, a byddai, drwy ffonio’r GMC, wedi gallu dod i wybod am ei euogfarnau ym 1976. Fel arall, pe bai’r claf wedi ffonio’r GMC yn y lle cyntaf, byddai’r wybodaeth wedi bod ar gael felly. Credaf fod y trefniant hwn yn rhoi cydbwysedd rhesymol rhwng buddiannau’r meddyg o ran gallu claddu’r gorffennol (a fyddai’n anodd pe bai’r holl wybodaeth yn aros ar y wefan am gyfnod amhenodol) a hawl y cyhoedd a chleifion i gael gwybod popeth am y meddyg sydd rywdro neu‘i gilydd wedi bod yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus.
Mae’r ail fesur yr wyf yn ei argymell yn ymwneud â gwybodaeth a roddir i gleifion pan fydd meddyg yn ailgydio yn ei waith mewn meddygfa deulu ar ôl cyfnod o gael ei atal neu ddileu neu lle mae amodau wedi’u gosod ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, dylai’r feddygfa anfon llythyr o esboniad at bob claf. Dylai’r PCT gymeradwyo’r llythyr drafft. Dylai cleifion gael y cyfle i wrthod cael triniaeth gan feddyg y gosodwyd amodau arno neu sydd wedi ailgychwyn gweithio ar ôl cyfnod o gael ei atal neu ddileu. Mae hawl ganddynt i wneud dewis gwybodus am y mater pwysig hwn.

---  ---
Y System cyn mis Ebrill 1996
Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio y byddai cwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan neu ar ran cleifion, hyd at 1996, yn mynd at y PCO. Pe bai’r gŵyn yn haeriad bod y meddyg wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, byddai’n aml yn cael ei gyfeirio at bwyllgor gwasanaethau meddygol (MSC), sef pwyllgor disgyblu yn cael ei weinyddu gan y PCO. Byddai’r MSC yn penderfynu (gyda neu heb wrandawiad llafar) pa un a oedd y meddyg teulu wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, a byddai’n argymell pa gamau gweithredu y dylid eu cymryd. Pe canfuwyd bod meddyg wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, fe allai’r FPC roi rhybudd neu atal tâl y meddyg hyd at uchafswm o £500. Os oedd yr FPC o’r farn bod cosb lymach yn cael ei dynodi, gallai wneud argymhellion i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd a Nawdd Cymdeithasol (yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd yn ddiweddarach) neu wneud sylwadau i Dribiwnlys y GIG yn gofyn am ddileu’r meddyg o’r rhestr feddygol. Bryd hynny, felly, roedd y system o ddelio â chwynion cleifion wedi’i chysylltu’n uniongyrchol â phwerau disgyblu’r PCO, gyda chefnogaeth yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol, Tribiwnlys y GIG, ac, yn y pen draw, y GMC.
Fodd bynnag, roedd y system ar gyfer delio â chwynion ymhell o fod yn ddelfrydol. Nid oedd unrhyw ymchwiliad annibynnol i’r gŵyn; yr achwynydd oedd yn gorfod casglu’r dystiolaeth a chyflwyno’r achos. Roedd nifer o reolau technegol a oedd o anfantais i achwynwyr. Roedd cwyn yn gorfod cael eu gwneud o fewn cyfnod byr iawn yn dilyn y digwyddiadau yr oedd cwyn yn cael ei gwneud amdanynt; nid oedd tystiolaeth achlust yn cael ei derbyn yn aml. Roedd meddygon, a oedd yn cael eu cynrychioli gan eu sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol fel arfer, i weld bod mantais ganddynt yn aml. Fodd bynnag, o leiaf roedd mecanwaith ar gyfer lleisio cwynion a phenderfynu arnynt. Hefyd, roedd safon (h.y. honno a bennir yn y telerau gwasanaeth) y gellid barnu cwynion yn ei herbyn. Gellid cymryd mesurau disgyblu os canfuwyd bod y meddyg yn torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, ac, os oedd y mater yn ddigon difrifol, gellid hysbysu Tribiwnlys y GIG neu’r GMC yn ei gylch.
Cwynion yn erbyn Shipman
Bu Shipman yn destun tair cwyn ffurfiol a gyfeiriwyd at MSC, un ym 1985, un ym 1990 ac un ym 1992. Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 6 y digwyddiadau a arweiniodd at y cwynion hynny a’u cwrs a’u canlyniad. Diystyrwyd y gŵyn gyntaf gan yr MSC heb wrandawiad. Mewn ymateb i’r ail gŵyn, cyfaddefodd Shipman ei fod wedi torri telerau’i wasanaeth. Rhoddodd yr MSC rybudd iddo. Ar y drydydd achlysur, fe wnaeth Shipman ddadlau ynghylch yr amgylchiadau, a chynhaliodd yr MSC wrandawiad llafar a dyfarnu yn ei erbyn. Ar yr achlysur hwnnw, ataliwyd swm o £800 o’i dâl, a chafodd rybudd eto i gydymffurfio’n fwy agos â’i delerau gwasanaeth. Mae’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r tair cwyn yn dangos rhai o ddiffygion y system a oedd ar waith yn ystod y blynyddoedd cyn 1996. Yn benodol, mae’n dangos y broblem a allai godi pan oedd disgwyl i’r achwynydd gasglu’r dystiolaeth i gefnogi’i gŵyn, ac eto nid oedd y grym na’r adnoddau ganddo i wneud hynny.
Gan gofio bod Shipman yn llofrudd cyfres sefydledig o’u gleifion, ymddengys yn rhyfedd nad oedd y cwynion a wnaethpwyd amdano yn ystod y blynyddoedd rhwng 1977 a 1996 yn rai o natur fwy difrifol. Ni dderbyniwyd unrhyw gŵyn ynghylch ei driniaeth, neu ei fethiant i drin, unrhyw glaf yr oedd wedi’i ladd mewn gwirionedd. Hyd yn oed ped archwiliwyd iddynt yn fanylach, ni fyddai unrhyw un o’r tair cwyn yr wyf wedi cyfeirio atynt wedi taflu unrhyw oleuni ar wir gymeriad Shipman fel llofrudd. Gyda mantais fy ngwybodaeth am anonestrwydd parhaus Shipman, rwyf wedi canfod arwyddion o ymddygiad anonest mewn dau o’r achosion. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd arwyddion felly’n amlwg o gwbl, ac nid yw’n syndod na chawsant eu canfod ar y pryd.
Penderfynodd Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu, ar ran yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd, i gyfeirio cwynion 1990 a 1992 at y GMC. Fodd bynnag, roedd y GMC o’r farn nad oedd y ddau fater yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch camymddwyn proffesiynol difrifol (SPM) a gwrthododd gymryd unrhyw gamau pellach. Yn fy marn i, hyd yn oed pe bai’r GMC wedi penderfynu gweithredu, rhoi rhybudd arall i Shipman fyddai’r peth mwyaf a fyddai wedi digwydd. Mae’n annhebygol iawn y byddai enw Shipman wedi’i ddileu neu’i atal o’r gofrestr feddygol neu y byddai unrhyw ymholiadau pellach wedi’u gwneud a allai fod wedi datgelu’i wir natur.
Y System ar ôl mis Ebrill 1996
Ym 1996, newidiwyd y trefniadau ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan neu ar ran cleifion. Wedi hynny, roedd yn rhaid gwneud cwynion am feddygon teulu yn uniongyrchol i’r feddygfa deulu dan sylw. Yn dilyn y newid hwn, os oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei ‘datrys’ bryd hynny, o bosibl trwy ymddiheuriad a sicrwydd na fyddai unrhyw ailadrodd o’r hyn a barodd anfodlonrwydd, efallai na fyddai’r PCO fyth yn dod i wybod bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud. Mewn rhai achosion, fe allai’r PCO fod yn gysylltiedig â threfnu cymodiad rhwng y meddyg a’r claf. Fe allai hyn fod yn system foddhaol i rai, er bod ymchwil yn awgrymu bod llawer o gleifion yn amharod i wneud cwyn yn uniongyrchol i feddygfa‘r meddyg dan sylw. Hefyd, ymddengys nad oedd rhai meddygfeydd mor agored a pharod i helpu wrth ddelio â chwynion ag y dylent fod.
Os nad oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei datrys a bod yr achwynydd yn fodlon, fe allai fynd ymlaen i ail gam y gweithdrefnau. Bryd hynny, byddai’r PCO yn dod yn ymwybodol o’r gŵyn a natur y gŵyn. Fodd bynnag, nid y PCO oedd yn gyfrifol am ymchwilio i’r gŵyn o hyd. Yn lle hynny, roedd ‘cynullydd’ (aelod anweithredol o Fwrdd y PCO fel arfer) yn penderfynu bod angen datrys y gŵyn, byddai’r PCO yn sefydlu panel adolygu annibynnol (IRP), a fyddai’n cynnal gwrandawiad i ganfod a oedd cyfiawnhad dros wneud y gŵyn. Nid oedd unrhyw safonau i farnu’r gŵyn yn eu herbyn. Ni allai IRP ychwaith bennu, neu hyd yn oed argymell pennu, unrhyw sancsiynau ar y meddyg. Byddai’r IRP yn ysgrifennu adroddiad ar ei ganfyddiadau i’w gyflwyno i’r PCO, a allai, pe bai’n dymuno, gymryd camau disgyblu yn erbyn y meddyg. Mewn geiriau eraill, nid oedd delio â chwynion bellach yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â’r gweithdrefnau disgyblu i feddygon. Er y gallai PCOau mewn egwyddor barhau i ddod ag achos disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon am honiadau o dorri’u telerau gwasanaeth, prin iawn y byddent yn gwneud hynny.
Yn fy marn i, fe ddaeth y trefniadau ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion yn erbyn meddygon teulu ar ôl 1996 hyd yn oed yn llai effeithiol na’r trefniadau blaenorol fel modd o ganfod camarfer neu berfformiad gwael. Fodd bynnag, cyn belled ag y gwyddys, ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw gŵynion o bwys yn erbyn Shipman rhwng 1996 a 1998, er gwaetha’r ffaith ei fod yn lladd mor aml yn ystod y cyfnod hwn; lladdodd 30 o gleifion ym 1996, 37 ym 1997, ac 18 ym 1998 cyn iddo gael ei ganfod o’r diwedd.
Newidiadau Diweddar i’r System
Mae’r system ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion o fewn y GIG wrthi’n cael ei newid. Mae ail gam y gweithdrefnau wedi’i newid yn ddiweddar. Yn lle IRP yn gwrando cwynion, cânt bellach eu cyfeirio at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Mae’r adnoddau gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i ymchwilio i gŵynion ac i drefnu gwrandawiad llafar gerbron panel. Mae’n annibynnol ar y GIG. Mae cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwynion ac eithrio lle yr effeithia ar feddygon teulu wedi’i newid hefyd. Fodd bynnag, mae cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau ar gyfer meddygon teulu yn aros yr un fath er 1996. Mae’r Llywodraeth yn bwriadu ei ddiwygio, ond mae’n aros cyhoeddi’r Adroddiad hwn cyn gwneud hynny. Gobeithiaf y caiff fy argymhellion mewn perthynas â hynny eu hystyried.
Y Dyfodol
Ym Mhennod 27, rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion manwl ynghylch y modd y dylid delio â chwynion gan gleifion a’u cynrychiolwyr. Nid wyf yn bwriadu eu hailadrodd yma. Yn lle hynny, byddaf yn crynhoi’r prif bwyntiau. Dylai’r system cwynion gael ei chyfeirio at roi bodlonrwydd i’r person sy’n gwneud y gŵyn, lle bynnag y bydd modd, at sicrhau diogelwch cleifion, ac at fod yn deg i feddygon y gwneir cwynion amdanynt.
Am y rheswm hwn, mae’n bwysig gwahaniaethu’n gynnar rhwng y cwynion hynny sy’n rhai cymharol fach o ran natur ac sy’n ymwneud â materion ‘cwyn breifat yn unig, a’r rheiny sydd yn berthnasol i reolaeth glinigol, h.y. y rheiny a all ddangos bod meddyg wedi rhoi claf mewn perygl neu wedi rhoi safon wael o ofal. Gellir delio â chwynion yn y categori cyntaf drwy gymodi a chyflafareddu, gyda’r nod o adfer, os oes modd, y berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a hyder rhwng meddyg a chlaf. Dylai’r cwynion yn yr ail gategori gael eu cymryd gan y PCT a dylid delio â nhw mewn modd a fydd yn hyrwyddo cyfrifoldebau rheolaeth glinigol.
Mae’r Llywodraeth yn cynnig, dan gam cyntaf gweithdrefn newydd meddygon teulu, y dylai cleifion gael dewis ym mha le i wneud eu cwyn: yn y feddygfa deulu dan sylw neu gyda’r PCT. Rwy’n croesawu’r newid hwn ac yn cytuno y dylai cleifion gael y dewis hwn. Er mwyn galluogi PCTau i fonitro’r cwynion sy’n cael eu gwneud gyda meddygfeydd ac i nodi unrhyw gŵynion sy’n codi materion rheolaeth glinigol, argymhellais y dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd teulu hysbysu’r PCT am bob cwyn o fewn cyfnod byr i’w derbyn. Gall y PCT wedyn ‘alw i mewn’ y cwynion hynny sydd neu a allai fod yn berthnasol i reolaeth glinigol. Gan mai cyfartaledd nifer y cwynion a dderbynnir yw un gŵyn i bob meddyg teulu y flwyddyn (ac mae llawer o’r rheiny’n debygol o fod yn gŵynion ‘preifat’), nid yw’r nifer o ‘gŵynion yn ymwneud â rheolaeth glinigol’ i PCT ddelio â nhw mewn unrhyw flwyddyn yn debygol o fod yn fawr.
Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, nid yw systemau cwynion blaenorol wedi gwneud darpariaeth briodol ar gyfer ymchwilio i gŵyn. Yn fy marn i, darparu trefniadau ar gyfer ymchwilio’n gyflym ac yn drylwyr i ‘gŵynion rheolaeth glinigol’ yw’r mater unigol pwysicaf i fynd i’r afael ag ef wrth ddiwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwyno. Nid yw PCTau’n gymwys i gynnal ymchwiliadau o’r fath eu hunain. Os yw ymchwiliadau iawn i’w cynnal, bydd yn ofynnol cael ymchwilwyr medrus a phrofiadol. Ni fyddai ar PCT unigol angen ymchwilydd yn ddigon aml i gyfiawnhau cyflogi unrhyw un yn amser llawn yn y rhinwedd hwnnw.
Argymhellais felly y dylai grwpiau o PCTau sefydlu timau ymchwilio ar y cyd ac y dylid cyfeirio ‘cwynion rheolaeth glinigol’ (ac eithrio’r rheiny nad ydynt yn golygu materion difrifol diogelwch cleifion a lle mae’r ffeithiau sylfaenol sy’n ffurfio’r gŵyn yn glir ac yn ddiamau) at y tîm ymchwilio er mwyn iddo allu cynnal ymchwiliad ac adrodd yn ôl i’r PCT. Os yw’r ymchwiliad yn mynd yn fwy cymhleth nag a feddyliwyd ar y cychwyn (e.e. oherwydd ei fod yn ymwneud â gofal sylfaenol ac eilaidd), dylid ei gyfeirio at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Argymhellais hefyd, os yw canlyniad yr ymchwiliad yn amhendant oherwydd bod dadl ynghylch tystiolaeth (e.e. os yw’r meddyg a’r claf yn anghytuno ynghylch y digwyddiadau a arweiniodd at y gŵyn), dylid cyfeirio’r gŵyn at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar gerbron panel. Pan fydd canlyniad yr ymchwiliad (gyda gwrandawiad neu hebddo) yn hysbys, bydd y PCT mewn sefyllfa i benderfynu pa gamau i’w cymryd. Dylai fod ganddo sylfaen ffeithiau gadarn i weithredu arni.
Argymhellais hefyd y dylid delio â phryderon sy’n cael eu mynegi ynghylch meddyg teulu gan rywun heblaw am glaf neu gynrychiolydd claf (e.e. gan gyd-weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd) yn yr un modd â chwynion cleifion. Dylid ymchwilio i bryderon felly (lle bydd angen) gan y tîm ymchwilio rhyng-PCT, neu, mewn achos sy’n codi materion anodd neu gymhleth, gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Argymhellais hefyd y dylai systemau delio â chwynion yn y sector preifat cydweddu gymaint â phosibl â’r rheiny yn y GIG.
Un o ganlyniadau (nas rhagwelwyd fwy na thebyg) datgysylltu’r achosion disgyblu oddi wrth gŵynion ym 1996 oedd colli unrhyw safon wrthrychol (hyd yn oed yn rhannol) y gellid barnu cwyn yn ei herbyn. Cyn 1996, roedd cwyn yn cael ei chadarnhau os canfuwyd bod y meddyg wedi torri ei delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth. Roedd y sancsiwn a bennwyd yn dibynnu ar ddifrifoldeb y torri telerau a chofnod y meddyg. Ar ôl 1996, fodd bynnag, gellid cychwyn achos disgyblu am honiadau o dorri telerau gwasanaeth y meddyg, ond anaml y gwnaethpwyd hynny. Gellid gwneud cwynion mewn perthynas â phob mater, pa un a oedd yn cael ei gwmpasu gan delerau gwasanaeth y meddyg teulu ai peidio. O fis Ebrill 2004, pan ddaeth Contract newydd y GMS i rym, ni fu unrhyw delerau gwasanaeth i weithredu fel fframwaith cefndir. I bob pwrpas, caiff cwyn ei chadarnhau os yw’r rheiny sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau o’r farn y dylid gwneud hynny. Nid oes unrhyw safon y gellir barnu yn ei herbyn.
O ganlyniad, nid oes modd y gall cleifion wybod beth yw eu disgwyliadau rhesymol, ac a yw’r disgwyliadau hynny wedi’u bodloni. Mae angen ar fyrder am safonau y gellir eu cymhwyso i PCTau, gan gyrff eraill y GIG a chan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wrth ddelio â chwynion. Argymhellais felly y dylid sefydlu ar fyrder safonau gwrthrychol, y gellir barnu cwynion trwy gyfeirio atynt.
Cefnogaeth i Achwynwyr
Mae’n amlwg bod llawer iawn o ddryswch ynghylch y man iawn i gyfeirio cwyn am feddyg. Mae llawer o achwynwyr yn meddwl, yn anghywir, eu bod yn gwybod ble i wneud eu cwynion a byddant yn eu hanfon i’r lle anghywir. Nid yw rhai yn gwybod ble i’w cyfeirio. Mae problem debyg yn bodoli i bobl sy’n dymuno gwneud adroddiad cyfrinachol yn ymwneud â rhyw fath o amheuaeth o gamarfer y maent yn pryderu yn ei gylch. Yn ddiau fe allai rhaglen gynaledig o addysg gyhoeddus wella’r sefyllfa i achwynwyr a’r rheiny sy’n dymuno adrodd am bryder, ond mae’r broblem yn siŵr o barhau i ryw raddau.
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, awgrymodd y GMC ateb posibl i’r broblem hon. Cynigiodd y dylai fod ‘porth sengl’ y gallai pobl sy’n dymuno gwneud cwyn fynd ato. Gellid rhoi cyngor ynghylch y gyrchfan briodol ar gyfer derbyn y gŵyn a delio â hi. Mewn geiriau eraill, byddai ‘porth sengl’ yn gweithredu fel arwyddbost, yn nodi’r cyfeiriad priodol ar gyfer y gŵyn. Ers gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r GMC wedi comisiynu rhywfaint o waith rhagarweiniol ar opsiynau amrywiol ar gyfer darparu gwasanaeth felly.
Yn fy marn i, yr hyn sydd ei angen yw gwasanaeth sy’n cyflawni dwy swyddogaeth. Dylai gynghori pobl sydd eisoes wedi penderfynu cwyno neu godi cwestiwn ynghylch ble i wneud eu cwyn neu bryder. Dylai hefyd roi gwybodaeth i bobl nad ydynt yn sicr ynghylch a ydynt yn dymuno cwyno neu beidio neu godi cwestiwn ynghylch lle gallant ddod o hyd i’r cyngor y mae arnynt ei hangen. At y diben hwnnw, dylai fod llinell ffôn gymorth, yn ogystal â mynediad trwy wefan. Credaf y byddai o gymorth hefyd pe bai’r gwasanaeth ‘porth sengl’, yn ychwanegol at ddarparu cyngor ynghylch y gyrchfan gywir ar gyfer cwyn, yn cael ei pharatoi i anfon y gŵyn ymlaen i’r corff priodol os oedd yr achwynydd yn dymuno hynny. Pa ffurf bynnag a gymera’r ‘porth sengl’, mae’n rhaid ei hysbysebu’n eang. Mae angen iddo fod mor adnabyddus ag NHS Direct a’r Samariaid.
Am lawer o flynyddoedd, hyd at 2003, roedd Cynghorau Iechyd Cymunedol (CHC) yn darparu cyngor a chymorth i bobl a oedd yn dymuno bwrw ymlaen â chwyn. Mynegwyd cryn ofid pan ddiddymwyd y CHCau yn 2003, yn enwedig gan sefydliadau yn cynrychioli buddiannau cleifion. Ffurfiwyd dau wasanaeth newydd, y Gwasanaethau Cyngor a Chysylltu i Gleifion (PALS) a’r Gwasanaeth Annibynnol Eirioli Cwynion (ICAS). Nid yw PALS yn rhoi cymorth annibynnol i achwynydd. Byddai’n amhriodol iddo wneud hynny, gan mai staff y GIG sy’n gweithio iddo. Fodd bynnag, bwriad ICAS yw darparu cyngor a chymorth annibynnol.
Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi derbyn unrhyw dystiolaeth ynghylch y modd y mae ICAS yn gweithredu. O’r wybodaeth ar ei wefan, ymddengys yn debygol y bydd yn rhoi cymorth i achwynwyr gydol y broses gŵynion. Mae angen i achwynwyr a darpar achwynwyr gael mynediad at gyngor gwybodus, annibynnol a di-dâl. Nid yw’n ddigon dweud wrth achwynydd sut i fwrw ymlaen. Mae angen rhywun arno/arni i drafod materion a rhinweddau’r gŵyn. Mae angen cyngor arno/arni ynghylch pa un a ddylid bwrw ymlaen, a sut i wneud hynny’n union. Mae angen rhywun arno/arni i’w gefnogi/chefnogi mewn gwrandawiad, os oes un. Os yw ICAS yn wir yn gallu darparu cyngor a chymorth felly, dylid annog ei waith yn fawr iawn.
Yn unol â hynny, rwyf wedi argymell, rhyw ddwy flynedd ar ôl i’r trefniadau newydd ar gyfer cwynion ddod i rym yn gyfan gwbl, y dylid comisiynu corff annibynnol i adolygu gweithrediad y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer cynghori a chefnogi cleifion sy’n dymuno gwneud cwyn. Dylid cywiro unrhyw ddiffygion a nodir gan yr adolygiad hwnnw.
Gweithdrefnau Disgyblu
Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, gyda chyflwyno Contract newydd GMS ym mis Ebrill 2004, mae telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu wedi dod i ben. Fe’u disodlwyd gan drefniadau contractiol a wneir â meddygfa deulu, yn hytrach na meddyg teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, mae gan PCTau bwerau bellach i reoli rhestrau. Gall PCT ddileu neu atal meddyg o’i restr neu bennu amodau ar ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr. Nid oes unrhyw rym i orchymyn atal tâl; nid oes grym swyddogol ychwaith i roi rhybudd neu gerydd. Ymddengys i mi fod hyn yn fwlch ym mhwerau’r PCT.
Gallaf weld manteision fod gan PCTau ystod eang o sancsiynau ar gael iddynt pan fyddant wedi cynnal ymchwiliad i gŵyn neu bryder, ac wedi canfod fod cyfiawnhad dros hynny, er nad ydynt mor ddifrifol i deilyngu defnyddio’u pwerau rheoli rhestr neu gyfeirio at y GMC neu gorff arall. Ymddengys ei bod yn anghywir, yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, nad oes gan y PCT rym i weithredu. Argymhellais felly y dylid ymestyn pwerau’r PCTau er mwyn eu galluogi i roi rhybuddion i feddygon teulu ac i bennu cosbau ariannol mewn perthynas â chamymddwyn, perfformiad proffesiynol gwael neu arfer clinigol diffygiol. Nid yw hynny i ddweud fy mod o’r farn y dylai PCTau dreulio mwy o’u hamser yn cynnal achosion disgyblu os gallant ddelio â’r mater mewn modd symlach sy’n adeiladol ac yn effeithiol ar yr un pryd. Wedi’r cyfan, y nod pwysicaf yw gwella perfformiad clinigol.

---  ---
Mynegi Pryderon gan Gydweithwyr Meddygol
Mae wastad wedi bod yn bosibl i feddyg a oedd yn pryderu ynghylch y driniaeth yn cael ei rhoi i glaf gan feddyg arall i hysbysu awdurdod priodol ynghylch ei bryderon/phryderon am y driniaeth honno. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd llawer o feddygon yn barod i wneud hynny; roeddent wedi cael eu ‘magu’ i ystyried ei bod yn amhriodol i feirniadu neu anghymeradwyo ymddygiad cydweithiwr proffesiynol. Y diwylliant oedd ‘nad hynny oedd y peth i’w wneud’. Fodd bynnag, erbyn dechrau’r 1990au, roedd y GMC wedi dweud yn eglur ei bod yn ddyletswydd ar feddyg i hysbysu awdurdod priodol ynghylch unrhyw bryder oedd ganddo/ganddi am driniaeth meddyg arall i glaf os oedd y pryder yn codi materion diogelwch claf. Mae’r dystiolaeth a glywyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu, er bod y GMC wedi dweud hyn yn ddigon eglur erbyn 1993 fan hwyraf, roedd llawer o feddygon yn amharod i wneud adroddiadau felly. Roedd yr hen ddiwylliant yn parhau. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd y diwylliant wedi newid hyd nes bod y digwyddiadau yn Bristol Royal Infirmary wedi dod i’r golwg. Cymerodd y GMC gamau disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon a oedd wedi methu gweithredu ar wybodaeth fod y gyfradd marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion pediatrig a oedd yn cael llawdriniaeth y galon yn yr Ysbyty yn anarferol o uchel. Dywedwyd wrthyf fod y digwyddiadau ym Mryste wedi cael effaith lesol ar y proffesiwn, a oedd bellach yn cydnabod bod rhaid i’w ddyletswydd i ddiogelu cleifion fod yn bwysicach na theyrngarwch i gydweithwyr. Fodd bynnag, yn ei adroddiad o’r Ymchwiliad i’r digwyddiadau hynny, a gyhoeddwyd yn 2001, awgrymodd yr Athro (Syr bellach) Ian Kennedy bod yr hen ddiwylliant ymhlith meddygon yn dal yn fyw bryd hynny. Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad hwn yn awgrymu, mewn rhai mannau, bod y diwylliant yn parhau hyd yn oed heddiw.
Achos Mrs Renate Overton
Roedd y dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad hwn yn canolbwyntio ar y diwylliant yng nghanol y 1990au. Ym 1994, rhoddodd Shipman gorddos enbyd o ddiamorffin i’r claf 46 mlwydd oed, Mrs Renate Overton. Roedd Mrs Overton yn dioddef o asthma ac wedi galw Shipman gan ei bod yn cael pwl o asthma ar y pryd. Mae diamorffin - ac yn wir unrhyw gyffur opiad - yn cael ei wrthgymeradwyo ar gyfer pobl sy’n dioddef o asthma. Rhoddodd Shipman chwistrelliad o forffin iddi, rwy’n eithaf bodlon, â’r bwriad o’i lladd. Aeth Mrs Overton yn anymwybodol a chael trafferth anadlu a dioddef ataliad ar y galon. Cafodd ei merch, Mrs Sharon Carrington, a oedd yn y tŷ, ei galw gan Shipman a ffoniodd am ambiwlans, a gyrhaeddodd mewn pryd i’r parafeddygon atal marwolaeth Mrs Overton. Aethpwyd â Mrs Overton i Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside lle’r arhosodd, mewn cyflwr disymud parhaol, nes ei marwolaeth 14 mis yn ddiweddarach.
Roedd gwybodaeth a dderbyniwyd gan y parafeddygon, merch Mrs Overton a Shipman yn awgrymu bod Mrs Overton wedi cael dos mawr o forffin neu ddiamorffin, wedi’u rhoi fel dos ‘bolws’ yn ôl pob golwg, gan olygu bod y cyfan wedi’i roi ar unwaith yn hytrach na’n raddol, fel y byddai’n arferol. Roedd aelodau’r staff meddygol a’r staff nyrsio yn yr ysbyty o’r farn fod Shipman wedi bod yn anghywir i roi cyffur opiad i Mrs Overton o gwbl (gan ei bod yn dioddef o asthma), ond bod y camgymeriad yn un mwy difrifol oherwydd ei bod yn ymddangos bod y dos yn ormodol ac wedi’i roi yn rhy sydyn. Yn fyr, roeddent yn sylweddoli bod cyflwr Mrs Overton yn ganlyniad gweithredu Shipman, er na wnaethant am eiliad amau y gallai fod wedi’i niweidio’n fwriadol. Ni wnaeth un aelod o staff hysbysu awdurdod priodol ynghylch y digwyddiadau hyn gyda golwg ar gynnal ymchwiliad i ymddygiad Shipman.
Archwiliais yn fanwl yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad y digwyddiadau’n ymwneud â mynd â Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty. Deuthum i’r casgliad, os oedd unrhyw gyfrifoldeb i adrodd am y digwyddiadau hyn, y ddau ymgynghorydd a oedd yn gofalu am Mrs Overton pan aeth i mewn i’r ysbyty oedd yn gyfrifol. Yr ymgynghorwyr oedd Dr Ceri Brown, anesthetydd ymgynghorol, a Dr Murtaza Husaini, cardiolegydd ymgynghorol, a oedd yn rhannu cyfrifoldeb am uned gofal dwys yr ysbyty. Cyfaddefodd Dr Brown nad oedd wedi gwneud unrhyw adroddiad am rôl Shipman yng nghwymp Mrs Overton. Dywedodd Dr Husaini ei fod wedi yn gwybod am ei ddyletswydd i wneud hynny a’i fod mewn gwirionedd wedi gwneud adroddiad i ddarpar Brif Weithredwr yr Ymddiriedolaeth GIG yn gyfrifol am yr ysbyty, ymhlith pobl eraill. Canfûm nad oedd wedi gwneud adroddiad. Oedais rhag ystyried a ddylid beirniadu’r ddau feddyg hwn am eu methiant i beidio â gwneud adroddiad nes cam olaf yr Ymchwiliad, pan fyddwn yn cael tystiolaeth am y cyngor a roddwyd gan y GMC, y modd yr oedd meddygon yn deall y cyngor hwnnw a’r diwylliant o fewn y proffesiwn ar yr adeg dan sylw.
Ar ôl clywed y dystiolaeth, deuthum i’r casgliad, ym 1994, na ddylai unrhyw feddyg beidio â bod yn ymwybodol o’i ddyletswydd/dyletswydd foesegol i hysbysu awdurdod priodol ynghylch unrhyw bryderon y gallai fod ganddo/ganddi am ymddygiad meddyg arall, os oedd yr ymddygiad hwnnw’n codi materion yn ymwneud â diogelwch cleifion. Fe wnaeth ymddygiad Shipman yn amlwg achosi pryderon felly a dylid fod wedi gwneud adroddiad amdanynt. Ystyriais esboniadau Dr Brown dros beidio â gwneud adroddiad felly, gan iddo gyfaddef nad oedd wedi gwneud adroddiad. Yn gyntaf, roedd o’r farn fod amgylchiadau cwymp Mrs Overton mor ansicr na allai weithredu’n rhesymol. Gwrthodais yr haeriad hwnnw. Roedd yn eglur o ddatganiad tyst a roddodd Dr Brown i’r heddlu ym 1999 ei fod o’r farn fod y modd yr ymdriniodd Shipman â Mrs Overton yn ‘anarferol iawn, yn beryglus hyd yn oed’. Yn ail, dywedodd Dr Brown ei fod o’r farn mai’r unig lwybr a oedd yn agored iddo oedd gwneud cwyn i’r GMC. Fodd bynnag, ni chredai ei bod yn briodol iddo wneud hynny; credai na fyddai’r GMC yn derbyn cwyn oni bai a hyd fod ymchwiliad mwy trylwyr yn cael ei gynnal i’r gŵyn honno. Fel y byddaf yn esbonio, nid wyf o’r farn bod y gred honno yn ddi-sail, a gallaf ddeall pam y byddai wedi oedi rhag gwneud adroddiad am feddyg teulu i’r fan honno. Dywedodd Dr Brown na wyddai i bwy y gallai wneud adroddiad am feddyg teulu o fewn y trefniadau GIG lleol. Gwyddai beth oedd y gweithdrefnau ar gyfer codi mater o fewn yr ysbyty, ond roedd y gŵyn botensial hon yn ymwneud â meddyg teulu, nid meddyg yr ysbyty. Roedd y gweithdrefnau’n wahanol ac ni wyddai beth oeddent. Gallaf dderbyn nad oedd yn gwybod beth oedd y gweithdrefnau, ond ni allaf dderbyn bod hynny’n esgus dros beidio ag adrodd ynghylch ei bryderon. Roedd Dr Brown yn aelod o’r Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol (MDU), sy’n gweithredu llinell gymorth i aelodau sy’n wynebu problemau moesegol. Pe na bai wedi meddwl am drafod y broblem gyda dirprwy Brif Weithredwr neu ddirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr Ymddiriedolaeth GIG (byddai’r naill neu’r llall wedi bod yn briodol i dderbyn ei bryder), dylai Dr Brown fod wedi ymgynghori â’r MDU a fyddai, rwy’n fodlon, wedi rhoi cyngor cadarn iddo.
Dywedodd Dr Brown hefyd fod moesddefod proffesiynol yn chwarae rhan yn ei benderfyniad i beidio â gwneud adroddiad. Roedd yn teimlo bod tensiwn rhwng y ddyletswydd i adrodd am gamymddygiad cydweithiwr a’r angen i osgoi cyhuddiad yn erbyn cydweithiwr a allai fod yn un cam. Dywedodd ei fod yn poeni, pe bai’n gwneud adroddiad, y gallai’r GMC ei feirniadu am ddilorni Shipman. Rwy’n derbyn bod yr amheuon hyn gan Dr Brown yn wirioneddol mewn perthynas â moesddefod proffesiynol. Yn olaf, dywedodd Dr Brown ei fod yn teimlo y dylai anrhydeddu dymuniadau teulu Mrs Overton na ddylid gwneud cwyn yn erbyn Shipman. Roedd Dr Brown wedi dweud wrth frawd Mrs Overton (Dr Michael Overton, meddyg teulu) bod morffin wedi’i roi i Mrs Overton, er gwaetha’r ffaith hysbys ei bod yn dioddef o asthma. Roedd, meddai, wedi rhoi’r teulu mewn sefyllfa i wneud cwyn neu ddod â hawliad pe byddent yn dewis gwneud hynny. Rwy’n gwrthod hynny fel esboniad. Ni wnaeth Dr Brown roi’r holl ffeithiau i Dr Overton fel yr oeddent yn hysbys iddo; ni ddywedodd wrth Dr Overton yr hyn a gredai oedd maint y dos morffin; ni ddywedodd ychwaith ei fod wedi’i roi fel dos bolws yn ôl pob golwg. Yn sicr fe ddaeth Dr Brown yn ymwybodol nad oedd teulu Mrs Overton yn bwriadu gwneud cwyn neu hawliad. Gwyddai, felly, os oedd unrhyw un i gymell ymchwiliad i ymddygiad Shipman, mae’n rhaid mai ef ei hun neu Dr Husaini fyddai hwnnw.
Deuthum i’r casgliad bod rhaid beirniadu Dr Husaini a Dr Brown am eu methiant i adrodd am weithredoedd Shipman mewn perthynas â Mrs Overton. Fodd bynnag, lleddfir fy meirniadaeth gan fy mod yn derbyn mai’r diwylliant o fewn y proffesiwn ar y pryd, ym 1994, oedd bod adrodd am gydweithiwr ‘ddim yn cael ei wneud’. Byddai llawer o feddygon ledled y wlad wedi methu gweithredu, fel y ddau feddyg hyn.
Canfûm, pe bai adroddiad wedi’i wneud am Shipman ar y pryd, mae’n bosibl, er yn annhebygol, y byddai gwir natur ei weithredoedd mewn perthynas â Mrs Overton wedi’u canfod. Canfûm, pe bai cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn lleol, byddai’r gweithdrefnau ymchwilio yn annhebygol o fod wedi datgelu’r gwir. Mae’n annhebygol y byddai adroddiad wedi cael ei wneud i’r heddlu am Shipman. Yn yr un modd, pe hysbyswyd y GMC ynghylch y gŵyn, mae’n annhebygol y byddid wedi ymchwilio’n drylwyr i’r ffeithiau a’r cefndir. Mae’n debygol y byddai’r GMC wedi cymryd y farn fod Shipman wedi gwneud camgymeriad. Ar ôl adolygu nifer o achosion lle bu’r GMC yn delio â meddygon a oedd wedi gwneud camgymeriadau difrifol wrth ragnodi neu roi cyffuriau peryglus, deuthum i’r casgliad ei bod yn annhebygol iawn y byddai Shipman wedi cael ei ddileu o’r rhestr feddygol. Yr effaith fwyaf llesol, o ran ei ddioddefwyr potensial, fyddai y gallai fod mewn gwirionedd wedi peidio â lladd am gyfnod, a gellid fod wedi arbed rhai bywydau. Ni allaf ddweud faint o fywydau na bywydau pwy.
Mae degawd wedi mynd heibio ers i Dr Brown a Dr Husaini fethu gwneud adroddiad am Shipman. Fel y dywedais, mae arwyddion bod y diwylliant o hunanamddiffyn ei gilydd wedi newid ers hynny, er nad yw’r broses wedi’i chwblhau o bell ffordd. Mae’n anochel bod ymagweddau cynhenid ddwfn yn cymryd amser hir i newid. Yn fy marn i, mae’n bwysig bod meddygon ifanc yn cael eu trwytho gan y diwylliant newydd o’r cychwyn. Mae hefyd yn hollbwysig bod arweinwyr y proffesiwn yn cyfleu’r neges yn gyson i’r genhedlaeth bresennol o feddygon. Ni all fod lle heddiw i ddiogelu cydweithwyr lle mae diogelwch a lles cleifion yn y fantol. Credaf y gallai parodrwydd un gweithiwr iechyd proffesiynol i gymryd cyfrifoldeb am godi pryderon am ymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd person arall wneud cyfraniad mwy o bosibl i ddiogelu cleifion rhag unrhyw ffactor arall.
Pryderon am Shipman
Roedd safle Shipman fel meddyg â pharch iddo, ei allu i ddweud celwydd yn argyhoeddiadol a’r graddau ymddiriedaeth a roddwyd ynddo gan ei gleifion a’u teuluoedd yn golygu mai ychydig iawn o bobl yn rhyfeddol a oedd ag unrhyw bryderon o gwbl ynghylch nifer ei gleifion a oedd yn marw neu ynghylch amgylchiadau eu marwolaethau. Nid oedd gan fwyafrif helaeth o berthnasau a ffrindiau galarus dioddefwyr Shipman unrhyw amheuon o gwbl ynghylch y marwolaethau ar y pryd. Roeddent yn cael eu syfrdanu’n aml gan sydynrwydd marwolaeth, ond, yn gyffredinol, roeddent yn derbyn esboniad Shipman yn ddi-gwestiwn. Nid oedd yr ychydig rai a chanddynt amheuon yn pryderu ynghylch posibilrwydd ymddygiad
troseddol
; yn fwy arferol, y pryderon oedd y gallai Shipman fod wedi rhoi gofal is na’r safon - efallai drwy fethu ceisio dadebru claf neu ffonio ambiwlans, neu drwy adael claf a oedd yn marw ar ei ben ei hun. Weithiau, roedd y pryderon yn ddim mwy na theimlad cyffredinol o anesmwythyd nad oedd rhywbeth ‘yn hollol iawn’ ynglŷn â marwolaeth. Ond, nes bod ymchwiliad yn mynd rhagddo am i Shipman ladd Mrs Kathleen Grundy, ni wnaeth un o’r perthnasau a ffrindiau galarus hysbysu’r awdurdodau ynghylch eu pryderon. Roedd rhai yn ofni’r syniad o amau gweithredoedd meddyg; cafodd rhai eraill eu perswadio gan aelodau eu teuluoedd nad oedd sail i’w pryderon. Mae sawl un wedi dweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oeddent yn gwybod at bwy y gallent fynegi’u pryderon. Roedd nifer o unigolion, fodd bynnag, a ddaeth yn amheus o Shipman.
Pryderon Mrs Christine Simpson
Roedd Mrs Christine Simpson yn un o’r unigolion hynny. Hi oedd rheolwraig breswyl Ogden Court, datblygiad tai lloches yn Hyde, a oedd yn cael ei weinyddu ar y pryd gan Manchester & District Housing Association. Rhwng 1988 a 1998, lladdodd Shipman naw o’r preswylwyr yn Ogden Court. Fe ddaeth Mrs Simpson yn fwyfwy pryderus ynghylch sydynrwydd y marwolaethau a’r ffaith eu bod yn digwydd yn fuan ar ôl ymweliadau gan Shipman. Daeth yn amheus y gallai fod yn lladd ei gleifion. Ym 1995 neu 1996, penderfynodd sôn am ei phryderon wrth ei rheolwraig llinell, Mrs Janet Schofield. Roedd Mrs Simpson yn teimlo’n betrus ynglŷn â gwneud hyn ac rwy’n derbyn iddi gyfleu ei phryderon mewn modd braidd yn anuniongyrchol. Rwy’n fodlon, fodd bynnag, ei bod, wrth siarad â Mrs Schofield, yn cysylltu’r marwolaethau ag ymweliadau gan Shipman, a’i bod wedi rhoi’r hyn a gredai oedd yn arwydd clir o’i phryder nad oedd popeth fel y dylai fod. Rwy’n fodlon hefyd fod Mrs Schofield wedi diystyru pryderon Mrs Simpson. Ei barn hi oedd bod Mrs Simpson yn bersonoliaeth braidd yn anodd, gydag agwedd negyddol tuag at awdurdod. Ni holodd Mrs Simpson ynghylch ei phryderon, ac ni aeth â nhw ymhellach ychwaith. Er na wnaeth Mrs Simpson godi’i phryderon eto mewn unrhyw ddull ffurfiol, rwy’n fodlon ei bod wedi cyfeirio atynt wrth siarad â Mrs Schofield, drwy sylwadau’n cysylltu enw Shipman â marwolaethau yn Ogden Court. Ar brydiau, mae’n siwr iddi ddefnyddio’r enw ‘Dr Death’ i ddisgrifio Shipman.
Fel rheolwraig, dylai Mrs Schofield fod wedi bod yn effro i’r math o neges anuniongyrchol o bryder yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn ceisio’i chyfleu iddi, a dylai fod wedi cymryd unrhyw bryderon felly o ddifrif. Os oedd hi’n ymddangos, ar ôl trafodaeth, y gallai fod unrhyw bosibilrwydd o sail dda i’r pryderon, dylai fod wedi mynd â nhw ymhellach. Credaf fod agwedd Mrs Schofield tuag at Mrs Simpson wedi atal ei pharodrwydd neu’i gallu i wrando’n ofalus ar yr hyn yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn dweud wrthi, ac i feddwl am yr oblygiadau. Fodd bynnag, roedd y pryderon yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn ceisio’u codi yn anarferol iawn, a byddent wedi ymddangos yn hurt i lawer mae’n siwr. Fe wnaeth ffrind yr oedd Mrs Simpson wedi dweud wrthi am ei phryderon ei chynghori i beidio â sôn wrth unrhyw un arall amdanynt gan y byddai pobl yn dweud ei bod yn ‘wallgof’. Roedd y ffrind yn graff; priodolodd Mrs Schofield bryderon Mrs Simpson i ‘obsesiwn’â marwolaeth. Mae fy meirniadaeth i o Mrs Schofield yn cael ei thawelu. Ni wnaeth wrando’n ofalus ar ymdrechion Mrs Simpson i fynegi’i phryderon. Roedd hynny’n ganlyniad yn rhannol i’w phersonoliaeth ei hun a’i hagwedd tuag at Mrs Simpson. Ond credaf hefyd bod y gred bod unrhyw awgrym y gallai meddyg fod yn niweidio’i gleifion yn fwriadol yn annirnad wedi effeithio’n ddealladwy hefyd ar ei hagwedd.
Pryderon Pobl Eraill
Roedd gan Mrs Dorothy Foley, Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross, MrJohn Shaw a Mrs Shirley Harrison bob un ohonynt amheuon ynghylch Shipman. Gweithiai Mrs Foley a Mrs Shawcross fel gweithwyr cymorth cartref i Wasanaethau Cymdeithasol Tameside. Fe wnaethant ddechrau pryderu pan fu farw tri o’u cleientiaid oedrannus (dau ym 1986 ac un ym 1989) yn ystod ymweliad gan Shipman, neu’n fuan wedi hynny. Clywsant hanesion tebyg gan weithwyr cymorth cartref eraill. Roedd Mr Shaw yn cynnal gwasanaeth tacsi yn Hyde. Roedd llawer o’i gwsmeriaid yn bobl oedrannus a oedd â threfniadau cludiant rheolaidd gydag ef. Daeth i adnabod llawer ohonynt a daethant yn ffrindiau personol. Dros y blynyddoedd rhwng 1992 a 1998, sylwodd Mr Shaw fod nifer o’i gwsmeriaid wedi marw’n annisgwyl iawn; roedd bob un ohonynt yn gleifion i Shipman. Yn raddol daeth i amau fod Shipman yn lladd ei gleifion. Daeth Mrs Harrison hefyd i amau bod Shipman yn llofruddio. Yn dilyn marwolaeth ei modryb, Mrs Erla Copeland, ym mis Ionawr 1996, roedd Mrs Harrison yn amau fod Shipman wedi ‘helpu ei modryb i farw’. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Copeland. Roedd Mrs Harrison yn credu iddo wneud hyn er mwyn arbed ei modryb rhag gorfod dioddef. Ugain mis yn ddiweddarach, canfuwyd cymydog iddi, Mrs Mavis Pickup, yn fawr ychydig oriau wedi i Shipman ymweld â hi. Er bod Mrs Pickup wedi dioddef profedigaeth yn ddiweddar, roedd i weld mewn iechyd da. Daeth Mrs Harrison yn amheus iawn, ond teimlai hefyd ei bod yn ‘darllen gormod i bopeth’.
Ni ddylid beirniadu’r bobl hyn o gwbl am yr hyn sy’n ymddangos ar yr wyneb fel methiant i godi pryderon difrifol yn y man iawn. Ni fethodd y bobl yma weithredu am eu bod yn anghyfrifol; fe wnaethant fethu gweithredu am eu bod yn teimlo eu bod ‘heb rym’. Oherwydd y diwylliant a oedd yn bodoli ar y pryd, roeddent yn ofni na fyddai eu pryderon yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif, ac y byddent yn cael eu diystyru fel rhai afresymol. Roedd rhai ohonynt yn pryderu y gallent fod yn anghywir i gael amheuon felly am Shipman, ac, os byddent yn siarad am eu pryderon, byddai’r canlyniadau’n rhai difrifol iddynt. Nid oedd gan rai ohonynt unrhyw un i droi atynt i gael cyngor annibynnol a chyfrinachol. Yn fy marn i, rhaid delio â’r angen hwn.
Dau berson arall a ddaeth i amau fod Shipman yn lladd ei gleifion oedd Mr David a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, ymgymerwyr angladdau yn Hyde. Disgrifiais yn fy Ail Adroddiad sut y codwyd eu hamheuon. Am gryn amser, fe wnaethant oedi rhag dweud wrth unrhyw un y tu allan i’w teulu am eu pryderon. Roeddent yn ofni y gallent fod yn anghywir; roeddent yn poeni na fyddai pobl yn eu cymryd o ddifrif. Dywedodd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe y byddent wedi bod yn fwy hyderus i wneud adroddiad am eu pryderon pe bai sefydliad annibynnol yn bodoli y gallent fod wedi mynd ato’n gyfrinachol. Ym mis Chwefror 1988, mynegodd Mrs Bambroffe ei phryderon wrth Dr Susan Booth, un o’r meddygon teulu ym Meddygfa Brooke, Hyde. Adroddodd Dr Booth y pryderon hynny wrth rai o’i phartneriaid. Yn y cyfamser, fe ddaeth y diweddar Dr Linda Reynolds, a oedd hefyd yn aelod o Feddygfa Brooke, yn ymwybodol ei bod yn ymddangos bod cyfradd farwolaethau uchel ymhlith cleifion Shipman. Ym mis Mawrth 1998, penderfynwyd y dylai Dr Reynolds adrodd ei phryderon, a phryderon ei phartneriaid, wrth y Crwner. Trosglwyddodd yntau’r wybodaeth i’r heddlu. Yn anffodus, arweiniodd ymchwiliad cyntaf yr heddlu at y casgliad nad oedd sail i’r pryderon.
Er 1998, bu cryn newid ymagwedd tuag at y rheiny sy’n dymuno mynegi pryder ynghylch rhyw agwedd ar ofal iechyd. Erbyn hyn mae gan bob corff y GIG bolisi ‘chwythu’r chwiban’ sy’n cynghori gweithwyr sut i fynegi pryder, ac sy’n rhoi sicrwydd y bydd pryderon yn cael ystyriaeth o ddifrif ac na fydd unrhyw ddial annheg hyd yn oed pe byddai’r pryderon yn rai di-sail. Mae Deddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998 (PIDA) yn rhoi mesur o ddiogelwch yn erbyn dial annheg i bob gweithiwr sy’n mynegi pryderon. Hefyd, mae cyngor annibynnol yn cael ei ddarparu bellach gan gorff elusennol, Public Concern at Work. Serch hynny, mae angen gwneud mwy. Rwyf wedi argymell y dylai fod rhywfaint o ddarpariaeth (llinell ffôn gymorth siwr o fod) i alluogi unrhyw berson, pa un a yw’n gweithio o fewn gofal iechyd ai peidio, i gael cyngor ynghylch y ffordd orau i fynegi pryder am fater gofal iechyd ac am y goblygiadau cyfreithiol o wneud hynny. Yn fy marn i, dylid darparu hwn yn genedlaethol. Nid wyf wedi gwneud unrhyw argymhelliad o ran y modd y dylid darparu hwn. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi y gallai fod yn bosibl cysylltu’r llinell gymorth â’r ‘porth sengl’ y soniais amdano’n barod. Argymhellais hefyd bod newidiadau’n cael eu gwneud i’r PIDA a fyddai’n rhoi mwy o ddiogelwch i weithwyr sy’n gwneud adroddiad am eu pryderon.
Staff Meddygfa Shipman
Ym Mhennod 9, rwyf wedi ystyried safbwynt y staff gweinyddol ym meddygfa Shipman yn 21 Market Street, Hyde. Roeddent yn gweithio’n agos ato yn ystod y blynyddoedd pan oedd yn lladd cleifion yn aml iawn. Mae llawer o bobl wedi awgrymu ei bod yn rhaid bod yr aelodau hyn o’r staff yn gwybod beth yr oedd yn ei wneud. Rwy’n eithaf bodlon nad oeddent yn gwybod. Nid oeddent yn coleddu amheuon ynghylch nifer y marwolaethau. Ni wnaethant sylweddoli ychwaith ei bod yn anghyffredin i farwolaethau ddigwydd yn adeilad meddygfa. Ni ddylid eu beirniadu o gwbl. Maent hwythau eu hunain wedi dioddef yn sgil tor ymddiriedaeth Shipman.
Mae safbwynt Sister Gillian Morgan, nyrs y feddygfa, ychydig yn wahanol. Rwy’n eithaf bodlon na wnaeth hi amau fod Shipman yn niweidio’i gleifion. Ni wnaeth amau nifer y marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman. Roedd ei pherthynas broffesiynol â Shipman yn un o barch. Nid oedd hynny’n anghyffredin o gwbl ar y pryd. At hynny, credaf nad yw, yn ôl ei natur, yn berson chwilfrydig neu ymholgar. Digwyddodd nifer o bethau a fyddai, petai wedi bod o natur fwy ymholgar, wedi peri iddi deimlo synnwyr o anesmwythyd. Un digwyddiad felly oedd marwolaeth Miss Joan Harding, y lladdodd Shipman hi yn y feddygfa. Gofynnodd i Sister Morgan ei ‘helpu’ i ddadebru Miss Harding pan oedd eisoes wedi marw. Siarâd oedd hyn cyn belled ag yr oedd Shipman yn y cwestiwn, ond yn ymgais go iawn ar ran Sister Morgan. Eto, ni wnaeth Sister Morgan gwestiynu’r ffaith na wnaeth Shipman fynd i ‘nôl, na gofyn iddi hi fynd i ‘nôl, y cyfarpar dadebru a oedd ar gael yn y feddygfa. Ni wnaeth Sister Morgan ychwaith, yn gynnar ym 1998, gwestiynu’r nodweddion rhyfedd a oedd yn gysylltiedig â marwolaethau sydyn Miss Maureen Ward a Mrs Margaret Waldron. Dywedaf eto fy mod yn derbyn yn llwyr na wnaeth Sister Morgan amau Shipman. Roedd yn ildio i’w farn yn broffesiynol ac nid oedd fyth yn cwestiynu’r hyn a ddywedai wrthi. Petai wedi dangos mwy o chwilfrydedd ac annibyniaeth meddwl, efallai y byddai wedi gweithredu fel ataliad i Shipman. Efallai y byddai wedi bod yn wyliadwrus ohoni. Credaf ei bod yn bwysig ar gyfer y dyfodol bod pob gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn cydnabod, fel dyletswydd, y ffaith y dylent edrych ar weithredoedd a pherfformiad cydweithwyr proffesiynol gydag annibyniaeth meddwl a gwrthrychedd proffesiynol.
Pryderon Staff Meddygfeydd yn Gyffredinol
Canfûm nad oedd gan staff meddygfa Shipman unrhyw bryderon yn ei erbyn ef na’i arfer clinigol. Fodd bynnag, fe all staff meddygfa fod mewn lle unigryw i sylwi ar arwyddion arfer clinigol gwael gan feddyg neu weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill y maent yn gweithio gyda hwy. Fe allant ddod yn ymwybodol o gŵynion gan gleifion, meddygon locwm ac eraill y maent yn delio â nhw. Fe allant sylwi ar achosion o arfer gwael neu ymddygiad afreolaidd eu hunain. Fe allant ddod yn ymwybodol o fethiannau trefniadau o fewn y feddygfa (e.e. arfer gwael wrth gadw cofnodion) a allai roi cleifion mewn perygl. Eto, gall staff sy’n cael eu cyflogi mewn meddygfeydd teulu gael anhawster arbennig wrth fynegi unrhyw bryderon o’r natur hwn. Mae meddygfeydd teulu yn sefydliadau bach a gall fod gwrthdaro o ran teyrngarwch ac amharodrwydd i ddod â beirniadaeth yn erbyn un aelod o’r feddygfa i sylw cydweithwyr. Po leiaf yw’r feddygfa, mwya’n y byd y mae’r problemau’n debygol o fod. Mewn meddygfa â meddyg teulu’n gweithio ar ei ben ei hun, er enghraifft, mae’n debygol nad oes neb o fewn y feddygfa y gall aelod o staff droi ato/ati i leisio pryder am ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr. Gwaethygir y problemau hyn gan y ffaith fod staff meddygfeydd teulu yn gweithio ar eu pennau’u hunain yn aml, ar wahân i staff mewn meddygfeydd eraill a’r PCO lleol. Efallai nad oes ganddynt brofiad o weithio mewn meddygfa arall. Efallai nad oes ganddynt unrhyw syniad pa weithdrefnau sy’n arferol a pha rai ohonynt sy’n hollol anarferol. Efallai eu bod yn ansicr ynghylch pwy i droi ato/ati am gyngor.
Er mwyn delio â’r problemau hyn, argymhellais y dylai pob meddygfa teulu gael polisi ysgrifenedig yn nodi’r weithdrefn sydd i’w dilyn gan unrhyw aelod o staff y feddygfa sy’n dymuno mynegi pryder, ac yn benodol pryder ynghylch arfer clinigol neu ymddygiad gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd o fewn y feddygfa. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion hefyd ynghylch y camau y dylid eu cymryd gan PCTau er mwyn lleihau unigedd staff meddygfeydd (yn benodol, y rheiny sy’n gweithio ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach) ac i hwyluso mynegi unrhyw bryderon a all fod ganddynt.

---  ---
Ym 1976, roedd gan y GMC y pŵer i ddileu neu atal cofrestriad unrhyw feddyg yn cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd. Roedd yn ofynnol i’r heddlu adrodd i’r GMC am unrhyw euogfarnau a allai adlewyrchu ar addasrwydd meddyg i arfer meddygaeth. Byddai adroddiadau am euogfarnau felly’n cael eu cyflwyno i’w hystyried gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbadwy (PeCC), a eisteddai’n breifat ac a oedd â swyddogaeth i benderfynu a ddylid cyfeirio’r achos at y Pwyllgor Disgyblu (DC) ‘i ymchwilio iddo’. Eisteddai’r DC yn gyhoeddus ac roedd ganddo bwerau i ddileu ac atal. Ar yr adeg hon, nid oedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd ar waith eto, er bod Adroddiad Pwyllgor yr Ymchwiliad i Reoleiddio’r Proffesiwn Meddygol, dan gadeiryddiaeth Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alec Merrison (Adroddiad Merrison), a argymhellodd cyflwyno gweithdrefnau iechyd, wedi’i gyhoeddi ym 1975.
Cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog o dair trosedd o gael gafael yn anonest ar gyffur rheoledig (pethidin) trwy dwyll, dau achos o ffugio rhagnodyn GIG a thri achos o feddu’n anghyfreithlon ar gyffur rheoledig. Gofynnodd hefyd am i 74 o droseddau tebyg gael eu hystyried. Roedd y cwrs hwn o ymddygiad troseddol wedi digwydd dros gyfnod o bron i 14 mis. Yn Llys Ynadon Halifax, cafodd ddirwy a gorchymyn i dalu iawndal. Erbyn i’w achos ddod gerbron y PeCC i’w ystyried, roedd Shipman wedi cael triniaeth mewn ysbyty seiciatrig yn Efrog, ar gyfer caethni i bethidin neu ddibyniaeth ar bethidin yn ôl pob golwg. Gwnaeth y seiciatrydd a oedd wedi’i drin yno adroddiad ffafriol ar ei gynnydd. Ers rhyddhau Shipman o’r ysbyty, cafodd waith ym maes iechyd plant yn County Durham. Dywedodd adroddiad gan ei gyflogwr ei fod yn gwneud yn dda yn ei swydd newydd. Fe wnaeth y seiciatrydd a oedd yn gyfrifol am ei ofal wedi iddo adael yr ysbyty roi adroddiad ffafriol amdano hefyd. Cyflwynwyd yr adroddiadau hyn i’r GMC gan gyfreithwyr ar gyfer yr MDU, y sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol yr oedd Shipman yn perthyn iddo, i’w hystyried gan y PeCC. Ym mis Ebrill 1976, penderfynodd y PeCC nad oedd angen cyfeirio achos Shipman i’r DU am wrandawiad cyhoeddus. Penderfynodd gau ei achos gyda rhybudd yn erbyn ailadrodd ei gamymddwyn blaenorol.
Parodd y penderfyniad hwnnw lawer o bryder ymhlith y cyhoedd a rhywfaint o feirniadaeth. Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad achosion eraill o natur debyg i weld sut yr oedd y GMC yn delio â nhw’n gyffredinol bryd hynny. Nid oedd ac nid yw achosion felly’n rai prin o bell ffordd. Mae’n amlwg i mi, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 16, mai polisi’r GMC ym 1976 mewn perthynas â meddyg a oedd wedi bod yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau oedd gadael i’r meddyg barhau i ymarfer wrth geisio sicrhau i ymadferiad. Roedd gan y PeCC y grym i ohirio cyn penderfynu eu cyfeirio nhw at y DC ai peidio. Canfûm y byddai’n aml yn arfer ei rym i ohirio er mwyn rhoi cyfle i’r meddyg ofyn am driniaeth seiciatrig. Yr achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y DC, yn gyffredinol, oedd y rheiny lle nad oedd y meddyg wedi gofyn am driniaeth nac wedi cyflwyno tystiolaeth feddygol am driniaeth felly. Anaml iawn yn unig y byddid yn delio â’r achosion hynny a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y DC gydag atal cofrestriad. Roedd y grym gan y DC i ohirio dyfarniad a byddai’n arfer y grym hwnnw’n aml (weithiau sawl gwaith yn ystod yr un achos) i roi’r cyfle i’r meddyg i gael triniaeth a chyflwyno tystiolaeth o hynny. Yn y cyfamser, byddai’r meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer. Roedd y PeCC a’r DC o’r farn nad oedd gweithredoedd anonest yn cael eu cyflawni mewn cysylltiad â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau yn dangos anonestrwydd cyffredinol, ond roeddent ‘yn rhan o’r salwch’ dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau. Yn fyr, deliodd y GMC â Shipman yn yr un modd fwy neu lai ag y deliai â meddygon eraill yr oedd adroddiad yn cael ei wneud amdanynt am droseddau tebyg ar y pryd.
Ym Mhennod 16, deuthum i’r casgliad, wrth ymdrin â’r achosion fel ag y gwneuthum, bod y GMC wedi canolbwyntio gormod ar fuddiannau’r meddygon ac nid yn ddigonol ar fuddiannau’r cyhoedd a’r angen i ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau. Rwy’n cydnabod, yn y blynyddoedd rhwng cyhoeddi Adroddiad Merrison a chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ym 1980, roedd y GMC mewn sefyllfa anodd. Roedd yr angen am y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn cael ei gydnabod, ond nid oeddent yn bodoli eto. Nid yw’n syndod felly bod y PeCC a’r DC wedi ceisio llenwi’r bwlch trwy ddefnyddio’u pwerau i oedi neu ohirio. Ymddengys i mi mai’r broblem oedd na wnaethant lwyddo i sicrhau’r cydbwysedd iawn. Roedd Pwyllgor Merrison wedi cynnig gweithdrefnau iechyd lle gellid diogelu cleifion ar yr un pryd ag yr oedd y meddyg yn ymadfer. Roedd hynny i’w gyflawni trwy bennu amodau a chyfyngiadau ar ymarfer meddyg a thrwy ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo/iddi dderbyn goruchwyliaeth. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys bod y PeCC a’r DC wedi bod yn benderfynol i gynnig cyfle i ymadfer, er nad oeddent mewn sefyllfa i roi diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd trwy bennu amodau, cyfyngiadau a/neu oruchwyliaeth. Mewn gwirionedd, yn fy marn i, gallent fod wedi gwneud llawer mwy nag a wnaethant i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd trwy roi’r opsiwn i feddyg dderbyn ymgymeriadau, gydag atal fel dewis arall. Ni wnaethpwyd hynny. Y canlyniad oedd bod y GMC wedi rhoi gormod o bwys ar fuddiannau’r meddyg yn ymadfer a rhy ychydig ar angen y cyhoedd i gael eu diogelu rhag meddyg nad oedd tystiolaeth eto i ddangos ei fod wedi ymadfer o’r caethni neu’r ddibyniaeth a arweiniodd at ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad troseddol.
Mae gennyf feirniadaethau eraill o’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achos Shipman, a nodir y rhain ym Mhennod 16. Yn benodol, rwy’n beirniadu’r ffaith bod y GMC wedi gwneud cyn lleied o ymdrech i ymchwilio i’r cefndir i achos Shipman. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cydnabod, hyd yn oed pe byddid wedi ymdrin ag achos Shipman yn y modd y credaf y dylid fod wedi gwneud, mae’n annhebygol y byddai’r canlyniad wedi bod yn wahanol iawn i’r canlyniad gwirioneddol. Rwy’n derbyn na fyddai cofrestriad Shipman wedi cael ei atal fwy na thebyg, ac yn sicr ni fyddai ei enw wedi’i ddileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Y tebygolrwydd yw y byddai wedi cael ei roi ‘ar brawf’ am ychydig flynyddoedd ar y mwyaf. Nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth ei fod wedi llithro yn ôl i’w arfer blaenorol o gamdrin cyffuriau.
Rhaid gosod penderfyniad y GMC i rybuddio Shipman yn hytrach na’i atal neu ddileu ei enw o’r gofrestr yng nghyd-destun arferion ac athroniaeth y dydd. Yn gyntaf, roedd hi’n arferiad gan y GMC i ddelio â meddygon a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau drwy eu helpu tuag at ymadfer yn hytrach nag atal neu ddileu eu cofrestriad. Ni chafodd ei feirniadu’n gyhoeddus am wneud hynny. Yn wir, ymddengys bod Llywodraeth y dydd wedi derbyn yr athroniaeth a oedd yn sylfaen i Adroddiad Merrison a’i argymhellion ar gyfer creu gweithdrefnau iechyd. Gweithredwyd yr argymhellion hyn yn Neddf Meddygol 1978 a daeth i rym ym 1980. Yr athroniaeth oedd bod rhaid helpu meddygon sâl, gan gynnwys y rheiny a gamddefnyddiai cyffuriau, tuag at ymadfer mewn modd a oedd yn rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Nid y ffaith eu bod wedi mabwysiadu ymagwedd ymadferol yw fy meirniadaeth o’r GMC, ond yn hytrach eu bod, wrth ganlyn yr ymagwedd honno, heb roi digon o bwys i’r angen i ddiogelu cleifion nes y gellid dangos yn glir bod y broses ymadfer wedi’i chwblhau. Ar ôl i weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC ddod i rym ym 1980, parhaodd yr un ymagwedd adferiad. Ymddengys nad yw erioed, hyd yma, wedi bod yn destun amheuaeth. Os yw’r polisi cyfredol yn codi gofid cyhoeddus, rhaid cael dadl agored ynghylch sut y dylid delio â meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau.
Yn fy marn i, ni ellir beirniadu’r GMC am fethu rhagweld y gallai cyrch Shipman i gamddefnyddio pethidin ragflaenu rhywbeth llawer mwy difrifol. Yn fyr, rwy’n gwrthod unrhyw awgrym, pe bai gweithdrefnau’r GMC wedi bod yn foddhaol, y gellid fod wedi atal troseddoldeb diweddarach Shipman ac achub llawer o fywydau. Mae’n bosibl y gallai cyfnod o ‘brawf’ fod wedi oedi’r ailgychwyn defnyddio cyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon ar gleifion ac y gallai fod wedi achub bywydau un neu ddau o’u ddioddefwyr. Rwy’n eithaf bodlon, fodd bynnag, na fyddai ‘cyfnod prawf’ a’r oruchwyliaeth feddygol a fyddai wedi mynd law yn llaw ag ef wedi cael unrhyw effaith fawr neu barhaol ar ei ymddygiad yn y dyfodol.

---  ---
Fel y dywedais, y GMC yw’r unig gorff a all ddileu neu atal hawl meddyg i ymarfer yn y DU. Gall hefyd bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg. Os yw’r GMC yn cymryd unrhyw un o’r camau hyn, dywedir ei fod yn ‘cymryd camau gweithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg’. O dan yr ‘hen’ drefniadau FTP, a oedd ar waith hyd 1 Tachwedd 2004, roedd grym gan y GMC i weithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg dim ond os cafwyd ef/hi yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM), os canfuwyd bod ei berfformiad/pherfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol difrifol neu os canfuwyd bod amharu difrifol ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. O dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, mae’r amgylchiadau lle bydd y GMC yn gallu gweithredu yn wahanol, a byddaf yn mynd yn ôl atynt gyda hyn. O dan yr hen drefniadau FTP, dim ond dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y deliwyd ag achosion o SPM. Deliwyd ag achosion o berfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP) dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, a gyflwynwyd ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, a deliwyd ac achosion o nam difrifol o ran addasrwydd i ymarfer yn sgil afiechyd dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd a gafodd eu cyflwyno, fel y dywedais, ym 1980.
Mae’r GMC wedi derbyn bod rhai agweddau ar yr hen weithdrefnau wedi bod yn anfoddhaol. Ar y diwrnod pan drodd gwrandawiadau llafar yr Ymchwiliad i archwilio gwaith y GMC, gwnaeth y Prif Gwnsler dros y GMC, Mr Roger Henderson CF, gyfaddefiadau didwyll mewn perthynas â llawer o’r diffygion a oedd wedi dod yn amlwg yn ystod archwiliadau’r Ymchwiliad. Derbyniodd fod gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC wedi methu mewn llawer agwedd i fodloni disgwyliadau rhesymol cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Ei neges i’r Ymchwiliad oedd bod y diffygion wedi’u cydnabod a’u bod yn delio â nhw. Soniodd am ddyletswydd hollbwysig y GMC i amddiffyn diogelwch cleifion, wrth roi ystyriaeth ddyledus ar yr un pryd i fuddiannau meddygon. Ar yr adeg pan siaradodd, roedd y GMC wrthi’n datblygu gweithdrefnau FTP newydd sydd bellach wedi’u cyflwyno.
Er gwaetha’r consesiynau a wnaed ar ran y GMC ac er gwaetha’r ffaith bod yr hen weithdrefnau FTP wedi’u disodli’n ddiweddar, bu’n bwysig i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’u gweithredu yn o fanwl, ynghyd â’r agweddau a’r ethos sy’n sylfaenol i’w gweithredu. Bu’n angenrheidiol i mi lunio barn ynghylch a fydd y GMC, fel y bu hi, yn barod i ac yn gallu sicrhau y bydd popeth yn wir yn wahanol yn y dyfodol. Mae’n amlwg mai’r dangosydd gorau o agwedd a pherfformiad yn y dyfodol yw agwedd a pherfformiad blaenorol. Fel rhan o’i archwiliad, ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad gael gafael ar, a chael, nifer fawr o ffeiliau’n ymwneud ag achosion y deliwyd â nhw yn y gweithdrefnau FTP rhwng y 1970au a 2003. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi cynnal archwiliad o achosion yn ystod y cyfnod perthnasol, ond mae archwilio’r ffeiliau achos wedi rhoi golwg werthfawr ar y modd y mae’r gweithdrefnau wedi gweithio’n ymarferol.
Y Gweithdrefnau Iechyd
Lle gwnaethpwyd cwyn neu adroddiad am feddyg, ac yr ymddengys y gallai ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer gael ei niweidio’n ddifrifol oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol, gellir cyfeirio’r mater at ‘sgriniwr iechyd’ i’w ystyried. Fel arfer roedd dau sgriniwr iechyd ar unrhyw un adeg. Roeddent yn aelodau o’r GMC, ac yn gyffredinol, er nad yn ddieithriad, yn seiciatryddion ymgynghorol. Os oedd y sgriniwr iechyd yn cytuno bod tystiolaeth o nam difrifol ar yr iechyd, byddai’r meddyg fel arfer yn cael ei wahodd i gael archwiliadau addasrwydd i ymarfer meddygol. Os oedd yr archwiliadau hynny’n cadarnhau bod addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn cael ei rwystro’n ddifrifol gan afiechyd, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i roi addewidion ynglŷn â’i ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Byddai’n ofynnol iddo ef neu hi i ildio i oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Mewn achos yn ymwneud â dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau neu alcohol, efallai y bydd hi’n ofynnol iddo/iddi addo i ymwrthod rhag y sylwedd perthnasol. Yn aml, byddai cyfyngiadau’n cael eu rhoi ar ymarfer y meddyg. Os oedd y meddyg yn cytuno i wneud yr addewidion, byddid yn delio ag ef/hi dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, lle byddai’n aros am gyfnod, o leiaf dwy flynedd fel arfer, nes bod y sgriniwr iechyd yn fodlon ei bod yn ddiogel i’r meddyg ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Os nad oedd y meddyg yn cytuno i addewidion priodol, byddai’n cael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd, a oedd â’r grym i atal cofrestriad y meddyg neu bennu cyfyngiadau arno. Byddai’r meddyg wedyn yn cael ei oruchwylio/goruchwylio am gyfnod, a’i achos/hachos yn cael ei adolygu.
Yn gyffredinol, ymddengys i mi bod y gweithdrefnau hyn yn gweithio’n dda, yn enwedig ar ôl diwedd y 1990au, pan gafodd gwerthusiad annibynnol o’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ei gomisiynu gan y GMC. Datgelodd y gwerthusiad hwnnw’r angen am welliannau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth feddygol ac ar gyfer delio â meddygon a oedd yn methu cydymffurfio â’u haddewidion gwirfoddol. Yn fyr, roedd yn dangos bod angen ‘tynhau’ y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Gweithredodd y GMC ar yr argymhellion a wnaed, ac mae, yn fy marn i, yn haeddu’i longyfarch am ei weithredu wrth gomisiynu’r gwerthusiad ac wrth ymateb mor gadarnhaol iddo.
Serch hynny, mae gennyf rai pryderon ynghylch y modd y cafodd meddygon a fu’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau eu cyfeirio fwy neu lai’n awtomatig at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Pan ddaeth y gweithdrefnau iechyd i rym, fe ddaeth yn arfer dieithriad bron i gyfeirio meddygon yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau (a’r meddygon hynny’n cael eu cyhuddo o gamymddwyn mewn perthynas â defnyddio neu ddwyn cyffuriau rheoledig) at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Nid felly’r oedd hi os cafwyd bod y meddyg yn rhagnodi’n anghyfrifol neu ei fod yn cyflenwi cyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon i gleifion neu bobl eraill; fodd bynnag, dyna oedd yr arfer os cafwyd gafael ar y cyffuriau at ddefnydd y meddyg ei hun. Yn fy marn i, nid yw’r arfer hwn wedi gweithredu er lles diogelwch cleifion bob tro.
Ym Mhennod 23, esboniais fy nghasgliad bod rhai achosion lle mae’n briodol trin meddygon sy’n ddibynnol ar gyffuriau fel pe bai salwch arnynt, a bod angen triniaeth ac ymadfer arnynt, ond bod rhai achosion hefyd lle nad yw ymagwedd ymadfer felly’n briodol, ac nid yw’n rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Rwyf wedi disgrifio parodrwydd y GMC i ddod i’r casgliad, heb archwiliad manwl, bod meddyg yn ‘ddioddefwr’ caethni. Fel rheol, ni wnaeth y GMC ymchwilio i gefndir achosion o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau, ac, yn benodol, yr effaith a gafodd y camddefnyddio cyffuriau ar gleifion y meddyg a’i arfer/harfer clinigol yn gyffredinol. Yn aml, ni wnaeth y GMC gynnal asesiad digonol o’r risg yr oedd y meddyg yn ei greu i ddiogelwch cleifion. Rwyf wedi gweld rhai achosion lle mae’r GMC wedi cyfeirio meddyg at y gweithdrefnau iechyd heb wneud unrhyw ganfyddiadau o ffaith am natur neu raddau’r camymddygiad honedig yn ymwneud â chyffuriau lle’r oedd y meddyg ei hun yn gwadu bod ganddo/ganddi ‘broblem cyffuriau’ o gwbl. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion mewn perthynas â’r materion hyn ym Mhennod 23.
Y Gweithdrefnau Ymddygiad
Mae’r GMC yn cael llawer o gŵynion ac adroddiadau am feddygon. Mae’r nifer wedi cynyddu’n sylweddol dros oddeutu’r deng mlynedd diwethaf. Ym 1994, derbyniodd y GMC ryw 1600 o gŵynion ac adroddiadau. Yn 2003, rhyw 4000 oedd y ffigur. Mae’r cyfathrebiadau hyn yn ymwneud ag ystod eang o destunau; nid yw pob un ohonynt yn gŵyn yn erbyn meddyg. Mae rhai cwynion yn rhai mân iawn. Yn amlwg, mae’n rhaid i gorff rheoleiddio fel y GMC gael rhyw broses ar gyfer pennu pa gŵynion sy’n disgyn, neu allai ddisgyn, o fewn ei awdurdodaeth a pha rai ddylid eu gwrthod neu’u cyfeirio i rywle arall.
Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) oedd y corff â’r grym i gymryd camau gweithredu ar gofrestriad; byddai’n cynnal gwrandawiad cyhoeddus ac, os oedd y meddyg yn cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd neu os oedd SPM yn cael ei brofi neu’i gyfaddef, byddai’n penderfynu pa gamau gweithredu oedd yn angenrheidiol ar y cofrestriad. Cyn i’r achos gyrraedd y PCC, fodd bynnag, roedd yn rhaid iddo fynd drwy dair proses nithio. Roedd y cyntaf o’r rhain yn broses nithio gychwynnol yn cael ei chynnal gan staff y GMC; roedd yr ail yn broses ‘sgrinio’ a oedd, tan yn ddiweddar, yn cael ei chynnal gan aelodau o’r GMC a oedd â chymwysterau meddygol neu a oedd yn aelodau lleyg o’r GMC. Y drydedd broses nithio oedd ystyriaeth o’r achos gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC). Roedd y tair proses yn cael eu cynnal yn breifat. Dim ond cyfran fach iawn (dim mwy na rhyw 5%) o achosion oedd yn goroesi’r tair proses nithio ac yn cyrraedd y PCC. Yn 2003, caewyd o leiaf 65% o gŵynion ar adeg y broses nithio gychwynnol gan staff y GMC.
Cafodd y modd yr oedd y prosesau nithio yn gweithredu dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP ddylanwad pwysig ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Os oedd achosion yn cael eu nithio a ddylai neu a allai fod wedi gwarantu gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg, fe allai’r ffaith fod meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad fod wedi rhoi cleifion mewn perygl. Am y rheswm hwnnw a rhesymau eraill, archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad weithrediad pob proses nithio yn dra manwl. Nodir canlyniadau’r archwiliadau hynny ym Mhenodau 18 i 20.
Ystyr Camymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol
Rwy’n disgrifio, ym Mhennod 17, yr anawsterau a gafwyd dros y blynyddoedd wrth ddiffinio ac adnabod camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Gan mai dyma am rai degawdau oedd sylfaen awdurdodaeth y GMC, roedd yn amlwg yn bwysig, er budd cysondeb a thryloywder, y dylai fod gan bawb a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau farn glir a chytûn ynghylch yr hyn yr oedd SPM yn ei olygu. Eto, nid oedd y GMC erioed wedi ffurfio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon cytûn y gellid gwneud penderfyniadau ynghylch beth oedd yn SPM a’r hyn nad oedd yn SPM trwy gyfeirio atynt. Aeth y broblem yn waith dros y blynyddoedd. Hyd at ddechrau’r 1990au, roedd y GMC yn ymwneud yn bennaf ag achosion o gamymddygiad yn ymwneud â diogelwch, camddefnyddio cyffuriau, anwedduster, perthnasoedd amhriodol gyda chleifion a thorri cyfrinachedd. Byddai’r GMC hefyd yn ystyried honiadau bod meddyg wedi diystyru’i rwymedigaethau/rhwymedigaethau proffesiynol, er enghraifft, trwy fethu neu wrthod ymweld â chlaf neu i ddarparu triniaeth angenrheidiol. I bob pwrpas, roedd y GMC yn ymwneud ag achosion yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad gwirfoddol, bwriadol neu ddiofal. Bryd hynny, nid oedd y GMC yn gyffredinol yn ymwneud â honiadau o anghymhwyster neu esgeuluster, hyd yn oed esgeuluster difrifol. Ystyriai’r rheiny fel mater i’r llysoedd sifil. Fodd bynnag, yn dilyn penderfyniad y Cyfrin Gyngor ym 1987, daeth yn eglur y gallai gweithredoedd o esgeuluster, os oeddent yn ddigon difrifol, fod yn SPM. Roedd nifer yr honiadau o’r math hwnnw a dderbyniodd y GMC wedi cynyddu’n gyson dros y blynyddoedd. Arweiniodd y cynnydd hwn at fwy o broblemau’n codi o’r anhawster wrth ddiffinio ac adnabod SPM. Yn gyntaf, nid yw’r cysyniad o esgeuluster, hyd yn oed os yw’n ddifrifol, yn cydweddu’n esmwyth â‘chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’. Yn ail, roedd angen hyd yn oed yn fwy am bennu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon ar gyfer penderfynu achosion felly. Cynghorwyd y GMC am hyn nifer o weithiau. Mae’n wir bod y GMC, ym 1995, wedi cynhyrchu llyfryn o’r enw ‘Good Medical Practice’, sy’n nodi’r safonau i’w disgwyl gan feddyg. Mae’r llyfryn hwnnw’n un da iawn cyn belled ag y mae’n mynd. Mae’n nodi’r safonau y dylai meddygon ddyheu i’w cyrraedd, ond nid yw’n dweud dim am y safonau y dylai meddyg ddisgwyl wynebu achos disgyblu o ddisgyn islaw’r safonau hynny. Nid oedd unrhyw safonau, meini prawf na throthwyon cytûn ar gyfer SPM wedi’u sefydlu pan ddarfu’r hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad ym mis Tachwedd 2004. O ganlyniad, roedd gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad yn frith o benderfyniadau anghyson.
Y Broses Nithio Gychwynnol gan y Staff Gweinyddol
Ym Mhennod 18, rwyf wedi disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau gweinyddol cychwynnol ar gyfer ‘nithio’ cwynion gan staff y GMC yr oedd y GMC yn eu derbyn gyda’r bwriad o ddileu’r rheiny nad oeddent yn amlwg yn disgyn o fewn awdurdodaeth y GMC gan nad oeddent yn ‘codi cwestiwn SPM’. Cefais fod y broses nithio hon yn un ddiffygiol mewn rhai agweddau pwysig. Roedd llawer o achosion yn cael eu ‘cau’ heb fod y GMC wedi ystyried pan un a allai’r honiad fod yn codi cwestiwn SPM. Os oedd hi’n ymddangos nad oedd yr achwynydd wedi dilyn unrhyw weithdrefnau cwynion lleol at eu diwedd, ni fyddai’r GMC yn derbyn yr achos oni bai ei bod yn ymddangos bod y meddyg yn berygl i gleifion. Nid dyna oedd y prawf statudol cywir, ac mae’n siwr bod llawer o achosion wedi’u gwrthod neu’u cau a ddylai fod wedi cael eu derbyn. Nid yw’r ffaith y byddai wedi bod yn agored i’r achwynydd ddychwelyd at y GMC ar ôl dihysbyddu’r gweithdrefnau lleol yn unrhyw ateb i’r feirniadaeth, yn anad dim gan nad oedd llawer yn dychwelyd mewn gwirionedd. Nid oedd y GMC yn darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion; yn lle hynny, roedd yn rhoi’r cyfrifoldeb yn ôl ar yr achwynwyr i fynd ymlaen â’u honiadau yn rhywle arall. At hynny, roedd y GMC yn gwbl ymwybodol o ddiffygion gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG, yr wyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio atynt. Nid oedd gan PCOau unrhyw gyfleusterau ar gyfer ymchwilio i gŵynion, a’r achwynwyr eu hunain oedd yn gorfod casglu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol.
Ychydig a wnaeth y GMC ei hun i ymchwilio i’r cwynion hynny a oroesodd y broses nithio gychwynnol. Nid oedd ganddo uned archwilio fewnol, ac, yn gyffredinol, ni fyddai’n anfon achos at ei gyfreithwyr i’w archwilio oni bai a hyd ei fod yn mynd drwy bob un o’r tair proses nithio ac wedi’i gyfeirio at y PCC. Roedd llawer o gŵynion (yn benodol, y rheiny’n cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat a’r rheiny’n ymwneud ag arfer clinigol is na’r safon) wedi’u nithio cyn y pwynt hwnnw, rai ohonynt oherwydd diffyg archwilio.
Diffygion eraill yn y cyfnod cynnar oedd amharodrwydd y GMC i wneud unrhyw ymholiadau er mwyn canfod gwybodaeth gefndir am y meddyg. Byddai’r GMC yn derbyn cwyn, yn ei hystyried a, chyhyd â bod y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u dihysbyddu a’r honiad yn codi cwestiwn SPM, yn derbyn y gŵyn. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddid yn chwilio am ragor o wybodaeth cyn cyflwyno’r achos i’r cam sgrinio. Hyd at yn ddiweddar, agwedd y GMC tuag at gasglu gwybodaeth gan gyflogwyr a PCOau oedd nad ei dasg ef oedd paratoi cwyn yn erbyn y meddyg; byddai hynny’n annheg ar feddygon. Rôl y GMC oedd rhoi’r cyfle i’r achwynydd i fynd ymlaen â’i gŵyn/chwyn a dim mwy. Nid oedd yr agwedd hon yn diogelu cleifion na buddiannau’r cyhoedd yn ddigonol.
Y Cam Sgrinio
Cam nesaf y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, yr wyf yn ei ddisgrifio ym Mhennod 19, oedd y broses sgrinio. Yn hanesyddol, y Llywydd oedd yn gwneud y gwaith sgrinio, ond, yn ystod y cyfnod sydd dan sylw gennyf, dirprwyodd y dasg i gydweithwyr eraill yn y GMC a ddewiswyd ganddo’n bersonol. Hyd at 1990, roedd yr holl sgrinio’n cael ei wneud gan aelodau â chymwysterau meddygol, ond, wedi hynny, roedd aelodau lleyg yn chwarae rhan bwysig. Yn gyffredinol, ni ellid cau achos yn y cam sgrinio heb gytundeb sgriniwr lleyg.
Roedd y prawf statudol i sgrinwyr, am lawer o flynyddoedd, yn amhenodol iawn. Nid oedd yn ofynnol i’r sgriniwr gyfeirio achos ymlaen at y PPC, oni bai ei bod yn ymddangos iddo/iddi nad oedd ‘angen i’r mater fynd ymhellach’. Gan nad oedd, am lawer o flynyddoedd, unrhyw arweiniad yn cael ei ddarparu ynghylch yr amgylchiadau lle nad oedd ‘angen i’r mater fynd ymhellach’, y canlyniad oedd bod sgriniwyr yn arfer disgresiwn gwrthrychol i raddau helaeth ynghylch pa achosion ddylai fynd ymlaen a pha rai y dylid eu cau. Clywais dystiolaeth mai ymagwedd arferol sgrinwyr, hyd at ganol y 1990au, oedd cau achosion oni bai bod rheswm cadarnhaol iddynt fynd ymlaen. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd y prawf statudol yn cael ei ‘wrthdroi’. Dywedwyd wrthyf fod yr ymagwedd hon wedi newid yn raddol o ganol y 1990au ymlaen. Fodd bynnag, mewn cyfres o achosion adolygiad barnwrol yn cychwyn ym 1997, daeth yn amlwg nad oedd sgrinwyr yn cymhwyso’r prawf statudol cywir o hyd. Ym 1997, cynhyrchodd y GMC lawlyfr arweiniad ar gyfer sgrinwyr, ond hyd yn oed wedi hynny, roedd achosion adolygiad barnwrol a oedd yn datgelu bod y sgrinwyr wedi cau achosion gan iddynt ffurfio barn derfynol nad oedd yr achos yn SPM, yn hytrach na chymhwyso’r prawf statudol cywir. Nid oedd sgrinwyr yn fodlon derbyn arweiniad o hyd. Gan fod rhai sgrinwyr ar y PPC a’r PCC yn ogystal, ymddengys, ar rai achlysuron, eu bod yn cymryd golwg eang ynghylch a fyddai’r achos yn arwain at ganfod SPM pe bai’n mynd at y PCC, ac os oeddent yn meddwl na fyddai, byddent yn cau’r achos. Mae’n rhaid bod yr ymagwedd hon wedi arwain at gau lawer o achosion a ddylai fod wedi mynd ymlaen i gam nesaf y gweithdrefnau FTP o leiaf. Awgrymwyd gan y GMC bod y sgrinwyr yn awyddus i ddod â gwerth llawn eu profiad a’u harbenigedd i’r dasg sgrinio, a’u bod yn ei chael hi’n anodd derbyn na ddylai’r prawf gynnwys arfer disgresiwn eang. Fe all hynny fod yn wir, ond roedd y modd yr oedd y broses sgrinio yn gweithredu dros flynyddoedd lawer yn anfoddhaol ac nid oedd yn gweithredu er diogelwch cleifion.
Dros y blynyddoedd diweddar, gwnaethpwyd ymdrechion go iawn i gyflwyno rhywfaint o gysondeb i’r broses sgrinio drwy ddefnyddio ffurfiau safonol a oedd yn arwain y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Cyflwynwyd hyfforddiant ac roedd mwy o arweiniad ar gael. Serch hynny, fel y disgrifiaf ym Mhennod 19, nid oedd yr ymdrechion hyn yn gwbl lwyddiannus ac roedd gwrthwynebiad ar ran rhai sgrinwyr o leiaf i rai o’r newidiadau a gafodd eu cyflwyno gyda’r nod o hyrwyddo cysondeb mewn penderfyniadau sgrinio.
Penderfyniadau gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Ym Mhennod 20, rwy’n disgrifio gweithdrefnau’r PPC. Roedd y pwyllgor hwn yn cynnwys aelodau o’r GMC ac, am flynyddoedd lawer, roedd yn cael ei gadeirio gan y prif sgriniwr meddygol. Mae’r rôl ddeuol hon yn ymddangos yn un gwbl anfoddhaol i lygaid modern. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn cael ei hystyried yn foddhaol hyd at 1999, pan wnaeth Dr Robin Steel, a fu’n chwarae’r rôl ddeuol honno am nifer o flynyddoedd, ymddeol o’r GMC. Roedd Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 i fod i ddod i rym y flwyddyn ganlynol. Yn ddiau fe wnaeth y digwyddiad hwnnw roi ysgogiad ar gyfer newid.
Swyddogaeth statudol y PPC oedd penderfynu pa un a ddylai achos ‘gael ei gyfeirio ar gyfer ymchwiliad’, at y PCC neu’r Pwyllgor Iechyd. Os na ddylai, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau, er y gallai rhybudd gael ei roi os nad oedd dadlau ynghylch ffeithiau’r achos. Roedd y prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso gan y PPC yn un amhenodol iawn. Hefyd, nid oedd yn wahanol iawn i’r prawf a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso yn y cam sgrinio, sef, fel y dywedais, y dylai’r achos fynd ymlaen oni bai bod y sgriniwr o’r farn nad oedd ‘angen iddo fynd ymhellach’. Nid oedd y Rheolau statudol nag arweiniad y GMC yn rhoi unrhyw feini prawf yr oedd y PPC i benderfynu yn eu herbyn pa un a ddylai achos gael ei ‘gyfeirio ymlaen ai peidio’. Y canlyniad oedd bod y PPC yn arfer disgresiwn eang yn union fel y sgrinwyr.
Cafodd yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Polisi Iechyd a Chymdeithasol, University of Westminster Policy Studies Institute (PSI) ei chomisiynu gan y GMC ar nifer o achlysuron i wneud ymchwil i’w weithdrefnau ymddygiad. Amcan yr ymchwil oedd archwilio bodolaeth bosibl rhagfarn hiliol o fewn y gweithdrefnau. Rhoddwyd mynediad llawn iddi hi a’i chydweithwyr at ffeiliau’r GMC, a nododd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai llawer o sefydliadau a fyddai wedi cytuno i roi mynediad mor agored ac wedi caniatáu cyhoeddi’r canlyniadau. Rwy’n cytuno bod penderfyniad y GMC i gomisiynu a chyhoeddi’r ymchwil hwn yn glod mawr iddo. Yn ystod gwaith yr Athro Allen, a ddechreuodd yng nghanol y 1990au, fe wnaeth hi a’i chydweithwyr wneud nifer fawr o argymhellion ynghylch camau y dylai’r GMC eu cymryd i wella’i ddull o weinyddu’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad a’i brosesau gwneud penderfyniadau. Derbyniodd a gweithredodd y GMC ar lawer, ond nid y cyfan, o’r argymhellion hynny, gyda chryn effaith fuddiol.
Archwiliodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr benderfyniadau’r PPC a wnaethpwyd yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1997, 1998 a 1999. Maent yn nodi’u canfyddiadau mewn adroddiad a ysgrifennwyd yn 2000. Mynegwyd pryder ganddynt ynghylch nifer o faterion. Yn benodol, gwelsant fod anghysonderau anesboniadwy rhwng penderfyniadau’r PPC. Argymhellwyd ganddynt y dylai’r PPC roi rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau, nad oedd wedi gwneud cyn hynny. Mabwysiadwyd yr awgrym hwnnw’n fuan wedi hynny.
Arsylwodd yr Athro Allen a’i thîm gyfres o 11 o gyfarfodydd y PPC rhwng mis Mehefin 1999 a mis Ionawr 2000. Roedd eu Hadroddiad 2000 yn feirniadol o lawer o agweddau ar broses y PPC ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau. Yn fyr, roedd diffyg cysondeb, tryloywder a thegwch yn y prosesau. Nododd yr Adroddiad bod dryswch ac anghytundeb sylweddol rhwng aelodau ynghylch yr hyn oedd SPM, a’r hyn ddylai’r trothwy ar gyfer SPM fod. Roedd barnau’n amrywio’n eang. Roedd aelodau’n tueddu damcaniaethu ynghylch pam yr oedd rhywun wedi ymddwyn fel y gwnaethant, neu’r modd yr oedd rhai sefyllfaoedd wedi codi pan nad oedd tystiolaeth i seilio damcaniaeth felly arni. Roedd aelodau’n cael anhawster o ran deilio â thystiolaeth arbenigol. Os oedd dau safbwynt arbenigol croes i’w gilydd gerbron y PPC, fe allai aelodau dderbyn y naill neu’r llall heb fod unrhyw reswm clir am hynny. Nid oedd gan rai aelodau ddealltwriaeth glir o weithdrefnau FTP y GMC neu’r pwerau a oedd yn agored iddynt. Roedd yr Athro Allen yn bryderus hefyd ynghylch yr amlder yr oedd achosion yn cael eu cau oherwydd nad oedd yn ymddangos i aelodau’r PPC bod tystiolaeth ddigonol i gefnogi’r honiad. Bryd hynny, wrth gwrs, nid oedd unrhyw gamau wedi’u cymryd i gasglu’r dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael.
Y prif achos pryder ynghylch proses y PPC ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau oedd ei thuedd i ddod i gasgliad ynghylch a oedd yr honiad yn SPM mewn gwirionedd, yn hytrach na chyfyngu’u hun i benderfynu a ddylai’r achos fynd ymlaen at y PCC. Wrth gyrraedd casgliadau felly, roedd y PPC yn hawlio swyddogaeth y PCC iddo’i hun ar gam. Ym Mhennod 20, rwyf wedi adrodd ar ddau achos adolygiad barnwrol lle cafodd penderfyniadau’r PPC eu beirniadu. Yn y ddau achos, nododd yr Uchel Lys nad swyddogaeth y PPC oedd datrys tystiolaeth groestynnol. Gwaith y PCC oedd hynny. Ni allaf ddweud a oedd yr achosion adolygiad barnwrol hyn yn gynrychioliadol o safon gyffredinol penderfyniadau’r PPC ar y pryd, er eu bod yn cydsynio â sylwadau’r tîm PSI. Yn sicr, roedd y camgymeriadau a wnaethpwyd o natur sylfaenol iawn. Fe’m gyrrwyd i’r casgliad bod penderfyniadau’r PPC i beidio â chyfeirio achosion at y PCC yn anghywir mewn nifer sylweddol o achosion, a bod yr achosion hyn yn destun pryder gwirioneddol bod y PPC yn cael ei ddylanwadu arno’n ormodol gan ei ddymuniad i fod yn ‘deg i feddygon’, ac yn poeni rhy ychydig am amddiffyn cleifion a’r cyhoedd.
Yn dilyn Adroddiad 2000 y tîm PSI a datblygiadau eraill a ddigwyddodd tua’r un adeg, roedd ymdrechion i wella’r broses o fewn y PPC ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau. Cyhoeddwyd arweiniad a datblygwyd
gyda golwg ar gyfeirio meddyliau aelodau at y materion iawn. Mae’n anodd gwybod pa mor llwyddiannus oedd y mesurau hyn yn absenoldeb archwiliad llawn o benderfyniadau’r PPC. Fodd bynnag, fe wnaeth Papur a luniwyd gan y tîm PSI yn 2003 dynnu sylw at anghysonderau amlwg yn y modd yr oedd y PPC wedi deilio ag achosion o euogfarnau yn y cyfnod o 1999 hyd at 2001. Ym Mhennod 23, rwyf wedi cyfeirio at y gwahaniaeth trawiadol yn y modd yr ymdriniodd y PPC mewn cyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2002 â dau achos a oedd â nodweddion tebyg iawn. Nid yw gwahaniaethau felly’n syndod, o gofio’r diffyg safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon y cyfeiriais atynt yn barod.
Gweithrediad y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Ym Mhennod 21, rwy’n ystyried gweithrediad y PPC. O dan yr hen weithdrefnau, hwn oedd y Pwyllgor a allai ddileu, atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad yn dilyn canfod SPM. Hyd at 2000, roedd y PCC yn cynnwys 30 o aelodau’r GMC, ac eisteddent mewn panelau a chanddynt gworwm o bum aelod, gan gynnwys un aelod lleyg. O 2000, cafodd y GMC y grym i gyd-ethol pobl nad ydynt yn aelodau (cyfranogion) ar y panelau PCC. Roedd y cam hwn yn angenrheidiol gan fod llwyth gwaith y PCC wedi cynyddu’n sylweddol, ac roedd yn ei gwneud hi’n bosibl i banelau lluosog o’r PCC eistedd ar yr un pryd. Hefyd, lleihawyd y cworwm i dri, i gynnwys o leiaf un aelod lleyg ac un aelod meddygol. Roedd y weithdrefn a oedd i’w dilyn yn y gwrandawiad yr un fath â honno mewn achos troseddol, er bod disgresiwn cyffredinol i dderbyn tystiolaeth na fyddai fel arfer yn cael ei derbyn mewn achos troseddol (fel tystiolaeth achlust) os oedd derbyn y dystiolaeth yn ddymunol yng ngolau dyletswydd y PCC i ‘wneud ymchwiliad dyledus’. Awgryma’r dystiolaeth nad oedd y disgresiwn yn cael ei ddefnyddio’n aml. Y safon prawf i’w chymhwyso i ganfyddiadau o ffaith oedd y safon prawf troseddol. Nid oedd cymwysterau cyfreithiol gan gadeirydd y panel, a chafodd y panel gyngor cyfreithiol gan asesydd cyfreithiol.
Mewn achosion euogfarnau, roedd gan y PPC y grym i ddileu, atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Mewn achosion ymddygiad, dim ond wedi i’r panel gael y meddyg yn euog o SPM y byddai’r pwerau hynny’n cael eu harfer. Byddai’r panel yn penderfynu yn gyntaf pa ffeithiau yr oedd yn eu canfod, eu profi neu’n eu derbyn, a byddai wedyn yn ystyried a oeddent yn SPM. Fel y dywedais, nid oes safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon cytûn wedi bodoli erioed i farnu achosion o SPM yn eu herbyn. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, cyn Lywydd uniongyrchol y GMC, a oedd â phrofiad hir o eistedd ar banelau PCC, bod dadleuon ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn SPM yn peri llawer o ‘angerdd’ ac ‘emosiwn’. Roedd diffyg safonau’n siŵr o arwain at benderfyniadau anghyson.
Am lawer o flynyddoedd, nid oedd unrhyw arweiniad swyddogol ynghylch pennu sancsiynau er defnydd aelodau panelau PCC. Ym 1999, fe wnaeth Gweithgor mewnol adolygu’r holl benderfyniadau ar sancsiynau’n cael eu gwneud gan y PCC dros gyfnod o ddeng mlynedd. Cynhaliwyd yr adolygiad yn rhannol oherwydd pryder o fewn y GMC ynghylch beirniadaeth gan y cyhoedd a’r cyfryngau bod penderfyniadau PCC yn rhai amhriodol neu rai anghyson â phenderfyniadau blaenorol. Un o dasgau’r Gweithgor oedd canfod a oedd neu a oedd hi’n ymddangos bod unrhyw anghysonder yn ymagwedd y PCC tuag at sancsiynau. Daeth y Gweithgor o hyd i enghreifftiau lle’r oedd hi’n ymddangos bod sancsiwn amhriodol wedi’i bennu neu lle’r oedd anghysonder i’w weld. Fodd bynnag, rhwystrwyd ei waith gan absenoldeb unrhyw beth ac eithrio esboniadau byrion gan banelau PCC am eu penderfyniadau. Roedd yn amhosibl mewn llawer o achosion i ddweud a oedd penderfyniad wedi bod yn un anarferol mewn gwirionedd, neu a fu mesur o liniaru eithriadol na wnaethpwyd yn eglur yn y penderfyniad a roddwyd gan y panel PCC. Yn amlwg, fe wnaeth yr adolygiad beri rhywfaint o bryder ac argymhellodd y Gweithgor datblygu datganiad am sancsiynau. Arweiniodd hyn, yn 2001, at gynhyrchu Arweiniad Sancsiynau Dangosol ar gyfer aelodau’r panel. Mae’r arweiniad hwn (sydd wedi cael ei ddiweddaru ers hynny) yn ddefnyddiol, er bod cyfyngiadau iddo. Datgelodd adolygiad mewnol diweddar o benderfyniadau’r panel PCC rai canlyniadau a oedd ‘yn ymddangos yn syndod’. Fodd bynnag, fel ym 1999, fe’i gwnaethpwyd yn amhosibl gan fethiant panelau i roi rhesymau manwl dros eu penderfyniadau i wybod a oedd y canlyniadau hyn wedi deillio o benderfyniadau gwyrol neu wedi’u cyfiawnhau gan amgylchiadau’r achos.
Apeliadau
Yn hanesyddol, roedd gan feddygon yr hawl i apelio i’r Cyfrin Gyngor mewn perthynas â chanfyddiadau o SPM a sancsiynau yr honnwyd eu bod yn rhy llym. Yn 2003, trosglwyddwyd yr hawl i apelio i’r Uchel Lys. Ar yr un pryd, cafodd y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (a elwir bellach y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE)) yr hawl i gyfeirio unrhyw sancsiwn i’r Uchel Lys yr oedd yn ystyried ei fod yn rhy drugarog, neu unrhyw ryddfarn ar gyhuddiad o SPM yr oedd yn ystyried ei fod yn anghywir. Gall y CRHP/CHRE weithredu’n unig os yw’n ystyried ei bod yn angenrheidiol gwneud hynny er budd y cyhoedd. Mae hwn yn beth newydd sy’n cael ei groesawu’n fawr, ac mae’r CRHP/CHRE eisoes wedi gwneud ei farc trwy gyfeirio nifer o achosion i’r Uchel Lys. Ni all bodolaeth yr hawl hon i gyfeirio ar ran budd y cyhoedd ond arwain at benderfyniadau gwell gan y PCC, neu, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, gan banelau FTP.
Y Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad
Cyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yr wyf yn eu disgrifio ym mharagraff 24 ym 1997. Fel y gweithdrefnau iechyd, gallent weithredu ar sail wirfoddol neu orfodol. Pan dderbyniwyd gwybodaeth a oedd yn awgrymu y gallai perfformiad meddyg fod yn ddiffygiol, gwahoddwyd y meddyg i fynd drwy asesiad perfformiad. Mae’r dulliau a’r offerynnau a ddefnyddir yn asesiad perfformiad y GMC yn hysbys ledled y byd. Darparant ar gyfer asesiad trylwyr iawn, ac maent, fel canlyniad anochel bron, yn ddrud ac yn llafurus i’w cynnal. Roedd yr asesiad yn cynnwys dau gam. Roedd y cyntaf yn cynnwys adolygiad cymheiriaid yn cael ei gynnal gan dîm o aseswyr. Roedd yr ail yn cynnwys cyfres o brofion gwrthrychol a oedd, yn achos meddygon teulu, wedi’u graddnodi ar y lefel perfformiad y mae’n rhaid i’r rheiny sy’n dod i mewn i feddygaeth deuluol eu cyflawni. Gellir gwahodd meddygon sy’n disgyn islaw lefel perfformiad boddhaol i gytuno i ddatganiad gwirfoddol o ofynion mewn perthynas â’u harfer yn y dyfodol. Fe allai hyn gynnwys gofynion ar gyfer ailhyfforddi neu oruchwylio. Gall hefyd gynnwys cyfyngiadau ar yr amgylchiadau yr oedd y meddyg yn cael ymarfer o danynt. Os oedd y meddyg yn gwrthod cytuno i ddatganiad o ofynion, neu os ystyriwyd ei ddiffygion/diffygion fel rhai rhy ddifrifol i ddelio â nhw gan fesurau gwirfoddol, roedd y meddyg yn cael ei gyfeirio at y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP). Os oedd y CPP, ar ôl gwrandawiad, yn canfod fod perfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg yn ddiffygiol difrifol, gallai atal y meddyg o’r gofrestr neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Yn yr achos olaf, byddai cyfnod o oruchwyliaeth yn dilyn, ac un neu fwy o wrandawiadau pellach wedi hynny. Y nod fyddai gwella perfformiad y meddyg i’r graddau ei fod/bod yn gallu ymarfer yn ddiogel heb gyfyngiad.
Fy mhrif bryder ynghylch rhoi’r gweithdrefnau hyn ar waith oedd bod y dystiolaeth yn awgrymu bod y safonau perfformiad yn cael eu pennu gan y CPP yn isel iawn (yn is na’r safon ar gyfer graddnodi ail gam yr asesiad perfformiad) ac nid oedd bob tro’n rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion a’r cyhoedd. Roeddwn yn pryderu hefyd nad oedd meddygon bob tro’n yn cael eu goruchwylio gystal ag y dylent fod, ac weithiau roeddent yn cael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad heb fod wedi cyflwyno tystiolaeth ddigonol o welliant. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion ynghylch y materion hyn yng nghyd-destun y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.

---  ---
Mae Pennod 25, lle’r wyf yn disgrifio datblygiad y gweithdrefnau newydd a’r modd y credaf y byddant yn gweithredu, bron yn 100 tudalen o hyd. Mae’n anodd crynhoi mewn ychydig eiriau, a bydd darllenwyr sy’n dymuno deall y manylder yn gorfod cyfeirio at y Bennod honno. Yma, disgrifiad bras iawn yn unig o’r gweithdrefnau rwy’n ei roi.
Yn 2001, nododd y GMC ei weledigaeth ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Roeddent wedi’u seilio’n gadarn ar y ddelfryd o gychwyn gweithdrefnau a fyddai’n darparu diogelwch priodol i gleifion heb aberthu’r angen i fod yn deg i feddygon. Fy nghasgliad cyffredinol yw, wrth roi’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith, bod y GMC i ryw raddau wedi colli golwg ar ei weledigaeth gynharach. Wrth ddatblygu’r gweithdrefnau newydd, bu cryn dipyn o ‘newid meddwl’. Bu’n anodd nodi’r egwyddorion wrth wraidd llawer o’r newidiadau.
Trefniant arloesol pwysig yw cyfuno’r hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad i un set o weithdrefnau FTP. Un math o wrandawiad yn unig fydd, sef gwrandawiad panel FTP. Bydd honiadau o fathau gwahanol (er enghraifft, ymddygiad a pherfformiad) yn erbyn yr un meddyg yn gallu cael eu clywed ar yr un pryd. Dan ddarpariaethau Deddf Feddygol 1983, fel y’i diwygiwyd, sylfaen awdurdodaeth y GMC fydd canfyddiad fod diffyg wedi bod ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Dim ond trwy dystiolaeth o gamymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, euogfarnau neu rybuddion, iechyd gwael neu benderfyniad gan gorff rheoleiddio arall bod addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn ddiffygiol, y gellir dangos bod diffyg ar addasrwydd i ymarfer.
Mae’r term ‘diffyg addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn fy marn i yn amhenodol, ac, er bod y statud yn cyfyngu’r ffyrdd y gellir dangos diffyg, nid yw’n diffinio’r term nac yn gosod unrhyw safon y mae meddygon i’w barnu yn eu herbyn. Yn fy marn i, nid yn unig y bydd problemau diffinio ac adnabod, a wynebodd y GMC yn ei benderfyniadau’n seiliedig ar SPM, yn parhau, ond byddant yn cynyddu hefyd. Mae angen ar fyrder i’r GMC ffurfio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon y mae diffyg addasrwydd i ymarfer i’w farnu yn eu herbyn. Bydd methu darparu safonau felly’n arwain at anghysondeb wrth wneud penderfyniadau, annhegwch, diffyg tryloywder a methiant i ddarparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion mewn perthynas â ffurfio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon felly.
Mae camau rhagarweiniol y gweithdrefnau FTP wedi’u symleiddio. Bydd staff y GMC yn cynnal y broses nithio gychwynnol i ddileu achosion nad ydynt yn disgyn o fewn awdurdodaeth y GMC. Ymddengys bod rhai o ddiffygion yr hen weithdrefnau yn y cyfnod hwn wedi’u dileu, er y bydd angen archwilio’n ofalus yr achosion sy’n cael eu cau er mwyn sicrhau mai felly y mae. Yn benodol, ymddengys na fydd y GMC yn cau honiadau a wnaed gan unigolion preifat am y rheswm syml nad yw’r gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u dihysbyddu. Hefyd, mae’r GMC bellach yn barod i wneud ymholiadau i gyflogwyr a PCOau cyn penderfynu a ddylid gwrthod achos yn y cam cychwynnol.
Pan fydd achos wedi’i dderbyn i’r gweithdrefnau FTP, dylai fod ymchwiliad llawer gwell i’r ffeithiau erbyn hyn. Mae’r GMC wedi recriwtio tîm o archwilwyr i weithio ar y broses gychwynnol casglu tystiolaeth. Bydd y fantais ganddynt o gael cyngor gan dîm o gyfreithwyr mewnol. Bydd modd yn ystod y cam hwn i orchymyn archwiliad meddygol (os oes materion iechyd yn codi) a/neu asesiad o berfformiad. Pan fydd y dystiolaeth wedi’i chasglu, bydd yr achos yn cael ei gyflwyno i wneud penderfyniad arno yn yr hyn a elwir y ‘cam archwilio’. Diben y broses yw penderfynu a ddylai’r achos fynd ymlaen at wrandawiad gerbron panel FTP. Bydd yr achos yn cael ei gyflwyno i ddau archwilydd achos sydd dan gontract i weithio i’r GMC yn rhan-amser. Bydd cymwysterau meddygol gan un o’r archwilwyr achos; bydd y llall yn berson lleyg. Os yw’r archwilwyr achos yn cytuno y dylai’r achos fynd ymlaen at wrandawiad, gallant orchymyn hynny. Os ydynt yn cytuno y dylid cau’r achos, gallant orchymyn hynny. Os ydynt yn anghytuno ynglŷn â’r canlyniad, bydd yr achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at banel o’r Pwyllgor Archwilio (IC). Bydd gan archwilwyr achos a phanelau IC bwerau i roi rhybuddion hefyd. Mae’r gweithdrefnau arfaethedig ar gyfer rhoi rhybuddion yn rhai cymhleth a llai na boddhaol. Rwyf wedi argymell y dylid eu hailystyried.
Yn anffodus bu rhywfaint o ddryswch meddwl ynghylch ffurfio’r prawf (y prawf cam archwilio) i’w gymhwyso gan archwilwyr achos a phanelau IC wrth benderfynu a ddylid cyfeirio achos at banel FTP. Lle mae awdurdodaeth y GMC wedi’i seilio ar ddiffyg addasrwydd i ymarfer, dywedir mai prawf y cam archwilio, sy’n brawf nithio cychwynnol, yw ‘pa un a oes gobaith realistig o bennu bod addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer wedi’i niweidio i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’. Yn amlwg mae’r prawf hwn wedi’i osod yn amhriodol o uchel ar gyfer prawf rhagarweiniol. Gwneuthum argymhellion y gobeithiaf y byddant o gymorth wrth ddatrys y broblem hon.
Pan benderfynodd yn y lle cyntaf i gyflwyno gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, cydnabu’r GMC y byddai’n ddymunol gwahanu’r ‘swyddogaeth archwilio’ (hynny yw, y cam hyd at ac yn cynnwys gwneud penderfyniad y cam archwilio) oddi wrth y ‘swyddogaeth dyfarnu’, a fydd yn cynnwys gwrandawiad y panel FTP ac unrhyw baratoadau ar ei gyfer. Cydnabuwyd, ers pasio Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998, y gallai’r GMC fod yn agored i feirniadaeth pe bai’n ymddangos ei fod yn gweithredu fel yr erlynydd a’r barnwr yn yr un achos. Ystyriodd gael gwared ar y naill neu’r llall o’r ddwy swyddogaeth. Fel y bu hi, penderfynodd beidio â chael gwared ar yr un ohonynt. Mae o’r farn ei fod wedi gwahanu’r swyddogaethau’n ddigonol drwy sicrhau y bydd y panelau FTP yn y cam dyfarnu yn cynnwys rhai nad ydynt yn aelodau o’r GMC.
Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, ni fydd hynny’n ddigon. Bydd y GMC yn dewis y panelwyr FTP, yn eu hyfforddi, yn eu gwerthuso ac yn eu galw i mewn i gael cyngor os nad yw eu penderfyniadau’n cael eu cymeradwyo, ac, yn y dadansoddiad olaf, yn eu diarddel os ydynt yn anfoddhaol. Yn fyr, ni fydd panelwyr FTP yn annibynnol ar y GMC o gwbl. Rwyf wedi argymell y dylid dod o hyd i ryw fecanwaith ar gyfer penodi, hyfforddi a rheoli panelwyr FTP sy’n bobl leyg ac yn bobl a chanddynt gymwysterau meddygol, yn ogystal ag ar gyfer gweinyddu gwrandawiadau panelau FTP, gan gorff sy’n annibynnol ar y GMC. Yn y modd hwnnw, bydd y swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu yn cael eu gwahanu’n effeithiol.
Ym Mhennod 27, gwneuthum nifer fawr o argymhellion eraill mewn perthynas â’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Fy nghasgliad cyffredinol yw, gyda’r newidiadau yr wyf wedi’u hawgrymu, y gallant ddarparu dull llawer gwell o ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon a allai eu niweidio. Mae llwyddiant y gweithdrefnau newydd yn dibynnu i raddau helaeth ar ewyllys a phenderfyniad y GMC i wneud iddynt weithredu er budd cleifion yn hytrach nag er budd meddygon, fel yr oedd yr hen weithdrefnau’n gweithredu’n aml.

---  ---
Yn 2000, yn sgil nifer o sgandalau a thrasiedïau meddygol, ac yr oedd achos Shipman yn un ohonynt, penderfynodd y GMC gyflwyno dull eithaf chwyldroadol o fonitro meddygon. Cyhoeddodd Bapur Ymgynghorol yn nodi’i syniadau gweledigaethol. Yn lle adweithio i gŵynion yn cael eu gwneud gan gleifion a chyflogwyr, roedd y GMC yn mynd i gymryd camau rhagweithiol i sicrhau bod pob meddyg ar y gofrestr feddygol a chanddynt wybodaeth a sgiliau diweddar a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer. Byddai hyn yn rhoi sicrwydd i’r cyhoedd y byddai unrhyw feddyg yr oedd ei berfformiad/pherfformiad yn is na’r safon neu yr oedd ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn gamweithredol yn cael ei ganfod mor gynnar â phosibl. Byddai meddygon a oedd yn dymuno ymarfer meddygaeth, yn ychwanegol at fod ar y gofrestr feddygol, yn gorfod cael trwydded i ymarfer. Byddai’n rhaid ‘ail-ddilysu’r drwydded honno bob pum mlynedd. Byddai hyn yn cael ei gyflawni trwy ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r meddyg gael gwerthusiad o’i addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Rwyf wedi disgrifio datblygiad cynlluniau’r GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ym mharagraff 26.
Cafodd y Papur Ymgynghorol dderbyniad da, a chomisiynodd y GMC waith ar ddatblygu’r cynlluniau ar gyfer gweithredu. Roedd y cynlluniau wedi’u seilio ar bob meddyg yn paratoi ffolder o dystiolaeth a fyddai’n dangos y modd yr oedd yn ymarfer. Ni fyddai paratoi’r ffolderi hyn, fe dybid, yn rhoi gormod o faich ar feddygon oherwydd, dan y trefniadau rheolaeth glinigol newydd i’w cyflwyno o fewn y GIG, byddai pob meddyg yn gorfod cadw ffolderi felly ar gyfer eu harfarniad blynyddol. Byddai’r ffolderi’n ateb y ddau ddiben. Ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, byddai’r ffolderi’n cael eu harchwilio gan ‘grŵp ailddilysu lleol’, a fyddai’n cymhwyso safonau priodol i arbenigedd y meddyg, wedi’u cymeradwyo gan y GMC. Aeth y cynlluniau gweithredu, a oedd yn cynnwys cynnal cynllun peilot yn 2001, yn eithaf da.
Ym mis Ebrill 2002, cynhaliwyd ail gynllun peilot, a diben hwnnw oedd gweld pa un ai a ellid defnyddio’r ffurflenni a oedd yn cael eu defnyddio yn arfarniadau meddygon, yn lle eu ffolderi tystiolaeth. Roedd y cynllun peilot hwnnw’n llai llwyddiannus. Daeth yn amlwg y byddai ail-ddilysu fel y rhagwelwyd bryd hynny yn broses gostus a byddai’n rhoi cryn faich gweinyddol ar y GMC. Daeth i’r golwg hefyd bod y cynigion yn amhoblogaidd ymhlith adrannau pwysig o’r proffesiwn meddygol. Serch hynny, cafodd y diwygiad i Ddeddf Feddygol 1983, a fyddai’n ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r GMC gynnal proses ailddilysu, ei basio ym mis Rhagfyr 2002; roedd i ddod i rym yn ddiweddarach. Dan y ddarpariaeth ddeddfwriaethol newydd, diffiniwyd ail-ddilysu fel ‘gwerthusiad o addasrwydd ymarferydd meddygol i ymarfer’.
Yn gynnar yn 2003, rhoddodd y GMC y gorau i’w gynlluniau i grŵp dilysu werthuso addasrwydd meddyg unigol i ymarfer trwy archwilio tystiolaeth. Yn lle hynny, penderfynodd y GMC bod y ffaith bod y meddyg wedi cymryd rhan mewn arfarniad ynddo’i hun yn ddigonol i gyfiawnhau ail-ddilysu. Roedd tystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu mai proses ffurfiannol lwyr oedd arfarniadau ar gyfer meddygon teulu, nad oedd yn gallu rhoi gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. At hynny, dim ond yn ddiweddar yr oedd wedi’i chyflwyno, ac roedd safonau’r arfarnu yn amrywiol. Mynegodd llawer o dystion y farn nad oedd yn sail foddhaol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Yn amlwg nid oedd arfarnu’n cynnwys gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn fy marn i, newidiodd y GMC gyfeiriad, nid am resymau egwyddor, ond yn hytrach am resymau hwylustod.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2003, cyhoeddodd y GMC y byddai’n rhaid i’r meddyg, yn ychwanegol at ddangos ei fod/bod wedi cymryd rhan yn llwyddiannus mewn arfarniad, gyflwyno ‘tystysgrif rheolaeth glinigol’, ac yn ôl hwnnw y byddai cyflogwr y meddyg neu’r PCO yn ardystio bod y meddyg wedi’i arfarnu ac nad oedd unrhyw bryderon (neu unrhyw bryderon o bwys) heb eu datrys yn codi o weithgarwch rheolaeth glinigol. Yn fy marn i, roedd ychwanegu’r dystysgrif hon yn welliant ar y sefyllfa flaenorol o ail-ddilysu, ond byddai’n dal i olygu gwerthuso addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Byddai meddyg yn cael ei arfarnu’n ‘llwyddiannus’ oni bai y byddid yn sylwi ar bryderon difrifol ynghylch ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Hefyd, roedd y dystysgrif rheolaeth glinigol i fod yn dystysgrif negyddol, yn dweud yn unig nad oedd unrhyw beth anffafriol yn hysbys. Yn fyr, ni fyddai’r broses o hyd yn darparu’r gwerthusiad cadarnhaol o addasrwydd i ymarfer a oedd yn ofynnol gan ddeddfwriaeth ac yr oedd y GMC wedi dweud y byddai’n darparu.
Dyna oedd y sefyllfa pan gynhaliwyd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Ionawr 2004. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi parhau i dderbyn tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig ers hynny. Yn ystod gwanwyn a haf 2004, ymddengys bod cynigion yn cael eu trafod rhwng y grwpiau diddordeb amrywiol (gan gynnwys y GMC a’r GIG) a allai arwain at gryfhau rhywfaint ar y cynigion ail-ddilysu. Fodd bynnag, ar 11 Tachwedd 2004, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad lythyr gan y Prif Swyddog Meddygol, ac o hwnnw mae’n eglur bod yr Adran Iechyd a’r GMC wedi cytuno y bydd ail-ddilysu’n dibynnu ar gymryd rhan mewn arfarniad a thystysgrif rheolaeth glinigol sydd yn negyddol yn ei hanfod. Bydd y dystysgrif yn cadarnhau bod y meddyg wedi cymryd rhan mewn arfarniad a bydd yn datgan (os yw’n briodol) nad oes unrhyw bryderon sy’n hysbys yn lleol ynghylch iechyd neu onestrwydd y meddyg, nad oes unrhyw weithdrefnau disgyblu lleol ar waith ac na chafwyd unrhyw ganfyddiadau disgyblu perthnasol ers yr ailddilysiad diwethaf. Ni fydd y dystysgrif yn cynnwys unrhyw ddatganiad fod y meddyg yn destun ‘dim pryderon’ neu ‘dim pryderon heb eu datrys’ yn lleol. Ni fydd y trefniadau hyn yn rhoi gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae’n bwysig bod y cyhoedd yn gwerthfawrogi hyn ac yn sylweddoli na fydd ail-ddilysu yn darparu’r sicrwydd y gobeithid amdano. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion a fyddai, pe’u mabwysiadwyd, yn sicrhau bod ail-ddilysu yn rhoi gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer.
Mae gennyf bryder arall ynghylch y cynigion ail-ddilysu. Bydd unrhyw feddyg sy’n ‘methu’ cael ei ail-ddilysu yng ngham gyntaf y broses yn cael ei roi drwy archwiliad ychwanegol o fewn y GMC. Ar hyn y bryd, nid yw’n glir sut yn union y bydd ail gam y broses yn gweithio. Mae diffyg tryloywder yn y cynigion. Fodd bynnag, yr hyn sy’n eglur yw na fydd unrhyw feddyg yn cael ei amddifadu o’i drwydded/thrwydded i ymarfer oni bai bod panel FTP yn canfod fod ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn ddiffygiol i raddau sy’n cyfiawnhau atal neu ddileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Felly, bydd hyd yn oed meddyg y mae ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn ddigon diffygiol i warantu pennu amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad yn cael ei ail-ddilysu. Yn gyffredinol, bydd meddygon sydd wedi methu’r ailddilysiad yn y ddau gam cyntaf yn cael eu cyfeirio at banel FTP os yr ymddengys, o gynnal asesiad, bod eu perfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol neu fod problemau ymddygiad neu iechyd. O dan safonau’r hen weithdrefnau, roedd yn rhaid i berfformiad proffesiynol fod yn ddiffygiol difrifol cyn cymryd unrhyw gamau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Roedd y safonau hynny’n isel iawn; fe’u disgrifiwyd gan Lywydd y GMC, yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, fel rhai ‘hynod o isel’. Felly, diwedd y gân yw pan fydd perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg yn ‘hynod’ o wael yn unig y bydd meddyg yn methu cael ei ail-ddilysu. Nid wyf o’r farn fod hon yn sefyllfa foddhaol.

---  ---
Fel y dywedais eisoes, mae’r diwylliant o fewn y GMC a’i ymagwedd tuag at ei ddyletswydd i weithredu er lles y cyhoedd ac i ddiogelu cleifion wrth galon llwyddiant y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn y dyfodol. Yn wir, mae wrth galon y cwestiwn mwy sylfaenol fyth, sef pa un a ddylai’r GMC gadw cyfrifoldeb am gynnal y gweithdrefnau FTP. Gyda’r gweithdrefnau hyn, dylai’r GMC ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon sy’n camweithredu, sydd, oherwydd eu camymddygiad, afiechyd neu berfformiad gwael, yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl o niwed. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi derbyn tystiolaeth a sylwadau o rai mannau sy’n awgrymu na ddylai’r GMC gyflawni’r swyddogaeth honno mwyach. Awgrymwyd nad yw diogelu cleifion yn flaenoriaeth gyntaf gan y GMC; ei flaenoriaeth yw buddiannau’r proffesiwn meddygol. Rwyf wedi penderfynu peidio ag argymell y dylai’r GMC gael ei amddifadu o’i swyddogaeth FTP. Hoffwn esbonio fy rhesymau dros ddod i’r casgliad hwnnw.
Ar ôl archwilio’r dystiolaeth, cefais fy ngyrru i’r casgliad nad yw’r GMC, yn y gorffennol, wedi llwyddo yn ei ddiben sylfaenol, sef diogelu cleifion. Yn lle hynny mae wedi gweithredu, i raddau sylweddol iawn, er buddiannau meddygon. Wrth gwrs, rwy’n derbyn bod dyletswydd gan y GMC tuag at feddygon hefyd; mae’n rhaid iddo fod yn deg yn ei holl drafodion â nhw. Ond, yn y gorffennol, nid yw’r cydbwysedd wedi bod yn iawn ac, yn fy marn i, roedd yr anghydbwysedd yn ganlyniad diwylliant o fewn y GMC, set o agweddau ac ymagwedd a roddodd yr hyn a welwyd a oedd yn ‘deg i feddygon’ o flaen diogelu cleifion.
Mae Penodau 15 i 24 yn cynnwys llawer o enghreifftiau o’r modd yr oedd y diwylliant hwn yn gweithredu. Nid wyf yn bwriadu eu hailadrodd yma. Hyd at ryw bum mlynedd yn ôl, nid yn unig y methodd y GMC i weithredu’i weithdrefnau FTP er lles cleifion, ond ymddengys na wnaeth mwyafrif ei aelodau hyn yn oed sylweddoli bod unrhyw beth difrifol o’i le. Fodd bynnag, tua’r adeg honno, cydnabuwyd bod angen newid. Oni bai am hynny, a phe na chafwyd newid sylweddol yn ystod y pum mlynedd diwethaf, ni fyddwn wedi oedi rhyw lawer rhag cynghori’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol bod rhaid iddo ddarparu ar gyfer dull arall o ddelio â meddygon yr oedd eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer dan amheuaeth. Mae’n amlwg na wnaeth y GMC agor ei lygaid cyfunol i’w ddiffygion ei hun heb rywfaint o brocio o’r tu allan. Mae’n rhaid bod nifer o sgandalau meddygol a ddaeth i olwg y cyhoedd yn ystod diwedd y 1990au wedi chwarae rhan bwysig wrth ddatblygu penderfyniad i ddiwygio. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth bod rhai o fewn y GMC a oedd wedi dymuno gweld newid diwylliant ac arfer am lawer o flynyddoedd. Cafodd sgandalau Bryste, Ledward, Shipman, Green ac eraill o bosibl yr effaith o ddod â’r mwyafrif o fewn y GMC i ffurfio’r farn bod rhywfaint o ddiwygio yn angenrheidiol. Ers hynny, mae’r GMC wedi bod yn newid trefniadaeth.
Roedd y newid trefniadaeth hwn yn cynnwys datblygu’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, a ddaeth i rym ar 1 Tachwedd 2004, a’r broses ail-ddilysu, a fydd yn dod i rym ym mis Ebrill 2005. Damcaniaethol fu’r prosesau newid hyn, hyd at yn ddiweddar iawn. Maent wedi cynnwys paratoadau ar gyfer y dyfodol. Fodd bynnag, mae rhywfaint o newidiadau ymarferol wedi’u gwneud yn ystod y pum mlynedd diwethaf. Newidiadau oedd y rhain nad oeddent yn ddibynnol ar gyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Rwyf wedi rhestru rhai o’r rhain ym Mhennod 27. Y casgliad y dof iddo yn y fan honno yw bod y newidiadau hyn yn welliannau ar arfer blaenorol. Roeddent yn gwella sefyllfa achwynwyr a gallu’r system i ddiogelu cleifion. I ryw raddau, dylid llongyfarch y GMC ar wneud y newidiadau hynny. Fodd bynnag, y nodwedd sy’n peri siom yw yr ymddengys i mi bod yr holl newidiadau hyn wedi’u gwneud fel adwaith i ryw ffurf ar bwysau allanol. Nid yw’r newidiadau hynny’n dangos y bu newid diwylliant o fewn y GMC.
Yn ystod yr un cyfnod, methodd y GMC â gwneud nifer o newidiadau y byddai, yn fy marn i, wedi’u gwneud pe bai diogelwch cleifion ar flaen ei feddwl cyfunol. Ym Mhennod 27, soniais am bedwar. Nid wyf am eu disgrifio yma. Fodd bynnag, mae f’archwiliad o’r digwyddiadau dros y pum mlynedd diwethaf yn fy arwain at y casgliad, er bod y GMC wedi bod yn newid ei drefniadaeth ac wedi gwneud nifer o newidiadau buddiol, nid yw wedi newid ei ddiwylliant yn sylfaenol.
Y newidiadau pwysicaf a wnaethpwyd yn yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf oedd y paratoadau ar gyfer cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd a’r trefniadau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. A yw ymagwedd y GMC at y newidiadau pwysig hyn yn dangos newid diwylliant ac ymagwedd? Ym Mhennod 25, archwiliais ddatblygiad y cynigion ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn fanwl mewn ymgais i ddeall y meddylfryd y tu ôl i’r datblygiad hwnnw. Roedd gweledigaeth y GMC ar gyfer gweithdrefnau’r dyfodol wedi’u nodi’n glir yn y Papur Ymgynghorol a gyhoeddwyd yn 2001. Dangosodd y papur hwnnw ymrwymiad cadarn i weithdrefnau FTP a fyddai’n gweithredu er diogelu cleifion heb gyfaddawdu’r angen i fod yn deg â meddygon. Ar sail y ddogfen honno, byddwn wedi dweud y bu newid yn wir yn niwylliant y GMC. Fodd bynnag, bu trosi’r weledigaeth yn realiti yn siom mewn rhai agweddau. Yn fy nghasgliadau ym Mhennod 25, cefais na fu datblygiad cyson o’r weledigaeth gychwynnol i’r cynnyrch terfynol. Y newid mwyaf yw creu set unedig o weithdrefnau. Bu llawer o newidiadau eraill, rhai er gwell, rhai er gwaeth. Mae’r GMC wedi mabwysiadu nifer o awgrymiadau a wnaethpwyd mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Mae wedi ymateb yn gadarnhaol i rai o’r beirniadaethau a’r pryderon y cafodd tystion y GMC eu holi yn eu cylch. Ond nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus bod y GMC wedi cynnal yr eglurder diben a ddangosodd yn 2001. Nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus bod polisi cydlynol ar hyn o bryd y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu gweithredu â’r amcan sylfaenol o ddiogelu cleifion.
Mae archwilio datblygiad cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu yn arwain at gasgliad tebyg. Disgrifiais y cynigion hynny uchod, ac rwyf wedi mynegi fy marn nad ydynt yn foddhaol. Nid ydynt yn rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Yn y dyddiau cynnar, roedd gan y GMC gynlluniau gweledigaethol, ond pan ddaeth i’w gweithredu, roedd tynnu’n ôl. Parodd y tynnu’n ôl anghydweld o fewn y GMC, ond fe’i derbyniwyd gan y mwyafrif. Caf fy ngyrru i’r casgliad bod yr hen ddiwylliant o ddiogelu buddion meddygon, i’r rhan fwyaf o aelodau’r GMC, yn parhau.
Deuthum i ddau gasgliad. Y cyntaf yw nad yw’n ymddangos bod y GMC fel corff yn rhagweithiol er budd diogelu cleifion. Bydd yn aml (ond nid bob tro) yn cymryd camau gweithredu priodol pan fydd yr angen i wneud hynny wedi’i nodi iddo, ond nid yw’n gweld pethau felly drosto’i hun. Yr ail gasgliad yw, pan fydd cyd-daro rhwng buddiannau ‘bod yn deg i feddygon’ a gwneud ‘yr hyn y cred y proffesiwn sy’n iawn’ a buddiannau diogelu cleifion, mae’r mwyafrif weithiau’n cymryd barn y meddygon. Nid wyf yn dweud mai felly y mae bob tro, ond mae ail-ddilysu’n enghraifft bwysig o’r pwynt.
Pam felly nad wyf wedi argymell i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol na ddylai’r GMC fod yn gyfrifol am y gweithdrefnau FTP mwyach? Mewn gwirionedd, rwyf wedi argymell y dylid trosglwyddo’r cyfrifoldeb hwnnw am y cyfnod dyfarnu i sefydliad annibynnol. Fodd bynnag, argymhellais hynny gan ei bod yn amhriodol i’r GMC reoli camau archwilio a dyfarnu’r gweithdrefnau. Byddwn wedi argymell hynny hyd yn oed pe na bai awgrym y gellid beirniadu diwylliant y GMC. Nid wyf wedi argymell y dylai’r GMC beidio â bod yn gyfrifol am addasrwydd i ymarfer am bedwar rheswm.
Yn gyntaf, mae cysylltiad agos rhwng addasrwydd i ymarfer ac ail-ddilysu. Mae cysylltiad agos rhwng ail-ddilysu a chofrestriad. Mae’n well felly bod addasrwydd i ymarfer a chofrestriad dan reolaeth yr un corff. Nid wyf yn credu bod fy Nghylch Gwaith yn fy nghaniatáu i ystyried a allai’r GMC golli’i gyfrifoldeb am gofrestru (neu yn wir ar gyfer pennu’r safonau ar gyfer mynediad a’r holl gyfrifoldebau addysgol sy’n mynd law yn llaw â’r swyddogaeth honno). Byddai hynny, i bob pwrpas, yn argymell diddymu’r GMC. Ni allwn wneud hynny. Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus yw hwn, nid Comisiwn Brenhinol ar reoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol. Pe bawn yn argymell datgysylltu’r gweithdrefnau FTP, byddai’n creu anawsterau ymarferol ar gyfer y dyfodol, er nad wyf yn credu y byddent yn anorchfygol.
Yn ail, ni fyddai’r dasg o greu corff i gymryd y swyddogaeth FTP drosodd yn un hawdd. Pe gellid gwneud gwelliannau i’r GMC, er mwyn iddo weithredu’n fwy cyson er buddiannau cleifion a’r cyhoedd, ymddengys i mi mai’r llwybr hwnnw fyddai’r un gorau i’w gymryd.
Hyd yn hyn, rhoddais ddau reswm; mae’r ddau yn negyddol. Fodd bynnag, mae rhai rhesymau cadarnhaol dros fy nghasgliad. Mae’r GMC wedi newid yn ystod yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf. Mae wedi cynnal set newydd o weithdrefnau FTP ac mae ar fin cyflwyno ffurf ar ail-drwyddedu, a elwir ail-ddilysu. Fy nghasgliadau i yw nad ymdriniwyd â’r materion hyn gystal ag yr oedd hawl gan y cyhoedd i’w ddisgwyl, ond nid yw hynny’n negyddu’r ffaith y bu rhywfaint o newid i’r cyfeiriad iawn. Mae’n bwysig i’r cyfeiriad newid hwnnw barhau.
Mae rheswm pwysig dros ddisgwyl y gall y newid er gwell barhau, sef y CRHP/CHRE. Corff newydd yw hwn, ond mae eisoes wedi gwneud ei farc yn sgil ei rym i gyfeirio at yr Uchel Lys unrhyw benderfyniad a wna’r GMC y mae’n ystyried ei fod yn rhy drugarog, ac y mae’n ystyried y dylid ei adolygu er diogelwch aelodau’r cyhoedd. Fodd bynnag, mae gan y CRHP/CHRE bwerau arolygu eang hefyd dros swyddogaeth FTP y GMC. Gall archwilio canlyniadau achosion; gall archwilio prosesau a’i gwneud yn ofynnol i newid rheolau. Caiff ei fodolaeth, mi gredaf, effaith bwysig ar y GMC. Mae’r GMC yn gwybod, os yw’n methu gweithredu er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd, bydd y CRHP/CHRE yn ymyrryd. At hynny, mae’r Ymchwiliad hwn wedi taflu llawer iawn o oleuni ar arferion y GMC, yn enwedig y rhannau hynny nad ydynt fel arfer yn agored i’w harchwilio gan y cyhoedd. Gobeithiaf y bydd yr hyn y mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi’i ddatgelu yn helpu’r CRHP/CHRE yn gymaint ag y bydd yn gwybod ble i edrych i weld a yw’r GMC yn gwneud ei waith yn dda neu beidio. Rwyf wedi argymell y dylai fod adolygiad o bwerau’r CRHP/CHRE yn y dyfodol gyda golwg ar ganfod a oes angen ymestyn ei bwerau er mwyn ei alluogi i weithredu’n effeithiol er mwyn sicrhau bod cleifion yn cael eu diogelu’n ddigonol gan y GMC.
Nid oes modd dweud sut y bydd y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn gweithredu’n ymarferol. Yn fy marn i, mae’n bwysig er budd y cyhoedd y dylid cynnal adolygiad ymhen rhyw dair neu bedair blynedd o weithrediad y gweithdrefnau newydd, a hynny gan sefydliad annibynnol. Argymhellais y dylai’r dasg honno gael ei chyflawni gan neu ar gyfarwyddyd y CRHP/CHRE. Arian cyhoeddus ddylai dalu’r gost yn fy marn i. Ni ddylai’r adolygiad hwnnw gael ei gyfyngu i ystyriaeth o systemau gweinyddol, ond dylai fod ganddo’r grym i archwilio penderfyniadau gwaith achos ar bob lefel yn ogystal.
Hoffwn gredu y bydd diwylliant y GMC yn parhau i newid yn y cyfeiriad iawn trwy rinwedd ei fomentwm ei hun. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus y bydd yn gwneud hynny. Rwy’n sicr bod llawer o bobl o fewn y GMC, yn aelodau ac yn staff, sydd eisiau gweld rheoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol yn cael ei seilio ar yr egwyddorion meddygaeth ‘canolog ar gleifion’ a diogelu’r cyhoedd. Yn wir, credaf ei bod yn debygol bod yr holl aelodau o blaid yr egwyddorion hynny yn ddamcaniaethol. Ymddengys mai’r broblem yw, pan fydd materion penodol yn codi, bod safbwyntiau croes yn cael eu cymryd, ac, fel yn y gorffennol, mae’r cydbwysedd yn tueddu gogwyddo o blaid buddiannau meddygon.
I sefydliad fel y GMC, mae materion yn siŵr o godi lle mae gwrthdaro rhwng buddiannau meddygon a buddiannau cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Mae aelodau’n gorfod delio â’r gwrthdaro hwnnw. I wneud eu gwaith yn iawn fel aelodau o gorff rheoleiddio, mae’n rhaid iddynt roi budd y cyhoedd yn gyntaf. Mae hynny’n anodd iawn i aelod y mae ei swydd yn dibynnu ar etholaeth o feddygon. Rwy’n sicr bod rhai yn llwyddo i wneud hynny. Credaf fod rhai eraill yn ei chael hi’n anoddach. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r GMC yn cael ei reoli’n effeithiol gan aelodau etholedig. Ymddengys i mi mai un o’r problemau sylfaenol i’r GMC yw’r canfyddiad, a rennir gan lawer o feddygon, y dylai fod yn eu ‘cynrychioli’ nhw. Nid ydyw; mae’n eu rheoleiddio. Efallai bod y canfyddiad hwn yn mynd yn ôl i’r 1970au, pan fynegodd y proffesiwn wrthynebiad pan ofynnwyd iddo dalu ffî cadw blynyddol, a chodwyd y gri ‘dim treth heb gynrychiolaeth’. Os yw’r proffesiwn yn canfod fod y GMC i fod i’w gynrychioli, byddai hynny’n esbonio pam mae rhai aelodau’r GMC yn tueddu mabwysiadu rôl gynrychioliadol. Mewn gwirionedd, mae gan y proffesiwn meddygol gorff cynrychioliadol effeithiol iawn, sef y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig; nid oes angen dau arno - ac ni ddylai gael dau.
Deuthum i’r casgliad mai un o’r rhesymau pam nad yw’r GMC yn gallu ymddiosg rhag yr hen ddiwylliant yw ei gyfansoddiad a’r mwyafrif cyffredinol o aelodau ‘cynrychioliadol’ etholedig. Credaf y dylai’r GMC edrych eto ar ei gyfansoddiad. Gwn i’r cyfansoddiad gael ei newid mor ddiweddar â mis Gorffennaf 2003. Rwy’n sylweddoli na fyddai cynnwrf arall yn cael croeso. Fodd bynnag, fy marn ystyriol i yw nad yw’n briodol i’r GMC gael ei orbwyso gan aelodau etholedig. Yn sicr fe ddylai gael ei orbwyso gan aelodau meddygol; nid wyf yn awgrymu y dylai fod cynnydd yng nghyfran yr aelodau lleyg. Ond rwyf yn awgrymu y dylai fod mwy o aelodau meddygol penodedig, pobl nad ydynt yn ddyledus i etholaeth ac nad ydynt yn eu gweld eu hunain mewn safle cynrychiolwyr y proffesiwn. Yn hytrach, dylent weld eu hunain fel gweision budd y cyhoedd. Yn unol â hynny, rwyf wedi argymell bod cyfansoddiad y GMC yn cael ei ailystyried.
Rwyf wedi argymell hefyd y dylai aelodau meddygol a lleyg sydd i’w penodi (gan y Cyfrin Gyngor) gael eu dewis ar gyfer eu henwebu i’r Cyfrin Gyngor gan y Comisiwn Penodiadau Cyhoeddus yn dilyn cystadleuaeth agored. Byddai’n ymddangos yn synhwyrol i’r Prifysgolion a’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol gael yr hawl i enwebu ymgeiswyr a chanddynt gymwysterau meddygol ar gyfer ystyriaeth. Fodd bynnag, dylai’r gystadleuaeth fod yn agored hefyd i bersonau a chanddynt gymwysterau meddygol sy’n dymuno cynnig eu hunain. Gwelais, o brosbectws yr Adran Iechyd a oedd yn gwahodd ceisiadau ar gyfer swydd aelodaeth leyg yn 2003, y pwyslais a roddwyd - yn iawn felly - ar ddyletswydd yr aelodau lleyg i ddiogelu budd y cyhoedd. Hoffwn weld yr un pwyslais ar y budd cyhoeddus yn cael ei gymhwyso i benodi aelodau meddygol.
Yn y gorffennol, bu’r GMC yn atebol i’r cyhoedd mewn termau cyffredinol iawn yn unig. Bu ganddo ddyletswydd i reoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Fodd bynnag, ni fu erioed unrhyw berson na chorff y mae’r GMC wedi bod yn atebol yn uniongyrchol iddo. Er mis Ebrill 2003, bu’r grym gan y CRHP/CHRE i oruchwylio a chywiro rhai agweddau ar waith y GMC. Roedd y GMC ei hun yn cydnabod, ac fe dynnodd sylw’r Ymchwiliad at y ffaith, er bod y GMC yn deillio’i bwerau o’r Senedd, nid yw’n uniongyrchol atebol i’r Senedd am y modd y mae’n arfer ei bwerau. Awgrymodd y GMC y gallai fod yn briodol pe bai’n uniongyrchol atebol. Credaf fod hynny’n syniad da. Yr hyn sydd gennyf yw y dylai fod yn ofynnol i’r GMC gyhoeddi adroddiad blynyddol am ei weithgareddau, a dylai gael ei archwilio gan Bwyllgor Dethol Seneddol. I hyn fod yn ymarferiad gwerth chweil, byddai’n rhaid i’r adroddiad gynnwys categorïau penodol o wybodaeth, gan gynnwys gwybodaeth ystadegol, ar ffurf a oedd yn hawdd i’w deall ac, i bob pwrpas, yn dryloyw.
Yn ystod yr Adroddiad hir hwn, rwyf wedi bod yn feirniadol o’r GMC ar sawl achlysur, ei weithdrefnau a’i agweddau. Rwy’n sylweddoli bod yn rhaid bod y ffaith fod yr Ymchwiliad hwn wedi’i gynnal yn gyhoeddus, ac y bydd fy Adroddiad yn cael ei gyhoeddi, yn gwneud y beirniadaethau hynny hyd yn oed yn fwy annifyr na phe baent wedi’u gwneud yn breifat. Yn wir, rwy’n cydnabod bod eu heffaith yn debygol o fod yn niweidiol. Nid fy mwriad oedd bod yn gas nac yn wir yn feirniadol o unrhyw unigolyn yn y GMC. Roedd fy meirniadaethau’n ymwneud â’r corff corfforaethol a’i gweithredoedd cyfunol. Gwneuthum nifer fawr o argymhellion sy’n effeithio ar y GMC, ac rwy’n sylweddoli na fydd croeso i rai ohonynt. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n gobeithio y caiff ei dderbyn i’r argymhellion gael eu gwneud mewn ysbryd adeiladol â’r bwriad o helpu’r GMC gyflawni’i ddiben sylfaenol, sef diogelu cleifion.

---  ---
Yn y Cam hwn o’r Ymchwiliad, rwyf wedi archwilio’r rhannau sydd yn cael eu chwarae neu a allai gael eu chwarae gan y Llywodraeth, y GMC, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, y CRHP/CHRE, sefydliadau’r GIG, staff meddygfeydd, cleifion ac aelodau’r cyhoedd wrth ddiogelu cleifion a allai fod mewn perygl yn sgil meddyg teulu cyfeiliornus neu feddyg teulu sy’n perfformio’n wael. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, gwneuthum nifer fawr o argymhellion sydd, law yn llaw â’r argymhellion yn fy Nhrydydd a’m Pedwerydd Adroddiad, â’r nod o ymestyn a gwella’r fframwaith presennol o systemau diogelu. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi awgrymu gwelliannau i systemau rheolaeth glinigol; yn benodol, pwysleisiais yr angen i ymchwilio’n briodol i gŵynion a’r angen am system ar gyfer monitro ystadegau marwolaethau. Rwyf wedi argymell ffyrdd y gellir gwella rôl ddiogelu’r PCTau, er enghraifft, trwy roi gwybodaeth well iddynt am y meddygon sydd wedi’u cynnwys, neu sy’n gofyn am gael eu cynnwys, ar eu rhestrau. Gwneuthum argymhellion a fydd yn rhoi mwy o wybodaeth i gleifion am eu meddygon, ac a fydd yn eu galluogi i arfer rhywfaint o ddewis, er mai cyfyngedig fydd hwnnw. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion â’r bwriad o sicrhau y bydd gweithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC yn gweithio’n effeithiol er diogelu cleifion ac a fydd hefyd yn deg i feddygon. Yn olaf, awgrymais ffordd y gellid gwneud i ail-ddilysu gydymffurfio â gofynion Deddf Meddygol 1983, ac i gyflawni dyheadau uchel y rheiny sydd wedi ceisio’u hyrwyddo.
I ryw raddau, mae’r argymhellion hyn yn siŵr o beri rhywfaint o densiwn a gwrthdaro rhwng buddiannau’r rheiny y maent yn effeithio arnynt. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n hyderus bod corff mawr o farn o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol a thu hwnt a fydd yn cydnabod yr angen i bawb sy’n gysylltiedig weithio gyda’i gilydd a thynnu i’r un cyfeiriad. Wrth wneud yr argymhellion hyn, rwyf wedi ceisio cyflawni tri pheth: yn gyntaf, pe bai Shipman potensial arall fyth, byddai’n cael ei ganfod yn gyflym iawn; yn ail, dylai’r gobeithion o ganfod pob ffurf ar ymddygiad cyfeiliornus neu berfformiad is na’r safon gan feddygon gael eu gwella, ac, yn drydydd, dylai’r ansawdd gofal da sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan fwyafrif helaeth y meddygon fod â chwmpas a chyfle ar gyfer gwelliant pellach parhaus.

---  ---
Ymdrin â Chwynion a Phryderon
Defnyddio Gwybodaeth Rhagnodi yn Offeryn Rheolaeth Glinigol
Defnyddio Data Marwoldeb yn Offeryn Rheolaeth Glinigol
Arfarnu yng Nghyd-destun Rheolaeth Glinigol
Defnyddio eu Pwerau Rheoli Rhestri gan Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Cynlluniau Achredu Meddygfeydd
Cefnogaeth i Feddygfeydd Un Person a Meddygfeydd Bach
Recriwtio a Phenodi Meddygon Teulu
Ffeiliau Personol Meddygon Teulu
Codi Pryderon
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol

---  ---
Dim ond datganiad byr o bob un o’m hargymhellion sydd yn y Crynodeb hwn. I ddeall y rhesymu y tu ôl i bob argymhelliad, rhaid i’r darllenydd gyfeirio at y Bennod (Penodau) lle disgrifir y dystiolaeth mewn perthynas ag ef a’r paragraff(au) o Bennod 27 lle trafodir y materion. Mae cyfeiriadau perthnasol ynghlwm wrth bob argymhelliad neu set o argymhellion cysylltiedig.

---  ---
Cyflwyno Cwynion
Cefnogaf y ddarpariaeth a geir yn Rheoliadau drafft y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Cwynion) (y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft), lle caniateir i gleifion a’u cynrychiolwyr sy’n dymuno gwneud cŵyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu ddewis naill ai cyflwyno’r gŵyn honno i feddygfa’r meddyg o dan sylw neu i’r ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol leol (PCT). Argymhellaf fod y terfyn amser ar gyfer cyflwyno cŵyn yn cael ei estyn o chwech i ddeuddeg mis.
(Pennod 7, paragraffau 27.15-27.16 a pharagraff 27.18)
Dylai camau gael eu cymryd i wella safon ymdrin â chwynion gan feddygfeydd meddygon teulu.
(Pennod 7 a pharagraff 27.17)
Dylid diwygio rheoliad drafft 30 o’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, a fyddai’n ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd meddygon teulu roi i PCTs wybodaeth gyfyngedig am y cwynion sy’n dod i law yn y feddygfa ar adegau sydd i’w pennu gan y PCT. Dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd meddygon teulu adrodd pob cŵyn i’r PCT o fewn, dyweder, dau ddiwrnod gwaith ar ôl eu cael. Dylai’r adroddiad gynnwys y llythyr cwyno gwreiddiol neu, os gwnaed y gŵyn ar lafar, cofnod y feddygfa o’r gŵyn. Dylai’r PCT gofnodi’r gŵyn at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol ac, os cred fod y gŵyn yn codi ystyriaethau rheolaeth glinigol, dylai ‘alw’r gŵyn i mewn’ i’w harchwilio.
(Pennod 7 a pharagraffau 27.19-27.23)
Ymchwilio i Gŵynion
Dylai fod cydnabyddiaeth statudol o bwysigrwydd ymchwilio i gwynion yn briodol i brosesau rheolaeth glinigol a monitro ansawdd gofal iechyd.
(paragraff 27.26)
Y Triage Cyntaf
Pan fydd PCT yn cael cwyn am feddyg teulu, dylai ‘triage’ (y triage cyntaf) o’r gŵyn gael ei gynnal gan aelod o staff y PCT â chanddo/chanddi’r hyfforddiant a’r profiad priodol ac â mynediad i gyngor clinigol perthnasol. Diben y triage cyntaf yw asesu a yw’r gŵyn yn codi o achwyniad preifat yn unig neu’n codi ystyriaethau rheolaeth glinigol.
(paragraffau 27.27-27.30)
‘Cwynion Achwyniad Preifat’
Dylai ‘cwynion achwyniad preifat’ gael eu trafod gan staff y PCT sydd wedi eu hyfforddi’n briodol. Amcanion ymdrin â chwynion o’r fath fydd bodloni’r claf a, lle bo modd, adfer y berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a hyder rhwng y meddyg a’r claf.
(paragraff 27.31)
Yr Ail Triage
‘Dylid ymdrin â‘chwynion rheolaeth glinigol’ gyda’r ddau amcan o amddiffyn a bodloni cleifion a thegwch i feddygon. Dylid eu cyfeirio am triage pellach (yr ail triage) i grŵp bach sy’n cynnwys dau neu dri pherson - er enghraifft, y Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol, un o uwch swyddogion anfeddygol y PCT ac aelod lleyg o Fwrdd y PCT. Amcan yr ail triage fydd penderfynu a ddylid archwilio’r gŵyn gan neu ar ran y PCT neu yn hytrach ei chyfeirio at ryw gorff arall, fel yr heddlu, y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) neu’r Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA).
(paragraffau 27.32-27.33)
Archwilio ‘Cwynion Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Nid staff y PCT ddylai ymchwilio i ‘gwynion rheolaeth glinigol’. Yn lle hynny, dylai grwpiau o PCTs sefydlu cyd-dimau o archwilwyr, a ddylai gael eu hyfforddi’n briodol yn nhechnegau archwilio ac a ddylai fabwysiadu ymagwedd wrthrychol a dadansoddol, gan gadw eu meddyliau ar agor i bob posibilrwydd.
(paragraffau 27.35-27.49)
Dylai pob ‘cŵyn rheolaeth glinigol’ (ar wahân i’r rhai nad ydynt yn cynnwys materion difrifol diogelwch cleifion a lle bo’r ffeithiau y tu ôl i’r gŵyn yn amlwg a heb eu dadlau) gael ei chyfeirio i’r tîm archwilio rhyng-PCT. Dylai nodau’r archwiliad fod i ddod i gasgliad am beth ddigwyddodd a nodi’r dystiolaeth a’r casgliadau mewn adroddiad a ddylai fynd i’r PCT sy’n gyfrifol am y meddyg. Os na all yr archwilwyr ddod i gasgliad am beth ddigwyddodd am fod gwrthdrawiad tystiolaeth sydd heb ei ddatrys, dylent ddweud hynny yn eu hadroddiad.
(paragraff 27.50)
Gweithredu ar Adroddiad yr Ymchwiliad
Wrth gael adroddiad yr archwiliad, dylai grŵp y PCT a gynhaliodd yr ail triage ystyried pa gamau i’w cymryd. Efallai y bydd yn briodol cyfeirio’r mater i gorff arall, fel y GMC neu’r NCAA. Fel arall, gallai fod yn briodol i’r PCT gymryd camau ei hun, e.e. drwy alw i rym ei bwerau rheoli. Os bydd adroddiad y tîm archwilio yn methu dod i gasgliad, oherwydd gwrthdrawiad tystiolaeth, dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd bellach), o dan bŵer a ddylai gael ei gynnwys yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft diwygiedig wrth eu gweithredu.
(paragraffau 27.52-27.54)
Ni ddylai bwriad ar ran yr achwynydd i ddwyn achos cyfreithiol, na’r ffaith bod achos o’r fath wedi dechrau, atal ymchwilio i gŵyn gan gorff y GIG. O dan amgylchiadau lle bydd corff y GIG yn cymryd camau disgyblu mewn perthynas â mater y gŵyn yn erbyn y person a oedd yn destun y gŵyn, dylai fod hawl gan achwynydd i weld sylwedd yr adroddiad am yr ymchwiliad sy’n sail i’r camau disgyblu, ac ni ddylid ond dweud wrthynt fod yr ymchwiliad i’w gŵyn ef/ei chŵyn hi i’w ohirio neu ei derfynu.
O dan rai amgylchiadau, gall fod angen i gorff y GIG ohirio neu derfynu ei ymchwiliad ei hun i gŵyn os yw’r mater yn cael ei ymchwilio gan yr heddlu, corff rheoleiddio, ymchwiliad statudol neu ryw broses arall. Er hynny, ni ddylai corff y GIG byth golli golwg ar ei ddyletswydd i ddarganfod beth sydd wedi digwydd ac i gymryd pa gamau bynnag sy’n angenrheidiol er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion y meddyg o dan sylw. Yn ogystal, dylai roi’r gyfryw wybodaeth i’w achwynydd ag sy’n gyson â’r angen, os oes un, am gyfrinachedd er lles y cyhoedd. Dylid diwygio darpariaethau perthnasol y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft i adlewyrchu’r egwyddorion hyn.
(paragraffau 27.55-27.61)
Rôl y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd
Dylai’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, wrth eu gweithredu, gynnwys pŵer sy’n caniatáu i PCTs atgyfeirio cŵyn i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i ymchwilio iddi ar unrhyw adeg yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwynion. Gellid atgyfeirio achosion sy’n codi materion anodd neu gymhleth neu sy’n ymwneud â gofal sylfaenol ac eilaidd ill dau i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i ymchwilio iddynt adeg yr ail triage, neu’n hwyrach os bydd ymchwiliad y tîm ymchwilio rhyng-PCT yn codi materion mwy cymhleth nag oedd yn amlwg ar y dechrau. Dylai atgyfeirio i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ddigwydd hefyd mewn achosion lle bydd tîm ymchwilio rhyng-PCT wedi darganfod na all ddod i gasgliad am fod gwrthdrawiadau ffeithiau sydd heb eu datrys. Diben yr atgyfeirio fyddai i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd gynnal unrhyw ymchwiliad pellach a, phe bai’n briodol, sefydlu panel i wrando tystiolaeth lafar am y ffeithiau sy’n cael eu dadlau a phenderfynu beth sy’n wir.
(paragraffau 27.52 a 27.62-27.71)
Cwynion yn y Sector Preifat
Dylai gweithdrefnau cwyno yn y sector preifat gyd-fynd cymaint â phosibl â’r rhai yn y GIG, er mwyn i achwynydd nad yw’n derbyn ymateb boddhaol i’w gŵyn/chŵyn oddi wrth gorff yn y sector preifat fynd ymlaen i ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwynion sydd i’w cynnal gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd.
(paragraffau 27.72-27.74)
Ymdrin â Chwynion
Dylai pryderon a fynegir am feddyg teulu gan rywun heblaw claf neu gynrychiolydd claf (e.e. gan broffesiynolyn gofal iechyd arall) gael eu trin yn yr un modd â chwynion cleifion. Dylai cwynion o’r fath gael eu hymchwilio (lle bo angen) gan y tîm ymchwilio rhyng-PCT neu, mewn achos sy’n codi ystyriaethau anodd neu gymhleth, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Dylid rhoi ystyriaeth i ddiwygio darpariaethau perthnasol y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft i ganiatáu i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd dderbyn ac ymchwilio i bryderon a atgyfeirir iddo gan PCT neu gorff gofal iechyd arall heb angen atgyfeiriad gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd.
(paragraffau 27.77-27.78)
Safonau
Dylai safonau gwrthrychol, y gellir barnu cwynion y eu herbyn, gael eu sefydlu’n ddi-oed. Dylai’r safonau hyn gael eu cymhwyso gan y rheiny sy’n gwneud y penderfyniad am gadarnhau neu wrthod cŵyn a chan PCTs a chyrff eraill y GIG wrth benderfynu pa gamau i’w cymryd mewn perthynas â meddyg y cadarnhawyd cŵyn yn ei erbyn/ei herbyn. Ar ôl eu sefydlu, rhaid i’r safonau yr ymdrinnir â chwynion yn eu herbyn gyd-fynd â’r trothwy y bydd y GMC yn derbyn ac yn gweithredu ar honiadau drwy gyfeirio ato, er mwyn creu fframwaith cynhwysfawr.
(paragraffau 27.79-27.82)
Yr ‘Un Porth’
Er mwyn sicrhau, cyn belled â phosibl, bod cwynion a phryderon am ofal iechyd yn cyrraedd y cyrchfan priodol, dylai fod ‘un porth’ i atgyfeirio neu ailgyfeirio cwynion a phryderon drwyddo i’r man priodol. Dylai’r gwasanaeth hwn roi gwybodaeth hefyd am y gwahanol wasanaethau cyngor sydd ar gael i bobl sy’n ystyried a fyddent a/neu sut mae cwyno neu godi pryder, gan gynnwys gwasanaethau cyngor i bobl sy’n poeni am oblygiadau cyfreithiol lleisio pryder.
(Pennod 11 a pharagraffau 27.83-27.88)
Y Trefniadau Newydd
Rhyw ddwy flynedd ar ôl i’r Rheoliadau Cwynion ddod i rym yn eu cyfanrwydd, dylai adolygiad annibynnol gael ei gomisiynu i weithrediad y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer cynghori a chefnogi cleifion sy’n dymuno gwneud cŵyn. Dylai unrhyw ddiffygion a nodir gan yr adolygiad hwnnw gael eu cywiro.
(Pennod 7 a pharagraffau 27.89-27.90)

---  ---
Dylai pwerau PCTs gael eu hestyn er mwyn caniatáu iddynt roi rhybuddion i feddygon teulu a gosod cosbau ariannol ar feddygon teulu mewn perthynas â chamymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol neu arfer clinigol diffygiol sy’n syrthio o dan y trothwyon ar gyfer atgyfeirio at y GMC neu ymarfer pwerau PCTs i reoli rhestri.
(Pennod 7 a pharagraffau 27.91-27.102)

---  ---
Dylai camau gael eu cymryd i sicrhau bod pob presgripsiwn a grëir gan feddyg teulu yn gallu cael ei briodoli’n gywir i feddyg unigol. Dim ond wedyn bydd y data sy’n deillio o fonitro gwybodaeth rhagnodi yn offeryn dibynadwy at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol.
Dylai PCTs ymgymryd â monitro rhagnodi gan feddygon teulu yn rheolaidd, gan roi sylw arbennig i ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Dylai meddygon sydd wedi dioddef problem cam-drin cyffuriau yn y gorffennol neu yr amheuir bod ganddynt broblem nawr fod yn destun sylw arbennig o agos. Pan gyfyngir pwerau rhagnodi meddyg, rhaid trefnu bod y wybodaeth hon ar gael (yn ddelfrydol drwy ddulliau electronig) i’r rhai y mae arnynt angen wybod, yn enwedig fferyllwyr.
(Pedwerydd Adroddiad, Penodau 5 a 12 o’rAdroddiad hwn a pharagraffau 27.103-27.104)

---  ---
Rhaid i’r Adran Iechyd arwain wrth ddatblygu system genedlaethol o fonitro cyfraddau marwoldeb cleifion meddygon teulu. Dylai’r system gael ei hategu gan ffordd drefnus, gyson a gwrthrychol o ymchwilio i’r achosion hynny lle bydd arwydd bod cyfraddau marwoldeb cleifion meddyg teulu yn uwch na’r norm.
(Pennod 14 a pharagraffau 27.105-27.107)
Dylai pob meddygfa meddygon teulu gadw cofrestr o farwolaethau lle cofnodir manylion marwolaethau cleifion y feddygfa i’w defnyddio wrth archwilio ac at ddibenion eraill.
(paragraff 27.108)
Dylai PCTs gynnal adolygiadau o gofnodion meddygol cleifion ymadawedig, naill ai’n gyfnodol fel rhan o’r drefn (os bydd adnoddau’n caniatáu) neu ar sail targedu’r meddygon teulu hynny y mae eu perfformiad yn peri pryder.
(paragraffau 27.109)

---  ---
Rhaid gwneud diben arfarnu meddygon teulu yn glir. Rhaid penderfynu a fwriedir iddi fod yn broses ffurfiannol (h.y. addysgol) yn unig neu a fwriedir iddo fodloni sawl pwrpas: yn rhannol ffurfiannol ac yn rhannol gyfansymiol (h.y. llwyddo/methu) a/neu yn rhan o reoli perfformiad.
Os bwriedir i arfarnu fod yn offeryn rheolaeth glinigol, rhaid ei gryfhau. Er mwyn gwneud hynny, bydd angen cymryd y camau canlynol. Dylai arfarnwyr gael hyfforddiant mwy trylwyr a dylent gael eu hachredu yn dilyn rhyw fath o brawf neu asesiad. Dylai arfarnwyr gael eu hyfforddi i werthuso addasrwydd yr arfarnai i ymarfer. Dylai meddygon teulu gael eu harfarnu gan feddygon teulu o PCT arall. Dylai safonau gael eu pennu, y bydd meddyg teulu yn ‘cwblhau’n llwyddiannus’ neu’n ‘methu’ yr arfarniad. Dylai pob arfarniad gael ei seilio ar graidd o wybodaeth y gellir ei chadarnhau, a gytunir yn genedlaethol, a gyflenwir gan y PCT i’r arfarnwr a’r arfarnai fel ei gilydd.
(Pennod 12 a pharagraffau 27.110-27.116)

---  ---
Dylai’r Awdurdod Apelio Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig) neu’r corff a gynigiwyd i’w olynu, Awdurdod Cyfreitha’r GIG, gasglu a dadansoddi gwybodaeth mewn perthynas â’r defnydd a wneir gan PCTs o’u pwerau rheoli rhestri. Byddai dadansoddiad o’r fath o gymorth i’r Adran Iechyd wrth ddarparu canllawiau i PCTs am y mathau o amgylchiadau lle gallent ddefnyddio eu pwerau’n briodol.
(Pennod 5 a pharagraff 27.117)

---  ---
Dylai’r Llywodraeth ystyried y posibilrwydd o gynnig cymhelliant ariannol i gyrraedd achrediad meddygfa meddygon teulu drwy gyfrwng cynllun achredu tebyg i’r un a weithredir gan y Coleg Brenhinol Meddygon Teulu yn yr Alban.
(Pennod 5 a pharagraff 27.118)

---  ---
Dylai polisi’r Adran Iechyd a’r PCTs ganolbwyntio ar ddatrys y problemau sy’n gynhenid mewn meddygfeydd un person a meddygfeydd bach. Dylai mwy o gefnogaeth ac anogaeth gael eu rhoi i feddygon teulu sy’n rhedeg meddygfeydd un person a meddygfeydd bach. Yn gyfnewid, dylid disgwyl mwy oddi wrth feddygon teulu o’r fath yn nhermau gweithgarwch grŵp a goruchwyliaeth y naill o’r llall. Yr Adran Iechyd ddylai fod yn gyfrifol am y mentrau hyn.
(Penodau 9 a 13 a pharagraffau 27.119-27.120)

---  ---
Dylai PCTs fod yn fodlon ac yn gallu rhoi cyngor i feddygfeydd meddygon teulu am arferion recriwtio da a hefyd fod yn fodlon cynnig cefnogaeth i lunio manylebau swydd a hysbysebion. Dylent fod yn fodlon, os gwneir cais, i gynorthwyo wrth ddidoli ceisiadau (os bydd nifer o geisiadau yn dod i law) ac wrth wneud y gwiriadau angenrheidiol ar geiswyr cyn iddynt gyrraedd cam cyfweliad, er mwyn cadw allan unrhyw geiswyr sy’n anaddas ymlaen llaw. Serch hynny, mae’n bosibl y bydd yr ymarfer olaf hwn yn ormod o faich i PCTs oni bai a nes y gweithredir argymhellion yr Ymchwiliad i fwy o wybodaeth gael ei rhoi ar wefan y GMC a chreu cronfa ddata ganolog o wybodaeth am feddygon (gweler isod).
(paragraffau 27.121-27.128)
Dylai ffurflen dystlythyr safonol gael ei datblygu i’w defnyddio mewn cysylltiad â phenodi i feddygfeydd meddygon teulu. Dylai PCTs fynnu y ceir tystlythyr oddi wrth gyflogydd neu PCT blaenorol y meddyg. Yn achos y PCT, dylai’r tystlythyr gael ei lofnodi gan y Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu’r Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol.
(paragraff 27.129)
Wrth recriwtio aelod newydd, dylai meddygfeydd meddygon teulu geisio a chymryd sylw o farn eu cleifion am y math o feddyg mae ar y feddygfa ei angen.
(paragraffau 27.130-27.137)

---  ---
Dylai PCTs gadw ffeil ar wahân a bob meddyg teulu unigol sydd ar eu rhestri. Dylai’r ffeil honno gynnwys unrhyw ddeunydd mewn perthynas â’r meddyg a allai fod yn berthnasol o gwbl i reolaeth glinigol. Os bydd meddyg yn symud o un PCT i’r llall, dylai’r ffeil (neu gopi ohoni) gael ei hanfon i’r PCT newydd. Gallai fod yn ddefnyddiol petai’r Adran Iechyd yn sefydlu meini prawf cenedlaethol ar gyfer cynnwys y ffeiliau sydd i’w cadw gan PCTs.
(paragraff 27.138)

---  ---
Hwyluso Codi Pryderon gan Staff mewn Ymarfer Cyffredinol
Dylai fod gan bob meddygfa meddygon teulu bolisi ysgrifenedig sy’n nodi’r weithdrefn i’w dilyn gan aelod o staff y feddygfa sy’n dymuno codi pryderon, yn enwedig pryderon am ymarfer clinigol neu ymddygiad proffesiynolyn gofal iechyd o fewn eu meddygfa. Dylai staff gael eu hannog i gyflwyno unrhyw bryder sydd ganddynt yn agored, fel rhan o’r drefn a heb ofni beirniadaeth. Petai aelod o staff meddygfa meddygon teulu yn teimlo na all godi ei bryder/phryder o fewn y feddygfa, dylai allu fynd at berson a ddynodir gan y PCT at y diben hwn. Dylai manylion cyswllt y person hwnnw ymddangos yn y polisi ysgrifenedig. Dylai’r person dynodedig wneud ei hunan yn hysbys i holl staff meddygfeydd sy’n gweithio o fewn ardal y PCT. Dylai PCTs sicrhau, drwy hyfforddiant, bod staff meddygfa yn deall pwysigrwydd adrodd pryderon a’u bod yn gwybod sut i wneud hynny.
Dylai’r polisi ysgrifenedig gynnwys manylion mudiadau y gall staff gael cyngor annibynnol oddi wrthynt am ddim. Os crëir yr ‘un porth’, ar ba ffurf bynnag, dylai’r polisi nodi manylion hwnnw hefyd.
(Pennod 9 a pharagraff 27.139)
Hwyluso Codi Pryderon gan Staff yn y Sector Preifat
Dylai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ei gwneud yn ofynnol bod gan bob corff gofal iechyd preifat bolisi ysgrifenedig clir am godi pryderon. Dylai camau gael eu cymryd i feithrin yn y sector preifat yr un diwylliant o fod yn agored ag sy’n cael ei annog yn y GIG.
(Pennod 11 a pharagraff 27.140)
Cefnogaeth ar Lefel Genedlaethol i’r Rhai sy’n Dymuno Codi Pryderon am Ofal Iechyd
Dylai ystyriaeth gael ei rhoi i ddiwygio’r Ddeddf Datgelu er Budd y Cyhoedd 1998 er mwyn rhoi mwy o ddiogelwch i bobl sy’n datgelu gwybodaeth, y mae ei datgelu er budd y cyhoedd.
Dylai fod modd defnyddio polisïau ysgrifenedig sy’n nodi’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer codi pryderon yn y sector gofal iechyd mewn perthynas â phersonau nad ydynt y rhannu cyflogaeth gyffredin.
Dylai fod darpariaeth genedlaethol (llinell gymorth ffôn mae’n debyg) i ganiatáu i unrhyw berson, sy’n gweithio yn y sector gofal iechyd neu fel arall, gael cyngor am y ffordd orau i godi pryder am fater gofal iechyd ac am oblygiadau cyfreithiol gwneud hynny. Gallai fod yn bosibl cysylltu’r llinell gymorth hon â’r ‘un porth’ y cyfeiriwyd ato o’r blaen.
(Pennod 11 a pharagraff 27.141)

---  ---
Gwybodaeth sydd Ar Gael i Gyflogwyr a Chyrff Gofal Sylfaenol
Dylai fod cronfa ddata ganolog sy’n cynnwys gwybodaeth am bob meddyg sy’n gweithio yn y DU. Dylai hon fod ar gael i swyddogion cyrff y GIG ac i gyflogwyr achrededig yn y sector preifat, yn ogystal â chyrff sydd â diddordeb dilys, fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, y GMC, yr NCAA a’r Adran Iechyd.
Byddai’r gronfa ddata yn cynnwys, neu’n cynnig cysylltiadau â, gwybodaeth a ddelir gan y GMVC, y Biwro Cofnodion Troseddol (CRB) a Gwasanaeth Gwrth-dwyll a Rheoli Diogelwch y GIG. Byddai hefyd yn cynnwys cofnodion am gamau disgyblu gan gyflogwyr, manylion camau rheoli rhestri gan PCTs, unrhyw adroddiadau negyddol yn sgîl ymchwilio i gŵyn, unrhyw ddarganfyddion andwyol gan banel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu gan yr Ombwdsmon Gofal Iechyd a manylion unrhyw ddarganfyddion o esgeulustod mewn achos esgeulustod clinigol a setliad hawliad o esgeulustod clinigol uwchlaw lefel ragbenodedig o iawndal. Dylai gynnwys rhywfaint o wybodaeth arall hefyd. Byddai modd i feddygon weld y cofnodion arnynt hwy eu hun er mwyn gwirio cywirdeb y wybodaeth a ddelir.
Dylai fod yn ofynnol i gyflogwyr yn y sector preifat ddarparu gwybodaeth berthnasol fel un o amodau cofrestru gyda’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Hefyd dylai fod yn ofynnol i wasanaethau dirprwyo ddarparu gwybodaeth a dylent gael mynediad i’r gronfa ddata drwy gyfrwng y PCT perthnasol.
Ni ddylai gwybodaeth am honiadau neu bryderon sydd heb eu cadarnhau gael ei chynnwys yn y gronfa ddata ganolog. Yn hytrach, dylai cofnod y meddyg ar y gronfa ddata ddwyn baner i ddangos bod gwybodaeth gyfrinachol yn cael ei dal gan gorff a enwir. Byddai mynediad i’r wybodaeth honno’n dibynnu ar bwy oedd yn gofyn amdani ac at ba ddiben a byddai’n rhaid iddo gael ei benderfynu ar lefel uchel.
(paragraffau 27.142-27.149)
Gwybodaeth Bellach i’w Darparu i Gyrff Gofal Sylfaenol
Dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu ddatgelu i’r PCO perthnasol y ffaith bod achos esgeulustod clinigol wedi ei ddwyn yn eu herbyn, byrdwn yr honiad sydd wedi ei wneud ac, ar yr adeg briodol, canlyniad yr achos. Dylai methiant gan feddyg i wneud datganiadau llawn i PCO yn unol â Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Rhestri Cyflawnwyr) 2004 gael ei drin fel camymddygiad sy’n ddigon difrifol i haeddu ei atgyfeirio i’r GMC.
(paragraffau 27.150-27.154)
Gwybodaeth sydd Ar Gael i’r Cyhoedd a Chleifion
Dylai’r GMC fabwysiadu polisi o ddatgelu yn ôl haenau a fydd yn gymwys i bob person sy’n chwilio am wybodaeth am feddyg.
Dylai’r haen gyntaf ymwneud â gwybodaeth sy’n berthnasol o statws cofrestru presennol y meddyg, ynghyd â rhywfaint o wybodaeth am hanes ei ffitrwydd i ymarfer (FTP). Dylai gwybodaeth yr haen gyntaf gael ei dangos ar wefan y GMC a dylai hefyd gael ei datgelu i unrhyw un sy’n gofyn am wybodaeth am gofrestriad y meddyg. Dylai am ba gyfnodau mae gwybodaeth yn aros ar yr haen gyntaf ddibynnu ar natur y wybodaeth. Pan fydd y cyfnod perthnasol yn dod i ben, dylai’r wybodaeth gael ei thynnu o’r wefan. Dylai nodyn gymryd ei lle i ddangos bod gwybodaeth bellach sydd ar gael drwy ffonio’r GMC. Yna dylai’r wybodaeth honno fod ar gael wedyn ar yr ail haen.
Dylai gwybodaeth ar yr ail haen gael ei datgelu i unrhyw berson sy’n gwneud cais am weld hanes FTP meddyg. Dylai’r holl wybodaeth a fu ar gael yn gyhoeddus ar unrhyw adeg aros ar gael i ymholwyr ar yr ail haen cyn belled ag y bydd y meddyg yn aros ar y gofrestr.
(paragraffau 27.155-27.197)
Gwybodaeth a Ddylai Gael ei Rhoi i Gleifion Meddygfa
Ym mhob achos lle bydd amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg teulu, neu lle bydd ef/hi wedi ailgychwyn ymarfer ar ôl cyfnod o atal neu ddileu, dylid dweud hynny wrth gleifion unrhyw feddygfa mae’r meddyg teulu’n gweithio ynddi. Dylai llythyr o esboniad sydd wedi ei gymeradwyo gan y PCT gael ei anfon at bob claf. Dylai fod gan gleifion y cyfle i wrthod cael eu trin gan feddyg sy’n ddarostyngedig i amodau neu sydd yn y gorffennol wedi dod o dan orchymyn atal neu ddileu.
(paragraffau 27.198-27.199)

---  ---
Rôl y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn y Fframwaith Rheoleiddio Ehangach
Dylai’r GMC sicrhau bod ei gyhoeddiadau’n cynnwys arweiniad cywir a hawdd ei ddeall i’r mathau o achos sy’n dod o fewn cylch gwaith ei weithdrefnau FTP a’r rhai sydd heb.
(Penodau 18 a 25 a pharagraffau 27.201-27.202)
Gwahanu Swyddogaethau
Rhaid i swyddogaeth gwaith achos a swyddogaeth reolaeth y GMC gael eu gwahanu’n llwyr yng nghyfnod ymchwilio’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd a rhaid i hyn gael ei adlewyrchu yn y Rheolau.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.205)
Corff sy’n annibynnol ar y GMC ddylai ymgymryd â cham dyfarnu’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Dylai’r corff hwn benodi a hyfforddi panelwyr lleyg a rhai â chymwysterau meddygol ac ymgymryd â’r dasg o benodi rheolwyr achos, aseswyr cyfreithiol (os oes eu hangen o hyd) ac unrhyw arbenigwyr angenrheidiol. Hefyd dylai ddarparu cymorth gweinyddol ar gyfer gwrandawiadau.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraffau 27.206-27.209)
Dylid rhoi ystyriaeth i benodi corff o banelwyr amser llawn, neu bron yn amser llawn, a allai eistedd ar baneli FTP yr holl gyrff rheoleiddio gofal iechyd.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.207)
Y Profion Statudol
Dylai’r GMC fabwysiadu profion clir, gwrthrychol i’w cymhwyso gan y rhai sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau ar gamau ymchwilio a dyfarnu’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Nodir y profion rwyf yn eu hargymell ym mharagraffau 25.63 a 25.67-25.68. Dylai’r profion gael eu hymgorffori yn Neddf Meddygol 1983 a/neu’r Rheolau. Dylai’r Arweiniad drafft i banelwyr FTP gael ei ddiwygio er mwyn iddo fod yn gyson â darpariaethau Adran 35D o Ddeddf Meddygol 1983 a rheol 17(2)(k) o Orchymyn y Cyngor 2004 a bennodd Reolau (Ffitrwydd i Ymarfer) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Rheolau Tachwedd 2004).
(Pennod 25 a pharagraffau 27.211 a 27.261)
Llwybr Newydd i Amhariad ar Ffitrwydd i Ymarfer
Dylai Deddf Meddygol 1983 gael ei diwygio i ychwanegu llwybr pellach y gellid pennu amhariad ar ffitrwydd i ymarfer drwyddo, sef ‘ymarfer clinigol diffygiol’.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.212)
Safonau, Meini Prawf a Throthwyon
Dylai camau gael eu cymryd ar frys i ddatblygu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon er mwyn i’r rhai sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau allu dod i benderfyniadau gweddol gyson ar gamau ymchwilio a dyfarnu’r gweithdrefnau FTP fel ei gilydd ac ar geisiadau am adfer.
(Penodau 17-25 a pharagraffau 27.213-27.229)
Dylai’r Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Proffesiynolion Gofal Iechyd (a elwir bellach y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE)) gael ei wahodd i sefydlu panel o bobl broffesiynol a lleyg (yn debyg o ran ei natur i’r Panel Dedfrydu Ymgynghorol) a ddylai gynorthwyo yn y broses o ddatblygu’r safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon angenrheidiol.
(Pennod 21 a pharagraff 27.230)
Dylai camau gael eu cymryd i sicrhau bod paneli FTP sy’n penderfynu achosion lle bydd ystyriaethau o berfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol yn codi yn cymhwyso safon sydd heb fod yn is na’r safon a bennir ar gyfer mynediad i ymarfer cyffredinol.
(Pennod 24 a pharagraff 27.231)
Y Cam Ymchwilio
Didoli Cychwynnol: y Prawf ar gyfer Awdurdodaeth
Dylai Rheol 4 o Reolau Tachwedd 2004, sy’n nodi’r prawf i’w gymhwyso gan y Cofrestrydd wrth gael honiad, gael ei ddiwygio er mwyn cynnig mwy o eglurdeb. Nodir y prawf rwyf innau’n ei argymell ym mharagraff 25.115.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.232)
Trafodaethau Rhagarweiniol a Datgelu i Gyflogwyr a Chyrff Gofal Sylfaenol
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio i ddarparu’n ffurfiol i’r GMC gyfathrebu fel rhan o’r drefn â chyflogwyr ac â chyrff gofal sylfaenol (PCOs) cyn penderfynu pa gamau ddylai gael eu cymryd mewn ymateb i honiad ac yn rhoi pŵer i’r GMC fynnu bod y meddyg yn rhoi’r manylion angenrheidiol i ganiatáu i’r GMC gyfathrebu yn y modd hwn. Dylai cyfathrebu ddigwydd ym mhob achos ar wahân i achos honiad sydd mor ddifrifol ei bod yn amlwg bod angen ymchwilio i’r honiad ymhellach neu yn achos honiad sydd yn amlwg y tu allan i gylch gwaith y GMC.
(Penodau 18 a 25 a pharagraff 27.234)
Ymdrin ag Euogfarnau
Lle bydd meddyg wedi cyflawni tramgwydd troseddol y mae llys wedi gosod rhyddhad amodol mewn perthynas ag ef, dylai’r GMC ymdrin â’r tramgwydd hwnnw yn yr un modd â phe bai’n euogfarn troseddol.
(Penodau 18 a 25 a pharagraff 27.232)
Y Pŵer i Gyfarwyddo Ymchwiliadau
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio er mwyn rhoi i archwilwyr achos, a phaneli Pwyllgor Ymchwilio (IC) mewn achosion lle bydd archwilwyr wedi anghytuno, y pŵer i gyfarwyddo ymchwiliadau.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.235)
Archwilwyr Achosion
Dylid dweud wrth archwilwyr achosion na ddylent gymryd lliniaru i ystyriaeth wrth wneud eu penderfyniadau ac y dylent ymgynghori â chyfreithiwr os oes ganddynt unrhyw amheuaeth a yw’r dystiolaeth sydd ar gael yn gyfryw bod posibilrwydd realistig o brofi’r honiad.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.236)
Asesiadau o Berfformiad ac Iechyd
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio i roi i archwilwyr achosion, a phaneli Pwyllgor Ymchwilio (IC) mewn achosion lle bydd archwilwyr wedi anghytuno, y pŵer i gyfarwyddo cynnal asesiad o berfformiad a/neu iechyd meddyg.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.237)
Dylai’r GMC ddatblygu asesiad perfformiad talfyredig i’w ddefnyddio fel arf sgrinio mewn unrhyw achos pan wneir honiad sydd â’r potensial i fwrw amheuaeth ar ansawdd ymarfer clinigol meddyg.
(Pennod 24 a pharagraff 27.237)
Er mwyn osgoi meddygon yn cael asesiadau perfformiad lluosog, dylai’r GMC ymchwilio i ddatblygiad asesiad modylaidd.
(Pennod 24 a pharagraff 27.237)
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio i gynnwys darpariaeth i’r GMC ddatgelu adroddiadau am asesiadau perfformiad i gyflogwyr meddygon neu PCOs cyn gynted â phosibl ar ôl eu cael.
(Penodau 24 a 25 a pharagraffau 27.238-239)
Llythyrau Cyngor
Dylai’r pŵer i anfon llythyr cyngor gael ei ymgorffori yn y Rheolau a dylid paratoi meini prawf clir ar gyfer anfon y cyfryw lythyrau.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.240)
Cyhoeddi Rhybuddion ar y Cam Ymchwilio
Dylai’r GMC ailystyried ei gynigion ar gyfer cyhoeddi rhybuddion ar y cam ymchwilio.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.241)
Y Weithdrefn ar gyfer Canslo Gwrandawiadau Gerbron Panel Ffitrwydd i Ymarfer
Dylai Rheol 28 o Reolau Tachwedd 2004, sy’n darparu ar gyfer canslo gwrandawiadau gerbron panel FTP, gael ei diwygio er mwyn darparu mai panel IC fydd yn gwneud y penderfyniad i ganslo a bod y rhaid i’r rhesymau dros ganslo gael eu cofnodi’n ffurfiol. Dylid rhoi gwybod ymlaen llaw i’r meddyg a’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad am y ffaith bod canslo’n cael ei ystyried a dylai fod gan y ddau y cyfle i gyflwyno sylwadau.
Dylai nifer y ceisiadau i ganslo gwrandawiadau paneli FTP a phenderfyniadau i ganslo a’r rhesymau dros y ceisiadau a’r penderfyniadau hynny gael eu monitro a’u harchwilio’n rheolaidd. Dylid craffu ar y rhesymau hynny gyda golwg ar gymryd camau i leihau’r nifer o achosion lle bydd atgyfeiriadau’n cael eu canslo yn nes ymlaen. Dylai’r nifer a’r rhesymau fod ar gael i’r cyhoedd yn flynyddol.
(Penodau 20 a 25 a pharagraff 27.242)
Gweithdrefnau Cydsyniol
Os bydd y GMC yn dilyn ei fwriad presennol i estyn defnydd ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol i achosion heblaw’r rhai sy’n codi ystyriaethau iechyd gwael neu berfformiad diffygiol, dylai gwaredu achosion o’r fath ddigwydd yn gyhoeddus ar y cam dyfarnu ac nid yn breifat fel rhan o’r cam ymchwilio.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.243)
Adfer Honiadau a Gaewyd
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio i ddarparu ar gyfer adfer honiadau a gaewyd. Dylai’r cyfnod ‘terfyn’ arferol fod 5 mlynedd ond dylai fod modd, o dan amgylchiadau eithriadol ac er lles amddiffyn cleifion, ailagor achos ar unrhyw adeg.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.244)
Adolygu Penderfyniadau’r Cam Ymchwilio
Dylai adolygiadau o benderfyniadau cam ymchwilio gael eu cynnal gan gomisiynydd allanol annibynnol. Dylai’r amgylchiadau y gall adolygiad ddigwydd odanynt gael eu hestyn i gynnwys penderfyniadau’r Cofrestrydd i wrthod honiad yn hytrach na’i atgyfeirio i archwiliwr achosion.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.245)
Ymgymeriadau Gwirfoddol mewn Achosion ag Elfen Iechyd
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio er mwyn darparu i’r trefniadau ar gyfer cael ac ystyried asesiadau iechyd ac ar gyfer rheoli a goruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol mewn perthynas ag iechyd gael eu cyfarwyddo gan archwiliwr achosion â chymwysterau meddygol, a ddylai gyflawni’r swyddogaethau a gyflawnwyd gynt gan sgriniwr iechyd. Os bwriedir cau achos ar sail asesiad iechyd, dylai’r penderfyniad gael ei gymryd gan ddau archwiliwr achosion, un â chymwysterau meddygol a’r llall yn lleygwr, ac, os byddant yn anghytuno, gan banel IC.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.246)
Ymgymeriadau Gwirfoddol mewn Achosion ag Elfen Perfformiad
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio er mwyn darparu i’r trefniadau ar gyfer cael ac ystyried asesiadau perfformiad ac ar gyfer rheoli a goruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol mewn perthynas â pherfformiad gael eu cyfarwyddo gan archwiliwr achosion â chymwysterau meddygol, a ddylai gyflawni’r swyddogaethau a gyflawnwyd gynt gan gydlynydd achosion perfformiad. Os bwriedir cau achos ar sail asesiad perfformiad, dylai’r penderfyniad gael ei gymryd gan ddau archwiliwr achosion, un â chymwysterau meddygol a’r llall yn lleygwr, ac, os byddant yn anghytuno, gan banel IC.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.248)
Y Cam Dyfarnu
Ymchwilio
Dylai fod pŵer penodol yn y Rheolau i ganiatáu i’r GMC ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwiliadau pellach y cred eu bod yn angenrheidiol ar ôl i achos gael ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP a chyn gwrandawiad y panel.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.250)
Rheoli Achosion
Os bydd y GMC yn cadw rheolaeth dros y cam dyfarnu, dylai pwyllgor y GMC sydd â gofal am reoli’r cam dyfarnu archwilio gwaith rheolwyr achosion. Dylai rheoli achosion gael ei gymhwyso i achosion sydd ag elfen berfformiad.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.252)
Dylai panelwyr FTP gael eu rhybuddio y dylent fod yn ofalus am ddod i gasgliadau negyddol o fethiant i gydymffurfio â gorchmynion rheoli achosion.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.253)
Cadeiryddion â Chymhwyster Cyfreithiol
Os bydd y GMC yn cadw rheolaeth dros y cam dyfarnu, dylai benodi nifer o gadeiryddion â chymhwyster cyfreithiol a ddylai, fel arbrawf neu beilot, lywyddu dros wrandawiadau mwy cymhleth panel FTP. Dylai canlyniadau’r cynllun peilot gael eu harchwilio i weld a oes manteision, boed o ran cynnal gwrandawiadau’n well, canlyniadau mwy cyson, rhesymau gwell a/neu lai o apeliadau.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.254)
Tystiolaeth
Fel rhan o’u hyfforddiant, dylai panelwyr FTP gael eu cynghori am eu disgresiwn i dderbyn tysiolaeth achlust a mathau eraill o dystiolaeth na chaniateir mohonynt mewn treial troseddol. Dylid dweud wrth banelwyr hefyd, yn ystod eu hyfforddiant, ei bod yn hollol briodol iddynt ymyrryd yn ystod gwrandawiadau panel FTP a gofyn cwestiynau os teimlant nad yw unrhyw fater yn cael ei archwilio’n ddigonol.
(Penodau 21 a 25 a pharagraff 27.255)
Safon Prawf
Dylai’r GMC ailagor ei drafodaeth am safon y prawf sydd i’w gymhwyso gan baneli FTP. Mae’r safon prawf sifil yn briodol mewn awdurdodaeth amddiffynnol. Gellir dadlau bod y safon prawf droseddol yn briodol mewn achos lle bydd yr honiadau o gamymddygiad yn gyfystyr â thramgwydd troseddol difrifol.
(Penodau 21 a 25 a pharagraff 27.256)
Hysbysu Canlyniad Arfaethedig Gwrandawiad
Dylai’r GMC roi’r gorau i’w fwriad i hysbysu meddygon, ar yr un pryd ag anfon atgyfeiriad o’u hachos i banel FTP, am y canlyniad y bydd yn ceisio ei sicrhau yng ngwrandawiad y panel FTP.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.257)
Rhesymau dros Ddarganfyddion Ffeithiau
Dylai fod yn ofynnol i baneli FTP roi’r rhesymau byr dros eu prif ddarganfyddion ffeithiau.
(Penodau 21 a 25 a pharagraff 27.258)
Atgyfeirio Achos ar ôl Asesiad Iechyd neu Berfformiad
Dylid diddymu Rheol 17(5)(b) o Reolau Tachwedd 2004 (sy’n caniatáu i banel FTP, wrth dderbyn adroddiad am asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad, atgyfeirio’r honiad yn ôl i’r cam ymchwilio er mwyn ystyried ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol).
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.259)
Tystiolaeth y Dylid ei Chael
Dylai Rheol 17(2)(j) o Reolau Tachwedd 2004 gael ei ddiwygio i’w gwneud yn glir pa fathau o dystiolaeth bellach dylid eu cael cyn i banel FTP benderfynu a amherir ar ffitrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Dylai’r dystiolaeth honno gynnwys hanes FTP blaenorol y meddyg gyda’r GMC neu unrhyw gorff rheoleiddio arall. Dylai Rheol 17(2)(l) o gael ei ddiwygio i’w gwneud yn glir pa gategorïau o dystiolaeth dylid eu cael ar ôl darganfyddiad o amhariad ar ffitrwydd i ymarfer ond cyn penderfynu’r gosb.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.260)
Rhybuddion
Dylai Deddf Meddygol 1983 gael ei diwygio i ganiatáu i banel FTP roi rhybudd mewn achos lle bydd wedi darganfod bod amhariad ar ffitrwydd meddyg i ymarfer ond nid i raddau sy’n cyfiawnhau cymryd camau ynglŷn â’u cofrestriad.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraff 27.261)
Ymgymeriadau
Dylai Rheol 17(2)(m) o Reolau Tachwedd 2004, sy’n caniatáu i banel FTP gymryd i ystyriaeth ymgymeriadau ysgrifenedig a wneir gan feddyg wrth benderfynu sut i ymdrin ag achos y meddyg, gael ei diddymu. Os bwriedir ei chadw, dylai’r rheol gael ei diwygio i’w gwneud yn glir na all ymgymeriadau gael eu cymryd i ystyriaeth ond ar adeg penderfynu cosb, ar ôl darganfyddion ffeithiau a phenderfyniad am amhariad ar ffitrwydd i ymarfer gael eu gwneud. Hefyd os digwydd hynny, dylai darpariaeth gael ei gwneud o fewn y rheolau ar gyfer goruchwylio’r meddyg er mwyn sicrhau cydymffurfedd ag ymgymeriadau, ar gyfer cynnal gwrandawiadau adolygu mewn achosion lle bydd meddyg wedi rhoi ymgymeriadau ac ar gyfer ymdrin â thorri ymgymeriad.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraffau 27.262-27.263)
Yr Angen am Oruchwyliaeth
Drwy gydol y cyfnod y bydd cofrestriad meddyg yn ddarostyngedig i amodau a osodir gan banel FTP neu i ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol, dylai rhywun o fewn y GMC (yn ddelfrydol archwiliwr achosion) gymryd cyfrifoldeb dros fonitro cynnydd y meddyg a thros sicrhau, cyn belled â phosibl, ei fod/ei bod yn cydymffurfio â’r amodau a osodwyd neu’r ymgymeriadau a roddwyd.
Ym mhob achos lle bydd meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer yn ddarostyngedig i amodau eu hymgymeriadau gwirfoddol, dylai goruchwyliwr proffesiynol gael ei benodi i oruchwylio ac adrodd ar gynnydd y meddyg ac ar ei gydymffurfedd/ei chydymffurfedd â’r amodau neu’r ymgymeriadau. Mewn achos lle bo amheuon am iechyd y meddyg, dylai goruchwyliwr meddygol gael ei benodi.
Dylai unrhyw dorri amod a osodwyd gan banel FTP neu dorri ymgymeriad gwirfoddol (ar wahân i doriad mân iawn) arwain at atgyfeirio’r meddyg yn ôl (neu ei atgyfeirio) i banel FTP er mwyn i ystyriaeth gael ei rhoi i osod cosb sy’n cynnig amddiffyniad gwell i’r cyhoedd.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraffau 27.264-27.266)
Gwrandawiadau Adolygu
Dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu diwygio i sicrhau bod o leiaf un gwrandawiad adolygu ym mhob achos lle gosodwyd cyfnod o atal neu amodau ar gofrestriad, oni bai bod rhesymau eithriadol pam na ddylai gwrandawiad o’r fath ddigwydd.
Dylid adfer y trefniadau a bennir yn Rheolau drafft (Ffitrwydd i Ymarfer) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 2003 (Rheolau drafft 2003), sy’n nodi mai archwiliwr achosion a benodir yn arbennig a ddylai ymgymryd ag unrhyw gasglu tystiolaeth wrth baratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiad adolygu.
Ym mhob achos heblaw rhai eithriadol, dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddyg y mae ei gofrestriad wedi ei atal fod yn destun asesiad gwrthrychol o’i ffitrwydd i ymarfer cyn y caniateir iddo/iddi ddychwelyd i ymarfer. Dylai’r asesiad gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP mewn gwrandawiad adolygu a dylai penderfyniad gael ei wneud o ran ffitrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddyg y rhoddwyd amodau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad fynd drwy’r un broses. Dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddygon sy’n destun ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol gael asesiad o’r fath hefyd cyn y caniateir i’w hymgymeriadau fethu.
Dylai prif rôl y GMC fod nid adfer meddygon, ond amddiffyn cleifion. Os bydd meddyg sy’n destun amodau neu ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol yn cael ei asesu o dan yr amgylchiadau a ddisgrifir uchod, a’r asesiad yn dangos nad yw’n bodloni’r safon sy’n ofynnol, dylid rhoi ystyriaeth i gymryd y camau angenrheidiol i symud y meddyg o ymarfer. Ni ddylai ef neu hi gael llusgo ymlaen gyda chyfnodau mynych o gofrestriad amodol a dim gobaith gwirioneddol o fodloni’r safon ar gyfer ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad.
(Penodau 22, 24 a 25 a pharagraffau 27.249 a 27.267-27.274)
Ceisiadau am Adfer i’r Gofrestr Feddygol
Dylid adfer y trefniadau a nodwyd yn Rheolau drafft 2003, a bennodd mai archwiliwr achosion a benodir yn arbennig a ddylai ymgymryd ag unrhyw gasglu tystiolaeth sy’n angenrheidiol wrth baratoi am wrandawiad adfer.
Dylai fod yn ofynnol i bob meddyg mae ei gais am gael ei adfer i’r gofrestr wedi cyrraedd ail gam y weithdrefn gael asesiad gwrthrychol o bob agwedd ar ei ffitrwydd i ymarfer. Ni ddylai’r meddyg gael ei adfer/ei hadfer i’r gofrestr oni bai ei fod /ei bod wedi cyrraedd y safon angenrheidiol.
Dylai fod yn ofynnol bod mentor gan feddygon sy’n cael eu hadfer i’r gofrestr sydd â’r dasg o fonitro eu cynnydd wrth ymarfer, ac adrodd i’r GMC amdano.
(Penodau 24 a 25 a pharagraffau 27.275-27.277)
Achosion sy’n Cynnwys Cam-drin Cyffuriau
Dylai ymchwiliad trylwyr gael ei gynnal i’r amgylchiadau sydd y tu ôl i honiadau o gamymddygiad sy’n cynnwys cam-drin cyffuriau. Dylai’r ffeithiau llawn gael eu sefydlu, gan gynnwys o dan ba amgylchiadau y dechreuodd y cam-drin.
Dylai’r GMC gomisiynu ymchwil i feddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau a chanlyniadau eu hachosion yn dilyn goruchwyliaeth o dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd.
(Pennod 23 a pharagraff 27.278)
Tryloywder
Dylai’r Rheolau bennu pob agwedd ar y gweithdrefnau FTP y bydd gan feddygon neu’r sawl sy’n gwneud honiadau ddiddordeb uniongyrchol ynddynt. Yn ogystal, dylai’r GMC gyhoeddi llawlyfr FTP, sy’n cynnwys ei holl Reolau perthnasol a’i ganllawiau i banelwyr, archwilwyr achosion a staff, ynghyd ag unrhyw Orchmynion Sefydlog perthnasol.
Dylai gwybodaeth ystadegol glir gael ei chasglu a’i chyhoeddi gan y GMC. Dylai’r GMC gyhoeddi adroddiad blynyddol a ddylai fod yn ddatganiad tryloyw o weithgareddau’r flwyddyn mewn perthynas â gweithdrefnau FTP.
(Pennod 25 a pharagraffau 27.279-27.280)
Archwilio
Dylai’r GMC gynnal archwiliadau o wahanol agweddau penodol ar ei weithdrefnau, yn ogystal â’i weithgareddau eraill arferol.
(paragraffau 27.203, 27.232, 27.233, 27.240 a 27.241)
Dylai’r trefniadau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu gael eu diwygio er mwyn i ail-ddilysu gynnwys, yn unol â gofynion adran 29A o Ddeddf Meddygol 1983, gwerthusiad o ffitrwydd meddyg unigol i ymarfer.
(Pennod 26 a pharagraffau 27.281-27.282)
Dylai’r adroddiad blynyddol y cyfeirir ato yn 101 uchod gynnwys gwybodaeth ystadegol glir am nifer y ceisiadau am ailddilysu a’u canlyniadau. Dylai fod yn ddatganiad tryloyw o weithgareddau ailddilysu’r flwyddyn.
(paragraff 27.280)
Adolygiad Annibynnol
Ymhen tair i bedair blynedd, dylai fod adolygiad cynhwysfawr o weithrediad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, i’w gynnal gan gorff annibynnol. Dylai’r dasg hon gael ei chyflawni gan neu yn ôl cyfarwyddiadau’r CRHP/CHRE.
(paragraff 27.307)
Cyfansoddiad
Dylai cyfansoddiad y GMC gael ei ailystyried, gyda golwg ar newid ei gydbwysedd, fel nad oes gan aelodau meddygol etholedig fwyafrif cyffredinol. Dylai’r aelodau meddygol a lleyg sydd i’w penodi (gan y Cyfrin Gyngor) gael eu dethol i’w henwebu ar gyfer y Cyfrin Gyngor gan y Comisiwn Penodiadau Cyhoeddus yn sgîl cystadleuaeth agored.
(paragraffau 27.310-27.312)
Atebolrwydd Cyhoeddus
Dylai’r GMC fod yn uniongyrchol atebol i’r Senedd a dylai gyhoeddi adroddiad blynyddol a ddylai gael ei archwilio gan Bwyllgor Dethol Seneddol.
(paragraff 27.314)
Y Cyngor Dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd
Dylai adran 29 o Ddeddf Diwygio’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol a Phroffesiynau Gofal Iechyd 2002 gael ei diwygio er mwyn egluro bod y Ddeddf yn darparu i’r CRHP/CHRE apelio yn erbyn ‘rhyddfarnau’ a darganfyddion o ‘dim amhariad ar ffitrwydd i ymarfer’, yn ogystal ag mewn perthynas â chosbau y cred eu bod yn amhriodol o drugarog.
Yn y dyfodol dylai fod adolygiad o bwerau’r CRHP/CHRE gyda golwg ar ddarganfod a oes angen unrhyw estyniad i’w bwerau a’i swyddogaethau er mwyn caniatáu iddo weithio’n effeithiol i sicrhau bod cleifion yn cael eu hamddiffyn yn ddigonol gan y GMC.
(Pennod 21 a pharagraff 27.283)

---  ---
Pan sefydlwyd yr Ymchwiliad hwn ym mis Ionawr 2001, roedd yn hysbys fod Shipman wedi llofruddio 15 o gleifion a oedd yn ferched rhwng 1995 a 1998. Roedd amheuaeth hefyd y gallai fod wedi lladd pobl eraill dros gyfnod lawer yn hwy. Pan ddaeth i’r golwg, ar ddiwedd ei achos, fod Shipman, ym 1976, wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau o ffugio ac o gael gafael ar bethidin trwy dwyll, dechreuodd llawer o bobl, yn enwedig y rheiny mewn profedigaeth, ofyn sut yr oedd Shipman wedi gallu mynd yn ôl i ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth fel meddyg teulu ym 1977, ychydig dros flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach. Roedd pobl yn tybied yn ogystal sut yr oedd wedi gallu lladd cleifion dro ar ôl tro heb i’r awdurdodau a oedd yn gyfrifol am feddygon teulu fel yntau sylwi. Roedd un cylch gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad yn gofyn i mi edrych ar
Erbyn yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad yn barod i gychwyn ar y gwrandawiadau mewn cysylltiad â’r agwedd hon ar ei waith, yn 2003, roeddwn eisoes wedi cyhoeddi’r Adroddiad Cyntaf, lle canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd nid llai na 215 o gleifion dros y cyfnod rhwng 1975 a 1998. Felly, er mwyn cydymffurfio â’r Cylch Gorchwyl, roedd yn rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r darpariaethau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu yn gweithio yn y GIG dros gyfnod o 23 blynedd. Roedd hynny’n cynnwys ystyried y modd yr oedd gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) yn gweithredu yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw gan fod y gweithdrefnau hynny’n rhan annatod o fonitro pob meddyg, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu’n gweithio o fewn y GIG. Fel y gwelir o’r Adroddiad hwn, yn ystod cyfnod cyfan Shipman yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu bron, rôl cyrff y GIG ar lefel leol oedd darparwr a hwylusydd gwasanaethau meddyg teulu i’r boblogaeth yn bennaf. Nid oedd ganddynt rôl oruchwylio dros feddygon teulu, gan nad cyflogeion oeddent ond yn hytrach contractwyr annibynnol. Dim ond yn y 1990au y dechreuodd awdurdodau gwasanaethau iechyd teulu ac awdurdodau iechyd arfer rôl fonitro neu led-reoli mewn perthynas â meddygon teulu’n gweithio yn eu hardal.
Oherwydd bod Cylch Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad y gofyn i mi wneud argymhellion ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn well yn y dyfodol, roedd yn rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio hefyd y systemau sydd ar waith ar hyn y bryd ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu, a’r rheiny a ragwelir ar gyfer y dyfodol. Canfûm fod y newidiadau a ddechreuodd yn gynnar yn y 1990au wedi cyflymu, yn raddol i gychwyn ac yna’n gyflymach. Mae’n rhaid bod llawer o resymau am hyn, yn anad dim newid Llywodraeth ym 1997. Fodd bynnag, yn ddiau fe wnaeth cyfres o drasiedïau a sgandalau meddygol, a Shipman o bosibl yr achos pwysicaf o’r rheiny, roi ysgogiad mawr i newid y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu o fewn y GIG. Bu newidiadau eraill o fewn y GIG fel cyfanrwydd, yn ogystal ag o fewn y GMC. Digwyddodd y newidiadau hyn hefyd, yn rhannol o leiaf, fel ymateb i drasiedïau a sgandalau a’r ymchwiliadau a’r ymholiadau a ddilynodd.
Mewn gwirionedd, mae chwyldro wedi digwydd yn y chwech neu saith mlynedd diwethaf. Gellir crynhoi’n fyr iawn y polisi sydd wrth wraidd y newidiadau hyn. Cydnabuwyd, wrth ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol, bod rhaid cael llawer mwy o atebolrwydd i gleifion a’r cyhoedd yn gyffredinol. Erbyn hyn, ledled y GIG, mae dyletswydd i fonitro a gwella ansawdd y gofal iechyd sy’n cael ei ddarparu. Mae atebolrwydd hefyd yn golygu bod rhaid bod yn llawer mwy agored â’r cyhoedd a chleifion.
Gelwir y prif fecanwaith ar gyfer cyflawni’r ddyletswydd i ddarparu gofal o ansawdd dderbyniol fel ‘rheolaeth glinigol’, cysyniad y byddaf yn mynd yn ôl ato droeon yn yr Adroddiad hwn. Erbyn hyn mae gan gyrff lleol y GIG - gelwir y rhain yn ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCT) yn Lloegr - ystod eang o ddulliau ar gyfer gallu monitro perfformiad y meddygon o fewn eu cylch gwaith, gan wobrwyo’r rheiny sy’n gwneud yn dda, a helpu’r rheiny nad ydynt yn gwneud gystal i wneud yn well. Nawr, yn y dadansoddiad olaf, mae’r grym ganddynt yn ogystal i ddileu o’r rhestr feddygol ar gyfer yr ardal y rheiny nad ydynt yn barod i ddarparu - neu nad ydynt yn gallu darparu - gwasanaeth digonol.
Fel rhan o’r chwyldro, mae nifer o gyrff GIG newydd wedi dod i fodolaeth dros y blynyddoedd diwethaf. Un enghraifft yw’r Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol, sy’n cynnal asesiadau o feddygon y credir eu bod yn perfformio’n wael. Mae hefyd yn cynghori PCTau ac ymddiriedolaethau ysbyty sy’n dymuno cynnal eu hasesiadau eu hunain o berfformiad meddyg. Ffurfiwyd y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd i fonitro perfformiad bob corff y GIG, fel PCTau. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl cyfnod byr yn unig mewn bodolaeth, mae’r corff hwn wedi’i chwalu bellach, ac mae ei ddyletswyddau, wedi’u haddasu rhyw ychydig, wedi’u hysgwyddo gan y Comisiwn ar gyfer Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd, a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn. Ffurfiwyd yr Asiantaeth Genedlaethol Diogelwch Cleifion gyda chylch gwaith i ddysgu oddi wrth ddamweiniau a chamgymeriadau clinigol. Mae rôl gan bob un o’r cyrff newydd hyn i’w chwarae wrth fonitro meddygon a gwella ansawdd y gofal sydd i’w ddarparu o fewn y GIG.
Nid yw’r chwyldro’n gyflawn eto, ac mae pethau’n dal i newid ar gyflymder uchel iawn. Hyd yn oed o fewn y cyfnod byr ers gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad yn haf a hydref 2003, gwnaethpwyd neu cyhoeddwyd newidiadau sylweddol. Mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi gwneud rhywfaint o newidiadau i’r modd y delir â chwynion gan gleifion am y ddarpariaeth gwasanaeth iechyd; mae mwy o newidiadau i’w disgwyl ar ôl cyhoeddi’r Adroddiad hwn. Mae’r GMC yn ddiweddar iawn wedi cyflwyno’i weithdrefnau FTP newydd ac wedi cyhoeddi’i gynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon ar gofrestr y DU o ymarferwyr meddygol, i’w gyflwyno ym mis Ebrill 2005.
Os bwriedir i’r cyfan neu’r rhan fwyaf o’r newidiadau hyn esgor ar welliannau a ddylai sicrhau diogelwch gwell ar gyfer cleifion yn y dyfodol, gellid meddwl nad oes angen i Ymchwiliad fel hwn wneud argymhellion pellach. A oes unrhyw beth arall y mae angen i’r Ymchwiliad ei argymell? Fel y gwelir, er mai fy marn i yn wir yw bod y rhan fwyaf o’r newidiadau a gyflwynir neu a gynigir er budd cleifion, mae rhywfaint i’w wneud o hyd.
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, derbyniais dystiolaeth gan lawer o feddygon ac rwyf wedi darllen yn eithaf eang o’r wasg feddygol. Deuthum yn ymwybodol bod rhai meddygon wedi croesawu’r newidiadau y soniais amdanynt. Mae llawer nad ydynt wedi’u croesawu. Nid yw hynny’n fy synnu o gwbl. Mae’n rhaid bod graddau’r newid a’r cyflymder rhoi’r newidiadau ar waith wedi peri i lawer deimlo’n ansefydlog tu hwnt. Gwn fod rhai’n teimlo eu bod yn cael eu llethu gan yr hyn a welant fel gor-reoleiddio, colli annibyniaeth broffesiynol, ymyrraeth â’u gwaith clinigol a niwed i’w perthnasoedd â chleifion. Mae teimlad o ddicter bod yr ‘awdurdodau sydd ohoni’ wedi gorymateb i achos Shipman; dywedir bod y proffesiwn yn cael ei feio a bydd yn cael ei gosbi am weithredoedd ‘llofrudd a oedd digwydd bod yn feddyg’. Gwn bod pryder a gofid mewn rhai rhannau o’r proffesiwn ynghylch yr Ymchwiliad. Mae’n siŵr eu bod yn ofni y bydd yr Ymchwiliad yn argymell gofynion, cyfyngiadau, profion, arolygiadau ac ‘ysgwyd’ cyffredinol eto fyth. Rwy’n deall ac yn cydymdeimlo â’r ofnau hynny a gobeithiaf eu tawelu.
Credaf y byddai’n gamgymeriad i’r proffesiwn meddygol ystyried Shipman fel ‘llofrudd a oedd digwydd bod yn feddyg’. Roedd yn feddyg - ac nid yn feddyg drwg mewn llawer o ffyrdd - a wyrdrodd ei sgiliau, ei wybodaeth ac ymddiriedaeth ei gleifion at ddibenion drwg. Y ffaith ei fod yn feddyg a’i galluogodd i wneud yr hyn a wnaeth. Yn ei Ddarlith Arloesol, a roddwyd i anrhydeddu Syr Donald Irvine, yn y Fforwm ar Ansawdd mewn Gofal Iechyd ar 13 Ionawr 2004, dywedodd yr Athro Richard Baker:
‘Ers dechrau ymchwilio i Shipman yn 2000, rwyf wedi bod yn ceisio deall sut y bu y gallai ladd cymaint o gleifion heb gael ei ganfod. Wrth gwrs, roedd rhai methiannau yn y system, ond ni fu modd osgoi’r cwestiwn ynghylch pam y goddefwyd diffygion y system i’r graddau fod Shipman wedi gallu llofruddio nid un neu ddau o gleifion yn unig, ond dros 200. Y casgliad y deuthum iddo yw y dylai pob meddyg, ac nid meddygon teulu’n unig, rannu cyfrifoldeb am greu’r amgylchiadau a alluogodd Shipman i fod yn llofrudd mor llwyddiannus’.
Credaf mai’r hyn a oedd gan yr Athro Baker dan sylw oedd y diwylliant hunan-ddiogelu y naill i’r llall o fewn y proffesiwn a’r agwedd dadol tuag at gleifion a’r rheiny y tu allan i’r proffesiwn. Nid yw’r diwylliant a’r agwedd hon yn dderbyniol bellach ac maent yn diflannu. Maent yn cael eu disodli gan y diwylliant meddygaeth sy’n ganolog ar gleifion. Er hynny, maent yn parhau. Ond, yn fy marn i, ni fyddai unrhyw feddyg yn ei iawn bwyll yn ceisio’u hamddiffyn heddiw.
Rwy’n cydnabod bod y mwyafrif llethol o feddygon yn ddibynadwy, yn gymwys, yn weithwyr caled ac yn haeddiannol falch o’u proffesiwn. Nid oedd Shipman yn sicr yn un o’r mwyafrif hwnnw. Torrodd ymddiriedaeth ei gleifion a’i gydweithwyr proffesiynol i raddau mwy nag y mae’n hysbys i unrhyw feddyg arall wneud erioed. Wrth gwrs, byddai’n anghywir i bennu ar gyfer y proffesiwn cyfan ofynion rheoleiddio wedi’u cynllunio’n unig i ddal llofrudd torfol. Yn ffodus iawn, mae meddygon sy’n llofruddio’u cleifion yn brin tu hwnt. Mae rhai eraill wedi’u canfod, ac nid yw’n anhysbys i weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd, fel nyrsys, ddefnyddio’u safle o ymddiriedaeth i ladd eu cleifion. Ffolineb fyddai tybio na fu eraill nad ydynt wedi cael eu canfod neu na fydd fyth unrhyw enghreifftiau tebyg yn y dyfodol. Ni fyddai unrhyw feddyg yn ei iawn bwyll yn dymuno i gydweithiwr sy’n niweidio claf yn fwriadol fynd heb ei ganfod neu barhau i ymarfer.
Nid yw pob meddyg sy’n niweidio’u cleifion yn bwriadu gwneud hynny, fel y gwnaeth Shipman. Mae rhai’n ddi-hid ynghylch a ydynt yn achosi niwed. Yn eu plith, byddwn yn cynnwys meddygon sy’n ymosod yn anweddus ar eu cleifion. Ceisio’u boddhau eu hunain y mae meddygon felly, ac er nad ydynt yn dymuno niweidio’u cleifion yn bendant, maent yn ddi-hid ynghylch pa un a ydynt yn gwneud hynny mewn gwirionedd. Dim ond darllen y papurau newydd sydd angen i ni wneud i weld nad yw achosion felly’n anghyffredin. Gwelir ffurf arall ar ddihidrwydd ynghylch diogelwch cleifion mewn meddygon sy’n parhau i ymarfer tra’u bod dan ddylanwad alcohol neu gyffuriau sy’n effeithio ar y meddwl. Byddai pob meddyg yn ei iawn bwyll yn cytuno y dylai cydweithwyr felly gael eu hatal rhag ymarfer nes eu bod wedi rhoi’r gorau i hunanddifrïo felly.
Mae meddygon hefyd sy’n niweidio cleifion oherwydd nad ydynt wedi’u hyfforddi’n ddigonol neu oherwydd eu bod wedi methu diweddaru’u gwybodaeth neu oherwydd bod ganddynt broblem bersonol, feddygol neu seiciatryddol sy’n effeithio ar eu gallu i ddarparu gofal diogel i’w cleifion. Efallai eu bod yn ddibynadwy yn bersonol ac yn gydwybodol, ac eto maent yn achosi niwed heb yn wybod iddynt. Eto, byddai pob aelod o’r proffesiwn sydd yn ei iawn bwyll yn cytuno bod rhaid cymryd camau i ddiogelu cleifion meddygon felly rhag niwed tra bod y meddyg yn cael triniaeth neu tra’u fod yn ymadfer. Credaf hefyd y byddent yn cytuno, pe bai’r broblem yn un anhydrin, bydd yn rhaid i’r meddyg roi’r gorau i ymarfer neu gael ei atal rhag parhau.
Â’r categorïau hyn o feddyg y mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud â nhw, nid â’r mwyafrif helaeth, sydd, fel y dywedais, yn ddibynadwy, yn gymwys ac yn weithwyr caled. Nid oes neb yn awgrymu bod llawer o feddygon yn y categorïau hyn, hyd yn oed o’u rhoi ynghyd. Nid oes barn derfynol ynghylch graddau’r broblem. Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, gwnaethpwyd amryw o awgrymiadau - rhai ohonynt yn seiliedig ar ymchwil, rhai ohonynt yn fawr fwy nag amcanddyfaliadau - o ran y gyfran o feddygon yn ymarfer y mae eu perfformiad yn creu risg niwed annerbyniol i gleifion. Gallai fod gymaint â 5%; gall fod cyn lleied ag 1%. Awgrymodd yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, Llywydd y GMC, y gall fod hyd at 10% yr oedd eu hymarfer yn peri rhywfaint o bryder. Hyd yn oed pe bai’r ganran o feddygon anniogel cyn lleied ag 1%, byddai hynny’n golygu y byddai oddeutu 1000 o feddygon anniogel yn ymarfer yn y DU. Mae meddygon felly, o’u gadael i barhau i ymarfer, nid yn unig yn niweidio cleifion, ond yn gwneud niwed anghymesur i enw da’r proffesiwn. Ar chwynnu’r meddygon anniogel hynny y bydd yr Ymchwiliad yn canolbwyntio’n bennaf.
Gellid dweud, os yw diddordeb yr Ymchwiliad mewn diogelu cleifion rhag meddygon anniogel yn unig, dylai fod wedi canolbwyntio ar y meddygon hynny’n unig ac ni ddylai fod wedi ystyried darpariaethau sy’n effeithio ar
bob
meddyg teulu, Yn fy marn, rhaid mynd i’r afael mewn dwy ffordd â diogelu cleifion rhag niwed. Rhaid cael mesurau ar gyfer nodi’r rheiny nad ydynt yn perfformio i safon dderbyniol, a rhaid hefyd cael mesurau a fydd yn helpu meddygon sy’n perfformio’n foddhaol i wella gydag amser a phrofiad a pheidio â llithro tuag yn ôl. Mae’n rhaid i’r system geisio sicrhau bod pawb sy’n mynd i mewn i feddygaeth teulu yn gymwys i wneud hynny a’u bod yn aros yn gymwys. Ar hyn o bryd, ni ellid dweud yn hyderus bod pob meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer yn gymwys pan aethant i mewn i’r proffesiwn; bydd y mwyafrif llethol ohonynt wedi bod yn gymwys, ond dim ond er 1998 y bu’n ofynnol i feddygon teulu brofi’u cymhwysedd trwy fynd drwy asesiad adolygol yn llwyddiannus. Yn ddamcaniaethol, dylai safon ymarfer meddyg teulu godi wrth iddo/iddo symud ymlaen, gan y bydd yn ychwanegu budd profiad at ei wybodaeth/gwybodaeth a sgiliau sylfaenol. Ond, gyda’r cyflwr dynol fel y mae, wrth i amser fynd yn ei flaen, mae perfformiad rhai meddygon yn mynd ar i lawr yn hytrach nag am i fyny. Mae meddygaeth yn faes sy’n datblygu’n gyflym, ac nid yw pob meddyg yn diweddaru’i wybodaeth/gwybodaeth. Mae eraill yn dirywio yn sgil amrywiaeth o anawsterau personol a phroffesiynol. Ymddengys i mi mai’r ffordd orau i atal meddygon rhag disgyn yn is na’r lefel perfformiad derbyniol ac i wella safon gofal cleifion yn gyffredinol yw darparu cyfleusterau a chyfleoedd ar gyfer datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus ac i’w gwneud yn ofynnol manteisio ar y cyfleoedd hynny. Fy marn i yw y dylid cynnig y cyfleoedd hynny mewn ffordd ffurfiannol ac nid mewn awyrgylch o feirniadaeth neu arolygiaeth. Nid yw hynny’n golygu na ddylai’r broses addysg barhaus gynnig unrhyw her. ‘Does bosib na fyddai unrhyw feddyg yn ei iawn bwyll yn anghytuno.
Er mai nod yr Ymchwiliad yw diogelu cleifion, rwy’n cydnabod bod rhaid i’r mesurau sydd i’w hargymell fod yn gymesur â phwysigrwydd y nodau. Mae’r nodau’n bwysig. Er hynny, mae ystyriaethau eraill sy’n bwysig iawn hefyd, efallai, gellir dadlau, yn bwysicach hyd yn oed. Ni ddylai’r mesurau niweidio’r perthnasoedd da ac ymddiriedus sy’n bodoli rhwng miliynau o gleifion a’u meddygon. Ni ddylent amddifadu meddygon teulu o bob annibyniaeth na cheisio gorfodi unffurfiaeth; nid wyf wedi argymell y dylai meddygon teulu golli’u statws hunangyflogedig. Ni ddylai’r mesurau ychwaith fynd yn rhy bell o ran mynd â meddygon i ffwrdd oddi wrth eu prif swyddogaeth, sef rhoi gofal clinigol i gleifion. Rwy’n ymwybodol fod llawer o feddygon teulu’n cwyno am y baich ‘llenwi ffurflenni’ sydd, dywedant, yn lleihau’r amser y gallant ei roi i gleifion. Gallaf weld bod gofynion rheolaeth glinigol a gwerthuso yn golygu llawer o waith nad ydyw’n waith clinigol. Teimla llawer o feddygon bod amser felly’n cael ei dreulio’n fuddiol; yn ddiau mae meddygon eraill yn anghytuno. Rwyf wedi ceisio sicrhau na fydd y cynigion rwyf wedi’u gwneud yn golygu cynnydd sylweddol pellach yn y gwaith anghlinigol y mae’n rhaid i feddygon teulu ei wneud.
Un o’r ffyrdd pwysicaf y gellir diogelu cleifion rhag meddygon anniogel yw drwy ymchwilio’n drylwyr i gwynion a wneir gan ac ar ran cleifion, a hefyd pryderon a fynegir gan gydweithwyr proffesiynol. Bu, yn y gorffennol, ganfyddiad ym meddwl rhai meddygon bod cleifion sy’n cwyno yn bobl sy’n codi twrw. Gwn o brofiad personol y gall fod yn dipyn o ergyd i gael cwyn yn ddiwarant. Mae’n naturiol hefyd bod y person sy’n wrthrych y gŵyn yn debygol o’i gweld fel cwyn ddiwarant, er na fyddai eraill yn cytuno o bosibl. Cydnabyddir yn gyffredinol gan gyrff sy’n delio â chwynion bod rhai pobl sy’n gwynwyr cyson neu flinderus; mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniais yn awgrymu mai lleiafrif bach iawn yw’r bobl hynny. Fy marn i, ar ddiwedd yr Ymchwiliad, yw y gellir dysgu llawer o gwynion a phryderon gan gleifion a chydweithwyr proffesiynol. Nid yn unig y bydd meddygon anniogel yn cael eu hadnabod, ond gellir canfod arfer gwael hefyd, a bydd hynny’n cynnig cyfle i wella. Gellid canfod methiannau yn y systemau hefyd a dysgu gwersi ar gyfer y dyfodol. Rwy’n cydnabod bod ymchwilio i gwynion a phryderon yn brofiad anesmwyth iawn. Fodd bynnag, credaf fod rhaid i bob meddyg - a phob person proffesiynol - dderbyn hynny, nid yn unig am fod ymchwiliad felly yn hawl y claf neu’r cleient, ond hefyd fel profiad dysgu ac fel modd pwysig o ddod â gofal is na’r safon i’r golwg a diogelu cleifion rhag meddygon anniogel.
Rwyf wedi cysylltu pryder yn cael ei fynegi ynghylch meddyg gan gydweithiwr proffesiynol gyda chwynion cleifion. Yn fy marn i, dylid eu cysylltu felly gan y gall y deunydd pwnc fod yr un fath yn wir. Credaf hefyd y gallai parodrwydd un gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd i gymryd cyfrifoldeb am godi pryderon ynghylch ymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd gweithiwr arall wneud cyfraniad llawer yn fwy o bosibl at ddiogelwch cleifion nag unrhyw ffactor unigol arall. Rwyf o’r farn mai ychydig iawn o feddygon anniogel fyddai’n mynd heb dynnu sylw cydweithiwr proffesiynol os yw pob gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn derbyn synnwyr o gydgyfrifoldeb am ansawdd a diogelwch.
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, defnyddiwyd yr ymadrodd ‘diwylliant dim bai’ yn aml. Un farn gyfredol yw, pan fydd anap meddygol yn digwydd, ei bod yn bwysicach i ddysgu gwers er mwyn gallu osgoi ailadrodd y digwyddiad, na chosbi’r meddyg neu’r gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yr arweiniodd ei weithredoedd at yr anap. O’i rhoi felly, mae’r egwyddor i weld yn un gadarn. Mae’r rheiny sy’n cynnig y farn hon yn honni’n aml fod y rhan fwyaf o anapon yn digwydd yn sgil methiannau yn y systemau yn hytrach na chamgymeriad personol. Ni fyddai’n iawn i gosbi meddyg am fethiant y system yr oedd yn gorfod gweithio ynddi. Eto, o’i rhoi felly, mae’r egwyddor yn un gadarn. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn derbyn bod y barnau hyn yn gwbl gywir. Dros 30 mlynedd fy mywyd proffesiynol, rwyf wedi delio â miloedd o achosion o ddamweiniau ac anafiadau, a ddigwyddodd ar y ffordd, yn y gweithle ac yn ystod triniaeth feddygol a deintyddol. Arweinia’r cyfoeth hwnnw o brofiad i mi gredu, er y caiff rhai anapon eu hachosi gan fethiant llwyr y systemau, caiff y mwyafrif eu hachosi gan gyfuniad o ffactorau personol a system. Wrth gwrs, mae cyfiawnder yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol na ddylai unrhyw feddyg gael ei ddal/dal yn gyfrifol am faterion sydd y tu hwnt i’w reolaeth/rheolaeth bersonol. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, mae cyfiawnder a diogelwch cleifion yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol y dylai meddygon - a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill - gael eu dal yn gyfrifol os ydynt wedi methu mewn agwedd sy’n disgyn o fewn eu cylch priodol nhw. Pan fydd pethau’n mynd o le, mae’n rhaid cael ymchwiliad priodol a nodi’r achos. Dim ond bryd hynny y gall fod cyfle iawn i ddysgu oddi wrth y digwyddiad. Dim ond wrth adnabod methiant yn y system y gellir ei gywiro. Dim ond bryd hynny, os canfyddir camgymeriad personol, y gellir cymryd camau, trwy ddisgyblu neu ail-addysgu, i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol. Mae rhai pobl yn galw hyn yn ‘ddiwylliant o feio’n deg’. Byddwn i’n dweud mai’r hyn sydd ei angen yw ymchwiliad, cyfiawnder, dysgu a diogelu.
Ar bwnc ar wahân, ond pwnc sy’n gysylltiedig, rwyf yn gadarn o’r farn bod rhaid i’r proffesiwn dderbyn graddfa fwy fyth o onestrwydd gyda chleifion nag a roddwyd hyd yn hyn. Mae’r proffesiwn a chleifion wedi mynd ymhell ers y dyddiau pan oedd y meddyg yn dweud wrth y claf beth oedd yn bwriadu gwneud, a’r claf yn derbyn hynny’n ddiolchgar ond heb ddeall fawr ddim. Fel y gwyddys pob meddyg, mae cleifion wedi newid. Ar gyfartaledd, maent wedi’u haddysgu’n well, maent yn fwy gwybodus ac mae ganddynt ddealltwriaeth fwy nag erioed o’r blaen. Hefyd, maent yn dangos llai o barch ac yn holi mwy. Maent yn disgwyl (ac yn haeddu) partneriaeth o gydraddoldeb. Mae llawer yn disgwyl cael mynediad llawn at eu cofnodion ac i ddarllen adroddiad yr ymgynghorydd eu hunain ar eu cyfeiriad diweddar. Mae’r dyddiau hynny pan oedd unrhyw feddyg yn meddwl ysgrifennu sylw personol yng nghofnod claf, gan gredu mai meddyg arall yn unig fyddai’n ei weld, wedi hen fynd.
Mae’r holl newidiadau hyn yn rai da, ac mae’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn cydnabod hynny. Fodd bynnag, mae cleifion erbyn hyn yn galw am fwy o onestrwydd fyth. Er y gellid dweud mai ychydig o gyfle sydd i ‘ddewis’ meddyg o fewn y GIG, mae cleifion eisiau gwneud dewis mor wybodus ag y bo modd, a, hyd yn oed pe na allant ddewis, maent eisiau bod â’u llygaid ar agor. Mae cleifion eisiau gallu ymddiried yn llwyr yn eu meddyg eu hunain gyda’u hiechyd, eu lles a’u cyfrinachau. Dengys arolygon cleifion bod yr ymddiriedaeth honno ganddynt yn gyffredinol, er gwaetha trasiedïau a sgandalau’r 1990au. Ond dengys yr un arolygon bod y cyhoedd o’r farn fod rhai meddygon analluog ac sy’n ymddwyn yn wael sydd wedi cael parhau i ymarfer gan yr ‘awdurdodau sydd ohoni’. Mae cleifion eisiau gwybod nad yw eu meddyg nhw yn un o’r rheiny. Maent eisiau gwybod mwy am gymwysterau, profiad a chymhwyster eu meddyg. Teimlant fod ganddynt hawl i wybod a yw eu meddyg wedi bod mewn helynt gyda’r gyfraith trosedd neu gyda’r GMC. Maent eisiau gwybod a gafwyd bod diffygion gan eu meddyg mewn asesiad o’u perfformiad ac a bennwyd amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad. Yn yr Unol Daleithiau a Chanada, darperir gwybodaeth felly i’r cyhoedd ar wefannau fel mater o drefn arferol, gyda chefnogaeth naill ai’r awdurdodau trwyddedu neu golegau proffesiynol. Yn fy marn i, dylai mwy o wybodaeth felly fod ar gael bellach yn y wlad hon. Gall fod y bydd rhai meddygon yn teimlo y bydd cyhoeddi gwybodaeth felly’n golygu colli preifatrwydd a byddai’n cyfyngu ar allu meddyg i roi problemau’r gorffennol y tu ôl iddo/iddi a symud ymlaen. Efallai’n wir. Fodd bynnag, fy marn i fy hun yw bod rhaid i feddygon ddangos nad ydynt wedi gweithredu mewn modd sy’n codi amheuaeth ynghylch ymddiriedaeth eu cleifion.
Y rheiny yw’r syniadau a’r egwyddorion sy’n sylfaen i argymhellion yr Adroddiad hwn. I’r rheiny sy’n derbyn yr egwyddorion hyn, ni fyddai unrhyw newidiadau o ganlyniad i f’argymhellion yn peri unrhyw syndod, unrhyw bryder na siom. Bu’r Ymchwiliad yn ffodus i glywed tystiolaeth a derbyn cyfraniadau gan lawer o feddygon ac academyddion amlwg. Daw’r rhan fwyaf o’r syniadau a’r egwyddorion a gynigiais gan yr arweinwyr blaengar hyn yn y proffesiwn. Mae llawer o’r syniadau hyn eisoes wedi’u derbyn yn eang o fewn y proffesiwn, a gwelir nhw fel rhai sy’n dod â buddion i gleifion, i’r proffesiwn ac i’r gymdeithas fel cyfanrwydd. Ond nid yw pob meddyg yn gweld pethau yn yr un modd. Mewn proffesiwn mor fawr â meddygaeth, nid yw hynny’n syndod. Fodd bynnag, credaf, gydag arweinyddiaeth gref ac effeithiol, y daw’r proffesiwn cyfan i dderbyn y syniadau hyn fel y ffordd i gynnal safonau uchel ac ymddiriedaeth a hyder cleifion.

---  ---
Cylch Gwaith
Y Deunydd Pwnc
Ymagwedd yr Ymchwiliad
Ymgynghoriadau'r Ymchwiliad ei Hun
Cyn y Gwrandawiadau Llafar
Y Gwrandawiadau Llafar
Y Seminarau
Strwythur yr Adroddiad Hwn
Effaith y Dystiolaeth

---  ---
Mae Cylch Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad sy’n berthnasol i ddeunydd pwnc Cyfnod Dau, Cam Pedwar (‘Cam Pedwar’) fel a ganlyn:
‘(c) trwy gyfeiriad at achos Harold Shipman i ymchwilio i berfformiad swyddogaethau’r cyrff statudol hynny, yr awdurdodau, sefydliadau eraill ac unigolion â chyfrifoldeb am fonitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol a’r defnydd o gyffuriau rheoledig; ac
(d) yn dilyn yr ymchwiliadau hynny, argymell pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol ...’.

---  ---
Yn ystod Cam Pedwar, archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu a oedd ar waith rhwng 1974 a 1998, pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Roedd yr archwiliad hwn yn cynnwys ystyried y canlynol:
digonolrwydd y trefniadau monitro yn cael eu gweithredu gan sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau) a chyrff eraill, a’u heffeithiolrwydd wrth ganfod arfer clinigol gwael neu ymddygiad afreolaidd
rôl cwynion cleifion o fewn y system monitro a digonolrwydd y systemau ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion dros y cyfnod perthnasol
rôl o fewn y system fonitro pryderon yn cael eu codi am feddygon teulu gan gydweithwyr, gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill ac aelodau’r cyhoedd, a digonolrwydd y camau sydd wedi’u cymryd yn y gorffennol i hwyluso codi pryderon felly
gweithredu’r systemau rheoleiddio a disgyblu sy’n rhan annatod o’r broses fonitro gyffredinol a’r graddau y mae’r systemau hynny wedi gweithio’n effeithiol yn y gorffennol i gefnogi ac atgyfnerthu trefniadau monitro lleol.

---  ---
Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad y testunau hyn yng ngolau’r holl wybodaeth a gasglodd am droseddau Shipman, am ei arfer meddygol, am ei hanes o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau yn y gorffennol ac am y cwynion a wnaed a’r camau disgyblu a gymerwyd yn ei erbyn yn ystod ei yrfa.
Aeth yr Ymchwiliad ymlaen wedyn i ystyried y newidiadau i’r systemau sydd wedi digwydd er 1998, yn ogystal â’r rheiny a gynllunnir ar gyfer y dyfodol. Gydol Cam Pedwar, rwyf wedi ymdrin â’r dasg o asesu effeithiolrwydd a digonolrwydd y systemau amrywiol hyn - systemau’r gorffennol, y presennol a’r dyfodol - trwy gyfeirio at y ddyletswydd a bennwyd i mi gan Gylch Gwaith yr Ymchwiliad i wneud unrhyw argymhellion yr wyf yn ystyried sy’n angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol. Er mwyn deall graddfa’r diogelwch a roddir gan y systemau amrywiol, bu’n angenrheidiol edrych ar y fframwaith rheoleiddio cyfan sy’n rheoli gwaith meddygon teulu.

---  ---
Byddaf yn delio ar wahân â’r dystiolaeth a gasglwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad mewn perthynas â phob un o’r testunau a restrir uchod. Mae cyfanswm o 386 o ddatganiadau tyst ac oddeutu 52,430 o dudalennau o ddogfennau wedi’u sganio i gronfa ddata delweddau’r Ymchwiliad mewn cysylltiad â Cham Pedwar.
Teuluoedd
Wrth ddarparu eu datganiadau tyst i’r Ymchwiliad ar gyfer Cyfnod Un, cafodd perthnasau a ffrindiau cleifion Shipman eu gwahodd i roi’u hawgrymiadau ar gyfer newidiadau i’r systemau presennol a allai, o’u rhoi ar waith, ddarparu mesurau diogelwch ychwanegol i gleifion yn y dyfodol. Ymatebodd llawer i’r gwahoddiad hwn, a gwnaethant awgrymiadau defnyddiol ac adeiladol ynghylch y modd y gellid gwella’r systemau amrywiol. Rwyf wedi ystyried pob un o’r awgrymiadau ysgrifenedig hynny ac, yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth bellach, tystiolaeth lafar ac ysgrifenedig, gan nifer o berthnasau a ffrindiau cleifion yr oedd Shipman wedi’u lladd.
Trefniadau Monitro
Trefniadau Monitro Lleol
Prif bwrpas yr Ymchwiliad wrth archwilio trefniadau monitro lleol oedd ystyried a fu unrhyw fethiant ar ran y PCOau a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ofal sylfaenol yn Tameside yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Golygai hyn cynnal archwiliad o’r trefniadau a oedd ar waith yn lleol a chymharu’r trefniadau lleol hynny â’r trefniadau a oedd ar waith mewn rhannau eraill o’r wlad yn ystod yr un cyfnod. Golygai hefyd asesu pa un a ddylai’r trefniadau hynny a oedd ar waith fod wedi deffro’r PCOau i’r ffaith fod arfer Shipman yn anarferol neu’n afreolaidd mewn unrhyw ffordd neu ei fod yn ‘ystadegyn anarferol’ mewn unrhyw fodd.
Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol a Chyrff Lleol Eraill
Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan swyddogion y PCOau olynol a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ofal sylfaenol yn Tameside. Y PCOau oedd â’r cyfrifoldeb hwn yn y gorffennol oedd Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside (FPC), Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside (FHSA) ac Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA). Y corff â’r cyfrifoldeb presennol yw Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Tameside a Glossop (PCT).
Derbyniwyd tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig a llafar gan swyddogion gweinyddol a chynghorwyr meddygon a arferai gael eu cyflogi gan FPC Tameside, FHSA Tameside a’r WPHA. Disgrifiodd y tystion hyn y trefniadau monitro a oedd ar waith yn ystod gyrfa Shipman, gan esbonio, trwy gyfeirio at ddogfennau cyfoes yn cael eu cynnwys yn y ffeiliau ar Shipman yn cael eu cadw gan y PCOau, beth oedd y trefniadau amrywiol wedi’i ddatgelu am arfer Shipman. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar hefyd gan Brif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol PCT Tameside a Glossop ynghylch y trefniadau monitro sydd ar waith ar hyn o bryd a’r datblygiadau sydd wedi digwydd er 1998, pan stopiodd Shipman ymarfer.
Er mwyn cymharu perfformiad PCOau amrywiol Tameside gyda’u cymheiriaid mewn ardaloedd eraill, anfonodd yr Ymchwiliad holiaduron at nifer o awdurdodau iechyd strategol (SHAau) a ddewiswyd ar hap yng Nghymru a Lloegr. Gofynnodd yr holiadur gwestiynau manwl ynghylch y trefniadau monitro a fu ar waith dros y 25 mlynedd flaenorol. Derbyniwyd 19 o ymatebion gan SHAau a PCOau (y rhoddwyd yr holiadur iddynt gan yr SHA perthnasol) mewn ardaloedd gwahanol o Gymru a Lloegr. Gwahoddwyd cynrychiolwyr o bedwar o’r cyrff a ymatebodd i ddarparu tystiolaeth bellach, a bu dau o’r cynrychiolwyr hynny, ynghyd â Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol PCT lleol arall, yn bresennol i roi tystiolaeth lafar am drefniadau monitro’r gorffennol a threfniadau monitro presennol yn eu hardaloedd.
Hefyd, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan gynrychiolwyr sefydliadau lleol eraill, gan gynnwys Pwyllgor Meddygol Lleol West Pennine (Tameside a Glossop gynt) (y bu Shipman yn ysgrifennydd iddo yn y gorffennol), a chan feddygon a fu yng nghyflogaeth yr hen Wasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol.
Monitro Rhagnodi gan Feddygon Teulu
Cafodd Shipman afael ar gyffuriau i fwydo’i arfer ei hun o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau ym 1974 a 1975, ac, ar hyd ei holl yrfa mewn meddygaeth deuluol bron, i ladd cleifion. Yn ystod blynyddoedd diweddarach ei amser yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu, gwnaethpwyd rhywfaint o fonitro rhagnodi meddygon teulu yn lleol. Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad ganlyniadau monitro rhagnodi Shipman yn fanwl, a chlywodd dystiolaeth am hyn gan gynghorwyr fferyllol a arferai gael eu cyflogi gan FHSA Tameside a’r WPHA, yn ogystal â chan ymgynghorydd fferyllol a arferai gael ei gyflogi gan y consortiwm a oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa y bu Shipman yn aelod ohono ar un adeg.
Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, a ysgrifennwyd ar ddiwedd Cyfnod Dau, Cam Tri (‘Cam Tri’) gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, argymhellais fesurau a fyddai’n ei gwneud yn llawer anoddach i feddyg neu weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd arall i gael gafael ar gyflenwadau anghyfreithlon o gyffuriau rheoledig, ac a fyddai hefyd yn ei gwneud yn fwy tebygol y byddai meddyg a lwyddodd i gael gafael ar gyffuriau yn anghyfreithlon yn cael ei ganfod. Un o’r mesurau sydd â rôl werthfawr i’w chwarae yw monitro meddygon teulu yn rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yng Ngham Tri wedi llywio fy marn ar y pwnc hwn. Yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiad ysgrifenedig gan Mr Barry Lloyd, Ymgynghorydd Gwybodaeth Ragnodi, sy’n cael ei gadw gan y Ganolfan Ragnodi Genedlaethol a’r Awdurdod Prisio Rhagnodion (PPA) i ddatblygu a darparu hyfforddiant wrth ddefnyddio systemau gwybodaeth ragnodi. Aeth Mr Lloyd i swyddfa’r Ymchwiliad a rhoi arddangosiad sut i ddefnyddio’r system ePACT.net sydd bellach yn cael ei defnyddio ar gyfer monitro rhagnodi. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar hefyd am y pwnc hwn gan Mr Michael Siswick, o’r PPA.
Penodi Meddygon Teulu
Ym 1977, penodwyd Shipman i feddygfa Donneybrook yn Hyde. Gwnaethpwyd y penodiad hwn ar adeg pan fu’n gweithio y tu allan i feddygaeth deuluol am dros 18 mis, yn dilyn ei ddiswyddiad o Ganolfan Feddygol Abraham Ormerod, Todmorden, ar ddiwedd 1975. Cafodd ei ddiswyddo ar ôl canfod ei fod wedi bod yn cael gafael ar gyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfreithlon ac yn eu camddefnyddio. Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad amgylchiadau penodiad Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook, a’i gynnwys ar restr feddygol FPC Tameside. Ystyriodd yr Ymchwiliad yn benodol a wyddai FPC Tameside am ei hanes blaenorol ac, os nad ydoedd, a ddylai fod wedi gwneud ymholiadau a fyddai wedi datgelu’r hanes hwnnw. Ystyriwyd hefyd rôl aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook yn y penodiad.
Cafwyd datganiadau tystion gan saith aelod a chyn-aelodau o feddygfa Donneybrook, a rhoddodd bob un ohonynt ac eithrio dwy dystiolaeth lafar. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad wedi cael tystiolaeth yn flaenorol gan dri chynbartner Shipman ym meddygfa Abraham Ormerod at ddibenion ei ymchwiliadau Cyfnod Un. Hefyd, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan dystion eraill a oedd â gwybodaeth am y trefniadau ar gyfer penodi meddygon teulu a oedd ar waith ym 1977. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys Cadeirydd yr hen Bwyllgor Arferion Meddygol, y corff a oedd yn gyfrifol ar y pryd am sicrhau bod meddygon teulu’n cael eu dosbarthu’n deg ar draws Cymru a Lloegr. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiadau llafar hefyd gan gyn-weinyddydd FPC Calderdale (a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ofal sylfaenol yn Todmorden pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer yno), gan ddau arolygydd Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref (a fu’n gysylltiedig â chanfod troseddau cyffuriau Shipman), gan gynrychiolydd Heddlu Gorllewin Swydd Efrog a chan gyn-weithiwr y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC). Rhoddodd y tystion hyn dystiolaeth am y wybodaeth a fyddai wedi cael ei darparu i berson yn gwneud ymholiad ym 1977 i un o’r sefydliadau hynny am hanes blaenorol Shipman o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau neu am yr achosion troseddol neu gamau disgyblu yn deilio oddi yno.
Y Darlun Ehangach
Tystiolaeth gan Gyrff Cenedlaethol
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiad tyst manwl gan Syr Nigel Crisp, Ysgrifennydd Parhaol yr Adran Iechyd a Phrif Weithredwr y GIG yn Lloegr, yn disgrifio datblygiad y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu o’r 1970au hyd heddiw. Rhoddodd Syr Nigel dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad a nododd newidiadau pellach a oedd wedi’u cynllunio ar gyfer y dyfodol. Roedd y newidiadau pellach hyn yn cynnwys y rheiny’n deillio o’r Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS) newydd (a gyflwynwyd ym mis Ebrill 2004), ynghyd â gofyniad newydd (i’w gyflwyno i’r GMC yn 2005) y dylai pob meddyg gael ei ail-ddilysu yn rheolaidd. Darparodd yr Adran Iechyd gryn dipyn o dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig arall, mewn ymateb i geisiadau penodol gan yr Ymchwiliad ac yn gyffredinol. Hefyd, cyfranogodd cynrychiolwyr yr Adran Iechyd yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad.
Bu Dr John Chisholm (Cadeirydd, Pwyllgor y Meddygon Teulu, y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig (BMA) a Dr William Reith (cyn-Gadeirydd, Cyngor yr Alban o Goleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu (RCGP) yn bresennol i roi tystiolaeth am amrywiaeth o faterion, gan gynnwys y cynlluniau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon yn y dyfodol. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan yr Athro Alastair Scotland (Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol, yr Awdurdod Asesiadau Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA)) a Dr Linda Patterson (Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol, y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI) yn flaenorol) am rôl a swyddogaethau eu sefydliadau priodol. Bu Dr Reith a’r Athro Scotland yn bresennol yn rhai o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, fel Dr John Grenville, yn cynrychioli’r BMA. Cyfranogodd yr Athro Aidan Halligan, y Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol dros Loegr a Chyfarwyddwr Rheolaeth Glinigol dros y GIG, yn rhai o’r seminarau hefyd.
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiadau ysgrifenedig a gohebiaeth arall mewn cysylltiad â’r rhan hon o’i ymchwiliad gan amrywiaeth eang o sefydliadau, gan gynnwys yr Asiantaeth Diogelwch Cleifion Genedlaethol (NPSA), y Comisiwn Archwilio, y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn), Cymdeithas y Cleifion, Patient Concern, Cymdeithas y Cynghorau Iechyd Cymunedol, y Comisiwn dros Gysylltiad y Cyhoedd a Chleifion ag Iechyd, y Cyd-bwyllgor ar Hyfforddiant Ôl-raddedig ar gyfer Meddygaeth Deuluol, Gweithredu yn erbyn Damweiniau Meddygol (AvMA), Cymdeithas Genedlaethol Addysgwyr Gofal Sylfaenol y DU a nifer o ddeoniaethau ôl-raddedig. Bu cynrychiolwyr Cymdeithas y Cleifion, Patient Concern ac AvMA yn bresennol yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad lle trafodwyd pwnc monitro a materion cysylltiedig. Hefyd yn bresennol yn rhai o’r seminarau yr oedd yr Athro Dame Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, cyn Lywydd yr RCGP a’r person yn gyfrifol am gynllunio’r offer asesu a ddefnyddir yng ngweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC.
Tystiolaeth gan Academyddion
Mewn cysylltiad â’r pwnc monitro meddygon teulu, comisiynodd yr Ymchwiliad ddau adroddiad gan arbenigwyr academaidd. Roedd y cyntaf, a ysgrifennwyd gan yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, yn rhoi sylw i nifer o faterion penodol a nodwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad. Ysgrifennwyd yr ail, a oedd yn drosolwg o drefniadau blaenorol, trefniadau presennol a threfniadau’r dyfodol ar gyfer monitro ansawdd y gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygon teulu, gan yr Athro Martin Roland (Cyfarwyddwr, Canolfan Ymchwil a Datblygiad Gofal Sylfaenol Cenedlaethol, Prifysgol Manceinion), yr Athro Martin Marshall (Athro Meddygaeth Deuluol, Prifysgol Manceinion), a Dr Jonathan Shapiro (Cyfarwyddwr, ‘Polisi. Datblygiad. Partneriaeth.’ ac Uwch Gymrawd, Prifysgol Birmingham). Bu‘r Athro Baker a’r Athro Roland eu dau yn bresennol yn rhai o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, a rhoddodd yr Athro Baker dystiolaeth lafar yn ogystal.
Arfarnu
Pan gynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd y system newydd ar gyfer arfarnu meddygon teulu newydd ddod ar waith. Roedd yn bwysig i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r modd yr oedd arfarniadau’n cael eu cynnal ac i archwilio’i berthynas â systemau monitro lleol a systemau rheolaeth glinigol leol a’i gysylltedd bwriadedig ag ail-ddilysu. Rhoddodd nifer o dystion dystiolaeth am eu profiadau eu hunain o arfarnu mewn meddygaeth deuluol neu mewn ysbyty neu leoliadau eraill. Hefyd, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiad ysgrifenedig gan Dr Vikram Tanna, Arweinydd Arfarnu, PCT Tameside a Glossop, a chlywodd dystiolaeth lafar gan ddau dyst a oedd yn gyfrifol am drefnu arfarniadau meddygon teulu ar ran eu PCTau; roedd un o’r tystion ei hun yn arfarnwr meddygon teulu. Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer o ffurflenni arfarnu dienw wedi’u llenwi hefyd gan PCT Tameside a Glossop.
Delio â Pherfformiad Gwael a Digwyddiadau Chwithig Difrifol
Dosbarthwyd holiadur arall, yn ymwneud â’r trefniadau a wnaed gan PCOau ar gyfer delio â meddygon yr oedd eu perfformiad proffesiynol yn peri pryder, i ddetholiad ar hap o 24 PCOau yng Nghymru a Lloegr, ac ymatebodd bob un ohonynt. Hefyd, dosbarthodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur i chwe SHAau (ymatebodd bob un ohonynt), yn gofyn am wybodaeth am eu systemau ar gyfer delio â digwyddiadau chwithig difrifol.
Meddygon yn Ymarfer ar eu Pennau’u Hunain
Ar ôl dyfarnu Shipman yn euog ym mis Ionawr 2000, bu llawer o alwadau i symud i ffwrdd oddi wrth feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Awgrymwyd na fyddai Shipman wedi dianc rhag cael ei ganfod dros gyfnod mor hir pe bai’n gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp. Roedd yn angenrheidiol, felly, i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried pa un a oedd yn haws i Shipman droseddu oherwydd y trefniadau a oedd yn bodoli yn y meddygfeydd lle’r oedd yn gweithio, a, hefyd, i ystyried rhinweddau ac anfanteision meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Mae’r Gymdeithas Meddygfeydd Bach yn gorff cenedlaethol sy’n cynrychioli buddiannau meddygfeydd yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach, a rhoddodd ei Chadeirydd, Dr Michael Taylor, dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Clywais dystiolaeth lafar hefyd gan Dr Hugh Whyte, Uwch Swyddog Meddygol, y Gyfarwyddiaeth Polisi Iechyd a Chynllunio, Adran Iechyd Gweithgor yr Alban, ynghylch sefyllfa meddygfeydd bach a meddygfeydd yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn yr Alban. Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatganiad hefyd gan Mrs Ann Lloyd, Cyfarwyddwr Adran GIG Cymru yng Nghynulliad Cenedlaethol Cymru, yn delio â pholisi’r Cynulliad ar ymarferwyr meddygol yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Fe wnaeth nifer o dystion a alwyd i roi tystiolaeth ar bynciau eraill ddarparu’u barnau a’u profiad o feddygfeydd bach a meddygfeydd yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Anfonodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur at 15 o PCTau a ddewiswyd ar hap, yn gofyn am wybodaeth am eu hagweddau tuag at feddygfeydd felly, ac am unrhyw drefniadau arbennig a wnaethant i’w cefnogi. Darparodd yr Adran Iechyd ddeunydd perthnasol yn ymwneud â pholisi ac ystadegau.
Monitro Cyfraddau Marwolaeth
Un agwedd ar fonitro a ddaeth yn arbennig o bwysig ar ôl canfod troseddau Shipman oedd monitro cyfraddau marwolaeth. Nid oedd unrhyw waith monitro wedi’i wneud o’r cyfraddau marwolaeth ymhlith cleifion Shipman cyn yr ymchwiliad iddo a’i arestio. Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig gan nifer o gyn aelodau staff y WPHA am y wybodaeth ystadegol yn ymwneud â chleifion meddygon teulu a marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu a oedd yn cael ei chadw gan y WPHA yn ystod cyfnod Shipman yn ymarfer, ac am y defnyddiau y gwnaethpwyd o’r wybodaeth honno. Roedd y dystiolaeth yn ymwneud hefyd â’r dadansoddiadau o gyfraddau marwolaethau Shipman a wnaethpwyd gan y WPHA yn dilyn arestio Shipman ym mis Medi 1998. Ystyriodd yr Ymchwiliad yr archwiliad clinigol o arfer Shipman hefyd a gynhaliwyd gan yr Athro Baker. Ar ddiwedd yr adroddiad ar ganlyniadau ei archwiliad clinigol, roedd yr Athro Baker wedi argymell y dylai’r systemau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu gael eu hadolygu a’u hymestyn i gynnwys monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o drefn arferol.
Roedd yn rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried yn gyntaf a oedd y PCOau dilynol a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am Tameside ar fai am beidio sefydlu unrhyw system fonitro yn ystod cyfnod Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Er mwyn canfod pa gamau, os o gwbl, yr oedd PCOau mewn rhannau eraill o’r wlad wedi’u cymryd i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau, dosbarthodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur i bob SHA yn Lloegr ac awdurdodau iechyd yng Nghymru, yn gofyn am wybodaeth. Cafwyd ymatebion gan bob un o’r 33 SHA ac Awdurdodau Iechyd. Ar ôl derbyn yr ymatebion, gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad, a chael, tystiolaeth bellach gan nifer o PCOau a oedd wedi gwneud dadansoddiadau o gyfraddau marwolaethau yn y gorffennol diweddar. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig hefyd gan gyrff y GIG yng Ngogledd Iwerddon a’r Alban am y camau a oedd yn cael eu cymryd i ddatblygu systemau monitro yn eu hardaloedd.
Comisiynwyd Dr Paul Aylin, Uwch Ddarlithydd Clinigol mewn Epidemioleg ac Iechyd Cyhoeddus, Imperial College School of Science, Technology and Medicine, i adrodd am ddichonoldeb sefydlu system fonitro genedlaethol ar gyfer meddygon teulu ac i gynghori ar ddull priodol o ddadansoddi. Gwnaeth Dr Aylin a thîm o gydweithwyr o Imperial College y gwaith angenrheidiol, a pharatoi adroddiad ysgrifenedig. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, rhoddwyd cyflwyniad o’u gwaith ganddynt i’r Ymchwiliad.
Ym mis Hydref 2003, trafodwyd gwaith Dr Aylin, ynghyd â’r materion ehangach yn ymwneud â monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu, mewn seminar deuddydd, ac roedd nifer o arbenigwyr yn y maes yn bresennol yno, ynghyd â chynrychiolwyr o’r BMA, yr RCGP a’r hen CHI. Hefyd, fe wnaeth tri chynrychiolydd o’r PCOau a oedd â phrofiad o fonitro a/neu ymchwilio i gyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu gymryd rhan yn y seminarau. Dywedodd Dr Kathryn Booth (Cadeirydd, Grŵp Rhanbarthol Cyfraddau Marwolaethau Meddygaeth Deuluol Gogledd Iwerddon) a Dr Mohammed A Mohammed (Uwch Gymrawd Ymchwil, Adran Iechyd Cyhoeddus ac Epidemioleg, Prifysgol Birmingham) wrth y seminar am y prosiect peilot ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau a oedd ar waith ar y pryd gan Fwrdd Gwasanaethau Iechyd a Chymdeithasol y Dwyrain yng Ngogledd Iwerddon.
Cwynion Cleifion a Gweithdrefnau Disgyblu Lleol
Diben cyntaf yr Ymchwiliad wrth ystyried cwynion cleifion a gweithdrefnau disgyblu oedd archwilio rhan Shipman yn y gweithdrefnau hynny ac ystyried a ddylai cynnwys unrhyw gwynion a wnaed yn ei erbyn fod wedi deffro’r rheiny a oedd yn gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau i’w droseddoldeb. Roedd yn angenrheidiol hefyd ystyried y rhan yr oedd yn cael ei chwarae gan y gweithdrefnau cwynion a disgyblu o fewn cyd-destun ehangach y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro, ac, yn fwy diweddar, ar gyfer rheolaeth glinigol. Roedd archwilio’r dystiolaeth fanwl yn ymwneud â gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau hyn trwy gyfeirio at nifer o achosion penodol yn ddefnyddiol i mi pan ddeuthum i ffurfio fy nghynigion ar gyfer newid.
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad wybodaeth gan y WPHA yn ymwneud â’r cwynion a wnaed i’r PCOau yn gyfrifol am Tameside am Shipman rhwng 1977 a 1996. Roedd Shipman wedi cael ei ddisgyblu ddwy waith yn dilyn cwynion gan gleifion, unwaith gan FPC Tameside ym 1990 ac unwaith gan FHSA Tameside ym 1993. Hysbyswyd y GMC am y ddau achos hynny hefyd. Roedd cwyn gynharach i FPC Tameside ym 1985 wedi cael ei diystyru. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Steven Rawlinson, cyfaill i’r claf ymadawedig yr oedd ei farwolaeth yn destun cwyn 1985. Rhoddodd mam y claf ymadawedig ddatganiad ysgrifenedig. Fe wnaeth Mr William Greenwood, Gweinyddydd Cynorthwyol yn FPC Tameside ar y pryd, a Chyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol Gofal Sylfaenol, WPHA, roi tystiolaeth lafar am ei brofiad o weithredu’r gweithdrefnau’n lleol, gan gynnwys ei ran yn y cwynion a wnaed yn erbyn Shipman. Darparwyd datganiadau gan ddeg aelod a chyn gadeiryddion y pwyllgorau gwasanaeth meddygol a ddyfarnodd ar y cwynion hynny, ac fe wnaeth pump ohonynt - rhaid yn aelodau meddygol a rhai yn aelodau lleyg - roi tystiolaeth lafar.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Miss Andrea Horsfall, cyn Ddirprwy Reolwraig Cysylltiadau Cwsmeriaid, WPHA, am ei phrofiad o’r gweithdrefnau a oedd ar waith ar ôl 1 Ebrill 1996. O ganlyniad i’r newidiadau mewn gweithdrefnau, roedd llai o ran nag o’r blaen gan y WPHA yn y broses datrys cwynion cleifion, ac roedd llawer llai o wrandawiadau disgyblu. Rhoddwyd datganiad gan Mr Geoffrey Lamb, cyn uwch gynullydd yn y WPHA, am ei ran yn y gweithdrefnau a ddilynodd methiant i ddatrys cwyn yn lleol.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr David Laverick, gyn Brif Weithredwr yr Awdurdod Apeliadau Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu, a darparodd wybodaeth ystadegol am gamau diweddarach y prosesau disgyblu. Ategwyd ei dystiolaeth ar y pwnc hwnnw gan ddatganiadau tyst gan Mr Brian Hubbard (cydweithiwr iau i Mr Laverick), Mr Paul Burns (olynydd Mr Laverick fel Prif Weithredwr) a Dr William Miller (cyn Gadeirydd y Pwyllgor Cynghori Meddygol).
Hefyd, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad 14 o ymatebion i holiadur a anfonwyd allan gan yr Ymchwiliad at nifer o sefydliadau gofal iechyd ar y testun cwynion, yn arbennig cwynion am feddygon teulu. Gofynnodd yr holiadur - ymhlith pethau eraill - pa newidiadau yr hoffent weld yn cael eu gwneud i weithdrefnau cwynion presennol y GIG. Mynychwyd seminar yn delio â chwynion cleifion ac archwilio cwynion gan gynrychiolwyr yr RCGP, y BMA, yr Adran Iechyd, y Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol (NCSC, bellach yn rhan o’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd), Cymdeithas yr Ysgrifenyddion Meddygol, Rheolwyr Meddygfeydd, Gweinyddwyr a Derbynyddion (AMSPAR), Cymdeithas y Defnyddwyr (a elwir yn Which? bellach), Swyddfa Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd, yr NCAA, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r GMC.
Fe wnaeth graddfa a nifer troseddau Shipman a chyfnod hir cyflawni’r troseddau hynny godi’r posibilrwydd y gallai pryderon fod wedi’u codi ynghylch ei weithgareddau yn y gorffennol ac y gallai’r pryderon hynny fod wedi mynd heb sylw gan yr awdurdodau. Aeth yr Ymchwiliad ati i ganfod a fu unrhyw un a oedd wedi teimlo pryderon o’r fath, ac os felly, a oeddent wedi gwneud eu pryderon yn hysbys. Fel y bu hi, roedd yn glir mai ychydig iawn o bobl oedd ag unrhyw amheuaeth o gwbl ynghylch Shipman. Yn achos y nifer fach honno o bobl, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn dymuno sefydlu a oeddent wedi lleisio’u pryderon, ac os felly, pam na weithredwyd ar y pryderon hynny. Os oedd pobl a fu â phryderon, ond na wnaethant leisio’r pryderon hynny, roeddwn eisiau sefydlu pam yr oedd felly, ac archwilio ffyrdd lle gellid annog pobl felly, yn y dyfodol, i ddod ymlaen.
Pryderon ynghylch Shipman
Canolbwyntiodd yr Ymchwiliad ar nifer o grwpiau penodol o bobl a allai fod â rheswm penodol i fod yn bryderus ynghylch gweithgareddau Shipman.
Teuluoedd a Ffrindiau
Y cyntaf o’r rhain oedd perthnasau a ffrindiau dioddefwyr Shipman. Wrth ddarparu’u datganiadau tyst i’r Ymchwiliad ar gyfer Cyfnod Un, mewn cysylltiad ag archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad i farwolaethau cleifion Shipman, gofynnwyd i berthnasau a thystion eraill a fu ganddynt unrhyw bryderon ynghylch y farwolaeth dan sylw. Wrth baratoi ar gyfer Cam Pedwar, archwiliwyd y datganiadau tyst hynny eto, a gofynnwyd i’r tystion a ddywedodd bod pryderon ganddynt pan ddigwyddodd y farwolaeth i ddarparu rhagor o wybodaeth. Gofynnwyd i dystion esbonio pam (os mai felly yr oedd) na wnaethant leisio’u pryderon ar y pryd. Gofynnwyd iddynt a fyddent wedi gwybod at bwy y dylent fynd â’r pryderon hynny. Gofynnwyd iddynt hefyd i awgrymu syniadau ar gyfer newid a allai ei gwneud yn haws i bobl ddod â chwynion tebyg ymlaen yn y dyfodol.
Aelodau Meddygfa Donneybrook
Y grŵp nesaf a ystyriwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad oedd aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook, lle lladdodd Shipman o leiaf 71 o gleifion rhwng 1977 a 1990. Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at eu tystiolaeth yn gynharach yn y Bennod hon.
Aelodau Staff y Feddygfa
Y trydydd grŵp a ystyriwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad oedd staff meddygfa Shipman. Roeddent wedi gweithio’n agos ag ef ym Meddygfa Market Street, ac roedd yn amlwg yn bwysig i ganfod a oedd un o aelodau’r staff wedi gwybod rhywbeth neu wedi amau rhywbeth am ei weithgareddau troseddol. Roedd aelodau’r feddygfa wedi rhoi cryn dipyn o dystiolaeth gefndir i’r Ymchwiliad at ddibenion ei ymchwiliadau Cyfnod Un. Wrth baratoi ar gyfer Cam Pedwar, dangoswyd amserlenni iddynt yn cynnwys manylion am farwolaethau cleifion y feddygfa, a gofynnwyd iddynt, beth, os rhywbeth, y gallent gofio am y marwolaethau hynny. Darparwyd datganiadau tyst hir gan Sister Gillian Morgan (ymarferydd nyrs), Mrs Alison Massey (rheolwraig y feddygfa), Mrs Carol Chapman (derbynwraig), a Mrs Judith Cocker (derbynwraig). Darparwyd datganiadau tyst gan ddau aelod arall o staff hefyd, a fu’n gweithio yn y feddygfa am gyfnodau byr. Rhoddodd pob un o’r tystion hyn dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Roedd Mrs Margaret Walker (gweithiwr cyfrifiadur) wedi ymfudo erbyn i wrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad gael eu cynnal. Roedd hi wedi darparu datganiad tyst manwl iawn cyn iddi adael. Darparwyd datganiad ysgrifenedig gan dyst arall, a fu’n gweithio dros dro fel nyrs yn y feddygfa.
Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd Eraill
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig hefyd gan dri gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd arall, a fu’n gweithio’n rhan-amser ym Meddygfa Market Street, ond a oedd ag ychydig o gysylltiad â rhedeg y feddygfa o ddydd i ddydd. Clywyd tystiolaeth Mrs Marion Gilchrist, y nyrs ardal yn gweithio i feddygfa Shipman rhwng 1995 a 1998, gan yr Ymchwiliad yn ystod Cam Tri. Clywyd tystiolaeth Mrs Ethel Dooley a Mrs Barbara Sunderland, y ddwy ohonynt yn nyrsys ardal a lenwai’r bwlch i Mrs Gilchrist o dro i dro, yn ystod y cam hwnnw hefyd.
Pobl Eraill oedd â Phryderon
Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth, llafar ac ysgrifenedig, yn ymwneud ag amheuon ynghylch Shipman a gododd ym meddyliau Mrs Christine Simpson (rheolwraig breswyl Ogden Court, datblygiad cartrefi lloches yn Hyde), Mr John Shaw (gyrrwr tacsi lleol), Mrs Dorothy Foley a Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross (cynorthwywyr cartref) a Mrs Shirley Harrison (perthynas un o ddioddefwyr Shipman a chymydog un arall). Nid oedd Mr Shaw, Mrs Foley, Mrs Shawcross a Mrs Harrison wedi dweud wrth unrhyw un mewn awdurdod am eu pryderon. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mrs Simpson wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod wedi dweud wrth ei rheolwr llinell, Mrs Janet Schofield, swyddog tai yn cael ei chyflogi gan Gymdeithas Tai Manceinion a’r Ardal (bellach yn rhan o’r Harverst Housing Group), am ei phryderon. Ni dderbyniodd Mrs Schofield fod Mrs Simpson wedi cyfleu’r wybodaeth hon, a rhoddodd Mrs Schofield dystiolaeth lafar am y mater i’r Ymchwiliad.
Yn ystod Cyfnod Dau, Cam Un (a oedd yn ymwneud ag ymchwiliad cyntaf ac aflwyddiannus yr heddlu i farwolaethau cleifion Shipman), clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth am bryderon cynyddol Mr David Bambroffe a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, a arweiniodd yn y pen draw at Mrs Bambroffe yn mynegi’r pryderon hynny i Dr Susan Booth o Feddygfa Brooke. Arweiniodd hynny at ddwysáu’r pryderon a oedd eisoes yn cael eu teimlo gan Dr Linda Reynolds, aelod arall o Feddygfa Brooke. Ym mis Mawrth 1998, hysbysodd y Crwner lleol am ei phryderon, a phryderon ei phartneriaid, ac felly cychwynnodd ymchwiliad cyntaf yr heddlu. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Mr a Mrs Bambroffe, ynghyd â Mr Nigel Reynolds (gŵr gweddw Dr Reynolds) yng Ngham Dau; rhoddwyd tystiolaeth bellach ganddynt at ddibenion Cam Pedwar, lle nodwyd eu barnau am gamau y gellid eu cymryd i’w gwneud yn haws i’r rheiny â phryderon i ddod â nhw i sylw’r awdurdodau priodol.
Pryderon Cydweithwyr
Roedd achos Mrs Renate Overton, yr wyf yn delio ag ef ym Mhennod 10, yn amlwg yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf a fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, a chlywyd tystiolaeth lafar am amgylchiadau ei marwolaeth a’r canlyniad ym mis Rhagfyr 2002. Yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, cefais fod dau ymgynghorydd yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside (Dr Ceri Brown a Dr Murtaza Husaini) wedi bod yn ymwybodol ym mis Chwefror 1994 fod Shipman wedi rhoi (yn esgeulus fe gredent, yn hytrach na’n fwriadol fel y canfûm yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf) gorddos o forffin neu ddiamorffin i Mrs Overton a bod hwnnw wedi achosi niwed difrifol i’r ymennydd a arweiniodd, 14 mis yn ddiweddarach, at ei marwolaeth. Nid oeddent wedi hysbysu unrhyw un mewn awdurdod am y mater. Pan ysgrifennwyd y Trydydd Adroddiad, gohiriais y cwestiwn pa un a oeddent dan ddyletswydd i adrodd am eu pryderon am achos Mrs Overton, a pha un a ddylid eu beirniadu am eu methiant i wneud hynny. Penderfynais y dylwn ystyried y cwestiynau hynny ar ôl gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar lle’r oedd tystiolaeth i’w dderbyn ar faterion ehangach yn ymwneud â’r ddyletswydd i adrodd, y dewisiadau adrodd a oedd ar gael i’r ddau ymgynghorydd a’r diwylliant o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol ar y pryd. Ar yr un pryd, clywais rywfaint o dystiolaeth am y newid mewn diwylliant ers hynny.
Roeddwn eisoes wedi clywed tystiolaeth, yn ystod Cam Dau, am y pynciau hynny gan y ddau ymgynghorydd eu hunain a chan aelodau eraill o’r staff meddygol, nyrsio a gweinyddol yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside. Ar gyfer gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, casglodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan amrywiaeth o ffynonellau. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Gyfarwyddwyr Meddygol y tair ymddiriedolaeth yn gyfrifol am ysbytai y gellid cymharu eu maint ag Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside. Rhoddodd y cyfreithwyr a oedd yn cynrychioli’r ddau ymgynghorydd ddatganiadau tyst gan yr Athro Alan Aitkenhead, Athro Anaesthesia, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham, a Dr John Givans, meddyg teulu wedi ymddeol sy’n gwneud gwaith ymgynghorol i’r Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan y ddau. Darparodd y sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol a’r BMA gyfraniadau ysgrifenedig, a rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar hefyd gan Dr Gerard Panting, o’r Gymdeithas Diogelu Meddygol. Gwrthododd y ddau ymgynghorydd y cyfle i roi tystiolaeth bellach, er iddynt gael eu cynrychioli yn y gwrandawiadau.
Y Darlun Ehangach
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar ac ysgrifenedig gan y sefydliad Public Concern at Work (PCaW), sy’n cynnig help ac anogaeth i sefydliadau (sefydliadau’r GIG yn arbennig) sy’n dymuno creu a meithrin diwylliant lle mae staff yn teimlo’n ddiogel i godi pryderon. Mae hefyd wedi sefydlu ac yn gweinyddu llinell ffôn gymorth sy’n rhoi cyngor cyfreithiol cyfrinachol rhad ac am ddim ynghyd â chymorth ymarferol i unigolion sy’n ystyried codi pryderon. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mr Guy Dehn, Cyfarwyddwr, PCaW, am ddatblygiad mesurau dros y blynyddoedd diwethaf i annog pobl â phryderon go iawn ynghylch camarfer i wneud eu pryderon yn hysbys, ac i ddiogelu’r rheiny sy’n cymryd camau felly rhag dioddef niwed o ganlyniad.
Pryderon Staff Meddygfeydd a Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd
Roeddwn eisiau deall yr anawsterau yn cael eu hwynebu gan staff meddygfeydd teulu a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd â phryderon (yn benodol, pryderon yn ymwneud ag arfer clinigol wael neu ymddygiad arall y gallai beri risg i gleifion) am feddygon neu weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill, ac i archwilio ffyrdd o leihau’r anawsterau hynny. Deliodd Mr Dehn a’r materion hyn yn ei dystiolaeth, a chlywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth hefyd gan Mr Ian Hargreaves, Cyfarwyddwr Rhanbarthol wedi ymddeol, Coleg Brenhinol y Nyrsys (RCN), a Mrs Debra Davies, Rheolwraig Gwrth-dwyll a Pherfformiad hen Awdurdod Iechyd Morgannwg. Cafwyd tystiolaeth berthnasol hefyd gan nifer o sefydliadau, gan gynnwys AMSPAR, Cymdeithas Rheolwyr Meddygol Prydain, Cymdeithas y Defnyddwyr (a elwir yn Which? erbyn hyn), y Cyngor Nyrsio a Bydwreigiaeth, Cymdeithas yr Ymarferwyr Cymunedol ac Ymwelwyr Iechyd a Chymdeithas Swyddogion yr Heddlu. Darparwyd datganiad tyst gan Mr Simon Bennett, o’r Adran Iechyd, yn delio â’r materion hyn, ac fe’u trafodwyd yn ogystal mewn seminar lle bu cynrychiolwyr PCaW, AMSPAR, yr RCN a’r Adran Iechyd, ymhlith eraill, yn bresennol.
Pryderon Cynorthwywyr Cartref, Wardeiniaid Datblygiadau Cartrefi Lloches a Chynorthwywyr Gofal Preswyl
Gall cynorthwywyr cartref, wardeiniaid datblygiadau cartrefi lloches, cynorthwywyr gofal preswyl a’r rheiny mewn cyflogaeth debyg fod mewn sefyllfa i weld arfer clinigol wael neu ymddygiad arall gan feddygon a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd arall a allai roi cleifion mewn perygl. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn dymuno archwilio’r trefniadau ar gyfer dod â phryderon felly ymlaen. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad enghreifftiau gan 14 awdurdod lleol o’r polisïau ‘cyhuddo’ sydd ar waith ar hyn o bryd ar gyfer gweithwyr yn y meysydd a nodir uchod. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig a llafar hefyd gan bersonau â chyfrifoldeb am drefnu cymorth cartref a gwasanaethau wardeiniaid yn ardal Tameside ac mewn rhannau eraill o Fanceinion. Darparwyd tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig bellach gan nifer o sefydliadau, gan gynnwys yr NCSC, Arolygiaeth Safonau Gofal Cymru, y Comisiwn Gofal (yr Alban), Bwrdd Rheoli Llywodraeth Leol, UNISON ac Age Concern.
Y Meysydd Diddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad
Y pynciau olaf i’w hystyried gan yr Ymchwiliad oedd y gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) yn cael ei gweithredu gan y GMC, y corff sy’n gyfrifol am gofrestru meddygon ac sy’n chwarae rhan ganolog wrth reoleiddio’r proffesiwn, a chynlluniau’r GMC yn y dyfodol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon. Codwyd diddordeb yr Ymchwiliad yng ngweithdrefnau FTP y GMC mewn nifer o ffyrdd gwahanol. Yn gyntaf, roedd yn angenrheidiol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â Shipman ym 1976, pan gafodd ei hysbysu am Shipman yn cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau cyffuriau, ac i benderfynu a oedd y driniaeth honno, yn ôl safonau’r dydd, yn ddigonol ac yn briodol. Roedd llawer o bobl wedi mynegi’r farn bod delio â meddyg a oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau cyffuriau trwy lythyr rhybudd yn amhriodol, ac nid oedd wedi darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Roedd yn rhaid i mi ystyried ai achos ‘unigryw’ oedd achos Shipman neu a oedd, mewn gwirionedd, yn nodweddiadol o’r ffordd y deliwyd ag achosion o’r math hwnnw ar y pryd.
Ym 1976, nid oedd y gweithdrefnau a ddatblygwyd yn ddiweddarach gan y GMC ar gyfer delio â meddygon sâl (y gweithdrefnau iechyd) ar waith. Cawsant eu cyflwyno ym 1980, a’u nod pennaf oedd adferiad y meddyg dan sylw. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, be baent wedi bod mewn grym pan gyfeiriwyd Shipman at y GMC, byddid wedi delio â Shipman dan y gweithdrefnau hynny gan iddo gael ei ddiagnosio ei fod yn ddibynnol ar gyffuriau. Roedd hi’n angenrheidiol, felly, i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd o’u dechreuad ym 1980 hyd heddiw, er mwyn canfod a fyddai canlyniad achos Shipman wedi bod yn wahanol pe delid ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Roedd yn rhaid i mi ystyried hefyd a yw’r modd y mae’r GMC wedi delio yn y gorffennol â meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau fel Shipman wedi rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion.
Roedd hi’n angenrheidiol hefyd i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried a fyddai wedi bod yn fwy priodol i ddelio â meddygon yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau (yn enwedig y rheiny a oedd, fel Shipman, wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau troseddol difrifol) trwy weithdrefnau’r GMC ar gyfer disgyblu meddygon sydd, neu a allai fod, wedi bod yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM) (y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad) fel ffordd arall o (neu atodiad at) ddelio â nhw dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Roedd hyn o reidrwydd yn golygu archwilio’r modd yr oedd gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC yn cael eu gweithredu.
Mae’r gweithdrefnau rheoleiddio a disgyblu sy’n cael eu gweithredu gan y GMC yn rhan annatod o’r system fonitro gyffredinol. Os yw PCO yn derbyn cwyn am ymddygiad neu berfformiad meddyg teulu, neu os yw canlyniadau monitro lleol arferol yn awgrymu ei fod/bod yn perfformio’n wael, gellid cyfeirio’r meddyg at y GMC gyda golwg ar gymryd camau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Mae’r bygythiad gweithredu ar gofrestru yn rhoi’r ‘dannedd’ i’r broses fonitro leol, a gall effeithiolrwydd neu fel arall gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC ddiffinio llwyddiant y trefniadau monitro lleol. Os nad yw’r GMC yn gweithredu, neu os yw’n ymateb yn annigonol ac, o ganlyniad, bod meddyg sy’n peri risg i gleifion yn cael parhau i ymarfer, bydd y broses fonitro gyfan yn cael ei thanseilio. Fe wnaeth y rhyngddibyniaeth hon o’r systemau lleol a systemau’r GMC roi rheswm ychwanegol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio gweithdrefnau iechyd ac ymddygiad y GMC, yn ogystal â’i weithdrefnau perfformiad, y gellid cyfeirio meddygon y nodwyd bod eu perfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol yn lleol atynt. Mae’r Ymchwiliad hefyd wedi archwilio’r rhyngberthynas rhwng cwynion meddygon teulu’r GIG a gweithdrefnau disgyblu a’r gweithdrefnau FTP yn cael ei gweithredu gan y GMC. Yn benodol, ystyriodd yr Ymchwiliad ddwy gŵyn am Shipman yr adroddwyd amdanynt i’r awdurdodau GIG lleol a’r GMC, ac archwiliodd y modd yr ymdriniodd y cyrff hynny â’r cwynion. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi ystyried yr angen i safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon cydgysylltu gael eu cymhwyso gan wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau yn lleol a chan y rheiny sy’n gysylltiedig â gwneud penderfyniadau yn ystod camau gwahanol gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC.
O 2005, mae’r GMC yn bwriadu cyflwyno gofyniad i bob meddyg fynd trwy broses ail-ddilysu rheolaidd fel amod parhau i ddal trwydded i ymarfer. Diffinnir ail-ddilysu yn Neddf Meddygaeth 1983 (fel y’i diwygiwyd) fel
‘gwerthusiad o addasrwydd ymarferydd i ymarfer’
. Bydd cyflwyno’r gofyniad i ail-ddilysu yn rhoi cyfrifoldeb uniongyrchol i’r GMC am fonitro meddygon, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu. Os mai effaith ail-ddilysu oedd y byddai’n ofynnol i bob meddyg ar y gofrestr arddangos safon cymhwysedd a pherfformiad derbyniol y gellid ei mesur yn wrthrychol, byddai hyn yn ychwanegiad pwysig iawn at y trefniadau monitro presennol i feddygon teulu. Mae datblygu’r cynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, felly, wedi bod o gryn ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad. Rwyf wedi ystyried y cynigion gwahanol ar gyfer cynnal y broses ail-ddilysu sydd wedi’u cynnig gan y GMC dros y blynyddoedd diweddar, gyda golwg ar bennu a fyddai’r modelau amrywiol a gynigir yn rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion yn erbyn meddygon analluog, cyfeiliornus sy’n perfformio’n wael.
Bwriedir bod y meddygon hynny y mae amheuaeth ynghylch eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer (ac na allant, felly, gael eu hailddilysu yn y ffordd arferol) yn cael eu cyfeirio at weithdrefnau FTP y GMC (yn aml, ond nid yn ddieithriad, ar ffurf achos gydag elfen perfformiad). Felly, bydd y gweithdrefnau FTP yn tanategu’r broses ail-ddilysu. Pa mor llym bynnag yw’r broses gychwynnol gwerthuso meddygon at ddibenion ail-ddilysu, byddai’n ddiwerth pe bai’r gweithdrefnau FTP yn gweithredu er mwyn caniatáu i feddygon nad oeddent wedi cyrraedd y safon cymhwysedd a pherfformiad barhau i ymarfer. Rhoddodd y rhyngberthynas rhwng ailddilysu a’r gweithdrefnau FTP, felly, reswm ychwanegol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio effeithiolrwydd y gweithdrefnau hynny.
Cododd achos Mrs Overton faterion hefyd yn ymwneud â’r GMC. Un o’r rhesymau a gynigiwyd gan Dr Brown am beidio ag adrodd am y digwyddiad oedd na fyddai’r GMC wedi gweithredu ar gŵyn felly. Ni chredai fod ganddo ddigon o wybodaeth i seilio’i gŵyn arni. Roedd yn pryderu hefyd, pe bai’n gwneud adroddiad, gallai’r GMC ei feirniadu am ddifrïo Shipman. Er mwyn fy ngalluogi i asesu pwysigrwydd y darn hwn o dystiolaeth yn iawn, roedd yn angenrheidiol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio sut y byddai’r GMC yn gynnar ac yng nghanol y 1990au wedi delio â digwyddiadau difrifol, ‘unigryw’ yn ôl pob golwg, fel hwnnw’n ymwneud â Mrs Overton. Defnyddiwyd ffeithiau achos Mrs Overton gan yr Ymchwiliad hefyd i brofi sut y byddai’r GMC (yn ogystal â Chyrff GIG lleol) wedi delio â digwyddiad o’r math hwnnw yn y gorffennol mwy diweddar.
Cododd ddau fater arall yn ymwneud â’r GMC yn uniongyrchol o achos Shipman. Y cyntaf o’r rhain oedd anallu’r GMC, pan oedd Shipman dan ymchwiliad am lofruddiaeth - a hyd yn oed wedi’i arestio - i gymryd unrhyw gamau i’w atal rhag ymarfer. Dan y trefniadau a oedd ar waith ar y pryd, nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw rym i weithredu nes iddo gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o lofruddiaeth, dros flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach. Roedd yr ail fater yn ymwneud â darparu gwybodaeth am hanes blaenorol Shipman. Roedd y PCOau a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal sylfaenol yn Tameside yn parhau’n anymwybodol o hanes blaenorol Shipman nes adeg ail ymchwiliad yr heddlu ym mis Awst 1998. Nid oedd gan y rhan fwyaf o’i gleifion unrhyw syniad bod adroddiad wedi’i wneud yn flaenorol i’r GMC am gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Mae’r ffactorau hyn wedi f’arwain i ystyried a ddylai gwybodaeth o’r fath sy’n cael ei chadw gan y GMC fod ar gael yn haws i gyrff y GIG a sefydliadau eraill sydd â diddordeb i wybod, ac i gleifion hefyd.
Yn ddiweddar cyflwynodd y GMC weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Yn unol â’r gofyniad a bennwyd i mi wneud unrhyw argymhellion y credaf eu bod yn angenrheidiol er diogelwch cleifion, fe’i ystyriais yn briodol i archwilio’r gweithdrefnau newydd arfaethedig ac i ystyried y graddau y darparant ddiogelwch digonol i gleifion.
Tystion o’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Robert Gray, a oedd yn Gofrestrydd Cynorthwyol y GMC ym 1976 ac a fu’n gysylltiedig â phrosesu’r adroddiad yn erbyn Shipman. Darparwyd datganiad ysgrifenedig gan aelod arall o’r staff gweinyddol ar y pryd. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar hefyd gan Dr Derek Llewellyn, aelod o’r Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbi (PeCC) a benderfynodd cau achos Shipman ac anfon llythyr rhybudd ato, yn hytrach na chyfeirio’r achos ar gyfer gwrandawiad cyhoeddus gerbron y Pwyllgor Disgyblu. Darparwyd tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig gan Dr Ronald Bryson, un o’r seiciatryddion ymgynghorol y dibynnodd y PeCC ar ei dystiolaeth wrth wneud ei benderfyniad.
Cafodd y tystion a roddodd dystiolaeth yn ymwneud â digwyddiadau mwy diweddar eu dewis yn gyffredinol gan y GMC, ar ôl ymgynghori â’r Ymchwiliad. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan ddau gyn aelod o’r staff gweinyddol, un a fu yng nghyflogaeth y GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002, am arfer a gweithdrefnau yn y 1980au a’r 1990au. Disgrifiodd ddau uwch aelod presennol o’r staff gweinyddol yr arfer a’r gweithdrefnau a fu ar waith yn fwy diweddar. Darparwyd tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig gan nifer o gyn-aelodau ac aelodau presennol o’r GMC, rhai â chymwysterau meddygol (‘meddygol’) a rhai heb gymwysterau meddygol (‘lleyg’). Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Dr Krishna Korlipara (aelod meddygol presennol a chyn sgriniwr meddygol), Dr Sheila Mann (cyn aelod meddygol a sgriniwr iechyd), Mr Stephen Brearley (aelod meddygol presennol, a esboniodd gynlluniau’r GMC ar gyfer ailddilysu) a Mr Robert Nicholls a Dr Arun Midha (y ddau yn aelodau lleyg presennol). Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth hefyd gan yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, y Llywydd presennol, a Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr a Chofrestrydd, gyda’i gilydd ac ar wahân. Cynrychiolwyd y GMC yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr Malcolm Lewis (aelod meddygol presennol a chyn sgriniwr meddygol) a Mr Robin Macleod (aelod lleyg cyfredol).
Tystion Eraill
Mae’r Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol Westminster, wedi gwneud cryn dipyn o waith ymchwil, a gomisiynwyd gan y GMC, i weithrediad ei weithdrefnau FTP, yn benodol, ei weithdrefnau ymddygiad. Gyda chydweithwyr, lluniodd ddau Adroddiad manwl iawn ar sail ei hymchwil, un ym 1996 ac un yn 2000, ynghyd â Phapur arall yn 2003. Bu’n bresennol yn yr Ymchwiliad i roi tystiolaeth lafar. Rhoddodd Syr Donald Irvine, cyn Lywydd nesaf y GMC, gryn dipyn o dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig (gan gynnwys ei lyfr, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, a gyhoeddwyd yn 2003), a rhoddodd dystiolaeth lafar mewn perthynas â gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC, ei gynlluniau ar gyfer ailddilysu, a materion eraill yn berthnasol i Gam Pedwar. Rhoddwyd datganiadau ysgrifenedig gan nifer o dystion eraill, yn eu plith Miss Isabel Nisbet, a oedd ar secondiad ar y pryd i’r Cyngor ar gyfer Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (gelwir y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd nawr (CRHP/CHRE)). Esboniodd rôl y CRHP/CHRE wrth oruchwylio swyddogaethau rheoleiddio’r GMC. Bu Mr Sandy Forrest, Cyfarwyddwr y CRHP/CHRE, yn bresennol mewn dau o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad. Darparwyd datganiadau tyst gan y Ditectif Brif Arolygydd Bernard Postles (sydd wedi ymddeol bellach) a Mrs Jan Forster, cyn Gyfarwyddwr Gofal Sylfaenol, WPHA, yn delio â’u hymdrechion rhwng mis Awst a mis Hydref 1998 i sicrhau ataliad Shipman o ymarfer.
Meddygon yn Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau
Fel yr esboniais, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn dymuno archwilio a oedd y modd y mae’r GMC wedi delio â meddygon yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn y gorffennol wedi rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion ac i ystyried a fyddai’n briodol iddo ddelio â meddygon felly yn wahanol yn y dyfodol. Comisiynodd yr Ymchwiliad adroddiad gan Dr Andrew Johns, Seiciatrydd Fforensig Ymgynghorol, Ymddiriedolaeth GIG De Llundain a Maudsley, sy’n arbenigwr ar y pwnc camddefnyddio sylweddau. Deliodd yr adroddiad â materion meddygon yn camddefnyddio sylweddau, y risgiau’n cael eu creu gan feddyg sydd wedi ymadfer, tebygolrwydd mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau ac asesu risg hynny. Darparwyd datganiad tyst gan Dr Douglas Fowlie, Seiciatrydd Ymgynghorol, Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Gofal Sylfaenol Grampian, yn delio â’i brofiad o drin a goruchwylio meddygon, ac o gynghori’r GMC, mewn achosion o gamddefnyddio sylweddau, fe wnaeth Dr Johns, Dr Fowlie, yr Athro Syr Michael Rawlins (cyn Gadeirydd, y Cyngor Cynghori ar Gamddefnyddio Cyffuriau), Dr Kit Harling (Cyfarwyddwr NHS Direct, yr Adran Iechyd) a Dr Jolyon Oxley (Ysgrifennydd Cyffredinol, y Gwasanaeth Cynghori Cenedlaethol i Feddygon Sâl) gymryd rhan yn un o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad lle trafodwyd y pwnc hwn.
Ffeiliau Achos
Er mwyn cymharu’r modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman ym 1976 â’r modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achosion tebyg a adroddwyd i’r GMC yn ystod canol y 1970au i ddiwedd y 1970au, ac ar ôl hynny dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd, ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad gael, a chael, nifer fawr o ffeiliau’n ymwneud ag achosion yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau y deliodd y GMC â nhw. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud yn bennaf ag achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi cael gafael ar gyffuriau at ei ddefnydd/defnydd ei hun, yn hytrach na’r rheiny lle’r oedd haeriadau o ragnodi anghyfrifol, cyflenwi cyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon i eraill neu ymddygiad o natur felly. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad afael ar ffeiliau achos hefyd yn ymwneud ag achosion (yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau a heb fod yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau) lle’r oedd gonestrwydd y meddyg wedi bod dan sylw. Er mwyn archwilio’r modd y byddai’r GMC wedi delio ag achos Mrs Overton, pe bai adroddiad wedi’i wneud am yr achos, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad afael ar rai ffeiliau’n ymwneud â haeriadau o esgeulustod clinigol neu arfer clinigol gwael mewn cysylltiad â rhagnodi a rhoi cyffuriau yr adroddwyd i’r GMC amdanynt yng nghanol y 1990au ac wedi hynny. Gofynnwyd i dystion o’r GMC roi sylwadau ar gynnwys rhai o’r ffeiliau achos, yn ysgrifenedig ac yn eu tystiolaeth lafar.
Ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad gael, a chael, ffeiliau mewn nifer fach o achosion diweddar yn disgyn o fewn rhai categorïau ac a ddewiswyd ar hap. Amcan hyn oedd dangos y modd yr oedd agweddau amrywiol ar weithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn gweithio fel yr oeddent yn 2003. Gofynnwyd i dystion perthnasol roi sylwadau ar gynnwys y ffeiliau achos, yn ysgrifenedig ac yn llafar.
Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gwneud unrhyw archwiliad manwl o achosion y deliodd y GMC â nhw. Fodd bynnag, mae’r ffeiliau achos wedi cael eu defnyddio i ddangos y ffordd yr oedd y gweithdrefnau FTP yn gweithio’n ymarferol ar adegau amrywiol o’u gweithrediad. Maent wedi rhoi mewnwelediad gwerthfawr i weithrediad y gweithdrefnau nad ydynt yn agored yn gyffredinol i’r cyhoedd eu harchwilio. Cyfeiriaf at rai o’r achosion ym Mhenodau 16 i 24 o’r Adroddiad hwn. Cyfeirir hefyd at benderfyniadau cyhoeddedig y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol a phenderfyniadau’r Cyfrin Gyngor a’r Uchel Lys mewn perthynas ag apeliadau yn erbyn penderfyniadau pwyllgorau FTP y GMC, a cheisiadau am adolygiad barnwrol o benderfyniadau a wnaed gan y GMC. Lle nad yw amgylchiadau’r achos dan sylw yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus, rhoddwyd rhifau cod i’r meddygon cysylltiedig, a hepgorwyd rhai manylion (fel dyddiadau) er mwyn diogelu cyfrinachedd.
Tystiolaeth Ychwanegol
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad ymatebion i holiadur a ddosbarthwyd gan Alexander Harris, y cyfreithwyr yn cynrychioli Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside, i’r teuluoedd a ffrindiau hynny i gleifion Shipman y maent yn gweithredu ar eu rhan. Roedd yr holiadur yn gofyn am farnau ar,
, y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achos Shipman ym 1976 a’r modd y dylid delio â meddygon sy’n cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau cyffuriau. Ysgrifennodd yr Ymchwiliad ei hun at amrywiaeth o sefydliadau, yn gofyn am eu barnau. Derbyniwyd 31 o ymatebion. Hefyd, dosbarthodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur i ddetholiad ar hap o PCTau, yn gofyn am eu profiad o ddelio â’r GMC; ymatebodd chwech ohonynt.
Tystiolaeth Ddogfennol
Nid yw’r dystiolaeth y cyfeiriais ati uchod, wrth gwrs, yn cynrychioli’r darlun cyfan. Hefyd, rwyf wedi gallu archwilio ac ystyried dogfennau o’r ffynonellau canlynol.
Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine a’i Ragflaenwyr
Yn fuan iawn wedi sefydlu’r Ymchwiliad yn 2001, darparodd y WPHA ffeiliau o’i ddogfennau yn ymwneud â gweithgareddau monitro’r PCOau yn ystod amser Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Roedd rhai o’r dogfennau hyn yn gyffredinol eu natur, ac roedd rhai’n ymwneud yn benodol â Shipman. Ers cyflwyno’r dogfennau yn y lle cyntaf, mae’r WPHA wedi ymateb i geisiadau gan yr Ymchwiliad i ddarparu dogfennau pellach a rhagor o wybodaeth.
Yr Adran Iechyd
Darparodd yr Adran Iechyd gryn dipyn o ddeunydd cefndir, gan gynnwys dogfennau ymgynghorol, Papurau Gwyn y Llywodraeth, cylchlythyron, adroddiadau, arweiniad a chyfarwyddyd, yn ymwneud â’r cyfnod o’r 1970au i’r amser pan stopiodd Shipman ymarfer a thu hwnt. Mae hyn wedi fy ngalluogi i roi’r amrywiol drefniadau a oedd ar waith yn Tameside mewn cyd-destun, ac i ddeall datblygiad y trefniadau ar gyfer rheoleiddio meddygon teulu dros oddeutu’r 30 mlynedd diwethaf. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer cyfyngedig o ddogfennau a oroesodd o’r adeg pan oedd y Gwasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol yn gyfrifol am ymweld â meddygon teulu.
Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu
Darparodd yr RCGP ddogfennaeth i’r Ymchwiliad yn cofnodi’i ran yn y datblygiadau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer rheoleiddio meddygon teulu, sydd yn amlwg wedi bod yn hynod bwysig. Hefyd darparwyd dogfennau yn ymwneud â gwobrau a marcwyr safon amrywiol yr RCGP a’i gynigion ar gyfer y prosesau arfarnu ac ailddilysu.
Atodwyd oddeutu 9000 o dudalennau o ddogfennau at ddatganiadau tyst amrywiol Mr Scott, yn ymwneud â gweithredu gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC. O ganlyniad, mae’r GMC wedi darparu llawer iawn o ddogfennaeth bellach, rhywfaint ar gais penodol yr Ymchwiliad a rhywfaint ar ei liwt ei hun. Yn gynwysedig yn y dogfennau hyn yr oedd papurau briffio, cofnodion a thrawsgrifiadau’n ymwneud â chyfarfodydd diweddar y Cyngor.
Sefydliadau Eraill
Hefyd, derbyniais gyfoeth o ddogfennaeth o sefydliadau eraill, yn nodedig yr NCAA, CHI, yr NPSA, y BMA a PCaW.
Cylchgronau Academaidd a Phroffesiynol a Chyhoeddiadau Proffesiynol Eraill
Gyda chymorth y Cynghorwr Meddygol i’r Ymchwiliad, Dr Aneez Esmail, casglodd tîm yr Ymchwiliad, o gylchgronau academaidd a phroffesiynol a chyhoeddiadau eraill, lawer iawn o lenyddiaeth wedi’i chyhoeddi yn delio â,
, y systemau rheoleiddio a disgyblu ar gyfer meddygon teulu, offer ar gyfer monitro a gwerthuso meddygon teulu, gwerthuso meddygon teulu, cynigion ar gyfer ailddilysu meddygon, codi pryderon, systemau cwyno’r GIG, monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu a gweithredu gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC. Rwyf wedi cyfeirio ar rywfaint o’r llenyddiaeth hon yn ystod yr Adroddiad hwn.
Bu’r cyfnod y bu’r Ymchwiliad yn ystyried y pynciau hyn yn gyfnod o newid i’r proffesiwn, gyda chyflwyno arfarnu meddygon teulu a gweithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC, creu cyrff newydd (fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r CRHP/CHRE), datblygu sefydliadau sydd wedi’u creu’n ddiweddar (fel yr NCAA a’r NPSA), cyflwyno’r Contract GMS newydd a chyflwyniad ailddilysu cyn bo hir. Dadleuwyd a thrafodwyd pob un o’r newidiadau hyn yn y cyhoeddiadau proffesiynol sy’n cael eu cynhyrchu’n rheolaidd. Mae’r cyhoeddiadau hyn wedi rhoi mewnwelediad defnyddiol i agwedd aelodau’r proffesiwn tuag at yr amryw ddatblygiadau sydd wedi’u rhoi ar waith neu sy’n cael eu cynnig.

---  ---
Wrth baratoi ar gyfer Cam Pedwar, dechreuodd yr Ymchwiliad drwy ofyn am farnau nifer fawr o sefydliadau ac unigolion y credwyd eu bod yn debygol o fod â diddordeb mewn rhywfaint neu bob un o’r pynciau i’w hystyried yn ystod Cam Pedwar. O ganlyniad i’r rhain ac ymholiadau dilynol, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn gallu nodi’r personau a’r sefydliadau hynny a fyddai o bosibl yn gallu darparu tystiolaeth a deunydd arall a fyddai’n cynorthwyo’r Ymchwiliad. Hefyd, fel y soniais yn barod, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cyhoeddi holiaduron a cheisiadau amrywiol am wybodaeth a dogfennau.
Yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, cyhoeddodd yr Ymchwiliad Bapur Ymgynghorol, ‘Safeguarding Patients: Topics for Consideration at the Stage Four Seminars’. Diben y Papur Ymgynghorol oedd darparu ffocws ar gyfer ymatebion ysgrifenedig ac ar gyfer trafodaethau mewn cyfres o seminarau a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ionawr 2004. Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad ymatebion ysgrifenedig gan 95 o unigolion a sefydliadau. Ystyriwyd a thrafodwyd y barnau a fynegwyd yn yr ymatebion hynny yn y seminarau.
Roedd y seminarau’n cwmpasu chwe phwnc gwahanol a pharodd dros wyth niwrnod. Yn cymryd rhan yn y seminarau oedd cynrychiolwyr sefydliadau ac unigolion gyda diddordeb ac arbenigedd yn y pynciau dan sylw. Soniais uchod am lawer o’r rheiny a gymerodd ran. Cyfeirir at lawer o’r barnau a fynegwyd yn ystod proses ymgynghori’r Ymchwiliad yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Y Persbectif Rhyngwladol
Roedd un o’r seminarau, a barodd ddau ddiwrnod, wedi ymroi i drafodaeth o’r systemau mewn pum awdurdodaeth arall. Dywedodd Dr Perry Pugno (Cyfarwyddwr, Adran Addysg Feddygol, American Academy of Family Physicians, UDA) wrth yr Ymchwiliad am y trefniadau cyfredol ar gyfer monitro ac ail-ardystio meddygon teulu yn yr UDA, ynghyd â newidiadau i’r broses ail-ardystio a gynllunnir ar gyfer y dyfodol. Disgrifiodd hefyd y modd yr oedd y National Practitioner Data Bank yn gweithio, sef cronfa ddata o wybodaeth am ymarferwyr teulu y mae gan y cyhoedd fynediad ati. Ar ail ddiwrnod y seminar, disgrifiodd y modd y mae cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu yn cael eu prosesu yn UDA. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr André Jacques (Cyfarwyddwr, Practice Enhancement Division, Collège des Médecins du Québec, Montréal, Canada) am y systemau ar gyfer monitro perfformiad ymarferwyr teulu sy’n cael eu defnyddio yn nhalaith Québec. Disgrifiodd hefyd rôl reoleiddio’r Coleg. Disgrifiodd Dr Rocco Gerace (Cofrestrydd, Coleg Meddygon a Llawfeddygon Ontario, Toronto, Canada) y systemau monitro meddygon teulu sydd ar waith yn nhalaith Ontario, ynghyd â’r cynlluniau ar gyfer y rhaglen Cynnal a Gwella Perfformiad Meddygon, system ailddilysu, i’w chyflwyno yn y dyfodol. Soniodd Dr Gerace am rôl reoleiddio’r Coleg hefyd. Disgrifiodd Mr Ronald Paterson (Comisiynydd Iechyd ac Anabledd, Seland Newydd) y system ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion yn Seland Newydd ac, yn benodol, ei rôl ei hun fel archwiliwr annibynnol cwynion am weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd unigol a systemau gofal iechyd. Soniodd yr Athro Chris van Weel (Pennaeth yr Adran Meddygaeth Deuluol a Meddygaeth Gymdeithasol, Prifysgol Nijmegen, yr Iseldiroedd) am y trefniadau ar gyfer rheoleiddio meddygaeth deuluol yn ei wlad. Bu’r Athro Baker a’r Athro David Newble (Athro Addysg Feddygol, Pennaeth yr Adran Addysg Feddygol, Cyfarwyddwr Dysgu ac Addysgu, y Gyfadran Feddygaeth, Prifysgol Sheffield) ill dau yn bresennol ar un diwrnod o’r seminar hwn.

---  ---
Y Trefniadau ar gyfer Dosbarthu Tystiolaeth
Roedd y trefniadau ar gyfer dosbarthu tystiolaeth yr un fath ar gyfer Cam Pedwar ag ar gyfer Cyfnod Un. Fe’u disgrifir ym mharagraffau 3.17 a 3.18 yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf. Fel ag yng Nghyfnod Un, cafodd yr holl dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael i’r Ymchwiliad ei rhyddhau i’r cyhoedd trwy wefan yr Ymchwiliad ac eithrio lle’r oedd yn rhaid golygu’r deunydd i barchu cyfrinachedd neu i ddiogelu hunaniaeth unigolion nad oeddent yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â Shipman.
Y Cyfarfod Cyhoeddus
Ddydd Llun, 17 Mawrth 2003, cynhaliodd yr Ymchwiliad Gyfarfod Cyhoeddus, lle’r esboniais y trefniadau ar gyfer Camau Tri a Phedwar o Gyfnod Dau.
Cynrychiolaeth
Cyn ac ar ôl y Cyfarfod Cyhoeddus, rhoddais ganiatâd i unigolion a sefydliadau amrywiol i gael eu cynrychioli gerbron yr Ymchwiliad yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, ac i rai, argymhellais nawdd ar gyfer y gynrychiolaeth honno ar gost gyhoeddus. Gellir gweld rhestr o gyfranogwyr yng Ngham Pedwar a’u cynrychiolaeth yn Atodiad A i’r Adroddiad hwn.
Llythyrau Salmon
Cyn i wrandawiadau Cam Pedwar gychwyn, anfonodd y Cyfreithiwr i’r Ymchwiliad, Mr Henry Palin, lythyrau (a elwir ‘llythyrau Salmon’) at y personau a’r sefydliadau hynny y gallai eu hymddygiad fod yn destun beirniadaeth gan yr Ymchwiliad. Nodwyd y beirniadaethau posibl yn glir yn y llythyrau hynny.
Pe byddai unrhyw feirniadaethau potensial pellach yn dod i’r golwg yn y gwrandawiadau neu wedi hynny, roedd y rhain yn destun llythyrau Salmon pellach. Rhoddwyd y cyfle i’r rheiny a dderbyniodd lythyrau Salmon i ymateb i feirniadaethau potensial yn ysgrifenedig, yn ogystal ag yn ystod eu tystiolaeth lafar yn y gwrandawiadau.
Darlledu
Roeddwn wedi rhoi caniatâd i wrandawiadau Camau Un, Dau a Thri gael eu darlledu yn unol â phrotocol a baratowyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, ac a gynlluniwyd i sicrhau na fyddai deunydd yr Ymchwiliad yn cael ei gamddefnyddio. Newidiwyd y protocol hwnnw ychydig ym mis Medi 2002. Nid achosodd y trefniadau hynny unrhyw anawsterau yn ystod Camau Un, Dau na Thri, ac ni dderbyniais unrhyw sylwadau yn awgrymu y dylid rhoi’r gorau iddynt. Rhoddais ganiatâd felly i sefydliadau cydnabyddedig i ddarlledu yn ystod Cam Pedwar, cyhyd â’u bod yn cydymffurfio â’r protocol a newidiwyd ychydig, yn esbonio dyletswyddau darlledwyr mewn perthynas â gwefannau. Yn ystod Cam Pedwar, derbyniais a chaniatáu chwe chais gan dystion i beidio darlledu’u tystiolaeth. Rhoddais gyfarwyddyd hefyd na ddylid darlledu rhai rhannau o’r dystiolaeth yn ymwneud â’r modd yr oedd y GMC wedi delio ag achosion unigol, ac na ddylid defnyddio’r sgriniau cyhoeddus i arddangos dogfennau yn ystod y rhannau hynny o’r gwrandawiadau pan oedd yr achosion hynny’n cael eu trafod. Roedd hynny er mwyn parchu cyfrinachedd y meddygon a oedd yn destun yr achosion hynny.

---  ---
Cynhaliwyd y gwrandawiadau llafar yn Siambr y Cyngor yn Neuadd y Dref Manceinion. Cynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar rhwng dydd Llun, 14 Gorffennaf 2003 a dydd Iau, 18 Rhagfyr 2003.
Roedd y trefniadau ar gyfer y gwrandawiadau llafar, ac ar gyfer cyhoeddi tystiolaeth, yr un fath ar gyfer gwrandawiadau Cyfnod Un. Fe’u disgrifir ym mharagraffau 3.28 i 3.36 o fy Adroddiad Cyntaf. Cadwyd yr oriel gyhoeddus yn Neuadd y Dref ar agor, a phostiwyd trawsgrifiadau a dogfennau eraill ymlaen at wefan yr Ymchwiliad ar ôl gwrandawiad bob diwrnod.
Bu gwirfoddolwyr o Wasanaeth Tystion Cymorth Dioddefwyr Tameside yn bresennol i gynorthwyo tystion teulu a thri thyst arall pan ddaethant i roi tystiolaeth yng ngwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, ond nid oedd eu hangen yn ystod gweddill y gwrandawiadau hyn. Rwy’n ddiolchgar iawn i Wasanaeth Tystion Cymorth Dioddefwyr Tameside am yr holl gymorth a roddwyd ganddynt yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad.
Yn gyffredinol, cafodd tystion a roddodd dystiolaeth lafar yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar eu galw gan y Cwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, er lles tegwch, rhoddwyd y cyfle i’r tystion hynny a dderbyniodd lythyrau Salmon i wneud datganiad agoriadol o’u tystiolaeth mewn ymateb i gwestiynau gan eu cwnsler neu gyfreithiwr eu hunain, cyn cael eu holi gan y Cwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad. Ni wnaeth un o’r rheiny a dderbyniodd lythyrau Salmon yng Ngham Pedwar fanteisio ar y cyfle hwn.
Cyflwyniadau
Ar ôl i wrandawiadau Cam Pedwar ddod i ben, gwnaethpwyd cyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig gan gynrychiolwyr yr unigolion a’r sefydliadau hynny y rhoddwyd caniatâd iddynt gael cynrychiolaeth. Rhoddodd y Cwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad gyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig hefyd yn ymwneud â rhai materion penodol. Cynigiais gyfle i bob cynrychiolydd wneud sylwadau y dylwn i glywed cyflwyniadau llafar, ond ni chefais unrhyw sylwadau felly. Er nad wyf, yn ystod yr Adroddiad hwn, wedi gwneud unrhyw gyfeiriadau uniongyrchol at y cyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig a dderbyniwyd, rwyf wedi’u hystyried yn ofalus ac wedi rhoi ystyriaeth lawn iddynt wrth lunio fy nghasgliadau.

---  ---
Cynhaliwyd y seminarau yn Siambr y Cyngor yn Neuadd y Dref Manceinion ddydd Llun 19, dydd Mawrth 20, dydd Iau 22, dydd Gwener 23, dydd Llun 26, dydd Mawrth 27, dydd Iau 29 a dydd Gwener 30 Ionawr 2004. Cymerodd gyfanswm o 37 o gyfranogwyr ran yn y trafodaethau yn y seminarau amrywiol. Gellir gweld rhestr o’r rhai a gyfranogodd yn y seminarau yn Atodiad B i’r Adroddiad hwn. Cafodd y trafodaethau hynny eu harwain gan y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad. Er eu bod yn drafodaethau strwythuredig, roeddent yn llawer llai ffurfiol na’r dystiolaeth lafar a roddwyd yn ystod gwrandawiadau arferol yr Ymchwiliad.
Roedd y cyfranogwyr yn y seminarau wedi cyflwyno ymatebion ysgrifenedig i Bapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad o flaen llaw, ac wedi ymhelaethu ar yr ymatebion hynny yn ystod y seminarau. Roedd y personau hynny a oedd yn bresennol yn y seminarau fel gwylwyr yn gallu codi pwyntiau drwy’r Cwnsler i’w hystyried gan y rheiny’n cymryd rhan yn y seminarau. Ar ôl y seminarau, derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer o ymatebion pellach, gan gyfranogwyr a oedd yn dymuno cadarnhau neu adolygu barnau a fynegwyd yn flaenorol, a chan bobl a fynychodd y seminarau, neu a ddaeth yn ymwybodol o’r trafodaethau a gafodd eu cynnal, ac a oedd eisiau cyfrannu eu barnau eu hunain. Mae rhestr o ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol i’w gweld yn Atodiad C i’r Adroddiad hwn.
Cefais fod y seminarau, ac yn wir y broses ymgynghori gyfan a ymgymerodd yr Ymchwiliad â hi, yn hynod werthfawr o ran esbonio fy meddyliau ac o ran fy nghynorthwyo i ffurfio fy argymhellion ar gyfer y dyfodol.

---  ---
Ym Mhenodau 3 a 4 o’r Adroddiad hwn, byddaf yn disgrifio’r trefniadau ar gyfer gweinyddu a monitro’r ddarpariaeth gofal sylfaenol yn ystod cyfnod Shipman mewn meddygaeth deuluol, rhwng 1974 a 1998. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried amgylchiadau penodi Shipman i feddygfa Donneybrook, a’i symudiad at ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun ym 1992. Ym Mhennod 5, byddaf yn ystyried y newidiadau i’r trefniadau ar gyfer gweinyddu a monitro’r ddarpariaeth gofal sylfaenol sydd wedi digwydd er 1998.
Bydd Pennod 6 yn ymwneud â’r system ar gyfer delio â chwynion am feddygon teulu cyn 1996, a’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â chwynion yn erbyn Shipman, a wnaed ym 1985, 1990 a 1992. Ym Mhennod 7, byddaf yn trafod y system cwynion cleifion sydd wedi bod ar waith er 1996 a’r system newydd sydd bellach wedi’i chyflwyno’n rhannol.
Codi pryderon yw testun Penodau 8, 9, 10 ac 11. Mae Pennod 8 yn disgrifio profiad yr ychydig bobl hynny a oedd â phryderon ynghylch marwolaethau cleifion Shipman. Mae Pennod 9 yn archwilio pa un a oedd y staff ym meddygfa Shipman yn gwybod am ei weithgareddau troseddol, neu â rheswm i’w hamau. Mae Pennod 9 hefyd yn edrych ar sefyllfa staff y feddygfa, ac ar yr anawsterau y gallent eu hwynebu wrth ddod ymlaen ag unrhyw bryderon y gall fod ganddynt am feddygon a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill o fewn y feddygfa. Mae Pennod 10 yn canolbwyntio ar faterion yn gysylltiedig â marwolaeth Mrs Overton. Mae Pennod 11 yn delio â materion cyffredinol yn ymwneud â chodi pryderon yn y cyd-destun cyflogaeth ac mewn amgylchiadau eraill, ac at gamau y gellid eu cymryd i ddarparu diogelwch pellach i bersonau sy’n dymuno dod ymlaen â phryderon go iawn.
Ym Mhennod 12, rwy’n disgrifio’r trefniadau presennol ar gyfer rheolaeth glinigol a chyfyngiadau’r trefniadau hynny. Mae Pennod 13 yn delio â sefyllfa ymarferwyr unigol, a’r camau y dylid eu cymryd i osgoi’r sefyllfa lle maent ar eu pennau’u hunain yn broffesiynol.
Mae Pennod 14 y cynnwys trafodaeth am ddichonoldeb a dymunoldeb monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu, profiad y cyrff hynny sydd wedi gwneud gwaith monitro felly yn y gorffennol, a’r modd y gellid ei drefnu yn y dyfodol.
Mae Pennod 15 yn rhoi cyflwyniad i’r adran o’r Adroddiad sy’n delio â gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC a’i gynlluniau ar gyfer ailddilysu. Ym Mhennod 16, byddaf yn archwilio’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â’r adroddiad am Shipman yn cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau ym 1976. Mae Pennod 17 yn delio â’r anawsterau wrth ddiffinio cysyniadau SPM a pherfformiad diffygiol difrifol, y seiliwyd yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad a pherfformiad arnynt.
Ym Mhennod 18, rwy’n archwilio prosesu cwynion gan staff gweinyddol y GMC sydd, yn y gorffennol diweddar, wedi arwain at 65% o achosion yn cael eu gwrthod yn gynnar iawn. Ym Mhenodau 19 i 22, rwy’n archwilio’r broses sgrinio, gwaith y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol, a gweithrediad gweithdrefnau iechyd y GMC. Ym Mhennod 23, rwy’n ystyried y modd y mae’r GMC wedi delio â meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn y gorffennol, a’r newidiadau y credaf y dylid eu gwneud yn y dyfodol. Mae Pennod 24 yn cynnwys archwiliad o weithrediad gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Mae Pennod 25 yn ystyried y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ac, ym Mhennod 26, rwy’n archwilio cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ailddilysu meddygon. Mae Pennod 27 yn nodi fy nghynigion ar gyfer newid.

---  ---
Yng Ngham Pedwar, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cwmpasu ystod eang o faterion ac wedi derbyn llawer iawn o dystiolaeth. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi nodi rhai rhannau o’r dystiolaeth yn fanwl, ond, yn gyffredinol, dim ond fy sylwadau a’m casgliadau yn seiliedig ar y cyfan a glywais ac a ddarllenais yr wyf wedi’u cofnodi. Mae’r dystiolaeth ar gael ar wefan yr Ymchwiliad i’r rheiny sy’n dymuno’i darllen. Rwy’n ymwybodol bod rhai agweddau ar y dystiolaeth y cyfeiriais ati’n fyr iawn. Er enghraifft, prin y soniais am y cyflwyniadau hynod ddiddorol a dderbyniwyd yn y seminarau rhyngwladol. Nid yw hyn yn golygu nad oeddent o unrhyw werth, neu nad ydynt wedi dylanwadu ar fy meddwl; maent wedi gwneud hynny. Golyga’n unig fy mod wedi gorfod bod yn ddetholus. Mae’r Adroddiad hwn eisoes yn un hir ac wedi cymryd sawl mis i’w ysgrifennu. Ni fyddwn wedi dymuno oedi’i gyhoeddi mwy.

---  ---
Y Fframwaith Rheoleiddio Proffesiynol Ehangach
Cyn 1974
O 1974: Strwythur a Swyddogaethau Pwyllgorau Ymarferwyr Teulu
Y Gwasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol
Penodiad Shipman i Feddygfa Donneybrook

---  ---
Pan ddaeth troseddau Shipman i’r golwg, roedd teimlad cyffredinol o anghrediniaeth nad oedd yr awdurdodau a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddarpariaeth gofal iechyd sylfaenol wedi canfod ei weithgareddau afreolaidd ac wedi cymryd camau i’w atal rhag ymarfer flynyddoedd ynghynt. Yr unig beth a wnaeth canfod ei fod wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog ym 1976 o droseddau yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau rheoledig (ffaith y tybir yn ddealladwy a oedd yn hysbys i’r awdurdodau hynny) oedd cynyddu’r teimlad hwnnw.
Roedd Shipman mewn meddygaeth deuluol o 1974 hyd at 1998, gyda seibiant o ddwy flynedd (o fis Medi 1975 hyd at fis Hydref 1977), yn dilyn ei ymadawiad o Todmorden. Dros y cyfnod hwnnw o dros 20 mlynedd, roedd newidiadau sylweddol yn y modd yr oedd meddygaeth deuluol yn cael ei threfnu. Er 1998, mae cyflymder y newid wedi cynyddu fwy fyth. Mae llawer o drefniadau newydd wedi’u cyflwyno, rhai ohonynt o ganlyniad uniongyrchol i ganfod gweithgareddau Shipman, ac eraill fel rhan o symudiadau ehangach i wella ansawdd gofal o fewn y GIG. Mae fframwaith cynnal meddygaeth deuluol heddiw yn wahanol iawn i hynny a oedd yn bodoli yn y 1970au a’r 1980au.
Yn y Bennod hon ac ym Mhennod 4, byddaf yn disgrifio’r trefniadau a oedd ar waith ar gyfer rheoleiddio gweithgareddau meddygon teulu yn ystod y cyfnod pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu. Ym Mhennod 5, byddaf yn nodi’r newidiadau a ddigwyddodd ers iddo stopio ymarfer ym 1998. Roedd manylion llawer o’r trefniadau y byddaf yn eu disgrifio yn gymhleth. At ddibenion presennol, dim ond crynhoi’r sefyllfa’n fras sydd angen ei wneud. Byddaf yn delio’n unig â’r trefniadau fel yr effeithiant ar Loegr. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried gweithredoedd y rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am benodi Shipman i’w swydd mewn meddygaeth deuluol yn Hyde ym 1977.

---  ---
Heddiw, mae oddeutu 34,500 o feddygon teulu yn ymarfer. Gweithia’r rhan fwyaf ohonynt yn gyfan gwbl o fewn y GIG. Mae rhai yn ymarfer yn breifat. Mae llawer o feddygon y GIG yn gwneud ychydig o waith preifat yn ychwanegol at eu gwaith GIG. Nid yw’r cyrff GIG sydd, dros y blynyddoedd, wedi bod yn gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal iechyd sylfaenol (ac y byddaf yn cyfeirio atynt yn gyfunol fel ‘sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol’ (PCOau) erioed wedi cael unrhyw gyfrifoldeb am feddygon teulu’n gweithio yn y sector preifat.
Hyd at yn ddiweddar, yr unig sefydliad â’r grym i reoleiddio meddygon yn ymarfer yn y sector preifat oedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC). Sefydlwyd y GMC dan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1858. Er mwyn bod â hawl i ymarfer, mae’n rhaid i feddyg fod ar y gofrestr feddygol yn cael ei chadw gan y GMC. Pennodd y Senedd ofyniad ar y GMC i sicrhau bod y rheiny sy’n cael eu cynnwys ar y gofrestr yn gymwys. Hyd at fis Tachwedd 2004, roedd yn ofynnol iddo hefyd weithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg, pan ddangoswyd, yn dilyn cwyn, bod y meddyg hwnnw wedi mynd yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol, nam difrifol ar yr iechyd neu berfformiad diffygiol difrifol. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd a gyflwynwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2004, bydd yn gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg os yw’n fodlon fod nam ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Y GMC yn unig a all ddileu hawl meddyg i ymarfer yn unrhyw le yn y DU. Gall wneud hynny pa un a yw’r meddyg yn ymarfer yn y GIG neu yn y sector preifat.
Pwyllgorau Meddygol Lleol
Mae pwyllgorau meddygon teulu sy’n cael eu hethol yn lleol (a elwir yn bwyllgorau meddygol lleol (LMCau) wedi cael cydnabyddiaeth statudol er 1911. Eu diben gwreiddiol oedd rhoi llais i feddygon teulu yn y modd y gweinyddir meddygaeth deuluol. Mewn gwirionedd, mae’r ystod eang o swyddogaethau sy’n cael eu cyflawni gan LMCau yn golygu bod mwy na llais yn unig ganddynt. Gall aelodau LMC, yn enwedig yr ysgrifennydd a’r cadeirydd, arfer cryn bŵer a dylanwad. Yn anad dim, dosbarthiadau gwleidyddol yw LMCau, sy’n cynrychioli buddiannau meddygon teulu mewn ymgynghoriadau a thrafodaethau gyda PCOau. Rhoddant gyngor a chymorth i ymarferwyr lleol. Mae rôl statudol ffurfiol gan LMCau hefyd mewn gweithdrefnau disgyblu a chwynion sy’n ymwneud â meddygon teulu. Mae’r grym ganddynt i enwebu cynrychiolwyr i fod yn aelodau pwyllgorau arbennig, gan gynnwys pwyllgorau disgyblu. Mae hawl statudol ganddynt i gael cyfle i fynegi barn am ystod eang o faterion sy’n effeithio ar feddygon teulu. Gallant hefyd fod yn ffynhonnell werthfawr o wybodaeth a deallusrwydd i’r PCOau.
Gall aelodau LMC, yn rhinwedd eu safle, gael eu penodi’n aelodau o PCOau. Roedd Shipman yn ysgrifennydd yr LMC yn Tameside rhwng 1981 neu 1982 a 1988. Fel cynrychiolydd yr LMC, roedd ganddo le am gryn dipyn o amser ar Fwrdd Gweithredol Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside (FPC), y PCO a oedd â chyfrifoldeb dros Tameside ar y pryd.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr William Greenwood, Gweinyddydd Cynorthwyol (Dirprwy Reolwr Cyffredinol yn ddiweddarach) FPC Tameside o 1983 hyd at 1990. Yn y 1970au, roedd wedi dal mwy o swyddi iau yn FPC Tameside ac wedi cydnabod mai cyfyngedig oedd ei wybodaeth uniongyrchol am y cyfnod hwn. Roedd yn cofio y byddai’r LMC a’r FPC, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, yn cydweithio i ddatrys materion a oedd yn peri pryder i’r naill a’r llall. Fodd bynnag, roedd yr LMC yn wyliadwrus o ran diogelu meddygon teulu rhag unrhyw ymyrraeth ganfyddedig gan yr FPC mewn materion proffesiynol. Ar brydiau, roedd staff yr FPC wedi dymuno cynnal arolygon gan ofyn cwestiynau i feddygon teulu. Nid oedd yr LMC yn fodlon cydweithredu yn yr arolygon. Gwrthwynebodd unrhyw ymgais gan yr FPC i ‘gamu allan o fowld gweinyddwyr’.

---  ---
Rhoddodd Deddf Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol 1946 gyfrifoldeb am ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol (ynghyd â gwasanaethau fferyllol, gwasanaethau deintyddol a gwasanaethau offthalmig) gyda 117 o gynghorau gweithredol. At ddiben yr Adroddiad hwn, byddaf yn delio’n unig â gwasanaethau meddygol, a oedd i’w darparu gan feddygon teulu. O gychwyn y GIG ym 1948, roedd meddygon teulu’n mwynhau statws gweithwyr proffesiynol hunangyflogedig yn darparu gwasanaethau dan gontract cenedlaethol, y Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC). Fel contractwyr annibynnol, yn hytrach na gweithwyr uniongyrchol, roedd eu perthynas â’r GIG yn wahanol iawn i berthynas meddygon yn cael eu cyflogi mewn gofal eilaidd (h.y. ysbytai) o fewn y GIG.
Contract rhwng meddygon teulu a’r Llywodraeth yw’r Contract GMC ynghylch trefniadau ar gyfer cyflenwi gwasanaethau meddygol. Hyd at fis Ebrill 2004, nodwyd cyfrifoldebau meddygon teulu mewn telerau gwasanaeth, a gallai dorri’r telerau hynny arwain at gamau disgyblu. Roedd taliadau am wasanaethau’n cael eu rheoli gan y Datganiad Ffioedd a Lwfansau (y ‘Llyfr Coch’), a gyhoeddwyd gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS) ar ôl trafod gyda’r proffesiwn. Roedd y telerau gwasanaeth a’r Llyfr Coch yn cael eu hadolygu o dro i dro.
Yn y blynyddoedd cynnar, roedd y rhan fwyaf o feddygon teulu’n ymarferwyr unigol. Roedd safonau ymarfer yn amrywiol tu hwnt. Roedd adeiladau meddygfeydd yn annigonol yn aml. Roedd tal meddygon yn cael ei seilio’n gyfan gwbl ar nifer y cleifion ar restr meddyg teulu. Arweiniodd hyn at gystadleuaeth am gleifion na wnaeth o reidrwydd arwain at welliant yn ansawdd y gofal.
Ym 1966, daeth Contract GMC newydd â newidiadau mawr i feddygaeth deuluol. Dan y Contract newydd, roedd cyfraniadau’n cael eu talu gan y GIG tuag at gost darparu adeiladau meddygfeydd a chyflogi staff meddygfeydd. Cyflwynwyd lwfans meddygfeydd grŵp newydd, ynghyd â thaliadau am waith y tu allan i oriau. Effaith y newidiadau hyn oedd annog meddygon teulu i wella’r ystod - ac, i ryw raddau o leiaf, ansawdd - gwasanaethau’n cael eu darparu. Ffurfiwyd meddygfeydd grŵp ac adeiladwyd canolfannau iechyd modern, gyda chyfleusterau gwell. Cafodd y system newydd ar gyfer ariannu meddygon teulu effaith sylweddol ar y berthynas rhwng meddygaeth deuluol a’r GIG. Golygai bod meddygon teulu i ryw raddau wedi dod yn ddibynnol yn ariannol ar FPCau. Dywed rhai bod Contract 1966 yn nodi cychwyn meddygaeth deuluol fodern, yn seiliedig ar dîm.

---  ---
Ym 1974, sef y flwyddyn y dechreuodd Shipman ymarfer, gwelodd y GIG y newid strwythurol mawr cyntaf ers ei sefydlu. Sefydlwyd 14 o awdurdodau iechyd rhanbarthol (RHAau). Roedd eu rôl yn cynnwys cyfrifoldeb am gynllunio ac am ddyrannu adnoddau i 90 o awdurdodau iechyd ardal (AHAau). Roedd cyfrifoldeb gan yr AHAau am sefydlu FPCau ar gyfer eu hardaloedd. Disodlodd yr FPCau hyn y cynghorau gweithredol. Roedd cyfrifoldeb statudol gan yr AHAau am ddarparu gwasanaethau iechyd teulu, gan gynnwys gwasanaethau meddygol. Rhoddwyd y ddyletswydd o weinyddu’r gwasanaethau hynny i’r FPCau. Yr awdurdodau â chyfrifoldeb dros Tameside oedd RHA y Gogledd Orllewin, AHA Tameside ac FPC Tameside.
Yn gyffredinol, roedd FPCau yn cael eu rheoli gan fwrdd gweithredol, yn cynnwys cadeirydd a 30 o aelodau, 15 ohonynt o’r proffesiynau contractwyr (h.y. meddygon teulu, deintyddion, optegwyr a fferyllwyr). Roedd yr wyth aelod meddygol yn cael eu henwebu gan yr LMC. Roedd 15 aelod lleyg yn ogystal. Gallai’r cadeirydd fod yn aelod lleyg neu’n aelod proffesiynol. Nid oedd gan FPCau unrhyw aelodau a oedd yn swyddogion (h.y. cyflogeion). Gweinyddwr oedd yr aelod uchaf o’r staff, a byddai cynorthwyydd ganddo/ganddi. Byddai’r ddau aelod hynny o staff yn cael eu penodi gan yr Adran Iechyd a Nawdd Cymdeithasol (DHSS). Ni fyddai staff cyfan FPC arferol yn cynnwys mwy na rhyw 25 o aelodau.
Roedd FPCau yn gyfrifol am sicrhau mynediad at, ac argaeledd, gwasanaethau meddygol i’r boblogaeth leol. Hefyd, roedd cyfrifoldebau ganddynt am
gynnal eu rhestrau meddygol
cyflogau meddygon teulu
gweinyddu telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu
gweithredu mecanwaith i ddelio â meddygon teulu yn torri eu telerau gwasanaeth.
Tasg yr FPCau oedd sicrhau bod y systemau a bennwyd ar gyfer cyflawni’u swyddogaethau amrywiol yn cael eu gweithredu’n iawn. Disgrifiwyd yr FPCau gan un tyst fel ‘dim ond sefydliadau taliadau a dognau mewn gwirionedd’. Nid oedd rôl reoli ganddynt. Nid oedd cyfrifoldeb ganddynt ychwaith am allu proffesiynol neu ansawdd gofal. Roedd y rhain yn faterion a oedd yn cael eu gadael i’r proffesiwn yn gyfan gwbl. Nid oedd gan yr FPCau unrhyw fynediad at arbenigedd meddygol annibynnol. Cymerodd yr LMCau gyfrifoldeb am gynnal safonau proffesiynol yn lleol. Yn genedlaethol, fel y dywedais yn barod, roedd y GMC yn gyfrifol am reoleiddio ymddygiad proffesiynol y meddygon ar ei gofrestr.
Y Rhestr Feddygol
Roedd yn ofynnol i bob FPC gadw rhestr feddygol o feddygon yn ei ardal a oedd wedi ymrwymo i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol. Roedd ceisiadau gan feddygon i gael eu cynnwys ar restr feddygol yn cael eu gwneud mewn tri amgylchiad gwahanol:
lle’r oedd aelod o feddygfa grŵp gyfredol wedi ymddeol, wedi marw neu wedi gadael am resymau eraill a bod angen rhywun yn ei le/lle
lle’r oedd ymarferydd unigol wedi marw neu wedi rhoi’r gorau i ymarfer, gan adael y feddygfa yn wag
lle’r oedd yn ymddangos bod galw am feddyg ychwanegol.
Ym mhob achos, roedd rhaid gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch a ddylid datgan swydd wag. Ni allai’r FPC ei hun wneud y penderfyniad hwnnw. Yn lle hynny, roedd y penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud gan y Pwyllgor Arferion Meddygol (MPC), corff cenedlaethol â swyddogaeth i sicrhau dosbarthu meddygon yn gyfartal ar draws Cymru a Lloegr.
Pan oedd swydd wag yn cael ei datgan er mwyn cael rhywun yn lle aelod o’r feddygfa bresennol, roedd rôl yr FPC wrth benodi meddyg i lenwi’r swydd honno yn gyfyngedig iawn. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at y rôl honno’n fanylach ym mharagraffau 3.51-3.54, pan fyddaf yn disgrifio penodiad Shipman i feddygfa Donneybrook. Pan oedd swydd wag yn dod ar gael yn un o’r ddau amgylchiad a nodir uchod, roedd yr FPC yn gyfrifol am hysbysebu’r swydd wag ac am lunio rhestr o ymgeiswyr a’u cyfweld. Byddai’r FPC wedyn yn gwneud argymhellion i’r MPC, a oedd yn gyfrifol am wneud y dewis terfynol.
Roedd grym FPC i ddileu meddyg teulu o’i restr yn gyfyngedig i achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg teulu wedi marw, wedi peidio â bod yn ymarferydd cofrestredig, wedi methu darparu gwasanaethau meddygol am gyfnod o chwe mis neu lle’r oedd cofrestriad y meddyg teulu wedi cael ei ddileu neu’i atal gan y GMC. Mewn amgylchiadau penodol, (gweler paragraff 3.24 isod), gallai FPC wneud sylwadau i Dribiwnlys y GIG y dylai meddyg gael ei dynnu oddi ar ei restr. Roedd Tribiwnlys y GIG yn gorff anadrannol gyda phwerau barnwrol. Ei ddiben oedd diogelu gwasanaethau iechyd teulu rhag meddygon a oedd yn niweidio’u heffeithlonrwydd. Roedd grym gan y Tribiwnlys i dynnu meddyg oddi ar restr FPC neu i ddatgan na ddylai’r meddyg gael ei gyflogi mewn unrhyw rinwedd yn gysylltiedig â darparu gwasanaethau meddygol.
Cyflogau
Roedd FPCau yn gyfrifol am gyflog meddygon teulu, yn unol â’r cynllun ffioedd a lwfansau cynyddol gymhleth a nodir yn y Llyfr Coch. Bwriad rhai o’r lwfansau hynny oedd rhoi cymhelliant i wella safonau. Fodd bynnag, roeddent yn gyfyngedig iawn o ran cwmpas.
Y Telerau Gwasanaeth
Pan oedd meddyg teulu’n cael ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar restr feddygol, roedd yn rhwym wrth delerau gwasanaeth a oedd yn cael eu nodi yn Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol a Fferyllol Cyffredinol) 1974 (Rheoliadau 1974). Roedd y telerau gwasanaeth yn pennu nifer o ofynion ar feddygon teulu, gan gynnwys y canlynol:
rhoi i’w cleifion yr holl wasanaethau meddygol personol angenrheidiol a phriodol o’r math a ddarperir fel arfer gan feddygon teulu
cadw cofnodion digonol o afiechydon a thriniaeth eu cleifion ar ffurflenni a gyflenwir gan yr FPC at y diben hwnnw
archebu, trwy roi rhagnodyn, unrhyw gyffuriau neu offer yr oedd eu hangen ar gyfer trin y claf.
Roedd telerau eraill yn ymwneud â materion fel derbyn a therfynu cyfrifoldeb am gleifion, cyfrifoldeb am ddarparu dirprwyon a chynorthwywyr, darparu lle priodol a digonol yn adeilad y feddygfa, a darparu tystysgrifau meddygol. Cyfrifoldeb yr FPC oedd gweinyddu’r telerau gwasanaeth a gweithredu ar unrhyw faterion yn codi o’r cyfryw waith gweinyddu.
Methiant i Gydymffurfio â’r Telerau Gwasanaeth
Roedd cyfrifoldeb gan FPCau yn ogystal am roi ar waith a gweinyddu mecanwaith disgyblu ar gyfer delio ag achosion lle’r oedd hi’n ymddangos bod meddyg teulu wedi methu cydymffurfio â’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth. Pennwyd gofyniad gan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau a Thribiwnlys y Gwasanaeth) 1974 i bob FPC sefydlu o leiaf un pwyllgor gwasanaethau meddygol (MSC). Swyddogaeth yr MSC oedd clywed cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu am fethiannau honedig i gydymffurfio â’u telerau gwasanaeth. Byddai tri aelod lleyg o’r FPC yn eistedd ar yr MSC, ynghyd â thri meddyg yn cael eu penodi gan yr LMC a’r cadeirydd. Roedd y cadeirydd yn berson lleyg, ac nid oedd o reidrwydd yn gorfod bod yn aelod o’r FPC.
Roedd y dasg o brosesu cwynion a darparu cymorth ysgrifenyddol a gweinyddol i’r MSC yn cael ei chyflawni gan staff yr FPC. Fodd bynnag, yr MSC oedd yn cymryd y penderfyniad a oedd meddyg teulu wedi torri ei delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, ac yn argymell gweithredu pellach os teimlai fod hynny’n briodol. Byddai’r FPC wedyn yn ystyried adroddiad yr MSC ac yn penderfynu pa gamau i’w cymryd. Byddai’n argymell i’r SoS y dylai rhybudd gael ei roi neu y dylid cadw swm yn ôl o gyflog y meddyg teulu. Fe allai, mewn amgylchiadau penodol (ac ar ôl ymgynghori â’r LMC), bennu cyfyngiad ar nifer y cleifion ar restr meddyg teulu. Mewn achos difrifol, gallai’r FPC wneud gosodiadau i Dribiwnlys y GIG y byddai parhau i gynnwys meddyg ar ei restr feddygol yn niweidio effeithiolrwydd y gwasanaethau yr oedd yn eu darparu. Gellid effeithio ar effeithlonrwydd os oedd y meddyg teulu yn fygythiad i gleifion neu os oedd safon y gofal yn cael ei ddarparu ymhell o’r hyn yr oedd gan y GIG a chleifion hawl i’w ddisgwyl. Gallai gosodiadau felly arwain at ddileu’r meddyg teulu oddi ar restr yr FPC, ac, mewn achos eithafol, o holl restrau’r GIG. Roedd cyfeiriadau at y Tribiwnlys, fodd bynnag, yn anghyffredin iawn, a’r weithdrefn yn un feichus iawn. Nid oedd gan yr FPC ei hun unrhyw rym i dynnu meddyg oddi ar ei restr (ac eithrio mewn amgylchiadau cyfyngedig y cyfeirir atynt ym mharagraff 3.19) nag i bennu amodau ar barhau i’w gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr.
Lle’r oedd yn ymddangos i FPC, ar ôl ymgynghori â’r LMC, fod meddyg yn analluog i gyflawni’i ymrwymiadau/hymrwymiadau dan y telerau gwasanaeth oherwydd salwch corfforol neu feddyliol, roedd yn agored i’r FPC i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i feddyg gyflwyno adroddiad meddygol i’r LMC. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yr FPC ei hun yn gallu dewis yr ymarferydd a oedd yn paratoi’r adroddiad, i bennu’r agweddau ar iechyd y meddyg y dylid delio â nhw yn yr adroddiad nag i weld yr adroddiad wedi iddo gael ei baratoi. Roedd yr holl swyddogaethau hyn yn cael eu cyflawni gan yr LMC. Y cyfan yr oedd hawl gan yr FPC i’w gael oedd adroddiad gan yr LMC, yn nodi barnau’r LMC am addasrwydd y meddyg i gyflawni’i ymrwymiadau/hymrwymiadau. Hyd yn oed os oedd yr adroddiad yn dangos fod y meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer, ni allai’r FPC ei atal/hatal rhag ymarfer, nag i wneud trefniadau arall i ofalu am gleifion, heb ymgynghori’n gyntaf â’r LMC a chael caniatâd yr SoS wedyn.
Rôl Gyfyngedig y Pwyllgorau Ymarferwyr Teulu
Yn fyr, roedd rôl yr FPCau yn gyfyngedig iawn, ac yn un eithaf hynod mewn rhag agweddau. Roeddent yn gyfrifol am weinyddu’r ddarpariaeth gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol, ond ychydig o reolaeth oedd ganddynt am y meddygon teulu a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddarparu’r gwasanaethau hynny. Roedd materion safonau ac ansawdd gofal yn cael eu hystyried fel materion i’w rheoleiddio gan y proffesiwn ei hun. FPCau oedd yn derbyn cwynion, a allai gynnwys cwynion am ansawdd gwasanaethau, ond ychydig o ddylanwad, neu ddim o gwbl, oedd ganddynt dros yr ansawdd hwnnw. Cyfle cyfyngedig oedd ganddynt i gysylltu’n uniongyrchol â meddygon teulu ar eu rhestrau, ac, fel yr af ymlaen i esbonio, ychydig o wybodaeth oedd ganddynt amdanynt.
Yn y 1970au, roedd rhai’n cydnabod (Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu’n nodedig) bod y safonau gofal ymhlith meddygon teulu yn amrywiol tu hwnt ac, yn achos rhai, yn annerbyniol o isel. Dechreuodd rhai aelodau o’r proffesiwn gymryd camau i geisio codi safonau. Bryd hynny, nid oedd FPCau yn gwneud unrhyw waith monitro ar berfformiad clinigol neu ansawdd y gwasanaethau’n cael eu cynnig. I’r graddau yr oedd unrhyw waith monitro o feddygon teulu’n cael ei wneud, y Gwasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol (RMS) oedd yn gwneud y gwaith hwnnw.

---  ---
Roedd yr RMS yn cynnwys staff meddygol a chefnogol yn cael eu cyflogi gan y DHSS ac wedi’u seilio mewn chwe rhanbarth yn Lloegr. Roedd gan bob rhanbarth uwch swyddog meddygol a oedd wedi’i ddynodi’n swyddog meddygol adrannol. Roedd y swyddog meddygol adrannol yn cael ei gefnogi gan nifer o swyddogion meddygol rhanbarthol (RMOau). Roedd gan yr RMO ddwy swyddogaeth arbennig. Yn gyntaf, roeddent yn darparu barnau meddygol ar gyfer cynlluniau budd-daliadau DHSS. Eu rôl arall oedd cynghori a chysylltu’n gyffredinol â meddygon teulu. Byddent yn ymweld â bob meddyg teulu yn gyson, unwaith bob blwyddyn neu ddwy fel arfer. Natur fugeiliol arferol oedd i’r ymweliadau hyn yn bennaf. Byddai ystod eang o faterion yn effeithio ar drefniant meddygaeth deuluol yn yr ardal yn cael eu trafod. Byddai ymweliadau’n cael eu defnyddio hefyd i wneud archwiliadau o adeiladau meddygfeydd ac i drafod arferion rhagnodi meddygon teulu. Roedd RMOau yn cynghori meddygon teulu am eu dyletswyddau mewn perthynas â chyffuriau rheoledig, ac fe’u hawdurdodwyd gan yr SoS i archwilio’u cofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig (CDR) a’u stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig. Hyd at y 1960au, byddai RMOau yn archwilio cofnodion clinigol er mwyn sicrhau eu bod yn cael eu cadw’n briodol. Roedd yr arfer hwnnw wedi dod i ben erbyn canol y 1960au.
Gan mai RMOau oedd, ar un adeg, yr unig gyswllt uniongyrchol rhwng meddygon teulu a’r DHSS, roedd y wybodaeth yn cael ei chasglu adeg ymweliadau â meddygfeydd yn rhoi mewnwelediad gwerthfawr potensial i’r modd yr oedd meddygaeth deuluol yn gweithredu ar lawr gwlad. Roedd gwybodaeth ar ffurf adroddiadau cyson (nid adroddiadau am ymweliadau â meddygfeydd unigol) yn cael eu trosglwyddo gan yr RMOau i swyddogion meddygol adrannol i’w dosbarthu o fewn y DHSS. Nid oedd unrhyw drefniant ffurfiol ar gyfer cyfleu’r wybodaeth hon i’r FPC perthnasol ar gyfer bob ardal. Gwnaeth rhai RMOau hi’n arfer i gysylltu’n agos â’u FPCau lleol, ond nid oedd hyn yn digwydd bob tro.
Yn ystod ei drafodion/thrafodion â meddyg teulu, gallai RMO gael ei ddeffro/deffro i’r posibilrwydd bod y meddyg teulu’n gor-ragnodi, neu ei fod/bod yn methu arfer gofal rhesymol wrth roi tystysgrifau meddygol neu nad oedd yn cadw cofnodion meddygol priodol. Mewn unrhyw un o’r amgylchiadau hynny, gellid arwain at achos disgyblu. Pe bai hynny’n digwydd, byddai’r SoS yn cyfeirio’r mater er mwyn dyfarnu arno, nid i’r FPC, ond i’r LMC. Y rheswm am hyn oedd bod materion fel ardystio meddygol, cadw cofnodion a rhagnodi yn cael eu hystyried fel materion i’w rheoleiddio gan y proffesiwn meddygol, nid gan y rheiny’n gyfrifol am weinyddu. Byddai’r LMC wedyn yn adrodd ei ganfyddiadau a’i argymhellion i’r SoS, a fyddai’n penderfynu ar gosb briodol. Pe rhoddid cyfarwyddyd i atal cyflog, byddai’r SoS yn cyfarwyddo’r FPC i weithredu hyn. Ac eithrio’r gwaith gweinyddol pur hwn, nid oedd gan yr FPC unrhyw ran i’w chwarae yn y prosesau disgyblu hyn. Mae’r dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu, mewn gwirionedd, mai anaml iawn yr oedd y prosesau hyn yn cael eu rhoi ar waith.

---  ---
Yn dilyn ei ymadawiad o Todmorden, gweithiodd Shipman am ryw 20 mis yn y Gwasanaethau Iechyd Plant Cymunedol yn Newton Aycliffe, County Durham. Yno, byddai’n cynnal clinigau ac yn cynghori ar ddatblygiad plant. Yn haf 1977, ymatebodd i hysbyseb a roddwyd yn y wasg feddygol gan feddygon yn ymarfer yn Donneybrook House yn Hyde. Roeddent yn chwilio am rywun yn lle Dr John Bennett, a oedd wedi gadael y feddygfa yn ddiweddar.
Trefniadau yn y Feddygfa
Roedd y trefniadau rhwng y saith meddyg ym meddygfa Donneybrook yn anarferol braidd. Ffurfiwyd y feddygfa drwy gyfuno tair partneriaeth ar wahân. Ar ôl y cyfuno, parhaodd dau o’r meddygon a oedd yn rhan o’r partneriaethau a oedd eisoes yn bod i weithredu rhestr unigol o gleifion. Roedd y ddau feddyg yn rhannu gofal y cleifion hynny. Roedd pob un o bum aelod arall y feddygfa yn gweithredu’i restr unigol ei hun. Roedd pob un o saith aelod y feddygfa yn rhannu costau staff a threuliau eraill. At y rhan fwyaf o ddibenion, roeddent yn cael eu trin gan FPC Tameside a’i olynwyr fel partneriaeth sengl.
Yn dilyn ymadawiad Dr John Bennet, parhaodd chwe meddyg i ymarfer yn Donneybrook House. Y chwe meddyg oedd Dr John Smith (yr uwch bartner), Dr Derek Carroll, Dr Geoffrey Bills, Dr William Bennett, a dau o recriwtiaid gymharol newydd, Dr Geoffrey Roberts a Dr Ian Napier, a ymunodd ym 1975 a 1976 yn y drefn honno. Swydd gyntaf Dr Roberts mewn meddygaeth deuluol oedd hon. Roedd Dr Napier wedi gweithio am ddwy i dair blynedd mewn meddygfa arall yn Stockport cyn ymuno â meddygfa Donneybrook. Parhaodd Dr Bills a Dr Carroll i weithredu rhestr ar y cyd. Gweithiai’r lleill fel ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain bron, ac eithrio eu bod wedi trefnu’u hunain yn ddau grŵp at ddiben cyflenwi ar gyfer hanner diwrnodau. Roedd Dr John Bennett a Dr Roberts wedi ffurfio un grŵp, a Dr Smith, Dr William Bennett a Dr Napier wedi ffurfio’r grŵp arall.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr Smith, Dr Bills, Dr Roberts, Dr Napier a Dr Jeffery Moysey (a ymunodd â’r feddygfa ym 1983). Darparwyd datganiadau gan Dr Carroll a Dr William Bennett.
Camau Rhagarweiniol
Er nad yw’r rhan fwyaf o’r rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig yn cofio’r rhan hon o’r broses yn glir, ymddengys ei bod yn rhaid bod y meddygon ym meddygfa Donneybrook, pan adawodd Dr John Bennett, wedi hysbysu’r FPC. Y weithdrefn oedd y byddai’r FPC yn gwneud adroddiad i’r MPC ac yn cael cymeradwyaeth mewn egwyddor i benodi meddyg newydd. Cafwyd y gymeradwyaeth honno ym mis Gorffennaf 1977. Byddai wedi bod yn rhywfaint o ffurfioldeb. Ar y pryd, roedd Tameside yn ardal ‘ddynodedig’, a olygai bod angen lefel uchel am feddygon wedi’i nodi gan yr MPC. Roedd meddygfa Donneybrook yn feddygfa brysur a byddai meddyg newydd yn amlwg wedi bod yn angenrheidiol. Pan gafodd aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook gadarnhad y gallent fynd ymlaen i ddewis meddyg newydd, rhoddwyd hysbysebion yn y wasg ganddynt.
Ar ôl derbyn cais Shipman, gwnaethpwyd penderfyniad i’w gyfweld. Atgof Dr Roberts oedd bod recriwtio’n anodd ar y pryd, bod ymateb gwael wedi bod i’r hysbysebion, ac mai Shipman oedd yr unig ymgeisydd a gyfwelwyd. Roedd Dr Bills yn cofio hefyd bod hwn yn amser anodd i recriwtio. Credai Dr Napier bod nifer o ymgeiswyr eraill i ddewis o’u plith. Ychydig o atgof am y mater oedd gan aelodau eraill y feddygfa.
Y Cyfweliad
Roedd rhywfaint o wahaniaethu o ran atgofion hefyd ynghylch ai un cyfweliad yn unig a fu neu gyfweliad rhagarweiniol ac yna cyfarfod mwy ffurfiol rhwng Shipman a’i wraig, Mrs Primrose Shipman, ac aelodau’r feddygfa. Roedd Dr Roberts yn cofio cyfweliad a gafodd ei gynnal gan Dr Smith, Dr Bills ac ef ei hun. Credai fod Mrs Shipman yn bresennol am rywfaint o’r amser neu’r holl amser. Nid oedd Dr Bills yn cofio Mrs Shipman yno. Roedd Dr Smith yn cofio Mrs Shipman yn bresennol. Credai Dr Napier iddo ef fod mewn cyfweliad hefyd, ac, o’i ddisgrifiad o’r hyn a drafodwyd, ymddengys mai hon oedd yr un achlysur ag yr oedd y lleill wedi disgrifio. Dywedodd nad oedd Mrs Shipman yno. Gall fod, fel yr awgrymodd Dr Roberts, fod Mrs Shipman yn bresennol am ran o’r amser yn unig. Gallai hynny gyfrif am yr atgofion gwahanol ynghylch ei phresenoldeb.
Roedd pawb a oedd yn bresennol yn cofio bod Shipman wedi gwirfoddoli gwybodaeth am broblemau yr oedd wedi’u cael yn Todmorden. Dywedodd Dr Smith bod Shipman wedi cyfeirio ato ef ei hun ei fod yn ‘gwneud cyfaddefiad’ ynghylch yr hyn a oedd wedi digwydd yno. Dywedodd wrth y panel cyfweld ei fod wedi mynd yn ddiflas o ganlyniad i orfod ymgymryd â chyfran annheg o’r gwaith yn y feddygfa lle’r arferai weithio. Roedd Dr Roberts wedi deall fod Shipman wedi troi yn gyntaf at drin ei hun â meddyginiaeth gwrth-iselder a’i fod ar ôl hynny wedi mynd yn gaeth i bethidin.
Roedd aelodau eraill y panel cyfweld yn cofio’n unig ei fod wedi mynd yn gaeth i bethidin neu gyffur tebyg. Roedd Dr Roberts yn cofio Shipman yn dweud wrthynt iddo gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau mewn cysylltiad ag yntau’n cymryd cyffuriau. Roedd Dr Roberts wedi deall bod y rhain yn groes i Ddeddf Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau 1971. Nid oedd wedi gwerthfawrogi eu bod wedi golygu ffugio rhagnodion a throseddau o gael gafael ar gyffuriau trwy dwyll. Yn wir, synnodd wrth ddarllen yn Adroddiad Cyntaf yr Ymchwiliad am natur y troseddau y cafwyd Shipman yn euog ohonynt. Nid oedd Dr Napier yn cofio sôn am unrhyw gysylltiad â’r llysoedd troseddau. Dywedodd Dr Roberts fod Shipman wedi dweud wrth y panel cyfweld hefyd ei fod wedi cael rhybudd gan y GMC a’i fod wedi bod yn cael triniaeth gan seiciatrydd. O’r meddygon a gyfwelodd Shipman, dim ond Dr Napier gafodd unrhyw argraff o ba mor hir yr oedd yr ymddygiad wedi para. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai cyfnod o ryw chwe mis oedd ganddo yn ei feddwl, er na wyddai sut y cafodd yr argraff honno. Ymddengys yn debygol bod Shipman yn gyffredinol wedi tanchwarae difrifoldeb y digwyddiadau yn Todmorden, a’i fod wedi rhoi adroddiad hunanlesol o’r modd yr oedd ei anawsterau wedi codi, a pham. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r panel cyfweld wedi sylweddoli hynny.
Er gwaetha’r problemau yr oedd Shipman wedi disgrifio iddynt, mae’n amlwg mai argraff ffafriol yn gyffredinol a ffurfiwyd ohono gan aelodau’r panel cyfweld. Roedd Shipman i weld yn frwdfrydig ac yn egnïol. Roedd ganddo ddiddordeb mewn, a phrofiad diweddar o, ddatblygiad plant (maes a oedd yn ehangu ar y pryd). Roedd ganddo ddiddordeb hefyd mewn meddygaeth ataliol. Roedd i weld yn ddidwyll am ei hanes blaenorol ac yn aeddfed o ran ei ymagwedd tuag ato. Roedd ei stori am ei driniaeth yn ei feddygfa flaenorol yn gredadwy, o gofio’r hinsawdd ar y pryd. Yn fyr, enillodd hyder a chydymdeimlad ei gyfwelwyr.
Ymholiadau Dilynol
Ar ôl y cyfweliad, penderfynwyd y dylid gwneud ymholiadau gan y GMC, y Swyddfa Gartref (er mwyn pennu a oedd unrhyw gyfyngiad wedi’i roi ar ei ragnodi), a’r seiciatrydd a fu’n trin Shipman. Nid yw’n glir pa un ai Dr Ronald Bryson, yr oedd Shipman dan ei ofal pan oedd yn glaf mewnol yn The Retreat (ysbyty preifat yn Efrog lle cafodd driniaeth yn dilyn canfod ei arfer o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau), neu Dr Hugo Milne, a’i gwelodd fel claf allanol wedi hynny, oedd hwn. Ymddengys yn debygol mai’r ail un ydoedd, gan y byddai ganddo fwy o wybodaeth ddiweddar am Shipman. Beth bynnag, rhoddodd Shipman y manylion angenrheidiol, a dirprwywyd Dr Roberts i wneud yr ymholiadau.
Canfu Dr Roberts gan y GMC fod Shipman wedi cofrestru, ac nad oedd unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer; mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw rym i bennu cyfyngiadau felly bryd hynny, ond ni fyddai Dr Roberts o reidrwydd wedi bod yn ymwybodol o hynny. Mae tystion o’r GMC wedi cadarnhau na fyddai Dr Roberts wedi cael gwybod bod gan Shipman hanes o addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP), h.y. ei fod wedi bod yn destun rhybudd (ar ffurf llythyr) mewn perthynas ag euogfarnau yr hysbyswyd y GMC yn eu cylch. Roedd llythyrau rhybudd yn cael eu trin fel mater cyfrinachol rhwng y GMC a’r meddyg dan sylw. Mewn gwirionedd, fel y dywedais, roedd Shipman wedi dweud wrth y panel cyfweld ei fod wedi cael rhybudd gan y GMC.
Siaradodd Dr Roberts wedyn â’r Swyddfa Gartref. Dywedodd y dywedwyd wrtho nad oedd unrhyw gyfyngiad ar allu Shipman i ragnodi. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Frank Eggleston, yr Uwch Arolygydd Cyffuriau yn swyddfa’r Swyddfa Gartref yn Bradford ym 1977. Ni allai gofio delio ag ymholiad Dr Roberts, ac nid oes cofnod ohono ar ffeil. Fe allai un o’r arolygwyr eraill fod wedi siarad â Dr Roberts. Byddai eu hymagwedd, fe gredai, wedi bod yr un fath â’i ymagwedd ef ei hun fwy neu lai. Byddai wedi dweud wrth y sawl a ffoniodd a oedd Shipman wedi cael ei wneud yn destun cyfarwyddyd neu beidio a oedd yn cyfyngu ar ei allu i ragnodi. Ni fyddai wedi gwirfoddoli unrhyw wybodaeth bellach, hyd yn oed gwybodaeth (e.e. am yr amgylchiadau’n arwain at gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd) a oedd eisoes yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus. Ni fyddai wedi eisiau niweidio gobeithion Shipman o gael swydd, a byddai, felly, wedi bod yn ofalus iawn o ran yr hyn a ddywedai.
Siaradodd Dr Roberts â’r seiciatrydd wedyn. Roedd yn cofio y dywedwyd wrtho fod problem dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau gan Shipman, bod Shipman wedi bod trwy gyfnod o ddadwenwyno, a’i fod wedi cael triniaeth am iselder a’i fod wedi gorffen ei driniaeth. Nid oedd yn cofio unrhyw drafodaeth am achos sylfaenol problemau Shipman, nag am amgylchiadau’r troseddau y cafodd ei ddyfarnu’n euog ohonynt. Roedd Dr Roberts eisiau gwybod a oedd Shipman yn gymwys i ymarfer meddygaeth deuluol, ac roedd yn cofio, o’i roi yn syml, iddo gael yr ateb ‘Oedd’. Roedd Dr Napier yn cofio rhywun yn dweud wrtho wedi hynny bod y seiciatrydd wedi mynegi’r farn y byddai’n golled fawr i feddygaeth pe na bai Shipman yn gallu ymarfer. Byddai’r farn honno wedi adlewyrchu’r teimladau a gynhwyswyd mewn llythyr a ysgrifennwyd gan Dr Milne ac a gyflwynodd cyfreithwyr Shipman i’r GMC pan oedd achos Shipman yn cael ei ystyried ym 1976.
Roedd Dr Roberts yn cofio hefyd siarad ag un o gyn bartneriaid Shipman yn Todmorden. Dywedodd iddo gael ‘rhywfaint o fustl’ am Shipman ar y cychwyn, ac y dywedwyd wrtho fod Shipman wedi dwyn neu wedi camddefnyddio pethidin o’r feddygfa. Fodd bynnag, dywedwyd wrtho hefyd, er gwaetha’i broblemau, fod Shipman wedi bod yn feddyg teulu da. Nid oedd Dr Roberts yn cofio unrhyw drafodaeth am ddibyniaeth Shipman, ac nid oedd yn meddwl y byddai trafodaeth felly wedi bod yn briodol yn yr amgylchiadau. Ni chododd ychwaith gyda chyn bartner Shipman yr awgrymiadau bod Shipman wedi cael ei orweithio yn y feddygfa. Credai Dr Roberts mai ychydig y byddid wedi ennill trwy wneud hynny gan mai’r cyfan y byddai wedi’i gael byddai safbwynt gwahanol i hwnnw a oedd gan Shipman. Roedd adroddiad Shipman o’i brofiadau yn y feddygfa wedi bod yn argyhoeddiadol, ac roedd Dr Roberts yn barod i’w dderbyn. Yr argraff y gadawyd Dr Roberts â hi oedd:
‘... roedd Shipman wedi bod yn ddyn â phroblemau a arweiniodd ato’n gadael y feddygfa, ond roedd ei sgiliau sylfaenol fel meddyg teulu yn dda’.
Credai Dr Roberts y byddai wedi siarad â chyflogwyr Shipman yn County Durham, er nad oedd atgof penodol ganddo iddo wneud hynny. Byddai hynny wedi cydsynio â’i arfer arferol. Ymddengys nad oes fawr o amheuaeth y byddai Shipman wedi cael geirda cadarnhaol o’r fan honno. Yn fyr, ni wnaeth yr ymholiadau a wnaeth Dr Roberts unrhyw beth i danseilio’r adroddiad yr oedd Shipman wedi’i roi am ei broblemau a’r argraff ffafriol yr oedd y panel wedi’i ffurfio yn ystod y cyfweliad.
Y Penderfyniad i Benodi
Roedd Dr Roberts yn cofio iddo roi’r wybodaeth yr oedd wedi’i chasglu i’w bartneriaid yn anffurfiol, yn hytrach nag mewn cyfarfod y feddygfa. Roedd Dr William Bennett a Dr Carroll eu dau yn cofio rhywun yn dweud wrthynt am broblem cyffuriau Shipman, a’i bod yn ymddangos bod y broblem honno wedi’i thrin a’i datrys. Ni chofiai’r un o’r ddau bod yn ymwybodol fod Shipman wedi cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog am unrhyw droseddau. Dywedodd Dr Carroll nad oedd yn ymwybodol o euogfarnau Shipman nes diwedd y treial yn 2000, pan gawsant lawer iawn o gyhoeddusrwydd. Hyd yn oed pe gwyddai amdanynt, dywedodd, ni fyddai wedi effeithio ar ei farn y dylid penodi Shipman. Roedd Dr Bennett yn sicr nad oedd yn ymwybodol fod Shipman wedi ffugio rhagnodion. Dywedodd y byddai wedi ystyried hynny fel mater difrifol ac y byddai wedi bod yn anesmwyth ynghylch cael partner a ddyfarnwyd yn euog o droseddau o anonestrwydd. Mae’n eithaf tebygol nad esboniwyd y ffaith am euogfarnau troseddol Shipman i Dr Bennett neu Dr Carroll. Ymddengys mai ychydig o bwyslais a roddwyd ar yr agwedd honno gan y rheiny a gyfwelodd Shipman. Mae’n eithaf posibl, felly, nad oeddent yn ystyried y mater fel un digon pwysig i basio ymlaen i’r lleill.
Dywedodd Dr Napier wrth yr Ymchwiliad iddo deimlo rhywfaint o betruster ynghylch penodi Shipman, gan fod ymgeiswyr eraill ar gyfer y swydd a’i fod yn teimlo bod risg y gallai Shipman fynd yn ôl at ei hen arfer o gymryd cyffuriau. Cydnabu Dr Smith fod Dr Napier o bosibl wedi cwestiynu pa un a oedd hi’n iawn i benodi Shipman, ond nid yw’n cofio unrhyw wrthwynebiad cryf i’w benodiad. Nid oedd yr un o’r meddygon yn cofio unrhyw anghytundeb am y mater hwn. Beth bynnag, gwnaethpwyd penderfyniad i benodi Shipman am gyfnod prawf o dri mis neu chwe mis. Dyna oedd sail arferol gwneud penodiadau, gan yr oedd hynny’n rhoi cyfle i’r ddwy ochr sicrhau eu bod yn gallu cydweithio’n foddhaol. Yn ystod y cyfnod prawf, roedd Shipman i ysgwyddo dyletswyddau arferol prif feddyg teulu, a chymryd cyfrifoldeb am restr cleifion Dr John Bennett. Ni chwblhawyd y ffurfioldeb cyfreithiol nes bod y cyfnod prawf wedi dod i ben.
Esboniodd Dr Roberts bod aelodau’r feddygfa, wrth wneud eu penderfyniad, wedi cael eu harwain gan y GMC. Roedd y GMC, y credent y byddai ganddo wybodaeth am yr holl ffeithiau’n ymwneud â gweithgareddau Shipman wrth gymryd cyffuriau, wedi canfod bod Shipman yn addas i ymarfer. Nid oedd hi’n briodol i’r feddygfa fynd y tu ôl i’r canfyddiad hwnnw. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pe bai cyfyngiadau wedi’u pennu ar ymarfer Shipman (e.e. cyfyngiadau rhagnodi), ni fyddai wedi cael ei benodi, gan y byddai hyn wedi achosi anawsterau ymarferol yn ei fywyd proffesiynol o ddydd i ddydd. Yn yr un modd, pe bai wedi bod yn destun goruchwyliaeth broffesiynol, byddai hyn wedi bod yn rhwystr, gan nad oedd unrhyw un ar gael yn y feddygfa â’r profiad angenrheidiol i arfer goruchwyliaeth ffurfiol drosto. Pe bai’r seiciatrydd a fu’n trin Shipman wedi dweud nad oedd Shipman yn barod i ymarfer neu fod angen goruchwyliaeth broffesiynol drosto, byddai hyn wedi bod yn ffactor pendant hefyd. Fel y bu hi, roedd yr holl ddangosyddion i weld yn rhai cadarnhaol.
Cyffuriau Rheoledig
Roedd sawl aelod o’r feddygfa yn cofio, ar ryw adeg, fod Shipman wedi dweud nad oedd yn bwriadu cadw cyffuriau rheoledig. Gall fod iddo fynegi’r bwriad hwn yn y cyfweliad, er nad oedd gan Dr Bills unrhyw atgof o hynny. Roedd Dr Roberts yn cofio rhywun yn dweud wrtho am fwriad Shipman ac enw’r cyffur (Fortral) yr oedd yn bwriadu’i ddefnyddio i leddfu poen yn lle cyffur rheoledig. Yn unol â’u dull o redeg eu meddygfeydd, roedd aelodau’r feddygfa yn cadw eu cyflenwadau eu hunain o gyffuriau rheoledig at ddefnydd argyfwng. Nid oedd unrhyw gyflenwad cyffuriau ar gael i bob aelod o’r feddygfa, fel ag yr oedd yn Todmorden, ac nid oedd unrhyw CDR yn cael ei ddefnyddio’n gyffredin.
Cais Shipman i Gael ei Gynnwys ar y Rhestr Feddygol
Pan oedd y feddygfa wedi gwneud ei dewis, gwnaeth Shipman gais i gael ei gynnwys ar y rhestr feddygol yn cael ei chadw gan FPC Tameside. Roedd y ffurflen gais (fel y rhagnodwyd gan Reoliadau 1974) yn gofyn am fanylion ei gymwysterau meddygol, y feddygfa yr oedd yn bwriadu ymuno â hi, natur y gwasanaethau (e.e. gwasanaethau mamolaeth ac atal cenhedlu) yr oedd i’w darparu, a’i swydd bresennol. Roedd gofyniad iddo nodi ardal ddaearyddol arfaethedig ei feddygfa, adeilad ei feddygfa, oriau ymarfer a manylion ffôn. Llenwodd Shipman holiadur atodol hefyd, lle nododd,
, iddo fod yn brif feddyg mewn meddygfa deuluol yn flaenorol, a’i fod wedi ymarfer yn ardal FPC Calderdale. Roedd yr holiadur at ddibenion ystadegol yn unig. Rhoddwyd amryw o ffurflenni eraill i Shipman hefyd a oedd o natur weinyddol ac a oedd yn ofynnol iddo eu llenwi. Ni ofynnwyd am unrhyw wybodaeth, ac ni roddwyd unrhyw wybodaeth, am ei gofnod disgyblu nac am unrhyw euogfarnau troseddol y gallai fod ganddo.
Ar ôl derbyn cais Shipman i gael ei gynnwys ar ei restr, gwiriodd yr FPC â’r GMC ei fod ar y gofrestr. Heb gofrestriad, ni fyddai, wrth reswm, wedi bod yn gymwys i gael ei gynnwys ar y rhestr. Ni fyddai’r FPC wedi gwneud ymholiadau i’r GMC ynghylch a oedd gan Shipman hanes FTP, h.y. a oedd wedi cael ei ddisgyblu gan y GMC yn y gorffennol. Fel y dywedais, ni fyddai’r GMC wedi darparu unrhyw wybodaeth bellach, hyd yn oed pe gofynnwyd amdani. Ni fu unrhyw gyswllt â’i gyn-gyflogwyr nag ag FPC Calderdale. Ni ofynnwyd am unrhyw eirda ac ni chafwyd geirda. Ar ôl bodloni’u hunain fod Shipman wedi cofrestru gyda’r GMC, anfonwyd ei gais at yr MPC gan staff yn FPC Tameside, ynghyd ag adroddiad yr FPC yn cefnogi’i gais.
Caniatawyd y cais gan yr MPC. Roedd swydd wag wedi’i datgan ac roedd y feddygfa wedi dewis ymgeisydd. Os cydymffurfiwyd â’r gweithdrefnau perthnasol, byddai’r cais wedi cael ei gymeradwyo’n awtomatig. Wedi i gymeradwyaeth yr MPC gael ei rhoi, cafodd enw Shipman ei gynnwys ar y rhestr feddygol. Roedd y ffaith ei fod yn gorfod cwblhau cyfnod prawf yn fater rhyngddo ef ac aelodau eraill meddygfa Donneybrook. Cyn belled ag yr oedd yr FPC yn y cwestiwn, roedd Shipman yn rhydd i ymarfer fel prif feddyg teulu.

---  ---
Rôl Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside
Cyfyngedig dros ben oedd rhan FPC ym mhroses penodi meddyg yn lle aelod o feddygfa bresennol. Rôl weinyddol bur oedd ganddo. Roedd yr FPC yn gweithredu fel fawr fwy na chwndid ar gyfer darparu gwybodaeth i’r MPC. Swyddogaeth yr MPC yn unig oedd sicrhau bod cleifion ym mhob rhan o’r wlad yn cael mynediad rhesymol at feddyg teulu. Nid oedd yn ymwneud â materion ansawdd gofal. Ni ofynnodd yr FPC na’r MPC, ac ni fyddent wedi disgwyl cael, unrhyw dystiolaeth ansoddol am gymhwysedd neu berfformiad meddyg teulu yn gwneud cais i fod yn aelod o feddygfa bresennol. Hyd yn oed wrth ddelio â mathau eraill o swyddi gweigion - ni fyddai unrhyw wybodaeth am faterion fel canfyddiadau disgyblu neu euogfarnau troseddol wedi bod ar gael iddynt. Roedd y rheiny’n faterion rhwng meddygon a’u corff rheoleiddio, y GMC, yn unig. Tasg y GMC, nid tasg yr FPC, oedd penderfynu a oedd meddyg yn addas i drin cleifion. Rhaid edrych ar rôl FPC Tameside wrth benodi Shipman yn y cyd-destun hwn.
Rôl Aelodau Meddygfa Donneybrook
Yng nghyfweliad Shipman, gwnaeth ei frwdfrydedd, ei egni a’i ddiddordeb mewn iechyd plant argraff ar aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook. Cawsant eu swyno (ac eithrio Dr Napier o bosibl) gan ei onestrwydd ymddangosiadol am ei hanes blaenorol, ac fe’u hargyhoeddwyd gan ei sicrwydd bod ei broblem y tu ôl iddo bellach. Roedd ganddynt rywfaint o gydymdeimlad â’r sefyllfa anodd yr honnodd y cafodd ei hun ynddi yn ei hen feddygfa.
Roedd Dr Roberts wedi dod i wybod gan y GMC bod Shipman wedi cofrestru heb unrhyw gyfyngiad. Roedd yn amlwg, felly, fod y GMC, y tybiwyd ei fod wedi ystyried ffeithiau llawn ei achos, wedi cymryd y farn ei fod yn addas i ymarfer. Nid yw’n syndod, yn fy marn i, fod aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook wedi bod yn barod i dderbyn barn y GMC yn ddi-gwestiwn. O’r Swyddfa Gartref, roedd Dr Roberts wedi canfod nad oedd unrhyw gyfyngiad wedi’i bennu ar ragnodi Shipman, ag y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl yn dilyn ei ddyfarnu’n euog am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau ym mis Chwefror 1976. Byddai hyn wedi tueddu awgrymu na chredwyd bod risg arbennig y byddai’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig yn y dyfodol. Hefyd, roedd y neges gan y seiciatrydd a fu’n trin Shipman yn gadarnhaol tu hwnt; byrdwn y neges oedd bod problem gan Shipman a bod y broblem honno wedi’i datrys yn foddhaol. Fe wnaeth partner yn y feddygfa y cafodd ei diswyddo ohoni siarad yn uchel am ei alluoedd fel meddyg teulu. Byddai’r wybodaeth a ddarparwyd gan ei gyflogwyr, y bu’n gweithio iddynt am ryw 18 mis, wedi bod yn galonogol hefyd. Yn ddiau roedd y rheiny a oedd yn ymwybodol o fwriad Shipman i beidio â chario cyffuriau rheoledig yn y dyfodol yn cael eu calonogi gan hynny.
Yn fy marn i, ni ellir beirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook am eu penderfyniad i roi cyfle iddo trwy ei recriwtio. Gall fod eu bod i ryw raddau wedi’u dylanwadu gan ddiffyg ymgeiswyr addas eraill am y swydd. Fodd bynnag, pwysleisiodd Dr Roberts nad oedd unrhyw gwestiwn o ‘wneud y tro’; y teimlad oedd y byddai Shipman yn gaffaeliad cadarnhaol i’r feddygfa. Nodaf nad ymddengys fod neb wedi ystyried beth oedd barn cleifion am benodiad meddyg â hanes blaenorol Shipman. Byddai hynny wedi bod yn nodweddiadol o agweddau ar y pryd.
Mae’n glir na wnaeth yr aelodau hynny o feddygfa Donneybrook a oedd yn ymwybodol o anonestrwydd blaenorol Shipman ganolbwyntio ar yr agwedd honno ar ei ymddygiad. I’r graddau yr oeddent yn pryderu am ei ymarweddiad a’i ymddygiad yn y dyfodol, yr hyn yr oeddent yn ei ofni oedd y risg mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau, ac nid parhau â’i ymddygiad anonest blaenorol. Yn fy marn i, ni ellir eu beirniadu am eu methiant i beidio â rhoi mwy o bwys ar y ffaith fod Shipman wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau o anonestrwydd. Hyd yn oed nawr, mae ymddygiad anonest gan feddyg, a hynny er mwyn cael gafael ar gyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon, yn cael ei ystyried gan lawer fel ‘rhan o’r salwch yn syml’. Yn fy marn i, roedd yn rhesymol iddynt ddilyn yr arweiniad a roddwyd gan y GMC wrth ystyried Shipman fel meddyg addas i ymarfer, er gwaethaf ei anonestrwydd yn y gorffennol.
A Ddylid Fod Wedi Dweud Wrth y Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu?
Nid ystyriodd yr un o aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook ddweud wrth yr FPC am hanes Shipman, na gofyn am gyngor yr FPC ynghylch a oedd penodi rhywun a arferai fod yn gaeth i gyffuriau (er bod y person hynny wedi diwygio) i’r feddygfa. Yn ei rinwedd fel ysgrifennydd yr LMC, byddai Dr Roberts yn cael cyfarfodydd cyson â gweinyddydd yr FPC, ac roedd ganddo berthynas bersonol dda ag ef. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth feddwl am y posibilrwydd o ymgynghori â’r gweinyddydd ynghylch penodiad Shipman. Roedd Dr Roberts yn ystyried rôl yr FPC fel rôl hwyluso yn unig. Ni fyddai wedi gweld rôl staff yn yr FPC fel swyddogaeth gynghori. Ni fyddai wedi meddwl eu hysbysu am hanes blaenorol Shipman. Yn wir, dywedodd na fyddai wedi gwybod beth fyddai’r FPC yn gwneud â’r wybodaeth honno, pe bai wedi cael ei rhoi. Mae agwedd Dr Roberts yn adlewyrchu’n fanwl gywir y dystiolaeth a glywais ac a ddarllenais am y berthynas bell braidd rhwng meddygfeydd teulu ac FPCau yn y 1970au. Nid oedd Mr Greenwood am feirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook am beidio hysbysu’r FPC am orffennol Shipman. Yn wir, roedd ei dystiolaeth yn pwysleisio’r rhan gyfyngedig yr oedd yr FPC yn ei chwarae yn y broses benodi. Rwy’n fodlon na ellir beirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook mewn perthynas â’u methiant i roi gwybod i’r FPC am hanes blaenorol Shipman.
A Ddylid Fod Wedi Gwneud Trefniadau i Shipman Gael Goruchwyliaeth?
Wedi i Shipman ddechrau ym meddygfa Donneybrook, ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw drefniadau ar gyfer unrhyw fath o oruchwyliaeth drosto nag ar gyfer monitro’i arfer clinigol. A ddylid beirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook am y methiant hwnnw? Dywedodd Dr Roberts nad felly yr oedd pethau’n cael eu gwneud ym 1977. Nid oedd monitro a goruchwylio meddygon teulu yn rhan o ddiwylliant y dydd. Mae’r haeriad hwn yn cael rhywfaint o gefnogaeth o’r ffaith nad oedd gan y GMC ei hun unrhyw rym i orchymyn cyfyngiadau neu amodau ar ymarfer bryd hynny. Byddai goruchwylio cydweithiwr yn sicr wedi achosi anawsterau ymarferol gan fod aelodau’r feddygfa’n brysur, yn gweithio’n annibynnol ar ei gilydd ac a chanddynt restrau llawn. Os oeddent yn credu bod angen goruchwyliaeth ar Shipman, ni fyddai wedi cael ei gyflogi. Fel y dywedais, y risg a fyddai gan gydweithiwr Shipman yn eu meddyliau fyddai’r risg o fynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau. Yn sicr, roedd Dr Smith, fel uwch bartner a meddyg teulu i Shipman a’i deulu, yn ymwybodol o’r angen i sicrhau nad oedd Shipman yn mynd yn ôl at ei arferion cymryd cyffuriau. Fodd bynnag, ni sylwodd Dr Smith ar unrhyw arwydd o gymryd cyffuriau o’r newydd a nododd fod Shipman yn gweithio’n dda ac i weld â digon o ddiddordebau y tu allan.
Credaf, i’r graddau yr ystyriwyd y mater ganddynt, y byddai aelodau’r feddygfa wedi meddwl y byddent yn effro i arwyddion o Shipman yn mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau, fel y byddent, pe byddai’n digwydd, yn sylwi ac yn gallu cymryd camau priodol. Fel y bu hi, nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth bod Shipman erioed wedi mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau yn dilyn ei gyfnod yn Todmorden. Yn fy marn i, ni ellir beirniadu aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook am beidio trefnu unrhyw fonitro neu oruchwylio ar gyfer Shipman. Ni fyddai unrhyw syniad wedi bod ganddynt sut i fynd ynghylch hyn. Nid awgrymwyd gan y GMC na chan seiciatrydd Shipman bod goruchwyliaeth yn angenrheidiol. Gellid fod wedi dehongli trefniant felly fel un a oedd yn dangos diffyg hyder yn adferiad Shipman. Roedd yr awdurdodau (y GMC a’r Swyddfa Gartref) wedi penderfynu fod Shipman yn addas i ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau ar ei ragnodi. Dibynnodd ei gydweithwyr ar hynny. O farnu yn ôl safonau’r dydd, roedd eu hymddygiad, yn fy marn i, yn gwbl resymol.
Effeithiau Peidio â Datgelu
Fel y dywedais, ni wnaeth aelodau meddygfa Donneybrook roi gwybod i FPC Tameside am orffennol Shipman. Nid oedd y wybodaeth yr oedd yn ofynnol i Shipman i’w darparu i gefnogi’i gais i ymuno â’i restr yn cynnwys unrhyw wybodaeth am ei gofnod disgyblu neu droseddol ychwaith. Nid bai’r FPC oedd hynny, gan mai dilyn y gweithdrefnau rhagnodedig yn syml yr oedd. Ni chredwyd ei bod yn briodol nac yn angenrheidiol yn y 1970au i ddarparu gwybodaeth felly i FPCau. O gofio’i swyddogaeth gyfyngedig, nid yw hynny’n syndod efallai.
Yr effaith oedd nad oedd na wnaeth Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine, a oedd erbyn hynny wedi olynu i gyfrifoldebau FPC Tameside, ddod yn ymwybodol o euogfarnau Shipman tan 1998, pan oedd ymchwiliad yr heddlu i farwolaeth Mrs Kathleen Grundy ar waith. Felly, gydol 21 mlynedd eu cysylltiad â Shipman, credai’r cyrff amrywiol a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal sylfaenol yn Tameside eu bod yn delio â dyn proffesiynol ac onest. Nid oeddent yn ymwybodol y gallai fod rhesymau arbennig am gadw golwg fanwl ar Shipman, ac, yn benodol, ar ei arfer o ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig.
Mae pwysigrwydd PCOau yn cael mynediad parod at wybodaeth lawn am hanes blaenorol meddygon teulu sy’n gwneud cais i ymuno â- neu sydd eisoes wedi’u cynnwys ar - eu rhestrau yn fater y byddaf yn dychwelyd ato nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn.

---  ---
O 1980 i 1990
O 1990 i 1998
Y Trefniadau yn Tameside
Y Trefniadau Mewn Mannau Eraill

---  ---
Yn y 1980au, dechreuodd y sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau) ysgwyddo rhywfaint o gyfrifoldeb am fonitro gweithredu rhai agweddau ar feddygaeth deuluol. Wrth i amser fynd yn ei flaen, fe wnaethant ddechrau cymryd camau tuag at wella ansawdd gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygon teulu. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn archwilio’r trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu rhwng 1980 a mis Medi 1998, pan stopiodd Shipman ymarfer. Byddaf hefyd yn disgrifio’r camau a gymerwyd gan PCOau olynol yn Tameside i fonitro meddygon teulu yn eu hardal yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Af ymlaen i ystyried a ddylid fod wedi gwneud mwy yn hynny o beth gan y sefydliadau hynny, trwy gyfeirio at y camau yn cael eu cymryd ar y pryd gan PCOau mewn rhannau eraill o’r wlad.

---  ---
Newidiadau mewn Strwythurau
Rhoddodd Deddf Gwasanaethau Iechyd 1980 y grym i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Dros Iechyd a Nawdd Cymdeithasol (SoS) i hepgor rhai awdurdodau iechyd ardal (AHAau) mewn rhai ardaloedd, ac i’w disodli ag awdurdodau iechyd dosbarth (DHAau). Ym 1982, diddymwyd yr AHAau a throsglwyddodd cyfrifoldeb am y pwyllgorau ymarferwyr teulu (FPCau) i’r DHAau. Disodlwyd AHA Tameside a Glossop gan DHA Tameside. Ym 1985, daeth yr FPCau yn awdurdodau ymreolaethol, yn annibynnol ar y DHAau ac yn uniongyrchol atebol, yn gyntaf i’r Adran Iechyd a Nawdd Cymdeithasol (DHSS), ac, o fis Gorffennaf 1988, i’r Adran Iechyd. O ddiwedd y 1980au, roedd gan yr FPCau rôl fwy gweithredol wrth gynllunio trefniant a datblygiad gwasanaethau gofal iechyd sylfaenol.
O 1985, roedd yr FPCau yn gwbl gyfrifol am ddarparu a rheoli gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol yn eu hardal, er mai offer cyfyngedig oedd ganddynt i reoli ansawdd y gwasanaethau hynny. Serch hynny, gwnaethant ddefnydd o’r rheiny a oedd ganddynt. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr William Greenwood, Gweinyddwyr Cynorthwyol (Dirprwy Reolwr Cyffredinol nes ymlaen) FPC Tameside o 1983 hyd at 1990, ei fod, erbyn canol i ddiwedd y 1980au, wedi sefydlu system o adolygiadau cyson o’r log cwynion am feddygon teulu a oedd yn cael ei gadw gan yr FPC. Roedd yn cofio un enghraifft pan ddatgelodd yr adolygiadau hynny batrwm o gwynion gan gleifion o feddygfa benodol a oedd yn cael anhawster o ran cael apwyntiadau o fewn cyfnod rhesymol. Arweiniodd hynny at Mr Greenwood yn ymweld â’r feddygfa dan sylw i drafod y broblem. Byddai trafodaethau o’r math hyn yn aml yn arwain at ateb cytûn. Fodd bynnag, oni bai bod meddyg teulu yn torri ei delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, roedd yr FPC yn gwbl ddibynnol ar ei bwerau dylanwadu a pherswadio i sicrhau newid. Ni allai gymryd unrhyw gamau gweithredu i orfodi meddyg teulu i gydymffurfio. Arweiniodd anallu’r FPC i bob pwrpas i reoli mynediad at, a dileu oddi ar, ei restr feddygol at rwystredigaeth fawr, a mwy fyth gan yr oedd aelodau’r cyhoedd yn tueddu rhagdybio bod yr FPC yn gallu arfer graddfa fwy o reolaeth dros feddygon teulu nag a allent mewn gwirionedd.
‘Hybu Iechyd Gwell’
Yng nghanol y 1980au, gwnaeth y Llywodraeth adolygiad o wasanaethau gofal iechyd sylfaenol a arweiniodd at gyhoeddi ym mis Tachwedd 1987 Bapur Gwyn, ‘Hybu Iechyd Gwell’. Roedd y Papur Gwyn yn cynnwys nifer fawr o gynigion i wella safon y ddarpariaeth gofal sylfaenol. Bwriad y Llywodraeth oedd y dylai’r FPCau ddod yn fodd i sicrhau gwelliannau yn lefel, ansawdd a chost-effeithiolrwydd gwasanaethau lleol. Roedd eu cyfrifoldebau i’w hymestyn a’u rôl reoli i’w chryfhau. Er enghraifft, roedd FPCau i gael rôl wrth annog rhagnodi effeithiol ac economaidd. Hefyd, roedd FPCau (mewn cydweithrediad â DHAau) i osod targedau ar gyfer mesurau (e.e. brechu, imiwneiddio a sgrinio am ganser cerfigol) er mwyn atal afiechyd. Roedd cymhellion ariannol i fod ar gael i feddygon teulu a oedd yn bodloni’r targedau hynny ac a oedd yn cymryd rhan mewn mentrau eraill i hybu iechyd. Nododd y cynigion hyn ddechrau defnyddio cymhellion ariannol ar raddfa eang fel modd o ddwyn perswâd ar feddygon teulu i wella safon ac ansawdd eu gwasanaethau. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad gan Syr Nigel Crisp, Ysgrifennydd Parhaol yr Adran Iechyd a Phrif Weithredwr y GIG yn Lloegr. Disgrifiodd y modd y mae cymhellion ariannol wedi cael eu defnyddio i sicrhau cydweithrediad meddygon teulu contract annibynnol, na fyddent fel arall yn cael eu sicrhau. Fel y byddaf yn disgrifio ym Mhennod 5, mae’r Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (2004) yn gwneud defnydd helaeth ar gymhellion ariannol i annog gwelliannau mewn ansawdd.
O ddiwedd y 1980au, nid oedd uwch aelodau staff yn yr FPCau yn cael eu galw’n ‘weinyddwyr’ mwyach. Yn lle hynny, daethant yn ‘reolwyr’. Dechreuodd nifer y staff yn cael eu cyflogi gan yr FPCau gynyddu. Cafodd personél ag amrywiaeth eang o sgiliau eu recriwtio i gynorthwyo FPCau wrth ddatblygu’u rôl reoli newydd. Cyflwynwyd adolygiadau perfformiad o FPCau gan Weinidogion ac uwch swyddogion yr Adran Iechyd. Gosodwyd systemau cyfrifiadurol gan FPCau i hwyluso ail-alw cleifion i ddod i gael eu himiwneiddio a’u sgrinio. Roedd y llwyfan wedi’i osod ar gyfer cychwyn proses newid sydd wedi parhau hyd heddiw.
Ym mis Ebrill 1990, daeth newidiadau i Reoliadau Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol a Fferyllol Cyffredinol) 1974 i rym (Rheoliadau 1974). Roedd y telerau gwasanaeth yn nodi’r fframwaith yr oedd meddygon teulu’n gweithredu ynddynt. Fe wnaeth y newidiadau i’r telerau gwasanaeth roi ar waith llawer o’r cynigion a gynhwyswyd yn ‘Hybu Iechyd Gwell’. Yn benodol:
Ymestynnwyd y gofyniad cyffredinol yn nhelerau gwasanaeth 1974 y dylai meddygon teulu roi i’w cleifion ‘yr holl wasanaethau meddygol personol angenrheidiol a phriodol’ i gynnwys,
, rhoi cyngor priodol mewn cysylltiad ag iechyd cyffredinol a chynnig mathau amrywiol o frechu ac imiwneiddio.
Roedd telerau gwasanaeth newydd yn rhwymo meddygon teulu i gael cymeradwyaeth yr FPC ar gyfer yr amserau a’r mannau yr oeddent yn bwriadu bod ar gael i ymgynghori â chleifion.
Roedd telerau gwasanaeth newydd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu ateb ymholiadau llafar neu ysgrifenedig gan yr FPC ynghylch rhagnodi neu gyfeiriadau at wasanaethau eraill y GIG. Gallai ymholiadau felly ymwneud ag un rhagnodyn neu gyfeiriad, neu fe allent fod yn fwy cyffredinol o ran natur. Roedd yn ofynnol i FPCau benodi cynghorwyr meddygol i’w cynorthwyo wrth wneud ymholiadau felly. Roedd y cynghorwyr hyn i fod yn annibynnol i’r proffesiwn meddygol lleol.
Roedd gofynion i feddygon teulu gynnig ymgynghoriad ac archwiliad i gleifion newydd eu cofrestru, i gleifion nad oeddent wedi’u gweld ers tair blynedd ac (yn flynyddol) i gleifion 75 oed a hŷn.
Roedd meddygon teulu dan rwymedigaeth i gymryd gofal rhesymol i fodloni’u hunain bod cymwysterau addas gan unrhyw berson a oedd yn cael eu cyflogi i’w cynorthwyo a’u bod yn gymwys. Rhoddwyd y grym i FPCau roi arweiniad i helpu meddygon teulu wrth asesu cymwysterau, profiad a chymhwysedd. Fodd bynnag, roedd yr asesiad ei hun yn fater i’r meddyg teulu yn unig.
Roedd nifer o ddarpariaethau a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu ddarparu gwybodaeth (gan gynnwys Adroddiad Blynyddol yn cynnwys gwybodaeth benodol) i FPCau.
Fel ag o 1 Ebrill 1991, roedd unrhyw feddyg yn cyrraedd 70 oed i’w dynnu oddi ar y rhestr feddygol.
Cafodd y trefniadau ar gyfer talu meddygon teulu eu newid i gynnwys mathau amrywiol o gymelldaliadau.
‘Gweithio ar Ran Cleifion’
Yn y cyfamser, ym mis Ionawr 1989, roedd y Llywodraeth wedi cyhoeddi Papur Gwyn arall, ‘Gweithio ar Ran Cleifion’, yn cyhoeddi newidiadau pwysig i’r trefniadau (ac yn arbennig y trefniadau ariannu) ar gyfer gofal iechyd sylfaenol. Un o nodau pwysig y newidiadau oedd cryfhau rôl reoli FPCau ymhellach fyth.
Roedd Papur Gwyn 1989 yn cynnig y dylai cyfansoddiad FPCau gael ei newid yn sylweddol. Roedd aelodaeth FPC i’w lleihau o 31 (gan gynnwys y cadeirydd) i 11. Roedd y cadeirydd i’w benodi gan yr SoS. Roedd cyfran yr aelodau proffesiynol i’w lleihau, ac roedd yr aelodau proffesiynol hynny a oedd yn aros i’w penodi gan awdurdodau iechyd rhanbarthol (RHAau) i weithredu mewn rhinwedd bersonol yn hytrach na rhinwedd gynrychiolaethol. Un o ddibenion y newid hwn oedd creu pellter rhwng yr FPC a’r bobl broffesiynol yr oedd yn gyfrifol am reoli’u contractau. Roedd prif weithredwyr (a oedd hefyd yn aelodau o’r FPC) i’w penodi, ar gyflog uwch nag a dalwyd hyd yn hyn i uwch aelodau staff FPC.
Roedd meddygfeydd teulu mwy i gael yr opsiwn o gynnal eu cyllidebau eu hunain (‘deiliaid cronfa’). O’r cyllidebau hynny byddent yn gorfod talu’r gost o gael ystod o wasanaethau ysbyty ar gyfer cleifion, yn ogystal â chost cyflogi staff y feddygfa a gwella adeiladau’r feddygfa a chostau rhagnodi.
Cynigiwyd newidiadau hefyd yn y trefniadau ar gyfer meddygfeydd nad oeddent yn ddeiliaid cronfa. Am y tro cyntaf, cyflwynwyd terfynau arian parod ar gyfer costau isadeiledd, h.y. costau datblygu a gwella adeiladau meddygfa a chael offer cyfrifiadurol. Hefyd, roedd symiau rhagnodi dangosol (IPA) i’w dyrannu i feddygfeydd nad oeddent yn ddeiliaid cronfa. Roedd y rhain yn gyllidebau tybiannol, yn hytrach na gwirioneddol: felly’r term ‘dangosol’. Roeddent i’w cyfrifo drwy gyfeirio at gostau rhagnodi blaenorol a chyfartaledd y costau a gafwyd gan feddygfeydd mewn amgylchiadau tebyg. Un o’r nodau y tu ôl i’r cynigion hyn oedd gwneud meddygon teulu’n fwy gofalus ynghylch y modd yr oeddent yn defnyddio adnoddau ac i annog arbedion lle’r oedd modd.
Roedd Papur Gwyn 1989 yn mynegi bwriad y Llywodraeth hefyd i sefydlu system archwilio meddygol mewn meddygaeth deuluol.
Rhoi ‘Gweithio ar Ran Cleifion’ ar Waith
Cafodd y cynigion a gynhwyswyd ym Mhapur Gwyn 1989 eu rhoi mewn grym i raddau helaeth gan Ddeddf y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol a Gofal yn y Gymuned 1990. Ym mis Medi 1990, disodlwyd FPCau gan awdurdodau gwasanaethau iechyd teulu (FHSAau). Roeddent i fod yn atebol i’r RHAau. Felly, roedd FHSA newydd Tameside yn atebol i RHA y Gogledd Orllewin. Diben y newid oedd rhyddhau’r Adran Iechyd o fod â rhan uniongyrchol mewn rheolaeth leol, a dod â chyfrifoldeb am ofal iechyd sylfaenol a gwasanaethau ysbyty ynghyd ar lefel strategol, gan ei gwneud yn bosibl i gydlynu mentrau polisi yn cwmpasu’r ddau wasanaeth.

---  ---
Newidiadau ar Lawr Gwlad
Yn ystod dechrau’r 1990au, dechreuodd yr FHSAau ddefnyddio offer newydd a roddwyd iddynt i ddatblygu’u rolau rheoli. Fe’u gwelwyd yn tyfu o ran maint. Dyblodd FHSA Tameside nifer ei staff i ryw 50. Cyflogwyd cynghorwyr meddygol gan yr FHSAau, llawer ohonynt o’r Gwasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol (RMS), a fu’n rhan o’r Adran Iechyd newydd ers creu’r olaf (arferai fod yn rhan o’r DHSS) ym 1988. Ym 1991, trosglwyddwyd yr RMS i’r Adran Nawdd Cymdeithasol (DSS) ac ar hynny, peidiodd unrhyw gyfrifoldeb cyffredinol oedd ganddo am feddygon teulu.
Roedd lefel y costau rhagnodi a gafwyd gan feddygfeydd teulu yn destun cryn bryder i’r FHSA. Pe bai meddygfa a oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa yn gorwario ar ei chyllideb rhagnodi, roedd yr FHSA yn gyfrifol am dalu’r gor-dâl. Roedd hynny’n cael effaith amlwg ar gyllideb yr FHSA ei hun. Os oedd meddygfa nad oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa yn methu cadw o fewn ei IPA, roedd y gor-dâl yn cael ei dalu o gronfeydd canolog yn cael eu cadw gan yr Adran Iechyd. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r FHSA dan bwysau o du’r RHA i ddefnyddio’i ddylanwad i newid gweithgareddau rhagnodwyr cost uchel yn ei ardal. Yn ymarferol, ychydig a allai FHSA ei wneud os oedd meddygfa yn gorwario, oni bai y gallai sefydlu’n llwyddiannus bod meddyg teulu’n euog o or-ragnodi: gweler paragraff 4.21.
Yn y lle cyntaf, felly, roedd gwaith cynghorwyr meddygol yn ymwneud yn bennaf â hyrwyddo arfer rhagnodi rhesymol a chost-effeithiol. Ar yr amser hwn, roedd y prif bwyslais ar ffactorau cost. Gwnaethpwyd ymdrechion i annog meddygon teulu i beidio rhagnodi cyffuriau perchnogol drud. Fe’u hanogwyd yn hytrach i ragnodi cyffuriau cyfwerth generig, rhatach. Defnyddiai’r cynghorwyr ddata rhagnodi a ddarparwyd gan yr Awdurdod Prisio Rhagnodion (PPA) i gyfrannu at eu trafodaethau gyda meddygon teulu. Mae’r PPA yn awdurdod iechyd arbennig sy’n prosesu bob rhagnodyn y GIG yn cael ei ysgrifennu gan feddygon teulu a rhagnodwyr a oedd yn nyrsys yn Lloegr. Cyflwynir rhagnodion gan fferyllwyr cymunedol a meddygon teulu dosbarthu cyffuriau sy’n derbyn tâl gan y PPA. Mae’r PPA hefyd yn casglu ac yn dosbarthu (i feddygfeydd teulu, PCOau a chyrff eraill y GIG) data am gyffuriau a ragnodwyd, ynghyd â’u costau. O fis Ebrill 1991, awdurdodwyd cynghorwyr meddygol hefyd gan yr SoS i archwilio cofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig (CDR) meddygon teulu a stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig, er mwyn sicrhau cydymffurfio â’r gofynion statudol yn ymwneud a chadw cyffuriau rheoledig.
Dechreuodd yr FHSAau recriwtio cynghorwyr fferyllol (neu ragnodi) hefyd (yn rhan-amser fel arfer) er mwyn cynorthwyo â’r agweddau mwy technegol ar ragnodi. Daeth y cynghorwyr fferyllol â gradd uwch o wybodaeth arbenigol am gyffuriau a’u priodweddau nag oedd gan y cynghorwyr meddygol. Sefydlwyd cynlluniau cymell lleol i hyrwyddo rhagnodi cost effeithiol. Os oedd meddygfa nad oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa yn tanwario ar ei IPA, byddai’n cael arian ychwanegol i fuddsoddi mewn prynu offer neu welliannau eraill. Datblygwyd fformiwlarïau cytunedig (h.y. rhestrau o gyffuriau i’w rhagnodi) at ddefnydd meddygon teulu. Symudodd y pwyslais i hyrwyddo arfer rhagnodi da, yn ogystal ag arbedion cost. Dechreuodd FHSAau gyflogi fferyllwyr cymunedol a fyddai’n trafod anghenion rhagnodi cleifion unigol neu grwpiau o gleifion gyda meddygon. Nid oedd yr un pwerau gan gynghorwyr fferyllol â chynghorwyr meddygol i ymholi i arfer rhagnodi meddyg teulu. Nid oedd yr awdurdod ganddynt ychwaith i archwilio CDRau meddygon teulu na’u stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig. Os oedd ganddynt unrhyw reswm i bryderu ynghylch y modd yr oedd meddyg teulu’n ymdrin â chyffuriau rheoledig, byddent yn cyfeirio’r pryder hwnnw at eraill i ymchwilio iddo.
Fe wnaeth derbyn ystod o daliadau anogaeth am ddarparu gwasanaethau ychwanegol a gweithgareddau eraill hi’n angenrheidiol i ddatblygu systemau gwirio hawliadau ar gyfer taliadau. Roedd yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd teulu sefydlu systemau ar gyfer casglu data i gefnogi’u hawliadau am daliadau anogaeth. Hwyluswyd y broses honno gan systemau cyfrifiadurol cynyddol mewn meddygfeydd teulu a ddechreuodd tua’r adeg hon. Yn sgil casglu’r data hwn, ynghyd â gwybodaeth arall yr oedd meddygfeydd dan rwymedigaeth i’w darparu iddynt nawr, galluogwyd FHSAau i lunio darlun cywirach o’r gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygfeydd unigol.
Sefydlwyd grwpiau cynghori archwilio meddygol (MAAGau) gan FHSAau i annog meddygfeydd teulu i gynnal archwiliadau o’u gweithgareddau. Mynnodd y proffesiwn y dylai’r gwaith archwilio gael ei arwain gan aelodau o’r proffesiwn, y dylai fod yn ffurfiannol (h.y. addysgol) o ran natur, y dylai fod yn gyfrinachol ac na ddylai fod yn gysylltiedig â phrosesau rheoli. O ganlyniad, adroddwyd yn flynyddol i’r FHSA am ganlyniadau archwiliadau fel crynswth ac yn ddienw. Nid oedd mynediad gan reolwyr FHSA at ganlyniadau archwiliadau yn cael eu cynnal gan feddygfeydd teulu unigol. Dim ond aelodau o’r MAAG a oedd yn feddygon teulu a’r staff a oedd yn gyfrifol am gefnogi’r MAAG oedd yn gweld y rhain.
Nid oedd unrhyw gorgyffwrdd sylweddol mwyach rhwng aelodaeth o’r FHSAau ac aelodaeth y pwyllgorau meddygol lleol (LMCau). Serch hynny, parhaodd FHSAau i ymgynghori’n agos ag LMCau. Cychwynnodd FHSA Tameside (nad oedd ei un aelod meddygol yn aelod o’r LMC) gyfarfodydd misol arferol â’r LMC. Yn gyffredinol, cydweithredodd y ddau’n dda, er y cafwyd rhywfaint o anawsterau pan alwyd ar yr FHSA i weithredu polisïau’r Llywodraeth (fel y trefniadau dal cronfa) a oedd yn amhoblogaidd ymhlith rhai meddygon teulu. Roedd perthnasoedd ag LMCau yn amrywio o ardal i ardal, gan ddibynnu ar y personoliaethau a oedd yn gysylltiedig.
Datblygiadau ym 1992
Fe wnaeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 1992 gydgrynhoi a newid Rheoliadau 1974 a chynnwys telerau gwasanaeth newydd (telerau gwasanaeth 1992) a oedd i raddau helaeth yr un fath â’r rheiny a fu mewn grym yn flaenorol. Parhaodd telerau gwasanaeth 1992 (a newidiwyd dros amser) mewn grym hyd at fis Ebrill 2004.
Hefyd ym 1992, cyflwynodd Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau Gwasanaeth a Thribiwnlys) 1992 weithdrefn newydd ar gyfer delio â honiadau o or-ragnodi. Gallai gor-ragnodi ddigwydd yn sgil naill ai maint neu nifer y cyffuriau’n cael eu rhagnodi. Rhoddwyd y grym i FHSAau i gyfeirio achosion felly at bwyllgorau proffesiynol. Roedd y pwyllgorau hyn yn cynnwys meddyg â phrofiad sylweddol o ffarmacoleg glinigol (a ddewiswyd o banel a ddetholwyd, ar ôl ymgynghori, gan yr SoS) ynghyd â dau feddyg teulu, un ohonynt wedi’i enwebu gan yr LMC. Disodlodd y weithdrefn hon y trefniant blaenorol lle bu LMCau yn gyfrifol am farnu mewn achosion felly: gweler Pennod 3. Gallai’r pwyllgorau proffesiynol bennu maint unrhyw gost ariannol i’w rhoi. Roedd Dr David Edwards yn gyn swyddog meddygol rhanbarthol (RMO) ac yn gyd-Gynghorydd Meddygol (gyda Dr David Archer) i gonsortiwm o FHSA Tameside, Wigan a Stockport ar ddechrau’r 1990au. Ef, mae’n credu, oedd y cynghorydd cyntaf i ddefnyddio’r weithdrefn hon yn llwyddiannus. Roedd hyn ar ôl iddo adael y consortiwm a symud i Wigan. Mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu mai ar achlysuron prin iawn y rhoddwyd y weithdrefn ar waith wedi hynny.
Parhaodd yr LMCau i fod yn gyfrifol am benderfynu ar faterion yn ymwneud ag ardystio meddygol a chadw cofnodion, yn ogystal ag ystyried cwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan un meddyg teulu yn erbyn un arall, ac a olygai gwestiwn ynghylch effeithlonrwydd gwasanaethau. Mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu na ddefnyddiwyd y gweithdrefnau olaf hyn yn aml, er bod Mr Greenwood yn cofio un achlysur pan ystyriodd yr LMC ar gyfer Tameside bryderon yr adroddwyd amdanynt gan bartneriaid meddygfa am weithgareddau clinigol un o’u cydweithwyr. Parhaodd LMCau hefyd i fod yn gysylltiedig â’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer delio â meddygon yr oedd yn ymddangos eu bod yn anaddas i gyflawni’u rhwymedigaethau dan delerau gwasanaeth 1992 oherwydd salwch corfforol neu feddyliol. Ym 1980, roedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) wedi cyflwyno’i weithdrefnau newydd ar gyfer delio â meddygon yr oedd eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer wedi’i niweidio’n ddifrifol gan afiechyd. Gellid cyfeirio’r achosion mwy anhydrin, felly, at y GMC.
Shipman yn Symud i’r Feddygfa ym Market Street
Ym 1992, symudodd Shipman o feddygfa Donneybrook i Feddygfa Market Street, lle bu’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun hyd ei arestio ym 1998. Roedd eisoes ar restr feddygol FHSA Tameside. Yn syml iawn, roedd yn gadael un feddygfa ac yn sefydlu un arall yn yr un ardal. Nid oedd angen gwneud cais i’r Pwyllgor Arferion Meddygol. Y cyfan yr oedd yn ofynnol i Shipman wneud oedd sefydlu i fodlonrwydd yr FHSA bod ganddo adeilad addas i ymarfer ohono, y byddai ei drefniadau (e.e. yr amserau y byddai ar gael) yn bodloni anghenion cleifion yn ddigonol a bod y trefniadau gweinyddol angenrheidiol eraill wedi’u gwneud. Nid oedd gan yr FHSA unrhyw rym i atal y symudiad, er y byddai wedi bod yn agored iddo atal nawdd ar gyfer costau isadeiledd pe bai wedi dewis gwneud hynny.
Ar ôl dod o hyd i’r adeilad yn 21 Market Street, ysgrifennodd Shipman at Mr Barry Thomas, Rheolwr Cyffredinol yr FHSA, yn gofyn iddo i edrych ar yr adeilad a rhoi ei gymeradwyaeth. Ar gais yr FSHA, cyflwynodd gynllun busnes amlinellol hefyd. Ar ôl hynny, cyfarfu Shipman â Mr Thomas, Dr Roger Freedman (y Cynghorwr Meddygol ar y pryd) ac ysgrifennydd yr LMC. O ganlyniad i’r cyfarfod hwnnw, cymeradwywyd yr adeilad.
Dywedodd Mr Greenwood y byddai teimladau cymysg wedi bod gan yr FHSA ynghylch Shipman yn symud. Ar yr un llaw, ef oedd y meddyg cyntaf i symud y tu allan i’r ddwy feddygfa fawr a oedd yn gweithredu o Donneybrook House, a byddai felly wedi darparu rhywfaint o amrywiaeth i’w groesawu o ran y mathau o ymarfer yn cael eu cynnig. Ar y llaw arall, golygai creu meddygfa newydd gostau ychwanegol i’w talu gan yr FHSA. Ffactor arall, a oedd yn anarferol ar y pryd, oedd bod gan FHSA Tameside bolisi o beidio â chefnogi meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain oni bai y gallai’r ymgeisydd ddangos y gallai ddarparu gwasanaethau o ansawdd gwell yn lleol. Fel y bu hi, mae’n rhaid bod yr FHSA wedi bod yn fodlon mai felly’r oedd hi, gan iddo gefnogi symudiad Shipman. Credai Mr Greenwood y gallai bwriad datganedig Shipman i gynnal meddygfeydd agored (ar adeg pan oedd cleifion yn cael problemau go iawn o ran cael apwyntiadau gyda meddygfeydd eraill) fod wedi bod yn ffactor pwysig ym mhenderfyniad yr FHSA.
Canol y 1990au
Yng nghanol y 1990au, roedd nifer o newidiadau trefniadaethol yn y GIG. Ym 1994, lleihawyd y nifer o RHAau o bedwar ar ddeg i wyth. Unwyd RHA y Gogledd Orllewin ag RHA Mersey. O 1 Ebrill 1996, diddymwyd yr RHAau yn llwyr, a chymerwyd eu swyddogaethau gan wyth Swyddfa Ranbarthol o Weithgor y GIG. Roedd Swyddfa Ranbarthol y Gogledd Orllewin yn cynnwys Tameside. Roedd y Swyddfeydd Rhanbarthol hyn yn gyfrifol am reoli perfformiad gofal sylfaenol fel rhan o’u cyfrifoldeb am reoli systemau gofal iechyd yn eu hardaloedd.
Ar yr un pryd, diddymwyd y DHAau a’r FHSAau, ac aeth eu swyddogaethau i gant o awdurdodau iechyd unedol newydd (HAau), ac roedd Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA) yn un ohonynt. Roedd y WPHA yn cwmpasu’r ardaloedd a arferai gael eu gweinyddu gan FHSAau Tameside ac Oldham, ynghyd ag ardal Glossop, a arferai fod yn rhan o FHSA Derbyshire. Roedd y tîm gofal sylfaenol yn y WPHA yn cael ei arwain gan Mrs Jan Forster, Cyfarwyddwr Gofal Sylfaenol. Roedd y ddau Gynghorydd Meddygol, Dr Alan Banks a Dr Frances Bradshaw, yn rhannu swydd Cyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol. Dan strwythur yr HA, nid oedd rhan ffurfiol gan feddygon teulu lleol wrth reoli gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol lleol. Fodd bynnag, roedd cydweithrediad agos rhwng y WPHA a’r LMC.
Cwynion a Disgyblu
Ym mis Ebrill 1996, gwnaethpwyd newidiadau hefyd i’r systemau cwynion a disgyblu a oedd yn rheoli meddygon teulu. Gwahanwyd y rhain fel nad oedd penderfyniad ynghylch cwyn gan glaf yn arwain yn awtomatig mwyach at y posibilrwydd o gynnal achos disgyblu. Roedd yn ofynnol i bob meddygfa gael gweithdrefn cwynion, ac ymdriniwyd yn y lle cyntaf â chwynion cleifion ar lefel meddygfa. Os oedd hynny’n methu, gallai cymodi ac, o bosibl, gwrandawiad gan banel adolygu annibynnol (IRP) ddilyn. Byddai’r IRP yn llunio adroddiad, yn nodi’i ganfyddiadau ac, os oedd yn briodol, yn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer newidiadau i feddygfa’r meddyg teulu. Fodd bynnag, ni allai’r IRP na’r HA a oedd yn cael yr adroddiad, orfodi’r meddyg teulu dan sylw i gydymffurfio. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r trefniadau hyn yn fanwl ym Mhennod 7.
Roedd yn ofynnol i bob HA sefydlu pwyllgorau disgyblu meddygol, naill ai ar eu pennau’n hunain neu ar y cyd â HAau eraill. Os oedd HA yn derbyn gwybodaeth yr oedd yn ystyried y gallai fod gystal â bod yn haeriad bod meddyg teulu wedi methu cydymffurfio â’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, roedd nifer o ddewisiadau ganddo. Gallai’r HA:
beidio â chymryd camau gweithredu neu
gyfeirio’r mater i bwyllgor disgyblu HA arall ymchwilio iddo a/neu
gyfeirio’r wybodaeth i Dribiwnlys y GIG, y GMC neu’r heddlu.
Os yr ymdriniwyd â’r haeriad drwy’r weithdrefn cwynion, roedd yn rhaid i’r HA aros i gael adroddiad yr IRP, neu fod yr achwynydd yn rhoi’r gorau i’r gŵyn/tynnu’r gŵyn yn ôl cyn cymryd y camau gweithredu trwy gyfeirio’r gŵyn at bwyllgor disgyblu HA arall. Roedd y broses yn un faith a beichus. Efallai nad yw’n syndod mai ychydig a ddefnyddiwyd arni, fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 7.
Un effaith y newidiadau i’r weithdrefn cwynion oedd, ar ôl 1996, mai anaml iawn y byddai HAau yn dod yn ymwybodol o gynnwys unrhyw gwynion unigol yn cael eu gwneud am feddygon teulu. Roedd meddygfeydd yn rhwym i wneud adroddiad blynyddol i’r HA, yn nodi faint o gwynion oedd wedi cael eu gwneud iddynt, ond nid oedd yr adroddiad hwnnw’n cynnwys gwybodaeth am natur y cwynion a wnaed. At hynny, roedd y system yn dibynnu ar onestrwydd meddygfeydd ynghylch nifer y cwynion a dderbyniwyd. Nid oedd gan HAau ddarlun cyflawn o’r cwynion yn cael eu gwneud yn eu hardal. Roedd hyn yn eu hamddifadu o fodd gwerthfawr o fonitro ansawdd gofal a gwasanaethau. Rhedai’n groes i’r rôl fwy yr oeddent, mewn agweddau eraill, yn ei chwarae wrth reoli gofal iechyd sylfaenol.
Y Sefyllfa ym 1998
Erbyn 1998, roedd cryn gynnydd wedi’i wneud gan HAau wrth gasglu data am feddygfeydd teulu ac wrth annog meddygfeydd, trwy gymhellion ariannol, i wella ystod ac ansawdd eu gwasanaethau. Serch hynny, roedd cryn gyfyngiadau o hyd ar allu’r HAau i ddelio â’r meddygon teulu hynny nad oeddent yn fodlon newid. Roedd gan y cynghorwyr meddygol bwerau i ymholi’n unig ynghylch rhagnodion a chyfeiriadau, ac i archwilio trefniadau meddygon teulu ar gyfer cadw cyffuriau rheoledig. Fel arall, nid oedd hawl ganddynt i fynd i mewn i adeilad meddygfa. Roedd yn rhaid iddynt fynd ymlaen trwy geisio perswadio a dylanwadu. Yn y pen draw, nid oedd sancsiwn ganddynt yn erbyn meddyg teulu a oedd yn gorwario’i IPA, os nad oedd yn euog o ‘or-ragnodi’. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Banks, cyn Gynghorydd Meddygol i FHSA/WPHA Tameside, bod rhagnodi yn ‘arf pwerus iawn’ a oedd ar gael i feddygon teulu. Pe baent yn cael eu dieithrio, gallent wario llawer o arian ar ragnodi, a, thrwy wneud hynny, cael effaith niweidiol ar gyllideb yr FHSA/HA. Oherwydd hynny, dywedodd, yr oedd yn awyddus i beidio dieithrio Shipman. Ar yr ystyriaeth gyntaf, efallai bod agwedd Dr Banks tuag at Shipman i weld braidd yn wangalon. Byddai meddyg yn cynyddu’u wariant ar gyffuriau’n fwriadol fel rhan o ‘gêm bŵer’ yn gwbl annerbyniol. Fodd bynnag, mae gennyf lawer o gydymdeimlad â sefyllfa ac agwedd Dr Banks. Mae hawl meddyg i ragnodi fel y gwêl yn dda er lles y claf wastad wedi cael ei warchod yn genfigennus, a gallai fod yn anodd iawn dangos bod meddyg yn rhagnodi cyffuriau drud am resymau amhriodol. Awgryma’r dystiolaeth y gallai Shipman yn hawdd fod wedi dyfynnu papurau wedi’u cyhoeddi i gyfiawnhau ei benderfyniadau rhagnodi. Hefyd, roedd yn bersonoliaeth bigog, anodd a thrahaus weithiau. Gallaf ddeall pam yr oedd Dr Banks yn meddwl y gallai gwrthdaro fod yn wrthgynhyrchiol.
Yn dilyn newidiadau 1996, roedd llai o gysylltiad gan HAau â chwynion cleifion. Yn wir, fel y dywedais, roeddent yn cael gwybodaeth anghyflawn am gwynion a wnaed, ac o ganlyniad, roedd llai o gyfle ganddynt i gael gwybodaeth am arfer gwael. Anaml iawn y cymerwyd camau disgyblu lle’r oedd meddyg teulu’n torri telerau gwasanaeth, a daeth cyfeiriadau at Dribiwnlys y GIG yn llai cyffredin fyth. Grym cyfyngedig o hyd oedd gan HAau i dynnu meddyg oddi ar eu rhestrau. Yr unig hawl oedd ganddynt, os oeddent yn anfodlon ynghylch rhyw agwedd ar ymarfer meddyg teulu nad oedd o bosibl yn torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, oedd cyfeirio’r meddyg at y GMC. Dywedodd Dr Banks wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai materion i’r GMC oedd materion rheolaeth glinigol yn ei farn ef, ac ni ellid ymdrin â nhw ar lefel leol.
Problem y Meddyg sy’n Cyflawni’n Wael
Yn ystod diwedd y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au, roedd ymwybyddiaeth gynyddol a phryder ynghylch meddygon yr oedd eu hymddygiad, eu cymhwysedd a/neu ansawdd eu gofal yn is na’r safon. Cydnabuwyd nad oedd y meddygon hyn i gyd o bell ford yn cael eu dwyn i sylw’r awdurdodau. Hyd yn oed pe baent, ni allent ddelio’n hawdd â nhw drwy’r gweithdrefnau presennol.
Yr unig fecanwaith ar gyfer ymdrin â phroblemau felly bryd hynny oedd galw ar weithdrefn anffurfiol lle byddai’r LMC yn penodi ‘Tri Gŵr Doeth’ i ymholi i berfformiad meddyg teulu, ac a fyddai’n ceisio datrys unrhyw broblemau a gafodd eu nodi. Cynghorwyd pob HA i wneud cytundeb â’r LMC ar gyfer sefydlu gweithdrefn felly. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd sail statudol i’r weithdrefn, ac ni ellid gorfodi’r meddyg teulu i gydweithredu. Heb fod yn syndod, methodd y weithdrefn yn aml i ddatrys y broblem.
Cyflwynodd Deddf Meddygaeth (Cyflawniadau Proffesiynol) 1995 (Deddf 1995) yr hyn a ddaeth yn hysbys fel gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Cyn cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau hyn, roedd y GMC wedi gallu gweithredu’n unig os canfuwyd bod meddyg yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol neu ei fod/bod yn dioddef o nam iechyd difrifol. Rhoddodd Deddf 1995, a ddaeth i rym ar 1 Gorffennaf 1997, y grym i’r GMC i atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg y canfuwyd fod ei berfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol difrifol. Y nod oedd galluogi’r GMC i gymryd camau lle’r oedd cwynion am berfformiad clinigol meddyg dros amser yn awgrymu patrwm o ddiffyg difrifol.
Rhoddwyd trefniadau lleol ar waith i gynorthwyo wrth nodi meddygon (yn feddygon teulu a meddygon ysbyty) a oedd yn perfformio’n wael, ac i sicrhau, lle bynnag yr oedd modd, bod camau gweithredu’n cael eu cymryd ar lefel leol i wella’u diffygion. Dim ond lle’r oedd y camau adferol hynny yn methu y dylai ddod yn angenrheidiol i gyfeirio at y GMC.
Tua adeg cyflwyno gweithdrefnau newydd y GMC, rhoddwyd cryn dipyn o arweiniad i HAau ynghylch y trefniadau y dylent eu rhoi ar waith i ddelio â meddygon a oedd yn cyflawni’n wael. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r trefniadau hynny ym Mhennod 5. Cymerodd amser i roi’r trefniadau angenrheidiol ar waith. Yn y rhan fwyaf o ardaloedd, ni ddaeth y gweithdrefnau ar waith hyd at 1998 neu’n hwyrach. Pan ddaethant ar waith yn y pen draw, roeddent yn atodiad pwysig iawn i’r mecanweithiau cwynion a disgyblu a oedd ar gael yn flaenorol i’r PCOau.

---  ---
Trof yn awr i ystyried y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu a oedd ar waith yn Tameside yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. A allai, ac a ddylai’r trefniadau hynny fod wedi arwain at ei ganfod yn gynharach, neu, o leiaf, a ddylent fod wedi deffro’r awdurdodau i’r ffaith fod ei ymddygiad yn anarferol mewn unrhyw ffordd? A oedd mecanweithiau effeithiol y gellid fod wedi’u rhoi ar waith, ond na wnaethpwyd? Sut oedd y trefniadau yn Tameside yn cymharu â’r trefniadau mewn mannau eraill?
Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, nid oedd y cyrff a oedd yn gyfrifol yn olynol am drefnu gofal sylfaenol yn Tameside yn gwybod nes 1998 fod euogfarnau troseddol (gan gynnwys euogfarnau am ffugio rhagnodion) gan Shipman yn gysylltiedig â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Nid oeddent yn ymwybodol felly ei fod yn peri unrhyw risg arbennig, mewn perthynas â’i arferion rhagnodi neu fel arall. Mae’n rhaid edrych ar eu hymddygiad yn y golau hwnnw. Awgrymwyd i’r Ymchwiliad y dylid beirniadu FPC Tameside a’i olynwyr am fethu datguddio gwybodaeth am hanes blaenorol Shipman. Byddaf yn delio â’r awgrym hwnnw nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Roedd Shipman, mewn llawer modd, yn feddyg cymwys. Roedd yn dal yn gyfwastad â llenyddiaeth feddygol gyfredol a datblygiadau ym maes meddygaeth deuluol. Roedd yn frwdfrydig ynghylch cynnig meddyginiaeth ataliol. Pan gyflwynwyd taliadau targed ar gyfer brechu, imiwneiddio a chytoleg serfigol, byddai’n cyrraedd y targedau hynny’n gyson. Sefydlodd ei feddygfa ym Market Street systemau cadarn ar gyfer monitro a thrin cleifion yn dioddef o afiechyd cronig, fel asthma. Mae’n bosibl (fel yr awgrymodd rhai) fod Shipman wedi creu argraff o gymhwysedd proffesiynol uwch nag a oedd ganddo mewn gwirionedd. Beth bynnag, mae’n annhebygol y byddai archwiliad arferol o’r data cyfyngedig a oedd ar gael i FHSA/WPHA Tameside am weithgarwch ei feddygfa wedi codi unrhyw bryderon ynghylch ei gymhwysedd neu ymddygiad proffesiynol. Ni ddangoswyd unrhyw anghysonderau o bwys gan yr archwiliadau arferol a wnaethpwyd gan y WPHA flynyddoedd yn ddiweddarach i wirio hawliadau Shipman am daliadau am eitemau gwasanaeth. Canfu archwiliadau o adeilad ei feddygfa eu bod mewn trefn. At hynny, byddaf yn esbonio ym Mhennod 6, er bod cwynion wedi’u gwneud yn erbyn Shipman, nad oeddent o natur a fyddai wedi codi pryderon difrifol ynghylch ei ymddygiad neu’i gymhwysedd. Byddai’r rhan fwyaf o dechnegau monitro confensiynol, felly, wedi methu’i nodi fel ffynhonnell botensial problemau.
Rwy’n bwriadu canolbwyntio ar yr agweddau hynny ar arfer Shipman y gellid fod wedi’u nodi, pe byddent wedi bod yn destun ymchwiliad penodol, fel rhai anarferol mewn rhyw ffordd, ac a oedd yn teilyngu ymchwiliad pellach. Yr agweddau hynny yw nifer y marwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion a’r amgylchiadau’n ymwneud â’r marwolaethau hynny, ei arfer rhagnodi (yn benodol, rhagnodi cyffuriau opiad) ac ansawdd ei gofnodion meddygol. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried gwybodaeth arall a oedd, yn ystod y blynyddoedd diweddarach, yn cael ei chadw gan FHSA/WPHA Tameside, ac a allai fod wedi cynnwys deunydd arwyddocaol.
Nifer ac Amgylchiadau Marwolaethau Cleifion
Cyn arestio Shipman, nid oedd yn arfer gan PCOau i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu unigol. Roedd nifer o resymau am hyn, a byddaf yn eu hesbonio ym Mhennod 14. Ni ellir beirniadu’r PCOau yn Tameside am y ffaith na wnaethant unrhyw waith monitro o’r fath.
Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes system ar gyfer casglu a dadansoddi gwybodaeth am amgylchiadau marwolaethau. Felly, ni rybuddiwyd unrhyw un mewn awdurdod i’r gyfran anarferol o uchel o gleifion Shipman a oedd wedi marw yn eu cartrefi, neu a fu farw’n sydyn ac yn annisgwyl, neu a fu farw (ar gyfaddefiad Shipman ei hun) yn ei bresenoldeb neu’n fuan wedi iddo ymweld neu yr oedd yntau wedi’u ‘canfod’ yn farw. Nid oedd unrhyw un mewn awdurdod yn ymwybodol o’r ffaith bod chwe marwolaeth wedi digwydd yn adeilad ei feddygfa. Nid oedd un o’r PCOau a oedd yn gyfrifol am Tameside dros y blynyddoedd yn cadw data felly, neu nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw fodd o gael gafael arno. Ni ellir eu beirniadu felly am beidio â bod yn ymwybodol ohono.
Dan system newydd y crwner a gynigiwyd yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, byddai’r crwner yn cael ei hysbysu ynghylch bob marwolaeth, a byddai llawer mwy o wybodaeth ar gael am yr amgylchiadau’n ymwneud â phob marwolaeth. Byddai’r wybodaeth honno’n dod oddi wrth y person (gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd fel arfer) a gadarnhaodd bod marwolaeth wedi digwydd, gan y meddyg a roddodd adroddiad am hanes meddygol y person ymadawedig, a chan aelod o deulu’r ymadawedig neu rywun arall â gwybodaeth am y person ymadawedig. Byddai gwybodaeth o’r ffynonellau amrywiol hyn yn cael ei chroeswirio. Byddai system y crwner yn cadw’r holl ddata perthnasol. Byddai modd monitro’r data hwnnw ac ymchwilio i unrhyw batrymau anarferol neu nodweddion eraill. Ar hyn o bryd, ni ellir gwneud yr ymarferiad hwn.
Y Cyfnod o 1977 i 1990: Pwyllgorau Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 3, roedd rôl yr FPCau cyn canol y 1980au yn un gyfyngedig iawn. Roedd yn ymwneud â materion gweinyddu, yn hytrach nag ymddygiad proffesiynol neu arfer clinigol. Nid oedd FPCau yn gwneud unrhyw fath o weithgarwch a ellid ei ddisgrifio fel ‘monitro’r’ meddygon teulu ar eu rhestrau. Ni allai FPC, yn ystod y cyfnod hwn, ddisgwyl cael meddyg yn mynegi pryder am feddyg arall ychwaith. Fel y disgrifiaf ym Mhennod 10, oherwydd diwylliant y dydd, ychydig o feddygon a fyddai wedi ei hystyried yn ddyletswydd broffesiynol i hysbysu’r awdurdodau am gydweithiwr, hyd yn oed pe bai ganddynt bryderon am ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Ar yr achlysuron prin pan oedd pryder yn cael ei fynegi, yr LMC fyddai’n delio â’r mater yn hytrach na’r FPC: gweler paragraff 4.22.
Yr unig ffynhonnell wybodaeth bron a allai fod wedi arwain at nodi ‘meddyg problemus’ fyddai cwynion gan gleifion neu’u cynrychiolwyr. Mae’n arwyddocaol, felly, fod Mr Greenwood erbyn canol y 1980au i ddiwedd y 1980au wedi sefydlu system adolygu’r log cwynion yn cael ei gadw gan FPC Tameside. Fel yr esboniais, roedd Mr Greenwood yn cofio bod ei adolygiad wedi datgelu bodolaeth problem weinyddol a oedd yn effeithio ar un feddygfa. Ni fyddai wedi datgelu problem gyda Shipman. Ni wnaeth cwyn na phatrwm o gwynion ddod i’r golwg ar unrhyw adeg yn ystod ei yrfa, a fyddai wedi arwain at amheuon ehangach ynghylch ei weithgareddau. Fel y byddaf yn disgrifio ym Mhennod 6, gwnaethpwyd rhywfaint o gwynion amdano. Fodd bynnag, nid oeddent yn rhoi unrhyw arwydd o’i droseddoldeb.
Y Cyfnod o 1977 i 1990: y Gwasanaeth Meddygol Rhanbarthol
Fel y dywedais, byddai’r RMOau yn ymweld yn gyson â meddygon teulu yn ystod y cyfnod hwn. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan dri chyn RMO. Roedd Dr Jack Edwards, cyn feddyg teulu, yn RMO o 1965 hyd at 1992 ac yn gweithio dros ardaloedd Tameside, Trafford a Stockport. Ymunodd Dr Archer, cyn feddyg teulu arall, â’r RMS ym 1987 a gweithiai o Fanceinion, gan gwmpasu pedair ardal FPC, yn cynnwys Tameside. Ym mis Ionawr 1988, cafodd ei secondio i FPC Trafford ac ni ymwelodd wedi hynny â meddygon teulu yn Tameside nes iddo ddychwelyd yno fel Cynghorwr Meddygol i Gonsortiwm FHSAau Tameside, Wigan a Stockport. Roedd Dr David Edwards, a adawodd meddygaeth deuluol ym 1986 i ymuno â’r RMS, yn gweithio dros ardaloedd Cilgwri a Swydd Gaer (ac eithrio Stockport). Ym mis Mehefin 1990, gadawodd yr RMS ac ymuno â chonsortiwm FHSAau Tameside, Wigan a Stockport fel cyd-Gynghorwr Meddygol gyda Dr Archer.
Nid oes un adroddiad o’r ymweliadau â meddygfeydd gan RMOau ar gyfer meddygon teulu yn Tameside wedi goroesi. Roedd Dr Archer, fodd bynnag, yn gallu cyfeirio at nodiadau am ymweliadau (gan gynnwys ymweliadau â meddygfa Donneybrook) a gofnodwyd yn ei ddyddiadur. Cytunodd bob un o’r tystion mai un o’r pynciau a drafodwyd yn eu cyfarfodydd â meddygon teulu oedd rhagnodi. Dywedodd Dr Archer y byddai’r pwnc yn cael ei drafod mewn termau cyffredinol. Byddai’n pwysleisio’r angen am gynildeb wrth ragnodi. Byddai’n cynghori meddygon teulu i gymryd gofal wrth ragnodi cyffuriau newydd. Byddai’n eu hannog i adrodd am adweithiau croes i gyffuriau.
Yn gyffredinol, gwybodaeth sylfaenol yn unig fyddai gan RMOau am gostau rhagnodi pob meddygfa. Byddent yn cael data manylach dim ond pan fyddai’r feddygfa wedi’i nodi gan Bencadlys RMS fel rhagnodwr cost uchel. Y rheol arferol oedd, os oedd costau rhagnodi meddygfa yn fwy na 25% uwchlaw’r cyfartaledd, byddai’n ofynnol i’r RMO ymweld â’r feddygfa i drafod ffyrdd y gallai’r meddyg(on) teulu dan sylw newid eu harferion rhagnodi.
Nid oedd yr un o’r RMOau a roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad yn cofio Shipman yn cael ei nodi ganddynt (neu iddynt) fel rhagnodwr uchel. Nid yw nodiadau Dr Archer am ymweliadau â Donneybrook House ym mis Rhagfyr 1987 a mis Ionawr 1991 yn sôn am unrhyw bryderon yn ei gylch. Fe allai’n wir fod mai’r rheswm am hynny oedd bod costau rhagnodi Shipman bryd hynny yn rhan o’r costau rhagnodi ar gyfer meddygfa Donneybrook gyfan. Byddai data rhagnodi a oedd ar gael i’r RMOau wedi ymwneud â’r feddygfa, nid â meddygon unigol o fewn y feddygfa. Os nad oedd meddygfa Donneybrook wedi’i nodi fel un â chostau rhagnodi uchel, ni fyddai data manylach wedi’i gael. Felly, ni fyddai’r RMOau wedi bod yn ymwybodol o gostau rhagnodi Shipman o’u cymharu â chostau ei gydweithwyr yn y feddygfa.
Rhwng 1977 a 1990, lladdodd Shipman 71 o gleifion. Er nad oes gan yr Ymchwiliad unrhyw wybodaeth am Shipman yn cael gafael ar gyffuriau opiad yn ystod y cyfnod hwn, nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth ei fod yn dargyfeirio diamorffin, a oedd wedi cael ei ragnodi yn enwau cleifion, at ei ddibenion ei hun. Roedd wedi gwneud hynny yn Todmorden (gyda phethidin) ac roedd i wneud hynny eto (gyda diamorffin) tra’i fod ym Meddygfa Market Street. Ni fyddai’r wybodaeth ragnodi sylfaenol a oedd ar gael i RMOau wedi dangos bod Shipman yn rhagnodi cyffuriau opiad. Yn wir, fel yr esboniais, ni fyddai wedi dangos manylion rhagnodi Shipman o gwbl.
Ymholiadau i Shipman yn Cadw Cyffuriau Rheoledig
Roedd yr RMOau yn gyfrifol am edrych ar CDRau a stociau meddygon teulu. Roedd pedwar aelod o feddygfa Donneybrook yn cofio’u CDRau yn cael eu harchwilio. Dim ond un ohonynt (Dr Ian Napier) a gofiai RMO yn archwilio’i stoc o gyffuriau rheoledig. Dywedodd Dr David Edwards wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod Shipman wedi dweud wrtho nad oedd yn cadw cyffuriau rheoledig ac nad oedd CDR ganddo. Nid yw’n cofio a wnaeth Shipman rhoi rheswm am hyn. Nid oedd yn anghyffredin. Nid oedd cyfran sylweddol o feddygon teulu yn cadw stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig. Ni fyddai Dr Edwards felly wedi cael unrhyw reswm i amau’r hyn ddywedodd Shipman. Ymddengys mai ychydig o amheuaeth sydd, pa RMO bynnag oedd wedi holi ynghylch ei drefniadau ar gyfer cyffuriau rheoledig, y byddai’r ateb wedi bod yr un fath.
Dylid nodi, yn ystod y cyfnod hwn, bod archwiliadau cyson o CDRau fferyllwyr yn cael eu cynnal gan swyddogion archwilio fferyllfeydd yr heddlu (CIO). Byddent wedi bod yn canolbwyntio’u sylw ar gyffuriau rheoledig yn unig, ac yn rhinwedd eu swydd, roedd ganddynt gryn wybodaeth a phrofiad am eu defnydd. Ni wnaethant sylwi ar unrhyw beth amheus ynghylch rhagnodi Shipman. Gan hynny, byddai wedi ymddangos yn afrealistig i awgrymu y dylai’r RMOau fod wedi gwneud hynny o’r wybodaeth oedd wedi’i chynnwys yn nata rhagnodi’r feddygfa.
Shipman yn Cadw Cofnodion
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r arfer, hyd at y 1960au, oedd i’r RMOau archwilio cofnodion meddygol meddygon teulu er mwyn sicrhau eu bod yn cael eu cadw yn unol â’r telerau gwasanaeth. Roedd yr arfer hwnnw wedi dod i ben (yn Hyde yn sicr) ymhell cyn i Shipman gyrraedd. Ni allodd yr Ymchwiliad ganfod pam beidiodd yr arfer. Mae archwilio cofnodion yn broses lafurus, a gall fod iddi ddod i ben am y rheswm hwnnw. Mae’n bosibl i’r broses ddiweddu o ganlyniad i wrthwynebiad o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol i archwilio’i gofnodion. Roedd yn amhoblogaidd yn sicr. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Geoffrey Roberts, cyn ysgrifennydd i’r LMC dros Tameside, ei fod wedi ceisio sefydlu system o archwiliadau o adeiladau meddygfeydd ym 1980. Gwnaeth un archwiliad, a oedd yn cynnwys edrych ar gofnodion, ond dywedodd bod y meddyg teulu dan sylw wedi ‘digio’n fawr’ at hyn. Gall fod bod yr RMOau yn cael ymateb tebyg pan oeddent yn cynnal eu harchwiliadau nhw. Beth bynnag am hynny, mae’n amlwg, erbyn 1977, bod yr arfer wedi hen ddod i ben.
Pe bai cofnodion meddygol Shipman wedi cael eu harchwilio’n feirniadol, efallai y byddai dwy nodwedd wedi dod i’r golwg. Yn gyntaf, efallai y byddid wedi sylwi bod ansawdd ei gofnodion yn wael. Dyna’n sicr oedd barn gyffredinol y meddygon hynny a archwiliodd ei gofnodion wedyn at ddibenion yr Ymchwiliad. Dywedaf ‘efallai y byddid’ wedi ystyried bod y cofnodion yn wael, oherwydd bod Dr Napier, un o gydweithwyr Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook, yn ddigon gonest i ddweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod cofnodion pob un o’r meddygon ym meddygfa Donneybrook, gan gynnwys ei gofnodion ei hun, yn ‘go ofnadwy, os nad yn druenus’ pan adawodd Shipman. Fe’u gwellwyd yn fawr wedyn gyda dyfodiad y cyfrifiadur. Gall fod, felly, na fyddai ansawdd cyffredinol nodiadau Shipman wedi denu llawer o sylw penodol.
Y nodwedd arall fyddai natur y cofnodion a wnaed mewn cysylltiad â marwolaethau cleifion. Weithiau, roedd y cofnodion hynny’n brin iawn ac roedd gwybodaeth am amgylchiadau marwolaethau, y diagnosis am achos y farwolaeth a’r sylfaen ar gyfer y diagnosis yn amlwg yn annigonol. Weithiau, roedd y cofnodion yn llawer manylach, ond datgelent amgylchiadau anghyffredin ynghylch y farwolaeth. Mae llawer o enghreifftiau o gofnodion felly (rhai’n dyddio o’r 1980au) yn cael eu trafod yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf. Byddai pa un a fyddai nodweddion anghyffredin y cofnodion wedi denu sylw wedi dibynnu’n gyntaf ar ba un a oedd yr RMO wedi dewis archwilio cofnodion claf ymadawedig yr oedd Shipman wedi’i ladd/lladd. Efallai nad yw hynny’n debygol iawn, gan y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o gofnodion felly wedi cael eu hanfon ‘nôl at yr FPC yn fuan wedi marwolaeth y claf. Hyd yn oed pe byddent wedi cael eu dychwelyd i Shipman wedi hynny, maent yn debygol o fod wedi cael eu storio yn ei gartref, lle canfuwyd llawer o gofnodion ar ôl ei arestio. Byddai wedi dibynnu hefyd ar ba un a oedd cynnwys y nodiadau wedi cael ei ystyried yn feirniadol. Os mai diben yr archwiliad oedd canfod a oedd y nodiadau wedi’u trefnu’n gronolegol, a oedd crynodebau priodol wedi’u paratoi a materion eraill o’r math hwnnw, efallai y byddai’r nodweddion od wedi’u colli.
Y Cyfnod o 1990 i 1998: Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside ac Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine
Ym 1991, fel yr esboniais, disodlwyd yr FPCau gan FHSAau. Cymerodd yr FHSAau yr holl gyfrifoldebau a fu gan yr RMS yn flaenorol, ac eithrio’r rheiny’n ymwneud ag ardystio at ddibenion budd-daliadau DSS. Cymerodd y cynghorwyr meddygol annibynnol, yr oedd gofyniad ar yr FHSAau i’w cyflogi, y cyfrifoldeb am fonitro rhagnodi meddygon teulu ac am gynorthwyo wrth gyflwyno’r IPAau newydd. O 1990, roedd Dr Archer a Dr David Edwards, y ddau’n gyn feddygon teulu ac RMOau, yn gyd-Gynghorwyr Meddygol i gonsortiwm o FHSAau Tameside, Wigan a Stockport. Fe’u holynwyd, ym mis Tachwedd 1991, gan Dr Freedman, cyn feddyg teulu. Ym mis Awst 1993, daeth yn Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol FHSA Manceinion, a chymerwyd ei le yn Tameside gan Dr Banks, cyn feddyg teulu arall.
O fis Ebrill 1991, cymerodd y cynghorwyr gyfrifoldeb hefyd am archwilio CDRau meddygon teulu a’u stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig. Ymddengys, o’r amser hwnnw, bod llai o archwiliadau o CDRau a stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig yn cael eu cynnal nag o’r blaen. Cyfaddefodd Dr Jim Smith, Prif Swyddog Fferyllol dros Loegr yn yr Adran Iechyd, mai felly’r oedd hi. Dywedodd nad oed cyffuriau rheoledig yn flaenoriaeth ar ddechrau’r 1990au. Credai mai’r rheswm am hyn oedd nad oeddent yn cael eu gweld fel problem. Teimlwyd bod y systemau rheoli eraill (yn cael eu gweithredu gan y Swyddfa Gartref a’r heddlu) yn ddigon cadarn. Cydnabu bod y farn honno wedi cael ei phrofi’n anghywir. Gwnaethpwyd astudiaeth gan dîm a oedd yn cynnwys yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, a chyhoeddwyd canlyniadau’r astudiaeth mewn papur o’r enw ‘Reducing Leakage of Prescribed Drugs’ ym mis Ionawr 2002. Yn ystod yr astudiaeth hon, nododd y tîm 59 o feddygfeydd teulu yn Swydd Gaerlŷr a Rutland a oedd yn cadw stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig. Roedd 31 o’r meddygfeydd hynny heb gael archwiliad o’u CDRau na’u stociau o gyffuriau rheoledig am gyfnod o dros ddeng mlynedd cyn yr astudiaeth. Dim ond chwe meddygfa oedd wedi’u harchwilio o fewn y 12 mis blaenorol. Ymddengys, felly, bod y cynghorwyr yn Tameside wedi holi meddygon teulu ynghylch eu trefniadau ar gyfer cadw cyffuriau rheoledig. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at ymatebion Shipman i gwestiynau felly nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Penododd FHSA Tameside gynghorydd fferyllol hefyd. Mrs Rosalyn Anderson oedd y cynghorydd fferyllol i FHSA Tameside (y WPHA yn ddiweddarach) o fis Medi 1992 hyd at fis Ebrill 1996. Fe wnaeth Mrs Bernice Abrahams (Miss Bernice Caden ar y pryd) sefyll i mewn am flwyddyn yn gynnar ym 1993 tra’r oedd Mrs Anderson ar seibiant mamolaeth. Bu Mr Peter Welsby yn cydweithio â Mrs Anderson am ryw chwe mis cyn cymryd drosodd oddi wrthi.
Data Rhagnodi
Erbyn dechrau’r 1990au, daeth data rhagnodi â mwy o wybodaeth ynddo ar gael gan y PPA. Roedd data dadansoddi rhagnodi a data cost (PACT) ar gael ar ffurf papur. Roedd rhywfaint o gyfyngiadau iddo. Roedd yr adroddiad Pact wyth tudalen safonol yn rhoi gwybodaeth am ragnodi yn ôl y feddygfa deulu, nid meddyg teulu unigol, oni bai bod y meddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Nid oedd yn cynnwys gwybodaeth am ragnodion preifat. Nid oedd yn nodi’r claf yr oedd cyffur neu offer wedi’u rhagnodi iddo. Mewn gwirionedd, bryd hynny - fel heddiw - nid oedd data penodol i gleifion yn cael ei gasglu gan y PPA.
Roedd y data’n cael ei gyflwyno drwy gyfeirio at Gyffurlyfr Cenedlaethol Prydain (BNF). Mae’r BNF yn cael ei rannu’n benodau, pob un ohonynt yn nodi manylion cyffuriau sy’n gweithredu ar ardal therapiwtig benodol. Rhennir pob pennod yn adrannau sy’n delio â’r mathau o gyffuriau sy’n gweithredu ar yr ardal therapiwtig honno. Rhennir yr adrannau ymhellach yn baragraffau ac is-baragraffau, gan ddarparu manylion penodol iawn am gyffuriau bob math. Rhennir is-baragraffau eto yn fanylion am gyffuriau, cynhyrchion a fformiwleiddiadau
Gan ddefnyddio rhagnodi chwistrelliad 100mg o ddiamorffin fel enghraifft, mae’r wybodaeth sy’n cael ei chynnwys yn y BNF fel a ganlyn:
BNF Pennod 4:
Y brif system nerfol
BNF Adran:
Poenladdwyr
BNF Paragraff:
Poenladdwyr opioid
BNF Is-baragraff:
Poenladdwyr opioid (h.y. yr un fath â’r paragraff BNF)
BNF Sylwedd cemegol:
Diamorffin
BNF Cynnyrch:
Diamorffin HCI (systemig)
BNF Cyflwyniad:
Chwistrelliad Diamorffin HCI ampwl 100mg
Roedd adroddiadau PACT ar ffurf papur ar gael i feddygfeydd teulu a PCOau. Roedd pob adroddiad yn ymwneud â chyfnod tri mis ac yn cymharu data meddygfa â chyfartaleddau cenedlaethol FHSA/HA. Byddai adroddiad PACT safonol yn dangos costau rhagnodi meddygfa ar gyfer adran y BNF. Gan ddefnyddio’r enghraifft diamorffin, byddai’n dangos costau rhagnodi’r feddygfa ar gyfer poenladdwyr, ond ni fyddai’n gwahaniaethu rhwng y mathau gwahanol o boenladdwyr (llai fyth y sylweddau, cynhyrchion neu gyflwyniadau cemegol) a ragnodwyd. Felly, ni fyddai’n amlwg o’r adroddiad PACT bod meddyg wedi rhagnodi diamorffin. Er bod yr adroddiadau’n nodi’r 20 prif gyffur yn y feddygfa yn ôl cost ac amlder eu rhagnodi, roedd y ffaith nad yw cyffuriau opiad yn ddrud yn golygu na fyddai meintiau mawr o ddiamorffin hyd yn oed wedi ymddangos, yn enwedig os oedd meddygfa yn ragnodwr cost uchel mewn meysydd eraill. Eithriad fyddai pe bai nifer o ampylau dogn uchel (100mg neu 500mg) o ddiamorffin wedi’u rhagnodi. Mae’r ampylau dogn uchel yn dipyn drutach na’r ampylau dogn is. Fel arfer, caiff yr ampylau dogn uchel eu rhagnodi ar gyfer claf sydd â salwch terfynol am gyfnod byr yn union cyn marwolaeth. Mae adroddiadau PACT ar bapur wedi parhau’r un fath yn eu hanfod ers iddynt ddod ar gael yn y lle cyntaf.
Roedd catalogau PACT ar gael i PCOau hefyd, ac, ar gais, i feddygfeydd teulu. Yn gyffredinol, roeddent yn ymwneud â chyfnod tri mis, er y gellid gwneud cais am gatalogau a oedd yn cynnwys gymaint â data dwy flynedd. Roedd y catalogau’n swmpus iawn, yn cynnwys unrhyw beth rhwng 70 i 250 o dudalennau am gyfnod tri mis. Roeddent yn cynnwys rhestr fanwl o bob cyffur a ragnodwyd gan y feddygfa ar lefel cyflwyno’r BNF. Byddai’r catalog yn dangos y nifer o weithiau yr oedd cyffur yn cael ei ragnodi, maint y cyffur a ragnodwyd a chyfanswm y gost. Ni fyddai’n dangos ar gyfer faint o gleifion yr oedd y cyffur wedi’i ragnodi. Roedd catalogau PACT yn cynnwys data amrwd ac nid oedd yn cynnig unrhyw fodd o ddadansoddi tueddiadau neu gymharu rhagnodi rhwng meddygfeydd.
Er 1992, mae systemau PACT electronig wedi bod ar gael i PCOau a chyrff eraill y GIG. Roedd y cyntaf o’r rhain, PACTLINE, yn darparu data ar gyfer rhagnodi’r flwyddyn flaenorol yn unig. Gellid dadansoddi hyd at lefel yr adran BNF (e.e. poenladdwyr) yn unig. Roedd yn rhaid dadansoddi ymhellach gan ddefnyddio’r catalog PACT papur. Roedd y system FEPACT (a alwyd yn HAEPACT yn ddiweddarach), a gyflwynwyd yn ystod 1994 a 1995, yn galluogi PCOau i anfon ceisiadau at brif gyfrifiadur y PPA ar gyfer dadansoddi data lefel cyffuriau a lefel cyflwyniad. Defnyddiwyd hwn i gael dadansoddiad manylach o’r wybodaeth a oedd eisoes ar gael gan PACTLINE. Yn ddamcaniaethol, byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i ofyn am ddadansoddiad o arfer Shipman o ragnodi chwistrelliadau diamorffin drwy’r system hon. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, ni fyddai ymholiad felly wedi cael ei wneud heb awgrym fod rhywbeth o’i le. Yn gyffredinol, roedd y systemau FEPACT/HAEPACT yn cael eu defnyddio i gael data pellach am feysydd problem yn cael eu nodi gan PACTLINE. Pe bai FHSA/WPHA Tameside wedi cael gwybodaeth o rywle arall fod Shipman yn camddefnyddio diamorffin, gallai fod wedi holi’r system PPA i archwilio’r posibilrwydd hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, byddai wedi gorfod cael ei rybuddio am broblem botensial er mwyn gwneud yr ymholiad yn y lle cyntaf. Dim ond data hanesyddol dwy flynedd oedd ar gael ar y systemau electronig. Ym mis Ebrill 1997, disodlwyd PACTLINE a HAEPACT gan system EPACT newydd. Roedd EPACT yn rhoi dadansoddiadau ac adroddiadau mwy soffistigedig. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y system yn un hawdd, ac roedd yn gofyn am rywfaint o arbenigedd.
Ym mis Ebrill 1999, cyflwynwyd system newydd, ePACT.net. Roedd hyfforddiant ar gael ar sut i ddefnyddio’r system. I gychwyn, nid oedd y cwrs hyfforddi yn cynnwys technegau ar gyfer dadansoddi rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. O ganlyniad i euogfarn Shipman, fodd bynnag, cychwynnwyd hyfforddiant priodol ym mis Mai 2000. Ers hynny, mae llawer o PCOau wedi dechrau system o fonitro’n gyson arferion meddygon teulu wrth ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn eu hardal. Mae tair mantais bwysig i’r system ePACT.net dros ei rhagflaenwyr. Yn gyntaf, mae’n haws o lawer i’w defnyddio. Yn ail, mae’r system yn galluogi holi’r system ar-lein, fel bod y canlyniadau ar gael ar unwaith. Trydydd mantais ePACT.net yw bod data ar gyfer y tair blynedd flaenorol ar gael ar gyfer ei ddadansoddi. Mae hyn yn rhoi mwy o gyfle i weld patrwm yn dod i’r golwg.
Mae’n amlwg, o fis Mawrth 1992 o leiaf, fod Shipman wedi’i nodi gan FHSA Tameside fel rhagnodwr cost uchel. Achoswyd y broblem gan ei duedd i ragnodi cyffuriau drug, yn enwedig cyffuriau lleihau lipid. Roedd yn well ganddo gyffuriau brand yn hytrach na’r math generig llai costus. Ym 1993, ef oedd y rhagnodwr isaf o gyffuriau generig yn yr ardal. Fel rhagnodwr cost uchel, cafodd Shipman ymweliadau cyson gan gynghorwyr meddygol a fferyllol yr FHSA. Roeddent yn ceisio’i berswadio i newid ei arferion rhagnodi.
Pan fyddai’n cael ei holi ynghylch cost uchel ei ragnodi, byddai Shipman wastad yn gallu cyfiawnhau ei hun, trwy gyfeirio at ymchwil gyfredol neu ddata ei hun am gleifion. Byddai’n honni fod ganddo gyfradd marwolaethau isel ymhlith ei gleifion a ddioddefai o asthma, a dim hunanladdiadau o gwbl ymhlith cleifion yn dioddef o iselder, a byddai’n cyfeirio at hyn fel tystiolaeth o ba mor llwyddiannus a ddefnyddiai meddyginiaeth gwrth-asthmatig a gwrth-iselder. Byddai’n esbonio ac yn cyfiawnhau ei gred yn effaith proffylactig cyffuriau lleihau lipid. Roedd rhyddid clinigol gan feddygon teulu i ragnodi fel y credent oedd yn briodol ar gyfer eu cleifion. Dim ond annog a cheisio’u perswadio i newid eu harferion rhagnodi y gallai cynghorwyr ei wneud. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw rym i wneud mwy oni bai bod meddyg teulu’n euog o or-ragnodi i’r graddau a oedd yn torri’i delerau/telerau gwasanaeth. Roedd Dr Freedman yn cofio, ar un adeg, cyn iddo adael FHSA Tameside ym mis Awst 1993, fod rhywfaint o drafod wedi bod ynghylch a fyddai’n briodol i gyfeirio Shipman at bwyllgor proffesiynol ar sail ei ragnodi drud, ac iselo ran cyffuriau generig. Credai bod yr FHSA wedi cymryd cyngor gan un o’r cynghorwyr fferyllol rhanbarthol. Y farn oedd na ellid cymhwyso’r gweithdrefnau newydd i Shipman gan nad oedd patrymau ei ragnodi’n disgyn i’r categorïau priodol. Penderfynwyd ei bod yn well mabwysiadu ‘ymagwedd addysgol’.
Ym 1993, cafodd Shipman system gyfrifiadur â meddalwedd oedd wedi’i gynllunio i annog defnyddio cyffuriau generig lle bynnag yr oedd modd. Pa un ai oherwydd hynny neu (fel yr awgrymodd Dr Banks) mewn ymateb i gyflwyno cymhellion ariannol yr FHSA am ragnodi generig, cynyddodd Shipman ei ragnodi generig yn nodedig. O’r amser hwnnw, daeth yn un o’r rhagnodwyr uchaf o gyffuriau generig yn yr FHSA. Fodd bynnag, roedd ei gostau rhagnodi cyffredinol yn parhau i fod yr uchaf yn yr ardal. Ym 1995, ymunodd Shipman â chonsortiwm a oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa â chyllideb ragnodi a oedd yn cael ei rhannu. Cyflogodd y consortiwm wasanaethau Ms Carol Abdulezer, ymgynghorydd fferyllol annibynnol, i baratoi cyffurlyfr i’w ddefnyddio gan y consortiwm. Yn ystod y gwaith hwnnw, adolygodd ddata PACT pob un o’r meddygon teulu yn y consortiwm hwnnw, gan gynnwys Shipman.
Ni wnaeth Shipman newid ei gostau rhagnodi, hyd yn oed pan roddwyd pwysau arno gan ei gydweithwyr o fewn y consortiwm. Ym mis Mehefin 1998, dri mis cyn ei arestio, roedd ei gostau rhagnodi’n uwch na chyfwerth yr HA o 75%, a’r cyfwerth cenedlaethol o 88%. Gydol y cyfnod hwn, roedd rhagnodi Shipman yn fater o bryder gwirioneddol i FHSA/WPHA Tameside a Swyddfa Ranbarthol Gogledd Orllewin o Weithgor y GIG. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y pryder hwnnw’n ymwneud ag ansawdd ei ragnodi. Ni theimlwyd ei fod yn rhagnodi’n amhriodol neu’n annigonol. Nid oedd yn rhagnodi cyffuriau a oedd wedi’u disodli gan baratoadau mwy effeithiol neu gyffuriau a oedd yn hysbys bod gwerth therapiwtig cyfyngedig iddynt. I’r gwrthwyneb, roedd o blaid cyffuriau modern, newydd eu datblygu. Yr unig reswm am y pryder ynghylch arferion rhagnodi Shipman oedd eu cost uchel.
Shipman yn Rhagnodi Cyffuriau Opiad
Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Dr Archer, Dr David Edwards, Dr Freedman, Dr Banks, Mrs Abrahams a Mr Welsby, yr oedd eu cyflogaeth ar y cyd fel cynghorwyr i FHSA/WPHA Tameside yn ymestyn dros y cyfnod sydd dan sylw gennyf. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth hefyd gan Ms Abdulezer. Cafodd Mrs Anderson ei hatal rhag mynychu i roi tystiolaeth oherwydd anawsterau teuluol, ond darparodd ddau ddatganiad. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad nodiadau a llythyrau’n ymwneud ag ymweliadau rhagnodi, rhywfaint o’r data rhagnodi a ddefnyddiwyd i baratoi ar gyfer yr ymweliadau hynny a dogfennau perthnasol eraill. Nid oedd yr un o gynghorwyr FHSA/WPHA Tameside erioed wedi cael rheswm i bryderu ynghylch rhagnodi Shipman o ddiamorffin. Cafodd Ms Abdulezer reswm i siarad ag ef ynghylch hynny unwaith mewn amgylchiadau y byddaf yn ymwneud â nhw’n fuan.
Fel yr esboniais, nid oedd adroddiadau safonol papur PACT yn ddigon manwl i ddangos fod diamorffin wedi’i ragnodi. Pan gafodd y cynghorwyr y catalogau PACT manylach, byddai’u sylw wedi’i ganolbwyntio ar yr ardaloedd cost uchel. Ni fyddai’r rhain fel arfer yn cynnwys cyffuriau opiad sydd, fel yr esboniais, yn gymharol rad ac eithrio’r ampylau dogn uchel o ddiamorffin.
Pe bai archwiliad o gatalog PACT wedi datgelu bod maint mawr o ddiamorffin wedi’i ragnodi yn ystod y cyfnod (tri mis fel arfer) yr oedd y catalog yn ymwneud ag ef, byddid yn tybio bod hynny i’w briodoli i gyffuriau lleddfu poen yn cael eu rhagnodi i glaf â salwch terfynol yn ystod camau olaf ei fywyd/bywyd. Mae angen meintiau mawr iawn o ddiamorffin ar gleifion felly’n aml i leddfu’u poen. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai’r cynghorwyr eisiau ymddangos eu bod yn grintachlyd mewn maes mor sensitif. Yn unol â hynny, byddent yn amharod i gwestiynu faint o ddiamorffin oedd yn cael ei ragnodi yn yr amgylchiadau hyn. Dywedodd Mrs Anderson na fyddai hi wedi edrych yn fanwl ar ddefnydd meddyg teulu o gyffuriau rheoledig oni bai ei bod wedi cael ei rhybuddio am broblem botensial.
Ym mis Mawrth 1992, rhagnododd Shipman ddau ampwl 30mg o ddiamorffin. Ni ragnododd mwy y flwyddyn honno. Ni fyddai’r rhagnodyn wedi denu unrhyw sylw. Rhwng mis Mawrth a mis Awst 1993, rhagnododd 14 o ampylau 30mg sengl o ddiamorffin, yn enwau 13 o gleifion gwahanol. Ni fyddai’r rhain wedi bod yn amlwg o’r system PACTLINE electronig na’r adroddiadau PACT papur safonol. Byddent, fodd bynnag, wedi ymddangos yn y catalogau PACT ar gyfer y tri chwarter pan gafodd y rhagnodion eu rhoi. Byddai rhagnodyn am ampwl 30mg o ddiamorffin fel modd ‘unigol’ o drin claf yn anarferol. Byddai cyfres o ragnodion felly yn fwy anarferol fyth. Pe sylwid arno gan rywun â gwybodaeth am ddefnyddio cyffuriau opiad, dylai’r patrwm rhagnodi hwn fod wedi codi cwestiynau a phryderon. Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, roeddwn yn feirniadol o’r fferyllydd a’r CIO a fethodd sylwi ar natur anarferol y rhagnodion hyn o gofnodion yn y CDR a oedd yn cael ei gadw yn y fferyllfa lle cafodd y cyffuriau ar y rhagnodion eu dosbarthu. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn feirniadol o gynghorwyr yr FHSA a oedd yn gyfrifol am archwilio’r data PACT am y cyfnodau yn ymwneud â’r rhagnodion hyn. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio na fyddai’r wybodaeth a oedd yn cael ei chynnwys yn y catalogau PACT wedi dweud wrth ddarllenydd faint o gleifion oedd wedi derbyn y diamorffin. Byddai’r ffaith honno, a’r ffaith y byddai’r darllenydd yn archwilio catalog un chwarter ar y tro, yn golygu mai ychydig iawn o effaith fyddai’r wybodaeth honno wedi’i chael, hyd yn oed pe sylwyd arni. Byddai cyfanswm maint a chost y diamorffin yn cael ei ragnodi dros chwarter unigol wedi bod yn gymharol fach. Byddai’r wybodaeth wedi ymddangos mewn dogfen swmpus a oedd yn cynnwys llawer iawn o ddata am y cyffuriau, gan gynnwys cyffuriau cost uchel, a ragnodwyd gan Shipman dros yr un cyfnod tri mis. Nid yw’n syndod na sylwyd ar yr ampylau 30mg unigol hyn o ddiamorffin.
Ym mis Tachwedd 1993, roedd dull Shipman o gael gafael ar ddiamorffin wedi newid. Cymerodd feddiant ar ddau neu dri blwch, bob un ohonynt yn cynnwys deg ampwl 100mg o ddiamorffin, ar ôl marwolaeth claf. Dywedodd ei fod yn bwriadu’u dinistrio. Roedd y diamorffin wedi’i ragnodi i’w roi trwy yrrwr chwistrell i glaf â salwch terfynol a oedd wedi marw yn ei gartref. Wedi hynny, cafodd Shipman afael ar forffin mewn meintiau mawr trwy ei ragnodi ar gyfer cleifion canser nad oedd ei angen arnynt mewn gwirionedd, trwy fynd ag ef o dai’r cleifion a oedd wedi marw o ganser, neu drwy ei gasglu ar ran claf â salwch terfynol a chadw rhywfaint neu’r cyfan o’r cyffur iddo ef ei hun.
Fel y dywedais, cafodd Ms Abdulezer reswm i holi Shipman ynghylch ei arfer wrth ragnodi diamorffin. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pan oedd yn archwilio data rhagnodi’r consortiwm a oedd yn ddeiliad cronfa yr oedd Shipman yn aelod ohono, canfu fod ei ragnodi o ddiamorffin ar gyfer y chwarter wedi cynyddu. Tybiodd ar unwaith mai’r rheswm am y cynnydd oedd bod Shipman yn rhagnodi ar gyfer claf â salwch terfynol. Nid ymchwilio i’r rheswm am ei ragnodi oedd ei diben wrth siarad ag ef, nac i geisio’i berswadio i’w leihau, ond i ganfod am ba hyd yr oedd yr angen am y cyffur yn debygol o barhau. Roedd eisiau gwybod a ddylai ofyn i FHSA/WPHA Tameside ei ystyried wrth bennu cyllideb rhagnodi’r consortiwm. Nododd Shipman y claf dan sylw ar unwaith, mynd i ‘nôl ei gofnodion/chofnodion meddygol, a dangos llythyr i Ms Abdulezer o’r ysbyty yn nodi’r dogn o ddiamorffin i’w roi. Dywedodd wrth Ms Abdulezer na fyddai angen y cyffur am gyfnod hir iawn, gan fod y claf yn y cyfnodau olaf o salwch terfynol. Y chwarter dilynol, roedd y costau wedi dychwelyd i’w lefel blaenorol, felly ni wnaeth Ms Abdulezer ymholi iddynt ymhellach. Ni all gofio enw’r claf, ond credai mai ym 1995 neu yn gynnar ym 1996 y digwyddodd. Nid oedd ganddi unrhyw reswm i amau gair Shipman.
Yn ystod y ddwy flynedd hynny, roedd nifer o gleifion gan Shipman a oedd yn dioddef o ganser ac a oedd ag angen gwirioneddol am feintiau mawr o ddiamorffin. Mewn gwirionedd, gwyddwn nawr iddo ddargyfeirio rhywfaint o’u diamorffin at ei ddibenion ei hun. Ni fyddai hynny wedi bod yn amlwg i gynghorydd, gan mai’r unig beth oedd ganddo/ganddi oedd y data PACT, a dibynnai ar Shipman am unrhyw wybodaeth ychwanegol. Nid oedd data PACT yn nodi enw’r claf (cleifion) yr oedd y cyffur wedi’i ragnodi iddo/iddynt, ac nid oedd ychwaith yn rhoi unrhyw wybodaeth am yr hyn ddigwyddodd i’r cyffur wedi iddo gael ei ragnodi a’i ddosbarthu. Byddai wedi bod yn hawdd i Shipman argyhoeddi cynghorydd, fel y gwnaeth gyda Ms Abdulezer, bod y diamorffin wedi’i ragnodi’n gyfreithiol i glaf a’i fod wedi cael ei ddefnyddio ganddo/ganddi.
Am y rhesymau a esboniais uchod, nid yw’n syndod i mi na wnaeth y gwaith monitro rhagnodi gan gynghorwyr FHSA/WPHA Tameside ddatgelu unrhyw reswm i bryderu ynghylch Shipman yn rhagnodi diamorffin. Hyd yn oed pe bai, nid oes gennyf fawr o amheuaeth y byddai Shipman wedi gallu tawelu unrhyw bryderon a godai.
Yn y cyfamser, dros yr un cyfnod, roedd CIOau yr heddlu yn cynnal archwiliadau o’r CDR yn cael ei gadw gan y Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, lle’r oedd y rhan fwyaf o ragnodion Shipman am ddiamorffin yn cael eu dosbarthu. Ni wnaethant hwy ychwaith weld unrhyw beth i achosi pryder iddynt. Fel yr esboniais yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, ni ddylid eu beirniadu am hynny, ac eithrio mewn perthynas â’r cofnodion yn ymwneud â’r ampylau 30mg o ddiamorffin a ddosbarthwyd ym 1993. Roedd pob un o’r rhagnodion wedi’u hysgrifennu’n gywir yn enwau cleifion go iawn a oedd yn dioddef o ganser. Nid oedd yn amlwg i’r CIOau - nac yn wir i’r fferyllydd dosbarthu - fod Shipman yn rhagnodi mwy nag a oedd ar y claf ei angen mewn gwirionedd. Ni allent wybod ychwaith beth fyddai archwiliad manwl o ddata PACT wedi’i ddatgelu, sef fod Shipman yn ragnodwr uchel o ddiamorffin, er nad yr uchaf yn yr ardal. Nid oedd y CIOau yn ymwybodol ychwaith fod Shipman weithiau’n casglu cyffuriau ar ran ei gleifion. Ni chofnodwyd y wybodaeth honno yn y CDR, er, os caiff f’argymhellion i eu derbyn, bydd yn cael ei chynnwys yn y dyfodol. Yn y Pedwerydd Adroddiad, rwyf wedi argymell hefyd y dylai asiantaeth unigol gael y swyddogaeth o arolygu’r CDRau ac archwilio data PACT. Fel hynny, byddai swyddogion un corff yn cael darlun cyflawn o ymarfer meddyg mewn perthynas â rhagnodi a chasglu cyffuriau rheoledig.
Ymholiadau ynghylch Shipman yn Rhagnodi Cyffuriau Rheoledig ac â Chyffuriau Rheoledig yn ei Feddiant
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud y dywedwyd wrth Dr David Edwards gan Shipman nad oedd yn cadw cyffuriau rheoledig ac nad oedd CDR ganddo. Pan oedd Dr Edwards yn RMO oedd hynny. Yn ddiweddarach, daeth yn un o Gynghorwyr Meddygol cyntaf FHSA Tameside. Ni ddywedodd Dr Archer, cyd-Gynghorwr Dr Edwards, yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, a oedd wedi trafod y mater gyda Shipman, ond, pe bai wedi gwneud hynny, yn ddiau byddai wedi cael yr un ateb.
Dywedodd Dr Freedman wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pan ofynnodd i Shipman ar un o’i ymweliadau rhagnodi a oedd ganddo CDR, atebodd Shipman nad oedd yn cadw cyffuriau rheoledig. Dywedodd ei fod yn ofni y gallent gael eu dwyn. Pan ofynnwyd iddo beth fyddai’n ei wneud mewn argyfwng, dywedodd wrth Dr Freedman nad ei arfer oedd ymweld â chleifion a oedd yn ffonio’r feddygfa â symptomau trawiad ar y galon. Dywedodd, pan fyddai hyn yn digwydd, byddai’n ffonio am ambiwlans ar unwaith ac yn eu cludo i’r ysbyty yn syth er mwyn iddynt gael eu trin yn gyflym. Fel y digwydd, honnodd Shipman yn aml fod ei gleifion wedi marw o drawiad ar y galon wedi iddo fethu mewn ymgais i’w trin neu’u dadebru, ond nid oedd Dr Freedman i wybod hynny. Ymddengys nad oes fawr o amheuaeth y byddai Shipman wedi rhoi’r un ateb i unrhyw un a holai’r cwestiwn hwnnw iddo. Nid oedd yn safbwynt anarferol i feddyg teulu ei gymryd. Ni fyddai unrhyw gynghorwr wedi cael unrhyw reswm i amau gair Shipman.
Ym mis Hydref 1998, yn dilyn arestio Shipman, gofynnodd Dr Banks, y Cynghorwr Meddygol i’r WPHA bryd hynny, i’r PPA ddadansoddi arfer Shipman o ragnodi chwistrelliadau 100mg o ddiamorffin. Oherwydd y cyfyngiadau ar y data a oedd ar gael (gweler paragraff 4.66 uchod), dim ond ar ddata’r ddwy flynedd flaenorol y gellid edrych arno. Daeth dau bwynt i’r golwg o’r dadansoddiad hwn. Y cyntaf oedd nad Shipman, fel y gellid fod wedi disgwyl, oedd y rhagnodwr uchaf o’r dogn hwn o ddiamorffin yn ardal y WPHA. Mewn gwirionedd, ef oedd y chweched rhagnodwr uchaf dros y cyfnod dwy flynedd. Fe allai yn wir fod wedi’i ganfod fel y rhagnodwr uchaf pe gellid fod wedi archwilio cyfnod hwy; rhagnodai’n drwm a dygodd feintiau mawr iawn yn hanner cyntaf 1996. Yr ail bwynt oedd, er bod arfer Shipman o ragnodi ampylau 100mg o ddiamorffin yn arnarferol (yn fod rhagnodi lefel isel cymharol amlach nag a fyddid wedi disgwyl), nid oedd pob un o batrymau rhagnodi’r meddygon eraill a oedd yn ragnodwyr uchel yn gonfensiynol ychwaith.
Pe bai’r patrwm anarferol hwn wedi dod i sylw’r awdurdodau, ac y byddid wedi holi Shipman yn ei gylch, byddai ar bob achlysur wedi gallu cyflwyno tystiolaeth o glaf (â salwch terfynol neu wedi marw’n ddiweddar) yr oedd diamorffin wedi’i ragnodi ar ei gyfer. Byddai cofnodion y rhan fwyaf o’r cleifion hynny wedi cadarnhau bod arnynt angen meintiau mawr o ddiamorffin yn wirioneddol er mwyn lleddfu poen. Byddai’r nyrsys ardal a oedd yn gofalu am y cleifion wedi cadarnhau, pe gofynnwyd iddynt, nad oedd mwy o’r cyffur yn cael ei ragnodi nag a oedd yn angenrheidiol. Ni fyddent wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r cyffuriau hynny yr oedd Shipman wedi’u casglu o’r feddygfa a’u dargyfeirio at ei ddibenion ei hun. Hyd yn oed ar yr achlysuron pan oedd wedi rhagnodi diamorffin i glaf nad oedd ag angen gwirioneddol amdano, byddai Shipman yn ddiau wedi rhoi rheswm credadwy, yn gysylltiedig â chanser y claf, am ragnodi’r cyffur. Byddai wedi gofyn cael ymchwiliad manwl, o’r math a fyddai wedi’i gynnal os oedd pryderon neu amheuon go iawn wedi codi, i ddatgelu arfer Shipman o gasglu a chadw cyffuriau iddo ef ei hun.
Cadw Cofnodion
Yn ystod y cyfnod o 1991 hyd 1998, ni chynhaliwyd unrhyw archwiliadau arferol o gofnodion meddygol yn Tameside. Dywedodd Dr David Edwards wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pan oedd yn gyd-Gynghorwr Meddygol, o 1990 hyd at 1991, y byddai’n derbyn ceisiadau weithiau gan berthnasau cleifion i edrych ar gofnodion meddygol mewn cysylltiad â chwyn neu’n dilyn marwolaeth claf. Byddai’n gofyn am ganiatâd meddyg teulu’r claf a’r LMC cyn dangos y cofnodion i berthnasau ac esbonio’u cynnwys. Os oedd Dr Edwards yn sylwi bod cofnodion yn is na’r safon, byddai’n siarad â’r meddyg teulu dan sylw.
Cytunodd Dr Banks y gallai setiau unigol o gofnodion meddygol claf gael eu harchwilio mewn cysylltiad chwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu. Fodd bynnag, pe bai’r cofnodion, o’u harchwilio, i weld yn annigonol, dywedodd na fyddai hyn yn arwain at unrhyw archwiliad ehangach o gofnodion y meddyg teulu.
Barn FHSA/WPHA Tameside oedd nad oedd hawl ganddynt i archwilio cofnodion ac eithrio yn yr amgylchiadau cyfyngedig a ddisgrifir uchod. Nid yw’r Adran Iechyd yn rhannu’r farn hon. Ei barn yw, yn unol â pharagraff 36 o delerau gwasanaeth 1992 (a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu gadw cofnodion meddygol digonol a’u hanfon ymlaen at yr FHSA (yr HA yn ddiweddarach) ar gais cyn gynted â phosibl), gallai PCO ofyn i weld y cofnodion meddygol unrhyw bryd. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Dr Banks y byddai’r proffesiwn wedi gwrthwynebu unrhyw ymgais i gynnal archwiliadau ar hap o gofnodion meddygon teulu. Yn y gorffennol, bu problemau o ran cael mynediad at gofnodion at ddiben gwirio honiadau ariannol a wnaed gan feddygon teulu mewn perthynas â thriniaeth a roddwyd i gleifion. Roedd y WPHA wedi llwyddo i ddod i gytundeb â meddygon teulu lleol y dylai staff gael mynediad felly at y diben cyfyngedig o gynnal archwiliad ariannol. Nid oedd bob HA yn y wlad wedi llwyddo i’r un graddau. Dywedodd Dr Banks, pe bai’r WPHA wedi ceisio cynnal archwiliadau ar hap o gofnodion, ‘byddai’r BMA (
Y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig
) wedi bod ar ein cefnau’n syth’. Fe wnaeth Dr Banks, wrth gwrs, archwilio 15 set o gofnodion cleifion ymadawedig Shipman yn ystod ymchwiliad aflwyddiannus yr heddlu ym mis Mawrth 1998. Roedd o’r farn bod diffyg gwybodaeth yn y cofnodion ond cymerodd, nid bod Shipman yn un gwael am gadw cofnodion, ond yn hytrach ei bod yn rhaid bod y cofnodion yn anghyflawn.
Datgelodd cyflwyno archwiliad meddygol broblemau gyda’r cofnodion yn cael eu cadw gan rai meddygon teulu yn Tameside. Roedd cofnodion a oedd yn anghyflawn neu’n anniben neu a oedd heb gerdyn crynodeb manwl, yn achosi anawsterau o ran cael gafael ar wybodaeth at ddiben archwilio. Er mwyn mynd i’r afael â’r broblem hon, cychwynnodd FHSA Tameside gynllun (a barhaodd y WPHA wedi hynny) lle byddai timau o staff anfeddygol wedi’u hyfforddi yn mynd i feddygfeydd teulu i grynhoi ac ad-drefnu cofnodion meddygol. Nid oedd gorfodaeth ar feddygfa i dderbyn y gwasanaeth hwn. Nid oedd gwaith y tîm yn golygu unrhyw asesiad clinigol o’r cofnodion, ac nid oedd yn broses monitro mewn unrhyw ystyr. Ni fanteisiodd Shipman erioed ar y gwasanaeth hwn.
Ffynonellau Gwybodaeth Eraill
Yn gynnar yn y 1990au, cyflwynodd FHSA Tameside system o ‘broffilio meddygfeydd’. Nid oedd gofyniad arno i wneud hynny. Roedd y proffilio yn ymarferiad ychwanegol a ddewisodd ei berfformio. Golygai defnyddio’r wybodaeth a oedd ar gael am feintiau rhestrau, gweithgarwch rhagnodi a chyfeirio, rheoli afiechyd cronig a materion ariannol fel taliadau am eitemau o wasanaeth er mwyn cymharu perfformiad meddygfeydd teulu unigol. Anfonwyd copi o broffil at bob meddygfa a oedd yn dangos ei berfformiad o gymharu â meddygfeydd eraill (dienw). Datblygodd y proffiliau’n fwy soffistigedig dros y blynyddoedd a chynnwys ystod ehangach o wybodaeth.
Dywedodd Mr Greenwood mai diben yr ymarferiad oedd nodi tueddiadau a allai gynorthwyo wrth gynllunio gwasanaethau yn y dyfodol. Dywedodd bod yr FHSA yn ceisio nodi ystadegwyr anarferol hefyd gyda golwg ar gynnig cymorth a chefnogaeth iddynt, a dod â nhw’n fwy cyfartal â’u grŵp cymheiriaid. Roedd y proffil yn darparu modd hefyd lle’r oedd meddygfeydd teulu (a oedd yn gweithredu ar wahân i ryw raddau) yn gallu cymharu’u perfformiad â pherfformiad meddygfeydd eraill. Yn y blynyddoedd cynnar, byddai uwch reolwyr o’r FHSA yn ymweld â phob un o’r meddygfeydd teulu yn yr ardal yn flynyddol i drafod eu proffiliau. Dros amser, teimlwyd nad oedd hyn yn fodd effeithiol o ddefnyddio adnoddau, a rhoddwyd y gorau i’r ymweliadau.
Mae gan yr Ymchwiliad y proffiliau meddygfa a luniwyd mewn perthynas â meddygfa Market Street ym mis Mawrth 1996, 1997 a 1998. Mae’r proffiliau’n dangos lefel uchel o weithgarwch gan y feddygfa mewn meysydd fel brechu plant a chytoleg. Dangosant dystiolaeth o gostau rhagnodi uchel Shipman hefyd. Roedd yr unig ddata ychwanegol a allai fod wedi bod yn arwyddocaol yn ymwneud â’r lefel isel o weithgarwch ysbyty ymhlith ei gleifion oedrannus (h.y. y rheiny dros 65 oed). Ym 1996 a 1997, gan feddygfa Shipman oedd y lefel isaf o weithgarwch ysbyty yn yr ardal ymhlith cleifion o’r oed hwnnw. Yng ngolau’r hyn a wyddwn nawr, mae cryn arwyddocâd i’r ffactor hwn. Nid oedd unrhyw ffigurau ar gyfer gweithgarwch ysbyty ym mhroffil 1998.
Esboniodd Mr Greenwood a Dr Banks bod y data ar gyfer gweithgarwch ysbyty yn cael ei ystyried fel data annibynadwy iawn. Dywedodd Dr Banks, beth bynnag, nad oedd gweithgarwch ysbyty yn fater a oedd o fewn cylch gwaith cynghorwyr meddygol. Y duedd oedd i wasanaethau ysbyty, dywedodd, gael eu hystyried fel mater iechyd cyhoeddus i’w ystyried ar y cyd â’r rheiny a oedd yn darparu’r gwasanaethau. Dywedodd Mr Greenwood y byddai’r cynghorwyr yn edrych ar y gydberthynas rhwng gweithgarwch ysbyty a rhagnodi (e.e. i weld bod gan feddygfeydd a oedd yn rhagnodi meddyginiaeth gwrth-asthmatig lefel uchel lai o achosion o dderbyniadau i ysbyty). Fel arall, roedd gweithgarwch ysbyty’n cael ei ystyried fel mater cynllunio ac ariannu. Hyd yn oed pe bai wedi denu sylw, byddai’r lefel isel o weithgarwch ysbyty ymhlith cleifion hŷn Shipman yn ddiau wedi’i briodoli i’w bolisi datganedig o gadw cleifion oedrannus yn eu cartrefi am gyn hired â phosibl.
Sefydlwyd MAAG Tameside ym mis Hydref 1990. Roedd yn is-bwyllgor i’r FHSA. Cynhwysai ymhlith ei aelodau feddygon teulu (rhai ohonynt wedi’u henwebu gan yr LMC), tiwtor ôl-raddedig, cynrychiolydd o ofal eilaidd a chynghorwyr meddygol yr FHSA. Cyflogai’r FHSA gyn reolwr a oedd yn nyrs, Ms Heather Harrisson, fel hwylusydd archwilio, ac aelod arall o staff fel ysgrifennydd. Tasg y MAAG oedd hwyluso gweithgarwch archwilio drwy gynnig cyngor, addysg, hyfforddiant a chymorth wrth archwilio. Roedd meddygon teulu’n cael eu hannog i gyfranogi, a byddai’r MAAG yn awgrymu testunau addas ar gyfer archwilio, gyda golwg ar gael data y gellid ei ddefnyddio i wella iechyd cleifion. Fe wnaeth y MAAG gydlynu archwiliadau ledled yr ardal a oedd yn cynnig adborth cymaradwy. Cafodd bob meddygfa deulu gynnig ymweliad blynyddol gan aelodau’r MAAG. Byddai’r feddygfa’n cael ei gwahodd i gyflwyno canlyniadau ysgrifenedig ei harchwiliadau er mwyn eu trafod gydag aelodau’r tîm ymweld a oedd yn feddygon teulu.
Cynhaliwyd archwiliadau gan feddygfeydd teulu eu hunain. Nid oeddent yn gorfod cyflwyno’u canlyniadau i’r MAAG, er y byddai’r rhan fwyaf yn gwneud. Pe’u cyflwynwyd, byddai’r adroddiadau’n cael eu trafod mewn cyfarfod MAAG lle’r oedd aelodau a oedd yn feddygon teulu yn unig (ac un aelod o’r staff) yn bresennol. Byddai’r MAAG llawn yn trafod canlyniadau archwilio cydgasgledig a dienw yn unig. Nid oedd gan yr FHSA fynediad at ganlyniadau archwiliadau yn ymwneud â meddygfeydd unigol.
Ym mis Ebrill 1996, unodd MAAGau Tameside ac Oldham i ffurfio Grŵp Archwilio Clinigol Gofal Sylfaenol West Pennine (WPPCCAG). Ymunodd meddygfeydd Glossop â’r WPPCCAG ym 1997. Bryd hynny, roedd cyfrifoldebau rheoli penodol wedi’u rhoi i HAau i gynnal archwiliadau clinigol. Y bwriad oedd y dylai’r archwiliad gael ei gysylltu’n agos â gwelliannau yn ansawdd gofal clinigol. Roedd yr HAau i gael rhan wrth bennu pa archwiliadau y dylid eu cynnal. Roedd yn rhaid iddynt fonitro ystod a graddau cyfranogaeth meddygfeydd mewn archwiliadau a sicrhau bod cleifion yn cael rhan gynyddol yn y broses archwilio. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd HAau yn gweld canlyniadau archwiliadau meddygfeydd unigol o hyd, ac nid oeddent yn cael unrhyw gyfle i asesu’u hansawdd. Ni fyddent ychwaith wedi dod yn ymwybodol o unrhyw arwyddion o arfer is na’r safon y gallai’r archwiliadau eu datgelu.
O’r amser pan ddechreuodd ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun, roedd Shipman yn gyfranogwr brwdfrydig yn y broses archwilio. Roedd nyrs ei feddygfa, Sister Gillian Morgan, a rheolwr y feddygfa, Mrs Alison Massey, yn cymryd rhan yn y broses archwilio hefyd. Cyflwynodd Shipman nifer o archwiliadau i’r MAAG (y WPPCCAG yn ddiweddarach) yn delio ag ystod eang o destunau. Ni wnaeth yr un ohonynt ddatgelu ymarfer is na’r safon. Roedd nifer o feddygfeydd yn yr ardal wedi cynnal archwiliadau o farwolaethau eu cleifion. Ni wnaeth Shipman erioed hynny, er iddo honni’n gelwyddog, fel y soniais yn fy Ail Adroddiad, i Dr Banks ym mis Gorffennaf 1998 ei fod ef a Sister Morgan wedi cynnal archwiliad i farwolaethau cleifion a oedd wedi digwydd yn rhan gyntaf 1998. Ym mis Tachwedd 1997, cynhaliodd Mrs Massey archwiliad o gleifion a oedd wedi gadael y feddygfa yn y chwe mis blaenorol. Canfu o leiaf 29 o achosion lle’r oedd y claf wedi marw. Roedd hwn yn nifer uchel. Cyfartaledd y gyfradd marwolaethau ar gyfer meddygfeydd teulu yw oddeutu deg claf i bob mil y flwyddyn. O gofio bod gan Shipman ychydig dros 3000 ar restr ei feddygfa, gellid fod wedi disgwyl rhyw 15 o farwolaethau mewn chwe mis. Fodd bynnag, mynegwyd y nifer fel canran (27.9%) o gleifion yn gadael y feddygfa yn yr archwiliad. Ni ddywedwyd beth oedd cyfanswm nifer y cleifion yn gadael. Ni fyddai’r rheiny a welodd yr archwiliad wedi bod yn ymwybodol o nifer sylfaenol y marwolaethau.
Yn gyffredinol, cadarnhaodd gweithgarwch archwilio Shipman yr argraff o feddygfa frwdfrydig a oedd yn cael ei rhedeg yn dda. Ym mis Tachwedd 1997, dywedodd llythyr gan weinyddydd yr archwiliad fod meddygfa Shipman
‘wedi’i nodi fel un o nifer sy’n ymgymryd â lefel uchel o waith archwilio, ac sydd yn flaengar iawn o ran datblygiadau yn y feddygfa’.

---  ---
Rwyf wedi disgrifio’r trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu a oedd ar waith yn Tameside yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Er mwyn canfod sut yr oedd y trefniadau hynny’n cymharu â’r rheiny ar waith mewn mannau eraill, anfonodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur at nifer o awdurdodau iechyd strategol yng Nghymru a Lloegr, a ddewiswyd ar hap, yn gofyn am wybodaeth fanwl am y systemau a oedd ar waith yn eu hardaloedd yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno.
Datgelodd yr ymatebion i’r holiaduron hyn bod y trefniadau yn Tameside yn nodweddiadol iawn o’r rheiny a oedd ar waith yn y rhan fwyaf o ardaloedd y cafwyd ymatebion ohonynt. Roedd yr ymagwedd tuag at fonitro rhagnodi yn debyg yn y rhan fwyaf o ardaloedd. Yn gyffredinol, roedd PCOau yn dibynnu’n bennaf ar gwynion cleifion a phryder yn cael ei fynegi i ddatgelu arfer gwael. Roedd llawer o’r ymatebion yn cyfeirio at y ffaith nad oedd gan reolwyr FHSA/HA fynediad at archwiliadau’n cael eu cynnal gan feddygfeydd unigol. Roedd rhai rheolwyr wedi datblygu protocolau, a thrwyddynt byddent yn cael eu hysbysu am bryderon difrifol yn codi o’r gweithgarwch archwilio. Dim ond un o’r PCOau a ymatebodd i’r holiadur a adroddodd ei fod wedi cynnal archwiliadau rheolaidd o gofnodion meddygol meddygon teulu. Dywedodd y rhan fwyaf, fel yn Tameside, mai dim ond pan oedd cwyn yn destun ymchwiliad y byddai cofnodion yn cael eu harchwilio. Fel y dywedais, dechreuodd y rhan fwyaf o HAau weithredu gweithdrefnau perfformiad lleol newydd o 1998 ymlaen.
Mae nifer o HAau wedi datblygu strategaethau ychwanegol i wella ansawdd gofal a nodi meddygon teulu problemus. Gan gychwyn tua 1996, roedd rhai ardaloedd wedi datblygu dangosyddion perfformiad yr oedd meddygfeydd yn cael eu mesur yn eu herbyn. Roedd rhai (e.e. FHSA/HA Sheffield) yn cynnal archwiliadau cyson o reolaeth afiechyd cronig, y dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad a oedd yn ddefnyddiol wrth nodi meddygol a oedd yn perfformio’n wael. Adroddodd un PCO iddo gynnal archwiliadau o gofnodion cleifion ymadawedig er mwyn ymchwilio i bryderon a gododd ynghylch perfformiad meddygon teulu. Fe wnaeth un HA fonitro’r nifer o gleifion a oedd yn newid o un feddygfa deulu i un arall tra’n parhau i fyw yn yr un cyfeiriad. Gallai symudiad felly yn wir fod wedi dangos anfodlonrwydd â meddygfa wreiddiol y claf. Pe gwelwyd fflyd o achosion felly o newid meddygfa, byddai hyn yn awgrymu bod problem gyda’r feddygfa a oedd yn gofyn am ymchwiliad.
Roedd llawer o’r ymatebion yn pwysleisio’r cyfyngiadau a bennwyd ar allu FHSAau a HAau i fonitro a rheoli meddygon teulu o ganlyniad i statws contractiwr annibynnol meddygon teulu, a’r angen i brofi achos o dorri’r telerau gwasanaeth cyn y gellid cymryd unrhyw gamau disgyblu lleol.

---  ---
Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside
Ymddengys i mi bod FPC Tameside, yn ystod y cyfnod o 1997 i 1990, yn gwneud hynny a allai - o fewn y cwmpasiad cyfyngedig iawn a oedd ar gael iddo - i nodi a delio â phryderon a allai godi am feddygon teulu ar ei restr. Nid oedd ganddo’r grym na’r adnoddau i wneud mwy. Mae’r wybodaeth a gafodd yr Ymchwiliad o ardaloedd eraill yn cadarnhau’r farn hon.
Fel y nodais yn barod, nid wyf o’r farn y gellir beirniadu’r RMOau a oedd yn gyfrifol am ymweld â meddygfa Donneybrook rhwng 1977 a 1990 o gwbl. Nid oes unrhyw reswm i gredu y byddent wedi bod yn ymwybodol o arfer Shipman wrth ragnodi cyffuriau opiad. Ni ellir eu beirniadu ychwaith am fethu archwilio’u gofnodion meddygol. Roedd yr arfer o archwilio cofnodion meddygol wedi peidio ymhell cyn i Shipman gyrraedd Hyde. Hyd yn oed ped archwiliwyd y cofnodion, mae’n annhebygol, at ei gilydd, y byddent wedi datgelu unrhyw beth ac eithrio’r ffaith nad oedd Shipman yn un dyfal iawn am gadw cofnodion.
Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside ac Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine
Mae’n amlwg o’r dystiolaeth bod FHSA/WPHA Tameside wedi cyflawni’u dyletswyddau mewn perthynas â rheoli a goruchwylio meddygon teulu mewn modd cydwybodol a phriodol. Rwy’n hyderus bod awydd gwirioneddol ymhlith aelodau ei staff i wella ansawdd meddygaeth deuluol yn ei ardal a gwneud defnydd da o’r pwerau a roddwyd iddynt wrth hyrwyddo’r amcan hwn. Ymddengys o’r ymatebion i holiadur yr Ymchwiliad bod perfformiad FHSA/WPHA Tameside yn nodweddiadol o berfformiad PCOau ledled y wlad. Roedd ardaloedd (roedd De Swydd Efrog yn un) lle’r oedd yr HA wedi cymryd camau arloesol mewn ymgais i godi safonau a nodi meddygon a oedd yn perfformio’n wael. Fodd bynnag, ni ellir beirniadu’r PCOau yn Tameside am beidio bod ar flaen y gad. Roeddent yn gwneud hynny a oedd yn ofynnol iddynt wneud.
Mewn llawer modd, byddai’r data a gasglwyd am arfer Shipman wedi rhoi darlun cadarnhaol o’i gymhwysedd a’i berfformiad. Dim ond ym maes rhagnodi yr oedd Shipman yn cael ei ystyried yn ystadegyn anarferol. Hyd yn oed wedyn, cododd y broblem yn sgil ei farnau anhyblyg (yr oedd yn gallu’u cyfiawnhau) am effeithiau llesol rhai cyffuriau drud. Nid oedd unrhyw gwestiwn fod ei arfer rhagnodi’n is na’r safon mewn unrhyw fodd. Oni bai bod ei arfer o ragnodi diamorffin yn ddigon uchel i ddod i’r golwg ynghanol gweddill ei ragnodi (fel yr oedd yn amlwg, pan siaradodd Ms Abdulezer ag ef), ni fyddai wedi’i ganfod yn absenoldeb monitro cyson o arferion rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Nid oedd monitro cyson felly’n cael ei wneud yn gyffredin, os o gwbl. Mae’n bwysig yn y cyd-destun hwnnw na chafodd unrhyw hyfforddiant ei roi yn genedlaethol ar y pwnc hwn tan ar ôl i Shipman gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog yn 2000.
Roedd FHSA/WPHA Tameside yn nodweddiadol yn eu bod yn archwilio cofnodion meddygol meddygon teulu mewn cysylltiad â chwynion am feddyg teulu’n unig. Heblaw am hynny, ni fyddai unrhyw reswm wedi bod i archwilio cofnodion Shipman. Efallai mai ychydig o bwys y byddai archwilio cofnodion rhai o gleifion byw Shipman wedi’i ddangos, ac eithrio bod y cofnodion o ansawdd gwael yn gyffredinol. Fe allai archwilio nodiadau ei gleifion ymadawedig yn ofalus fod wedi codi pryderon. Roedd FHSA/WPHA Tameside yn gwbl nodweddiadol wrth beidio bod â system o archwilio nodiadau cleifion ymadawedig yn absenoldeb pryderon penodol.
Ymddengys bod FHSA/WPHA Tameside wedi gwneud trefniadau ar gyfer archwilio clinigol a oedd yn gwbl nodweddiadol o’r PCOau arall hynny. Yn benodol, nid oedd ganddo bwerau i orfodi meddygfa i gynnal archwiliadau, heb sôn am archwilio unrhyw weithgarwch penodol. Byddai archwiliad o farwolaethau cleifion Shipman ym 1995, 1996 neu 1997 wedi datgelu achos go iawn i bryderu, a gallai fod wedi arwain at ganfod ei droseddau. Fodd bynnag, ni ddylid beirniadu’r WPHA am y ffaith na ddigwyddodd hyn.
Rwyf wedi cyfeirio at y feirniadaeth a wnaed o FPC Tameside a’i olynwyr am iddo fethu datguddio a gweithredu ar wybodaeth lawn a phriodol am wir natur a graddau gorffennol troseddol Shipman. Mae’n anodd gweld sut y byddai’r PCOau wedi gallu mynd ati i gael y wybodaeth hon. Yn y lle cyntaf, nid oeddent yn ymwybodol bod unrhyw beth i’w ganfod yn achos Shipman. Byddent felly wedi gorfod cychwyn system o archwilio hanes blaenorol bob meddyg teulu ar eu rhestr feddygol. Byddai hyn wedi’i wrthwynebu’n chwyrn gan y proffesiwn, ac ni fyddai’n debygol o fod wedi cael cefnogaeth y DHSS/yr Adran Iechyd. Cyn belled ag y mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol, nid oedd hwn yn ymarferiad yr ymgymerwyd ag ef yn unrhyw le arall. Yn fy marn i, ni ellir beirniadu’r rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal sylfaenol yn Tameside am fethu ag ymgymryd â’r ymarferiad.
Yn ei gyflwyniad ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside at benbleth ei aelodau fod y Wladwriaeth, yn ystod y cyfnod pan fu Shipman yn ymarfer yn Hyde, wedi gwrthod bod yn gyfrifol am fonitro meddygon teulu. Gallaf ddeall y teimlad hwnnw. O edrych ar y sefyllfa trwy lygaid heddiw, ymddengys yn hynod bod gan y PCOau, hyd at lai na degawd yn ôl, gyn lleied o bwerau i reoleiddio ymddygiad meddygon teulu.
Credaf for yr esboniad i’w gael yn statws hanesyddol meddygon teulu fel contractwyr annibynnol. Mae’r statws hwn wedi pennu rhai cyfyngiadau ar gynigion gan PCOau olynol i reoli a goruchwylio meddygon teulu’n effeithiol. Hyd at yn ddiweddar, gellid gorfodi meddygon teulu i gydymffurfio â’u telerau gwasanaeth ond ddim mwy. Mae meddygfeydd teulu yn fusnesau bach sy’n darparu gwasanaethau y mae’r PCOau yn talu amdanynt. Yn ystod rhan gynnar y cyfnod yr ydym yn ymwneud ag ef, roedd cred gref, a rannwyd gan y Llywodraeth mae’n debyg, bod y proffesiwn wedi darparu’r modd gorau (yn wir, yr unig fodd) o bennu safonau uchel o ofal clinigol ac ymddygiad proffesiynol ar feddygon a monitro’r safonau hynny. Credwyd y byddai’n gwneud hynny’n drwyadl. Felly, gadawyd materion o bryder proffesiynol yn codi’n lleol i’w pennu gan yr LMCau, gyda’r GMC fel canolwr eithaf addasrwydd i ymarfer. Roedd y gred hon, a gafodd ei meithrin gan y proffesiwn, yn un anodd ei herio mewn maes a olygai bod angen arbenigedd proffesiynol.
Mae’n amlwg, erbyn y 1980au (a chyn hynny o bosibl), y sylweddolwyd, os oedd cysondeb gwasanaethau a safonau ymhlith arferion meddygon teulu i’w gyflawni, bod rhaid cyflwyno rhyw elfen o reolaeth gan PCOau. Ni ellid gadael y mater i’r proffesiwn mwyach. Dechreuodd y broses newid yng nghanol y 1980au ac mae wedi parhau fyth ers hynny. Law yn llaw â hynny bu cydnabyddiaeth gynyddol o bwysigrwydd mynd i’r afael â pherfformiad gwael ymhlith meddygon teulu. Fel y byddaf yn disgrifio ym Mhennod 5, bu cryn ddatblygiadau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu er 1998. Hyd hynny, roedd cynnydd yn araf, ac o edrych yn ôl, mae’n naturiol i ddymuno na wnaeth y broses newid gychwyn yn gynharach. Fodd bynnag, ni ellir, yn fy marn i, briodoli’r ffaith na wnaeth i ddiffyg ar ran unrhyw berson neu sefydliad.

---  ---
Datganoli Grym i'r Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Ansawdd
Newidiadau yn y Trefniadau ar gyfer Meddygaeth Deuluol
Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Gallu Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol i Reoli'u Rhestrau
Delio â Pherfformiad Gwael
Cynnal Ansawdd
Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol 2004

---  ---
Ym mis Mai 1997, daeth Llywodraeth newydd i rym. Roedd hwn yn gyfnod anodd i’r GIG. Roedd y pryderon ynghylch y gyfradd marwolaethau uchel ymhlith plant a oedd yn cael llawdriniaeth gymhleth ar y galon yn y British Royal Infirmary wedi dod yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus erbyn 1995. Roedd yn hysbys hefyd bod yr uwch aelodau staff yn yr ysbyty wedi bod yn ymwybodol o broblemau am beth amser ac nad oeddent wedi gweithredu. Cafodd tri meddyg eu cyhuddo gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Dechreuodd gwrandawiadau ym mis Hydref 1997 a dod i ben gyda’r tri ohonynt yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o SPM ym mis Mehefin 1998.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 1996, roedd Rodney Ledward, gynaecolegydd ymgynghorol, yr oedd ei ddiffyg sgiliau wedi achosi niwed i lawer o’i gleifion dros gyfnod o ryw 15 mlynedd, wedi cael ei ddiswyddo o’r ysbyty lle’r oedd yn gweithio. Daeth ei achos ef gerbron y GMC ym mis Medi 1998. Fe’i cafwyd ef yn euog o SPM hefyd. Roedd cwynion a phryderon wedi’u mynegi ynghylch ei ymddygiad a’i gymhwysedd dros gyfnod hir, eto roedd wedi cael parhau i ymarfer. Hefyd ym mis 1998, cafodd Shipman ei arestio, a daeth yn glir yn fuan y gallai fod wedi lladd nifer fawr o’i gleifion dros lawer o flynyddoedd.
Yn sgil y digwyddiadau hyn, a digwyddiadau eraill â phroffil llai uchel, tynnwyd sylw’r cyhoedd at ddigonolrwydd y trefniadau a oedd ar waith bryd hynny ar gyfer nodi a dileu ymarfer clinigol analluog neu afreolaidd. Roedd y trefniadau hynny yn amlwg wedi methu diogelu cleifion Ledward a Shipman, a’r plant a gafodd lawdriniaeth ym Mryste. Roedd yn amlwg bod angen newid ar fyrder.
Mae’r blynyddoedd ers hynny wedi bod yn gyfnod o newid mawr i’r proffesiwn meddygol a’r GIG. Ym maes meddygaeth deuluol, bu datblygiadau sylweddol yn rôl sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau). Maent wedi cael pwerau ychwanegol a ddylai eu galluogi i arfer rheolaeth lawer fwy nag o’r blaen dros y meddygon teulu ar eu rhestrau. Hefyd, maent wedi bod yn datblygu ffyrdd i wella ansawdd gofal a delio â meddygon nad ydynt yn darparu safon gofal dderbyniol. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio’r datblygiadau sydd wedi digwydd ac yn ystyried y modd y maent yn gweithio’n ymarferol.

---  ---
Fe wnaeth cyhoeddi Papur Gwyn, ‘Y GIG Newydd’, ym mis Rhagfyr 1997, gyhoeddi ad-drefniant sylfaenol yn y GIG. Roedd mwy o bwyslais i fod ar ansawdd gofal. Roedd safonau gofal wedi’u diffinio’n glir i’w llunio, ac yn erbyn y safonau hynny y byddai perfformiad sefydliadau’r GIG yn cael ei fesur. Roedd y cyfrifoldeb am fodloni’r safonau hynny i’w ddatganoli’n lleol, gyda meddygon a nyrsys yn chwarae rôl allweddol wrth wneud penderfyniadau am y gwasanaethau i’w darparu yn eu hardaloedd.
Roedd deiliaid cronfa meddygon teulu wedi annog rhai meddygfeydd teulu i ymestyn ystod eu gwasanaethau a datblygu ffyrdd gwahanol o gomisiynu gwasanaethau er mwyn bod o fudd i gleifion. Yn y Papur Gwyn, roedd y Llywodraeth wedi rhoi arwydd o’i fwriad i gael gwared ar ddeiliadaeth cronfa gan feddygfeydd teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, y bwriad oedd adeiladu ar, a datblygu ymhellach, y gwaith a oedd eisoes wedi’i gychwyn gan glinigwyr lleol.
Diddymwyd deiliadaeth cronfa’n seiliedig ar feddygfeydd gan Ddeddf Iechyd 1999. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2001, mewn cyhoeddiad o’r enw ‘Shifting the Balance of Power within the NHS’, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth bod y cyfrifoldeb dros reoli, datblygu ac integreiddio pob un o’r gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol (meddygol, deintyddol, fferyllol ac optegol) yn Lloegr i’w drosglwyddo o’r awdurdodau iechyd (HAau) i rwydwaith o ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCTau) wedi’u creu o’r newydd, yn cwmpasu’r wlad gyfan.
O 1 Ebrill 2002, diddymwyd y 95 Awdurdod Iechyd presennol a chrëwyd 28 Awdurdod Iechyd newydd yn eu lle. Daeth yr ardal a oedd yn cael ei chynnwys gan hen Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA) yn rhan o Awdurdod Iechyd newydd Greater Manchester. Yn fuan wedi hynny, ailenwyd yr Awdurdodau Iechyd yn awdurdodau iechyd strategol (SHAau).
Hefyd ym mis Ebrill 2002, crëwyd 302 (cynyddwyd i 303 erbyn hyn) o PCTau newydd. O bryd hynny ymlaen, mae’r PCTau wedi bod yn gyfrifol am wella iechyd y gymuned yn eu hardaloedd ac am gomisiynu gofal eilaidd (h.y. ysbyty), yn ogystal ag am ddarparu gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol. Yn y cyfamser, gwnaethpwyd yr SHAau yn gyfrifol am greu fframwaith strategol cydlynol ar gyfer datblygu gwasanaethau GIG yn eu hardaloedd. Maent yn gyfrifol hefyd am reoli perfformiad PCTau ac ymddiriedolaethau GIG yn erbyn cynlluniau busnes a gytunwyd a set genedlaethol o flaenoriaethau. Yn eu tro, mae’r SHAau yn adrodd i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS) am berfformiad y GIG yn eu hardaloedd.

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn bod Papur Gwyn 1997 wedi addo y byddai mwy o bwyslais yn cael ei roi yn y dyfodol ar ansawdd gofal. Un amlygiad o’r pwyslais newydd hwn fyddai dyletswydd statudol newydd yn ymwneud ag ansawdd.
Dyletswydd Ansawdd
Roedd Adran 18 o Ddeddf Iechyd 1999 yn pennu dyletswydd ar bob HA, PCT ac ymddiriedolaeth GIG:
‘... to put and keep in place arrangements for the purpose of monitoring and improving the quality of health care which it provides to individuals’.
Roedd y geiriau ‘health care’ yn cael eu diffinio gan y Ddeddf (fel y’i diwygiwyd) fel:
‘... services for or in connection with the prevention, diagnosis or treatment of illness and the environment in which such services are provided’.
Y bwriad oedd y dylai’r ‘ddyletswydd ansawdd’ gael yr effaith o ganolbwyntio sylw PCTau ar ddyfeisio ffyrdd ar gyfer monitro a gwella ansawdd gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygon teulu yn eu hardaloedd.
Galwyd y modd yr oedd y ddyletswydd ansawdd i’w chyflawni yn ‘rheolaeth glinigol’, cysyniad newydd a olygai o anghenraid sefydlu strwythurau a systemau wedi’u cynllunio i sicrhau a gwella ansawdd gofal. Roedd i fod yn berthnasol i holl gyrff y GIG. Byddaf yn trafod y cysyniad rheolaeth glinigol yn fanylach ym Mhennod 12.
Fel rhan o’u trefniadau rheolaeth glinigol, mae PCTau yn parhau i fonitro arferion rhagnodi meddygon teulu ac yn parhau hefyd i annog a hwyluso archwiliadau gan feddygfeydd teulu. Hefyd, mae gofyniad bellach ar bob meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer yn y GIG i gymryd rhan mewn arfarniadau blynyddol. Caiff y rhain eu trefnu gan eu PCTau a’u cynnal yn bennaf gan gyd feddygon teulu sy’n gweithio o fewn yr un PCT fel arfer. Byddaf yn delio â monitro rhagnodi, archwilio ac arfarnu, ynghyd â chamau eraill a gymerwyd gan PCTau i roi rheolaeth glinigol ar waith, ym Mhennod 12.
Safonau a Chanllawiau
Yn dilyn cyhoeddi Papur Gwyn 1997, bu ymgais am y tro cyntaf i ddiffinio safonau clinigol cenedlaethol, trwy Fframweithiau Gwasanaeth Cenedlaethol (NSFau) a thrwy sefydlu, ym 1999, y Sefydliad Cenedlaethol dros Ragoriaeth Glinigol (NICE). Datblygwyd NSFau gyda’r bwriad o nodi cynhwysion hanfodol darpariaeth gwasanaeth clinigol dda ar gyfer rhai grwpiau afiechydon a phoblogaethau cleifion (e.e. ar gyfer canser, iechyd meddwl, clefyd coronaidd y galon, ac ati). Y nod oedd lleihau amrywiadau annerbyniol mewn gofal a safonau triniaeth ledled y wlad. Rôl y NICE oedd datblygu canllawiau clinigol seiliedig ar dystiolaeth ar gyfer gofal a thriniaeth cleifion ag afiechydon neu gyflyrau penodol, ac i asesu a gwerthuso meddyginiaethau, triniaethau a gweithdrefnau ymyraethol newydd a chyfredol trwy gyfeirio at gost ac effeithiolrwydd clinigol.
Yn fwy diweddar, ym mis Chwefror 2004, cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd Bapur Ymgynghorol, ‘Safonau ar gyfer Iechyd Gwell’, a oedd yn gofyn am farnau ar set o safonau craidd arfaethedig yn rheoli ansawdd gofal iechyd yn cael ei ddarparu gan holl gyrff y GIG yn Lloegr. Roedd y papur hefyd yn nodi safonau datblygiadol arfaethedig â’r bwriad i annog cynnydd yn ansawdd cyffredinol gofal iechyd yn yr hirdymor. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd ei gynigion mewn dogfen o’r enw ‘Safonau Cenedlaethol, Gweithredu’n Lleol: Safonau Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol a Chynllunio’. Mae’r ddogfen hon wedi’i hanelu’n bennaf at y rheiny sydd â chyfrifoldeb am gynllunio a chomisiynu cyflwyno gwasanaethau yn y blynyddoedd 2005-2008. Mae’n nodi’r safonau y mae’n rhaid eu cyflawni ar unwaith fel ‘safonau craidd’ a’r ‘safonau datblygiadol’ y dylid eu cyflawni yn ystod y blynyddoedd i ddod.
Y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd
Hefyd, sefydlodd Deddf Iechyd 1999 y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI), corff cyhoeddus anadrannol, yn annibynnol ar y GIG. Ymgymerodd CHI â phwerau llawn ym mis Ebrill 2000. Rhoddwyd cyfrifoldeb iddo am adolygu ac adrodd ar y trefniadau rheolaeth glinigol a wnaed gan ymddiriedolaethau GIG a PCTau. Rhoddwyd iddo hefyd y dasg o fonitro trefniadau ar gyfer gwasanaethau cenedlaethol, gan gynnwys cydymffurfio â’r NSFau. Diddymwyd CHI gan Ddeddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol (Iechyd Cymunedol a Safonau) 2003, ac, o fis Ebrill 2004, mae ei swyddogaethau wedi’u gogynnwys yn swyddogaethau ei olynydd, y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd). Byddaf yn disgrifio rôl CHI a’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ym Mhennod 12.

---  ---
Yn y gorffennol, mae meddygon teulu wedi arfer ymarfer fel prif feddygon (h.y. gyda’u rhestrau eu hunain o gleifion) o fewn meddygfeydd grŵp neu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Maent wedi bod yn gontractwyr annibynnol, yn darparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol (GMS) yn unol â chontract cenedlaethol safonol. Daeth Contract GMS newydd i rym ym mis Ebrill 2004. Wrth gwrs, mae meddygon teulu nad ydynt yn brif feddygon wedi bodoli erioed, y maent wedi darparu gwasanaethau locwm yn amser llawn neu’n rhan-amser. Hefyd, dros y blynyddoedd diweddar, mae llawer o feddygon teulu wedi’u cyflogi (eto’n amser llawn neu’n rhan-amser) trwy ddirprwyo gwasanaethau i ddarparu gofal y tu allan i oriau arferol meddygfeydd teulu.
O ganlyniad i ddarpariaethau a gynhwysir yn Neddf y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gofal Sylfaenol) 1997, daeth yn bosibl i feddygon teulu weithio o fewn amrywiaeth o drefniadau mwy hyblyg. Nawr, mae cyfran sylweddol - oddeutu 40% - o’r oll feddygon teulu’n darparu gwasanaethau dan gontractau ar gyfer gwasanaethau meddygol personol (PMS). Mantais contractau PMS yw eu bod yn cael eu trafod yn unigol ac y gellir eu teilwra i fod yn addas ar gyfer y feddygfa deulu dan sylw, yn ogystal ag anghenion y PCT. Mae’n agored i PCT (yn amodol, wrth gwrs, ar drafod gyda’r feddygfa) i fewnosod telerau mewn contract PMS, yn pennu safonau ansawdd ac yn rhoi rheolaeth ychwanegol i’r PCT dros y modd y mae’r gwasanaethau’n cael eu darparu.
Mae llawer o feddygon teulu nad ydynt yn dymuno ysgwyddo risgiau, cyfrifoldebau a/neu ymrwymiad partneriaeth neu feddygfa unigol yn cael eu cyflogi nawr gan feddygfeydd teulu neu gan PCTau. Mae manteision ynghlwm wrth y trefniant olaf i PCT, sy’n gallu lleoli meddyg teulu yn ei gyflogaeth i feddygfeydd neu ardaloedd sydd angen meddyg ychwanegol ar sail dros dro neu hirdymor. Mae gan PCTau fwy o reolaeth dros weithgareddau ac ansawdd arfer meddyg sy’n cael ei gyflogi’n uniongyrchol na thros feddyg sy’n darparu GMS.

---  ---
Trefniadaeth
Mae bob PCT yn cael ei reoli gan fwrdd, sydd â chyfrifoldeb am swyddogaeth statudol y PCT. Gwna benderfyniadau ar ymrwymo adnoddau ariannol, ar faterion polisi a strategaeth a materion adnoddau dynol. Mae’r bwrdd yn cynnwys cadeirydd y PCT a rhwng deg a phedwar ar ddeg aelod, a gall nid mwy na saith ohonynt fod yn swyddogion y PCT. Ni all nifer aelodau’r bwrdd sy’n swyddogion fyth fod yn uwch na’r nifer o aelodau nad ydynt yn swyddogion. Mae’r aelodau nad ydynt yn swyddogion yn bobl leyg, yn yr ystyr nad ydynt yn weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd gweithredol nac yn weithwyr rhai cyrff penodol o’r GIG. Caiff yr aelodau nad ydynt yn swyddogion eu tynnu o’r gymdogaeth ac fe’u penodir gan yr SoS, fel y cynghorir gan Gomisiwn Penodiadau’r GIG. Mae’n rhaid i’r aelodau sy’n swyddogion gynnwys:
prif weithredwr, cyfarwyddwr cyllid a chyfarwyddwr iechyd cyhoeddus y PCT
cadeirydd pwyllgor gweithredol proffesiynol (PEC) y PCT: gweler paragraff 5.23. Ystyrir ei fod/bod yn ‘swyddog’ o’r PCT at y dibenion hyn.
rhwng un a thri pherson (ac mae’n rhaid i o leiaf dau ohonynt fod yn aelodau o’r PEC) wedi’u penodi gan gadeirydd y PEC yn dilyn enwebiad gan y PEC. Ystyrir bod yr holl bersonau hyn yn ‘swyddogion’ o’r PCT at y dibenion hyn.
Mae’n rhaid i o leiaf un o’r aelodau sy’n swyddogion yng nghategorïau (b) neu (c) fod yn feddyg teulu, ac mae’n rhaid i un (o’r un categorïau) fod yn nyrs. Gall yr aelodau sy’n swyddogion gynnwys swyddogion ac eithrio’r rheiny a bennir yn (a) uchod. Rhaid i’r cadeirydd fod yn aelod lleyg o’r bwrdd.
Mae’r PEC yn gyfrifol am yrru gweithgareddau’r PCT. Dywedodd Syr Nigel Crisp, Ysgrifennydd Parhaol yr Adran Iechyd a Phrif Weithredwr y GIG yn Lloegr, yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, mai’r PEC yw ‘ystafell injan’ y PCT. Mae’n cael ei reoli gan glinigwyr, a’r amcan yw y dylai gweithwyr proffesiynol sy’n darparu gwasanaethau’n lleol chwarae rhan go iawn wrth lunio polisïau a datblygu gwasanaethau ar gyfer eu hardal. Mae’r PEC yn pennu polisïau ar gyfer gweithredu swyddogaethau’r PCT, ac mae’n ymarfer swyddogaeth reoli. Mae ganddo rhwng saith a deunaw aelod, gan gynnwys prif weithredwr a chyfarwyddwr cyllid y PCT. Mae aelodaeth y PEC hefyd yn cynnwys gweithwyr proffesiynol lleol (gan gynnwys o leiaf un meddyg teulu ac un nyrs, ynghyd ag aelodau proffesiynol eraill sy’n adlewyrchu’r swyddogaethau sy’n cael eu cyflawni gan y PCT), un neu ddau gynrychiolydd o’r Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol ac un aelod ag arbenigedd penodol mewn iechyd cyhoeddus. Fel arfer, meddygon teulu yw mwyafrif y PEC, ac mae cadeirydd y PEC yn feddyg teulu yn ddieithriad bron.
Mae PCTau yn amrywio o ran maint. Bydd PCT o faint canolig yn gyfrifol am ryw 100 o feddygon teulu. Mae hynny gryn dipyn yn llai nag oedd yr hen HAau yn gyfrifol amdanynt. Dylai maint y PCTau olygu hefyd bod eu staff mewn sefyllfa dda i gael gwybodaeth wirioneddol am feddygon teulu a gweithwyr proffesiynol eraill sy’n gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal iechyd yn eu hardaloedd. Fodd bynnag, mae anfanteision i faint y PCTau hefyd. Nid yw’n ymarferol i PCT unigol gyflogi staff sy’n meddu ar yr holl sgiliau arbenigol y bydd angen arno o dro i dro. Nid oes cyfarwyddwr meddygol gan lawer ohonynt. Hwn, yn ddiau, yw un o’r rhesymau pam y rhoddwyd y grym i PCTau i ymuno er mwyn cyflawni rhai o’u swyddogaethau. Mae llawer o PCTau yn gwneud defnydd o’r grym hwn ac yn datblygu ffyrdd o gynyddu’r ystod sgiliau sy’n agored iddynt drwy rannu gwasanaethau. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Robert Queenborough, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol, PCTau Gogledd Trafford a De Trafford. Mae ei PCTau ef yn rhannu tîm rheoli unigol tra’n cynnal byrddau, PECau a chyllid ar wahân. Wrth i amser fynd yn ei flaen, gall fod y daw yr arfer o gydgyfrannu adnoddau rhwng PCTau yn fwy cyffredin.
Gweithredu
Mae swyddogaethau’r PCTau yn eang eu cwmpas. Fel eu rhagflaenwyr, maent yn gyfrifol, nid yn unig am ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol sylfaenol, ond hefyd am wasanaethau fferyllol, offthalmig (gelwir yn ‘optegol’ nawr) a deintyddol. Mae ganddynt gyfrifoldebau hefyd am faterion fel gwella iechyd yn eu cymuned, comisiynu gofal eilaidd, a chydlynu â sefydliadau eraill i ddarparu gwasanaethau iechyd a chymdeithasol integredig. Fel y byddaf yn disgrifio, mae eu pwerau rheoli mewn perthynas â’u rhestrau o feddygon teulu wedi’u hymestyn gryn dipyn. Mae hyn yn rhoi cyfrifoldebau ychwanegol arnynt. Mae’n rhaid i’r PCTau weithredu yn ogystal ar bryderon ynghylch meddygon sy’n darparu safon ymarfer annerbyniol. Tynnwyd sylw gan nifer o dystion a chyfranogwyr yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad at y cryn benderfyniad ac adnoddau (dynol ac ariannol) sydd ofynnol gan PCT wrth ddelio â meddyg sy’n perfformio’n wael neu sydd fel arall yn peri pryder. Mae’r gwaith gweinyddol sy’n gysylltiedig â’r Contract GMS newydd hefyd yn her ofnadwy i’r PCTau. Mae’r amryw swyddogaethau a chyfrifoldebau hyn yn rhoi baich trwm ar yr hyn sydd, fel y dywedais, yn sefydliadau bach. Heb fod yn syndod, dengys y dystiolaeth bod eu hymdrechion i ymdopi â’r galwadau a wneir arnynt yn llwyddiannus i raddau amrywiol.
Mae set arall o broblemau y mae PCTau yn ei wynebu yn codi o ganlyniad i’w newydd-deb. Fe wnaeth chwalu’r hen Awdurdodau Iechyd a chreu’r 303 PCT newydd arwain at wasgaru nifer fawr o staff â chryn arbenigedd ym maes gofal iechyd. Yn benodol, collwyd llawer o gynghorwyr meddygol, a oedd â gwybodaeth fanwl am feddygon yn eu hardaloedd. Mae llawer o dystion wedi sôn am golli ‘gwybodaeth gorfforaethol’ neu ‘gof corfforaethol’ mewn rhai ardaloedd. Nid dros nos y byddir yn casglu’r wybodaeth (neu’r cof) hwnnw eto. Gobeithir y caiff y strwythurau presennol eu gadael ar waith yn ddigon hir i aelodau a staff y PCTau ddatblygu’r wybodaeth a’r cof hwnnw.
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud mai un o gryfderau canfyddedig y PCTau newydd yw eu bod yn cael eu harwain gan weithwyr proffesiynol lleol. Er bod buddion amlwg i hyn, mae anfanteision potensial hefyd. Mae’r rhan fwyaf o gadeiryddion PEC (sydd ar fwrdd y PCT yn awtomatig) yn feddygon teulu lleol. Gallant fod yn swyddogion hefyd (e.e. ysgrifennydd neu gadeirydd) y pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC). Mae gorfodaeth ar PCTau o hyd i ymgynghori ag LMCau ar ystod eang o faterion. Mae’n hawdd dychmygu amgylchiadau (e.e. pan fydd PCT mewn trafodaethau â’r LMC ynghylch mater dadleuol sy’n effeithio ar fuddion meddygon teulu) lle gall achos o wrthdaro buddiannau godi. Hyd yn oed lle nad oes unrhyw wrthdaro gwirioneddol, gall fod yn anodd i’r meddyg dan sylw fabwysiadu ymagwedd wrthrychol y gellid fod wedi disgwyl gan aelod rheoli o sefydliad cyhoeddus. Fe wnaeth Mr William Greenwood, cyn Gyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol Gofal Sylfaenol yn y WPHA, Prif Gyfarwyddwr erbyn hyn, Asiantaeth Gwasanaethau a Rennir Manceinion (a gyflogir gan PCT Canol Manceinion), sôn am densiynau potensial ynghylch rheoli cyllideb a blaenoriaethau a all godi. Â’r sefyllfa’n anoddach fyth pan wneir cwyn neu pan fynegir pryder ynghylch arfer neu ymddygiad proffesiynol cydweithiwr proffesiynol agos aelod o PEC neu gadeirydd, neu, fel sydd eisoes wedi digwydd mewn rhai ardaloedd, yr aelod neu’r cadeirydd ei hun.
Dywedodd Dr Queenborough bod rhywfaint o ddryswch ynghylch rôl y PECau ac, yn benodol, ynghylch atebolrwydd aelodau unigol PECau. Byddai’n hoffi gweld aelodau’r PEC yn annibynnol ar yr LMC. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd nad oedd digon o feddygon teulu yn ei ardal ef a oedd yn barod i gymryd rôl weithredol mewn materion meddygol lleol i wneud hynny’n bosibl. Dywedodd Mrs Chris Page, Pennaeth Ailgynllunio Gwasanaethau, PCT Bebington a Gorllewin Cilgwri, wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod ei PCT wedi dod i gytundeb gyda’r LMC y byddai unrhyw swyddog o’r LMC a oedd yn cael ei benodi i’r PEC yn gadael ei swydd ar yr LMC. Dywedodd Dr John Chisholm, Cadeirydd Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig, y daethpwyd i gytundebau tebyg mewn lleiafrif o PCTau yn unig. Nid oedd yn cefnogi rhaniad felly mewn rolau. Ei farn ef oedd y gellid rheoli unrhyw achos potensial o wrthdaro buddiannau. Roedd ef, fel Dr Queenborough, yn ymwybodol mai nifer fach o feddygon yn unig a oedd yn barod i gymryd rhan weithredol ac i weithio ar ran PCTau. Hefyd, credai y gallai aelodau’n gorgyffwrdd rhwng y ddau sefydliad gael mantais gadarnhaol. Nid oedd yn ystyried ei bod yn ‘ddelfrydol’ i gadeirydd PEC i fod yn swyddog o’r LMC.
Er gwaetha’r presenoldeb proffesiynol cryf ar PCTau, nid yw’r PCTau wastad yn mwynhau perthynas dda â meddygon teulu lleol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan yr Athro Martin Roland, Cyfarwyddwr, Canolfan Ymchwil a Datblygiad Gofal Sylfaenol Cenedlaethol ac Athro Meddygaeth Deuluol, Prifysgol Manceinion, yn feddyg teulu gweithredol ei hun, y byddai’n anghywir i dybio bod meddygon teulu, fel corff, yn ystyried PCTau mewn golau cadarnhaol a’u bod yn gyfeillgar, yn barod eu cymorth ac yn gefnogol i’r proffesiwn. I’r gwrthwyneb, mae rhai yn gweld eu PCTau mewn golau negyddol iawn. Dywedodd Dr Michael Taylor, Cadeirydd y Gymdeithas Meddygfeydd Bach, bod meddygfeydd unigol yn tueddu meddwl am PCTau fel sefydliadau gelyniaethus, yn hytrach na chefnogol, tuag atynt. Nid oes amheuaeth bod llawer o bryder ac amheuaeth ynghylch y modd y bydd y PCTau yn dewis arfer y pwerau a gawsant yn ddiweddar i reoli’u rhestrau. Mae tensiwn parhaus hefyd rhwng meddygon teulu sy’n gontractwyr annibynnol a’r PCTau sy’n ceisio’u ‘rheoli’.

---  ---
Nid yw PCTau, yn gyffredinol, yn cyflogi meddygon teulu. Nid oes ganddynt felly rym arferol cyflogwr i ‘gyflogi a diswyddo’. Yn y gorffennol, ychydig o lais oedd ganddynt mewn perthynas â phwy oedd yn cael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau, ac nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw rym i ddileu meddyg a oedd yn perfformio’n anfoddhaol. Mae hyn wedi newid bellach.
Y Rhestrau
Ym Mhennod 3, esboniais fod gofyniad ar PCOau i gadw rhestr feddygol o feddygon yn eu hardaloedd a oedd wedi ymrwymo i gyflawni GMS. Roedd y rhestr feddygol yn ymwneud â phrif feddygon teulu’n unig. Nid oedd gofyniad i feddygon nad oeddent yn brif feddygon, na’r rheiny a oedd yn darparu gwasanaethau meddygol dan gontractau PMS, i gael eu cynnwys ar restr PCO. Yn ymarferol, roedd rhai PCOau yn cadw rhestr o feddygon nad oeddent yn brif feddygon. Gwnaethant hyn fel gwasanaeth i feddygfeydd teulu, a oedd yn ceisio cyflogi meddygon locwm neu ddirprwyon. Trefniant lleol, anffurfiol oedd hwn. Os nad oedd rhestr o feddygon nad oeddent yn brif feddygon yn cael ei chadw, nid oedd gan PCOau fawr o syniad pwy oedd yn ymarfer yn eu hardaloedd. Parhaodd y sefyllfa hon hyd at yn gymharol ddiweddar.
Y Rhestr Feddygol Atodol
O fis Mehefin 2002, roedd yn ofynnol cynnwys bob meddyg teulu nad oedd yn brif feddyg (ac eithrio’r rheiny’n gweithio dan gontractau PMS) ar restr feddygol atodol PCT. Mae’r term ‘meddygon nad ydynt yn brif feddygon’ yn cynnwys meddygon locwm, dirprwyon, cymdeithion, daliedyddion a chofrestryddion meddygon teulu (h.y. hyfforddeion). Gall rhai meddygon nad ydynt yn brif feddygon (e.e. meddygon locwm) weithredu mewn ardal y mae nifer o PCTau gwahanol yn ei chwmpasu. Mae gofyniad iddynt fod ar restr un o’r PCTau yn unig y maent yn gweithio yn ei ardal. Mae’n rhaid i feddyg nad yw’n brif feddyg gynnal cysylltiad ag ardal y PCT y mae’n cael ei gynnwys ar ei restr. Os nad yw, mae hawl gan y PCT ei dynnu/thynnu oddi ar ei restr.
O fis Ebrill 2002, cafodd prif feddygon teulu eu gwahardd rhag cyflogi fel dirprwy neu gyflogi unrhyw feddyg (ac eithrio meddyg yn cyflawni PMS) nad oedd wedi’i gynnwys/chynnwys ar (neu yn destun cais rhagorol i’w gynnwys ar) restr feddygol atodol neu restr feddygol. Mae’r gofyniad i feddygon nad ydynt yn brif feddygon i fod ar restr y PCT yn cael ei gynnwys gan y Contract GMS newydd erbyn hyn. Mae arweiniad gan yr Adran Iechyd yn dweud yn glir bod unrhyw berson sy’n cyflogi neu sy’n hurio meddyg nad yw’n brif feddyg sydd wedi’i gynnwys ar restr PCT yn gyfrifol am fodloni’i hun bod y sgiliau a’r profiad clinigol angenrheidiol gan y meddyg nad yw’n brif feddyg i ymgymryd â’r tasgau y cafodd ei recriwtio i’w cyflawni. Mae’n rhaid i’r meddygon nad ydynt yn brif feddygon ddarparu geirda clinigol, a dylid gwirio’r rhain. Nid yw enw’n cael ei gynnwys ar restr y PCT yn unrhyw sicrwydd. Unwaith eto, mae’r Contract GMS newydd yn cwmpasu hyn.
O’r adeg pan gyflwynwyd rhestrau atodol, mae PCTau wedi cael yr un pwerau’n ymwneud â chynnwys neu atal neu ddileu o’r rhestr feddygol fel ag ar gyfer y rhestr feddygol.
Y Rhestr Gwasanaethau
Hyd at yn ddiweddar, nid oedd meddygon yn cyflawni PMS, yn gyffredinol, yn cael eu cynnwys ar restr PCT. Fe all fod rhai ohonynt ar y rhestr feddygol atodol. Fodd bynnag, o fis Chwefror 2004, roedd yn ofynnol i bob meddyg yn cyflawni PMS (ac eithrio’r rheiny a oedd eisoes wedi’u cynnwys ar restr atodol) i fod ar restr gwasanaethau PCT. Roedd yn rhaid i ymgeiswyr gyflwyno tystiolaeth foddhaol o’u bwriad i ddarparu PMS yn ardal y PCT perthnasol.
Y Rhestr Perfformwyr Meddygol
Ers mis Ebrill 2004, mae rhestr perfformwyr meddygol newydd wedi disodli’r tri math o restr a ddisgrifir uchod. Mae’n rhaid i bob meddyg teulu sy’n cyflawni gwasanaethau meddygol, boed o dan gontractau GMS neu PMS, ymddangos ar y rhestr. Mae Deddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol (Iechyd a Safonau Cymdeithasol) 2003 yn darparu ar gyfer rheolaethau i’w gwneud yn y dyfodol sy’n gwahardd rhai gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd (e.e. nyrsys meddygfeydd) rhag gweithio mewn meddygfa deulu oni bai eu bod ar restr PCT. Os gwneir rheoliadau felly, a bod rhestrau o nyrsys a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill yn cael eu creu, bydd hyn yn galluogi[‘r PCTau i gymhwyso’r un rheolau i’w cynnwys a’u parhau ar y rhestr i weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill ag sy’n gymwys i feddygon teulu ar hyn o bryd.
Cynnwys ar Restr
Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 3 y weithdrefn, fel ag yr oedd ym 1977, ar gyfer penodi aelod arall yn lle meddyg mewn meddygfa deulu bresennol a’r rhan gyfyngedig iawn oedd gan y PCO (y pwyllgor ymarferwyr teulu (FPC) ar y pryd) i’w chwarae yn y broses. Esboniais hefyd bod yr FPC wedi chwarae rôl fwy wrth ddewis a phenodi meddyg i lenwi swydd mewn meddygfa unigol neu lle’r oedd swydd wag yn codi ar gyfer meddyg teulu ychwanegol yn ei ardal.
Rhwng 1977 a 1998, roedd newidiadau i’r trefniadau ar gyfer delio â cheisiadau i gynnwys ymgeiswyr ar y rhestr feddygol ac i lenwi swyddi. Nid oes angen i mi nodi’r newidiadau amrywiol yn fanwl. Yn eu hanfod, fodd bynnag, roedd pwerau’r PCO yr un fath i raddau helaeth. Nid oedd gofyniad o hyd i’r rheiny a oedd yn gwneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar y rhestr i ddarparu gwybodaeth am achosion disgyblu neu euogfarnau troseddol blaenorol.
Cyflwyno Meini Prawf Statudol
Ym mis Rhagfyr 1998, gwnaeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) Diwygiad (Rhif 2) 1998 newidiadau sylweddol i’r trefniadau. Eto, nid oes angen i mi ddisgrifio’r rhain yn fanwl. Fodd bynnag, datblygiad pwysig oedd bod y Rheoliadau’n cyflwyno meini prawf statudol i’w cymhwyso gan PCOau (yna’r HAau) wrth benderfynu ynglŷn â chymeradwyo cynnwys ymgeisydd ar eu rhestrau a oedd wedi’i ddewis gan feddygfa bresennol, a phan oedd ei hun yn dewis ymgeisydd i lenwi swydd. Roedd y Rheoliadau hefyd yn rhoi grym i’r HAau i bennu (o fewn cyfyngiadau penodol) eu meini prawf eu hunain, y byddai ymgeiswyr yn cael eu barnu yn eu herbyn. Rhoddodd y grym hwn fwy o hyblygrwydd i HAau wrth gynllunio ar gyfer y dyfodol. Er enghraifft, gallent ei gwneud yn ofynnol y dylai ymgeiswyr am swydd feddu ar sgiliau iaith penodol neu arbenigedd penodol wrth ofalu am blant. Er gwaetha’r newidiadau hyn, cyfyngedig o hyd oedd grym HA i ddylanwadu ar feddygfa wrth ddewis meddyg newydd. Roedd arweiniad yr Adran Iechyd ar y pryd yn datgan, os nad oedd yr ymgeisydd a ddewiswyd yn bodloni’r meini prawf a nodwyd gan yr HA, dylai’r HA gael trafodaethau gyda’r feddygfa gyda golwg ar ddod i
‘gyfaddawd derbyniol’
. Os na ellid dod i gytundeb, dylai’r HA ystyried pa un a ddylai benodi’r ymgeisydd a ddewiswyd gan y feddygfa neu i beidio gwneud hynny a’i gwneud yn ofynnol i’r feddygfa i ddewis ymgeisydd arall. Rhybuddiodd yr arweiniad:
‘Dylai gwrthod penodi meddyg yn yr amgylchiadau hyn fod yn eithriad a bydd angen i HAau gael rhesymau cryf dros wneud hynny.’
Nid oedd yr arweiniad hwn yn debygol o annog HAau i wrthwynebu ymgeisydd a ddewiswyd gan feddygfa. At hynny, nid oedd gofyniad o hyd i ymgeiswyr ddatgan gwybodaeth - nac i HAau ofyn am wybodaeth - am achosion disgyblu blaenorol neu euogfarnau troseddol.
Datganiadau gan Ymgeiswyr
Newidiodd hynny ar 4 Chwefror 2000, bedwar diwrnod wedi i Shipman gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o lofruddiaeth. Diwygiwyd Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 1992 (Rheoliadau 1992) i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i ymgeiswyr ddatgan a oeddent wedi cael eu dyfarnu’n euog am unrhyw drosedd neu wedi’u rhwymo neu’u rhybuddio, a pha un a oeddent wedi bod yn destun unrhyw achos disgyblu gan eu corff proffesiynol neu reoleiddiol, yn y DU neu yn rhywle arall. Rhoddwyd y grym i HAau wrthod cais os oeddent o’r farn, ar ôl ystyried cynnwys ei ddatganiad/datganiad, bod yr ymgeisydd yn anaddas i’w gynnwys/chynnwys ar eu rhestrau meddygol.
Diddymu’r Pwyllgor Arferion Meddygol
Diddymodd Deddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol 2001 y Pwyllgor Arferion Meddygol (MPC). O’r amser hwnnw, rhoddwyd y pŵer i PCOau benderfynu a oedd angen meddyg newydd neu feddyg ychwanegol yn eu hardal.
Gwiriadau Cyn Cynnwys
Gwnaeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) Diwygiad (Rhif 4) 2001 (Rheoliadau Diwygiedig 2001) hi’n orfodol i PCO (yr HA bryd hynny) i gynnal archwiliadau penodol cyn derbyn meddyg i’w restr. Roedd yn ofynnol i HAau wirio, cyn belled ag a oedd yn ymarferol bosibl:
y geirda a ddarparwyd gan yr ymgeisydd
y wybodaeth a roddwyd gan yr ymgeisydd mewn perthynas â’i gymwysterau/chymwysterau meddygol a’i gofrestriad/chofrestriad
cynnwys ei ddatganiad/datganiad am unrhyw gofnod troseddol neu ddisgyblu blaenorol. Roedd yn ofynnol i’r datganiad hwn fod gryn dipyn yn llawnach nag o’r blaen: gweler paragraff 5.60
pa un a oedd unrhyw ymchwiliad blaenorol neu gyfredol i dwyll yn gysylltiedig â’r meddyg.
Roedd yn ofynnol i’r HA anfon am ddau eirda a’u hystyried.
Mae’r gwiriadau hyn yn cael eu gwneud gan y PCTau erbyn hyn. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes gofyniad y dylai PCT wirio gyda’r Swyddfa Cofnodion Troseddol (CRB) cyn gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch cynnwys meddyg ar ei restr. Mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi gadael hyn i ddisgresiwn PCTau unigol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Anne Rothery, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol PCT Tameside a Glossop, bod ei PCT hi yn dewis gwneud gwiriadau felly. Mae’n waith llafurus, ac mae bob gwiriad yn cymryd rhyw hanner diwrnod. Mae’r CRB, wrth gwrs, wedi bod dan gryn bwysau ers ei sefydlu, a bu oedi hir wrth gwblhau gwiriadau. Er mis Ebrill 2004, bu’n ofynnol i bob meddyg teulu sy’n gwneud cais i ymuno â rhestr PCT ddarparu tystysgrif cofnod troseddol uwch fel rhan o’u cais. Dylai hyn roi gwybodaeth am haeriadau nas profwyd, cyhuddiadau troseddol na aethpwyd ymlaen â nhw a rhyddfarniadau. Fodd bynnag, mae graddfa’r wybodaeth a gynhwysir ar y cofnod yn dibynnu ar yr ymgeisydd yn rhoi’r holl gyfeiriadau perthnasol a’i enwau/henwau cywir.
Yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig) (FHSAA (SHA)) (a elwid yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu yn flaenorol) yw’r corff sy’n cael ei ddefnyddio i wrando apeliadau o’r hen bwyllgorau gwasanaethau meddygol, ac, wedi hynny, y pwyllgorau disgyblu meddygol. Mae’n cynnal, ar ran yr SoS, gofnod o feddygon y gwrthodwyd eu cynnwys neu a gynhwyswyd yn amodol ar restr PCT, neu feddygon a ataliwyd, a thynnwyd neu a thynnwyd yn amodol oddi ar restr PCT. Mae cyflawnrwydd y wybodaeth sy’n cael ei chadw gan yr FHSAA (SHA) yn gwbl ddibynnol ar PCTau yn ei hysbysu ynghylch penderfyniadau perthnasol. Er bod gofyniad ar PCTau i wneud hyn, nid yw hyn yn digwydd bob tro. Er mis Tachwedd 2003, bu’n orfodol i PCTau wirio gyda’r FHSAA (SHA) cyn cynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestrau. Yn ddiweddar cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth ei fwriad i ddiddymu’r FHSAA (SHA) ac i drosglwyddo’i swyddogaethau i Awdurdod Cyfreitha’r GIG.
Dywedwyd yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr Sarah Wilson, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol, SHA Trent, bod y gwiriadau y mae’n ofynnol i PCTau eu gwneud yn golygu ‘rhedeg i chwilio go iawn’. Mae eu cyflawnrwydd yn dibynnu ar bobl yn gwybod pa wiriadau sydd i’w gwneud ac â phwy. Nid yw’r staff clercio sy’n gwneud y gwiriadau yn meddu ar y wybodaeth hon bob tro. Gwnaethpwyd yr awgrym yn ystod gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad y gallai fod modd symleiddio’r broses, a dywedodd Syr Nigel Crisp y byddai’r awgrym yn cael ei ystyried.
Meddygon Nad Ydynt yn Brif Feddygon
Mae’n ofynnol i feddygon nad ydynt yn brif feddygon wneud yr un datganiadau ar eu ceisiadau i ymuno â rhestr PCT, ac mae’r un ddyletswydd barhaus ganddynt i ddatgan achosion troseddol neu ddisgyblu. Mae PCTau yn gyfrifol am wneud gwiriadau ar eu cymwysterau ac ati, ar gais i ymuno â’r rhestr. Mae arweiniad yr Adran Iechyd yn cyfeirio at anymarferoldeb gwneud ymholiadau manwl am hanes cyflogaeth meddyg nad yw’n brif feddyg, ac yn awgrymu y dylai sylw gael ei ganoli ar unrhyw seibiannau sylweddol yn hanes eu gyrfa.
Darparwyr Gwasanaethau Meddygol Personol
Nes cyflwyno’r rhestrau gwasanaethau newydd, nid oedd PCTau yn cael datganiadau gan lawer o feddygon yn gweithio dan gontractau PMS am achosion troseddol neu ddisgyblu y buont yn gysylltiedig â nhw. Ni allai PCTau ychwaith gymryd camau gweithredu i ddileu neu atal meddyg rhag cyflawni PMS, bwlch a allai beri cryn anhawster. Dim ond os oedd darpariaethau priodol wedi’u cynnwys yn y contract PMS lleol yr oedd modd gweithredu yn y modd hwnnw. Er mis Chwefror 2004, mae meddygon sy’n darparu PMS wedi gorfod gwneud yr un datganiadau, ac maent dan reolaeth yr un sancsiynau o ddileu neu atal o’r rhestr, â darparwyr GMS.
Gwrthod Cynnwys
Fe wnaeth Rheoliadau Newid 2001 ymestyn hefyd sail gallu HA i wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar ei restr. Cyfyngedig iawn fu’r rhain yn flaenorol. Roedd yn ofynnol i HA wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar ei restr os nad oedd yr ymgeisydd yn meddu ar brofiad addas, os nad oedd yn siarad Saesneg yn ddigon da, os oedd yn 70 oed neu’n hŷn, neu os oedd wedi’i ddiarddel gan Dribiwnlys y GIG. Hefyd, roedd disgresiwn gan HAau i wrthod cynnwys meddyg y pennwyd amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad gan y GMC, neu nad oedd yn cyflawni’r meini prawf ar gyfer y swydd. Gallai HAau wrthod cynnwys meddyg hefyd os oeddent o’r farn, yng ngolau ei ddatganiad/datganiad am achosion troseddol neu ddisgybl blaenorol neu gyfredol, bod meddyg yn anaddas: gweler paragraff 5.41.
Fe wnaeth Rheoliadau Newid 2001 hi’n orfodol i HA wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar ei restr mewn amgylchiadau penodol, a’r pwysicaf o’r rhain oedd:
lle’r oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu yn euog o lofruddiaeth yn y DU
lle’r oedd (ar ôl 13 Rhagfyr 2001) wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd a’i ddedfrydu i dymor o garchar dros chwe mis
lle’r oedd wedi bod yn destun diarddel gan yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA) yn Lloegr neu gorff cyffelyb yn rhywle arall yn y DU: gweler paragraff 5.54.
Hefyd, rhoddwyd pwerau dewisol i HAau wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestr:
os oeddent o’r farn bod y meddyg yn anaddas i’w gynnwys ar y rhestr nid yn unig oherwydd cynnwys ei ddatganiad/datganiad am achosion troseddol neu ddisgybl blaenorol neu gyfredol, ond hefyd oherwydd unrhyw wybodaeth arall ym meddiant yr HA, neu oherwydd canlyniadau’r gwiriadau a wnaed ar ei gymwysterau/chymwysterau a’i gofrestriad/chofrestriad
os nad oeddent, ar ôl cysylltu â chanolwyr, yn fodlon â geirda’r meddyg
os oedd y ffeithiau a oedd yn ymwneud ag ymchwiliadau blaenorol neu gyfredol i dwyll gan Wasanaeth Gwrth-dwyll y GIG (Gwasanaeth Gwrth-dwyll a Rheoli Diogelwch y GIG erbyn hyn) ac unrhyw achos o dwyll yn gysylltiedig neu’n ymwneud â’r meddyg yn cyfiawnhau hynny
os oedd sail ganddynt i ystyried y byddai cynnwys y meddyg ar y rhestr yn niweidiol i effeithlonrwydd y gwasanaeth y byddai’n ymgymryd ag ef.
Nodwyd meini prawf statudol, a oedd i’w hystyried cyn dod i benderfyniad ynglŷn â’r materion hyn. Rhoddwyd y grym i HAau ohirio penderfyniad mewn rhai amgylchiadau neu i bennu amodau ar gynnwys meddyg ar y rhestr.
Mae’r pwerau hyn yn cael eu harfer gan y PCTau erbyn hyn, ac mae’n ofynnol iddynt hysbysu’r FHSAA (SHA) am bob penderfyniad i wrthod cynnwys meddyg neu gynnwys meddyg yn amodol ar eu rhestr.
Yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu
Ym mis Rhagfyr 2001, diddymwyd Tribiwnlys y GIG a chrëwyd yr FHSAA. Er gwaethaf tebygrwydd yr enw, mae’r FHSAA yn gorff gwahanol i’r FHSAA (SHA) (yr FHSAA yn flaenorol), y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 5.46. Mae’r FHSAA yn dribiwnlys annibynnol, a phenodir ei Lywydd a’i aelodau gan yr Arglwydd Ganghellor. Mae apeliadau yn erbyn PCT yn gwrthod cynnwys meddyg ar ei restr (ac eithrio pan wrthodwyd ar sail orfodol) yn cael eu penderfynu gan yr FHSAA. Caiff PCTau sy’n gwrthod cynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestrau eu cynghori i ystyried mynd at yr FHSAA, gyda golwg ar yr FHSAA yn pennu bod y meddyg yn cael ei ddiarddel yn genedlaethol. Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd diarddeliad cenedlaethol o reidrwydd yn golygu bod meddyg yn cael ei ddiarddel rhag cael ei gynnwys ar restr pob PCT. Roedd hi’n bosibl, er enghraifft, i’r FHSAA ddiarddel meddyg o bob rhestr atodol, ond nid rhestrau eraill. Yn ymarferol, prin iawn y gwnaethpwyd hyn (os erioed). Ers cyflwyno’r rhestr perfformwyr meddygol, mae’r sefyllfa wedi newid ac mae unrhyw ddiarddeliad cenedlaethol (pa un a gafodd ei bennu cyn Ebrill 2004 neu wedi hynny) yn berthnasol bob rhestr perfformiwr meddygol.
Effaith y Newidiadau
Mae’r newidiadau a ddisgrifiais wedi galluogi’r PCOau (y PCTau erbyn hyn) i arfer rheolaeth wirioneddol dros bwy sy’n cael ei gynnwys a phwy nad yw’n cael ei gynnwys ar eu rhestrau. Y PCT bellach (ac nid yr MPC) sy’n penderfynu a oes angen meddyg neu feddygfa newydd yn ei ardal. Y PCT (ar ôl ymgynghori â’r LMC ac unrhyw feddygfa sy’n gysylltiedig) sy’n pennu’r meini prawf y caiff ymgeiswyr am swydd eu barnu yn eu herbyn. Mae’r pwerau newydd hyn wedi galluogi rhai PCTau i ddatblygu strategaeth ar gyfer recriwtio, wedi’i theilwra yn ôl anghenion eu poblogaeth a meddygon teulu sy’n gwneud cais. Gall hyn fod o gymorth arbennig mewn ardaloedd difreintiedig lle mae recriwtio’n anodd.
Dylai’r system newydd o ddatganiadau gan ymgeiswyr, a’r gofyniad i PCTau wneud gwiriadau mwy cynhwysfawr o’r wybodaeth sy’n cael ei darparu gan ymgeiswyr, olygu bod gan PCTau lawer fwy o wybodaeth am unrhyw hanes blaenorol niweidiol meddygon sy’n gwneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau. Os yw PCT yn penderfynu cynnwys meddyg sydd â chofnod troseddol neu ddisgyblu ar ei restr, gall wneud hynny yn amodol, a gall lunio amodau addas i’w pennu ar y meddyg er mwyn diogelu cleifion. Lle bydd yn briodol, gall wrthod cynnwys meddyg. Pe bai cais Shipman i ymuno â’r rhestr yn Tameside wedi’i wneud nawr, gyda’r darpariaethau newydd hyn ar waith, byddai’r PCT wedi bod yn gwbl ymwybodol o’r cychwyn cyntaf o’i euogfarnau troseddol. Gallai fod wedi ymholi i’w hamgylchiadau ac i’w gynnydd ef ers gadael Todmorden. Gallai fod wedi gwneud ei benderfyniad ei hun ynghylch a oedd yn meddwl ei bod yn briodol i’w gynnwys ar ei restr. Pe bai’r PCT wedi penderfynu gwneud hynny, gallai fod wedi gwneud trefniadau arbennig i fonitro’i ragnodi. Gallai fod wedi cynghori swyddog archwilio fferyllfeydd yr heddlu lleol i archwilio’n ofalus unrhyw gofnodion perthnasol yng nghofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig fferyllwyr. Yn anad dim, o’r cychwyn cyntaf yn deg, byddai wedi gwybod llawer mwy am y person yr oedd yn delio ag ef.
Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 4 y modd yr oedd Shipman, ym 1992, wedi gallu symud yn hawdd i ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Roedd eisoes ar y rhestr feddygol, felly ychydig o ffurfioldebau oedd eu hangen. Pe bai’r HA wedi gwrthwynebu’r symud yn llwyr, gallai fod wedi gwrthod y nawdd angenrheidiol. Fodd bynnag, efallai nad oedd ganddo wybodaeth ddigonol am y meddyg dan sylw (Shipman, yn yr achos hwn) i seilio penderfyniad gwybodus arni. Nawr, fodd bynnag, byddai’n agored i’r PCT i roi ystyriaeth ofalus i’r angen am, a dymunoldeb, ffurfio meddygfa ychwanegol ar ei phen ei hun ac addasrwydd y meddyg a oedd yn ymgeisio. Os oedd y PCT yn ymwybodol bod gan y meddyg dan sylw gofnod troseddol a/neu ddisgyblu fel un Shipman, gallai fod yn amharod i ymrwymo i gontract gydag ef fel meddyg yn ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Ni fyddai’n agored iddo, dan ddarpariaethau’r Contract GMS newydd, i fynd â’i restr cleifion gydag ef fel y gwnaeth Shipman o feddygfa Donneybrook. Ymddengys yn amheus, pe bai’r trefniadau presennol wedi bod ar waith ym 1992, y byddai Shipman wedi symud i’r Feddygfa ym Market Street.
Meddygon Sydd Eisoes Wedi’u Cynnwys ar Restr Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol
Nid oedd y darpariaethau newydd a oedd yn rheoli datganiadau gan ymgeiswyr i’w cynnwys ar restrau PCOau am unrhyw achosion troseddol neu ddisgyblu blaenorol, wrth gwrs, yn cwmpasu meddygon a oedd eisoes ar y rhestrau. Roedd yn amlwg y gallai fod meddygon, fel Shipman, a chanddynt euogfarnau troseddol neu ganfyddiadau disgyblu yn eu herbyn, a bod y PCO yn anymwybodol ohonynt. Felly, roedd Rheoliadau Newid 2001 yn cynnwys ‘darpariaeth dal i fyny’, a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob meddyg ar y rhestr feddygol gyflenwi gwybodaeth ysgrifenedig i’r HA perthnasol erbyn 31 Mawrth 2002 ynghylch:
a oedd ganddo/ganddi unrhyw euogfarnau troseddol yn y DU
a oedd wedi’i rwymo/rhwymo yn dilyn euogfarn troseddol yn y DU
a oedd wedi derbyn rhybudd gan yr heddlu yn y DU
a oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog yn rhywle arall am drosedd, neu’r hyn a fyddai wedi golygu trosedd pe bai’n cael ei gyflawni yng Nghymru a Lloegr, neu a phennwyd cosb arno a fyddai’n gyfwerth â chael ei rwymo neu rybuddio
a oedd yn destun unrhyw achos cyfredol a allai arwain at euogfarn felly, ac nad oedd yr HA wedi’i hysbysu yn ei gylch eto
a fu’n destun unrhyw ymchwiliad i’w ymddygiad/hymddygiad proffesiynol gan unrhyw gorff trwyddedu, rheoleiddio neu gorff arall unrhyw le yn y byd, a bod canlyniad hwnnw’n anffafriol
a oedd yn destun cyfredol unrhyw ymchwiliad i’w ymddygiad/hymddygiad proffesiynol gan unrhyw gorff trwyddedu, rheoleiddio neu gorff arall unrhyw le yn y byd, a bod canlyniad hwnnw’n anffafriol
a oedd, hyd y gwyddai, neu a fu lle’r oedd y canlyniad yn anffafriol, yn destun unrhyw ymchwiliad gan Wasanaeth Gwrth-dwyll y GIG mewn perthynas ag unrhyw achos o dwyll
a fu’n destun unrhyw ymchwiliad gan HA arall, neu gorff cyfwerth, a allai arwain at ei ddileu/dileu o unrhyw un o restrau’r HA hwnnw, neu unrhyw restrau cyfwerth
a oedd, neu a fu lle’r oedd y canlyniad yn anffafriol, yn destun ymchwiliad i’w berfformiad/pherfformiad proffesiynol mewn perthynas ag unrhyw gyflogaeth bresennol neu flaenorol
a oedd wedi’i ddileu, neu wedi’i ddileu’n amodol, wedi gwrthod cael ei gynnwys, neu ei gynnwys yn amodol, ar unrhyw restr neu restr gyfwerth a oedd yn cael ei chadw gan HA arall, neu gorff cyfwerth, neu a oedd wedi’i atal oddi ar restr felly ar hyn o bryd.
Sylweddolir bod y datganiad hwn yn fwy cynhwysfawr nag a fu’n ofynnol er mis Chwefror 2000 i ymgeiswyr ei wneud er mwyn cael eu cynnwys ar restr. Yn benodol, roedd yn cynnwys gweithredu gan gyn gyflogwr neu PCO. Ar yr un pryd, ymestynnwyd y datganiadau a oedd i’w gwneud cyn cael eu cynnwys ar y rhestr. Os oedd unrhyw un o’r amgylchiadau uchod yn cael eu datgan, roedd yn rhaid i’r ymgeisydd roi manylion yr ymchwiliad neu’r achos perthnasol. Roedd yn ofynnol i feddygon a oedd eisoes ar y rhestr feddygol ac ymgeiswyr newydd i’r rhestr roi manylion tebyg mewn perthynas ag unrhyw gorff corfforaethol yr oeddent yn gyfarwyddwr iddynt. Fe wnaeth Rheoliadau Newid 2001 hi’n ofynnol i feddygon hefyd gydsynio i’r HA yn gofyn am wybodaeth gan drydydd parti am unrhyw ymchwiliadau i’w hymddygiad lle bu’r canlyniad yn anffafriol.
Hefyd, pennodd Rheoliadau Newid 2001 ofyniad parhaus ar feddygon i hysbysu’r HA cyn pen saith niwrnod o euogfarn, yn rhybuddio neu’n rhwymo, neu o gychwyn unrhyw achos neu ymchwiliad o’r math a bennir ym mharagraff 5.58(e)-(j) ac unrhyw gam gweithredu gan HA o’r math a bennir ym mharagraff 5.58(k).
Mae datganiadau felly’n cael eu gwneud i’r PCTau erbyn hyn. Bydd ‘ymarferiad dal i fyny’ mawr i’w gynnal, a bydd yn ofynnol i bob meddyg teulu sydd eisoes ar restr PCT i ddarparu tystysgrif cofnod troseddol uwch, oni bai ei bod wedi’i darparu’n barod. Bydd PCTau yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob meddyg teulu ar eu rhestrau i wneud cais i’r CRB erbyn 1 Chwefror 2005. Bydd unrhyw feddyg teulu sy’n methu cydymffurfio â’r gofyniad yn cael ei dynnu oddi ar restr y PCT. Fodd bynnag, gan y disgwylir y gall fod rhywfaint o oedi wrth brosesu nifer fawr o geisiadau, gall PCTau ganiatáu estyniad amser. Ar hyn o bryd, gall PCTau ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu ddarparu tystysgrif felly os oes ganddynt reswm i gredu nad oedd ei ddatganiad/datganiad yn gyflawn, ond nid yw’n ofyniad cyffredinol.
O fis Tachwedd 2003, roedd gofyniad ar feddygon teulu yn ôl eu telerau gwasanaeth i adrodd i’r PCT am unrhyw farwolaeth yn digwydd yn adeilad eu meddygfa. Pennir y ddyletswydd hon bellach ar feddygfeydd sy’n ymrwymo i’r Contract GMS newydd. Er mis Mawrth 2004, bu’n ofynnol i feddygfeydd teulu gadw cofrestrau o roddion â gwerth dros £100 a roddwyd i aelodau’r feddygfa a meddygon a phersonau eraill yn cael eu cyflogi yn y feddygfa, ynghyd â’u priod neu bartneriaid, gan gleifion, teuluoedd cleifion a chymdeithion busnes neu ddarpar gymdeithion busnes. Cynlluniwyd y darpariaethau hyn yn amlwg â Shipman mewn cof.
Dileu, Atal neu Ddileu’n Amodol oddi ar Restr
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn ym Mhennod 3 mai cyfyngedig iawn oedd pwerau FPC i dynnu meddyg teulu oddi ar ei restr. Felly’r oedd hi hyd at 4 Chwefror 2000, pan newidiwyd Rheoliadau 1992 i’w gwneud yn orfodol i PCO (HAau bryd hynny) i dynnu meddyg oddi ar ei restr a ddyfarnwyd yn euog yn y DU am lofruddiaeth, neu a ddyfarnwyd yn euog o drosedd a’i ddedfrydu i dymor yn y carchar o chwe mis o leiaf. Newidiwyd y ddarpariaeth olaf hon yn ddiweddarach i dymor o fwy na chwe mis. Yn ei ddatganiad atodol i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Nigel Crisp mai’r bwriad gwreiddiol oedd cyfyngu dileu gorfodol oddi ar y rhestr i’r achosion hynny lle’r oedd dedfryd wedi’i phennu a oedd yn hwy na’r ddedfryd fwyaf ar gyfer trosedd unigol gan Lys Ynadon, h.y. i adlewyrchu’r farn yn cael ei chymryd gan y system farnwrol o ddifrifoldeb trosedd benodol. Roedd y darpariaethau hyn ar gyfer dileu gorfodol yn debyg i’r rheiny y cyfeiriwyd atynt ym mharagraff 5.51, yn rheoli cynnwys meddygon ar y rhestr.
Rhoddodd Deddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol 2001 bwerau (ac, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, rwymedigaeth) ar HAau i ddileu meddyg oddi ar eu rhestr ar y sail:
y byddai parhau i gynnwys y meddyg ar y rhestr yn niweidiol i effeithlonrwydd y gwasanaethau meddygol yr oedd meddygon ar y rhestr wedi ymrwymo i’w darparu (‘achos effeithlonrwydd’)
bod y meddyg wedi bod yn gysylltiedig â digwyddiad o dwyll neu ymgais at dwyll (‘achos twyll’)
bod y meddyg yn anaddas i aros ar y rhestr (‘achos anaddasrwydd’)
Mewn achos effeithlonrwydd neu achos twyll (ond nid achos anaddasrwydd), rhoddwyd grym i HAau hefyd i bennu amodau ar barhau i gynnwys meddyg ar y rhestr. Os oedd yr amodau’n cael eu torri wedi hynny, gellid dileu’r meddyg oddi ar y rhestr. Felly, galwyd y broses pennu amodau yn ‘dileu amodol’. Gallai amodau gael eu hadolygu. Rhoddwyd y grym i HAau hefyd i atal meddygon mewn amgylchiadau cyfyngedig penodol, sef pan oedd gwneud hynny’n angenrheidiol er mwyn diogelu aelodau’r cyhoedd neu ei fod fel arall er lles y cyhoedd.
Gellid penderfynu tynnu meddyg oddi ar y rhestr, neu bennu amodau ar barhau i’w gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr, am nifer o resymau. Fe allai’r rhesymau hynny ymwneud â niwed i effeithlonrwydd yn codi o berfformiad gwael y meddyg. Fe allent ymwneud ag anonestrwydd ariannol neu ddibyniaeth ar alcohol neu gyffuriau. Gallai PCO benderfynu hefyd tynnu meddyg oddi ar ei restr yn sgil gwybodaeth am gysylltiad diweddar mewn achos troseddol neu ddisgyblu a ddatgelwyd yn dilyn y darpariaethau a ddisgrifiwyd ym mharagraff 5.58. Roedd Rheoliadau Newid 2001 yn nodi meini prawf i’w cymhwyso pan oedd dileu oddi ar restr yn cael ei ystyried ar sail anaddasrwydd, twyll neu niwed i effeithlonrwydd. Un o’r meini prawf i’w gymhwyso ym mhob achos yw’r
‘risg debygol i gleifion’
yn sgil ymddygiad blaenorol y meddyg.
Byddai apêl yn erbyn dileu oddi ar restr yn mynd i’r FHSAA. Roedd HAau yn cael eu cynghori, pe byddent yn penderfynu tynnu meddyg oddi ar eu rhestr, i ystyried mynd at yr FHSAA gyda golwg ar bennu diarddeliad cenedlaethol. Cyflwynwyd darpariaeth lle na allai meddyg, ac eithrio â chydsyniad yr SoS, gael ei enw/henw wedi’i dynnu oddi ar restr feddygol nes bod unrhyw gam gweithredu gan yr HA yr oedd ei enw/henw yn ymddangos ar ei restr wedi’i bennu. Roedd hyn er mwyn atal meddyg rhag osgoi gweithredu gan HA trwy dynnu ei enw/henw oddi ar ei restr yn wirfoddol.
Mae’r pwerau hyn wedi syrthio ar y PCTau erbyn hyn. Mae’n ofynnol iddynt bellach adrodd i’r FHSAA (SHA) (Awdurdod Cyfreitha’r GIG cyn bo hir) am benderfyniadau i ddileu meddyg, ei atal neu’i ddileu’n amodol oddi ar eu rhestrau.
Effaith y Newidiadau
Roedd y pwerau newydd a oedd ar gael i reoli’u rhestrau yn gryn symudiad ymlaen yng ngallu’r PCOau (y PCTau erbyn hyn) i ddelio â meddygon problemus. Nid oes rhaid iddynt ddibynnu ar gyrff eraill mwyach (yn arbennig, y GMC) er mwyn gweithredu. Os yw diogelu cleifion yn gofyn am hynny, gallant gymryd camau brys i atal meddyg. Os yw’r broblem yn llai difrifol, gallant bennu amodau ar barhau i’w gynnwys/chynnwys ar y rhestr, er mwyn sicrhau diogelwch cleifion a sicrhau cyflwyno gwasanaethau’n effeithlon. Dywedodd Mr Greenwood bod y darpariaethau newydd wedi ‘trawsffurfio’r system’. Roeddent wedi rhoi pwerau newydd a ffynonellau gwybodaeth newydd i’r PCTau. Credai bod y rhain yn hanfodol os oedd PCTau i gynyddu eu gallu i fonitro meddygon teulu yn y dyfodol.
Gall defnyddio’r pwerau newydd hyn, fodd bynnag, arwain at golli neu gyfyngu ar fywoliaeth meddyg, a gall niweidio’i enw/henw da proffesiynol a phersonol. Rhaid defnyddio’r pwerau’n gyfrifol, a rhaid i unrhyw gam gweithredu a gymerir gan PCT gael ei seilio ar dystiolaeth gadarn a dibynadwy a gafwyd yn ystod ymchwiliad trylwyr a gwrthrychol. Fel arall, gallai anghyfiawnder ddeillio, a bydd penderfyniadau a wneir dan y pwerau yn amodol yn gyson ar apêl a’u herio yn y llysoedd. Wedi dweud hynny, mae’n hanfodol fod PCTau yn datblygu’r hyder a’r sgiliau i ddefnyddio’r pwerau newydd pan fydd y sefyllfa yn gofyn am hynny.
Mae ffigurau’r Adran Iechyd yn dangos, rhwng 14 Rhagfyr 2001 (pan gyflwynwyd rheoli rhestrau meddygon teulu am y tro cyntaf) a mis Mawrth 2003, bod y PCTau wedi adrodd i’r FHSAA (SHA) am 37 achos o atal a naw achos o ddileu oddi ar eu rhestrau, ynghyd ag 16 achos o ddileu amodol. Roedd tri o’r achosion hyn o ddileu yn dilyn y meddyg teulu dan sylw yn cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau. Nid oedd unrhyw resymau am y camau gweithredu a gymerwyd ar gael yn yr achosion eraill. Hefyd, adroddodd PCTau eu bod wedi gwrthod 33 achos o gynnwys meddygon ar eu rhestrau ac wedi pennu amodau ar gynnwys mewn 49 o achosion. Roedd un gwrthodiad yn ymwneud â’r ffaith bod y meddyg dan sylw wedi bwrw tymor mewn carchar. Ac eithrio yn yr achos hwnnw, nid oes unrhyw wybodaeth ar gael am yr amgylchiadau a arweiniodd at wrthod neu bennu amodau.
Rhwng 1 Ebrill 2003 a 31 Mawrth 2004, cafodd yr FHSAA (SHA) ei hysbysu ynghylch 22 achos arall o atal. Gan gynnwys y rheiny a oedd yn bodoli o gyfnodau blaenorol, roedd 25 ataliad yn parhau mewn grym ar 31 Mawrth 2004. Hefyd, bu 25 achos o ddileu oddi ar restrau PCT a dau achos o ddileu’n amodol. Roedd meddygon wedi’u gwrthod rhag cael eu cynnwys ar restr PCT mewn 21 o achosion, a chawsant eu cynnwys yn amodol mewn 28 o achosion. Bu pum apêl lwyddiannus yn erbyn camau gweithredu gan PCTau, ac roedd saith apêl arall yn dal heb eu penderfynu. Nid oes unrhyw wybodaeth ar gael i’r Ymchwiliad am y rhesymau am y camau gweithredu a gymerwyd gan PCTau yn ystod y flwyddyn hyd at 31 Mawrth 2004. Nid oes gofyniad ar PCTau i hysbysu’r FHSAA (SHA) am y lefel fanylder hon. Ymddengys i mi ei bod yn anffodus nad yw’r wybodaeth hon yn cael ei chasglu a’i dadansoddi. Byddai’n cynorthwyo wrth ddarparu arweiniad i PCTau am y mathau o amgylchiadau lle dylent arfer eu pwerau rheoli. Byddai hefyd yn galluogi cynnal gwerthusiadau i ganfod a oedd PCTau yn gwneud defnydd digonol a phriodol o’u pwerau newydd. O 31 Mawrth 2004, roedd naw diarddeliad cenedlaethol mewn grym.
Mae ffigurau heb eu dilysu a gyflenwyd gan yr FHSAA (SHA) ar gyfer y cyfnod chwe mis hyd at 30 Medi 2004 yn datgelu bod 27 achos arall o atal yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, gyda 46 achos o atal yn bodoli ar 30 Medi.
Bylchau yn Parhau yn y Wybodaeth Sydd ar Gael i’r Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Mae bylchau sylweddol o hyd yn y wybodaeth sydd ar gael i PCT am feddygon teulu sy’n gwneud cais i gael eu cynnwys, neu sydd eisoes wedi’u cynnwys, ar ei restr. Yn benodol, ni fydd PCT fel arfer yn ymwybodol o:
gŵynion (hyd yn oed cwynion o natur ddifrifol) a wneir gan gleifion neu eraill am feddyg teulu tra’i fod/bod ar restr PCT arall neu mewn cyflogaeth yn rhywle arall yn y GIG neu yn y sector preifat. Dim ond os oedd penderfyniad wedi’i wneud yn eu cylch neu eu bod wedi arwain at y PCT yn gweithredu ar reoli’r rhestr, neu bod camau gweithredu disgybl gan y GMC neu gyflogwr y byddai PCT yn ymwybodol o gwynion felly. Er enghraifft, ni fyddai meddyg teulu yn gwneud cais a fu’n destun cyfres o gŵynion nas profwyd o ymosod yn anweddus ar gleifion yn gorfod datgan y ffaith honno. Yr unig amgylchiadau lle gallai’r PCT ddod i wybod am ei hanes fyddai pe bai’n cael gwybod yn anffurfiol, neu os oedd yr heddlu wedi ymchwilio a bod gwiriad CRB wedi datgelu’r wybodaeth honno.
pryderon ynghylch perfformiad y meddyg yn cael eu mynegi gan gydweithwyr, gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd neu eraill. Dim ond pe baent wedi arwain at PCT arall yn gweithredu ar reoli’r rhestr y byddai PCT yn ymwybodol o bryderon felly, neu os cymerodd y GMC neu gyflogwr gamau disgyblu.
dan ‘hen’ weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer y GMC, cwynion yn cael eu gwneud i’r GMC ynghylch y meddyg, oni bai bod y GMC wedi penderfynu bwrw ymlaen â’r gŵyn ymhellach na’r cam sgrinio. Er mis Awst 2000, bu’n ofynnol i’r GMC hysbysu cyflogwyr a PCOau am gŵynion felly wedi i’r penderfyniad hwnnw gael ei wneud; gall y penderfyniad hwnnw gael ei wneud ryw amser wedi i’r GMC dderbyn y gŵyn. Os nad yw’r gŵyn yn cael ei chanlyn, ni roddir unrhyw hysbysiad. Dylai’r trefniadau dan y gweithdrefnau ‘newydd’ arwain at hysbysu’n gynharach am honiadau a wneir i’r GMC. Hefyd, er mis Mai 2004, mae’r GMC wedi mabwysiadu’r arfer o gael trafodaethau cynnar â PCO meddyg mewn rhai achosion. Felly, nid yw’r bwlch yma mor fawr ag yr arferai fod.
cysylltiad blaenorol neu gyfredol y meddyg mewn achos o esgeulustod clinigol, beth bynnag yw’r canlyniad.
cwynion yn cael eu gwneud i’r feddygfa deulu. Hyd at fis Ebrill 2004, dim ond hysbysu PCT am niferoedd y cwynion yn cael eu gwneud yr oedd meddygfa yn gorfod gwneud. Dan y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft i’w gweithredu’n fuan (gweler Pennod 7), bydd rhwymedigaeth i hysbysu’r PCT am gynnwys cwynion. Fodd bynnag, ni fydd y PCT yn gweld y gŵyn ei hun, a bydd yn dibynnu ar onestrwydd meddygfeydd wrth adrodd am gŵynion iddo.
Golyga’r bylchau hyn y gall PCTau fod yn anymwybodol o wybodaeth am feddygon teulu sy’n berthnasol iawn i ddiogelu cleifion. Os yw PCTau i gydymffurfio â’u dyletswydd ansawdd a darparu gwasanaethau meddygol lleol diogel ac effeithiol, mae’n hanfodol eu bod yn cael yr holl wybodaeth sydd ar gael am feddygon teulu ar eu rhestrau. Yn y dyfodol, os a phan fydd yn ofynnol i PCTau gymryd rhan yn y broses ail-ddilysu, trwy lofnodi tystysgrif yn gwarantu nad oes unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys am y meddyg, gall ddod yn bwysicach fyth i PCTau gael gwybodaeth lawn am y meddygon teulu ar eu rhestr. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r cynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ym Mhennod 26.

---  ---
Datblygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad Lleol
Soniais ym Mhennod 4 am gyflwyno gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, a’r grym a gafodd y GMC bryd hynny i atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg y canfuwyd bod ei berfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol difrifol. Byddai’r GMC yn gweithredu’u unig mewn perthynas â’r meddygon hynny yr oedd eu perfformiad mor ddifrifol o ddiffygiol bod cofrestriad y meddyg yn cael ei amau. Roedd hwn yn drothwy uchel iawn. Cydnabuwyd o’r cychwyn cyntaf y byddai meddygon yn perfformio ar safon annerbyniol na fyddent yn cyrraedd trothwy’r GMC, ond a oedd serch hynny’n risg wirioneddol i gleifion. Roedd yn rhaid datblygu gweithdrefnau lleol, felly, i alluogi PCOau (yr HAau bryd hynny) i ddelio â meddygon felly.
Hefyd, byddai’r GMC yn galw ar ei weithdrefnau perfformiad mewn perthynas â pherfformiad ar ôl 1 Gorffennaf 1997 yn unig. Ni ellid dibynnu ar dystiolaeth am berfformiad cyn y dyddiad hwnnw, pa mor annerbyniol bynnag yr oedd. Effaith y ddarpariaeth hon oedd nad oedd HAau yn gallu cyfeirio’r meddygon hynny at y GMC yr oedd eu perfformiad wedi bod yn achosi problemau am flynyddoedd. Yn lle hynny, roedd yn rhaid iddynt aros nes y gellid casglu tystiolaeth ddigonol ar ôl mis Gorffennaf 1997. Yn y cyfamser, fe’u gadawyd i ddelio â safonau gofal gwael gan ddilyn eu gweithdrefnau lleol eu hunain.
Ym 1997, comisiynwyd y School of Health and Related Research ym Mhrifysgol Sheffield (ScHARR) gan yr Adran Iechyd i lunio arweiniad i gynorthwyo HAau wrth ddatblygu trefniadau ar gyfer cefnogi meddygon teulu yr oedd eu perfformiad yn peri pryder. Cyhoeddwyd arweiniad ScHARR ym mis Medi 1997. Roedd wedi’i gyfeirio’n bennaf at gynorthwyo HAau wrth ddelio â pherfformiad a oedd yn peri rhai pryderon, ond nid pryderon o faint bod cyfeirio at y GMC yn amlwg yn briodol. Yn wahanol i weithdrefnau’r GMC, roedd yr arweiniad yn cwmpasu pryderon ynghylch perfformiad meddygfeydd teulu, yn ogystal ag ynghylch meddygon teulu unigol. Roedd yr arweiniad yn cydnabod y byddai ychydig o feddygon teulu yr oedd eu perfformiad mor wael y byddai angen cyfeirio at y GMC. Fodd bynnag, pwysleisiodd y byddai HA a oedd yn gwneud cyfeiriad at y GMC yn gorfod dangos ei fod wedi gwneud hynny a allai o fewn ei rym yn gyntaf i wella perfformiad trwy roi cymorth priodol.
Roedd arweiniad ScHARR yn rhoi cyngor ynghylch y modd gorau i HA, wedi i feddyg teulu gael ei nodi fel meddyg yn tanberfformio, roi cefnogaeth a chymorth iddo/iddi er mwyn codi’i safonau perfformiad i lefel dderbyniol. Pwysleisiodd yr arweiniad,
, yr angen:
i ddiagnosio’n briodol y problemau sylfaenol a oedd yn achosi’r meddyg teulu i berfformio’n wael, ac i ddelio â nhw.
i ystyried ystod eang o ymyriadau posibl. Gallai’r rhain gynnwys addysg adferol neu ychwanegol a/neu hyfforddiant, mentora, mesurau i wella isadeiledd meddygfa (e.e. darparu staff cymorth ychwanegol, hyfforddiant staff neu gyfleusterau gwell), ynghyd â mesurau i ddelio ag unrhyw broblemau iechyd y gallai fod gan y meddyg.
sefydlu proses reoli glir, yn cael ei harwain gan uwch reolwr, ar gyfer ymateb i bryderon am danberfformio posibl ac ar gyfer cydlynu’r ymateb i’r pryderon hynny, ynghyd ag unrhyw ymyriad angenrheidiol neu weithredu arall.
Gyda chymorth ScHARR, datblygwyd gweithdrefnau peilot ar gyfer nodi a rheoli perfformiad gwael ymysg meddygon teulu, ac fe’u profwyd mewn chwe safle yng Ngogledd Orllewin Lloegr. Sefydlwyd un o’r gweithdrefnau peilot hyn gan HA Manceinion ar y pryd. Sefydlwyd ‘panel perfformiad’, yn cynnwys cynrychiolwyr o’r HA, yr LMC, cynghorau iechyd y gymuned leol a’r adran addysg ôl-raddedig leol. Roedd y panel yn ystyried achosion lle’r oedd yr HA wedi derbyn pryderon yn cael eu mynegi am feddyg teulu o dair ffynhonnell o leiaf. Roedd y panel yn diffinio ‘pryder’ fel datganiad yn cael ei wneud gan neu ar ran claf, neu gan weithiwr proffesiynol, a oedd yn awgrymu y gallai perfformiad meddyg ddisgyn islaw safonau derbyniol. Gallai pryderon ddod hefyd o du staff HA o ganlyniad i wybodaeth a oedd ganddynt. Byddai’r panel wedyn yn ystyried y pryderon ochr yn ochr â gwybodaeth gefndir am y meddyg yn cael ei chadw gan yr HA. Byddai’n penderfynu a oedd y dystiolaeth yn bodloni’i feini prawf ar gyfer perfformiad gwael. Os oedd y meini prawf yn cael eu bodloni, byddai dau aelod o’r panel yn ymweld â’r meddyg teulu trwy drefniant ymlaen llaw i drafod y pryderon. Byddai’r tîm ymweld yn adrodd yn ôl i’r panel wedyn, a byddai penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud ynghylch pa gamau gweithredu, os o gwbl, oedd angen eu cymryd.
Byddai camau gweithredu, pe’u cymerwyd, yn golygu paratoi ‘contract’ fel arfer, yn cynnwys cynllun datblygu meddygfa ac amserlen ar gyfer gweithredu. Byddai’r HA yn trefnu ac yn ariannu i fentor a oedd yn feddyg teulu wedi’i hyfforddi i roi cymorth i’r meddyg pe bai’n dymuno’i gael. Gallai’r HA ddarparu cefnogaeth a chymorth gweinyddol hefyd pe bai angen. Os byddai diffyg difrifol yn cael ei nodi, os oedd y meddyg yn methu cydweithredu neu os nad oedd unrhyw welliant, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei gyfeirio at y GMC.
O 1998, yn sgil y prosiectau peilot, dechreuodd HAau sefydlu trefniadau tebyg. Aethant i’r afal â’u tasgau mewn ffyrdd gwahanol. Er enghraifft, ymatebodd rhai HAau (fel panel Manceinion) i bryderon a fynegwyd iddynt gan drydydd parti. Roedd eraill yn ceisio nodi meddygon a allai fod yn perfformio’n wael o’r data a oedd ar gael iddynt fel arfer. Heb fod yn syndod, cafodd HAau broblemau wrth archwilio ac asesu pryderon ynghylch perfformiad gwael ac wrth ddyfeisio a gweithredu mesurau adferol ar ôl nodi perfformiad gwael. Roedd hwn yn dir newydd i’r PCOau, ac roedd ansicrwydd ynghylch y modd i weithredu’r gweithdrefnau newydd.
Yr Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol
Rhoddwyd sylw i’r problemau hyn mewn Papur Ymgynghorol, ‘Cefnogi meddygon, diogelu cleifion’, a gyhoeddwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd ym 1999. Roedd y papur yn cynnig sefydlu nifer o ganolfannau asesu a chefnogi, yn cael eu rhedeg ar y cyd gan y GIG a’r proffesiwn. Byddai’r canolfannau’n darparu cyngor i gyrff y GIG ar ddelio â phryderon am feddygon (yn feddygon ysbyty a meddygon teulu), yn cynnal asesiadau gyda golwg ar nodi natur a difrifoldeb unrhyw broblem, a byddent yn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer gweithredu. Gwaith y cyflogwr lleol wedyn (neu’r HA, yn achos meddyg teulu) oedd gweithredu’r argymhellion a darparu unrhyw gefnogaeth a chymryd unrhyw gamau adferol yr oedd eu hangen. Gobeithiwyd y byddai datblygu’r canolfannau asesu a chefnogi yn galluogi datblygu arbenigedd arbenigol ac yn disodli’r angen i gyrff unigol y GIG gynnal eu hasesiadau eu hunain o berfformiad. Yn y gorffennol, roedd yr asesiadau hyn (yn cael eu cyflawni gan ymddiriedolaethau’r GIG yn bennaf) yn amrywiol iawn o ran ansawdd.
Sefydlwyd yr Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA) ym mis Ebrill 2001. Roedd ei ffurf yn wahanol mewn rhai agweddau i’r model a ddisgrifiwyd yn ‘Cefnogi meddygon, diogelu cleifion’. Yn benodol, gollyngwyd y cynnig i sefydlu canolfannau lleol (a gafodd eu gwrthwynebu gan y proffesiwn ar y sail y byddent yn debyg i ‘wersylloedd disgyblu’). Yn lle hynny, roedd canolfan weinyddol i’w chreu yn Llundain (mae un yng Nghymru erbyn hyn hefyd), gyda phersonél ledled y wlad. Awdurdod iechyd arbennig yw’r NCAA ar hyn o bryd, yn cwmpasu Cymru a Lloegr, ond nid yr Alban nac (ar hyn o bryd o leiaf) Gogledd Iwerddon. Mae bellach yn delio ag arfer deintyddol, yn ogystal â meddygol, yn y GIG ac yn y gwasanaethau meddygol mewn carchardai a’r sector amddiffyn. Nid yw’n cwmpasu’r sector preifat. Dan drefniadau newydd, a gyhoeddwyd gan y Llywodraeth yn haf 2004, mae’r NCAA i’w gogynnwys yn yr Asiantaeth Diogelwch Cleifion Cenedlaethol, a bydd yn adran ar wahân ohono.
Er nad oedd ffurf yr NCAA yn unol â’r cynllun, roedd ei ddiben yn debyg i hynny a ragwelwyd yn wreiddiol. Roedd i ddarparu gwasanaeth asesu a chefnogi perfformiad i gynorthwyo cyflogwyr y GIG a HAau wrth ddatrys problemau perfformiad gwael. Mae’n cael cyfeiriadau o amrywiaeth o ffynonellau, ymddiriedolaethau GIG a PCTau yn bennaf. Ar ddiwedd mis Medi 2004, roedd yr NCAA wedi derbyn 1438 o gyfeiriadau. Er 2001, mae llawer o PCOau wedi gofyn am gyngor gan yr NCAA. Darperir y cyngor hwnnw gan dîm o gynghorwyr. Mae’r cynghorwyr yn uwch glinigwyr neu reolwyr, wedi’u lleol ledled y wlad, bob un ohonynt yn cwmpasu ardaloedd SHA penodol. Cysylltant yn uniongyrchol â’r PCO, gan gynghori ar reoli achosion unigol. Os na ellir datrys pryderon yn lleol, gall yr NCAA gytuno i ymgymryd ag asesiad o berfformiad y meddyg. Yr NCAA sydd i benderfynu cynnal asesiad felly neu beidio. Ni all PCO orfodi’r NCAA i ymyrryd. O fis Rhagfyr 2001, newidiwyd telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu i bennu dyletswydd ar feddyg i gydweithredu ag asesiad gan yr NCAA pan ofynnwyd iddo wneud hynny gan ei PCO (y PCT erbyn hyn). Dan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Contractau Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 2004 (Rheoliadau 2004), mae’n ddyletswydd ar feddygfa sy’n ymrwymo i Gontract GMS i sicrhau bod meddyg sy’n gweithio yn y feddygfa yn cydweithredu ag asesiad gan yr NCAA pan ofynnir iddo/iddi wneud hynny gan y PCT.
Mae asesiad yr NCAA yn ffurfiannol (h.y. yn addysgol), nid yn grynodol (h.y. ‘llwyddo neu fethu’). Pwrpas asesiadau yw canfod a yw’r meddyg yn ‘addas i’r pwrpas’, h.y. yn addas i weithio yn y lleoliad lle mae’n gweithio ar hyn o bryd. Os nad yw meddyg yn ‘addas i’r pwrpas’, gall serch hynny fod yn gymwys i weithio mewn lleoliad gwahanol. Efallai mai’r broblem yw, er enghraifft, nad yw’n gweddu i’r tîm lle mae’n gweithio. Pwysleisiodd yr Athro Alastair Scotland, Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr NCAA, bod ‘addasrwydd i’r pwrpas’ yn gysyniad gwahanol iawn i ‘addasrwydd i ymarfer’, h.y. addasrwydd i ymarfer fel meddyg mewn unrhyw leoliad. Addasrwydd i ymarfer yw testun asesiadau perfformiad yn cael eu cynnal gan y GMC, nid addasrwydd i ymarfer mewn lleoliad penodol. Caiff asesiadau NCAA eu cynnal gan aseswyr meddygol a lleyg wedi’u hyfforddi. Darparwyd adroddiad i’r Ymchwiliad am asesiad enghreifftiol at ddibenion gwybodaeth. Elfen gyntaf pob asesiad yw asesiad iechyd galwedigaethol. Ei ddiben yw sicrhau bod y meddyg yn addas i fynd drwy weddill yr asesiad. Mae hefyd yn rhoi sylw i’r cwestiwn a oes unrhyw nodweddion ar iechyd y meddyg a allai gael effaith ar ei allu/gallu i ymarfer yn effeithiol yn ei leoliad/lleoliad presennol, neu a allai gael effaith ar ei les/lles cyffredinol. Yr ail elfen yw asesiad seicoleg galwedigaethol, a’i ddiben yw archwilio ymddygiad y mae’r meddyg yn ei ffafrio yn y gwaith. Dywedodd yr Athro Scotland bod hwn yn ymarferiad arbennig o werthfawr. Ei brofiad ef yw, pan fydd meddyg yn perfformio’n wael, bod elfen ymddygiadol yn chwarae rhan yn ddieithriad. Mae’r asesiad ar gyfer meddygon teulu’n cynnwys asesiad o wybodaeth sylfaenol, gan ddefnyddio prawf a ddatblygwyd gan Goleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu (RCGP). Mae ymweliad undydd â’r feddygfa hefyd, sy’n cynnwys archwiliad o sampl o gofnodion meddygol ac arsylwi’r meddyg wrthi’n ymgynghori.
Caiff adroddiad llawn o’r asesiad, gydag argymhellion, ei anfon at y meddyg a’r PCT a gyfeiriodd. Bydd yr NCAA wedyn yn gweithio gyda’r ddau i gynorthwyo wrth ddatblygu cynllun gweithredu ymarferol i ddelio â chanfyddiadau’r aseswyr. Ni all yr NCAA orfodi cydymffurfio â’i argymhellion ond, os yw PCT yn esgeuluso’u gweithredu, gall yr NCAA godi’r mater gyda’r SHA perthnasol neu’r Adran Iechyd. Gall hefyd gyfeirio meddyg at y GMC os yr ymddengys bod ei berfformiad/pherfformiad yn peri risg i gleifion. Weithiau, mae’r NCAA wedi teimlo ei bod yn angenrheidiol i atal asesiad er mwyn gwneud cyfeiriad brys at y GMC.
Mae’r PCT yn cadw cyfrifoldeb am ddatrys y broblem ac am roi unrhyw fesurau adferol neu gefnogol angenrheidiol ar waith. Gwneir hyn fel arfer ar y cyd â’r deoniaid ôl-raddedig sy’n gyfrifol am ddarparu addysg feddygol ôl-raddedig yn eu hardaloedd. Gall cyllid ar gyfer mesurau felly fod yn broblem, yn enwedig o gofio maint bach PCTau. Dywedodd yr Athro Scotland wrth yr Ymchwiliad am gamau a oedd yn cael eu cymryd mewn ymgais i gael nawdd o ffynonellau eraill i gynorthwyo’r PCTau wrth gyflawni’r cyfrifoldeb hwn.
Gweithdrefnau Lleol Cyfredol
Ers i PCTau ddisodli’r HAau, mae cyfrifoldeb am weithdrefnau perfformiad lleol wedi syrthio arnynt. Mae’n arferol bellach i PCTau fabwysiadu proses dau gam. Mae’r cam cyntaf yn cael ei gynnal fel arfer gan bwyllgor neu grŵp o bersonau, gan gynnwys swyddogion, rheolwyr ac aelodau bwrdd y PCT, ac o leiaf un cynrychiolydd o’r LMC. Efallai y caiff pobl eraill gydag arbenigedd priodol (e.e. cynghorwr fferyllol) eu cyd-ethol fel y bydd angen. Yn PCT Tameside a Glossop, gelwir y corff perthnasol yn Grŵp Monitro Contractwyr. Swyddogaeth y Grŵp fu trafod ac ystyried adroddiadau panelau adolygu annibynnol (a ddiddymwyd ym mis Gorffennaf 2004), ynghyd â chwynion a phryderon am feddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu, ac i ystyried y rhain yn erbyn cefndir o wybodaeth ‘galed’ sydd ar gael i’r PCT. Mae Dr Jeffery Moysey, un o gyn gydweithwyr Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook, ac is-gadeirydd yr LMC sy’n gwasanaethu Tameside, yn aelod o’r Grŵp Monitro Contractwyr. Disgrifiodd y modd y byddai’r Grŵp yn trafod ‘pryderon sythweledol braidd, a phryderon goddrychol yn aml’ am berfformiad ymarferwyr. Teimlai fod hyn yn bwysig gan y byddai’r wybodaeth hon, yn y dyfodol, o bosibl yn ffitio ynghyd ac yn ‘ffurfio jig-so’ a fyddai’n deffro’r Grŵp i ymddygiad anarferol gan feddyg teulu. Ar ôl ystyried yr holl wybodaeth berthnasol, bydd y Grŵp wedyn yn llunio cynlluniau gweithredu lleol i gefnogi’r meddyg teulu, a’i gynorthwyo/chynorthwyo wrth gyflawni safon perfformiad uwch. Os yw’r ymdrechion hyn yn aflwyddiannus, neu os oes hanes o berfformiad gwael nas deilwyd ag ef, bydd y meddyg yn cael ei gyfeirio at banel perfformiad. Mae gan PCT Tameside a Glossop weithdrefn ‘carlam’ i’w defnyddio pan fydd materion pryder uniongyrchol a brys.
Bydd gan PCT ei banel perfformiad ei hun, neu bydd yn rhannu panel gydag un PCT neu fwy. Mae gan PCT Tameside a Glossop banel sy’n cynnwys ei Brif Weithredwr, ei Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol a’i Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol, tri chynrychiolydd o’r LMC ac aelod bwrdd lleyg. Mae Cadeirydd y PEC yn cadeirio’r panel perfformiad hefyd. Mae’r panel yn cynnal ymweliad rhagarweiniol â meddyg y codwyd pryderon yn ei gylch. Yn dilyn yr ymweliad hwnnw, bydd y panel yn penderfynu a oes angen gwneud asesiad. Os oes asesiad yn cael ei gynnal, bydd yn arwain at adroddiad ac argymhellion. Bydd y panel wedyn yn gofyn i’r meddyg gydweithredu wrth gydymffurfio â’r argymhellion. Os nad yw’n barod i gydweithredu, neu os nad yw’r camau gweithredu adferol a argymhellwyd yn cael unrhyw effaith, bydd y meddyg yn cael ei gyfeirio at yr NCAA neu’r GMC.
Problemau â’r System Bresennol
Mae pryderon wedi’u mynegi (er enghraifft, gan yr Athro Roland a’i gydweithwyr yn eu hadroddiad i’r Ymchwiliad) mai prin iawn yn unig y bydd panelau sy’n gwasanaethu un PCT yn unig yn gweld achosion perfformiad o bosibl, ac efallai, felly, na fyddant yn gallu casglu arbenigedd digonol i ddelio ag achosion felly. Mae problem diffyg annibyniaeth hefyd a gwrthdaro posibl rhwng buddiannau. Mae’r Athro Roland yn eirioli y dylai panelau perfformiad gwmpasu ardal ehangach nag ardal un PCT, neu y dylai fod trawsweithio rhwng PCTau. Mae lle hefyd i anghysonder rhwng panelau mewn ardaloedd gwahanol o’r wlad. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Michael Newton, Pennaeth Rheoli Perfformiad, SHA De Swydd Efrog, a chynghorydd NCAA, bod ansawdd aseswyr lleol ac asesiadau’n amrywiol. Nid oes safonau cyffredin y caiff asesiadau lleol eu cynnal yn eu herbyn. Mae o’r farn bod grwpiau bach yn hytrach na phanelau perfformiad mawr yn delio â materion perfformiad yn well ac yn gyflymach. Roedd o blaid sefydlu timau o aseswyr wedi’u hyfforddi’n briodol a fyddai’n cynnal asesiadau ar ran nifer o PCTau. Byddent yn cynnal asesiadau yn unol â phrotocol cyffredin er mwyn sicrhau cysondeb. Mae Mr Newton wedi bod yn gysylltiedig â sefydlu gwasanaeth asesu lleol sydd ar gael i PCTau yn Ne Swydd Efrog. Lluniwyd protocol ac mae’r cynllun newydd wedi’i fabwysiadu mewn ardaloedd eraill. Pwysleisiodd Mr Newton y dylai tîm asesu ddarparu gwasanaeth technegol, proffesiynol, sy’n nodi pryderon ac yn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer camau gweithredu adferol. Y PCT sydd i benderfynu wedyn pa gamau gweithredu ddylai ddilyn. At hynny, dywedodd ei bod yn hanfodol i PCT fodloni’i hun ynghylch y dystiolaeth am berfformiad gwael. Efallai y byddai rhaid iddo, rywbryd yn y dyfodol, wneud penderfyniad i ddileu meddyg neu ddileu meddyg yn amodol o’i restr ar sail y dystiolaeth honno. Mae’n hanfodol, felly, bod hyder ganddo yn y dystiolaeth y mae i ddibynnu arni.
Mae’r NCAA wedi gwneud gwaith gyda’r bwriad o ddatblygu dull ar gyfer asesu meddyg yn lleol y mynegwyd pryder yn ei gylch. Wrth wneud hynny, mae’r NCAA wedi ymateb i geisiadau gan PCTau am arweiniad ar y modd i fynd ati i gynnal asesiadau eu hunain neu ar y cyd â PCTau eraill. Mae amheuon gan yr NCAA ynghylch a yw’n ymarferol i’r PCTau gynnal asesiadau felly. Gwna sylw o’r ffaith fod y broses casglu tystiolaeth yn un gymhleth a llafurus. Mae’n rhaid i aseswyr fod o galibr uchel, wedi’u dewis yn ofalus a’u hyfforddi’n dda. Rhaid bod system o sicrhau ansawdd. Os nad yw asesiad yn cael ei gynnal i safon uchel, efallai na fydd yn cyflawni’i amcan a gall fod yn agored i’w herio. Cred yr NCAA bod y broses sefydlu a rheoli asesiadau lleol
‘yn creu heriau ofnadwy ac anorchfygol efallai i PCT unigol, neu grwpiau bach o PCTau, sydd prin iawn yn ymgymryd ag asesiadau’
. Mae’n cynghori y dylai unrhyw PCT sy’n ystyried cynnal asesiad lleol ofyn am gyngor gan yr NCAA cyn bwrw ymlaen. Gall fod bod asesiad yn amhriodol a bod ymchwiliad lleol, neu gyfeiriad at y GMC, yn angenrheidiol.
Dewis arall i asesiad lleol yw asesiad gan yr NCAA. Mewn gwirionedd, mae’r NCAA wedi cynnal nifer gymharol fach o asesiadau yn ystod cyfnod ei fodolaeth. Yn y tair blynedd a hanner rhwng mis Ebrill 2001 a mis Medi 2004, cynhaliodd yr NCAA 87 o asesiadau llawn. O’r rheiny, roedd 36 yn asesiadau o feddygon teulu. Roedd llawer o weithgarwch yr NCAA yn ystod y cyfnod hwn yn canolbwyntio ar broblemau â meddygon ysbyty, yn enwedig y rheiny a oedd yn destun ataliad. Deliwyd â’r rhan fwyaf o geisiadau am gymorth gan PCTau trwy roi cyngor, trwy gefnogi PCTau wrth ddefnyddio’u gweithdrefnau lleol, a thrwy roi cymorth iddo wrth ddatrys anghydfodau. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth bod yr NCAA yn ffynhonnell cyngor a chymorth werthfawr i PCTau. Un o’i gryfderau go iawn yw ei annibyniaeth o PCTau a chyrff eraill y GIG, yn ogystal ag o’r meddyg y codwyd pryderon yn ei gylch. Cryfder arall yw brwdfrydedd ac ymrwymiad ei Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol, yr Athro Scotland.
Mae rhai wedi cael eu siomi am nad yw’r NCAA wedi cynnal mwy o asesiadau. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd yr Athro Scotland nad oedd y ffaith mai nifer cymharol fach o asesiadau a oedd wedi’u cynnal yn gysylltiedig â diffyg amser neu adnoddau. Dywedodd fod yr NCAA wedi cynnal asesiadau ym mhob un o’r achosion hynny lle’r oedd yn ystyried y byddai asesiad yn ddefnyddiol ac yn briodol. Ym mwyafrif helaeth o achosion, bu modd delio â’r broblem heb yr angen am asesiad llawn.
Mae’n bosibl yn ddamcaniaethol i feddyg teulu sy’n cael ei gyfeirio yn y pen draw at y GMC fynd drwy dri asesiad ar wahân - un yn cael ei gynnal yn lleol, un gan yr NCAA a thrydydd asesiad gan y GMC. Efallai nad yw hyn yn digwydd yn aml, ond yn sicr nid yw’n anghyffredin i feddyg gael ei asesu ddwywaith. Mae hyn yn wastraff ar adnoddau, yn ogystal â bod yn waith rhy ymdrechgar a dirdynnol i’r meddyg. At hynny, gall arwain at oedi sylweddol iawn, a’r meddyg yn cael parhau i ymarfer yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, gyda risg i ddiogelwch cleifion o ganlyniad. Tynnwyd sylw at y broblem hon gan yr Athro Dame Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain. Pwysleisiodd yr angen i gasglu tystiolaeth yn lleol yn systematig. Dywedodd y dylai asesiadau lleol gael eu cynnal gyda chymorth deoniaethau, ac y dylid penderfynu a oedd camau gweithredu adferol i weld yn bosibl. Teimlai na allai’r NCAA gynorthwyo gyda’r prosesau lleol hyn, ac y gallai bennu safonau cenedlaethol ar gyfer y modd yr oedd tystiolaeth yn cael ei chasglu. Os oeddent o’r farn bod camau gweithredu adferol yn debygol o fod yn aflwyddiannus, gallai’r GMC neu ryw gorff arall gyda’r profiad angenrheidiol gynnal asesiad llawn.
Byddaf yn delio â’r potensial i ddyblygu rhwng asesiadau gan yr NCAA a’r GMC nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn. O ran dyblygu gyda gweithdrefnau lleol, ymddengys bod symudiad tuag at gefnogi a gwella gweithdrefnau perfformiad lleol er mwyn galluogi PCTau i ddatrys eu problemau eu hunain, gyda chyngor - ond nid ymyriad o reidrwydd - gan yr NCAA. Rhaid aros i weld pa un a fydd y symudiad hwnnw’n esgor ar asesiadau sydd o safon ddigon uchel a chyson.
Mae problemau penodol yn codi gyda meddygon locwm. Gallant weithredu yn ardal mwy nag un PCT. Efallai na fyddant yn gweithio mewn un lle yn ddigon hir i nodi a gweithredu ar batrwm o ymarfer is na’r safon. Efallai na fydd canlyniadau ymarfer is na’r safon yn cael eu canfod nes wedi iddynt ymadael. Os oes problemau gyda locwm, efallai na fydd meddygfa mor barod i’w gyflogi/chyflogi eto. Ar ôl gwneud y penderfyniad hwnnw, efallai bydd aelodau’r feddygfa yn tueddu peidio dod â pherfformiad y locwm i sylw’r PCT. Hyd yn oed os ydynt, efallai y bydd y PCT yn amharod i ymgymryd â’r dasg anodd o ymchwilio i berfformiad gwael y meddyg. Efallai mai ychydig o dystiolaeth sydd ganddo i wneud hynny, yn enwedig os yw’r locwm wedi symud ymlaen i ardal arall. Os ymchwilir i’r mater a bod angen am gamau gweithredu adferol yn cael ei nodi, gall fod yn anodd i’r PCT drefnu’r camau gweithredu angenrheidiol. Gall problemau cyllid godi hefyd.

---  ---
Mae’r pwyslais diweddar ar ansawdd gofal wedi arwain at gynnydd cyfatebol diddordeb mewn ffyrdd o sicrhau a chynnal safonau da o ymarfer meddygol. Arweiniodd hyn at nifer o fentrau wedi’u hanelu at sicrhau ansawdd gwasanaethau yn cael eu darparu gan feddygon unigol a meddygfeydd teulu.
Mecanweithiau Unigol
Asesiad Crynodol
Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd meddygon teulu’n cael unrhyw hyfforddiant penodol i’w cymhwyso ar gyfer eu gwaith mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Roedd cymhwyso i’w cynnwys ar y gofrestr feddygol yn cael ei ystyried yn baratoad digonol ar gyfer eu rôl yn y dyfodol. Dros amser, dechreuodd rhai unigolion ymgymryd â hyfforddiant galwedigaethol gwirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, ni ddaeth hyfforddiant galwedigaethol, yn cynnwys o leiaf blwyddyn yn cael ei threulio fel hyfforddai meddyg teulu mewn meddygfa hyfforddi gymeradwy, ynghyd â hyd at ddwy flynedd mewn swyddi wedi’u cymeradwyo’n addysgol o fewn nifer o arbenigeddau a ddiffiniwyd, yn orfodol nes 1981.
Hyd yn oed ar ôl 1981, nid oedd asesiad ffurfiol ar ddiwedd hyfforddiant galwedigaethol lle gellid profi cymhwysedd yr hyfforddai a gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch a oedd yn addas i ymarfer mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Tystysgrif cwblhau hyfforddiant yn foddhaol oedd yr unig ofyniad. Rhwng 1989 a 1992, dim ond 0.26% o hyfforddeion a fethodd cael tystysgrifau felly. Roedd mynediad i feddygaeth deuluol wedi’i warantu fwy neu lai, felly, wrth gwblhau hyfforddiant galwedigaethol. Dewisodd rhai meddygon i sefyll arholiad Aelodaeth yr RCGP cyn pen cyfnod byr o gychwyn ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd rhwymedigaeth i wneud hynny.
At ddibenion hyfforddi, mae’r DU wedi’i rhannu ar sail ranbarthol yn 22 o ddeoniaethau. Mae’r deoniaethau’n gyfrifol am gomisiynu addysg feddygol ôl-raddedig. Fe’u seilir o amgylch bob ysgol feddygol yn y DU. Mae’r cyfrifoldeb am ddarparu a threfnu hyfforddiant o fewn pob deoniaeth yn gorwedd gyda chyfarwyddwr addysg meddygaeth deuluol ôl-raddedig. Mae trefnu hyfforddiant yn cynnwys achredu arferion hyfforddi, a chynhelir asesiadau manwl ohonynt bob tair blynedd, ac mae ansawdd yr hyfforddiant a ddarperir yn cael ei fonitro’n barhaus. Yn Lloegr, mae gan ychydig dan 25% o feddygfeydd teulu o leiaf un hyfforddwr cymeradwy. Mae bron i 4000 o feddygon teulu yn hyfforddwyr cymeradwy. Mae’r cyfrifoldeb am oruchwylio hyfforddiant meddygon teulu yn gorwedd ar hyn o bryd gyda’r Cyd Bwyllgor ar Hyfforddiant Ôl-raddedig ar gyfer Meddygaeth Deuluol, sy’n cynnal ymweliadau monitro bob tair blynedd â’r deoniaethau. Mae’r ymweliadau hyn yn cynnwys asesiadau manwl o arferion hyfforddi (a gynhelir ar y cyd â’r RCGP) er mwyn sicrhau bod safonau achredu’n cael eu cynnal. Yn y dyfodol (mis Medi 2005 yw’r disgwyl ar hyn o bryd), bydd y cyfrifoldeb am oruchwylio hyfforddiant meddygon teulu’n cael ei drosglwyddo i’r Bwrdd Addysg a Hyfforddiant Meddygol Ôl-raddedig (PMETB), sydd hefyd yn gyfrifol am hyfforddi meddygon ysbyty.
Ym 1996, cyflwynwyd asesiadau crynodol ar gyfer pob hyfforddai (a elwid yn gofrestryddion meddygon teulu) ledled y DU. Daeth hyn yn orfodol ar 30 Ionawr 1998 ar gyfer pob meddyg teulu’n ymarfer yn y GIG. Nid oes gofyniad y dylai meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer yn y sector preifat fod wedi cael hyfforddiant galwedigaethol neu asesiad crynodol. Yr elfennau y caiff ymgeiswyr ar gyfer asesiad crynodol eu barnu arnynt yw:
asesiad o wybodaeth a datrys problemau
asesiad o sgiliau ymgynghori, yn cael eu barnu â thâp fideo neu lawfeddygaeth ffug
cyflwyniad ysgrifenedig o waith ymarferol, archwiliad fel arfer
adroddiad hyfforddwr.
Mae’r profion gwybodaeth a datrys problemau’n cael eu gweinyddu a’u marcio’n genedlaethol. Llunnir adroddiad yr hyfforddwr o fewn y feddygfa hyfforddi. Caiff dwy elfen arall yr asesiad eu barnu gan aseswyr hyfforddedig a’u graddnodi gan y deoniaethau. Mae’r Swyddfa Asesiadau Crynodol Genedlaethol yn rheoli ansawdd canlyniadau asesiadau. Datgelodd adolygiad diweddar o asesiadau crynodol a gynhaliwyd rhwng 1996 a 2001 anghyfartaledd yn y cyfraddau methu rhwng deoniaethau, gyda chyfraddau’n amrywio rhwng 1.1% a 10.1%. Cynlluniwyd y system asesiadau crynodol i roi’r diogelwch i gleifion o wybod y byddai pob meddyg teulu a oedd yn cwblhau hyfforddiant galwedigaethol wedi cael asesiad o’u cymhwysedd i safon genedlaethol. Mae’r anghyfartaledd a ddangosir yn yr adolygiad yn peri pryder gan ei fod yn awgrymu bod safonau’n gwahaniaethu’n sylweddol o ardal i ardal. Cyfrifodd awduron yr adolygiad (cynrychiolwyr o’r ddwy ddeoniaeth a’r Swyddfa Asesiadau Crynodol Genedlaethol), pe bai’r gyfradd fethu yn y deoniaethau â’r cyfraddau methu isaf wedi bod yn unol â’r cyfartaledd, byddai 40 arall o gofrestryddion meddyg teulu wedi methu. Roedd hynny’n awgrymu y gallai fod 40 o feddygon teulu o’r cyfnod hwnnw’n ymarfer ar hyn o bryd na ddylent fod wedi’u hasesu fel meddygon cymwys. Awgrymodd yr awduron bod angen gweithredu i wneud safonau’n fwy cyson.
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, mynegwyd y farn gan y Fonesig Lesley Southgate, sy’n aelod o’r PMETB a chadeirydd ei Bwyllgor Asesu Statudol, bod asesu crynodol ar ei ffurf bresennol yn debygol iawn o gael ei ddiddymu yn y dyfodol ac y byddai mynediad i gofrestr newydd arbenigol meddygon teulu yn cael ei reoli gan asesiad tebyg i hwnnw a oedd yn gofyn am Aelodaeth o’r RCGP: gweler isod. Roedd yn disgwyl y byddai hyn yn arwain at godi safonau, ond mynegodd y pryder hefyd y gallai’r newid arwain at densiynau rhwng y PMETB a’r Llywodraeth gan y byddai’n olaf yn pryderu ynghylch darparu niferoedd digonol o feddygon teulu i staff y GIG.
Aelodaeth o Goleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu
Mae’r RCGP wedi datblygu nifer o wobrau i nodi rhagoriaeth mewn meddygon unigol. Ymgymerir ag Aelodaeth o’r Coleg drwy arholiad ychydig cyn neu ychydig ar ôl diwedd hyfforddiant galwedigaethol meddyg teulu. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio bod rhaid i gofrestrydd meddyg teulu gael asesiad crynodol ohono ar ddiwedd ei hyfforddiant galwedigaethol. Dywedodd Dr William Reith o’r RCGP ei fod yn cael ei dderbyn yn gyffredinol bod y lefel cyrhaeddiad a oedd yn angenrheidiol i lwyddo yn yr asesiad crynodol yn llai na hynny a oedd yn ofynnol i sicrhau Aelodaeth o’r Coleg. Priodolodd hyn yn bennaf i’r ffaith bod arholwyr yr Aelodaeth yn grŵp bychan o unigolion wedi’u hyfforddi’n dda sy’n pennu safonau cyson. Tynnodd sylw at wahaniaethau penodol rhwng y ddwy weithdrefn yn yr asesiad o’r recordiad fideo o sgiliau ymgynghori ymgeisydd, elfen a oedd yn gyffredin i asesiadau crynodol ac arholiad yr Aelodaeth. Mae’r meini prawf a ddefnyddir gan yr RCGP yn wahanol i’r rheiny ar gyfer asesiad crynodol. Hefyd, ar gyfer arholiad yr Aelodaeth, gwneir yr asesiad o’r recordiad fideo gan unigolion wedi’u hyfforddi sy’n arbenigo yn y rhan honno o’r arholiad. Ar gyfer yr asesiad crynodol, gwneir yr asesiad o’r recordiad fideo yn y deoniaethau gan nifer fawr o feddygon sy’n cymhwyso safonau llai cyson.
Mae’n anodd sefydlu cyfradd lwyddo union ar gyfer arholiad yr Aelodaeth oherwydd ei bod yn fodiwlar o ran ffurf a gall ymgeiswyr sefyll modiwlau ar adegau gwahanol. Yn hanesyddol, oddeutu 90% oedd y gyfradd lwyddo, er, yn dilyn cyflwyno’r fformat modiwlar yn ddiweddar yn lle’r ymagwedd flaenorol ‘popeth neu ddim’, byddid yn disgwyl y byddai’r gyfradd lwyddo wedi cynyddu (gan ei bod yn bosibl i ymgeisydd fethu modiwl erbyn hyn ac ail geisio). Hefyd, mae cyflwyno Aelodaeth drwy asesiad perfformiad (gweler paragraff 5.109) yn golygu bod prif feddygon teulu sy’n ymgeisio am Aelodaeth yn debygol o ddewis y llwybr hwnnw, yn hytrach nag Aelodaeth drwy arholiad. Roedd yr ymgeiswyr mwy profiadol hyn yn tueddu bod â chyfraddau llwyddo ychydig yn is yn yr arholiad na’u cydweithwyr iau, fwy na thebyg o ganlyniad i anawsterau â thechneg arholiad. Bydd y ffaith fod llai ohonynt yn sefyll yr arholiad wedi tueddu peri i’r gyfradd lwyddo gynyddu.
Wrth gwrs, wrth gymharu’r cyfraddau llwyddo ar gyfer asesiadau crynodol ac Aelodaeth o’r RCGP, nid ydym yn cymharu dau beth cyffelyb. Mae ymgeiswyr ar gyfer arholiad yr Aelodaeth yn dewis gwneud hynny eu hunain. Efallai ei bod yn annhebygol y byddai’r recriwtiaid gwannach i feddygaeth deuluol yn dewis sefyll yr arholiad. Pe bai pob un a oedd yn cael asesiad crynodol yn sefyll arholiad yr Aelodaeth yn ogystal, yn ddiau byddai’r bwlch rhwng y cyfraddau llwyddo ar gyfer pob un gryn dipyn yn ehangach.
Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y mater yn ymwneud â’r gwahaniaeth rhwng y safon ar gyfer asesiadau crynodol a’r safon ar gyfer arholiad yr aelodaeth wedi bod yn destun dadlau dros y blynyddoedd. Mae diben y ddwy broses yn wahanol. Bwriad asesiad crynodol yw sefydlu bod yr ymgeisydd wedi cyrraedd safon sylfaenol ar gyfer ymarfer. Bwriad arholiad yr Aelodaeth yw sefydlu’r safon ar gyfer perfformiad ansawdd uchel a mynediad i’r RCGP. Mae’n fwy academaidd o ran natur. Un elfen o’r asesiad crynodol yw adroddiad gan hyfforddwyr y cofrestrydd meddyg teulu, yn seiliedig ar ei sylwadau o’r cofrestrydd meddyg teulu neu ymarfer. Nid yw hyn yn nodwedd o arholiad yr Aelodaeth.
Cyflwynwyd Aelodaeth o’r Coleg drwy asesiad o berfformiad ym 1999. Golyga asesiad manwl o allu ac ymarfer clinigol meddyg. Mae’n rhaid iddo/iddi gyflwyno recordiad fideo o ymgynghoriadau a rhywfaint o waith archwilio, ac ymwelir â’r feddygfa, lle’r archwilir y cofnodion meddygol. Erbyn mis Hydref 2004, roedd 79 meddyg teulu wedi cwblhau’r Aelodaeth yn llwyddiannus drwy asesiad o berfformiad, a chofrestrwyd 194 yn swyddogol fel meddygon yn gweithio tuag at y cymhwyster.
Cymrodoriaeth o Goleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu
Cyflwynwyd Cymrodoriaeth o’r RCGP drwy asesiad ryw ddegawd yn gynharach nag Aelodaeth drwy asesiad. Mae hwn yn gymhwyster ymdrechgar anodd iawn, sy’n gofyn am arddangos safonau gofal uchel tu hwnt. Mae’n rhaid i ymgeiswyr fod wedi bod yn Aelodau o’r RCGP am bum mlynedd o leiaf cyn cychwyn ar eu Cymrodoriaeth. Erbyn mis Hydref 2004, roedd 289 o feddygon teulu wedi cwblhau’r Gymrodoriaeth yn llwyddiannus, ac roedd 16 meddyg arall yn y broses o wneud hynny. Gan fod y cymhwyster mor anodd, nid yw wedi denu gymaint o ymgeiswyr ag yr oedd y Coleg yn disgwyl yn y lle cyntaf.
Mecanweithiau Seiliedig ar Feddygfeydd
Achredu Meddygfeydd
Mae achredu meddygfeydd yn broses lle bydd meddygfeydd teulu’n cyflwyno’u hunain ar gyfer asesiad i’w gynnal o agweddau amrywiol ar eu sefydliad gan dîm sy’n ymweld. Yn Lloegr, mae’n broses gwbl wirfoddol. Nid oes unrhyw gysylltiad rhwng achredu meddygfeydd ac arfarnu meddygon teulu.
Dechreuwyd datblygu dulliau achredu meddygfeydd yn y 1990au. Dywedodd Mr Newton wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod HA Sheffield, ym 1998, ynghyd â HA Swydd Gaerlŷr, wedi datblygu system achredu meddygfeydd, sef y Rhaglen Ymrwymo i Ansawdd (CQP). Mae’r cynllun hwn wedi’i barhau gan y PCTau yn ardal SHA De Swydd Efrog, gan weithio ar y cyd â PCTau o Swydd Gaerlŷr a Swydd Lincoln. Ar ôl ymgynghori’n eang, pennwyd nifer o safonau arfer da. Mae’n ofynnol i feddygfeydd teulu fodloni’r safonau hyn er mwyn cael achrediad. Bydd rheolwr PCT yn gweithio gyda meddygfeydd i’w cynorthwyo wrth baratoi ar gyfer eu hasesiadau. Caiff yr asesiad ffurfiol ei gynnal gan dîm o aseswyr wedi’u hyfforddi sy’n archwilio’n systematig bob agwedd ar weithgarwch meddygfa yn erbyn safonau’r rhaglen CQP. Gall y timau gynnwys dau feddyg neu nyrs a rheolwr. Mae cynrychiolydd o’r PCT yn mynd gyda’r tîm ar yr ymweliad asesu, ac mae mynediad ganddo at adroddiad yr asesiad. Mae’r asesiad yn seiliedig ar y feddygfa, ac nid asesu perfformiad meddygon unigol yw’r bwriad. Fodd bynnag, mae’n cynnwys archwiliad o gofnodion meddygol, protocolau a chynlluniau datblygu personol meddygon teulu sy’n gweithio yn y feddygfa. Mae trefniadau dwyochrog rhwng PCTau yn golygu y gall y tîm asesu gael ei dynnu o du allan i ardal y feddygfa sy’n cael ei hasesu. Mae’r achrediad yn para tair blynedd, ac mae asesu pellach yn ofynnol ar ôl hyn er mwyn sicrhau ail-achrediad.
Dywedodd Mr Newton bod meddygfeydd teulu da wedi cael y cynllun yn un defnyddiol iawn. Defnyddiant y safonau fel rhestr wirio i sicrhau bod ganddynt systemau priodol ar waith. Yr hyn sy’n fwy calonogol fyth, fodd bynnag, yw’r ffaith fod llawer o feddygfeydd mewn ardaloedd difreintiedig wedi ymuno â’r cynllun. Mae’r PCTau yn darparu cefnogaeth i feddygfeydd i’w cynorthwyo i fodloni’r safonau ar gyfer achrediad ac wrth wneud unrhyw welliannau angenrheidiol. Gweithredant wefan lle gall meddygfeydd gael
ar gyfer dogfennau angenrheidiol i gydymffurfio â’r safonau (e.e. contractau cyflogaeth staff, cytundebau cyfrinachedd, ac ati) a chymorth arall. Dywedodd Mr Newton bod y CQP yn cynnig cyfle rhagorol i PCTau ddod i adnabod y meddygfeydd yn eu hardaloedd.
Mae’r RCGP wedi dyfeisio rhaglen, a elwir y Rhaglen Datblygu Tîm Ansawdd, sy’n cael ei defnyddio gan rai PCTau ac sy’n debyg mewn rhai agweddai i’r CQP. Dan y rhaglen, mae PCTau yn cynnal archwiliad rhagarweiniol o feddygfeydd teulu i weld a ydynt yn bodloni’r safonau gofynnol. Wedyn maent yn cynorthwyo ac yn cefnogi meddygfeydd i wella yn y meysydd hynny lle maent yn disgyn yn is na’r safon. Nid oes ymweliad asesu olaf a dim ‘llwyddo neu fethu’. Bwriad y rhaglen yw hyrwyddo gwelliant ansawdd parhaus ac, unwaith eto, mae’n gwbl wirfoddol.
Yn ystod yr amser pan oedd y Rhaglen Datblygu Tîm Ansawdd yn cael ei datblygu yn Lloegr, roedd y Bwrdd Safonau Clinigol ar gyfer yr Alban (sydd bellach yn rhan o Wella Ansawdd GIG yr Alban) wedi nodi angen am raglen debyg yn yr Alban, ond gyda’r elfen ychwanegol o asesiad ffurfiol er mwyn sicrhau achrediad. Newidiwyd y Rhaglen Datblygu Tîm Ansawdd i’w defnyddio fel cynllun achredu meddygfeydd, a rhoddodd y Bwrdd Safonau Clinigol sêl ei fendith i’r cynllun fel y dull a oedd orau ganddo ar gyfer sicrhau ansawdd mewn meddygfeydd yn yr Alban. Mae’r cynllun yn cael ei weithredu gan RCGP yr Alban.
Fel y cynllun yn Ne Swydd Efrog, mae cynllun achredu meddygfeydd yr Alban wedi’i osod ar lefel y dylai unrhyw feddygfa deulu resymol allu ei chyflawni. Yn ôl Dr Hugh Whyte, Uwch Swyddog Meddygol, y Gyfarwyddiaeth Polisi Iechyd a Chynllunio, Adran Iechyd Gweithgor yr Alban, mae aseswyr yn chwilio am dystiolaeth,
, o archwiliad clinigol, dadansoddiad o ddigwyddiadau critigol ac effeithiolrwydd clinigol. Caiff aseswyr eu hyfforddi a’u cymeradwyo gan yr RCGP. Gallant fod yn glinigwyr, yn rheolwyr meddygfeydd, yn nyrsys neu’n bobl leyg. Mae’r asesiad yn cynnwys archwiliad ar hap o gofnodion a (yn wahanol i gynllun De Swydd Efrog) chyfweliadau â’r meddygon sy’n gweithio yn y feddygfa. Mae hefyd yn archwilio trefniant y feddygfa. Llunnir adroddiad gan yr aseswyr sy’n cael ei gyflwyno i’r PCO perthnasol. Mae’r adroddiad yn nodi cryfderau a gwendidau ac yn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer newid. Defnyddir yr adroddiadau hyn gan PCOau fel rhan o’u strategaeth rheolaeth glinigol.
Ar hyn o bryd, mae cynllun achredu meddygfeydd yr Alban yn un gwirfoddol. Erbyn mis Hydref 2004, roedd 586 o’r 1052 o feddygfeydd teulu yn yr Alban wedi ennill rhyw ffurf ar achrediad (neu ar fin gwneud hynny), naill ai drwy’r cynllun hwn neu dan y system ar gyfer cymeradwyo meddygfeydd fel rhai addas i hyfforddi cofrestryddion meddygon teulu. Mae’r system olaf yn gofyn am fwy o ymdrech na’r cynllun achredu meddygfeydd. Dylai pob meddygfa sy’n cael ei chymeradwyo at ddibenion hyfforddi allu ennill achrediad yn esmwyth dan y cynllun achredu meddygfeydd. Mae’r ddau gynllun wedi’u cysylltu erbyn hyn, fel bod asesiadau ar gyfer y ddau yn cael eu cynnal ar yr un pryd. Mae’r cynllun achredu meddygfeydd wedi’i gysylltu hefyd â’r system arfarnu yn yr Alban. Cymerir yn awtomatig bod meddygon teulu sy’n gweithio mewn meddygfeydd sydd wedi ennill achrediad wedi cwblhau agweddau penodol ar y broses arfarnu. Roedd ymrwymiad Gweinidogol yn yr Alban y byddai pob meddygfa wedi ennill achrediad erbyn diwedd 2004. Nid yw’n eglur eto a fydd hyn yn cael ei gyflawni (er yn hwyrach nag a ragwelwyd yn wreiddiol), a beth fydd yn digwydd os yw rhai meddygfeydd teulu’n gwrthod ymgymryd â’r broses achredu. Nid oes unrhyw fecanwaith i orfodi meddygfeydd i gydweithredu. Ond nid ymddengys bod unrhyw wrthwynebiad mawr i’r cynnig. Credaf bod rhaid priodoli hynny i benderfyniad a brwdfrydedd arweinwyr y proffesiwn ac ar lefel y Llywodraeth yn yr Alban. Rwy’n sicr bod brwdfrydedd go iawn hefyd o fewn yr RCGP yn Lloegr, ond, hyd yn hyn, nid arweiniodd hyn at yr un ymrwymiad gan y proffesiwn cyfan. Gall fod mai gwahaniaeth maint sydd i gyfrif a’i bod yn llawer anoddach i gymell corff mawr o bobl broffesiynol na chorff cymharol fach. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi y byddai’n werthfawr iawn pe gellid annog pob meddygfa deulu yn Lloegr i fodloni’r un safonau sy’n angenrheidiol i ennill achrediad.
Mae’r RCGP hefyd yn gweithredu Dyfarniad Meddygfeydd Safonol a ddisgrifiwyd i’r Ymchwiliad fel y ‘safon aur’ ar gyfer achrediad. Fe’i lansiwyd ym 1997. Fel yr awgryma’i enw, mae’r Dyfarniad wedi’i gyfeirio at gyflawniadau meddygfeydd teulu, nid meddygon unigol. Mae’n gofyn am safonau uchel ac yn gorffen gydag asesiad ffurfiol i sicrhau bod y safonau hynny wedi’u cyrraedd. Esboniodd Dr Reith bod y Dyfarniad Meddygfeydd Safonol yn rhoi mwy o gyfle i feddygfeydd i fod yn greadigol. Maent yn gallu dewis agweddau penodol ar ofal, neu ddiddordebau arbennig, a darparu tystiolaeth fanylach o arbenigedd yn y meysydd hynny. Erbyn mis Hydref 2004, roedd 118 o feddygfeydd wedi sicrhau’r dyfarniad ac roedd 31 yn gweithio tuag ato.
I ryw raddau, efallai bod telerau’r Contract GMS newydd yn gyfuwch na’r rhaglen achredu meddygfeydd: gweler paragraffau 5.123-5.134. Dan y Contract, bydd meddygfeydd yn ennill ‘pwyntiau’ (a thâl ychwanegol felly) am fodloni rhai safonau ansawdd. Mae rhai o’r safonau hynny’n debyg i’r rheiny y mae’n rhaid eu cyrraedd er mwyn sicrhau achrediad i feddygfa. Mae’n bosibl y bydd yr angen am gynlluniau achredu ar wahân yn lleihau yn y dyfodol. Am nawr, fodd bynnag, mae’r Contract newydd yn amodi y bydd meddygfeydd teulu sy’n cael eu hachredu dan y Dyfarniad Meddygfeydd Safonol yn cael eu hesgusodi rhag darparu tystiolaeth am rai agweddau ar eu gweithgareddau. Y bwriad yw, yn y dyfodol, y gellir cymeradwyo cynlluniau ansawdd trefniadaethol eraill at ddiben tebyg.
Gwerth Marcwyr Ansawdd
Fel y nododd nifer o dystion, mae cyfyngiadau i gynlluniau achredu meddygfeydd. Maent wedi’u hanelu at feddygfeydd, nid unigolion. Maent yn canolbwyntio ar ffactorau trefniadaethol, ar systemau gofal ac agweddau mesuradwy ar ofal. Nid ydynt yn profi sgiliau’r meddyg yn yr ystafell ymgynghori. Serch hynny, mae achredu’n cynnwys rhai elfennau sy’n berthnasol i ymarfer meddygon unigol. Caiff cofnodion eu hadolygu a chaiff staff eu cyfweld. Dan fodel yr Alban, caiff meddygon eu cyfweld yn ogystal. Gall yr holl agweddau hyn yn wir ddatgelu problemau gyda chymhwysedd neu berfformiad meddyg, os oes problemau felly. Mewn meddygfeydd ag un meddyg neu feddygfeydd bach, gall gwendid meddyg unigol fod yn amlwg. Mewn grŵp mawr, gellir ei guddio’n haws. Dengys y dystiolaeth y gall trefniant gwael mewn meddygfa fod yn symptom o berfformiad gwael yn aml, neu achosi perfformiad gwael. Nododd Dr Reith hefyd bod meddygfeydd neu feddygon yn perfformio’n wael o bosibl oherwydd diffyg adnoddau, diffyg staff a’u bod yn gweithredu mewn ardaloedd difreintiedig. Efallai bod angen cymorth a chefnogaeth arnynt i ddarparu gwasanaeth priodol. Fe all asesiad at ddibenion achredu meddygfa ddatgelu’r mathau hyn o broblemau, ac arwain at ddarparu’r cymorth angenrheidiol. Efallai mai’r agwedd fwyaf gwerthfawr ar gynllun achredu, fodd bynnag, yw ei fod yn cynnig cyfle i aseswyr - o’r PCT neu rywle arall - i fynd i mewn i feddygfeydd a gweld yn uniongyrchol sut y cânt eu rhedeg ac a oes unrhyw broblemau amlwg o ran trefniant, cyfleusterau neu berthnasoedd. Mae cryn fuddion i feddygfeydd hefyd. Dywedodd yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, bod hyd yn oed y broses eistedd i lawr fel tîm a thrafod sut y gyflawni’r safon yn ymarferiad defnyddiol. Y broblem yw bod cyfranogaeth mewn achredu meddygfeydd yn gwbl wirfoddol yn Lloegr, ac nid yw wedi cael yr un hwb yn sgil ymrwymiad Gweinidogol ag yn yr Alban. Gall y meddygfeydd hynny nad ydynt yn dewis cymryd rhan osgoi’r archwiliadau manwl sy’n cael eu cynnal ar feddygfeydd sy’n ymgeisio am achrediad.
Mae marcwyr ansawdd unigol o werth gwirioneddol wrth asesu safon ymarfer meddyg. Mae Aelodaeth o’r RCGP drwy arholiad yn dangos cyrraedd safon uwch na hynny sy’n ofynnol gan yr asesiad crynodol gorfodol ar ddiwedd hyfforddiant galwedigaethol meddyg teulu. Mae Aelodaeth drwy asesu perfformiad, y gellir ymgymryd ag ef ar unrhyw bwynt yn ystod gyrfa meddyg teulu, yn gofyn am dystiolaeth o safon uwch o ofal clinigol. Mae Cymrodoriaeth o’r RCGP drwy asesiad yn gofyn am ragoriaeth wirioneddol. Nid oes gofyniad ar feddygon teulu, fodd bynnag, i ymgymryd â’r arholiadau na’r asesiadau hyn, ac mae cyfran go helaeth (ymhell dros draean) o feddygon teulu yn dewis peidio. Nid oes unrhyw wobr ariannol ar gael i’r rheiny sy’n ennill y marcwyr safon hyn.
Diddorol yw nodi, er gwaethaf ei fedrusrwydd proffesiynol a glodforwyd gan lawer, ni wnaeth Shipman ymgeisio am gymhwyster dewisol. Ni chymerodd arholiad yr Aelodaeth. Mewn cyferbyniad, anogodd staff ei feddygfa i gael cymwysterau priodol a mynegodd falchder pan wnaethant hynny. Nid oedd cynllun achredu meddygfeydd ar waith yn ardal Tameside yn ystod y cyfnod y bu Shipman yn ymarfer yno. Hyd yn oed pe bai, ymddengys yn annhebygol iawn y byddai wedi cymryd rhan. Nid wyf yn meddwl y gallai fod wedi cymryd y risg y gallai archwiliad ar hap o’i gofnodion beri i rywun amau ei ofal am ei gleifion. Efallai y byddai ei staff, pe byddent wedi’u cyfweld, wedi sôn am lefel uchel y marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion yn y feddygfa neu am farwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd yn y feddygfa. Er nad bwriad yr achrediad yw canfod ymddygiad anarferol gan feddygon unigol, mae’n bosibl, pe bai achrediad yn orfodol, y byddai’r wybodaeth syml y byddai eu meddygfa yn destun archwiliad manwl yn gweithredu i rai fel modd i atal rhag ymddygiad felly ac i eraill fel cymhelliad i wella.

---  ---
Rhoddwyd Contract GMS 2004 ar waith ar 1 Ebrill 2004. O’r dyddiad hwnnw, roedd dyletswydd newydd ar PCTau i sicrhau darpariaeth gwasanaethau meddygol sylfaenol. Gellir comisiynu’r gwasanaethau hyn trwy bedwar llwybr: gan GMC, gan PMS, gan ddarparwyr eraill (e.e. y sector gwirfoddol, darparwyr masnachol, ymddiriedolaethau GIG neu PCTau eraill) neu gan ddarpariaeth uniongyrchol gan y PCT ei hun.
Mae contract i ddarparu GMS yn cael ei wneud rhwng PCT a meddygfa sydd ag o leiaf un meddyg teulu sy’n ddarparwr gwasanaethau. Nid yw contract rhwng PCT a meddyg teulu unigol mwyach. Gall y feddygfa sy’n contractio fod yn feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun, yn bartneriaeth neu fath arbennig o gwmni cyfyngedig. Mae cleifion yn cofrestru gyda meddygfa nawr, yn hytrach nag â meddyg teulu unigol. Ar adeg cofrestru, gofynnir iddynt enwi ymarferydd y mae’n well ganddynt o fewn y feddygfa.
Mae meddygfeydd contractio dan rwymedigaeth i ddarparu ‘gwasanaethau hanfodol’ yn ystod ‘oriau craidd’. Gallant eithrio rhag darparu ‘gwasanaethau ychwanegol’ (h.y. sgrinio serfigol, gwasanaethau atal cenhedlu, brechu ac imiwneiddio oedolion a phlant, goruchwylio iechyd plant, gwasanaethau meddygol mamolaeth a mân llawfeddygaeth). O 1 Ionawr 2005, gall meddygfeydd eithrio hefyd rhag darparu gwasanaethau allan o oriau. Lle mae meddygfa yn dewis peidio darparu gwasanaethau ychwanegol penodol, neu wasanaethau allan o oriau, cyfrifoldeb y PCT yw comisiynu eraill i ddarparu’r gwasanaethau hynny.
Bwriad y Contract newydd yw annog meddygfeydd i ddatblygu ffyrdd gwahanol o weithio, gan ddefnyddio mwy o gymysgedd o sgiliau proffesiynol. Er enghraifft, gall meddygfa benderfynu cyflogi mwy o nyrsys i gyflawni rhai o’r swyddogaethau a arferai gael eu cyflawni gan feddygon. Gall meddygfeydd hefyd wneud mwy o ddefnydd o feddygon teulu’n cael eu cyflogi (yn rhan-amser o bosibl). Yn ddiau, gobeithir y bydd hyn yn lleihau problem niferoedd annigonol o feddygon teulu i ryw raddau. Bwriad y cyfle i eithrio rhag darparu gwasanaethau allan o oriau yw gwneud swydd meddyg teulu’n fwy deniadol, a bod hynny’n helpu recriwtio a chadw meddygon teulu.
O 1 Ebrill 2004, peidiodd telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu, a’r mecanweithiau disgyblu a oedd yn cael eu rhoi ar waith (yn anaml iawn) pe digwyddai meddyg dorri’r telerau gwasanaeth hynny, â bod mewn grym. Mae trefniadau’r Contract newydd yn cael eu rheoli gan Reoliadau 2004. Roedd yr Atodlenni i’r Rheoliadau yn pennu’r rhwymedigaethau ar feddygfeydd sy’n ymrwymo i’r Contract. Dan Atodlen 6, mae meddygfa felly dan rwymedigaeth,
i gael system effeithiol o reolaeth glinigol ar waith
i gyflawni’i rhwymedigaethau dan y Contract â‘sgil a gofal rhesymol’
i weithredu gweithdrefn cwynion yn unol â gweithdrefn cwynion y GIG a darparu gwybodaeth am nifer y cwynion a dderbyniwyd i’r PCT ar adegau pan fydd yn ofynnol
i gydweithredu ag unrhyw archwiliad i gŵyn gan PCT neu’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd
i ddal yswiriant indemniad proffesiynol digonol
i sicrhau bod y rheiny sy’n cyflawni gwasanaethau o fewn y feddygfa a chanddynt gymwysterau addas, eu bod yn gymwys, bod ganddynt y profiad a’r hyfforddiant clinigol angenrheidiol a’u bod wedi cofrestru (lle bydd yn briodol) ar restr y PCT
i sicrhau bod trefniadau gan y rheiny sy’n cyflawni gwasanaethau o fewn y feddygfa i gynnal a diweddaru sgiliau a gwybodaeth
i sicrhau bod perfformwyr meddygon teulu yn cymryd rhan mewn proses arfarnu
i sicrhau cydymffurfio ag asesiadau’r NCAA pan fydd y PCT yn gwneud hynny’n ofynnol
i ddarparu adeilad addas
i alluogi personau sydd wedi’u hawdurdodi gan y PCT i fynd i mewn i adeilad y feddygfa a’i archwilio
i gadw cofnodion cleifion digonol a sicrhau bod rhestrau cleifion yn cael eu diweddaru
i fod â threfniadau ar waith i reoli haint yn effeithiol a diheintio.
Mae’r sancsiynau sydd ar gael i PCT lle mae meddygfa contractio’n methu cyflawni’i rhwymedigaethau yn cael eu nodi yn Rheoliadau 2004. Mewn amgylchiadau penodol, gall PCT derfynu Contract GMS. Os yw meddygfa contractio yn torri telerau’r Contract a bod modd unioni’r cam, gall y PCT roi rhybudd i’r feddygfa, gan ei gwneud yn ofynnol i unioni’r cam o fewn cyfnod penodol. Lle nad oes modd unioni’r cam, gall y PCT roi hysbysiad, yn pennu gofyniad ar y feddygfa i beidio ag ailadrodd yr achos o dorri’r telerau. Os ailadroddir yr achos o dorri’r telerau, neu os torrir y telerau eto, gall y PCT derfynu’r Contract. Dim ond os yw’n fodlon bod effaith gronnol yr achosion o dorri’r telerau o’r fath natur y byddai’n niweidiol i effeithlonrwydd y gwasanaethau y gall PCT wneud hyn. Mae sancsiynau eraill (e.e. terfynu neu atal rhwymedigaethau penodol dan y Contract, neu atal neu dynnu arian sy’n daladwy dan y Contract) ar gael hefyd.
Y gwahaniaeth pwysig dan y mecanwaith newydd yw mai i’r parti contractio yn unig y gellir cymhwyso sancsiynau fel atal taliadau ac nid (oni bai ei fod/bod yn ymarferydd ar ei ben/phen ei hun) i feddygon teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, efallai mai rhesymol yw tybio y gall meddyg y mae ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn peri, neu yn gallu peri, i’r feddygfa gyfan ddioddef cosb ariannol neu gosb o fath arall, fod dan rywfaint o bwysau gan ei gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr i unioni’i ffyrdd. Noda’r Adran Iechyd, dan y Contract GMS, bod contractiwr yn gwbl gyfrifol am unrhyw fethiant i arfer gofal a medr rhesymol ar ran unrhyw berson sy’n cyflawni gwasanaethau dan y Contract. Fe allai unrhyw gontractiwr nad yw’n delio’n briodol â methiant ar ran meddyg sy’n cael ei gyflogi yn y feddygfa roi’r Contract cyfan mewn risg felly. Bydd PCTau hefyd yn cadw’u pwerau i ddileu, dileu’n amodol ac atal ymarferwyr o’u rhestrau.
Cyflwynodd y Contract newydd fframwaith ansawdd a chanlyniadau newydd (QOF), system o gymhellion ariannol er mwyn annog meddygfeydd i gyflawni safonau ansawdd penodol. Bydd cryn dipyn o daliadau meddygfeydd yn gysylltiedig o bosibl â’r QOF. Mae’r Contract yn cynnwys 146 o ddangosyddion, sydd, o’u cyrraedd, yn cario ‘pwyntiau’ sy’n cynrychioli taliadau ychwanegol. Gall meddygfeydd ddewis dangosyddion y byddant yn ymgeisio i’w cyrraedd. Mae’r dangosyddion yn ymwneud â’r:
maes clinigol (yn cwmpasu meysydd fel atal afiechyd coronaidd y galon, drin diabetes, etc)
maes trefniadaethol (yn cwmpasu meysydd fel cofnodion cleifion a rheoli meddygfeydd)
maes profiadau cleifion (yn cwmpasu hyd ymgynghoriadau ac arolygon o gleifion)
maes gwasanaethau ychwanegol (yn cwmpasu sgrinio serfigol, goruchwylio iechyd plant, gwasanaethau mamolaeth a gwasanaethau atal cenhedlu).
Mae data ar ‘gyflawni ansawdd’ yn cael ei drosglwyddo gan feddygfeydd i PCTau trwy gysylltiadau cyfrifiadur. Mae gweithredu’r QOF yn ddibynnol i raddau helaeth ar onestrwydd y feddygfa sy’n contractio. Bydd rhai gwiriadau’n cael eu gwneud i atal twyll, ond bydd elfen fawr o ymddiriedaeth yng ngweithrediad y system. Bydd PCTau yn cynnal adolygiadau blynyddol o’r holl feddygfeydd sy’n contractio, gan ddefnyddio aseswyr hyfforddedig. Bydd yr aseswyr yn cynnwys meddygon teulu, rheolwyr PCT a chynrychiolwyr cleifion. Mae ScHARR wedi cynghori’r Adran Iechyd ar y gweithdrefnau sydd i’w dilyn mewn adolygiadau felly. Dosbarthodd yr Adran Iechyd arweiniad rhagarweiniol i PCTau ar recriwtio aseswyr. Bydd yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd i gyflwyno tystiolaeth cyn yr adolygiad. Bydd gan aseswyr fynediad at gofnodion meddygol er mwyn gwirio cyflawniad yn erbyn y QQOF. Bydd cod ymarfer mewn grym wrth archwilio’r cofnodion. Ymddengys yn debygol y bydd yr arolygiad wedi’i gyfyngu o ran maint a diben, fel yn achos dilysu cyn-talu, y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 4. Nid yw’n fwriad delio â phryderon ynghylch perfformiad meddyg mewn adolygiad blynyddol.
Mae cysylltu taliadau â dangosyddion ansawdd yn newid y system flaenorol lle’r oedd cysylltiad agosach rhwng taliadau â nifer cleifion ar restr meddyg teulu. Ni fydd y newid, fodd bynnag, yn arwain at golli incwm (yn y tymor byr o leiaf) i feddygfeydd sydd â rhestrau mawr ac nad ydynt yn cymryd rhan yn y QOF. Mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi gwarantu na fydd unrhyw feddygfa yn dioddef colli incwm o ganlyniad i’r newidiadau i’r Contract GMS.
Mae’r Contract yn ei ddyddiad cynnar, ac mae’n amhosibl asesu’n hyderus yr effaith y mae’n debygol o’i chael ar ansawdd gofal cleifion. Mae rhywfaint o bryder y gallai’r ffaith y bydd meddygfeydd yn cael eu hannog i ganolbwyntio’u hymdrechion ar fodloni dangosyddion ansawdd a nodir yn y Contract arwain at esgeuluso agweddau pwysig ar ofal (fel parhad gofal) nad ydynt yn cael eu cynnwys. At hynny, nid yw’r dangosyddion ansawdd yn cwmpasu rhai o’r agweddau pwysicaf ar ‘ddoctora’ fel sgiliau ymgynghori a chywirdeb diagnosio. Dylai’r Contract gael yr effaith o gynyddu’n sylweddol faint o ddata sydd ar gael i PCTau am feddygfeydd sy’n cymryd rhan yn y QOF. Rhaid aros i weld a fydd y data o ddefnydd go iawn wrth asesu ansawdd gofal yn cael ei roi i gleifion. Bydd yr adolygiad blynyddol yn cynnig cyfle i PCTau i fynd i mewn i feddygfeydd teulu ac archwilio agweddau penodol arnynt. Bydd gwerth yr ymarferiad hwn yn dibynnu ar union ffurf yr adolygiadau, ac ar sgiliau ac arbenigedd yr aseswyr dan sylw. Nid yw’n glir ar hyn o bryd pa mor fanwl y bydd meddygfeydd yn cael eu harchwilio. Ffactor anhysbys arall yw’r graddau, os o gwbl, y bydd meddygfeydd lle gall y safonau gofal fod yn wael, yn dewis cymryd rhan yn y QOF a darparu gwasanaethau ychwanegol.
Disgwylir y bydd PCTau yn ceisio mesur perfformiad ar gontractau PMS trwy gyfeirio at yr un fframwaith â dan y Contract GMS newydd. Gan y bydd contractau PMS yn parhau i gael eu trafod yn lleol, rhaid aros i weld beth fydd effaith hyn.

---  ---
Yn y Bennod hon, disgrifiais yn fras rhai o’r prif ddatblygiadau yn y trefniadau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu sydd wedi digwydd ers arestio Shipman ym mis Medi 1998. Bu newidiadau eraill hefyd, a byddaf yn cyfeirio atynt nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn. Mae rhai o’r datblygiadau hyn wedi digwydd o ganlyniad uniongyrchol i droseddau Shipman, er bod cymhwyso’r datblygiadau’n ymestyn ymhellach o lawer nag ymgais i ddiogelu cleifion yn erbyn meddyg llofuddiol. Mae’n amlwg bod y dirwedd meddygaeth deuluol yn wahanol iawn erbyn hyn i’r hyn ydoedd chwe blynedd yn ôl. Bu newidiadau hefyd yn y modd y mae llawer o feddygon teulu’n gweithio. Mae’r cynnydd yn nifer y meddygon teulu sy’n cael eu cyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan PCTau ac sy’n gweithio dan gontractau PMS wedi rhoi mwy o allu i’r PCTau i’w ‘rheoli’. Mae’n parhau’n ansicr pa mor llwyddiannus y cyflawnir hynny. Beth bynnag, mae poblogaeth fawr o feddygon teulu o hyd sy’n gweithio fel contractwyr annibynnol nad ydynt yn barod i dderbyn rheolaeth y PCT na chael eu rheoli ganddo. Rhaid aros i weld a fydd y Contract GMS newydd yn rhoi mwy o gyfleoedd i PCTau i fonitro a rheoleiddio ansawdd gofal meddygol sylfaenol, ac os ydyw, a fydd y cyfleoedd hynny’n cael eu defnyddio’n effeithiol. Mae mynediad gan PCTau erbyn hyn at fwy o wybodaeth am feddygon teulu, ac maent yn fwy tebygol o fod yn ymwybodol o feddygon sy’n ymarfer yn anarferol mewn rhyw fodd. Mewn achos eithafol, gallant dynnu meddyg oddi ar eu rhestr. Ymddengys i mi, yn ddamcaniaethol o leiaf, bod yr holl newidiadau hyn er gwell. Fodd bynnag, maent yn rhoi baich anferthol ar PCTau, sydd, fel y dywedais, yn sefydliadau bach ac ‘ifanc’. Mae’n debygol, yn fy marn i, mai amrywiol fydd llwyddiant y mesurau newydd hyn.
Pe bai’r mesurau newydd hyn wedi bod ar waith yn ystod y cyfnod pan fu Shipman yn ymarfer, a fyddai wedi cael ei atal neu’i rwystro rhag lladd cleifion, neu a fyddai wedi cael ei ganfod pe bai wedi gwneud hynny? Yn sicr, byddai’r PCT wedi gwybod am ei gefndir a gallai fod wedi gwrthod ei gynnwys ar y rhestr. Gallai fod wedi pennu amodau ar ei gynnwys, a byddai hynny wedi galluogi goruchwylio’i arfer yn fanwl mewn perthynas â chyffuriau rheoledig. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn meddwl ei bod yn debygol y byddai trefniadau felly wedi atal Shipman rhag lladd. Ni fyddai’r trefniadau presennol ychwaith wedi gwella’r gobeithion o’i ganfod rhyw lawer. Mewn Penodau dilynol, byddaf yn ystyried a oes mesurau eraill y dylid eu cymryd i fonitro meddygon teulu. Yn benodol, byddaf yn ystyried y modd y dylid ymchwilio i gŵyn neu bryder ynghylch meddyg, a, phan fydd meddyg afreolaidd wedi’i nodi, a oes camau digonol yn cael eu cymryd i gyfyngu ei weithgareddau/gweithgareddau proffesiynol neu i’w atal/hatal rhag ymarfer, ac felly rhwystro risg annerbyniol i gleifion.

---  ---
Telerau Gwasanaeth Meddygon Teulu
Fframwaith y System Cwynion a Disgyblu
Cwynion a Wnaed yn erbyn Shipman: 1985 i 1993
Cydnabod yr Angen am Newid

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud mai un elfen o reolaeth leol o feddygon teulu oedd y broses ddisgyblu a gychwynnwyd ac a weithredwyd ar lefel leol. Yn fuan wedi cychwyn yr Ymchwiliad, deuthum i wybod, yn dilyn cwynion gan gleifion, fod Shipman wedi cael ei ddisgyblu ar ddau achlysur gan y sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol a oedd yn gyfrifol am Tameside, ym 1990 ac ym 1993. Cyn disgrifio’r amgylchiadau a arweiniodd at y cwynion hynny a’r achosion disgyblu a ddilynodd, byddaf yn esbonio’r cefndir deddfwriaethol a gweithdrefnol ar yr adeg berthnasol.

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhenodau 3 a 4, rhwng 1974 a mis Medi 1990, roedd pwyllgorau meddygon teulu (FPCau) yn gyfrifol am weinyddu’r trefniadau ar gyfer gofal sylfaenol. Ym mis Medi 1990, disodlwyd FPCau gan awdurdodau gwasanaethau iechyd teulu (FHSAau). Nid oedd meddygon teulu mewn perthynas gontractiol uniongyrchol â’r FPC na’r FHSA, ond gweithredent yn lle hynny dan y Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS), cytundeb cenedlaethol â’r Llywodraeth. Roedd yr FPC/FHSA yn gweinyddu gweithrediad lleol y Contract GMS. Dan ddarpariaethau Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol a Fferyllol Cyffredinol) 1974 (Rheoliadau 1974), roedd yn rhaid i’r trefniadau yr oedd FPCau (yr FHSAau yn ddiweddarach) yn eu gwneud gyda meddygon ar gyfer darparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol yn gorfod cynnwys telerau gwasanaeth y meddygon teulu.
Roedd telerau gwasanaeth y meddygon teulu’n cwmpasu ystod eang o destunau, ond yng nghyd-destun penodol cwynion roeddent yn amodi fel a ganlyn:
‘Cyffredinol
3. Lle mae penderfyniad pa un a ddylid cymryd unrhyw gamau, ac os felly pa gamau, dan y telerau gwasanaeth hyn yn gofyn am arfer barn broffesiynol, ni ddylid disgwyl i feddyg, wrth ddod i’r penderfyniad hwnnw, arfer graddfa uwch o sgiliau, gwybodaeth a gofal nag a ddylid yn rhesymol i feddygon teulu fel dosbarth eu harfer yn rhesymol.’
Roedd y paragraff hwn pennu’r safon yr oedd ymddygiad meddyg i’w farnu yn ei erbyn fel ymddygiad y gellid yn rhesymol ei ddisgwyl gan feddyg teulu cymharol gymwys.
Roedd y telerau gwasanaeth a oedd yn berthnasol i gynnwys y cwynion a wnaed yn erbyn Shipman fel a ganlyn:
‘Gwasanaeth i Gleifion
13. Yn amodol ar baragraff 3, bydd meddyg yn rhoi i’w gleifion yr holl wasanaethau meddygol personol angenrheidiol a phriodol o’r math a ddarperir fel arfer gan ymarferwyr meddygol cyffredinol. Bydd yn gwneud hynny yn adeilad ei feddygfa, neu, os yw cyflwr y claf yn gofyn am hynny, yn rhywle arall yn ardal ei feddygfa neu yn y fan lle’r oedd y claf yn byw pan y’i derbyniwyd gan y meddyg ... ni fydd gofyn i’r meddyg ymweld â’r claf a’i drin mewn unrhyw le arall. Mae gwasanaethau felly’n cynnwys trefniadau ar gyfer cyfeirio cleifion fel y bydd angen i unrhyw wasanaethau eraill a ddarperir dan y Deddfau Gwasanaethau Iechyd a chyngor i’w galluogi i fanteisio ar wasanaethau cymdeithasol yr awdurdod lleol ...
14.Bydd meddyg, oni chaiff ei atal gan argyfwng, yn gwasanaethu ac yn trin unrhyw glaf sy’n mynd at y diben i’r mannau ac yn ystod yr oriau a gymeradwyir ar hyn o bryd gan y Pwyllgor ...’
a
‘Cofnodion
30. Bydd meddyg -
(a) yn cadw cofnodion digonol o afiechydon a thriniaethau ei gleifion ar ffurflenni a gyflenwir iddo at y diben gan y Pwyllgor, ac
(b) yn anfon y cyfryw gofnodion ymlaen at y Pwyllgor ar gais cyn gynted â phosibl, a
(c) chyn pen 14 diwrnod o gael gwybod gan y Pwyllgor am farwolaeth person ar ei restr a beth bynnag nid hwyrach na mis o gael gwybod fel arall am farwolaeth felly, anfon y cofnodion yn ymwneud â’r person hwnnw ymlaen at y Pwyllgor.’
Cymerir y geiriad uchod o Reoliadau 1974, ond parhaodd heb ei newid fwy neu lai yn y Rheoliadau diweddarach. Ym mis Ebrill 1990, gwnaethpwyd rhywfaint o newidiadau i Reoliadau 1974 pan ddaeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol a Fferyllol) Diwygiad (Rhif 2) 1989 i rym. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y newidiadau hyn o unrhyw arwyddocâd at ddibenion y Bennod hon. Cyd-gyfnerthwyd a newidiwyd Rheoliadau 1974 gan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 1992, a nodi’r telerau gwasanaeth newydd a barhaodd heb eu newid i raddau helaeth hefyd.

---  ---
Yn ôl Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgor a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) 1974 (Rheoliadau Pwyllgorau Gwasanaeth 1974), roedd gofyniad ar FPCau (ac FHSAau yn ddiweddarach) i sefydlu pwyllgorau gwasanaeth ar gyfer pob gwasanaeth contractiwr i ymchwilio i gwynion o fethiannau honedig i gydymffurfio â’r telerau gwasanaeth. Bu Rheoliadau Pwyllgorau Gwasanaeth 1974 yn destun nifer o newidiadau, yn enwedig gan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgor a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) Diwygiad 1990. Cyd-gyfnerthodd Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgor a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) 1992 y Rheoliadau a’r newidiadau cynharach a gwnaeth newidiadau pellach. Roedd y Rheoliadau hyn yn rheoli’r cwynion a dderbyniwyd ar ôl 1 Ebrill 1992, gan barhau mewn grym hyd at 1996.
Gweithdrefnau Anffurfiol
Nid oedd pob cwyn a dderbyniwyd gan FPC/FHSA yn cynnwys honiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr â thorri telerau gwasanaeth meddyg teulu. Ni ellid cyfeirio cwynion nad oeddent yn cynnwys honiadau felly at bwyllgor gwasanaeth, ond gallent fod yn agored i’w datrys yn anffurfiol, trwy drafodaeth rhwng y partïon, a fyddai’n cael yr effaith o adfer y berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a hyder rhwng meddyg a chlaf. Nid oedd rhai cwynion, hyd yn oed y rheiny a allai fod yn gyfystyr â honiad o dorri telerau gwasanaeth, yn ddifrifol iawn i bob golwg, a gallai ymddangos yn amhriodol iddynt arwain at achos disgyblu ffurfiol. Mewn achosion felly, gallai swyddog o’r FPC/FHSA geisio datrys y gŵyn yn anffurfiol trwy drafod, os oedd yr achwynydd yn cydsynio. Cyn 1990, nid oedd unrhyw weithdrefnau cwynion anffurfiol yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ganolog nac yn swyddogol. Roedd gan ardaloedd gwahanol drefniadau gwahanol a ddatblygwyd yn lleol.
Newidiodd y sefyllfa ym 1990. Ar 7 Mawrth 1990, rhoddodd yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS) gyfarwyddiadau i FPCau sefydlu prosesau cymodi. Roedd y weithdrefn a oedd i’w dilyn yn dibynnu ar ddifrifoldeb ymddangosiadol cwyn y claf. Ar gyfer materion llai difrifol, byddai swyddog o’r FPC (ar ôl mis Medi 1990, yr FHSA) yn ceisio datrys y broblem mewn gohebiaeth. Ar gyfer achosion mwy difrifol, gellid cyfeirio’r mater i’w gymodi. Penodwyd cymodwyr lleyg a oedd yn atebol i’r FPC/FHSA, ac roedd pob FPC/FHSA, ar ôl ymgynghori â’r pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC) ar gyfer ei ardal, yn llunio rhestr o gynghorwyr proffesiynol y byddai gan y cymodwyr lleyg fynediad atynt. Rhoddwyd arweiniad ar y mathau o achosion nad oeddent yn addas ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau anffurfiol hyn ac y dylid delio â nhw gan weithdrefn y pwyllgor gwasanaeth meddygol (MSC) mwy ffurfiol. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys cwynion fel honiad o fethiant i ymateb i geisiadau niferus gan glaf i ymweld, honiad bod y meddyg wedi methu lleddfu poen difrifol mewn salwch terfynol neu gŵyn bod y claf wedi methu cysylltu â’r meddyg.
Gweithdrefnau Ffurfiol
Delio â Chŵyn
Os oedd cwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu yn cael ei derbyn gan glaf, neu’n gysylltiedig â chlaf, a oedd neu fu â hawl i gael gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol gan feddyg teulu ar restr yr FPC/FHSA, ac os yr oedd yn ymddangos bod y gŵyn yn gyfystyr â thoriad posibl o delerau gwasanaeth y meddyg teulu, byddai’n cael ei chyfeirio at gadeirydd MSC yr FPC/FHSA. Fel rheol, roedd yn rhaid i’r gŵyn gael ei gwneud gan y claf neu gan rywun arall gydag awdurdod y claf. Fodd bynnag, os oedd y claf wedi marw neu dan 16 oed, neu os nad oedd, oherwydd henaint, salwch neu wendid arall, yn gallu gwneud y gŵyn ei hun, gallai cwyn gael ei gwneud gan berson arall. Roedd yn rhaid gwneud cwynion cyn pen wyth wythnos (o 1990, 13 wythnos) o’r digwyddiad a arweiniodd at y gŵyn, oni bai bod yr MSC yn fodlon fod y methiant i hysbysu am y gŵyn mewn pryd wedi’i achosi gan salwch neu achos rhesymol arall, a bod y meddyg teulu neu’r SoS wedi cydsynio hefyd i archwilio i’r gŵyn wedi’r amser. O 1992, cafodd swyddogaethau’r SoS eu dirprwyo i’r Uned Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAU).
Er nad oedd gweithdrefn benodol felly’n bodoli cyn 1990, os nad sylwedd y gŵyn, ar ôl 1990, yn ymddangos yn ddigonol o ddatganiad ysgrifenedig yr achwynydd, roedd yn rhaid i’r FPC/FHSA ofyn i’r achwynydd ddarparu manylion pellach yr oedd yr FPC/FHSA yn gofyn yn rhesymol amdanynt.
Roedd yr MSC yn cynnwys cadeirydd, tri aelod lleyg o’r FPC/FHSA a thri aelod a oedd yn ymarferwyr a benodwyd gan yr LMC ar gyfer yr ardal. Yn ymarferol, yn Tameside, roedd enwebeion yr LMC yn aelodau o’r LMC. Ni allai swydd cadeirydd gael ei llenwi gan feddyg, felly, yn ymarferol, roedd cadeiryddion yn aelodau lleyg o’r FPC. Byddai aelod lleyg o’r pwyllgor yn cael ei ddynodi’n ddirprwy gadeirydd.
Roedd penderfyniad ynghylch a ddylai cwyn gael ei derbyn ar gyfer ymchwilio iddi yn cael ei wneud gan gadeirydd yr MSC. Os oedd yn penderfynu bod y gŵyn yn datgelu sail resymol i gredu bod y meddyg wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, byddai swyddog o’r FPC/FHSA yn anfon y datganiadau ysgrifenedig o gŵyn i’r meddyg teulu, ac (ar ôl 1990) manylion y telerau gwasanaeth yr honnwyd iddynt gael eu torri. Roedd yn rhaid i’r meddyg teulu gyflwyno’i ymateb/hymateb ysgrifenedig cyn pen pedair wythnos, neu’n hwy os cytunwyd gan yr MSC. Lle’r oedd ymateb yn cael ei dderbyn gan y meddyg teulu, roedd yr FPC/FHSA yn anfon copi o hwn at yr achwynydd ac yn gwahodd ei sylwadau ysgrifenedig cyn pen 14 diwrnod, neu’n hwy os cytunwyd ar hynny.
Byddai cadeirydd yr MSC wedyn yn penderfynu a ddylid cynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Yn gyffredinol, byddai cyfarwyddyd yn cael ei roi i gynnal gwrandawiad llafar lle’r oedd gwrthdaro amlwg rhwng tystiolaeth yr achwynydd a’r meddyg teulu. Os nad oedd gwrthdaro felly, gallai’r cadeirydd roi cyfarwyddyd bod y mater yn cael ei ystyried gan yr MSC heb wrandawiad llafar. Byddai swyddog o’r FPC/FHSA yn ceisio sicrhau fel arfer bod unrhyw gofnodion meddygol perthnasol ar gael. Byddai ef neu hi hefyd yn hysbysu’r partïon (h.y. yr achwynydd a’r meddyg teulu) am gyfarfod yr MSC lle’r oedd y mater i’w ystyried, ac am fanylion yr achos honedig o dorri telerau gwasanaeth. Os oedd gwrandawiad llafar i’w gynnal, roedd yn ofynnol i’r partïon gyflwyno unrhyw dystiolaeth ddogfennol ac enwau unrhyw dystion. Mater i’r partïon oedd pa dystiolaeth oedd yn cael ei nodi.
Gwrandawiadau’r Pwyllgor Gwasanaeth Meddygol
Byddai cyfarfod o’r MSC yn cael ei alw i ddelio ag ystyried un neu fwy o gwynion. Gallai pob aelod o’r pwyllgor fod yn bresennol, ond roedd hyn yn amhosibl yn aml. Ar ôl 1990, y cworwm gofynnol i wrando cwyn oedd cadeirydd (neu ddirprwy), dau aelod lleyg a dau aelod meddygol. Cyn 1990, gallai tri aelod wneud cworwm, a bod o leiaf un aelod lleyg ac un aelod meddygol yn bresennol. Gallai swyddog awdurdodedig priodol o’r LMC fod yn bresennol. Byddai un neu ddau swyddog awdurdodedig o’r FPC/FHSA yn bresennol i gynorthwyo’r pwyllgor. Gellid delio â’r gŵyn ar y papurau neu ar ôl gwrandawiad llafar. Roedd gwrandawiadau llafar yn cael eu cynnal ar sail wrthwynebus gan ddilyn gweithdrefn treial sifil. Roeddent yn cael eu cynnal yn breifat, ond gallai’r partïon fod yn bresennol nes cyrraedd y cam ystyried. Gallai parti gael rhywun yn bresennol i gynorthwyo wrth gyflwyno’r achos, ond, os oedd y person hwnnw’n fargyfreithiwr neu’n gyfreithiwr, ni allai annerch y pwyllgor na holi tystion. Fel arfer, byddai cynrychiolydd o sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol y meddyg teulu yn ymddangos ar ei ran/rhan. Weithiau, roedd yr achwynydd yn cael cymorth rhywun o’r Cyngor Iechyd Cymunedol (CHC) lleol. Roedd rôl cynghori a chefnogi achwynwyr gydol y broses cwynion yn ychwanegol at brif swyddogaeth y CHC, sef darparu ffocws ar gyfer ymgynghoriad cyhoeddus ar ystod eang o faterion iechyd. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn rôl yr ymddengys bod llawer o CHCau wedi’u llenwi’n effeithiol iawn.
Os oedd honiad newydd, yn berthnasol i’r gŵyn a oedd yn cael ei hystyried, yn cael ei gyflwyno yn ystod y gwrandawiad, roedd yn rhaid i’r cadeirydd benderfynu a ddylid ei dderbyn. Dim ond os gwnaethpwyd yr honiad o fewn y terfyn amser y gellid derbyn cwyn newydd. Os oedd cwyn newydd yn cael ei derbyn wedi’r amser, roedd yr holl achos yn agored i’w ddatgan yn ddi-rym ar apêl.
Ar ôl y dystiolaeth a chyflwyniadau’r partïon (os oedd rhai), byddai’r pwyllgor yn ystyried ei ganfyddiadau ffeithiol a chasgliadau ynghylch a dorrwyd telerau gwasanaeth. Hyd at y cam hwn, ni fyddai aelodau’r pwyllgor wedi cael unrhyw wybodaeth am gofnod disgyblu’r meddyg teulu yn y gorffennol. Pe canfyddent fod achos o dorri telerau, byddent yn cael gwybod am unrhyw achosion o dorri telerau a ganfuwyd yn erbyn y meddyg mewn unrhyw adroddiad MSC a wnaed o fewn y chwe blynedd flaenorol cyn gofyn iddynt ystyried pa gosb i’w hargymell i’r FPC/FHSA. Ar ddiwedd yr achos, byddai’r pwyllgor yn cyfarwyddo swyddog o’r FPC/FHSA i ysgrifennu adroddiad am y dystiolaeth, y canfyddiadau a’r argymhelliad ar gyfer y gosb, os o gwbl.
Os oedd parti yn methu bod yn bresennol, fe allai’r achos gael ei ohirio, ond gellid dod i benderfyniad heb wrandawiad. Ar ôl 1990, os oedd yr achwynydd yn gwrthod bod yn bresennol neu’n methu cadarnhau ei fod/bod yn bwriadu bod yn bresennol, gallai’r MSC wneud adroddiad am y gŵyn heb gynnal gwrandawiad. Oni bai bod y meddyg teulu’n cydsynio i waredu heb wrandawiad, fodd bynnag, ni allai’r adroddiad gynnwys unrhyw argymhelliad a oedd yn wrthwynebus iddo/iddi.
Ar gyfer achosion lle’r oedd yr FPC/FHSA ei hun yn dymuno dod â chwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu, gallai’r mater gael ei gyfeirio at MSC FPC/FHSA arall. Byddai hyn yn codi fel arfer lle nad oedd y gŵyn yn effeithio ar glaf penodol, e.e. mewn achos o dwyll. Roedd y trefniant hwn ar gael hefyd mewn achosion lle’r ystyriwyd ei fod yn ddymunol am resymau eraill. Un enghraifft fyddai pe bai’r meddyg teulu’n cwyno yn erbyn aelod o’r MSC neu yr oedd aelodau’r MSC ar gyfer yr ardal lle’r oedd yn ymarfer yn adnabod y meddyg yn bersonol.
Nid oedd yr MSC yn rhwym gan reolau llym tystiolaeth. Cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd a Nawdd Cymdeithasol (o 1988, yr Adran Iechyd) nodiadau arweiniad am faterion amrywiol, gan gynnwys derbynioldeb a phwysau rhai mathau o dystiolaeth. I grynhoi, roedd gan yr MSC ddisgresiwn eang ynghylch a ddylai wrando neu edrych ar unrhyw dystiolaeth benodol a faint o bwys y dylid rhoi iddi.
Adroddiad a Chosbau’r Pwyllgor Gwasanaeth Meddygol
Cyn 1990, roedd yn rhaid i adroddiad yr MSC ddatgan ei ganfyddiadau ffeithiol a’r casgliadau y daethpwyd iddynt. O 1990, roedd yn rhaid i’r adroddiad ddarparu’n ychwanegol resymau’r pwyllgor am ddod i gasgliadau felly. Byddai’r adroddiad yn cael ei gyflwyno i’r FPC/FHSA. Os oedd yr MSC yn canfod bod y meddyg wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, gallai’r MSC argymell bod achosion blaenorol o’r meddyg yn torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth yn cael eu hystyried. Ar ôl 1992, roedd yn rhaid i’r adroddiad hefyd gynnwys manylion o’r dystiolaeth berthnasol a dderbyniwyd, yr holl ganfyddiadau ffeithiol, y rhesymau am unrhyw gasgliadau y daethpwyd iddynt a’r argymhellion ar gyfer gweithredu gan yr FHSA.
Roedd yr FPC/FHSA yn ystyried yr adroddiad. Roedd yn rhwym gan ganfyddiadau ffeithiol yr MSC ac roedd yn gorfod rhoi rhesymau am unrhyw wyro o’i argymhellion. Ar gosb, gallai’r FPC/FHSA, yn unol â’r Rheoliadau:
bennu terfyn ar nifer y cleifion yn cael eu cynnwys ar restr y meddyg teulu. Byddai hyn yn cael ei argymell lle daethpwyd i’r casgliad nad oedd y meddyg, oherwydd ei restr/rhestr fawr, yn gallu rhoi gwasanaeth digonol i’r holl gleifion ar ei restr/rhestr.
(cyn 1990) argymell i’r SoS y dylai’r meddyg teulu dalu unrhyw gostau a gafwyd gan y claf oherwydd yr achos o dorri telerau gwasanaeth a/neu fod swm yn cael ei atal o’i daliad/thaliad; (o 1990) bennu ei hun y dylai’r meddyg teulu dalu unrhyw gostau a gafwyd oherwydd yr achos o dorri telerau gwasanaeth a/neu bennu bod swm heb fod yn fwy na £500 yn cael ei atal oddi wrth y meddyg teulu; mewn perthynas â symiau dros £500, hyd yn oed ar ôl 1990, gallai’r FPC/FHSA argymell yn unig i’r SoS, ac nid penderfynu, y dylid atal swm
gwneud sylwadau i Dribiwnlys y GIG y byddai parhau i gynnwys y meddyg teulu ar ei restr feddygol yn niweidiol i effeithiolrwydd y gwasanaethau dan sylw; mewn geiriau eraill, argymell bod y meddyg teulu’n cael ei ddileu o’r rhestr feddygol
(cyn 1990) argymell i’r SoS y dylai’r meddyg teulu gael rhybudd i gydymffurfio a’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth yn fanylach yn y dyfodol; (o1990) penderfynu ei hun y dylai gael rhybudd felly
(o 1992) anfon unrhyw ddogfennau yn gysylltiedig â’r gŵyn at y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC). Cyn 1992, ystyriwyd nad oedd hyn yn angenrheidiol gan yr oedd yr SoS i fod i adrodd i’r GMC am achosion MSC priodol ar argymhelliad corff a elwid y Pwyllgor Cynghori Meddygol (MAC), y byddaf yn ei ddisgrifio isod. Roedd nodiadau arweiniad a ddosbarthwyd i’r FHSAau gan yr Adran Iechyd wedi atodi arweiniad iddynt, a luniwyd yn flaenorol ar gyfer MAC, ar y mathau o achos y dylid adrodd amdanynt. Roedd yr arweiniad ar gyfer MAC yn cyfeirio at argraffiad mis Ebrill 1987 o gyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline (a elwid y Llyfr Glas; gweler Pennod 17), ond esboniodd yn eglur hefyd y dylai unrhyw gamymddygiad a ystyriwyd
‘yn niweidiol ddifrifol i ofal meddygol cleifion’
fod yn destun adroddiad.
Apeliadau i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd
Roedd hawl gan y meddyg a’r achwynydd i apelio i’r SoS mewn perthynas ag unrhyw benderfyniad gwrthwynebus. Felly, gallai’r naill barti neu’r llall apelio yn erbyn canfyddiad bod achos o dorri telerau wedi digwydd neu beidio, yn erbyn penderfyniad ar ymestyn terfyn amser neu yn erbyn sancsiwn a bennwyd gan yr FPC/FHSA. Ym 1992, datganolodd yr SoS y swyddogaethau apeliadol hynny i’r FHSAU, a sefydlwyd gan Awdurdod Iechyd Rhanbarthol Swydd Efrog. Byddai’r corff hwn hefyd yn gwrando achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio ato oherwydd mai’r sancsiwn argymelledig oedd atal dros £500 ac a oedd yn gofyn am gadarnhad gan yr SoS. Ar 1 Ebrill 1995, sefydlwyd yr FHSAU fel Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig, a newidiodd ei enw i Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA); ym mis Tachwedd 2001 newidiodd ei enw i’r Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig) (FHSAA (SHA)).
Roedd swyddogaethau dirprwyedig yr SoS yn cael eu cyflawni gan swyddog o’r FHSAU, neu, yn ddiweddarach, yr FHSAA a’r FHSAA (SHA). Yn ymarferol, felly, roedd penderfyniadau ar apeliadau’n cael eu gwneud gan y Prif Weithredwr neu ei ddirprwy/dirprwy. Os oedd y Prif Weithredwr o’r farn bod angen datrys gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth, gallai benodi panel i gynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Byddai’r panel yn cynnwys bargyfreithiwr neu gyfreithiwr fel cadeirydd, a dau feddyg, un o banel wedi’i enwebu gan y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig (BMA). Byddai’r panel yn cynnal y gwrandawiad llafar, ond adroddai yn ôl gydag argymhelliad ynghylch a fu achos o dorri telerau a’i beidio; y Prif Weithredwr neu ei ddirprwy/dirprwy a wnâi’r penderfyniad terfynol.
Roedd gan y Prif Weithredwr y grym i ofyn am gyngor ac argymhelliad gan MAC, ac roedd gofyniad penodol arno i wneud hynny yn achos methiannau penodol i gydymffurfio â thelerau gwasanaeth (yn fras, y rheiny a olygai arfer barn glinigol). Yn ôl Mr David Laverick, a oedd yn Brif Weithredwr yr FHSAA o 1 Hydref 1995 hyd at 31 Awst 2001, roedd yn arfer ganddo o hyd i gynnwys y MAC, er y byddai ei ragflaenwyr yn gwneud hynny fwy na thebyg, yn ôl ei dystiolaeth, pan oedd yn ofynnol iddo wneud hynny’n benodol gan y Rheoliadau. Roedd y MAC yn cynnwys chwe aelod, a oedd yn cael eu penodi gan yr SoS. Roedd y Cadeirydd a’i ddirprwy/dirprwy i fod yn feddygon â nid llai na deng mlynedd o wasanaeth, a ddewiswyd gan yr SoS ar ôl ymgynghori â’r BMA. O’r pum aelod arall, roedd tri’n cael eu dewis o banel y BMA o ryw 24 o feddygon, a’r lleill o banel a ddewiswyd gan yr SoS.
Pan ddaeth Mr Laverick i’w swydd, roedd yn pryderu ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn ymddangos iddo ef fel anghysonderau yn yr argymhellion yn cael eu gwneud gan y MAC mewn achosion a oedd i weld yn gyffelyb. Roedd yn pryderu hefyd ynghylch bod y meddygon ar y MAC yn ôl pob golwg yn gweld eu hunain fel eiriolwyr y meddyg teulu a oedd yn destun adolygiad. O ganlyniad, ceisiodd Mr Laverick gyflwyno arweiniad o ran y swm i’w atal mewn gwahanol fathau o achosion. Am fân achos cyntaf o dorri telerau gwasanaeth, awgrymodd mai’r gosb briodol fyddai rhyw £250. Lle’r oedd achos cyntaf cymharol ddifrifol o dorri telerau, byddai’r ffigwr oddeutu £750-£1000. Mewn perthynas ag ail neu drydydd achos o dorri telerau neu achosion â diffyg gofal neu ddiystyrwch amlwg o’r GIG, awgrymodd Mr Laverick y dylai’r gosb fod yn adenilliad o rhwng £1500-£3000, yn dibynnu ar yr amgylchiadau. Ar ôl cyflwyno’r canllawiau, dywedodd Mr Laverick bod argymhellion y MAC wedi dod yn fwy cyson, a’i fod yn teimlo y gallai eu dilyn mewn rhyw 90% o achosion.
Mewn rhai achosion byddai’r FHSAU/FHSAA yn cyfeirio achosion at y GMC. Atgof Mr Laverick oedd, pan gyrhaeddodd ym 1995, bod meini prawf ar waith a ddaeth o’r GMC yn wreiddiol, lle’r oedd yr FHSAA i hysbysu’r GMC am unrhyw ganfyddiad o dorri’r hyn a oedd bryd hynny’n baragraff 12 o’r telerau gwasanaeth (y rhwymedigaeth i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol personol o’r math a ddarperir gan feddygon teulu fel arfer), a hefyd unrhyw achos o atal dros £750. Wedi iddo gyrraedd, cafodd Mr Laverick drafodaethau gyda chynrychiolwyr o’r GMC lle ceisiodd helaethu, yn wyneb rhywfaint o wrthwynebiad gan gynrychiolwyr y meddygon, y categorïau achos a oedd yn cael eu hadrodd y tu hwnt i’r achosion hynny lle cafwyd canfyddiad o dorri telerau gwasanaeth. Ei farn ef oedd y dylid adrodd am ystod ehangach o achosion a olygai diffygion clinigol. Dywedodd fod ei farn ef wedi llwyddo, a bod yr FHSAA wedyn wedi adrodd am achosion yn cynnwys materion fel methiant meddyg i adnabod terfynau ei gymhwysedd proffesiynol, i ddiweddaru’u sgiliau a’i wybodaeth broffesiynol, i gadw cofnodion cleifion digonol, i gymryd hanes digonol neu gyflawni archwiliad corfforol digonol.
Apeliadau i Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd
Ym 1973, cafodd swydd Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd (a elwid hefyd y Comisiynydd Gwasanaeth Iechyd) ei chreu. Mae Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd yn edrych i gwynion a wneir gan neu ar ran pobl sydd wedi dioddef oherwydd triniaeth neu wasanaeth anfoddhaol gan y GIG. Mae ef neu hi yn annibynnol ar y GIG a’r Llywodraeth, ac mae ei wasanaethau/gwasanaethau yn rhad ac am ddim. Fodd bynnag, hyd at 1 Ebrill 1996, nid oedd gan yr Ombwdsmon awdurdodaeth dros gwynion am feddygon teulu.

---  ---
Ymchwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad i gwynion a wnaed yn erbyn Shipman yn y lle cyntaf mewn ymgais i weld a oedd y system cwynion a oedd ar waith ar yr adegau perthnasol yn gallu datgelu neu ddarparu cliwiau am ei weithgareddau troseddol. Fel y gwelir, deuthum i’r casgliad na wnaeth yr un o’r cwynion y gwnaeth MSC benderfyniad yn eu chylch ddarparu fawr o gliw am wir natur Shipman. Rwyf wedi penderfynu nodi amgylchiadau’r cwynion hyn gan fod eu harchwilio’n dangos rhai o ddiffygion y system, ac yn taflu goleuni hefyd ar yr hyn sydd ei angen mewn unrhyw system er mwyn delio’n foddhaol â chwynion.
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad i Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA) i ddarparu’i holl gofnodion mewn perthynas â chwynion a wnaed yn erbyn Shipman. Anfonodd y WPHA ffeiliau yn ymwneud â 18 achos a logiau’n cofnodi manylion moel deg achos arall. Fodd bynnag, wrth archwilio, canfuwyd nad cwynion yn erbyn Shipman yn bersonol oedd y rhain. Roedd rhai yn gwynion am ei staff; roedd rhai yn gwynion a wnaed gan ei gleifion ond yn ymwneud â’u triniaeth gan feddygon eraill. Nid oedd un, a nodwyd mewn llythyr gan Miss Beatrice Clee, yn gŵyn o gwbl, ond yn hytrach yn gais am gyngor am y cyffuriau amrywiol yr oedd Shipman wedi rhagnodi ar ei chyfer. O’r cwynion hynny a wnaed yn erbyn Shipman ei hun, cafodd rhai eu datrys drwy weithdrefnau anffurfiol. Ychydig iawn o wybodaeth oedd ar ffeil, ac nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi ceisio edrych i mewn i’r achosion hynny. Fodd bynnag, roedd tair cwyn yn erbyn Shipman a gafodd eu cyfeirio at MSC, gan eu bod yn ymwneud ag achos honedig o dorri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r tri achos hwn isod.
Achos Mr J
Daethpwyd â dwy gŵyn gysylltiedig gan fam claf i Shipman, Mr J, a oedd wedi marw o ffibrosis yr ysgyfaint ym mis Gorffennaf 1985 yn 29 oed. Roedd y gyntaf yn ymwneud â’r driniaeth a ddarparwyd gan Shipman rhwng 1977 a marwolaeth y claf ym 1985; roedd yr ail yn honni iddo dorri cyfrinachedd y claf. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at fam Mr J fel Mrs J.
Yn ei llythyr cwyno, dyddiedig 16 Awst 1985, a ddrafftiwyd ar ei chais gan Mr Steven Rawlinson, ffrind agosaf Mr J, dywedodd Mrs J bod ei mab wedi’i gofrestru gyda Shipman er 1977. Roedd Mr J wedi gweithio fel briciwr hunangyflogedig ac wedi mwynhau iechyd da ac eithrio’i fod yn dioddef o beswch trafferthus, yn enwedig yn y gaeaf. Honnodd fod Mr J wedi ymgynghori â Shipman ar ddau achlysur ym 1984 (unwaith yn yr haf ac unwaith ym mis Rhagfyr), yn cwyno o ddiffyg anadl. Roedd Shipman wedi dweud wrtho mai ‘yn ei feddwl’ yr oedd y broblem. Roedd ei mab wedi ymgynghori â Shipman eto ym mis Chwefror 1985, pan drefnwyd pelydr X o’r frest. Pan gyrhaeddodd y clinig lle’r oedd y pelydr X i’w gymryd, roedd y technegydd wedi gofyn i Mr J a fu ganddo gyflwr ar y frest mewn gwirionedd. Pan atebodd Mr J yn gadarnhaol, dywedodd y technegydd bod y llythyr cyfeirio yn dweud mai seicosomatig ydoedd. Ar ôl y pelydr X, roedd Shipman wedi cynghori Mr J bod yr ysgyfaint yn normal, ac eithrio am un neu ddau o ddarnau gwynion. Dywedodd Mrs J bod iechyd ei mab wedi dirywio o bryd hynny ymlaen; roedd ei beswch wedi parhau a chollodd bwysau.
Dywedodd Mrs J bod ei mab, ym mis Mai 1985, wedi sylwi ar waed yn ei boer a’i fod wedi mynd yn ôl i weld Shipman, a ragnododd gwrthfiotig a mewnanadlydd asthma. Dywedodd bod ei mab wedi mynnu cael archwiliad mwy trylwyr, a bod Shipman wedi cytuno’n anfodlon i’w gyfeirio at feddyg ymgynghorol y frest yn yr ysbyty lleol. Cynigiwyd apwyntiad ar gyfer 22 Gorffennaf 1985. Ar ddechrau mis Mehefin, roedd Mrs J, a oedd yn poeni’n fawr am iechyd dirywiol ei mab, wedi cysylltu â Shipman, a chytunwyd y dylid trefnu apwyntiad preifat â’r ymgynghorydd. Yn yr apwyntiad hwnnw, ar 20 Mehefin, mynegodd yr ymgynghorydd bryder am Mr J. Cymerodd samplau amrywiol ar gyfer profion ac, ychydig ddyddiau’n ddiweddarach, trefnodd i Mr J fynd i’r ysbyty. Deallodd Mrs J, pan gafodd ei dderbyn i’r ysbyty, bod y diagnosis yn aneglur, ond crybwyllwyd y ddarfodedigaeth a niwmonia firaol fel posibiliadau. Wedi wythnos yn yr ysbyty, nid oedd unrhyw ddiagnosis pendant wedi’i wneud, ond roedd cyflwr Mr J i weld yn fwy sefydlog, ac fe’i anfonwyd adref ar 2 Gorffennaf. Erbyn 9 Gorffennaf, roedd wedi ailwaelu, ac aethpwyd ag ef i’r ysbyty eto, yn amlwg yn sâl iawn. Cynhaliwyd profion amrywiol. Ar 19 Gorffennaf, gwnaethpwyd broncosgopi a biopsi ar Mr J. Bu farw yn fuan wedi hynny.
Mynegodd Mrs J y farn fod Shipman wedi bod yn esgeulus. Ni ddarparodd fanylion am yr honiad hwnnw, ond gofynnodd nifer o gwestiynau, ac o’r rheiny mae’n amlwg ei bod yn pryderu nad oedd Shipman wedi archwilio’i mab yn ddigon trylwyr, ei fod heb lawn werthfawrogi difrifoldeb ei gyflwr, ac wedi’i ystyried yn seicosomatig. Roedd hyn wedi arwain at oedi o ran triniaeth. Roedd yn pryderu hefyd nad oedd Shipman, pan gytunodd i gyfeirio ei mab at feddyg y frest, wedi gofyn am apwyntiad wedi’i frysio.
Honnodd Mrs J hefyd, ar achlysur cymdeithasol tra’r oedd ei mab yn yr ysbyty, roedd Shipman wedi dadlennu gwybodaeth gyfrinachol am ei gyflwr i bâr - fe’u galwaf yn Mr a Mrs G - a oedd yn gleifion iddo ac yn ffrindiau i Mr J hefyd. Yr honiad oedd bod Shipman wedi dweud wrth Mr a Mrs G y gallai Mr J fod yn dioddef o’r ddarfodedigaeth. Roedd Mrs G yn feichiog ac wedi ymweld â Mr J yn yr ysbyty. Dywedodd Mrs J ei bod yn meddwl y byddai Mr a Mrs G yn amharod i roi tystiolaeth am hyn, gan eu bod yn dal ar restr Shipman. Roedd y gŵyn hon, a wadodd Shipman yn ddiweddarach, y tu allan i gylch gwaith yr MSC; y GMC oedd ei gyrchfan priodol. Ni ddywedaf mwy am hynny, ac eithrio gwneud y sylw nad yw’n foddhaol i achwynydd orfod mynd â dwy gŵyn gysylltiedig at ddau gorff gwahanol.
Ar 3 Medi 1985, ystyriwyd y papurau gan Gadeirydd MSC Tameside, a phenderfynodd eu bod yn datgelu sail ddigonol i gwyno. Anfonodd swyddog o’r FPC y gŵyn at Shipman er mwyn cael ei ymateb. Ymatebodd Shipman trwy lythyr dyddiedig 10 Medi 1985. Mae papurau a adferwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad o feddygfa Shipman yn dangos bod Shipman, cyn iddo gyflwyno’i ymateb, wedi cymryd cyngor gan ei gynrychiolydd rhanbarthol o’r Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol ar gynnwys ei ymateb drafft. Fe’i rhybuddiwyd, o ystyried y gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth rhwng ei adroddiad ef ac adroddiad mam Mr J, dylai ddisgwyl cael ei alw i wrandawiad llafar.
Dechreuodd ymateb Shipman gydag adroddiad byr o hanes blaenorol. Cyfeiriodd at ymgynghoriadau ym mis Ionawr a mis Mawrth 1979, ac ar 13 Mehefin a 26 Medi 1980. Nid oedd yr un o’r ymgynghoriadau hynny’n ymwneud â chyflwr y frest. Wedyn, adroddodd hanes cyflwr y frest, gan gychwyn ag ymgynghoriad ar 15 Ebrill 1985. Roedd hwn yn adroddiad manwl, ac yn ôl pob golwg wedi’i dynnu o gofnodion clinigol. Nid oedd yr adroddiad yn dweud dim ynghylch a fu unrhyw ymgynghoriadau o gwbl rhwng 1980 a 1984 neu un ym mis Chwefror 1985, ond yr ymhlygiad oedd na fu ymgynghoriad.
Dywedodd Shipman bod Mr J, ar 15 Ebrill 1985, wedi cwyno o ddiffyg anadl. Gwnaethpwyd diagnosis o froncitis, a rhagnodwyd gwrthfiotig. Trefnodd Shipman belydr X o’r frest ar gyfer y diwrnod canlynol. Byddai’n ymddangos mai hwn oedd yr ymgynghoriad yr oedd mam Mr J yn meddwl a gafwyd yn y mis Chwefror. Gwadodd Shipman iddo ddweud mai ‘seicosomatig’ oedd cyflwr Mr J, ond cytunodd y byddai weithiau’n cynghori cleifion bod pryder yn gallu gwaethygu gwichian ar y frest. Dywedodd Shipman bod y pelydr X wedi dangos haint actif a bod cwrs arall o wrthfiotigau wedi’i ragnodi ar 7 Mai. Mewn adolygiad ar 21 Mai, canfu Shipman fod brest Mr J yn gwichian, ei fod yn peswch a’i fod wedi colli stôn o bwysau mewn tri mis. Dangosodd prawf ar yr ysgyfaint cyfradd briglif (PFR) o 300 litr y funud (sy’n wael iawn i ddyn o oed Mr J). Rhagnododd Shipman mewnanadlydd Ventolin a threfnodd amryw o brofion ar gyfer 24 Mai. Yn ei ymateb, disgrifiodd Shipman ganlyniadau’r profion hyn, yr oedd i weld yn cynnwys profion gwaed ac wrin ond nid pelydr X arall, a honnodd fod y canlyniadau yn awgrymu’n gryf bod haint ar y frest; dywedodd ei fod wedi meddwl tybed a oedd Mr J yn dioddef o’r ddarfodedigaeth.
Dywedodd Shipman fod Mr J wedi dod i’w feddygfa eto ar 4 Mehefin a chan nad oedd fymryn yn well, penderfynodd Shipman ei gyfeirio at feddyg y frest. Roedd y llythyr cyfeirio, dyddiedig 6 Mehefin, yn dweud fod Mr J wedi dod ato yn gynnar yn y mis blaenorol (mis Mai fyddai hynny) â’i frest yn dynn ac yn gwichian, a pheswch a oedd yn codi fflem gwyrdd. Mewn adolygiad yn dilyn cwrs o wrthfiotigau, rhwnc anadlu allan â gwichian a PFR o 300 yn unig oedd y canfyddiad. (Nid oedd unrhyw sôn am y colli pwysau). Roedd wedi rhagnodi Ventolin, a dywedodd ei fod wedi trefnu pelydr X, a bod canlyniad hwnnw’n gydnaws â haint actif ar y frest. (Roedd hynny’n gamarweiniol; cymerwyd y pelydr X ym mis Ebrill). Dywedodd bod y PFR yn yr adolygiad
‘diweddar’
wedi
‘graddol ddringo’
i 500 litr y funud, ond, ysgrifennodd,
‘y cwestiwn amlwg yw ai dyn ifanc ag asthma sydd gennym neu olion haint ar y frest yw hyn?’
Nodaf dair nodwedd ddiddorol yn y llythyr hwn. Fe wnaeth Shipman gamarwain yr ymgynghorydd o ran yr hanes, gan ddweud iddo weld Mr J yn gyntaf yn gynnar ym mis Mai ac iddo drefnu pelydr X ar ddiwedd mis Mai. Nid oedd wedi gwneud hynny; digwyddodd hyn ym mis Ebrill. Yn ail, ni wnaeth unrhyw gyfeiriad at y colli pwysau, a gallai hynny’n wir fod wedi bod yn arwydd o gyflwr cynyddol. Yn drydydd, nid oedd unrhyw awgrym yn y llythyr fod Shipman wedi amau’r ddarfodedigaeth nag unrhyw gyflwr arall a oedd yn gofyn am sylw brys. Roedd y llythyr yn sicr yn awgrymu sefyllfa nad oedd yn un argyfyngus.
Dywedodd Shipman wedyn ei fod wedi trefnu ymgynghoriad preifat â’r ymgynghorydd ar 14 Mehefin 1985, ar gais mam Mr J. Mewn gwirionedd, defnyddiodd yr un llythyr cyfeirio (camarweiniol) ag o’r blaen. Cynhaliwyd yr ymgynghoriad ar 20 Mehefin, ac ar y diwrnod hwnnw, hysbyswyd Shipman gan yr ymgynghorydd mai ei ddiagnosis ef oedd bod Mr J yn dioddef o bronciectasis gydag atalfa finimol ar y llwybr anadlu. Rhagnododd yr ymgynghorydd gwrthfiotig sbectrwm eang a chynghori Mr J i barhau â’r mewnanadlydd. Dilynodd lythyr llawnach gan yr ymgynghorydd, dyddiedig 2 Gorffennaf, yn cofnodi cwynion o ddiffyg anadl dros saith mlynedd, gyda phoer helaeth, yn waeth yn ystod misoedd y gaeaf. Soniodd y llythyr hefyd am golli dwy stôn mewn pwysau. O’r llythyr, ymddengys, ar ôl yr ymgynghoriad, bod yr ymgynghorydd wedi archwilio’r pelydr X o’r frest (yr un a gymerwyd ar 16 Ebrill fwy na thebyg) a chredai fod golwg y pelydr X yn codi diagnosis o ddarfodedigaeth yr ysgyfaint. Roedd Mr J i fynd i’r ysbyty i gael ymchwiliad pellach.
Fe wnaeth ymateb Shipman gwblhau’r hanes trwy gyfeirio at ddau lythyr rhyddhau o’r ysbyty. Roedd y cyntaf, dyddiedig 8 Gorffennaf, yn adrodd bod diagnosis Mr J yn parhau’n aneglur, er y credwyd ei fod yn dioddef o ddarfodedigaeth gronig. Roedd ei symptomau wedi gwella tra’i fod yn yr ysbyty, a chafodd fynd adref. Fodd bynnag, roedd Mr J wedi ailwaelu ychydig ddyddiau wedi ei ryddhau, ac aethpwyd ag ef i’r ysbyty eto ar 11 Gorffennaf. Roedd yr ail lythyr rhyddhau o’r ysbyty, a ysgrifennwyd ar ôl marwolaeth Mr J, yn hysbysu Shipman fod Mr J wedi marw o ffibrosis idiopathig tryledol yr ysgyfaint. Dangosodd y llythyr nad oedd diagnosis pendant wedi’i wneud hyd nes cynnal biopsi.
Roedd ymateb Shipman yn cynnwys yr awgrym fod Mr J wedi cael ei ystyried fel un a oedd o bosibl yn dioddef o AIDS, ac ymhlygodd bod technegau nyrsio rhwystrol wedi’u rhoi ar waith am y rheswm hwnnw. Mae cynnwys y cyfeiriad hwn at AIDS i weld yn gwbl ddiangen i mi, a pheri trallod neu dramgwydd yn unig y gall ei fwriad fod. Mae’r llythyr rhyddhau yn dweud yn glir bod y profion ar gyfer AIDS yn negyddol. Nid oes unrhyw gyfeiriad at dechnegau nyrsio rhwystrol yn y llythyr rhyddhau, ac ymddengys o rywle arall yn ei ymateb fod Shipman ei hun o’r farn, os oedd technegau nyrsio rhwystrol ar waith, ar gyfrif posibilrwydd y ddarfodedigaeth oedd hynny ac nid AIDS. Beth bynnag, nid oedd technegau nyrsio rhwystrol yn cael eu defnyddio ar gleifion ag AIDS, hyd yn oed ym 1985.
Yn olaf, dywedodd Shipman ei fod wedi cyflawni’i delerau gwasanaeth. Roedd wedi archwilio Mr J ar nifer o achlysuron. Roedd wedi trefnu pelydr X, wedi gwneud diagnosis gweithiol a rhoi triniaeth; wedyn, pan nad oedd y claf wedi gwella, roedd wedi’i gyfeirio’n briodol. Nododd nad oedd natur ddifrifol a therfynol salwch Mr J wedi bod yn amlwg nes iddo fynd i’r ysbyty am yr ail waith. Atododd Shipman ddisgrifiad o ffibrosis idiopathig tryledol yr ysgyfaint, y cyflwr yr oedd Mr J wedi marw ohono.
Mewn ymateb i lythyr Shipman, anfonodd Mrs J ateb maith, wedi’i ddrafftio gan Mr Rawlinson eto. At ddibenion presennol, dim ond at nifer o bwyntiau y mae angen i mi gyfeirio i ddangos yn glir eu bod hi’n teimlo bod materion i’w rhoi ar brawf. Dywedodd eto bod ei mab wedi ymgynghori â Shipman ynghylch ei frest cyn 15 Ebrill, ac awgrymodd y dylai’r MSC gael cofnodion clinigol ei mab, yn ogystal â thaflenni apwyntiadau’r feddygfa. Dywedodd eto mai barn Shipman oedd bod problemau ei mab ‘yn ei feddwl’; bu hyn yn jôc barhaol rhyngddo a Mr Rawlinson. Tynnodd sylw at haeriad Shipman ei fod wedi amau’r ddarfodedigaeth ar ddiwedd mis Mai, ac eto nid oedd wedi gofyn am apwyntiad brys â’r ymgynghorydd. Nododd anghywirdeb haeriad Shipman i’r ymgynghorydd iddo weld Mr J am y tro cyntaf yn gynnar ym mis Mai pan oedd, yn ôl ei air ei hun, wedi’i weld am y tro cyntaf ar 15 Ebrill. Atododd adroddiad gan yr ymgynghorydd, a oedd yn nodi’r hanes a chanfyddiadau’r awtopsi, ac yn mynegi’r farn fod ffibrosis idiopathig yr ysgyfaint wedi datblygu yn Mr J dros nifer o flynyddoedd. Dywedodd yr ymgynghorydd ei fod yn gyflwr prin iawn ymhlith yr ifainc; yn ei yrfa hir, nid oedd erioed wedi gweld achos mewn rhywun mor ifanc. Dywedodd nad oedd unrhyw driniaeth foddhaol i’r cyflwr, er bod cynnig wedi’i wneud ar ddefnyddio steroidau.
Fe wnaeth Cadeirydd yr MSC ystyried yr holl ohebiaeth a oedd ar gael wedyn, a rhoddodd ei farn nad oedd gwrandawiad o’r achos yn angenrheidiol. Nid oedd yn ofynnol iddo roi rhesymau am y penderfyniad hwnnw, ac ymddengys na wnaeth. Yn anffodus, nid yw’r ffeil FPC lawn ar gael bellach, ac ni fu modd i’r Ymchwiliad weld pa faterion a dynnwyd i sylw’r Cadeirydd. Yn benodol, nid yw’n glir pa un a roddwyd unrhyw ystyriaeth i’r ffaith fod rhai o’r haeriadau’n ymwneud â chyfnod dros wyth wythnos cyn gwneud y gŵyn, neu a wnaeth y ffaith honno ddylanwadu ar y penderfyniad y daethpwyd iddo.
Ar ryw adeg wedi hynny, ond cyn i’r achos ddod gerbron yr MSC i wneud penderfyniad yn ei gylch, anfonodd mam Mr J lythyr arall lle dywedodd y byddai’n
‘ddiddorol’
i gael gwybod beth ddigwyddodd i gofnodion meddygol ei mam ar gyfer y cyfnod mis Medi 1980 i fis Ebrill 1985 (y cyfnod y bu ymateb Shipman yn dawel).
Yng nghyfarfod yr MSC ar 4 Rhagfyr 1985, roedd y Pwyllgor yn cynnwys Mr Jack Millin (ei gadeirydd gweithredol), Mrs Joyce Howarth, Mr Peter Jackson, Dr Thomas Cooksey, Dr Terry Hughes (nad oedd yn feddyg meddygol ond yn hytrach yn beiriannydd), Dr Winston Jackson a Dr Dennis Milner. Mae cofnodion y cyfarfod yn cofnodi bod tri achos wedi’u hystyried, dau (gan gynnwys achos Mr J) heb wrandawiad llafar, ac un ar ôl gwrandawiad llafar llawn. Roedd y cofnod am achos Mr J yn dweud bod yr MSC wedi derbyn yr ohebiaeth yn ymwneud â’r gŵyn, wedi ystyried yr achos, ac wedi penderfynu bod adroddiad i’w baratoi ar gyfer yr FPC, yn argymell bod y gŵyn yn cael ei diystyru.
Roedd yr adroddiad, a ddrafftiwyd gan Mr William Greenwood, Gweinyddydd Cynorthwyol yn FPC Tameside ar y pryd, yn rhestru’r holl ddeunydd a oedd gerbron y Pwyllgor. Ym mharagraff 17, roedd yr adroddiad yn datgan bod cofnodion meddygol y claf wedi bod ar gael i’r Pwyllgor. Cofnodwyd bod yr MSC ar ôl ystyried pob un o’r eitemau hyn yn
‘ofalus iawn’
, wedi cytuno â phenderfyniad blaenorol Cadeirydd yr MSC nad oedd gwrandawiad o’r achos yn angenrheidiol. Ni roddwyd unrhyw resymau am y casgliad hwnnw.
Yna aeth Mr Greenwood ati i nodi’n fanwl y prawf i’w ddefnyddio wrth ystyried y prif gŵyn, gan ddweud bod rhaid i’r MSC ystyried a oedd Shipman wedi arfer medr a gofal dyledus wrth ffurfio diagnosis, ac a oedd wedi rhoi ei hun mewn sefyllfa lle gallai arfer y medr hwnnw’n rhesymol. Yna roedd yr adroddiad yn cofnodi’r canfyddiadau ffeithiol. Roedd yr MSC yn cofnodi’r cyfnodau y bu Mr J yn glaf i Shipman, ond nid oedd yn gwneud unrhyw gyfeiriad at unrhyw ymgynghoriadau ym 1984 na 1985, cyn 15 Ebrill 1985, er gwaethaf taerineb Mrs J iddo ymgynghori â Shipman yn ystod y cyfnod hwn. Yna roedd yr adroddiad yn rhoi crynodeb byr o’r hanes, a gymerwyd, dywedwyd, o’r cofnodion meddygol. Roedd yr adroddiad yn dilyn hwnnw a roddwyd yn ymateb Shipman. Y casgliad oedd na fu unrhyw oedi afresymol yn nhriniaeth Shipman o Mr J. Nid oedd unrhyw gyfeiriad at fethiant Mr J i wella gyda thriniaeth nac at y pwysau yr oedd wedi’i golli. Ni soniwyd ychwaith nad oedd Shipman wedi gofyn am apwyntiad brys, er ei fod yn ôl pob golwg yn amau’r ddarfodedigaeth. Canfu’r Pwyllgor fod Shipman wedi arfer barn resymol; roedd wedi trefnu pelydr X ac wedi cyfeirio’r claf i gael barn ymgynghorydd. Roedd y Pwyllgor yn amlwg yn ystyried natur anarferol y cyflwr ac anhawster y diagnosis yn ffactorau pwysig. Dywedwyd nad oedd unrhyw sôn yn y nodiadau bod Shipman wedi ystyried mai natur seicosomatig oedd i’r salwch. Daeth y Pwyllgor i’r casgliad na fu unrhyw achos o dorri telerau gwasanaeth.
Tystiolaeth yn yr Ymchwiliad
Rhoddodd Mr Rawlinson dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Dywedodd iddo fod yn anfodlon â chanlyniad y gŵyn, ac roedd o’r farn y dylai fod wedi’i chynnal. Cytunodd, ar y pryd, iddo deimlo gofid mawr ynghylch y farwolaeth a’i fod yn ddig iawn. Mae’n sylweddoli erbyn hyn bod helpu Mrs J i wneud ei chŵyn yn fodd o gael gwared ar ei ddicter. Mae’n ddyn deallus, a chredaf ei fod yn cydnabod nad oedd o bosibl mor wrthrychol ar y pryd ag a fyddai fel arfer. Mynegodd y farn, a oedd ganddo ar y pryd, bod yr MSC yn glwb caeedig, a fyddai’n diogelu meddygon rhag beirniadaeth. Ychwanegodd, wrth ailddarllen y papurau ar adeg yr Ymchwiliad, mai dyna oedd ei argraff o hyd.
Aeth Mr Rawlinson drwy’r hyn yr oedd yn ei gofio nawr fel manylion salwch ei ffrind, a chadarnhaodd gywirdeb hynny a gafodd ei ddweud yn y gŵyn wreiddiol. Ailadroddodd ei bryder am amharodrwydd ymddangosiadol Shipman i gymryd cyflwr Mr J o ddifrif a’r oedi o ran cael apwyntiad ag ymgynghorydd a chychwyn ymchwiliadau eraill.
Gofynnwyd iddo a oedd yn ymwybodol o’r terfynau amser a olygai, ond bai bod caniatâd arbennig wedi’i roi, na fyddai’r MSC wedi gallu edrych i mewn i faterion a oedd wedi digwydd dros wyth wythnos cyn dyddiad y gŵyn. Dywedodd nad oedd yn ymwybodol o hynny, a’i fod yn meddwl erbyn hyn na ddywedwyd wrtho yntau a Mrs J am y rheol honno. Fodd bynnag, nid oes modd gwirio a yw’n iawn yn hynny o beth, gan mai’r unig rannau o ffeil yr FPC sydd wedi goroesi yw’r dogfennau hynny a ddarparwyd i’r MSC.
Mynegodd Mr Rawlinson y farn hefyd nad oedd gwybodaeth ddigonol yn cael ei rhoi iddo yntau a Mrs J am yr hyn a oedd yn mynd ymlaen. Nid oeddent yn gwybod sut oedd y weithdrefn cwynion yn gweithio. Nid oeddent yn gwybod pa gofnodion meddygol oedd ar gael, ac i ba raddau yr edrychwyd arnynt. Nid oedd unrhyw ymgais i egluro’r materion; ymddengys mai’r broses oedd: cwyn - ymateb - ateb. Roeddent wedi disgwyl y byddai’r MSC ei hun yn ymchwilio i’r hyn ddigwyddodd. Roedd Mr Rawlinson wedi gwneud awgrymiadau am y modd y cynhaliwyd yr ymchwiliad (gan gynnwys cael taflenni apwyntiadau’r feddygfa a chofnodion meddygol Mr J), ac nid oedd wedi sylweddoli mai’r partïon oedd yn gwneud y gwaith ymchwilio. Teimlai y byddai wedi bod yn werthfawr cael gwrandawiad llafar. Dywedodd hefyd nad oedd yn gwybod y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i apelio yn erbyn penderfyniad yr MSC. Fodd bynnag, credaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai rhywun wedi’i wneud yn ymwybodol o hynny. Credaf ei bod yn debygol fod Mrs J wedi cael ei chynghori ynglŷn â hynny pan gafodd ei hysbysu am y penderfyniad. Dyna fyddai’r weithdrefn arferol, a chredaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai Mr Greenwood wedi dilyn y weithdrefn. Nid oes modd gwirio’r pwynt hwn gan nad yw rhan o’r ffeil ar gael bellach.
Tystiolaeth Aelodau’r Pwyllgor Gwasanaeth Meddygol
Ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad ganfod pam benderfynodd Cadeirydd yr MSC beidio cynnal gwrandawiad llafar, a pham yr oedd y Pwyllgor a oedd yn eistedd ar 4 Rhagfyr wedi penderfynu cadarnhau penderfyniad hwn. Nid oedd yr adroddiad swyddogol yn taflu unrhyw oleuni ar y materion hynny. Ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad ganfod mwy hefyd am resymeg y Pwyllgor a’r modd yr oedd wedi ymdrin â’r achos.
Ymddengys yn debygol fod Cadeirydd FPC Tameside, Mr Basil Sabine, a oedd hefyd yn Gadeirydd yr MSC, wedi gwneud y penderfyniad gwreiddiol i beidio gorchymyn cynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Mae Mr Sabine wedi marw bellach. Nid oedd yn gallu bod yn bresennol yng nghyfarfod yr MSC ar 4 Rhagfyr ac, yn ei absenoldeb, cafodd y cyfarfod ei gadeirio gan Mr Millin (a oedd yn rhy anhwylus i roi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ). O’r aelodau eraill o’r MSC, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn gallu dod o hyd i Mr Jackson, Mrs Howarth, Dr Jackson, Dr Milner a Dr Cooksey. Darparwyd datganiadau tystion gan y pump ohonynt; rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Jackson a Dr Cooksey.
Dywedodd Dr Cooksey bod gwrandawiad llafar yn cael ei gynnal fel arfer os oedd anghydfod ffeithiau. Yn ei dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig, dywedodd, wrth ddarllen yr achos hwn, ei bod yn ymddangos iddo ef bod y materion yn glir ac na fyddai wedi synnu bod y Cadeirydd wedi penderfynu peidio cynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Wrth roi tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad, derbyniodd bod dadl yn codi rhwng y partïon ynghylch a oedd Shipman wedi gweld Mr J gan gyfeirio at yr anhwylder ar ei frest cyn mis Ebrill 1985. Roedd i weld ei fod yn derbyn hefyd bod dadl ynghylch a oedd yn rhesymol, os oedd Shipman yn amau y gallai Mr J fod yn dioddef o’r ddarfodedigaeth, i’w gyfeirio at ymgynghorydd a hynny heb apwyntiad brys. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd ei fod o’r farn bod y Pwyllgor wedi llunio’r farn, beth bynnag oedd wedi cael ei wneud, na fyddai wedi gwneud unrhyw wahaniaeth i’r canlyniad. Gallai hyn, fe gredai, fod wedi dylanwadu ar ei benderfyniad. Os oedd hynny’n wir, byddai’n golygu bod y Pwyllgor wedi canolbwyntio ar y cwestiwn anghywir, gan mai’r prawf oedd pa un a oedd yr hyn a wnaeth Shipman yn rhesymol, nid a fyddai triniaeth resymol wedi gwneud unrhyw wahaniaeth i’r canlyniad. Pan holwyd ef pa mor ofalus yr oedd yr MSC wedi ystyried yr achosion nad oedd oeddent yn achosion llafar (roedd dau ohonynt ar 4 Rhagfyr yn ogystal â gwrandawiad llafar), dywedodd Dr Cooksey bod yr MSC ‘yn cefnogi penderfyniad y Cadeirydd a oedd wedi penderfynu mai hwn oedd y dull gweithredu iawn’. Derbyniodd mai’r trydydd achos oedd prif fusnes y dydd, ac roedd gwrandawiad llafar i’w gynnal ar hwnnw. Teimlaf fod rhaid i mi ddweud y byddwn innau wedi ei chael hi’n anodd iawn, mewn un diwrnod o waith (ac nid yw’n eglur a wnaeth y Pwyllgor eistedd am y diwrnod cyfan neu hanner diwrnod yn unig), i roi ystyriaeth
‘ofalus iawn’
i’r holl ddeunydd a’r cofnodion yn yr achos hwn, achos arall tebyg iddo ac un arall eto lle’r oedd gwrandawiad llafar i’w gynnal, hyd yn oed pe byddem wedi darllen y papurau o flaen llaw.
Roedd Mr Jackson, cyfreithiwr, yn aelod lleyg o’r MSC. Dywedodd nad oedd yn gwybod pam yr oedd y Cadeirydd wedi penderfynu o flaen llaw i beidio cynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd na fyddai’r MSC yn edrych ar honiadau yn ymwneud â digwyddiadau a oedd wedi digwydd dros wyth wythnos cyn dyddiad y gŵyn, oni bai bod cais i ymestyn yr amser wedi’i gytuno neu’i ganiatáu. Gwnaeth y pwynt bod adroddiad y Pwyllgor yn datgan nad oedd unrhyw beth yn y cofnodion a oedd yn dangos bod Shipman yn meddwl mai problem seicosomatig oedd hi. Felly’n wir, ond tynnwyd ei sylw at y ffaith nad oedd yr adroddiad yn delio â’r cwestiwn a oedd unrhyw gofnodion o gwbl yn ystod y cyfnod cynharach. Ymateb Mr Jackson i hynny oedd bod unrhyw ymgynghoriadau yn y cyfnod cynharach ‘wedi’r amser’. Nododd hefyd yr anhawster o wneud penderfyniad am yr achos ar dystiolaeth achlust. Esboniodd na fyddai’r fam wedi gallu rhoi tystiolaeth uniongyrchol am yr hyn ddywedodd Shipman; roedd Shipman wedi gwadu iddo ddweud ei fod wedi trin y cyflwr fel un seicosomatig. Fodd bynnag, mae tystiolaeth achlust o’r hyn a glywyd person ymadawedig yn dweud yn cael ei derbyn yn aml; fe allai gwrthod clywed y dystiolaeth achosi anghyfiawnder gwirioneddol. Rhaid ystyried yn ofalus faint o bwys y dylid ei briodoli i’r dystiolaeth. Pe bai’r cofnodion wedi cynnwys nodiadau ym 1984 yn ymwneud â pheswch neu ddiffyg anadl, ac os nad oedd cofnod digonol o archwiliadau ac arsylwadau, gallai’r Pwyllgor fod wedi casglu bod y dystiolaeth achlust yn gywir. Nid oedd unrhyw rwystr i dderbyn tystiolaeth felly, ac, yn wir, roedd nodiadau arweiniad yr Adran Iechyd, yr wyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio atynt, yn dweud yn benodol y gallai tystiolaeth achlust gael ei derbyn, yn amodol ar rybuddion ynghylch y pwys y dylid priodoli iddi.
Dywedodd Dr Jackson, un o’r aelodau meddygol, yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn gwybod pam y penderfynwyd peidio cynnal gwrandawiad llafar. Roedd y rhan fwyaf o achosion yn cael gwrandawiad. Dyfalodd fod y penderfyniad wedi’i wneud o bosibl er mwyn osgoi trallod pellach i’r fam. Dywedodd Dr Milner yn ei ddatganiad tyst nad oedd yn gallu dweud pan wnaethpwyd y penderfyniad.
Yn ei datganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mrs Howarth na allai gofio’r achos, ond, o ddarllen y papurau, credai bod nifer o resymau pam y byddai’r MSC wedi penderfynu cadarnhau’r penderfyniad blaenorol i beidio cynnal gwrandawiad llafar a diystyru’r gŵyn. Roedd o’r farn y byddai’r dystiolaeth ynghylch yr hyn a ddigwyddodd mewn ymgynghoriadau cynharach wedi cael ei hystyried fel tystiolaeth achlust. Nid oedd y nodiadau’n cynnwys unrhyw gyfeiriad at gred Shipman bod y broblem yn un seicosomatig. Rwyf eisoes wedi rhoi sylwadau ar y pwyntiau hynny. Roedd o’r farn hefyd ei bod yn ymddangos na fu unrhyw ymgynghoriadau yn ystod y cyfnod cynharach (er, mewn gwirionedd, nid yw’n glir a fu neu beidio). Nododd ei bod yn ymddangos fod Mr J wedi gallu parhau i weithio, ac felly rhesymol oedd casglu na fu’n ddifrifol wael hyd at y diwedd, pan oedd gweithredoedd Shipman, fel y cofnodir yn y nodiadau, yn glir ac yn briodol yn ôl pob golwg. Soniodd bod y cyflwr yn un prin iawn ac anodd i’w ddiagnosio. Felly’n wir, ond nid a ddylai Shipman fod wedi diagnosio’r cyflwr oedd y cwestiwn i’r MSC, ond yn hytrach a oedd wedi darparu gofal meddygol priodol ar bob achlysur pan welodd y claf.
Arsylwadau
O gofio’r wybodaeth a’r deunydd anghyflawn a oedd ar gael i mi, ni allaf ddod i unrhyw gasgliad ynghylch a ymdriniwyd yn briodol â’r gŵyn hon mewn gwirionedd. Fodd bynnag, caf fy ngadael â nifer o bryderon. Nid wyf yn gwybod a ddywedwyd wrth Mrs J am y terfynau amser. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod wedi cael ei chynghori ynglŷn â hynny, a dylid fod wedi dweud wrthi am y posibilrwydd o wneud cais am ganiatâd i ymestyn cwmpas y gŵyn. Gall fod iddi gael gwybod ond ei bod wedi penderfynu peidio gwneud cais neu ei bod wedi gwneud cais ac na roddwyd caniatâd. Mae’n bosibl ei bod wedi gwneud cais, bod caniatâd wedi’i roi a bod y gŵyn yn cynnwys digwyddiadau 1984. Os felly, nid oedd y penderfyniad yn delio’n ddigonol â’r cyfnod cynharach hwn. Ymddengys i mi y dylid fod wedi cynnal gwrandawiad llafar, er y byddai rhywfaint o’r dystiolaeth wedi bod yn dystiolaeth achlust. Roedd gwrthdaro amlwg mewn tystiolaeth am agwedd Shipman a’i amharodrwydd i gyfeirio Mr J at ymgynghorydd. Pe bai gwrandawiad llafar wedi’i gynnal, efallai y byddai’r Pwyllgor wedi talu mwy o sylw i’r haeriad fod Shipman wedi honni iddo amau’r ddarfodedigaeth ar ddiwedd mis Mai, ond na ofynnodd am apwyntiad brys â’r ymgynghorydd. Ymddengys bod o leiaf un aelod o’r Pwyllgor (mwy o bosibl) wedi ystyried ei rôl fel un a gefnogai penderfyniad y Cadeirydd. Gall fod nad oedd rhai aelodau o’r MSC yn deall y cwestiwn y dylent fod wedi bod yn ei ofyn a’u bod wedi ystyried ystyriaethau amherthnasol.
Roedd Mrs J a Mr Rawlinson yn anfodlon â’r broses a’r canlyniad, a, chyn belled ag y mae’r broses yn y cwestiwn, mae hynny’n ddealladwy. Wrth feirniadu’r broses, nid wyf yn beirniadu’r unigolion dan sylw. Roeddent yn gwneud pethau yn y ffordd arferol. Ond nid ymddengys bod y broses wedi’i chynllunio i roi dealltwriaeth i’r achwynydd o’r hyn a oedd wedi digwydd. Ni fu unrhyw ymchwiliad i’r gŵyn hon, nac unrhyw ymgais i ddatrys y materion a gweld pa dystiolaeth oedd ei hangen neu a oedd ar gael i ddelio â phob mater. Pe bai rhywun wedi gofyn i Mr Rawlinson pa oedi yr oedd yn cwyno yn ei gylch, byddai wedi cynnwys ei bryder ynghylch yr anweithgarwch honedig rhwng 1984 a dechrau 1985. Byddai rhywun wedi gorfod esbonio na allai’r MSC, dan y rheolau, edrych i mewn i hynny oni ofynnwyd am ganiatâd a’i gael. Byddwn wedi disgwyl y byddai caniatâd wedi’i roi. Dylai rhywun fod wedi edrych ar y cofnodion, a dweud yn glir yn y penderfyniad pa gofnodion, os o gwbl, a oedd ym 1984. Os nad oedd unrhyw gofnodion, a bod Mrs J yn parhau i ddweud bod ei mab wedi ymweld â Shipman yn y flwyddyn honno, does bosib y gellid fod wedi cael gafael ar daflenni apwyntiadau’r feddygfa. Ar ddiwedd y dydd, roedd yr holl gwestiwn ynghylch a wnaeth Mr J ymgynghori â Shipman o gwbl ym 1984 yn parhau’n gwbl amhendant.
Teimlai Mr Rawlinson hefyd bod diffyg annibyniaeth ar ran yr MSC. Pan wnaethpwyd y gŵyn hon, roedd Shipman yn ysgrifennydd yr LMC, ac roedd wedi bod yn y swydd honno ers rhyw 1981. Fel ysgrifennydd, roedd yn aelod o’r FPC yn awtomatig. Yn Tameside ar y pryd (er nad oedd hyn yn ofyniad y Rheoliadau), roedd pob aelod o’r MSC hefyd yn aelodau o’r FPC. Felly, roedd Shipman yn gydweithiwr i bob un o aelodau’r FPC a’r MSC, yn aelodau lleyg a meddygol. Dywedodd Dr Cooksey ei fod wedi gwasanaethu ar yr LMC o ddiwedd y 1960au hyd at 1994, a’i fod yn gadeirydd o 1977 hyd at 1983. Yn ystod ei dymor fel cadeirydd, gweithiodd gyda Shipman fel ysgrifennydd. Dywedodd Dr Jackson ei fod ef yn gadeirydd yr LMC am ddwy flynedd yn y 1980au, er nad oedd yn sicr a oedd yn dal yn y swydd honno ym mis Rhagfyr 1985. O gofio dyddiadau cadeiryddiaeth Dr Cooksey, ymddengys yn gwbl bosibl fod Dr Jackson wir yn gadeirydd yr LMC ar adeg y gwrandawiad. Dywedodd Mr Greenwood wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod yn meddwl ei bod yn amhriodol y dylai ymddygiad meddyg teulu lleol gael ei adolygu gan ei gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr lleol. Rwy’n cytuno. Nid yw’n syndod fod Mr Rawlinson yn teimlo fod yr MSC yn siop gaeedig. Hyd yn oed pe bai’r aelodau’n orofalus o deg, nid ymddengys bod unrhyw elfen o annibyniaeth.
Achos Mr W
Ym 1990, gwnaethpwyd cwyn ynghylch triniaeth Shipman o glaf y byddaf yn ei alw’n Mr W. Roedd yn 39 oed ac yn dioddef o epilepsi. Roedd anawsterau dysgu ganddo hefyd, er ei fod yn byw bywyd annibynnol. Yn ddiau oherwydd yr anawsterau hynny y gwnaethpwyd y gŵyn ar ei ran gan ei chwaer, Mrs L. Trwy lythyr dyddiedig 6 Ionawr 1990, adroddodd Mrs L bod ei brawd wedi’i ddiagnosio ag epilepsi, a’i fod wedi cael ei gynghori gan ymgynghorydd yn yr ysbyty lleol ym 1986 y dylai gymryd deg o dabledi y dydd o Epilim 200mg. Ymddengys fod Shipman, mewn gwirionedd, wastad wedi rhagnodi wyth o dabledi y dydd, ond nid oes dim yn dibynnu ar y pwynt hwnnw. Ar 14 Tachwedd 1989, roedd Shipman wedi rhoi ail ragnodyn ar gyfer Epilim, ond, yn lle rhagnodi tabledi 200mg, roedd wedi rhagnodi tabledi 500mg, i’w cymryd fel arfer, sef wyth y dydd. Ar 7 ac 8 Rhagfyr, ar ôl bwyta 76 o’r tabledi 500mg, dros gyfnod o naw niwrnod yn ôl pob golwg, syrthiodd Mr W i lawr y grisiau. Rai dyddiau’n ddiweddarach, fe’i canfuwyd mewn cyflwr gwael iawn gan Mrs L, yn eistedd mewn cadair. Ymddengys ei fod wedi mynd yn anymatal ac wedi datblygu ‘briwiau gorwedd’. Nid oedd ef na’i bartner, a oedd ag anawsterau dysgu fel yntau, wedi gallu galw am help. Aethpwyd ag ef i’r ysbyty lle’r arhosodd dair wythnos yn ddiweddarach.
Cyfeiriwyd y gŵyn at FPC Tameside. Ym mis Medi 1990, trosglwyddwyd swyddogaethau’r FPC i FHSA Tameside a pharhaodd i ddelio â’r gŵyn. Cyfarwyddwyd yr FPC gan Gadeirydd yr MSC i ofyn am ymateb Shipman i’r gŵyn. Ymatebodd Shipman ym mis Gorffennaf 1990. Cyfaddefodd iddo wneud camgymeriad, a dywedodd na allai ddeall sut yr oedd wedi digwydd; roedd nodiadau Mr W ganddo o’i flaen pan ysgrifennodd y rhagnodyn. Meddyliodd efallai bod ei sylw wedi’i wrthdynnu. Tynnodd sylw at fethiant y fferyllydd dosbarthu i sylwi ar y camgymeriad. Adroddodd fod Mr W wedi ymadfer o’r digwyddiad erbyn hyn, a’i fod wedi cael ei drosglwyddo i lety cysgodol a oedd yn fwy addas i’w anghenion. Esboniodd hefyd bod y feddygfa wedi cael system gyfrifiadur lawn yn ddiweddar, a phan fydd y dogn cywir wedi’i gofnodi, ni ddylai camgymeriadau o’r fath ddigwydd, gan y byddai’r ail-ragnodion yn cael eu paratoi o ddata yn y system.
Anfonwyd ymateb Shipman at gyfreithiwr Mrs L, a ymatebodd, gan herio amryw agweddau ar ymateb Shipman, er nad oedd yr un o feysydd y ddadl yn berthnasol i’r penderfyniad am y gŵyn. Er bod Cadeirydd yr MCS o’r farn yn y lle cyntaf y byddai’n rhaid cynnal gwrandawiad llafar, cytunwyd yn y diwedd na fyddai hyn yn angenrheidiol. Ar 12 Rhagfyr 1990, deliwyd â’r achos mewn cyfarfod o’r MSC lle nad oedd yr un o’r ddau barti’n bresennol. Yn anochel, canfuwyd bod Shipman wedi torri telerau paragraff 13 o’i delerau gwasanaeth. Daeth adroddiad y gwrandawiad i ben gydag argymhelliad y dylai Shipman gael rhybudd i gydymffurfio â’i delerau gwasanaeth yn fanylach yn y dyfodol, ond nid oedd unrhyw argymhelliad ar gyfer atal tâl. Dyma’r tro cyntaf y canfuwyd Shipman yn torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Derbyniwyd y canfyddiad a’r argymhelliad hwn gan yr FHSA. Nid apeliodd Shipman yn erbyn y canfyddiad na’r rhybudd. Hysbyswyd yr SoS, a chefnogodd y camau a gymerwyd gan yr FHSA. Hysbyswyd Shipman am hyn ar 20 Mawrth 1991. Nid adroddwyd i’r GMC am yr achos.
Dim ond dau sylw rwy’n gwneud am yr achos syml iawn hwn. Yn gyntaf, cymerodd bron i flwyddyn i ddod â’r mater i ben. Mae hynny’n gyfnod hwy nag sy’n ddymunol. Yn ail, mae’n dangos, os oes rhaid cymryd camau i ddisgyblu meddyg, sut mae potensial mewn system wrthwynebus sy’n canolbwyntio ar safonau y mae meddyg yn gorfod eu bodloni, i ddarparu modd addas o ganfod y ffeithiau y mae camau gweithredu disgyblu i’w seilio arnynt.
O gofio cwyn Mr Rawlinson bod yr MSC, ym 1985, i weld yn siop gaeëdig, rwyf wedi ystyried graddau annibyniaeth yr MSC oddi wrth Shipman ym 1990. Nodaf, yn y llythyrau yn hysbysu aelodau’r Pwyllgor o’r dyddiad delio â’r gŵyn, rhybuddiwyd aelodau i ystyried pa un a ddylent anghymhwyso’u hunain. Dywedwyd wrthynt am beidio eistedd os oedd ganddynt ddiddordeb yn y cwestiwn yr oedd penderfyniad i wneud yn ei gylch, neu os oedd ganddynt unrhyw gysylltiad ag unrhyw un o’r partïon. Cynghorodd y llythyr
‘y byddai cyfeillgarwch neu berthynas fusnes neu gymdeithasol agos yn anghymhwyso ond nid - ar eu pennau’u hunain - adnabyddiaeth syml neu gysylltiadau swyddogol’
. Ym 1990, nid oedd Shipman yn ysgrifennydd yr LMC mwyach; roedd wedi ymddiswyddo ym 1988. Nid oedd yn aelod o’r FPC mwyach, a oedd, beth bynnag, wedi’i ddisodli gan yr FHSA. Fodd bynnag, bu’n ysgrifennydd yr LMC ac ar yr FPC am ryw saith mlynedd ac mae’n rhaid ei fod yn adnabyddus iawn i lawer o aelodau cyfredol yr FHSA a’r MSC. Dywedodd yr Uwchgapten Robin Tarr, aelod o’r MSC a fu’n gwrando’r gŵyn mewn perthynas â Mr W, ei fod yn adnabod Shipman o’r FPC a bod Shipman, pan wnaethant gyfarfod gyntaf, wedi’i wahodd i edrych o gwmpas meddygfa Donneybrook, i weld sut yr oedd meddygaeth deuluol yn gweithio. Cafodd yr ymweliad yn un defnyddiol iawn. Dywedodd nad oedd ei adnabyddiaeth â Shipman wedi effeithio ar ei benderfyniad yn yr achos. Dywedodd Mr Jackson, cadeirydd yr MSC, fod enw da gan Shipman yn yr ardal ac nid oedd yn cael ei ystyried fel meddyg esgeulus. Roedd wedi adnabod Shipman drwy eistedd ar bwyllgor FPC arall yr oedd y ddau ohonynt yn aelod ohono, ac, er ei fod yn ei ystyried fel tipyn o rebel, roedd yntau ac aelodau lleyg eraill o’r pwyllgor wedi cael argraff dda ohono.
Yng ngolau’r cyngor a roddwyd iddynt, nid wyf yn beirniadu aelodau’r MSC a benderfynodd beidio datgymhwyso’u hunain. Fodd bynnag, credaf, er budd sicrhau bod cyfiawnder yn cael ei wneud a’i fod yn weladwy, byddai wedi bod yn well pe bai polisi y dylai’r achos gael ei drosglwyddo i MSC FPC/FHSA cyfagos pan oedd aelod meddyg teulu (neu gyn aelod diweddar) o’r FPC/FHSA ar fin dod gerbron yr MSC. Yn wir, gallai rhywun fynd ymhellach a dweud y byddai’n well pe bai unrhyw gamau gweithredu disgyblu yn erbyn meddyg teulu yn cael eu penderfynu gan bobl o ardal arall nad oes ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth bersonol amdano/amdani. Byddai polisi felly’n osgoi’r perygl y gallai unrhyw anfodlonrwydd ar ran achwynydd siomedig ganolbwyntio ar ddiffyg didueddrwydd yn y tribiwnlys. Yn yr achos hwn, gallai’r achwynydd fod wedi cymryd y farn bod y gosb yn rhy drugarog.
Achos Mrs B
Ar 4 Mawrth 1992, gwnaeth Mr B gŵyn mewn perthynas â gwasanaethau meddygol yn cael eu darparu i’w wraig ddydd Mercher, 26 Chwefror 1992. Roedd Mrs B yn ddynes oedrannus ac yn glaf i Dr Jeffery Moysey, cydweithiwr i Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Roedd gan Dr Moysey a Shipman drefniant lle’r oeddent yn cyflenwi dros ei gilydd ar hanner diwrnodau. Ar ddydd Mercher, byddai Dr Moysey yn gweithio tan ryw 10.30a.m. ac ar ôl hynny byddai Shipman yn cyflenwi drosto.
Yn y llythyr cwyno, dywedodd Mr B fod ei wraig wedi bod yn sâl ddydd Sul, 23 Chwefror. Roedd Dr Moysey wedi ymweld ar y dydd Llun ac wedi diagnosio strôc. Roedd wedi addo galw ‘nôl ‘mewn diwrnod neu ddau’. Addawodd hefyd y byddai’n trefnu ymweliad yn y cartref gan ymgynghorydd ac i nyrsys ardal fod yn bresennol. Roedd nyrs wedi bod yno ar 24, 25 a 26 Chwefror. Ddydd Mercher, 26 Chwefror, roedd cyflwr Mrs B wedi gwaethygu ac roedd y teulu wedi disgwyl ymweliad gan Dr Moysey. Pan na chyrhaeddodd erbyn canol dydd, roedd ei mab (llysfab Mr B) wedi ffonio’r feddygfa i ofyn am ymweliad. Roedd wedi dweud wrth y derbynnydd fod cyflwr Mrs B yn waeth; roedd i ddweud yng ngwrandawiad yr MSC ei fod yn meddwl ei bod wedi cael strôc arall. Roedd y derbynnydd wedi dweud bod Dr Moysey ar ei hanner diwrnod, ond fod Shipman yn cyflenwi ar ei ran, ac y byddai neges yn cael ei throsglwyddo cyn gynted ag y byddai’n dod i mewn. Ychydig wedyn, roedd y derbynnydd wedi ffonio cartref Mrs B a dweud wrth fab Mrs B fod Shipman wedi dod yn ôl ond ei fod wedi dweud nad oedd angen ymweld, gan fod Dr Moysey wedi gweld Mrs B ddeuddydd yn gynharach. Roedd mab Mrs B wedi ailadrodd ei gais am ymweliad, gan bwysleisio (fel yr oedd i ddweud yn y gwrandawiad) bod cyflwr ei fam wedi dirywio. Roedd i ddweud hefyd yn y gwrandawiad ei fod wedi sôn ei bod yn ddynes drom iawn ac yn anymatal, a’u bod yn cael anhawster wrth ei chodi. Aeth y derbynnydd i siarad â Shipman eto, ond adroddodd yn ôl i fab Mrs B ei fod yn gwrthod dod allan gan na fyddai’n iawn iddo ‘fynd dros ben’ benderfyniad Dr Moysey nad oedd angen i Mrs B fynd i’r ysbyty. Ychydig wedyn, roedd y teulu wedi ffonio ambiwlans ac aethpwyd â Mrs B i’r ysbyty.
Roedd ymateb Shipman i’r gŵyn yn gadarn. Cytunodd ei fod wedi bod yn dirprwyo ar ran Dr Moysey ar y diwrnod dan sylw, a’i fod wedi cael cais i ymweld â Mrs B. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd ei fod wedi gwneud nodyn gofalu o’r cais a’r hyn a wnaeth. Amgaeodd gopi o’r nodyn, a ddywedwyd a gafodd ei ysgrifennu ar y pryd, yn darllen:
(Dr Moysey)
(trannoeth)
For Dr Moysey to reassess’.
Taerodd Shipman na ddywedwyd wrtho fod cyflwr Mrs B wedi dirywio. Yn ei farn ef, roedd y gŵyn wedi codi oherwydd camddealltwriaeth ynghylch pa bryd y byddai Dr Moysey yn ail-ymweld. Gwadodd ei fod wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth.
Ymateb Dr Moysey, cyn belled ag y mae’n berthnasol at ddibenion cyfredol, oed, pan ymwelodd ar 24 Chwefror, canfu fod Mrs B wedi cael strôc fach a’i bod i weld yn ymadfer. Gwnaeth drefniadau addas ar gyfer gofal yn ei chartref. Nid oedd wedi gwneud unrhyw drefniant pendant i ail-ymweld â hi, ond roedd wedi dweud y byddai’n galw nes ymlaen yn yr wythnos. Ddydd Iau ar ôl ei hanner diwrnod, roedd un o’i dderbynyddion wedi dweud wrtho fod Mrs B wedi cael ei chludo i’r ysbyty, ac nad oedd angen ymweld â hi yn ei chartref. Gwadodd ei fod wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth.
Ar ôl esbonio rhai o’r materion yn gyntaf, trosglwyddwyd y gŵyn i’r MSC o FHSA Manceinion oherwydd bod Dr Moysey yn aelod o MSC Tameside. Gorchmynnwyd gwrandawiad ac fe’i gynhaliwyd ar 8 Medi 1993. Honnwyd bod y ddau feddyg yn torri paragraff 13 o’u telerau gwasanaeth. Cynrychiolwyd Mr B gan ysgrifennydd CHC Tameside a Glossop.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Mr B ac ymhelaethodd ar ei gŵyn ysgrifenedig. Yn benodol, rhoddodd ddisgrifiad clir o’r dirywiad yng nghyflwr ei wraig a ddigwyddodd ar fore 26 Chwefror. Esboniodd hefyd pam na wnaeth y teulu ffonio’r feddygfa hyd nes ychydig ar ôl ganol dydd. Roeddent wedi bod yn disgwyl i Dr Moysey ymweld; roedd wedi dweud y byddai’n galw ‘mewn diwrnod neu ddau’. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth hefyd gan Mr S, mab Mrs B, a darparodd mwy o fanylion am y sgyrsiau a gafodd gyda’r derbynnydd ar 26 Chwefror. Taerodd bod cyflwr ei fam wedi dirywio’r diwrnod hwnnw, a’i fod wedi esbonio hynny i’r derbynnydd. Dywedodd fod y derbynnydd wedi adrodd yn ôl na fyddai Shipman yn dod allan gan fod Dr Moysey wedi gweld Mrs B deuddydd yn gynharach, ac na fyddai’n iawn iddo ‘fynd dros ben’ ei farn nad oedd angen iddi fynd i’r ysbyty.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Dr Moysey. Cadarnhaodd ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig. Rhoddodd adroddiad llawn iawn o’i archwiliad o Mrs B, a’r rhesymau pam y penderfynodd ar y dydd Llun y dylai Mrs B aros yn ei chartref. Esboniodd y trefniadau yr oedd wedi’u gwneud, a’i gynlluniau ar gyfer ymdrin â hi yn y dyfodol. Disgrifiodd y trefniad a oedd ganddo â Shipman, a dywedodd nad oedd erioed wedi ceisio cyfyngu ar y modd yr oedd Shipman yn trin ei (Dr Moysey) gleifion.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Shipman. Cadarnhaodd ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig a dywedodd na allai gofio’r digwyddiad o gwbl. Roedd yn ddibynnol ar y nodyn a wnaeth. Dywedodd nad oedd wedi siarad yn uniongyrchol â Mr S gan fod staff y dderbynfa’n brofiadol iawn; dywedodd ei fod yn teimlo y gallai ddibynnu ar y derbynnydd i adrodd yn gywir yr hyn a ddywedwyd. Dywedodd mai ei arfer fel rheol oedd gofyn i’r derbynnydd ganfod a oedd dirywiad wedi bod mewn cyflwr claf. Dywedodd, yn ôl hynny a glywodd gan y derbynnydd, na fu dirywiad yng nghyflwr Mrs B. Awgrymodd y gallai’r derbynnydd fod wedi mynd yn rhy bell ac wedi camddehongli’ cais y teulu am ymweliad, a dywedodd y byddai’n derbyn cyfrifoldeb am hynny. Dywedodd nad oedd wedi gallu gofyn i’r derbynnydd fod yn bresennol yn y gwrandawiad gan nad oedd wedi galli nodi pa dderbynnydd a gymerodd y neges, a beth bynnag, pan oedd y neges wedi’i throsglwyddo i’r meddyg, ei gyfrifoldeb ef ydoedd. Nid oedd wedi cyflwyno llyfr ymweliadau’r feddygfa, lle’r oedd ceisiadau am ymweliadau’n cael eu cofnodi, a dywedodd nad oedd yn sicr a oedd ar gael o hyd, 18 mis wedi’r digwyddiad. Nid oedd yn gallu esbonio pam wnaeth y derbynnydd ddyfynnu moeseg feddygol i Mr S. Cytunodd, os oedd perthynas yn dweud bod dirywiad yng nghyflwr y claf, dylai’r meddyg ymweld. Dywedodd ei fod yn credu iddo roi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i lunio barn glinigol, ond cytunodd, os oedd tystiolaeth y teulu i’w chredu, nid oedd wedi gwneud hynny. Gwrthododd wneud cyflwyniad terfynol.
Canfu’r MSC nad oedd Dr Moysey wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Yn achos Shipman, roedd yn well ganddynt dystiolaeth Mr B a Mr S na thystiolaeth Shipman. Nododd yr MSC fethiant Shipman i gyflwyno’r llyfr ymweliadau (credent y dylai fod wedi’i gadw’n ddiogel cyn gynted ag y derbyniwyd y gŵyn) neu i ffonio’r derbynnydd i roi tystiolaeth gerbron yr MSC. Canfu’r MSC fod Shipman wedi gwrthod ymweld â Mrs B ddwywaith ar 26 Chwefror, a chyn gwneud hynny, nid oedd wedi rhoi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i lunio barn broffesiynol briodol. Roedd yn torri paragraff 13 o’i delerau gwasanaeth. Ar ôl clywed am yr achos blaenorol o dorri telerau gwasanaeth yn achos Mr W, ym 1989, argymhellodd yr MSC y dylid atal £800 o dâl ac y dylid rhybuddio Shipman i gydymffurfio’n fanylach â’i delerau gwasanaeth yn y dyfodol.
Yn ei benderfyniad, soniodd y Pwyllgor am nodyn ysgrifenedig Shipman mewn cysylltiad â Mrs B (roeddent wedi canfod drwy ymhlygiad nad oedd yn gywir), ond ni wnaeth sylw ar ba un a allai fod yn gamarweiniol yn fwriadol, yn hytrach na’n gamgymeriad go iawn. Roedd Shipman wedi honni iddo wneud y nodyn ar y pryd. Roedd yn datgan yn ddigamsyniol na fu dirywiad. Gyda’r fantais o edrych yn ôl, mae’n amlwg fod Shipman wedi gwneud, yn yr achos hwn, yr hyn y mae’n hysbys bellach iddo wneud mewn llawer o achosion; gwnaeth gofnod ffug a hunanlesol. Ar y cychwyn, roedd yn ymddangos i mi ei bod yn rhaid bod yr MSC wedi ystyried y nodyn fel un ffug. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl ystyried ymhellach, ymddengys yn debygol y gallai fod wedi meddwl fod Shipman yn wirioneddol wedi cam-glywed neu gamddeall yr hyn a ddywedodd y derbynnydd wrtho, ac mai’r bai ar ei ran ef oedd peidio siarad naill â Dr Moysey, i ganfod a oedd yn bwriadu ymweld nes ymlaen y diwrnod hwnnw, neu â Mr S yn uniongyrchol, er mwyn rhoi ei hun mewn safle i lunio barn ynghylch yr angen i ymweld. Mewn geiriau eraill, ymddengys na wnaeth y Pwyllgor o reidrwydd ei gael yn euog o wrthod ymweld yn fwriadol neu lunio nodyn ffug yn fwriadol.
Roedd Mrs Elsie Gilliland, Cadeirydd yr MSC, a fu’n llywyddu’r cyfarfod, yn cofio mai ei barn hi oedd nad oedd Shipman wedi gwneud unrhyw ymgais i asesu’r claf. Dywedodd fod y Pwyllgor wedi bod yn amheus o fethiant Shipman i ffonio’r derbynnydd neu i gyflwyno’r llyfr ymweliadau, a chredai nad oedd ei esgusodion dros beidio gwneud hynny yn foddhaol iawn. Dywedodd hefyd bod aelodau’r Pwyllgor yn ymwybodol o’r posibilrwydd fod Shipman wedi edrych ar y llyfr ymweliadau a’i fod yn gwybod nad oedd yn cefnogi’i achos. Ni allai fynd cyn belled â dweud ei bod yn meddwl ei fod yn anonest. Gallaf ddeall prosesau ei meddwl yn iawn.
Cafodd argymhellion MSC Manceinion eu derbyn gan FHSA Tameside. Nid apeliodd Shipman yn erbyn y canfyddiad na’r gosb. Ar 22 Hydref 1993, anfonwyd hysbysiad o’r canlyniad at yr FHSAU ac, ar 26 Mai 1994, cadarnhawyd y gosb gan y Prif Weithredwr ar ran yr SoS. Yn unol â’r pwerau, a roddwyd gan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) 1992, y soniais amdanynt yn gynharach yn y Bennod hon, anfonwyd achos Mrs B at y GMC, ynghyd â’r papurau yn achos Mr W.
Mae papurau’r GMC yn dangos bod y GMC wedi penderfynu peidio gweithredu. Roedd o’r farn fod achos Mr W yn rhy hen i’w ail-agor, ac y byddai achos Mrs B yn anodd i ymchwilio iddo gan nad oedd Shipman wedi gwneud cyfaddefiad. Ymddengys bod y GMC yn meddwl na fyddai modd gwneud canfyddiad ynghylch ymddygiad Shipman, er gwaetha’r ffaith fod y GMC wedi gallu gwneud. Y farn oedd bod yr achos yn dangos perfformiad gwael yn unig yn hytrach na chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol. Byddaf yn delio’n fanwl â’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â’r achos hwn ym Mhennod 19.
Nodaf fod yr achos wedi cymryd 18 mis i gyrraedd gwrandawiad. Yn ddiau roedd rhywfaint o’r oedi hwn yn ganlyniad yr angen i drosglwyddo’r achos o Tameside i Fanceinion. Ond, er hynny, roedd yr oedi’n rhy hir o lawer. Mae’r achos hwn yn enghraifft dda o wendid y system MSC, lle nad oedd gan y Pwyllgor unrhyw rym i alw am ddogfennau neu wysio tystion. Nid oedd y system yn darparu ar gyfer ymchwiliad annibynnol i’r ffeithiau, ond yn hytrach gadawai i’r partïon gynnal eu hymchwiliad eu hunain, i’r graddau yr oeddent yn barod i wneud hynny neu’n gallu gwneud hynny. Yn yr achos hwn, byddai ymchwilydd annibynnol wedi gallu cymryd meddiant o’r llyfr ymweliadau, a oedd yn debygol o fod wedi cynnwys y cofnod cyfredol gorau o’r hyn a ddywedodd Mr S wrth y derbynnydd. Hefyd, byddai ymchwilydd felly wedi gallu nodi pwy oedd y derbynnydd. Mae’n annirnadwy na fyddai’r derbynyddion wedi adnabod yr ysgrifen yn y llyfr ymweliadau.
Fel y bu hi, rwy’n hyderus fod yr MSC wedi dod i’r casgliad iawn. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth, am resymau dealladwy, ganfod fod Shipman wedi gwneud cofnod ffug mewn ymgais i leihau ei ddiffyg ei hun fel camddealltwriaeth gan y derbynnydd neu rhyngddo ef a’r derbynnydd. Pe bai’r holl dystiolaeth wedi bod ar gael, byddid wedi cael mewnwelediad mwy i ymddygiad Shipman.
Sylwadau am y Tair Cwyn
Gan gofio fod Shipman yn llofrudd cyfresol sefydledig, ymddengys yn hynod nad oedd y cwynion a wnaed amdano yn y blynyddoedd rhwng 1977 a 1996 o natur fwy difrifol. Ni chafwyd unrhyw gŵyn am ei driniaeth o unrhyw glaf neu’i fethiant i drin unrhyw glaf yr oedd mewn gwirionedd wedi’i ladd/lladd. Hyd yn oed pe byddid wedi ymchwilio’n fanylach iddynt, ni fyddai’r tair cwyn yr wyf newydd eu disgrifio wedi taflu unrhyw oleuni ar wir gymeriad Shipman fel llofrudd. Gyda mantais fy ngwybodaeth am anonestrwydd cyson Shipman, rwyf wedi canfod arwyddion o ymddygiad anonest yn achosion Mr J a Mrs B. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd arwyddion felly’n amlwg o bell ffordd, ac nid yw’n syndod na chawsant eu canfod ar y pryd.
Yr unig achos yr wyf yn ymwybodol ohono a allai fod wedi arwain at gŵyn a fyddai o bosibl wedi arwain at ganfod gwir natur Shipman oedd achos Mrs Renate Overton. Fe wnaeth Shipman rhoi chwistrelliad â gorddos o ddiamorffin iddi ym mis Chwefror 1994 ond fe oroesodd, mewn cyflwr disymud parhaus, hyd at fis Ebrill 1995. Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi cofnodi yn yr Adroddiad Cyntaf a’r Trydydd Adroddiad, ac fel y byddaf yn crybwyll eto ym Mhennod 10 o’r Adroddiad hwn, roedd y staff meddygol yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside yn ymwybodol fod Shipman wedi rhoi dogn peryglus o gyffur opiad. Nid oedd yn cael ei amau ei fod wedi gweithredu’n fwriadol. Rhybuddiwyd teulu Mrs Overton i’r posibilrwydd fod Shipman wedi bod yn esgeulus. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaethpwyd cwyn.
Mae’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r tri achos hwn yn dangos rhai o ddiffygion y system a oedd ar waith yn ystod y blynyddoedd cyn 1996. Yn gyntaf, maent yn dangos, o leiaf lle’r oedd gwrandawiad llafar i’w gynnal, y gallai fod oedi annerbyniol. Yn ail, mae achos Mr J yn dangos yr anawsterau a allai godi yn sgil pennu cyfyngiadau amser. Yn drydydd, mae’r achosion yn dangos y problemau a allai ddigwydd pan oedd y partïon yn cael eu gadael i gynnal ymchwiliad a pharatoi’r achos, a phenderfynu pa dystiolaeth y dylid ei chyflwyno. Roedd mantais gan feddygon o gael cymorth gan gynghorwyr medrus o’u sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol, ond nid oedd y fantais hon gan achwynwyr. Gallent gael cyngor cynrychiolydd o’r CHC, ond, os nad oeddent yn ei gael, byddent dan anfantais ddifrifol. Hyd yn oed â chyngor felly, fe allai achwynydd deimlo dan anfantais yn wir wrth gyflwyno’r achos. Roedd diffyg adnoddau ymchwilio’r achwynydd yn fater mwy difrifol fyth. Awgrymodd Mrs J y gallai cyflwyno dogfennau eu helpu i brofi’i hachos, ond nid oedd ganddi’r grym na’r adnoddau i’w cael. Yn olaf, mae achos Mrs J a Mr W yn dangos y problemau a all godi lle nad yw cyfansoddiad y pwyllgor yn dangos didueddrwydd llwyr.
Fel y byddaf yn esbonio, nid achwynwyr yn unig oedd yn teimlo mesur o anfodlonrwydd gyda’r gweithdrefnau cyn 1996. Teimlodd llawer o feddygon bwysau mawr yn ystod yr achosion, yn enwedig gan mai achosion disgyblu oeddent a allai arwain at gosbi neu gyfeirio at y GMC hyd yn oed. Mae’n bosibl fod Shipman wedi teimlo pwysau mawr yn ystod yr achosion, ac ymddengys, yn ystod cyfnod achosion Mr J a Mr W, fod Shipman wedi lladd cleifion yn llai aml. Yn y 12 mis cyn mis Medi 1985 pan gafodd ei hysbysu am y gŵyn yn ei erbyn yn achos Mr J, lladdodd Shipman 13 o gleifion, ac rwy’n amau iddo ladd pump arall. Ni laddodd o gwbl yn ystod y pedwar mis rhwng cael ei hysbysu am yr achos a diwedd yr achos ar 4 Rhagfyr 1985. Yn y mis dilynol, rhwng 17 Rhagfyr 1985 a 7 Ionawr 1986, lladdodd pedwar claf. Yn yr un modd, mewn cysylltiad ag achos Mr W, lladdodd Shipman un claf yn unig yn ystod y cyfnod o ryw ddeng mis tra’r oedd yr achos yn mynd rhagddo. Lladdodd eto’n fuan iawn wedi i’r achos ddod i ben. Roedd achos Mrs B yn estynedig iawn. Yn y naw mis a oedd yn weddill ym 1992 ar ôl cael ei hysbysu am y gŵyn, un claf yn unig a laddodd Shipman. Fodd bynnag, yn wyth mis cyntaf 1993, cyn y gwrandawiad ym mis Medi, lladdodd Shipman 13 o gleifion, ac rwy’n ei amau mewn perthynas ag un arall.
Nid wyf yn gwybod a oedd y newid hwn ym mhatrwm Shipman o ladd yn gysylltiedig mewn unrhyw ffordd â’r achosion disgyblu a oedd yn mynd rhagddynt. Soniaf am y posibilrwydd gan i mi, yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf, awgrymu rhesymau posibl eraill am yr amrywiadau yn y gyfradd lladd. Nid oedd yr Ymchwiliad wedi ymchwilio’n llawn i’r cwynion yn erbyn Shipman bryd hynny, ac nid oeddwn wedi sylweddoli y gallai’r achosion fod wedi cael effaith ataliol.

---  ---
Wrth ystyried y tair cwyn hon, rwyf wedi tynnu sylw at nifer o ddiffygion yn y system MSC. Mae’r diffygion hyn yn nodweddiadol o’r math o feirniadaeth a oedd yn cael ei mynegi’n eang am y system cwynion ar ddechrau’r 1990au. Ym mis Mehefin 1993, penododd yr SoS Bwyllgor Adolygu Annibynnol dan gadeiryddiaeth yr Athro (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alan Wilson, Dirprwy-Ganghellor Prifysgol Leeds. Ei Gylch Gwaith oedd:
‘Adolygu’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer gwneud cwynion a delio â chwynion gan gleifion y GIG a’u teuluoedd yn y Deyrnas Unedig, a chostau a buddion gweithdrefnau gwahanol i’r gweithdrefnau cyfredol, ac i wneud argymhellion i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd a gweinidogion iechyd eraill.’
Cyhoeddwyd Adroddiad Wilson, o’r enw ‘Being Heard’, ym mis Mai 1994. Roedd yn dweud bod y trefniadau presennol ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn rhy gymhleth, yn rhy faith ac yn rhy wrthdrawiadol. Roedd adroddiadau MSC yn aml yn methu rhoi esboniad boddhaol am y penderfyniad y daethpwyd iddo. Roedd y gofyniad bod rhaid i gŵyn olygu torri telerau gwasanaeth yn rhy gyfyngol. Roedd y system i weld yn rhagfarnllyd o blaid y meddyg teulu. Roedd y terfynau amser yn rhy dechnegol ac yn gyfyngol.
Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad newidiadau sylfaenol. Gwahoddodd y Llywodraeth ymatebion i Adroddiad Wilson, ynghyd â sylwadau, cyn cyhoeddi ei ymateb ei hun, o’r enw ‘Acting on Complaints’, ym mis Mawrth 1995. Roedd ymateb y cyhoedd yn ffafriol i raddau helaeth, a derbyniodd y Llywodraeth bron pob un o argymhellion Adroddiad Wilson. Roedd yn cynnig gweithdrefnau newydd a oedd i ddod i rym ar 1 Ebrill 1996. Byddaf yn disgrifio argymhellion Adroddiad Wilson a chynigion y Llywodraeth ar gyfer newid yn y Bennod nesaf.

---  ---
Gweithdrefnau Cwynion 1996
Adweithiau i Weithdrefnau Cwynion 1996
Gweithdrefnau Disgyblu 1996
Ymchwil i Weithrediad Gweithdrefnau Cwynion 1996
Ymrwymiad i Ddiwygio: Ymgynghoriad
Gweithdrefnau Disgyblu ar ôl mis Ebrill 2004

---  ---
Fel y nodais yn y Bennod ddiwethaf, cyhoeddwyd cynigion y Llywodraeth am weithdrefnau newydd ar gyfer delio â chwynion cleifion yn y GIG ym mis Mawrth 1995. Cyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau ym mis Ebrill 1996. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio gweithdrefnau 1996, fel yr oeddent yn berthnasol i gwynion am feddygon teulu, a byddaf yn crynhoi’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad ynghylch y modd yr oeddent yn gweithio’n ymarferol. Byddaf hefyd yn trafod diffygion 1996 ac yn ystyried cynigion diweddar y Llywodraeth ar gyfer diwygio.
Yn y Bennod ddiwethaf, disgrifiais y modd y gweithredwyd tair cwyn a arweiniodd at achosion disgyblu yn erbyn Shipman dan y gweithdrefnau cyn 1996. Ni fydd y Bennod hon yn cynnwys unrhyw ddisgrifiadau tebyg. Cyn belled ag yr oedd yn hysbys i Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA), dim ond un gŵyn yn erbyn Shipman a wnaethpwyd yn y blynyddoedd 1996 i 1998. Mae datblygiad a gweithrediad gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 a’r newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau disgyblu a ddaeth i rym ar ôl 1996 o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad gan mai’r rhain yw’r cysylltiad rhwng y gweithdrefnau cyn 1996 a set newydd o weithdrefnau, rhannau ohonynt wedi’u cyflwyno ym mis Gorffennaf 2004 a rhannau ohonynt yn cael eu trafod o hyd. Fy mwriad yw gwneud argymhelliad ynglŷn â’r agweddau hynny ar y gweithdrefnau newydd na phenderfynwyd yn eu cylch eto.

---  ---
Adroddiad Wilson
Roedd cynigion y Llywodraeth wedi’u seilio ar yr egwyddorion a nodwyd yn Adroddiad Wilson ‘Being Heard’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mai 1994, a mabwysiadodd lawer o’i argymhellion gweithdrefnol. Dywedodd yr Adroddiad mai’r egwyddorion a ddylai fod yn sylfaen i weithdrefn cwynion yw ymatebolrwydd, gwella ansawdd, cost-effeithiolrwydd, hygyrchedd, didueddrwydd, symlrwydd, cyflymder, cyfrinachedd ac atebolrwydd. Pwysleisiodd yr Adroddiad bod angen gwahaniaethu’n glir rhwng cwynion a gweithdrefnau disgyblu. Ni ddylai cwynion o reidrwydd arwain at gamau gweithredu disgyblu, er, os oedd mater disgyblu yn codi, dylai’r mater gael ei drosglwyddo i reolwyr yr awdurdod gwasanaethau iechyd teulu (FHSA) iddynt benderfynu a oedd camau gweithredu disgyblu yn briodol. Dywedwyd y dylai graddfa ymchwilio i gŵyn gael ei rheoli gan ddymuniadau’r achwynydd, ond y gall fod angen i’r rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am reoli’r meddyg dan sylw ymgymryd ag ymchwiliadau pellach at ddibenion rheoli neu ddisgyblu.
Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad mai’r sefydliad yr oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn ddylai ymdrin â phob cwyn yn y lle cyntaf, ac yn ail, os oedd angen, corff allanol. Dylai fod rheolwr cwynion gan bob sefydliad, a fyddai’n gyfrifol am ddelio â’r gŵyn. Mewn meddygaeth deuluol, rheolwr y feddygfa neu bartner yn y feddygfa fyddai’r person hwn yn amlaf na pheidio. Dylid rhoi ymateb cyntaf i’r gŵyn yn gyflym iawn, cyn pen 48 o’i derbyn, â’r nod fyddai bodloni’r achwynydd naill ai drwy roi esboniad neu ymddiheuriad, fel yr oedd yn briodol. Os oedd angen, dylai ymchwiliad ddilyn hynny a/neu gynnig o gymodiad, a byddai ymateb ysgrifenedig yn cael ei ddarparu wedi hynny. Os nad oedd yr achwynydd yn fodlon â’r ymateb hwnnw, dylai’r gŵyn gael ei hystyried gan uwch swyddog o’r ymddiriedolaeth a oedd yn gyfrifol. Dylai fod gan y person hwnnw ystod o opsiynau ar gael, fel cymodiad, trafodaeth bersonol â’r achwynydd, ymchwiliad pellach fwy manwl, cymryd cyngor annibynnol ar faterion clinigol, neu, fel gobaith olaf i bob pwrpas, sefydlu ymchwiliad annibynnol.
Cynigion y Llywodraeth
Wrth gyhoeddi’i gynigion, dywedodd y Llywodraeth ei fod yn dymuno sicrhau’r
‘cyffredinedd mwyaf posibl’
yn ei weithdrefnau ledled y GIG. Yr athroniaeth a oedd yn sylfaen i’r broses cwynion oedd y dylai fod yn
‘broses ddysgu’
. I’r perwyl hwnnw, roedd cwynion i’w gwahanu’n llwyr oddi wrth achosion disgyblu. Os oedd yn ymddangos bod camau gweithredu disgyblu’n briodol mewn perthynas â’r amgylchiadau a oedd yn sail i gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud gan glaf neu ar ran claf, dim ond ar ôl cwblhau’r gweithdrefnau cwynion y byddai’r achos disgyblu’n dechrau.
Roedd gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 i gael dau gam o fewn y GIG. Byddai’r cam cyntaf yn cael ei gynnal gan gorff y GIG a oedd wedi darparu’r gwasanaeth y cododd y gŵyn ohono. Y feddygfa, yn y cam cyntaf, oedd i ymdrin â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu. Roedd cymodiad i fod ar gael fel ychwanegiad at gam cyntaf y broses cwynion. Os oedd achwynydd yn anfodlon â chanlyniad cwyn am feddyg teulu, gallai symud ymlaen at yr ail gam a gofyn am adolygiad annibynnol. Byddai ef neu hi’n gwneud cais i ‘gynullydd’, a fyddai fel arfer yn gyfarwyddwr anweithredol o’r awdurdod iechyd (HA), a fyddai’n penderfynu pa un a ddylid caniatáu adolygiad. Os oedd adolygiad yn cael ei ganiatáu, byddai’n cael ei wrando gan banel o dri pherson anfeddygol. Byddai adroddiad y panel yn cael ei anfon at brif weithredwr yr HA, a byddai ef/hi yn anfon copïau at y partïon amrywiol a oedd yn gysylltiedig, gan gynnwys cadeirydd yr HA. Gallai achwynydd a oedd wedi bod drwy’r ddau gam hwn ond a oedd dal yn anfodlon droi at Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd (a elwid hefyd yn Gomisiynydd y Gwasanaeth Iechyd). Dosbarthwyd arweiniad ymlaen llaw i holl gyrff y GIG ym mis Hydref 1995 ar weithredu’r gweithdrefnau newydd.
Y Ddeddfwriaeth ac Arweiniad
Daeth y ddeddfwriaeth a oedd yn rheoli gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 i rym ar 1 Ebrill 1996, sef yr un dyddiad â chreu’r Awdurdodau Iechyd unedol a gyfunodd swyddogaethau’r HAau ardal (a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ofal eilaidd yn flaenorol) a’r FHSAau (a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ofal sylfaenol yn flaenorol). Rhoddwyd y gofynion i feddygon teulu weithredu gweithdrefnau’n seiliedig ar feddygfeydd mewn grym drwy newid telerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu yn Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) Diwygiad 1996. Nodwyd y trefniadau yr oedd yn ofynnol i HAau i’w gwneud ar gyfer darparu gwasanaethau cymodi ac ar gyfer penodi cynullyddion a phanelau adolygu annibynnol (IRPau) mewn cyfarwyddiadau a ddosbarthwyd gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS). Roedd y trefniadau disgyblu newydd i’w gweld yn Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) Diwygiad 1996. Ar y cychwyn, dosbarthwyd arweiniad i HAau, cynullyddion a meddygon teulu ar y modd yr oeddent i gyflawni’u swyddogaethau newydd.
Y Cam Cyntaf
Ar gyfer cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu, roedd pob meddygfa i ddatblygu ei gweithdrefnau cwynion ei hun yn seiliedig ar y feddygfa. Roedd y modd yr oeddent i ymdrin â’r gŵyn yn cael ei adael i ddisgresiwn y feddygfa i raddau helaeth. Yr unig ddarpariaethau gorfodol oedd bod rhaid i’r feddygfa enwebu person i weinyddu’r gweithdrefnau; roedd yn gorfod darparu gwybodaeth i gleifion am y modd yr oedd y gweithdrefnau’n gweithio; ac roedd yn gorfod cydnabod cwyn cyn pen dau ddiwrnod gwaith a rhoi
‘esboniad’
cyn pen deng niwrnod gwaith o dderbyn y gŵyn. Ym mhob agwedd arall, y feddygfa oedd i benderfynu ar fanylion gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau. Roedd yr arweiniad ysgrifenedig yn rhoi cyngor ar arfer gorau, ac anogwyd meddygon teulu i ofyn am gymorth yr HA os oeddent yn petruso. Y polisi oedd annog meddygfeydd i ddyfeisio gweithdrefnau a fyddai’n gweithio’n dda iddynt hwy a’u cleifion. Pwysleisiwyd bod rhaid i bob aelod o’r feddygfa a fu’n gysylltiedig â’r amgylchiadau a arweiniodd at godi cwyn fod yn gysylltiedig hefyd ag ymateb i’r gŵyn, ac roedd rhaid iddynt fod yn barod i gydweithredu wrth ddelio â chwyn. Ymddengys y rhagdybiwyd y byddai pob meddyg teulu yn cymryd eu dyletswyddau o ddifrif ac yn yr ysbryd
‘dysgu’
a oedd yn sail i’r gweithdrefnau newydd.
Awgrymodd yr arweiniad mai’r person a ddylid ei enwebu i fod â gofal oedd rheolwr/rheolwraig y feddygfa neu un o’r partneriaid, er y gellid penodi rhyw berson arall. Os nad oedd y rheolwr cwynion yn feddyg, dylai un o’r meddygon fod yn
‘bartner goruchwylio’
. Rhoddwyd cyngor ynghylch y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael i gleifion. Cafodd llythyrau a ffurflenni safonol ar gyfer cadw cofnodion eu cynnig i’w mabwysiadu neu’u haddasu. Cynghorwyd meddygfeydd am yr angen i gadw cofnodion o gwynion. Y bwriad oedd y byddai’r rhain yn galluogi’r feddygfa i sicrhau ei bod yn defnyddio’r broses datrys cwynion fel proses ddysgu. Efallai y byddai’n ofynnol i’r feddygfa ddarparu gwybodaeth i’r HA os nad oedd cwyn yn cael ei datrys ar lefel meddygfa, ond sicrhawyd meddygfeydd na fyddai’n ofynnol iddynt gyflwyno’u cofnodion i’r HA.
Trefnu cyfweliad, naill ai wyneb yn wyneb neu ar y ffôn, rhwng y rheolwr cwynion a’r achwynydd, ddylai ymateb cychwynnol y feddygfa fod. Rhoddwyd llawer o gyngor da ynghylch yr ymagwedd iawn. Dylai’r rheolwr cwynion
‘ymchwilio’
i’r gŵyn wedyn. Dywedodd yr arweiniad y gallai hyn
‘gynnwys sefydlu’r ffeithiau drwy siarad â’r meddygon neu’r staff a oedd yn gysylltiedig’
. Hwn oedd yr unig gyngor a roddwyd ar yr agwedd hollbwysig hon ar y broses. Awgrymwyd, pe bai angen, y gellid gofyn am gyngor gan sefydliad amddiffyn y meddyg, y pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC) neu reolwyr cwynion yr HA. Dylai rheolwr cwynion y feddygfa drafod ei
‘ganfyddiadau/chanfyddiadau’
â’r partner goruchwylio wedyn er mwyn penderfynu ar ymateb, a allai fod yn llythyr esbonio neu gynnig i gyfarfod. Os credwyd y gallai cymodiad fod yn briodol, dylid mynd at yr HA. Rhoddwyd cyngor ynghylch naws a chynnwys llythyr esbonio. Dylai hwn gynnwys gwybodaeth am gam nesaf y weithdrefn cwynion. Yn olaf, gwnaethpwyd awgrymiadau ynghylch y modd y dylai meddygfeydd ddysgu o’r cwynion a dderbyniwyd.
Dan y pennawd
, cynghorwyd meddygfeydd i annog cleifion a oedd yn bwriadu cwyno i wneud hynny o fewn amser rhesymol yn dilyn y digwyddiadau perthnasol, ond awgrymwyd y dylai meddygfeydd fabwysiadu ymagwedd hyblyg tuag at gwynion hwyr. Os oedd achwynydd i weld yn amharod i wneud ei gŵyn/chwyn i’r feddygfa, dylai gael gwybodaeth am y cyswllt priodol yn yr HA a’r Cyngor Iechyd Cymunedol (CHC). Disgrifiais rôl y CHC ym Mhennod 6.
Tybiwyd y gallai meddygfeydd bach neu feddygfeydd unigol gael anhawster o ran sefydlu proses ddigonol ar gyfer delio â chwynion. Awgrymwyd nifer o atebion posibl i’r broblem hon. Gallai’r feddygfa ymuno â meddygfeydd eraill i weithredu’r system cwynion gyda’i gilydd, neu gallai meddygfa ofyn i’r LMC enwebu aelod a fyddai’n cynorthwyo â’r broses. Ateb posibl arall fyddai cynnig gwasanaethau cymodwr lleyg yr HA i’r achwynwyr. Soniaf wrth fynd heibio na wnaeth Shipman gymryd yr un o’r awgrymiadau hynny. Penododd ei hun fel rheolwr cwynion a nyrs y feddygfa, Sister Gillian Morgan, fel ei ddirprwy. Dywedodd gweithdrefn cwynion ysgrifenedig y feddygfa y byddai Shipman
‘neu feddyg teulu arall’
yn delio â chwynion clinigol. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd meddyg teulu arall yn y feddygfa, ac nid oedd Sister Morgan yn ymwybodol o unrhyw drefniant â meddygfa arall ar gyfer delio â chwynion.
Yr Ail Gam
Os oedd achwynydd yn parhau’n anfodlon ar ddiwedd y cam cyntaf, gallai wneud cais, cyn pen 28 diwrnod, am adolygiad annibynnol. Wrth ystyried pa un a ddylid caniatáu adolygiad, byddai’r cymodwr yn sefydlu union natur y cwynion a oedd yn dal i fod gan yr achwynydd. Roedd yn rhaid i’r cymodwr yn y lle cyntaf i ystyried a wnaed y gŵyn wreiddiol o fewn yr amser a oedd yn cael ei ganiatáu. Roedd cwynion i’w gwneud cyn pen chwe mis o’r digwyddiadau a oedd yn destun cwyn, neu cyn pen chwe mis o ganfod y ffeithiau i gwyno yn eu cylch, a beth bynnag cyn pen 12 mis i’r digwyddiadau. Fodd bynnag, gallai cymodwyr arfer disgresiwn i alluogi i gŵyn fynd ymlaen os nad oedd yr oedi yn afresymol ac os oedd modd o hyd i ymchwilio i gŵyn yn foddhaol. Cyn dod i benderfyniad, roedd yn rhaid i’r cymodwr ymgynghori â’r person a fyddai’n gadeirydd y panel adolygu (IRP) os oedd y cais yn cael ei ganiatáu. Roedd y cadeirydd yn berson lleyg a ddewiswyd o restr wedi’i henwebu gan yr SoS. Os oedd y gŵyn yn golygu materion yn ymwneud â barn glinigol, roedd y cymodwr i fod i ofyn am gyngor cynghorwr meddygol cymwys. Dylid nodi, er bod rhaid i’r cymodwr ymgynghori â’r cadeirydd arfaethedig, ac o bosibl â chynghorwr clinigol cymwys, nid oedd yn ymchwilio i’r gŵyn ei hun.
Rhoddwyd arweiniad ynghylch yr ymagwedd y dylai cymodwyr ei mabwysiadu. Dylid gwrthod cais os oedd yn ymddangos bod y broses ddatrys leol wedi cyflawni’r cyfan y gobeithid ei gyflawni, ac na allai panel ychwanegu unrhyw werth pellach, os oedd cymodi pellach i weld yn briodol neu os oedd yr achwynydd wedi dechrau neu wedi mynegi bwriad i ddechrau hawliad am iawndal. Yn ymarferol, dim ond cyfran fach o geisiadau am adolygiad annibynnol oedd yn cael caniatâd. Yn ôl ffigurau cenedlaethol a ddarparwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd, yn y blynyddoedd rhwng 1996 a 2001, gwnaed rhwng 1040 a 1430 o geisiadau yn flynyddol, ac o’r rheiny caniatawyd rhwng 219 a 341. Rhwng 22% a 23% oedd y ganran gyffredinol yn cael caniatâd. Yn Tameside, lle gwnaethpwyd rhwng 14 a 24 o geisiadau’n flynyddol dros yr un cyfnod, nid oedd y canrannau’n annhebyg, er mewn un blwyddyn, dim ond caniatâd i un cais a roddwyd allan o 23 o geisiadau a wnaed. Gallai unrhyw achwynydd a oedd yn anfodlon â’r gwrthodiad i ganiatáu adolygiad ofyn i Ombwdsom y Gwasanaeth Iechyd i ystyried y mater.
Pe bai’r cais am adolygiad annibynnol yn cael ei ganiatáu, byddai’r cymodwr yn pennu’r cylch gwaith ar gyfer y panel. Byddai panel yn cael ei gynnull gan swyddog o’r HA. Byddai’r Cadeirydd lleyg annibynnol eisoes wedi’i nodi. Byddai person lleyg annibynnol arall yn cael ei ddewis o restr o enwebeion yr SoS. Y cymodwr fyddai’r trydydd aelod. Os oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â materion yn ymwneud â barn glinigol, byddai dau asesydd clinigol annibynnol wedi’u dewis o restr wedi’i henwebu gan yr SoS yn cael eu penodi i gynghori’r panel.
Roedd Miss Andrea Horsfall yn Ddirprwy Reolwr Cysylltiadau Cwsmeriaid ar gyfer y WPHA, ac mae bellach yn Reolwr Cwynion ar gyfer Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol (PCT) Oldham. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai hi oedd yn gyfrifol am wneud y trefniadau ymarferol i gynnal gwrandawiadau IRP, a byddai’n paratoi bwndeli o ddogfennau perthnasol ar gyfarwyddiadau’r Cadeirydd. Pan ofynnwyd iddi a oedd unrhyw waith ymchwilio pellach fyth yn cael ei wneud cyn y gwrandawiad, dywedodd Miss Horsfall y byddai’r Cadeirydd ar brydiau’n cyfarwyddo bod tyst penodol yn cael cais i fod yn bresennol i roi tystiolaeth (er na ellid gorfodi unrhyw dyst i fod yn bresennol). Ni fyddai’r tyst yn cael ei gyfweld o flaen llaw ond byddai eglurhad yn cael ei anfon ato/ati yn nodi manylion yr achos er mwyn iddo/iddi wybod ynghylch beth yr oedd yn cael ei holi. Ymddengys, er bod dogfennau perthnasol yn cael eu rhoi ynghyd a bod tystion yn cael eu gwahodd, nid oedd unrhyw ymchwilio’n cael ei wneud i’r materion yn cael eu codi gan yr achwynydd.
Byddai’r gwrandawiad gerbron yr IRP yn cael ei gynnal yn breifat. Nid oedd y weithdrefn a oedd i’w dilyn wedi’i phennu. Y bwriad oedd y dylai fod yn anffurfiol, yn hyblyg a heb fod yn wrthdrawiadol. Dylai’r weithdrefn gael ei haddasu yn unol â’r achlysur a’r materion i’w hystyried. Weithiau byddai ffrind yn mynd gyda’r achwynydd neu (nes diddymu’r CHCau ym mis Rhagfyr 2003) cynrychiolydd o’r CHC. Fel arfer byddai cynrychiolydd o’i sefydliad amddiffyn gyda’r meddyg. Gallai’r naill o’r cyfranogwyr gael cyfreithiwr, ond nid oedd hawl gan y cyfreithiwr weithredu fel eiriolwr. Ymddengys fod llawer o banelau’n dewis cyfweld tystion heb fod y parti gwrthwynebu yn bresennol, er mai mater i ddisgresiwn y panel oedd hwn. Dywedodd Mrs Horsfall, yn ei phrofiad hi, ei bod yn arferol gofyn i’r achwynydd yn gyntaf roi ei ddisgrifiad/disgrifiad o’r digwyddiadau, ac esbonio pam yr oedd yn parhau’n anfodlon â chanlyniad y gŵyn. Byddai’r panel yn gofyn cwestiynau. Yna byddai unrhyw dystion gan yr achwynydd yn rhoi eu disgrifiadau hwythau a chael eu holi. Wedi hynny, byddai’r achwynydd a’i dystion/thystion yn gadael yr ystafell a byddai’r meddyg y gwnaethpwyd cwyn yn ei erbyn yn dod i mewn i roi ei ddisgrifiad/disgrifiad, ac yna unrhyw dystion a oedd ganddo/ganddi. Byddai unrhyw dystion y gofynnodd y Cadeirydd iddynt fod yn bresennol yn rhoi tystiolaeth wedyn. Byddai nodyn llawn o’r dystiolaeth yn cael ei rhoi yn cael ei wneud gan weinyddydd o’r HA - byddai Miss Horsfall yn bresennol yn aml at y diben hwn - ac roedd yr achos yn cael ei recordio fel ‘cofnod wrth gefn’. Ar ddiwedd y dystiolaeth, byddai trafodaeth fer rhwng aelodau’r panel a’r aseswyr o bosibl, os oedd rhai. Byddai’r aseswyr yn gadael yr ystafell i ysgrifennu’u hadroddiad(au) am y materion clinigol. Byddai’r panel yn gwasgaru.
Byddai adroddiad(au) yr aseswyr (os oedd rhai) a’r nodiadau tystiolaeth yn cael eu rhoi i’r Cadeirydd, a fyddai’n ysgrifennu adroddiad drafft i’w ddosbarthu i’r aelodau eraill i gytuno arno neu’i newid. Roedd yn rhaid i’r adroddiad gynnwys y canfyddiadau ffeithiol perthnasol a barn y panel (gyda rhesymau) am y gŵyn, gan ystyried y canfyddiadau ffeithiol. Nid oedd rhaid i’r panel dderbyn adroddiad yr aseswyr ar faterion clinigol, ond os nad oedd yn gwneud, roedd yn rhaid iddo roi rhesymau am ei anghytundeb. Gallai’r adroddiad gynnwys awgrymiadau ar gyfer gwelliannau yn y gwasanaeth yn cael eu darparu gan yr ymarferydd dan sylw. Ni allai gynnwys argymhellion y dylai achos disgyblu gael ei gynnal. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Miss Horsfall fod panelau weithiau’n mynegi’u hunain yn eithaf cryf a byddai eu barnau’n glir. Byddai’r adroddiad yn cael ei anfon at Brif Weithredwr yr HA, a oedd yn gorfod ei ddosbarthu i restr o bartïon â diddordeb.
Os oedd yr achwynydd yn anfodlon ag adroddiad yr IRP, gallai wneud cais i Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd, gan yr estynnwyd ei bwerau/phwerau ym 1996 i gynnwys ymchwilio i gwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu a chwynion a olygai arfer barn glinigol.
O fis Ebrill 2002, cymerodd PCTau gyfrifoldeb am ofal sylfaenol oddi wrth HAau, a chymryd y swyddogaethau perthnasol dan y gweithdrefnau cwynion. Roedd y gweithdrefnau a ddaeth i rym ym 1996 yn parhau ar waith nes daeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Cwynion) 2004 (Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004) i rym ar 30 Gorffennaf 2004.

---  ---
Adolygiad o’r Gyfraith Feddygaeth
Cafwyd rhai beirniadaethau o weithdrefnau cwynion 1996 yn gynnar ar ôl eu cyflwyno. Ym 1997, ysgrifennodd Ms Diane Longley erthygl yn y Medical Law Review
. Cydnabu nad oedd y gweithdrefnau newydd wedi bod mewn grym am hir iawn a bod trafferthion cychwynnol i’w disgwyl. Fodd bynnag, ei phrif feirniadaeth oedd bod y system newydd yn ddiffygiol gan nad oedd yn ddigon annibynnol ar y GIG. Yn gyntaf, nododd bod cymodwyr yn gyfarwyddwyr anweithredol o’r HAau ac nad oeddent felly yn annibynnol arnynt. At hynny, nid rôl hawdd oedd ganddynt; roedd elfen eang o ddisgresiwn ganddynt, i’w arfer mewn ymgynghoriad â’r person a ddewiswyd i fod yn gadeirydd yr IRP. Os oedd y cais yn cael ei ganiatáu, roedd yr IRP yn ffurfiol yn bwyllgor o’r HA a gallai presenoldeb y cymodwr ar y panel beri iddi ymddangos bod rhagfarn wedi’i fewnosod yn barod.
Tynnodd Ms Longley sylw hefyd at yr angen am system cwynion a oedd yn cwmpasu pob agwedd ar y gwasanaeth iechyd, gan fod llawer o gwynion yn codi, meddai, o’r rhyngweithio rhwng nifer o asiantaethau gwahanol. Er bod y gweithdrefnau newydd ar gyfer gofal sylfaenol a gofal eilaidd yn debyg, nid oeddent yn gysylltiedig. Byddai’n anodd i glaf i gwyno am driniaeth a oedd yn rhychwantu mwy nag un corff y GIG.
Canmolodd Ms Longley rinweddau’r systemau a oedd ar waith yn nhalaith New South Wales yn Awstralia ac yn Seland Newydd, gan awgrymu eu bod yn cynnig ymagwedd holistaidd tuag at gwynion gofal iechyd a gwir annibyniaeth oddi wrth ddarparwyr gofal iechyd. Mae system Seland Newydd yn seiliedig ar god statudol o hawliau cleifion. Mae hyn yn darparu safonau a bennwyd yn fras ar gyfer darparu gwasanaeth y gall y Comisiynydd Iechyd ac anabledd asesu a barnu cwynion yn eu herbyn. Cefais ddarllen rhai o benderfyniadau’r Comisiynydd presennol, Mr Ronald Paterson, a fynychodd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad. Gan ei fod yn rhoi penderfyniadau wedi’u rhesymu’n llawn, bu modd datblygu safonau penodol i’w cymhwyso mewn mathau penodol o achos neu sefyllfa. Gall ei benderfyniadau ef, lle bydd yn briodol, gael eu cyfeirio at y corff disgyblu proffesiynol perthnasol.
Tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad o Adweithiau i’r Gweithdrefnau Newydd
Gwrandodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth nad oedd gweithdrefnau 1996 yn dod â bodlonrwydd llawn. Roedd Miss Horsfall yn gyfrifol, ymhlith pethau eraill, am gynghori meddygfeydd teulu ynghylch cwynion, am drefnu gwasanaethau cymodi ac am weinyddu’r adolygiadau annibynnol. Dywedodd ei bod yn meddwl bod gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 yn llawer gwell na’r rhai blaenorol. Roeddent yn rhoi llai o bwysau o lawer ar bawb, i raddau helaeth am nad oeddent yn gysylltiedig â disgyblu mwyach. Fodd bynnag, daeth yn ymwybodol bod achwynwyr yn amharod i gwyno am eu meddyg teulu’n uniongyrchol i’r feddygfa. Credai bod rhai yn cael eu rhwystro rhag cwyno o gwbl oherwydd hyn. Ofnai rhai y gallent gael eu tynnu oddi ar restr y meddyg pe byddent yn gwneud cwyn. Os oedd achwynydd yn cysylltu â’r HA, roedd yn rhaid i’r staff gynghori’r achwynydd i wneud y gŵyn i’r feddygfa. Fel arfer, byddai staff yn ceisio esmwytho’r llwybr i’r achwynydd, drwy awgrymu o bosibl bod y gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud yn ysgrifenedig a thrwy gynnig cymodiad. Roedd Miss Horsfall wedi canfod fod cymodi’n hynod ddefnyddiol mewn ystod eang o gwynion, gan gynnwys rhai’n gysylltiedig â materion yn ymwneud â thriniaeth glinigol, gan mai ymddiheuriad yn unig yr oedd rhai achwynwyr yn ceisio’i gael.
Mynegodd Miss Horsfall y farn hefyd fod y system newydd yn parhau i gael ei ‘gyrru gan gleifion’, fel yr hen system. Yr achwynydd oedd i fynd â materion yn eu blaen at yr ail gam. Nid oedd unrhyw un a fyddai’n cymryd y gŵyn ac yn symud ymlaen â hi, os nad oedd yr achwynydd am ei chanlyn. Credai bod rhai achwynwyr yn rhoi’r gorau iddi, hyd yn oed os nad oeddent yn fodlon. Felly’r oedd hi hyd yn oed lle’r oedd yr haeriad o natur a allai godi pryderon difrifol am gymhwysedd y meddyg.
Roedd un o brif bryderon Miss Horsfall yn ymwneud â’r wybodaeth a oedd ar gael i’r HA. Roedd yr HA yn ystyried cwynion fel ffynhonnell wybodaeth bwysig am y meddygon teulu yn ei ardal. Dan yr hen system, roedd pob cwyn yn dod yn uniongyrchol i’r FHSA. Dan y system newydd roedd y rhan fwyaf o gŵynion yn cael eu gwneud yn uniongyrchol i’r feddygfa deulu. Yr unig beth yr oedd yn rhaid i’r feddygfa wneud oedd hysbysu’r HA ynghylch faint o gŵynion oedd wedi’u derbyn yn ystod y flwyddyn flaenorol. Nid oedd yn rhaid iddo roi unrhyw wybodaeth am gynnwys cwyn neu’r modd yr oedd wedi’i datrys. Nifer fach o gŵynion yr oedd yr HA yn dod i wybod amdanynt. Os oedd achwynydd yn cysylltu â’r HA, efallai na fyddai’n dweud wrth Miss Horsfall beth oedd cynnwys y gŵyn. Dim ond mewn ychydig o achosion y daeth Miss Horsfall i wybod yn ystod y cam hwnnw yn erbyn pwy yr oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud a beth oedd cynnwys y gŵyn. Os gofynnwyd i Miss Horsfall drefnu cymodiad, byddai’n canfod yn erbyn pwy yr oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud a byddai’n cael cofnodion y feddygfa’n ymwneud â’r gŵyn i’w trosglwyddo i’r cymodwr, ond, yn swyddogol, nid oedd hawl ganddi ddefnyddio’r wybodaeth honno. Os oedd yr achwynydd yn mynd ymlaen i’r ail gam, byddai’r HA yn dod i wybod beth oedd cynnwys y gŵyn. Pryder Miss Horsfall oedd nad oedd gan yr HA ddarlun llawn o gŵynion yn yr ardal. Er 2002, pan gymerodd PCTau gyfrifoldeb am ddarparu gofal sylfaenol a gweinyddu ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwynion yn eu hardal, mae’r un problemau wedi parhau. Dywedodd Miss Horsfall bod casglu gwybodaeth am gŵynion yn agwedd bwysig ar reolaeth glinigol heddiw. Roedd o’r farn y dylai fod yn ofynnol i feddygfeydd ddarparu gwybodaeth am gŵynion i PCTau yn llawer amlach nag yn flynyddol, a dylent orfod cynnwys copïau o’r gŵyn a’r llythyr esbonio terfynol.
Roedd gan Miss Horsfall amheuon hefyd ynghylch y meini prawf ar gyfer pennu a ddylid cynnal adolygiad annibynnol ai peidio. Credai eu bod yn rhy gul a bod hyn wedi arwain at anfodlonrwydd ar ran achwynwyr. Roedd yn anhapus yn benodol ynghylch effaith y rheol nad oedd achwynwyr yn cael symud ymlaen i’r ail gam os oeddent yn bwriadu erlyn am iawndal. Ei chyfarwyddiadau hi oedd gofyn i achwynwyr am hyn. Os oedd achwynydd yn dweud ei fod/bod yn bwriadu erlyn, byddai’r cais yn cael ei wrthod.
Fe wnaeth yr Ymchwiliad wrando tystiolaeth hefyd bod anfodlonrwydd mewn rhai mannau (er nad yn Tameside) ynghylch y modd yr oedd cymodwyr yn cyflawni’u dyletswyddau. Codwyd y cwestiwn yn yr Ymchwiliad hefyd ynghylch a allai’r wybodaeth y byddai’n achosi cost i’r HA, yr oeddent yn gyfarwyddwyr iddo, ddylanwadu ar gymodwyr yn erbyn cymodi IRP. Dywedwyd wrthyf y byddai adolygiad yn costio rhyw £1500 i £2000 i’r HA. Roedd yr arweiniad a ddosbarthwyd yn cydnabod y gallai cost weithredu fel anghymhelliad i argymell adolygiad annibynnol, gan ddatgan yn benodol na ddylai cost gael ei ystyried.
Dywedodd Miss Horsfall wrth yr Ymchwiliad, er bod ganddi rai amheuon ynghylch y rheolau a’r arweiniad yr oedd y cymodwyr yn gorfod gweithredu o danynt, roedd o’r farn fod Mr Geoffrey Lamb, y cymodwr ar gyfer yr WPHA, yn defnyddio’r canllawiau’n deg ac â’r gofal pennaf. Nid oedd unrhyw amheuaeth yn ei meddwl y gallai fod wedi gwrthod cais erioed oherwydd y gost a fyddai’n ei olygu i’r HA pe bai’n cael i ganiatáu.
Credai Miss Horsfall fod achwynwyr yn fodlon yn gyffredinol â’r modd yr oedd gwrandawiadau IRP yn cael eu cynnal. Dywedai achwynwyr yn aml iddynt gael y profiad yn un llai ingol na’r disgwyl. Dywedodd Dr John Givans, a oedd â chryn brofiad o gynrychioli meddygon teulu mewn gwrandawiadau panel ar ran yr Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol, bod llawer o’i gleientiaid ef yn anfodlon gan nad oeddent yn cael y cyfle i glywed tystiolaeth yr achwynydd. Roedd hyn yn arbennig o anfoddhaol mewn achosion lle’r oedd gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth ynghylch yr hyn ddigwyddodd, ac roedd yn rhaid i’r panel benderfynu rhwng un fersiwn ag un arall. Roedd yn deall fod llawer o achwynwyr yn mynegi barn debyg.
Dywedodd Miss Horsfall fod rhai achwynwyr yn blês â chanlyniad eu hadolygiadau, a bod rhai’n siomedig. Roedd rhai’n anfodlon gan na phennwyd unrhyw sancsiwn yn erbyn y meddyg, er bod y gŵyn wedi’i chynnal.
Dywedodd Miss Horsfall nad oedd modd cwblhau’r broses IRP bob tro o fewn y graddfeydd amser targed o dri mis. Mae archwilio data a gyhoeddwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd ym mis Medi 2003 yn dangos, yn y flwyddyn 2002-2003, bod gweithredu gan IRP wedi dod i ben y tu allan i amserau targed mewn rhyw 55% o achosion.
Pan oedd adroddiad yr IRP yn cael ei dderbyn, byddai’r HA (a’r PCT yn ddiweddarach) yn penderfynu pa gamau gweithredu, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd i gywiro unrhyw broblemau a nodwyd gan y panel. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd unrhyw rym gan yr IRP i fynnu bod yr HA/PCT yn gweithredu i roi’r argymhellion ar waith neu i ddelio â diffygion y meddyg teulu mewn unrhyw ffordd.
Diddorol yw nodi, am y cyfnod dwy flynedd a hanner y bu Shipman yn ymarfer tra’r oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 ar waith, daeth y WPHA yn ymwybodol o un cwyn yn unig yn ei erbyn, ac, yn unol â’r arfer ar y pryd, ni roddwyd unrhyw fanylion am hynny ganddo ef. Awgryma’r dystiolaeth bod o leiaf tair cwyn, mewn gwirionedd, wedi’u gwneud i’r feddygfa dros y cyfnod hwnnw. Roedd ffurflenni a ddisgrifiwyd fel ‘Taflenni Rheoli Cwynion’ wedi’u styffylu i lyfr cwynion Shipman, a gasglwyd o’r feddygfa wedi ei arestio. Roedd y gyntaf yn gŵyn lafar ynghylch y geiriad a ddefnyddiodd Shipman mewn llythyr cyfeirio ysbyty. Disgrifiwyd Shipman yn y Daflen Rheoli Cwynion fel y
‘Swyddog Ymchwilio’
a chofnododd, wedi cyfarfod, bod yr achwynydd yn hapus â’r canlyniad. Roedd yr ail yn gŵyn lafar fanwl ynghylch aelod o staff y feddygfa a oedd yn gwrthod rhoi gwybodaeth am amserau’r feddygfa. Roedd yr achwynydd wedi hynny wedi gwrthod cael ei weld a chofnodwyd y byddid yn delio a’r gŵyn pan fyddai cwyn ffurfiol yn cael ei derbyn. Ni chofnodwyd trydydd cwyn ar Daflen Rheoli Cwynion o gwbl. Y cyfan sydd ar gael yw copi o lythyr a anfonwyd gan Shipman, ac o hwnnw mae modd casglu bod y claf wedi cwyno am iddo wrthod ymgymryd â’i gofal mamolaeth os oedd eisiau genedigaeth yn y cartref. Nid yw canlyniad y gŵyn yn hysbys.
Mae’n destun cryn bryder, y gall meddyg, os nad oes unrhyw oruchwyliaeth allanol o gŵynion, dawel achwynydd ar sail ffug, er enghraifft, drwy honni fod yr hyn a ddigwyddodd yn ganlyniad anffodus ond yn rhywbeth a oedd yn digwydd o dro i dro. Posibilrwydd arall yw y gallai meddyg ymddangos fel pe bai’n ymddiheuro’n ddidwyll, dyweder, am gamgymeriad rhagnodi, a bod hynny wedi bodloni’r claf ond heb wneud dim i gywiro arfer gwael y meddyg. Neu, fel yr ymddengys a ddigwyddodd gyda Shipman, gallai’r wybodaeth a roddwyd gan y feddygfa i’r HA neu’r PCT am nifer y cwynion a dderbyniwyd fod yn anghywir.
Longley D (1997) ‘Complaints after Wilson; another case of too little too late?’, Medical Law Review, 5, Haf 1997, tud. 172-192.

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais, dan y gweithdrefnau cyn 1996, lle’r oedd cwynion a olygai torri telerau gwasanaeth y meddyg teulu yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â gweithdrefnau disgyblu gerbron pwyllgor gwasanaeth meddygol, o fis Ebrill 1996 nid felly’r oedd hi. Daeth Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) Diwygiad 1996 i rym yr un pryd â gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996. Gallai HAau (a PCTau yn ddiweddarach) drefnu achos disgyblu mewn unrhyw fater (a oedd i weld yn golygu torri telerau gwasanaeth meddyg teulu) a oedd, yn eu barn nhw, yn ddigon difrifol i warantu camau gweithredu disgyblu. O 1996, roedd penderfyniadau ynghylch cychwyn achos yn cael eu gwneud gan bwyllgor o’r HA neu’r PCT, a oedd yn cael ei alw’n bwyllgor cyfeirio fel arfer. Os oedd yn angenrheidiol cynnal gwrandawiad disgyblu, byddai pwyllgor disgyblu meddygol yn cael ei ddarparu gan HA neu PCT cyfagos er mwyn sicrhau graddfa o annibyniaeth o’r HA neu’r PCT a oedd, i bob pwrpas, yr achwynydd neu’r erlynydd. Byddai gweithdrefn wrthwynebol feichus yn cael ei dilyn. Fodd bynnag, yn ymarferol, aeth achosion felly’n brin iawn. Dywedodd Mrs Horsfall wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai un meddyg yn unig, dros gyfnod o saith mlynedd, oedd wedi cael ei gyfeirio at banel disgyblu yn Tameside, ac roedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) wedi cael ei hysbysu’n uniongyrchol amdano ef ac un meddyg arall. Yn genedlaethol, roedd lleihad dramatig yn nifer yr achosion disgyblu a oedd yn cael eu cynnal. Lle canfuwyd, ym mlynyddoedd olaf yr hen gyfundrefn, bod rhwng 325 a 552 o feddygon teulu’n flynyddol yn torri’u telerau gwasanaeth, rhwng 1997 a 2003 y ffigurau cyfatebol oedd rhwng tri a deuddeg. Ni ragwelwyd y lleihad hwn o gwbl. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr David Laverick, a oedd yn Brif Weithredwr yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA) ar adeg y trosglwyddo, y rhagwelwyd y byddai’r niferoedd yn aros yr un fath ag yn flaenorol, a bod yr FHSAA wedi cynllunio ar gyfer rhyw 400 o ganfyddiadau yn flynyddol. Disgrifiodd Adroddiad Blynyddol 2002/2003 y Cyngor ar Dribiwnlysoedd lawer o ddiffygion sylweddol a threfniadol a ddatgelwyd wrth iddynt arsylwi’r pwyllgorau disgyblu meddygol yn gweithio. Deilliodd nifer o’r rhain o’r ffaith fod cyn lleied o wrandawiadau’n cael eu cynnal mewn gwirionedd. Yn benodol, roedd sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygon yn ecsbloetio anghysonderau yn y rheolau ac roedd y broses mesur a phwyso a gwneud penderfyniadau yn llafurus ac yn ddi-strwythur yn aml.
Ymddengys bod o leiaf dau reswm am y lleihad nodedig yn nifer y gwrandawiadau. Yn gyntaf, nid oedd modd i’r HA neu’r PCT gynnal achos disgyblu mewn perthynas ag unrhyw fater yn codi o gŵyn claf oni bai a hyd nes bod y gweithdrefnau cwynion wedi’u cwblhau. Os oedd cwyn yn mynd at adolygiad annibynnol neu at Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd, gallai’r broses gymryd yn hir iawn. Pan oedd wedi’i chwblhau, ni allai’r HA neu’r PCT ddefnyddio’r dystiolaeth a roddwyd eisoes i’r IRP, ond roedd yn rhaid iddo ofyn i’r achwynydd a’i dyst/thyst, os o gwbl, i roi tystiolaeth eto. Nid oedd pawb yn barod i gydweithredu mor hir ar ôl y digwyddiad. Roedd y weithdrefn hon yn angenrheidiol o ran tegwch i’r meddyg nad oedd, yn flaenorol, hyd yn oed wedi clywed tystiolaeth yr achwynydd, heb sôn am gael y cyfle i’w herio’n uniongyrchol.
Yr ail reswm, a’r pwysicaf efallai, am y gostyngiad yn nifer yr achosion disgyblu oedd newid diwylliant. Mae cred gyffredinol bellach ei bod yn well pe byddai meddyg y cafwyd ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad neu’i berfformiad/pherfformiad yn annerbyniol mewn rhyw ffordd, yn cael cymorth i wella yn hytrach na’i gosbi/chosbi. Ym Mhennod 5, disgrifiais y ffyrdd yr oedd HAau (a PCTau yn fwy diweddar) wedi datblygu pwyllgorau neu grwpiau â swyddogaeth i sicrhau bod unrhyw bryder ynghylch meddyg, ym mha ffordd bynnag y cafodd ei ddwyn i sylw’r HA, yn cael sylw digonol. I raddau helaeth iawn, roedd gweithgareddau pwyllgorau neu grwpiau felly wedi disodli achosion disgyblu ar lefel leol hyd yn oed cyn cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau rheoli rhestrau y gall PCTau alw arnynt nawr i ddelio â phroblemau mwy difrifol neu anhydrin â meddygon teulu. Ym Mhennod 5, disgrifiais hefyd y pwerau rheoli rhestrau sydd wedi bod gan PCTau ers mis Ebrill 2002. Mae’r rhain yn galluogi PCT (ac yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol mewn rhai amgylchiadau cyfyngedig) i atal neu ddileu meddyg oddi ar restr y PCT neu i bennu amodau ar barhau i gynnwys y meddyg.
Roedd yn ganlyniad anochel y gostyngiad sydyn mewn achosion disgyblu mai ychydig iawn o apeliadau a wnaed i’r FHSAA, ac yn ddiweddarach, yr FHSAA (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig), ac, o ganlyniad i’r gostyngiad hwnnw, ychydig iawn o feddygon yr adroddwyd amdanynt i’r GMC gan y corff hwnnw. Ar ôl 1996, y mecanwaith arferol ar gyfer adrodd i’r GMC am feddyg oedd naill ai cwyn uniongyrchol gan glaf neu gynrychiolydd, neu gan yr HA neu’r PCT ei hun os oedd o’r farn nad oedd mesurau adfer yr oedd wedi’u cymhwyso ei hun wedi bod yn llwyddiannus, ac yn annhebygol o fod yn llwyddiannus. Ymhlith y rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am weinyddu’r mesurau disgyblu, nid ymddengys bod eu tranc wedi peri rhyw lawer o anfodlonrwydd. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys fod rhai cleifion neu’u cynrychiolwyr a ddilynodd cwyn yn erbyn meddyg yn parhau’n anfodlon er bod eu cwynion efallai wedi’u cynnal, gan mai eu canfyddiad oedd nad oedd y meddyg wedi’i gael yn atebol. I ryw raddau, cododd y broblem hon gan nad oedd hawl gan achwynwyr i gael gwybod (ac, yn ymarferol, ni chawsant wybod) am unrhyw fesurau adfer y gallai fod wedi bod yn ofynnol i’r meddyg fynd drwyddynt o ganlyniad i adroddiad IRP. Fodd bynnag, gall fod bod problem sylfaenol â gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 gan nad ydynt yn darparu unrhyw ffocws neu amcan clir. Cyn 1996, roedd yr amcan yn glir o leiaf, er yn anfoddhaol: yr amcan oedd cosbi’r meddyg a dorrodd ei delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth. Er 1996, yr amcanion oedd
‘bodloni’r achwynydd’
a dysgu oddi wrth gamgymeriadau. Cyn belled â bod yr achwynydd yn y cwestiwn, nid oes unrhyw iawndal ac eithrio ymddiheuriad o bosibl. Byddaf yn mynd yn ôl at fater iawndal yn y Bennod hon.
Y Grym i Atal Meddyg Teulu rhag Ymarfer yn y GIG
Daethpwyd ag un agwedd foddhaol ar weithdrefnau disgyblu 1996 i ffocws manwl ym 1998, pan gynghorwyd y WPHA gan Heddlu Greater Manchester (GMP) fod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad am lofruddiaeth claf, Mrs Kathleen Grundy, bod nifer o farwolaethau eraill yn codi amheuaeth ac y credwyd bod Shipman yn risg i’w gleifion. Nid oedd Shipman wedi’i arestio bryd hynny na’i gyhuddo o unrhyw drosedd. Roedd yn ymarfer, fel arfer, yn 21 Market Stryeet, Hyde. Ar 14 Awst 1998, gofynnwyd i’r WPHA gan y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Bernard Postles (Ditectif Brif Uwcharolygydd yn ddiweddarach), y swyddog â gofal am yr ymchwiliad i Shipman, i gymryd camau i atal Shipman rhag ymarfer. Cysylltodd â’r GMC hefyd, ond dywedwyd wrtho nad oedd grym gan y corff hwnnw i atal meddyg yn ystod ymchwiliad i drosedd.
Nid oedd y grym gan y WHPA ei hun i atal Shipman ychwaith. Y weithdrefn dan Reoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Pwyllgorau a Thribiwnlys Gwasanaeth) 1992, fel y’i diwygiwyd, oedd i’r WPHA wneud cais i Dribiwnlys y GIG, a oedd â’r grym i bennu ataliad interim, tra’n disgwyl gwrandawiad cais gan y WPHA i dynnu enw Shipman oddi ar eu rhestr. Datgelodd cyswllt rhwng cyfreithiwr y WHPA a’r Clerc i Dribiwnlys y GIG y byddai Tribiwnlys y GIG yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol cael cais ysgrifenedig yn cael ei ategu gan dystiolaeth gan yr heddlu, gan gynnwys datganiadau tyst. Nid oedd yr heddlu’n barod i ddatgelu gwybodaeth felly bryd hynny, gan y gallai datgelu hynny i Shipman niweidio’u hymchwiliadau. Arweiniodd cyfathrebu pellach rhwng y WPHA a’r Clerc i Dribiwnlys y GIG at gais ffurfiol yn cael ei wneud ar 21 Awst, yn cael ei ategu gan grynodeb o’r sefyllfa a llythyrau lle’r oedd y GMP yn egluro’r rhesymau am ei
‘bryderon cynyddol’
ynghylch diogelwch cleifion Shipman. Roedd y weithdrefn yn gofyn am gynnal gwrandawiad gerbron y Tribiwnlys. Roedd yn rhaid rhoi hysbysiad 14 diwrnod i Shipman am wrandawiad; mewn gwirionedd, trefnwyd y gwrandawiad ar gyfer 29 Medi.
Penderfynodd yr heddlu weithredu ac arestio Shipman ar 7 Medi. Fe’i cyhuddwyd o lofruddiaeth a ffugio, a’i gadw yn y ddalfa. Roedd ei gleifion yn ddiogel erbyn hyn, er bod y GMP yn ofni y gallai cais am fechnïaeth lwyddo. Beth bynnag, roedd y WPHA yn dymuno cymryd gofal o reolaeth meddygfa Shipman, gan fod y consortiwm yr oedd Shipman yn perthyn iddo yn cael anhawster wrth ddod o hyd i feddygon locwm i ddarparu gwasanaethau i gleifion. Roedd y GMP a’r WPHA yn dymuno dilyn y cais i Dribiwnlys y GIG. Cyflwynwyd rhagor o dystiolaeth, ar affidafid.
Cynhaliwyd gwrandawiad gerbron y Tribiwnlys yn Llundain ar 29 Medi. Cafodd cais i ohirio’r achos, a wnaed ar ran Shipman, ei wrthod. Neilltuwyd penderfyniad y Tribiwnlys a’i gyflwyno, yn ysgrifenedig, ar 15 Hydref. Roedd y Tribiwnlys wedi penderfynu atal Shipman o’r rhestr meddygon a oedd yn darparu gwasanaethau meddygol cyffredinol i’r WPHA. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd grym cyfreithiol i’r penderfyniad am 14 diwrnod arall, ac yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw roedd hawl gan Shipman wneud apêl. Mewn gwirionedd, ni wnaeth hynny, a daeth y gorchymyn i rym ar 29 Hydref 1998. Roedd y WPHA a’r GMP yn anfodlon iawn ei bod wedi cymryd deng wythnos i gael gorchymyn effeithiol.
Arweiniodd yr anawsterau a gafodd y WPHA a’r GMP yn yr achos hwn yn uniongyrchol at benderfyniad gan y GMC i ofyn am bwerau estynedig i bennu ataliad interim, ac mae’r grym hwnnw ganddo bellach. Hefyd, roedd Deddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol 2001 yn diddymu Tribiwnlys y GIG ac yn rhoi’r grym i HAau (PCTau yn ddiweddarach) i atal neu ddileu meddyg teulu oddi ar eu rhestrau. Gall PCT weithredu mewn perthynas â’i restr ei hun yn unig. Os yw’n briodol, gall PCT gyfeirio achos at yr FHSAA (corff newydd a grëwyd ym mis Rhagfyr 2001), sy’n gallu pennu gwaharddiad cenedlaethol.

---  ---
Prosiect y Gyfraith Gyhoeddus
Ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, dechreuodd Prosiect y Gyfraith Gyhoeddus wneud ymchwil i weithrediad gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996 o bersbectif defnyddwyr y gwasanaeth iechyd. Cyhoeddwyd ei adroddiad, o’r enw ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, ym mis Medi 1999.
Adroddwyd bod datrys ar lefel leol yn foddhaol yn gyffredinol mewn meddygfeydd a oedd wedi ymrwymo i’r broses, ond ddim cystal gyda meddygon amddiffynnol a oedd yn syml yn
‘chwarae’r gêm’
. Mynegwyd nifer o bryderon. Yn gyntaf, roedd yn amlwg o archwilio penderfyniadau cymodwyr bod llawer o feddygfeydd nad oeddent yn gweithredu gweithdrefnau teg; roedd llawer yn methu archwilio’n ddigonol i’r gŵyn, neu’n methu rhoi esboniad digonol ar ddiwedd y broses. Mewn 47% o’r achosion a archwiliwyd, roedd y cymodwr wedi anfon yr achos yn ôl ar gyfer gwneud ymgais bellach i’w ddatrys yn lleol. Roedd pryderon mwy sylfaenol hefyd. Roedd y gweithdrefnau lleol yn methu rhoi ystyriaeth i’r anghydbwysedd grym a oedd yn gynhenid yn y berthynas rhwng gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd a chlaf. Roedd yn anodd iawn i gleifion herio’r sefydliad a oedd wedi rhoi triniaeth iddynt. Roedd y gweithdrefnau lle’r oedd sefydliad yn ymchwilio i’w ymddygiad neu’i berfformiad ei hun yn annhebygol o fod yn ddiduedd. Nid oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion GIG lleol yn atebol i unrhyw gorff allanol. Roedd y problemau hyn yn arbennig o ddifrifol yn y sector gofal sylfaenol, lle’r oedd yr angen i ddod â’r gŵyn yn uniongyrchol i’r feddygfa yn gweithredu fel rhwystr i gwyno. Gallai sefydliad bach yn delio â chwyn fynd yn anesmwyth o bersonol. Roedd cleifion yn ofni dial fel cael eu tynnu oddi ar restr y feddygfa. Roedd rhai’n amheus ynghylch a fyddent yn cael esboniadau onest neu ddiduedd. Teimlwyd bod angen i achwynwyr allu mynd â’u cwynion at awdurdod annibynnol a fyddai’n cymryd cyfrifoldeb am oruchwylio unrhyw ymchwiliad.
Mynegwyd pryder ynghylch anallu’r gweithdrefnau newydd (yn enwedig ar lefel leol) i ddelio’n ddigonol â chwynion a oedd yn codi cwestiynau difrifol ynghylch perfformiad, ymddygiad neu gymhwysedd, o’r fath natur a allai roi cleifion mewn perygl. Un o’r prif broblemau oedd annigonolrwydd yr ymchwiliad i’r gŵyn. Nid yn unig yr oedd diffyg sgiliau angenrheidiol gan y rheolwr cwynion weithiau, ond roedd agwedd amddiffynnol yn aml a oedd yn gyfystyr â
‘chadw cefn cyfunol’
. Yn y maes hwn yn arbennig yr oedd angen annibyniaeth a chymhwysedd wrth ddelio â chwynion.
Roedd cymodwyr i weld yn llai nag annibynnol ac fe’u canfuwyd fel
‘mewnwyr’
y GIG. Dywedodd bron i 50% o’r holl gymodwyr a gyfwelwyd eu bod yn teimlo dan fygythiad gan eu rôl fel cyfarwyddwr anweithredol yr HA. Roedd rhai’n dioddef o ddiffyg profiad neu hyfforddiant i gyflawni’u swyddogaethau’n foddhaol.
Roedd y modd yr oedd gwrandawiadau IRP yn cael eu cynnal yn anfoddhaol hefyd. Adroddwyd bod y rhan fwyaf o banelau yn dewis clywed y cyfranogwyr ar wahân. Teimlai llawer o achwynwyr yn anfodlon nad oeddent wedi gallu clywed esboniad y meddyg. Roedd teimlad hefyd bod rhai panelau ac aseswyr yn rhagfarnllyd o blaid y GIG. Weithiau, nid oedd y sgiliau angenrheidiol gan gadeiryddion IRP i weithredu’n dda.
Roedd yr adroddiad yn amlygu’r broblem, y soniwyd amdani gan Miss Horsfall mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, nad oedd HAau a PCTau yn gallu monitro’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â chwynion gofal sylfaenol gan mai ychydig o wybodaeth oedd ganddynt amdanynt. Roedd hyn wedi arwain at golli atebolrwydd meddygon. Adroddodd yr awduron hefyd mai amrywiol oedd ymrwymiad sefydliadau’r GIG i ddefnyddio’r broses cwynion fel arf newid. Nid oedd pawb yn gwneud ymdrech fawr i weithredu’r argymhellion IRP. Mynegwyd pryder ynghylch effaith datgysylltiad y gweithdrefnau disgyblu a chwynion. Nodwyd y bu gostyngiad nodedig yn nifer yr achosion disgyblu mewn gofal sylfaenol. Roedd yn ymddangos bod delio â diffygion drwy ailhyfforddi a gwella sgiliau yn cael ei ffafrio. Awgrymwyd mai anfantais hyn oedd diffyg unrhyw sancsiwn. Roedd yn ymddangos fel nad oedd gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn atebol.
Daeth yr adroddiad i ben â nifer o argymhellion. Byddaf yn amlygu pump. Yn gyntaf, dywedwyd y dylai cleifion gofal sylfaenol allu cwyno’n uniongyrchol i swyddog a oedd yn annibynnol ar y feddygfa ac a fyddai’n gyfrifol am oruchwylio’r ymchwiliad i’r gŵyn. Yn ail, awgrymwyd y dylai’r Adran Iechyd ddatblygu fframwaith ar gyfer hyrwyddo ar garlam cwynion a oedd yn codi cwestiynau difrifol ynghylch perfformiad, ymddygiad neu gymhwysedd a oedd yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl. Dylai cwynion felly gael eu hystyried gan ‘sgriniwr’ a fyddai’n penderfynu a ddylent gael eu cyfeirio ar unwaith at brosesau ymchwilio neu adfer mwy ffurfiol. Yn drydydd, dylai ail gam y broses gael ei gynnal dan nawdd corff rhanbarthol, yn hytrach na lleol, o’r GIG, er mwyn cynyddu annibyniaeth ac effeithlonrwydd. Yn bedwerydd, dylai arweiniad gael ei ddosbarthu ar gyfer cynnal IRPau er mwyn gwella tegwch a thryloywder. Yn olaf, dylid gwella atebolrwydd trwy ddarparu gwybodaeth am gŵynion am ofal sylfaenol i HAau, trwy ganiatáu i IRPau argymell camau gweithredu disgyblu a thrwy roi gwybodaeth gyson i achwynwyr am ganlyniad camau gweithredu disgyblu.
Yn fy marn i, cafodd y gwaith ymchwil hwn ei gynnal yn dda, daeth i gasgliadau gofalus ac argymhellodd fesurau synhwyrol. Er na wnaeth arwain at unrhyw weithredu uniongyrchol, gall yn wir fod wedi ysgogi comisiynu ymchwil pellach a gallai fod wedi dylanwadu ar feddwl y Llywodraeth.
Adroddiad ar yr Ymchwil a Wnaed gan Gonsortiwm Economeg Iechyd Efrog
Ym 1999, comisiynwyd Consortiwm Economeg Iechyd Efrog i wneud ymchwil i’r modd yr oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG yn gweithredu. Cyhoeddodd y Consortiwm ei adroddiad (Adroddiad Efrog) ym mis Mawrth 2001. Fel â gwaith Prosiect y Gyfraith Gyhoeddus, ymddengys fod y gwaith ymchwil hwn wedi’i gynnal yn dda. Fodd bynnag, roedd ei sylfaen yn ehangach ac roedd yn edrych ar brofiad pob mathau o bobl a oedd yn gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau yn ogystal â’r rheiny a’u defnyddiai. Mae’r canfyddiadau’n hynod debyg i ganfyddiadau ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, er, fel y byddaf yn esbonio, roedd yr argymhellion yn llawer llai radical.
Ymhlith achwynwyr, roedd lefel uchel o anfodlonrwydd mewn perthynas â datrys cwynion yn lleol a’r ail gam. Ar lefel leol, dim ond rhyw draean o achwynwyr oedd yn fodlon â’r broses. Roedd yr anfodlonrwydd yn ymwneud â’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â chwynion, yr amser a gymerwyd, annhegwch a rhagfarn, straen a chanlyniad. Roedd grwpiau buddiannau cleifion yn pwysleisio’r anhawster y mae llawer o gleifion yn ei gael wrth gwyno’n uniongyrchol i ddarparwr gwasanaeth. Roedd adroddiadau am gleifion yn cael eu tynnu oddi ar restr meddygfa yn dilyn cwyn. Roedd beirniadaethau penodol yn ymwneud ag agweddau anghynorthwyol, ymosodgar neu drahaus staff, cyfathrebu gwael a diffyg gwybodaeth a chefnogaeth. Yn yr ail gam, dim ond chwarter oedd yn fodlon. Roedd anfodlonrwydd yn ymwneud eto ag oedi, annhegwch a rhagfarn, straen a chanlyniad. Dim ond 13% oedd yn fodlon â’r canlyniad. Diffyg annibyniaeth oedd y prif gŵyn am yr ail gam.
Ymhlith staff y GIG a fu’n destun cwyn, roedd lefel uchel o fodlonrwydd. Teimlai’r rhan fwyaf yr ymdriniwyd yn dda â’r gŵyn yn eu herbyn, a bod y broses wedi bod yn un deg a diduedd. Cwynodd rhai na chawsant wybodaeth ddigonol am gynnydd. Yn fy marn i, mae’r gwahaniaeth llwyr rhwng lefelau bodlonrwydd y rheiny a oedd yn cwyno a’r rheiny y gwnaethpwyd cwyn yn eu herbyn yn arwyddocaol iawn. Awgryma’n gryf fod y gweithdrefnau’n pwyso yn erbyn achwynwyr.
Yng ngolwg y rhan fwyaf o’r rheiny a fu’n gysylltiedig â gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau, y farn oedd eu bod yn well na’r rheiny a oedd mewn grym cyn 1996. Fodd bynnag, cydnabuwyd yr angen am welliant, yn enwedig mewn perthynas ag annibyniaeth y rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig â’r ail gam. Roedd rhai o’r rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig o’r farn fod gweithdrefnau’r ail gam yn rhy llafurus a drud. Teimlai rhai bod y targedau perfformiad yn anodd i’w cyrraedd. Roedd aelodau IRP eisiau hyfforddiant ac adborth gwell.
Roedd Adroddiad Efrog yn trafod goblygiadau polisi’r canfyddiadau a gwnaeth lawer o argymhellion penodol. Mewn perthynas â gwasanaethau gofal sylfaenol, roedd yr argymhellion yn ddatblygiadol yn hytrach na radical. Prif fyrdwn y cynigion oedd sicrhau bod blaenoriaeth uwch yn cael ei rhoi i ddelio â chwynion ar lefel leol. Awgrymwyd bod rhaid cynnig y cyfle i achwynwyr gwyno mewn modd nad oedd yn uniongyrchol i’r feddygfa. Roedd hyn i’w gyflawni drwy annog meddygfeydd i gydweithio i rannu gwybodaeth a chynnig cefnogaeth wrth ddarparu gweithdrefnau derbyniol. Dylid rhoi llai o ddisgresiwn i reolwyr cwynion meddygfeydd ynghylch y modd y dylid delio â chwynion. Dylid defnyddio’r broses cymodi’n ehangach. Dylid cael unigolyn penodol ym mhob PCT, y byddai gan achwynwyr fynediad ato/ati, â chyfrifoldeb am
‘ddelio â chwynion am aelod feddygfeydd’
. Hefyd, cynigiwyd y dylai PCTau gael mwy o wybodaeth am gŵynion, gan gynnwys achosion cwynion a’r camau gweithredu a gymerwyd neu a gynigiwyd i atal ailadrodd. Dylai byrddau PCT gael adroddiad chwarterol ar gŵynion a dylent gymryd cyfrifoldeb am sicrhau bod camau y cytunwyd arnynt yn cael eu gweithredu. Dylai’r adroddiad chwarterol gael ei ddosbarthu i sefydliadau cleifion lleol. Dylid rhoi ystyriaeth i ddatblygu Fframwaith Gwasanaeth Cenedlaethol ar gyfer rheoli cwynion.
Roedd cynigion ar gyfer gwella’r ail gam yn ymwneud yn bennaf ag annibyniaeth gynyddol i gymodwyr a phanelau. Dylai’r ail gam gael ei gynnal ar lefel ranbarthol neu isranbarthol. Dylid rhoi ystyriaeth i bwerau cynyddol i banelau, er enghraifft, i alw tystion a chymryd tystiolaeth. Dylid darparu hyfforddiant gwell i bawb a oedd yn gweithredu’r ail gam. Dylid gofyn i Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd i ystyried y modd y dylid gweithredu gweithdrefn garlam lle byddai’r ail gam, mewn achosion priodol, yn cael ei gynnal gan yr Ombwdsmon. Dylai bwrdd y corff perthnasol o’r GIG gymryd cyfrifoldeb gweithredol am sicrhau, ar ôl derbyn adroddiad IRP, bod cynllun gweithredu yn cael ei lunio a bod y camau gweithredu’n cael eu cymryd.
Adroddiad y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd ar Achos Peter Green
Ym mis Awst 2001, cyhoeddodd y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI) adroddiad am ei ymchwiliad i ymddygiad meddyg teulu, Peter Green, a gafodd ei ddyfarnu’n euog ym mis Gorffennaf 2000 o ymosodiadau rhywiol ar nifer o gleifion. Roedd yr adroddiad yn beirniadu
‘diwylliant y GIG nad oedd yn gwrando ar gŵynion nac yn eu trin yn ymholgar’
‘system cwynion y GIG a oedd yn methu canfod materion yn ymwneud â chamymddygiad proffesiynol neu weithgarwch troseddol’
dros nifer o flynyddoedd. Codwyd pryderon ynghylch ymddygiad Green gydag amrywiaeth o gyrff gwahanol ar nid llai na 23 o achlysuron rhwng 1985 a 1997. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys yr FHSA, meddygon ym meddygfa Green, y GMC a’r heddlu. Nid oedd y cwynion wedi’u cofnodi na’u croesgyfeirio, ac ni sylwyd ar y patrwm.
Roedd adroddiad CHI yn canolbwyntio ar fethiannau’r systemau, ac nid oedd yn gwneud argymhellion penodol ar gyfer diwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwynion. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn disgrifio enghraifft drawiadol o’r modd y gall gweithdrefnau lleol fethu’n llwyr os nad yw agwedd y feddygfa yn agored a theg. Gwnaeth un o ddioddefwyr Green gŵyn i’r feddygfa ym 1996. Ar ôl
, yr ymateb swyddogol oedd nad oedd
‘unrhyw dystiolaeth bod Dr Green yn euog o unrhyw gamymddygiad proffesiynol neu bod cymhellion ganddo ac eithrio i fod o fudd i chi
(yr achwynydd)
yn ei driniaeth ohonoch’
. Wrth gwrs, roedd tystiolaeth o gamymddygiad proffesiynol - gan yr achwynydd - ond nid oedd y feddygfa wedi cymryd y dystiolaeth ddigon o ddifrif ac roedd yn ôl pob golwg wedi derbyn esboniad Green o’r hyn ddigwyddodd.

---  ---
Datganiadau o Fwriad
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth ‘Cynllun y GIG, Cynllun ar gyfer buddsoddi, Cynllun ar gyfer diwygio’ (Cynllun y GIG), a oedd yn cynnwys ei gynigion ar gyfer moderneiddio pob agwedd ar y gwasanaeth iechyd. Roedd Cynllun y GIG yn cynnwys ymrwymiad i ddiwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwynion, a hefyd i wella’r wybodaeth a’r cymorth a oedd i fod ar gael i gleifion. Cyhoeddodd ffurfiant y Gwasanaeth Eiriolaeth (i’w newid i ‘Gyngor’ yn ddiweddarach) a Chyswllt Cleifion (PALS), a fyddai, fe ddywedwyd, yn
‘cyfeirio cleifion a theuluoedd tuag at y broses cwynion lle’r oedd angen’
a byddai’n cymryd y swyddogaethau a oedd yn cael eu cyflawni bryd hynny gan y CHCau wrth gefnogi achwynwyr. Roedd CHCau yn darparu cyngor a chefnogaeth am ddim i achwynwyr ym mhob cam o’r gweithdrefnau cwynion. Byddai CHCau yn drafftio ac yn delio â gohebiaeth, yn cynghori ynghylch y materion a oedd yn cael eu codi, a byddai’n mynd gyda’r achwynydd i unrhyw wrandawiad. Mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod llawer yn gwneud eu gwaith yn dda a bod eu gwasanaethau’n cael eu gwerthfawrogi’n fawr, nid gan achwynwyr yn unig ond hefyd gan y rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am weinyddu’r gweithdrefnau, fel Miss Horsfall.
Ym mis Medi 2001, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth Bapur Ymgynghorol o’r enw ‘Reforming the NHS Complaints Procedure: a listening document’. Cynhaliwyd yr ymgynghoriad yn fuan ar ôl cyhoeddi Adroddiad yr Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus i lawfeddygaeth plant yn y Bristol Royal Infirmary 1984-1995. Roedd y Papur Ymgynghorol yn esbonio mai bwriad y Llywodraeth oedd gwella atebolrwydd y GIG a rhoi rôl fwy i gleifion a’r cyhoedd wrth ffurfio gofal iechyd. Roedd y Papur Ymgynghorol yn crynhoi canfyddiadau Adroddiad Efrog, ac yn gofyn am farnau am ei argymhellion. Gofynnwyd rhai cwestiynau penodol er mwyn eu trafod. Addawodd y Llywodraeth y byddai’n gwrando ar farnau cleifion. Caeodd yr Ymgynghoriad ym mis Hydref 2001.
Ym mis Medi 2001 hefyd, cyhoeddwyd ail Bapur Ymgynghorol, o’r enw ‘Involving Patients and the Public in Healthcare. A Discussion Document’. Y prif fesurau a oedd yn cael eu cynnig oedd ffurfio’r Comisiwn dros Gyswllt Cleifion a’r Cyhoedd ag Iechyd (CPPIH), a fyddai â chyfrifoldeb cyffredinol a chydlynol dros gyswllt cleifion â’r gwasanaeth iechyd. Byddai dau gorff newydd yn cael eu ffurfio, PALS a Gwasanaeth Eiriolaeth Cwynion Annibynnol (ICAS) yn seiliedig yn lleol. Byddai Fforwm Cleifion yn cael ei sefydlu ym mhob ymddiriedolaeth GIG. Cylch gwaith y Fforymau Cleifion fyddai monitro ac adolygu ansawdd gwasanaethau lleol o safbwynt cleifion. Byddai CHCau yn cael eu diddymu. Byddai’r ddau wasanaeth newydd, PALS ac ICAS, yng ngeiriau’r Papur Ymgynghorol,
‘yn fodd allweddol o sicrhau delio â phryderon cleifion yn gyflym ac er bodlonrwydd pawb’
. Y bwriad oedd y byddai PALS yn gallu darparu cyngor a chymorth yn y fan a’r lle i gleifion wrth ddatrys amrywiaeth eang o broblemau. Byddai ICAS yn darparu cymorth i gleifion wrth fwrw ymlaen â chwyn. Mynegwyd siom cyffredinol yn wyneb y cynnig i ddileu’r CHCau, yn enwedig gan sefydliadau a oedd yn cynrychioli buddiannau cleifion.
Yn ‘Delivering the NHS Plan’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Ebrill 2002, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth ei fwriad i ffurfio’r Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn), a fyddai, ymysg llawer o swyddogaethau eraill, â chyfrifoldeb am archwilio cwynion gofal iechyd yn annibynnol.
Ar ôl y Cynghorau Iechyd Cymunedol
Aeth diddymiad y CHCau rhagddo fwy neu lai yn ôl fel a gynlluniwyd, a sefydlwyd cangen o PALS ym mhob ardal. Mae cynghorwyr PALS yn gyflogeion y GIG; gallant gael eu cyflogi gan ymddiriedolaeth ysbyty neu PCT, ac, mewn rhai ardaloedd, gall PALS wasanaethu’r sectorau sylfaenol ac eilaidd. Bwriad PALS yw rhoi cyngor ynghylch ystod eang o broblemau y gall claf eu hwynebu o fewn y GIG; nid yw’n gyfyngedig i gyngor ynghylch cwynion. Gall cynghorydd PALS ddweud wrth glaf sut i fynd ati i wneud cwyn, a gall ei gynghori/chynghori sut i gael cefnogaeth ICAS. Nid yw PALS yn rhoi cymorth annibynnol i achwynydd. Byddai’n amhriodol iddo wneud hynny, gan fod y rheiny sy’n rhedeg y gwasanaeth yn gyflogeion y GIG.
Ym mis Mai 2003, cyhoeddodd Cymdeithas y CHCau arolwg rhagarweiniol o hygyrchedd ac effeithlonrwydd PALS. Rwy’n cydnabod o’r cychwyn bod yr arolwg hwn wedi’i gynnal gan un o’r cyrff a oedd yn cael ei ddisodli gan PALS. Gellir dweud yn rhesymol fod gan y Gymdeithas safbwynt i’w hyrwyddo. Fodd bynnag, nid oes gennyf reswm i dybio bod ei ddata’n anghywir. Dangosodd yr arolwg mai bylchog iawn oedd darpariaeth y gwasanaeth newydd. O 100 o alwadau sampl a wnaed i’r switsfyrddau mewn 100 o ymddiriedolaethau GIG gwahanol, yn gofyn am fynediad at PALS, dim ond 51 o alwadau a arweiniodd at ymateb personol. Roedd y lleill naill ai heb fod yn gysylltiedig â PALS neu ymateb peiriant ateb a gafwyd. Cynhaliwyd yr arolwg hwn yn y dyddiau cynnar wedi sefydlu PALS. Gobeithir y bu rhywfaint o welliant yn ystod y 18 mis diwethaf.
Cymerodd ICAS ychydig mwy o amser i’w sefydlu. Fel yr ymhlyga’i enw, bwriad ICAS yw bod yn annibynnol ar y GIG. Roedd contractau ar gyfer darpariaeth ICAS wrthi’n cael eu llofnodi pan roddwyd tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad gan Syr Nigel Crisp, Prif Weithredwr y GIG yn Lloegr, ym mis Gorffennaf 2003. Mae gwasanaethau ICAS yn cael eu comisiynu’n ganolog ar hyn o bryd gan y CPPIH, ac fe’u darperir gan y Ganolfan Gynghori neu sefydliadau tebyg. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth ei fwriad i ddiddymu’r CPPIH, ac ar hyn o bryd, nid yw’n eglur i mi pwy fydd yn gyfrifol am gomisiynu gwasanaethau ICAS. Pan oedd yr Ymchwiliad yn gwrando tystiolaeth lafar, roedd ICAS yn ei ddyddiau cynnar, ac nid oedd union gwmpas ei swyddogaethau’n glir eto. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, fodd bynnag, yn ôl gwefan y CPPIH, gallai ICAS gynnig
‘helpu cleientiaid nodi’r opsiynau ar gyfer mynd ymlaen â’u cwyn/ion am wasanaethau’r GIG’
‘gwneud yn siŵr bod gwersi o brofiad defnyddwyr o’r GIG yn cael eu bwydo’n ôl i’r gwasanaeth ac i’r rheiny sy’n gyfrifol am archwilio’r GIG’
. Ni all helpu gyda chwynion, fodd bynnag, ynghylch triniaeth neu wasanaethau gofal iechyd preifat sy’n codi y tu allan i’r GIG, ac ni all ychwaith gynorthwyo achwynwyr sy’n cyfreitha neu’n bwriadu cyfreitha mewn perthynas â chwyn am wasanaethau’r GIG.
Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi derbyn tystiolaeth ynghylch y modd y mae ICAS yn gweithredu. Ymddengys yn debygol o wybodaeth sydd ar gael ar ei wefan ar hyn o bryd y bydd mewn gwirionedd yn darparu cefnogaeth i achwynwyr gydol y broses cwynion. Mae angen i achwynwyr gael mynediad at gyngor di-dâl, annibynnol a gwybodus. Nid yw dweud wrth achwynydd sut i fwrw ymlaen yn ddigon. Mae angen rhywun arno/arni i drafod y materion a rhinweddau’r gŵyn. Mae angen cymorth arno/arni i’w gefnogi/chefnogi mewn gwrandawiad, os oes un. Os yw ICAS yn wir yn gallu darparu cyngor a chefnogaeth felly, dylid annog ei waith yn fawr iawn.
Cynigion y Llywodraeth ar gyfer Gweithdrefnau Cwynion
Ym mis Chwefror 2003, cyhoeddwyd cynigion y Llywodraeth ar gyfer diwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwynion yn ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’. Roedd y ddogfen hon yn cydnabod holl ddiffygion y system bresennol a gafodd eu hamlygu yn yr ymchwil ac a gafodd, yn ôl pob golwg, eu cadarnhau yn ystod yr ymarferiad ymgynghori. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys anhawster wrth ganlyn cwynion, oedi, agweddau negyddol gan y rheiny a oedd yn gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau, diffyg tegwch, diffyg cefnogaeth, diffyg annibyniaeth yn y cyfnod adolygu, diffyg iawndal a methiant i ddefnyddio adborth o gŵynion i wella gwasanaethau.
Y cynigion hanfodol oedd gwella’r modd yr oedd y gweithdrefnau lleol yn cael eu rhoi ar waith, i ddiwygio’r ail gam yn radical a gwella’r mecanweithiau ar gyfer dysgu o gŵynion. Cydnabuwyd, os oedd gweithdrefnau lleol i’w gwella, y byddai’n rhaid cael newid agwedd mewn rhai o’r rheiny a oedd yn gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau. Yn benodol, dywedwyd y dylai cwynion fod o werth fel cymorth i ddysgu a gwella ansawdd gwasanaeth; dylid delio â nhw yn gadarnhaol ac yn ewyllysgar, nid yn amddiffynnol. Roedd y cynnig i ennyn y newid ymagwedd hwn trwy raglenni hyfforddi a datblygu gwell. Hefyd, roedd cleifion a oedd yn dymuno cwyno i gael gwybodaeth well a mwy o gefnogaeth.
Teimlaf fod rhaid i mi ddweud y byddai’n dda o beth pe bai agweddau tuag at gŵynion yn gallu cael eu newid yn hawdd drwy hyfforddiant ac addysg. Credaf y gellir eu gwella ond y bydd newid yn broses hir a graddol. Yn gyntaf, rwy’n cael yr argraff, i lawer o feddygon, bod agwedd elyniaethus tuag at gŵynion wedi’i hymgorffori’n ddwfn. Yn y wasg feddygol, nid yw’n anghyffredin i weld barnau bod y rhan fwyaf o achwynwyr yn obsesiynol a bod eu cwynion yn ddi-sail. Yn ail, natur ddynol yw hi i droi’n amddiffynnol yn wyneb beirniadaeth. Gall derbyn cwyn beri straen mawr, gall fod yn annifyr a llafurus iawn. Nid yw hynny i ddweud nad yw’n werth gwneud yr ymdrech i sicrhau newid mewn agweddau. Credaf ei bod yn ymdrech gwerth chweil. Mewn perthynas â’r ail gam, cynigiodd ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’ y dylid cynnal yr adolygiad annibynnol, nid dan nawdd y PCT lleol, ond gan yr hyn a elwir bellach y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Byddai’r sefydliad hwn yn cael ei weld fel un annibynnol ac effeithlon. Byddai’n gallu nodi’r hyn a oedd yn ofynnol i roi pethau’n iawn, a byddai’n sicrhau hefyd bod gwersi’n cael eu dysgu lle cafodd camgymeriadau eu gwneud. Yn drydydd, dylai cwynion a’u datrys ddod yn rhan annatod o’r systemau sicrhau ansawdd yn y GIG. Yr uwch reolwyr fyddai â’r cyfrifoldeb cyffredinol am ddelio â chwynion. Byddai gwybodaeth yn deillio o gŵynion yn cael ei defnyddio at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol.
Cynigion i Gynnwys y Ddarpariaeth ar gyfer Iawndal am Gŵynion y mae Cyfiawnhad Drostynt
Cyfeiriais yn gynharach at ddiffyg unrhyw iawndal i achwynwyr y canfyddir bod cyfiawnhad dros eu cwyn. Ar hyn o bryd, ac yn wir dan Reoliadau drafft y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Cwynion) (y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft) sy’n nodi’r gweithdrefnau cwynion newydd arfaethedig, os yw cwyn yn cael ei chynnal, dylai’r achwynydd gael ymddiheuriad ac eglurhad o’r hyn a ddigwyddodd. Nid oes posibilrwydd o iawndal ariannol cyfyngedig hyd yn oed. Yn hanesyddol yn y wlad hon, bu gwahaniad llwyr rhwng gwneud cwyn a cheisio cael iawndal ariannol. Dim ond drwy gamau cyfreithiol yn y llysoedd y gellir cael iawndal ariannol, ac, o ganlyniad, dim ond mewn achosion lle gall yr achwynydd brofi niwed yn sgil torri’r ddyletswydd ofalu gyfreithiol sy’n ddyledus i’r claf gan y meddyg neu’r sefydliad. Fel y soniais yn gynharach, mae unrhyw glaf sy’n penderfynu cymryd camau cyfreithiol yn cael ei wahardd, ar hyn o bryd, rhag canlyn cwyn i’r ail gam, ac ni all ddisgwyl unrhyw gymorth gan ICAS.
Taliadau Cysur
Mae gweithdrefn cwynion na all ddarparu unrhyw iawndal ariannol yn annhebygol o roi bodlonrwydd mewn llawer o achosion. Yn wir, fy nealltwriaeth i yw bod rhywfaint o iawndal ariannol yn arferol y dyddiau hyn ar gyfer cwynion yn erbyn gweithwyr proffesiynol eraill; yn sicr mae’r gweithdrefnau sydd ar waith gan gyfreithwyr a bargyfreithwyr yn darparu iawndal ariannol cyfyngedig. Pan fydd claf yn cwyno am feddyg, bydd adegau pan mai ymddiheuriad yn unig y bydd ef/hi eisiau, neu ganfod beth sydd wedi digwydd, neu sicrwydd bod camau wedi’u cymryd i atal ail-adrodd y broblem a arweiniodd at y gŵyn. Weithiau, bydd achwynydd yn teimlo mai’r unig ffordd o gael sicrwydd yw bod y meddyg y gwnaethpwyd cwyn yn ei erbyn yn destun rhyw broses ddisgyblu, gan olygu ei ddileu o’r rhestr feddygol hyd yn oed o bosibl. Weithiau, bydd achwynydd eisiau - a dylai fod hawl ganddo/ganddi gael - ymddiheuriad, esboniad, neu sicrwydd bod gwersi wedi’u dysgu, a bod rhywfaint o iawndal, er mor fychan fydd hwnnw.
Yn ei Adroddiad Blynyddol ar gyfer 2000-2001, adroddodd Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd bod cyrff y GIG wedi’u cael eu hunain mewn anhawster pan oeddent yn dymuno gwneud taliad cysur bach, er enghraifft, i berson a oedd wedi dioddef rhywfaint o anghyfiawnder, gan na allent wneud hynny dan reolau’r GIG. Dim ond os oedd y person dan sylw yn gallu dangos colled ariannol, neu os cafwyd corff y GIG yn euog o gamweinyddu, y gellid gwneud taliad. Awgrymodd yr Ombwdsmon y dylai’r rheolau ganiatáu talu swm gweddol fychan i gydnabod oedi neu
‘ffwdan’
a dweud yn glir nad yw taliad felly yn gyfystyr ag addef atebolrwydd. Byddai rheol felly, yn ei farn ef, yn fwy cydnaws â GIG modern. Dywedodd yr Ombwdsmon ei fod wedi codi’r pwynt hwn gyda’r SoS mewn cysylltiad â chŵyn benodol, ond roedd yr SoS yn ôl pob golwg yn amharod i ystyried unrhyw newid ar y sail y byddai taliadau cysur yn dargyfeirio cyllid o ofal cleifion. Nododd yr Ombwdsmon bod y rheol yn erbyn taliadau cysurlon, mewn egwyddor, yn berthnasol nid yn unig i’r GIG, ond i’r Llywodraeth ganolog a Llywodraeth leol yn ogystal, â’r ddau ohonynt, honnodd yr Ombwdsmon, yn barod i wneud taliadau cysurlon. Yn fy marn i, roedd barn Ombwdsom y Gwasanaeth Iechyd yn ddiddorol ac yn werthfawr. Roedd mewn sefyllfa unigryw dda i amcangyfrif gwerth taliadau cysurlon wrth sicrhau bodlonrwydd i achwynwyr.
Ym mis Mehefin 2003, cyhoeddodd y Prif Swyddog Meddygol ‘Making Amends’, Papur Ymgynghorol yn nodi cynigion ar gyfer diwygio’r ymagwedd tuag at esgeuluster clinigol yn y GIG. Nid wyf yn bwriadu disgrifio cynnwys y Papur yn fanwl. Yn ei hanfod, mae’n nodi strategaeth hirdymor i wella gofal iechyd trwy ddysgu o gamgymeriadau a darparu ymateb holistaidd i gleifion sy’n cwyno am ddigwyddiad niweidiol mewn gofal iechyd. Mae’r papur yn cydnabod yr angen i gleifion sydd wedi dioddef canlyniadau niweidiol o ganlyniad i rywbeth ‘yn mynd o le’ i gael ymddiheuriad, esboniad onest o’r hyn ddigwyddodd, triniaeth adferol a gofal, a, lle bydd yn briodol, iawndal ariannol. Fy nealltwriaeth i yw y byddai’r iawndal ariannol a ragwelir llawer yn fwy na thaliad cysur, ond yn llawer llai na’r iawndal a fyddai’n cael ei ddyfarnu gan y llysoedd.
Y feddylfryd y tu ôl i’r cynigion yw y bydd system sy’n darparu’r pedair elfen hon yn sicrhau, yn yr hirdymor, bod y GIG yn canolbwyntio ar atal niwed a lleihau risgiau fel bod ansawdd gofal yn cael ei wella a’r lefel camgymeriadau meddygol yn cael ei gostwng. Hefyd, dylai’r cynigion arwain at ymateb wedi’i gydlynu’n well i niwed yn codi yn sgil gofal iechyd annigonol. Byddai gostyngiad yn y lefel camgymeriadau meddygol yn golygu y byddai gan lai o gleifion achos i erlyn y GIG, a byddai ymateb gwell i niwed yn golygu y byddai llai o gleifion yn dymuno erlyn, gan y byddid wedi delio’n briodol â’u cwynion heb droi at weithredu yn y llysoedd sifil. Heb fod yn annaturiol, mae gobaith y bydd cost uchel hawliadau esgeuluster clinigol yn cael ei leihau yn y pen draw.
Mae’r Papur Ymgynghorol yn canolbwyntio’n bennaf ar yr awgrym am gynllun iawndal y GIG, sy’n cael ei ddisgrifio’n weddol fanwl, er ei fod hefyd yn awgrymu rhai newidiadau yn y gyfraith camwedd mewn perthynas â hawliadau esgeuluster clinigol. Byddai’r cynllun ar gyfer iawndal ar gael mewn achosion lle dioddefwyd niwed o ganlyniad i ddiffygion difrifol yn safon y gofal, lle gellid fod wedi osgoi niwed a lle nad oedd y canlyniad croes yn ganlyniad cynnydd naturiol salwch. Ar hyn o bryd, â’r sector gofal eilaidd yn unig y mae’r cynnig yn ymwneud ag ef, er y gobeithir, os yw’n llwyddiannus, ei ymestyn i ofal sylfaenol.
Mae’r Papur Ymgynghorol yn pwysleisio’r angen i archwilio pob digwyddiad niweidiol yn drylwyr a’r ddyletswydd sydd ar weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd a rheolwyr i ddarparu esboniad onest i gleifion am yr hyn a aeth o le. Mae un argymhelliad penodol yn ymwneud â
‘dyletswydd gonestrwydd’
gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd. Awgrymir y dylai fod dyletswydd gyfreithiol ar weithwyr proffesiynol felly i hysbysu cleifion lle dônt yn ymwybodol o weithred esgeulus neu anwaith posibl. Awgryma’r papur hefyd, yn gydredol â’r ddyletswydd gonestrwydd, y dylai fod eithriad rhag camau disgyblu gan gyflogwyr neu gyrff rheoleiddio proffesiynol ar gyfer y rheiny sy’n adrodd am ddigwyddiadau niweidiol,
‘ac eithrio lle mae’r gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd wedi cyflawni trosedd neu ni fyddai’n ddiogel i’r gweithiwr proffesiynol barhau i drin cleifion’
Yn ei ymateb i ‘Making Amends’, nododd y GMC bod dyletswydd broffesiynol ar feddygon yn barod i roi esboniad clir i gleifion pan fydd pethau wedi mynd o le. Mae hyn yn ehangach na’r ddyletswydd a awgrymwyd i ddweud wrth gleifion pan fydd y meddyg yn meddwl y gallai esgeuluster fod wedi digwydd. Hefyd, awgrymodd y GMC y byddai dyletswydd gyfreithiol yn anodd i’w heddlua, a byddai, felly, yn annymunol. Byddai’n well gan y GMC ddyletswydd broffesiynol. O ran yr eithriad a awgrymwyd rhag camau disgyblu, fe wnaeth y GMC atgoffa’r Llywodraeth am y polisi a ddatganwyd yn ‘A Commitment to Quality, A Quest for Excellence: A statement on behalf of the Government, the medical profession and the NHS’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mehefin 2001. Yn y ddogfen honno, roedd y Llywodraeth a’r proffesiwn wedi cytuno, heb leihau’r ymrwymiad i ansawdd ac atebolrwydd i’r cyhoedd, na ddylid delio â methiant onest gan weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd trwy feio a dial yn anad dim, ond yn hytrach trwy ddysgu o gamgymeriadau. Fodd bynnag, fel y nododd y GMC yn ei ymateb, roedd yr eithriad rhag camau disgyblu sy’n cael ei gynnig nawr yn mynd tu hwnt i’r ymrwymiad yn y cyd-ddatganiad polisi, ac ni fyddai’n gydnaws â dyletswydd statudol y GMC ei hun i gymryd camau priodol (o bosibl yn cynnwys camau disgyblu) pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei derbyn. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad hefyd gan Mr Ian Hargreaves, Cyfarwyddwr Rhanbarthol wedi ymddeol, y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol, ei fod ef yn ystyried y syniad o eithrio rhag camau disgyblu yn annymunol yn achos unrhyw weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd.
Daeth y cyfnod ymgynghori a ganiatawyd yn ‘Making Amends’ i ben ym mis Hydref 2003, ond, pan ysgrifennwyd hwn ar ddiwedd 2004, nid yw’r Llywodraeth wedi cyhoeddi sut mae’n bwriadu bwrw ymlaen.
Cynigion ar gyfer Diwygio Gweithdrefnau Cwynion 1996
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, pan gychwynnodd yr Ymchwiliad ar wrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, a oedd y cwmpasu’r holl faterion yn ymwneud â monitro meddygon teulu, nid oedd y Llywodraeth wedi llunio unrhyw gynigion pendant eto ar gyfer newid i’r gweithdrefnau cwynion. Roedd gwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar yn cynnwys ymchwiliad i weithrediad y system delio â chwynion. Ym mis Hydref 2003, cyhoeddodd yr Ymchwiliad Bapur Ymgynghorol, o’r enw ‘Safeguarding Patients: Topics for Consideration at the Stage Four Seminars’, a gynlluniwyd i ennyn ymateb i, ac ysgogi trafodaethau o, syniadau a gafodd tîm yr Ymchwiliad yn ystod y cyfnod ymchwilio ac wythnosau cyntaf y gwrandawiadau. Roedd y dadleuon a’r ymatebion i ffurfio’r sylfaen ar gyfer trafodaeth yn y seminarau i’w cynnal ym mis Ionawr 2004. Roedd pump o’r pynciau a godwyd yn y Papur Ymgynghorol yn ymwneud â chwynion cleifion.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd gynigion manwl ar gyfer newid ar ffurf Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft. Erbyn hyn, roedd yr Ymchwiliad eisoes wedi gwrando tystiolaeth am gŵynion cleifion, ond, yn anffodus, cyhoeddwyd y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft cyn i’r seminarau gael eu cynnal. Ymddengys bod y Llywodraeth wedi parhau i ‘wrando’ ar ymatebion i’w gynigion amlinellol, gan fod y cynigion manwl yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn cynnwys rhai datblygiadau pwysig. Darparwyd ar gyfer y diwygiad mawr a ragfynegwyd yn ‘NHS Complaints Reform: Making Things Right’ (h.y. trosglwyddo ail gam yr adolygiad i’r Comisiwn Gwasanaeth Iechyd) yn Rhan IV o’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft. Fodd bynnag, mewn perthynas â’r cam cyntaf, ymddengys y cydnabuwyd na ellid newid agweddau negyddol tuag at gŵynion a oedd yn gyffredin mewn rhai sefydliadau GIG o fewn rhychwant amser rhesymol drwy addysg a hyfforddiant yn unig.
Pasiwyd Deddf Iechyd a Gofal Cymdeithasol (Iechyd Cymunedol a Safonau) 2003 a darparodd ar gyfer creu’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, a ddaeth i fodolaeth ym mis Ebrill 2004. Gan i’r cynnig i drosglwyddo ail gam y weithdrefn cwynion i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd gael ei groesawu’n eang, a’i bod yn mynd yn fwyfwy anodd gweithredu’r system IRP, roedd y Llywodraeth yn awyddus i ddod â’r darpariaethau a oedd yn rheoli’r ail gam i rym. Fodd bynnag, ni chafodd y cynigion ar gyfer cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau gymeradwyaeth mor gyflawn ac eang. Yn benodol, mynegwyd rhai amheuon yn eu cylch yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, ac roedd yn hysbys y byddai’r Ymchwiliad hwn yn gwneud argymhellion perthnasol. Roedd y Llywodraeth hefyd yn dymuno aros am Adroddiadau dau Ymchwiliad arall (Ymchwiliadau Neale ac Ayling) a fyddai’n ymwneud yn uniongyrchol â materion cwynion. Yn unol â hynny, ym mis Ebrill 2004, hysbyswyd yr Ymchwiliad hwn gan yr Adran Iechyd y byddai rheoliadau’n rheoli trosglwyddo’r ail gam i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn cael eu gwneud ym mis Gorffennaf 2004. Dywedwyd hefyd y byddai gweithredu unrhyw newidiadau i gam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau yn cael ei oedi tra’n disgwyl Adroddiadau’r tri Ymchwiliad. Byddai’r rheoliadau a wnaed yn atgyfnerthu ac yn rhesymoli’r Rheoliadau amrywiol presennol sy’n rheoli’r cam cyntaf. Rwy’n ddiolchgar am y cyfle i f’argymhellion gael ystyriaeth cyn terfynoli’r ddeddfwriaeth sydd ar ddod. Byddaf yn trafod y materion a godwyd yn fanylach ym Mhennod 27. Cyhoeddwyd adroddiadau Ymchwiliadau Neale ac Ayling ym mis Medi 2004.
Fel yr esboniais, daeth Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 i rym ar 30 Gorffennaf 2004. Mae dwy brif ran i’r Rheoliadau. Mae’r rhan gyntaf yn ymwneud â’r modd y mae cyrff y GIG yn ymdrin â chwynion ac yn ystyried cwynion (h.y. y cam cyntaf), ond nid yw’n cwmpasu darparwyr gofal sylfaenol (lle mae’r Rheoliadau blaenorol yn dal mewn grym felly). Mae ‘corff y GIG’ yn golygu awdurdod iechyd strategol, ymddiriedolaeth GIG, PCT neu awdurdod iechyd arbennig. Yng nghyd-destun yr Adroddiad hwn, mae ‘darparwr gofal sylfaenol’ yn golygu meddygfa deulu. Mae’r ail ran yn ymwneud â’r modd y mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn ymdrin â chwynion ac yn ystyried cwynion (h.y. yr ail gam), ac mae’n berthnasol i gŵynion am ddarparwyr gofal sylfaenol yn ogystal â chwynion am gyrff eraill. Byddaf yn trafod yr ail ran yn fanwl ym Mhennod 27.
Byddai’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i ddarparwyr gofal sylfaenol, fel ag o’r blaen, i benodi rheolwr cwynion i fod yn gyfrifol am ymchwilio i unrhyw gŵyn yr oedd y corff hwnnw’n ei derbyn. Fodd bynnag, yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol, y cynnig nawr yw y dylai cleifion gael y dewis, sef cwyno naill ai i’r PCT neu i’r darparwr gofal sylfaenol. Byddai cwynion yn cael eu gwneud i’r feddygfa yn cael eu hymchwilio gan y feddygfa, fel ag ar hyn o bryd. Byddai cwynion yn cael eu gwneud i’r PCT yn cael eu hymchwilio gan y PCT. Credaf y byddai cyflwyno’r dewis hwn yn cael ei groesawu gan lawer o gleifion am y rhesymau a drafodwyd eisoes. Byddai’r rhan fwyaf o gleifion yn ei chael hi’n haws i gwyno i’r PCT, yn enwedig mewn perthynas â materion a oedd yn golygu beirniadaeth bersonol o feddyg.
Cynigiwyd nifer o newidiadau eraill yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft ac mae rhai, er nad y cyfan ohonynt, wedi’u cyflwyno ar gyfer cyrff y GIG gan Reoliadau Cwynion 2004. Roedd y terfynau amser ar gyfer gwneud cwyn i’w hymestyn o chwe mis i flwyddyn, ond fe’u cadwyd ar chwe mis ar gyfer cyrff y GIG. Nid wyf yn sicr ai dros dro y bwriadwyd cadw’r
, tra’n disgwyl cyhoeddi Adroddiadau’r tri Ymchwiliad. Fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 27, fy marn i yw mai 12 mis ddylai’r cyfnod fod. Roedd rhai o’r rheolau cyfyngol, a oedd yn amodi na allai cwynion mewn rhai amgylchiadau penodol fynd ymlaen, i’w newid dan y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, ond ni wnaethpwyd y newidiadau hyn gan Reoliadau Cwynion 2004. Yn gyntaf, dan weithdrefnau 1996, ni ellid caniatáu adolygiad annibynnol i achwynydd a oedd yn bwriadu cymryd camau cyfreithiol. Dan y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, roedd rheolwr cwynion corff y GIG y gwnaethpwyd y gŵyn iddo/iddi, i ystyried, mewn ymgynghoriad â’r achwynydd, y modd y dylid ymdrin â’r gŵyn. Gallai ef neu hi ymchwilio i’r gŵyn os oedd ef/hi o’r farn na fyddai ymchwiliad y GIG yn peryglu neu’n niweidio’r achos cyfredol. Dan Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004, fodd bynnag, mae unrhyw gŵyn yn erbyn corff y GIG, y mae’r achwynydd wedi datgan ei fod/bod yn bwriadu cymryd camau cyfreithiol mewn perthynas â hi, yn cael ei heithrio o weithrediad y Rheoliadau. Yn yr un modd, ni fyddai’r ffaith bod corff y GIG yn cymryd camau disgyblu yn erbyn meddyg, dan y Rheoliadau drafft, yn rhagwahardd hyrwyddo cwyn y claf; fodd bynnag, bydd bodolaeth camau disgyblu arfaethedig neu wirioneddol mewn perthynas â sylwedd y gwyn, dan Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004, yn peri i’r gŵyn honno nawr gael ei heithrio o weithrediad y Rheoliadau. Nid yw hyn yn foddhaol yn fy marn i, a byddaf yn gwneud argymhellion ar y pwnc hwn ym Mhennod 27.
Mae un newid arfaethedig sydd i’w groesawu yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft wedi’i gyflwyno, yn ymwneud â chymhwyso’r cam cyntaf i gŵynion ynghylch cyrff y GIG. Mae’r categorïau o berson sydd â hawl i gwyno wedi’u hymestyn dan Reoliadau Cwynion 2004. Yn flaenorol, yr unig bersonau â hawl i gwyno oedd cleifion, cyn gleifion a phersonau eraill a allai gynrychioli’n briodol buddiannau cleifion a chyn gleifion nad oeddent yn gallu canlyn cwyn drostynt eu hunain. Nawr, byddai unrhyw berson (neu gynrychiolydd person felly) yr effeithir arno neu y mae’n debygol yr effeithir arno gan gam gweithredu, anwaith neu benderfyniad corff y GIG neu ddarparwr gofal sylfaenol yn gallu gwneud cwyn. Mae hwn yn newid i’w groesawu.
Newid arfaethedig arall rwy’n ei groesawu yw’r ddarpariaeth sydd i’w gwneud ar gyfer cwynion ‘cymhleth’. Heddiw, mae llawer o gŵynion yn ymwneud â mwy nag un corff y GIG. Hyd nawr, ni fudd modd gwneud cwyn unigol am ymddygiad neu berfformiad mwy nag un corff y GIG, nac yn wir y cyswllt - neu ddiffyg cyswllt - rhwng dau gorff y GIG. Amlygwyd y broblem hon yn erthygl Ms Longley yn y Medical Law Review ym 1996, y cyfeiriwyd ati’n gynharach yn y Bennod hon.
Mae Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 yn pennu’r ddyletswydd ar reolwr cwynion corff y GIG sy’n derbyn y gŵyn i ymchwilio iddi
‘i’r graddau sy’n angenrheidiol ac yn y modd yr ymddengys sy’n fwyaf priodol iddo i’w datrys yn gyflym ac yn effeithiol’
. Byddai’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn pennu’r un rhwymedigaeth ar y darparwr gofal sylfaenol. Os yw rhai cwynion am ddarparwr gofal sylfaenol i’w cyfeirio at y PCT (fel y gobeithiaf y cânt), mae’r cynnig yn achosi anawsterau potensial yn sgil diffyg hyfforddiant, arbenigedd ac adnoddau PCTau i ymdrin â chwynion yn dda. Byddaf yn trafod yr anawsterau hyn yn fanylach ym Mhennod 27. I ryw raddau, ymddengys bod yr anawsterau potensial hyn wedi’u cydnabod gan y Llywodraeth, gan yr oedd y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn amodi, lle’r oedd yn ymddangos yn briodol, y gallai rheolwr cwynion corff y GIG neu’r darparwr gofal sylfaenol a oedd yn delio â’r gŵyn ei chyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu at Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd. Dim ond â chaniatâd yr achwynydd a’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd y gellid gwneud cyfeiriad felly. Ymddengys bod y ddarpariaeth hon wedi’i chynllunio hefyd i fodloni’r pryder a oedd yn cael ei fynegi yn adroddiad Prosiect y Gyfraith Gyhoeddus, sef y bu darpariaeth annigonol yn y gorffennol i ddatrys cwynion yn gyflym a arweiniodd at bryderon difrifol ynghylch ymddygiad neu berfformiad a allai beri risg niweidio cleifion. I bob pwrpas, byddai’r ddarpariaeth hon wedi galluogi cwyn i gael ei symud ymlaen yn gyflym a’i hymchwilio gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd. Roedd hwn i weld yn gynnig i’w groesawu, er yr oeddwn yn bryderus i glywed gan Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, Arweinydd Prosiect Cwynion a Llinell Gymorth yn y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, mai bwriad cyntaf y ddarpariaeth hon, mewn gwirionedd, oedd galluogi cyfeirio mewn achosion lle’r oedd yr achwynydd wedi ‘colli ffydd’ yng ngweithdrefnau’r GIG. Nodaf nad yw hyn yn Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004. Trafodaf hyn ymhellach ym Mhennod 27.

---  ---
Ym mharagraffau 7.36-7.38, esboniais pam yr aeth gweithdrefnau disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon teulu ar lefel leol allan o arfer ym 1996 yn syth ar ôl cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau cwynion newydd. Roeddent yn dal i gael eu defnyddio o bryd i’w gilydd, fodd bynnag, ac roedd eu gweithredu’n dal i ddibynnu ar sefydlu bod achos o feddyg teulu’n torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 5 gyda chyflwyno’r Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol newydd ym mis Ebrill 2004, roedd telerau gwasanaeth wedi peidio â bodoli. Yn eu lle, mae Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Contractau Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 2004 (Rheoliadau 2004) wedi cyflwyno ystod eang o amodau a rhwymedigaethau contractiol. Bydd gwasanaethau’n cael eu darparu dan gontract rhwng y PCT a’r feddygfa, nid rhwng y PCT a’r meddyg unigol. Mae amodau sy’n ymwneud â chyfansoddiad y feddygfa. Mae rhwymedigaethau ar y feddygfa yn cynnwys, er enghraifft, gofyniad bod y feddygfa yn cyflawni’i dyletswyddau â medr a gofal rhesymol, a bod rhaid i feddygfeydd gydweithredu ag ymchwiliad i gŵynion.
Mae paragraffau 110 i 120 o Atodlen 6 i Reoliadau 2004 yn darparu pwerau i’r PCT ddelio ag achosion o dorri amodau neu rwymedigaethau. Mae’r rhain yn bwerau cwbl ar wahân i’r pwerau rheoli rhestrau a ddisgrifiais eisoes ym Mhennod 5. Dan Rheoliadau 2004, gall y PCT, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, derfynu’r contract â’r feddygfa. Er enghraifft, gall wneud hynny os canfydda fod y feddygfa wedi darparu gwybodaeth ffug mewn perthynas â rhai materion pwysig wrth ymrwymo i’r contract. Hefyd, gall y PCT derfynu’r contract os yw sefyllfa ariannol y feddygfa yn rhoi’r PCT mewn perygl o golled ariannol sylweddol. Mae’r grym gan y PCT i roi rhybudd adfer os yw’r feddygfa yn torri rhwymedigaeth y gellir ei hadfer ac nad yw mor bwysig ei bod yn gwarantu terfynu. Er enghraifft, gellid delio â methiant i ddarparu taflen meddygfa â rhybudd adfer. Mewn achos o dorri telerau sydd wedi digwydd ac na ellir ei adfer bellach (fel methiant i ymweld â chlaf mewn amgylchiadau a oedd yn gofyn am ymweliad), gall y PCT roi rhybudd i’r feddygfa yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddi beidio ag ailadrodd yr achos o dorri telerau. Gall y PCT derfynu’r contract am dorri telerau dro ar ôl tro neu am fethiannau dro ar ôl tro i roi sylw i rybuddion os yw’n fodlon fod effaith gronnus yr achosion o dorri rheolau neu fethu o’r fath natur y byddai’n niweidiol i effeithiolrwydd y gwasanaethau ar gyfer y contract barhau. Mae’r grym gan y PCT hefyd, lle bo’n briodol, i bennu sancsiynau ar feddygfa. Er enghraifft, gall derfynu neu atal darpariaeth rhai gwasanaethau penodol gan feddygfa, fel, er enghraifft, goruchwylio iechyd plant. Gall hefyd atal neu dynnu arian sy’n daladwy dan y contract.
Ni phennwyd unrhyw weithdrefn ffurfiol y mae’n rhaid ei dilyn cyn y gellir terfynu contract neu bennu sancsiwn. Fodd bynnag, os yw’n rhesymol o ymarferol i wneud hynny, mae’n rhaid i’r PCT ymgynghori â’r LMC pan fydd yn ystyried terfynu contract neu bennu sancsiwn. Hefyd, mae’n rhaid i’r PCT roi rhybudd yn ysgrifenedig o’i fwriad i derfynu’r contract neu bennu sancsiwn, ac mae gan y feddygfa 28 diwrnod wedyn i alw ar weithdrefn datrys anghydfodau’r GIG cyn i’r terfyniad neu’r sancsiwn ddod i rym. Os rhoddir y weithdrefn datrys anghydfodau ar waith, ni fyddai’r terfyniad neu’r sancsiwn yn dod i rym fel arfer nes bod y weithdrefn honno wedi’i chwblhau. Fodd bynnag, gall y PCT derfynu’r contract neu bennu’r sancsiwn cyn cyrraedd y cam hwnnw os yw’n fodlon bod angen gwneud hynny er mwyn sicrhau diogelwch cleifion neu ddiogelu ei hun rhag colled ariannol sylweddol.
Golyga’r pwerau hyn, o’u cyfuno â’u pwerau rheoli rhestrau, fod pwerau go helaeth gan PCTau erbyn hyn, ar bapur o leiaf, i fynnu bod gwasanaethau priodol yn cael eu darparu ac i waredu gwasanaethau meddygfeydd nad ydynt yn gallu eu darparu. Mae’n rhy gynnar i ddweud sut fydd y pwerau newydd hyn yn gweithio’n ymarferol. Rwy’n ofni y bydd rhywfaint o densiwn rhwng dymuniad PCT i waredu gwasanaethau nad ydynt i fyny i safon, a’r angen i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddyg teulu i’r boblogaeth ar adeg pan fo prinder meddygon teulu. Mae’r broblem yn debygol o fod yn arbennig o ddifrifol mewn ardaloedd nad ydynt yn ddeniadol i feddygon teulu neu nad ydynt yn boblogaidd yn eu plith. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, mae’n well bod y pwerau ar waith, hyd yn oed os nad ydynt yn cael eu defnyddio mor effeithiol ag y byddai’r PCT yn dymuno, na bod y pwerau ddim yn bodoli o gwbl.

---  ---
O ran y gweithdrefnau cwynion, cydnabuwyd bod angen newid y trefniadau sydd wedi bodoli er 1996. O safbwynt yr Ymchwiliad hwn, ymddengys i mi bod nifer o welliannau hanfodol i’w gwneud. Un yw y dylai PCTau gael gwybodaeth lawn am bob cwyn sy’n cael ei derbyn am feddyg teulu, nid yn unig y rheiny sy’n mynd ymlaen i ail gam y weithdrefn. Mae gwybodaeth felly’n gydran bwysig o reolaeth glinigol. Gwelliant arall yw y dylai achwynwyr gael y dewis o wneud cwyn am eu meddyg teulu neu’r feddygfa i’r PCT, ac ni ddylai orfod ‘wynebu’r’ meddyg neu staff y feddygfa yn uniongyrchol. Yn drydydd, mae angen gwirioneddol i sicrhau bod y cyfrifoldeb a’r adnoddau gan PCTau i ymchwilio i’r cwynion mwy difrifol yn ddigonol, gan gynnwys y rheiny lle mae haeriad bod gofal clinigol yn is na’r safon. Ymddengys i mi nad yw cwynion, yn y gorffennol, wedi bod yn ‘hollol sicr’ gan nad oes neb wedi bod yn gyfrifol am gynnal ac yn gallu cynnal ymchwiliad annibynnol. Bu diffyg adnoddau a medr ymhlith achwynwyr, ac nid yw bob amser er lles y meddygon i sicrhau cyflwyno’r holl wybodaeth sydd ar gael. Rwy’n croesawu’r penderfyniad i drosglwyddo cynnal ail gam cwyn i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, sy’n sefydlu tîm o ymchwilwyr. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn datblygu arbenigedd gwirioneddol wrth ymchwilio. Fodd bynnag, ni fydd bodolaeth tîm ymchwilio yn y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn hepgor yr angen i PCTau gael eu cyfleusterau eu hunain. Yn olaf, rwy’n argyhoeddedig o’r angen i ddarparu cymorth priodol i achwynwyr ym mhob cam o’r broses. Byddaf yn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau cwynion ym Mhennod 27.

---  ---
Y Meddygon ym Meddygfa Donneybrook
Pryderon Mr John Shaw
Pryderon Mrs Dorothy Foley a Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross
Pryderon Mrs Shirley Harrison
Pryderon Mr David a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe
Pryderon Dr Linda Reynolds
Pryderon Teuluoedd a Ffrindiau mewn Profedigaeth

---  ---
Mae graddfa troseddau Shipman a chyfnod hir cyflawni’r troseddau hynny yn awgrymu, ar yr olwg gyntaf, ei bod yn rhaid bod ei ymddygiad wedi codi pryderon ac amheuon ymhlith y rheiny a oedd yn gweithio’n agos ag ef. Does bosib bod pobl fel cydweithwyr meddygol, gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill ac aelodau o staff ei feddygfa wedi sylweddoli bod rhywbeth o le ac wedi hysbysu rhywun ynghylch hynny? Beth am y bobl leyg hynny - ffrindiau, teuluoedd a chymdogion - a fu’n gysylltiedig â’r cyfnodau yn dilyn y marwolaethau? Mae ymchwiliadau blaenorol sydd wedi ymchwilio i ymddygiad troseddol neu ymddygiad anghyfreithlon arall gan unigolyn neu sefydliad, yn aml wedi gwrando tystiolaeth am gwynion a wnaed neu bryderon a fynegwyd dros y blynyddoedd ac a aeth heibio’n ddisylw, ac o ganlyniad i hynny bod yr ymddygiad troseddol wedi cael parhau heb reolaeth.
Er syndod, fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth ymchwiliadau’r Ymchwiliad ddatgelu unrhyw hanes hir o gwynion neu bryderon yn achos Shipman. Mae’r ffaith na wnaethant yn dangos y parch uchel a oedd yn cael ei ddangos yn gyffredinol i Shipman, a’i allu eithriadol i ddweud celwydd yn argyhoeddiadol a chael ei hun allan o’r sefyllfaoedd mwyaf amheus.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn ystyried sefyllfa cydweithwyr Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook ac yn archwilio pa un a oedd ganddynt unrhyw reswm i amau Shipman. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi clywed wrth gwrs bod aelod o feddygfa arall, ym 1998, sef y diweddar Dr Linda Reynolds, wedi dechrau amau nifer o farwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman. Penderfynodd hi a’i chydweithwyr ym Meddygfa Brooke yn Hyde y dylai hysbysu’r Crwner am eu pryderon. Yr adroddiad hwnnw a gychwynnodd ymchwiliad aflwyddiannus yr heddlu ym mis Mawrth 1998, a archwiliais yn fy Ail Adroddiad. Roedd nifer o bobl eraill ag amheuon ynglŷn â Shipman hefyd. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio’r modd y datblygodd yr amheuon hynny a’r hyn yr oedd y rheiny â phryderon, os unrhyw beth o gwbl, yn teimlo yr oeddent yn gallu gwneud yn eu cylch. Byddaf yn delio ar wahân â sefyllfa staff y feddygfa a gweithwyr proffesiynol iechyd a fu’n gweithio gyda Shipman ym Meddygfa Market Street ym Mhennod 9.

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi disgrifio, ym Mhennod 3, yr amgylchiadau pan ymunodd Shipman â meddygfa Donneybrook ym 1977. Canfûm na ellir beirniadu aelodau’r feddygfa a’i penododd, mewn perthynas â’u penderfyniad gwreiddiol i’w benodi, neu’r ffaith, ar ôl ei benodi, na wnaethpwyd Shipman yn destun unrhyw oruchwyliaeth arbennig.
Serch hynny, roedd Shipman yn aelod o feddygfa Donneybrook am bron i 15 mlynedd. Canfûm ei fod wedi lladd o leiaf 71 o gleifion yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Mae’n rhaid codi’r cwestiwn ynghylch a ddylai ei gydweithwyr fod wedi bod yn effro i nifer ac amgylchiadau marwolaethau cleifion Shipman, neu i unrhyw nodweddion anarferol eraill o’i ymarfer.
Gwrandodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan Dr John Smith, Dr Geoffrey Bills, Dr Geoffrey Roberts, Dr Ian Napier a Dr Jeffery Moysey. Darparwyd datganiadau gan Dr Derek Carroll a Dr William Bennett.
Roedd y modd yr oedd meddygfa Donneybrook wedi’i threfnu, gyda phob meddyg (ac eithrio Dr Bills a Dr Carroll) yn gweithredu rhestr unigol, yn golygu mai anaml iawn y byddai cleifion un meddyg yn cael eu gweld gan y meddygon eraill yn y feddygfa. Dim ond os oedd meddyg arferol y claf ar wyliau, os oedd angen triniaeth allan o oriau ar y claf, os oedd angen ymgynghoriad ar hanner diwrnod y meddyg neu ar adegau salwch ac mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol eraill y byddai’n digwydd. Felly, yn gyffredinol, nid oedd aelodau’r feddygfa yn dod i adnabod cleifion a oedd wedi cofrestru gyda’u cydweithwyr, na’u hanesion meddygol. Pan oedd claf cydweithiwr yn marw, ni fyddai hyn wedi cael yr un effaith ar aelodau eraill y feddygfa ag a fyddai pe bai gofal y claf hwnnw wedi’i rannu.
At hynny, nid oedd unrhyw fodd ffurfiol ar gyfer hysbysu aelodau’r feddygfa am farwolaethau cleifion a oedd wedi cofrestru ag aelodau eraill. Ni fyddai unrhyw ran ganddynt yn ardystio’r achos marwolaeth, na’r ardystio at ddibenion amlosgi. Roedd gan bob aelod ei lyfr ei hun o Dystysgrifau Meddygol o Achos Marwolaeth (MCCDau), felly ni fyddent yn gweld faint o MCCDau yr oedd Shipman wedi’u rhoi. Yn gyffredinol, dim ond os oedd staff y feddygfa yn siarad amdano neu os oedd Shipman yn sôn yn benodol amdano y byddai aelodau eraill y feddygfa yn dod yn ymwybodol o farwolaeth un o gleifion Shipman.
Ni fyddai gan aelodau’r feddygfa unrhyw wybodaeth ychwaith am gyfanswm nifer y marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman neu yn y feddygfa gyfan. Cefais fod t nifer blynyddol o laddiadau yn ystod cyfnod Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook yn amrywio. Canfûm ei fod wedi lladd 12 claf ym 1989; yn ystod rhai blynyddoedd (1977, 1980, 1982 a 1991), efallai na wnaeth ladd o gwbl. Yn sicr, nid oedd yn lladd mor aml ag yn ystod ei flynyddoedd olaf yn y Feddygfa yn Market Street. Hyd yn oed be baent wedi bod yn ymwybodol bod marwolaeth wedi digwydd, ni fyddai cydweithwyr Shipman wedi gwybod unrhyw beth am amgylchiadau’r farwolaeth (e.e. a oedd Shipman yn bresennol neu a oedd wedi ymweld ychydig yn gynharach) oni bai bod Shipman yn gwirfoddoli i roi’r wybodaeth hon. Yn ystod cyfnod Shipman yn y feddygfa, nid oedd unrhyw broses adolygu marwolaethau. Datgelodd archwiliad o laddiadau Shipman gan yr Ymchwiliad mai nifer fach o farwolaethau a oedd yn debygol o fod wedi dod at sylw’i gydweithwyr. Ni fyddai’r un o’r achosion wedi peri unrhyw bryder gwirioneddol. Nid oedd un o’r meddygon yn cofio marwolaeth Mrs Mary Hamer, a ddigwyddodd ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi’i lladd. Yn y gorffennol, bu marwolaethau eraill yn y feddygfa nad oedd gan Shipman unrhyw gysylltiad â nhw. Nid oedd unrhyw reswm, felly, i fod ag unrhyw amheuaeth arbennig mewn cysylltiad â marwolaeth Mrs Hamer.
Nid oedd gan un o gyn-gydweithwyr Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook unrhyw bryderon ynghylch nifer neu amgylchiadau’r marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman. Ni fynegwyd unrhyw bryderon felly iddynt gan eraill. Dywedodd Dr Roberts, a oedd yn cyflenwi dros Shipman ar ei hanner diwrnodau, na welodd unrhyw beth anarferol yng nghofnodion meddygol Shipman na’i batrwm ymweld. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol bod nifer o gleifion wedi marw ym mhresenoldeb Shipman. Dywedodd, pe bai wedi gwybod hynny, byddai wedi synnu. Ni welodd Dr Moysey, a oedd yn cyflenwi dros Shipman ar ei hanner diwrnodau wedi i Dr Roberts adael y feddygfa, unrhyw beth anarferol yng nghofnodion Shipman na’r triniaethau a ragnododd.
Roedd Dr Roberts yn ystyried Shipman fel gweithiwr caled, a dywedodd ei fod i weld yn dod ymlaen yn dda gyda chleifion, cydweithwyr a staff. Ni ddangosodd unrhyw ymddygiad anarferol. Roedd Dr Smith yn cofio fod gan Shipman wybodaeth feddygol dda, a byddai wastad yn ymorol ei fod yn diweddaru’i wybodaeth. Dywedodd Dr Napier nad oedd unrhyw bryderon ynghylch gonestrwydd Shipman na’i gymhwysedd. Roedd parch mawr iddo gan glinigwyr ac roedd yn flaenweithgar mewn atal clefydau. Roedd ei ymddygiad proffesiynol ‘i weld yn rhagorol’. Nid oedd yr un o’r meddygon yn teimlo fod gan Shipman bersonoliaeth arbennig o unig pan oedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook.
Roedd rhywfaint o sylwadau negyddol am Shipman. Dywedodd Dr Moysey a Dr Napier ei fod yn ‘gyfnewidiol’. Cofiai Dr Smith y byddai weithiau’n cweryla â staff y feddygfa. Roedd Dr Bills yn teimlo ei fod yn theatraidd, fel pe bai wastad yn cyflwyno delwedd. Teimlai fod Shipman yn gorliwio difrifoldeb afiechydon ei gleifion er mwyn gwneud mwy o argraff pan oedd yn gallu eu ‘gwella’. Roedd Dr Carroll yn cytuno â’r farn hon. Sylwodd Dr Bills hefyd fod Shipman rhywfaint yn ansensitif pan oedd yn siarad am gleifion a oedd yn dioddef o salwch terfynol. Dywedodd hefyd fod Shipman yn creu argraff ar gleifion, a oedd o’r farn ‘ei fod yn rhyfeddol’. Dywedodd fod y gweithwyr iechyd a’r ymwelwyr iechyd yr oedd Shipman yn dod i gysylltiad â nhw wedi cael mwy o argraff o’i fedrusrwydd na’r nyrsys ardal a oedd yn gweithio gydag ef.
Ni sylwodd yr un o’r meddygon ar unrhyw arwydd fod Shipman wedi mynd yn ôl i’w hen arferion o gymryd cyffuriau. Nid oeddent ychwaith yn cofio unrhyw broblemau gydag arfer rhagnodi Shipman yn ystod ei gyfnod ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Ym 1989, dioddefodd un o gydweithwyr Shipman, Dr William Bennett, thrombosis coronaidd yn y feddygfa. Rhoddodd Shipman chwistrelliad iddo, a chredai Dr Bennett ei fod yn cynnwys 10mg o forffin. Ni wnaeth Dr Bennett holi o ble ddaeth y morffin, na Dr Napier ychwaith, a ddaeth i wybod am y digwyddiad wedyn. Roeddent yn syml yn ddiolchgar fod Shipman wedi gweithredu’n iawn. Erbyn hynny, roedd yn rhyw 12 mlynedd ers i Shipman ymuno â’r feddygfa. Ymddengys na fu unrhyw drafodaeth bellach am gadw cyffuriau rheoledig. Pe bai Dr Bennett a Dr Napier wedi meddwl tybed o ble yr oedd Shipman wedi cael y morffin ar gyfer y chwistrelliad (ond ni wnaethant), yn ddiau byddent wedi cymryd ei fod bellach yn cadw maint bach o gyffuriau rheoledig ar gyfer achosion brys. Roedd yr aelodau hynny o’r feddygfa a oedd yn cadw stoc o gyffuriau rheoledig yn cadw’u cofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig eu hunain (CRDau). Nid oedd CDR yn cael ei rannu, ac ni fyddai unrhyw reswm wedi bod i un aelod o’r feddygfa i archwilio CDR aelod arall.
Roedd y rhan fwyaf o’i gydweithwyr wedi synnu pan gyhoeddodd Shipman y byddai’n gadael meddygfa Donneybrook yn fuan. Credai Dr Napier fod Shipman yn teimlo’n rhwystredig ag arafwch newid o fewn y feddygfa. Aeth â Shipman i’r naill ochr a nodi anfanteision symud i feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun.
Nid yw’n syndod yn fy marn i nad oedd cydweithwyr Shipman ym meddygfa Donneybrook yn ymwybodol o’i weithgareddau troseddol, ac nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw reswm i amau fod ei arfer yn anarferol mewn unrhyw ffordd. Golygai strwythur y feddygfa mai ychydig a wyddent am weithgareddau clinigol ei gilydd. Nid oedd unrhyw bryderon wedi’u mynegi iddynt am Shipman. Nid oedd unrhyw nodweddion anarferol i dynnu’u sylw. Yn wir, roedd y wybodaeth a gawsant am arfer Shipman yn ffafriol yn gyffredinol. Mae’n glir yn fy marn i nad oedd ganddynt unrhyw amheuon ar y pryd, ac rwy’n fodlon na ellir eu beirniadu am hynny.
Dywedodd Dr Napier wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai trefniadau yn y feddygfa a gyflwynwyd ers ymadawiad Shipman yn ei gwneud yn fwy tebygol y byddai ymddygiad fel ei ymddygiad ef yn cael ei ganfod. Byddai rhestrau cyfrannol gan y meddygon nawr. Mae’r ffaith fod gofal cleifion yn cael ei rannu yn arwain at drafodaeth rhwng y meddygon ynghylch diagnosis a thriniaeth. Maent yn fwy tebygol o sylwi os yw claf yn marw’n annisgwyl. Maent yn rhannu un llyfr o MCCDau, sy’n agored i bawb i’w archwilio. Mae’r cofnodion meddygol wedi’u cyfrifiaduro, ac o ansawdd gwell. Mae aelodau’r feddygfa yn cael cyfarfodydd lle byddant yn adolygu digwyddiadau pwysig (gan gynnwys marwolaethau) ac yn cynnal asesiadau risg. Cafwyd datblygiadau tebyg mewn llawer o feddygfeydd eraill dros yr un cyfnod. Nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn, byddaf yn trafod effaith newidiadau felly.

---  ---
Mrs Christine Simpson oedd y rheolwraig breswyl yn Ogden Court o tua 1987 nes 2002. Gweithiai ei gŵr, Mr Alan (a elwid yn Sam weithiau) Simpson fel garddiwr a glanhawr yn Ogden Court ac mewn eiddo tebyg eraill yn yr ardal.
Roedd Ogden Court yn un o nifer fawr o eiddo dan berchenogaeth Cymdeithas Tai Manceinion a’r Ardal (y Gymdeithas Tai). Roedd Ogden Court yn ddatblygiad cartrefi gwarchodol (neu ‘gynllun’ cartrefi gwarchodol), yn darparu 42 o fflatiau ar rent, ynghyd ag amryw gyfleusterau cymunedol eraill i’w defnyddio gan y trigolion. Roedd rhan fwyaf o drigolion Ogden Court yn oedrannus. Roedd rhai ohonynt yn gwbl annibynnol, tra’r oedd eraill yn derbyn lefel uchel o ofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan y Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol neu aelodau eu teulu. Roedd gan bob un o’r trigolion fynediad at gyfleuster ffôn brys 24 awr.
Dyletswyddau Mrs Simpson
Roedd Mrs Simpson yn byw mewn fflat ar lawr gwaelod y prif adeilad yn Ogden Court. Rôl ‘cymydog da’ oedd ganddi i drigolion Ogden Court. Roedd yn ofynnol iddi wneud yn siŵr yn ddyddiol eu bod yn iawn, a chysylltu â’r Gymdeithas Tai er mwyn sicrhau bod unrhyw waith cynnal a chadw, atgyweirio neu addasu angenrheidiol yn cael ei wneud. Roedd hefyd yn gyfrifol am hwyluso mynediad y trigolion at ofal proffesiynol gan asiantaethau fel y Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol, am sicrhau bod yr adeiladau’n cael eu cadw’n ddiogel ac am drefnu gweithgareddau cymdeithasol cyson i’r trigolion. Dywedodd ei gŵr wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’n ffurfio perthnasoedd agos â’r trigolion, a oedd yn hapus i ymddiried eu problemau a’u pryderon iddi.
Rheolaeth Ogden Court
Prif swyddogaeth y Gymdeithas Tai mewn perthynas ag Ogden Court oedd fel landlord â chyfrifoldeb am ddyrannu a gosod y fflatiau, casglu rhenti, trefnu gwaith cynnal a chadw, atgyweirio ac addasu angenrheidiol, datrys anghydfodau rhwng tenantiaid a materion eraill o’r fath.
O 1985 hyd at ei ymddeoliad ym mis Mawrth 2003, gweithiai Mrs Janet Schofield i’r Gymdeithas Tai fel swyddog tai. Hyd at 1993, roedd yn cael ei chyflogi’n amser llawn; wedi hynny, gweithia’n rhan-amser yn unig. Roedd cyfrifoldeb ganddi am Ogden Court am gyfnodau amrywiol rhwng 1987 a 2001. Ni allai gofio’n union pa bryd yr oedd y cyfnodau hynny, gan y byddai eu dyletswyddau’n newid yn aml. Am ran o’r cyfnod hwn, roedd ganddi drefniant rhannu swydd fel bod cyfrifoldeb am Ogden Court yn cael ei rannu rhyngddi hi ac aelod arall o staff. Am gyfnod o fis Ebrill 1996, Mrs Schofield ar ei phen ei hun oedd â chyfrifoldeb am ddelio ag Ogden Court. Byddai dogfennau ym meddiant yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu y gallai cysylltiad gweithredol Mrs Schofield ag Ogden Court fod wedi dod i ben ar ddiwedd 1998/dechrau 1999.
Roedd Mrs Schofield yn rheoli rhyw 800-1000 o unedau preswyl ar ran y Gymdeithas Tai. Cynhaliai gyfarfodydd cyswllt misol â rheolwyr preswyl pob un o’r cynlluniau cartrefi gwarchodol yr oedd yn gyfrifol amdanynt. Roedd trafodaethau yn ei chyfarfodydd â Mrs Simpson yn canolbwyntio ar faterion yn ymwneud â ffabrig yr adeiladau yn Ogden Court ac â chyflogaeth Mrs Simpson. Hefyd, byddai trafodaethau am lefelau dibyniaeth trigolion unigol a’r graddau y gallai fod angen gofal ychwanegol arnynt gan y Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol neu drosglwyddo i lety gwahanol fel cartref gofal preswyl. Byddai marwolaethau diweddar yn cael eu nodi, a lleoedd gweigion (‘gwagleoedd’) presennol a rhai ar ddod yn cael eu trafod. Roedd cofnodion y cyfarfodydd cyswllt yn cael eu cadw gan Mrs Schofield ac yn cael eu hanfon ymlaen at Mrs Simpson. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld cofnodion y cyfarfodydd rhwng Mrs Schofield a Mrs Simpson a gynhaliwyd rhwng mis Rhagfyr 1996 a mis Mai 1998. Nid yw cofnodion cyfarfodydd cynharach ar gael bellach. Yn ychwanegol at ymweld ag Ogden Court ar gyfer cyfarfodydd, byddai Mrs Schofield yn ymweld ddwy neu dair gwaith y mis er mwyn gweld trigolion.
Rhwng cyfarfodydd, roedd cyswllt ffôn mynych rhwng Mrs Simpson a Mrs Schofield a’r staff eraill yn y Gymdeithas Tai, a bryd hynny byddai Mrs Simpson yn adrodd am broblemau dydd i ddydd wrth iddynt godi. Byddai’n adrodd am farwolaethau cleifion wrth iddynt ddigwydd, gan y byddai’r rhain yn gadael lleoedd gweigion.
Marwolaethau yn Ogden Court
Canfu’r Ymchwiliad bod naw o drigolion yn Ogden Court wedi cael eu lladd gan Shipman. Y rhain oedd:
Mrs Alice Prestwich, a fu farw, yn 69 oed, ar 20 Hydref 1988
Mr John Charlton, a fu farw, yn 81 oed, ar 16 Hydref 1989
Mrs Alice Kennedy, a fu farw, yn 88 oed, ar 9 Ionawr 1995
Mrs Muriel Ward, a fu farw, yn 87 oed, ar 24 Hydref 1995
Mrs Gladys Saunders, a fu farw, yn 82 oed, ar 17 Mehefin 1996
Mr Samuel Mills, a fu farw, yn 89 oed, ar 23 Tachwedd 1996
Mrs Betty Royston, a fu farw, yn 70 oed, ar 4 Chwefror 1997
Mr James King, a fu farw, yn 83 oed, ar 24 Rhagfyr 1997
Miss Maureen Ward, a fu farw, yn 57 oed, ar 18 Chwefror 1998.
Cydweithredodd Mrs Simpson yn llawn â Chyfnod Un yr Ymchwiliad, gan ddarparu nifer o ddatganiadau mewn cysylltiad â’r marwolaethau amrywiol. Roedd wedi bod yn anhwylus am beth amser ac wedi ymddeol o’r gwaith yn 2002 ar sail iechyd. Ar ôl gofyn iddi roi tystiolaeth yng Nghyfnod Dau, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth feddygol i’r perwyl y byddai bod yn bresennol yn yr Ymchwiliad yn niweidiol i’w hiechyd. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, nid oedd gofyn iddi fynychu i roi tystiolaeth. Darparodd ddatganiad tyst manwl, fodd bynnag, yn nodi’r hyn a gofiai am y digwyddiadau yn ymwneud â’r marwolaethau a’r amheuon a ddatblygodd am gysylltiad Shipman â’r marwolaethau hynny.
Digwyddodd y farwolaeth gyntaf, sef marwolaeth Mrs Prestwich, ar 20 Hydref 1988. Roedd Mrs Prestwich wedi gofyn am ymweliad gan Shipman oherwydd bod ei choesau (cofiai Mrs Simpson mai ei phengliniau oedd) wedi chwyddo ac yn boenus. Galwodd Shipman Mrs Simpson, a dweud wrthi fod Mrs Prestwich wedi marw ychydig funudau’n gynharach, tra’r oedd yn ei harchwilio. Er gwaethaf sydynrwydd y farwolaeth, dywedodd Mrs Simpson nad oedd ganddi unrhyw amheuon ynghylch y farwolaeth. Roedd o’r farn, fodd bynnag, fod agwedd Shipman tuag at y farwolaeth yn ysgafn, yn ddidaro ac yn amhriodol i’r amgylchiadau.
Digwyddodd marwolaeth Mr Charlton flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach ar 16 Hydref 1989. Fe wnaeth Shipman, a ymwelodd â Mr Charlton yn ddirybudd (fwy na thebyg mewn ymateb i gais anffurfiol am ymweliad gan ei deulu drwy nyrs meddygfa Donneybrook), alw yn fflat Mrs Simpson a dweud bod angen iddo ffonio am ambiwlans i fynd â Mr Charlton, a oedd yn sâl iawn, i’r ysbyty. Gofynnodd Shipman i Mrs Simpson i fynd i fflat Mr Charlton. Yno, canfu Mr Charlton yn gorwedd ar wastad ei gefn ar ei wely. Roedd yn farw. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson iddi feddwl ei bod yn rhyfedd fod Mr Charlton wedi marw yn y safle hwnnw. Roedd wedi bod yn cael problemau anadlu ac wedi dechrau cysgu mewn cadair lledorwedd yn hytrach nag yn y gwely. Nid oedd yn argyhoeddedig fod Mr Charlton wedi marw marwolaeth naturiol, a meddyliodd tybed a allai Shipman fod wedi cynorthwyo’r farwolaeth mewn rhyw fodd, trwy drefniant â Mr Charlton.
Aeth dros bum mlynedd heibio cyn marwolaeth Mrs Kennedy ar 9 Ionawr 1995. Roedd Shipman wedi galw i’w gweld, yn ddirybudd yn ôl pob golwg. Nes ymlaen, ffoniodd merch Mrs Kennedy, Mrs Patricia Higgins, i fynegi pryder nad oedd Mrs Kennedy i weld yn rhyw dda iawn. Pan ymwelodd Mrs Higgins â’i mam yn ddiweddarach yn y diwrnod, canfu Mrs Kennedy yn farw yn ei chadair. Roedd Mrs Kennedy wedi dioddef o glefyd Parkinson ac roedd yn eithaf bregus. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson na chafodd ffaith y farwolaeth yn amheus ynddi hi eu hun. Y wybodaeth fod Shipman wedi bod yn bresennol ychydig cyn canfod y farwolaeth a wnaeth iddi amau y gallai fod wedi bod yn gyfrifol am y farwolaeth.
Dywedodd Mrs Simpson ei bod wedi dod yn eglur iddi hi, erbyn hyn, fod marwolaethau cleifion Shipman yn dilyn patrwm gwahanol i farwolaethau trigolion eraill yn Ogden Court. Fel arfer, roedd marwolaethau yn cael eu rhagflaenu gan gyfnod o ddirywiad, gyda cholli annibyniaeth yn raddol ac angen am fwy o ofal gan y Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol a/neu aelodau’r teulu. Yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, byddai marwolaeth yn digwydd yn yr ysbyty. Ar yr achlysuron hynny pan oedd preswylydd yn marw yn Ogden Court, byddai wedi bod yn hysbys ymlaen llaw fod y farwolaeth ar ddigwydd. Mewn cyferbyniad, roedd cleifion Shipman yn marw’n sydyn ac ar adeg pan oedd, neu wedi bod yn ddiweddar, yn agos atynt yn gorfforol.
Bu Mrs Ward farw ar 24 Hydref 1995. Roedd wedi syrthio a thorri’i chlun ddeufis yn gynharach, ac wedi dioddef thrombosis gwythiennau dwfn tra’n ymadfer yn yr ysbyty. Ar adeg ei marwolaeth, roedd yn ôl adref ac yn gwneud cynnydd da. Ymwelodd Shipman â hi i gymryd sampl gwaed yn union fel yr oedd ei merch, Miss Maureen Ward, yn gadael i fynd i’r siopau. Pan ddaeth yn ôl ryw hanner awr yn hwyrach, canfu ei mam yn farw yn ei chadair. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson mai’r ffaith unwaith eto fod Shipman wedi ymweld â Mrs Ward yn ddiweddar cyn canfod ei marwolaeth a barodd iddi amau na fu’r farwolaeth yn un naturiol.
Bu Mrs Saunders farw wyth mis yn ddiweddarach ar 17 Mehefin 1996. Roedd wedi cael ei rhyddhau o’r ysbyty ddeng niwrnod cyn iddi farw, yn dilyn pwl o afiechyd ar y diferticwlwm. Roedd i weld mewn iechyd a hwyliau da i Mrs Simpson, er iddi gwyno i eraill am wendid a ‘dirgrynu’ yn ei chalon. Roedd wedi gofyn i Shipman ymweld â hi yn ei chartref. Gwnaeth hynny, a galwodd ar Mrs Simpson yn ddiweddarach a dweud wrthi fod Mrs Saunders yn marw. Aeth Mrs Simpson gyda Shipman i fflat Mrs Saunders. Credai i Mrs Saunders gymryd ei hanadl olaf fel yr oeddent yn cyrraedd. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson ei fod yn argyhoeddedig ar y pryd fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Saunders.
Ar 23 Tachwedd 1996, bu Mr Mills farw. Nid oedd Mrs Simpson yn Ogden Court ar y pryd. Roedd Mr Mills yn dioddef o ganser o’r brostad ac roedd wedi mynd yn fregus iawn. Ar fore ei farwolaeth (dydd Sadwrn), teimlai’n anhwylus a gofynnodd i Mr Simpson (yn absenoldeb Mrs Simpson) i ofyn i Shipman ymweld. Ymwelodd Shipman, a thra’r oedd gyda Mr Mills, galwodd am wasanaeth y warden symudol a oedd yn cael ei ddefnyddio gan Ogden Court pan nad oedd Mrs Simpson ar gael, gan ddweud fod Mr Mills yn marw. Cyrhaeddodd y warden i ganfod Mr Mills yn gorwedd ar y llawr, yn amlwg yn marw. Yn fuan wedyn, ymddangosodd Shipman a chyhoeddi ei fod wedi marw. Cyrhaeddodd Mrs Simpson yn ôl ychydig yn ddiweddarach a chysylltu ag aelodau teulu Mr Mills. Dywedodd nad oedd y ffordd yr oedd Mr Mills yn gorwedd i weld yn naturiol, a pharodd hynny iddi feddwl fod Shipman unwaith eto’n gyfrifol am y farwolaeth.
Codwyd amheuon Mrs Simpson unwaith eto gan amgylchiadau canfod marwolaeth Mrs Royston, ar 5 Chwefror 1997. Canfu Mrs Royston yn farw’r bore hwnnw. Roedd Mrs Royston yn gorwedd yn daclus ar y llawr. Roedd ei sbectol (a wisgai bob amser) ar gefn y soffa. Roedd Shipman, ar gais mab Mrs Royston, Mr Alan Royston, wedi ymweld â Mrs Royston y diwrnod blaenorol. Pan ganfu’r farwolaeth, ffoniodd Mrs Simpson feddygfa Shipman. Nid oedd Shipman ar gael ar unwaith, felly gadawodd Mrs Simpson neges gyda’r derbynnydd. Yna ffoniodd yr heddlu i’w hysbysu am y farwolaeth. Dyma oedd y polisi arferol pan oedd marwolaeth yn sydyn a phan nad oedd meddyg teulu’r person ymadawedig ar gael. Mae cofnodion yr heddlu’n dangos bod yr alwad wedi’i gwneud am 8.39 a.m. Y neges a dderbyniwyd oedd:
Dywedodd Mrs Simpson ei bod yn meddwl y byddai’r heddlu’n ymchwilio i’r farwolaeth, ac y byddai Shipman yn cael ei ddal allan o’r diwedd.
Fodd bynnag, cyn i’r heddlu gyrraedd, ymddangosodd Shipman. Roedd yn flin pan ddywedodd Mrs Simpson wrtho ei bod wedi galw’r heddlu. Aeth gyda hi i weld Mrs Royston, chwiliodd am guriad galon Mrs Royston, cadarnhau ei fod wedi marw a dweud wrth Mrs Simpson y byddai’n gallu rhoi tystysgrif marwolaeth gan iddo weld Mrs Royston y noson flaenorol. Yna gadawodd, ar ôl bod yno am gyfnod byr yn unig. Yn ei datganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mrs Simpson na ddaeth yr heddlu fyth. Credai ei bod yn rhaid bod Shipman wedi’u ffonio a dweud wrthynt nad oedd angen iddynt fod yn bresennol. Dywedodd nad oedd yn teimlo y gallai gysylltu â’r heddlu eto a dweud wrthynt ei bod yn anghytuno â Shipman.
Mewn gwirionedd, roedd atgof Mrs Simpson yn ddiffygiol yn y fan honno. Dengys cofnodion yr heddlu fod y Cwnstabl (PC) Donna Jones wedi mynd i Ogden Court gyda chydweithiwr, gan gyrraedd am 8.58 a.m. Mewn datganiad a wnaed ym mis Ionawr 1999, dywedodd PC Jones ei fod wedi siarad â Mrs Simpson. Am 9 a.m. anfonodd neges i Ystafell Gweithrediadau Ardal yr heddlu, yn dweud ei bod yn ymddangos y byddai meddyg teulu Mrs Royston, sef Shipman, yn rhoi tystysgrif marwolaeth. Mae’n rhaid bod y wybodaeth honno wedi dod oddi wrth Mrs Simpson, a oedd newydd ei chael gan Shipman ei hun. Yna ceisiodd yr heddlu gysylltu â Shipman yn y feddygfa. Roedd gyda chlaf ar y pryd, ond cadarnhaodd derbynnydd wedyn y byddai’n rhoi tystysgrif marwolaeth. Gadawodd yr heddlu Ogden Court yn fuan wedi hynny.
Ymddengys, ar yr achlysur hwn, fod Mrs Simpson wedi cael cyfle i leisio’u phryderon am farwolaeth Mrs Royston i’r heddlu yn absenoldeb Shipman. Gall fod nad oedd yr hyder ganddi i wneud hynny yn wyneb haeriad Shipman y byddai’n llofnodi tystysgrif marwolaeth. Efallai iddi gael ei synnu gan barodrwydd yr heddlu i dderbyn bod tystysgrif marwolaeth i’w rhoi ac na fyddai unrhyw ymchwiliad yn angenrheidiol felly.
Esboniad posibl arall am fethiant Mrs Simpson i leisio’i phryderon i’r heddlu ar yr achlysur hwn fyddai nad oedd y pryderon hynny mor fawr ag y mae’n credu yr oeddent erbyn hyn. Fodd bynnag, mae sgwrs a gafodd â mab Mrs Royston yn cefnogi’i haeriad ei bod yn wirioneddol amheus o Shipman ar y pryd. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson pan gyrhaeddodd Mr Royston yn fflat ei fam, roedd yn amheus ar unwaith a mynegodd y farn fod
‘rhywbeth nad oedd yn iawn’
am y farwolaeth. Disgrifiodd sut na wnaeth anghytuno â’i awgrym. Credai ei fod yn mynd i fynd i’r afael â Shipman. Teimlai ei bod yn briodol mai ef, fel mab Mrs Royston, ddylai fynd â’r mater ymhellach.
Mae Mr Royston wedi rhoi dau ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad. Mae ei wraig wedi rhoi datganiad hefyd. Cadarnhaodd Mr Royston fod nifer o nodweddion am y farwolaeth - gan gynnwys safle ei fam a’i sbectol - wedi ei daro’n rhyfedd. Dechreuodd feddwl tybed a oedd Mrs Royston wedi marw ym mhresenoldeb Shipman, ac a oedd Shipman wedi’i gadael gan nad oedd eisiau delio â’r cyfnod yn dilyn ei marwolaeth. Roedd Mr Royston yn cofio cael sgwrs â Mrs Simpson. Credai i hyn ddigwydd rai dyddiau ar ôl marwolaeth ei fam yn hytrach nag ar y diwrnod ei hun, fel yr awgryma Mrs Simpson. Roedd wedi gofyn i Mrs Simpson (yn yr hyn a alwai’n
‘ffordd eironig’
) a allai Shipman fod wedi
‘cael gwared’
â’i fam ac a oedd Mrs Simpson yn meddwl y gallai Shipman fod yn
‘lofrudd neiniau cyfres’
. Dywedodd fod wyneb Mrs Simpson wedi newid a dywedodd wrtho fod nifer o bobl wedi marw wedi i Shipman ymweld â nhw. Dywedodd hefyd ei bod wedi trafod y mater gyda’i gŵr, ond credai na fyddai neb yn ei chredu pe ddywedai rhywbeth wrth unrhywun arall. Parodd ei sylwadau i Mr Royston feddwl tybed a oedd Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Royston. Trafododd y mater gyda chydweithwyr ac aelodau ei deulu. Ni allent gredu fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Royston. Er bod Mr Royston wedi parhau â phryderon parhaol am amgylchiadau’r farwolaeth, nid ystyriodd o ddifrif dweud wrth unrhyw un mewn awdurdod am y pryderon hynny nes iddo glywed fod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad. Cysylltodd â’r heddlu’n fuan wedyn, ar 21 Awst 1998.
Bu Mr King farw Noswyl Nadolig 1997. Dywedodd Mrs Simpson, er gwaethaf ei oed, fod ei iechyd yn dda yn gyffredinol. Ar ddiwrnod ei farwolaeth, fodd bynnag, roedd wedi cwyno ei fod yn teimlo’n
‘ddryslyd’
, ac o hynny deallodd ei fod yn cael pyliau o’r bendro. Ni feddyliodd fod unrhyw beth difrifol o le. Dywedodd Mr King wrthi ei fod wedi gofyn i Shipman ymweld. Roedd hyn yn anarferol iawn iddo ef. Ymwelodd Shipman mewn ymateb i gais Mr King. Yn fuan wedyn, canfu ei ferch Mr King yn farw yn ei gadair. Parodd sydynrwydd marwolaeth Mr King, a’r ffaith iddi ddigwydd yn fuan wedi ymweliad gan Shipman, i Mrs Simpson gredu fod Shipman wedi lladd eto.
Ar 18 Chwefror 1998, galwodd Shipman yn fflat Mrs Simpson a dywedodd wrthi ei fod wedi canfod Miss Maureen Ward (merch Mrs Muriel Ward) yn farw. Dim ond 57 mlwydd oed oedd Miss Ward, ac roedd wedi aros ymlaen yn Ogden Court yn dilyn marwolaeth ei mam. Roedd wedi cael triniaeth am ganser yn flaenorol, ond, yn union cyn ei marwolaeth, roedd i weld mewn iechyd da. Roedd yn bwriadu mynd ar wyliau ac yn edrych ymlaen at symud tŷ yn y dyfodol agos. Roedd yn amlwg i Mrs Simpson, pan aeth gyda Shipman i fflat Miss Ward, fod Miss Ward wedi bod wrth ei gweithgareddau dyddiol arferol pan wnaeth rhywbeth darfu arni. Cafodd Mrs Simpson sioc wrth glywed am farwolaeth Miss Ward, a dywedodd hynny wrth Shipman. Dywedodd wrthi fod Miss Ward wedi bod yn dioddef o dyfiant ar yr ymennydd a achosodd ei marwolaeth. Ni allai Mrs Simpson gredu y byddai Miss Ward wedi bod yn cynllunio mor frwdfrydig ar gyfer y dyfodol pe chredai nad oedd ganddi lawer o amser i fyw. Unwaith eto, credai fod Shipman yn gyfrifol am y farwolaeth.
Tystiolaeth Mr Simpson
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mr Simpson. Cadarnhaodd fod ei wraig wedi dod i gredu fod Shipman yn lladd ei gleifion. Ar y cychwyn, roedd wedi trafod gydag ef y posibilrwydd y gallai fod trefniant gan Shipman â’i gleifion i’w cynorthwyo i farw pan oedd ansawdd eu bywyd yn mynd yn wael. Ar ryw adeg, fodd bynnag, roedd wedi peidio â chredu fod y cleifion wedi cydsynio i’w marwolaethau. Ni allai Mr Simpson gofio ba bryd y digwyddodd y newid meddwl hwn. Roedd yn cofio, pan fu Mrs Saunders farw ym mis Mehefin 1996, na allai Mrs Simpson gredu y byddai wedi eisiau cymryd ei bywyd ei hun. Cydnabu Mr Simpson ei hun y cysylltiad agos rhwng ymweliadau Shipman a’r marwolaethau. Credai y gallent fod wedi digwydd â chydsyniad y cleifion. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na allai’n syml iawn dderbyn y gallai Shipman fod yn lladd ei gleifion heb eu cydsyniad, gan nad ymddengys bod unrhyw reswm iddo wneud hynny. Ni lwyddodd i berswadio Mrs Simpson i rannu ei farn. Yn raddol, dros gyfnod o amser, aeth i deimlo’n isel. Ar y pryd, rhoddodd y bai am ei hiselder ar broblemau eraill. Wrth edrych yn ôl, fodd bynnag, cred Mr Simpson bod ei phryderon am farwolaethau cleifion Shipman yn ffactor pwysig.
Cyfleu Pryderon i Drydydd Parti
Disgrifiodd Mrs Simpson a’i gŵr ddau achlysur (yn ychwanegol at y sgwrs â Mr Royston yr wyf eisoes wedi’i disgrifio) pan leisiodd ei phryderon i bersonau y tu allan i’w theulu agosaf. Ar un achlysur felly, soniodd am ei amheuon wrth ffrind uchel ei pharch a fu ganddi am lawer o flynyddoedd. Roedd y ffrind yn gweithio mewn meddygfa ac yn glaf i Shipman. Cynghorodd Mrs Simpson i beidio dweud dim am eu hamheuon gan y byddai pobl yn dweud ei bod
‘yn wallgof’
Y person arall yr honnodd Mrs Simpson iddi ymddiried ynddi oedd Mrs Schofield. Dywed iddi godi ei phryderon ar ddiwedd un o’i chyfarfodydd cyswllt arferol â Mrs Schofield. Roedd Mr Simpson yn cofio y penderfynwyd y dylai ei wraig ddweud wrth ‘y rheolwyr’ am ei phryderon ynghylch y marwolaethau. Nid oedd yn cofio pa bryd oedd hyn. Credai Mrs Simpson ei hun iddi siarad â Mrs Schofield ar ôl marwolaeth Mrs Ward, h.y. rywbryd ar ôl 24 Hydref 1995. Byddai hynny wedi bod ryw dair blynedd cyn arestio Shipman yn y pen draw. Roedd Mr Simpson o’r farn fod yr amseru’n swnio’n iawn. Ni wyddai’n union beth a ddywedwyd, ond byddai wedi disgwyl i Mrs Simpson roi adroddiad clir o’i hamheuon a’r digwyddiadau a arweiniodd atynt.
Yn ei datganiad tyst, dywedodd Mrs Simpson y modd na allai ei chael ei hun i ddweud ei bod yn amau fod Shipman yn llofruddio pobl. Credai ei bod wedi sôn am Shipman yn ôl ei enw ac wedi dweud wrth Mrs Schofield:
‘...bu nifer o farwolaethau lle’r oedd amgylchiadau’r marwolaethau wedi bod yn hynod ac roeddwn yn amheus ac yn bryderus. Mynegais fy mhryder yn gyffredinol yn hytrach nag mewn termau penodol. Dywedais fod cleifion yn marw yn dilyn ymweliadau gan y meddyg a bod pobl eraill wedi dechrau siarad am y peth yn ogystal.’
Yn ôl ei gŵr, roedd Mrs Simpson yn gobeithio cael rhyw arweiniad ynghylch beth i’w wneud neu sicrwydd y byddai Mrs Schofield yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb am ddwyn ei phryderon yn eu blaen. Yn lle hynny, ni wnaeth Mrs Schofield roi unrhyw ymateb ac ni ofynnodd unrhyw gwestiynau. Ni wnaeth unrhyw awgrymiadau ynghylch yr hyn allai neu ddylai Mrs Simpson wneud. Cafodd Mrs Simpson yr argraff nad oedd Mrs Schofield yn ei chymryd o ddifrif. Mewn un ystyr, roedd diffyg ymateb Mrs Schofield yn destun calondid iddi, o leiaf yn y tymor byr. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd, pan fu Mrs Saunders farw yn y mis Mehefin canlynol, peidiodd â theimlo’n dawel ei meddwl a theimlai ei bod wedi bod yn iawn i fod yn amheus.
Roedd Mrs Simpson yn cofio fod Mrs Schofield wedi gwneud rhai nodiadau am ei phryderon, ond nid yw’n cofio gweld unrhyw gyfeiriad atynt pan dderbyniodd gofnodion y cyfarfod perthnasol. Fel y dywedais yn barod, nid yw cofnodion cyfarfodydd o’r cyfnod hwn ar gael bellach. Hyd yn oed be baent, ni fyddwn yn synnu na fyddai mater mor sensitif yn cael ei gofnodi. Gallaf ddeall hefyd pam na fyddai Mrs Simpson o reidrwydd wedi pwyso iddynt gael eu cofnodi wedi hynny. Ni fyddai wedi bod eisiau i’w phryderon gael eu gweld gan bobl eraill yn y Gymdeithas Tai, yn enwedig os oedd, erbyn hynny, wedi’i chalonogi gan agwedd Mrs Schofield ac y credai nad oedd sail i’w hamheuon.
Dywedodd Mrs Simpson nad oedd yn meddwl iddi sôn wrth Mrs Schofield am ei phryderon eto. Ni chyfeiriodd Mrs Schofield erioed at y pwnc. Ni wyddai Mrs Simpson beth arall i’w wneud. Ystyriodd ymgynghori â chyfreithiwr, ond ni chredai y byddai’n ei chymryd o ddifrif gan nad oedd ganddi unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol i gefnogi haeriad mor ddifrifol. Cyn belled ag yr oedd yn ymwybodol, nid oedd neb yn rhannu’i phryderon. Roedd yn poeni ynghylch cael ei phrofi’n anghywir. Roedd yn ymwybodol wrth gwrs o’r enw da a oedd gan Shipman ymhlith ei gleifion a’r gymuned ehangach.
Ar 14 Hydref 1998, rhoddodd Mrs Simpson ddatganiad i’r heddlu am farwolaeth Mrs Royston. Dywedodd wrth y swyddog cyfweld fod Shipman wedi bod yn gysylltiedig â naw marwolaeth yn Ogden Court, a rhoddodd fanylion. Ar 21 Hydref 1998, cafodd ei chyfweld mewn cysylltiad â’r marwolaethau hynny, a disgrifiodd yr amheuon cynyddol a oedd ganddi i’r heddlu.
Tystiolaeth Mrs Schofield
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mrs Schofield. Gwadodd fod Mrs Simpson wedi mynegi pryderon wrthi ar unrhyw adeg ynghylch marwolaethau cleifion Shipman. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pe bai Mrs Simpson wedi gwneud hynny, byddai wedi hysbysu’i phenaethiaid am y mater. Roedd o’r farn, pe bai pryderon gan Mrs Simpson, byddai wedi’u mynegi’n glir ac yn uniongyrchol, a phe na weithredwyd ar y pryderon hynny, byddai wedi’u canlyn. Roedd Mrs Schofield yn bendant na wnaethpwyd hyn erioed. Nid oedd ganddi unrhyw atgof o unrhyw bryder yn cael ei godi ynghylch marwolaeth Mrs Ward. Dywed y byddai wedi cofio hyn, gan iddi gael trafodion blaenorol gyda’r teulu Ward a’u bod yn eu hadnabod.
Rhoddodd Mrs Schofield dri datganiad i’r Ymchwiliad. Yn y ddau gyntaf, dywedodd ei bod yn cofio Mrs Simpson yn cyfeirio at Shipman fel ‘Dr Death’ ar nifer o achlysuron dros y blynyddoedd y bu’n gweithio â hi. Dywedodd fod Mrs Simpson, ar rai o’r achlysuron hynny o leiaf, wedi cysylltu’r sôn am ymweliad gan ‘Dr Death’â lle gwag yn dod yn rhydd. Yr ymhlygiad oedd y byddai lle gwag wedi’i achosi neu’n cael ei achosi gan farwolaeth yn dilyn ymweliad gan Shipman. Dywedodd Mrs Schofield na chymerodd y sylwadau hyn o ddifrif. Meddyliai’n unig fod marwolaethau yn anochel ymhlith bobl oedrannus.
Wrth wneud ei thrydydd datganiad, a lofnododd dridiau’n unig cyn iddi fod yn bresennol i roi tystiolaeth, newidiodd Mrs Schofield rywfaint ar ei thystiolaeth. Dywedodd na ddefnyddiwyd yr ymadrodd ‘Dr Death’ gan Mrs Simpson i ddisgrifio unrhyw unigolyn penodol. Awgrymodd Mrs Schofield fod y term wedi’i ddefnyddio’n gyffredinol wrth siarad am le gwag yn cael ei achosi gan farwolaeth. Dywedodd iddi glywed pobl eraill yn sôn am Shipman fel ‘Dr Death’, ond pan oedd yn hysbys fod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad yn unig, h.y. ar ôl canol mis Awst 1998.
Roedd tystiolaeth lafar Mrs Schofield am y cyfeiriadau hyn yn ddryslyd iawn. Ar adegau, awgrymodd ei bod yn cofio Mrs Simpson yn defnyddio’r enw ‘Dr Death’ mewn cysylltiad â Shipman. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd ei bod yn credu mai ar ôl i Shipman ddod yn destun ymchwiliad ym 1998 oedd hyn. Nid yw’n glir pa bryd fyddai hyn, gan i Mrs Simpson roi’r gorau i weithio beth amser cyn mis Gorffennaf 1998, ac nid ymddengys ei bod wedi dychwelyd hyd oddeutu mis Hydref. (Ni ellir gwirio union ddyddiadau ei habsenoldeb). Ar adegau eraill, awgrymodd Mrs Schofield y gallai Mrs Simpson fod wedi defnyddio’r enw ‘Dr Death’ yn unig i ddangos bod marwolaeth wedi bod. Gwnaeth y pwynt bod y geiriau yr oedd yn ceisio’u cofio wedi’u hynganu nifer o flynyddoedd yn ôl, felly atgof niwlog oedd ganddi.
Yn ystod ei thystiolaeth lafar, dywedodd Mrs Schofield, yn dilyn arestio Shipman, fod yr heddlu wedi’i ffonio i ofyn iddi a oedd yn wir bod pobl yn arfer galw Shipman yn ‘Dr Death’. Dywedodd iddi ddweud wrthynt, ‘Mae hynny’n wir, fe roeddent’. Esboniodd ei bod yn meddwl iddi ddweud hyn oherwydd, erbyn hynny, roedd yr enw ‘Dr Death’ yn cael ei ddefnyddio i ddisgrifio Shipman gan bobl yn Hyde a chan y papurau newydd. Roedd yr esboniad hwnnw, wrth gwrs, yn anfoddhaol gan mai diben ymchwiliad yr heddlu yn amlwg fyddai canfod beth oedd yn cael ei ddweud cyn yr ymchwiliadau gychwyn ar Shipman, nid wedi hynny.
Fel y bu hi, fodd bynnag, roedd diben a natur ymchwiliad yr heddlu yn eithaf gwahanol i hynny a awgrymwyd gan Mrs Schofield. Wedi iddi roi tystiolaeth, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad afael ar gofnod yr heddlu o sgwrs ffôn a ddigwyddodd ar 15 Chwefror 1999. Roedd swyddog o’r heddlu wedi cael y dasg o gysylltu â Mrs Schofield er mwyn ymchwilio i haeriad Mrs Simpson, a wnaed mewn datganiad i’r heddlu dyddiedig 21 Hydref 1998, ei bod wedi siarad â Mrs Schofield am ei hamheuon tua adeg marwolaeth Mrs Ward. Dywed y cofnod:
‘... ON MONDAY 15TH FEBRUARY 1999 AT 3PM I SPOKE TO JANET SCHOFIELD WHO IS A HOUSING OFFICER WITH MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT HOUSING OFFICE ... MRS SCHOFIELD STATED THAT SHE DID NOT FEEL CONFIDENT ENOUGH TO MAKE A STATEMENT IN REGARDS TO ANY CONVERSATION THAT SHE HAD HAD WITH N762 SIMPSON RE THE DEATH OF MURIAL (sic) WARD AS SHE COULD NOT REMEMBER IF ONE ACTUALLY TOOK PLACE, SHE DOES HOWEVER STATE THAT ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS COMMENTS WERE MADE BY CHRISTINE SIMPSON IN REGARDS TO THE NUMBER OF DEATHS THAT WERE OCCURRING AT OGDEN COURT WHILST DR SHIPMAN WAS PRESENT. MRS SCHOFIELD CANNOT BE ANYMORE SPECIFIC IN REGARDS TO THE CONTENTS OF THESE COMMENTS OR THE TIMES AND DATES THEY WERE MADE, THUS A STATEMENT HAS NOT BEEN TAKEN FROM HER AT THIS TIME.’
Cynigiwyd cyfle i Mrs Schofield wneud sylw ar gofnod ond dewisodd peidio gwneud hynny. Mae cynnwys y cofnod hwn yn dangos yn glir fod Mrs Simpson wedi gwneud sylwadau a oedd yn cysylltu presenoldeb Shipman yn Ogden Court â marwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd yno. Mae hefyd yn dangos yn glir fod y sylwadau hynny wedi’u gwneud, nid unwaith, ond nifer o weithiau.
Roedd Mrs Schofield yn swyddog tai profiadol ac nid oes gennyf unrhyw reswm i amau y byddai’n cyflawni’i dyletswyddau mewn modd cydwybodol a phroffesiynol. Cydnabu nad oedd yn berson chwilfrydig nac ymholgar. Yn wir, daeth drosodd fel cymeriad braidd yn ddigyffro a phellennig. Efallai ei bod yn arwyddocaol, er gwaethaf ei chysylltiadau agos ag Ogden Court dros gyfnod o flynyddoedd, na cheisiodd erioed ganfod faint o drigolion a gafodd eu lladd gan Shipman, ac ni chymerodd unrhyw ddiddordeb yn nhreial Shipman. Roedd un o’r cyhuddiadau y cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog ohono yn ymwneud â Miss Ward, a oedd yn hysbys i Mrs Schofield. Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, dywedodd, ‘a dweud y gwir yn onest, nid oedd ... o ddiddordeb i mi’.
Er nad wyf wedi gweld Mrs Simpson, mae’n amlwg o’r dystiolaeth a glywais ac a ddarllenais ei bod yn gymeriad gwahanol iawn. Cydnabu Mrs Schofield ei hun fod Mrs Simpson yn gwneud gwaith rhagorol wrth reoli Ogden Court. Roedd yn gymwys, yn alluog, yn broffesiynol ac wedi ymrwymo i les ‘ei’ thrigolion. Arweiniodd ei phenderfyniad i gyflawni’r gorau iddynt at densiwn ar brydiau rhyngddi hi eu hun a’i chyflogwyr.
Canfyddiad Mrs Schofield oedd fod Mrs Simpson yn bersonoliaeth braidd yn anodd, gydag agwedd negyddol tuag at awdurdod yn gyffredinol ac at ei chyflogwyr yn arbennig. Roedd y farn hon yn amlwg yn cael ei rhannu gan swyddog arall o’r Gymdeithas Tai, a gyfeiriodd at
‘ymagwedd ymosodol’
Mrs Simpson yn ei adroddiad o arfarniad a gynhaliwyd ym mis Rhagfyr 2004. Mae cofnodion eraill yn cofnodi ei theimladau o unigedd a’i chwyn na chafodd gefnogaeth ddigonol gan y Gymdeithas Tai, ynghyd â’i chred fod ei chyflogwyr yn ystyried eu cynlluniau cartrefi gwarchodol
‘fwy neu lai fel eiddo neu denantiaid eraill’
. Mae’n glir hefyd iddi fynd yn rhwystredig â’r diffyg parhad yn y swyddogion tai yr oedd yn gorfod delio â nhw. Yn ddiau roedd y ffactorau hyn yn fwy o her i Mrs Schofield wrth ddelio â Mrs Simpson na wynebodd yn ei thrafodion â rheolwyr preswyl eraill.
Hefyd, ymddengys fod Mrs Simpson wedi dangos arwyddion o straen a phryder, yn sicr yn y blynyddoedd yn arwain at 1998, pan ‘dorrodd i lawr’ a bu i ffwrdd o’r gwaith am rai misoedd. Roedd nifer o broblemau ganddi, a byddai’n trafod rhai ohonynt gyda Mrs Schofield yn eu cyfarfodydd misol. Un broblem oedd y ffaith ei bod yn byw ar y safle yn Ogden Court, ac o ganlyniad dioddefai o ddiffyg preifatrwydd a chyfrifoldeb parhaus am y trigolion. Trafododd hithau a Mrs Schofield y posibilrwydd y gallai gael eiddo yn rhywle arall lle gallai ddianc ar y penwythnosau. Trafodwyd ffyrdd ymarferol ganddynt hefyd o frwydro yn erbyn ei theimladau o unigedd.
Mewn tystiolaeth, disgrifiodd Mrs Schofield Mrs Simpson mewn termau braidd yn ddigydymdeimlad. Dywedodd ei bod yn ‘bersonoliaeth gymhleth’ gyda ‘ffordd ryfedd o edrych ar bethau.’ Roedd ‘obsesiwn am farwolaeth’ ganddi - ei marwolaeth ei hun a’r trigolion. Dywedwyd ei bod ‘wedi ymgolli â marwolaeth ... roedd bron fel obsesiwn ganddi’. Yn fyr, credai Mrs Schofield fod Mrs Simpson yn bersonoliaeth anodd a braidd yn hysterig. Rwy’n fodlon y byddai’r farn honno (pa un oedd cyfiawnhad drosti ai peidio) wedi llywio barn Mrs Schofield am unrhyw beth yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn adrodd iddi. Yn wir, yn ei ail ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mrs Schofield ei hun:
‘... Credaf ei bod yn deg i ddweud, oherwydd bod Christine mor negyddol ac y gallai gael chwilen yn ei phen ynghylch llawer o bethau, byddwn yn aml yn cymryd yr hyn a ddywedai gyda phinsiad o halen. Ymddengys bod agwedd negyddol Christine wedi’i chyfeirio at bobl mewn awdurdod yn aml, a chredaf y byddwn wedi ystyried ei sylwadau am Shipman gan gofio hynny.’
Rwy’n gwbl fodlon, er gwaethaf anghywirdeb ei hatgof o amgylchiadau marwolaeth Mrs Royston, bod nodweddion hanfodol tystiolaeth Mrs Simpson yn wir ac yn gywir. Rwy’n derbyn ei bod wedi datblygu amheuon am Shipman a’i bod, ar un achlysur o leiaf, wedi dweud wrth Mrs Schofield amdanynt. Pa un a wnaeth hynny mor gynnar â mis Hydref 1995, mae hynny’n llai sicr yn fy marn i. Gall fod mai yn dilyn marwolaeth Mrs Saunders y daeth Mrs Simpson yn wirioneddol bryderus ynghylch posibilrwydd llofruddiaeth. Gall fod mai bryd hynny y penderfynodd siarad â Mrs Schofield. Beth bynnag, rwy’n fodlon iddynt drafod y mater yn gyntaf ym 1995 neu 1996.
Mynegodd Mrs Schofield a Mr Simpson y farn mewn tystiolaeth, pe bai Mrs Simpson wedi lleisio pryderon i Mrs Schofield, byddai wedi bod yn debygol o wneud hynny mewn modd clir ac uniongyrchol. Byddai hynny wedi bod yn nodweddiadol o’i hymagwedd arferol. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mrs Simpson ei hun na allai ddod â’i hun i wneud hynny. Dywedodd iddi fynegi’i phryderon yn gyffredinol, yn hytrach nag mewn termau penodol. Rwy’n fodlon, fodd bynnag, pan siaradodd â Mrs Schofield, ei bod yn cysylltu’r marwolaethau ag ymweliadau gan Shipman, a’i bod wedi rhoi’r hyn a gredai oedd yn arwydd clir o’i phryderon nad oedd popeth fel y dylai fod.
Yn fy marn i, ni wnaeth Mrs Schofield adnabod ymagwedd anuniongyrchol annodweddiadol Mrs Simpson fel pryder yr oedd disgwyl iddi weithredu arni. Dywedaf hynny am ddau reswm. Yn gyntaf, rwy’n fodlon y byddai datganiad clir a diamwys wedi bod yn ofynnol y gallai Shipman fod wedi niweidio preswylydd penodol cyn y byddai Mrs Schofield wedi adnabod bod ganddi ddyletswydd i weithredu. Os mynegwyd pryderon mwy cyffredinol, ni chredaf y byddai wedi annog Mrs Simpson i ymhelaethu ymhellach. Ni fyddai wedi holi Mrs Simpson ynghylch beth allai fod y tu ôl i ddatganiad mwy anuniongyrchol a byddai wedi ceisio ei chael i ddweud beth oedd gwir achos ei phryderon. Ni fyddai ymagwedd felly wedi bod yn gydnaws â phersonoliaeth Mrs Schofield. Yn ail, rwy’n hyderus y byddai Mrs Schofield wedi diystyru pryderon Mrs Simpson, pe’u mynegwyd yn gyffredinol, fel rhan o’i obsesiwn afiach â marwolaeth. Gall fod, wrth gwrs, mai ofnau Mrs Simpson ynghylch marwolaethau cleifion Shipman oedd wrth wraidd y pryderon a fynegodd am farwolaeth yn gyffredinol, ond ni fyddai Mrs Schofield wedi sylweddoli hynny. Byddai yn ddiau wedi diystyru pryderon Mrs Simpson fel un arall o’i syniadau ‘rhyfedd’. Hyd yn oed pe bai Mrs Simpson wedi datgan ei hofnau yn uniongyrchol a chlir, mae’n bosibl y byddai Mrs Schofield wedi’u diystyru fel amlygiad o bersonoliaeth Mrs Simpson. Fodd bynnag, pe lleisiwyd y pryderon yn anuniongyrchol, byddai wedi bod yn llawer haws iddi wneud hynny.
Er na wnaeth Mrs Simpson godi’i phryderon eto mewn unrhyw ddull ‘ffurfiol’, rwy’n fodlon ei bod wedi cyfeirio atynt mewn sgwrs gyda Mrs Schofield drwy sylwadau yn cysylltu enw Shipman â marwolaethau yn Ogden Court. Mae’n debygol iddi ddefnyddio’r enw ‘Dr Death’ i ddisgrifio Shipman ar brydiau. Eto, o gofio’i barnau am Mrs Simpson a’r ffaith fod pryderon a phroblemau eraill gan honno y byddai yn sôn amdanynt yn ogystal, nid yw’n syndod yn fy marn i nad ystyriodd Mrs Schofield y cyfeiriadau parhaus hyn fel rhai pwysig. Serch hynny, rwy’n fodlon iddynt gael eu gwneud, ac roeddent yn dangos pryder parhaus a chynyddol Mrs Simpson.
Tynnodd Mrs Schofield sylw at nifer o lwybrau o fewn y Gymdeithas Tai a’r awdurdod lleol y gallai Mrs Simpson fod wedi mynd â’i phryderon ymhellach pe bai’n anfodlon na chymerodd Mrs Schofield ei hun unrhyw gamau gweithredu. Gallaf ddeall yn iawn pam y byddai Mrs Simpson wedi ystyried ei bod yn amhriodol codi materion mor ddifrifol mewn unrhyw un o’r ffyrdd hyn. Mae’n naturiol yn fy marn i y byddai wedi bod yn well ganddi i sôn am y pwnc wrth ei rheolwr llinell, a oedd wedi adnabod ers tro, ‘yn dawel bach’ ar ddiwedd cyfarfod anffurfiol. Credaf ei bod mewn gwirionedd yn ‘profi’r dŵr’ i weld pa adwaith fyddai’n ei gael. Yn ddiau hefyd roedd yn gobeithio y byddai Mrs Schofield yn holi ymhellach i’w phryderon ac yn eu pasio ymlaen i ymchwilio iddynt. Pan na chafodd unrhyw adwaith amlwg, collodd hyder a theimlai na allai sôn amdanynt eto, ac eithrio drwy gyfeiriadau anuniongyrchol. Nid yw’r ffaith na wnaeth Mrs Simpson ganlyn ei phryderon drwy unrhyw un o’r llwybrau a awgrymwyd gan Mrs Schofield yn awgrymu mewn unrhyw ffordd, yn fy marn i, na fynegodd ei phryderon i Mrs Schofield yn y lle cyntaf. Rwy’n fodlon iddi wneud a bod ei gweithredoedd, yng ngolwg adwaith Mrs Schofield, yn gwbl ddealladwy. Ni ellir beio Mrs Simpson am beidio mynd â’i phryderon ymhellach.
A ddylid beirniadu Mrs Schofield am fethu gweld bod Mrs Simpson yn ceisio cyfleu pryder go iawn iddi y gallai Shipman fod yn lladd ei gleifion? Er mwyn barnu hyn yn deg, mae’n rhaid i mi roi o’r neilltu y nodweddion annymunol yn nhystiolaeth Mrs Schofield i’r Ymchwiliad. Mae’n anffodus, yn fy marn i, fod Mrs Schofield wedi ceisio gwadu fod Mrs Simpson erioed wedi codi pryderon ynghylch Shipman, ac mae’n arbennig o annymunol iddi geisio, mewn tystiolaeth lafar, roi lluniad gwahanol i eiriau a oedd wedi’u defnyddio’n gwbl ddiamwys yn ei datganiadau ysgrifenedig. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i’w diffyg didwylledd i’r Ymchwiliad, er mor annymunol ydyw, beidio ag effeithio ar fy marn ynghylch ei methiant i ymateb i bryderon Mrs Simpson ar y pryd.
Yn fy marn i, dylai rheolwr yn safle Mrs Schofield fod wedi bod yn effro i’r math o neges anuniongyrchol o bryder yr oedd Mrs Simpson wedi ceisio’i chyfleu iddi, a dylai fod wedi cymryd unrhyw bryderon felly o ddifrif. Os oedd yn ymddangos, ar ôl trafod, fod unrhyw bosibilrwydd y gallai fod sail dda i’r pryderon, dylai’r rheolwr fod wedi’u dwyn yn eu blaen.
Ni sylweddolodd Mrs Schofield fod Mrs Simpson yn ceisio codi pryder ger ei bron. Dywedais nad yw Mrs Schofield yn berson chwilfrydig iawn. Credaf hefyd nad oedd yn arbennig o hoff o Mrs Simpson. Fe’u cafodd yn anodd delio â hi, ac ni wnaeth adnabod yn llawn ei hymrwymiad diamheuol i les y bobl oedrannus yr oedd ganddi rywfaint o gyfrifoldeb amdanynt. Credaf fod agwedd Mrs Schofield tuag at Mrs Simpson wedi atal ei pharodrwydd neu’i gallu i wrando’n ofalus ar yr hyn yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn dweud wrthi ac i feddwl am oblygiadau hynny. Credaf fod Mrs Schofield yn ddiystyriol o ‘neges’ Mrs Simpson, ac fe’i priodolodd i obsesiwn â marwolaeth. Fodd bynnag, roedd y pryderon yr oedd Mrs Simpson yn ceisio’u codi yn gwbl hynod a byddent wedi ymddangos yn afresymol i lawer. Fe wnaeth y ffrind y lleisiodd Mrs Simpson ei phryderon iddi ei chynghori i beidio sôn wrth neb arall amdanynt rhag i bobl ddweud ei bod yn ‘wallgof’. Roedd y ffrind yn graff; priodolodd Mrs Schofield bryderon Mrs Simpson i obsesiwn â marwolaeth. Heddiw, gwyddwn fod Shipman yn llofrudd a bod sail dda i bryderon yn ei gylch; cyn i’w droseddau gael eu datgelu, roedd unrhyw amheuaeth amdano, i lawer, yn annychmygol bron.
Beirniadaeth dawel sydd gennyf o Mrs Schofield. Ni wrandodd yn ofalus ar ymdrechion Mrs Simpson i godi’i phryderon. Roedd hynny yn rhannol yn sgil ei phersonoliaeth ei hun a’i hagwedd tuag at Mrs Simpson. Ond credaf hefyd yr effeithiwyd yn ddealladwy ar ei chred bod unrhyw awgrym y gallai meddyg fod yn niweidio’i gleifion y tu hwnt i unrhyw amgyffred.

---  ---
Roedd Mr John Shaw yn yrrwr tacsi hunangyflogedig yn Hyde am ryw ddeng mlynedd gan ddechrau ym 1988. Treuliodd y rhan fwyaf o’i fywyd gweithio ym maes peirianneg, er iddo, fel dyn ifanc, wasanaethu am ddau gyfnod byr yn yr heddlu. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mr Shaw.
Ym mis Awst 1998, yn dilyn sylw yn y wasg i’r ffaith fod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad gan yr heddlu am ffugio ewyllys claf, cysylltodd Mr Shaw â’r heddlu a mynegi pryder ynghylch marwolaethau 21 o bobl (y rhan fwyaf ohonynt yn gyn-gwsmeriaid iddo) a gredai oedd yn gleifion i Shipman. Cefais fod Shipman wedi lladd 19 o’r 21 o bobl a nododd Mr Shaw, sef:
Mrs Rene Sparkes, a fu farw, yn 72 oed, ar 7 Hydref 1992
Miss Joan Harding, a fu farw, yn 82 oed, ar 4 Ionawr 1994
Mrs Maria West, a fu farw, yn 81 oed, ar 6 Mawrth 1995
Mrs Netta Ashcroft, a fu farw, yn 71 oed, ar 7 Mawrth 1995
Mrs Ada Hilton, a fu farw, yn 88 oed, ar 12 Gorffennaf 1995
Mr Sidney Smith, a fu farw, yn 76 oed, ar 30 Awst 1996
Mrs Millicent Garside, a fu farw, yn 76 oed, ar 23 Hydref 1996
Mr Thomas Cheetham, a fu farw, yn 78 oed, ar 4 Rhagfyr 1996
Mr Kenneth Smith, a fu farw, yn 73 oed, ar 17 Rhagfyr 1996
Mrs Irene Brooder, a fu farw, yn 76 oed, ar 20 Ionawr 1997
Mrs Lizzie Adams, a fu farw, yn 77 oed, ar 28 Chwefror 1997
Mrs Elsie Cheetham, a fu farw, yn 76 oed, ar 25 Ebrill 1997
Miss Lena Slater, a fu farw, yn 68 oed, ar 2 Mai 1997
Mrs Florence Lewis, a fu farw, yn 79 oed, ar 10 Tachwedd 1997
Mrs Norah Nuttall, a fu farw, yn 64 oed, ar 26 Ionawr 1998
Miss Maureen Ward, a fu farw, yn 57 oed, ar 18 Chwefror 1998
Mrs Margaret Waldron, a fu farw, yn 65 oed, ar 6 Mawrth 1998
Miss Ada Warburton, a fu farw, yn 77 oed, ar 20 Mawrth 1998.
Nid oedd y ddau berson arall a nododd Mr Shaw yn gleifion i Shipman mewn gwirionedd, ac ni chysylltwyd ef â’u marwolaethau.
Roedd llawer o gwsmeriaid Mr Shaw yn bobl oedrannus a oedd â threfniadau cyson ag ef. Roedd rhai ohonynt wedi teithio mor gyson gydag ef eu bod wedi dod yn ffrindiau personol iddo. Pan fyddai un o’i gwsmeriaid yn marw, byddai Mr Shaw yn clywed am y farwolaeth gan berthynas y cwsmer fel arfer, a fyddai’n ffonio ac yn dweud wrtho pam nad oedd angen iddo godi’r cwsmer hwnnw eto. Yn aml, byddai’n cael gwybodaeth am amgylchiadau’r farwolaeth. Wrth i amser fynd heibio, dechreuodd sylwi bod patrwm yn datblygu. Y ffactor cyffredin ymhob achos oedd mai Shipman oedd meddyg teulu’r person ymadawedig. Dywedodd Mr Shaw wrth yr Ymchwiliad:
‘Ni allwn gredu beth oedd f’amheuon. Roedd f’amheuon yn rai mor rhyfeddol na allwn ... na allwn amgyffred yr hyn a oedd yn mynd ymlaen yn fy meddwl fy hun.’
Dechreuodd wneud pwynt, pan glywai am farwolaeth, o holi pwy oedd meddyg teulu’r person ymadawedig. Roedd ganddo system fynegai ar gardiau o gwsmeriaid, ac, ynddo, dechreuodd nodi manylion y marwolaethau yr oedd ganddo amheuon yn eu cylch.
Dywedodd Mr Shaw bod yr amheuon y soniai amdanynt wedi codi yn y lle cyntaf yn dilyn marwolaeth Mrs Ashcroft ym mis Mawrth 1995. Erbyn hynny, roedd pedwar o’i gwsmeriaid a fu’n gleifion i Shipman wedi marw, ac roedd wedi dechrau amau y gallai Shipman fod wedi’u lladd. Ym mis Hydref 1996, bu farw un arall o’i gwsmeriaid, Mrs Garside. Dywedodd perthynas wrth Mr Shaw fod Shipman wedi rhoi chwistrelliad iddi cyn ei marwolaeth. Erbyn hyn, gymaint oedd pryderon Mr Shaw roedd yn awyddus i hysbysu perthnasau Mrs Garside, a oedd yn gyfarwydd iddo, am ei gred fod Shipman wedi’i llofruddio. Fodd bynnag, teimlai na allai ddweud dim.
Esboniodd Mr Shaw na ddywedodd unrhyw beth am ei bryderon gan ei fod yn dechrau amau cyflwr ei feddwl ei hun. Teimlai, pe bai’n siarad, na fyddai neb yn ei gredu a gallai pobl eraill amau cyflwr ei feddwl hefyd. Ofnai y gallai fod yn anghywir ac y gallai hyn arwain at gael ei erlyn am enllib a cholli popeth oedd ganddo. Roedd ei wraig hefyd yn ofni’r canlyniadau pe bai’n siarad a’i fod yn anghywir.
Ffactor arall oedd y parch a oedd yn cael ei ddangos i Shipman yn y gymuned leol, a’i boblogrwydd. Ar un achlysur, rhybuddiodd Mr Shaw gwsmer a oedd yn cynllunio i ymweld â Shipman i beidio mynd ar ei ben ei hun. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad iddo gael ei wrthod ar unwaith a dywedwyd wrtho ei fod yn ‘baranoid’. Fe wnaeth y cwsmer dan sylw ei ollwng yn syth ac ni wnaeth drefniadau i’w hurio eto. Gymaint oedd poblogrwydd Shipman, roedd cleifion yn gweiddi i gael mynd ar ei restr. Nododd Mr Shaw hefyd nad oedd pobl eraill a oedd yn gwybod am y marwolaethau i weld yn rhannu’i amheuon.
Teimlai Mr Shaw na allai fynd at yr heddlu â’i bryderon gan nad oedd ganddo unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol am y marwolaethau, ac eithrio adroddiadau ail-law. At hynny, nid oedd y rhain hyd yn oed yn adroddiadau ail-law o lygad y ffynnon, ond yn hytrach yn adroddiadau ail-law neu drydydd-llaw. Ystyriodd fynd at y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol gan iddo ddeall bod gan y Cyngor rywfaint o gyfrifoldeb am feddygon. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn hyderus y byddai ei bryderon yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif. Ni wyddai am unrhyw sefydliad arall a oedd â chyfrifoldeb am fonitro neu reoli meddygon teulu. Hyd yn oed pe bai’n gwybod am rôl yr Awdurdod Iechyd, ni fyddai wedi teimlo y gallai fynd ato gan y byddai wedi tybio (fel proffesiynau eraill) y byddai’r proffesiwn meddygol wedi ‘cau’r rhengoedd’ yn wyneb cwyn o’r tu allan. Teimlai Mr Shaw nad oedd ganddo unrhyw le i fynd â’i gwynion.
Pan holwyd ef beth allai fod wedi’i berswadio i ddod ymlaen, dywedodd Mr Shaw mai wrth sefydliad diduedd ac annibynnol yn unig y byddai wedi teimlo y gallai fod wedi adrodd am ei bryderon, a hwnnw’n sefydliad nad oedd ganddo unrhyw gysylltiad â’r proffesiwn meddygol ac a oedd yn delio ag adroddiadau gan bobl a oedd â phryderon ac â materion yn ymwneud a marwolaethau sydyn, anesboniadwy. Dywedodd y byddai wedi teimlo y gallai fynd at sefydliad i gael cyngor ynghylch y modd i fynd ati i adrodd am ei bryderon, a bod y sefydliad hwnnw’n un tra adnabyddus a’i fod yn gweithredu’n genedlaethol - nid yn lleol. Byddai wedi teimlo’n anesmwyth ynghylch adrodd am ei bryder neu ofyn am gyngor yn lleol, gan fod Shipman mor adnabyddus ac uchel ei barch. Credai felly ei bod yn hollbwysig y dylai unrhyw sefydliad at ddefnydd pobl fel ef ei hun fod yn anghysbell yn ddaearyddol ac yn annibynnol.
Roedd Mr Shaw yn aelod o’r cyhoedd heb unrhyw rwymedigaeth i ddod â’i bryderon at sylw’r awdurdodau. Eto, roedd gwybodaeth werthfawr ganddo i’w rhoi - gwybodaeth, o’i hystyried yn briodol ac ymchwilio iddi’n briodol, a allai fod wedi arwain at ganfod Shipman yn gynharach. Mae’n bwysig y dylai personau fel Mr Shaw deimlo eu bod yn gallu dod ymlaen ag unrhyw bryderon gwirioneddol a difrifol y gall fod ganddynt, gan gredu’n sicr yr archwilir y pryderon hynny yn wrthrychol ac yn annibynnol ac na fydd y personau sy’n lleisio’r pryderon yn cael eu cosbi o ganlyniad i leisio’r pryderon hynny.

---  ---
Roedd Mrs Dorothy Foley a Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross yn cael eu cyflogi fel cynorthwywyr cartref gan Wasanaethau Cymdeithasol Tameside. Gweithiodd Mrs Foley fel cynorthwyydd cartref o 1985 nes iddi ddod yn warden preswyl llety gwarchodol ym 1992. Roedd Mrs Foley a Mrs Shawcross yn gynorthwywyr cartref i Miss Mona White, Mrs Mary Tomlin a Mr George Vizor. Canfu’r Ymchwiliad fod Shipman wedi lladd y tri ohonynt. Rhoddwyd datganiadau tyst i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mrs Foley a Mrs Shawcross am y marwolaethau. Hefyd, rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mrs Foley.
Marwolaeth Miss Mona White
Bu Miss White farw ar 15 Medi 1986. Gwelodd Mrs Foley a Mrs Shawcross hi’n sefyll wrth ei drws ffrynt tua chanol dydd ar ddiwrnod ei marwolaeth. Dywedodd ei bod yn disgwyl i Shipman ymweld â hi a’i bod yn bryderus am nad oedd wedi cyrraedd. Fe wnaethant ei sicrhau hi y byddai’n cyrraedd yn fuan ac aethant i ffwrdd. Roedd y ddwy yn cofio nad oedd Mrs White yn edrych yn sâl. Pe bai wedi ymddangos yn sâl, ni fyddai’r cynorthwywyr cartref wedi’i gadael ar ei phen ei hun i aros. Ychydig yn ddiweddarach, gwelodd Mrs Shawcross Shipman gerllaw fflat Miss White. Gofynnodd iddo ai problem gyda’i chalon oedd gan Miss White. Atebodd Shipman mai dyna oedd a’i fod wedi rhoi chwistrelliad iddi ar gyfer ei phoen. Aeth Mrs Shawcross yn ôl i weld Miss White ryw 20 munud wedi hynny. Canfu nad oedd y drws ar glo. Aeth i mewn a dod o hyd i Miss White yn eistedd i fyny yn ei chadair arferol. Edrychai fel pe bai’n cysgu. Nid oedd Mrs Shawcross yn gallu deffro Miss White a sylweddolodd ei bod wedi marw. Rhedodd Mrs Shawcross i dy Mrs Foley, a oedd gerllaw, ac aethant yn ôl i fflat Miss White gyda’i gilydd. Erbyn hynny, roedd Shipman wedi dod yn ôl. Ni wnaeth Shipman unrhyw ymgais i’w hadfywio. Hon oedd y farwolaeth gyntaf yr oedd Mrs Foley wedi dod ar ei thraws yn ystod ei gwaith fel cynorthwyydd cartref. Dywedodd nad oedd ganddi unrhyw bryderon penodol am y farwolaeth er iddi feddwl ei bod yn sydyn iawn.
Marwolaeth Mrs Mary Tomlin
Bu Mrs Tomlin farw ychydig dros dair wythnos yn ddiweddarach, ar 7 Hydref 1986. Roedd Mrs Foley a Mrs Shawcross wedi ymweld â Mrs Tomlin ar ddiwrnod ei marwolaeth. Fe wnaethant gyrraedd ei fflat ychydig cyn cinio a chanfod ei bod yn anhwylus. Roedd yn eistedd i fyny yn y gwely. Pan holwyd nhw gan yr heddlu, yn ystod eu hymchwiliadau yn dilyn arestio Shipman, nid oedd Mrs Foley na Mrs Shawcross yn gallu cofio beth yn union oedd natur ei anhwylder. Dywedodd Mrs Tomlin wrthynt ei bod yn disgwyl ymweliad gan Shipman. Arhosodd Mrs Shawcross a Mrs Foley am ychydig a sgwrsio. Roedd Mrs Tomlin i weld yn eithaf siriol ac roedd yn edrych ymlaen at ymweliad Shipman. Ar ôl ychydig amser, gadawodd y cynorthwywyr cartref i barhau â’u gwaith. Yn fuan wedyn, gwelodd Mrs Foley Shipman yn mynd i mewn i fflat Mrs Tomlin. Rhyw ddeng munud yn ddiweddarach, aeth i’r fflat a daeth Shipman i gyfarfod â hi. Dywedodd wrthi, ‘Ewch i roi’r tegell ymlaen, ffoniwn ni’r teulu, mae ar fynd.’ Gofynnodd Mrs Foley i Shipman beth oedd yn ei feddwl, ac atebodd, ‘Mae ar fynd. Mi af i gael golwg arni.’ Aeth Shipman i mewn i’r ystafell wely wedyn ac aeth Mrs Foley i’r ystafell fyw. Yn fuan wedyn, daeth Shipman drwodd i’r ystafell fyw a dywedodd wrth Mrs Foley fod Mrs Tomlin yn farw. Dywedodd Shipman fod Mrs Tomlin wedi bod yn ddynes wael ac unig iawn a bob pob diwrnod wedi bod yn ‘fonws’. Ni ffoniodd am ambiwlans. Ni wnaeth unrhyw ymgais i’w hadfywio ychwaith.
Dywedodd Mrs Foley, ar ôl marwolaeth Mrs Tomlin, bod ganddi deimlad cryf fod ‘rhywbeth ddim yn iawn’ am ei marwolaeth hi a marwolaeth Mrs White. Roedd Mrs Shawcross yn rhannu’i barn. Credai Mrs Foley fod Shipman yn feddyg da, felly ni chredai mai anallu meddygol oedd yr esboniad. Croesodd ei meddwl fod Shipman yn ceisio rhoi ‘marwolaeth berffaith’ i’w gleifion. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn ymwybodol nad oedd Miss White na Mrs Tomlin yn dioddef o salwch terfynol.
Marwolaeth Mr George Vizor
Aeth tair blynedd heibio wedyn cyn marwolaeth Mr Vizor ar 18 Hydref 1989. Ymwelodd Mrs Shawcross ag ef yn ei gartref ar ddiwrnod ei farwolaeth. Credai nad oedd yn edrych yn dda a gofynnodd am ymweliad gan Shipman. Pan oedd Mrs Shawcross wedi gorffen ei gwaith i Mr Vizor, gadawodd ef ar ei ben ei hun fel arfer. Ni chredai ei fod mor anhwylus bod angen i rywun aros gydag ef. Tua hanner dydd, roedd Mrs Shawcross a Mrs Foley yn ymweld â chleient arall ger cartref Mr Vizor a dywedodd Mrs Shawcross wrth Mrs Foley fod Shipman i fod i ymweld â Mr Vizor. Fe wnaethant gytuno i alw heibio i fflat Mr Vizor yn ddiweddarach.
Ychydig amser yn ddiweddarach, gwelodd Mrs Shawcross Shipman yn mynd i mewn i’w gar, a oedd wedi’i barcio y tu allan i fflat Mr Vizor, a gyrru i ffwrdd. Rhyw 15 i 20 munud wedi hynny, aeth Mrs Shawcross a Mrs Foley i fflat Mr Vizor. Roedd y drws ar glo ond, trwy’r panel gwydr, gallai Mrs Shawcross weld rhan isaf corff Mr Vizor ar y llawr yn y drws rhwng yr ystafell fyw a’r cyntedd. Ar y pryd, meddyliodd ei bod yn rhaid ei fod wedi codi i hebrwng y meddyg at y drws, a’i fod wedi cwympo ar ei ffordd yn ôl i’r ystafell fyw. Galwodd Mrs Shawcross y warden ac aeth y tair dynes i mewn i’r fflat. Archwiliwyd corff Mr Vizor a daethant i’r casgliad ei fod wedi marw.
Yn ystod yr amser rhwng marwolaeth Mrs Tomlin a marwolaeth Mr Vizor, daeth Mrs Foley yn ymwybodol o farwolaethau cleifion eraill i Shipman. Byddai cynorthwywyr cartref eraill yn dweud bod un o’u cleientiaid wedi marw a dywedodd Mrs Foley y byddai’n gofyn ‘yn awtomatig’ a oedd Shipman wedi bod yno. Weithiau, byddai cynorthwyydd cartref yn dweud fod Shipman wedi rhoi chwistrelliad i’w chleient cyn y farwolaeth. Byddai Mrs Foley yn dyfalu gyda’i chydweithwyr ai Shipman oedd yn achosi’r marwolaethau.
Ar ôl marwolaeth Mr Vizor, ychwanegwyd at amheuon Mrs Foley eto. Siaradodd hi a Mrs Shawcross am eu pryderon. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n cofio iddynt gael unrhyw drafodaeth benodol ynghylch beth allent wneud am y pryderon hynny. Esboniodd Mrs Foley, os oedd gan gynorthwywyr cartref unrhyw bryderon am eu cleientiaid, roeddent i fod i hysbysu’u rheolwr llinell amdanynt. Fodd bynnag, ni theimlodd erioed y gallai ddefnyddio’r llwybr hwn i leisio’i phryderon am Shipman. Ni fyddai wedi disgwyl i rywun gredu’i gair hi yn erbyn gair meddyg.
Dywedodd Mrs Foley, pe bai’r un peth yn digwydd nawr, byddai’n lleisio’i phryderon. Mae hyn yn rhannol yn sgil ei phrofiad blaenorol ac yn rhannol yn sgil y ffaith ei bod yn fwy hyderus erbyn hyn. Byddai’n codi’i phryderon gyda’i rheolwr llinell. Pe bai sefydliad yn bodoli y gallai leisio’i phryderon iddo’n breifat, byddai’n defnyddio hwnnw. Soniodd am sefydliad presennol y mae staff yn gallu ei ffonio os ydynt yn credu y gall person oedrannus fod yn destun camdriniaeth. Mae’r sefydliad yn sicrhau bod rhywun ar gael a fydd yn gwrando ar bryderon ac yn ymchwilio iddynt, pa un a yw’r sawl sy’n ffonio yn gywir neu’n anghywir. Dywedodd bod gweithwyr erbyn hyn yn cael eu hyfforddi i ddod ag unrhyw bryderon sydd ganddynt ymlaen. Y tu allan i’r strwythur cyflogaeth, dywedodd Mrs Foley y byddai’n hoffi gweld corff annibynnol y gallai ei ffonio ac a fyddai’n ymchwilio i’w phryderon yn gyfrinachol. Pwysleisiodd y byddai corff felly’n gwbl annibynnol ac ymhell o’r ardal lle’r oedd y pryderon yn codi.

---  ---
Mrs Shirley Harrison yw nith Mrs Erla Copeland. Roedd hefyd yn gymydog i Mrs Mavis Pickup. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Copeland a Mrs Pickup. Rhoddodd Mrs Harrison dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad.
Marwolaeth Mrs Erla Copeland
Bu Mrs Copeland farw ar 11 Ionawr 1996. Mam Mrs Harrison, Mrs Dorothy Proctor, wnaeth ganfod Mrs Copeland yn farw, yn eistedd yn ei chadair arferol. Roedd yn hysbys fod Shipman wedi ymweld ychydig cyn ei marwolaeth. Daeth i’r tŷ ar ôl y farwolaeth, a dywedodd nad oedd wedi bod yn disgwyl i Mrs Copeland farw. Yna aeth ymlaen i ardystio’r farwolaeth fel un yn sgil
‘achosion naturiol’
Esboniodd Mrs Harrison, yn y misoedd yn arwain at farwolaeth Mrs Copeland, roedd Shipman wedi arwain y teulu i gredu bod salwch terfynol arni, er eu bod yn sylweddoli erbyn hyn nad oedd mewn gwirionedd. Yn dilyn y farwolaeth, roedd Mrs Harrison ac aelodau eraill ei theulu yn meddwl y gallai Shipman fod wedi helpu Mrs Copeland i farw o ystyried amgylchiadau canfod ei chorff. Fodd bynnag, credent fod Shipman wedi arbed Mrs Copeland rhag llawer o ddioddef, ac felly daethant i delerau â’i marwolaeth â chysylltiad posibl Shipman â hi. Dywedodd Mrs Harrison ei bod wedi siarad â ffrind am ei chred fod Shipman wedi bod yn gysylltiedig â’r farwolaeth, ond rhybuddiodd y ffrind hi i fod yn ofalus iawn ynghylch yr hyn yr oedd yn ei awgrymu oherwydd bod Shipman yn feddyg a oedd yn uchel ei barch.
Marwolaeth Mrs Mavis Pickup
Ar 22 Medi 1997, bu Mrs Pickup farw. Roedd cymydog wedi canfod y farwolaeth nifer o oriau ar ôl ymweliad gan Shipman. Dywedodd y cymydog wrth Mrs Harrison am y farwolaeth ac aeth i dy Mrs Pickup. Gwelodd Mrs Pickup yn gorwedd ar ei chefn ar lawr y gegin, yn farw. Yn dilyn y farwolaeth honno, aeth Mrs Harrison yn anesmwyth iawn. Sylweddolodd fod amgylchiadau marwolaeth Mrs Pickup yn debyg iawn i amgylchiadau marwolaeth ei modryb. Credai fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Pickup. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod ‘ei meddwl yn corddi’ oherwydd, er bod ganddi bryderon go iawn, teimlai hefyd ei bod yn darllen gormod i bopeth. Siaradodd ag aelodau ei theulu a barhaodd i gredu fod marwolaeth Mrs Copeland wedi bod yn ‘ladd tosturiol’. Nodwyd ganddynt nad oeddent mewn sefyllfa i wybod beth oedd cyflwr iechyd Mrs Pickup cyn ei marwolaeth. Ni wnaeth Mrs Harrison sôn wrth unrhyw un arall am ei phryderon. Wedi i Shipman gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o lofruddiaeth, dywedodd ei bod yn ‘llawn euogrwydd’ am beidio dod ymlaen â’i phryderon yn gynharach.
Nid oedd Mrs Harrison yn gwybod pwy oedd yn gyfrifol am reoli neu fonitro meddygon teulu. Yr unig bobl a feddyliodd amdanynt i siarad â nhw oedd ei ficer a’i meddyg. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn ofni bod yn anghywir ac ni aeth at y naill na’r llall. Dywedodd y byddai wedi bod yn amharod i fynd at ei meddyg, am na fyddai’n ‘ddelfrydol’ mynd at un meddyg i feirniadu meddyg arall. Teimlai bod angen rhywun y tu allan i’r proffesiwn.
Teimlai Mrs Harrison, pe bai gwasanaeth cynghori annibynnol tra adnabyddus wedi bod ar gael, y gallai fod wedi mynegi ei phryderon iddo, byddai wedi bod yn haws iddi ddod ymlaen. Ni fyddai, fodd bynnag, wedi teimlo y gallai hysbysu ynghylch Shipman yn ardal Tameside, a byddai wedi bod yn angenrheidiol i’r gwasanaeth fod y tu allan i’r ardal uniongyrchol o gwmpas, e.e. yn cwmpasu Manceinion gyfan. Credai y byddai’n bosibl y byddai wedi hysbysu rhywun ynghylch ei phryderon am farwolaeth Mrs Pickup pe bai’r cyhoedd yn cael eu hannog i fynd â’u pryderon at Wasanaeth y Crwner. Fodd bynnag, credai y byddai wedi cymryd gryn amser iddi wneud y penderfyniad i wneud hynny.
Fel Mr Shaw, roedd Mrs Harrison wedi pryderu, pe bai’n lleisio’i hamheuon a’i bod yn anghywir, byddai mewn helynt difrifol. Er mwyn iddi hi ddod ymlaen, byddai angen iddi fod yn hyderus, a bod ei phryderon yn rai gwirioneddol, na fyddai’n cael ei chosbi am godi’r pryderon, hyd yn oed os profwyd nad oedd sail iddynt. Fel Mr Shaw, nododd nodweddion angenrheidiol sefydliad yn cael ei sefydlu i dderbyn pryderon, neu i roi cyngor ynghylch lleisio pryderon, sef annibyniaeth, pellter o’r ardal uniongyrchol o gwmpas a phroffil uchel ymhlith y cyhoedd.

---  ---
Mae Mr David a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe yn drefnwyr angladdau sy’n gweithio ym musnes y teulu, Frank Massey a’i Fab, Trefnwyr Angladdau (Masseys). Mae tad Mrs Bambroffe, Mr Alan Massey, yn gweithio yn y busnes hefyd, er iddo drosglwyddo rheolaeth y busnes o ddydd i ddydd i’w ferch a’i fab yng nghyfraith oddeutu 1996.
Yn ystod eu gwaith, deliodd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe â marwolaethau llawer o gleifion Shipman. Dros amser, fe wnaethant ddatblygu ymwybyddiaeth gynyddol fod nodweddion rhyfedd ynghylch rhai o’r marwolaethau hynny. Dechreuodd Mr Bambroffe, a ymunodd â’r busnes ym 1996, sylweddoli’n fuan fod cleifion Shipman yn aml yn marw ar eu pennau’u hunain tra’n eistedd i fyny, wedi’u gwisgo yn eu dillad dydd a heb fod yn dangos unrhyw arwydd o fod yn sâl. Nid hwn oedd y patrwm arferol. Fel arfer, roedd marwolaeth yn digwydd yn y gwely gyda theulu a phetheuach salwch o gwmpas y claf. Trafododd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe y materion hyn a dechrau sylwi ar nodweddion rhyfedd eraill. Fe wnaethant sylweddoli, er enghraifft, fod Shipman yn aml i weld yn bresennol ar adeg neu thua adeg y farwolaeth. Mewn datganiad tyst, dywedodd Mrs Bambroffe wrth yr Ymchwiliad na wnaeth erioed lunio barn gadarn am y rheswm am amgylchiadau gwahanol marwolaethau cleifion Shipman. Roedd yn syml yn gwybod bod rhywbeth ‘nad oedd yn iawn’. Ar y llaw arall, roedd yn ymwybodol fod parch mawr i Shipman fel meddyg da. Ef oedd ei meddyg teulu hi eu hun, ac roedd ganddi ffydd a hyder ynddo. Ar ddiwedd 1997 neu ddechrau 1998, soniodd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe wrth rieni Mrs Bambroffe am eu pryderon. Nid oedd Mr Massey, a oedd wedi adnabod Shipman am flynyddoedd, yn rhannu’u pryder.
Roedd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe yn bryderus iawn ynghylch gwneud cyhuddiad yn erbyn Shipman. Roeddent yn ofni bod yn anghywir. Credent na fyddent yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif. Roeddent yn meddwl y gallai pobl feddwl eu bod yn wallgof. Roedd Mrs Bambroffe yn ymwybodol hefyd, pe byddent yn codi pryder ynghylch marwolaeth, y gallai archwiliadau post-mortem gael eu cynnal. Nid oedd yn dymuno achosi trallod diangen i deuluoedd, pe canfuwyd bod ei phryderon yn anghywir.
Ym mis Chwefror 1998, fodd bynnag, soniodd Mrs Bambroffe am ei phryderon wrth Dr Susan Booth, aelod o Feddygfa Brooke. Byddai aelodau Meddygfa Brook, gan gynnwys Dr Booth, yn aml yn llofnodi tystysgrifau amlosgi Ffurflen C ar gyfer Shipman. Mae dilyniant llawn y digwyddiadau wedi hynny’n cael eu nodi yn fy Ail Adroddiad. Digon yw dweud yma bod gweithred Mrs Bambroffe yn siarad â Dr Booth yn ffactor pwysig yn y penderfyniad dilynol gan Dr Reynolds i hysbysu Mr John Pollard, Crwner EM dros Ardal De Greater Manchester, am ei phryderon. Arweiniodd hynny yn ei dro at ymchwiliad cyntaf yr heddlu i Shipman, a fethodd ganfod ei weithgarwch troseddol.
Dywedodd Mr a Mrs Bambroffe y byddent wedi bod yn fwy hyderus wrth adrodd am eu pryderon pe bai sefydliad wedi bodoli y gallent fod wedi mynd ato’n gyfrinachol ac y byddent yn gwybod a fyddai wedi’u cymryd o ddifrif.

---  ---
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Nigel Reynolds, gŵr gweddw y diweddar Dr Reynolds, yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cam Un, a darparodd dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig bellach wedi hynny. Esboniodd mai ofn pennaf ei wraig wrth adrodd am ei phryderon oedd canlyniadau gwneud cyhuddiad di-sail. Yn benodol, roedd wedi trafod gydag ef y posibilrwydd o achos enllib, a fyddai wedi’u dinistrio’n ariannol. Teimlai y dylai help a chyngor fod ar gael i berson yn sefyllfa ei wraig. Roedd Mr Reynolds o’r farn hefyd y gallai fod angen am gorff canolog y gallai meddyg ei hysbysu am unrhyw bryderon am eu cydweithwyr. Gallai’r corff canolog hwnnw wedyn wneud dyfarniad ynghylch cyfreithlondeb yr ofnau hynny a phenderfynu a ddylid mynd â’r mater yn ei flaen.

---  ---
Nid oedd gan fwyafrif helaeth perthnasau a ffrindiau galarus dioddefwyr Shipman unrhyw amheuon ynghylch y marwolaethau ar y pryd. Cawsant eu synnu’n aml at ba mor sydyn yr oedd y farwolaeth wedi digwydd, ond, yn gyffredinol, fe wnaethant dderbyn esboniad Shipman yn ddi-gwestiwn. Roedd rhai, fodd bynnag, â phryderon. Anaml yr oedd yr amheuon hyn yn ymwneud â phosibilrwydd ymddygiad
, yn fwy arferol, y pryderon oedd y gallai Shipman fod wedi rhoi gofal is na’r safon - efallai drwy fethu gwneud ymgais at adfywio neu alw am ambiwlans neu drwy adael claf a oedd yn marw ar ei ben/phen ei hun. Weithiau, dim ond teimlad cyffredinol o anesmwythyd yn unig oedd y pryderon hyn bod rhywbeth ‘nad oedd yn iawn’ am farwolaeth. Ceisiodd nifer o unigolion gael cyfweliad gyda Shipman i drafod eu pryderon. Ond, nes bod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad am farwolaeth Mrs Kathleen Grundy, ni wnaeth yr un o’r perthnasau a ffrindiau galarus hysbysu’r awdurdodau ynghylch eu pryderon. Roedd rhai’n cael eu dychryn â’r syniad o amau gweithredoedd meddyg; cafodd eraill eu perswadio gan aelodau eu teuluoedd bod eu pryderon yn ddi-sail. Mae nifer wedi dweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oeddent yn gwybod at bwy y dylent fynd â’u pryderon.

---  ---
Fel y dywedais, nifer hynod o fach o bobl oedd ag unrhyw bryderon am Shipman ac amgylchiadau marwolaethau ei gleifion. Yn y Bennod hon, rwyf wedi disgrifio’r anawsterau a wynebwyd gan y rheiny a oedd â phryderon felly a’r amodau y credent a allai fod wedi’i gwneud yn haws iddynt hysbysu rhywun ynghylch y pryderon hynny. Ni ddylid beirniadu’r bobl hyn o gwbl am yr hyn sy’n ymddangos, ar yr wyneb, fel methiant i godi pryderon difrifol yn y lle priodol. Ni fethodd y bobl hyn weithredu oherwydd eu bod yn anghyfrifol; ni wnaethant weithredu oherwydd eu bod yn teimlo’n ‘ddi-rym’. Roedd diwylliant y dydd o’r fath natur eu bod yn pryderu na fyddai eu pryderon yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif, ond yn hytrach byddent yn cael eu diystyru fel rhai afresymol. Ofnai rhai ohonynt y gallent fod yn anghywir i goleddu amheuon am Shipman, a, phe byddent, byddai’r canlyniadau iddynt yn ddifrifol. Nid oedd gan rai ohonynt unrhyw un i droi atynt i gael cyngor annibynnol a chyfrinachol. Ym Mhennod 11, byddaf yn ystyried pa gamau y dylid eu cymryd i gynorthwyo pobl sydd â phryderon gwirioneddol am weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd i ddod â’r pryderon hynny ymlaen i’r awdurdodau priodol ymchwilio iddynt.

---  ---
Staff Meddygfa Market Street
Staff y Feddygfa yn Codi Pryderon
Y Ffordd Ymlaen

---  ---
Mae meddygfeydd teulu yn ganolbwynt y ddarpariaeth gofal meddygol sylfaenol. Gall y gofal hwnnw gael ei ddarparu gan feddygon teulu yn ogystal ag ystod o weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill gan gynnwys bydwragedd, ymwelwyr iechyd, cynghorwyr, nyrsys ardal a nyrsys meddygfa. Bydd y gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill yn cael eu cyflogi’n nodweddiadol gan ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol (PCT) neu ymddiriedolaeth gofal iechyd arall, neu yn achos nyrs meddygfa, gan y feddygfa ei hun. Hefyd, bydd rheolwyr meddygfeydd a staff gweinyddol/clercio, yn cael eu cyflogi’n gyffredinol gan y feddygfa, sydd â’r dasg o drefnu a rheoli’r feddygfa er mwyn iddi redeg yn esmwyth.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn archwilio’r trefniadau staffio ym meddygfa Shipman yn 21 Market Street yn gyntaf, ynghyd â’r graddau yr oedd ei staff, neu’r graddau y dylent fod, yn ymwybodol neu’n effro i’w weithgareddau troseddol. Byddaf yn mynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried y sianelau cyfathrebu sydd yn agored i staff at ddibenion adrodd am unrhyw bryderon a all fod ganddynt ynghylch aelodau’r feddygfa lle maent yn gweithio neu am weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill sy’n cael eu cyflogi yno.

---  ---
Pan ddaeth yn hysbys gyntaf fod Shipman yn destun ymchwiliad am ffugio a llofruddiaeth, arhosodd y staff a oedd yn cael eu cyflogi yn ei feddygfa - fel llawer o’i gleifion - yn ffyddlon iddo. Bryd hynny, credent fod Shipman yn destun camgymeriad ofnadwy. Pan ehangwyd ymchwiliad yr heddlu ac arestio Shipman, daeth y feddygfa yn ffocws sylw cyhoeddus. Penodwyd locwm, a pharhaodd y feddygfa a’i staff i weithredu. Fodd bynnag, cynyddodd dicter y cyhoedd, yn enwedig yn dilyn dyfarnu Shipman yn euog am lofruddiaeth ym mis Ionawr 2000. Ymwelai dieithriaid â’r feddygfa a difrïo’r staff. Torrwyd ffenestri’r feddygfa a chafodd gannoedd o alwadau ffôn sarhaus ar ôl i rif ffôn y feddygfa ymddangos mewn o leiaf un papur newydd cenedlaethol. Hyd yn oed pan oeddent i ffwrdd o’r gwaith, roedd aelodau’r staff yn tueddu cael eu hadnabod a’u gwneud yn destun diarddel, aflonyddu a difrïo. Roedd yn ymddangos bod rhagdybiaeth gyffredinol yn waelodol i’r holl ddigwyddiadau hyn ei bod yn rhaid bod y rheiny a oedd yn gweithio ym meddygfa Shipman yn gwybod fod Shipman yn lladd ei gleifion.
Os oedd staff y feddygfa yn wir wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r hyn yr oedd Shipman yn ei wneud, ac am ryw reswm wedi dewis aros yn dawel a galluogi i’w weithgareddau troseddol barhau, byddai hynny’n amlwg wedi bod yn fater difrifol iawn. Os oedd y staff, ar y llaw arall, yn gwbl anymwybodol o’r hyn a oedd yn mynd ymlaen, mae’n bwysig er eu mwyn nhw bod hyn yn cael ei ddatgan yn glir ac yn ddiamwys. Hyd yn oed os yw’r dystiolaeth yn dangos nad oedd y staff yn gwybod am weithgareddau troseddol Shipman, mae’r cwestiwn yn codi o hyd a ddylent, o gofio’r wybodaeth a oedd ar gael iddynt, fod wedi sylweddoli o leiaf fod rhywbeth o le ac wedi gweithredu i ddod ag ef i sylw’r awdurdodau priodol. Gan gadw’r materion hyn mewn cof, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio’r wybodaeth sydd ar gael i aelodau unigol y staff ar y pryd a’u cyflwr gwybodaeth dros y cyfnod perthnasol.
Yr Aelodau Staff
Pan symudodd i Feddygfa Market Street ym mis Awst 1992, aeth Shipman â thri aelod o staff o feddygfa Donneybrook gydag ef. Y rhain oedd Mrs Judith Cocker (derbynnydd), Mrs Alison Massey (derbynnydd) a Sister Gillian Morgan (nyrs y feddygfa). Recriwtiodd Mrs Carol Chapman, un o’i gleifion, fel derbynnydd ychwanegol. Ymunodd Mrs Margaret Walker (gweithiwr cyfrifiadur), a fu hefyd yn gweithio ym meddygfa Donneybrook am gyfnod byr, â Meddygfa Market Street ym mis Awst 1993 pan osodwyd y cyfrifiadur newydd. Arhosodd pob un o’r aelodau staff hynny mewn cyflogaeth ym Meddygfa Market Street hyd at yr adeg pan arestiwyd Shipman ym mis Medi 1998 a thu hwnt.
Roedd staff eraill yn cael eu cyflogi yn y feddygfa am ran o’r cyfnod dan sylw. Gweithiodd Mrs Lee Leech yno rhwng mis Medi 1993 a mis Mehefin 1994, yn cofnodi hanesion cleifion ar y cyfrifiadur newydd yn bennaf. Gweithiai fel derbynnydd rhan-amser hefyd am ryw chwe mis ym 1995 yn absenoldeb, Mrs Chapman yn gyntaf, ac yna Mrs Massey. Cafodd Mrs Jayne Kenyon ei chyflogi fel derbynnydd o ddechrau 1995 hyd at fis Awst 1996. Ar ôl i Mrs Kenyon adael, gweithiodd gwraig Shipman, Mrs Primrose Shipman, fel derbynnydd rhan-amser yn y feddygfa, yn cyflenwi ar adegau gwyliau a salwch staff ac ambell fore Sadwrn nes arestio Shipman. Roedd Ms Susan Elliot yn gweithio fel dirprwy i Sister Morgan tra’r oedd ar absenoldeb mamolaeth ym 1995.
Roedd nifer o weithwyr proffesiynol eraill yn gysylltiedig â’r feddygfa hefyd. Roedd Mrs Alison Worthington, ymwelydd iechyd, yn gweithio o’r feddygfa o 1995 ac roedd ganddi swyddfa i fyny’r grisiau. Treuliai gyfnodau byr yno bob dydd. Ychydig oedd ganddi i wneud â’r feddygfa, ac eithrio cynnal clinig brechiadau wythnosol i fabanod yno. Byddai Mr Colton Reid, cynghorydd, yn cynnal sesiynau yn y feddygfa am ryw ddeng awr yr wythnos hyd at ryw amser ym 1995. Roedd ei wraig, Mrs Madeleine Reid, bydwraig, yn cynnal clinig cyn-geni yn y feddygfa unwaith yr wythnos gydol cyfnod Shipman yno.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Mrs Chapman, Mrs Cocker, Mrs Leech, Mrs Kenyon, Mrs Massey a Sister Morgan yn ystod gwrandawiadau Cyfnod Dau, Cam Pedwar. Roedd Mrs Shipman wedi rhoi tystiolaeth yn ystod Cyfnod Un. Darparwyd datganiadau i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mrs Walker, Ms Elliot, Mrs Worthington a Mr a Mrs Reid.
Mae angen ystyried y dystiolaeth yn ymwneud ag aelodau neu grwpiau o aelodau amrywiol o staff ar wahân, gan fod natur a graddfa eu gwybodaeth briodol am farwolaethau cleifion yn gwahaniaethu yn ôl eu rolau unigol.
Staff y Dderbynfa
Rhyngddynt, roedd Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker yn darparu gwasanaeth amser llawn wrth ddesg y dderbynfa. Roedd ganddynt drefniant lle byddai’r ddwy ohonynt yn gweithio yn y bore (8a.m. hyd at 1p.m.) un wythnos, ac yn y prynhawn (1p.m. hyd at ryw 6p.m.) yr wythnos wedyn. Roedd trydydd derbynnydd ar ddyletswydd o ryw 10a.m. hyd at ryw 2p.m. Hyd at ddiwedd 1994, Mrs Massey oedd hon fel arfer. O ddechrau 1995 nes mis Awst 1996, gweithiai Mrs Kenyon y shifft hon. Yn y cyfamser, newidiodd dyletswyddau Mrs Massey rywfaint ac estynnwyd ei horiau. Gweithiai rywfaint o’i hamser mewn swyddfa i fyny’r grisiau wedyn, er iddi barhau i gynorthwyo wrth ddesg y dderbynfa fel yr oedd angen. Gweithiai’r derbynwyr ar fore Sadwrn hefyd ar system rota, er, tuag at ddiwedd cyfnod Shipman yn y feddygfa, Mrs Shipman oedd yn gweithio ar fore Sadwrn gan amlaf.
Roedd staff y dderbynfa yn gyfrifol am ateb y ffôn, trefnu apwyntiadau i gleifion gyda Shipman, Sister Morgan a Mrs Reid, trefnu i Shipman ymweld â chleifion yn eu cartrefi a chofnodi ceisiadau am ail ragnodion a rhagnodion brys. Byddent yn cysylltu ag asiantaethau eraill hefyd, fel ysbytai, y Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol a’r gwasanaeth ambiwlans. Byddent yn teipio llythyrau ac yn ffeilio eitemau fel llythyrau ymgynghorwyr a chanlyniadau profion yng nghofnodion meddygol cleifion. Wedi i’r cofnodion gael eu rhoi ar system gyfrifiadur ym 1993, roedd y derbynwyr yn gyfrifol am gofnodi gwybodaeth (a oedd wedi’i nodi’n flaenorol gan Shipman) o eitemau felly ar y cofnod cyfrifiadur cyn eu ffeilio. O 1997, rhoddwyd y teitl ‘rheolwr yr adeilad’ i Mrs Chapman a hi oedd yn gyfrifol am faterion fel trefnu unrhyw waith cynnal a chadw yr oedd Shipman yn penderfynu yr oedd yn angenrheidiol. Cyfrifoldeb arbennig Mrs Cocker oedd cadw cofnodion o ymweliadau a wnaed gan y gwasanaeth dirprwyo ac ymweliadau a wnaed gan Shipman y tu allan i oriau. Ym 1997, newidiodd ei theitl i ‘uwch dderbynnydd’.
Dywedodd aelodau’r staff wrth yr Ymchwiliad, bod y staff, yn ystod y diwrnod gwaith, yn cael eu cadw’n brysur iawn, yn delio â chleifion ac â dyletswyddau amrywiol eraill. Amser cinio oedd y prif gyfle i gysylltu’n gymdeithasol, pan fyddai aelodau’r staff yn tueddu casglu wrth y dderbynfa i fwyta’u prydau. Hyd yn oed bryd hynny, byddai cleifion yn dod i mewn weithiau, a gallai’r ffôn ganu hefyd. Byddai’r derbynnydd a oedd yn gweithio’r shifft prynhawn yn cyrraedd ychydig yn gynnar yn aml er mwyn bwyta’i chinio gydag aelodau eraill y staff. Byddai negeseuon yn cael eu trosglwyddo a byddent yn sôn wrth ei gilydd am unrhyw newyddion.
Pan oedd claf yn marw a bod Shipman yn ardystio’r achos marwolaeth, byddai’n cwblhau’r Dystysgrif Feddygol Achos Marwolaeth (MCCD) ac yn ei rhoi mewn amlen. Wedyn byddai yn ei rhoi i staff y dderbynfa a fyddai’n ei chadw mewn lle dynodedig yn y dderbynfa nes i rywun - aelod neu aelodau teulu’r claf fel arfer - yn dod i’w chasglu. Pan oedd aelodau’r claf ymadawedig yn dod i gasglu’r MCCD, byddai staff y dderbynfa yn cydymdeimlo â nhw. Os oedd y perthnasau wedi cynhyrfu, byddai’r derbynwyr yn ceisio trefnu iddynt weld Shipman. Ar ôl marwolaeth, byddai staff y dderbynfa yn tynnu cofnodion meddygol y claf allan ac yn cofnodi ar gofnod y cyfrifiadur y ffaith fod y farwolaeth wedi digwydd. Byddent yn rhoi’r cofnodion meddygol mewn blwch wedyn yn barod i’w ddosbarthu i Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA) (Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside (FHSA) yn flaenorol). Byddai cofnodion meddygol cleifion a oedd wedi gadael y feddygfa am resymau eraill yn y blwch hefyd. Pan oedd y blwch yn llawn, byddai Mrs Chapman yn mynd â’r blwch i swyddfa’r WPHA yn Hyde, a oedd ar ei ffordd adref. Amcangyfrifodd y byddai hyn yn digwydd bob ryw chwech i wyth wythnos.
Pan oedd claf yn marw yn y gymuned, efallai y byddai’r feddygfa yn dod i wybod am y farwolaeth yn y lle cyntaf gan berthynas y claf, gan staff y cartref preswyl lle bu’r claf yn byw, gan y gwasanaeth dirprwyo (os oedd y farwolaeth wedi digwydd allan o oriau) neu gan yr heddlu neu swyddfa crwner. Byddai staff y dderbynfa yn cael clywed y newyddion am farwolaeth fel arfer. Weithiau, byddai Shipman ei hun yn dweud wrthynt, pan ddychwelai o’i ymweliadau, fod claf wedi marw. Ar rai achlysuron, byddai’n ffonio o gartref claf i ddweud fod y claf wedi marw. Ar brydiau, y cyntaf yr oedd staff y dderbynfa yn dod i wybod am farwolaeth oedd pan oedd Shipman yn rhoi’r MCCD iddynt i’w gasglu gan berthnasau’r claf. Byddai newyddion am farwolaethau yn cael ei drosglwyddo o un derbynnydd i’r llall wrth iddynt orffen a chychwyn ar ddyletswydd. Derbyniodd Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker eu dwy mewn tystiolaeth y byddent wedi dod i wybod am fwyafrif helaeth (os nad y cyfan) o farwolaethau cleifion Shipman a oedd wedi digwydd yn y gymuned o fewn ychydig amser i’r farwolaeth. Mewn cyferbyniad, ni fyddent o reidrwydd wedi cael gwybod am farwolaeth a oedd wedi digwydd mewn ysbyty nes gryn amser wedi iddi ddigwydd. Os nad oedd y perthnasau’n rhoi gwybod i’r feddygfa am farwolaeth mewn ysbyty, yr awgrymiad cyntaf fyddai pan oedd hysbysiad ffurfiol yn cael ei dderbyn o’r ysbyty gryn amser yn ddiweddarach.
Byddai’r derbynwyr yn cael ceisiadau gan gleifion am ymweliad gan Shipman. Byddent yn cofnodi ceisiadau felly yn llyfr ymweliadau’r feddygfa, ac, yn ddiweddar, ar ffurflen cais am ymweliad hefyd. Pan oedd cais am ymweliad yn cael ei dderbyn, byddai’r derbynnydd a oedd yn cymryd y neges yn mynd i nôl cofnodion meddygol y claf hefyd ac yn eu rhoi mewn lle dynodedig yn barod i’w casglu gan Shipman. Pan ddechreuwyd defnyddio’r ffurflenni ceisiadau am ymweliadau, byddent yn cael eu lapio o amgylch y cofnodion. Pan fyddai’n dychwelyd o ymweliad, byddai Shipman fel arfer yn gwneud nodyn o’r ymweliad ar y cofnod cyfrifiadur, yna’n rhoi’r cofnodion meddygol yn ôl i staff y dderbynfa. Byddai’n eu hysbysu am unrhyw gleifion yr oedd yn bwriadu ymweld â nhw eto a chyfnod gwneud yr ymweliad arall hwnnw. Byddai aelod o staff yn cofnodi enw’r claf wedyn ynghyd â’r gair ‘ail-ymweld’ yn y llyfr ymweliadau ar gyfer y dyddiad priodol. Roedd y cofnodion meddygol ar gyfer y cleifion hynny yr oedd meddyg i ail-ymweld â nhw, ac ar gyfer unrhyw ymweliadau eraill wedi’u trefnu ymlaen llaw ar gyfer y diwrnod hwnnw, yn cael eu tynnu allan a’u rhoi’n barod i’w casglu peth cyntaf bob bore.
Byddai derbynnydd a oedd yn gweithio’r shifft bore felly yn ymwybodol o’r rhan fwyaf o’r ymweliadau a oedd Shipman i’w gwneud y diwrnod hwnnw. Efallai na fyddai’n gwybod am ymweliadau a drefnwyd gan y cydweithiwr a weithiai gyda hi am ran o’r shifft bore. Ni fyddai ar ddyletswydd yn gyffredinol ychwaith pan oedd Shipman yn dychwelyd i’r feddygfa ar ôl yr ymweliadau. Ni fyddai’r derbynnydd ar y shifft prynhawn o reidrwydd yn gwybod pa gleifion yr oedd Shipman i ymweld â nhw. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman y byddai hi fel arfer yn edrych i weld ble’r oedd yn mynd a pha bryd yr oedd yn debygol o ddychwelyd i’r feddygfa. Dywedodd Mrs Cocker y byddai’n gwneud hyn weithiau, ond nid bob tro.
Gadawodd Mrs Chapman yr ysgol yn 15 oed ac ni chafodd unrhyw hyfforddiant galwedigaethol ffurfiol o unrhyw fath. Cafodd amryw o swyddi, pob un ohonynt yn swyddi gweinyddol/clercio. Cyn dechrau gweithio ym Meddygfa Market Street ym 1992, nid oedd ganddi unrhyw brofiad blaenorol o weithio mewn lleoliad meddygol. Mae’n arwyddocaol bod gŵr Mrs Chapman wedi marw’n sydyn o drawiad ar y galon yn 34 oed. Nid oedd ganddo unrhyw hanes o broblemau ar y galon. Roedd profiad o’r farwolaeth honno wedi gwneud Mrs Chapman yn ymwybodol iawn y gall marwolaeth ddigwydd yn sydyn a dirybudd.
Nodwedd hynod ac echrydus o recriwtio Mrs Chapman i Feddygfa Market Street oedd, erbyn i Shipman ei gwahodd i weithio iddo, ei fod eisoes wedi lladd ei modryb, Mrs Mary Winterbottom (ym mis Medi 1984), a’i mam, Mrs Nellie Bardsley (ym mis Rhagfyr 1987). Honnodd Shipman iddo ganfod Mrs Winterbottom yn farw ac roedd wedi dweud wrth y teulu fod Mrs Bardsley wedi marw yn ei bresenoldeb tra’r oedd yn ffonio am ambiwlans. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fu ganddi unrhyw amheuon o gwbl am y marwolaethau hyn. Yn wir, be bai wedi coleddu unrhyw amheuon, mae’n annirnadwy y byddai wedi cytuno i weithio i Shipman.
Cafodd Mrs Chapman ac aelodau eraill o staff y feddygfa eu holi’n fanwl gan y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad ynghylch marwolaethau cleifion Shipman. Yn benodol, holwyd hwy ynghylch:
nifer y marwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd, yn enwedig marwolaethau yn y gymuned
y ffaith fod clystyrau o farwolaethau yn digwydd o dro i dro. Weithiau, byddai dwy farwolaeth yn digwydd ar un diwrnod; brydiau eraill, byddai nifer o farwolaethau yn digwydd o fewn cyfnod byr.
y ffaith fod pum marwolaeth wedi digwydd yn y feddygfa dros gyfnod o dair blynedd a hanner
y ffaith nad oedd yn anarferol i farwolaethau gael eu canfod yn fuan wedi i Shipman ymweld, neu yn ôl pob golwg gan Shipman ei hun pan oedd yn cyrraedd tŷ claf. Nid oedd yn anarferol ychwaith i Shipman fod yn bresennol pan oedd claf yn marw.
y ffaith fod llawer o’r marwolaethau wedi digwydd yn sydyn mewn cleifion a oedd i weld yn rhesymol iach a bywiog cyn hynny.
Roedd Mrs Chapman yn bendant nad oedd wedi meddwl fod unrhyw beth rhyfedd neu anarferol ynghylch unrhyw rai o’r nodweddion hyn. Gwyddai fod llawer o gleifion Shipman yn oedrannus ac yn sâl, ac, os oedd marwolaeth yn digwydd, cymerai fod y claf wedi bod yn fwy anhwylus nag yr oedd hi wedi tybio. Hyd yn oed pan glywai am farwolaeth person iau, iachach, parodd y profiad o farwolaeth ei gŵr iddi dderbyn hynny fel rhywbeth a oedd yn digwydd o dro i dro. Dywedodd ei bod yn derbyn digwyddiadau fel yr oeddent yn digwydd. Ni wnaeth ymgais i ddadansoddi amgylchiadau pob marwolaeth, ac ni wnaeth ganfod fod unrhyw batrymau yn dod i’r golwg ychwaith. Hyd at 1998, nid oedd yn ymwybodol fod nifer y marwolaethau yn y feddygfa yn anarferol mewn unrhyw ffordd. Ni chredai iddi weld cylchlythyr y feddygfa ar gyfer mis Mawrth 1997, a oedd yn cofnodi bod 63 o farwolaethau wedi digwydd dros y 12 mis blaenorol. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd na fyddai wedi ei synnu pe bai. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn ymwybodol y byddai Shipman weithiau’n ymweld â chleifion heb apwyntiad os nad oedd yn rhy brysur, i weld sut yr oeddent. Ni chredai y byddai’n gwneud hyn yn aml, ac nid oedd yn ystyried fod hynny’n anarferol mewn unrhyw ffordd.
Roedd Mrs Chapman ar ddyletswydd ar adeg tair o’r pum marwolaeth a ddigwyddodd yn y feddygfa, sef marwolaethau Miss Joan Harding (ar 4 Ionawr 1994), Mrs Dora Ashton (ar 26 Medi 1995) a Mrs Ivy Lomas (ar 29 Mai 1997). Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd y tair ohonynt. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman fod Miss Harding yn edrych yn wael ar ddiwrnod ei marwolaeth. Nid oedd yn amheus ynghylch ei marwolaeth sydyn. Yn achos yr ail farwolaeth, dywedodd Shipman wrthi nad oedd Mrs Ashton yn hwylus a’i fod eisiau iddi fynd i’r ysbyty, ond ei bod hi’n gwrthod gwneud hynny. Gofynnodd i Mrs Chapman ffonio mab Mrs Ashton a’i gael ef i geisio’i pherswadio. Gwnaeth Mrs Chapman hyn ac aeth i’r ystafell archwilio i ddweud wrth Mrs Ashton. Fe’i canfu yn farw. Yna aeth i ddweud y newyddion wrth Shipman a chael yr argraff, pan wnaeth hynny, ei fod eisoes yn gwybod. Teimlai’n ofidus iawn am y farwolaeth gan yr oedd Mrs Ashton yn ffrind i’w mam. Ni feddyliodd fwy am y ffaith fod Shipman i weld yn gwybod am y farwolaeth nes iddo ddod dan amheuaeth. Ar y trydydd achlysur, galwodd Shipman Mrs Chapman i’w ystafell ymgynghori a dweud wrthi fod Mrs Lomas wedi marw. Ceisiodd Mrs Chapman gysylltu â mab Mrs Lomas wedyn, ac, ar ôl methu gwneud hynny, ffoniodd yr heddlu. Ni wnaeth swyddog yr heddlu a ddaeth yno godi unrhyw bryderon ynghylch y farwolaeth. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman wrth yr Ymchwiliad na welodd unrhyw beth anarferol neu amheus yn y ffaith fod y marwolaethau hyn wedi digwydd yn y feddygfa. Cymerodd fod hynny’n rhywbeth a fyddai’n digwydd o dro i dro.
Cafodd Mrs Chapman ei holi ynghylch sylw yr oedd wedi’i ysgrifennu ar ddogfen fewnol yn y feddygfa ar ddiwedd Ionawr 1996. Roedd Mrs Massey wedi bod yn paratoi swydd-ddisgrifiad newydd i Mrs Chapman. Roedd wedi rhoi’r swydd-ddisgrifiad drafft i Mrs Chapman iddi hi gael rhoi’i sylwadau am y rhestr dyletswyddau y dylid eu cynnwys yn y ddogfen. Ysgrifennodd Mrs Chapman ar frig y ddogfen:
Roedd y sylw yn amlwg yn cyfeirio at farwolaeth Mrs Ashton y canfyddodd Mrs Chapman, fel y dywedais, yn yr ystafell archwilio dri mis yn flaenorol. Mewn datganiad ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mrs Chapman fod y sylw yn enghraifft o’r
‘synnwyr hiwmor du yn y feddygfa’
. Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, dywedodd mai ‘ein ffordd ni (
h.y. y staff
) o ddelio â phethau’ ydoedd. Dywedodd y gallai’r sylw ymddangos yn un ysgafn braidd, ond ‘eich bod yn gorfod delio â phethau fel marwolaethau mewn meddygfa’. Awgrymodd y gallai fod wedi bod yn teimlo’n arbennig o ‘isel’ pan ysgrifennodd y sylw. Ni feddyliodd, wrth ei ysgrifennu, ei bod yn meddwl fod unrhyw beth ‘rhyfedd’ (yn yr ystyr ‘anarferol’) am y farwolaeth. Rwy’n derbyn y dystiolaeth honno ac yn wir, ni chredaf, pe bai gan Mrs Chapman unrhyw amheuon go iawn am farwolaeth Mrs Ashton ar y pryd, ni fyddai wedi ysgrifennu’r sylw yn y ffordd a wnaeth, yn enwedig gan fod Mrs Ashton wedi bod yn ffrind i’w mam.
Roedd marwolaethau eraill a oedd ag arwyddocâd arbennig i Mrs Chapman. Bu Mrs Elsie Hannible, modryb Mrs Chapman, farw ym mis Gorffennaf 1996. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi’i lladd. Dywedodd Shipman wrth Mrs Chapman am y farwolaeth pan ddychwelodd i’r feddygfa y diwrnod hwnnw, er mai beth amser yn ddiweddarach (yn angladd Mrs Hannible fwy na thebyg) y daeth Mrs Chapman i wybod ei fod wedi bod yn bresennol ar adeg y farwolaeth. Ymhell o feddwl fod hynny’n rhyfedd, dywed ei bod yn dechrau meddwl mai hynny oedd y norm erbyn hyn. Bu Mrs Irene Chapman, mam-yng-nghyfraith Mrs Chapman, farw ar 7 Mawrth 1998. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi’i lladd. Dywedodd Shipman wrth Mrs Chapman ei fod wedi ymweld â’i mam-yng-nghyfraith a’i chael yn anhwylus. Pan ddychwelodd yn ddiweddarach y diwrnod hwnnw, fe’i canfu yn farw. Ni wnaeth marwolaeth Mrs Hannible na marwolaeth Mrs Irene Chapman godi amheuon Mrs Carol Chapman.
Roedd marwolaeth Mrs Mavis Pickup, ar 22 Medi 22 1997, yn destun sioc a gofid i Mrs Chapman. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Pickup. Roedd Mrs Chapman wedi siarad â Mrs Pickup ychydig oriau cyn ei marwolaeth, pan oedd Mrs Pickup yn teimlo’n ofidus, ond nid yn anhwylus yn ôl pob golwg. Pan ddywedodd Shipman wrthi am farwolaeth Mrs Pickup, mynegodd Mrs Chapman syndod a dywedodd, pan siaradodd â Mrs Pickup, ‘mai dim ond crïo oedd hi’. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn gofyn i Shipman am esboniad meddygol am yr hyn ddigwyddodd. Nid ystyriodd y posibilrwydd y gallai Shipman fod wedi bod yn gysylltiedig â’r farwolaeth. Cafodd Mrs Chapman sioc hefyd i glywed am farwolaeth Miss Maureen Ward (a oedd yn 57 oed yn unig) ar 18 Chwefror 1998. Cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog am lofruddiaeth Miss Ward. Roedd Mrs Chapman wedi gweld Miss Ward yn y feddygfa y diwrnod cyn ei marwolaeth, ac wedi cyfnewid jôc â hi. Pan ddywedodd Shipman wrth Mrs Chapman am y farwolaeth, teimlai’n ddig a throdd ei chefn arno. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn ddig â Shipman, nid oherwydd ei bod yn ei amau o fod yn gyfrifol am y farwolaeth, ond oherwydd mai ef ddaeth â’r newyddion drwg. Roedd yn flin fod Miss Ward wedi marw ar adeg pan oedd ganddi gymaint i fyw iddo, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 8. Cynyddodd dicter Mrs Chapman ymhellach pan roddodd yntau un fersiwn o amgylchiadau ei gysylltiad â’r amgylchiadau’n dilyn marwolaeth Miss Ward iddi hi, a fersiwn arall i aelodau eraill y staff. Pan dynnodd Mrs Chapman sylw at hyn, awgrymodd Shipman mai hi oedd yn anghywir. Credai hithau mai ei gamgymeriad ef ydoedd. Er gwaethaf ei dicter, fodd bynnag, priodolodd y gwahaniaeth i ddryswch neu gamddealltwriaeth, ac ni chodwyd ei hamheuon.
Gadawodd Mrs Cocker yr ysgol yn 16 neu 17 oed. Ni chafodd unrhyw hyfforddiant galwedigaethol ffurfiol o unrhyw fath. O ganlyniad, gweithiodd mewn swyddi amrywiol, rhai o natur glercio neu ysgrifenyddol yn bennaf. Tua mis Medi 1988, cafodd swydd ran-amser fel derbynnydd ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Yno, roedd yn un o chwech neu saith derbynnydd, yn gweithio i saith o feddygon. Cyflawnai ddyletswyddau cyffredinol y dderbynfa. Dywedodd Mrs Cocker, tra’i bod ym meddygfa Donneybrook, iddi ddod yn ymwybodol weithiau fod marwolaeth wedi digwydd. Fodd bynnag, ni chafodd unrhyw argraff o ba mor aml y digwyddai hyn, nac amgylchiadau’r marwolaethau. Cafodd yr argraff gyffredinol fod y rhan fwyaf o farwolaethau yn digwydd yn yr ysbyty, yn hytrach nag yn y cartref. Ni chofiai marwolaethau unrhyw un o gleifion Shipman yn benodol yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw.
Wedi iddi ddod i Meddygfa Market Street, dywed Mrs Cocker - fel Mrs Chapman - iddi dderbyn digwyddiadau fel yr oeddent yn digwydd. Ni wnaeth nifer a phatrwm y marwolaethau ei tharo fel rhywbeth anarferol nag amheus mewn unrhyw ffordd. Dros y blynyddoedd, gostyngodd cyfran y marwolaethau yn digwydd yn yr ysbyty. Fodd bynnag, dywed Mrs Cocker na feddyliodd erioed bod nifer anarferol o gleifion yn marw yn eu cartrefi. Roedd yn ymwybodol o’r hyn a ddywedwyd wrthi gan gleifion, a chan Shipman ei hun, fod llawer o bobl oedrannus ddim yn dymuno mynd i mewn i’r ysbyty; roedd yn well ganddynt gael gofal, a marw, yn eu cartrefi. Roedd yn ymwybodol fod Shipman yn hoffi cadw’i gleifion yn byw yn eu cartrefi cyn hired â phosibl, ac ni wnaeth felly synnu eu bod yn marw yn eu cartrefi.
Roedd Mrs Cocker yn cofio amgylchiadau dwy farwolaeth yn benodol. Y cyntaf oedd marwolaeth Mr John Stone ar 24 Ebrill 1996, a’r ail oedd Mrs Elsie Cheetham ar 25 Ebrill 1997. Canfûm fod Shipman yn gyfrifol am y ddwy farwolaeth. Ymwelodd Shipman â Mr Stone ac ymddengys ei bod yn rhaid ei fod wedi ffonio’r feddygfa ac wedi gofyn i Mrs Cocker ddweud wrth fab Mr Stone, Mr Ronald Stone, fod ei dad wedi marw. Honiad Shipman (nad yw Mrs Cocker yn ei gofio) oedd, pan gyrhaeddodd, fod Mr John Stone eisoes yn farw. Roedd Mrs Cocker yn cofio ffonio Mr Ronald Stone (yr oedd yn ei adnabod) a dweud wrtho am farwolaeth ei dad. Bron i flwyddyn union wedi hynny, cymerodd Mrs Cocker alwad gan Mrs Cheetham, a ddywedodd ei bod yn cael ‘tro rhyfedd’, a gofynnodd am ymweliad gan Shipman. Cysylltodd Mrs Cocker â Shipman gan ddefnyddio’i beiriant galw. Yn fuan wedyn, ffoniodd y feddygfa a dweud wrth Mrs Cocker fod Mrs Cheetham wedi marw. Hysbysodd Mrs Cocker y teulu am y farwolaeth. Ar yr un diwrnod, cymerodd Mrs Cocker alwad ffôn arall gan Shipman, yn dweud wrthi fod Mrs Jean Lilley wedi marw. Pan ofynnwyd iddi gan y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad a oedd y ffaith ei bod wedi derbyn dwy alwad ffôn felly ar un diwrnod wedi’i tharo fel cyd-ddigwyddiad rhyfedd, dywedodd Mrs Cocker na wnaeth ‘erioed feddwl am y peth’. Roedd yn syml wedi derbyn yr hyn a ddywedodd Shipman ar ei olwg am ei bod yn ymddiried ynddo.
Roedd Mrs Leech yn athrawes gymwys. Cafodd ei chyflogi ym Meddygfa Market Street o ganlyniad i’w chyfeillgarwch â Mrs Shipman. Nid oedd ganddi unrhyw brofiad blaenorol o weithio mewn lleoliad meddygol. Yn ystod cyfnod cyntaf ei chyflogaeth, gweithiai’n bennaf mewn ystafell fach ychydig bellter i ffwrdd o ddesg y dderbynfa. Os nad oedd yr ystafell honno ar gael, byddai’n defnyddio cyfrifiadur unrhyw le yn yr adeilad, weithiau mewn ystafell i fyny’r grisiau. Byddai’n helpu weithiau ar ddesg y dderbynfa, ond, heblaw am hynny, ychydig o gyswllt oedd ganddi â’r hyn a oedd yn mynd ymlaen yno. Yn ystod yr ail gyfnod y bu’n gweithio yn y feddygfa, cyflawnai Mrs Leech ddyletswyddau sylfaenol y dderbynfa. Ychydig a gofiai am y gweithdrefnau a oedd yn dilyn marwolaeth.
Yn ystod dau gyfnod ei chyflogaeth yn y feddygfa, digwyddodd dwy farwolaeth yn y feddygfa. Roedd Mrs Leech yn gweithio ar y bore y bu Miss Harding farw. (Am adroddiad byr o amgylchiadau marwolaeth Miss Harding, gweler paragraff 9.57). Gwyddai Mrs Leech fod Sister Morgan wedi helpu mewn ymgais i adfywio Miss Harding. Disgrifiodd y modd yr oedd Sister Morgan, yn benodol, i weld wedi’i synnu gan y farwolaeth, a awgrymodd i Mrs Leech ei bod yn rhaid ei fod yn ddigwyddiad anarferol. Yn ddiweddarach, dywedwyd wrthi am ail farwolaeth yn y feddygfa, marwolaeth Mrs Bertha Moss fwy na thebyg, y canfûm fod Shipman wedi’i lladd yn ogystal. Mae’n cofio teimlo syndod bod person arall wedi marw ar y safle, er nad oedd yn amheus o hynny o gwbl. Nid ystyriodd marwolaeth Miss Harding fel un amheus o gwbl, felly nid oedd ganddi reswm i amau marwolaeth Mrs Moss.
O’r marwolaethau eraill a ddigwyddodd yn ystod cyfnod ei chyflogaeth, nid oedd llawer o atgof gan Mrs Leech. Ni ddaeth i adnabod llawer o’r cleifion yn bersonol ac ychydig a wyddai am gyflwr eu hiechyd. Nid oedd yn cofio teimlo unrhyw syndod â nifer y marwolaethau. Nid yw’n cofio ychwaith cael gwybod am achlysuron lle’r oedd amser marwolaeth claf yn agos iawn at amser ymweliad gan Shipman. Cymerodd, o sylwi, fod y rhan fwyaf o gleifion Shipman yn oedrannus ac yn sâl. Credai y gallai llawer ohonynt wedi bod yn dioddef o gyflyrau yn gysylltiedig â chyflogaeth. Dywedodd nad oedd yr un o’r staff parhaol i weld yn pryderu ynghylch nifer neu amgylchiadau’r marwolaethau a chymerodd ei harwain ganddynt hwy.
Ar ôl gadael yr ysgol, gweithiai Mrs Kenyon fel cynorthwyydd mewn tair siop fferyllydd. Y Norwest Co-op Pharmacy oedd yr olaf o’r rhain, drws nesaf i Feddygfa Market Street. Tra’n gweithio yno, daeth swydd wag fel derbynnydd ar gael yn y feddygfa, a gwnaeth Mrs Kenyon gais llwyddiannus am y swydd. Cyflawnai ddyletswyddau tebyg i rai Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker. Yn ystod ei chyfnod yn y feddygfa, enillodd Ddiploma mewn Gwasanaethau Derbynfa Feddygol, a ddyfarnwyd gan y Gymdeithas Ysgrifenyddion Meddygol, Rheolwyr Meddygfeydd, Gweinyddwyr a Derbynwyr (AMSPAR).
Cytunodd Mrs Kenyon, yn ystod ei chyfnod yn y feddygfa, y byddai staff y dderbynfa wedi gwybod am y rhan fwyaf o’r marwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd, yn enwedig y rheiny a ddigwyddai yn y gymuned. Roedd yn cofio fod rhai achlysuron pan fyddai perthynas yn ffonio’r feddygfa i adrodd am farwolaeth, a byddai’n dweud fod Shipman wedi ymweld yn gynharach ar y diwrnod y digwyddodd y farwolaeth. Dywedodd y byddai fwy na thebyg wedi tybio fod y claf eisiau ymweliad am ei fod/bod yn sâl a bod y salwch wedi achosi’r farwolaeth. Fodd bynnag, ychydig a gofiai beth oedd yn ei meddwl ar y pryd. Nid oedd ganddi unrhyw syniad am nifer y cleifion a oedd yn marw ac nid oedd ganddi unrhyw beth i gymharu’r rhif hwnnw ag ef. Nid oedd yn cofio unrhyw drafodaeth ymhlith y staff am y ffaith fod nifer y marwolaethau yn uchel. Ni welai unrhyw batrwm yn y marwolaethau.
Roedd Mrs Kenyon ar ddyletswydd pan fu Mrs Moss farw yn y feddygfa ar 13 Mehefin 1995. Ychydig a gofiai am y digwyddiadau’n ymwneud â’r farwolaeth. Ni ofynnwyd iddi ffonio am ambiwlans, ac ni wnaeth gwestiynu hyn gan iddi gymryd fod Shipman yn gwybod beth oedd yn ei wneud. Credai y byddai wedi trafod y farwolaeth gydag aelodau eraill y staff wedi hynny. Fodd bynnag, ni fynegodd unrhyw un unrhyw bryderon, a chymerodd fod cleifion weithiau yn marw mewn meddygfeydd. Ni chofiai neb yn dweud wrthi mai hon oedd yr ail farwolaeth a oedd wedi digwydd yn y feddygfa.
Roedd Mrs Kenyon yn gweithio hefyd pan fu Mrs Ashton farw yn y feddygfa dri mis yn ddiweddarach. Ni welodd unrhyw beth rhyfedd yn y ffaith fod dwy farwolaeth wedi digwydd ar y safle o fewn cyfnod byr. Digwyddodd trydedd marwolaeth, marwolaeth Mrs Edith Brady, yn y feddygfa yn ystod cyfnod cyflogaeth Mrs Kenyon. Digwyddodd ychydig cyn ei phriodas pan oedd Mrs Kenyon yn cael ychydig o ddyddiau i ffwrdd i wneud paratoadau. Ni ddychwelodd i’r gwaith nes tair wythnos yn ddiweddarach, ac ni allai gofio neb yn dweud wrthi am farwolaeth Mrs Brady.
Pan ddaeth ei chyflogaeth ym Meddygfa Market Street i ben oherwydd diffyg cyllid, aeth Mrs Kenyon i weithio i ddwy feddygfa unigol. Mewn un feddygfa, byddai’n cofnodi data ar gyfrifiadur. Yn y llall, gweithiai fel derbynnydd. Wrth edrych yn ôl, mae’n gweld erbyn hyn bod llai o farwolaethau yn digwydd yn y meddygfeydd hynny nag ym meddygfa Market Street, a bod mwy o’r marwolaethau yn digwydd yn yr ysbyty. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth nifer y marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman, na’r ffaith fod gymaint ohonynt yn digwydd yn y cartref, ei tharo fel nodwedd anarferol ar y pryd.
Rheolwr y Feddygfa
Ar ôl gadael yr ysgol, aeth Mrs Massey i goleg ysgrifenyddol a gweithiodd mewn amrywiaeth o swyddi wedi hynny, rhai ysgrifenyddol a gweinyddol yn bennaf. Ym mis Mai 1991, dechreuodd weithio’n rhan-amser fel derbynnydd ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Cyn hynny, nid oedd ganddi unrhyw brofiad o weithio mewn sefydliad meddygol. Tra’r oedd yn Donneybrook, cyflawnai Mrs Massey ddyletswyddau cyffredinol yn y dderbynfa. Ychydig o gyswllt fu ganddi â Shipman.
Wedi symud i Feddygfa Market Street, parhaodd Mrs Massey i weithio fel derbynnydd, gan gyflawni dyletswyddau tebyg i’r rheiny a oedd gan Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker. Nid oedd ar ddyletswydd pan fyddai Shipman yn dychwelyd o’i ymweliadau, ac eithrio pan oedd yn cyflenwi dros un o aelodau eraill y staff yn ystod cyfnodau gwyliau. Penodwyd Mrs Massey yn rheolwraig y feddygfa yn gynnar ym 1994. I gychwyn, ni newidiodd ei dyletswyddau, ond yn raddol cymerai fwy o gyfrifoldeb am waith gweinyddol yn y feddygfa. Enillodd Ddiploma AMSPAR mewn Rheolaeth Meddygfa ym 1996. Fodd bynnag, Shipman oedd yn dal i wneud yr holl benderfyniadau pwysig. Yn wir, tuag at ddiwedd ei gyfnod yn y feddygfa, roedd Mrs Massey yn teimlo braidd yn anfodlon â’r lefel cyfrifoldeb a roddwyd iddi. Wrth iddi ddechrau cyfnewid barn â rheolwyr meddygfeydd eraill, sylweddolodd eu bod nhw’n chwarae rhan lawer fwy gweithgar wrth redeg eu meddygfeydd nag yr oedd hi’n cael hawl i wneud.
O dro i dro, daeth Mrs Massey yn gysylltiedig â gweithgareddau archwilio. Roedd un o’r archwiliadau a gynhaliodd, ym 1997, yn golygu edrych ar y rhesymau pam yr oedd cleifion wedi gadael y feddygfa. Y bwriad oedd canfod gan y rheiny a oedd wedi trosglwyddo i feddygfa arall o fewn yr un ardal pam yr oeddent wedi dewis gwneud hynny. Yn ystod yr archwiliad, roedd yn angenrheidiol i Mrs Massey ganfod faint o gleifion oedd wedi gadael y feddygfa oherwydd marwolaeth dros gyfnod o chwe mis. Cafwyd allbrint cyfrifiadur; ymddengys ei bod yn rhaid mai Mrs Massey wnaeth hyn. Roedd yr allbrint yn cynnwys 31 o enwau, 29 ohonynt yn ymwneud yn amlwg â chleifion a oedd wedi marw. Nid oedd yn gwbl glir o’r ddogfen a oedd y ddau glaf arall wedi marw. Dywedodd Mrs Massey na fyddai 29 o farwolaethau wedi ymddangos yn nifer uchel iawn iddi gan na fyddai ganddi unrhyw beth i gymharu ag ef.
Un o gyfrifoldebau eraill Mrs Massey oedd cynhyrchu cylchlythyrau’r feddygfa. Dywedodd mai syniad Shipman oedd cofnodi nifer y genedigaethau a marwolaethau yn y cylchlythyr. Ymddengys ei fod o’r farn y byddai diddordeb gan bobl yn hynny. Hi oedd yn gyfrifol am ymgorffori’r niferoedd i’r cylchlythyrau. Dywedodd, er ei bod yn sylweddoli bellach fod niferoedd y marwolaethau yn uchel, ni wnaethant ei tharo felly ar y pryd. Nid oedd wedi sylweddoli ychwaith fod y niferoedd i weld yn cynyddu.
Roedd gan Mrs Massey atgof clir o farwolaeth Miss Mary Andrew, ar 8 Ebrill 1993. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Miss Andrew. Roedd wedi ffonio’r feddygfa ac wedi dweud wrth Mrs Massey bod ganddi boen ar frig ei chefn. Ychydig wedyn, dychwelodd Shipman i’r feddygfa a dweud wrth Mrs Massey fod Miss Andrew wedi marw. Deallodd Mrs Massey mai trawiad ar y galon oedd achos y farwolaeth. Teimlai sioc a gofid a mynegodd ei syndod wrth Shipman. Wrth edrych yn ôl, mae’n cofio Shipman yn ‘cilwenu’ a chafodd yr argraff ei fod yn chwerthin ar ei sioc. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd mai ffocws ei phryder, ar y pryd, oedd nad oedd o bosibl wedi ymdrin â galwad ffôn Miss Andrew ar ddigon o fyrder. Nid oedd ganddi unrhyw amheuaeth nad oedd Shipman efallai wedi gweithredu’n briodol. Ar ôl y digwyddiad hwnnw, dywedodd Mrs Massey ei bod yn ofalus iawn pan oedd yn delio â chleifion a oedd yn cwyno eu bod yn dioddef poenau. Os oedd ganddi unrhyw amheuon, byddai’n ymgynghori â Shipman ynghylch beth i wneud.
Dywedodd Mrs Massey wrth yr Ymchwiliad, hyd yn oed wedi iddi roi’r gorau i dreulio’i holl amser gweithio fel derbynnydd, y byddai wedi parhau i wybod am y mwyafrif o farwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd mewn cartrefi cleifion. Fel Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker, ni sylweddolodd Mrs Massey ar unrhyw gysylltiad nodedig neu anarferol rhwng ymweliadau Shipman a marwolaethau cleifion. Ni chafodd ei synnu ychwaith gan nifer y marwolaethau yn digwydd yn y feddygfa; gwyddai am bedwar o’r pump ar y pryd. Roedd yn gweithio ar adeg un o’r marwolaethau hynny, sef marwolaeth Mrs Brady. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Brady. Ar gais Shipman, aeth Mrs Massey gydag ef i’r ystafell archwilio lle’r oedd Mrs Brady yn gorwedd yn farw. Gwasgodd Shipman frest Mrs Brady â’i ddwy law am gyfnod byr. Deallodd Mrs Massey ei fod yn ceisio’i hadfywio. Cafodd sioc o weld corff Mrs Brady, ond ni choleddodd unrhyw amheuon. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol ar y pryd fod Shipman wedi dweud wrth deulu Mrs Brady fod Mrs Massey wedi ei helpu i geisio’i hadfywio’n artiffisial. Daeth i wybod hyn yn ystod tystiolaeth a roddwyd yn y cwest i farwolaeth Mrs Brady, a gynhaliwyd yn 2001. Hyd yr amser hwnnw, roedd Mrs Massey wedi coleddu amheuon annifyr y gallai Shipman, er ei ddyfarnu’n euog, fod yn ddieuog. Fe wnaeth y dystiolaeth a glywodd yn y cwest ei hargyhoeddi ei fod yn euog.
Ni allai Mrs Massey gofio marwolaeth, ac eithrio marwolaeth Mrs Brady, lle’r oedd yn ymwybodol fod Shipman wedi bod yn bresennol. Ni wyddai yr arferai ymweld â chleifion yn ddirybudd, a chafodd ei synnu pan ddaeth yn ymwybodol o’r ffaith hon wedi hynny.
Y Gweithiwr Cyfrifiadur
Roedd Mrs Walker wedi gweithio ym meddygfa Donneybrook am gyfnod o 12 mis rhwng 1989 a 1990. Am y chwe mis cyntaf, cyflawnai ddyletswyddau clercio cyffredinol. Yn ddiweddarach, gweithiai ar gyfrifiadur. Cyn dechrau gweithio ym meddygfa Donneybrook, roedd Mrs Walker yn cael ei chyflogi gan gyngor lleol ac mewn nifer o swyddi rhan-amser â chyflogwyr eraill. Ar ôl gadael meddygfa Donneybrook, cafodd gyfnod i ffwrdd o’r gwaith yn sgil afiechyd, ac yna cafodd swyddi clercio, gyda FHSA Tameside yn gyntaf, ac yna mewn siop deithio.
Ar ôl ymuno â Meddygfa Market Street ym 1993, roedd dyletswyddau Mrs Walker yn cynnwys argraffu ail-ragnodion, teipio dogfennau fel adroddiadau meddygol, creu cofnodion cyfrifiadur ar gyfer cleifion newydd, cofnodi gwybodaeth o lythyrau ymgynghorwyr i gofnodion cyfrifiadur a chasglu gwybodaeth i’w defnyddio mewn archwiliadau. I gychwyn, gweithiai Mrs Walker o 10a.m. hyd at 1 neu 2p.m. Dros amser, estynnwyd ei horiau o 9a.m. hyd at 2p.m. Gweithiai mewn ystafell i fyny’r grisiau yn y feddygfa. Weithiau byddai’n helpu wrth y ddesg yn y dderbynfa pan oedd y feddygfa’n brin o staff.
Roedd cyfrifiadur y feddygfa wedi’i gysylltu â system gyfrifiadur y WPHA. Pan oedd claf yn marw neu’n trosglwyddo i feddygfa arall, byddai’r WHPA yn tynnu enw’r claf oddi ar restr y feddygfa. Pan gai ei hysbysu bod claf wedi’i dynnu oddi ar y rhestr, byddai Mrs Walker yn argraffu’r fersiwn ddiweddaraf o gofnod cyfrifiadur y claf ac yn ei roi gyda chofnodion meddygol eraill y claf yn barod i’w dosbarthu i’r WPHA. Amcangyfrifodd y byddai’n argraffu rhyw 85% o’r cofnodion cyfrifiadur terfynol. Mrs Massey a wnâi’r gweddill. Hefyd, roedd Mrs Walker a Mrs Massey yn rhannu’r dasg o ganfod, o wybodaeth yn cael ei chadw ar gyfrifiadur, niferoedd marwolaethau cleifion i’w cynnwys yng nghylchlythyrau’r feddygfa.
Yn rhinwedd ei chysylltiad â’r tasgau hyn, roedd Mrs Walker mewn safle i gael trosolwg o nifer y marwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd, a pha mor aml yn fras. Nododd, fodd bynnag, na fyddai’n ymwybodol yn aml o amgylchiadau marwolaeth, na’r ffaith fod Shipman wedi ymweld â chlaf ychydig cyn canfod y farwolaeth. O dro i dro, byddai Shipman yn dweud wrthi iddo ganfod claf yn farw mewn cadair neu yn y gwely, ond dywedodd Mrs Walker mai sylwadau ar eu pennau’u hunain oedd y rhain ac ni sylwodd ar unrhyw batrwm penodol i’r marwolaethau. At hynny, nid oedd mewn safle i gymharu’r nifer o farwolaethau yn digwydd ym Meddygfa Market Street â’r niferoedd mewn unrhyw feddygfa arall.
Ni wnaeth Mrs Walker fynd ati ychwaith i fonitro lefel y marwolaethau yn y feddygfa. Fe wnaeth, fodd bynnag, sylwi bod ‘uchafbwyntiau’ yn ystod ei chyflogaeth yn y feddygfa pan oedd nifer y marwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd i weld yn uwch nag ar adegau eraill. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at yr ‘uchafbwyntiau’ hyn yn fanylach isod.
Nyrs y Feddygfa
Cymhwysodd Sister Morgan fel nyrs gyffredinol gofrestredig ym 1983. Cyn gweithio gyda Shipman, daeth yn glaf iddo ym 1984. Gweithiai’n gyntaf ar ward derbyniadau meddygol difrifol i’r oedrannus, ac yna mewn ysbyty i’r henoed. Bu’n absennol o’i gwaith am ddwy flynedd wedyn yn sgil salwch, ac wedi hynny hyfforddodd fel nyrs iechyd alwedigaethol. Fodd bynnag, ni lwyddodd i gael swydd yn y maes hwnnw, ac, ym mis Medi 1988, fe’i penodwyd fel nyrs meddygfa ar gyfer meddygfa Donneybrook. I gychwyn, darparai wasanaethau nyrsio i bedwar o’r saith meddyg yn y feddygfa, gan gynnwys Shipman. Wedi hynny, ymunodd dwy nyrs arall â’r feddygfa a rhannwyd y gwaith rhwng y tair ohonynt.
Roedd gwaith Sister Morgan yn cynnwys sgrinio am afiechyd coronaidd y galon ac asthma, gosod rhwymynnau, cymryd pwysedd gwaed a samplau gwaed a chyflawni dyletswyddau nyrsio eraill. Roedd y feddygfa yn un brysur. Gwelai Sister Morgan Shipman yn gyson, yn achlysurol ac er mwyn trafod cleifion unigol yn ôl yr angen. Fe’i cafodd y meddyg mwyaf hawdd mynd ato o’r meddygon ym meddygfa Donneybrook.
Ar ôl symud i Feddygfa Market Street, cynhaliai Sister Morgan glinigau afiechydon cronig ar gyfer rheoli pwysedd gwaed uchel, afiechyd y galon, asthma a diabetes. Cynhaliai ‘glinig MOT’ yn ogystal, gan gynnal archwiliadau iechyd cyffredinol ar gleifion dros 30 oed. Treuliwyd gweddill ei hamser yn rhoi chwistrelliadau, cymryd samplau gwaed, cymryd profion ceg y groth, gosod rhwymynnau a chyflawni tasgau nyrsio eraill. Roedd ganddi ei hystafell ei hun, a oedd i lawr y coridor o ddesg y dderbynfa, gerllaw ystafell ymgynghori Shipman. Gweithiai wythnos 24 awr, yn y boreau yn bennaf, ond gydag un shifft hwyr, ar ddydd Gwener fel arfer.
Roedd gan Sister Morgan gyswllt aml â staff y dderbynfa. Byddai’n cysylltu â nhw ynghylch gwneud apwyntiadau a materion gweinyddol eraill. Gwelai Mrs Massey a Mrs Walker yn ddyddiol, ac weithiau byddai’n bwyta cinio gyda’r staff eraill yn ardal y dderbynfa. Droeon eraill, byddai’n bwyta brechdan yn ei hystafell. Gwelai Shipman bob dydd. Yn y boreau gan amlaf, byddai’n rhaid iddi ei weld mewn cysylltiad ag ymholiad ynghylch claf neu ryw fater arall. Byddai’n cael coffi gydag ef wedi i’r feddygfa gau unwaith neu ddwy yr wythnos.
Rhwng 1996 a 1998, astudiodd Sister Morgan am radd Meistr y Celfyddydau (MA) mewn Ymarfer Annibynnol (Nyrsio). Treuliai un diwrnod yr wythnos ym Mhrifysgol Leeds ac un bore’r wythnos ar seibiant astudio. Ar adegau eraill, gweithiai yn y feddygfa fel arfer. Pan gwblhaodd ei chwrs gradd, cafodd Sister Morgan ei hasesu am ei chymhwysedd clinigol. Cynhaliwyd yr asesiad gan Dr Alan Banks, Cynghorwr Meddygol y WPHA ar y pryd. Yn dilyn yr asesiad, cafodd ei phenodi’n ymarferydd nyrsio. Yn adroddiad ei asesiad, cofnododd Dr Banks y ffaith fod rhan sylweddol o waith Sister Morgan yn cynnwys cymryd hanes gan glaf, gwneud archwiliad a diagnosis dros dro, trefnu ymchwiliadau a thriniaethau a chyfeirio’r claf yn ôl yr angen. Dywedodd Sister Morgan wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’n llunio’i barn ei hun ynghylch diagnosis, ymchwiliadau, triniaethau a chyfeiriadau. Byddai naill ai’n derbyn ei hasesiad neu’n gweld y claf drosto’i hun a dod i’w gasgliad ei hun. Fel nyrs, nid oedd awdurdod gan Sister Morgan i lofnodi rhagnodyn, cyfarwyddo mathau penodol o ymchwiliadau nag i gyfeirio claf, ac eithrio at ddietegydd neu geiropodydd. Yn unol â hynny, roedd angen i Shipman fod yn gysylltiedig ag unrhyw benderfyniadau’n ymwneud â’r materion hyn.
Dywedodd Sister Morgan wrth yr Ymchwiliad na wnaeth feddwl erioed y gallai cofnodion meddygol Shipman fod yn ddiffygiol mewn unrhyw ffordd. Roedd hi’n ymddangos fod digon o wybodaeth yno iddi weld beth oedd wedi digwydd yn flaenorol. Ers i Shipman adael y feddygfa, mae wedi cael y cyfle i weld nodiadau meddygon eraill a’u cymharu â’i nodiadau ef. Mae o’r farn erbyn hyn fod nodiadau Shipman ‘fwy na thebyg yn fyr’. Pwysleisiodd eu bod yn ddigonol at ei dibenion hi. Nid oeddent, fodd bynnag, yn ddigonol i bawb a’u defnyddiai. Roedd Mrs Massey yn cofio fod rhai meddygon locwm a fu’n gweithio yn y feddygfa wedi cael anhawster wrth ganfod hanesion meddygol cleifion oherwydd bod nodiadau Shipman naill ai’n aneglur neu’n anghyflawn. Dywedodd Mrs Massey ei bod hi a staff eraill yn cymryd fod Shipman yn cario llawer o wybodaeth yn ei ben, gan nad oedd hi’n ymddangos ei fod yn ysgrifennu rhyw lawer.
Ychydig a gofiai Sister Morgan am farwolaethau a ddigwyddodd tra’r oedd yn gweithio ym meddygfa Donneybrook. Ni ddaeth i adnabod y cleifion unigol yno yn yr un modd ag y daeth i’w hadnabod ym Meddygfa Market Street. Ni allai gofio unrhyw system ffurfiol ar gyfer ei hysbysu am farwolaeth. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn teimlo y cafodd unrhyw argraff glir o’r nifer o bobl a oedd yn marw, amlder y marwolaethau nac achosion marwolaethau cleifion. Ni chafodd unrhyw argraff ychwaith o faint o bobl oedd yn marw yn yr ysbyty. Tra’r oedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook, digwyddodd rhywbeth anffodus pan anfonodd y feddygfa wahoddiad at glaf i weld un o’r nyrsys. Roedd y claf eisoes wedi marw ers cryn amser. Achoswyd gofid i’r perthnasau ac roeddent yn ddig. O bryd hynny ymlaen, penderfynodd Sister Morgan i wneud ei gorau na fyddai’r math hwn o gamgymeriad yn digwydd eto.
Wedi iddi gyrraedd Meddygfa Market Street, ceisiodd Sister Morgan sicrhau ei bod yn cael gwybod am farwolaeth unrhyw glaf dan ei gofal. Byddai’r derbynwyr yn rhoi gwybod iddi am farwolaethau cleifion ar y cofrestrau afiechydon cronig. Byddent yn gadael negeseuon yn ei dyddiadur. Pan oedd wedi bod i ffwrdd o’r feddygfa am gyfnod, byddai’n gofyn a oedd unrhyw un wedi marw yn ei habsenoldeb. Byddai hefyd yn gweld amlenni’n cynnwys MCCDau wrth ddesg y dderbynfa, a byddai’n gwybod wedyn bod marwolaeth wedi digwydd. Teimlai - ond ni wyddai’n sicr - y byddai’n clywed am y rhan fwyaf o’r marwolaethau yn y feddygfa trwy ryw fodd neu’i gilydd. Dywedodd nad oedd yn gwybod amgylchiadau marwolaeth yn aml, ond yn hytrach y ffaith fod claf wedi marw’n unig. Ar brydiau, byddai’n clywed mwy o fanylion gan aelodau eraill staff y feddygfa. Dywedodd Sister Morgan nad oedd yn synnu pan oedd y cleifion yr oedd yn eu monitro yn marw o achos yn gysylltiedig â’u hafiechyd cronig. Dywedodd, os oedd afiechyd cronig ar glaf, y tebygolrwydd oedd ei fod/bod wedi datblygu cyflwr a oedd wedi achosi’r farwolaeth. Roedd y cyfan i weld yn gredadwy iddi hi. Ni fyddai Sister Morgan wedi synnu o glywed fod claf wedi marw ar yr un diwrnod ag ymweliad gan Shipman os mai’r rheswm am ei ymweliad oedd bod y claf yn sâl. Ni wnaeth ychwaith ganfod unrhyw batrwm i’r marwolaethau, e.e. eu bod yn tueddu i fod ag achosion sydyn, yn hytrach nag yn arwain o gyflwr cronig fel canser terfynol. Roedd y cleifion a oedd yn marw yn tueddu i fod â ffactorau risg uchel o gyflyrau a oedd yn achosi marwolaeth sydyn. Nid oedd yn cofio cael gwybod erioed fod Shipman wedi canfod claf yn farw neu fod claf wedi marw yn ei bresenoldeb. Roedd yn ymwybodol o un digwyddiad yn unig, pan oedd Shipman wedi gadael claf am gyfnod byr ac wedi mynd yn ôl a’i chanfod yn farw. Marwolaeth Mrs Irene Turner oedd honno, sy’n cael ei disgrifio ym mharagraffau 9.63-9.65 isod.
Dywedodd Sister Morgan nad oedd yn gallu ffurfio argraff o’r nifer cyffredinol o farwolaethau, na dweud a oedd nifer y marwolaethau yn y feddygfa yn anarferol o uchel. Pan oedd yn cynllunio archwiliad (ym 1993 fwy na thebyg), dywedodd Shipman wrth Sister Morgan bod y feddygfa yn cael oddeutu 40 o enedigaethau a 40 o farwolaethau y flwyddyn. Mae cofnodion y WPHA yn dangos i Shipman gael 46 o farwolaethau cleifion ym 1993. Mae’r nifer o enedigaethau yn debygol o fod gryn dipyn yn is. Roedd nifer y marwolaethau ar gyfer 1995, 1996 a 1997 gryn dipyn yn uwch. Nid oedd Sister Morgan yn cofio gweld niferoedd y marwolaethau yn cael eu nodi yng nghylchlythyrau’r feddygfa a dywedodd, hyd yn oed pe bai, ni fyddent wedi golygu rhyw lawer iddi. Dywedodd, nad oes ganddi unrhyw syniad, hyd yn oed nawr, faint o farwolaethau i bob mil o gleifion y gellid disgwyl bob blwyddyn mewn meddygfa deulu.
Roedd Sister Morgan yn gysylltiedig â digwyddiadau marwolaeth Miss Harding, a fu farw ar 4 Ionawr 1994. Marwolaeth Miss Harding oedd y cyntaf o’r pum marwolaeth a ddigwyddodd ym Meddygfa Market Street. Daeth Shipman i mewn i swyddfa Sister Morgan a dweud bod ei hangen hi arno. Dywedodd wrthi fod claf wedi diffygio. Aeth gydag ef i’w ystafell archwilio. Roedd Miss Harding yn gorwedd yno, yn welw ac yn ddisymud. Cyfarwyddwyd Sister Morgan gan Shipman i dylino’r galon tra’i fod yntau’n ceisio’i hadfywio ceg-wrth-geg. Gwnaethant hynny am rai munudau cyn i Shipman roi arwydd y dylent roi’r gorau iddi. Credai Sister Morgan fod ei benderfyniad yn un cywir gan nad oedd unrhyw arwyddion o fywyd. Teimlodd Shipman guriad calon Miss Harding ond nid yw Sister Morgan yn cofio a wnaeth edrych ar gannwyll ei llygaid. Nid yw’n cofio’i weld yn defnyddio stethosgop. Roedd Sister Morgan yn cofio, pan holwyd hi gan yr Ymchwiliad, bod cyfarpar adfywio yn cynnwys bag â bag a masg a ffordd aer ar gyfer adfywio yn cael ei gadw yn y feddygfa, ynghyd â chyflenwad o adrenalin. Dywedodd ei bod ‘yn gweithredu’n awtomatig’ felly ni wnaeth ei tharo’n rhyfedd nad oedd Shipman yn defnyddio’r cyfarpar hwn. Wedi hynny, pan ofynnwyd iddi roi datganiad am y farwolaeth i’r heddlu, ym 1998, tybiodd pam na feddyliodd am fynd i nôl yr offer ei hun. Fel y bu hi, ni chafodd Shipman unrhyw drafferth dod o hyd i ffordd aer yn ôl pob golwg. Cyn yr amser hwn, roedd Sister Morgan wedi cyflawni rhyw bedair ymgais ar adfywio yn dilyn trawiadau ar y galon. Roedd wedi cael hyfforddiant mewn adfywio yn ystod ei chwrs iechyd galwedigaethol a chafodd gwrs diweddaru wedi iddi gyrraedd Meddygfa Market Street.
Nid oedd Sister Morgan wedi cael unrhyw amheuon ynghylch marwolaeth Miss Harding nac unrhyw amheuon fod yr ymgais i adfywio wedi bod yn un go iawn. Ffoniwyd am ambiwlans i Miss Harding, ond canslwyd hynny’n ddiweddarach. Atgof niwlog yn unig oedd gan Sister Morgan o hyn. Dywedodd na fyddai wedi synnu pe bai Shipman wedi rhoi’r gorau i’w ymdrechion i adfywio Miss Harding cyn i ambiwlans (a fyddai wedi cymryd rhwng 10 ac 20 munud i gyrraedd y feddygfa) gyrraedd, gan nad oeddent yn gwneud unrhyw gynnydd. Roedd Dr John Grenville, a roddodd dystiolaeth yn ystod Cyfnod Un yr Ymchwiliad, yn anghytuno. Dywedodd na fyddai wedi gwneud unrhyw synnwyr i fod wedi dechrau’r broses adfywio ac yna rhoi’r gorau iddi cyn i ambiwlans gyrraedd. Byddai, wrth gwrs, wedi gwneud synnwyr pe bai’r ymgais i adfywio, fel y canfûm, yn un ffug, â’r bwriad o argyhoeddi Sister Morgan ac eraill fod Shipman wedi gwneud ymgais wirioneddol i achub bywyd Miss Harding.
Mewn tystiolaeth, dywedodd Sister Morgan wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod hi a Shipman wedi trafod y farwolaeth nes ymlaen yr un bore. Gofynnodd iddo a oedd wedi tylino’r galon yn gywir. Nid oedd yn cofio unrhyw drafodaeth am fethu defnyddio’r cyfarpar adfywio. Mewn tystiolaeth, roedd yn ymddangos i gychwyn ei bod yn awgrymu nad oedd wedi meddwl am y methiant hwn o adeg y digwyddiad ei hun nes rhoi ei datganiad i’r heddlu ym 1998. Fodd bynnag, wedi hynny, awgrymodd y gallai fod wedi’i tharo’n ddiweddarach pan oedd ‘yn meddwl drosto, y noson honno o bosibl’. Credai, pe bai wedi meddwl am y methiant i ddefnyddio’r cyfarpar adfywio ac nad oedd wedi crybwyll hynny wrth Shipman, y rheswm am hynny fyddai ei bod yn brysur â phethau eraill a’i bod wedi anghofio gwneud hynny.
Ymddengys yn annhebygol i mi fod Sister Morgan erioed wedi ystyried y methiant i ddefnyddio’r cyfarpar adfywio nes iddi roi ei datganiad i’r heddlu, neu hyd yn oed yn hwyrach. Pe bai wedi rhoi unrhyw ystyriaeth i’r mater ar y pryd, ymddengys yn debygol iawn y byddai wedi’i drafod gyda Shipman ac y byddai wedi eisiau sicrhau na fyddai methiant felly’n digwydd eto.
Roedd Sister Morgan wedi deall fod Miss Harding i weld yn sâl pan gyrhaeddodd y feddygfa, a’i bod wedi marw o thrombosis coronaidd. Dywedodd y byddai wedi disgwyl i’r crwner gael ei hysbysu am farwolaeth felly ac nid oedd yn ymwybodol na chafodd ei hysbysu. Gwyddai fod marwolaeth wedi digwydd ar y safle ym meddygfa Donneybrook yn ystod ei chyfnod yno, felly ni wnaeth ystyried marwolaeth felly fel un arbennig o anarferol. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol fod y claf a fu farw ym meddygfa Donneybrook, Mrs Mary Hamer, wedi bod yn glaf i Shipman.
Roedd Sister Morgan yn y gwaith hefyd pan fu Mrs Ashton farw yn y feddygfa. Nid oedd gan Sister Morgan unrhyw ran yn y digwyddiadau’n gysylltiedig â’r farwolaeth, a chred iddi glywed amdani nes ymlaen yr un diwrnod gan Mrs Chapman. Ni feddyliodd pam na wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymgais i adfywio, a dywedodd nad oedd yn ymwybodol na ffoniwyd am ambiwlans. Roedd yn absennol o’r feddygfa ar seibiant mamolaeth neu wyliau ar yr adeg pan ddigwyddodd tair marwolaeth arall yno. Dywedodd Sister Morgan na wnaeth gyfrif o’r marwolaethau a ddigwyddodd ar safle’r feddygfa, ac ni wnaeth eu hystyried yn eu crynswth. Digwyddodd y marwolaethau dros gyfnod o dair blynedd a hanner. Ni roddodd unrhyw ystyriaeth i ba un a ddefnyddiwyd technegau adfywio digonol ar bob achlysur. Cymerodd y byddai Shipman wedi gwneud hynny a oedd yn briodol ar y pryd.
Mewn datganiad a wnaed i’r Ymchwiliad, soniodd Sister Morgan am dair marwolaeth yn benodol a barodd iddi synnu ar y cychwyn. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd ei bod wedi gallu priodi’r ffaith marwolaeth ym mhob achos â rhyw wybodaeth arall a wnaeth iddi edrych fel rhan o broses naturiol. Y cyntaf o’r marwolaethau oedd marwolaeth Mrs Turner ddydd Iau, 11 Gorffennaf 1996. Cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog o’i llofruddio. Fe wnaeth Mrs Turner, a oedd â diabetes, ffonio’r feddygfa ar fore ei marwolaeth. Siaradodd Sister Morgan â hi. Dywed i Mrs Turner ddweud wrthi ei bod wedi bod yn chwydu am nifer o ddiwrnodau a’i bod wedi stopio cymryd y feddyginiaeth a ragnodwyd iddi ar gyfer ei diabetes. Dywedodd teulu Mrs Turner wrth yr heddlu mai’r broblem oedd fod gan Mrs Turner annwyd a’i bod yn peswch fflem ac yn chwydu bob hyn a hyn. Dywedwyd ganddynt ei bod yn pryderu ei bod yn peswch ei meddyginiaeth yn ôl a ffoniodd y feddygfa i ofyn am gyngor. Roedd Sister Morgan yn bendant fod Mrs Turner wedi dweud wrthi ei bod wedi stopio cymryd ei meddyginiaeth rai diwrnodau ynghynt. Byddai hyn wedi bod yn groes i’r cyfarwyddiadau yr oedd Sister Morgan yn eu rhoi i bobl â diabetes, sef os oeddent yn anhwylus (yn enwedig os oeddent yn chwydu neu’n dioddef o ddolur rhydd) y dylent ffonio’r feddygfa ac na ddylent stopio’u meddyginiaeth nes iddynt gael cyngor. Dywed Sister Morgan ei bod wedi dweud wrth Mrs Turner y dylai fod wedi cysylltu â’r feddygfa yn gynharach. Aeth ymlaen i awgrymu y dylai Shipman ymweld â Mrs Turner.
Ymwelodd Shipman yn ddiweddarach yr un diwrnod. Roedd Sister Morgan yn cofio’i weld ar ôl yr ymweliad hwnnw. Dywedodd wrthi ei fod yn amau fod Mrs Turner yn dioddef o ‘haint ar y dŵr’ a’i fod wedi dod â sampl o wrin yn ôl i’r feddygfa i wneud prawf arno. Mae’n meddwl fod Shipman wedi dweud wrthi hefyd fod Mrs Turner yn wael ac y dylai fod wedi mynd i mewn i’r ysbyty. Cred Sister Morgan iddi ddod i wybod am farwolaeth Mrs Turner ar y dydd Llun canlynol, 15 Gorffennaf. Roedd yn ymwybodol fod Shipman wedi mynd yn ôl i dy Mrs Turner ar 11 Gorffennaf a’i chanfod yn farw. Nid yw’n cofio cael gwybod beth oedd achos y farwolaeth. Dywed iddi gael sioc o glywed am y farwolaeth. Roedd yn poeni ei bod wedi ‘colli rhywbeth’. Roedd yn tybied hefyd, pe bai Mrs Turner wedi dilyn ei chyfarwyddiadau, a fyddai’n dal yn fyw. Roedd yn pryderu nad oedd o bosibl wedi cyfleu’r cyfarwyddiadau’n ddigonol i Mrs Turner, ac wedi hynny gwnaeth yn sicr ei bod yn pwysleisio pwysigrwydd dilyn ei chyfarwyddiadau wrth siarad â phobl â diabetes.
Dywedodd Sister Morgan, er ei bod yn pryderu y gallai hi ei hun fod wedi colli rhywbeth, nid oedd ganddi bryderon felly am Shipman. Ni wnaeth erioed feddwl, wrth adael Mrs Turner, y gallai Shipman fod wedi methu sylweddoli pa mor ddifrifol oedd ei chyflwr. Dywedodd fod yr holl ofal a’i gwelodd yn ei ddarparu erioed wedi bod yn briodol, felly nid oedd unrhyw reswm iddi ei amau ar yr achlysur hwnnw.
Yr ail farwolaeth y soniodd Sister Morgan amdani oedd marwolaeth Miss Ward, a ddigwyddodd, fel y dywedais, ar 18 Chwefror 1998. Gwelodd Sister Morgan Miss Ward ar 5 Chwefror. Rhoddodd frechiadau iddi a oedd eu hangen arni ar gyfer mordaith dramor yr oedd ar fin mynd arni. Dywedwyd wrthi am farwolaeth Miss Ward yn ddiweddarach, o bosibl mewn cyfarfod staff a gynhaliwyd drannoeth y farwolaeth. Meddyliodd Miss Ward ei bod yn drueni nad oedd Miss Ward wedi gallu mynd ar ei gwyliau. Daeth i wybod fod Miss Ward wedi marw o ‘ganser â thyfiannau eilaidd’. Ni feddyliodd y byddai’n anarferol i rywun fod yn iach ac yn edrych ymlaen i fynd ar wyliau un diwrnod ac i fod yn farw o ganlyniad i ganser a thyfiannau eilaidd cyn pen pythefnos. Roedd aelodau eraill o’r staff, wrth gwrs, yn ymwybodol fod Miss Ward wedi bod i’r feddygfa ar y diwrnod yn union cyn ei marwolaeth, a’i bod i weld mewn iechyd da bryd hynny. Mae’n amlwg fod marwolaeth Miss Ward yn destun trafod ymhlith y staff, ac, er nad yw Sister Morgan yn cofio cael gwybod am ei hymweliad diweddar â’r feddygfa, mae’n debygol iddi gael gwybod. Fel y bu hi, byddai sydynrwydd ei marwolaeth wedi bod hyd yn oed yn fwy trawiadol ac anarferol.
Yn drydydd, cyfeiriodd Sister Morgan at farwolaeth Mrs Margaret Waldron ar 6 Mawrth 1998. Canfûm fod Shipman wedi lladd Mrs Waldron. Ar 4 Mawrth, aeth Mrs Waldron, a oedd yn 65 oed, ac yn ôl Sister Morgan, ‘yn ddynes hardd iawn’, i weld Sister Morgan mewn cysylltiad â lefel ei cholesterol. Roedd Sister Morgan yn cofio fod Mrs Waldron wedi sôn bod ganddi boen yn ei chefn hefyd. Fe wnaeth Sister Morgan felly baratoi rhagnodyn ar gyfer cyffur lleddfu poen ac aeth ag ef i Shipman ei lofnodi. Dywedwyd wrth Sister Morgan yn ddiweddarach fod Mrs Waldron wedi marw o drawiad ar y galon. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai poen yn y cefn fod yn arwydd annodweddiadol o drawiad ar y galon, a bod lefel colesterol uchel yn ffactor risg. Dywedodd iddi fynd ymlaen i ystyried ei gweithredoedd ei hun a pha un a fyddai wedi gallu newid y canlyniad mewn unrhyw fodd. Dywedodd na ddilynodd yr ystyriaeth honno ymhellach a gofyn iddi’i hun a allai Shipman ei hun, wrth beidio ymchwilio i gŵyn Mrs Waldron o symptomau yn ei chefn, wedi bod ar fai.
Mewn gwirionedd, pan welodd Sister Morgan, roedd Mrs Waldron wedi bod yn dioddef poen yng ngwaelod ei chefn a sciatica am dridiau. Mae hynny’n amlwg o lythyr a ysgrifennodd Mrs Waldron ar y pryd ac o sgwrs a gafodd â ffrind ychydig cyn ymweld â’r feddygfa. Nid yw Sister Morgan yn meddwl i unrhyw sôn wrthi hi am safle’r boen na phresenoldeb sciatica, er y byddai wedi gofyn cwestiynau penodol am y materion hyn. Fodd bynnag, roedd Mrs Waldron yn nyrs gofrestredig ac yn ddynes lafar iawn. Mae’n annirnadwy na fyddai wedi rhoi hanes manwl gywir mewn ymateb i gwestiynau Sister Morgan. Mae’n amlwg y byddai wedi dweud bod y boen yng ngwaelod ei chefn a/neu ei choes. Gan hynny, ni ellid fod wedi cysylltu symptomau Mrs Waldron yn synhwyrol â’r trawiad ar y galon a gafodd wedi hynny.
Y Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd Eraill
Nid oedd gan y gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill a oedd yn gysylltiedig â Meddygfa Market Street (gan gynnwys Ms Elliott a ddirprwyodd am gyfnod byr dros Sister Morgan ym 1995) unrhyw wybodaeth fanwl am ddigwyddiadau yn y feddygfa, na’r nifer o farwolaethau cleifion a oedd yn digwydd. Cyn belled ag yr oedd ganddynt hwy unrhyw drafodion â Shipman, cawsant argraff dda o’r hyn a welsant. Hefyd, fe wnaethant gyfeirio yn eu datganiadau tyst i’r ffaith eu bod yn ymwybodol o’r parch mawr a oedd yn cael ei ddangos i Shipman.
Er mwyn rhoi’r darlun cyflawn, dylwn sôn am Mrs Marion Gilchrist, y nyrs ardal a ddynodwyd i feddygfa Shipman o fis Ebrill 1995 nes ei arestio ym 1998. Nid oedd yn cael ei chyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan Shipman ond yn hytrach gan Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Gwasanaethau Cymunedol a Blaenoriaeth Tameside a Glossop. Fodd bynnag, gweithiai’n agos iawn â Shipman. Byddai’n cyfarfod ag ef o leiaf unwaith yr wythnos, ac mae’n bosibl y byddai’n cyfathrebu ag ef yn amlach. Ffurfiodd farn ffafriol iawn o Shipman. Canfu ei fod yn adnabod ei gleifion a’u teuluoedd estynedig a’u hamgylchiadau yn dda iawn. Ymwelai’n aml â chleifion a byddai’n mynd i lawer o drafferth, ac roedd i weld yn gofalu amdanynt yn wirioneddol. Cafodd argraff dda yn benodol o’r gofal a ddarparai i gleifion â salwch terfynol. Ni fyddai’n ymwybodol o farwolaethau llawer o gleifion oni bai mai’r cleifion yr oedd hi’n darparu gofal nyrsio iddynt oedd wedi marw. Fel arfer, byddent yn eithaf gwael. Ni chafodd ei synnu erioed gan farwolaeth unrhyw un o gleifion Shipman; ni wnaeth erioed amau y gallai fod wedi peri niwed i glaf ychwaith. Dywedodd pe bai unrhyw amheuon ganddi, byddai wedi’u codi gydag arweinwyr ei thîm. Dylwn sôn yn fyr fod Mrs Gilchrist wedi awgrymu y gallai ystyriaethau ariannol weithredu i annog peidio codi pryderon. Gwnaeth yr awgrym hwn yng nghyd-destun bod yn ddeiliaid cronfa, gan ddweud iddi hi a’i chydweithwyr gael eu rhybuddio pe bai consortiwm o feddygon teulu’n anhapus â’r gwasanaeth nyrsio ardal yr oedd hi a’i chydweithwyr yn eu darparu, byddai hawl ganddo i chwilio am y gwasanaethau hynny gan ddarparwr lleol arall. Gallaf weld y modd y gallai hyn weithredu ar feddwl nyrs ardal a oedd rhwng dau feddwl ynghylch codi pryder yr oedd ganddi/ganddo am feddyg teulu. Gallai weithredu’n llawer cryfach, wrth gwrs, os oedd y nyrs yn cael ei chyflogi/gyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan y meddyg teulu.
Ymwybyddiaeth Staff y Feddygfa o Nifer y Marwolaethau
Mewn datganiad a wnaed i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mrs Walker iddi feddwl ei bod wedi sylwi ar yr ‘uchafbwynt’ cyntaf yn lefel y marwolaethau efallai flwyddyn neu ddwy wedi iddi ddechrau gweithio yn y feddygfa. Byddai hynny wedi bod ym 1994 neu 1995. Mae cofnodion sy’n cael eu cadw gan y WPHA yn dangos fod gan Shipman 58 o farwolaethau cleifion ym 1995 - i fyny o 37 o farwolaethau y flwyddyn flaenorol. Canfûm iddo ladd o leiaf 30 o gleifion ym 1995. Ymddengys yn debygol, felly, y gallai Mrs Walker fod wedi nodi’r ‘uchafbwynt’ cyntaf rhywbryd yn ystod 1995. Mae cofnodion y WPHA yn dangos fod gan Shipman 48 o farwolaethau cleifion ym 1996 a 57 (59 o bosibl) ym 1997. Canfûm iddo ladd o leiaf 37 o gleifion ym 1997. Gall fod yn wir fod yr ail ‘uchafbwynt’ y cyfeiriodd Mrs Walker ato wedi digwydd rhywbryd yn ystod 1997.
Disgrifiodd Mrs Walker un neu ddau o ddigwyddiadau - fwy na thebyg ar adegau’r ‘uchafbwyntiau’ y soniodd amdanynt - pan oedd yn cofio meddwl tybed pam oedd gymaint o farwolaethau yn digwydd. Dywedodd ei bod wedi meddwl tybed a allai Shipman fod yn ‘colli rhywbeth yn ei ddiagnosis’. Dywedodd fod ei gŵr yn cofio hi’n gofyn y cwestiwn hwn iddo ar un achlysur. Roedd un digwyddiad a gofiai wedi digwydd mewn dathliad o’i phen-blwydd yn y feddygfa ar 15 Gorffennaf 1997. Daeth Shipman yn ôl, wedi ymweld â chlaf a oedd wedi marw. Mrs Muriel Grimshaw fyddai hon, a ganfuwyd yn farw ar 15 Gorffennaf, wedi marw’r diwrnod blaenorol. Cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog o’i llofruddio. Roedd Mrs Walker yn cofio teimlad o embaras pan gyhoeddwyd y newyddion am y farwolaeth. Ni all gofio nawr ai embaras ar ran Shipman ydoedd neu ar ei rhan hi. Nid oedd unrhyw un arall a oedd yn bresennol yn cofio’r digwyddiad hwn.
Roedd Mrs Walker yn cofio dweud wrth ei gŵr unwaith fod claf arall wedi marw’r diwrnod hwnnw. Atebodd, ‘Rwyt ti yn gweithio mewn meddygfa’, gan awgrymu bod marwolaethau i’w disgwyl o gofio natur ei gwaith. Derbyniodd yr esboniad hwn ac anghofiodd ei phryder am y tro. Bob tro y byddai Mrs Walker yn meddwl am y posibilrwydd y gallai’r marwolaethau fod yn sgil rhyw ddiffyg ar ran Shipman, byddai’n diystyru’r syniad. Roedd parch mawr iddo ymhlith ei gleifion, roedd yr ymgynghorwyr y byddai’n cyfeirio cleifion atynt i weld yn cadarnhau’r diagnosisau yr oedd wedi’u gwneud ac roedd eraill yn canmol ei wybodaeth a’i alluoedd.
Yn ei datganiad, cyfeiriodd Mrs Walker at sylwadau ysgafn ymhlith aelodau staff y feddygfa am y cysylltiad ymddangosiadol rhwng y clustdlysau mawr yr oedd Mrs Chapman yn hoffi’u gwisgo (ac nad oedd Shipman yn eu hoffi) a marwolaeth yn digwydd. Yn ôl Mrs Chapman, Shipman wnaeth y cysylltiad y gyntaf a chyfeiriwyd atynt wedi hynny pa bryd bynnag y byddai marwolaeth yn digwydd. Roedd Mrs Heather De-Rome, merch Mrs Eileen Robinson ac yn un o gleifion Shipman ei hun, yn cofio achlysur pan ddaeth Mrs Chapman i mewn yn ystod ymgynghoriad â Shipman i ddweud wrtho fod claf wedi marw. Cyfeiriodd Shipman at glustdlysau Mrs Chapman a’u cysylltu â’r farwolaeth; roedd hyn yn amlwg yn jôc barhaus rhwng y ddau. Yn y diwedd, dywedodd Mrs Chapman bod y sylwadau’n dechrau ‘ei phoeni’. Wedi i Mrs Elizabeth Battersby farw, ym mis Rhagfyr 1997, ni wnaeth Mrs Chapman wisgo clustdlysau am wythnos.
Pwysleisiodd Mrs Walker nad oedd y ffaith fod y sylwadau wedi’u gwneud yn dangos bod gan y staff unrhyw bryderon gwirioneddol am y marwolaethau. Rwy’n derbyn hyn, ac, yn wir, mae’r ffaith i sylwadau felly gael eu gwneud - ac i Shipman - yn dangos, yn fy marn i, absenoldeb unrhyw bryderon go iawn. Yn hytrach, roedd y sylwadau, ar ran y staff o leiaf, yn enghraifft o’r math o hiwmor du yr oedd y rheiny sy’n gorfod delio â ffaith marwolaeth yn gyson yn troi ato. I Shipman, wrth gwrs, roedd yn fater gwahanol.
Disgrifiodd Mrs Walker achlysur hefyd, pan wnaeth jôc gyda Shipman, wedi iddi darllen llyfr o’r enw
, y byddai’n enw da iddo ef. Mae’n debyg iddo gymryd yr awgrym yn iawn. Mae aelodau eraill o staff wedi awgrymu hefyd y cyfeiriwyd at Shipman weithiau o bosibl fel ‘Dr Death’ a ‘The Grim Reaper’. Roedd Mrs Leech yn cofio Mrs Chapman yn defnyddio’r term olaf pan ymwelodd â’r feddygfa rywbryd wedi iddi adael. Gallai hyn fod unrhyw bryd hyd at arestio Shipman. Dywedodd fod llawer o farwolaethau wedi bod yn y feddygfa ac mae’n cofio Mrs Chapman yn gwneud sylw fel jôc. Nid yw Mrs Chapman yn cofio defnyddio’r term, ac nid oes unrhyw un arall yn cofio’r digwyddiad hwn. Nid yw’r dystiolaeth am ddefnyddio enwau felly gan staff y feddygfa yn gwbl glir, ond, os cawsant eu defnyddio, rwy’n hyderus na’u defnyddiwyd o ddifrif i ymhlygu fod Shipman yn gyfrifol yn droseddol am farwolaethau ei gleifion.
Yn rhan gyntaf 1998, dechreuodd pethau newid. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman bod y staff, erbyn 1998, wedi dechrau sylwi ar nifer y marwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd, a bod ‘aeliau’n cael eu codi’ pan oedd rhywun yn marw. Mae’n amlwg bod trafod yn mynd ymlaen ymhlith rhai aelodau’r staff o leiaf am nifer y marwolaethau. Dywedodd Mrs Chapman ei bod yn meddwl y gallai Shipman fod ychydig yn flinedig. Ystyriodd y posibilrwydd y gallai hyn fod yn achosi iddo ‘golli rhywbeth’ yn ei waith diagnosio. Dywed na wnaeth ddweud hynny wrth y lleill. Pa un a wnaeth ai peidio, mae’n glir fod Mrs Walker a Mrs Massey eu dwy wedi cael yr un syniad. Gallai’r ffaith ei bod yn hysbys fod Shipman yn chwilio am bartner yn y feddygfa yn gynnar ym 1998 ategu’r gred fod Shipman yn teimlo’n flinedig. Gellid fod wedi meddwl felly ei fod yntau’n teimlo bod angen cymorth arno i reoli’i faich gwaith.
Soniodd Mrs Chapman, Mrs Massey a Mrs Walker am achlysur, fwy na thebyg ym mis Chwefror 1998, pan godwyd pwnc nifer y marwolaethau ym mhresenoldeb Mrs Shipman. Roedd Mrs Walker a Mrs Massey yn bresennol ar y pryd. Dywedodd Mrs Massey fod Mrs Chapman yn bresennol hefyd, er y cred Mrs Chapman nad oedd. Roedd yn cofio, fodd bynnag, iddi gael gwybod am y sgwrs yn ddiweddarach. Dywedodd Mrs Massey bod y staff yn ddryslyd a’u bod yn amau pam yr oedd gymaint o gleifion yn marw. Cododd Mrs Shipman ei hysgwyddau a dweud fod Shipman yn cael (neu wedi cael) yr hyn a alwai’n ‘rediad o lwc wael’. Mae taflenni apwyntiadau’r feddygfa yn dangos fod Mrs Shipman wedi cyflenwi dros Mrs Cocker ar foreau 19, 20 a 23 Chwefror 1998. Yn ystod y deng niwrnod cyn 19 Chwefror, bu pum marwolaeth. Bu Miss Ward farw ar 18 Chwefror. Ymddengys yn debygol fod y sgwrs y cyfeiriwyd ati wedi digwydd tua’r adeg hon. Roedd Mrs Chapman yn gweithio yn y prynhawn yr wythnos honno. Byddai hynny’n esbonio pam nad yw’n cofio bod yn bresennol. Byddai’r ffaith fod Mrs Cocker yn absennol yn ystod y cyfnod hwn yn esbonio hefyd pan nad oedd yn cofio dim am y drafodaeth.
Dywedodd Sister Morgan wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai aelodau’r feddygfa, ar adegau amrywiol pan fu rhediad o farwolaethau, yn gwneud sylwadau am hyn, fel arfer yn ei gysylltu â’r ffaith mai’r gaeaf oedd hi neu bod y ffliw wedi torri allan. Fodd bynnag, ni chofiai unrhyw drafodaethau eraill am nifer y marwolaethau yn digwydd yn y feddygfa, hyd yn oed ym 1998. Nid oedd yn bresennol ar adeg y sgwrs gyda Mrs Shipman. Dywedodd na feddyliodd erioed y gallai Shipman fod yn methu’i gleifion mewn unrhyw ffordd, o ganlyniad i flinder neu fel arall. Mynegodd Sister Morgan amheuaeth fod unrhyw drafodaethau felly wedi digwydd o gwbl cyn i ymchwiliad yr heddlu ddechrau ym mis Awst 1998. Pe bai trafodaethau felly wedi bod, teimlai y byddai Mrs Walker a Mrs Cocker (a, byddai wedi gobeithio, Mrs Massey a Mrs Chapman) wedi dweud wrthi amdanynt. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg o dystiolaeth Mrs Chapman nad felly y byddai wedi bod. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai’r staff eraill yn cynnwys Sister Morgan mewn unrhyw drafodaethau felly oherwydd ei theyrngarwch i Shipman (‘ni fyddai fyth yn fodlon clywed unrhyw beth yn cael ei ddweud yn ei erbyn’) ac oherwydd ei bod yn ‘sensitif iawn, iawn’. Nid yw’r ffaith nad oedd Sister Morgan yn ymwybodol fod y marwolaethau yn destun trafod, felly, yn golygu na chynhaliwyd trafodaethau felly.
Yn wir, mae’n glir fod Mrs Walker, Mrs Chapman a Mrs Massey yn coleddu rhai pryderon ynghylch nifer y marwolaethau erbyn mis Chwefror 1998. Rwy’n derbyn, fodd bynnag, nad oedd fformiwla i’w pryderon ac nad oeddent fwy nag ystyriaeth o’r posibilrwydd y gallai Shipman, drwy flinder neu ryw achos arall, fod wedi methu diagnosio cyflyrau marwol potensial. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw amheuaeth fod rhywbeth difrifol o le. Pe bai, ni fyddai Mrs Walker a Mrs Massey wedi crybwyll y pwnc wrth Mrs Shipman. Fel y bu hi, parhaodd y lefel uchel o farwolaethau am lai na phum wythnos wedi’r amser y mae eu sgwrs â Mrs Shipman yn debygol o fod wedi digwydd. Yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, bu farw deg claf arall. Canfûm fod wyth ohonynt wedi’u lladd gan Shipman. Ar ôl 24 Mawrth, disgynnodd y gyfradd marwolaethau. Canfûm mai’r rheswm am hynny oedd fod Shipman wedi dod yn ymwybodol o ymchwiliad cyntaf yr heddlu a ddaeth yn sgil adroddiad Dr Linda Reynolds i’r Crwner. Yn y tri mis a ddilynodd, dim ond tair marwolaeth a ddigwyddodd mewn cartrefi cleifion. O ran y staff, mae’n rhaid iddynt fod wedi cael eu calonogi’n fawr gan yr arafu yn y gyfradd marwolaethau.
Sut yr Oedd Shipman yn Cael ei Weld
Cyn Arestio Shipman
Roedd Mrs Chapman a Mrs Cocker wedi bod yn gleifion i Shipman cyn iddynt ddechrau gweithio iddo. Roedd ganddynt barch mawr at ei sgiliau a chredent ei fod yn feddyg da a gofalgar. Roedd Mrs Cocker, Mrs Massey a Sister Morgan yn hapus i symud gydag ef o feddygfa Donneybrook i Feddygfa Market Street, ac i aros gydag ef gydol ei amser yno. Mae’n amlwg ei bod yn rhaid ei fod yn gyflogwr da a bod y feddygfa yn le dymunol i weithio. O’r tri aelod lleyg o’r staff, ymddengys mai Mrs Cocker oedd yn dod ymlaen orau â Shipman. Rhannai jôcs gydag ef a dangosai gydymdeimlad pan oedd yn mynd yn ‘nowty’ (h.y. yn fyr ei dymer neu’n bigog). Roedd Mrs Chapman yn llai amyneddgar. Mae’n amlwg iddi gael yr argraff fod Shipman yn ystyried yr hyn a alwai’n ‘the hired help’ yn israddol yn ddeallusol iddo ef ei hun ac y byddai’n ceisio dangos yr israddoldeb hwnnw o dro i dro drwy ddefnyddio terminoleg feddygol gymhleth. Roedd gan Mrs Massey barch tuag at Shipman, ac roedd ganddi berthynas weithio dda gydag ef. Fodd bynnag, roedd wedi dechrau teimlo rhywfaint o anniddigrwydd nad oedd yn gadael iddi reoli’r feddygfa mewn unrhyw wir ystyr. Ymddengys fod gan Mrs Walker berthynas dda â Shipman hefyd ac roedd yn gallu tynnu arno. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn ofalus i beidio mynd dros ben llestri.
O’r holl staff, gan Sister Morgan oedd y berthynas agosaf â Shipman. Roedd ganddi barch mawr iawn tuag at ei allu, fel claf ac fel cydweithiwr proffesiynol. Byddai’n cael cyfle i’w weld gyda’i gleifion a sylwi ar ei ffordd o gyfathrebu â nhw. Fe’i cafodd yn ddyn hawdd mynd ato pan oedd yn mynd ag ymholiadau ato ynghylch cleifion unigol, ac roedd yn barod i dderbyn ei syniadau ynghylch triniaeth a materion eraill. Fe’i hanogodd hi i ddatblygu’i sgiliau a’i chefnogi yn ei hymdrechion i ennill cymwysterau proffesiynol pellach.
Roedd pob un o’r staff yn ymddiried yn Shipman fel unigolyn a gweithiwr proffesiynol. Roeddent i gyd yn ymwybodol o’r parch mawr oedd gan ei gleifion a’r gymuned yn gyffredinol tuag ato. Roedd yn ymddangos fod parch iddo hefyd ymhlith ei gydweithwyr meddygol a chan y gymuned feddygol leol yn gyffredinol.
Ar Ôl Arestio Shipman a’i Ddyfarnu’n Euog
Disgrifiodd Mrs Chapman sut y dechreuodd sylwi yn fuan, wedi i Shipman gael ei arestio ac wedi i’r feddygfa fynd dan ofal meddyg locwm, fod y gyfradd marwolaethau wedi disgyn yn nodedig. Byddai cleifion yn marw yn yr ysbyty neu mewn cartrefi nyrsio. Ni allai Mrs Chapman gofio marwolaeth a oedd wedi digwydd mewn cartref claf wedi i Shipman adael. Roedd cleifion yn tueddu bod yn gaeth i’w gwelyau yn y cyfnod yn union cyn eu marwolaeth. Dechreuodd sylweddoli pwysigrwydd y gostyngiad yn y gyfradd marwolaethau. Hefyd, wrth i staff y feddygfa ddechrau gwneud datganiadau i’r heddlu a thrafod amgylchiadau marwolaethau amrywiol ymhlith ei gilydd, sylwodd ar batrwm o gysylltiad rhwng marwolaethau ac ymweliadau gan Shipman. Dywedodd Sister Morgan na sylwodd ar unrhyw wahaniaeth yn nifer na phatrwm y marwolaethau wedi i Shipman adael y feddygfa. Dywedodd ei bod yn ymdrechu i aros yn y gwaith ar y pryd ac na allai ystyried arwyddocâd unrhyw newidiadau a oedd yn digwydd.
Ar 12 Hydref 1998, gwnaeth Mrs Chapman ddatganiad i’r heddlu am farwolaeth Mrs Ashton. Drannoeth, ffoniodd yr heddlu i fynegi’i phryderon ynghylch marwolaeth Mrs Pickup. Yn yr un alwad ffôn, neu ail alwad ffôn a wnaed o fewn munudau i’r gyntaf, dywedodd Mrs Chapman wrth yr heddlu hefyd ei bod yn pryderu am farwolaeth ei mam, Mrs Bardsley. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad iddi hysbysu’r heddlu ynghylch marwolaeth ei mam yn dilyn sgwrs gyda Mr Peter Wagstaff. Roedd wedi dweud wrthi am rai manylion am farwolaeth ei fam, Mrs Kathleen Wagstaff, a ddigwyddodd yn ystod ymweliad gan Shipman. Cafodd Mrs Chapman ei tharo gan y Wagstaff a marwolaeth ei mam ei hun. Sylweddolodd am y tro cyntaf y gallai’r hyn a oedd yn cael ei awgrymu am Shipman fod yn wir mewn gwirionedd. Er na allai gofio dyddiad y sgwrs honno, ymddengys yn debygol iddi gael ei chynnal ychydig cyn 13 Hydref 1998.
Fel y soniais, ni sylweddolodd Mrs Massey yr un peth nes lawer yn hwyrach, yng nghwest Mrs Brady yn 2001. Fel Mrs Chapman, roedd wedi dod i delerau â ffaith euogrwydd Shipman erbyn hyn. Nid yw Mrs Walker, Mrs Cocker a Sister Morgan yn gallu gwneud hynny, hyd yn oed nawr. Eu hanhawster yw nad ydynt yn gallu cysoni’r meddyg gofalgar yr oeddent yn ei hoffi ac yn ymddiried ynddo â’r llofrudd cynllwyngar y dengys y dystiolaeth iddo fod.

---  ---
Yr Aelodau Lleyg o’r Staff
Rwy’n eithaf bodlon nad oedd gan yr un aelod o’r staff gweinyddol unrhyw wybodaeth am weithgareddau troseddol Shipman nac amheuaeth yn eu cylch. Hyd at adeg ei arestio a thu hwnt, roedd y staff yn ei edmygu ac yn ymddiried ynddo’n llwyr. Os oedd gan Mrs Chapman neu Mrs Cocker unrhyw amheuon yn ei gylch, credaf ei bod yn annhebygol y byddent wedi aros yn gleifion iddo. Pe bai unrhyw bryderon gan Mrs Massey a Mrs Walker y gallai Shipman fod yn gyfrifol am y nifer uchel o farwolaethau cleifion yr oeddent wedi sylwi arnynt, ymddengys i mi mai’r person olaf y byddent wedi crybwyll y peth iddo (ac eithrio Shipman ei hun) fyddai Mrs Shipman. Mae’r ffaith fod y staff wedi cael gymaint o anhawster wrth ddod i delerau â realiti euogrwydd Shipman yn gyson hefyd â’u honiadau bod ganddynt ymddiriedaeth a hyder llwyr ynddo. Mrs Chapman oedd y cyntaf i dderbyn fod yr honiadau’n wir; hi oedd yr un yr oedd Shipman wedi lladd ei pherthnasau.
Ni ddylid beirniadu staff y feddygfa am eu methiant i sylweddoli fod unrhyw beth difrifol o le. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth na phrofiad o faint o farwolaethau y gellid fod wedi’u disgwyl mewn meddygfa deulu o faint meddygfa Shipman. Nid oedd gan y rheiny a oedd yn gweithio ym meddygfa Donneybrook unrhyw ymwybyddiaeth hyd yn oed o’r hyn oedd yn arferol ac yn anarferol. Pan oedd y marwolaethau yn digwydd, nid oedd gan y staff unrhyw gyswllt ag eraill yn gweithio mewn amgylchiadau tebyg y gallent fod wedi trafod cynnydd ymddangosiadol mewn marwolaethau cleifion gyda nhw. Gwyddent fod gan Shipman lawer o gleifion oedrannus, sâl. Gwyddent mai ei bolisi datganedig oedd gadael iddynt aros yn eu cartref a marw gartref, yn hytrach na mynd i mewn i’r ysbyty. Os oedd angen cysur arnynt, byddent wedi’i gael o sylweddoli fod Shipman i weld yn destun edmygedd a pharch gan bawb. Yn bersonol roedd ganddynt bob rheswm i ymddiried yn Shipman ac nid oedd ganddynt y wybodaeth na’r profiad proffesiynol i’w werthuso yn broffesiynol. Mae’n rhaid rhoi diwedd, unwaith ac am byth, ar unrhyw awgrym ei bod rhaid bod staff y feddygfa ‘yn gwybod’. Nid oeddent. Ni ellid yn rhesymol fod wedi disgwyl iddynt wybod.
Nyrs y Feddygfa a’r Nyrs Ardal
Mae’n rhaid i mi ystyried sefyllfaoedd Sister Morgan a Mrs Gilchrist ar wahân. Nid y ffaith fy mod o’r farn eu bod yn amheus o Shipman yw’r rheswm am hynny; yn wir, rwy’n eithaf bodlon nad oeddent. Rwy’n eu hystyried ar wahân gan yr oeddent, oherwydd eu hyfforddiant, eu gwybodaeth a’u profiad proffesiynol, mewn sefyllfa well i werthuso ymddygiad Shipman nag aelodau lleyg y staff.
Gallaf ddelio’n fyr iawn â Mrs Gilchrist. Er iddi weithio’n eithaf agos â Shipman, nid oedd yn rhan o dîm y feddygfa ac ni fyddai wedi bod yn ymwybodol pa mor aml yr oedd ei gleifion yn marw. Roedd llawer o’r cleifion a laddwyd gan Shipman mewn iechyd cymharol dda; yn sicr nid oeddent yn ddigon anhwylus i ofyn am wasanaethau Mrs Gilchrist. Nid oedd Mrs Gilchrist yn bresennol pan ddigwyddodd marwolaeth yn y feddygfa. Ni chymerai ei seibiant cinio yn y feddygfa a rhannu newyddion y dydd â staff y feddygfa. Rwy’n ei gael yn syndod llwyr nad oedd ganddi unrhyw amheuon ynghylch ymddygiad Shipman.
Roedd Sister Morgan mewn sefyllfa wahanol. Nid yn unig yr oedd yn nyrs â chymwysterau nyrsio uchel iawn, ond gweithiau’n agos iawn iawn â Shipman gydol y cyfnod y bu’n lladd amlaf. Rwy’n derbyn heb betruso na wnaeth ei amau am unrhyw ddrwgweithredu. Y cwestiwn yw a ddylai fod wedi ei amau, neu o leiaf a ddylai fod wedi sylweddoli nad oedd popeth fel y dylai fod.
O’r dystiolaeth a glywais yng Ngham Pedwar yr Ymchwiliad, rwyf wedi llunio’r farn bod nyrs brofiadol mewn sefyllfa dda yn aml i sylwi ar gamymddygiad proffesiynol neu berfformiad gwael gan feddyg y mae’n gweithio gydag ef/hi. Mae hyn yn arbennig o wir lle mae’r nyrs yn bresennol yn ystod ymgynghoriadau, neu’n gweithio, er enghraifft, mewn theatr lawdriniaeth. Rwy’n derbyn na wnaeth Sister Morgan weithio ochr yn ochr â Shipman yn y modd hwnnw yn aml. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth o gwbl ychwaith y byddai ymddygiad Shipman wedi bod yn ddi-feth pa bryd bynnag yr oedd Sister Morgan yn bresennol mewn ymgynghoriad.
Roedd nifer o achlysuron lle byddwn wedi disgwyl i nyrs yn sefyllfa Sister Morgan i deimlo synnwyr o anesmwythyd ynghylch digwyddiadau yn y feddygfa. Un oedd marwolaeth Miss Harding, ym mis Ionawr 1994, pan ofynnodd Shipman iddi helpu ei hadfywio, ac eto ni wnaeth ofyn iddi hi nag unrhyw arall i ‘nôl y cyfarpar adfywio. Dywedodd, gan eu bod wedi ymgolli’n llwyr yn yr hyn roedd yn ei wneud, na feddyliodd am alw am y cyfarpar ei hun. Rwy’n derbyn na wnaeth, ac nid wyf yn ei beirniadu am hynny, er y byddwn wedi disgwyl i nyrs yn ei sefyllfa hi o leiaf i sylweddoli’n syth wedyn na wnaethpwyd defnydd llawn ar yr adnoddau a oedd ar gael. Byddwn yn sicr fod wedi disgwyl iddi deimlo rhywfaint o bryder ynghylch hyn ac i’w drafod gyda Shipman. Nid wyf yn credu iddi wneud erioed.
Rwy’n derbyn, wedi marwolaeth Miss Harding, fod Sister Morgan wedi gofyn i Shipman a oedd wedi cyflawni’i rhan hi yn y weithdrefn adfywio yn gywir. Yn wir, ymddengys y ffaith iddi wneud hynny beth oedd ei pherthynas â Shipman. Credaf mai perthynas athro a disgybl ydoedd; byddai ef yn arwain a hithau’n dilyn; roedd ef i addysgu a hithau i ddysgu. Fe allai hi awgrymu sut i weithredu, ond ef fyddai’n penderfynu. I ryw raddau, mae hyn yn anochel mewn perthynas broffesiynol rhwng meddyg a nyrs, lle mae’n rhaid i’r meddyg gymryd cyfrifoldeb cyffredinol am benderfyniadau. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cael yr argraff glir fod y berthynas broffesiynol hon yn fwy ‘anghyfartal’ na llawer o berthnasoedd tebyg. Credaf i’r anghyfartaledd ddeillio’n rhannol o’r ffaith mai trefniant ‘un-i-un’ ydoedd. Mae’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn gweithio gyda nifer o nyrsys a’r rhan fwyaf o nyrsys yn gweithio gyda nifer o feddygon gwahanol. Fod bynnag, credaf mai prif achos yr anghyfartaledd hwn oedd personoliaethau Shipman a Sister Morgan. Roedd personoliaeth drechol gref gan Shipman. Roedd Sister Morgan yn ei edmygu a’i barchu’n fawr iawn. Byddai ef yn argymell edmygedd yn hollol fwriadol; credaf fod yr edmygedd hwnnw i’w ddisgwyl gan weithwyr. Yn wir, credaf ei bod yn annhebygol na fyddai neb nad oedd yn edmygu Shipman wedi aros yn hir iawn yn ei gyflogaeth. Nid yw Sister Morgan, ar y llaw arall, yn bersonoliaeth annibynnol gref yn fy marn i. Rwy’n meddwl ei bod yn hapus i ddilyn arweiniad Shipman o hyd. Nid wyf yn awgrymu nad oedd yn nyrs gymwys, gydwybodol a weithiai’n galed; credaf ei bod. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn credu y byddai unrhyw amgylchiadau wedi bod lle byddai wedi meddwl bod ei barn ei hun yn gywir ac y gallai Shipman fod yn anghywir. Gan hynny, rwy’n ei gael yn syndod y dylai Sister Morgan fod wedi amau ei chyfraniad ei hun at broses adfywio Miss Harding ond na wnaeth amau’r modd y trefnwyd y broses gan Shipman.
Roedd marwolaeth Mrs Turner ym mis Gorffennaf 1996 yn achlysur arall lle gallai Sister Morgan fod wedi teimlo synnwyr o anesmwythyd. Ar yr achlysur hwn, eto, holodd Sister Morgan a oedd wedi rhoi cyfarwyddiadau ddigon clir i Mrs Turner ynghylch gofyn am gyngor cyn rhoi’r gorau i gymryd ei meddyginiaeth. Ni wnaeth amau a oedd Shipman wedi methu gweld pa mor sâl oedd Mrs Turner yn ôl pob golwg pan adawodd hi a mynd yn ôl i’r feddygfa.
Credaf hefyd nad yw’r chwilfrydedd arferol sydd gan y rhan fwyaf o bobl gan Sister Morgan. Oddeutu 1993, dywedodd Shipman wrthi y gallent ddisgwyl rhyw 40 o enedigaethau a 40 o farwolaethau bob blwyddyn yn y feddygfa. Nid oedd gan Sister Morgan unrhyw syniad beth oedd y gyfradd farwolaeth arferol. Ni sylwodd, ym mhob blwyddyn ddilynol, bod llawer mwy na 40 o farwolaethau yn y feddygfa. Nid yw hynny’n syndod llwyr i mi; efallai nad yw nifer marwolaethau yn fater arbennig o ddiddorol. Ond rwyf yn synnu, wedi i Shipman gael ei arestio, ei gyhuddo a’i ddyfarnu’n euog yn y diwedd o lofruddiaeth luosog - llofruddiaeth a gyflawnwyd dan ei thrwyn bron - nad oedd Sister Morgan wedi canfod o hyd peth oedd y gyfradd farwolaethau arferol.
Yn fy marn i, mae diffyg chwilfrydedd Sister Morgan yn esbonio ei methiant i sylwi ar nodweddion rhyfedd y ddwy farwolaeth a ddigwyddodd yn gynnar ym 1998. Rwyf yn ei chael yn hynod na wnaeth Sister Morgan sylweddoli ei bod yn rhyfedd y gallai Miss Ward farw o ganser yn ôl pob golwg heb dyfiannau eilaidd, pan oedd, a gwyddai Sister Morgan yn bersonol am hynny, wedi bod yn y feddygfa bythefnos yn gynharach i gael brechiadau cyn mynd ar ei gwyliau. Yn wir, mae’n debygol, yn fy marn i, fod Sister Morgan yn ymwybodol fod Miss Ward wedi bod yn y feddygfa ddiwrnod yn unig cyn ei marwolaeth. Nid wyf yn dweud nad yw marwolaeth mor sydyn o ganser eilaidd yn amhosibl, ond mae’n rhaid ei fod yn ddigwyddiad anarferol. Byddwn wedi disgwyl i Sister Morgan ddymuno trafod y farwolaeth â Shipman. Heddiw, yn y rhan fwyaf o feddygfeydd, byddai marwolaeth felly yn destun ‘archwilio digwyddiadau pwysig’, pan fyddai’r tîm clinigol yn trafod digonolrwydd y driniaeth a ddarparwyd. Mewn meddygfa ag un meddyg, byddwn yn disgwyl iddo fod yn arferiad i’r meddyg drafod digwyddiad felly gyda’i nyrs. Hefyd, yn dilyn ei phrofiad ym Mhrifysgol Leeds tra’n astudio ar gyfer ei MA, byddwn wedi disgwyl i Sister Morgan wybod mai dyna oedd yr arfer arferol. Eto mae’n ymddangos, os bu unrhyw drafodaeth, mai ar lefel arwynebol yn unig y gallai fod wedi digwydd.
Yr ail farwolaeth, a ddylai, yn fy marn i, fod wedi peri dryswch i Sister Morgan oedd marwolaeth Mrs Waldron. Rwy’n ofni na allaf dderbyn tystiolaeth Sister Morgan sef, wedi marwolaeth Mrs Waldron, iddi ddod i’r casgliad ei bod yn rhaid bod y boen yn y cefn yr oedd Mrs Waldron wedi bod yn ei ddioddef ddiwrnod neu ddau cyn ei marwolaeth wedi bod yn arwydd o anhwylder a oedd yn datblygu ar y galon. Rwy’n eithaf bodlon, pe bai Sister Morgan wedi gofyn lle’n union yr oedd poen Mrs Waldron yn ei chefn, fel y credaf y gwnaeth fwy na thebyg, byddai Mrs Waldron wedi dweud wrthi mai yn y meingefn yr oedd. Ni allai Sister Morgan fod wedi meddwl fod hyn yn arwydd o anhwylder y galon. Rwy’n cael fy ngyrru i’r casgliad fod Sister Morgan wedi’i pherswadio ei hun o’r esboniad hwnnw tra’n ymbaratoi ar gyfer ei hymddangosiad yn yr Ymchwiliad. Nid wyf yn awgrymu iddi wneud hynny’n anonest, ond yn hytrach ei bod yn syml wedi chwilio a chael esboniad derbyniol am ei phrosesau meddwl ei hun. Fodd bynnag, ni ddeil yr esboniad ei archwilio. Rwyf wedi dod i’r casgliad na wnaeth Sister Morgan feddwl yn ofalus nac yn annibynnol am farwolaeth Mrs Waldron. Credaf iddi wneud yr hyn fyddai wastad yn ei wneud ynghylch unrhyw beth yr oedd Shipman yn ei ddweud; derbyniodd yr hyn a dywedodd yn ddi-gwestiwn a heb feddwl am y mater yn annibynnol.
Dywedaf eto fy mod yn derbyn na wnaeth Sister Morgan amau Shipman o ddrwgweithredu. Fe’i beirniadaf yn unig i’r graddau nad wyf yn meddwl y gwnaeth hithau feddwl yn annibynnol na’n wrthrychol am ddigwyddiadau yn y feddygfa a ddylai fod wedi peri dryswch iddi, ond na wnaethant. Nid wyf yn awgrymu, pe bai wedi meddwl yn fwy gofalus, y byddai wedi sylweddoli fod Shipman yn lladd ei gleifion. Credaf y byddai hynny wedi bod yn gam rhy fawr i’w ystyried. Fodd bynnag, pe bai wedi dangos mwy o chwilfrydedd ac annibyniaeth meddwl, gallai fod wedi gweithredu fel rhwystr i Shipman. Fe allai fod wedi bod yn ochelgar ohoni. Fel y bu hi, credaf ei bod yn debygol ei fod yntau’n sylweddoli ei bod hi wastad yn ildio iddo’n broffesiynol, a gwyddai na fyddai’n amau yr hyn a ddywedai wrthi.
Nid wyf yn credu y byddai perthynas anghyfartal felly’n debygol o godi rhwng meddyg a nyrs mewn meddygfa grŵp. Yno, fel rheol, mae nifer o feddygon yn rhannu cymorth nifer o nyrsys. Mae’n annhebygol y byddai perthynas broffesiynol, un-i-un, fel perthynas Shipman a Sister Morgan, yn codi fyth. Rwy’n ystyried perthnasoedd felly fel rhai anfoddhaol. Maent yn tueddu amddifadu’r ddau barti o’r gwrthrychedd proffesiynol sy’n cael ei feithrin trwy weithio â nifer o gydweithwyr. Mae ffactor arall yn y berthynas rhwng meddyg teulu a nyrs y feddygfa: maent yn gyflogwr ac yn gyflogai. Mae hyn mewn cyferbyniad â’r sefyllfa mewn lleoliad ysbyty, lle mae meddygon a nyrsys bob un ohonynt yn cael eu cyflogi gan yr ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu awdurdodau ysbyty, ac nid oes grym diswyddo gan y meddygon. Mewn meddygaeth deuluol, mae dibyniaeth y nyrs ar y meddyg am ei chyflogaeth/gyflogaeth yn debygol o’i gwneud yn anoddach fyth iddi herio’r meddyg.
Yr Effeithiau Parhaol
Mae’r effeithiau ar aelodau staff meddygfa Shipman wedi bod yn rai dwfn a pharhaol. Mae nifer ohonynt wedi dioddef o salwch rheolaidd yn y cyfnod ers i’w droseddau dod yn hysbys. Nid yw Mrs Chapman na Mrs Cocker yn gweithio ar hyn o bryd. Mae Mrs Walker wedi ymfudo i wlad arall. Mae Mrs Massey wedi symud i fath arall o waith. Mae hi a Mrs Chapman yn teimlo iddynt gael eu defnyddio, a bod eu hymddiriedaeth wedi’i fradychu’n llwyr gan Shipman. O ganlyniad i’r elyniaeth a wynebodd, nid yw Mrs Cocker yn teimlo ei bod yn gallu mynd i mewn i ganol tref Hyde ar ei phen ei hun bellach. Dywedodd Sister Morgan wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod digwyddiadau yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf wedi cael effaith ddifrifol ar ei bywyd personol a phroffesiynol.
Yn wir newidiwyd bywydau pob aelod o staff a weithiai i Shipman yn ddiwrthdro o ganlyniad i’w droseddau. Gwnaethpwyd niwed pellach gan y cyhuddiadau gofidus a wnaed yn eu herbyn i’r perwyl ei bod yn rhaid ‘eu bod yn gwybod’ am weithredoedd troseddol Shipman ar y pryd. Gobeithiaf fod y ffaith i mi ganfod nad oedd unrhyw sail o gwbl i’r cyhuddiadau hynny fod o gymorth wrth gael gwared ar unrhyw amheuon sy’n parhau ym meddyliau rhai pobl.

---  ---
Canfûm nad oedd gan staff meddygfa Shipman unrhyw bryderon sylweddol yn ei gylch ef na’i arfer clinigol. Eto, mewn amgylchiadau eraill, gall staff meddygfa fod mewn lle unigryw i sylwi ar arwyddion o arfer clinigol gwael gan feddyg neu weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill y maent yn gweithio gyda nhw. Gallant ddod yn ymwybodol o gwynion gan glaf, meddygon locwm ac eraill y mae ganddynt drafodion â nhw. Gallant sylwi ar achosion o arfer gwael neu ymddygiad anarferol drostynt eu hunain. Gallant ddod yn ymwybodol o fethiannau’r drefniadaeth yn y feddygfa (e.e. cadw cofnodion gwael) a allai roi cleifion mewn perygl. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn awyddus i ganfod pa mor hawdd fyddai i aelod o staff meddygfa deulu â oedd â’r fath hon wybodaeth i adrodd amdani.
Y Problemau yr oedd Staff y Feddygfa yn eu Hwynebu
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gall staff sy’n cael eu cyflogi mewn meddygfeydd teulu wynebu anhawster arbennig wrth godi pryderon am berfformiad gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd o fewn y feddygfa. Mae meddygfeydd teulu yn sefydliadau bach a gall fod achosion o wrthdaro o ran teyrngarwch ac amharodrwydd i ddod â beirniadaeth am un aelod o’r feddygfa i sylw ei gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr. Mae’r amharodrwydd hwn yn debygol o gynyddu lle mae gan aelod lleyg o staff bryderon am ofal clinigol. Gall ef neu hi yn wir deimlo na all herio gweithredoedd gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd, gan gredu y gall ei bryderon/phryderon fod yn ddi-sail ac ofni’r canlyniadau. Gall fod canfyddiad hefyd (pa un a oes cyfiawnhad drosto ai peidio), os yw pryder yn cael ei godi, y bydd meddygon yn ‘cau’r rhengoedd’, gan arwain at y pryderon yn mynd heb sylw. Gall aelodau staff boeni, pe baent yn lleisio’u pryderon, y bydd eu perthynas â’u cyflogwyr a’u cydweithwyr yn cael eu niweidio y tu hwnt i adfer. Po leiaf yw’r feddyga, mwya’n y byd y mae’r problemau hyn yn debygol o fod. Mewn meddygfa deulu ag un meddyg, er enghraifft, nid yw’n debygol y bydd unrhyw un yn y feddygfa y gall aelod o staff leisio pryder iddo/iddi am ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr. Mewn achos difrifol, lle gall addasrwydd y meddyg fod dan amheuaeth, gallai codi pryderon gael effaith uniongyrchol ar fywoliaeth y rheiny sy’n cael eu cyflogi yn y feddygfa.
Gwaethygir y problemau hyn gan y ffaith bod staff meddygfeydd teulu yn aml yn gweithredu ar eu pennau’u hunain, ar wahân i staff mewn meddygfeydd eraill ac ar wahân i’r sefydliad gofal sylfaenol (PCO). Efallai nad oes ganddynt unrhyw brofiad o weithio mewn meddygfa arall. Efallai nad oes ganddynt unrhyw syniad pa weithdrefnau sy’n arferol a beth sydd yn gwbl anarferol i’r norm. Gallant fod yn ansicr ynghylch at bwy i droi.
Cafodd y problemau rwyf wedi’u nodi eu trafod mewn un o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad. Roedd Mrs Pauline Webdale yn cynrychioli AMSPAR yn y seminar. Mae hi yn rheolwr meddygfa ei hun, ac, yn ogystal, mae ganddi brofiad o gynghori aelodau AMSPAR ynghylch sut i godi pryderon. Cadarnhaodd y gall meddygon fod yn amharod yn aml i ddelio â chwynion neu bryderon am gydweithiwr. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, gall fod yn angenrheidiol i staff fynd y tu allan i’r feddygfa er mwyn sicrhau delio â’u pryderon. Mae staff sy’n ystyried gweithredu felly yn pryderu yn aml y gallant gael eu brandio fel ‘codwyr twrw’ o ganlyniad i’w gweithredoedd.
Mae arwyddion bod mwy o ymwybyddiaeth ar ran staff meddygfeydd o’u rôl mewn diogelu cleifion. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Ms Anna Myers, Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr, Pulic Concern at Work (PCaW), mai ei hargraff hi, o ymholiadau a dderbyniodd yn PCaW, oedd fod y wybodaeth am weithgareddau Shipman, ac o weithgareddau troseddol meddygon teulu eraill, wedi gwneud staff meddygfeydd ‘yn effro iawn’ i’r ffaith ei bod yn bwysig codi unrhyw bryderon all fod ganddynt gyda’u PCT lleol.
Yr Angen am Newid Diwylliant
Gobeithiai Mrs Webdale y byddai’r diwylliant mewn meddygaeth deuluol yn newid yn y dyfodol, fel y gellid delio’n fewnol â mwy o bryderon, heb o reidrwydd fynd at sefydliad y tu allan. Yn y feddygfa y mae Mrs Webdale yn ei rheoli, anogir staff i adrodd am unrhyw beth y teimlant sy’n ‘anweddaidd’. Darperir ffurflenni i staff eu llenwi. Defnyddir y ffurflenni hyn i gofnodi pob math o ddigwyddiadau, gan gynnwys materion sy’n effeithio ar iechyd a diogelwch neu gyfarfyddiadau rhwng aelodau staff a chleifion anfodlon. Llenwir ffurflenni hefyd yn dilyn digwyddiadau mwy difrifol, fel camgymeriad yn cael ei wneud gan feddyg locwm neu feddyg teulu cynorthwyol. Roedd Mrs Webdale o’r farn y byddai’r arfer o gofnodi ac adrodd am fân faterion fel mater o drefn yn annog ac yn hwyluso adrodd am bryderon pwysicach pan fyddai’r angen yn codi.
Ategwyd yr ymagwedd hon gan Ms Myers, gan ddweud, pe bai diwylliant lle’r oedd pryderon yn cael eu codi’n ddyddiol wrth iddynt ddigwydd, byddai hyn yn cael gwared ar unrhyw ymdeimlad fod codi pryderon yn ‘ymddygiad gwyredig’. Pwysleisiodd Mrs Debbie Mellor, yn cynrychioli’r Adran Iechyd, mai’r hyn yr oedd yr Adran Iechyd yn anelu i’w wneud oedd cyflawni diwylliant agored, lle’r oedd yr arfer pobl yn codi’u pryderon yn cael ei dderbyn.
Soniodd Mrs Webdale am bwysigrwydd sicrhau fod yr holl aelodau staff o fewn meddygfa deulu - gan gynnwys yr aelodau mwyaf iau - yn teimlo bod eu barnau o werth. Disgrifiodd ymdrechion i gyflwyno strwythur llai hierarchaidd o fewn meddygfeydd, lle’r oedd aelodau iau y staff ddim yn ystyried meddygon fel bobl ‘anghyffyrddadwy’, ond yn hytrach, yn teimlo y gallent gyfnewid barnau â nhw.
Codi Pryderon y Tu Allan i’r Feddygfa
Yn y seminar, roedd barn gyffredinol mai’r sefyllfa ddelfrydol oedd un lle’r oedd aelodau o’r staff, beth bynnag oedd eu statws, yn teimlo y gallent godi pryderon yn agored o fewn y feddygfa. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed os yw’r diwylliant yn newid yn y modd yr awgrymir, bydd adegau o hyd pan na fydd yn ymarferol i aelodau staff godi’u pryderon o fewn y feddygfa, yn enwedig mewn meddygfa ag un meddyg. Er enghraifft, pe bai gan staff Shipman unrhyw bryderon am farwolaethau ei gleifion, go brin y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl iddynt godi’r pryderon hynny gyda Shipman ei hun. Byddai’n rhaid iddynt fod wedi mynd y tu allan i’r feddygfa.
Pan ofynnwyd i staff Shipman beth fyddent wedi’i wneud pe byddent wedi teimlo pryderon ynghylch Shipman, dywedodd y derbynwyr y byddent wedi siarad â Mrs Massey fel rheolwr y feddygfa. Pe na bai hynny wedi bod yn bosibl am unrhyw reswm, byddent wedi ystyried ei bod yn briodol i fynd at y WPHA yn uniongyrchol. Dywedodd Mrs Massey y byddai hi wedi mynd at y WPHA, er, ar y pryd, ni fyddai wedi gwybod pa aelod o’r WPHA y dylai gysylltu ag ef/hi. Byddai wedi gwerthfawrogi perthynas agosach gydag aelod o staff yr oedd wedi dod i’w adnabod/hadnabod ac y teimlai’n hyderus y gallai fynd ato/ati. Dywedodd y gallai weld mantais hefyd mewn cael corff annibynnol y gallai aelod o staff gael cyngor cychwynnol ganddo ynghylch a ddylai fwrw ymlaen, a sut ddylai fwrw ymlaen, a lle i gyfeirio pryder.
Byddai Sister Morgan wedi bod mewn sefyllfa braidd yn well. Pe bai ganddi hi unrhyw bryderon, gallai fod wedi siarad â’i chynghorwr clinigol, neu gynghorwr nyrsio i’r WPHA. Roedd ei chorff proffesiynol, y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol (RCN), ar gael hefyd i roi cyngor a chefnogaeth. Nid oedd y PCT yr oedd Sister Morgan yn gweithio yn ei ardal pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad yn cyflogi cynghorwr nyrsio, felly nid oedd gan Sister Morgan unrhyw gyswllt canfyddadwy yno. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r RCN wedi’i chynghori ynglŷn â phwy ddylai fynd ato/ati a byddai cynrychiolydd wedi mynd gyda hi i unrhyw gyfweliad pe bai angen.
Roedd gan y gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill eu sianelau cyfathrebu a chefnogi eu hunain. Gallai Mrs Gilchrist, er enghraifft, fod wedi mynd at yr RCN a’i chyflogwyr ei hun (drwy ei rheolwr llinell) pe bai ganddi unrhyw bryderon.
Dywedodd Mrs Webdale pe bai ganddi hi, fel rheolwr y feddygfa, unrhyw bryderon am feddyg yn y feddygfa, neu pe bai pryderon felly’n cael eu hadrodd iddi, byddai’n cysylltu â’r pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC) neu’r PCT. Os oedd y pryder o natur sensitif - fel haeriad fod meddyg yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau - byddai’n mynd at yr LMC. Teimlai nad oedd PCTau, hyd yn hyn, yn gymwys iawn i ddelio â phryderon o’r math hyn. Wrth wynebu materion sensitif posibl, roedd yn bwysig cael perthynas gyda’r sawl yr oedd yn ymddiried ynddo/ynddi. Nid oedd wedi gallu ffurfio’r perthnasoedd angenrheidiol gyda’r staff yn ei PCT eto. Roedd ganddi gryn hyder yn yr Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol yno, ond dywedodd fod ganddo gylch gwaith ‘anferth’ ac na allai wneud popeth. Am y rheswm hwnnw y byddai wedi mynd at yr LMC.
Roedd cyfranogwyr eraill yn y seminarau o’r farn nad oedd PCTau’n cael eu gweld gan staff fel sefydliadau y gellid mynd atynt yn ddigon hawdd. Y rheswm posibl am hyn yw eu bod yn sefydliadau cymharol newydd, bod trosiant staff uchel ganddynt ac nad ydynt eto wedi cael amser i ffurfio perthnasoedd gyda’r staff yn y PCTau. Hefyd, fodd bynnag, dywedwyd fod can staff PCT ystod eang o gyfrifoldebau ac nad ydynt weithiau’n gallu ymdopi â’r cyfan ohonynt.
Rhoi Sylw i’r Problemau y Mae Staff Meddygfeydd yn eu Hwynebu
Polisi ‘Canu’r Gloch’ mewn Meddygfa
Dywedodd Mrs Myers, yn ei barn hi, mai’r dull gweithredu cywir oedd i PCTau helpu meddygon teulu i ddeall gwerth annog staff i godi pryderon o fewn y feddygfa pa bryd bynnag yr oedd modd gwneud hynny. Fodd bynnag, dylid dweud wrth staff meddygfa, os nad oeddent yn teimlo eu bod yn gallu codi’u pryderon yn fewnol, dylent fynd at unigolyn penodol yn y PCT. Efallai mai’r Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol fyddai hwnnw, neu rywun arall. Credai y dylai meddygfeydd ystyried y PCT fel ‘rhwyd ddiogelwch’, nid fel y man galw cyntaf i aelod o staff â phryderon. Cytunodd y byddai o gymorth pe bai’r unigolyn penodol yn y PCT yn hysbys i staff meddygfa cyn i’r angen i fynd at yr unigolyn godi. Dywedodd nad oedd yn awgrymu y dylai aelod o staff gael ei atal rhag mynd at unigolyn gwahanol yn y PCT yr oedd yn teimlo’n fwy hyderus ynghylch siarad ag ef/hi, ond, ar gyfer y rheiny nad oeddent yn gwybod at bwy i droi, dylid darparu enw.
Pwysleisiodd Mrs Webdale y dylai fod gan bob meddygfa deulu bolisi ‘canu’r gloch’ ysgrifenedig, yn nodi’r camau y dylid eu cymryd gan staff a oedd yn dymuno codi pryder. Dywedodd y dylai fod yn ‘ddogfen fyw’, a oedd yn datblygu dros amser ac yr oedd pawb yn y feddygfa yn ymwybodol ohonynt. Ymddengys nad oes gan lawer o feddygfeydd bolisi felly. Ym mis Medi 2003, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Linda Patterson, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI) ar y pryd, fod CHI wedi canfod fod ‘bylchau sylweddol’ yn y modd yr oedd gweithdrefnau PCT ar gyfer canu cloch yn cael eu cymhwyso i feddygfeydd teulu a staff. Ymhlith y meddygfeydd yr oedd CHI wedi’u hadolygu ar y pryd, dim ond 24% oedd wedi adrodd bod polisi canu cloch ganddynt. Credai CHI y dylai mwy gael ei wneud gan PCTau i sicrhau fod meddygon teulu a’u staff yn ymwybodol o’r gweithdrefnau i’w dilyn. Mynegwyd y farn gan yr RCN hefyd fod gan PCTau gyfrifoldeb am sicrhau fod meddygon teulu’n ymwybodol o’r mecanweithiau a oedd ar gael iddynt godi pryderon ynghylch arfer proffesiynol.
Pan gynhaliwyd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd yr Adran Iechyd yn gweithio gyda’r PCaW i baratoi arweiniad i feddygon teulu ar y modd i ddatblygu a gweithredu polisi canu cloch ar gyfer gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd a staff eraill yn y feddygfa. Erbyn hyn mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld drafft o’r arweiniad hwnnw ac o’r polisi canu cloch a gynhwysir ynddo.
Mae’r polisi drafft yn sicrhau staff fod y feddygfa yn croesawu pryderon gwirioneddol ac mae wedi ymrwymo i ddelio â nhw’n gyfrifol, yn agored ac yn broffesiynol. Mae’n pwysleisio y dylai staff godi pryderon tra’u bod
‘yn bryderon yn unig’
, yn hytrach nag aros nes bod lefel y pryder yn dwysáu. Mae’n sicrhau staff a all ddymuno codi pryderon gwirioneddol na fyddant yn colli eu swyddi ac na fydd dial arnynt o ganlyniad i wneud hynny. Ni ofynnir iddynt ychwaith ddarparu prawf bod sail gadarn i’w pryderon. Mae’r polisi drafft yn annog dod â phryderon ymlaen yn agored. Mae’n nodi mewn termau cyffredinol beth fydd yn digwydd wedi i bryder gael ei godi a phwysleisia y bydd person sy’n codi pryder, cyn belled ag y bydd modd, yn cael gwybodaeth gyson am yr hyn sy’n cael ei wneud mewn ymateb i’r pryder.
Mae’r polisi drafft yn awgrymu y dylai aelod o staff godi pryder gyda’i reolwr/rheolwr llinell. Os nad yw hynny’n briodol am ryw reswm, neu os nad yw’n effeithiol, mae’r polisi drafft yn cynghori mynd at reolwr/reolwraig y feddygfa neu at feddyg teulu penodol o fewn y feddygfa. Cynghorir staff, os nad ydynt yn gallu codi pryderon yn fewnol, neu os na ddeliwyd â’r pryder mewn modd priodol, dylent fynd at gyswllt penodol yn y PCT. Mae manylion cyswllt yn cael eu rhoi. Mae’r polisi drafft yn glir ac yn galonogol o ran natur. Mae’n cynnwys manylion cyswllt ar gyfer PCaW ac yn crybwyll hefyd y gall cyngor annibynnol di-dâl fod ar gael gan yr undeb llafur neu sefydliad proffesiynol y mae’r aelod o staff yn perthyn iddo.
Mae’r arweiniad i feddygon teulu’n awgrymu y dylai polisi drafft gael ei baratoi a’i drafod mewn cyfarfod staff, ac y dylid cytuno ar bolisi ar gyfer y feddygfa wedi hynny. Dylid cysylltu â’r PCT. Dylai staff gael eu briffio ar gynnwys y polisi, a dylid arddangos poster, yn ategu’r neges. Dylid newid contractau cyflogaeth fel y bydd angen er mwyn cydgordio â’r polisi canu cloch.
Hyfforddiant
Pwysleisiodd Mrs Webdale yr angen i staff meddygfeydd teulu gael hyfforddiant, nid yn unig iddynt fod yn gyfarwydd â’r weithdrefn i’w dilyn pe byddent yn dymuno codi pryder, ond er mwyn iddynt fod yn ymwybodol hefyd o faterion ehangach yn ymwneud â rheolaeth glinigol. Mae AMSPAR yn cynhyrchu pecyn sefydlu ar gyfer staff newydd, sydd, o’i weithredu’n iawn ar lefel meddygfa, yn rhoi sylfaen gynhwysfawr ar gyfer staff newydd. Mae’n cynnwys pwnc codi pryderon. Dywedodd Mrs Webdale fod yr hyfforddiant i staff newydd bellach yn cwmpasu ystod llawer ehangach o faterion nag yn y gorffennol. Mae hyn yn cynnwys materion yn ymwneud â rheolaeth glinigol, ac roedd hi’n ystyried y rheiny’n bwysig iawn. Mae Mrs Webdale yn cyfrannu hefyd at ddigwyddiadau addysgiadol ar gyfer staff meddygfeydd teulu, ar wahoddiad PCTau. Weithiau bydd yn mynd i feddygfeydd i ddarparu hyfforddiant ar y safle. Teimlai fod mwy o feddygfeydd teulu yn cydnabod gwerth hyfforddiant da i’w staff gweinyddol.
Cysylltiadau Agosach gyda’r Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol a Staff o Feddygfeydd Eraill
Soniais am y broblem staff yn teimlo ar wahân, oddi wrth feddygfeydd eraill a staff yn y PCTau. Gall staff deimlo nad oes ganddynt unrhyw un y gallant ymgynghori â nhw ynghylch eu pryderon. Yn y seminar, disgrifiodd Mrs Webdale y cyfeiriadur sy’n cwmpasu Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Norfolk, Suffolk a Swydd Gaergrawnt. Mae hwn yn cynnwys enwau rheolwyr meddygfeydd a staff sy’n meddu ar arbenigedd penodol ar destunau gwahanol y gall staff fod angen cyngor arnynt. Gyda chymorth y cyfeiriadur, mae staff meddygfeydd mewn sefyllfa i ymgynghori â rhywun â phrofiad yn y maes perthnasol. Mae’r meysydd arbenigedd a restrir yn y cyfeiriadur yn cynnwys codi pryderon. Soniodd Mrs Webdale hefyd am drefniadau ar gyfer rhannu staff rhwng meddygfeydd.
Fe wnaeth Mrs Sue Antrobus, yn cynrychioli’r RCN, bwysleisio pwysigrwydd PCTau yn sefydlu rhwydweithiau o nyrsys meddygfeydd. Teimlai Dr Grenville ei bod yn bwysig hefyd hyrwyddo cysylltiadau rhwng nyrsys meddygfeydd a nyrsys ardal. Disgrifiodd Dr Patterson gamau amrywiol i’r Ymchwiliad y credai y gellid eu cymryd gan PCTau er mwyn cryfhau eu cysylltiadau â staff meddygfeydd teulu. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys darparu cyfleusterau iechyd galwedigaethol a threfniadau ar gyfer mentora a chefnogaeth cymheiriaid.
Roedd rhai ymatebwyr i Bapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad yn teimlo fod problem fawr yn y ffaith fod staff meddygfeydd yn cael eu cyflogi gan feddygon teulu, yn hytrach na chan y PCTau. Roedd meddygon teulu weithiau’n amharod i ryddhau staff i fynychu hyfforddiant a chyfarfodydd rheolaeth glinigol. O ganlyniad, gallai fod yn anodd i PCTau ffurfio perthnasoedd gyda staff meddygfeydd. Dywedodd Mrs Stephanie Farr, Pennaeth Gwasanaeth (Plant), PCT Castle Point a Rochford, fod ei PCT hi yn ceisio annog cysylltiad â staff meddygfeydd ond nad oedd meddygfeydd wastad yn barod i gydweithredu. Dywedodd Dr Grenville bod grŵp rheolwyr meddygfeydd ym mhob PCT yn ei ardal ef, a fyddai’n cyfarfod yn gyson. Ei argraff ef oedd fod rôl y PCOau wrth hyfforddi staff gweinyddol wedi lleihau gyda dyfodiad y PCTau, yn bennaf oherwydd bod gan y PCTau gymaint o swyddogaethau i’w cyflawni. Gobeithiai y byddai ei rôl ef yn cael ei hadfywio mewn amser. Dywedodd Mr Robin Macleod, yn cynrychioli’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol, nad oedd yr arian gan PCTau, mewn rhai ardaloedd, i ariannu hyfforddiant staff.
Rôl yr Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol wrth Gefnogi Staff Meddygfeydd
Gall sefyllfa aelod o staff sy’n lleisio pryder fynd yn sefyllfa na ellir mo’i chynnal, yn enwedig o fewn meddygfa fach neu feddygfa ag un meddyg. Gall gwneud cwyn neu godi pryder ynghylch meddyg neu gydweithiwr yn wir ddinistrio’r berthynas weithio o fewn y feddygfa. Dywedodd Mrs Webdale mai’r ‘ddelfryd’ fyddai i staff y feddygfa gael eu cyflogi gan PCTau yn uniongyrchol, ond nid oedd hwn yn ragolwg realistig. Fodd bynnag, pe bai aelod o staff yn cael ei orfodi/gorfodi i adael meddygfa o ganlyniad iddo/iddi godi pryderon, dywedodd ei bod yn meddwl y dylai’r PCT ei gefnogi/chefnogi wrth ddod o hyd i swydd arall. Dywedodd ei bod yn ymwybodol o rai staff yr oedd yn well ganddynt adael eu swyddi, yn hytrach na chodi pryder ynghylch y feddygfa lle’r oeddent yn gweithio. Teimlai y dylai PCTau gymryd camau i ganfod pam oedd aelod o staff wedi gadael meddygfa. Un posibilrwydd fyddai cynllunio holiaduron i’w llenwi a’u cyflwyno i PCTau gan staff yn gadael meddygfeydd teulu. Gellid cymharu’r holiaduron hyn, ac, os oedd unrhyw duedd yn dod i’r golwg mewn perthynas ag arfer penodol, gellid dilyn hyn ymlaen. Teimlai Mrs Webdale y gallai’r ymarferiad gyfrannu at ddealltwriaeth y PCT o anghenion hyfforddi staff, a, hefyd, ei allu i adnabod pan oedd angen help a chefnogaeth ar staff mewn meddygfa. Mewn cyferbyniad, credai Dr Grenville, ar ran y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig, y byddai proses felly’n afrosgo. Awgrymodd y byddai’n well i PCTau ganolbwyntio ar annog meddygfeydd i gymryd camau eu hunain i ganfod pam yr oedd aelodau staff yn gadael. Y feddygfa ddylai weithredu wedyn i ddileu unrhyw broblemau a oedd yn cael eu datgelu.

---  ---
Cytunaf â’r rheiny sy’n dweud y dylai fod gan bob meddygfa deulu bolisi ysgrifenedig yn nodi’r weithdrefn sydd i’w dilyn gan aelod o staff y feddygfa sy’n dymuno codi pryderon ynghylch unrhyw fater, yn benodol ynghylch arfer clinigol neu ymddygiad gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd o fewn y feddygfa. Mae’r polisi drafft a ddatblygwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd a PCaW i weld yn fan cychwyn gwych. Fodd bynnag, mae polisi ysgrifenedig yn effeithiol yn unig os yw staff yn ymwybodol ohono ac yn hyderus i ddilyn ei arweiniad.
Cam cyntaf unrhyw weithdrefn felly ddylai fod i staff godi unrhyw bryderon y gall fod ganddynt o fewn y feddygfa. Fodd bynnag, nid yw cynnwys anogaeth i wneud hynny mewn polisi ysgrifenedig yn ddigon ar ei ben ei hun. Dylid annog staff i beidio â dod ymlaen â’u pryderon o fewn y feddygfa os canfyddant, pan fyddant yn gwneud hynny, eu bod yn wynebu diffyg diddordeb, dicter neu hyd yn oed elyniaeth lwyr, ac nad oes unrhyw gamau yn cael eu cymryd i weithredu ar y pryderon. Bydd llawer yn dibynnu ar agwedd y meddygon yn y feddygfa. Os dangosant eu bod yn gwerthfawrogi sylwadau a beirniadaethau staff yn gadarnhaol, bydd diwylliant llawer mwy agored yn y feddygfa a bydd yn llawer haws i’r staff godi pryder difrifol os oes un yn codi. Ymddengys i mi y byddai’r math o drefniadau ymarferol a ddisgrifir gan Mrs Webdale yn fodel defnyddiol. Dylai fod yn norm felly i bob digwyddiad anffodus neu bryder, bach neu fwy difrifol, gael eu dwyn i sylw’r rheiny sy’n gyfrifol am reoli’r feddygfa.
Dylai polisi’r feddygfa roi i’r staff enw a manylion cyswllt unigolyn yn y PCT y gall y staff fynd ag unrhyw bryderon ato/ati y teimlant na allant eu codi o fewn y feddygfa. Ymddengys yn glir i mi mai’r PCT ddylai fod yr ‘ail fan galw’ ar gyfer pryderon, yn hytrach na sefydliad arall fel yr LMC. Y PCT sy’n gyfrifol am reolaeth glinigol o fewn gofal sylfaenol; os oes problemau gyda meddygon neu weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill o fewn meddygfa, mae’n bwysig bod y PCT yn ymwybodol ohonynt. Mae hyn yn arbennig o bwysig os oes materion yn codi yn ymwneud â diogelwch cleifion. Roedd Adroddiad diweddar yr ymchwiliad annibynnol i’r modd yr oedd y GIG wedi delio â honiadau ynghylch ymddygiad Clifford Ayling (Adroddiad Ayling) wedi amlygu’r ‘rôl amwys’ a chwaraewyd gan yr LMC yn yr achos hwnnw. Pwysleisiodd Adroddiad Ayling nad rôl LMCau oedd gweithredu ar wybodaeth a oedd yn awgrymu fod diogelwch cleifion yn cael ei beryglu. Rôl y PCT neu’r corff rheoleiddio proffesiynol perthnasol oedd honno. Byddwn yn awgrymu y dylai’r arweiniad mewn polisi ysgrifenedig ddweud yn glir, nid yn unig mai’r PCT ddylai fod yr ‘ail fan galw’, ond hefyd pam ei bod yn bwysig y dylid gwneud y PCT yn fwy ymwybodol o bryderon.
Weithiau, gall fod pryder gan weithiwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd neu aelod arall o staff sy’n bryder mor sensitif y byddai’n anodd ei godi’n lleol. Byddai pryderon o’r math y gallai’r staff fod wedi’u coleddu ynglŷn â Shipman yn enghraifft. Byddai wedi cymryd llawer iawn o ddewrder i aelod o staff i fod wedi codi pryderon gyda’r WPAH ynghylch cyfraddau marwolaethau Shipman. Byddai mynediad at gyngor gan sefydliad ymhell i ffwrdd o’r ardal yn gwneud y rhagolwg o wneud adroddiad yn llawer llai dychrynllyd. I ddarparu ar gyfer y sefyllfa hon, dylai’r polisi gynnwys manylion sefydliadau, fel PCaW, lle gall staff gael cyngor annibynnol yn ddi-dâl. Os yw’r ‘porth unigol’ neu ‘dŷ clirio’ ar gyfer cyfeirio cwynion a phryderon, y cyfeiriais atynt yn rhywle arall yn yr Adroddiad hwn, yn cael ei greu, dylai’r polisi nodi’r manylion cyswllt ar gyfer hwnnw hefyd.
Dylai meddygfeydd gael eu hannog i hyfforddi’u staff yn y gweithdrefnau a nodir yn eu polisi ac i atgyfnerthu’r hyfforddiant hwnnw’n gyson. Dylai fod yn rhan o’r broses sefydlu ar gyfer staff newydd. Dylid adolygu a diweddaru’r polisi ei hun (e.e. trwy sicrhau fod yr enwau cyswllt penodol a’r manylion cyswllt yn dal yn rai cyfredol) yn gyson; fel y dywedodd Mrs Webdale, dylai fod yn ‘ddogfen fyw’.
Yn ychwanegol at unrhyw hyfforddiant a roddir gan feddygfeydd teulu, dylai PCTau ddarparu gwybodaeth a hyfforddiant am bolisïau canu cloch yn uniongyrchol i staff y feddygfa. Dylid rhoi’r hyfforddiant yng nghyd-destun materion rheolaeth glinigol cyffredinol. Dylid gwneud y staff yn ymwybodol o’r rôl bwysig y gallant ei chwarae wrth hyrwyddo rheolaeth glinigol o fewn eu meddygfeydd ac wrth ddiogelu cleifion. Dylai PCTau ddynodi o leiaf un unigolyn i weithredu fel cyswllt ar gyfer staff meddygfeydd sydd â phryderon i’w cyfleu. Dylid gwneud pob ymdrech i sicrhau fod yr unigolion dynodedig yn hysbys yn bersonol i staff y feddygfa. Byddai’n helpu pe gellid cael elfen o barhad fel na fyddai staff yn gorfod delio’n barhaus ag unigolion gwahanol. Ni ddylai’r unigolion dynodedig weithredu’n unig fel rhai sy’n derbyn pryderon, ond yn hytrach dylent gynnig cefnogaeth a chyngor cyffredinol i staff meddygfeydd.
Dylid gwneud trefniadau arbennig i staff mewn meddygfeydd bach neu feddygfeydd ag un meddyg. Dylai’r polisïau ysgrifenedig ar gyfer meddygfeydd felly gyfeirio at yr anawsterau penodol y gall staff mewn meddygfeydd felly wynebu wrth leisio pryderon, a dylent adnabod y gall fod yn well ganddynt godi’u pryderon gyda’r PCT, yn hytrach na’n fewnol, yn y lle cyntaf. Dylid gwneud ymdrechion ychwanegol i hyrwyddo cysylltiadau rhwng y PCT a staff meddygfeydd ag un meddyg neu feddygfeydd bach, ac i gynnwys yr olaf mewn hyfforddiant a digwyddiadau eraill. Nodaf fod Adroddiad Ayling wedi cyfeirio at yr angen i PCTau dalu sylw penodol i ddatblygu a chefnogi annibyniaeth rheolwyr meddygfa mewn meddygfeydd ag un meddyg. Byddwn yn ategu’r argymhelliad hwn, ond hoffwn ei weld yn cael ei ymestyn yn ogystal i staff eraill mewn meddygfeydd teulu - yn benodol, nyrsys meddygfeydd.
Er mwyn lleihau’r problemau sy’n cael eu hachosi gan arwahanrwydd, dylid annog mentrau sy’n hyrwyddo ‘croes-ffrwythlonni’ staff rhwng un feddygfa deulu ac un arall lle bynnag y mae modd gwneud hynny. Yr hyn sydd gennyf dan sylw yw’r trefniadau y soniodd Mrs Webdale amdanynt ar gyfer rhannu staff, a’r cynlluniau mentora a chefnogi cymheiriaid sy’n bodoli mewn rhai ardaloedd. Dylai lledaenu syniadau a gwybodaeth rhwng staff mewn meddygfeydd teulu gwahanol gynyddu gallu’r staff, yr ymddengys i mi, i adnabod ymddygiad neu arfer clinigol sy’n disgyn y tu allan i’r norm yn llwyr.
Yn yr Ymchwiliad, cododd y mater ynghylch a yw staff meddygfeydd sy’n codi pryderon gwirioneddol am eu meddyg teulu cyflogi wedi’u diogelu’n ddigonol rhag dial gan ddarpariaethau Deddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998 (PIDA). Disgrifiaf ddarpariaethau’r PIDA ym Mhennod 11. Er bod staff meddygfeydd yn dechnegol yn cael eu diogelu gan y Ddeddf, mae dwy broblem botensial. Y gyntaf yw bod PIDA yn gofyn i’r sawl sy’n canu’r gloch i godi’i bryderon/phryderon gyda sefydliad y cyflogwyr cyn eu codi y tu allan. Os yw’r sawl sy’n canu’r gloch yn mynd at gorff allanol yn syth, bydd llawer o amddiffyniad y PIDA yn cael ei golli. Gwir fwriad y ddarpariaeth hon yw annog y rhai sy’n canu’r gloch i beidio ‘mynd yn gyhoeddus’ cyn iddynt godi’u pryderon yn fewnol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw diogelwch y PIDA yn cael ei golli os yw’r sawl sy’n canu’r gloch yn codi’i bryderon/phryderon gyda pherson neu gorff y mae’r cyflogwr wedi’i awgrymu fel rhywun addas i dderbyn y pryderon hynny. Felly, os yw polisi meddygfa deulu ar gyfer canu’r gloch yn awgrymu’r PCT fel man addas i dderbyn pryderon, ni fyddai diogelwch y PIDA yn cael ei golli os oedd yr aelod o staff yn codi ei bryderon/phryderon gyda gweithiwr y PCT. Dylai’r un peth fod yn berthnasol os yw ‘porth unigol’ neu ‘dŷ clirio’ yn cael eu sefydlu. Os credir bod unrhyw amheuaeth ynghylch cymhwyso’r egwyddor y soniais amdani, yna rwy’n awgrymu y dylid newid y PIDA i egluro hyn.
Mae’r ail broblem yn un fwy cyffredinol. Bydd unrhyw ddiogelwch sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan y PIDA yn aneffeithiol os yw’r aelod o staff yn codi pryder ynghylch rhywun yn y feddygfa (meddyg neu nyrs meddygfa er enghraifft), ac os yw’r berthynas weithio yn y feddygfa yn chwalu o ganlyniad. Mae’n hawl i gadw swydd wedyn yn un wag. Credaf fod darpariaethau’r PIDA wedi cael eu drafftio gan ystyried sefydliadau mawr, yn hytrach na rhai bach. Nid wyf yn credu y byddai’n ymarferol i newid y PIDA i unioni’r broblem hon. Fodd bynnag, pe bai aelod o staff ‘yn canu’r gloch’ ar feddygfa ac ni all barhau i weithio yno, dylai’r PCT, yn fy marn i, gynorthwyo’r gweithiwr i ddod o hyd i swydd mewn meddygfa arall lle bynnag y bydd modd.
Nid wyf yn sicr a fyddai’n synhwyrol i PCTau gasglu ‘holiaduron ymadael’ gan staff sy’n gadael meddygfeydd teulu. Yr unig ffordd o ganfod hyn fyddai cynnal nifer o gynlluniau peilot ac asesu’r canlyniadau. Nid yw’n ymddangos i mi y byddai hyn yn anodd i’w drefnu. Fodd bynnag, byddwn wedi meddwl, pe bai PCTau yn sicrhau bod aelod o’u staff eu hunain â chyfrifoldeb am gynnal perthnasoedd â staff meddygfeydd, byddai staff â phroblemau yn troi at y PCT yn naturiol am gymorth, ac ni fyddai angen yr holiaduron.
Rwy’n cytuno â Dr William Reith, a bwysleisiodd, gan siarad ar ran Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu, yr angen i PCTau ddilyn pryderon ymlaen mewn modd priodol. Roedd ei sylwadau ef yn adlewyrchu pryderon llawer o bobl, sef, os yw staff meddygfa yn gweld patrwm cyson lle nad oes unrhyw weithredu mewn perthynas â phryderon sy’n cael eu codi, bydd hynny’n anochel yn eu hannog i beidio ag adrodd am bryderon yn y dyfodol. Mae rhesymau eraill pam y dylid ymchwilio’n briodol a gweithredu ar bryderon sy’n cael eu mynegi gan staff meddygfeydd. Mae aelod o staff meddygfa deulu yn debygol o feddwl yn ddwys cyn dod â phryder i’r PCT; nid yw’n gam y mae’n debygol o’i gymryd yn ysgafn. Hi neu ef fwy na thebyg yw un o’r ychydig bobl sy’n gweithio’n agos â’r meddyg neu weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd dan sylw, ac a fyddai mewn sefyllfa i ddod yn ymwybodol o arfer clinigol gwael neu ymddygiad anarferol. Er bod posibilrwydd wrth gwrs nad oes sail i’w bryderon/phryderon, gall yn wir fod cyfiawnhad drostynt, ac, er lles rheolaeth glinigol dda, mae’n hanfodol eu bod yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif a’u gwneud yn destun ymchwiliad. Byddaf yn dweud mwy am y modd y credaf y dylai PCTau ymateb i bryderon felly nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn.

---  ---
A Oedd Dyletswydd i Adrodd?
Tystiolaeth o'r Modd yr oedd y Ddyletswydd i Adrodd yn Gweithredu mewn Gwirionedd yn y GIG ym 1994
Ystyriaeth Olaf o Sefyllfaoedd Dr Brown a Dr Husaini
Cywiriad i baragraff 10.26:

---  ---
Ym mis Hydref 2003, gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad ar dystiolaeth bellach yn ymwneud ag achos Mrs Renate Overton; gwrandawyd ar dystiolaeth lafar am yr achos yn flaenorol ym mis Rhagfyr 2002. Disgrifir yr achos yn fanwl yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf a fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad.
Aethpwyd â Mrs Overton yn anymwybodol i Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside nos Wener, 18 Chwefror 1994. Roedd Shipman wedi rhoi gorddos angheuol o ddiamorffin iddi, ar ôl iddo fynd i’w chartref yn dilyn adroddiad ei bod yn dioddef pwl o asthma. Ni wnaeth erioed ddod at ei hun yn dilyn ei ymyrraeth, a bu farw yn yr ysbyty ar 21 Ebrill 1995. Credai llawer o feddygon a staff yn yr ysbyty bod rhywbeth o le gyda’i thriniaeth. Credent fod llewyg Mrs Overton wedi’i achosi gan gorddos o 20mg o forffin, a oedd yn amhriodol i rywun yn dioddef o asthma. Fe wnaethant ddeall fod Shipman wedi chwistrellu’r cyffur yn fewnwythiennol fel ‘stat’ neu ddos bolws, hynny yw, dogn sy’n cael ei roi yn gyflym a’r ‘cyfan ar yr un pryd’. Er gwaethaf eu cred bod y llewyg yn ganlyniad triniaeth amhriodol gan Shipman, nid adroddwyd am eu pryderon ac ni chychwynnwyd unrhyw ymchwiliad felly.
Yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, deuthum i’r casgliad, os oedd unrhyw ddyletswydd i adrodd, dyletswydd Dr Murtaza Husaini, y cardiolegydd ymgynghorol, a Dr Ceri Brown, yr anesthetydd ymgynghorol, oedd honno, a oedd, yn y cyfnodau cynnar yn dilyn mynediad Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty, yn gyd-gyfrifol am ei gofal. Deuthum i’r casgliad nad oedd unrhyw ddyletswydd felly ar y staff nyrsio na’r meddygon iau. Gwyddent fod yr ymgynghorwyr yn ymwybodol o’r amgylchiadau ac roedd hawl ganddynt ddisgwyl iddynt weithredu’n briodol.
Pan ysgrifennwyd y Trydydd Adroddiad, gohiriais y cwestiwn a oedd Dr Husaini a Dr Brown dan ddyletswydd i adrodd am eu pryderon am achos Mrs Overton a pha un a ddylid eu beirniadu am eu methiant i wneud hynny. Roedd yn amlwg yn amhriodol i mi ystyried y cwestiynau hynny ar ôl cael dealltwriaeth bellach o natur y ddyletswydd fel yr hysbyswyd gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC), o’r opsiynau ar gyfer adrodd a oedd ar gael i’r ddau ymgynghorydd ac o’r diwylliant o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol ar y pryd, materion yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad i’w hystyried yng ngwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar. Yn ystod y gwrandawiadau hynny, rhoddwyd y cyfle i’r ddau feddyg, ond gwrthodwyd y cyfle ganddynt, i roi tystiolaeth bellach. Roeddent yn ymwybodol erbyn hynny, wrth gwrs, o’m canfyddiadau yn y Trydydd Adroddiad. Cawsant eu cynrychioli yn y gwrandawiadau perthnasol a chyflwynwyd tystion y mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cytuno i ystyried eu tystiolaeth.
Mae cwestiynau’n aros o hyd ynghylch beth fyddai wedi digwydd pe bai Dr Husaini a Dr Brown wedi adrodd am eu pryderon. A fyddai’r ffeithiau wedi cael eu hymchwilio’n llawn naill ai’n lleol neu gan y GMC? A fyddai difrifoldeb ymddygiad Shipman tuag at Mrs Overton wedi’i adnabod, ac a fyddai ymchwiliad pellach wedi’i gynnal a allai fod wedi datgelu ei ymddygiad troseddol arall? A fyddai Shipman wedi cael ei rwystro rhag lladd gan y ffaith syml fod ymchwiliad yn mynd rhagddo? Mae’r cwestiynau hyn wedi’u cysylltu â’r cwestiwn beth fyddai wedi digwydd pe bai Dr David Bee, patholegydd ymgynghorol, wedi adrodd yn fwy gofalus wedi iddo gynnal awtopsi ar gorff Mrs Overton ym 1995, a phe bai Mr Peter Revington, Crwner EM dros Dde Greater Manchester, wedi penderfynu cynnal cwest. Ystyriwyd eu hymddygiad yn llawn ym Mhennod 13 o fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad.

---  ---
Sefyllfa Dr Husaini
Pan roddodd dystiolaeth ym mis Rhagfyr 2002, cydnabu Dr Husaini, fel ymgynghorydd â gofal am ofal Mrs Overton, ei fod dan ddyletswydd i adrodd am ei bryderon am driniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton i awdurdod priodol. Dywedodd ei fod yn sylweddoli fod y driniaeth hon wedi bod yn eithaf anarferol a’i bod yn dangos y gallai Shipman fod yn berygl i gleifion. Mewn gwirionedd, honnodd iddo fod mor bryderus ei fod, ym 1994, wedi adrodd y ffeithiau i Mr Revington, i Mr Roger Butterworth (darpar Brif Weithredwr yr Ymddiriedolaeth GIG yn gyfrifol am Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside), i Mrs Lynn Nuttall (Rheolwr Busnes yr Ymddiriedolaeth) ac i Mr Charles Howorth (cynghorwr cyfreithiol ar y pryd i Awdurdod Iechyd Rhanbarthol y Gogledd Orllewin). Am resymau sy’n cael eu nodi’n llawn yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, gwrthodais ei dystiolaeth a chanfod na wnaeth adrodd i neb am ei bryderon. Wedi gwrthod ei honiad, mae’n dilyn ei bod yn rhaid ei feirniadu am fethu gwneud hynny a gydnabu oedd ei ddyletswydd. Fodd bynnag, rhaid edrych ar y feirniadaeth hon yng ngolau diwylliant ac arfer y dydd.
Sefyllfa Dr Brown
Cytunodd Dr Brown na wnaeth adrodd am driniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton i unrhyw un mewn awdurdod. Rhoddodd nifer o resymau pan na wnaeth hynny. Yn gyntaf, haerodd, pan oedd Mrs Overton dan ei ofal, ei fod o’r farn fod amgylchiadau ei llewyg mor ansicr na allai weithredu’n rhesymol. Gwrthodais yr haeriad hwnnw. Canfûm fod cyflwr ei feddwl yn cael ei grynhoi yng ngeiriau datganiad tyst a wnaeth i’r heddlu ar ddechrau 1999, lle dywedodd am ei farn ym 1994:
(Mrs Overton)
may have had a chest pain, although this contradicts the clear statement of the casualty officer that she had no chest pain prior to her collapse. While intravenous Morphine has a place in the management of acute myocardial infarction (heart attack) I have always understood that it should be given intravenously, in small amounts, with time between doses to assess the affect
(sic)
of the drug. In addition, it should be essential to monitor the heart rate and blood pressure of the patient in order to detect any signs of a cardiovascular collapse. In my experience of managing patients who have developed wheeze following a heart attack, I have never seen a dose of 20mg of Morphine used. I should add that I am familiar with the administration and effects of Morphine because in my work as an anaesthetist I regularly administer Morphine intravenously to patients undergoing surgery. I am also familiar with the use of Morphine post-operatively in patient-controlled analgesia pumps and it is common for these pumps only to allow 1mg of Morphine to be given at a time with five minutes elapsing between doses of Morphine.’
Yn ail, dywedodd Dr Brown hefyd ei fod yntau’n credu mai’r unig lwybr posibl a oedd ar agor iddo oedd gwneud cwyn i’r GMC. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol o unrhyw weithdrefn GIG leol na mecanwaith ar gyfer canlyn cwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu. Ni chredai y gallai adrodd i’r GMC am y mater gan nad oedd yn meddwl fod ganddo wybodaeth ddigonol i seilio cwyn i’r corff hwnnw arni. Nid oedd yn meddwl fod nodiadau’r ysbyty yn ddigon.
Yn drydydd, dywedodd Dr Brown hefyd fod ystyriaethau moesau proffesiynol yn chwarae rhan yn ei benderfyniad i beidio gwneud adroddiad. Dywedodd, fel rhan o’u hyfforddiant, bod meddygon yn cael eu dysgu i fod yn araf iawn i feirniadu meddygon eraill neu i fynegi barn amdanynt. Teimlai fod tensiwn rhwng dyletswydd i adrodd am gamymddygiad meddyg a’r angen i osgoi cyhuddiad yn erbyn cydweithiwr a allai droi allan i fod yn ffals. Dywedodd ei fod yn poeni, pe bai’n gwneud adroddiad, y gallai’r GMC ei feirniadu am ddifrïo Shipman. Yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, derbyniais fod Dr Brown wir yn coleddu’n amheuon hyn am foesau meddygol. Mae ei benderfyniad i ffonio’r Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol (MDU) i gael cyngor cyn rhoi datganiad i’r heddlu am driniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton yn cadarnhau hynny. Mor ddiweddar â 1999, roedd yn betrusgar ynghylch beirniadu cyd-feddyg, hyd yn oed un a oedd wedi’i arestio am lofruddiaeth.
Yn bedwerydd, dywedodd Dr Brown ei fod yn teimlo y dylai anrhydeddu dymuniadau teulu Mrs Overton na ddylid gwneud cwyn yn erbyn Shipman. Fel yr esboniais yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, roedd Dr Brown wedi dweud wrth Dr Michael Overton, brawd Mrs Overton, fod Shipman wedi rhoi morffin i’w chwaer. Gwyddai Dr Overton, sy’n feddyg teulu, ei bod yn anghywir i roi cyffur opiad i berson yn dioddef o asthma. Fodd bynnag, cytunodd Dr Brown nad oedd wedi dweud wrth Dr Overton faint o forffin y deallodd oedd wedi’i roi neu fod yr hyn a roddwyd yn ôl pob golwg wedi’i chwistrellu fel ‘stat’ neu ddos bolws. Dadleuodd ei fod wedi dweud digon i alluogi’r teulu benderfynu a oeddent am fynd ymlaen â chwyn. Dywedodd, pe baent wedi bod yn awyddus i fynd ymlaen, gallai fod wedi darparu mwy o wybodaeth. Roeddent wedi penderfynu peidio gwneud cwyn, ac roedd Dr Brown yn ystyried nad oedd yn rhesymol iddo yntau felly wneud unrhyw beth pellach. Yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, mynegais y pryder nad oedd Dr Brown wedi rhoi digon o wybodaeth i’r teulu Overton i’w galluogi i wneud penderfyniad gwybodus ynghylch bwrw ymlaen â chwyn ai peidio.
Rhaid ystyried pob un o esboniadau Dr Brown yng ngolau’r diwylliant a’r fframwaith ar gyfer adrodd am bryderon ar adeg marwolaeth Mrs Overton.
Arweiniad gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol: Natur y Ddyletswydd i Adrodd
Ystyriaf yn gyntaf yr hyn oedd gan y GMC i’w ddweud yn ei gyhoeddiadau am ddyletswydd meddyg i adrodd am ymddygiad cydweithiwr. Ymddengys fod y ddyletswydd hon wedi datblygu mewn dwy agwedd berthnasol dros y 30 mlynedd diwethaf. Yn gyntaf, 30 mlynedd yn ôl, roedd yn anarferol i’r GMC gymryd camau disgyblu mewn perthynas ag arfer clinigol gwael. Yn gyffredinol, ymddengys mai yn erbyn meddygon a oedd wedi bod yn euog o gamymddygiad yn unig y byddai’r GMC yn cymryd camau disgyblu. Dywedodd Mr Alan Howes, swyddog o’r GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002, bod y ffurfiau mwyaf cyffredin ar gamymddygiad yn cael eu galw fel ‘y tair A’, yn dynodi ‘advertising, abortion ac adultery’ (hysbysebu, erthylu a godinebu). Heddiw, mae llawer o feddygon sy’n ymddangos gerbron Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) y GMC yn wynebu cyhuddiadau yn ymwneud â’u harfer clinigol. Yn ail, mae rhwymedigaeth glir erbyn hyn ar feddygon i adrodd am gydweithiwr sydd neu a allai fod yn risg i gleifion, gan yn y gorffennol, roedd y ddyletswydd yn llai clir a’r pwyslais ar osgoi difenwi cydweithwyr heb gyfiawnhad.
Am lawer o flynyddoedd hyd at oddeutu 1995, darparodd y GMC arweiniad ar swyddogaethau, gweithdrefnau ac awdurdodaeth ddisgyblu’r GMC i bob meddyg ar ei restr. Gelwid yr arweiniad hwn y ‘Llyfr Glas’. Yn ddamcaniaethol, dylai pob meddyg fod wedi darllen y Llyfr Glas er mwyn bod â gwybodaeth ddiweddar am unrhyw newidiadau yn y cyngor a oedd yn cael ei roi neu’r gofynion a oedd wedi’u pennu arnynt gan eu corff rheoleiddio. Fodd bynnag, mae tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu nad oedd y rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn gwneud hynny. Nid oedd rhai yn ei ddarllen o gwbl; byddai eraill yn edrych arno’n frysiog gan sylwi ar y prif negeseuon y n unig.
Fel y byddaf yn esbonio ym Mhennod 15, yn hanesyddol roedd y GMC yn ystyried bod dyletswydd arno i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd trwy gymryd camau disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon a oedd yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Roedd Llyfr Glas 1971, o’r enw ‘GMC Professional Discipline’, yn darparu arweiniad ar y math o droseddau a chamymddygiad proffesiynol a allai arwain at gamau disgyblu. Roedd y pwyslais ar gamymddygiad a thorri moeseg feddygol, yn hytrach nag ar arfer clinigol gwael. Roedd yn pwysleisio fod y cwestiwn pa un a oedd cwrs ymddygiad penodol yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn fater i’w benderfynu gan Bwyllgor Disgyblu’r GMC (rhagflaenydd y PCC) ar y dystiolaeth yn yr achos penodol hwnnw. Nid oedd y categorïau camymddygiad a ddisgrifiwyd i’w hystyried fel rhai cyflawn. Daeth i’r casgliad, mewn geiriau a barodd yn ddigyfnewid i raddau helaeth ym mis Rhagfyr 1993:
‘Any abuse by a doctor of any of the privilieges and opportunities afforded to him, or any grave dereliction of professional duty or serious breach of medical ethics, may give rise to a charge of serious professional misconduct.’
Yn ystod y 1970au, ychydig iawn o newid a fu yn yr arweiniad a gynhwyswyd yn y Llyfr Glas. Roedd cyngor yn erbyn anghymeradwyo sgiliau, gwybodaeth, cymwysterau neu wasanaeth cydweithiwr i’w gael yn yr adran a oedd yn delio â hysbysebu a chanfasio. Nod cyngor felly oedd atal meddygon rhag ceisio ehangu eu meddygfeydd eu hunain drwy ddifrïo arferion eraill.
Ym mis Awst 1977, cyhoeddwyd yr argraffiad newydd o’r Llyfr Glas, o’r enw ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline’. Mewn adran â’r pennawd
dywedwyd y gallai’r GMC gychwyn camau disgyblu:
Ymddengys mai’r neges oedd y byddai’r GMC yn gweithredu ar faterion clinigol, ond y rheiny a oedd yn golygu penderfyniad ymwybodol gan y meddyg i weithredu fel a wnaeth yn unig, gan wybod y canlyniadau tebygol. Ni fyddai esgeuluster, hyd yn oed esgeuluster garw, yn arwain at gamau disgyblu. Gallai’r geiriau terfynol yn yr adran honno fod wedi’u dehongli i beidio cynnwys gweinyddu gorddos peryglus o feddyginiaeth, yn cael ei rhoi yn ddiffuant ond ag esgeuluster garw.
Ym 1983, newidiwyd y darn cyfatebol yn y Llyfr Glas er mwyn ehangu’r meysydd triniaeth glinigol lle gellid cymryd camau gweithredu. Roedd yn darllen:
‘The Council is not ordinarily concerned with errors in diagnosis or treatment, or with the kind of matters which give rise to action in the civil courts for negligence, unless the doctor’s conduct in the case has involved such a disregard of his professional responsibility to his patients or such a neglect of his professional duties as to raise a question of serious professional misconduct’.
Nid oedd y neges wedi newid yn sylweddol, fodd bynnag. At hynny, roedd anhawster i ymarferwyr gan fod y cyngor yn gylchol. Roedd y GMC yn dweud y byddai’n gweithredu ar achosion o SPM ond y byddai camgymeriadau mewn diagnosis a thriniaeth yn destun camau disgyblu os oeddent yn ddigon difrifol yn unig i godi cwestiwn SPM. Mae’n rhaid bod ymarferwyr wedi meddwl tybed pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd achosion yn gorfod bod cyn i’r GMC ddod yn gysylltiedig.
Roedd Llyfr Glas 1985 yn cynnwys nodwedd newydd, sef datganiad o’r safonau gofal meddygol yr oedd hawl gan y cyhoedd eu disgwyl. Yn ddiau roedd hyn o gymorth i ymarferwyr. Fodd bynnag, yn amlwg nid y bwriad oedd bod methiant i fodloni’r safonau hyn yn briodol yn arwain at achos SPM gerbron y GMC. Ni fyddai’n fy synnu pe bai meddygon yn parhau yn ansicr ynghylch pa fathau o anap meddygol oedd yn gallu golygu SPM.
Ym 1983, roedd rhaglen deledu’r BBC, ‘That’s Life’, wedi darlledu eitem a oedd yn feirniadol iawn o aelodau’r proffesiwn meddygol am fethu adrodd am bryderon yn ymwneud â thriniaeth laser anfedrus a roddwyd gan feddyg i gleifion. Roedd llawer o aelodau’r GMC yn flin gyda’r BBC am ddarlledu’r rhaglen. Derbyniodd y GMC serch hynny argymhelliad ei Bwyllgor Gweithredol y dylai’r GMC hysbysu meddygon yn Adroddiad Blynyddol nesaf y GMC
‘y gallai fod amgylchiadau lle mai cyfrifoldeb y meddygon fyddai adrodd tystiolaeth i’r Cyngor a ellid ystyried ei bod yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol gan gydweithiwr proffesiynol’
. Wedi hynny, roedd argraffiad mis Ebrill 1987 o’r Llyfr Glas yn nodi am y tro cyntaf y rhwymedigaeth foesegol ar feddyg i adrodd am gydweithiwr proffesiynol y credwyd ei fod/bod wedi cyflawni SPM neu a allai fod wedi bod yn dioddef o nam iechyd difrifol. Nododd y Llyfr Glas:
‘...a doctor has a duty, where the circumstances so warrant, to inform an appropriate body about a professional colleague whose behaviour may have raised a question of serious professional misconduct, or whose fitness to practise may be seriously impaired by reason of a physical or mental condition. Similarly, a doctor may also comment on the professional performance of a colleague in respect of whom he acts as a referee.’
Dylwn ddweud, dros ddeng mlynedd yn gynharach, fod Adroddiad Pwyllgor yr Ymchwiliad i Reoleiddio’r Proffesiwn Meddygol (Pwyllgor Merrison) wedi awgrymu bod dyletswydd foesegol ar feddygon oedd â gwybodaeth a oedd yn rhoi rheswm da iddynt gredu fod ymddygiad meddyg arall yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl, i weithredu ar y wybodaeth honno.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 1990, yn Adroddiad Blynyddol y GMC, cyhoeddodd Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Donald Irvine, Cadeirydd Pwyllgor Safonau y GMC ar y pryd, symudiad pellach yn ymagwedd y GMC tuag at adrodd am bryderon ynghylch cydweithwyr. Cydnabu y gallai darnau mewn argraffiadau blaenorol o’r Llyfr Glas, ynghylch difrïo cydweithwyr, fod wedi annog meddyg rhag beirniadu cydweithwyr, a bod sail dda i’r beirniadu hwnnw, neu rhag adrodd am gamymddygiad posibl. Aeth Syr Donald ymlaen i esbonio fod y Pwyllgor Safonau yn cynnig y dylai ffocws y GMC gael ei newid er mwyn pwysleisio dyletswydd meddygon i gymryd camau priodol pan allai perfformiad cydweithiwr fod yn ddiffygiol. Roedd y rhybudd yn erbyn difrïo i gael lle eilaidd. Cymeradwywyd yr arweiniad newydd gan y GMC, ac fe’i ymgorfforwyd wedyn yn argraffiad mis Chwefror 1991 o’r Llyfr Glas. Roedd yn dweud:
Roedd y newid yn ehangu’r ddyletswydd i adrodd. Lle o’r blaen roedd y ddyletswydd wedi codi yn unig yn achos pryder ynghylch ymddygiad a allai olygu SPM neu amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, roedd bellach yn cynnwys dyletswydd i adrodd am feddyg
‘yr ymddengys fod ei berfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol mewn rhyw ffordd’
. Roedd hyn i weld yn cynnwys trothwy llawer is ar gyfer adrodd. Awgrymwyd i’r Ymchwiliad, pe bai meddygon wedi dilyn y cyngor hwn i’r llythyren, byddent yn adrodd am eu cydweithwyr yn gyson iawn. Gall fod fod y geiriau’n ehangach nag a fwriadwyd iddynt fod. Ymddengys i mi fod y darn i fod i gyfleu mai
‘lle’r oedd yr amgylchiadau’n gwarantu hynny’
yn unig y dylid adrodd am berfformiad diffygiol. Er y gallai’r darn fod wedi gadael meddygon yn amheus ynghylch ble’r oedd y trothwy ar gyfer adrodd, roedd yn glir o leiaf fod y ddyletswydd yn un bwysig, ac, os oedd meddyg yn amheus ynghylch lle’r oedd y ddyletswydd yn codi, roedd wastad yn agored iddo/iddi i gymryd cyngor. Roedd y darn yn dweud yn glir mai sylw di-alw-amdano, na ellid ei gynnal a wnaed gyda’r bwriad o danseilio ymddiriedaeth mewn cydweithiwr a fyddai’n cael ei ystyried yn anfoesegol.
Nid oedd y darn yn rhoi arweiniad penodol ynghylch pwy oedd
‘yn berson neu’n gorff priodol’
y dylid adrodd iddo/iddi. Nid oedd ychwaith yn disgrifio’r trefniadau a oedd yn bodoli ar gyfer delio ag unrhyw bryderon oedd yn cael eu hadrodd. Yn ddiau mai’r rheswm am hynny oedd y byddai’r
‘person neu’r corff priodol’
yn amrywio yn ôl yr amgylchiadau. Felly hefyd
y ‘trefniadau’
. Gall fod nad oedd yr arweiniad ar y materion hynny’n angenrheidiol; gallai meddygon yn hawdd gymryd cyngor, os oeddent yn amau, gan eu sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol.
Fel y dywedais, ymgorfforwyd yr arweiniad newydd hwn yn argraffiad mis Chwefror 1991 o’r Llyfr Glas. Nid oedd argraffiadau dilynol, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Ebrill a mis Mai 1992 ac ym mis Ionawr a mis Rhagfyr 1993, yn cynnwys unrhyw newidiadau o bwys. Roedd argraffiad mis Rhagfyr 1993 yn gyfredol pan aethpwyd â Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty a phan fu farw.
Ymdrechion i Gyhoeddi ac Esbonio’r Arweiniad Newydd
Ymddengys fod yr arweiniad fwy na thebyg wedi cael rhywfaint o gyhoeddusrwydd yn y wasg. Ym mis Awst 1992, cyhoeddodd y GMC ddogfen o’r enw ‘Form of Response to Press Inquiries’ a oedd yn pwysleisio pwysigrwydd meddygon yn adrodd am gydweithwyr yr oedd eu hymddygiad yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl, ac yn rhybuddio y gallai meddygon nad oeddent yn dilyn yr arweiniad orfod ateb i’r GMC. Nid yw’n eglur beth ysgogodd llunio’r ddogfen hon na pha mor eang y cafodd ei chyhoeddi, os o gwbl.
Cadarnhawyd y neges y flwyddyn ddilynol. Ar 15 Gorffennaf 1993, cyhoeddodd y GMC ddatganiad i’r wasg yn codi o achos Dr Behrooz Sohrab Irani, anaesthetegydd ymgynghorol locwm y cafodd y PCC ef yn euog o SPM mewn cysylltiad â’r modd peryglus yr ymdriniodd â chlaf a oedd wedi dioddef niwed difrifol ar yr ymennydd dan ei ofal. Roedd y dystiolaeth yn dangos fod Dr Sean Dunn, Cadeirydd Adran Anaestheteg ymddiriedolaeth y GIG a oedd yn rheoli’r ysbyty lle gweithiai Dr Irani, wedi derbyn adroddiadau cynharach am arfer gwael gan Dr Irani, ond na weithredwyd arnynt. Er ei fod yn ymwybodol o’r adroddiadau hyn, roedd Dr Dunn wedi ysgrifennu geirda ffafriol i Dr Irani, a oedd yn ei alluogi i gael gwaith yn rhywle arall. Daeth datganiad mis Gorffennaf 1993 i ben gan ddweud:
‘Yn olaf, mae gweithdrefnau priodol ar gyfer ymateb i adroddiadau o anallu amlwg a pheryglus; mae dyletswydd ar feddygon i ysgogi’r gweithdrefnau hynny ar unwaith, er budd diogelwch cleifion, lle mae achosion felly’n codi.’
Cafodd errata yn ymwneud â’r paragraff hwn ei gyhoeddi ym mis Mawrth 2005. Mae’r errata i’w weld ar ddiwedd y bennod hon.
Cyhuddwyd Dr Dunn o SPM a gwrandawyd ei achos gan y PPC ym mis Mawrth 1994. Fe’i cafwyd yn euog. Roedd y penderfyniad yn rhybudd i feddygon, os oedd ganddynt reswm i gredu fod ymddygiad neu berfformiad proffesiynol cydweithiwr yn creu perygl i gleifion, roedd dyletswydd arnynt i weithredu ar y gred honno. Cynghorwyd meddygon y dylent, cyn gweithredu, wneud eu gorau i sefydlu’r ffeithiau. Dylid ystyried unrhyw eirda yn ofalus a dylid rhoi geirda yn ddiffuant. Os oedd y meddyg yn amheus ynghylch cydweithiwr, byddai’n anfoesegol i roi geirda. Roedd nodyn atgoffa arall fod gweithdrefnau’n bodoli ar gyfer ymateb i adroddiadau o anallu amlwg a pheryglus. Daeth y penderfyniad i ben:
‘Mae’n rhaid i ddiogelwch cleifion gymryd blaenoriaeth dros bob mater arall ar bob adeg, gan gynnwys tawedogrwydd dealladwy i amau gyrfa cydweithiwr.’
Adroddwyd am achos Dunn yn adran newyddion y British Medical Journal. Roedd yr erthygl berthnasol yn dyfynnu geiriau terfynol penderfyniad y GMC. Yn ôl yr erthygl,
‘Defnyddiodd y GMC achos Dr Dunn i anfon neges i’r proffesiwn am ei ddyletswydd i ddiogelu cleifion hyd yn oed os yw hyn yn golygu adrodd am gydweithiwr neu wrthod rhoi geirda.’
Dywedodd Dr Gerard Panting, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfathrebu a Pholisi yn y Gymdeithas Diogelu Meddygol, fod yr achos yn pwysleisio’r angen i sicrhau bod meddygon yn cymryd camau cadarnhaol pan oeddent yn gweld bod risg i gleifion. Mae tystiolaeth arall a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu fod y brif neges a dderbyniwyd gan y proffesiwn gan achos Dr Dunn yn ymwneud â’r angen i fod yn onest ac yn gywir wrth roi geirda.
Er bod safbwynt y GMC, yn fy marn i, wedi’i nodi’n glir ym 1991, yn sicr dylai unrhyw feddyg a oedd yn diweddaru’i wybodaeth/gwybodaeth trwy ddarllen y Llyfr Glas a’r wasg feddygol fod wedi bod yn ymwybodol ei fod/bod dan rwymedigaeth broffesiynol, erbyn mis Gorffennaf 1993, i adrodd i awdurdod priodol am unrhyw bryderon y gall fod ganddo/ganddi fod cydweithiwr wedi bod yn euog o SPM, neu fod arfer y cydweithiwr wedi peri risg niweidio cleifion. Rwy’n cydnabod nad oedd rhai meddygon o bosibl wedi darllen y cyhoeddiadau perthnasol. Ond, pa un a oeddent mewn gwirionedd yn gwybod amdani neu beidio, dylai pob meddyg fod wedi gwybod eu bod dan y ddyletswydd honno o’r amser hwnnw. Rwy’n cydnabod hefyd nad oedd syniad clir iawn gan feddygon yn eu meddyliau ynghylch pa fath o ymddygiad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, credaf y dylai pob meddyg allu adnabod pa fathau o ymddygiad sy’n creu risg niweidio cleifion. Y math hwnnw o ymddygiad oedd dan sylw yn achos Mrs Overton. Roedd, wedi’r cyfan, wedi dioddef y niwed mwyaf difrifol posibl ac eithrio marwolaeth uniongyrchol, ac ystyriodd Dr Brown fod y driniaeth a roddwyd iddi
‘yn anarferol iawn, yn beryglus hyd yn oed’
Er bod safbwynt y GMC o ran bodolaeth dyletswydd meddyg i adrodd am bryderon ynghylch cydweithwyr wedi’i wneud yn glir i’r proffesiwn erbyn hyn, nid oedd arweiniad penodol wedi’i roi ynghylch lle dylid gwneud adroddiad. O ran y GMC, byddai wastad yn cynghori y dylid ymdrin yn lleol ag adroddiadau am ymddygiad na allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM; pe bai’n codi o driniaeth o fewn y GIG, y corff GIG lleol ddylai wneud hyn. Byddai adroddiadau am ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM hyd yn oed yn cael eu hanfon yn ôl gan staff neu sgrinwyr y GMC i ddelio â nhw’n lleol, oni bai bod yr adroddiad am ymddygiad a oedd yn cael ei ganfod fel ymddygiad a barai risg i’r cyhoedd. Byddaf yn delio â’r pwnc hwn yn fanylach ym Mhennod 18.
Fe allai’r GMC yn wir fod wedi meddwl nad oedd yn angenrheidiol cynghori meddygon am eu gweithdrefnau GIG lleol. Roedd yn rhesymol i dybio y byddai meddyg yn gweithio o fewn y GIG yn gwybod am y gweithdrefnau lleol a oedd yn berthnasol i’w waith/gwaith. Efallai na ddylai’r GMC fod wedi tybio y byddai pob meddyg yn gwybod am y gweithdrefnau lleol a oedd yn berthnasol i’r rhannau hynny o’r GIG lle nad oeddent yn gweithio. Er enghraifft, efallai na fyddai meddyg teulu’n gwybod am y gweithdrefnau a oedd yn rheoli meddygon ysbyty a
. Fodd bynnag, gallai’r GMC fod wedi tybied yn rhesymol y byddai meddyg a oedd yn gwybod y dylai wneud adroddiad yn gallu canfod i bwy ddylid gwneud yr adroddiad.

---  ---
Argymhellwyd ar ran Dr Brown, er bod dyletswydd meddyg o bosibl wedi’i hesbonio’n glir gan y GMC, nad oedd yr arfer mewn ysbytai’r GIG ym 1994 yn adlewyrchu arweiniad y GMC. Dadleuwyd, yn wyneb y diwylliant a fodolai ar y pryd, na fyddai llawer o feddygon yn sefyllfa Dr Brown wedi adrodd am eu pryderon ynghylch triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton. Casglodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ar y materion hyn o amrywiaeth o ffynonellau. Eisoes, yn ystod Cam Dau, cafwyd tystiolaeth gan y staff meddygol, nyrsio a gweinyddol yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside. Yng ngwrandawiadau Cam Pedwar, estynnwyd y maes ymholi i gynnwys yr arfer o fewn yr Ymddiriedolaethau a oedd yn gyfrifol am dri ysbyty cyffelyb o ran maint i Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Gyfarwyddwyr Meddygol yr Ymddiriedolaethau hyn. Y rhain oedd Mr Alan Turner (wrolegydd ymgynghorol a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol er 1993 yn Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Ysbytai Peterborough), Dr Christopher Bateman (Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol o 1994 i 1996 yn Ysbyty St Richard’s, Chichester) a Mr Ian Harrison (ymgynghorydd mewn llawfeddygaeth gyffredinol yn Ysbyty Southport, Glannau Merswy, a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Southport ac Ormskirk er 1991).
Ar yr un materion, darparwyd datganiad tyst gan y cyfreithwyr a oedd yn cynrychioli Dr Brown a Dr Husaini ar gyfer yr Athro Alan Aitkenhead a Dr John Givans. Mae’r Athro Aitkenhead yn Athro Anaesthesia yn Queen’s Medical Centre, Prifysgol Nottingham; mae ganddo brofiad o gynghori hawlwyr a diffynyddion mewn hawliadau esgeuluster clinigol, yn ogystal â phrofiad o eistedd ar y Pwyllgor Achosion MDU, sy’n penderfynu a ddylid amddiffyn neu setlo gweithredoedd esgeuluster clinigol yn erbyn aelodau MDU. Ymgymhwysodd Dr Givans fel meddyg ym 1958; ar ôl cyfnod yn y Fyddin, gweithiodd mewn meddygaeth deuluol am 25 mlynedd, gan ymddeol ym 1991. Roedd wedi gwasanaethu ar bwyllgor gwasanaeth meddygol (MSC) am ryw ddeng mlynedd o 1973. Bu’n ysgrifennydd amser llawn dau bwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC). Ers ymddeol o feddygaeth deuluol, mae wedi gwneud gwaith ymgynghori ar gyfer yr MDU, gan gynorthwyo meddygon sy’n ymddangos gerbron MSCau, neu, yn fwy diweddar, panelau adolygu annibynnol. Mae wedi parhau mewn cysylltiad, felly, â phrif ffrwd meddygaeth deuluol glinigol.
Darparwyd tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig gan y sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol a’r Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig. Rhoddodd Dr Panting dystiolaeth lafar hefyd.
Ymwybyddiaeth o’r Ddyletswydd i Adrodd
Cytunwyd yn gyffredinol gan y tystion a oedd yn rhoi tystiolaeth yng Ngham Pedwar fod gwahaniaeth dramatig yn hinsawdd adrodd am bryderon ynghylch arfer clinigol cydweithwyr ym 1998 a’r hyn ydyw heddiw. Erbyn hyn mae meddygon yn llawer fwy ymwybodol o’u dyletswydd i adrodd am bryderon nag oeddent bryd hynny ac yn fwy parod i wneud hynny. Roedd Mr Turner o’r farn i’r newid ddechrau gydag achosion Irani a Dunn, ond bod effaith llawer fwy pellgyrhaeddol wedi’i achosi gan y cyhoeddusrwydd yn ymwneud â chamau gweithredu’r GMC yn erbyn Dr John Roylance, Prif Swyddog Gweithredol United Bristol Healthcare NHS Trust, am ei fethiant dros gyfnod hir i weithredu ar bryderon ynghylch y gyfradd fethiant uchel mewn llawfeddygaeth paediatrig y galon yn y British Royal Infirmary. Dechreuodd ymwybyddiaeth o ddigwyddiadau ym Mryste yn dilyn marwolaeth plentyn bach, Joshua Loveday, ym mis Ionawr 1995, ond ni ddaeth gwrandawiad y GMC a arweiniodd at ddileu Dr Roylance o’r gofrestr feddygol, i ben nes 1998. Dywedodd Dr Givans nad oedd y meddygon yn deall bod dyletswydd ganddynt i adrodd tan oddeutu 1996. Hyd hynny, roeddent yn tueddu rhagdybio fod eu cydweithwyr wedi gweithredu’n ddiffuant a rhoi iddynt fantais yr amheuaeth a fodolai mewn achos penodol.
Dywedodd Mr Butterworth, a oedd, fel y dywedais, yn ddirprwy Brif Weithredwr yr Ymddiriedolaeth GIG a oedd yn gyfrifol am Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside, ei bod yn anarferol i aelod o staff yr ysbyty adrodd am bryder ynghylch meddyg teulu. Serch hynny, ym 1994, dylai digwyddiad difrifol fel hwnnw’n gysylltiedig â Mrs Overton fod wedi bod yn destun adroddiad. Fodd bynnag, pe bai’r gorddos wedi’i ganfod gan y rheiny a oedd yn trin Mrs Overton fel ‘camgymeriad pur’, efallai na fyddid wedi adrodd amdano; ychwanegodd Mr Butterworth na fyddai o bosibl, hyd yn oed heddiw, yn cael ei adrodd. Ni fyddai’r digwyddiad yn destun adroddiad (ym 1994 na hyd yn oed heddiw) pe na bai’r canlyniadau’n ddifrifol. Gan fod y canlyniadau’n ddifrifol yn achos Mrs Overton, dywedodd Mr Butterworth, ‘y byddai wedi disgwyl cael gwybod’ ym 1994.
Dywedodd Mr Timothy Dunningham, a oedd yn llawfeddyg orthopaedig ymgynghorol yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside ym 1994, ac a ddaeth yn Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr ysbyty yn ddiweddarach, na wyddai am unrhyw enghraifft lle’r oedd ysbyty (neu feddyg ysbyty) wedi beirniadu ymddygiad meddyg teulu yn swyddogol. Roedd yn fwy arferol i’r claf neu’r teulu ganlyn pryderon felly.
Dywedodd Dr Panting bod meddygon a oedd â diddordeb penodol mewn materion moesegol wastad wedi gwybod bod dyletswydd arnynt i adrodd am gydweithiwr lle’r oedd problem a oedd yn bygwth gofal cleifion. Ond nid felly’r oedd hi yn achos y proffesiwn yn gyffredinol. Nid oedd llawer o feddygon yn gyfarwydd â materion, ac nid oedd ganddynt ddiddordeb mewn materion, a oedd yn gysylltiedig â moeseg feddygol. Nid oedd moeseg feddygol yn cael ei haddysgu, fel y dylai, fel rhan o’r cwrs israddedig; nid oedd ychwaith yn cael ei haddysgu yn ystod y flwyddyn cyn-gofrestru. Byddai meddyg ifanc yn clywed uwch feddygon yn trafod materion moesegol, ond fe allai’n wir glywed agweddau nad oedd yn iawn. Wrth wynebu cwestiwn pa un a ddylid adrodd am gydweithiwr neu beidio, os nad oedd meddyg yn gofyn am gyngor ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol, roedd perygl na fyddai’n dibynnu ar y Llyfr Glas, ond yn hytrach ar werthoedd mwy cyffredinol a oedd yn cael eu ‘traddodi’. Mae Dr Panting ei hun yn darlithio i grwpiau o feddygon ar faterion moesegol, ac mae’n synnu’n aml ar raddfa’r anwybodaeth sy’n cael ei dangos. At hynny, nid oedd y cyhoeddiadau am y ddyletswydd i adrodd a wnaed ar ddiwedd y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au yn werth eu cofnodi. Ni chredai fod achosion Dr Irani a Dr Dunn wedi cael effaith fawr. Roedd wedi deall hefyd bod neges wirioneddol achos Dr Dunn yn ymwneud â rhoi geirda diffuant, ac nid adrodd ynghylch arfer gwael. Dywedodd Dr Panting fod nifer y meddygon a oedd yn darllen y Llyfr Glas yn eithaf isel fwy na thebyg. Roedd Mr Turner, yr Athro Aitkenhead a Dr Givans yn cytuno. Dr Bateman yn unig a ddywedodd ei fod o’r farn y dylai pob ymgynghorydd ei ddarllen, ac y byddai pob ymgynghorydd wedi’i ddarllen. Dywedodd Mr Harrison y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon wedi ‘pori’ drwy’r Llyfr Glas am gyfnod byr, ond dyna’i gyd.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead, cyn 1987 (pan nodwyd y rhwymedigaeth yn y Llyfr Glas am y tro cyntaf) ac wedi hynny, y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o ymgynghorwyr wedi bod yn ymwybodol mai eu dyletswydd oed adrodd am bryderon ynghylch cydweithwyr yr oedd eu hymddygiad yn codi cwestiwn SPM, neu bryderon y gellid fod wedi amharu’n ddifrifol ar eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Fodd bynnag, ym 1994, oni bai ei bod yn eglur fod ‘esgeuluster garw’ wedi digwydd, neu fod patrwm o berfformiad gwael, ni fyddid wedi disgwyl i feddyg wneud adroddiad am driniaeth glinigol wael a roddwyd gan gydweithiwr. Byddai’r nodweddion annigonol canfyddedig yn cael eu trafod yn anffurfiol gyda’r meddyg neu mewn cyfarfodydd archwilio lle gallai’r meddyg fod yn bresennol neu’n absennol, yn y gobaith y byddai diffygion yn cael eu nodi a chamau’n cael eu cymryd i osgoi hynny rhag digwydd eto. Wrth gwrs, ni fyddai opsiynau felly ar gael i feddyg ysbyty a oedd yn pryderu ynghylch perfformiad meddyg teulu. Dywedodd Dr Givans, hyd yn oed erbyn 1994, nid oedd yr arweiniad a gyhoeddwyd gan y GMC wedi bod yn effeithiol wrth newid y diwylliant a oedd wedi bodoli’n flaenorol er mwyn sicrhau bod adroddiadau’n cael eu gwneud i awdurdod priodol.
Yr Ofn o Gael eu Cyhuddo o Ddifrïo
Roedd yn ymddangos i mi, o ddarllen yr argraffiadau perthnasol amrywiol o’r Llyfr Glas, fod y cyngor yn erbyn difrïo meddyg arall wedi’i gyfeirio’n bennaf (os nad yn benodol) yn erbyn y gamweithred o ddenu cleifion i ffwrdd oddi wrth gydweithiwr. Os felly’r oedd hi, yna nid oedd yn ymddangos i mi y gallai’r cyngor fyth fod wedi gweithredu fel rhwystr i feddyg a oedd yn ystyried adrodd i awdurdod priodol am bryderon gwirioneddol ynghylch cydweithiwr, a oedd yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion.
Roedd Dr Bateman a Dr Panting eu dau yn cytuno na allai’r cyngor yn erbyn difrïo fod wedi cael yr effaith o anghymell meddyg a oedd yn bwriadu adrodd am bryder gwirioneddol ym 1994. Dywedodd Dr Panting, mewn blynyddoedd cynharach, roedd y cyngor yn y Llyfr Glas wedi cael yr effaith o anghymell rhai meddygon.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead nad oedd yn gweld y rhybuddion yn erbyn difrïo fel rhwystr mawr i adrodd am driniaeth wael, ond roeddent wedi anghymell rhai meddygon. Dywedodd Dr Givans, cyn oddeutu 1996, roedd pob meddyg wedi’u trwytho mewn diwylliant a oedd yn pwysleisio peryglon beirniadu perfformiad proffesiynol cydweithiwr yn absenoldeb tystiolaeth uniongyrchol i gefnogi beirniadaeth felly.
Fy marn i yw na ddylai darllen y Llyfr Glas yn ofalus fod erioed wedi anghymell meddyg rhag adrodd am bryderon ynghylch cydweithiwr i awdurdod priodol, yn sicr nid ar ôl 1991. Fodd bynnag, ar y dystiolaeth, rwy’n derbyn iddo anghymell rhai meddygon mewn gwirionedd. Dyna pam, ym mis Rhagfyr 1990, y cyhoeddodd Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Irvine symudiad ffocws yng nghyngor y GMC. Os yw’n wir mai nifer fach o feddygon sy’n darllen y Llyfr Glas ag unrhyw lefel o astudrwydd, efallai nad yw’n syndod fod syniadau hen ffasiwn ynghylch difrïo cydweithiwr, a ddysgwyd fel myfyriwr neu swyddog tŷ ifanc, wedi aros yn gyfredol ymhell wedi iddynt gael eu gwrthod gan y GMC. Yn fy marn i, er 1991, mae’r cyngor yn y Llyfr Glas ynghylch y ddyletswydd i adrodd am bryderon sy’n effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion wedi bod yn eglur. Ymddengys yn debygol, fodd bynnag, fod y diwylliant yn erbyn adrodd wedi parhau ychydig yn hwy, o bosibl oherwydd bod cyn lleied o feddygon yn darllen y Llyfr Glas ac yn cadw yn eu meddyliau yn hytrach y syniadau a fabwysiadwyd yn ystod eu hyfforddiant cynnar.
Y Camgymeriad ‘Unigol’ neu ‘Wirioneddol’
Ar lawer achlysur yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, dywedodd tystion y byddai meddyg yn amharod i adrodd am gydweithiwr a oedd wedi gwneud camgymeriad os oedd yn ymddangos mai camgymeriad ‘unigol’ neu ‘wirioneddol’ oedd wedi digwydd. Y ddadl yw bod pob meddyg yn gwneud camgymeriadau weithiau; mae camgymeriad ‘unigol’ yn goblygu’r math o gamgymeriad nad ydyw’n cynrychioli cyfres neu batrwm o gamgymeriadau. Mae camgymeriad ‘gwirioneddol’ yn goblygu camgymeriad nad ydyw’n codi o broblem sylfaenol gydag arfer y meddyg ond sy’n fath o gamgymeriad y gallai unrhyw feddyg ei wneud o bryd i’w gilydd, er cymryd pob gofal rhesymol. Hwn yw’r math o gamgymeriad sy’n peri i feddygon fod yn faddeugar a dweud, ‘Dyna ni, onibai am ras Duw, fe af.’
Mae’n ddealladwy y bydd meddyg yn amharod i wneud adroddiad am gydweithiwr am gamgymeriad y cred y meddyg y gallai ef/hi ei hun fod wedi’i wneud. Fodd bynnag, os yw meddyg yn ystyried pa un ai adrodd am bryder ai peidio a’i fod yn mynd i lunio barn ynghylch a oedd y camgymeriad yn un ‘unigol’ neu ‘wirioneddol’, mae ef/hi yn debygol o fod angen mwy o wybodaeth nag sydd ar gael fel arfer. Eto ymddengys bod meddygon yn aml yn rhagdybio y byddai’r wybodaeth goll yn cadarnhau fod y camgymeriad yn un ‘unigol’ neu ‘wirioneddol’, er bod y ffeithiau hysbys yn niwtral neu yn gallu awgrymu fel arall hyd yn oed. Mewn geiriau eraill, mae mantais yr amheuaeth sy’n codi o’r wybodaeth goll yn cael ei rhoi i’r meddyg.
Fe wnaeth hyd yn oed y meddygon a oedd yn rhoi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ddangos y math hwn o ymagwedd. Yn ei dystiolaeth ysgrifenedig, dywedodd Mr Turner y gallai
‘camgymeriad’
Shipman wrth drin Mrs Overton fod wedi bod yn gamgymeriad
‘unigol’
. Dywedodd, cyn belled ag yr oedd ef yn ymwybodol, mai digwyddiad ar ei ben ei hun oedd hwn. Yn unol â hynny, gallai ef ei hun fod wedi penderfynu peidio adrodd amdano. Yn yr un modd, dywedodd Dr Bateman, os oedd enw da i’r meddyg ac os credwyd mai hwn oedd y tro cyntaf i ddigwyddiad felly ddigwydd, ni fyddai wedi disgwyl i’r achos fod yn destun adroddiad. Esboniodd mai ‘tuedd gyntaf rhywun’ oedd meddwl fod y meddyg wedi gwneud camgymeriad ‘unigol’. Byddai’r meddyg wedi cael mantais yr amheuaeth.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead, tua adeg y digwyddiad yn ymwneud â Mrs Overton, y byddai’r canfyddiad y gallai’r digwyddiad fod wedi bod yn ‘gamgymeriad unigol’ wedi cael cryn ddylanwad ar benderfyniad meddyg ynghylch adrodd. Os oedd tystiolaeth o gamgymeriad neu enghraifft o arfer gwael gan feddyg y credwyd bod ganddo hanes da o ymarfer fel meddyg cymwys a gofalgar, y duedd fyddai peidio ag adrodd, ond yn hytrach rhoi mantais yr amheuaeth i’r meddyg. Gallai hynny fod wedi digwydd hefyd lle nad oedd gan y meddyg a oedd yn ystyried pa un ai adrodd ai peidio unrhyw wybodaeth o gwbl am berfformiad cyffredinol y meddyg arall.
Dywedodd Dr Givans, os oedd meddyg yn credu y bu damwain ‘unigol wirioneddol’ yn ymwneud â chlinigwr yr oedd parch mawr iddo cyn hynny, y diwylliant ym 1994 oedd peidio ag adrodd. Yn ystod ei dystiolaeth, tynnwyd sylw gan Dr Givans - yn gyffredin â meddygon eraill - at fylchau ac anghysonderau potensial ynghylch llewyg Mrs Overton a mynd â hi i’r ysbyty er mwyn esbonio pam yr oedd penderfyniad Dr Brown i beidio adrodd yn un rhesymol. Roedd yn glir o’r hyn a ddywedodd ei fod yn dangos yr ymagwedd y disgrifiais uchod. Ychwanegodd at y ffeithiau hysbys y dehongliad o’r digwyddiadau a oedd mwyaf ffafriol i’r meddyg. Cydnabu Mr Givans berygl diwylliant lle mae meddygon yn cymryd arnynt eu hunain i benderfynu nad oes angen ymchwilio i fater ar y sail eu bod hwy eu hunain, heb hyd yn oed gofyn am adroddiad y cydweithiwr y mae ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn destun sylw, wedi dod i’r casgliad nad yw ar fai. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai ‘ffaith bywyd’ oedd hyn.
Awgrymodd yr Athro Aitkenhead y byddai’n rhy feichus o lawer i ddisgwyl i feddygon adrodd am bob camgymeriad. Fel y deallaf ei dystiolaeth, roedd yn awgrymu ei bod yn rhesymol i feddyg wneud ei asesiad/hasesiad ei hun ynghylch pa un a oedd y camgymeriad yn ddigon difrifol i warantu adrodd. Cyflwynodd erthygl academaidd Ffrangeg, a oedd yn dangos bod yr hyn yr oedd yn ei ddweud yn hysbys i bawb sy’n gweithio mewn unedau gofal dwys (ICU), sef, bod rhyw 8% o dderbyniadau i unedau gofal dwys yn deillio o gamgymeriad mewn triniaeth feddygol. Yn y mwyafrif o achosion felly, meddai, byddai’r staff derbyn yn ymwybodol o’r ffaith honno. Ni ellid disgwyl iddynt adrodd am bob achos felly. Rwy’n derbyn ei bod yn rhaid i feddyg sy’n ystyried adrodd lunio rhyw fath o farn ynghylch difrifoldeb yr hyn sydd wedi digwydd, er, os yw’r camgymeriad wedi arwain at orfod mynd i ICU, mae’n rhaid ei fod yn ddifrifol, trwy ddiffiniad bron. At hynny, byddai adrodd am y digwyddiad yn orfodol y dyddiau hyn. Yr hyn na ddylai’r meddyg yn sicr ei wneud, yn fy marn i, yw seilio’r penderfyniad ynghylch adrodd ar ragdybiaethau neu ddamcaniaethu am faterion nad oes ganddo/ganddi unrhyw dystiolaeth.
Annigonolrwydd y Dystiolaeth
Honnodd Dr Brown mai un o’r rhesymau na wnaeth adrodd am Shipman oedd nad oedd ganddo ddigon o wybodaeth i wneud hynny; nid oedd yn meddwl fod nodiadau’r ysbyty yn ddigon at y diben. Mae’n rhaid i mi gyfaddef, cyn gwrando’r dystiolaeth yng Ngham Pedwar, ni chafodd y ddadl honno argraff arnaf. Roeddwn yn credu y byddai wedi gwybod y byddai’n ddigon iddo adrodd am ei bryderon wrth awdurdod priodol, a fyddai wedyn yn penderfynu pa un a ddylid ymchwilio i’r pryderon a’u canlyn. Fodd bynnag, daeth yn eglur i mi yn ystod Cam Pedwar y byddai Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside (FHSA), a oedd bryd hynny’n gyfrifol am ofal sylfaenol yn yr ardal, wedi disgwyl cael y dystiolaeth i gefnogi pryderon felly, ac ni fyddai wedi gwneud fawr neu ddim gwaith ymchwilio iddynt. Ni fyddai’r GMC ychwaith wedi cynnal ymchwiliad felly oni bai a hyd nes bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud gan y PPC i gyfeirio’r achos at y PCC.
Roedd yn ddealladwy ym marn Dr Panting y gallai meddyg yn sefyllfa Dr Brown betruso cyn adrodd am bryder oherwydd teimlad nad oedd ganddo ddigon o ‘afael ar y ffeithiau’. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd mai’r gwir rwymedigaeth oedd penderfynu pa un a oedd ganddo sail resymol i feddwl bod problem, ac os felly dylai adrodd am yr hyn a wyddai i’r awdurdod priodol.
Roedd Mr Harrison o’r farn y byddai’n rhaid i feddyg, ym 1994, deimlo’n sicr iawn o’i dir cyn adrodd i’r GMC am gydweithiwr. Dywedodd Dr Givans bod meddygon yn ‘arswydo’ o fod yn gysylltiedig â’r GMC ac roeddent yn ochelgar iawn o feirniadaeth bosibl. Dywedodd hefyd y byddai angen ‘tystiolaeth gadarn a fyddai’n dal ei thir yn y llys’ ar feddyg cyn mynd at y GMC. Yn ôl yr Athro Aitkenhead, ‘ychydig iawn, iawn’ o feddygon yn sefyllfa Dr Brown ym 1994 fyddai wedi adrodd yn uniongyrchol i’r GMC. Hyd yn oed pe credwyd bod achos o esgeuluster garw, roedd yn anarferol eithriadol i feddygon adrodd am ei gilydd i’r GMC, oni bai eu bod yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd swyddogol fel Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol ymddiriedolaeth GIG.
Rwyf bellach wedi gwrando llawer iawn o dystiolaeth am weithdrefnau’r GMC dros y 30 mlynedd diwethaf, ac rwy’n derbyn fod rhyw sail i’r gred y byddai’r GMC wedi disgwyl i waith ymchwilio fod wedi’i wneud i’r achos cyn y byddai’n barod i ganlyn yr achos. Ni fyddai wedi bod yn ddigon i Dr Brown fod wedi nodi’i bryderon yn syml. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn derbyn y byddai unrhyw reswm wedi bod i feddyg ofni y byddai ef/hi yn cael eu beirniadu am adrodd am achos nad ymchwiliwyd yn llawn iddo. Pe bai Dr Brown wedi ysgrifennu llythyr yn cynnwys y math o farn fanwl ac eglur a ddarparodd ar gyfer yr heddlu ym 1999, mae’n debygol y byddai’r GMC wedi derbyn yr achos a chychwyn ar ei weithdrefnau, a’r cam cyntaf fyddai cael ymateb Shipman. Wedi dweud hynny, rwyf yn derbyn na fyddai’r GMC wedi gwneud unrhyw ymchwilio pellach i’r ffeithiau oni bai bod ei Bwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) wedi penderfynu, ar sail datganiad Dr Brown ac ymateb Shipman, y dylid cyfeirio’r achos at y PCC.
Gweithdrefnau Lleol
Dywedodd Dr Brown wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod o’r farn mai’r unig ffordd y gallai adrodd am Shipman oedd ysgrifennu at y GMC. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol o unrhyw weithdrefnau lleol lle gallai ymgynghorydd ysbyty godi cwyn ynghylch meddyg teulu. Ym 1994, yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside, nid oedd unrhyw fecanwaith ffurfiol ar gyfer adrodd am bryderon ynghylch gweithredoedd meddyg teulu. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mr Butterworth, pe bai yntau neu’r darpar Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol wedi cael unrhyw adroddiad am feddyg teulu, byddai wedi gwneud ymholiadau i’r FHSA ynghylch y modd priodol i fynd ymlaen. Nid wyf yn credu y byddai Mr Butterworth wedi disgwyl i un o’i ymgynghorwyr baratoi achos a ymchwiliwyd yn llawn iddo cyn dweud wrtho am bryder. Dywedodd Mr Turner pe bai Dr Brown wedi bod yn yr ysbyty yn Peterborough a’i fod wedi adrodd am ei bryderon ynghylch triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton, byddai ef (Mr Turner) wedi dwyn materion yn eu blaen. Nid wyf yn credu y gallai unrhyw ymgynghorydd a oedd yn adrodd am bryder yn y modd hwn fod wedi teimlo yn rhesymol ei fod mewn unrhyw berygl o gael ei gyhuddo o ddifrïo.
Rwy’n derbyn nad oedd Dr Brown yn gwybod pa fecanwaith oedd ar gael i ymchwilio i bryder felly. Rwy’n derbyn hefyd y byddai llawer o ymgynghorwyr ysbyty wedi bod yn yr un sefyllfa anwybodaeth. Fodd bynnag, ni allaf dderbyn y byddai wedi bod yn anodd i unrhyw feddyg ganfod y math hwn o wybodaeth. Gallai meddyg ofyn i’w sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol am gyngor a byddai wedi cael ei gynghori ynghylch ei ddyletswydd/dyletswydd (mewn modd a oedd yn adlewyrchu safbwynt y GMC yn fanwl-gywir) a byddai wedi cael gwybod sut y gallai fynd ati i wneud adroddiad naill ai i’r GMC neu drwy fecanweithiau lleol. Hefyd, mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi bod yn amlwg i Dr Brown y gallai fod wedi gofyn am gyngor ymarferol wrth drafod â’i gydweithwyr ymgynghori. Cefais fy rhyfeddu gan dystiolaeth Dr Husaini a Dr Brown, a ddywedodd eu dau na wnaethant hyn yn oed drafod achos Mrs Overton gyda’i gilydd, heb sôn am beth ddylid ei wneud ynghylch adrodd am bryderon yr oedd y ddau ohonynt, yn ôl pob golwg, yn teimlo. Byddai’r darpar Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol wedi bod yn ffynhonnell cyngor amlwg o fewn yr Ymddiriedolaeth.
Ymddengys i mi, pa mor ansicr bynnag yr oedd Dr Brown o bosibl yngylch cael tystiolaeth annigonol i wneud adroddiad i’r GMC, na fyddai unrhyw anhawster felly wedi codi mewn perthynas ag adroddiad yn cael ei wneud i’r awdurdod meddygol priodol yn yr ardal leol.
I liniaru sefyllfa Dr Brown, rwy’n derbyn ei bod yn anarferol iawn i ymgynghorydd ysbyty godi pryder ynghylch meddyg teulu. Ymddengys bod barn nad oedd gan feddyg ysbyty’r un cyfrifoldeb am weithredoedd meddyg teulu ag yr oedd ganddo/ganddi am gydweithiwr yn yr ysbyty. Ni allai Dr Bateman gofio unrhyw achos mewn 20 mlynedd o ymarfer lle’r oedd meddyg ysbyty wedi adrodd am bryderon ynghylch meddyg teulu i’r sefydliad gofal sylfaenol perthnasol. Ymddengys, ym 1994, bod y tebygrwydd y byddai ymgynghorydd ysbyty yn adrodd am bryder ynghylch triniaeth meddyg teulu o glaf hyd yn oed yn llai fyth na’r tebygrwydd iddo/iddi adrodd am gydweithiwr yn yr ysbyty, er gwaetha’r ffaith fod y ddyletswydd i wneud hynny yn un eglur.
Barnau Meddygon Eraill ynghylch a Ddylai Dr Brown Fod Wedi Adrodd am ei Bryderon ym 1994
Mynegodd nifer o feddygon y farn ynghylch pa un a oeddent yn meddwl y dylai meddyg yn sefyllfa Dr Brown fod wedi adrodd ei bryderon ynghylch Shipman ym 1994. Yn bennaf, eu barn oedd y dylai fod wedi gwneud hynny.
Yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Turner na fyddai, ym 1994, wedi disgwyl i’r rhan fwyaf o ymgynghorwyr yn sefyllfa Dr Brown a Dr Husaini i adrodd am eu pryderon, er y gallant fod wedi gwneud hynny’n anffurfiol. Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, dywedodd, ar ôl ystyried disgrifiad Dr Brown, yn ei ddatganiad i’r heddlu, o gyflwr ei feddwl ym 1994, a’r ffaith ei bod yn ymddangos fod y chwistrelliad wedi’i roi fel dogn bolws, byddai wedi disgwyl i Dr Brown adrodd am ei bryderon.
Dywedodd Mr Dunningham, pe bai wedi bod ar ddyletswydd ar adeg llewyg Mrs Overton ym 1994, byddai wedi ‘mynd â materion ymhellach’. Byddai wedi bod yn sicr na allai Shipman fod wedi meddwl fod 20mg o forffin yn ddogn derbyniol i Mrs Overton yn yr amgylchiadau. Byddai unrhyw feddyg wedi gwybod na ddylid rhoi dogn felly o forffin yn fewnwythiennol i glaf yn dioddef o asthma. Roedd hwn yn gamgymeriad difrifol iawn. Ni allai fod wedi deall nag esgusodi rhoi 20mg fel chwistrelliad mewnwythiennol bolws. Er iddo’i chael hi’n anodd diystyru’r fantais o edrych yn ôl, taerodd pe bai wedi bod yn sefyllfa Dr Husaini neu Dr Brown, byddai wedi adrodd am ei bryderon ynghylch Shipman, gan drafod hynny yn y lle cyntaf gyda’r darpar Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu uwch gydweithiwr. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd hefyd, pe bai canlyniad unrhyw drafodaeth gyda chydweithwyr wedi bod yn gonsensws cyffredinol na ddylid gwneud dim, ystyriodd ei bod yn rhesymol, o gofio diwylliant y dydd, i beidio gwneud mwy na hysbysu Dr Overton o’r amgylchiadau.
Er gwaethaf ei dystiolaeth am y camau gweithredu y byddai wedi’u cymryd, dywedodd Mr Dunningham iddo ganfod fod penderfyniad Dr Brown i wneud dim yn ddealladwy. Fodd bynnag, pan roddodd y farn hon, roedd Mr Dunningham dan yr argraff fod Dr Brown wedi esbonio’i bryderon yn llawn i Dr Overton a’i fod wedi teimlo nad oedd angen iddo wneud mwy. Beth fyddai ei farn pe bai wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r wybodaeth gyfyngedig a roddodd Dr Brown i Dr Overton, nid wyf yn gwybod. Hyd yn oed ar sail ei ddealltwriaeth o’r sefyllfa, cydnabu Mr Dunningham fod penderfyniad Dr Brown i adael y mater ynglŷn â chwyno i’r teulu, yn llawn perygl. Yn gyntaf, fe allai’r teulu benderfynu peidio mynd â’r mater ymhellach. Yn ail, roedd risg y gallai Shipman, drwy esgeuluster (yr esboniad mwyaf tebygol am ei ymddygiad a fyddid wedi’i ystyried ar y pryd), wneud yr un peth eto. Dywedodd Mr Dunningham bod y penderfyniad serch hynny yn ddealladwy yng ngolau’r berthynas a fodolai bryd hynny rhwng meddygon teulu ac ymgynghorwyr. Credai fod hawl gan Dr Brown barchu barn y teulu drwy adael y mater yn y fan a’r lle; dyma’r llwybr y byddai’r mwyafrif o feddygon ar y pryd wedi’i ddilyn.
Dywedodd Mr Harrison na fyddai wedi disgwyl i ymgynghorydd, ym 1994, adrodd am gamgymeriad unigol gan gydweithiwr. Roedd goddefgarwch camgymeriadau, meddai, a chymryd nad oeddent yn digwydd yn barhaus. Pan oedd wedi darllen yr adroddiad ysgrifenedig byr a ddarparwyd iddo gan yr Ymchwiliad am yr amgylchiadau yn ymwneud â derbyn Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty, roedd wedi coleddu rhai amheuon ynghylch beth oedd wedi digwydd; roed wedi meddwl tybed a oedd Mrs Overton wedi cael pwl o asthma mewn gwirionedd neu a allai fod wedi dioddef o boen yn y frest o ganlyniad i fethiant y fentrigl chwith. Roedd wedi meddwl tybed beth oedd chwistrelliad bolws yn ei olygu yn union. Mewn geiriau eraill, pan edrychodd ar ffeithiau’r achos yn y lle cyntaf, credai y gallai Dr Brown fod wedi gweld gweithredoedd Shipman fel rhai nad oeddent yn afresymol. Fodd bynnag, mewn tystiolaeth lafar, dywedodd os mai barn Dr Brown oedd fod triniaeth Shipman wedi bod yn
‘anarferol iawn, peryglus hyd yn oed’
(yr ymadrodd a ddefnyddiodd yn ei ddatganiad i’r heddlu), dylai fod wedi trafod y mater gyda chydweithwyr yn yr ysbyty er mwyn cael cadarnhad fod ei ddehongliad yntau’n gywir. Os ydoedd, yna byddai camau gweithredu wedi bod yn briodol a gallai Dr Brown fod wedi cymryd cyngor gan ei ddirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol.
Cytunodd Dr Givans y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o bobl wedi cymryd y farn fod triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton yn
‘anarferol iawn, peryglus hyd yn oed’
. Derbyniodd Dr Givans fod arweiniad gan y GMC yn pennu dyletswydd ar feddyg i adrodd am ei bryderon/phryderon mewn amgylchiadau felly, ond haerodd y byddai llawer o feddygon a oedd yn rhannu barn Dr Brown wedi methu cydymffurfio â’r ddyletswydd honno ym 1994. Dywedodd Dr Givans y byddai llawer o ymgynghorwyr wedi gweithredu fel y gwnaeth Dr Brown. Y diwylliant ar adrodd oedd ‘na fyddai neb yn gwneud hynny’. Nid oedd Dr Givans yn dweud fod yr agwedd hon yn iawn, ond yn hytrach mai dyna oedd yr agwedd gyffredin.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead na fyddai wedi disgwyl i amgylchiadau llewyg Mrs Overton fod wedi cael eu hadrodd. Cymerodd farn wahanol am briodolrwydd triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton i honno a fynegwyd gan bob tyst meddygol arall i’r Ymchwiliad. Nid oedd yn meddwl fod rhoi 20mg o forffin i Mrs Overton yn anghywir o reidrwydd. Credaf ei fod yn anghywir yn hynny o beth; rwy’n eithaf bodlon, o’r holl dystiolaeth rwyf wedi’i gwrando, y byddai rhoi dogn felly i glaf yn dioddef o asthma gan feddyg teulu yng nghartref y claf yn beryglus. Roed barn yr Athro Aitkenhead ar y mater hwnnw, fodd bynnag, yn sicr o effeithio ar ei farn am benderfyniad Dr Brown i beidio ag adrodd am Shipman.
Hysbysu’r Teulu
Yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, canfûm fod methiant cydnabyddedig Dr Brown i ddweud wrth Dr Overton am y dogn awgrymedig a’r dull o roi’r morffin wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag atal gwybodaeth bwysig. Byddai’r wybodaeth hon wedi bod yn berthnasol iawn i benderfyniad y teulu ynghylch gwneud cwyn am Shipman neu beidio. Cefais fy synnu gan y methiant hwn, ac rwy’n feirniadol ohono.
Cafodd yr atal gwybodaeth hwn ei gondemnio gan y rhan fwyaf o’r rheiny a roddodd dystiolaeth yng Ngham Pedwar. Dywedodd Dr Panting y byddai wedi disgwyl i feddyg yn sefyllfa Dr Brown i fod wedi darparu’r holl wybodaeth berthnasol i’r teulu, iddynt gael gwybodaeth lawn am yr hyn a arweiniodd at ei bryder. Cytunodd Dr Turner, er iddo ddweud iddo ddod ar draws achosion mewn ysbytai eraill lle nad oedd hynny wedi digwydd. Cytunodd Dr Bateman mai bod yn agored yw’r polisi gorau tuag at deuluoedd, er mwyn iddynt gael dealltwriaeth lawn o ddigwyddiadau. Mynegodd Dr Givans syndod na dynnodd Dr Brown sylw Dr Overton at y dogn morffin. Dywedodd Mr Harrison y dylai meddyg esbonio holl elfennau pwysig ei bryder/phryder ynghylch triniaeth er mwyn galluogi perthynas lunio barn briodol ynghylch sut i fynd ymlaen.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead na ddylai meddyg ddweud wrth deulu bod camgymeriad wedi digwydd ac yna lleihau’r camgymeriad, na hepgor elfennau o’r driniaeth a ychwanegodd at y camgymeriad neu a oedd yn rhan bwysig ohono. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad hefyd, ym 1994, mai geiriad y cyngor a oedd yn cael ei roi gan gyflogwyr ysbyty a’r sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol oedd na ddylai meddygon gyfaddef na cheisio priodoli bai pan oedd anap yn digwydd. Byddai meddygon yn cael eu cynghori i atal gwybodaeth oddi wrth berthnasau ynghylch mecanwaith y niwed a allai gyfeirio mwy tuag at fai nag yn ei erbyn. Y cyngor oedd na fyddai’n briodol i wneud nag awgrymu i berthnasau y gallant ddymuno cwyno ynghylch beth oedd wedi digwydd. Effaith yr agwedd hon oedd bod gwybodaeth berthnasol a oedd yn awgrymu atebolrwydd neu fai ar ran ysbyty neu feddyg weithiau’n cael ei hatal oddi wrth deuluoedd ac nad oedd fyth yn dod yn hysbys iddynt. Mae’r dystiolaeth honno’n cydsynio â fy mhrofiad i fy hun o waith esgeuluster clinigol yn y Bar yn y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au. Cydnabu‘r Athro Aitkenhead fod y sefyllfa ym 1994 yn anfoddhaol. Dywedodd fod y broblem yn parhau o hyd, er i raddau llai. Mae’r dystiolaeth honno’n cydsynio â fy mhrofiad mwy diweddar o waith esgeuluster clinigol tra ar y Fainc ar ddiwedd y 1990au. Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead bod meddygon ym 1994 yn ofni y gallai camau disgyblu gael eu cymryd yn eu herbyn pe baent yn gwneud sylwadau croes ynghylch y driniaeth yn cael ei darparu gan eu hysbytai. Ni allai nodi unrhyw achos lle’r oedd hyn wedi digwydd, ond credai bod digwyddiadau felly wedi bod. Y canfyddiad oedd y gallai meddyg gael ei gosbi, er enghraifft trwy atal pwyntiau gwobrwyo teilyngdod dewisol, pe bai’n dweud rhywbeth a oedd yn peri i’r ysbyty ddioddef colled ariannol yn sgil hawliad esgeuluster clinigol.
Dywedodd yr Athro Aitkenhead wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn gyffredin i awgrym gael ei roi i deulu claf gan feddyg y dylid ymchwilio i fater, heb feirniadu gweithredoedd cydweithiwr yn benodol. Yng nghyd-destun achos Mrs Overton, awgrymodd y byddai wedi bod yn rhesymol i fod wedi dweud wrth cyd-feddyg, fel Dr Overton, bod morffin wedi’i roi yn unig i berson yn dioddef o asthma, ac yna gadael i’r meddyg benderfynu gofyn mwy o gwestiynau ai peidio. Felly’r oedd hi er y gallai’r cyd-feddyg gasglu’n wir, o’r wybodaeth gyfyngedig a roddwyd, nad oedd unrhyw achosion pryder eraill.
Yn fy marn i, roedd rhoi awgrymiadau, neu roi gwybodaeth anghyflawn, yn annerbyniol, ac mae’n annerbyniol o hyd. Mae hawl gan bob claf a pherthynas gael adroddiad ffeithiol llawn o’r driniaeth a roddwyd a’r digwyddiadau. Os yw meddyg yn credu bod cydweithiwr wedi gwneud camgymeriad difrifol, dylai esbonio sail ei bryder/phryder i’r claf neu berthnasau. Os yw’n teimlo’n ansicr ynghylch a oedd y driniaeth yn anghywir, ond creda y gallai fod, dylai roi arwydd clir i’r claf neu berthnasau y byddai rhai meddygon yn cymryd y farn fod camgymeriad wedi’i wneud ac y byddai’n briodol i gymryd cyngor. Wedi dweud hynny, rwy’n derbyn fod yr arfer o roi awgrym yn gyffredin ym 1994.
Yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, mynegais rywfaint o syndod na wnaeth Dr Brown gofnodi graddfa ei bryder yn nodiadau ysbyty Mrs Overton. Roeddwn i’n yn arbennig o bryderus gan yr ymddengys bod y rheswm a roddodd am beidio gwneud hynny wedi’i seilio ar yr angen i ddiogelu’r meddyg neu’r ysbyty yn hytrach na chynorthwyo’r claf. Ni wnaeth barn Dr Brown na ddylai wneud hynny, fodd bynnag, synnu Dr Panting. Pe byddid wedi gofyn iddo gynghori Dr Brown, byddai wedi cynghori yn erbyn cofnodi’i bryderon yn y nodiadau gan na fyddai wedi talu i wneud hynny. Cytunodd Dr Bateman a dywedodd mai adroddiad ffeithiol yn unig y byddai wedi disgwyl iddo gael ei ysgrifennu. Gallaf weld, a bod y pryder yn cael ei drosglwyddo ymlaen gan y meddyg, na fyddai’n talu cofnodi natur y pryder yn nodiadau’r ysbyty. Yr hyn sydd wir i’w anghymeradwyo yw’r methiant i hysbysu’r teulu yn llawn, fel y nodais yn y paragraff blaenorol.

---  ---
Ar ddechrau’r Bennod hon, rhoddais grynodeb o resymau awgrymedig Dr Brown am beidio adrodd am ei bryderon. Dychwelaf yn awr i’w gwerthuso yng ngolau’r dystiolaeth a wrandewais. Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud mai cyflwr meddwl Dr Brown yn fuan ar ôl mynd â Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty oedd bod triniaeth Shipman ohoni wedi bod
. Roedd yn amlwg wedi cael effaith drychinebus.
Mae’n amlwg o’r dystiolaeth fod Dr Brown dan ddyletswydd, a dylai fod yn gwybod ei fod dan ddyletswydd, i adrodd i awdurdod priodol am unrhyw bryder o natur ddifrifol a oedd yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Yn fy marn i, roedd pryder Dr Brown ynghylch triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton yn disgyn i’r categori hwn. Nid yw Dr Brown erioed wedi honni nad oedd yn ymwybodol o fodolaeth y ddyletswydd hon, ond yn hytrach credai nad oedd yn berthnasol iddo ef yn yr amgylchiadau penodol. Roedd yn ddigon, yn ei farn ef, ei fod wedi rhoi gwybodaeth i’r teulu ac wedi gadael y mater iddynt hwy wneud cwyn os oeddent yn dewis gwneud hynny.
Ni wnaeth Dr Brown, fodd bynnag, roi’r wybodaeth lawn yr oedd ei hangen arnynt i’r teulu wneud penderfyniad gwybodus ynghylch a oeddent yn dymuno gwneud cwyn. Yr unig beth a ddywedodd wrth Dr Overton oedd fod Shipman wedi rhoi morffin i Mrs Overton. Gofynnodd a oedd Dr Overton yn deall arwyddocâd rhoi morffin i glaf yn dioddef o asthma. Dywedodd Dr Overton ei fod yn deall. Ni ddywedwyd wrth Dr Overton fod Shipman yn ôl pob golwg wedi rhoi 20mg, dogn cwbl amhriodol, neu ei bod yn ymddangos iddo roi’r morffin fel ‘stat’ neu ddos bolws. Yn fy marn i, os oedd Dr Brown yn meddwl ei bod yn briodol i drosglwyddo’r cyfrifoldeb i Dr Overton i benderfynu a ddylid ymchwilio i ymddygiad Shipman, dylai fod wedi sicrhau bod gan Dr Overton y wybodaeth lawn. Wrth feirniadu Dr Brown yn hyn y beth, rwy’n cydnabod fod rhai meddygon ar y pryd, llawer ohonynt fwy na thebyg, a fyddai wedi gweithredu fel y gwnaeth yntau.
Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, nid oedd yn dderbyniol i Dr Brown esgusodi ei hun o’i ddyletswydd ei hun trwy drosglwyddo’r penderfyniad i Dr Overton, yn sicr wedi iddo sylweddoli fod y teulu Overton wedi penderfynu gwneud dim. Erbyn hynny, roedd Dr Brown yn gwybod, neu dylai fod yn gwybod, mai ef a Dr Husaini oedd â’r cyfrifoldeb i gymryd unrhyw gamau gweithredu yr oedd eu hangen. Rwy’n derbyn ei bod yn rhesymol i Dr Brown ystyried dymuniadau’r teulu, ond, hyd yn oed os oedd y teulu wedi mynegi dymuniad cadarn na ddylid cymryd camau gweithredu, ni ellid rhyddhau Dr Brown o bob cyfrifoldeb. Fel y mae Dr Husaini wedi cydnabod, parodd yr amgylchiadau ddyletswydd i adrodd. Roedd Dr Husaini a Dr Brown yn ymwybodol fod triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton yn annerbyniol a’i bod wedi’i niweidio’n ddifrifol. Ni wyddent unrhyw beth am farn Shipman am y driniaeth yr oedd wedi’i rhoi. Gallai fod wedi cydio yn yr ampwl anghywir mewn camgymeriad. Ond, am hynny a wyddent, gallai fod wedi bod dan yr argraff fod 20mg o forffin yn driniaeth briodol i glaf yn dioddef o asthma a oedd yn ôl pob golwg yn dioddef o boen yn y frest. Os oedd dan yr argraff honno, roedd ei gleifion mewn perygl o gael eu niweidio’n ddifrifol. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, roedd dyletswydd ar y cyd ar Dr Husaini a Dr Brown i wneud adroddiad i awdurdod priodol. Y llwybr cywir fyddai i un ohonynt siarad â Dr Overton ac esbonio pam, er gwaethaf penderfyniad y teulu i beidio cwyno, yr oedd yr ymgynghorwyr yn teimlo na allent ollwng y mater, ar sail diogelwch cleifion. Credaf ei bod yn debygol, pe bai sgwrs felly wedi digwydd, y byddai Dr Overton a Mrs Sharon Carrington, merch Mrs Overton, wedi cytuno i gydweithredu, cyhyd â bod dim angen i rieni Mrs Overton fod yn gysylltiedig.
Beth fyddai awdurdod priodol y gallai’r meddygon fod wedi adrodd am ei bryderon wrtho? Mae’n amlwg bod dau bosibilrwydd. Gallai’r ymgynghorwyr fod wedi gwneud adroddiad i’r GMC neu wneud adroddiad yn lleol yn Tameside. Gallaf ddeall yn iawn amharodrwydd Dr Brown i wneud adroddiad i’r GMC. Yn un peth, gallai fod wedi bod yn ansicr ynghylch a fyddai camgymeriad o’r math y credai oedd wedi’i wneud yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Hefyd, rwy’n derbyn bod meddygon yn credu (nid yn afresymol), cyn y gallent fynd at y GMC mewn modd priodol, roedd rhaid iddynt ymchwilio’n llawn i’r ffeithiau a chyflwyno achos, yn hytrach nag adrodd am bryder yn unig heb rywbeth mwy i’w gefnogi. Rwy’n derbyn y byddai wedi bod yn anodd, ac yn wir yn amhriodol fwy na thebyg, i Dr Brown a Dr Husaini yn bersonol ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwilio pellach i ymddygiad Shipman. Rwy’n derbyn hefyd bod rhai meddygon yn oedi rhag adrodd am gydweithiwr i’r GMC gan eu bod yn ofni y gallent gael eu cyhuddo o ddifrïo. Rwyf wedi dweud y byddai unrhyw feddyg a oedd yn cymryd diddordeb mewn materion moesegol ac a oedd yn sicrhau gwybodaeth ddiweddar wedi gwybod nad oedd perygl o hynny, cyhyd â bod yr adroddiad yn cael ei wneud yn ddiffuant. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n derbyn mai’r farn hen ffasiwn honno oedd gan Dr Brown. Gan ystyried y ffactorau hyn, ni fyddwn yn beirniadu Dr Brown a Dr Husaini am beidio mynd â’u pryderon yn uniongyrchol at y GMC, pe baent wedi gwneud adroddiad amdanynt yn lleol.
Fodd bynnag, nid fu adroddiad lleol. Nid yw’r un o’r esboniadau a gynigiodd Dr Brown yn gyfystyr ag esgus go iawn am hynny. Honnodd Dr Husaini ei fod wedi gwneud adroddiad i Mr Butterworth. Mewn gwirionedd, canfûm na wnaeth, ond mae’n amlwg y byddai Mr Butterworth wedi bod yn berson priodol i allu gwneud cwyn felly iddo. Os nad oedd Dr Brown yn gwybod â phwy y dylai siarad yn Tameside, gallai fod wedi gofyn i’r MDU am gyngor. Gallai staff yr MDU fod wedi esbonio’r trefniadau lleol iddo ar gyfer disgyblu meddygon teulu. Gallent fod wedi dweud wrtho, er mwyn gwneud cwyn ffurfiol, roedd angen enwi achwynydd, ac y gallai hynny, yng ngolau agwedd y teulu, fod wedi achosi problem. Gallent yn wir fod wedi’i gynghori i siarad â Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol ei Ymddiriedolaeth ei hun neu i fynd at yr FHSA neu’r LMC. Ni fyddent yn sicr wedi ei adael heb unrhyw arweiniad. Byddent wedi’i sicrhau, a bod ei bryderon yn bryderon go iawn, fel yr oeddent yn amlwg, ei fod dan ddyletswydd i weithredu ac ni fyddai wedi cael ei gyhuddo o ddifrïo; ni fyddid wedi disgwyl iddo fod wedi cynnal ymchwiliad llawn ychwaith. Yn fyr, rwy’n feirniadol o Dr Husaini a Dr Brown eu dau am eu methiant i wneud unrhyw ymgais i adrodd am eu pryderon i berson neu gorff priodol yn Tameside. Mae’r ffaith na wnaeth yr un ohonynt ffonio’u sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol i gael cyngor yn fy argyhoeddi na wnaethant hyd yn oed roi ystyriaeth o ddifrif i’r mater.
Mae fy meirniadaeth o’r meddygon hyn yn cael ei lleddfu gan y dystiolaeth a wrandewais am yr arfer ei hun o adrodd am bryderon mewn ysbytai GIG ym 1994. Yn syml iawn, y diwylliant oedd nad oedd ‘yn cael ei wneud’. Arweinwyr y proffesiwn, dros gyfnod sylweddol, sy’n gyfrifol am y diwylliant hwnnw. Erbyn 1994, roedd Dr Brown a Dr Husaini eu dau wedi cymhwyso fel meddygon am flynyddoedd lawer. Am y rhan fwyaf o’u bywydau proffesiynol, bu’n arfer arferol i gau llygad ar ddiffygion cydweithwyr. Yn fy ngyrfa gynnar yn y Bar, roedd hi’n anodd tu hwnt i ddod o hyd i arbenigwr meddygol a fyddai’n rhoi tystiolaeth a oedd yn feirniadol o gydweithiwr, er bod y driniaeth a oedd yn destun cwyn yn gyfystyr ag esgeulustra garw a bod y meddygon ddim hyd yn oed yn adnabod ei gilydd. Mae’r dystiolaeth a wrandewais, felly, yn gyson â fy mhrofiad fy hun. Ar ddiwedd y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au, cymerodd y GMC gamau gweithredol i newid y diwylliant hwn o ddiogelu ei gilydd. Gellid dweud yn weddol gadarn y gallai ac y dylai fod wedi gweithredu’n gynharach. Fodd bynnag, gan gychwyn oddeutu 1987, fe ddechreuodd weithredu. Ymatebodd lleiafrif o feddygon. Roedd rhai eisoes wedi cydnabod y ddyletswydd a oedd erbyn hynny wedi’i hysbysu’n amlwg. Ond nid ymatebodd llawer. Roedd llawer o aelodau’r proffesiwn yn geidwadol iawn, ac maent yn dal i fod efallai. Nid oedd eu harferion cadarn i’w newid dros nos ac roedd rhaid cael y drychineb yn y Bristol Royal Infirmary i ddod â’r neges adref. Felly, er fy mod yn feirniadol o Dr Brown a Dr Husaini am eu methiant i gydymffurfio â’u dyletswydd broffesiynol i adrodd am feddyg yr oedd ei ymddygiad yn peryglu diogelwch cleifion, rwy’n cymedroli fy meirniadaeth trwy dderbyn, ym 1994, y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn y wlad hon fwy na thebyg wedi gweithredu mewn modd tebyg.
Mae un mater yn aros sy’n ymwneud â Dr Brown. Am resymau a esboniwyd uchod, rwy’n feirniadol ohono am fethu rhoi adroddiad llawn i Dr Overton am ei bryderon. Rhoddodd ‘awgrym’, ond nid esboniad iawn. Fodd bynnag, lliniaraf y feirniadaeth honno gan fy mod yn derbyn, ym 1994, ei bod yn arfer cyffredin i atal gwybodaeth berthnasol am anapau oddi wrth gleifion a pherthnasau. Nid oedd ymddygiad felly’n dderbyniol, ond rwy’n cydnabod y byddai llawer o feddygon, mwyafrif o bosibl, wedi gweithredu yn yr un modd. Efallai na fyddai rhai yn wir wedi sôn am y wybodaeth o gwbl.
Yn olaf, trof at sefyllfa Dr Husaini. Yn y Trydydd Adroddiad, roeddwn yn feirniadol tu hwnt o’r dystiolaeth a roddodd. Ceisiodd fy mherswadio ei fod wedi adrodd am ei bryderon, ond rwy’n eithaf fodlon na wnaeth. Credaf erbyn iddo ddod i roi ei ddatganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad hwn, teimlai Dr Husaini embaras neu gywilydd am ei fethiant i adrodd am ei bryderon. Rwy’n derbyn fod Dr Husaini yn ymboeni’n fawr ynghylch yr hyn ddigwyddodd i Mrs Overton, a gwnaeth lawer iawn i helpu a chefnogi ei theulu yn ystod ei harhosiad 14 mis ar ward 17. Credaf, pan sylweddolodd Dr Husaini pa mor ddifrifol oedd ymddygiad Shipman tuag at Mrs Overton, perswadiodd ei hun ei fod wedi adrodd am ei bryderon yn briodol, ond bod eraill wedi methu gweithredu arnynt. Wrth beidio ag adrodd am ei bryderon bryd hynny, fel y dylai fod wedi gwneud, gweithredodd mewn modd y byddai llawer o feddygon eraill wedi gwneud bryd hynny.

---  ---
Canlyniadau Uniongyrchol Adrodd am Bryder
Pe bai Dr Brown neu Dr Husaini wedi adrodd am eu pryderon wrth Mr Butterworth neu’r darpar Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu rhyw berson arall mewn swydd uchel, fel Mrs Linda Lloyd, Cyfarwyddwr Gweithrediadau’r Ysbyty bryd hynny, yna, fwy na thebyg, byddai’r adroddiad wedi’i drosglwyddo i FHSA Tameside. Dywedodd Mr Butterworth nad oedd yn gwybod beth oedd y trefniadau ar gyfer ymchwilio i bryder ynghylch meddyg teulu, ond esboniodd sut fyddai wedi mynd ati i ganfod y wybodaeth. Gan y byddai wedi ymddangos ar unwaith fod yr honiad yn golygu torri telerau gwasanaeth Shipman o bosibl, byddai’r adroddiad fwy na thebyg wedi arwain at achos MSC, cyhyd ag y gellid enwi achwynydd addas. Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud, pe bai’r ymgynghorwyr wedi esbonio i deulu Overton eu penderfyniad i adrodd am Shipman, gallai aelod o’r teulu yn wir fod wedi bod yn barod i gydweithredu trwy fod yr achwynydd. Fodd bynnag, os nad oeddent, gallai anhawster fod wedi bod o ran dod o hyd i achwynydd addas. Pe bai Dr Brown wedi bod yn barod i weithredu fel achwynydd, efallai y byddai’r MSC wedi bod yn barod i’w dderbyn. Fel arall, ni fyddai wedi bod yn bosibl i FHSA Tameside weithredu fel achwynydd ei hun, ac os felly byddai’r achos wedi’i drosglwyddo i’r MSC mewn FHSA cyfagos. Rwy’n cydnabod y byddai llwybr gweithredu felly wedi bod yn anarferol. Os nad oedd ateb boddhaol yn dod i’r FHSA, gellid yn wir fod wedi gwneud y penderfyniad i adrodd yn uniongyrchol i’r GMC am yr achos.
Fe allai’r achos fod wedi cyrraedd y GMC trwy lwybrau eraill hefyd. Gallai’r ymgynghorwyr fod wedi adrodd i’r corff hwnnw’n uniongyrchol neu gallai’r achos fod wedi’i gyfeirio yno ar ôl y gwrandawiad MSC drwy’r Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA). Posibilrwydd arall yw, pe byddai cwest wedi’i gynnal ar ôl marwolaeth Mrs Overton ym 1995, gallai’r Crwner fod wedi adrodd i’r GMC am rôl Shipman yn y mater.
Ymateb Tebygol Shipman
Trwy ba lwybr bynnag yr adroddwyd am yr achos, a pha un a oedd hynny i’r FHSA neu’r GMC, mae angen ystyried beth fyddai ymateb tebygol Shipman wedi bod a pha mor argyhoeddiadol y byddai wedi ymddangos. I ateb y cwestiwn, mae’n ddefnyddiol edrych eto ar y nodyn a wnaeth Shipman yng nghofnodion meddygol Mrs Overton ynghylch ei derbyn i’r ysbyty:
Pulmicort nebul. x 1
Ventolin nebul x 5ml.
Laid down ECM x 5
Yna, parhaodd ar ddalen ar wahân:
anarllenadwy
x diagnosis + Rx’
Rwy’n eithaf sicr fod Shipman, wrth wneud y nodyn hwn, a oedd yn annodweddiadol o fanwl iddo ef, yn ceisio llunio darlun a oedd yn gyson â’r amgylchiadau fel yr oeddent yn hysbys i Mrs Carrington ac yn gyson ag yntau wedi darparu gofal priodol i Mrs Overton mewn amgylchiadau anodd. Credaf ei bod yn fwyaf tebygol y byddai ei esboniad wedi bod rhywbeth tebyg i’r hyn sy’n dilyn. Byddai wedi dweud ei fod wedi gofalu am Mrs Overton a’i fod wedi rhoi triniaeth briodol i’w phwl difrifol o asthma gyda nebiwlydd, gan leddfu ei symptomau yn dda. Rhywbryd wedyn, ond tra’r oedd yntau yn dal gyda hi, roedd Mrs Overton wedi dechrau cwyno o boen yn y frest. Byddai Shipman wedi dweud, gan wybod (fel y byddai wedi honni) bod afiechyd coronaidd y galon ar Mrs Overton, ei fod yn credu bod y boen yn ei brest yn sgil digwyddiadau cardiaidd ac nad oedd yn gysylltiedig â’i asthma. Gan fod y boen i weld yn ddifrifol, a chan fod Mrs Overton i weld yn ofidus iawn, roedd wedi penderfynu rhoi diamorffin iddi. Dim ond un ampwl oedd gydag ef, yn cynnwys 10mg. Paratôdd y chwistrelliad a rhoi rhywfaint ohono yn fewnwythiennol. Byddai siŵr o fod wedi dweud na roddodd y cyfan o’r 10mg iddi, ond ei fod wedi oedi i weld ei effaith, a oedd yn foddhaol, am rai eiliadau nes i Mrs Overton lewygu’n sydyn. Roedd wedi sylweddoli ei bod wedi stopio anadlu ac ni allai ddod o hyd i b?ls. Roedd wedi rhedeg i ffonio Mrs Carrington ac roedd y ddau ohonynt wedi dechrau’r broses adfywio. Pe gofynnwyd iddo pam yr oedd wedi rhoi gymaint â 10mg o ddiamorffin, gallai yn wir fod wedi dweud ei fod yn ansicr ynghylch faint yn union yr oedd wedi’i roi, er y gwyddai nad oedd wedi rhoi’r dogn cyfan. Gallai yn wir fod wedi honni ei fod yn ansicr ynghylch y maint oherwydd y sioc o weld llewyg sydyn Mrs Overton. Gallai yn wir fod wedi dweud iddo gofnodi ei fod wedi rhoi 10mg er mwyn cyfrif am ddefnyddio’r ampwl. Roedd wedi defnyddio’r gair
i ddangos ei fod wedi rhoi’r dogn ‘yn y fan a’r lle’ yn hytrach na’i ragnodi ar gyfer ei ddefnyddio yn y dyfodol.
Ped ymchwiliwyd yn briodol i’r amgylchiadau, byddai Shipman wedi’i gael ei hun mewn trafferth ddifrifol wrth amddiffyn ei ymddygiad. Yn benodol, er y byddai wedi gallu cyfeirio at gofnod diweddar (ffug fwy na thebyg) yng nghofnod meddygol Mrs Overton a oedd yn awgrymu bod symptomau cardiaidd ganddi ar 10 Chwefror 1994, dangosodd cyfres o brofion yn dilyn ei derbyniad i’r ysbyty nad oedd wedi dioddef trawiad ar y galon yn ddiweddar. At hynny, ni ddatgelodd yr awtopsi ym 1995 unrhyw afiechyd ischemig y galon. Felly, byddai ymchwiliad ym 1994 wedi taflu amheuaeth ar honiad Shipman fod Mrs Overton wedi dioddef trawiad ar y galon, a, phe bai’r ymchwiliad wedi parhau i mewn i 1995, byddai wedi dangos na allai Mrs Overton fod wedi cael unrhyw ddigwyddiad cardiaidd o gwbl. Yn ail, byddai honiad Shipman iddo roi llai na’r 10mg o ddiamorffin a gofnodwyd wedi bod yn destun archwiliad. Pam dweud mai’r ampwl 10mg oedd
‘yr unig ddogn yn y bag’
os mai rhan o’r ampwl a oedd ar gael yn unig yr oedd wedi’i roi? Ymddengys bod yr esgus
‘yr unig ddogn yn y bag’
yn esboniad am roi 10mg. Pam dweud iddo’i roi fel dogn
? Yn drydydd, pe bai Mrs Carrington wedi gwneud datganiad, byddai wedi bod yn hysbys fod Shipman wedi rhoi rhywbeth i Mrs Overton wedi iddi lewygu a phan oedd yn anymwybodol. Beth allai hynny fod? Mae ei gofnod yn dawel ar y pwnc. Pe bai’n honni bod Naloxone neu adrenalin wedi’u rhoi (byddai’r naill neu’r llall wedi bod yn briodol), byddai’n gorfod esbonio pam na soniwyd am hyn yn y nodiadau. Yn olaf, roedd y canlyniad ofnadwy a ddioddefodd Mrs Overton yn gwbl gyson â hithau’n cael gorddos garw o ddiamorffin.
Yr Achos gerbron y Pwyllgor Gwasanaeth Meddygol
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud, pe bai un o’r ymgynghorwyr wedi esbonio’r sefyllfa’n llawn i Dr Overton ac y byddai wedi dweud bod rhaid iddo wneud adroddiad hyd yn oed os nad oedd y teulu yn gwneud, credaf y byddai’r teulu wedi cydweithredu fwy na thebyg. Byddai achos wedi gorfod cael ei drefnu yn erbyn Shipman, a chredaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai gwrandawiad llafar gan yr MSC wedi cael ei orchymyn. Mae’n bosibl y byddai Shipman wedi ‘dal ei ddwylo i fyny’ ac awgrymu ei fod yn ddiofal wedi rhoi mwy o ddiamorffin na ddylai fod wedi gwneud. Roedd wedi gwneud hyn ym 1990 pan oedd cwyn ynghylch camgymeriad wrth ragnodi meddyginiaeth gwrth-gonfylsiol wedi’i gwneud ar ran un o’i gleifion, Mr W. Yn yr achos hwnnw, deliodd yr MSC â’r mater heb wrandawiad llafar. Fodd bynnag, yn achos Mrs Overton, gan ystyried yr anghysonder rhwng yr adroddiad y byddai Shipman wedi’i roi (yn seiliedig ar y cofnod a wnaeth yng nghofnodion y meddyg teulu), a hynny a gafodd ei gofnodi yng nghofnodion yr ysbyty, mae’n debygol y byddai Cadeirydd yr MSC wedi gorchymyn gwrandawiad. Byddai hyn fwy na thebyg wedi cael ei gynnal yn gynnar ym 1995. Gallai fod wedi digwydd cyn i Mrs Overton farw, ac os felly ni fyddai canlyniadau’r awtopsi wedi bod ar gael. Byddai Shipman wedi cael ei gyhuddo o fethiant i roi i Mrs Overton yr holl wasanaethau meddygol personol angenrheidiol a phriodol o’r math sy’n cael eu darparu fel arfer gan feddygon teulu, sef torri paragraff 12 o’r telerau gwasanaeth a nodir yn Atodlen 2 i Reoliadau’r GIG (Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol) 1992. Ni fyddai unrhyw anhawster tystiolaethol wedi bod pe bai Mrs Carrington wedi rhoi tystiolaeth a phe bai un o’r ymgynghorwyr (Dr Brown fwy na thebyg oherwydd ei arbenigedd perthnasol) wedi darparu barn arbenigol ynghylch ymddygiad Shipman. Gallai fod wedi bod yn synhwyrol hefyd i’r teulu fod wedi gofyn i un neu fwy o’r staff a oedd ar ddyletswydd pan aethpwyd â Mrs Overton i’r ysbyty i gael eu galw i roi tystiolaeth ynghylch beth oedd Shipman wedi’i ddweud a sut y gwnaethpwyd cofnodion yr ysbyty.
Mae’n bosibl y gallai’r MSC fod wedi derbyn adroddiad Shipman a’i gael yn ddieuog o dorri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Fodd bynnag, o gofio’r problemau y byddai Shipman wedi’u hwynebu, fel yr amlinellwyd uchod, credaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai wedi’i gael yn euog o dorri paragraff 12. Credaf ei bod yn debygol mai casgliad yr MSC fyddai fod Shipman wedi gwneud camgymeriad difrifol a’i fod wedi rhoi gorddos o ddiamorffin, naill ai yn sgil diofalwch neu ddiffyg gwybodaeth am ei effaith. Nid wyf yn credu ei bod yn debygol o gwbl y byddai’r MSC wedi’i amau o achosi niwed bwriadol. Nid wyf yn credu ychwaith y byddai wedi gofyn lle cafodd afael ar y diamorffin. Mae llawer o feddygon yn cario diamorffin yn eu bagiau fel mater o arfer. Maent yn ei brynu ar gais o fferyllfa ac yn cadw’u cofrestrau cyffuriau rheoledig eu hunain (CDR). Byddai’r pryder wedi ymwneud â’i allu clinigol yn hytrach na’r graddau yr oedd yn cydymffurfio â’r rheoliadau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig. Ni fyddai’r ffaith bod Shipman yn cario ampwl 10mg o ddiamorffin yn ei fag wedi peri unrhyw bryder.
Nid wyf wedi f’argyhoeddi ychwaith y byddai’r MSC wedi ffurfio’r farn fod Shipman wedi paratoi cofnod ffug, naill ai mewn perthynas â’r cofnod cyn 18 Chwefror 1994 lle’r honnodd fod Mrs Overton wedi adrodd bod ganddi symptomau cardiaidd neu mewn perthynas ag achlysur ei llewyg. Fe allai fod wedi gwneud. Pe bai wedi, byddai’n amlwg wedi llunio barn llawer mwy difrifol nag fel arall. At ei gilydd, credaf ei bod yn annhebygol y byddai wedi gwneud canfyddiad felly oni bai bod y dystiolaeth yn gwbl amlwg; byddai wedi bod yn amharod i wneud canfyddiad felly pe bai unrhyw esboniad credadwy am yr anghysonderau rhwng cofnod Shipman a’r ffeithiau fel y’u canfyddodd.
Wrth ystyried pa gosb i’w hargymell, byddai’r MSC wedi cael gwybod bod dau ganfyddiad arall wedi’u gwneud yn erbyn Shipman o fewn y pum mlynedd arall. Disgrifir yr achosion hyn yn fanwl ym Mhennod 6. Byddai’r MSC wedi cael gwybod am y canfyddiadau yn achos Mr W a Mrs B. Roedd achos Mr W yn ymwneud â rhagnodi’r maint anghywir o feddyginiaeth gwrth-gonfylsiol, camgymeriad a achosodd gryn niwed. Am dorri’i delerau gwasanaeth yn y cyswllt hwnnw, cafodd Shipman rybudd ond ni phennwyd unrhyw gosb ariannol. Yn achos Mrs B, roedd Shipman wedi methu ymweld â’r claf pan ddylai fod wedi ymweld â hi. Cafodd rybudd a gorchmynnwyd atal £800 o’i dâl. O ganlyniad, rwy’n sicr y byddai swm sylweddol o dros £1000 wedi’i atal yn achos Mrs Overton, a byddai wedi’i gynnal gan yr FHSAA ar ôl cael cyngor gan y Pwyllgor Cynghori Meddygol. Credaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai’r achos wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y GMC wedyn. Ni fyddai hynny wedi digwydd nes diwedd 1995 fan cynharaf, ac yn fwy tebygol ymhell i mewn i 1996.
Heb gefnogaeth teulu i ganlyn yr achos, byddai’r sefyllfa wedi bod yn fwy cymhleth. Ym mhrofiad sylweddol Dr Givans, ychydig iawn o achosion a oedd yn cael eu dwyn gerbron yr MSC gan bersonau ac eithrio’r claf ei hun neu aelod o’i deulu/theulu agos. Fodd bynnag, byddai cwyn yn cael ei gwneud i’r FHSA weithiau gan drydydd parti (er enghraifft, nyrs gymunedol). Mewn achosion felly, byddai’r FHSA yn cymryd rôl yr achwynydd yn unol â’r weithdrefn a ddisgrifiais ym Mhennod 6. Felly, er y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl bwrw ymlaen heb gyfranogiad y teulu, yn enwedig cyfranogiad Mrs Carrington, mae’n llai tebygol y byddai’r gŵyn wedi gerbron MSC.
Y Cwêst
Pe bai cwest wedi’i gynnal, gan ddefnyddio gwybodaeth o adroddiad awtopsi priodol a fyddai wedi cofnodi rôl botensial cyffuriau opiad ym marwolaeth Mrs Overton, byddai Mr Revington wedi gwrando tystiolaeth am amgylchiadau’r farwolaeth. Gallai hyn fod wedi cynnwys tystiolaeth gan Dr Brown a Dr Husaini. Mae’n rhy ddyfaliadol i ddweud beth fyddai dedfryd y Crwner neu’r rheithgor. Fodd bynnag, mae posibilrwydd gwirioneddol y gallai’r Crwner fod wedi cymryd y farn fod y farwolaeth wedi’i hachosi gan weithredu Shipman wrth roi gorddos o ddiamorffin. Os felly, byddai wedi bod yn agored iddo i gyfeirio Shipman at y GMC. Pa un a fyddai wedi gwneud hynny ai peidio, mae’n amhosibl i mi ddweud. Mae archwilio rhai o’r achosion sy’n debyg i achos Mrs Overton, a gafodd eu hystyried gan y GMC tua’r un adeg, yn datgelu na fyddai crwneriaid wastad yn cyfeirio achosion felly at y GMC, hyd yn oed lle’r oedd esgeuluster garw amlwg.
Ystyriaf yn gyntaf beth fyddai wedi digwydd pe bai Dr Brown wedi adrodd am Shipman i’r GMC a bod hwnnw wedi penderfynu ystyried yr achos yn hytrach na chynghori Dr Brown i adrodd am y mater yn lleol. Delir â gweithdrefnau perthnasol y GMC ym Mhenodau 18-21. Y cam cyntaf fyddai i’r adroddiad gael ei ystyried gan aelod o staff y swyddfa. Rwy’n fodlon, gan mai uwch feddyg oedd yn gwneud yr adroddiad, byddai’r achos yn gorfod cael ei drosglwyddo i sgriniwr meddygol wedyn. Mae’n debygol, cyn i’r sgriniwr ystyried yr achos, y byddai adroddiad Dr Brown wedi cael ei anfon at Shipman a byddid wedi gofyn am ei ymateb. Ni fyddai unrhyw ymchwiliad pellach gan y GMC. Roedd Arweiniad Mewnol o 1994 yn adlewyrchu prinder yr achosion lle’r oedd y GMC yn cymryd unrhyw rôl ymchwiliol. Roedd yr Arweiniad yn datgan:
‘Mae’r cyfrifoldeb i gyflwyno tystiolaeth yn gyfrifoldeb yr achwynydd bron yn gyfan gwbl, ac nid y GMC, gan nad oes gan y GMC fawr o bwerau ymchwilio yng nghyfnod rhagarweiniol y gweithdrefnau; mae ei bwerau gwysio wedi’u cyfyngu i achosion sy’n cael eu gwrando gan y PCC neu’r Pwyllgor Iechyd.’
Yna, yn y paragraff nesaf, roedd yn datgan:
‘Mewn nifer fach iawn o achosion, fodd bynnag, gall y sgriniwr rhagarweiniol meddygol ystyried, ar gyngor y swyddfa, fod y materion honedig mor ddifrifol y dylai ymchwiliad anffurfiol trylwyr gael ei gynnal yn lleol gan gyfreithwyr y Cyngor, a fydd wedyn yn ceisio ymchwilio i’r achos a chymryd datganiadau, i’r graddau y mae tystion potensial yn barod i gydweithredu.’
Roedd yn nodi wedyn nad oedd yn bosibl, oherwydd adnoddau cyfyngedig, i ymchwilio i lawer o achosion o SPM potensial yn y modd hwn. Felly, ac mae hyn yn gyson â’r hyn yr oedd Dr Brown yn ei feddwl, yn ogystal â’r hyn yr oedd yr MDU a sefydliadau eraill yn ei gynghori, os oedd unrhyw ymchwiliad i’w gynnal neu dystiolaeth i’w chasglu, roedd yn rhaid i hynny gael ei wneud yn lleol ac ni fyddai’n cael ei wneud gan y GMC, nid yn ystod y camau cynnar o leiaf.
Felly, byddai’r dogfennau gerbron y sgriniwr meddygol fwy na thebyg wedi’u cyfyngu i lythyr cwyno Dr Brown ac ymateb Shipman iddo. Gallai’r GMC fod wedi gofyn i Dr Brown i anfon y nodiadau ysbyty a byddai Shipman fwy na thebyg wedi anfon y rhannau perthnasol o gofnodion meddyg teulu Mrs Overton. Barn Dr Krishna Korlipara, a oedd yn sgriniwr meddygol gyda’r GMC o 1998 hyd at 2004 ac a roddodd dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Tachwedd 2003, oedd y byddai achos Shipman wedi cael ei drosglwyddo gan y sgriniwr meddygol i’r PPC. Rwy’n derbyn mai dyna fyddai wedi digwydd fwy na thebyg. Dywedodd Dr Korlipara hefyd y byddai’r PPC wedi cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen i’r PCC. Gall fod yn iawn, er, yn ystod Cam Pedwar, rwyf wedi gweld rhai achosion sydd wedi cael eu cau gan y PPC a oedd llawn mor ddifrifol ag yr oedd yr achos yn ymddangos ei fod. Er enghraifft, yn achos Dr JK 07, a ystyriwyd gan y GMC ar ddiwedd y 1990au, roedd tystiolaeth ddiwrthdro bod y meddyg wedi chwistrellu gorddos o lignocaine (anaesthetig lleol a oedd yn cael ei roi cyn gweithdrefn lawfeddygol) a bod hyn wedi achosi marwolaeth claf ifanc. Cafodd y GMC dystiolaeth feddygol gan athro amlwg mewn anaesthesia (a oedd hefyd yn aelod o’r GMC) a fynegodd y farn fod y dogn a roddwyd yn annerbyniol o fawr ac yn awgrymu fod y meddyg wedi bod yn euog o SPM. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y PPC nad oedd angen cyfeirio’r mater at y PCC a rhoddodd rybudd i’r meddyg ynghylch ei arfer yn y dyfodol. Disgrifiaf yr achos yn fanylach ym Mhennod 20.
Er fy mod yn ansicr yn ei gylch rwy’n derbyn y gallai achos Mrs Overton fod yn wir fod wedi mynd drwodd at y PCC. Pe bai wedi cyrraedd y GMC ar ôl canfyddiad croes gan yr MSC neu yn dilyn beirniadaeth gan y Crwner, mae’n eithaf tebygol y byddai’r achos wedi mynd drwodd at y PCC. A fyddai SPM wedi ei ganfod? Dywedodd Dr Korlipara ei fod o’r farn y byddai SPM wedi’i ganfod, a bod posibilrwydd y byddai Shipman wedi cael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Fel arall, dywedodd, gallai cyfnod o atal wedi bod, neu gellid fod wedi pennu amodau, a oedd yn cyfyngu ar ryddid Shipman i ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig.
Gan gymryd fod yr achos wedi’i anfon at y PCC ar gyfer gwrandawiad (ac os felly byddai cyfreithwyr y GMC wedi ymgymryd ag ymchwiliad pellach yr oeddent yn ystyried yn angenrheidiol, er mwyn paratoi ar gyfer y gwrandawiad), ni allaf ragweld a fyddai SPM wedi’i ganfod. Mae’n bosibl y byddai wedi’i ganfod. Fodd bynnag, os oedd SPM, nid wyf yn credu y byddai wedi arwain at ei ddileu. Dof i’r casgliad hwnnw ar ôl archwilio nifer o achosion tebyg y deliodd y GMC â nhw tua’r adeg honno. Mae’r achosion canlynol yn berthnasol, yn fy marn i.
Dros gyfnod o ddwy flynedd ar ddechrau’r 1990au, achosodd Dr JC 02, meddyg teulu, farwolaethau dau glaf trwy roi dognau gormodol o ddiamorffin iddynt. Arweiniodd y ddwy farwolaeth at gwestau. Yn ôl pob golwg achoswyd y farwolaeth gyntaf gan y meddyg yn rhoi 15mg o ddiamorffin. Yn y cwêst, awgrymodd y Crwner i’r meddyg ei fod ef (y Crwner) wedi derbyn tystiolaeth arbenigol mai rhwng 5 a 10mg oedd y dogn priodol. Dywedodd y meddyg ei fod yn cofio sgwrs gyda meddyg teulu yn yr Alban a’i cynghorodd i beidio byth rhoi llai na 15mg gan y byddai dogn llai yn ‘llidio’r claf yn unig’. Cyhoeddodd y Crwner reithfarn o farwolaeth drwy anffawd, ond ni chyfeiriodd yr achos at y GMC. Ryw 12 mis wedi’r cwêst cyntaf, daeth yr un meddyg gerbron yr un Crwner. Y tro hwn, adroddodd y meddyg iddo roi 20mg o ddiamorffin. Fe wnaeth y Crwner atgoffa’r meddyg iddo gael achos i’w geryddu yn y gorffennol am ei ddefnydd annoeth o ddiamorffin, a dywedodd y meddyg na fyddai fyth yn ei ddefnyddio eto. Cyhoeddodd y Crwner ail reithfarn o farwolaeth drwy anffawd a chyfeiriodd yr achos at y GMC. Daeth yr achos gerbron y PCC a chafwyd y meddyg yn euog o SPM. Cafodd ei wneud yn destun cofrestriad amodol am wyth mis gyda’r gofyniad na ddylai ragnodi na feddu ar ddiamorffin, ac y dylai ailhyfforddi mewn defnyddio
‘cyffuriau therapiwtig’
. Pan gafodd ei achos ei ystyried gan y PCC, wedi i’r cyfnod wyth mis ddod i ben, cyfeiriwyd yr achos at y Pwyllgor Iechyd, a ganfu yn ddiweddarach fod afiechyd wedi amharu ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, a phennwyd amodau pellach ar ei ryddid i ymarfer.
Ar ddechrau’r 1990au, fe wnaeth llawfeddyg orthopaedig ymgynghorol adrodd am feddyg, Dr JF 02 i’r GMC, a oedd wedi rhoi 100mg o ddiamorffin i glaf a oedd wedi dioddef ataliad resbiradol. Cafodd y claf ei adfywio’n llwyddiannus. Daeth yr achos gerbron y PCC, ac, yn dilyn canfyddiad ei fod yn euog o SPM, pennwyd amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am gyfnod o chwe mis. Roedd yn ofynnol iddo ddilyn rhaglen strwythuredig o ailhyfforddiant mewn defnyddio cyffuriau rhestredig a chyffuriau rheoledig. Yn y gwrandawiad, derbyniodd y PCC mai digwyddiad ar ei ben ei hun oedd hwn. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd cwyn anghysylltiedig o ymosod yn anweddus, a wnaethpwyd tua’r un amser yn erbyn yr un meddyg, wedi methu gan nad oedd yr achwynydd wedi cefnogi’r gŵyn gyda datganiad statudol fel yr oedd yn angenrheidiol bryd hynny.
Ar ddechrau’r 1990au, rhoddodd Dr JG 03 propranolol i ferch ifanc a oedd yn dioddef o asthma, a’r canlyniad oedd iddi farw yn dilyn iselder resbiradol. Yn y cwêst, cyflwynodd y meddyg a dibynnu ar gofnodion meddygol cyfrifiadur wedi’u ffugio. Diben y ffugio yn amlwg oedd camarwain unrhyw ymchwiliad dilynol i’w ymddygiad. Cyhoeddwyd rheithfarn o farwolaeth trwy ddamwain a daeth yr heddlu’n gysylltiedig. Cyhuddwyd y meddyg o ddynladdiad a gwyrdroi cwrs cyfiawnder mewn perthynas â’r cofnodion ffug. Cafodd ei ddyfarnu’n ddieuog o ddynladdiad, ond ei ddyfarnu’n euog o wyrdroi cwrs cyfiawnder, ac fe’i dedfrydwyd i chwe mis o garchar. Wrth gyfeirio at y GMC, canfu’r PCC fod gofal y meddyg o’r claf wedi disgyn yn druenus islaw safon dderbyniol, a’i gael yn euog o SPM, ond, oherwydd ei gyfnod yn y carchar a ffactorau eraill a ystyriwyd fel rhai a oedd yn lliniaru difrifoldeb y drosedd, fe’i gwnaethpwyd yn destun cofrestriad amodol am flwyddyn. Yr amodau oedd y dylai gael ei asesu gan a dilyn arweiniad (ynghylch cadw cofnodion meddygol llawn, cywir a chyfoes) gan ei Gynghorwyr Rhanbarthol mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol. Ni ddaeth yr Ymchwiliad ar draws unrhyw achos tebyg i achos Mrs Overton, lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi’i ddileu, er bod y meddyg wedi’i ddileu mewn un achos ar ôl methu cydymffurfio ag amodau a bennwyd ar ei gofrestriad, yn dilyn digwyddiad tebyg.
Effaith Gyffredinol Adrodd am Shipman
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud fy mod o’r farn y byddai gwir raddfa troseddoldeb Shipman wedi dod i’r golwg, neu hyd yn oed ei hamau, o ganlyniad i unrhyw adroddiad gan Dr Brown neu Dr Husaini. Nid wyf yn credu ychwaith y byddai adroddiad neu gyfeiriad at y GMC wedi arwain at Shipman yn cael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Byddai wedi bod yn rhydd i barhau i ymarfer gyda neu heb egwyl fer o atal neu ymarfer dan gyfyngiadau. Fodd bynnag, byddai cyfnod o atal wedi arwain o reidrwydd at rywfaint o gwtogi ar ei ymddygiad troseddol, fel y byddai pennu amod i beidio rhagnodi na rhoi cyffuriau rheoledig. Byddai wedi bod yn llawer anoddach a pheryglus iddo gael gafael ar gyflenwadau anghyfreithlon o ddiamorffin, sef y cyffur a oedd orau ganddo. Yn wir, pe bai hysbysiad am unrhyw gyfyngiad wedi’i gylchredeg yn iawn, fe allai fod wedi cael anhawster mawr yn dod o hyd i gyflenwad.
Yn yr Adroddiad Cyntaf, tynnais sylw at y ffaith na wnaeth Shipman ladd am gyfnod o dri mis wedi i Mrs Overton fynd i’r ysbyty. Yn fy marn i, os oedd unrhyw brosesau disgyblu wedi dechrau, byddai’r cyfnod hwn o ymatal wedi’i ymestyn fwy na thebyg. Byddai wedi arwain at effaith lesol, hyd yn oed pe na bai’r prosesau wedi arwain at unrhyw gosb neu gyfyngiadau ar ei gofrestriad. Credaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai Shipman wedi rhoi’r gorau i ladd am gyfnod sylweddol. Fodd bynnag, ni allaf ddweud am ba mor hir.
Byddai canfyddiad iddo dorri’i delerau gwasanaeth, credaf, wedi cael rhywfaint o effaith lesol ar Shipman. Ni chredaf y byddai hyn wedi bod yn effaith fawr, gan fod achosion MSC yn cael eu cynnal yn breifat, a nifer cymharol fach o bobl fyddai wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r achos a’r canfyddiad. Efallai y byddai rhywfaint o sôn amdano, a gallai hyn fod wedi tynnu rhywfaint oddi ar lewyrch ei enw da. Mae’n annhebygol y byddai pobl wedi sylweddoli difrifoldeb yr hyn yr oedd wedi’i wneud. Ymddengys na wnaeth y canfyddiadau yn erbyn Shipman yn achos Mr W a Mrs B niweidio’i enw da yn sylweddol. Roeddent, wrth gwrs, yn llawer llai difrifol na’r gŵyn mewn perthynas â Mrs Overton. Mae’n bosibl fod cwyn yr MSC am iddo ragnodi gormod o feddyginiaeth gwrth-gonfylsiol i Mr W wedi cyfrannu at arafu ei weithgarwch troseddol ym 1990 a’i ymatal yn llwyr ym 1991, er i mi nodi yn yr Adroddiad Cyntaf bod o leiaf un rheswm posibl arall am y nodweddion hyn. Nid ymddengys, fodd bynnag, bod cwyn yr MCS am ei driniaeth o Mrs B wedi cael unrhyw effaith barhaol ar ei ymddygiad; yn ystod 1993, cafodd afael yn gyson ar ampylau diamorffin unigol i ailgyflenwi’r stociau yr oedd arno’u hangen i ladd ei gleifion. Gallai cwyn ym 1994 am ei driniaeth o Mrs Overton fod wedi cael effaith fwy llesol. Yn gyntaf, roedd wedi’i lladd hi. Yn ail, roedd wedi gwneud hynny gan ddefnyddio diamorffin. Yn drydydd, byddai hyn wedi dilyn yn weddol fuan ar ôl y cwynion eraill.
Pe bai Shipman wedi cael ei feirniadu gan y Crwner yn y cwêst i farwolaeth Mrs Overton ym 1995, gallai’r effaith ar lwybr ei ymddygiad yn y dyfodol fod wedi bod yn sylweddol iawn. Mae cwestau’n cael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus, ac adroddir amdanynt mewn papurau newydd lleol fel arfer. Pe bai’r Crwner wedi dweud yn glir fod Shipman wedi rhoi dogn peryglus o ddiamorffin i Mrs Overton, gallai nifer o bethau fod wedi digwydd. Yn gyntaf, byddai enw da Shipman wedi’i niweidio i ryw raddau. Efallai y byddai rhai o’i gleifion, rhai o berthnasau ei gleifion, ei staff a rhai o’i gydweithwyr wedi bod yn llai ymddiriedus ohono nag a fyddent fel arall. Efallai y byddai cyd feddygon teulu, pan ofynnwyd iddynt lofnodi Ffurflenni C amlosgi, wedi bod yn fwy gofalus wrth ardystio’i farn ynghylch yr achos marwolaeth. Efallai y byddai Mrs Ghislaine Brant, y fferyllydd yn y siop drws nesaf i feddygfa Shipman lle byddai’n cael y rhan fwyaf o’i gyflenwadau, wedi myfyrio ynghylch defnydd Shipman o ampylau 30mg o ddiamorffn ym 1993 a gallai fod wedi penderfynu archwilio’i ragnodion yn fwy gofalus yn y dyfodol. Efallai y byddai ei staff wedi bod yn llai ymddiriedus ohono os a phryd, o 1995, y byddai’r gyfradd marwolaethau yn ei feddygfa wedi cynyddu’n sylweddol. Nid oes modd dweud a fyddai’r amheuon hyn fyth wedi bod yn ddigon i arwain at ei ganfod. Credaf ei bod yn debygol y byddai Mr David a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe, y trefnwyr angladdau a ddaeth i amau Shipman o ladd ei gleifion, wedi teimlo’n fwy hyderus ynghylch codi’u pryderon ac y byddent o bosibl wedi gwneud hynny yn gynharach nag a wnaethant. Pe baent wedi sôn yn gynharach am eu pryderon, efallai y byddai aelodau Meddygfa Brooke wedi sylweddoli’n gynharach nag a wnaethant fod y gyfradd marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman yn anarferol o uchel ac efallai y byddent wedi gwneud eu hadroddiad i’r Crwner yn gynharach nag a wnaethant. Os, pan ddaeth Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine yn ymwybodol o ymchwiliad gan yr heddlu, roedd hefyd wedi gwybod am ganlyniad gwrandawiad yr MSC mewn perthynas â Mrs Overton, efallai y byddai ymagwedd Dr Banks tuag at archwilio cofnodion meddygol wedi bod yn fwy meddwl-agored a gallai’r canlyniad fod wedi bod yn wahanol. Byddai’r effaith fwyaf yn fy marn i wedi dod o ymwybyddiaeth Shipman nad oedd pobl yn ymddiried yn llwyr ynddo, fel yr oeddent o’r blaen. Byddai hynny, credaf, wedi’i wneud yn fwy gofalus a byddai wedi cyfyngu ar nifer y cleifion y teimlodd yn hyderus i’w lladd. Yn fyr, credaf y byddai cyhoeddusrwydd neu unrhyw fath o gamau disgyblu neu hyd yn oed bygythiad o hynny wedi cael effaith gyfyngol ar Shipman a byddai bywydau wedi cael eu harbed. Ni allaf ddweud faint.

---  ---
Deddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998
Codi Pryderon yn y Sector Iechyd
Gwella'r Sefyllfa ar gyfer y Dyfodol
Pryderon yn Cael eu Teimlo gan Eraill

---  ---
Ym Mhenodau 8 a 9, rwyf wedi ystyried sut y daeth neu na ddaeth amryw bobl i amau y gallai Shipman fod yn lladd ei gleifion a’r hyn, os unrhyw beth o gwbl, yr oedd y rheiny â phryderon yn teimlo y gallent wneud ynghylch codi’r pryderon. Rwyf hefyd wedi ystyried ym Mhennod 10 sefyllfa dau feddyg na wnaeth amau fod Shipman yn gwneud unrhyw beth o le yn fwriadol ond a gredai ei fod wedi rhoi dogn amhriodol o forffin i glaf, gyda chanlyniadau trychinebus. Ni wnaethant adrodd wrth unrhyw un mewn awdurdod am eu pryderon.
Rwyf wedi dod i’r casgliad, cyn mis Mawrth 1998, pan adroddodd y diweddar Dr Linda Reynolds am ei phryderon hi a phryderon ei phartneriaid ynghylch y gyfradd marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion Shipman, ychydig iawn o bobl oedd ag unrhyw bryderon yn ei gylch. Roedd Mr David Bambroffe a Mrs Deborah Bambroffe yn bryderus, ac roedd Mrs Bambroffe wedi sôn wrth Dr Susan Booth am ei phryderon. Cyfrannodd y cysylltiad hwnnw at godi pryder ymhlith aelodau Meddygfa Brook a arweiniodd, beth amser yn ddiweddarach, at adroddiad Dr Reynolds i’r Crwner. Yr unig berson arall a geisiodd codi pryder oedd Mrs Christine Simpson, a geisiodd rybuddio’i rheolwr, Mrs Janet Schofield. Fodd bynnag, mynegwyd ei phryderon hi braidd yn anuniongyrchol, ac ni wnaeth Mrs Schofield sylweddoli beth oedd Mrs Simpson yn ceisio dweud wrthi. Roedd Mrs Simpson wedi petruso cyn siarad â Mrs Schofield oherwydd ei bod yn ofni y byddai pobl yn meddwl ei bod yn ‘wallgof’ am goleddu amheuon am feddyg teulu uchel ei barch. Pan na chafodd unrhyw ymateb i’w hymgais gyntaf, ni chododd y pwnc yn uniongyrchol eto ond yn hytrach gwnaeth sylwadau a oedd yn cysylltu enw Shipman â marwolaethau yn Ogden Court. Roedd y ddwy gynorthwyydd cartref, Mrs Dorothy Foley a Mrs Elizabeth Shawcross, yn pryderu ynghylch Shipman ond ni theimlent y gallent ddweud unrhyw beth. Ni wyddent at bwy i droi ac roeddent yn pryderu, pe byddent yn siarad, na fyddent yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif. Ni wnaeth Mr John Shaw, gyrrwr tacsi a oedd wedi mynd yn amheus ynghylch marwolaethau nifer o’i gwsmeriaid, sôn am ei bryderon wrth neb gan nad oedd yn gwybod ble gallai godi’i bryderon. Hefyd, roedd yn ofni’r canlyniadau cyfreithiol posibl pe bai’n anghywir.
Mae’r ofn a’r pryder yr oedd yr unigolion hyn yn ei deimlo yn nodweddiadol o adwaith pobl eraill sydd wedi’u cael eu hunain mewn sefyllfa dymuno adrodd am gŵyn. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn archwilio’r camau sydd wedi’u cymryd dros oddeutu’r degawd diwethaf i wella sefyllfa pobl sydd â phryder ac sy’n dymuno codi’r pryder ond sy’n petruso rhag gwneud hynny am rhyw reswm. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried pa gamau pellach, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd.
Terminoleg
Yn y Bennod hon, rwyf wedi ceisio osgoi defnyddio’r term ‘whistleblowing’ neu ‘ganu cloch’. Yn nodweddiadol, dywedir bod person wedi ‘canu’r gloch ar rywun’ os yw wedi dod â rhyw ffurf ar ymddygiad anghyfreithlon sydd wedi’i gyflawni gan neu o fewn y sefydliad lle mae’n cael ei gyflogi neu y mae’n gysylltiedig ag ef mewn rhyw ffordd arall, i sylw’r awdurdodau neu’r cyhoedd. Yn aml, bydd y sawl sy’n ‘canu’r gloch’ yn gwneud ei ddatgeliad/datgeliad i newyddiadurwr a bydd yn cael ei adrodd yn y cyfryngau. Gall fod nifer o resymau dros i’r ‘sawl sy’n canu’r gloch’ wneud ei ddatgeliad y tu allan - yn hytrach nag o fewn - y sefydliad. Efallai ei fod ef neu hi wedi adrodd am yr ymddygiad yn flaenorol o fewn y sefydliad, ond heb unrhyw ganlyniad. Efallai ei fod ef neu hi yn ofni (efallai oherwydd bod yr ymddygiad anghyfreithlon yn cael ei gyflawni gan uwch aelodau’r sefydliad) na fyddai unrhyw bwynt mewn gwneud adroddiad y tu fewn i’r sefydliad; gall hyd yn oed ofni canlyniadau gwneud adroddiad felly. Nodwedd hanfodol ‘canu’r gloch’ fodd bynnag, yw bod y person sy’n gwneud yr adroddiad am rhyw reswm wedi dewis mynd â’r adroddiad hwnnw y tu allan i’r sefydliad y byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl i’r adroddiad gael ei gyfeirio ato. Fel arfer, nid oes fawr o amheuaeth ym meddwl y ‘sawl sy’n canu’r gloch’ fod y wybodaeth sydd ganddo/ganddi yn wir; mae ei egnïon/hegnïon wedi’u cyfeirio at sicrhau fod y wybodaeth yn cael ei gwneud yn hysbys i’r rheiny sydd mewn sefyllfa i unioni’r cam y mae’n cwyno amdano.
Mae’r term ‘canwr cloch’ felly, yn ffordd gryno gyfleus o ddisgrifio’r person sy’n dod â gwybodaeth am ryw ffurf ar gamymddygiad i sylw’r rheiny y tu allan i’w sefydliad. Ni allai’r un o’r bobl y cyfeiriais atynt ym mharagraff 11.2 fod wedi’u galw’n ‘ganwyr cloch’ pe byddent wedi mynd â’u pryderon at yr heddlu, y sefydliad gofal sylfaenol neu (yn achos Mrs Foley a Mrs Simpson) at eu cyflogwyr. Nid oedd Mrs Bambroffe yn ‘canu’r gloch’ pan leisiodd ei phryderon i Dr Booth; na Dr Reynolds ychwaith pan wnaeth ei hadroddiad i’r Crwner. Nid oedd Mrs Simpson yn ‘canu’r gloch’ pan siaradodd â’i rheolwr llinell am ei phryderon. Nid oedd yr un o’r bobl hynny’n gweithio yn yr un sefydliad â Shipman; roeddent yn syml yn lleisio’u pryderon i’r rheiny y teimlent oedd yr awdurdodau priodol.
Nodwedd arall a oedd yn neilltuo’r bobl hynny oddi wrth y ‘canwr cloch’ nodweddiadol oedd y ffaith fod y rhan fwyaf ohonynt ymhell o fod yn hyderus bod cyfiawnhad dros eu pryderon. Nid oeddent yn ceisio gwneud cwyn neu ddweud barn am rywbeth y gwyddent ei fod yn anghywir. Yn wir, un o’r ffactorau a’u rhwystrodd rhag siarad oedd eu pryder y gallent fod yn anghywir a’r ffaith eu bod yn ofni canlyniadau camgymeriad felly.
Daw’r cyhoedd yn ymwybodol yn gyffredinol o ddigwyddiad o ‘ganu’r gloch’ pan fydd pethau wedi mynd o le - fel arfer pan fydd y sawl sydd wedi ‘canu’r gloch’ wedi’i ddiarddel/diarddel o’i waith/gwaith am dorri ei ddyletswydd/dyletswydd cyfrinachedd neu pan fydd wedi dioddef rhyw niwed arall. Mewn rhai achosion sy’n ymwneud â diogelwch cenedlaethol, mae ‘canwyr cloch’ wedi cael eu herlyn. Pan ymddengys fod y ‘canwr cloch’ wedi cael ei gymell gan bryderon gwirioneddol â sail dda iddynt, mae barn y cyhoedd yn tueddu cefnogi’r ‘canwr cloch’ a’r teimlad yw ei fod/bod wedi gwneud ei ddyletswydd/dyletswydd gyhoeddus. Serch hynny, mae’r neges sy’n dod allan o adroddiadau yn y cyfryngau am achosion o ‘ganu’r gloch’ yn un negyddol yn ei hanfod; sef bod y rheiny sy’n codi’u pennau’n uchel ac yn beiddio siarad yn agored i gael eu cosbi mewn rhyw ffordd. Nid wyf yn credu ei bod yn ddefnyddiol cymysgu’r neges negyddol honno â thrafodaeth o’r modd y gellir helpu pobl sydd â phryderon gwirioneddol a dilys sy’n effeithio ar les y cyhoedd ddod â’r pryderon hynny ymlaen mewn modd cyfrifol ac effeithiol.
Rwy’n cydnabod bod ystyr y term ‘canu’r gloch’ wedi’i ymestyn rywfaint yn ddiweddar. Fe’i defnyddir weithiau nawr i ddisgrifio person sy’n adrodd am ei bryderon/phryderon o fewn sefydliad y mae’r pryderon yn cyfeirio ato, neu hyd yn oed i ddisgrifio aelod o’r cyhoedd sy’n codi pryderon ynghylch person neu sefydliad nad oes ganddo/ganddi unrhyw gysylltiad personol ag ef/hi o gwbl. Caiff y term ei ddefnyddio hefyd i ddisgrifio codi pryderon sy’n llai difrifol o ran natur na’r rheiny sy’n sail i’r rhan fwyaf o’r achosion mwyaf adnabyddus o ‘ganu’r gloch’. Fe wnaeth llawer o’r tystion i’r Ymchwiliad ddefnyddio’r term ‘whistleblowing’ (canu’r gloch) bron yn gyfystyr â‘chodi pryderon’.
Rwy’n bwriadu osgoi defnyddio’r ymadrodd ‘whistleblowing’ (‘canu’r gloch’) lle bynnag y gallaf. Fodd bynnag, mae’r term wedi dod mor gyffredin bod gan lawer o sefydliadau yr hyn a elwir yn bolisïau ‘canu’r gloch’ erbyn hyn, sydd mewn gwirionedd yn bolisïau i gynorthwyo gweithwyr i ‘godi pryderon’ mewn modd priodol, gan roi’r sicrwydd iddynt y cânt eu cymryd o ddifrif ac na fyddant yn cael eu herlid o ganlyniad i’w gweithredu. Gan fod y term ‘whistleblowing’ yn cael ei ddefnyddio gan rai yn y modd hwn, bydd rhaid i mi ddefnyddio’r ymadrodd fy hun yn y Bennod hon o dro i dro, fel y gwneuthum ym Mhennod 9. Fel arall, ni fyddaf yn ei ddefnyddio.
Gwasanaethu Lles y Cyhoedd
Mae codi pryderon gwirioneddol am faterion sydd o bwys cyhoeddus i’w annog. Gellir gwasanaethu lles y cyhoedd mewn llawer o ffyrdd gwahanol, fel atal neu ganfod trosedd, try atal damweiniau neu drwy ddiogelu’r pwrs cyhoeddus. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am rai rhwystrau naturiol i godi pryderon a wynebodd y rheiny a oedd yn coleddu pryderon ynghylch Shipman. Mae rhwystrau eraill yn cynnwys ofni cael eu gweld fod rhywun sy’n creu trafferth neu ‘rebel’, ofn gwrthgyhuddiadau a theimlad o ddiymadferthedd wedi’i seilio yn y gred, er bod yr adroddiad yn cael ei wneud, na fydd unrhyw beth yn cael ei wneud ynglŷn ag ef. Gall fod pryder y gallai gwneud adroddiad arwain at achos difenwi. Gall fod pryder y bydd adroddiad am bryder yn cael ei ddehongli fel ymosodiad ar unigolyn neu gorff lle na fwriadwyd ymosodiad felly. Gall fod ofn y bydd y grŵp neu’r tîm y mae’r person sydd i’w feirniadu yn aelod ohono yn ymlynu wrtho/wrthi ac yn alltudio’r person sydd wedi codi’r pryder.
Gall fod sail dda i ofnau felly. Fel yr esboniaf nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon, mae profiad Dr Stephen Bolsin, yr anaesthetydd ymgynghorol a geisiodd yn aflwyddiannus i adrodd am ei bryderon ynghylch y gyfradd marwolaethau uchel ymhlith cleifion cardiaidd paediatrig yn y Bristol Royal Infirmary (BRI) ar ddiwedd y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au, yn dangos pa mor ddifrifol y gall canlyniadau codi pryderon fod. Deilliodd ei benderfyniad i roi’r gorau i ymarfer yn y DU a chychwyn ymarfer yn Awstralia, yn rhannol o leiaf, o’r ymateb i’w geisiadau i godi pryderon. Yn fy marn i, rhaid annog unigolion i godi’u pryderon onest; mae angen iddynt wybod sut i wneud hynny ac mae angen iddynt gael yr hyder y caiff y pryderon hynny, os codant hwy, eu cymryd o ddifrif ac na chânt eu herlid mewn unrhyw ffordd.
Cydnabyddir yn gyffredinol erbyn hyn bod codi pryder o fewn y sefydliad lle mae’n codi fel arfer yn well na datgelu mwy cyhoeddus. Mae nifer o resymau am hyn. Mae er lles priodol y cyhoedd i sicrhau bod gwybodaeth wirioneddol gyfrinachol yn cael ei chadw’n gyfrinachol. Mae lles cyhoeddus go iawn hefyd mewn hyrwyddo atebolrwydd mewnol mewn sefydliadau. Wrth gwrs, mae rhai camgymeriadau a chamweddau mor bwysig ei bod ond yn iawn bod y cyhoedd yn cael eu gwneud yn gwbl ymwybodol ohonynt; mae llawer o achlysuron, fodd bynnag, pan fyddai’n well, er lles y cyhoedd, bod y sefydliad sy’n gyfrifol am gamgymeriad yn gallu ei unioni a dysgu ohono heb unrhyw gysylltiad o’r tu allan. Gall datgeliadau i’r wasg ddenu graddfa anghymesur o gyhoeddusrwydd gyda chanlyniadau croes i bawb. Mae’r sefydliad yn cael ei ‘roi ar y droed ôl’ gan y datgeliad annisgwyl a gall fynd yn amddiffynnol ac yn gyfrinachgar. Mae tuedd i’r sylw gael ei ganolbwyntio ar y negesydd yn hytrach na’r neges a gall ‘y sawl sy’n canu’r gloch’ ddioddef dial. Yn fyr, nid oes neb yn elwa.
Mae’r dasg o ddyfeisio system yn un gymharol hawdd. Yr her go iawn yw datblygu diwylliant lle mae pob aelod o grŵp, tîm, adran neu broffesiwn yn teimlo synnwyr o gyfrifoldeb am weithredoedd pobl eraill. Lle mae’r hyn sydd dan sylw yn gwestiwn o berfformiad clinigol gwael, gall y synnwyr o gyfrifoldeb hwnnw arwain, yn gyntaf, at ymgais i gynorthwyo’r person sy’n perfformio’n wael i wella, ond dylai ymestyn, os oes angen, i wneud adroddiad swyddogol i berson priodol. Hefyd mae angen datblygu diwylliant lle, pan godir pryder ynghylch ymddygiad neu arfer un aelod o grŵp, nad yw gweddill y grŵp yn ‘cau’r rhengoedd’ ac yn alltudio’r person sydd wedi siarad. Yn yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf, mae ymdrechion go iawn wedi’u gwneud i wella sefyllfa pobl sy’n codi pryderon.
Y Dystiolaeth
Derbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer fawr o ddatganiadau, erthyglau a deunydd dogfennol arall o lawer o ffynonellau ar y pwnc codi pryderon. Anfonwyd holiadur at nifer o awdurdodau lleol a sefydliadau eraill yn gofyn am fanylion eu polisïau a’u harferion. Fe wnaeth llawer o ymatebion atodi copïau o bolisi ‘canu cloch’ y corff perthnasol. Disgrifiwyd y gweithdrefnau ar gyfer codi pryderon o fewn eu sefydliadau gan nifer o dystion a chyfranogwyr mewn seminarau a gynhaliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad. Esboniodd rhai eu profiad eu hunain o godi pryder. Gwnaethpwyd cyfraniad pwysig gan Mr Guy Dehn, Cyfarwyddwr Public Concern at Work (PCaW), sefydliad sydd, fel yr esboniaf isod, wedi gwneud llawer iawn o waith i hyrwyddo hinsawdd gyfreithiol a diwylliannol lle mae pobl yn teimlo’n hyderus i godi’u pryderon. Rhoddodd dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad, a bu Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr PCaW, Ms Anna Myers, yn bresennol yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Ionawr 2004.

---  ---
Y Sefydliad
Mae PCaW, a sefydlwyd ym 1993, yn gwmni cyfyngedig bach â statws elusennol. Mae’n cynnig help ac anogaeth i sefydliadau (y GIG yn benodol) sy’n dymuno creu a meithrin diwylliant lle mae staff yn teimlo’n ddiogel i godi pryderon. Mae’n rhoi cyngor ar y gyfraith berthnasol. Mae’n darparu deunyddiau (fel polisïau drafft) a gwasanaethau ymgynghori a hyfforddi yn ymwneud â chodi pryderon ac atebolrwydd o fewn sefydliadau. Ei nod yw dylanwadu ar bolisi cyhoeddus trwy wneud gwaith ymchwil a thrwy gyhoeddi erthyglau. Mae wedi sefydlu ac yn gweithredu llinell ffôn gymorth hefyd sy’n darparu cyngor cyfreithiol cyfrinachol, di-dâl a chymorth ymarferol i unigolion sy’n ansicr ynglŷn â sut i godi pryderon ynghylch camarfer, yn enwedig camarfer yn y gweithle. Mae’r gwasanaeth ar gael i bob gweithiwr, er bod nifer o brif gyflogwyr, gan gynnwys y GIG, wedi dechrau cymryd tanysgrifiadau i’r gwasanaeth. Cyflwynwyd y cynllun tanysgrifio hwn gan y PCaW i helpu cyflogwyr ddangos eu hymrwymiad i hyrwyddo polisïau canu cloch yn weithredol. Nid yw PCaW yn chwarae unrhyw ran mewn ymchwilio na chanlyn y pryderon hynny, er y bydd, os gofynnir iddo, yn trosglwyddo pryderon i’r derbynnydd priodol ac yn cynorthwyo’r rhai sy’n ffonio i ddrafftio a chyfleu pryderon, os gofynnir iddynt wneud hyn.
Mae Mr Dehn wedi bod yn bersonol gyfrifol am lawer o’r cynnydd sydd wedi’i gyflawni gan y PCaW wrth wella sefyllfa’r rheiny sy’n dymuno codi pryderon. Mae’n fargyfreithiwr a chynorthwyodd wrth ddrafftio Deddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998 (PIDA), sy’n darparu mesur o ddiogelwch rhag erledigaeth gan gyflogwyr y rheiny sydd wedi codi pryder.
Fel yr ymhlyga’i enw, mae PCaW yn canolbwyntio’i sylw ar godi pryderon ynghylch gweithgarwch yn y gweithle. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd llawer o’r dystiolaeth a wrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad am godi pryderon yn ymwneud â phroblemau a oedd wedi codi yn y gweithle. Nid yw hyn yn syndod. Yn gyntaf, mae mwyafrif helaeth y digwyddiadau a allai arwain at godi pryder ynghylch diogelwch cyhoeddus yn gysylltiedig â’r gweithle mewn rhyw ffordd. Yn ail, gweithwyr sy’n fwyaf tebygol o ddod yn ymwybodol o ddigwyddiadau felly a hwythau sydd â’r mwyaf i golli os nad yw’r pryder a godant yn cael derbyniad ffafriol.
Ffactorau sy’n Dylanwadu ar Godi Pryderon
Cadarnhaodd Mr Dehn i’r Ymchwiliad yr achosion ar gyfer pryder sy’n gyffredin ymhlith pobl sy’n ystyried codi pryder. Mae’r ffactorau yr wyf eisoes wedi sôn amdanynt ymhlith y rhain, sef, ansicrwydd ynghylch sut i fynd ati i wneud adroddiad, yn ogystal ag ofn na fydd yr adroddiad yn cael ei gymryd o ddifrif ac na fydd unrhyw beth yn cael ei wneud yn ei gylch. Hefyd, soniodd am y pryder y bydd rhyw fath o ddial neu niwed yn y gwaith, naill ai gan y rheolwyr neu gan gydweithwyr.
Dechreuad Deddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998
Ar ddiwedd y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au, pan oedd Mr Dehn yn gweithio fel Swyddog Cyfreithiol i’r Cyngor Defnyddwyr Cenedlaethol, roedd yn rhaid iddo ystyried adroddiadau nifer o Ymchwiliadau cyhoeddus neu farnwrol i drychinebau mawr. Gwelodd, ymron ym mhob achos, bod yr Ymchwiliadau hynny wedi canfod fod gweithwyr wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r perygl a oedd yn amlwg ond eu bod wedi bod naill ai’n rhy ofnus i godi’u pryderon neu eu bod wedi codi’u pryderon yn y ffordd anghywir neu â’r person anghywir. Nid oedd yr hyder a/neu’r wybodaeth angenrheidiol ganddynt i leisio’u pryderon yn effeithiol. Roedd enghreifftiau’n cynnwys damwain reilffordd Clapham (lle clywodd yr Ymchwiliad Cudd nad oedd arolygwr wedi codi’i bryder gan nad oedd eisiau ‘siglo’r cwch’), trychineb Piper Alpha (lle daeth Ymchwiliad Cullen i’r casgliad nad oedd gweithwyr eisiau rhoi eu cyflogaeth barhaus mewn perygl yn sgil codi mater diogelwch a allai beri embaras i’r rheolwyr) a’r fferi Zeebrugge yn suddo (lle canfu Ymchwiliad Sheen fod staff wedi codi pryderon ond iddynt wneud hynny ‘â’r bobl anghywir yn y ffordd anghywir ac ni wnaethpwyd dim am y peth’). Daethpwyd i gasgliadau tebyg o adroddiadau ar sgandalau ariannol. Ym mhob un o’r achosion hyn, bu methiant cyfathrebu rhwng staff a’r rheolwyr. Lluniodd Mr Dehn y farn bod methiant cyfathrebu yn debygol o fod yn ffactor perthnasol mewn llawer o ddamweiniau eraill a oedd wedi achosi marwolaeth neu anafiadau difrifol, ac mewn llawer o achosion o dwyll a oedd wedi arwain at golled ariannol ond nad oeddent, oherwydd eu graddfa lai, wedi cyfiawnhau ymchwiliad cyhoeddus neu farnwrol. Y meddyliau hyn a arweiniodd at greu’r PCaW ym 1993.
Yn fuan wedyn, fel y dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad, dangosodd Pwyllgor Nolan ar Safonau Mewn Bywyd Cyhoeddus (Pwyllgor Nolan) a’r Comisiwn Archwilio ddiddordeb yn y mater. Dywedodd Ail Adroddiad Pwyllgor Nolan:
‘Mae pob sefydliad yn wynebu risgiau pethau’n mynd o le neu o goleddu camarfer heb yn wybod iddynt. Gall rhan o’r ddyletswydd i adnabod sefyllfa felly a chymryd camau adfer orwedd gyda’r corff rheoleiddio neu ariannu. Ond mae’r rheoleiddiwr yn rôl y ditectif fel arfer, yn pennu cyfrifoldeb wedi canfod y drosedd. Bydd annog diwylliant o fod yn agored o fewn sefydliad yn helpu: gwell rhwystro’r clwy na’i wella. Eto mae’n hynod mai yn yr ychydig o achosion lle mae pethau wedi mynd o chwith yn ddifrifol mewn cyrff gwariant cyhoeddus lleol, y rhybudd i’r wasg neu’r Aelod Seneddol lleol yn aml - weithiau’n rhybudd dienw, weithiau ddim - sydd wedi ysgogi’r rheoleiddwyr i weithredu. Mae rhoi staff mewn sefyllfa lle maent yn teimlo eu bod yn cael eu gyrru i fynd at y cyfryngau i leisio’u pryderon yn anfoddhaol i’r aelod o’r staff a’r sefydliad.’
Mae’r barnau hyn - sy’n farnau rwyf yn eu rhannu - yn crynhoi diben y ddeddfwriaeth a oedd i ddilyn. Nid annog cyflogeion â phryderon i’w taenu ar led oedd y diben hwnnw. Yn hytrach, y diben oedd sicrhau, trwy ddeddfwriaeth, y byddai gweithwyr yn teimlo’n ddigon hyderus i godi’u pryderon yn fewnol. Y nod oedd annog datgelu allanol pan oedd datgelu’n fewnol yn amhriodol yn unig.
Codwyd y syniad o fframwaith deddfwriaethol i annog gweithwyr i godi pryderon yn ymwneud â lles y cyhoedd, ac i ddiogelu’r rheiny a oedd yn gwneud hynny rhag canlyniadau croes, am y tro cyntaf yn y Senedd ym 1995 mewn Mesur ‘rheol deng munud’, a ddrafftiwyd gan PCaW a’r Ymgyrch dros Ryddid Gwybodaeth (CFOI). Cafodd y Mesur gefnogaeth eang ond ni aeth ymhellach. Ym 1996, roedd Mesur Aelod Preifat â’r un nod yn aflwyddiannus, er iddo gael cefnogaeth gref o fewn y Senedd a thu hwnt. Addawodd y Gwir Anrhydeddus Tony Blair AS, Arweinydd yr Wrthblaid ar y pryd a Phrif Weinidog bellach, y byddai Llywodraeth Lafur yn y dyfodol yn cyflwyno deddfwriaeth â’r amcanion hyn. Cyn pen ychydig wythnosau i ethol y Llywodraeth Lafur ym 1997, gofynnwyd i PCaW a’r CFOI gan Weinidogion i hyrwyddo’r Mesur eto, trwy bleidlais Aelodau Preifat y tro hwn. Roedd AS Ceidwadol, Mr Richard Shepherd, cefnogwr y Mesurau cynharach, yn llwyddiannus yn y bleidlais a chyflwynodd y Mesur a oedd i ddod yn PIDA yn ddiweddarach.

---  ---
Amcanion y Ddeddf
Daeth y PIDA i rym ar 2 Gorffennaf 1999. Mae’r rhaglith yn ei disgrifio fel:
‘Deddf i ddiogelu unigolion sy’n gwneud datgeliadau penodol o wybodaeth er lles y cyhoedd; i alluogi unigolion felly i ysgogi gweithredu mewn perthynas ag erledigaeth; ac at ddibenion cysylltiedig’.
Mae’r PIDA yn cynnig diogelwch rhag cael eu diarddel a’u herlid i weithwyr sy’n codi pryderon gwirioneddol ynghylch ‘camarfer’ yn y gweithle. Mae’r diogelwch hwn yn rhan o ddeddfwriaeth cyflogaeth ond roedd gan y PIDA ddiben sylfaenol ehangach o lawer nag ymestyn hawliau gweithwyr i gael eu diogelu rhag erledigaeth. Roedd yn cael ei gweld fel arf defnyddiol i hyrwyddo gonestrwydd a rheolaeth dda. Diben y ddeddf oedd helpu sicrhau bod sefydliadau yn ymateb i achosion o ddatgelu trwy roi sylw i’r pryder a godwyd (y ‘neges’), yn hytrach na thrwy ganolbwyntio sylw ar y person a oedd wedi codi’r pryder hwnnw (y ‘negesydd’). Rhagwelwyd y byddai’r PIDA yn ei gwneud yn fwy tebygol y byddai sefydliadau yn gwrthsefyll y temtasiwn i gelu camarfer difrifol. Yn ôl PCaW, roedd y goblygiadau ehangach hyn ar gyfer rheolaeth a’u perthnasedd ar draws pob sector o’r gweithle yn golygu fod y ddeddfwriaeth wedi cael cefnogaeth eang gan Gydffederasiwn Diwydiant Prydain, Sefydliad y Cyfarwyddwyr a grwpiau proffesiynol allweddol eraill.
Diben y PIDA (fel y polisïau canu cloch gorau) yw sicrhau gweithwyr ei bod yn ddiogel ac yn dderbyniol iddynt godi’u pryderon o fewn eu sefydliad. Os cyflawnir hyn, a bod codi pryderon yn fewnol yn dod yn fater o drefn, bydd y rheolwyr yn aml yn cael rhybudd cynnar o gamarfer a byddant yn cael cyfle i ymchwilio ac unioni pethau. Hyd yn oed lle na roddir rhybudd cynnar, gall adroddiad hwyrach arwain at ganfod y rheiny sy’n gyfrifol, a bydd y wybodaeth fod camarfer yn debygol o fod yn destun adroddiad, beth bynnag, yn gweithredu fel arf ataliol i ddrwgweithredu. Bydd atebolrwydd y rheiny sy’n gyfrifol am y sefydliad yn cael ei wella. At hynny, os yw’r rheolwyr yn methu gweithredu wrth dderbyn pryder y gwelir bod sail dda iddo nes ymlaen, gellir dal y rheolwyr yn gyfrifol. Os yw codi pryderon yn dod yn norm, mae llai o debygrwydd y bydd y berthynas rhwng y cyflogwr a’r gweithiwr yn chwalu pan fydd adroddiad yn cael ei wneud, hyd yn oed os canfyddir ei fod yn ddi-sail. Gwnaethpwyd y pwynt hwn gan Mrs Pauline Webdale, Cymrawd a chyn Gadeirydd cenedlaethol, Cymdeithas yr Ysgrifenyddion Meddygol, Rheolwyr Meddygfeydd, Gweinyddwyr a Derbynwyr (AMSPAR), fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 9. Felly, polisi’r PIDA yw annog adrodd yn fewnol ond, lle mae rheswm da i amau y bydd adrodd yn fewnol yn ddigonol a bod y gweithiwr yn gwneud ei adroddiad/hadroddiad i reoleiddiwr neu hyd yn oed yn fwy cyhoeddus, ni fydd y diogelwch sy’n cael ei roi gan y PIDA yn cael ei golli o reidrwydd.
Cyfundrefn Haenog y Ddeddf
Mae darpariaethau’r PIDA wedi’u hymgorffori i Ddeddf Hawliau Cyflogi 1996 (ERA), trwy newid nifer o adrannau o’r ERA, yn bennaf adrannau 43 a 47. Mae’r PIDA yn creu cyfundrefn ddatgelu mewn tri darn lle mae hawl gan weithwyr sy’n cael eu diswyddo am adrodd am bryder i gael eu diswyddiad yn destun triniaeth annheg yn awtomatig os yw’r adroddiad yn bodloni’r meini prawf a nodir yn y PIDA. Daw’r meini prawf hynny’n gynyddol anodd i’w bodloni yn ôl pellter y person yr adroddir iddo/iddi am y pryder o’r sefydliad y mae’r pryder yn cael ei godi yn ei gylch.
Dosbarthiadau’r Personau a Ddiogelir
Mae’r PIDA yn rhoi diogelwch i bob
‘gweithiwr’
o fewn y diffiniad a nodir yn adran 230(3) o’r ERA. Mae hefyd yn ymestyn y diffiniad hwnnw (mewn amgylchiadau lle nad yw eu telerau gweithio neu eu man gweithio dan eu rheolaeth hwy eu hunain) i weithwyr asiantaeth a chontractwyr annibynnol a meddygon teulu a gontractiwyd dan Gontractau Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol. Mae defnydd eang iawn iddi felly.
Natur y Diogelwch
Mae’r PIDA yn rhoi i weithwyr yr hawl i beidio bod yn destun dioddef
‘niwed’
gan eu cyflogwyr ar sail eu bod wedi gwneud datgeliad sy’n cael ei ddiogelu gan ddarpariaethau’r PIDA (
‘datgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu’
). Lle mae gweithiwr yn dioddef niwed felly, a/neu ei fod/bod yn cael ei ddiarddel/diarddel am wneud datgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu, mae ganddo/ganddi rai hawliau ychwanegol wrth ddod â hawliad gerbron tribiwnlys cyflogaeth. Ystyrir yn awtomatig bod gweithiwr wedi’i ddiswyddo’n annheg os mai’r ffaith ei fod/bod wedi gwneud datgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu yw’r unig reswm neu’r prif reswm am ddiswyddo. Mae iawndal a ddyfernir yn cael ei seilio ar y colledion a ddioddefwyd ac nid oes terfyn uchaf. Gellir dyfarnu iawndal gwaethygedig hefyd. Gall y gweithiwr hefyd, cyn pen saith niwrnod i’r diswyddiad, geisio cael cymorth interim fel bod ei gyflogaeth/chyflogaeth yn parhau neu y tybir ei bod yn parhau nes gwrandawiad llawn yr hawliad gan dribiwnlys cyflogaeth. Nid oes unrhyw gyfnodau cymhwyso na therfynau oed yn cyfyngu cymhwyso’r diogelwch. Mae’r diogelwch ar gael pa un a yw’r wybodaeth a ddatgelwyd yn gyfrinachol ai peidio a beth bynnag yw lleoliad daearyddol y camarfer yr adroddwyd amdano.
Datgeliadau Cymwys
Dan y PIDA, dim ond yr hyn a elwir yn
‘ddatgeliad cymwys’
sydd â’r potensial i fod yn ddatgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu. I ddatgeliad fod yn ddatgeliad cymwys, mae’n angenrheidiol yn gyntaf i’r gweithiwr sy’n gwneud y datgeliad i fod â
‘chred resymol’
(ni fydd amheuaeth resymol yn ddigonol) fod ei ddatgeliad/datgeliad
‘yn tueddu dangos’
(ac nid yn awgrymu’n unig) bod un neu fwy o’r mathau canlynol o gamarfer wedi digwydd, yn digwydd neu’n debygol o ddigwydd. Y mathau o gamarfer, a all orgyffwrdd, yw:
torri’r gyfraith troseddau neu
‘unrhyw rwymedigaeth gyfreithiol y mae’r person yn ddarostyngedig iddi’
yn wirioneddol neu’n ddirnadwy
camwedd
perygl i iechyd a diogelwch
niwed i’r amgylchedd
celu unrhyw gamarfer felly’n fwriadol.
Datgeliadau Wedi’u Diogelu
Datgeliadau i Gyflogwyr a Datgeliadau Cysylltiedig
Mae ‘haen’ gyntaf y datgeliad lle bydd y PIDA yn rhoi diogelwch yn cwmpasu’r datgeliadau a wneir i gyflogwr y gweithiwr, y rheiny a wneir i berson sydd wedi’i awdurdodi gan bolisi canu cloch y cyflogwr i’w derbyn yn uniongyrchol a’r rheiny a wneir i’r person sydd â
‘chyfrifoldeb cyfreithiol’
am y camarfer dan sylw. Mae ystyr y
‘cyfrifoldeb cyfreithiol’
yn ansicr, fel yr esboniaf isod.
Gan mai amcan y PIDA yw cynnig yr anogaeth fwyaf bosibl i godi pryderon o fewn y sefydliad sy’n gyfrifol, mae’r baich tystiolaethol ar y gweithiwr sy’n ceisio gwneud datgeliad haen gyntaf wedi’i osod ar lefel gymharol isel a daw’r datgeliad yn ddatgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu’n eithaf hawdd. Mae’r un diogelwch parod yn ymestyn i ddatgeliadau a wneir i Weinidog y Goron, lle mae cyflogwyr y gweithiwr naill ai yn unigolyn a benodwyd dan ymddeddfiad gan Weinidog, neu gorff, y penodir unrhyw aelod ohono felly. Byddai hyn yn berthnasol i’r achos lle mae gweithiwr sy’n cael ei gyflogi/chyflogi gan gorff cyhoeddus dan benodiad Gweinidogol (e.e. y GIG neu’r ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol (PCT)) yn ‘canu’r gloch’ yn uniongyrchol i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol (SoS) dros Iechyd (neu, yn fwy tebygol yn ymarferol, i uwch swyddog yn yr Adran Iechyd).
Mae datgeliadau cymwys felly yn dod yn ddatgeliadau wedi’u diogelu os cânt eu gwneud
‘yn ddidwyll’ (‘in good faith’)
. Mae’r cwestiwn ynghylch a yw datgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu’n cael ei wneud
‘yn ddidwyll’
yn gwestiwn o ffaith i’r tribiwnlys cyflogaeth benderfynu yn ei gylch. Nid oes diffiniad statudol o’r ymadrodd, er bod y Llys Apêl yn ddiweddar wedi cynnal (yn achos
Street V Derbyshire Unemployed Workers’ Centre
) bod
‘yn ddidwyll’
yn gofyn mai lles y cyhoedd oedd y cymhelliad pennaf dros wneud yr adroddiad. Ni fyddai gan berson sydd ag anhoffter personol fel prif gymhelliad â hawl i ddiogelwch y PIDA, er bod y wybodaeth a ddatgelwyd yn wir ac yn gywir ac yn ymwneud â chyflawni trosedd ddifrifol. Pe bai aelod o staff y feddygfa a oedd yn cael eu cyflogi gan Shipman, felly, wedi adrodd am bryderon ynghylch ei ymddygiad, ni fyddai wedi cael diogelwch y PIDA os mai ei phrif reswm am wneud yr adroddiad oedd anhoffter personol o Shipman. Mae hyn er gwaethaf lles cyhoeddus aruthrol yn y datgeliad y gallai fod yn llofruddio’i gleifion. Byddaf yn trafod y broblem hon ymhellach isod.
Datgeliadau i Reoleiddwyr Allanol
Mae ail ‘haen’ y datgeliad yn cwmpasu’r diogelwch sydd i’w roi i ddatgeliadau cymwys yn cael eu gwneud i reoleiddwyr allanol penodol a chyrff tebyg neu, gan ddefnyddio geiriau 43F yr ERA, i bersonau
‘wedi’u rhagnodi gan orchymyn a wnaed gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol
(dros Fasnach a Diwydiant)
at ddibenion yr adran hon’ (‘personau a ragnodwyd’)
. Amcan y PIDA yw cynnig ychydig yn llai o anogaeth yn unig i bryderon yn cael eu codi yn y modd hwn nag i bryderon yn cael eu codi o fewn y sefydliad sy’n gyfrifol. Mae’r
‘personau hyn a ragnodwyd’
- pob rheoleiddiwr allanol - yn cynnwys cyrff fel yr Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Ariannol, y Gweithgor Iechyd a Diogelwch, y Cyngor Gofal Cymdeithasol Cyffredinol ac Asiantaeth yr Amgylchedd. Nid ydynt yn cynnwys y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) na’r Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd).
Cyn y gall datgeliad sy’n cael ei wneud i reoleiddiwr allanol gael ei ddiogelu dan y PIDA, mae’n ofynnol i’r gweithiwr sy’n gwneud y datgeliad fod wedi gweithredu
‘yn ddidwyll’ (‘in good faith’
); rhaid iddo/iddi hefyd fod â
‘chred resymol’
, yn gyntaf, fod y wybodaeth a ddatgelwyd neu fod yr honiadau a wnaed yn ‘
wir yn sylweddol
’, ac, yn ail, fod y datgeliad yn disgyn o fewn y disgrifiad o’r mathau o ddatgeliad yr awdurdodwyd
‘y person a ragnodwyd’
i’w derbyn. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn, cyn y gall datgeliad hyd yn oed ennill statws datgeliad cymwys, mae’n angenrheidiol i’r gweithiwr fod â
‘chred resymol’
fod ei ddatgeliad/datgeliad yn
‘tueddu dangos’
un neu fwy o’r mathau amrywiol o gamarfer. Dan yr ail haen, rhaid mai’r gred resymol yw bod y wybodaeth yn
‘wir yn sylweddol’
, trothwy uwch na’r haen gyntaf, lle mai’r gofyniad ychwanegol cyn y bydd datgeliad cymwys yn mynd yn ddatgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu, fel y dywedais, yw y dylid fod wedi gwneud y datgeliad yn ddidwyll. Dof yn ôl at y mater hwn isod.
Datgeliadau Ehangach
Mae trydedd ‘haen’ datgeliadau yn cwmpasu’r datgeliadau cymwys hynny nad ydynt yn disgyn i’r un o’r ddau gategori uchod. Cyfeiriaf atynt fel ‘datgeliadau ehangach’. Gallant gynnwys datgeliadau i’r cyfryngau neu i reoleiddwyr nad ydynt yn
‘bersonau a ragnodwyd’
, fel y GMC ar hyn o bryd. I ddatgeliadau felly ddenu diogelwch y PIDA, mae’n rhaid i’r gweithiwr fodloni gofynion eithaf beichus, yn ychwanegol at y rheiny sy’n ofynnol yn achos datgeliadau i
‘bersonau a ragnodwyd’
. Caiff y gofyniad ychwanegol cyntaf (y gellir ei fodloni mewn unrhyw un neu fwy o dair ffordd wahanol) ei fodloni lle bydd:
y gweithiwr yn credu’n rhesymol y bydd yn destun anfantais gan ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr os yw’n gwneud datgeliad naill ai i’r cyflogwr hwnnw, i berson a awdurdodwyd gan y cyflogwr hwnnw i’w dderbyn, i’r person sy’n gyfrifol am y camarfer neu i
‘berson a ragnodwyd’
lle nad oes unrhyw
‘berson a ragnodwyd’
y gellid gwneud y datgeliad iddo/iddi (e.e. oherwydd nad oes unrhyw berson wedi’i ragnodi i dderbyn datgeliadau o’r disgrifiad hwnnw), neu fod y gweithiwr yn credu’n rhesymol y bydd y dystiolaeth berthnasol yn cael ei chelu neu’i dinistrio os yw’n gwneud y datgeliad i’w gyflogwr/chyflogwr
lle mae’r gweithiwr wedi datgelu’r un wybodaeth i raddau helaeth yn flaenorol i unrhyw un o’r personau a restrir yn (a).
Yn fras, felly, mae’r gofyniad ychwanegol hwn yn dibynnu ar y gweithiwr naill ai bod ganddo/ganddi gred resymol y bydd ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr yn ‘ymateb yn wael’ i’r datgeliad neu y bydd eisoes wedi codi’i bryder/phryder yn aflwyddiannus (a bod wedi’i wneud drwy’r sianelau priodol neu nad oes unrhyw sianelau priodol i fynd â’r pryder).
Yr ail ofyniad ychwanegol ar gyfer datgeliad ehangach yw bod y person sy’n gwneud y datgeliad ddim yn gwneud hynny er budd personol. Felly ni fyddai datgeliad sy’n cael ei wneud i’r wasg am wobr ariannol yn cael ei ddiogelu.
Y trydydd gofyniad ychwanegol a’r olaf ar gyfer datgeliad ehangach yw rhaid ei bod yn rhesymol, ym mhob amgylchiadau, i’r gweithiwr fod wedi gwneud y datgeliad. Wrth bennu’r cwestiwn rhesymoldeb hwn, rhaid rhoi ystyriaeth i:
adnabyddiaeth y person y gwneir y datgeliad iddo
difrifoldeb y mater dan sylw
pa un a roddwyd y gorau i’r camarfer neu a yw’n debygol o ddigwydd eto
pa un a yw’r datgeliad yn gyfystyr â’r cyflogwr yn torri dyletswydd cyfrinachedd sy’n ddyledus i berson arall ac (mewn achos lle mae’r person dan sylw wedi datgelu’r un wybodaeth i raddau helaeth yn flaenorol i unrhyw un o’r personau a restrir yn (a) ym mharagraff 11.35 uchod) a wnaeth hynny gan gydymffurfio â gweithdrefn a awdurdodwyd gan ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr.
Lle mae datgeliadau ehangach yn hynny a ddisgrifir fel
‘methiannau difrifol eithriadol’
, nid oes rhaid bodloni’r gofynion yn (a) i (c) ym mharagraff 11.35. Rhaid bodloni’r gofynion eraill, fod bynnag, ac, wrth bennu cwestiwn rhesymoldeb, rhaid rhoi ystyriaeth benodol i adnabyddiaeth y person y gwneir y datgeliad iddo. Fel enghraifft, byddai adroddiad i’r GMC am bryder ynghylch risg ddifrifol barhaus i ddiogelwch claf lle mae’r gweithiwr wedi codi’r pryder yn fewnol yn flaenorol yn fwy tebygol o gael ei ddiogelu na datgeliad tro cyntaf i’r wasg am fân bryder nad ydyw’n ymwneud â diogelwch y cyhoedd.
Dyletswyddau Contractiol Cyfrinachedd
Mae llawer o gontractau cyflogaeth yn cynnwys cymalau cyfrinachedd penodol; ymhlygir dyletswydd mewn llawer o gontractau eraill. Lle mae partïon i gontract cyflogaeth yn mynd i anghydfod ac yn dod i gytundeb ynghylch y telerau ar gyfer diddymiad eu perthynas, mae cymal yn aml yn y cytundeb (‘cytundeb holltiad’) i gadw ei delerau’n gyfrinachol. Mae cymalau cyfrinachedd felly yn rai cwbl briodol fel arfer. Fodd bynnag, mae’r PIDA yn amodi y bydd darpariaeth mewn unrhyw gytundeb rhwng gweithiwr a chyflogwr yn ddi-rym i’r graddau ei fod yn awgrymu gwahardd y gweithiwr rhag gwneud datgeliad wedi’i ddiogelu. Mae’r PIDA felly yn cwmpasu pob cytundeb rhwng cyflogwyr a gweithwyr ac nid yw’n gyfyngedig i gontractau cyflogaeth. Mae hefyd yn cwmpasu cytundebau holltiad.
Datgeliad i Gynghorwyr Cyfreithiol
Mae’r rhain yn cael eu diogelu’n lawn. Fodd bynnag, credaf ei bod yn annhebygol y bydd llawer o achosion yn codi o ddatgeliad i gynghorwr cyfreithiol oherwydd mae’n naturiol bod datgeliadau felly yn gyfrinachol ac yn annhebygol felly o arwain at ddiswyddo neu anfantais arall.
Effaith y Ddeddf
Dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y PIDA yn gweithio’n dda a’i bod wedi cael effaith lesol sylweddol. Ers ei deddfu, mae llawer o gyflogwyr wedi dod yn fwy ymwybodol o’r angen i ddatblygu a sefydlu polisïau cadarn ar gyfer canu’r gloch sy’n ymgorffori’r nodweddion a ddisgrifiaf yn fuan. Mae cyflogwyr yn fwy ymwybodol erbyn hyn ei bod yn gyfreithlon i’w cyflogeion godi pryderon, bod rhaid iddynt fod yn ochelgar ynghylch y modd yr ymdriniant â phryderon pan gânt eu codi, ac ‘os yw’n mynd o chwith efallai bydd rhaid iddynt dalu’. Yn y modd hwn, mae’r cydbwysedd grym wedi’i unioni rywfaint.
Roedd Mr Dehn yn awyddus i bwysleisio effaith ataliol polisi ysgrifenedig cadarn da sy’n nodi’r weithdrefn i’w dilyn wrth godi pryder a delio â phryder. Soniodd am ‘dystiolaeth gynnar’ fod polisïau felly yn cael yr effaith honno. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod drwgweithredwr yn fwy tebygol o gyflawni camarfer os yw’n amau na fydd ei gyfoedion/chyfoedion a’i gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr yn gwybod beth i wneud, neu y byddant yn rhy ofnus i weithredu, pan ac os dônt yn ymwybodol bod camarfer yn cael ei gyflawni.
Tribiwnlysoedd Cyflogaeth
Yn ôl gwybodaeth a gasglwyd gan PCaW yn 2003, roedd y gofrestr gyhoeddus o geisiadau am dribiwnlys cyflogaeth yn awgrymu fod rhyw 1200 o hawliadau dan ddarpariaethau’r PIDA wedi’u cofrestru yn y tair blynedd gyntaf wedi i’r PIDA ddod i rym. Roedd yr hawliadau hyn wedi arwain at un penderfyniad gan y Llys Apêl, un penderfyniad gan Lys Sesiwn yr Alban, chwe phenderfyniad gan y Tribiwnlys Apeliadau Cyflogaeth a rhyw 100 o benderfyniadau llawn gan dribiwnlysoedd cyflogaeth. Soniais yn gynharach am achos Llys Apêl
. Mae’r rhain yn niferoedd sylweddol. Cadarnhânt yr angen i ddiogelu gweithwyr yn y modd hwn. Roedd y pryderon a godwyd gan y rheiny a ddaeth â hawliadau yn amrywio o faterion eithaf dibwys i droseddau difrifol a pheryglon enbyd. Roedd y dialedd a ddioddefwyd yn cwmpasu sbectrwm eang hefyd. Tra’r oedd y mwyafrif o’r achosion yn golygu codi pryderon yn fewnol, roedd tribiwnlysoedd cyflogaeth yn barod iawn i ystyried datgeliadau i reoleiddwyr fel rhai wedi’u diogelu. Ystyriwyd bod pum datgeliad cyhoeddus - gan gynnwys dau i’r cyfryngau - yn teilyngu cael eu diogelu. Dyfarnwyd iawndal gwaethygedig mewn nifer o achosion, ac, mewn un achos, rhoddwyd iawndal o £50,000 am niwed i deimladau. Er mai’r dyfarniad mwyaf gan dribiwnlys erbyn 2003 oedd £805,000, awgrymodd PCaW fod nifer o achosion wedi’u setlo am dros £1m.
Roedd Mr Dehn yn awyddus iawn i bwysleisio, fodd bynnag, nad y nifer o benderfyniadau gan dribiwnlysoedd cyflogaeth na’r symiau a ddyfernir yw’r mesurau cywir o lwyddiant y PIDA, gan mai diben sylfaenol y ddeddf oedd creu diwylliant lle byddai gweithwyr yn teimlo y gallent godi pryderon gwirioneddol mewn modd adeiladol a lle byddai gweithwyr yn delio’n briodol ag unrhyw berygl neu risg go iawn.
Agweddau Newidiol a Datblygu Polisïau Canu Cloch
Dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y PIDA wedi rhoi ysgogiad mawr i sefydliadau gyflwyno’u polisïau eu hunain ar gyfer canu’r gloch. Gall polisïau felly fod yn ddefnyddiol iawn ac yn arf cadarnhaol ar gyfer ‘rheolaeth gorfforaethol, a ‘rheoli risg’, a bod sefydliadau cyflogwyr a gweithwyr yn edrych arnynt yn ffafriol. Prif elfennau polisïau felly, fel y’u disgrifir gan PCaW ac fel y’u cadarnheir gan Bwyllgor Nolan, yw:
datganiad clir bod camarfer yn cael ei gymryd o ddifrif yn y sefydliad
arwydd o’r mathau o ddeunydd a ystyrir fel camarfer
rhoi’r cyfle i godi pryderon y tu allan i’r strwythur rheolwr llinell
dangos y ffordd y gellir codi pryderon, os oes angen, yn briodol y tu allan i’r sefydliad
rhoi mynediad at gyngor cyfrinachol gan elusen annibynnol
rhoi mynediad i staff cwmnïau contractio at bolisi’r sefydliad ar gyfer canu’r gloch
pennu cosbau am honiadau ffug maleisus
hyrwyddo’r polisi yn effeithiol.
Yn ôl PCaW, bu rhai mentrau da gan y llywodraeth leol yn ddiweddar ac mae sefydliadau preifat mwy yn magu mwy o ddiddordeb ac yn cymryd mwy o ran. Mae diffyg ymwybyddiaeth o hyd, fodd bynnag, o’r ddeddfwriaeth mewn sefydliadau bach a chanolig. O’r sefydliadau Llywodraethol mawr, gan y GIG y mae’r ymwybyddiaeth fwyaf yn ôl pob golwg; ym mharagraffau 11.66-11.73, byddaf yn delio’n benodol â chodi pryderon yn y GIG. Mae’r sefyllfa fwy na thebyg yr un fath i raddau helaeth mewn sefydliadau masnachol a diwydiannol mawr. Mae ymwybyddiaeth yn amrywio mewn Adrannau’r Llywodraeth ac eithrio’r Adran Iechyd, ond mae’n eithaf uchel mewn llywodraeth leol.
Er bod cynnydd yn cael ei wneud, dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod o’r farn y bydd yn cymryd cenhedlaeth neu fwy i gyflawni newid gwirioneddol mewn agwedd. Yn amlwg, mae gan PCaW rôl hirdymor bwysig i’w chwarae.
Fe wnaeth nifer o gyfranwyr at seminarau’r Ymchwiliad gadarnhau, er bod agweddau tuag at bobl sy’n codi pryderon yn gwella, mae ffordd bell i fynd eto. Dywedodd Mrs Webdale mai un o’r prif sylwadau o’i haelodaeth hi oedd bod llawer o waith i’w wneud eto i wneud pobl yn ddigon dewr i ‘godi’u pennau’n uchel’.

---  ---
Yr Hanes
I lygaid modern, ymddengys yn amlwg y byddai diwylliant ym mhob sefydliad gofal iechyd sy’n annog adrodd pryderon yn golygu buddion mawr. Fe allai parodrwydd staff i dynnu sylw at gamgymeriadau neu ‘fethiannau agos’ gan feddygon a nyrsys, a’r cyfleuster iddynt wneud hynny, gael effaith fawr ar ddiogelwch cleifion ac ar ansawdd gofal yn cael ei ddarparu. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r buddion hynny wedi’u gwerthfawrogi’n gyffredinol erioed. Ym Mhennod 10, disgrifiais y modd, ym 1994, nad oedd y diwylliant o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol yn ffafriol i un meddyg godi pryderon am feddyg arall. Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth hefyd am y modd y gallai nyrsys neu staff iau gael eu hanwybyddu neu eu herlid hyd yn oed os oeddent yn adrodd am gamarfer neu berfformiad gwael gan gydweithiwr neu feddyg. Ar ddechrau’r 1990au, roedd y GMC wedi esbonio’n glir i feddygon beth oedd eu dyletswydd; eu dyletswydd oedd gwneud adroddiad mewn unrhyw achos lle gallai arfer neu berfformiad gwael effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Eto, fel yr oeddwn i glywed gan nifer o dystion, ni thalwyd fawr o sylw i neges y GMC. Felly, er bod pethau wedi gwella o bosibl yn y cyfnod yn dilyn euogfarnau Shipman a’r Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus i lawfeddygaeth y galon i blant yn y BRI (Ymchwiliad Bryste), mae lle i wella o hyd. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 10, mae Dr Gerard Panting, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfathrebiadau a Pholisi yn y Gymdeithas Diogelu Meddygol, yn darlithio i grwpiau o feddygon ar faterion moesegol, ac mae’n cael eu synnu’n aml gan y raddfa anwybodaeth sy’n cael ei dangos mewn perthynas â materion felly.
O fewn y GIG hefyd, bu symudiad tuag at fwy o onestrwydd, er i hynny ddeillio’n wreiddiol yn ôl pob golwg, nid o ganlyniad i bryderon ynghylch diogelwch cleifion, ond oherwydd bod meddygon yn teimlo eu bod yn cael eu rhwystro rhag siarad yn gyhoeddus am eu pryderon ynghylch y modd yr oedd y GIG yn cael ei redeg. Ym 1993, cyhoeddodd Gweithgor Rheoli’r GIG arweiniad o’r enw ‘Guidance for Staff on Relations with the Public and the Media’. Bwriad yr arweiniad hwn oedd delio â phryderon meddygon teulu a oedd yn teimlo bod eu cwynion ynghylch ymyrraeth wleidyddol mewn materion iechyd yn cael eu mygu gan gymalau cyfrinachedd yn eu contractau cyflogaeth. Roedd yr arweiniad yn ymgais ffurfiol gyntaf gan yr Adran Iechyd i roi arweiniad i gyflogwyr a staff y GIG ynghylch y modd y dylai staff fynd ati i godi materion pryder, ond roedd yn llai na delfrydol. Esboniodd Mr Dehn bod y gweithdrefnau a oedd i’w mabwysiadu dan yr arweiniad yn hir ac yn flinderus. Nid oedd yr arweiniad yn dweud yn glir beth ddylai gweithwyr wneud pan oeddent eisiau gwneud datgeliad; nid oedd ychwaith yn cynnig unrhyw gysur iddynt ynghylch beth allai ddigwydd iddynt pe baent yn gwneud hynny. Nid oedd yn esbonio mai’r opsiynau oedd dweud dim, gwneud datgeliad mewnol neu gwneud datgeliad allanol.
At hynny, roedd y weithdrefn ar gyfer codi pryderon a ddisgrifir yn yr arweiniad yn debyg i weithdrefn cwyno. Roedd teimlad gwrthwynebus i’r weithdrefn, sef i’r gwrthwyneb i’r hyn a oedd ei eisiau. Y person a oedd yn codi’r pryder oedd ei ‘berchennog’ ac roedd yn cael ei adnabod gydag ef. Mewn geiriau eraill, y mater i’r cyflogwr oedd ‘A yw’r gŵyn hon wedi’i rhestru?’ yn hytrach, fel y dylai fod, ’Beth sydd angen i ni ei wybod am y pryder hwn? Sut gallwn unioni’r pryder? Beth allwn ni ddysgu oddi wrtho?’ Barn y PCaW yw bod rhaid i gyflogwyr annog eu gweithwyr i fynegi’u pryderon i rywun o fewn y sefydliad sy’n gallu asesu’r pryderon hynny a gweithredu os yw’n briodol. Ni ddylai fod rhaid i’r gweithiwr fel arfer wneud mwy na chodi’r pryder. Rhaid pwysleisio mai ‘pryderon’ ac nid ‘cwynion’ neu ‘achwyniadau’ sy’n cael eu codi.
Dywedodd Mr Dehn bod y cyfnod hwn (deallaf mai dechrau’r 1990au a olygai) yn gyfnod o weithgarwch mawr yn y GIG. Roedd nifer o resymau am hynny fwy na thebyg, ond, yn fyr, ni chanlynwyd y cam cyntaf a gymerwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd ym 1993. Dywedodd Prif Weithredwr y GIG ar y pryd mewn llythyr a oedd yn cyflwyno arweiniad 1993 bod
‘angen ymdrech barhaus i sicrhau bod y canllawiau hyn
(h.y. y rheiny a oedd yn yr arweiniad)
y cael eu cario drwodd, mewn ysbryd ac yn fanwl ar lefel leol’
. Ym mis Mai 1995, cofnododd Adroddiad Cyntaf Pwyllgor Nolan fod y Comisiwn Archwilio wedi canfod nad oedd yr un o’r 17 corff GIG yr ymwelont â nhw yn hyrwyddo cynllun canu cloch, fel yr oedd arweiniad 1993 wedi argymell. Canfu’r Comisiwn Archwilio bod traean o staff y GIG a gyfwelwyd wedi dweud na fyddent yn codi pryder difrifol pe bai un ganddynt, rhag ofn iddynt golli eu swyddi.
Argymhellodd Adroddiad Cyntaf Pwyllgor Nolan y dylai pob corff GIG nad oedd eisoes wedi gwneud hynny yn dyrannu i swyddog neu aelod o’r bwrdd y ddyletswydd o ymchwilio i bryderon staff ynghylch priodoldeb a oedd wedi’i godi’n gyfrinachol. Argymhellodd y dylai staff allu gwneud cwynion, lle’r oedd angen, y tu allan i’r gadwyn rheolaeth linell arferol, ac, wrth wneud hynny, dylid gwarantu cyfrinachedd. Pe baent yn anfodlon â’r ymateb a gawsant, dylent gael llwybr clir yn ogystal ar gyfer codi pryderon ynghylch priodoldeb gyda’r adran noddi, h.y. yr Adran Iechyd.
Yn ôl y PCaW, roedd Ail Adroddiad Pwyllgor Nolan, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mai 1996, yn atgoffa cyrff y GIG am y cyngor hwn ac yn rhoi rhestr wirio i’w defnyddio gan fyrddau ymddiriedolaeth GIG i asesu i ba raddau yr oeddent yn cydymffurfio â’u rhwymedigaethau.
Cyhoeddwyd arweiniad newydd gan yr Adran Iechyd ar 27 Awst 1999, wedi i’r PIDA ddod i rym. Roedd Cylchlythyr y Gwasanaeth Iechyd 1999/198 yn argymell adolygu’r polisïau canu cloch presennol yn unol â’r PIDA, ac roedd yn datgan mewn telerau yr hyn a oedd yn cael ei ddisgwyl gan Weinidogion. Roedd y Cylchlythyr yn darllen:
‘Mae Gweinidogion yn disgwyl hinsawdd o onestrwydd a thrafod o fewn y GIG, diwylliant ac amgylchedd ym mhob man o fewn y GIG sy’n annog staff i deimlo eu bod yn gallu codi’u pryderon ynghylch materion gofal iechyd yn synhwyrol ac yn gyfrifol heb ofni cael eu herlid. Mae’r Ddeddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus yn darparu impetws newydd i weithredu ymhellach.’
Roedd y Cylchlythyr yn gofyn am weithredu cadarnhaol gan ymddiriedolaethau’r GIG ac awdurdodau iechyd. Yn unol â’r hyn a ddywedwyd yn Adroddiad Cyntaf Pwyllgor Nolan, roedd uwch reolwyr neu gyfarwyddwyr anweithredol i gael cyfrifoldeb penodol am ddelio â phryderon a oedd yn cael eu codi’n gyfrinachol ac yr oedd rhaid delio â nhw - oherwydd eu natur sensitif - y tu allan i’r gadwyn rheolaeth linell arferol. Roedd rhaid sicrhau bod arweiniad ar gael i staff i’w galluogi i godi unrhyw bryderon all fod ganddynt ynghylch gofal iechyd, yn rhesymol ac yn gyfrifol a chyda’r bobl iawn. Roedd rhaid rhoi ymrwymiad clir y byddai pryderon yn cael eu cymryd o ddifrif ac y byddid yn ymchwilio’n briodol iddynt. Dylai fod gwarant diamwys hefyd y byddai staff a oedd yn codi pryderon yn rhesymol ac yn gyfrifol yn cael eu diogelu rhag eu herlid. Roedd pecyn adnoddau a gynhyrchwyd gan y PCaW yn amgaeedig gyda’r Cylchlythyr. Roedd hwn yn cynnwys copi o’r PIDA a phecyn offer, yn cynnwys llyfryn eglurhaol cyflwyniadol a nifer o astudiaethau achos, canllaw gweithredu, disg gyfrifiadur yn cynnwys deunyddiau addysgol a hyrwyddol a deunydd arall gan gynnwys rhestrau gwirio. Roedd y fenter yn ysbryd y ddeddfwriaeth ac yn cael ei chroesawu gan PCaW.
Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste
Daeth impetws pellach tuag at ddiwylliant o adrodd yn agored o fewn y GIG o Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste. Cychwynnodd Ymchwiliad Bryste ym mis Hydref 1998, a chyhoeddwyd ei Adroddiad ym mis Gorffennaf 2001. Fe’i sefydlwyd i ymchwilio i reolaeth gofal plant a oedd yn cael gwasanaethau llawfeddygol cardiaidd cymhleth yn y BRI rhwng 1984 a 1995 a materion cysylltiedig perthnasol. Roedd i sefydlu pa gamau gweithredu oedd wedi’u cymryd i ddelio â phryderon a godwyd ynghylch y gwasanaethau ac i nodi unrhyw fethiant i gymryd camau priodol.
Daeth Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste i’r casgliad bod safonau yn y meysydd perthnasol o arfer clinigol yn y BRI wedi disgyn islaw’r hyn a oedd yn dderbyniol. Dros gyfnod o ryw bedair blynedd, o 1991 i 1995, roedd rhyw draean o’r holl blant a gafodd lawdriniaeth calon agored wedi cael gofal llai na digonol. Roedd y diffygion wedi’u gweld gan rai, a chan Dr Bolsin yn arbennig, anaesthetydd ymgynghorol yn yr Ysbyty. Roedd ei ymdrechion i godi’i bryderon ynghylch y safonau yn uned cardiaidd paediatrig yr Ysbyty a’r canlyniadau gwael wedi syrthio ar glustiau byddar. Ysgrifennodd yn gyntaf at Brif Weithredwr Ymddiriedolaeth yr Ysbyty, Dr John Roylance, ym 1990. Cafodd y cysylltiad cyntaf
‘anuniongyrchol braidd’
(fel y’i disgrifiwyd gan Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste) hwn â Dr Roylance ei wrthod. Wedi hynny, siaradodd Dr Bolsin ag eraill, gan gynnwys Mr James Wisheart, yr ymgynghorydd perthnasol â gofal, a chydweithwyr o fewn arbenigedd Dr Bolsin. Yn ddiweddarach, siaradodd neu ysgrifennodd Dr Bolsin at gydweithwyr anaesthetig y tu allan i’r Ysbyty, at ei grŵp cymheiriaid yn yr Ysbyty ymhlith yr ymgynghorwyr a oedd newydd eu penodi mewn nifer o arbenigeddau gan gynnwys llawfeddygaeth, ac yn olaf at reolwyr Ymddiriedolaeth yr Ysbyty a’r Adran Iechyd. Yn ôl Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste, roedd yr anawsterau a wynebodd yn datgelu
‘y teyrngarwch tiriogaethol a’r ffiniau o fewn diwylliant meddygaeth a’r GIG, a hefyd gwirioneddau grym a dylanwad’
. Beirniadwyd dull ymagwedd Dr Bolsin gan ei gydweithwyr, ac, yn ôl Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste, ymddengys iddo gythruddo uwch reolwyr ac uwch weithwyr meddygol yn gynnar iawn. Wedi hynny, teimlai bod rhaid iddo gymryd llwybr mwy cwmpasog i leisio’i bryder. Nid oedd ar ei ben ei hun o ran cael anhawster cael ymateb oddi wrth Dr Roylance a Mr Wisheart. Daeth Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste i’r casgliad
‘er nad oedd camau Dr Bolsin efallai y rhai doethaf bob tro, ac weithiau y byddai’n rhoi arwyddion cymysg, nid ildiodd ac roedd yn iawn i wneud hynny’
Nododd Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste bod y systemau a’r
‘diwylliant clwb’
hierarchaidd a oedd yn bodoli ar y pryd (ac a ddywedwyd eu bod yn parhau’n
‘rhy gyffredin’
pan gyhoeddwyd Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste) o’r fath natur eu bod yn gwneud trafod data canlyniadau yn agored a’i adolygu yn anodd. Nid oedd staff yn cael eu hannog i rannu’u pryderon nag i siarad yn agored. Roedd staff nyrsio yn cael eu siomi gan y diwylliant hwn, a oedd yn eu heithrio. Cafodd y rheiny a geisiodd godi pryderon hi’n anodd i rywun wrando ar eu lleisiau. Nodaf, mewn cyd-destun gwahanol, y gwnaethpwyd canfyddiadau tebyg gan yr Ymchwiliad i achos y gynaecolegydd Rodney Ledward.
Daeth Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste i’r casgliad bod angen mewn unrhyw sefydliad am systemau a oedd yn ei alluogi i ddysgu a datblygu; un nodwedd allweddol systemau felly ddylai fod bod pawb a oedd yn gysylltiedig yn teimlo eu bod yn gallu bod yn agored am eu gwaith a gwaith cydweithwyr. Mae Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste a’r achosion cysylltiedig gerbron y GMC wedi cael effaith bwysig, yn fy marn i, ar agweddau o fewn y GIG. Mae’r diwylliant yn newid ond proses araf yw hi.
Arolwg UNISON a Public Concern at Work
Ym mis Mai 2003, cyhoeddodd undeb llafur y gwasanaethau cyhoeddus UNISON ganlyniadau arolwg o’i aelodau, gan adrodd am eu profiad a’r lefelau ymwybyddiaeth o weithdrefnau canu cloch yn y GIG. Helpodd PCaW i ddylunio’r arolwg, a dadansoddwyd yr ymatebion gan ystadegydd academaidd.
Nid oedd rhyw 50% o aelodau UNISON hyd yn oed yn gwybod a oedd gan eu hysbyty neu’u hymddiriedolaeth GIG bolisi canu cloch ai peidio, a dywedodd rhyw 30% na fyddai eu hymddiriedolaeth eisiau cael gwybod os oedd problem fawr. Yn anffodus, o’r rheiny a gododd pryderon, roedd traean wedi dioddef rhyw fath o
‘edliw’
personol (nid ymhelaethwyd), er bod un hanner yn teimlo y deliwyd â’u pryderon yn rhesymol. Ar yr olwg gyntaf, ni ellir ond disgrifio’r canlyniadau hyn fel rhai siomedig.
Roedd agwedd Mr Dehn, fodd bynnag, yn optimistaidd, a chafodd ei annog gan y gwelliant sylweddol mewn ymwybyddiaeth a phrofiadau cadarnhaol o ganu’r gloch, o gymharu â’r sefyllfa pan ddaeth yn gysylltiedig gyntaf. Yr hyn a oedd yn fwyaf calonogol oedd y ffaith bod 90% o aelodau UNISON a fu â phryder ganddynt dros y tair blynedd flaenorol wedi teimlo eu bod yn gallu codi’r pryder hwnnw. Roedd hyn yn arbennig o galonogol oherwydd bod aelodaeth UNISON yn cynnwys nifer fawr o staff iau. Dywedodd chwarter fod y diwylliant wedi gwella dros y tair blynedd flaenorol.
Rwy’n amau bod y canlyniadau hyn gryn dipyn yn well na fyddid wedi disgwyl yn gyffredinol o ganlyniadau yn y gweithle y tu allan i’r GIG. Mae hyn yn awgrymu’n gryf i mi, pan fydd polisïau felly yn cael eu hyrwyddo’n egnïol ac yn frwdfrydig, gall y buddion ddod i’r amlwg yn gyflym. Fel y dywedodd Mr Dehn, y neges yw, lle buddsoddir amser mewn sefydlu a gweinyddu gweithdrefn canu cloch wedi’i chynllunio’n dda, ad-delir y buddsoddiad hwnnw gan welliant yn niwylliant y sefydliad. Yn ôl PCaW, pwysleisiodd y cyfryngau elfennau negyddol, ond nid elfennau cadarnhaol, canlyniadau’r arolwg.
Public Concern at Work a’r GIG: y Sefyllfa Bresennol
Dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ers sefydlu PCaW, roedd 515 o’r 3846 o achosion o fynegi pryder a dderbyniwyd wedi dod o’r sectorau gofal iechyd a gofal. Yn y blynyddoedd 2000, 2001 a 2002, roedd PCaW, wedi derbyn, yn y drefn hon, 78, 87 a 73 o bryderon gan bersonau yn cael eu cyflogi yn y sectorau hynny. Bu cynnydd nodedig ar ôl 1999, a briodolodd Mr Dehn i Ymchwiliad Bryste ac arestio Shipman ym 1998 a’i euogfarnu yn 2000.
Yn ôl Mr Dehn, mae llawer o sefydliadau’r GIG bellach yn annog eu staff i godi pryderon ac yn cynnig mynediad iddynt at gyngor annibynnol. Dywedwyd wrth staff hefyd, os oeddent yn amharod, am unrhyw reswm, i adrodd am bryder o fewn y sefydliad lle cododd y pryder, gallant ei godi’n allanol.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, anfonodd yr Adran Iechyd gylchlythyr at gyfarwyddwyr adnoddau dynol pob ymddiriedolaeth GIG, PCTau, awdurdodau iechyd strategol (SHAau) ac awdurdodau iechyd arbennig, yn eu hatgoffa o’r arweiniad yng Nghylchlythyr 1999/198 y Gwasanaeth Iechyd. Roedd y llythyr yn tynnu sylw at arolwg UNISON a PCaW ac yn atgoffa’r sefydliadau o’r angen i gyflwyno a hyrwyddo polisi canu cloch i’r staff. Roedd yn amgáu pecyn polisi (ar ffurf electronig), a luniwyd mewn partneriaeth â PCaW, a gynlluniwyd i helpu cyrff GIG i ddrafftio polisi addas. Roedd yn dweud bod y Llywodraeth yn disgwyl i sefydliadau feithrin hinsawdd o onestrwydd.
Yn amlwg, mae’r Adran Iechyd a PCaW wedi bod yn gweithio’n agos gyda’i gilydd ar gyflwyno polisïau canu cloch o fewn y GIG. Ar hyn o bryd, mae datblygu polisïau canu cloch yn dal i gael ei ystyried fel swyddogaeth adnoddau dynol. Gallaf ddeall sut y mae felly; bydd yr adran adnoddau dynol yn gyfrifol am ddrafftio’r polisi ac yn ei ymgorffori i’r contractau cyflogaeth. Hefyd, bwriedir i’r polisi gwmpasu llawer o fathau gwahanol o bryder heblaw am y rheiny sy’n ymwneud â thriniaeth glinigol. Fodd bynnag, mae dibenion y polisi yn cynnwys sicrhau bod staff yn teimlo eu bod yn gallu adrodd am bryderon ynghylch triniaeth glinigol, bod unrhyw bryderon felly’n cael eu hymchwilio’n briodol a bod gwersi’n cael eu dysgu. Mae paratoi’r polisi yn swyddogaeth adnoddau dynol, ond dylai gwneud iddo weithio, fel yr awgrymodd Mr Dehn, fod yn agwedd ar reolaeth glinigol. Roedd PCaW yn croesawu’r ffaith fod adrodd am bryderon ynghylch materion clinigol yn cael ei ddefnyddio’n gynyddol fel arf rheolaeth glinigol. Byddai PCaW yn dymuno i’r Adran Iechyd roi cyfarwyddiadau hefyd yn hytrach nag anogiadau i gyrff y GIG ynghylch cyflwyno polisïau canu cloch. Byddai’n synhwyrol, yn fy marn i, pe bai cylchlythyrau neu gyfarwyddiadau ynghylch codi pryderon yn cael eu hanfon at arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol a chyfarwyddwyr meddygol, yn ogystal ag i gyfarwyddwyr adnoddau dynol cyrff y GIG. Byddai’r awgrymiadau hyn yn helpu meithrin diwylliant o onestrwydd ynghylch camgymeriadau a diffygion clinigol y mae’r Adran Iechyd yn ceisio’i hyrwyddo.
Gofal Sylfaenol
Mae gofal meddygol sylfaenol yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygon teulu a chan ystod o weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill yn ogystal fel bydwragedd, ymwelwyr iechyd, cynghorwyr a nyrsys ardal. Mae’r gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill hyn yn cael eu cyflogi fel arfer gan y PCT lleol neu’r ymddiriedolaeth gofal cymunedol. Mae nyrsys meddygfeydd yn cael eu cyflogi fel arfer gan y feddygfa deulu ei hun. Hefyd, bydd rheolwyr meddygfeydd a staff gweinyddol/clercio, a’u tasg nhw yw trefnu a rheoli gweinyddiaeth esmwyth y feddygfa. Yn gyffredinol, cânt eu cyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan y feddygfa. Ym Mhennod 9, disgrifiais rai o’r anawsterau y mae staff felly’n eu hwynebu os dymunant godi pryder ynghylch rhywbeth sy’n digwydd o fewn y feddygfa.
Yn hanesyddol, anaml iawn yr oedd PCaW yn gysylltiedig â’r sector gofal sylfaenol. Nid oedd Mrs Webdale, hyd yn ddiweddar, wedi clywed am y sefydliad er gwaethaf ei chysylltiad ag AMSPAR a’r ffaith ei bod ar y blaen i raddau helaeth mewn rheolaeth meddygfeydd teulu. Yn 2003, derbyniodd llinell gyngor PCaW ryw 15 o alwadau mewn perthynas â gofal sylfaenol, ac roedd o leiaf tair ohonynt yn ymwneud â meddygfeydd ag un meddyg.
Fodd bynnag, pan gynhaliwyd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd yr Adran Iechyd a PCaW yn gweithio gyda’i gilydd wrth baratoi arweiniad i feddygon teulu ar y modd i ddatblygu a gweithredu polisi canu cloch ar gyfer gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd a staff eraill yn eu meddygfa. Mae’r Ymchwiliad bellach wedi gweld drafft o’r arweiniad hwnnw ac o’r polisi canu cloch sy’n cael ei gynnwys ynddo. Mae’r polisi drafft yn ymgorffori’r rhan fwyaf o elfennau allweddol a nodir ym mharagraff 11.46 uchod. Fe’i disgrifiais yn fanylach ym Mhennod 9. Caiff staff eu cynghori, os nad ydynt yn gallu codi’r pryder yn fewnol, neu os na ddeliwyd â’r pryder yn briodol, dylent fynd at gyswllt penodol yn y PCT. Mae’r polisi drafft yn glir ac yn galonogol o ran tôn. Mae’n cynnwys manylion cyswllt ar gyfer PCaW ac mae’n sôn hefyd y gall cyngor annibynnol di-dâl fod ar gael gan yr undeb llafur neu’r sefydliad proffesiynol y mae’r aelod o staff yn perthyn iddo.
Bydd o fudd yn ddiau, yn fy marn i, i godi pryderon gael cyhoeddusrwydd a’i hyrwyddo mewn gofal sylfaenol, fel a gafodd mewn gofal eilaidd. Ymddengys i mi y dylai’r un egwyddorion bras fod yn berthnasol mewn gofal sylfaenol ag sy’n berthnasol mewn gofal eilaidd. Dylai staff meddygfeydd ar bob lefel deimlo’n hyderus bod eu strwythur cyflogaeth yn galluogi iddynt godi pryderon heb ofni erlid. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r perthnasoedd cyflogaeth/partneriaeth gwahanol sy’n bodoli mewn gofal sylfaenol yn ffafriol i eglurder neu sicrwydd ynghylch llinellau datgelu. Fe yr awgrymais eisoes, gallai’r opsiwn datgeliad i’r PCT (neu i’r GMC) gael ei ysgrifennu i mewn i bolisi canu cloch meddygfa deulu (ac effaith hynny fydd rhoi’r diogelwch mwyaf posibl i ddatgeliadau i’r corff hynny).
Sefydliadau Gofal Iechyd Preifat
Dywedodd Ms Beverley Cole, rheolwr prosiect dros dro y Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol (NCSC), bod staff sy’n gweithio mewn cartrefi gofal preifat, ysbytai a chlinigau yn aml yn cael mwy o anhawster fyth wrth leisio pryderon gan nad oes ganddynt unrhyw PCT i droi ato. Roedd yn gam mawr iddynt fynd yn uniongyrchol at yr NCSC; roedd ei gyfrifoldebau’n cynnwys rheoleiddio ac arolygu sefydliadau gofal iechyd preifat, rôl yr ymgymera’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd â hi bellach.
Mae llai na 5% o gyfeiriadau at PCaW yn deillio o sefydliadau gofal iechyd preifat. Pan fydd rhywun o’r sector preifat yn cysylltu â PCaW gyda phryder, mae’n anodd weithiau i PCaW roi cyngor. Ychydig iawn o ysbytai preifat sydd â pholisi canu cloch, a golyga hyn y gall fod yn anodd i PCaW roi cyngor clir.
Yn fy marn i, dylai staff sy’n gweithio yn y sector preifat gael yr un cyfle â staff o fewn y GIG i godi pryderon heb ofni dial. Hefyd, dylai’run diwylliant o onestrwydd gael ei feithrin mewn sefydliadau gofal iechyd nad ydynt yn sefydliadau y GIG ag sydd o fewn y GIG. Gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd bennu gofyniad bod gan bob sefydliad gofal iechyd preifat bolisi ysgrifenedig clir ar gyfer codi pryderon fel amod cofrestru. Gellid gwella sefyllfa staff sy’n gweithio yn y sector preifat pe bai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn cael ei gynnwys fel
‘person a ragnodwyd’
at ddiben derbyn pryderon yn cael eu mynegi ynghylch y sector gofal iechyd preifat, yn ogystal ag o dan y GIG.
Rhwymedigaeth Broffesiynol Meddygon
Daeth achos Mrs Renate Overton â chwestiynau pwysig i’r amlwg yn ymwneud â dyletswydd meddyg sydd â phryderon ynghylch ymddygiad proffesiynol neu berfformiad cydweithiwr, lle gellir peryglu diogelwch cleifion. Mae fy Adroddiad Cyntaf yn cynnwys fy mhenderfyniad ar ran Shipman yn achos marwolaeth Mrs Overton. Mae fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad yn cynnwys archwiliad o’r rolau sy’n cael eu chwarae gan yr asiantaethau a’r unigolion amrywiol a ddaeth yn gysylltiedig â’r achos o’r amser pan roddodd Shipman ddogn marwol o ddiamorffin ym mis Chwefror 1994. Mae Pennod 10 o’r Adroddiad hwn yn delio â’r cwestiwn pa un a ddylai dau ymgynghorydd yn Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside fod wedi adrodd am eu pryderon ynghylch triniaeth Shipman o Mrs Overton.
Fel yr esboniais ym mharagraff 11.50, ar ddechrau’r 1990au, esboniwyd yn eglur gan y GMC bod dyletswydd gan feddyg i adrodd i berson neu gorff priodol am unrhyw bryder ynghylch ymddygiad neu berfformiad cydweithiwr a allai gael effaith ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Mae’r arweiniad cyfredol i feddygon i’w weld yn y rhifyn diweddaraf (mis Mai 2001) o ‘Good Medical Practice’, sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan y GMC i bob meddyg. Mae’n dweud:
Mae’r arweiniad yn glir yn ei fod yn gwneud meddygon yn gwbl sicr ynghylch eu rhwymedigaeth i adrodd am bryderon ynghylch gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd arall. Gellid ei ddiweddaru’n ddefnyddiol i ddweud y gallai derbynwyr eraill pryderon yn cael eu mynegi gynnwys yr arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol a/neu swyddogion eraill PCT. Ymddengys i mi mai’r peth pwysig yn awr yw sicrhau bod meddygon yn derbyn beth yw eu dyletswydd a’u bod yn gweithredu’n unol â hynny. Ym Mhennod 10, archwiliais yn eithaf manwl y rhesymau pam mae meddygon wedi bod yn amharod i adrodd am bryderon ynghylch cydweithwyr, hyd yn oed yn wyneb cyngor eglur y dylent wneud hynny. Yn hanesyddol, y diwylliant fu ‘nad yw’n cael ei wneud’. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bu newid sylweddol mewn diwylliant ac agwedd er 1994, a bod meddygon erbyn hyn yn fwy tebygol o lawer i gydymffurfio â’u dyletswydd adrodd. Ni chefais dystiolaeth ar y mater hwnnw’n uniongyrchol, ond mae’r dystiolaeth honno a gyfeiriodd ato yn awgrymu bod yr hen ddiwylliant yn parhau. Fel y soniais, priodolwyd y newid agwedd, ymhlith pethau eraill, i ddysgu o’r digwyddiadau a ddatgelwyd i Ymchwiliad Bryste. Fodd bynnag, roedd Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste ei hun yn awgrymu fod y
‘diwylliant clwb’
yn parhau o hyd i ryw raddau yn 2001. Mae tystiolaeth arall sy’n cadarnhau hynny. Mae adroddiadau a baratowyd ar gyfer y GMC gan gwmni o ymgynghorwyr rheoli (disgrifir ymhellach ym Mhennod 26) yn awgrymu bod amheuaeth o hyd, o fewn y GMC, ynghylch y lefel adrodd am bryderon ynghylch meddygon. Roedd tystiolaeth a gyflwynwyd i’r Ymchwiliad gan Bwyllgor Meddygon Iau y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig yn awgrymu bod meddygon iau yn amharod i godi pryderon yngylch ymgynghorydd oherwydd y pryder y gallai ymgynghorwyr flocio cynnydd eu gyrfa fel meddygon iau. Mae’n anochel y cymer amser hir i agweddau sydd wedi hen sefydlu newid. Yn fy marn i, mae’n bwysig bod meddygon ifanc yn cael eu trwytho â’r diwylliant newydd o’r cychwyn. Ond mae’n hanfodol hefyd bod arweinwyr y proffesiwn yn cyfleu’r neges yn gyson i’r genhedlaeth bresennol o feddygon.
Sefyllfa Nyrsys
Mae tystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod nyrsys wedi wynebu anhawster penodol wrth adrodd am bryderon ynghylch meddygon, er iddynt ganfod ei bod ychydig yn haws adrodd am bryderon ynghylch aelodau o’u proffesiwn eu hunain. Dywedodd Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste ac Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Ledward fod y diwylliant mewn meddygaeth yn rhwystro nyrsys rhag adrodd yn briodol am bryderon ynghylch meddygon. Dywedodd y rhan fwyaf o’r nyrsys a roddodd dystiolaeth am achos Mrs Overton y byddent, yn y gorffennol, wedi’i chael yn anodd iawn codi pryder ynghylch ymddygiad neu berfformiad meddyg. Mae’r sefyllfa’n haws erbyn hyn, meddent, a naill ai byddent yn adrodd am bryder wrth eu rheolwr llinell, neu byddent yn gofyn am gyngor gan y Cyngor Nyrsio a Bydwreigiaeth ynghylch yr hyn ddylent ei wneud.
Dywedodd Mr Ian Hargreaves, Cyfarwyddwr Rhanbarthol wedi ymddeol y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol (RCN), wrth roi tystiolaeth ym mis Hydref 2003, ei fod yn parhau’n bryderus ynghylch parhad bodolaeth diwylliant mewn ysbytai a oedd yn anghefnogi codi pryderon, er iddo sylwi ar welliant dros ryw flwyddyn cyn iddo ymddeol yng ngwanwyn 2003. Roedd wedi sylwi bod ymddiriedolaethau GIG a’r rheolwyr o’u mewn yn dangos eu bod yn derbyn codi pryderon yn agored yn fwy. Er mai’r argraff oedd bod newid yn digwydd ar frig sefydliadau, nid oedd yn sicr ‘pa mor sefydledig y mae ... ar y llinell flaen ... a dyna lle mae rhai o’r problemau’n codi’. Mae dau reswm o leiaf a allai esbonio pam nad yw’r neges yn cael ei chyfleu er gwaethaf ymdrechion i sicrhau newid. Yn gyntaf, gall fod yn wir mai’r canfyddiad ‘ar y llinell flaen’ yw fod polisïau a gweithdrefnau’n cael eu hystyried fel ‘geiriau teg’, nad ydynt yn adlewyrchu’r ymagwedd a fabwysiedir yn ymarferol. Gall ofn dialedd barhau yn real o hyd. Yn ail, gall fod bod rhai pobl heb eu hargyhoeddi eto o fuddion y gonestrwydd newydd yn nhermau gwella gofal cleifion.
Mae’r RCN wedi sefydlu llinell gymorth 24 awr er mwyn cynghori nyrsys sy’n dymuno gwybod sut i godi pryderon. Ystyrir hwn fel elfen bwysig o’r gefnogaeth a ddarpara i’w aelodau. Mae’r Coleg hefyd yn cyhoeddi arweiniad ar godi pryderon, ac mae’n cynnig cwnsela proffesiynol, lle mae ei angen. O’r safbwynt hwnnw, felly, mae cefnogaeth dda i nyrsys.
Dywedodd Mr Hargreaves mai profiad yr RCN yw y gall anfantais ddilyn codi pryderon, a hynny mewn dwy ffurf o leiaf. Fel arfer, daw anfantais felly o du’r meddyg sy’n destun cwyn, a all wrthod gweithio gyda’r nyrs a/neu fynnu bod y nyrs yn cael ei throsglwyddo. Weithiau, mae nyrsys sydd wedi codi pryderon yn mynd yn destun ymchwiliad eu hunain am iddynt oedi cyn adrodd a/neu am y gellir dweud eu bod wedi cyfranogi yn yr ymddygiad a oedd yn destun pryder. Mewn sefyllfaoedd felly, awgrymwyd bod posibilrwydd, os yw gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn gweld arfer peryglus unwaith ac nad ydynt yn gwneud unrhyw beth yn ei gylch, ‘mae ganddynt hwythau ddiddordeb mewn unrhyw gelu dilynol hefyd’. Felly, efallai nad yw’n syndod os oes amharodrwydd i godi pryderon.
Dywedodd Mr Hargreaves, er gwaetha’r cymorth y mae’r RCN yn gallu’i roi, y dystiolaeth anecdotaidd a dderbyniwyd yw ei bod yn dal yn anodd iawn i nyrs herio arfer gwael gan feddyg. Dywedodd ei fod yn gwybod am ymgynghorwyr o hyd a allai beri ‘ofn ac anesmwythyd’ mewn nyrsys ac a oedd weithiau’n defnyddio’r grym hwnnw i orfodi’u hewyllys ar weddill y tîm, er nad i gelu arfer clinigol gwael o reidrwydd. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod nyrsys sy’n cwyno am feddygon ysbyty yn cael eu symud yn aml i swydd arall, i ffwrdd oddi wrth y meddygon y maent wedi codi pryder yn eu cylch. Mae hyn, meddai, yn wrthgynhyrchiol. Nid yw’n datrys y pryder ynghylch y meddyg ond mae hefyd yn gweithredu fel anghymhelliad i nyrsys eraill a all gael eu hunain mewn sefyllfa debyg. Yn gyntaf, nid yw pryder y nyrs yn cael sylw, ac, yn ail, mae’n colli ei swydd. Yn amlwg ni ddylai’r math hon o sefyllfa godi, er y gallaf weld y gall perthnasoedd gweithio o fewn tîm clinigol, weithiau, fynd yn anodd iawn yn dilyn codi pryder ynghylch arfer gwael. Ymddengys i mi, lle mae pryder wedi’i godi’n onest, dylid gwneud pob ymdrech i annog y partïon i ‘gymodi’. Os na ellir gwneud hynny, bydd rhaid i rywun symud, ond ni ddylid rhagdybio mai’r nyrs ddylai symud bob tro. Dylai fod llai o ragdybiaeth fyth mai’r un a gododd y pryder ddylai symud yn hytrach na’r sawl yr arweiniodd ei ymddygiad at y pryder. Beth bynnag, rhaid gweld bod pryderon yn cael eu harchwilio’n briodol, yn deg ac yn drylwyr.
Er mai â nyrsys yn cael eu cyflogi mewn lleoliad ysbyty yr oedd llawer o brofiad Mr Hargreaves, gwyddai am achosion hefyd lle’r oedd nyrsys meddygfeydd wedi codi pryderon ynghylch y meddyg teulu a oedd yn eu cyflogi. Mewn meddygfeydd ag un meddyg, gallai hynny olygu na allent weithio gyda’u cyflogwr mwyach. Dywedodd bod tystiolaeth, hyd yn oed mewn meddygfa grŵp, os yw nyrs yn codi pryderon ynghylch un partner, adwaith y partneriaid eraill yw ‘lapio’u hunain o amgylch y partner hwnnw’ gyda’r nod o ddiogelu’r bartneriaeth.
Astudiaeth o Nyrsys Cymunedol
Mewn papur a gyhoeddwyd yn y Medical Law Review yn haf 2001
datgelwyd canlyniadau astudiaeth a wnaethpwyd ym mis Mawrth 2000 o’r lefel ymwybyddiaeth ymhlith 70 o nyrsys cymunedol yn Sheffield o’r diogelwch cyfreithiol a oedd yn cael ei rhoi i’r rheiny a oedd yn canu’r gloch. Nid yw’r nyrsys cymunedol yn Sheffield mewn perthynas uniongyrchol rheolwr llinell â meddygon teulu, a chredwyd y gallai hyn fod wedi annog gonestrwydd wrth adrodd am bryderon.
Dywedodd bron i draenan y nyrsys a holwyd eu bod wedi coleddu pryderon ynghylch perfformiad meddyg teulu ar ryw adeg yn ystod eu gyrfa, a hynny i’r graddau iddynt deimlo bod cleifion mewn perygl, eto nid oedd dros eu hanner wedi adrodd am y pryderon hynny. O’r 41% a oedd wedi adrodd am y pryder, ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau mewn dros hanner yr achosion. Dim ond 61% o nyrsys a ddywedodd y byddent yn adrodd am bryder ynghylch perfformiad ‘peryglus’ meddyg teulu. Hyd yn oed ymhlith y rheiny a ddywedodd y byddent yn adrodd am bryder, ychydig o eglurder oedd ynghylch y gweithdrefnau adrodd cywir. Rwy’n rhannu pryder yr awdur bod goblygiadau pryderus yn hyn o beth i ddiogelwch cleifion.
Sefyllfa Awdurdodau Lleol
Yn yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf, yn ôl PCaW, mae awdurdodau lleol wedi dangos cryn ddiddordeb yn natblygiad polisïau canu cloch. Ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad gael a chael nifer fawr o bolisïau felly; dau, yn benodol, o gyrff lleol sy’n darparu gwasanaethau cefnogaeth cartref (Gwasanaeth Cartref a Chefnogi Cyngor Bwrdeistref Metropolitanaidd Tameside) a llety a reolir gan warden (Ymddiriedolaeth Tai’r Siarter Newydd). Mae pob polisi’n bodloni’r meini prawf a nodais. Mae pob un ohonynt hefyd yn cynnig sicrwydd bod diddordeb gwirioneddol gan y cyflogwr mewn derbyn adroddiadau am bryder a datgana y bydd y gweithiwr yn cael gwybodaeth gyson am gynnydd unrhyw ymchwiliad i’r pryder a’r cam a gymerwyd. Mae polisi Tameside yn datgan:
‘Fel Gweithiwr Iechyd a Chymunedol mae dyletswydd arnoch i adrodd am unrhyw bryderon all fod gennych yn narpariaeth y gwasanaeth i’n defnyddwyr gwasanaeth. Gallai’r rhain gael eu darparu gan gydweithwyr, gweithwyr preifat/gwirfoddol, eraill.
Ni allwn anwybyddu unrhyw ffurf ar gamdriniaeth a fyddai’n effeithio ar les defnyddwyr ein gwasanaeth.
Os oes gennych unrhyw bryderon:-
Gweithdrefn
1) Ffoniwch y swyddfa a rhoi gwybod i Reolwr.
2) Ysgrifennwch grynodeb byr o ddigwyddiadau yn eich dyddiadur - diwrnod, dyddiad a’r digwyddiad. Ysgrifennwch enw’r Rheolwr y siaradoch ag ef/hi.
(Bydd y wybodaeth hon yn eich helpu nes ymlaen os oes angen i chi wneud datganiad).
Bydd hwn yn destun achos wedyn, cewch wybodaeth gyson am y sefyllfa a’r canlyniad.’
Heb wrando tystiolaeth helaeth a manwl gan weithwyr y sefydliadau hyn a sefydliadau eraill, mae’n amhosibl asesu pa mor dda yw’r ddealltwriaeth o’r polisïau hyn a pha mor dda y rhoddwyd nhw ar waith. Fodd bynnag, mae rhywfaint o dystiolaeth a gafwyd gan dystion â chyfrifoldeb am weithredu’r polisïau hyn yn dangos y bu newid sylweddol mewn agweddau tuag at godi pryderon o fewn yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf.
Julia Burrows. ‘Telling Tales and Saving Lives: Whistleblowing - The Role of Professional Colleagues in Protecting Patients from Dangerous Doctors’, Medical Law Review, 9, Haf 2001, tt. 110-129.

---  ---
Ymddengys i mi fod sefyllfa unrhyw berson sy’n ceisio codi pryder yn llawer gwell nawr nag oedd hyd yn oed chwe blynedd yn ôl, pan basiwyd y PIDA. Credaf fod y PIDA wedi bod o werth mawr, yn y cymorth mae wedi’i roi i unigolion a hefyd wrth newid agweddau cyffredinol. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n sicr bod mwy i’w wneud o hyd. Dywedodd Mr Dehn wrth yr Ymchwiliad y cafwyd bod y modd yr oedd y PIDA yn cael ei gweithredu yn llai na pherffaith mewn rhai agweddau, a’r bwriad oedd y byddai ei gweithrediad yn cael ei adolygu gyda golwg ar gyflwyno newidiadau. Os felly, bwriadaf wneud rhai awgrymiadau ynghylch sut y dylid newid y PIDA.
Newidiadau Posibl i Ddeddf Dadlennu Buddiant Cyhoeddus 1998
Efallai ei bod yn werth dweud eto ei bod yn rhaid mai amcan unrhyw ddeddfwriaeth o’r math hwn yw annog personau i ddod ymlaen â phryderon sydd ganddynt yn wirioneddol lle mae dod â’r pryderon hynny ymlaen, pa un a chanfyddir wedi hynny eu bod yn gywir neu’n anghywir, er lles y cyhoedd.
Defnyddio’r Gair ‘Datgeliad’
Fel y dywedais, mae’r PIDA yn cyfeirio’n gyffredinol at wneud
‘datgeliadau’
. I mi, mae’r defnydd o’r gair hwnnw’n cyfleu’r rhagdybiaeth bod y ffeithiau ‘a ddatgelir’ yn wir. Yr hyn sy’n digwydd mewn gwirionedd yw bod pryderon neu wybodaeth (a all fod yn wir neu’n anwir) yn cael eu ‘hadrodd’. Byddwn yn awgrymu bod ystyriaeth yn cael ei rhoi i ddefnyddio’r gair ‘adrodd/adroddiad’ o bosibl yn lle’r geiriau
‘datgeliad’
‘datgelu’
Ymestyn y Categorïau Personau wedi’u Rhagnodi dan Adran 43F
Yng nghyd-destun codi pryder ynghylch meddyg neu nyrs neu weithiwr gofal iechyd arall, nid yw’n foddhaol nad yw
‘datgeliad’
neu adroddiad a wneir i’r GMC neu i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn denu diogelwch yr ail haen. Os a phan newidir y ddeddfwriaeth, rwy’n awgrymu bod y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, a phob un o’r rheoleiddwyr gofal iechyd ac o bosibl hyd yn oed y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Cyngor dros ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd) yn cael ei gynnwys yn y rhestr dan adran 43F o’r Ddeddf. Nodaf fod Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Ledward yn argymell y dylid rhoi diogelwch ail haen i weithwyr yn adrodd i’r GMC am feddyg.
Didwylledd
Fel yr esboniais uchod, ni all datgeliad (ac eithrio datgeliad a wneir i gynghorwr meddygol tra’n cael cyngor cyfreithiol) fod yn ddatgeliad cymwys oni bai ei fod yn cael ei wneud
). Pan roddodd Mr Dehn dystiolaeth, ym mis Medi 2003, gofynnwyd iddo am ei ddealltwriaeth o’r ymadrodd hwnnw. Roedd ei ymateb yn awgrymu fod PCaW yn gyffredinol yn cynghori bod
‘didwylledd’
yn gyfystyr â gonestrwydd. Dywedodd:
‘I think two things - and this was an issue that came up slightly with the discussion after the Bristol Inquiry reported - is that the good faith test or the reference to good faith was very much certainly in my understanding - subject to what you and the Chairman would say - is in the narrow legal meaing of “good faith”, as in honesty or an absence of predominant or improper motive rather than in this sort of slightly more common meaning of “good faith” meaning sort of “virtuous”. So we generally say that the phrase “good faith” if we are speaking to a public audience is we equate that with honesty. In other words, it is a disclosure that is made honestly.’
Y pwynt cyntaf i’w wneud yw y bydd rhaid i’r cwestiwn priodol i’r tribiwnlys cyflogaeth ei ofyn fod wedi’i lunio yng ngeiriau’r statud bob tro. Ar hyn o bryd, y cwestiwn fydd, ‘A oedd yr achwynydd yn gweithredu yn ddidwyll? Ac nid ‘A wnaeth yr achwynydd weithredu’n onest?’ neu ‘A oedd cymelliadau cymysg gan yr achwynydd?’
Cododd cwestiwn ystyr
yng nghyd-destun y PIDA yn achos diweddar
y cyfeiriais ato’n gynharach. Roedd y ffeithiau fel a ganlyn. Ym mis Ionawr 2001, diswyddwyd yr apelydd, Mrs Frances Muriel Street, o’i chyflogaeth fel gweinyddydd, gan Derbyshire Unemployed Workers’ Centre. Roedd wedi gwneud honiad bod rheolwr y Ganolfan wedi cyflawni twyll ar y Ganolfan trwy dreulio amser ar brosiectau eraill pan ddylai fod wedi bod yn gweithio er lles y Ganolfan, a’i fod wedi gwario arian ar brosiectau eraill a ddylai fod wedi’i ddefnyddio er budd y Ganolfan. Yn dilyn cyfweliad disgyblu, diswyddwyd Mrs Street am
‘gamymddygiad difrifol’
‘thor ymddiriedaeth’
ar sail ei honiadau
‘di-sail ac enllibus’
yn erbyn y rheolwr, ac oherwydd iddi wrthod cydweithredu gydag ymchwiliad i’w honiadau. Roedd apêl fewnol Mrs Street yn erbyn y diswyddiad yn aflwyddiannus. Gwnaeth gais i dribiwnlys cyflogaeth (ET) yn honni iddi gael ei diswyddo’n annheg. Honnodd, gan eu bod yn syrthio o fewn diogelwch y PIDA, bod amgylchiadau ei diswyddiad yn golygu bod hawl ganddi i hawlio ei fod yn annheg yn ‘awtomatig’. Roedd un o’r datgeliadau wedi’i wneud yn fewnol ac am hynny hawliodd Mrs Street ddiogelwch haen gyntaf. Gwnaethpwyd datgeliad arall i drysorydd y Cyngor Bwrdeistref lleol; nid oedd y person hwnnw’n
ac felly, er mwyn cael diogelwch y PIDA, roed rhaid i Mrs Street fodloni gofynion y drydedd haen.
Gwrthododd yr ET gais Mrs Street am gymorth interim a ‘diogelwch awtomatig’, er y rhoddwyd caniatâd i’w hawliad ‘cyffredin’ iddi gael ei diswyddo’n annheg (h.y. hynny nad oedd yn golygu diogelwch awtomatig) barhau. Nid oedd yr un o’i datgeliadau, fe ganfuwyd, wedi’u diogelu gan y PIDA. Roedd yr Eto’r farn, mewn perthynas â’r datgeliadau allanol, fod Mrs Street wedi credu’n rhesymol bod:
ei datgeliadau yn tueddu dangos bod y rheolwr wedi methu cydymffurfio â’i rwymedigaethau cyfreithiol
roeddent yn wir yn sylweddol
ni wnaethpwyd y datgeliadau er budd personol
byddai’n destun anfantais pe bai’n adrodd am y mater wrth ei chyflogwr.
Roedd yr ET o’r farn hefyd ei bod wedi bod yn rhesymol ym mhob amgylchiad iddi wneud y datgeliadau. Serch hynny, methodd ei hawliad gan i’r ET ganfod nad oedd Mrs Street wedi gwneud ei datgeliadau
. Canfu fod Mrs Street wedi cael ei chymell gan ei gelyniaeth bersonol tuag at reolwr y Ganolfan. Roedd tystiolaeth bod Mrs Street, mewn un o’i datgeliadau, wedi cyfeirio wrth fynd heibio at rywbeth am y rheolwr yr oedd yn gwybod nad oedd yn wir. Felly roedd wedi goresgyn pob rhwystr yn llwyddiannus, ac eithrio’r un yn ymwneud â
‘didwylledd’
, a oedd yn berthnasol i ddatgeliadau haen gyntaf a thrydedd haen. Cafodd apeliadau Mrs Street i’r Tribiwnlys Apeliadau Cyflogaeth (EAT) ac i’r Llys Apêl eu gwrthod.
Dadl Mrs Street gerbron y Llys Apêl oedd nad oedd yr ymadrodd
yn golygu mwy nag ‘yn onest’. Gan iddi brofi bod ganddi gred resymol yng ngwirionedd sylweddol ei haeriadau, roedd y gofyniad
‘didwylledd’
yn cael ei fodloni. Byddai, dadleuwyd, yn tanseilio diben y PIDA i feddwl yn wahanol. Roedd y cyflogwyr, a oedd yn ceisio cynnal penderfyniad yr ET a’r EAT, yn dadlau fod y gofyniad ar gyfer
‘didwylledd’
yn ofyniad ychwanegol ar ben yr angen i ddangos cred resymol bod yr haeriadau’n wir yn sylweddol. Rhaid cymryd yr ymadrodd
i bennu gofyniad ychwanegol, fel arall, ni fyddai wedi’i gynnwys yn y statud.
Roedd hawl gan PCaW, fel parti â diddordeb, i wneud cyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig. Prif fyrdwn y cyflwyniadau hynny, a oedd yn cefnogi dadl Mrs Street, oedd y byddai’n niweidio gweithrediad y PIDA yn ddifrifol pe bai cymhelliad dirgel - yn benodol, hyrwyddo dig - yn atal canfod
‘didwylledd’
ac yn arwain at golli diogelwch statudol. Roedd PCaW yn dadlau bod cymelliadau ac eithrio’r dymuniad ‘pur’ i hyrwyddo lles y cyhoedd yn bresennol yn aml pan wneir datgeliadau neu haeriadau. Ni ddylai’r Llys ymboeni ynghylch cymhelliad y negesydd, ond dylai yn hytrach ganolbwyntio ar y neges a pha un a oedd cred resymol yn ei gwirionedd. Diben y ddeddfwriaeth oedd annog pobl i ddod â’u haeriadau ymlaen er lles y cyhoedd; nid yw’r ffaith y gall fod ganddynt gymelliadau cymysg neu ddirgel fod o bwys. Cyflwynodd PCaW, fel dewis arall, y dylai cymhelliad dirgel weithredu i amharu ar
‘ddidwylledd’
lle mai hwnnw oedd y cymhelliad pennaf yn unig a/neu lle’r oedd yn ‘ddrwg’ neu’n ‘faleisus’.
Mabwysiadwyd y cyflwyniadau hyn gan y cwnsler dros Mrs Street fel dewis arall i’w brif gyflwyniad, gan ddadlau y dylai presenoldeb cymhelliad cudd ddangos diffyg
‘didwylledd’
os mai hwnnw oedd y cymhelliad pennaf yn unig.
Derbyniodd y Llys Apêl gyflwyniad y cyflogwr ac roedd o’r farn bod rhaid i’r geiriau
‘didwylledd’
ofyn am rywbeth mwy na chred resymol yng ngwirionedd sylweddol yr haeriad a rhywbeth mwy na ‘gonestrwydd’. Diben y PIDA, pwysleisiodd, oedd diogelu’r rheiny sy’n gwneud datgeliadau penodol ac a gafodd eu cymell gan ‘les y cyhoedd’. Cyfeiriwyd at y rhagarweiniad. Dywed hwnnw fod y PIDA yn bodoli i ddiogelu’r rheiny sy’n gwneud datgeliadau penodol o wybodaeth er lles y cyhoedd. Mae’r geiriad yn awgrymu bod y PIDA yn bodoli i ddiogelu ‘unigolion’ sy’n gweithredu er lles y cyhoedd. Nodaf nad yw’n dweud bod y PIDA i ddiogelu unigolion sy’n datgelu gwybodaeth, a bod datgelu honno er lles y cyhoedd. Pe bai wedi gwneud hynny, gallai Mrs Street fod wedi bod ar dir cadarnach gerbron y Llys Apêl.
Yn y Llys Apêl, dywedodd yr Arglwydd Ustus Auld bod y drafftiwr yn amlwg wedi ystyried, er y gallai datgeliad fod wedi’i wneud gyda chred resymol ei fod yn wir, ni fyddai’n gymwys ar gyfer diogelwch pe na chafodd ei wneud
. Dywedodd,
‘heb gyd-destun’
, mae
‘ystyr graidd o onestrwydd’
i’r geiriau
. Fod bynnag, roedd rhaid dehongli
yng nghyd-destun y PIDA. Ar ôl ystyried a chymharu â’r gyfraith ddifenwi, lle gall presenoldeb malais drechu amddiffyniad mantais gymwys, daeth yr Arglwydd Ustus Auld i’r casgliad bod y geiriau
yn pennu gofyniad bod rhaid mai diben pennaf neu flaenaf y gweithiwr oedd hynny y pasiwyd y statud ar ei gyfer, sef, datgelu gwybodaeth er lles y cyhoedd. Os oedd prif ddiben arall, byddai didwylledd yn absennol.
Mewn dyfarniad cydsyniol, dywedodd yr Arglwydd Ustus Wall bod
‘didwylledd’
yn gwestiwn o gymhelliad a nododd,
‘fel mater o brofiad cyffredinol dyn, gall person gredu’n wirioneddol bod rhywbeth yn wir, ond, fel yn yr achos cyfredol, gall gael ei gymell/chymell gan elyniaeth bersonol wrth ei ddatgelu i rywun arall’
. Aeth ymlaen i ddiffinio’r graddau y dylai cymhelliad cymysg danseilio’r diogelwch sy’n cael ei roi gan y PIDA, gan gydnabod ar yr un pryd mai’r cwestiwn i’r ET o hyd fydd ‘A oedd yr achwynydd yn gweithredu yn ddidwyll? Ac nid ‘A oedd cymelliadau cymysg gan yr achwynydd?’ Dywedodd mai’r prif ddiben ar gyfer datgelu’r wybodaeth berthnasol ddylai fod i unioni’r cam sy’n digwydd neu sydd wedi digwydd (neu, fe dybir, i atal hynny a all fod ar fin digwydd). Fel arall, rhaid mai’r prif ddiben, o leiaf, yw dod â’r wybodaeth i sylw trydydd parti mewn ymgais i sicrhau bod camau’n cael eu cymryd i unioni’r cam. Wrth ateb y cwestiwn a oedd
‘didwylledd’
, dywedodd yr Arglwydd Ustus Wall bod rhaid i ETau fod yn rhydd i ddod i’r casgliad bod cymelliadau cymysg gan weithiwr ac nad oedd, felly, yn gweithredu
. Byddai’n agored iddynt ddod i’r casgliad - er na fyddai rheidrwydd arnynt i wneud hynny - nad oedd gweithiwr yn gweithredu
os nad y diben unioni neu ataliol a ddisgrifir uchod oedd ei brif/phrif gymhelliad.
Dyfynnodd y Llys Apêl â chymeradwyaeth y geiriau canlynol o benderfyniad yr EAT:
Gwrthodwyd yr apêl gan y Llys Apêl. Ymddengys i mi bod y penderfyniad yn amlwg yn un cywir fel mater o gyfraith. Fel yr esboniais, mae’r rhagarweiniad i’r PIDA yn dangos nad ei fwriad oedd diogelu’r rheiny sy’n gweithredu (trwy ddatgelu gwybodaeth) er lles y cyhoedd; ni chynlluniwyd y Ddeddf i ddiogelu’r rheiny sy’n datgelu gwybodaeth, a bod datgelu’r wybodaeth honno er lles y cyhoedd. Bwriad y Ddeddf yn amlwg yw y bydd diogelwch yn cael ei ddarparu yn unig os yw’r person sy’n gwneud y datgeliad wedi’i gymell gan ddymuniad i hyrwyddo lles y cyhoedd, neu, yn ôl barn y Llys Apêl erbyn hyn, os mai dyna yw cymhelliad pennaf y person. Safbwynt PCaW, yn seiliedig ar ei brofiad helaeth o gynghori pobl sy’n ystyried gwneud datgeliad ai peidio, yw bod pobl felly â chymelliadau cymysg yn aml ond y dylid eu hannog i wneud eu datgeliad, os yw er lles y cyhoedd i wneud y datgeliad. Mewn geiriau eraill, os yw datgeliad er lles y cyhoedd, nid yw o bwys pa un a oes gan y person sy’n gwneud y datgeliad gymelliadau cymysg (neu, o bosibl, faleisus hyd yn oed).
Gallaf weld grym dadl PCaW. Os yw cyflogwyr yn gallu archwilio ac amau cymelliadau’r ‘negesydd’, wrth geisio cyfiawnhau fod wedi gweithredu yn ei erbyn/herbyn, ni fydd llawer o ‘negeseuon’ yn dod i’r golwg oherwydd y bydd rhaid i sefydliadau fel PCaW gynghori’r rheiny sy’n dod atynt am gyngor na allant, os gellir amau eu cymelliadau, gael eu diogelu gan y PIDA. Pwysleisiodd y Llys Apêl nad oedd rhywun yn sefyllfa Mrs Street heb unrhyw fodd unioni o gwbl; roedd yn colli ‘diogelwch awtomatig’ y PIDA ond yn cadw’r hawl i ddadlau bod ei diswyddiad, ym mhob un o’r amgylchiadau, wedi bod yn annheg. Mae hynny’n wir yn ddiau, ond byddai unrhyw un a oedd yn ei chynghori cyn iddi wneud ei datgeliad wedi gorfod rhoi cyngor gofalus iawn iddi. Gallai effaith cael y cyngor gofalus hwnnw yn wir fod wedi golygu y byddai wedi cadw’n dawel. Byddai hyn yn anffodus os oedd y wybodaeth yn effeithio, er enghraifft, ar ddiogelwch cleifion mewn lleoliad gofal iechyd. Mae’n amlwg, cyn y penderfyniad yn
o leiaf, na wnaeth PCaW gynghori’r rheiny a ofynnodd am ei gyngor y byddai presenoldeb cymelliadau cymysg yn trechu hawliad i ddiogelwch awtomatig dan y ddeddfwriaeth.
Ymddengys hefyd bod rhai sefydliadau yn gweithredu polisi sy’n gwarantu mwy o ddiogelwch i’w gweithwyr na hwnnw sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan y PIDA mewn gwirionedd. Fe wnaeth Mr Alan Turner, wrolegydd ymgynghorol ac, er 1993, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Ysbytai Peterborough, roi copi i’r Ymchwiliad o’r polisi canu cloch a oedd yn cael ei weithredu gan ei Ymddiriedolaeth. Nid yw’r iaith sydd ynddo mor eglur ac a fyddai’n ddymunol mewn Deddf Seneddol ond mae ei neges yn weddol glir. Dywed:
Nid ymddengys bod yr ymadrodd
’in good faith’
yn y cyd-destun hwnnw, ochr yn ochr â chyflwr meddwl person
‘sy’n codi mater yn faleisus (‘maliciously raises a matter’)
y mae’n gwybod nad yw’n wir, yn gofyn am absenoldeb cymelliadau cymysg y mae’r PIDA wedi’u gwneud yn ofynnol. Mae polisi’r New Charter Housing Trust yn cynnwys y paragraff canlynol, sydd eto’n mynd ymhellach na’r PIDA:
Er bod y geiriau
yn ymddangos yn y polisi hwnnw, ymddengys na fyddai gan berson â‘chymelliadau cymysg’
‘unrhyw beth i’w ofni’
cyhyd â’i fod/bod â
, hyd yn oed os nad oedd sail i’w bryderon/phryderon.
Ymddengys i mi bod y sicrwydd sy’n cael ei roi yn y ddau bolisi hwn wedi’i osod i’r lefel diogelwch y dylai’r PIDA ei roi - ac y byddai’r PCaW yn dymuno ei roi - ond nid ydyw. Credaf y dylai fod trafodaeth gyhoeddus ynghylch a ddylai’r geiriau
ymddangos yn y PIDA. Yn fy marn i, gellid eu hepgor fwy na thebyg. Dylai cyfundrefn tair haen y PIDA, gyda’i gofynion manwl cynyddrannol, roi anghymhelliant digonol i’r rheiny sydd â’u bryd ar godi pryderon di-sail yn faleisus. Credaf y byddai’n briodol hefyd pe bai’r rhagarweiniad i’r PIDA yn dweud yn eglur mai diben y PIDA yw diogelu personau sy’n datgelu gwybodaeth, a bod datgelu’r wybodaeth honno er lles y cyhoedd. Byddai hynny’n canolbwyntio sylw ar y neges yn hytrach na’r negesydd. Byddai lles y cyhoedd yn cael ei wasanaethu, hyd yn oed mewn achosion lle nad oedd cymelliadau’r negesydd yn gwbl anhunanol o bosibl.
Amheuaeth Resymol a Chred Resymol
Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio, cyn y gall unrhyw ddatgeliad ddod yn ddatgeliad cymwys, mae’n angenrheidiol i’r gweithiwr sy’n gwneud y datgeliad gael
‘cred resymol’
bod y wybodaeth yn tueddu dangos bod gweithred sy’n disgyn i un neu fwy o’r categorïau camarfer a restrir wedi’i chyflawni, wrthi’n cael ei chyflawni neu’n debygol o gael ei chyflawni. Nid yw amheuaeth resymol o hynny yn ddigon.
Ymddengys i mi y gall y gofyniad hwn weithredu yn erbyn lles y cyhoedd yn ogystal, yn enwedig mewn achosion lle mae gan y gweithiwr fynediad at wybodaeth anghyflawn neu anuniongyrchol. Rwy’n bryderus ynghylch bod gweithiwr, er mwyn gwneud datgeliad i’w gyflogwr/chyflogwr hyd yn oed, yn gorfod bod mewn sefyllfa lle gallai ddweud, er enghraifft, ‘Credaf fod y datgeliad hwn yn tueddu dangos bod trosedd wedi’i chyflawni ac mae fy nghred yn rhesymol.’ Fel y gellir gweld ym Mhenodau 8 a 9, pe bai’r trothwy hwn yn cael ei gymhwyso i weithwyr â chyflwr meddwl Mr Shaw, Mr a Mrs Bambroffe, Mrs Foley, Mrs Shawcross a Mrs Simpson, rwy’n amau y byddent wedi gallu croesi’r trothwy hwnnw’n hyderus. At hynny, nid wyf yn credu y gallai unrhyw un a oedd yn ateb galwad ar linell gymorth y PCaW wedi gallu sicrhau unrhyw un o’r personau hynny’n hyderus (be baent wedi bod yn
‘weithwyr’
) bod eu cyflwr meddwl o’r fath natur bod diogelwch yn cael ei warantu iddynt.
Ni ddylai’r cyfrifoldeb fod ar unigolyn, yn fy marn i, i sefydlu
‘cred resymol’
yn achos datgeliadau mewnol a datgeliadau i reoleiddwyr allanol. Byddai lles y cyhoedd, yn fy marn i, yn cael ei wasanaethu orau gan amnewid ‘amheuaeth’ am ‘cred’. Awgrymwyd hyn gan Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside ac rwy’n cytuno â’i awgrym.
Rwyf o’r farn hefyd bod cymhwyso’r prawf
‘cred resymol’
i adroddiadau am bryder i
yn gosod y trothwy ar gyfer diogelwch yn rhy uchel. Wrth bennu a yw datgeliadau
‘i bersonau a ragnodwyd’
yn denu diogelwch, mae’r prawf yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol bod
‘cred resymol’
bod y wybodaeth sy’n cael ei datgelu a bod unrhyw honiad a gynhwysir ynddo yn
. Gall hyn fod yn ddymunol ac yn briodol pan fydd y wybodaeth yn fater o sylw uniongyrchol, ond mae’r sefyllfa’n wahanol pan fydd y wybodaeth yn ail-law, efallai’n achlust neu amheuaeth gref. Gall yn wir fod nad yw’r person dan sylw mewn sefyllfa i ddweud ei fod/bod yn credu’n rhesymol
‘bod y wybodaeth a ddatgelwyd, ac unrhyw honiad a gynhwysir ynddi’
yn
, er y gall amau’n gryf mai felly y mae ac y gall yr amheuaeth yn wir warantu ymchwiliad. Mewn maes lle mai’r tueddiad naturiol fydd i bobl ‘ddal eu tir’ neu ‘gadw’n dawel’, rwy’n cymryd y farn y bydd cymhwyso trothwy ‘cred resymol mewn gwirionedd sylweddol’ yn arwain at y rheoleiddwyr yn parhau’n anymwybodol o achosion y dylent fod yn ymwybodol ohonynt.
Mae’r trydydd prawf
‘cred resymol’
, sy’n berthnasol, er enghraifft, i ddatgeliadau i’r cyfryngau, yn dibynnu bod gan y gweithiwr
‘gred resymol’
y bydd ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr yn ‘ymateb yn wael’ i’r honiad, cyn y daw datgeliad allanol (ac eithrio i reoleiddiwr) yn un wedi’i ddiogelu. Nid wyf yn ystyried bod hyn yn feichus. Mae’n llawer llai llethol i ddisgwyl i weithiwr allu esbonio sylfaen ar gyfer cred am ymateb tebygol ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr nag ydyw i ofyn iddo/iddi gyfiawnhau cred am sefyllfa y mae ganddo/ganddi wybodaeth neu ddealltwriaeth rannol amdano’n unig.
Datgeliadau Mewnol
Fel yr esboniais, mae’r PIDA yn rhoi diogelwch yn barod iawn i ddatgeliadau sy’n cael eu gwneud i gyflogwr y gweithiwr, i berson wedi’i awdurdodi gan bolisi canu cloch y cyflogwr i’w derbyn yn uniongyrchol neu i’r person sydd â
am y camarfer dan sylw. Yn fy marn i, mae’r darpariaethau hyn yn gadael rhai gweithwyr mewn sefyllfa anodd. Yn benodol, gweithwyr mewn sefydliadau bach iawn rwy’n meddwl amdanynt. Efallai nad oes polisi canu cloch neu gall fod yn amhosibl yn ymarferol i weithiwr godi pryder yn uniongyrchol gyda’r cyflogwr. Efallai nad oes unrhyw berson na sefydliad yr ymddengys fod ganddo/ganddi unrhyw gyfrifoldeb cyfreithiol am y camarfer dan sylw. Cymerwch, er enghraifft, sefyllfa nyrs sy’n cael ei chyflogi/gyflogi’n uniongyrchol gan feddygfa deulu ac sy’n dod i amau bod un o’r meddygon teulu yn y feddygfa yn euog o ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfrifol i gleifion. Efallai’n wir na fydd nyrs y feddygfa eisiau codi ei phryderon/bryderon yn uniongyrchol gyda’r feddygfa, ond mae’n haeddu, yr ymddengys i mi, lefel uchel o ddiogelwch os yw’n dymuno adrodd i’r PCT am y pryderon hynny. Gellir dadlau - ond ymhell o fod yn sicr - bod diogelwch felly’n bodoli dan y PIDA. Gellid dweud bod gan y PCT
‘gyfrifoldeb cyfreithiol’
am weithredoedd y meddyg teulu gan fod ganddo ddyletswydd ansawdd a bennwyd iddo gan Ddeddf Iechyd 1999 mewn perthynas â gwasanaethau’n cael eu darparu gan feddygon teulu. Fodd bynnag, gall y ddadl fethu yn wir. Byddai diogelwch dan y PIDA yn annhebygol o fod ar gael lle mai’r pryder oedd bod y meddyg teulu’n rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfrifol iddo’i hun.
Ni ellid datrys y broblem yn yr enghraifft benodol a roddais drwy bennu gofyniad bod pob meddygfa deulu â pholisi yn awdurdodi bod datgeliadau i’w gwneud yn uniongyrchol i’r PCT. Mae hynny’n ddymunol, ac, yn wir, mae’n cael ei ystyried gan y polisi drafft y cyfeiriaf ato ym mharagraff 11.72. Fodd bynnag, gall fod sefyllfaoedd eraill lle na ellid datrys y broblem mor hawdd. Yr hyn sydd gennyf mewn golwg, er enghraifft, yw sefyllfa gweithiwr mewn cwmni neu fusnes bach sy’n dechrau amau y gall ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr fod yn twyllo cleientiaid. Mae ef neu hi yn debygol o deimlo na all godi’r pryder gyda’r cwmni, eto efallai nad yw’n teimlo’n ddigon sicr i wneud adroddiad i’r heddlu. Byddai adroddiad yn cael ei wneud i sefydliad masnach neu broffesiynol yn denu diogelwch dan y PIDA ar y drydedd haen yn unig, gyda’r holl rwystrau ychwanegol i’w datrys cyn y gellir sicrhau diogelwch. Dewis posibl ond trwsgl fyddai i’r ystod o
gael ei ymestyn. Efallai mai’r ateb gorau - ac rwy’n awgrymu hyn er ystyriaeth yn unig - fyddai ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob gweithiwr bennu derbynnydd trydydd pari i fynegi pryder iddo/iddi. Gellid gwneud darpariaeth i ganiatáu trin datgeliadau trydedd haen gan weithwyr cyflogeion na gymerodd y cam hwn fel datgeliadau ail haen. Rwy’n cydnabod bod yr awgrym hwn y tu allan i fy Nghylch Gwaith, ond, os yw’r PIDA i’w adolygu, mae’n fy nharo y gall helpu i gynnwys darpariaeth felly.
Adrodd am Bryderon mewn Perthynas â Sefydliadau Cysylltiedig
Bydd yn digwydd weithiau bod gweithiwr mewn un sefydliad gofal iechyd yn datblygu pryderon ynghylch ymddygiad neu berfformiad gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd mewn sefydliad arall. Y sefyllfa fwyaf cyffredin fwy na thebyg fydd lle mae pryder yn codi mewn ysbyty ynghylch y gofal yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddyg teulu neu
. Mae achos Mrs Overton yn enghraifft. Bydd gweithiwr ysbyty sy’n pryderu ynghylch y driniaeth yn cael ei rhoi i glaf gan feddyg teulu yn gwybod neu ddylai wybod am y polisi ar gyfer codi pryderon sy’n gweithredu o fewn yr ysbyty, ond efallai nad yw’n gwybod am y polisi sy’n gweithredu o fewn y PCT neu’r feddygfa deulu a roddodd driniaeth i’r claf. Mewn achosion fel hyn, ni fydd unrhyw bryder ynghylch colli cyflogaeth neu ofn unrhyw fath o ddial arall; gall yr unig broblem fod yn un yn ymwneud ag anwybodaeth neu ddryswch ynghylch beth i’w wneud.
Rwy’n awgrymu y dylai polisïau ar gyfer codi pryderon, yn sicr yn y sector gofal iechyd, allu cael eu defnyddio yn y dyfodol i godi pryderon gan ac ynghylch personau nad ydynt yn rhannu cyflogaeth gyffredin. Y datblygiad diweddar yn Hyde yw un enghraifft, lle, yn dilyn cyhoeddi Trydydd Adroddiad yr Ymchwiliad, a ddeliodd â Shipman yn lladd Mrs Overton yn anghyfreithlon, bydd y PCT lleol a’r Ymddiriedolaeth Ysbyty leol wedi dod at ei gilydd i lunio polisi defnyddiol iawn. Yn ei hanfod, mae’r polisi’n amodi y dylai pryder gael ei godi yn y lle cyntaf gyda sefydliad y gweithiwr sydd â’r pryder. Caiff y pryder ei asesu wedyn gan aelod o’r uwch reolwyr o fewn y sefydliad hwnnw. Os ystyrir bod sail dda i’r pryder, caiff ei drosglwyddo i’r sefydliad sy’n cyflogi’r person y mynegwyd pryder yn ei gylch/chylch. Bydd y sefydliad hwnnw’n ymchwilio i’r pryderon ond dylai cyfarwyddwyr y ddau sefydliad gytuno ar y camau gweithredu sydd i’w cymryd, gan gynnwys camau disgyblu. Ar delerau ehangach, byddai’n synhwyrol dweud wrth weithwyr yn gyffredinol, os oes ganddynt bryderon am bersonau sy’n cael eu cyflogi gan sefydliad arall ac nad ydynt yn gwybod beth i wneud, dylent ofyn am gyngor gan eu cyflogwyr eu hunain. Ni all pawb gael trefniadau cilyddol.
Hunan-Adrodd a’r Diwylliant Dim Bai
Bu symudiad dros y blynyddoedd diweddar o fewn y GIG i annog meddygon a nyrsys i adrodd am unrhyw ddigwyddiad lle maent wedi gwneud camgymeriad a arweiniodd at niwed neu a barodd
‘fethiant agos’
. Y syniad yw hyrwyddo awyrgylch o onestrwydd lle bydd y sefydliad, yn lle ceisio beio rhywun sydd wedi gwneud camgymeriad, yn ceisio dysgu o’i gamgymeriadau. Mewn llawer ffordd, dyma’r sefyllfa ddelfrydol, a, phe bai’n digwydd, ychydig iawn o angen fyddai i adrodd am bryderon. Fodd bynnag, mae’r dystiolaeth a glywais yn awgrymu ein bod yn bell i ffwrdd o’r ddelfryd honno ar hyn o bryd. Yn y cyd-destun hwn, dylwn ddweud fy mod eisoes wedi esbonio’r
‘ddyletswydd gonestrwydd’
arfaethedig ym Mhennod 7. Nid wyf wedi dadansoddi’r pwnc hwn yn fanwl, ond rwy’n rhannu pryderon y GMC a’r RCN.

---  ---
Hyd yn hyd deliais yn bennaf â sefyllfa gweithwyr. Serch hynny, fel yr esboniais ar ddechrau’r Bennod hon, mae rhai o’r cyfyngiadau ar ddatgeliadau gan weithwyr yn berthnasol hefyd i eraill nad yw eu pryderon yn codi yn y cyd-destun cyflogaeth. Er enghraifft, er bod pryderon Mr Shaw a Mr a Mrs Bambroffe wedi codi yn ystod eu gwaith, nid oedd ganddynt gyflogwr y gallent fynd â’u pryderon ato/ati. Roedd gan Mr a Mrs Bambroffe gymdeithas broffesiynol ond mae’n rhaid eu bod wedi meddwl nad oedd yn briodol i drafod eu pryderon â’i swyddogion.
Roedd ofn ymgyfreitha yn gweithredu ar feddyliau o leiaf dau o’r bobl a oedd â phryderon am Shipman. Roedd Mr Shaw a Dr Reynolds eu dau yn ofni’r rhagolwg o achos difenwi a allai eu dinistrio pe byddent yn ‘siarad’. Ar yr adeg pan ddaethant yn bryderus, wrth gwrs, byddai’r syniad ei hun y gallai Shipman fod yn lladd ei gleifion wedi’i ystyried y tu hwnt i amgyffred gan y rhan fwyaf o’r cyhoedd. Hefyd, nid oedd llawer o’r dystiolaeth sydd wedi’i datgelu ers hynny ar gael i’r un o’r ddau. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw ffordd, felly, o gymryd camau pellach i wrthbrofi neu gadarnhau eu hamheuon. Nid eu cyfrifoldeb nhw oedd gwneud hynny ychwaith. Y cyfan yr oeddent yn dymuno ei wneud - a’r cyfan y gellid disgwyl yn rhesymol iddynt wneud - oedd dod â’u hamheuon i sylw’r awdurdodau priodol a gadael iddynt hwy ymchwilio iddynt.
Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd angen i Mr Shaw na Dr Reynolds fod wedi ofni achos o ddifenwi. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddent wedi gwybod hynny heb gyngor cyfreithiol. Nid oedd angen iddynt ofni am ddau reswm. Yn gyntaf, pe baent wedi’u cyfyngu’u hunain i ddweud hynny a oedd yn wir mewn gwirionedd, ni fyddai angen iddynt fod wedi poeni, gan na all datganiadau sy’n wir fod yn ddifenwol. Pe bai Dr Reynolds wedi darparu’r ystadegau o’r nifer o dystysgrifau amlosgi y gofynnwyd iddi hi a’i phartneriaid eu llofnodi i Shipman, a oedd â rhestr cleifion o 3000 o gleifion, a’r rheiny yr oedd hi a’i phartneriaid wedi gofyn i feddygon eraill eu llofnodi, mewn perthynas â’u rhestr o 8000 o gleifion, ni fyddai angen iddi fod wedi gwneud unrhyw honiad o ddrwgweithredu yn erbyn Shipman, er y byddai’r ymhlygiad y tu ôl i’w hadroddiad wedi bod yn glir. Byddai’r ffeithiau a honnwyd wedi bod yn wir yn amlwg. Roedd gwybodaeth Mr Shaw yn llai eglur o wir gan mai’r hyn yr oedd ef yn pryderu yn ei gylch oedd nid nifer y cleifion a oedd yn marw ond y ffaith nad ymddengys eu bod yn sâl cyn hynny. Byddai gwirionedd y ffeithiau hynny wedi bod yn anoddach i’w dangos, er, fel y bu hi, gwyddwn nawr ei fod yn gywir.
Yn ail, hyd yn oed pa na bai Dr Reynolds a Mr Shaw wedi bod yn sicr o gwbl ynghylch y ffeithiau, gallent fod wedi amddiffyn achos am ddifenwi yn llwyddiannus, cyhyd â’u bod wedi codi’u pryderon mewn lle priodol ac nad oeddent wedi’u cymell gan falais. Gallent fod wedi dibynnu ar amddiffyniad braint amodol. Mae amddiffyniad braint amodol yn berthnasol pan fydd y person sy’n gwneud y cysylltiad yn gwneud hynny oherwydd bod ganddo/ganddi ryw ddiddordeb neu ddyletswydd gyfreithiol, gymdeithasol neu foesol i’w wneud a lle mae gan y person y cysylltir ag ef/hi ryw ddiddordeb neu ddyletswydd gyfatebol i’w dderbyn. Mae’r amddiffyniad yn glasurol yn cyfeirio’r rheiny sy’n adrodd am bryderon i’r heddlu neu i gyrff ymchwilio neu reoleiddio eraill. Mae’r amddiffyniad ar gael hyd yn oed lle canfyddir nad yw’r wybodaeth sydd wedi’i chyfleu yn wir. Er mwyn dal y fantol rhwng annog cyflawni’r ddyletswydd ac anghymell gwneud cwynion di-sail yn faleisus, nid yw’r amddiffyniad ar gael lle mae gwneud cysylltiad yn cael ei gymell gan falais neu gymhelliad amhriodol.
Pe bai Mr Shaw wedi adrodd i gorff priodol am ei bryderon, byddai wedi gwneud hynny allan o ymdeimlad o rwymedigaeth foesol. Roedd Dr Reynolds yn ystyried ei bod hithau dan ddyletswydd broffesiynol i wneud yr adroddiad a wnaeth, ac, yng ngolwg natur y wybodaeth i’w chyfleu ym mhob achos, ni fyddai neb yn amau bodolaeth y ddyletswydd o ddifrif. Gallai fod wedi bod angen cyngor ar Mr Shaw am rywrai addais i dderbyn y wybodaeth, h.y. y sefydliadau hynny â dyletswydd i’w derbyn. Mae’r GMC, Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine, y Crwner a’r heddlu bob un ohonynt yn dod i’r meddwl. Yn achos Dr Reynolds, gallai canolwr meddygol yr amlosgfa lle amlosgwyd cyrff llawer o gyn gleifion Shipman fod wedi bod yn dderbynnydd priodol arall. Ymgynghorodd Dr Reynolds a’i sefydliad amddiffyn. Nid oedd angen i Mr Shaw na Dr Reynolds ofni’r awgrym iddynt gael eu cymell gan falais neu gymhelliad amhriodol, ac ni fyddai angen i eraill yn y sefyllfa hon ofni hynny ychwaith. At hynny, mae Tŷ’r Arglwyddi wedi datgan y dylai barnwyr a rheithgorau
fod ‘yn araf iawn i ddod i’r casgliad bod y diffynnydd wedi’i gymell gymaint gan gymelliadau amhriodol bod hynny wedi’i amddifadu o ddioglewch y fraint oni bai eu bod yn fodlon nad oedd yn credu bod yr hyn a ddywedodd neu a ysgrifennodd yn wir neu ei fod yn ddifater ynghylch ei wirionedd neu’i ffalsrwydd’
yn achos
). Yn fyr, nid oes angen i berson sy’n teimlo dan ddyletswydd i godi pryder ac sy’n gwneud hynny o ganlyniad i amheuon y mae’n eu coleddu’n onest, ofni achos difenwi, cyhyd â bod gofal yn cael ei gymryd wrth wneud yr adroddiad i’r fan iawn. Am hynny, efallai y bydd angen cyngor ar rai pobl, fel Mr Shaw. Dylai cyngor felly fod ar gael yn hawdd.
Soniaf wrth fynd heibio bod y diogelwch y mae cyfraith gwlad yn ei roi yn erbyn achosion difenwi braidd yn ehangach na hynny a roddir dan y PIDA i weithwyr sydd wedi dioddef niwed yn sgil gwneud datgeliad. Effaith y penderfyniad yn Horrocks y cyfeiriais ato, yw, mewn cyfraith gwlad, os ymddengys bod cymelliadau cymysg gan y person sy’n gwneud yr honiad, ni ddylai barnwyr a rheithgorau archwilio’r cymelliadau hynny’n fanwl i ganfod pa un oedd y prif gymhelliad. Yn lle hynny, dylent ganolbwyntio ar ba un a oedd y person yn credu yng ngwirionedd yr hyn a ddywedodd. Pe bai’r geiriau
yn cael eu dileu o’r PIDA, byddai’r prawf dan y PIDA yn cael ei ddwyn yn fwy cyson â’r prawf ar gyfer ‘malais’ mewn achosion difenwi. Byddai’n ymddangos yn ddymunol i mi pe bai’r profion fod mor agos â phosibl fel bod y person sy’n ystyried gwneud adroddiad yn gallu cael ei gynghori’n ddiogel ynghylch ei sefyllfa mewn perthynas â’r ddau fath o achos. Byddai hefyd yn dod â’r prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso dan y PIDA yn agosach at delerau llawer o bolisïau canu cloch sydd mewn grym ar hyn o bryd.
Argaeledd Cyngor
Rwyf wedi dweud bod angen cyngor ar bobl sy’n ystyried gwneud adroddiad neu ddatgeliad ynghylch y modd i fynd ati i gael sicrwydd meddwl ac er mwyn osgoi, cyn belled ag y bo modd, unrhyw ganlyniadau croes. Os oes polisi yn rheoli codi pryderon ar waith yn y gweithle, dylai hwnnw ddarparu’r cyfan sydd ei angen. Os nad oes, gall fod ffynonellau cymorth a chyngor eraill sy’n gysylltiedig â’r gweithle, fel undeb llafur neu gymdeithas broffesiynol. Fodd bynnag, mae gwarged o achosion lle nad oes unrhyw ffynhonnell cyngor neu unrhyw ffynhonnell cyngor briodol. Mae Mr Shaw yn enghraifft o’r broblem, gan nad oedd ganddo unrhyw gyflogwr na chymdeithas broffesiynol i roi cyngor iddo. Mae math arall o achos yn codi lle mae’r wybodaeth sydd i’w dadlennu mor sensitif yn yr ardal lle mae’n codi bod y person dan sylw yn amharod i siarad ag unrhyw un yn yr ardal honno. Dywedodd nifer o dystion wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pe bai ganddynt bryderon am Shipman, ni fyddent wedi teimlo y gallent siarad ag unrhyw un yn Tameside gan fod Shipman mor adnabyddus yno ac mor uchel ei barch. Dywedodd y tystion hyn wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r hyn yr oedd ei angen arnynt oedd sefydliad y gallent ymddiried cyfrinachedd yn llwyr ynddo, a oedd mewn sefyllfa i roi cyngor cadarn iddynt ac nad oedd ganddo unrhyw gysylltiad o gwbl â gwrthrych eu pryderon neu’r ardal lle’r oeddent yn codi. Mae’r gofynion hynny’n ymddangos yn rhai cwbl resymol i mi.
Sut dylid rhoi cyngor felly a phwy ddylai ei roi? Mae PCaW yn darparu’r math hwn o gyngor ac mae’n barod i roi cyngor i’r rheiny sy’n galw ynghylch pob mathau o broblemau sy’n gysylltiedig â chodi pryderon. Ni fydd rhywun sy’n galw yn cael ei droi/throi i ffrwd gan nad yw’n weithiwr yn codi pryder am ddigwyddiadau a oedd yn codi yn y gweithle. Fodd bynnag, ar hyn o bryd, nid yw PCaW yn adnabyddus iawn eto a byddai rhaid gwario arian ar roi cyhoeddusrwydd i’w wasanaethau pe bai’n gallu gyflawni’r angen a nodais. Rwy’n cyfaddef nad oeddwn wedi clywed am y sefydliad cyn i’r Ymchwiliad hwn ddechrau. Ffactor arall yw mai elusen ydyw, ac nid wyf yn sicr y byddai’n deg pennu dyletswydd arno i gynghori unrhyw aelod o’r cyhoedd ynghylch codi unrhyw bryder y tu allan i’r maes diddordeb a gymerodd iddo’i hun. Yn sicr ni fyddai disgwyl iddo ariannu’r cyhoeddusrwydd angenrheidiol. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn amau ei allu i roi cyngor cadarn, yn gyfrinachol ac mewn modd defnyddiol a chefnogol.
Os gellir darparu cymorth ariannol ac os yw PCaW yn barod, yna gallai ymgymryd â’r swyddogaeth hon. Fel arall, rhaid bodloni’r angen mewn rhyw ffordd arall gan sefydliad arall. Mewn cyd-destun gwahanol, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi ystyried y syniad y dylai fod ‘porth unigol’ ar gyfer cyfeirio pob cwyn am y system gofal iechyd. Pe byddai ‘porth unigol’ yn cael ei sefydlu at y diben hwnnw, rwy’n rhagweld y byddai’n cyfeirio personau sy’n gofyn am gyngor at y PCaW neu pa sefydliad bynnag sydd i ymgymryd â’r swyddogaeth a ddisgrifiais.
[1975] AC 135, 150

---  ---
Ni ddylid peidio â llawn werthfawrogi gwerth codi pryderon yn onest o fewn y gwasanaethau gofal iechyd, yn fy marn i. Law yn llaw â chwynion cleifion, y byddaf yn sôn mwy amdanynt nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn, mae’n darparu ffynhonnell wybodaeth bwysig am berfformiad clinigol ac mae ganddo rôl hanfodol i’w chwarae mewn rheolaeth glinigol. Mae’r diwylliant, a wnaeth am flynyddoedd lawer atal codi pryderon felly i bob pwrpas, yn newid, ond nid yw’r hen agweddau wedi darfod o bell ffordd. Mae’n bwysig, yn fy marn i, y dylai’n rheiny sydd mewn swyddi arwain, pa un a ydynt mewn swyddi rheoli neu ar frig y proffesiynau, ymrwymo i onestrwydd wrth adrodd, nid yn unig drwy gadarnhau polisïau ac yn y blaen, ond trwy ddilyn eu pregeth eu hunain.
Rwyf eisoes wedi awgrymu nifer o ffyrdd y gellid cynnal y momentwm ar gyfer newid. Awgrymais newidiadau i’r PIDA a fyddai, o’u gweithredu, yn cryfhau sefyllfa’r rheiny sy’n codi pryderon. Ni fyddaf yn ailadrodd yr awgrymiadau hynny yma. Rwyf wedi awgrymu hefyd y dylai polisïau ar gyfer codi pryderon ar draws adrannau gwahanol o’r gwasanaethau gofal iechyd gael eu cyhoeddi. Rwyf wedi galw am ddarparu gwasanaeth cyngor i fod ar gael i unrhyw un, pa un a ydyw’n weithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd ai peidio, er mwyn darparu cyngor, anogaeth a sicrwydd meddwl sy’n angenrheidiol iddynt ddod ymlaen â phryderon y mae adrodd amdanynt er lles y cyhoedd.

---  ---
Strwythurau a Systemau
Gweithredu Rheolaeth Glinigol gan Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Monitro Trefniadau Rheolaeth Glinigol

---  ---
Rwyf wedi dweud eisoes ym Mhennod 5 mai rheolaeth glinigol yw’r ffordd y bwriedir i sefydliadau’r GIG gyflawni’r ddyletswydd ansawdd a osodir gan Ddeddf Iechyd 1999. Cafodd theori rheolaeth glinigol ei datblygu o’r fenter rheolaeth glinigol a ddaeth i’r amlwg yn gynnar yn y 1990au fel ffordd o fynd i’r afael â safonau annerbyniol o isel ym myd busnes. Cafodd ei harddel yn y Papur Gwyn ‘The New NHS’, a gyhoeddwyd yn Rhagfyr 1997. Ar yr adeg honno, roedd y Llywodraeth yn cydnabod bod safonau gofal yn y GIG yn amrywiol a bod hynny’n arwain nid yn unig at niwed i gleifion, ond hefyd at golli hyder ar ran y cyhoedd. Bwriad rheolaeth glinigol oedd ymdrin â’r broblem honno.
Diffinnir rheolaeth glinigol gan yr Adran Iechyd fel:
‘... a framework through which National health Service organisations are accountable for continuously improving the quality of their services and safeguarding high standards of care by creating an environment in which excellence in clinical care will flourish’.
Yn bersonol, ni chefais y dyfyniad hwnnw yn un hawdd ei ddeall ac nid yw’n syndod, yn y dyddiau cynnar o leiaf, y bu llawer iawn o ddryswch ac ansicrwydd yn y proffesiwn meddygol am y cysyniad o reolaeth glinigol ac am beth fyddai’n ei golygu yn ymarferol. Roedd rhai meddygon teulu yn amheus o’i diben (gan gredu ei bod yn ymosodiad ar eu statws fel contractwyr annibynnol) ac yn elyniaethus i’w chyflwyniad. Cafodd y teimladau hyn eu dwysáu gan gyflymder ei chyflwyniad a chan y newidiadau i drefniant gofal sylfaenol a oedd yn digwydd ar yr un pryd.
Gobeithio bod fy nealltwriaeth i o’r cysyniad o reolaeth glinigol wedi gwella yn y misoedd diwethaf. I’r rhai sy’n parhau yn anghyfarwydd â hi, ceisiaf nid i’w diffinio, sy’n ymddangos bron yn amhosibl, ond i’w disgrifio. System i wella safon ymarfer clinigol yn y GIG ac i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd rhag safonau gofal annerbyniol yw rheolaeth glinigol. Mae’r system yn cynnwys sawl math gwahanol o weithgarwch a ddylai ffitio gyda’i gilydd yn fframwaith. Mae’r system integredig hon wedi disodli’r ymagweddau gwahanol a gwasgaredig blaenorol at wella ansawdd gofal. Mae’r mathau gwahanol o weithgarwch yn cynnwys addysg barhaol, cyflwyno a chynnal systemau rheoli da, hybu effeithiolrwydd clinigol, archwilio clinigol, rheoli risgiau, ymchwilio a datblygu a meithrin ethos o fod yn agored ac yn atebol. Mae rhai o’r gweithgareddau hyn yn ddatblygiadol eu natur, fel addysg barhaol a lledaenu arferion da. Mae rheoli risgiau, lle bydd cyrff yn ceisio dadansoddi digwyddiadau chwithig a dysgu oddi wrthynt, yn enghraifft arall o weithgaredd datblygiadol. Natur arolygu neu oruchwylio sydd i weithgareddau eraill; er enghraifft, mae’n ofynnol i gyrff gasglu data a gwybodaeth am y gofal sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan eu clinigwyr. Dylai hyn ganiatáu i’r corff ganfod perfformiad gwael er mwyn ei gywiro, ond dylai casglu data dynnu sylw hefyd at berfformiad da ac felly bod ag effaith ddatblygiadol. Mae gweithgareddau eraill eto wedi eu dylunio i annog clinigwyr i’w harolygu eu hunain, gyda’r bwriad i hyn gynnig y cyfle a’r cymhelliant i wella perfformiad clinigol. Er enghraifft, rhoddir gwybodaeth i glinigwyr am eu perfformiad eu hun a pherfformiad eu tîm neu eu grŵp; maent yn cael eu hannog i archwilio eu gweithgareddau eu hun a rhai eu cydweithwyr.
Roedd canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd a gyhoeddwyd ym 1999 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i ymddiriedolaethau’r GIG a chyrff gofal sylfaenol (PCOs) nodi arweinwyr ym maes rheolaeth glinigol (a oedd i fod yn glinigwyr) ac i sefydlu strwythurau priodol i oruchwylio rheolaeth glinigol o fewn eu cyrff. Ar ôl i’r ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCTs) ddod i fodolaeth, gwnaethant benodi eu harweinwyr a’u his-bwyllgorau rheolaeth glinigol eu hun. Gwirfoddolwyr ymhlith meddygon teulu lleol oedd llawer o’r arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol hyn, a fu’n ansicr am eu hunion rôl a’u llinellau atebolrwydd. I rai, roedd eu rôl ddeuol fel aelodau o’r gymuned feddygol leol ac fel rhan o’r ‘sefydliad’ PCT yn anodd ei chymodi. Bu eraill yn ansicr am sut allent geisio hybu rheolaeth glinigol dda heb unrhyw ‘ddannedd’. Serch hynny, roedd llawer o bobl yn y proffesiwn meddygol a groesawodd y pwyslais ar ansawdd a gyflwynwyd gyda rheolaeth glinigol ac a welodd y cyfle i weithio gyda rheolwyr PCT i godi safonau lleol yn beth cadarnhaol.

---  ---
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, pwysleisiodd yr Athro Aidan Halligan, Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol Lloegr a Chyfarwyddwr Rheolaeth Glinigol i’r GIG, mai hanfod rheolaeth glinigol oedd ‘system o atebolrwydd dros ofal’. Roedd cyflwyno rheolaeth glinigol, meddai, yn dibynnu ar ‘ddyfeisiau pensaernïol’: strwythurau, prosesau, mecanweithiau a threfniadau atebolrwydd clir.
Mae’n amlwg, wrth gwrs, bod rheolaeth dda - o ba gorff bynnag - yn gofyn am strwythurau cadarn a systemau sydd wedi eu dylunio’n dda. Os nad oes llinellau atebolrwydd rheolaethol, er enghraifft, bydd neb yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb pan fydd pethau’n mynd o’u lle. Os nad oes system gwyno briodol yn ei lle, aiff cwynion heb eu cofnodi a chaiff gwybodaeth a allai fod yn werthfawr am arferion neu allbynnau gwael ei cholli. Os nad oes gan gorff bolisi am chwythu’r chwiban, mae’n bosibl y caiff staff eu hatal rhag adrodd ar gydweithwyr a allai fod yn euog o anonestrwydd neu anghymhwyster. Gall diffyg system o wiriadau ariannol arwain at dwyll helaeth.
Er hynny, nid yw strwythurau a systemau cadarn, ynddynt eu hunain, yn ddigon i sicrhau rheolaeth dda. Nid oes unrhyw werth i system gwyno oni bai bod y rheiny y bwriedir iddynt ei defnyddio (cwsmeriaid, cleientiaid, cleifion etc) yn gwybod ei bod yn bodoli ac oni bai bod staff o fewn y corff wedi eu hyfforddi i’w gweithredu’n effeithiol. Ni chaiff polisi chwythu’r chwiban ei ddefnyddio oni bai bod staff yn gwybod amdano ac yn hyderus, os byddant yn lleisio eu pryderon, y cânt eu cymryd o ddifrif ac y bydd y corff yn ymdrin â hwy yn deg. Mae’n hanfodol sicrhau bod rheolaeth glinigol yn estyn i bob haen o gyrff GIG fel bod pob aelod o’r corff yn gweithredu’r systemau y bwriedir iddynt hybu ansawdd.
Yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol, mae hyn yn golygu estyn y systemau, nid yn unig i lefel staff PCT, meddygon teulu unigol a phroffesiynolion gofal iechyd eraill, ond hefyd i aelodau o staff pob meddygfa gyffredinol yn yr ardal. O dan Gontract newydd Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS), mae’n ofynnol i bob meddyfga sy’n contractio feddu ar system effeithiol o reolaeth glinigol.

---  ---
Ar y dechrau, efallai i’r term ‘rheolaeth glinigol’ swnio’n estron; ond roedd ei throsi yn weithgarwch ymarferol ychydig yn llai brawychus na’r disgwyl. Nid dulliau newydd a ddefnyddid bob tro - er enghraifft, monitro cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu, cynhyrchu data yn cymharu perfformiad un feddygfa gyffredinol ag eraill yn yr ardal, annog archwilio clinigol a monitro rhoi presgripsiynau. Effaith rheolaeth glinigol yw dod â’r mentrau hyn (a llawer o rai eraill) ynghyd yn un polisi cydlynus. Serch hynny, roedd meysydd newydd i ymdrin â nhw, yn fwyaf nodedig gweithredu’r canllawiau a gynhwyswyd yn y Fframweithiau Gwasanaeth Newydd (NSFs) a gyhoeddwyd gan y Sefydliad Cenedlaethol dros Ragoriaeth Glinigol (NICE). Yn nyddiau cynnar rheolaeth glinigol, roedd datblygu strategaethau i fonitro a gwella ufuddhau i’r canllawiau hyn yn un o flaenoriaethau pennaf y PCTs.
Mae tystiolaeth ddiweddar yn awgrymu bod PCTs yn defnyddio amrywiaeth mawr o strategaethau i fonitro a gwella ansawdd gofal yn lleol. Yn y Bennod hon, trafodaf nifer o’r rhai a ddefnyddir yn fwyaf cyffredin. Wrth wneud hynny, byddaf yn ystyried sut (os oes modd) y gallai’r strategaethau hynny effeithio’n fanteisiol ar ansawdd gofal. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried i ba raddau (os o gwbl) mae pob un o’r gwahanol strategaethau a ddisgrifir yn arwain at wybodaeth ystyrlon a allai fod o gymorth i PCT wrth asesu a yw meddyg teulu unigol yn rhoi safon gofal dderbyniol i gleifion.
Y strategaethau byddaf yn edrych arnynt yw:
monitro rhoi presgripsiynau gan feddygon teulu
monitro atgyfeiriadau gan feddygon teulu
monitro dangosyddion perfformiad a/neu ddata cymharol am berfformiad meddygfeydd cyffredinol
monitro’r data a gesglir mewn cysylltiad â’r Contract GMS newydd
ymweliadau â meddygfa
achredu meddygfeydd
monitro a dadansoddi cwynion cleifion
gweithredu systemau i nodi ac ymdrin â meddygon teulu sy’n perfformio’n wael
archwilio clinigol
rheoli risgiau
adolygu digwyddiadau arwyddocaol
arfarnu.
(a) Monitro Rhoi Presgripsiynau gan Feddygon Teulu
Ym Mhennod 4, disgrifiais yn gryno y system ePACT.net, a ddefnyddir gan PCTs i fonitro rhoi presgripsiynau gan feddygon teulu. Cynhelir y monitro hwn yn bennaf i ganiatáu i’r cynghorwyr meddygol a fferyllol a gyflogir gan PCTs gynnig cyngor i feddygon teulu am effeithlonrwydd a chost-effeithiolrwydd y cyffuriau maent yn eu rhagnodi. Er hynny, gallai data am ragnodi ddatgelu diffygion yn ansawdd rhagnodi gan feddyg. Er enghraifft, gallai ddangos o bosibl ei fod/ei bod yn aml yn rhagnodi cyffuriau sydd wedi eu disodli gan ddewisiadau gwell neu sy’n israddol i gyffuriau newydd sydd ar gael. Gallai ddangos bod y meddyg yn rhagnodi cyffuriau y gwyddys eu bod o werth clinigol cyfyngedig, fel moddion llacio’r trwyn. Gallai’r data ddangos bod meddyg yn rhagnodi symiau sy’n sylweddol llai na’r cyfartaledd o gyffuriau a ddefnyddir mewn clefyd cardiofasgwlaidd. Mae’n bosibl bod yr holl amgylchiadau hyn yn dangos diffygion yn arferion rhagnodi meddyg. Gallent ddangos hefyd safon wael o ofal sy’n mynd y tu hwnt i’r cwestiwn o roi presgripsiynau. Er enghraifft, efallai bod meddyg sy’n rhagnodi cyffuriau yn gyson sydd wedi eu disodli gan ddewisiadau mwy effeithiol ar ei hôl hi mewn meysydd eraill o’i ymarfer/ei hymarfer hefyd.
Gallai’r data awgrymu hyd yn oed y posibilrwydd o weithgarwch troseddol (e.e. petai lefel uchel iawn o bensodiasepinau yn cael eu rhagnodi’n rheolaidd). Erbyn hyn, mae PCTs yn cael eu cynghori i gynnal dadansoddiadau chwarterol ar gyfer rhagnodi opiadau, bensodiasepinau ac amffetaminau gan bob meddyg teulu yn eu hardal. Gall y dadansoddiadau gael eu cynnal drwy gyfrwng technegau syml, gan ddefnyddio’r system ePACT.net. Mae’r ystod o gyffuriau mae’r technegau hyn ar gael ar eu cyfer yn ehangu wrth i broblemau newydd, sy’n cynnwys cyffuriau gwahanol, ddod i’r amlwg. Wrth gwrs, ni all data rhagnodi ond tynnu sylw at batrwm o ragnodi sy’n ymddangos yn anghyffredin. Ni all gynnig esboniad am y patrwm anghyffredin. Mae angen dehongli’r data yng ngoleuni ffactorau lleol ac amgylchiadau claf/cleifion unigol y rhagnodwyd y cyffuriau ar eu cyfer, cyn y gellir rhoi barn.
Fel un o arfau rheolaeth ariannol yn bennaf y dechreuodd y gwaith monitro arferion rhagnodi. Ond erbyn hyn mae wedi datblygu’n rhan o reolaeth glinigol. Fel rwyf wedi dweud, gall godi cwestiynau am ansawdd rhagnodi gan feddyg. Gall y cwestiynau hynny arwain yn eu tro at ystyriaeth o berfformiad y meddyg yn fwy cyffredinol. Os caiff problem ei nodi, efallai y byddai modd ei datrys drwy ddarparu cyngor a gwybodaeth. Efallai ei bod yn fwy cymhleth ac yn gofyn, er enghraifft, am atgyfeirio i weithdrefnau perfformiad y PCT. Yn y naill achos neu’r llall, gall gynnig ffynhonnell werthfawr o wybodaeth am ansawdd gofal.
Problemau gyda Data Rhagnodi
Yn y gorffennol, cafodd gwerth data rhagnodi ei leihau gan y ffaith ei bod ar gael ar lefel meddygfa yn unig. Nid oedd modd cael data am feddyg unigol, oni bai bod y meddyg hwnnw’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Petai meddyg yn aelod o feddygfa grŵp fawr, byddai’n rhaid i’w batrwm/ei phatrwm rhagnodi fod yn anghyffredin iawn i fod yn amlwg o’r data am y feddygfa gyfan. Yn amlach, byddai unrhyw broblemau gydag ansawdd rhagnodi aelod unigol o’r feddygfa wedi cael eu cuddio gan y data mewn perthynas ag aelodau eraill.
Erbyn hyn mae dadansoddi rhagnodi ar lefel rhagnodwr unigol yn bosibl. Mae gan bob rhagnodwr o fewn meddygfa meddygon teulu god rhagnodi unigol sydd wedi ei argraffu ar ei ffurflenni rhagnodi. Mae’r Awdurdod Prisio Presgripsiynau (PPA) bellach yn cynhyrchu data sy’n cyfeirio at ragnodwyr unigol. Serch hynny, mae cywirdeb y data yn lleihau os bydd aelodau o feddygfa meddygon teulu (fel a fu’n gyffredin yn y gorffennol) yn defnyddio padiau rhagnodi sy’n perthyn i aelodau eraill o’r feddygfa. Problem bellach a ddaeth i’r amlwg yn ystod seminarau Cam Tri oedd bod presgripsiwn a gynhyrchir gan gyfrifiadur a roddir gan un meddyg, petai’r cyfrifiadur wedi ei rhaglennu mewn ffordd arbennig, yn dwyn enw’r meddyg roedd y claf wedi cofrestru gyda hwy (neu, o dan y Contract GMS newydd, y meddyg sy’n well gan y claf), yn hytrach nag enw’r meddyg a oedd wedi rhagnodi’r feddyginiaeth. Mae modd atal hyn drwy addasu’r cyfrifiadur ond, er mwyn gwneud hyn, rhaid i’r feddygfa fod yn ymwybodol o’r broblem yn y lle cyntaf a’r angen i’w hosgoi. Rwyf wedi argymell yn y Pedwerydd Adroddiad y dylai pob rhagnodwr ddefnyddio eu padiau rhagnodi eu hun yn unig, wedi eu marcio â’u rhifau cofrestru proffesiynol eu hun, er mwyn i’r holl waith rhagnodi gael ei briodoli’n gywir i’r clinigwr sy’n gyfrifol amdano.
Mae problemau’n codi hefyd gyda phresgripsiynau ailadroddol. Mae’n gyffredin i aelodau o feddygfa meddygon teulu wirio a llofnodi presgripsiynau ailadroddol i’r feddygfa gyfan ar sail rota. Mae’n bosibl felly nad y meddyg a ragnododd y cyffur o dan sylw yw’r meddyg sy’n llofnodi’r presgripsiwn. Ni fydd ef neu hi wedi cael unrhyw fewnbwn clinigol gwirioneddol i’r feddyginiaeth a ddewisir. Effaith anochel hwn yw bod data rhagnodi’r feddygfa gyfan yn anghywir. Gallai gael yr effaith o guddio patrwm rhagnodi anghyffredin gan un aelod o feddygfa. Mae rhai meddygfeydd, sy’n effro i’r broblem hon, wedi cymryd camau i’w hosgoi yn y gorffennol ond mae llawer heb wneud.
Yn seminarau Cam Tri, esboniodd Dr Jim Smith, Prif Swyddog Fferyollol Lloegr, yr Adran iechyd, fod system newydd o ymdrin â phresgripsiynau ailadroddol wedi ei rhoi ar brawf yn llwyddiannus mewn sawl ardal ac y byddai’n cael ei chyflwyno’n gyffredinol cyn hir. O dan y system hon, bydd meddyg sy’n dymuno rhagnodi meddyginiaeth ar sail hirdymor yn ysgrifennu presgripsiwn i ddarparu am weinyddu cyfnodol am gyfnod hyd at flwyddyn. Bydd y claf yn gadael y presgripsiwn yn y fferyllfa a ddewisir ganddo/ganddi, yn casglu’r cyffuriau bob ychydig o wythnosau ac nid oes angen iddo/iddi ddychwelyd i’r feddygfa nes i’r presgripsiwn ddod i ben. Y fferyllydd fydd yn gyfrifol am adolygu priodoldeb y cyflenwadau parhaus a weinyddir o dan y presgripsiwn pan fydd yn ddilys. Nid yn unig y bydd y system hon yn arbed llawer o amser i feddygon teulu, bydd hefyd yn caniatáu mwy o gywirdeb yn y data rhagnodi am y bydd y swm cyfan a gyflenwir o dan y presgripsiwn yn cael ei briodoli i’r meddyg a wnaeth y penderfyniad gwreiddiol.
Problem arall yw’r defnydd gan non-principals, fel dirprwy feddygon a chofrestryddion meddygon teulu (h.y. hyfforddeion), o badiau rhagnodi sy’n perthyn i feddygon teulu principal. Ar hyn o bryd nid oes gan y non-principals hyn eu codau rhagnodi unigol eu hun. Yn hytrach, mae’n ofynnol iddynt gadarnhau eu presgripsiynau â ‘T’ coch (dirprwy feddygon) neu ‘D’ (cofrestryddion) i’w gwahaniaethu rhang y principal y mae’r pad rhagnodi yn perthyn iddynt. Nid oes unrhyw ffordd o adnabod pa non-principal sy’n rhagnodi. O ganlyniad, nid oes unrhyw ddata rhagnodi unigol ar gael ar gyfer dirprwy unigol ac nid oes, felly, unrhyw ffordd o ddarganfod a yw ei h/arferion rhagnodi yn anghyffredin mewn unrhyw ffordd. Ar ben hynny, un o effeithiau defnyddio eu padiau rhagnodi gan eraill yw ‘pylu’r’ data mewn perthynas â meddygon teulu principal.
Mae camau yn cae l eu cymryd i newid y trefniadau hyn. Y gobaith yw y bydd dirprwyon a non-principals eraill yn cael eu codau rhagnodi unigryw eu hun wedi eu dyrannu iddynt, yn y dyfodol. Dylai hyn wella’r cyfle i ddarganfod rhagnodi cyfeiliornus gan feddyg teulu non-principal yn sylweddol. Er hynny, cyfrifoldeb y PCT y cynhwysir y dirprwy ar eu rhestr fydd monitro ei ragnodi/rhagnodi ac unrhyw gamau canlynol y gall fod eu hangen.
Anhawster arall yw nad yw’r data sydd ar gael ar hyn o bryd o bosibl yn datgelu darlun llawn o ragnodi gan feddyg unigol. Petai’n rhoi unrhyw bresgripsiynau preifat ni chaiff y rheiny eu cynnwys o fewn y data. Mae hyn yn fwlch difrifol a all arwain at beidio â darganfod rhagnodi gormodol neu gyfeiliornus gan feddyg. Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, argymhellais y dylai pob presgripsiwn, rhai’r NHS a rhai preifat, fynd i’r PPA i’w prosesu a dylent gael eu cynnwys o fewn y data rhagnodi sydd ar gael i PCTs. Mae hyn yn ymddangos yn hanfodol i mi er mwyn i PCTs gael y wybodaeth am ragnodi mae arnynt ei hangen at ddibenion cyflawni eu cyfrifoldebau rheolaeth glinigol.
Nid yw data rhagnodi presennol o reidrwydd yn adlewyrchu arferion rhagnodi meddygon unigol ac ni all, felly, gynnig gwybodaeth ddibynadwy am ansawdd ymarfer meddyg unigol. Dim ond os gweithredir y gwahanol newidiadau rwyf wedi eu disgrifio y bydd modd ei ddefnyddio’n ffynhonnell wybodaeth ddibynadwy at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol.
(b) Monitro Atgyfeiriadau Meddygon Teulu
Roedd yn ymddangos bod cytundeb cyffredinol ymhlith tystion a chyfranogwyr eraill yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad fod data am atgyfeiriadau meddygon teulu at wasanaethau eraill (yn arbennig, gwasanaethau ysbyty) yn annibynadwy ac yn anodd ei ddehongli. Nid yw’n glir pa gydberthynas sydd, os oes un, rhwng patrymau atgyfeirio ac ansawdd gofal. Gan hynny, mae defnyddioldeb data atgyfeirio wrth reswm yn gyfyngedig. Hefyd, dim ond ar lefel meddygfa y maent ar gael, sy’n arwain at broblemau tebyg i’r rhai y soniwyd amdanynt eisoes mewn cysylltiad â data rhagnodi yn y gorffennol.
(c) Monitro Dangosyddion Perfformiad a/neu Ddata Cymharol am Berfformiad Meddygfeydd
Ers canol y 1990au, mae rhai PCOs wedi datblygu ystod o ddangosyddion perfformiad, wedi eu casglu o’r data a oedd ar gael iddynt. Maent wedi cymharu’r dangosyddion fel rhai rhwng meddygfeydd yn eu hardal eu hun a meddygfeydd mewn mannau eraill. Maent wedi defnyddio’r canlyniadau mewn ffyrdd gwahanol. Rwyf wedi sôn eisoes ym Mhennod 5 bod y cyfryw ddangosyddion wedi eu defnyddio o’r blaen weithiau fel sbardun am archwiliadau o berfformiad rhai meddygon.
Mae gan lawer o arbenigwyr amheuon am ddefnyddio dangosyddion perfformiad fel ffordd o asesu ansawdd. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd yr Athro Martin Roland, Cyfarwyddwr, Canolfan Genedlaethol Ymchwil a Datblygiad Gofal Sylfaenol ac Athro Ymarfer Cyffredinol, Prifysgol Manceinion, at ei brofiadau ar Banel Perfformiad Manceinion. Ymatebodd y Panel i bryderon a fynegwyd am feddygon, yn hytrach na (fel a wnaed mewn mannau eraill) defnyddio dangosyddion perfformiad i nodi achosion posibl o berfformiad gwael. Teimlai’r Athro Roland fod profiad wedi dangos mai ymagwedd Panel Manceinion oedd yr un gywir yn ôl pob tebyg. Tynnodd sylw at y ffaith mai’r mathau o broblemau a nododd y Panel (e.e. cyfathrebu gwael o fewn meddygfa, gwaith tîm gwael, anallu i weithio gydag eraill, cyfathrebu gwael â chleifion a rheolaeth wael) oedd y problemau mwyaf anodd eu gweld drwy gyfrwng data arferol.
Dywedodd Dr Sarah Wilson, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol, Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol (SHA) Trent, iddi gysylltu â’r PCTs yn ei hardal hi, cyn mynychu seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, i gael gwybod pa drefniadau rheolaeth glinigol oedd ganddynt ar waith. Roedd rhai wedi datblygu setiau o ddangosyddion perfformiad soffistigedig iawn, gan ddefnyddio dangosyddion fel data rhagnodi, cyfraddau marwolaethau, cyfraddau brechu, cyfraddau manteisio ar sgrinio a chwynion. Maent yn gweithredu system ‘goleuadau traffig’ lle bydd meddyg teulu â chanddo/chanddi ‘olau coch’ (sy’n awgrymu bod eu harferion yn anarferol) ar fwy na nifer penodedig o ddangosyddion yn cael eu targedu i ymholiadau gael eu gwneud. Gofynnodd Dr Wilson i arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol y PCTs sy’n gweithredu’r system hon a oedd unrhyw gydberthynas rhwng amlder llawer o ‘oleuadau traffig coch’ a chanfyddiad o fewn y gymuned iechyd leol fod perfformiad y meddyg o dan sylw yn wael. Dywedwyd wrthi mai’r unig ddangosydd a arweiniodd at gydberthynas o’r fath oedd llawer iawn o gwynion yn erbyn meddyg. Dywedodd Dr Wilson fod pryder gwirioneddol bod arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol yn gwneud llawer iawn o waith wrth ddatblygu setiau o ddangosyddion gan ddefnyddio data na fwriadwyd byth ei ddefnyddio at ddiben pennu ansawdd y gofal a roddir gan feddyg unigol. Mynegodd Ms Fiona Freedland, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfreithiol, Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), a chyfarwyddwr anweithredol PCT Hackney, amheuaeth, ar sail ei phrofiad ei hun o ddefnyddio dangosyddion perfformiad, i ba raddau yr oedd unrhyw gydberthynas rhwng y cyfryw ddangosyddion a chymhwysedd meddyg teulu.
Cyfeiriodd yr Athro Fonesig Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, a’r Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Datblygu Ymchwil i Reolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, hefyd at gyfyngiadau’r data sydd ar gael ar hyn o bryd i PCTs. Mae cyfyngiadau o’r fath yn bodoli hyn yn oed lle defnyddir y data i archwilio ansawdd gofal ar lefel meddygfeydd - yn hytrach na meddyg unigol. Er enghraifft, soniodd y Fonesig Lesley am broblemau gyda thrin y data a chyda defnyddio data a gasglwyd at un diben i gyflawni diben gwahanol. Daw’r broblem yn llawer mwy difrifol wrth geisio defnyddio’r data i asesu ansawdd gofal a roddir gan feddyg unigol.
Nododd y Fonesig Lesley a’r Athro Baker ill dau nad yw dangosyddion a data tebyg arall yn cynnig unrhyw wybodaeth am faterion fel medrau cyfathrebu meddygon teulu, eu perthnasau â chleifion a’u gofal clinigol. Mae pob un o’r rhain yn faterion sy’n hanfodol i asesu ansawdd gofal.
(d) Monitro Data a Gasglwyd mewn Cysylltiad â’r Contract Newydd Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol
Er mwyn cyflawni eu cyfrifoldeb dros weinyddu taliadau o dan y Contract GMS newydd, mae’n ofynnol i PCTs gasglu swm mawr o ddata oddi wrth feddygfeydd meddygon teulu unigol. Mae rhywfaint o’r data hwn yn debyg i’r hyn a gasglwyd o’r blaen mewn cysylltiad â thargedau am rai mathau o driniaeth ataliol a chymhwyso am gymhellion ariannol. Ond yn ôl yr Athro Roland, bydd y contract GMS newydd yn ‘newid yn radicalaidd’ (a deallaf mai ei ystyr yma yw cynyddu’n sylweddol) y wybodaeth sydd ar gael i PCTs am ansawdd y gofal sy’n cael ei ddarparu mewn meddygfeydd sy’n gweithredu o dan Gontractau GMS. Yr un fframwaith asesu fydd ar gyfer meddygfeydd sy’n darparu gwasanaethau meddygol personol (PMS). Nid yw’n glir eto a fydd gan PCTs unigol yr arbenigedd neu’r adnoddau angenrheidiol i ddadansoddi’r swm mawr o ddata a fydd ar gael iddynt, ac i’w ddefnyddio i wella ansawdd gofal.
Wedi eu seilio ar feddygfeydd y mae’r data a gesglir ac, ar wahân i achos meddygfa un-person, nid yw’n cyfeirio at feddyg teulu unigol. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, nododd yr Athro Roland fod y Contract GMS wedi ei anelu’n benodol ar lefel meddygfeydd sef y lefel briodol, yn aml, i ystyried gofal cleifion arni. Rhoddodd enghraifft o feddyg unigol a allai fod yn wael wrth reoli’r clefyd siwgr, ond sydd â nyrs o’r radd flaenaf sy’n cymryd cyfrifoldeb dros reoli cleifion â’r clefyd. Bydd y cleifion hynny yn derbyn gofal da oddi wrth y feddygfa, er gwaethaf gwendid y meddyg unigol, a dyna beth sy’n cyfrif. Gan hynny mae darparu data ar lefel meddygfa yn hollol briodol at ddibenion y Contract GMS. Er hynny, ni ellir defnyddio’r un data i werthuso ansawdd y gofal a roddir gan feddyg unigol o fewn y feddygfa.
Mae cymryd rhan yn fframwaith ansawdd a chanlyniadau (QOF) y Contract GMS yn wirfoddol, er y bydd methu â chymryd rhan yn golygu na fydd meddygfa yn gymwys i gael taliadau ychwanegol o dan y Contract GMS. Amser a ddengys a fydd llawer o feddygfeydd yn dewis peidio â chymryd rhan yn y QOF neu’n gwneud hynny i raddau cyfyngedig yn unig. I’r meddygfeydd hynny sy’n dewis hynny, ychydig neu ddim data fydd ar gael. Er hynny, tybiaf y bydd y ffaith bod meddygfa meddygon teulu yn gwrthod cymryd rhan yn y QOF - neu’n cymryd rhan i raddau cyfyngedig - ynddo ei hun yn codi cwestiynau am safon y gofal a gynigir gan y feddygfa honno a pheri i PCT graffu arni’n agosach o bosibl.
(e) Ymweliadau â Meddygfeydd
Mae arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol llawer o PCTs wedi datblygu system o ymweliadau rheolaidd â meddygfeydd fel rhan o’r drefn. Siaradodd Ms Freedland am bwysigrwydd yr ymweliadau hyn. Yn gyntaf, maent yn gadael i’r arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol feithrin perthynas â meddygon teulu ac annog mwy o ymdeimlad o ‘berchnogaeth’ o reolaeth glinigol gan y proffesiwn. Mae iddynt y fantais ychwanegol o ganiatáu i’r arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol arsylwi ar nodweddion fel y trefniadau ar gyfer storio meddyginiaeth a brechiadau ac ar gyfer rheoli heintiau a glendid y feddygfa. Maent yn cynnig cyfle i holi staff meddygfa am weithdrefnau a pholisïau sydd ar waith. Dywedodd Dr Wilson fod ymweld â meddygfeydd meddygon teulu mewn modd systemataidd yn rhywbeth yr hoffai arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol ei wneud. Drwy ymweld, cânt ‘ymdeimlad gwirioneddol o’r feddygfa’.
Mae ffurf ymweliadau rheolaeth glinigol - ac, yn wir, a ydynt yn digwydd o gwbl - yn dibynnu ar gydweithrediad y feddygfa o dan sylw. Dywedodd Ms Freeland fod ‘ambell i feddyg teulu’ yn ei PCT a oedd wedi gwrthod mynediad i’r arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol. Ond ar y cyfan, roedd y system o ymweld wedi gweithio’n dda. Dywedodd Dr Wilson y bu problemau yn y gorffennol, yn ei hardal hi, am gael mynediad, ond roedd y rhain wedi eu datrys i raddau helaeth. Ar brydiau, roedd staff meddygfa a rheolwyr meddygfa wedi cymryd yr awenau ac wedi trefnu ymweliad gan y PCT. Roedd arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol (aelodau o’r gymuned broffesiynol leol fel arfer) yn cyfleu’r neges nad ymosod ar feddygon teulu oedd nod y PCT, ond yn hytrach rhoi cefnogaeth a chymorth. Roedd yn ymddangos bod yr ymagwedd hon yn cael yr effaith ddymunol.
Er bod croeso wrth gwrs i’r ffaith bod y cyfryw ymweliadau yn digwydd, mae’n ymddangos i mi ei bod yn anochel bod yr ymagwedd a ddisgrifiodd Dr Wilson yn cyfyngu i ba raddau y gall arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol sy’n ymweld ‘herio’ aelodau o’r feddygfa am ddata mewn perthynas â’r feddygfa sydd yn nwylo’r PCT neu, yn wir am unrhyw agwedd arall ar ei gweithgareddau. Ni fyddai gwneud hynny’n gyson â’r rôl a ddatganwyd gan y PCT fel rhoddwr cefnogaeth a chymorth. Gwelwyd enghraifft dda o hyn yn nhystiolaeth Dr Michael Taylor, Cadeirydd y Gymdeithas Meddygfeydd Bach ac Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol, PCT Heywood a Middleton. Dywedodd fod yr aelodau mewn unrhyw feddygfa mae’n ymweld â hi yn ei PCT yn gwybod nad yw byth yno ond i gynnig ei gefnogaeth. Os oes ganddo bryderon am gydweithiwr, mae trefniadau ar waith ganddo â PCTs cyfagos a hwy fydd yn cynnal unrhyw ymchwiliad angenrheidiol. Serch hynny, mae’n ymddangos i mi bod yn rhaid wrth gam canolig - lle nad oes unrhyw bryderon wedi codi eto ond lle bo angen gofyn cwestiynau treiddiol - pan fydd yn anodd i PCT gynnal ei safbwynt hollol gefnogol. O dan amgylchiadau o’r fath, rhaid bod sefyllfa arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol, meddyg teulu lleol fel arfer, yn arbennig o anodd. Yn y seminarau, nododd yr Athro Halligan y gallai ymweliadau rheolaeth glinigol ddwyn ‘canlyniadau gwrthnysig’. Fe allent, meddai, ‘atgyfnerthu ymddygiad tanseiliol drwy chwyddo diwylliant o ofn’. Dywedodd fod gwerth y cyfryw ymweliadau yn ‘ysbeidiol’ o ganlyniad. Pwysleisiodd yr angen am newid diwylliant.
Mae’n syndod ac yn siom i mi bod ymweliad blynyddol gan swyddogion PCT â meddygfa meddygon teulu yn cael ei drin â chymaint o amheuaeth - hyd yn oed ofn - gan rai. Mae’n amlwg ei bod yn anfoddhaol i feddygfa wrthod caniatáu ymweliad rheolaeth glinigol o gwbl. Rhaid bod pryder mai’r meddygfeydd hynny sy’n anfodlon i ymweliadau ddigwydd yw’r union rai lle gall safonau gofal fod yn annerbyniol o isel. Effaith gwrthod y cyfryw ymweliadau yw llesteirio ymdrechion y PCT i gyflawni ei gyfrifoldebau o ran rheolaeth glinigol.
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn ym Mhennod 5 y bydd PCTs yn ymgymryd ag adolygiadau blynyddol o berfformiad pob meddygfa gontractio o dan y trefniadau ar gyfer y Contract GMS newydd. Bydd yr adolygiadau hyn yn cynnwys ymweliad ag eiddo’r feddygfa a thrafodaethau â’r contractiwr. Byddant yn orfodol. Mae meddygfeydd sy’n darparu PMS eisoes yn cael eu hadolygu’n flynyddol. Nid yw’n glir eto sut yn union y bydd yr adolygiadau hyn yn asio â’r ymweliadau rheolaeth glinigol - ac a fyddant, ymhen amser, yn cymryd eu lle. Nid yw’n glir ychwaith, fel rwyf wedi sôn eisoes, pa mor agos y caiff meddygfeydd eu harchwilio yn ystod adolygiad.
(f) Achredu Meddygfeydd
Fel rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio ym Mhennod 5, mae achredu meddygfeydd hefyd yn cynnig cyfle am ymweliad â meddygfa ac asesu’r feddygfa yn erbyn meini prawf penodedig. O dan y model a ddefnyddir yn Ne Swydd Efrog, Swydd Gaerlŷr a Swydd Lincoln, ceir cyfranogiad llawn y PCT, a all ddefnyddio’r wybodaeth a geir wrth baratoi ar gyfer yr asesiad, ac yn ystod yr asesiad ei hun, at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Er bod yr asesiad yn seiliedig ar y feddygfa, mae rhai agweddau arno, fel rwyf wedi esbonio, a allai fwrw goleuni ar ymarfer meddyg unigol.
(g) Monitro a Dadansoddi Cwynion Cleifion
Ar hyn o bryd, mae cyfyngiadau, fel rwyf eisoes wedi sôn, ar allu PCTs i fonitro a dadansoddi cwynion a wneir am feddygon teulu ac i’w defnyddio’n effeithiol at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Nid oes gan PCT ddarlun llawn o natur a thestun y cwynion a wneir gan gleifion am feddyg. Efallai y bydd meddygfa yn gwneud esgus i gael gwared ar glaf sy’n cwyno neu efallai y bydd y claf yn rhoi’r gorau i’w gŵyn/chŵyn ac ni fydd y PCT byth yn clywed amdani. Yn ogystal, mae’n bosibl y bydd digwyddiadau sy’n awgrymu safon isel o ofal ond nad ydynt yn destun cwynion. Mae hyn yn arbennig o wir o dan y system bresennol, lle gall cleifion gael eu hatal rhag cwyno gan y gofyniad y dylent gyfeirio eu cŵyn yn y lle cyntaf at y meddyg neu’r feddygfa o dan sylw. (Yn y dyfodol, byddant yn gallu dewis a ydynt am gyflwyno eu cŵyn i’r feddygfa neu i’r PCT.) Serch hynny, mae’n amlwg, er gwaethaf y cyfyngiadau ar y wybodaeth sydd ar gael iddynt, bod cwynion yn ddangosydd gwerthfawr i PCTs o berfformiad meddyg a’u bod yn eu defnyddio fel arf monitro. Gall cwynion gan gleifion, wrth gwrs, gynnig cipolwg ar faterion fel medrau (neu ddiffyg medrau) cyfathrebu meddyg teulu, ei berthynas/pherthynas â chleifion ac ansawdd ei ofal/gofal. Mae’r rhain i gyd yn agweddau ar ymarfer meddyg na all dangosyddion perfformiad fwrw unrhyw oleuni arnynt. Yn ogystal, mae modd cysylltu llawer o gwynion yn glir â meddyg unigol.
Nodais ym Mhennod 5 rai o’r bylchau sy’n aros am y wybodaeth sydd ar gael i PCTs am y meddygon teulu ar eu rhestr. Mae’r bylchau hyn yn ymwneud â chwynion blaenorol a mynegiannau blaenorol o bryder am feddyg teulu ac â’i ran/rhan ef neu hi mewn achosion o esgeulustod clinigol. Mae’n bosibl bod rhywfaint o’r wybodaeth hon yn berthnasol iawn i ansawdd y gofal sy’n cael ei roi gan feddyg.
Er mwyn i PCT gael system effeithiol o reolaeth glinigol, mae’n hanfodol bod unrhyw gŵyn sy’n ymwneud ag ansawdd gofal yn cael ei harchwilio’n drylwyr ac yn effeithiol. Os cafwyd methiant yn ansawdd y gofal, dylai camau gael eu cymryd cyn gynted â phosibl i leihau neu ddileu’r risg y gallai methiant o’r fath ddigwydd eto. Mae’r system bresennol o gwynion gan gleifion yn ei gwneud yn anodd, os nad yn amhosibl, i PCTs wneud hyn.
(h) Gweithredu Systemau i Adnabod a Delio â Meddygon Teulu sy’n Perfformio’n Wael
Fel rwyf wedi esbonio ym Mhennod 5, mae rhai PCTs yn defnyddio data a gesglir ganddynt fel rhan o’r drefn er mwyn nodi meddygon a all fod yn perfformio’n wael. Ni fydd eraill yn gweithredu eu gweithdrefnau perfformiad ond mewn ymateb i fynegiannau o bryder oddi wrth broffesiynolion gofal iechyd ac eraill. Mae rhai PCTs wedi cymryd camau gweithgar (e.e. drwy ddosbarthu taflenni) i gynyddu ymwybyddiaeth, ar ran proffesiynolion gofal iechyd a staff eraill sy’n gweithio ym maes gofal sylfaenol, o bwysigrwydd lleisio unrhyw bryderon sydd ganddynt am berfformiad meddygon teulu. Dylai fod gan PCTs systemau effeithiol ar waith ar gyfer archwilio pryderon pan gânt eu codi ac asesu perfformiad. Mae cywiro perfformiad gwael pan gaiff ei nodi (os oes angen, drwy symud meddyg sy’n darparu safon gofal annigonol o ymarfer) yn rhan hanfodol o reolaeth glinigol.
Rwyf wedi disgrifio ym Mhennod 5 y cynnydd sy’n cael ei wneud wrth sefydlu gweithdrefnau lleol ar gyfer ymdrin â meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael. Mae’n amlwg bod ansawdd gweithdrefnau lleol (yn arbennig, asesiadau lleol o berfformiad meddygon) yn amrywiol ar hyn o bryd a bod angen datblygiad pellach er mwyn sicrhau eu bod yn hollol effeithiol.
(i) Archwilio Clinigol
Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 5 ddatblygiad archwilio clinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol. Mae archwilio’n cael ei drefnu bellach gan is-bwyllgorau PCTs. Maent yn cydlynu ymarferion, sy’n cynnwys y PCT cyfan, i archwilio rhai pynciau y mae gan y PCT neu’r proffesiwn lleol ddiddordeb arbennig ynddynt. Bydd meddygfeydd unigol yn cynnal eu harchwiliadau eu hunain hefyd ar bynciau sydd o ddiddordeb arbennig iddynt hwy.
Mae gan archwilio clinigol y potensial i ganiatáu i feddygon adolygu eu harferion a’u canlyniadau a’u cymharu â rhai eu cymheiriaid. O ganlyniad, mae modd cynllunio a gweithredu gwelliannau ac yna eu hadolygu yn yr un modd. Gall archwilio fod yn arf gwerthfawr wrth ddysgu a gwella ansawdd. Nid yw’r Contract GMS newydd yn gwneud unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol ar gyfer archwilio. Y meddwl yn ôl pob golwg yw y bydd casglu’r data mae ei angen i ddangos cyflawni ansawdd o dan QOF yn gyfystyr ag archwilio, yn ymarferol, ac fe gaiff ei wobrwyo gan daliadau o dan y Contract.
Fel rwyf wedi dweud o’r blaen, fodd bynnag, nid yw cymryd rhan yn y QOF yn orfodol. Yng Nghynllun y GIG, a gyhoeddwyd yn 2000, cyhoeddodd y Llywodraeth ei bwriad i wneud cymryd rhan mewn archwilio clinigol yn orfodol i bob meddyg a gyflogir yn y GIG neu o dan gontract iddo. Nid yw hyn wedi ei weithredu eto. Mae’r Ymchwiliad yn cael ar ddeall bod yna feddygfeydd meddygon teulu (er mai nifer fach ohonynt sydd, mae’n debyg) nad ydynt yn ymgymryd ag archwilio clinigol o hyd.
Er y gall archwilio fod yn ffordd o wella ansawdd mewn meddygfeydd unigol a gall ddarparu gwybodaeth gyffredinol i’r PCT, mae ei ddefnydd fel arf monitro, os oes un, yn gyfyngedig. Nid oes unrhyw rwymedigaeth ar feddygfeydd i rannu canlyniadau eu harchwiliadau â’r PCT. Os gwnânt hynny, mae’n debyg mai clinigwyr ar yr is-bwyllgor archwilio yn unig a fydd yn eu gweld. Bydd unrhyw gylchrediad ehangach yn ddienw, yn aml gyda’r canlyniadau wedi eu hagregu ar draws y PCT, yn hytrach na chyfeirio at feddygfeydd unigol. Fel arfer bydd canlyniadau’r archwilio yn adlewyrchu perfformiad y feddygfa yn ei chyfanrwydd ac nid (oni bai mai meddygfa un person ydyw) perfformiad meddyg unigol.
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, cwynfanodd Syr Donald Irvine, cyn Lywydd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC), am y methiant i wneud defnydd llawn o archwilio clinigol drwy ddefnyddio’r canlyniadau i asesu a gwella perfformiad meddygon. Cytunodd yr Athro Halligan, gan ddweud:
‘Dywedodd Syr Donald yn huawdl iawn fod 500 miliwn
(o bunnoedd)
wedi eu buddsoddi mewn archwilio, ac er pa fantais? ... ni aethpwyd â’r broses i’w therfyn. Cynhaliwyd y digwyddiad, cynhaliwyd yr archwilio, gwnaed y tablu a’r amodi ond a newidiodd unrhyw beth? Felly collodd pobl hyder yn y broses honno.’
Er gwaethaf y pryderon hyn, mae’n ymddangos nad oes unrhyw gynlluniau i newid y trefniadau ar gyfer archwilio clinigol yn sylweddol yn y dyfodol. Fel yr esboniaf yn hwyrach yn y Bennod hon, mae’n bosibl y daw archwiliadau ymarfer yn rhan o’r dystiolaeth a ddangosir gan feddyg mewn arfarniad. Er hynny, nid oes rhwymedigaeth iddo/iddi eu dangos. O dan y trefniadau presennol ar gyfer arfarnu, os bydd arfarnai yn cyfeirio at archwiliad a gynhaliwyd gan ei feddygfa/ei meddygfa, ond heb ddangos yr archwiliad ei hun, nid oes gan yr arfarnwr unrhyw bŵer i alw amdano.
(j) Rheoli Risgiau
Mae cyflwyniad rheolaeth glinigol wedi cynnig ysgogiad i ddatblygu systemau ar gyfer asesu risgiau a rheoli risgiau o fewn cyrff y GIG. Yng nghyd-destun gofal eilaidd, bu systemau’n canolbwyntio i ddechrau ar leihau risgiau cyfreitha o ganlyniad i ddigwyddiadau clinigol anffafriol. Hefyd roedd symudiad i leihau risg ariannol yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol a gofal eilaidd fel ei gilydd. Yn fwy diweddar, cafwyd mwy o bwyslais ar asesu risgiau a rheoli risgiau yn lleol fel rhan o’r fframwaith rheolaeth glinigol.
Gall risg gymryd llawer iawn o ffurfiau, yn glinigol ac yn anghlinigol, a gall risg gael ei reoli mewn nifer fawr o ddulliau. Gellid dadlau y dylai fod i bob menter gan PCT i wella ansawdd gofal clinigol yr effaith hefyd o leihau’r risg i gleifion. Ond un o feysydd pennaf sylw ym maes rheoli risgiau fu datblygu mecanweithiau sydd wedi eu dylunio i sicrhau bod digwyddiadau anffafriol yn cael eu hadrodd a’u dadansoddi, bod gwersi yn cael eu dysgu ohonynt a bod newidiadau priodol i ymarfer yn cael eu cyflwyno er mwyn lleihau’r risg y byddant yn ailddigwydd.
Trafodwyd pwysigrwydd mecanweithiau o’r fath yn ‘An organisation with a memory’, adroddiad grŵp o arbenigwyr dan gadeiryddiaeth y Prif Swyddog Meddygol, a gyhoeddwyd yn 2000. Awgrymodd yr adroddiad fod dros 850,000 o ddigwyddiadau gofal iechyd anffafriol (h.y. digwyddiadau neu ddiffygion sy’n codi yn ystod gofal clinigol ac sy’n peri anaf corfforol neu seicolegol) yn digwydd yn flynyddol i gleifion yn ysbytai’r GIG yn y DU. Roedd y digwyddiadau hyn yn costio biliynau o bunnoedd mewn taliadau iawndal ac arosiadau ychwanegol yn yr ysbyty, ar wahân i’r trallod dynol a’r costau economaidd ehangach sy’n gysylltiedig â hwy. Cydnabu’r adroddiad hefyd fod rhai mathau o ddigwyddiad anffafriol (y rhai mwyaf difrifol weithiau) yn digwydd drosodd a throsodd, heb i wersi gael eu dysgu o brofiad y gorffennol. Tynnwyd y rhan fwyaf o’r data yn yr adroddiad o ofal eilaidd. Cydnabu’r awduron mai ychydig oedd yn hysbys am y sefyllfa mewn gofal sylfaenol lle roedd yn ymddangos bod systemau ar gyfer adrodd digwyddiadau heb eu datblygu’n fawr iawn. Roedd hyn yn wir er gwaethaf y ffaith bod gofal sylfaenol y cyfrif am y mwyafrif mawr o gysylltiadau â chleifion yn y GIG ac y gallai digwyddiadau anffafriol ddigwydd, ac wedi gwneud, yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol, a hynny gyda chanlyniadau difrifol i gleifion unigol weithiau. Yn ogystal, nododd yr adroddiad nad oedd adrodd systemataidd, ym mhob un o gyrff y GIG, o brin osgoi digwyddiadau.
Yn 2001, pennodd cyhoeddiad yr Adran Iechyd ‘Building a safer NHS for patients’ gynlluniau’r Llywodraeth dros hybu diogelwch cleifion. Yn ganolog i’r cynlluniau hynny roedd creu awdurdod iechyd arbennig newydd, sef yr Asiantaeth Genedlaethol Diogelwch Cleifion (NPSA). Ei nod fyddai bod yn ganolbwynt ar gyfer casglu gwybodaeth am ddigwyddiadau anffafriol a’u prin osgoi (a ddisgrifir heddiw gan y term cyfunol ‘digwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion’) a dadansoddi achos y digwyddiadau mwyaf difrifol ac unrhyw batrymau a thueddiadau sy’n dod i’r amlwg. Byddai’r NSPA hefyd yn lledaenu’r gwersi a ddysgwyd o ddigwyddiadau’r gorffennol ledled cyrff y GIG ac yn ysgwyddo rôl gynghorol ac addysgol. Roedd systemau lleol ar gyfer adrodd digwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion i’w sefydlu. Rhoddwyd pwyslais ar hybu diwylliant o adrodd a diogelwch cleifion o fewn cyrff y GIG. Cyfeirir at y diwylliant hwn mewn mannau eraill yn y ddogfen fel
‘diwylliant adrodd agored, dim bai’
Sefydlwyd yr NPSA yn 2001 ac erbyn hyn mae wedi dechrau sefydlu’r System Adrodd a Dysgu Genedlaethol (NRLS) i dderbyn adroddiadau o ddigwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion oddi wrth gyrff y GIG (gan gynnwys PCTs) a staff, cleifion a gofalwyr. Nid yw’r NRLS ar waith yn llawn eto a, hyd yn hyn, ychydig o effaith y mae wedi ei chael ar ofal sylfaenol. Y bwriad yw y bydd yr NRLS, maes o law, yn derbyn gwybodaeth berthnasol oddi wrth gyrff eraill (e.e. Y Weithrediaeth Iechyd a Diogelwch) sydd hefyd yn casglu data diogelwch. Bydd adrodd yn wirfoddol ac yn gyfrinachol. Tynnir enwau cleifion a staff, a data adnabod arall nad oes ei angen at ddibenion dysgu, o bob adroddiad sy’n dod i law yn yr NPSA. Ni fydd unrhyw ddata o systemau’r NPSA ar gael i’w ddefnyddio mewn achosion disgyblu. Unig ddiben casglu’r data yw dysgu o ddigwyddiadau’r gorffennol a datblygu strategaethau i wella diogelwch cleifion.
Ochr yn ochr â’r system genedlaethol, mae disgwyl i gyrff GIG lleol fod â systemau yn eu lle i gasglu data ar ddigwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion. Y nod yw cael systemau lleol a chenedlaethol hollol integredig er mwyn caniatáu i staff y GIG ac eraill adrodd digwyddiadau’n uniongyrchol i’r NPSA. Mae gan SHAs fecanweithiau eisoes ar gyfer adrodd digwyddiadau anffodus difrifol. Mae ysbytai wedi datblygu systemau ar gyfer adrodd digwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion. O fewn cyd-destun ysbyty, cymharol ychydig o gyfle sydd i ddigwyddiadau fynd heb eu hadrodd. Mae’n bosibl bod sawl aelod o staff yn ymwybodol ohonynt, efallai y cyflwynir cŵyn i awdurdodau’r ysbyty, a gall cyfreitha (y mae’r ymddiriedolaeth GIG sy’n gyfrifol am yr ysbyty yn debygol o fod yn barti iddi) ddilyn. Mae’r sefyllfa yn wahanol iawn ym maes gofal sylfaenol. Mae meddygon teulu yn gweithio mewn sefyllfaoedd sydd ar wahân yn gorfforol o PCTs. At ei gilydd, maent yn cyflogi eu staff eu hun. Y system bresennol yw bod cwynion cleifion yn cael eu cyfeirio yn y lle cyntaf at y feddygfa ac mae’n bosibl na fyddant byth yn dod i sylw’r PCT. Os bydd achos sifil yn cael ei ddwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu, ei gorff/chorff amddiffyn meddygol fydd yn ymdrin ag ef. Caiff hawlwyr eu cynrychioli gan amrywiaeth o gwmnïau o gyfreithwyr. Ni fydd y PCT yn barti i’r cyfreitha. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad i feddyg teulu hysbysu PCTs am unrhyw honiad sydd wedi ei awgrymu neu ei ddwyn yn ei h/erbyn. Mae potensial llawer uwch felly i PCT beidio â gwybod am ddigwyddiad diogelwch cleifion sy’n ymwneud â meddyg teulu sydd ar ei restr. Ym 1994, ni ddaeth y PCO dros Tameside i wybod am y ffaith bod Mrs Renate Overton wedi ei derbyn i Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside mewn cyflwr anymwybodol a bod y meddygon yn yr ysbyty o’r farn bod ei chyflwr i’w briodoli i gamgymeriad difrifol a wnaed gan Shipman wrth weinyddu gorddos o gyffur opiad. Pe bai digwyddiad o’r fath yn digwydd heddiw, mae’n debyg y câi ei adrodd (yn ddienw) i’r NPSA. Er hynny, nid oes system a fyddai’n gwarantu y byddai’r digwyddiad ac enw’r meddyg yn cael eu tynnu at sylw’r PCT.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod PCTs wrthi’n datblygu systemau ar gyfer adrodd a dadansoddi digwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes unrhyw ofyniad i feddyg teulu adrodd digwyddiadau (hyd yn oed digwyddiadau anffodus difrifol) i’w PCT nac i’r SHA perthnasol. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd Dr Wilson at ei phrofiad ei hun o weithredu system adrodd digwyddiadau anffodus difrifol ei SHA hi. Dywedodd fod yr amgylchiadau a arweiniodd at hawl sifil yn erbyn meddyg ysbyty wedi eu hadrodd o’r blaen bron bob tro i’r SHA. Mewn cyferbyniad, ni allai gofio ond un digwyddiad anffodus difrifol yn cael ei adrodd o’r sector gofal sylfaenol. Dywedodd ei fod yn gwneud iddi deimlo’n ‘nerfus’ ei bod yn gwybod yn union ble roedd cyfreitha yn debygol mewn gofal eilaidd a’r ymddiriedolaethau iechyd meddwl, ond nad oedd ganddi unrhyw wybodaeth o’r fath am ofal sylfaenol. Dywedodd Ms Freedland ei bod wedi darganfod, wrth eistedd ar is-bwyllgor rheolaeth glinigol ei PCT, anymwybodaeth gyffredinol o’r ffaith bod meddygon teulu yn ymwneud â digwyddiadau andwyol o gwbl. Hefyd adroddodd sgwrs â meddyg teulu a ddywedodd:
‘ “Eisteddes i’n ceisio gweithio allan yr wythnos hon faint o ddigwyddiadau andwyol oedd gen i yn fy meddygfa benodol i. Eisteddes i i lawr gyda llyfr nodiadau du yr wythnos hon a chofnodes i 48 o ddigwyddiadau andwyol posibl. Roeddwn i mor isel penderfynes i beidio â’u cofnodi bellach. Wrth feddwl am y peth, nid wy’n sicr beth yw digwyddiad andwyol neu ddigwyddiad anffodus difrifol.” ’
Dywedodd Ms Freedland fod gwybodaeth o’r cyfryw faterion wedi ei meithrin ymhlith meddygon sy’n gweithio yn y sector anhwylderau llym ond nid mewn ymarfer cyffredinol. Roedd ganddi bryderon am bwy oedd yn gyfrifol am gyfleu’r neges i feddygon teulu, yn enwedig o ystyried rôl rheolaeth glinigol PCTs. Nododd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate fod llawer o ddigwyddiadau andwyol sy’n digwydd yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol (e.e. methu â chanfod meningitis neu ganser) yn ddifrifol iawn. Ond eto, hyd yn oed pan oedd cyfreitha wedi digwydd, erys PCTs yn anymwybodol bod y digwyddiadau hyn wedi digwydd.
Mae casglu gwybodaeth am ddigwyddiadau diogelwch cleifion (gan gynnwys prin osgoi digwyddiadau) a’u hachos yn hanfodol i reoli risg ac i reolaeth glinigol. Mae’n amlwg, yng nghyd-destun gofal sylfaenol, bod llawer iawn o waith i’w wneud i annog meddygon teulu, proffesiynolion gofal iechyd eraill a staff meddygfa i adrodd digwyddiadau perthnasol. Hyd yn oed wedyn, mae’n bosibl bod amharodrwydd ar ran rhai i adrodd digwyddiad sy’n adlewyrchu’n wael ar eu perfformiad proffesiynol eu hun neu berfformiad aelod o’u tîm. Mae’n bwysig, felly, bod PCTs yn cael mynediad i wybodaeth am ddigwyddiadau o’r fath sydd ar gael o ffynonellau eraill, fel cwynion gan gleifion. Dim ond os bydd ganddynt ddarlun llawn o’r digwyddiadau sy’n codi yn eu hardaloedd y byddant yn gallu cymryd y camau priodol i atal y cyfryw ddigwyddiadau rhag digwydd eto. Bydd hefyd yn bosibl wedyn iddynt gyflawni’r rhwymedigaeth a roddir iddynt yn ddiau yn y dyfodol i adrodd pob digwyddiad perthnasol i’r NPSA.
(k) Adolygu Digwyddiadau Arwyddocaol
Mae adolygu digwyddiadau arwyddocaol (a elwir hefyd yn archwilio neu ddadansoddi digwyddiadau arwyddocaol neu adolygu, archwilio neu ddadansoddi digwyddiadau difrifol) yn broses lle bydd grŵp o feddygon (fel arfer, ond nid bob tro, o’r un feddygfa) neu (yn llai cyffredin) tîm neu grŵp amlddisgyblaeth yn trafod digwyddiadau arwyddocaol sydd wedi digwydd yn ystod ei arfer(ion) a’r gwersi y gellir eu dysgu o’r digwyddiadau hynny. Nid oes rhaid i’r digwyddiad fod yn un negyddol neu’n un a gafodd ganlyniad gwael. Efallai y bydd wedi dangos arfer da y gall y tîm adolygu ddysgu ohono. Os digwyddiad negyddol oedd ef, efallai y bydd y cyfranogwyr am drafod a allai pethau fod wedi eu gwneud yn wahanol ac, os felly, a ellid fod wedi cyflawni canlyniad gwell. Yn gyffredinol, mae adolygiadau digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn gyfrinachol er mwyn annog cyfranogwyr i siarad yn ddi-flewyn ar dafod. Fel rheol, cedwir rhyw gofnod o gynnwys y drafodaeth sy’n digwydd yn yr adolygiad.
Mae’r Contract GMS newydd yn cynnig gwobr ariannol i feddygfeydd sydd wedi ymgymryd ag isafswm o chwe adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn y tair blynedd blaenorol. Mae gwobr bellach ar gael os bydd y feddygfa wedi ymgymryd ag isafswm o 12 adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn y tair blynedd blaenorol, sy’n cynnwys (os ydynt wedi digwydd) unrhyw farwolaeth sy’n digwydd yn adeiladau’r feddygfa, dau ddiagnosis newydd o ganser, dwy farwolaeth lle bydd gofal terfynol wedi digwydd gartref, un gŵyn gan glaf, un hunanladdiad ac un dal o dan y Ddeddf Iechyd Meddwl. O’r blaen, ni fu unrhyw gymhelliant ariannol i gynnal adolygiadau digwyddiadau arwyddocaol a bernid mai dim ond rhyw 10% o feddygfeydd meddygon teulu oedd yn eu cynnal. Mae’n debygol y bydd y gyfran honno yn cynyddu yn sgîl cynnwys cymhellion yn y Contract.
Siaradodd nifer o dystion yn yr Ymchwiliad am werth adolygu digwyddiadau arwyddocaol fel ymarfer mewn dysgu. Dywedodd Dr William Reith (cyn gadeirydd Cyngor yr Alban o Goleg Brenhinol Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (RCGP)) fod RCGP o’r farn ei fod yn dechneg mor bwysig a defnyddiol bod meddygfeydd, o dan y meini prawf ar gyfer y Dyfarniad Ansawdd Ymarfer, yn cael eu hannog i ymgymryd ag adolygiadau a gynhwysai bob aelod a phob cyflogai. Dywedodd yr Athro Baker wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai ychydig o ymchwil ffurfiol oedd wedi ei wneud i ddefnyddioldeb archwilio digwyddiadau arwyddocaol, ond bod y rheiny a oedd wedi defnyddio’r dechneg yn bositif ynghylch ei heffaith.
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, nododd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate y byddai wedi dod i’r amlwg yn fuan iawn, petai Shipman wedi eistedd i lawr gyda hi â siarad am rai o farwolaethau ei gleifion, fod rhywbeth rhyfedd amdanynt. Roedd amgylchiadau llawer o’r marwolaethau mor hollol wahanol i’w phrofiad hi ei hun y byddai hyn wedi bod yn amlwg iddi ar unwaith. Cytunodd Syr Donald Irving mai dadansoddiad o’r marwolaethau drwy eu trafod â chymheiriad fyddai’r broses fwyaf tebygol o arwain at ddarganfod Shipman.
Er hynny, rhaid i werth adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol ddibynnu ar faint o wybodaeth berthnasol sydd ar gael i’r rheiny sy’n adolygu. Mae’n debyg bod dadansoddiad o farwolaeth heb y cofnodion meddygol perthnasol yn llawer llai o werth nag un lle bo’r cofnodion ar gael i’w harchwilio. Mae gwerth adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn dibynnu hefyd ar bersonoliaethau’r unigolion sy’n cymryd rhan ac i ba raddau maent yn gallu ac yn fodlon trin a thrafod pa wybodaeth bynnag sydd ar gael yn ddadansoddol ac, os oes angen, i amau’r hyn a ddywedir wrthynt. Fel a nodais yn ystod y dystiolaeth, gellid fod wedi ystyried y trafodaethau rhwng Shipman a’r meddygon Ffurflen C (h.y. y meddygon a weithredodd yn ail-ardystwyr at ddibenion amlosgi) yn ‘adolygiadau digwyddiadau arwyddocaol’ o farwolaeth y claf perthnasol. Ond eto arweiniodd y trafodaethau hynny at y meddygon Ffurflen C yn derbyn beth ddywedodd Shipman wrthynt yn ddi-gwestiwn, hyd yn oed pan oedd nodweddion anghyffredin am y marwolaethau a ddylai fod wedi bod yn amlwg o’r Ffurflenni amlosgi B a lenwyd gan Shipman. Digwyddodd y trafodaethau hynny rhwng Shipman a’i gymheiriaid ymhlith meddygon teulu. O fewn tîm meddygfa un meddyg teulu, byddai’r statws anghyfartal rhwng y meddyg a chyfranogwyr eraill mewn adolygiad o ddigwyddiad arwyddocaol yn ei gwneud yn anodd i’r olaf godi cwestiynau am ymddygiad y meddyg. Yn bendant, mae’n anodd dychmygu y byddai Nyrs Gillian Morgan, nyrs meddygfa Shipman, wedi bwrw amheuaeth ar ymddygiad Shipman yn ystod adolygiad o amgylchiadau marwolaeth un o’i gleifion, neu y byddai aelod lleyg o’i staff wedi teimlo y gallent wneud hynny. Mae rhai ymarferwyr unigol yn dod ynghyd mewn grwpiau at ddiben adolygu digwyddiadau arwyddocaol. O dan yr amgylchiadau hynny, mae cyfranogwyr eraill yn dibynnu ar y wybodaeth mae’r meddyg y mae ei ddigwyddiad yn cael ei drafod yn dod â hi i’r adolygiad. Os bydd y cyfranogwyr yn agored ac yn onest, gall yr adolygiad fod yn brofiad dysgu gwerthfawr i bawb. Ond os bydd cyfranogydd yn benderfynol o guddio ei berfformiad/pherfformiad gwael neu eu troseddoldeb, mae’n annhebygol y câi hyn ei ganfod.
Mae’r ffaith bod adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn gyfrinachol yn golygu, er y bydd PCT efallai’n dod i wybod ei fod yn digwydd, nad oes ganddo unrhyw fynediad i wybodaeth am gynnwys adolygiadau o dan y Contract GMS newydd. Bydd gan PCTs hawl i wirio adroddiadau adolygu meddygfeydd er mwyn cadarnhau y bodlonwyd y dangosyddion QOF perthnasol. Serch hynny, mae’n ymddangos yn annhebygol iawn y bydd yr adroddiadau’n cynnwys unrhyw beth mwy na’r wybodaeth sylfaenol mae ei hangen at ddibenion cadarnhau.
Yn debyg i archwilio clinigol, ni ellir ystyried adolygiad digwyddiadau arwyddocaol yn arf monitro. Gall fod yn ffordd werthfawr i unigolion a thimau ddysgu o brofiad y gorffennol. Gan hynny, gall helpu i wella ansawdd. Ond, nid yw’n rhoi unrhyw wybodaeth i’r PCT am ansawdd ymarfer meddyg unigol.
(l) Arfarnu
Cyflwyno Arfarnu Gorfodol ar gyfer Meddygon Teulu
Tan yn ddiweddar, ni fu’n ofynnol i feddygon teulu nag ymgynghorwyr ysbyty gael eu harfarnu fel rhan o’r drefn. Roedd hyn yn wahanol iawn i broffesiynolion eraill y GIG, a oedd yn destun arfarnu blynyddol. Yr unig feddygon teulu a oedd wedi cael profiad o arfarnu oedd y rheiny a ddaliai swyddi y tu allan i ymarfer cyffredinol, e.e. mewn prifysgolion, lle roedd arfarnu yn arferol. Yn ogystal, roedd rhai meddygfeydd cyffredinol yn gweithredu eu gweithdrefnau arfarnu mewnol eu hun.
Ym Mhennod 5, rwyf wedi disgrifio sut, yn y 1990au hwyr, oedd cyfres o achosion perfformiad clinigol gwael proffil uchel wedi arwain at bryder ymhlith y cyhoedd am y trefniadau a oedd ar waith ar y pryd i nodi a dileu ymarfer clinigol a oedd yn anghymwys ac yn gyfeiliornus. Yn ogystal, roedd pryder am i ba raddau roedd meddygon yn diweddaru eu gwybodaeth feddygol. Ar yr adeg honno, roedd cymhellion ariannol ar gael i feddygon teulu a ymgymerodd â datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus. Roedd y mwyafrif o feddygon teulu yn ceisio cael y wybodaeth ddiweddaraf am ddatblygiadau drwy fynychu darlithoedd a digwyddiadau eraill. Er hynny, byddai penderfyniad meddyg teulu unigol i fynychu rhai digwyddiadau addysgol ac nid eraill yn cael ei lywodraethu’n aml gan ffactorau fel cyfleuster daearyddol, yn hytrach nag unrhyw gynllun cydlynus a strwythuredig i ddatblygu ei g/wybodaeth neu arbenigedd mewn maes penodol o ymarfer. Byddai’r dewis o ddigwyddiadau hefyd yn cael ei lywodraethu gan hoffter personol am bwnc, yn hytrach na mynd i’r afael â mannau gwan. Ar ben hyn, nid oedd y rhai a fu’n gyfrifol am ddarparu addysg barhaus o reidrwydd yn ymwybodol o’r union anghenion y dylid cyfeirio’r addysg honno atynt. Bu’n anodd iawn i rai grwpiau o feddygon, fel locymau, cael mynediad i addysg broffesiynol barhaus.
Ym 1998, cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’, Papur Ymgynghori ar atal, nodi ac ymdrin â pherfformiad clinigol gwael meddygon yn GIG Lloegr. Cynigiodd y papur y dylid gwneud arfarnu’n orfodol i bob meddyg sy’n gweithio yn y GIG, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu. Prif nod arfarnu oedd cynorthwyo wrth gynllunio anghenion datblygiadol ac addysgol yr unigolyn. Er hynny, fe’i bwriadwyd hefyd i gynorthwyo wrth nodi perfformiad gwael. Yn ôl y Papur Ymgynghori:
Hefyd nododd y Papur Ymgynghori:
(gwnaeth y Papur yn glir fod y term hwn i fod i gynnwys PCOs)
is essential to enabling the NHS to fulfil its statutory duty of quality through clinical governance.’
Yn ogystal, cysylltodd y Papur Ymgynghori arfarnu â’r broses ail-ddilysu a oedd i’w chyflwyno gan y GMC. Byddai arfarnu yn cynnig ‘craidd o wybodaeth’ ar gyfer ailddilysu. Trafodaf y berthynas rhwng arfarnu ac ailddilysu ym Mhennod 26. Am y tro, byddaf yn ystyried arfarnu yng nghyd-destun rheolaeth glinigol yn unig.
Cyflwynwyd arfarnu ar gyfer ymgynghorwyr y GIG yn 2001. O Ebrill 2002 ymlaen, roedd cymryd rhan yn y cynllun arfarnu a sefydlwyd gan eu PCO yn orfodol i bob meddyg teulu sy’n bartner a oedd yn darparu GMS a PMS. Erbyn hyn mae’r mwyafrif llethol o feddygon teulu sy’n bartneriaid, os nad pob un, wedi eu harfarnu o leiaf unwaith. Mae rhaglen o arfarnu meddygon teulu nad ydynt yn bartneriaid wedi cychwyn.
Natur a Phwrpas Arfarnu
Gall fod i arfarnu nifer o nodau gwahanol ac mae modd ei gynnal mewn amrywiaeth o ffyrdd, yn ôl y pwrpas mae i’w gyflawni. Bydd sut y cynhelir arfarniad meddygon teulu yn pennu, i ryw raddau o leiaf, gwerth y broses at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Mae angen, felly, edrych ar ddibenion datganedig arfarnu meddygon teulu a’r ffordd mae’r arfarnu yn cael ei gynnal ar hyn o bryd.
Fel arfer bydd arfarnu’n digwydd mewn sefyllfa gyflogaeth hierarchaidd. Yn aml, rheolwr llinell yr arfarnai fydd yr arfarnwr. Bydd gan yr arfarnwr wybodaeth (gwybodaeth uniongyrchol yn aml) am berfformiad yr arfarnai yn y gorffennol. Efallai y bydd yr arfarniad yn cynnwys gwerthusiad neu asesiad ffurfiol o berfformiad person yn y gorffennol, ynghyd â gosod targedau ar gyfer eu perfformiad yn y dyfodol. Gallai proses o’r fath gynnwys holi’r arfarnai am agweddau ar ei berfformiad/pherfformiad yn y gorffennol a gofyn am esboniad am berfformiad sydd yn ôl pob golwg yn syrthio islaw’r safon a ddisgwylir. Efallai y bydd yr arfarniad yn nodi ffyrdd o wella perfformiad yr arfarnai a datblygu ei g/yrfa yn y dyfodol. Mae gan y math hwn o arfarniad swyddogaeth glir o ran rheoli perfformiad.
Disgrifiodd yr Athro Baker i’r Ymchwiliad ei brofiad ei hun o arfarnu yng nghyd-destun prifysgol. Dywedodd y byddai, fel arfarnwr i aelodau iau o’i dîm, yn gyfarwydd â’u gwaith. Diben yr arfarniad fyddai edrych ar gynlluniau’r arfarnai ar gyfer y flwyddyn flaenorol a thrafod gydag ef/hi pa elfennau oedd wedi eu cyflawni a ble roedd anawsterau wedi codi. Pe bai’r aelod o’r tîm wedi bod yn perfformio’n annigonol neu’n cyflwyno problemau o unrhyw fath, byddai’r Athro Baker wedi bod yn ymwybodol o hyn cyn yr arfarniad. Byddai wedi ymdrin â’r materion hynny wrth iddynt godi. Ni fyddai’n aros tan yr arfarniad i’w codi. Er hynny, yn yr arfarniad, byddai’n ceisio archwilio dealltwriaeth yr arfarnai o’r hyn a oedd wedi digwydd ac o’i sefyllfa oherwydd, petai bwlch rhwng realiti beth oedd wedi digwydd a chanfyddiad yr arfarnai ohono, byddai problem reoli ddifrifol y byddai’n rhaid iddo fynd i’r afael â hi. Ar y llaw arall, petai’r arfarnai yn dangos mewnwelediad i’w broblemau/phroblemau, ac yn gweithio’n galed i wella, ffocws yr arfarniad fyddai ei gynorthwyo/chynorthwyo wrth wneud hynny. Er bod y broses a ddisgrifiwyd gan yr Athro Baker ychydig yn wahanol i’r broses arfarnu a ddisgrifiwyd o’r blaen, ei nod hithau hefyd oedd rheoli perfformiad.
Roedd yn ymddangos bod gan y broses arfarnu a ddisgrifiwyd yn ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’ elfennau o reoli perfformiad. Fe’i disgrifiwyd fel hyn:
‘The employer will wish to apraise an individual’s performance in their post as well as their participation in local clinical governance activities and these two strands will tie in specifically to a health organisation’s accountability to achieve high standards of quality. An employer will wish to ensure that the doctor adheres to the standards laid out in the
Gwnaeth y Papur Ymgynghori yn glir y bwriadwyd i’r mecanweithiau arfarnu a ddisgrifiwyd ynddi gael eu cymhwyso i feddygon teulu a oedd yn gontractwyr annibynnol, y ogystal â meddygon cyflogedig.
Pan gynigiwyd arfarnu ar gyfer meddygon teulu, roedd cryn bryder o fewn y proffesiwn. Bu ofn y câi arfarniadau eu defnyddio i ‘blismona’ meddygon ac y byddent mewn gwirionedd yn asesiadau perfformiad a fyddai’n arwain at farnu cymhwysedd meddygon teulu. Gwrthwynebwyd defnyddio arfarnu fel arf rheoli gan y PCOs. Roedd natur arfarnu meddygon teulu, fel y’i cytunwyd yn y diwedd rhwng yr Adran Iechyd a’r proffesiwn, yn wahanol iawn i’r hyn a oedd wedi’i ofni ac, yn wir, i’r disgrifiad a roddwyd yn ‘Supporting doctors, protecting patients’. Fe’i disgrifir yn nogfennau’r Adran Iechyd fel:
‘... a professional process of constructive dialogue, in which the doctor being appraised has a formal structured opportunity to reflect on his or her work and to consider how his or her effectiveness might be improved.’
ac
(h.y. addysgol)
and developmental process. It is about identifying development needs, not performance management.’
Fel a ddaw yn amlwg pan ddisgrifiaf y ffordd y mae arfarnu meddygon teulu yn cael ei gynnal, nid yw’n cynnwys unrhyw archwiliad gwrthrychol o berfformiad y gorffennol. Nid yw’n bosibl ‘methu’ arfarniad. Mae yn bosibl i rywbeth ddigwydd yn ystod arfarniad sy’n peri pryderon i’r arfarnwr am berfformiad arfarnai. Un enghraifft amlwg fyddai, mewn arfarniad, petai’r arfarnai yn ymddangos bod o dan ddylanwad alcohol neu gyffuriau. Mae cyfarwyddiadau gan arfarnwyr y dylent, petai pryderon difrifol ganddynt, atal yr arfarniad. Mae canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd yn cynghori:
‘It would be exceptional for serious concerns about performance to be first raised in an appraisal. The appraisal itself should be formative. However, both the appraiser and appraisee need to recognise that as registered medical practitioners they must protect patients when they believe that a colleague’s health, conduct or performance poses a threat to patients...’.
Mewn achosion o’r fath, cynghorir arfarnwyr i gyfeirio’r mater ar unwaith i’r clinigwr hŷn/arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol a phrif weithredwr y PCT er mwyn iddynt gymryd camau priodol. Yna dylai’r mater gael ei drafod o dan weithdrefnau’r PCT ar gyfer ymdrin â phryderon am berfformiad. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol o unrhyw arfarniad sydd hyd yma wedi arwain i arfarnwr leisio pryderon difrifol am berfformiad yn y modd hwn.
Dywedodd Dr John Chisholm, Cadeirydd Pwyllgor yr Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (GPC), y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig (BMA), wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod natur arfarnu mewn ymarfer cyffredinol ychydig yn wahanol i’r arfer mewn ysbytai lle ceir ‘mwy o elfen o adolygu perfformiad yn ogystal ag arfarnu pur am y broses’. Dywedodd fod y GPC a’r RCGP ill dau wedi teimlo bod ‘drysu’ adolygu perfformiad ag ‘arfarnu pur’ yn ‘annefnyddiol’ a’i fod am gadw purdeb arfarnu fel arf datblygiadol’.
Y Broses Arfarnu yn Lloegr
Mae arfarnu wedi dilyn llwybr gwahanol yn Lloegr i’w hanes mewn rhannau eraill o’r DU. Yn Lloegr, yn wahanol i Gymru a’r Alban, ni fu unrhyw system ganolog ar gyfer gweithredu arfarnu. Yn lle hynny, gadawyd bob PCT i wneud ei drefniadau ei hun, yn ddarostyngedig i arweiniad a gyhoeddwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd ar ôl negodi â’r proffesiwn. Mae pob PCT yn gyfrifol am drefnu arfarniadau blynyddol o bob meddyg teulu, yn bartneriaid a’r rhai nad ydynt yn bartneriaid, sydd ar ei restr.
Yn Lloegr, fel arfer cynhelir arfarniad meddyg teulu gan feddyg teulu arall o’r un PCT. Er hynny, mewn rhai PCTs, mae arfarniadau wedi eu cynnal gan nyrsys, bydwragedd, hyd yn oed reolwyr meddygfeydd. Mae penodi arfarnwyr wedi ei gynnal yn wahanol o ardal i ardal. Mae rhai PCTs wedi dethol arfarnwyr o blith hyfforddwyr meddygon teulu yn yr ardal. Bydd gan y cyfryw arfarnwyr brofiad o hyfforddi a materion sy’n ymwneud ag addysg broffesiynol. Byddant hefyd wedi cyrraedd y safonau uchaf o ymarfer sy’n angenrheidiol i’w cymeradwyo’n hyfforddwyr meddygon teulu. Mewn ardaloedd eraill, chwiliwyd am wirfoddolwyr sy’n fodlon gweithredu’n arfarnwyr ac mae pob un sydd wedi rhoi eu henw ymlaen wedi eu derbyn. Bu’n rhaid i rai PCTs ‘dreillio’ ymhlith meddygon teulu lleol er mwyn cael ymgeiswyr sy’n fodlon gweithredu’n arfarnwyr. Mae rhai eraill wedi dethol arfarnwyr o’r rhai a fynegodd ddiddordeb yn y swydd.
Bydd arfarnwyr yn derbyn diwrnod (weithiau dau ddiwrnod) o hyfforddiant cychwynnol, pan fyddant yn gwylio fideo, yn ymgyfarwyddo â’r ddogfennaeth berthnasol ac yn perfformio arferion chwarae rôl. I ddechrau, cafodd yr hyfforddiant ei drefnu gan y Tîm Cenedlaethol Cynnal Rheolaeth Glinigol (NCGST) a’i ddarparu gan gwmni preifat. Ers hynny, mae rhai PCTs wedi trefnu digwyddiadau hyfforddi, gweithdai, cyfarfodydd a grwpiau cymorth pellach i ganiatáu i arfarnwyr drafod cynnydd ac unrhyw broblemau maent wedi dod ar eu traws. Mewn ardaloedd eraill, ychydig iawn o gefnogaeth mae arfarnwyr wedi ei gael, a dim ond yr hyfforddiant cychwynnol. Mae rhai PCTs wedi rhoi hyfforddiant i ddarparu arfarnwyr hefyd. Mae’r cyfrifoldeb dros ddarparu hyfforddiant arfarnwyr wedi ei ddatganoli i ddeoniaethau ôl-raddedigion erbyn hyn.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad i rai PCTs ganiatáu i arfarneion ddewis eu harfarnwr eu hun o’r rhestr o arfarnwyr yn yr ardal. Mae eraill wedi penodi aelod o bob meddygfa grŵp yn eu hardal yn arfarnwr. Mae’r arfarnwr yna wedyn wedi arfarnu pob aelod arall o’i feddygfa/meddygfa ei hun. Serch hynny, yn y mwyafrif o ardaloedd, mae arfarnwyr wedi eu dyrannu fel na fyddant yn ymdrin ag aelodau o’r un feddygfa, nac â pherthnasau na ffrindiau agos. Ond, o fewn cymuned broffesiynol fach fel yr un sy’n dod o dan PCT, mae’n anochel y bydd y mwyafrif o arfarnwyr ac arfarneion o leiaf yn adnabod ei gilydd. Mae’n ymddangos bod y mwyafrif o PCTs wedi gweithredu system lle bydd arfarnwyr wedi eu dyrannu i arfarneion gan y person a benodir gan y PCT i drefnu’r broses arfarnu. Os bydd arfarnai yn gwrthwynebu’r arfarnwr sydd wedi ei ddyrannu, y drefn arferol yw y gall ofyn am newid. Yn y mwyafrif o PCTs - ond nid bob yn, yn ôl pob golwg - mae arfarnwyr ac arfarneion fel ei gilydd yn cael eu talu i gymryd rhan. Mae’r cyfraddau tâl yn amrywio. Yn Tameside, telir £300 i bob un, i dalu am amser paratoi yn ogystal â’r amser a dreulir ar yr arfarniad ei hun.
Mae’n bosibl mai’r un arfarnwr neu arfarnwr arall a fydd yn cynnal yr ail arfarniad a’r rhai ar ôl hynny. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad am sawl PCT a oedd yn bwriadu cadw, lle bo’n bosibl, yr un arfarnwyr am ail - neu hyd yn oed drydedd - flwyddyn er, yn y dyfodol, byddai rhywfaint o gylchdroi arfarnwyr er mwyn cadw’r pellter rhwng yr arfarnwr a’r arfarnai.
Mae’r broses arfarnu yn defnyddio pum ffurflen safonol a welir yn Atodiad D i’r Adroddiad hwn. Mae’r ddwy gyntaf, i’w llenwi gan yr arfarnai, yn gofyn am fanylion sylfaenol am yr arfarnai (enw, cyfeiriad cofrestredig, swyddi presennol etc) a gwybodaeth am eu gweithgareddau meddygol presennol. Ffurflen 3, o dan y teitl ‘Material for Appraisal’, y sylfaen yr arfarniad. Fe’i trefnir o dan naw pennawd bras, sef Gofal Clinigol Da, Cynnal Arferion Meddygol Da, Perthnasau â Chleifion, Gweithio gyda Chydweithwyr, Addysgu a Hyfforddi, Priodoldeb, Gweithgarwch Rheoli, Ymchwil, Iechyd. Cymerir saith o’r penawdau hyn o’r rhai sydd yng nghyhoeddiad yr RCGP ‘Good Medical Practice for General Practitioners’, dogfen a seilir ar gyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Good Medical Practice’. Mae’r geiriad o dan bob pennawd yn amrywio ond, yn nodweddiadol, mae Ffurflen 3 yn gwahodd yr arfarnai i roi sylwebaeth ar ei g/waith:
gan nodi’r prif gryfderau a gwendidau ym mhob maes
datgan sut mae ei berfformiad/pherfformiad ym mhob maes wedi gwella ers yr arfarniad diwethaf (neu yn ystod y flwyddyn flaenorol)
rhoi ei farn/barn am ei h/anghenion datblygu parhaus
rhoi crynodeb o’r ffactorau sy’n ei gyfyngu/chyfyngu o ran cyrraedd ei nodau.
Rhoddir awgrymiadau am y dogfennau y gallai arfarnai gyfeirio atynt a’u cyflwyno mewn cysylltiad â’i h/atebion. Er enghraifft, o dan y cwestiwn mewn perthynas â beth ym marn yr arfarnai yw prif gryfderau a gwendidau ei h/arfer clinigol, yr awgrymiadau yw:
‘... up-to-date audit data (as appropriate); prescribing analyses (if applicable); PCT clinical governance reviews (as appropriate); relevant clinical guidelines you use; records of any significant event audits or critical incident reports; any complaints and records of their investigation; any reflective diary you keep about these events; any plaudits you have received; any “in-house” or personal monitoring materials you use; references or feedback from colleagues’.
Mae canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd sy’n cyd-fynd â Ffurflen 3 yn datgan y
‘gwahoddir’
yr arfarnai i gyflwyno dogfennau i ategu’r hyn a ddywedir ar y ffurflen. Nid oes disgwyl, meddir, i’r arfarnai
‘brofi’
ei honiadau am ei g/waith, ond mae’n debyg y bydd yr arfarnwr yn dymuno
‘rhoi prawf’
ar rai o’r honiadau hynny drwy drafodaeth a bydd y dogfennau o gymorth i’r arfarnwr a’r arfarnai ill dau. Er hynny, nid oes unrhyw rwymedigaeth i ddangos unrhyw ddogfen benodol na dosbarth o ddogfennau. Ar ben hynny, mae’n ymddangos yn debygol y bydd perthnasedd dogfen i’r drafodaeth mewn arfarniad yn cael ei bennu gan y wybodaeth mae’r arfarnai yn dewis ei chynnwys ar Ffurflen 3.
Mae canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd hefyd yn cynghori arfarneion i baratoi plygell sy’n cynnwys set o’r holl ddogfennau, gwybodaeth, tystiolaeth a data a gasglwyd at ddiben y broses arfarnu. Dylai’r arfarnai baratoi cynllun datblygu personol amlinell hefyd, gan nodi amcanion datblygu allweddol a’r ffyrdd y bwriedir mynd i’r afael â’r amcanion hyn. Dylai’r blygell hon gael ei hanfon at yr arfarnwr o leiaf bythefnos cyn yr arfarniad, er mwyn caniatáu digon o amser i baratoi. Mae modd gwneud hyn yn gyfrinachol ar-lein, drwy ddefnyddio ‘Toolkit’ Arfarnu’r GIG.
Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad fod swm y ddogfennaeth a ddarperir gan arfarneion yn amrywio’n fawr iawn. Yn ôl Dr Robert Ashworth, meddyg teulu sy’n arfarnwr o PCT De a Gorllewin Bradford (a oedd, adeg rhoi ei dystiolaeth ym Medi 2003, wedi cynnal 21 o arfarniadau), bydd rhai meddygon teulu yn cynnig ‘bron dim - efallai ychydig o dystysgrifau am fynychu cyrsiau’. Bydd eraill y dangos symiau mawr o wybodaeth am gyrsiau a fynychwyd, rhagnodi, atgyfeirio, digwyddiadau arwyddocaol, cwynion a materion eraill mewn perthynas â’u harferion. Roedd Dr Ashworth wedi ceisio annog y rhai a oedd wedi dangos ychydig yn unig o ddeunydd i gasglu mwy yn y dyfodol a’i obaith oedd y byddai hyn yn dwyn ffrwyth yn yr ail gylch o arfarniadau. Er hynny, dywedodd na allai wneud dim mwy nag annog arfarneion i gasglu mwy o dystiolaeth. Nid oes gan arfarnwyr unrhyw bŵer i fynnu dangos tystiolaeth.
Wrth wneud yr apwyntiad ar gyfer arfarniad, bydd Dr Ashworth yn dweud wrth y meddygon y mae i’w harfarnu beth ddylent ei wneud o ran paratoi, h.y. llenwi Ffurflenni 1, 2 a 3 a chasglu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol. Mae’n eu hannog i gyflwyno’r ffurflenni a’r dystiolaeth iddo ymhell cyn dyddiad yr arfarniad, fel y gall eu darllen a nodi unrhyw bwyntiau mae’n dymuno eu codi yn yr arfarniad. Mae wedi cael y ffurflenni wedi eu llenwi ymlaen llaw ym mhob achos, ond dim ond mewn rhyw hanner o’r achosion y cafodd y dystiolaeth ategol ymlaen llaw. Unwaith eto, teimlai na allai fynnu hyn. Cytunodd Mrs Chris Page, Pennaeth Ailddylunio Gwasanaeth, PCT Bebington a Gorllewin Cilgwri, sydd â gofal y broses arfarnu ar gyfer ei PCT hi, petai meddyg teulu yn gwrthod dangos dogfennau, nad oedd unrhyw beth y gallai’r arfarnwr (neu, yn wir, y PCT, petai’n dod i wybod am y sefyllfa) ei wneud.
Esboniodd Dr Chisholm fod y geiriad yng nghanllawiau’r Adran Iechyd, sy’n ‘gwahodd’ (yn hytrach nag yn ‘ei gwneud yn ofynnol’) i’r arfarnai ddangos dogfennaeth, wedi ei ddewis yn ymwybodol. Bu’r Adran Iechyd a’r GPC yn ymwybodol yn ystod eu negodiadau nad oedd unrhyw frwdfrydedd yn y proffesiwn am gyflwyno arfarnu ac, er mwyn cael meddygon teulu i gymryd rhan yn y broses, y byddai angen gweithredu’n araf deg. Gobeithiai y byddai perthynas o ymddiriedaeth yn datblygu rhwng arfarnwyr ac arfarneion a fyddai’n caniatáu i’r arfarnwyr ofyn am dystiolaeth ddogfennol na chafodd ei chynnig yn wirfoddol ar y dechrau.
Dylai’r arfarniad ei hun ganolbwyntio ar y wybodaeth a gynhwysir ym mhlygell yr arfarnai, ar gynnwys Ffurflen 3 ac (ym mhob arfarniad ond yr un cyntaf) ar y cynnydd sydd wedi ei wneud i gyrraedd yr amcanion a bennir yng nghynllun datblygu personol (PDP) yr arfarnai. Dylai’r arfarnai gael ei wahodd i godi unrhyw faterion penodol mae ef/hi am eu trafod hefyd. Ar ddiwedd yr arfarniad, dylai’r arfarnwr a’r arfarnai gytuno ar grynodeb o drafodaeth yr arfarniad ac unrhyw gamau maent wedi cytuno y dylent gael eu cymryd. Dylai hyn gael ei gofnodi ar Ffurflen 4. Yna bydd yr arfarnai yn diweddaru ei PDP, gan ddefnyddio templed safonol. Mae’n agored i arfarnwr, petai’n dymuno, lenwi Ffurflen 5, sy’n rhoi cyfrif cyfrinachol am y cyfweliad arfarnu. Bwreidir i hwn lywio’r arfarniad nesaf. Mae’n gyfrinachol a dylai cael ei gadw gan yr arfarnwr. Mae ei lenwi’n hollol ddewisol.
Yn y mwyafrif helaeth o achosion, os nad pob un, canlyniad yr arfarniad fydd llenwi Ffurflen 4 a chynhyrchu PDP. Yr eithriad fyddai petai pryderon difrifol yn cael eu nodi, pan ddylai’r arfarniad gael ei atal a dylai’r pryderon gael eu hadrodd, fel a ddisgrifiwyd o’r blaen. Petai arfarnai yn gwrthod yn llwyr â chydweithredu â’r broses arfarnu, fel ei bod yn amhosibl cynnal trafodaeth ystyrlon, yna, gellid tybio, byddai’r arfarnwr yn atal y broses arfarnu ac yn adrodd y ffaith hon i’r PCT, er nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld unrhyw arweiniad penodol i ymdrin â’r sefyllfa hon. Byddai problem fwy difrifol yn codi lle rhoddir yr isafswm cydweithrediad. Nid yw’n glir o gwbl pa mor gyfyngedig y mae’n rhaid i gydweithrediad arfarnai fod, neu pa mor ychydig o wybodaeth y mae’n rhaid ei darparu, cyn y gellir dweud nad oes arfarniad ystyrlon wedi digwydd.
Yn dilyn arfarniad, mater i’r meddyg teulu unigol yw sicrhau eu bod yn ymdrin â’r anghenion a nodir yn eu PDP. Mae canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd yn nodi y dylai arfarnwr ac arfarnai wneud trefniadau i siarad neu gyfarfod o leiaf unwaith yn ystod y flwyddyn yn dilyn arfarniad. Dylent dreulio rhyw hanner awr yn adolygu cynnydd ar y camau y cytunwyd i’r afarnai eu cymryd ac ar ei PDP. Serch hynny, mae ymchwil wedi awgrymu mai anaml iawn y digwydd hyn yn ymarferol.
Gwybodaeth sy’n Deillio o’r Broses Arfarnu
Mae’r arfarniad ei hun yn gyfrinachol. Dim ond yr arfarnwr a’r arfarnai sy’n gwybod beth sy’n digwydd rhyngddynt. Dim ond y ddau yna sy’n gweld y blygell a baratoir gan yr arfarnai a’r ffurflenni (1, 2 a 3) a gwblheir ganddo/ganddi.
Mae canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd y dylai copi o
‘ddatganiad crynhoi’r arfarniad’
(sy’n golygu Ffurflen 4) gael ei anfon, ynghyd â PDP yr arfarnai, at yr uwch glinigydd neu arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol y PCT perthnasol ac at brif weithredwr y PCT. Yn ymarferol, nid yw hyn yn digwydd bob tro. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad nad yw’r prif weithredwr, mewn rhai PCTs o leiaf, yn gweld Ffurflenni 4. Nid yw PCT Dr Ashworth yn cael copïau o Ffurflen 4, dim ond PDPs. Adroddodd Mrs Page fod ei PCT hi wedi cytuno â meddygon teulu lleol na fyddai’r PCT yn cael ond y PDP a ‘dalen gymeradwyo’ Ffurflen 4 (h.y. y ddalen sy’n cynnwys y datganiad wedi ei lofnodi bod Ffurflen 4 yn grynodeb cywir o drafodaeth yr arfarniad), ond nid y crynodeb ei hun. Weithiau, bydd arfarnwyr yn anfon yr holl set o ffurflenni arfarnu i’r PCT.
Os bydd wedi ei llenwi’n gyflawn, dylai Ffurflen 4 roi rhywfaint o olwg o leiaf ar beth ddigwyddodd yn ystod yr arfarniad. Dylai nodi’r meysydd hynny lle canfyddir bod angen gwella neu ddatblygu a’r cynllun gweithredu at gyfer mynd i’r afael â hynny. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer fach o Ffurflenni 4 â’r enwau wedi eu tynnu o’r cylch cyntaf o arfarnu a drefnwyd gan PCT Tameside a Glossop. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys amrywiaeth o ran manylion. Mewn un enghraifft, cofnodion nodweddiadol oedd (o dan y pennawd Gofal Clinigol Da):
‘Sylwebaeth: Gofal clinigol da
Camau a gytunwyd: Cynnal safonau’
ac (o dan y pennawd Cynnal Arfer Meddygol Da):
‘Sylwebaeth: Arfer meddygol da
Camau a gytunwyd: Cynnal safonau’.
Mae’n bosibl, fel yr awgrymodd un tyst, i’r cofnodion hynny gael eu gwneud ar ôl arfarniad trylwyr lle roedd yr arfarnwr wedi cymryd pob cam angenrheidiol i’w fodloni/bodloni ei hun fod yr arfarnai yn ymarfer yn ôl safon uchel. Ar y llaw arall, efallai bod yr arfarniad yn ddi-hid a bod yr arfarnwr wedi derbyn yn syml honiad yr arfarnai ei hun ei fod/bod yn perfformio’n dda yn y meysydd perthnasol. Nid yw Ffurflen 4 wedi ei llenwi yn rhoi unrhyw wybodaeth am yr hyn a drafodwyd yn yr arfarniad. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd yr Athro Halligan nad oedd cynnwys y Ffurflen 4 hon yn caniatáu i’r PCT farnu dim am ddichonolrwydd yr arfarniad neu gadernid y broses, nac yn wir safon yr ymarferwr sy’n cael ei arfarnu. Awgrymodd fod canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd o bosibl yn ‘rhy feddal’ a dywedodd y câi hyn ei unioni. Roedd rhai o’r Ffurflenni 4 a gyflwynwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn fanylach na’r un y cyfeirir ati uchod. Hyd yn oed wedyn, ychydig y gellid ei ganfod ohonynt am ansawdd yr arfarniad a oedd wedi ei gynnal.
Mae’n ofynnol i uwch glinigwyr neu arweinyddion rheolaeth glinigol PCTs gyflwyno i brif weithredwr y PCT yn flynyddol adroddiad wedi ei agregu a chyda’r enwau wedi eu tynnu ar sail y wybodaeth gyfyngedig maent yn ei chael am arfarniadau. Dylai’r adroddiad hwn gael ei drafod ar lefel y bwrdd. Dylai ymdrin ag anghenion hyfforddi a datblygu sy’n dod i’r amlwg a materion gwasanaeth trefniadaethol y mae angen gweithgarwch neu gyllid ar eu cyfer. Dylai hefyd adolygu gweithrediad y broses arfarnu.
Gwybodaeth sy’n Cyfrannu at y Broses Arfarnu
Yng nghyd-destun cyflogaeth, bydd gan arfarnwr, y mae’n debygol bod ganddo rywfaint o gyfrifoldeb rheoli dros yr arfarnai, wybodaeth gefndir am yr arfarnai a’i berfformiad/pherfformiad. Bydd ganddo/ganddi hefyd fynediad i wybodaeth oddi wrth gydweithwyr yr arfarnai. Bydd gan yr arfarnwr, felly, wybodaeth gadarn i seilio’r drafodaeth yn yr arfarniad arni. Nid yw hyn yn wir yn achos arfarniad a gynhelir gan feddyg teulu sy’n gydradd (oni bai, fel a ddigwydd mewn rhai ardaloedd) bod yr arfarnwr yn aelod o’r un feddygfa. Mae’n bosibl y bydd neu na fydd gan arfarnwr sy’n feddyg teulu wybodaeth gyffredinol am ymarfer ac enw da neu wael yr arfarnai. Bydd ganddo/ganddi rywfaint o wybodaeth yn bendant am amodau a phroblemau lleol sy’n effeithio ar ymarfer cyffredinol. Er hynny, oni fydd trydydd parti yn eu rhoi, ni fydd ganddo/ganddi unrhyw ddata am berfformiad yr afarnai, ar wahân i’r hyn y mae’r arfarnai yn dewis ei roi. Mae hyn yn rhoi deunydd cyfyngedig i arfarnwr i seilio’r arfarniad arno, y enwedig os bydd yr arfarnai yn datgelu dim ond ychydig neu ddim data ymlaen llaw. O dan yr amgylchiadau hynny, mae’n anochel mai’r arfarnai, yn hytrach na’r arfarnwr, fydd yn pennu’r agenda ar gyfer yr arfarniad.
Datganodd canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd mai’r
‘bwriad oedd i’r rhan fwyaf o’r dystiolaeth ddogfennol gael ei chyflenwi gan y PCT fel rhan o’r gwaith monitro perfformiad sefydliadol yn rheolaidd a wneir gan yr Ymddiriedolaeth’
. Cymeraf y byddai’r dystiolaeth ddogfennol y cyfeirir ati yn cynnwys gwybodaeth fel data rhagnodi, data ar atgyfeiriadau i ysbyty, dangosyddion perfformiad a data am gwynion a chamau disgyblu, y byddai’r cyfan ohoni ym mherchnogaeth y PCT. Yr hyn na wnaed yn glir yn y canllawiau oedd ai dyma’r dystiolaeth a fyddai wedi ei chyflenwi eisoes i’r afarnai fel rhan o drefniadau rheolaeth glinigol parhaus y PCT ac a fyddai (neu a ddylai) gael ei chynnwys yn ei blygell/phlygell arfarnu, neu a ragwelwyd y byddai’r PCT yn cyflenwi’r deunydd perthnasol yn uniongyrchol i arfarnwyr. Dywedodd Syr Nigel Crisp, Ysgrifennydd Parhaol yr Adran Iechyd a Phrif Weithredwr y GIG yn Lloegr, wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’n disgwyl i PCTs roi i arfarnwyr unrhyw wybodaeth a oedd yn berthnasol ym marn y PCT. Mae’r canllawiau cyfredol i feddygon teulu sy’n cyd-fynd â’r ffurflenni arfarnu yn datgan, mewn perthynas â dogfennaeth:
‘Mae’n bosibl y bydd eich PCT yn gallu eich helpu gyda rhai deunyddiau’
Mae’n amlwg, beth bynnag oedd bwriad gwreiddiol yr Adran Iechyd, nad yw PCTs at ei gilydd wedi darparu gwybodaeth i arfarnwyr. Dywedodd Dr Ashworth nad oedd y PCT, yn ei ardal ef, yn rhoi unrhyw wybodaeth i arfarnwyr. Dywedodd y byddai unrhyw symudiad i ddarparu’r gyfryw wybodaeth ‘would ... be frowned upon by the GPs’. Nododd nad yw’r meddygon teulu yn gyfarwydd â chael eu harfarnu ac, er mwyn i arfarnu ddatblygu’n llwyddiannus, bod angen iddynt deimlo bod y broses yn un gyfrinachol, ddatblygiadol. Petai ‘asiantaethau allanol’ yn darparu neu’n derbyn gwybodaeth mewn perthynas â’r arfarniad, gallai datblygiad y broses arfarnu, fe awgrymodd, gael ei beryglu, Dywedodd Mrs Page na ddarparwyd unrhyw wybodaeth gan ei PCT hi fel rhan o’r drefn. Serch hynny, mewn tri achos, lle bu pryderon neu anawsterau yr oedd y PCT yn ymwybodol ohonynt ac a allai fod wedi effeithio ar berfformiad yr afarnai, rhoddwyd gwybodaeth gyfyngedig i’r arfarnwr. Prif ddiben gwneud hynny oedd caniatáu i’r arfarnwr ofyn cwestiynau perthnasol a gweld a oedd angen unrhyw gefnogaeth bellach oddi wrth y PCT. Roedd Mr Julian Hartley, Prif Weithredwr, PCT Tameside a Glossop, yn ymwybodol hefyd o un enghraifft yn ei PCT ef lle roedd y meddyg teulu a oedd i’w arfarnu wedi mynegi pryderon o’r blaen am feichiau gwaith ac am reoli’r feddygfa; rhoddwyd gwybod i’r arfarnwr am y pryderon hynny cyn i’r arfarniad ddigwydd. Dywedodd Dr Robert Queenborough, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol, PCTs Gogledd Trafford a De Trafford, nad oedd unrhyw wybodaeth yn cael ei darparu fel rhan o’r drefn gan ei PCTs ef. Yn wir, byddai gwrthwynebiad o du rhai arfarnwyr i’r syniad o ddefnyddio data PCT yn sail i arfarniad. Dywedodd mai eu hagwedd hwy fyddai mai contractwyr annibynnol oedd meddygon teulu a mater i’r arfarnwr a’r arfarnai yn gyfan gwbl oedd cynnwys arfarniad.
Dywedodd Dr Taylor, a oedd yn gyfrifol am arfarnu yn PCT Heywood a Middleton, na allai weld unrhyw anhawster i’w PCT roi gwybod i arfarnwyr am faterion fel y ffaith bod arfarnai yn eithriad o ran rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Er hynny, nid oedd yn credu yn ôl pob golwg y dylid rhoi gwybod i arfarnwyr am faterion fel cwynion neu ddarganfyddion disgyblu andwyol sy’n effeithio ar arfarnai. Dywedodd Dr Linda Patterson, cyn Gyfarwyddwraig Feddygol, y Comisiwn Gwella Iechyd (CHI), fod angen trafod gwybodaeth am faterion fel cwynion mewn arfarniad. Diben arfarnu oedd helpu’r meddyg i ddod yn feddyg gwell fel y gallai roi gofal gwell i gleifion. O ystyried arfarnu yn y goleuni hwnnw, credai ei bod yn dod yn glir y dylid trafod materion o’r fath. Er hynny, mae canllawiau a gyhoeddwyd gan y BMA yn gwahardd yn benodol trafod cwynion sy’n cael eu hymchwilio yn ystod y broses arfarnu.
Dywedodd Dr Chisholm wrth yr Ymchwiliad y teimlai fod argaeledd gwybodaeth yn hanfodol i ategu arfarnu ansawdd dda. Credai y dylai PCTs, yn unol â chanllawiau’r Adran Iechyd rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio atynt, ddarparu i’r arfarnwr a’r arfarnai wybodaeth am faterion fel rhagnodi, atgyfeiriadau a chwynion, i’w defnyddio yn yr arfarniad. Yn wir, dywedodd ei fod wedi siomi dysgu nad oedd hyn yn digwydd, gan mai dyna oedd y bwriad ymhlith y rhai a gymerodd ran mewn negodi’r trefniadau ar gyfer arfarnu. Gallai darparu’r math hwn o wybodaeth, meddai, arwain arfarnwr i ofyn ‘cwestiynau treiddgar’ yn ystod yr arfarniad. Nododd Syr Donald Irvine fod ansawdd y broses arfarnu yn dibynnu i raddau helaeth ar ansawdd y dystiolaeth roedd wedi ei seilio arni.
Bydd peth o’r wybodaeth a allai gael ei thrafod yn ddefnyddiol mewn arfarniad (e.e. archwiliadau meddygfeydd ac adolygiadau o ddigwyddiadau arwyddocaol, cofnodion cwynion, protocolau meddygfa) ym mherchnogaeth y feddygfa, ac ni fydd gan y PCT fynediad iddi. Gallai arfarnai ddewis cyflwyno’r dogfennau hyn neu beidio. Yn yr un modd, gallai gynnwys yn ei blygell/phlygell neu beidio ddogfennau, fel data rhagnodi, a fydd gan y PCT hefyd. Fel rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio, nid oes gofyniad iddo/iddi gyflwyno’r un o’r dogfennau hyn yn yr arfarniad. Ar ddiwedd yr arfarniad, ni fydd gan y PCT unrhyw ffordd o wybod ar ba wybodaeth y cafodd yr arfarniad ei seilio. Nid yw’r PCT yn cael unrhyw restr o’r dogfennau a gyflwynwyd. Hyd yn oed petai’n ymwybodol o ba ddogfennau a fu ar gael yn yr arfarniad, ni fyddai gan y PCT ychwaith unrhyw ffordd o wybod pa rai o’r dogfennau hyn gafodd eu trafod yn y cyfarfod arfarnu.
Sicrhau Ansawdd Arfarnu
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r Comisiwn Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd) oedd i gynnal sicrhau ansawdd y broses arfarnu. Yn ôl Dr Patterson, roedd yn debyg o gynnwys materion fel a oedd arfarnwyr wedi eu hyfforddi ac a fu data am ganlyniadau clinigol ar gael a’i ddefnyddio yn ystod arfarniad. Ni ragwelwyd y byddai unrhyw arolygu o blygellau arfarniadau. Roedd yn anodd gwybod felly sut byddai’r rheiny a oedd yn cynnal y broses yn gwybod pa dystiolaeth a fu ar gael a’i defnyddio mewn arfarniad. Yn fwy diweddar, mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wedi dweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y Comisiwn y disgwyl cynnal adolygiadau cyfnodol o wahanol agweddau ar y broses arfarnu. Gwneir hyn fel rhan o’i raglen gyffredinol o adolygiadau yn ôl thema. Mae’r Comisiwn wedi ei gwneud yn glir, fodd bynnag, na ellid ystyried ei adolygiadau
‘yn system sicrhau ansawdd gynhwysfawr ar gyfer y broses arfarnu meddygon’
Yn fwy diweddar, adroddwyd bod y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn bwriadu ystyried sut i asesu systemau arfarnu fel rhan o werthusiad cyffredinol o’i adolygiad cyffredinol o PCTs. Mae dogfen ymgynghori i fod yn ymddangos cyn hir cyn cyhoeddiad yr Adroddiad hwn.
Mae adroddiad gan y Gymdeithas Genedlaethol Addysgwyr Gofal Sylfaenol (NAPCE), a gomisiynwyd gan yr RCGP a’i gyhoeddi yn Hydref 2003, yn cyfeirio at yr anhawster a wynebir gan y rhai sy’n ceisio monitro’r broses arfarnu:
Mae’r adroddiad yn awgrymu mai un ffordd o sicrhau ansawdd fyddai gwerthuso arfarniadau drwy ofyn am farn arfarnwyr ac arfarneion am sut aeth yr arfarniad a monitro’r canlyniadau. Dr Malcolm Lewis, Cyfarwyddwr Addysg i Ôl-raddedigion, Coleg Meddygaeth prifysgol Cymru, sy’n gyfrifol am arfarnu yng Nghymru. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod gan y broses arfarnu yng Nghymru fecanweithiau sicrhau ansawdd mewnol, gan gynnwys samplo a chydweddu Ffurflenni 3 a 4. Byddai’r cyfle i weld ac asesu cynnwys Ffurflen 3 (a ddylai gynnwys rhestr o’r ddogfennaeth y daeth yr arfarnai â hi i’r arfarniad) yn rhoi gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol am y graddau yr oedd yr arfarnwr wedi paratoi ar gyfer yr arfarniad ac am y wybodaeth a fu ar gael i’r arfarnwr. Serch hynny, ni fyddai’n cynnig unrhyw wybodaeth am gynnwys unrhyw drafodaeth a ddigwyddodd yn ystod yr arfarniad. Mae’n anodd gweld sut i sicrhau ansawdd cyfarfod cyfrinachol o’r math hwn yn effeithiol.
Barn am Arfarnu
Mae’n amlwg bod canfyddiad cychwynnol bod gan arfarnu rai effeithiau cadarnhaol. Mae rhai meddygon teulu wedi nodi mai dyna’r cyfle cyntaf a gânt i siarad amdanynt hwy eu hunain, eu harferion a’u hanghenion datblygiad personol ers diwedd eu hyfforddiant. Mae hyn yn arbennig o werthfawr ar adeg pan geir pryder am arwahaniad a’r pwysau ar feddygon teulu. Mae’r paratoi ar gyfer arfarnu, os caiff ei wneud yn gydwybodol, yn gorfodi meddygon teulu i ystyried eu cryfderau a’u gwendidau a sut maent yn dymuno datblygu eu harferion. Mae’r arfarniad ei hun y cynnig cyfle i eistedd i lawr mewn ‘amser a ddiogelir’ a chael deialog proffesiynol am y materion sy’n effeithio ar arfer yr arfarnai. Mwynhaodd llawer y profiad hwn. Mae’n eithaf posibl bod gan y profiad fanteision gwirioneddol i feddygon teulu nad ydynt yn bartneriaid, yn enwedig locymau, sy’n gallu dioddef problemau arbennig o ganlyniad i arwahaniad.
I PCTs, un fantais arfarnu yw ei fod yn rhoi gwybodaeth werthfawr iddynt am anghenion hyfforddiant a datblygiad meddygon teulu ac yn caniatáu iddynt gynllunio at y dyfodol. Mae’n rhoi gwybod hefyd i’r deoniaethau ac eraill sy’n ymwneud ag addysg ôl-raddedig leol i feddygon teulu am y meysydd lle mae angen mewnbwn addysgol. Pwysleisiodd Dr Ashworth werth hyn a’r potensial i ddatblygu hyfforddiant sydd wedi ei dargedu at fodloni anghenion meddygon teulu lleol, yn ogystal ag at flaenoriaethau PCTs. Gobaith Mrs Page oedd y byddai arfarnu yn cynnig cyfle i PCTs adeiladu perthnasau cefnogol â meddygon teulu. Wrth gwrs, bydd llawer yn dibynnu a oes modd llwyddo i fodloni anghenion addysgol meddygon teulu, fel y’u nodir drwy’r broses arfarnu.
Mae diffyg unrhyw system ganolog ar gyfer gweithredu arfarnu wedi golygu y bu diffyg cysondeb cyfatebol yn y trefniadau a wneir gan PCTs gwahanol. Cafwyd amrywiaethau mawr yn yr adnoddau ariannol sydd wedi eu darparu ar gyfer arfarnu ac yn yr ymagweddau a fabwysiedir, er enghraifft, at ddethol a chefnogi arfarnwyr sy’n feddygon teulu. Mae’n ymddangos yn anochel y bu amrywiaethau mawr hefyd yn ansawdd arfarniadau, o ganlyniad i alluoedd ac ymagweddau amrywiol yr arfarnwyr a lefel gydweithrediad arfarneion. Bu rhai meddygon teulu yn anfodlon iawn cymryd rhan.
Hyd yn hyn, mae’r wybodaeth sydd wedi bod ar gael i arfarnwyr wedi dod oddi wrth yr arfarneion yn unig. Weithiau, ychydig iawn o wybodaeth sydd wedi ei rhoi. Mae’r agenda ar gfyer yr arfarniad wedi ei gosod nwy neu lai yn llwyr gan yr arfarnai. ‘Mewn un ystyr’, fel a ddywedodd un tyst, mae arfarnwyr ‘ar drugaredd yr arfarnai.’ Yn wreiddiol, awgrymodd yr Ysgol Iechyd ac Ymchwil Cysylltiedig, Prifysgol Sheffield (ScHARR), a gynghorodd yr Adran Iechyd ar weithredu arfarniad, y gallai PCTs fod am enwebu pynciau i’w trafod mewn arfarniadau, naill ai â meddygon teulu penodol neu drwyddi draw. Mae’n ymddangos na ddigwyddodd hyn ond i raddau cyfyngedig iawn, e.e. lle roedd pryderon penodol eisoes yn bodoli ynglŷn â meddyg teulu a oedd i’w arfarnu. Anhawster arall yw bod llawer o’r wybodaeth a gyflwynir gan arfarnai (yn gyffredin â data a ddelir gan y PCT) wedi ei seilio ar ymarfer, yn hytrach na chyfeirio at y meddyg unigol sy’n cael ei arfarnu.
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am fethiant PCTs i ddarparu data i arfarnwyr ei ddefnyddio yn y cyfarfod arfarnu. Hyd yn oed petai data o’r fath yn cael ei gyflenwi, nid yw’n glir yn union sut y byddai disgwyl i arfarnwyr ei ddefnyddio. Pa mor fanwl byddai disgwyl iddynt ei ddarllen? A fyddai disgwyl, fel yr awgrymodd Dr Chisholm, iddynt ei astudio a gofyn ‘cwestiynau treiddgar’ am ei gynnwys? A fyddai arfarnwyr a oedd yn feddygon teulu yn fodlon ysgwyddo’r cyfryw rôl? A fyddent yn atebol petai’n dod i’r amlwg wedyn eu bod wedi methu â gweld arwyddion hollbwysig a ddylai fod wedi awgrymu bod yr arfarnai yn niweidio ei gleifion/chleifion? A fyddai arfarnwyr yn hapus i dderbyn cyfrifoldeb o’r fath? Sut fyddai arfarneion yn ymateb i ‘gwestiynau treiddgar’ yn cael eu gofyn gan eu cydweithwyr? Dyma’r cwestiynau y bydd angen eu hateb yn y dyfodol os bwriedir i arfarnu fod yn seiliedig ar ddata gwrthrychol a ddarperir gan y PCT.
Mae sefyllfa’r PCT yn y broses arfarnu y tanlinellu rhai o’r amwyseddau maent yn eu hwynebu mewn perthynas â materion rheolaeth glinigol yn gyffredinol. Y PCT sy’n trefnu’r broses ac yn ei hariannu. Y PCT sydd â’r ddyletswydd ansawdd i’w chyflawni ond eto ychydig o wybodaeth mae’n ei chael am y broses arfanu, ychydig neu dim rheolaeth dros arfarnwyr a dim ffordd o asesu ansawdd yr arfarniad sydd wedi digwydd. Nid oes unrhyw safonau neu feini prawf y bernir perfformiad arfarnai yn y gorffennol yn eu herbyn. Ni all PCT, felly, fod ag unrhyw hyder bod arfarnai sydd wedi ei arfarnu’n ‘llwyddiannus’ wedi cyrraedd safon ymarfer arbennig. Yn wir, clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth oddi wrth Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol un PCT fod o leiaf un meddyg a oedd yn cael ei archwilio ar hyn o bryd gan y PCT am berfformiad gwael wedi ei arfarnu heb i unrhyw bryderon gael eu codi gan yr arfarnwr.
Cododd yr Athro Roland broblem wahanol. Nododd y gallai cyfranogiad PCTs yn y broses arfarnu gael yr effaith o atal arfarneion rhag bod yn ddidwyll am unrhyw wendidau sydd ganddynt. Er y gallaf ddeall y gallai hyn fod yn wir, byddai’n bosib dweud yr un peth o bosibl am unrhyw arfarniad sy’n digwydd yng nghyd-destun cyflogaeth. Serch hynny, fel y mae’r Athro Roland ac eraill wedi dweud, câi’r sefyllfa ei dwysáu petai cyswllt uniongyrchol rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu ac felly rhwng arfarnu a thrwydded barhaus meddyg teulu i ymarfer. Mae tystion wedi nodi y gallai cyswllt rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu fod yn ffynhonnell pryder hefyd i ddarpar arfarnwyr, a allai fod yn anfodlon cymryd rhan mewn proses a allai, yn ddamcaniaethol o leiaf, arwain i gydweithiwr golli ei hawl i ymarfer.
Newidiadau i’r Broses Arfarnu yn y Dyfodol
Mae’n ddyddiau cynnar i arfarnu ac mae’n rhy gynnar rhagweld yn union sut y bydd yn datblygu. Fel rwyf wedi sôn yn barod, mae’r GCGP wedi comisiynu adroddiad oddi wrth y NAPCE, a gynhwysodd rywfaint o ymchwil archwiliadol ar safonau ansawdd ar gyfer arfarnu meddygon teulu. Mae adroddiad NAPCE yn gwneud nifer o awgrymiadau o ran gweithredu, gan gynnwys:
sefydlu prosesau llymach ar gyfer dethol a hyfforddi arfarnwyr
darparu cefnogaeth a datblygiad parhaus i arfarnwyr, sy’n cynnwys system o unedau cymorth rhanbarthol ar gyfer arfarnwyr
dulliau o ymdrin â phroblem arfarnwyr annigonol
cyflwyno system i arfarnwyr gael eu harfarnu gan feddygon teulu o’r tu allan i’w PCT eu hun
cytuno ar gontract ysgrifenedig safonol cenedlaethol rhwng arfarnwyr a PCTs
darpariaeth hyfforddiant i arfarneion.
Yn ogystal, yng Ngorffennaf 2003, adroddodd ScHARR ar y trefniadau ar gyfer estyn arfarnu i feddygon teulu nad ydynt yn bartneriaid , a allai ei chael yn anodd casglu tystiolaeth at ddibenion arfarniad. Yn ddiweddar, mae’r NCGST a’r RCGP wedi cynnal gwaith ar lunio rhestr o dystiolaeth i’w chyflwyno gan feddygon teulu. Mae canlyniadau gwaith yr NCGST wedi eu cyhoeddi’n ddiweddar mewn dogfen, ‘Definig the evidence for Revalidation - supporting the Royal College of General Practitioners’, a ysgrifennwyd gan Grŵp Arbenigwyr yr NCGST. Fel mae ei enw yn awgrymu, mae’r ddogfen yn ymwneud yn bennaf ag ailddilysu ac yn ceisio nodi’r isafswm eitemau tystiolaeth sy’n hanfodol ym marn ei awduron i ganiatáu tystio i reolaeth glinigol leol at ddibenion ailddilysu. Mae’n ymddangos y rhagwelir mai’r un eitemau hyn o dystiolaeth (ynghyd ag unrhyw rai eraill mae’r arfarnai yn dymuno eu gwirfoddoli) fydd, os bydd yr arfarnai yn dymuno, sylfaen yr arfarniad.
Yn Awst 2004, cyhoeddodd yr RCGP ddogfen ymgynghori, ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: A Tool for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’. Diben y ddogfen yw pennu cynigion o ran y dystiolaeth y gallai meddygon teulu for am ei chasglu i ddangos eu safonau proffesiynol, i’w defnyddio at ddiben arfarnu ac i’w cyflwyno am asesiad at ddibenion ailddilysu. Byddaf yn trafod y dystiolaeth a nodir ym mhob un o’r dogfennau hyn ym Mhennod 26. Mae’n ddigon dweud am y tro bod y math o dystiolaeth a nodir gan Grŵp Arbenigwyr yr NCGST yn ymddangos rhywfaint yn ‘fwy meddal’ na’r hyn a gynigiwyd gan yr RCGP. Un enghraifft o hyn yw bod yr RCGP yn cynnig cyflwyniad archwiliad safonedig a gynhelir gan gydweithiwr annibynnol sy’n dangos ansawdd briodol cofnodion clinigol y meddyg; mewn cyferbyniad, mae Grŵp Arbenigwyr yr NCGST yn awgrymu y byddai archwiliad cofnodion a hunan-adroddir yn dderbyniol. Yn yr un modd, mae’r RCGP yn cynnig y dylai meddygon teulu ddangos copïau o bob cŵyn sy’n ymwneud â’r meddyg, ynghyd â thystiolaeth bod unrhyw anghenion dysgu wedi eu bodloni, tra bod dogfen yr NCGST yn awgrymu na ddylai’r meddyg ond dangos rhestr o’r cwynion sydd wedi dod i law a’r camau dilynol a gymerwyd.
Yn ddiweddar, mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi comisiynu gwaith pellach ar gynnydd arfarnu meddygon teulu; caiff hwn ei gyhoeddi cyn hir a disgwylir cyhoeddiad canllawiau pellach ar y broses arfarnu hefyd yn fuan iawn. Mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi dweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bydd yn cymryd camau yn y dyfodol i sicrhau bod pob PCT yn gweld Ffurflen arfarnu 4 yn ei chyfanrwydd, yn ogystal â PDP yr arfarnai.
O ran yr ymagwedd i’w mabwysiadu yn y dyfodol, pwysleisiodd Mr Michael Warner, cyn Gyfarwyddwr Prosiect, SHA Avon, Swydd Gaerloyw a Wiltshire, yr angen i arfarnu perfformiad y gorffennol a thanlinellu cryfderau a gwendidau ym mherfformiad y gorffennol er mwyn llunio cynllun datblygu priodol ar gfyer y dyfodol. Teimlai fod yn rhaid i PCTs weithio tuag at system mwy systemataidd a chadarn o arfarnu. O dan y gyfryw system, y PCT fyddai’n coladu’r holl wybodaeth am y meddyg teulu, yn eistedd i lawr gydag ef/hi ac yn mynd trwy broses ffurfiol o arfarnu’r wybodaeth honno. Nododd mai prif weithredwr y PCT oedd yn atebol yn y pen draw petai perfformiad gwael yn arwain at wasanaeth gwael a theimlai y dylai’r atebolrwydd hwn gael ei adlewyrchu yn y broses arfarnu. Dywedodd fod PCTs yn dechrau sylweddoli bod yn rhaid iddynt gysylltu perfformiad yn y gorffennol â datblygiad yn y dyfodol ond eu bod yn ‘brwydro’ i wneud y cysylltiad hwnnw. Roedd yn amau na fyddai symudiad o’r fath yn cael ei groesawu gan y proffesiwn, er y teimlai y byddai rhai meddygon teulu yn gydymdeimladol. Arddelodd ymagwedd sensitif, gyda’r proffesiwn a’r PCTs yn gweithio mewn partneriaeth. Teimlai Dr Queenborough hefyd fod y broses arfarnu’n debycach o ddod yn debycach i reolaeth linell maes o law. Dywedodd Dr Patterson fod yn rhaid wrth rywfaint o atebolrwydd dros berfformiad o fewn y broses arfarnu. Siaradodd am ei phrofiad ei hun o arfarniad yng nghyd-destun ysbyty a fu iddi hi yn brofiad cadarnhaol. Dywedodd fod yn rhaid cynnwys elfen o reoli perfformiad.
Rwyf wedi cyfeirio o’r blaen at y ffaith bod canllawiau’r Adran Iechyd yn disgrifio arfarnu meddygon teulu fel ‘
ffurfiannol’
. Mewn ymateb i Bapur Ymgynghori’r Ymchwiliad, fodd bynnag, datganodd yr Adran Iechyd fod i arfarnu
‘elfennau cyfansymiol
h.y. llwyddo/methu
a ffurfiannol fel ei gilydd’
. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd yr Athro Halligan y dylai fod yn bosibl ‘methu’ arfarniad drwy gwympo islaw’r safonau a oedd wedi eu derbyn. Nododd nad oedd unrhyw bwynt cael proses mae pawb yn llwyddo ynddi. Serch hynny, nid oedd yn glir a oedd, wrth ‘fethu’, yn cyfeirio at y sefyllfa y cyfeiriwyd ati eisoes (lle bo gan arfarnwr bryderon digon difrifol i haeddu atal yr arfarniad) neu a oedd ganddo rywbeth llai difrifol mewn golwg (e.e. deunydd dogfennol annigonol, methu â chydymffurfio â PDP, neu bryderon eraill nad oeddent yn gyfystyr â‘difrifol’ ond roedd angen eu harchwilio serch hynny).
Er yr ymddengys yn debygol y byddai llawer o PCTs yn croesawu ymagwedd sy’n edrych yn debycach i reoli perfformiad, mae’n amlwg y byddai newid pwyslais yn y modd hwn yn cael ei wrthod gan lawer o fewn y proffesiwn. A, chan y bydd y mwyafrif helaeth o arfarniadau’n parhau i gael eu cynnal gan arfarnwyr sy’n feddygon teulu, mae’n anodd gweld sut y gellid gorfodi ymagwedd o’r fath. Mae’n bosibl mai’r realiti yw y bydd yn rhaid i unrhyw swyddogaeth rheoli perfformiad a ymarferir gan PCTs ddigwydd yng nghyd-destun ar wahân i arfarnu, tra bod arfarnu’n anelu’n gyfan gwbl at annog datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus a cheisio sicrhau ei fod yn digwydd. Mae’n amlwg bod gan yr ymagwedd olaf hon ran i’w chwarae mewn cynnal safonau. Serch hynny, ychydig neu dim gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol sy’n cael ei chynhyrchu ganddi am berfformiad a chymhwysedd meddygon unigol.

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio bod ymdrechion sylweddol wedi eu gwneud o fewn sefydliadau’r GIG, dros yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf, i sefydlu strwythurau a systemau priodol sydd wedi eu dylunio i hybu rheolaeth glinigol dda. Mae’r ymdrechion hynny wedi eu monitro gan y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI). Rhwng 2000 ac Ebrill 2004, cynhaliodd CHI raglen o adolygiadau lleol o drefniadau rheolaeth glinigol mewn ymddiriedolaethau’r GIG a PCTs. Arweiniodd bob adolygiad at adroddiad a gyhoeddwyd ar wefan CHI. Cynhwysodd pob adolygiad ymweliad, a barodd wythnos, â’r PCT gan dîm o adolygwyr. Roedd y tîm yn cynnwys rhyw ddeg o bobl, gan gynnwys gweithiwr cyflogedig CHI (a reolodd yr adolygiad), meddyg, nyrs, rheolwr, proffesiynolyn gofal iechyd cysylltiedig, cynrychiolydd Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol a pherson lleyg. Roedd yr adolygiad yn cynnwys yr holl wasanaethau a ddarparwyd gan y PCT, gan gynnwys gwasanaethau meddygol. Cyn yr ymweliad, byddai gofyn i’r PCT gyflwyno swm mawr o wybodaeth (polisïau ysgrifenedig, protocolau, strategaethau, cofnodion cyfarfodydd a data arall) i CHI. Câi’r wybodaeth honno ei dadansoddi wrth baratoi am yr ymweliad.
Hefyd cyn i’r ymweliad ddigwydd, byddai CHI yn cynnal cyfarfod yn ardal y PCT ac yn gwahodd aelodau o’r cyhoedd er mwyn cael rhywfaint o wybodaeth gefndir am farn cleifion, gofalwyr a phartïon eraill â diddordeb am y PCT. Hefyd byddai gan CHI fynediad i arolygon cleifion a gynhaliwyd mewn rhai ardaloedd. Byddai CHI yn ceisio barn am y PCT oddi wrth gyrff fel yr SHA perthnasol, ymddiriedolaethau GIG lleol a Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol.
Seiliwyd adolygiadau o PCTs ar yr hyn a ddisgrifiwyd gan Dr Patterson fel ‘saith cydran rheolaeth glinigol’, sef:
cyfranogiad cleifion
rheoli risg
archwiliad clinigol
staffio a rheoli staff
addysg a hyfforddiant
effeithiolrwydd clinigol
defnyddio gwybodaeth.
Byddai timau a oedd yn ymweld hefyd yn edrych ar ‘brofiad y claf’ ac ar allu strategol y PCT i ddatblygu a gwella rheolaeth glinigol. Esboniodd Dr Patterson fod yr elfen olaf hon yn dibynnu i raddau helaeth ar ansawdd yr arweinyddiaeth a’r diwylliant o fewn y PCT a oedd yn cael ei adolygu.
Byddai’r tîm a oedd yn ymweld yn archwilio’r strategaethau a’r polisïau a oedd gan y PCT yn eu lle o dan bob un o’r saith cydran ac yn asesu sut roeddent yn gweithredu ar y llawr. Rhoddodd Dr Patterson yr enghraifft o reoli risg. Byddai tîm adolygu yn dymuno gwybod a oedd gan y PCT strategaeth ar gyfer rheoli risg. Yna byddai am weld sut y troswyd y strategaeth honno yn bolisïau a gweithdrefnau ac, yn bwysicach, a oedd yn cael ei deall gan staff y rheng flaen. Lle bo modd, câi staff y PCT eu holi sut y byddent yn ymdrin â digwyddiadau penodol a sut roeddent wedi ymdrin â digwyddiadau go iawn yn y gorffennol. Drwy hyn, byddai tîm CHI yn gobeithio darganfod a oedd y strwythurau a’r systemau yr honnai’r PCT eu bod yn eu lle yn gweithio’n effeithiol yn ymarferol.
Yn ystod yr ymweliad, byddai’r tîm adolygu yn treulio amser yn swyddfeydd y PCT, yn cyfweld â rheolwyr a staff ac yn trafod y systemau sydd ar waith. Byddai’r tîm hefyd yn cynnal rhyw chwe ymweliad â meddygfeydd meddygon teulu. Byddai’n ceisio dewis meddygfeydd o fathau gwahanol (e.e. trefol a gwledig, un meddyg a grŵp mawr). Byddai’n chwilio am faterion amlwg fel glendid o fewn y feddygfa ac a oedd taflenni gwybodaeth priodol yn cael eu harddangos. Er hynny, diben yr ymweliad oedd nid i edrych ar safon y gofal a roddir gan y feddygfa unigol. Ei nod pennaf oedd darganfod a oedd gan y PCT fframwaith ansawdd priodol yn ei le a oedd ar waith ar lefel meddygfeydd. Cyfyngwyd i ba raddau roedd CHI yn gallu casglu gwybodaeth am sut roedd systemau a pholisïau PCT yn gweithio ar y llawr, wrth reswm, gan amser a ffactorau eraill. Ni fyddai ei arolygiad yn canfod arferion clinigol gwael gan feddygon unigol.
Yn dilyn ymweliad, câi adroddiad ysgrifenedig ei baratoi, gan nodi asesiad CHI o systemau’r PCT o dan bob un o saith cydran rheolaeth glinigol. Câi perfformiad PCT mewn perthynas â phob un o’r saith cydran ei sgorio gan y tîm adolygu ar raddfa pedwar pwynt. Byddai’r adroddiad yn nodi argymhellion CHI i’w gweithredu yn y dyfodol. At ei gilydd roedd yr argymhellion hyn yn cyfeirio at sefydlu systemau newydd neu wella systemau presennol. Byddai rai argymhellion yn ymwneud â darparu addysg a hyfforddiant. Nid oedd argymhellion yn cael (nac i fod i gael) eu cyfeirio at ansawdd wirioneddol y gofal clinigol a oedd yn cael ei ddarparu gan feddygfeydd meddygon teulu. Er hynny, mae’n bosibl mai gwella ansawdd gofal fyddai canlyniad cydymffurfio â’r argymhellion. Un enghraifft fyddai argymhelliad o dan gydran ‘rheolaeth glinigol’. Mae hyn yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i PCTs fod â systemau yn eu lle i sicrhau bod triniaeth a roddir yn seiliedig ar y dystiolaeth orau sydd ar gael, e.e. o ymchwil, deunyddiau ysgrifenedig neu ganllawiau lleol neu genedlaethol (gan gynnwys NSFs a chanllawiau NICE). Gallai argymhelliad y dylai PCT ddatblygu system i ledaenu i bob meddygfa meddygon teulu dystiolaeth newydd am arferion gorau arwain at newidiadau mewn triniaeth ar ran rhai meddygon teulu a gwelliant canlynol yng ngofal cleifion. Ni fyddai, wrth gwrs, yn cael yr effaith hon ar bob un. Byddai adroddiad CHI hefyd yn nodi rhai meysydd o arfer nodedig gan PCTs ac unrhyw arferion y credai CHI y gallai gweddill y GIG ddysgu ohonynt. Ar ôl cael yr adroddiad, roedd disgwyl i PCTs gynhyrchu cynlluniau gweithredu yn nodi’r camau roeddent yn bwriadu eu cymryd i gydymffurfio ag argymhellion CHI. SHAs oedd yn gyfrifol wedyn am oruchwylio cydymffurfedd â’r cynlluniau gweithredu hyn gan PCTs.
Roedd cynnal adolygiadau CHI yn ddwys iawn o safbwynt adnoddau. I ddechrau, y bwriad oedd bod CHI yn cynnal rhaglen dreigl o arolygiadau, gan ddychwelyd i bob corff bob rhyw ychydig o flynyddoedd. Nid oedd hyn yn ymarferol. Yn ystod pedair blynedd ei weithredu, cynhaliodd CHI 377 o adolygiadau, gan gynnwys 86 adolygiad o PCOs yng Nghymru a Lloegr.
Y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd
Mae swyddogaethau CHI bellach wedi eu trosglwyddo i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd sydd, yn y tymor byr, yn parhau ag adolygiadau o PCTs. Yn y tymor hwy, fodd bynnag, ni fwriedir cynnal unrhyw adolygiadau o reolaeth glinigol fel rhan o’r drefn. Yn lle hynny, bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn cynnal adolygiadau themâol o’r ddarpariaeth gofal iechyd a gynhelir drwy gyfeirio at safonau a bennir gan y Llywodraeth a meini prawf manylach y bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ei hun yn eu datblygu. Cynhelir yr adolygiadau drwy gasglu, dadansoddi a sgrinio data (yr hyn a elwir y ‘wybodaeth ddeallus’) a grëir gan gyrff GIG. Caiff lefelau perfformiad cymharol cyrff gwahanol yn cael eu hasesu. I’r rhai mae’n ymddangos nad ydynt yn perfformio cystal, bydd adolygiadau pellach i ganfod problemau a nodi unrhyw gamau adferol mae eu hangen. I’r rhai sy’n perfformio’n dda yn ôl pob golwg, bydd adolygiadau pellach gyda golwg ar nodi’r ffactorau sy’n caniatáu iddynt berfformio’n dda ac ar gyfleu’r ffactorau hynny i eraill. Ni fydd unrhyw raglen gynhwysfawr o ymweliadau.
O ran rheolaeth glinigol, ni fydd yr adolygiadau arfaethedig yn rhoi ond gwybodaeth gyfyngedig am a yw systemau a pholisïau yn cael eu gweithredu ar y llawr. Yn anochel, bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn edrych yn bennaf ar drefniadau a systemau sefydliadol, nid ar ymarfer meddygon unigol.

---  ---
Dywedodd Dr Patterson wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod adolygiadau o PCTs a gwblhawyd pan roddodd dystiolaeth ym Medi 2003 wedi datgelu eu bod yn ‘brwydro’ i weithredu trefniadau ar gyfer rheolaeth glinigol. Fel rwyf wedi dweud, mae PCTs yn gyrff bach, gydag ystod eang o swyddogaethau a set o flaenoriaethau sy’n cystadlu yn erbyn ei gilydd. Ychydig o amser sydd ganddynt i sefydlu strwythurau a systemau cynhwysfawr. Mae eu problemau wedi eu dwysáu gan y faith nad ydynt, fel a nododd Dr Patterson, yn gweithredu o fewn ‘amgylchedd rheoledig’ o ran meddygfeydd meddygon teulu. Nid ydynt yn ymdrin â grŵp cydlynus o weithwyr y gallant gyfarwyddo eu hymddygiad. Yn hytrach, mae’n yn ymdrin â nifer o gyrff bach annibynnol, sydd ar wahân yn ddaearyddol. Dywedodd Dr Patterson fod CHI wedi darganfod ‘nerfusrwydd’ ar ran PCTs a diffyg eglurdeb am beth oedd eu rôl reoli mewn perthynas â meddygon teulu. Ceir llai o broblem gyda meddygon teulu sy’n gweithio o dan gontractau PMS. Ond i feddygon sy’n gweithio o dan y Contract GMS, cafwyd, ym marn Dr Patterson, ‘rhai rhwystrau strwythurol a diwylliannol’ i weithredu trefniadau rheolaeth glinigol ar draws PCT. Rhagwelodd y gallai hyn newid o bosibl o dan y Contract GMS newydd.
Ym Medi 2003, cyhoeddodd y Swyddfa Archwilio Genedlaethol (NAO) adroddiad cynnydd, ‘Achieving Improvements through Clinical Governance’, am weithrediad rheolaeth glinigol gan ymddiriedolaethau’r GIG. Nid ymdriniodd yr adroddiad â gofal sylfaenol. O ystyried mai yn gymharol ddiweddar y crëwyd y PCTs, barnwyd ei bod yn rhy gynnar i adrodd arnynt. O fewn ymddiriedolaethau gofal llym, iechyd meddwl ac ambiwlans y GIG, darganfu’r NAO fod gan gyflwyniad rheolaeth glinigol
‘lawer o effeithiau manteisiol’
. Er hynny,
‘ysbeidiol’
oedd y cynnydd wrth ei gweithredu, gan amrywio rhwng ymddiriedolaethau, o fewn ymddiriedolaethau a rhwng cydrannau o reolaeth glinigol. Mae’n ymddangos yn debygol iawn fod gweithredu rheolaeth glinigol mewn PCTs yr un mor ysbeidiol - os nad yn fwy felly. Cafodd hyn ei gydnabod gan yr Athro Halligan yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad fan ddywedodd fod rheolaeth glinigol heb ymsefydlu eto mewn gofal sylfaenol. Nododd Y Fonesig Lesley Southgate mai cyrff ifanc yw PCTs sy’n newid ac yn datblygu’n gyson. Dywedodd ei bod yn amhosibl dod i gasgliad am gysondeb neu ddiffyg cysondeb rhwng PCTs gan nad yw digon yn hysbys am eu gweithgareddau. Teimlai’r Athro Baker, ar sail ei arsylwadau ei hun, fod gwahaniaethau yn y ffyrdd roedd gwahanol PCTs wedi croesawu rheolaeth glinigol. Teimlai mai mater o arweinyddiaeth oedd hyn i raddau helaeth a’i bod yn dibynnu ar agwedd arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol a phrif weithredwr y PCT. Dywedodd yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Polisi Iechyd a Chymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol San Steffan, fod rhai cynghorwyr meddygol PCTs yn dehongli rheolaeth yn nhermau disgyblaeth tra bod eraill yn gweld eu rôl fel ‘llawer mwy addysgiadol’. Hefyd pwysleisiodd yr Athro Halligan bwysigrwydd arweinyddiaeth yng ngweithrediad effeithiol trefniadau rheolaeth glinigol. Yn fwy diweddar, mewn llythyr i’r Ymchwiliad dyddiedig 10fed Tachwedd 2004, mae Syr Liam Donaldson, y Prif Swyddog Meddygol, wedi datgan ei gred fod diwylliant a phroses rheolaeth glinigol bellach ‘
wedi ymsefydlu’n gryf yn nhrefniant lleol y GIG’
. Ni wn ar ba dystiolaeth mae wedi seilio’r datganiad hwnnw. Mae’n ymddangos yn annhebygol bos cynnydd sylweddol wedi digwydd ers Ionawr 2004, pan rodiodd un o gydweithwyr Syr Liam a thystion eraill sylwadau am sefyllfa rheolaeth glinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol.
Mae’n ymddangos yn glir i mi bod cryn bellter i fynd yn wir cyn i reolaeth glinigol gael ei gweithredu’n llawn mewn gofal sylfaenol. Rwyf wedi esbonio hefyd bod cyfyngiadau gan rai o’r arfau sy’n cael eu defnyddio ar hyn o bryd gan PCTs yn y broses weithredu o ran i ba raddau y gellir eu defnyddio at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Er hynny, nid wyf y dymuno ymddangos yn negyddol am ymdrechion presennol PCTs. Croesewir unrhyw gamau a gymerir gyda golwg ar wella ansawdd gofal cleifion. Ymhen amser, rhaid i ganolbwyntio ymdrech ar strategaeth i wella ansawdd gofal ddwyn ffrwyth i gleifion. Dim ond ceisio tynnu sylw at yr anawsterau a wynebir gan PCTs ar hyn o bryd wrth weithredu rheolaeth glinigol ydwyf i.
Yn fy marn i, y rhwystr gwirioneddol i weithredu rheolaeth glinigol yw’r hyn a nodwyd gan Dr Patterson, sef sefyllfa meddygon teulu fel contractwyr annibynnol ac anallu PCTs o ganlyniad i hynny i’w ‘rheoli’ at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Dangosir y tyndra hwn yn dda gan y ddadl dros arfarnu a’r ffurf y dylai ei gymryd. Y PCTs sy’n gyfrifol ân ansawdd ac yn teimlo’r angen i ddarganfod ffyrdd o fonitro ac asesu ansawdd y gofal sy’n cael ei roi gan feddygon teulu. Mae’r proffesiwn yn ofni cael ei ‘blismona’ gan y PCTs a cholli rhyddid clinigol o ganlyniad. Mae rhywfaint o ddryswch ynghylch atebolrwydd, yn enwedig atebolrwydd arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol y mae ganddynt, fel meddygon teulu lleol, ‘droed yn y ddau wersyll’ yn aml. Mae llawer ohonynt wedi ceisio mabwysiadu ymagwedd araf deg, gan geisio hybu hinsawdd gefnogol ac annog ‘perchnogaeth’ o reolaeth glinigol gan y proffesiwn. Daw’r anhawster gyda’r meddygfeydd cyffredinol hynny sy’n anfodlon ysgwyddo egwyddorion rheolaeth glinigol a lle gallai problemau safonau gofal gwael fodoli. Gallai PCT fod bron heb unrhyw bŵer i gymryd camau pe bai meddygfa, er enghraifft, yn gwrthod caniatáu i ymweliad rheolaeth glinigol ddigwydd. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y gall fod angen rhoi pwerau ehangach i PCTs os ydynt i gyflawni eu cyfrifoldebau rheolaeth glinigol yn effeithiol a bod yn gyfrifol ân gyflawni’r ddyletswydd ansawdd a osodir arnynt. Hefyd bydd arnynt angen arweinyddiaeth a phenderfyniad i wneud ansawdd eu blaenoriaeth gyntaf ac i ddadwreiddio arferion is-safonol.
Ymwneud â systemau yn bennaf y mae rheolaeth glinigol. Ar hyn o bryd, ychydig o wybodaeth mae’n ei rhoi am feddygon unigol. Mae’n cynhyrchu llai byth o wybodaeth am faterion fel gwybodaeth feddygol neu fedrau ymgynghori meddyg (h.y. a oes ganddo/ganddi’r medrau i fynnu’r wybodaeth mae ei hangen i gymryd hanes, gwneud diagnosis a phenderfynu gyda’r claf beth ddylid ei wneud). Dyma’r agweddau ar ofal sydd o bwys i’r mwyafrif o gleifion ac sy’n hollol sylfaenol i ansawdd a diogelwch gofal meddygol. Ymddengys i mi felly, o fewn gofal sylfaenol o leiaf, y dylai ffocws rheolaeth glinigol symud i ffwrdd o systemau trefniadaethol a chael ei chyfeirio yn hytrach at gasglu a defnyddio gwybodaeth am gyflawniad arferion ac ymarferwyr unigol.
Yn fy marn i, o’i datblygu’n briodol a chyda’r adnoddau priodol, gallai rheolaeth glinigol gynnig y ffordd fwyaf effeithiol o gyrraedd dau nod pwysig. Yn gyntaf, gallai ganiatáu i PCTs ganfod meddygon teulu sydd ar eu rhestrau sy’n perfformio’n wael neu’n gamweithredol. Gallai hefyd helpu meddygfeydd i ddarganfod unrhyw broblemau neu ddiffygion ymhlith eu pobl eu hunain. Yn ail, gallai fod iddi effaith fanteisiol o helpu meddygon sy’n perfformio’n foddhaol i wneud yn wel byth. Ar hyn o bryd, ni chredaf ei bod yn cyrraedd y nodau hyn, a hynny am ddau brif reswm.
Yn gyntaf, fel rwyf wedi dweud, mae swm y wybodaeth sydd ar gael sy’n ymwneud â meddygon unigol yn fach iawn. Mae’r rhan fwyaf o’r data yn cyfeirio at feddygfeydd ac nid unigolion. Mae hyd yn oed data rhagnodi heb ei ddiffinio mor eglur ag y dylai fod. Ni fydd rheolaeth glinigol yn cyrraedd ei botensial llawn nes ei bod yn cynnwys casglu data sy’n ymwneud â meddygon unigol. Mae’n eithaf posibl bod data sy’n ymwneud â dyweder chwech neu saith ymarferwr yn cuddio diffygion difrifol ynglŷn ag unigolion. Rhaid rhoi llawer mwy o ymdrech i gasglu data am unigolion. Gallai hyn gynnwys data rhagnodi, data atgyfeirio a chwynion. Dylai arolygon boddhad cleifion ofyn am adweithiau i feddygon unigol ac nid y gwasanaeth a ddarperir gan y feddygfa yn unig. Os a phryd y bydd nodd dadansoddi ystadegau marwoldeb, dylai’r rhain gael eu cynnwys. Mae’n siŵr gennyf fod posibiliadau eraill nad wyf wedi meddwl amdanynt.
Yn ail, dylid rhoi proffil llawer uwch i reolaeth glinigol yn y PCT. Caf ar ddeall mai meddyg teulu sydd â diddordeb yn y pwnc yw’r arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol ar hyn o bryd, a’i fod yn ymgymryd â’r gwaith y rhan amser. Gallaf weld mantais arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol sy’n dal i weithio mewn ymarfer clinigol. Er hynny, nid yw’n ymddangos yn foddhaol i mi y dylai ef/hi dim ond godi’r hyn sydd i’w ddysgu am reolaeth glinigol wrth fynd ymlaen o ganlyniad i brofiad. Dylai fod cyfleoedd i arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol rannu profiad a dysgu beth arall y gellid ei wneud a sut. Yn ogystal, os bydd profiad arweinwyr rheolaeth glinigol yn dangos bod arnynt angen fwy o bwerau, dylent gael eu rhoi iddynt. I ddefnyddio’r term sydd ar lafar, mae angen ‘biffio’r’ broses i fyny.
Dwedais y byddwn yn ystyried, petai rheolaeth glinigol wedi bod ar waith yng nghanol y 1990au, a fyddai wedi gallu canfod gweithgareddau troseddol Shipman. Yr ateb byr yw na fyddai rheolaeth glinigol fel y mae’n gweithredu ar hyn o bryd wedi gwneud. Petai wedi bod yn bosibl cynnwys dadansoddiad o ystadegau marwoldeb, mae’n amlwg y byddai wedi gwneud; roedd y cyfraddau marwolaeth ymhlith ei gleifion ef yn nodedig o uchel. Ni allaf feddwl am unrhyw offeryn arall rheolaeth glinigol a fyddai wedi canfod ei droseddau’n bendant. Efallai y byddai archwilio clinigol wedi gwneud, petai’r pwnc cywir wedi ei ddewis. Mae’n eithaf posibl y byddai adolygiad digwyddiad arwyddocaol, a ganolbwyntiodd ar farwolaeth sydyn, yn enwedig marwolaeth yn y feddygfa, wedi gwneud. Ni allaf fod yn sicr. Petai rheolaeth glinigol yn digwydd ar y cyd ag archwilio ac ardystio marwolaethau’n well (yn unol â’r argymhelliad fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad) a gwell reoleiddio o ddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig (yn unol â’r argymhelliad yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad) ync credaf fod y rhagolygon o ganfod yn eithaf uchel. Yn bwysicach byth, efallai, fyddai effaith ataliol y mesurau hyn.
Wedi dweud hynny, ni chredaf mai rheolaeth glinigol fydd y dull a ddewisir byth i ganfod camarfer bwriadol. Fel arfer mae’r rheiny sy’n gwneud cam yn fwriadol y cymryd camau i guddio eu holion. Defnyddioldeb rheolaeth glinigol, yn fy marn i, yw’r hyn mae’n ei ddarganfod am feddygon nad ydynt yn perfformio’n wael yn fwriadol ac sydd efallai’n hollol anymwybodol bod eu harfer clinigol yn wael. Nid yw’r ffaith na fyddai rheolaeth glinigol o reidrwydd ‘yn dal Shipman arall’ yn golygu nad yw’n rhywbeth gwerthfawr iawn.

---  ---
Diffiniadau, Ystadegau a Thueddiadau
Polisi'r Llywodraeth
Manteision ac Anfanteision Meddygon yn Gweithio ar eu Pennau'u Hunain
Lliniaru Problemau Meddygfeydd ar eu Pennau'u Hunain

---  ---
Am chwe blynedd olaf ei yrfa fel meddyg teulu, gweithiai Shipman ‘ar ei ben ei hun’ o feddygfa yn 21 Market Street, Hyde. Wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog am lofruddio 15 o’i gleifion ym mis Ionawr 2000, roedd llawer o alwadau i symud i ffwrdd oddi wrth y syniad o feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Roedd y llofruddiaethau hyn wedi’u cyflawni dros gyfnod o dair blynedd, ac awgrymwyd na fyddai Shipman wedi dianc rhag cael ei ganfod dros gyfnod mor hir pe bai’n gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp; byddai ei bartneriaid neu’i gydweithwyr wedi gweld bod rhywbeth o le. Fel arall, byddai’r ffaith ei hun o orfod gweithio’n agos â chydweithwyr fel rhan o dîm wedi gweithredu fel rhwystr iddo.
Adlewyrchwyd y teimlad hwn sef ‘mwyaf y nifer, mwyaf diogel’ yng nghanlyniad ymchwil a wnaed gan Market & Opinion Research International (MORI) ar ran y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) ym mis Ebrill 2000
. Adroddodd am deimlad bod
‘meddygon mewn meddygfeydd grŵp yn rheoleiddio’i gilydd i ryw raddau’
, barn a adleisiwyd yn ddiweddarach yn yr ymatebion i holiadur a anfonwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad at 15 o ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCTau) a ddewiswyd ar hap. Yr un flwyddyn, siaradodd Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu (RCGP) am bryder parhaus ynghylch diffyg atebolrwydd meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain i gydweithwyr agos, ac ynghylch meddygon teulu a oedd yn gweithio o fewn grŵp ond a oedd serch hynny yn gweithredu rhestrau cleifion ar wahân. Dywedwyd bod diogelwch yng ngoruchwyliaeth anffurfiol y naill aelod i’r llall mewn meddygfa grŵp, gyda thimau o bobl broffesiynol yn gweithio gyda’i gilydd i sicrhau datblygiad parhaus ei gilydd
. Mewn cyferbyniad, roedd peryglon gwirioneddol o arwahanu proffesiynol mewn perthynas â meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Er yr ymddengys y cydnabyddir yn gyffredinol bod llawer o ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn ymarfer yn unigol am resymau cwbl briodol, rwy’n synhwyro amheuaeth, mewn rhai mannau, bod y rheiny sy’n mynd i ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn gwneud hynny o gymelliadau llai boddhaol. Credaf fod barn bod rhai yn ceisio osgoi ymarfer fel meddygfa grŵp, gan ofni y byddai cydweithwyr yn archwilio’u gwaith yn arwain at ddatgelu’u hannigonolrwydd clinigol neu ryw annigonolrwydd arall. Amheuaeth arall yw y gall fod y nodweddion cymeriad ganddynt sy’n eu gwneud yn bartneriaid proffesiynol anodd ac yn feddygon gwael hefyd o bosibl. Bydd meddygon sydd â rhywbeth ganddynt i’w guddio - boed yn ymddygiad troseddol neu’n anallu clinigol - fe deimlir, yn ceisio’n naturiol i guddio’u hunain i ffwrdd mewn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Yr awgrym yw y gallai Shipman fod wedi bod yn enghraifft o hyn.
Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Dr Michael Taylor, Cadeirydd Cymdeithas y Meddygfeydd Bach (SPA). Mae SPA yn gorff cenedlaethol ar gyfer meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach. Mae ganddo ystod eang o swyddogaethau. Mae’r rhain yn cynnwys cylch gorchwyl cynrychioliadol a gwleidyddol. Mae’n cynnal arolygon, yn gwneud ymchwil ac yn casglu data. Mae hefyd yn cyhoeddi arweiniad ysgrifenedig i’w aelodau ar ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus ac ar bynciau, fel gweithdrefnau cwynion, a all bery anawsterau arbennig i feddygfeydd bach. Ei ddatganiad bwriad yw ei fod yn bodoli
‘i wella ansawdd gofal i gleifion mewn meddygfeydd bach’
. Dywedwyd wrth seminarau’r Ymchwiliad gan yr Athro Fonesig Lesley Southgate, Athro Addysg Gofal Sylfaenol a Meddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, bod rhywfaint o’r gwaith gorau ar ddatblygu rheolaeth glinigol ar gyfer meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach wedi’i wneud gan yr SPA. Cefais fod tystiolaeth Dr Taylor yn ddefnyddiol.
Clywais dystiolaeth hefyd gan Dr Hugh Whyte, uwch swyddog meddygol, Y Gyfarwyddiaeth Polisi a Chynllunio Iechyd, Adran Iechyd Gweithgor yr Alban, ynghylch sefyllfa meddygfeydd bach a meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn yr Alban. Darparodd nifer o dystion, a alwyd i roi tystiolaeth ar bynciau eraill yn bennaf, eu barnau am agweddau penodol ar feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Fel y soniwyd uchod, anfonodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur at 15 PCT a ddewiswyd ar hap, yn gofyn am wybodaeth am eu hagweddau tuag at feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain ac am unrhyw drefniadau arbennig yr oeddent yn eu gwneud ar gyfer meddygfeydd felly. Trafodwyd problemau rheolaeth glinigol mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad yn ogystal. Ystyriais hefyd lawer iawn o ddeunydd ysgrifenedig, yn cynnwys erthyglau o gylchgronau meddygol yn bennaf a datganiadau gan gyrff â diddordeb, fel yr RCGP.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn crynhoi’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad mewn perthynas â’r materion hyn, a byddaf yn ystyried y ffyrdd y gellir lliniaru ar anfanteision canfyddedig meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain.
’Views on Erasure and Restoration of Doctors - Ymgynghoriad Cyhoeddus Cyffredinol a gynhaliwyd ar ran y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol’, Ebrill 2000.
’The Future of Professionally Led Regulation for General Practice - Dogfen Drafod a gyhoeddwyd ar y cyd â ac ar ran Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu, Pwyllgor Meddygon Teulu y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig a’r Cyd Bwyllgor ar Hyfforddiant Ôl-raddedig ar gyfer Meddygaeth Deuluol’.

---  ---
Diffiniad o Feddygfa ar ei Phen ei Hun
Nid yw’r term ‘meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun’ yn derm celfyddyd. Gellir ei ddefnyddio i ddisgrifio ymarferwyr sy’n gweithio dan lawer o drefniadau gwahanol. Mae’r Adran Iechyd yn diffinio meddyg teulu ar ei ben/phen ei hun fel meddyg heb unrhyw bartneriaid, er y gall fod ganddo/ganddi gynorthwyydd neu gofrestrydd meddyg teulu. Diffiniad arall o feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun, y cyfeirir ato ym mhapur yr RCGP, yw:
‘meddygfa lle mae pob un o’r cleifion wedi cofrestru gydag un meddyg teulu, a gontractiwyd gan yr awdurdod iechyd perthnasol ac sy’n gyfrifol am y cleifion hynny 24 awr y dydd a 365 diwrnod y flwyddyn, er y gall yr ymarferydd gael mynediad at weithwyr proffesiynol iechyd eraill, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu, er mwyn cyflawni’r cyfrifoldebau contractiol’
Roedd tystiolaeth Dr Taylor yn gyson â’r diffiniad hwn. Yn ôl yntau, ‘Meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun yw grŵp o gleifion sydd wedi cofrestru gyda phrif feddyg teulu sy’n derbyn nawdd ar gyfer y cleifion hynny.’ Yn ei hanfod, yr hyn sy’n gwahaniaethu’r ymarferydd ar ei ben/phen ei hun yw’r ffaith fod ganddo/ganddi ei restr/rhestr cleifion ei hun. Er y gall rhai o’i gleifion/chleifion gael eu trin gan gynorthwy-ydd yn y feddygfa, nid yw’r meddyg teulu ar ei ben/phen ei hun yn rhannu gofal cleifion mewn rhestr a rennir gyda meddygon eraill.
Mewn rhai meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain, gall fod mai un meddyg sy’n gweithio’n rheolaidd yn y feddygfa, gyda meddygon locwm yn dirprwyo yn ystod cyfnodau salwch neu wyliau. Hwn yw’r model y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o aelodau’r cyhoedd yn ei adnabod fel meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun. Mewn meddygfeydd eraill, efallai bod gan y meddyg gofrestrydd meddyg teulu amser llawn neu ran-amser cyflogedig neu gynorthwy-ydd i helpu. Mewn mannau eraill, er yr ymddengys mai ychydig o’r rhain sydd erbyn hyn, mae meddygfeydd lle mae gan y meddygon teulu eu rhestrau cleifion eu hunain ond sy’n rhannu staff, adeiladu a chyfleusterau eraill. Er y byddent yn ystyried eu hunain (ac y byddent yn cael eu hystyried felly gan y proffesiwn a’r Adran Iechyd) fel meddygon ar eu pennau’u hunain, ni fyddent fwy na thebyg yn cael eu hystyried felly gan y rhan fwyaf o aelodau’r cyhoedd. Disgrifiodd Dr Taylor nifer o amrywiadau eraill ar y thema.
Mae meddygfa fach yn cael ei diffinio gan SPA fel meddygfa a chanddi naill ai lai na 7000 o gleifion neu lai na phedwar prif feddyg teulu. Eto, nid term celfyddyd yw hwn. Nid oedd Shipman erioed mewn meddygfa fach (yn hytrach na meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun) ond mae rhywfaint o’r dystiolaeth yr wyf wedi’i hystyried yn awgrymu bod rhai problemau yn gyffredin i feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach.
Proffil Nodweddiadol Meddyg Teulu ar ei Ben ei Hun
Nododd Dr Taylor bedwar grŵp o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Ni fyddai pob meddyg teulu ar ei ben ei hun yn syrthio i un o’r grwpiau hyn, ond mae’r pedwar grŵp yn cyfrif am gyfran fawr o’r cyfanswm. Mae’r grŵp cyntaf yn cynnwys meddygon a ddaeth i’r DU o isgyfandir India yn y 1960au a’r 1970au ac na aethant fyth i mewn i feddygfa grŵp. Mae’r mwyafrif o’r meddygon hyn yn gwasanaethu ardaloedd difreintiedig canol dinas; mae llawer ohonynt ar fin ymddeol. Yr ail grŵp yw meddygon ifainc o Orllewin Ewrop, o’r gwledydd Benelwcs yn arbennig, sydd yn arfer ymarfer fel meddygon ar eu pennau’u hunain ac yn ei fwynhau, a dyna sy’n arferol yn ei gwledydd eu hunain. Mae trydydd grŵp yn cynnwys meddygon sy’n eu cael eu hunain mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun wedi i bartneriaeth rannu. Y pedwerydd grŵp yw’r hyn a ddisgrifir gan Dr Taylor fel y grŵp ‘harddaf po leiaf’, a byddai Dr Taylor fwy na thebyg yn ei gynnwys ei hun ymhlith y rheiny. Mae’n well gan y rheiny sydd yn y grŵp hwn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, gan gredu bod hynny’n rhoi’r cyfle iddynt drin eu cleifion yn y dull ‘holistaidd’ sydd yn fwyaf priodol i’w hanghenion. Wrth gwrs, gall meddygon sydd mewn unrhyw un neu ragor o’r tri grŵp cyntaf fod yn y pedwerydd grŵp yn ogystal. Mae’r meddygfeydd yn tueddu bod mewn ardaloedd difreintiedig canol dinas. Mae rhai mewn ardaloedd gwledig na allent gynnal mwy nag un meddyg.
Niferoedd
Mae’r nifer o ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn Lloegr yn gostwng yn raddol. Ym 1952, roedd rhyw 43% o feddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Erbyn 1993, dim ond rhyw 2888 o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain oedd allan o boblogaeth meddygon teulu o 25,968. Ym 1998, roedd dros 200 yn llai (2683) allan o boblogaeth fwy yn sylweddol o feddygon teulu, sef 27,392. Erbyn 2003, y ffigurau priodol oedd 2504 allan o gyfanswm o 28,568. Felly, dros y cyfnod 11 mlynedd hwnnw, gostyngodd canran y meddygon teulu yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn y boblogaeth meddygon teulu o ryw 11% i lai na 9%. Nid yw’r ffigurau hyn yn gwahaniaethu rhwng meddygon ar eu pennau’u hunain ‘yn gyfan gwbl’ a’r meddygon teulu hynny sy’n gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp gyda’u rhestrau cleifion eu hunain. Y boblogaeth meddygon teulu y cyfeirir ati yw’r boblogaeth o ‘brif feddygon digyfyngiad a chyfwerthoedd’ (unrestricted principals and equivalents) (UPE), term yr Adran Iechyd sy’n eithrio grwpiau fel prif feddygon cyfyngedig, meddygon teulu cynorthwyol a meddygon cyflogedig.
Nid oes gan feddygon sy’n ferched a meddygon ifainc gynrychiolaeth ddigonol ymhlith meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Mae dro 50% o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain dros 50 oed, o gymharu â 25% o feddygon teulu fel cyfanrwydd. Dim ond 11% sydd dan 40 oed, o gymharu â 40% o feddygon teulu fel cyfanrwydd. Dim ond 15% o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain sy’n ferched, o gymharu â 27% o feddygon teulu fel cyfanrwydd
Y Gostyngiad mewn Niferoedd
Yn ôl Dr Taylor, dechreuodd y dirywiad mewn nifer yn y 1960au ac ymddengys yn debygol y bydd yn parhau. Gellir ei briodoli i raddau helaeth i ystyriaethau cyllidol, ymarferol a gweinyddol sy’n rhoi apêl ehangach i feddygfeydd grŵp ymhlith y rhan fwyaf o feddygon teulu uchelgeisiol.
Ar ddechrau’r 1960au, roedd barn gyffredin bod meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn rhwystro datblygiad ymarfer clinigol da. O ganlyniad, ym 1966, cyflwynwyd cymhelliant ariannol ar ffurf Lwfans Meddygfeydd Grŵp (GPA), er mwyn annog ffurfio meddygfeydd grŵp. Cyflawnodd y GPA ei nod ac o ganlyniad cafwyd gostyngiad yn niferoedd y meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Diddymwyd y GPA oddeutu 1990, pan gyflwynwyd deiliadaeth cronfa. Yn ei gyfnodau cynnar, nid oedd deiliadaeth cronfa ar gael mewn gwirionedd i feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach, ac nid oedd y lwfansau ychwanegol a oedd yn cael eu talu am wasanaethau fel rheoli afiechydon cronig yn hawdd i’w cyflawni gan feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain, na fyddent fel arfer wedi meddu ar yr isadeiledd angenrheidiol na’r lefelau staffio.
Dywedodd Mr William Greenwood wrth yr Ymchwiliad pan oedd, ym 1980, yn gweithio fel Gweinyddydd Cynorthwyol ar Bwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside (FPC), byddai rhwng 20 a 40 o geisiadau am swydd mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun, lle mae tri neu bedwar cais yn unig sydd erbyn hyn. Awgrymodd Dr Taylor bod ceisiadau’n ‘rhyfeddol o isel’. Mae nifer o resymau pam yr ymddengys fod y symudiad i ffwrdd o feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn parhau. Yn gyntaf, mae meddygon teulu ifainc uchelgeisiol yn fwyaf tebygol o hyfforddi mewn meddygfa grŵp (dim ond 2% o hyfforddiant meddygon teulu sy’n cael ei roi mewn meddygfeydd bach neu feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain) ac maent felly’n debygol o chwilio am swydd yn y math o feddygfa y maent yn gyfarwydd â hi. Awgrymwyd hefyd bod meddygon teulu’n cael y trefniadau ymarferol mewn meddygfa grŵp yn fwy boddhaol. Gallant ganfod eu bod yn fwy hyblyg ac yn llai ymdrechgar yn bersonol. Yn olaf, dechreuodd llawer o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain ymarfer yn y 1960au a’r 1970au ac maent wedi cyrraedd oed ymddeol neu yn nesau at oed ymddeol.
Ymddengys i mi hefyd, o’r ymatebion i holiadur yr Ymchwiliad, bod PCTau yn gyffredinol yn anghymell parhau â’r drefn meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Pan fydd meddyg teulu ar ei ben/phen ei hun yn ymddeol neu’n rhoi’r gorau i ymarfer, bydd y PCT yn annog uno â meddygfa arall. Dywedir mai’r cyfiawnhad dros yr agwedd hon tuag at feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yw bod gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp yn rhoi gwell gofal i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, gall fod bod ystyriaethau pragmatig yn chwarae rhan. Yn gyntaf, rhaid ei bod yn haws i PCTau reoli nifer llai o feddygfeydd, hyd yn oed os yw’r nifer o feddygon yr un fath at ei gilydd efallai. Mewn tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, awgrymodd yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, y gall meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain fod yn amhoblogaidd gyda PCTau oherwydd eu bod yn anoddach i’w rheoli a bod eu costau’n uwch. Soniodd Dr Taylor am y gost sylweddol o roi meddyg teulu newydd ar ei ben/phen ei hun mewn meddygfa sefydledig ar ei phen ei hun. Gall fod yn wir nad yw’r ymarferydd sy’n gadael wedi cynnal yr adeilad a’r offer yn ddigonol, ac mae’n bosibl y byddai’n rhaid gwario symiau sylweddol i’w ‘hadnewyddu’. Caiff y symiau hyn eu hosgoi pan fydd y rhestr cleifion yn cael ei hymgorffori i restr meddygfa grŵp sydd eisoes yn bodoli, felly hefyd costau hysbysebu a phenodi meddyg teulu newydd ar ei ben/phen ei hun, a fyddai fel arall yn syrthio ar y PCT. Bydd y gwariant ar adeilad ac offer yn uwch fyth lle mae meddygfa newydd ar ei phen ei hun yn cael ei ffurfio (fel yn achos Shipman ym 1992).
Mae rheswm ychwanegol erbyn hyn pam mae’r dirywiad yn nifer yr ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn debygol o barhau. Dan yr hen Gontract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC), roedd gan bob meddyg teulu mewn meddygfa grŵp ei restr/rhestr cleifion ei hun, er ei fod/bod o bosibl yn rhannu gofal y cleifion hynny â’i bartneriaid/phartneriaid. Os oedd y feddygfa yn ymrannu, gallai meddyg teulu fynd â’i restr/rhestr cleifion i ffurfio meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun. Dan y Contract GMS newydd, a ddaeth i rym ym mis Ebrill 2004, mae cleifion wedi’u cofrestru gyda’r feddygfa deulu ac nid â meddyg teulu unigol. Yn y dyfodol, os yw meddyg teulu’n gadael partneriaeth, ni fydd yn gallu mynd â’i gleifion/chleifion i ffurfio meddygfa newydd.
Am bob un o’r rhesymau hyn, ymddengys y bydd y nifer o feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain yn parhau i ddirywio. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys yn debygol i mi y bydd angen am rai o hyd.
Wylie AM et al (1999) ‘Single-handed practices - their contribution to an undergraduate teaching network in the first year of the new curriculum’, Medical Education, Cyfrol 33: tt 531-536.
Lunt N et al (1997) ‘Staying single in the 1990s: single-handed practitioners in the new National Health Service’, Social Science & Medicine, Cyfrol 45(3): tt 341-349.

---  ---
Fel y disgrifiais yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf, ymunodd Shipman â Chanolfan Feddygol Abraham Ormerod yn Todmorden yn gynnar ym 1974. Roedd rhwng 9000 a 12,000 o gleifion wedi cofrestru gyda’r feddygfa, a oedd yn cynnwys pum partner, gan gynnwys Shipman. Roedd gan bob partner ei restr/rhestr cleifion ei hun. Mae’n amlwg erbyn hyn i ba raddau yr etifeddodd Shipman restr ei ragflaenydd, a oedd newydd ymddeol o ymarfer. Ymddengys y disgwylid i Shipman adeiladu ei restr ei hun. Roedd y partneriaid, felly, yn feddygon ar eu pennau’u hunain o fewn y diffiniad a grybwyllir uchod er bod eu cleifion fwy na thebyg yn ystyried y feddygfa fel uned unigol.
Yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf, canfûm fod Shipman, tra’r oedd yn Todmorden, wedi lladd un claf, Mrs Eva Lyons, yn anghyfreithlon. Roedd yn glaf ar ei restr ef fwy na thebyg. Roedd yn dioddef o salwch terfynol ac ymwelai Shipman â hi’n aml yn y cyfnod yn arwain at ei marwolaeth. Bu farw yn hwyr un noson wedi i Shipman alw i’w gweld. Roedd mewn poen eithaf difrifol a rhoddodd Shipman chwistrelliad o gyffur iddi, a arweiniodd at ei marwolaeth cyn pen ychydig funudau. Roedd ei marwolaeth yn cael ei disgwyl, a, hyd yn oed pe bai wedi cofrestru gyda meddyg arall, mae’n annhebygol y byddai’r meddyg hwnnw wedi gweld unrhyw achos i bryderu. Canfûm fod sail resymol dros amau ei fod wedi lladd chwech arall, pob un ohonynt yn gleifion iddo ef fwy na thebyg. Canfûm hefyd yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf bod achlysur ym mis Awst 1974 pan wnaeth Shipman mae’n debyg chwistrellu Mrs (Athro erbyn hyn) Elaine Oswald, claf 25 oed, gyda chyffur opiad, gan bery iddi ddioddef ataliad anadliadol. Nid wyf yn teimlo y gallaf ddod i unrhyw gasgliad pendant ynghylch ei gymhelliad. Fodd bynnag, roeddwn o’r farn ei bod yn annhebygol iawn bod ganddo unrhyw fwriad i’w lladd nac achosi niwed difrifol iddi. Roedd hithau’n un o’i gleifion hefyd.
Tra’r oedd yn Todmorden, fe wnaeth Shipman hefyd ddiystyru’r gofynion cyfreithiol a oedd yn rheoli cadw cofrestr cyffuriau rheoledig y feddygfa, yr oedd yntau’n gyfrifol amdani. Casglodd feintiau mawr o bethidin at ei ddefnydd ei hun. Felly, yn Todmorden, ni chafodd Shipman ei atal na’u ganfod gan ‘oruchwyliaeth y naill i’r llall’ fel yr oedd yn bodoli lle’r oedd y meddygon yn gweithio gyda’i gilydd yn yr un lle, gan rannu gwasanaethau staff. Efallai ei bod yn ddadlennol mai aelod o staff yn y fferyllfa leol a ‘ganodd y gloch’ yn y pen draw i bartneriaid Shipman am ei arfer o gaffael meintiau gormodol o bethidin. Gallai’r llwybrau gweithredu a oedd ar gael iddi fod wedi bod yn llai amlwg os mai Shipman oedd yr unig feddyg yn gweithio yn y feddygfa.
Meddygfa Donneybrook
Ym mis Hydref 1977, ymunodd Shipman â meddygfa Donneybrook, Hyde, lle’r oedd saith o feddygon. Roedd gan bump o’r saith eu rhestr cleifion eu hunain ac roedd dau yn rhannu rhestr. Etifeddodd Shipman restr Dr John Bennett. Roedd y pum meddyg wedi trefnu’u hunain i ddau grŵp er mwyn cyflenwi yn ystod eu hanner diwrnodau i ffwrdd. Am oddeutu’r tair blynedd gyntaf, fe fu Shipman a Dr Geoffrey Roberts yn cyflenwi am hanner diwrnodau dros ei gilydd. Wedi i Dr Roberts adael y feddygfa, gwnaeth Shipman yr un trefniadau dwyochrog, gyda Dr Wojciech Kucharczyk yn gyntaf ac yna â Dr Jeffery Moysey. Hefyd, byddai meddyg yn gyfrifol am yr holl gleifion a oedd wedi cofrestru gyda’r feddygfa pan oedd ar ddyletswydd gyda’r nos, ar benwythnosau neu dros wyliau banc. Y system oedd bod pob un o aelodau’r feddygfa yn darparu gwasanaeth allan o oriau ar rota. Pan oedd ar ddyletswydd gyda’r nos, roedd meddyg yn gyfrifol am gyflenwi o 5.30pm neu 6pm hyd at ryw 11pm, ac wedi hynny byddai galwadau ffôn yn cael eu hailgyfeirio i’r gwasanaeth dirprwyo a oedd yn cael ei ddefnyddio gan y feddygfa. Byddai’r gwasanaeth dirprwyo wedyn yn ymateb i’r holl alwadau a oedd yn cael eu gwneud hyd at 8 neu 8.30 y bore canlynol. Roedd y taliadau a oedd yn cael codi gan y gwasanaeth dirprwyo am ddelio â galwadau a oedd yn cael eu derbyn ganddyn o 11pm ymlaen yn cael eu rhannu rhwng pob un o’r partneriaid yn y feddygfa. Cyn 11pm, roedd galwadau ffôn i’r feddygfa yn cael eu trosglwyddo i gartref y meddyg ar ddyletswydd. Gallai’r meddyg hynny ddewis i gael galwadau wedi’u hailgyfeirio i’r gwasanaeth dirprwyo yn gynharach nag 11pm, ond, os oedd yn dewis gwneud hynny, byddai’n gyfrifol yn ariannol am daliadau’r gwasanaeth dirprwyo am ymateb i’r galwadau hynny.
Roedd y trefniadau ariannol a gweinyddol cyffredinol yn parhau’n drefniadau partneriaeth yn eu hanfod hyd at 1 Ionawr 1992, ac o’r amser hwnnw, wedi iddo gyhoeddi’i fwriad i symud, cynhaliodd Shipman feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun yn gyfan gwbl ar wahân o fewn yr adeilad a oedd yn cael ei rannu. Pan gyhoeddodd ei fwriad i symud ym 1991, credai un o’i bartneriaid ei fod yn symud i feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun oherwydd ei ymagwedd ‘unigolyddol’ tuag at ei waith. Credai hefyd fod Shipman eisiau bod yn rhydd i ymarfer heb unrhyw ymyrraeth gan eraill; awgrymwyd yr arferai ddangos arwyddion o biwisrwydd pan oedd cydweithwyr neu staff yn anghytuno ag ef. Gweithiai Dr Graham Bennett mewn meddygfa gyfagos a llofnododd Ffurflenni C amlosgi ar nifer o achlysurol pan oedd Shipman wedi ardystio’r achos marwolaeth ac wedi llenwi Ffurflen B amlosgi. Dywedodd ei fod o’r farn ei bod yn anochel, o gofio ei gymeriad, y byddai Shipman yn troi i ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun lle byddai ganddo’i ‘ymerodraeth fach ei hun’ a lle na fyddai neb yn goruchwylio.
Yn ystod ei flynyddoedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook, lladdodd Shipman 71 o gleifion a chanfûm fod sail resymol dros amau iddo ladd 30 yn rhagor. Mae’n debygol bod pob un ohonynt ar ei restr cleifion. Ni wnaeth ei bartneriaid amau ar unrhyw adeg beth oedd yn ei wneud.
Meddygfa Market Street
Ym mis Awst 1992, symudodd Shipman gyda rhai o’r staff o feddygfa Donneybrook i feddygfa newydd yn 21 Market Streeet, Hyde. Er dicter ac anfantais ariannol ei gyn bartneriaid, aeth â’i restr cleifion gydag ef. Roedd y rhestr honno i dyfu mor fawr bod Shipman, erbyn diwedd 1997, yn cychwyn y broses ar gyfer recriwtio partner. Rhwng 1992 a 1998, roedd gan Shipman enw da iawn fel meddyg astud a gofalgar. Yn y chwe blynedd cyn ei arestio, lladdodd 143 o gleifion ac mae sail resymol dros amau iddo ladd wyth yn rhagor.
Mae’n amlwg, felly, fod Shipman, i bob pwrpas, yn ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun gydol ei yrfa broffesiynol fel meddyg teulu. Er bod o bosibl rhywfaint o ymwybyddiaeth y naill i’r llall ym meddygfa Donneybrook, o’r hyn yr oedd meddygon eraill yn y feddygfa yn ei wneud, prin y byddai hyn yn ymestyn i wybodaeth am hanes meddygol neu amgylchiadau cleifion meddyg arall. Felly nid yw’n syndod na wnaeth y meddygon eraill ym meddygfa Donneybrook sylwi ar unrhyw beth anarferol am farwolaethau cleifion Shipman. Efallai bod rhywfaint o sail i’r pryder y gallai Shipman fod wedi osgoi cael ei ganfod oherwydd ei fod yn ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn ystyried pa un a fyddai’r oruchwyliaeth y naill i’r llall y gellid ei disgwyl mewn meddygfa grŵp, gyda rhestrau cleifion yn cael eu rhannu, wedi cael unrhyw effaith sylweddol ar lwybr ymddygiad Shipman.

---  ---
Nid yw’r pryderon am feddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’n hunain yn rhai diweddar. Yng nghanol y 1990au, roedd datganiadau yn y wasg feddygol yn dyfynnu cynrychiolwyr o Gymdeithas Genedlaethol yr Awdurdodau a’r Ymddiriedolaethau Iechyd, a oedd yn dweud bod dyddiau’r meddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun ar ben. Ni ellid disgwyl i feddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain i ddarparu’r math o wasanaethau a oedd yn ofynnol ganddynt, o gofio’r baich ar ofal sylfaenol a’r angen i ddatblygu timau ymarfer yn cynnig ystod o arbenigedd proffesiynol a chyfleusterau.
Ar adegau, mae polisi’r Llywodraeth i weld o blaid symud i ffwrdd oddi wrth feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, ar y rhagdybiaeth y byddai hyn yn arwain at safonau gwell o ran gofal cleifion trwy leihau’r ‘unigedd clinigol’ y dywedir yw profiad meddygon sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Un o’r cynigion a gynhwyswyd yn ‘The NHS Plan, A Plan for investment, A plan for reform’ (Cynllun y GIG), a gyflwynwyd i’r Senedd ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, oedd bod angen trefniadau contractiol arbennig ar gyfer meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Yn ôl paragraffau 8.10 ac 8.11:
‘It is particularly important to be able to confirm that single-handed practices are offering high standards, because although most single-handed GPs work hard and are committed to their patients, they tend to operate in relative clinical isolation. They do not have the ready support from colleagues enjoyed by GPs in larger practices. The current “red book” contract is a particluarly poor mechanism for protecting quality standards in these practices.
Yna, ar 3 Gorffennaf 2002, dywedodd y Prif Weinidog, y Gwir Anrhydeddus Tony Blair AS, yn Nhŷ’r Cyffredin:
‘Bu symudiad dros amser i ffwrdd oddi wrth feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain er mwyn gwella ansawdd gofal i bobl. Seiliwyd hynny ar lawer iawn o dystiolaeth dros gyfnod hir.’
Parodd y cyhoeddiad hwn anesmwythyd yn y proffesiwn meddygol, ac ni dderbyniodd bod tystiolaeth felly’n bodoli. O fewn amser byr, bu rhywfaint o ‘feddalu’ ar y llinell bolisi. Ar 17 Hydref 2002, dywedwyd wrth y cyhoeddiad ‘Doctor’ gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd ar y pryd, y Gwir Anrhydeddus Alan Milburn AS, bod y dyfodol i feddygfeydd bach yn un ‘cadarnhaol’ ac y byddai hyn yn cael ei gydnabod yn y Contract GMC newydd. Nid yw’r Contract GMS newydd yn pennu unrhyw gyfyngiadau neu ofynion arbennig ar feddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Mae’n gadael i feddygfeydd unigol, gan gynnwys meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain, i benderfynu sut orau i gynllunio’u trefniadau er mwyn bodloni anghenion lleol. Mae’n mynd ati i wobrwyo ansawdd gofal uchel trwy dalu meddygon teulu’n unol â’u perfformiad, sy’n cael ei fesur yn erbyn nifer o farcwyr safon. Er bod SPA yn croesawu’r ffocws ar ansawdd gofal, mae siom nad oes unrhyw wobr benodol am barhad gofal.
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ionawr 2004, dywedwyd bod canfyddiad o hyd mewn rhai mannau bod anogaeth yn erbyn meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Yn wir, cefais yr argraff hon fy hun o dystiolaeth rhai swyddogion PCT. Mewn ymateb, dywedwyd yn glir gan y Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol dros Loegr, yr Athro Aidan Halligan, nad oedd yr Adran Iechyd yn annog PCTau yn weithredol i berswadio meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain i symud i feddygfeydd â nifer o feddygon. Mewn tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, datganodd yr Adran Iechyd mai’r polisi nawr yw bod y dyfodol i feddygfa ar ei phen ei hun yn
‘ddiogel’
. Bydd meddygfeydd bach yn cael eu hannog i gydweithredu â’i gilydd er mwyn sicrhau darparu ystod llawn o wasanaethau i gleifion. Bydd gwell cefnogaeth gan y PCT, er enghraifft trwy ddarparu nyrsys meddygfeydd a staff profiadol mewn meddygfeydd, yn helpu gwella ansawdd y gwasanaeth yn cael ei gynnig gan y meddygfeydd hynny. Dylwn ychwanegu bod pwerau rheoli rhestr gan PCTau erbyn hyn sy’n rhoi mwy o allu iddynt ddelio â phob meddyg teulu problemus, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain. Yn fyr, mae meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yma i aros ac ni chaniateir i hynny fod yn berthynas tlawd gofal sylfaenol.

---  ---
Ymddengys mai canfyddiad cyffredinol y cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn meddygol yw bod meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn boblogaidd ymhlith cleifion gan fod hynny’n rhoi parhad mewn gofal meddygol personol. Y canfyddiad cyffredinol yn y proffesiwn meddygol yw nad yw meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn rhoi gofal o ansawdd gystal ag a ddarperir gan feddygfeydd grŵp.
Mesuriadau Gwrthrychol o Berfformiad Clinigol
Mae adolygu’r llenyddiaeth dros y degawd diwethaf yn awgrymu nad oes tystiolaeth dda bod perfformiad clinigol meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn israddol i berfformiad eu cydweithwyr mewn meddygfeydd grŵp. Ymddengys na all un math unigol o ymarfer hawlio monopoli dros ansawdd gofal uchel
ac nad os unrhyw gysylltiad rhwng maint meddygfa ac ansawdd gofal
. Cydnabyddir bod cryfderau a gwendidau gwahanol gan feddygfeydd o feintiau gwahanol. Yn yr achosion hynny lle byddai’n ymddangos bod y data’n awgrymu bod meddygfeydd grŵp yn darparu gofal gwell, mae’r anghyfartalwch yn diflannu pan wneir addasiadau ar gyfer oed, rhyw ac amddifadedd cymdeithasol cleifion. Beth bynnag, gellid disgwyl y byddai ymchwil yn awgrymu bod meddygfeydd grŵp yn darparu safon well o ofal na meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain, oherwydd bod y dangosyddion perfformiad a dangosyddion eraill a ddefnyddir i asesu meddygfeydd wedi’u seilio i raddau helaeth ar niferoedd y cleifion sy’n cael ffurfiau penodol ar driniaeth (fel brechu, cytoleg serfigol neu reolaeth gyson ar afiechyd cronig), ac nid ydynt yn adlewyrchu manteision llai mesuradwy meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain, fel y rheiny a gysylltir â pharhad gofal.
Maint Meddygfeydd
Mae tystiolaeth tystion yn gyffredinol yn cefnogi’r farn nad oes unrhyw gysylltiad rhwng maint meddygfa ac ansawdd gofal. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd yr Athro Martin Roland, Cyfarwyddwr, Canolfan Genedlaethol Ymchwil a Datblygiad Gofal Sylfaenol, Athro Meddygaeth Deuluol (Prifysgol Manceinion) a Phennaeth mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol, Canolfan Iechyd Rusholme, Manceinion, bod meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn cael eu cynrychioli ymhlith y rheiny sy’n darparu safonau gofal uchel iawn yn ogystal ag ymhlith y rheiny ar ben arall y sbectrwm. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Syr Donald Irvine, Llywydd y GMC rhwng 1995 a 2002:
‘... mae gan rai SHPau
(meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain)
y trefniadau gorau ar gyfer rheolaeth glinigol y gallai rhywun ddymuno’u gweld. Nid yw’r rhagdybiaeth na ellir cyfystyru bychander neu ymarfer yn unigol ag ansawdd yn wir o gwbl.’
Dywedwyd wrth un o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr John Grenville, yn cynrychioli’r Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig, bod rhai meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn ‘anhygoel o dda’, gyda safonau uchel iawn o reolaeth glinigol.
Rheoli Afiechyd Cronig
Sonnir yn aml am reolath afiechyd cronig fel maes mewn meddygaeth deuluol lle mae’r model meddygfa grŵp yn well yn gynhenid i’r model meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain. Heddiw, disgwylir y bydd afiechydon cronig, fel diabetes, afiechyd y galon a phwysedd gwaed uchel yn cael eu rheoli fel rhan o ofal sylfaenol, gyda chyfeiriad achlysurol i’r ysbyty yn unig. Y disgwyliad yw y bydd gan feddygfa grŵp feddyg teulu â diddordeb arbennig yn y maes perthnasol ac y bydd ef/hi yn cynnal clinigau, ar y cyd yn aml â nyrs (arbenigol) meddygfa. Yn ôl Mr Mike Newton, Pennaeth Rheoli Perfformiad, Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol De Swydd Efrog (SHA), mae sefydlu clinig yn rhoi cryn ofynion ar feddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun, ac efallai nad oes ganddo/ganddi unrhyw ddiddordeb arbennig mewn rheoli’r afiechyd perthnasol, neu efallai bod nyrs y feddygfa’n gweithio’n rhan-amser. Gellid unioni’r broblem, pe tybid yn ddymunol, drwy fod y meddyg sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun yn cyfeirio cleifion ag afiechyd cronig i glinig yn cael ei gynnal gan feddygfa gyfagos.
Dywedodd Dr Taylor nad yw trin cleifion mewn clinigau sy’n cael eu cynnal ar gyfer monitro cyflyrau penodol yn cydweddu’n esmwyth ag ethos ‘holistaidd’ y feddygfa fach. Disgrifiodd hyn fel ‘darparu gofal i gleifion sydd ag afiechydon, yn hytrach na gofal am yr afiechydon sydd gan bobl’. Rhoddodd enghraifft hefyd o’r math o achos lle gallai rheoli afiechyd cronig fod yn well mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun. Dywedodd, wrth drin claf ag arthritis gwynegol, mae’n ddefnyddiol iawn i’r meddyg fod yn gyfarwydd â dynameg y teulu. Os ydyw, yna mae’n haws trin y claf mewn modd sy’n ei alluogi/galluogi i ymdopi â’r sefyllfa, yn hytrach na thrin symptomau ei afiechyd/hafiechyd yn unig. Mae meddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun yn llai tebygol hefyd o wneud cyfeiriad diangen i’r ysbyty, gan y bydd ef/hi yn hyderus yn ei wybodaeth/gwybodaeth y bydd dynameg y teulu’n galluogi’r claf gael triniaeth yn y cartref. Rwy’n rhagweld y byddai’r rhai sy’n cynnig y system clinig yn dweud y byddai’r meddyg sy’n cynnal y clinig yn datblygu’r wybodaeth berthnasol mewn cyfnod byr o ddechrau gweld y claf.
Fe wnaeth tystion eraill gefnogi barnau Dr Taylor am ofal holistaidd. Dywedodd Dr Whyte bod y math o feddygfa sy’n cael ei heirioli gan Dr Taylor yn cael ei hystyried yn eang fel system ddymunol iawn, os nad yn well na dim. Gwneir y pwynt hefyd na ddylid mynd ag arbenigedd i feddygon teulu yn rhy bell. Mewn gofal sylfaenol, lle mae’n rhaid i’r meddyg teulu allu delio ag ystod eang o gyflyrau a chyflwyniadau, a lle mae i bob pwrpas yn geidwad porth i’r system gofal eilaidd, rhaid cynnal sgiliau’r ymarferydd cyffredinol. Mae’n amlwg bod y ddwy ochr yn y ddadl hon yn gallu gwneud pwyntiau dilys i gefnogi’u haeriadau priodol.
Dewis Cleifion a Pharhad Gofal
Mae cryn gorff o dystiolaeth i awgrymu bod cleifion yn hoffi meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain neu feddygfeydd bach. Mewn astudiaeth ym 1995
, adroddwyd bod yn well gan gleifion feddygfeydd llai, meddygfeydd â systemau rhestrau personol a meddygfeydd nad oeddent yn cynnig hyfforddiant. Cadarnhawyd hyn gan astudiaeth fwy diweddar; ystyriwyd bod meddygfeydd llai yn fwy hygyrch a’u bod yn cyflawni lefelau uwch o fodlonrwydd ymhlith cleifion
. Mae tystiolaeth arall sy’n awgrymu bod parhad gofal yn arwain at lefelau uchel o fodlonrwydd ymhlith cleifion. Mae Adroddiad y Comisiwn Archwilio yn 2000, o’r enw ‘A focus on general practices in England’, yn cadarnhau bod parhad gofal yn tueddu bod yn well mewn meddygfeydd bach a bod cleifion gwerthfawrogi hynny. Mae ymatebion y PCT i holiadur yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu hefyd bod cleifion yn hoff o feddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Yn ôl Mr Newton, maent yn arbennig o boblogaidd ymhlith yr henoed.
Roedd tystiolaeth anecdotaidd gan Mr Newton bod meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn tueddu denu nifer mwy o gwynion na’u cydweithwyr. Nid oedd yr SPA, y GMC nag unrhyw un o’r sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol yn gallu darparu tystiolaeth ystadegol ar y pwynt. Ym 1996, cyhoeddodd yr Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol (MDU) bamffled ar gwynion a oedd yn awgrymu bod meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yn denu cyfran gymharol lai o gwynion na’u cydweithwyr mewn meddygfeydd grŵp. Fodd bynnag, mae’r MDU wedi esbonio nad oedd y gwaith y seiliwyd yr awgrym hwnnw arno yn ystadegol ddilys gan ei fod yn ystyried cwynion yn erbyn y meddygon teulu hynny’n unig y gwyddai’r MDU eu bod yn ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain (sef nad y cyfan ohonynt).
Mae’n hunanamlwg bron ei bod yn haws i gyflawni parhad gofal mewn meddygfa lle priodolir meddyg penodol i bob claf. Po leiaf yw’r feddygfa, lleia’n y byd y nifer o feddygon sy’n debygol o weld y claf. Disgrifir parhad gofal gan Dr Taylor fel ‘cydran fesuradwy bwysig o gyfaniaeth’. Awgrymodd, yn ôl tystiolaeth o astudiaethau yn yr UDA, bod parhad gofal yn cael ei gysylltu â nifer llai o gyfeiriadau i ysbytai. Gall hynny fod yn arwydd da ac efallai ddim.
Yn ôl Dr Taylor, mae parhad gofal yn arwain at lefelau uwch o ymddiriedaeth a lefelau is o bryder ymhlith cleifion. Mae’r ffactorau hyn yn galluogi’r claf, sy’n gweld wyneb yn gyson y gall ymddiried ynddo, i gymryd diddordeb gweithredol a gwybodus yn ei driniaeth/thriniaeth ei hun. Gallaf weld sut y gall hyn arwain at ofal gwell i gleifion, cyhyd â bod yr ymddiriedaeth yn y meddyg heb ei roi ar gam. Rwy’n derbyn y gall parhad gofal, a’i fod yn aml yn gwneud, gynnig buddion go iawn yn nhermau ansawdd gofal, ac mae hefyd yn arwain at lefelau uchel o fodlonrwydd ymhlith cleifion.
Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi bod rhai anfanteision gwirioneddol yn deillio o berthynas barhaus un-i-un rhwng meddyg a chlaf. Yn gyntaf, gall y claf ddod i roi ymddiriedaeth a hyder diwarant yn y meddyg. Mae Shipman yn dangos y pwynt. Roedd ganddo berthynas un-i-un â’i gleifion. Cynigiai lefel uchel o barhad gofal iddynt. Nid oedd fyth unrhyw anhawster o ran cael apwyntiad i’w weld neu o ran trefnu ymweliad cartref. Dim ond ar achlysuron prin iawn y byddai meddyg locwm yn cymryd ei le. Roedd yn cael ei edmygu a’i barchu’n fawr - ei garu hyd yn oed - gan ei gleifion. O ganlyniad, roedd yn mwynhau ymddiriedaeth lwyr llawer o’i gleifion (a’u teuluoedd), ac felly roedd y trothwy lle gallai cleifion neu deuluoedd fod wedi amau ei weithredoedd neu’i gyngor (a oedd eisoes yn uchel yn y berthynas meddyg/claf) hyd yn oed yn uwch nag arfer. Roedd yn gallu camddefnyddio ymddiriedaeth ar raddfa aruthrol heb godi unrhyw amheuaeth. Wrth gwrs, rwy’n derbyn bod Shipman yn achos anghyffredin iawn, ond gall gor-hyder mewn meddyg arwain yn hawdd at anallu i amau ei weithredoedd/gweithredoedd a’i farn/barn pan ddylent gael eu hamau mewn gwirionedd.
Yn ail, mae math hollol wahanol o broblem y gellir ei chysylltu â pharhad gofal. Y perygl o fethu gweld afiechyd sy’n cychwyn yn llechwraidd yw hon, lle mae’r meddyg yn gweld y claf yn gyson ac yn methu sylwi ar neu roi sylw i arwyddion sy’n datblygu’n raddol. Yn drydydd, nid oes gan gleifion sy’n gweld yr un meddyg dro ar ôl tro a neb arall, unrhyw brofiad i gymharu’u hymgynghoriadau yn eu herbyn. Dangosir y broblem hon gan brofiadau cleifion Clifford Ayling, nad oeddent yn gwybod mewn llawer o achosion pa un a oedd yr archwiliadau manwl yr oeddent yn eu cael yn ‘arferol’. Roedd Ayling yn feddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun a gafodd ei ddyfarnu’n euog ym mis Rhagfyr 2000 o 12 achos o ymosod yn anweddus, yn ymwneud â deg o gleifion a oedd yn ferched, a chafodd ei ddedfrydu i bedair blynedd o garchar. Yn bedwerydd, nid oes gan gleifion unrhyw ‘ffon fesur’ ar gyfer mesur cymhwysedd eu meddyg teulu, os nad ydynt yn gweld sut mae eu hiechyd a’u salwch yn cael eu rheoli gan feddygon eraill.
Unigedd
Wrth drafod manteision ac anfanteision meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, awgrymodd llawer o dystion a chyfranwyr i seminarau’r Ymchwiliad bod ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn tueddu bod yn ‘ynysedig’. Mae’r term hwn yn golygu diffyg cysylltiad â chymheiriaid a methiant i gadw’n gyson ag arfer cyfredol. Yn ôl Dr Taylor, nid oes tystiolaeth i awgrymu bod ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn fwy ynysedig na’u cydweithwyr. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr William Reith, prif feddyg teulu yn Aberdeen a chyn Gadeirydd Cyngor yr Alban o’r RCGP, bod llawer o feddygon sy’n gweithio mewn meddygfeydd mwy sydd wedi’u hynysu’n broffesiynol ac yn teimlo na allant drafod materion gyda chydweithwyr. Rwy’n derbyn yr hyn y mae’r ddau yn ei ddweud, ond byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai synnwyr cyffredin yn dangos bod y peryglon ynysu yn fwy mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun nag mewn meddygfa grŵp. At hynny, os yw meddyg mewn meddygfa grŵp yn mynd yn ‘ynysedig’ yn y modd hwn, mae cydweithwyr yn fwy tebygol o sylwi ar y broblem.
Roedd Dr Roger Freedman, cynghorwr meddygol i Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside o fis Tachwedd 1991 hyd fis Awst 1993, yn gysylltiedig yn ddiweddarach â gwaith Panel Perfformiad Manceinion, a sefydlwyd ar ddiwedd y 1990au i asesu, ac os oedd yn briodol, unioni perfformiad meddygon yr oedd pryder wedi’i fynegi yn eu cylch. Yn ystod dwy flynedd gyntaf ei weithrediad, ystyriodd y Panel berfformiad 14 o brif feddygon teulu ac un meddyg locwm. Roedd tri o’r prif feddygon teulu’n feddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, ac nid oedd yr un ohonynt mewn partneriaeth o fwy na thri meddyg. Cadarnhaodd Dr Freedman bod rhai meddygon teulu gwych sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, ond teimlai bod problemau’n codi lle mae’r meddygon llai da yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain; gall ddiffyg cysylltiad â chymheiriaid olygu nad ydynt yn ymwybodol bod eu safonau clinigol a rheoli yn diffygio. Diffyg mewnwelediad, awgrymodd, yw’r broblem.
Nodaf na wnaeth Shipman ddangos unrhyw arwydd o fod yn ynysedig yn broffesiynol. Daeth yn gysylltiedig â sefydliadau y tu allan i’r feddygfa. Tra’r oedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook, roedd yn llawfeddyg ardal ar gyfer yr Ambiwlans Sant Ioan yn lleol, yn ysgrifennydd Pwyllgor Meddygol Lleol Tameside a Glossop ac yn aelod o FPC Tameside. Tra’n gweithio ym Market Street, mynychai ddigwyddiadau hyfforddi proffesiynol yn gyson, roedd yn weithgar mewn gwleidyddiaeth feddygol yn lleol ac yn aelod brwdfrydig, ac yn drysorydd yn ddiweddarach, o SPA West Pennine. Roedd yn hysbys hefyd fod Shipman yn awyddus i gyflwyno syniadau newydd i feddygfa Donneybrook. Roedd meddygfa Market Street yn cael ei hystyried gan y WPHA fel un arloesol a blaengar. Ym Market Street, cynhaliai Shipman a’i staff archwiliadau meddygol cyson, a gwnaeth hynny argraff ar Grŵp Archwilio Clinigol Gofal Sylfaenol WPHA (WPPCCAG). Gwnaethpwyd y sylw canlynol ym mis Ionawr 1998 yn dilyn ymweliad archwilio meddygfa gan aelod o’r WPPCCAG:
Mae’r sylw hwn yn dangos y modd yr oedd ei gyfranogaeth yn cael ei hystyried.
Ym Mhennod 12, disgrifiais y ffyrdd y mae PCTau yn ceisio cyflawni’u dyletswydd rheolaeth glinigol o feddygon teulu. Mae rhai o’r dulliau hyn yn golygu casglu a/neu archwilio data’n ymwneud ag arfer y meddyg. Gyda meddygfa grŵp, mae llawer o’r data a gesglir yn ymwneud â’r feddygfa fel cyfanrwydd, ac ni ellir ei briodoli i berfformiad unrhyw un meddyg unigol. Enghreifftiau yw data’n ymwneud â brechu a chytoleg serfigol. Mae rhai mathau o ddata, er enghraifft data rhagnodi, i fod i ymwneud â meddyg unigol, ond, oherwydd bod meddygon yn defnyddio padiau rhagnodion ei gilydd, mae’r data’n mynd yn ‘niwlog’ ac nid yw’n rhoi darlun eglur o arfer neu berfformiad meddyg unigol. Pan gyflwynir data gan feddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun, mae’n ymwneud â’r meddyg hwnnw’n unig ac mae’r darlun a ddarperir i’r PCT yn fwy eglur na hwnnw sydd ar gael ar gyfer meddygfa grŵp.
Mae rhywfaint o weithgareddau rheolaeth glinigol yn cael eu cyflawni o fewn meddygfeydd grŵp. Er enghraifft, mae’n arfer cyffredin i’r partneriaid mewn meddygfa grŵp i drafod data rhagnodi. Gall trafodaeth rhwng meddygon ddatgelu arfer afreolaidd gan un aelod o’r grŵp na fyddai monitro gan y PCT yn sylwi arno o bosibl. Gall ymarferydd unigol ddewis archwilio’i ddata/data rhagnodi ei hun; mae llawer o feddygon teulu’n ystyried ‘hunan-archwilio’ yn arfer da erbyn hyn. Fodd bynnag, os yw ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun yn dewis peidio archwilio’i ddata/data personol, nid oes neb i sicrhau bod hyn yn cael ei wneud. Os yw meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun yn dewis anwybyddu unrhyw broblemau y gall y data eu datgelu, nid oes unrhyw un i fynnu bod y problemau yn cael sylw.
Gall ffurfiau eraill ar reolaeth glinigol weithio’n effeithiol mewn grŵp yn unig. Enghraifft yw adolygiad neu archwiliad o ddigwyddiadau pwysig, sef proses lle bydd grŵp o feddygon a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill yn trafod y gofal a ddarparwyd ychydig cyn marwolaeth claf neu ryw ddigwyddiad arall - digwyddiad niweidiol fel arfer (ond nid bod tro). Yr amcan yw dadansoddi’r gofal sy’n cael ei ddarparu gyda golwg ar ddysgu gwersi naill ai o’r camgymeriadau a wnaed neu o’r llwyddiant a gyflawnwyd. Mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun, nid oes neb yn aml y gall y meddyg gael trafodaeth heriol ag ef/hi. Gall nyrs y feddygfa deimlo’n wir nad yw’n gallu beirniadu triniaeth y meddyg o glaf; mae angen barn cymheiriaid. Nid oedd adolygiadau digwyddiadau pwysig yn cael eu cynnal yn gyffredin pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer. Pe baent, a phe bai yntau wedi gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp, gallai’r ffurf hwn ar adolygu fod wedi bod yn effeithiol wrth ganfod lladdiadau anghyfreithlon Shipman. Pe bai gan Shipman gydweithwyr proffesiynol â hawl ganddynt archwilio’i adroddiad o farwolaeth claf a’r penderfyniadau rheoli a gymerwyd ganddo, credaf y byddai hynny wedi bod yn rhwystr go iawn iddo, a byddai gobaith llawer yn fwy o ganfod ei gamymddygiad pe bai wedi parhau.
Mae ffurfiau eraill ar archwilio yn fwy effeithiol mewn lleoliad grŵp nag o fewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain. Er ei bod wedi bod yn bolisi swyddogol y Llywodraeth am dros ddeng mlynedd i annog archwilio o fewn meddygaeth deuluol, a bod nawdd wedi’i ddarparu i wobrwyo hynny, mae gweithgarwch archwilio yn weithgarwch preifat i’r feddygfa y mae’n ymwneud â hi i bob pwrpas. Felly, byddai canlyniadau archwiliad o farwolaethau cleifion mewn cyfnod penodol yn aros yn wybodaeth gyfrinachol i’r feddygfa, hyd yn oed os oedd y canlyniadau hynny i ddatgelu diffygion difrifol mewn gofal. Ym 1998, honnodd Shipman iddo gynnal archwiliad o farwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd yn ei feddygfa yn nhri mis cyntaf y flwyddyn. Nid oedd wedi gwneud hynny o gwbl mewn gwirionedd. Yng nghyd-destun meddygfeydd grŵp, bydd y ffaith bod archwiliad yn cael ei gynnal yn hysbys i bob partner a bydd y canlyniadau ar gael i bob un ohonynt. Os ydynt yn peri pryder, mae llawer mwy o obaith y bydd camau’n cael eu cymryd i unioni’r broblem na phe bai’r broblem yn hysbys i’r meddyg sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun yn unig. Er nad yw archwiliadau felly’n cael eu cynnal yn eang o bosibl, mae tystiolaeth wedi’i chyhoeddi eu bod neu y gallant fod o werth.
Cyfrifoldeb ac Atebolrwydd Unigol
Awgrymodd Dr Taylor, bod llawer mwy o atebolrwydd a chyfrifoldeb am ofal cleifion mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun. Mae’r meddyg yn gyfrifol yn unigol am ofal pob claf, ac ni all drosglwyddo cyfrifoldeb i unrhyw un arall. Felly, yn ei farn ef, mae meddyg yn fwy tebygol o roi sylw i broblem gofal cleifion a’i datrys nag i eistedd yn ôl, gan obeithio neu ddisgwyl y bydd camau mwy pendant yn cael eu cymryd gan gydweithiwr rywbryd yn ddiweddarach. Gallaf weld grym y ddadl honno. Gallaf weld hefyd y modd y gall meddyg sy’n rhannu’r cyfrifoldeb am ofal claf â meddygon eraill fod yn amharod i argymell triniaeth na chychwynnwyd gan unrhyw un o’i gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr pan ddaeth y claf i’r feddygfa yn y gorffennol gyda’r un symptomau. Gall fod tueddiad naturiol ‘i gytuno’â barn y mwyafrif, hyd yn oed os nad yw’r llwybr hwnnw’n un cywir o bosibl.
Mae’r cyfrifoldeb unigol a ddisgrifiwyd gan Dr Taylor yn cynnwys hefyd yr anfantais na fydd triniaeth y meddyg fyth yn dod yn destun y math o drafodaeth anffurfiol ac adolygiad cymheiriaid sy’n digwydd yn ddyddiol mewn meddygfeydd lle mae gofal cleifion yn cael ei rannu.
Rheoli a Gweinyddu
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud mai un o’r rhesymau dros y niferoedd gostyngol o ymgeiswyr i swyddi ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yw bod ei bod yn well gan feddygon ifanc amgylchedd meddygfa grŵp. Awgrymodd yr Athro Baker bod arbedion maint a rhannu’r baich gwaith clinigol yn gwneud gweithio mewn meddygfa grŵp yn fwy deniadol i feddygon. Cododd ymatebwyr PCT i holiadur yr Ymchwiliad bryderon ynghylch isadeiledd gweithio, adeiladau a threfniadau recriwtio gwael mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Mae astudiaethau wedi dangos hefyd bod meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn tueddu bod yn llai datblygedig na meddygfeydd grŵp a gallant fod yn arafach i osod cyfleusterau modern. Ni fyddai hyn o reidrwydd yn golygu eu bod yn darparu safon gofal is. Fodd bynnag, dangosodd un astudiaeth bod meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn cael mwy o anawsterau na meddygfeydd grŵp wrth, er enghraifft, recriwtio a chadw nyrs meddygfa. System gyfrifiadur a rheolaeth gyffredinol oedd meysydd pryder eraill
. Roedd profiad personol Mr Newton yn cadarnhau bodolaeth y math hon o broblem mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain. Roedd ymatebion i arolwg PCTau yn awgrymu bod ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain yn wynebu mwy o anawsterau wrth ddarparu gwasanaeth allan o oriau, er y dylai hyn beidio â bod yn broblem ar ôl mis Ionawr 2005 pan fydd PCTau yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb am ddarparu gofal allan o oriau. Dywedodd Mr Newton bod rheoli meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain a cheisio cadw’n gyson â datblygiadau mewn triniaeth glinigol yn rhoi baich trwm ar feddygon teulu, yn enwedig wrth iddynt nesáu at oed ymddeol.
Cwynion
Ym Mhennod 7, disgrifiais y system o ddelio â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu sydd wedi bod ar waith er 1996. Soniais yn benodol am yr anawsterau yr oedd cleifion yn eu cael, sydd, ar hyn o bryd, yn gorfod codi’u cwyn yn uniongyrchol â’r feddygfa deulu dan sylw. Mae’r claf yn teimlo embaras a bydd yn aml yn penderfynu peidio â chwyno yn hytrach na wynebu’r meddyg neu staff y feddygfa. Gwaethygir y broblem os yw’r gŵyn yn ymwneud â meddyg sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun. Roedd adroddiad mis Medi 1999 gan y Prosiect Cyfraith Gyhoeddus, o’r enw ‘Cause for Complaint? An evaluation of the effectiveness of the NHS complaints procedure’, y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 7, yn sôn am ddymunoldeb cael ‘byffer’ rhwng y person sy’n cwyno a’r person sy’n destun cwyn. Nid yw’r byffer hwn yn bodoli mewn meddygfa ar ei phen ei hun, lle mae’r staff yn debygol o deimlo synnwyr cryf o deyrngarwch i’w cyflogwr. Mae’r angen i glaf allu mynd â chwyn at berson neu gorff nad yw’n gysylltiedig â’r feddygfa yn glir, yn fy marn i, ledled meddygaeth deuluol, ond mae’r angen honno gymaint yn fwy pan fydd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun.
Adrodd am Bryderon a Chwynion Staff
Rwyf wedi esbonio hefyd, ym Mhennod 9, ei bod yn anodd mewn unrhyw feddygfa deulu i aelod o staff godi pryder ynghylch ymddygiad, iechyd neu berfformiad meddyg teulu yn y feddygfa. Gall codi pryder difrifol yn wir olygu diwedd y berthynas i bob pwrpas. Caiff y problemau hynny eu dwysau mewn meddygfeydd bach neu feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Roland M et al (2001) ‘Identifying predictors of high quality care in English general practice: observational study’, BMJ, Cyfrol 323: t 784.
Majeed A et al (2003) ‘Association between practice size and quality of care of patients with ischaemic heart disease: cross sectional study’, BMJ, Cyfrol 326: t 371.
Baker R and Streatfield J (1995) ‘What type of general practice do patients prefer? Exploration of practice characteristics influencing patient satisfaction’, British Journal of General Practice, Cyfrol 45: t 654.
Leese B and Bosanquet N (1995) ‘Change in general practice and its effects on service provision in areas with different socio-economic characteristics’, BMJ, Cyfrol 311: tt 546-550.

---  ---
Bydd yn glir o’r uchod mai’r prif broblemau sy’n gysylltiedig â meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain yw diffyg adolygu gan gymheiriaid, risg unigedd clinigol a pherygl y meddyg yn camddefnyddio ymddiriedaeth lwyr ym mharhad y gofal. Byddaf nawr yn archwilio’r mecanweithiau y gellir eu defnyddio i liniaru’r problemau hyn.
Rheolaeth Glinigol ac Archwilio Clinigol
Yn ôl yr RCGP, gyda dyfodiad PCTau, mae problemau unigedd mewn meddygaeth deuluol yn cael eu lleihau. Mae PCTau yn sefydliadau llai, mwy lleol na’r awdurdodau iechyd a’u rhagflaenodd. Maent yn agosach at y meddygfeydd y mae ganddynt gyfrifoldeb amdanynt. Mae cysylltiad mwy â’r PCT wedi arwain at gyfarfodydd mwy mynych gyda chydweithwyr a mwy o gydweithredu ar lefel PCT. Mae’r graddau y mae hyn yn digwydd yn ddiau yn amrywio o le i le. Mae mecanweithiau ar waith i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain i gymryd rhan mewn rheolaeth ac arfarnu clinigol. Rwyf o’r farn y gallai arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu gael gwerth sylweddol be baent wir yn sicrhau cymhwysedd ac addasrwydd parhaus i ymarfer. Gall meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain gymryd rhan mewn cynlluniau cefnogi cymheiriaid hefyd. Esboniodd Dr Reith i’r Ymchwiliad y modd y gellir cynnal adolygiad o ddigwyddiadau pwysig yng nghyd-destun meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain.
Yn ôl Mr Michael Warner, cyn Gyfarwyddwr Prosiect, SHA Avon, Swydd Gaerloyw a Wiltshire, iddo ddod yn arfer safonol yn ystod diwedd y 1990au yn ei SHA i feddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain i rannu’u canlyniadau ac i drafod eu harchwiliadau gyda’i gilydd. Roedd hyn yn cael ei oruchwylio gan y Grŵp Cynghori Archwilio Meddygol.
Mae meddygfa Dr Taylor yn ceisio lleihau unrhyw berygl o ynysu trwy gysylltiad â dwy feddygfa fach arall yn yr ardal. Mae gan y tair meddygfa restrau cleifion ar wahân, ond rhannant rai aelodau o’r staff. Mae’r meddygon yn gweithredu rota ar gyfer gwaith brys a gwaith allan o oriau, ac mae ganddynt gronfa ddata ar y cyd o gofnodion cleifion er mwyn hwyluso gweithio’r rota. Hefyd, defnyddiant y cofnodion cyfrifiadur hyn sy’n cael eu rhannu at ddiben gwaith archwilio clinigol a dadansoddi rhagnodi ar y cyd. Dywedodd Dr Taylor bod mwy o feddygfeydd bach yn cydweithredu yn y modd hwn ers cyflwyno rheolaeth glinigol ac archwilio clinigol. Mae llawer o feddygfeydd bach neu feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn cau am hanner diwrnod bob wythnos i gynnal adolygiad o ddigwyddiadau pwysig.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad am un ‘Grŵp Meddygon Bach’ yr oedd ei aelodau’n cyfarfod i drafod eu meddygfeydd. Cefais yr argraff, er bod yr SHA yn ystyried eu menter fel cam cadarnhaol, bod eu meddygfeydd yn anghymesur iawn ac nad oedd y cyfarfodydd yn gwneud unrhyw gyfraniad manwl at reolaeth glinigol.
Cydnabu’r Athro Baker y potensial i fentrau lleol felly wella rheolaeth glinigol mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain. Credaf ei fod yn iawn, fodd bynnag, pan ddywedodd bod llwyddiant mentrau felly’n dibynnu ar rywun yn nodi lle’r oedd angen gweithredu felly a rhywun penderfynol i arwain grŵp o ymarferwyr ar hyd y llwybr iawn. Y rheiny sydd fwyaf tebygol o weld lle mae angen gweithredu yw meddygon teulu ar eu pennau’u hunain, ond y nhw efallai sydd â’r amser lleiaf i gychwyn camau gweithredu.
Ar hyn o bryd, nid yn unig y mae cysylltiad â gweithgareddau grŵp fel y disgrifiais yn wirfoddol, nid yw hyd yn oed ar gael ym mhob man. Hyd yn oed lle mae ar gael, nid yw cynnyrch cydweithredu - fel canlyniadau archwiliad ar y cyd - yn wiriadwy. Yn ôl yr RCGP, dylai pob meddyg fod yn atebol i’w cleifion yn y lle cyntaf, ac, yn ehangach, i’r GIG ac i’r cyhoedd. Rwy’n cytuno y dylent, ond y ffaith yw nad ydynt ar hyn o bryd. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n eithaf posibl i unrhyw feddyg teulu, yn enwedig y meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun efallai, i osgoi cymryd rhan mewn gweithgarwch ar y cyd a/neu i gamarwain ei gydweithwyr/chydweithwyr neu gymheiriaid. Gallaf ddychmygu yn wir sut y byddai Shipman wedi dethol nifer o ‘ddigwyddiadau pwysig’ ar gyfer eu hadolygu mewn modd a fyddai wedi’i ddangos yn y golau gorau posibl yn unig. Dan y rhan fwyaf o’r trefniadau cydweithredu y clywais amdanynt, ni fyddai unrhyw bosibilrwydd y byddai’n ofynnol iddo gynnig marwolaeth benodol ar gyfer adolygiad digwyddiad pwysig.
Yn Adroddiad yr ymchwiliad annibynnol i’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GIG â honiadau am ymddygiad Clifford Ayling, mynegwyd pryder bod meddygon teulu’n parhau i ymarfer mewn sefyllfaoedd ynysedig lle nad oes unrhyw fentora uniongyrchol, naill ai’n ffurfiol neu’n anffurfiol. Gan gydnabod y bydd wastad meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, roedd yn argymell yn benodol y dylai PCTau ddatblygu rhaglenni cefnogi ar gyfer meddygon teulu’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, i’w cytuno gyda phob meddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun a chyda’r SHA. Dylai rhaglenni felly dalu sylw arbennig i reoli risgiau ynysu sy’n gysylltiedig â meddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain. Dylai eu gweithredu gael ei fonitro gan yr SHA, a dylai fod yn rhan o adolygiad cyson y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (gelwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn) o’r PCT. Byddwn yn cytuno gyda’r cynnig hwn, gan ychwanegu’n unig y dylai’r rhaglenni ddarparu elfen wirioneddol o oruchwyliaeth yn naill i’r llall yn ogystal â chefnogaeth.
Dywedodd Mr Greenwood wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod PCTau mewn nifer o ardaloedd yn hyrwyddo rheolaeth well mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain drwy annog rhannu staff meddygfeydd, rheolwyr meddygfeydd a staff nyrsio. Yn y modd hwn, gall meddygfeydd bach elwa o ystod o arbenigedd a gwasanaethau, na fyddent fel arall yn gallu’u fforddio. Bydd rhai PCTau yn talu ‘lwfans locwm’ hefyd i alluogi meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain i gyflogi meddyg dirprwyo tra bydd yn mynychu digwyddiadau datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus. Gan gydnabod yr anawsterau rheoli a brofir yn aml gan feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain neu feddygfeydd bach, sefydlodd Awdurdod Iechyd Manceinion Gynllun Cynghori Meddygfeydd Bach. Mae hyn yn golygu bod dau reolwr meddygfa profiadol iawn yn gweithio gyda nifer o feddygfeydd bach i ddarparu cyngor a chefnogaeth yn y gwaith o drefnu meddygfa. Dywedodd Mr Newton wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai PCT, mewn ardaloedd sy’n cael eu hamddifadu’n gymdeithasol, lle gall fod angen cryn fewnbwn gan y PCT, ariannu penodiad meddyg cyflogedig a nyrs i gynorthwyo meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun.
Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad tystiolaeth am gamau a gymerwyd i ddarparu ar gyfer anghenion meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain sy’n gweithio mewn ardaloedd anghysbell iawn yn yr Alban (e.e. yr Ucheldiroedd a’r Ynysoedd). Yn hanesyddol, nid oeddent yn gallu cael amser i ffwrdd yn gyson, ac roeddent yn wynebu problemau yn sgil cael eu hynysu’n gymdeithasol ac yn broffesiynol. Dan Gontract GMS 1991, cyflwynwyd ‘lwfans cyfranogion’ yn llwyddiannus mewn ardaloedd felly er mwyn ariannu cyflogi meddyg teulu ‘cyfrannog’. Dywedodd Dr Whyte wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod dros ddwy ran o dair o feddygfeydd gwledig wedi defnyddio cynlluniau felly, sy’n galluogi cyflogi meddygon cyfrannog, yn cael eu rhannu rhwng dwy neu dair meddygfa, er mwyn galluogi’r meddyg teulu sy’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun i gael amser i ffwrdd ar gyfer gwyliau, salwch a datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus. Mewn gwirionedd, rwy’n cymryd y farn bod mantais ynghlwm wrth unrhyw drefniant lle bydd meddygon, nyrsys neu aelodau staff o’r tu allan i’r feddygfa yn cael eu dwyn i mewn yn gyson yn eu bod yn dod â‘phâr newydd o lygaid’ ac yn galluogi gwneud cymariaethau â meddygfeydd mewn mannau eraill. Gallai hefyd alluogi PCT i gael gwybod am unrhyw broblemau neu ddiffygion gyda’r feddygfa.
Yr Iseldiroedd
Meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain fu’r model traddodiadol ar gyfer cyflwyno gofal sylfaenol yn yr Iseldiroedd, er bod hyn yn newid bellach. Dros amser, ac mewn modd
, mae meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain wedi grwpio ynghyd mewn ffyrdd lle mai gwella ansawdd gofal yw’r bwriad. Dechreuodd y sail hanesyddol ar gyfer y cydweithredu hwn mewn
‘cylchoedd ansawdd’
honedig neu grwpiau adolygu cymheiriaid rhyw 20 mlynedd yn ôl pan oedd rhwymedigaeth ar bob meddyg teulu’n ymarfer ar ei ben/phen ei hun i drefnu ei feddygfa/meddygfa mewn grŵp mwy ar gyfer darparu gofal allan o oriau. Datblygodd grwpio meddygfeydd i fodloni’r amcan hwn, ac yn raddol cymerodd yr un grŵp rôl mewn addysg feddygol barhaus. Yn ôl yr Athro Baker, mae cyfarfodydd archwilio clinigol yn cael eu cynnal ac mae presenoldeb ynddynt yn orfodol. Mae grwpiau o ymarferwyr, dan arweiniad hwylusydd wedi’i hyfforddi, yn adolygu’u perfformiad clinigol trwy gyfeirio at ddata a gyflwynwyd gan feddygfeydd unigol.

---  ---
Ymddengys i mi bod meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn amrywio yn yr un modd fwy neu lai â meddygfeydd grŵp. Mae rhai o’r ddau yn dda, yn wael neu’n ddifater. Yn sicr, nid oes gan feddygfeydd grŵp fonopoli ar ansawdd gofal uchel i gleifion. Mae gan feddygfeydd bach a meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain eu selogion, yn enwedig ymhlith y rheiny sy’n chwilio am berthynas bersonol â’u meddyg teulu ac sy’n gwerthfawrogi’r parhad gofal y mae hyn yn ei ddarparu. Gall y nifer o feddygfeydd bach fod yn gostwng am amrywiaeth o resymau. Fodd bynnag, mae nifer sylweddol ohonynt o hyd ac mae’n debygol mai felly y bydd hi hyd y gellir rhagweld.
Gan hynny, ymddengys i mi mai polisi’r Adran Iechyd a’r PCTau ddylai fod i ganolbwyntio ar ddatrys y problemau sy’n gynhenid mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain neu feddygfeydd bach yn hytrach na cheisio lleihau’r niferoedd ohonynt sy’n bodoli. Gwn bod yr Adran Iechyd yn dweud nad oes ganddi bolisi felly, ond rwy’n cael yr argraff glir bod polisi felly yn bodoli yn y rhanbarthau, os nad yn Whitehall. Caiff ei nodweddu gan yr agwedd bod meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain yn broblem ac y byddai’r GIG yn well hebddynt. Fel y dywedais, mae’r niferoedd yn debygol o ostwng gydag amser beth bynnag.
Rwyf eisoes wedi disgrifio nifer o’r problemau sy’n gynhenid mewn meddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain neu feddygfeydd bach. Rwyf hefyd wedi disgrifio’r nifer o fentrau sydd eisoes yn mynd rhagddynt mewn ymgais i ddatrys neu liniaru’r problemau hyn. Yn fy nhyb i, y peth pwysig nawr yw, er mwyn y cleifion sydd wedi cofrestru gyda hwy, y dylai ymarferwyr ar eu pennau’u hunain gael mwy o gefnogaeth ac anogaeth. Yn gyfnewid am hynny, dylid gofyn mwy ganddynt yn nhermau gweithgarwch grŵp a goruchwyliaeth y naill i’r llall. Nid fy lle i yw awgrymu’r modd gorau i gyflawni hyn. Mae’r mentrau presennol yn fylchog ac yn ddi-drefn. Nid wyf yn awgrymu bod un ateb ‘i bawb’ i’r problemau hyn. Gall anghenion meddygfeydd bach yng Nghernyw fod yn wahanol iawn i’r rheiny yng Nghanol Manceinion. Yr hyn sydd ei angen, yn fy marn i, yw cydgyfrannu syniadau, parodrwydd i archwilio’r ffyrdd y caiff pethau eu gwneud mewn mannau eraill, fel yn yr Iseldiroedd, a phenderfyniad i ddatrys y problemau.
Trof i ystyried pa arwyddocâd, os o gwbl, sydd ynghlwm wrth y ffaith fod Shipman wastad yn ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun yn dechnegol, ac na weithiodd erioed mewn meddygfa grŵp gyda rhestr cleifion wedi’u rhannu. A wnaeth hyn hi’n haws iddo ddianc rhag cael ei ganfod? A oedd yn teimlo’n fwy hyderus y byddai ei droseddau’n mynd heb eu canfod? Yn gyntaf, nodaf fod Shipman wedi lladd o leiaf 71 o gleifion pan oedd ym meddygfa Donneybrook, a bod ei gydweithwyr yn y feddygfa, heb fai arnynt hwythau, yn anymwybodol o’r hyn a oedd yn mynd ymlaen. Mae hyn yn cadarnhau fy nghred nad yw meddyg dichellgar ac afreolaidd yn llawer mwy tebygol o gael ei atal/hatal neu’i ganfod/chanfod am ei fod/bod mewn partneriaeth a/neu yn gweithio dan yr un to â meddygon eraill. Rwy’n amau mai cymeriad cyffredinol Shipman ydoedd yn hytrach na theimlad y byddai’n debygol o gael ei ganfod pe bai’n aros a’i achosodd ef i symud o feddygfa Donneybrook. Yn ail, credaf be bai meddygfa Donneybrook wedi bod yn feddygfa grŵp go iawn gyda rhestrau’n cael eu rhannu, byddai Shipman fwy na thebyg wedi teimlo’n llai hyderus y byddai’n dianc rhag cael ei ganfod. Pe bai ei gyd-feddygon wedi cael rhywfaint o gysylltiad â thriniaeth y rheiny a oedd i ddod yn ddioddefwyr Shipman, byddai wedi teimlo’n llai hyderus wrth lunio hanesion meddygol ffug a gallent fod wedi dod yn amheus pe bai patrymau anarferol wedi datblygu. Mae llawer yn dibynnu ar beth fyddai’r trefniadau mewn gwirionedd a’r graddau y byddai goruchwyliaeth neu fonitro gwirioneddol y naill i’r llall. Wrth gwrs, mae hynny’n gadael y cwestiwn yn agored a fyddai Shipman, pe bai’r sefyllfa wedi bod felly, erioed wedi gwneud cais am y swydd neu wedi aros yno cyhyd - efallai’n wir na fyddai.
Yn fy marn i, roedd y ffaith fod gan Shipman ei restr cleifion ei hun, a’i fod yn rhydd o’r oruchwyliaeth a’r monitro anffurfiol sy’n mynd law yn llaw â rhannu rhestrau cleifion, yn golygu ei fod yn llai tebygol o gael ei atal neu’i ganfod. Fodd bynnag, gallai argaeledd dulliau mwy ffurfiol o fonitro, trwy reolaeth glinigol, fod wedi cael effaith debyg. Os oedd adnoddau a dyfeisgarwch i’w cymhwyso i’r broblem, gellid cymhwyso dulliau rheolaeth glinigol o fonitro i feddygfeydd ar eu pennau’u hunain a meddygfeydd bach, yn ogystal ag i feddygfeydd grŵp mwy. Nid wyf yn credu y dylid defnyddio’r ffaith fod Shipman yn ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun fel rheswm dros atal meddygon teulu rhag ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain.

---  ---
Dadansoddi Data Marwolaethau cyn Arestio Shipman
Dadansoddi Data Marwolaethau ar ôl Arestio Shipman
Gwaith Dr Paul Aylin a'i Dîm
Y Fframwaith Posibl ar gyfer System Fonitro
Gwaith Diweddar ar Ddadansoddi ac Ymchwilio i Gyfraddau Marwolaethau
Ymchwiliadau yn y Dyfodol
Problemau Potensial gyda Monitro
Dulliau Ystadegol Posibl Eraill
Pryderon y Proffesiwn
Manteision Potensial System Fonitro

---  ---
Yn ystod y cyfnod pan fu Shipman yn ymarfer, nid oedd system ar waith ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu. Nid oes - ac ni fu erioed - unrhyw ofyniad y dylai sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau) fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ar lefel meddyg teulu neu feddygfeydd teulu. Nid oes unrhyw fonitro felly’n cael ei wneud ychwaith gan unrhyw gorff cenedlaethol, fel yr Adran Iechyd.
Pan ddaeth graddfa troseddau Shipman yn amlwg, roedd llawer o bobl wedi synnu nad oedd system o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu ar waith. Awgrymwyd, pe bai system felly wedi bodoli, gallai fod wedi rhybuddio’r awdurdodau, flynyddoedd cyn canfod Shipman yn y pen draw, i’r ffaith bod gormod o farwolaethau, heb esboniad, ymhlith ei gleifion.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn ystyried ymarferoldeb sefydlu system ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o drefn. Byddaf yn trafod y buddion potensial o gyflwyno system ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau, ac yn ystyried hefyd y problemau y gellid eu hwynebu gan unrhyw un sy’n ceisio sefydlu system felly.

---  ---
Yng Nghymru a Lloegr yn Gyffredinol
Roedd tîm yr Ymchwiliad eisiau gwybod pa gamau, os o gwbl, oedd wedi’u cymryd gan PCOau yn y gorffennol i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu yn eu hardaloedd. Yn unol â hynny, ym mis Awst 2002, dosbarthodd yr Ymchwiliad holiadur i bob awdurdod iechyd strategol (SHAau) yn Lloegr ac awdurdodau iechyd (HAau) yng Nghymru, yn gofyn am wybodaeth am unrhyw waith monitro o gyfraddau marwolaethau a wnaethpwyd gan y PCOau yn eu hardaloedd yn y gorffennol, neu a oedd yn cael ei wneud ar hyn o bryd. Datgelodd yr ymatebion i’r holiadur hwn mai ychydig iawn o ymgeisiau a fu gan PCOau, cyn arestio Shipman ym 1998, i gasglu a dadansoddi data o unrhyw fath am farwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu. Roedd y nifer fach o ymgeisiau a wnaethpwyd wedi’u cyfeirio, nid at ganfod cyfraddau marwolaethau afreolaidd, ond at archwilio marwolaethau o afiechydon neu gyflyrau penodol neu, mewn un achos, at ddarparu data i feddygon teulu am farwolaethau eu cleifion er mwyn eu galluogi i gynnal adolygiadau o ddigwyddiadau pwysig o’r marwolaethau hynny. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, mewn rhai ardaloedd PCO, mai ychydig o lwyddiant a gafodd rhai ymgeisiau i ddadansoddi data marwolaethau, yn bennaf oherwydd problemau gyda chysylltu data.
Yn Ardal West Pennine
Nid oedd Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine (WPHA) na’i ragflaenwyr, Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Teulu Tameside ac Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu Tameside (FHSA), wedi gwneud unrhyw waith monitro o’r cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu ar eu rhestrau cyn arestio Shipman. Fel yr esboniais, roedd hynny’n gwbl nodweddiadol o’r mwyafrif helaeth o PCOau yng Nghymru a Lloegr bryd hynny. Ni ellir beirniadu’r WPHA am y ffaith na wnaeth unrhyw waith monitro o’r math hwn.
Y Rhesymau Pam na Wnaethpwyd Unrhyw Waith Monitro
Mae nifer o resymau pam nad oedd PCOau yn monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygon teulu. Yn gyntaf, fel y dywedais, nid oedd gofyniad arnynt i wneud hynny. Ni chawsant eu cynghori ychwaith y gallai monitro o’r math hwn fod yn werthfawr. Ymddengys yn debygol nad yw’r rhan fwyaf o PCOau erioed wedi ystyried y posibilrwydd o wneud hynny hyd yn oed. Mae’n amheus y byddai wedi taro unrhyw un cyn i weithgareddau Shipman ddod i’r golwg y gallai meddyg teulu fod yn euog o droseddoldeb neu esgeuluster ar raddfa mor fawr y byddai’n arwain at gyfradd marwolaethau ormodol weladwy ar gyfer cleifion yn ei feddygfa/meddygfa. Fel y dywedais, fe wnaeth y PCOau hynny a geisiodd gasglu a dadansoddi data marwolaethau wneud hynny at ddibenion heblaw am fonitro’r niferoedd o farwolaethau.
Mae’r Swyddfa Ystadegau Gwladol (SYG) yn cadw data marwolaethau a gasglwyd o dystysgrifau marwolaethau. Mae’r data hwnnw’n cynnwys manylion fel achos a man marwolaeth, ynghyd (ac eithrio yn achos marwolaethau yn cael eu hardystio gan grwner) ag enw’r meddyg a ardystiodd yr achos marwolaeth. Nid yw data marwolaethau yr SYG yn cynnwys enw’r meddyg teulu na’r feddygfa deulu yr oedd y person ymadawedig wedi cofrestru gyda hi.
Mae PCOau unigol yn cadw rhestrau o gleifion sydd wedi’u cofrestru gyda meddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu yn eu hardaloedd. Er mwyn casglu data am farwolaethau cleifion sydd wedi cofrestru gyda meddyg teulu unigol neu feddygfa deulu unigol, mae’n angenrheidiol, dan y system bresennol, i gysylltu’r data sy’n cael ei gadw gan y SYG â data sy’n cael ei storio yn systemau’r PCO.
Soniais fod problemau o ran cysylltu data. Cododd y problemau hyn yn sgil diffyg unrhyw system genedlaethol yn cysylltu ffaith neu fanylion marwolaeth person i feddygfa deulu yr oedd y person hwnnw wedi cofrestru gyda hi. Roedd modd i PCO wneud cysylltiad mewn achos unigol os dymunai, trwy gydweddu data marwolaethau y SYG â’i ddata rhestr cleifion ei hun. Fodd bynnag, roedd y dasg o gydweddu’r data o’r ffynonellau gwahanol hyn yn un feichus a llafurus. Hefyd, roedd ei lwyddiant yn dibynnu ar gywirdeb y wybodaeth oedd wedi’i chynnwys yn y system PCO. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Peter Goldblatt, Prif Ystadegydd Meddygol, SYG, bod cywirdeb y data ar systemau PCO, hyd yn oed nawr, yn amrywio’n eang o ardal i ardal. Mae problem mewn rhai ardaloedd gyda rhestrau chwyddedig, h.y. cynnwys ar restrau cleifion meddygon teulu enwau pobl nad ydynt bellach yn gleifion y feddygfa deulu y mae eu henwau’n ymddangos ar ei rhestr. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod rhestrau’n cael eu chwyddo gymaint â 15% i 20% mewn rhai ardaloedd trefol â phoblogaeth symudol. Hefyd, mae’r data ar system PCO yn cynnwys gwybodaeth sy’n ymwneud â chleifion sy’n byw yn yr ardal honno’n unig. Nid yw’n cynnwys gwybodaeth am gleifion sy’n byw y tu allan i’r ardal ond sydd wedi cofrestru gyda meddyg teulu yn yr ardal. Felly, mae’r wybodaeth ar system PCO am restrau cleifion meddygon teulu sy’n ymarfer ger ffiniau ardal y PCO yn tueddu bod yn anghyflawn.
Fel y dywedais, achosodd y problemau gyda chysylltu data anawsterau yn y gorffennol i rai PCOau a geisiodd gasglu neu ddadansoddi data ar gyfer meddygon teulu yn eu hardaloedd. Yn ddiau cafodd yr effaith o atal eraill rhag ymgeisio o gwbl. Hyd at 1998, cyfyngodd PCOau eu hunain yn gyffredinol i wneud dadansoddiadau a oedd yn archwilio marwolaethau o achosion penodol ymhlith poblogaethau preswyl ar lefel wardiau etholiadol. Roedd data ar gyfer dadansoddiadau felly ar gael yn hawdd ac nid oedd angen unrhyw gysylltiad cymhleth. Gwnaeth y WPHA y math hwn o ddadansoddiad â’r nod o nodi unrhyw ffactorau economaidd-gymdeithasol, amgylcheddol neu ffactorau eraill a allai fod yn effeithio ar gyfraddau marwolaethau.

---  ---
Gan Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine
Ar ôl arestio Shipman ac wedi iddi ddod yn amlwg y gallai fod wedi lladd nifer fawr o’i gleifion, gwnaeth y WPHA ddadansoddiadau amrywiol o’r cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion. Amcan y dadansoddiadau oedd, yn gyntaf, i ganfod graddau tebygol ei droseddoldeb ac, yn ail, i ganfod a fyddai wedi bod yn amlwg bod cyfraddau marwolaethau Shipman yn ormodol pe bai’r cyfraddau hynny wedi cael eu monitro yn ystod cyfnod ei droseddoldeb. Roedd y dasg o gysylltu’r data a ddefnyddiwyd yn y dadansoddiadau hyn yn anodd ac yn llafurus.
Dangosodd y dadansoddiadau bod gan Shipman, dros nifer o flynyddoedd, nifer gormodol sylweddol o farwolaethau yn ystadegol. Fodd bynnag, pan roddwyd ffocws y dadansoddiadau ar farwolaethau’r cleifion a oedd wedi digwydd yng nghartref y claf neu ar y marwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion oedrannus a oedd yn ferched, roedd nifer gormodol sylweddol o farwolaethau yn ystadegol ymhlith y grwpiau hyn o gleifion yn ystod y rhan fwyaf o’r blynyddoedd o 1992 i 1998.
Ym mis Ebrill 1999, cyflwynodd y WPHA adroddiad i’r Adran Iechyd ar ymhlygiadau’r polisi i’r GIG yn codi o hynny a oedd yn hysbys am weithgareddau Shipman. Yn yr adroddiad hwnnw, argymhellodd y WPHA y dylid cyflwyno gweithgarwch monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o drefn, ac y dylai gwerth monitro felly gael ei brofi. Cydnabu’r adroddiad y gallai fod anawsterau wrth ddehongli gormodaeth ymddangosiadol yng nghyfradd marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn awgrymu y gallai gormodaeth felly ddangos bod angen ymchwilio manylach yn achos meddyg teulu penodol. Gallai monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau, fe awgrymwyd, ffurfio rhan o’r
‘fframwaith asesu perfformiad cyffredinol’
Gan Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol Eraill
Fe wnaeth arestio Shipman a’i ddyfarnu’n euog beri i nifer o PCOau eraill i ystyried cynnal rhyw ffurf ar ddadansoddiad o gyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu yn eu hardaloedd. Cynhaliodd rhai PCOau ymarferiad ‘unigol’. Roedd rhai eraill yn fwy uchelgeisiol, gan geisio datblygu systemau o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn barhaus. Datblygodd nifer o PCOau systemau ar gyfer casglu a dadansoddi data marwolaethau a oedd wedyn yn cael ei fwydo yn ôl i feddygon teulu, fel rhan o gasgliad o ddangosyddion perfformiad. Ar ôl derbyn ymatebion i’w holiadur gwreiddiol, ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad gael, a chael, gwybodaeth bellach gan rai PCOau a oedd wedi gwneud dadansoddiad o ystadegau marwolaethau dros yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf. Roedd eu hadroddiadau o’u profiadau yn ddadlennol iawn, a byddaf yn cyfeirio at rai ohonynt nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Gan yr Athro Richard Baker
Yn dilyn dyfarnu Shipman yn euog o lofruddiaeth ym mis Ionawr 2000, comisiynwyd archwiliad clinigol o arfer Shipman gan y Prif Swyddog Meddygol, yr Athro (Syr erbyn hyn) Liam Donaldson. Gwnaethpwyd yr archwiliad gan yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr. Yn gyntaf, dadansoddodd yr Athro Baker y patrwm marwolaethau mewn perthynas â’r rhai yr oedd Shipman wedi rhoi Tystysgrif Feddygol o Achos Marwolaeth (MCCD) ar eu cyfer. Fel yr esboniais yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf, dim ond pan fydd claf wedi marw yn y gymuned yn unig (h.y. gartref neu mewn cartref preswyl) bydd meddyg teulu’n gyffredinol mewn sefyllfa i roi MCCD, a lle nad oes rhaid adrodd i grwner am y farwolaeth. Os yw claf yn marw yn yr ysbyty, bydd yr MCCD yn cael ei roi gan feddyg ysbyty fel arfer. Mae’r broses o roi MCCD yn cael ei alw’n ‘ardystio’r farwolaeth’ yn aml.
Gwnaeth yr Athro Baker ddau ddadansoddiad. Roedd ei ddadansoddiad cyntaf yn cymharu nifer a nodweddion amrywiol yr MCCDau a oedd yn cael eu rhoi yn flynyddol gan Shipman â’r MCCDau hynny a oedd yn cael eu rhoi yn flynyddol gan ddau grŵp rheoli meddygon teulu eraill a fu’n ymarfer ar yr un pryd ac yn yr un ardaloedd (h.y. Todmorden a Hyde) â Shipman, ac yr oedd nodweddion economaidd-gymdeithasol tebyg gan eu cleifion.
Roedd ail ddadansoddiad yr Athro Baker yn cymharu’r nifer blynyddol o farwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd ymhlith personau a fu’n gleifion i Shipman o 1987 ymlaen (nid yn unig y cleifion hynny yr oedd Shipman wedi ardystio’u marwolaethau) â’r nifer blynyddol o farwolaethau y gellid fod wedi disgwyl iddynt ddigwydd ymhlith y boblogaeth cleifion honno. Roedd cleifion Shipman yn cael eu hadnabod drwy’r data rhestr cleifion a oedd yn cael ei gadw gan y WPHA. Gwnaeth y SYG y gwaith cysylltu angenrheidiol rhwng y data hwnnw â gwybodaeth am farwolaethau. Roedd nifer y marwolaethau disgwyliedig yn cael ei chyfrifo trwy gyfeirio at ffigurau a ddarparwyd gan y SYG ac a oedd yn ymwneud â marwolaethau ymhlith poblogaeth yr ardal leol (Tameside) a grŵp o ardaloedd yn rhannu poblogaeth a nodweddion economaidd-gymdeithasol tebyg i’r rheiny yn Tameside, a hefyd trwy gyfeirio at farwolaethau ymhlith poblogaeth gyffredinol Cymru a Lloegr.
Roedd dadansoddiadau’r Athro Baker yn dangos bod Shipman, tra’r oedd yn ymarfer yn Todmorden a Hyde, wedi rhoi cyfanswm nifer ‘gormodol’ o 236 MCCD yn ymwneud â marwolaethau yn digwydd yng nghartref y claf neu yn ei feddygfa. Roedd y ffigur hwn yn debyg iawn i’r nifer o farwolaethau y canfûm a oedd wedi’u hachosi gan Shipman yn ystod ei gyfnod yn Todmorden a Hyde.
Ar ddiwedd yr adroddiad ar ganlyniadau ei archwiliad clinigol, gwnaeth yr Athro Baker nifer o argymhellion. Yn eu plith roedd argymhelliad y dylai systemau ar gyfer monitro meddygon teulu gael eu hadolygu a’u hymestyn i gynnwys monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith eu cleifion fel mater o drefn. Nododd fod achos Shipman wedi dangos, yn absenoldeb unrhyw fonitro o gyfraddau marwolaethau, bod modd i feddyg teulu â chyfradd ormodol gyson o gyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion/chleifion i fynd heb gael ei ganfod am flynyddoedd lawer. Fodd bynnag, cydnabu’r Athro Baker bod nifer o anawsterau gyda monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau. Eu hamrywioldeb cynhenid oedd y cyntaf. Yr ail oedd y ffaith y bydd llawer o gleifion meddygon teulu, dan amgylchiadau arferol, yn marw ar adeg pan nad ydynt dan ei reolaeth/rheolaeth. Yr enghraifft fwyaf cyffredin o hyn yw pan fydd claf yn marw mewn ysbyty. Awgrymodd yr Athro Baker bod ei archwiliad clinigol wedi amlygu rhai ffactorau a allai wella gallu systemau monitro i ganfod cyfraddau marwolaethau anarferol neu weithgarwch troseddol. Awgrymodd hefyd y byddai monitro nifer y marwolaethau yn cael eu hardystio gan feddygon teulu - yn hytrach na chyfradd marwolaethau ymhlith eu cleifion cofrestredig - yn dangos mwy o weithgareddau clinigol y meddyg teulu. Cyfeiriodd hefyd at werth potensial dadansoddi cyfradd marwolaethau gronnol ormodol meddygon teulu fel bod holl farwolaethau gormodol meddyg teulu gydol ei yrfa/gyrfa yn cael eu hasesu, nid y rheiny a oedd yn digwydd mewn blynyddoedd unigol yn unig.
Aeth yr Athro Baker ymlaen i nodi na fyddai casglu data’n deillio o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn ddigonol ynddo’i hun. Byddai’n rhaid adolygu’r canfyddiadau’n gyson. Dywedodd mai un ddadl yn erbyn monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau oedd y byddai’n gofyn am ormod o fuddsoddiad o ran amser ac adnoddau eraill, a bod meddygon teulu eisoes yn cael eu gorweithio. Gellid dadlau hefyd, meddai, bod monitro felly’n ddiangen, gan fod achosion fel un Shipman yn brin eithriadol. Gellid dweud hefyd y byddai unigolion sy’n penderfynu llofruddio yn mabwysiadu strategaethau i osgoi cael eu canfod. Serch hynny, credai y dylid cymryd camau i gyflwyno system i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Ymateb yr Adran Iechyd
Ar 1 Chwefror 2000, yn syth ar ôl dyfarnu Shipman yn euog, gwnaeth yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd ar y pryd, y Gwir Anrhydeddus Alan Milburn AS, ddatganiad i Dŷ’r Cyffredin, lle cyhoeddodd bod yr Adran Iechyd yn gweithio gyda’r SYG
‘i ganfod ffyrdd newydd a gwell o fonitro marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu’
. Ers hynny, mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi bod yn ystyried dichonoldeb ac ymarferoldeb casglu a defnyddio data ar farwolaethau i fonitro marwolaethau cleifion ar lefel meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at ganlyniad y gwaith a wnaed gan yr Adran Iechyd nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.

---  ---
Roedd yn amlwg i mi o gyfnod cynnar bod rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio posibilrwydd sefydlu system ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o drefn. Roeddwn eisiau canfod a fyddai modd, trwy ddefnyddio ffynonellau data presennol, darparu gwybodaeth gyflawn a chywir y gellid seilio monitro felly arni. Roeddwn eisiau canfod hefyd a fyddai monitro felly’n gallu nodi annormaledd mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau ac, os felly, ar ba lefel (h.y. lefel meddyg teulu, meddygfa deulu neu ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol (PCT)) y byddai’n gallu gwneud hynny. Os oedd monitro arferol yn debygol o allu canfod annormaledd ar unrhyw lefel, roeddwn eisiau gwybod pwy fyddai orau i drefnu monitro felly a pha ddull fyddai orau. Er mwyn fy nghynorthwyo wrth ateb y cwestiynau hyn, roedd yn amlwg bod angen gwasanaeth arbenigwr ar yr Ymchwiliad.
Comisiynu Gwaith gan Dr Paul Aylin a’i Dîm
Comisiynodd tîm yr Ymchwiliad Dr Paul Aylin, Uwch Ddarlithydd Clinigol mewn Epidemioleg ac Iechyd Cyhoeddus, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, i wneud y gwaith angenrheidiol ac i adrodd. Roedd Dr Aylin yn ymgynghorydd i’r Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus i lawfeddygaeth calon y plant yn y Bristol Royal Infirmary (Ymchwiliad Bristol Royal Infirmary) a gweithiai’n flaenorol fel ystadegydd meddygol i’r SYG. Casglodd dîm, bob un ohonynt o Imperial College, gan gynnwys Dr Nicky Best (Uwch Ddarlithydd mewn Ystadegau), Dr Alex Bottle (Ymchwilydd) a Dr Clare Marshall (Darlithydd mewn Ystadegau). Gofynnwyd i Dr Aylin a’i dîm i bennu:
a oedd unrhyw fudd mewn monitro data marwolaethau ar lefel leol
ar ba lefel (h.y. lefel meddyg teulu, meddygfa deulu neu PCO) y dylid cynnal monitro felly
sut dylid gwneud y gwaith monitro
pa ddull o ddadansoddi fyddai’n briodol
ar ba bwynt ddylai fod pryder ynghylch cyfradd marwolaethau cleifion yr uned (h.y. meddyg teulu, meddygfa deulu neu PCO) a oedd yn cael ei monitro
pwy ddylai wneud y gwaith monitro.
Paratodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm adroddiad, ac, ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, gwnaethant gyflwyniad o’u gwaith i’r Ymchwiliad. Cyhoeddwyd adroddiad o’u gwaith wedi hynny yn y Lancet
ac fe’i gwelir yn Atodiad E i’r Adroddiad hwn.
Seminar yr Ymchwiliad
Cafodd gwaith Dr Aylin a’i dîm, ynghyd â materion ehangach yn ymwneud â monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu, ei drafod mewn seminar deuddydd a gynhaliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad ym mis Hydref 2003. Cymerodd nifer o arbenigwyr yn y maes ran yn y seminar hwnnw. Yn ogystal â Dr Aylin a’i dîm, roedd Dr John Fox (Cyfarwyddwr Ystadegau, yr Adran Iechyd), Dr David Spiegelhalter (Uned Bioystadegau’r Cyngor Ymchwil Meddygol), Dr Mohammed A Mohammed (Uwch Gymrawd Ymchwil, Adran Iechyd Cyhoeddus ac Epidemioleg, Prifysgol Birmingham), Dr Christopher Roberts (Uwch Ddarlithydd mewn Ystadegau Meddygol, Ysgol Epidemioleg a Gwyddorau Iechyd, Prifysgol Manceinion a Dr Goldblatt. Hefyd yn bresennol yn y seminar oedd yr Athro Baker, Dr Maureen Baker (yn cynrychioli Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu (RCGP)), Dr John Grenville (yn cynrychioli’r Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig (BMA)) a’r Athro Gwyn Bevan (Pennaeth Gwybodaeth dros dro ar y pryd, y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd (CHI) ac aelod o’r tîm trawsnewid ar gyfer y Comisiwn newydd dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (gelwir bellach y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd)). Hefyd, gwahoddodd yr Ymchwiliad gynrychiolwyr i’r seminar o nifer o PCOau a oedd â phrofiad o wneud gwaith yn ymwneud â dadansoddi cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu neu feddygfeydd teulu. Mae rhestr lawn o gyfranogwyr yn y seminar i’w gweld yn Atodiad F i’r Adroddiad hwn.
Cyflwynodd cyfranogwyr yn y seminar ddeunydd ysgrifenedig ymlaen llaw, ac ymhelaethwyd ar y deunydd hwnnw yn ystod trafodaethau yn y seminar. Cafodd y trafodaethau eu harwain gan y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad. Ysgogodd y seminar drafodaeth ddiddorol iawn am y buddion a allai ddeillio o fonitro data marwolaethau, ac am y problemau y gellid eu cysylltu â’r broses fonitro ac am y gwaith ymchwilio sydd o reidrwydd yn gorfod dilyn canfod unrhyw annormaledd amlwg. Daeth y drafodaeth i ben, fel y daw’n eglur, gyda mesur calonogol o gonsensws ar y ffordd ymlaen.
Rwy’n hynod ddiolchgar i Dr Aylin a’i gydweithwyr am y gwaith a wnaethant i’r Ymchwiliad. Mae’n arloesol ac, fel yr oeddwn wedi gobeithio, mae wedi gwneud cyfraniad go iawn at y ddadl ynghylch ymarferoldeb a gwerth sefydlu system ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu fel mater o drefn. Ymddengys bod gwaith Dr Aylin a’i dîm wedi cael derbyniad da gan eu cymheiriaid ac roedd yn destun canmoliaeth fawr yn y seminar.
Aylin P, Best N, Bottle A, Marshall C (2003) ‘Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitroing mortality rates in primary care’, The Lancet, Cyfrol 362: tt485-491.

---  ---
Mae’r adroddiad a gafodd ei baratoi gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm ar wefan yr Ymchwiliad. Mae eu gwaith wedi’i ddisgrifio’n dda yn yr adroddiad cyhoeddedig y cyfeiriais ato’n barod. Byddaf yn cyfeirio yma at rai o brif bwyntiau’r system y maent wedi’i dyfeisio.
Cysylltu Data
Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, yn y gorffennol, roedd diffyg unrhyw system genedlaethol i gysylltu data marwolaethau a oedd yn cael ei gadw gan y SYG â’r meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu yr oedd y person ymadawedig wedi cofrestru â nhw, yn ei gwneud yn anodd casglu’r data angenrheidiol i wneud dadansoddiad o gyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu. Hyd yn oed pe byddai cysylltiad yn cael ei wneud, roedd y data yn deillio ohono’n debygol o fod yn anghyflawn a, fwy na thebyg, yn anghywir. Cynhaliodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm ymarferiad peilot er mwyn cysylltu cofnodion cofrestru marwolaethau cenedlaethol â data rhestr cleifion y meddyg teulu ar gyfer pump cyn Awdurdod Iechyd, gan gynnwys y WPHA. Defnyddiwyd rhaglen gyfrifiadur arbennig i gysylltu data marwolaethau y SYG ar gyfer y blynyddoedd 1993 hyd at 1999 gyda data rhestrau cleifion dienw. Roedd marwolaethau yn cael eu cysylltu â’r meddyg teulu yr oedd y person ymadawedig wedi cofrestru gydag ef/hi, gan ddefnyddio rhifau GIG y cleifion, eu dyddiad geni, rhyw a chod post. Darparodd Awdurdod Gwybodaeth y GIG meintiau rhestrau cleifion i Dr Aylin a’i dîm ar gyfer pob meddyg teulu a meddygfa deulu yn ardaloedd y pump awdurdod iechyd yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1993 hyd at 2000. Roedd y data’n rhannu’r boblogaeth cleifion i dri band oed (0-64, 65-74 a 75 a hŷn). Roedd y bandiau oed hyn yn eang, ond yn cynnwys y wybodaeth orau a oedd ar gael ar gyfer y cyfnod.
Roedd y llwyddiant cyffredinol wrth gysylltu cofnodion cofrestru marwolaethau â rhestrau cleifion yn amrywio rhwng pob ardal y pump awdurdod iechyd. Roedd cyfradd lwyddiant isel (nid mwy na 60%) ar gyfer y WPHA hyd at 1999. Arweiniodd hyn yn ôl pob golwg at golli data ar yr adeg pan unodd dau gyn FHSA i greu’r WPHA. Yn gyffredinol, cafwyd gwelliant nodedig yn y cysylltiad ar ôl 1997, pan ddaeth rhifau GIG cleifion unigol ar gael am y tro cyntaf. Dywedodd Dr Aylin wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y gwelliant hwn yn awgrymu y byddai cysylltu data mewn unrhyw ymarferiad monitro yn y dyfodol yn fwy llwyddiannus. Y gyfradd lwyddiant gyffredinol wrth gysylltu cofnodion oedd 92%. Yn 2000, roedd yn 98%-99%.
Er 2000, mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi bod yn gweithio ar ddarparu cronfa ddata unigol yn cynnwys gwybodaeth am bob claf y GIG sydd wedi marw, gan gynnwys nodi’r meddyg teulu neu’r feddygfa deulu yr oedd y claf wedi cofrestru gyda nhw a’r achos marwolaeth. Mae’r gronfa ddata i’w chadw gan Awdurdod Gwybodaeth y GIG. Mae eisoes wedi cael ei rhoi ar brawf gan nifer o PCTau, ac ymddengys yn debygol, fel yr awgrymodd Dr Aylin, ei bod yn darparu cysylltiad gwell a data mwy cywir nag oedd ar gael i Dr Aylin a’i dîm pan wnaethant eu dadansoddiad hwythau.
Pan gynhaliwyd yr ymarferiad cysylltu peilot gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, roedd y data rhestrau cleifion ar gyfer meddygon teulu yr oedd eu meddygfeydd ger ffin yr Awdurdod Iechyd i weld yn anghyflawn. Y rheswm tebygol am hyn oedd bod rhai o gleifion y meddygon teulu hynny yn byw yn ardaloedd HAau cyfagos. Byddai’r data’n ymwneud â chlaf felly’n cael ei gadw yn y gronfa ddata ar gyfer ardal yr awdurdod iechyd lle’r oedd yn byw. Mewn ymgais i ddatrys problem data anghyflawn, fe wnaeth Dr Aylin a’i dîm hepgor o’u dadansoddiad y meddygfeydd teulu hynny â rhestrau cleifion â llai na 1000 o gleifion ar gyfer unrhyw rai o’r blynyddoedd o 1993 hyd at 1999. Gwnaethant hynny ar y rhagdybiaeth ei bod yn rhaid bod rhestrau cleifion y meddygfeydd hynny yn anghyflawn. Fodd bynnag, nid yw hepgor rhai meddygfeydd yn ateb y gellid ei fabwysiadu ar gyfer system genedlaethol o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau. Pwysleisiodd Dr Aylin, er mwyn osgoi’r broblem yn y dyfodol, y byddai’n angenrheidiol cael system genedlaethol ar gyfer cysylltu data.
Dewisodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm i edrych at gyfraddau marwolaethau blynyddol, yn hytrach na chyfraddau marwolaethau dros gyfnod byrrach. Y rheswm pennaf am hyn oedd y nifer fach o farwolaethau mewn cyfnod byrrach. Ffactor arall oedd yr oedi rhwng marwolaeth yn digwydd a chofrestru marwolaeth, a llunio’r ystadegau marwolaethau yn genedlaethol. Yn y gorffennol, bu cryn oedi (gymaint â rhai misoedd) cyn bod y data marwolaethau perthnasol ar gael ac y gellid ei gysylltu â data rhestrau cleifion. Byddai hyn wedi golygu y byddai gwaith monitro wedi gorfod cael ei wneud nifer o fisoedd ar ei hôl hi. Dywedodd Dr Goldblatt y dylai fod modd cael gafael ar wybodaeth am 97% yn y dyfodol - mwy o bosibl - am farwolaethau cyn pen pythefnos o’r farwolaeth yn digwydd. Byddai hyn yn golygu y gallai gwaith dadansoddi ar ystadegau marwolaethau gael ei wneud lawer yn gynharach na fyddai wedi bod yn bosibl yn flaenorol. Awgrymodd Dr Mohammed y gellid gwneud dadansoddiadau bob chwe mis neu bob chwarter. Dywedodd Dr Aylin y byddai hyn yn bosibl dan y system newydd. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’n cynghori gwneud dadansoddiadau’n amlach o gofio’r niferoedd bach o farwolaethau a oedd yn gysylltiedig.
Y System Monitro Dichonol
Datblygodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm system y gellid ei defnyddio i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn ddichonol. Roedd y system i fod yn arf sgrinio er mwyn nodi unedau a oedd i weld â chyfraddau marwolaethau uwch na fyddid wedi disgwyl. Disgrifiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm y system fel system ‘wyliadwriaeth’. Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter yn y seminar y byddai gwyliadwriaeth yn gweithredu fel ‘gweithdrefn awtomatig canu cloch’ a fyddai’n rhybuddio pobl i’r ffaith y gallai rhywbeth fod yn mynd o le. Pan fyddai arwydd felly’n cael ei seinio, byddai penderfyniad yn gorfod cael ei wneud wedyn ynghylch pa gamau, os o gwbl, oedd eu hangen mewn ymateb iddo, er mwyn canfod a oedd problem gydag arfer clinigol gwael a oedd yn effeithio ar gyfraddau marwolaethau neu â gweithgarwch troseddol potensial hyd yn oed. Nododd bod gwahaniaeth rhwng ‘gwyliadwriaeth’ o ddata marwolaethau a ‘monitro’ data marwolaethau. Byddai’r olaf, awgrymodd, yn cael ei wneud fel rhan o fonitro cronfa o wybodaeth y gellid ei harchwilio a’i defnyddio at ddiben gwella ansawdd. Yn amlwg, mae ‘gwyliadwriaeth’ a ‘monitro’ yn cyflawni swyddogaethau defnyddiol. Yn hytrach na cheisio gwahaniaethu rhwng ‘gwyliadwriaeth’ a ‘monitro’ gydol y Bennod hon, byddaf yn defnyddio’r gair ‘monitro’ i ddisgrifio’r ddau.
Nodwedd wahaniaethol monitro dichonol yw ei fod yn golygu monitro’n barhaus dros amser, yn hytrach na chymryd golwg ciplun unigol a chymharu perfformiad ar un pwynt amser. Mae data’n cael ei gasglu dros amser ac mae’r dadansoddiad yn cael ei ailadrodd ar bob pwynt amser. Mae buddion arbennig yn hyn wrth edrych ar y niferoedd bach o farwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu. Y nod yw canfod amrywiad anarferol yng nghyfradd marwolaethau sylfaenol unrhyw uned (e.e. meddyg teulu unigol) cyn gynted â phosibl wedi iddi ddigwydd.
Dylid nodi bod y dadansoddiad a wnaethpwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm yn ymwneud â marwolaethau‘r holl gleifion a oedd wedi cofrestru gyda’r meddygon teulu perthnasol, nid yn unig â’r marwolaethau hynny yr oedd y meddygon teulu wedi’u hardystio. Cafodd y nifer o farwolaethau ar gyfer pob meddyg teulu ei chymharu â nifer y marwolaethau y gellid eu disgwyl ymhlith cyfanswm y boblogaeth cleifion ar gyfer y meddyg teulu hwnnw. Nid oedd modd gwneud dadansoddiad trwy gyfeirio at nifer y marwolaethau yn cael eu hardystio gan bob meddyg teulu. Y rheswm am hyn yw nad oedd poblogaeth cleifion i gymharu â hi ar gael er mwyn cyfrifo nifer y marwolaethau y gellid disgwyl i bob meddyg teulu eu hardystio.
Siartiau Rheoli Proses Ystadegol
Deilliodd y dull a ddatblygwyd gan Dr Aylin o reolaeth proses ystadegol (SPC) a ddatblygwyd yn wreiddiol i’w ddefnyddio wrth reoli ansawdd prosesau diwydiannol. Fe’i seiliwyd ar y gydnabyddiaeth y bydd allgynnyrch hyd yn oed y broses gynhyrchu mwyaf sefydlog a’r broses sydd wedi’i chyweirio’n fwyaf perffaith yn anochel yn dangos rhywfaint o amrywio (gelwir yn amrywiad cydfwriad). Mae’r amrywiad cydfwriad hwn yn golygu, hyd yn oed dan amodau delfrydol, ni fydd grŵp o feddygon tebyg fyth yn perfformio union yr un fath o un cyfnod i’r nesaf.
Wrth ddatblygu system fonitro, mae’n bwysig gallu gwahaniaethu amrywiad ‘cydfwriad’ o’r amrywiad sydd wedi digwydd o ganlyniad i ‘achos arbennig’. Mae achos arbennig yn ffactor sy’n anghynhenid i weithrediad arferol y broses sy’n cael ei monitro, sy’n arwain at amrywiad sy’n ychwanegol at yr amrywiad cydfwriad y gellir ei ddisgwyl yn anochel mewn unrhyw broses sefydlog. Bydd cydfwriadau’n gyfrifol am y rhan fwyaf o’r amrywiadau a welir mewn system fonitro a bydd yn creu ‘sŵn cefndir’ mewn monitro proses sefydlog. Yn ddelfrydol, dylai’r system fonitro gael ei chynllunio i ‘roi arwydd’ o’r ffaith bod amrywiad yn sgil rhyw achos arbennig wedi, neu gallai fod wedi, digwydd ac i ddangos y dylai camau gael eu cymryd i nodi’r achos arbennig.
Cynlluniwyd siartiau SPC i ganfod a rhoi arwydd o’r pwynt lle mae proses ddiwydiannol yn gwyro o fod yn sefydlog, dan reolaeth ac yn dangos amrywiad cydfwriad yn unig i fod yn ansefydlog, allan o reolaeth ac yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig. Gall graddfa’r amrywiad cydfwriad fod yn dderbyniol. Os nad ydyw, bydd angen gweithredu ar y broses sylfaenol er mwyn ei ddileu neu ei leihau. Os yw’r broses yn mynd yn ansefydlog - oherwydd bod rhyw amrywiad achos arbennig - bydd angen ymchwiliad er mwyn pennu pa achos arbennig sy’n gyfrifol am yr amrywiad. Rhaid delio â’r achos arbennig hwnnw wedyn fel y bydd angen. Nid yw amrywiad achos arbennig yn beth gwael o reidrwydd; pa un a yw’n beth da neu’n beth drwg, mae hynny’n fater i farnu yn ei gylch gan ddibynnu ar amgylchiadau’r achos arbennig.
Caiff siartiau SPC eu creu gyda ‘therfynau rheoli’, yn cynrychioli terfynau uchaf ac isaf amrywiad cydfwriad. Rhaid i derfynau addas, fel y terfynau ar gyfer unrhyw brawf diagnostig, gydbwyso anfantais rhoi arwydd ar gam bod achos arbennig yn bresennol pan nad ydyw (h.y. positif ffug) a’r anfantais a fyddai’n deillio o fethu canfod presenoldeb achos arbennig (h.y. negatif ffug). Terfynau rheoli â phenodoldeb uchel (h.y. yn gallu gwahaniaethu i lefel uchel) yw’r mwyaf priodol.
Mae’r system fonitro a eiriolwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm yn debyg i hynny a ddisgrifir uchod, yn ei bod yn anelu i nodi a rhoi arwydd pan fydd cyfraddau marwolaethau meddyg teulu i weld yn dueddol i amrywiad (achos arbennig) yn ychwanegol at yr amrywiad hwnnw a fyddai’n gyffredin i bob meddyg teulu â nodweddion tebyg. Mae cymhwyso siartiau SPC yn golygu diffinio pa bryd y gellir ystyried bod cyfraddau marwolaethau yn dderbyniol neu ‘dan reolaeth’ a phan dybir eu bod wedi mynd yn ‘annerbyniol’ neu ‘allan o reolaeth’.
Mae gwerth yr ystadegyn siart wedi’i blotio ar siart yr SPC, sy’n cynrychioli’r gwahaniaeth rhwng y canlyniadau gweledig (h.y. y cyfraddau marwolaethau blynyddol) ar gyfer yr uned berthnasol (meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu yn yr achos hwn) a’r canlyniadau y byddid yn eu disgwyl os oedd y meddyg teulu neu’r feddygfa deulu’n perfformio’n annerbyniol. Mae’r ystadegyn siart yn cael ei blotio yn erbyn amser. Mae trothwy rhybudd rhagddiffiniedig yn cael ei bennu. Gydol yr amser y mae’r ystadegyn siart yn aros islaw’r trothwy hwnnw, ystyrir bod cyfraddau marwolaethau‘r meddyg teulu dan reolaeth ac yn dangos amrywiad cydfwriad yn unig. Fodd bynnag, os yw’r ystadegyn siart yn croesi’r trothwy rhybudd, mae’n rhoi arwydd y gallai fod rhyw ffactor sy’n effeithio ar y meddyg teulu neu’r feddygfa deulu sydd wedi peri i’r gyfradd marwolaethau fynd yn ansefydlog neu allan o reolaeth, ac yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig. Dylid canlyn yr arwydd wedyn, a’i ymchwilio, er mwyn canfod esboniad amdano.
Mae’r math cynharaf o siart SPC yn cael ei alw’n siart rheoli Shewhart (enwyd ar ôl Walter Shewhart, a’i dyfeisiodd gyntaf). Trwy gytundeb, mae’r terfynau rheoli ar siart Shewhart yn cael eu gosod mewn ffordd fel y byddai 99.8% o’r amrywiad cydfwriad yn disgyn o fewn y terfynau hyn. Mae cyfres o ganlyniadau gweledig dros amser yn cael eu plotio ar y siart a phan fydd y canlyniad gweledig, ar unrhyw bwynt, yn mynd uwchlaw’r terfyn rheoli uwch neu islaw’r terfyn rheoli is, mae’r siart yn rhoi arwydd bod amrywiad achos arbennig. Mae’r ystadegyn siart ar siart Shewhart yn annibynnol ar bob pwynt amser. Nid yw’n dibynnu ar nag yn adlewyrchu data hanesyddol. Nid yw gwerthoedd blaenorol yr ystadegyn siart yn cael eu casglu. Felly, nid oes tystiolaeth yn cael ei chasglu am unrhyw amrywiadau anarferol a allai fod wedi digwydd dros nifer o bwyntiau amser.
Siartiau Swm Cronnol
Mewn cyferbyniad, mae’r math o siart SPC a ddefnyddiwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm (a elwid yn siart swm cronnol (CUSUM) yn ychwanegu mewn sylwadau ‘newydd’ at werth blaenorol yr ystadegyn siart. Felly, mae pob sylw yn cael ei seilio ar sylwadau hanesyddol a newydd. Y rheswm pam ddefnyddiodd Dr Aylin a’i gydweithwyr y dull gweithredu hwn oedd eu bod yn credu mai’r hyn yr oedd ei angen oedd system a fyddai’n canfod arfer is na’r safon neu arfer anarferol dros gyfnod o amser. Efallai na fydd effeithiau arfer is na’r safon neu arfer anarferol felly yn amlwg ar un pwynt amser unigol. Dim ond pan fydd tystiolaeth o berfformiad dros gyfnod estynedig yn cael ei chasglu a’i hystyried y gallant ddod yn amlwg. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn bod yr Athro Baker, yn adroddiad ei archwiliad clinigol, wedi adnabod buddion potensial o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cronnol a’i fod wedi argymell y dylid ymchwilio i’r posibilrwydd o ddefnyddio dull cronnol o fonitro.
Amrywiad
Un o’r problemau o drosglwyddo’r dechneg fonitro a ddefnyddir mewn lleoliad rheoli proses ddiwydiannol i leoliad gofal iechyd yw bod y broses sy’n mynd ymlaen o fewn meddygfa deulu yn llawer iawn mwy cymhleth na phroses ddiwydiannol. O ganlyniad, mae graddfa’r amrywiad cynhenid (amrywiad cydfwriad) yn eithaf mawr yn nodweddiadol. Mae’n dod yn bwysig iawn felly i nodi amrywiad sy’n gynhenid ac i’w wahaniaethu oddi wrth yr amrywiad achos arbennig y mae’r monitro wedi’i gynllunio i’w ganfod.
Wrth gymharu cyfraddau marwolaethau ar gyfer cleifion meddygon teulu o flwyddyn y flwyddyn, mae’n debygol y bydd gwahaniaethau sylweddol rhwng meddygon teulu unigol a hyd yn oed rhwng cyfraddau marwolaethau ar gyfer cleifion yr un meddyg teulu o flwyddyn i flwyddyn. Gall y gwahaniaethau hyn gael eu hachosi gan nifer o fathau o amrywiadau.
Y Math o Amrywiad y mae’r System Fonitro Wedi’i Chynllunio i’w Ganfod
Wrth sefydlu system fonitro, mae angen nodi ymlaen llaw y math penodol o amrywiad y mae’r monitro i fod i’w ganfod. Yn achos monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau, mae’r monitro i fod i ganfod amrywiadau anarferol yn y gyfradd marwolaethau neu amrywiad achos arbennig. Byddai amrywiad achos arbennig felly yn digwydd, er enghraifft, ym mhresenoldeb ymddygiad troseddol fel ymddygiad Shipman, neu lle’r oedd ansawdd gofal gwael gan feddyg teulu’n arwain at gyfradd marwolaethau uwch ymhlith ei gleifion/chleifion. Bydd amrywiad achos arbennig o’r math hwn yn bodoli yn achos nifer fach o feddygon teulu’n unig. Wrth fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau, y nod yw sicrhau mai’r meddygon teulu sy’n dueddol i amrywiad achos arbennig yw’r rheiny sy’n rhoi arwydd. Mae’n bwysig hefyd sicrhau, cyn belled ag y mae modd gwneud hynny, nad yw eu harwyddion yn cael eu cuddio gan ‘sŵn cefndir’ o fathau eraill o amrywiad cydfwriad.
Er mwyn dileu (neu leihau, o leiaf) effaith amrywiadau ac eithrio’r rheiny sy’n arwain o wahaniaeth systematig rhwng meddygon teulu, mae angen nodi’r mathau o amrywiad sy’n anochel a defnyddio dulliau ystadegol i feintioli ac addasu ar gyfer y mathau hynny o amrywiad. Ceisiodd Dr Ayling a’i dîm feintioli ac addasu ar gyfer nifer o wahanol fathau o amrywiad cydfwriad a fyddai, pe na fyddid wedi addasu ar eu cyfer, wedi cael effaith ar gyfraddau marwolaethau o bosibl. Disgrifiodd Dr Best y mathau hynny o amrywiad i’r Ymchwiliad.
Amrywiadau Siawns
Y math cyntaf o amrywiad cydfwriad a ddisgrifiodd Dr Best oedd y math sy’n digwydd yn gwbl ar hap, yn ddamweiniol. Bydd nifer marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddyg teulu yn amrywio o flwyddyn i flwyddyn, fel mater o hap a damwain llwyr. Mae dulliau ystadegol, a ddefnyddiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm, o addasu ar gyfer effeithiau siawns.
Cymysgedd Achos
Gelwir yr ail fath o amrywiad cydfwriad yn ‘cymysgedd achos’. Ffactorau cymysgedd achos yw ffactorau sy’n gysylltiedig â phoblogaeth cleifion meddyg teulu y gwyddys eu bod yn cael effaith ar gyfraddau marwolaethau. Oed a rhyw yw’r ffactorau felly sydd fwyaf amlwg. Pe na fyddai unrhyw addasiad yn cael ei wneud ar gyfer oed, byddai meddygon teulu â phoblogaethau cleifion oedrannus yn debygol o roi arwydd bod ganddynt gyfraddau marwolaethau uwch na’r disgwyl, tra gallai eu cyfraddau marwolaethau, pan oedd oed eu poblogaeth cleifion yn cael ei ystyried, fod o fewn dosbarthiad arferol. Hefyd, byddai disgwyl i feddyg teulu â chryn dipyn yn fwy o gleifion oedrannus gwryw na chleifion oedrannus benyw fod â chyfradd marwolaethau uwch nag un â niferoedd cyfartal o gleifion oedrannus gwryw a benyw. Ffactor cymysgedd achos arall y gwyddys ei fod yn cael effaith ar farwolaethau yw amddifadiad economaidd-gymdeithasol. Os nad oes addasiad yn cael ei wneud ar gyfer y ffactor hwnnw, byddai meddygon teulu â phoblogaeth amddifadus yn fwy tebygol o roi arwydd.
Pwysleisiodd Dr Best bod rhaid bod yn ofalus wrth wneud addasiadau ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos hysbys. Dylid gwneud addasiadau’n unig ar gyfer ffactorau sydd y tu hwnt i reolaeth y meddyg teulu. Fel arall, gallai addasu gael yr effaith o guddio amrywiadau pwysig yn cael eu hachosi gan ffactorau systematig o fewn y feddygfa deulu, sydd yr union fath o amrywiadau y mae’r system fonitro i fod i’w canfod. Yn y cyd-destun hwn, soniodd cyfranogwyr eraill yn y seminar am y cyfyng-gyngor ynghylch addasu neu beidio ar gyfer amddifadiad economaidd-gymdeithasol. Dywedodd Mrs Catherine Scott, Arbenigwraig mewn Iechyd Cyhoeddus, PCT Croydon, nad yw cleifion mewn ardaloedd amddifadus ar hyn o bryd o bosibl yn cael y gofal iechyd y mae arnynt ei angen. Gall hyn ddigwydd oherwydd prinder o feddygon teulu mewn ardaloedd amddifadus neu am resymau eraill a all fod yn gysylltiedig ag amrywiadau mewn perfformiad meddyg teulu neu arfer clinigol gwael. Mae’r rhain yn faterion y gallai’r PCT, er lles iechyd y cyhoedd, fod wedi eu hamlygu, yn hytrach na risgio iddynt gael eu celu. Dywedodd Mrs Scott bod ei PCT hi, yn 2003, wedi paratoi dwy set o ddata marwolaethau, un wedi’i haddasu ar gyfer amddifadiad economaidd-gymdeithasol, a’r llall heb. Y bwriad oedd gweld pa mor ddefnyddiol yr oedd y ffigurau.
Fel y soniwyd yn gynharach yn y Bennod hon, oherwydd y diffyg data’n cael ei gadw gan y GIG am gleifion wedi’u cofrestru â meddygon teulu penodol neu feddygfeydd teulu penodol yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1993 i 1999, dim ond o fewn tri band oed (0-64, 65-74 a 75 a hŷn) yr oedd Dr Aylin a’i dîm yn gallu addasu ar gyfer oed. Defnyddiwyd dull safoni anuniongyrchol ganddynt i amcangyfrif y nifer disgwyliedig o farwolaethau ar gyfer pob meddyg teulu a meddygfa deulu. Nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth am ryw nac am amddifadiad economaidd-gymdeithasol. Felly, nid oedd eu haddasiad mor sensitif ag y byddent wedi dymuno iddo fod.
Amrywiadau yn Sgil Ffactorau Allanol
Math arall o amrywiad cydfwriad sy’n rhai ei ystyried yw hwnnw sy’n cael ei achosi gan ffactorau allanol nad ydynt yn gysylltiedig â chymysgedd achos. Enghraifft o hyn fyddai effaith digwyddiadau hysbys fel epidemig ffliw, neu gyfnod o dywydd garw tu hwnt, a gallai’r naill neu’r llall achos cynnydd sydyn mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Amrywiadau yn Sgil Ffactorau Nad Oes Cyfrif Amdanynt
Gellir priodoli pedwerydd math o amrywiad cydfwriad i ffactorau nad oes cyfrif amdanynt fel arall. Hyd yn oed ar ôl caniatáu ar gyfer effeithiau siawns, cymysgedd achos hysbys ac ar gyfer ffactorau allanol, gall fod ffactorau eraill y gellid disgwyl iddynt effeithio ar gyfradd marwolaethau meddyg teulu ond nad ydynt yn hysbys i’r bobl sy’n gwneud y gwaith monitro. Gall y ffactorau anhysbys unigol fod yn fach, ond gall eu heffaith gyfun arwain at amrywiadau sylweddol. Yn wir, roedd gwaith a wnaethpwyd gan Dr Ayling a’i dîm yn awgrymu bod yr amrywiad mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau ar lefel meddyg teulu a achoswyd gan ffactorau nad oedd cyfrif amdanynt, ryw ddwywaith hynny y byddid wedi disgwyl o ganlyniad i amrywiadau siawns ar eu pennau’u hunain. Esboniodd Dr Best bod ffactorau nad oes cyfrif amdanynt yn bwysig, ond eu bod yn cael eu hanwybyddu’n aml gan y rheiny sy’n gwneud gwaith monitro o’r math hwn. Disgrifiodd y dull a ddefnyddiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm i addasu ar gyfer y math hwn o amrywiad. Nid oes angen ei ddisgrifio’n fanwl. Fodd bynnag, gall fod yn werth nodi bod Dr Aylin o’r farn bod angen i waith pellach gael ei wneud yn y maes hwn cyn rhoi system fonitro ar waith.
Nifer yr Achosion o Gamrybuddion
Pan fydd siartiau SPC yn cael eu defnyddio mewn lleoliad diwydiannol, cânt eu defnyddio i fonitro proses unigol ar y tro yn unig. Fe’u defnyddiwyd hefyd ar gyfer gwaith monitro iechyd cyhoeddus a llawfeddygaeth ond, hyd yn oed bryd hynny, mae monitro felly wedi golygu un neu ddwy o brosesau ar y tro yn unig. Mae hyn yn wahanol iawn i system genedlaethol ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion pob meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu ar yr un pryd. Bydd y ffaith bod nifer o unedau (yn hytrach nag un uned yn unig) yn cael eu monitro dros amser yn cynyddu’r cyfle i gael arwydd. Bydd hefyd yn cynyddu’r cyfle o gael camrybuddion. Mae’n amlwg bod lleihau’r nifer o gamrybuddion yn ddymunol gan y byddant yn dargyfeirio sylw ac adnoddau i ffwrdd oddi wrth y rhybuddion go iawn y mae angen gwir angen ymchwilio iddynt. Dros amser, byddai nifer fawr o gamrybuddion heb ganlyniadau cadarnhaol yn dod ag enw drwg i’r holl system fonitro.
Mae’n bwysig diffinio’n union beth a olygir gan ‘camrybudd’. Bydd camrybudd ystadegol yn digwydd pan fydd cyfradd marwolaethau cleifion meddyg teulu’n ysgogi rhybudd ond mae’r gyfradd mewn gwirionedd dan reolaeth ac nid yw’n dangos amrywiad achos arbennig. Mewn cyferbyniad, mae rhybudd gwirioneddol ystadegol yn digwydd lle mae’r rhybudd yn ddilys, h.y. mae’r gyfradd marwolaethau
uwch nag y byddid wedi disgwyl ar ôl gwneud addasiadau priodol ar gyfer amrywiad cydfwriad. Bydd llawer o rybuddion gwirioneddol ystadegol yn gamrybuddion meddygol, gan y bydd esboniad clinigol derbyniol ar gyfer y ffaith fod cyfradd marwolaethau meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu allan o reolaeth yn ystadegol. Ni fydd, felly, unrhyw reswm i bryderu. Byddai achos fel achos Shipman, fodd bynnag, yn rhybudd gwirioneddol ystadegol a meddygol gan fod y gyfradd marwolaethau allan o reolaeth yn wir ac roedd hyn yn sgil amrywiad achos arbennig, sef ei droseddoldeb.
Dylai’r trothwy rhybudd gael ei osod mewn ffordd lle bydd y nifer o gamrybuddion ystadegol yn cael eu lleihau, tra bydd y system, ar yr un pryd, yn parhau’n sensitif i rybuddion gwirioneddol o unedau ansefydlog sydd yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig yn wirioneddol. Rhedodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm efelychiadau cyfrifiadur i gyfrifo’r gyfradd ganfod ffug (h.y. cyfran yr arwyddion yn digwydd cyn pwynt amser penodol a fydd yn gamrybuddion ystadegol) a’r gyfradd ganfod lwyddiannus (h.y. cyfran yr unedau ansefydlog yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig a fydd yn cael eu canfod yn llwyddiannus cyn yr un pwynt amser). Cynhaliwyd yr efelychiadau ganddynt gan ddefnyddio gwahanol drothwyon rhybudd. Awgrymwyd ganddynt y gallai’r cyfraddau canfod ffug a llwyddiannus ffurfio rhan o gyfrifiad cost a budd i helpu gosod trothwy rhybudd priodol ar gyfer system fonitro. Awgrymwyd ganddynt hefyd y gallai ffactorau sydd i’w hystyried wrth wneud cyfrifiad cost a budd felly gynnwys y pwysigrwydd sydd ynghlwm wrth ganfod meddygon teulu yr oedd eu cyfraddau marwolaethau yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig, yn berthynol i’r pwysigrwydd sydd ynghlwm wrth osgoi camrybuddion. Byddai’r goblygiadau adnoddau sy’n gysylltiedig ag ymchwilio i achosion rhybuddion yn ffactor perthnasol hefyd.
Esboniodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm y byddai modd ‘tiwnio’ siart CUSUM drwy nodi dau (neu fwy o bosibl) drothwy gwahanol. Er enghraifft, byddai trothwy is yn codi gormodedd lefel is o gyfraddau marwolaethau a byddai’n gyfwerth â‘rhybudd cynnar’, yn dangos meddyg teulu yr oedd ei gyfradd marwolaethau ar ben eithaf dosbarthiad arferol cyfraddau marwolaethau ar gyfer meddygon teulu. Gallai hyn deilyngu ymchwiliad lefel isel. Gellid gosod trothwy uwch hefyd, gyda golwg ar seinio rhybudd pe bai cyfraddau marwolaethau meddyg teulu’n wahanol i’r dosbarthiad arferol. Efallai y byddai ymchwiliad manylach yn cael ei gynnal wedyn. Gellid ‘tiwnio’r’ siartiau felly mewn modd a fyddai’n bodloni nod yr ymarferiad monitro. Er mwyn dangos y modd y cymhwyswyd eu siartiau SPC, defnyddiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm ddau drothwy gwahanol.
Canlyniadau‘r Dadansoddiadau a Wnaethpwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i Dîm
Defnyddiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm eu siartiau CUSUM i archwilio data marwolaethau ar gyfer 1009 o feddygon teulu (gan gynnwys Shipman) a oedd yn ymarfer ym mhump ardal yr Awdurdod Iechyd yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1993 i 1999. Roedd y data a ddefnyddiwyd, wrth gwrs, yn hen ddata, er bod Dr Aylin a’i gydweithwyr wedi edrych ar yr hyn y byddai’r siartiau wedi’i ddatgelu pe byddent wedi’u gweld o’r un cyfnod. Roedd data ar gael mor bell yn ôl â 1993 yn unig, felly ni ellid rhoi unrhyw ystyriaeth i unrhyw farwolaethau gormodol ymhlith cleifion Shipman cyn y cyfnod hwnnw.
Mae’r siart CUSUM ar gyfer Shipman yn dangos bod ei ystadegyn siart uwchlaw sero ar gyfer 1993, gan ddangos iddo gael nifer fwy o farwolaethau na fyddid wedi disgwyl. Disgynnodd ym 1994, gan awgrymu iddo gael llai o farwolaethau na’r disgwyl yn y flwyddyn honno, o gofio dosbarthiad oed ei gleifion. Mewn gwirionedd, canfu’r Ymchwiliad ei fod wedi lladd 11 o gleifion y flwyddyn honno, ond efallai mai ychydig o farwolaethau cleifion eraill a gafodd. Wedi hynny, cododd yr ystadegyn siart yn gyson wrth i’r marwolaethau gormodol gronni. Ar yr isaf o’r ddau drothwy a bennwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, Shipman fyddai wedi ysgogi’r rhybudd yn gyntaf yn ystod 1996. Ar yr uchaf o’r ddau drothwy, byddai wedi’i ysgogi’n gyntaf yn ystod 1997. Byddai wedi parhau i roi arwydd hyd at 2000, er gwaetha’r ffaith iddo stopio ymarfer ym mis Medi 1998. Y rheswm am hyn yw bod côd ei feddygfa deulu wedi’i gymryd gan feddyg locwm a bod data hanesyddol Shipman yn dal i gael effaith. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl y cyfnod pan ddechreuodd y meddyg locwm, roedd cwymp yn amlwg yn yr ystadegyn siart.
Dywedodd Dr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod golwg y siart ar gyfer y cyfnod wedi i’r meddyg locwm gyrraedd ym mis Medi 1998 yn amlygu dau fater. Yn gyntaf, ni fyddai’r ffaith fod côd meddygfa deulu Shipman wedi’i drosglwyddo o un meddyg i feddyg arall yn hysbys fel arfer i’r person neu’r corff a oedd yn gwneud y gwaith monitro. Gallai hyn arwain at ganlyniadau camarweiniol os oedd y monitro’n parhau. Byddai’n amlwg yn ddymunol lle mae ymarferydd ar ei ben/phen ei hun, fel yn yr achos hwn, yn cael ei ddisodli gan feddyg arall, dylid newid côd y feddygfa deulu, er mwyn gallu ailgychwyn y monitro.
Yr ail fater oedd beth i wneud pan oedd meddyg teulu’n rhoi arwydd. Yn yr achos hwn, roedd y feddygfa wedi parhau i roi arwydd, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod yr amrywiad achos arbennig (h.y. troseddoldeb Shipman) wedi’i ddileu a bod y gyfradd marwolaethau wedi mynd yn ôl i fod dan reolaeth. Un opsiwn oedd, pan oedd esboniad derbyniol ar gyfer arwydd wedi’i ganfod, dylai’r siart gael ei ail-osod ar sero. Byddai hynny’n cael yr effaith o ‘ddechrau o’r dechrau eto’ a byddai’r meddyg teulu wedyn yn cael cychwyn newydd. Y dewis arall fyddai ail-osod y siart i ryw werth uwch na sero. Effaith hynny fyddai rhoi’r meddyg ‘ar brawf’. Byddai’r dull olaf yn gwneud y siart yn fwy sensitif i gyfraddau marwolaethau gormodol cyson.
At ddibenion eglurhaol, cymerodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm y byddai 5% o feddygon teulu’n dangos amrywiad achos arbennig. Nid yw hwn wrth gwrs yn golygu eu bod yn cymryd bod gan 5% o feddygon teulu gyfraddau marwolaethau gormodol oherwydd troseddoldeb neu arfer clinigol gwael. Gall fod ganddynt ormodedd ystadegol o farwolaethau am resymau cwbl ddiniwed, er enghraifft, oherwydd bod llawer o’u cleifion yn byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio neu oherwydd eu bod yn gofalu am gleifion sy’n cael triniaeth mewn hosbis lleol. At ddibenion eglurhaol eto, gosododd Dr Aylin a’i dîm ddau drothwy rhybudd gwahanol ar gyfer canfod meddygon teulu a chanddynt amrywiad achos arbennig. Roedd Shipman yn un o 33 meddyg teulu o’r 1009 a gafodd eu monitro a fyddai wedi rhoi arwydd yn ystod y cyfnod monitro rhwng 1993 a 1999 os oedd y trothwy isaf yn cael ei gymhwyso. Ar y trothwy isaf, cyfrifodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm o’u hefelychiadau cyfrifiadur y byddai’r gyfradd ganfod ffug yn 5.2%. Byddai hynny’n golygu bod 5.2% o’r 33 o arwyddion yn debygol o fod yn gamrybuddion ystadegol. Fe wnaethant gyfrifo hefyd mai 96.6% oedd y gyfradd ganfod lwyddiannus. Golygai hynny bod gan y system 96.6% o obaith o nodi’n gywir unrhyw feddyg teulu yr oedd ei gyfradd/chyfradd marwolaethau yn tueddu tuag at amrywiad achos arbennig.
Pe bai’r trothwy rhybudd yn cael ei osod ar lefel uwch, yna dim ond 12 meddyg teulu (gan gynnwys Shipman) fyddai wedi rhoi arwydd. Cyfrifodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm o’u hefelychiadau cyfrifiadur bod gan y trothwy uwch gyfradd ganfod ffug o lai na 0.01%. Gellid disgwyl felly mai cyfran bitw iawn o arwyddion a fyddai’n gamrybuddion ystadegol. Mae cyfaddawd, felly, wrth osod trothwyon rhybudd gwahanol. Byddai trothwy rhybudd isel yn cael yr effaith o nodi nifer fwy o feddygon teulu yr oeddent yn ymddangos eu bod yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig a byddai angen ymchwilio iddynt; byddai rhai o’r arwyddion hynny’n gamrybuddion ystadegol. Byddai trothwy uwch yn nodi nifer llai o feddygon teulu a byddai cyfradd rhybudd ffug ystadegol isel iawn ganddynt. Fodd bynnag, gallai fethu rhai meddygon teulu a fyddai’n teilyngu ymchwilio iddynt oherwydd bod ganddynt ormodoedd o farwolaethau.
Y Gwersi i’w Dysgu o’r Gwaith
Gorffennodd Dr Aylin trwy ddweud bod y gwaith a wnaethpwyd ganddo yntau a’i dîm yn dangos y gellid defnyddio siartiau CUSUM i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion ar lefel meddyg teulu ac y byddent wedi gallu canfod Shipman pe byddent wedi cael eu defnyddio ar yr adeg berthnasol. Fodd bynnag, byddai canfod cyfraddau marwolaethau gormodol ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu (oni bai eu bod yn uchel iawn yn wir) yn amhosibl o ddadansoddi ar lefel PCT neu uwch. Cydnabu, mewn realiti, y gall cleifion meddygfeydd grŵp gael triniaeth gan fwy nag un meddyg teulu, felly gallai monitro ar lefel meddygfa deulu fod yn fwy priodol nag ar lefel meddyg teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, cydnabu y byddai’n anoddach i ganfod patrwm marwolaethau anarferol y gellid ei briodoli i feddyg teulu unigol os oedd y monitro’n cael ei wneud ar lefel meddygfa deulu, yn hytrach nag ar lefel meddyg teulu unigol. Byddaf yn dod yn ôl at y pwnc hwn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Pwysleisiodd Dr Aylin y gall siartiau CUSUM amlygu patrymau marwolaethau anarferol ond ni allant eu hunain daflu unrhyw oleuni ar y rhesymau drostynt. Mae’n rhaid bod hwnnw’n fater i ymchwilio iddo. Dywedodd hefyd, os yw gwaith monitro i’w wneud, bod rhaid cael rhyw rwydwaith mewnol i ymgymryd â’r ymchwiliadau angenrheidiol. Ni fyddai unrhyw bwynt mewn cynnal y siartiau CUSUM a pheidio cymryd unrhyw sylw ar yr arwyddion yr oeddent yn eu rhoi. Awgrymodd y byddai angen i’r rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am ymchwilio i’r arwyddion gael y wybodaeth angenrheidiol i’w galluogi i ymchwilio’n effeithiol. Credai mai PCTau fyddai’n fwyaf addas i gyflawni’r dasg hon. Nid yw rhai eraill yn cytuno â hyn, fel yr esboniaf.
Dywedodd Dr Aylin ac aelodau ei dîm wrth yr Ymchwiliad, pan fuont yn edrych ar ddata marwolaethau y 1009 meddyg teulu, roedd amrywio anferthol rhyngddynt. Roedd yr amrywio hwnnw’n fwy na fyddid wedi disgwyl yn ôl siawns ar ei ben ei hun, a dim ond esboniad rhannol yn unig oedd iddo gan ffactorau cymysgedd achos fel oed, rhyw ac amddifadiad economaidd-gymdeithasol. Priodolodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm yr amrywio mawr yn rhannol i ansawdd gwael rhywfaint o’r data hanesyddol a oedd ar gael iddynt. Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud bod y data a fydd ar gael yn y dyfodol yn debygol o fod o ansawdd llawer gwell. Ffactor arall oedd annigonolrwydd y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael am ffactorau cymysgedd achos, a olygai na ellir gwneud addasiad iawn ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos. Dywedodd Dr Aylin bod mwy o ddata manwl ar gael bellach. Mae data yn ôl wardiau etholiadol ar gael, a gellir ei gysylltu â data cyfrifiad i roi addasiadau gwell ar gyfer oed, rhyw a ffactorau economaidd-gymdeithasol. Elfen bwysig iawn arall a oedd yn debygol o fod wedi cyfrannu at yr amrywio yn y cyfraddau marwolaethau oedd y ffactorau nad oes cyfrif amdanynt yr wyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio atynt. Dywedodd Dr Aylin mai un o’r negeseuon allweddol oedd bod rhai i’r amrywiad a oedd yn cael ei achos gan y ffactorau hyn gael ei ystyried yn ddigonol mewn unrhyw system fonitro sy’n cael ei rhoi ar waith. Ymddengys i mi, pe bai prototeip o’r system yn cael ei ddyfeisio a’i roi ar waith, gellid dysgu llawer am amrywio o’r profiad a fyddai’n cael ei gasglu yn y flwyddyn neu ddwy gyntaf.
Dywedodd Dr Aylin y byddai’n amhosibl gosod y siartiau CUSUM i ganfod naill ai lefelau uchel iawn o farwolaethau o fewn cyfnod byr iddynt ddigwydd neu lefelau is o farwolaethau yn fwy cyson dros gyfnod hwy. Dywedodd Dr Best mai’r elfen hanfodol sydd ei hangen i roi’r hyblygrwydd angenrheidiol i ganfod mathau gwahanol o ganlyniad oedd data o ansawdd da, nid yn unig data’n ymwneud â marwolaethau gwirioneddol, ond ‘data enwadur’ o ansawdd da, h.y. gwybodaeth yn ymwneud â’r boblogaeth cleifion yn cael ei defnyddio i gyfrifo nifer o farwolaethau disgwyliedig. Defnyddir y data enwadur i gyfrifo’r ystadegyn siart ar gyfer siart reoli CUSUM. Dywedodd fod y data enwadur hwn yn debygol o wella yn y dyfodol, yn enwedig gyda chyflwyno cofnodion electronig i gleifion. Pwysleisiodd Dr Aylin hefyd, mewn dadansoddiad ystadegol, bod y data enwadur mor bwysig â’r data’n ymwneud â marwolaethau dan sylw. Cytunodd Dr Spiegelhalter y gallai’r un broses ystadegol gael ei defnyddio i ganfod newidiadau sydyn mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau a newidiadau mwy graddol. Mater o diwnio’r system ydoedd i fod ‘â diddordeb’ mewn gwahanol fathau o amrywiad.

---  ---
Yr Angen i Waith Dadansoddi Gael ei Wneud gan Uned Ganolog
Roedd cytundeb yn y seminar y dylai’r gwaith o gasglu a chysylltu data gael ei wneud yn ganolog. Dywedodd Dr Aylin bod ansawdd y data sydd yn system gyfredol y GIG yn amrywio o ardal i ardal, a bod anawsterau o hyd gyda chleifion yn byw mewn un ardal ond a oedd wedi cofrestru gyda meddygfa deulu mewn ardal arall. Byddai’r data’n fwy cywir pe bai’n cael ei gasglu ledled y wlad. Cytunodd Dr Goldblatt, o’r SYG, bod ‘amrywioldeb enfawr’ yn ansawdd y data rhestr cleifion sydd ar gael ar gyfer rhannau gwahanol o’r wlad. Os oedd ansawdd y data marwolaethau i fod yn gyffelyb ym mhob ardal, rhaid cael system genedlaethol ar gyfer cysylltu data a’i fwydo’n ôl i’r rheiny sy’n gyfrifol am reolaeth glinigol yn lleol, h.y. y PCTau. Fel y dywedais, mae’r Adran Iechyd yn cynllunio y dylai’r gronfa ddata gael ei chadw gan Awdurdod Gwybodaeth y GIG.
Credai Dr Aylin y gallai gwaith dadansoddi’r data gael ei wneud yn effeithlon ac yn gymharol rad gan uned genedlaethol fach. Awgrymodd na fyddai gan lawer o PCTau yr arbenigedd angenrheidiol i gyflawni’r dasg hon. Gallai canlyniadau’r gwaith dadansoddi yn yr uned ganolog gael eu bwydo’n ôl i PCTau, a fyddai yn eu tro yn trosglwyddo’r canlyniadau i feddygfeydd teulu unigol. Cytunodd Dr Spiegelhalter a dywedodd y byddai dadansoddi cyfraddau marwolaethau yn ganolog a dosbarthu’r canlyniadau yn werthfawr yn nhermau effeithlonrwydd, a byddai hefyd yn galluogi rhoi arweiniad ar ddehongli canlyniadau’r gwaith dadansoddi. Dywedodd Dr Fox wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd gan yr Adran Iechyd unrhyw gynlluniau i wneud unrhyw waith dadansoddi o ddata marwolaethau ei hun. Pan gynhaliwyd y seminar, rhagwelwyd y byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd newydd.
Pwysigrwydd Gwybodaeth Leol
Pwysleisiodd Dr Aylin a’r Athro Baker eu dau bod rhaid i PCTau archwilio canlyniadau gwaith dadansoddi canolog eu hunain a’u monitro. Ni fyddai’n ddigon iddynt yn unig i drosglwyddo’r canlyniadau’n ôl i feddygfeydd teulu. Wrth gwrs, byddai’r PCTau yn gwybod nad yw cyfradd marwolaethau uchel o reidrwydd yn dangos bod meddyg yn methu mewn rhyw ffordd. Mae’n llai mynegol fyth o weithgarwch troseddol. Yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, bydd y gyfradd uchel yn cael ei hesbonio gan ryw nodwedd o arfer y meddyg neu ei boblogaeth/phoblogaeth cleifion. Enghraifft amlwg fyddai meddyg a oedd yn gofalu am gleifion mewn hosbis lleol neu mewn un neu fwy o gartrefi gofal lleol. Fe allai’r cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion felly gyfrif yn wir am gyfradd farwolaethau uwch ymhlith cleifion meddyg teulu na fyddid wedi disgwyl mewn meddygfa lle nad oedd y nodweddion hyn gan y cleifion. Nid yw’r math hon o wybodaeth sy’n benodol i feddygfa deulu yn debygol o fod ar gael y tu allan i’r ardal uniongyrchol, a dim ond ar ôl trafodaethau â’r meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu dan sylw y gall PCT ddod i wybod amdani.
Dywedodd yr Athro Baker ei fod yn disgwyl y byddai’r ddwy neu dair blynedd gyntaf ar ôl cyflwyno system fonitro yn cael eu treulio yn casglu llawer o wybodaeth ychwanegol am feddygfeydd a’u poblogaethau cleifion. Byddai hwn yn gyfnod pwysig iawn. Ar ôl casglu’r wybodaeth, byddai’r monitro’n symud i gyfnod braidd yn wahanol, sef gwyliadwriaeth tymor hir. Dywedodd yr Athro Baker ei fod yn gobeithio y byddid yn cyrraedd y pwynt lle byddai pob meddygfa - nid yn unig y rheiny a oedd wedi’u nodi fel rhai anarferol yn ystadegol mewn rhyw ffordd - yn gallu esbonio’u cyfradd marwolaethau trwy gyfeirio at eu poblogaethau cleifion.
Y Rhan sydd i’w Chwarae gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd
Yn seminar yr Ymchwiliad, soniodd yr Athro Bevan a Dr Spiegelhalter am y rhan y rhagwelwyd y gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ei chwarae mewn unrhyw system yn y dyfodol ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu. Fel yr esboniais, roedd yr Athro Bevan yn aelod o’r tîm cyfnewid a oedd yn gweithio ar ddatblygu trefniadau ar gyfer y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i’r dyfodol. Roedd Dr Spiegelhalter yn gynghorydd arbenigol i Is-bwyllgor Asesu Perfformiad y CHI; arferai’r CHI gyflawni llawer o’r swyddogaethau sydd bellach yn cael eu cyflawni gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Dywedodd yr Athro Bevan mai’r disgwyl oedd y byddai gwaith monitro a gwylio cyfraddau marwolaethau, yn ogystal â dangosyddion eraill, yn cael ei wneud gan uned ddadansoddi ganolog yn cael ei rhedeg gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Byddai canlyniadau’r monitro’n cael eu rhannu â PCTau a meddygfeydd teulu. Disgrifiodd yr Athro Bevan sut yr oedd disgwyl mai ‘calon yn curo’ y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fyddai system o swyddfeydd lleol. Roedd disgwyl y byddai’r swyddfeydd lleol hyn yn cwmpasu ardaloedd yr SHAau. Dywedodd yr Athro Bevan bod y trafodaethau yn CHI wedi awgrymu mai un o brif rolau swyddfeydd lleol y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fyddai cymhwyso’u gwybodaeth leol i’r cwestiynau a oedd yn cael eu gofyn gan yr uned ganolog dadansoddi data.
Os oedd yr uned ddadansoddi ganolog yn nodi annormaledd ystadegol (boed mewn perthynas â chyfraddau marwolaethau neu unrhyw ddangosydd arall), byddai’n hysbysu swyddfa leol y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r PCT perthnasol. Byddai’r swyddfa leol yn archwilio unrhyw ddata (gan gynnwys data rheolaeth glinigol) yr oedd yn ei gadw am y meddyg teulu neu’r feddygfa deulu berthnasol. Byddai’r PCT yn gwneud yr un peth. Byddai’r canfyddiadau’n cael eu rhannu. Yn yr achosion prin lle na fyddai unrhyw esboniad credadwy yn cael ei ganfod ar gyfer yr annormaledd, byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn cynnal ymchwiliad wedi’i dargedu. Awgrymodd y byddai ei ymateb fwy na thebyg yn cael ei deilwra yn ôl ei asesiad o allu’r PCT unigol i gynnal ei ymchwiliadau ei hun. Credai Dr Spiegelhalter mai’r patrwm arferol tebygol oedd y byddai monitro dangosyddion amrywiol fel mater y drefn yn arwain at nifer o feysydd problem yn effeithio ar feddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu yn codi ar yr un pryd, gan ei gwneud hi’n angenrheidiol cynnal ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn bosibl y byddai dangosydd unigol (fel cyfraddau marwolaethau) yn dangos amrywiad trawiadol ac yn gofyn am ymchwiliad ynddo’i hun.
Dywedodd Dr Fox wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y disgrifiad a roddwyd gan yr Athro Bevan a Dr Spiegelhalter yn unol â dealltwriaeth yr Adran Iechyd o’r trefniadau tebygol ar gyfer y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd.
Pwysleisiodd yr Athro Bevan mai prif swyddogaeth y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fyddai gwella ansawdd. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod ei waith monitro, pe bai’r Comisiwn yn canfod fod rhywbeth yn ddifrifol o le, yn amlwg byddai’n rhaid iddo weithredu. Credai y byddai’r cyfuniad o fonitro a gwyliadwriaeth (gweler paragraff 14.43) yn ‘fantol go anodd i’w dal’. Gobeithiai Dr Spiegelhalter y gellid dal y fantol. Rhagwelai y byddai’r Adran Iechyd yn sicrhau bod data marwolaethau ar gael yn gyflym. Byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn monitro’r data wedyn, gan ddefnyddio gweithdrefn wyliadwriaeth drefnus iawn. Byddai canlyniadau’r weithdrefn honno wedyn yn cael eu cyflwyno mewn modd syml ac addysgiadol i PCTau a meddygfeydd teulu.
Dyma oedd y sefyllfa pan gynhaliwyd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, ym mis Ionawr 2004. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, ysgrifennodd yr Ymchwiliad at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, yn gofyn am wybodaeth wedi’i diweddaru am y rôl yr oedd i’w chwarae wrth fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddygon teulu. Ym mis Hydref 2004, ymatebodd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd trwy ddweud bod gwaith monitro’r cyfraddau marwolaethau i
‘fod ar gael’
drwy Raglen Genedlaethol yr Adran Iechyd ar gyfer Technoleg Gwybodaeth, tra byddai asesiadau arferol o gyfraddau meddygon teulu unigol yn gyfrifoldeb y PCTau. Ymddengys, felly, nad yw’n fwriad ar hyn o bryd y dylai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd roi cartref i’r uned ddadansoddi ganolog a ragwelwyd gan yr Athro Bevan a Dr Spiegelhalter pan gynhaliwyd y seminarau. Nid yw’n eglur i mi pa un a ragwelir y byddai’r Adran Iechyd yn gwneud y gwaith dadansoddi canolog ar ddata marwolaethau, neu a fyddai ei swyddogaeth, fel yr awgrymodd Dr Fox, yn cael ei gyfyngu i ddarparu data cysylltiedig ar farwolaethau. Nid yw’n eglur ychwaith a yw’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i gael y system swyddfeydd lleol a ddisgrifiwyd gan yr Athro Bevan. Mewn llythyr diweddar i’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd at ei fwriad i
‘reoli perthnasoedd ar lefel leol’
ac i
‘weithio’n agos gyda rhanddeiliaid lleol’
. Cyfeiriodd hefyd at fwriad i roi ar brawf amrywiaeth o ffyrdd o
‘gyflawni’r amcanion ar gyfer presenoldeb lleol’
. Nid oedd unrhyw sôn am sefydlu swyddfeydd lleol. Felly, mae ansicrwydd ynghylch pa gorff fyddai’n gwneud unrhyw waith ymchwilio angenrheidiol yn deillio o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Mae’n siomedig nad yw’r trefniadau ar gyfer monitro a dadansoddi data marwolaethau a ragwelwyd pan gynhaliwyd seminar yr Ymchwiliad wedi symud ymlaen. Yn wir, mae ansicrwydd nawr ynghylch a yw’r swyddogaeth i’w chyflawni o gwbl, ac os ydyw, gan bwy. Mae’n aneglur hefyd pwy all fod yn gyfrifol am yr ymchwiliad i achos a phwysigrwydd unrhyw ddata sydd y tu allan i’r arferol.

---  ---
Y Prosiect Peilot a Gynhaliwyd gan Fwrdd Iechyd a Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol Dwyreiniol Gogledd Iwerddon
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad, a chael, gwybodaeth am un prosiect peilot a oedd yn cael ei gynnal yng Ngogledd Iwerddon i ddatblygu system ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygaeth deuluol. Cynhaliwyd y prosiect peilot, a oedd yn cael ei gynnal gan dîm o’r Bwrdd Iechyd a Gwasanaethau Cymdeithasol Dwyreiniol (Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol), ar y cyd â’r Adran Iechyd Cyhoeddus ac Epidemioleg, Prifysgol Birmingham. Yn seminar yr Ymchwiliad, rhoddwyd manylion pellach am y prosiect gan Dr Kathryn Booth, Cadeirydd Grŵp Rhanbarthol Marwolaethau Meddygfeydd Teulu Gogledd Iwerddon, a Dr Mohammed, a helpodd gyda’r prosiect peilot.
Sefydlodd Asiantaeth Gwasanaethau Canolog Gogledd Iwerddon gronfa ddata a darparodd ddata marwolaethau ar gyfer y meddygfeydd teulu yn eu hardal i bob un o bedwar Bwrdd HSS Gogledd Iwerddon. Cynhaliodd bob Bwrdd HSS ei brosiect peilot ei hun. Fel y dywedais, clywodd yr Ymchwiliad am hwnnw a gynhaliwyd gan y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol.
Roedd tîm y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol yn defnyddio siartiau rheoli Shewhart i nodi meddygfeydd teulu â chyfraddau marwolaethau addasedig a oedd yn uwch na therfyn rheoli uwch neu islaw terfyn rheoli is y siartiau, ac a oedd felly yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig. Defnyddiwyd siart rheoli hydredol i gymharu cyfradd marwolaethau pedair meddygfa deulu â’u cyfraddau marwolaethau yn y gorffennol ac â chyfartaledd cyfraddau marwolaethau Gogledd Iwerddon dros gyfnod o wyth mlynedd. Esboniodd Dr Mohammed bod y dechneg olaf hon yn osgoi problemau gyda ffactorau cymysgedd achos ac yn dangos newidiadau yn y patrwm marwolaethau o fewn meddygfa unigol dros amser.
Esboniodd Dr Mohammed, cyn i brosiect peilot y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol gychwyn, bod pryder mawr o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol ynghylch nod y gwaith yn y pen draw. Roedd pryder hefyd ynghylch y posibilrwydd o gyhoeddi data marwolaethau ac am y modd y byddai’r data hwnnw’n cael ei ddehongli gan gleifion a chan y cyhoedd. Nododd Dr Booth bod ofn, yn benodol, y byddai’r data’n cael ei gyflwyno i’r cyhoedd ar ffurf graddio. Dywedodd mai ofn arall oedd, pe dangosid bod meddygfa yn ystadegyn anarferol, efallai na fyddai aelodau’r feddygfa yn cael cyfrannu at unrhyw ymchwiliad i’r rheswm pam oedd ei chyfradd marwolaethau yn ‘disgyn y tu allan i’r ystlyslinau’ ac y gallai eu henwau gael eu ‘pardduo’ ymhlith eu cymheiriaid neu â’r cyhoedd heb gael cyfle i esbonio’r annormaledd ymddangosiadol. Deliodd tîm y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol â phryderon y proffesiwn trwy gynnal cyfres o seminarau ar gyfer meddygon teulu, cynrychiolwyr cleifion a chynrychiolwyr o swyddfeydd crwneriaid ar gychwyn ei brosiect peilot. Ceisiodd aelodau’r tîm dawelu meddwl y rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig mai amcan y prosiect peilot yn bennaf oedd gwella ansawdd gofal iechyd. Roeddent wedi llwyddo i sicrhau cefnogaeth gan gynrychiolwyr meddygon teulu. Dywedodd Dr Booth bod rhai pryderon yn cael eu mynegi o hyd yn ystod ymweliadau â meddygfeydd gan y rheiny a oedd yn gweithio ar y prosiect peilot, er ei bod hithau a Dr Mohammed yn teimlo bod cynnydd wedi’i wneud wrth berswadio’r proffesiwn bod gwerth i’r prosiect.
Os oedd yn ymddangos bod cyfradd marwolaethau meddygfa deulu yn dangos amrywiad achos arbennig, roedd y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol yn defnyddio model ymchwilio pyramid, a gafodd ei addasu o ddiwydiant, er mwyn canfod pam fod hyn wedi digwydd. Golygai cam cyntaf yr ymchwiliad gwirio data presennol gyda’r Asiantaeth Gwasanaeth Canolog ac â’r feddygfa ei hun. Trefnwyd ymweliad, a chyn yr ymweliad hwnnw, darparwyd yr holl ddata y seiliwyd dadansoddiad y tîm arno i’r feddygfa. Gofynnwyd i’r feddygfa wneud gwiriad i ddilysu’r data.
Ail gam y broses ymchwilio oedd gwirio cymysgedd achos cleifion. Paratôdd aelodau’r Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol wybodaeth a gafwyd o’r data sylfaenol am farwolaethau cleifion a’i addasu ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos fel oed, rhyw ac amddifadedd economaidd-gymdeithasol. Byddent yn esbonio i’r feddygfa beth oedd yr addasiadau yr oeddent wedi’u gwneud. Byddai aelodau’r feddygfa, gan ddefnyddio’u gwybodaeth leol eu hunain, yn cael cyfle wedyn i herio’r addasiadau hynny os oeddent o’r farn eu bod yn amhriodol mewn rhyw ffordd. Byddai’r tîm yn gwahodd aelodau o’r feddygfa dan sylw i nodi unrhyw nodweddion y feddygfa, neu ei phoblogaeth cleifion, yr oeddent yn ystyried y gallai fod wedi cael effaith ar ei chyfraddau marwolaethau.
Yn ystod ymweliad â meddygfa, byddai aelodau’r Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol yn defnyddio darn o feddalwedd o’r enw ‘data mining tool’, a oedd wedi’i gynnwys ar liniadur. Roedd hyn yn eu galluogi i gael mynediad at gyfoeth o wybodaeth, cymharu’r data ar gyfer y feddygfa blwyddyn wrth flwyddyn a hefyd cymharu ystadegau’r feddygfa â chyfartaledd Gogledd Iwerddon. Roedd yr holl wybodaeth hon yn cael ei hanfon i’r feddygfa cyn yr ymweliad. Cyn yr ymweliad, byddai’r tîm yn dadansoddi’r data mewn ymgais i greu damcaniaeth i esbonio cyfraddau marwolaethau uchel (neu isel) y feddygfa. Ni fyddai’r tîm yn datgelu ei ddamcaniaeth i’r feddygfa, gan mai un o ddibenion yr ymweliad oedd gweld a allai’r feddygfa ei hun esbonio’r rhesymau am ei hamrywiad achos arbennig.
Ym mhob achos lle’r oedd ymchwiliad yn cael ei gynnal, roedd y tîm yn fodlon erbyn diwedd ail gam yr ymchwiliad bod yr amrywiad achos arbennig yn ymwneud â data a/neu ffactorau cymysgedd achos. Dywedodd Dr Mohammed nad oedd y tîm wedi rhagweld effaith byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio ar gyfraddau marwolaethau. Dim ond mewn trafodaethau â’r meddygfeydd dan sylw y daeth hyn yn amlwg. Roedd o’r farn bod gwybodaeth leol yn allweddol i’r broses ymchwilio. Rhoddodd ddwy enghraifft o hyn. Mewn un achos, roedd meddygfa wedi cael cyfradd farwolaethau isel iawn am o leiaf tair o’r blynyddoedd a ddadansoddwyd; cododd y gyfradd marwolaethau honno’n sydyn a lefelu unwaith eto. Datgelodd ymchwiliad rhagarweiniol bod y feddygfa, yn ystod cyfnod cyntaf y dadansoddiad, wedi bod yn gwasanaethu poblogaeth prifysgol, fel bod ei chleifion yn gyffredinol yn ifanc iawn. Caeodd y brifysgol wedyn a dechreuodd y feddygfa ddenu cleifion hŷn, a oedd yn esbonio’r gyfradd marwolaethau uwch. Roedd ail feddygfa wedi cael cyfradd marwolaethau uchel iawn a oedd yn gostwng dros gyfnod. Datgelodd ymchwiliad i hyn bod y gyfradd marwolaethau yn disgyn oherwydd bod gan y feddygfa ar un pwynt gyfran uchel iawn o gleifion a oedd yn byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio, ond a oedd wedi stopio cymryd cleifion felly wedi hynny. Roedd cyfran y cleifion a oedd yn byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio, felly, wedi disgyn - gan hynny’r gostyngiad mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Nid fu’n angenrheidiol yn un o’r achosion yr ymchwiliodd iddynt i dîm y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol fynd ymhellach nag ail gam y model ymchwilio pyramid. Pe bai wedi mynd ymlaen i’r trydydd cam, byddai hyn wedi golygu gwirio adnoddau meddygfa. Byddai wedi bod yn angenrheidiol i ganfod o’r feddygfa a’r PCT a oedd gan y feddygfa unrhyw broblem benodol o ran adnoddau (e.e. mynediad gwael at lawfeddygaeth y galon) a allai fod wedi effeithio ar ei chyfradd marwolaethau. Pe bai’r trydydd cam hwn wedi methu datgelu esboniad am y gormodedd, byddai’r tîm wedi symud ymlaen i bedwerydd cam y model pyramid. Byddai hyn wedi cynnwys gwirio’r broses ofalu h.y. edrych ar y prosesau gofalu a fabwysiadwyd gan y feddygfa a chan asiantaethau eraill wrth drin grwpiau penodol o gleifion yn y feddygfa. Gallai, er enghraifft, fod wedi golygu ystyried protocolau a oedd ar waith yn y feddygfa ar gyfer trin grwpiau cleifion amrywiol. Byddid wedi cyrraedd y pumed cam os nad oedd yr un o’r camau blaenorol wedi rhoi esboniad credadwy am y gormodedd yn y cyfraddau marwolaethau. Byddai wedi golygu ymchwiliad ffurfiol o’r meddyg teulu dan sylw.
Dywedodd Dr Mohammed bod ymchwiliadau’r Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol wedi’u cynllunio i gynhyrchu gwybodaeth mewn modd systematig. Pan ddaethpwyd o hyd i ddata i esbonio’r amrywiad achos arbennig, roedd yr ymchwiliad yn cael ei atal. Fel y dywedais, roedd yr esboniadau yn ddibynnol yn gyffredinol ar wybodaeth leol. Dywedodd Dr Mohammed, os oedd system fonitro barhaus yn cael ei rhoi ar waith, ni fyddai’r rheiny a oedd yn ei gweithredu o reidrwydd yn dymuno ymchwilio i bob achos pan fyddai uned yn croesi’r terfyn rheoli. Os oedd adnoddau ar gyfer ymchwilio yn gyfyngedig, gallai fod yn briodol i flaenoriaethu trwy ymchwilio’n unig i’r unedau hynny yr oedd eu hystadegau siart bellach oddi wrth y terfynau rheoli.
Ymchwiliad Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr
Fel y dywedais, datgelodd y gwaith a wnaethpwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, pe bai eu system monitro wedi bod ar waith ar yr adeg berthnasol, byddai 12 meddyg teulu (gan gynnwys Shipman) wedi rhoi arwydd ar yr uchaf o’r trothwyon a gymhwyswyd. Wedi iddo gael ei hysbysu o’r ffaith honno, penderfynodd yr Ymchwiliad y dylai’r Adran Iechyd a’r PCT yr oedd yr 11 meddyg teulu arall ar eu rhestrau nawr gael eu hysbysu o’r ffaith eu bod yn rhoi arwydd. Byddai hynny’n galluogi’r PCTau i gynnal unrhyw ymchwiliadau yr oeddent yn ystyried a oedd yn briodol er mwyn canfod y rheswm am y gormodedd ymddangosiadol mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Roedd dau o’r ymchwiliadau a gododd o’r hysbysiad hwn o ddiddordeb penodol i’r Ymchwiliad. Cynhaliwyd y cyntaf yng Ngorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr gan dîm o PCTau Swydd Amwythig a Telford a Wrekin, gyda chymorth technegol gan Dr Mohammed (tîm Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr). Adroddwyd am yr ymchwiliad wedi hynny yn y British Medical Journal
Defnyddiodd tîm Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr y model ymchwilio pyramid yr wyf eisoes wedi’i ddisgrifio. Ei gam cyntaf oedd gwirio’r data. Yr ail oedd gwirio cymysgedd achos cleifion y ddau feddyg teulu a oedd yn destun yr ymchwiliad. Cyn cychwyn yr ymchwiliad, hysbysodd tîm Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr y ddau feddyg teulu am yr hyn yr oedd yn ei wneud. Yna cafodd y tîm y data crai a ddefnyddiwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i gydweithwyr, ynghyd â chanlyniadau eu dadansoddiadau. Cafodd y tîm wybodaeth ychwanegol hefyd am ble yr oedd pob marwolaeth wedi digwydd. Fel hyn, roeddent yn gallu gweld faint o farwolaethau oedd wedi digwydd mewn cartrefi nyrsio. Yna lluniodd y tîm ddamcaniaeth weithio ragarweiniol y gallai’r gormodedd marwolaethau fod wedi’i achosi gan y ffaith bod gan y ddau feddyg teulu, ar yr adeg berthnasol, nifer o gleifion a oedd yn byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio. Roedd yn hysbys bod cyfradd marwolaeth uchel ymhlith cleifion a oedd yn mynd i mewn i gartrefi nyrsio.
Cynhaliodd tîm Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr drafodaethau gyda’r ddau feddyg teulu a chyda’r cynghorwr meddygol gofal sylfaenol lleol, a oedd yn gyfrifol am berfformiad meddygon teulu. Archwiliodd aelodau’r tîm ddata gweinyddol o feddygfeydd y ddau feddyg teulu. Cymharwyd y cyfraddau marwolaethau gormodol ar gyfer pob meddyg teulu â nifer y marwolaethau ymhlith eu cleifion a oedd wedi digwydd mewn cartrefi nyrsio. Cynhaliwyd dadansoddiadau amrywiol o’r data ganddynt. Ar sail eu hymchwiliadau, daethant i’r casgliad bod modd priodoli cyfraddau marwolaethau uchel y ddau feddyg teulu i ‘effaith cartref nyrsio’. Fe wnaethant farnu nad oedd angen mynd ymlaen i drydydd cam y model pyramid.
Ymchwiliad Gorllewin Sussex
Cynhaliwyd yr ail ymchwiliad gan PCT Adur, Arun a Worthing i bum meddyg teulu, un o’i ardal ei hun a phedwar o PCTau eraill yn ardal Gorllewin Sussex. Darparodd y tîm ymchwilio gopi o’i adroddiad i’r Ymchwiliad, a soniodd Ms Julie Billet, Arbenigwraig Cyswllt Iechyd Cyhoeddus, amdano yn seminar yr Ymchwiliad.
Cynhaliwyd yr ymchwiliad heb yn wybod i’r meddygon teulu dan sylw. Dywedodd Ms Billett mai’r rheswm am hyn oedd y cefndir i’r ymchwiliad, sef posibilrwydd cyhoeddusrwydd negyddol a’r pryderon y gellid fod wedi’u creu’n lleol pe bai ffaith yr ymchwiliad wedi dod yn hysbys. Roedd rhan gyntaf yr ymchwiliad yn cynnwys dadansoddiad ystadegol, gan ddefnyddio data lleol i wneud addasiadau mwy cywrain ar gyfer oed a rhyw na fu modd eu gwneud yn nadansoddiad Dr Aylin. Roedd dadansoddiad ystadegol y PCT, a oedd yn cwmpasu’r flwyddyn yr oedd pob un o’r meddygon teulu wedi rhoi arwydd am y tro cyntaf yn unig, yn cadarnhau bod pum meddyg teulu yn wir â chyfraddau marwolaethau gormodol arwyddocaol yn ystadegol o gymharu ag oed a rhyw cyfraddau marwolaethau penodol ar gyfer Gorllewin Sussex yn ystod yr un blynyddoedd. Roedd ail ran yr ymchwiliad yn cynnwys adolygiad o’r cofnodion meddygol ar gyfer y cleifion y cafodd eu marwolaethau eu hardystio gan bob un o’r pum meddyg teulu yn y flwyddyn a roddodd arwydd. Yn achos dau o’r meddygon teulu, cafwyd problemau wrth nodi tystiolaeth o gofnodion meddygol y cleifion o’r cyflwr meddygol yr oedd y meddygon teulu wedi’i ardystio fel achos marwolaeth claf. Priodolwyd y problemau hynny i ddiffygion difrifol yng nghofnodion meddygol y claf. Yn wir, roedd y diffygion yn y cofnodion o’r fath natur bod yr adolygwyr wedi awgrymu y gallai’r meddygfeydd wedi methu cynnwys y cofnodion cyfrifiadur mwyaf diweddar wrth ddychwelyd y cofnodion i’r PCT yn dilyn marwolaethau’r cleifion. Esboniad arall oedd y gallai’r set gyfochrog o nodiadau fod wedi cael ei chadw yn y cartrefi nyrsio neu’r cartrefi preswyl lle’r oedd rhai o’r cleifion wedi byw. O ganlyniad i’r bylchau yn y cofnodion meddygol, roedd rhai pryderon ynghylch rheolaeth y meddygon teulu o afiechyd cronig. Ni sefydlwyd yn ystod yr ymchwiliad a oedd unrhyw gofnodion eraill yn bodoli mewn gwirionedd. Ar ôl hynny, esboniodd un o’r meddygon teulu mewn llythyr bod ei feddygfa ef wedi bod yn ddi-bapur am rai blynyddoedd a’i fod wedi
‘teimlo nad oedd angen cynhyrchu crynodeb rhyddhau llawn ar bapur o’r cyfrifiadur ar gyfer claf a oedd wedi marw’
Ar ddiwedd yr ymchwiliad, penderfynodd y PCT mai’r esboniad mwyaf tebygol am y cyfraddau marwolaethau uwch na’r disgwyl oedd bod cyfran sylweddol o’u poblogaethau cleifion yn drigolion mewn cartrefi nyrsio neu breswyl, gyda chyfraddau uchel cyfatebol o farwolaethau. Bryd hynny, cafodd y ffaith iddynt fod yn destun ymchwiliad ei ddatgelu i’r meddygon teulu. Fe’u gadawyd i’r Cyfarwyddwyr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a’r Arweinwyr Rheolaeth Glinigol ar gyfer y PCTau perthnasol i godi’r materion gyda’r meddygon yn ymwneud â chadw cofnodion a rheoli afiechyd cronig a gafodd eu nodi yn ystod yr ymchwiliad.
Mohammed MA, Rathbone A, Myers P, Patel D, Onions H, Stevens A (2004) ‘An investigation into general practitioners associated with high patient mortality flagged up through the Shipman Inquiry: retrospective analysis of routine data’. British Medical Journal, Cyfrol 328: tt 1474-1477.

---  ---
Roedd yn rhaid i PCT Adur, Arun a Worthing ddyfeisio’r broses ymchwilio gyfan iddo’i hun. Dywedodd Ms Billett mai un o’r anawsterau oedd gwybod lle ddylai’r ymchwiliad stopio. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai o gymorth mawr pe bai rhyw arweiniad clir ar gael i PCTau ar strwythur a phroses i’w dilyn wrth gynnal ymchwiliadau. Roedd cytundeb cyffredinol yn y seminar bod angen arweiniad felly. Cefnogodd yr Athro Baker ddatblygiad protocol strwythuredig. Awgrymodd mai canlyniadau potensial ymchwiliad fyddai, yn gyntaf, bod esboniad clinigol boddhaol am y canfyddiadau afreolaidd ymddangosiadol. Ni fyddai’r canlyniad hwnnw’n gofyn am weithredu pellach. Yr ail ganlyniad posibl fyddai bod problem gyda pherfformiad meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu; gallai hynny arwain at ddarparu cefnogaeth neu adferiad neu wrth ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau disgyblu. Y trydydd canlyniad posibl fyddai nodi ymddygiad troseddol posibl. Awgrymodd yr Athro Baker bod rhaid cael eglurder ynghylch y pwynt yr oedd ymchwiliad wedi’i gyrraedd a pham ei fod wedi cyrraedd y pwynt hwnnw. Awgrymodd y dylai’r heddlu gael rhywfaint o fewnbwn i lunio protocol. Dylent gynghori ynghylch ar ba bwynt y gallent ddymuno dod yn gysylltiedig mewn ymchwiliad. Awgrymodd Dr Grenville, yn cynrychioli’r BMA, y dylid ymgynghori â’r sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol hefyd mewn cysylltiad â llunio protocol ymchwilio.
Awgrymodd Dr Fox, ar ran yr Adran Iechyd, bod dau fath gwahanol o ymchwiliad a allai ddeillio o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau. Byddai’r cyntaf yn digwydd yng nghyd-destun monitro dichonol arferol lleol pan oedd PCT neu feddygfa deulu yn edrych ar ddata yn y ‘modd dysgu, gwella’. Byddai’r math hwn o ymchwiliad yn wahanol iawn i hynny a fyddai’n digwydd pan oedd PCT wedi cael ei rybuddio i’r ffaith y gallai fod ‘problem’ gyda meddygfa. Awgrymodd Dr Fox bod angen canllawiau gwahanol i ddelio â’r ddau fath hwnnw o ymchwiliad. Pan oedd ymchwiliad ffurfiol i’w gynnal, pwysleisiodd bwysigrwydd nodi’r cwestiwn yr oedd yr ymchwiliad i fod i’w ateb. Heb hwnnw, byddai’n amhosibl gwybod pa bryd yr oedd y cwestiwn wedi’i ateb a pha bryd y dylid atal yr ymchwiliad. Rhagwelodd Dr Fox mai gweddol anaml y byddai ymchwiliadau ffurfiol yn cael eu cynnal. Roedd yn bryderus ynghylch y ffaith mai anaml y byddai unigolion yn gysylltiedig ag ymchwiliadau felly ac na fyddent mewn sefyllfa i ennill unrhyw brofiad o’r modd i ddelio â nhw. Awgrymodd y byddai’n bwysig datblygu banc o wybodaeth am y modd y dylai ymchwiliadau felly gael eu cynnal.
Mynegwyd amheuon ynghylch a fyddai gan PCTau, sy’n sefydliadau bach gyda llawer o gyfrifoldebau eraill, yr adnoddau a’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol i gynnal yr ymchwiliadau a fyddai’n dod yn angenrheidiol o ganlyniad i feddygon teulu’n rhoi arwydd o fewn system fonitro. Teimlai Ms Billett y dylai’r dasg o ymchwilio gael ei chyflawni gan PCTau, gan y gallent gyfrannu at y dasg eu dealltwriaeth o’r ffactorau lleol a allai ddylanwadu ar gyfraddau marwolaethau meddygfa deulu neu feddyg teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn amau a fyddai’r gallu gan bob PCT i ymgymryd â’r dasg. Roedd yr ymarferiad wedi bod yn ddefnyddiol i’w PCT hi, gan iddo nodi problemau gyda dau feddyg teulu ac amlygu pwysigrwydd gwarchod ansawdd a chywirdeb systemau data hanesyddol y PCTau. Fodd bynnag, roedd wedi defnyddio cryn dipyn ar amser ac adnoddau.
Credai’r Athro Baker bod ymchwiliad mor gymhleth â hwn yn debygol o fod y tu hwnt i allu’r rhan fwyaf o PCTau. Derbyniodd werth gwybodaeth leol, ond teimlai bod perygl o ganolbwyntio’n ormodol ar esboniad lleol yn unig, yn hytrach na mabwysiadu golwg ehangach a mwy gwrthrychol. Awgrymodd y dylai mewnbwn lleol gael ei gymysgu â phrofiad rhanbarthol neu genedlaethol a gasglwyd, er mwyn sicrhau dod ag arbenigedd a gwrthrychedd i ymchwiliadau. Cyfeiriodd Dr Grenville at y trosiant uchel o staff mewn PCTau ac awgrymodd ei bod yn debygol o fod yn anodd i PCTau unigol adeiladu’r gronfa wybodaeth a fyddai’n ofynnol i ymgymryd ag ymchwiliadau felly.
Y dewis arall i ymchwiliad lleol fyddai ymchwiliad gan gorff allanol. Roedd yn ymddangos mai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd oedd yr ymgeisydd mwyaf tebygol. Dywedodd Ms Billett y byddai ymchwiliad gan gorff allanol yn debygol o gael ei ganfod gan feddygon teulu fel mwy o fygythiad. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r derbyniad y byddai ymchwiliad felly’n ei gael yn dibynnu ar y modd y byddai’n cael ei gynnal. Cytunai hi a Mrs Scott y byddai eu PCTau nhw eisiau gallu cyfrannu at unrhyw ymchwiliad felly a oedd yn effeithio ar feddyg teulu yn eu hardal.
Yn fy marn i, mae’n bwysig y dylid dod ag arbenigedd a gwrthrychedd gwirioneddol i ymchwiliadau felly. Rwy’n cydnabod yr angen i PCTau fod yn gysylltiedig, er mwyn gallu gwneud defnydd o’u gwybodaeth leol. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf o’r farn y byddai’n briodol, naill ai mewn egwyddor nac yn ymarferol, i PCTau fod â’r prif gyfrifoldeb am ymchwiliad ffurfiol i feddyg a oedd wedi rhoi arwydd o fewn system fonitro. Fel y dywedodd yr Athro Baker, nid yn unig na fyddai’r sgiliau angenrheidiol ganddynt na chyfle digonol i’w datblygu, gall fod diffyg gwrthrychedd ynddynt hefyd. Byddai perygl y gallai gwybodaeth leol ac enw da gael gormod o amlygrwydd a gallent gael eu gweld yn darparu esboniad diniwed am ffigurau a ddylai fod wedi codi pryder gwirioneddol. Nid wyf yn mynegi barn ynghylch pwy ddylai fod yn gyfrifol am gynnal ymchwiliadau felly. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa mor aml y byddant yn ofynnol. Os yw’n dod yn hysbys mai prin y bydd gofyn amdanynt, fel y rhagwela Dr Fox, dylai tîm cenedlaethol bach fod yn ddigon, yn cael ei drefnu o bosibl gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Os, ar y llaw arall, y canfyddir bod ymchwiliadau felly’n ofynnol yn eithaf aml, gall yn wir fod yn angenrheidiol i ddarparu cyfleuster yn rhanbarthol. Os felly, mae’n rhaid i’r rheiny sy’n gyfrifol yn y rhanbarthau weithio i ddulliau a phrotocolau cyffredin. Byddai bodolaeth arbenigedd cenedlaethol neu ranbarthol yn darparu ffynhonnell cyngor hefyd i PCTau a oedd yn dod ar draws posibilrwydd problem wrth gasglu data yn y ‘modd dysgu, gwella’ y soniodd Dr Fox amdano.
Ar ôl Ymchwiliad
Cododd Dr Spiegelhalter y cwestiwn beth fyddai’n digwydd wedi i ymchwiliad ganfod bod esboniad clinigol derbyniol am gyfradd marwolaethau ormodol. Os oedd y gwaith monitro’n parhau a bod y gyfradd marwolaethau uchel yn parhau, byddai arwydd arall ar ryw bwynt. Byddai’n rhaid gwneud penderfyniad wedyn ynghylch a ddylid ymchwilio eto (a allai fod yn wastraff adnoddau yn wir ac yn destun gofid i’r meddyg dan sylw) neu gymryd bod yr esboniad a nodwyd yn flaenorol yn rhoi cyfrif boddhaol am y gormodedd parhaus (a allai fod yn rhagdybiaeth ffug). Dywedodd y byddai’n rhaid gwneud penderfyniadau wedyn ynghylch y dull gweithredu i’w fabwysiadu mewn amgylchiadau felly.
Rwy’n cytuno y byddai’n rhaid rhoi ystyriaeth ofalus i achos felly. Byddwn wedi meddwl mai’r dull iawn fyddai i ail ymchwilydd (ac un mwy profiadol o bosibl) i adolygu’r ymchwiliad cyntaf, yng ngolau’r ffaith bod y gyfradd marwolaethau uchel yn ymddangos fel be bai’n parhau. Os oedd yn fodlon â’r fethodoleg a chasgliad yr ymchwiliad cyntaf, ac o’r farn fod yr esboniad a dderbyniwyd bryd hynny yn cyfrif hefyd am barhad y gyfradd marwolaethau uchel, ni ddylai fod angen cynnal ail ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, byddai’n rhaid cynnal ail ymchwiliad os oedd unrhyw bryder yn parhau ar ôl yr adolygiad. Beth bynnag, ni ddylai adolygiad felly gael ei wneud yn lleol, am y rhesymau a roddais yn barod.

---  ---
Yn y seminar, cafwyd trafodaeth am rai o’r problemau a allai fod yn gysylltiedig â monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Ymarferoldeb Monitro ar Lefel Meddyg Teulu Unigol
Yn ystod y cyfnod cyfan yr oedd y dadansoddiad a wnaethpwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm yn ei gwmpasu, roedd Shipman (ac, wedi hynny, y meddyg locwm a ddaeth yn ei le), yn ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun. Dangosodd y dadansoddiad y byddai wedi rhoi arwydd yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, cododd y cwestiwn wedyn, pe bai wedi bod yn aelod o feddygfa deulu fwy (fel ag yr oedd nes 1992), byddai ei farwolaethau gormodol wedi peri i’r feddygfa roi arwydd.
Dywedodd Dr Aylin wrth yr Ymchwiliad, os oedd cyfradd farwolaethau ormodol yn cael ei hachosi gan un meddyg i’w gogynnwys o fewn meddygfa deulu fawr, byddent yn anochel yn dod yn anoddach o lawer i’w canfod. Dywedodd y byddai modd tiwnio’r siart CUSUM i godi gwahaniaethau mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau o fewn meddygfa yn cael eu hachosi gan feddyg unigol. Fodd bynnag, pe bai’r trothwy rhybudd i’w osod ar lefel a fyddai’n codi gwahaniaethau felly, byddai hyn yn arwain at nifer fawr o gamrybuddion ystadegol. Dywedodd Dr Aylin, gyda data gwell ac addasiadau gwell ar gyfer cymysgedd achos neu ar gyfer ffactorau nad oes cyfrif amdanynt nag a fu’n bosibl yn y dadansoddiad ystadegol a wnaethpwyd ganddo ef a’i dîm, gallai fod modd codi, yn y data marwolaethau ar gyfer meddygfa o chwe meddyg, ormodedd o 25 o farwolaethau yn cael eu hachosi’n flynyddol gan feddyg teulu unigol. Byddai hwn yn ormodedd mawr; roedd gan Shipman ormodedd o 25 o farwolaethau yn ystod tair blynedd ei ymarfer yn unig.
Nododd Dr Aylin, os oedd marwolaethau y gellid fod wedi’u hosgoi yn cael eu hachosi gan systemau meddygfa a oedd yn effeithio ar fwy nag un meddyg, gallai cyfradd marwolaethau ormodol ymddangos yn haws. Awgrymodd, o safbwynt ansawdd gofal yn cael ei roi i gleifion, bod meddygfa deulu yn uned ddadansoddi resymol. Fodd bynnag, yn nhermau canfod marwolaethau gormodol y gellid eu priodoli i weithredoedd meddyg teulu unigol o fewn y feddygfa, mae’n amlwg ei fod yn erfyn di-awch. Er fy mod yn cytuno â Dr Aylin y gall monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ar lefel meddygfa deulu fod â rhywfaint o werth iddo, ymddengys i mi, er mwyn bod yn ddigon sensitif i ganfod gormodedd o farwolaethau yn cael ei achosi gan weithgarwch meddyg teulu unigol, mae’n rhaid monitro ar lefel meddyg teulu. Byddai monitro ar lefel meddyg teulu unigol - yn hytrach na lefel meddygfa deulu - yn galluogi olrhain meddyg teulu hefyd gydol ei yrfa/gyrfa. Mae hyn yn bwysig oherwydd tuedd gynyddol meddygon i symud rhwng meddygfeydd.
Os oes gwaith monitro i’w wneud ar lefel meddyg teulu, rhaid bodloni dau amod. Yn gyntaf, mae angen cysylltu gofal claf ei hun i feddyg teulu penodol, fel bod modd, pan fydd y claf yn marw, cyfrif yn synhwyrol am y farwolaeth fel un y ‘gellir ei phriodoli’ i’r meddyg teulu hwnnw/honno at ddibenion monitro. Ni fyddai unrhyw werth mewn dyrannu cleifion i feddyg teulu penodol fel mater o drefn weinyddol yn unig. Yn ail, rhaid bod modd cyfrifo cyfanswm poblogaeth cleifion ar gyfer bob meddyg teulu. Gellid gwneud hyn trwy wneud cysylltiad rhwng cleifion a enwir a’r meddyg teulu hwnnw/honno, neu drwy ddyrannu cyfran o boblogaeth cleifion y feddygfa i’r meddyg teulu trwy gyfeirio at wybodaeth fel nifer y sesiynau’n cael eu gweithio gan y meddyg teulu.
Mae newidiadau diweddar i’r trefniadau ar gyfer meddygaeth deuluol wedi’i gwneud yn anodd cysylltu claf â meddyg teulu unigol. Dan y Contract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol newydd (a dan y contractau gwasanaethau meddygol personol sydd wedi’u cyflwyno’n ddiweddar), mae cleifion i’w cofrestru â meddygfa deulu erbyn hyn ac nid â meddyg teulu unigol. Felly ni fydd modd, ar sail y data sydd ar gael, i gysylltu claf ymadawedig â meddyg teulu unigol at ddibenion monitro. Hyd yn oed cyn y newidiadau diweddar, gallai’r cysylltiad rhwng claf a’r meddyg yr oedd wedi cofrestru gydag ef/hi fod yn gamarweiniol, gan y gallai cleifion fod wedi cofrestru gydag un meddyg, ond efallai bod eu gofal yn cael ei rannu gan feddygon eraill o fewn y feddygfa. Mae’r math hwn o ofal a rennir wedi dod yn fwy cyffredin mewn blynyddoedd diweddar.
Dywedodd yr Athro Baker wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai ragweld y posibilrwydd o’i gwneud yn ofynnol i rai cleifion gael eu dyrannu gan feddygfa deulu, fel bod meddyg teulu a enwir ar gyfer bob claf unigol. Fodd bynnag, teimlai y gallai hyn fod yn ‘gofyn gormod braidd’ gan rai meddygfeydd a chleifion. Credai y dylai fod modd amcangyfrif â chryn hyder y gyfran o gleifion mewn meddygfa yr oedd meddyg teulu unigol yn gofalu amdanynt, trwy gyfeirio at batrymau gwaith aelodau’r meddygon teulu o fewn y feddygfa. Yn y tymor hwy, awgrymodd y gallai systemau gwybodaeth electronig gwell (gan gynnwys cofnodion cleifion electronig) alluogi mesur yn uniongyrchol nifer y cleifion yn cael gofal gan feddyg teulu unigol. Nododd, hyd yn oed nawr, bod bron pob un o’r ymgynghoriadau rhwng claf a gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd o fewn meddygfa yn cael eu cofnodi’n electronig. Os oedd data dienw yn dod ar gael, byddai modd pennu cyfran yr ymgynghoriadau rhwng claf unigol a phob meddyg teulu o fewn y feddygfa a dyrannu cleifion i feddygon teulu a enwir ar sail y cyfrannau hynny. Byddai modd cael gwybodaeth hefyd am weithgareddau meddygon locwm a gafodd eu cyflogi o fewn y feddygfa. Nododd yr Athro Baker y byddai’r system hon hefyd yn galluogi gwneud addasiadau manwl gywir i adlewyrchu oed a rhyw cleifion yn cael eu dyrannu i feddyg teulu penodol. Cefnogodd Dr Aylin syniad yr Athro Baker o ganolbwyntio ar nifer yr ymgynghoriadau rhwng claf a meddyg teulu unigol er mwyn pennu poblogaeth cleifion y meddyg teulu hwnnw/honno.
Soniwyd yn y seminar am rai anfanteision potensial i ddull yr Athro Baker. Credai Dr Goldblatt, os oedd rhaid casglu gwybodaeth am ymgynghoriadau cleifion cyn gallu dadansoddi data marwolaeth, byddai hyn yn cyflwyno oedi i’r system fonitro. Roedd Dr Fox yn bryderus y byddai darparu gwybodaeth am ymgynghoriadau cleifion yn rhoi baich gormodol ar feddygfeydd teulu ar adeg pan oedd yr Adran Iechyd yn ceisio lleihau’r baich hwnnw.
Nododd yr Athro Bevan, os oedd y wybodaeth am ymgynghoriadau cleifion yn cael ei chasglu er mwyn monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau gyda’r bwriad unigol o ‘adnabod Shipman arall’, byddai’n anodd i’w gyfiawnhau. Fodd bynnag, gallai’r wybodaeth gael diben ehangach i’w wasanaethu yng nghyd-destun monitro a gwelliannau yn ansawdd gofal. Dywedodd y bu pryder o fewn y CHI ynghylch ‘bwlch anferthol’ yn y wybodaeth ystadegol oedd ar gael am feddygaeth deulu. Roedd hyn mewn cyferbyniad â faint o wybodaeth oedd ar gael mewn perthynas â gofal ysbyty. Nododd bod 90% o gyswllt cleifion yn digwydd ar lefel meddygaeth deuluol. Dywedodd y gallai’r potensial fod yno i sefydlu cronfeydd data i gasglu’r data perthnasol fel rhan o symudiad ehangach i wella ansawdd gofal mewn meddygaeth deuluol.
Soniodd yr Athro Baker bod o leiaf dau gynllun yn bodoli lle’r oedd grwpiau o feddygfeydd yn gweithredu systemau cyfrifiadur tebyg wedi ymgymryd â chasglu a rhannu data’n ymwneud ag ystod o faterion. Dywedodd fod y cynlluniau hynny wedi galluogi cynnal chwiliadau o gronfeydd data’n cynnwys gwybodaeth am gysylltiadau hyd at filiwn o gleifion gyda meddygon a nyrsys. Dywedodd Dr Baker wrth yr Ymchwiliad am nifer o brosiectau sydd ar waith gan yr RCGP. Dywedodd bod gwaith yn cael ei wneud ar ddull lle gallai data gael ei dynnu’n awtomatig o system gyfrifiadur meddygfa deulu heb angen i’r feddygfa weithredu o gwbl.
Os oes monitro effeithiol i’w wneud o gyfraddau marwolaethau ar lefel meddyg teulu unigol, rhaid canfod rhyw ffordd o wneud cysylltiad go iawn rhwng claf unigol sydd wedi cofrestru gyda meddygfa a meddyg teulu a enwir o fewn y feddygfa honno. Rhaid seilio hynny ar y gofal sy’n cael ei ddarparu mewn gwirionedd ac nid ar unrhyw ffactor gweinyddol. Rwy’n cytuno â’r Athro Baker y dylai fod modd gwneud hyn trwy gyfeirio at gyswllt gwirioneddol â chleifion. Bydd llawer o gleifion ifainc iach, wrth gwrs, sydd prin yn cysylltu â’u meddygon sy’n gorfod cael eu dyrannu’n dybiannol i un aelod o’r feddygfa. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r dyrannu’n gorfod cael ei adolygu o dro i dro fel bod modd, os oedd claf yn dechrau datblygu angen am ofal cyson, yn cael ei ail-ddyrannu/hail-ddyrannu os oedd angen i’r meddyg a oedd yn darparu’r gofal. Byddwn wedi meddwl bod modd gwneud hynny. Byddwn wedi meddwl hefyd y byddai o gymorth i ddealltwriaeth meddyg teulu o’i feddygfa/meddygfa ei hun i gael mynediad at ddata am gleifion yr oedd yn eu trin a’u nodweddion. O’r hyn ddywedodd yr Athro Bevan wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ymddengys y gall fod gan y data ddefnydd ehangach nag mewn monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn unig. Ymddengys i mi hefyd, gyda’r datblygiadau mewn technoleg y clywodd yr Ymchwiliad amdanynt, dylai fod modd casglu’r data angenrheidiol heb roi baich gormodol ar feddygfeydd. Rwy’n gobeithio y caiff mesurau felly eu harchwilio gan fy mod yn gadarn o’r farn y bydd dadansoddi ystadegau marwolaethau cyfunol meddygfa grŵp yn erfyn di-awch iawn yn wir wrth ganfod arfer clinigol gwael neu droseddoldeb.
Dros y blynyddoedd diweddar, bu cynnydd yn nifer y meddygon locwm sy’n darparu gofal. Bu cynnydd hefyd yn y defnydd o wasanaethau allan o oriau. Bydd hyn yn parhau gyda’r newidiadau i’r trefniadau i ddarparu gwasanaethau allan o oriau ym mis Ionawr 2005. Yn y seminar, gofynnwyd i Dr Aylin a oedd wedi ystyried y modd y gallai cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygon teulu locwm a gwasanaethau allan o oriau gael eu monitro. Esboniodd nad yn y materion ystadegol yr oedd yr anawsterau, ond wrth gasglu’r data angenrheidiol yn cysylltu marwolaeth â meddyg locwm penodol neu asiantaeth allan o oriau, ac wrth bennu cyfanswm nifer y cleifion yn cael gofal gan y meddyg locwm hwnnw neu’r asiantaeth honno. Awgrymodd y gallai fod modd monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion yn cael gofal gan asiantaeth allan o oriau. Gellid pennu’r boblogaeth cleifion yn cael gofal gan asiantaeth felly trwy gyfeirio at feddygfeydd teulu a oedd yn defnyddio’r asiantaeth. Os oedd system fonitro i’w chyflwyno, byddai’n angenrheidiol archwilio’r posibiliadau gwahanol ar gyfer casglu’r data hwn.
Ble i Osod y Trothwy
Problem arall a nodwyd yn y seminar oedd gwybod ble i osod y trothwy rhybudd, er mwyn peidio achosi nifer fawr o gamrybuddion.
Dywedodd Dr Aylin ei fod ef a’i dîm wedi ceisio peidio â bod yn ‘rhy benodol’ ynghylch ble dylid gosod y trothwy. Dywedodd mai un o gryfderau’r dulliau CUSUM oedd bod modd cyfrifo’r cyfraddau canfod ffug a llwyddiannus fel y byddai’r rheiny a oedd yn gosod y trothwy rhybudd yn gwybod sut yr oedd y siart yn debygol o berfformio. Golygai hynny na chafodd y trothwyon eu dewis yn fympwyol. Nododd Dr Mohammed, dan ddull arfaethedig Dr Aylin, bod cyfrifo’r cyfraddau canfod ffug a llwyddiannus yn dibynnu ar ragdybiaeth bod cyfraddau marwolaethau 5% y meddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu’n cael eu harchwilio allan o reolaeth. Dywedodd nad ydym yn gwybod, mewn gwirionedd, faint o unedau sydd allan o reolaeth. Awgrymodd fod y cyfrifiadau’n ddefnyddiol at ddibenion enghreifftiol, ond na allent ddatrys y broblem sylfaenol nad yw cyfran y meddygon teulu â chyfradd marwolaethau ormodol yn anhysbys. Gwnaeth Dr Goldblatt bwynt tebyg. Cytunodd Dr Best a Dr Aylin na ddylai cyfrifiadau ystadegol bennu ble i osod y trothwyon. Dylent gyfrannu’n unig at y dewis o drothwyon gan eraill. Byddai’n angenrheidiol i ystyried ystyriaethau ymarferol yn ymwneud ag adnoddau ac â’r mathau a nifer yr ymchwiliadau y teimlwyd eu bod yn briodol i’w cynnal. Dywedodd Dr Aylin y byddai nifer y rhybuddion meddygol gwir a’r camrybuddion meddygol yn rhoi arwydd dan y system fonitro yn cyfrannu’n gyson at y penderfyniad ynghylch ble i osod y trothwyon rhybudd.
Pryd Fyddai Shipman wedi Rhoi Arwydd?
Roedd rhywfaint o bryder wedi’i fynegi cyn y seminar am y ffaith, ar sail y dadansoddiad ystadegol a gynhaliwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, ei bod yn ymddangos y byddai Shipman wedi rhoi arwydd ym 1996 yn unig. Byddai’r oedi o ran amser wrth gasglu’r data perthnasol wedi golygu na ellid fod wedi canfod yr arwydd nes diwedd 1997. Ni fyddai hyn wedi bod fawr o amser cyn mis Mawrth 1998 pan adroddodd y diweddar Dr Linda Reynolds am ei hamheuon am Shipman. Arweiniodd ei hadroddiad hi at ymchwiliad cyntaf - ac aflwyddiannus - yr heddlu. Mynegwyd pryderon ynghylch gwerth system fonitro a fyddai wedi cymryd cyhyd i ganfod Shipman.
Pan holwyd ef am hyn, nododd Dr Aylin mai ym 1993 yn unig yr oedd y cyfnod yr oedd ei ddadansoddiad wedi cwmpasu wedi cychwyn. Pe bai’r dadansoddiad wedi bod ar waith am y cyfnod cyfan pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer, gellid fod wedi disgwyl iddo roi arwydd yn gynharach o lawer. Hefyd, fe wnaeth ansawdd gwael y data a’r addasiad cyfyngedig ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos hi’n llai hawdd i ganfod patrwm anarferol o farwolaethau. Ymddengys i mi, gyda data o ansawdd gwell, byddai addasiadau manylach ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos a’r defnydd o’r dull cronnol, llofrudd cyfresol neu feddyg a oedd yn esgeuluso’i gleifion/chleifion yn gyson yn rhoi arwydd o fewn amser rhesymol. Fodd bynnag, rhaid cydnabod na fyddai meddyg a oedd yn lladd claf yn achlysurol yn unig, neu a oedd yn cyflymu marwolaethau cleifion o gyfnod byr yn unig, yn cael ei ganfod/chanfod gan system fonitro felly.
Pan gyflwynwyd eu gwaith i’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, awgrymodd Dr Aylin y byddai pob meddyg teulu, yn ystadegol, yn rhoi arwydd rywbryd neu’i gilydd dan ei system ef. Achosodd yr awgrym hwn gryn dipyn o bryder. Yn y seminar, esboniodd fod ei sylw ef wedi’i wneud yng nghyd-destun monitro ar gyfer cyfnod annherfynol yn y dyfodol. Roedd wedi cyfrifo, gan ddefnyddio’r trothwyon a ddefnyddiwyd yn ei ddadansoddiad, y gallai 1.5% o feddygon teulu roi arwydd drwy hap a damwain yn llwyr dros gyfnod o 50 mlynedd. Byddai, felly, yn cymryd nifer o filoedd o flynyddoedd i bob meddyg teulu yn cael ei fonitro/monitro i roi arwydd o ganlyniad i siawns yn unig.
Effaith Byw mewn Cartref Gofal ar Gyfradd Marwolaethau
Roedd pob un o ganlyniadau’r ymchwiliadau yng Ngogledd Iwerddon, Gorllewin Canolbarth Lloegr a Gorllewin Sussex, yr wyf wedi’u disgrifio, yn amlygu’r berthynas rhwng y cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddyg teulu neu feddygfa deulu a nifer y cleifion hynny sy’n byw mewn cartrefi nyrsio. Gall yr effaith hon ymestyn i gleifion yn byw mewn cartrefi preswyl hefyd. Mae’r ffaith bod claf yn byw mewn cartref nyrsio yn awgrymu ei fod/bod mewn cyflwr iechyd gwaeth ac â lefel uwch o ddibyniaeth na chlaf mewn cartref preswyl. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, fodd bynnag, nad felly yr oedd hi bob tro; weithiau, mae ystyriaethau ymarferol yn rheoli derbyn claf i un math o gartref neu fath arall. At ddibenion y drafodaeth hon, byddaf yn cyfeirio at gartrefi nyrsio a chartrefi preswyl yn gyfunol fel ‘cartrefi gofal’, a byddaf yn cymryd bod byw yn y naill neu’r llall yn cael effaith ar gyfraddau marwolaethau.
Os yw patrwm y tri ymchwiliad yn cael ei ddilyn, ymddengys yn debygol y bydd cyfrif am lawer o’r rhybuddion gwir ystadegol gan y ffaith bod cyfran uwch na’r cyfartaledd o boblogaeth cleifion y meddyg teulu dan ymchwiliad yn byw mewn cartrefi gofal. Bydd ymchwilio i’r rhybuddion hyn, felly, yn arwain yn anochel at wario adnoddau’n ddiangen.
Un ffordd o osgoi hyn fyddai gwneud addasiad cymysgedd achos er mwyn cyfrif am nifer cleifion meddyg teulu sy’n byw mewn cartrefi gofal. Mae tair problem o leiaf gyda’r dull hwnnw. Un broblem yw y gall addasiad gelu bodolaeth cyfradd farwolaethau uchel y dylai’r awdurdodau fod yn ymwybodol ohonynt. Mae’n bosibl y gall meddyg fod yn gyfrifol - trwy ddiffyg gofal neu weithgarwch troseddol - am farwolaethau cleifion mewn cartref gofal. Pe bai addasiad yn cael ei wneud ar gyfer preswylwyr mewn cartref gofal, efallai na fyddai cyfradd marwolaethau ormodol o’r achos hwnnw’n cael ei chanfod. Yr ail broblem yw y gall meddyg teulu, i raddau o leiaf, ddylanwadau ar dderbyn claf i gartref gofal. Fel y dywedais, mae peryglon wrth addasu ar gyfer ffactor cymysgedd achos sydd o fewn rheolaeth testun y monitro. Mae’r drydedd broblem yn ymwneud â chasglu’r data angenrheidiol i alluogi gwneud addasiad cywir. Awgrymodd Dr Farhang Tahzib, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus, PCT Adur, Arun a Worthing, y dylai’r ffaith fod claf wedi’i dderbyn/derbyn i gartref gofal gael ei chofnodi ar system ddata ganolog y GIG. Awgrymodd y gallai hyn gael ei wneud trwy gysylltu gwybodaeth o gartrefi gofal a chan y Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol (sydd bellach yn rhan o’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd) â’r system GIG. Byddai gwybodaeth felly’n galluogi canfod nifer y cleifion sydd wedi cofrestru gyda phob meddyg teulu a oedd yn byw mewn cartrefi gofal. Awgrymodd Ms Billett y dylai’r wybodaeth gael ei hanfon i feddygfeydd teulu, a all fod yn anymwybodol bod un o’u cleifion wedi’i dderbyn/derbyn i gartref gofal.
Yn ddamcaniaethol, roedd hwn i weld yn syniad da. Fodd bynnag, roedd Dr Goldblatt yn amau y byddai modd casglu data yn y modd yr awgrymodd Dr Tahzib. Dywedodd y gallai dynodiad cartrefi gofal fel cartrefi nyrsio neu fel cartrefi preswyl newid yn eithaf aml ac yn sydyn, ac felly byddai’n anodd diweddaru data. Hefyd, roedd cleifion yn cael eu derbyn i gartrefi gofal am gyfnodau amser gwahanol. Roedd rhai’n cael eu derbyn am gyfnodau byr o ofal seibiant. Roedd cleifion eraill yn cael eu derbyn am gyfnod byr yn unig cyn eu marwolaeth. Roedd rhai cleifion yn symud rhwng cartrefi mewn ardaloedd PCT gwahanol. Cadarnhaodd Dr Grenville y pwyntiau hyn ac ychwanegu bod rhai wardiau ysbyty yn debyg iawn i gartrefi nyrsio, er na fyddent yn cael eu categoreiddio felly.
Dywedodd Mrs Scott, o PCT Croydon, bod ei PCT hi, wrth baratoi data cymharol ar gyfraddau marwolaethau cleifion meddyg teulu, wedi hepgor marwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd mewn cartrefi gofal. Teimlwyd ei bod yn amhriodol cymharu meddygfeydd a oedd â phoblogaethau cleifion mawr yn byw mewn cartrefi gofal gyda meddygfeydd ag ychydig neu ddim cleifion mewn cartrefi preswyl. Roedd gan y PCT wybodaeth dda am nifer y gwelyau mewn cartrefi gofal ac am ba feddygon teulu oedd yn gofalu am gleifion yn y gwahanol gartrefi. Roedd y PCT yn gallu nodi marwolaethau a oedd yn digwydd mewn cartrefi gofal. Roedd yn ystyried sefydlu system ar gyfer dadansoddi marwolaethau mewn cartrefi gofal. Dywedodd Mrs Scott mai’r prif anhawster oedd y newid aml mewn dynodiad cartrefi gofal - hyd yn oed mewn gwelyau unigol o fewn cartrefi gofal. Dywedodd y byddai gofyn cael llawer o wybodaeth leol a monitro gofalus i ddelio â’r newidiadau hyn.
Dywedodd Dr Aylin wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai fyth modd addasu ar gyfer pob agwedd ar gymysgedd achos. Dywedodd nad oedd y faith na fyddai modd addasu ar gyfer pob posibilrwydd yn atal dadansoddiad rhag cael ei wneud ar sail y data a oedd ar gael. Awgrymodd y gallai fod achos ar gyfer gwneud dadansoddiadau gydag addasiad, a heb addasiad, ar gyfer trigolion mewn cartrefi gofal.
Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai’n ymarferol casglu data am bersonau’n cael eu derbyn i gartrefi gofal. Gall fod yn bosibl nodi’r rheiny sy’n cael eu derbyn ar sail dros dro yn llwyr, e.e. cyfnod gwella neu ofal seibiant. Byddwn wedi meddwl hefyd y byddai o gymorth i feddygfeydd teulu ac i PCTau gael gwybodaeth am y nifer o gleifion yn byw mewn cartrefi gofal a hefyd mewn sefydliadau eraill fel hosbisau. Gellid yn ddiau ddyfeisio ffyrdd o ddadansoddi a chymharu cyfraddau marwolaethau trigolion mewn cartrefi gofal a mathau eraill o sefydliadau. Cam cyntaf fyddai ymchwilio â’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd pa wybodaeth yn union y mae’n ei chadw a pha mor ddiweddar yw’r wybodaeth.

---  ---
Yn y seminar, roedd rhywfaint o drafod ynghylch dulliau ystadegol gwahanol y gellid eu defnyddio wrth ddadansoddi cyfraddau marwolaethau ac y gallai fod â manteision dros ddefnyddio’r siartiau CUSUM a eiriolwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm. Byddaf yn delio â’r rhain yn fyr iawn.
Roedd y drafodaeth gyntaf yn ymwneud â rhinweddau cymharol siartiau rheoli Shewhart a siartiau CUSUM. Prif reswm Dr Aylin dros ffafrio siartiau CUSUM oedd, fel y dywedais, eu gallu i gasglu data hanesyddol. Cyfeiriodd hefyd at eu heffeithlonrwydd wrth bennu codiadau cyson, graddol mewn marwolaethau a gwyriadau mawr a sydyn mewn marwolaethau. Nododd Dr Mohammed, a oedd o blaid defnyddio siartiau Shewhart, bod y siartiau rheoli hydredol yn dangos cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygfa unigol yn datgelu tystiolaeth o berfformiad hanesyddol y feddygfa honno. Cyfeiriodd at dryloywder siartiau rheoli Shewhart a pha mor hawdd yr oeddent i’w deall.
Barn Dr Roberts oedd bod y ffaith bod siartiau CUSUM yn defnyddio gwybodaeth o’r gorffennol yn golygu eu bod yn well rhagwelyddion o’r hyn fyddai’n digwydd yn y dyfodol. Roedd Dr Spiegelhalter hefyd o blaid defnyddio siartiau CUSUM i’w defnyddio mewn system fonitro ganolog. Cytunodd â Dr Aylin ynghylch pwysigrwydd casglu data hanesyddol. Roedd hefyd yn ffafrio’r dechneg fwy ffurfiol ar gyfer gosod trothwyon rhybudd a eiriolwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, yn hytrach na’r hyn a ddisgrifiodd fel ‘synnwyr y fawd’ a ddefnyddiwyd i bennu’r terfynau rheoli ar gyfer siartiau Shewhart. Fodd bynnag, roedd Dr Spiegelhalter o blaid dull ychydig yn wahanol i ddefnyddio data hanesyddol.
Wrth blotio’u hystadegyn siart blynyddol, byddai Dr Aylin a’i gydweithwyr yn syml yn gwneud cyfanswm o’r canlyniadau o flynyddoedd blaenorol a chadw ychwanegu blwyddyn wrth flwyddyn. Effaith hyn oedd rhoi pwys cyfartal ar sylwadau hanesyddol a diweddar. Dull arall fyddai addasu canlyniadau blaenorol er mwyn rhoi mwy o bwys ar ddata mwy diweddar a llai o bwys ar ddata mewn blynyddoedd blaenorol. Ni cheisiodd Dr Aylin a’i dîm wneud hyn, gan nad oedd yn eglur i ba raddau y byddai’n briodol i roi llai o bwys ar wybodaeth o’r gorffennol.
Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter ei bod yn well ganddo ef ddiystyru data hanesyddol yn raddol. Effaith hynny fyddai rhoi’r pwys mwyaf ar y wybodaeth mwyaf diweddar a rhoi llai o bwys wrth i ddata fynd yn hŷn. Eiriolai diystyru graddol, er mwyn peidio achosi newid sydyn trwy ddileu data hanesyddol.
Pwysleisiodd Dr Spiegelhalter nad oes angen i system fonitro fod yn gyfyngedig i ddefnyddio un dull ystadegol. Gellid defnyddio dulliau gwahanol at ddibenion gwahanol ac i gyflwyno’r data i grwpiau gwahanol o bobl. Awgrymodd mai’r system a ddyfeisiwyd gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm fyddai’r system fwyaf addas i’w defnyddio fel erfyn sicrhau ansawdd. Gellid ei defnyddio’n ganolog ar gyfer monitro niferoedd mawr o unedau, a gallai roi rhybuddion a fyddai wedyn yn cael eu trosglwyddo i lawr i’r rheiny a oedd i ymchwilio iddynt. Mewn geiriau eraill, gellid defnyddio’r system at ddibenion gwyliadwriaeth.
Awgrymodd Dr Spiegelhalter, pan oedd y data’n cael ei roi i PCTau a meddygfeydd, dylid ei gyflwyno yn glir ac yn syml. Trwy siartiau Shewhart y gellid gwneud hyn orau efallai. Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter y byddai modd symud rhwng y ddau ddull ystadegol ac felly cael nifer o olygon o’r data. Ni fyddai angen unrhyw adnoddau ychwanegol. Cytunodd Dr Aylin nad oedd siartiau CUSUM yn briodol ar gyfer bwydo’n ôl yn uniongyrchol i feddygon teulu. Byddai’n rhaid mabwysiadu dulliau eraill o gyflwyno’r wybodaeth.
Cododd mater arall mewn perthynas â thriniaeth meddyg teulu, sydd â chyfradd marwolaethau isel am gyfnod, ar siart CUSUM. Mae’r siart CUSUM wedi’i osod ar sero, felly os yw cyfradd marwolaethau meddyg teulu yn is na fyddid wedi disgwyl, mae’r ystadegyn siart yn cael ei blotio ar sero. Nid yw’n cael mynd yn is na sero ac adeiladu credyd trwy gofrestru gwerthoedd negyddol. Mae hyn yn wahanol i’r dull cymhareb tebygolrwydd dilyniannol yr oedd Dr Spiegelhalter wedi’i ffafrio yn wreiddiol. Dan y dull hwnnw, mae’r ystadegyn siart yn adeiladu ‘credyd’. Y perygl yw y gallai adeiladu gormod o gredyd, felly os yw cyfradd marwolaethau meddygfa yn codi, byddai’n cymryd mwy o amser i’r feddygfa roi arwydd, gan y byddid yn gwneud yn iawn am y dirywiad i ryw raddau gan y perfformiad da blaenorol. Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter, wrth ddefnyddio’r dull cymhareb tebygolrwydd dilyniannol, roedd wedi canfod bod adeiladu credyd yn broblem go iawn ac yn arwain at ddiffyg sensitifrwydd. Er y credai bod rhai manteision yn y dull cymhareb tebygolrwydd dilyniannol, teimlai bellach bod y siart CUSUM yn well. Roedd hefyd o blaid y dull yn cael ei hyrwyddo gan Dr Aylin a’i dîm, sef defnyddio efelychiadau cyfrifiadur a data blaenorol go iawn i weithio’r cyfraddau canfod ffug a gwirioneddol ac yna gadael y penderfyniad ynghylch ble i osod y trothwy i’r rheiny a oedd yn gyfrifol am redeg y system fonitro.
Awgrymodd Dr Spiegelhalter y dylai fod cynllun peilot i ddylunio’r system, i osod y trothwyon ac i fireinio’r ffordd y mae’n gweithio. Awgrymodd y dylai’r cynllun peilot ddefnyddio data a oedd mor debyg â phosibl i’r data a fyddai’n cael ei ddefnyddio yn y pen draw. Pan oedd y system yn cael ei rhoi ar waith, byddai angen monitro ei defnydd yn fanwl a’i haddasu yn ôl yr angen.
Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter y byddai’n bryderus iawn â’r awgrym, a gynigiwyd gan rai, y dylai monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau gael ei adael i gymariadau gweledol o ddata marwolaethau crai gan PCTau. Soniodd am ei brofiad yn Ymchwiliad y Bristol Royal Infirmary a dywedodd fod yr ysbyty dan sylw yn ‘boddi dan bapur’, gyda digon o gyfle ar gyfer cymharu gweledol, ond nid oedd unrhyw beth wedi’i wneud ynghylch y wybodaeth a ddangoswyd gan y data. Roedd angen system ffurfiol yn ei farn ef. Mynegodd yr Athro Baker y farn na fyddai cymhariaeth weledol yn ddigon sensitif na dibynadwy. Roedd yn debygol y byddai rhywfaint o wybodaeth yn cael ei cholli, fe gredai.

---  ---
Awgrymodd nifer o gyfranogwyr yn y seminar bod llawer o feddygon teulu yn teimlo bod y syniad y gallai cyfraddau marwolaethau eu cleifion gael eu monitro yn fygythiad mawr. Gwnaeth Dr Grenville y pwynt, yn cynrychioli’r BMA, os oedd meddygon teulu ‘cwbl ddi-fai’ i’w gor-ymchwilio, byddai hyn yn cael effaith niweidiol ar forâl ac, yn y pen draw, ar ofal cleifion. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am bryderon aelodau o’r proffesiwn meddygol am y gwaith sydd wedi’i wneud yng Ngogledd Iwerddon.
Soniodd Dr Booth y bu pryder arbennig yng Ngogledd Iwerddon y byddai data ar farwolaethau yn cael ei gyflwyno i’r cyhoedd ar ffurf graddio neu dablau cynghrair. Roedd cytundeb cyffredinol yn y seminar y byddai cyhoeddi graddau meddygon teulu yn ôl cyfraddau marwolaethau yn amhriodol ac yn ddi-fudd. Nododd Dr Aylin y gall graddio syml fod yn beryglus. Golyga’n anochel bod un feddygfa ar waelod y tabl cynghrair a chaiff ei labelu y feddygfa ‘waethaf’. Byddai angen cael rhywfaint o ddealltwriaeth o ddosbarthiad marwolaethau rhwng meddygon teulu, er mwyn canfod a oedd meddygfa yn ystadegyn anarferol go iawn, neu a oedd yn cynrychioli pen ôl dosbarthiad arferol yn unig. Cytunodd yr Athro Baker a Dr Spiegelhalter y byddai graddio’n ddi-fudd. Dywedodd Dr Spiegelhalter bod dulliau eraill y gellid eu defnyddio i daflu goleuni’n glir ar achosion dargyfeiriol.
Credai Dr Aylin a’i dîm, fodd bynnag, y gallai fod defnydd i raddio cyfraddau marwolaethau ar gyfer meddygon teulu mewn ardal PCT - wedi’u haddasu’n briodol ar gyfer ffactorau cymysgedd achos - wrth gyfleu gwybodaeth gymharol am ddata marwolaethau i feddygon teulu, a bod y graddfeydd yn cael eu cyflwyno mewn modd priodol. Yn nodweddiadol byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud yn graffigol trwy gyflwyno cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygon teulu gydag ystod o werthoedd (a elwir yn gyfyngau hyder) yr oedd eu cyfraddau marwolaethau yn debygol o amrywio ynddynt.
Mae graddfeydd o’r math hyn eisoes yn cael eu cynhyrchu mewn rhai ardaloedd. Dywedodd Mrs Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod ei PCT hi yn darparu gwybodaeth gymharol am 60 neu 70 o ddangosyddion perfformiad i feddygfeydd teulu yn ei ardal, a hynny’n flynyddol. Am yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf, mae data marwolaethau wedi bod yn un o’r dangosyddion. Mae dangosyddion meddygfa’n cael eu trafod mewn ymweliadau rheolaeth glinigol blynyddol.
Gallaf ddeall yn iawn pam y byddai meddygon teulu yn teimlo y gallai cyhoeddi graddfeydd cyfraddau marwolaethau meddygon teulu fod yn gamarweiniol, yn annheg ac yn niweidiol i foral meddygon a gofal cleifion. Yn fy marn i, ni ddylai ddigwydd. Dylid cyflwyno’r data i feddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu fel mewn astudiaeth wyddonol, gydag esboniad o’r fethodoleg a’i chyfyngiadau a’r cyfyngau hyder sy’n berthnasol. Yna, gan gymryd bod meddygon teulu yn gallu deall a dehongli’r deunydd ar y ffurf hwnnw, dylai fod o werth gwirioneddol iddynt at eu dibenion rheolaeth glinigol ar lefel unigol a lefel meddygfa.

---  ---
Ers i fater monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ennill amlygrwydd yn sgil gweithgareddau Shipman, efallai nad yw’n syndod bod canfyddiad mai unig bwrpas monitro felly yw ‘dal Shipman arall’. Fodd bynnag, mae’r rheiny sydd o blaid sefydlu system fonitro yn dadlau y byddai buddion iddi a oedd yn ymestyn ymhell y tu hwnt i ganfod - ac atal o bosibl - meddyg llofruddiog.
Roedd cytundeb ymhlith cyfranogwyr yn y seminar y gallai fod dau ddefnydd gwahanol ac ar wahân i’r broses monitro data marwolaethau. Gwella ansawdd oedd y cyntaf o’r rhain. Credai’r Athro Baker, os oedd data marwolaethau ar gael a bod meddygfeydd teulu’n meddu ar yr arbenigedd angenrheidiol i ddeall y data a dysgu oddi wrtho, dylai fod modd defnyddio’r data at ddibenion gwella ansawdd yn lleol. Byddai ail ddefnydd y monitro at ddibenion sicrhau ansawdd. Byddai hyn yn golygu defnyddio’r data i arsylwi annormaledd a allai ddangos problem gyda pherfformiad, neu weithgarwch troseddol hyd yn oed.
Ni allai Dr Mohammed rhoi unrhyw enghreifftiau penodol o welliant mewn ansawdd gofal a oedd wedi dod yn sgil prosiect y Bwrdd HSS Dwyreiniol, er ei bod yn ddyddiau cynnar, wrth gwrs. Awgrymodd, fodd bynnag, y byddai monitro’n helpu wrth ddeall y ffactorau sy’n cyfrannu at ormodedd mewn cyfraddau marwolaethau. Gallai hyn arwain at welliant mewn ansawdd gofal a gallai hefyd nodi ymddygiad troseddol o bosibl. Byddai’n hoffi i system fonitro edrych at gyfraddau marwolaethau uchel ac isel. Credai y gallai hyn arwain at nodi arfer da - yn ogystal ag arfer gwael - a gallai wneud y broses yn un llai bygythiol i’r proffesiwn meddygol. Cadarnhaodd Dr Aylin y byddai modd, gan ddefnyddio siartiau CUSUM, edrych ar gyfraddau marwolaethau uchel ac isel.
Nododd Dr Grenville y gallai monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ateb diben deuol. Gallai fod yn ‘erfyn grymus ar gyfer gwella arfer’. Ar yr un pryd, gallai fod yn erfyn hefyd ar gyfer canfod ‘Shipman arall’ pe bai un yn dod i’r golwg. Teimlai Dr Grenville mai gwella ansawdd ddylai’r prif nod fod, gyda chanfod troseddoldeb yn ‘sgil gynnyrch’. Roedd eisiau sicrhau bod monitro’n darparu’r ‘budd mwyaf i’r rhan fwyaf o bobl’. Teimlai y byddai’n gwneud hyn trwy wella arfer. Dyfynnodd fel enghraifft y sefyllfa a allai godi os oedd monitro’n dangos bod gan feddygfa ormodoedd o farwolaethau yn sgil afiechyd cardiofasgwlaidd o fewn y feddygfa a’r ardal. Os oedd modd, yn y broses o ddefnyddio data marwolaethau i wella tynged pobl, roedd modd hefyd canfod arfer gwael neu enghreifftiau (a fyddai’n brin iawn yn ei farn ef) o arfer troseddol. Dywedodd Dr Grenville y byddai’n hynod falch. Ei bryder ynghylch sefydlu system fonitro oedd, pan oedd y system ar waith, gallai annog cred anghywir y byddai’n anochel yn dal ‘y Shipman nesaf’. Nid oedd yn meddwl y byddai’n gwneud hynny o reidrwydd, oherwydd, os oedd meddyg â’i fryd/bryd i weithredu yn yr un modd â Shipman yn y dyfodol, roedd yn annhebygol o wneud hynny yn y sefyllfa mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Fodd bynnag, gyda’r eithriad hwnnw, gallai Dr Grenville weld buddion gwirioneddol mewn monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau.
Teimlai’r Athro Baker bod gwerth gwirioneddol mewn meddygfeydd teulu’n cael eu data marwolaethau eu hunain, a bod y wybodaeth angenrheidiol ar gael iddynt i’w galluogi i gymharu’u data eu hunain â data meddygfeydd eraill. Awgrymodd, er enghraifft, pe bai meddygfa deulu’n canfod ei bod yn cael mwy o farwolaethau cardiofasgwlaidd na ellid fod wedi disgwyl o’r ffigurau ar gyfer meddygfeydd eraill, gallai hwn fod yn ‘sbardun da’ iddynt edrych ar y modd yr oeddent yn trin cleifion â ffactorau risg ar gyfer afiechyd cardiofasgwlaidd. Cytunodd Dr Baker, yn cynrychioli’r RCGP, â’r Athro Baker ynghylch buddion meddygfeydd yn cael dealltwriaeth o’u cyfraddau marwolaethau eu hunain. Credai y gallai system o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau weithredu fel rhwystr i droseddwr potensial. Fodd bynnag, mynegodd y farn hefyd na fyddai system felly o reidrwydd yn effeithiol wrth ganfod gweithgareddau meddygon locwm neu feddygon a oedd yn gwneud gwaith allan o oriau, ac na fyddai, felly, o reidrwydd yn canfod troseddoldeb ar ran meddyg yn gweithio yn y meysydd hynny.
Mynegwyd rhai amheuon ynghylch y graddau yr oedd ymddygiad meddygon teulu â’r potensial i ddylanwadu ar gyfraddau marwolaethau eu cleifion. Nododd Dr Goldblatt bod cysylltiad agos â llawer o afiechydon ac achosion marwolaeth â ffactorau economaidd-gymdeithasol a ffactorau eraill (e.e. y driniaeth yn cael ei derbyn gan glaf mewn ysbyty neu’r gofal mewn cartref nyrsio neu’r claf yn cydsynio â thriniaeth) sydd y tu allan i reolaeth meddyg teulu’r claf. Nid yw rhai cyflyrau’n agored i driniaeth o gwbl. Ymddengys yn debygol i mi hefyd y gall fod gan rai marwolaethau ffactorau cyfrannol sy’n gorwedd lawer o flynyddoedd yn y gorffennol, cyn i’r person ymadawedig ddod yn glaf yn y feddygfa deulu yr oedd wedi cofrestru â hi ar adeg ei farwolaeth/marwolaeth.
Gwnaeth Dr Goldblatt y pwynt mai nifer fach o farwolaethau y fil yn unig sydd gan bob meddyg teulu unigol yn flynyddol, ac mai cyfran gymharol fach o’r cyflyrau sy’n achosi’r marwolaethau sy’n agored i driniaeth neu ymyrraeth gan y meddyg teulu. Dim ond y gyfran fach honno o farwolaethau a all fod yn gysylltiedig â pherfformiad meddyg teulu. Dywedodd Dr Goldblatt ei fod yn credu bod monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu yn werthfawr, ond bod rhaid cydnabod y gallai lefel uchel o farwolaethau o fewn meddygfa gael ei hachosi, nid gan ansawdd gofal yn y feddygfa honno, ond gan ryw ffactor allanol. Credai bod rhaid i fonitro sefydliadau a chymdeithasau eraill fynd law yn llaw â monitro meddygaeth deuluol.
Mynegodd Dr Roberts rywfaint o amheuaeth, yn seiliedig ar ei brofiad o arbrofion clinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol, ynghylch y graddau yr oedd amrywio mewn ymddygiad meddyg teulu (e.e. trwy wella’i arfer/harfer) yn gallu dylanwadu ar y canlyniad i gleifion. Cydnabu y gall fod yn ddefnyddiol i feddyg teulu edrych ar y marwolaethau yn ei feddygfa/meddygfa, ac, ar ôl gweld, er enghraifft, bod nifer o farwolaethau yn y feddygfa yn sgil camddefnyddio sylweddau, i ystyried newid ei system o ddelio â chamddefnyddio sylweddau. Fodd bynnag, nododd nad oedd hwnnw’n ‘sylw ystadegol’, ac rwy’n credu mai’r hyn a olygai gan hynny oedd nad oedd angen gwneud dadansoddiad o gyfraddau marwolaethau er mwyn gwneud y sylw. Serch hynny, rwy’n tybio y gallai archwiliad o ddata marwolaethau beri i feddygfa ganolbwyntio ar farwolaethau a oedd wedi digwydd ac ar achosion y marwolaethau hynny mewn modd na fyddai fel arall o bosibl. Credaf mai dyna oedd y pwynt a oedd yn cael ei wneud gan yr Athro Baker a chan Dr Baker.
Dywedodd yr Athro Baker ar ddiwedd y seminar ei fod yn teimlo’n optimistaidd ynghylch gallu system fonitro i gyfuno’r rolau gwella ansawdd a sicrhau ansawdd. Teimlai’n gadarn y byddai monitro gwybodaeth am farwolaethau yn debygol o fod yn bwysig i weithgareddau gwella ansawdd lleol. Nododd mai trwy gael nifer o ffyrdd gwahanol o’i fesur y gellid mesur ansawdd yn unig. Y rheswm am hyn yw bod ansawdd gofal iechyd yn gysyniad cymhleth a dryslyd. Mae nifer marwolaethau, er nad yw’n fesur sensitif iawn o ansawdd, meddai, yn un pwysig. Dylai fod yn rhan o unrhyw gynllun cyffredinol i asesu ansawdd. Credai’r Athro Baker, o’r hyn a glywodd yn y seminar, y byddai modd cael system a allai ganfod meddygon â chyfraddau marwolaethau uchel nad oedd esboniad clinigol iddynt, ac a allai hefyd helpu meddygon a thimau gofal iechyd sylfaenol i ystyried y patrymau marwolaethau ymhlith eu poblogaeth ac i gynllunio’u prif bolisïau. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud:
‘Nid wyf yn credu ei bod yn bosibl i ni ddweud wrth y cyhoedd, heb sôn am berthnasau dioddefwyr Shipman, nad ydym yn gallu canfod ac na fyddwn yn gallu canfod yn y dyfodol meddyg sy’n llofruddio nifer fawr o gleifion. Nid wyf yn credu bod hynny’n gynaliadwy.’

---  ---
Nododd nifer o gyfranogwyr yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad pe bai, yn y dyfodol, meddyg arall gyda bwriad troseddol yn debyg i fwriad Shipman, roedd yn annhebygol o ganlyn ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad troseddol yn yr un modd ag a wnaeth Shipman. Gan hynny, felly, dywedwyd nad oedd unrhyw sicrwydd y byddai system o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn rheolaidd ymhlith cleifion meddygon teulu yn ‘dal Shipman arall’.
Rwy’n cydnabod, wrth gwrs, na fyddai system o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn rheolaidd, ar ei phen ei hun, yn rhoi unrhyw sicrwydd y byddai cleifion yn cael eu diogelu yn erbyn meddyg llofruddiog. Rwy’n cytuno hefyd gyda’r rheiny a bwysleisiodd bwysigrwydd, os oes system o fonitro rheolaidd i’w chyflwyno, sicrhau bod PCTau, y proffesiwn meddygol a’r cyhoedd yn cael eu tawelu i ymdeimlad ffug o sicrwydd, lle maent yn credu y bydd y system fonitro ei hun yn rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Un elfen o’r diogelwch hynny’n unig fyddai monitro ystadegau marwolaethau yn rheolaidd. Rwyf eisoes wedi gwneud argymhellion manwl ar gyfer diwygio’r systemau ardystio marwolaethau ac ymchwilio, a chredaf y byddent yn rhoi cryn ddiogelwch. Yn wir, fy marn i yw y byddai cyflwyno’r diwygiadau hynny, ynghyd â system o fonitro ystadegau marwolaethau, yn creu rhwystr go iawn i gamymddwyn, yn ogystal â chyfle llawer gwell i ganfod gweithgarwch meddyg fel Shipman. Er enghraifft, pe bai canlyniadau monitro wedi bod ar gael pan wnaeth Dr Reynolds ei hadroddiad i’r Crwner, byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i ganfod ar unwaith a oedd gan Shipman gyfradd marwolaethau anarferol o uchel. Pe bai’r wybodaeth a awgrymais y dylid ei chasglu ar gyfer ardystio marwolaethau wedi bod ar gael hefyd, byddai wedi bod yn bosibl wedyn i godi’r annormaledd yn y patrwm marwolaethau ymhlith ei gleifion hyd yn oed os nad oeddent eisoes wedi dod i’r amlwg o ganlyniad i fonitro rheolaidd. Yn fyr, ymddengys i mi, pe dangosid bod monitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn rheolaidd yn ymarferol, rhaid ystyried cyflwyno system o ddifrif.
Wrth gwrs, byddai’r achos dros fonitro arferol yn gryfach fyth pe dangosid y byddai buddion ynghlwm wrth fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn ychwanegol at y posibilrwydd o ganfod ymddygiad anarferol neu droseddol. Ac eithrio unrhyw ystyriaeth arall, pe bai meddygon teulu yn gallu gweld bod y data a oedd yn deillio o fonitro cyfraddau marwolaethau yn gwneud cyfraniad cadarnhaol at ansawdd gofal cleifion o fewn eu meddygfeydd eu hunain - ac yn ehangach o bosibl - byddai’r broses fonitro i weld yn llai bygythiol na fyddai fel arall. Ymddengys i mi, fel person lleyg, bod rhaid bod yr Athro Baker ac eraill yn iawn pan ddywedant ei bod yn bwysig i feddygon teulu a meddygfeydd teulu gael mynediad at, a gallu dehongli a deall, eu data marwolaethau. Wrth gwrs, nid data marwolaethau yw’r unig ddangosydd - na’r dangosydd cryfaf o reidrwydd - o ansawdd gofal cleifion. Serch hynny, mae’n ddangosydd pwysig a rhaid iddo, yn fy marn i, ffurfio rhan o’r data a ddylid ei gasglu yn ystod rheolaeth glinigol.
Rwy’n cydnabod bod anawsterau ymarferol yn y ffordd o sefydlu system foddhaol o fonitro ystadegau marwolaethau. Ymddengys mai’r anhawster mwyaf yw’r broblem o ddarparu dull dibynadwy o gysylltu claf unigol â meddyg teulu unigol. Rwy’n amau, oni bai y gellir gwneud hyn, gall system fonitro fod yn erfyn braidd yn ddi-awch i fod yn erfyn buddiol. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n optimistaidd y gellid ei wneud, gydag ewyllys. Rwy’n cytuno â’r Athro Baker nad yw’n dderbyniol i ddweud yn syml wrth y cyhoedd - ac yn enwedig teuluoedd dioddefwyr Shipman - na ellir ei wneud neu nad yw’n werth ei wneud. Yn fy marn i, mae Dr Aylin a’i dîm wedi dangos y gellir ei wneud, ac rwy’n fodlon, ar ôl clywed barnau cyfranogwyr yn y seminar, y bydd yn werth ei wneud.
Yn fy marn i, mae dadansoddi data marwolaethau yn bwysig. Cydnabuwyd gwerth y broses hon gan yr holl gyfranogwyr yn y seminar, er y cydnabuwyd hefyd yr anawsterau sydd o’n blaenau. Roedd cytundeb hefyd bod rhaid gwneud y gwaith yn ganolog. Yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid i’r Adran Iechyd nawr wneud darpariaeth i’r gwaith gael ei wneud. Roedd cytundeb yn y seminar hefyd y dylai gwaith ymchwilio i’r achos a phwysigrwydd data allanol gael ei wneud yn lleol, ond bod y broses yn gofyn am gryn arbenigedd. Rhaid i ymchwiliadau felly gael eu trefnu’n dda, bod yn gyson ac yn wrthrychol. Oni bai bod modd archwilio achosion felly’n briodol, ni fydd y system yn ddefnyddiol a gall beri pryder a dicter. Ni ragwelwyd y dylai PCT unigol ymgymryd â’r swyddogaeth hon. Ni ellid disgwyl i PCTau ddatblygu’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol, gan mai anaml iawn y bydd yr angen am ymchwiliadau felly’n codi. Os nad yw’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn bwriadu sefydlu canolfannau lleol neu ranbarthol, wedi’r cyfan, credaf y gall fod rhaid neilltuo’r gwaith ymchwilio i’r timau ymchwilio rhyng-PCTau, yr ydwyf, ym Mhennod 27, yn argymell y dylid eu sefydlu er mwyn ymchwilio i gwynion a phryderon. Nid hwnnw fyddai’r ateb delfrydol mae’n debyg, ond, pe gellid darparu hyfforddiant ac y gellid datblygu protocol ar gyfer ymchwiliadau felly, credaf y byddai’r trefniant yn ddigonol.

---  ---
Hanes
Swyddogaethau Amrywiol
Y Strwythur Presennol
Yr 'Hen' Weithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer yn Fras
Beirniadaeth o'r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a'r Mudiad dros Ddiwygio
Adnabod yr Angen am Newid

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 2, mae Cylch Gwaith yr Ymchwiliad yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo, trwy gyfeirio at achos Harold Shipman, i ymholi i gyflawniad swyddogaethau’r cyrff statudol, yr awdurdodau, sefydliadau eraill a’r unigolion hynny sydd â chyfrifoldeb am fonitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol ac i argymell pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd i ddiogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol. Rhan sylfaenol a hanfodol o fonitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol yw’r busnes o benderfynu a yw meddyg sy’n ymarfer fel meddyg teulu yn addas i barhau i wneud hynny. Cyflawnir y dasg gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC), corff rheoleiddio a disgyblu’r proffesiwn meddygol yn y DU.
Mae’r GMC yn gorff statudol â chyfrifoldeb am gofrestru pob meddyg. Mae dwy agwedd ar y ddyletswydd gofrestru: un yw cynnal y gofrestr; y llall yw penderfynu pwy fydd arni. Mae penderfynu pwy fydd ar y gofrestr yn golygu’n gyntaf gosod y safonau addysgol i’w cyflawni cyn y gall unigolyn gael ei gynnwys/chynnwys ar y gofrestr. Mae’n golygu hefyd penderfynu a ddylai enw meddyg gael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr neu a ddylai ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad gael ei atal gan yr ystyrir ei fod/bod yn anaddas i ymarfer fel meddyg. Mae’r grym gan y GMC i ddileu meddygon o’r gofrestr neu i atal eu cofrestriad, ac, fel ychwanegiad at y grym hwnnw, gall hefyd gyfyngu cofrestriad meddyg unigol, gan bennu amodau i bob pwrpas sy’n caniatáu i’r meddyg barhau i ymarfer. Mae’r GMC yn arfer ei bwerau dileu, atal a chyfyngu trwy ei ‘weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP)’, sef testun Penodau canlynol yr Adroddiad hwn.
Mae’n amlwg, dan ei Gylch Gwaith, bod rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio rôl y GMC fel y corff rheoleiddio a disgyblu i bersonau sydd eisoes yn ymarfer fel meddygon teulu. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn ymddangos i mi bod y Senedd wedi bwriadu i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r modd, o leiaf fel unrhyw beth ac eithrio cefndir, y mae person yn mynd yn feddyg teulu neu’r safonau sydd i’w cyflawni cyn y gall hynny ddigwydd. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad, felly, yn ymwneud â chyfrifoldebau addysgol y GMC.
Cafodd Shipman ei gynnwys ar y rhestr feddygol ym mis Awst 1971 a bu’n ymarfer fel meddyg teulu am dros 22 o flynyddoedd rhwng 1974 a 1998. Yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, adroddwyd i’r GMC amdano am ffurfiau amrywiol o gamymddygiad honedig ar dri achlysur, ym 1976, 1985 a 1994, cyn ymchwiliad yr heddlu a arweiniodd at ei ddyfarnu’n euog o lofruddiaeth. Ar bob achlysur, ar ôl ystyried yr amgylchiadau neu’r honiadau yng ngolau’r gweithdrefnau a oedd mewn grym ar yr adegau perthnasol, penderfynodd y GMC ganiatáu iddo barhau i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Yn amlwg, roedd disgwyl i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r honiadau, yr amgylchiadau a’r gweithdrefnau hynny ac i ystyried penderfyniadau’r GMC a effeithiodd ar Shipman. O ran tegwch i’r GMC, roedd yn amlwg yn angenrheidiol i archwilio’r gweithdrefnau a oedd ar waith ar yr adegau amrywiol pan wnaethpwyd cwynion, ac i ystyried y penderfyniadau’n effeithio ar Shipman yng nghyd-destun diwylliant y cyfnod ac yn erbyn y cefndir i’r modd y byddai’r GMC fel arfer yn penderfynu achosion felly ar yr adegau hynny.
Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad wneud argymhellion hefyd ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol. Mae’r gweithdrefnau a oedd mewn grym pan adroddwyd am Shipman ddiwethaf i’r GMC wedi newid yn fawr iawn; yn wir, fel y byddaf yn esbonio, maent wedi cael eu datblygu a’u newid yn gyson bron er canol y 1990au. Yn ddiweddar iawn cyflwynodd y GMC gyfundrefn hollol newydd o weithdrefnau FTP. Er mwyn gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gorfod archwilio datblygiad y gweithdrefnau FTP a ‘hanes’ y GMC o’u gweithredu. Rhaid iddo hefyd ystyried y gweithdrefnau newydd, nad oes ‘hanes’ gweithredol yn bodoli iddo eto.
Mae’r Cylch Gwaith yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried gweithredoedd pawb a oedd yn gysylltiedig â monitro darpariaeth gofal sylfaenol
‘trwy gyfeirio at achos Harold Shipman’
. Roedd Shipman, fel sy’n hysbys, yn llofrudd cyfresol o’u gleifion. Fodd bynnag, byddai’n rhy syml i awgrymu bod disgwyl i’r Ymchwiliad wneud argymhellion yn unig am y modd i ddiogelu cleifion rhag cael eu llofruddio gan eu meddygon teulu. Roedd Shipman yn llawer o bethau eraill heblaw am fod yn llofrudd. Roedd yn gelwyddgi ac yn dwyllwr. Ffugiodd ragnodion, ffugiodd gofnodion meddygol ac arferai amryw ffurfiau eraill o anonestrwydd. Yn y 1970au, camddefnyddiodd pethidin, cyffur rheoledig, trwy gael gafael arno’n anghyfreithlon a’i ddefnyddio’i hun; roedd, am gyfnod, yn gaeth neu’n ddibynnol ar y cyffur hwnnw. Gydol ei holl amser mewn meddygaeth deuluol, wfftiodd y rheoliadau statudol yn ymwneud â chadw a defnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Mae tystiolaeth hefyd ei fod yn anystyriol neu’n esgeulus wrth ragnodi neu roi cyffuriau. Ar un achlysur, canfuwyd ei fod wedi methu mynd at glaf yr oedd angen iddo/iddi fynd i’r ysbyty. Felly, mae ystyried gweithdrefnau’r GMC
‘trwy gyfeirio at achos Harold Shipman’
yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i ystyried gweithdrefnau’r GMC fel yr effeithiant ar feddygon sy’n dangos ystod eang o broblemau, gan gynnwys camymddygiad, anhwylder yn sgil bod yn gaeth neu’n ddibynnol ar gyffuriau a pherfformiad clinigol is na’r safon. Am y rheswm hwnnw, mae’n rhaid i’r archwiliad sy’n dilyn fod yn un manwl ac eang ei ystod o reidrwydd.

---  ---
Amcanion
Crëwyd y GMC gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1858. Y statud gyfredol sy’n rheoli ei gyfansoddiad, ei swyddogaethau a’i arferion yw Deddf Meddygaeth 1983, fel y’i diwygiwyd (Deddf 1983). Yn wreiddiol, prif bwrpas y GMC oedd rhesymoli’r llawer o wahanol fathau o gymhwyster meddygol a oedd yn bodoli ar y pryd, ac i wahaniaethu ymarferwyr meddygol cymwys yn briodol o’r nifer fawr o bersonau anghymwys a oedd yn dal eu hunain fel pobl a oedd yn cynnig gwasanaethau meddygol. Rhoddwyd rôl ddisgyblu gyfyngedig i’r GMC cynnar hefyd, ac yn unol â’r rôl honno gallai ddileu unrhyw feddyg o’r rhestr feddygol a oedd yn ei gael/chael yn euog o
‘ymddygiad anfad mewn ystyr broffesiynol’
. O amserau cynnar, roedd rhywfaint o adnabyddiaeth mai amcan sylfaenol y GMC ddylai fod i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd rhag meddygon ‘drwg’. Fodd bynnag, mewn amserau diweddar, mae’r amcan hwnnw wedi cael ei ddiffinio’r llawer cliriach ac mae’r GMC yn derbyn erbyn hyn mai diogelu cleifion a’r cyhoedd yw ei amcan pennaf o reidrwydd. Yn ddiweddar iawn, rhoddwyd adnabyddiaeth statudol i’r amcan hwnnw. Yn ôl adran 1A o Ddeddf 1983, fel y’i diwygiwyd yn 2002, prif amcan y GMC wrth arfer ei swyddogaethau yw
‘diogelu, hyrwyddo a chynnal iechyd a diogelwch y cyhoedd’
. Diffiniwyd ei ddiben gan y Comisiynwyr Elusen, wrth roi statws elusennol i’r GMC yn 2001, fel un
‘i ddiogelu, hyrwyddo a chynnal iechyd a diogelwch y gymuned drwy sicrhau safonau priodol wrth ymarfer meddygaeth’
. Mae’r datganiadau bwriad hynny’n berthnasol i brif swyddogaethau’r GMC, h.y. gosod safonau addysgol ac arfer ei rôl ddisgyblu drwy’r gweithdrefnau FTP.
Yn y lle cyntaf, roedd y GMC yn cynnwys 24 o aelodau (yn cael eu galw’n ‘y Cyngor’ gyda’i gilydd), y rhan fwyaf ohonynt wedi’u henwebu gan y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol a’r prifysgolion. Dewiswyd rhai gan y Cyfrin Gyngor. Roedd cymwysterau meddygol gan bob un ohonynt. Cynyddodd y niferoedd i 29 ym 1886, ac, o 1926, daeth yn arfer y Cyfrin Gyngor i ddewis o leiaf un aelod anfeddygol (‘lleyg’). Erbyn 1950, roedd gan y GMC 50 o aelodau, a thri o’r rheiny’n aelodau lleyg. Newidiodd y dull dewis a phenodi pan ddaeth Deddf Meddygaeth 1978 i rym, ac ers hynny mae mwyafrif o aelodau wedi cael eu dewis gan feddygon ar y gofrestr feddygol. Bryd hynny hefyd, cynyddodd nifer aelodau’r GMC yn ogystal. Erbyn 1989, roedd y nifer wedi codi i 102. Ym mis Mehefin 2003, roedd 104 o aelodau gyda 54 ohonynt wedi’u hethol, 25 wedi’u penodi gan y prifysgolion a’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol, ac enwebwyd 25 gan y Frenhines ar gyngor y Cyfrin Gyngor. Yn ôl y gyfraith, mae’n rhaid i fwyafrif o aelodau enwebedig fod yn bersonau nad oes ganddynt gymwysterau meddygol, ond, yn y blynyddoedd diweddar, yr arfer fu i’r Cyfrin Gyngor gynghori y dylai pob aelod enwebedig fod yn aelod lleyg. Mae pob aelod sy’n cael ei ethol/hethol a’i benodi/phenodi yn feddygon cofrestredig.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, lleihawyd nifer aelodau’r Cyngor i 35, yn cynnwys 19 o aelodau meddygol etholedig, dau o aelodau meddygol wedi’u penodi, ac 14 o aelodau lleyg enwebedig. Gwnaethpwyd y newid hwn gan y cydnabuwyd ei bod bron yn amhosibl i grŵp â 104 o aelodau wnedu penderfyniadau’n effeithiol. Effaith y newid hwn oedd cynyddu’r gyfran o aelodau lleyg ar y Cyngor o ryw 25% i 40%.
Datblygiad: Pwyllgor Merrison
Daeth y newid i aelodaeth etholedig o ganlyniad yn bennaf i argymhellion Pwyllgor a sefydlwyd ym 1972, dan gadeiryddiaeth Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alec Merrison (Pwyllgor Merrison). Hyd at ddiwedd y 1960au, roedd y GMC yn cael ei ariannu gan ffî cofrestru unigol gan bob meddyg pan oedd yn cofrestru. Erbyn y 1960au, roedd gweithgareddau a gwariant y GMC wedi cynyddu ac roedd angen mwy o incwm arno. Penderfynodd bennu tâl cadw blynyddol ar bob meddyg. Arweiniodd hyn at wrthryfel. Gwrthododd llawer o feddygon i dalu’r tâl blynyddol; roeddent yn dadlau ‘dim treth heb gynrychiolaeth’. Fe wnaeth y GMC fygwth eu dileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Roedd y Llywodraeth yn pryderu yn wyneb y rhagolwg o golli nifer fawr o feddygon GIG. Ar y pryd, roedd materion eraill yn rhannu’r GMC oddi wrth gyrff proffesiynol amrywiol, fel y Gymdeithas Feddygol Brydeinig a nifer o’r Colegau Brenhinol. Er mwyn rhoi ystyriaeth briodol i’r holl faterion hyn, sefydlodd y Llywodraeth Bwyllgor Merrison. Roedd ei Gylch Gwaith yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Pwyllgor:
‘Ystyried pa newidiadau sydd angen eu gwneud yn y darpariaethau presennol ar gyfer rheoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol; pa swyddogaethau a ddylid eu neilltuo i’r corff sydd â’r cyfrifoldeb am ei reoleiddio; a beth ddylai cyfansoddiad y corff hwnnw fod er mwyn ei alluogi i gyflawni’i ddyletswyddau’n fwyaf effeithiol; ac i wneud argymhellion.’
Cyhoeddodd Pwyllgor Merrison adroddiad ym 1975, gyda dau brif gynnig. Awgrymodd y dylai’r proffesiwn gael yr hawl i ethol mwyafrif aelodau’r GMC, newid a ddaeth, fel y dywedais, yn sgil Deddf Meddygaeth 1978. Heddiw, mae mwyafrif aelodau’r GMC yn dal i gael eu hethol gan ymarferwyr meddygol. Yn ddiau fe wnaeth y newid hwn ddatrys yr anniddigrwydd o fewn y proffesiwn; roedd treth i fod nawr, ond gyda chynrychiolaeth. Fodd bynnag, mae goruchafiaeth grŵp etholedig mewn corff rheoleiddio, gydag etholaeth i’w gwasanaethu, yn anochel yn arwain at wrthdaro o ran buddiannau ac amcanion. Mae’n rhaid i’r aelodau hynny sy’n cael eu hethol gan y proffesiwn, i ryw raddau o leiaf, gael yn ganolog buddiannau eu hetholwyr. Ar adegau, mae buddiannau meddygon a’r cyhoedd yn gorwedd mewn cyfeiriadau gwahanol. Eto, fel yr esboniais, prif amcan y GMC ddylai fod i
‘ddiogelu, hyrwyddo a chynnal iechyd a diogelwch y cyhoedd’
. Mae’n rhaid bod materion ariannol weithiau’n peri gwrthdaro posibl rhwng buddiannau ac amcanion. Mae’r GMC yn parhau i gael ei ariannu gan dâl cadw blynyddol sy’n daladwy gan bob meddyg. Yr eitem fwyaf o wariant o bell ffordd yng nghyllideb y GMC yw’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Mae’r nifer a’r amrywiaeth o achosion sy’n mynd drwy’r gweithdrefnau FTP wedi cynyddu’n anferthol dros y blynyddoedd diweddar. Mae’n rhaid bod penodi staff ag addysg, profiad a hyfforddiant addas ac aelodau panel digonol i weinyddu’r gweithdrefnau FTP wedi arwain at faich ariannol mwy.
Cynigiodd Bwyllgor Merrison ddiwygiadau i’r gweithdrefnau FTP hefyd, yn seiliedig ar ddatganiad clir o athroniaeth bod y gweithdrefnau hyn wedi’u cynllunio i ddiogelu cleifion yn hytrach na chosbi meddygon. Yn benodol, argymhellodd weithdrefnau newydd ar gyfer cefnogi ac adsefydlu meddygon a oedd yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd afiechyd. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau hyn ym Mhennod 22. Pa un a yw’r GMC wedi dal y fantol yn iawn rhwng diogelu cleifion a chefnogi ac adsefydlu meddygon (yn hytrach na’u cosbi), mae hynny’n fater y byddaf yn troi yn ôl ato mewn Penodau dilynol.
Argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison y dylid rhoi’r ddyletswydd statudol ar y GMC i hyrwyddo safonau uchel o ymddygiad proffesiynol. Darparwyd y pwerau perthnasol gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978. Ystyriodd y Pwyllgor hefyd y posibilrwydd y gallai’r GMC ymgymryd â rhyw ffurf ar ‘ail-drwyddedu’ meddygon o bryd i’w gilydd. Y sefyllfa bryd hynny (a heddiw) oedd, pan oedd meddyg wedi ymgymhwyso, cymerwyd yn ganiataol ei fod/bod yn parhau’n addas i ymarfer oni bai a hyd nes yr oedd yn cael ei ganfod/chanfod yn anaddas i ymarfer o ganlyniad i weithrediadau FTP. Dim ond ar ôl i’r GMC dderbyn cwyn neu adroddiad am y meddyg y gallai’r gweithrediadau gael eu rhoi ar waith. Byddai ail-drwyddedu wedi golygu rhyw fath o ail-asesu cyfnodol o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Roedd Pwyllgor Merrison o’r farn fod unrhyw argymhellion mewn perthynas ag ail-drwyddedu y tu hwnt i’w gylch gwaith, ac mae’r rhagdybiaeth y bydd meddyg yn parhau’n addas i ymarfer gydol ei yrfa/gyrfa, felly, wedi parhau. Fodd bynnag, mae’r sefyllfa honno ar fin newid dan gynigion y dylai cofrestriad meddygon gael ei ‘ail-ddilysu’ yn gyfnodol. Cynigir, bob pum mlynedd, bod pob meddyg sy’n dymuno parhau i ddal trwydded i ymarfer yn gorfod dangos i’r GMC ‘bod ganddo/ganddi wybodaeth ddiweddar a’i fod/bod yn addas i ymarfer’ yn ei faes/maes dewisedig. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r cynigion hyn ym Mhennod 26.

---  ---
Fel y dywedais, swyddogaeth y GMC sydd o ddiddordeb mwyaf uniongyrchol i’r Ymchwiliad yw cynnal y gweithdrefnau FTP. Mae ail-ddilysu cofrestriad meddygon yn fater o ddiddordeb hefyd. Fodd bynnag, er mwyn sicrhau cyflawnrwydd a rhag i rywrai feddwl nad wyf yn ymwybodol o’r gwaith pwysig sy’n cael ei wneud gan y GMC mewn meysydd eraill, byddaf yn disgrifio ei swyddogaethau eraill yn fyr iawn cyn disgrifio (yn fyr iawn yma hefyd) y gweithdrefnau FTP amrywiol. Y swyddogaethau eraill hynny yw:
gosod safonau cymhwysedd ac ymddygiad proffesiynol
cofrestriad meddygon
hyrwyddo safonau uchel mewn hyfforddiant ac addysg i feddygon.
Gosod Safonau Cymhwysedd ac Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Mae’r Pwyllgor Safonau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol a Moeseg Feddygol (y Pwyllgor Safonau) yn gyfrifol am waith y GMC wrth osod safonau cymhwysedd ac ymddygiad. Mae’n ceisio diffinio’r egwyddorion sy’n sylfaenol i arfer proffesiynol da, i gymhwyso’r egwyddorion hynny i sefyllfaoedd ac amgylchiadau newydd a datblygol, ac i gynghori’r GMC ar arweiniad y dylid ei gyhoeddi fel cyfanrwydd.
O’i ddyddiau cynnar, darparodd y GMC arweiniad i feddygon ynghylch ymddygiad annerbyniol. Hyd at ddechrau’r 1990au, roedd yr arweiniad yn cynnwys rhybuddion yn bennaf am y math o gamymddygiad a allai arwain at gamau disgyblu gan y GMC. Nid yw’r GMC yn gwneud hyn mwyach. Er 1995, mae’r pwyslais wedi newid ac mae’r GMC wedi ceisio darparu cyngor cadarnhaol ynghylch safonau arfer da a moeseg. Mae’r Pwyllgor Safonau hefyd wedi cynhyrchu, a’r GMC wedi cyhoeddi, nifer o setiau eraill o arweiniad o natur gyffredinol a phenodol.
Ym 1995, cyhoeddodd y GMC yr argraffiad cyntaf o’r cyhoeddiad ‘Good Medical Practice’, a oedd yn cynnwys datganiad o’r egwyddorion a oedd yn nodweddu arfer meddygol da, ynghyd ag esboniad am ‘Ddyletswyddau Meddyg’. Rwy’n deall bod meddygon o’r farn bod y cyhoeddiad hwn yn un hynod ddefnyddiol, ac mae wedi’i fabwysiadu neu’i addasu i’w ddefnyddio mewn llawer o wledydd eraill. Mae ‘Good Medical Practice’ ar ei drydydd argraffiad nawr, ac mae wrthi’n cael ei adolygu eto. Dywedid ei fod yn darparu’r safonau y bydd meddygon yn cael eu barnu yn eu herbyn os oes amheuaeth ynghylch eu cofrestriad dan y gweithdrefnau FTP. Dywedir bod yr egwyddorion a’r dyletswyddau a nodir yn ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn ffurfio sylfaen
‘contract proffesiynol rhwng meddygon a’u cleifion’
. Er fy mod yn derbyn yn barod bod ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn darparu’r safonau y mae meddyg yn cael ei farnu/barnu yn eu herbyn, mae’n ddyheadol o ran natur. Nid yw’n darparu - boed ar gyfer meddygon, rheolwyr gofal iechyd neu gleifion - arweiniad clir ynghylch y safonau y mae’n rhaid i’r meddyg eu cyflawni os yw i osgoi beirniadaeth neu gamau ar gofrestriad dan y gweithdrefnau FTP.
Cofrestriad Meddygon
Mae Adran 2 Deddf 1983 yn amodi bod rhaid i’r Cofrestrydd gadw dwy gofrestr o ymarferwyr meddygol. Mae’r gyntaf yn cynnwys enwau meddygon sydd wedi cofrestru’n llawn, ac mae’r ail yn cynnwys enwau meddygon sydd â hawl i gofrestriad dros dro neu gofrestriad cyfyngedig. Mae cofrestriad dros dro yn caniatáu i feddygon sydd newydd gymhwyso i ymgymryd â’r hyfforddiant clinigol cyffredinol sydd ei angen ar gyfer cofrestriad llawn. Mae hawl gan feddyg sydd wedi cofrestru dros dro i weithio mewn rhai lleoliadau penodedig yn unig. Gall meddygon â chofrestriad cyfyngedig weithio dan oruchwyliaeth meddyg â chofrestriad llawn yn unig ac mewn rhai mathau penodol o swydd. Mae’n drosedd i unrhyw berson yn fwriadol honni ei fod/bod yn ymarferydd meddygol cofrestredig os nad yw mewn gwirionedd wedi cofrestru felly. Mae’r GMC yn gweithredu trydedd gofrestr hefyd, a elwir y gofrestr arbenigol, ac mae cael eich cynnwys yn honno yn rhagofyniad ar gyfer penodiad i swydd ymgynghorol wirioneddol neu anrhydeddus yn y GIG.
Y sefyllfa bresennol yn gyffredinol yw, pan fydd wedi cofrestru, bydd hawl gan feddyg aros ar y gofrestr oni bai bod ei enw/henw yn cael ei ddileu trwy orchymyn panel FTP. Yn y dyfodol, mae’n fwriad gan y GMC i roi trwydded i ymarfer i bob meddyg sy’n dymuno arfer hawliau a breiniau’r proffesiwn. Wedyn, bydd y GMC yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob meddyg sy’n dymuno cadw’i drwydded/thrwydded i ymarfer i gael ei ail-ddilysu/hail-ddilysu. Bydd y broses hon yn cael ei chyflwyno yn 2005, ond fe gymera nifer o flynyddoedd i fod yn llawn effeithiol.
Hyrwyddo Safonau Uchel mewn Hyfforddiant ac Addysg Meddygon
Dan adran 5(1) Deddf 1983, mae gan Bwyllgor Addysg y GMC swyddogaethau cyffredinol i hyrwyddo safonau uchel a chydlynu holl gamau addysg feddygol. Ym 1993, dosbarthodd y Pwyllgor y cyhoeddiad ‘Tomorrow’s Doctors - Recommendations on Undergraduate Medical Education’, a oedd yn cynnwys argymhellion ar weithredu cwricwlwm newydd mewn ysgolion meddygol yn y DU. Yn 2002, cyhoeddwyd fersiwn diwygiedig o’r gwaith hwn, gan ddisgrifio’r hyn a oedd yn cael ei ddisgwyl o’r holl raddedigion meddygol. Cyhoeddodd y Pwyllgor nifer o draethodau hefyd, gan gynnwys adolygiad o’r cyfnodau ‘prentisiaeth’ sy’n dilyn cwblhau gradd feddygol, sef y flwyddyn cyn-gofrestru a’r flwyddyn sy’n cael ei threulio fel uwch swyddog tŷ.
Y Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Mae sail statudol y gweithdrefnau FTP i’w gweld yn Rhan V o Ddeddf 1983. Yn y gorffennol, bu tri math gwahanol o weithdrefn FTP:
y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, sef olynwyr gweithdrefnau disgyblu gwreiddiol y GMC
y gweithdrefnau iechyd, a gyflwynwyd gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978, yn dilyn argymhellion Pwyllgor Merrison. Daethant ar waith ym 1980 ac fe’u cynlluniwyd i ddelio â meddygon yr oedd afiechyd yn amharu ar eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer
y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, a ddaeth ar waith ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, ac fe’u cynlluniwyd i ddelio â meddygon y canfuwyd bod eu hymddygiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol difrifol.
Gydol yr Adroddiad hwn, byddaf yn cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau hynny fel ‘hen’ weithdrefnau FTP, a defnyddiaf yr amser gorffennol i’w disgrifio. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau FTP sydd wedi’u cyflwyno’n ddiweddar fel y gweithdrefnau ‘newydd’, a chyfeiriaf atynt yn yr amser dyfodol.

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio bod y GMC yn cynnwys 35 o aelodau, gyda 21 o’r rheiny yn ymarferwyr meddygol cofrestredig ac 14 ohonynt yn aelodau anfeddygol neu’n aelodau lleyg. Caiff y Llywydd, sy’n arweinydd ac yn arweinydd mewn enw, ei ethol/hethol gan yr aelodau am gyfnod nid hwy na saith mlynedd, ac mae’n aelod amlwg o’r proffesiwn meddygol bob tro. Y Llywydd presennol yw’r Athro Syr Graeme Catto, meddyg ymgynghorol nodedig y mae ei benodiadau cyfredol yn cynnwys Deon Guy’s, King’s College a St Thomas’ Hospitals Medical and Dental School, Is-Brifathro, King’s College Llundain, ac Athro Meddygaeth a Dirprwy Is-Ganghellor, Prifysgol Llundain.
Caiff yr 19 aelod meddygol eu dewis gan nifer o ‘etholaethau’ daearyddol gwahanol o feddygon. Penodir dau aelod meddygol gan y prifysgolion sydd ag ysgolion meddygol a’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol. Caiff yr aelodau lleyg, a enwebir gan y Cyfrin Gyngor, eu dewis o amrywiaeth o gefndiroedd. Yn ystod y gwrandawiadau, tynnodd y Prif Gwnsler dros Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside (TFSG) sylw at y ffaith bod gan nifer sylweddol o aelodau lleyg gefndir proffesiynol mewn rheolaeth neu weinyddiaeth y GIG. Awgrymwyd nad oeddent yn bobl ‘leyg’ go iawn a allai gynrychioli a diogelu buddiannau’r cyhoedd a chleifion yn benodol. O ganlyniad i’w cefndiroedd proffesiynol, byddent wedi ymdrwytho yn niwylliant y proffesiwn meddygol a rheolaeth y GIG. Awgrymodd y GMC, mewn ymateb, ei bod yn briodol i rai aelodau lleyg gael cefndir mewn gweinyddiaeth iechyd; roedd hyn yn rhoi dealltwriaeth iddynt o strwythurau eithaf cymhleth y GIG a oedd yn amhrisiadwy iddynt yn eu rôl GMC. Beth bynnag, meddai’r GMC, roedd aelodau lleyg bob un ohonynt yn annibynnol dros ben, beth bynnag fo’u cefndir, ac roeddent yn ymwybodol iawn o’u dyletswydd i ddiogelu buddiannau cleifion a’r cyhoedd.
Nid wyf yn teimlo y gallaf fynegi unrhyw farn gasgliadol ar y gwahaniaeth barn diddorol hwn. Gwelaf y fantais o fod â gwybodaeth am weithdrefnau presennol y GIG. Bydd gwybodaeth felly’n ddefnyddiol iawn i aelod GMC. Gellir dysgu’r wybodaeth, ond cymera amser. Ymddengys i mi hefyd, o dystiolaeth a glywais gan aelodau lleyg, ac amdanynt, bod rhai ohonynt yn annibynnol iawn o ran meddwl, er gwaethaf eu cefndir mewn gofal iechyd. Mae Dr Arun Midha, sydd wedi bod yn aelod o’r GMC er mis Tachwedd 2000 ac a oedd yn sgriniwr lleyg o fis Gorffennaf 2001 hyd at 2004, yn enghraifft. Nid yw Dr Midha yn feddyg meddygol; mae ei gymwysterau academaidd ym meysydd astudiaethau cymdeithasol a gweinyddiaeth busnes. Mae’n Gyfarwyddwr Cysylltiol (Busnes a Chynllunio) yr Ysgol Addysg Feddygol a Deintyddol i Ôl-raddedigion, Coleg Meddygaeth Prifysgol Cymru. Cyn cymryd y rôl honno, roedd yn dal swyddi rheoli a chynghori gyda Hybu Iechyd Cymru a Chanolfannau Cyfunol Cymru dros Iechyd Cyhoeddus (Adran o Iechyd Cyhoeddus). Rhwng mis Mai 1994 a mis Ionawr 2002, roedd yn Reolwr Rhaglenni i’r cynllun hyfforddiant meddygaeth iechyd cyhoeddus yng Nghymru. Yn y gorffennol, bu’n gyfarwyddwr anweithredol ymddiriedolaeth ambiwlans ac yn gadeirydd lleyg panel cwynion y GIG yng Nghymru. Er nad oes ganddo gymwysterau meddygol, felly, gellir gweld bod gan Dr Midha gefndir ym maes gofal iechyd. Eto roedd yn amlwg o’i benderfyniadau yn y gweithdrefnau FTP ei fod yn cymhwyso’i feddwl mewn ffordd gwbl annibynnol. Ar y llaw arall, gallaf ddeall y pryderon a fynegwyd gan TFSG. Hyd yn oed os yw’r aelodau lleyg sydd wedi gweithio mewn rheolaeth y GIG yn bennaf yn annibynnol mewn gwirionedd, fe allai eu cefndiroedd greu’r argraff eu bod yn ‘aelodau o’r un clwb’â’r meddygon. Efallai na fyddant yn dod â llygad ffres i’w harchwiliad o arferion a gweithdrefnau’r GMC. Mae’n hanfodol bod aelodau lleyg yn bobl â meddwl annibynnol, sy’n abl ac yn benderfynol i ddiogelu buddiannau’r cyhoedd, gan gynnwys cleifion. Rwyf o’r farn y dylai aelodau lleyg ddod o ystod o gefndiroedd gwahanol. Gall fod, yn y gorffennol, bod y cymysgedd wedi bod pwyso braidd yn ormodol tuag at weithwyr proffesiynol y GIG. Credaf fod y GMC wedi cydnabod grym y pwyntiau a wnaed gan TFSG, a gobeithiaf yn y dyfodol y bydd modd sicrhau bod cymysgedd priodol o gefndiroedd ymhlith aelodau lleyg.
Mae’r Cyngor yn cyfarfod ryw chwe gwaith y flwyddyn i drafod a phenderfynu ar brif faterion polisi. Fodd bynnag, mae llawer o’r gwaith datblygu polisi yn cael ei wneud gan bwyllgorau neu gan weithgorau a ffurfiwyd gan y pwyllgorau hynny. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am y Pwyllgor Addysg a’r Pwyllgor Safonau. Mae’r pwyllgorau hyn yn cynnwys aelodau GMC yn bennaf, er bod aelodau cyfetholedig gan rai ohonynt hefyd. Mae pwyllgorau eraill sydd â swyddogaethau’n amrywio dros addasrwydd i ymarfer, cofrestriad, cyllid ac adnoddau, archwilio a hil, cydraddoldeb ac amrywiaeth. Mae ‘Grŵp Cyfeirio Cleifion a’r Cyhoedd’ yn ogystal, yn cynnwys aelodau’r GMC ac eraill, sy’n cynrychioli buddiannau cleifion a defnyddwyr. Er enghraifft, mae gan Gymdeithas y Cleifion, Cymdeithas y Defnyddwyr (e elwir Which? erbyn hyn) a Fforwm y Cleifion gynrychiolaeth arno. Amcan y Grŵp hwn yw galluogi ymgynghori parhaus rhwng y GMC a grwpiau cleifion ar faterion polisi.
Mae corff go fawr o staff gweinyddol yn cefnogi gwaith y GMC o ddydd i ddydd. Y pennaeth yw’r Prif Weithredwr a’r Cofrestrydd. Deiliad presennol y swydd hon yw Mr Finlay Scott. Mae’r Cyfarwyddwyr oddi tano sydd â gofal am bedair cyfarwyddiaeth, sy’n delio ag addasrwydd i ymarfer, cofrestriad ac addysg, materion a pholisi corfforaethol, ac adnoddau.
Mae’r Gyfarwyddiaeth Addasrwydd i Ymarfer wedi’i rhannu i nifer o Adrannau, pob un ohonynt yn delio ag agwedd wahanol ar waith FTP; uwch aelod o staff yw’r pennaeth. Nid oes gan yr uwch aelodau staff hyn unrhyw gymwysterau meddygol; fel arfer mae ganddynt gefndir mewn gweinyddiaeth - llawer ohonynt yn y Gwasanaeth Sifil neu gyrff cwasi-lywodraethol. Mae’r gwaith o ddelio â’r miloedd o achosion unigol yr adroddir amdanynt bob blwyddyn i’r GMC yn cael ei wneud gan dimau o weithwyr achos, dan arweinyddiaeth a goruchwyliaeth rheolwyr gwaith achos. Eto, nid oes unrhyw gymwysterau meddygol gan yr aelodau staff hyn fel arfer. Mae’r rhan fwyaf ohonynt yn raddedigion. Hefyd, mae staff ysgrifenyddol a gweinyddol iau.
Yn y gorffennol, ymgymerwyd ag agweddau pwysig ar waith rhagarweiniol mewn prosesu achos unigol gan aelodau meddygol neu leyg y Cyngor. Yn y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, er enghraifft, roedd cwynion am gamymddygiad yn cael eu cyfeirio gan staff y swyddfa at ‘sgriniwr meddygol’ (aelod o’r Cyngor â chymwysterau meddygol), a fyddai’n penderfynu a ddylai’r gŵyn fynd ymlaen i gam nesaf y gweithdrefnau ai peidio. Proses nithio oedd hon. Os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu na ddylai’r achos fynd ymlaen i’r cam nesaf, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau, a bod y ‘sgriniwr lleyg’ yn cytuno. Mewn achosion iechyd, roedd ‘sgriniwr iechyd’, sef aelod meddygol o’r Cyngor (un a oedd yn gweithio mewn seiciatreg fel arfer), yn gyfrifol am oruchwylio meddyg a oedd yn destun cyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/hymarfer. Yn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, roedd aelod meddygol o’r GMC yn cael ei benodi/phenodi fel cydlynydd achos. Byddai ef neu hi’n gwneud penderfyniadau rhagarweiniol pwysig, a allai gynnwys drafftio datganiad o ofynion ar gyfer ail-addysgu neu adferiad y gallai’r meddyg gytuno iddo.
Yn y dyfodol, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, mae’n debygol na fydd aelodau meddygol unigol y GMC yn gyfrifol yn gyffredinol am unrhyw un o gamau rhagarweiniol y gweithdrefnau FTP, fel yr oeddent yn y gorffennol. I’r graddau y mae swyddogaethau nithio yn gofyn am arbenigedd meddygol, byddant yn cael eu cyflawni gan aelodau o staff â chymwysterau meddygol, a elwir yn archwilwyr achos. Bydd aelodau’r GMC yn ymwneud yn bennaf â materion polisi a rheolaeth. Bydd llawer llai o gyfrifoldeb ganddynt nag o’r blaen am benderfyniadau ar achosion unigol.
Yn y gorffennol, roedd pum pwyllgor yn gyfrifol am benderfynu achosion yn dod dan y tri math o weithdrefnau FTP. Y rhain oedd y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) a’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) (gweithdrefnau ymddygiad), y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC) (gweithdrefnau iechyd), a’r Pwyllgor Cyfeirio ac Asesu a’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP) (gweithdrefnau perfformiad). Hefyd, roedd gan y Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim, a grëwyd yn 2000, y dasg o benderfynu a oedd hi’n angenrheidiol atal cofrestriad meddyg neu bennu amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad tra’n disgwyl penderfyniad terfynol ar ei achos/hachos.
Yn draddodiadol, roedd panelau’r pwyllgorau FTP amrywiol yn cynnwys aelodau o’r pwyllgor priodol yn unig; er enghraifft, byddai panel o’r HC yn cynnwys digon o aelodau’r Pwyllgor hwnnw i wneud cworwm. Fodd bynnag, cynyddodd nifer yr achosion FTP a daeth yn angenrheidiol i amryfal banelau o bwyllgorau FTP i eistedd ar yr un pryd er mwyn lleihau’r oedi hir a oedd yn digwydd cyn bod achosion yn cael eu gwrando. Er mwyn gwneud hyn yn bosibl, yn 2000, ceisiodd y GMC gael, a chael, y grym i gyfethol aelodau heb fod yn aelodau GMC i eistedd ar ei bwyllgorau FTP. Roedd y personau a oedd yn cael eu cyfethol yn cael eu galw’n ‘feirniaid’, ac yna’n ‘gyfranogion’. Roedd nifer fawr o ‘gyfranogion’ (meddygol a lleyg) yn cael eu recriwtio i eistedd ar banelau pwyllgor yr FTP. Pan leihawyd nifer aelodau’r GMC yn 2003, penodwyd llawer o aelodau a oedd yn ymddeol fel cyfranogion. Erbyn canol 2004, nid oedd aelodau’r GMC bellach yn eistedd ar banelau, ac eithrio mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol; yn lle hynny, roedd panelau’n cynnwys cyfranogion yn gyfan gwbl. Yn y dyfodol, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, ni fydd aelodau’r GMC yn gymwys i eistedd ar banelau FTP, er y byddant yn cymwys i eistedd ar banelau’r Pwyllgor Ymchwilio newydd. Pa un a fyddant yn gwneud hynny mewn gwirionedd, mae hynny’n ansicr ar hyn o bryd. Bydd pob panel arall yn cynnwys aelodau nad ydynt yn aelodau o’r GMC sydd wedi cael eu hyfforddi a’u hasesu.

---  ---
Roedd yr ‘hen’ weithdrefnau FTP yn cael eu rheoli gan ystod o ddarpariaethau anstatudol, mewnol a statudol. Roedd y ddeddfwriaeth sylfaenol wedi’i chynnwys yn Rhan V o Ddeddf 1983. Fodd bynnag, roedd gan bob set o weithdrefnau ei set ei hun o Reolau statudol. Yn y gorffennol, roedd y GMC yn cael anhawster wrth gael newidiadau i’r Rheolau neu wrth sicrhau pasio deddfwriaeth eilaidd newydd. Fodd bynnag, roedd darpariaethau adran 60 Deddf Iechyd 1999 yn galluogi’r GMC i sicrhau newid i’r Ddeddf Meddygaeth yn gyflymach a chyflwyno deddfwriaeth eilaidd. Roedd adran 60 yn galluogi’r Adran Iechyd i wneud rhai newidiadau i ddeddfwriaeth sylfaenol, gan gynnwys Deddf 1983, trwy Orchymyn y Cyfrin Gyngor. Mae Gorchymyn felly’n amodol ar benderfyniad cadarnhaol yn nau dy’r Senedd. Mae gwneud rheoliadau a rheolau dan Ddeddf 1983 ac mewn perthynas â gweithdrefnau FTP ac ail-ddilysu yn fater i’r GMC ei hun, ond mae’n rhaid iddynt gael eu cymeradwyo trwy Orchymyn y Cyfrin Gyngor. Mae gan y GMC set o Reolau Sefydlog mewnol hefyd, sy’n cynnwys gweithdrefnau wedi’u cymeradwyo gan y Cyngor llawn. Roedd rhai o’r rhain yn delio ag agweddau ar y gweithdrefnau FTP. Hefyd, mae prosesau mewnol ac arweiniad sy’n rheoli’r modd y mae’r GMC yn delio ag achosion unigol. Nid yw’n eglur i mi i ba raddau y mae’r prosesau mewnol hyn a’r arweiniad wedi’u cymeradwyo’n ffurfiol gan y Cyngor llawn. Efallai eu bod wedi’u cymeradwyo gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer neu efallai iddynt gael eu gwneud dan bwerau a ddirprwywyd i’r Prif Weithredwr.
Fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, cyflwynwyd y tair gweithdrefn FTP ar wahân ar adegau gwahanol ac i fodloni anghenion canfyddedig gwahanol. Mae rhyw ffurf ar weithdrefn ddisgyblu i ddelio â chamymddygiad wedi bodoli cyn hired â’r GMC ei hun, er bod llawer o newidiadau wedi’u gwneud dros y blynyddoedd. Am lawer o flynyddoedd, roedd y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad yn delio â meddygon a oedd wedi’u cael yn euog o droseddau ac â’r rheiny yr honnwyd eu bod yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Daeth y gweithdrefnau iechyd i rym ym 1980 i fodloni’r angen i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd rhag meddygon a oedd yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd afiechyd, tra ar yr un pryd yn trin meddygon felly mewn modd cefnogol, heb fod yn gosbol, er mwyn eu helpu i ymadfer a chael eu hadsefydlu i ymarfer yn llawn. Cyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1997, a’u bwriad oedd rhoi’r grym i’r GMC i ddelio â meddygon yr oedd eu safon perfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol difrifol, ond na ellid categoreiddio’u perfformiad gwael fel SPM.
Mae’r cysyniad o SPM wedi peri cryn anhawster wrth ei ddehongli. Ym Mhennod 17, byddaf yn trafod ystyr SPM a’r amryw gynigion a wnaethpwyd dros y blynyddoedd i’w ddiffinio. Am y tro, digon yw dweud y gall amrywiaeth eang o ffurfiau gwahanol ar gamymddygiad fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Yn aml, roedd y rhain yn ymwneud â thrafodion meddyg â’i gleifion/chleifion (er enghraifft, camymddygiad rhywiol), ond gallai ymddygiad a oedd yn dwyn anfri ar y proffesiwn meddygol neu a oedd yn tanseilio hyder y cyhoedd fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM hefyd, er nad oedd yn ymwneud â chleifion yn uniongyrchol. Er enghraifft, gall anonestrwydd mewn ymchwil fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mewn cysylltiad â thriniaeth glinigol, cydnabuwyd ers tro y gallai esgeuluso cyfrifoldebau clinigol yn fwriadol, fel gwrthod darparu triniaeth pan oedd angen, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ond gallai methiannau esgeulus, yn hytrach na bwriadol, mewn cysylltiad â thriniaeth glinigol fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM hefyd, a bod y methiant dan sylw yn ddigon difrifol. Ymddengys bod rhagdybiaeth y byddai aelodau’r GMC yn adnabod achos o SPM pan fyddent yn dod ar ei draws, er bod y dystiolaeth, mewn gwirionedd, yn awgrymu bod y mater pa un a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn esgor ar wahaniaethau barn yn aml.
Yn yr un modd, nid oedd diffiniad cyffredinol o’r hyn a olygwyd gan berfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP). Fel gydag SPM, ymddengys bod rhagdybiaeth y byddai aelodau’n ei adnabod pan fyddent yn dod ar ei draws. Fel gydag SPM, parodd diffyg unrhyw ddiffiniad awdurdodol anawsterau a gwahaniaethau barn. Byddaf yn trafod ystyr SDP ym Mhennod 17.
Roedd pob cwyn, honiad a mynegiant pryder a oedd yn cyrraedd y GMC yn cael eu hystyried yn gyntaf gan reolwr achos. Byddai ef neu hi yn dilyn cyfarwyddiadau manwl wrth ystyried pa un a ddylid cau’r mater yn y cam cyntaf neu a ddylai fynd ymlaen i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Os oedd yn penderfynu bod yr achos i fynd ymlaen, byddai’n ei anfon naill ai at sgriniwr meddygol, neu, os oedd yn amlwg bod yr achos yn ymwneud â materion afiechyd, yn uniongyrchol at sgriniwr iechyd. Byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn ystyried pa un a oedd yr achos yn codi unrhyw fater FTP, boed yn SPM, SDP neu amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd afiechyd. Os oedd yn credu ei fod, byddai’r achos yn cael ei drosglwyddo i’r Adran briodol. Os oedd o’r farn nad oedd unrhyw faterion felly’n cael eu codi ac y dylid cau’r achos, byddai sgriniwr lleyg yn archwilio’r papurau. Os oedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno y dylid cau’r achos, byddai’n cael ei gau. O’r cyfnod hwnnw ymlaen, roedd y gweithdrefnau’n gwahaniaethu.
Os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol neu’r sgriniwr lleyg yn penderfynu bod cwestiwn o SPM wedi codi, roedd yr achos yn cael ei drafod yn yr Adran Ymddygiad ac yn mynd at y PPC, a oedd yn penderfynu pa un a ddylai’r achos fynd ymlaen i wrandawiad gerbron panel o’r PCC. Roedd gwrandawiadau gerbron y PCC yn cael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus. Os oedd y panel PCC yn canfod bod meddyg yn euog o SPM, roedd y grym ganddo i roi cerydd, i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg (fel ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth neu ymgymryd â hyfforddiant pellach), i atal meddyg rhag ymarfer am hyd at flwyddyn, neu ddileu ei enw/henw o’r gofrestr feddygol.
Pan oedd achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at Adran Iechyd y GMC (naill ai gan weithiwr achos neu sgriniwr), byddai’n cael ei ystyried gan sgriniwr iechyd. Yn y gorffennol, roedd dau aelod meddygol o’r GMC yn gweithredu fel sgrinwyr iechyd. O fis Mawrth 2004, penodwyd dau archwilydd achos â chymwysterau meddygol i weithredu fel sgrinwyr iechyd yn lle’r aelodau o’r GMC a oedd wedi cyflawni’r swyddogaeth hon yn flaenorol. Roedd cyfran fawr iawn o’r holl achosion y deliwyd â nhw yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn ymwneud â phroblemau seiciatrig o ryw fath neu’i gilydd. Byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn ysgrifennu at y meddyg yn ei wahodd/gwahodd i gael archwiliad gan o leiaf dau archwilydd meddygol, seiciatryddion fel arfer. Ar ôl derbyn adroddiadau’r archwiliad, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn penderfynu pa un a oedd amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ac, os felly, byddai’n dyfeisio rhestr o amodau (yn seiliedig ar yr argymhellion yn adroddiadau’r archwiliad), a byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i gytuno â nhw. Gallai’r rhain gynnwys cyfyngiadau ar amgylchiadau ymarfer (fel peidio ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain) a byddent wastad yn cynnwys gofyniad bod y meddyg yn ildio i oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Os oedd y meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer, byddai gofyniad bod goruchwyliwr proffesiynol yn cael ei benodi/phenodi.
Os oedd y meddyg yn cytuno i’r amodau arfaethedig, dywedwyd bod y meddyg yn mynd i mewn i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ‘gwirfoddol’. Roedd ef neu hi yn derbyn yr amodau ac roedd y sgriniwr iechyd yn goruchwylio eu gweithrediad, gan ofyn am adroddiadau cyfnodol gan y goruchwyliwr meddygol. Os a phan oedd yn fodlon ei bod yn briodol i wneud hynny, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd amrywio’r amodau neu’u terfynu, gan adael y meddyg yn rhydd i ymarfer. Os nad oedd y meddyg yn derbyn yr amodau yr oedd y sgriniwr iechyd yn ystyried eu bod yn briodol, neu os oedd y meddyg yn gwrthod cael ei archwilio o gwbl, neu os oedd yn anaddas i gytuno i amodau, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd benderfynu cyfeirio’r achos at yr HC, a oedd â grym i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg (yr un math o amodau ag y byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd wedi’u hawgrymu i bob pwrpas) neu i’w atal/hatal rhag ymarfer hyd at flwyddyn. Byddai’r HC yn eistedd yn breifat. Nid oedd y grym ganddo i ddileu meddyg o’r gofrestr feddygol, er y gallai adnewyddu ac ymestyn amodau neu ataliad. Mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gallai roi cyfarwyddwyd bod cofrestriad meddyg yn cael ei atal am gyfnod amhenodol.
Roedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn debyg o ran gweithrediad i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd, yn gymaint ag y gellid mynd i mewn iddynt yn wirfoddol neu gellid eu gweithredu trwy orfodaeth. Pan oedd yn ymddangos i sgriniwr meddygol y gallai perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg fod wedi bod yn ddiffygiol difrifol a’i bod yn briodol i weithredu, gallai wahodd y meddyg i gytuno i asesiad o’i berfformiad/pherfformiad gan Banel Asesu. Os oedd y meddyg yn cytuno, byddai’r achos yn cael ei drosglwyddo i’r Adran Perfformiad, lle byddai trefniadau ar gyfer yr asesiad yn cael eu rhoi ar waith. Byddai cydlynydd achos yn cael ei benodi. Yn y gorffennol, roedd dau aelod o’r GMC heb gymwysterau meddygol yn gweithredu fel cydlynwyr achos. O fis Mawrth 2004, penodwyd dau archwilydd achos â chymwysterau meddygol i weithredu fel cydlynwyr achos yn lle’r aelodau o’r GMC a oedd wedi cyflawni’r swyddogaeth hon yn flaenorol.
Byddai’r Panel Asesu’n cynnwys un asesydd lleyg a dau asesydd â chymwysterau meddygol, un ohonynt yn ymarfer yn yr un arbenigedd (neu arbenigedd tebyg) â’r meddyg dan archwiliad. Byddai un asesydd meddygol yn cael ei benodi fel y prif asesydd. Gallai asesiad gymryd rhai misoedd i’w drefnu a’i gwblhau. Pan oedd yr aseswyr wedi cyflwyno’u hadroddiad, byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn penderfynu a oedd perfformiad y meddyg i weld yn ddiffygiol difrifol. Os felly, gallai ddyfeisio datganiad o ofynion, a byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i gytuno iddynt. Gallai’r datganiad ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r meddyg ymgymryd â hyfforddiant mewn rhyw agweddau ar ei ymarfer/hymarfer a gallai bennu cyfyngiadau (e.e. gofyniad i ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth) ar ei ymarfer/hymarfer. Os oedd y meddyg yn derbyn y datganiad o ofynion, byddai’n mynd i mewn i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ‘gwirfoddol’. Byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn gofyn am adroddiadau cynnydd cyfnodol, ac, yn ei dro, yn trefnu i ailasesiad gael ei gynnal. Os oedd popeth yn foddhaol, gallai’r cydlynydd achos benderfynu y dylai’r meddyg fod yn rhydd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Os oedd y meddyg wedi methu cytuno neu gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion, neu wedi gwrthod cydweithredu mewn rhyw ffordd arall, neu os nad oedd y cydlynydd achos yn meddwl bod gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol yn addas, roedd yr achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at banel o’r CPP. Byddai’r panel yn eistedd yn breifat fel arfer. Os oedd y panel yn penderfynu bod perfformiad y meddyg wedi bod yn ddiffygiol difrifol, gallai bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg neu atal y meddyg rhag ymarfer am hyd at flwyddyn. Nid oedd grym ganddo i ddileu enw meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol. Gellid adnewyddu ac ymestyn yr amodau a’r cyfnod atal. Mewn amgylchiadau penodol, gallai panel CPP roi cyfarwyddyd i atal cofrestriad meddyg am gyfnod amhenodol.
Yr ‘Effaith Seilo’
Oherwydd bod y tair gweithdrefn FTP wedi dod i fodolaeth ar adegau gwahanol, roeddent yn gweithredu ar wahân ac yn annibynnol ar ei gilydd. Er bod modd, mewn rhai amgylchiadau cyfyngedig, i feddyg gael ei drosglwyddo o un set o weithdrefnau i set arall, ni ellid delio ag achos o fewn mwy nag un set o weithdrefnau ar unrhyw un adeg. Felly, os oedd meddyg yn dod gerbron gyda phroblemau a oedd yn cynnwys materion ymddygiad, perfformiad ac iechyd, roedd yn rhaid gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch lle byddid yn delio â nhw. Roedd y GMC yn cyfeirio at hyn fel yr ‘effaith seilo’. Mae’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd wedi’u cynllunio i oresgyn yr anhawster sylfaenol hwn. Y bwriad yw y bydd ymchwilio i bob achos gan ddefnyddio pwerau hyblyg i gael tystiolaeth o fathau amrywiol, gan gynnwys barn arbenigol am arfer clinigol, adroddiadau meddygol neu seiciatrig ar iechyd y meddyg, ac adroddiadau asesiad perfformiad. Os oes materion ymddygiad yn codi, bydd panel FTP fel arfer yn gwneud penderfyniad yn eu cylch, ond bydd y panel hefyd yn gallu ystyried unrhyw faterion perfformiad neu iechyd sy’n parhau’n destun dadl neu sy’n gofyn am bennu amodau neu sancsiwn arall.

---  ---
Beirniadaeth Allanol
Yn ei lyfr, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’
, disgrifiodd Syr Donald Irvine (aelod o’r GMC o 1979 a’i Lywydd o 1995 hyd at 2002) y modd y daeth y GMC yn destun beirniadaeth gynyddol o lawer o fannau o’r 1980au ymlaen. Yn ei Ddarlithoedd Reith o 1980, o’r enw ‘Unmasking Medicine’, roedd yr Athro (Syr erbyn hyn) Ian Kennedy, Cadeirydd presennol y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd bellach), yn feirniadol iawn o’r GMC. Roedd yn amau y byddai hunan-reoleiddio meddygol yn ddigonol erbyn diwedd yr ugeinfed ganrif. Dywedodd, er bod dyletswydd gan y GMC i ddiogelu buddiannau’r cyhoedd, nid oedd ganddo unrhyw ddull o ymgynghori â’r cyhoedd. Honnodd ei fod yn diystyru llawer gormod o gwynion am feddygon heb ymchwiliad digonol nag archwiliad cyhoeddus. Roedd o’r farn nad oedd y GMC yn cael ei ddwyn i gyfrif yn iawn gan y Cyfrin Gyngor. Roedd yn pryderu bod ymagwedd y GMC tuag at ei weithdrefnau disgyblu yn cael ei rheoli gan faint o arian yr oedd yn barod i wario arnynt. Awgrymodd ail-gofrestru cyson yn lle’r rhagdybiaeth bod meddyg, wedi iddo/iddi gymhwyso, yn parhau’n addas i ymarfer oni bai y profwyd, wrth dderbyn cwyn benodol, ei fod/bod yn anaddas. Awgrymodd hefyd y dylai fod arolygiaeth a fyddai’n gallu edrych ar bob agwedd ar arfer proffesiynol meddyg. Nododd y byddai angen canllawiau penodol ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag arfer da.
Llais beirniadol arall oedd llais Mrs Jean Robinson, Cadeirydd Cymdeithas y Cleifion ar un adeg ac aelod lleyg o’r GMC. Ym 1998, cyhoeddodd fonograff lle’r oedd yn feirniadol eithriadol o anhryloywedd gweithdrefnau’r GMC a’u methiant i wneud unrhyw beth i ddiogelu cleifion rhag perfformiad clinigol gwael meddygon anghymwys. Fe wnaeth yr Athro Rudolf Klein, o Brifysgol Caerfaddon, feirniadu ymagwedd adweithiol y GMC tuag at gwynion am gamymddygiad a’i fethiant llwyr i fynd i’r afael â phroblemau perfformiad gwael.
Ym 1989, cyhoeddodd y British Medical Journal gyfres o erthyglau gan Mr Richard Smith, y cynorthwyydd golygyddol ar y pryd. Roedd y rhain yn feirniadol eithriadol o’r GMC. Dywedwyd bod y GMC yn rhy fawr a’i aelodaeth yn rhy hen ac yn rhy geidwadol. Roedd gormod o ddiddordeb ganddo mewn materion mewnol, ac nid oedd yn ymboeni’n ddigonol am faterion yn ymwneud ag addysg feddygol ac anallu clinigol. Hefyd, dylai fod i weld (ond nid ydoedd) yn gwasanaethu buddiannau’r cyhoedd; yn lle hynny, roedd byddai’n cwyno pan oedd yn cael ei feirniadu yn y wasg.
Gellid crynhoi’r beirniadaethau hynny trwy ddweud bod y GMC yn ‘feddyg-ganolog’. Roedd i weld yn rhagdybio bod pob meddyg yn dda, yn gymwys ac yn gydwybodol nes y profwyd yn wahanol. Byddai’n delio â’r ‘rhai drwg’ yn y proffesiwn er mwyn y proffesiwn. Byddai’n gwneud hynny yn ei ffordd ei hun ac ni fyddai’n croesawu archwilio. Roedd ei weithdrefnau wedi’u cynllunio i fod yn deg i feddygon ac i sicrhau na fyddai’r un meddyg yn colli ei hawl i ymarfer heb achos da iawn. Nid oedd yn canolbwyntio ar ddisgwyliadau rhesymol y cyhoedd, ac nid oedd yn ei weld ei hun â dyletswydd i sicrhau bod holl aelodau’r proffesiwn meddygol yn barod i ddarparu, ac yn gallu darparu, gwasanaeth proffesiynol.
Ers yr adeg pan oedd y feirniadaeth hon ar ei gwaethaf, mae’r GMC wedi gwneud cryn ymdrechion i newid. Mae datblygu’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar ddechrau’r 1990au, a’r gwelliannau yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd, y byddaf yn eu disgrifio nes ymlaen, yn enghreifftiau o hyn. Yn ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, disgrifiodd Syr Donald Irvine sut y cafodd ei ethol i’r Llywyddiaeth ar ‘bleidlais ddiwygio’. Enillodd yr etholiad, ond esboniodd nad oedd y llwybr tuag at ddiwygio wastad yn hawdd. I ryw raddau, roedd digwyddiadau i wthio’r GMC yn ei flaen. Roedd trasiedïau achos Shipman, y digwyddiadau’n ymwneud â methiant llawfeddygaeth paediatrig y galon yn y Bristol Royal Infirmary ac achos Rodney Ledward (gynaecolegydd ymgynghorol, yr oedd ei ddiffyg medr wedi achosi niwed i lawer o’i gleifion dros gyfnod o ryw 15 mlynedd) yn gyfryngau pwysig i newid ar ddiwedd y 1990au. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed cyn hynny, mae pryder sydd wedi’i fynegi ynghylch posibilrwydd gogwydd hiliol o fewn y GMC wedi arwain at archwiliad eang o weithdrefnau mewnol y GMC ac at lawer o newidiadau pwysig yn ei weithdrefnau.
Gwaith y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi
Ym 1994, daethpwyd â dadansoddiad o natur a chanlyniad achosion yn cael eu hystyried gan y PCC dros gyfnod o ddeng mlynedd i sylw’r GMC. Roedd y dadansoddiad hwn yn ymddangos fel pe bai’n awgrymu bod meddygon o leiafrifoedd ethnig yn fwy tebygol o gael eu dwyn gerbron y PCC na meddygon gwyn. Er clod mawr iddo, penderfynodd y GMC bod rhaid ymchwilio’n llawn i’r pryderon hyn. Cyfarwyddwyd y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi (PSI) gan y GMC i wneud y gwaith, a rhoddodd fynediad llawn i’r tîm PSI i’r holl ddeunydd perthnasol a oedd ar gael.
Mae honiadau o ogwydd hiliol y tu hwnt i gylch gwaith yr Ymchwiliad yn llwyr. Fodd bynnag, nid felly honiadau bod gogwydd yn y GMC tuag at feddygon. Mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol bod canfyddiad cyhoeddus bod y GMC yn aml yn ffafrio meddygon yn hytrach na’r achwynydd yn ei brosesau gwneud penderfyniadau. Mae hwn yn honiad o ogwydd mewn ffurf arall. Gwaith y tîm PSI oedd taflu llawer iawn o oleuni ar weithdrefnau’r GMC. Mae’r gweithdrefnau hynny o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad. Dim ond os oedd gweithdrefnau’r GMC yn drylwyr, yn deg ac yn dryloyw y byddai modd dweud a oedd gogwydd yn erbyn achwynwyr ac a oedd cleifion yn cael eu diogelu’n briodol rhag gweithredoedd meddygon yr oedd adroddiadau wedi’u gwneud amdanynt i’r GMC am gamymddygiad neu anallu honedig.
Diben yr astudiaeth PSI oedd, yn gyntaf, i edrych am dystiolaeth o ogwydd hiliol yng ngweithdrefnau a phrosesau presennol y GMC, ac, yn ail, ystyried a ddylid gwneud unrhyw newidiadau i leihau’r risg o ogwydd hiliol yn y dyfodol. Cyfyngwyd yr astudiaeth i weithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC. Roedd tîm yr astudiaeth yn cael ei arwain gan yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, PSI Prifysgol Westminster. I gychwyn, fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ddadansoddi cwynion a wnaed i’r GMC yn erbyn meddygon yn y cyfnod 12 mis hyd at fis Awst 1994. Cyflwynwyd Adroddiad (Adroddiad PSI 1996), yn nodi’u canfyddiadau a’u hargymhellion ar gyfer newid, i Grŵp Cydraddoldeb Hiliol y GMC ym mis Tachwedd 1995 ac fe’i cyhoeddwyd ym 1996.
Cafodd y tîm PSI gryn anhawster wrth wneud ei waith. Canfu bod data’r GMC wedi’i gofnodi â llaw i raddau helaeth. Nid oedd unrhyw log na chronfa ddata ddibynadwy o gwynion blaenorol. Roedd y modd yr oedd cwynion wedi’u dosbarthu wedi’i gwneud yn anodd dadansoddi’u difrifoldeb. Roedd papurau’n ymwneud â chwynion blaenorol wedi’u storio yn yr un ffeiliau ag ymholiadau, gohebiaeth gyffredinol a thoriadau o’r wasg. Nid oedd papurau’n ymwneud â meddyg unigol wedi’u ffeilio gyda’i gilydd o reidrwydd. Roedd dadansoddiad a wnaethpwyd gan y tîm PSI yn taflu amheuaeth ar gywirdeb ystadegau a gyflwynwyd yn flaenorol gan y GMC. O ganlyniad i’r anawsterau hyn, gwnaeth Adroddiad PSI 1996 argymhellion manylach am gamau y dylid eu cymryd i sefydlu cronfa ddata ddibynadwy a chywir o gŵynion. Gwnaeth yr Adroddiad lawer o sylwadau ac argymhellion hefyd am weithdrefnau’r GMC ar gyfer delio â chwynion. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at rai o’r rhain yn y Penodau sy’n dilyn.
Ar fater gogwydd hiliol, adroddodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr
‘na chanfuwyd unrhyw dystiolaeth o ogwydd neu anffafriaeth hiliol amlwg yn y gweithdrefnau na’r prosesau’n ymwneud ag ymddygiad’
. Ni ddaethant o hyd i dystiolaeth ychwaith o unrhyw ffurf ar ogwydd neu anffafriaeth hiliol amlwg mewn unrhyw gyfweliad neu gyfarfod anffurfiol gyda staff neu aelodau’r GMC nag mewn unrhyw sylw ysgrifenedig a ganfuwyd ar ffeiliau’r GMC. Serch hynny, roedd y dadansoddiad ystadegol a wnaethpwyd gan y tîm PSI yn dangos yn glir bod meddygon a oedd wedi cymhwyso dramor neu a oedd ag enw a oedd yn awgrymu eu bod yn perthyn i leiafrif ethnig yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a oedd wedi cymhwyso yn y DU neu yn Iwerddon, neu a oedd ag enw Saesneg neu Ewropeaidd, i gael eu cyfeirio ymlaen drwy’r gweithdrefnau FTP, yn hytrach na chael eu hachos wedi’i gau mewn cyfnod cynnar. Canfuwyd y prif wahaniaeth rhwng y grwpiau yn y gyfran o bob grŵp a gyfeiriwyd gan y PPC ar gyfer gwrandawiad gerbron y PCC. Ni ellid esbonio’r gwahaniaethau hyn yn foddhaol oherwydd anhryloywder prosesau’r GMC.
Dywedodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 yn glir nad oedd y ffaith bod gwahaniaethau mewn canlyniad rhwng y ddau grŵp yn golygu ynddo’i hun bod gogwydd hiliol o fewn y GMC. Gallai’n syml olygu bod y cwynion yn erbyn meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor a’r rheiny o wledydd heb fod yn wledydd Saesneg/Ewropeaidd yn fwy difrifol na’r rheiny yn erbyn aelodau o’r grwpiau eraill. Fodd bynnag, ni ellid diystyru’r posibilrwydd bod gogwydd. Prif gasgliad yr Adroddiad oedd, oni bai bod holl weithdrefnau’r GMC ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon yn dryloyw ac yn agored, ni fyddai modd dangos na fu unrhyw ogwydd. Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad nifer o gamau y dylai’r GMC eu cymryd er mwyn gwneud ei weithdrefnau’n fwy agored, tryloyw a chyson. Byddaf yn trafod yr argymhellion hynny nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Ym 1998, comisiynodd y GMC astudiaeth ddilynol gan y PSI, a arweiniodd at Adroddiad arall. Nod yr astudiaeth ddilynol hon oedd nodi unrhyw ffactorau a allai esbonio gwahaniaethau yng nghynrychiolaeth meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor yng nghamau amrywiol gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC. Cyn dechrau ei astudiaeth ddilynol, argymhellodd y tîm PSI rai newidiadau ar unwaith i weithdrefnau’r GMC. Diben y rhain oedd symleiddio’r broses sgrinio a gwella tryloywder a chysondeb y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r newidiadau hyn ym Mhennod 19. Gwnaeth y tîm PSI ddadansoddiad maint o gŵynion a dderbyniwyd gan y GMC yn y blynyddoedd calendr 1997, 1998 a 1999, a dadansoddodd y canlyniadau ar gyfer tystiolaeth o ogwydd hiliol. Hefyd, archwiliodd yr astudiaeth y broses sgrinio, gan gynnwys effeithiau’r newidiadau i’r broses a gyflwynwyd gan y GMC ar gyngor y tîm PSI. Archwiliodd yr astudiaeth brosesau gwneud penderfyniadau’r PPC yn ogystal.
Erbyn i’r astudiaeth ddilynol gychwyn, roedd y GMC wedi gwneud cryn gynnydd o ran gweithredu’r argymhellion a gynhwyswyd yn Adroddiad PSI 1996. Yn benodol, roedd ei system casglu data wedi’i chyfrifiaduro a gwnaethpwyd y broses olrhain cwynion yn llawer haws. Fodd bynnag, roedd nifer y cwynion yr oedd y GMC yn eu derbyn yn flynyddol wedi cynyddu’n nodedig, ac roedd cryn oedi’n digwydd wrth brosesu cwynion. Ar y pryd, staff cymharol fach oedd gan y GMC, llawer ohonynt wedi cael eu cyflogi yno am gyfnod hir. Roedd sgiliau wedi’u trosglwyddo trwy gyswllt personol a mentora, ac nid oedd y GMC bryd hynny wedi datblygu systemau a fyddai’n ei alluogi i gynyddu’i staff a hyfforddi personél newydd i ddelio â’r baich gwaith cynyddol hwn.
Dangosodd y dadansoddiad a wnaethpwyd gan y tîm PSI, gydol y tair blynedd a astudiwyd, bod anghysondeb diesboniad rhwng nifer y meddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU a gyfeiriwyd at y PCC gan y PPC, a’r nifer o feddygon a gymhwysodd dramor a gyfeiriwyd felly. Er enghraifft, ym 1999, o’r achosion a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC, cyfran y meddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU a anfonwyd gan y PPC ar gyfer gwrandawiad yn y PCC oedd 33%, lle mai 54% oedd cyfran y meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor a anfonwyd. Ni allai’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr gyfrif am y gwahaniaeth hwnnw. Fe wnaethant sylwi, gan nad oedd y PPC yn cadw cofnod cyfoes o’i ystyriaethau a chan nad oedd yn rhoi unrhyw resymau am ei benderfyniadau, ni ellid dod i unrhyw gasgliadau cadarn. Roedd gwahaniaethau sylweddol, diesboniad hefyd rhwng meddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU a thramor o ran canlyniadau achosion a wrandawyd gan y PCC.
Gwnaeth Adroddiad PSI 2000 nifer o argymhellion, y byddaf yn eu trafod mewn Penodau diweddarach. Am y tro, digon yw dweud mai’r byrdwn cyffredinol oedd, er mwyn darparu cysondeb a thryloywder ym mhenderfyniadau’r GMC, roedd angen ar fyrder i ddatblygu safonau a meini prawf. Yn benodol, roedd angen diffiniad clir a dehongliad cytûn o SPM.
Yn 2002, comisiynwyd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr i wneud gwaith pellach i’r GMC. Gwnaethant ddadansoddiad rhagarweiniol o’r data’n ymwneud â chwynion a dderbyniwyd gan y GMC ym 1999, 2000 a 2001. Nodwyd eu canfyddiadau mewn Papur. Dangosodd y dadansoddiad wahaniaethau nodedig rhwng y cyfrannau gwahanol o feddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU a thramor a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PPC gan sgriniwyr meddygol unigol. Fe wnaeth rhai sgrinwyr gyfeirio cyfrannau cyfartal o feddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU a meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor, tra cyfeiriodd rhai sgrinwyr deirgwaith gymaint o feddygon a gymhwysodd dramor â meddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU. Gan y dywedwyd mai ar hap yr oedd achosion yn cael eu dosbarthu i’r sgrinwyr, ymddengys ei bod yn rhaid bod y sgrinwyr yn cymhwyso safonau gwahanol. Eto, roedd cyfran y meddygon yn cymhwyso dramor a gyfeiriwyd gan y PPC at y PCC yn uwch na chyfran y meddygon yn cymhwyso yn y DU. Roedd gwahaniaethau parhaus hefyd rhwng meddygon yn cymhwyso yn y DU a meddygon yn cymhwyso dramor o ran canlyniadau achosion a oedd yn cael eu gwrando gan y PCC. Unwaith eto, nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ei bod yn bosibl bod y cwynion a dderbyniwyd am feddygon a gymhwysodd dramor wedi bod yn fwy difrifol na’r rheiny am eu cymheiriaid yn y DU. Byddai hynny’n esbonio’r cyfraddau cyfeirio anghymesur a’r gwahaniaethau mewn canlyniadau. Ond, yn absenoldeb meini prawf gwrthrychol y gellid mesur penderfyniadau yn eu herbyn, roedd yn dal yn amhosibl dangos hyn.
Felly, mewn tair astudiaeth, a gynhaliwyd dros gyfnod o naw mlynedd, canfu’r PSI wahaniaethau diesboniad yn y modd yr oedd y GMC yn trin meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor o gymharu â meddygon a gymhwysodd yn y DU; deliwyd yn fwy difrifol â meddygon a gymhwysodd dramor. Gall hyn ddangos neu beidio bod gogwydd hiliol o fewn y GMC. Pwysigrwydd y canfyddiadau hyn, o safbwynt yr Ymchwiliad, yw bod diffyg tryloywder yn y gweithdrefnau. Dylai fod modd gwrthbrofi awgrym o ogwydd os gellir dangos bod penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud yn unol â meini prawf gwrthrychol a chan gymhwyso safonau sefydledig yn gyson. Mae’r Athro Allen wedi cynghori’r GMC dro ar ôl tro na fydd yn gallu gwrthbrofi’r honiadau o ogwydd hiliol oni bai a hyd nes y bydd yn datblygu safonau a meini prawf gwrthrychol. Ymddengys i mi ei bod yn dilyn, heb safonau a meini prawf felly, ni fydd y GMC yn gallu bodloni’r cyhoedd ei fod yn cydymffurfio â’i ddyletswydd i ddiogelu cleifion.
Irvine, Donald (2003) ‘The Doctors’ Tale’. Rhydychen: Radcliffe Medical Press.

---  ---
Rwyf wedi sôn bod nifer o ddigwyddiadau ar ddiwedd y 1990au (Bryste, Ledward, Shipman) yr ymddengys eu bod wedi peri i’r cyhoedd yn gyfunol golli hyder yn y proffesiwn meddygol yn gyffredinol. Dywedaf ‘cyfunol’ ac ‘yn gyffredinol’ gan nad yw’n ymddangos i mi bod unrhyw golli hyder gan unigolion yn y meddygon a oedd yn eu trin yn bersonol. Cydnabu’r Llywodraeth a’r GMC yr angen am newid radical. Arweiniodd hyn at raglen o ddiwygio mewn tri chyfeiriad. Yn gyntaf, mae cyfansoddiad y GMC wedi newid; fel y nodais yn barod, mae’r Cyngor mawr afrosgo o 104 o aelodau wedi’i leihau i gyngor o 35 o aelodau, ac mae’r gyfran o aelodau lleyg wedi’i chynyddu. Yn ail, cyhoeddodd y GMC ei fwriad i archwilio’i weithdrefnau FTP. Mae’r gweithdrefnau newydd wedi dod i rym yn ddiweddar. Yn drydydd, mae’r GMC yn bwriadu cyflwyno, yn 2005, system o ail-drwyddedu a elwir yn ail-ddilysu. Byddaf yn trafod y cynigion ar gyfer gweithdrefnau FTP ac ail-ddilysu yn fanylach mewn Penodau diweddarach.
Mae newidiadau eraill wedi’u gwneud yn ddiweddar i’r dirwedd rheoleiddio. Yn 2004, daeth y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i fodolaeth, gyda chyfrifoldeb am oruchwylio swyddogaeth cyrff y GIG a meddygaeth breifat. Mae’n gyfrifol hefyd am ‘ail gam’ cwynion cleifion am feddygon a gwasanaethau’r GIG. Er na fydd gan y corff hwn unrhyw ran uniongyrchol mewn rheoleiddio meddygon gan y GMC, fe allai’n wir gael effaith anuniongyrchol. Er enghraifft, gallai gyfeirio at achosion y GMC y mae wedi ymchwilio iddynt drwy ei gysylltiad â’r gweithdrefnau cwynion a lle mae wedi canfod achos i bryderu ynghylch addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer.
Yr hyn a gafodd effaith fwy uniongyrchol ar y dirwedd rheoleiddio oedd creu yn 2003 y Cyngor ar gyfer Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (gelwir y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE) bellach). Mae gan y corff hwn gyfrifoldeb cyffredinol am reoleiddwyr gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd, gan gynnwys, wrth gwrs, y GMC. Mae pwerau’r CRHP/CHRE yn cynnwys y pŵer i archwilio ac adrodd am gyflawniad eu swyddogaethau gan reoleiddwyr, ac i wneud argymhellion ar gyfer newid. Gall hefyd roi cyfarwyddyd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i gorff rheoleiddio wneud rheolau penodedig os yw o’r farn y byddai’n ddymunol gwneud hynny er diogelwch aelodau’r cyhoedd. Mae Adran 28 o Ddeddf Diwygio’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol a’r Proffesiynau Gofal Iechyd 2002 yn rhoi’r pwerau i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd hefyd i wneud rheoliadau yn galluogi’r CRHP/CHRE i ymchwilio i gŵynion gan unigolion am y modd y mae corff rheoleiddio wedi arfer unrhyw un o’i swyddogaethau. Mae’r grym gan y CRHP/CHRE hefyd i apelio yn erbyn rhai penderfyniadau cyrff rheoleiddio yr ymddengys eu bod yn rhy drugarog lle byddai’n ddymunol, er diogelwch y cyhoedd, i’r CRHP/CHRE weithredu. Mae apeliadau gan yr CRHP/CHRE yn cael eu derbyn gan yr Uchel Lys. Mae hwn yn gysyniad cwbl newydd ym maes rheoleiddio proffesiynol. Lle, yn flaenorol, dim ond unigolyn sydd wedi’u digio gan benderfyniad y GMC oedd â’r hawl i herio’r penderfyniad hwnnw, mae apêl yn cael ei derbyn nawr, i bob pwrpas, ar ran buddiannau’r cyhoedd.
O Lygad y Ffynnon
Yn y Penodau dilynol, byddaf yn archwilio hen weithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn o fanwl. Byddaf yn archwilio nid yn unig y modd yr oedd y gweithdrefnau hynny i fod i weithio, ond hefyd, y modd yr oeddent yn gweithio’n ymarferol. Byddaf hefyd yn archwilio’n eithaf manwl gynigion y GMC ar gyfer y dyfodol, yn benodol y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ac ail-ddilysu. Fel y daw’n amlwg cyn bo hir, byddaf yn feirniadol o lawer o agweddau ar waith y GMC yn y gorffennol.
Safiad y GMC yn yr Ymchwiliad oedd nad oedd, wastad, wedi bod yn berffaith. Yn realistig iawn, fe wnaeth y rheiny a oedd yn cynrychioli’r GMC gydnabod y bu llawer i’w feirniadu. Ar y diwrnod pan drodd yr Ymchwiliad i archwilio gwaith y GMC, gwnaeth ei Brif Gwnsler, Mr Roger Henderson CF, gyfaddefiadau agored mewn perthynas â llawer o’r diffygion a oedd wedi dod yn amlwg yn ystod ymchwiliadau’r Ymchwiliad. Derbyniodd bod gweithdrefnau’r GMC wedi methu mewn llawer o agweddau i fodloni disgwyliadau rhesymol y cyhoedd a chleifion. Ei neges i’r Ymchwiliad oedd bod y diffygion hyn wedi’u cydnabod ac y deliwyd â nhw. Soniodd am ddyletswydd hollbwysig y GMC i ddiogelu buddiannau cleifion, tra’n rhoi sylw dyledus i fuddiannau meddygon.
Croesewais gyfaddefiadau Mr Henderson, a wnaed yn amlwg gydag awdurdod y GMC ar y lefel uchaf. Rwy’n cydnabod iddynt gael eu gwneud yn y gobaith y gellid tawelu neu hyd yn oed ddistewi beirniadaethau’r Ymchwiliad yng ngolau cydnabyddiaeth y GMC o’i fethiannau blaenorol. Roeddent serch hynny yn dderbyniol am hynny. Maent yn bwysig ac rwy’n bwriadu’u crynhoi.
Yn gyntaf, mewn perthynas â materion gweithredol, cyfaddefodd Mr Henderson y bu oedi annerbyniol wrth ddelio â chwynion a phryderon am feddygon. Derbyniodd fod y GMC wedi methu ymchwilio i gŵynion yn ddigonol ac wedi methu canlyn cwynion a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio gan gyrff eraill ar gyfer ymchwilio iddynt. Derbyniodd bod achosion wedi’u cau na ddylid fod wedi’u cau.
Yn ail, mewn perthynas ag ansawdd y broses gwneud penderfyniadau, derbyniodd Mr Henderson y bu diffyg cysondeb a bod ansawdd y penderfyniadau wedi bod yn amrywiol. Derbyniodd bod yr ymagwedd wedi bod ‘yn fympwyol yn hytrach na’n systematig’ a bod y gwahaniaeth a ddeilliodd rhwng canlyniadau achosion yn ‘annerbyniol’. Priodolodd Mr Henderson y diffyg cysondeb, yn rhannol, i ‘absenoldeb hyfforddiant strwythuredig wedi’i gynllunio’n foddhaol’. Dywedodd:
‘Gellid meddwl ei fod yn annymunol i aelodau etholedig o’r Cyngor i fod angen hyfforddiant pa un ai fel sgrinwyr, aelodau o’r PPC neu’r PCC. Mae ymagwedd mor hen ffasiwn â hynny wedi dyddio ers tro, a chydnabyddir ei bod yn gwbl anghydnaws ag anghenion heddiw ac yfory. Ni all athroniaeth gofal gwirfoddol, da ei fwriad, dyfarnol fod yn unrhyw fath o eilydd yn lle hyfforddiant addas ar gyfer pobl â chymwysterau addas yn cael eu harwain gan weithdrefnau cyfundrefnol, cydlynol wedi’u cynllunio’n ofalus, yn cael eu cynnwys mewn testun clir ar bwnc goruchwyliaeth ac archwilio priodol.’
Tynnodd Mr Henderson sylw, yn briodol iawn, at y cynigion a wnaed i ddarparu hyfforddiant ac arweiniad i’r rheiny a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau, ond derbyniodd nad oeddent yn ddigonol. Dywedodd fod y GMC bellach yn cydnabod yr angen am hyfforddiant strwythuredig ar gyfer y rheiny sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau. Er fy mod yn derbyn ac yn cytuno â’r cyfan a ddywedodd Mr Henderson am hyfforddiant ac arweiniad, nodaf na soniodd am yr angen am safonau a meini prawf clir fel sylfaen i wneud penderfyniadau.
Awgrymodd Mr Henderson mai achos arall anghysondeb ac ansawdd gwael yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau oedd y ffaith na fu yn y gorffennol yn arfer i banelau neu bwyllgorau’r GMC roi rhesymau am eu penderfyniadau. Dywedodd bod ‘rhoi penderfyniadau yn llesol’. Dywedodd (ac rwy’n cytuno) bod y ddisgyblaeth o orfod rhoi rhesymau yn gwella’r broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Nododd, wrth amddiffyn methiant y GMC i roi rhesymau yn y gorffennol, bod y Cyfrin Gyngor, hyd at yn ddiweddar, wedi cymeradwyo’i arfer. Roedd hynny wedi newid bellach, er i Mr Henderson addef, hyd yn oed yn ddiweddar, nad oedd y rhesymau a roddwyd wastad yn hynny y dylent fod.
O ran penderfyniadau sgrinio, cyfaddefodd Mr Henderson y bu gwahaniaeth rhwng canlyniadau. Priodolodd hyn i fethiant gan y GMC i werthfawrogi gwir natur y broses sgrinio nes cafodd ei gynghori yn ei gylch gan Meistr Ustus Lightman yn achos
yn 2000. Tan hynny, meddai Mr Henderson, roedd sgriniwyr wedi dymuno i’w barn broffesiynol ddylanwadu ar achosion mewn modd a oedd, mewn gwirionedd, yn amhriodol. Derbyniodd bod gormod o achosion wedi cael eu ‘sgrinio allan’. Wrth gyfeirio at rai achosion yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad wedi’u harchwilio a chanfod eu bod yn cynnwys penderfyniadau anghyson, daeth i’r casgliad:
‘Gyda mantais archwilio briodol a hyfforddiant cyson, dylai fod set gyson o ganlyniadau yn arwain at fwy o benderfyniadau Pwyllgor yn cynnwys personau, a fyddai, yn eu tro, drwy hyfforddiant a dogfennaeth, wedi osgoi rhai o’r problemau y mae rhai o’r achosion dewisedig hynny’n datgelu.’
Cydnabu Mr Henderson yn ogystal nad archwiliwyd penderfyniadau’r GMC yn ddigonol. Yn wir, derbyniodd bod yr archwiliadau o benderfyniadau a oedd wedi’u gwneud (a hynny yn y blynyddoedd diweddar yn unig) wedi bod ‘yn fwy rhifiadol nag ansoddol o ran natur’. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd yr archwilio wedi edrych ar faint o achosion y deliwyd â nhw, nid a wnaethpwyd penderfyniad priodol yn eu cylch. Cytunodd nad oedd hynny’n ddigon da a bod angen archwilio priodol nawr. Roedd sylw yn cael ei roi bellach, meddai, i’r diffyg tryloywder ym mhenderfyniadau’r GMC.
Neges Mr Henderson i’r Ymchwiliad oedd bod methiannau’r gorffennol wedi’u cydnabod ac y deliwyd â nhw. Byddai’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn datrys nid yn unig yr anawsterau a achoswyd gan ‘effaith seilo’ y gweithdrefnau ar wahân, ond byddai hefyd yn sicrhau ymchwilio’n briodol i achosion a’u bod yn cael eu datrys yn y pen draw gan benderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud gan bersonau a oedd yn gymwys ac wedi’u hyfforddi ar gyfer y dasg.

---  ---
Ers i Gam Pedwar yr Ymchwiliad gychwyn, bu rhywfaint o ddyfalu yn y papurau newydd, yn enwedig yn y wasg feddygol, y gallai Ymchwiliad Shipman ‘ddymchwel’ y GMC. Awgrymwyd y gallwn argymell ‘diddymu’ y GMC. Nid oedd sail wybodus i ddyfalu felly. Cyn i Gam Pedwar gychwyn, nodais y materion y byddai’r Ymchwiliad yn eu harchwilio. Nid oedd bodolaeth y GMC yn y dyfodol yn eu plith. Cyhoeddodd yr Ymchwiliad Bapur Ymgynghorol ym mis Hydref 2003, lle gofynnwyd am farnau ymatebwyr ar ystod eang o faterion. Nid oedd y materion hynny’n cynnwys ‘diddymu’ y GMC na diweddu hunan-reoleiddio ar gyfer y proffesiwn meddygol. Mae tu hwnt i unrhyw amgyffred y byddwn yn gwneud argymhellion mor eang eu cwmpas heb roi rhybudd priodol.
Mae Cylch Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad yn eang ac yn sicr yn gofyn i mi archwilio’r modd yr oedd y GMC yn cyflawni’i swyddogaethau FTP. Maent yn ddigon eang, fe gredaf, i ganiatáu i mi - yn wir i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i mi - ystyried a ddylai’r swyddogaethau hynny gael eu cyflawni mewn ffordd wahanol neu gan gorff gwahanol hyd yn oed. Maent yn ddigon eang, fe gredaf, i ganiatáu i mi awgrymu y dylai’r GMC drefnu ei hun mewn ffordd wahanol, er mwyn iddo allu cyflawni’i brif ddyletswydd i ddiogelu cleifion. Yr hyn y maent yn ei ganiatáu, yn fy marn i, yw unrhyw ystyriaeth o ba un a ddylai’r GMC barhau i fodoli neu a ddylid diweddu hunan-reoleiddio meddygon. Yn fy marn i, os yw’r materion hynny i’w hystyried, rhaid i’r dasg gael ei chyflawni gan gorff yr ymddiriedwyd y gwaith iddo i ymchwilio i holl swyddogaethau’r GMC. Mae’r Ymchwiliad hwn wedi canolbwyntio ar y gweithdrefnau FTP ac ar ail-ddilysu. Mae gan y GMC swyddogaethau pwysig eraill, nad yw’r Ymchwiliad hwn wedi sôn amdanynt o gwbl.
Rwyf newydd gyfeirio at ‘hunan-reoleiddio’ y proffesiwn meddygol. Gydol ei dystiolaeth a’i gyflwyniadau i’r Ymchwiliad, mae’r GMC wedi mynd i drafferth fawr i nodi bod rheoleiddio’r proffesiwn bellach yn waith cymhleth a bod llawer o gyrff eraill yn chwarae rhan ynddo. Mae’r rhain yn cynnwys cyrff y GIG sy’n cyflogi neu’n contractio â meddygon, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd sydd â chyfrifoldeb eang am archwilio ac arolygu gwasanaethau gofal iechyd a’r CRHP/CHRE. Dywed y GMC, ac rwy’n derbyn, bod rhaid iddo weithio mewn partneriaeth â’r cyrff eraill hynny. Mae’r GMC yn ddibynnol ar gyrff eraill (a chleifion a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill) sy’n adrodd wrtho am eu cwynion a’u pryderon am feddygon. Serch hynny, mae’r GMC yn chwarae rôl allweddol fel ceidwad y gofrestr. Y GMC sy’n penderfynu pwy sy’n cael a ddim yn cael ymarfer fel meddyg.
Mewn blynyddoedd diweddar, bu’r GMC yn destun llawer o feirniadaeth gyhoeddus, y rhan fwyaf ohoni’n deillio o’r ffordd y deliodd, neu’r ffordd y methodd ddelio, â meddygon sydd wedi’u cael yn euog o ryw ffurf ar gamymddygiad. Y gweithdrefnau FTP yw wyneb cyhoeddus y GMC, a’r pwynt cyswllt mwyaf tebygol â’r GMC ar gyfer aelodau cyffredin y cyhoedd. Y ffaith yw bod y cyhoedd wedi dod i ystyried y GMC ag amheuaeth a drwgdybiaeth gan mai ei ganfyddiad yw bod y GMC yn gweithredu, nid er buddiannau cleifion, ond er buddiannau meddygon. Yn wir, mae’r argraff gan lawer o aelodau’r cyhoedd bod y GMC yn gorff cynrychioliadol, yn debyg i undeb llafur. Yn baradocsaidd, mae’r GMC yn cael ei feirniadu gan y proffesiwn hefyd, lle mai’r canfyddiad yw bod y GMC yn annheg â meddygon ac yn rhy galed arnynt. Mae’r materion hyn yn ymwneud ag ‘ethos ac agweddau’ yn mynd i galon pa un a yw’r GMC yn gweithredu mewn gwirionedd, fel yr honna ei fod yn gweithredu, er buddiannau diogelu cleifion. Mae ystyriaeth o’r materion hyn wedi gofyn am adolygu gofalus a manwl o’r hyn y mae’r GMC yn ei wneud a’r modd y gweithreda’n ymarferol.
Bu archwilio ethos ac agweddau’r GMC yn rhan hanfodol o waith yr Ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, mae materion ymarferol yn bwysig hefyd. Ni all corff weithio’n effeithiol er diogelu cleifion os yw ei weithdrefnau a’i arferion yn aneffeithlon. Un o’r beirniadaethau a wnaethpwyd o’r GMC yw y bu oedi annerbyniol ar adegau wrth ddelio â chwynion a dod â meddygon gerbron pwyllgor disgyblu. Fe wnaeth Mr Scott a Mr Antony Townsend, a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad o 1993 hyd at 1995, dderbyn bod systemau gweinyddol y GMC, hyd at ganol y 1990au, yn hen ffasiwn ac yn annigonol. Mae llawer wedi’i wneud i’w gwella ac i leihau’r oedi a oedd yn digwydd yn flaenorol. Mae’r GMC bellach yn gweithredu yn unol â safonau gwasanaeth.
Heblaw am archwilio agweddau a gweithdrefnau, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gorfod ystyried y gweithdrefnau FTP eu hunain a pha un a ydynt yn effeithiol fel modd o ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon sy’n camymddwyn neu sy’n methu arfer ar lefel dderbyniol. Roedd llawer o waith ymchwilio’r Ymchwiliad wedi’i gynllunio i ganfod hynny. Cyn i’r ymchwilio hwnnw hyd yn oed gychwyn, roedd y GMC wedi cydnabod nad oedd ei weithdrefnau presennol yn effeithiol a bod rhaid eu newid. Wrth i’r Ymchwiliad wneud ei waith, roedd y GMC yn datblygu’i weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Maent wedi’u cyflwyno erbyn hyn.
Yn ei dystiolaeth a’i gyflwyniadau i’r Ymchwiliad, ceisiodd y GMC sicrhau’r Ymchwiliad (ac yn wir y cyhoedd) y bydd y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn wahanol iawn i’r hen rai. Rwy’n gobeithio y byddant. Ond, wrth geisio gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer sicrhau diogelwch gwell i gleifion yn y dyfodol, rhaid i mi lunio barn ynghylch a fydd y GMC, beth bynnag, yn barod ac yn gallu sicrhau bod popeth yn wahanol yn wir. Mae’n amlwg mai’r dangosydd gorau o agwedd a pherfformiad yn y dyfodol yw agwedd a pherfformiad blaenorol. Mae newidiadau o ran arfer a pherfformiad yn bosibl, wrth gwrs, fel y mae’r GMC eisoes wedi dangos. Mae newidiadau agwedd yn anoddach i’w sicrhau. Yn y Penodau dilynol, byddaf yn nodi’n fanwl y modd y mae’r gweithdrefnau FTP wedi gweithio yn y gorffennol a’r casgliadau y deuthum iddynt ynghylch ethos y GMC yn y gorffennol. Byddaf hefyd yn ystyried y dystiolaeth yn ymwneud â’r modd y mae’r gweithdrefnau newydd wedi’u datblygu a’r modd y maent yn debygol o weithredu yn y dyfodol. Byddaf yn ystyried pa un a yw’r dystiolaeth honno’n dangos newid mewn ethos o fewn y GMC. Yn olaf, byddaf yn ystyried pa gamau neu gamau pellach y dylid eu cymryd gan y GMC i sicrhau bod cleifion a’r cyhoedd yn cael y diogelwch y maent yn haeddu ei gael gan feddygon nad ydynt, am ryw reswm neu’i gilydd, yn ymarfer fel y dylent wneud.

---  ---
Gweithdrefnau'r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ym 1976
Achos Shipman
Beirniadaethau Posibl o'r Modd yr Ymdriniodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ag Achos Shipman

---  ---
Yn dilyn dyfarnu Shipman yn euog, ym mis Ionawr 2000, ar 15 cyfrif o lofruddiaeth (a gyflawnwyd trwy chwistrellu pob un o’i ddioddefwyr â gorddos o ddiamorffin, cyffur opiad), daeth i’r golwg ei fod, ym 1976, wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o gyfres o droseddau mewn cysylltiad â chyffur opiad arall, pethidin. Roedd y troseddau hyn yn cynnwys nid yn unig meddu’n anghyfreithlon ar y cyffur, ond cael gafael ar bethidin trwy dwyll a ffugio yn ogystal. Cafodd y troseddau eu cyflawni dros gyfnod o ryw 14 mis. Awgrymodd llawer o bobl, a frawychwyd gan y darganfyddiad hwn, y dylai’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) ddileu enw Shipman o’r gofrestr feddygol ym 1976. Dywedwyd, pe bai’r GMC wedi’i ‘ddiddymu’ oddi ar y rhestr, yna ni fyddai Shipman wedi gallu cyflawni ei droseddau diweddarach. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd wedi cael parhau i ymarfer. Nid awgrymwyd, cyn belled ag yr wyf yn ymwybodol, y dylai’r GMC fod wedi adnabod Shipman fel llofrudd potensial, ond y dylid yn unig fod wedi delio ag ef yn llawer llymach am y troseddau yr oedd wedi’u cyflawni bryd hynny.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau disgyblu a oedd ar waith gan y GMC ym 1976, ac yn ystyried y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman. Cyn belled ag y gallaf, byddaf yn archwilio’r rhesymau pam yr ymdriniwyd â’r achos felly. Gan fy mod yn dymuno gosod y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman mewn cyd-destun, ceisiodd yr Ymchwiliad ddatgelu ffeiliau o’r holl achosion yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau a ystyriwyd gan bwyllgorau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) y GMC yn y blynyddoedd 1975 i 1980. Roeddwn yn dymuno archwilio achosion tebyg i achos Shipman, er mwyn gweld a oedd y modd yr ymdriniwyd â’i achos ef yn eithriadol mewn unrhyw fodd. Roeddwn hefyd yn dymuno deall yr ystyriaethau polisi y tu ôl i’r penderfyniad yn ei achos ef, a chael rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i’r meini prawf a gymhwyswyd gan y GMC wrth ystyried achosion yn ymwneud â throseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau. Ar ôl archwilio’r materion hyn, byddaf yn esbonio fy nghasgliadau ynghylch rhesymoldeb penderfyniad y GMC yn achos Shipman.
Staff y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a oedd yn Gweithio ym 1976
Ym 1976, pennaeth staff gweinyddol y GMC oedd y Cofrestrydd, Mr Martin Draper. Ymddengys ei fod wedi bod yn y GMC ers oddeutu 1950 neu 1951. Ym 1976, roedd Mr Robert Gray yn Gofrestrydd Cynorthwyol (yn Ddirprwy Gofrestrydd yn ddiweddarach). Gweithiai’n flaenorol mewn gweinyddiaeth y trefedigaethau, yna phrifysgol. Ymunodd â’r GMC ym mis Tachwedd 1971. O’r adeg honno hyd at oddeutu mis Mehefin 1976, ac o ddyddiad ym 1980 nes ei ymddeoliad ym mis Chwefror 1988, roedd Mr Gray yn Bennaeth Adran Ddisgyblu’r GMC. Yn y rhinwedd honno, roedd yn gyfrifol, dan oruchwyliaeth y Cofrestrydd, am ddelio â materion gweinyddol yn ymwneud â gweithdrefnau disgyblu’r GMC. Roedd cynorthwyydd gweinyddol yn gweithio yn yr Adran Ddisgyblu hefyd, sef Mr Adrian Williams (a gyflogwyd rhwng mis Rhagfyr 1970 a mis Mai 1977), ynghyd ag ail gynorthwyydd gweinyddol, nad yw wedi cael ei enwi. Roedd gan yr Adran Ddisgyblu staff ysgrifenyddol a staff teipio hefyd. Rhoddodd Mr Gray dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Darparodd Mr Williams ddatganiad tyst. Oherwydd cyflwr ei iechyd, nid oedd Mr Draper yn gallu cynorthwyo’r Ymchwiliad drwy ddarparu datganiad neu drwy fod yn bresennol i roi tystiolaeth. Bu farw ym mis Awst 2004.

---  ---
Grym y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol i Weithredu mewn Perthynas ag Euogfarn
Ym 1976, roedd y GMC yn cael ei reoli gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1956, fel y’i diwygiwyd gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1969 (Deddf 1956). Bryd hynny, yr unig weithdrefnau FTP ar waith oedd y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Ni chyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau iechyd nes 1980, ac ni ddaeth y gweithdrefnau perfformiad i rym nes 1997.
Ym 1976, roedd adran ddiwygiedig 33 o Ddeddf 1956 yn amodi:
(1) Where a fully registered person -
Roedd gan Bwyllgor Disgyblu (DC) y GMC felly awdurdodaeth dan adran 33 i gymryd camau gweithredu mewn perthynas ag euogfarn droseddol neu mewn perthynas ag ymddygiad a olygai camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Roedd y gweithdrefnau ar gyfer delio ag achosion o euogfarn ac ag achosion yn ymwneud â chwynion o SPM (‘achosion ymddygiad’) yn wahanol. Daeth Shipman gerbron y GMC oherwydd ei euogfarn. Byddaf, felly, yn cyfyngu fy nisgrifiad o weithdrefnau’r GMC ar y pryd i’r gweithdrefnau’n ymwneud ag achosion o euogfarn yn bennaf.
Dylid nodi, ym 1976, nad oedd y term
‘dyfarnwyd yn euog ... o drosedd’
yn cynnwys canfyddiad o euogrwydd yr oedd meddyg yn cael ei roi/rhoi ar brawf mewn perthynas ag ef, neu’n cael ei ryddhau/rhyddhau yn amodol neu’n ddiamod. Nid oedd ychwaith yn cynnwys trosedd yr oedd meddyg wedi derbyn rhybudd gan yr heddlu mewn perthynas â hi, er gwaetha’r ffaith na fyddai rhybudd gan yr heddlu wedi’i roi yn absenoldeb cyfaddefiad o euogrwydd.
Prif ffynhonnell wybodaeth y GMC am euogfarnau oedd yr heddlu, yr oedd gofyniad arnynt gan Gylchlythyr y Swyddfa Gymreig o 1973 i adrodd i’r GMC am euogfarnau a allai adlewyrchu ar addasrwydd meddyg i barhau yn ei broffesiwn/phroffesiwn. Yn benodol, roedd gofyniad ar yr heddlu i adrodd am droseddau’n ymwneud â thrais, anwedduster, anonestrwydd, alcohol neu gyffuriau. Er nad oedd rhwymedigaeth ar yr heddlu i adrodd am ganfyddiadau o euogrwydd lle’r oedd meddyg wedi’i wneud yn destun gorchymyn profiannaeth neu ryddhad (a lle nad oedd, felly, unrhyw ‘euogfarn’), dywedodd Mr Gray wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddent, yn ymarferol, yn gwneud hynny fel arfer. Os oedd canfyddiad o euogrwydd a bod gorchymyn profiannaeth neu ryddhad wedi’u pennu mewn perthynas ag ef yn cael ei ddwyn i sylw’r GMC, gallai’r GMC ddewis mynd ymlaen trwy drin y mater fel cwyn o SPM.
Roedd pob achos o euogfarn, ac eithrio’r rheiny ar gyfer mân droseddau moduro nad oeddent yn ymwneud ag alcohol, cyffuriau na niwed i eraill, yn cael eu cyfeirio gan staff y GMC i’r Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol (PeCC). Y PeCC oedd rhagflaenydd y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC). Roedd ganddo’r dasg o benderfynu pa achosion ddylai fynd ymlaen ‘i ymchwiliad’ (h.y. ar gyfer gwrandawiad) gan y DC. Roedd y DC yn gyfwerth â’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) presennol.
Roedd Rheolau (Gweithdrefn) Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Disgyblu’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1970 (Rheolau 1970) yn amodi y dylai achosion a olygai euogfarnau gael eu cyflwyno gan y Cofrestrydd i Lywydd y GMC neu i aelod (‘sgriniwr’) a enwebwyd ganddo. Fodd bynnag, yn ymarferol, roedd gan y Llywydd a’r staff drefniant lle’r oedd pob achos o euogfarn (ac eithrio’r rhai mwyaf difrifol, a oedd yn mynd at y Llywydd) yn cael eu cyfeirio gan staff yn uniongyrchol at y PeCC heb ymyrraeth gan y Llywydd/sgriniwr. Pan fyddai hysbysiad am euogfarn yn dod i swyddfa’r GMC, byddai’r staff fel arfer yn ceisio cael gwybodaeth am amgylchiadau’r drosedd yr oedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog ohoni. Byddai’r wybodaeth hon yn dod gan yr heddlu neu’r Swyddfa Gartref yn fwyaf cyffredin. Pan oedd y staff o’r farn bod digon o wybodaeth, byddai’r achos yn cael ei roi ar yr agenda ar gyfer cyfarfod nesaf y PeCC. Byddai cyfarfodydd o’r PeCC yn cael eu cynnal deirgwaith y flwyddyn.
Y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
Roedd y PeCC yn cynnwys Llywydd y GMC (neu aelod o’r GMC a enwebwyd ganddo) a oedd yn cadeirio’r Pwyllgor, ynghyd ag un aelod etholedig (‘meddygol’) o’r GMC â chymwysterau meddygol, un aelod lleyg a thri aelod meddygol wedi’u dewis o Gynghorau Cangen y GMC dros Loegr, Cymru, yr Alban ac Iwerddon yn y drefn honno. Ym mis Ebrill 1976, roedd Syr John (Arglwydd yn ddiweddarach) Richardson, meddyg ymgynghorol, yn Llywydd. Aelodau eraill y PeCC oedd yr Athro (yr Athro Syr yn ddiweddarach) William Trethowan (seiciatrydd ymgynghorol), Dr Derek Llewellyn (meddyg teulu o Gangen Cymru a Lloegr), Dr William Fulton (meddyg teulu o Gangen yr Alban) a Dr Thomas Murphy (Cangen Iwerddon). Roedd yr aelod lleyg, Miss Ruth Cohen, wedi ymddeol o’r flwyddyn flaenorol ac nid oedd neb wedi dod yn ei lle eto. Tri oedd y cworwm cyfreithiol. Cynghorwyd y PeCC gan asesydd cyfreithiol, a oedd yn bresennol ym mhob un o’i gyfarfodydd.
Yn ôl rheol 6(1) o Reolau 1970, roedd yn ofynnol i’r PeCC, ar ôl ystyried achos, i bennu:
‘(a) na fydd ymchwiliad yn cael ei gynnal yn yr achos gan y Pwyllgor Disgyblu, neu
(b) bod y mater dan sylw yn cael ei gyfeirio, yn gyfan gwbl neu’n rhannol, i’r Pwyllgor Disgyblu i ymchwilio iddo naill ai yn y cyfarfod nesaf o’r Pwyllgor hwnnw neu mewn cyfarfod yn y dyfodol fel y bydd y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol neu’r Llywydd yn pennu’
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd unrhyw feini prawf ysgrifenedig yn bodoli i roi arweiniad i aelodau’r PeCC wrth benderfynu a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y DC. Dywedodd Mr Gray wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn credu bod unrhyw feini prawf yn angenrheidiol. Roedd o’r farn bod y grŵp o bobl a oedd yn gysylltiedig mor fach, a bod eu cysylltiad â’r gwaith mor gyson, eu bod yn gwybod ar ba egwyddorion i weithredu. Nid oedd Rheolau 1970 eu hunain yn darparu unrhyw feini prawf; ymddengys iddynt roi disgresiwn dilyffethair i’r PeCC. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at fater egwyddorion a meini prawf nes ymlaen.
Roedd Rheol 6(3) yn amodi:
‘Cyn dod i benderfyniad fe all y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol, os yw o’r farn bod hynny’n addas, beri i ymchwiliadau pellach gael eu cynnal, neu gael cyngor neu gymorth gan y Cyfreithiwr neu’r Cwnsler a gyfarwyddir ganddo, fel y byddant yn ystyried sy’n angenrheidiol.’
Canlyniad cyntaf posibl achos a oedd yn cael ei ystyried gan y PeCC oedd cyfeiriad at y DC i ymchwilio iddo mewn gwrandawiad cyhoeddus. Yr ail ganlyniad posibl oedd dim cyfeiriad at y DC. Y trydydd canlyniad posibl oedd cais am wybodaeth bellach neu gyngor cyfreithiol. Os oedd cais felly’n cael ei wneud, byddai’r PeCC yn gohirio ystyried yr achos nes cael y wybodaeth neu’r cyngor. Roedd yn bosibl hefyd, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, i’r PeCC wneud ‘penderfyniad dros dro’. Nid oedd yr opsiwn hwn yn berthnasol i achos Shipman ac ni fyddaf, felly, yn ei ystyried ymhellach. Mae’n bwysig nodi nad oedd gan y PeCC unrhyw rym i atal cofrestriad meddyg tra’n disgwyl penderfyniad ar ei achos/hachos gan y DC, hyd yn oed os oedd y meddyg i weld yn berygl i gleifion. Nid oedd ganddo’r grym ychwaith i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg.
Ystyriaf y canlyniadau posibl amrywiol yn fyr nawr.
Cyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Disgyblu ar gyfer Gwrandawiad
Os oedd y PeCC yn penderfynu cyfeirio achos at y DC, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei hysbysu o’r ffaith hwnnw, ac o’r materion i’w hystyried gan y DC a’r trefniadau ar gyfer y gwrandawiad. Byddai ef neu hi yn cael y cyfle i gyflwyno tystiolaeth i’r DC.
Dim Cyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Disgyblu
Os oedd y PeCC yn penderfynu peidio cyfeirio achos at y DC, roedd Rheolau 1970 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Cofrestrydd hysbysu’r meddyg o benderfyniad y PeCC mewn termau y gallai’r PeCC eu gorchymyn. Ar brydiau, byddai’r PeCC yn defnyddio’r ddarpariaeth i orchymyn bod llythyr yn cael ei anfon at y meddyg dan sylw, yn ei rybuddio/rhybuddio am ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Roedd argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o gyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline’ (a elwid y Llyfr Glas) y nodi disgrifiad o rai amgylchiadau lle byddai llythyrau’n cael eu hanfon:
Ymddengys i mi na fyddai rhywun wedi disgwyl, wrth ddarllen y darn hwn o’r Llyfr Glas, y byddai llythyr rhybudd yn cael ei ddefnyddio mewn achos mor ddifrifol ag un a olygai aml-droseddau o gael gafael ar gyffuriau rheoledig, yn anghyfreithlon ac yn anonest, yng nghyd-destun ymarfer proffesiynol.
Esboniodd Mr Gray bod llythyrau rhybudd, yn gyffredinol, yn cael eu hanfon gan y PeCC mewn achosion o euogfarn, yn hytrach nag mewn achosion ymddygiad. Y rheswm am hyn oedd, mewn achosion ymddygiad, na fyddai camymddygiad fel arfer wedi’i brofi erbyn y cam hwnnw. Felly, ni fyddai llythyr yn rhybuddio meddyg am ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad wedi bod yn briodol. Yr eithriad i hyn fyddai pe bai’r meddyg wedi cyfaddef y camymddygiad, er enghraifft, os oedd wedi’i gyhuddo/chyhuddo o droseddau a’i fod/bod wedi pledio’n euog, ond wedi’i ryddhau/rhyddhau’n amodol, ac nad oedd felly wedi’i ‘ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog’ yn dechnegol wedyn. Dywedodd Mr Gray wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod ‘hierarchaeth’ o lythyrau rhybudd wedi’i datblygu, gan ddibynnu ar farn y PeCC ynghylch difrifoldeb ymddygiad y meddyg. Dangosodd archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad o ganlyniadau achosion y deliwyd â nhw gan y PeCC yn ei gyfarfodydd yng nghanol y 1970au, bod llythyrau rhybudd o raddau gwahanol o ddifrifoldeb yn cael eu hystyried yn briodol ar gyfer amrywiaeth o droseddau. Er enghraifft, rhoddodd y PeCC gyfarwyddiadau mewn achos o ladrad/siopladrad i ‘lythyr o anghymeradwyaeth’ gael ei anfon, mewn achos o yfed a gyrru i ‘lythyr rhybudd’ gael ei anfon, yn achos methu darparu sampl o waed neu wrin ac o ddwyn cerdyn credyd i ‘lythyr rhybudd difrifol’ gael ei anfon, ac, mewn achos tebyg arall, ‘llythyr rhybuddio cryf’. Fodd bynnag, ni ddatblygwyd unrhyw feini prawf ac ni pharatowyd unrhyw arweiniad ysgrifenedig.
Roedd Rheolau 1970 yn amodi, lle’r oedd penderfyniad wedi’i wneud i beidio ag anfon achos at y DC a bod y GMC wedi hynny’n cael hysbysiad o euogfarn arall neu gŵyn o SPM yn erbyn yr un meddyg, roedd yn agored i’r GMC i ddelio â’r ddwy euogfarn flaenorol a’r euogfarn newydd neu gŵyn am gamymddygiad gyda’i gilydd, fel pe na bai’r penderfyniad cynharach i gyfeirio at y DC wedi’i wneud.
Cais am Wybodaeth Bellach
Fel yr wyf wedi nodi, rhoddodd Rheolau 1970 y grym i’r PeCC, os oedd o’r farn bod hynny’n addas, i ymchwiliadau pellach gael eu gwneud, neu i gael cyngor cyfreithiol, cyn gwneud penderfyniad terfynol. Byddai hyn yn amlwg yn rym defnyddiol os oedd aelodau yn teimlo nad oedd yn bosibl gwneud penderfyniad heb gael darn arall o wybodaeth neu esbonio’u sefyllfa gyfreithiol. Fodd bynnag, mae archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad i achosion yn ymwneud ag euogfarnau am droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau a ystyriwyd gan y PeCC yng nghanol i ddiwedd y 1970au, yn awgrymu bod y grym i ohirio ar gyfer ymchwiliadau pellach yn cael ei ddefnyddio at ddiben braidd yn wahanol, sef arfer rhywfaint o oruchwyliaeth barhaus dros feddyg a oedd wedi bod yn camddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau. Byddaf yn trafod y defnydd hwn o’r grym i ohirio yn fanylach nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Byddai’r PeCC yn eistedd yn breifat ac yn gwneud ei benderfyniadau ar sail tystiolaeth a chyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig. Byddai’n delio â baich achosion mawr ym mhob cyfarfod, gymaint â 30 neu 40 o achosion yn aml. Nid oedd unrhyw dystion yn cael eu galw i roi tystiolaeth. Nid oedd y meddyg a oedd yn destun yr achos yn cael ei wahodd i fod yn bresennol. Yn achos cwyn yn honni bod SPM, byddai gan y PeCC ymateb gan y meddyg o’i flaen fel arfer, yn esbonio’i ymddygiad/hymddygiad. Roedd Rheolau 1970 yn pennu gofyniad, cyn bod achos yn ymwneud â chwyn o SPM honedig yn cael ei anfon at y PeCC, dylai’r meddyg gael y cyfle i gynnig esboniad felly. Mewn achosion o euogfarnau, fodd bynnag, nid oedd gofyniad bryd hynny i wahodd y meddyg i roi esboniad oni bai a hyd nes bod yr achos wedi’i gyfeirio gan y PeCC at y DC. Roedd y rheswm am hyn yn y gweithdrefnau gwahanol ar gyfer delio ag euogfarnau a chwynion. Mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiad o SPM, gallai’r esboniad yn cael ei roi gan feddyg am ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad fod yn ffactor perthnasol i’w ystyried gan y PeCC wrth benderfynu a oedd yr ymddygiad hwnnw’n gyfystyr neu y gallai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, roedd euogfarn yn cael ei thrin gan y GMC fel tystiolaeth bendant bod y meddyg yn euog o’r drosedd y cafodd ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog ohoni. Roedd Rheolau 1970, felly, yn adlewyrchu’r bwriad y dylai unrhyw esboniad gan y meddyg yn ymwneud ag amgylchiadau ei euogfarn/heuogfarn, yn gyffredinol, fod yn berthnasol yn unig i fater pa sancsiwn a ddylid ei bennu gan y DC. Er gwaetha’r ffaith nad oedd gofyniad yn y Rheolau y dylid gofyn i feddyg ddarparu esboniad mewn achos o euogfarn cyn i’r achos gael ei ystyried gan y PeCC, mae archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad o ffeiliau achosion o euogfarnau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau y deliodd y PeCC â nhw yng nghanol i ddiwedd y 1970au, yn dangos y gofynnwyd yn aml i feddygon ddarparu esboniad felly, a byddai’r rhan fwyaf yn gwneud. Yn wir, mewn nifer o achosion lle’r ymddengys na wnaethpwyd cais felly, cynigiwyd esboniad gan y meddyg serch hynny.
Roedd cofnodion y PeCC yn cynnwys adroddiad moel iawn o’r penderfyniadau y daethpwyd iddynt. Nid oedd gofyniad ar y PeCC i roi unrhyw resymau am ei benderfyniadau.
Y Pwyllgor Disgyblu
Roedd y DC yn cynnwys y Llywydd (neu aelod arall o’r GMC a enwebwyd ganddo), ynghyd â 18 aelod arall o’r GMC, gydag o leiaf chwech ohonynt yn aelodau meddygol etholedig ac o leiaf dau ohonynt yn aelodau lleyg. Pump oedd y cworwm cyfreithiol. Erbyn 1976, nid oedd yn arfer bellach (fel y bu hyd at 1973) i’r Llywydd gadeirio’r PeCC a’r DC. Yn lle hynny, roedd y Llywydd yn gadeirydd y PeCC, ac roedd y DC yn cael ei gadeirio gan aelod meddygol, Mr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Robert Wright, a gafodd ei enwebu at y diben hwn gan y Llywydd. Roedd y DC yn cael ei gynghori gan asesydd cyfreithiol. Roedd ei wrandawiadau’n cael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus ac eithrio mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol. Roedd ei drafodaethau, fodd bynnag, yn cael eu cynnal yn breifat. Roedd gwrandawiadau’r DC yn cael eu hadrodd yn y wasg ac mewn cylchgronau cyhoeddus. Roedd ei weithdrefnau’n debyg i weithdrefnau llys troseddau mewn llawer o agweddau. Byddai meddygon a oedd yn destun achos gerbron y DC yn cael eu gwahodd i fod yn bresennol yn y gwrandawiad, a byddent yn bresennol fel arfer. Yn gyffredinol, byddai ganddynt gynrychiolaeth gyfreithiol, cyfreithwyr a chwnsler fel arfer yn cael cyfarwyddyd gan eu sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol. Gallai’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth a galw tystion. Gymaint oedd baich achosion y DC ar gyfer cyfarfod unigol ei fod yn gallu rhoi ystyriaeth hwy a manylach i bob achos nag yr oedd y PeCC yn gallu gwneud.
Mewn achos ymddygiad, gallai’r honiadau (neu rai ohonynt) gael eu gwadu, a gallai’r DC gynnal gwrandawiad llawn. Byddai’n rhaid i’r DC wneud canfyddiadau o ffaith a phenderfynu a oedd y ffeithiau yr oedd wedi’u profi, yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Os felly, byddai’r DC yn mynd ymlaen i ystyried y sancsiwn priodol. Mewn achos o euogfarn, byddai’r DC yn ymorol yn unig i sefydlu difrifoldeb y drosedd, ac ystyried unrhyw amgylchiadau lliniaru, cyn pennu sancsiwn. Roedd yn gyffredin i dystlythyrau a thystiolaeth arall am gymeriad y meddyg gael eu dyfynnu gan y rheiny a oedd yn ei gynrychioli/chynrychioli. Byddai’r DC yn ystyried unrhyw ganfyddiad croes yn erbyn y meddyg a oedd wedi’i wneud gan y DC yn y gorffennol.
Roedd pedwar llwybr gweithredu ar agor i’r DC ar ddiwedd gwrandawiad mewn achos o euogfarn neu’n dilyn canfyddiad o SPM. Y cyntaf oedd ceryddu’r meddyg a therfynu’r achos. Yr ail oedd gohirio dyfarniad, gan hynny’n rhoi’r meddyg ‘ar brawf’ i bob pwrpas. Gallai’r gohiriad fod yn amhenodol, neu i ryw ddyddiad penodedig neu gyfarfod o’r DC yn y dyfodol. Y trydydd llwybr posibl oedd cyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg gael ei atal am gyfnod nid hwy na 12 mis. Y pedwerydd opsiwn oedd gorchymyn dileu enw’r meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol.
Ystyriaf y pedwar llwybr gweithredu hwnnw yn awr.
Cerydd a Chau Achos
Byddai cerydd gan y DC yn golygu rhybudd cyhoeddus. Fe allai fod adroddiad amdano yn y wasg. Byddai’n rhan o hanes FTP y meddyg. Os oedd ymholiad yn cael ei wneud wedi hynny am yr hanes hwnnw, dylai’r ymholwr fod wedi cael gwybod am y rhybudd, neu dylid fod wedi rhoi copi iddo/iddi o gofnodion perthnasol y DC lle’r oedd wedi’i gofnodi.
Gohirio Dyfarniad
Er bod Rheolau 1970 yn darparu ar gyfer gohirio dyfarniad gan y DC, nid oeddent yn rhoi unrhyw arweiniad ynghylch yr amgylchiadau lle dylid arfer y grym i ohirio. Gellid cael cymorth, fodd bynnag, o’r Llyfr Glas a oedd yn gyfredol ar y pryd. Roedd argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 yn datgan:
‘The primary duty of the Disciplinary Committee is to protect the public. In any case the Committee must therefore first consider whether the public interest requires it to remove the doctor’s name from the Register, or to suspend his registration. Subject however to this overriding duty to the public the Committee considers what is in the best interests of the doctor himself. Largely for this reason the Council has evolved a system of postponing a judgment, especially in relation to offences arising from abuse of drink or drugs, in order that the doctor may satisfy the Disciplinary Committee that he is able to conduct himself properly and to overcome any addiction to alcohol or drugs. In severe cases of addiction, however, the Committee may consider it necessary to order suspension while the doctor undergoes treatment.’
Aeth y Llyfr glas ymlaen:
Dylid nodi mai at y DC yn unig y cyfeiriodd y Llyfr Glas, ac ni wnaeth unrhyw gyfeiriad at y ffaith y gallai’r PeCC ddefnyddio’i bwerau i ohirio er mwyn gohirio dyfarniad ar feddyg a oedd wedi camddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau.
Byddaf yn trafod y defnydd o rym y DC i ohirio dyfarniad yn fanylach nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Atal
Mewn achosion lle’r oedd y DC wedi dewis atal cofrestriad meddyg, roedd yn agored iddo i ystyried yr achos eto cyn diwedd cyfnod yr ataliad. Gallai wedyn, os oedd o’r farn ei bod yn briodol, ymestyn cyfnod gwreiddiol yr ataliad neu orchymyn dileu enw meddyg. Cyn mynd ati i ail-ystyried yr achos, gallai’r DC, yr un fath â phan fyddai’n gohirio dyfarniad, ofyn i’r meddyg i roi enwau canolwyr y gellid gofyn iddynt am wybodaeth am ei arferion/harferion a’i ymddygiad/hymddygiad ers pennu’r ataliad. Byddai’r wybodaeth hon yn cael ei hystyried pan oedd y DC yn mynd ati i ail-ystyried yr achos. Roedd y Llyfr Glas yn dweud yn glir, dim ond os oedd tystiolaeth nad oedd y meddyg wedi ymddwyn yn briodol, neu ei fod/bod yn gaeth i ddiod neu gyffuriau ac nad oedd wedi ymateb i driniaeth, yr oedd y DC yn debygol o orchymyn ataliad pellach neu roi cyfarwyddyd i ddileu enw’r meddyg mewn gwrandawiad arall. Eto, dylid nodi, pan oedd y DC yn mynd ati i ail-ystyried achos yn dilyn cyfnod o ataliad, nid oedd staff y GMC yn ceisio cael gwybodaeth am ymddygiad y meddyg o ffynhonnell annibynnol. Roedd y meddyg yn cyflwyno’i ganolwyr/chanolwyr ei hun. Fel arfer, mewn achos lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau mewn cysylltiad â chyffuriau caethni, byddai disgwyl iddo/iddi gyflwyno un neu fwy o adroddiadau gan y seiciatrydd ymgynghorol a oedd â gofal am ei driniaeth/thriniaeth.
Dileu
Y sancsiwn mwyaf difrifol y gellid ei bennu gan y DC oedd dileu enw meddyg o’r gofrestr feddygol. Nid ymddengys bod unrhyw arweiniad wedi’i roi ynghylch pa fath o achos allai warantu dileu enw meddyg, a pha ffactorau y gellid eu hystyried yn briodol i liniaru’r drosedd neu’r ymddygiad. Os oedd yn cael ei bennu, roedd dileu ei enw yn atal meddyg rhag ymarfer, ac roedd hynny’n parhau mewn grym oni bai a hyd nes bod y meddyg yn gwneud cais llwyddiannus i ail-gynnwys ei enw/henw ar y gofrestr. Gallai cais i ail-gynnwys gael ei wneud pan oedd deg mis wedi mynd heibio yn dilyn y gorchymyn gwreiddiol i ddileu. Os oedd y cais cyntaf i ail-gynnwys yn aflwyddiannus, roedd rhaid i gyfnod pellach o ddeg mis fynd heibio cyn y gellid gwneud cais arall. Nid oedd unrhyw derfyn ar nifer y ceisiadau i ail-gynnwys y gellid eu gwneud. Nododd argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o’r Llyfr Glas:
Roedd yn eglur, felly, nad oedd dileu meddyg wedi’i fwriadu i fod yn barhaol o reidrwydd. Esboniodd y Llyfr Glas bod y DC yn archwilio pob cais i ail-gynnwys ar ei rinweddau, gan ystyried, ymhlith pethau eraill, natur a difrifoldeb y drosedd wreiddiol, hyd y cyfnod ers dileu, ac ymddygiad yr ymgeisydd yn y cyfamser.
Gwahaniaethau rhwng Achosion a Phwerau’r Pwyllgor Disgyblu a’r Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
I grynhoi, y prif wahaniaethau rhwng achosion a phwerau’r PeCC a rhai’r DC oedd bod y DC yn cynnal gwrandawiad ffurfiol yn gyhoeddus a’r PeCC yn cynnal cyfarfod yn breifat. Byddai’r meddyg yn bresennol fel arfer ac roedd yn cael ei gynrychioli mewn gwrandawiad gerbron y DC; yn wir, byddai’n debygol o greu argraff wael os nad oedd yn bresennol. Nid oedd y meddyg yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i fod yn bresennol yng nghyfarfodydd y PeCC. Nid oedd ychwaith yn cael ei gynrychioli/chynrychioli mewn cyfarfodydd felly. Byddai’r PeCC yn gwneud ei benderfyniad ar sail deunydd ysgrifenedig yn unig. Roedd gwrandawiad gerbron y DC yn debygol o gael ei adrodd yn y wasg, a dylai unrhyw berson a oedd yn gwneud ymholiad penodol i’r GMC fod wedi’i hysbysu am y canlyniad. Roedd achosion y PeCC yn gyfrinachol. Roedd gan y DC y grym i ddileu ac atal meddyg; nid oedd y grym hwnnw gan y PeCC.
Troseddau’n Ymwneud â Chyffuriau ac Anonestrwydd
Roedd argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o’r Llyfr Glas yn nodi enghreifftiau o rai mathau o drosedd a mathau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol a oedd yn y gorffennol wedi arwain at gamau disgyblu gan y GMC. Roedd hwn wedi’i fwriadu fel arweiniad i feddygon am ba fath o ymddygiad oedd yn annerbyniol. Roedd y Llyfr Glas yn nodi’n glir nad oedd yr enghreifftiau’n gynhwysfawr. Roedd y materion pa un a oedd ymddygiad penodol yn gyfystyr ag SPM, a difrifoldeb euogfarn, y dywedwyd, yn faterion i’w pennu gan y DC ar ôl ystyried y dystiolaeth ym mhob achos unigol. Nid oedd unrhyw awgrym y dylai’r PeCC ymwneud â materion felly.
Mae’r enghreifftiau a roddir yn y Llyfr Glas sy’n berthnasol i achos Shipman yn cynnwys y canlynol:
Roedd achos Shipman yn ymwneud â rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig ac eithrio yn ystod triniaeth
, law yn llaw â throseddau o dwyll troseddol a ffugio, wedi’u cyflawni dros gyfnod sylweddol ac i foddhau ei gaethni neu’i ddibyniaeth ei hun. Gall darllenydd y Llyfr Glas yn wir fod wedi disgwyl y byddai
‘golwg ddifrifol iawn’
wedi’i chymryd o ymddygiad felly.
Adroddiad Pwyllgor Merrison
Ym 1975, cyhoeddwyd Adroddiad y Pwyllgor Ymchwilio a gadeiriwyd gan Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alec Merrison i Reoleiddio’r Proffesiwn Meddygol (Adroddiad Merrison). Am gryn amser cyn cyhoeddi Adroddiad Merrison, bu pryder cynyddol ynghylch gallu’r system reoleiddio bresennol i ddelio’n ddigonol â phroblem meddygon sâl. Roedd y broblem yn ddeublyg. Yn gyntaf, dim ond os oedd meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd neu os oedd yn cael ei ganfod/chanfod yn euog o SPM y gallai’r GMC weithredu. Hyd yn oed bryd hynny, roedd y sancsiynau a oedd ar gael i’r DC yn gyfyngedig. Er enghraifft, roedd y GMC yn ystyried ei hun yn ddi-rym i weithredu lle’r oedd yn hysbys bod meddyg yn alcoholig cronig (ac yn risg i gleifion felly) ond nad oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd ac nad oedd wedi cyflawni unrhyw weithredu a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Felly, teimlwyd bod y gweithdrefnau presennol yn methu darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion.
Y broblem arall oedd, mewn achosion lle’r oedd modd defnyddio gweithdrefnau disgyblu’r GMC i ddelio â meddygon sâl, roedd y gweithdrefnau hynny’n gosbol o ran natur, ac, mewn achos achosion gerbron y DC, roeddent yn cael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus. Teimlai llawer o bobl bod hyn yn ddull amhriodol - annynol hyd yn oed - o ddelio â meddygon a oedd yn dioddef o salwch corfforol neu feddyliol. Dywedodd Mrs Jean Robinson, a ddaeth yn aelod lleyg o’r GMC, am y cyfnod hwn:
‘Roedd anesmwythyd mawr bod meddygon nad oeddent yn gallu ymdopi oherwydd salwch meddyliol neu gorfforol - rhai ohonynt mewn cyflwr pathetig - wedi’u llusgo yn y gorffennol gerbron gwrandawiad cyhoeddus a oedd yn gyfystyr â threial troseddol. Roeddwn i’n meddwl ei bod yn gywilyddus nad oedd corff a oedd yn gosod y safon ar gyfer cyfrinachedd meddygol yn sicrhau hynny ar gyfer meddygon eu hunain, gan adael iddynt gael gwrandawiad a goruchwyliaeth breifat ar gyfer problemau iechyd (fel salwch meddwl) ...’.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Syr Donald Irvine, a oedd yn aelod o’r GMC o 1979 ac yn Llywydd rhwng 1995 a 2002, bod tan-adrodd difrifol, yn y 1970au, gan feddygon am gydweithwyr yr oedd yn hysbys eu bod yn risg i gleifion oherwydd salwch. Prif achos y tan-adrodd hwnnw oedd bygythiad y GMC yn erbyn y meddyg sâl, a allai fod yn gosbol yn unig (yn swyddogol o leiaf). Roedd pryderon hefyd am y trefniadau lleol ar gyfer delio â meddygon sâl a oedd, yn ôl Syr Donald, ‘yn fylchog, wedi’u cydlynu’n wael ac yn aneffeithiol i raddau helaeth’.
Nid oedd gan Bwyllgor Merrison unrhyw ystadegau dibynadwy o’i flaen a oedd yn dangos maint y broblem, ond roedd yn hyderus
‘nad oedd yn fach’
. Roedd y GMC wedi rhoi tystiolaeth i’r Pwyllgor i’r perwyl bod y categori mwyaf o achosion o afiechyd seiciatrig yn codi o gaethni i ddiod neu gyffuriau a oedd
‘yn gysylltiedig â’
ac yn
‘amlygu canlyniadau rhyw anhwylder personoliaeth cyfredol arall’
Nid oedd gan Bwyllgor Merrison unrhyw amheuaeth bod angen ar fyrder i’r GMC gael y pwerau i ddelio â meddygon sâl. Dywedodd ei Adroddiad:
‘The need for the GMC to have power to control the right to practice of sick doctors is so overwhelming and so obvious that it seems to us amazing that the GMC has continued for so long without such a power. There are very sick doctors, and by no means all of them have enough insight into their condition to retire from practice before they endanger their patients. Those who do continue to practise can be completely stopped from doing so only if they commit a criminal offence or do something which constitutes serious professional misconduct. That is not a rational way of ordering matters.’
Argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison sefydlu Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC) a threfniadau ar gyfer cam ‘cymodi’ gerbron gwrandawiad ffurfiol gan yr HC. Diben y cymodi hwn fyddai rhoi’r cyfle i feddyg gytuno i archwiliad gan arbenigwr a chytuno i ymrwymiad gwirfoddol fel dewis arall i’r achos yn mynd ymlaen at wrandawiad ffurfiol. Os oedd y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiad/hymrwymiad, ni fyddai angen am wrandawiad ffurfiol gan yr HC. Y gobaith oedd y byddai llawer o feddygon yn gallu ailsefydlu. Argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison, os oedd ailsefydlu’n methu, dylai’r grym fod gan yr HC i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad, neu atal cofrestriad. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth Pwyllgor Merrison argymell y dylai’r sancsiwn dileu enw meddyg o’r gofrestr fod ar gael i’r HC. Cyflwynwyd gweithdrefnau iechyd y GMC, wedi’u modelu ar yr argymhellion yn Adroddiad Merrison, gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978 a daethant i rym ym mis Awst 1980.
Pwysleisiodd Pwyllgor Merrison, yn ei drafodaeth gyffredinol o weithdrefnau FTP y GMC, ddiben sylfaenol y gweithdrefnau hynny:
‘Dylai camau gweithredu’r GMC tuag at y rheiny nad ydynt yn addas i ymarfer gael eu cyfeirio i ddiogelu’r claf, nid cosbi’r meddyg. Felly y dylai fod, yn ein barn ni, hyd yn oed pan fydd cwestiwn ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn codi oherwydd camymddygiad proffesiynol. I feddyg gael ei enw wedi’i ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr, ac i gael ei amddifadu/hamddifadu i bob pwrpas o’i fywoliaeth, mae hynny’n gosb ddifrifol iawn, ond mae’r ffaith ei fod yn gosb yn sgil-effaith yn hytrach na diben rheoleiddio ... yn sicr gall awyrgylch o gosbi ... annog aelodau’r proffesiwn neu’r cyhoedd i beidio hysbysu’r GMC am faterion y dylid dod â nhw i’w sylw; yn enwedig, er enghraifft, salwch meddwl a oedd hefyd yn golygu camymddygiad proffesiynol ...’.
Deliwyd ag achos Shipman gan y GMC ym 1976. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine bod, erbyn hynny,
‘synnwyr enfawr o ryddhad’
yn y proffesiwn meddygol yn wyneb y gobaith bod dulliau mwy boddhaol o ddelio â meddygon sâl i’w cyflwyno. Yn benodol, teimlwyd, wedi i’r gweithdrefnau newydd gael eu cyflwyno, y byddai meddygon yn fwy hyderus ynghylch adrodd am gydweithwyr a oedd yn risg i’w cleifion ac angen help arnynt.
Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn wrth yr Ymchwiliad, fel aelod o’r PeCC, ei fod wedi ystyried bod cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd yn ‘hanfodol’. Hebddynt, ni fyddai gan y PeCC unrhyw ddewis weithiau ond cyfeirio meddyg sâl at y DC. ‘Niweidio’r meddyg yn aml yn unig’ y gallai hyn wneud, meddai. Dywedodd, pan ddaeth y gweithdrefnau iechyd i mewn, bod y proffesiwn yn teimlo’n llawer mwy esmwyth gan fod meddygon yn cael ‘eu trin yn deg’.
Wedi i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gael eu cyflwyno ym 1980, roedd y GMC yn gallu mabwysiadu ymagwedd adferol yn ffurfiol ac yn agored tuag at achosion yr oedd yn ymddangos bod ymddygiad troseddol neu gamymddygiad meddyg yn deillio o afiechyd corfforol neu feddyliol. Ym 1976, roedd paratoadau’n cael eu gwneud ar gyfer y newidiadau a oedd ar ddod. Roedd hwn yn gyfnod o drawsnewid i’r GMC. Rhaid edrych ar y digwyddiadau yn gysylltiedig â’r modd yr ymdriniodd ag achos Shipman yn y cyd-destun hwnnw.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Alan Howes, a oedd yn gysylltiedig â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd fwy neu lai’n barhaus rhwng mis Mehefin 1980 a 1994, ei bod yn anodd, wrth edrych yn ôl, i roi eich hun yng nghyd-destun y cyfnod yn union ar ôl cyhoeddi Adroddiad Merrison. Roedd yr Adroddiad newydd osgoi bygythiad anferth o wrthryfel o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol yn gysylltiedig â chynnig y GMC i bennu tâl cadw blynyddol. Dywedodd Mr Howes bod ‘unrhyw beth yr oedd y GMC yn ei wneud yn y dyddiau hynny mewn perthynas â’r proffesiwn yn sicr yn troedio’n ofalus’. Dywedodd bod rhaid edrych ar waith pwyllgorau FTP y GMC bryd hynny yn y cyd-destun hwn. Dywedodd hefyd nad oedd materion fel ‘diogelu lles y cyhoedd’ ar flaen meddyliau pobl yn y 1970au. Dywedaf ar draws hynny, os yw hynny’n iawn, nid felly y dylai fod wedi bod. Ymddengys o’r darn a ddyfynnais ym mharagraff 16.41 bod diogelu cleifion yn sicr ar flaen meddyliau’r rheiny a oedd ar Bwyllgor Merrison. Yn wir, dywedodd y Llyfr Glas mai prif ddyletswydd y GMC oedd diogelu’r cyhoedd.
Aeth Mr Howes ymlaen i ddweud, ar ddiwedd y 1970au, bod pwyllgorau FTP y GMC yn ‘ymgodymu â phroses yr oedd pawb yn gwybod nad oedd yn gweithio’n foddhaol i feddygon sâl’. Roedd y GMC yn disgwyl am ddeddfwriaeth newydd i gyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd, ac, yn y cyfamser, roedd y PeCC (a’r DC hefyd fwy na thebyg) yn ymlafnio i wneud y gorau a allai gydag achosion yn cynnwys elfen iechyd. Dywedodd, pan oedd aelodau’r PeCC wedi gweld bod problemau meddyg yn deillio o afiechyd, byddent wedi canolbwyntio ar yr afiechyd, nid ar ffactorau eraill yr achos, oni bai eu bod yn eu gweld fel rhai perthnasol eithriadol i gyflwr meddygol y meddyg nawr neu yn y dyfodol.
Roedd Pwyllgor Merrison wedi argymell hefyd y dylai’r PeCC gael ei ddisodli gan Bwyllgor Cwynion. Ei brif swyddogaeth fyddai
‘i ystyried, ar y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael, pa un a oedd tystiolaeth olwg gyntaf wedi’i chasglu bod meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer’
. Fel yr hidlwr cwynion olaf, ni fyddai’r Pwyllgor Cwynion yn cynnal gwrandawiadau, ond byddai naill ai yn
‘cyfeirio achosion ar gyfer gweithredu pellach neu’n cyfarwyddo bod y mater yn cael ei gau, gan drefnu i bob parti â diddordeb gael eu hysbysu yn y naill achos neu’r llall’
. Nid ymddengys bod Pwyllgor Merrison wedi rhagweld y byddai’r Pwyllgor Cwynion yn gwneud penderfyniadau sylweddol nac yn pennu sancsiynau. Byddai, fodd bynnag, yn cael y grym i orchymyn atal cofrestriad meddyg dros dro lle’r oedd y meddyg yn creu perygl difrifol i’r cyhoedd. Beth bynnag, disodlwyd y PeCC gan y PPC a barhaodd, fel yr esboniaf nes ymlaen, fel yr oedd y PeCC wedi gwneud, i farnu ar achosion i raddau cyfyngedig. Argymhellodd Adroddiad Merrison hefyd y dylai’r GMC sefydlu uned ymchwilio fechan i gasglu tystiolaeth mewn cysylltiad â chwynion yn cael eu gwneud yn erbyn meddygon.
Safonau, Trothwyau a Meini Prawf
Er bod Deddf 1956 a Rheolau 1970 yn darparu disgresiwn eang iawn o ran y dull yr oedd y GMC yn cyflawni’i swyddogaeth ddisgyblu, ac er na bennwyd unrhyw safonau na meini prawf ffurfiol ar gyfer arfer y disgresiwn hwnnw, ymddengys bod rhai egwyddorion sylfaenol i arwain y DC a’r PeCC. Fel yr esboniais, roedd y Llyfr Glas yn dweud mai prif ddyletswydd y GMC oedd diogelu’r cyhoedd; dan reolaeth y ddyletswydd bennaf honno, byddai’r DC yn ystyried beth oedd er budd gorau’r meddyg dan sylw.
Y Brif Ddyletswydd i Ddiogelu’r Cyhoedd
Yn amlwg, roedd diogelu’r cyhoedd (ac, yn benodol, cleifion) yn faen prawf pwysig, neu dylai fod wedi bod yn faen prawf pwysig i’w ystyried gan y PeCC a’r DC eu dau. Os nad oedd unrhyw faterion diogelu’r cyhoedd neu gleifion yn codi, byddai’r ddau Bwyllgor yn rhydd i roi blaenoriaeth i fuddiannau’r meddyg ei hun. Mewn achos lle’r oedd y meddyg, neu lle’r oedd yn ymddangos ei fod/bod, yn gaeth i gyffuriau, byddai’r Pwyllgorau, yn ddiau, yn dymuno ystyried y modd y dylid ei ailsefydlu/hailsefydlu orau. Yn achos y PeCC, byddai’n berthnasol i ystyried a oedd er budd y meddyg i ddelio ag ef/hi yn gynharach ac yn breifat, yn hytrach nag yn hwyrach ac yn gyhoeddus. Byddai synnwyr cyffredin yn dweud y byddai bron bob amser yn well i ddelio â’r meddyg yn gynharach ac yn breifat. Fodd bynnag, os oedd y PeCC i fod yn deyrngar i brif ddyletswydd y GMC, byddai’n rhaid iddo gymryd camau priodol i ganfod a oedd neu a allai’r meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer beri unrhyw risg i gleifion neu’r cyhoedd. Byddai’n ymddangos yn amlwg i mi, os oedd risg felly’n bodoli, y dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y DC er mwyn cymhwyso o bosibl yr ystod ehangach o sancsiynau a oedd ar gael i’r Pwyllgor hwnnw. Eto roedd problem sylfaenol i’r PeCC wrth ystyried mater risg a diogelu cleifion. Byddai’r PeCC yn gwneud ei benderfyniadau ar said gwybodaeth amlinellol yn unig. Gallai benderfynu cyfeirio achos at y DC
‘i ymchwilio iddo’
. Y ddealltwriaeth oedd mai yn y cyfnod ymchwilio yn unig y byddai’r ffeithiau llawn yn dod yn hysbys. Dim ond bryd hynny fyddai’r meddyg yn ymddangos gerbron aelodau’r GMC, a bryd hynny’n unig y byddai’r DC yn cael y cyfle i wneud asesiad llawn o ba un a oedd y meddyg yn risg i gleifion. Felly, os oedd y PeCC i benderfynu delio â’r achos ei hun, byddai perygl y byddai’n dod i gasgliad ar sail gwybodaeth anghyflawn ac annigonol.
Difrifoldeb y Drosedd neu’r Gŵyn
Fel gydag unrhyw gorff a oedd yn gysylltiedig â gweithredu proses ddisgyblu, roedd y PeCC yn pryderu ynghylch difrifoldeb y camymddygiad yr oedd yn gorfod delio ag ef. Wrth benderfynu ynghylch cyfeirio achos at y DC neu beidio
‘i ymchwilio iddo’
, byddai’r PeCC yn ystyried difrifoldeb yr honiad o gamymddygiad neu’r euogfarnau dan ystyriaeth. Nid oedd safonau, trothwyau na meini prawf ysgrifenedig, na chanllawiau hyd yn oed, i helpu aelodau’r PeCC wrth asesu difrifoldeb. Roedd y darn o argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o’r Llyfr Glas, a ddyfynnais ym mharagraff 16.16, i weld fel pe bai’n dweud (er nad yn gwbl eglur) y byddai euogfarnau unigol neu honiadau o gamymddygiad yn ddigon difrifol i warantu cyfeirio; ni fyddai rhai eraill. Fodd bynnag, os oedd trosedd yn cael ei hail-adrodd, gallai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y DC er na fyddai trosedd unigol o’r un natur yn cael ei chyfeirio. Nid yw’n eglur pa un a oedd hynny’n golygu y byddai’r achos yn fwy tebygol o gael ei gyfeirio os oedd y meddyg yn cael ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog, ar un achlysur, o aml droseddau nag a fyddai pe bai wedi ymddangos gerbron y llysoedd dro ar ôl tro. Hefyd, nid oedd y Llyfr Glas yn rhoi unrhyw arwydd pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd yn rhaid i’r drosedd neu’r gyfres o droseddau fod cyn y byddai cyfeiriad yn cael ei warantu. Gan gofio bod pwerau’r DC i bennu unrhyw sancsiwn ar feddyg am gamymddygiad (lle nad oedd euogfarn wedi’i chofnodi) wedi’u cyfyngu i achosion lle’r oedd y DC yn cael y meddyg yn euog o SPM, ymddengys i mi mai’r unig drothwy synhwyrol ar gyfer cyfeirio, mewn achos ymddygiad, fyddai a oedd gobaith rhesymol o sefydlu SPM. Mewn blynyddoedd diweddarach, pan oedd gan y GMC rywfaint o feini prawf ysgrifenedig, dyna oedd safon trothwy difrifoldeb ar gyfer cyfeirio at wrandawiad disgyblu. Trwy gydweddiad, ymddengys i mi, mewn perthynas ag euogfarnau, mai’r unig fesur synhwyrol o ddifrifoldeb fyddai pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad a oedd yn sail i’r euogfarnau mor ddifrifol ag ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed pe bai safon felly wedi’i gosod yn eglur, ni fyddai wedi bod yn hawdd i’w chymhwyso’n ymarferol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gall barnau ynghylch yr hyn sy’n gyfystyr ag SPM wahaniaethau’n o eang. Ym Mhennod 17, byddaf yn disgrifio, yng nghyd-destun trafodaeth am weithrediad y PCC (yr olynydd i’r DC) yn ystod y blynyddoedd pan oedd yn aelod, y modd y dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod dadleuon ynghylch pa un a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn arwain at anghytundeb cryf ar brydiau ac yn creu llawer o ‘wres’ ac ‘emosiwn’. Yn y 1970au, ychydig iawn o arweiniad oedd ynghylch y mathau o ymddygiad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, a heb fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae wedi parhau felly fyth ers hynny.
Gyda hyn, byddaf yn archwilio’r graddau yr oedd y PeCC yn cymhwyso meini prawf cyson o ddifrifoldeb wrth benderfynu cyfeirio achos neu beidio at y DC. Fel y byddaf yn dangos, mae dadansoddiad o’r achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn dangos nad oedd llawer o achosion o euogfarnau’n cael eu cyfeirio gan y PeCC at y DC er gwaetha’r ffaith, ar unrhyw olwg, bod yr ymddygiad sylfaenol yn ddifrifol. Mae Shipman yn enghraifft. Mae’n rhaid bod euogfarnau o aml droseddau o gael gafael ar gyffuriau rheoledig trwy dwyll (y mae’n rhaid o reidrwydd eu bod wedi golygu ymddygiad anonest), yn fy marn i, wedi bod yn ddigon difrifol i wneud cyfeiriad yn ofynnol. At hynny, byddai’r deunydd a gyhoeddwyd gan y GMC ar y pryd wedi peri i feddygon a’r cyhoedd eu dau i ddisgwyl y byddent yn cael eu cyfeirio. Eto, roedd rhai achosion felly’n cael eu cyfeirio at y DC; roedd rhai nad oeddent yn cael eu cyfeirio.
Roedd llawer o achosion o feddygon a oedd yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau yn wir yn cael eu cyfeirio gan y PeCC at y DC. Yng nghyfarfod y PeCC a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ionawr 1976, o’r 14 o achosion o feddygon yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau, cyfeiriwyd naw ohonynt at y DC, a gohiriwyd un tan y cyfarfod nesaf, pan gafodd ei ohirio eto a’i gau yn y pen draw heb gyfeirio at y DC. Nid yw canlyniad y pedwar achos arall yn hysbys, ond nid ymddengys iddynt gael eu cyfeirio at y DC. Yng nghyfarfod y PeCC ym mis Ebrill 1976 (lle’r ystyriwyd achos Shipman), o’r naw achos o euogfarnau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau, dim ond un a gyfeiriwyd at y DC. Cafodd y lleill (ac eithrio un, nad yw ei ganlyniad yn hysbys) naill ai eu gohirio neu eu cau â llythyr rhybudd.
Mae archwilio ffeithiau’r achosion a ystyriwyd yng nghyfarfodydd mis Ionawr a mis Ebrill 1976 o’r PeCC yn awgrymu nad difrifoldeb yr ymddygiad a oedd yn sylfaenol i’r troseddau a bennodd a oedd achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at y DC. Er enghraifft, roedd pump o’r meddygon a gyfeiriwyd at y DC gan y PeCC yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Ionawr 1976 wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig, wedi’u cyflawni dros gyfnod amser sylweddol. Roedd pob un ohonynt wedi mynd yn gaeth i’r cyffur dan sylw. Ym mhob achos, ymddengys bod elfen o anonestrwydd wrth gael gafael ar y cyffur. Ar y llaw arall, roedd achosion tri meddyg arall a Shipman ei hun yn ymwneud ag euogfarnau am droseddau o raddfa difrifoldeb debyg, ac eto, ni chawsant eu cyfeirio at y DC gan y PeCC yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Ebrill 1976.
Mae archwilio’r ffeiliau yn yr achosion hyn yn awgrymu mai’r ffactor a wnaeth y gwahaniaeth oedd bod y meddyg wedi cyflwyno rhywfaint o dystiolaeth ei fod/bod yn cael triniaeth seiciatrig, neu ei fod/bod o leiaf dan ryw ffurf o oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Ym 1976, fel y nodais, nid oedd gofyniad yn y Rheolau y dylid gofyn i feddyg a oedd yn cael ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau am ei esboniad/hesboniad o amgylchiadau’r drosedd/troseddau yr oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog ohonynt cyn i’r PeCC gyfarfod i ystyried ei achos/hachos. Fodd bynnag, roedd yr arfer o ofyn i feddygon felly am eu hesboniad a rhoi’r cyfle iddynt i gyflwyno tystiolaeth feddygol a thystiolaeth arall gerbron gwrandawiad y PeCC, yn tyfu. Fel y gwelwn, cafodd Shipman ei hun y cyfle, ac fe’i cymerodd. Gallaf weld bod y PeCC, i ryw raddau, yn ystyried ei ddyletswydd i ddiogelu cleifion; roedd yn dibynnu ar y deunydd a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg i asesu a oedd y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys o’r achosion bod yr Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio, os oedd unrhyw ddeunydd defnyddiol yn cael ei gyflwyno, byddai’r PeCC yn barod iawn i ddod i’r casgliad nad oedd y meddyg yn risg i’r cyhoedd ac y gallai barhau i ymarfer, yn amodol naill ai ar gyfnod o oruchwyliaeth feddygol barhaus (a fyddai’n cael ei gyflawni trwy ohirio ystyried yr achos i gyfarfod diweddarach) neu trwy gau’r achos gyda rhybudd.
Cynnal Bri ac Enw Da‘r Proffesiwn Meddygol
Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn wrth yr Ymchwiliad, wrth benderfynu gohirio achos neu beidio i’r DC, byddai’r PeCC hefyd yn ystyried a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg wedi dwyn anfri ar y proffesiwn. Byddwn wedi disgwyl iddo wneud, gan fod y GMC wastad wedi cydnabod pwysigrwydd cynnal bri ac enw da’r proffesiwn meddygol a hyder y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn, a’r modd yr oedd y GMC yn ei reoleiddio. Un o’r rhesymau pam mae’r DC (a’r PCC yn ddiweddarach) wastad wedi eistedd yn gyhoeddus ac wastad wedi caniatáu cyhoeddi’i benderfyniadau oedd cynnal hyder y cyhoedd yng nghyflawniad ei swyddogaeth ddisgyblu. Lle mae meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau, mae’r ffeithiau sydd wrth wraidd yr euogfarnau hynny’n wybodaeth gyhoeddus. Efallai nad ydynt wedi cael sylw yn y wasg genedlaethol, ond byddant yn hysbys yn yr ardal lle mae’r meddyg yn byw a/neu yn ymarfer, ac maent yn debygol iawn o ddod i sylw ei gleifion/chleifion. Gan gymryd bod y GMC yn ymdrin ag achos y meddyg mewn ffordd sy’n diogelu’r cyhoedd a chleifion y meddyg yn briodol, bydd hyder y cyhoedd yn y GMC yn fwy yn sgil cyhoeddi’r penderfyniad. Os delir ag achos felly o euogfarn yn breifat, mae perygl y bydd aelodau’r cyhoedd sy’n gwybod am yr euogfarn yn meddwl nad yw’r GMC wedi gwneud dim.
Defnydd y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol o’r Grym i Ohirio
Rwyf wedi sôn bod grym y PeCC i ohirio achos wedi’i roi er mwyn galluogi gwneud ymchwiliadau pellach neu gael cyngor cyfreithiol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n glir o’r achosion mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi’u harchwilio bod y grym yn cael ei ddefnyddio weithiau er mwyn arfer mesur o reolaeth dros feddyg a oedd wedi bod yn camddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau rheoledig. Gall yr achos drwy hynny aros dan awdurdodaeth y PeCC am flwyddyn neu fwy. Weithiau, byddai’r PeCC yn gohirio achos fwy nag unwaith, hyd yn oed pan oedd tystiolaeth ar yr ail achlysur neu’r achlysur dilynol bod y meddyg wedi mynd yn ôl at ei hen arferion. Mewn achos lle nad oedd y meddyg wedi gofyn am driniaeth seiciatrig eto, byddai’r PeCC weithiau yn cyfarwyddo y dylai wneud hynny a byddai’n gohirio’r achos i gyfarfod diweddarach, gan ei gwneud yn ofynnol bod adroddiad yn cael ei gyflwyno gan seiciatrydd i’w ystyried bryd hynny. Os oedd y meddyg eisoes dan ofal seiciatrydd, byddai’r PeCC yn mynegi’i ddisgwyliad y byddai’r meddyg yn parhau dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol yn ystod cyfnod y gohiriad. Fel arfer byddai cais i’r meddyg roi enw’r seiciatrydd goruchwylio i’r GMC, ac enwau cydweithwyr proffesiynol eraill a allai ddarparu gwybodaeth gyfrinachol am ei gynnydd/chynnydd. Os oedd y meddyg yn methu cydweithredu â’r GMC neu’n mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau neu gamddefnyddio alcohol, roedd posibilrwydd cyfeirio’r achos at y DC yn agored o hyd. Fodd bynnag, fel y daw i’r golwg o’r ddwy enghraifft ddilynol, ymddengys mai ar ailsefydlu’r meddyg yr oedd ffocws y PeCC.
Yn achos Dr JA 04, roedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog, yng nghanol y 1970au, o gael gafael ar forffin trwy dwyll, at ei ddefnydd ei hun yn ôl pob golwg. Deliwyd ag ef yn Llys y Goron, a gofynnodd i nifer fawr o droseddau gael eu hystyried. Cyn gynted ag y daeth ei droseddau i sylw’r heddlu, roedd wedi cael triniaeth seiciatrig ac roedd yn gallu rhoi adroddiad gerbron y Barnwr wrth gael ei ddedfrydu. Cafodd ei ddirwyo. Daeth yr achos gerbron y PeCC. Yn amlwg, roedd yr ymddygiad sylfaenol yn ddigon difrifol i warantu cyfeirio at y DC. Ar yr adeg pan ddaeth ei achos gerbron y PeCC, roedd y meddyg yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu ac roedd dan oruchwyliaeth seiciatryddol. Roedd wedi gadael ei gyn bartner ac wedi bod yn ymarfer fel meddyg teulu ar ei ben ei hun. Roedd yn chwilio am bartner arall. Byddwn wedi meddwl bod y ffaith ei fod yn ymarfer ar ei ben ei hun yn creu risg i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, gohiriodd y PeCC ystyried yr achos am wyth mis, gan ddweud ei fod i aros dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Yn y cyfamser, roedd y meddyg, wrth gwrs, yn rhydd i ymarfer, a chyflwr ei iechyd oedd dan oruchwyliaeth, nid ei ymarfer. Ymddengys bod rhagdybiaeth nad oedd unrhyw risg i gleifion y meddyg.
Ar yr adeg pan ystyriodd yr achos y tro nesaf, roedd gan y PeCC ddeunydd gerbron a ddylai fod wedi arwain at bryder ynghylch lles cleifion y meddyg. Roedd llythyr y meddyg ei hun yn rhoi adroddiad disglair o’i ymadferiad. Roedd wedi cael partner newydd a oedd, meddai, yn
‘gwbl ymwybodol’
o’i euogfarn. Roedd popeth yn mynd yn dda, meddai, ym mhob ffordd. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd y partner newydd wrth y GMC, er bod Dr JA 04 wedi dweud wrtho, yn gynnar, ei fod wedi cael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd yn ymwneud â chyffuriau, roedd wedi ei dwyllo ynghylch gwir raddfa ei droseddoldeb, a newydd ddod yn ymwybodol ohono yr oedd ei bartner. Roedd hyn wedi achosi anawsterau rhyngddynt. Hefyd, dywedodd y partner fod Dr JA 04 wedi rhoi geirda wedi’i baratoi ar gyfer y GMC o’i flaen iddo ei lofnodi. Roedd y partner wedi gwrthod ei lofnodi gan nad oedd y cynnwys yn wir. Mynegodd bryder am gyflwr iechyd Dr JA 04 ac nid oedd yn gallu cynnig
‘barn wedi’i phrofi’
ynghylch a oedd Dr JA 04 wedi rhoi’r gorau i ddefnyddio cyffuriau. Hefyd, roedd adroddiad y seiciatrydd trin yn eithaf gwyliadwrus ynghylch y gwir am honiad y meddyg nad oedd yn cymryd cyffuriau ac am y prognosis ar gyfer ailsefydlu. Cafwyd rhai geirdaon ffafriol gan gydweithwyr meddygol, ond ymddengys mai ffrindiau’r meddyg oeddent. Hefyd, roedd y GMC wedi derbyn llythyr gan ymarferydd a oedd yn dal swydd feddygol bwysig yn yr ardal lle’r oedd y meddyg yn ymarfer. Roedd y llythyr hwn wedi mynegi pryder ar ran y gymuned feddygol leol bod meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd ddifrifol ac eto nid oedd y GMC wedi
‘cymryd unrhyw sylw’
. Dylai’r deunydd hwn, yn fy marn i, fod wedi seinio rhybudd uchel ynghylch diogelwch cleifion y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, ni chafodd yr achos ei gyfeirio at y DC o hyd, ac fe’i gohiriwyd eto gan y PeCC ar yr un telerau ag o’r blaen. Ar yr achlysur nesaf ystyriodd y PeCC adroddiadau a geirdaon a oedd, eto, ddim yn gwbl gefnogol o bell ffordd. Taerodd un canolwr bod y meddyg yn dal i gymryd cyffuriau a mynegodd y farn, er ei les ei hun ac enw da’r proffesiwn meddygol yn yr ardal lle’r oedd yn ymarfer, y dylai’r meddyg gael ei ddileu dros dro o’r gofrestr feddygol. Er hynny, gohiriwyd yr achos gan y PeCC am flwyddyn arall. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gallu canfod sut y cafodd yr achos hwn ei ddatrys yn y pen draw.
Dywedodd Mr Howes wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn anodd iddo ef ddeall pam nad oedd y PeCC wedi cyfeirio’r achos hwn at y DC pan ystyriodd yr achos yr ail waith neu’r drydedd waith, o gofio’r adroddiadau amwys yr oedd wedi’u derbyn. Rwy’n teimlo bod rhaid i mi ddweud, na allai’r PeCC, yn ôl y deunydd a oedd ganddo gerbron, fod wedi bod yn fodlon nad oedd y meddyg yn dal i ddefnyddio morffin neu nad oedd yn risg i gleifion. Yn fy marn i, mae’r achos hwn yn dangos methiant gan y PeCC i roi pwys priodol ar yr angen i ddiogelu cleifion y meddyg. Dylai’r achos hwn fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y DC ar yr achlysur cyntaf, ac, os nad bryd hynny, yn sicr pan ddaeth yn ôl gerbron y PeCC yr ail dro. Ymddengys, pan oedd y PeCC wedi penderfynu cadw’r achos iddo’i hun ac i fynd ar hyd y ‘llwybr ailsefydlu’, roedd amharodrwydd i symud oddi ar y llwybr hwnnw ac ychydig o bwys a roddwyd i’r pryderon yn cael eu mynegi am ymddygiad y meddyg.
Mewn perthynas â’r pryderon a fynegwyd gan y gymuned feddygol leol bod y GMC heb gymryd unrhyw sylw o’r achos hwn yn ôl pob golwg, cytunodd Mr Howes y gallai delio â’r achos yn breifat fod wedi niweidio hygrededd y GMC. Mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud, pe bai’r cyhoedd wedi gwybod sut oedd y GMC yn delio â’r achos hwnnw, ni fyddai mwy o hygrededd ynddo.
Mewn achos arall (achos Dr JA 08), roedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog, yng nghanol y 1970au, o gael gafael ar bethidin trwy dwyll. Roedd wedi bod yn defnyddio’r cyffur ei hun mewn meintiau mawr, hyd at 1000mg y dydd. Daeth ei achos gerbron y PeCC. Roedd adroddiad y seiciatrydd, a baratowyd ar gyfer yr achos troseddol gan gyn gydweithiwr i’r meddyg, yn dweud nad oedd y meddyg yn gaeth i’r cyffur a’i fod yn addas i ymarfer heb unrhyw gyfyngiad ar ei hawliau rhagnodi. Mewn gwirionedd, pan ystyriodd y PeCC yr achos y tro cyntaf, roedd y meddyg eisoes wedi mynd yn ôl i gymryd meintiau mawr o bethidin bob dydd. Mewn geiriau eraill, nid oedd adroddiad y seiciatrydd yn adlewyrchu’r sefyllfa fel ag yr oedd erbyn cyfarfod y PeCC. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y PeCC yn ymwybodol o’r ffaith hwnnw a gohiriodd achos Dr JA 08 i’w gyfarfod nesaf, a oedd i’w gynnal ymhen tri mis. Yn y cyfamser, roedd y meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer fel meddyg teulu. Mis wedi i’r PeCC ystyried ei achos y tro cyntaf, aethpwyd ag ef i ysbyty seiciatrig. Ychydig cyn cyfarfod y PeCC lle’r oedd ei achos i’w ystyried am yr ail dro, adroddodd seiciatrydd yr ysbyty i’r GMC y gallai’r meddyg ddychwelyd i weithio’n fuan, heb fod ganddo unrhyw fynediad at bethidin. Yn y cyfarfod hwnnw, daeth y PeCC i wybod bod y meddyg mewn gwirionedd eisoes wedi mynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau pan wnaeth ei benderfyniad cynharach. Fodd bynnag, gohiriodd yr achos eto, am flwyddyn y tro hwn, i roi
‘cyfle arall i’r meddyg ailsefydlu’
. Roedd yn rhydd i ailddechrau ymarfer fel meddyg teulu, heb unrhyw gyfyngiad ar ei fynediad at bethidin. Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, daeth yr achos i ben, gyda chyfeiriad at y DC, ar sail adroddiad arall a ddarparwyd gan y seiciatrydd a fu’n gydweithiwr i Dr JA 08. Roedd yr adroddiad yn ffafriol, ond roedd adroddiad blaenorol y seiciatrydd hwnnw yn anghywir; roedd wedi cynghori bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer heb unrhyw gyfyngiad, pan nad ydoedd, mewn gwirionedd. Eto, gweithredodd y PeCC ar farn ffafriol yr un seiciatrydd. Wrth wneud hynny, ymddengys i mi nad diogelwch cleifion oedd ar flaen meddwl cyfunol y PeCC.
Priodoldeb a Doethineb yr Arfer o Ohirio Dro ar Ôl Tro
Pan ofynnwyd i Mr Gray y tro cyntaf mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad am ddefnydd y PeCC o’i rym i ohirio ar gyfer ymchwilio ymhellach, dywedodd nad oedd erioed yn cofio’r PeCC yn defnyddio’r grym er mwyn cadw meddyg dan wyliadwriaeth. Pe bai’r PeCC wedi teimlo bod angen hynny, byddai wedi bod yn well, meddai, i gyfeirio’r meddyg at y DC. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl darllen y papurau mewn rhai o’r achosion a benderfynwyd gan y PeCC yng nghanol y 1970au, derbyniodd Mr Gray ei bod wedi bod yn arfer eithaf cyffredin i’r PeCC ohirio, ac i bob pwrpas, rhoi meddyg dan orfodaeth i ofyn am driniaeth ac i gyflwyno adroddiadau mewn cyfarfod diweddarach o’r PeCC.
Gwnaeth Mr Howes sylwadau ar yr achosion a wrandawyd gan y PeCC yn y 1970au. Dywedodd ei bod yn ymddangos iddo ef bod y PeCC wedi bod yn defnyddio’r grym i ohirio er mwyn gweld a fyddai meddyg a oedd dan driniaeth neu oruchwyliaeth feddygol yn cynnal y gwelliant yr oedd wedi’i wneud dros gyfnod. Disgrifiodd hynny fel ‘cyffyrddiad ysgafnach’ na rhoi’r meddyg ‘ar brawf’, fel y gallai’r DC fod wedi gwneud. Credai ei bod yn briodol i’r grym i ohirio ar gyfer ymchwilio pellach gael ei ddefnyddio yn y modd hwn, os mai tymor byr oedd hynny. Dywedodd:
‘Os oedd y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol eisiau cael mwy o wybodaeth neu ddarlun gwell o’r meddyg cyn penderfynu cyfeirio neu beidio at y Pwyllgor Disgyblu, credaf fod hynny’n rhesymol. Os oeddent i wneud hynny am flwyddyn ar ôl blwyddyn, er enghraifft, ni fyddai hynny’n briodol.’
Dywedodd Mr Howes bod y PeCC a’r DC, wrth ddefnyddio’u pwerau i oedi a gohirio, yn ‘chwarae bod yn Bwyllgor Iechyd’ i bob pwrpas. Roedd hyn ar adeg pan oedd Pwyllgor Merrison wedi gwneud ei argymhellion a phan oedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd wrthi’n cael eu paratoi. Nid oeddent wedi dod i rym.
Awgrymodd y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad wrth Mr Howes mai swyddogaeth y PeCC mewn perthynas ag achos o euogfarn oedd i edrych ar yr euogfarn, asesu ei difrifoldeb a phenderfynu a ddylai fynd at y DC. Y DC oedd y Pwyllgor â’r cyfrifoldeb am bennu’r sancsiwn priodol. Gan hynny, awgrymodd nad swyddogaeth y PeCC oedd gohirio achos er mwyn cadw meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth, heb sôn am ddod â’r meddyg yn ôl dro ar ôl tro ar wrandawiadau wedi’u gohirio. Cytunodd Mr Howes, o’i ystyried heddiw, bod yr awgrym ‘yn amlwg yn un dilys’. Fodd bynnag, nododd nad ymddengys, ar y pryd, fod unrhyw wrthwynebiadau gan aseswyr cyfreithiol y GMC. Ni fu unrhyw wrthwynebiad ychwaith gan y sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol. Mewn gwirionedd, fel y nodais, roedd yn annhebygol iawn y byddai’r sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol wedi gwrthwynebu, oherwydd, o ran y rheiny wedi’u hindemnio ganddynt hwy, byddai gohiriad gan y PeCC yn well na chyfeiriad at y DC. Nid oedd y Prif Gwnsler wedi awgrymu i Mr Howes bod yr arfer o orchymyn gohirio dro ar ôl tro yn anghyfreithlon; roedd wedi awgrymu’n unig mai swyddogaeth y PeCC oedd cadw meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth faith. Gallai’r arfer o ohirio er mwyn goruchwylio fod wedi bod yn anghyfreithlon hefyd, ond nid dyna oedd y pwynt. Y pwynt oedd nad oedd yr arfer fel y’i dilynwyd yn briodol ar gyfer y PeCC.
Yn y ddau achos a ddisgrifiais, gallaf weld dyhead y PeCC yn glir i helpu’r meddyg tuag at ailsefydlu. Fodd bynnag, ni allaf ganfod cymhwyso rhag-amod tybiedig rhyddid y GMC i wneud hynny, sef yr egwyddor mai prif ddyletswydd y GMC oedd diogelu cleifion. Roedd meddyg a oedd wedi bod yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig does bosib wedi creu risg i gleifion yn y gorffennol. Ni cheisiodd y PeCC ganfod a ddioddefwyd unrhyw niwed; gallaf weld y gallai ymholiadau felly fod yn anodd i’w cyflawni weithiau. Ond, er bod risg o hyd o fynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau, mae’n rhaid bod rhywfaint o risg i gleifion o hyd. Yn fy marn i, roedd caniatáu i feddyg teulu a oedd mewn perygl o fynd yn ôl i gymryd cyffuriau i barhau i ymarfer, heb unrhyw oruchwyliaeth go iawn, yn amlwg yn peri risg niwed i gleifion. Ymddengys i mi bod y penderfyniadau hyn gan y PeCC i ohirio ystyriaeth derfynol yn peri risg i gleifion.
Y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol yn Defnyddio Llythyrau Rhybudd
Ymddengys i mi, wrth ddarllen rheol 6(1) o Reolau 1970, mai swyddogaeth y PeCC oedd gweithredu fel nithiwr, gan bennu pa achosion ddylai fynd drwodd at y DC a pha rai na ddylai fynd. Fodd bynnag, mae’n glir bod pwerau’r PeCC yn ddigon eang i ganiatáu iddo gau achos gan roi rhybudd, a bod y GMC o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i’r PeCC wneud hynny lle’r oedd yn briodol. Nid oedd unrhyw arweiniad mewnol ynghylch pa bryd y byddai’r llwybr hwnnw’n briodol. Roedd y darn yn argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o’r Llyfr Glas, a ddyfynnais ym mharagraff 16.16, yn awgrymu na fyddai’n cael ei ddefnyddio mewn achosion o ddifrifoldeb go iawn. Eto mae’n amlwg o rai o’r achosion a archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad bod llythyrau rhybudd yn cael eu defnyddio gan y PeCC mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau eithaf difrifol yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau.
Mewn un achos (achos Dr JA 18), roedd y meddyg wedi cyfaddef cyfres o ryw 125 o droseddau o gael gafael ar gyffuriau rheoledig (decsamffetamin) trwy dwyll, at ei ddefnydd ei hun, dros gyfnod o ddwy flynedd a hanner o leiaf. Roedd wedi rhoi rhagnodion yn enwau cleifion, wedi’u cyflwyno i’r fferyllfa, a chadw’r cyffuriau iddo ef ei hun. Ymddengys, yn y llys, iddo honni ei fod wedi cymryd y cyffuriau’n unig er mwyn rhoi’r nerth iddo’i hun i weithio ar adeiladu’r feddygfa newydd yr oedd newydd ei sefydlu. Honnodd na fu erioed yn ddibynnol ar y cyffuriau, a’i fod wedi rhoi’r gorau iddynt cyn gynted ag y cafodd ei weld gan yr heddlu. Roedd wedi gofyn am help seiciatryddol hefyd. Cafodd ei ryddhau’n amodol gan y llys ond adroddwyd i’r GMC amdano. Ar ôl cael adroddiad ffafriol iawn gan y seiciatrydd, a ddywedodd bod gan y meddyg bersonoliaeth gref a’i fod yn benderfynol o gadw oddi ar gyffuriau, caewyd ei achos gan y PeCC â llythyr rhybudd. Mae’r achos hwn yn debyg iawn i achos Shipman, a deliwyd ag ef mewn modd tebyg iawn. Yn anffodus, nid yw’n hawdd gweld pa feini prawf a gymhwyswyd gan na chofnododd y PeCC y rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau. Nid ymddengys o’r ffeil fod gan y PeCC unrhyw wybodaeth annibynnol am unrhyw risg bosibl i gleifion. O’r ffeil, ymddengys bod yr unig wybodaeth fanwl a oedd ar gael i’r PeCC wedi’i darparu gan y meddyg a’r seiciatrydd trin. Pan ofynnwyd iddo am wybodaeth am yr achos, yr unig beth a ddywedodd Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref oedd bod yr achos
‘yn syml yn achos o ymarferydd yn cael gafael ar gyffuriau at ei ddefnydd ei hun’
Roedd esboniad y meddyg, a ysgrifennwyd ar ei ran gan Hempsons, cyfreithwyr i’r Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol (MDU), yn paentio darlun a allai, ynddo’i hun, beri rhai pryderon am les ei gleifion. Ymhlith pethau eraill, dywedwyd, ar brydiau, tra’r oedd yn adeiladu’r feddygfa newydd, bod y meddyg wedi bod yn aros i fyny drwy’r nos, nifer o nosweithiau’r wythnos, i wneud y gwaith adeiladu, a’i fod yn cynnal y feddygfa yn ystod y dydd. Roedd wedi cymryd y cyffuriau i’w helpu i ymdopi â’r straeniau hyn. Os oedd yr adroddiad hwn yn wir, rwy’n ei chael yn anodd dychmygu pa fath o gyflwr fyddai arno yn ystod y dydd. Fodd bynnag, pan ddarllenir adroddiad y meddyg ac adroddiad y seiciatrydd ynghyd, maent yn rhoi darlun sy’n creu mwy o bryder fyth. Dywedwyd bod y meddyg wedi dechrau cymryd cyffuriau bum mlynedd yn gynharach, tra’i fod mewn partneriaeth â meddyg teulu arall, y gwahanodd oddi wrtho/wrthi y flwyddyn ddilynol. Priodolodd y seiciatrydd y gwahanu hwn i wrthdaro o ran personoliaeth a dim mwy, ond ni ofynnwyd i’r meddyg arall am ei adroddiad/hadroddiad. Roedd hynny cyn i unrhyw gwestiwn o waith adeiladu godi. Dywedodd y meddyg wrth y seiciatrydd, yn ystod y gwaith adeiladu, ei fod yn cymryd rhyw 120mg o’r cyffur bob dydd. Honnodd na fu’n ymwybodol o unrhyw
‘afluniad canfyddiadol’
wrth gymryd y cyffuriau, ac na theimlodd unrhyw
‘ollwng i lawr’
wrth stopio’u cymryd. Nid oedd wedi cymryd y cyffuriau er pleser, ond yn hytrach at y
‘diben ymarferol llwyr’
hwn yn unig (deallaf iddo olygu i’w helpu i ymdopi yn ystod y gwaith adeiladu). Fodd bynnag, nid oedd wedi stopio eu cymryd (na chael gafael arnynt yn anghyfreithlon) pan ddaeth y gwaith adeiladu i ben, er iddo honni ei fod wedi lleihau ei ddogn i ryw 60mg y dydd. Nid oedd unrhyw ddeunydd gerbron y PeCC y gallai fod wedi gwirio gwirionedd yr haeriad hwnnw yn ei erbyn. Cyfiawnhad y meddyg dros barhau i gymryd y cyffuriau oedd yr angen i adnewyddu ei gartref yn ei amser rhydd tra’n cynnal y feddygfa yn ystod y dydd. Rwy’n gorfod tybied sut y gallai’r PeCC fod wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd angen i’r achos hwn fynd at y DC. Cyn dod i unrhyw benderfyniad am yr achos hwn, byddwn wedi dymuno cwestiynu cywirdeb adroddiadau’r meddyg a’i farn wrth drin cleifion tra’n gorfodi ei hun i ddioddef y gyfundrefn galed yr oedd wedi’i disgrifio. I gyflawni hynny, byddai’n rhaid i’r achos fynd at y DC.
Casgliadau am y Meini Prawf a Gymhwyswyd gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
Ymddengys i mi, yn achosion meddygon yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig, nad oedd difrifoldeb yr ymddygiad a oedd wrth wraidd y troseddau a’r anonestrwydd a oedd yn gysylltiedig yn cael eu hystyried gan y PeCC fel ffactor pwysig mewn penderfynu a ddylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y DC. Ymddengys, os oedd unrhyw wybodaeth ar gael i’r PeCC y gallai ddod i’r casgliad oddi wrthi fod disgwyliad y byddai meddyg yn ailsefydlu, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau gyda llythyr rhybudd ac y byddai’r achos, os oedd y dystiolaeth yn awgrymu gobaith o ailsefydlu hyd yn oed, yn cael ei ohirio i gyfarfod arall yn y disgwyliad y byddai’r meddyg yn cadw mewn cysylltiad â’i seiciatrydd. Ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymholiadau ynghylch a oedd caethni’r meddyg i gyffuriau wedi cael unrhyw effaith niweidiol ar ei gleifion/chleifion yn y gorffennol. Byddai ymchwiliad yr heddlu yn annhebygol o gwmpasu materion felly. Mae’n amlwg i mi, er y gallai mater diogelwch cleifion fod wedi cael ei ystyried, bod y PeCC yn hawdd iawn i’w fodloni nad oedd unrhyw risg. Yn ymarferol, nid yn unig y cafodd buddiannau’r meddyg yn ailsefydlu eu hystyried, ond gadawyd iddynt fod yr ystyriaethau pennaf.
Ymagwedd y Pwyllgor Disgyblu tuag at Achosion yn Ymwneud ag Euogfarnau yn Gysylltiedig â Chyffuriau
Mae archwilio ffeiliau’r achosion hynny o euogfarnau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau a gyfeiriwyd at y DC yn dangos bod y Pwyllgor yn annhebygol iawn yn wir i atal meddyg rhag ymarfer, ac yn fwy annhebygol fyth i’w ddileu/dileu oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol. Canlyniad llawer mwy tebygol fyddai gohirio’r penderfyniad i gyfarfod dilynol, neu nifer o ohiriadau hyd yn oed dros gyfnod gymaint â dwy i dair blynedd. Byddai achosion felly’n cael eu cau wedyn gyda cherydd neu heb gerydd. Pan oedd achos yn cael ei ohirio, byddai gofyniad ar y meddyg i gyflwyno adroddiadau yn disgrifio ei driniaeth/thriniaeth a’i gynnydd/chynnydd, ac enwi canolwyr y gellid eu holi. Dylid nodi, wrth geisio cael gwybodaeth am y cynnydd yn cael ei wneud gan feddyg a oedd wedi bod yn gaeth i gyffuriau, na chafodd staff y GMC unrhyw gyfarwyddyd i gael adroddiadau o ffynhonnell annibynnol. Gofynnwyd fel arfer i’r seiciatrydd a oedd yn trin y meddyg i adrodd, a gofynnwyd i’r meddyg i enwi canolwyr o’i ddewis/dewis. Ymhlith yr achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, ni ddeuthum ar draws un lle’r oedd y DC wedi dod i gasgliad mewn gwrandawiad pellach bod y wybodaeth am y meddyg yn ddigon anfoddhaol i warantu atal neu ddileu’r meddyg. O’r achosion a archwiliwyd, y rhoddir rhai enghreifftiau isod, ymddengys i mi mai amcan y DC oedd gohirio penderfyniad yn yr achos nes bod y meddyg wedi ailsefydlu. Gydol y broses, roedd y meddyg yn cael ymarfer ac yn destun yr oruchwyliaeth leiaf yn unig.
Yn achos Dr JA 09, cafodd y meddyg ei dyfarnu’n euog o gyfres o droseddau o gael gafael ar forffin a phethidin trwy dwyll. Roedd wedi rhoi rhagnodion yn enwau cleifion, wedi’u cyflwyno ei hun ac wedi cadw’r cyffuriau at ei defnydd ei hun. Cafodd y troseddau eu cyflawni dros gyfnod o ryw 14 mis. Yng nghanol y 1970au, cyfeiriodd y PeCC yr achos at y DCC, a daeth yr achos ymlaen ar gyfer gwrandawiad ddeufis yn ddiweddarach. Ymddengys bod adroddiad seiciatrig wedi’i gyflwyno, er nad yw hwn ar gael bellach. Mae cofnodion cyfarfod y DC yn cofnodi bod yr achos wedi’i ohirio am bedwar mis. Dywedwyd wrth y meddyg bod ei hymddygiad yn
‘ffynhonnell perygl potensial i’ch cleifion’
. Dywedaf ar draws hynny bod yr ymadrodd hwn yn cael ei ddefnyddio’n aml mewn penderfyniadau’r DC, ac o hynny rwy’n casglu mai barn y GMC bryd hynny’n wir oedd bod meddyg a oedd yn cymryd cyffuriau yn creu risg i gleifion. Gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniad i ohirio er mwyn galluogi’r meddyg i ddangos ei bod yn ymateb i driniaeth ac y byddai’n gallu bodloni’r sicrwydd o ymddygiad da yr oedd wedi’i roi. Yn y cyfarfod nesaf, daeth i’r golwg nad oedd y meddyg wedi cadw at ei thriniaeth feddygol. Nid yw’r cofnodion yn cofnodi pa ddeunydd oedd gerbron y DC, ond maent yn cofnodi bod y meddyg wedi’i chymell i gael triniaeth feddygol ar unwaith ac i barhau â’r driniaeth honno’n gyson. Er gwaethaf methiant y meddyg i barhau â’i thriniaeth, gohiriwyd yr achos, am 12 mis tro hwn. Ni ddywedwyd unrhyw beth arall am y risg i gleifion, ac ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau i sicrhau nad oedd cleifion y meddyg yn cael eu niweidio. Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, daeth y DC i wybod nad oedd y meddyg wedi cynnal cysylltiad cyson â seiciatrydd yn y cyfnod canol. Eto, nid yw’r cofnodion yn cofnodi pa wybodaeth oedd ar gael i’r DC. Er gwaethaf methiant y meddyg yn hynny o beth, gohiriwyd ei hachos am flwyddyn arall. Fe’i cynghorwyd y byddai
‘er lles iddi’
i ymgynghori â seiciatrydd yn gyson. Eto, ni ddywedwyd dim am ei chleifion, ac ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau i’w diogelu. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gallu canfod beth ddigwyddodd i’r achos hwn. Nid yw enw’r meddyg yn ymddangos yng nghofnodion y DC ar gyfer y flwyddyn ddilynol. Gall fod ei bod wedi marw neu ymddeol. Ymddengys yn annhebygol iddi gael ei hatal neu’i dileu gan y DU, gan y byddai canlyniad felly’n sicr o fod wedi’i gofnodi yn y cofnodion. Cafodd y meddyg yma ymarfer am ymhell dros flwyddyn, yn hwy o bosibl, mewn amgylchiadau lle mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi peri rhywfaint o risg i gleifion.
Yn achos Dr JA 11, cafodd y meddyg ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau o fethu cofnodi meintiau o Palfium yr oedd wedi’u prynu ar gais yn ei gofrestr cyffuriau rheoledig (CDR). Cafodd ddirwy o £25. Yng nghanol y 1970au, cyfeiriodd y PeCC yr achos at y DC. Mewn un ystyr, roedd hwn yn doriad technegol ar ofynion cadw cofnodion Rheoliadau Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau 1973; nid oedd yn golygu anonestrwydd. Ymddengys bod y meddyg yn cymryd y cyffur ei hun. Gohiriwyd yr achos gan y DC er mwyn gallu cael adroddiad seiciatryddol. Yn ei gyfarfod nesaf, caewyd yr achos. Nid yw’r cofnodion yn cofnodi pa wybodaeth oedd ar gael a pham y daethpwyd i’r penderfyniad hwnnw. Nid oes unrhyw gyfeiriad ychwaith yn unrhyw gyfnod at y risg i gleifion.
Yn achos Dr JA 10, y meddyg a ddyfarnwyd yn euog o gael gafael ar Decsedrin yn anonest trwy roi rhagnodion yn enwau cleifion nad oedd angen y cyffur arnynt ac na chafodd y cyffur. Fe’i dyfarnwyd yn euog hefyd o droseddau’n gysylltiedig â’i fethiant i gadw CDR. Parhaodd ei ymddygiad am bron i flwyddyn. Mewn cyfarfod o’r PeCC yng nghanol y 1970au, cyfeiriwyd yr achos at y DC. Ddeufis yn ddiweddarach, gohiriwyd yr achos gan y DC am bedwar mis, gan ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r meddyg nodi’i seiciatrydd trin a chanolwyr eraill. Mae’r cofnodion yn cyfeirio at ei anonestrwydd ac at y risg i gleifion yn deillio o’i ymddygiad. Yn y cyfarfod nesaf, gohiriwyd yr achos am bedwar mis arall ar sail debyg. Yn y mis Tachwedd, caewyd yr achos; ni chafodd y meddyg ei geryddu.
Yng nghanol y 1970au, dyfarnwyd Dr JA 12 yn euog o gael gafael ar gyffuriau trwy dwyll, a gofynnodd am i 25 o droseddau tebyg gael eu hystyried. Ymddengys, felly, bod yr ymddygiad hwn wedi ymestyn dros rai misoedd. Cyfeiriwyd ei achos at y DC a daeth ymlaen ar gyfer gwrandawiad ddeufis yn ddiweddarach. Gohiriwyd yr achos am flwyddyn ac roedd yn ofynnol i’r meddyg ddarparu enwau ei seiciatrydd a’i ganolwyr. Y flwyddyn ddilynol, ystyriodd y DC adroddiad gan seiciatrydd a ddywedodd bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, ond argymhellodd gyfnod arall o oruchwyliaeth. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y DC ddod â’r achos i ben, gan gynghori’r meddyg i barhau â’i oruchwyliaeth. Nid oedd mewn sefyllfa i ganfod a wnaeth y meddyg hynny ai peidio.
Sylw Cyffredinol
Mae sawl trywydd cyffredin yn rhedeg drwy achosion o’r cyfnod hwn sy’n ymwneud â meddygon a fu’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Mae’r rhain yn amlwg nid yn unig yn yr achosion a ddisgrifiais ond mewn achosion eraill hefyd a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad. Y cyntaf yw ei bod yn ymddangos i mi bod y DC wedi defnyddio’i rym i ohirio dyfarniad er mwyn cynorthwyo ailsefydlu meddygon a oedd wedi cyflawni troseddau o ganlyniad i gaethni i gyffuriau. Fodd bynnag, roedd y graddau y gallai’r DC ddarparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion yn y cyfamser yn gyfyngedig iawn. Rwy’n derbyn nad oedd ganddo unrhyw rym i bennu amodau ar hawl y meddyg i barhau i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, llwyddodd i gael cydweithrediad y meddyg yn gyffredinol wrth dderbyn triniaeth drwy fygythiad pendant y byddai’n cael ei atal/hatal neu’i ddileu/dileu os oedd yn methu cydweithredu, a gallai fod wedi gwneud llawer mwy i ddiogelu cleifion drwy ei gwneud yn ofynnol cael ymrwymiadau gan feddyg fel tâl am beidio cael ei atal/hatal.
Yr ail drywydd yw, wrth oedi neu ohirio achos er mwyn rhoi cyfle i ailsefydlu, roedd y PeCC a’r DC wastad yn gadael i’r meddyg dan sylw ddewis y seiciatrydd a fyddai’n darparu’r adroddiad ar ddiwedd cyfnod yr oedi neu ohirio. Ni wnaeth y GMC unrhyw ymgais i gasglu rhestr o seiciatryddion cymeradwy, y gallai’r GMC fod yn fodlon eu bod yn annibynnol, ac y gellid eu cyfarwyddo i archwilio’r meddyg ac adrodd i’r GMC. Nid oedd gofyniad bod haeriad meddyg ei fod/bod wedi rhoi’r gorau i gymryd cyffuriau erioed yn cael ei wneud yn destun prawf gwrthrychol, fel, er enghraifft, dadansoddiad wrin, er y byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud o bryd i’w gilydd. Roedd popeth yn cael ei gymryd ar ymddiriedaeth. Yn ddiau roedd yr ymddiriedaeth honno’n iawn mewn llawer o achosion, ond byddai’n syndod os mai felly byddai bob tro.
Roedd y meddyg yn gwbl rydd hefyd i ddewis canolwr, ac roedd yn rhydd i ofyn am gymorth gan ffrindiau. Fel y gwelsom, byddai rhai meddygon yn paratoi geirda drafft i gydweithiwr ei lofnodi. Nid oedd rhaid i’r canolwr ddatgan natur ei berthynas/pherthynas â’r meddyg (er y byddai’n gwneud weithiau), nac i ddweud i ba raddau yr oedd wedi cael y cyfle i arsylwi’r meddyg yn ystod cyfnod y gohiriad.
Ysgafn iawn oedd raddfa’r ‘oruchwyliaeth’ yn ystod cyfnod gohiriad neu oediad, ac nid oedd, yn fy marn i, yn ddigon i ddiogelu cleifion. Yr unig ofyniad oedd ‘aros dan oruchwyliaeth’ seiciatrydd. Cyswllt cyfyngedig, achlysurol fyddai hyn yn ei olygu fel arfer. Fel y dywedais, nid oedd gan y GMC y grym bryd hynny i bennu amodau a gofynion a gafodd yn ddiweddarach dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Fodd bynnag, gallai fod wedi cymryd y pwerau hynny pe bai wedi dymuno trwy wahodd meddyg i ymrwymo neu roi caniatâd i amodau neu ofynion fel dewis arall i atal neu ddileu. Yr hyn sydd gennyf dan sylw yw amodau fel peidio gweithio mewn meddygaeth deuluol, gan weithio mewn swydd dan oruchwyliaeth yn unig, heb gadw na rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Mesur diogelwch arall posibl fyddai gofyniad y dylid gofyn i bartner neu uwch gydweithiwr gadw golwg dros y meddyg a rhoi adroddiadau cyson i’r GMC.
Y trywydd cyffredin arall sy’n rhedeg drwy bob un o’r achosion hyn yw absenoldeb llwyr unrhyw ymgais gan y GMC i ganfod a oedd arfer y meddyg o gymryd cyffuriau wedi peri unrhyw broblemau i gleifion mewn gwirionedd. Ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymholiadau i weld a oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud i feddygfeydd, ysbytai neu bwyllgorau ymarferwyr teulu (FPCau). Ni fyddai gan y GMC unrhyw syniad a fyddai meddyg wedi cael ei erlyn/herlyn o bosibl am esgeuluster o ganlyniad i ddigwyddiadau wedi’u hachosi gan ei ddibyniaeth/dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau. Hyd yn oed pan oedd yr adroddiadau a oedd ar gael yn awgrymu problemau sylfaenol gydag arfer meddyg, nid oedd ymholiad yn cael ei wneud. Mae hyn eto’n awgrymu, o leiaf mewn achosion yn ymwneud â meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau, nid oedd diogelu cleifion yn cael lle uchel iawn yn ystyriaethau’r GMC.

---  ---
Yn erbyn y cefndir hwnnw, trof yn awr i ystyried y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achos Shipman. Disgrifiais arfer Shipman o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig yn Todmorden yn fyr yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf ac yn fanylach yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad. At ddibenion presennol, cyfyngaf f’adroddiad i’r materion hynny a gafodd ddylanwad, neu gallai fod wedi cael dylanwad ar y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â’i achos.
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn cael ei Hysbysu am Euogfarnau Shipman
Cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog a’i ddedfrydu yn Llys Ynadon Halifax ar 13 Chwefror 1976. Hysbyswyd y GMC am ei euogfarn trwy lythyr gan Heddlu Gorllewin Swydd Efrog (WYP) dyddiedig 8 Mawrth 1976. Roedd atodlen ynghlwm wrth y llythyr, yn nodi manylion y troseddau y cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog ohonynt. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys tair trosedd o gael gafael ar gyffuriau’n anonest trwy dwyll troseddol, dwy drosedd o ffugio rhagnodion GIG a thair trosedd o feddu’n anghyfreithlon ar gyffur rheoledig (pethidin). Cofnododd yr atodlen hefyd bod 74 o droseddau tebyg wedi’u hystyried. Cafodd Shipman ddirwy o £75 ar bob cyhuddiad a’i orchymyn i dalu iawndal o £58.78 i’r FPC lleol, h.y. FPC Calderdale, yr oedd wedi’i gynnwys ar ei restr bryd hynny.
Ni roddwyd unrhyw fanylion pellach am y troseddau i’w hystyried, ac nid ymddengys bod y GMC erioed wedi gofyn am restr na chael gafael ar restr. Nid oes unrhyw fanylion am y troseddau’n goroesi; mae ffeiliau’r heddlu a’r llys, a fyddai wedi cynnwys rhestr, wedi’u dinistrio bellach. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg o adroddiadau cyfoes yn y wasg bod 67 o’r 74 o droseddau yn ymwneud â chael gafael ar bethidin trwy dwyll, ac roedd y saith arall yn droseddau ffugio.
Y llythyr gan y WYP, a ysgrifennwyd ym mis Mawrth, oedd yr awgrymiad cyntaf a gafodd y GMC o gysylltiad Shipman ag achos troseddol. Roedd Shipman wedi cyfaddef y troseddau i’r heddlu ac i arolygydd yng Nghangen Cyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref ym mis Tachwedd 1975, ac fe gafodd ei gyhuddo yn fuan wedi hynny. Nid oedd meddyg dan unrhyw rwymedigaeth i hysbysu’r GMC o’r ffaith ei fod/bod wedi’i gyhuddo/chyhuddo o droseddau, nac yn wir o’i euogfarn/heuogfarn pan oedd yn digwydd. Nid oedd dyletswydd ar yr heddlu ychwaith i hysbysu’r GMC am gysylltiad meddyg mewn achos troseddol oni bai a hyd nes yr oedd yn cael ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd.
Ym 1976, ni fyddai rhybudd ymlaen llaw o gysylltiad meddyg ag achos troseddol cyn iddo/iddi gael ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog fod wedi bod o unrhyw fudd ymarferol i’r GMC. Fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 20, nid oedd ganddo unrhyw rym i gymryd camau gweithredu interim e.e. trwy atal cofrestriad meddyg neu bennu amodau arno. Ym 1980, gafodd y GMC bwerau cyfyngedig i wneud gorchmynion interim. Golygai natur gyfyngedig y pwerau hynny nad oedd y GMC, ym 1998, yn gallu atal cofrestriad Shipman, er gwaetha’r ffaith ei fod wedi cael ei arestio ar gyhuddiad o lofruddiaeth. Yn 2000, rhoddwyd pwerau ehangach i’r GMC, a chrëwyd Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim newydd, o ganlyniad uniongyrchol i bryder cyhoeddus a achoswyd gan anallu’r GMC i weithredu yn achos Shipman.
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn Gofyn am Wybodaeth Bellach
Pan dderbyniwyd y llythyr gan yr heddlu, fe’i arnodwyd gan Mr Gray gyda nodyn i Mr Williams, yn gofyn iddo ofyn i’r heddlu a Changen Cyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref am fanylion pellach, ac yna i
‘ddrafftio’
(credaf iddo olygu paratoi achos trwy ddrafftio memorandwm) ar gyfer cyfarfod mis Ebrill 1976 o’r PeCC. Ysgrifennodd Mr Williams yn ei bryd at y WYP ac at Mrs Susan Powrie yng Nghangen Cyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref.
Roedd llythyr Mr Williams at y WYP yn gofyn am
‘adroddiad byr o’r amgylchiadau’n ymwneud â’r troseddau’
. Daeth i ben:
‘The Committee will be particularly concerned to know whether the drugs involved were improperly obtained by the practitioner for self-administration or for other puposes.’
Esboniodd Mr Gray i’r Ymchwiliad, pe bai Shipman wedi cael gafael ar gyffuriau er mwyn eu cymryd ei hun, byddai hyn wedi golygu iddo fod yn anonest, ei fod wedi defnyddio’r cyffuriau’n amhriodol a’i fod wedi camddefnyddio’u freintiau proffesiynol. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai wedi cael ei ystyried gan y GMC fel perygl i’r cyhoedd yn yr un modd â phe bai wedi cyflenwi cyffuriau i bobl eraill. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at effaith y gwahaniaeth hwn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Ymateb yr Heddlu
Ymatebodd y WYP trwy lythyr dyddiedig 22 Mawrth 1976, yn dweud ei bod
‘yn groes i arfer i roi detholiadau o adroddiadau heddlu i gyrff allanol mewn achosion fel hwn’
. Roedd y llythyr, fodd bynnag, yn cynnig y swyddog yn yr achos, y Ditectif Ringyll (DS) George McKeating, ar gyfer cyfweliad. Ni fyddai hawl ganddo lofnodi datganiad ysgrifenedig, ond gallai ateb cwestiynau ar unrhyw faterion yr oedd yn gallu rhoi tystiolaeth arnynt. Dywedodd y llythyr hefyd y byddai DS McKeating yn bresennol mewn gwrandawiad pan fyddai’n cael
. Rhoddwyd manylion y cyhuddiadau a fyddai’n cael eu codi ar gyfer cyfweld DS McKeating, ac ar gyfer ei bresenoldeb mewn gwrandawiad.
Dywedodd Mr Gray bod rhai heddluoedd yn fwy cydweithredol nag eraill wrth ddarparu gwybodaeth. Roeddent yn amharod yn gyffredinol i ddarparu gwybodaeth yn ysgrifenedig am unrhyw beth nad oedd wedi’i brofi mewn llys troseddau. Teimlai Mr Williams bod yr ymateb gan y WYP
‘yn anarferol braidd’
. Ei atgof oedd bod yr heddlu fel arfer yn barotach i helpu na fuont yn yr achos hwn.
Darparwyd datganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad gan y Ditectif Brif Arolygydd (DCI) Bryan Dent, o Sgwad Cyffuriau WYP. Roedd yn dditectif ifanc ar ddiwedd y 1970au, felly nid oedd ganddo unrhyw wybodaeth bersonol am y gweithdrefnau a oedd mewn grym bryd hynny. Fodd bynnag, roedd wedi gwneud rhywfaint o ymchwil, a chredai y byddai’r heddlu wedi bod yn ymwybodol ar y pryd o’r ffaith bod cyfweliadau gyda pherson wedi’i gyhuddo/chyhuddo yn cael eu hystyried fel rhai cyfrinachol i’r broses cyfiawnder troseddol. Arweiniodd benderfyniad diweddar yn y llysoedd, credai, at bolisi o wrthod rhyddhau trawsgrifiadau o gyfweliadau nac adroddiadau ac arddangosion eraill a oedd wedi dod i feddiant yr heddlu yn ystod ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, byddai gwybodaeth atodol yn cael ei darparu os oedd swyddog yn cael ei gyfweld/chyfweld. Awgrymodd DCI Dent bod hyn i bob pwrpas yn fodd o drechu’r embargo ar ryddhau dogfennau. Er nad oedd yn arfer ar y pryd i swyddog lofnodi datganiad yn cofnodi beth oedd wedi’i ddweud yn y cyfweliad, byddai ef/hi yn ailadrodd cynnwys y datganiad be bai’n cael ei wysio/gwysio ar ôl hynny i roi tystiolaeth mewn gwrandawiad.
Gwelodd Mr Gray y llythyr gan WYP pan ddaeth i mewn. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd y cynnig i ddarparu gwybodaeth, er ei fod yn gynnig caredig, o lawer o ddefnydd i staff y GMC yn y cam hwn yn yr achos. Roedd yn amlwg na fyddai DS McKeating yn cael llofnodi datganiad a ellid ei roi gerbron y PeCC. Pe bai Mr Gray wedi cyfweld DS McKeating ac wedi cymryd nodiadau, ni allai, dywedodd, fod wedi rhoi’r nodiadau hynny gerbron y PeCC gan nad ‘tystiolaeth’ oeddent. Ni wrandawodd y PeCC dystiolaeth lafar, felly ni ellid fod wedi gwysio DS McKeating i fod yn bresennol. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mr Gray, pe bai’r achos wedi cael ei gyfeirio gan y PeCC at y DC, byddai DS McKeating ‘bron yn sicr’ o fod wedi cael ei wysio i fynychu a rhoi tystiolaeth lafar. Yn ei ddatganiad tyst, dywedodd Mr Gray y gallai gofio nifer o alwadau ffôn gyda swyddogion yr heddlu a oedd wedi taflu goleuni gwerthfawr ar yr amgylchiadau y tu ôl i euogfarnau. Fodd bynnag, ni ffoniodd DS McKeating ar yr achlysur hwn.
Ymddengys i mi, wrth ystyried achos o euogfarn, y byddai wastad yn ddefnyddiol i’r PeCC ac i’r DC gael rhywfaint o wybodaeth gefndir gan swyddog yr heddlu â gwybodaeth bersonol am yr achos. Efallai na fydd atodlen o droseddau ar ei phen ei hun yn cyfleu argraff glir iawn o raddfa’r camymddygiad. Er enghraifft, nid yw
trosedd wastad yn amlwg o’r atodlen, a gall gwybodaeth amdani fod yn ddadlennol iawn. Hefyd, gall ymateb uniongyrchol person pan fydd yn cael ei gyhuddo/chyhuddo o drosedd fod yn ddadlennol yn aml o’i agwedd/hagwedd tuag ati.
Gofynnwyd i Mr Gray a fyddai wedi meddwl am gyfweld DS McKeating ac am gyflwyno nodyn i’r PeCC, yn nodi’r dystiolaeth y gellid disgwyl i’r swyddog ei rhoi be bai’n cael ei alw gerbron y DC. Atebodd Mr Gray nad oedd wedi ystyried mai ei swyddogaeth ef oedd gwneud hynny, ac nad oedd neb erioed wedi awgrymu y dylai wneud. Ei arfer ef oedd cyflwyno ‘tystiolaeth wrthrychol, dda’ yn unig i’r PeCC. Byddai wedi pryderu, pe bai wedi crynhoi ar gyfer y PeCC y dystiolaeth y byddai disgwyl i’r swyddog ei rhoi, ac nad oedd y swyddog, mewn gwirionedd, ‘cystal â’i broflen’ wrth roi tystiolaeth gerbron y DC, y byddai ef (h.y. Mr Gray) yn cael ei feirniadu. Dywedodd Mr Gray, beth bynnag, bod digon o wybodaeth gan yr heddlu a’r Swyddfa Gartref i gyfiawnhau’r staff yn cyfeirio’r achos at y PeCC heb chwilio am wybodaeth bellach. Dywedodd bod digon o dystiolaeth hefyd i gyfiawnhau’r PeCC yn cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen at y DC os oedd o’r farn bob hynny’n briodol. Pe bai’r PeCC wedi gwneud hynny, byddai unrhyw wybodaeth ychwanegol y gallai DS McKeating fod wedi’i rhoi wedi dod i’r golwg, dywedodd Mr Gray, pan gafodd ei alw i fod yn bresennol yng ngwrandawiad y DC. Felly’n wir, ond, gan na chyfeiriwyd yr achos at y DC, ni chafwyd gafael ar y dystiolaeth fyth.
Mae’r ffaith y byddai unrhyw wybodaeth yn dod oddi wrth swyddog yr heddlu at y PeCC o ganlyniad i gyfweliad yn cael ei gynnal gan aelod o staff y GMC, wedi bod yn dystiolaeth ail law (ac nid yn ‘dystiolaeth wrthrychol, dda’ felly, ym marn Mr Gray), yn ymddangos i mi fel rheswm da dros beidio’i chael. Os oedd y dystiolaeth ail law yn ffafriol i’r meddyg, ni fyddai unrhyw niwed wedi’i wneud i’w fuddiannau/buddiannau; pe bai’n niweidiol iddo/iddo a bod y PeCC yn penderfynu cyfeirio’r achos at y DC, gellid galw’r swyddog i roi tystiolaeth a byddai cynrychiolwyr y meddyg yn cael y cyfle i herio’r hyn yr oedd yn ei ddweud. Beth bynnag, roedd y PeCC yn barod i dderbyn llythyr a ysgrifennwyd gan gyfreithiwr yn cynrychioli’r meddyg, lle’r oedd adroddiad y meddyg yn cael ei nodi. Mae llythyr felly’n gyfystyr â thystiolaeth ail law hefyd, ac ni fyddai’n dderbyniol yn y ffurf honno fel tystiolaeth o wirionedd ei gynnwys. Felly ymddengys bod y PeCC yn barod i dderbyn tystiolaeth ail law am adroddiad y meddyg ond nid adroddiad swyddog yr heddlu.
Gwnaeth Mr Gray nodiadau ar y llythyr oddi wrth WYP gyda sylwadau wedi’u cyfeirio at Mr Williams. Darllenai’r nodyn:
‘... PI
(please)
speak, with previous pp
(papers)
(?one for solicitors)’.
Dywedodd Mr Gray fod ei nodyn yn awgrymu y dylai ef a Mr Williams drafod y posibilrwydd o ofyn i gyfreithwyr y GMC i gymryd datganiad gan y swyddog o’r heddlu. Nid yw’n glir sut y byddid wedi defnyddio datganiad felly, nac yn ystod pa gam yn yr achos, er, yng ngolwg tystiolaeth Mr Gray, ymddengys yn debygol y byddai wedi ffurfio rhan o’r gwaith paratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiad gerbron y DC yn hytrach nag i’w gyflwyno i’r PeCC. Fel y bu hi, nid ymddengys bod y drafodaeth a awgrymwyd erioed wedi’i chynnal, fwy na thebyg oherwydd bod llythyr yn cynnwys gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol wedi’i dderbyn o Gangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref.
Ymateb y Swyddfa Gartref
Fel y dywedais, roedd Mr Williams wedi ysgrifennu at Mrs Powrie hefyd yng Nghangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref yn gofyn
‘am adroddiad byr o’r amgylchiadau’n arwain at’
y troseddau, ynghyd ag unrhyw wybodaeth ychwanegol a allai gynorthwyo’r PeCC pan oedd yn ystyried yr achos ym mis Ebrill. Ymatebodd Mrs Powrie mewn llythyr dyddiedig 25 Mawrth 1976.
Roedd llythyr Mrs Powrie yn hysbysu’r GMC fod Shipman wedi dod i sylw Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref gyntaf ym mis Gorffennaf 1975. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd hyn yn anghywir; roedd Shipman wedi denu’i sylw gyntaf ym mis Ionawr a Chwefror 1975, pan sylwodd ei fod wedi casglu meintiau mawr o bethidin o ddwy fferyllfa leol. Gwnaethpwyd ymholiadau bryd hynny, a phenderfynwyd cadw golwg arno ac i weld a oedd rhywbeth pellach yn dod i’r golwg. Ni ddaeth y wybodaeth hon erioed yn hysbys i’r GMC. Wedi dweud hynny, mae’n annhebygol y byddai wedi cael unrhyw effaith ar ganlyniad yr achos, hyd yn oed pe bai’r GMC wedi bod yn ymwybodol ohono.
Aeth Mrs Powrie ymlaen i ddweud y canfuwyd, ym mis Gorffennaf 1975, fod Shipman yn cael gafael ar gyflenwadau mawr a chyson o bethidin ar geisiadau ysgrifenedig i’w defnyddio yn ei feddygfa ac ar ragnodion ar gyfer claf. Roedd Shipman wastad wedi casglu’r rhagnodion ar ran y claf, a oedd yn dioddef o ganser terfynol. Roedd wedi dod i’r golwg wedi hynny nad oedd yn cadw cofrestr o gyflenwadau o gyffuriau rheoledig, ac ar hynny roedd wedi’i hysbysu o’r gofyniad statudol i wneud hynny.
Aeth y llythyr ymlaen i ddweud y modd yr adroddwyd, ym mis Medi 1975, fod Shipman wedi ymddiswyddo o’i feddygfa ac wedi cyfaddef ei gaethni i bethidin wedi i’w achosion o brynu meintiau mawr o’r cyffur ddod i sylw un o’i bartneriaid. Daeth yn hysbys fod Shipman wedi bod yn cael gafael ar bethidin ar ragnodyn hefyd, ar gyfer cleifion yn ôl pob golwg, a chyflwynwyd y ffeithiau i’r WYP. Roedd y llythyr yn esbonio fod Shipman, mewn cyfweliad ag arolygydd o Gangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref a swyddog yr heddlu ym mis Tachwedd 1975, wedi cyfaddef iddo gyflawni’r troseddau. Roedd wedi dweud iddo ddechrau cymryd pethidin ym mis Ebrill 1974. Dywedodd y llythyr fod Shipman wedi bod yn cael triniaeth ar gyfer ei gaethni gan Dr (Ronald) Bryson yn The Retreat, Efrog, a Dr (Hugo) Milne o Ysbyty Lynfield Mount, Bradford.
Esboniais yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad bod gan yr Ysgrifennydd Cartref, ym 1976, y grym i roi cyfarwyddyd mewn perthynas â meddyg a oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd dan Ddeddf Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau 1971 (MDA 1971). Dan adran 12 o MDA 1971, gallai’r Ysgrifennydd Cartref gyfarwyddo y dylai’r meddyg gael ei wahardd rhag meddu, ar, cyflenwi, rhagnodi neu roi cyffuriau rheoledig. Yn wir, mae’r grym gan yr Ysgrifennydd Cartref o hyd i wneud cyfarwyddyd adran 12, er nad yw wedi’i arfer am ddegawd neu fwy. Yn ei llythyr, nododd Mrs Powrie bod y Swyddfa Gartref yn ystyried a ddylid cymryd camau gweithredu dan adran 12 o MDA 1971. Dywedodd,
’... byddwn yn falch yn y cyswllt hwn pe baech yn rhoi gwybod i ni beth yw barn y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol’
. Fel yr esboniais yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, talodd y Swyddfa Gartref gryn sylw i agwedd y GMC wrth ystyried pa un a ddylid gwneud cyfarwyddyd adran 12, gan fod gan y GMC mwy o brofiad na’r Swyddfa Gartref ym maes camddefnyddio cyffuriau ymhlith meddygon. Prif ddiddordeb a phrofiad y Swyddfa Gartref oedd dadorchuddio cyflenwi cyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon.
Ar 1 Ebrill 1976, ymatebodd Mr Williams i lythyr Mrs Powrie, yn addo gadael iddi wybod yn ei bryd beth oedd penderfyniad y PeCC. Ar yr un diwrnod, ysgrifennodd at Shipman, yn ei hysbysu bod y GMC wedi cael adroddiad am ei euogfarn, ac yn dweud wrtho y byddai llythyr arall yn cael ei anfon ato pan oedd y PeCC wedi penderfynu ynghylch gweithredu mewn perthynas â hi ai peidio. Hwn oedd y llythyr safonol a oedd yn cael ei anfon at feddygon mewn achosion o euogfarn ac, weithiau, hwn oedd yr unig lythyr y byddent yn ei gael cyn i’w hachos gael ei ystyried gan y PeCC. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio nad oedd yn arfer dieithriad i’r GMC bryd hynny i ofyn am esboniad gan y meddyg yn y cam hwn yn yr achos. Fel y dywedais, fodd bynnag, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld bod hynny’n cael ei wneud yn aml mewn achosion yn ymwneud â chyffuriau.
Yna paratôdd Mr Williams femorandwm at sylw Mr Gray. 1 Ebrill 1976 oedd dyddiad y memorandwm. Roedd y llythyr gwreiddiol gan y WYP ynghlwm wrth y memorandwm, ynghyd ag atodlen o droseddau. Mae’n debygol bod llythyr Mrs Powrie ynghlwm hefyd. Cyfeiriodd Mr Williams at y llythyr o’r WYP a’r atodlen o droseddau a oedd ynghlwm wrtho. Nododd fod Shipman wedi’i nodi’n bendant fel meddyg ar y gofrestr feddygol. Soniodd am ei gais am wybodaeth bellach gan y WYP, a’r ymateb a oedd, meddai,
‘yn dweud yn glir nad ydynt yn barod i ddarparu unrhyw wybodaeth, llai na chael eu gwysio’
. Nid oedd hyn yn gywir mewn gwirionedd, gan fod yr heddlu wedi cynnig cyfweliad gyda DS McKeating. Gall fod bod Mr Williams wedi sylweddoli na fyddai hyn yn cael ei weld yn briodol, a soniodd am yr hyn a gredai oedd yr unig opsiwn a oedd yn debygol o fod yn dderbyniol. Aeth Mr Williams ymlaen i ddweud:
‘Yn ffodus, mae Mrs Powrie o’r Swyddfa Gartref (Cangen Gyffuriau) wedi rhoi adroddiad defnyddiol a chynhwysfawr o amgylchiadau penodol y troseddau ac ni fydd agwedd yr heddlu felly yn niweidiol i’r wybodaeth y gallwn ei darparu ar gyfer y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol.’
Mynegodd Mr Williams ansicrwydd ynghylch ai £225 neu £600 oedd cyfanswm y ddirwy a bennwyd ar Shipman. Yn olaf, gofynnodd am awdurdod Mr Gray i anfon yr eitem at y PeCC. Arnodwyd y memorandwm gan Mr Gray gyda chais y dylai Mr Williams ffonio’r Llys Ynadon a chanfod beth oedd maint dirwy Shipman. Gwnaeth Mr Williams hynny, a daeth i wybod mai £600 oedd cyfanswm y ddirwy. Mae’n annirnadwy i mi pam yr oedd Mr Gray yn ymorol i ganfod faint o ddirwy a gafodd Shipman, ac eto ni wnaeth unrhyw ymdrech i gael adroddiad llawnach am ymddygiad troseddol Shipman. Beth bynnag, roedd Mr Gray yn fodlon bod y wybodaeth yn ddigonol i fynd at y PeCC. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y wybodaeth a ddarparwyd gan y Swyddfa Gartref yn gyfwerth â’r hyn yr oedd yn ymddangos iddo ef fel ‘stori ddigon cyflawn’. Yn unol â hynny, ni roddwyd unrhyw ystyriaeth bellach i ymorol am gael cymorth cyfreithwyr y GMC i gael rhagor o wybodaeth gan yr heddlu bryd hynny.
Cyfyngiadau ar yr Ymchwiliadau a Wnaed at Ddibenion y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
Mewn datganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Gray, gydag achos o euogfarn, bod angen i’r GMC:
‘... geisio cael digon o dystiolaeth am yr amgylchiadau
(h.y. am y troseddau)
i alluogi’r Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol i asesu difrifoldeb yr achos a’r graddau yr oedd yn datgelu bod yr ymarferydd dan sylw yn berygl i gleifion’.
Ymddengys i mi, pe bai’r PeCC wedi cyfyngu’i hun i wneud penderfyniad ar sail cyffredinol ynghylch a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y DC ai peidio ar sail difrifoldeb ymddygiad y meddyg neu’r risg i gleifion, neu’r ddau, byddai wedi bod yn rhesymol i gyfyngu’r dystiolaeth a gafodd yn y modd y disgrifiwyd gan Mr Gray. Mewn achos o feddyg yn cael ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o aml droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chael gafael yn anonest ar gyffuriau rheoledig dros gyfnod o amser o ganlyniad i gaethni i gyffuriau, dylai’r dull cyffredinol wastad fod wedi arwain at benderfyniad i gyfeirio’r achos at y DC ar sail difrifoldeb a risg i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, fel yr wyf eisoes wedi esbonio, nid oedd y PeCC yn cyfyngu’i hun bob tro i’r math hwnnw o ymagwedd gyffredinol; byddai weithiau’n penderfynu y dylai ymagwedd adferol gael ei chymryd ac nad oedd angen cyfeirio’r meddyg at y DC, er gwaethaf difrifoldeb amlwg y troseddau yr oedd wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog ohonynt. Yn fyr, byddai’n cymryd, nid penderfyniad hidlo, ond penderfyniad gwirioneddol. Ar wahân i’r ffaith nad oedd penderfyniadau felly i weld yn rai priodol i mi am yr hyn a oedd i fod yn bwyllgor hidlo, byddai penderfyniadau gwirioneddol felly wedi gofyn am ystyriaeth ofalus o’r holl dystiolaeth. Ni fyddai’r PeCC wedi cael mynediad at yr holl wybodaeth a fyddai wedi bod ar gael i’r DC.
Tystiolaeth y Ditectif Ringyll McKeating
Yn achos Shipman, nid oedd gan y PeCC dystiolaeth DS McKeating a fyddai wedi bod ar gael i’r DC pe bai’r achos wedi’i gyfeirio. Pe bai DS McKeating wedi’i alw i roi tystiolaeth, byddai wedi gallu esbonio
Shipman a graddfa ei anonestrwydd. Byddai wedi gallu disgrifio’r troseddau a ystyriwyd gan y Llys Ynadon. Byddai DS McKeating wedi esbonio hefyd pam yr oedd Shipman, mewn rhai achosion, wedi’i gyhuddo o ffugio: ar rai achlysuron, roedd Shipman wedi ffugio llofnod aelod o staff yn y cartref preswyl lle’r oedd y claf yn byw. Roedd y claf yn oedrannus, a chanddi hawl i gael ei rhyddhau rhag taliadau rhagnodion; os nad oedd y claf i weld yn hawlio rhyddhad, byddai’r fferyllydd wedi meddwl tybed pam. Yn fy marn i, mae ffugio llofnod yn weithred ychwanegol arwyddocaol o anonestrwydd ar ben yr anonestrwydd a oedd yn gynhenid mewn cael gafael ar gyffuriau trwy dwyll. Gallai DS McKeating fod wedi sôn hefyd am agwedd gafalîr braidd Shipman tuag at ei droseddu, a oedd wedi’i ddatgelu yn ystod y cyfweliad a gynhaliwyd ganddo ef ei hun ac arolygydd Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref. Wrth ddisgrifio i’w gyfwelwyr faint o bethidin un claf yr oedd wedi’i gymryd iddo’i hun, roedd Shipman wedi dweud,
‘Beth ddywedwn ni, hanner iddi hi a hanner i mi?’
Gallai DS McKeating hefyd fod wedi mynegi’r farn a roddodd i’r Ymchwiliad, sef, o’i asesiad o olwg y gwythiennau datchwyddedig ym mreichiau Shipman, ei bod yn ymddangos bod Shipman wedi bod yn chwistrellu’i hun am gyfnod lawer hwy na’r cyfnod y mae’n hysbys iddo fod yn troseddu. Dywedodd DS McKeating wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn ymddangos iddo ef fod Shipman wedi bod yn defnyddio cyffuriau am ryw bum mlynedd yn hytrach nag oddeutu’r 14 mis yr oedd wedi cyfaddef iddo.
Gellir ond dyfalu beth fyddai’r DC wedi gwneud o’r dystiolaeth hon. Gall fod yn wir y byddai Shipman (a fyddai bron yn sicr wedi bod yn bresennol yn y gwrandawiad) wedi dymuno herio rhywfaint o dystiolaeth DS McKeating a gallai’n wir fod wedi rhoi tystiolaeth ei hun. Byddai hynny wedi rhoi cyfle llawer gwell i’r DC nag a oedd ar gael i’r PeCC i asesu Shipman.
Tystiolaeth o Effaith Bosibl Meddyg yn Cymryd Cyffuriau ar Gleifion
Bwlch arall yn y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael i’r PeCC oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth ynglŷn â gafodd caethni Shipman i bethidin unrhyw effaith groes ar ei feddygfa neu’i gleifion. Ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymholiadau gan y GMC i gyn bartneriaid Shipman nag FPC Calderdale. Ymddengys ei bod yn arfer sefydledig gan y GMC i beidio gwneud ymholiadau felly mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi bod yn camddefnyddio’r cyffuriau trwy eu cymryd ei hun, ac nad oedd yn hysbys ei fod/bod yn eu cyflenwi i bobl eraill. Dywedodd Mr Gray bod gwahaniaeth rhwng rhagnodi amhriodol i bobl eraill ar raddfa fawr, lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi ennyn caethni mewn cleifion neu’u peryglu mewn modd arall, ac achos lle’r oedd meddyg, fel Shipman, wedi defnyddio cyffuriau ei hun. Yn yr achos olaf, roedd y PeCC yn fwy tebygol o gymryd golwg ‘glinigol’, h.y. i ystyried bod y meddyg yn sâl a gobeithio y gellid ei wella/gwella. Byddai’r ffocws mewn achos o hunan-ddefnyddio cyffuriau ar y meddyg ac (os oedd tystiolaeth seiciatrig ar gael) ar farnau’r seiciatryddion am yr achos.
Awgrymodd Mr Gray i’r Ymchwiliad y byddai wedi bod yn anodd cael gafael ar dystiolaeth ddibynadwy ynghylch a oedd arfer meddyg yn cymryd cyffuriau wedi cael unrhyw effaith ar ei gleifion/chleifion. Yn gyntaf, awgrymodd y byddai wedi bod yn anodd i ganfod, yn achos meddyg teulu, pa FPC i gysylltu ag ef. Cefais hynny’n anodd ei dderbyn, ac, yn wir, cytunodd Mr Gray yn ddiweddarach mewn tystiolaeth y byddai wedi bod yn amhosibl canfod yr FPC priodol a chanfod a oedd wedi derbyn unrhyw gwynion perthnasol am y meddyg. Yn ail, dywedodd, er y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl, yn achos Shipman, i fynd at ei gyn bartneriaid, mae’n siŵr y byddent wedi bod yn ‘nerfus’ ynghylch rhoi eu barnau am Shipman gan y byddent wedi gwybod bod anghymeradwyo cydweithwyr yn drosedd ddisgyblu. Pan bwyswyd arno ynglŷn â hyn, derbyniodd Mr Gray, pe bai’r GMC wedi mynd at gyn bartneriaid Shipman ac wedi gofyn a oedd ei arfer o gymryd cyffuriau wedi cael unrhyw effaith ar ei berfformiad fel meddyg, a phe byddai’r cyn bartneriaid wedi ateb yn onest, ni allent fod wedi bod mewn perygl (neu’n synhwyrol wedi ofni rhoi eu hunain mewn perygl) o gamau disgyblu trwy leisio unrhyw bryderon y gallai fod wedi bod ganddynt. Addefodd Mr Gray na fyddai unrhyw beth (ac eithrio, meddai, ‘y ffactor amser’) i stopio’r GMC rhag gofyn y math hwnnw o gwestiwn i gydweithiwr meddyg fel mater o drefn, er mwyn canfod a oedd pryderon bod y meddyg wedi peri risg i gleifion. Y ‘ffactor amser’ y cyfeiriwyd ato oedd yr angen i gael achosion ar yr agenda ar gyfer cyfarfod nesaf y PeCC. Fodd bynnag, derbyniodd Mr Gray y gellid fod wedi gwneud ymholiadau felly. Mae’n amlwg, fodd bynnag, na wnaethpwyd. Nid oedd yn arferol i wneud hynny.
Yn ei ddatganiad tyst, awgrymodd Mr Gray, hyd yn oed pe bai wedi dod i’r golwg bod problemau wedi bod ynghylch ansawdd y gofal yr oedd Shipman wedi’i roi yn ystod ei yrfa fer mewn meddygaeth deuluol, ni fyddai wedi bod yn bosibl profi bod y problemau hynny wedi’u hachosi ganddo ef yn camddefnyddio pethidin. Ceisiodd gefnogi’i haeriad trwy gyfeirio at Gyffurlyfr Cenedlaethol Prydain a’r wybodaeth a oedd wedi’i chynnwys ynddo am ba mor gyflym y mae effeithiau pethidin yn diflannu. Cyfeiriodd at y ffaith na fu unrhyw gŵyn i’r GMC yn ystod cyfnod Shipman mewn meddygaeth deuluol ynghylch ei driniaeth o gleifion, ac na fu unrhyw adroddiad i’r GMC am unrhyw achos gan y pwyllgor gwasanaethau meddygol (MSC) yn ei erbyn. Felly’r oedd hi’n wir. Fodd bynnag, fe allai fod (er nad oedd) llawer o gwynion am Shipman i’r FPC. Fe allai fod (er nad oedd) achos MSC cyfredol lle’r oedd haeriad ei fod wedi torri ei delerau gwasanaeth. Gan nad oedd y GMC wedi gofyn am unrhyw wybodaeth gan yr FPC, ni allai fod wedi gwybod a fu unrhyw gwynion neu beidio neu a oedd unrhyw achosion cyfredol. Y cyfan y gallai fod yn hyderus ohono oedd, mewn perthynas â’r cyfnod o ryw 19 mis y bu Shipman mewn meddygaeth deuluol, nid oedd unrhyw gŵyn amdano yn amlwg o gofnodion y GMC ei hun.
Fel mae’n digwydd, yn achos Shipman, ni fyddai ymholiad i’w arfer yn Todmorden lle bu’n gweithio wedi datgelu unrhyw bryderon penodol am ddiogelwch cleifion. Dywedodd Dr John Dacre, yr uwch bartner, wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bu Shipman yn weithiwr diwyd ac na fu unrhyw bryderon am ei gymhwysedd. Nid oedd Dr Dacre yn ymwybodol bod Shipman wedi lladd claf yn anghyfreithlon yn ystod cyfnodau terfynol canser, fel y canfûm y gwnaeth. Ni wyddai ychwaith fod Shipman wedi llofnodi tair Tystysgrif Feddygol o Achos Marwolaeth mewn un diwrnod, mewn amgylchiadau sy’n fy ngwneud yn amheus bod Shipman yn euog o ladd anghyfreithlon. Nid oedd yn ymwybodol ychwaith fod Shipman wedi chwistrellu Mrs (yr Athro nawr) Elaine Oswald, claf, gyda phethidin, yn fuan wedi iddi gymryd Diconal ( a ragnodwyd ganddo), a bod Mrs Oswald wedi dioddef ataliad ar yr anadl o ganlyniad. Ymddengys yn annhebygol, hyd yn oed pe bai staff y GMC wedi gwneud ymholiadau i’r feddygfa, y byddent wedi holi am iechyd Shipman. Ymddengys yn annhebygol, felly, y byddai Dr Dacre wedi gwirfoddoli’r wybodaeth bod Shipman wedi cael nifer o lewygon yn ystod yr ychydig fisoedd olaf tra’r oedd yn ymarfer yn Todmorden, a bod gwraig Shipman, am y rheswm hwnnw, wedi bod yn ei yrru pan oedd yn ymweld â chleifion. Mae’n eglur na fyddai gan FPC Calderdale unrhyw wybodaeth am Shipman y gallent fod wedi’i throsglwyddo i’r GMC, yn ychwanegol at y wybodaeth yr oeddent wedi’i chael gan hen feddygfa Shipman. Pe byddid wedi holi DS McKeating am faterion lles cleifion, byddai wedi dweud wrth y GMC nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o unrhyw glaf yn cael ei amddifadu/hamddifadu o bethidin yr oedd ei angen arno/arni. Ni fyddai DS McKeating, Dr Dacre nag unrhyw un o FPC Calderdale wedi gallu rhoi unrhyw gliw o bwys ynghylch gwir gymeriad Shipman.
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn Gofyn am Adroddiad Meddygol
Y weithdrefn mewn achosion yr oedd Mr Gray o’r farn a oedd yn barod i fynd gerbron y PeCC oedd i’r papurau gael eu cyflwyno’n gyntaf i’r Cofrestrydd, Mr Draper. Yn unol â hynny, yn achos Shipman, arnododd Mr Gray nodyn i Mr Draper ar femorandwm Mr Williams, yn gofyn am ei ganiatâd i’r achos fynd at y PeCC. Ymatebodd Mr Draper gyda nodyn pellach:
‘Yes, but in cases like these, I think it would be helpful to invite the practitioner’s observations and if he agrees, a confidential medical report? Do so now...’.
Rwyf wedi sôn y byddai meddyg, mewn achosion o euogfarn, yn cael llythyr safonol yn unig weithiau yn ei hysbysu o’r ffaith fod adroddiad wedi’i wneud o’i euogfarn/heuogfarn ac y byddai’n cael ei gyfeirio at y PeCC, gan addo llythyr pellach pan oedd y PeCC wedi gwneud ei benderfyniad. Dywedodd Mr Gray bod llythyr gwahanol, o’r math a awgrymwyd gan Mr Draper, yn cael ei anfon pan oedd amheuaeth bod y meddyg yn gaeth i gyffuriau. Yn achos Shipman, roedd llythyr y Swyddfa Gartref wedi cyfeirio at ei
‘gaethni’
i bethidin ac wedi sôn ei fod wedi cael triniaeth yn The Retreat (ysbyty preifat ar gyfer trin anhwylderau seiciatrig) a’i fod yn cael triniaeth am ei gaethni gan feddygon a enwyd, y byddai Mr Draper siwr o fod wedi’u hadnabod fel seiciatryddion ymgynghorol. Roedd yn ymddangos yn debygol, felly, mai hwn oedd yr esboniad am ei awgrym y dylid gofyn i Shipman ddarparu adroddiad meddygol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw archwilio’r ffeiliau yn ymwneud ag achosion o euogfarnau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau y deliodd y PeCC â nhw yng nghanol y 1970au i ddiwedd y 1970au yn datgelu unrhyw batrwm cyson o geisiadau am esboniad y meddyg am y drosedd neu
‘sylwadau’
a/neu adroddiadau meddygol. Roedd achosion o euogfarnau lle’r oedd tystiolaeth bod y meddyg, neu gallai’r meddyg fod, yn gaeth i gyffuriau, ond nid oedd unrhyw esboniad na chofnodion meddygol pan ofynnwyd amdanynt. Roedd achosion eraill lle nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o gaethni, ond lle gofynnwyd i’r meddyg, serch hynny, i roi esboniad. Nid yw’n glir ar ba sail yr oedd penderfyniad i ofyn am esboniad a/neu dystiolaeth feddygol yn cael ei wneud. Yn achos Shipman, fodd bynnag, roedd gwybodaeth, fel y dywedais, ei fod wedi dioddef o gaethni a’i fod dan ofal meddygol. Roedd Mr Draper yn amlwg o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i ofyn iddo ddarparu
‘sylwadau’
ac, os oedd yn cytuno, adroddiad meddygol.
Yn unol â hynny, ysgrifennodd Mr Gray at Shipman ar 6 Ebrill 1976. Hysbysodd Shipman fod cyfarfod y PeCC i’w gynnal ar 28 Ebrill 1976. Fe’i gwahoddodd i gyflwyno unrhyw sylwadau a oedd ganddo ar fater ei euogfarn, ac i drefnu i’r GMC gael adroddiad meddygol cyfrinachol ar ei gyflwr presennol. Dywedodd y llythyr y byddai unrhyw ddogfennau a oedd yn cael eu derbyn gan Shipman yn cael eu rhoi gerbron y PeCC, ynghyd â gwybodaeth am ei euogfarn.
Dywedodd Mr Gray wrth yr Ymchwiliad, lle’r oedd yn amlwg, fel fan hyn, o’r wybodaeth a oedd ym meddiant y GMC bod meddyg eisoes yn cael triniaeth am ei gaethni/chaethni, byddai disgwyl y byddai unrhyw adroddiad meddygol yr oedd y GMC yn gofyn amdano yn dod gan y meddyg trin. Nid oedd yn cofio bod y GMC bryd hynny (sef, fel y dywedais, cyn cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd) erioed wedi gofyn i feddyg fodloni i gael archwiliad gan ymarferydd o ddewis y GMC. Nid oedd y GMC yn pennu ba destunau y dylid eu cynnwys mewn adroddiad meddygol, neu pa gwestiynau y dylid eu hateb gan yr ymarferydd adrodd. Dywedodd Mr Gray y byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i fynd yn ôl at yr awdur a holi ynghylch rhywbeth a ddywedwyd mewn adroddiad. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn cofio hyn yn cael ei wneud ‘gan eu bod yn adroddiadau da iawn fel arfer’. Pan ofynnwyd iddo a fu pryder erioed ynghylch diffyg annibyniaeth posibl ar ran yr ymarferwyr a oedd yn adrodd, atebodd, ‘Byddwn wedi meddwl nad oedd dim o gwbl’. Dywedodd, pan oedd adroddiad yn dod i mewn i’r swyddfa, byddai’r staff yn ei ddarllen, ond ni fyddent yn ei amau, gan nad meddygon mohonynt. Byddai’n cael ei roi ynghlwm wrth y papurau yn yr achos a’i anfon gyda nhw at y PeCC.
Cydnabu Shipman lythyr Mr Gray, gan nodi ei fod wedi rhoi’r mater yn nwylo Hempsons, cyfreithwyr yr MDU. Anfonodd Hempsons ‘lythyr dal’, yn addo anfon sylwadau Shipman mor fuan â phosibl.
Y Dystiolaeth a Ddarparwyd gan Shipman
Y Llythyr gan Gyfreithwyr Shipman
Mewn llythyr dyddiedig 21 Ebrill 1976, nododd Hempsons sylwadau Shipman am ei euogfarn. Roedd eu llythyr yn nodi mai rhyw 30 oedd oed Shipman bryd hynny. Roedd yn awgrymu bod Shipman
‘heb wneud y penderfyniad iawn wrth fynd i mewn i feddygaeth deuluol ac yn arbennig i bartneriaeth gydag ychydig iawn o brofiad, yn enwedig ar yr ochr weinyddol o feddygaeth deuluol’
. Ymhelaethodd ar yr hyn a roddwyd ymlaen fel y cefndir i Shipman yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau. Esboniodd y llythyr fod Shipman wedi’i roi yng ngofal archebu cyffuriau rheoledig ar gyfer ei feddygfa. Dywedwyd iddo roi pethidin iddo’i hun yn gyntaf yn dilyn ysigiad ar ei gefn, fwy na thebyg yn gynnar ym 1974. (Ymddengys mai dyma’r tro cyntaf i’r awgrym gael ei wneud fod camddefnydd Shipman o bethidin wedi dechrau mewn ymateb i boen yn ei gefn. Roedd bron yn sicr yn gelwydd, ond nid oedd - ac, yn wir, nid yw o hyd - yn beth anghyffredin i feddygon yn ei sefyllfa drafferthus ef i honni i’w camddefnydd o gyffuriau gychwyn â defnyddio cyffuriau i leddfu poen yn wirioneddol). Rhoddodd y llythyr adroddiad o’r digwyddiadau’n ymwneud â chanfod ymddygiad Shipman, a nododd bod ei bartneriaid wedi terfynu’i bartneriaeth yn syth pan ddaeth ei gamddefnydd o gyffuriau i’r golwg. Roedd wedi aros yn glaf yn The Retreat, Efrog, nes 31 Rhagfyr 1975. Nodwyd bod Shipman wedi cyfaddef ei ymddygiad i’w bartneriaid pan gyhuddwyd ef gyntaf ohono, ac roedd wedi cyfaddef i’r heddlu wedi hynny.
Gan fynd yn ôl at y materion cyfredol, datganodd y llythyr bod Shipman wedi cael gwaith fel swyddog meddygol clinigol, penodiad amser llawn mewn iechyd plant, gydag Awdurdod Iechyd Ardal Durham (AHA). Dywedodd y llythyr bod y penodiad wedi’i wneud gyda gwybodaeth lawn ei gyflogwr am hanes y materion a nodwyd yn llythyr Hempsons. Roedd Shipman wedi symud gyda’i deulu i County Durham ac, ar gyngor Dr Bryson a Dr Milne, roedd wedi cadw at apwyntiadau fel claf allanol.
Gyda’u llythyr, amgaeodd Hempsons adroddiad seiciatryddol gan Dr Bryson, dyddiedig 29 Ionawr 1976, ac un gan Dr Milne, dyddiedig 26 Ionawr 1976. Roedd y ddau adroddiad wedi’u paratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiad y Llys Ynadon. Roedd Dr Bryson a Dr Milne yn brofiadol iawn yn eu maes. Erbyn 1976, roedd Dr Bryson wedi bod yn ymarfer yn The Retreat am 25 mlynedd, 20 ohonynt fel seiciatrydd ymgynghorol. Roedd ganddo gryn brofiad o drin cleifion (gan gynnwys meddygon a gweithwyr proffesiynol eraill) a oedd yn dioddef o gaethni i alcohol a chyffuriau. Darparodd Dr Bryson ddau ddatganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad, yn delio â’i driniaeth o Shipman a chynnwys ei adroddiad. Nid oedd yn ddigon iach i fod yn bresennol yn yr Ymchwiliad i roi tystiolaeth lafar.
Roedd Dr Milne yn uwch seiciatrydd ymgynghorol ac yn Gyfarwyddwr yr Uned Cyffuriau Ranbarthol ar gyfer ardal Metropolitanaidd Swydd Efrog. Nid oedd yn ddigon iach i ddarparu datganiad i’r Ymchwiliad na rhoi tystiolaeth lafar.
Adroddiad Dr Ronald Bryson
Esboniodd adroddiad Dr Bryson ei fod wedi cyfarfod Shipman gyntaf pan dderbyniwyd Shipman ar 2 Hydref 1975 fel claf gwirfoddol i The Retreat. Roedd Shipman wedi cael ei gyfeirio yno gan Dr Milne. Datblygu caethni i bethidin oedd y rheswm am ei dderbyniad. Nododd Dr Bryson, fodd bynnag, bod rhyw
‘nodweddion anarferol’
i’r caethni, a oedd yn
ac nad oedd
‘wedi cyrraedd cyfnod gorfodaeth lwyr ac angen cyson eto’
. Roedd diddyfnu oddi ar bethidin wedi’i sefydlu dros ychydig o ddyddiau heb unrhyw gymhlethdod.
Adroddodd Dr Bryson, wedi cwblhau’r diddyfnu, y
‘daeth yn amlwg’
bod Shipman yn dioddef o
‘gyflwr iselhaol neu felancolaidd cymharol ddifrifol’
. Ar ôl trafod gyda Shipman a’i wraig, roedd Dr Bryson wedi llunio’r farn bod y cyflwr hwn wedi bodoli am
‘rywbeth fel 18 mis yn flaenorol’
. Nid oedd Shipman, dywedwyd, wedi adnabod ei salwch nac wedi gofyn am sylw meddygol. Disgrifiodd Dr Bryson gyflwr Shipman fel
‘iselder mewndarddol, sef math o iselder sy’n deillio o ryw aflonyddwch biocemegol mewnol fel arfer ar weithrediad yr ymennydd, yn hytrach nag wedi’i ysgogi gan ddigwyddiadau yn peri dryswch seicolegol’
. Disgrifiodd
‘lawer o arweddion nodweddiadol’
o gyflwr yr oedd Shipman, meddai, wedi’u dangos. Credai Dr Bryson bod yr anhwylder iselhaol fwy na thebyg wedi digwydd o flaen ymgais Shipman
‘i gadw i fynd drwy hunan-feddyginiaeth annoeth’
Aeth Dr Bryson ymlaen i ddisgrifio cefndir Shipman a’i
‘ddyfalwch a’i benderfyniad’
i oresgyn gwrthwynebiad teuluol er mwyn cymhwyso mewn meddygaeth. Roedd, dywedwyd, wedi canfod ei fod yn addas ar gyfer meddygaeth deuluol, er ei fod
‘yn poeni llawer amdano ac yn tueddu gor-uniaethu â chleifion a’u problemau’
Wedi i Shipman gael triniaeth â meddyginiaeth gwrth-iselder, fe fu, meddai Dr Bryson,
‘gwelliant dramatig yn ei gyflwr’
. Nid oedd
‘fyth wedi edrych ‘nôl ers hynny’
. Roedd ganddo
‘gryn dipyn o fewnwelediad i natur ei salwch’
. Nid oedd ganddo unrhyw flys am bethidin ac nid oedd wedi amnewid
‘unrhyw ffurf arall o hunan-feddyginiaeth’
. Nododd Dr Bryson:
‘Mae wedi delio â phroblemau ei ddyfodol gyda dewrder, synnwyr cyffredin a phenderfyniad mawr, ac rwyf wedi cael argraff dda gan y ffaith ei fod yn adnabod peryglon potensial yn y dyfodol a’i fod yn ceisio cymryd camau yn ei yrfa broffesiynol i sicrhau pe byddai fyth yn teimlo’n isel eto, ei fod yn cael triniaeth feddygol briodol, ac mae hefyd yn cymryd camau i sicrhau nad oes ganddo fynediad hawdd at gyffuriau a allai fod yn beryglus iddo.’
Roedd Dr Bryson yn ystyried y siawns iddo fynd yn ôl yn ddibynnol ar gyffuriau fel peth
‘annhebygol eithriadol’
o gofio’r ffaith:
‘... pe bai’n dioddef o’i salwch
(h.y. iselder)
fyth eto, byddai’n ei adnabod ar unwaith, ac yn ail, cymaint yw cryfder ei bersonoliaeth sylfaenol wedi cael profiad o’r gyfres hon o ddigwyddiadau, byddai ganddo’r cryfder cymeriad a’r penderfyniad i osgoi hynny rhag digwydd eto’.
Argymhellodd Dr Bryson fod Shipman yn parhau dan oruchwyliaeth seiciatryddol
‘hyd yn oed os mai anaml oedd hynny’
, am nifer o flynyddoedd. Roedd trefniadau wedi’u gwneud gogyfer â hyn, gyda chydweithrediad llawn Shipman.
Esboniodd Dr Bryson i’r Ymchwiliad mewn datganiad tyst ei fod, wedi gweld cyflwr Shipman yn ystod cyfnod ei ddiddyfniad oddi ar bethidin, wedi llunio’r farn na fu Shipman yn gaeth ddifrifol. Deilliodd y farn hon hefyd o honiad Shipman ei fod wedi gallu ymatal rhag cymryd y cyffur am gyfnodau yn ystod cyfnod ei ddibyniaeth. Hyd yn oed os oedd Dr Bryson yn credu bod Shipman wedi bod yn gaeth ddifrifol, fodd bynnag, ni fyddai o reidrwydd wedi ystyried ei fod yn anaddas i ymarfer meddygaeth am byth. Byddai ei farn wedi dibynnu ar bersonoliaeth sylfaenol ei glaf. Dywedodd Dr Bryson, pe bai wedi bod yn delio â chlaf a fu’n gaeth ddifrifol ac a oedd â phersonoliaeth wan, byddai wedi ystyried y byddai mynd yn ôl yn ddibynnol yn debygol iawn, a byddai wedi awgrymu newid gyrfa. Roedd gan Shipman, fodd bynnag, bersonoliaeth gref ac ni chredai Dr Bryson ei fod yn dioddef o
‘gaethni llwyr’
. O ganlyniad, roedd Dr Bryson wedi teimlo mai isel oedd y posibilrwydd y byddai’n mynd yn ôl i gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Roedd risg, fe gydnabu, y gallai hyn ddigwydd pe bai Shipman yn dioddef o iselder eto. Fodd bynnag, roedd Dr Bryson wedi teimlo bod gan Shipman y cryfder personoliaeth, a digon o gefnogaeth, i allu delio’n briodol ag unrhyw iselder pellach, yn hytrach na thrin ei hun â phethidin.
Ni soniodd Dr Bryson yn ei adroddiad am effeithiau Shipman yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau ar ei feddygfa. Mewn datganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad, cyfeiriodd Dr Bryson at bwysigrwydd dilysu gwybodaeth a oedd yn cael ei rhoi gan glaf a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau. Nododd bod cleifion felly, fel grŵp, yn gyfrinachgar a’u bod yn dioddef o ddiffyg mewnwelediad. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd na wnaeth gysylltu â chyn bartneriaid Shipman gan ei fod yn meddwl y byddent wedi bod yn
‘eithaf gwyliadwrus’
ynghylch yr hyn yr oeddent yn dweud wrtho, ac y byddai, o ganlyniad, yn annhebygol o gael unrhyw wybodaeth ddefnyddiol. Roedd gan Dr Bryson gryn brofiad o drin meddygon am gaethni. Roedd hyn wedi’i arwain i gredu y byddai cyn bartneriaid meddyg, o fynd atynt, yn debygol o fod yn bryderus ynghylch effaith yr hyn y byddent yn ei ddweud ar enw da eu meddygfa, ac yn cael eu dylanwadu hefyd gan ddymuniad i beidio gwneud dim i wneud dyfodol mewn meddygaeth yn amhosibl i’w cyn gydweithiwr. Casglaf o hynny bod Dr Bryson wedi credu bod gwybodaeth o ffynhonnell felly’n annhebygol o fod yn ddibynadwy.
Adroddiad Dr Hugo Milne
Yn ei adroddiad, adroddodd Dr Milne sut oedd yn gweld Shipman wedi iddo gael ei dderbyn yn y lle cyntaf i’r Halifax Royal Infirmary, yn syth wedi canfod ei gamddefnydd o gyffuriau. Dywedodd fod Shipman, ar yr adeg honno,
‘yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio Pethidin i’r graddau ei fod yn gaeth iddo’
am ryw 18 mis. Roedd Dr Milne wedi argymell ei fod yn cael ei dderbyn i The Retreat. O ganlyniad, roedd Dr Milne wedi trafod ei achos gyda Dr Bryson, ac roedd hefyd wedi gweld y crynodeb rhyddhau a baratowyd gan Dr Bryson yn dilyn rhyddhau Shipman o The Retreat. Roedd wedi cyfweld Shipman a’i wraig ar y diwrnod yr ysgrifennodd yr adroddiad, sef 26 Ionawr 1976.
Dywedodd Dr Milne, pan wnaeth gyfweld Shipman gyntaf ym mis Medi 1975, ei fod wedi dod yn ymwybodol bod Shipman wedi bod yn dioddef o salwch iselhaol am rhwng 18 mis a dwy flynedd. Credai Dr Milne bod camddefnydd Shipman o bethidin, a’i gaethni iddo, yn ganlyniad uniongyrchol y salwch iselhaol hwnnw. Cydnabu fod salwch iselhaol yn
‘achosiaeth anarferol ar gyfer caethni’
ond roedd wedi’i argyhoeddi, serch hynny, bod y diagnosis yn gywir. Cafodd y diagnosis ei gadarnhau gan Dr Bryson. Nododd Dr Milne bod Shipman, yn y lle cyntaf, yn amharod i dderbyn ei gyngor y dylai fynd i mewn i The Retreat, gan awgrymu
‘nad oedd yn ddigon da’
i gael ei dderbyn i ysbyty felly, gan ddymuno yn lle hynny i fynd i’r uned seiciatryddol lem. Priodolodd Dr Milne hyn i
‘syniadau o annheilyngdod ac euogrwydd’
a oedd yn rhan o’i
‘seicosis iselhaol’
Yn ogystal â natur anarferol achos y caethni, nododd Dr Milne bod nodwedd anarferol arall. Er gwaetha’r cyfnod hirfaith yr oedd wedi bod yn camddefnyddio pethidin, roedd Shipman wedi dweud wrth Dr Milne ei fod wedi gallu rhoi’r gorau i gymryd cyffuriau er mwyn mynd â’i deulu ar wyliau ac er mwyn bod yn abl i yrru ei gar tra’r oedd ar ddyletswydd. Mewn gwirionedd, fel y soniais yn gynharach, mae’n eglur bellach bod Shipman, ar ryw adeg cyn diwedd mis Medi 1975, wedi stopio gyrru a’i fod wedi hynny wedi dibynnu ar ei wraig i’w yrru pan oedd yn ymweld â chleifion yn eu cartrefi. Roedd hyn fwy na thebyg yn ganlyniad y ‘llewygon’ a oedd wedi dechrau eu cael yn gynharach y flwyddyn honno. Dywedodd Mrs Primrose Shipman wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn meddwl ei bod wedi bod yn gyrru’i gŵr o gwmpas am fater o wythnosau’n unig cyn iddo roi’r gorau i ymarfer yn Todmorden ar ddiwedd mis Medi 1975. Nid ymddengys bod Dr Milne yn ymwybodol o’r hanes hwn; na’r GMC ychwaith.
Awgrymodd Dr Milne y gallai gwrthdaro rhwng Shipman a’i bartneriaid yng Nghanolfan Feddygol Ormerod o bosibl fod wedi cyfrannu at iselder Shipman
‘a wnaeth yn ei dro ryddhau ei gaethni i Pethidene
’.
Ymddengys mai dyfalu oedd hyn ar ei ran. Dim ond ym mis Mawrth 1974 yr oedd Shipman wedi ymuno â’r feddygfa, a dywedodd Dr Milne bod ei iselder wedi bodoli am ryw 18 mis i ddwy flynedd cyn diwedd mis Medi 1975, pan welodd Dr Milne gyntaf. Os oedd gosodiad Dr Milne yn gywir, mae’n rhaid bod gwrthdaro Shipman â’i bartneriaid wedi digwydd yn syth wedi iddo gyrraedd yn Todmorden oherwydd, yn ôl ei adroddiad ei hun, ei fod wedi dechrau cymryd pethidin pump i chwe wythnos yn unig yn ddiweddarach. O gofio’r raddfa amser, mae’n anodd gweld sut y gallai unrhyw broblemau yn y berthynas â’i bartneriaid (hyd yn oed os oedd problemau felly’n bodoli) fod wedi gwneud unrhyw gyfraniad o bwys at iselder Shipman neu’i ddibyniaeth ar bethidin. Nid yw’n eglur o’r adroddiad a oedd Dr Milne yn gwerthfawrogi pa mor ddiweddar yr oedd Shipman wedi mynd i mewn i feddygaeth deuluol, a pha mor fuan wedi iddo gyrraedd Todmorden yr oedd wedi dechrau cael gafael ar gyffuriau’n anghyfreithlon.
Dywedodd Dr Milne, pan welodd Shipman ar 26 Ionawr 1976, bod Shipman wedi
‘gwella’n fawr’
; nid oedd tystiolaeth o unrhyw iselder mwyach, a chadarnhaodd ei wraig ei fod wedi ymadfer yn dda. Adroddodd Dr Milne bod Shipman, ar un adeg,
‘ddim yn ystyried ei ddyfodol o fewn y Proffesiwn Meddygol’
, ond roedd Dr Bryson a Dr Milne eu dau wedi’i gynghori
‘na fyddai hyn yn rhesymol’
. Dywedodd Dr Milne, pan welodd Shipman ar y diwrnod yr ysgrifennodd ei adroddiad, bod Shipman wedi dweud wrtho ei fod wedi gwneud cais am swydd, ac wedi cael cynnig swydd, gydag AHA Durham. Nid oedd, bryd hynny, wedi hysbysu’i ddarpar gyflogwyr am ei hanes blaenorol. Roedd Dr Milne wedi’i gynghori i wneud hynny, a chymerodd Shipman ei gyngor. Yn y cyfamser, roedd Dr Milne wedi trafod cwestiwn addasrwydd Shipman ar gyfer y swydd a gynigiwyd iddo gyda Dr Michael O’Brien, Swyddog Meddygol Ardal AHA Durham. Cytunwyd y byddai’r cynnig o swydd yn cael ei gadw ar agor, ar y ddealltwriaeth bod Shipman yn parhau i weld Dr Milne ar gyfer
‘y driniaeth angenrheidiol’
yn y dyfodol. Awgrymodd adroddiad Dr Milne bod yr holl ddigwyddiadau hyn wedi digwydd mewn un diwrnod, sef 26 Ionawr. Er ei fod yn bosibl, mae hyn i weld yn annhebygol, a gall fod iddynt ddigwydd dros gyfnod braidd yn hwy nag a awgrymwyd gan ei adroddiad.
Argymhellodd Dr Milne y dylai’r Llys Ynadon ddelio â Shipman trwy ei ryddhau’n amodol gydag ymrwymiad i barhau â’i driniaeth fel claf allanol neu trwy orchymyn profiannaeth gydag amod ei fod yn cael ei drin gan Dr Milne. Awgrymodd y dylai’r gorchymyn profiannaeth, pe bai’n cael ei bennu, fod am gyfnod o dair blynedd ar y mwyaf. Dylid nodi, pe byddid wedi delio â Shipman yn un o’r ddwy ffordd a awgrymwyd gan Dr Milne, ni fyddai wedi bod yn destun euogfarn: gweler paragraff 16.6. Fel y bu hi, ni fyddai’r heddlu wedi bod dan unrhyw ddyletswydd i adrodd i’r GMC y ffaith fod Shipman wedi pledio’n euog i droseddau yn y Llys Ynadon, er, fel y dywedais, byddent yn gwneud hynny’n ymarferol. Pe bai’r mater wedi dod i sylw’r GMC, ni allai’r GMC fod wedi delio ag ef fel euogfarn. Byddai, fodd bynnag, wedi bod yn agored i’r GMC ddelio ag ef fel mater o SPM, pe bai wedi dewis gwneud hynny.
Roedd Dr Milne wedi nodi nad oedd
‘unrhyw awgrym’
nad oedd Shipman
‘ddim yn gallu cyflawni’i ddyletswydd tra’r oedd ar alwad oherwydd effeithiau Pethidin’
. Yn ei adroddiad, roedd Dr Milne wedi sôn am ei drafodaethau â Shipman a’i wraig. Ymddengys yn annhebygol y byddent wedi gwirfoddoli gwybodaeth am unrhyw anawsterau y gallai Shipman fod wedi’u cael wrth gyflawni’i ddyletswyddau. (Nid ymddengys, er enghraifft, eu bod wedi dweud wrth Dr Milne nad oedd Shipman, am beth amser, wedi bod yn gyrru o ganlyniad i lewygon). Soniodd Dr Milne am drafodaethau hefyd â Dr Bryson a Dr O’Brien. Ni fyddai’r un ohonynt wedi bod mewn sefyllfa i wybod unrhyw beth am effeithiau Shipman yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau ar ei ofal o’i gleifion. Er ei bod yn hollol wir, felly, na fu unrhyw awgrym i Dr Milne fod cleifion Shipman wedi dioddef o ganlyniad i’w gamddefnydd o gyffuriau, y realiti oedd nad oedd wedi cynnal unrhyw ymchwiliad ystyrlon i’r mater. Nid ymddengys fod Dr Milne wedi siarad â phartneriaid Shipman nag ag FPC Calderdale.
Tystiolaeth Bellach
Yn amgaeedig â llythyr dyddiedig 26 Ebrill 1976, a ddosbarthwyd â llaw gan y GMC, anfonodd Hempsons lythyr gan Dr O’Brien, yn cynnwys gwybodaeth am gynnydd Shipman yn ei swydd newydd. Dywedodd Dr O’Brien fod Shipman wedi dechrau gweithio ar 2 Chwefror 1976, wedi iddo gael y swydd yn dilyn cyfweliad ac mewn cystadleuaeth agored â meddygon eraill. Dywedodd bod y cynnig o swydd wedi’i wneud
‘yn amodol ar gliriad meddygol boddhaol’
. Dywedodd fod Shipman, bryd hynny, wedi cael cyfweliad gyda Dr O’Brien lle’r oedd wedi disgrifio’i anawsterau diweddar. Mae’n anodd gweld sut mae’r adroddiad hwn yn gydnaws â’r gronoleg o ddigwyddiadau a ddisgrifiwyd gan Dr Milne, ond, fel y dywedais, gall fod nad oedd adroddiad Dr Milne am amseru’r digwyddiadau yn gwbl gywir.
Dywedodd Dr O‘Brien fod Shipman wedi dweud wrtho ei fod wedi dioddef o
‘bwl o iselder dwys’
, a’i fod wedi defnyddio pethidin yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Roedd wedi trafod â Shipman a’i wraig y ffaith y byddai achos cyfreithiol a chysylltiad â’r GMC yn dilyn. Roedd Shipman yn amlwg yn ymwybodol o’r anawsterau yr oedd yn eu hwynebu, ond roedd Dr O‘Brien wedi llunio’r farn
‘y gallai ailsefydlu’
. Dywedodd Dr O‘Brien ei fod wedi trafod achos Shipman gyda Dr Bryson a Dr Milne, a oedd wedi cadarnhau ei farn. Roedd felly wedi cadarnhau’r cynnig o swydd ar yr amod y byddai Shipman yn parhau i gael gofal dilynol gan Dr Milne.
Wedi i Shipman ddechrau gweithio i’r AHA, ni chafodd Dr O‘Brien unrhyw gyswllt proffesiynol pellach ag ef, ond dywedodd ei fod wedi cadw
‘cysylltiad agos’
â chydweithwyr proffesiynol yn yr ardal lle’r oedd Shipman yn gweithio. Roedd wedi deall ganddynt fod Shipman wedi ymgynefino’n dda yn ei swydd newydd a’i fod
‘wedi cael derbyniad da gan gleifion a chydweithwyr proffesiynol fel ei gilydd’
. Nid oedd wedi derbyn unrhyw dystiolaeth i awgrymu ei fod wedi mynd yn ôl at
‘ei hen anawsterau’
. Daeth Dr O‘Brien i ben drwy fynegi’r gobaith y byddai’r PeCC yn gallu dod i ddyfarniad a fyddai’n hyrwyddo ailsefydlu Shipman.
Ar 27 Ebrill 1976, dosbarthodd Hempsons lythyr arall â llaw, gan amgáu adroddiad byr arall gan Dr Milne, â dyddiad y diwrnod blaenorol arno. Adroddodd Dr Milne fod Shipman wedi’i weld ar nifer o achlysuron ers ei ryddhau o The Retreat. Roedd Shipman yn gwbl hapus yn ei swydd newydd ac nid oedd wedi dangos unrhyw dystiolaeth o annormaledd seiciatryddol. Nid oedd
‘unrhyw dystiolaeth pa beth bynnag’
ei fod yn camddefnyddio unrhyw ffurf o gyffur. Ni ddywedodd Dr Milne pa a oedd wedi cynnal unrhyw brofion wrin neu wedi archwilio Shipman am farciau chwistrelliad. Daeth i ben:
‘O’m rhan i, mae Dr Shipman mewn iechyd da iawn, a byddai o fantais iddo pe bai’n cael parhau i ymarfer, ac i’r gwrthwyneb, byddai’n drychinebus pe na bai’n cael parhau i ymarfer.
Byddaf yn parhau i’w weld yma’n gyson.’
Dylid nodi er bod Shipman, ym mis Tachwedd 1975, wedi dweud wrth DS McKeating ac arolygydd Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref nad oedd unrhyw fwriad ganddo i fynd yn ôl i feddygaeth deuluol neu i weithio mewn sefyllfa lle gallai gael gafael ar bethidin, ni fu’r GMC erioed yn ymwybodol o’i ddatganiad o fwriad.
Cyfarfod y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol ar 28 Ebrill 1976
Paratoadau ar gyfer y Cyfarfod
Ystyriwyd achos Shipman mewn cyfarfod o’r PeCC a gynhaliwyd ar 28 Ebrill 1976. Roedd Mr Gray yn bresennol yn y cyfarfod, fel Mr Williams. Heb fod yn syndod, erbyn gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, nid oedd gan y naill na’r llall unrhyw atgof personol o achos Shipman. Nid yw cofnodion y cyfarfod ar gael bellach, felly nid oes modd dweud yn sicr pa aelodau o’r PeCC oedd yn bresennol. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad, fodd bynnag, yn gallu cysylltu â Dr Llewellyn, a oedd yn hysbys fel aelod o’r PeCC ym 1976. Ni allai gofio a fu’n bresennol yn y cyfarfod lle cafodd achos Shipman ei ystyried. Fodd bynnag, ychydig cyn yr oedd i fod i roi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, canfu Dr Llewellyn bentwr o bapurau yn ei atig yn ymwneud â’r cyfarfod. O’r papurau hynny, roedd yn glir ei fod yn bresennol mewn gwirionedd, er nad oedd ganddo atgof clir ohono o hyd. Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn bod niferoedd da yn mynychu cyfarfodydd y PeCC fel arfer, a byddai wedi disgwyl y byddai pob un o’r chwe aelod wedi bod yn bresennol.
Ar 28 Ebrill 1976, roedd y PeCC i ystyried 14 o achosion newydd o euogfarnau, gan gynnwys achos Shipman. Hefyd, byddai rhai achosion ymddygiad hefyd, a nifer o achosion a oedd wedi dod yn ôl at y PeCC wedi iddynt gael eu gohirio o gyfarfod blaenorol. Mae archwilio cofnodion cyfarfodydd y PeCC a gynhaliwyd ym 1977 a 1978 (nid yw’r rheiny ar gyfer 1976 ar gael) yn awgrymu y gallai yn wir fod yr un faint o achosion yn fras yn y ddau gategori hwnnw ag a oedd o achosion o euogfarnau newydd. Awgrymodd Dr Llewellyn bod pentwr o bapurau ar gyfer cyfarfod o’r PeCC yn rhyw wyth modfedd o uchder fel arfer.
Byddai papurau’n ymwneud â chyfarfodydd y PeCC yn cael eu hanfon at aelodau mewn nifer o gyfrannau. Byddai’r gyfran gyntaf yn cael ei hanfon i’w cartrefi bythefnos cyn y cyfarfod. Yn achos Shipman, ymddengys bod y gyfran gyntaf yn cynnwys y llythyr gwreiddiol gan y WYP, ynghyd â’r atodlen troseddau a oedd wedi’i rhoi ynghlwm, a’r llythyr gan Mrs Powrie. Byddai ail gyfran o bapurau wedyn, yn cynnwys y papurau mewn achosion nad oeddent wedi’u cynnwys yn y gyfran gyntaf, ynghyd â rhai papurau ychwanegol mewn achosion a fu’n rhan o’r gyfran gyntaf. Yn achos Shipman, roedd y papurau ychwanegol yn yr ail gyfran yn cynnwys llythyr Hempsons o 21 Ebrill a dau gopi (roedd y dyblygiad yn gamgymeriad yn ôl pob tebyg) o’r adroddiad gan Dr Bryson. Byddai rhywfaint o ddeunydd (yn achos Shipman, y llythyr gan Dr O‘Brien a’r ail adroddiad gan Dr Milne) wedi cyrraedd swyddfa’r GMC yn rhy hwyr i gael eu postio at aelodau’r PeCC. Byddai’r dogfennau hyn yn cael eu dosbarthu ar ddiwrnod y cyfarfod a byddai aelodau’n cyrraedd yn gynnar er mwyn gallu darllen y deunydd ychwanegol. Yn achos Shipman, roedd y drydedd gyfran honno o ddogfennau’n cynnwys adroddiad cyntaf Dr Milne hefyd, a oedd wedi’i hepgor yn flaenorol trwy gamgymeriad.
Esboniodd Dr Llewellyn ei fod yn arfer ganddo, yn ystod yr amser pan oedd y papurau ganddo ar gyfer cyfarfod, i’w darllen drwodd, weithiau nifer o weithiau. Byddai’n gwneud nodiadau ar y papurau gyda’i farnau dros dro ynghylch y modd y dylid gwaredu achos. Yn achos Shipman, roedd wedi ysgrifennu
yn wreiddiol, gan olygu mai ei farn ef oedd y dylai’r achos gael ei anfon at y DC. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud, wedi iddo ddarllen pob cyfran olynol o bapurau, y byddai’n adolygu’i nodiadau. Os oedd ei farn am achos wedi newid o ganlyniad i’r deunydd newydd yr oedd wedi’i ddarllen, byddai’n newid ei nodiadau’n unol â hynny. Nid oedd wedi gwneud unrhyw newid yn achos Shipman a daeth i’r casgliad, felly, nad oedd wedi newid ei farn dros dro hyd at y pwynt pan aeth i mewn i’r cyfarfod.
Y Broses Gwneud Penderfyniadau
Fel y bu hi, yn groes i farnau Dr Llewellyn ynghylch y modd y dylid delio ag achos Shipman, penderfynodd y PeCC beidio â chyfeirio’r achos at y DC. Yn lle hynny, cafodd yr achos ei gau. Croesodd Dr Llewellyn ei nodiadau gwreiddiol allan ac ysgrifennu’r gair
yn eu hymyl.
Fel yr esboniais, pan ddarparodd Dr Llewellyn ei ddau ddatganiad tyst cyntaf i’r Ymchwiliad, nid oedd yn sicr a fu yn y cyfarfod o’r PeCC lle’r oedd achos Shipman wedi cael ei ystyried. Dywedodd, pe bai wedi bod yno, nad oedd yn cofio beth oedd ei farn am achos Shipman. Yn ei ddatganiadau, roedd i weld yn gefnogol i benderfyniad y PeCC i gau achos Shipman a chynigiodd nifer o seiliau y gellid cyfiawnhau’r penderfyniad arnynt.
Yn ei ddatganiadau, dywedodd Dr Llewellyn mai tasg y PeCC oedd penderfynu a oedd Shipman yn addas i barhau i ymarfer. (Nodaf ar draws hynny mai’r DC mewn gwirionedd ddylai wneud penderfyniad felly). Esboniodd Dr Llewellyn y feddylfryd y tu ôl i benderfyniadau’r PeCC fel a ganlyn. Nododd bod y cyhuddiadau’n rai difrifol, ond bod Shipman wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog a’i gosbi am y rheiny. Nid oedd unrhyw gleifion yn gysylltiedig yn uniongyrchol. Dywedodd y byddai’r PeCC wedi ystyried bod y ddedfryd am euogfarnau Shipman yn ddigonol, a byddai wedi mynd ymlaen i ystyried ei salwch, h.y. ei gaethni i gyffuriau ac iselder cymharol ddifrifol. Soniodd am gyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau iechyd a oedd ar ddod. Nododd Dr Llewellyn bod Dr Milne a Dr Bryson yn ddau seiciatrydd cynghorol amlwg. Roedd Shipman wedi bod dan eu gofal am fisoedd lawer, gan gynnwys tri mis fel claf mewnol. Cawsant argraff dda gan ymdrechion Shipman i ailsefydlu’i hun. Roedd wedi cael gafael ar swydd mewn meddygaeth ataliol lle na fyddai’n ofynnol iddo ragnodi ar gyfer cleifion.
Nododd Dr Llewellyn hefyd bod hawl gan y GMC ddisgwyl y byddai amgylchiadau llawn Shipman yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau (gan gynnwys unrhyw effaith y gallai fod wedi cael ar gleifion) wedi’u canfod gan Gangen Cyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref a chan y ddau seiciatrydd a oedd wedi gwneud adroddiadau. Nid oedd unrhyw beth anffafriol wedi dod i’r golwg am ei berfformiad clinigol. Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth fod Shipman yn anonest yn gyffredinol. Awgrymodd fod dedfryd y llys am ei anonestrwydd yn ddigonol.
Aeth Dr Llewellyn ymlaen yn olaf i ddweud yn ei ddatganiadau y byddai’r PeCC wedi bod yn ymwybodol y byddai’r trawma o gyfeiriad at y DC wedi ychwanegu at straen Shipman, ac, mewn claf yn dioddef o iselder, gallai ysgogi iselder pellach, hyd yn oed ymgais ar hunanladdiad. Roedd y seiciatryddion wedi rheoli caethni Shipman a’i salwch iselhaol yn ôl pob golwg. Roedd yn parhau i dderbyn triniaeth fel claf allanol. Roedd ei gyflogwr newydd yn ymwybodol o’i hanes ac roedd yn cadw golwg fanwl arno. Nododd, gan fod
‘ateb wedi’i ganfod yn lleol’
, na fyddai cyfeirio at y DC wedi ateb unrhyw ddiben.
Wedi i Dr Llewellyn ddod o hyd i’r papurau ar gyfer y cyfarfod, sylweddolodd, wrth gwrs, mai ei farn dros dro am achos Shipman oedd y dylai gael ei gyfeirio at y DC. Yn ei drydydd datganiad tyst, cyfeiriodd at y nodiadau ar ei bapurau a dywedodd:
‘Mae hyn yn awgrymu i mi, yn ystyriaeth y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol o achos Shipman, efallai y cefais fy mherswadio gan fy nghydweithwyr ar y Pwyllgor ei bod yn briodol i gau’r achos yn yr amgylchiadau; neu fod fy marn wedi’i diystyru yn ystod y broses gonsensws.’
Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, esboniodd Dr Llewellyn fod barnau gwahanol gan aelodau’r PeCC am feddygon a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau. Esboniodd ei fod yn ystyried y posibilrwydd o ailsefydlu meddygon a oedd yn cymryd cyffuriau i fynd yn ôl i’r proffesiwn meddygol fel un ‘bach iawn’. Dywedodd:
‘Oes, mae rhai alcoholigion sy’n cael eu gwella, mae rhai pobl sy’n gaeth i gyffuriau yn cael eu gwella, ond fe fyddwn i’n bersonol wastad yn edrych yn wysg fy ochr arnynt. Efallai bod hynny’n annheg, ond dyna fy marn bersonol i.’
Er bod Dr Llewellyn wedi nodi ar un cyfnod yn ei dystiolaeth lafar mai ei safiad ef oedd bod pobl a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn ‘ddiymddiried iawn’, ymddengys ei fod yn siarad yn y fan honno am y cyfnod pan oedd y camddefnyddio’n mynd ymlaen. Dywedodd yn ddiweddarach ei fod o’r farn bod defnyddio dulliau anonest o gael gafael ar gyffuriau (e.e. drwy ffugio rhagnodyn) yn ystod cyfnod y camddefnyddio yn ‘rhan o’r salwch’ ac nid oedd yn dangos tueddfryd cyffredinol i fod yn anonest mewn agweddau eraill wedi i’r camddefnyddio ddod i ben. Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn mai dyna pam ‘na wnaethom ni
(h.y. y PeCC)
... ystyried yr agweddau anonest mewn gwirionedd, yn hytrach na’r agweddau clinigol’. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd y byddai’n amheugar ynghylch a oedd y camddefnyddiwr wedi’i wella/gwella mewn gwirionedd o’i gaethni/chaethni i gyffuriau.
Dywedodd Dr Llewellyn mai neges adroddiadau Dr Milne a Dr Bryson eu dau oedd bod y prognosis yn dda, ond bod angen cyfnod o oruchwyliaeth dros nifer o flynyddoedd. Cydnabu mai’r unig fodd o sicrhau goruchwyliaeth ffurfiol oedd anfon yr achos at y DC. Roedd y grym gan y DC, os oedd yn dewis, i ohirio’i benderfyniad, gan hynny’n rhoi meddyg ‘ar brawf’. Dywedodd, wedi darllen llythyr Dr O‘Brien, ei farn fyddai bod y newyddion yn galonogol ond byddai wedi bod yn amheus na fyddai Shipman o bosibl yn cydymffurfio â goruchwyliaeth feddygol barhaus gan Dr Milne oni bai ei fod dan rwymedigaeth i wneud hynny. Nododd:
‘... yr unig oruchwyliaeth i berson sy’n ystrywgar yw un a chanddi ddannedd; adrodd parhaus i gorff cyfrifol a fyddai â’r mecanwaith i sicrhau ei fod yn dod iddynt yn gyson a’r grym i’w gosbi os nad oedd’.
Yn amlwg, mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi bod yn anodd i Dr Llewellyn ddatod ei farnau cyfredol am achos Shipman (a luniwyd â’r wybodaeth am yr hyn sydd wedi digwydd ers hynny) a’r barnau a oedd ganddo ar y pryd. Cydnabu hyn yn agored, a dywedodd bod llawer o agweddau cadarnhaol ar y deunydd a gyflwynwyd ar ran Shipman a allai fod wedi peri iddo gael ‘meddyliau o’i blaid’ ar y pryd. Credaf mai pwynt Dr Llewellyn oedd, er ei bod yn glir o’i nodiadau ei fod o blaid cyfeirio achos Shipman at y DC pan aeth i mewn i’r cyfarfod, efallai nad oedd mor sicr ar y pryd mai hwn oedd yr unig lwybr priodol, fel y gallai ei dystiolaeth lafar am feddygon yn cymryd cyffuriau fod wedi’i awgrymu.
Esboniodd Dr Llewellyn, yn ystod y cyfnod pan oedd ar y PeCC, ni fu pleidlais erioed. Proses o gydsynio oedd hi. Personoliaethau cryf fyddai’n arwain. Byddid yn delio â rhai achosion yn gyflym iawn; byddai dadl mewn achosion eraill, ac, yn y pen draw, byddai’r Cadeirydd yn dod â’r drafodaeth i ben ac yn nodi’r farn y credai yr oedd gan y Pwyllgor, neu’r mwyafrif ohono. Os oedd seiciatryddion ar y PeCC, byddai ganddynt farnau cryf am addasrwydd Shipman i ddychwelyd i’r gwaith, barnau a fyddai wedi bod yn anodd i rai eraill ar y PeCC i’w gwrthbrofi. Wrth ddweud hyn, roedd Dr Llewellyn yn adleisio’r farn a fynegwyd gan Mr Gray yn ei ddatganiad tyst, lle cyfeiriodd at y ffaith bod yr Athro Trethowan, seiciatrydd, yn aelod o’r PeCC. Nododd Mr Gray y
‘byddai rwy’n sicr wedi helpu’r Pwyllgor ddod i gasgliad nad oedd yr achos fel y’i cyflwynwyd iddynt yn cyhoeddi unrhyw berygl i’r cyhoedd’
Barn Dr Milne a Dr Bryson oedd bod nifer o flynyddoedd o oruchwyliaeth bellach fel claf allanol yn ddymunol. Cytunodd Dr Llewellyn, ac, er mwyn i’r PeCC wneud y penderfyniad i gau’r achos, mae’n rhaid bod aelodau o’r Pwyllgor a oedd o’r farn nad oedd unrhyw gamau i orfodi Shipman i gydymffurfio â goruchwyliaeth yn angenrheidiol. Mae’n rhaid bod yr aelodau hynny’n hapus i dderbyn y byddai Shipman yn bodloni i driniaeth felly’n wirfoddol. Meddyliodd Dr Llewellyn tybed a oeddent wedi meddwl mor bell ymlaen â hynny mewn gwirionedd. Roedd o’r farn mai’r prif reswm dros i’r mwyafrif o’r PeCC benderfynu peidio cyfeirio achos Shipman at y DC oedd eu bod wedi teimlo y gallent ymddiried ynddo.
Mae’n anodd deall pam, yng ngolau’r argymhelliad am oruchwyliaeth barhaus a gafodd ei gynnwys yn y ddau adroddiad seiciatryddol, bod y PeCC wedi penderfynu cau achos Shipman heb rybudd. Credai Dr Bryson, er gwaethaf ei farn fod gan Shipman bersonoliaeth gref a’i fod yn wynebu’r dyfodol â synnwyr cyffredin a phenderfyniad, bod goruchwyliaeth barhaus yn bwysig. Roedd Dr Milne wedi argymell i’r Llys Ynadon y dylai ddewis llwybr (naill ai drwy bennu rhyddhad amodol neu orchymyn profiannaeth) a fyddai’n golygu ymrwymiad, neu ofyniad gwirioneddol, i barhau â’i driniaeth â Dr Milne. Cafodd yr awgrym hwn ei wrthod gan y Llys. Gall fod bod y PeCC o’r farn bod yr Ynadon wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd goruchwyliaeth yn angenrheidiol. Os felly, fe allai hynny fod wedi bod yn gamddealltwriaeth ar ei ran, gan ei bod yn gwbl debygol bod yr Ynadon yn dymuno pennu rhyw gosb ar Shipman ac adennill y golled yr oedd wedi’i hachosi i arian cyhoeddus. Ni ellid cyfuno dirwy a gorchymyn iawndal gyda gorchymyn profiannaeth. Yng ngolau’r argymhelliad yn yr adroddiadau meddygol am oruchwyliaeth barhaus, ymddengys i mi, pe bai’r PeCC yn dymuno hyrwyddo ailsefydlu’r meddyg ac i ddarparu rhywfaint o ddiogelwch i gleifion, y llwybr cywir fyddai cyfeirio’r achos at y DC. Gallai’r Pwyllgor hwnnw fod wedi defnyddio’i bwerau i ohirio pe bai, o gael gwybod mwy am ffeithiau’r achos, o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i wneud hynny.
Sylwadau ar y Broses Gwneud Penderfyniadau
Taflodd tystiolaeth Dr Llewellyn olau defnyddiol ar broses gwneud penderfyniadau’r PeCC. Yn gyntaf, ymddengys bod y PeCC yn ystyried bod ganddo’r swyddogaeth i benderfynu ynghylch a oedd meddyg yn addas i ymarfer. Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud mai swyddogaeth y DC oedd honno, a mynegais fy mhryder nad oedd y PeCC yn cyfyngu’i hun i’r rôl hidlo ond yn hytrach yn gwneud penderfyniadau gwirioneddol mewn achosion eithaf difrifol. Pan ofynnwyd a ddylai’r PeCC fod wedi cyfyngu’i hun i hidlo achosion, dywedodd Dr Llewellyn fod hynny’n ‘feddylfryd dilys’, ac ychwanegodd bod ‘gan bawb eu barnau eu hunain ar hynny’. Casglaf o hynny bod barnau gwahanol ynghylch a yw arfer y PeCC wrth fynd y tu hwnt i’w rôl hidlo, yn briodol. Eto ymddengys nad oedd unrhyw drafodaeth swyddogol am y mater, nag unrhyw arweiniad o ran y math o achos a fyddai’n briodol neu na fyddai’n briodol i’w gyfeirio at y DC. Mae’n amlwg o rannau eraill o dystiolaeth Dr Llewellyn a ddyfynnwyd uchod bod aelodau’n dibynnu ar eu barnau personol eu hunain, ac nad oeddent yn dibynnu ar farn broffesiynol gadarn yn seiliedig ar dystiolaeth. Er enghraifft, yr hyn sydd gennyf dan sylw yw barnau personol Dr Llewellyn am y gobeithion o ailsefydlu meddyg a oedd yn gaeth i gyffuriau. Ymddengys ei bod yn rhaid bod barnau gwahanol gan rai eraill. Fe allai rhai barnau fod yn seiliedig ar dystiolaeth wyddonol feddygol ac eraill ddim. Nid ymddengys i mi ei bod yn foddhaol gadael i benderfyniadau gael eu gwneud ar sail barnau personol gwahanol o’r math hwn, sef barnau y gallai unrhyw un ohonynt fodoli mewn achos arbennig.
Ar Ôl Cyfarfod y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
Y Llythyr i Shipman
Ar ôl y cyfarfod, paratôdd Mr Williams femorandwm at sylw Mr Gray. Roedd hwn yn cofnodi bod y PeCC wedi penderfynu y dylai achos Shipman gael ei gau. Aeth ymlaen:
‘Nes ymlaen yn yr achos daeth yn amlwg bod y Pwyllgor yn dymuno anfon llythyrau at yr ymarferwyr hynny y daethpwyd i’r casgliad bod eu hachosion yn cynnwys rhyw elfen rybuddiol.’
Roedd Mr Williams wedi drafftio llythyr i’w anfon at Shipman er mwyn i Mr Gray ei gymeradwyo. Gwnaeth Mr Gray rai diwygiadau i’r drafft a’i anfon ymlaen i’w gymeradwyo gan y Cofrestrydd, Mr Draper. Ar 6 Mai 1976, ysgrifennodd Mr Draper at Shipman. Ar ôl ailadrodd manylion y wybodaeth a gafodd ei hystyried gan y PeCC, aeth y llythyr ymlaen:
Yr
oedd argraffiad mis Ionawr 1976 o’r Llyfr Glas. Y rhannau perthnasol oedd y rheiny a ddyfynnir ym mharagraff 16.34.
Dywedodd Mr Gray mai’r
‘elfen rybuddiol’
(‘admonitory element’
) yn y llythyr i Shipman oedd y bygythiad o ymchwiliad cyhoeddus gan y DC os oedd Shipman yn ail-droseddu. Nododd Mr Gray a Mr Williams, o farnu yn ôl safonau’r dydd, bod y llythyr a anfonwyd at Shipman mewn ‘telerau cryf iawn’. Roedd y llythyr yn cloi gyda chais am gydnabyddiaeth bersonol ei fod wedi’i dderbyn. Esboniodd Mr Gray, os oedd meddyg yn methu ymateb cyn pen chwe mis i lythyr yn cael ei anfon gan y GMC trwy ddosbarthiad wedi’i gofnodi, gallai ei enw/henw gael ei ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr. Roedd hwn (ac mae’n parhau, yn wir) yn rym angenrheidiol gan ei fod yn atal meddyg rhag ceisio osgoi camau disgyblu trwy fethu ymateb i lythyrau gan y GMC. Cydnabu Shipman ar unwaith ei fod wedi derbyn y llythyr, a nododd ei fod yn deall ei oblygiadau.
Cyfathrebu â’r Swyddfa Gartref
Trwy lythyr dyddiedig 3 Mai 1976, hysbysodd Mr Williams Mrs Powrie, o Gangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref, o’r penderfyniad a wnaeth y PeCC yn achos Shipman. Dywedodd:
Ni soniwyd am y ffaith bod llythyr rhybudd wedi’i anfon at Shipman, gan fod hynny’n cael ei ystyried fel mater preifat rhwng y GMC a’r meddyg ac nid oedd yn cael ei ddatgelu i bersonau na chyrff y tu allan i’r GMC.
Roedd y llythyr gwreiddiol o Gangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref wedi gofyn am y
‘farn a luniwyd’
gan y PeCC, nid am ei benderfyniad. Nid wyf yn deall hyn i feddwl bod Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref yn dymuno gwybod pa farn a luniodd y PeCC ynghylch yr angen am gyfarwyddyd adran 12, ond yn hytrach beth oedd y PeCC wedi penderfynu gwneud yn unig. Nid oedd llythyr Mr Williams yn mynegi unrhyw farn ynghylch priodoldeb cyfarwyddyd adran 12. Mewn tystiolaeth, dywedodd Mr Gray nad oedd Deddf 1956 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r GMC fod yn rhan o gamau gweithredu gan y Swyddfa Gartref i gyfyngu ar hawliau meddyg mewn perthynas â chyffuriau rheoledig. Dywedodd bod llythyr Mr Williams wedi hysbysu Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref am yr hyn yr oedd y PeCC wedi gwneud â’r achos, sef yr hyn y gofynnwyd amdano. Nid oedd Mr Gray yn credu y byddai’r PeCC wedi mynegi unrhyw farn ynghylch y posibilrwydd o gyfyngu ar hawliau Shipman, er yr ymddengys yn debygol i mi y byddai Cangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref wedi casglu, o’i benderfyniad i gau’r achos, nad oedd y PeCC o’r farn ei fod yn angenrheidiol i gyfyngu ar hawliau rhagnodi Shipman. Ar y pryd, nid oedd gan y GMC ei hun rym i bennu cyfyngiad felly. Yr unig ffordd y gallai’r GMC stopio meddyg rhag rhagnodi math penodol o gyffur oedd drwy’r GMC yn atal ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad neu’n dileu ei enw/henw oddi ar y gofrestr. Nid oedd Mr Gray yn cofio unrhyw ymgais gan y GMC i gau’r bwlch hwnnw yn ei bwerau drwy annog y Swyddfa Gartref i ddefnyddio’r grym a oedd gan yr Ysgrifennydd Cartref i wneud cyfarwyddyd adran 12.
Trwy lythyr dyddiedig 9 Gorffennaf 1976, hysbysodd Mrs Powrie Mr Williams nad oedd y Swyddfa Gartref yn bwriadu cymryd unrhyw gamau gweithredu yn yr achos. Fel yr esboniais yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, ychydig cyn yr amser hwn, roedd y Swyddfa Gartref wedi mabwysiadu polisi newydd lle’r oedd cyfarwyddiadau adran 12 yn cael eu hystyried yn briodol yn unig mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg yn torri MDA 1971 a oedd yn golygu ymddygiad a oedd yn creu risg niwed i’r cyhoedd. I bob pwrpas, o oddeutu mis Mai neu fis Mehefin 1976 ymlaen, dim ond mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi cyflenwi cyffuriau rheoledig i gaethion neu lle’r oedd mewn rhyw fodd wedi achosi rhyddhau cyffuriau rheoledig i’r ‘farchnad ddu’ yr oedd cyfarwyddiadau adran 12 yn cael eu gwneud. Nid oedd cyfarwyddiadau’n cael eu gwneud mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi bod yn cymryd y cyffuriau ei hun. Nid oedd y Swyddfa Gartref yn gallu esbonio i’r Ymchwiliad y rheswm am y newid polisi hwn. Mae’n bosibl bod y newid polisi wedi digwydd o ganlyniad i gyhoeddi Adroddiad Merrison, gyda’i bwyslais ar drin meddygon a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau fel ‘achosion iechyd’ a oedd angen eu hailsefydlu. Os deellid bod yr Adroddiad yn awgrymu nad oedd meddygon a oedd yn cymryd cyffuriau eu hunain yn risg i gleifion, byddai hynny wedi bod yn gamgymeriad. Argymhellodd Adroddiad Merrison y dylai pwerau’r GMC gael eu hymestyn er mwyn iddo allu diogelu cleifion trwy bennu amodau neu gyfyngiadau ar feddyg yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau tra’i fod/bod yn ailsefydlu. Nid oedd yn awgrymu nad oedd cleifion mewn risg o feddygon felly.
Effaith y Penderfyniad ar y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol
Effaith penderfyniad y PeCC oedd fod Shipman yn rhydd i arfer meddygaeth mewn unrhyw faes a oedd yn briodol i’w sgiliau. Roedd yn gallu rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn yr un modd ag unrhyw feddyg arall heb unrhyw ‘olwg’ arbennig yn cael ei chadw ar ei ragnodi. Yn bwysicach oll, roedd yn rhydd i fynd yn ôl i feddygaeth deuluol cyn gynted ag yr oedd swydd addas yn dod ar gael.
Nid oedd Shipman dan unrhyw orfodaeth i barhau â’r oruchwyliaeth fel claf allanol. Nid yw’n hysbys a wnaeth hynny nac am ba hyd. Nid yw cofnodion Dr Milne ar gael bellach. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Dr Geoffrey Roberts, cyn aelod o feddygfa Donneybrook, ei fod wedi siarad â seiciatrydd (nid oedd yn sicr ai Dr Bryson neu Dr Milne ydoedd) am gais Shipman i ymuno â’r feddygfa. Byddai hynny wedi bod yn ail hanner 1977, ym mis Awst neu fis Medi fwy na thebyg. Ei atgof oedd iddo gael gwybod bod Shipman wedi cael problem caethni, ei fod wedi cael triniaeth am iselder ond ei fod wedi gorffen ei driniaeth bryd hynny. Os yw atgof Dr Roberts yn gywir, ymddengys nad oedd Shipman dan oruchwyliaeth mwyach bryd hynny. Yn sicr, nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gallu cael unrhyw gofnodion meddygol sy’n cadarnhau parhad unrhyw driniaeth.
Y Penderfyniad i Beidio â Chyfeirio Achos Shipman at y Pwyllgor Disgyblu
Awgrymodd y GMC i’r Ymchwiliad bod y penderfyniad yn achos Shipman yn rhesymol ac yn gyfiawnadwy o’i farnu yn erbyn arfer a safonau’r dydd. Dywedodd fod gan y PeCC yr holl ddeunyddiau yr oedd eu hangen arno i wneud penderfyniad gwybodus. Roedd y dystiolaeth seiciatryddol yn dangos fod Shipman wedi ymadfer yn dda a bod y prognosis yn wych. Roedd gan Shipman swydd lle na fyddai angen iddo ragnodi na defnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Awgrymodd y GMC, felly, na fyddai cyfeirio’r achos at y DC wedi ateb unrhyw ddiben.
Awgrymodd y GMC hefyd, hyd yn oed pe bai’r achos wedi’i gyfeirio at y DC, ni fyddai dileu’r meddyg wedi’i ystyried yn briodol. Y canlyniad tebygol fyddai cerydd neu ohirio dyfarniad. Dywedodd y GMC, pe bai’r DC wedi gohirio dyfarniad, mae’n debygol y byddai’r achos wedi’i gau cyn pen rhyw flwyddyn.
Ar yr wyneb, efallai mai’r nodwedd o’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achos Shipman sy’n peri’r syndod mwyaf oedd na chafodd ei gyfeirio at y DC. Ymddengys bod hyn yn awgrymu nad oedd yr achos yn cael ei ystyried yn ‘ddigon difrifol’ i warantu cyfeirio, er, fel y dangosais, roedd materion heblaw am ddifrifoldeb yn cael eu hystyried gan y PeCC wrth benderfynu a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio. Ymddengys bod argaeledd adroddiadau seiciatryddol a chynnwys yr adroddiadau hynny wedi chwarae rhan benderfynol yn y penderfyniad i beidio cyfeirio achos Shipman.
Mae’n gyfarwyddiadol i ystyried beth fyddai wedi digwydd pe bai achos Shipman wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y DC. A ydyw’n iawn, fel yr awgryma’r GMC, hyd yn oed pe bai’r achos wedi’i gyfeirio, y byddai’r canlyniad wedi bod yn ddigon tebyg? Damcaniaethol yw hyn i ryw raddau, gan y byddai’r dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael i’r DC fwy na thebyg wedi bod yn wahanol i hynny a ystyriwyd gan y PeCC. Efallai y byddai DS McKeating wedi rhoi tystiolaeth a oedd yn taflu goleuni mwy difrifol ar ymddygiad Shipman. Efallai y byddai Shipman wedi rhoi tystiolaeth, naill ai i wrthbrofi, lliniaru neu esbonio rhyw agwedd ar dystiolaeth DS McKeating, neu i danlinellu rhyw agwedd ar y barnau seiciatryddol. Mae’n eithaf posibl, gyda mantais y dystiolaeth ychwanegol honno, y byddai aelodau’r DC wedi llunio barn lai ffafriol o Shipman na wnaeth y PeCC.
Roedd Mr Gray o’r farn, pe bai’r achos wedi’i gyfeirio at y DC, gohirio penderfyniad fyddai’r canlyniad wedi bod. Fel yr esboniais, ymddengys bod y DC yn gohirio achos wedi arwain yn y pen draw at gau’r achos gyda cherydd neu heb gerydd. Nododd Mr Gray ei bod yn ‘ffodus’ i Shipman fod Mr Draper wedi penderfynu y dylai Shipman gael ei wahodd i ddarparu adroddiad meddygol. Pe na bai’r gwahoddiad hwnnw wedi’i roi neu’i dderbyn, credai Mr Gray, ar sail yr hyn a oedd wedi digwydd mewn achosion eraill tebyg, y byddai’r PeCC naill ai wedi gohirio’r achos er mwyn iddo wneud hynny neu byddai wedi cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen at y DC. Pe bai’r achos wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y DC, y tebygolrwydd llethol yw y byddai’r un dystiolaeth feddygol ag a oedd gerbron y PeCC wedi’i chasglu gan gyfreithwyr Shipman a’i hanfon at y GMC cyn y cyfarfod o’r DC. Gohiriad fyddai’r canlyniad. I bob pwrpas, roedd Mr Gray yn dweud bod Shipman yn ffodus oherwydd, pe na bai wedi derbyn y gwahoddiad i gyflwyno adroddiad meddygol, byddai wedi gorfod dioddef trawma cynyddol ymddangosiad cyhoeddus; eto byddai’r canlyniad wedi bod yn debyg yn y pen draw.
Yn ei ddatganiad tyst, dywedodd Mr Williams bod achos Shipman yn fath o achos a fyddai wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y DC yn gyffredinol. Credai mai un rheswm na chafodd ei gyfeirio oedd bodolaeth adroddiadau seiciatryddol ffafriol. Credai ei bod yn rhaid bod hwn yn achos
‘ffiniol’
. Fe’i cafodd hi’n anodd dweud beth allai fod wedi digwydd be bai’r mater wedi’i gyfeirio at y DC. Dywedodd nad oedd wastad yn gallu rhagweld penderfyniadau’r DC. Dyfalodd y gallai cofrestriad Shipman fod wedi cael ei atal, ond pwysleisiodd mai dyfalu’n unig yr oedd.
Mae ystadegau a ddarparwyd ar gyfer yr Ymchwiliad gan yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol Westminster, ac archwilio achosion yn ymwneud â chyffuriau fy hun y deliodd y DC â nhw ar ddiwedd y 1970au, yn awgrymu ei bod yn annhebygol eithriadol y byddai Shipman wedi cael ei ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr. Byddai ataliad wedi bod yn bosibilrwydd, ond mae’r achosion a archwiliwyd yn awgrymu y byddai hynny wedi bod yn annhebygol hefyd.
Ymddengys i mi y gallai’r canlyniad gerbron y DC, i ryw raddau, fod wedi dibynnu ar raddfa unrhyw ymchwilio pellach. Os mai ychydig o ymchwilio pellach a fu, neu ddim ymchwilio pellach o gwbl, byddai’r canlyniad tebygol gerbron y DC wedi bod yn debyg iawn i’r hyn ddigwyddodd mewn gwirionedd yn y PeCC, sef cau’r achos â cherydd. Rwyf wedi dweud, pe bai mwy o dystiolaeth wedi bod ar gael, fe allai’r DC fod wedi cymryd golwg fwy difrifol o ymddygiad Shipman na wnaeth y PeCC, a gallai fod wedi llunio barn lai ffafriol o’i ailsefydlu a’i brognosis. Fel y bu hi, credaf mai gohirio am gyfnod o ‘brawf’ fyddai’r canlyniad tebygol. Gan mai ychydig o amheuaeth sydd gennyf y byddai Shipman wedi ymddwyn yn dda tra’r oedd dan oruchwyliaeth, rwy’n cytuno â’r GMC ei bod yn debygol y byddai’r achos wedi’i gau cyn pen blwyddyn neu ddwy ar y mwyaf.

---  ---
Wrth archwilio gweithdrefnau’r GMC ym 1976, mae’n rhaid i mi fod yn ofalus i osgoi’r fantais o edrych yn ôl a’r wybodaeth fod Shipman i ddod yn llofrudd torfol. Byddaf yn ystyried ei achos fel achos meddyg yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau nad oes unrhyw wybodaeth ddiweddarach ar gael amdano.
Methiant y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol i Ddileu Enw Shipman oddi ar y Gofrestr Feddygol
Rwyf eisoes wedi nodi, pan ddaeth ffaith euogfarnau blaenorol Shipman am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau i’r golwg, mynegodd llawer o bobl y farn y dylai’r GMC fod wedi dileu ei enw oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol ym 1976. Dylai’r cyfuniad o Shipman yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig dros fisoedd lawer a’i anonestrwydd wrth gael gafael ar y cyffuriau fod wedi dangos yn glir, dywedwyd, nad oedd yn addas i ymarfer. Mynegwyd sioc a syndod yn y wasg a mannau eraill bod gyrfa feddygol Shipman yn lle hynny wedi cael parhau yn ddi-ymyrraeth bron.
Wrth baratoi ar gyfer y rhan hon o’r Ymchwiliad, dosbarthodd Alexander Harris, y cyfreithwyr a oedd yn cynrychioli Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside, holiadur i deuluoedd a ffrindiau dioddefwyr Shipman y maent yn gweithredu ar eu rhan. Roedd yr holiadur yn gofyn am farnau am, ymhlith pethau eraill, y modd y deliodd y GMC ag achos Shipman ym 1976, a’r modd y dylid delio’n gyffredinol â meddygon sy’n cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau. Credai’r mwyafrif o’r rheiny a oedd yn ymateb i’r holiadur na ddylid caniatáu i feddygon yn sefyllfa Shipman barhau i ymarfer. Gwnaeth nifer y pwynt, gan fod gan feddygon yn anochel fynediad at gyffuriau, ei bod yn amhriodol i feddyg sydd wedi camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn y gorffennol i barhau i ymarfer. Roedd Miss Suzanne Brock, wyres Mrs Edith Brock, o’r farn hon. Rhoddodd dystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Dywedodd ei bod o’r farn y dylai’r GMC fod wedi dileu enw Shipman oddi ar y gofrestr yn barhaol ym 1976 oherwydd y temtasiwn parhaus i gamddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig y byddai’n ei wynebu’n anochel pe bai’n parhau i ymarfer.
Nid ymddengys ei bod yn hysbys yn gyffredinol bod nifer sylweddol o feddygon yn ymarfer yn y DU heddiw sydd, yn y gorffennol, wedi bod yn gaeth i gyffuriau neu sydd wedi cyflawni troseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau. Roedd y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman yn nodweddiadol mewn llawer ffordd o’r modd y deliwyd â’r rhan fwyaf o achosion dros y 25 neu 30 mlynedd diwethaf. Ym 1978, parodd y Senedd, gan weithredu ar argymhellion Pwyllgor Merrison, creu gweithdrefnau iechyd y GMC. Ers hynny, bu’n bolisi swyddogol, lle bynnag y bydd modd, y dylai meddygon sydd wedi mynd yn gaeth i gyffuriau neu’n ddibynnol ar gyffuriau gael dychwelyd i ymarfer wedi iddynt ailsefydlu. Mae meddygon felly’n aml wedi troi at ddulliau anonest er mwyn cael gafael ar gyflenwadau o’u cyffur dewisedig. Yn anochel, felly, mae gan lawer ohonynt euogfarnau am droseddau sy’n ymwneud nid yn unig â chael gafael neu feddu’n anghyfreithlon ar gyffuriau, ond anonestrwydd yn ogystal. Ni fu unrhyw awgrym erioed y dylent gael eu trin yn wahanol i’r rheiny nad oes euogfarnau felly ganddynt. O ganlyniad, maent yn gyffredinol wedi cael eu trin fel ‘achosion iechyd’, ac ymdriniwyd â nhw drwy weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC, nad ydynt, yn unol ag argymhellion Pwyllgor Merrison, yn golygu’r sancsiwn posibl o ddileu’r meddyg.
Gall fod bod yr angen i gael nifer digonol o feddygon ar gael i staffio’r GIG yn ffactor y tu ôl i’r polisi a fabwysiadwyd gan y Senedd ym 1978. Gall fod hefyd ei fod yn cael ei gydnabod y gall arfer meddygaeth fod yn alwedigaeth sy’n peri straen a’i bod, oherwydd mynediad hawdd meddyg at gyffuriau, yn arwain at demtasiynau anarferol i’w camddefnyddio. Yn ôl pob tebyg, pan basiodd Deddf Meddygaeth 1978, roedd y Senedd yn fodlon y gallai llawer o feddygon a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau gael eu hailsefydlu’n llwyddiannus ac y gallent ddychwelyd i ymarfer heb risg fawr i gleifion. Beth bynnag oedd yr ystyriaethau sylfaenol, gweithredodd y Senedd ar argymhellion Adroddiad Merrison ym 1978, a daeth gweithdrefnau iechyd y GMC i rym ym 1980. Ym 1976, mae’n rhaid ei bod yn amlwg y byddai hyn yn digwydd yn fuan.
Er gwaetha’r polisi sydd wedi bod ar waith am dros 25 mlynedd, ymddengys nad yw’n cael ei dderbyn yn gyffredinol o bell ffordd bod meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn gallu ailsefydlu a mynd ymlaen i fyw bywydau proffesiynol defnyddiol a gwerthfawr. Y broblem go iawn yw bod bwlch rhwng canfyddiad y cyhoedd o bolisi swyddogol a realiti. Yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid gwneud y cyhoedd yn ymwybodol ei bod wedi bod yn bolisi gan y GMC i annog a chynorthwyo meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau i ailsefydlu a mynd yn ôl i arfer heb gyfyngiad. Mae’n rhaid gwneud y cyhoedd yn ymwybodol hefyd bod y polisi hwn wedi’i gadarnhau gan y Senedd. Os oes pryder gwirioneddol a chyffredin am y polisi hwn - fel yr ymddengys yn debygol i mi - mae’n rhaid dod ag ef i’r amlwg ar gyfer trafodaeth gyhoeddus a’i newid o bosibl. Gall fod yn wir, ar ôl archwilio’r holl dystiolaeth berthnasol, mai canlyniad dadl gyhoeddus felly fyddai cadarnhau polisi cyfredol, gyda phwyslais priodol ar ddiogelu cleifion yn ystod cyfnod ailsefydlu. Gall fod hefyd y byddai dadl felly’n arwain at alwad gyffredinol i gleifion fod yn ymwybodol o hanes blaenorol eu meddyg yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau, er mwyn iddynt allu gwneud dewis gwybodus ynghylch a ydynt yn dymuno cael eu trin ganddo/ganddi. Dywedaf fwy am y materion hyn nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Methiant y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol i Atal Shipman
Mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol bod rhai pobl wedi llunio’r farn, er y byddai wedi bod yn rhy llym i ddileu enw Shipman oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol, dylai ei gofrestriad fod wedi’i atal nes ei bod yn glir ei bod yn ddiogel iddo ymarfer. Roedd atal yn sancsiwn a oedd ar gael i’r GMC ar y pryd. Fodd bynnag, roedd atal yn cael ei ystyried fel sancsiwn cosbol yn hytrach na sancsiwn ailsefydlu. Gallaf ddeall pam yr oedd felly, er fy mod o’r farn bersonol nad oes angen i ataliad o reidrwydd fod yn anghyson ag ailsefydlu, cyhyd ag yr esbonnir yn eglur i’r meddyg beth a ddisgwylir ganddo/ganddi yn ystod cyfnod yr ataliad. Gan ddibynnu ar natur problem y meddyg, gallai hwnnw fod yn gyfnod dwys o driniaeth seiciatryddol neu, os yw’n briodol, ail-addysgu mewn rhyw faes meddygaeth. Fodd bynnag, roedd Shipman eisoes wedi cael triniaeth seiciatryddol ddwys. At hynny, pan gafodd ei achos ei ystyried, roedd yn arfer mewn maes meddygaeth lle’r oedd yn agored i lawer llai o demtasiwn i gamddefnyddio cyffuriau na phan oedd mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Gallaf ddeall pam wnaeth y GMC, a oedd o’r farn mai ailsefydlu oedd y dull gweithredu mewn achosion fel ei achos ef, ystyried bod atal yn amhriodol.
Methiant gan y Gyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol i Bennu Amodau ar Gofrestriad Shipman
Roedd llawer o deuluoedd a ffrindiau dioddefwyr Shipman o’r farn, hyd yn oed pe na bai enw Shipman wedi cael ei ddileu’n barhaol o’r gofrestr, y dylai parhad ei gofrestriad fod wedi bod yn destun amodau llym a dylai fod wedi cael ei fonitro’n fanwl. Dywedodd rhai y dylai mesurau diogelu felly fod wedi aros gydol yr amser yr oedd yn ymarfer. Awgrymwyd y dylai monitro mewn achosion fel hyn fod wedi cynnwys profion gwaed ar hap ac archwiliadau meddygol cyson i wirio am arwyddion eraill bod meddyg yn mynd yn ôl i gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Hefyd, dylid fod wedi cynnal archwiliadau cyfnodol o ragnodion, cofnodion meddygol ac agweddau eraill ar arfer clinigol y meddyg. Roedd amodau ar gofrestriad a gafodd eu hawgrymu yn cynnwys gwaharddiadau ar ragnodi neu roi cyffuriau rheoledig ac ar feddygon yn ymarfer ar eu pennau’u hunain, ynghyd â gofynion y dylai’r meddyg weithio dan oruchwyliaeth fanwl yn unig neu mewn lleoliad heblaw am feddygaeth deuluol. Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Mrs Theresa Deeley, merch Mrs Edna Llewellyn, a oedd yn teimlo y dylai’r GMC fod wedi parhau i fonitro Shipman gydol ei yrfa wedi iddo gael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer. Dywedodd, oherwydd ei hanes blaenorol o euogfarnau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau, ni ddylai fod wedi cael gweithio fel ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun ar unrhyw adeg yn ei yrfa. Rhannwyd y farn hon gan Mrs Sally Freeman, merch Mrs Margaret Waldron, a ychwanegodd y dylid fod wedi gwrthod mynediad i Shipman at gyffuriau rheoledig gydol gweddill ei yrfa.
Roedd ymatebion eraill i holiadur Alexander Harris yn awgrymu y gallai amodau ar arfer fod wedi’u pennu am gyfnodau llai, yn amrywio o ddwy flynedd i ddeng mlynedd. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mrs Sheila Caldecott, merch Mrs Angela Tierney, pe bai caethni Shipman i gyffuriau wedi’i achos gan straen yn gysylltiedig â gwaith, dylai’r GMC fod wedi rhoi ystyriaeth o ddifrif ynghylch a oedd yn briodol i adael iddo ddychwelyd i feddygaeth deuluol lle fyddai ganddo fynediad at gyffuriau rheoledig. Credai na ddylai Shipman fod wedi cael parhau mewn meddygaeth deuluol, ond y dylai yn lle hynny fod wedi’i gyfyngu i swyddi gweinyddol neu addysgu heb fynediad at gyffuriau rheoledig. Roedd o’r farn y gallai meddyg fel Shipman gael mynd yn ôl i feddygaeth deuluol os gallai, ar ôl cyfnod, ddangos ei fod/bod wedi ailsefydlu’n llwyddiannus.
Mewn gwirionedd, fel yr esboniais, nid oedd y grym gan y GMC ym 1976 i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad Shipman, nac i wneud unrhyw waith monitro ar ei gynnydd neu’i ymarfer. Roedd y DC yn gallu arfer rhywfaint o ddylanwad dros feddyg trwy ohirio dyfarniad, ac rwyf eisoes wedi awgrymu y gallai fod wedi gwneud llawer mwy drwy ofyn am ymrwymiadau gan feddygon i gwmpasu cyfnod gohirio’i ddyfarniad. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed pe bai ymrwymiadau felly wedi bod yn ofynnol, a phe’u rhoddwyd, byddent wedi’u cyfyngu mewn amser i gyfnod y gohiriad ac ni ellid fod wedi’u cadw mewn grym am hwy na blwyddyn neu ddwy ar y mwyaf. Heb ddileu enw Shipman o’r gofrestr, nid oedd gan y DC unrhyw fodd o arfer unrhyw reolaeth hirdymor drosto yntau na’i feddygfa.
Casglu a Dilysu Tystiolaeth
Dylai fod yn amlwg, rwy’n gobeithio, o’r achosion a ddisgrifiais yn gynharach, nad oedd y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman yn eithriadol mewn unrhyw fodd ar gyfer y cyfnod hwnnw. Yr ymagwedd sylfaenol i achosion o gaethni i gyffuriau oedd cymryd camau gweithredu a fyddai’n annog ailsefydlu’r meddyg, a bod hyn ddim yn creu risg amlwg ac uniongyrchol i ddiogelwch cleifion. Fodd bynnag, ni chyfeiriwyd unrhyw ymholiadau at ganfod a oedd risg felly’n bodoli. Os ymddengys yr ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman yn fwy ‘trugarog’ nag achosion eraill o bwysigrwydd tebyg, esbonnir hynny gan gynnwys cefnogol yr adroddiadau seiciatryddol a’r adroddiad gan ei gyflogwr newydd.
Ychydig iawn o dystiolaeth am droseddau Shipman a gasglwyd cyn i’r achos gael ei roi gerbron y PeCC. Yn ddelfrydol, dylai pwyllgor a oedd yn gwneud unrhyw benderfyniad ar achos fod wedi cael darlun llawn o’r ffeithiau. Os mai penderfyniad hidlo yn unig oedd i’w wneud, gallai fod wedi bod yn rhesymol i weithredu ar sail gwybodaeth gyfyngedig, cyhyd â bod canllawiau clir am fath a phwysigrwydd achos a oedd i’w gyfeirio, a’i fod, os oedd unrhyw amheuaeth, yn cael ei ddatrys o blaid cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen at y cam nesaf. Fodd bynnag, os oedd y PeCC i gael gwneud penderfyniad terfynol ar achos, heblaw am un lle’r oedd yn glir nad oedd unrhyw ffurf o gamau disgyblu yn briodol, roedd angen darlun llawn o’r ffeithiau arno. Y cyfiawnhad dros wneud cyn lleied o ymholiadau am amgylchiadau achos oedd, pe bai’r achos yn mynd ymlaen at y DC, byddai ymholiadau eraill yn cael eu gwneud. Fodd bynnag, y gwrthwyneb oedd, pe bai’r PeCC yn penderfynu ymdrin â’r achos ei hun, ni fyddai unrhyw ymholiadau pellach yn cael eu gwneud a byddent yn dod i gasgliadau ar sail y wybodaeth eithaf prin a oedd ar gael.
Yn achos Shipman, ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymgais i ganfod a gafodd ei gaethni i bethidin unrhyw effaith ar y gofal clinigol i’w gleifion. Hefyd, pan gafwyd gwybodaeth gan gyfreithwyr Shipman, fe’i cymerwyd heb ei amau. Nid wyf, wrth gwrs, yn awgrymu y byddai’r cyfreithwyr wedi camliwio’u cyfarwyddiadau, ond, fel y gwyddys unrhyw farnwr neu ynad, rhaid i faterion sy’n cael eu cynnig gerbron i liniaru gan gyfreithwyr ar gyfarwyddyd gan gleient fod yn destun rhywfaint o archwilio beirniadol. Nid oedd Shipman hyd yn oed yno gerbron y PeCC i ofyn unrhyw gwestiynau iddo ef neu’i gynrychiolwyr. Roedd Shipman yn gallu honni drwy ei gyfreithwyr ei fod wedi dechrau cymryd pethidin yn dilyn anaf i’w gefn. Ni wiriwyd hyn, er gwaetha’r ffaith na soniodd amdano wrth yr un o’r ddau seiciatrydd. Priodolodd gychwyn ei ‘gaethni’ hefyd i iselder a achoswyd gan ei anaddasrwydd i feddygaeth deuluol. Ni holwyd ef erioed ynglŷn â hyn, ac nid ymddengys fod neb ychwaith wedi sylwi ei bod yn rhaid bod ei iselder wedi cychwyn neu waethygu o fewn wythnosau’n unig wedi iddo gychwyn mewn meddygaeth deuluol. Dechreuodd weithio yn Todmorden ym mis Mawrth 1974, a dechreuodd gael gafael ar bethidin cyn pen rhyw chwe wythnos.
Roedd y GMC wedi awgrymu y byddai wedi bod yn ddefnydd anghymesur o’i adnoddau i gychwyn ymchwiliad llawn i achos Shipman. Roedd ei achos i weld yn un eithaf aneithriadol. Rwy’n derbyn hynny, a byddai’n dilyn, pe byddid wedi ymchwilio’n fanylach i achos Shipman, dylid fod wedi ymchwilio’n fanylach i lawer o rai eraill. Fodd bynnag, mae dweud na fyddai cyfiawnhad dros ymchwiliad trylwyr i weld yn rhoi terfyn ar werth diogelwch cleifion. Yr egwyddor sylfaenol i fod oedd, mewn achos o gaethni i gyffuriau, y byddai’r GMC yn mabwysiadu dull ailsefydlu os nad oedd unrhyw reswm i gredu y byddai risg yn cael ei greu i gleifion. Nid wyf yn credu y gellid fod wedi bodloni’r rhag-amod hwnnw heb ymchwiliad rhesymol o drylwyr i’r ffeithiau cefndir a heb ryw wiriad annibynnol ar ffeithiau’n cael ei gynnig i liniaru. Fan lleiaf, dylid fod wedi gwneud ymholiadau i’r swyddog o’r heddlu â gofal am yr achos, i bartneriaid Shipman ac FPC Calderdale. Mae’r ffaith na wnaethpwyd ymholiadau felly yn awgrymu i mi nad oedd diogelwch cleifion yn brif ystyriaeth yn yr achos hwn neu mewn achosion eraill o’r fath. Ailsefydlu’r meddyg oedd y brif ystyriaeth, yn groes i’r hyn a honnodd y GMC ar y pryd.
Dibynnu ar Seiciatryddion a Ddewisir gan y Meddyg
Mae’n eglur, mewn achosion o gaethni i gyffuriau, bod y GMC yn dibynnu cryn dipyn ar adroddiadau seiciatryddol. Roedd yn amlwg yn iawn ei fod yn gwneud hynny, er y dylai adroddiadau felly, yn fy marn i, fod wedi cael eu hystyried gan y DC, yng nghyd-destun gwybodaeth lawn am yr achos, ac nid gan y PeCC. Yn gyffredinol, ac yn achos Shipman, darparwyd yr adroddiadau hyn gan seiciatryddion a oedd wedi trin y meddyg dan sylw. Nid ymddengys ei fod wedi taro unrhyw un yn y GMC i amau sail ffeithiol adroddiad felly na dilysrwydd y barnau a fynegwyd ynddo. Fodd bynnag, annoeth yw dibynnu ar unrhyw adroddiad arbenigol heb edrych arno’n feirniadol. Mae rhai adroddiadau felly’n llawer gwell nag eraill. Mae rhai seiciatryddion (a thystion arbenigol eraill) yn fwy ‘annibynnol’ a diduedd nag eraill. Yn wir, gwn o fy mhrofiad fy hun yn y Bar ac ar y Fainc, nad oedd llawer o dystion arbenigol, hyd at y blynyddoedd diweddar, yn cydnabod mai eu prif ddyletswydd oedd rhoi barn ddiduedd i’r llys - neu, yn yr achos hwn, i’r GMC. Teimlwyd, os nad oedd y llys - na’r GMC - yn cael eu camarwain mewn gwirionedd, roedd yr arbenigwr yn rhydd i gyflwyno’r achos gorau posibl i’w gleient/chleient neu glaf/chlaf. Credaf, mewn blynyddoedd diweddarach, bod y GMC wedi cydnabod y broblem hon, ac fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 22, daeth yn arfer y sgrinwyr iechyd i gyfarwyddo seiciatryddion annibynnol i adrodd i’r GMC.
Yn achos Shipman (ac achosion eraill a archwiliais), roedd y GMC wedi derbyn adroddiadau a oedd wedi’u comisiynu’n bennaf i’w defnyddio yn y llysoedd troseddau. Mewn amgylchiadau felly, mae’n rhaid bod yna demtasiwn i’r seiciatrydd ddweud hynny a allai a oedd yn ffafriol i’r claf/cleient. Nid wyf yn awgrymu fod Dr Milne na Dr Bryson yn rhagfarnllyd o blaid Shipman. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys o’r adroddiadau bod y ddau seiciatrydd yn derbyn adroddiad Shipman o’r digwyddiadau, heb unrhyw ymgais go iawn i ddilysu’r ffeithiau. Mae’n wir fod y ddau seiciatrydd wedi cyfarfod, a’u bod wedi siarad â Mrs Shipman, ond mae’n annhebygol y byddai hi wedi rhoi adroddiad a oedd yn wahanol iawn i adroddiad ei gŵr, o gofio’r defnydd a fyddai’n cael ei wneud o’r adroddiadau. Nid ymddengys, o weld yr adroddiadau, bod y seiciatryddion wedi siarad ag unrhyw un arall am yr hanes. Nid fel beirniadaeth y dywedaf hynny. Mae fy mhrofiad fy hun yn awgrym na fyddai wedi bod yn arferol i wneud hynny yn y 1970au, yn gymaint ag y byddai heddiw. Nid ymddengys ychwaith, o weld yr adroddiadau, fod Dr Milne wedi cynnal unrhyw brawf gwrthrychol o haeriad Shipman ei fod wedi rhoi’r gorau i bethidin. Efallai ei fod wedi gwneud prawf, ond, os do, byddid wedi disgwyl iddo sôn amdano. Hyd yn oed os na wnaeth, nid wyf yn beirniadu Dr Milne. Roedd profion gwrthrychol, fel profion wrin, er eu bod ar gael yn y 1970au, yn cael eu defnyddio lawer llai nag y maent nawr. Heddiw, byddai’n anarferol iawn i seiciatrydd dderbyn gair claf ei fod/bod wedi rhoi’r gorau i gyffur; byddai’n arfer arferol i gynnal profion gwrthrychol ar adegau pan nad oedd y claf yn disgwyl prawf.
Ymddengys i mi, yn y 1970au, bod y GMC yn derbyn adroddiadau seiciatryddol, nid yn unig fel tystiolaeth barn, ond hefyd fel datganiad dibynadwy o’r ffeithiau a adroddwyd. Ymddengys ei fod wedi tybio y byddai’r seiciatrydd wedi gwneud unrhyw waith dilysu angenrheidiol. Mae’n rhaid mai amrywiol oedd y graddau yr oeddent yn iawn i ddibynnu ar yr adroddiadau. Yn fy marn i, byddai ymagwedd ychydig yn fwy amheugar wedi bod yn well, yn enwedig mewn achosion yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddwyr cyffuriau, sy’n hysbys yn aml fel pobl dwyllodrus ac y gallai eu hachosion yn wir fod wedi golygu rhywfaint o anonestrwydd. Mae’n arfer cyffredin, wrth gwrs, i lysoedd barn dderbyn a dibynnu ar wybodaeth mewn adroddiadau seiciatryddol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n arfer arferol yn y llysoedd i farnwr archwilio’r sail ffeithiol y seiliwyd y farn arbenigol arni i weld a yw’n gyson â ffynonellau gwybodaeth eraill. Ymddengys i mi na wnaeth y GMC unrhyw waith archwilio felly o gwbl. Gallai hyn fod oherwydd bod y GMC yn delio’n unig â meddygon a’i fod yn tybio (ar gam weithiau) eu bod i gyd yn onest yn y bôn. Mae’r llysoedd, ar y llaw arall, yn delio â phob math o bobl, llawer ohonynt yn anonest. Byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i’r GMC ymchwilio i wirionedd rhai o’r ffeithiau a honnodd Shipman, ac, yn ddiau, gan feddygon eraill mewn achosion eraill. Byddai wedi bod yn bosibl hefyd i’r GMC ysgrifennu at seiciatryddion adrodd i’w gwahodd i gwmpasu materion penodol amrywiol, i wirio geirwiredd haeriadau meddygon lle’r oedd yn ymarferol, ac i ddefnyddio profion wrin ar hap cyn adrodd bod meddyg yn rhydd o gyffuriau. Byddai wedi bod yn bosibl hefyd i’r GMC atgoffa seiciatryddion adrodd o’r diben yr oedd yn ofynnol cael eu hadroddiadau, ac i’w rhybuddio y gellid dibynnu ar eu barnau wrth wneud penderfyniadau a oedd yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Wrth gwrs, byddai hyn i gyd wedi golygu amser ac arian. Unwaith eto, roedd parodrwydd y GMC i weithredu ar ddeunydd nad oedd wedi cael ei archwilio’n iawn yn awgrymu nad diogelu’r cyhoedd oedd ei brif ystyriaeth.
Wedi dweud hynny i gyd, rwy’n derbyn yn llwyr fod y seiciatryddion yr oedd y PeCC wedi seilio’i benderfyniad arnynt yn iawn yn y bôn o ran eu prognosis y byddai Shipman yn annhebygol o fynd yn ôl at ei arfer o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth iddo erioed wneud hynny.
Ymagwedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol tuag at Anonestrwydd
Un o’r rhagdybiaethau a oedd yn sylfaenol i’r modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achosion yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau oedd y ddamcaniaeth nad nodwedd bersonol yw’r anonestrwydd sy’n aml yn mynd law yn llaw â chaffael cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfreithlon, ond yn hytrach mae’n wyriad dros dro o safon uchel arferol gonestrwydd y meddyg. Mae bron yn anochel yn mynd law yn llaw â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Y rhagdybiaeth yw, cyn gynted ag y mae’r angen anorchfygol i gael gafael ar y cyffur wedi’i drechu, bydd unrhyw berygl o gamymddygiad anonest pellach yn diflannu’n awtomatig. Esboniwyd y ddamcaniaeth hon yn eglur gan Dr Douglas Fowlie, sydd wedi bod yn seiciatrydd ymgynghorol am flynyddoedd lawer. Dywedodd:
‘Mae anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun dibyniaeth gynyddol ar gyffuriau neu alcohol yn wahanol i anonestrwydd yn absenoldeb dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau neu alcohol. Nid yw anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun dibyniaeth gynyddol yn rhywbeth sydd yn ffocws o safbwynt seiciatryddol. Yn anochel bron, bydd elfen o anonestrwydd yn codi lle mae gan berson ddibyniaeth ar sylwedd ...
Mae’n bwysig bod yn ymwybodol, pan fydd rhywun yn ystyried anonestrwydd ym mhresenoldeb dibyniaeth gynyddol, mai un o agweddau salwch dibyniaeth yw canfyddiad anffurfiedig detholus o’ch ymddygiad eich hun. Wrth i ddibyniaeth gynyddu, blaenoriaeth yr unigolyn yw cael gafael ar y dos nesaf o’r ddiod neu’r cyffur. Hon yw’r flaenoriaeth lethol ac mae ffactorau allanol eraill i hyn yn lleihau yn eu pwysigrwydd. Pan fydd y canfyddiadau yn mynd yn anffurfiedig, mae diffyg mewnwelediad yn datblygu, a gall y salwch achosi anffurfiad o’r hyn yr oedd unigolyn nad oedd yn ddibynnol yn flaenorol yn ystyried fel cywir ac anghywir. Gall anonestrwydd fod yn un o nodweddion salwch meddwl dibyniaeth. Ni fyddai’n deg i ddweud bod person sydd â dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau neu alcohol ac sy’n ymddwyn yn anonest o ganlyniad i’r ddibyniaeth honno yn rhywun a ddylai, yn ôl yr arfer, gael ei ystyried fel person â thuedd i fod yn anonest yn absenoldeb dibyniaeth felly.’
Nid yw’r ddamcaniaeth honno’n cael ei rhannu gan bawb y clywodd yr Ymchwiliad ganddynt. Byddaf yn trafod ei dilysrwydd mewn perthynas â meddygon sy’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau ym Mhennod 23. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n derbyn bod y ddamcaniaeth a esboniwyd gan Dr Fowlie yn cael ei derbyn yn gyffredin o fewn y GMC yn y 1970au, a rhaid edrych ar y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC ag achos Shipman yn y golau hwnnw. Rwy’n dal yn bryderus bod y ddamcaniaeth, yn achos Shipman, wedi’i chymhwyso heb ystyriaeth fanwl o ba un a oedd yn briodol i wneud hynny yn yr achos unigol. Os yw anonestrwydd i’w esbonio (a’i esgusodi) gan yr orfodaeth i gael gafael ar gyffuriau sy’n deillio o gaethni’r meddyg, does bosib ei bod yn bwysig ystyried a yw ef/hi yn gaeth mewn gwirionedd. Os nad yw ef/hi yn gaeth mewn gwirionedd ac os yw’n gallu rhoi’r gorau i gymryd cyffuriau fel y mynna, nid yw’r meddyg does bosib dan reolaeth y raddfa orfodaeth a fydd yn esgusodi ei anonestrwydd/hanonestrwydd.
Yn ôl y ddau seiciatrydd a adroddodd am Shipman, nid oedd ei arfer o gymryd cyffuriau wedi cyrraedd cyfnod dibyniaeth go iawn eto; roedd yn gallu rhoi’r gorau i gymryd y cyffur am gyfnodau: er enghraifft pan oedd ar wyliau. Er hynny, ymddengys bod y rhagdybiaeth wedi’i gwneud gan y PeCC bod anonestrwydd Shipman yn ‘rhan o’r salwch’. Yma eto, ymddengys bod meddylfryd y PeCC wedi’i ganolbwyntio, nid ar ddiogelu cleifion, ond ar les y meddyg.

---  ---
Rwy’n fodlon bod y GMC wedi cynnal achos Shipman mewn modd a oedd yn nodweddiadol o’r modd yr oedd yn cynnal achosion bryd hynny. Rwyf wedi tynnu sylw at nifer o agweddau lle mae gweithdrefnau a rhagdybiaethau sylfaenol y dydd i’w beirniadu.
Fy mhrif feirniadaeth yw bod y GMC wedi methu rhoi diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd pan oedd yn delio ag achosion meddygon a oedd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n deillio o gaethni i gyffuriau rheoledig. Mae’n amlwg bod ei ymagwedd yn rhoi mwy o bwyslais ar fuddiannau’r meddyg na sicrhau diogelwch cleifion. Rwy’n cydnabod, yn y blynyddoedd rhwng cyhoeddi Adroddiad Merrison a chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ym 1980, bod y GMC mewn sefyllfa anodd. Roedd yr angen am y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn cael ei gydnabod, ond nid oeddent yn bodoli eto. Nid yw’n syndod felly bod y PeCC a’r DC wedi ceisio llenwi’r bwlch trwy ddefnyddio’u pwerau i oedi neu ohirio. Fel y dywedodd Mr Howes, roeddent yn ‘chwarae bod yn Bwyllgor Iechyd’. Ymddengys i mi mai’r broblem oedd na wnaethant lwyddo i ddal y fantol yn gywir. Roedd Pwyllgor Merrison wedi cynnig gweithdrefnau iechyd lle gellid diogelu cleifion tra’r oedd y meddyg yn ailsefydlu. Roedd hynny i’w gyflawni drwy bennu amodau a chyfyngiadau ar arfer y meddyg a thrwy ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo/iddi dderbyn goruchwyliaeth. Fel Pwyllgor Merrison, roedd y GMC o’r farn y dylid delio’n breifat â materion iechyd. Yn y cyfnod rhwng 1975 a 1980, ymgymerodd y PeCC â’r hawl i ddelio ag achosion yn breifat yn hytrach na’u hanfon at y DC ar gyfer gwrandawiad cyhoeddus. Gwnaeth hynny gan fod hynny er lles y meddyg. Hefyd, ymddengys bod y PeCC a’r DC wedi bod yn benderfynol i gynnig cyfle i ailsefydlu, er nad oeddent mewn sefyllfa i ddarparu diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd trwy bennu amodau, cyfyngiadau a/neu oruchwyliaeth. Mewn gwirionedd, yn fy marn i, gallent fod wedi gwneud llawer mwy nag a wnaethant i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd trwy roi’r opsiwn i’r meddyg i dderbyn amodau, cyfyngiadau a/neu oruchwyliaeth gydag atal neu ddileu fel dewis arall. Ni wnaethpwyd hynny. Y canlyniad oedd bod y GMC wedi rhoi llawer gormod o bwys ar fuddiannau’r meddyg yn ailsefydlu, a rhy ychydig o bwys ar yr angen i’r cyhoedd gael eu diogelu rhag meddyg nad oedd wedi dangos eto ei fod/bod wedi ymadfer o’r caethni neu’r ddibyniaeth a’i arweiniodd at ymddygiad troseddol.
Fy ail feirniadaeth fawr yw bod y GMC wedi gwneud ymgais mor bitw i ymchwilio i gefndir achos Shipman ac achosion tebyg iddo. Yn fy marn i, dylid fod wedi ystyried achos fel un Shipman fel achos a oedd yn peri risg potensial i gleifion. Dylid fod wedi ymchwilio i’r cefndir gan gofio hynny. Roedd Adroddiad Merrison wedi awgrymu creu uned ymchwilio o fewn y GMC. Nid ymddengys bod y GMC wedi gweld doethineb yr awgrym hwnnw ac ni chynhaliodd ymchwiliadau, ac eithrio yn y lleiafrif bach o achosion yr oedd rhaid eu paratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu llawn. Yn lle ymchwilio, fe wnaeth y GMC wahodd sylwadau gan y meddyg a barnau arbenigwyr, ac ni wnaeth unrhyw beth i gwestiynu, archwilio na gwirio’r honiadau a wnaed ar ran Shipman.
Ystyriaf hefyd, yn y cyfnod cyn cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd, y dylai achos fel un Shipman fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y DC bob tro. Nid oedd gan y PeCC ddarlun llawn a dylai fod wedi bod yn gwneud penderfyniadau’n gyffredinol yn unig. Ni ddylai fod wedi bod yn gwneud asesiadau manwl o dystiolaeth seiciatryddol. Roedd y rheiny’n swyddogaethau a briodolwyd yn gywir i’r DC, a oedd â baich achosion llai i’w ystyried mewn unrhyw un cyfarfod, a gwybodaeth lawnach o’i flaen. Roedd y DC yn cael y cyfle hefyd i weld, ac weithiau clywed, y meddyg. Dylai’r DC wastad fod wedi archwilio cynnwys adroddiadau seiciatryddol yn ofalus, a dylai fod wedi edrych yn feirniadol ar yr adroddiadau o ddigwyddiadau a gofnodwyd ynddynt. Byddai’r rhain wrth wraidd y farn arbenigol, ac, os oeddent yn anghywir, byddent yn ei annilysu. Dylai’r GMC fod wedi gwerthfawrogi’r angen i gael gafael ar adroddiadau gan seiciatryddion annibynnol i’r meddyg, a dylai fod wedi pennu gofynion mewn perthynas â chynnwys adroddiadau felly.
Rwy’n cydnabod, hyd yn oed ped ymdriniwyd ag achos Shipman fel y credaf y dylid fod wedi gwneud, mae’n annhebygol y byddai’r canlyniad wedi bod yn wahanol iawn i’r canlyniad gwirioneddol. Rwy’n derbyn ei bod yn debygol na fyddai cofrestriad Shipman wedi cael ei atal, ac na fyddai ei enw’n sicr wedi’i ddileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Fe fyddai fwy na thebyg wedi’i roi ‘ar brawf’ am ychydig flynyddoedd ar y mwyaf.
Nid wyf yn beirniadu’r GMC am ei benderfyniad i beidio ag atal Shipman na dileu ei enw o’r gofrestr feddygol. Yn gyntaf, roedd yn arfer gan y GMC i ddelio â meddygon a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau drwy eu helpu i ailsefydlu. Cafodd ei feirniadu’n gyhoeddus am hynny. Mae’n debygol mai go brin fod aelodau’r cyhoedd yn ymwybodol o’r polisi cyfredol; pe byddent, nid yw’n eglur o bell ffordd y byddai wedi cael ei feirniadu. Ymhell o fod yn destun beirniadaeth, ymddengys bod Llywodraeth y dydd wedi derbyn yr athroniaeth a oedd wrth wraidd Adroddiad Merrison a’i argymhellion ar gyfer creu gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yr athroniaeth oedd bod rhaid helpu meddygon sâl, gan gynnwys y rheiny a oedd yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau, i ailsefydlu mewn modd a oedd yn darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Nid oedd hynny’n ymhlygu bod ymagwedd bresennol y GMC o blaid ailsefydlu yn anghywir mewn egwyddor.
Ni ellir beirniadu’r GMC ychwaith, yn fy marn i, am fethu rhagweld y gallai cyrch Shipman i gamddefnyddio pethidin fod yn rhagflaenydd rhywbeth mwy difrifol o lawer. Yn fyr, rwy’n gwrthod unrhyw awgrym, hyd yn oed pe bai gweithdrefnau’r GMC wedi bod yn foddhaol, y gallent fod wedi atal troseddoldeb diweddarach Shipman ac arbed llawer o fywydau. Mae’n bosibl y gallai cyfnod o ‘brawf’ fod wedi dileu ailgychwyn ei ddefnydd anghyfreithlon o gyffuriau ar gleifion, a gallai fod wedi arbed bywydau un neu ddau o’i ddioddefwyr. Rwy’n eithaf bodlon, fodd bynnag, na fyddai ‘cyfnod prawf’ a’r oruchwyliaeth feddygol gyfyngedig a fyddai wedi mynd law yn llaw ag ef wedi cael unrhyw effaith ddofn ar ei ymddygiad yn y dyfodol.

---  ---
Camymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol
Perfformiad Diffygiol Difrifol

---  ---
Ym Mhennod 15, esboniais fod gweithdrefnau ymddygiad neu ddisgyblu’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) yn seiliedig, am flynyddoedd lawer, ar y mater pa un a oedd y meddyg dan sylw wedi bod yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Mae ystyr yr ymadrodd hwnnw wedi’i ddiffinio yn gyffredinol o dro i dro. Fodd bynnag, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod barnau ynghylch pa fathau o ymddygiad a oedd yn golygu SPM yn amrywio’n sylweddol, ac y gallai’r ddadl rhwng aelodau amlwg o’r proffesiwn meddygol ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad meddyg mewn un achos arbennig yn gyfystyr ag SPM fynd yn un boeth ac emosiynol. Gan mai SPM oedd sylfaen y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, mae’n amlwg, os oedd barnau ynghylch beth oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn gwahaniaethu, yna mae’n rhaid bod y safonau a oedd yn cael eu cymhwyso gan y GMC yn anghyson a’i benderfyniadau’n annheg i rai meddygon. Canlyneb yr annhegwch hwnnw yw ei bod yn rhaid bod rhai penderfyniadau ar gamymddygiad wedi bod yn rhy drugarog, ac y gallent fod wedi methu darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion a’r cyhoedd. Mae’n hanfodol bwysig y dylai unrhyw broses ddisgyblu gael ei seilio ar safonau y gellir eu cymhwyso’n gyson ym mhob achos.
Seiliwyd gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC, a gyflwynwyd ym 1997, ar fater a oedd perfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg dan sylw wedi bod yn ‘ddiffygiol difrifol’. Er bod hanes achosion dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn llawer byrrach na hanes achosion dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, ymddengys bod anawsterau wrth ddiffinio ac adnabod perfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP), fel gydag SPM. Arweiniodd absenoldeb unrhyw ddiffiniad clir o SDP, a safonau ar gyfer SDP, at yr un problemau a nodais uchod. Gymaint oedd pwysigrwydd y problemau hyn fy mod yn bwriadu neilltuo’r Bennod hon i drafod y problemau hynny a hanes y problemau.
Nid wyf am drafod y cysyniad o amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol, a oedd yn sylfaen i weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC, gan nad ymddengys bod hyn wedi peri unrhyw anawsterau tebyg.

---  ---
‘Ymddygiad Gwaradwyddus mewn Cyswllt Proffesiynol’
Amnewidiwyd y term
‘camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’
gan Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1969 am y term
‘ymddygiad gwaradwyddus mewn cyswllt proffesiynol’
, a oedd wedi ymddangos mewn deddfwriaeth flaenorol.
Ym 1894, roedd
‘ymddygiad gwaradwyddus mewn cyswllt proffesiynol’
wedi’i ddiffinio gan yr Arglwydd Ustus Lopes yn
yn y termau a ganlyn:
Ym 1930, datganodd yr Arglwydd Ustus Scrutton yn
R V General Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom
bod:
‘... “infamous conduct” ... means no more than serious misconduct judged according to the rules written or unwritten governing the profession’.
Y Llyfr Glas
Am flynyddoedd lawer, gan ddod i ben ym 1993, darparodd y GMC arweiniad i bob meddyg ar y gofrestr feddygol am ei swyddogaethau, ei weithdrefnau a’i awdurdodaeth ddisgyblu. ‘The Blue Book’ oedd yr enw ar yr arweiniad hwn. Roedd yn disgrifio’r mathau mwyaf cyffredin o gamymddygiad a oedd yn y gorffennol wedi’u hystyried fel sail ar gyfer achos disgyblu. Yn bennaf, roeddent yn ymwneud â’r hyn y gellid ei alw’n gamymddygiad ‘bwriadol’ neu fwriadus (e.e. terfyniad beichiogrwydd yn anghyfreithlon, camddefnyddio cyffuriau, canfasio am gleifion) neu dorri moeseg feddygol (e.e. camddefnyddio cyfrinachedd proffesiynol). Soniwyd hefyd am ddiystyru cyfrifoldebau proffesiynol i glaf (e.e. trwy fethu ymweld neu ddarparu triniaeth i glaf pan oedd yn angen).
Roedd pob argraffiad o’r Llyfr Glas o 1975 (y cynharaf ym meddiant yr Ymchwiliad) i 1993 yn nodi’r ddau ddiffiniad a ddyfynnais uchod ac yn datgan, wrth gynnig amnewid yr ymadrodd
‘camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’ (‘serious professional misconduct’)
am
‘ymddygiad gwaradwyddus mewn cyswllt proffesiynol’ (‘infamous conduct in a professional respect’)
, roedd y GMC wedi bwriad bod yr ymadroddion yn cadw’r un pwysigrwydd.
Roedd y Llyfr Glas yn dweud yn eglur bod y cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd math penodol o ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn un a oedd i’w bennu gan y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) ar ôl ystyried y dystiolaeth mewn achos unigol. Roedd yn pwysleisio na ellid ystyried bod y categorïau o gamymddygiad a ddisgrifiwyd ynddo yn gynhwysfawr. Datganodd (a dyfynnaf o’r argraffiad terfynol, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Rhagfyr 1993):
Roedd argraffiad 1985 o’r Llyfr Glas wedi cynnwys datganiad am y tro cyntaf o’r safon o ofal meddygol yr oedd hawl gan y cyhoedd i’w ddisgwyl. Datganodd:
Ymddengys bod y datganiad hwn wedi’i ffurfio yn dilyn achos bondigrybwyll Alfie Winn, a wrandawyd gan y PCC ym mis Mawrth 1983. Ym 1982, aeth Alfie Winn, a oedd yn wyth oed, yn sâl, gyda chwydu a thymheredd uchel. Galwyd ei feddyg teulu, a daeth ato deirawr yn ddiweddarach. Gofynnodd i Alfie agor ei geg. Roedd y bachgen i weld mewn coma a dywedodd y fam, ‘Nid yw’n gallu eich clywed chi.’ Atebodd y meddyg, ‘Os nad yw’n gallu trafferthu agor ei blydi geg, nid wyf am blydi edrych arno.’ Rhagnododd gwrthfiotig. Ddwy awr yn ddiweddarach, ffoniodd y teulu am ambiwlans ac aethpwyd ag Alfie i’r ysbyty. Bu farw bedair awr yn ddiweddarach o meningitis. Canfu’r PCC bod y ffeithiau’n profi ac yn ystyried ymddygiad y meddyg fel ymddygiad islaw na safonau derbyniol. Serch hynny, roedd o’r farn na fu unrhyw SPM. Aeth y meddyg ymlaen i’w gael yn euog o SPM gan y PCC mewn achos gwahanol y flwyddyn ganlynol. Yn y cyfnod yn y canol, roedd wedi parhau i ymarfer.
Yn dilyn y digwyddiadau hyn, roedd galwadau y dylai’r GMC ostwng ei drothwy ar gyfer cymryd camau disgyblu i ‘gamymddygiad proffesiynol’, heb y gofyniad bod rhaid i gamymddygiad felly fod yn ‘ddifrifol’. Sefydlodd y GMC Weithgor, a adroddodd ym 1984 na allai ganfod unrhyw gyfiawnhad dros ostwng y trothwy SPM. Yn lle hynny cynigiodd y GMC ffurfio arweiniad manwl ar yr amgylchiadau lle gallai methiant i ddarparu safon ddigonol o ofal meddygol arwain at SPM. Y datganiad a gynhwyswyd yn Llyfr Glas 1985 oedd y canlyniad. Fodd bynnag, cyngor yn unig oedd y datganiad hwnnw, ac nid oedd methiant i fodloni’r safonau a nodwyd yn y datganiad wedi hynny yn arwain at gamau disgyblu gan y GMC yn awtomatig. Nid oedd y datganiad yn rhyw fanwl iawn ychwaith. Arhosodd y datganiad yn ddigyfnewid gydol gweddill cyfnod cyhoeddi’r Llyfr Glas.
Achos Doughty
Yn achos
, apêl o benderfyniad y Cyngor Deintyddol Cyffredinol (GDC) a wrandawyd gan Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor ym 1987, diffiniodd y Cyfrin Gyngor SPM fel:
‘... conduct connected with his profession in which the dentist concerned has fallen short, by omission or commission, of the standards of conduct expected among dentists and that such falling short as is established should be serious’.
Dywedodd y Cyfrin Gyngor mai’r prawf a gymhwyswyd gan y GDC (yr oedd y Cyfrin Gyngor wedi’i gymeradwyo’n llwyr) oedd:
‘... judged by proper professional standards in the light of the objective facts about the individual patients that were presented in evidence to the Committee, the dental treatments criticised as unnecessary would be treatments that no dentist of reasonable skill exercising reasonable care would carry out’.
Nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor ymhellach bod y Pwyllgor perthnasol o’r GDC yn arbennig o gymwys i lunio barn ynghylch a oedd y camymddygiad perthnasol yn ddifrifol. Dywedodd yn eglur nad oedd y canfyddiadau yn erbyn yr apelydd yn golygu unrhyw warthnod moesol. Serch hynny, roedd y methiannau a ganfuwyd o fath yr oedd gan y GDC hawl i’w hystyried fel rhai digon difrifol i warantu dileu enw’r deintydd oddi ar y gofrestr.
Mae’r sylw bod y proffesiwn (yn achos
, y proffesiwn deintyddol, ond mewn achosion eraill, y proffesiwn meddygol) yn arbennig o gymwys i farnu pa ymddygiad sy’n ‘ddifrifol’ a ‘heb fod yn ddifrifol’ wedi’i ailadrodd yn aml yn y llysoedd. Y broblem yw, ac eithrio yn yr achosion mwyaf amlwg, nad oedd unrhyw gytundeb o fewn y proffesiwn ynghylch pa fath o ymddygiad a allai fod (neu a oedd) yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ym 1988, dywedodd Mrs Jean Robinson, aelod lleyg o’r GMC a eisteddodd ar adegau amrywiol ar y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) a’r PCC, yn ei monograff, ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
, bod nifer o farnau meddygol gwahanol yn aml ynghylch a allai achos arbennig fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, neu beidio. Fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 20, sylwodd yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol Westminster (PSI), a’i chydweithwyr, ar wahaniaethau barn tebyg pan aethant i gyfarfodydd o’r PPC ym 1999 a 2000. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Syr Donald Irvine, Llywydd y GMC rhwng 1995 a 2002, yn ei brofiad ef o’r PCC, mai’r rhannau mwyaf cynhennus ac anodd o’r broses gwneud penderfyniadau oedd y materion ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad meddyg (ar sail ffeithiau a gyfaddefwyd gan y meddyg neu a brofwyd i fodlonrwydd y PCC) yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ac, os felly, pa sancsiwn a ddylid ei bennu. Dywedodd mai dyna oedd y materion a oedd yn creu’r ‘gwres’ a’r ‘emosiwn’ ymhlith aelodau o banelau’r PCC wrth ddadlau am eu penderfyniadau. Parodd y materion hyn anawsterau arbennig mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau am driniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Byddaf yn trafod yr anawsterau hynny nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
‘Arfer Meddygol Da’
Yng nghanol y 1990au, roedd pryder bod y Llyfr Glas yn rhy negyddol, gan yr oedd yn ymwneud â‘meddygon gwael’. Roedd dymuniad i ddatblygu yn lle hynny ddatganiad mwy cadarnhaol yn diffinio arfer da. Arweiniodd hyn at ddatblygu rhestr o 14 o ‘Ddyletswyddau Meddyg’, a gynhwyswyd mewn llyfryn, ‘Good Medical Practice’. Roedd y llyfryn, a ddosbarthwyd ym 1995 i bob meddyg ar y gofrestr, yn nodi egwyddorion sylfaenol arfer meddygol da, ac fe’i disgrifiwyd fel
‘arweiniad’
. Roedd argraffiadau diweddarach o ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn gwneud cysylltiad clir rhwng ei gynnwys a’r gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP). Datganodd argraffiad mis Gorffennaf 1998:
Mae trydydd fersiwn a fersiwn mwyaf diweddar ‘Good Medical Practice’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mai 2001, i’w weld yn Atodiad G i’r Adroddiad hwn. Mae tudalen gyntaf y cyhoeddiad yn rhybuddio:
‘Serious or persistent failures to meet the standards in this booklet may put your registration at risg.’
Bwriadwyd y Llyfr Glas i’w ddarllen gan feddygon, nid gan aelodau’r cyhoedd. Yn wir, roedd aelodau o staff y GMC yn cael eu hannog i beidio anfon copïau o’r Llyfr Glas at aelodau’r cyhoedd rhag iddynt ‘chwilota’ drwyddo i ganfod enghreifftiau o gamymddygiad y gallai meddyg fod wedi’i gyflawni. Dywedodd Mr Antony Townsend, Dirprwy Bennaeth, Pennaeth yn ddiweddarach, yr Adran Ymddygiad rhwng 1994 a 1998, bod yr anghymeradwyaeth hon yn ‘adlewyrchiad o’r diwylliant ar y pryd’. Mewn cyferbyniad, gwnaethpwyd ‘Good Medical Practice’ ar gael i’r cyhoedd. Yn amlwg, nid y bwriad oedd y byddai gwyriad unigol o’r safonau a nodwyd yn ‘Good Medical Practice’ o reidrwydd yn destun camau disgyblu. Yr anhawster i’r rheiny a oedd yn darllen y cyhoeddiad yn y cyd-destun disgyblu - pa un a oeddent yn feddygon, yn aelodau o’r cyhoedd neu bobl eraill - oedd gwybod pa mor
‘ddifrifol’
neu
‘barhaus’
yr oedd rhaid i wyriad o’r safonau fod cyn iddo fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad, er bod ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn ‘hollol iawn’ at y dibenion a fwriadwyd, nid oedd yn addas i’w ddefnyddio fel arweiniad ynghylch beth allai neu na allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dywedodd:
‘... Mae “Good Medical Practice” yn gymysgedd o bethau na ddylid mynd y tu hwnt iddynt o gwbl ac a fyddai yn ddifrifol iawn, a phwyntiau eraill, sef, er enghraifft, bod yn gwrtais i’ch cleifion. Ni allai hyn ar ei ben ei hun godi mater a ddylai effeithio ar gofrestriad meddyg yn ôl pob tebyg; felly mae gennych yn “Good Medical Practice” lawer o bethau gwahanol ar lefelau gwahanol o ddifrifoldeb.’
Yr hyn yr oedd ei angen, meddai, oedd arweiniad manwl ar gyfer y rheiny’n gwneud penderfyniadau, gydag enghreifftiau o fathau gwahanol o achos a allai gyrraedd trothwyau gwahanol, gan greu ‘hierarchaeth difrifoldeb’ felly.
Cytunodd Mr Townsend na fyddai achos o dorri un o’r safonau yn ‘Good Medical Practice’ o reidrwydd yn arwain at gamau disgyblu gan y GMC. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad:
‘... er bod “Good Medical Practice” yn benodol, yn benodol iawn yn fy marn i, am yr egwyddorion o fod yn feddyg da, yr hyn na wnaeth, ac, yn wir, yr hyn na allai wneud fwy na thebyg oedd diffinio pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd yn ofynnol i wyriad o’r egwyddorion hynny fod cyn bod amheuaeth yn cael ei godi ynglŷn â chofrestriad. Mae hwnnw’n fater anodd iawn y mae’r Cyngor a llawer un arall wedi bod yn ymgodymu
(ag ef)
am amser maith.’
Soniodd nifer o dystion yn frwdfrydig am y ‘newid diwylliant’ a oedd yn cael ei arwyddo gan gyhoeddi ‘Good Medical Practice’. Fe’i disgrifiwyd gan Syr Donald, a fu’n aelod o’r Gweithgor a luniodd y ddogfen, fel
‘datganiad consensws a oedd yn dod â barnau proffesiynol a barnau cleifion ar briodweddau meddyg ynghyd am y tro cyntaf’.
Dywedodd Mr Townsend wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn rhoi llawer mwy o bwyslais ar fuddiannau cleifion ac ar gymhwysedd meddygon. Roedd yn nodi’r hyn a alwai’n ‘ddisgwyliadau canolog ar gleifion’. Dywedodd y bu dadl ar adeg cyhoeddi’r llyfryn ynghylch a ddylid parhau i gyhoeddi’r Llyfr Glas ochr yn ochr â‘Good Medical Practice’, ond penderfynwyd y byddai hyn yn ‘parhau’r hen gyfundrefn’ lle’r oedd ‘y ffocws ar ymddygiad annerbyniol yn hytrach na chyflwyno gofal i gleifion’.
Fel aelod o staff y GMC, dywedodd Mr Alan Howes, a oedd yn gysylltiedig â’r Adran Ymddygiad mewn rhyw rinwedd neu’i gilydd bron yn ddi-dor rhwng 1980 a 1995, iddo gael y Llyfr Glas yn ddefnyddiol fel arweiniad i’r math o ymddygiad a allai arwain at achos disgyblu. Roedd ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn anoddach i’w ddefnyddio yn y ffordd honno, ac yn wir nid oedd wedi’i fwriadu i’w ddefnyddio at y diben hwnnw. Teimlai bod y GMC wedi ‘colli rhywbeth’ wrth ddisodli’r Llyfr Glas â‘Good Medical Practice’, er gwaetha’r ffaith y gallai weld buddion yr olaf. Nid oes unrhyw ddogfen gywerth â’r Llyfr Glas wedi’i chynhyrchu er 1993. ‘Good Medical Practice’, ar ei ffurf wedi’i ddiweddaru, yw prif ffynhonnell arweiniad y GMC o hyd o ran y math o ymddygiad a allai ddod o fewn diffiniad SPM.
Llawlyfr y Sgrinwyr 1997
Roedd Llawlyfr y Sgrinwyr 1997 a gynhyrchwyd gan y GMC yn cynghori sgrinwyr y dylai’r sgriniwr (meddygol neu leyg), wrth lunio barn ynghylch a oedd cwyn yn ddigon difrifol i godi mater SPM, asesu’r wybodaeth a ddarparwyd yn y gŵyn yn erbyn y meini prawf canlynol:
• The gravity of the doctor’s act or omission.
•Whether the doctor appears to have acted deliberately, recklessly, accidentally, or in bad faith.
•Whether the doctor may have neglected or disregarded his or her professional responsibilities.
•Whether there have been any previous complaints to the GMC about the doctor which, taken with the current complaint, suggest a course of conduct which could amount to spm.’
Roedd y cyngor hwn yn ddefnyddiol, ond nid oedd arweiniad o hyd ynghylch pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd rhaid i weithred neu esgeulustod fod cyn y gallai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad ychwaith ynghylch y pwys y dylid ei roi ar y meini prawf amrywiol a restrwyd neu o ran yr ymagwedd y dylid ei chymryd os oedd un neu fwy o’r meini prawf yn cael eu bodloni.
Arweiniad Pellach
Roedd arweiniad pellach mewn perthynas ag ystyr SPM i gael mewn man arall. Yn ‘A Problem with Your Doctor?’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Tachwedd 1997 ar gyfer aelodau’r cyhoedd, diffiniwyd SPM gan y GMC fel
. Mewn dogfen o’r enw ‘The Conduct Procedures of the General Medical Council’, a gyhoeddwyd gan Gyfarwyddiaeth Addasrwydd i Ymarfer y GMC ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, diffiniwyd SPM fel
. Y broblem gyda’r ddau ddiffiniad hwnnw oedd nad oeddent yn rhoi unrhyw gliw o ran y math o ymddygiad a oedd yn cael ei ystyried gan y GMC fel ymddygiad digon difrifol i gyfiawnhau cyfyngu ar hawl meddyg i ymarfer meddygaeth neu ddal cofrestriad.
Adroddiad 1999 o Weithgor y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Yn fuan wedi sefydlu Pwyllgor Polisi Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPPC) y GMC ym 1997, sefydlodd y Pwyllgor Weithgor i adrodd ar weithgareddau’r PCC. Un o’r materion a ystyriwyd gan Weithgor y PCC oedd pan un a ddylai fod unrhyw ymgais i ddiffinio SPM yn fanylach. Un o’r rhesymau am sefydlu’r Gweithgor oedd beirniadaeth gyhoeddus o rai penderfyniadau gan y PCC ar y sail eu bod yn amhriodol neu’n anghyson. Roedd adroddiad Gweithgor y PCC yn adnabod bod diffyg
‘dehongliad diffiniol‘
o SPM yn ffactor a oedd yn cynyddu risg anghysondeb ym mhroses gwneud penderfyniadau’r PCC.
Roedd Gweithgor y PCC o’r farn mai prif fantais y cysyniad SPM oedd ei hyblygrwydd. Credai y gellid dehongli’r cysyniad yn unol ag amgylchiadau newidiol a disgwyliadau. Yr unig ddewis arall, ym marn Gweithgor y PCC, oedd cael cod ymddygiad, yn pennu pob trosedd unigol y gallai meddyg gael i gyhuddo/chyhuddo ohonynt. Nid oedd aelodau Gweithgor y PCC o’r farn y byddai cod ymddygiad yn cynnig unrhyw fuddion go iawn. I’r gwrthwyneb, teimlent y byddai cryn anfanteision ynghlwm wrtho. Yn benodol, credent y byddai’n arwain at
‘ddadlau cyfreithiol diderfyn’
ynghylch pa un a oedd manylion y camymddygiad honedig mewn achos unigol yn gweddu i’r amgylchiadau a ddiffiniwyd yn y cod.
Nododd Gweithgor y PCC bod SPM weithiau’n cael ei ddisgrifio fel
‘ymddygiad ... mor ddifrifol ei fod yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad meddyg’
. Nododd ei adroddiad:
Rwy’n cytuno’n llwyr â’r sylw nad oedd y disgrifiad neu’r diffiniad hwn o SPM yn ddefnyddiol oherwydd ei gylchogrwydd. Roedd y diffiniad yn codi’r cwestiynau yn syth ‘A pha mor ddifrifol yw hynny?’ a hefyd ‘Beth ydych chi’n ei olygu gan “codi amheuaeth ynghylch”?’ Yn anffodus, bydd gweithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC yn dibynnu ar ddiffiniad cylchol felly.
Nododd Gweithgor y PCC mai dehongliad y llys o SPM oedd:
‘... methiant difrifol i fodloni’r safonau ymddygiad priodol i’w disgwyl gan feddygon, neu, mewn materion clinigol o leiaf ... gweithredu neu anweithredu gan feddyg o fath difrifol na fyddai unrhyw feddyg o allu rhesymol yn arfer gofal rhesymol yn gyfrifol amdano ...’.
Roedd y cyfeiriad hwn at y dehongliad o’r SPM a nodir yn achos
: gweler paragraff 17.13. Nododd Gweithgor y PCC bod y diffiniad yn gadael
‘heb eu hateb’
y cwestiynau ynghylch beth oedd y safonau ar unrhyw un adeg a’r hyn a olygid gan
‘difrifol’
Gwnaeth Gweithgor y PCC y sylw mai un
‘canlyniad anfwriadol’
amnewid ‘Good Medical Practice’ am y Llyfr Glas oedd y gallai fod
‘colli eglurder y tu allan i’r GMC ynghylch ystyr SPM’
. Cymeradwyodd gyhoeddiad y GMC ym 1998 ‘Maintaining Good Medical Practice’, a oedd yn rhoi arweiniad i feddygon a rheolwyr ar yr hyn i wneud pan oeddent yn canfod arfer gwael. Roedd y cyhoeddiad yn cynnwys enghreifftiau (twyll ariannol, gwneud datganiadau ffug, anwedduster, ac ati) a fyddai’n cyfiawnhau cyfeirio meddyg at y GMC. Teimlai’r Gweithgor bod y mathau o ymddygiad y soniwyd amdanynt yn y cyhoeddiad hwnnw yn rhoi
‘trosolwg defnyddiol’
o SPM. Fodd bynnag, fy marn fy hun yw, er bod arweiniad 1998 yn well na dim, nid oedd yn ddigonol oherwydd ei fod yn llawer rhy gyffredinol. Nid oedd yn syndod bod llawer o achosion yn cael eu hadrodd i’r GMC yr oedd y GMC o’r farn eu bod yn ddigon difrifol i warantu gweithredu.
Daeth Gweithgor y PCC i’r casgliad y dylai SPM barhau i fod â chysylltiad agos â’r angen i gofrestriad meddyg gael ei ddileu neu’i gyfyngu. Gwrthododd y posibilrwydd o ehangu awdurdodaeth y PCC i gynnwys troseddau llai difrifol, neu gadw trosedd SPM ond cyflwyno trosedd newydd o ddifrifoldeb llai, fel ‘ymddygiad annerbyniol’. Nododd y Gweithgor nad oedd unrhyw bwynt i’r PCC yn gwrando achos os nad oedd amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg. Y rheswm am hynny oedd bod y broses statudol (h.y. y gwrandawiad cwasi-droseddol) yn bodoli er mwyn sicrhau nad oedd meddyg yn cael ei ddileu rhag ymarfer heb achos dyledus. O ran achosion llai difrifol, lle nad oedd bywoliaeth y meddyg yn y fantol, nododd y Gweithgor
‘ei bod yn well delio â nhw mewn ffyrdd eraill’
Adolygu ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn 2001
Ym mis Mai 2001, roedd ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn cael ei adolygu am yr ail waith. Roedd drafft wedi’i baratoi ac ymgynghoriad wedi’i gynnal. Roedd dau sefydliad meddygol wedi codi pryderon ynghylch rhai o’r newidiadau a’r ychwanegiadau i’r testun. Roeddent yn dadlau bod yr arweiniad yn rhy amhendant ac y dylai gynnwys safonau penodol a mesuradwy os oedd i’w ddefnyddio fel templed y byddai meddygon yn cael eu hasesu yn ei erbyn. Roedd grwpiau anfeddygol, fodd bynnag, naill ai’n cefnogi’r safonau a’r egwyddorion a nodwyd yn y drafft, neu’n dadlau am ddatganiad mwy pendant am yr angen i feddygon gydymffurfio â’r arweiniad ym mhob amgylchiadau ac eithrio rhai eithriadol. Ni wnaeth y grwpiau meddygol na’r grwpiau anfeddygol ddadlau y dylai pob cwyn am fynd yn groes i’r arweiniad, pa mor fach bynnag ydoedd, arwain at gamau gweithredu gan y GMC. Fodd bynnag, datgelodd yr ymgynghoriad wahaniaeth mewn barnau ynghylch y pwynt y dylid ystyried methiant i fodloni safonau fel ymddygiad annerbyniol, ac, felly, fel ymddygiad a oedd yn gwarantu gweithredu posibl ar gofrestriad.
O ganlyniad i’r gwahaniaeth barnau hwn, ac yn dilyn trafodaeth mewn Cyfarfod o’r Cyngor ym mis Mai 2001, penderfynwyd y byddai’n ddefnyddiol i lunio cyfres o enghreifftiau neu ddangosyddion o SPM i fynd law yn llaw â’r arweiniad yn ‘Good Medical Practice’. Roedd y gwaith hwn i’w ddwyn yn ei flaen gan yr FPPC a’r Pwyllgor Safonau; y bwriad oedd y dylent weithio gyda’i gilydd i lunio enghreifftiau o ymddygiad a fyddai’n codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad meddyg. Awgrymwyd mai un enghraifft posibl oedd datganiad bod rhaid i feddygon fod yn onest ac yn ddibynadwy ac y byddai euogfarn droseddol am ddwyn yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad meddyg. Y gobaith oedd y byddai llunio enghreifftiau neu ddangosyddion yn bodloni rhai o’r pryderon a fynegwyd yn ystod ymgynghoriad ar yr argraffiad diwygiedig o ‘Good Medical Practice’. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys na luniwyd unrhyw enghreifftiau o’r math a ragwelwyd. Pan ofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad i’r GMC (trwy ei gyfreithwyr), ym mis Mai 2004, beth fu canlyniad y fenter ac a oedd wedi ysgogi unrhyw arweiniad, atebodd y GMC bod y gwaith wedi’i
‘ddwyn yn ei flaen’
a’i fod yn cael ei
‘adlewyrchu’
yn ffurflen ddrafft penderfyniad yr archwilydd achosion a oedd yn cael ei pharatoi bryd hynny i’w defnyddio ar ôl cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, ac yn y ddogfen ddrafft, ‘The Investigation Stage Test - Guidance on Criteria and Thresholds’, a gafodd ei pharatoi at ddefnydd yr archwilwyr achos a benodwyd i weithio dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Darparwyd copïau o’r ddau. Mae’r ddogfen ddrafft bellach wedi’i disodli gan ddogfen ddrafft arall, ‘Making decisions on cases at the end of the investigation stage: Guidance for Case Examiners and the Investigation Committee’, a luniwyd gan y GMC ym mis Medi 2004 (Arweiniad CE/IC drafft mis Medi 2004). Byddaf yn cyfeirio at Arweiniad CE/IC drafft mis Medi 2004 eto isod, ac yn ei ddisgrifio’n llawnach ym Mhennod 25.
Arweiniad ar gyfer y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Roedd nodiadau a baratowyd gan y GMC i’w defnyddio gan aelodau’r PPC, a oedd yn gyfredol ym mis Ionawr 2002, yn nodi bod y GMC yn ystyried SPM fel
. Yma eto, roedd y GMC yn defnyddio diffiniad neu ddisgrifiad o SPM a oedd yn gylchol o ran natur. Nid oedd y diffiniad yn rhoi unrhyw gliw ynghylch pa fath o ymddygiad allai godi materion yn ymwneud â chofrestriad neu addasrwydd i barhau i ymarfer. Beth bynnag, gallai’r geiriad penodol hwn yn wir arwain at gamddealltwriaeth. Gallai gyfleu’n hawdd y syniad bod SPM wedi’i gyfyngu i ymddygiad y gallai’r meddyg gael ei ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr amdano.
Arweiniad i Sgrinwyr
Nid oedd y Llawlyfr i Sgrinwyr o fis Tachwedd 2002 yn cynnwys unrhyw arweiniad penodol am ystyr SPM. Fodd bynnag, roedd disgrifiad o SPM i weld ar y ffurflen penderfyniad sgrinio (SDF), y ffurflen safonol a oedd yn cael ei defnyddio gan staff y GMC a sgrinwyr bryd hynny yn ystod y prosesau cyn-sgrinio a sgrinio. Nid yw’n eglur a oedd y disgrifiad yn ymddangos ar yr SDF ar y drafft gwreiddiol ym 1999, ond roedd yn sicr wedi’i gynnwys ar y ffurflen ar gyfer y tair neu bedair blynedd flaenorol. Roedd yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad heblaw am ymosod rhywiol neu anwedduster, trais, anonestrwydd a mathau penodol o ymddygiad camweithredol. Y bwriad oedd y dylai’r categorïau ymddygiad hynny gael eu hystyried gan y sgrinwyr fel rhai a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn awtomatig neu’n gyfystyr ag ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’.
Roedd y disgrifiad o SPM a oedd yn ymddangos ar yr SDF yn datgan:
Ar wahân i’r problemau cystrawen ac eglurder mynegiant, nid oedd y disgrifiad hwn (a ddeilliwyd o’r dehongliad o SPM yn achos Doughty) yn ddefnyddiol iawn gan nad oedd yn briodol i’w gymhwyso i lawer o’r dosbarthiadau o ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr o bosibl ag SPM. Roedd yn ymwneud yn unig ag achosion o arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Ar gyfer achosion felly, roedd y prawf a gynigiwyd yn debyg i hwnnw a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso gan y llysoedd wrth benderfynu hawliadau sifil am esgeuluster yn cael eu gwneud yn erbyn meddygon. Roedd yn cynnwys elfen ychwanegol, nad oedd yn bresennol o fewn y diffiniad esgeuluster clinigol a gymhwyswyd gan y llysoedd, sef bod rhaid i weithredu neu anweithredu gan feddyg fod
‘o fath difrifol’
. Ond nid oedd unrhyw arweiniad ynghylch pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd rhaid i’r esguluster fod cyn y gallai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Gadawyd i’r sgriniwr gymhwyso’i farn/barn ei hun am ddifrifoldeb.
Casgliad o Adroddiadau Achos
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, pan oedd yn Llywydd, bod y syniad o gyhoeddi adroddiadau achos neu astudiaethau achos wedi’i drafod. Y syniad oedd dangos trwy enghraifft y mathau o ymddygiad a fyddai ac na fyddai’n gyfystyr ag SPM. Gall fod mai’r hyn a oedd gan Syr Donald dan sylw oedd y gwaith yr wyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio ato ac a fwriadwyd y dylai’r FPPC a’r Pwyllgor Safonau ymgymryd ag ef. Dywedodd, fel y bu hi, nad oedd y gwaith wedi’i wneud, ffaith a oedd yn drueni yn ei farn ef.
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, Llywydd presennol, a Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr, fod y GMC yn bwriadu cyhoeddi casgliad o adroddiadau achos ym mis Chwefror 2004. Fel y deallais, roedd y rhain i fod yn grynodebau o achosion lle’r ystyriwyd bod y penderfyniad a wnaethpwyd gan banel PCC yn dda, ac fel enghraifft i’w dilyn. Roeddwn wedi gobeithio y byddai’r crynodebau hyn yn rhoi enghreifftiau defnyddiol o’r math o ymddygiad a oedd neu nad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn ogystal ag arweiniad ar sancsiynau priodol. Fel y bu hi, cafodd cyhoeddi’r adroddiadau achos ei ddileu nes mis Medi 2004, pan gyhoeddwyd pump ‘astudiaeth achos’. Roeddent yn siomedig, ac ychydig o arweiniad defnyddiol a roddwyd ganddynt, neu ddim o gwbl, ynghylch y trothwy difrifoldeb lle gellid ystyried bod ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM, neu yn ymddygiad o fath a oedd yn gwarantu gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at yr astudiaethau achos yn fanylach ym Mhennod 21.
Y Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Newydd
Fel y soniais, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, y prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso wrth benderfynu pa un a oes angen gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg yw nid a yw’r meddyg wedi’i gael/chael yn euog o SPM, ond pa un a amharwyd ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer i raddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Mae’r prawf hwn yn arwain at yr un problemau cylchogrwydd â’r diffiniad o SPM y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 17.28. Sut mae meddygon, cleifion neu eraill i farnu pa raddfa o amhariad fydd, ym marn y GMC, yn cyfiawnhau ‘gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg?’ Yr ateb yw, oni bai y rhoddir arweiniad cynhwysfawr iddynt ar safonau, dyfalu byddant yn gwneud. O fewn y GMC, sut mae gweithwyr achos, rheolwyr achos, archwilwyr achos ac aelodau’r panel FTP i farnu ynghylch a oes cyfiawnhad dros weithredu ar gofrestriad? Yr ateb yw, oni bai y rhoddir arweiniad cynhwysfawr iddynt ar safonau, byddant yn cymhwyso’u barnau unigol eu hunain a’r canlyniad fydd penderfyniadau anghyson â’r holl ganlyniadau croes a ddaw law yn llaw â hwy. Yn ddiau mae’r GMC wedi cydnabod yr angen am arweiniad, ac, fel y dywedais, mae wedi llunio arweiniad draft (Arweiniad CE/IC drafft mis Medi 2004) ar gyfer archwilwyr achos, a fydd yn gorfod penderfynu a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at banel FTP. Mae’n nodi nifer o amgylchiadau lle byddai amheuaeth ynghylch addasrwydd i ymarfer yn debygol o godi. Rhoddir nifer o enghreifftiau. Mae’n gam yn y cyfeiriad cywir. Law yn llaw â chyhoeddi adroddiadau achos yn gyson, fe allai arweiniad felly ddarparu sail ar gyfer proses gwneud penderfyniadau mwy cyson a thryloyw. Fel yr esboniaf nes ymlaen, fodd bynnag, credaf fod rhaid gwneud mwy i sefydlu safonau y mae cymdeithas gyfan yn eu deall a’u derbyn.
Triniaeth Wael ac Arfer Clinigol Is Na’r Safon
Fel yr esboniais, mae’n eglur y bu cryn wahaniaeth barn yn aml ynghylch a oedd y ffeithiau a sefydlwyd mewn achos arbennig yn gyfystyr ag SPM, neu a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae’r gwahaniaeth barn hwn wedi bod yn arbennig o nodedig mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o driniaeth wael a/neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Rwy’n cydnabod y bydd risg o hyd y bydd dau dribiwnlys yn dod i gasgliadau gwahanol ar sail yr un ffeithiau; dyna pam mae arweiniad clir yn hanfodol.
Yn y gorffennol, fel y dywedais, roedd pwyslais y Llyfr Glas ar yr hyn a ellid ei alw’n gamymddygiad ‘bwriadol’ neu fwriadus ac ar dorri moeseg feddygol. Roedd yn anarferol i’r GMC gymryd camau gweithredu mewn perthynas ag arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Dywedodd Mr Townsend wrth yr Ymchwiliad, tra’r oedd yn y GMC, gwnaeth arolwg bychan a ddangosodd, ar ddiwedd y 1960au, mai 5% o achosion yn unig yn cyrraedd y PCC a oedd ag unrhyw fath o gysylltiad â gofal clinigol. Dywedodd bod achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PCC:
‘... yn faterion yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad bron bob tro, ynghylch a oedd person yn berson addas i fod yn ymarferydd meddygol cofrestredig yn hytrach nag a oedd yn gymwys i ymgymryd â’r mathau cywir o driniaeth’.
Gan siarad am yr un cyfnod, cyfeiriodd Mr Howes at ffurfiau ‘hen ffasiwn’ o gamymddygiad y byddai’r GMC wedi ymwneud â nhw bryd hynny, ‘fel hysbysebu ac erthylu a godinebu.’
Roedd argraffiadau cynnar o’r Llyfr Glas, fel y dywedais, wedi cyfeirio at y posibilrwydd y gellid cychwyn camau disgyblu mewn achos lle’r oedd yn ymddangos bod meddyg wedi diystyru’n ddifrifol ei gyfrifoldeb/chyfrifoldeb i’w gleifion/chleifion neu wedi esgeuluso’i ddyletswyddau/dyletswyddau proffesiynol, er enghraifft, drwy fethu ymweld â chlaf neu fethu darparu triniaeth i glaf pan oedd yn angenrheidiol. Ni soniwyd, fodd bynnag, am driniaeth is na’r safon - yn absenoldeb camymddygiad a olygai penderfyniad ymwybodol gan y meddyg i weithredu fel y gwnaeth, gan wybod y canlyniadau posibl neu debygol. Roedd argraffiad 1977 o’r Llyfr Glas yn datgan yn benodol bod y GMC yn
Yn argraffiad 1983, ymhelaethwyd ar y datganiad hwnnw. Roedd y rhan berthnasol yn datgan wedyn:
Yn argraffiad 1985 o’r Llyfr Glas, ychwanegwyd y datganiad o’r safonau gofal meddygol yr oedd hawl gan y cyhoedd eu disgwyl. Cyfeiriais at y datganiad hwnnw ym mharagraff 17.10. Fel y dywedais, arweiniad yn unig oedd y datganiad, ac nid oedd methiant i fodloni’r safonau’n arwain at gamau disgyblu gan y GMC yn awtomatig.
Dywedodd Mr Howes iddi ddod yn fwy cyffredin yn ystod y 1980au i achosion o driniaeth is na’r safon gael eu hadrodd i’r GMC. Roedd y math hwn o gŵyn yn fwy o ‘ardal lwyd’ na chwynion am fathau eraill o gamymddygiad. Dehongliad Mr Howes o’r ymagwedd a gymerwyd gan y GMC yn ystod y 1980au ac ar ddechrau’r 1990au oedd:
‘... os ydych
(h.y. y meddyg)
yn gwneud eich gorau glas ac mae’n digwydd nad yw’ch gorau glas yn ddigon da, yna nid camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol yw hynny. Camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol yw esgeuluso’r hyn y dylech fod wedi’i wneud neu mewn rhai achosion gwneud hynny na ddylech fod wedi gwneud.’
Ym 1994, lluniodd Mr Howes yr hyn a ddisgrifiodd fel ‘dechreuad llawlyfr hyfforddi’ (Llawlyfr Hyfforddi 1994). Nid oedd dogfen debyg wedi’i llunio yn yr Adran Ymddygiad o’r blaen, ac fe wnaeth Mr Howes, a oedd erbyn hynny yn Bennaeth yr Adran ac yn ymwybodol y byddai’n symud i Adran arall yn y dyfodol agos, lunio’r ddogfen hon er mwyn trosglwyddo’i wybodaeth a’i brofiad er budd staff newydd yn ymuno â’r Adran. Esboniodd mewn tystiolaeth nad oedd yn ei hystyried fel dogfen orffenedig, ond roedd wedi rhagweld y byddai’n cael ei gwella a’i hadolygu o dro i dro, ac yn cael ei harchwilio yn y pen draw gan rywun ac y byddai statws mwy ffurfiol yn cael ei rhoi iddi. Rhagdybiodd ei bod yn rhaid bod Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 wedi’i gymeradwyo ar y pryd - mewn termau cyffredinol o leiaf - gan y swyddog a oedd union uwch ei ben, ond ni allai gofio hyn yn glir. Mae’r Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant yn ddogfen werthfawr gan ei bod yn darparu crynodeb o weithrediad gweithdrefnau’r GMC ym 1994, fel y canfuwyd hwy gan Mr Howes, a oedd bryd hynny yn aelod uchel iawn a phrofiadol o’r staff. Yn gyffredinol, roedd y tystion yn cytuno bod y ddogfen yn cynrychioli arfer a meddylfryd y dydd yn gywir. Fodd bynnag, fel yr esboniaf, mynegwyd rhywfaint o bryder ynghylch y disgrifiad a oedd ynddi o ymagwedd y GMC tuag at achosion o driniaeth wael ac arfer is na’r safon. Awgrymwyd efallai nad oedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn adlewyrchu’n gywir yr ymagwedd a fabwysiadwyd gan y GMC tuag at achosion felly.
Datganodd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994:
(pwyslais yn y gwreiddiol)
Datganodd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 hefyd:
Roedd geiriad Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn awgrymu ymagwedd gyfyngol iawn tuag at gwynion ynghylch triniaeth wael ac arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Ymddengys bod gwahaniaeth clir iawn wedi’i nodi rhwng
ar yr un llaw a
mewn perthynas â chyfrifoldebau proffesiynol i gleifion ar y llaw arall. Ymddengys bod y syniad bod rhaid i SPM olygu rhyw elfen o ymddygiad ‘bwriadol’ neu, o leiaf ‘di-hid’ wedi’i barhau. Roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 i weld yn awgrymu nad oedd syrthio islaw safonau gofal rhesymol (yn hytrach na gwrthod rhoi unrhyw ofal o gwbl yn fwriadol) ynddo’i hun yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Er gwaetha’r ffaith ei fod yn gyfrifol am lunio Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994, ni chredai Mr Howes bod y darnau hyn yn adlewyrchu meddylfryd y GMC fel ag yr oedd ym 1994 yn gywir. Dywedodd, bod y GMC bryd hynny’n aml yn delio â chwynion am feddygon a oedd yn methu trin ac yn rhoi triniaeth anghywir. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd ‘camgymeriadau’n faterion i’r GMC. Roedd Mr Howes i weld yn hyderus bod staff ac aelodau’r GMC wedi gallu gwahaniaethu rhwng achosion a allai ymwneud ag SPM a’r rheiny na allai fyth wneud hynny. Cytunodd â mi, fodd bynnag, ei bod yn anodd ar brydiau i benderfynu a oedd ‘camgymeriad’ (‘error’) yn ‘feius’ (‘culpable’) ar yr un llaw (ac, felly, yn gallu golygu SPM) neu’n ‘esgusodol’ (heb fod yn golygu SPM felly) ar y llaw arall. Dywedodd Dr Krishna Korlipara hefyd, a oedd yn aelod etholedig o’r GMC er 1984 ac yn sgriniwr meddygol rhwng 1998 a 2004, nad oedd y darnau o Lawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn cydsynio â’i ddealltwriaeth ef o’r profion a oedd yn cael eu cymhwyso ar y pryd.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 1995, rhoddodd Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor ddyfarniad yn achos
. Roedd y PC wedi cael Dr McCandless, meddyg teulu, yn euog o SPM ac wedi cyfarwyddo y dylai ei enw gael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Y cyhuddiadau oedd camgymeriadau diagnosis honedig mewn perthynas â thri chlaf a methiant i’w cyfeirio at yr ysbyty. Roedd dau glaf wedi marw a chanfuwyd bod un yn ddifrifol wael pan gafodd ei derbyn i’r ysbyty yn y pen draw. Canfu’r PCC bod y gofal a ddarparwyd gan y meddyg
‘wedi syrthio yn druenus islaw’r safon y mae gan gleifion hawl i’w disgwyl gan eu meddygon teulu’
. Mewn apêl, cafodd canfyddiadau o ffaith y PCC eu derbyn gan Dr McCandless a derbyniwyd hefyd ei fod wedi bod yn esgeulus. Fodd bynnag, dadleuwyd ar ei ran nad oedd triniaeth wael yn ddigon i fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dywedwyd bod SPM yn golygu ymddygiad a oedd
‘yn feius yn foesol’
. Ni ellid pennu hyn drwy benderfynu’n syml a oedd y driniaeth yn cymharu’n ffafriol â safon wrthrychol. Fe allai’r meddyg fod wedi bod yn gwneud ei orau. Efallai ei fod wedi’i orweithio. Dadleuwyd ei bod yn angenrheidiol edrych ar pam wnaeth y meddyg roi’r driniaeth a wnaeth. Awgrymodd y Cwnsler dros Dr McCandless pe bai’r driniaeth wedi syrthio islaw safon resymol oherwydd ei fod, er enghraifft, wedi bod yn rhy ddiog neu feddw i archwilio’r claf yn iawn, yna byddai’n euog o gamymddygiad. Ond nid os mai camgymeriad onest a wnaeth.
Roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor o’r farn bod yr awdurdodau cyfreithiol yn delio ag
‘ymddygiad gwaradwyddus mewn cysylltiad proffesiynol’
o ychydig gymorth wrth ddehongli SPM. Dywedodd nad oedd beiusrwydd moesol yn gynhwysyn angenrheidiol SPM. Nododd yr Arglwydd Hoffmann:
‘... mae gan y cyhoedd ddisgwyliadau uwch o feddygon ac aelodau o broffesiynau eraill sy’n rheoli’u hunain. Mae eu cyrff llywodraethol dan ddyletswydd gyfatebol i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd yn erbyn yr anghymwys mwyn yn ogystal â’r drwgweithredwyr bwriadol.’
Cymhwysodd y Cyfrin Gyngor y prawf gwrthrychol y cyfeiriwyd ato yn Doughty (gweler paragraff 17.13), gan ddweud ei fod yr un mor berthnasol i feddygon ag i ddeintyddion. Gan hynny, methodd yr apêl yn
Dywedodd Mr Townsend wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod o’r farn bod gweithdrefnau’r GMC wedi’u cynllunio i ddelio ag amheuon ynghylch ymddygiad proffesiynol, ac nad oeddent mewn gwirionedd wedi’u cynllunio i ddelio ag amheuon yn ymwneud â thriniaeth. Dywedodd nad oedd unrhyw amheuaeth y gallai’r GMC weithredu, er enghraifft, os oedd meddyg teulu’n gwrthod ymweld â chlaf lle’r oedd tystiolaeth ddigonol bod angen ymweliad ar rywun. Dywedodd, dros gyfnod o flynyddoedd (degawdau hyd yn oed), bod y GMC wedi bod yn ‘gwthio ffiniau’ SPM i geisio cynnwys gofal is na’r safon. Dywedodd bod yr arweiniad a gynhwyswyd yn Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 wedi bod ‘ar ben gochelgar’ y dehongliad o’r Llyfr Glas. Fodd bynnag, bryd hynny, roedd y GMC yn dod yn llai gochelgar. Gwnaeth Mr Townsend y pwynt mai’r rheswm dros gyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad oedd nad oedd gweithdrefnau’r GMC yn addas mewn gwirionedd i ddelio â gofal is na’r safon. Fel yr esboniais, dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, gallai’r GMC weithredu os oedd safon perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg yn ddifrifol ddiffygiol. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth dyfodiad y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ddatrys y broblem y soniodd Mr Townsend amdani yn llwyr. Roedd rhaid bod patrwm o fethiant (neu fethiant difrifol o bosibl) i gydymffurfio â safonau proffesiynol perthnasol cyn y gellid sefydlu SDP. Lle’r oedd patrwm felly, roedd gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn briodol. Fodd bynnag, lle’r oedd y mater a oedd yn destun cwyn i weld yn ddigwyddiad unigol, nid oedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn briodol a’r mater o hyd oedd pa un a oedd y digwyddiad a oedd yn destun cwyn yn gyfystyr ag SPM, neu a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roedd y rhan fwyaf o gwynion i’r GMC yn dod gan unigolion preifat fel digwyddiadau ar eu pennau’u hunain. Oni bai bod ymholiadau’n cael eu gwneud i gyflogwyr y meddyg neu’i sefydliad gofal sylfaenol (PCO) (anaml iawn yr oeddent), nid oedd y GMC mewn sefyllfa i wybod a oedd y gŵyn yn rhan o batrwm o ddigwyddiadau tebyg a allai fod yn ddigon i gychwyn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad.
Nid oes amheuaeth, yn ystod rhan gyntaf a chanol y 1990au, barnwyd gan y GMC bod rhai cwynion yn ymwneud â’r hyn a ellid ei alw’n ‘gamgymeriadau’ fel ymddygiad a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ym Mhennod 21, rwyf wedi cyfeirio at nifer o enghreifftiau o achosion felly, bob un ohonynt yn ymwneud â rhoi dognau gormodol amlwg o gyffuriau. Mae’n eglur, mewn achosion eraill, lle nad oedd y ‘camgymeriad’ mor amlwg, bod ansicrwydd ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn croesi’r trothwy SPM. O 1995, roedd modd edrych ar ymddygiad y meddyg yn erbyn cefndir y safonau a nodwyd yn ‘Good Medical Practice’. Fodd bynnag, fel y dywedais yn barod, nid oedd gwyro o’r safonau hynny’n gyfystyr ag SPM o reidrwydd. Roedd yr anhawster o hyd mewn diffinio’n union pa mor ddifrifol oedd gwyriad felly’n gorfod bod cyn bod camau disgyblu’n briodol.

---  ---
Nid oedd Deddf Meddygaeth (Perfformiad Proffesiynol) 1995, a gyflwynodd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, yn diffinio’r amgylchiadau lle dylid ystyried bod perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg yn
‘ddiffygiol difrifol’
. Yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997, diffiniwyd ‘perfformiad’ fel
‘unrhyw waith proffesiynol yn cael ei wneud gan y meddyg, gan gynnwys gwaith gweinyddol meddygol’
. Cynghorwyd sgrinwyr i ystyried a oedd tystiolaeth dda y gallai’r meddyg fod yn
‘methu’n fynych neu’n gyson i gydymffurfio â’r safonau proffesiynol a oedd yn briodol i’r gwaith’
yr oedd ef/hi yn ei wneud. Fe’u cynghorwyd i ystyried a allai fod
‘patrwm o berfformiad diffygiol’
yn hytrach na
‘thystiolaeth o un neu ddau o ddigwyddiadau yn unig’
o berfformiad diffygiol, a allai fod yn
‘lithriadau unigol’
Ym mis Tachwedd 1997, cyhoeddodd y GMC arweiniad, ‘When Your Professional Performance is Questioned’, am y gweithdrefnau perfformiad newydd. Roedd yr arweiniad yn datgan:
Yma eto, roedd y prawf cylchol yn cael ei gynnig. Roedd SDP yn cael ei ddiffinio fel gwyriad oddi wrth arfer proffesiynol da, a oedd yn ddigon difrifol i godi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad. Ond pa mor ddifrifol oedd hynny? Wrth wneud dyfarniad yn achos
ym mis Tachwedd 2000, nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor nad oedd yn gweld unrhyw reswm i feirniadu’r arweiniad cyffredinol a roddir yn y darn hwnnw, a chymryd nad oedd yn cael ei ystyried yn gynhwysfawr. Dywedodd y dylai trydedd frawddeg yr arweiniad ddarllen yn fwy cywir:
Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn awgrymu y dylai gweithredu ar gofrestriad fod yn seiliedig ar asesiad o berfformiad blaenorol - nid presennol. Ymddengys bod yr arweiniad wedi’i newid wedi hyn yn unol â’r awgrym hwn. Yn achos diweddarach
, cyfeiriodd y Cyfrin Gyngor at yr arweiniad diwygiedig:
(Y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol)
Yma, ymddengys i mi, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn awgrymu’n ddefnyddiol y dylid addasu ymagwedd tuag at gymhwyso prawf ar gyfer SDP yng nghyd-destun y math o waith sy’n cael ei wneud. Yn fy marn i, hwn oedd y llwybr iawn i’w ddilyn.
Hefyd yn achos
, nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor nad oedd o’r farn bod esgeuluster yn gysyniad perthnasol na defnyddiol i’w ystyried mewn gwrandawiad perfformiad gerbron y CPP. Nododd fod SDP yn golygu:
‘... cysyniad llawer ehangach gan ... gall ymestyn i faterion fel cadw cofnodion gwael, arfer gwael wrth gynnal rhwymedigaethau proffesiynol cyfrinachedd, neu hyd yn oed diffygion (os ydynt yn ddifrifol ac yn gyson) mewn ystyriaeth a chwrteisi tuag at gleifion. Nid yw’n dibynnu ar brawf achosiaeth o golled gyfreithadwy. (Ar y llaw arall gall un camgymeriad barn unigol gan lawfeddyg arwain at atebolrwydd mewn esgeuluster ond byddai’n annhebygol, oni bai ei fod yn ddifrifol iawn yn wir, o fod yn gyfystyr â pherfformiad diffygiol difrifol ynddo’i hun.)’
Roedd fersiwn 1999 o’r SDF a gwblhawyd gan sgrinwyr meddygol yn datgan:
‘SDP is normally indicated by a repeated or persistent failure to comply with relevant professional standards ...’.
Fodd bynnag, yn fersiwn mis Awst 2001 o’r SDF, amnewidiwyd y geiriau
gan y geiriau
. Cyflwynodd y newid hwn y cysyniad o
‘batrwm o fethiant difrifol’
) yn hytrach na
‘methiant mynych neu gyson’
) i gydymffurfio â safonau perthnasol. Nid mater o semanteg yn unig yw hyn, gan fod geiriad mis Awst 2001 yn awgrymu bod rhaid i fethiannau eu hunain fod yn ddifrifol yn ogystal â mynych. Atgynhyrchwyd geiriad mis Awst 2001 mewn fersiynau diweddarach o’r SDF.
Roedd fersiwn mis Awst 2001 o’r SDF hefyd yn cynnwys rhestr o
‘feini prawf’
a allai, fe awgrymwyd, gynorthwyo sgrinwyr meddygol wrth asesu a oedd yr ymddygiad neu’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn briodol. Roedd yr SDF yn dweud yn glir nad oedd y rhestr o
‘feini prawf’
yn gynhwysfawr, ond datganodd y gallai (a olygai yn ôl pob tebyg bresenoldeb un neu fwy o’r
‘meini prawf’
) fod yn ddangosydd SDP. Roedd y rhestr o
‘feini prawf’
fel a ganlyn:
Atgynhyrchwyd y
‘meini prawf’
hyn mewn fersiynau diweddarach o’r SDF. Roedd y
‘meini prawf’
hyn yn ddefnyddiol yn unig i’r graddau yr oeddent yn cyfeirio at ystyriaethau perthnasol. Roedd y safonau gwirioneddol i’w cymhwyso yn dal yn rhydd, i’r sgriniwr unigol benderfynu ei hun yn eu cylch.
Yn dilyn achos
, y soniais amdano uchod ac a fyddaf yn disgrifio’n fanwl ym Mhennod 24, ceisiodd y GMC newid adran 55 (yr adran ddehongli) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983. Ar ôl mis Rhagfyr 2002, pan ddaeth y newidiadau i rym, roedd yr ymadrodd
‘perfformiad proffesiynol’
) yn cynnwys cymhwysedd proffesiynol. Fodd bynnag, nid ymddengys bod y newid hwn wedi’i adlewyrchu yn yr arweiniad a ddarparwyd i sgrinwyr neu’n fwy cyffredinol ar gyfer aelodau’r Panelau Asesu neu banelau’r CPP. Roedd y newidiadau’n dweud yn eglur hefyd y gallai asesiad o berfformiad proffesiynol meddyg gynnwys asesiad o berfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg ar unrhyw adeg cyn yr asesiad, yn ogystal â’i berfformiad/pherfformiad proffesiynol ar adeg yr asesiad.

---  ---
Ymddengys, na fu, yn y gorffennol, ddealltwriaeth glir a chyffredin am fath a difrifoldeb camymddygiad neu berfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol a oedd yn debygol o arwain at weithredu ar gofrestriad. Arweiniodd hyn at anawsterau, a byddaf yn archwilio enghreifftiau ohonynt yn y Penodau sy’n dilyn. Mae’r GMC ar fin cyflwyno’i weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Er na fydd y rhain, yn y dyfodol, yn gweithredu yn y ‘seilos’ ar wahân, sef ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad, fel y gwnaethant yn y gorffennol, bydd y penderfyniadau y bydd rhaid i’r panelau FTP eu gwneud yn parhau i ymwneud â materion camymddygiad, perfformiad diffygiol ac afiechyd. Yn wir, yn y dyfodol, mae materion camymddygiad a pherfformiad diffygiol yn debygol o godi gyda’i gilydd yn yr un achos. Mae’n hanfodol, yn fy marn i, y dylai’r GMC sefydlu safonau clir i seilio’r gweithdrefnau newydd hyn arnynt. Mae hyn yn bwysig am nifer o resymau.
Yn gyntaf, mae’n amlwg yn ddymunol ac yn deg bod meddygon eu hunain yn gwybod pa fath o ymddygiad neu ddiffyg perfformiad sy’n debygol o arwain at weithredu ar eu cofrestriad ac y dylent fod yn gallu rheoleiddio’u hymddygiad yn unol â hynny. Wrth gwrs, y gobaith yw y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn anelu braidd yn uwch yn eu bywyd proffesiynol nag i osgoi camau disgyblu’n unig, ond mae ond yn deg eu bod yn deall yr amgylchiadau lle gallant dramgwyddo’u corff rheoleiddio proffesiynol.
Yn ail, os yw, fel y bu yn y gorffennol, yn parhau’n agored i gleifion, perthnasau ac eraill sydd â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon i’w cyfeirio at y GMC, yna mae’n rhaid iddynt gael dealltwriaeth eglur ynghylch ai’r GMC yw’r corff iawn i ddelio â’u cwynion. Fel arall, bydd eu cwynion yn cael eu gwrthod gan y GMC, byddant yn cael eu siomi a’u llesteirio a bydd enw da’r GMC yn dioddef.
Yn drydydd, mae’n bwysig bod y rheiny sy’n gyfrifol am gyfeirio achosion at y GMC - fel cyflogwyr meddygon, PCOau, cyrff gofal iechyd preifat, gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill a chyrff fel y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (gelwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn) - yn ymwybodol o’r mathau o achos y dylent eu cyfeirio. Os nad ydynt, byddant yn cyfeirio’r achosion anghywir neu’n methu cyfeirio’r achosion iawn, bydd adnoddau’n cael eu gwastraffu ac efallai na fydd diogelwch digonol i gleifion.
Yn bedwerydd, pan fydd achos wedi cyrraedd y GMC, mae’n bwysig bod pawb sy’n gyfrifol am wneud penderfyniadau yn y dyfodol yn deall y safonau sydd i’w cymhwyso a dylent eu cymhwyso’n gyson. Fel arall, bydd y system yn annheg i’r meddygon sy’n destun cwynion ac i’r rheiny sy’n gwneud y cwynion.
Mae rhai blynyddoedd wedi mynd heibio bellach ers i’r GMC gael ei gynghori y dylai ddyfeisio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau ar gyfer gweithredu’i weithdrefnau FTP yn gyson. Cynghorwyd hynny gan yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ym 1996, 2000 a 2003. Eto nid yw’r GMC wedi gwasgu’r danadl o hyd. Ni fydd y broblem yn mynd i ffwrdd â’r gweithdrefnau newydd; yn wir, credaf yr aiff yn broblem fwy. Dywedaf ar unwaith fy mod yn cydnabod nad tasg hawdd yw llunio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau. Fodd bynnag, rhaid mynd i’r afael â’r dasg, ac, yn fy marn i, rhaid i’r cyhoedd fod yn gysylltiedig â’r broses. Ni fydd y GMC yn hawlio hyder y cyhoedd oni bai bod consensws ynghylch y safonau sydd i’w cymhwyso. Byddaf yn trafod dwy ymagwedd bosibl tuag at y broblem ym Mhennod 27.

---  ---
Ffynonellau Adroddiadau am Feddygon
Prosesu Cychwynnol Achosion Ymddygiad dan yr 'Hen' Weithdrefnau
Y Weithdrefn ar Gyfer Delio ag Euogfarnau
Cyngor i Gyfeirio Cwyn at Weithdrefnau Cwynion Lleol
Ymchwilio i Amgylchiadau Cwyn
Cysylltiadau â Chyflogwyr Meddygon s Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol
Rhai Problemau gydag Achosion a Gaewyd gan Staff y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Canfod Adnabyddiaeth y Meddyg Sy'n Destun Cwyn

---  ---
Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio bod hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) yn delio â meddygon a oedd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau a’r rheiny yr honnwyd iddynt fod yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Roedd yr holl gwynion ynghylch ymddygiad meddyg a phob gwybodaeth bod meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd a oedd yn cael eu derbyn gan y GMC yn cael eu hystyried yn gyntaf gan aelodau’r staff gweinyddol. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio ym Mhennod 15 bod cwynion yn cael eu gwneud i’r GMC yn mynd trwy gyfres o brosesau hidlo. O ganlyniad i’r prosesau hidlo hynny, roedd y mwyafrif helaeth o achosion yn cael eu cau heb gyrraedd cam gwrandawiad cyhoeddus gan y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC).
Roedd y cyntaf o’r prosesau hidlo hynny’n cael eu gwneud gan y staff gweinyddol, a oedd yn cymhwyso meini prawf penodol amrywiol i bennu a ddylai achos gael ei gau yn y cam cychwynnol hwnnw neu a ddylai fynd ymlaen i weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP). Yn 2003, roedd aelodau o’r staff gweinyddol yn gyfrifol am gau 65% o’r 3821 o gŵynion am ymddygiad neu berfformiad meddygon a dderbyniodd y GMC yn y flwyddyn honno. O gofio’r ffaith bod gymaint o achosion wedi’u cau yn y cyfnod cynnar hwn, o ganlyniad i benderfyniadau a wnaed gan y staff gweinyddol, roedd yn amlwg yn bwysig i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio’r prosesau yr ymgymerodd y staff â nhw ynghyd â’r meini prawf y seiliwyd eu penderfyniadau arnynt.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio’n fyr y prosesau yr ymgymerodd y staff â nhw wrth dderbyn cwyn neu adroddiad am feddyg. Byddaf yn ystyried yr amgylchiadau lle’r oedd aelodau staff yn y gorffennol yn cael cau achos a’r meini prawf yr oedd yn ofynnol iddynt eu cymhwyso. Byddaf yn edrych hefyd ar y weithdrefn ar gyfer delio â gwybodaeth am euogfarnau. Byddaf yn archwilio’r graddau yr oedd y penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud gan aelodau’r staff yn destun archwiliad.
Af ymlaen wedyn i ystyried rhai materion penodol yn codi o’r prosesau yr ymgymerodd y staff â nhw. Yn benodol, byddaf yn ystyried polisi’r GMC, a oedd yn gyfredol am lawer o flynyddoedd, o gyfarwyddo’i staff i gynghori achwynwyr y dylent ganlyn eu pryderon drwy’r gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Byddaf yn ystyried hefyd a oedd unrhyw ddilyniant, neu ddilyniant digonol, i achosion felly gan y GMC. Af ymlaen i ystyried a ymchwiliwyd yn briodol yn y gorffennol i gŵynion ac adroddiadau i’r GMC. Byddaf yn ystyried a fu cyfnewid gwybodaeth digonol yn y gorffennol rhwng y GMC a’r cyflogwyr a sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau) meddygon y gwnaethpwyd cwynion yn eu cylch. Yn olaf, byddaf yn archwilio rhai problemau sydd wedi codi mewn cysylltiad â phenderfyniadau i gau achosion, trwy gyfeirio at rai achosion unigol y deliodd y staff â nhw. I fy ngalluogi i wneud hyn, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad, ac archwilio, nifer fach o achosion a gafodd eu cau’n ddiweddar gan aelodau o’r staff gweinyddol. Y bwriad y tu ôl archwilio’r achosion hyn oedd cael rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i’r modd yr oedd y prosesau a ddisgrifiwyd gan y GMC yn gweithio’n ymarferol.
Tystion
Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Mr Alan Howes (a oedd yn cael ei gyflogi gan y GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002 ac a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad o 1987 i 1994), gan Mr Antony Townsend (Dirprwy Bennaeth, Pennaeth yn ddiweddarach, yr Adran Ymddygiad o 1994 i 1998), Mr Finlay Scott (Prif Weithredwr y GMC er 1994) a Mr Neil Marshall (Pennaeth yr Adran Sgrinio er mis Mawrth 2002). Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth berthnasol gan yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto (Llywydd presennol y GMC), Dr Krishna Korlipara (aelod o’r GMC er 1984 a sgriniwr meddygol o 1998 hyd at 2004) a’r Athro Isobel Allen (Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol Westminster (PSI)) yn ogystal.
Yr Adran Sgrinio
Roedd yr Adran Sgrinio’n delio yn y lle cyntaf â gwybodaeth am euogfarnau, ynghyd â’r holl gŵynion a’r cyfathrebiadau am feddygon. Yr eithriad oedd pan oedd y wybodaeth neu’r gŵyn yn ymwneud yn amlwg â materion a oedd yn effeithio ar iechyd meddyg. Roedd yr achosion hynny’n cael eu cyfeirio at yr Adran Iechyd yn syth. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, fel yr oedd hi ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, roedd staff yr Adran Sgrinio yn cynnwys tri rheolwr gwaith achos, 29 o weithwyr achos, 11 cynorthwyydd gwaith achos ac ysgrifennydd/ysgrifenyddes. Gan weithiwr achos oedd y cyfrifoldeb sylfaenol o ddydd i ddydd am bob achos, gydag arweiniad gan reolwyr gwaith achos a chymorth gweinyddol gan gynorthwywyr gwaith achos.

---  ---
Euogfarnau
Mae’r GMC yn derbyn gwybodaeth am feddygon sydd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau, neu sy’n destun ymchwiliadau neu achosion troseddol cyfredol, o nifer o ffynonellau. Mae’n cyflogi asiantaeth toriadau papur newydd i’w rybuddio i achosion troseddol yn ymwneud â meddygon sy’n mynd drwy’r llysoedd neu sydd wedi arwain at euogfarnau. Mae Cylchlythyrau’r Swyddfa Gartref yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r heddlu adrodd i’r GMC am rai mathau o euogfarnau. Hefyd, gall cysylltiad meddyg mewn ymchwiliadau neu achosion troseddol gael eu hadrodd i’r GMC gan Gangen Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref, gan gyflogwyr y meddyg neu PCO (yn Lloegr, ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol (PCT)), gan aelod o’r cyhoedd neu gan y meddyg ei hun. Nid yw’r systemau hyn yn ddi-feth, ac, weithiau, mae oedi hir rhwng dyddiad euogfarn a’r adeg pan gaiff y GMC ei hysbysu ohoni. Mae rhai euogfarnau wedi’u colli’n gyfan gwbl.
Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd rhwymedigaeth broffesiynol ar feddyg i hysbysu’r GMC o’r ffaith ei fod/bod wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd neu o’r ffaith y bu yn destun ymchwiliad troseddol neu achos o drosedd. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 5, bu’n ofynnol i feddygon teulu er mis Rhagfyr 2001 i ddatgan materion felly i’r PCO y maent wedi’u cynnwys ar ei restr, cyn pen saith niwrnod o gychwyn ymchwiliadau troseddol neu achosion o drosedd, neu o euogfarn droseddol. Bu’n ofynnol iddynt hefyd ddatgelu, ymhlith pethau eraill, y ffaith eu bod wedi cael rhybudd gan yr heddlu neu eu bod yn destun ymchwiliad i’w hymddygiad gan unrhyw gorff trwyddedu, corff rheoleiddio neu gorff arall unrhyw le yn y byd. Fodd bynnag, ni fu unrhyw fecanwaith ffurfiol lle byddai’r PCTau yn hysbysu’r GMC yn awtomatig pan oeddent yn derbyn datganiad felly. Fy nealltwriaeth i yw y byddai’r PCTau yn gwneud hynny os oeddent o’r farn ei bod yn briodol.
Ym mis Medi 2004, o ganlyniad i drafodaethau a gynhaliwyd yn ystod tystiolaeth Mr Scott i’r Ymchwiliad, penderfynodd y GMC y dylid pennu dyletswydd broffesiynol ar feddygon i ddatgelu gwybodaeth i’r GMC am achosion troseddol a rheoleiddio gerllaw neu yn y gorffennol. Nid yw union delerau’r ddyletswydd wedi’u penderfynu’n derfynol eto, ond mae’n debygol o gynnwys rhwymedigaeth i ddatgelu gwybodaeth am euogfarnau a chyhuddiadau troseddol a ddygwyd yn erbyn meddygon (ac eithrio’r rheiny mewn perthynas â rhai mân droseddau moduro), am rybuddion yr heddlu a dderbyniwyd ac am achosion a ddygwyd yn eu herbyn gan gyrff rheoleiddio eraill yn y DU ac mewn mannau eraill. Mae’r ddyletswydd newydd i’w chynnwys yn argraffiad nesaf o ‘Good Medical Practice’. Gall methu cydymffurfio â’r ddyletswydd arwain at achos disgyblu. Mae’r newid hwn i’w groesawu ac mae’n dod â’r proffesiwn meddygol yn unol â phroffesiynau eraill, gan gynnwys bargyfreithwyr.
Hyd at 1991, nid oedd y term
yn cynnwys canfyddiad o euogrwydd yr oedd meddyg wedi’i roi/rhoi ar brawf mewn perthynas ag ef, neu wedi’i ryddhau/rhyddhau’n amodol neu’n ddiamod. Ar ôl 1991, dim ond i ganfyddiadau o euogrwydd lle’r oedd rhyddhad amodol neu ddiamod wedi’i bennu yr oedd yr eithriad yn berthnasol. Mae canfyddiadau felly o euogrwydd, fodd bynnag, wedi’u hadrodd i’r GMC gan yr heddlu yn aml. Bu’n agored i’r GMC wedyn, pe bai’n dewis, i fynd ymlaen â’r achos fel pe bai’n honiad o SPM. Ar brydiau, gallai ffaith bod meddyg wedi derbyn rhybudd gan yr heddlu fod yn destun adroddiad i’r GMC hefyd. Pe bai hyn yn digwydd, gallai’r GMC wedyn ddewis trin yr adroddiad fel honiad o SPM. Mae’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn amodi’n benodol y dylai rhybudd gan yr heddlu gael ei drin yn yr un modd ag euogfarn. Byddaf yn argymell hefyd y dylid ymdrin â throseddau y deliwyd â nhw drwy ryddhad amodol yn yr un modd ag euogfarn.
Mae’r GMC yn derbyn cwynion o lawer o ffynonellau hefyd am ymddygiad meddygon, yn bennaf gan ymddiriedolaethau GIG, gan gyflogwyr meddygon, gan gleifion a theuluoedd cleifion a chan weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill. Mae rhai o’r cwynion hyn yn ddifrifol a bu’n glir o’r cychwyn y byddent, o’u profi, yn gyfystyr ag SPM dan yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad. Mae rhai eraill mor ddibwys, hyd yn oed o’u cymryd ar eu huchaf, na allent fyth gwarantu camau disgyblu gan y GMC nac, yn wir, gan unrhyw gorff arall. Mae llawer yn syrthio rhywle rhwng yr eithafion hyn. Nid yw rhai cwynion yn ymwneud ag arfer meddygol meddyg o gwbl, ond at ryw fater personol yn ymwneud â’r meddyg.
Cyfathrebiadau Eraill am Feddygon
Mae’r GMC hefyd yn derbyn rhai cyfathrebiadau am feddygon na ellid yn iawn eu galw’n ‘gŵynion’. Gall y rhain fod yn geisiadau am wybodaeth neu gwestiynau am foeseg feddygol. Nid yw rhai o’r cyfathrebiadau’n ymwneud â meddygon o gwbl. Fel unrhyw gorff cyhoeddus arall, mae’r GMC hefyd yn derbyn rhai cyfathrebiadau sy’n afresymol neu’n anghydlynus. Rhaid i’r holl gyfathrebiadau hyn gael eu hystyried gan y staff, a rhaid gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch a oes angen camau pendant gan y GMC. Os yw’r staff yn barnu nad ydynt yn gofyn am weithredu felly, cânt eu ‘cau’ yn y cyfnod hwn.

---  ---
Roedd yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad yn cael eu rheoli gan Orchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988). Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, roedd y cyfarwyddiadau perthnasol i staff wedi’u cynnwys yn argraffiad mis Ebrill 2003 o’r Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP. O ganlyniad, cyhoeddwyd cyfarwyddiadau newydd ac fe’u cynhwyswyd yn y Llawlyfr Ymchwilio FTP, a daeth y fersiwn gyntaf ohono i rym ym mis Mai 2004. Roedd y Llawlyfr Ymchwilio FTP yn cynnwys newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer delio â chwynion a oedd wedi’u cyflwyno ar ôl gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad. Roedd y rhan fwyaf o’r newidiadau hynny’n ymwneud â threfniadau newydd ar gyfer cyfnewid gwybodaeth rhwng y GMC a’r cyflogwyr a PCOau meddygon yr oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud amdanynt i’r GMC. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r trefniadau newydd hynny, a gyflwynwyd o ganlyniad i bryderon a fynegwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Yn ystod y broses gwneud penderfyniadau, roedd aelodau staff yn defnyddio ffurflenni safonol a gynlluniwyd yn arbennig i arwain a chofnodi’u penderfyniadau.
Yr Arfer ym mis Rhagfyr 2003
Y Camau Cyntaf
Deliaf yn gyntaf â’r weithdrefn ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn ymwneud â honiadau o SPM a chyfathrebiadau eraill am feddygon (cyfeiriaf atynt yn gyfunol fel ‘cwynion’), fel y’u disgrifiwyd gan y tystion ym mis Rhagfyr 2003. Roedd y weithdrefn ar gyfer delio â gwybodaeth am euogfarnau yn wahanol, a byddaf yn ei disgrifio nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei derbyn yn y lle cyntaf, roedd rhywfaint o wybodaeth ragarweiniol yn cael ei chofnodi â llaw ar ffurflen cyfarwyddyd achos (CDF) gan gynorthwyydd gwaith achos. Roedd y ffurflen CDF wedi’i chynllunio i ddarparu cofnod o’r camau trefniadol a gymerwyd, o’r penderfyniadau rhagarweiniol a wnaed ac o’r cyfarwyddiadau a roddwyd ynghylch cynnal yr achos yn y dyfodol. Roedd manylion am yr achos yn cael eu cofnodi ar gronfa ddata’r GMC, a oedd yn cael ei diweddaru wrth i’r achos fynd yn ei flaen.
Byddai nifer o weithdrefnau safonol yn cael eu cynnal wedyn. Os oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â meddyg penodol, byddai cynigion yn cael eu gwneud i gadarnhau ei adnabyddiaeth/hadnabyddiaeth trwy gyfeirio at gofrestr feddygol y GMC. Nid oedd modd gwneud hyn o hyd, am resymau yr esboniaf nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon. Os gellid adnabod y meddyg, byddai chwiliad o gronfa ddata’r GMC yn cael ei wneud er mwyn canfod a oedd adroddiad wedi’i wneud amdano/amdani i’r GMC yn flaenorol. Byddai canlyniadau’r chwiliad, ynghyd â natur a chanlyniad unrhyw gŵynion blaenorol a ganfuwyd, yn cael eu cofnodi ar y CDF. Roedd chwiliad yn cael ei wneud hefyd i weld a oedd yr achwynydd wedi gwneud cwynion blaenorol i’r GMC. Byddai’r achos yn cael ‘dosbarthiad’ (‘triage’) cychwynnol gan reolwr gwaith achos.
Dosbarthiad
Roedd y dosbarthiad yn asesiad cychwynnol, yn cael ei wneud gan reolwyr gwaith achos er mwyn pennu pa achosion y gellid eu cau ar unwaith a pha rai y dylid eu dwyn yn eu blaenau. Fe allai’r rheolwr gwaith achos benderfynu nad oedd cyfathrebiad yn gŵyn o gwbl, ond yn hytrach yn eitem o ohebiaeth gyffredinol. Os felly, byddai’n cael ei hidlo allan yn y cyfnod dosbarthu. Efallai nad oedd y rheolwr gwaith achos yn gallu gwneud penderfyniad terfynol am waredu’r gŵyn. Fe allai fod angen mwy o wybodaeth arno/arni cyn gwneud hynny, ac os felly, byddai’n trosglwyddo’r achos i weithiwr achos ac yn rhoi unrhyw gyfarwyddiadau a chyngor angenrheidiol ynghylch yr hyn a oedd i’w wneud. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn nodi achosion yr oedd angen delio â nhw ar frys am ryw reswm, a byddai’n rhoi cyfarwyddiadau priodol i’r gweithiwr achos dynodedig. Lle’r oedd y rheolwr gwaith achos yn teimlo bod gwybodaeth ddigonol i seilio penderfyniad arni, byddai’n mynd ymlaen i benderfynu a dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol.
Roedd dau fater arall y byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn chwilio amdanynt yn y cam cyntaf hwnnw. Yn gyntaf, byddai’n ceisio nodi achosion lle’r oedd yn ymddangos bod camau interim brys (e.e. atal meddyg rhag ymarfer) yn angenrheidiol er mwyn diogelu cleifion neu er lles y cyhoedd fel arall. Ar ôl 2000, roedd penderfyniadau am gamau interim yn cael eu gwneud gan y Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim (IOC). Ni allai aelodau o staff gyfeirio achos yn uniongyrchol at yr IOC. Roedd yn rhaid i’r achos fynd at sgriniwr meddygol yn gyntaf. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn sicrhau bod achos lle gallai camau interim fod yn angenrheidiol yn mynd at sgriniwr meddygol cyn gynted â phosibl. Yn ail, os oedd y gŵyn yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd ei gyflwr/chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ac mai dyna oedd y prif bryder, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn gyrru’r gŵyn ymlaen at yr Adran Iechyd. Yn amodol ar y materion hynny, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn defnyddio’r rhan gyntaf o’r ffurflen penderfyniad sgrinio safonol (SDF) fel canllaw wrth wneud ei benderfyniad/phenderfyniad a byddai’n cofnodi ar yr SDF y camau amrywiol yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Roedd yr SDF yn cael ei ddefnyddio i gofnodi penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud gan staff ynghylch a ddylai achos gael ei drosglwyddo i sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd hefyd yn cofnodi’r penderfyniadau a oedd yn cael eu gwneud gan sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg.
Y Penderfyniad i Gyfeirio Achos at Sgriniwr Meddygol Neu Beidio
Roedd Rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi:
Roedd swyddogaethau’r Cofrestrydd, fel y’u nodwyd yn rheol 6, yn cael eu cyflawni gan staff y GMC ar ei ran. Cymerodd y sgrinwyr meddygol gyfrifoldeb am y rôl sgrinio a arferai gael ei chyflawni gan y Llywydd. Yn achos
, disgrifiodd Meistr Ustus Lightman rôl y Cofrestrydd (staff y GMC yn ymarferol) mewn perthynas â rheol 6 fel a ganlyn:
‘Yn y cam cyntaf, mae gan y Cofrestrydd rôl weinidogaethol: cyn belled â bod cwyn (sy’n goblygu gwneud rhyw fath o gyhuddiad yn erbyn ymarferydd), bod y gwyn yn ysgrifenedig a bod y gŵyn ar yr wyneb yn codi cwestiwn gwirioneddol ynghylch a yw ymddygiad ymarferydd yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol, mae dyletswydd arno i gyfeirio’r mater at y sgriniwr.’
Roedd rhan gyntaf yr SDF yn nodi rhestr hir o amgylchiadau lle’r oedd y GMC wedi penderfynu y byddai’n briodol i reolwr gwaith achos wneud penderfyniad yn gyntaf i beidio cyfeirio’r achos at sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd yr amgylchiadau hyn yn codi:
pan nad oedd y gŵyn ynghylch meddyg
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â mân drosedd foduro yn unig nad oedd yn ymwneud â chyffuriau nac alcohol
pan oedd y digwyddiadau a oedd yn destun cwyn wedi digwydd dros bum mlynedd yn flaenorol
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â ffioedd a godwyd am driniaeth/gwasanaeth preifat
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig ag oedi o lai na chwe mis o ran darparu adroddiad meddygol unigol
pan oedd proffesiwn y meddyg yn ddamweiniol i’r mater, e.e. dadl rhwng cymdogion, a bod un ohonynt yn digwydd bod yn feddyg
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â gwrthwynebiadau i gynnwys adroddiadau neu gofnodion meddygol lle nad oedd unrhyw awgrym bod y meddyg wedi gweithredu’n afresymol
pan oedd y ‘gŵyn’ mewn gwirionedd yn ymholiad afresymol/digyswllt
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â materion anghlinigol disylwedd/dibwys, e.e. roedd y meddyg ychydig funudau’n hwyr ar gyfer apwyntiad rheolaidd
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â’r ffaith bod y meddyg wedi methu cymryd swydd yn dilyn cytundeb llafar i wneud hynny ond lle rhoddodd bythefnos neu fwy o rybudd
pan oedd y gŵyn yn dod gan drydydd parti lle’r oedd yn amlwg nad oedd y prif barti eisiau canlyn y mater, ac nid oedd unrhyw reswm arall i fynd ymlaen
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â statws mewnfudwr y meddyg
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â lefel neu ansawdd y gwasanaeth a ddarparwyd gan sefydliad gofal iechyd lle nad oedd unrhyw awgrym bod y meddyg yn uniongyrchol gyfrifol
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â dileu enw meddyg o restr meddygon teulu lle nad oedd unrhyw awgrym bod penderfyniad y meddyg yn annheg neu’n mynd yn groes i ganllawiau GMC
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig ag anghydfodau mewn meddygfa neu adran lle nad oedd unrhyw awgrym bod cleifion yn cael eu rhoi mewn risg
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud yn unig â methiannau mewn gweithdrefnau lleol ar gyfer ymdrin â chwynion
pan oedd yr ohebiaeth yn gopi o lythyr nad oedd yn gofyn am weithredu gan y GMC yn benodol
pan oedd y gohebydd yn gofyn yn benodol am ymddiheuriad
pan oedd y gŵyn yn ddienw ac nad oedd unrhyw reswm i amau bod y meddyg yn fygythiad uniongyrchol i gleifion.
Os barnwyd bod unrhyw rai o’r amgylchiadau hyn yn berthnasol, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn cau’r achos oni bai bod rhyw reswm arall pam y dylai’r achos gael ei ystyried gan sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd rhaid cofnodi unrhyw resymau felly ar yr SDF. Wrth benderfynu a oedd rhyw reswm arall i gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried a oedd unrhyw achos i amau y gallai’r meddyg fod yn beryglus. Roedd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP yn rhoi arweiniad ar yr amgylchiadau pan allai hyn godi, gan nodi na ddylid cau achos lle’r oedd i weld yn golygu:
‘a. camgymeriadau clinigol parhaus;
b. methiant parhaus i ddarparu triniaeth/gofal priodol;
c. unrhyw gamgymeriad clinigol unigol difrifol iawn neu fethiant i ddarparu gofal priodol;
d. unrhyw ymddygiad a fyddai’n disgyn i’r categori “SPM” trwy ddiffiniad” ...’.
Esboniaf y category ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ym Mhennod 19.
Roedd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP yn datgan yn glir y dylai rheolwyr gwaith achos fod yn barod i
‘arfer disgresiwn’
wrth asesu achos nad oeddent yn bodloni unrhyw rai o’r meini prawf a nodwyd uchod, ond a oedd serch hynny i weld yn codi amheuon ynghylch pa un a oedd y meddyg yn beryglus.
Cyfeirio ‘Nôl ar gyfer Gweithredu’n Lleol
Os nad oedd yr un o’r amgylchiadau a restrir ym mharagraff 18.22(a)-(s) yn berthnasol, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn mynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried ffynhonnell y gŵyn. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried pa un a oedd y gŵyn yn dod gan unigolyn preifat neu gan berson yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus. Roedd person a oedd yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus yn cael ei ddiffinio yn Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 fel:
‘... an officer of a Health Authority, Health Board, Common Services Agency or Board of Governonrs of a hospital, or of a Local or Area Medical Committee or Family Practitioner Committee, or of a Hospital Medical Staff Committee or body exercising similar functions, or of a Licensing Body (that is, a University or other body granting primary United Kingdom qualifications), acting as such, or of a Government Department or local or public authority, or any person holding judicial office, or any officer attached to a Court, or the Solicitor to the Council’.
Yn ymarferol, roedd y ‘person a oedd yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus’ (‘person acting in a public capacity’) yn ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu PCT fel arfer. Er cyfleustra, defnyddiaf y term ‘corff cyhoeddus’ neu ‘gorff cyfeirio’ yn lle ‘person yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus’.
Os oedd y gŵyn yn dod gan gorff cyhoeddus, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried pa un a oedd yn ymddangos bod pob un o’r ‘gweithdrefnau lleol’ wedi’u disbyddu cyn i’r gŵyn gael ei chyfeirio at y GMC. Os, er enghraifft, yr oedd PCT yn adrodd am feddyg y dywedwyd ei fod/bod yn ymarfer i safon wael yn gyffredinol, byddai’r GMC yn disgwyl bod y PCT wedi ceisio cymryd rhyw ffurf ar gamau adferol (gan ddefnyddio’i weithdrefnau perfformiad) cyn cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen. Os oedd yn ymddangos nad oedd, neu efallai nad oedd, y gweithdrefnau lleol wedi’u disbyddu’n llawn, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn cysylltu â’r corff cyfeirio ac yn trafod y modd y dylid ymdrin â’r achos. Roedd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP yn dweud:
(National Clinical Assessment Authority)
Mae’r cyfeiriad at yr NCAA yn awgrymu bod y gofyniad i gyrff cyhoeddus ddisbyddu pob gweithdrefn leol yn gyntaf cyn y byddai’r GMC yn gweithredu yn berthnasol yn bennaf i achosion yn ymwneud â pherfformiad gwael potensial gan feddyg. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai trafodaeth deirffordd yn digwydd weithiau rhwng y GMC, yr NCAA a’r corff cyfeirio. Dywedodd, ym mhob achos lle’r oedd y gŵyn yn dod gan gorff cyhoeddus (nid yn unig lle’r oedd ansicrwydd ynghylch a oedd gweithdrefnau lleol wedi’u disbyddu), roedd cyswllt personol gyda’r corff cyfeirio er mwyn trafod y modd y dylid delio â’r achos.
Lle’r oedd y gŵyn yn dod gan unigolyn preifat, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried a oedd y person hwnnw wedi defnyddio unrhyw weithdrefnau cwynion a oedd ar gael cyn mynd at y GMC. Yn gyffredinol, ni fyddai’r GMC yn ystyried cwyn gan unigolyn preifat oni bai bod gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u disbyddu. Os oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â meddyg yn gweithio yn y GIG, roedd yn rhaid i’r rheolwr gwaith achos ystyried a oedd unrhyw reswm i gredu bod yr achwynydd wedi cyfeirio’r mater at y corff cwynion GIG perthnasol ac wedi disbyddu gweithdrefnau cwynion y corff hwnnw cyn gwneud cwyn i’r GMC. Os oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â meddyg mewn meddygaeth breifat, byddai disgwyl i’r unigolyn fod wedi defnyddio unrhyw weithdrefnau cwynion a oedd ar gael, gan gynnwys cyfeiriad at y Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol (NCSC, sydd bellach yn rhan o’r Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd, a elwir y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd). Roedd gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol eraill yr oedd disgwyl i rai achwynwyr gyfeirio’u cwynion atynt mewn amgylchiadau penodol, ond cyfeiriaf yn unig at y rheiny’n ymwneud â’r GIG a thriniaeth breifat. Os nad oedd yn ymddangos bod yr unigolyn wedi defnyddio’r gweithdrefnau cwynion a oedd ar gael, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau yn y cam hwnnw oni bai bod achos i amau bod y meddyg yn beryglus. Os nad oedd unrhyw achos i amau ei fod/bod yn beryglus, byddai’r achwynydd yn cael ei gynghori/chynghori i gyfeirio’r gŵyn at y corff priodol a oedd yn ymdrin â chwynion.
Dylid nodi mai’r prawf a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso gan y staff yn y cam hwn (mewn achosion lle’r oedd yn ymddangos nad oedd y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u disbyddu) oedd nad oedd (yng ngeiriau rheol 6)
. Y prawf a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso gan y staff oedd y prawf uwch, sef pa un a oedd achos i amau bod y meddyg yn beryglus. Mewn geiriau eraill, hyd yn oed os oedd cwestiwn yn codi ynghylch pa un a oedd ymddygiad ymarferydd yn y gyfystyr ag SPM, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau oni bai bod achos i amau ei fod/bod yn beryglus. Ymddengys i mi bod yr arfer a nodais uchod yn anghyfreithlon, o gofio geiriad gorfodol rheol 6. Mae’r meini prawf yr oedd staff y GMC wedi’u cyfarwydd i’w defnyddio wrth benderfynu a oedd unrhyw achos i amau bod y meddyg yn beryglus wedi’u nodi ym mharagraff 18.23. Byddaf yn trafod yn fanylach yr arfer o gyfeirio cwynion yn ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Byddai gohebiaeth ag achwynydd unigol yn y cam hwn, ac ar bob adeg arall hyd at ac yn cynnwys yr achos yn cael ei ystyried gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) a’i gyfeirio at y PCC, trwy lythyr yn gyffredinol. Byddai’n anarferol i’r GMC gychwyn unrhyw gyswllt ffôn.
Os oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth bod y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u defnyddio neu’u disbyddu, neu os nad oeddent ar gael oherwydd bod y terfynau amser perthnasol wedi mynd heibio, byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn mynd ymlaen i ystyried y cam nesaf yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Roedd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP yn cynghori, os oedd yr unigolyn dan sylw wedi cyfeirio’i gŵyn/chwyn at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, ond ei fod/bod yn anfodlon â’i gynnydd drwy’r gweithdrefnau hynny, byddai’r GMC fel arfer yn mynd â’r gŵyn yn ei blaen, yn hytrach na cheisio gorfodi’r unigolyn i ddal ati â phroses yr oedd yn anhapus â hi.
Sgrinio Cychwynnol
Yn y pwynt hwn, roedd gan y rheolwr gwaith achos yr opsiwn o gyflwyno’r achos at sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer yr hyn a elwid yn ‘sgrinio cychwynnol’. Roedd hon yn system garlam ar gyfer achosion y credai staff y GMC na allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu berfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP), ond lle’r oedd y gŵyn ynghylch triniaeth neu faterion eraill yn ymwneud â barn glinigol, ac felly roedd rhywfaint o fewnbwn gan ymarferydd meddygol yn cael ei ystyried yn angenrheidiol cyn y gellid gwneud penderfyniad terfynol i gau’r achos. Os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn cytuno y dylai’r achos gael ei gau, roedd cadarnhad sgriniwr lleyg yn angenrheidiol cyn y gellid gwneud hyn. Byddaf yn ystyried y broses hon o sgrinio cychwynnol pan fyddaf yn mynd ymlaen i archwilio’r broses sgrinio ym Mhennod 19.
Paratoi’r Achos i’w Gyfeirio at y Sgriniwr Meddygol
Os oedd achos yn mynd drwy’r dosbarthiad cychwynnol (a sgrinio cychwynnol, lle’r oedd yn briodol) ac roedd i’w ddwyn ymlaen, roedd yn cael ei ddyrannu i weithiwr achos a fyddai’n gyfrifol wedyn am baratoi’r achos i’w ystyried gan sgriniwr meddygol. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos wedi rhoi arwydd o unrhyw gamau paratoi a oedd i’w cymryd. Dywedodd Mr Marshall y gallai’r camau hyn gynnwys cael gafael ar gofnodion meddygol neu farn arbenigol, os oedd yn amlwg bod y rhain yn ofynnol. Byddai’r gweithiwr achos yn ysgrifennu at yr achwynydd (os oedd yn unigolyn preifat) a byddai’n gofyn am ei ganiatâd/chaniatâd i ddatgelu manylion ei gŵyn/chwyn i’r meddyg a oedd yn destun y gŵyn. Os oedd caniatâd yn cael ei roi, byddai’r gŵyn yn cael ei datgelu, a byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i roi ymateb. Os nad oedd yn cael ei roi, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau oni bai, fel yr oedd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP yn datgan,
(the GMC)
. Roedd caniatâd i ddatgelu yn cael ei ragdybio pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei gwneud gan gorff cyhoeddus.
Byddai’r gweithiwr achos yn asesu’n ogystal y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael ac yn ystyried a oedd unrhyw wybodaeth bellach y gellid ei chael a fyddai o gymorth i’r sgriniwr meddygol wrth benderfynu pa gamau i’w cymryd mewn perthynas â’r gŵyn. Byddaf yn delio â chasglu gwybodaeth cyn sgrinio yn fanylach nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Cyn cyflwyno’r achos i’r sgriniwr meddygol, byddai’r gweithiwr achos yn paratoi memorandwm, yn crynhoi natur yr honiad, y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael i gefnogi, ac, fel arfer, barnau’r gweithiwr achos ynghylch y camau gweithredu priodol. Os mai barn y gweithiwr achos oedd bod yr achos yn debygol o gael ei anfon at y PPC, byddai’n paratoi llythyr drafft i’w gymeradwyo gan y sgriniwr meddygol ac yna’i anfon at y meddyg ar ôl sgrinio. Byddai’r llythyr yn hysbysu’r meddyg am y cyhuddiadau y gallai fod yn rhaid iddo/iddo wynebu.
Cau Achos yn Ddiweddarach
Roedd yn digwydd weithiau nad oedd yr ohebiaeth gyntaf y byddai’r GMC yn ei chael yn dweud yn glir beth oedd union natur y gŵyn. Efallai y byddai angen esboniad er mwyn canfod hyn. Wedi i’r mater gael ei esbonio, efallai y byddai wedi bod yn briodol i gau’r achos ar y sail a nodir ym mharagraff 18.22(a)-(s). Fe allai fod wedi bod yn briodol i gau’r achos hefyd am resymau eraill a oedd wedi dod yn hysbys neu a oedd wedi codi tra’r oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei hystyried. Yn unol â hynny, roedd modd i’r staff gau achos heb gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol ar unrhyw gam yn dilyn yr asesiad cychwynnol neu’r dosbarthiad a chyn sgrinio. Y sail ar gyfer gwneud hynny (yn ychwanegol at y rheiny y cyfeirir atynt ym mharagraff 18.22(a)-(s)) oedd:
bod y gŵyn wedi’i thynnu’n ôl
ni ellid nodi pwy oedd y meddyg er gwaethaf pob ymdrech resymol i wneud hynny
bod y meddyg wedi marw
ni fu unrhyw ymateb gan y meddyg a bod ei enw/henw wedi’i ddileu o’r gofrestr dan adran 30(5) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983, lle gellir dileu enw meddyg sy’n methu ymateb cyn pen chwe mis i ymholiad ynghylch ei gyfeiriad/chyfeiriad.
Yn y gorffennol, byddai’r staff hefyd yn cau achos pan oedd yr achwynydd yn gwrthod darparu datganiad statudol i gefnogi’i gŵyn/chwyn. Cadarnhad ffurfiol yw datganiad statudol bod cynnwys datganiad ysgrifenedig yn wir. Rhaid gwneud hyn ym mhresenoldeb cyfreithiwr neu berson o fewn categorïau cyfyngedig eraill. Fodd bynnag, diddymwyd gofyniad y GMC am ddatganiad statudol i gefnogi cwyn ym mis Tachwedd 2002. Roedd yn ymwneud yn unig ag unigolion preifat. Nid oedd unrhyw ddatganiad statudol yn ofynnol gan berson yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus.
Arfer Cynharach
Mae’r system ar gyfer camau cychwynnol prosesu achosion ymddygiad a ddisgrifiais uchod yn gymharol ddiweddar o ran tarddiad. Hyd at ddiwedd y 1990au, roedd y modd yr oedd achosion yn cael eu prosesu yn llawer llai strwythuredig. Ychydig o ddata a oedd yn cael ei storio ar gyfrifiadur ac nid oedd gan staff yr arweiniad manwl a’r ffurflenni safonol a ddatblygwyd yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng 1999 a 2003.
Newidiadau mewn Arfer ar ôl mis Rhagfyr 2003
Mae rhai newidiadau mewn arfer swyddfa wedi digwydd ers gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad. Fel y dywedais, ym mis Mai 2004, disodlwyd y Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP gan y Llawlyfr Ymchwilio FTP. Ar yr un pryd, disodlwyd y CDF a’r SDF safonol gan y ffurflen prosesu ac asesu cychwynnol. Nid oes angen i mi gyfeirio mewn unrhyw fanylder at gynnwys y dogfennau hyn, a fydd yn cael eu disodli gan arweiniad a ffurflenni newydd a fydd yn cael eu paratoi at ddefnydd staff wrth weithredu’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.
[2001] 1 WLR 2209.

---  ---
Roedd y weithdrefn a fabwysiadwyd pan oedd y GMC yn cael ei hysbysu am euogfarn braidd yn wahanol i’r weithdrefn yn dilyn gwneud cwyn am feddyg. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 (fel y’u newidiwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2002) yn amodi bod rhaid cyfeirio pob euogfarn, ac eithrio dau ddosbarth o achosion, at sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd yr eithriad cyntaf yn ymwneud â mân euogfarnau moduro (h.y. euogfarnau moduro nad oeddent yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau nac alcohol). Lle’r oedd gwybodaeth yn cael ei derbyn am euogfarn lle’r oedd y Cofrestrydd o’r farn ei bod yn
‘fân drosedd foduro’
, ni ddylai’r achos fynd ymhellach. Byddai achosion felly’n cael eu cau yn y swyddfa heb gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd yr ail eithriad yn ymwneud ag achosion o euogfarnau lle’r oedd dedfryd o garchar (ond nid dedfryd ohiriedig) wedi’i phennu. Ar ôl mis Tachwedd 2002, roedd y rhain yn cael eu cyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at y PCC ar gyfer gwrandawiad, oni bai bod y staff (yn arfer pwerau’r Cofrestrydd) o’r farn na fyddai cyfeiriad uniongyrchol er lles y cyhoedd.
Os nad oedd cyhuddiadau’n cael eu gwneud, neu os oedd cyhuddiadau’n cael eu gollwng, yn dilyn ymchwiliad troseddol, neu os oedd treial troseddol wedi arwain at ryddfarn, fe allai’r GMC, serch hynny, ddymuno canlyn yr achos os oedd materion ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer wedi codi yn ystod yr ymchwiliad troseddol. Fe allai fod felly hefyd os oedd llys troseddau wedi pennu rhyddhad diamod neu amodol (na fyddai, fel yr esboniais, wedi’i restru fel ‘euogfarn’), neu os oedd y meddyg wedi cael rhybudd am drosedd. Os digwydd hynny, byddai’r achos yn dilyn yr un weithdrefn ag ar gyfer cwyn.
Ar ôl 2000, wedi i’r GMC dderbyn gwybodaeth am euogfarn, neu am ymchwiliad troseddol cyfredol neu achos troseddol cyfredol a oedd yn effeithio ar feddyg, byddai rheolwr gwaith achos yn rhoi ystyriaeth frys i ba un a fyddai’n briodol i’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol i’w gyfeirio at yr IOC o bosibl. Fodd bynnag, cyn 2000, nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw rym i wneud gorchmynion interim mewn perthynas â meddyg a oedd yn destun ymchwiliad neu a oedd yn wynebu treial am drosedd. Cafodd y bwlch hwn ym mhwerau’r GMC ei unioni o ganlyniad uniongyrchol i anallu’r GMC i atal Shipman rhag ymarfer ym 1998 pan ganfuwyd ei fod yn destun ymchwiliad am lofruddiaeth. Erbyn meddwl, mae’n syndod nad oedd y GMC, nes achos Shipman, wedi teimlo’r angen yn ôl pob golwg am rym felly, ac nad oedd wedi gofyn am ddarparu grym felly o’r blaen. Rwy’n cyfeirio’n fanylach at y mater hwn ym Mhennod 20.

---  ---
Yn y cyfnod o 1996 hyd at 2001, cynyddodd nifer blynyddol yr euogfarnau yr adroddwyd i’r GMC amdanynt, a nifer blynyddol y cwynion a dderbyniodd y GMC, o ryw 1500 neu 1600 i 4500. Cafodd swyddfa’r GMC gryn anhawster wrth ddelio â’r baich gwaith ychwanegol hwn ac arweiniodd hyn at oedi maith wrth ddelio ag achosion. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad y cydnabuwyd, erbyn 2000, nad oedd gan y GMC unrhyw ffordd effeithiol o reoli achosion. Roedd yn dibynnu ar weithwyr achos i adrodd am unrhyw broblemau a oedd yn codi. Roedd llawer o’r achosion yn y system wedi bod ar agor am amser maith heb unrhyw gamau go iawn yn cael eu cymryd mewn perthynas â nhw. Cynhaliwyd ymarferiad, o’r enw y Prosiect Gwybodaeth Archwilio a Rheoli Adolygiadau Achos. Bu Mr Marshall yn rheoli’r Prosiect am 12 mis. I bob pwrpas, roedd yn gyfystyr â‘glanhad llwyr’ o achosion agored. Roedd yn golygu ystyried a oedd camau pellach yn angenrheidiol ac adolygu achosion. O ganlyniad i’r ymarferiad, caewyd llawer o achosion. Ar yr un pryd, cychwynnwyd proses archwilio, lle cafodd 10% o achosion a broseswyd gan staff y GMC eu harchwilio mewn ymgais i ganfod a oedd gweithdrefnau priodol wedi’u dilyn a pha un a ellid gwella ar y gweithdrefnau hynny. Arweiniodd y gwaith hwnnw at weithredu gweithdrefn llif gwaith strwythuredig ar gyfer sgrinio ac at baratoi’r Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP a chyfarwyddiadau eraill ar gyfer gweithwyr achos. Mewn amser, daeth elfen adolygu achosion y Prosiect i ben, gan y deliwyd â’r ôl-groniad o achosion agored. Fodd bynnag, parhaodd yr archwilio, a gwnaethpwyd y gwaith hwnnw gan dîm archwilio’r Gyfarwyddiaeth Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPD) a ffurfiwyd yn ddiweddar.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, daeth safonau gwasanaeth i rym am y tro cyntaf. Roedd y safonau gwasanaeth hyn yn nodi cyfnodau y dylid cwblhau rhai elfennau ar weithdrefnau’r FTP oddi mewn iddynt. Gosodwyd targedau ar gyfer cwblhau achosion o fewn safonau’r gwasanaeth ac roedd yn ofynnol cyflwyno adroddiadau cyson o berfformiad yn erbyn y safonau i’r Cyngor.
O fis Ionawr 2003, cynhaliodd y tîm archwilio FPD archwiliadau o samplau ar hap o achosion ar bedwar cam gwahanol o’u cynnydd. Disgrifiwyd y rhain fel ‘archwiliadau sgrinio’ (oherwydd eu bod yn archwiliadau o waith a wnaed yn yr Adran Sgrinio yn ôl pob tebyg). Nid oeddent, fodd bynnag, yn ymwneud â gwaith y sgrinwyr. Roedd 110 o achosion bob pedair wythnos yn cael eu dethol ar gyfer eu harchwilio. Diben yr archwilio oedd gwirio bod yr holl gamau trefniadol priodol wedi’u cymryd. Yn benodol, roedd gwiriad yn cael ei wneud i sicrhau bod safonau gwasanaeth wedi’u bodloni, bod ffeil yr achos wedi’i threfnu’n dda a bod y gronfa ddata wedi’i chadw’n briodol i adlewyrchu camau cywirol y dylid eu cymryd, ac roedd cymryd y camau cywirol hynny’n destun archwiliad hefyd.
Roedd penderfyniadau i gau achos yn y cyfnod dosbarthu yn destun archwiliad hefyd, ac roedd unrhyw gamgymeriadau’n cael eu codi gyda’r rheolwr gwaith achos perthnasol. Hyd at ddiwedd 2003, archwiliwyd 10% o achosion a gafodd eu cau yn y cam dosbarthu (triage). Cynyddwyd hyn i 50% wedi hynny. Yn ystod mis Rhagfyr 2003, caewyd 144 o achosion yn y cam dosbarthu. Cafodd hanner (72) yr achosion hynny eu harchwilio. Nodwyd pedwar o’r achosion fel rhai a gafodd eu cau’n anghywir (er, mewn un achos, ar ôl trafod ymhellach â’r rheolwr gwaith achos, penderfynwyd bod cyfiawnhad dros ei weithredu). Ail-agorwyd tri achos. Roedd dau o’r achosion hynny wedi’u cyfeirio’n amhriodol yn ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Roedd un achos (achos sensitif yn ymwneud â chwyn gan dad yr oedd ei blant wedi’u tynnu o’i ofal yn dilyn gwrandawiad llys lle’r oedd y meddygon a oedd yn destun cwyn wedi rhoi tystiolaeth arbenigol) wedi’i gau ar y sail nad oedd yr achwynydd yn awgrymu bod y meddygon wedi gweithredu’n afresymol. Mewn gwirionedd, er yr ymddengys na ddywedodd hynny’n blwmp ac yn blaen, roedd yn eglur ei fod yn honni afresymoldeb. Roedd naw achos arall lle’r oedd rheswm amhriodol am gau wedi’u cofnodi ar yr SDF, er bod yr archwilydd yn fodlon bod cyfiawnhad dros gau’r achos am resymau eraill. Fe’m trawodd, o gofio’r ffaith y canfuwyd bod tri o’r 72 o achosion a archwiliwyd wedi’u cau’n anghywir, byddai wedi bod yn ddoeth i archwilio’r 72 achos arall. Fodd bynnag, ni chredaf i hynny gael ei wneud.

---  ---
Rwyf wedi dweud nad oedd y GMC, yn gyffredinol, yn barod yn y gorffennol i ystyried cwyn gan unigolyn preifat ynghylch triniaeth feddygol oni bai a nes bod unrhyw weithdrefnau cwynion a oedd ar gael yn lleol wedi’u disbyddu. Yn lle hynny, byddai achwynwyr yn cael eu cynghori i ganlyn y gŵyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Hyd at fis Hydref neu fis Tachwedd 2002, nid oedd y polisi yn ymestyn i gŵynion am driniaeth breifat, ond yn hytrach i gŵynion yn ymwneud â thriniaeth y GIG yn unig. Wedi hynny, fodd bynnag, roedd cwynion am driniaeth breifat yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl hefyd at weithdrefnau cwynion y meddygon neu’r sefydliadau preifat dan sylw.
Beirniadu’r Polisi
Bu’r polisi hwn yn destun dadl am flynyddoedd lawer. Ym 1988, tynnodd Mrs Jean Robinson, aelod lleyg o’r GMC ar y pryd, sylw ato yn ei chyhoeddiad ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
. Cwynodd mai
‘polisi cudd’
y GMC am y 15 mlynedd blaenorol oedd nad oedd cwynion ynghylch triniaeth GIG yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat yn cael eu hystyried gan sgriniwr y GMC, ond roeddent yn lle hynny’n cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl ar unwaith at yr achwynydd gyda chyngor i ganlyn y gŵyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Byddai’r GMC yn ystyried cwynion felly’n unig os oeddent wedi bod yn destun ymchwiliad ac wedi cael eu profi gan awdurdod y GIG. Yn lle penderfynu ei hun ym mha achosion y dylai weithredu, roedd y GMC yn dibynnu ar awdurdodau GIG i adrodd, ar ddiwedd y gweithdrefnau cwynion, am unrhyw achos yr oedd yn ymddangos eu bod yn rhai digon difrifol iddynt warantu sylw’r GMC. Mynegodd Mrs Robinson bryder bod y polisi hwn yn cael ei fabwysiadu ym mhob achos yn ymwneud â chwynion GIG, pa mor ddifrifol bynnag oedd yr honiad yn erbyn y meddyg ac ni waeth a oedd cwestiwn o SPM yn codi ai peidio. Holodd Mrs Robinson a oedd y polisi’n cydymffurfio â Rheolau’r GMC. Rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 oedd y rheol berthnasol, a nodaf delerau’r rheol ym mharagraff 18.20.
Nododd Mrs Robinson bod trefniadau ar waith i adroddiadau gael eu gwneud i’r GMC gan awdurdodau GIG yn achos cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu, ond nid mewn perthynas â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon ysbytai. Nododd, ar yr adeg pan oedd yn ysgrifennu, bod gweithdrefnau cwynion ysbytai GIG yn anfoddhaol ac anaml iawn y byddent yn arwain at adroddiad i’r GMC. Dywedodd, o ganlyniad, bod
‘meddygon ysbytai wedi bod yn imiwn i raddau helaeth i gamau gweithredu’r GMC ar safonau clinigol’
. Roedd Mrs Robinson yn feirniadol hefyd o’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu. Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 6 y gweithdrefnau cwynion a oedd mewn grym pan oedd Mrs Robinson yn ysgrifennu, ac mae’n amlwg bod cyfiawnhad am ei beirniadaethau.
Yn fyr, y sefyllfa oedd bod cwynion am feddyg teulu’n torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth yn cael eu gwrando gan bwyllgorau gwasanaethau meddygol (MSCau) pwyllgorau ymarferwyr teulu (FPCau). Roedd adroddiadau am yr holl achosion lle canfuwyd bod achos o dorri telerau yn cael eu hanfon at yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS), a fyddai’n adrodd i’r GMC am achosion priodol, ar ôl cymryd cyngor gan y Pwyllgor Cynghori Meddygol. O 1992, dirprwyodd yr SoS ei bwerau/phwerau i’r Uned Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAU), ac, o 1996, roedd swyddogaethau’r FHSAU yn cael eu cyflawni gan yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA) (yr FHSAA (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig) yn ddiweddarach). Cyhoeddodd yr Adran Iechyd restr o feini prawf a oedd yn nodi’r mathau o achos y dylid adrodd i’r GMC amdanynt. Roedd y rhain yn achosion yn ymwneud ag esgeuluso neu ddiystyru cyfrifoldebau proffesiynol i gleifion, achosion lle bu penderfyniad gan Dribiwnlys GIG y dylai enw meddyg gael ei ddileu oddi ar restr feddygol yr FPC, ac achosion eraill yn ymwneud ag ardystio afreolaidd, cyhuddo amhriodol neu hawliadau am ffioedd neu ganfasio neu ennill cleifion trwy ddull anfoesegol. Hefyd, rhoddwyd cyngor i ystyried adrodd am achosion o gamymddygiad a oedd wedi bod yn
‘niweidiol ddifrifol i ofal meddygol cleifion’
. Roedd cyfeiriad hefyd at y posibilrwydd y gallai achosion o anonestrwydd gan feddygon fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM a dylent fod yn destun adroddiad. Ar ôl 1992, cafodd awdurdodau gwasanaethau iechyd teulu (FHSAau), olynwyr yr FPCau, eu hannog i adrodd am achosion priodol yn uniongyrchol at y GMC (yn hytrach nag i ddibynnu ar yr FHSAU/FHSAA i wneud hynny).
Er gwaetha’r rhestr o feini prawf a ddosbarthwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd, a oedd yn bodoli ar adeg pryder Mrs Robinson, nid oedd yn glir o gwbl y byddai’r holl gŵynion a brofwyd a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn mynd yn ôl at y GMC o reidrwydd. Dadl Mrs Robinson oedd mai bach iawn oedd y siawns o feddyg teulu’n cael ei wneud yn destun adroddiad i’r GMC yn dilyn cwyn i’w FPC. Nododd y gallai gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG gymryd amser maith i’w cwblhau. Hyd yn oed os oedd cwyn yn cael ei chyfeirio’n ôl yn y pen draw at y GMC ar ôl cwblhau’r gweithdrefnau, roedd oedi hir yn aml cyn y byddai hyn yn digwydd. Fe allai meddyg a oedd yn beryglus o analluog fod wedi achosi niwed pellach i gleifion tra’r oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei phrosesu.
Nododd Mrs Robinson y gallai’r dasg o ganlyn cwyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG fod yn ormod o dasg i rai cleifion a’u teuluoedd, ac fe allai rhai ganfod eu bod eisoes y tu allan i’r terfyn amser (wyth wythnos yn unig bryd hynny) ar gyfer gwneud hynny. Efallai nad oedd rhai’n sylweddoli bod angen iddynt ddilyn y gweithdrefnau cwynion ffurfiol (yn hytrach na’r gweithdrefnau cymodi anffurfiol a oedd yn cael eu hannog ar y pryd) er mwyn cael unrhyw obaith o gwbl o’u hachosion yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC. Pan oedd Mrs Robinson wrthi’n ysgrifennu, roedd y llythyrau safonol a oedd yn cael eu hysgrifennu gan y GMC i achwynwyr yn eu cynghori y gallent ddod â’u cwynion yn ôl i’r GMC ar ddiwedd proses cwynion y GIG. Nid oedd fersiynau blaenorol o’r llythyr wedi cynnwys y wybodaeth honno. Dywedodd Mrs Robinson fod y llythyr safonol wedi’i newid ar ei thaerineb hi. Fe allai’r rhai a dderbyniodd fersiynau cynharach o’r llythyr, fodd bynnag, fod wedi credu na allent fynd at y GMC eto, hyd yn oed pe na fyddent wedi cael unrhyw fodlonrwydd o weithdrefnau cwynion lleol.
Effaith polisi’r GMC oedd ei gwneud yn debygol na fyddai rhai achosion o arfer clinigol a oedd yn ddifrifol is na’r safon yn cael eu hystyried gan y GMC. Fe allai hyn ddigwydd oherwydd bod achwynwyr, a gafodd eu siomi â’r ymateb gwreiddiol gan y GMC, wedi rhoi’r gorau iddi a pheidio canlyn eu hachosion ymhellach. Ond, hyd yn oed pe byddent yn canlyn eu cwyn yn lleol, fe allai fynd i’r gwellt mewn nifer o ffyrdd. Os oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei phrofi, efallai na fyddai’n cael ei chyfeirio at y GMC gan yr awdurdod GIG perthnasol. Hyd yn oed pe bai’n cael ei chyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC, fe allai dwy i dair blynedd fod wedi mynd heibio, ac ar ôl hynny efallai na fyddai tystion ar gael mwyach neu efallai y byddent yn amharod i roi’u tystiolaeth am yr ail waith. Mewn achosion felly, byddai camau disgyblu gan y GMC yn amhosibl. Heblaw hynny, gydol yr amser hwnnw, byddai’r meddyg wedi bod yn rhydd i drin cleifion.
Nododd Mrs Robinson bod y GMC yn ceisio cyfiawnhau ei bolisi trwy gyfeirio at y terfynau amser llym yr oedd rhaid gwneud cwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu oddi fewn iddynt. Dywedwyd, erbyn i’r GMC ystyried a gwrthod cwyn, fe allai’r achwynydd fod wedi colli’r cyfle i gwyno’n lleol. Roedd yn well iddo/iddi felly, awgrymodd y GMC, i gael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau lleol ar unwaith. Nododd Mrs Robinson y byddai’n gwbl bosibl i’r GMC gyfeirio cwyn at sgriniwr meddygol i’w hystyried, tra’n ysgrifennu at yr achwynydd ar yr un pryd i’w hysbysu o’r terfynau amser ar gyfer gwneud cwyn yn lleol. Felly, fe ellid diogelu sefyllfa’r achwynydd yn foddhaol. Pan roddwyd awgrym Mrs Robinson i Mr Howes, a gafodd ei gyflogi yn yr Adran Ymddygiad fwy neu lai’n ddi-dor rhwng 1980 a 1994, dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r canfyddiad o fewn y GMC pan oedd Mrs Robinson yn ysgrifennu oedd, yn gam neu’n gymwys, y byddai dechrau dwy weithdrefn ar yr un pryd wedi bod yn ‘nonsens; ac yn annheg i feddygon. Teimlaf fod rhaid i mi ddweud nad ymddengys ei bod yn flaenoriaeth uchel ym meddwl y GMC mai’r hyn a oedd yn ofynnol oedd gweithdrefn a fyddai’n diogelu cleifion orau, wrth fod yn deg i feddygon ar yr un pryd. Beth bynnag, ymddengys bod y GMC weithiau wedi caniatáu i ddwy set o weithdrefnau fod ar waith ar yr un pryd. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Townsend, Pennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad o 1994 hyd at 1998, bod adegau pan oedd awdurdodau GIG yn adrodd i’r GMC am achosion difrifol yr oeddent wrthi’n delio â nhw yn eu gweithdrefnau cwynion. Cadwodd y GMC y posibilrwydd ar agor o gychwyn ei weithdrefnau ei hun i redeg ochr yn ochr â gweithdrefnau lleol pe bai lles y cyhoedd yn gofyn am hynny. Gall fod nad oedd y sefyllfa a ddisgrifiwyd gan Mr Townsend yn berthnasol yn y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au.
Tystiolaeth i Bwyllgor Wilson
Hyd at 1993, ac er gwaethaf y pryderon difrifol a godwyd gan Mrs Robinson, parhaodd y system lle byddai aelod o staff yn cyfeirio cwynion am driniaeth GIG yn ôl at achwynwyr heb eu cyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol. Mae ystadegau’r GMC yn dangos, yn y flwyddyn hyd at 31 Awst 1993, y deliwyd â 160 o gŵynion (h.y. rhyw 10% o’r holl gŵynion a dderbyniwyd gan y GMC) yn y modd hwn. Ym mis Gorffennaf 1993, cyflwynwyd cynllun peilot lle byddai cwynion felly’n cael eu cyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol i’w hystyried, yn hytrach na chael eu cyfeirio’n ôl ar unwaith at yr achwynydd gan aelodau o staff y GMC. Pan wnaethpwyd y newid, dywedwyd (yn Adroddiad Blynyddol y PPC a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor ym mis Tachwedd 1993) mai’r rheswm y tu ôl i’r newid oedd bod y terfynau amser y gellid gwneud cwynion i gyrff y GIG wedi’u llacio, gan roi mwy o amser i’r GMC i ddelio â chwynion. Nid dyma’r rheswm yn amlwg, gan fod y newid yn y terfynau amser wedi cael ei wneud ym 1990 ac estynnwyd y terfynau amser o wyth i dair wythnos ar ddeg yn unig. Beth bynnag, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y newid system wedi arwain o’r ffaith bod y GMC, ym 1993, wedi’i wahodd i gyflwyno tystiolaeth i’r Pwyllgor Adolygu Annibynnol, dan gadeiryddiaeth yr Athro (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alan Wilson (Pwyllgor Wilson). Roedd Pwyllgor Wilson yn ystyried diwygio gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Fe wnaeth paratoi tystiolaeth i’w chyflwyno i Bwyllgor Wilson beri i aelodau o’r GMC fyfyrio ynghylch ei arfer presennol o ganiatáu aelodau o staff i gyfeirio achosion yn ôl at achwynwyr heb ymyrraeth y sgrinwyr meddygol, ac i’w newid. Gall fod bod y newid wedi deillio o bryderon ynghylch a oedd y polisi a oedd ar waith bryd hynny’n cydymffurfio â Rheolau’r GMC. Yn fy marn i, nid oedd. Roedd Rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, aelod o staff) i anfon at y Llywydd (sgriniwr meddygol) unrhyw gŵyn a oedd i weld yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Ni ddylai aelodau’r staff gau achosion felly eu hunain ar ôl cynghori achwynwyr i ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau lleol.
Ym mis Medi 1993, anfonodd y PPC femorandwm o dystiolaeth at Bwyllgor Wilson ar ran y GMC. Roedd y memorandwm yn trafod polisi’r GMC o gyfeirio cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG, polisi a ddisgrifiwyd gan y PPC fel un
‘defnyddiol i achwynwyr’
. Roedd y memorandwm yn disgrifio sut yr oedd achwynwyr i’r GMC yn cael eu hysbysu, lle’r oedd yn briodol, o fodolaeth gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG ac yn cael cynnig y cyfle i ddefnyddio’r gweithdrefnau hynny a/neu ysgrifennu eto at y GMC. Nododd bod y rhan fwyaf o gŵynion felly’n mynd ymlaen wedyn dan weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd gan y PPC unrhyw fodd o wybod hynny. Ni chymerodd y GMC unrhyw gamau i ganfod beth oedd yn digwydd wedi hynny i achosion a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio’n ôl at achwynwyr. Y cyfan y gallai’r PPC fod wedi’i wybod oedd nad oedd y mwyafrif o achwynwyr yn mynd at y GMC eto.
Roedd y memorandwm yn dweud yn glir bod y GMC eisiau cadw’r gallu, os oedd o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i wneud hynny, i fynd ymlaen â chwyn a oedd yn destun adroddiad iddo, heb ei chyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Byddai’n gwneud hynny, fe honnwyd, os oedd y gŵyn i weld yn codi cwestiwn o SPM neu o amhariad difrifol ar iechyd yr oedd gan y GMC ddyletswydd statudol i’w ystyried a gweithredu arno. Nid oedd y datganiad hwnnw o arfer cyfredol yn gywir oherwydd, fel y nodais, nid oedd staff yn cyfeirio at sgrinwyr meddygol yr holl gŵynion gan unigolion a oedd i weld yn codi cwestiwn o SPM, ond yn hytrach y rheiny lle’r oedd y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u cwblhau’n unig. Os nad oedd y weithdrefn cwynion lleol wedi’i chwblhau, dim ond os oedd yn ymddangos i’r GMC bod y meddyg yn risg i’r cyhoedd y byddai’r achos yn cael ei dderbyn i weithdrefnau’r GMC.
Mynegodd y PPC bryder i Bwyllgor Wilson nad oedd cyrff y GIG yn cyfeirio’r holl achosion y dylid fod wedi’u cyfeirio at y GMC. Nododd y memorandwm mai un neu ddwy o gŵynion yn unig a benderfynwyd gan MSCau a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at y GMC gan FHSAau. Byddai FHSAau weithiau’n delio ag achosion MSC difrifol heb eu cyfeirio at yr FHSAU. Dim ond un achos y deliodd y Tribiwnlys GIG ag ef oedd wedi’i adrodd i’r GMC mewn tair blynedd. Roedd cyfeiriadau o awdurdodau ysbyty wedi bod mewn ffigurau sengl ym 1990, 1991 a 1992. Dywedodd y memorandwm bod y GMC wedi bod yn mynegi pryder er 1987 am y nifer fach o feddygon yr oedd awdurdodau ysbyty yn adrodd amdanynt. Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Townsend bod diffyg gweithdrefnau disgyblu effeithiol mewn ysbytai yn ffynhonnell pryder yn ystod ei amser yn yr Adran Ymddygiad rhwng 1994 a 1998. Roedd meddygon ysbytai yn tueddu cael eu diswyddo am gamymddygiad heb eu cyfeirio at y GMC. At hynny, dywedodd bod pryder o fewn y GMC bod y polisi a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i gŵynion gael eu cyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol yn rhoi’r cyfrifoldeb ar achwynwyr a’r awdurdodau GIG i ysgogi adfywio’r achosion yn y GMC. Teimlwyd bod hyn yn anghyson â bwriad penodedig y GMC, sef diogelu lles y cyhoedd.
Roedd memorandwm y PPC at Bwyllgor Wilson yn cyfeirio hefyd at yr oedi (dywedwyd eu bod cyn hired â thair blynedd weithiau) a allai ddigwydd cyn bod cwyn am driniaeth y GIG yn cael ei datrys yn lleol ac adrodd am ei chanlyniad i’r GMC. Cyfeiriwyd at yr effeithiau croes ar y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael i’r GMC, a rhoddwyd enghreifftiau o achosion arbennig o faith o oedi. Cyfeiriodd y memorandwm at gynrychiolaethau a wnaethpwyd gan y GMC dro ar ôl tro dros gyfnod o 17 mlynedd ynghylch oedi gormodol yng ngweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG ac ynghylch effaith yr achosion hynny o oedi. Yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, dywedodd y memorandwm, roedd yr oedi wedi gwaethygu, nid gwell.
Gofynnodd y memorandwm i Bwyllgor Wilson i ystyried modd o osgoi achosion maith o oedi. Gwnaeth y PPC gais y dylid atgoffa’r FHSAau am eu dyletswydd i gyfeirio achosion priodol at y GMC. Roedd cais hefyd y dylid sefydlu mecanweithiau ar gyfer adrodd i’r GMC am achosion a oedd yn ymwneud â meddygon ysbyty lle’r oedd yn ymddangos bod cwestiwn o SPM yn codi.
Mae’n amlwg, erbyn 1993 o leiaf (ac ymhell cyn hynny fwy na thebyg), bod y GMC yn cydnabod yn llawn y diffygion yng ngweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Cydnabuwyd hefyd, o ganlyniad i’r diffygion hynny, nad oedd achosion o SPM y dylid fod wedi’u cyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC, yn ei gyrraedd. Nid oedd yr achosion hynny a gyfeiriwyd yn y diwedd at y GMC, ar ôl mynd drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG, yn cyrraedd tan ymhell wedi’r digwyddiadau yr oedd y cwynion yn ymwneud â nhw. Eto, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod Mrs Robinson, ym 1988, wedi tynnu’i sylw at effaith y diffygion, roedd y GMC wedi parhau â’i bolisi o anfon achosion yn ôl i’w cyfeirio at weithdrefnau lleol heb ystyried a oeddent yn codi cwestiwn SPM. Hyd yn oed ym 1993, lle’r oedd effeithiau diffygion y system cwynion i’w gweld yn amlwg, nid ymddengys bod unrhyw gydnabyddiaeth o’r ffaith ei bod yn bosibl nad oedd rhai cwynion a oedd wedi dod at y GMC ac a gafodd eu cyfeirio’n ôl at yr achwynydd wedi mynd i mewn i weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG o gwbl, ac y gallent o ganlyniad fod wedi’u colli i’r system reoleiddio yn gyfan gwbl.
Newid Arfer ym 1993
Golygai’r newid arfer, a roddwyd ar brawf gyntaf ym mis Gorffennaf 1993 ac a barhaodd wedi hynny, bod yr holl gŵynion am driniaeth y GIG yn cael eu cyfeirio yn y lle cyntaf at sgriniwr meddygol. Pan wnaethpwyd y newid, dywedwyd mai’r bwriad oedd y byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu a oedd y gŵyn yn codi cwestiwn o SPM, a dim ond os oedd o’r farn nad oedd, y byddai’r achwynydd yn cael ei gynghori/chynghori i gyfeirio’r gŵyn at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Mynegwyd y bwriad hwnnw yn Adroddiad Blynyddol y PPC, a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor ym mis Tachwedd 1993. Pe bai’r bwriad hwnnw wedi’i roi ar waith, byddai arfer y GMC wedyn wedi cydymffurfio â rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988.
Er gwaethaf cynnwys yr Adroddiad Blynyddol hwnnw, mae’n glir o ganfyddiadau’r PSI, a wnaeth dadansoddiad o gŵynion a dderbyniodd y GMC yn y cyfnod 12 mis o fis Medi 1993, nad oedd y bwriad a honnwyd yn yr Adroddiad Blynyddol wedi’i roi ar waith. Canfu’r tîm PSI bod y sgrinwyr meddygol yn cymhwyso trothwy uwch nag SPM ar gyfer cadw achosion yn y GMC. Wrth ddisgrifio’r gweithdrefnau, datganodd Adroddiad PSI 1996:
case of serious professional misconduct may or may not arise in these cases, but the GMC does not usually pursue a complaint in these circumstances but suggests that the complainant takes it up initially with “a more appropriate body”. The discretion of the medical screener is exercised in cases where it is felt that there could be a risk to the public if the GMC failed to initiate action at the same time as suggesting that the complaint should be made to another authority.’
Ymddengys y dywedwyd wrth y tîm PSI mai’r prawf a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr oedd, nid a oedd cwyn yn codi cwestiwn o SPM ond pa un a oedd yn peri risg i’r cyhoedd. Cyn belled ag ystyriwyd nad oedd risg felly’n codi, byddai’r achwynydd yn cael ei gynghori/chynghori i gyfeirio’r gŵyn i’r gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol, pa un a oedd yr achos yn codi cwestiwn o SPM ai peidio. Nid oedd yn ofynnol cael cydsyniad sgriniwr lleyg pan oedd sgriniwr meddygol yn cytuno y dylai achos gael ei gyfeirio’n ôl i’w ganlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Y rheswm am hyn oedd nad oedd yr achos yn cael ei ddosbarthu fel un a oedd wedi’i wrthod yn ffurfiol gan y GMC. Dylai fod wedi’i ddosbarthu felly, oherwydd, mewn gwirionedd, roedd yr achos wedi’i gau. Wrth gwrs, roedd posibilrwydd y gallai’r achwynydd ddod â’r achos yn ôl, ond, os nad oedd, ni fyddai’r GMC yn gwneud unrhyw beth arall. Effaith y dosbarthu anghywir hwn oedd bod y posibilrwydd y gallai’r sgriniwr lleyg benderfynu y dylai’r achos aros yn y GMC yn cael ei golli. Yn fyr, yr unig newid a oedd wedi digwydd o ganlyniad i’r ystyriaeth o weithdrefnau’r GMC ar adeg y cyflwyniad i Bwyllgor Wilson oedd bod y prawf ‘risg i’r cyhoedd’ yn cael ei gymhwyso gan sgrinwyr, yn hytrach na chan staff y GMC. Yn ddiau roedd llawer o aelodau’r Cyngor o’r farn (gan ddibynnu ar Adroddiad Blynyddol 1993) bod y gweithdrefnau a oedd ar waith yn cydymffurfio â rheol 6. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oeddent, gan nad oedd y sgrinwyr meddygol yn cymhwyso’r prawf statudol cywir. Roedd y sgrinwyr meddygol yn aelodau o’r GMC a dylent fod wedi sylweddoli mai’r realiti oedd nad oedd y broses fel yr oedd yn cael ei disgrifio yn yr Adroddiad Blynyddol ac nid oedd yn cydymffurfio â’r Rheolau. Byddaf yn cyfeirio ymhellach at ganfyddiadau’r tîm PSI nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Pe bai newid yn wir wedi bod yn y prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso o tua mis Tachwedd 1993, gellid fod wedi disgwyl gweld lleihad sylweddol yn y gyfran o gŵynion yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl at achwynwyr gyda chyngor i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Fodd bynnag, mae’r ffigurau sydd ar gael yn awgrymu nad oedd gostyngiad felly. Yn y flwyddyn hyd at fis Awst 1992, derbyniodd y GMC wybodaeth am 1300 o euogfarnau a chwynion; cyfeiriwyd 185 o’r rheiny yn ôl i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Yn y flwyddyn hyd at fis Awst 1993, derbyniwyd 1612 o euogfarnau a chwynion, a chyfeiriwyd 160 ohonynt yn ôl. Ym 1994, derbyniwyd 1626 o euogfarnau a chwynion a chyfeiriwyd 192 o achosion yn ôl i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Byddai’r ffigurau hyn yn tueddu cadarnhau mai’r prawf a oedd yn cael ei gymhwyso cyn ac ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1993 oedd y prawf ‘risg i’r cyhoedd’ a bod barn y sgrinwyr meddygol am risg yr un fath yn fras â barn y staff cyn y newid.
Ymddengys bod yr arfer o gyfeirio achos yn ôl i’w ganlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol, oni bai bod ffeithiau’n awgrymu bod risg i’r cyhoedd, wedi bod ar waith hyd yn oed lle’r oedd gan y meddyg ganfyddiad blaenorol o SPM yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Mewn un achos a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, cafodd Dr JG 03 ei ddyfarnu’n euog o wyrdroi cwrs cyfiawnder, ac fe’i cafwyd yn euog o SPM yn ddiweddarach. Roedd wedi rhoi cyffur gwrtharwyddol i glaf a oedd yn dioddef o asthma yn gynnar yn y 1990au ac roedd wedi dweud celwydd yng nghwest y crwner, gan honni nad oedd yn ymwybodol o’r cofnodion bod y claf yn dioddef o asthma. Canfuwyd yn ddiweddarach ei fod wedi ffugio’r cofnodion a chafodd ei erlyn. Deliodd y GMC â’r ddau fater a phennwyd amodau ar ei gofrestriad am flwyddyn. Derbyniwyd cwyn bellach am y meddyg hwn saith mlynedd yn ddiweddarach, ond cynghorwyd yr achwynydd i ganlyn y gŵyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Nid oes unrhyw arwydd yn ffeil y GMC bod cynnydd neu ganlyniad ar lefel leol y gŵyn fwy diweddar wedi’u dilyn.
Yr Arweiniad a Gynhwyswyd yn Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994
Roedd y Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant, a luniwyd ym 1994 gan Mr Howes (Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994), yn datgan bod triniaeth y GIG (neu ddiffyg triniaeth) yn gyfrifoldeb yr awdurdod GIG lleol yn y lle cyntaf, ac y dylid cynghori achwynyr
‘in the first instance’
i gyfeirio’u cwynion at yr awdurdod iechyd priodol (HA) neu’r FHSA. Rhoddodd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 nifer o resymau am y weithdrefn hon. Roedd y gyntaf yn ymwneud â therfynau amser a oedd yn rheoli gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Os oedd unigolyn i gael ei gŵyn/chwyn wedi’i hystyried dan y gweithdrefnau hynny, roedd rhaid iddo/iddi symud yn o sydyn. Yr ail reswm oedd y cyflymder y gallai ymchwiliadau lleol gychwyn, hyd yn oed (fel y cydnabuwyd) pe baent yn cymryd
‘cryn amser i’w cwblhau’
. Dywedodd Mr Howes bod y cyfeiriad at y cyflymder y gallai ymchwiliadau lleol gychwyn yn ymwneud â’r amser y byddai meddyg yn cael ei hysbysu am gŵyn a oedd wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Dan weithdrefnau’r GIG, byddai’n cael ei hysbysu’n gynnar, yn unol â therfynau amser penodedig. Dan weithdrefnau’r GMC bryd hynny, ni fyddai’r meddyg yn cael ei hysbysu (ac ni fyddai’r ‘ymchwiliad’ yn cychwyn) nes bod y sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud y penderfyniad i gyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Fe allai hynny, dywedwyd, gymryd
‘cryn amser’
. Mewn gwirionedd, yn y cyfnod hwn, nid oedd oedi sylweddol yng nghyfnodau cynnar gweithdrefnau’r GMC. Roedd hwn yn ymgais i ddefnyddio’r posibilrwydd o oedi yn y GMC fel cyfiawnhad dros anfon yr achos at weithdrefnau lleol. Hefyd, byddai gan yr FHSA neu’r HA, dywedwyd, fynediad llawer mwy at dystion potensial a chofnodion perthnasol. Gwnaeth Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 y pwynt hefyd bod cwynion am driniaeth ysbyty’n ymwneud â llawer o ffactorau’n aml (e.e. ymddygiad nyrsys) a oedd y tu allan i faes y GMC.
Roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn atgoffa staff nad oedd achwynwyr dan unrhyw rwymedigaeth i wneud cwyn i’r corff lleol yn gyntaf, er y dywedwyd bod hyn
‘yn ddymunol ac yn briodol yn y rhan fwyaf o ystyriaethau’
. Os oedd achwynydd yn mynnu y dylai ei gŵyn/chwyn gael ei hystyried gan y GMC cyn cael ei chyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer penderfyniad pa un a ddylai’r GMC
‘ymyrryd’
Wrth ddisgrifio’r camau i’w cymryd pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei hadrodd i’r GMC ar ôl cwblhau gweithdrefn gŵynion y GIG, roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddi 1994 yn cydnabod y gallai achosion felly gyrraedd y GMC gymaint â dwy neu dair blynedd wedi’r digwyddiadau a arweiniodd atynt. Erbyn hynny, roedd y claf dan sylw wedi marw weithiau. Gan y byddai gwrandawiad pellach yn ofynnol, os oedd y gŵyn i’w chyfeirio at y PCC, fe allai’r ffaith nad oedd y claf ar gael i roi tystiolaeth beri anhawster yn amlwg mewn achos a oedd yn dibynnu ar ei dystiolaeth/thystiolaeth. Efallai na fyddai modd i achos felly fynd ymlaen.
Roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn dweud yn glir, pan oedd cwyn wedi’i chyfeirio at y GMC gan FHSA neu HA, ar ôl cwblhau’i weithdrefnau cwynion, byddai’r GMC yn cymryd rhyw fath o gamau gweithredu bron bob tro, pa un ai drwy gyfeirio’r achosion at y PPC (ac, o bosibl, o’r fan honno at y PCC) neu drwy roi rhybudd i’r meddyg. Mewn achosion lle bu canfyddiad croes gan MSC, os mai hwn oedd y tro cyntaf i’r meddyg gael ei ganfod/chanfod yn torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth ac nad oedd gan y meddyg unrhyw hanes disgyblu blaenorol hysbys, nododd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 y gellid delio â’r achos fwy na thebyg trwy rybudd. Mewn ail achos neu achos dilynol, fodd bynnag, fe allai fod cyfiawnhad dros gamau disgyblu, gan ddibynnu ar amgylchiadau’r achos a pha un a oedd tystiolaeth ar gael o hyd. Fodd bynnag, pan gafodd canfyddiadau croes y ddau MSC yn ymwneud â Shipman eu cyfeirio at y GMC gan yr FHSAU ym 1994, ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau o gwbl. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r hyn ddigwyddodd ar yr achlysur hwnnw ym Mhennod 19.
Ar ôl 1993, pan oedd cwyn am driniaeth y GIG yn cael ei derbyn a bod staff y GMC o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i’w chyfeirio’n ôl i’w chanlyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, byddai’r staff yn cyflwyno memorandwm (llawer byrrach a llai manwl na hynny a oedd yn cael ei ddarparu fel arfer pan oedd achos i’w sgrinio) i’r sgriniwr meddygol, yn nodi’r rhesymau dros argymell y dylai’r gŵyn gael ei chyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion GIG lleol. Byddai llythyr safonol drafft at yr achwynydd ynghlwm wrth y memorandwm. Roedd enghreifftiau o’r llythyrau safonol a oedd yn cael eu defnyddio ym 1994 wedi’u cynnwys yn Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994. Byddai’r llythyr yn hysbysu achwynwyr mai’r corff GIG lleol oedd â’r prif gyfrifoldeb am ystyried cwynion ynghylch triniaeth (neu ddiffyg triniaeth). Byddai’n awgrymu y dylai’r achwynydd wneud ei gŵyn/chwyn i’r corff GIG priodol yn y lle cyntaf. Byddai’r llythyr yn dweud wrth yr achwynydd am y terfyn amser ar gyfer cwynion lleol a byddai’n amgáu llungopi o lythyr gwreiddiol yr achwynydd at y GMC, fel y gallai’r achwynydd ei ddefnyddio, os oedd yn dymuno, wrth ysgrifennu at y corff cwynion GIG perthnasol. Byddai’r llythyr yn hysbysu’r achwynydd, os oedd ei gŵyn/chŵyn yn cael ei chynnal, byddai adroddiad swyddogol yn cael ei anfon yn awtomatig at y GMC, os
‘ystyrir
(h.y. gan y GIG)
y gall fod cyfiawnhad dros gamau disgyblu dilynol gan y Cyngor’
. Byddai’r achwynydd yn cael gwybod y gallai ysgrifennu eto at y GMC pan oedd yr ymchwiliad gan y corff cwynion lleol wedi’i gwblhau. Bryd hynny, byddai’r sgriniwr yn barod i ystyried y mater ymhellach, hyd yn oed os nad oedd y gŵyn wedi’i chynnal. Datganodd y llythyr:
Fe allai fod wedi bod yn annymunol ac yn wastraff adnoddau i gael dau ymchwiliad ar yr un pryd (a gellid fod wedi ystyried ei fod yn ‘annheg i feddygon’) ond nid wyf yn sicr beth fyddai’r
‘anawsterau cyfreithiol’
. Aeth y llythyr ymlaen i ddweud wrth yr achwynydd os oedd yna
‘reswm penodol’
pam nad oedd yn dymuno cwyno i’r awdurdod GIG perthnasol, neu os nad oedd yr awdurdod am ryw reswm yn gallu ymchwilio i’r mater, fe allai ysgrifennu eto at y GMC a fyddai’n ystyried y gŵyn ymhellach. Rhoddwyd rhif ffôn gwasanaeth a oedd yn darparu arweiniad cyffredinol am wneud cwyn ynghylch meddyg GIG.
Er bod y llythyr yn ddefnyddiol o ran tôn a chynnwys, roedd serch hynny’n rhoi’r cyfrifoldeb am ganlyn y gŵyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG ar yr achwynydd yn gyfan gwbl. Roedd hyn ar adeg pan oedd y GMC yn gwbl ymwybodol o ddiffygion y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol ac o’r ffaith mai ychydig o achosion a oedd yn dod yn ôl at y GMC wedi iddynt gael eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau hynny. Nid oedd y llythyr yn cynnwys unrhyw awgrym y gallai’r GMC ei hun drosglwyddo’r gŵyn at y corff cwynion GIG dan sylw. Nid oedd gweithdrefn ddilynol ychwaith i sicrhau bod cwyn wedi’i hadrodd i’r awdurdod priodol neu i ganfod y canlyniad. Fe allai’r gŵyn fod wedi ymwneud ag arfer clinigol annerbyniol, a allai, o’i ail-adrodd, fod wedi achosi niwed i gleifion eraill. Eto, os oedd yr achwynydd yn dewis peidio canlyn y gŵyn ymhellach, fe allai’r corff GIG a oedd yn gyfrifol am y meddyg (yn achos meddyg teulu, yr FHSA) fod wedi aros yn gwbl anymwybodol bod digwyddiad wedi digwydd neu y gallai cleifion fod mewn risg gan y meddyg. Ni fyddai’r GMC yn cymryd unrhyw gamau i’w hysbysu.
Argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 y dylai’r GMC adolygu’i rôl a’i gyfrifoldebau wrth ddelio ag achosion lle’r oedd achwynwyr yn cael eu cynghori i gyfeirio’u cwynion at gorff GIG lleol. Gwnaeth y pwynt na fyddai’r GMC mewn sefyllfa yn aml i wybod, pan oedd y cyngor yn cael ei roi, a oedd y gŵyn yn debygol o fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Archwiliodd y tîm PSI sampl o 134 o gŵynion lle’r oedd y GMC, yn ystod y flwyddyn hyd at fis Awst 1994, wedi cynghori achwynwyr i gyfeirio’u cwynion at gorff mwy priodol. Fe wnaethant ganfod bod y cwynion yn cynnwys cwynion am anfodlonrwydd â thriniaeth, am fethiant i gymryd camau i wneud diagnosis ac am fethiant i ddiagnosio a thrin cleifion. Roedd un yn honiad o ‘anghyfrifoldeb troseddol’ yn arwain at farwolaeth claf. Roedd y ffaith na chafodd y cwynion hyn (yn enwedig cwyn fel yr un y soniwyd amdani ddiwethaf) eu canlyn ar unwaith gan y GMC yn ffynhonnell pryder dealladwy i’r tîm PSI.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan yr Athro Allen, a oedd yn arwain y tîm PSI, ei bod hi a’i chydweithwyr yn pryderu bod yr achosion hyn weithiau i weld yn cael eu ‘colli’ i’r GMC. Fe wnaethant nodi’r cyfrifoldeb a oedd yn cael ei roi ar gleifion a’u teuluoedd i ganlyn y cwynion. Pe byddent yn penderfynu peidio eu canlyn, byddai’r cwynion yn syml yn diflannu. Mynegodd y tîm PSI bryder hefyd o ran methiant y GMC i ganlyn cwynion er mwyn canfod eu canlyniad.
Ym 1996, newidiodd gweithdrefnau’r GIG a oedd yn rheoli cwynion am feddygon teulu. Mae’r gweithdrefnau a oedd ar waith o 1996 yn cael eu disgrifio ym Mhennod 7. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad, dan y gweithdrefnau cyn 1996, bod y broses o wneud cwyn am feddyg teulu yn lleol yn gymharol hawdd. Byddai’r achwynydd yn cwyno i’r FHSA. Byddai’r gŵyn yn cael ei chofnodi a’i hystyried ac, os oedd yn ymddangos ei bod yn ymwneud â thorri telerau gwasanaeth, byddai’n cael ei chyfeirio at gadeirydd yr MSC a byddai’r broses ar waith. Dan weithdrefnau 1996, fodd bynnag, roedd cwynion yn mynd at y feddygfa deulu yn y lle cyntaf, a byddai llawer yn cael eu ‘datrys’ yn y fan honno. Ni fyddai gan y PCO unrhyw syniad ynghylch beth oedd natur y gŵyn neu’r ‘canlyniad’. Roedd y broses o sicrhau gwrandawiad gan y panel adolygu annibynnol (IRP) dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, meddai, ‘yn anhygoel o astrus’, ac o ganlyniad, nifer cymharol fach o wrandawiadau oedd yn cael eu cynnal. Credai’r Athro Allen bod rhai cleifion yn cael eu hannog rhag cwyno oherwydd gofyniad i fynd at y feddygfa deulu yn gyntaf, pryder y tynnwyd sylw ato yn yr ymchwil a wnaethpwyd ar ddiwedd y 1990au, y disgrifiais ym Mhennod 7. Yn fyr, nid oedd cwynion am feddyg teulu’n cael eu hymchwilio gan gorff y GIG; nid oedd gan y PCO y grym na’r adnoddau i wneud hynny.
Ar ôl 1 Ebrill 1996, roedd gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG, am y tro cyntaf, ar wahân i’r gweithdrefnau disgyblu ar gyfer meddygon teulu. Yn flaenorol, fe allai cwyn gan glaf arwain at ganfod bod achos o dorri telerau gwasanaeth y meddyg teulu ac at sancsiwn. Ar ôl 1996, hyd yn oed os oedd canfyddiadau gwrandawiad IRP yn dangos bod meddyg teulu wedi torri’i delerau/thelerau gwasanaeth, ni fyddai achos disgyblu yn dilyn yn awtomatig. Roedd y broses ddisgyblu yn un feichus, ac ychydig o wrandawiadau disgyblu oedd yn cael ei cynnal o gwbl. Hefyd, roedd newid diwylliant ac roedd yn well gan PCOau gymryd ymagwedd adferol tuag at unrhyw ddiffygion mewn meddygfa deulu. Ar ôl 1996, effaith polisi’r GMC, felly, oedd cyfeirio meddyg o system a chynlluniwyd i ddisgyblu meddygon lle’r oedd yn briodol (h.y. gweithdrefnau’r GMC) i system cwynion, a phrif ddiben y system honno oedd ‘datrys’ y gŵyn, trwy gymodi o ddewis. Roedd yn debygol y byddai unrhyw ddiffygion cydnabyddedig yn arfer y meddyg yn debygol o gael eu trin (os o gwbl) drwy gamau adfer yn hytrach na chamau disgyblu, a bach iawn oedd y rhagolygon y byddent yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl ar unwaith at y GMC. Nid ymddengys y GMC wedi gwerthfawrogi afresymegolrwydd y sefyllfa honno, a’i photensial mwy fyth ar gyfer gadael i gŵynion gael eu ‘colli’.
Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997
Pan gynhyrchwyd y Llawlyfr i Sgrinwyr ym 1997, roedd gofyniad o hyd ar sgrinwyr meddygol (yn hytrach na staff y GMC) i ystyried beth ddylai ddigwydd i gŵynion lle mai’r canlyniad tebygol oedd cyfeiriad at weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Roedd y Llawlyfr i Sgrinwyr yn cynnwys y cyngor canlynol:
Dylid nodi, yn gyntaf, mai’r prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr meddygol oedd prawf nad oedd
‘yn fygythiad uniongyrchol i ddiogelwch cleifion’
. Roedd hwn yn debyg i’r prawf a gymhwyswyd yn flaenorol gan y sgrinwyr meddygol, sef a allai fod risg i’r cyhoedd pe na bai’r GMC yn gweithredu ar unwaith. Yn ail, mae’n eglur i mi o’r dystiolaeth, yn enwedig tystiolaeth Dr Korlipara, bod y sgrinwyr wedi rhagdybio mai canlyn cwyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG, ym mhob achos nad oedd yn datgelu
‘bygythiad uniongyrchol i ddiogelwch cleifion’
, fyddai’r ffordd fwyaf effeithiol o ddelio â’r achos.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn disgrifio newid mewn arfer a gychwynnodd, fe ddywedwyd, yn dilyn Adroddiad PSI 1996. Os oedd achos yn cael ei
‘ohirio’
, trwy gynghori’r achwynydd i’w ganlyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion GIG lleol, roedd y sgriniwr meddygol i bennu dyddiad nawr ar gyfer adolygu’r achos. Os nad oedd mwy wedi’i glywed am yr achos erbyn y dyddiad hwnnw, roedd staff y GMC i ysgrifennu at yr achwynydd ac i geisio sefydlu a oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u cwblhau, ac, os felly, beth oedd y canlyniad. Wrth dderbyn ateb, byddai penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud ynghylch a ddylid dwyn yr achos yn ei flaen dan weithdrefnau’r GMC neu, os oedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno, cau’r achos. Os nad oedd yr achwynydd yn ateb, roedd ymdrechion i’w gwneud i’w berswadio/pherswadio i ddarparu tystiolaeth bellach, ac os byddai hynny’n methu, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau. Diben y newid hwn oedd sicrhau bod penderfyniad cadarnhaol i gau achos, yn hytrach na gadael i’r achos fynd yn angof heb unrhyw ymgais i’w ddilyn ymlaen wedi iddo gael ei gyfeirio’n ôl at yr achwynydd.
Disgrifiodd Mr Townsend y newid arfer a’r rhesymau y tu ôl iddo. Dywedodd bod gwerthfawrogiad o fewn y GMC bod y modd yr oedd ei weithdrefnau wedi gweithio yn flaenorol wedi gwneud iddynt ymddangos
‘yn fwy fel gweithdrefn cwynion na gweithdrefn diogelu lles y cyhoedd’
. Gadawodd yr Adran Ymddygiad ym 1998, ac nid oedd yn gallu dweud beth fu effaith yr arfer newydd. Ar ryw bwynt yn fuan wedyn, ymddengys bod yr arfer newydd o bennu dyddiad adolygu a dilyn cwynion ymlaen wedi mynd allan o arfer. Fe allai hyn fod wedi bod ym 1999 pan wnaethpwyd penderfyniad, fel yr esboniaf, na ddylai achosion o’r math hwn gael eu cyfeirio mwyach at y sgriniwr meddygol ac eithrio mewn rhai amgylchiadau cyfyngedig.
Arweiniad i’r Cyhoedd
Ym mis Tachwedd 1997, dosbarthodd y GMC ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’, taflen a gynlluniwyd i hysbysu’r cyhoedd am ei weithdrefnau. Dan y pennawd ‘What to do if you have a problem with your doctor’, roedd y daflen yn esbonio, mewn termau syml, y gweithdrefnau ar gyfer gwneud cwyn am wasanaethau’r GIG yn lleol. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud:
Mae’r cyngor hwn (sy’n cael ei atgynhyrchu yn y fersiwn gyfredol o’r un cyhoeddiad) i weld yn rhyfedd gan mai polisi’r GMC o hyd oedd y dylai cwynion am driniaeth y GIG gael eu cyfeirio’n ôl i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol oni bai bod bygythiad uniongyrchol i ddiogelwch cleifion. Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai bwriad y daflen oedd bod yn ddefnyddiol, ond cafodd yr effaith anfwriadol o roi’r argraff i unigolion y byddai’r GMC yn edrych ar ‘unrhyw broblem bron’ gyda meddyg, beth bynnag oedd y broblem. Dywedodd bod y daflen wedi deillio o ‘ddiffyg eglurder gwirioneddol o fewn y sefydliad ynghylch sut i osod ei hun mewn perthynas â systemau eraill ac yn benodol system cwynion y GIG’.
Newid Pellach mewn Arfer
Ym mis Mawrth 1999, bu newid arall mewn arfer, o ganlyniad i gyngor a roddwyd gan yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr. Fe wnaethant awgrymu y gellid ysgafnhau baich gwaith y sgrinwyr meddygol (a oedd yn drwm iawn yng nghanol y 1990au) trwy leihau nifer yr achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ddiangen atynt. Fe wnaethant awgrymu felly y dylai staff y GMC, yn y dyfodol, ddelio â’r achosion hynny a oedd bryd hynny’n cael eu cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr meddygol yn awtomatig at weithdrefnau cwynion GIG lleol. Dylai achosion felly gael eu cyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol os credwyd bod y meddyg yn risg i’r cyhoedd yn unig. Rhoddwyd y newid hwn ar waith ym mis Mawrth 1999 ac mae wedi parhau byth ers hynny. Fel y dywedais, y maen prawf y mae’n rhaid i staff y GMC ei gymhwyso nawr yw pa un a oes achos i amau y gallai’r meddyg fod yn beryglus. Yn 2000, cynghorodd staff y GMC achwynwyr mewn 897 o achosion (20% o’r holl gŵynion a dderbyniwyd yn y flwyddyn honno) i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau lleol. Yn 2001 (y flwyddyn olaf y mae ffigur ar gael ar ei chyfer) cafodd achwynwyr mewn 998 o achosion (18.7% o’r holl gŵynion a dderbyniwyd) eu cynghori felly gan aelodau o staff y GMC.
Mae’n eglur bod yr arfer a oedd yn cael ei weithredu gan y GMC ar ôl 1999 wedi parhau achosion o dorri rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988. Aethpwyd yn ôl i’r arfer a oedd yn cael ei ddilyn cyn 1993 i bob pwrpas. Yn ôl Mr Scott, roedd y GMC wedi sylweddoli ym 1993 bod rhaid newid yr arfer o adael i staff wneud y penderfyniad i gynghori achwynwyr i ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau lleol, heb ofyn yn gyntaf i sgrinwyr ystyried yr achos. Nid yw’n eglur pa un a sylweddolwyd hefyd nad oedd yr arfer yn cydymffurfio â’r Rheolau. Mae’n bosibl nad oedd yr aelodau’n sylweddoli hyn, gan nad ymddengys eu bod wedi gwerthfawrogi, hyd yn oed ar ôl y newid, nad oedd yr arfer yn cydymffurfio o hyd gan nad oedd y sgrinwyr yn cymhwyso’r prawf statudol cywir. Mewn gwirionedd, ymddengys bod y GMC yn gyfunol o’r farn bod y sgrinwyr yn cymhwyso’r prawf cywir (gweler uchod), ond mae’n rhaid bod y sgrinwyr yn gwybod nad oeddent. Beth bynnag, ym 1999, derbyniodd y GMC awgrym yr Athro Allen i fynd yn ôl at yr hen arfer. Ni ddylid beio’r Athro Allen a’i thîm am gynnig y cyngor hwnnw. Nid cyfreithwyr oeddent. Yr hyn yr oeddent yn ceisio’i wneud yn syml oedd helpu’r GMC i ddelio â’i faich gwaith. Nid ymddengys bod neb wedi ystyried a oedd yr arfer newydd yn cydymffurfio â’r Rheolau.
Cwynion am Driniaeth Breifat
Ym mis Hydref neu fis Tachwedd 2002, ymestynnwyd yr arfer o gynghori achwynwyr i gyfeirio’u cwynion yn y lle cyntaf at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol i gynnwys cwynion am driniaeth breifat. Golygai hyn bod cleifion a oedd yn honni iddynt gael triniaeth is na’r safon mewn ysbytai, clinigau a meddygfeydd preifat neu gan feddygon preifat unigol yn cael eu cynghori o’r adeg honno gan y GMC (yn absenoldeb unrhyw reswm i amau bod y meddyg dan sylw yn berygl uniongyrchol i gleifion) i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion y sefydliadau neu’r meddygon hynny. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gwrando unrhyw dystiolaeth am weithdrefnau cwynion preifat. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi bod ansawdd ac effeithiolrwydd y gweithdrefnau hynny’n debygol o fod yn amrywiol eithriadol. Fe allai fod gan rai o’r darparwyr gofal iechyd preifat mwyaf weithdrefnau cwynion datblygedig iawn. Mae’n bosibl nad oedd gan ddarparwyr eraill. Gall fod diffyg annibyniaeth gan rai gweithdrefnau cwynion, yn enwedig os yw’r meddyg yn arfer ar ei ben ei hun neu o fewn sefydliad bach. Mae’n wir, ers ei sefydlu yn 2002, bod yr NCSC (sydd bellach yn rhan o’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd) wedi bod yn gyfrifol am fonitro a rheoleiddio gofal iechyd preifat, gan gynnwys gweithdrefnau cwynion. Os yw achwynydd yn cael problemau gyda gweithdrefn cwynion sefydliad neu feddyg preifat, gall adrodd i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd am y mater. Gallai hefyd fynd yn ôl at y GMC. Fodd bynnag, mae’r cyfrifoldeb unwaith eto ar y claf i gychwyn camau gweithredu felly ac i ddyfalbarhau os nad yw’n llwyddo yn y lle cyntaf. Fel arall, bydd ei gŵyn/chŵyn yn cael ei cholli’n gyfan gwbl i’r system reoleiddio.
Datblygiadau Dilynol
Fel y dywedais, ymddengys bod yr arfer o ganlyn cynnydd cwynion a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio’n ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi dod i ben ar ryw bwynt, fwy na thebyg ym mis Mawrth 1999. Nid oedd unrhyw sôn yn argraffiadau mis Tachwedd 2002 na mis Ebrill 2003 o’r Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP am unrhyw weithdrefn adolygu neu ddilynol. Pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Mr Marshall mai’r unig gam dilynol fyddai pe bai’r GMC yn cael cwyn arall am y meddyg. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, byddai’r gŵyn wreiddiol yn cael ei hadfer a’r gŵyn newydd yn cael ei hystyried yng ngolau honno. Fodd bynnag, fel yr esboniaf, ni chafodd adnabyddiaeth llawer o’r meddygon a fu’n destun cwynion sydd wedi’u cau gan staff y GMC erioed eu nodi gan y GMC. Gan hynny, ni fyddai unrhyw bosibilrwydd y byddai cwynion yn eu herbyn yn cael eu hailgychwyn os oedd cwyn ddiweddarach am yr un meddyg yn cael ei derbyn.
Tystiolaeth am y Polisi gan Aelodau a Staff yn y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Dywedodd Dr Korlipara ei bod ‘ond yn iawn’ yn ei farn ef (ac eithrio lle’r ystyriwyd bod meddyg teulu’n beryglus) y dylai gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol gael eu cwblhau cyn bod y GMC yn gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch gweithredu ai peidio. Fe allai PCTau ddefnyddio’u gwybodaeth am y meddyg i roi’r gŵyn mewn cyd-destun. Os oedd angen, gellid diogelu’r claf gan gamau gweithredu gan y GMC ar unwaith. Lle nad oedd angen hynny, byddai’r GMC yn cael ei gynorthwyo trwy beidio gorfod ’mynd drwy’r gweithdrefnau lleol’. Trwy hyn, credaf mai’r hyn a olygai Dr Korlipara oedd na fyddai’n rhaid i’r GMC ymgymryd ag ymchwiliadau lleol. Os oedd yr achos yn cael ei gyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC, gallai ddod i benderfyniad yn gyflym (ar sail unrhyw ymchwiliad a oedd wedi’i wneud yn lleol) ynghylch a oedd materion o SPM yr oedd angen gweithredu pellach arnynt. Roedd Dr Korlipara yn cydnabod y gallai gweithdrefn cwynion y GIG fod yn un hirfaith, ond, serch hynny, teimlai ei bod yn ‘llawer mwy synhwyrol a theg’ y dylai cwynion, lle bynnag yr oedd modd, fod yn destun ymchwiliad a’u hadfer yn lleol. Dywedodd y dylai’r GMC ymchwilio’n unig i’r cwynion hynny a oedd mor ddifrifol bod perygl difrifol i ddiogelwch cleifion neu berygl ar ddigwydd i gleifion. Os oedd oedi, dywedodd Dr Korlipara mai ‘rhyw asiantaethau eraill’ (cymeraf fod hynny’n golygu cyrff sy’n delio â chwynion) ddylai gyflymu’u prosesau er mwyn arbed cleifion rhag dioddef.
Cytunodd Dr Korlipara bod y system yn rhoi baich ar gleifion. Derbyniodd, os oedd cwyn i’w chyfeirio’n ôl at weithdrefn cwynion lleol, byddai’n well o safbwynt y claf pe bai’r GMC yn cysylltu’n uniongyrchol â’r PCT lleol, ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu gorff arall a oedd yn delio â chwynion, yn hytrach na gadael i’r achwynydd wneud hynny. Nid oedd yn gwybod pa un a oedd y GMC erioed wedi ystyried gwneud hyn.
Roedd tystion eraill hefyd yn cefnogi’r angen i ymchwilio i gŵynion yn lleol. Er enghraifft, soniodd Mr Howes am gymhlethdod rhai cwynion a oedd yn cyrraedd y GMC; roeddent yn ymwneud nid yn unig â beirniadaeth o’r driniaeth a ddarparwyd gan feddyg, a oedd yn fater i’r GMC, ond hefyd â phroblemau fel rhestrau aros ysbytai a chwynion am ymddygiad nyrsys a gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill. Roedd ef yn ffafrio system lle’r oedd yr holl gŵynion a oedd yn ymwneud â thriniaeth yn cael eu trin yn gyflym ac yn well ar lefel leol a lle’r oedd pryderon perthnasol yn codi o’r cwynion hynny yn cael eu hadrodd i’r GMC.
Credai Syr Graeme Catto y gellid ymchwilio’n fwy effeithiol a chyfleus yn lleol i’r rhan fwyaf o gŵynion ynghylch triniaeth glinigol, ond roedd yn ymorol i sicrhau bod y GMC yn cael ei hysbysu’n gyson ac yn cael y cyfle i ddarparu unrhyw wybodaeth berthnasol y gall fod ganddo. Roedd yn awyddus hefyd i gadw’r sefyllfa bresennol lle byddai aelodau’r cyhoedd yn cael eu cynghori y gallent ddod â chŵyn neu bryder yn uniongyrchol at y GMC os oedd yn well ganddynt wneud hynny.
Erbyn i Mr Scott roi tystiolaeth, roedd y GMC yn ymwybodol o bryderon yr Ymchwiliad am yr arfer o gyfeirio achosion yn ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Dywedodd bod y GMC yn ‘ystyried yn lle ei hanfon
(h.y. cwyn)
yn ôl gydag awgrym eu bod
(h.y. yr achwynwyr)
yn mynd â hi i rywle arall, ein bod ni yn gwneud y gwaith hwnnw ar eu rhan, yn amodol, wrth gwrs, ar eu cytundeb ein bod yn gwneud hynny’. Wedi gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, cyhoeddodd y GMC, o fis Mai 2004, y byddai’n trafod rhai cwynion ar gam cynnar (yn fras, y rheiny lle nad oedd y ffordd ymlaen yn glir) â chyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Os oedd y GMC, yn dilyn y drafodaeth honno, yn penderfynu peidio mynd ymlaen â’r gŵyn ei hun, ond ei fod o’r farn y dylid delio â hi’n lleol, byddai (a bod yr achwynydd yn cytuno) yn cyfeirio’r achos yn uniongyrchol at gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg.
Nid yw’n hysbys sut mae’r fenter hon wedi gweithio’n ymarferol. Fodd bynnag, pe bai’n arwain at achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio’n uniongyrchol gan y GMC i weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, yn hytrach na bod y cyfrifoldeb yn cael ei roi ar achwynwyr i wneud hyn, dylai hyn o leiaf ddileu’r potensial i gŵynion gael eu colli rhwng y GMC a’r corff cwynion lleol. Byddai hynny’n gryn ddatblygiad. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debygol y byddai rhai problemau’n parhau o hyd. Yn gyntaf, os oedd y gŵyn yn cael ei chyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion cleifion lleol, byddai’r cyfrifoldeb ar yr achwynydd o hyd i’w chanlyn i gasgliad. Yn ail, nid yw gweithdrefnau cwynion cleifion - gyda’u pwyslais ar fodlonrwydd cleifion - yn fodd addas, ymddengys i mi, o ddelio â honiadau y maent a wnelo â gallu meddyg i drin cleifion yn ddiogel. Maent yn annhebygol o arwain at ymchwilio diymdroi a thrylwyr i amgylchiadau’r achos. Yn drydydd, nid ymddengys o hyn bod unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn bodoli ar gyfer dilyn ymlaen gan y GMC pan fudd cwyn wedi’i chyfeirio at gorff cwynion lleol. Ymddengys i mi y dylai fod mecanwaith gan y GMC er mwyn iddo allu bod yn fodlon bod cwynion y mae wedi’u trosglwyddo i gyrff eraill i ymchwilio iddynt neu weithredu arnynt yn cael eu trin yn briodol ac yn gyflym.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, gwnaethpwyd newid sylweddol i ail gam gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Yn lle bod posibilrwydd bod y gŵyn yn mynd ymlaen at IRP, gall achwynydd sydd yn anfodlon â chanlyniad cam cyntaf y weithdrefn gyfeirio’r achos at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd erbyn hyn. Bydd y corff hwnnw’n ystyried yr achos a gall, os yw o’r farn bod hynny’n briodol, gynnal ei ymchwiliad ei hun cyn dod i’w gasgliadau. Mewn rhai achosion, bydd gwrandawiad llafar. Rhagwelir y bydd newidiadau hefyd i gam cyntaf gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG i’r graddau y maent yn ymwneud â meddygon teulu. Dylai cyfeirio cwynion at gorff annibynnol â phwerau ymchwilio yn yr ail gam wella’r modd y mae’r GIG yn ymdrin â chwynion. Gan y bydd gan y GMC berthynas weithio â’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, dylai, yn y dyfodol, fod yn haws i’r GMC gadw golwg fanwl ar gynnydd cwynion sy’n mynd drwy weithdrefnau lleol.
Cyfeiriaf ymhellach at fwriadau’r GMC mewn perthynas â chynnal trafodaethau cynnar â chyflogwyr a PCOau meddygon nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Achosion Penodol
Cwyn am Shipman: Mr J
Ym Mhennod 6, disgrifiais y modd yr ymdriniwyd â chŵyn yn erbyn Shipman, a wnaed ym mis Awst 1985, ynghylch triniaeth claf, Mr J, a oedd wedi marw’n ddiweddar, gan MSC yr FPC. Cafodd y gŵyn ei gwrthod heb wrandawiad llafar. A dweud y gwir, anfonwyd llythyr cwyno at y GMC hefyd tua’r un adeg ag y gwnaethpwyd y gŵyn i’r FPC.
Roedd y llythyr, a ysgrifennwyd gan Mr Steven Rawlinson, ffrind agosaf Mr J, ar ran mam Mr J, yn cwyno am driniaeth glinigol Shipman o Mr J, ac roedd yn honni bod Shipman wedi torri cyfrinachedd meddygol Mr J drwy sôn am ei gyflwr wrth Mr a Mrs G, a oedd hefyd yn gleifion i Shipman. Roedd yn llythyr manwl, yn bedair tudalen o deipysgrif, ac yn gorffen â’r geiriau
. Crybwyllaf hynny gan ei fod yn dangos beth oedd rhai aelodau’r cyhoedd yn disgwyl (ac yn dal i ddisgwyl fwy na thebyg) gan y GMC, sef, y bydd yn ymchwilio i’w cwyn. Ar ôl llythyr atgoffa gan Mr Rawlinson, atebodd aelod o staff y GMC, gan gynghori y dylai’r gŵyn gael ei chanlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Nid oedd y llythyr yn cynghori Mr Rawlinson i gysylltu â’r GMC eto os oedd yn anfodlon â chanlyniad y gweithdrefnau lleol, er bod y llythyr yn dweud ei bod yn agored iddo ysgrifennu at y GMC eto pan oedd gweithdrefnau’r GIG wedi’u cwblhau. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd Mr Rawlinson a Mrs J eisoes wedi cychwyn cwyn yn lleol.
Nid oedd awdurdodaeth gan yr MSC i ddelio â’r honiad o dorri cyfrinachedd, gan nad oedd mater felly yn rhan o delerau gwasanaeth meddygon teulu. Dim ond y GMC a allai ddelio â’r honiad hwnnw. Cydnabuwyd hyn gan staff y GMC ac roedd y llythyr at Mr Rawlinson yn addo gohebiaeth bellach am y rhan honno o’i gŵyn. Ysgrifennodd yr aelod o’r staff femorandwm mewnol hefyd yn awgrymu y dylai’r mater cyfrinachedd gael ei gyfeirio at y Llywydd, a oedd bryd hynny’n gweithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol. Fodd bynnag, tynnodd sylw at y ffaith y gallai fod yn anodd i Mr Rawlinson gyflwyno tystiolaeth o dorri cyfrinachedd gan yr oedd wedi dweud y gallai Mr a Mrs G fod yn amharod i roi tystiolaeth yn erbyn Shipman. Y canlyniad oedd bod llythyr wedi mynd at Mr Rawlinson yn ei gynghori mai dim ond os oedd yntau a Mr a Mrs G yn darparu datganiadau statudol yn cefnogi’r gŵyn y byddai modd i’r GMC gymryd camau yn erbyn Shipman. Nid oes gan Mr Rawlinson unrhyw atgof erbyn hyn iddo dderbyn y llythyr hwnnw, ond credaf ei bod yn debygol iddo wneud, a’i fod yntau a Mrs J wedi sylweddoli na fyddai unrhyw obaith o berswadio Mr a Mrs G i ddarparu datganiad statudol yn cefnogi’r gŵyn. Ni aeth y gŵyn honno ymhellach.
Roedd y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â’r gŵyn ynghylch triniaeth glinigol yn nodweddiadol o’r ymateb y byddai’r GMC wedi’i roi i gŵyn felly dros gyfnod hir iawn o amser. Yn wir, ni fyddai’r ymagwedd wedi bod yn wahanol iawn be bai’r gŵyn wedi’i gwneud yn 2003. Roedd y gŵyn yn un a allai neu na allai, o ymchwilio iddi, fod wedi datgelu ymddygiad a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ni wnaeth y GMC ymchwilio iddi o gwbl, ond yn hytrach cynghorodd defnyddio gweithdrefnau lleol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 6, nid yw’n eglur pa mor drylwyr yr ymchwiliwyd i’r gŵyn yn lleol. Nid oedd gan yr achwynydd unrhyw rym i gael gafael ar ddogfennau. Roedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â thriniaeth dros gyfnod sylweddol, ond nid yw’n eglur a wnaeth y GMC hepgor y terfyn amser ac ystyried digwyddiadau a ddigwyddodd dros wyth wythnos cyn dyddiad y gŵyn. Credaf ei bod yn debygol na wnaeth. Cafodd y gŵyn ei gwrthod heb wrandawiad llafar. Nid yw sail y penderfyniad hwnnw’n glir, ac eithrio ei bod yn ymddangos nad oedd yr MSC o’r farn fod triniaeth Shipman wedi cyfrannu at farwolaeth Mr J. Ni allaf ddweud beth fyddai’r canlyniad pe byddid wedi ymchwilio’n iawn i’r achos, ac na fyddai problemau terfynau amser wedi effeithio arno. Yn fyr, cyfeiriodd y GMC yr achos yn ôl at weithdrefn a oedd ymhell o fod yn foddhaol. Fe allai triniaeth Shipman o Mr J fod wedi bod yn ddifrifol is na’r safon, gan hynny’n ei wneud yn euog o SPM. Ni fyddwn fyth yn gwybod.
Ffeiliau Achos Eraill
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad afael ar y papurau’n ymwneud â’r pum achos olaf a gafodd eu cau gan staff y GMC cyn 30 Medi 2003, lle cafodd achwynwyr eu cynghori i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad afael hefyd ar y papurau yn y pum achos olaf cyn 30 Medi 2003 lle cafodd achwynwyr eu cynghori i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion preifat. Parodd tri o’r achosion olaf hyn rywfaint o bryder i mi. Fe’u trafodaf nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon: gweler paragraffau 18.181-18.184 a 18.213-18.227. Roedd y cwynion eraill yn codi materion a oedd i weld yn briodol i’w cyfeirio at weithdrefnau lleol. Pa un a wnaeth y cyfeiriad hwnnw ddigwydd ai peidio, fodd bynnag, cafodd hynny ei adael yn gyfan gwbl yn nwylo’r achwynydd ym mhob achos. Nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw fodd o wirio bod hyn wedi’i wneud.
Sylw
Mae’n ofid i mi ddweud fy mod yn feirniadol o bolisi’r GMC tuag at gŵynion am driniaeth feddygol a wnaed gan unigolion preifat. Fel yr esboniais, nid oedd yr arfer ar gyfer ymdrin â chwynion felly yn cydymffurfio â rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988. Ond nid y ffaith fod yr arfer yn anghyfreithlon sy’n fy mhryderu fwyaf. Yr hyn sy’n peri’r pryder mwyaf i mi yw bod polisi’r GMC mewn perthynas â chwynion gan unigolion preifat wedi cael yr effaith o orfodi achwynwyr bron i fynd drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol oni bai bod y gŵyn i weld yn un mor ddifrifol bod y GMC o’r farn bod y meddyg yn risg uniongyrchol i gleifion. Mae’r GMC wedi bod yn troi llawer o achosion ymaith heb ystyried a allai’r ymddygiad honedig fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae wedi’i gwneud yn ofynnol i achwynwyr fynd drwy broses leol sy’n gofyn am benderfyniad a dyfalbarhad ac nad ydyw, ymhellach, yn debygol o arwain at ganlyniad mewn ymchwiliad trylwyr i’r ffeithiau.
Mae honiad y GMC ei bod yn well i weithdrefnau lleol gael eu defnyddio oherwydd bod sefydliadau GIG lleol yn gallu cynnig cyfle gwell ar gyfer ymchwilio yn mynd yn groes i realiti. Mae’r gweithdrefnau cwynion y mae’r GMC wedi bod yn fodlon dibynnu arnynt wedi dioddef o nifer o ddiffygion. Mae’r diffygion hynny wedi bod yn hysbys i aelodau a staff y GMC am ddegawdau. Dywedodd Mr Howes mewn tystiolaeth:
‘Nid wyf yn adnabod neb sydd â meddwl mawr o unrhyw un o hen systemau’r GIG na systemau presennol y GIG ar gyfer delio â chwynion a phryderon.’
Mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi bod yn eglur mai canlyniad anochel y diffygion yn y system oedd na fyddai llawer o’r achosion lle’r oedd amheuaeth ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn dychwelyd i’r GMC. Dylai’r goblygiadau i ddiogelwch cleifion fod wedi bod yn amlwg. Hyd at yn gymharol ddiweddar, nid oedd gan y PCOau unrhyw rym i gyfyngu ar arfer meddyg, anaml iawn yr oedd pwerau’r Tribiwnlys GIG yn cael eu harfer ac roedd yn hysbys bod systemau disgyblu ysbytai yn aneffeithiol. Roedd y ffaith nad oedd achosion o SPM potensial yn cyrraedd y GMC yn golygu bod meddygon a oedd yn anaddas i ymarfer yn parhau i drin cleifion. Hyd y gwyddai’r Ymchwiliad, roedd y sefyllfa’n arbennig o anodd ym maes gofal sylfaenol. Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am rôl gyfyngedig PCOau wrth ymdrin â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu. Yn aml, nid oeddent yn ymwybodol o gŵyn, a, hyd yn oed os oeddent, nid oedd ganddynt rôl ymchwilio swyddogol. Dim ond mewn lleiafrif bach o achosion oedd yna unrhyw bosibilrwydd o achos yn cael ei gyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC. Roedd y rheiny’n achosion lle’r oedd adolygiad annibynnol wedi’i wneud, roedd yr adroddiad yn feirniadol difrifol o’r meddyg ac roedd y PCO yn pryderu’n ddigonol i gyfeirio’r achos ymlaen at y GMC yn hytrach na cheisio rhoi mesurau adferol ar waith ei hun. Hefyd, roedd nifer fach o achosion a wnaeth, am ryw reswm neu‘i gilydd, ddod at sylw PCO ac a gafodd eu hymchwilio’n uniongyrchol ganddo. Fe allai ymchwiliad felly arwain at gyfeiriad at y GMC. Ond byddai’r mwyafrif helaeth o gŵynion yn dilyn y ‘gweithdrefnau arferol’ ac ni fyddid yn ymchwilio iddynt o gwbl. Ni roddaf sylwadau pellach ar y sefyllfa mewn perthynas ag achosion ysbyty, gan nad yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi’u harchwilio’n fanwl. Rwy’n derbyn wrth gwrs nad oes gan y GMC unrhyw reolaeth dros ansawdd gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG na’r rheiny yn y sector preifat. Eto, er ei fod yn gwybod fod y gweithdrefnau’n ddiffygiol ac nad oedd ganddo unrhyw rym i wneud unrhyw beth ynglŷn â hynny, parhaodd y GMC, dros gyfnod o flynyddoedd lawer, i’w gwneud yn ofynnol bod achwynwyr yn ‘disbyddu’ eu gweithdrefnau unioni lleol.
Yn fy marn i, roedd polisi’r GMC a ddisgrifiais yn gyfystyr â methu’i ddyletswydd. Roedd y GMC yn derbyn ac yn delio â’r achosion mwyaf difrifol, ond roedd yn siomi achwynwyr yn gyson a oedd yn adrodd am faterion a allai’n wir fod wedi ymwneud ag SPM, ond nad oedd, ym marn y GMC, yn peri risg amlwg i ddiogelwch cleifion. Nid oedd y polisi hwn yn anrhydeddu prif ddyletswydd y GMC i ddiogelu cleifion. Mae’n glir o’r dystiolaeth mai ffactor sylweddol a oedd yn sylfaen i’r polisi oedd y dymuniad i fod yn ‘deg i feddygon’; yn ymarferol, yr effaith oedd diogelu meddygon rhag ymchwilio i gŵynion a rhag posibilrwydd camau disgyblu. Fe wnaeth y polisi alluogi’r GMC hefyd i osgoi ymdrin â nifer sylweddol o achosion y byddai fel arall wedi gorfod delio â nhw. Ac, yn ychwanegol at hynny i gyd, arweiniodd y polisi at arfer a oedd yn amlwg yn torri rheol 6 ac a oedd felly yn anghyfreithlon.
Gallaf ddeall yn iawn barn y GMC mai ymchwilio’n lleol sydd orau, mewn egwyddor, i lawer o gŵynion am feddygon. Yn wir, os nad oedd adnoddau lleol yn foddhaol, os oedd y gweithdrefnau’n rhesymol o gyflym ac nad oeddent yn dibynnu ar yr achwynydd i ganlyn y gŵyn, ac os oedd mecanweithiau priodol, dibynadwy ar gyfer cyfeirio achosion at y GMC pan oedd yn briodol, byddwn yn cytuno y byddai system a oedd yn darparu ar gyfer ymchwilio’n lleol yn y lle cyntaf yn ddelfrydol. Fodd bynnag, fel y cydnabydda’r GMC, nid yw adnoddau lleol yn foddhaol, nid yw gweithdrefnau’n rhesymol o gyflym ac mae’r cyfrifioldeb ar yr achwynydd o hyd i ganlyn y gŵyn. Er hynny, mae’r GMC wedi cynnal ei bolisi dros lawer o flynyddoedd. Rhan o’r broblem yn ddiau oedd nad yw’r GMC erioed wedi cael cyfleuster ymchwilio mewnol digonol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 16, ac fel yr esboniaf ymhellach isod, yn y gorffennol, dim ond wrth baratoi at gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu y mae’r GMC erioed wedi ymchwilio’n llawn i achos. Ond agwedd arall ar y broblem oedd ansicrwydd a deuoliaeth teimlad y GMC ynghylch ei rôl a’i sefyllfa mewn perthynas â gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Ymddengys i mi nad yw’r GMC eisiau derbyn ystod eang o gŵynion ‘crai’ mewn gwirionedd; mae’n well ganddo gael adroddiadau gan sefydliadau eraill sydd eisoes wedi casglu a chloriannu’r dystiolaeth. Yna, mae’n hawdd i’r GMC benderfynu a ddylai unrhyw weithdrefnau FTP ddilyn, a chynnal unrhyw waith ymchwilio pellach y mae’n ystyried sy’n angenrheidiol cyn y gwrandawiad. Ond, fel y gwelsom, mae’r GMC yn parhau i ddal ei hun gerbron y cyhoedd fel prif dderbynnydd pob cwyn am feddygon.
Yn fy marn i, bydd yn rhaid i’r GMC benderfynu go iawn lle mae’n sefyll. Un opsiwn yw y dylai dderbyn y cwynion hynny y mae cyrff eraill (GIG neu breifat) o’r farn y dylid eu cyfeirio - naill ai mewn cyflwr heb ymchwilio iddynt oherwydd eu bod yn amlwg yn ddifrifol iawn, neu ar ôl ymchwilio iddynt oherwydd eu bod yn ymddangos i’r corff ymchwilio eu bod yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Posibilrwydd arall yw ei fod yn parhau fel ag y mae ar hyn o bryd, yn agor ei ddrysau i bawb sy’n dod. Os yw’n penderfynu gwneud hynny, fe ddylai roi ystyriaeth briodol i bob cwyn. Rhaid iddo ymchwilio i’r graddau angenrheidiol i weld a ddylid gweithredu. Nid yw’n dderbyniol, yn fy marn i, i’r GMC geisio cadw’i droed yn y ddau wersyll: cynnig derbyn pob cwyn ac yna dewis y rheiny sy’n codi’r pryderon mwyaf amlwg ynghylch diogelwch cleifion yn unig i ymchwilio iddynt.
Mae’r GMC wedi awgrymu y gallai’r broblem gael ei datrys trwy greu ‘porth unigol’, a fyddai, fel y deallaf yr awgrym, yn rhoi cyngor i achwynwyr potensial ynghylch ble i gyfeirio’u cwynion. Ymddengys bod nifer sylweddol o gŵynion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y lle anghywir neu’n cael eu derbyn gan gyrff nad ydynt yn gyrff ymdrin â chwynion o gwbl. Er enghraifft, dywedodd yr Athro Alastair Scotland, Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr NCAA, ei fod yn derbyn nifer eithaf sylweddol. Mae aelodau’r staff wastad yn ceisio helpu achwynydd i nodi’r cyrchfan ar gyfer ei gŵyn/chŵyn neu’i bryder/phryder, ac weithiau byddant yn cysylltu â’r corff priodol i hwyluso cynnydd y gŵyn. Nid oes atyniadau gwirioneddol yn yr awgrym hwn, a byddaf yn ei ystyried yn fanylach nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed pe bai cyfleuster felly’n cael ei gyflwyno, byddai’n angenrheidiol o hyd i’r GMC esbonio’u rôl ei hun yn eglur, nid yn unig yn ei feddwl ei hun ond ym meddwl y cyhoedd yn ogystal.

---  ---
Cwynion gan Gyrff Cyhoeddus ac Unigolion Preifat
Mae graddfa ac ansawdd tystiolaeth sydd ar gael pan ddaw cwyn gerbron y GMC o gorff cyhoeddus, yn wahanol iawn, yn gyffredinol, o hynny a ddarperir gan unigolyn preifat. Fe allai cwyn gan unigolyn preifat gynnwys llythyr yn unig. Efallai nad yw’r llythyr yn llawn neu’n eglur iawn. Efallai nad yw’n delio â’r holl faterion perthnasol. Efallai nad yw’n cynnwys manylion am dystion sydd ar gael neu dystiolaeth ategol arall. Mewn cyferbyniad, mae cwyn gan gorff cyhoeddus yn debygol o fod wedi’i rhagflaenu gan ryw fath o ymchwiliad neu ymholiad. Bydd y llythyr cwyno fel arfer yn nodi’r materion yn glir. Bydd yn cael ei ategu gan gorff o dystiolaeth yn aml. Efallai y bydd adroddiad IRP (neu, dan y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwynion, panel o’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd) sydd wedi gwneud canfyddiadau yn erbyn y meddyg, yn mynd gyda’r llythyr. Gall ansawdd a graddfa ymchwiliadau lleol fod yn amrywiol iawn. Er hynny, arfer y GMC hyd yn hyn fu dibynnu ar y wybodaeth a gasglwyd gan gyrff lleol heb - yn sicr yng nghamau cyntaf ei weithdrefnau - ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwiliadau pellach ei hun.
Fel arfer, ni fydd gan yr unigolyn preifat sy’n gwneud cwyn am feddyg i’r GMC yr adnoddau angenrheidiol i gynnal ei ymchwiliadau/hymchwiliadau ei hun. Bydd ef neu hi felly’n disgwyl y bydd y GMC yn cynnal ymchwiliad trylwyr i’r gŵyn ac mai pan fydd yr holl wybodaeth berthnasol yn hysbys y bydd y GMC yn gwneud penderfyniad gwybodus ynghylch pa gamau, os o gwbl, sy’n angenrheidiol mewn perthynas â’r meddyg. Mewn geiriau eraill, mae disgwyliad y bydd y GMC yn cyflawni’r swyddogaeth sy’n cael ei chyflawni fel arfer gan sefydliad sydd wedi’i gynllunio a’i offeru i ymdrin â chwynion gan aelodau’r cyhoedd, a dyfarnu arnynt. Mae’r realiti, fodd bynnag, braidd yn wahanol.
Ystyr ‘Ymchwiliad’
Mae’n bwysig diffinio’r hyn a olygaf gan y term ‘ymchwiliad’. Trwy ‘ymchwiliad’, rwy’n golygu casglu gwybodaeth a thystiolaeth sy’n ymwneud â’r amgylchiadau sy’n arwain at gŵyn. Gallai ymchwiliad felly olygu:
gofyn cwestiynau i’r achwynydd a chael datganiad ganddo/ganddi
canfod gan yr achwynydd hunaniaeth unrhyw dystion potensial (e.e. ffrindiau neu deulu’r achwynydd sydd â gwybodaeth am yr amgylchiadau), a chael datganiadau ganddynt
cael gafael ar unrhyw gofnodion meddygol, canlyniadau profion a dogfennau eraill
cael gafael ar dystiolaeth ddogfennol am ymchwiliadau eraill fel trawsgrifiadau cwestau ac (yn y gorffennol) adroddiadau gwrandawiadau IRP
cael datganiad gan y meddyg sy’n destun cwyn a chan unrhyw dyst i’r ffeithiau a all roi ymlaen
cael gafael ar dystiolaeth gan arbenigwr yn yr arbenigedd perthnasol
cael sylwadau’r achwynydd (a thystion eraill o bosibl) am yr adroddiad a roddwyd gan y meddyg a’i dystion/thystion a vice versa
cychwyn ymholiadau eraill e.e. gwirio ffeithiau sydd wedi’u haeru gan yr achwynydd neu’r meddyg â thrydydd parti a/neu ddogfennaeth gyfredol.
Mae ymchwilio’n dasg sy’n gofyn am gryn arbenigedd, yn enwedig lle mae’r mater sy’n destun ymchwiliad yn ymwneud â gweithdrefnau neu faterion cymhleth. Gall ymchwiliad ofyn hefyd am rywfaint o benderfyniad, chwilfrydedd a dyfalbarhad er mwyn canfod beth sydd wedi digwydd, neu, lle mae gwrthdaro tystiolaeth, er mwyn nodi’n union ble mae’r gwahaniaethau rhwng yr adroddiadau a roddwyd gan y tystion amrywiol.
Cafodd Adroddiad Pwyllgor Merrison, yr wyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio ato, ei gyhoeddi ym 1975. Roedd yr Adroddiad yn trafod mater ymchwilio. Nododd mai tri amgylchiad yn unig oedd, yng nghyfnod cynnar hanes y GMC, lle byddai’r GMC yn gweithredu mewn perthynas ag adroddiadau bod meddyg wedi bod yn euog o SPM. Y cyntaf oedd pan gafodd wybodaeth am y camymddygiad honedig gan gorff cyhoeddus. Yr ail oedd pan gafodd wybodaeth am y camymddygiad honedig o ffynhonnell arall a phan oedd y wybodaeth honno’n cynnwys yr holl dystiolaeth ofynnol at ddibenion y GMC. Y trydydd amgylchiad oedd pan oedd achwynydd (unigolyn preifat fel arfer) a oedd yn barod i gydosod y dystiolaeth ei hun ac i’w chyflwyno mewn gwrandawiad o’r Pwyllgor Disgyblu (rhagflaenydd y PCC). Nododd Adroddiad Merrison hefyd, yn ystod y deg i bymtheg mlynedd flaenorol, roedd y GMC wedi bod o’r farn, os oedd yn parhau i gyfyngu’i weithgarwch fel ag o’r blaen, ni fyddid yn delio â rhai mathau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol a oedd yn arwain at feirniadaeth gyhoeddus. Roedd wedi dechrau casglu gwybodaeth ei hun felly, ac i erlyn mewn rhai mathau o achosion. Mynegodd Pwyllgor Merrison y farn bod
‘cyfiawnhad llwyr’
dros y gweithredu hwn a dylai barhau
‘er lles y cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn’
Argymhellodd Adroddiad Merrison felly y dylai’r GMC sefydlu uned fechan, dan oruchwyliaeth swyddog â chymwysterau meddygol o bosibl, er mwyn ymchwilio i honiadau yn erbyn meddygon. Y rheswm am hyn oedd bod Pwyllgor Merrison o’r farn ei bod yn bwysig y dylai’r GMC allu
‘... asesu mor gyflym â phosibl pa gŵynion sy’n sylweddol er mwyn gallu cymryd camau gweithredu, gan gynnwys gwrthod honiadau di-sail, heb oedi gormodol’
. Argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison y dylai’r uned ymchwilio weithredu dan gyfarwyddyd personol y Llywydd, a fyddai’n goruchwylio camau cyntaf gweithdrefnau FTP ac yn gweithredu fel sgriniwr. Byddai’r uned ymchwilio’n cael ei defnyddio’n bennaf ar gyfer ymchwilio i gŵynion gan unigolion preifat. Ei rôl fyddai sefydlu ffeithiau’r achos
‘mewn modd rhagbaratoawl a niwtral’
. Gan fod aelodau Pwyllgor Merrison o’r farn y gallai pwyntiau anhawster gael eu hesbonio’n well yn aml gan gyfweliad personol yn hytrach na thrwy gyfnewid llythyrau, fe wnaethant awgrymu y gallai trafodaethau gael eu cynnal rhwng cynrychiolydd o’r uned ymchwilio a’r meddyg dan sylw, a rhwng y cynrychiolydd a phartïon eraill i’r gŵyn. Ar ddiwedd yr ymchwiliad, byddai’r uned ymchwilio’n cyflwyno adroddiad i’r Llywydd, a fyddai wedyn yn gwneud y penderfyniad a ddylai’r achos gael ei wrthod neu a ddylid dwyn yr achos yn ei flaen.
Ni chafodd yr argymhellion hyn, sydd i weld yn rai synhwyrol amlwg i mi, erioed eu gweithredu. Ym 1988, mynegodd Mrs Robinson syndod nad oedd gan y GMC ei uned ymchwilio ei hun, a chymharodd sefyllfa’r GMC â sefyllfa’r Ombwdsmon, a oedd â staff parhaol o ymchwilwyr profiadol. Ym 1988, fel oedd hi hyd at yn ddiweddar iawn, roedd cwmnïau preifat o gyfreithwyr a oedd yn cael eu cadw gan y GMC yn ymchwilio i achosion ac yn paratoi achosion ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan y PCC. Roedd y cyfreithwyr yn cyflogi ymchwilwyr wedi’u hyfforddi, gan gynnwys cyn swyddogion heddlu. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ac nid oes gennyf unrhyw reswm i amau, bod cyfreithwyr y GMC, yn y gorffennol, wedi gwneud ymchwiliadau helaeth a thrylwyr iawn wrth baratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiadau PCC. Dyfynnwyd yr achosion a gododd o farwolaethau cardioleg paediatrig y Bristol Royal Infirmary fel enghreifftiau o hyn. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn beth prin i gyfreithwyr y GMC i fod yn gysylltiedig â chasglu gwybodaeth am amgylchiadau cwyn ar adeg cyn i’r gŵyn gael ei chyfeirio gan y PPC ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan y PCC.
Fel y cydnabu Pwyllgor Merrison, cododd yr angen am ymchwiliad gan y GMC mewn cysylltiad â chwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat yn bennaf. Fel y dywedais, byddai’r rhan fwyaf o gŵynion gan unigolion preifat am driniaeth y GIG yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol i ymchwilio iddynt. Fodd bynnag, byddai hynny’n dal i adael cwynion am driniaeth breifat (hyd at yn ddiweddar), ynghyd â chwynion a oedd yn syrthio y tu allan i derfynau amser ar gyfer gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol neu’r rheiny na ellid delio â nhw am resymau eraill drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol.
Diffyg Pwerau Ymchwilio
Hyd at 2000, nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw rym i orfodi cyflwyno dogfennau neu ddarparu gwybodaeth nes bod achos wedi’i gyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC. Nid oedd Mr Howes, a gafodd ei gyflogi gan y GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002, yn meddwl fod unrhyw erioed wedi rhoi cynnig gerbron y dylid rhoi’r grym i’r GMC weithredu’n gynharach. Gallaf ragdybio’n unig mai’r rheswm am hynny oedd nad ystyriwyd erioed yn iawn y byddai ymchwiliadau (ac eithrio gofyn am ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn) yn cael eu cynnal ar gyfnod yn yr achos a oedd yn gynharach nag adeg cyfeirio at y PCC.
Roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 a luniwyd gan Mr Howes yn nodi’r sefyllfa bryd hynny:
Yn y darn hwnnw, ymddengys bod dryswch sylfaenol rhwng diffyg ‘pwerau ymchwilio’ (
) gan y GMC yn ystod y camau rhagarweiniol, a’i allu i ymchwilio o gwbl. Cytunodd Mr Scott bod dryswch felly’n bodoli ym meddyliau rhai o staff ac aelodau’r GMC. Mae’n wir, fel y dywedais, nad oedd gan y GMC unrhyw rym i orfodi datgelu dogfennau na darparu gwybodaeth nes bod penderfyniad wedi’i wneud i gyfeirio cwyn at y PCC. Ond, er gwaethaf diffyg unrhyw rym felly, ni fyddai unrhyw beth, yn yr enghraifft a roddir yn y darn uchod, i atal aelod o staff y GMC rhag gofyn i gyflogwr achwynydd am gopi o’r llythyr. Fe ellid fod wedi’i roi’n wirfoddol. Dywedodd Mr Howes y byddai’r GMC wedi disgwyl i’r achwynydd gael copi o’r llythyr gan ei gyflogwr/chyflogwr. Os nad oedd yn gallu cyflwyno’r llythyr, dywedodd y byddai ‘rhywun yn tybed paham yr oedd felly’. Pan ofynnwyd pam na allai’r GMC ei hun fod wedi gwneud y math hwnnw o ymchwiliad, atebodd:
‘Wel, fe allai’r Cyngor, ond nid yw’r Cyngor, os mynnwch, yno i baratoi achos yr achwynydd. Mae’r Cyngor i fod yn ddiduedd ac, felly, yn sicr bryd hynny, y feddylfryd oedd y dylwn fod yn ddiduedd. Nid oedd unrhyw ran yn ein gwaith i gynorthwyo meddyg â’i amddiffyniad yn erbyn cyhuddiad ac nid oedd yn rhan o’n gwaith i fynd dros ben llestri a pharatoi’r achos ar gyfer yr achwynydd. Roedd yn rhaid i’r achwynydd baratoi’r
(achos)
, byddem ni wedyn, pe bawn yn dweud bod achos
, yn derbyn yr achos ac yn gwneud y gweddill a byddem yn talu costau’r achos ... gerbron y Pwyllgor Disgyblu, etc. Roeddwn yn barod i dderbyn achos pan oedd yr achwynydd, os mynnwch, wedi gwneud ei ran/rhan a pharatoi achos.’
Ar adeg ddiweddarach, dywedodd Mr Howes,
‘... nid oeddwn yn ystyried mai ein gwaith ni yn wir yn y dyddiau hynny oedd helpu’r achwynydd yn fwy na mai ein gwaith ni oedd helpu’r meddyg â’i amddiffyniad. Os oedd yr achwynydd yn dymuno dod â chŵyn yn erbyn y meddyg, yna roedd y gyfraith yn caniatáu iddo/iddi wneud hynny o fewn terfynau penodol, a’n gwaith ni oedd dyfarnu ar y gŵyn honno, a chredaf inni ganolbwyntio ar yr agwedd honno. Nid dyna’r ffordd y mae’r GMC yn edrych ar y materion hyn nawr, ond credaf mai dyna’r ffordd yr edrychwyd arno bryd hynny.’
Roedd amgylchiadau, fodd bynnag, lle’r oedd y GMC yn barod i gychwyn ymchwiliadau ar gyfnod cynnar, er gwaetha’i ddiffyg grym a’r disgwyliad arferol y byddai’r achwynydd yn darparu’r dystiolaeth. Dangosir hyn yn y paragraff nesaf o Lawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994.
Os gellid cynnal ymchwiliadau ar rai achlysuron, yna roedd absenoldeb pwerau yn amlwg ddim yn cael ei ystyried fel rhwystr llwyr. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg bod penderfyniad wedi’i wneud i gyfyngu ymchwiliadau i achosion difrifol, yn enwedig y rheiny â phroffil cyhoeddus uchel. Pan ofynnwyd am enghreifftiau o achosion pan allai achos gael ei drefnu, dyfynnodd Mr Howes gŵynion am ragnodi anghyfrifol i gaethion neu honiadau aml o anwedduster yn erbyn meddyg.
Cytunodd Mr Townsend bod rhywfaint o ddryswch meddwl fwy na thebyg rhwng absenoldeb grym i orfodi pobl i gydweithredu a’r anallu i ymchwilio o gwbl. Teimlai bod y ffaith bod anhawster go iawn os nad oedd pobl yn cydweithredu yn tueddu gwneud i staff fod yn fwy cyndyn i geisio ymchwilio. Roedd y farn mai cyfrifoldeb yr achwynydd oedd casglu’r dystiolaeth i gefnogi’i gŵyn/chŵyn yn ffactor arall. Cytunodd bod y cyfrifoldeb, yn y ‘mwyafrif helaeth o achosion’, ar yr achwynydd unigol i ddarparu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol i ddangos achos
o SPM. Ni fyddai’r unigolyn hwnnw’n cael ei gyfweld/chyfweld gan staff y GMC, ac ni fyddid yn mynd at dystion potensial arall nac yn eu cyfweld, ac eithrio mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol. Yn lle hynny, byddai’r achwynydd ei hun yn cael ei annog/hannog i gael gafael ar ddatganiadau gan unrhyw dystion potensial.
Fe wnaeth rhai tystion yn yr Ymchwiliad sôn am y ffaith nad oed y Rheolau’n rhoi unrhyw rym penodol i sgrinwyr meddygol i ymchwilio mewn achosion ymddygiad. Rhoddwyd grym penodol i’r PPC, ynghyd â sgriniwyr a oedd yn delio ag achosion lle’r oedd iechyd y meddyg yn fater (sgriniwyr iechyd) a sgrinwyr meddygol yn delio ag achosion perfformiad. Awgrymwyd y gallai’r diffyg grym penodol hwn fod wedi annog staff a sgrinwyr i beidio ymgymryd ag ymchwiliadau. Ni welaf sut y gall hyn fod. Mae’n eglur, os ystyriwyd bod achos yn ddigon difrifol ac/neu â phroffil digon uchel, byddai ymchwiliadau’n cael eu cynnal. Fe wnaeth sgrinwyr ar un achlysur beri i fwy o wybodaeth (e.e. barn arbenigol) gael ei chasglu. Ni wnaeth absenoldeb grym penodol eu hatal rhag gwneud hyn. At hynny, ni ddywedwyd wrthyf y bu unrhyw ymgais erioed i geisio cael grym felly. Ymddengys i mi y gellid priodoli’r diffyg ymchwilio yn bennaf i deimlad mai cyfrifoldeb yr achwynydd (nid y GMC) oedd cadarnhau ei gŵyn/chŵyn. Ni allai absenoldeb unrhyw rym i orfodi cyflwyno dogfennau a gwybodaeth fod wedi helpu. Fodd bynnag, gellid yn ddiau fod wedi unioni hynny pe byddid wedi ystyried ei bod yn angenrheidiol neu’n ddymunol i wneud hynny.
Tynnodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 sylw at y diffyg ymchwilio. Awgrymodd y dylai’r GMC ystyried cynnal rhyw ymchwiliad cyn bod achos yn mynd at sgriniwr meddygol, neu, os nad bryd hynny, ar ôl sgrinio neu tra’n disgwyl i’r PPC ystyried yr achos. Bryd hynny, nid oedd yn arfer hyd yn oed i ofyn am ymateb y meddyg i gŵyn a oedd yn cael ei gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn cyn bod y gŵyn yn cael ei sgrinio. Awgrymodd yr Adroddiad, y dylai hyn gael ei wneud, fan lleiaf, lle’r oedd yn ymddangos bod posibilrwydd o achos
o SPM. Gwnaethpwyd y newid hwnnw yn fuan wedyn. Cododd yr Adroddiad hefyd y posibilrwydd o chwilio am dystiolaeth bellach, yn ychwanegol at ymateb y meddyg. Rai blynyddoedd yn ddiweddarach, oddeutu 2000, ymestynnodd y GMC ei weithdrefnau ‘ymchwilio’ drwy wahodd yr achwynydd i roi sylwadau ar ymateb y meddyg, neu esboniad y meddyg, am y materion honedig. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd ac nid yw erioed wedi ymgymryd ag unrhyw ffurf arall o weithgarwch casglu tystiolaeth fel cymryd datganiadau tyst yn ystod y camau rhagarweiniol.
Fel y nododd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn glir, pan oedd unigolyn preifat yn gwneud cwyn i’r GMC, roedd yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb am gasglu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol i gefnogi’r honiad. Dangosodd Adroddiad PSI 1996, mewn cyfran sylweddol (22%) o achosion lle nad oedd y GMC yn cymryd unrhyw gamau gweithredu, y rheswm am ddiffyg gweithredu oedd bod y GMC wedi gofyn am dystiolaeth bellach gan yr achwynydd ond lle na chafodd unrhyw ymateb. Os na chafwyd unrhyw ymateb gan achwynydd, nid oedd unrhyw gais dilynol fel arfer. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod o’r farn y gallai achwynwyr fod wedi cael bod ceisiadau felly am dystiolaeth bellach yn fygythiol braidd. Roedd hi a’i chydweithwyr yn pryderu o weld y cyfrifoldeb a oedd yn cael ei roi ar achwynwyr a’r ffaith y gallai cwynion a oedd yn ymwneud ag SPM fod wedi’u colli. Am y rheswm hwnnw yr oedd y tîm PSI wedi argymell y dylai’r GMC gynnal ymchwiliadau ei hun.
Roedd gan y tîm PSI bryderon eraill ynghylch y diffyg ymchwilio gan y GMC i gŵynion yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat. Dangosodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 mai’r ffactor pwysicaf unigol o bell ffordd wrth bennu a oedd cwyn yn arwain at weithredu gan y GMC neu beidio, oedd a oedd y gŵyn wedi dod gan gorff cyhoeddus neu gan unigolyn preifat. Yn y flwyddyn hyd at fis Awst 1994, roedd 66% o feddygon a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC, a 72% o feddygon a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC, wedi’u cyfeirio gan gyrff cyhoeddus. Roedd Adroddiad PSI 2000 yn rhoi canlyniadau tebyg. Pur anaml yr oedd cwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat yn erbyn meddygon yn cael eu cyfeirio gan sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC: cyfeiriwyd 5% o gŵynion felly ym 1997, 6% ym 1998 a 13% ym 1999.
Cydnabu‘r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr y gallai’r gwahaniaethau mewn canlyniad rhwng cwynion yn dod gan unigolion preifat a’r rheiny gan gyrff cyhoeddus adlewyrchu’r ffaith bod cwynion a oedd yn cael eu gwneud gan gyrff cyhoeddus am ryw reswm yn gynhenid fwy difrifol na’r rheiny’n cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat. Os felly, ni fyddai’n syndod bod cyfran uwch yn mynd ymlaen ymhellach na’r cam sgrinio. Fodd bynnag, fe wnaethant annog cymryd pwyll wrth ragdybio mai dyma’r rheswm am y canlyniadau gwahanol. Credent y gallai’r gwahaniaethau mewn canlyniad gael eu hachosi yn lle hynny gan wahaniaethau ym maint ac ansawdd tystiolaeth yn cael ei darparu gan gyrff cyhoeddus, o gymharu â hynny yn cael ei ddarparu gan unigolion preifat. Pe bai hyn yn gywir, effaith methiant y GMC i ymchwilio i gŵynion fyddai bod rhai cwynion gan unigolion preifat a ddylai fod wedi bod yn destun camau gweithredu gan y GMC yn cael eu gwrthod oherwydd diffyg tystiolaeth.
Cytunodd Mr Townsend bod y gwahaniaethau mewn canlyniad rhwng cwynion yn cael eu gwneud gan gyrff cyhoeddus a’r rheiny’n cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat, yn cael eu hesbonio, yn rhannol, gan y ffaith y byddai corff cyhoeddus wedi casglu mwy o dystiolaeth nag unigolyn preifat. At hynny, byddai’r dystiolaeth honno wedi cael ei nithio hefyd. Byddai dyfarniad wedi cael ei wneud ar gywirdeb y dystiolaeth. Ffactor arall oedd, fe gredai, y gyfres o rwystrau yr oedd rhaid i unigolyn preifat eu datrys. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys (hyd at fis Tachwedd 2002) y gofyniad i ddatganiad statudol gael ei ddarparu. Teimlai y gallai’r rhwystrau hyn fod wedi annog unigolyn i beidio mynd ymlaen â’i gŵyn/chŵyn.
Ymddengys yn gwbl ddealladwy i mi y dylai’r GMC ganfod bod bron pob cwyn yn cael ei derbyn gan gorff cyhoeddus yn gofyn am ryw fath o gamau disgyblu. Byddai’r honiadau eisoes wedi bod yn destun ymchwiliad a byddai dyfarniad wedi cael ei wneud bod yr honiad yn ddigon difrifol i gyfeirio at y GMC. Fodd bynnag, mae’n fater o bryder nad yw’r GMC wedi bod yn barod i ymgymryd ag ymchwiliad
‘rhagbaratoawl a niwtral’
o gŵynion yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat. Ofnaf y bydd llawer o gŵynion dilys yn cael eu cau oherwydd y methiant i ymchwilio. Rwy’n cydnabod y byddai ymgymryd ag ymchwiliad felly wedi bod yn ymarferiad costus i’r GMC. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cael yr argraff glir nad cost oedd yr unig reswm pam nad ymgymerwyd ag ymchwiliadau felly. Yr argraff a gefais oedd bod cwynion gan unigolion yn cael eu hamau o fod, mewn rhyw ffordd, yn annibynadwy, o leiaf nes bod a hyd bod yr achwynydd yn gallu cyflwyno tystiolaeth ddigonol i fod yn gyfystyr ag achos
o SPM, yn cael ei gefnogi - hyd at fis Tachwedd 2002 - gan ddatganiad statudol. Hefyd, roedd gwrthwynebiad i unrhyw gamau y gellid eu gweld fel rhai a oedd yn ‘cynorthwyo achwynwyr’ ac a oedd, felly, yn ‘annheg i feddygon.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn cyfeirio at y ffaith y gellid gofyn i gyfreithwyr y GMC, mewn achosion mwy cymhleth, i gael gafael ar dystiolaeth cyn bod achos yn cael ei sgrinio. Gallent gyfweld tystion, ac, er nad oedd ganddynt unrhyw rym i orfodi cyflwyno tystiolaeth yn y cam hwnnw, dywedwyd eu bod
‘yn gallu sicrhau cydweithrediad unigolion ac awdurdodau drwy gyswllt personol yn aml’
. Nid ymddengys i hyn gael ei wneud yn aml. Trafodwyd hefyd yr opsiwn o gael cyngor arbenigol cyn sgrinio.
Roedd y fersiwn o’r Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Ebrill 2003 yn pwysleisio mai
‘minimol’
oedd maint y dystiolaeth a oedd yn ofynnol gan y sgrinwyr. Yr hyn yr oedd angen arnynt yn syml oedd digon o wybodaeth i ddeall beth oedd yr honiad. Roedd gweithwyr achos yn cael eu hannog i
‘gofio hyn yn gadarn’
wrth benderfynu pa wybodaeth ddylai gael ei chasglu cyn sgrinio. Roedd y
‘ddewislen o opsiynau casglu tystiolaeth’
a oedd yn agored i weithwyr achos yn y cam hwn yn cynnwys y canlynol:
datgelu cwyn i’r meddyg a gwahodd sylwadau. (Cafodd yr arfer hwn o ddatgelu cwyn i feddyg cyn sgrinio, fel y dywedais, ei gyflwyno mewn ymateb i’r argymhelliad a wnaed yn Adroddiad PSI 1996.)
datgelu sylwadau’r meddyg i’r achwynydd, gan gynnig y cyfle i roi sylwadau pellach. (Cyflwynwyd yr arfer hwn ym mis Gorffennaf 2000 gan ragweld Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998. Cyn hynny, nid oedd y sgriniwr meddygol na’r PPC wedi cael unrhyw sylwadau gan yr achwynydd mewn perthynas ag ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn.)
os oedd yr achwynydd yn rhoi sylwadau pellach, datgelu’r sylwadau hynny i’r meddyg er mwyn gael sylwadau pellach ganddo/ganddi
cael gafael ar gofnodion meddygol mewn achos priodol
gwneud ymholiadau â chyflogwyr neu PCO y meddyg. (Deliaf â’r opsiwn hwn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.)
gofyn am dystiolaeth neu ddatganiadau gan dystion potensial trwy ohebiaeth neu drwy gyfreithwyr y GMC. (Dywedwyd bod hyn yn angenrheidiol mewn rhai achosion er mwyn esbonio natur yr honiadau yn erbyn y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, rhybuddiwyd staff yn erbyn oedi penderfyniad sgriniwr drwy
‘fynd ar ôl tystiolaeth a oedd yn ofynnol mewn cam diweddarach yn unig’
gofyn am farn feddygol arbenigol mewn achosion yn ymwneud â materion a oedd i weld
‘yn gymhleth iawn ac yn anarferol’
a lle nad oedd unrhyw ffurf o farn feddygol wedi’i chynnwys gyda’r gŵyn yn barod.
Mae’n glir o gynnwys Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP mis Ebrill 2003 mai’r nod yn y cam hwn o weithdrefnau’r GMC oedd peidio â chynnal ymchwiliad trylwyr i amgylchiadau’r gŵyn. Yn hytrach roedd i sicrhau bod gan y sgriniwr meddygol y dystiolaeth
‘finimol’
angenrheidiol at ei ddibenion/dibenion, h.y. at ddiben penderfynu a oedd y gŵyn yn codi cwestiwn o SPM.
Roedd nifer o broblemau gyda’r ymagwedd hon. Yn gyntaf, fe allai fod y dystiolaeth a oedd yn cael ei hystyried gan staff y GMC fel tystiolaeth
‘finimol’
ond digonol yn cael ei hystyried fel tystiolaeth annigonol gan sgriniwr meddygol i sefydlu achos
o SPM. Fe allai’r achos, felly, fethu yn y cam sgrinio pan na fyddai hyn wedi digwydd pe bai mwy o dystiolaeth wedi bod ar gael. Yn ail, mewn achos yn ymwneud â honiadau o arfer clinigol is na’r safon, mae’n hanfodol sefydlu’r sail ffeithiol yn gyntaf, er mwyn sicrhau nad yw unrhyw farn arbenigol a geir (ac nad yw unrhyw farn a lunnir gan y sgriniwr meddygol) wedi’i seilio ar gamddealltwriaeth o’r ffeithiau. Yn drydydd, yn absenoldeb y ffeithiau llawn, fe allai sgriniwr gael ei demtio i wneud rhagdybiaethau ynghylch yr hyn ddigwyddodd. Yn bedwerydd, efallai na fyddai modd adnabod ar unwaith bod y gŵyn, fel yr adroddwyd amdani’n yn gyntaf gan yr unigolyn dan sylw, yn un ddifrifol; dim ond drwy ymchwilio’n iawn i’r gwyn y gallai hyn fod wedi dod yn amlwg.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai gweithgarwch casglu tystiolaeth cyfyngedig oedd, yn gyffredinol, cyn penderfyniad sgrinio. Nododd bod y gweithdrefnau presennol i weld yn ‘baradocs’. Roedd cwyn yn cael ei sgrinio, ei chyfeirio at y PPC, ei chyfeirio ymlaen at y PCC, roedd cyhuddiadau’n cael eu llunio, a bryd hynny’n unig yr oedd y GMC yn mynd ati i ganfod tystiolaeth i ategu’r cyhuddiadau. Cyfeiriodd at y broses hon fel ‘rhoi’r cart o flaen y ceffyl’. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud:
‘Efallai mai’r dull mwy rhesymegol fyddai casglu tystiolaeth sydd i weld yn berthnasol i chi ac yna byddwch yn ffurfio’r cyhuddiadau’n unol â hynny. Credaf fod hynny wedi bod yn rhwystr i gynnydd gydol y 1990au, ac ni chaiff ei ddatrys yn llawn nes bod y gweithdrefnau newydd yn dod ar waith ... .’
Cafodd y cyfeiriad hwnnw at y gweithdrefnau newydd, a’r newidiadau a fyddai wedi digwydd o ganlyniad, eu hadleisio gan dystion eraill o’r GMC. Byddaf yn ystyried y gweithdrefnau newydd, a’u goblygiad i ymchwilio i gŵynion, ym Mhennod 25. Fodd bynnag, ni allaf ddeall pam yr oedd y GMC, ar ôl cydnabod y diffygion yn ei weithdrefnau presennol, yn teimlo ei bod yn angenrheidiol i aros i’r gweithdrefnau newydd gael eu cyflwyno cyn cychwyn gweithdrefnau ymchwilio iawn.
Yn 2003, dechreuodd y GMC recriwtio tîm o gyfreithwyr, paragyfreithwyr a staff cymorth. Dywedodd Mr Scott ei fod wedi disgwyl y byddai’r tîm, pan oedd yn gyflawn, yn cynnwys oddeutu 20 o bobl i gyd. Ni wnaeth Mr Scott awgrymu, pan roddodd dystiolaeth ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, mai gwaith y tîm oedd casglu tystiolaeth am gŵynion yn y camau cynnar. Yn hytrach, roedd y tîm i weld fel pe bai’n cymryd y rôl a oedd yn cael ei chyflawni’n flaenorol gan gwmnïau cyfreithwyr preifat a oedd wedi’u cadw gan y GMC i baratoi achosion i’w gwrando gan y PCC ac, o bosibl, rôl y cwnsler a oedd wedi cyflwyno’r achosion i’r PCC yn flaenorol. Yn 2004, mae’r GMC wedi hysbysebu gyda golwg ar recriwtio ymchwilwyr, a rhagdybiaf y caiff y bobl hyn eu defnyddio i ymchwilio i achosion dan y gweithdrefnau newydd.
Datganiadau Statudol
Am lawer o flynyddoedd, roedd Rheolau’r GMC yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol bod cwynion a oedd yn cael eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat (ond nid y rheiny’n cael eu gwneud gan bersonau yn gweithredu mewn rhinwedd gyhoeddus), ynghyd â datganiadau gan dystion i gefnogi cwynion felly, yn cael eu hategu gan ddatganiadau statudol. Diben y gofyniad hwn oedd sefydlu
yr achwynydd a’i dystion/thystion. Y bwriad hefyd oedd atal gwneud cwynion maleisus. Fodd bynnag, ei effaith, fel y cydnabu’r GMC yn y pen draw, oedd atal cwynion go iawn. Yn gyffredinol gofynnwyd i achwynwyr ddarparu un datganiad statudol neu fwy yn union wedi i benderfyniad gael ei wneud gan y sgriniwr meddygol y dylid dwyn cwyn yn ei blaen. Os nad oedd datganiad statudol yn cael ei ddarparu, ni fyddai’r cyfeiriad at y PPC yn mynd ymlaen. Yn achos y gŵyn am Shipman mewn perthynas â Mr J, dywedwyd wrth yr achwynydd y byddai’n rhaid i dystiolaeth yr achwynydd a thystiolaeth y prif dystion gael eu hategu gan ddatganiad statudol. Yn gyffredinol, roedd yn ofynnol i’r achwynydd wneud y trefniadau angenrheidiol a thalu cost darparu datganiad statudol. Os oedd yr achwynydd yn gallu llunio’r datganiad ei hun, roedd y gost o’i weinyddu yn gymharol isel. Os oedd y gŵyn yn fwy cymhleth, fodd bynnag, ac roedd angen cymorth cyfreithiwr ar yr achwynydd i ddrafftio datganiad, byddai’r gost yn ddigon sylweddol i atal llawer o bobl. Fe allai’r ffaith ei hun o orfod mynd at gyfreithiwr i gael datganiad wedi’i dyngu, fod wedi bod yn ddigon i godi ofn ar rai. Yn Adroddiad PSI 1996, argymhellodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr y dylai’r gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol gael ei adolygu.
Mae’n eglur o Lawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 bod staff y GMC yn dra ymwybodol o’r beichiau ariannol a’r beichiau eraill yn cael eu rhoi ar achwynwyr mewn perthynas â chael datganiad statudol. Roeddent yn ceisio, lle bynnag oedd modd, i gynghori a chynorthwyo achwynwyr er mwyn cadw’r gost mor isel â phosibl. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn cael ei gydnabod, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, y byddai’n angenrheidiol i achwynwyr fynd at gyfreithiwr er mwyn cael y datganiad statudol. Mewn blynyddoedd diweddarach, roedd cymorth ariannol ar gael i achwynwyr mewn rhai amgylchiadau. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn rhaid iddynt ofyn amdano ac nid oedd llawer yn ymwybodol bod hyn yn bosibl. Cytunodd y tystion bod y gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol wedi cael yr effaith o annog rhai achwynwyr i beidio canlyn eu cwynion. Derbyniodd Mr Howes mewn tystiolaeth nad oedd ‘llawer iawn, iawn o achwynwyr’ wedi darparu datganiadau statudol pan oedd gofyniad iddynt wneud. Dywedodd nad oedd ef ac aelodau eraill o’r staff eisiau i’r gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol fod yn rhwystr diangen i wneud cwyn, ond bu’n rhan o’r Rheolau ac ni allai’r staff geisio osgoi’r gofyniad. Nid oedd gan y staff ychwaith, meddai, unrhyw awdurdod i ddweud wrth bob achwynydd unigol y byddai’r GMC yn awdurdodi ac yn talu am y datganiad. Dywedodd:
‘Credaf ein bod drwy’r adeg yn gwthio’r ffiniau o ran y modd y gallem helpu pobl ac mewn faint o achosion y gallem ddod o hyd i arian i’w helpu nhw ac yn y blaen. Ond roedd yn gwestiwn o wthio’r ffiniau yn ôl, yn enwedig gan fod teimlad cryf, fe gredaf, na ddylem, ar ochr feddygol y ddadl, fod yn helpu achwynwyr o gwbl yn y modd hwn.’
Dywedodd fod y GMC yn ‘cerdded ar raff rhwng buddiannau’r cyhoedd a’r buddiannau proffesiynol’. Roedd yno i ddyfarnu ar gŵyn, nid i helpu’r achwynydd nag i ‘ochri â’r’ meddyg. Os oedd y staff yn gwneud eu gorau glas i sicrhau bod achos achwynydd yn cael cefnogaeth, fe allai fod mai barn y proffesiwn meddygol oedd bod y GMC yn amlwg yn ochri â’r achwynwyr drwy’r amser. Byddai meddygon yn amheus ynghylch sut y gallent gael gwrandawiad teg yn y GMC. Dywedodd bod rhaid i rywun ddangos ei fod yn deg, a hefyd, o safbwynt yr achwynydd, roedd rhaid dangos nad oedd yn rhoi ‘rhwystr cwbl anorchfygol’ yn ei ffordd. Aeth ymlaen:
‘... bob tro’r oedd y Rheolau Gweithdrefn gerbron y Cyngor ar gyfer rhyw fath o newid, dyma’r math o fater fyddai’n cael ei godi, onid yw hi’n hen bryd i ni atal ein taerineb eu bod yn gwneud datganiadau wedi’u tyngu, a byddai’r ddadl hon gerbron y Cyngor wedyn, a byddai pobl yn sefyll i fyny, rhai ohonynt yn dweud, “Rwy’n credu y dylen ni barhau â datganiadau wedi’u tyngu,” ac eraill yn dweud, “Na, mae hyn yn gwbl anghywir ac mae’n faich ofnadwy ar achwynwyr, ac yn ddiangen.”
Felly byddech chi’n cael y ddadl hon ac yna’r canlyniad diweddaraf oedd na ddylent fod - dylai’r gofyniad hwn o’r diwedd gael ei ddileu ac roedd hynny’n gymharol ddiweddar. Hyd hynny roedd y ddadl wastad wedi bod o’r ongl arall.
Nid wyf yn dweud ei bod yn achos o’r proffesiwn yn erbyn y lleyg o hyd, ond credaf ei bod yn debygol bod y ddadl i raddau helaeth yn un o “A yw hyn yn deg i’r meddyg?” yn erbyn “A yw hyn yn deg i’r achwynydd?” ’
Dywedodd Mr Howes bod y GMC ‘mewn sefyllfa amhosibl’. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud ei fod o’r farn bod pethau wedi gwella’n raddol a bod y GMC erbyn hyn yn rhoi llawer mwy o help i achwynwyr.
Mae’n rhaid bod y ffaith fod llawer o achwynwyr wedi methu rhoi datganiad statudol wedi golygu’n anochel bod achosion o SPM potensial yn cael eu colli i’r system. Hefyd, mae’n eglur ei bod yn rhaid bod y gofyniad wedi creu’r argraff, yng ngolwg llawer o achwynwyr, nad oedd y GMC yn barod i gymryd y gŵyn o ddifrif neu i ‘boeni’r’ meddyg â hi nes bod tystiolaeth o safon uchel iawn wedi’i chyflwyno. Yn fyr, roedd yn rhoi’r argraff bod y GMC ‘ar ochr y meddyg’.
Diddymwyd y gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol yn y pen draw ym mis Tachwedd 2002.
Mae’n amlwg bod y GMC, hyd nawr, wedi gwneud ychydig iawn i ymchwilio i gwynion a wnaed iddo oni bai a hyd nes bod y cwynion hynny wedi’u cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC. Yn y pwynt hwnnw, mae cyfreithwyr yn cael eu cadw gan y GMC wedi cymryd y gwaith o baratoi’r achos ar gyfer gwrandawiad. Mae’r gŵyn wedyn wedi’i gwneud yn destun ymchwiliad gan rywun â rhyw raddfa o annibyniaeth a rhywfaint o arbenigedd mewn ymchwilio. Mewn nifer fach o achosion (proffil uchel fel arfer), mae ymchwiliadau wedi’u cychwyn ar gyfnod cynharach. Mae’r mwyafrif helaeth o gŵynion - yn enwedig y rheiny a gafodd eu gwneud gan unigolion preifat a’r rheiny’n ymwneud ag arfer clinigol is na’r safon - wedi’u cau ymhell cyn y pwynt hwnnw. Maent wedi’u cau heb unrhyw gyswllt personol â’r achwynydd a heb unrhyw ymgais i esbonio’r gŵyn nag i ddod o hyd i dystiolaeth a allai ei chefnogi neu’i gwrthbrofi. Mewn achos yn ymwneud â thriniaeth, gellid fod wedi cael gafael ar gofnodion meddygol, ac, mewn achos cymhleth, gofyn am dystiolaeth arbenigol. Lle’r oedd y ffeithiau’n ansicr iawn, fodd bynnag, fe allai fod mai o gymorth cyfyngedig fyddai tystiolaeth arbenigol oni bai a hyd nes bod y ffeithiau’n gliriach. Ymddengys yn debygol, fel y credai’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr, bod cwynion a fyddai wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM wedi’u sgrinio allan o ganlyniad i ddiffyg ymchwilio.
Y ffaith yw mai polisi’r GMC fu i gyfeirio cwynion am driniaeth feddygol yn ôl ar gyfer ymchwilio’n lleol iddynt gan gyrff y GIG, gan ddibynnu ar y cyrff hynny i bob pwrpas i wneud y gwaith ymchwilio ar ei ran. Nes bod corff y GIG yn darparu’r dystiolaeth i’r GMC fel pecyn, nid oedd y GMC yn debygol o weithredu. Roedd doethineb canlyn y polisi hwn yn amlwg yn amheus, oherwydd, fel y cydnabu’r GMC ei hun, roedd ansawdd ymchwiliadau lleol yn amrywiol iawn ac roedd llawer yn dibynnu ar benderfyniad yr achwynydd i sicrhau canlyniad priodol i’r materion yn hytrach na’u hosgoi. Nid oes unrhyw ffordd o wybod faint o achosion y dylai’r GMC fod wedi delio â nhw, ond na chawsant.
Nid yw’r syniad y dylai’r GMC sefydlu uned ymchwilio i gasglu tystiolaeth am gŵynion ar gam cynnar yn ei broses yn un newydd. Argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison y cam hwn bron i 30 mlynedd yn ôl. Fel Mrs Robinson ym 1988, cefais fy synnu’n fawr yn 2003 o ddod i wybod nad oedd gan y GMC, hyd at yn ddiweddar iawn, unrhyw arbenigedd ymchwilio lleol.
Ymddengys i mi bod nifer o resymau pam nad yw’r GMC wedi ymgymryd ag unrhyw waith ymchwilio i gŵynion yn y cam cyn sgrinio. Mae rhan o’r esboniad, fe gredaf, yn yr hanes y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 18.111. Yn y gorffennol, roedd unigolyn preifat a oedd eisiau dod â chŵyn yn erbyn meddyg yn ysgwyddo’r holl gyfrifoldeb am gydosod y dystiolaeth angenrheidiol ac am gyflwyno’r achos mewn gwrandawiad. Yn fwy diweddar, er bod hawl gan achwynwyr o hyd i gyflwyno achosion gerbron y PCC os oeddent yn dewis, y trefniant mwy arferol oedd i’r GMC ‘gymryd’ cwynion pan oeddent wedi’u cyfeirio at y PCC. Byddai’r GMC yn gyfrifol wedyn am baratoi’r achos a’i gyflwyno yn y gwrandawiad; rôl tyst yn unig fyddai gan yr achwynydd. Fodd bynnag, roedd yr egwyddor mai cyfrifoldeb yr achwynydd oedd sefydlu sylfaen yr achos ar y cychwyn, trwy ddarparu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol, yn parhau. Nid ymddengys bod unrhyw werthfawrogiad gwirioneddol o’r anawsterau yr oedd hyn yn ei achosi i achwynwyr. Nid oedd gydnabyddiaeth o’r ffaith ychwaith, os nad oedd achwynydd yn gallu neu os oedd yn amharod i gymryd y camau angenrheidiol i gydosod y dystiolaeth, fe allai hyn olygu bod cwyn â sylwedd gwirioneddol yn cael ei cholli i’r broses reoleiddio, gyda risg gysylltiedig i’r cyhoedd ac i gleifion.
Roedd barn hefyd mai rôl y GMC oedd gweithredu fel canolwr annibynnol, nid i gynorthwyo wrth gasglu tystiolaeth i gefnogi’r naill barti neu’r llall i’r gŵyn. Ymddengys mai’r gred oedd bod ymchwilio i gŵyn yn ‘wrth-feddyg’ mewn rhyw ffordd. Mewn sefydliad lle caiff y rhan fwyaf o aelodau eu hethol gan y proffesiwn, fe allai aelod a eiriolodd ymchwilio’n drylwyr i bob cwyn fod wedi bod yn amhoblogaidd â’i etholwyr/hetholwyr. Rwy’n cael yr argraff glir bod rhai aelodau â barn a oedd o blaid diogelu buddiannau meddygon ac a fyddai wedi gwrthwynebu ymchwilio i gŵynion ar egwyddor. Ymddengys bod methiant i gydnabod na ddylai ymchwiliad i amgylchiadau cwyn fod yn bleidiol. Ei ddiben ddylai fod, fel y cydnabu Pwyllgor Merrison, ymholi i’r ffeithiau
‘mewn modd rhagbaratoawl a niwtral’
. At hynny, fe wnaeth y syniad y byddai’n ‘annheg’ i feddygon i’r GMC ymgymryd â gwaith ymchwilio i gŵynion fethu ystyried yr anghydbwysedd yn y berthynas rhwng yr achwynydd a’r meddyg yr oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei gylch/chylch. Roedd diffyg adnoddau gan y cyntaf i ymchwilio; roedd yr olaf yn cael cefnogaeth yn gyffredinol gan arbenigedd a nawdd gan ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol ac roedd ganddo fynediad parod at farn feddygol.
Credaf mai rheswm arall am y methiant i ymchwilio oedd mater adnoddau. Mae ymchwilio’n broses drud, a phe bai pob cwyn, neu’r rhan fwyaf o gŵynion gan unigolion preifat wedi bod yn destun lefel resymol o ymchwilio, byddai hyn wedi rhoi cryn faich ar y proffesiwn meddygol. Fe allai aelod o’r GMC a oedd yn pleidleisio o blaid cyflogi tîm o ymchwilwyr fod wedi colli ei sedd ar y Cyngor. Bu diffyg arbenigedd ymchwilio hefyd ymhlith staff presennol y GMC, ac, yn wir, diffyg dealltwriaeth ymddangosiadol o’r modd y dylai ymchwiliad gael ei gynnal.
Rheswm arall yw’r broblem y soniais amdani o’r blaen, sef diffyg eglurder o rôl y GMC. Pe bai’r GMC wedi esbonio’n glir mai ei swyddogaeth oedd ystyried cwynion difrifol yn unig a oedd eisoes wedi’u nodi a’u hymchwilio gan eraill, ac nad oedd yn barod i ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwiliadau ac eithrio os nad oedd unrhyw gorff arall ar gael i wneud hynny, a allai fod wedi cynrychioli sefyllfa gwbl resymol i gorff rheoleiddio ei chymryd. Byddai safbwynt felly wedi rhoi ffocws manylach ar ansawdd bylchog ymchwiliadau’n cael eu cynnal gan sefydliadau GIG ac absenoldeb unrhyw ymchwilio lleol i bob diben i gŵynion am feddyg teulu. Ond, yn lle hynny, mae’r GMC wastad wedi cynnal ei hun fel derbynnydd parod cwynion yn uniongyrchol gan aelodau’r cyhoedd. Yr hyn sydd gennyf mewn golwg yw cyhoeddiadau fel ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’ a’i olynydd, ‘Referring a doctor to the GMC - a Guide for Patients’. Er bod y cyhoeddiadau hyn, ar brydiau, yn gwneud cyfeiriadau anuniongyrchol at awdurdodaeth gyfyngedig y GMC, yr argraff gyffredinol a oedd yn cael ei chyfleu oedd y byddai’r GMC yn derbyn ac yn ymchwilio i unrhyw gŵyn am feddyg a byddai’n rhoi cyngor hefyd. Mae llawer o achwynwyr i’r GMC, fel y gwelsom, wedi’u hanfon i ffwrdd i ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau lleol. Mae’r aelodau hynny o’r cyhoedd nad ymdriniwyd â nhw yn y modd hwnnw wedi disgwyl i’w cwynion fod yn destun ymchwiliad a phenderfyniad priodol. Ni ddywedwyd wrthynt erioed gan y GMC nad yw’n barod i wneud hyn. Yn wir, ni fydd gan lawer o unigolion y mae eu cwynion wedi’u gwrthod gan y GMC yn y gorffennol unrhyw syniad mai’r unig gamau a gymerodd y GMC mewn perthynas â’u cwyn oedd ei dangos i sgriniwr meddygol a’i sgriniodd allan. Am lawer o flynyddoedd, bu gagendor rhwng canfyddiad y cyhoedd o’r GMC fel ymchwilydd rhagweithiol cwynion yn erbyn meddygon a’r realiti. Mae’r GMC wedi methu adnabod y gagendor hwn, neu os ydyw, mae wedi methu cymryd unrhyw gamau i’w bontio. At hynny, mae wedi methu cydnabod fod ei ddiffyg ymchwilio wedi golygu bod rhai cwynion a allai fod wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM wedi methu, gyda goblygiadau difrifol potensial i ddiogelwch cleifion.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bydd pethau’n wahanol dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, a bydd ymchwiliadau priodol yn cael eu gwneud i gwynion cyn bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud ynghylch dwyn cwynion yn eu blaen neu’u gwrthod. Byddaf yn trafod haeriadau’r GMC am y dyfodol ym Mhennod 25, pan fyddaf yn ystyried ei drefniadau arfaethedig ar gyfer y ‘cam ymchwilio’ newydd.

---  ---
Mae tri phrif reswm pam y gallai fod yn ddefnyddiol i’r GMC gysylltu ar gam cynnar yn ei brosesau â chyflogwr meddyg y gwnaethpwyd cwyn yn ei erbyn/herbyn neu â’r PCO (y PCT bellach) y mae’r meddyg yn ymddangos ar ei restr. Yn gyntaf, byddai’n galluogi’r GMC ganfod a oedd gan y cyflogwr/PCT unrhyw wybodaeth am y meddyg a allai gynorthwyo’r GMC wrth asesu a delio’n briodol â’r gŵyn a wnaethpwyd iddo. Yn ail, byddai’n rhybuddio’r cyflogwr neu’r PCT i’r ffaith y gallai fod problem gyda’r meddyg. Yn drydydd, byddai’n galluogi’r GMC a chyflogwr neu PCT y meddyg i drafod a/neu esbonio pa sefydliad ddylai fynd ymlaen i ddelio â’r gŵyn a gwneud unrhyw waith ymchwilio angenrheidiol. Byddaf yn delio â’r tri mater hwn ar wahân.
Cael Gafael ar Wybodaeth Gefndir am Feddyg
Yn y gorffennol, pan oedd cwyn am ymddygiad meddyg, neu hysbysiad am euogfarn, yn cael ei dderbyn gan y GMC, nid yr arfer oedd gwneud unrhyw ymholiadau i gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg er mwyn canfod a fynegwyd unrhyw bryder yn ei gylch/chylch o’r blaen. Pan adroddwyd i’r GMC am euogfarnau Shipman ym 1976, ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymholiad i FPC Calderdale er mwn canfod beth oedd ei staff yn ei wybod am Shipman, ei allu fel meddyg neu ei arfer o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Mae’n glir o’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad nad yr arfer ar y pryd oedd gwneud ymholiadau felly. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, nid oedd yn arferol i unrhyw ymholiad rheolaidd gael ei wneud pan oedd y GMC yn cael ei hysbysu bod meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd. Os oedd ymholiad yn cael ei wneud, roedd yn debygol o ymwneud ag amgylchiadau’r drosedd (e.e. y lefel alcohol mewn achos o yfed a gyrru neu faint colled ariannol mewn achos yn ymwneud â thwyll ar y GIG). Roedd yn annhebygol o ymwneud â’r effaith bosibl y gallai troseddoldeb y meddyg fod wedi’i gael ar ei arfer/harfer.
O ran cwynion am ymddygiad, bydd y rheiny sy’n dod gan gyflogwyr neu PCTau yn dod â rhywfaint o wybodaeth gefndir am y meddyg ac unrhyw gyn broblemau a oedd yn gysylltiedig ag ef/hi gyda nhw. Nid oes gan aelodau’r cyhoedd fynediad at y math hwnnw o wybodaeth. Mae eu cwynion yn debygol o ymwneud â digwyddiadau unigol, sy’n rai unigryw i bob golwg yn aml. Yn y gorffennol, fodd bynnag, ni chymerodd y GMC unrhyw gamau rheolaidd i chwilio am wybodaeth gefndir am feddyg a oedd yn destun cwyn gan unigolyn preifat.
Pan wnaethant eu gwaith gwreiddiol yn y GMC, roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn pryderu am ddiffyg unrhyw gyswllt â chyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg cyn bod cwyn yn ei erbyn/herbyn yn cael ei sgrinio. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn ymddangos iddynt y byddai ‘galwad ffôn sydyn’ i’r cynghorwr meddygol yn y PCO perthnasol wedi helpu rhoi cwyn am feddyg teulu mewn persbectif. Roedd yn ymddangos i mi bod dwy ffordd y gallai gwybodaeth gefndir am feddyg fod wedi bod yn werthfawr iawn. Yn gyntaf, lle’r oedd y gŵyn am ddigwyddiad unigol yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad, a fyddai, o’i brofi, yn gyfystyr ag arfer clinigol is na’r safon (er nad yn SPM, o reidrwydd), byddai’n bwysig gwybod a oedd y digwyddiad honedig, cyn belled ag yr oedd yn hysbys, yn ddigwyddiad ‘unigryw’ neu a fu digwyddiadau tebyg blaenorol yr oedd cyflogwr neu PCT y meddyg yn ymwybodol ohonynt. Pe bai digwyddiadau blaenorol, fe allai hyn, yn y gorffennol, fod wedi awgrymu y dylai’r meddyg gael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at weithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC, neu, o leiaf, dylai fod rhywfaint o drafod rhwng y GMC a’r cyflogwr neu’r PCT (a’r NCAA, o bosibl) ynghylch y modd y dylid mynd i’r afael â’r broblem.
Yr ail ffordd y gallai gwybodaeth gefndir felly wedi bod yn werthfawr oedd wrth asesu difrifoldeb potensial cwyn am ddigwyddiad unigol. Er enghraifft, fe allai cwyn ymwneud â phryder a oedd ar yr olwg gyntaf i weld yn gamgymeriad ‘unigryw’ yn gysylltiedig â darn o offer neu gyffur arbennig. Fe allai’r meddyg gyfaddef y camgymeriad, ond gallai honni, heb fod unrhyw fai arno/arni, ei fod/bod yn anghyfarwydd â’r offer neu’r cyffur dan sylw. Fe allai ymholiad i’w gyflogwyr/chyflogwyr neu PCT ddatgelu digwyddiad tebyg cynharach gyda’r un darn o offer neu gyffur. Byddai’r wybodaeth am y digwyddiad cynharach yn rhoi’r digwyddiad hwyrach mewn golau cwbl wahanol. Fe allai awgrymu patrwm o berfformiad gwael. Fodd bynnag, fe allai hefyd awgrymu diffyg pryder am ddiogelwch claf a fyddai’n gyfystyr ag SPM.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997,a gyhoeddwyd i gyd-fynd â chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, yn darparu’n benodol ar gyfer ymholiadau i’w gwneud i gyflogwyr a PCOau, a swyddogion pwyllgorau meddygol lleol a’r pwyllgorau cyfwerth mewn ysbytai. Dim ond ar gais sgriniwr, fodd bynnag, yr oedd ymholiadau felly i’w gwneud. Yr awgrym oedd y dylent gael eu gwneud ym mhob achos oni bai ei bod yn glir o’r cychwyn pa gamau ddylid eu cymryd dan y gweithdrefnau FTP neu oni bai ei bod yn ymddangos nad oedd unrhyw sail dros gysylltiad y GMC â’r gŵyn. Roedd rheolau penodol i’w dilyn. Yn benodol, ni ddylid fod wedi mynd at unrhyw berson nad oedd eisoes yn ymwybodol o’r gŵyn oni bai bod y meddyg a oedd yn destun y gwyn wedi cael ei hysbysu ohoni’n gyntaf. At hynny, roedd i’w esbonio’n eglur i’r person yr oedd ymholiadau’n cael eu gwneud yn ei gylch/chylch, fod y GMC yn syml yn gwneud ymholiadau rhagarweiniol ac nad oedd unrhyw benderfyniad am gamau posibl gan y GMC wedi’u cymryd.
Roedd cynnwys Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 i weld yn awgrymu y byddai ymholiadau i gyflogwyr yn cael eu gwneud fwy neu lai fel mater o drefn mewn unrhyw achos ‘ar y ffin’ a oedd yn ymwneud â chŵyn am arfer clinigol is na’r safon yn cael ei gwneud gan unigolyn preifat. Mae’n eglur, fodd bynnag, na wnaethpwyd hyn. Yn wir, ymddengys bod achosion lle’r oedd ymholiadau felly’n cael eu gwneud i weld yn fater o eithriad i raddau helaeth yn hytrach na’r rheol.
Un rheswm am y methiant i ddilyn yr arfer a nodwyd yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 oedd nad oedd unrhyw amwysedd ynghylch a ddylai’r GMC fod yn gwneud ymholiadau felly. Rwyf eisoes wedi trafod yr amwysedd hwn mewn cysylltiad â mater ymchwilio’n gyffredinol. Cafodd ei esbonio’n dda yn nhystiolaeth Dr Korlipara. Roedd yn sgriniwr meddygol rhwng 1998 a 2004. Dywedodd, ar ôl cyhoeddi Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997, bod cefnogaeth gyffredinol i ymholiadau’n cael eu gwneud, i daflu goleuni pellach ar gŵyn unigol ac i weld a oedd y gŵyn honno yn rhan o broblem fwy cyffredinol mewn gwirionedd. Y math o gŵyn unigol lle byddai ymholiadau pellach yn cael eu gwneud, meddai, oedd lle’r oedd y gŵyn â photensial i fod yn ‘ddifrifol o annerbyniol’ ond lle’r oedd manylion yn fylchog, a bod angen eglurhad pellach felly. Mewn geiriau eraill, ni fyddai unrhyw ymholiadau i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg yn cael eu gwneud er mwyn cyfrannu at asesiad rhagarweiniol sgriniwr i’r gŵyn. Yn hytrach, byddent yn cael eu cychwyn wedi’r asesiad rhagarweiniol hwnnw, os oedd yn ymddangos i’r sgriniwr bod y gŵyn, ohoni’i hun, â’r potensial i fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP.
Gofynnwyd i Dr Korlipara am achos (achos Dr KE 10) a oedd yn dangos yr ymagwedd hon. Cwynodd gŵr gweddw i’r GMC ynghylch y driniaeth a gafodd ei wraig ddiweddar gan ddau feddyg teulu. Roedd wedi canlyn ei gŵyn yn flaenorol drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Roedd hyn wedi arwain, flwyddyn ar ôl y digwyddiadau a oedd yn destun y gŵyn, at adroddiad IRP a oedd yn feirniadol o feddygon a threfniant a rheolaeth eu harfer mewn nifer o agweddau pwysig. Cafodd un o’r meddygon y cyfle wedi hynny i gael ei ddileu’n wirfoddol o’r gofrestr feddygol, ac, fel y bu hi, dim ond y gŵyn mewn perthynas â Dr KE 10 oedd gan y GMC ar ôl.
Roedd gwraig yr achwynydd wedi bod yn dioddef o salwch terfynol a ddigwyddodd yn hwyr ac mewn modd anarferol. Nid awgrymwyd bod Dr KE 10 neu’i gydweithwyr wedi achosi’i marwolaeth, nac y byddai llwybr y salwch wedi’i newid pe byddent wedi ymddwyn yn wahanol. Nid awgrymwyd ychwaith y dylent fod wedi diagnosio’n gywir union natur cyflwr y claf. Roedd pelydr-x a gafwyd gan Dr KE 10, a ellid fod wedi disgwyl iddo ddangos tystiolaeth o’r cyflwr os oedd yn bresennol, yn dangos newidiadau dirywiol yn unig. Fodd bynnag, canfu’r IRP fod Dr KE 10 wedi methu cadw nodiadau na chofnodion clinigol o safon ddigonol, wedi methu ystyried cynnal profion gwael a fyddai wedi bod yn briodol, ac wedi gwrthod ceisiadau rhesymol am ymweliadau cartref. Dywedwyd gan yr IRP bod y methiannau hyn, ynghyd â methiannau ei gydweithwyr a’r feddygfa’n gyffredinol, wedi cyfrannu at fethiant i adnabod difrifoldeb cyflwr y claf a’i drin â mesurau lleddfu poen priodol.
Sgriniodd Dr Korlipara’r achos a chynghori y dylid ei gau. Cyfeiriodd at ganlyniad y pelydr-x a nododd bod gan Dr KE 10 gyfiawnhad dros galonogi’r claf ar sail yr adroddiad pelydr-x. Roedd yn fodlon na ellid fod wedi gwerthfawrogi natur derfynol cyflwr y claf nes dau ddiwrnod cyn iddi fynd i mewn i’r ysbyty y tro olaf. Ni chynigiodd sylw ar ganfyddiadau penodol yr IRP mewn perthynas â Dr KE 10, gan ddweud yn unig nad oedd y modd y rheolodd gyflwr y claf yn codi materion o SPM na SDP. Roedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno.
Mae’n eglur, ac eithrio’r adroddiad IRP a dogfennaeth gysylltiedig, a llythyr a ysgrifennwyd ar ran Dr KE 10 gan ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol, nad oedd gan Dr Korlipara unrhyw wybodaeth arall o’i flaen. Yn benodol, nid oedd unrhyw wybodaeth gefndir am y meddyg gan y PCT. Roedd hyn er gwaetha’r ffaith fod yr adroddiad IRP wedi codi pryderon a allai, byddwn wedi meddwl fod wedi bod yn rhan o faterion perfformiad ehangach. Nodaf hefyd bod yr achwynydd wedi awgrymu yn ei dystiolaeth i’r IRP bod problemau ehangach gyda Dr KE 10. Fe allai’r awgrym hwn fod yn gywir neu’n anghywir, ond ymddengys i mi y dylai fod o leiaf wedi ysgogi rhai ymholiadau i’r PCT.
Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, ymhelaethodd Dr Korlipara ar ei resymau am gynghori y dylid cau’r achos hwn. Cyfeiriaf at y penderfyniad hwn ymhellach ym Mhennod 19. Gofynnwyd i Dr Korlipara wedyn am y methiant i ganfod a oedd gan y PCT unrhyw bryderon eraill ynghylch perfformiad y meddyg. Cymerodd y cyfle i fynegi’i farnau cyffredinol am briodolrwydd y GMC yn gwneud ymholiadau i PCT. Dywedodd:
‘... mae’r GMC wedi derbyn cwynion yn draddodiadol. Nid yw wedi ysgogi cwynion ac eithrio os yw wedi’u gweld
(nhw yn)
y wasg neu ryw fan cyhoeddus, ond, ar y cyfan, mae cwynion wedi’u cyfeirio ato ac mae wedi edrych ar y cwynion, ac ar rinweddau’r cwynion hynny ar ôl dadansoddi’n ofalus fe ddaw i gasgliad ynghylch a oes unrhyw faterion a fyddai’n dangos bod safonau felly, naill ai mewn ymddygiad neu mewn perfformiad, sy’n disgyn mor ddifrifol islaw arfer meddygol da derbyniol y dylid ystyried camau pellach ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Os mai ie yw’r ateb, mae’r ymchwiliad yn mynd ymlaen at y cam pellach. Os mai na yw’r ateb a’i bod yn gŵyn unigol nad ydyw’n codi’r bwgan ynddi hi eu hun, rhagdybiwn yn achos cleifion y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol, sydd naill ai’n cael eu rheoli gan y PCTau neu’i ragflaenwyr neu’r ymddiriedolaethau ysbyty, bod dyletswydd ganddynt, a byddent yn gwneud eu dyletswydd wrth roi gwybod i ni pe bai ganddynt unrhyw bryderon ohonynt eu hunain.
... gan fynd yn ôl at y cwestiwn a roddwyd i mi dro ar ôl tro ynghylch a ddylai’r GMC fod wedi cychwyn ymholiadau ei hun i’r PCT neu’r ymddiriedolaethau ysbyty pan nad yw’r gŵyn unigol ei hun o unrhyw natur wirioneddol ddifrifol, credaf fod hynny’n mynd â’r gŵyn i lefel fwy newydd mewn gwirionedd. Fe allai pobl ei disgrifio fel chwilio am wybodaeth bellach am y wybodaeth
(credaf mai ‘meddyg’ ddylai hwn fod)
y mae’r gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn na fyddai ganddo unrhyw wybodaeth flaenorol amdani, ac eto y gellid ei defnyddio er mwyn llunio achos yn erbyn meddyg. Nid wyf yn rhyw sicr iawn a fyddai eiriolwyr y meddyg o’r farn fod hyn yn unol â deddf naturiol tegwch.
Yn bersonol, byddaf yn cael rhai anawsterau oni bai bod dadleuon darbwyllol yn cael eu rhoi ger ein bron yn gyhoeddus ei bod yn ddymunol ac yn deg y gellir ychwanegu gwybodaeth ychwanegol nad yw meddygon wedi’u hysbysu amdani’n flaenorol at y cwynion heb i’r meddyg fod wedi’i wneud/gwneud yn ymwybodol ohoni.’
Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd Dr Korlipara yn dweud na fyddai’n deg i’r meddyg dan sylw i ofyn am wybodaeth gan PCT neu gorff y GIG
cyn
bod penderfyniad wedi’i wneud ynghylch a oedd y gŵyn yn debygol o fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP. Os oedd penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud ei bod yn debygol o fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP, gellid gwneud ymholiadau pellach. Fel arall, awgrymodd, dylid rhagdybio, pe bai unrhyw bryderon am y meddyg, byddai’r PCT neu gyflogwyr y meddyg wedi adrodd wrth y GMC amdanynt.
Roedd y broblem gyda’r ymagwedd honno, ymddengys i mi, yn un ddeublyg. Yn gyntaf, fe allai’r wybodaeth gefndir fod yn angenrheidiol er mwyn ateb y cwestiwn cychwynnol a oedd y gŵyn yn debygol o fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP. Yn ail, gall fod bod y PCT yn delio â nifer o gŵynion neu bryderon am feddyg ond yn anymwybodol o gŵyn a oedd wedi’i gwneud i’r GMC gan unigolyn preifat. Efallai na fyddai’r PCT wedi cyrraedd y pwynt adrodd i’r GMC am y meddyg. Fe allai’r wybodaeth a oedd yn cael ei chadw gan y PCT serch hynny fod o werth i’r GMC wrth benderfynu beth i wneud â’r gŵyn yr oedd wedi’i derbyn. At hynny, o gofio’r ffaith bod y PCTau yn sefydliadau cymharol newydd, nid wyf yn meddwl y byddai’n ddiogel i ragdybio y bydd ganddynt syniad eglur o hyd o ba bryderon y dylent adrodd i’r GMC amdanynt a pha rai na ddylent adrodd amdanynt. O safbwynt diogelwch cleifion, ymddengys i mi ei bod yn amlwg yn ddymunol y dylai’r GMC gael darlun mor gyflawn â phosibl cyn gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch sut i ddelio â chŵyn. Beth bynnag, os yw’r swyddogaeth reoleiddio i’w rhannu rhwng y GMC a chyrff GIG lleol, rhaid, yn fy marn i, cael rhannu gwybodaeth sy’n berthnasol i’r swyddogaeth honno. Nid ymddengys i mi bod un sefydliad yn gwneud rhagdybiaethau ynghylch gwybodaeth a all fod gan sefydliad arall neu beidio, er lles diogelwch cleifion.
Dywedodd Dr Korlipara ei bod yn amlwg bod gan Dr KE 10 lawer o ddiffygion yr oedd angen eu hunioni, er nad oeddent yn gyfystyr ag SDP yn ei farn ef. Dywedodd ei bod yn eglur hefyd bod y feddygfa yn camweithredu mewn nifer o agweddau. Roedd wedi rhagdybio y byddai’r PCT wedi cymryd camau i ddelio â’r problemau hyn. Dywedodd nad rôl y GMC oedd goruchwylio’r PCT, felly ni fyddai wedi bod yn briodol yn ei farn ef iddo gychwyn ymchwiliad ynghylch beth oedd wedi’i wneud i ddelio â chwynion y meddyg neu ei feddygfa/meddygfa. Ymddengys i mi, wrth gymryd yr olwg braidd yn gul hon o swyddogaethau’r GMC, bod Dr Korlipara wedi methu rhoi pwys priodol i’r angen i ddiogelu cleifion Dr KE 10. Gan fod y GMC i fod i weithredu mewn partneriaeth â chyrff y GIG, does bosib y byddai wedi bod yn synhwyrol i ymholiad fod wedi’i wneud ynghylch pa gamau, os o gwbl, oedd wedi’u cymryd i sicrhau bod diffygion y meddyg, a diffygion y feddygfa, wedi’u hunioni. Os nad oedd unrhyw gamau wedi’u cymryd, fe allai llythyr ymholiad gan y GMC yn wir fod wedi gweithredu fel ysgogiad i’r PCT.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall, yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng mis Rhagfyr 1998 a mis Ebrill 2000, bod dadl yn mynd ymlaen yn y GMC ynghylch a dylid gofyn am wybodaeth gefndir am feddygon pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei derbyn. Dywedodd, yng ngolau rhai achosion blaenorol, ei bod wedi dod yn amlwg bod y GMC o bosibl yn methu yn ei ddyletswydd i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd os nad oedd ymholiadau felly’n cael eu gwneud. Fodd bynnag, roedd rhai aelodau’n teimlo bod anawsterau o ran gwneud ymholiadau ar gyfnod cynnar gan y byddai hyn yn golygu datgelu’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg. Penderfynwyd yn y pen draw y dylai trafodaethau gael eu cynnal mewn achosion penodol yn unig, h.y. y rheiny a oedd yn ‘achosion mwy fel achosion perfformiad’. Dangosodd tystiolaeth Mr Marshall y cysylltiad agos a wnaed â’r GMC rhwng y materion gofyn am wybodaeth am feddygon gan eu cyflogwyr a’u PCOau a datgelu i’r un personau neu gyrff hynny y ffaith bod cwyn am y meddyg wedi’i gwneud i’r GMC. Roedd gofyn am wybodaeth yn amlwg er lles diogelwch cleifion. Roedd canfyddiad, fodd bynnag, bod datgeliad bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud, yn annheg i feddygon. Mae ei dystiolaeth yn dangos hefyd bod gwrthdaro rhwng dyletswydd y GMC i ddiogelu cleifion a’i ddymuniad i ‘fod yn deg i feddygon’. Ymddengys, yn yr enghraifft honno, bod y gwrthdaro wedi’i ddatrys gan gyfaddawd a aeth rywfaint o’r ffordd, ond nid yn bell, tuag at les diogelu cleifion.
Datgelu’r Ffaith bod Cwyn wedi’i Gwneud
Mae hysbysu cyflogwr neu PCT meddyg yn gynnar o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud i’r GMC yn cael yr effaith o rybuddio’r person neu’r corff hwnnw am broblemau posibl gyda’r meddyg. Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd datgeliad awtomatig i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg hyd yn oed lle’r oedd y gŵyn wedi’i phrofi ac y bu’r meddyg yn destun camau disgyblu gan y GMC. Llai fyth oedd yna unrhyw ddatgeliad o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i derbyn a’i bod wedi’i gwrthod neu yn y broses o fod dan sylw. Byddai cyrff GIG yn cwyno am y ffaith mai’r tro cyntaf iddynt ddod i wybod am y ffaith fod meddyg ar eu rhestr neu yn eu cyflogaeth wedi cael ei ddisgyblu/disgyblu oedd wrth iddynt ddarllen amdano yn y papur lleol. Ym mis Rhagfyr 1999, cynigiodd y GMC mewn dogfen ymgynghorol y dylai, mewn rhai amgylchiadau cyfyngedig iawn, ddatgelu gwybodaeth yn wirfoddol am ran meddyg yn ei weithdrefnau PCT i gyflogwyr ac eraill gyda diddordeb dilys mewn cael y wybodaeth honno.
Roedd y Llywodraeth, fodd bynnag, o blaid creu dyletswydd statudol ar y GMC i ddarparu gwybodaeth amserol i gyrff GIG am feddygon yr oedd eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer dan ystyriaeth ffurfiol. O ganlyniad, o 2000, rhoddwyd dyletswydd statudol ar y GMC i ddatgelu i’r Adran Iechyd, ac i unrhyw berson neu gorff yr oedd meddyg yn cael ei gyflogi/chyflogi ganddo neu yr oedd dan gontract i ddarparu gwasanaethau iddo, unrhyw benderfyniad yn cael ei wneud gan y GMC i gyfeirio’r meddyg at y PPC, i’w wahodd/gwahodd i gytuno i asesiad ac i bennu a oedd ei gyflwr/chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd datgeliad i’w wneud ar ôl sgrinio’r gŵyn os oedd penderfyniad wedi’i wneud bod y gŵyn i’w dwyn yn ei blaen. Er nad oedd penderfyniad i gyfeirio achos at yr IOC wedi’i gynnwys yn y rhestr ysgogwyr i ddatgelu, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, bod penderfyniad felly, yn ymarferol, yn cael ei drin yn yr un modd â’r penderfyniadau eraill a bennwyd yn y ddarpariaeth statudol newydd.
Ar yr un pryd, rhoddwyd y grym i’r GMC i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i bersonau ddatgelu unrhyw wybodaeth neu ddogfennau yn eu meddiant a oedd i weld yn berthnasol i ystyriaeth y GMC o’r achos. Gellid defnyddio’r grym hwn, mewn theori, i gael gafael ar wybodaeth gan sefydliadau GIG, er y byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl y byddai gwybodaeth felly’n cael ei darparu’n wirfoddol fel arfer.
Hefyd, rhoddwyd grym statudol i’r GMC i ddatgelu i unrhyw berson gwybodaeth a oedd yn berthnasol i ymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol neu addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer yr oedd o’r farn ei fod er lles y cyhoedd i’w datgelu. Fe ellid defnyddio’r grym hwn, er enghraifft, lle’r oedd ymholiadau i’w gwneud gan ddarpar gyflogwr am feddyg a oedd yn cael ei ystyried ar gyfer swydd. Roedd hefyd yn galluogi’r GMC, os oedd o’r farn ei bod er lles y cyhoedd i wneud hynny, i hysbysu cyflogwr neu PCO meddyg o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn, cyn y cam yn ei weithdrefnau lle’r oedd rhwymedigaeth arno drwy statud i wneud y datgeliad. Roedd hyn yn bwysig oherwydd, mewn rhai achosion, fe allai cyfnod o nifer o wythnosau (neu hwy hyd yn oed) fynd heibio cyn bod penderfyniad sgrinio’n cael ei wneud a chyrraedd yr amser i wneud datgeliad statudol. Mewn achosion felly, fe allai fod yn ddymunol i gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg i gael rhybudd ymlaen llaw am y gŵyn a oedd wedi’i gwneud.
Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Scott bod ceisiadau gan y GMC i gyflogwyr neu PCOau am wybodaeth gefndir am feddygon yr oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud yn eu herbyn yn cael eu gwneud weithiau, ac weithiau nid oeddent. Hyd yn oed yn y cam ôl-sgrinio, lle’r oedd rhwymedigaeth ar y GMC i ddatgelu gwybodaeth am gŵyn a oedd wedi’i gwneud, ni fyddai cais gan y GMC am wybodaeth gan y cyflogwr neu’r PCO yn mynd law yn llaw â’r datgeliad bob tro. Weithiau, byddai cyflogwr neu PCT yn gwirfoddoli gwybodaeth am feddyg, ond nid oedd hyn yn cael ei wneud o hyd. Dywedodd Mr Marshall, yn achos euogfarnau, byddai cyflogwyr a PCOau yn cael eu hysbysu o’r ffaith bod euogfarnau wedi’u hadrodd i’r GMC pan gawsant eu cyfeirio at y PPC. Os oedd rheswm gan y GMC i gredu y gallai fod gwybodaeth berthnasol gan y cyflogwr neu’r PCO, byddai cwestiynau uniongyrchol yn cael eu gofyn iddo. Fel arall, byddai’r GMC yn dibynnu ar y cyflogwr neu’r PCO i wirfoddoli unrhyw wybodaeth a all fod yn berthnasol.
Dywedodd Mr Scott, gan nad oedd gofyniad, pan roddodd ei dystiolaeth ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, wedi’i bennu ar y GMC i wneud datgeliad i gyflogwr neu PCO yn syth ar ôl derbyn cwyn am feddyg, bod ‘deuoliaeth teimlad’ ar ran y GMC ynghylch gofyn am wybodaeth gefndir yn y cam hwnnw. O ganlyniad, dim ond os oedd ‘y rhai a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau’ (cymeraf mai’r sgrinwyr a olygai Mr Scott) yn dweud nad oedd ganddynt ddigon o wybodaeth i wneud eu penderfyniad heb ymholiadau felly y byddid yn gofyn am wybodaeth bellach. Y rheswm am y ‘deuoliaeth teimlad’ y cyfeiriodd Mr Scott ato oedd, os oedd ymholiadau’n cael eu gwneud i gyflogwr neu PCO pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei derbyn, byddai hyn yn datgelu’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i derbyn cyn bod gofyniad ar y GMC yn ôl statud i wneud y datgeliad hwnnw. Teimlwyd bod hyn yn annheg i’r meddyg dan sylw. Fel yr esboniais, mae’n eglur bod gan y GMC y grym i ddatgelu ar gyfnod cynharach y ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud, os oedd o’r farn ei bod er lles y cyhoedd i wneud y datgeliad er mwyn cael gwybodaeth gan gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, nid oedd yn dewis defnyddio’r grym hwnnw.
Gyda chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd gerllaw, roedd yn rhaid i’r GMC ailystyried y pwynt lle dylai ei ddyletswydd statudol i wneud datgeliad am gŵyn godi. Yn ystod y cyfnod yr oedd y gweithdrefnau newydd wrthi’n cael eu trafod, gwnaethpwyd newidiadau sylweddol i’w gynigion ynghylch pa gamau o’i weithdrefnau ddylai ysgogi datgeliad. Disgrifiaf y newidiadau hyn - a’r canlyniad yn y pen draw - ym Mhennod 25. Yn fras, bydd y rhwymedigaeth i ddatgelu cwyn i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, yn codi pan fydd yr achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at archwilydd achos, s fydd yn cyflawni rôl debyg - ond nid union yr un fath -â rôl y sgrinwyr presennol.
Yn y cyfamser, fel yr esboniais, ym mis Mai 2004, cyhoeddodd y GMC y byddai o hynny ymlaen yn gwneud datgeliad anffurfiol o’r ffaith bod cwynion wedi’u gwneud mewn achosion penodol. Y bwriad oedd trafod rhai cwynion gyda chyflogwyr a PCO y meddyg ar gyfnod cynnar. Diben y trafodaethau hyn fyddai, yn gyntaf, canfod a oedd y gŵyn yn fater ar ei ben ei hun neu’n rhan o bryderon lleol ehangach am y meddyg, ac, yn ail, i hysbysu’r rheiny â chyfrifoldebau rheolaeth glinigol lleol bod y GMC wedi derbyn cwyn am y meddyg. Nid y bwriad oedd y byddai trafodaethau felly’n cael eu cynnal ym mhob achos. Ni fyddent yn cael eu cynnal mewn achosion nad oedd yn amlwg yn gofyn am weithredu, ym marn y GMC, nac yn yr achosion hynny lle’r oedd yn eglur ar unwaith, oherwydd eu difrifoldeb, bod rhaid i’r GMC ymchwilio.
Y math o achos lle dylai trafodaethau gael eu cynnal yw achos lle nad yw’r honiad ei hun (hyd yn oed o’i brofi) yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, ond lle allai barn y GMC fod yn wahanol pe bai pryderon ehangach ar lefel leol ynghylch arfer y meddyg. Mewn achosion felly, bydd y GMC yn trafod gyda chyflogwr y meddyg cyn penderfynu a ddylid ymchwilio ymhellach. Os nad yw’r drafodaeth honno’n datgelu unrhyw bryderon ehangach ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, fe allai’r GMC benderfynu nad oes angen iddo ymchwilio ymhellach. Ymddengys i mi y dylai’r trefniadau newydd hyn, o’u gweithredu’n gyson, esgor ar gryn welliant ym mhroses rhagarweiniol gwneud penderfyniadau’r GMC.
Fodd bynnag, mae adroddiadau yn y wasg feddygol wedi awgrymu bod y trefniadau newydd wedi’u derbyn â siom gan feddygon. Dywedwyd y byddai’r datgeliad anffurfiol i gyflogwyr a PCOau o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ‘annheg i feddygon’ gan y byddai cyflogwyr yn debygol o ddod i gasgliadau croes o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn erbyn meddyg. Adroddwyd bod o leiaf dau sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol wedi herio hawl y GMC i ofyn i feddyg ddarparu manylion cyflogaeth er mwyn galluogi’r GMC gysylltu â’i gyflogwyr/chyflogwyr i drafod cwyn a wnaed yn ei erbyn/herbyn cyn cyrraedd amser gwneud datgeliad statudol. Rhaid aros i weld a fydd y GMC yn cymhwyso’r trefniadau newydd yn gyson yn wyneb gwrthwynebiad felly o du fewn i’r proffesiwn neu a fydd yn eu cymhwyso mewn lleiafrif o achosion yn unig, neu, fel y trefniadau tebyg iawn a ddisgrifiwyd yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997, y bydd y trefniadau newydd yn mynd allan o arfer.
Penderfynu Pa Sefydliad Ddylai Ddelio â’r Gŵyn
Dylai trafodaeth gynharach rhwng y GMC a chyflogwr neu PCO meddyg am gŵyn alluogi gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch pa sefydliad ddylai gymryd cyfrifoldeb am ddelio â’r gŵyn. Cyfeiriais ym mharagraff 18.104 at fanteision, mewn achos priodol, o gyfeiriad uniongyrchol gan y GMC at y corff cwynion lleol.
Mae’n siomedig bod y GMC, sydd â diogelu cleifion fel ei amcan datganedig, wedi bod yn fodlon am gyhyd i edrych ar gŵynion unigol ar eu pennau’u hunain. Ymddengys bod methiant i werthfawrogi’n llawn yr effaith y gallai gwybodaeth am gŵyn flaenorol ei chael ar arfarnu cwyn ddiweddarach. Ymddengys hefyd y bu barn, a ddangoswyd gan dystiolaeth Dr Korlipara, y byddai’n ‘annheg i feddygon’ i ofyn am wybodaeth gefndir a allai, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, fod yn anffafriol iddynt. O safbwynt diogelwch cleifion, ymddengys i mi ei bod yn hanfodol, pan fydd penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud i gychwyn camau disgyblu ai peidio, y dylai’r person sy’n gwneud y penderfyniad gael darlun cyflawn o’r holl faterion a all effeithio ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Rwy’n croesawu’r bwriad, a fynegwyd gan y GMC, y dylai gael trafodaethau anffurfiol â chyflogwr a PCOau meddygon ar gyfnod cynnar ar ôl i gŵyn gael ei derbyn. Os gwneir hyn, dylai sicrhau bod cyflogwyr a PCOau yn ymwybodol yn gynnar o gŵynion yn cael eu gwneud am feddygon y mae ganddynt gyfrifoldeb amdanynt. Bydd hyn yn eu rhybuddio i broblemau posibl gyda meddygon, a bydd yn eu galluogi i gymryd unrhyw gamau angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Hefyd, gall cwynion beri trallod a phryder mawr i feddygon, ac mae’n bwysig, bod eu cyflogwyr a’u PCOau yn ymwybodol o’r sefyllfa er mwyn iddynt allu cynnig unrhyw gefnogaeth a chymorth ymarferol a all fod yn angenrheidiol. Dylai’r trefniadau alluogi’r GMC hefyd i osod cwyn mewn cyd-destun, a chael gwybod os yw’r broblem sy’n destun cwyn yn rhan o batrwm ehangach o bryderon neu’n fwy difrifol nag oedd i weld ar yr olwg gyntaf. Rwy’n gobeithio na fydd y GMC yn cael ei droi oddi wrth ei fwriad presennol gan wrthwynebiad gan y proffesiwn. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd yn defnyddio’r opsiwn hwn yn y mwyafrif o achosion, yn wir ym mhob achos ac eithrio’r rheiny sy’n amlwg yn achosion dibwys ac nad ydynt yn amlwg yn arwain at unrhyw faterion i’r GMC neu’r corff GIG lleol. Nid wyf yn gwybod a yw’r GMC yn bwriadu cymhwyso’r polisi hwn i gŵynion am feddygon yn gweithio yn y sector preifat. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd yn gwneud hynny.

---  ---
Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, deliwyd â rhyw 65% o’r cwynion a gohebiaethau eraill a dderbyniodd Adran Sgrinio’r GMC gan aelodau o staff gweinyddol y GMC, a oedd ag awdurdod i’w cau heb gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol. Y rheolwyr gwaith achos a oedd yn cymryd y penderfyniad ynghylch a ddylid cau achos neu’i gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol. Y rheolwyr gwaith achos hefyd oedd yn penderfynu pa wybodaeth bellach, os o gwbl, yr oedd yn ofynnol ei chael cyn bod achos yn cael ei gyflwyno at sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd y rheolwyr gwaith achos yn gweithio i gyfarwyddiadau a nodwyd yn y Llawlyfr Gwaith FTP (Ymchwiliad FTP yn ddiweddarach) a dogfennau eraill.
Fel yr esboniais yn flaenorol, gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad am, a chael, pum achos diwethaf y GMC cyn 30 Medi 2003 a gafodd eu cau gan staff y GMC a lle’r oedd yr achwynwyr wedi’u cynghori i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion GIG lleol. Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad hefyd am, a chael, y pum achos diwethaf cyn yr un dyddiad lle cafodd achwynwyr eu cynghori i gyfeirio’u cwynion at weithdrefnau cwynion preifat. Cyfeiriaf nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon at ddau o’r achosion olaf, sef achosion Dr KC 02 a Dr KC 05, lle nad oedd adnabyddiaeth y meddygon a oedd yn destunau cwynion wedi’i datgelu. Mynegaf fy mhryderon am yr achosion hynny ym mharagraffau 18.213-18.227.
Achos arall o fewn y grŵp hwn o bum achos oedd achos Dr KC 03. Y gŵyn yn yr achos hwnnw oedd fod Dr KC 03 wedi anfon canlyniadau profion meddygol penodol at yr achwynydd, sef profion a gynhaliwyd yn ystod triniaeth (breifat) aelod o deulu’r achwynydd, heb ddarparu unrhyw esboniad am y canlyniadau. Dywedwyd pan siaradodd yr achwynydd â Dr KC 03 a gofyn am esboniad, roedd y meddyg wedi bod yn frathog ac yn anfoesgar. Gofynnodd yr achwynydd y dylai’r meddyg gael ei geryddu. Caewyd yr achos gan reolwr gwaith achos yn y GMC ar y sail y byddai modd delio ag ef yn fwy priodol dan weithdrefnau cwynion lleol.
Ar ei ben ei hun, ni ellid beirniadu’r penderfyniad hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, roedd dwy gŵyn gynharach wedi’u gwneud yn erbyn y meddyg. Roedd y gyntaf yn ymwneud ag arferion cyflogi’r meddyg. Roedd yr ail yn honni bod perfformiad y meddyg mewn meddygaeth breifat yn peri pryder. Mewn cysylltiad â’r ail gŵyn, roedd y GMC wedi ysgrifennu at y meddyg, yn ei hysbysu bod y sgriniwr meddygol yn ystyried cyfeirio’r meddyg ar gyfer asesiad perfformiad ac yn gofyn am ei sylwadau. (Ysgrifennwyd y llythyr hwn dan reol 5 o Reolau Gorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Perfformiad Proffesiynol) 1997, darpariaeth a ddiddymwyd yn 2002). Cyflwynodd y meddyg ymateb hirfaith, ac ar sail hwnnw y penderfynodd y sgriniwr meddygol na fyddai asesiad yn angenrheidiol, o gofio mewnwelediad y meddyg i’w broblemau a’i gynigion parhaus i ddelio â nhw.
Esboniodd Mr Marshall, pan gafodd y gŵyn fwyaf diweddar yn erbyn y meddyg ei dosbarthu, fe ddylai’r rheolwr gwaith achos fod wedi bod yn ymwybodol bod cwynion blaenorol wedi’u gwneud am y meddyg gan fod hyn wedi’i nodi ar y CDF. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd nad oedd yn eglur o’r dogfennau perthnasol a oedd y rheolwr gwaith achos wedi cyfeirio at y papurau’n ymwneud â’r cwynion blaenorol cyn gwneud penderfyniad am y gŵyn bresennol. Byddai Mr Marshall wedi disgwyl i hyn gael ei wneud o gofio’r ffaith bod un o’r cwynion blaenorol wedi rhoi digon o achos i bryderu i lythyr rheol 5 gael ei anfon. Roedd y gŵyn fwyaf diweddar yn taflu amheuaeth ar y gred bod y meddyg yn delio â’i broblemau’n llwyddiannus. Dywedodd Mr Marshall, pe bai’r rheolwr gwaith achos wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r gŵyn flaenorol, fe ddylai o leiaf fod wedi gwirio gyda chyflogwyr presennol neu gydweithwyr y meddyg i ganfod a oedd unrhyw bryderon cyfredol ynghylch ei arfer. Wedi i’r achos ddod i’r golwg, o ganlyniad i ymchwiliadau’r Ymchwiliad, parodd Mr Marshall i’r achos gael ei agor o’r newydd fel bod modd i’r GMC wneud ymholiadau priodol.
Roedd hwn yn achos lle mae’n debygol na chafodd cwyn flaenorol a oedd yn amlwg yn berthnasol i’r gŵyn dan ystyriaeth nawr ei hystyried. O ganlyniad, ni chafodd pwysigrwydd potensial y gŵyn ddilynol ei adnabod a chaewyd yr achos. Mae’n destun pryder penodol bod y GMC wedi methu gwneud ymholiadau priodol mewn achos yn ymwneud â phroblemau perfformiad posibl gyda meddyg mewn meddygaeth breifat. Mae problemau felly’n llai tebygol o ddod i’r golwg a delio â nhw mewn lleoliad preifat nag o fewn strwythurau GIG. Pan gânt eu datgelu, felly, dylid rhoi ystyriaeth arbennig o ofalus iddynt.
Wrth archwilio ffeiliau GMC yn ymwneud â meddygon a fu’n destun camau disgyblu am gamddefnyddio cyffuriau, daeth yr Ymchwiliad ar draws nifer o achosion ar hap lle’r oedd cwynion eraill yn erbyn yr un meddygon wedi’u cau gan aelodau o staff y GMC. Un enghraifft o achos felly oedd achos Dr KE 05, meddyg teulu. Derbyniodd y GMC lythyr gan HA, yn mynegi pryder am lefel uchel Dr KE 05 wrth ragnodi morffin. Yn dilyn dyfarnu Shipman yn euog, roedd y Cynghorwr Meddygol i’r HA wedi cynnal asesiad o arferion meddygon yn yr ardal wrth ragnodi morffin. Roedd hyn wedi dangos bod Dr KE 05 wedi bod yn rhagnodi dros ddeng waith mwy o forffin na’r cyfartaledd a oedd yn cael ei ragnodi gan feddygon/meddygfeydd teulu eraill yn yr ardal. Adroddodd y Cynghorydd Meddygol bod si wedi bod yn mynd ar led bod y meddyg wedi bod yn ‘delio’â chaethion i gyffuriau. Ers hynny, roedd y meddyg wedi gadael yr ardal yr oedd yr HA dan sylw yn gyfrifol amdani.
Gofynnodd y GMC am wybodaeth bellach gan yr HA, a darparwyd y wybodaeth. Un ar ddeg mis yn ddiweddarach, anfonodd y GMC lythyr ‘dal’. Ar ôl 11 mis arall (a bron i ddwy flynedd ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol), ysgrifennodd aelod o staff y GMC yn gofyn am
‘unrhyw ddogfennaeth ychwanegol’
yn ymwneud â’r gŵyn. Roedd y math hwn o oedi yn eithaf cyffredin mewn achosion yr oedd y GMC yn delio â nhw bryd hynny. Ymddengys bod y llythyr hwn wedi’i ysgrifennu yn dilyn Adolygiad Achos Sgrinio a oedd wedi arwain at argymhelliad y dylai’r achos, oherwydd ei gynnwys, gael ei symud ymlaen
‘fel mater o flaenoriaeth’
. Ymatebodd yr HA ar unwaith, gan ddweud nad oedd ganddo unrhyw ddogfennaeth bellach yn ei feddiant. Yn fuan wedyn, caewyd yr achos ar y sail ei bod yn gŵyn gan drydydd parti
‘lle mae’n eglur nad yw’r prif barti eisiau canlyn y mater, ac nid oes unrhyw reswm arall i fynd ymlaen’
Un nodwedd drawiadol o’r achos hwn oedd absenoldeb unrhyw ymchwiliad gan y GMC. Yr unig gamau gweithredu a gychwynnwyd gan y gweithiwr achos oedd gofyn am wybodaeth a dogfennaeth gan yr HA a oedd wedi codi’r pryder. Nid ymddengys bod unrhyw ddealltwriaeth wirioneddol o’r math o ddogfennaeth neu wybodaeth a fyddai wedi bod o gymorth. Yn amlwg, yr hyn yr oedd ei angen oedd data rhagnodi yn ymwneud ag arferion rhagnodi’r meddyg yn y gorffennol a’r presennol. Os nad oedd y data gan yr HA, gellid fod wedi’i gael gan yr Awdurdod Prisio Rhagnodion (PPA). Pe bai’r cais wedi’i wneud yn ddigon cyflym, gellid fod wedi cael ffurflenni rhagnodion hefyd gan y PPA. Ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw ymgais i wneud hyn. At hynny, nid oedd unrhyw ymgais i ganfod ymhle, ac ym mha amgylchiadau, yr oedd y meddyg yn gweithio pan adroddwyd i’r GMC amdano, nag i gysylltu â’i gyflogwyr neu PCO presennol.
Efallai nad y GMC oedd y corff priodol i ymgymryd ag ymchwiliad o’r math hwn. Efallai y byddai Arolygiaeth Gyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref wedi gwneud hynny’n well. Os felly, nid oedd unrhyw gydnabyddiaeth o’r ffaith nac unrhyw ymgais i gyfeirio’r achos i’r man priodol. Yn lle hynny, gweithredodd y GMC fel derbynnydd goddefgar gwybodaeth, a, phan yr oedd yn ymddangos nad oedd gan yr achwynydd unrhyw wybodaeth bellach i’w chynnig, roedd yr achos yn cael ei gau. Mae’r ffaith bod aelod o staff y GMC o’r farn nad oedd
‘unrhyw reswm arall i fynd ymlaen’
mewn achos yn ymwneud ag achos posibl o gyflenwi cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfreithlon yn peri pryder eithriadol.
Cydnabu Dr Korlipara i’r Ymchwiliad bod ‘methiant difrifol’ wedi digwydd yn yr achos hwn. O ganlyniad iddo, yn ei rinwedd fel sgriniwr meddygol, roedd yn rhaid iddo ystyried cwyn bellach yn erbyn Dr KE 05. Roedd hon wedi ymwneud â honiad o arfer clinigol is na’r safon ac nid oedd yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau. Dywedwyd wrth Dr Korlipara gan staff y GMC ar yr adeg sgrinio y bu dwy gŵyn flaenorol yn erbyn y meddyg. Roedd y gyntaf mewn amser wedi’i chyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol; gwelodd Dr Korlipara y papurau yn ymwneud â’r gŵyn honno, ac nid oedd o’r farn ei bod yn berthnasol i’r un a oedd wrthi’n ei hystyried. Pan ddywedwyd wrtho fod yr ail gŵyn flaenorol (yr achos morffin) wedi’i chau gan staff y GMC, nid edrychodd Dr Korlipara arni. Felly, parhaodd yn anymwybodol o’r gŵyn ynghylch achos posibl o or-ragnodi morffin nes iddo adolygu’r ffeil er mwyn gwneud datganiad ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad.
Roedd yr arfer o beidio ystyried achosion a oedd wedi’u cau’n flaenorol gan staff y GMC yn peri cryn bryder i mi. Nid wyf yn beirniadu Dr Korlipara’n bersonol am ei fethiant i edrych ar y gŵyn gynharach. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth mai dilyn yr arfer arferol a wnaeth. Fodd bynnag, roedd llawer o achosion yn cael eu cau gan reolwyr gwaith achos, nid am nad oeddent yn cynnwys honiadau o sylwedd, ond am nad oeddent wedi bod drwy’r gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol eto. Byddai’r mwyafrif o achosion a gafodd eu cau am y rheswm hwnnw wedi ymwneud â honiadau o driniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Ymddengys i mi ei bod yn ddymunol y dylai’r person sy’n cyflawni’r swyddogaeth sgrinio (yn y dyfodol, archwilydd achos) gael y darlun llawnaf posibl o hanes unrhyw drafodion blaenorol y gallai’r meddyg fod wedi’u cael gyda gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC cyn gwneud penderfyniad ynghylch a ddylai achos fynd ymlaen. Yn y cyd-destun hwn, roeddwn yn pryderu i glywed, ar un cyfnod yn y 1990au, bod y GMC wedi cychwyn ar y broses o waredu dogfennaeth yn ymwneud â chwynion a oedd wedi’u cau. Yn ffodus, ataliwyd y broses. Gallaf ddeall yn iawn y dymuniad i glirio hen ddogfennau i wneud lle i rai newydd. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi y dylai gwybodaeth am bob cwyn am feddyg gael ei chadw (ar ryw ffurf) tra bod y meddyg hwnnw’n parhau ar y gofrestr.
Gan fynd yn ôl at y gŵyn yn erbyn Dr KE 05 o achos posibl o or-ragnodi morffin, dywedodd Mr Marshall bod y penderfyniad i gau’r achos yn ‘amlwg yn anghywir’. Nid oedd yr aelod o staff a oedd wedi gwneud y penderfyniad yn gweithio i’r GMC mwyach. Ers i’r mater ddod i’r golwg, roedd yr achos wedi’i ail-agor ac ymholiadau wedi’u cychwyn. Disgrifiodd Mr Marshall mai posibilrwydd ‘minimol’ oedd, pan roddodd ei dystiolaeth, y byddai penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud i gau’r achos yn yr un amgylchiadau. Y rheswm am hyn, yn gyntaf, oedd bod y rheolwyr gwaith achos wedi’u hyfforddi’n well. Yn ail, bod y system ddosbarthu (triage) a oedd wedi gweithredu er mis Hydref 2002 yn golygu bod achosion newydd yn cael eu hystyried gan aelodau cymharol uchel o’r staff (rheolwr gwaith achos) ar gyfnod cynnar. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn rhoi cyfarwyddiadau ynghylch pa gamau i’w cymryd, ynghyd â’r terfynau amser ar gyfer cwblhau camau gweithredu. Ym mhob achos lle’r oedd cwynion wedi’u cyfeirio gan ddarparwyr gofal iechyd, roedd staff wedi’u cyfarwyddo i gysylltu â’r corff cyfeirio i drafod y modd y dylid delio â’r achos. Hefyd, roedd cyfarfodydd wythnosol rhwng gweithwyr achos a’u rheolwyr gwaith achos yn cael eu cynnal, lle byddai’r holl achosion ‘byw’ yn cael eu trafod, blaenoriaethau’n cael eu cytuno ac amcanion wythnosol yn cael eu pennu. Dywedodd Mr Marshall hefyd y dylai’r gweithdrefnau archwilio ar gyfer achosion yr oedd yr Adran Sgrinio yn delio â nhw, y cyfeiriais atynt eisoes, fod o gymorth wrth ddileu unrhyw anghysonderau a chamgymeriadau potensial a wneir wrth gau achosion ar lefel weinyddol.
Fel all camgymeriad neu hepgoriad gan aelod o staff y GMC sy’n arwain at fethiant i gael neu nodi gwybodaeth berthnasol am feddyg gael effaith bwysig ar lwybr unrhyw achos dilynol. Daeth un achos felly o gamgymeriad gan aelod o staff i’r golwg drwy hap o ganlyniad i’r Ymchwiliad yn ystyried achos (achos Dr KH 02) a oedd wedi mynd i mewn i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd. Ar ddiwedd y 1990au, derbyniwyd cwyn am Dr KH 02 i’r perwyl ei fod wedi bod yn feddw yn y gwaith. Fe wnaeth y sgriniwr meddygol, Dr Korlipara, ei gyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yn ddiarwybod i Dr Korlipara, ychydig fisoedd cyn i’r gŵyn hon gael ei derbyn, cafodd y GMC ei hysbysu bod Dr KH 02 wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog yn ddiweddar o feddu’n anghyfreithlon ar ganabis a chocên. Pe bai Dr Korlipara wedi gwybod am yr euogfarnau hyn, mae’n debygol y byddai ei benderfyniad wedi bod yn wahanol ac y byddai’r achos wedi’i gyfeirio at y PPC. Fel y bu hi, nid oedd cynnydd y meddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi bod yn dda, a phan ddaeth y camgymeriad hwn i’r golwg, yn ystod gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad yn 2003, roedd amheuaeth ynghylch ei ddyfodol mewn meddygaeth.
Achos arall a barodd bryderon ynghylch y camau a gymerwyd gan staff y GMC oedd achos Dr JN 01. Fe wnaeth HA hysbysu’r GMC am bryderon yn ymwneud â Dr JN 01, meddyg teulu, a ddywedwyd ei fod yn rhoi, mewn amgylchiadau amheus, niferoedd mawr o ragnodion GIG a phreifat am bensodiasepinau a chyffuriau eraill. Ar ôl hynny, anfonodd yr HA wybodaeth at y GMC o un fferyllfa a oedd yn dangos bod y meddyg wedi rhoi 329 o ragnodion preifat ar gyfer bensodiasepinau dros gyfnod o ddeng mis. Anfonodd yr HA goflen o dystiolaeth at y GMC yn ymwneud ag arfer rhagnodi Dr JN 01, ac yn ymwneud hefyd â dwy gŵyn arall (un ohonynt o ddwyn gan glaf) a wnaed amdano.
Cyn i’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y GMC, roedd ymchwiliadau wedi’u gwneud gan yr heddlu a chan Dîm Twyll Fferyllol y PPA (PPAPFT). Pan dderbyniodd y cyfeiriad, ni wnaeth y GMC gymryd unrhyw gamau ei hun, ond yn hytrach arhosodd am ganlyniad yr ymchwiliadau eraill. Cyfarfu un o weithwyr achos y GMC â chynrychiolydd o PPAPFT. Wedi hynny, penderfynwyd aros am wybodaeth bellach gan y PPAPFT cyn ystyried beth i wneud nesaf. Roedd ffeil y GMC yn cynnwys gwybodaeth yn gwrthdaro ynghylch a oedd ymchwiliad yr heddlu’n mynd rhagddo. Fod bynnag, ni wnaeth y GMC unrhyw gysylltiad uniongyrchol â’r heddlu, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod gan y GMC dîm o staff â thasg benodol i gysylltu â’r heddlu. Dywedodd Mr Marshall ei fod o’r farn bod y methiant i gyfeirio’r achos at y tîm arbenigol wedi digwydd oherwydd bod yr achos wedi’i gyfeirio yn y lle cyntaf fel cwyn o ‘ragnodi rhyfedd’, yn hytrach nag fel achos o euogfarn.
Saith mis wedi i’r GMC dderbyn yr adroddiad, cafodd yr achos ei gau’n weinyddol. Ni olygai hyn fod yr achos ar ben o reidrwydd. Yn lle hynny, mae’n ymddangos mai bwriad y GMC oedd y byddai’n cael ei adolygu’n fisol ac y byddai ymholiadau cyson yn cael eu gwneud i’r PPAPFT i ganfod pa gam oedd yr ymchwiliad wedi cyrraedd. Roedd system gyfrifiadur y GMC yn caniatáu i achos gael ei ‘lumanu’ ar gyfer gweithredu arno o dro i dro. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys na wnaethpwyd hyn. Ddeufis yn ddiweddarach, yn dilyn ymholiad gan yr HA, ysgrifennodd y GMC at y PPAPFT, yn holi ynghylch cynnydd. Ar ôl pedwar mis arall, hysbysodd y PPAPFT y GMC ei fod wedi cwblhau’i ymchwiliadau. Bedwar mis yn ddiweddarach, dywedwyd wrth y GMC bod y PCT (a oedd erbyn hyn wedi disodli’r HA fel y PCO) yn ystyried tystiolaeth a gasglwyd gan y PPAPFT a’i fod yn gwneud ymholiadau pellach am y meddyg. Ni wnaeth y GMC gymryd camau pellach o hyd, a pharhaodd yr achos ar gau nes iddo ddod i’r golwg ychydig fisoedd yn ddiweddarach o ganlyniad i gais yr Ymchwiliad am ddogfennau.
Cydnabu Mr Marshall bod y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â’r achos wedi bod yn ddiffygiol mewn dau fan. Yn gyntaf, dywedodd na ddylai’r achos fod wedi’i gau’n weinyddol. Roedd y cau hwnnw wedi arwain at fethiant i fynd ar ôl y PPAPFT am wybodaeth. Yn ail, ar ôl cysylltu â’r PCT, ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau pellach. Yr esboniad oedd, meddai, ‘ein bod (h.y. y GMC) naill ai wedi gwneud penderfyniad yn ymwybodol ein bod wedi rhoi tri chynnig ar hyn, a hwn yw’r tro olaf ry’n ni’n mynd i ymdrafferthu i’w wneud, neu ei fod yn syml wedi diflannu o olwg wrth i flaenoriaethau eraill gymryd eu lle’. Dywedodd, pe na bai’r achos wedi’i gau, byddai wedi cael ei adolygu bob wythnos gan reolwr gwaith achos a gweithiwr achos. Gan fod yr achos wedi’i gau, nid oedd yn cael ei wneud yn destun yr adolygiad rheolaidd hwnnw ac nid oedd yn ‘boen cyson’- oherwydd ei oed - a fyddai wedi bod mewn cyfarfodydd felly. Yr argraff a gefais oedd i’r achos gael ei gau yn y lle cyntaf i osgoi’r ‘poen cyson’ hwnnw.
Wedi i’r meddiant i ganlyn yr achos ddod i’r golwg o ganlyniad i ymchwiliadau’r Ymchwiliad, ail-agorwyd yr achos. Dywedodd Mr Marshall bod y GMC wedi cael gwybodaeth ddiweddar lawn gan y PCT, a oedd yn parhau i fonitro’r meddyg. Roedd swyddogion y PCT wedi dweud wrth y GMC nad oeddent yn teimlo bod cleifion mewn risg o ganlyniad i’r meddyg yn parhau ar y gofrestr a chael parhau i arfer yn ddigyfyngiad. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod o’r farn bod angen i’r GMC ofyn mwy o gwestiynau i’r PCT. Yn benodol, roedd angen iddo ganfod a oedd unrhyw esboniad erioed wedi’i gael am ‘y gwegian rhyfedd mewn gweithgarwch rhagnodi’ a oedd wedi digwydd. Roedd angen iddo wybod hefyd beth oedd y sefyllfa mewn perthynas â’r ddwy gŵyn a oedd yn aros yn erbyn y meddyg.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall na fyddai wedi bod yn briodol dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP i’r GMC fod wedi ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwiliad ei hun (e.e. trwy gyfarwyddo’i gyfreithwyr i ymchwilio) yn y cam sgrinio neu cyn y cam sgrinio. Beth bynnag, ni chredai y byddai’r cyfreithwyr wedi cael y pwerau angenrheidiol i drefnu ymchwiliad o’r math hwn. Oni bai bod ymchwiliad wedi’i gynnal gan gorff arall a bod esboniad am arferion rhagnodi’r meddyg wedi’i nodi, fe fyddai, meddai, wedi bod yn anodd i’r GMC ffurfio cyhuddiadau yn erbyn y meddyg. Ni fyddai wedi bod yn eglur i’r GMC beth ddylid cyhuddo’r meddyg ohono, gan nad oedd yn hysbys a oedd y rhagnodi yn ganlyniad troseddoldeb neu anghymhwysedd neu ei fod yn gwbl ddiniwed.
Fe wnaeth y modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r achos hwn beri nifer o bryderon. Gallaf ddeall yn iawn yr anhawster y mae’r GMC yn ei wynebu pan fydd cyrff eraill yn gysylltiedig ag ymchwiliadau, yn enwedig pan fydd y meddyg dan sylw yn anymwybodol bod yr ymchwiliadau hynny’n mynd rhagddynt. Mae’n amlwg yn bwysig nad yw’r GMC yn niweidio canlyniad ymchwiliadau eraill, ac ymchwiliadau’r heddlu yn arbennig. Mae’n bwysig hefyd, fodd bynnag, bod gan y GMC ddarlun clir o ba sefydliad(au) sy’n ymchwilio a pha faterion sy’n destun ymchwiliad ganddo/ganddynt. Mae’n rhyfedd iawn, yn fy marn i, yn yr achos presennol, nad oedd gan y GMC unrhyw gysylltiad â’r heddlu ac na wnaeth ofyn am gopi na chael copi o unrhyw adroddiad a baratowyd ar ddiwedd ymchwiliad yr heddlu. Gall fod bod staff y GMC wedi rhagdybio bod yr heddlu wedi penderfynu peidio erlyn y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r ffaith hwnnw’n golygu nad oedd unrhyw faterion y dylai’r GMC roi sylw iddynt. Ni chafodd y GMC unrhyw adroddiad ychwaith am y dystiolaeth a gasglwyd gan y PPAPFT. Ymddengys nad oedd unrhyw adnabyddiaeth o’r ffaith y byddai ymchwiliad y PPAPFT yn ymwneud yn unig â thwyll potensial ar y GIG (ac, felly, â rhagnodion y GIG yn unig yn cael eu rhoi gan y meddyg), nid â’r meddyg yn rhagnodi’n breifat.
Fe wnaeth methiant y GMC i ymchwilio ei wneud yn gwbl ddibynnol ar ganlyniad ymchwiliadau a gynhaliwyd gan gyrff eraill. Os oedd y canlyniadau hynny’n amhendant, fel yr ymddengys yr oeddent yma, ymddengys bod y GMC wedi ystyried nad oedd ganddo unrhyw rym i weithredu. Roedd hyn er gwaetha’r ffaith bod diben achosion disgyblu gan y GMC - i ganfod a yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer - yn gwbl wahanol i ddiben ymchwiliadau eraill a gynhaliwyd. Awgrymodd Mr Marshall y byddai’r problemau o ddelio ag achos fel hwn yn cael eu gwella yn sgil cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.
Pryder amlwg arall oedd cau’r achos cyn pryd. Fe allai mai diben y cau hwnnw oedd osgoi’r union weithdrefnau a oedd wedi’u cynllunio i sicrhau nad oedd achosion yn cael eu hesgeuluso a’u gadael yn ddisymud am gyfnodau hir. Nid ymddengys bod y system o lumanu achos i’w adolygu wedi’i rhoi ar waith. Yr effaith oedd, oni bai bod yr Ymchwiliad wedi dod â’r achos i’r amlwg, y gallai fod wedi aros yn ddisymud am gyfnod amhenodol, er gwaetha’i ddifrifoldeb potensial. Hyd yn oed pan gafodd ei ddwyn i sylw’r GMC, nid oedd yn ymddangos bod y GMC yn bwriadu cychwyn unrhyw ymchwiliad i’r achos. Yn hytrach roedd i weld yn fodlon i adael i’r PCT barhau â’i gynigion i’w ddatrys. Mae hyn er gwaetha’r ffaith ei bod yn rhaid bod tystiolaeth y rhagnodion preifat ar eu pennau’u hunain, fan lleiaf, fod wedi codi amheuon ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg hwn i ymarfer.
Rwyf yn cydnabod bod pob sefydliad yn gwneud camgymeriadau. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi cynnal archwiliad o achosion a gaewyd gan reolwyr gwaith achos; dim ond ychydig o achosion y mae wedi’u harchwilio, a ddaeth i’w sylw ar hap. Mae’n bosibl bod yr Ymchwiliad, ar hap, wedi dod ar draws digwyddiadau unigol o arfer gwael. Fodd bynnag, byddai canlyniadau’r ymarferiad archwilio a gychwynnwyd yn ddiweddar, a ddisgrifiais ym mharagraff 18.46, yn awgrymu nad yw camgymeriadau ac arfer gwael yn anghyffredin. Mae’n gysurlon i gael gwybod bod rhywfaint o archwilio’n cael ei wneud nawr. Fodd bynnag, er bod camgymeriadau’n cael eu canfod o hyd, rwy’n meddwl tybed a ddylai’r archwilio fynd yn adolygiad a chwmpasu pob penderfyniad yn hytrach na chyfran ohonynt yn unig. Ymddengys i mi bod penderfyniadau cywir yn yr achosion hyn yn bwysig i ddiogelwch cleifion.
Mae’r achosion a ddisgrifiais hefyd yn dangos y problemau go iawn sy’n cael eu hachosi gan ddiffyg unrhyw ymchwilio gan y GMC. O fewn y detholiad bach o achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, canfuwyd dau achos difrifol potensial, y ddau ohonynt yn ymwneud â rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn amhriodol. Cafodd y ddau achos eu cau heb unrhyw ymchwiliad gan y GMC. Fe allai’r naill feddyg neu’r llall, neu’r ddau ohonynt, barhau i fod yn risg i gleifion.

---  ---
Un o’r tasgau cyntaf y mae staff y GMC yn ymgymryd â hi pan fydd cwyn yn cael ei derbyn yw ceisio sefydlu adnabyddiaeth unrhyw feddyg a enwir neu a ddisgrifir yn y gŵyn, trwy gyfeirio at y gofrestr feddygol. Nid yw hyn mor syml ag yr ymddengys o reidrwydd. Fe all ymddangos yn rhyfedd nad yw achwynydd yn gallu nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg y mae’n cwyno yn ei gylch/chylch. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n anarferol i glaf mewn ysbyty fod yn anymwybodol o adnabyddiaeth y meddygon sy’n ei drin/thrin, nag i glaf sy’n mynychu clinig ‘cerdded-i-mewn’ fod yn anymwybodol yn yr un modd. Nid yw’n anghyffredin ychwaith i achwynydd rhoi enw i’r GMC a bod yr enw hwnnw’n gwbl neu’n rhannol anghywir. Gall adnabyddiaeth fod yn broblem hefyd lle mae nifer o feddygon ar y gofrestr gyda’r un enw neu enw tebyg iawn. Mae’n beth prin i aelod o’r cyhoedd fod mewn sefyllfa i ddyfynnu rhif cofrestru GMC meddyg, a allai fod yn angenrheidiol i nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg yn bendant yn yr amgylchiadau hyn.
Pan ddechreuodd yr Athro Allen a’i thîm eu hastudiaethau o weithdrefnau’r GMC yn y lle cyntaf, fe wnaethant nodi nad oedd adnabyddiaeth cyfran sylweddol o’r meddygon yr oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud yn eu herbyn erioed wedi’u nodi trwy gyfeirio at gofrestr feddygol y GMC. Yn amlwg, os oedd gweithdrefnau’r GMC i’w harchwilio’n drylwyr am ragfarn hiliol, roedd yn bwysig nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddygon a oedd yn destun cwyn. Mae system dda o adnabyddiaeth yn angenrheidiol hefyd os yw’r GMC i gyflawni’i ddyletswyddau i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd. Argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 y dylai’r GMC gofnodi a storio ar gyfrifiadur, at ddibenion monitro, manylion llawn y meddygon yr oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud amdanynt ac y dylai’r manylion hynny gael eu cydweddu a’u cysylltu â’r gofrestr feddygol.
Er gwaethaf hyn, nododd Papur PSI 2003 y bu cynnydd mewn gwirionedd er 1997 yn yng nghyfran y meddygon a oedd yn destun cwyn nad oedd eu hadnabyddiaeth wedi’i bennu gan y GMC. Ym 1997, gwnaethpwyd cwynion yn erbyn 2485 o feddygon, ac o’r rheiny roedd 377 (15%) heb eu hadnabod. Erbyn 2001, roedd nifer y meddygon a oedd yn destun cwyn wedi codi i 3999, ac o’r rheiny roedd gymaint â 1019 (ychydig dros 25%) heb eu hadnabod. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai esboniad y GMC am y cynnydd yn nifer y meddygon anhysbys oedd ei bod yn cael ei hystyried yn ddiangen i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddygon mewn achosion a oedd wedi’u cau gan y staff gweinyddol ac yr oedd y GMC o’r farn na allent fyth godi cwestiwn o SPM neu SDP. Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr â syndod mai categoreiddiad y cwynion a wnaed yn erbyn 22% o’r meddygon anhysbys (mewn achosion lle bu categoreiddio’r gŵyn) oedd
‘anonestrwydd/troseddoldeb’
. Roedd cyfran eithaf uchel o gŵynion yn y categori hwn heb eu hanfon at sgriniwr meddygol. Mae’n destun pryder i mi bod cymaint o feddygon wedi aros yn anhysbys, yn enwedig mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o anonestrwydd neu droseddoleb. Mae’n fater pryder hefyd na chawsant eu cyfeirio at y sgrinwyr meddygol. At hynny, ym mhob blwyddyn, roedd rhyw 10% o’r meddygon na nodwyd eu hadnabyddiaeth wedi bod yn destun adroddiad i’r GMC gan gyrff cyhoeddus. Roedd hyn yn arbennig o ryfedd oherwydd ei bod yn anodd dychmygu y byddai corff cyhoeddus yn gwneud cwyn am feddyg heb fod yn ymwybodol o adnabyddiaeth y meddyg.
Y Problemau a Achoswyd gan y Methiant i Nodi Adnabyddiaeth Meddygon
Wrth fod yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn edrych ar y posibilrwydd y gallai rhagfarn hiliol chwarae rhan mewn penderfyniadau a oedd yn cael eu gwneud gan y GMC, roedd y methiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddygon yn destun pryder arbennig. Yn ei dadansoddiadau amrywiol, roeddent wedi edrych ar y wlad yr oedd pob meddyg a oedd yn destun cwynion i’r GMC wedi ymgymhwyso ynddi. Wedyn roeddent wedi cymharu canlyniadau’r cwynion yn erbyn y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU gyda chanlyniadau’r cwynion a wnaed yn erbyn y rheiny a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor. Roedd methiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg yn golygu na ellid nodi ym mha wlad yr ymgymhwysodd y meddyg. Roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn pryderu na fyddai dadansoddiad tebyg o achosion yn bosibl yn y dyfodol pe na bai meddygon a’r wlad lle wnaethant ymgymhwyso ynddi yn cael eu nodi.
Mae canlyniadau eraill i’r methiant i bennu adnabyddiaeth meddyg y mae cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Yn gyntaf, golyga na all y GMC ganfod a oes gan y meddyg unrhyw hanes blaenorol o gŵynion a wnaed i’r GMC yn ei gylch/chylch neu o gamau disgyblu a gymerwyd yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Eto, fe fydd llawer o achosion lle gall gwybodaeth am hanes FTP meddyg beri i’r gŵyn bresennol gael ei gweld mewn golau gwahanol. Yn ail, golyga na ellir adalw’r gŵyn yn y dyfodol os oes cwyn arall yn cael ei derbyn yn erbyn yr un meddyg. Yn drydydd, gall fod bod y gŵyn yn ymwneud â pherson nad yw ar gofrestr y GMC ond sy’n ffugio bod yn feddyg. Os nad oes unrhyw ymgais yn cael ei gwneud i wirio bod enw’r person sy’n destun cwyn wedi’i gynnwys yn y gofrestr, ni fydd y ffaith ei fod/bod yn dwyllwr yn dod yn hysbys fyth.
Rhesymau Posibl am y Methiant i Nodi Adnabyddiaeth Meddygon
Yn ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, awgrymodd Mr Scott ddau reswm posibl am y nifer uchel ymddangosiadol o feddygon anhysbys. Yn gyntaf, awgrymodd y gallai adnabyddiaeth y meddyg fod yn hysbys mewn gwirionedd, ond efallai nad oedd yr enw yn syml wedi’i gofnodi ar gronfeydd data’r GMC. Mae’n syndod i mi y gallai hyn ddigwydd, gan y byddwn wedi meddwl bod enw’r meddyg yn ddarn hanfodol o wybodaeth at ddibenion cyfeirio. Fe allai hepgor cofnodi enw ar y gronfa ddata gael canlyniadau difrifol gan na fydd modd gwneud cysylltiad â chŵyn arall am yr un meddyg yn y dyfodol. Nid ymddengys i mi fod unrhyw esgus am fethiant i gofnodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg, os yw’n hysbys, ar gronfa ddata’r cyfrifiadur.
Yn ail, dywedodd Mr Scott nad oedd cyfran sylweddol o’r ohebiaeth yr oedd y GMC yn ei derbyn yn gŵynion yn erbyn meddygon ond yn hytrach yn ddarnau o ohebiaeth a oedd yn codi materion, a allai, pe bai meddyg yn gysylltiedig, fynd yn gŵyn. Nid oedd cyfran sylweddol o’r rheiny’n ymwneud â meddyg o gwbl. Gallaf weld, yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, na fyddai’n angenrheidiol (neu, mewn rhai achosion, yn bosibl) i gysylltu testun y gŵyn gydag enw ar y rhestr feddygol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid bod y cwynion y cyfeiriodd yr Athro Allen atynt (yn enwedig y rheiny’n ymwneud ag
‘anonestrwydd/troseddoldeb’
a’r adroddiadau gan gyrff cyhoeddus) wedi ymwneud â honiadau yn erbyn y meddygon dan sylw; ni allent fod wedi bod yn ohebiaeth gyffredinol yn unig.
Dywedodd Mr Scott bod gweithdrefn i’w dilyn wrth geisio nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg. Roedd y graddau yr oedd y weithdrefn honno’n cael ei gweithredu yn dibynnu ar ddifrifoldeb potensial y mater yr adroddwyd amdano. Os oedd yn ddigon difrifol i fod yn ymgeisydd potensial ar gyfer gweithdrefnau FTP, byddai staff yn mynd i gryn drafferth i nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg. Os nad oedd y gŵyn, ar y wyneb, yn codi mater a fyddai’n disgyn o fewn y gweithdrefnau FTP, yna i gyfateb, byddai llai o ymdrech yn cael ei gwneud i geisio nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg. Nid yw’r ymagwedd honno’n swnio’n afresymol, ond nid yw’n rhoi cyfrif am y methiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddygon yr oedd cwyn o
‘anonestrwydd/troseddoldeb’
yn eu herbyn. At hynny, mae archwilio nifer o achosion unigol yn awgrymu y gall staff roi’r gorau yn rhy gynnar weithiau i ymgais i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg.
Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad ddau achos a oedd yn dangos y problemau a oedd yn codi o fethiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg yr oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei gylch/chylch. Cafodd y ddau achos eu cau gan reolwyr gwaith achos ar ddiwedd 2003.
Yn yr achos cyntaf (achos Dr KC 02), roedd yr achwynydd wedi cael triniaeth laser ar y llygad mewn clinig preifat. Honnodd, o ganlyniad i’r driniaeth, ei bod wedi dioddef creithiau i’w llygad. Roedd yn cwyno ei bod yn dioddef o afluniad y golwg. Mewn llythyr at feddyg teulu’r achwynydd, a ysgrifennwyd wedi iddo gael ei hysbysu am anfodlonrwydd yr achwynydd, roedd y person a gyflawnodd y driniaeth (a oedd yn feddyg yn ôl hynny a ddeallai’r achwynydd) wedi honni bod yr achwynydd wedi cael ei rhybuddio am beryglon canlyniad gwael cyn cael y driniaeth. Dywedodd yr achwynydd na chafodd ei rhybuddio. Roed wedi cyfeirio’i chŵyn yn y lle cyntaf at y Cyngor Optegol Cyffredinol, a oedd wedi anfon ei chŵyn ymlaen at y GMC gan ei bod yn ymddangos mai meddyg oedd testun y gŵyn.
Cafodd yr achos ei gau gan staff y GMC ar y sail nad oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u disbyddu. Mewn llythyr a ysgrifennwyd gan gynorthwyydd gwaith achos, cynghorwyd yr achwynydd i gyfeirio’i chŵyn at Gyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu Brif Weithredwr y clinig lle’r oedd wedi cael ei thriniaeth. Awgrymodd y llythyr hefyd y gallai ddymuno anfon copi o’i chŵyn at yr NCSC, a fyddai’n monitro’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r gŵyn.
Roedd yr achwynydd wedi rhoi enw’r person a oedd wedi’i thrin. Roedd yr enw’n un anghyffredin. Eto, nid oedd y gweithiwr achos a ddeliodd â’r gŵyn wedi gallu paru’r enw gydag enw meddyg a oedd yn ymddangos ar y gofrestr feddygol. Roedd yn ymddangos i mi fod hyn wedi codi’r posibilrwydd yn syth nad oedd y person a oedd wedi trin yr achwynydd yn feddyg o gwbl. Wrth gwrs, fe all fod, fel yr awgrymodd Mr Marshall, bod yr achwynydd wedi camsillafu’r enw ac mai hwn oedd y rheswm pam na lwyddwyd i ddod o hyd i’r enw ar y gofrestr feddygol. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn amhosibl fod yn sicr.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall, pan oedd penderfyniad wedi’i wneud na fyddai’r GMC yn mynd ymlaen yn yr achos, byddai wedi bod yn wariant diangen o adnoddau i geisio nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg. Gallaf ddeall, mewn rhai achosion, na fyddai’n werth gwario adnoddau yn y modd hwn. Fodd bynnag, yn yr achos hwn, lle’r oedd gan y GMC gyfeiriad y clinig lle rhoddwyd y driniaeth, byddai’r dasg o ganfod manylion y meddyg wedi bod yn un cymharol hawdd. Os na wnaethpwyd hynny, roedd y posibilrwydd yn aros o hyn nad oedd y person a gyflawnodd y driniaeth yn feddyg o gwbl.
Pe bai’r person a roddodd driniaeth i’r achwynydd wedi bod yn dwyllwr, gan gymryd arno i fod yn feddyg cymwys pan nad ydoedd, gellid fod wedi’i erlyn. O gofio mai rôl y GMC yw diogelu cleifion, byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai ganddo ddiddordeb brwd mewn canfod a chychwyn camau yn erbyn unrhyw berson a oedd yn ymhonni i fod yn feddyg. Os oedd wedi ymddangos, wedi gwneud ymholiad i’r clinig, nad oedd y person a wnaeth drin yr achwynydd ar y gofrestr feddygol, y cam nesaf fyddai adrodd i’r heddlu am yr achos er mwyn ymchwilio iddo. Yn wir, pe na bai enw’r meddyg ar y gofrestr, dylai’r ffaith hwnnw fod wedi ysgogi ymchwiliadau i’r clinig, ei bolisi recriwtio a’i drefniadau staffio. Ni allai’r GMC ei hun fod wedi cynnal ymchwiliadau felly ond fe allai yn ôl pob tebyg fod wedi gofyn i’r NCSC i wneud hynny.
Roedd y gŵyn yn un o driniaeth esgeulus yn bennaf. Hyd yn oed os nad oedd y driniaeth ei hun wedi bod yn esgeulus, yna fe allai fod methiant esgeulus i hysbysu’r achwynydd o’r risgiau a oedd yn gysylltiedig â’r driniaeth. Byddai’r ddau yn faterion difrifol. Os mai meddyg yn wir oedd testun y gŵyn, fe wnaeth y methiant i nodi’i adnabyddiaeth hi’n amhosibl i’r GMC ganfod a fu unrhyw gŵynion blaenorol yn ei erbyn. Mae’n bosibl y bu hanes o gŵynion blaenorol o natur debyg. Hefyd, pe bai’r GMC yn derbyn cwyn o natur debyg am y meddyg yn y dyfodol, ni fyddai unrhyw fodd y gellid cysylltu’r gŵyn honno â’r un flaenorol.
Nododd Mr Marshall nad oedd y methiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg yn ddigwyddiad anarferol. Yn aml, roedd enw’r meddyg yn un cyffredin a’r broblem oedd canfod pa feddyg â’r enw hwnnw oedd yn gysylltiedig â’r gŵyn. Gan fod y sefyllfa a gododd yn yr achos hwn yn un gyffredin, ni fyddai’r achos hwn o reidrwydd wedi ‘seinio’r clychau larwm’ gyda’r gweithiwr achos. Wedi edrych ar yr achos o’r newydd, cydnabu Mr Marshall y posibilrwydd nad oedd y ‘meddyg’ mewn gwirionedd wedi’i gofrestru/chofrestru. Teimlai y dylai’r GMC edrych ar ei brosesau gyda golwg ar nodi meini prawf ar gyfer yr amgylchiadau lle dylid gwneud cynigion mwy egnïol i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg yr oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei gylch/chylch.
Roedd y gŵyn hon yn ymwneud â thriniaeth mewn clinig preifat, y gallai aelodau’r cyhoedd gerdded i mewn iddo heb gyfeiriad, na chyngor, gan feddyg teulu. Mae cleifion yn yr amgylchiadau hynny yn arbennig o agored i niwed a byddwn wedi meddwl y dylai’r GMC fod yn arbennig o drwyadl wrth eu diogelu. Testun pryder arbennig i mi yw bod prosesau’r GMC wedi gadael i’r cwestiwn pa un a oedd y person a roddodd driniaeth i’r achwynydd yn feddyg
neu beidio, i fynd heb ei ateb. Nodaf hefyd bod y gŵyn wedi’i chyfeirio at weithdrefnau cwynion y clinig ar adeg pan nad oedd y GMC mewn unrhyw sefyllfa i asesu’n briodol ddifrifoldeb y gŵyn neu a oedd y meddyg (os oedd yn feddyg) yn peri unrhyw berygl i gleifion a oedd yn mynychu’r clinig am driniaeth yn y dyfodol. Nid oedd gan y GMC ychwaith unrhyw wybodaeth am y gweithdrefnau cwynion a oedd ar waith yn y clinig neu a oeddent yn debygol o nodi bygythiad posibl i ddiogelwch cleifion, os oedd bygythiad felly’n bodoli.
At hynny, roedd y cyfrifoldeb am gychwyn y weithdrefn cwynion ar yr achwynydd. Roedd eisoes wedi nodi na lwyddodd i gael ymateb boddhaol i’w chŵyn gan y clinig. Efallai na fyddai wedi bod yn syndod pe bai wedi bod yn amharod i fynd atynt eto. Pe bai’r GMC wedi anfon ei chŵyn ymlaen yn uniongyrchol at y clinig ac wedi esbonio’n glir y byddai’n dilyn y mater ymlaen er mwyn canfod y canlyniad, byddai’r baich wedi’i dynnu oddi ar yr achwynydd a byddai mwy o siawns, fe dybiwn, i’w chŵyn gael ei chymryd o ddifrif.
Rhoddodd yr achos hwn fewnwelediad diddorol i agwedd y GMC tuag at gasglu gwybodaeth. Yn ystod ei dystiolaeth am yr achos hwn, gwnaeth Mr Marshall y pwynt y byddai’n feichus i’r GMC, ac yn destun siom posibl i achwynwyr, pe bai’r GMC yn cychwyn ‘gohebiaeth hirfaith’ gydag achwynwyr er mwyn ceisio sefydlu adnabyddiaeth meddyg mewn achos fel hwn, lle nad oedd y GMC yn mynd i ddwyn yr achos yn ei flaen. Yn amlwg, nid oedd wedi taro Mr Marshall y gallai’r GMC ei hun gymryd y cam cyntaf ac y gallai ofyn am wybodaeth gan drydydd parti, sef y clinig yn yr achos hwn. Ymddengys bod ‘ymchwilio’ i aelodau staff y GMC, yn cael ei gyfyngu yn ei hanfod i ofyn am wybodaeth naill ai gan yr achwynydd neu gan y meddyg yr oedd y gŵyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn. Efallai nad oedd hyn yn syndod, gan yr oedd yn adlewyrchu‘r hyn a fu’n arfer, yn gyffredinol, yn y gorffennol.
Yn achos Dr KC 05, ysgrifennodd aelod o’r cyhoedd at y GMC, yn dweud ei bod wedi cael triniaeth orthopaedig mewn ysbyty preifat, a bod y driniaeth wedi arwain at ganlyniad anfoddhaol iawn. Nid oedd natur y canlyniad anfoddhaol wedi’i bennu. Roedd yn canlyn cwyn am esgeuluster yn erbyn y llawfeddyg dan sylw, ond roedd eisiau i fater addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer gael ei ystyried gan awdurdod priodol. Nid enwodd y llawfeddyg dan sylw na’r ysbyty.
Cafodd yr achos ei gau gan reolwr gwaith achos, a chynghorwyd yr achwynydd i gysylltu â Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu Brif Weithredwr yr ysbyty dan sylw, a gofyn iddo/iddi i edrych ar y materion. Dywedwyd wrthi y gallai fynd yn ôl at y GMC os oedd yn anfodlon â’r ymateb. Yn yr achos hwn hefyd, awgrymwyd y gallai’r achwynydd anfon copi o’i chŵyn at yr NCSC. Nid oedd gan y rheolwr gwaith achos a gaeodd yr achos unrhyw syniad a oedd gan y llawfeddyg hanes o gŵynion o natur debyg, neu gofnod o gamau disgyblu yn ei erbyn. Fe allai fod cyfiawnhad, neu beidio, dros y gŵyn am ganlyniad gwael i driniaeth yr achwynydd. Pe bai canlyniad gwael, fe allai, neu beidio, fod wedi bod yn ganlyniad triniaeth is na’r safon ar ran y llawfeddyg. Os oedd, fe allai’r driniaeth honno fod wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, neu beidio. Pe bai hanes blaenorol o arfer tebyg is na’r safon, roedd y cyfle i gysylltu’r hanes hwnnw â’r gŵyn hon (a chanfod patrwm SDP o bosibl) wedi’i golli. Yn yr un modd, os oedd cwyn bellach o’r un fath yn cael ei derbyn yn y dyfodol, ni fyddai unrhyw ffordd o’i chysylltu â’r gŵyn hon.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall ei fod o’r farn y byddai wedi bod yn well pe bai llythyr y GMC at yr achwynydd wedi gofyn yn benodol iddi ddarparu manylion y llawfeddyg er mwyn gallu gwirio’r manylion hynny. Dywedodd, ‘Rwy’n meddwl ein bod yn gobeithio y bydd yr achwynydd penodol yma’n dod yn ôl atom’. Ni chredaf y byddai’r achwynydd wedi deall o’r llythyr a dderbyniodd y byddai mynd yn ôl at y GMC ar unwaith yn opsiwn. Roedd y llythyr yn awgrymu’n unig y dylai gysylltu â’r GMC eto os oedd yn anfodlon â’r ymateb a dderbyniodd o’r ysbyty. Nododd Mr Marshall na fyddai canlyniad anfoddhaol o reidrwydd yn codi unrhyw faterion a oedd yn effeithio ar feddygfa’r meddyg, a phe bai materion felly, efallai na fyddent ar y trothwy priodol i’r GMC ddod yn gysylltiedig, o leiaf, yn y lle cyntaf. Rwy’n derbyn hynny’n llwyr, wrth gwrs. Y broblem yw, yr ymddengys i mi, pan wnaethpwyd y penderfyniad i gau’r achos, nid oedd gan y GMC y wybodaeth angenrheidiol i wneud y dyfarniadau hyn.
Pe bai’r GMC wedi bod mewn sefyllfa i gysylltu meddyg y mae cwyn yn cael ei gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn, gydag unrhyw hanes FTP blaenorol y gall fod ganddo/ganddi, ac ag unrhyw hanes felly y gall gaffael yn y dyfodol, mae’n hanfodol bod cofnod llawn a chywir yn cael ei gadw o fanylion y meddyg hwnnw. Rwy’n derbyn, wrth gwrs, na fydd modd ar brydiau (yn enwedig lle mae’r gŵyn yn ymwneud â thriniaeth ysbyty), nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg dan sylw. Rwy’n derbyn hefyd y bydd achosion lle na allai mater diogelwch cleifion godi o gwbl neu lle mae amgylchiadau eraill sy’n golygu y byddai’n wastraff adnoddau llwyr i fynd i drafferth fawr i nodi adnabyddiaeth meddyg y mae cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi ei fod yn fater gwbl wahanol, megis yn y ddwy enghraifft a ddyfynnais, lle mae materion potensial diogelwch cleifion yn codi a bod cwynion yn cael eu cau nid am nad oes unrhyw sylwedd ynddynt, ond oherwydd ei bod yn well gan y GMC i adael y dasg o ymchwilio ac asesu difrifoldeb y gŵyn i weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Yn y ddau achos, dylai’r dasg o ganfod adnabyddiaeth y meddyg fod wedi bod yn un gwbl syml. Yn y ddau achos, fe allai bodolaeth hanes o gŵynion tebyg fod wedi bod yn arwyddocaol iawn.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod o’r farn bod angen i’r GMC ailystyried ei bolisi mewn perthynas ag achosion a gafodd eu cau er mwyn cyfeirio at weithdrefnau lleol. Yn benodol, roedd angen ystyried a ddylid gwneud mwy o ymdrech i nodi adnabyddiaeth y meddyg. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y GMC, ers ei wrandawiadau, wedi cymryd camau i ddelio â phroblem meddygon anhysbys ac, yn sicr, roedd Llawlyfr Ymchwilio FTP o fis Mai 2004 yn rhoi mwy o bwyslais na chyhoeddiadau tebyg blaenorol ar bwysigrwydd nodi meddyg yr oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa mor llwyddiannus y bu’r mesurau a gymerwyd gan y GMC. Ymddengys yn rhyfedd, fodd bynnag, nad ymddengys bod y GMC wedi gwerthfawrogi - nes bod yr Ymchwiliad wedi tynnu sylw at y ffaith - y goblygiadau i ddiogelwch cleifion yn sgil ei fethiant i sefydlu adnabyddiaeth cyfran mor uchel o feddygon yr oedd cwynion wedi’u gwneud yn eu cylch.

---  ---
Yn y Bennod hon, rwyf wedi archwilio camau cynnar ‘hen’ weithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC yn eithaf manwl, a bûm yn feirniadol iawn o rai o’r arferion, ac o’r polisïau a oedd yn sail i’w gweithredu. Gellir dweud bod yr archwiliad manwl hwn o’r modd y mae’r gweithdrefnau wedi gweithio wedi bod yn ddibwynt a’r feirniadaeth wedi’u chamosod, gan fod y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad wedi’u diddymu; bydd y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn llawer gwell. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, bu’n bwysig cynnal yr archwiliad hwn gan mai hwn oedd y cyfle gorau i ddeall sut yr oedd y gweithdrefnau’n gweithredu mewn gwirionedd yn y gorffennol yn hytrach na sut y bwriadwyd iddynt weithredu’n ddamcaniaethol. Roedd cryn wahaniaeth, fel y nodais, rhwng y ddau. Ar gyfer y dyfodol, rwyf wedi cael tystiolaeth am y modd y gobeithir ac y bwriedir i’r gweithdrefnau newydd weithredu. Mae’n naturiol bod rhywfaint o ddiffyg o reidrwydd rhwng y bwriadau a’r realiti. Roedd angen i mi wybod am unrhyw ddiffyg yn y gorffennol er mwyn asesu’r modd y gall y gweithdrefnau newydd weithredu mewn gwirionedd yn y dyfodol.
Mae’r dystiolaeth wedi datgelu llawer hefyd am agweddau ac ymagwedd y GMC dros y blynyddoedd. Er bod y GMC wedi cydnabod yr angen am newid, nid yn unig ei weithdrefnau ond hefyd rhai o’i hen agweddau, roedd angen i mi gael tystiolaeth fanwl o’r hen agweddau er mwyn i mi lunio barn am y gobeithion i’r gyfundrefn newydd lwyddo.
Fy argraff aruthrol o’r staff a gafodd eu cyflogi dros y blynyddoedd diweddar yw eu bod yn gydwybodol ac yn gydymdeimladol tuag at gleifion. Nid oeddent yn ymddangos i mi eu bod yn ddiystyriol mewn unrhyw ffordd o fuddiannau a phryderon cleifion, ac yn sicr ni wneuthum ganfod unrhyw ddymuniad sylfaenol i ‘wneud tro gwael â chleifion’. Ond ymddengys i mi na allodd y GMC, fel sefydliad, ddyfeisio a gweithredu’i weithdrefnau a’i bolisïau o safbwynt cleifion a diogelu cleifion. Mae hwn yn drywydd sy’n rhedeg drwy’r holl faterion a drafodais uchod. Yn yr Ymchwiliad, pan oedd problem yn cael ei dwyn i sylw aelod o staff, yr adwaith fel arfer oedd gweld y pwynt a derbyn bod angen ymagwedd wahanol. Un enghraifft yw’r nodwedd rwyf newydd ei disgrifio: y methiant i nodi adnabyddiaeth 25% o feddygon y derbyniwyd cwynion yn eu cylch. Eto ni chydnabuwyd y problemau gan y sefydliad ei hun nes iddynt gael eu nodi. Nid wyf yn siŵr pam. Mae nifer o bosibiliadau.
Rwy’n cydnabod y gall sefydliad fynd yn geidwadol ei ffordd, a chynefino â gwneud pethau mewn dull penodol i’r graddau ei fod yn methu sylwi bod unrhyw beth o’i le â’i ddulliau, ei weithdrefnau a’i agweddau. Ond ni ellir dweud hyn am y GMC. Yn y pum mlynedd diwethaf, mae’r GMC wedi wynebu’r ffaith fod ei weithdrefnau FTP yn annigonol a bod angen eu diwygio’n radical. Treuliodd lawer o amser ac ymdrech yn dyfeisio gweithdrefnau newydd ac yn ymgynghori arnynt. Mae’n honni ei fod wedi cydnabod yr angen i roi diogelu cleifion ar flaen popeth a wna. Eto ni welodd bod angen newid llawer o agweddau ar ei hen weithdrefnau FTP - newid nad oedd angen am Ddeddf Seneddol na gwario arian mawr i’w wneud. Un enghraifft oedd yr arfer o gynghori achwynwyr i ganlyn gweithdrefnau lleol ac yna gadael iddynt fwrw ymlaen â hi. Nododd Mrs Robinson anawsterau a pheryglon yr arfer hwn ym 1988. Eto fe oroesodd, heb newid fawr ddim, am dros 15 mlynedd wedi hynny.
Posibilrwydd arall, y soniaf amdano er mwyn ei ddiystyru’n unig, yw nad yw’r adnoddau deallusol gan aelodau o staff y GMC i fynd i’r afael â’r problemau hyn. Caf yr argraff bod y GMC yn cyflogi rhai staff galluogi eithriadol. Nid wyf yn credu mai dyna yw’r broblem. Mae’n amlwg hefyd fod aelodau blaenllaw o’r GMC, fel y Llywydd presennol, Syr Graeme Catto, a’i ragflaenydd, Syr Donald Irvine, wedi ymrwymo’n bersonol i ddarparu gweithdrefnau FTP sy’n diogelu cleifion.
Posibilrwydd arall, y credaf yw gwir achos y broblem, yw bod tensiynau cynhenid rhwng buddiannau cleifion o ran cael gweithdrefnau FTP o’r radd flaenaf a buddiannau’r meddygon sy’n ethol mwyafrif o aelodau’r GMC. Mae dwy ffynhonnell densiwn amlwg. Arian yw un ohonynt. Mae’r GMC yn cael ei ariannu gan feddygon, ac mae gweithdrefnau FTP da, gan gynnwys ymchwilio da, yn fusnes drud. Mae’r ffynhonnell arall yn fwy sylfaenol fyth. Gallaf ddeall a chydymdeimlo i ryw raddau â barn meddyg sy’n gofyn pam y dylid disgwyl iddo/iddi dalu (a thalu’n ddrud) am broses a gynlluniwyd yn bennaf i ddiogelu buddiannau grŵp arall (buddiannau cleifion) sydd i weld yn tynnu’n groes weithiau i fuddiannau’r meddyg ei hun. Yr ateb, wrth gwrs, yw, os yw’r proffesiwn eisiau bod â gofal am ei reoleiddio hun, mae’n rhaid iddo dalu amdano a rhaid iddo wneud y gwaith i fodlonrwydd y gymuned yn gyffredinol. Os nad yw’r proffesiwn yn barod i wneud y gwaith mewn modd sy’n diogelu’r cyhoedd yn briodol ac nad yw am dalu am broses o’r radd flaenaf, fe all y Llywodraeth benderfynu yn y pen draw y bydd rhaid i’r proffesiwn roi’r gorau i hunan-reoleiddio.
Ymddengys i mi mai agwedd arall ar y broblem yw bod llawer o feddygon yn canfod y GMC nid fel eu rheoleiddiwr ond fel corff cynrychioliadol. Mae’r canfyddiad hwn yn cael ei feithrin gan y ffordd y caiff y rhan fwyaf o aelodau eu hethol gan y proffesiwn. Os yw’r meddygon yn ethol yr aelodau ac yn talu am y gweithrediad cyfan, gall rhywun weld pam eu bod yn disgwyl i’r GMC gynnal ei hun mewn modd sy’n ffafrio diddordebau’r proffesiwn. Dechreuodd yr arfer o ethol aelodau yn y 1970au yn dilyn gwrthryfel bron o fewn y proffesiwn pan gyflwynwyd ffi cadw blynyddol. Y gri oedd ‘dim treth heb gynrychiolaeth’: gan hynny y camddealltwriaeth o ran rôl y GMC. Ateb posibl yw na ddylai’r GMC gael ei ddominyddu gan aelodau etholedig ond yn hytrach gan arweinwyr y proffesiwn nad ydynt dan ddyled i etholwyr.
Soniais hefyd mai un o’r problemau a oedd yn ymddangos yr oedd gan y GMC oedd y dryswch oddi mewn iddo ynghylch ei rôl a’i berthynas â chleifion a’r cyhoedd. Mae wedi rhoi’r argraff i’r cyhoedd, yn enwedig yn ei daflenni ‘A Problem With Your Doctor?’ a ‘Referring a doctor to the GMC - a Guide for Patients’, ei fod yn geidwad pob math o gŵynion a phryderon am feddygon. Eto mae ei bwerau a’i ddyletswyddau statudol wedi’u cyfyngu i ddelio â chwynion a phryderon sy’n codi cwestiwn o SPM, SDP neu amhariad difrifol i iechyd. Dyna oedd yr holl hen weithdrefnau FTP i fod i wneud, er y byddai staff y GMC hefyd yn rhoi cyngor i bobl a oedd yn galw hefyd. Yn y cyd-destun hwn, ac fel enghraifft arall o’r ffordd y mae’r GMC wedi ymateb i bryderon yn cael eu mynegi gan yr Ymchwiliad, sylwaf fod disgrifiad newydd - a mwy cywir - o swyddogaethau’r GMC mewn perthynas â chwynion a phryderon wedi ymddangos yn ddiweddar ar ei wefan. Wrth sôn am yr hen daflenni, dywedodd Mr Scott y bu diffyg eglurder yn y GMC ynghylch ble i osod ei hun mewn perthynas â systemau eraill, a gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG yn benodol. Rwy’n meddwl tybed a oedd y ‘diffyg eglurder’ mewn gwirionedd yn cynrychioli gwrthdaro mewn barnau rhwng ei aelodau ynghylch swyddogaeth a diben gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC.
Trof yn ôl at y materion hyn eto mewn Penodau diweddarach, wrth drafod problemau sydd wedi’u canfod yng ngweithrediad camau diweddar gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC. Maent yn berthnasol, rhag ofn bod y darllenydd yn amau, i’r cwestiwn pwysig pa un a fydd y GMC mewn gwirionedd yn dod ag ymagwedd ac agwedd newydd i’r gweithdrefnau newydd neu na fydd, fel y llewpard, yn gallu newid ei frychni.

---  ---
Rôl y Sgriniwr o'r 1970au hyd at 1996
Datblygiadau yn y Broses Sgrinio o 1996 hyd at 1997
Datblygiadau yn y Broses Sgrinio er 1998
Rhai Problemau gyda'r Broses Sgrinio
Yr Ymchwiliad yn Archwilio Achosion

---  ---
Ym Mhennod 18, disgrifiais y modd, dan yr ‘hen’ weithdrefnau ymddygiad, pan oedd cwynion neu adroddiadau am euogfarnau’n cael eu derbyn gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC), yr oeddent yn cael eu rhoi drwy broses hidlo gan aelodau o staff y GMC, a oedd yn arfer pwerau’r Cofrestrydd. Dim ond oddeutu 35% o achosion a oedd yn goroesi’r broses hidlo gyntaf honno. Ystyriaf yn awr y cam nesaf yn y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, sef y ‘sgrinio’.
O ddiwedd y bedwaredd ganrif ar bymtheg, roedd Rheolau’r GMC yn pennu y dylai euogfarnau a chwynion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y GMC fynd trwy gam ystyried cychwynnol er mwyn penderfynu a ddylent gael eu cyfeirio neu beidio ar gyfer gweithredu pellach. Roedd unigolion a oedd yn cyflawni’r swyddogaeth hon yn cael eu galw’n ‘sgrinwyr’. Am lawer o flynyddoedd, roedd Llywydd y GMC, a oedd yn aelod blaenllaw o’r proffesiwn meddygol, yn gweithredu fel yr unig sgriniwr. Os nad oedd yn gallu neu’n barod i wneud hynny am unrhyw reswm, byddai’n enwebu aelod arall o’r GMC â chymwysterau meddygol i gymryd ei le. Ychydig o gwynion oedd yn cael eu gwneud, ac roedd modd i un dyn ystyried y cyfan ohonynt. Byddai ymddygiad yr oedd y Llywydd yn ystyried fel ymddygiad ‘gwaradwyddus mewn unrhyw gysylltiad proffesiynol’ (camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM) nes ymlaen) yn mynd ymlaen at wrandawiad disgyblu. Byddai’r Llywydd ei hun yn cadeirio’r gwrandawiad disgyblu hwnnw. Yn rhinwedd ei rolau deuol, roedd Llywydd y GMC, i bob pwrpas, yn ganolwr pa ymddygiad oedd yn dderbyniol neu beidio mewn aelod o’r proffesiwn meddygol. Mae’r ffaith bod gymaint â hyn o rym a dylanwad wedi’u rhoi mewn un unigolyn i weld yn hynod i lygaid modern. Wrth gwrs, mae’r system wedi newid, ond, wrth archwilio swyddogaethau sgriniwr heddiw, mae’n ddefnyddiol i ddeall tarddiad y rôl.
Dros ddegawdau diweddar, fel y byddaf yn disgrifio, mae nifer y sgrinwyr wedi cynyddu. Peidiodd y Llywydd ag ymgymryd â’r rôl hon, a chafodd ei chyflawni wedi hynny gan nifer o unigolion. Ar ôl 1990, roedd pobl leyg yn cymryd rhan yn y broses sgrinio. Hyd at fis Gorffennaf 2003, roedd y Rheolau’n amodi mai aelodau o’r GMC yn unig a allai weithredu fel sgrinwyr. Pan leihawyd maint y GMC, ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, newidiodd hynny; ar ôl yr amser hwnnw, roedd modd i rywrai nad oeddent yn aelodau i weithredu fel sgrinwyr. O ganol 2004, disodlwyd y sgrinwyr presennol gan archwilwyr achos, a gafodd eu penodi at ddibenion y gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) newydd. Y bwriad oedd y dylent gyflawni rolau sgrinwyr tra’n disgwyl cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd.
Roedd achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio ymlaen gan y sgrinwyr yn mynd ymlaen i’w hystyried ymhellach gan un o bwyllgorau FTP y GMC. Hyd at 1980, y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol (PeCC) oedd hwnnw; ar ôl 1980, y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) ydoedd. Swyddogaeth y PPC oedd penderfynu a ddylai achos fynd ymlaen at y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) (y Pwyllgor Disgyblu (DC) yn flaenorol) ar gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu.
Dangoswyd pwysigrwydd rôl y sgriniwr fel hidlwr gan yr ystadegau a gyflwynwyd gan y GMC. Roedd sgrinwyr yn gyfrifol am ‘sgrinio allan’ cyfran fawr o’r achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio atynt. Yn y rhan fwyaf o’r blynyddoedd o 1987 i 1998, cafodd rhwng 82% ac 89% o achosion a gyfeiriwyd at sgrinwyr eu sgrinio allan a’u cau. Nid oedd y cyhoedd yn ymwybodol o hyn yn gyffredinol. Byddai’r broses sgrinio’n cael ei chynnal yn breifat, ac, fel yr esboniaf, nid oedd yn agored i’w harchwilio gan unrhyw un, nid hyd yn oed gan aelodau eraill o’r GMC.
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn archwilio rôl y sgrinwyr â chymwysterau meddygol a sgrinwyr ‘lleyg’ a’r datblygiadau yn y broses sgrinio a ddigwyddodd dros y blynyddoedd. Byddaf yn trafod y profion a gymhwyswyd gan y sgrinwyr ar adegau amrywiol a’r arweiniad a oedd ar gael i’w cynorthwyo wrth gymhwyso’r profion hynny. Byddaf yn trafod rhai penderfyniadau sgrinio unigol, gan gynnwys y rheiny a oedd yn ymwneud â chwynion yn erbyn Shipman yr adroddwyd amdanynt i’r GMC ym 1994, a rhai o’r penderfyniadau hynny a fu’n destun achos ar gyfer adolygiad barnwrol. Byddaf yn ystyried y golau a daflwyd ar y broses sgrinio gan y gwaith a wnaed gan y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi (PSI). Byddaf yn ystyried hefyd rhai problemau penodol sydd wedi codi mewn cysylltiad â’r broses sgrinio.
Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan Dr Krishna Korlipara, a oedd yn sgriniwr â chymwysterau meddygol yn delio ag achosion ymddygiad a pherfformiad (‘sgriniwr meddygol’) o 1998 hyd at 2004, a chan Dr Arun Midha, nad oes ganddo gymwysterau meddygol ac a gafodd ei benodi yn sgriniwr ‘lleyg’ ym mis Gorffennaf 2001. Darparwyd datganiadau tyst i’r Ymchwiliad gan Dr Robin Steel, sgriniwr meddygol rhwng 1987 a 1999, a Dr Joan Trowell, a benodwyd yn sgriniwr meddygol ym 1999. Darparwyd datganiad tyst hefyd gan Mr Blake Dobson, Pennaeth Gwaith Achos ar gyfer Cyfarwyddiaeth Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPD) y GMC a Phennaeth y Tîm Archwilio FPD. Darparwyd datganiad tyst a thystiolaeth lafar gan yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, PSI Prifysgol Westminster. Yn ystod diwedd y 1990au, fe wnaeth hi a thîm o gydweithwyr archwilio nifer o agweddau ar waith y GMC, gan gynnwys y broses sgrinio.

---  ---
Y 1970au
Roedd rheol 5 Gorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor 1970 Pwyllgor Disgyblu (Gweithdrefnau) y GMC (Rheolau 1970) yn amodi y dylai pob euogfarn droseddol (ar wahân i’r rheiny a eithriwyd gan gyfeiriad gan y PeCC) gael eu cyfeirio gan y Cofrestrydd at y Llywydd. Gwnaeth y PeCC eithriad ar gyfer mân droseddau moduro nad oeddent yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau; nid oedd unrhyw gamau’n cael eu cymryd felly mewn perthynas ag euogfarnau felly. Nid oedd gofyniad iddynt fynd ymlaen ar gyfer eu sgrinio gan y Llywydd.
Yn ymarferol, er gwaethaf y gofyniad yn Rheolau 1970 y dylai pob euogfarn (ar wahân i euogfarnau a eithriwyd) gael eu cyfeirio at y Llywydd, ymddengys nad oedd hyn yn digwydd. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Robert Gray, Cofrestrydd Cynorthwyol ym 1976, pan oedd y GMC yn ystyried euogfarn Shipman, ei fod o’r farn, erbyn hynny, fod y Llywydd ar y pryd, Syr John (Arglwydd yn ddiweddarach) Richardson, wedi trefnu gydag aelodau o staff y GMC mai’r euogfarnau mwyaf difrifol yn unig a ddylid eu cyfeirio ato. Byddai’r rhain yn cynnwys euogfarnau lle’r oedd dedfryd o garchar wedi’i phennu ac euogfarnau o yfed a gyrru am yr ail dro neu’r trydydd tro. Nid diben cyfeirio’r euogfarnau mwyaf difrifol, fel y deallaf, oedd oherwydd bod unrhyw amheuaeth ynghylch a ddylid eu cyfeirio at y PeCC; yn hytrach, y rheswm oedd bod y Llywydd eisiau cael gwybodaeth gyson am achosion felly. Roedd euogfarnau eraill (ar wahân i euogfarnau a eithriwyd) i’w cyfeirio gan staff yn uniongyrchol at y PeCC. Effaith y trefniadau hyn oedd bod yr holl euogfarnau troseddol (ac eithrio mân droseddau moduro) yn cael eu cyfeirio’n awtomatig i’w hystyried gan y PeCC.
Ymdrin ag Achosion Ymddygiad
Yn ôl rheol 5(1) o Reolau 1970, roedd gofyniad ar y Cofrestrydd hefyd i gyfeirio at y Llywydd unrhyw gŵyn a wnaed yn ysgrifenedig a oedd yn ymddangos iddo ef ei bod yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg dan sylw yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Byddai’r GMC yn cyfeirio at achosion felly fel ‘achosion ymddygiad’. Rheol 5(1) o Reolau 1970 oedd rhagflaenydd rheol 6 o Orchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefnau) 1988 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol, y trafodais eu gweithrediad yn y Bennod ddiwethaf.
Roedd Rheol 5(2) o Reolau 1970 yn amodi, mewn achos ymddygiad ac
‘oni bai yr ymddengys iddo ef nad oes angen i’r mater fynd ymhellach’
, dylai’r Llywydd roi’r gweithdrefnau disgyblu ar waith. Y Llywydd oedd i benderfynu ynghylch y cwestiwn a oedd
‘angen’
i achos fynd ymhellach neu beidio - ac ynghylch y modd i ddehongli’r gair
‘angen’
. Nid oedd y Rheolau yn cynnwys unrhyw feini prawf i’w cymhwyso wrth wneud y penderfyniad. Ymddengys i mi ei fod yn ymhlyg yn y Rheolau, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod y Cofrestrydd wedi cyfeirio’r achos i’w sgrinio (ac mae’n rhaid felly ei fod wedi bod o’r farn ei fod yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM), fe allai’r Llywydd lunio’r farn na allai’r gŵyn, mewn gwirionedd, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Os felly, ni fyddai
‘angen’
i’r mater fynd ymhellach. Mae mathau eraill o ystyriaeth yn dod i’r meddwl; er enghraifft, os oedd y meddyg a oedd yn destun cwyn eisoes wedi ymddeol o ymarfer, fe allai hynny roi rheswm synhwyrol pam nad oedd
‘angen’
i’r gŵyn fynd ymlaen. Presenoldeb neu absenoldeb
‘angen’
i achos beidio mynd ymlaen ymhellach oedd y prawf o hyd i’w gymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr meddygol hyd at fis Awst 2000. Roedd y prawf yn caniatáu disgresiwn eang i’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol. Er gwaetha’r ffaith bod geiriad y prawf wedi’i ffurfio er mwyn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i achos fynd ymlaen oni bai bod rheswm pam na ddylai, roedd cyfran uchel o achosion yn cael eu sgrinio allan. Mae hyn yn awgrymu bod y sgrinwyr wedi cymhwyso’r prawf o chwith efallai - trwy sgrinio achos allan oni bai bod rheswm canfyddadwy am adael iddo fynd ymlaen. Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod y prawf yn wir wedi’i gymhwyso o chwith. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Antony Townsend, Dirprwy Bennaeth, Pennaeth bryd hynny, yr Adran Ymddygiad rhwng 1994 a 1998, mai’r ‘hen farn’, hyd at ganol y 1990au, oedd bod rhaid canfod rheswm am gyfeirio achos at y PPC.
Ar ôl Sgrinio
Os oedd y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu
‘nad oedd angen i achos fynd ymhellach’
, roedd yr achos yn cael ei gau ac nid oedd camau pellach yn cael eu cymryd. Ni ofynnwyd am ‘ail farn’. Os oedd o’r farn y dylai’r achos fynd ymlaen, roedd rheol 5(2) o Reolau 1970 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo/iddi gyfarwyddo’r Cofrestrydd i ysgrifennu at y meddyg, yn ei hysbysu
‘bod cwyn neu wybodaeth wedi’u derbyn, ac yn nodi’r materion a oedd i weld yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd yr ymarferydd wedi cyflawni’
SPM. Byddai’n ofynnol i’r achwynydd (os oedd un ac a oedd yn unigolyn preifat) ddarparu datganiad statudol, a byddai hwnnw’n cael ei anfon at y meddyg. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei hysbysu o ddyddiad cyfarfod nesaf y PeCC a byddai’n cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i roi esboniad am ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad. Wedi i’r camau hyn gael eu cymryd, byddai’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol yn cyfeirio’r achos at y PeCC.
Y Sgrinwyr
Hyd at 1973, roedd yn arfer arferol i’r Llywydd nid yn unig i ddelio â sgrinio achosion, ond hefyd i gadeirio’r PeCC a’r DC. Cyflawnodd yr Arglwydd Cohen o Benbedw, Llywydd o 1961 hyd at 1973, bob un o’r tair rôl nes iddo fynd yn sâl oddeutu mis Gorffennaf 1973. Wedi hynny, penodwyd yr Athro Syr Denis Hill, aelod blaenllaw o’r GMC, gan y Llywydd i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol. Fe wnaeth dau aelod arall o’r GMC gadeirio cyfarfodydd o’r DC hefyd.
Dros y blynyddoedd, bu rhywfaint o anfodlonrwydd mewn rhai mannau ynghylch y trefniadau yr oedd y Llywydd yn penderfynu a ddylai cwyn gael ei chyfeirio at y PeCC drwyddynt, yna barnu ar yr un gŵyn yn y PeCC ac eto yn y DC. Ym 1973, derbyniodd y GMC ei bod yn annymunol i’r Llywydd barhau i gyflawni’r tair rôl. Wedi hynny, roedd y Llywydd newydd, Syr John Richardson, yn cadeirio’r DC, a phenodwyd Syr Denis eto i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol ac i gadeirio’r PeCC. Ym 1975, cymerodd y Llywydd rolau sgriniwr meddygol a Chadeirydd y PeCC. Dirprwyodd cadeiryddiaeth y DC i aelod arall o’r GMC, Mr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Robert Wright.
Ym 1975, argymhellodd Pwyllgor Merrison y dylai’r gwaith rhagarweiniol o nithio achosion (h.y. y sgrinio) gael ei wneud gan y Llywydd, gyda chymorth staff y GMC a chan yr uned ymchwilio arfaethedig y soniais amdani ym Mhennod 18. Y rheswm am ymddiried y dasg i’r Llywydd oedd, meddai’r Pwyllgor,
‘natur hanfodol y dasg nithio gychwynnol’
. Argymhellodd y Pwyllgor hefyd y dylai’r Llywydd fod yn aelod o’r Pwyllgor Cwynion newydd (a alwyd y PPC wedi hynny), a oedd i ddisodli’r PeCC. Y rheswm am hyn oedd y gallai gwybodaeth y Llywydd am achos, a ddeilliwyd o’i waith sgrinio blaenorol o’r achos, fod ar gael i’r PPC. Argymhellodd y Pwyllgor y dylai person heblaw am y Llywydd gadeirio’r DC (a oedd i fynd yn PCC).
Y 1980au
Roedd Deddf Meddygaeth 1978, ynghyd â Rheolau Gorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefnau) 1980 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980), yn dod â llawer o’r newidiadau a argymhellwyd gan Bwyllgor Merrison i rym.
Ar yr un pryd, daeth Rheolau Gorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Iechyd (Gweithdrefnau) y GMC 1980 (Rheolau Iechyd 1980) i rym a rheoli gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd newydd. Roeddent yn amodi y dylai’r Cyngor benodi’r Llywydd neu aelod arall o’r GMC i ymgymryd â’r ystyriaeth gychwynnol (h.y. y sgrinio) o achosion a oedd yn codi cwestiwn a oedd ei gyflwr/chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Os oedd y Llywydd yn dewis cadeirio’r Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC), neu os nad oedd, am resymau eraill, yn dymuno cael ei benodi fel sgriniwr ar gyfer achosion iechyd, roedd i enwebu aelod arall o’r GMC i’w benodi/phenodi gan y Cyngor. Daeth y person a oedd yn cyflawni’r rôl sgrinio hon, a fyddai â chymwysterau meddygol, i’w adnabod/hadnabod fel ‘sgriniwr iechyd’.
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn amodi, mewn unrhyw achos o euogfarn neu ymddygiad yr oedd yn ymddangos i’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol y gallai cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol fod yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, y dylai’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol gyfarwyddo’r Cofrestrydd i hysbysu’r meddyg o’r ffaith a gwahodd y meddyg i roi tystiolaeth feddygol o’i addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddai’r dystiolaeth honno ar gael wedyn i’r PPC pan oedd yn ystyried yr achos. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn caniatáu i’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol mewn achos felly i anfon yr achos yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd i weithredu arno dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Cofrestrydd gyfeirio pob euogfarn at y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol ac eithrio’r rheiny (h.y. mân droseddau moduro nad oeddent yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau) yr oedd y PPC wedi cyfarwyddo nad oedd angen eu cyfeirio. Mewn egwyddor, roedd yn ofynnol i’r Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol i gyfeirio at y PPC pob achos o euogfarn a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio ato. Roedd yn agored iddo, fodd bynnag, i anfon yr achos yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd i weithredu arno dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol fel dewis arall i gyfeirio’r achos at y PPC.
Cyflwynodd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 drefniant lle byddai meddygon mewn achosion o euogfarn yn cael eu gwahodd ar gyfnod cynnar i gyflwyno’u sylwadau i’r GMC. Roedd y sylwadau hyn wedyn yn cael eu rhoi gerbron y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol pan oedd yr achos yn cael ei sgrinio. Pan oedd y meddyg wedi cyflwyno tystiolaeth feddygol, fe allai hyn beri i’r achos gael ei anfon yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd yn hytrach na chael ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Nid ofynnwyd i feddygon mewn achosion ymddygiad am eu sylwadau nes wedi i’r achos gael ei sgrinio, ac felly, yn gyffredinol, nid oedd gan y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn a wnaed yn ei erbyn/herbyn.
Y Sgrinwyr
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn amodi y dylai’r Llywydd barhau i gyflawni rôl sgriniwr meddygol fel ag o’r blaen. Fodd bynnag, os oedd y Llywydd yn dewis eistedd naill ai ar y PCC neu ar yr HC newydd, neu os nad oedd y Llywydd, am resymau eraill, yn dymuno ymgymryd â gwaith sgrinio achosion, roedd yn agored iddo
‘enwebu rhyw aelod arall i’w benodi/phenodi’
gan y Cyngor fel sgriniwr meddygol. Yn ddiweddarach, roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi y bydd y Cyngor
‘yn penodi’
y person a enwebwyd gan y Llywydd. I bob pwrpas, felly, roedd y penodiad yn nwylo’r Llywydd. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi hefyd y gallai’r Llywydd enwebu (ac roedd yn ofynnol i’r Cyngor benodi) aelodau eraill o’r GMC i weithredu fel sgrinwyr meddygol ychwanegol mewn achosion lle nad oedd y Llywydd neu’r sgriniwr meddygol penodedig yn gallu gweithredu.
Ym 1980, daeth Syr Robert Wright yn Llywydd. Cadeiriodd y PCC hyd at ei farwolaeth ym 1981. Cafodd Syr Denis Hill ei benodi eto yn sgriniwr meddygol, ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad ac ar gyfer achosion y delid â nhw dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd newydd. Cadeiriodd y PPC. Ym mis Chwefror 1982, daeth Syr John (Arglwydd yn ddiweddarach) Walton yn Lywydd. O gychwyn ei Lywyddiaeth hyd at fis Tachwedd 1984, cadeiriodd yr HC. I gychwyn, parhaodd Syr Denis fel sgriniwr a Chadeirydd y PPC. Yn dilyn marwolaeth Syr Denis ym mis Mai 1982, enwebodd y Llywydd Dr John Fry, meddyg teulu, fel sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad. Cadeiriodd Dr Fry y PPC yn ogystal. Ym mis Tachwedd 1984, peidiodd Syr John â bod yn aelod o’r HC a daeth yn sgriniwr ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad ac iechyd. Cafodd ei gynorthwyo gan y sgriniwr meddygol blaenorol, Dr Fry. Cadeiriodd Syr John y PPC hefyd. Ym mis Tachwedd 1987, penodwyd Dr Steel fel sgriniwr meddygol ychwanegol. Syr John oedd y Llywydd olaf i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol.
Olynodd Syr (Arglwydd yn ddiweddarach) Robert Kilpatrick i’r Llywyddiaeth ym mis Chwefror 1989. Dewisodd gadeirio’r PCC. Penodwyd Dr Fry fel sgriniwr meddygol, gyda chymorth gan Dr Steel a Dr (y Fonesig yn ddiweddarach) Beulah Bewley. Cadeiriodd Dr Fry y PPC hefyd. O tua’r adeg hon, daeth y sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad yn hysbys fel y ‘prif’ sgriniwr meddygol, er mwyn ei wahaniaethu/gwahaniaethu oddi wrth y sgrinwyr meddygol ychwanegol. Mae’n amlwg, o leiaf hyd at yr adeg hon, mai maes ychydig iawn o aelodau o’r GMC oedd sgrinio, ac roedd pawb a oedd yn gysylltiedig wedi’u dewis yn bersonol gan Lywydd y dydd.
Gweithdrefnau Pennod XV
Rwyf wedi dweud, dan Reolau 1970, os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu nad oedd angen i’r gŵyn fynd ymhellach, byddai’n cael ei chau. Felly’r oedd hi hefyd dan Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980. Ym mis Mai 1981, cyflwynwyd mecanwaith anffurfiol ar gyfer rhybuddio meddyg am ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad. Bwriad hwn oedd caniatáu i’r GMC nodi’i anghymeradwyaeth o ymddygiad a oedd yn fyr o fod yn SPM, ond a oedd, serch hynny, yn cael ei ystyried yn annerbyniol. Roedd y gweithdrefnau perthnasol yn ymddangos ym Mhennod XV o’r fersiwn ddiwygiedig o Orchmynion Sefydlog y GMC a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Awst 1981.
Gellid defnyddio’r gweithdrefnau os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu nad oedd angen i’r gŵyn fynd ymlaen at y PPC, ond ei fod o’r farn serch hynny bod y meddyg i weld wedi ymddwyn mewn modd na ellid ei ystyried fel ymddygiad proffesiynol derbyniol. Roedd yn rhaid i’r sgriniwr meddygol fod yn fodlon hefyd nad oedd y mater yn un dibwys a’i fod yn ddymunol, er lles y cyhoedd, ac er mwyn cynnal enw da’r proffesiwn meddygol, y dylai’r GMC weithredu. Yn yr Adroddiad Blynyddol a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor gan y PPC ym mis Tachwedd 1993, disgrifiwyd gweithdrefnau Pennod XV fel rhai
Cyn gweithredu dan weithdrefnau Pennod XV, roedd yn ofynnol i’r sgriniwr meddygol ymgynghori â dau aelod o’r PPC: un aelod meddygol, a oedd yn ymwneud â’r un arbenigedd â’r meddyg dan sylw, ac un aelod lleyg. Os nad oedd ymddygiad y meddyg eisoes wedi bod yn destun ymchwiliad gan lys, pwyllgorau gwasanaethau meddygol (MSC) neu dribiwnlys statudol, roedd yn rhaid i’r aelodau yr ymgynghorwyd â nhw fod yn fodlon bod y dystiolaeth yn ddigonol. Er nad oedd yn ofynnol gan Reolau’r GMC, yr arfer oedd, pen oedd y gŵyn berthnasol yn dod gan unigolyn preifat, byddid yn gofyn i’r achwynydd gyflwyno datganiad statudol cyn bod gweithdrefnau Pennod XV yn cael eu cychwyn. Os oedd penderfyniad rhagarweiniol yn cael ei wneud y dylai gweithdrefnau Pennod XV gael eu rhoi ar waith, roedd sylwadau’r meddyg yn cael eu gwahodd. Roedd y llythyr a oedd yn gofyn am sylwadau’r meddyg yn dweud yn glir nad oedd achos disgyblu ffurfiol yn cael ei ystyried mewn perthynas â’r mater yr oedd cais am sylwadau’n cael ei wneud amdano. Roedd cychwyn y weithdrefn i bob pwrpas yn diystyru, felly, posibilrwydd camau disgyblu, hyd yn oed os oedd ymateb y meddyg yn anfoddhaol.
Wedi derbyn sylwadau’r meddyg (neu os nad oedd yn ymateb), roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr meddygol, gyda chytundeb y ddau aelod arall, i gyfarwyddo bod llythyr yn cael ei anfon at y meddyg, yn cynnwys cyngor yr oedd yr aelodau (gan gynnwys y sgriniwr meddygol) o’r farn a oedd yn addas. Byddai’r llythyr yn hysbysu’r meddyg, os oedd cwyn arall yn cael ei derbyn wedi hynny, byddai’r achos presennol yn cael ei adolygu. Os oedd ymholiad yn cael ei wneud wedi hynny i’r GMC ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ni fyddai’r ffaith ei fod/bod wedi derbyn llythyr Pennod XV yn cael ei ddatgelu.
Ni ellid defnyddio gweithdrefnau Pennod XV lle na fu unrhyw ganfyddiad blaenorol o ffaith a lle nad oedd y meddyg yn derbyn bod unrhyw sail i’r gŵyn. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, nid oedd unrhyw beth y gallai’r GMC ei wneud, gan y byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol, wrth gychwyn ar weithdrefnau Pennod XV, eisoes wedi penderfynu nad oedd gweithdrefnau disgyblu ffurfiol yn briodol.
Roedd ystadegau yn ymwneud â nifer yr achosion lle’r oedd camau gweithredu dan Bennod XV wedi’u cymryd yn cael eu hadrodd gan y PPC yn flynyddol i’r Cyngor. Mae’r ystadegau’n dangos bod gweithdrefnau Pennod XV yn cael eu defnyddio’n helaeth, yn enwedig wrth ddelio â chwynion o driniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon, a chyda chwynion yn ymwneud â honiadau yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad personol y meddyg. Er bod nifer yr achosion, hyd at 1985, o lythyrau Pennod XV yn cael eu hanfon yn parhau islaw 20 y flwyddyn, cynyddodd y niferoedd yn amlwg wedi hynny. Yn y flwyddyn hyd at 31 Awst 1994 ac ym 1995, anfonwyd llythyrau Pennod XV at 6% o’r holl feddygon yr oedd y GMC wedi derbyn cwynion mewn perthynas â nhw. Ym 1997, roedd 10% o achosion a sgriniwyd (h.y. 192 o achosion) yn destun camau gweithredu Pennod XV.
Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988
Gadawodd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 y prawf sgrinio’n ddigyfnewid. Y ddarpariaeth berthnasol oedd rheol 6(3) a amododd:
(h.y. y sgriniwr meddygol)
a) Notifying him of the receipt of a complaint or information and stating the matters which appear to raise a question whether the practitioner has committed serious professional misconduct...’.
Y Cyfnod o 1990 i 1996
Cyflwyno Sgrinwyr Lleyg
Hyd at 1990, nid oedd aelodau o’r GMC nad oedd ganddynt gymwysterau meddygol yn gysylltiedig â’r broses sgrinio. Ym 1990, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddarparu ar gyfer enwebu gan y Llywydd (a phenodi gan y Cyngor) aelod anfeddygol o’r GMC i weithredu fel sgriniwr lleyg. Ym mis Mai 1990, penodwyd Mr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Roger Sims yn sgriniwr lleyg. Ym mis Tachwedd 1991, ymunodd Syr Maurice Shock ag ef. Disodlwyd Syr Maurice yn ddiweddarach gan yr Athro Christine Chapman. Nid oedd y sgrinwyr lleyg yn sgrinio achosion ar ei ben/phen ei hun. Roedd yn ofynnol iddynt ystyried yr achosion ymddygiad hynny’n unig lle’r oedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud penderfyniad rhagarweiniol i gau’r achos. Os nad oedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno â’r penderfyniad hwnnw, byddai trafodaeth yn cael ei chynnal rhwng y ddau sgriniwr. Yn y pen draw, os nad oedd cytundeb yn bosibl, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at y PPC er gwaethaf barn y sgriniwr meddygol. Wedi cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1997, roedd sgrinwyr lleyg yn gysylltiedig hefyd â sgrinio achosion lle’r oedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud penderfyniad rhagarweiniol nad oedd yr achos yn codi cwestiwn naill ai o SPM neu berfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP). Efallai ei bod yn syndod na wnaeth sgrinwyr lleyg erioed chwarae unrhyw ran wrth sgrinio euogfarnau, yn enwedig gan i sgrinwyr, ar ôl mis Mai 1990, gael disgresiwn braidd yn ehangach mewn cysylltiad â’u triniaeth o euogfarnau: gweler paragraff 19.33. Byddaf yn trafod rôl sgrinwyr lleyg yn llawnach yn y Bennod hon.
Y Sgrinwyr Meddygol
Ym mis Tachwedd 1992, disodlwyd Dr Fry gan Dr Steel fel prif sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad ac fel Cadeirydd y PPC. Parhaodd Dr Bewley i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol ychwanegol. Penodwyd Dr Michael Wilson fel sgriniwr meddygol ychwanegol hefyd ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad. Ym mis Medi 1995, daeth Syr Donald Irvine yn Llywydd y GMC. Parhaodd y trefniadau sgrinio fel ag o’r blaen.
Ym mis Mai 1990, gwnaeth y PPC gyfarwyddyd yn rhoi disgresiwn pellach i sgrinwyr meddygol mewn perthynas ag euogfarnau. Roedd y cyfarwyddyd yn awdurdodi’r sgrinwyr meddygol i arfer eu disgresiwn wrth benderfynu pa un a ddylid cyfeirio at y PPC euogfarnau a oedd yn ymwneud ag unrhyw droseddau a gyflawnwyd dros bum mlynedd cyn hysbysu’r GMC. Rhoddwyd disgresiwn hefyd i’r sgrinwyr meddygol i beidio cyfeirio euogfarn at y PPC os oedd y drosedd:
‘... yn drosedd fân dros ben nad oedd i weld yn gysylltiedig ag unrhyw agwedd ar arfer proffesiynol y meddyg ac nad oedd yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad a oedd yn debygol o ddwyn anfri ar y proffesiwn meddygol yn gyffredinol’.
Ym mis Ionawr 1995, cadarnhaodd y PPC y cyfarwyddyd a roddwyd ym mis Mai 1990. Fodd bynnag, roedd telerau’r cyfarwyddyd ychydig yn wahanol i’r rheiny a roddwyd ym mis Mai 1990. Y tro hwn, roedd y sgrinwyr meddygol yn cael awdurdod i arfer eu disgresiwn wrth benderfynu cyfeirio at y PPC neu beidio:
‘... euogfarnau o fân droseddau nad oeddent i weld yn gysylltiedig ag arfer proffesiynol meddyg, nac yn ymwneud â graddfa ymddygiad a fyddai’n dwyn anfri ar y proffesiwn meddygol’.
Ym mis Mehefin 1997, lluniwyd Nodyn fel arweiniad i aelodau newydd o’r PPC. Roedd y Nodyn yn datgan bod y PPC wedi cytuno nad oedd angen cyfeirio
‘mân droseddau moduro fel goryrru’
ato (mewn gwirionedd, roedd wedi cyfarwyddo na ddylai achosion felly cael eu cyfeirio hyd yn oed at y sgriniwr meddygol), ond bod
‘rhaid cyfeirio euogfarnau eraill’
. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd y Nodyn hwn, a gynlluniwyd er budd aelodau’r PPC ac nad oedd wedi’i gyfeirio at sgrinwyr yn ôl pob golwg, yn gyson â chyfarwyddyd 1995. Yn ôl y cyfarwyddyd hwnnw, roedd sgrinwyr wedi cael disgresiwn i beidio cyfeirio at y PPC fathau eraill o fân euogfarnau, gan gynnwys rhai mân achosion o anonestrwydd y barnwyd ganddynt i fod yn annigonol i
‘ddwyn anfri ar y proffesiwn meddygol’
. Fe allai hyn fod wedi arwain at aelodau o’r PPC yn cael yr argraff eu bod yn derbyn yr holl achosion o euogfarn (ac eithrio mân droseddau moduro) pan nad oeddent mewn gwirionedd.
Diffyg Gwybodaeth am y Broses Sgrinio
Graddfa’r Wybodaeth ymhlith Aelodau o’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Mae’n amlwg o’r hyn a ddywedais, mai ychydig iawn o aelodau’r GMC, hyd at yr amser hwn, a fu’n gysylltiedig â’r broses sgrinio. Roedd y broses yn cael ei chynnal yn breifat a dan orchudd rhywfaint o gyfrinachedd. Dywedodd Mr Townsend wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai ‘maes nifer fach o bobl yn unig yn draddodiadol’ oedd sgrinio. ‘Gwybodaeth gyfyngedig iawn yn wir’ oedd gan y Cyngor ei hun am y modd yr oedd y swyddogaeth sgrinio’n cael ei chyflawni.
Ym 1988, mynegwyd pryder gan Mrs Jean Robinson, a oedd yn aelod lleyg o’r GMC bryd hynny, ynghylch y diffyg gwybodaeth am y broses sgrinio yn ei chyhoeddiad ‘A Patient Voice at the GMC’
. Dywedodd:
Roedd Mrs Robinson yn pryderu hefyd ynghylch diffyg cysylltiad pobl leyg â phenderfyniadau sgrinio ac absenoldeb unrhyw un yn y GMC â’r grym i adolygu neu holi ynghylch penderfyniadau sgrinio.
Rhoddwyd sylw i ddiffyg cysylltiad pobl leyg â’r broses sgrinio, fel y dywedais, ym 1990, pan benodwyd aelod anfeddygol o’r GMC, am y tro cyntaf, yn sgriniwr lleyg. Fodd bynnag, parhaodd aelodau eraill o’r GMC i dderbyn ychydig o wybodaeth am y broses sgrinio. Ni fyddent yn gweld achosion a oedd wedi’u ‘sgrinio allan’. Nid oedd y GMC wedi cytuno ar unrhyw feini prawf ar gyfer arwain sgrinwyr wrth benderfynu pa achosion ddylai ac na ddylai fynd ymlaen. Nid oed unrhyw archwilio nad adolygu mewnol o ansawdd penderfyniadau sgrinio. Roedd yr unig wybodaeth galed a oedd ar gael i aelodau yn cynnwys yr ystadegau’n ymwneud â’r achosion yr oedd y GMC yn delio â nhw, a oedd yn cael eu cyhoeddi’n flynyddol. Nid oedd yr ystadegau hyn yn taflu unrhyw oleuni ar ddifrifoldeb honiadau unigol. Roeddent, fodd bynnag, yn dangos bod cyfran y cwynion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC yn fach. Yn ystod y cyfnod o 1993 i 1995, nid oedd mwy na 15% o’r cwynion a oedd yn cael eu derbyn gan y GMC bob blwyddyn (yr oedd y cyfan ohonynt bryd hynny’n cael eu cyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol) yn cael eu cyfeirio gan y sgriniwr meddygol at y PPC.
Y Wybodaeth a Roddwyd i Achwynwyr
Hyd at 1998, nid oedd y Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol yn pennu a ddylai achwynwyr gael eu hysbysu o’r ffaith bod eu cwyn wedi’i sgrinio allan, neu, os felly, pa wybodaeth a ddylid ei rhoi iddynt. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi y dylid hysbysu achwynydd am benderfyniad gan y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol i beidio cyfeirio’i achos/hachos at y PPC. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd achwynwyr i gael hawl mynediad at unrhyw ddogfen yn ymwneud â’r achos a oedd wedi’i chyflwyno i’r GMC gan unrhyw berson arall. At hynny, nid oedd hawl ganddynt i gael unrhyw esboniad am y rhesymau dros y penderfyniad i beidio cyfeirio, os oedd y Llywydd/sgriniwr meddygol yn cyfarwyddo na ddylid rhoi unrhyw esboniad. Parhaodd y grym hwn i wrthod rhoi esboniad hyd at 2000, pan newidiwyd y Rheolau: gweler paragraff 19.118. Yn ymarferol, ar ôl 1988, roedd achwynwyr yn cael rhyw esboniad fel arfer pam nad oedd eu hachos wedi’i gyfeirio at y PPC, er nad oedd wastad yn un cynhwysfawr iawn.
Nid yw meddygon nac achwynwyr erioed wedi cael unrhyw hawl apêl yn erbyn, nac adolygu, penderfyniad gan sgriniwr, ac eithrio trwy adolygiad barnwrol. Mae honno’n broses ddrud ac un a all godi ofn ar lawer. Ni ddefnyddiwyd adolygiad barnwrol i herio penderfyniad sgrinio nes 1997. Yna, am y tro cyntaf, taflwyd rhywfaint o oleuni ar y broses sgrinio, a rhoddwyd rhyw fath o syniad i sgrinwyr pa un a oeddent yn mynd i’r afael â’u tasg yn y ffordd iawn. Am y tro cyntaf, rhoddodd y GMC arweiniad awdurdodol i’w sgrinwyr. Erbyn i nifer o achosion fynd at adolygiad barnwrol, roedd y GMC a’r cyhoedd yn gallu cael rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i’r modd yr oedd y dasg yn cael ei chyflawni, a’r meini prawf, os oedd rhai, a oedd yn cael eu cymhwyso.
Yr Ymagwedd tuag at y Broses Sgrinio
Cyfeiriais ym Mhennod 18 at y Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant a luniwyd ym 1994 gan Mr Alan Howes, a oedd yn gweithio yn yr Adran Ymddygiad fwy neu lai’n ddi-dor rhwng 1980 a 1994 ac a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran o 1987 hyd at 1994. Bwriad Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 oedd rhoi deunydd hyfforddi i staff newydd yn yr Adran wedi i Mr Howes symud oddi yno ym 1994. Mae’n rhoi mewnwelediad defnyddiol i arferion y dydd. Roedd rhan o Lawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn nodi arweiniad ar weithdrefnau cychwynnol a rôl y sgriniwr rhagarweiniol (h.y. meddygol), yn seiliedig ar nodyn arweiniad mewnol ar gyfer sgrinwyr newydd. Nid yw’r nodyn arweiniad hwnnw ar gael mwyach.
Roedd yr arweiniad yn Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn datgan, wrth asesu a oedd cwyn unigol yn codi unrhyw gwestiwn o SPM, bod rhaid i staff a sgrinwyr ystyried dau gwestiwn:
Os mai ‘ydy’ oedd yr ateb i’r ddau gwestiwn, roedd Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 yn cynghori bod yr achos yn
. Ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad ar y meini prawf i’w defnyddio wrth asesu difrifoldeb.
Aeth Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 ymlaen i ddweud ei bod yn angenrheidiol i sgrinwyr wedyn i
. Nododd bod mater digonorwydd tystiolaeth yn
. Aeth Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 ymlaen wedyn i drafod mater tystiolaeth mewn darn yr wyf eisoes wedi’i ddyfynnu ym Mhennod 18. Yn fyr, ymddengys bod yr arweiniad yn Llawlyfr Hyfforddiant 1994 wedi creu ‘hidlwr manylach’ nag a ragwelwyd gan reol 6(3),a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i sgriniwr gyfeirio achos at y PPC
(him/her)
that the matter need not proceed further...’
Adroddiad am Shipman: Achosion Mr W a Mrs B
Ym Mhennod 6, disgrifiais y ddwy gŵyn a wnaed yn lleol am Shipman ym 1990 ac ym 1992. Yn y gyntaf, yn ymwneud â Mr W, canfu MSC Tameside fod Shipman wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth; cafodd ei rybuddio i gydymffurfio’n fanylach â nhw yn y dyfodol. Roedd wedi gwneud camgymeriad difrifol wrth ragnodi maint gormodol o Epilim i glaf epileptig. Nid adroddwyd i’r GMC am ganfyddiad yr MSC pan gafodd ei wneud. Ym 1993, canfu MSC arall fod Shipman wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth eto, y tro hwn mewn perthynas â chlaf oedrannus a oedd wedi cael strôc, Mrs B. Ym 1992, roedd wedi gwrthod ymweld â hi mewn ymateb i gais gan ei pherthnasau, a chanfu’r MSC nad oedd wedi’i roi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i arfer barn broffesiynol briodol ynghylch yr angen am ymweliad. Cyfeiriwyd yr achos at Uned Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAU). Ym mis Mai 1994, rhybuddiwyd Shipman eto a chadarnhawyd argymhelliad i atal £800 o’i gyflog. Roedd gan Shipman ddau ganfyddiad MSC yn ei erbyn nawr. Adroddodd yr FHSAU i’r GMC am Shipman, ac anfonodd yr holl bapurau at y GMC.
Mae papurau’r GMC yn dangos bod gweithiwr achos wedi paratoi memorandwm manwl i’w gyflwyno, i Mr Howes yn gyntaf ac yna i Dr Steel, y prif sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd y memorandwm yn nodi euogfarnau Shipman ym 1976 a’r ffaith ei fod wedi cael ei rybuddio gan y GMC ar yr achlysur hwnnw. Roedd yn nodi ffeithiau’r ddau achos mwy diweddar. Mewn perthynas â’r ail achos, sef achos Mrs B, datganodd y crynodeb bod y ffeithiau yn bwnc dadl. Roedd y perthnasau yn dweud un peth a Shipman yn dweud rhywbeth arall. Nid oedd y crynodeb, fodd bynnag, yn cofnodi fod yr MSC wedi ffafrio tystiolaeth y perthnasau neu pham wnaethant hynny, materion a oedd wedi’u datgan yn eglur yn y papurau. Roedd yr MSC wedi canfod fod Shipman wedi methu rhoi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i ganfod a oedd angen ymweliad ar Mrs B. Dywedodd y gweithiwr achos, o gofio’r dystiolaeth yr oedd dadlau yn ei chylch, ei fod/bod yn eithaf siŵr na fyddai’r achos
‘yn ymgeisydd ar gyfer gweithredu o fewn y Rheolau’
. Yn ddiweddarach, mynegodd y farn y byddai
‘bron yn amhosibl’
i gymryd camau felly. Ni fyddai
‘llawer o bwynt’
ychwaith mewn cymryd camau dan weithdrefnau Pennod XV; ailadrodd ei fersiwn ef o’r digwyddiadau fyddai Shipman yn ei wneud. Nododd y gweithiwr achos hefyd, fodd bynnag, y byddai’n anarferol i’r GMC wneud dim mewn achos lle’r oedd yr MSC wedi argymell atal £800, a oedd, rwy’n casglu, yn cael ei ystyried yn swm sylweddol bryd hynny ac yn dangos achos difrifol o dorri telerau gwasanaeth meddyg teulu.
Ysgrifennodd Mr Howes ar y memorandwm:
Nododd Dr Steel:
(gair byr yn annarllenadwy, ‘in’ o bosibl)
Ar yr adeg hon, roedd y GMC yn paratoi ar gyfer cyflwyno gweithdrefnau perfformiad ac roedd yn ceisio canfod faint o achosion allai godi. Yn y cysylltiad hwn, ymddengys bod Dr Steel wedi llenwi ffurflen asesu perfformiad yn ymwneud â’r adroddiad am Shipman. Roedd y ffurflen yn gofyn tri chwestiwn. Y cyntaf oedd
‘A oes tystiolaeth o berfformiad diffygiol difrifol?’
I hynny, atebodd Dr Steel
‘oes’
. Roedd yr ail gwestiwn yn gofyn,
‘Os felly, a oes tystiolaeth o batrwm o berfformiad gwael (yn hytrach na digwyddiadau unigol)?’
I hynny, atebodd Dr Steel
‘oes - dim ond 2’
. Roedd y trydydd yn gofyn a oedd tystiolaeth hefyd o SPM a oedd yn dangos achos ymddygiad yn hytrach na gweithredu ar berfformiad. I hynny, atebodd Dr Steel yn negyddol.
Ni aeth yr achos at y PPC. Yn fy marn i, fe ddylai fod wedi gwneud. Yn gyntaf, dywedodd Dr Steel ar y ffurflen asesu perfformiad nad oedd yr achos yn dangos tystiolaeth o SPM, roedd wedi dweud yn ei benderfyniad sgrinio bod ymddygiad Shipman yn achos Mrs B
‘ar y ffin’
. Mae’n rhaid bod hynny, yn fy marn i, yn golygu y byddai rhai pobl yn cymryd y farn ei fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ymddengys yn destun dadlau sicr i mi bod y ffeithiau a ganfuwyd gan yr MSC yn achos Mrs B yn disgyn i’r categori o achosion a ddisgrifiwyd yn yr argraffiadau cynnar o’r Llyfr Glas (canllaw disgyblu proffesiynol y GMC) fel achos difrifol o ddiystyru cyfrifoldeb proffesiynol neu esgeuluso dyletswydd broffesiynol. Yr enghreifftiau o hyn a roddwyd yn y Llyfr Glas oedd methu ymweld â chlaf neu ddarparu triniaeth i glaf pan oedd yn angenrheidiol i wneud hynny. At hynny, roedd dibynnu ar wrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth fel rheswm i beidio mynd ymlaen yn eithaf anfoddhaol. Hyd yn oed o gydnabod ei bod, ar y pryd, yn ymddangos ei bod yn beth cywir i sgrinwyr ystyried cryfder y dystiolaeth, roedd penderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol yn amlwg yn anghywir. Ni fu unrhyw anhawster tystiolaethol i’r MSC ac nid oedd unrhyw reswm i dybio y byddai problem dystiolaethol i’r GMC pe bai’n dewis gweithredu. Fodd bynnag, caewyd yr achos. Ni allaf weld o’r ffeil unrhyw arwydd bod sgriniwr lleyg wedi cytuno i gau’r achos fel yr oedd yn ofynnol gan Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988.

---  ---
Newid Diwylliant
Dywedodd Mr Townsend, cyn ail hanner y 1990au, mai’r ‘hen farn’ oedd bod rhaid canfod rhesymau dros gyfeirio achos at y PPC. Byddai hyn yn awgrymu, yn lle rhagdybiaeth y byddai achos yn mynd ymlaen oni bai ei bod yn ymddangos i’r sgriniwr meddygol nad oedd
‘angen iddo’
fynd ymhellach (fel y darparodd y Rheolau ar ei gyfer), y rhagdybiaeth oedd na fyddai achos yn mynd yn ei flaen oni bai bod angen pendant iddo wneud hynny. Ymddengys bod y modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r adroddiad ym 1994 am ymddygiad Shipman yn achosion Mr W a Mrs B yn enghraifft o’r ymagwedd hon. Dywedodd Mr Townsend bod y farn honno wedi newid yng nghanol y 1990au. Priodolodd y newid yn rhannol i gyhoeddi ‘Good Medical Practice’ ym 1995, a oedd, fe gredai, yn cynrychioli ‘newid diwylliannol’. Roedd y newid diwylliannol hwn, meddai, wedi arwain at ‘mwy o barodrwydd’ ar ran staff y GMC a sgriniwyr i ganiatáu i achosion fynd ymlaen i’r cam nesaf, yn hytrach na’u diystyru ar unwaith. Nid wyf yn sicr a yw’r farn honno’n cael ei chadarnhau gan yr ystadegau. Hyd at 1999, o’r meddygon hynny a gyfeiriwyd at y sgrinwyr, arhosodd y ganran a gyfeiriwyd ymlaen ganddynt at y PPC yn gyson ar nid mwy na 15%. Cododd y gyfran a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC yn sydyn (i %25) ym 1999 ac eto yn y flwyddyn ganlynol, ond roedd hynny’n dilyn (ac efallai y gellir ei esbonio gan) ostyngiad sylweddol yn nifer yr achosion a gyfeiriwyd at y sgrinwyr meddygol, gyda llawer mwy o achosion yn cael eu cau gan staff y GMC. Roedd ffactorau eraill hefyd a fyddai wedi cael yr effaith o gynyddu cyfran yr achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC gan sgrinwyr ym 1999.
Dywedodd Mr Townsend hefyd, y bu ‘adolygiad o sail gyfreithiol sgrinio’ yng nghanol y 1990au, a ysgogwyd yn rhannol gan herio penderfyniad sgrinio’n ffurfiol drwy adolygiad barnwrol, ac yn rhannol gan ystyriaeth yn swyddfa’r GMC. Credaf ei bod yn debygol iawn mai’r adolygiad barnwrol y cyfeiriodd Mr Townsend ato oedd achos
. Byddaf yn trafod y penderfyniad yn yr achos hwnnw, a roddwyd ym mis Mawrth 1997, nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Adroddiad y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi 1996
Y Trefniadau Ymarferol
Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at waith ymchwil a wnaed gan y PSI. Gwnaeth y tîm PSI, dan arweinyddiaeth yr Athro Allen, ddadansoddiad o achosion y deliodd y GMC â nhw yn ystod y 12 mis o fis Medi 1993, yr adroddwyd amdanynt yn Adroddiad PSI 1996. Pan ysgrifennwyd yr Adroddiad hwnnw, roedd y gwaith sgrinio’n cael ei wneud gan dri sgriniwr meddygol, Dr Steel, Dr Bewley a Dr Wilson. Roedd y rhan fwyaf o’u gwaith sgrinio’n cael ei wneud yn eu cartrefi neu ar safle’r feddygfa, nid yn swyddfeydd y GMC. Byddent yn gwneud cyfle i’w gwaith sgrinio o gwmpas eu hymrwymiadau proffesiynol eraill. Canfu’r tîm PSI bod y prif sgriniwr, Dr Steel, wedi delio â 60% o gyfeiriadau at sgrinwyr yn ystod y cyfnod 12 mis y gwnaethant ddadansoddi data ar ei gyfer. Roedd ystadegau’r GMC yn dangos y bu 2294 o gyfeiriadau at sgrinwyr yn y cyfnod hwnnw (roedd y ffigur hwnnw’n cynnwys rhai achosion a gafodd eu cyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol fwy nag unwaith). Ar y sail honno, mae’n rhaid bod Dr Steel wedi delio ag oddeutu 1376 o gyfeiriadau. Byddai rhai achosion wedi bod yn syml iawn. Fodd bynnag, mewn eraill, fe allai fod cryn dipyn o fanylder. Roedd hyn yn amlwg yn cynrychioli llwyth gwaith sylweddol iawn, yn ychwanegol at waith Dr Steel fel meddyg teulu a’i ymrwymiadau fel aelod o’r GMC a Chadeirydd y PPC. Fe wnaeth y sgrinwyr eraill ddelio ag oddeutu 30% a 10% o gyfeiriadau yn y drefn honno. Fel arfer, dim ond un o’r sgrinwyr meddygol fyddai’n gweld bob achos. Weithiau, fodd bynnag, byddai sgriniwr meddygol yn gofyn am ail farn gan sgriniwr meddygol arall neu gan aelod arall o’r GMC â chymwysterau meddygol yr oedd ei arbenigedd/harbenigedd yn berthnasol i’r gŵyn. Fel y prif sgriniwr meddygol, byddai Dr Steel yn rhoi cyngor ac arweiniad i’r sgrinwyr meddygol eraill, yn gyffredinol ac mewn perthynas ag achosion penodol. Byddai’n gweithredu fel mentor hefyd i sgrinwyr meddygol newydd.
Byddai sgriniwr meddygol yn cael papurau’r achos, ynghyd â memorandwm wedi’i baratoi gan staff y GMC. Yn achos cwyn gan unigolyn preifat, fe allai’r papurau gynnwys llythyr unigol yn unig. Fe allai fod tystiolaeth ategol, neu ddim. Os oedd y gŵyn gan gorff cyhoeddus, fe allai gynnwys bwndel mawr o dystiolaeth a gasglwyd yn ystod ymchwiliad lleol, ynghyd ag adroddiad gwrandawiad MSC. Nododd y tîm PSI y byddai staff y GMC yn aml yn ysgrifennu memoranda hir, yn cynnwys llawer o sylwadau ac yn rhoi barnau clir iawn ynghylch y modd y dylid ymdrin â’r achos. Dywedaf ar draws hynny bod y gweithiwr achos wedi gwneud hynny yn achos 1994 yn ymwneud â Shipman. Byddai’r sgriniwr yn cofnodi ei benderfyniad/phenderfyniad ar dudalen frig papurau’r achos. Fe allai’r penderfyniad gynnwys gair unigol, yn nodi cytundeb â’r camau gweithredu a gynigiwyd yn y memorandwm. Ar brydiau, byddai’r sgriniwr yn ysgrifennu sylw hwy o bosibl, yn rhoi rhesymau am ei benderfyniad/phenderfyniad. Yn achos Shipman ym 1994, rhoddodd Dr Steel resymau byr, ond dealladwy. Nid oedd unrhyw rwymedigaeth ar sgriniwr meddygol i ddatgan ei resymau/rhesymau, ac mewn llawer o achosion, ni fyddent yn gwneud hynny. Nid oedd ffurflen safonol i’r sgriniwr ymateb.
Canlyniadau Sgrinio Posibl
Esboniodd Adroddiad PSI 1996, os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn gallu gwneud penderfyniad ar y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael, roedd ystod o ganlyniadau posibl. Yn gyntaf, fe allai’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu bod y gŵyn yn codi achos
o SPM a dylid ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Yn ail, fe allai benderfynu nad oedd y gŵyn yn codi achos
o SMP ond bod ymddygiad y meddyg serch hynny wedi disgyn islaw safonau derbyniol yn ôl pob golwg. Os felly, fe allai’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu y dylai llythyr o gyngor gael ei anfon at y meddyg yn unol â darpariaethau Pennod XV; rwyf eisoes wedi disgrifio’r weithdrefn ar gyfer hyn. Yn drydydd, fe allai’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu nad oed y gwyn yn codi achos
o SPM ac na ddylid gweithredu ymhellach mewn perthynas â hi; os felly, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr lleyg. Dim ond pan fyddai’r sgriniwr lleyg yn cadarnhau penderfyniad sgriniwr meddygol i beidio gweithredu ymhellach y byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau. Os oedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn anghytuno â’r sgriniwr meddygol, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gyfeirio ymlaen at y PPC.
Roedd y dadansoddiad a wnaethpwyd gan y tîm PSI ar ddiwedd haf 1995 yn dangos bod ychydig dros hanner yr achosion y deliodd sgrinwyr â nhw yn ystod y flwyddyn hyd at 31 Awst 1994 wedi arwain at un o’r tri chanlyniad a ddisgrifiais. Deliwyd mewn amrywiol ffyrdd eraill â gweddill yr achosion a gyfeiriwyd at y sgrinwyr meddygol. Roedd cyfran sylweddol o achosion lle’r oedd sgriniwr meddygol wedi cymeradwyo argymhelliad staff y GMC y dylai achwynydd gael ei gynghori/chynghori i gyfeirio’i gŵyn/chwyn at weithdrefnau cwynion GIG neu weithdrefnau cwynion lleol eraill. Pan wnaethpwyd yr ymchwil PSI, roedd cyfran go fawr o achosion hefyd lle’r oedd sgrinwyr meddygol yn teimlo na allent wneud penderfyniad. Mewn achosion felly, byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn gofyn i’r staff chwilio am wybodaeth bellach neu ofyn i’r papurau gael eu dangos i sgriniwr arall neu arbenigwr meddygol. Roedd penderfyniadau ynghylch a oedd gwybodaeth bellach yn angenrheidiol yn cael eu gadael, bryd hynny, i’r sgrinwyr meddygol, yn hytrach na chael eu cymryd gan y staff ar gyfnod cynnar. Roedd ceisiadau am wybodaeth bellach yn cael eu gwneud yn aml gan staff y GMC i achwynwyr, ac weithiau byddent yn mynd yn ddisylw. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 18, roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn pryderu bod achosion yn cael eu ‘colli’, yn enwedig pan oedd y cyfrifoldeb yn cael ei roi ar achwynwyr i fynd â’u hachosion yn ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol neu i ddarparu gwybodaeth bellach.
Os oedd hi’n ymddangos bod mater yn ymwneud ag iechyd y meddyg, fe allai’r sgriniwr meddygol anfon yr achos at sgriniwr iechyd, a fyddai’n cynghori a oedd yn addas neu beidio i ddelio â’r achos dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Os barnwyd ei bod yn addas, roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr meddygol i roi’r achos yn ei ôl i’r sgriniwr iechyd. Nid oedd yn ofynnol gael cytundeb sgriniwr lleyg ar gyfer y llwybr hwn.
Ar Ôl Sgrinio
Os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn barnu nad oedd achos yn gwarantu camau pellach, byddai’n aml yn cymeradwyo llythyr ymateb drafft i’r achwynydd, a fyddai wedi cael ei baratoi’n barod gan weithiwr achos. Os barnwyd bod yr achos yn addas i’w gyfeirio at y PPC, byddai’r gweithiwr achos yn ysgrifennu at yr achwynydd (os oedd yn unigolyn preifat), yn gofyn iddo/iddi ddarparu o leiaf un datganiad statudol i gefnogi’i dystiolaeth/thystiolaeth. Wedi derbyn y datganiad statudol, byddai llythyr yn cael ei ysgrifennu wedyn at y meddyg (yn unol â rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988), yn ei hysbysu bod y gŵyn wedi’i derbyn ac yn nodi manylion y cyhuddiadau a fyddai’n eu hwynebu gerbron y PPC. Pan ysgrifennwyd yr Adroddiad PSI ym 1996, dyna fyddai’r tro cyntaf y byddai’r meddyg wedi cael gwybod gan y GMC am y gŵyn, a’r tro cyntaf y byddid wedi gofyn iddo/iddi am ymateb i’r gŵyn. Pan oedd y penderfyniad sgrinio’n cael ei wneud, ni fyddai gan y sgriniwr unrhyw ymateb gan y meddyg o’i flaen/blaen fel arfer. Os oedd y cyfeiriad at y GMC, fodd bynnag, wedi’i ragflaenu gan ymchwiliad lleol, mae’n debygol y byddai ymateb y meddyg i’r honiadau yn ymddangos yn y papurau’n ymwneud â’r ymchwiliad hwnnw. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, byddai ar gael i’r sgrinwyr.
Canlyniadau Achosion yr Ymdriniodd Sgrinwyr Meddygol Gwahanol â Nhw
Archwiliodd y tîm PSI ganlyniadau achosion yr ymdriniodd sgrinwyr meddygol unigol â nhw. Y prif sgriniwr meddygol, Dr Steel, fu’r unig sgriniwr meddygol mewn 67% o’r achosion a aeth ymlaen at y PPC. Y ffigurau cymaradwy ar gyfer y ddau sgriniwr arall oedd 14% a 6%, yn y drefn honno. (Nid yw’r canrannau hyn yn gwneud cyfanswm o 100% gan i rai achosion gael eu gweld gan ddau - hyd yn oed y tri - sgriniwr meddygol.) Mewn gwirionedd, bu Dr Steel yn gysylltiedig ar ryw gam o’r broses sgrinio mewn 77% o’r achosion a aeth at y PPC. Roedd y sgrinwyr eraill yn amlwg yn ddibynnol i raddau helaeth ar ei gyngor. Daeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr i’r casgliad, o’r trafodaethau a gawsant gyda sgrinwyr a staff, bod achosion a oedd i weld yn fwy difrifol yn cael eu hanfon at Dr Steel, fel y prif sgriniwr meddygol. Oherwydd eu difrifoldeb, byddai’r achosion hynny’n fwy tebygol o gael eu cyfeirio at y PPC. Felly, nid oedd yn syndod bod Dr Steel wedi cyfeirio canran uwch o achosion at y PPC nag a fyddid wedi disgwyl pe bai’r achosion wedi’u dosbarthu ar hap rhwng sgrinwyr.
Rhesymau dros Wrthod Achos
Dywedais ym mharagraff 19.54 y dywedwyd mai un o ganlyniadau posibl y broses sgrinio oedd y byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu nad oedd y gŵyn yn codi achos
o SPM ac na ddylid cymryd unrhyw gamau pellach mewn perthynas â hi; os felly, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr lleyg. Dywedwyd wrth y tîm PSI gan aelodau o staff y GMC bod dwy sail ar wahân y gallai sgrinwyr wrthod cwyn fel un ‘nad oedd yn SPM’. Y gyntaf oedd lle barnwyd nad oedd y gŵyn yn ddigon difrifol neu un nad oedd yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad proffesiynol (h.y. ddim yn digwydd mewn cyd-destun proffesiynol). Yr ail oedd lle’r oedd honiad, os oedd yn cael ei ddatrys, yn gallu bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ond lle nad oedd tystiolaeth ategol ddigonol, ym marn y sgrinwyr, i alluogi i’r honiad gael ei brofi. Nododd y tîm PSI, wrth nodi’u penderfyniadau ar achosion, mai anaml y byddai sgrinwyr yn gwneud sylw ar ddifrifoldeb y gŵyn neu ansawdd y dystiolaeth.
Mae Adroddiadau Blynyddol y PPC yn dangos bod sgrinwyr, ym 1997, wedi gwrthod 54% o’r 1919 o achosion a gyfeiriwyd atynt ar y sail
‘Nad oeddent yn SPM/SDP’
, ac 18% ar sail
‘Tystiolaeth annigonol o SPM/SDP’
. O’r 1203 o achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o driniaeth wael, gwrthodwyd 57% ar y sail
‘Nad oeddent yn SPM/SDP’
ac 20% ar sail
‘Tystiolaeth annigonol o SPM/SDP’
. O’r 142 o benderfyniadau a wnaed gan sgrinwyr mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o anonestrwydd a throseddoldeb, gwrthodwyd 23% ar y sail
‘Nad oeddent yn SPM/SDP’
ac 11% ar sail
‘Tystiolaeth annigonol o SPM/SDP’
. Mae ystadegau 1998 yn dangos bod y sgrinwyr wedi gwrthod 28% o’r achosion a gyfeiriwyd atynt ar sail tystiolaeth annigonol o SPM/SDP.
Y Meini Prawf a Ddefnyddiwyd gan Sgrinwyr
Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr nad oedd unrhyw ganllawiau na meini prawf ysgrifenedig ar gyfer asesu difrifoldeb neu bwysigrwydd cwyn, neu ar gyfer asesu digonolrwydd neu bwysau’r dystiolaeth i’w chefnogi. Mewn ymgais i sefydlu’r modd yr oedd y sgrinwyr yn gwneud eu penderfyniadau, fe wnaethant drafod gyda staff y GMC a sgrinwyr pa feini prawf yr oedd y sgrinwyr yn eu defnyddio er mwyn pennu a oedd cwyn a godwyd yn achos
o SPM. Datgelodd y trafodaethau yr ystyriwyd yn gyffredinol bod
‘trothwy uchel’
i SPM, er bod rhai pobl yn ystyried y trothwy yn uwch nag a oedd eraill. Adroddodd y tîm PSI bod
‘consensws’
bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud drwy:
‘(a) ... ystyried natur yr honiad ac asesu ei ddifrifoldeb neu bwysigrwydd, (b) pwyso maint, math a natur y dystiolaeth, gyda sylw penodol i ba un a oes tystion neu gadarnhad arall, (c) gan edrych ar hanes perthnasol presennol y meddyg dan sylw a (d) ystyried o hyd bod addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer dan ystyriaeth ac mai’r sancsiwn eithaf yw dileu cofrestriad y meddyg’.
Ffactorau eraill a ystyriwyd gan rai (ond nid y cyfan) o’r rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig oedd:
‘(e) pwysigrwydd asesu’r graddau yr oedd risg i gleifion neu i’r cyhoedd, ac ‘(f) pa un a oedd y weithred neu’r gweithredoedd wedi’u cyflawni’n fwriadol neu gyda bwriad yn hytrach na thrwy ddamwain neu ddiffyg’.
Byddai’n ymddangos o hyn nad oedd rhai o aelodau staff na’r sgrinwyr yn ystyried dyletswydd bennaf y GMC o ddiogelu cleifion.
Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ei bod yn amlwg o’r meini prawf a nodwyd gan aelodau staff a sgrinwyr y credwyd yn gyffredinol bod pwysau ac ansawdd y dystiolaeth yn ffactor pwysig wrth bennu a oedd cwyn a godwyd yn achos
o SPM. Nodwyd ganddynt hefyd bod rhai o’r bobl y buont yn siarad â nhw wedi rhoi mwy o bwysau nag eraill i’r cwestiwn a fyddai’r honiad
‘yn dal dŵr mewn llys barn a gellid ei brofi y tu hwnt i unrhyw amheuaeth resymol’
. Credent y gallai’r pwyslais hwn ar bwysau ac ansawdd y dystiolaeth fod wedi cyfrif, yn rhannol o leiaf, am sgrinwyr yn gwrthod cyfran uchel o gwynion gan unigolion preifat. Mewn achosion gan unigolion felly, roedd y dystiolaeth yn debygol o fod yn brin, ac yn llai trefnus a llai cymen o ran cyflwyniad na thystiolaeth yn cael ei chyflwyno gan gyrff cyhoeddus. Efallai na fyddai unrhyw ddatganiadau tyst nag unrhyw gadarnhad arall.
Argymhellodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr datblygu canllawiau ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn gyffredinol ac mewn mathau arbennig o achos. Fe wnaethant argymell y dylai
‘hierarchaeth o ddifrifoldeb’
gael ei datblygu ar gyfer pob categori ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Awgrymwyd ganddynt hefyd y dylai’r GMC ddatblygu a gweithredu dull o ddangos y modd yr oedd y broses sgrinio a phrosesau eraill gwneud penderfyniadau wedi’u cynnal mewn achos penodol. Amcan yr argymhellion a’r awgrymiadau hyn oedd, yn gyntaf, hyrwyddo cysondeb wrth ymdrin â phob cwyn ym mhob cyfnod o’r broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Roedd y tîm PSI hefyd yn awyddus y dylai’r GMC fod mewn sefyllfa i ddangos, pe gelwid arno i wneud hynny, sut yn union - a thrwy gyfeirio at ba feini prawf - y daethpwyd at benderfyniad penodol. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd y tîm PSI eisiau i broses gwneud penderfyniadau‘r GMC fod yn fwy ‘tryloyw’. Dim ond felly y byddai’r GMC yn gallu amddiffyn ei hun yn effeithiol yn erbyn unrhyw honiadau o ragfarn, boed yn rhagfarn hiliol neu fel arall. Nododd yr Adroddiad PSI, fodd bynnag,
‘nad oedd brwdfrydedd’
ymhlith y rheiny a gafodd eu cyfweld i ddatblygu canllawiau neu feini prawf ysgrifenedig felly neu i gymhwyso technegau proses strwythuredig o wneud penderfyniadau.
Newidiadau i’r Trefniadau ar gyfer Sgrinio yn dilyn Adroddiad 1996
Argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 1996 nifer o newidiadau i’r trefniadau ar gyfer penodi a hyfforddi sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg. Yn benodol, argymhellodd cynyddu nifer ac amrywiaeth cefndir y sgrinwyr meddygol. Awgrymodd penodi fel sgrinwyr rhai meddygon a oedd wedi neilltuo amser a oedd ar gael i gyflawni’r dasg sgrinio, h.y. na fyddai’n rhaid iddynt wneud cyfle ar gyfer sgrinio o gwmpas ymrwymiadau proffesiynol eraill. Argymhellodd hefyd cyflwyno hyfforddiant a chyrsiau gloywi ar gyfer yr holl sgrinwyr, ynghyd ag adborth iddynt o wybodaeth am ganlyniad eu sgrinio.
Ym mis Tachwedd 1996, penodwyd dau sgriniwr meddygol newydd, Dr (Athro yn ddiweddarach) Hilary Thomas a Dr Pearl Hettiaratchy. Penodwyd sgriniwr lleyg arall, Mrs Rani Atma, ym mis Chwefror 1997. Roedd y cynnydd hwn mewn niferoedd mewn ymateb yn rhannol i’r argymhellion yn Adroddiad PSI 1996 ac yn rhannol oherwydd cynnydd disgwyliedig ym maich gwaith y sgrinwyr. Roedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad i’w cyflwyno ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, a chydnabuwyd y byddai hyn yn rhoi gofynion pellach ar y sgrinwyr, a’r sgrinwyr meddygol yn benodol.
Achos
Y Gŵyn
Ym mis Mawrth 1997, cynhaliwyd yr adolygiad barnwrol cyntaf yn achos
. Cododd yr achos o farwolaeth plentyn ifanc a oedd yn dioddef o
. Ym mis Medi 1993, pan oedd y plentyn oddeutu 12 mis oed, aeth yn sâl, ac aeth ei rieni ag ef i’r ysbyty. Credwyd bod haint troethol ganddo. Roedd wedi bod yn chwydu ac wedi dadhydradu. Fe’i cadwyd i mewn dros nos a gadawyd iddo fynd adref yn hwyr drannoeth. Y diwrnod canlynol, dirywiodd ei gyflwr a galwodd ei rieni eu meddyg teulu. Cyrhaeddodd oddeutu 3pm, archwilio’r plentyn, nodi bod brest y plentyn
‘ychydig yn swnllyd’
, cynghori y dylai gymryd Calpol a hylifau, ac addawodd ymweld y diwrnod wedyn. Yn fuan wedi i’r meddyg teulu adael, dirywiodd cyflwr y plentyn ymhellach. Aethpwyd â’r plentyn i’r ysbyty, ond bu farw oddeutu 4pm. Bronco-niwmonia oedd achos y farwolaeth.
Gyda hynny, gwnaeth y rhieni gŵyn i’r GMC ynghylch y meddyg teulu. Yn y lle cyntaf, cawsant eu cynghori i ganlyn eu cwyn yn lleol, ond roedd yr amser ar gyfer gwneud hynny wedi mynd heibio. Yna ysgrifennodd y GMC yn gofyn a oedd y rhieni yn wirioneddol yn dymuno canlyn eu cwyn. Roeddent yn dymuno gwneud hynny; roedd eu harbenigwr meddygol o’r farn bod methiant y meddyg teulu i sylweddoli bod y plentyn yn ddifrifol sâl am 3pm yn gyfystyr â
‘chamymddygiad proffesiynol enbyd’
. Cyfeiriwyd yr achos at Dr Steel, a sgriniodd yr achos allan. Roedd y llythyr a oedd yn esbonio’i benderfyniad, a ysgrifennwyd ym mis Tachwedd 1995, yn dweud, cyn y gellid cyfiawnhau camau disgyblu, roedd rhaid cael tystiolaeth eglur (i’r safon a oedd yn ofynnol gan lys troseddau) bod y meddyg wedi methu rhoi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i asesu cyflwr y plentyn, neu dystiolaeth fod y meddyg wedi esgeuluso’i gyfrifoldebau i’r plentyn mewn rhyw ffordd. Gan yr ymddengys fod y meddyg wedi archwilio’r plentyn ac wedi arfer ei farn glinigol, lluniodd y sgriniwr y farn nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o SPM. Ar 3 Ionawr 1996, (a oedd, nodaf, ychydig ar ôl penderfyniad y Cyfrin Gyngor in
, y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 17), atebodd cyfreithwyr y rhieni gan ddweud bod ymagwedd y sgriniwr yn anghywir. Eu pwynt hwy oedd y gallai esgeuluster, os oedd yn ddigon difrifol, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roedd y meddyg wedi archwilio’r plentyn ond wedi methu sylweddoli bod y plentyn yn marw, er ei bod yn rhaid bod yr arwyddion yn amlwg. Fis yn ddiweddarach, atebodd y GMC, gan ddweud bod yr achos wedi cael ei ailystyried, ond bod hyn wedi arwain at yr un canlyniad ag o’r blaen. Nid oedd camgymeriadau diagnosis, yn cael eu gwneud yn ddidwyll, yn codi cwestiwn SPM ynddynt eu hunain. Ni allai’r ffaith bod y plentyn wedi marw o fewn cyfnod
‘penodol’
yn dilyn archwiliad, gael ei ystyried, ynddo’i hun, fel tystiolaeth o SPM. Roedd Meistr Ustus Collins, a glywodd y cais am adolygiad barnwrol, yn feirniadol o’r ateb hwnnw oherwydd, fel y nododd, ei fod yn awgrymu na allai esgeuluster
, yn absenoldeb annidwylledd, godi cwestiwn o SPM. Roedd hynny’n anghywir a gallai ddeall pam yr oedd y rhieni wedi gofyn am adolygiad barnwrol.
Yr Adolygiad Barnwrol
Yn ystod yr achos am adolygiad barnwrol, cyflwynwyd memorandwm y gweithiwr achos; ynddo, roedd y gweithiwr achos wedi mynegi’r farn, gan ei bod yn glir bod y meddyg wedi archwilio’r plentyn, ni ellid dweud ei fod wedi methu rhoi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i asesu’r plentyn neu ei fod wedi esgeuluso’i gyfrifoldebau iddo’n fwriadol. Nodwyd yn y ffeil gan Mr Townsend, a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad bryd hynny, oni ddylai’r meddyg
‘y tu hwnt i unrhyw amheuaeth’
fod wedi gwneud cyfeiriad i’r ysbyty ar unwaith, nid oedd cwestiwn o SPM yn codi. (Dywedaf ar draws hynny ei bod yn ymddangos o hyn bod Mr Townsend o’r farn mai bwriad y broses sgrinio oedd gwneud gwaith hidlo manwl iawn ac mai achosion amlwg o SPM yn unig y dylid eu cyfeirio at y PPC). Roedd nodyn penderfyniad sgrinio Dr Steel yn dweud ei fod yn cytuno â Mr Townsend. Barn glinigol unigol wedi methu oedd hon. Aeth ymlaen:
‘Gellir gweld o edrych yn ôl bod y babi yn wael iawn, ond nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth bod y meddyg wedi esgeuluso’i gyfrifoldebau.’
Mewn affidafid a dyngwyd ar gyfer achos yr adolygiad barnwrol, nododd Dr Steel yr holl feini prawf a fyddai’n eu hystyried fel arfer wrth benderfynu achosion yn y cam sgrinio. Fe wnaeth gymhwyso’r meini prawf hynny i ffeithiau’r achos wedyn, a dywedodd ei fod wedi llunio’r farn bod y meddyg wedi gwneud camgymeriad wrth lunio barn glinigol, a allai arwain at hawliad mewn esgeuluster. Fodd bynnag, er ei fod yn
‘ymwybodol iawn’
y gallai esgeuluster fod mor ddifrifol ei fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, barnodd nad achos felly oedd hwn. Derbyniodd y Barnwr bod Dr Steel wedi mynd i’r afael â’r mater yn y modd a ddisgrifiodd yn ei affidafid, er gwaetha’r ffaith nad felly y cynrychiolwyd ei farnau mewn gohebiaeth. Penderfynodd nad oedd yr ymagwedd yn datgelu camgymeriad cyfreithiol a gwrthododd y cais am adolygiad barnwrol.
Mae’n werth nodi na chafodd rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, a oedd yn rheoli penderfyniad y sgriniwr, ei dadansoddi yn y dyfarniad. Nid ymddengys bod achos yr ymgeisydd wedi’i seilio ar fethiant y GMC i gymhwyso’r prawf statudol cywir. Yn hytrach, y ddadl oedd bod y sgriniwr wedi cyfeirio’i hun yn anghywir na allai esgeuluster, waeth pa mor ddifrifol ydyw, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Wedi i’r Barnwr gael ei berswadio nad oedd y sgriniwr wedi meddwl hynny a’i fod wedi rhoi ei feddwl ar ddifrifoldeb yr esgeuluster, roedd yr achos ar ben. Nid oedd tan achos
y daeth ystyr rheol 6 dan archwiliad mewn adolygiad barnwrol.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, cyhoeddodd y GMC Lawlyfr i Sgrinwyr (Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997) am y tro cyntaf. Yn ôl Adroddiad Blynyddol y PPC, a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor ym mis Mai 1997, bwriad y Llawlyfr oedd
‘pennu meini prawf clir, cyhoeddedig ar gyfer y prif benderfyniadau sgrinio’
. Yn ôl pob tebyg, roedd i fod i fodloni argymhellion y PSI. Amserwyd ei gynhyrchu i gyd-daro â chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad newydd. Roedd y Rhagair, a ysgrifennwyd gan Dr Steel, yn nodi mai diben Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 oedd cynorthwyo’r GMC yn ei waith ac i esbonio i’r rheiny y tu allan i’r GMC yr egwyddorion a oedd yn cael eu cymhwyso gan sgrinwyr wrth wneud penderfyniadau. Dywedodd Mr Townsend, a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad pan gyhoeddwyd y Llawlyfr, bod y ffaith fod Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn ddogfen gyhoeddus yn ‘newid amlwg’, yn rhan o symudiad gan Lywydd y GMC ar y pryd, Syr Donald Irvine, i ‘agor’ prosesau gwneud penderfyniadau’r GMC. Ymddengys i mi, ar ôl darllen y dyfarniad yn achos
, lle mae rhannau o affidafid Dr Steel yn cael eu dyfynnu, bod cynnwys y Llawlyfr i ryw raddau wedi’i lywio gan yr achos hwnnw.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn esbonio’r fframwaith yr oedd y sgrinwyr yn gweithio oddi fewn iddo. Roedd yn pwysleisio:
Nododd Mr Townsend bod y Llawlyfr yn adlewyrchu’r newid yn yr ymagwedd tuag at sgrinio y soniais amdano’n barod. Dywedodd:
‘... yn flaenorol, yn seicolegol o leiaf rwy’n credu, y cwestiwn oedd ’”A yw’r gŵyn yn goresgyn y rhwystr cyntaf i’w galluogi i fynd ymlaen at y PPC?” Disodlwyd hynny gan y farn, y credaf sy’n cael ei hadlewyrchu’n eithaf clir yn argraffiad cyntaf Llawlyfr y Sgrinwyr, bod rhaid bod rhesymau argyhoeddiadol, a bod esboniad amdanynt, pam nad oedd achos i fynd ymlaen; mewn geiriau eraill, bod y sgrinio yn hidlwr bras i gael gwared ar achosion a oedd yn gwbl amhosibl o’r cychwyn cyntaf, yn hytrach na hidlwr mwy soffistigedig.’
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn rhoi arweiniad ar y drefn ar gyfer ystyried materion iechyd, ymddygiad a pherfformiad gan sgrinwyr, ac ar y camau amrywiol a oedd yn agored i sgrinwyr i gael gwybodaeth bellach neu gyngor neu farn arbenigol cyn gwneud penderfyniad. Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn cynghori:
Mae’r cyfeiriad at
‘Reolau’r GMC’
yn ôl pob tebyg yn gyfeiriad at reol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 ac i’r ffaith y dylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC oni bai ei bod yn ymddangos i’r sgriniwr meddygol
‘nad oedd angen iddo fynd ymhellach’
. Nid yw rheol 6 yn cael ei dyfynnu yn y Llawlyfr.
Roedd sgrinwyr yn cael eu cynghori, er mwyn dal yn gyfuwch â’r hyn a ystyriai’r PPC oedd yn SPM, y dylent ddarllen cofnodion y PCC wrth iddynt gael eu cyhoeddi. Fe’u cynghorwyd hefyd y dylent fod yn ymwybodol o unrhyw benderfyniadau gan y Cyfrin Gyngor yn ymwneud ag ystyr SPM. (Nid oedd llawer o amser wedi mynd heibio ers y penderfyniad pwysig yn
). Cawsant eu cynghori ymhellach i asesu’r wybodaeth yn cael ei darparu yn y gŵyn yn erbyn y meini prawf canlynol:
Difrifoldeb gweithred neu ddiffyg y meddyg.
Pa un a oes mwy nag un digwyddiad neu ddioddefwr honedig.
Graddfa’r risg i gleifion neu’r cyhoedd.
Pa un a yw’r meddyg i weld ei fod/bod wedi gweithredu’n fwriadol, yn ddi-hid, trwy ddamwain, neu’n annidwyll.
Pa un a allai’r meddyg fod wedi esgeuluso neu diystyried ei gyfrifoldebau/chyfrifoldebau proffesiynol.
Pa un a fu unrhyw gwynion blaenorol i’r GMC ynghylch y meddyg, sydd, o’u cymryd gyda’r gŵyn bresennol, yn awgrymu ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag spm’.
Y rhain oedd y rhan fwyaf o’r meini prawf a ymddangosodd yn affidafid Dr Steel yn achos
ac a gafodd eu cymeradwyo, i bob pwrpas, gan y Barnwr (er mai heb iddo ystyried y ddarpariaeth statudol oedd hynny). Roedd Dr Steel wedi cynnwys hefyd
‘manylder a natur y dystiolaeth a’r amser ers i’r digwyddiadau perthnasol ddigwydd’
. Ni chafodd y rheiny eu cynnwys fel meini prawf yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997. Nid oedd y Llawlyfr yn cynnwys unrhyw arweiniad ynghylch pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd rhaid i weithred esgeulus neu ddiffyg fod cyn y gallai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad ychwaith ynghylch y pwysau perthnasol i’w roi i’r meini prawf amrywiol a restrir uchod.
Nodwyd na ddylai bodolaeth cwynion blaenorol, na ellid eu cadarnhau, gael eu hystyried. Dim ond os oeddent yn dangos bod yr achwynydd yn faleisus neu wedi’i drwblu, neu os oeddent yn dangos y gallai’r meddyg fod yn destun rhyw ffurf arall o fendeta, y gallai cwynion blaenorol gael eu hystyried. Gellid eu hystyried hefyd os oeddent eisoes wedi bod yn destun camau disgyblu ffurfiol gan y GMC. Felly, byddai cwyn heb ei chadarnhau am ymosod yn anweddus yn cael ei hepgor o gael ei hystyried os oedd ail gŵyn o natur debyg yn cael ei derbyn. Nid ymddengys bod unrhyw adnabyddiaeth o’r posibilrwydd y gallai adroddiad heb ei brofi fod yn wir, neu unrhyw sylweddoli y dylai derbyn mwy nag un cwyn o natur debyg, hyd yn oed os na chawsant eu profi, beri pryder.
Cynghorwyd sgrinwyr, os oedd cwestiwn o SPM yn codi, os oedd yr achos yn cydymffurfio â’r gofynion gweithdrefnol angenrheidiol (byddai’r achwynydd yn darparu datganiad statudol yn un gofyniad felly) ac os nad tystiolaeth bellach i ategu yn ofynnol yn y cam sgrinio, dylid cyfeirio’r achos at y PPC cyn gynted â phosibl. Roedd dau amgylchiad pan na ddylid gwneud hynny. Y cyntaf o’r rhain oedd lle dylai cyfeiriad at y PPC, am ryw reswm da, gael ei ohirio, ac y gellid gwneud hyn heb niwed i fudd y cyhoedd. Byddai gohiriad yn briodol, er enghraifft, lle’r oedd achos i’w gyfeirio’n ôl at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol neu i’w hymchwilio gan yr heddlu neu ryw sefydliad arall. Yr ail amgylchiad oedd bod rhyw reswm cwbl eithriadol yn bodoli pam nad oedd angen i’r PPC ystyried y gŵyn. Gallai hyn godi lle’r oedd y meddyg yn dioddef o salwch terfynol neu lle’r oedd risg y byddai dod ag achos disgyblu yn gyfystyr â chamddefnyddio proses.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn delio hefyd â’r sefyllfa lle’r oedd sgriniwr yn canfod fod achos yn codi cwestiwn o SPM, ond bod tystiolaeth annigonol i ategu’r honiad. Yn y cyswllt hwn, roedd sgrinwyr yn cael eu cynghori:
The Rules simply require that it must appear to the screener that there is a “question whether the practitioner has committed spm”.
The screener should not, at the screening stage, attempt to resolve conflicts of evidence between the doctor and the complainant.
The PPC has the power to adjourn a case for further evidence, and evidence may also be obtained following referral of a case by the PPC to the PCC.
If in doubt, and if further inquiries or consultation with other screeners cannot resolve the doubt, the case should be referred to the PPC.’
Ymddengys bod Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 wedi cydnabod bod cynhwysiad Dr Steel (yn ei affidafid yn
) o fanylion a natur y dystiolaeth fel un o’i feini prawf wedi bod yn anghywir. Cynghorwyd sgrinwyr nad oedd angen dwyn cwynion a oedd yn ymwneud â honiadau a oedd yn amlwg yn afresymol, neu’n amlwg eu bod yn anwir, yn eu blaenau, hyd yn oed pe bai cwestiwn o SPM yn codi os oedd yr honiadau yn wir. Fodd bynnag, cafodd sgrinwyr eu hatgoffa hefyd na ddylent, mewn unrhyw amgylchiadau eraill, geisio penderfynu a oedd unrhyw rai, neu’r cyfan, o’r ffeithiau a oedd yn destun cwyn, yn wir. Cawsant eu rhybuddio os oedd
‘unrhyw amheuaeth o gwbl’
ynghylch rhesymoledd honiad, dylai’r achos gael ei ystyried fel un a oedd i weld yn gofyn am weithredu gan y GMC, ond lle’r oedd tystiolaeth annigonol i fynd ymlaen i’r cam hwnnw. Dylid gofyn am dystiolaeth bellach wedyn nes ei bod yn dod yn glir a oedd unrhyw fater dilys neu beidio am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r GMC ei ystyried.
Nododd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997, lle’r oedd cais am wybodaeth bellach gan achwynydd ac na chydymffurfiwyd â’r cais, dylai fod ymdrech i berswadio’r achwynydd i ddarparu’r wybodaeth angenrheidiol, gan gofio y gallai gweithredu gan y GMC fod yn angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion eraill neu’r cyhoedd ac mai’r achwynydd o bosibl yw’r unig un yr effeithir arno/arni. Roedd y cyngor hwn yn adlewyrchu pryderon y tîm PSI bod cwynion yn cael eu ‘colli’ oherwydd methiant ar ran achwynwyr i ymateb i geisiadau gan y GMC i ddarparu gwybodaeth bellach.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn arwyddo newid gweithdrefn yn ogystal mewn perthynas â hysbysu meddygon am gwynion yn cael eu gwneud yn eu herbyn. Hyd at 1997, nid oedd meddygon yn gyffredinol yn cael eu hysbysu am gwynion oni bai a hyd nes bod penderfyniad wedi’i wneud i gyfeirio achos at y PPC ac (yn achos cwyn gan unigolyn preifat) oni bai a hyd nes bod datganiad statudol wedi’i gael gan yr achwynydd. Yn y cam hwnnw, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i gyflwyno unrhyw esboniad yr oedd ganddo/ganddi i’w gynnig. (Roedd y sefyllfa mewn perthynas ag euogfarnau yn wahanol: gweler paragraff 19.20). Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn cynghori bod sgrinwyr i benderfynu, ar gyfnod cynnar, a ddylai copi o gŵyn gael ei anfon at y meddyg. Yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, byddai hynny’n cael ei wneud cyn bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud ynghylch a ddylid cyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Effaith hyn oedd, o 1997, y byddai sgrinwyr yn aml yn cael ymateb y meddyg i gŵyn ar gael iddynt wrth ystyried cwyn. Bryd hynny, nid oedd unrhyw gyfle i’r achwynydd weld a chynnig sylw ar ymateb y meddyg. Ni fyddai copi o gŵyn yn cael ei anfon at y meddyg cyn sgrinio os oedd yn amlwg o’r cychwyn y dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Os felly, byddai’r meddyg y cael ei hysbysu am y gŵyn, a byddid yn gofyn am ei ymateb/hymateb ar yr un pryd ag y byddai’n cael ei hysbysu bod yr achos wedi’i gyfeirio at y PPC.
Roedd cynnwys Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn dweud yn glir bod y GMC wedi cydnabod nad oedd y broses sgrinio, yn y gorffennol, wedi’i chynnal yn unol â’r Rheolau. Roedd yr hidlwr a gymhwyswyd wedi bod yn llawer rhy fân; roedd llawer gormod o achosion wedi’u ‘sgrinio allan’. Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 yn ymgais go iawn i newid y diwylliant hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys bod rhai agweddau ar y cyngor a gynlluniwyd i newid y diwylliant naill ai wedi cael eu hanwybyddu neu aethant allan o arfer yn gyflym. At hynny, nid oedd unrhyw ymgais i ddiweddaru’r cyngor ac atgoffa sgrinwyr o’r egwyddorion y dylent weithredu arnynt. Er gwaetha’r newidiadau pwysig a ddigwyddodd yn ystod y blynyddoedd canlynol, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na luniwyd unrhyw fersiwn bellach o Lawlyfr y Sgrinwyr hyd at mor hwyr â mis Tachwedd 2002.
18 Mawrth 1997 (heb fod yn destun adroddiad)
18 Mawrth 1997 (heb fod yn destun adroddiad).
[1996] 1 WLR 167

---  ---
Penodwyd sgrinwyr meddygol ychwanegol, gan wneud cyfanswm o saith yn gweithio yn ystod y rhan fwyaf o 1998 a 1999.
Er gwaetha’r cyngor a roddwyd yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997, mae’n glir bod rhai sgrinwyr o leiaf heb gymhwyso’r profion a nododd. Ym mis Mawrth 1998, ystyriodd sgriniwr meddygol gŵyn gan dad Wilfred Toth, bachgen pum mlwydd oed a oedd yn dioddef o afiechyd storio glycogen. Roedd Wilfred wedi mynd yn hypoglycaemig ac roedd ei dad, Mr Arpad Toth, wedi ffonio meddyg teulu’r teulu, Dr Jarman, a ymwelodd â’r cartref. Honnodd Mr Toth ei fod ef a’i bartner wedi dweud wrth Dr Jarman am gyflwr Wilfred ac am eu barn fod angen chwistrelliad mewnwythiennol brys o glwcos arno. Methodd Dr Jarman â rhoi glwcos, ond yn lle hynny triniodd Wilfred trwy roi cyffuriau tawelu iddo. Gwadodd Dr Jarman yn ddiweddarach iddo gael gwybod am gyflwr Wilfred na’i angen am glwcos yn fewnwythiennol. Honnodd Mr Toth bod ei gyflwr didriniaeth wedi arwain at farwolaeth Wilfred wythnos yn ddiweddarach. Roedd Mr Toth wedi cwyno yn y lle cyntaf i’r Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSA) lleol. Roedd gwrandawiad MSC wedi dilyn, lle canfu’r MSC bod Dr Jarman wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth wrth fethu ystyried gwybodaeth Mr Toth am gyflwr Wilfred. Ni phennwyd unrhyw sancsiwn. Beth amser yn ddiweddarach, setlwyd hawliad am iawndal mewn perthynas â marwolaeth Wilfred pan dalodd Dr Jarman y swm o £10,500, swm sy’n ymhlygu cyfaddef atebolrwydd llawn. Cwynodd Mr Toth i’r GMC am ymddygiad Dr Jarman.
Y Penderfyniad Sgrinio
Ar ôl ystyried y papurau, penderfynodd y sgriniwr meddygol i beidio â chyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Cadarnhawyd y penderfyniad hwnnw gan sgriniwr lleyg. Ysgrifennwyd llythyr at Mr Toth (ar 23 Mawrth 1998, h.y. o fewn blwyddyn i lunio Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997) yn esbonio’r penderfyniad:
(matter of disclosure of the need for intravenous glucose)
. The standard of proof which the GMC works to, by law, is that of beyond reasonable doubt... Therefore, unless you are able to provide further evidence of a legal standard ... the members have concluded that there is no prospect of your allegations being proved to the required standard, and no further action can be taken.’
Dywedaf ar draws hynny ei bod yn ymddangos bod naill ai’r sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg neu’r gweithiwr achos a ddrafftiodd y llythyr, neu’r tri ohonynt o bosibl, wedi bod yn anymwybodol o gynnwys Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 i’r graddau yr oedd yn ymwneud â’r ymagwedd y dylai sgrinwyr ei chymryd lle’r oedd gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth yn digwydd. Os oeddent yn ymwybodol ohono, ni wnaethant sylwi ar ei gynnwys. Gwnaeth Mr Toth sylwadau pellach, ond, bedwar mis yn ddiweddarach, gwnaeth yr un sgriniwr meddygol ail benderfyniad yn cadarnhau’r penderfyniad cyntaf. Bryd hynny, nid ymgynghorwyd â’r sgriniwr lleyg.
Ceisiodd Mr Toth gael caniatâd i wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol mewn perthynas â’r ddau benderfyniad. Cafodd y GMC gyngor cyfreithiol ar y cais. Derbyniwyd y cyngor ym mis Awst 1998 ac roedd i’r perwyl nad oedd y sgrinwyr wedi dilyn y weithdrefn gywir wrth wneud y penderfyniad cyntaf. Nid rôl y sgrinwyr oedd datrys gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth. At hynny, nid oedd gan y sgriniwr meddygol unrhyw awdurdodaeth i ailystyried y gŵyn wedi i’r penderfyniad cyntaf gael ei wneud. Nid oedd yr ail benderfyniad yn ddilys ychwaith, fel y canfu’r Barnwr wedyn, gan nad oedd unrhyw sgriniwr lleyg wedi cydsynio ynddo. Wedi derbyn y cyngor hwnnw, cydsyniodd y GMC i orchymyn yn dileu’r penderfyniadau ac yn cyfarwyddo ailystyried yr achos gan sgriniwr meddygol gwahanol. Aeth yr achos gerbron yr Uchel Lys oherwydd bod Dr Jarman wedi gwrthwynebu ailagor ei achos ar y sail y byddai’n annheg iddo. Dyfarnwyd yn yr achos ym mis Mehefin 2000.
Fe wnaeth y Barnwr, Meistr Ustus Lightman, ystyried ystyr y geiriau a ddefnyddiwyd yn rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddisgrifio dyletswydd y sgriniwr. Y ddyletswydd honno, fel y dywedais, oedd penderfynu ynghylch
‘a ddylai’r mater fynd ymhellach ai peidio’
. Cyferbynnodd y ddyletswydd honno â swyddogaeth y PPC, a oedd, yn ôl adran 42(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983, i benderfynu a ddylai’r achos
‘gael ei gyfeirio i ymchwilio iddo gan y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol neu’r Pwyllgor Iechyd’
. Dywedodd mai rôl y sgriniwr oedd:
‘... penderfynu a oes sefyllfa negyddol yn bodoli, sef nad oes angen i’r gŵyn fynd ymhellach (fel y byddai’n arferol) at y PPC: yr unig gasgliad ar rinweddau’r gŵyn sy’n ofynnol ganddo cyn ei fod yn gadael i’r achwynydd fynd ymlaen (gan fod gofyniad ar y sgriniwr i hysbysu’r ymarferydd) yw bod y materion a ddatgenir “i weld yn codi cwestiwn a yw’r ymarferydd wedi cyflawni camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol”’.
Dehonglodd y Barnwr yr ‘angen’ y cyfeiriwyd ato yn rheol 6(3) fel “yr angen i anrhydeddu’r disgwyliad dilys y bydd cwynion (yn absenoldeb rhyw reswm arbennig a digonol) yn mynd ymlaen drwy’r PPC at y PCC’. Aeth ymlaen i ddweud:
‘Mae absenoldeb “angen”, y mae’n rhaid i’r sgriniwr fod yn fodlon ohono cyn y gall atal llwybr arferol y gŵyn i’r PCC, yn arwyddocáu absenoldeb unrhyw reswm ymarferol i’r gŵyn fynd ymlaen felly, ac na fyddai’r gŵyn yn mynd ymlaen at y PCC yn ateb unrhyw ddiben defnyddiol. Efallai nad oes angen oherwydd nad oes unrhyw beth yn gyfreithiol sy’n gyfystyr â chwyn; oherwydd bod diffyg dilysu ffurfiol
(h.y. y datganiad statudol)
; oherwydd na all y materion sy’n destun cwyn (hyd yn oed o’u profi) fod yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol; oherwydd bod yr achwynydd yn tynnu’r gŵyn yn ei hôl; neu oherwydd bod yr ymarferydd eisoes wedi peidio â bod ar y gofrestr. Nid yw cwestiynau ehangach ynghylch rhagolygon y gŵyn i lwyddo ynghylch a yw’r achwynydd yn gweithredu’n ormesol, neu ynghylch cyfiawnhad yr ymchwiliad yn mynd ymlaen ymhellach, o fewn cylch gorchwyl y sgriniwr. Cyn belled ag y gallant fynd mewn perthynas â pha un a ddylai’r gŵyn fynd ymlaen, maent yn disgyn o fewn cylch gorchwyl y PPC. Nid gwaith y sgriniwr yw cam-briodoli rôl y PPC iddo’i hun a phenderfynu a ddylai’r gŵyn fynd ymhellach, ac yn llai fyth cam-briodoli rôl y PCC iddo’i hun a phwyso a mesur tystiolaeth anghyson neu farnu’r rhagolygon i lwyddo. Mae’n rhaid iddo barchu’r rôl a briodolwyd gan y Rheolau i’r PPC (ac y mae gan y PPC y pwerau ymchwilio i’w chyflawni) a chydnabod mai ei ddyletswydd/dyletswydd yn unig yw gweithredu fel hidlwr cychwynnol cyn bod y rôl fwy sylweddol fel hidlwr yn cael ei harfer gan y PPC.’
Nododd ymhellach:
‘Wrth arfer eu hawdurdodaethau priodol, dylai’r sgriniwr a’r PPC fod yn arbennig o araf wrth stopio cwyn yn erbyn ymarferydd sy’n parhau i ymarfer; yn wahanol i un sydd wedi ymddeol ers hynny, gan mae’n rhaid mai’r ystyriaeth bennaf yw diogelu’r cyhoedd mewn perthynas â’r rheiny sy’n parhau i ymarfer; a dylent ystyried bob amser rôl yr HC pa bryd bynnag y bydd cwestiynau yn codi mewn perthynas ag amharu ar addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol.’
Casgliad y Barnwr, yn y diwedd, oedd na fyddai’n annheg i Dr Jarman pe bai penderfyniad y sgriniwr yn cael ei roi i’r naill ochr a bod cwyn Mr Toth yn cael ei hailagor. Fodd bynnag, roedd pwysigrwydd yr achos yn nadansoddiad y Barnwr o reol 6(3) ac o’r swyddogaeth sgrinio. I bob pwrpas, roedd yn taflu golau ôl-dremiol ar y broses sgrinio fel y cafodd ei chyflawni yn ystod y 30 mlynedd diwethaf, ac yn hwy hyd yn oed o bosibl. Roedd yn dangos bod sgrinwyr wedi mynd ymhellach na’u pwerau pan wnaethant seilio’u penderfyniad ar eu barn ynghylch a oedd y gŵyn yn gyfystyr ag SPM (yn hytrach nag a allai fod yn gyfystyr) ac a oedd y dystiolaeth yn ddigonol i brofi’r achos. Nid yw hynny’n feirniadaeth bersonol ohonynt. Nid cyfreithwyr mohonynt. Roeddent wedi bod yn gwneud y gwaith fel yr oedd pobl eraill wedi gwneud y gwaith o’u blaenau. Ond mae’n syndod na wnaeth neb yn y GMC yn ôl pob golwg, hyd at 1997, deimlo dan anfantais yn absenoldeb unrhyw arweiniad ynghylch y modd y dylai sgrinwyr fynd i’r afael â’u tasg bwysig.
Yn dilyn y penderfyniad yn
, a gafodd ei draddodi ym mis Mehefin 2000, newidiwyd y prawf sgrinio ym mis Awst 2000: gweler paragraff 19.120. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaethpwyd unrhyw newid cyfatebol i Lawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Robert Nicholls, aelod lleyg o’r GMC a oedd yn Gadeirydd y PPC rhwng mis Tachwedd 1999 a mis Mehefin 2003, mai ei argraff ef oedd bod y gyfran o achosion a gyfeiriwyd gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC wedi cynyddu ar ôl y penderfyniad yn
oherwydd bod sgrinwyr wedi mynd yn fwy gofalus ynghylch cau achosion. Nid yw’r argraff honno’n cael ei hategu gan yr ystadegau. Mae’n wir bod ystadegau’r GMC yn dangos bod cyfran yr achosion a gyfeiriwyd gan sgrinwyr at y PPC wedi codi o 30% ym 1999 i 39% yn 2000. Fodd bynnag, disgynnodd y cyfrannau yn ôl eto i 27% a 25% yn 2001 a 2002. Yn 2003, cyfeiriwyd 33% o achosion. Fodd bynnag, aeth niferoedd y cyfeiriadau i fyny o 466 yn 2000 i 600 yn 2001. Gall fod mai’r cynnydd hwn mewn niferoedd a roddodd yr argraff i Mr Nicholls bod cyfran yr achosion a gyfeiriwyd wedi cynyddu.
Gwaith Pellach gan y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi ym 1998
Ym 1998, comisiynwyd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr i wneud astudiaeth ddilynol. Cyn dechrau’r astudiaeth ddilynol honno, cynhaliwyd ‘cyfnod ymyrraeth’ ganddynt, ac yn ystod hwnnw fe wnaethant gynghori’r GMC ar newidiadau penodol i’r weithdrefn y dylid eu cyflwyno, gan gynnwys newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau sgrinio. Syniad y cyfnod ymyrraeth hwnnw oedd nodi newidiadau y dylid eu gwneud i’r gweithdrefnau cyn bod y tîm PSI yn gwneud y gwaith ymchwil a oedd i ffurfio sylfaen ei Adroddiad 2000.
Mewn ymgais i dorri baich gwaith y sgrinwyr ac osgoi dyblygu ymdrech, cytunwyd, o fis Mawrth 1999, na ddylid anfon achosion at sgrinwyr yr oedd y GMC o’r farn eu bod yn amlwg y tu allan i’w gylch gwaith. Yn lle hynny, byddai staff y GMC yn delio â’r achosion hynny heb gyfeirio at sgriniwr. Cafodd y broses hon o ‘hidlo achosion allan’ gan staff y GMC yr effaith o gynyddu (mewn gwirionedd, dyblu bron) y gyfran o achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio at sgrinwyr a oedd yn cael eu hanfon ymlaen ganddynt at y PPC. Mae ffigurau’r PSI yn dangos, ym 1999, bod y sgrinwyr wedi cyfeirio 25% o’r meddygon y gwnaethant ddelio â nhw ymlaen at y PPC; yn 2000, 22% oedd y gyfran. Ym 1997 a 1998, roedd y ffigurau wedi bod oddeutu 11% a 12%. Yn ystadegau FTP y GMC ar gyfer 1999, priodolwyd y cynnydd hwn yn rhannol i newid yn yr ymagwedd tuag at dystiolaeth, a oedd wedi digwydd, dywedwyd, ym mis Mawrth 1999, o ganlyniad i gyngor cyfreithiol (cyngor a gafwyd mewn cysylltiad ag achos
o bosibl). O fis Mawrth 1999, nid oedd sgrinwyr yn ystyried mwyach a oedd
‘tystiolaeth ddigonol i brofi’r honiad’
. Yn lle hynny, gallent
‘benderfynu cau achos pan nad oedd unrhyw obaith o gael tystiolaeth dystiolaethol yn unig’
. Nid ymddengys bod unrhyw newid i Lawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 i adlewyrchu’r newid ymagwedd hwn. Fodd bynnag, pe bai newid ymagwedd felly wedi’i wneud ym mis Mawrth 1999, fe allai fod wedi cyfrannu at y gyfran uwch o achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio gan sgrinwyr at y PPC.
Ym mis Medi 1998, cytunwyd rhwng y GMC a’r tîm PSI, oni bai yr oedd yn ymddangos bod risg i’r cyhoedd, mai dim ond pan oedd gwybodaeth ddigonol ar gael iddynt i’w galluogi i wneud penderfyniad gwirioneddol y dylid anfon achosion at sgrinwyr. Byddai aelodau o’r staff gweinyddol, yn hytrach na’r sgrinwyr, yn cymryd y cyfrifoldeb cyntaf am nodi unrhyw wybodaeth bellach a oedd yn ofynnol ac am gael y wybodaeth honno. Dim ond wedi gwneud hynny y byddai’r achos yn cael ei gyflwyno i’r sgriniwr meddygol, os oedd yn briodol. Cytunwyd hefyd, yn absenoldeb risg ganfyddedig i’r cyhoedd, na fyddai achosion a oedd yn ymwneud â meddygon nad oedd eu hadnabyddiaethau wedi’u canfod, yn cael eu hanfon at y sgrinwyr meddygol. Cyn 1998, roedd bron pob cwyn yr oedd y GMC yn eu derbyn yn cael eu cyfeirio at y sgrinwyr meddygol. O ganlyniad i’r newidiadau amrywiol hyn, disgynnodd canran y cwynion yn cael eu derbyn gan y GMC a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y sgrinwyr meddygol. Mae ffigurau’r PSI yn dangos, yn 2001, mai 41% o gwynion yn unig a aeth at y sgrinwyr meddygol. Mae ffigurau’r GMC ei hun yn datgelu bod y ganran wedi disgyn i ryw 35% yn 2003.
Hefyd, cytunodd y GMC y dylid mabwysiadu ymagwedd fwy strwythuredig tuag at sgrinio. Cafodd ffurflenni safonol, i’w galw’n ffurflenni penderfyniadau sgrinio (SDFau) eu cynllunio gan y tîm PSI mewn ymgynghoriad â’r GMC. Bwriadwyd i’r SDFau gael eu defnyddio gan weithwyr achos a sgrinwyr fel ysgogwr i sicrhau eu bod yn dilyn y camau hanfodol yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Bwriadwyd iddynt hefyd fod yn gofnod o’r broses honno, ac, felly, yn erfyn ar gyfer dadansoddi yn y dyfodol. Y gobaith oedd y byddent yn hyrwyddo eglurder, cysondeb a thryloywder.
Roedd strwythur yr SDFau yn rhannu cwynion i bedwar prif gategori, sef:
cwynion a oedd yn addas i’w cau gan staff y GMC heb gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol
adroddiadau am euogfarnau, a oedd i’w cyfeirio gan sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC ac eithrio pan oeddent yn cael eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd
cwynion a oedd ‘trwy ddiffiniad’ yn codi materion SPM (achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’). Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys cwynion yn ymwneud ag anonestrwydd, ymddygiad camweithredol, ymosod yn rhywiol neu anwedduster a thrais. Cyflwynwyd gofyniad y dylai pob cwyn felly gael ei chyfeirio’n awtomatig gan sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC oni bai bod y sgriniwr yn teimlo bod rhesymau diwrthdro am beidio gwneud hynny.
cwynion a oedd yn gofyn am arfer disgresiwn ar ran y sgrinwyr wrth benderfynu a ddylent gyfeirio at y PPC neu’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad (achosion ‘SPM neu SDP trwy ddiffiniad’) neu beidio.
Roedd achosion a oedd yn disgyn i gategori (d) yn gwynion a oedd, yn bennaf, yn ymwneud â thriniaeth wael/arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Roedd sgrinwyr yn cael arfer eu disgresiwn wrth benderfynu pa un a ddylid cyfeirio achosion felly at y PPC. Diben cyflwyno ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ oedd lleihau cyfran y cwynion yr oedd sgrinwyr yn cael arfer disgresiwn mewn perthynas â hwy, a, chan hynny, hyrwyddo cysondeb a gwylio rhag rhagfarn a chyhuddiadau o ragfarn. Byddaf yn disgrifio hanes gweithrediad y categori ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Roedd yr SDFau yn gofyn i sgrinwyr meddygol hefyd gofnodi, mewn perthynas â’r achosion hynny a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio atynt, asesiad o ba un a oeddent yn credu bod risg gyfredol neu risg wrth law i’r cyhoedd yn codi o’r gŵyn neu’r euogfarn. Y prif reswm am hyn oedd cynorthwyo yn y penderfyniad a allai gorchymyn interim (yn atal neu’n pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg tra’n disgwyl ymddangos gerbron pwyllgor FTP) fod yn angenrheidiol. Pan gyflwynwyd yr SDFau gyntaf, roedd gofyniad ar sgrinwyr meddygol hefyd i gofnodi’u hasesiad o ddifrifoldeb ymddygiad honedig y meddyg gan ddefnyddio graddfa pedwar pwynt. Bwriad yr asesiad hwn oedd ffurfio’r sylfaen ar gyfer dadansoddi penderfyniadau sgrinio yn y dyfodol. Os oedd y sgrinwyr meddygol yn penderfynu nad oedd achos yn codi mater o SPM neu SDP, roedd gofyniad arnynt i gofnodi’u rhesymau ar yr SDF.
Adroddiad y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi 2000
Yn y lle cyntaf, cafodd staff y GMC a sgrinwyr anhawster wrth ddod i’r arfer o gofnodi’r data perthnasol ar yr SDFau. Roedd Adroddiad PSI 2000 yn disgrifio cyflwyno’r SDFau fel
‘proses boenus’
. Roedd ‘ymarferiad peilot’ pedwar mis yn gynnar ym 1999. Roedd yr SDFau’n cael eu defnyddio’n barhaol wedi hynny. Yn rhan gynnar 2000, fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ddadansoddi cynnwys yr SDFau a gafodd eu llenwi gan sgrinwyr meddygol yn ystod y cyfnod o 1 Gorffennaf hyd at 31 Rhagfyr 1999.
Fe wnaeth y tîm PSI ddadansoddi 792 o SDFau a oedd wedi’u llenwi yn ystod y cyfnod chwe mis hwnnw. Erbyn hynny, roedd saith o sgrinwyr meddygol. Datgelodd y dadansoddiad amrywiadau sylweddol rhwng y sgrinwyr meddygol o ran canlyniadau eu sgrinio. Cyfeiriodd un sgriniwr meddygol 10% o achosion a sgriniodd at y PPC, tra bod un arall wedi cyfeirio 36%. Roedd hyn yn awgrymu bod y trothwy lle’r oedd sgrinwyr meddygol yn teimlo ei bod yn briodol i gyfeirio achos ymlaen at y PPC yn gwahaniaethu o sgriniwr i sgriniwr.
Fe wnaeth y dadansoddiad ddangos gwahaniaethau nodedig hefyd rhwng asesiadau sgrinwyr meddygol o risg a difrifoldeb. Roedd dau sgriniwr meddygol o’r farn bod risg gyfredol neu risg wrth law i’r cyhoedd mewn traean neu fwy o’r achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ a sgriniwyd ganddynt, tra’r oedd dau arall o’r farn nad oedd unrhyw risg o gwbl mewn unrhyw un o’r achosion y buont yn delio â nhw. Mewn perthynas ag achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, roedd dau o’r sgrinwyr meddygol (yr un ddau a oedd wedi nodi risg mewn cyfran uchel o achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’) o’r farn bod dros 40% o’r achosion a sgriniwyd ganddynt yn peri risg. Mewn cyferbyniad, roedd tri sgriniwr o’r farn bod llai na 10% o’u hachosion yn peri risg. Fe wnaeth un sgriniwr meddygol nodi bod bron i 90% o’r achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ a sgriniwyd ganddo/ganddi yn
‘ddifrifol iawn’
, tra bod sgriniwr arall wedi asesu mai 20% yn unig o achosion felly a oedd
yn ‘ddifrifol iawn’
. Roedd dosbarthiad gan sgrinwyr meddygol o achosion ‘SPM trwy ddisgresiwn’ fel rhai a oedd
‘ddim yn ddifrifol o gwbl’
yn amrywio rhwng 28% o’r achosion y deliwyd â nhw gan un sgriniwr meddygol a 70% o achosion a sgriniwyd gan un arall.
Roedd yn anodd llunio unrhyw gasgliadau pendant am yr amrywiadau a welwyd oherwydd, fel ag a ddaeth yn amlwg yn ystod yr astudiaeth PSI, nid oedd dosbarthu achosion i sgrinwyr yn cael ei wneud ar hap, h.y. trwy fod rhai sgrinwyr yn cael nifer uwch o achosion difrifol na sgrinwyr eraill yn fwriadol. Fe allai fod hefyd, trwy ddamwain, bod rhai sgrinwyr yn cael achosion â graddfa uwch o risg a difrifoldeb wedi’u dyrannu iddynt na’r rheiny a oedd yn cael eu dyrannu i sgrinwyr eraill. Fodd bynnag, roedd y tîm PSI o’r farn ei bod yn annhebygol y gallai’r naill o’r posibiliadau hynny ar eu pennau’u hunain fod wedi cyfrif am yr ystod eang o asesiadau a welwyd ganddynt. Roeddent o’r farn ei bod yn debygol bod yr amrywiadau yn ganlyniad rhannol o leiaf i’r ffaith fod sgrinwyr gwahanol yn cymhwyso safonau a meini prawf gwahanol wrth farnu ‘difrifoldeb’ a ‘risg’.
Yr Angen am Safonau a Meini Prawf y Cytunwyd Arnynt
Fe wnaeth yr amrywiadau amlwg rhwng sgrinwyr o ran canlyniadau’r achosion a sgriniwyd, a’r graddau yr oeddent yn gwahaniaethu yn eu hasesiadau o risg a difrifoldeb achosion, beri i’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ailadrodd yr angen (a nodwyd ganddynt yn eu Hadroddiad cyntaf) i bawb a oedd yn gysylltiedig yng ngweithdrefnau FTP y GMC i gael dealltwriaeth gyffredin o’r safonau, y meini prawf a’r trothwyau a oedd i’w cymhwyso yn y camau amrywiol o’r gweithdrefnau. Credent fod diffyg unrhyw ddealltwriaeth gyffredin felly wedi arwain at anghysondeb yn y gorffennol. Roedd y dadansoddiad o SDFau a wnaethant yn awgrymu bod sgrinwyr yn cymhwyso’u dehongliadau personol eu hunain o’r trothwy ar gyfer SPM. O ganlyniad, nid ystyriwyd bod achosion a allai fod wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC gan un sgriniwr yn codi mater o SPM gan un arall. Roedd y diffyg cysondeb hwn yr un mor berthnasol i benderfyniadau’r PPC, fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 20.
Nododd y tîm PSI angen am arweiniad manwl a oedd yn ddealladwy i feddygon a’r cyhoedd eu dau. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad, er bod cyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn ‘berffaith iawn’ at y dibenion y bwriadwyd iddo fod, nid oedd yn addas i’w ddefnyddio fel arweiniad ynghylch yr hyn a allai neu na allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dywedodd:
‘... mae “Good Medical Practice” yn gymysgedd o bethau na ddylid yn wir eu tramgwyddo ac a fyddai’n ddifrifol iawn, a phwyntiau eraill, er enghraifft, bod yn gwrtais i’ch cleifion. Ni allai hyn ar ei ben ei hun godi mater a ddylai yn ôl pob tebyg effeithio ar gofrestriad meddyg; felly’r hyn sydd gennych yn “Good Medical Practice” yw llawer o bethau gwahanol ar lefelau gwahanol o ddifrifoldeb...’.
Yr hyn yr oedd ei angen, meddai, oedd arweiniad manwl i’r rheiny a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau, gydag enghreifftiau o wahanol fathau o achos a allai gyrraedd trothwyau gwahanol, gan hynny’n creu ‘hierarchaeth o ddifrifoldeb’. Argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 2000:
Cydnabu’r tîm PSI bod y dryswch a’r anghysondeb presennol ynghylch y trothwy ar gyfer SPM yn peri problemau nid o fewn y GMC yn unig. Roedd yn creu anhawster hefyd i aelodau’r cyhoedd a chyrff cyhoeddus a allai ddymuno gwneud cwyn yn erbyn meddyg. Yn unol â hynny, argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 2000:
Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn eglur bod dryswch y tu fewn a thu allan i’r GMC ynghylch y mathau o achos a oedd yn addas i’w cyfeirio at y GMC. Dyma pam yr oedd hi a’i chydweithwyr o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i gael protocolau clir, yn nodi’r hyn a oedd ac nad oedd yn debygol o godi mater o SPM neu SDP. Byddai hyn yn cynorthwyo’r GMC trwy ysgafnhau’r baich iddo o lawer o gwynion amhriodol. Byddai hefyd yn arbed i’r cyhoedd gael eu siomi wrth gael eu cwynion wedi’u gwrthod.
Problemau gyda Chwynion ynghylch Triniaeth Wael neu Arfer Clinigol Is Na’r Safon
Roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr o’r farn bod problemau penodol yn bodoli wrth gymhwyso’r cysyniad SPM i gwynion ynghylch triniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon. Rwy’n cytuno â’r farn honno. Mae SPM yn ymadrodd priodol pan fydd yr ymddygiad dan sylw yn cynnwys, er enghraifft, ymosod yn anweddus, twyll neu gael gafael ar gyffuriau rheoledig yn anonest. Yng nghyd-destun arfer clinigol, ymddengys bod y gair ‘camymddygiad’ yn ymhlygu camweithred neu ddiffyg bwriadol neu ddiofal. Fodd bynnag, mae’r gyfraith yn eglur y gall esgeuluster, os yw’n ddigon difrifol, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ymddengys i mi y byddai ymadrodd fel ‘arfer clinigol diffygiol’ yn cynnwys yn fwy esmwyth unrhyw fethiannau a oedd yn cynnwys gweithredoedd neu ddiffygion a oedd yn esgeulus, yn ogystal â’r rheiny a oedd yn fwriadol neu’n ddiofal.
Adroddodd yr Athro Allen, yn ystod y cyfnod o 1997 i 1999, bod cwynion am driniaeth ac arfer clinigol gwael yn cyfrif am oddeutu 70% o’r holl gwynion a ddaeth at y GMC. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod lle i ddehongliadau gwahanol lle’r oedd honiadau am driniaeth ac arfer clinigol dan sylw. Roedd dehongliadau gwahanol yn arwain at anghysondeb. Pan ysgrifennwyd ei Adroddiad 2000, canfu’r tîm PSI
‘dryswch ac anghysondeb diamau’
yn y modd yr ymdriniwyd â chwynion felly. Argymhellodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr felly y dylai methiannau clinigol gael eu graddio ar raddfa hierarchaidd, yn amrywio o’r rheiny na allai fyth godi cwestiwn o SPM i’r rheiny a fyddai wastad yn gwneud hynny. Dylid sefydlu meini prawf ar gyfer mesur difrifoldeb cwyn yn eu herbyn. Credent y byddai’r camau hyn yn arwain at gysondeb llawer mwy mewn ymagwedd tuag at gŵynion am driniaeth glinigol.
Y Rhesymau a Roddwyd gan Sgrinwyr Meddygol am Eu Penderfyniadau
Rhoddwyd rhywfaint o fewnwelediad cyfyngedig i ddulliau sgrinwyr meddygol gwahanol gan y rhesymau a gofnodwyd ganddynt am ddod i’r casgliad nad oedd achos yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Sylwadau byrion yn unig a ysgrifennodd rhai; rhoddodd rhai eraill resymau llawer manylach. Y rheswm mwyaf cyffredin (a roddwyd mewn 26% o achosion) am sgrinio achos allan oedd
‘nad oedd tystiolaeth o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’
. Fel arfer, ni roddwyd unrhyw reswm pellach. Mewn 10% o achosion, y rheswm a roddwyd oedd nad oedd yr achos yn cyrraedd
‘trothwy SPM’
. Mewn rhai achosion, ni roddwyd unrhyw esboniad pellach, ac o ganlyniad nid oedd yn eglur ar ba sail yr oedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud ei ddyfarniad/dyfarniad.
Yr ail reswm mwyaf cyffredin (20% o achosion) am sgrinio achos allan oedd bod y driniaeth neu’r rheolaeth o glaf wedi bod yn
‘rhesymol’
neu’n
‘briodol’
. Roedd sgrinwyr meddygol a oedd yn rhoi’r rheswm hwn yn aml yn cynnig adroddiad clir am y ffactorau yr oeddent wedi’u hystyried. Erbyn hyn, roedd yr arfer wedi’i sefydlu o ofyn am ymateb i gŵyn gan y meddyg a oedd yn destun cwyn cyn y cam sgrinio. Roedd sgrinwyr meddygol a oedd yn rhoi ‘rhesymoldeb’ neu ‘briodolrwydd’ fel eu rheswm dros wrthod cwyn yn cyfeirio at ymateb y meddyg yn aml.
Perthnasedd Maint ac Ansawdd Tystiolaeth i Benderfyniadau Sgrinio
Fel y dywedais yn barod, roedd Adroddiad PSI 1996 wedi dangos mai’r ffactor pwysicaf o bell ffordd wrth bennu a oedd cwyn yn mynd ymlaen ar gyfer gweithredu gan y GMC oedd pa un a oedd y gŵyn yn dod o gorff cyhoeddus neu gan unigolyn preifat. Roedd cwynion gan gyrff cyhoeddus yn llawer llai tebygol na’r rheiny gan unigolion preifat i arwain at ganlyniad sgrinio o ddim SPM nag SDP neu o dystiolaeth annigonol.
Roedd dadansoddi’r penderfyniadau sgrinio yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1997, 1998 a 1999 a wnaethpwyd gan y tîm PSI yn dangos bod y patrwm hwn yn parhau. Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr bod cwynion gan gyrff cyhoeddus fel arfer yn cynnwys llawer mwy o dystiolaeth na’r rheiny gan aelodau o’r cyhoedd. Y rheswm am hyn oedd bod y cwynion hynny’n debygol o fod wedi bod yn destun rhyw ffurf o ymchwiliad neu ymholiad blaenorol, lle na fyddai’r GMC, yn gyffredinol, wedi cymryd unrhyw gamau i ymchwilio i gŵyn yn cael ei gwneud gan unigolyn preifat. Y canlyniad oedd bod sgrinwyr meddygol fel arfer yn barnu cwynion o ddwy ffynhonnell wahanol ar sail deunydd gwahanol iawn. Nododd y tîm PSI bod gofyniad ar sgrinwyr meddygol i benderfynu’n unig pa un a oedd cwyn yn codi mater o SPM. Mewn geiriau eraill, pe bai’r honiad (os oedd yn wir) yn gyfystyr ag SPM, dylai’r achos fynd ymlaen at y PPC. Awgrymodd y tîm PSI y gallai sgrinwyr meddygol fod wedi rhoi mwy o bwys i’r lefel uwch o dystiolaeth a oedd yn cael ei chyflwyno gan gyrff cyhoeddus nag i’r honiadau a oedd yn ymddangos bod llawer llai o gefnogaeth iddynt yn cael eu gwneud gan aelodau’r cyhoedd, er gwaetha’r ffaith y gallai’r cwynion o’r ddwy ffynhonnell wahanol fod wedi codi materion tebyg. Hefyd, roedd llawer o gŵynion gan gyrff cyhoeddus yn ymwneud â materion yr oedd canfyddiadau eisoes wedi’u gwneud mewn perthynas â hwy yn erbyn y meddyg gan gorff arall, fel panel adolygu annibynnol (IRP). Awgrymodd y tîm PSI y gallai’r canfyddiadau hyn, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gael eu hystyried gan sgrinwyr meddygol fel rhai a oedd yn rhoi mwy o bwys i’w dyfarniad na chwyn a oedd yn codi mater o SPM.
Gallaf weld pam yr oedd y tîm PSI yn pryderu ynghylch y canfyddiadau hyn a’u bod o’r farn y gallent ddangos bod sgrinwyr meddygol yn rhoi pwys i faint a threfnusrwydd y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael. Byddai hynny wedi bod yn anghywir. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn credu y dylid rhagdybio eu bod yn gwneud hynny. Ymddengys yn debygol i mi y byddai cyfran uwch o achosion a gyfeiriwyd gan gyrff cyhoeddus o natur ddifrifol, oherwydd yn syml bod y corff cyhoeddus wedi gwneud dyfarniad gwybodus ynghylch a ddylid adrodd i’r GMC am yr achos. Fodd bynnag, gallaf weld hefyd, os oedd y sgrinwyr wedi dod i arfer â gweld achosion wedi’u paratoi’n dda yn cael eu hadrodd gan gyrff cyhoeddus a oedd yn codi materion difrifol, byddai perygl na fyddent yn llawn werthfawrogi difrifoldeb yr honiadau a gynhwyswyd yn yr achosion wedi’u paratoi’n wael yn dod gan unigolion preifat. Fe allent fod wedi’u cadarnhau hefyd gan ddyfarniadau cyrff eraill, er, mae’n rhaid dweud, nid oeddent yn eu dilyn bob amser. Ymddengys i mi mai’r broblem go iawn oedd nad oedd y GMC yn ymchwilio i gŵynion a oedd yn dod mewn cyflwr ‘amrwd’ heb ymchwilio iddynt. Roedd y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael gan unigolion preifat yn debygol o fod yn brin ac wedi’i chyflwyno’n wael o bosibl. Nid yw’n syndod o gwbl y byddai mwy o achosion felly yn methu yn y cam sgrinio.
Newid yn y Gweithdrefnau Pennod XV
Ym 1999, penderfynodd Pwyllgor Polisi Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPPC) y GMC y dylid rhoi’r gorau i ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau Pennod XV. Roedd dogfennau a ystyriwyd yn y cyfarfod perthnasol yn cofnodi mai’r rheswm am hyn oedd y gallai’r
‘broses braidd yn feichus’
gymryd
‘sawl mis i ddod i gasgliad’
. Felly’r oedd hi yn ddiau. Fodd bynnag, nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn Adroddiad PSI 2000 ei bod wedi bod yn eglur ers tro bod nad oedd rhai achosion a oedd wedi codi materion o SPM wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC, ond yr ymdriniwyd â nhw yn lle hynny dan Bennod XV. Dywedwyd ganddynt fod yr FPPC yn rhannu’u pryder ynghylch hyn, a bod y pryder hwn wedi bod yn ffactor yn y penderfyniad i roi’r gorau i weithdrefnau Pennod XV. Byddai’r ffaith y gallai’r sgrinwyr meddygol fod wedi bod yn defnyddio gweithdrefnau Pennod XV i ddelio ag achosion a oedd yn codi materion o SPM yn destun pryder arbennig i ni oherwydd, i weithdrefnau Pennod XV gael eu cychwyn yn y lle cyntaf, mae’n rhaid bod y rhain yn achosion lle nad oedd y meddyg dan sylw yn dadlau ynghylch y dystiolaeth. Dylai achosion felly’n amlwg fod wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC.
Roedd Gorchmynion Sefydlog mis Gorffennaf 2000 yn cynnwys fersiwn ddiwygiedig o Bennod XV. Roedd hon yn darparu ar gyfer achosion lle’r oedd y sgriniwr meddygol o’r farn nad oedd ymddygiad neu berfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg yn codi cwestiwn o SPM nag SDP ond lle’r oedd yr ymddygiad i weld yn disgyn islaw safonau derbyniol fel y’u pennwyd yn ‘Good Medical Practice’ neu arweiniad arall gan y GMC a gyhoeddwyd, a lle’r oedd yn ddymunol er lles y cyhoedd y dylid rhoi cyngor i’r meddyg. Mewn achosion felly, roedd y fersiwn ddiwygiedig o Bennod XV yn amodi y dylai’r sgriniwr meddygol ymgynghori â sgriniwr lleyg ynghylch y cwestiwn a ddylid rhoi cyngor i’r meddyg, ac os felly, ar delerau’r cyngor i’w roi. Os oedd y sgrinwyr yn penderfynu anfon llythyr cyngor, roedd hyn yn cael ei wneud. Nid oedd unrhyw gyfle, fel yr oedd dan yr hen weithdrefnau Pennod XV, i’r meddyg wrthwynebu. Roedd llythyrau cyngor yn gyfrinachol, ac eithrio bod achwynwyr yn cael gwybod bod llythyr wedi’i anfon a’u bod yn cael gwybod am delerau’r llythyr. Nid oedd y llythyr cyngor yn ffurfio rhan o hanes FTP y meddyg, naill ai at ddibenion mewnol y GMC nag mewn ymateb i ymholiad allanol am hanes FTP y meddyg.
Newidiadau Eraill a Ddigwyddodd ym 1999
Ym mis Tachwedd 1999, tra’r oedd y tîm PSI yn gwneud ei astudiaeth, ymddeolodd Dr Steel fel sgriniwr meddygol a Chadeirydd y PPC. Yn y cyfamser, roedd y GMC wedi penderfynu, gan ragweld Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 yn dod i rym ym mis Hydref 2000, y dylid gwahanu swyddogaethau’r sgrinwyr a’r PPC. O fis Tachwedd 1999, nid oedd sgrinwyr (meddygol, iechyd a lleyg) yn gymwys mwyach i eistedd ar y PPC nag i fynychu cyfarfodydd o’r PCC fel arsylwr. Roedd y Llywydd i fod yn Gadeirydd y PPC, neu, os oedd yn dewis peidio gweithredu yn y rhinwedd honno, roedd rhyw aelod arall o’r GMC i’w benodi/phenodi ganddo. Daeth Mr Nicholls yn Gadeirydd gweithredol y PPC pan ymddeolodd Dr Steel. Cadarnhawyd ei benodiad fel Cadeirydd ym mis Ionawr 2000. Ym mis Awst 2000, newidiwyd y Rheolau i adlewyrchu’r newidiadau mewn cyfansoddiad a oedd eisoes wedi’u rhoi ar waith. O fis Tachwedd 1999, diddymwyd rôl y ‘prif sgriniwr’ a rhoddwyd statws cyfartal yn lle hynny i’r holl sgrinwyr meddygol.
Ar Ôl Adroddiad y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi 2000
Ystyriwyd Adroddiad PSI 2000 mewn cyfarfod o’r Cyngor ar 11 a 12 Gorffennaf 2000. Roedd y papur briffio a baratowyd ar gyfer y cyfarfod yn nodi bod y newidiadau a wnaed i’r broses sgrinio mewn ymateb i Adroddiad PSI 1996 wedi
‘gwneud gwelliannau sylweddol yng nghadernid y gweithdrefnau’
. Ni soniwyd yn uniongyrchol am yr amrywiadau rhwng penderfyniadau sgrinwyr a chafodd eu datgelu trwy ddadansoddi’r SDFau a adroddwyd amdanynt yn Adroddiad PSI 2000. Ni soniwyd yn benodol ychwaith am yr argymhelliad a fu’n ganolog i Adroddiad PSI 2000, sef ei bod yn hollbwysig, er mwyn cyflawni cysondeb a thegwch, y dylid cytuno ar safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon, a’u cymhwyso gan bawb â chyfrifoldeb am wneud penderfyniadau ynghylch beth oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roedd y papurau briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod y Cyngor, fodd bynnag, yn cydnabod bod Adroddiad PSI 2000 wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd prosesau’r GMC yn
‘cydweddu ag egwyddorion proses gwneud penderfyniadau dda’
a bod
‘anghysonderau mewn canlyniadau a nodwyd yn y dadansoddiad meintiol’
. Gwahoddwyd aelodau’r Cyngor i gytuno y dylai’r FPPC roi sylw i’r argymhellion a gynhwyswyd yn Adroddiad PSI 2000 ar fyrder. Byddaf yn ystyried nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn pa gynnydd, os o gwbl, sydd wedi’i wneud ar yr argymhelliad canolog yn ymwneud â sefydlu safonau wedi’u cytuno’n gyffredin.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2000 hefyd, cyflwynodd y GMC weithdrefn lle, cyn bod cwyn yn cael ei sgrinio, roedd ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn yn cael ei ddatgelu i’r achwynydd ac roedd sylwadau’r achwynydd ar ymateb y meddyg yn cael eu gwahodd. Er 1997, roedd sgrinwyr wedi cael y gŵyn ac (fel arfer) ymateb y meddyg, ond nid oedd ganddynt unrhyw sylw gan yr achwynydd ar ymateb y meddyg. Gallai hyd fod wedi cael effaith braidd yn unochrog. O fis Gorffennaf 2000, cyflwynwyd arfer lle’r oedd yr achwynydd yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i wneud sylwadau, ac roedd unrhyw sylwadau ganddo/ganddi yn cael eu hanfon at y meddyg er mwyn cael ei sylwadau pellach ef/hi. Byddai sylwadau’r achwynydd, yn ogystal â sylwadau pellach y meddyg, ar gael i’r sgriniwr meddygol. Oddeutu’r un adeg, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddileu grym y sgriniwr meddygol i gyfarwyddo na ddylid rhoi esboniad i achwynydd am benderfyniad i wrthod ei gŵyn/chwyn.
Ym mis Awst 2000, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i amodi y dylai’r GMC benodi i weithredu fel sgrinwyr meddygol y Llywydd (oni bai ei fod/bod yn dymuno eistedd ar y PPC, y PCC neu’r HC neu nad oedd am unrhyw reswm arall yn dymuno gweithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol) ac
‘aelodau meddygol eraill o’r Cyngor y bydd y Llywydd yn eu henwebu’
. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 (fel y’u diwygiwyd) yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Llywydd hefyd enwebu’r sgrinwyr lleyg (ac i’r Cyngor eu penodi).
Newid yn y Prawf Sgrinio
Rwyf eisoes wedi dweud, wedi i’r dyfarniad yn
gael i draddodi ym mis Mehefin 2000, cymerwyd camau i newid y prawf sgrinio statudol. Daeth hyn i rym ar 3 Awst 2000, pan newidiwyd rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddarllen:
(a) he decides that a question as to whether the practitioner’s conduct constitutes serious professional misconduct does not arise, and a lay member appointed under rule 4(5) agrees...’.
Yr unig eithriadau eraill i’r rheolau cyffredinol oedd achosion lle nad oedd unrhyw ddatganiad statudol wedi’i ddarparu gan yr achwynydd ac achosion a gyfeiriwyd gan y sgriniwr meddygol at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Nid oedd rhaid i’r achosion hyn gael eu cyfeirio at y PPC.
Nid ymddengys bod y newid pwysig hwn yn y prawf sgrinio wedi’i adlewyrchu mewn unrhyw newid i Lawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997. Ymddengys bod naill ai’r sgrinwyr wedi parhau i ddefnyddio’r Llawlyfr (er gwaetha’r ffaith ei fod wedi dyddio erbyn hyn mewn nifer o agweddau) neu ei bod yn rhaid bod y Llawlyfr wedi mynd allan o arfer. Mae digwyddiadau dilynol yn awgrymu bod y sgrinwyr (neu rai ohonynt) fwy na thebyg yn anymwybodol o’r newid yn y prawf rheol 6(3) a ddigwyddodd ym mis Awst 2000.
Penderfynwyd achos
gan Meistr Ustus Ouseley ar 27 Ebrill 2001. Roedd yn ymwneud â cheisiadau am adolygiad barnwrol, gan herio, ymhlith pethau eraill, penderfyniadau gan sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg a chan y PPC.
Y Cwynion
Mae’r achos dan sylw’n ymwneud â chwynion gan y partner, Ms Carys Nancy Holmes, a rhieni (cyfeiriaf at y tri ohonynt fel ‘yr hawlwyr’) Mr Derrick Marcus Dean, a fu farw ar 26 Gorffennaf 1995, yn 34 oed, o syst goloidaidd ar yr ymennydd. Roedd y cwynion yn ymwneud â’r safon gofal a roddwyd i Mr Dean gan ei feddyg teulu, Dr Rahman, a chan feddyg dirprwyo, Dr Sengupta. Roedd Mr Dean wedi gweld Dr Rahman yn ei feddygfa ddeuddydd cyn ei farwolaeth. Ar y noson cyn iddo farw, cafodd ei weld yn ei gartref gan Dr Sengupta. Aethpwyd ag ef i’r ysbyty wedi hynny lle bu farw. Nid yw union natur methiant y safon gofal a honnwyd gan yr hawliwr yn eglur o’r dyfarniad. Ymddengys yn debygol bod yr hawliwr wedi honni methiant ar ran y ddau feddyg i werthfawrogi difrifoldeb cyflwr Mr Dean.
Gwnaeth Ms Holmes gŵyn yn erbyn Dr Sengupta i’r FHSA. Ychwanegwyd cwyn yn ddiweddarach yn erbyn Dr Rahman. Ym mis Mawrth 1996, penderfynodd yr MSC bod Dr Sengupta wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth ond nad oedd Dr Rahman wedi gwneud hynny. Apeliodd Ms Holmes i Ysgrifennydd Gwladol (SoS) Cymru yn erbyn y penderfyniad yn achos Dr Rahman. Ym mis Mehefin neu fis Gorffennaf 1998, hysbysodd Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Cymru yr hawlwyr ei fod wedi caniatáu’r apêl ac wedi canfod fod Dr Rahman wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Cyfarwyddodd Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Cymru y dylai achos Dr Rahman gael ei gyfeirio at y GMC. Gofynnodd yr hawlwyr wedyn i’r GMC ystyried ymddygiad Dr Sengupta yn ogystal. Felly cymerodd y GMC ddwy gŵyn, y ddwy ohonynt wedi’u hategu gan ganfyddiad o dorri telerau gwasanaeth. Nid wyf yn gwybod a oedd achos un meddyg o dorri’r telerau yn fwy difrifol na’r llall, er yr ymddengys bod y cosbau a bennwyd yn wahanol.
Ryw amser rhwng mis Ionawr a mis Mawrth 1999, cafodd y gŵyn yn erbyn Dr Rahman ei hystyried gan dri sgriniwr: dau sgriniwr meddygol ac un sgriniwr lleyg. Fe wnaethant benderfynu na ddylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Cafodd achos Dr Sengupta ei ystyried gan yr un sgrinwyr meddygol a chan sgriniwr lleyg. Yn achos Dr Sengupta, penderfynodd y sgrinwyr meddygol na ddylai’r achos fynd yn ei flaen. Fodd bynnag, roedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn anghytuno a chyfeiriwyd yr achos felly at y PPC. Ar 9 Medi 1999, penderfynodd y PPC na ddylai’r gŵyn yn erbyn Dr Sengupta fynd ymlaen at y PCC. Fe wnaeth yr hawlwyr herio’r penderfyniad hwnnw gan y PPC; deliaf â’r rhan honno o’r achos ym Mhennod 20. Heriwyd penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr yn achos Dr Rahman ganddynt hefyd.
Penderfyniad y Sgrinwyr yn Achos Dr Rahman
Ar ryw gyfnod, fwy na thebyg yn ystod gweithrediadau’r adolygiad barnwrol, datgelodd y GMC nifer o ddogfennau a oedd yn taflu goleuni ar y rhesymau dros benderfyniad y sgrinwyr yn achos Dr Rahman. Roedd y cyntaf yn nodyn gan weithiwr achos, a oedd fwy na thebyg wedi ffurfio rhan o’r memorandwm a fyddai’n cael ei baratoi fel arfer gan aelodau staff i gynorthwyo’r sgrinwyr. Yn y nodyn, dywedodd y gweithiwr achos:
Roedd sylw gyda nodiadau wedyn gan y sgriniwr lleyg, yn nodi ei chytundeb â sylwadau’r gweithiwr achos. Roedd sylw hefyd gan sgriniwr meddygol, yr Athro Thomas, a ysgrifennodd:
(h.y. Swyddfa Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Cymru)
Oedaf i nodi bod yr oedi tair blynedd yn achos Dr Rahman i’w briodoli bron yn gyfan gwbl i’r amser a gymerwyd (o fis Awst 1995 i fis Mehefin 1998) i’r gŵyn basio drwy weithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Roedd y cyfnod o oddeutu chwe mis a oedd yn weddill i’w briodoli naill ai i oedi ar ran y Swyddfa Gymreig wrth gyfeirio achos Dr Rahman at y GMC, neu’r amser a gymerwyd gan y GMC i ddelio â’r gŵyn. Ni allaf weld pam y dylai’r oedi fod wedi bod yn berthnasol i’r prawf sgrinio. Nid wyf yn deall ychwaith pam y byddai’n anodd ystyried yr un o’r ddau achos oherwydd y modd y cafodd ei gyfeirio. Nid yw adwaith y Swyddfa Gymreig yn ystyriaeth berthnasol ychwaith. Yn fyr, nid ymddengys bod yr ystyriaethau perthnasol gan y sgriniwr meddygol cyntaf dan sylw.
Dr Steel oedd y prif sgriniwr meddygol ar y pryd, ac roedd yn feddyg teulu. Roedd yn beth cyffredin i rywun ymgynghori ag ef pan oedd sgriniwr meddygol arall yn ansicr ynghylch y modd i fynd ymlaen. Adolygodd yr achos a chynnig y sylw:
(Membership of the Royal College of Physicians)
Ar wahân i’r faith yr ymddengys bod Dr Steel wedi llunio barn bendant nad oedd triniaeth Dr Rahman mewn gwirionedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn hytrach na mynegi barn ynghylch a allai wneud hynny neu beidio, ymddengys iddo wneud dau gamgymeriad difrifol arall. Yn gyntaf, ni all fod yn berthnasol bod meddyg yn Aelod o Goleg Brenhinol y Meddygon neu beidio. Yn ail, ni all fod yn berthnasol bod MSC wedi penderfynu yn achos Dr Rahman nad oedd achos o dorri telerau. Dangoswyd bod y penderfyniad hwnnw’n anghywir gan benderfyniad dilynol Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Cymru. Ymddengys bod Dr Steel yn parhau i arfer disgresiwn eang wrth sgrinio achosion ac nid oedd y cyngor a roddwyd yn Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 ganddo dan sylw.
Gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniad i gau’r achos. Drafftiwyd llythyr at y Swyddfa Gymreig dyddiedig 8 Mawrth 1999, ond ymddengys na chafodd erioed ei anfon. Roedd y llythyr hwn yn cynnwys y darn canlynol:
(h.y. y sgrinwyr)
Cafodd y penderfyniad i beidio mynd ymlaen â’r achos yn erbyn Dr Rahman ei gyfleu i’r hawlwyr trwy lythyr dyddiedig 22 Hydref 1999. Cawsant eu hysbysu am benderfyniad y PPC mewn perthynas â Dr Sengupta dair wythnos yn gynharach. Ceisiodd yr hawlwyr wedyn, trwy eu cyfreithwyr, gael gafael ar y dogfennau’n ymwneud â gwneud y penderfyniadau. Parhaodd y cynigion hynny hyd ddiwedd mis Gorffennaf 2000 pan ysgrifennodd y GMC,
‘gydag ymddiheuriadau lu’
yn dweud nad oedd modd datgelu cofnodion y PPC. Nid yw’n eglur a gafodd y dogfennau y cyfeiriais atynt uchod eu datgelu bryd hynny neu’n ddiweddarach. Ni chafodd penderfyniad y GMC ei gyfleu i Dr Rahman ei hun nes 29 Rhagfyr 1999. Nid yw’n hysbys a gafodd y Swyddfa Gymreig ei hysbysu, ond ymddengys, ar ryw adeg, bod Ysgrifennydd Gwladol Cymru wedi dod yn ymwybodol o’r penderfyniad.
Roedd y llythyr gan y GMC at yr hawlwyr yn dweud:
Ar 26 Hydref 2000, cyhoeddodd yr hawlwyr weithrediadau achos barnwrol, yn herio penderfyniadau’r GMC mewn perthynas â’r ddau feddyg. Roedd y ddau feddyg wedi uno yn y gweithrediadau fel partïon cyfrannog. Cofnodwyd sail y gwrthwynebiad gan y GMC a’r meddygon. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2000, rhoddwyd caniatâd i’r hawlwyr wneud cais i’r Llys am adolygiad barnwrol. Roedd hynny ryw chwe mis ar ôl y penderfyniad yn achos
. Yn fuan iawn wedyn, hysbyswyd cyfreithwyr y meddygon gan y GMC ei fod yn bwriadu ildio’r hawliad oherwydd amheuon ynghylch cyfreithlondeb penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr (yn achos Dr Rahman) a’r PPC (yn achos Dr Sengupta). Ar ôl hynny, penderfynodd y GMC ganiatáu dileu’r ddau benderfyniad ar y sail bod y profion cyfreithiol anghywir wedi’u cymhwyso wrth ddod i’r penderfyniadau hynny. Cytunwyd ar orchymyn cydsynio rhwng y GMC a’r hawlwyr. Gwrthwynebwyd y cais gan y meddygon. Cymerodd y gwrandawiad ffurf anarferol felly, gyda’r GMC a’r hawlwyr yn dadlau bod penderfyniadau’r GMC yn anghywir ac y dylid eu diddymu, a’r meddygon a oedd yn haeru bod y profion cyfreithiol cywir wedi’u cymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr a’r PPC.
Yn ei ddyfarniad, mabwysiadodd Ouseley J y dadansoddiad o’r fframwaith cyfreithiol yn nyfarniad Lightman J yn achos
. Dadleuodd y Cwnsler ar ran y GMC nad oedd penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr wedi cydymffurfio ag iaith Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988. Argymhellodd nad oedd y dogfennau y dyfynnais ohonynt, yn benodol y llythyr drafft i’r Swyddfa Gymreig, wedi’u mynegi
‘mewn iaith ystyriaeth ragarweiniol’
, ond eu bod yn cynnwys ymadroddion dyfarniad. Felly, yn y llythyr i’r hawlwyr, dangoswyd bod y sgrinwyr wedi derbyn canfyddiadau’r Swyddfa Gymreig mewn perthynas ag ymgynghoriad Dr Rahman ar 24 Gorffennaf 1995 ond
‘nad oeddent yn teimlo bod y camgymeriadau a wnaeth ar yr achlysur hwn yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’
. Yn y llythyr drafft i’r Swyddfa Gymreig, dywedwyd bod y sgrinwyr yn
‘derbyn bod diffygion yn y gofal a gafodd Mr Dean gan y ddau feddyg’
, ond eu bod yn
‘fodlon’
bod y diffygion hyn
‘heb fod mor ddifrifol â chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol ac na allent, felly, gyfiawnhau cyfyngu neu ddileu ei
(h.y. Dr Rahman)
hawl i ymarfer
meddygaeth’
Casglodd Ouseley J y byddai’r gweithiwr achos a ysgrifennodd y llythyrau wedi cael gwybod am sail y penderfyniad gan y sgrinwyr ac y byddai wedi adlewyrchu hynny’n ffyddlon yn ei llythyrau. Nododd nad oedd y GMC wedi cyflwyno unrhyw dystiolaeth bod y prawf cywir wedi’i gymhwyso, gan ddweud
‘pe byddai tystiolaeth glir bod y prawf wedi’i gymhwyso’n gyson ... byddwn wedi’i chael, hyd yn oed pe na ellid cofio’r achos unigol ei hun’
. Daeth i’r casgliad y daethpwyd at y penderfyniad yn achos Dr Rahman fwy na thebyg drwy gymhwyso’r prawf anghywir. Roedd yn debygol, meddai, bod y sgrinwyr meddygol wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd gweithredoedd Dr Rahman yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn hytrach na’r casgliad na allai gweithredoedd Dr Rahman fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ym marn y Barnwr, roedd termau’r llythyrau a anfonwyd gan y GMC yn cynnwys dyfarniadau amlwg ynghylch ansawdd y gweithredoedd fel rhai nad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn hytrach na dyfarniadau ynghylch a allent fod yn gyfystyr. Aeth Ouseley J ymlaen i ddelio â’r dogfennau a ddatgelwyd gan y GMC:
‘Ni ellir diystyru cyfeiriad y gweithiwr achos a’r nodiadau gan yr Athro Thomas a Dr Steel fel nodiadau syml pan fydd rhywun yn ceisio dod i gasgliad fel mater o ffaith ynghylch y sail y daeth y corff gwneud penderfyniadau i’w benderfyniad. Nid yn unig y maent yn gwrth-ddweud yr ymagwedd sy’n eglur o’r llythyr dyddiedig 22 Hydref 1999, maent yn cefnogi’r casgliad y deuthum i iddo. Nid yw’r un deunydd yn dod â’r prawf gwirioneddol.’
Mae’n ddigalon iawn i sylweddoli, mor ddiweddar â 1999, bod camgymeriadau mor sylfaenol â hyn yn cael eu gwneud gan y GMC. Nid yn unig yr oedd y sgrinwyr wedi cymhwyso’r prawf anghywir, ond roedd y staff gweinyddol yn ôl pob golwg heb sylwi ar y camgymeriadau ac nid oeddent wedi holi ynghylch y rhesymau wrth ddrafftio’r llythyrau.
Ymddengys i mi nad oedd y camgymeriadau hyn yn fethiannau unigol wrth gymhwyso’r Rheolau i sefyllfaoedd penodol, ond yn hytrach roeddent yn dangos camddealltwriaeth sylfaenol ar ran y sgrinwyr meddygol o’r Rheolau a swyddogaeth sgriniwr. Rwy’n cael fy ngyrru i’r casgliad, wrth sgrinio achosion cyn 1999, bod y sgrinwyr wedi cymhwyso’r prawf anghywir yn gyson. Ymddengys i mi hefyd ei bod yn debygol bod y sgrinwyr yn aml yn ystyried ffactorau cwbl amherthnasol. Mae’r methiannau endemig hyn yn tanlinellu’r angen nid yn unig i hyfforddi sgrinwyr, a gydnabuwyd gan Mr Roger Henderson CF ar ran y GMC yn yr Ymchwiliad, ond hefyd i safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon clir a gytunwyd arnynt gael eu lledaenu. Rwy’n cydnabod nad yw’n hawdd sicrhau cysondeb ymagwedd gan bobl wahanol sy’n ymgymryd â thasg fel sgrinio. Fodd bynnag, er lles tegwch a chysondeb, mae’n amlwg y dylid gwneud penderfyniadau rhagarweiniol mewn modd strwythuredig, a rhoi rhesymau, er mwyn iddynt allu cael eu harchwilio a’u dadansoddi. Mae achos
yn dangos, mor ddiweddar â 1999, bod diffygion difrifol yng ngwaith sgrinio’r GMC.
Daeth achos
gerbron yr Uchel Lys ym mis Mehefin 2002, er bod y digwyddiadau perthnasol wedi digwydd yn 2001. Roedd yr hawliwr yn fam i fachgen bach a fu farw ac yr anfonwyd ei gorff ar gyfer archwiliad post-mortem i Ysbyty Plant Alder Hey. Roedd rhai o’i organau wedi’u cadw heb gydsyniad yr hawliwr. Yn dilyn cyhoeddi Adroddiad Ymchwiliad y Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital (Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Alder Hey), ar 30 Ionawr 2001, adroddwyd enwau meddygon penodol a gafodd eu beirniadu yn yr Adroddiad hwnnw i’r GMC. Penderfynodd y sgrinwyr meddygol a’r sgrinwyr lleyg i beidio cyfeirio achosion dau o’r meddygon at y PPC. Y rheswm a roddwyd gan y GMC am y penderfyniadau hyn oedd nad oedd Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Alder Hey yn codi materion SPM yn ymwneud â’r ddau feddyg. Daeth yr hawliwr ag achos drwy adolygiad barnwrol, gan herio penderfyniad y sgrinwyr. Heriodd hefyd benderfyniadau’r PPC mewn perthynas â naw meddyg arall a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC ond na chawsant eu cyfeirio ymlaen gan y PPC at y PCC.
Nid yw’n eglur pa bryd y gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniadau sgrinio perthnasol. Fodd bynnag, gofynnodd cyfreithwyr ar ran yr hawliwr am esboniad amdanynt a chyrhaeddodd llythyr esboniad y GMC (a oedd heb ei ddyddio) ar neu oddeutu 16 Awst 2001. Roedd hynny dros flwyddyn wedi i reol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 gael ei diwygio er mwyn newid y prawf sgrinio.
Rhoddwyd caniatâd i wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol, ac aeth yr achos ymlaen i wrandawiad gerbron Meistr Ustus Burton. Roedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi darparu datganiad tyst yn disgrifio’r broses a’r rhesymeg o’r modd y daeth i’w benderfyniad. Roedd y datganiad tyst hwnnw wedi’i gymeradwyo gan y sgriniwr lleyg. Dywedodd y datganiad tyst yn glir y bu anghytundeb rhwng y sgrinwyr yn y lle cyntaf. Roedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi bod yn hyderus nad oedd yr achos yn codi mater o SPM neu SDP. Roedd y sgriniwr lleyg wedi anghytuno â’r farn honno. Ar ôl trafodaethau hir, roeddent wedi cytuno na ddylai’r achos fynd at y PPC. Dywedodd y Barnwr nad oedd unrhyw beth o’i le neu unrhyw beth anarferol am y ffaith y bu anghytundeb rhwng dau sgriniwr, y ddau ohonynt yn annibynnol eu meddwl. Nododd, fodd bynnag, y dywedwyd y daethpwyd i gytundeb yn y pen draw gan y sgriniwr lleyg
‘at ei gilydd’
, er y dywedwyd hefyd bod y ddau sgriniwr, yn y diwedd, wedi’u
‘hargyhoeddi’
o’i gywirdeb.
O ddatganiad tyst y sgriniwr meddygol, roedd yn eglur ei fod wedi cymhwyso’r prawf sgrinio a oedd wedi bod mewn grym cyn mis Awst 2000. Disgrifiodd rôl y sgriniwr meddygol fel rôl a oedd yn penderfynu
‘nad oedd angen i gŵyn fynd ymhellach’
. Ymddengys bod y sgriniwr lleyg wedi derbyn mai dyna oedd y prawf yr oedd yntau wedi’i gymhwyso hefyd. Tynnodd Burton J sylw at y ffaith bod y newid i reol 6(3) ers achos Toth wedi dileu’r cyfeiriad at y gair
yn y prawf sgrinio, a bod y cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd yn ymddangos i’r sgriniwr
‘nad oedd angen i’r mater fynd ymhellach’
wedi mynd. Dyna oedd yr hen reol. O ran y prawf y dylid ei gymhwyso, dywedodd y Barnwr ei bod yn ymddangos yn bwysig iddo ef, yn ymarferol, bod y broses sgrinio’n arwain at ffurfio (gan y sgriniwr meddygol, neu gan y staff, ar gyfarwyddiadau’r sgriniwr meddygol) cyhuddiad neu honiad. Roedd y cyhuddiad neu’r honiad yn cael eu hanfon wedyn at y PPC i’w hystyried. Roedd yn rhaid i’r sgriniwr meddygol, felly, fod yn fodlon y gellid cyflwyno cyhuddiad. Roedd yn ymddangos i Burton J y gallai’r penderfyniad a oedd i’w wneud gan y sgriniwr meddygol yn y cam hwnnw fod, yn syml,
‘pa un a oes achos dadleuol’
. Dywedodd Burton J hefyd, er bod yr ‘hen’ brawf wedi bod yn brawf cul, gellid dweud hefyd ei fod
‘yn caniatáu ar gyfer elfen o oddrychedd neu gymesuredd’
. Mewn cyferbyniad, roedd y prawf ‘newydd’
‘heb fod yn achos dadleuol, i bob pwrpas’
. Mae’n glir bod y prawf anghywir wedi’i gymhwyso. Nid oedd Burton J yn fodlon, pe bai’r prawf cywir wedi’i gymhwyso, y byddai’r sgrinwyr o reidrwydd wedi dod i’r un penderfyniad. Cyfarwyddodd felly y dylai’r achos gael ei ailystyried gan y sgrinwyr, gan gymhwyso’r prawf cywir.
Mae’n amlwg yn fater pryder ei bod yn bosibl i ddau sgriniwr, yng nghanol 2001, i gymhwyso’r hen brawf sgrinio gymaint o fisoedd wedi iddo gael ei ddisodli. Roedd hyn er gwaethaf cyfarfodydd sgrinwyr cyson a sesiynau hyfforddi y dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad oedd yn cael eu cynnal er 1997. Cafodd y gwrandawiad yn yr achos hwn ei gynnal ym mis Mehefin 2002. Nid yw dyddiad datganiad tyst y sgriniwr meddygol yn ymddangos yn y dyfarniad. Gall fod iddo gael ei baratoi beth amser cyn i’r gwrandawiad gael ei gynnal. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys yn eglur na feddyliodd y sgriniwr meddygol na’r sgriniwr lleyg ar unrhyw gam hyd at amser y gwrandawiad ym mis Mehefin 2002 bod y datganiad wedi’i seilio ar gamgymeriad sylfaenol o ran y prawf sgrinio a oedd i’w gymhwyso. Roedd y sgriniwr meddygol dan sylw wedi cael ei benodi’n sgriniwr meddygol ym mis Gorffennaf 2002, sef y mis cyn i’r prawf sgrinio newydd ddod i rym. Dywedwyd gan y Barnwr ei fod wedi sgrinio dros 400 o achosion. Mewn llawer o achosion, gall fod na fyddai’r camgymeriad wedi cael unrhyw effaith ar y canlyniad. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys yn debygol y byddai llawer o achosion wedi bod lle gallai’r camgymeriad wedi gwneud y gwahaniaeth rhwng cwyn yn cael ei chyfeirio at y PPC a chwyn yn cael ei chau yn y cam sgrinio.
Ymddengys i mi, os oedd y ddau sgriniwr hwn dan gamddealltwriaeth ynghylch y prawf cywir i’w gymhwyso, mae’n annhebygol mai y nhw oedd yr unig ddau yn y sefyllfa honno. Mae’n debygol hefyd y byddai rhai eraill o fewn y GMC wedi darllen datganiad tyst y sgriniwr meddygol; eto, ymddengys na wnaeth neb sylwi ar y camgymeriad. Nid oedd fersiwn ddiweddar o’r Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr ar gael bryd hynny, wrth gwrs. Ni ddangoswyd unrhyw arweiniad ar gyfer sgrinwyr i mi a oedd ar gael bryd hynny. Byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl y byddai gorfod addef y camgymeriadau a wnaed yn
wedi bod yn brofiad sobreiddiol i’r GMC. Byddai rhywun wedi meddwl, ar ôl ceisio cael, a chael, newid i’r Rheolau i weithredu newid yn y prawf i’w gymhwyso gan sgrinwyr, y byddai’r GMC wedi rhoi blaenoriaeth uchel i addysgu a hyfforddi sgrinwyr er mwyn eu galluogi i gymhwyso’r prawf yn gywir ac yn gyson. Eto ymddengys na chafodd hyn ei wneud.
Gwaith Pellach gan y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi
Mewn gwaith pellach a wnaed yn ystod 2002, fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ddadansoddi canlyniadau penderfyniadau sgrinio a wnaed yn ystod y cyfnod o 1999 i 2001. Roedd y canlyniadau i’w gweld yn eu Papur yn 2003. Fe wnaethant gymharu’r canlyniadau ar gyfer sgrinwyr unigol. Roedd yr ymarferiad hwn yn dangos amrywiadau mewn canlyniad rhwng sgrinwyr meddygol, gyda dau
‘hebog’
yn anfon cyfartaledd o 30% o achosion a sgriniwyd dros y tair blynedd at y PPC a dwy
‘golomen’
yn anfon cyfartaledd o lai nag 20%. Roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wedi argymell yn flaenorol y dylid sefydlu system o ddosbarthu achosion i sgrinwyr ar hap. Dywedwyd wrthynt, o ganlyniad i’r argymhelliad hwnnw, bod system
‘safle cabiau’
o ddosbarthu achosion i’r sgrinwyr wedi bod ar waith o ddechrau 2000. O’r amser hwnnw, ni ddylai unrhyw wahaniaeth wedi bod ym mathau neu ddifrifoldeb achosion yr oedd pob sgriniwr meddygol unigol yn ymdrin â nhw. Awgrymodd y tîm PSI, os oedd yn ffaith yn wir bod achosion yn cael eu dosbarthu’n gyfan gwbl ar hap, roedd yr amrywiadau mewn canlyniad yn dystiolaeth nad oedd pob un o’r sgrinwyr meddygol yn cymhwyso’r un safonau a’r meini prawf i’w proses gwneud penderfyniadau.
Diben pennaf ymchwil y PSI oedd nodi unrhyw wahaniaethau rhwng y modd yr ymdriniodd y GMC â meddygon a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso yn y DU a’r modd yr ymdriniodd â’r rheiny a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor, ac, os oedd unrhyw wahaniaethau felly’n amlwg, dadansoddi’r rhesymau posibl am y gwahaniaethau hynny. Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wahaniaethau yn y modd yr ymdriniwyd â dau grŵp, ond cawsant anhawster wrth ddadansoddi’r rhesymau am y gwahaniaethau hynny oherwydd
‘nad oedd unrhyw gytundeb cyffredin dirnadwy am y meini prawf a’r trothwy i’w cymhwyso wrth ddod i ddyfarniad am ddifrifoldeb neu bwysigrwydd achosion’
. Fe wnaethant nodi bod y diffyg cytundeb cyffredin hwn wedi arwain at broblemau wrth sicrhau cysondeb. Ymestynnodd y problemau hyn i’r modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achosion gwahanol o fewn yr un cam (e.e. sgrinio) o’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, a’r modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achosion ar wahanol gamau o’r gweithdrefnau (e.e. fel rhwng y camau sgrinio a PPC). Cyfeiriodd y tîm PSI yn ôl at yr argymhellion yn ei Adroddiad 2000 a nodi bod y gwahaniaethau parhaus rhwng canlyniadau achosion FTP yn ymwneud â meddygon a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso yn y DU a’r rheiny a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor yn awgrymu bod datblygu canllawiau i’w defnyddio yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau yn
‘fater o flaenoriaeth’
Fel y dywedais, yn ystod eu gwaith ymchwil, diben pennaf yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr oedd canfod a oedd unrhyw ragfarn hiliol yng ngweithdrefnau FTP y GMC. Yn amlwg, os oedd anghysondeb yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau, byddai’n amhosibl iddynt ddod i unrhyw gasgliadau dibynadwy ar y mater hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, mae cysondeb wrth wneud penderfyniadau yn bwysig yn fwy cyffredinol hefyd er lles tegwch i bob meddyg sy’n destun cwyn. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ar y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael, na ellid taeru bod y GMC wedi ymdrin â phob meddyg yn yr un modd trwy gyfeirio at yr un meini prawf a’r un safonau. Y rheswm am hyn oedd nad oedd unrhyw feini prawf neu safonau a gytunwyd arnynt yn gyffredinol neu a gymhwyswyd yn gyffredinol. Byddwn yn ychwanegu bod cysondeb yn bwysig hefyd o safbwynt diogelu cleifion. Os oes trothwy ‘cywir’ ar gyfer cymryd camau, fe allai’r cyhoedd fod yn agored i risg os nad oes gweithredu ar y trothwy hwnnw mewn rhai achosion. Hefyd, oni nodir y trothwy yn glir, bydd y cyhoedd yn teimlo’n ddig pan fydd y diffyg eglurder yn arwain at anghysondeb yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau.
Newid Arall yn y Prawf Sgrinio
Ar 1 Tachwedd 2002, yn dilyn y penderfyniad yn
, newidiwyd y prawf sgrinio eto. Newidiwyd Rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddarllen:
Dywedodd Dr Midha wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y prawf hwn wedi newid y ‘rhagdybiaeth’ y byddai penderfyniadau sgrinio’n cael eu gwneud arni. Credaf mai’r hyn a olygai oedd, cyn mis Tachwedd 2002, roedd yn rhaid i achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC oni bai bod y sgrinwyr yn cytuno nad oedd unrhyw gwestiwn o SPM yn codi (prawf negyddol), ac o dan y rheol newydd, roedd yn rhaid i’r sgriniwr fod yn fodlon yn bendant ei fod yn ddadleuol a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mewn gwirionedd, bach iawn oedd y newid. Roedd yr iaith wedi newid, ond roedd y trothwy i’w groesi cyn bod yr achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at y PPC yn parhau’n isel iawn. O’i roi mewn ffordd arall, o’i chyflawni’n unol â’r Rheolau, roedd y broses sgrinio’n parhau, fel y bwriadwyd iddi fod o hyd, yn hidlwr bras iawn.
Ar 1 Tachwedd 2002 hefyd, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddileu’r gofyniad i achwynydd ddarparu datganiad statudol i ategu’i gŵyn/chwyn.
Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002
Ar yr achlysur hwn, cyhoeddwyd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr newydd (Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002) ar yr un amser â’r newid yn y prawf sgrinio. Hwn oedd y Llawlyfr a oedd yn cael ei ddefnyddio pan gynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003. Roedd yn cynnwys
ar ddehongli’r prawf sgrinio newydd. Cynghorwyd sgrinwyr hefyd y dylent ofyn yn gyntaf a yw’n ddadleuol yn briodol y gallai’r camymddygiad honedig fod yn gyfysytr ag SPM. Wrth ateb y cwestiwn cyntaf, cynghorwyd sgrinwyr:
Dywedwyd wrth sgrinwyr, os oeddent o’r farn ei bod yn ddadleuol yn briodol y gallai’r camymddygiad honedig fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yna dylent ystyried pa un a oedd yn ddadleuol yn briodol, o’r deunydd a oedd ar gael mewn perthynas â’r achos, bod yr ymarferydd wedi cyflawni SPM. Wrth ystyried y cwestiwn hwn, anogwyd sgrinwyr i gofio:
Cafodd sgrinwyr eu rhybuddio nad oedd elfen dystiolaethol y prawf yn sefydlu
‘rhwystr uchel yn erbyn cynnydd achos’
. Dywedwyd wrthynt na ddylent wneud unrhyw ymgais i ddatrys unrhyw wrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth. Datganodd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002:
Rwyf eisoes wedi sôn ym Mhennod 18 bod fersiynau mis Tachwedd 2002 a mis Ebrill 2003 o’r Llawlyfr Gwaith Achos FTP, a Llawlyfr Ymchwilio FPT mis Mai 2004, yn cynghori mai tystiolaeth
oedd yn ofynnol gan y sgrinwyr.
Wrth benderfynu pa un a oedd ymddygiad yn gallu bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu beidio, dywedwyd wrth sgrinwyr y dylent gofio arweiniad perthnasol y GMC wrth arfer eu disgresiwn ynghylch cau achos neu ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Datganodd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 y byddai staff yn sicrhau bod sylw’r sgrinwyr yn cael ei dynnu at yr arweiniad priodol. Mewn llawer o achosion, yr ‘arweiniad’ fyddai’r darn perthnasol o ‘Good Medical Practice’. Nododd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn eglur na fyddai gwyro o’r arweiniad cyhoeddedig o reidrwydd yn arwain at faterion o SPM. Datganodd:
Cynghorodd yr arweiniad ymhellach (mewn iaith a ddaeth yn beryglus o agos at annog y sgriniwr i wneud ‘dyfarniad’ ar y dystiolaeth):
Nid oedd y Llawlyfr yn cynnwys unrhyw feini prawf yr oedd sgrinwyr i asesu
‘graddfa’
‘natur’
y gwyro o’r arweiniad perthnasol a fyddai’n ddigonol i godi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg. Yn fy marn i, fe allai defnyddio’r ymadrodd ‘codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg’ fod wedi achosi rhywfaint o ddryswch, gan y gallai fod wedi awgrymu i rai sgrinwyr bod rhaid i’r ymddygiad fod mor ddifrifol ei fod yn arwain at y posibilrwydd o ddileu o’r gofrestr. Mewn gwirionedd, os oedd SPM yn cael ei brofi, gallai’r PCC bennu ffurf sancsiwn llai na dileu, gan gynnwys pennu amodau. Yn y gorffennol diweddar, daeth yn fwyfwy cyffredin i’r GMC ddefnyddio’r cysyniad o ymddygiad a oedd ‘yn ddigon difrifol i godi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad’ fel ymddygiad a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Yn fy marn i, ni wnaeth defnyddio’r ymadrodd hwn helpu sgrinwyr i benderfynu a oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Wrth wneud penderfyniad ar achos, cynghorodd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 bod nifer o opsiynau gan sgriniwr meddygol. Yn gyntaf, fe allai (gyda chytundeb sgriniwr lleyg) gau’r achos. Os oedd yn penderfynu bod y llwybr gweithredu’n briodol, gallai ddewis anfon llythyr at y meddyg, yn rhoi cyngor ynghylch ei ddyfodol/dyfodol. Yn ail, gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol gyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Yn drydydd, os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol o’r farn bod sail i awgrymu y gallai safon perfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg fod yn ddiffygiol difrifol, gallai gyfeirio’r achos ar gyfer asesiad perfformiad. Trafodaf yr opsiwn hwnnw ymhellach ym Mhennod 24. Yn bedwerydd, gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol gyfeirio’r achos at y gweithdrefnau iechyd.
Pumed opsiwn i’r sgriniwr meddygol oedd gofyn am wybodaeth bellach. Fodd bynnag, cynghorwyd sgrinwyr mai dim ond mewn amgylchiadau pan oedd gwybodaeth bellach yn angenrheidiol er mwyn esbonio beth oedd yr honiad, y dylent wneud hyn. Cafodd sgrinwyr eu rhybuddio i beidio gofyn am wybodaeth bellach nad oedd yn angenrheidiol at y diben hwn. Datganodd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002, os oeddent, ac yn cael tystiolaeth mewn ymateb i’w cais:
(h.y. y GMC)
leave ourselves open to the charge that the screeners, in seeking evidence, must have intended to take that evidence into account in making their decision and that in doing so they went beyond their legal powers and applied the wrong test (by weighing the evidence)’.
Rwy’n deall yn iawn pam yr oedd y GMC yn dymuno anghefnogi ceisiadau am dystiolaeth bellach am honiad. Fodd bynnag, byddai wedi bod yn anffodus pe bai sgrinwyr wedi cael eu hannog i beidio gofyn i staff ganfod, er enghraifft, a oedd cwynion eraill o natur debyg wedi dod i sylw cyflogwr y meddyg neu’r sefydliad gofal sylfaenol yr oedd wedi’i gynnwys/chynnwys ar ei restr. Ni ddylai cwynion gael eu hystyried ar eu pennau’u hunain; fe allai gwybodaeth ychwanegol ddangos yn wir bod cwyn a oedd i weld yn gŵyn unigol o arfer clinigol gwael, fod yn arwydd o SDP mewn gwirionedd. Fodd bynnag, gall fod, yn y dyfodol, y bydd y GMC yn cael gwybodaeth felly fel mater o drefn arferol, mewn rhai achosion o leiaf. Dof yn ôl at y mater hwn nes ymlaen.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn cynghori, pan oedd penderfyniad wedi’i wneud i gyfeirio achos at y PPC, ni ddylai’r sgriniwr meddygol ofyn am gael gwybodaeth bellach cyn i’r achos fynd yn ei flaen. Trwy wneud y penderfyniad hwn, roedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi cyflawni’i rôl ac nid oedd ganddo/ganddi unrhyw ran bellach mewn cyfarwyddo’r achos. Roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr meddygol, mewn achosion eithriadol, i ofyn am ail farn gan sgriniwr meddygol arall neu alw am gynhadledd achos yn cynnwys nifer o sgrinwyr. Fodd bynnag, roedd sgrinwyr yn cael eu hannog i arfer yr opsiynau hyn pan oedd
‘yn gwbl angenrheidiol’
yn unig, gan mai eu heffaith fyddai hwyhau‘r broses sgrinio. Dan safonau gwasanaeth y GMC, roedd gan sgrinwyr bythefnos i ystyried pob ffeil a dod i benderfyniad. Mewn achosion eithriadol (h.y. y rheiny a oedd yn gymhleth tu hwnt neu a oedd yn cynnwys meintiau mawr o wybodaeth neu ddogfennaeth), gallai sgrinwyr gytuno ar raddfa amser hwy gyda staff y GMC ar gyfer penderfyniad unigol. Roedd sgrinwyr meddygol yn cael eu cynghori hefyd y dylent ystyried a oedd yn angenrheidiol i gymryd camau i ddiogelu lles y cyhoedd drwy atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, tra’n disgwyl penderfyniad terfynol ar ei achos/hachos. Os oeddent o’r farn ei bod yn angenrheidiol cymryd camau felly, roedd yn ofynnol iddynt gyfeirio’r achos at y Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn cynghori y dylai ffurflen SDF gael ei llenwi ac y dylai’r sgriniwr roi rhesymau clir am ei benderfyniad/phenderfyniad. Dylai’r rhesymau hynny ymwneud yn unig â’r prawf yr oedd yn ofynnol i’r sgrinwyr ei gymhwyso. Os oedd achos i’w gau, dylai’r sgriniwr meddygol gymeradwyo’r llythyrau a oedd i’w hanfon at yr achwynydd a’r meddyg. Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn atgoffa sgrinwyr meddygol y dylai’r esboniadau i’r partïon amrywiol gynnwys geiriad union yr un fath, ac eithrio lle allai fod angen esbonio termau technegol i achwynydd.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn dweud yn glir mai un o swyddogaethau gweithwyr achos a rheolwyr achos yn yr Adran Sgrinio oedd sicrhau bod penderfyniadau sgrinwyr yn cael eu gwneud yn unol â’r gyfraith a’r broses statudol. Roedd protocol cytunedig ynghlwm wrth y Llawlyfr, yn nodi’r amgylchiadau lle fyddai’n briodol i aelod o staff ofyn i sgriniwr ailystyried penderfyniad a ellid fod wedi’i wneud am resymau nad oedd modd eu hamddiffyn yn gyfreithiol. Gallai hyn godi os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn gofyn i staff gael gafael ar wybodaeth nad oedd yn angenrheidiol at ddiben y penderfyniad sgrinio. Yn fwy aml, byddai’n codi os oedd y rhesymau am y penderfyniad a roddwyd gan y sgriniwr meddygol yn dangos ei fod/bod wedi ystyried materion na ddylai fod wedi bod yn rhan o’r broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Un enghraifft fyddai os oedd yn glir bod y sgriniwr wedi ‘pwyso a mesur’ y dystiolaeth neu wedi damcaniaethu ynghylch y modd y gallai’r PPC neu’r PCC waredu’r achos. Roedd y protocol yn nodi y gallai penderfyniad a oedd yn cael ei wneud yn yr amgylchiadau hyn fod yn agored i’w herio gan adolygiad barnwrol. Mewn achos lle’r oedd pryder gwirioneddol ynghylch y potensial am adolygiad barnwrol, roedd y protocol yn awgrymu y gall fod rhaid gofyn am gyngor cyfreithwyr y GMC cyn gwneud penderfyniad terfynol ar yr achos. Bwriad hyn, yn ddiau, oedd osgoi ailadrodd y sefyllfa yn
, lle’r oedd yn amlwg ar unwaith i gynghorwyr y GMC bod penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr yn anghynaladwy.
Ar 1 Tachwedd 2002, newidiwyd rheol 5(1) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddarllen:
Roedd y newid hwn yn rhoi awdurdod cyfreithiol penodol i’r cyfarwyddyd a fu ers tro gan y PPC nad oedd angen cyfeirio euogfarnau am fân droseddau moduro at y PPC, nac, yn wir, at sgriniwr meddygol. Ymddengys bod y rheol a newidiwyd wedi creu disgwyliad y byddai euogfarnau a oedd yn arwain at ddedfryd o garchar ar unwaith yn cael eu cyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at sgriniwr meddygol.
Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn delio â sgrinio euogfarnau. Roedd yn datgan:
Y Broblem o Ganfod y Modd y Deliwyd ag Achosion Euogfarnau
Mae problem go iawn o ran canfod nifer a natur yr euogfarnau’n cael eu hadrodd i’r GMC, ac o ran olrhain y modd y deliwyd â’r euogfarnau hynny. Yn ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC, mae achosion y deliodd sgrinwyr meddygol â nhw yn cael eu rhannu i gategorïau bras. Nid oes categori ‘euogfarn’ ar wahân. Bydd rhai o’r categorïau (e.e. anonestrwydd, ymosod yn rhywiol/anwedduster a thrais) yn ôl pob tebyg yn cynnwys achosion euogfarnau ac achosion ymddygiad. Nid yw’n bosibl, o ddarllen yr ystadegau, i wahaniaethu rhwng y ddau. Yn 2003, cafodd 28 o achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o anonestrwydd yn erbyn meddygon eu cau gan sgrinwyr, allan o 125 o achosion felly a gafodd eu hystyried. Gall fod na chafodd y meddyg yn yr un o’r 28 o achosion ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd. Gall fod fod cyfran go fawr wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog. Mae’n amhosibl dweud o’r ystadegau FTP blynyddol. Dim ond pan oedd achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC yr oedd ystadegau’r GMC yn nodi nifer yr achosion euogfarnau y deliwyd â nhw, a’u canlyniad. Yn fy marn i, mae hyn yn anfoddhaol. Mae’n bwysig i aelodau o’r GMC a’r cyhoedd yn ehangach wybod yn union sut mae’r GMC yn delio â meddygon sy’n cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau. Mae tryloywder yn arbennig o bwysig lle mae pryderon yn bodoli, fel sydd, ynghylch y gwahaniaeth yn y driniaeth rhwng grwpiau gwahanol o feddygon.
Anfon Achosion yn Eu Hôl at y Sgriniwr Iechyd
Ers cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ym 1980, mae’r Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol wedi caniatáu i sgrinwyr meddygol, mewn achosion euogfarnau ac ymddygiad, i anfon achos priodol yn ei ôl at sgriniwr iechyd er mwyn delio ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, fel dewis arall i gyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Mae cyfran fawr o’r achosion lle’r ystyrir gweithredu fel hyn yn ymwneud â meddyg yn camddefnyddio alcohol neu gyffuriau rheoledig.
Yn ôl ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC, yn 2001, anfonodd y sgrinwyr meddygol 31 o achosion (allan o 2235 o achosion a sgriniwyd) yn eu hôl at y sgriniwr iechyd. Yn 2002, anfonwyd 13 allan o 2239 o achosion yn eu hôl felly. Yn 2002, cafodd 13 allan o 1884 o feddygon y deliodd y sgrinwyr meddygol a’u hachosion eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yn 2003, y ffigur oedd saith allan o 1304 o feddygon. Nid oes modd dweud faint o’r achosion hyn (os o gwbl) a oedd yn ymwneud ag euogfarnau. Beth bynnag, mae’n eglur yn y gorffennol diweddar, bod y sgrinwyr meddygol wedi cyfeirio cyfran fechan o achosion yn unig at y gweithdrefnau iechyd.
Archwilio Penderfyniadau Sgrinio
Tra’n gwneud y gwaith paratoi ar gyfer eu Hadroddiad 1996, roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wedi cynghori y dylai sgrinwyr gael hyfforddiant, ac y dylent gael gwybodaeth am ganlyniadau achosion yr oeddent wedi’u sgrinio. Nid oedd hyn wedi digwydd hyd at yr amser hwnnw. Mewn ymateb i’r argymhelliad hwnnw, dechreuwyd cyfarfodydd rheolaidd i sgrinwyr a rheolwyr gwaith achos sgrinio. Defnyddiwyd y rhain i drafod materion o ddiddordeb cyffredin a oedd yn codi o’r broses sgrinio, yn ogystal ag achosion sgrinio penodol, wedi’u gwneud yn ddienw yn briodol. Hefyd, cyflwynwyd sesiynau hyfforddi a gweithdai i sgrinwyr a gweithwyr achos sgrinio.
O oddeutu diwedd 2002 neu ddechrau 2003, dechreuodd sgrinwyr gael ystadegau am eu canlyniadau sgrinio eu hunain. Roedd yr ystadegau’n dangos faint o achosion yr oedd y sgriniwr wedi’u cau a faint yr oedd wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC. Roedd sgrinwyr yn gallu cymharu’r wybodaeth hon â gwybodaeth ddienw am ganlyniadau sgrinio cydweithwyr. Amcan hyn oedd hysbysu sgrinwyr unigol a hefyd galluogi staff y GMC nodi sgrinwyr a oedd i weld yn ystadegau anarferol mewn rhyw ffordd. Pan gyflwynwyd y system newydd, y bwriad oedd, os oed ystadegyn anarferol yn cael ei nodi, byddid yn gofyn am esboniad a byddai unrhyw gamau adferol yn cael eu cymryd. Nid oes gan yr Ymchwiliad unrhyw wybodaeth a oes unrhyw gamau felly wedi’u cymryd mewn perthynas ag unrhyw sgriniwr. Cafodd sgrinwyr eu hysbysu hefyd am ganlyniadau ystyriaeth y PPC o achosion yr oeddent wedi’u cyfeirio yno.
Ym mis Medi 2002, ymunodd Mr Blake Dobson â’r GMC. Rhoddwyd cyfrifoldeb iddo am ddatblygu rhaglen i archwilio gwaith achos y GMC a ellid ei chymhwyso i’r gweithdrefnau FTP presennol a’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Ym mis Ionawr 2003, daeth Mr Dobson yn Bennaeth y Tîm Archwilio FPD. Mae’r tîm yn cynnwys tri gweithiwr achos a chynorthwyydd gweinyddol, yn ogystal â Mr Dobson.
Ym mis Awst 2003, dechreuodd y gwaith sgrinio ar y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Cafodd sampl ar hap o ddau achos i bob sgriniwr meddygol ei archwilio bob mis. Roedd yr archwiliad yn cynnwys archwiliad o femorandwm y gweithiwr achos at y sgriniwr ac o’r memorandwm sgrinio a oedd yn nodi penderfyniad y sgriniwr ac unrhyw sylw arall a wnaed gan y sgriniwr ar y ffeil. Fe wnaeth yr archwilwyr wirio hefyd bod y rhan berthnasol o’r SDF wedi’i llenwi’n gywir a’i bod yn gyson â’r penderfyniad sgrinio.
Roedd gwiriad yn cael ei wneud i sicrhau bod y rhesymau am y penderfyniad yn cydsynio â’r prawf sgrinio a oedd i’w gymhwyso. Os oedd tystiolaeth a oedd yn awgrymu bod sail y penderfyniad yn amheus - oherwydd bod y sgriniwr yn ôl pob golwg wedi cymhwyso’r prawf anghywir, er enghraifft, neu oherwydd ei fod/bod wedi ystyried materion na ddylai fod wedi ffurfio rhan o’r penderfyniad - roedd y ffeiliau’n cael eu cyfeirio at Mr Dobson, ac, os oedd ganddo yntau bryderon, roeddent yn cael eu trosglwyddo i Gyfarwyddwr yr FPD.
Roedd y weithdrefn hon yn ddatblygiad i’w groesawu’n fawr. Nes ei gyflwyno, dim ond os oedd gweithrediadau ar gyfer adolygiad barnwrol yn cael eu cymryd y byddai penderfyniad sgriniwr yn cael ei archwilio. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yr archwiliad yn gyflawn o hyd. Roedd yn gwirio bod y rhesymau a roddwyd yn cydymffurfio â’r prawf cyfreithiol (a oedd yn amlwg yn bwysig) ond nid oedd yn cynnwys unrhyw werthusiad o ba un a oedd y penderfyniad ei hun yn un cywir ym mhob un o amgylchiadau’r achos.
Yn fwy diweddar, ym mis Mai 2004, sefydlwyd Is-Grŵp Archwilio Ymchwiliad gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer, gyda golwg ar sefydlu a datblygu rhaglen archwilio ar gyfer cam ymchwilio’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.
Bu trafodaethau, yn y gorffennol, am arfarnu sgrinwyr. Nid aethpwyd â’r trafodaethau hyn yn eu blaen, oherwydd, i raddau helaeth, y newidiadau a oedd wrth law yn y trefniadau ar gyfer sgrinio.

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais yn barod, mae’r adolygiadau barnwrol wedi rhoi enghreifftiau o achosion lle mae sgrinwyr wedi cymhwyso’r prawf sgrinio anghywir ac wedi ystyried ystyriaethau amherthnasol. Ymddengys bod y camgymeriadau hynny wedi’u gwneud o ganlyniad i anwybodaeth am y prawf cywir a’r ystyriaethau a oedd yn berthnasol iddo. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod ei archwiliadau, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi dod yn ymwybodol hefyd o nifer o sefyllfaoedd lle mae sgrinwyr wedi bod yn amharod i gadw at benderfyniadau mewnol y GMC.
‘Camymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol trwy Ddiffiniad’
Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn Cytuno i Gyfeirio’n Awtomatig at y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Fel yr esboniais, roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn awyddus i hyrwyddo newidiadau yng ngweithdrefnau’r GMC a fyddai’n sicrhau cysondeb mwy yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Yn unol â hynny, yn y cyfnod cyn cychwyn ei hastudiaeth ddilynol ym 1999, cytunodd yr Athro Allen â’r GMC bod nifer o gategorïau o achosion a ddylai ‘trwy ddiffiniad’ gael eu hystyried gan y sgrinwyr meddygol fel SPM. Y categorïau y cytunwyd y dylai’r ymagwedd hon fod yn berthnasol iddynt oedd cwynion am anonestrwydd, ymddygiad camweithredol (e.e. ymddygiad difrïol, mynnu arian gan gleifion, parhau i ymarfer wrth gludo afiechyd heintus, etc.), ymosod yn rhywiol ac anwedduster a thrais. Roedd achosion a oedd yn disgyn o fewn y categorïau hyn i’w cyfeirio’n awtomatig gan y sgriniwr meddygol at y PPC, oni bai bod y sgriniwr meddygol o’r farn bod un o ddau eithriad yn berthnasol. Yr eithriadau hyn oedd, yn gyntaf, lle’r oedd y meddyg yn dioddef o salwch terfynol ac nad oedd yn ymarfer yn weithredol, ac, yn ail, pan nad oedd sail dichonol am weithredu oherwydd bod yr achwynydd wedi gwrthod ceisiadau rhesymol am wybodaeth bellach, lle nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth dystiolaethol i ategu’r honiad(au) (neu unrhyw obaith o’i chael), neu fod y gŵyn yn amlwg yn anwir neu’n afresymol. Roedd y mathau o ymddygiad a oedd yn gyfystyr ag ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ yn cael eu dynodi’n glir ar yr SDFau a gafodd eu cyflwyno bryd hynny i gynorthwyo sgrinwyr yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau.
Effaith Cyfeirio’n Awtomatig
Fe wnaeth cyflwyno’r categorïau ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ arwain yn y lle cyntaf at gynnydd dramatig yn nifer y cwynion am anonestrwydd, ymddygiad camweithredol, ymosod yn rhywiol ac anwedduster, a thrais a gyfeiriwyd gan y sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC. Ym 1997 a 1998, dim ond oddeutu hanner yr holl gwynion am anonestrwydd a throseddoldeb a gyfeiriwyd at y sgrinwyr meddygol - a llawer llai o gwynion yn ymwneud â’r categorïau eraill o ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’- oedd wedi’u cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC. Mewn cyferbyniad, yn ystod y cyfnod o fis Gorffennaf at fis Rhagfyr 1999, cafodd 93% o’r holl achosion o fewn y categorïau ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ eu cyfeirio at y PPC. Yn y 7% arall o achosion, y rheswm a roddwyd gan y sgrinwyr meddygol am beidio cyfeirio’r achos oedd
‘nad oedd tystiolaeth dystiolaethol i ategu’r honiad nag unrhyw obaith o gael unrhyw dystiolaeth felly’
Roedd Adroddiad PSI 2000 yn croesawu’r cysondeb ymagwedd yn sgil cyflwyno’r categorïau ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Yn wir, awgrymodd bod dadl o blaid staff y GMC yn cyfeirio pob cwyn am anonestrwydd, ymddygiad camweithredol, ymosod yn rhywiol ac anwedduster a thrais yn uniongyrchol at y PPC wrth eu derbyn, heb unrhyw ymyrraeth o gwbl gan y sgriniwr meddygol. Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr, ar gyfer achosion felly, bod ystyriaeth gan y sgriniwr meddygol a’r PPC eu dau i weld yn dyblygu ymdrech yn ddiangen. Roedd yn achosi oedi hefyd, a oedd yn peri pryder, yn enwedig pan oedd achos i weld yn codi cwestiwn risg i’r cyhoedd.
Enciliad Annisgwyl
Fel y dywedais, roedd y GMC wedi cytuno i gyflwyno ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ac roedd SDFau addas wedi’u cynllunio gan y tîm PSI mewn ymgynghoriad â’r GMC. Dywedodd Mr Scott y bu ‘ymrwymiad cryf iawn’ i ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ a ‘brwdfrydedd enfawr’ ynghylch gweithredu’r weithdrefn newydd. Ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, fe wnaeth cyfarfod o’r Cyngor ystyried Adroddiad PSI 2000. Roedd y papurau briffio ar gyfer y cyfarfod yn cyfeirio at achosion o ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ac yn nodi y byddai achosion felly’n cael eu cyfeirio fel arfer gan y sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC. Roedd y newid hwn a newidiadau eraill, dywedwyd, wedi
. Byddai unrhyw un a oedd yn darllen y papurau hynny wedi deall bod y system lle’r oedd mathau penodol o gwynion yn cael eu hystyried trwy ddiffiniad fel rhai a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC fwy neu lai yn awtomatig, ar waith ac yn esgor ar fuddion.
Byddai unrhyw un a oedd yn darllen Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 wedi cael yr un argraff, gan yr oedd yn datgan:
Pan wnaethant ymgymryd â’u gwaith yn 2002, roedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wedi rhagdybio’n ddealladwy y byddai bron i 100% o achosion yn y categori ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ a’r holl euogfarnau (heblaw am y rheiny a eithriwyd yn benodol) wedi cael eu cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr meddygol at y PPC. Cyn belled ag yr oeddent yn ymwybodol, roedd y system yn dal ar waith fel y cytunwyd gyda’r GMC yn gynnar ym 1999, ac ni chawsant eu hysbysu fel arall. Gyda syndod, felly, y gwnaethant ganfod, yn y categori anonestrwydd/troseddoldeb, mai 47% yn unig o’r achosion a oedd wedi mynd at y sgrinwyr meddygol yn 2000 oedd wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC, gan godi i 74% yn 2001. Yn y ddwy flynedd hynny, roedd un rhan o bump o’r achosion na chawsant eu cyfeirio at y PPC wedi’u sgrinio allan ar y sail nad oeddent yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Go brin fod hyn yn gyson â’u categoreiddio fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Hefyd, roedd 19% o achosion yn y categori anonestrwydd/troseddoldeb yn 2000 a 7% yn 2001 wedi’u cyfeirio gan sgrinwyr at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yn y categori ymddygiad camweithredol, dim ond rhyw 70% o achosion a welwyd gan y sgrinwyr meddygol oedd wedi’u cyfeirio ganddynt at y PPC yn 2001 a 2001. Eto, roedd y gyfran hon yn disgyn yn sylweddol islaw’r 100% bron a oedd wedi’i ddisgwyl.
Pan holodd yr Athro Allen ynghylch y canfyddiadau hyn, esboniodd aelodau o staff y GMC y bu newid arfer yng nghanol 2001. O’r amser hwnnw, dywedwyd wrthi, nid oedd gofyniad mwyach y dylai cwynion a oedd yn disgyn o fewn y categori ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ gael eu cyfeirio at y PPC yn absenoldeb rhesymau diwrthdro pam na ddylid gwneud hyn. Yn lle hynny, roedd sgrinwyr meddygol wedi bod yn defnyddio’u disgresiwn eu hunain wrth benderfynu cyfeirio achosion at y PPC ai peidio. Roedd cynnwys yr SDF hyd yn oed wedi’i newid i hwyluso hyn. Mae’n eglur o’r ystadegau, hyd yn oed yn 2000, nad oedd sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai sgrinwyr meddygol o leiaf) wedi bod yn gweithredu’r polisi mewn gwirionedd yn unol â’r cytundeb y daethpwyd iddo‘r flwyddyn flaenorol.
Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y newid arfer wedi ymddangos iddi hi ‘fel rhywbeth mor hynod i’w wneud’. Roedd cyfeirio’n awtomatig wedi bod yn bolisi cytunedig. Roedd wedi gofyn i’r GMC am esboniad am y newid, ond ni chafodd un. Dywedwyd wrthi, fodd bynnag, y byddai’r newid arfer yn cael ei wrthdroi er mwyn adfer y system y cytunwyd arni ym mis Mawrth 1999.
Gofynnwyd i Dr Korlipara, aelod o’r GMC a sgriniwr meddygol rhwng 1998 a 2004, am y newid hwn yn yr arfer. Pan ddangoswyd y categorïau ymddygiad iddo y cytunwyd y dylid eu trin fel achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, dywedodd, os oedd sgriniwr yn fodlon ynghylch cryfder yr honiad ac os oedd tystiolaeth
i ategu’r honiad, roedd yn rhaid i’r sgriniwr gyfeirio achosion felly at y PPC. Os oedd un o’r categorïau hynny’n berthnasol, dywedodd, ‘Does dim dwywaith, byddent yn mynd at y PPC.’ Fodd bynnag, pan ofynnwyd iddo am yr enghraifft benodol o ddwyn, dywedodd Dr Korlipara bod amgylchiadau lle’r oedd wedi penderfynu nad oedd angen i achos o ddwyn fynd at y PPC. Yr enghraifft a roddodd oedd:
‘Os oedd yn swm bychan o arian neu ychydig bach o adnoddau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol fel, wyddoch chi, cymryd paracetamol neu rywbeth felly sy’n cael ei ddwyn, yn dechnegol gywir, efallai na fyddwn yn mynd â’r mater ymhellach.’
Dywedodd y byddai’n arfer rhywfaint o ddisgresiwn er mwyn gwahaniaethu rhwng y ‘disylwedd’ a’r ‘ychydig mwy difrifol’. Nid oedd Dr Korlipara i weld ei fod yn gwerthfawrogi, drwy wneud hyn, ei fod yn tanseilio’r weithdrefn a bennwyd ar gyfer sgrinio cwynion a oedd wedi’u nodi fel rhai a oedd yn gyfystyr ag ‘SMP trwy ddiffiniad’. Nid oedd, yn ôl pob golwg, yn gwerthfawrogi ychwaith y gallai hyn fod yn ffynhonnell annhegwch i feddygon. Os oedd achos meddyg yn cael ei sgrinio gan un o gydweithwyr Dr Korlipara, a oedd yn cadw at y rheol ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, byddai’r achos hwnnw’n cael ei anfon at y PPC; os oedd achos yr un meddyg, fodd bynnag, yn cael ei sgrinio gan Dr Korlipara, byddai’n cael ei gau. Methodd ymateb Dr Korlipara hefyd â rhoi ystyriaeth i’r ffaith y gallai pobl gwahanol fod â barnau gwahanol ynghylch a ellid fyth ystyried dwyn arian (hyd yn oed swm bach o arian), neu ddwyn cyffuriau o’r GIG, fel rhywbeth ‘disylwedd’. Yn wir, roedd y weithdrefn ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ wedi’u hanelu at leihau’r anghysonder a oedd yn llifo o’r ffaith y gall fod barnau gwahanol gan unigolion ynghylch yr ymagwedd i’w mabwysiadu tuag at fathau penodol o gamymddygiad, gan gynnwys anonestrwydd.
Ymddengys bod yr hyn a alwyd gan Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, yn gyfnod o ‘gydymffurfio anghyflawn’â’r weithdrefn ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ gan sgrinwyr meddygol. Yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, nid oedd sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai ohonynt) yn anfon yr holl achosion o fewn y categorïau perthnasol at y PPC. Dywedodd y sgrinwyr meddygol wedyn wrth aelodau staff y GMC eu bod eisiau i’r SDF gael ei newid, ac fe gydymffurfiodd staff y GMC. Gwnaethpwyd y newidiadau hynny heb yn wybod i’r Cyngor na’r FPPC, a heb yn wybod i Mr Scott. Ar ddechrau 2003 y daeth i wybod am y newid gyntaf, pan dynnodd yr Athro Allen ei sylw at yr hyn a oedd wedi digwydd.
Roedd y newidiadau i’r SDF yn cynnwys symud mathau amrywiol o ymddygiad o’r rhestr o fathau o gamymddygiad a oedd i’w hystyried fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, a’u rhoi yn y rhestr o fathau o ymddygiad a allai godi mater o SPM. Yn yr achos olaf (‘SPM trwy ddisgresiwn’), byddai’r sgriniwr yn cael arfer ei ddisgresiwn/disgresiwn wrth benderfynu a oedd yr ymddygiad yn codi mater o SPM. Y mathau o gamymddygiad a gafodd eu symud o un rhestr i restr arall oedd:
yn y categori ‘anonestrwydd’
ardystiadau ffug
adroddiadau ffug
hawliadau ffug am effeithiolrwydd triniaeth
yn y categori ‘ymddygiad camweithredol’
ymddygiad difrïol
gyrru dan ddylanwad alcohol/cyffuriau (lle na fu unrhyw euogfarn)
methiant i adrodd am gydweithwyr camweithredol
mynnu arian gan gleifion.
Nid oedd darparu geirda camarweiniol, a ddynodwyd yn flaenorol fel math o ymddygiad i’w ystyried fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, yn ymddangos o gwbl ar y fersiwn newydd o’r SDF.
Y Rhesymau am yr Encilio
Ym mis Mawrth 2003, wedi i’r newid yn y polisi cytunedig ar ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ddod i’r golwg, fe wnaeth Mr Neil Marshall, a fu’n Bennaeth yr Adran Sgrinio er mis Mawrth 2002, baratoi papur briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod o’r FPPC. Cynigiodd ddau reswm am y newid arfer. Yn gyntaf, dywedodd bod y sgrinwyr wedi teimlo y gallai rhai achosion a oedd yn disgyn i’r categorïau ymddygiad a ddynodwyd fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ffurfio rhan o batrwm o berfformiad gwael, ac felly byddai cyfeiriad at y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn fwy priodol na chyfeiriad i lawr y llwybr ymddygiad. Os oedd sgrinwyr yn cael eu cymell i gyfeirio achosion at y PPC, byddai’r cyfle i gyfeirio ar gyfer asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei golli gan na allai’r PPC wneud cyfeiriad felly. Gallaf weld y gallai ‘ymddygiad difrïol’ o bosibl fod yn rhan o batrwm ehangach o berfformiad gwael. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud na allaf weld sut y gall ymddygiad fel mynnu arian gan gleifion, ardystiadau ffug, adroddiadau ffug a hawliadau ffug am effeithiolrwydd triniaeth fyth gael eu hystyried fel enghreifftiau o SDP.
Yn ail, roedd y sgrinwyr, dywedwyd, wedi pryderu ynghylch colli’u disgresiwn i gau achosion yn ymwneud â chwynion am y categorïau hyn o ymddygiad ar y sail nad oedd y cwynion yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud ei fod yn destun pryder mawr i mi y byddai unrhyw sgriniwr meddygol wedi ystyried y gallai honiadau o ymddygiad fel mynnu arian gan gleifion, gwneud hawliadau ffug am effeithiolrwydd triniaeth neu ysgrifennu tystysgrifau neu adroddiadau ffug fyth fethu codi cwestiwn o SPM. Mae hynny’n arbennig o wir gan mai’r cyfan yr oedd yn ofynnol i’r sgrinwyr meddygol ei wneud oedd cyfeirio achosion felly’n awtomatig at y PPC. Roedd y PPC yn darparu proses hidlo arall cyn bod achos yn mynd at y PCC. Nid oedd yn ofynnol i’r sgrinwyr ddyfarnu’n derfynol ynghylch a oedd yr ymddygiad a oedd yn destun cwyn yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu a oedd yn gofyn am wrandawiad cyhoeddus gerbron y PCC.
Roedd papur Mr Marshall yn nodi hanes hynny a ddigwyddodd a’r camau a oedd i’w cymryd i adfer y polisi cytunedig. Yn y papur hwnnw, rhoddwyd enghraifft bellach o fater pryder y sgrinwyr meddygol ynghylch colli’u disgresiwn:
Fel mae’n digwydd, nid oedd anwedduster yn un o’r mathau o ymddygiad a gafodd ei ddileu o’r rhestr ar yr SDF o gamymddygiad a oedd i ystyried ei fod yn gyfystyr ag ‘SMP trwy ddiffiniad’. Serch hynny, ymddengys yn glir bod sgrinwyr, ar brydiau, yn gwrthod hawliadau felly ar y sail nad oeddent yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae gwrthod honiad o anwedduster fel problem o
‘gyfathrebu gwael’
, heb wrando tystiolaeth gan y meddyg a chan y claf, i weld yn anniogel iawn. I bob pwrpas, mae sgriniwr sy’n gwrthod cyfeirio achos felly at y PPC yn gwneud dyfarniad gwerth ynghylch gwirionedd cwyn yr achwynydd ac ymateb y meddyg, ac ynghylch y pwys sydd i’w roi arnynt. Nid swyddogaeth sgriniwr yw hynny. Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad, er nad oedd y ffeithiau llawn ganddo, roedd y sgyrsiau a oedd wedi’u cael gyda sgrinwyr meddygol yn awgrymu y byddent wedi ceisio arfer disgresiwn mewn ‘nifer eithaf bach fwy na thebyg o achosion’ o gwynion am anwedduster. Fodd bynnag, mae ystadegau FPT y GMC ar gyfer 2002 yn dangos, o 65 o achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o ymosod yn rhywiol ac anwedduster yn erbyn meddygon a ystyriwyd gan y sgrinwyr, cafodd nid llai na 25 ohonynt eu cau ganddynt. Cafodd y 40 o achosion tebyg eraill eu cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC. Yn 2003, cafodd 17 allan o 40 o achosion felly eu cau gan y sgrinwyr.
Cyfeiriodd Mr Scott at ‘rwystredigaeth ddealladwy’ ar ran y sgrinwyr o fod yn rhan o ‘system brosesu fecanyddol’ a dymuniad yr unigolion hynny i ‘ychwanegu gwerth’ drwy arfer eu disgresiwn. Dywedodd Mr Scott y bu tuedd i sgrinwyr (yn enwedig y rheiny a oedd wedi arfer eistedd ar y PCC) i ‘lithro i mewn’ i bwyso a mesur tystiolaeth, ac, i bob pwrpas, gamu y tu hwnt i’w rôl fel sgrinwyr. Dywedodd bod perygl hefyd y byddai sgrinwyr meddygol, a oedd yn feddygon profiadol (ac, felly, yn brofiadol wrth wneud penderfyniadau), yn ‘ymestyn i’w profiad eu hunain’ i weld a allai fod ‘esboniad arall’ am yr ymddygiad a oedd yn destun cwyn. Ni chredai bod hyn yn cael ei gymell mewn unrhyw ystyr gan ‘ddymuniad cadarnhaol i geisio’i egluro’ ond credai y gallai fod ‘dylanwad isymwybodol yno’. Ni allai ddweud a oedd y ‘dylanwad isymwybodol’ yn gweithredu’n ddieithriad o blaid y meddyg yr oedd y gŵyn wedi’i gwneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn.
Adfer y Status Quo?
Datgelodd papur Mr Marshall, mewn cyfarfod o’r sgrinwyr a gynhaliwyd ar ôl derbyn Papur PSI 2003, bod rhaniad barn yn eu plith ynghylch a ddylid gwrthdroi’r newidiadau i’r categorïau ymddygiad a oedd wedi’u dynodi fel achosion ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ (h.y. dileu’r mathau o ymddygiad a oedd wedi’u rhestru ym mharagraff 19.185). Rhoddwyd y mater gerbron yr FPPC, gydag argymhelliad y dylai’r holl gategorïau ymddygiad a oedd wedi’u rhestru ym mharagraff 19.185 gael eu hadfer fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Ym mis Mawrth 2003, gwnaethpwyd penderfyniad i adfer y polisi a gytunwyd yn wreiddiol ym mis Mawrth 1999.
Mewn gwirionedd, pan newidiwyd yr SDF, dim ond rhai o’r mathau o ymddygiad a oedd wedi’u rhestru ym mharagraff 19.185 a gafodd eu hadfer fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Er gwaethaf penderfyniad yr FPPC, cafodd rhai mathau o ymddygiad (e.e. ymddygiad difrïol, gyrru dan ddylanwad alcohol/cyffuriau, methiant i adrodd am gydweithwyr camweithredol a mynnu arian gan gleifion) eu gadael yn y categori ‘SPM trwy ddisgresiwn’. Ni chafodd y drosedd o ddarparu geirda camarweiniol ei ailsefydlu naill ai yn y categori ‘SPM trwy ddisgresiwn’ na’r categori ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Dyna oedd y sefyllfa pan gynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003.
Ym mis Mawrth 2004, gofynnwyd i’r Cyngor llawn, i bob diben, i gadarnhau penderfyniad yr FPPC i adfer y polisi mewn perthynas ag ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ ac i gytuno’r mathau o gŵyn neu honiad a ddylai, at ddibenion sgrinio, gael eu hystyried fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Datganodd y papur briffio i’r Cyngor:
‘In mid-2001, changes were made to the SDFs and several sub-categories were removed from SPM by definition. However, in March 2003, the former Fitnesss to Practise Policy Committee, following discussion at a screeners meeting, restored the 1997
(1999 yn ôl pob tebyg)
Mewn gwirionedd, fel y dywedais, nid oedd sefyllfa 1999 wedi’i
‘hadfer’
, gan nad oedd pum math o ymddygiad a oedd ym 1999 wedi’u dosbarthu fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ wedi’u dosbarthu felly mwyach. Fe allai fod rheswm da pam na chafodd rhai o’r categorïau eu hadfer, er na allaf feddwl am unrhyw reswm sut y gallai mynnu arian gan gleifion, neu ddarparu geirda camarweiniol fyth fethu codi cwestiwn o SPM. Fodd bynnag, y pryder yw bod y Cyngor dan y gred anghywir bod y
wedi’i adfer pan nad oedd mewn gwirionedd.
Dywedodd y papur briffio hwn yn glir bod y categori ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ yn berthnasol yn unig at ddiben sgrinio, ac nid oedd yn berthnasol i’r PPC na’r PCC. Felly, roedd yn bosibl o hyd i’r PPC wrthod cyfeirio achos at y PCC a oedd yn ymwneud ag ymddygiad a oedd yn gyfystyr ag ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Aeth y Cyngor ymlaen i gymeradwyo rhestr o achosion i’w hystyried fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, gan hynny’n cadarnhau’r rhestr a nodwyd yn SDF Awst 2003.
Sylwadau
Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod ganddo tri phryder ynghylch y modd y cafodd y polisi a gytunwyd ym mis Mawrth 1999 ei newid yn answyddogol. Yn gyntaf, teimlai bod y newid wedi bod yn gam yn ôl. O gofio’r ffaith bod pryder ynghylch rhagfarn bosibl o fewn y GMC, teimlai ei bod yn angenrheidiol i’r sefydliad ‘fanteisio ar bob cyfle i roi ei hun uwchlaw amheuaeth’. Dywedodd ei fod ‘yn ofid mawr’ iddo bod cyfle i wneud hyn wedi’i golli yn ystod y cyfnod yr oedd y polisi wedi’i newid yn answyddogol.
Yn ail, teimlai Mr Scott ei fod wedi methu o ran cyfleu i aelodau eraill y GMC y pwysigrwydd yr oedd yn ei briodoli i’r SDF fel y’i lluniwyd yn wreiddiol, ac i’r cysyniad o ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Bu’n gysylltiedig â drafftio’r SDF a theimlai’n gryf ynghylch hyn. Yn drydydd, cafodd Mr Scott ei siomi nad oedd, fel y dywedodd, ‘so blindingly obvious to everyone’ bod y categorïau a ddynodwyd yn yr SDF gwreiddiol yn fathau (fel y cawsant eu disgrifio) o ymddygiad a oedd yn rhaid eu bod, trwy ddiffiniad, yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Gallaf ddeall pryderon Mr Scott yn iawn. Gan gofio mai’r anghysonderau ym mhenderfyniadau sgrinwyr a arweiniodd at gyflwyno’r cysyniad ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’, mae penderfyniad unochrog y sgrinwyr i fynd yn ôl at yr hen arfer o arfer disgresiwn mewn achosion felly’n codi amheuaeth ynghylch eu haddasrwydd fel gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau mewn proses ddisgyblu lle mae cysondeb safonau a thriniaeth yn hanfodol.
Dosbarthu Achosion i Sgrinwyr Meddygol ar Hap
Gydag effaith o fis Ionawr 1997, roedd y GMC wedi cytuno gyda’r tîm PSI i weithredu system o ddosbarthu achosion ar hap i sgrinwyr. Y rheswm oedd dileu unrhyw bosibilrwydd o ragfarn yn y dyrannu. Byddai dileu’r rhagfarn hon yn caniatáu dadansoddi penderfyniadau sgrinio. Dan y system hon, roedd achosion i’w dyrannu i sgrinwyr ar sail dau ddigid olaf rhif cofrestru GMC y meddyg.
Pan ddechreuodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wneud eu dadansoddiadau ym 1999, ni wnaeth neb ddweud wrthynt nad oedd y system gytunedig yn cael ei chymhwyso’n llawn. Fodd bynnag, daeth yn amlwg yn fuan nad oedd. At hynny, roedd rhai sgrinwyr yn sgrinio llawer mwy o achosion nag eraill. Ni roddwyd unrhyw esboniad clir i’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ynghylch pam nad oedd y system yn cael ei chymhwyso. Ni ddywedwyd wrthynt ychwaith pa system ddosbarthu a oedd yn cael ei chymhwyso mewn gwirionedd. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod ‘yn anodd cael ateb plaen’ am y mater.
Ar ôl trafodaethau rhwng y tîm PSI a’r GMC, cytunwyd, o fis Ionawr 2000, y byddai system ‘safle cabiau’ o ddosbarthu achosion i sgrinwyr yn cael ei rhoi ar waith, mewn ymgais i ddileu unrhyw bosibilrwydd o ragfarn yn y dyrannu. Argymhellodd y tîm PSI y dylid gwneud gwiriadau parhaus i sicrhau bod hyn yn cael ei wneud. Dangosodd Papur PSI 2003 nad oedd y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer dyrannu wedi cael yr effaith o gyfartalu nifer yr achosion yr oedd pob sgriniwr meddygol yn delio â nhw. Yn 2001, deliodd y ddau sgriniwr mwyaf gweithgar â dwywaith gymaint o achosion â’r ddau sgriniwr lleiaf gweithgar. Gan oedi yn y fan honno, nid wyf yn gweld sut y gellid osgoi hynny’n hawdd heb achosi oedi; byddai gan rai sgrinwyr fwy o amser i neilltuo i’r dasg nag eraill. Fodd bynnag, cyhyd â bod rhyw fath o system ‘safle cabiau’ o ddosbarthu yn cael ei gweithredu’n ffyddlon, ni fyddai’r ffaith bod y dosbarthu rhwng sgrinwyr yn anghyfartal o ran niferoedd yn effeithio ar ei natur ar hap. Ni wnaeth y tîm PSI unrhyw wiriad i sicrhau bod achosion yn cael eu dosbarthu i sgrinwyr ar hap. Sicrhawyd gan y GMC mai felly’r oedd hi.
Fe’i gadawyd i aelodau’r tîm PSI i ganfod drostynt eu hunain ym 1999 nad oedd y system gytunedig o ddosbarthu yn cael ei gweithredu. Pe na baent wedi gwneud eu gwaith, byddai pawb (ac eithrio’r rheiny’n ymwneud yn uniongyrchol â dosbarthu achosion) wedi rhagdybio - ar gam - bod y system o ddosbarthu yn ôl rhif cofrestru GMC yn cael ei gweithredu’n ffyddlon a bod y dosbarthu’n cael ei wneud ar hap.
Dywedodd Mr Scott bod achosion, yn y gorffennol, wedi tueddu cael eu dosbarthu yn ôl arbenigedd y sgriniwr meddygol. Er enghraifft, byddai meddyg teulu’n delio â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu. Pan gyflwynwyd y system newydd, roedd y sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai ohonynt) yn anhapus, gan ei bod o’r farn ei bod yn fwy priodol i barhau â’r hen system. Gofynnodd sgrinwyr meddygol felly i gael mathau penodol o achos. Byddent yn pasio achosion ymysg ei gilydd. Byddai rhai’n gwneud mwy o waith nag eraill. Arweiniodd bob un o’r ffactorau hyn at anomaleddau yng ngweithrediad y system newydd. Dywedodd Mr Scott bod ‘diffyg dealltwriaeth’, ar ran y rheiny a oedd yn gysylltiedig, o’r rheswm y tu ôl i’r newid system.
Asesiad o Ddifrifoldeb yr Honiadau yn Cael eu Cynnwys mewn Cwyn
Dywedais fod Adroddiad PSI 2000 yn cynnwys dadansoddiad o asesiadau sgrinwyr meddygol o ddifrifoldeb yr honiadau yn y cwynion a sgriniwyd ganddynt rhwng mis Gorffennaf a mis Rhagfyr 1999. Datgelodd y dadansoddiad hwnnw amrywiadau sylweddol rhwng sgrinwyr meddygol unigol yn eu hasesiad o ddifrifoldeb. Gwnaethpwyd y dadansoddiad yn bosibl trwy gynnwys adran ar yr SDFau a oedd yn cael eu defnyddio gan sgrinwyr, lle gofynnwyd i’r sgriniwr meddygol nodi’i asesiad/hasesiad o ddifrifoldeb yr achos, gan ddefnyddio graddfa pedwar pwynt.
Ar ôl hynny, cafodd yr adran hon o’r SDF ei dileu. Ymddengys bod hyn wedi digwydd ar yr un pryd ag y gwnaethpwyd y newidiadau i’r categorïau o ymddygiad a ddynodwyd ar yr SDF fel ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Byddai hynny wedi bod o gwmpas canol 2001.
Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn ymwybodol bryd hynny bod y newid hwn wedi digwydd. Ni wyddai sut yr oedd wedi cael ei wneud, ond ni chredai y byddai wedi bod yn ganlyniad gweithredu unochrog ar ran aelodau o staff y GMC. Er nad yw’n gwbl eglur, ymddengys yn debygol iawn i’r newid ddigwydd o ganlyniad i ddymuniadau’r sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai ohonynt). Mae’n anodd gweld pwy arall allai fod wedi ysgogi’r newid. Ymddengys, am ryw reswm, ei bod yn rhaid eu bod o’r farn bod yr asesiad o ddifrifoldeb yn ddianghenraid neu’n annefnyddiol, ac mae’n rhaid, felly, eu bod wedi awgrymu i’r staff y dylid dileu’r adran berthnasol o’r SDF. Dywedodd Mr Scott y credai y byddai wedi bod yn briodol i’r GMC fod wedi trafod gyda’r Athro Allen ymlaen llaw beth fyddai effaith debygol y newid ar gasglu a dadansoddi data ar ôl hynny.
Mae dileu’r adran berthnasol o’r SDF wedi cael yr effaith o atal y math o ddadansoddiad ôl-dremiol a gynhaliwyd gan y tîm PSI yn 2000. Mae wedi atal y GMC hefyd rhag cynnal archwiliadau mewnol parhaus o asesiadau sgrinwyr o ‘ddifrifoldeb’ yn ystod y cyfnod perthnasol. Mae wedi bod yn bosibl, wrth gwrs, cynnal archwiliadau neu ddadansoddiadau o ganlyniadau penderfyniadau sgrinwyr, e.e. o’r gyfran o achosion a gafodd eu cau gan sgrinwyr unigol neu a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC. Fodd bynnag, gall achosion gael eu cau am nifer o resymau nad ydynt yn ymwneud â difrifoldeb yr ymddygiad honedig.
Roedd yr anghysonderau ymddangosiadol yn yr asesiadau o ddifrifoldeb gan sgrinwyr unigol a ddatgelwyd gan ddadansoddiad y PSI yn 2000 yn nodedig. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai’r GMC wedi dymuno cynnal dadansoddiadau pellach i weld a lwyddwyd i gyflawni mwy o gysondeb, er enghraifft, o ganlyniad i gyflwyno’r system ‘safle cabiau’ o ddyrannu achosion. Byddwn wedi meddwl hefyd y byddai asesiadau o ddifrifoldeb wedi bod yn berthnasol iawn i ddatblygu safonau a meini prawf yr oedd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr wedi galw amdanynt ym mob un o Adroddiadau’r PSI.
Cafodd pob un o’r tri newid y soniwyd amdanynt uchod eu cyflwyno am resymau da iawn a chyda chymeradwyaeth y GMC. Un amcan oedd sicrhau y byddai ymchwil y PSI yn esgor ar ganlyniadau defnyddiol. Briff yr Athro Allen oedd canfod a oedd unrhyw ragfarn hiliol o fewn gweithdrefnau’r GMC. Roedd hynny, ynddo’i hun, yn amcan pwysig, ac mae’n destun siom bod gan y sgrinwyr gyn lleied o ddealltwriaeth neu barch tuag at yr amcan hwnnw eu bod wedi’i danseilio yn y modd a wnaethant. Fodd bynnag, bwriadwyd i’r newidiadau gael, a byddent wedi cael, effaith fuddiol ehangach. Dylai cyflwyno ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ fod wedi creu mwy o gysondeb yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau, er budd pob meddyg a allai fod yn destun cwynion i’r GMC. Byddai dyrannu achosion ar hap i sgrinwyr wedi galluogi’r GMC i archwilio gwaith sgrinwyr gwahanol ac i nodi ystadegau anarferol er mwyn iddynt allu cywiro’u hunain neu gael hyfforddiant pellach. Byddai cofnodi graddfeydd difrifoldeb wedi cael effaith lesol debyg, a byddai hefyd, fel y dywedais, wedi ffurfio sylfaen ddefnyddiol ar gyfer gwaith ar safonau a meini prawf. Nid yn unig y mae’n destun siom, ond mae’n destun pryder hefyd, bod cam pwysig o’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad dan ofal grŵp o bobl nad oedd ganddynt unrhyw werthfawrogiad cyfunol o ddibenion a manteision y newidiadau a gyflwynwyd, ac a oedd yn barod i roi cyfarwyddiadau i staff i newid y systemau heb gyfeirio at y pwyllgor priodol neu at y Cyngor.
Mae’n destun siom hefyd bod y staff a gafodd gyfarwyddiadau i newid y system o hynny a gytunwyd, wedi bodloni i ddymuniadau’r sgrinwyr meddygol heb dynnu’r dymuniadau hyn i sylw Mr Scott. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cydnabod y byddai’n anodd, mewn sefydliad fel y GMC, i aelodau staff amau priodoldeb cyfarwyddyd yn cael ei roi gan grŵp o aelodau’r Cyngor.
Mae’r digwyddiadau hyn, fodd bynnag, yn dangos yn glir nad yw’r GMC wedi gallu rheoli sgrinwyr meddygol yn arfer disgresiwn. Gall fod bod hanes sgrinio, a seiliwyd ar y Llywydd yn arfer disgresiwn personol ac a barhawyd i ryw raddau gan y llywydd yn dewis sgrinwyr i’w penodi, yn esbonio’u hagwedd. Gall fod, fel yr awgrymodd Mr Scott, nad oedd sgrinwyr meddygol, a oedd yn brofiadol wrth wneud penderfyniadau, yn barod i gymryd rhan mewn proses a oedd yn caniatáu cyn lleied o ddisgresiwn ag y dylai proses sgrinio. Ymddengys bod y GMC wedi sylweddoli erbyn hyn nad yw sgrinio gan aelodau sy’n dymuno arfer disgresiwn awtonomaidd, yn briodol.
Nodwedd arall sy’n destun siom i mi yw’r diffyg gonestrwydd a ddangoswyd gan y GMC pan ganfu’r Athro Allen bod systemau cytunedig naill ai heb eu gweithredu’n llawn neu nad oeddent wedi parhau mewn grym. Roeddwn yn synhwyro bod yr Athro Allen yn teimlo rhywfaint o embaras o orfod adrodd i’r Ymchwiliad na ddywedwyd wrthi nad oedd y systemau cytunedig mewn grym, ac na roddwyd unrhyw esboniad iddi pan ddaeth i wybod am hyn.
Testun pryder arall yw’r ffaith nad oedd Prif Weithredwr y GMC yn amlwg yn ymwybodol o’r hyn a oedd yn digwydd mewn maes mor bwysig o’i weithdrefnau FTP. Nid oedd aelodau’n gwybod nad oedd y cyfarwyddiadau a roddwyd gydag awdurdod priodol yn cael eu cyflawni. Mae’r ffaith y gall hyn ddigwydd (fwy nag unwaith) yn ei gwneud yn anodd dibynnu ar ddatganiadau polisi’r GMC. Ni ellir bod yn sicr bod y polisi datganedig yn cael ei roi ar waith mewn gwirionedd. Rwyf wedi dweud bod y GMC ar fin cyflwyno gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Bydd y rôl sgrinio’n cael ei chyflawni gan archwilwyr achos, a fydd yn agored i reolaeth mewn modd nad oedd y sgrinwyr. Fodd bynnag, bydd pryderon yn parhau o hyd y gall fod bwlch rhwng yr hyn y mae’r GMC yn penderfynu y dylid ei wneud a’r hyn sy’n digwydd yn ymarferol.

---  ---
Er mwyn archwilio’r modd yr oedd y broses sgrinio’n gweithio’n ymarferol, penderfynodd yr Ymchwiliad archwilio nifer o ffeiliau achos unigol. Cafodd ceisiadau eu gwneud i ffeiliau gael eu cyflwyno yn y pump neu’r deg achos mwyaf diweddar mewn categorïau amrywiol. Roedd y rhan fwyaf o’r ceisiadau hyn yn ymwneud â phenderfyniadau Dr Korlipara, a gafodd ei awgrymu gan y GMC fel tyst addas i ddisgrifio â delio â materion sgrinio. Yn y rhan hon o’r Bennod hon, byddaf yn cynnig sylwadau ar y penderfyniadau hynny, weithiau’n unigol, weithiau’n gyfunol. Dechreuaf gydag adroddiad cyffredinol am dystiolaeth Dr Korlipara.
Tystiolaeth Dr Krishna Korlipara
Mae Dr Korlipara, meddyg teulu gweithredol, wedi bod yn aelod etholedig o’r GMC er 1984 ac roedd yn sgriniwr meddygol rhwng 1998 a 2004. Yn ystod ei gyfnod ar y GMC, mae wedi eistedd ar nifer o Bwyllgorau, gan gynnwys y PPC a’r PCC. Pan ddechreuodd fel sgriniwr meddygol, roedd yn ‘cysgodi’ Dr Steel, a oedd yn gweithredu fel ei fentor. Fe wnaeth Dr Steel adolygu a thrafod gyda Dr Korlipara rai o benderfyniadau sgrinio cynnar Dr Korlipara, ac roedd Dr Korlipara hefyd yn gallu darllen y ffeiliau mewn rhai o’r achosion lle’r oedd Dr Steel wedi gwneud y penderfyniad sgrinio.
Am yr ychydig fisoedd cyntaf wedi i Dr Korlipara ddechrau sgrinio, roedd y baich gwaith yn drwm. Mewn rhai wythnosau, byddai’n delio â 18 i 20 o achosion. Fodd bynnag, lleihaodd y baich gwaith wedyn, a hynny’n ddiau o ganlyniad i’r mesurau a gyflwynwyd ar gyngor yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr a phenodi mwy o sgrinwyr meddygol. Mae’r baich gwaith wedi parhau i leihau ers hynny. Ym 1998, nid oedd unrhyw amserau targed ar gyfer rhoi penderfyniadau sgrinio. Fel y dywedais, cyflwynwyd y rhain yn ddiweddarach.
Yn ei dystiolaeth lafar, esboniodd Dr Korlipara y modd y defnyddiodd yr SDF i’w arwain wrth wneud ei benderfyniadau. Cytunodd bod y ffurflen wedi cael yr effaith o gyfeirio sgrinwyr i wneud penderfyniadau mewn modd trefnus. Honnodd hefyd bod yr SDF wedi:
‘... helpu cyflwyno cysondeb fel bod dealltwriaeth gyffredin i’r holl sgrinwyr o’r meini prawf amrywiol y dylid edrych arnynt cyn gwneud penderfyniad, ac i’r graddau hynny, mae wedi dileu’r sgrinwyr gwahanol yn gweithio yn ôl y meini prawf gwahanol posibl’.
Roedd yn ymddangos bod dwy broblem gyda’r hawliad hwn. Yn gyntaf, er bod y ffurflenni SDF yn ddiau wedi bod o gymorth wrth sicrhau bod sgrinwyr yn rhoi eu meddyliau ar y cwestiynau cywir yn y drefn gywir, nid oeddent yn cynnwys unrhyw safonau neu feini prawf i’w cymhwyso wrth wneud penderfyniad. Roedd yr SDF yn cynnwys diffiniad o SPM (gweler paragraff 19.220) ac o SDP. Roedd yn atgoffa sgrinwyr y dylent ystyried pwysau’r dystiolaeth neu fwriad y meddyg wrth ddod i benderfyniad ar ba un a oedd yr achos yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Roedd hefyd yn cynnig cymorth wrth asesu a fyddai’n briodol i achos fynd ymlaen drwy’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad (yn hytrach na’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Roedd nifer o nodweddion a allai fod wedi bod yn arwydd o SDP wedi’u rhestru ar y ffurflen. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd unrhyw safonau na meini prawf i farnu a oedd honiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn eu herbyn.
Yr ail broblem yw bod Adroddiad PSI 2000 a Phapur PSI 2003 wedi dangos bod amrywiadau eang yng nghanlyniadau achosion rhwng sgrinwyr ym 1999, 2000 a 2001, h.y. ar ôl cyflwyno’r SDFau. Cydnabu Dr Korlipara mai ‘neges glir’ Adroddiad PSI 2000 oedd bod diffyg cysondeb rhwng sgrinwyr. Dywedodd ei fod yn awyddus y dylai cysondeb gael ei wella. Awgrymodd y gellid gwneud hyn drwy fwy o hyfforddiant, mwy o feini prawf cytunedig ac archwiliadau cyson o benderfyniadau sgrinio. Dywedodd bod cynnydd yn y materion hyn wedi bod yn arafach nag a fyddai wedi dymuno. Dywedodd mai’r gobaith oedd y byddai mesur o gysondeb yn cael ei gyflwyno gyda dyfodiad yr archwilwyr achos newydd.
Y diffiniad o SPM a gynhwyswyd ar yr SDF oedd:
‘... action or inaction by a doctor of a serious kind of which no doctor of reasonable skill and exercising reasonable care would be responsible’.
Disgrifiodd Dr Korlipara hyn fel ‘diffiniad gweithio da’. Fodd bynnag, teimlai bod SPM yn mynd ‘ychydig y tu hwnt i hynny’. Byddai’n defnyddio’r diffiniad ‘fel y sylfaen gychwynnol yn unig’. Dyma a ddywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad:
(un)
acceptable that the registration of the doctor, in theory, ought to be in some way affected’.
Rwy’n cydymdeimlo ag ymgais Dr Korlipara i ddiffinio SPM; nid yw’n hawdd. Mae’r diffiniad o SPM yn yr SDF yn briodol yn unig mewn achosion o driniaeth honedig is na’r safon, ac, mewn achosion felly, nid yw’r diffiniad yn un annefnyddiol. Fodd bynnag, mae SPM yn cwmpasu llawer o fathau gwahanol o gamymddygiad, ac un ohonynt yn unig yw darparu triniaeth is na’r safon. Gallaf ddeall pam y byddai Dr Korlipara yn dymuno disgrifio SPM yn wahanol. Roedd y disgrifiad a roddwyd gan Dr Korlipara o’r prawf a fyddai’n ei gymhwyso wrth sgrinio achos yn awgrymu ei fod yn dal i wneud penderfyniadau (ym mis Rhagfyr 2003) o’r math a gondemniwyd fel rhai anghywir yn
, h.y. trwy benderfynu pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad honedig
gyfystyr ag SPM, yn hytrach nag a oedd yn
ddadleuol
ei fod. Nid beirniadaeth bersonol yw hon. Mae’n syml yn dangos y broblem wirioneddol iawn yr oedd y sgrinwyr yn ei hwynebu pan nad oedd ganddynt unrhyw safonau, meini prawf na throthwyon i’w cymhwyso wrth wneud eu penderfyniadau. Roedd Dr Korlipara yn aelod profiadol iawn o’r GMC ac roedd wedi bod yn sgriniwr meddygol am bum mlynedd. Os nad oedd yn cymhwyso’r prawf cywir, ymddengys yn debygol bod sgrinwyr eraill, llai profiadol, er gwaetha’r hyfforddiant a gawsant, nad oeddent wedi deall eu rôl yn llawn ac a oedd hefyd yn gweithredu trothwy sgrinio a oedd yn uwch na hynny a ganiatawyd gan y Rheolau.
Penderfyniadau Sgrinio Cychwynnol
Soniais ym Mhennod 18, dan y gweithdrefnau a oedd ar waith ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, bod gan reolwr gwaith achos yr opsiwn i gyflwyno achos at sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfnod cynnar i’w sgrinio am y tro cyntaf. Roedd y system llwybr carlam yma’n cael ei defnyddio ar gyfer achosion nad oedd yn ymddangos i staff y GMC eu bod yn codi cwestiwn o SPM neu SDP, ond lle’r oedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â digonolrwydd neu annigonolrwydd triniaeth neu arfer barn glinigol, ac yr ystyriwyd ei bod yn angenrheidiol cael rhywfaint o gyfraniad gan berson â chymwysterau meddygol cyn gwneud penderfyniad terfynol i gau’r achos. Os oedd y sgriniwr meddygol yn cytuno y dylai’r achos gael ei gau, roedd angen cael cadarnhad sgriniwr lleyg cyn y gellid gwneud hyn.
Er mwyn delio ag achos yn y modd hwn, roedd yn rhaid iddo ddisgyn i un o’r categorïau a nodwyd yn Adran B o’r SDF. Roedd y rhain fel a ganlyn:
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad i’r ffeiliau gael eu cyflwyno o’r pum achos olaf cyn 30 Medi 2003 yr oedd Dr Korlipara wedi’u sgrinio allan mewn asesiad cychwynnol o’u rhinweddau. Dim ond tri achos y deliodd Dr Korlipara â nhw yn y modd yn ystod y 12 mis blaenorol yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad yn gallu dod o hyd iddynt. Ymddengys nad oedd un o’r rhain, sef achos KD 01, mewn gwirionedd, wedi bod yn benderfyniad sgrinio cychwynnol o gwbl. Cafodd y gŵyn ei derbyn gan y GMC ym mis Mehefin 2001. Cafodd yr achwynydd ei gynghori yn y lle cyntaf i gyfeirio’i gŵyn at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Nid oedd yn barod i dderbyn y cyngor hwnnw, gan yr oedd yn anfodlon â’r modd y deliwyd â’i gwyn ar lefel leol. Daeth y gŵyn yn ôl at y GMC a chael ei gau gan weithiwr achos mewn camgymeriad ym mis Hydref 2001. Ail-agorwyd yr achos ym mis Chwefror 2002, a gofynnwyd am gofnodion meddygol a gwybodaeth arall. Cafodd y gŵyn ei gweld yn gyntaf gan Dr Korlipara ym mis Hydref 2002. Yn y cam hwnnw, gofynnodd am farn arbenigol. Pan oedd honno ar gael ym mis Tachwedd 2002, caeodd yr achos (gyda chytundeb sgriniwr lleyg) ar y sail nad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM nag SDP. Ni chafodd ei gau, felly, am un o’r rhesymau a nodwyd yn Adran B o’r SDF.
Roedd y ddau achos arall yn ymwneud â thriniaeth gosmetig. Yn y cyntaf (KD 02), roedd yr achwynydd yn anfodlon â chanlyniad triniaeth laser a gafodd ar gyfer capilarïau ar yr wyneb. Nid oedd y llythyr cwyno yn honni gweithdrefnau is na’r safon ag unrhyw ddirywiad yn ei chyflwr. Roedd yn cwyno yn ei hanfod bod achos o dorri contract. Os oedd adroddiad yr achwynydd yn wir, nid oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gwbl foddhaol. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, roedd y penderfyniad i gau’r achos yn un rhesymol.
Roedd yr achos arall yn ymwneud â Dr KD 03, yr oedd dwy gŵyn wedi’u derbyn yn ei erbyn, ddwy flynedd ar wahân. Yn y gŵyn gyntaf, dywedodd yr achwynydd ei bod wedi gofyn am driniaeth liposugno i wella siâp ei habdomen, ond, ar gyngor y llawfeddyg, cafodd driniaeth abdominoplasti (gweithdrefn a elwid ar lafar yn driniaeth twcio’r bol ‘tummy tuck’). Roedd yn anfodlon â’r canlyniad. Honnodd nad oedd unrhyw welliant yn siâp ei habdomen, a bod ei olwg yn waeth oherwydd y creithio. Roedd y meddyg wedi dweud y byddai ganddi greithiau main gwyn ar ôl y llawdriniaeth, ond, mewn gwirionedd, fel yr honnodd, roedd ganddi graith borffor hyll yn rhedeg o un ochr ei habdomen i’r ochr arall. Flwyddyn ar ôl y driniaeth, roedd y meddyg wedi cytuno na fu’r canlyniad ‘fel y cynlluniwyd’, ac roedd wedi cynnig rhoi triniaeth liposugno, yn rhad ac am ddim. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r achwynydd wedi gorfod talu costau’r ysbyty. Roedd llythyr a ysgrifennwyd ar ran y meddyg yn dweud bod y driniaeth a oedd yn destun dad wedi bod yn llwyddiannus, ac mai’r unig ffordd wirioneddol foddhaol ymlaen oedd i’r claf golli pwysau drwy fynd ar ddeiet. Beth bynnag, dywedwyd, roedd y meddyg wedi rhoi cyngor i’r claf ynghylch ‘canlyniadau realistig’ y llawdriniaeth. Roedd dau fater dadleuol felly: yn gyntaf, a oedd y canlyniad y tu allan i hynny a fyddai’n cael ei ystyried yn dderbyniol, ac yn ail, a oedd y meddyg wedi rhybuddio’r claf am y canlyniadau realistig neu a oedd wedi dweud wrthi, fel yr honnodd, y byddai ganddi ‘greithiau main gwyn’.
Soniais yn gynharach mai un o’r seiliau a restrwyd ar yr SDF a allai gyfiawnhau cau’r achos yn gynnar oedd ‘the complaint was about (only) the cosmetic outcome/failure of cosmetic surgery’. Ar y sail honno y cafodd y sgriniwr meddygol (nid Dr Korlipara) ei wahodd i ystyried cau’r achos hwn. Caeodd y sgriniwr meddygol yr achos ar y sail honno, gan ddweud ei fod:
‘... yn disgyn yn gyfan gwbl y tu allan i awdurdodaeth y GMC. Ni all canlyniad gweithdrefn mewn meddygaeth fyth gael ei warantu. Ymddengys bod y meddyg wedi gweithredu’n rhesymol a’i fod yn awr wedi cynnig unioni’r sefyllfa. Os
(yw’r claf)
yn anhapus byddwn yn awgrymu ei bod yn mynd at Reolwyr yr ysbyty lleol.’
Cytunodd y sgriniwr lleyg y dylai’r achos gael ei gau. Nid oedd y llythyr a oedd yn hysbysu’r claf am y penderfyniad yn dweud bod y gŵyn wedi’i gwrthod oherwydd ei bod yn disgyn o fewn categori o achosion yr oedd y GMC eisoes wedi penderfynu, fel mater o egwyddor, na allai fod yn gŵyn o SPM. Yn lle hynny, roedd y llythyr yn hysbysu’r achwynydd bod y sgrinwyr wedi canfod
(the doctor)
seriously neglected or disregarded his professional responsibilities towards you. It appears that (the doctor) discussed all your options with you and obtained your informed consent before proceeding with the operation.’
Yn fyr, roedd y sgrinwyr wedi penderfynu nad oedd yr achos mewn gwirionedd yn datgelu tystiolaeth o SPM. Yn ôl y ddarpariaeth statudol ar adeg y penderfyniad sgrinio roedd yn ofynnol i’r achos fynd ymlaen at y PPC oni bai bod y sgrinwyr yn penderfynu nad oed cwestiwn o SPM yn codi. Ymddengys i mi bod cwestiwn o SPM yn amlwg yn codi. Yn gyntaf, fe allai’r penderfyniad i gynghori am y driniaeth fod wedi bod yn gwbl anghywir neu gallai’r dechneg ar gyfer cyflawni’r driniaeth fod wedi bod yn gwbl anghywir. Hefyd, roedd dadl ynghylch a oedd y meddyg wedi cynghori’r claf am ‘ganlyniadau realistig’ neu a oedd wedi dweud wrthi y byddai ganddi ‘greithiau main gwyn’. Os oedd y meddyg wedi rhoi cyngor rhy optimistaidd a oedd wedi ysgogi’r claf i gael y driniaeth, fe ddylai hynny, yn fy marn i, fod wedi codi cwestiwn o SPM. At hynny, daethpwyd i’r penderfyniad i gau’r achos ar y sail bod yr adroddiad a gynigiwyd ar ran y meddyg wedi’i ffafrio i adroddiad yr achwynydd. Fe’i gwnaethpwyd yn glir yn achos
na ddylai sgrinwyr geisio datrys achosion o wrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth. Gofynnodd y Prif Gwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad i Dr Korlipara ai’r arfer oedd, mewn achosion o’r math hwn, i ofyn i’r achwynydd ddarparu llun o’r canlyniad. Byddai hynny o leiaf yn galluogi’r GMC gael barn ynghylch a oedd y canlyniad yn disgyn y tu allan i’r hyn a oedd yn rhesymol. Ymddengys bod lluniau ar gael weithiau, ac weithiau nid ydynt ar gael, ond nid yw’n arfer anarferol i ofyn amdanynt mewn achosion cosmetig.
Roedd y Prif Gwnsler yn awyddus i ganfod hefyd pam ei bod yn bolisi gan y GMC bod cwynion a oedd yn ymwneud yn unig â chanlyniad cosmetig llawdriniaeth gosmetig i’w cau. Dywedodd Dr Korlipara nad oedd yn gwybod pam y cynhwyswyd y categori hwn o achosion ar y rhestr o achosion i’w cau, ond dywedodd, fel y deallai, y gallai sgrinwyr arfer disgresiwn a chadw achos cosmetig ar agor os oedd yn teimlo bod hynny’n addas. Credai y dylai’r categori hwn o achosion gael ei ddileu o’r rhestr efallai. Tra’n ysgrifennu’r Adroddiad hwn, sylwodd tîm yr Ymchwiliad bod geiriad y ddarpariaeth berthnasol ar yr SDF wedi’i newid ar ryw adeg rhwng mis Gorffennaf 2000 a mis Awst 2001. Roedd y fersiwn o’r ffurflen SDF a oedd yn cael ei defnyddio ym mis Gorffennaf 2000 yn datgan y gellid cau achos os
. Erbyn mis Awst 2001, roedd y cymal olaf wedi’i ddileu. Felly, roedd sgrinwyr yn cael eu hannog i gau achosion heb unrhyw ystyriaeth go iawn o’r materion, a hynny’n syml ar y sail bod y gŵyn yn ymwneud â chanlyniad llawdriniaeth gosmetig. Mae’n amlwg fod Dr Korlipara yn ymwybodol y gallai gadw achos ar agor os oedd o’r farn bod hynny’n addas. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r newid yn y geiriad yn arwain at duedd i fwy o achosion cosmetig gael eu cau yn gynnar nag fel arall cyn i’r newid gael ei wneud.
Pan gafodd ei wahodd i roi sylwadau ar rinweddau’r penderfyniad ei hun, dywedodd Dr Korlipara, os mai ef oedd y sgriniwr meddygol, byddai wedi dod i’r un casgliad. Ni allai gredu y byddai unrhyw lawfeddyg wedi dweud wrth y claf mai creithiau main gwyn yn unig fyddai ganddi; yn syml iawn, ni ellid gwarantu hynny. Yr anhawster gyda’r ateb hwnnw mai’r hyn a ddywedwyd oedd yr union fater dan sylw yn yr achos hwn. Pan nodwyd hynny, mynegodd Dr Korlipara y farn, hyd yn oed os oedd y meddyg wedi gwneud addewidion annoeth na allai eu cyflawni, ni fyddai o reidrwydd yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP. Dywedaf ar draws hynny, ‘nid o reidrwydd efallai’, ond o leiaf byddai’n codi cwestiwn o SPM. Gofynnwyd i Dr Korlipara wedyn beth fyddai ei adwaith wedi bod pe bai meddyg yn fwriadol wedi gorbwysleisio’r gobeithion o lwyddo mewn triniaeth gosmetig gyda’r bwriad o ennill busnes preifat. Ei ymateb i hynny oedd y byddai’r syniad yn ‘gwneud iddo sefyll yn stond’. Casglaf o’r ateb hwnnw y byddai Dr Korlipara wedi ystyried hynny fel mater difrifol iawn; nid oedd wedi meddwl am yr achos yn y modd hwnnw yn ôl pob golwg. Eto, ar sail y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael i’r GMC pan gaewyd yr achos, fe allai fod yn ddigon posibl mai felly’r oedd. Gofynnwyd i Dr Korlipara wedyn (yn ddamcaniaethol) a fyddai wedi gwneud unrhyw wahaniaeth i’w farn am yr achos pe bai’n gwybod bod yr ysbyty wedi cael nifer o gwynion tebyg am y meddyg. Byddai hynny, meddai, wedi ‘troi’r achos ar ei ben’. Ni fu’n arfer y GMC i wneud ymholiadau felly i gyflogwyr lleol neu ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCTau). Roedd yn ymddangos bod Dr Korlipara yn derbyn, yn y math hwn o achos, y gallai fod achos dros wneud ymholiadau i’r awdurdodau yn yr ardal yr oedd y meddyg yn ymarfer ynddi.
Daeth yr ail gŵyn yn ymwneud â Dr KD 03 gan glaf a oedd wedi cael tynnu nam ar ei wyneb. Roedd yn anfodlon â’r canlyniad. Caewyd yr achos, yn dilyn penderfyniad gan Dr Korlipara, a gytunwyd gan y sgriniwr lleyg, bod yr achos yn ymwneud â chanlyniad cosmetig neu fethiant llawdriniaeth gosmetig yn unig ac
‘nad oes unrhyw beth yn y gŵyn sy’n codi cwestiwn o SPM/SDP’
. Yn ddiddorol, yng ngolau’r gŵyn flaenorol, honnodd yr achwynydd hwn hefyd bod y meddyg wedi’i gynghori mai ‘craith fain ysgafn’ a fyddai ganddo wedi’r driniaeth. Yn ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Dr Korlipara iddo gael gwybod am y gŵyn gynharach wrth ystyried y gŵyn ddiweddarach. Sut bynnag, ymddengys nad oedd wedi sylwi ar y tebygrwydd hynod braidd rhwng y ddau achos. Yn yr ail achos, roedd y claf wedi cwyno yn lle cael ‘craith fain wen’ centimedr o hyd, fe’i gadawyd â chraith a oedd yn 1.6cm o hyd a 1.5mm o led, a ddisgrifiwyd fel ‘pant coch trwchus’. Ymddengys o’r ohebiaeth a amgaewyd gyda’r gŵyn bod y claf wedi cael llun o’r creithio wedi’i dynnu; roedd wedi’i anfon at y meddyg pan gwynodd iddo. Eto nid oes unrhyw arwydd bod y GMC wedi gofyn am gael gweld copi o’r llun. Dywedodd yr achwynydd hefyd ei fod wedi cymryd cyngor llawfeddyg cosmetig arall, a oedd yn mynd i wneud llawdriniaeth adferol. Yn ôl pob golwg, roedd y llawfeddyg hwn wedi dweud bod y canlyniad gwreiddiol wedi bod yn un gwael o ganlyniad i’r driniaeth na chafodd ei chyflawni mewn ‘amgylchedd sterilaidd digon da’. Yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Dr Korlipara ei fod wedi cau’r achos gan ei fod o’r farn ei bod yn gŵyn ddibwys nad oedd cyfiawnhad drosti. Nid yw’n eglur sut y daeth i lunio’r farn, o’r deunydd a oedd ganddo o’i flaen, bod y gŵyn yn un ddibwys ac nad oedd cyfiawnhad drosti. Ychwanegodd na welodd unrhyw beth yn y gwyn gynharach a barodd iddo newid ei feddwl ar yr ail un. Fodd bynnag, mae’n eglur o’i sylwadau ar yr achos cynharach mai cyfyngedig iawn oedd ei ddealltwriaeth o’r materion.
Fe wnaeth y ddau achos yn ymwneud â Dr KD 03 beri pryder go iawn yn fy meddwl i ynghylch agwedd y GMC tuag at gwynion sydd ‘yn ymwneud â chanlyniad cosmetig/methiant llawdriniaeth gosmetig (yn unig)’. Rwy’n cydnabod y posibilrwydd y gallai cwynion heb gyfiawnhad gael eu gwneud gan gleifion sydd â gobeithion a disgwyliadau afrealistig. Fodd bynnag, ar wahân i hynny, ymddengys i mi bod rhesymau da dros archwilio cwynion am lawdriniaeth gosmetig yn ofalus iawn. Mae llawer o lawdriniaeth gosmetig a thriniaeth gosmetig yn cael ei wneud yn y sector preifat. Mae perygl go iawn nad oes cynghori priodol am ddisgwyliadau realistig wastad yn mynd law yn llaw â’r deunydd hysbysebu sy’n cael ei ddefnyddio gan ddarparwyr llawdriniaeth a thriniaeth felly. Mae’n dra hysbys, fel y deallaf, bod clinigau llawdriniaeth gosmetig yn cael eu gweithredu gan feddygon nad oes ganddynt hyfforddiant arbennig fel llawfeddygon plastig. Yn aml, ni fydd y claf yn cael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at y clinig gan feddyg teulu neu feddyg arall; fe allai yn wir fod wedi cerdded i mewn ‘oddi ar y stryd’. Mae rhai darparwyr preifat bach sy’n ymdrin â chwynion yn lleol yn debygol o fod yn llai na delfrydol. Fe all rhai cleifion sy’n cael llawdriniaeth blastig fod yn fregus yn emosiynol. Yn fy marn i, dylid archwilio â gofal arbennig y cwynion hynny gan gleifion sydd wedi cael llawdriniaeth gosmetig breifat. Ni ddylent yn sicr fod yn destun proses sy’n broses cau awtomatig bron, fel y bu yn y gorffennol yn amlwg.
Achosion y Deliwyd â Nhw dan Weithdrefnau Pennod XV
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad am bapurau o’r pum achos olaf cyn 30 Medi 2003 lle’r oedd Dr Korlipara wedi delio â’r achos dan weithdrefnau Pennod XV. Dangosodd y ffeiliau achos hyn yn gyntaf, o’u harchwilio, bod y gweithwyr achos dan sylw yn mynegi barnau priodol a dichonol ynghylch yr achosion dan sylw. Roedd pedwar o benderfyniadau Dr Korlipara i weld yn rhai rhesymol i mi, o leiaf i’r graddau yr ystyriwyd yr honiad ar ei ben ei hun; gellid dadlau na allai’r honiad, ar ei ben ei hun, fod wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mewn dau o’r pedwar achos, roedd y meddyg wedi methu esbonio’i ddiagnosis a’i driniaeth i’r claf; ym mhob achos, cafodd ei gynghori i wneud hynny yn y dyfodol. Mewn trydydd achos, roedd y meddyg wedi methu ‘cofnodi’ angen y claf am gyffuriau lladd poen; o ganlyniad, gadawyd y claf mewn poen am rai oriau. Cafodd y meddyg ei atgoffa o’r arweiniad ar wneud asesiad digonol o gyflwr claf a’r angen i gadw cofnod gofalus o driniaeth. Yn y pedwerydd achos, cynghorwyd y meddyg i fod yn fwy cwrtais i gleifion.
Fodd bynnag, gan na fu’n arfer y GMC i wneud ymholiadau lleol ynghylch unrhyw gwynion yn erbyn y meddyg neu bryderon arall yn ei gylch, mae rhywfaint o ansicrwydd o hyd yn fy meddwl i ynghylch a oedd yn briodol i gau’r pedwar achos hwn gyda llythyr cynghori. Er enghraifft, yn y pedwerydd achos, KF 04, roedd yr achwynydd wedi honni bod y meddyg wedi newid ei feddyginiaeth heb esbonio ei fod yn gwneud hynny na pham. Roedd y feddyginiaeth newydd wedi arwain at nifer o sgil-effeithiau annymunol. Ar ôl darllen y nodiadau meddygol, credai Dr Korlipara nad oedd y newid yn y feddyginiaeth yn afresymol a theimlai na allai methiant i roi esboniad digonol fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ar ei ben ei hun, mae’r penderfyniad hwnnw i weld yn rhesymol. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi, er mwyn diogelu cleifion yn briodol, dylid fod wedi gwneud rhywfaint o ymholiadau i’r PCT i ganfod a oedd unrhyw bryderon am arfer y meddyg. Mae’n bosibl y byddai’r PCT wedi bod yn ymwybodol o bryderon eraill, a allai, o’u cymryd gyda’r gŵyn hon (y gallai’n wir fod wedi bod yn anymwybodol ohoni), fod wedi codi cwestiwn o SDP.
Mewn un o’r pum achos hwn, KF 03, rwy’n teimlo rhywfaint o bryder ynghylch y ffaith bod yr achos wedi’i gau. Daeth y gŵyn gan weithiwr cwmni yswiriant. Roedd y cwmni yswiriant wedi derbyn hawliad dan bolisi ar fywyd un o gleifion Dr KF 03 a oedd wedi marw’n ddiweddar. Gan nad oedd teulu’r ymadawedig yn fodlon cytuno i ddatgelu cofnodion meddygol y claf ymadawedig, gofynnwyd i Dr KF 03 ddarparu adroddiad meddygol i’r cwmni yswiriant. Yn ei adroddiad, disgrifiodd y meddyg hanes meddygol y claf, fel y’i cymerwyd o’r cofnodion. Roedd y disgrifiad yn cynnwys cyfeiriad at y claf yn cael ei dderbyn i’r ysbyty ar ddiwedd y 1990au yn dilyn gorddos o gyffuriau, a chyfeiriad at gaethni’r person ymadawedig i diasepam, a oedd, dywedwyd, wedi bod yn drwm ers ychydig flynyddoedd yn gynharach pan gollodd ei swydd. Ymddengys y byddai’r un o’r ddau gyfeiriad hwn wedi rhoi hawl i’r cwmni yswiriant osgoi’r polisi. Mewn perthynas â’r gorddos cyffuriau, gofynnwyd i Dr KF 03 gan y cwmni yswiriant a allai ddweud pa gyffur gafodd ei gymryd. Atebodd mai
‘gorddos’
o alcohol fu hwn mewn gwirionedd. Ymddiheurodd am ei
‘gamgymeriad’
cynharach ond nid esboniodd pam wnaeth y camgymeriad hwnnw na pham yr oedd yn gallu’i gywiro yn awr. Mae’n amlwg o’i lythyr ei fod wedi siarad ag aelodau’r teulu am amgylchiadau’r
‘gorddos’
ers darparu’i adroddiad gwreiddiol. Nid oedd y llythyr cywiro yn esbonio pa wybodaeth yr oedd yn dibynnu arni yn awr. Ni chyfeiriodd y meddyg at lythyr rhyddhau’r ysbyty a fyddai wedi cael ei ysgrifennu’n fuan iawn ar ôl y gorddos. Byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl i lythyr felly bennu natur y sylwedd a gymerwyd. Rai misoedd yn ddiweddarach, ysgrifennodd y meddyg at y cwmni yswiriant eto, yn gwirfoddoli gwybodaeth y bu camgymeriad arall yn ei adroddiad gwreiddiol. Nid oedd y person ymadawedig mae’n debyg wedi bod yn gaeth iawn i diasepam hyd at flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach na hynny a adroddwyd gan y meddyg yn flaenorol, pan gollodd ei swydd. Ymddiheurodd y meddyg eto. Eto, ni roddodd esboniad sut y daeth i wneud y camgymeriad cynharach na pham yr oedd yn gallu’i gywiro yn awr. Ni wnaeth unrhyw gyfeiriad at y cofnodion meddygol. Roedd y cwmni yswiriant o’r farn bod y meddyg wedi gweithredu’n anonest (trwy geisio cefnogi hawliad y teulu dan y polisi) neu, fan lleiaf, ei fod wedi bod yn esgeulus iawn wrth ysgrifennu’i adroddiad gwreiddiol.
Pan hysbyswyd y meddyg gan y GMC am y gŵyn, ysgrifennodd ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol yn gwadu unrhyw fwriad ar ran y meddyg i dwyllo. Roedd gweithiwr achos y GMC yn pryderu ynghylch yr honiadau o dwyll, a fyddai, o’u profi, yn amlwg yn ddifrifol. Tynnodd sylw’r sgriniwr meddygol at y ffaith nad oedd y GMC wedi gallu archwilio cofnodion y claf ymadawedig. Nododd y gweithiwr achos wrthdaro rhwng yr honiad a gwadiad y meddyg. Roedd Dr Korlipara o’r farn nad gwaith y GMC oedd ymchwilio i bosibilrwydd twyll; gwaith yr heddlu oedd hynny. Roedd y cwmni yswiriant wedi penderfynu peidio adrodd i’r heddlu am yr achos. Roedd wedi penderfynu gwrthod talu allan dan y polisi. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys bod seiliau eraill i’r cwmni yswiriant weithredu fel hyn, nad oeddent yn dibynnu ar wirionedd ‘cywiriadau’ y meddyg. Penderfynodd Dr Korlipara ddelio â’r achos ar y sail nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o dwyll ac y dylid cynghori’r meddyg i fod yn fwy gofalus yn y dyfodol wrth ysgrifennu adroddiadau felly. Gallaf weld nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol o dwyll ond bod amheuaeth go iawn ohono, a dylai hynny fod wedi bod yn destun pryder i’r GMC. Mae llawer o sefydliadau, nid cwmnïau yswiriant yn unig, yn gorfod dibynnu ar gywirdeb adroddiadau meddygol, a honna’r GMC ei fod yn cymryd honiadau o anonestrwydd yn ddifrifol iawn. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r GMC bryderu pan gyflwynir tystiolaeth iddo o rywbeth mor amheus â hyn. Ymddengys i mi mai agwedd y GMC tuag at achos felly ddylai fod i drafod ffyrdd a dulliau i ymchwilio i wirionedd y mater. Nid yw’n ddigon yn fy marn i i ddweud yn syml y dylai’r achos gael ei gau. Credaf y dylai’r achos hwn fod wedi cael ei anfon at y PPC er mwyn trafod y modd gorau i fynd ymlaen. Byddai wedi bod yn ofynnol cael cyngor cyfreithiol o ran y posibilrwydd o gael gafael ar y cofnodion meddygol, a allai yn wir fod wedi datgelu gwirionedd y mater. Ymddengys i mi bod yr achos hwn - ac achosion eraill y cyfeiriaf atynt - yn dangos diffyg penderfyniad ar ran y GMC i gael at y gwir. Yn gyffredinol, ymddengys ei bod yn well ganddo adael eraill i ymchwilio, ac, os nad oedd unrhyw un arall yn barod i wneud hynny, roedd yn hapus i adael i achos difrifol iawn o bosibl fynd heb ymchwilio iddo.
Penderfyniadau Sgrinio Dr Korlipara
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad am bapurau’r deg achos olaf a gafodd eu cau gan Dr Korlipara cyn 30 Medi 2003 gael eu datgelu. Ni wnaeth yr un o’r achosion hyn codi pryder difrifol. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi, er lles diogelu cleifion, y dylai ymholiadau fod wedi cael eu gwneud yn lleol mewn rhai o’r achosion hynny, er mwyn canfod a oedd unrhyw bryderon eraill o natur debyg neu gysylltiedig ynghylch arfer neu berfformiad y meddyg. Mae achos Dr KE 10 yn un enghraifft.
Yn achos Dr KE 10, y cyfeiriaf ato ym Mhennod 18, honnwyd bod y meddyg wedi methu diagnosio cyflwr terfynol y claf, ac wedi methu rhoi cyffuriau lladd poen digonol iddi. Yn benodol, dywedwyd bod y meddyg wedi dibynnu’n ormodol ar ymgynghoriadau ffôn yn lle ymweliadau. Canlynwyd y gŵyn yn lleol ac roedd IRP wedi gwneud nifer o feirniadaethau o’r meddyg, ond ni fyddai’r un ohonynt wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, pe bai cwynion neu bryderon eraill ynghylch y meddyg hwn, mae’n bosibl y byddai mater o SDP wedi codi. I ganfod hynny, byddai wedi bod yn angenrheidiol i wneud ymholiadau lleol. Beth bynnag, byddai’n ymddangos i mi y byddai’n briodol i’r GMC ganfod beth oedd y PCT lleol yn ei wneud, os o gwbl, ynghylch y beirniadaethau a wnaed yn yr adroddiad IRP. Mewn achosion fel hwn, credaf y dylai’r GMC fod wedi cymryd rôl fwy gweithredol mewn diogelu cleifion, yn lle cau’r achos yn syml, oherwydd, ar eu pennau’u hunain, nid oedd yr honiadau, yn ei farn ef, yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP. Agwedd y GMC oedd nad oedd angen ymyrryd gan fod y PCT dan ddyletswydd i weithredu ar yr adroddiad IRP ac roedd gan y GMC hawl i ragdybio bod hynny wedi digwydd. Nid wyf yn credu y gallai’r GMC fod wedi bod yn rhesymol o hyderus y byddai’r PCT wedi gweithredu. Byddai galwad ffôn gan y GMC yn holi ynghylch beth oedd yn hysbys am y meddyg a pha gamau oedd wedi’u cymryd yng ngolau’r adroddiad IRP wedi esgor ar dair effaith fuddiol. Yn gyntaf, byddai wedi galluogi’r GMC i fodloni’i hun a oedd hanes o gwynion neu bryderon a allai awgrymu SDP. Yn ail, os nad oedd y PCT wedi gwneud unrhyw beth ynghylch yr adroddiad IRP, byddai’r alwad o’r GMC fwy na thebyg wedi cael effaith lesol. Yn drydydd, pe bai’r PCT wedi cymryd camau priodol, gallai’r GMC fod wedi dweud wrth yr achwynydd, er nad oedd yn mynd i weithredu ei hun, ei fod wedi’i fodloni’i hun bod materion dan reolaeth gan y PCT. Nid yw’n gwella’r canfyddiad cyhoeddus o’r GMC os nad yw’n gweithredu o gwbl mewn achos lle mae corff arall, fel IRP, wedi canfod sail i feirniadu.
Yn ychwanegol at y deg achos y soniwyd amdanynt yn y papurau a gyflwynwyd yn unol â chais penodol, daeth yr Ymchwiliad ar draws achos arall, achos Dr JA 40, lle’r oedd Dr Korlipara wedi sgrinio cwyn allan. Gwelodd yr Ymchwiliad y papurau’n ymwneud â’r meddyg hwn gyntaf oherwydd iddo gael ei ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau ar ddechrau’r 1980au. Bryd hynny, deliwyd â’i achos yn y GMC gan y PPC, a gaeodd y mater gyda llythyr rhybudd yn argymell goruchwyliaeth feddygol barhaus. Derbyniwyd cwyn yn erbyn Dr JA 40 ar ddiwedd y 1990au, yn ymwneud â’i fethiant honedig i werthfawrogi difrifoldeb cyflwr babi bach, a’i anfon yn syth i’r ysbyty. Ar y pryd, roedd y meddyg yn gweithio i wasanaeth dirprwyo. Yn y bôn, roedd y fam yn cwyno bod y meddyg wedi’i alw allan ac wedi archwilio’r babi a oedd, yn ôl y fam, yn amlwg yn sâl; roedd ei anadlu’n anarferol. Roedd y meddyg wedi dweud nad oedd unrhyw beth difrifol o’i le, ei fod yn ‘sniffian’ a chynghorodd y dylid mynd â’r babi at y meddyg teulu yn y bore. Roedd y fam wedi mynnu bod rhaid i’r babi fynd i’r ysbyty, ac, yn anfodlon braidd, cytunodd y meddyg a threfnwyd i’r babi fynd i’r ysbyty. Dywedodd y fam, oherwydd bod y meddyg wedi bod mor galonogol, ei bod wedi penderfynu y byddai’n mynd â’r babi i’r ysbyty wedi iddi wneud trefniadau ar gyfer gofal ei phlentyn arall. Pan aethpwyd â’r babi i’r ysbyty, ddwy awr yn ddiweddarach, canfuwyd ei fod yn ddifrifol wael. Yn ffodus, gwnaeth adferiad llawn.
Rhoddodd y meddyg adroddiad gwahanol o’r ymgynghoriad. Dywedodd, pan gafodd ei hysbysu gyntaf am bryder y fam am y babi, cynghorodd y dylid dweud wrthi am fynd â’r plentyn i’r Adran Damweiniau ac Argyfwng leol. Honnodd ei fod yn credu y byddai hynny’n cael ei wneud. (Gwadodd y fam hynny’n llwyr). Dywedodd ei fod serch hynny wedi mynd i’r tŷ a chanfod fod y fam wedi disgwyl iddo gyrraedd. Ar ôl archwilio’r babi, cytunodd â’r fam y dylai’r babi fynd i mewn i’r ysbyty. Ni wnaeth diagnosis pendant, ond nid oedd o’r farn bod unrhyw argyfwng. Trefnodd i’r babi gael ei dderbyn i’r ysbyty, a chynigiodd ambiwlans i’r fam, ond dywedodd ei bod yn dymuno gwneud trefniadau i ofalu am ei phlentyn, ac y byddai’n mynd â’r babi i’r ysbyty ei hun. Honnodd na wnaeth cyflwr y babi ddirywio’n ddifrifol tan yn ddiweddarach. Cytunodd y fam bod cyflwr y babi wedi dirywio ymhellach wedi i’r meddyg adael.
Penderfynodd Dr Korlipara y dylid cau’r achos oherwydd, meddai, bod y meddyg wedi gweithredu’n rhesymol ac yn alluog. Dywedodd ei bod yn eglur bod cyflwr y babi wedi dirywio wedi i’r meddyg adael. Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, pan awgrymwyd iddo ei fod wedi mynd y tu hwnt i’w swyddogaeth wirioneddol fel sgriniwr, ac wedi datrys yr anghydfod rhwng yr achwynydd a’r meddyg, dywedodd bod sail ddigonol o dystiolaeth ddiamheuol i ryddhau’r meddyg o feirniadaeth. Yn fy marn i, nid oedd. Ar wahân i’r ddadl ynghylch a wnaeth y meddyg mewn gwirionedd gynghori y dylid dweud wrth y fam i fynd â’r plentyn i’r ysbyty hyd yn oed cyn iddo ymweld, roedd dadl bellach ynghylch a oedd y meddyg wedi sylweddoli bod y plentyn yn sâl. Os nad oedd, ac os oedd y plentyn yn mynd i’r ysbyty oherwydd bod y fam wedi mynnu hynny’n unig, fe allai hynny yn wir fod yn gyfystyr â methiant difrifol neu gamgymeriad barn ar ran y meddyg. Yn fy marn i, fe wnaeth Dr Korlipara ddatrys y gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth o blaid y meddyg. Dylai fod wedi gofyn iddo’i hun a allai’r honiad, os oedd yn wir, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dylai’r achos fod wedi mynd drwodd at y PPC. Mae hwn yn enghraifft arall o sgriniwr meddygol yn mynd y tu hwnt i’w gylch/chylch gwaith priodol.
Yn yr achos hwn hefyd, fel nifer o achosion eraill, dylai’r GMC fod wedi gwneud ymholiadau lleol. Ar y ffeil, mae arwydd (fel ag yr oedd yn achos Dr KE 03) nad oedd y gwasanaeth dirprwyo yn barod i barhau i gyflogi’r meddyg. Dylid fod wedi gofyn pam iddo. Fe allai fod wedi ffurfio’r farn honno am ei fod yn pryderu’n ddifrifol ynghylch y modd yr ymdriniodd y meddyg â’r achos penodol hwn; fe allai fod pryderon mwy cyffredinol ganddo yn ei gylch. Er budd diogelu cleifion, dylai’r GMC fod wedi canfod hynny.
Y Sgrinwyr Lleyg
Cyn disgrifio grŵp arall o achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, h.y. y rheiny’n ymwneud â sgrinwyr lleyg, gall fod yn ddefnyddiol i ddweud ychydig mwy am rôl y sgrinwyr lleyg. Cyflwynwyd sgrinio gan aelodau lleyg y GMC ym 1990. Roedd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn disgrifio’u rôl fel a ganlyn:
Nid yw’n ofynnol i sgrinwyr lleyg fod yn rhan o’r sgrinio ym mhob achos. Yn lle hynny, maent yn gysylltiedig â’r achosion hynny’n unig lle mae’r sgriniwr meddygol wedi penderfynu na ddylai’r achos fynd ymhellach. Fel yr esboniais ym mharagraff 19.31, roedd sgrinwyr lleyg yn gysylltiedig hefyd â’r ‘hen’ weithdrefnau Pennod XV a oedd ar waith hyd at 1999.
Y Ddarpariaeth Statudol
Trwy Reolau (Gweithrediad) (Diwygiedig) Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1990, newidiwyd rheol 10(2) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i ddarllen:
(gan gynnwys rheol 6(3))
(a oedd yn ymwneud â hysbysu’r achwynydd, hysbysydd a’r meddyg)
(h.y. y sgriniwr lleyg)
Natur a Graddfa Cysylltiad Sgrinwyr Lleyg
Roedd Adroddiad PSI 1996 yn disgrifio rhan y sgrinwyr lleyg. Mewn achos lle’r oedd sgriniwr meddygol wedi penderfynu nad oedd angen i’r achos fynd ymhellach, roedd y papurau yn yr achos, gan gynnwys sylwadau’r sgriniwr meddygol, yn cael eu trosglwyddo i’r sgriniwr lleyg. Fel y dywedais, fe allai sylwadau’r sgriniwr lleyg fod wedi’u cyfyngu i un gair, yn nodi cytundeb â chynnwys y memorandwm ar yr achos wedi’i ysgrifennu gan staff y GMC. Fe allent fod yn fwy helaeth. Byddai’r sgriniwr lleyg yn cadarnhau penderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol wedyn neu’n dangos ei anghytundeb/hanghytundeb ag ef. Os oedd y sgriniwr lleyg yn anghytuno â phenderfyniad, byddai trafodaeth fel arfer rhwng y ddau sgriniwr. Fe allai’r sgriniwr lleyg dderbyn barnau’r sgriniwr meddygol a chytuno y dylai’r achos gael ei gau. Fe allai ef neu hi ofyn am wybodaeth bellach cyn bod penderfyniad terfynol yn cael ei wneud. Fe allai’r sgriniwr lleyg (cyn 1999) awgrymu y dylai’r ‘hen’ weithdrefnau Pennod XV gael eu rhoi ar waith, fel dewis arall i gau’r achos ar unwaith. Os oedd y sgriniwr lleyg, fodd bynnag, yn dilyn trafodaeth, yn parhau o’r farn y dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC, byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud.
Roedd cyfyngiadau ar gysylltiad sgrinwyr lleyg. Nid oeddent yn chwarae unrhyw ran mewn sgrinio achosion o euogfarnau. Nid oedd y Rheolau ychwaith fyth yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i sgrinwyr lleyg fod yn gysylltiedig cyn bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud i anfon achosion yn eu hôl at sgriniwr iechyd fel dewis arall i’w gyfeirio at y PPC. Roedd penderfyniadau ynghylch a ddylai achos fynd ymlaen ar hyd y llwybr ymddygiad at y PPC neu drwy’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn bwysig iawn. Roedd yn wir bod cyfeiriad at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn golygu nad oedd achos yn cael ei gau gan y GMC yn y cam hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, effaith cyfeiriad felly oedd dileu’r posibilrwydd o enw’r meddyg yn cael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr.
At hynny, nid yw sgrinwyr lleyg erioed wedi bod yn gysylltiedig ag achosion lle’r oedd y sgriniwr meddygol neu aelod o staff y GMC wedi penderfynu y dylai achwynydd gael ei gynghori/chynghori i ganlyn ei gŵyn/chwyn trwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Hyd at 1993, ac ar ôl mis Mawrth 1999, roedd staff y GMC yn delio â phenderfyniadau felly heb gysylltiad sgrinwyr meddygol. Ym Mhennod 18, mynegais fy marn nad oedd yr arfer hwnnw’n cydymffurfio â darpariaethau rheol 6 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988. Rhwng 1993 a 1999, bu newid polisi, ac yn ôl hwnnw byddai achosion a allai fod wedi’u nodi’n flaenorol gan staff y GMC fel achosion a oedd yn addas i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, yn cael eu cyfeirio yn y lle cyntaf at sgriniwr meddygol. Hyd yn oed wedyn, fodd bynnag, nid oedd sgrinwyr lleyg yn gysylltiedig â’r penderfyniad i gyfeirio achosion yn eu hôl at achwynwyr i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol. Yn ôl pob golwg, y rheswm am hyn oedd yr ystyriwyd bod achosion felly nid wedi’u ‘cau’, ond yn syml wedi’u gohirio gyda’r posibilrwydd y gallent rywbryd gael eu cyfeirio’n ôl at weithdrefnau’r GMC. Felly, mae’n rhaid mai’r feddylfryd oedd nad oedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud penderfyniad pendant i beidio cyfeirio’r gŵyn at y PPC. I bob pwrpas, fodd bynnag, roedd achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio’n ôl i’w canlyn drwy weithdrefnau lleol wedi’u ‘cau’, gan na chymerwyd unrhyw gamau i ganlyn eu cynnydd. Dim ond os oedd yr achwynydd neu gorff GIG yn dewis eu cyfeirio’n ôl at y GMC y byddent yn cael eu hailystyried. Ymddengys i mi bod y methiant i ofyn am gydsyniad y sgriniwr lleyg mewn achosion felly yn achos o dorri rheol 10(2) fwy na thebyg.
Adroddiad 2000 y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi
Yn 2000, fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ddadansoddi’r data a gynhwyswyd ar 792 o ffurflenni SDF a lenwyd yn ystod ail chwe mis 1999. Roedd gofyniad ar sgrinwyr lleyg i ddatgan ar yr SDF pa un a oeddent y cytuno â phenderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol. Os nad oeddent, roedd yn ofynnol iddynt roi’u rhesymau. Canfu’r tîm PSI bod sgrinwyr lleyg wedi cytuno â phenderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol mewn bron i 98% o’r 423 o achosion y bu sgriniwr lleyg yn gysylltiedig â nhw. Roedd sgrinwyr lleyg wedi anghytuno â’r sgriniwr meddygol mewn deng achos yn unig. Ar y pryd, roedd pedwar sgriniwr lleyg yn gwneud y rhan fwyaf o’r gwaith. Roedd ymyriadau un o’r pedwar wedi cyfrif am hanner y deng achos hynny.
Ym mis Awst 2000, pan newidiwyd y prawf sgrinio (gweler paragraff 19.120), roedd y rheol ddiwygiedig yn dweud yn glir bod rhaid i sgriniwr meddygol gyfeirio at y PPC pob achos a oedd yn cael ei gyflwyno iddo/iddi oni bai ei fod/bod yn penderfynu (a bod y sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno) nad oedd cwestiwn yn codi ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Yr eithriadau i’r rheol gyffredinol hon oedd pan oedd achwynydd a oedd yn unigolyn preifat wedi methu darparu datganiad statudol, a lle’r oedd achos yn cael ei gyfeirio gan y sgriniwr meddygol at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Erbyn hynny, staff y GMC (nid sgrinwyr) oedd yn gyfrifol am wneud y penderfyniad i gynghori achwynwyr i gyfeirio achosion at weithdrefnau cwynion lleol.
Newid yn y Ddarpariaeth Statudol
Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, pan newidiwyd y prawf sgrinio eto, cyflwynwyd rheol 6(3A) newydd, yn delio â rôl y sgriniwr lleyg, i Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988:
Ymddengys mai effaith y newid hwn oedd y byddai ymgynghoriad cyn bod y penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud, yn hytrach na’r sgriniwr meddygol yn gwneud y penderfyniad gyntaf a’r sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno neu’n anghytuno ag ef. Roedd i weld yn ymhlygu y byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn cysylltu’n uniongyrchol â’r sgriniwr lleyg pan oedd yn bwriadu gwneud penderfyniad i gau achos. Fodd bynnag, fel yr esboniaf isod, nid ymddengys bod hynny wedi digwydd ym mhob achos.
Tystiolaeth Dr Arun Midha
Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan Dr Midha, sydd wedi bod yn aelod o’r GMC er mis Tachwedd 2000 ac a fu’n sgriniwr lleyg o fis Gorffennaf 2001. Esboniodd Dr Midha y byddai’n delio â sgrinio achosion yn ei amser sbâr, gyda’r nos ac ar benwythnosau. Cymhwysai’r un prawf â’r sgrinwyr meddygol. Dywedodd mai ei arfer oedd i beidio trafod yr achos gyda’r sgriniwr meddygol cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad; roedd sgrinwyr lleyg yn cael y cyfle i siarad â sgrinwyr meddygol cyn gwneud penderfyniad, ond ni ddewisodd wneud hynny. Roedd yn ystyried yn gyntaf y memorandwm a ysgrifennwyd gan y gweithiwr achos a defnyddiai hwnnw i’w arwain drwy’r ffeil. Ar ôl nodi’r prif honiadau a materion a’r dystiolaeth berthnasol, byddai wedyn yn darllen argymhellion y sgriniwr meddygol. Byddai’n gwneud ei benderfyniad wedyn. Os oedd angen barn arbenigol arno, byddai’n gofyn am gael adroddiad. Os oedd ganddo amheuon ynghylch a ddylid cyfeirio achos at y PPC, byddai’n or-ofalus ac yn ei gyfeirio. Os oedd yn anghytuno ag argymhelliad y sgriniwr meddygol, byddai’n cyfleu’r ffaith honno i’r gweithiwr achos dros y ffôn neu drwy e-bost. Byddai’n cysylltu â’r sgriniwr meddygol hefyd drwy e-bost neu’n gofyn i’r gweithiwr achos gysylltu â’r sgriniwr meddygol i’w hysbysu y byddai’n rhaid i’r achos fynd ymlaen at y PPC. Byddai’n rhoi rhesymau am ei benderfyniad. Gwnâi hyn fel mater o gwrteisi. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’n trafod ei benderfyniad gyda’r sgriniwr meddygol. Mae’r arfer hwn braidd yn wahanol i hynny y sylwyd arno gan y tîm PSI ac a ddisgrifiwyd yn eu Hadroddiad 2000. Mae braidd yn wahanol hefyd i hynny a ragwelwyd yn ôl pob golwg gan reol 6(3A) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988.
Yn ei ddatganiad tyst, dywedodd Dr Midha bod y rheswm mwyaf arferol am anghytuno â’r sgriniwr meddygol yn ymwneud â gwahaniaethau mewn barn ynghylch a oedd yr honiad yn ddigon difrifol i gyrraedd y trothwy difrifoldeb yn y prawf sgrinio ar gyfer SPM neu SDP. Yn y gorffennol, gweithiai sgrinwyr meddygol a sgrinwyr lleyg mewn timau, gyda’r un sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg yn dyfarnu ar yr un achosion. Erbyn mis Rhagfyr 2003, fodd bynnag, roedd achosion yn cael eu dosbarthu ar hap i sgrinwyr, felly byddai Dr Midha yn gweld achosion gan bob un o’r sgrinwyr meddygol. Dywedodd ei fod wedi sylwi ar ‘amrywiad bach’ yn y modd yr oedd sgrinwyr meddygol gwahanol yn canfod yr hyn a oedd ac nad oedd yn ‘ddifrifol’. Fodd bynnag, teimlai y byddai’n anodd nodi trothwyon difrifoldeb adnabyddadwy. Fe wnaeth, fodd bynnag, gydnabod y gallai canllawiau yn nodi nodweddion a fyddai’n gwaethygu neu’n lliniaru difrifoldeb fod o werth.
Teimlai Dr Midha bod gan y broses sgrinio ei chyfyngiadau. Dan yr hen system, fel ag yr oedd ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, roedd gan sgrinwyr wybodaeth gyfyngedig i wneud penderfyniadau arni mewn rhai achosion. Teimlai fod angen ‘llawer mwy o gyfle i ymchwilio, i gael llawer mwy o wybodaeth drylwyr’. Cydnabu y gallai fod ‘cyfleoedd yn cael eu colli’ oherwydd diffyg ymchwilio. Gobeithiai y byddai modd ymchwilio mwy dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.
Dadansoddiad o Benderfyniadau Sgrinio Diweddar
Roedd Mr Marshall, Pennaeth Adran Sgrinio’r GMC, wedi gwneud dadansoddiad o benderfyniadau sgrinio a wnaed yn y 12 mis hyd at 30 Medi 2003. Yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, roedd achosion ymddygiad a pherfformiad yn ymwneud â 1300 o feddygon wedi’u sgrinio gan y sgrinwyr meddygol. O’r rheiny, roedd yr achosion yn ymwneud â 750 o feddygon wedi’u cyfeirio at sgriniwr lleyg gydag argymhelliad y dylai’r achos gael ei gau. Anghytunodd y sgrinwyr lleyg â’r sgrinwyr meddygol yn achosion 50 o feddygon (h.y. bron i 7% o achosion y deliodd sgrinwyr lleyg â nhw). Mae hynny’n amlder ychydig yn uwch o anghytundeb rhwng sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg nag a ddigwyddodd yn ystod y cyfnod chwe mis ym 1999 a gafodd ei ddadansoddi gan y tîm PSI: gweler paragraff 19.250. Mae’n awgrymu bod sgrinwyr lleyg yn fwy parod i anghytuno â barnau sgrinwyr meddygol yn y cyfnod o 2002 i 2003 nag yn ystod 1999.
Achosion a Gafodd eu Hystyried gan yr Ymchwiliad
Gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad bod y GMC yn darparu’r papurau yn y pum achos olaf cyn 30 Medi 2003 lle’r oedd sgriniwr lleyg wedi anghytuno â phenderfyniad sgriniwr meddygol. Beth bynnag, daeth yn glir nad y pum achos olaf a ddigwyddodd oedd yr achosion a ddarparwyd; deliwyd â’r cyfan ohonynt beth amser yn flaenorol. Gall fod mai’r hyn oeddent oedd y pum achos olaf lle’r oedd y sgriniwr lleyg wëid anghytuno â phenderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol a lle’r oedd y PPC eisoes wedi delio â’r achos.
Y sgriniwr lleyg mewn pedwar o’r pum achos oedd Dr Midha. Roedd pedair o’u pum cwyn yn ymwneud â honiadau o driniaeth wael a/neu arfer is na’r safon, y dywedwyd eu bod wedi achosi marwolaethau’r cleifion. Roedd y pedwar achos yn ymwneud â materion meddygol cymhleth. Roedd y pumed achos yn honiad o dorri cyfrinachedd. Cafodd pedwar achos eu cau wedi hynny gan y PPC; cyfeiriwyd y pumed gan y PPC at y PCC, ond canslwyd y cyfeiriad wedi hynny. Fodd bynnag, mewn pedwar o’r pum achos, roedd y PPC yn ddigon pryderus i anfon llythyr cynghori neu lythyr rhybuddio i o leiaf un o’r meddygon dan sylw. Ymddengys i mi, ym mhob achos, bod y sgriniwr lleyg wedi bod yn iawn i ymyrryd; roedd mater go iawn i’w drafod a’i benderfynu gan y PPC. Mewn un, a oedd yn ymwneud â honiad yn erbyn anaesthetydd, roedd y sgriniwr meddygol, a oedd yn feddyg teulu, yn dymuno cau’r achos heb gael unrhyw dystiolaeth gan arbenigwr annibynnol ar fater yn ymwneud â gwaith anaesthetydd. Dibynnodd ar y farn a fynegwyd mewn adroddiad ymchwiliad a gynhaliwyd gan yr ysbyty a oedd yn cyflogi’r anaesthetydd. Gofynnodd Dr Midha am adroddiad arbenigwr annibynnol, a fynegodd farn wahanol i hynny yn adroddiad yr ysbyty. Aeth yr achos at y PPC, a gafodd ei gau, fel y bu hi. Dywedodd Dr Midha wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod o’r farn ei bod yn ddefnyddiol i’r PPC drafod achosion felly. Rwy’n cytuno ag ef ac, yn fy marn i, ni fyddai’r GMC fod wedi bod yn gwneud ei waith yn iawn pe bai’r achos hwnnw wedi’i gau heb gael adroddiad arbenigwr annibynnol a thrafod yr achos yn llawn. Ymddengys i mi bod gwerth gwirioneddol i rôl y sgriniwr lleyg. Rwy’n cael yr argraff, fodd bynnag, ei bod yn rhaid ei bod yn anodd weithiau i sgrinwyr lleyg fynd i ddadl â sgriniwr meddygol, yn enwedig gan nad oes unrhyw safonau na meini prawf i farnu yn eu herbyn ynghylch a ellir dadlau bod yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM.

---  ---
Fel y gwelwyd, mae geiriad y prawf statudol sy’n sylfaenol i’r broses sgrinio wedi’i newid mewn blynyddoedd diweddar. Fodd bynnag, yn ymarferol, nid yw’r prawf wedi newid mewn gwirionedd. Hidlydd rhagarweiniol yn unig fu sgrinio o hyd, neu dyna ddylai fod, wedi’i gynllunio i ddileu o’r baich achosion y cwynion hynny na allent yn amlwg arwain at gamau disgyblu. Fel y dywedais, am lawer o flynyddoedd, ymddengys bod y prawf wedi’i gymhwyso’n anghywir. Mae llawer mwy o achosion wedi’u sgrinio allan na ddylid fod wedi’u gwneud. Mae’n amhosibl asesu faint neu ba gyfran o achosion a gafodd eu cau gan sgrinwyr ond a ddylai fod wedi mynd ymlaen at y PPC. Wrth gwrs, nid yw ffaith y dylai achos fod wedi mynd at y PPC o reidrwydd yn golygu y dylai fod wedi mynd drwodd at y PCC o reidrwydd; byddai wedi bod yn agored i’r PPC i’w gau. Ond roedd gan sgrinwyr a’r PPC swyddogaethau gwahanol, a phrofion gwahanol i’w cymhwyso. Byddaf yn ystyried gwaith y PPC ym Mhennod 20. Y pwynt rwyf yn ei wneud yma yw ymddengys bod ethos o gau’n gynnar, a oedd, yn fy marn i, yn dangos amharodrwydd i roi’r ystyriaeth yr oeddent yn eu haeddu i gwynion yn erbyn meddygon. Roedd y cydbwysedd rhwng diogelu cleifion a bod yn deg i feddygon yn pwyso tuag at fuddiannau’r meddygon. Yn fy marn i, cyn belled â bod aelodau’r GMC yn cael eu hethol gan y proffesiwn, bydd perygl o hyd y bydd eu penderfyniadau ‘barnwrol’ yn gogwyddo’n isymwybodol tuag at fuddiannau eu hetholwyr.
Nid wyf yn dymuno awgrymu nad oedd sgrinwyr unigol yn gydwybodol wrth gyflawni’u gwaith. Credaf eu bod felly. Y broblem oedd eu bod, am flynyddoedd lawer, wedi’u gadael i ddefnyddio’u disgresiwn eu hunain ynghylch y modd i fynd i’r afael â’r dasg. Y rheswm am hyn i raddau helaeth oedd hanes y ffordd yr oedd eu rôl wedi datblygu. Am ryw 75 mlynedd, sgrinio oedd maes unigol arweinydd y proffesiwn, Llywydd y GMC. Ef oedd yn penderfynu beth oedd yn dderbyniol ac fel arall. Hyd yn oed yn y 1970au, pan beidiodd y Llywydd â dal y tair rôl (h.y. sgriniwr meddygol, Cadeirydd y PeCC a Chadeirydd y DC), ef oedd yn enwebu’r sgrinwyr a chadeiryddion y pwyllgorau FTP amrywiol, ac felly gallai ddylanwadu dros eraill. Hyd at 2004, roedd y Llywydd yn enwebu’r sgrinwyr ac roedd y GMC yn gorfod eu penodi. Ymddengys i mi y gallai’r cysylltiad hwn â’r Llywydd fod wedi argraffu’r teimlad mewn sgrinwyr eu bod mewn sefyllfa i arfer disgresiwn a gwneud penderfyniadau ar sail eu barnau personol i raddau lawer mwy nag yr oedd Rheolau’r GMC yn caniatáu iddynt wneud mewn gwirionedd. Pan oedd yn glir, o ganlyniad i adolygiad barnwrol, nad oedd y sgrinwyr wedi bod yn cymhwyso’r Rheolau, nid oedd y sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai ohonynt o leiaf) yn barod i ddysgu a newid eu harfer. Hefyd, pan gytunodd y PSI a’r GMC ar fesurau a fyddai wedi creu mwy o gysondeb canlyniadau, fe wnaeth y sgrinwyr meddygol (neu rai ohonynt) danseilio’r trefniadau newydd. Gall fod bod rhywfaint o welliant yn ansawdd a chysondeb y broses gwneud penderfyniadau yn y flwyddyn olaf neu ddwy o’r hen weithdrefnau FTP. Ni allaf ddweud. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi ei bod yn ffodus y bydd sgrinio felly’n diflannu dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Bydd y broses hidlo ragarweiniol yn cael ei chyflawni gan archwilwyr achos, na fyddant yn aelodau etholedig o’r GMC, a, gobeithir, na ddylent deimlo dan unrhyw bwysau isymwybodol i ogwyddo tuag at ddiogelu meddygon. Gobeithir y bydd cychwyn newydd gyda safonau a meini prawf wedi’u diffinio’n glir ac yn ddealladwy i bawb yn cael eu cymhwyso ym mhob cam o’r broses.
Byddaf yn mynd yn ôl at fater safonau a meini prawf fwy nag unwaith yn yr Adroddiad hwn. Ymddengys i mi bod diffyg safonau a meini prawf yn sylfaenol i’r problemau a wynebodd y GMC yn y gorffennol. Ym mhob un o adroddiadau’r PSI, argymhellodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr y dylai safonau a meini prawf gael eu datblygu, gyda hierarchaeth difrifoldeb. Dim ond wedi i hynny gael ei wneud, dywedodd, y byddai modd cyflawni cysondeb a thryloywder yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Rwy’n cytuno â hi’n llwyr.
Fy mhryder mawr arall, a amlygwyd gan yr archwiliad hwn o’r broses sgrinio, yw methiant y GMC i ymchwilio i achosion yn drylwyr cyn bod penderfyniadau rhagarweiniol yn cael eu gwneud, ac, yn benodol, i wneud ymholiadau i gyflogwr neu PCT y meddyg. Nodais ym Mhennod 18 bod Dr Korlipara wedi mynegi’r farn nad oedd yn rhan o swyddogaeth y GMC i geisio gwneud achos yn erbyn y meddyg. Yn fy marn i, mae byd o wahaniaeth rhwng ceisio gwneud achos yn erbyn meddyg a chynnal ymchwiliad trylwyr a diduedd.

---  ---
Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Swyddogaethau a Phwerau'r Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Canlyniadau Posibl y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol yn Ystyried Achos
Yr Ymagwedd a Fabwysiadwyd gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol Mewn Rhai Mathau Penodol o Achos
Baich Gwaith y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol yn y 1990au
Rolau Gwahanol y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a'r Sgrinwyr: Achos Toth
Achos Richards
Baich Gwaith y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol o 2000 i 2003
Dau Achos Arall o Adolygiad Barnwrol
Achos Holmes
Datblygiadau Diweddarach
Y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol yn Canslo Gwrandawiadau gerbron y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol

---  ---
O 1951, darparodd Rheolau’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) ar gyfer proses hidlo bellach, i’w chynnal ar ôl honno yr oedd y sgrinwyr yn ei chyflawni, fel y disgrifiwyd yn y Bennod olaf. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP), roedd yn rhaid i bob cwyn ac adroddiad am euogfarnau a oedd yn goroesi’r prosesau hidlo gan staff y GMC a chan y sgrinwyr yn gorfod mynd trwy drydedd broses hidlo os oeddent i’w cyfeirio ar gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu cyhoeddus. Cyn 1951, roedd y drydedd broses hidlo hon yn cael ei chynnal yn anffurfiol. Rhwng 1951 a mis Awst 1980, cymerodd y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbol (PeCC) gyfrifoldeb am y drydedd broses hidlo. Ym mis Awst 1980, disodlodd y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) y PeCC a chyflawni’r un swyddogaeth. Hyd at 1980, pwyllgor y GMC a oedd yn gyfrifol am gynnal gwrandawiadau cyhoeddus mewn achosion disgyblu oedd y Pwyllgor Disgyblu (DC). Ym 1980, disodlwyd y DC gan y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC).
Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio pwerau a swyddogaethau’r PPC. Byddaf yn trafod y prawf a gymhwyswyd gan y PPC wrth benderfynu a ddylai gyfeirio achos at y PCC ai peidio, a’r arweiniad a oedd ar gael i aelodau’r PPC i’w cynorthwyo wrth wneud penderfyniadau felly. Byddaf yn ystyried y dystiolaeth am y modd yr oedd y PPC yn gweithredu’n ymarferol. Yn benodol, byddaf yn archwilio rhai penderfyniadau’r PPC a fu’n destun adolygiad barnwrol. Byddaf yn archwilio’r penderfyniadau hefyd mewn nifer o achosion y deliodd y PPC â nhw, y mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cael ffeiliau mewn perthynas â nhw. Byddaf yn ystyried y golau a daflwyd ar weithrediad y PPC gan y gwaith a wnaed gan y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi (PSI). Ni wnaeth yr un gŵyn yn ymwneud â Shipman erioed gyrraedd y PPC. Fodd bynnag, mae gweithrediad y PPC dros y 24 mlynedd diwethaf yn ddangosydd pwysig o’r modd yr oedd y GMC yn cynnal ei weithdrefnau FTP yn y gorffennol, ac mae, felly, yn berthnasol i dasg yr Ymchwiliad o wneud argymhellion ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol. Fel mewn Penodau blaenorol, byddaf yn canolbwyntio’n benodol ar dystiolaeth yn ymwneud â diogelu cleifion.
Roedd Dr Robin Steel yn aelod meddygol o’r GMC o 1984, yn sgriniwr ychwanegol o 1987 a’r prif sgriniwr meddygol a Chadeirydd y PPC rhwng mis Mehefin 1992 a mis Tachwedd 1999, pan ymddeolodd o’r GMC. Darparodd ddatganiad tyst, ond nid oedd yn ddigon iach i fynychu i roi tystiolaeth lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Darparwyd datganiad ysgrifenedig gan Mr Robert Nicholls, aelod lleyg o’r GMC a Chadeirydd y PPC o fis Tachwedd 1999 hyd at fis Mehefin 2003, a rhoddodd dystiolaeth lafar yn ogystal. Hefyd, gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth lafar gan dystion eraill â gwybodaeth am y PPC, gan gynnwys yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, PSI Prifysgol Westminster. Yn ystod ei gwaith ymchwil i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, arsylwodd yr Athro Allen 11 o gyfarfodydd rhwng mis Mehefin 1999 a mis Ionawr 2000.
Adroddiadau Blynyddol y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
O 1981, roedd yn ofynnol i’r PPC gan Orchmynion Sefydlog y GMC i gyflwyno adroddiad ar ei weithgareddau i’r Cyngor llawn o’r GMC o leiaf unwaith y flwyddyn. Trwy gytundeb, roedd yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol yn cwmpasu gweithgareddau’r sgrinwyr hefyd. Am lawer o flynyddoedd, roedd yr Adroddiadau’n cynnwys gwybodaeth (fanwl iawn weithiau) am y niferoedd a’r mathau o gwynion yr oedd y GMC yn eu derbyn, ac am ganlyniad y cwynion hynny yn y camau cyn-sgrinio, sgrinio a PPC. Roedd yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol yn rhoi gwybodaeth hefyd am newidiadau diweddar mewn arfer a gweithdrefn. Maent yn darparu ffynhonnell ddefnyddiol iawn o wybodaeth am gamau cynnar gweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC yn ystod y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au.
Yn ystod y 1990au hwyr, newidiodd ffurf Adroddiadau Blynyddol y PPC. Roeddent yn cynnwys llai o wybodaeth am arfer, gweithdrefnau a chanlyniadau ar gyfer mathau penodol o achos. Yn lle hynny, daethant i ymwneud mwy â gwybodaeth ystadegol. Ar ôl 2001, roedd Adroddiad Blynyddol y PPC yn cael ei gogynnwys mewn dogfen yn cynnwys ystadegau ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad (yr ystadegau FTP blynyddol). Mae’r un ystadegau FTP blynyddol hefyd yn cynnwys data am berfformiad yn erbyn safonau gwasanaeth.
Nid oedd yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol yn cynnwys cyfeiriad at, na thrafodaeth am, unrhyw safonau, meini prawf na phrofion yn cael eu cymhwyso gan staff, sgrinwyr neu aelodau’r PPC wrth wneud penderfyniadau am waredu achos.

---  ---
Roedd cyfansoddiad y PPC yn cael ei reoli’n olynol gan Orchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Rheolau’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgorau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer) 1980, 1986 a 1996 (y Rheolau Cyfansoddiad). Rhwng 1980 a 1996, roedd y PPC yn cynnwys y Cadeirydd, wyth aelod meddygol a dau aelod lleyg o’r GMC (h.y. 11 aelod i gyd). Ac eithrio Llywydd y GMC, nid oedd hawl gan aelodau i eistedd ar fwy nag un o bwyllgorau FTP y GMC ar yr un pryd (h.y. bryd hynny, y PPC, y PCC a’r Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC)).
Hyd at 2000, roedd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad yn amodi bod y Llywydd (neu’r aelod meddygol a enwebwyd ganddo ac a benodwyd gan y Cyngor i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol yn ei le) yn gadeirydd y PPC. Yn ymarferol, ac eithrio’r cyfnod rhwng 1984 a 1989, pan oedd y Llywydd yn gweithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol ac yn cadeirio’r PPC, roedd y PPC yn cael ei gadeirio gan y sgriniwr meddygol a benodwyd yn lle’r Llywydd. Daeth y sgriniwr meddygol hwnnw yn hysbys fel y ‘prif’ sgriniwr meddygol er mwyn gwahaniaethu rhyngddo/rhyngddi â’r sgrinwyr meddygol ychwanegol a benodwyd i gynorthwyo yn y broses sgrinio.
Roedd aelodau eraill o’r PPC yn cael eu hethol gan y Cyngor yn flynyddol. Wrth i fwy o sgrinwyr meddygol (ac, o 1990, sgrinwyr lleyg) gael eu penodi, roedd yn arferol i o leiaf rai ohonynt fod yn aelodau o’r PPC hefyd. Roedd sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg nad oeddent yn aelodau etholedig o’r PPC yn cael eu gwahodd serch hynny i fynychu cyfarfodydd y PPC fel gwylwyr. Er nad oedd pleidlais ganddynt, fe ellid galw arnynt i annerch y PPC mewn perthynas ag achosion yr oeddent wedi’u sgrinio. Pump oedd cworwm cyfreithiol y PPC.
Roedd yr aelod meddygol o’r GMC a benodwyd i sgrinio achosion a oedd yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd ei gyflwr/chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, yn cael ei alw’n sgriniwr iechyd. Erbyn 1984, roedd yn arfer sefydledig i’r sgriniwr iechyd, os nad oedd yn aelod etholedig o’r PPC, i fynychu cyfarfodydd y PPC er mwyn cynghori ar achosion lle’r oedd iechyd y meddyg dan sylw. Ym 1986, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad i amodi y dylai’r sgriniwr iechyd ddod yn aelod o’r PPC yn awtomatig oni bai ei fod/bod eisoes wedi’i ethol/hethol felly.
Ym 1994, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad ymhellach i ddarparu ar gyfer y sefyllfa lle’r oedd llai na phum aelod ar gael i fynychu cyfarfod o’r PPC, a lle nad oedd cworwm cyfreithiol felly. Rhoddwyd y grym i’r Llywydd i benodi i’r PPC dros dro unrhyw aelod o’r GMC a fyddai wedi bod yn gymwys i sefyll i gael ei ethol/hethol i’r PPC. Ym 1996, lleihawyd aelodaeth y PPC o 11 (gan gynnwys y Cadeirydd) i saith, er mai pump oedd y cworwm o hyd. Roedd pum aelod o’r PPC i fod yn aelodau meddygol a dau i fod yn aelodau lleyg. Parhaodd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad i amodi y dylai’r PPC gael ei gadeirio gan y Llywydd, neu, os oedd yn dewis peidio gweithredu yn y rhinwedd honno, gan y sgriniwr meddygol a benodwyd yn ei le. Os nad oedd Cadeirydd y PPC ar gael i gadeirio cyfarfod, roedd gan y Llywydd y grym i benodi aelod arall o’r PPC i weithredu fel Cadeirydd.
O 1996, nid oedd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad yn gorfodi’r sgriniwr iechyd i fod yn aelod o’r PPC. Fodd bynnag, roedd nodiadau a gynhyrchwyd gan y GMC ym mis Mehefin 1997 at ddefnydd aelodau newydd y PPC yn dangos, yn ymarferol, bod y prif sgriniwr iechyd yn cael ei drin fel aelod
o’r PPC. Roedd yr ail sgriniwr iechyd yn mynychu cyfarfodydd fel gwyliwr. Pump oedd y cworwm cyfreithiol o hyd, i gynnwys o leiaf un aelod lleyg. Wrth i faich gwaith y PPC gynyddu, cyfetholwyd aelodau pellach o’r GMC i eistedd ar y PPC, gan ddefnyddio’r grym a roddwyd i’r Llywydd ym 1994. Hefyd, galwyd weithiau ar sgrinwyr ‘gwylio’ i ddirprwyo ar ran aelodau o’r PPC a oedd yn absennol, er mwyn sicrhau bod cworwm cyfreithiol.
Ym mis Tachwedd 1999, penderfynodd y GMC, gan ddisgwyl i Ddeddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 ddod i rym ym mis Hydref 2000, y dylai swyddogaethau’r sgrinwyr a’r PPC gael eu gwahanu. O fis Tachwedd 1999, nid oedd sgrinwyr (meddygol, iechyd a lleyg) yn gymwys bellach i’w hethol i’r PPC. Nid oedd sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg yn mynychu cyfarfodydd fel gwylwyr mwyach. Cadeirydd y PPC oedd i fod yn Llywydd, neu, os oedd yn dewis peidio gweithredu yn y rhinwedd honno, rhyw aelod arall o’r GMC a benodwyd ganddo. Daeth Mr Nicholls, cyn sgriniwr lleyg, yn Gadeirydd gweithredol y PPC ym mis Tachwedd 1999. Cadarnhawyd ei benodiad ym mis Ionawr 2000. Ym mis Awst 2000, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad i adlewyrchu’r newidiadau a oedd eisoes wedi’u gwneud. Er nad oedd y sgrinwyr iechyd yn gymwys mwyach i’w hethol i’r PPC, roedd o leiaf un ohonynt yn parhau i fynychu cyfarfodydd y PPC lle bynnag yr oedd modd, er mwyn cynnig cyngor mewn achosion lle’r oedd iechyd meddyg dan sylw. Nid oedd pleidlais gan y sgrinwyr iechyd.
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 15, yn 2000, rhoddwyd y grym i’r GMC i gyfethol pobl nad oeddent yn aelodau o’r GMC, meddygol a lleyg, i eistedd ar ei bwyllgorau FTP. Cafodd carfan o bersonau felly, a alwyd yn ‘feirniaid’ yn gyntaf, ac yna’n ‘gyfranogion’, eu recriwtio’n fuan. Yn 2000 hefyd, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad ymhellach i roi’r grym i’r Llywydd (yn amodol ar gymeradwyaeth y Cyngor) i benodi aelod o’r PPC fel Dirprwy Gadeirydd, i gyflawni dyletswyddau Cadeirydd yn absenoldeb y Cadeirydd. Fe wnaeth y grym hwn, ynghyd â’r grym i gyfethol i’r PPC aelodau eraill o’r GMC a chyfranogion, hi’n bosibl i banelau o’r PPC â chyfansoddiadau gwahanol i eistedd yn llawer mwy mynych na fyddai wedi bod yn ymarferol pan oedd ganddo aelodaeth sefydlog fach. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, lleihawyd cworwm y PPC i dri, i gynnwys un aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg.
Cyfarfodydd y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Byddai’r PPC yn cyfarfod yn breifat ac yn ystyried tystiolaeth ddogfennol a chyflwyniadau ysgrifenedig yn unig. Nid oedd yr achwynydd na’r meddyg yn cael eu gwahodd i fynychu’i gyfarfodydd. Roedd eithriad i’r rheol gyffredinol honno’n bodoli rhwng 1980 a 2000, ac yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, roedd gan y PPC y grym i atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg tra’n disgwyl iddo/iddi ymddangos gerbron y PPC neu’r HC. Mewn achosion felly, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei hysbysu ymlaen llaw os oedd y PPC yn ystyried gwneud gorchymyn interim. Roedd hawl ganddo/ganddi (a/neu ei gynrychiolydd/chynrychiolydd) i fynychu’r cyfarfod lle’r oedd ei achos/hachos yn cael ei ystyried, ac i wneud sylwadau ynghylch a ddylid gwneud gorchymyn interim ai peidio.
O’i gychwyn ym 1980, roedd y PPC wastad yn cael ei gynghori yn ystod ei gyfarfodydd gan asesydd cyfreithiol, wedi’i benodi/phenodi gan y GMC, ac roedd yn rhaid iddo/iddi fod yn fargyfreithiwr, yn eiriolwr neu’n gyfreithiwr ag o leiaf deng mlynedd o brofiad. Yn ymarferol, roedd y rôl honno’n cael ei llenwi fel arfer gan fargyfreithiwr iau â chryn dipyn mwy na deng mlynedd o brofiad, gan Gwnsler y Frenhines neu gan farnwr wedi ymddeol. Roedd yn ddyletswydd asesydd cyfreithiol i gynghori ar unrhyw gwestiynau cyfreithiol a ellid eu cyfeirio ato/ati gan y PPC. Roedd dyletswydd gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol hefyd i hysbysu’r PPC ar unwaith am unrhyw afreoleidd-dra yn y modd yr oedd achosion yn cael eu cynnal gerbron y PPC a allai ddod i wybod amdano, ac i gynghori’r PPC ar ei fenter/menter ei hun lle’r oedd yn ymddangos iddo/iddi, oni chafwyd cyngor felly, bod posibilrwydd bod camgymeriad cyfreithiol yn cael ei wneud. Nid oedd unrhyw ofyniad (fel gyda chyngor cyfreithiol yn cael ei roi gan asesydd cyfreithiol i’r PPC) bod y cyngor hwnnw (ac unrhyw wrthodiad gan y PPC i’w dderbyn) yn cael ei wneud yn hysbys i’r meddyg neu i achwynydd. Hyd rhan gyntaf 2000 o leiaf, roedd un neu fwy o gynrychiolwyr cyfreithwyr y PPC yn mynychu cyfarfodydd y PPC hefyd mewn rhinwedd gynghori. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys y rhoddwyd y gorau i’w presenoldeb wedi hynny. Roedd aelodau o staff y GMC yn mynychu cyfarfodydd hefyd er mwyn darparu cymorth ysgrifenyddol a chymorth gweinyddol arall.

---  ---
Roedd Adran 13(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978 (a ddaeth i rym ym mis Awst 1980) yn diffinio swyddogaethau’r PPC. Roedd yn datgan:
Atgynhyrchwyd yr is-adran hon yn adran 42(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983 a pharhaodd yn ddigyfnewid wedi hynny.
Roedd Rheol 11(1) o Orchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Rheolau Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefn) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1980 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980) yn amodi:
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn rhoi’r grym i’r PPC hefyd i ohirio achos er mwyn i ymchwiliadau pellach gael eu gwneud, neu er mwyn cael cyngor cyfreithiol cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad. Atgynhyrchwyd y darpariaethau hyn yng Ngorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Rheolau Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefn) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1988 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988) ac arhosont yn ddigyfnewid bron wedi hynny.
Ni nodwyd unrhyw feini prawf fyth yn y Deddfa Meddygaeth nag yn y Rheolau ar gyfer arwain y PPC wrth benderfynu a
‘ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio’
at y PPC neu’r HC neu’r naill na’r llall;. Dylid nodi bod geiriad rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 (rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn ddiweddarach) a oedd yn rheoli penderfyniadau sgrinwyr, yn debyg iawn i adran 13(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978, adran 42(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983 yn ddiweddarach. Roedd Rheol 6(3) yn amodi:
Fel yr esboniaf nes ymlaen, fe wnaeth y tebygrwydd rhwng geiriad rheol 6(3) ac adran 42(2) arwain yr Athro Allen ddod i’r casgliad nad oedd unrhyw wahaniaeth gwirioneddol rhwng y ddwy broses hidlo a oedd yn cael eu cynnal gan y sgrinwyr a’r PPC. Roedd un yn penderfynu
a’r llall yn penderfynu a
‘ddylai gael ei gyfeirio’
at y PCC. Roedd y gwahaniaeth i weld yn un bach iawn.
Pan gyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1997, ni roddwyd y grym i’r PPC i gyfeirio achos at y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP). Nid oedd ychwaith yn gallu cyfeirio meddyg ar gyfer asesiad perfformiad neu i ystyriaeth gael ei rhoi gan sgriniwr meddygol i’r posibilrwydd o gyfeirio asesiad felly. Roedd hynny’n fwlch sylweddol ym mhwerau’r PPC. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod diffyg pwerau felly wedi ‘achosi cryn dipyn o hunanholi yn y PPC’ yn ystod ei amser fel Cadeirydd.

---  ---
Cyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Fel y dywedais, roedd rhaid i’r PPC benderfynu a
at y PPC. Hyd at 1988, pan oedd y PPC wedi penderfynu y dylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PCC, roedd rheol 11(2) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn berthnasol. Roedd Rheol 11(2) yn amodi:
Fe wnaeth Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 newid rheol 11(2) i ddweud yn glir mai’r
‘euogfarnau’
neu’r
‘materion’
a oedd yn cael eu nodi gan y PPC oedd y rheiny a fyddai’n ffurfio sail y cyhuddiadau y byddai’r meddyg yn gorfod eu hateb yn y gwrandawiad gerbron y PCC.
Cyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn amodi, os oedd y PPC yn ystyried cyfeirio achos at yr HC, gallai ofyn am dystiolaeth feddygol am gyflwr y meddyg cyn gwneud y penderfyniad i gyfeirio neu beidio, a gallai ohirio’r achos tra’n disgwyl cael tystiolaeth felly. Fel arall, gallai’r PPC gyfeirio’r achos at yr HC a gwahodd y meddyg i gael archwiliad(au) meddygol cyn bod yr achos yn dod gerbron yr HC. Wrth gyfeirio achos at yr HC, roedd yn ofynnol i’r PPC nodi natur y cyflwr(cyflyrau) corfforol neu feddyliol a oedd yn gwneud iddi ymddangos i’r PPC y gallai fod amharu difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Os oedd y PPC yn cyfeirio achos at yr HC a bod y cyfeiriad yn amhriodol am ryw reswm (e.e. oherwydd, wrth archwilio, na nodwyd unrhyw broblemau iechyd), nid oedd gan yr HC unrhyw awdurdodaeth i weithredu, nac unrhyw rym i anfon yr achos yn ôl at y PPC. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, ni fyddai gan y GMC unrhyw rym i weithredu. Roedd bwlch yn ei bwerau na chafodd fyth mo’i adfer. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag - yn ddiau oherwydd bod aelodau’r PPC yn ymwybodol o’r broblem botensial - ychydig iawn o achosion a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC yn uniongyrchol at yr HC. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ar yr achlysuron prin pan oedd achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at yr HC, byddid yn ddieithriad yn cael tystiolaeth feddygol cyn bod y cyfeiriad yn cael ei wneud.
Gohirio ar gyfer Ymchwilio Ymhellach
Defnyddio’r Grym i Ohirio mewn Achosion Ymddygiad ac Euogfarnau
Nid ymddengys bod grym y PPC i ohirio ar gyfer ymchwiliadau pellach wedi’i ddefnyddio’n aml er mwyn cychwyn ymchwiliadau ynghylch materion hawliau yn ymwneud â’r euogfarn neu’r ymddygiad dan ystyriaeth. Mae hyn yn syndod o gofio yr ymddengys, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, bod y dystiolaeth yn cael ei rhoi gerbron y PPC i weld, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, yr un fath â hynny a oedd yn cael ei rhoi gerbron y sgriniwr. Dywedwyd mai ‘minimol’ oedd maint y dystiolaeth a oedd yn ofynnol ar gyfer y penderfyniad sgrinio. Rwy’n casglu felly, mewn llawer o achosion, mai tystiolaeth ‘finimol’ fydd wedi’i rhoi gerbron y PPC hefyd. Yr arfer oedd y byddai’r PPC yn dod i benderfyniad i anfon achos at y PPC ‘i ymchwilio iddo’, ac yn ffurfio’r cyhuddiadau yr oedd y meddyg i’w hwynebu ar sail y dystiolaeth eithaf cyfyngedig. Roedd y ffeil wedyn yn cael ei chyfeirio at gyfreithwyr y GMC i’w paratoi ar gyfer y gwrandawiad; byddai’r broses hon yn golygu casglu tystiolaeth weithiau. Fel y dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, roedd hyn yn golygu ‘rhoi’r cart o flaen y ceffyl’. Mae canlyniadau niweidiol ymchwiliad hwyr yn amlwg. Yn gyntaf, roedd rhai achosion fwy na thebyg ddim yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC oherwydd nad oedd eu difrifoldeb wedi’i lawn werthfawrogi a/neu oherwydd bod y PPC wedi cael yr argraff na fyddai’r dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael yn ddigonol. Yn ail, roedd yn digwydd weithiau nad oedd y dystiolaeth a oedd yn cael ei chasglu yn y pen draw gan y cyfreithwyr yn ategu’n ddigonol y cyhuddiadau a oedd eisoes wedi’u ffurfio. Arweiniodd hyn at ollwng rhai, neu’r cyfan hyd yn oed, o’r cyhuddiadau yn erbyn y meddyg. Ar y llaw arall, fe allai’r dystiolaeth a gasglwyd ddatgelu bod yr honiadau braidd yn fwy difrifol na chredwyd, a bod angen newid y cyhuddiadau. Yn ddelfrydol, dylai ymchwilio ddigwydd mewn cyfnod cynnar. Ond, os nad yw’n digwydd ar y cychwyn cyntaf, fe ddylai, byddwn wedi meddwl, fod wedi digwydd o leiaf cyn bod y PPC yn dod i’w benderfyniad.
Gohirio mewn Achosion Iechyd
Nid oedd yn anghyffredin i’r PPC ohirio achos er mwyn cychwyn ymchwiliadau i iechyd meddyg. Roedd rheswm da i hyn.
Os nad oedd y sgriniwr meddygol, yn y cam sgrinio, yn cyfeirio’r meddyg at y PPC, ond yn anfon yr achos yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd yn lle hynny, fe ellid gwahodd y meddyg wedyn i gytuno i gael archwiliadau meddygol. Os oedd yn ymddangos i’r sgriniwr iechyd ei bod yn briodol, o ganlyniad i’r archwiliadau hynny, gellid gwahodd y meddyg i ymrwymo’n wirfoddol mewn perthynas â’i ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol, ac o ran unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ei arfer/harfer y gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd ystyried sy’n angenrheidiol. Daeth y broses o ddelio â meddygon drwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn hysbys fel y ‘gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol’. Byddaf yn esbonio’u gweithrediad ym Mhennod 22. Cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau/hymrwymiadau (ac nad oedd ei iechyd/hiechyd yn dirywio), ni fyddai’n ofynnol iddo/iddi fynychu gwrandawiad ffurfiol ac ni fyddai risg iddo/iddi gael ei atal/hatal, sef y sancsiwn mwyaf difrifol a oedd ar gael mewn ‘achos iechyd’.
Mewn cyferbyniad, os oedd meddyg yn cael ei gyfeirio gan y PPC at yr HC, nid oedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ar gael. Byddai’r meddyg yn destun gwrandawiad gerbron yr HC a oedd, er nad oedd yn cael ei gynnal yn gyhoeddus, yn ffurfiol o ran natur serch hynny. Byddai ef neu hi, yn ddamcaniaethol o leiaf, mewn perygl o gael ei atal/hatal. Felly, roedd meddyg a oedd yn cael ei gyfeirio gan y PPC at yr HC mewn sefyllfa dan anfantais o gymharu â meddyg yr oedd ei achos wedi’i anfon yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd gan sgriniwr meddygol. Gan gydnabod annhegwch potensial hyn, roedd y PPC yn ymorol am atal meddygon rhag bod o dan anfantais yn y modd hwn. Felly, mewn achos lle’r ystyriwyd y gallai afiechyd fod yn amharu ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, byddai’r PPC yn defnyddio’i rym i ohirio’r achos er mwyn ymchwilio ymhellach. Byddai wedyn yn anfon yr achos yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd. Byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn trefnu i’r meddyg cael archwiliad meddygol, a, chan ddibynnu ar gynnwys adroddiadau’r archwiliad, byddai’n asesu addasrwydd y meddyg i ddelio ag ef/hi drwy’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Os ystyriwyd bod y meddyg yn addas i ddelio ag ef/hi dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, byddai’r PPC yn gohirio’r achos
i alluogi hyn gael ei wneud. Os nad oedd y meddyg am rhyw reswm yn addas i ddelio ag ef/hi dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol (efallai gan na chanfuwyd unrhyw broblem iechyd neu oherwydd ei fod/bod yn gwrthod ymrwymo’n wirfoddol), byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn cyfeirio’r achos yn ôl at y PPC. Roedd y PPC wedyn yn gallu ystyried yr achos eto a phenderfynu sut i ddelio ag ef. Roedd yr opsiynau o gyfeirio’r achos at y PCC neu at yr HC ar agor iddo o hyd. Roedd y cyfleuster hwn - lle gellid cyfeirio achos gan y PPC at y sgriniwr iechyd a allai, os oedd angen, basio’r achos yn ôl at y PPC - yn ei gwneud yn well i’r PPC (ac eithrio mewn achosion prin iawn) ddefnyddio’i rym i ohirio ar gyfer ymchwiliad yn hytrach na chyfeirio’r achos at yr HC.
Rwyf wedi dweud, pan oedd achos yn cael ei anfon yn ei ôl at y sgriniwr iechyd, ac y deliwyd ag ef drwy’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, byddai’r PPC yn gohirio’r achos
. Roedd Adroddiad Blynyddol y PPC a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor ym mis Tachwedd 1985 yn dangos, yn hytrach na gadael achos wedi’i ohirio ‘yn angof’, roedd arfer wedi’i ddatblygu erbyn hynny lle byddai’r PPC, ar ryw gyfnod diweddarach, yn cael tystiolaeth feddygol, ac, os credai bod hynny’n addas, byddai’n cau’r achos wedyn. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad, rhwng mis Medi 1999 a mis Mai 2002, pan oedd ar y PPC, byddai’n derbyn adroddiadau cyson am achosion a oedd wedi’u gohirio
at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Roedd hyn yn galluogi achosion i gael eu cau’n ffurfiol gan y PPC. Er mwyn cydymffurfio â Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, roedd angen i’r PPC gau achos yn ffurfiol os nad oedd achos i’w gyfeirio at y PCC neu’r HC. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mr Nicholls, o fis Mai 2002, roedd cyfnod o ryw naw mis pan na wnaethpwyd adroddiadau i’r PPC am achosion a oedd wedi’u gohirio
. Er bod Mr Nicholls yn hyderus bod y ‘pethau anorffenedig’ yn cael eu ‘trefnu’n iawn’ gan yr Adran Iechyd yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, nid oedd y PPC yn gwybod canlyniad yr achosion a ohiriwyd, a dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod hyn yn rhywbeth a oedd yn ofid iddo. Cafodd yr arfer o adrodd yn gyson i’r PPC, meddai, ei ailgyflwyno wedi hynny.
Penderfyniad i Beidio â Chyfeirio
Os oedd y PPC yn penderfynu peidio cyfeirio meddyg at y PPC neu at yr HC, roedd yn ofynnol i’r Cofrestrydd (neu staff y GMC yn arfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol) i hysbysu’r meddyg a’r achwynydd (os o gwbl) am y penderfyniad mewn termau yr oedd y PPC yn cyfarwyddo.
Llythyrau Rhybuddio
Defnyddiwyd y ddarpariaeth hon ar brydiau i anfon llythyr rhybudd at feddyg, yn ei gynghori/chynghori ynghylch ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Yn wreiddiol, roedd llythyrau rhybudd yn cael eu hanfon mewn achosion euogfarnau’n bennaf, llawer ohonynt yn achosion o yfed a gyrru. Roedd ychydig o lythyrau rhybudd yn cael eu hanfon mewn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Nid oeddent yn cael eu defnyddio mewn achosion lle’r oedd y ffeithiau’n arwain at y gŵyn yn destun dadl. Mewn achosion felly, ni fyddai unrhyw gamymddygiad wedi’i brofi y gellid rhybuddio’r meddyg yn ei gylch. Roedd llythyrau rhybudd, felly, yn cael eu defnyddio’n unig mewn achosion lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi cyfaddef yr honiadau yn gyfan gwbl neu’n rhannol, neu lle’r oedd y ffeithiau wedi’u profi neu du hwnt i unrhyw ddadl. Dros amser, datblygodd hierarchaeth o lythyrau rhybudd gwahanol (a alwyd yn ‘ysgafn’, ‘safonol’ a ‘chryf’ neu ‘ddifrifol’). Fe’u defnyddiwyd yn helaeth.
Llythyrau Rhybuddiol a Llythyrau Cyngor
Mewn achos lle’r oedd gan y PPC bryderon ynghylch ymddygiad y meddyg ond nad oedd yn teimlo ei bod yn briodol i gyfeirio’r achos at y PCC a lle nad oedd unrhyw brawf na chyfaddefiad o gamymddygiad, tyfodd yr arfer o anfon ‘llythyr rhybuddiol’ neu ‘lythyr cyngor’. Yn y gorffennol, ymddengys bod y ddau fath o lythyr yn eithaf gwahanol. Byddai llythyr rhybuddiol yn hysbysu’r meddyg y byddai’r papurau a oedd yn ymwneud â’r gŵyn yn cael eu cadw yng nghofnodion y GMC, a byddent yn cael eu harchwilio pe bai’r meddyg yn destun cwyn debyg yn y dyfodol. Byddai’n cynghori’r meddyg hefyd ynghylch ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Roedd llythyrau cyngor yn gwneud argymhellion yn unig i’r meddyg ynghylch ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Roeddent yn aml yn cynnwys cyfeiriadau at y cyhoeddiad ‘Good Medical Practice’ (ar ôl 1995), neu at arweiniad arall gan y GMC. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, mewn blynyddoedd diweddar, y rhoddwyd y gorau i anfon llythyrau rhybuddiol. Fodd bynnag, roedd y PPC yn parhau i anfon llythyrau cyngor mewn nifer fawr o achosion. Yn 2002, ystyriodd y PPC achosion 546 o feddygon; anfonodd 234 o lythyrau rhybudd neu gyngor. Yn 2003, anfonodd y PPC lythyrau rhybudd neu gyngor at 185 o’r 418 o feddygon yr ystyriodd eu hachosion.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod y cynnydd yn nifer y llythyrau cyngor yn cael eu hanfon gan y PPC yn adlewyrchiad o werthfawrogiad mwy gan y GMC o’i ddyletswydd gyffredinol i geisio codi safonau gofal yn gyffredinol. Yn lle cyfyngu’i hun i’r ystod cul o achosion difrifol iawn lle’r oedd cofrestriad meddyg dan sylw, roedd dymuniad i gymryd rhyw gamau gweithredu mewn achosion llai difrifol lle bu gwyro o ‘Good Medical Practice’. Mae hwn yn nod canmoladwy ynddo’i hun. Fodd bynnag, rwyf yn ansicr ynghylch faint ellir ei gyflawni drwy anfon llythyr cyngor mewn achos lle nad ymchwiliwyd i’r honiad a lle nad yw’r meddyg wedi cyfaddef unrhyw ddiffyg.
Ymdrin ag Euogfarnau neu Honiadau o Gamymddygiad Pellach
Roedd Rheol 14 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn delio ag achosion euogfarnau lle’r oedd y PPC wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio at y PCC nac at yr HC, neu lle’r oedd y sgriniwr meddygol wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Os oedd y GMC wedi hynny yn derbyn hysbysiad am euogfarn arall neu gŵyn am gamymddygiad yn ymwneud â’r un meddyg, roedd yn agored i’r Llywydd (neu’r sgriniwr meddygol a benodwyd yn ei le) i gyfarwyddo y dylai’r euogfarn gynharach gael ei chyfeirio at y PPC, ynghyd â’r euogfarn neu gŵyn ddilynol. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, byddid yn delio o’r newydd â’r euogfarn gynharach, fel pe na bai’r PPC neu’r sgriniwr meddygol wedi gwneud y penderfyniad cynharach, a gallai’r PPC gyfeirio’r achos at y PCC neu at yr HC. Yng nghyd-destun rhagflaenydd y rheol hon y cafodd Shipman ei rybuddio ym 1976 bod unrhyw ailadrodd o’i gamymddygiad yn debygol o arwain at ailystyried ei euogfarnau am droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau.
Ym 1988, newidiwyd y rheol er mwyn bod yn berthnasol hefyd i achosion lle’r oedd y mater gwreiddiol a ystyriwyd gan y PPC neu’r sgriniwr meddygol wedi bod yn gŵyn am ymddygiad meddyg, yn hytrach nag euogfarn. Fodd bynnag, mewn achosion felly (ond nid lle’r oedd y mater gwreiddiol wedi bod yn euogfarn), roedd y rheol yn berthnasol yn unig os oedd y gŵyn ddilynol wedi’i hysbysu cyn pen dwy flynedd o benderfyniad y PPC neu’r sgriniwr yn y mater cynharach. Yn 2000, newidiwyd y rheol eto er mwyn cymhwyso’r terfyn dwy flynedd i euogfarnau, yn ogystal ag i achosion ymddygiad. Ymddengys i mi efallai nad oedd y terfyn dwy flynedd ar y grym i ail-godi achos a gaewyd wedi darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Pe bai Shipman, er enghraifft, wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o droseddau eraill yn ymwneud â chyffuriau (neu canfuwyd ei fod wedi bod yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau) dair blynedd - neu bump hyd yn oed - wedi i’r achos yn ei erbyn gael ei gau gyda rhybudd, nid wyf yn credu y byddai wedi bod yn foddhaol i’r GMC fod wedi delio ag ef heb allu ystyried y ffaith bod y broblem ddiweddarach yn golygu mynd yn ôl at hen arferion.
Ar un adeg, fel yr esboniais, roedd y llythyrau a oedd yn cael eu hanfon gan y PPC weithiau’n rhybuddio’r meddyg, er bod y PPC wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio’r gŵyn at y PCC ar yr achlysur dan sylw, fe ellid ail-godi’r gŵyn os oedd y GMC yn derbyn cwyn neu adroddiad pellach am y meddyg cyn pen dwy flynedd. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod hyn yn ‘amhoblogaidd iawn’. Y farn oedd bod y terfyn dwy flynedd yn y Rheolau, fel nad oedd angen cyfeirio ato wrth ysgrifennu at feddygon, a, beth bynnag, nid oedd unrhyw beth wedi’i brofi yn erbyn y meddyg dan sylw. Oherwydd ei amhoblogrwydd, rhoddwyd y gorau i’r arfer o gynnwys y ‘cymal ail-godi’ mewn llythyrau. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai bwriad llythyr cyngor oedd dweud wrth y meddyg i ‘wylio’i hun’. Ni chredai bod rhoi ‘amser artiffisial’ ar y cyngor yn ychwanegu dim. Gallaf weld na fyddai rhoi ‘amser artiffisial’ ar y cyngor yn synhwyrol. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yr amser yn artiffisial; roedd yn ddarpariaeth y Rheolau. Os oedd meddyg, o fewn cyfnod penodedig, mewn risg y gallai achos a gaewyd gael ei ail-godi, dylid fod wedi dweud wrtho/wrthi nid yn unig am y risg, ond hefyd am y cyfnod y byddai’r risg yn parhau. Ni ellir rhagdybio bod pob meddyg yn gyfarwydd â phrint mân Rheolau’r GMC. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai unrhyw feddyg nad oedd yn cael ei rybuddio/rhybuddio am risg y gallai achos a gaewyd gael ei ail-godi, fod â dadl dros wrthwynebu ail-godi’r achos.
Gorchmynion Interim
Y Sefyllfa cyn 2000
Roedd Adran 13(3) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978 a rheol 12 o’r Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn rhoi’r grym i’r PPC wneud gorchymyn interim yn atal cofrestriad meddyg neu wneud ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad yn amodol ar ei fod/bod yn cydymffurfio â gofynion yr oedd y PPC o’r farn y dylid eu pennu er mwyn diogelu aelodau’r cyhoedd neu er buddiannau’r meddyg ei hun. Gellid gwneud gorchymyn felly yn unig wedi i’r PPC benderfynu y dylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PCC neu’r HC. Roedd rhaid pennu gorchymyn interim am gyfnod penodedig nid hwy na deufis. Ni roddwyd unrhyw rym i’r PPC i adnewyddu’r gorchymyn wedi’r cyfnod hwnnw. Roedd rhaid hysbysu’r meddyg bod y PPC yn ystyried gwneud gorchymyn felly ac roedd rhaid iddo/iddi gael y cyfle i gael ei glywed/chlywed. Rhwng 1980 a 1996, ychydig iawn o ddefnydd a wnaed gan y PPC o’i bwerau interim. Dim ond pedwar gorchymyn interim a wnaethpwyd. Mae’r nifer fach o orchmynion felly a wnaed i weld yn rhyfeddol iawn. Byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl, dros gyfnod o 16 mlynedd, y byddai cryn dipyn o achosion lle byddai gorchymyn interim wedi bod yn angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Gallaf weld y gallai’r cyfnod byr y gallai gorchymyn felly weithredu fod wedi bod yn llai na boddhaol, ond byddai gorchymyn am ddau fis wedi ymddangos yn well na dim. Os oedd gorchymyn interim wedi’i wneud, gellid fod wedi gofyn i’r PCC gyflymu’i wrandawiad. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys o Adroddiadau Blynyddol y PPC mai ychydig iawn o angen a welodd y PPC i wneud gorchmynion interim.
Ym 1996, cynyddwyd y cyfnod y gellid pennu gorchymyn interim i chwe mis, a rhoddwyd y grym i’r PPC adnewyddu’r gorchymyn am hyd at dri mis. Wedi hynny, cynyddodd y defnydd a wnaeth y PPC o’i rym i bennu gorchmynion interim yn nodedig. Cafodd pum gorchymyn interim i atal eu gwneud (mewn perthynas â thri meddyg) ym 1997. Cafodd naw gorchymyn atal interim newydd eu gwneud ym 1998, ynghyd ag un gorchymyn yn pennu amodau interim a nifer o orchmynion adnewyddedig. Ym 1999, cynyddodd y nifer o orchmynion atal interim i dri ar ddeg, gyda naw gorchymyn newydd yn pennu amodau interim yn cael eu gwneud.
Yn y cyfnod o fis Ionawr i fis Awst 2000, gwnaeth y PPC 17 gorchymyn newydd i atal cofrestriad meddygon, ynghyd â 15 o orchmynion newydd yn pennu amodau interim. Ym mis Awst 2000, cafodd y grym i bennu gorchmynion interim ei dynnu oddi wrth y PPC a’i roi i’r Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim (IOC) a oedd newydd ei greu. Wedi hynny, os oedd yn ymddangos i’r PPC bod amgylchiadau lle gallai’r IOC ddymuno gwneud gorchymyn interim, pa un ai i atal cofrestriad neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad, roedd yn ofynnol i’r PPC gyfeirio’r achos at yr IOC.
Yr Amgylchiadau’n Arwain at Greu’r Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim
Cafodd yr IOC ei greu o ganlyniad uniongyrchol i anallu’r GMC i atal cofrestriad Shipman pan gafodd ei hysbysu, ym mis Awst 1998, gan Heddlu Greater Manchester (GMP), ei fod yn destun ymchwiliad am lofruddiaeth.
Cychwynnodd ail ymchwiliad yr heddlu (a fu’n llwyddiannus) i farwolaethau cleifion Shipman ar ddiwedd mis Gorffennaf 1998. Y farwolaeth gyntaf i ymchwilio iddi oedd marwolaeth Mrs Kathleen Grundy. Ar 10 Awst 1998, daeth y GMP i wybod am y tro cyntaf bod Shipman wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig. Bedwar diwrnod yn ddiweddarach, gwnaethpwyd ymholiadau i’r GMC ynglŷn â Shipman. Fe wnaeth aelod o staff y GMC gadarnhau bod euogfarnau blaenorol gan Shipman, ond gwrthododd roi manylion pellach, ac eithrio i ddweud nad oedd yr achos wedi mynd ymlaen at wrandawiad disgyblu. Yn ddiweddarach yr un diwrnod, cafodd canlyniadau’r archwiliad tocsicolegol o gorff Mrs Grundy eu derbyn gan yr heddlu. Roedd y rhain yn datgelu presenoldeb cyffur opiad (morffin o bosibl) ym meinwe ei chorff.
Ar y pwynt hwnnw, fe wnaeth y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd (Ditectif Uwcharolygydd, Ditectif Brif Uwcharolygydd yn ddiweddarach) Bernard Postles, a oedd yn arwain ymchwiliad yr heddlu, hysbysu’r GMC am y sefyllfa dros y ffôn, a hysbysodd aelod o staff am y pryderon a oedd ganddo am Shipman yn parhau i ymarfer. Dywedyd wrth y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles na allai’r GMC wneud unrhyw beth nes bod Shipman wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd. Ar 18 Awst 1998, ysgrifennodd y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles at y GMC, yn nodi manylion yr ymchwiliad cyfredol i farwolaeth Mrs Grundy ac yn gwahodd y GMC i weithredu os oedd yn ystyried bod hynny’n briodol. Ymatebodd aelod o staff y GMC trwy lythyr, yn gofyn i’r Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles i roi gwybodaeth gyson i’r GMC am gynnydd yr ymchwiliad. Roedd yn amlwg nad oedd unrhyw gamau i’w cymryd gan y GMC ac, yn wir, nid oedd ei Reolau ar y pryd yn caniatáu iddo gymryd camau interim i atal meddyg oni bai a nes bod y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu yn euog o drosedd, neu fod penderfyniad wedi’i wneud gan y PPC i gyfeirio ei achos/hachos at y PCC neu’r HC.
Erbyn hyn roedd wedi dod yn eglur y gallai Shipman fod wedi lladd cleifion eraill ar wahân i Mrs Grundy. Roedd Shipman yn dal i ymarfer ac roedd y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles yn pryderu’n gynyddol am ddiogelwch ei gleifion. Roedd mewn cyswllt ag Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine, a oedd yn archwilio’r posibilrwydd o gymryd camau drwy Dribiwnlys y GIG i atal Shipman. Nid oedd modd ei atal yn gyflym drwy’r modd hwnnw. Yn unol â hynny, penderfynodd y Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles mai’r unig ffordd i ddiogelu cleifion Shipman oedd i’w arestio. Gwnaethpwyd hyn ar 7 Medi 1998, yn gynharach nag y byddai’r Ditectif Uwcharolygydd Postles wedi dewis gweithredu fel arall. Cadwyd ef yn y ddalfa o’r amser hwnnw. Yn y pen draw, cafodd ei atal rhag ymarfer gan Dribiwnlys y GIG ar 15 Hydref. Daeth y penderfyniad i rym ar 29 Hydref. Adroddais ym Mhennod 7 y dilyniant o ddigwyddiadau a arweiniodd at atal Shipman.
Yn y cyfamser, roedd yr heddlu yn llunio hanes blaenorol ar gyfer Shipman, i’w roi gerbron y llys. Gwnaethpwyd ymholiad ffôn i’r GMC ynghylch a oedd camau disgyblu wedi’u cymryd yn erbyn Shipman o ganlyniad i’w euogfarnau ym 1976. Atebodd aelod o staff y GMC nad oedd gan y GMC unrhyw gofnod dogfennol o achos Shipman, ond mai’r llwybr gweithredu mwyaf tebygol fyddai i Shipman gael llythyr rhybudd. Mewn gwirionedd, fel sy’n amlwg o Bennod 16, roedd gan y GMC ffeil yn cynnwys dogfennau’n ymwneud ag achos Shipman ym 1976. Ym mis Ionawr 2000, ychydig cyn dyfarnu Shipman yn euog ac mewn ymateb i gais gan Mr Richard Henriques CF (Meistr Ustus Henriques erbyn hyn), Prif Gwnsler yr erlyniad yn nhreial Shipman, darparodd y GMC fanylion o’i ffeiliau am y modd yr ymdriniodd ag euogfarn Shipman ym 1976 ac am gwynion a wnaed i’r GMC ynghylch Shipman ym 1985 a 1994.
Roedd anallu’r GMC i gymryd camau interim yn achos Shipman yn achos cryn embaras, i’r GMC ac i’r Llywodraeth. Ym mis Tachwedd 1998, ystyriodd Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPPC) y GMC bapur yn ymwneud â meddygon a gyhuddwyd o droseddau difrifol. Datganodd y papur yn glir nad oedd y broblem a achoswyd gan anallu’r GMC i gymryd mesurau interim mewn perthynas â meddygon felly yn un newydd. Dywedodd y papur:
“We often become aware of criminal proceedings, involving a doctor, before the matter goes to trial. Typically, a Health Authority or Trust will phone when a doctor is charged. There is frequently an expectation that the doctor’s registration will be suspended pending the outcome of the criminal case. We also become aware of cases from press cuttings, or direct from the doctor concerned ...
Cydnabu’r papur ei bod yn amhosibl gwneud asesiad dibynadwy o nifer yr achosion lle’r oedd y broblem hon yn codi, gan na fyddai’r GMC o reidrwydd yn ymwybodol o bob achos lle’r oedd meddygon yn wynebu cyhuddiadau troseddol difrifol. Adroddwyd, ar yr adeg pan oedd yr FPPC yn ystyried y papur, bod y GMC yn ymwybodol o chwe achos cyfredol o’r math hwn. Roedd dau feddyg (Shipman yn un ohonynt) wedi’u cyhuddo o lofruddiaeth ac roeddent yn y ddalfa. Roedd yn hysbys bod dau feddyg ar fechnïaeth ac yn ymarfer; roedd un wedi’i gyhuddo o aml droseddau o anwedduster yn erbyn cleifion a oedd yn ferched; roedd un wedi’i gyhuddo o aml droseddau o drais ac ymosod yn anweddus. Roedd trydydd meddyg, a gafodd ei gyhuddo o drosedd yn ymwneud ag ymosod yn anweddus ar glaf, ar fechnïaeth a chredwyd ei fod yn chwilio am waith. Roedd y pedwerydd meddyg ar fechnïaeth a chredwyd ei fod yn chwilio am waith; cafodd ei gyhuddo o droseddau trais, achosi anafiadau corfforol difrifol a gwneud bygythiadau i ladd. Mae’n rhaid bod y pedwar meddyg a oedd ar fechnïaeth wedi bod yn risg difrifol i gleifion. Roedd mwyafrif y chwe meddyg yn feddygon teulu, gan yr oedd sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOau) yn cael mwy o anhawster nag ymddiriedolaethau ysbyty wrth atal meddygon rhag ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed os oedd ymddiriedolaeth ysbyty yn atal meddyg, fe allai’r meddyg yn syml symud ac ymarfer yn rhywle arall.
Nododd y papur bod anallu’r GMC i atal cofrestriad tra’n disgwyl treial meddyg wedi’i gyhuddo o droseddau difrifol:
‘... is beginning to appear unsatisfactory, whether considered from the point of view of the GMC, the Trust or health authority or, most importantly, the public interest’.
Roedd y papur yn cyfeirio at y
‘risgiau’
yn sgil atal meddyg yn yr amgylchiadau hyn. Nododd y gallai achosion troseddol fod yn faith ac y gallai ataliad, felly, bara hyd at flwyddyn neu fwy. Gellid meddwl ei bod yn
‘gynhenid annymunol’
i feddyg gael ei amddifadu/hamddifadu o’r modd o ennill ei fywoliaeth/bywoliaeth am gyfnod mor hir, ac y gallai ymddangos yn
‘anghyfiawnder difrifol’
os cafwyd y meddyg yn ddieuog yn y pen draw. Soniodd y papur hefyd y gallai gorchymyn am ataliad interim gael ei ystyried yn ormesol gan y llysoedd, a gallai wneud y GMC yn agored i adolygiad barnwrol neu i honiadau am iawndal am golli enillion ac enw da. Fe wnaeth y papur nodi, fodd bynnag, bod gan Gyngor Canolog y DU dros Nyrsio, Bydwreigiaeth ac Ymweliadau Iechyd (rhagflaenydd y Cyngor Nyrsio a Bydwreigiaeth) rym i bennu ataliad interim lle’r oedd yn ymddangos yn angenrheidiol i wneud hynny fel mesur interim i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd, neu er buddiannau’r ymarferydd.
Nododd y papur mai un opsiwn oedd gadael i’r llysoedd gadw yn y ddalfa meddygon yr oeddent yn ystyried eu bod yn berygl i’r cyhoedd. Fodd bynnag, cydnabuwyd, hyd yn oed os oedd meddyg yn y ddalfa, gallai barhau i fwynhau rhai o freintiau cofrestriad, fel rhagnodi. Awgrymodd y papur, fel mater o egwyddor, na ddylai’r GMC ddisgwyl i’r llysoedd gyflawni’i gyfrifoldeb i ddiogelu lles y cyhoedd. Argymhellodd felly y dylai’r FPPC ystyried a oedd yn ddymunol i gael pwerau ehangach atal dros dro.
Mabwysiadwyd yr argymhelliad hwn gan yr FPPC a benderfynodd ofyn am gyngor cyfreithiol ar amryw o faterion cysylltiedig. Derbyniwyd y cyngor hwnnw ac ymddengys mai dyna’r lle y safodd pethau hyd at ddiwedd 1999, pan oedd treial Shipman yn tynnu i derfyn. Bryd hynny, agorwyd trafodaethau gyda’r Adran Iechyd ynghylch beth ddylid ei wneud. Roedd llythyr gan Miss Isabel Nisbet, Pennaeth Cyfarwyddiaeth Addasrwydd i Ymarfer y GMC, a ysgrifennwyd ym mis Rhagfyr 1999, yn sôn am broblemau eraill yn codi o’r cyfyngiad ar bwerau presennol y GMC. Dywedodd:
‘... we regard it as very unsatisfactory that we have no power of interim suspension via the performance procedures for doctors about whose professional performance there are very serious concerns and who may be a danger to patients’.
Dywedodd bod y GMC dan rwymedigaeth i ganlyn achosion felly drwy’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad er mwyn galluogi’r PPC i ystyried cwestiwn ataliad interim. Yn ôl pob tebyg, ni fyddai hynny’n bosibl mewn rhai achosion. Beth bynnag, roedd yn amlwg yn anfoddhaol, gan nad oedd unrhyw fecanwaith bryd hynny i gael achosion yn ôl i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Tynnodd Miss Nisbet sylw hefyd at ddiffyg unrhyw rym i wneud gorchymyn interim cychwynnol o fewn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod meddyg yn fygythiad parhaus i ddiogelwch cleifion. Nododd, hyd yn oed pan oedd modd cymryd mesurau interim, roedd y cyfnodau amser a ganiatawyd gan y Rheolau yn golygu ei bod yn anarferol iawn i’r GMC allu pennu ataliad interim yn gynharach na chwech i wyth wythnos wedi’r amser pan ddaeth yn ymwybodol o bryder gyntaf.
Awgrymwyd ffyrdd gan Miss Nisbet lle gellid rhoi’r pwerau angenrheidiol i’r GMC. Gellid gwneud hyn drwy newid y Rheolau neu trwy greu pwyllgor newydd gyda grym i bennu ataliad interim pan oedd yn ymddangos yn angenrheidiol i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd. Byddai’r ateb olaf hwn yn gofyn am ddeddfwriaeth sylfaenol ac eilaidd, a dyna’r ateb yr oedd y GMC yn ei ffafrio.
Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod, ar 1 Chwefror 2000, y diwrnod ar ôl dyfarnu Shipman yn euog, ‘trafodaeth chwyrn’ gyda’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd (SoS) bryd hynny, y Gwir Anrhydeddus Alan Milburn AS. Dywedodd Mr Scott bod ’barn mewn rhai mannau ei bod yn gas gan y GMC bennu ataliad interim ac nid felly’r oedd hi o gwbl’. Dywedodd mai’r broblem oedd bod ei bwerau’n ‘anweithredadwy’. Dywedodd, cyn 1998, nad oedd y GMC wedi deall yn llawn y cyfyngiad yn ei bwerau mewn perthynas â meddygon a oedd yn gysylltiedig ag achosion troseddol. Roedd sylw’r GMC yn lle hynny wedi’i ganolbwyntio ar y problemau a achoswyd gan y cyfnod y gellid pennu ataliad interim. Fel yr esboniais, hyd at 1996, deufis yn unig oedd yr uchafswm cyfnod. Ym 1996, cynyddwyd hyn i chwe mis, gyda’r cyfle i adnewyddu’r gorchymyn hyd at dri mis wedyn. Cydnabu Mr Scott nad oedd y GMC wedi ‘gweld problem’ meddygon a oedd yn destun ymchwiliad troseddol ond nad oedd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog eto. Canlyniad y trafodaethau gyda’r SoS oedd creu’r IOC ym mis Awst 2000.
Ymddengys yn syndod i mi, nad oedd y GMC, hyd at 2000, wedi gweithredu i ymestyn ei bwerau i wneud gorchmynion interim er mwyn ei alluogi i atal cofrestriad meddyg a oedd dan ymchwiliad am neu wedi’i gyhuddo/chyhuddo o drosedd ddifrifol. Dylai’r angen am rym felly fod wedi bod yn amlwg fel y dangosir gan gynnwys y papur a ystyriwyd gan yr FPPC ym mis Tachwedd 1998 ac yn y ciplun o feddygon yn wynebu cyhuddiadau troseddol difrifol bryd hynny. Mae’n eglur, er bod y GMC yn ymwybodol yn gyffredinol o’r broblem, nid oedd wedi ystyried ei bod yn angenrheidiol i gymryd camau i ddiogelu cleifion rhag meddygon felly. Hefyd, roedd y GMC yn ymwybodol nad oedd ganddo’r grym i orchymyn ataliad interim cychwynnol ar feddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd (cyn bod penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud i’w gyfeirio/chyfeirio at yr HC) neu ar feddyg y deliwyd ag ef/hi yn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Cafodd y Rheolau’n ymwneud â gwneud gorchmynion interim yn y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad eu newid ym 1996, a gellid fod wedi disgwyl y byddai’r GMC wedi cymryd y cyfle hwnnw i geisio cael pwerau digonol i wneud pa orchmynion interim bynnag a oedd yn angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Fodd bynnag, fel y nododd Mr Scott, ni chafodd y broblem ei chydnabod nes iddi ddod i’r amlwg yn achos Shipman.
Ar ôl dyfarnu Shipman yn euog, cymerwyd camau brys gan y GMC i ddileu ei enw oddi ar y gofrestr. Gwnaethpwyd hyn gan y PCC ar 11 Chwefror 2000.
Rhoi Rhesymau am Benderfyniadau
Hyd at 2000, yr unig gofnod o benderfyniad a wnaed gan y PPC oedd cofnod byr o gyfarfod. Ni ffurfiodd y PPC na chofnodi unrhyw resymau ystyriol am ei benderfyniadau. Byddai’r cofnod, felly, yn cynnwys nodiadau byrion yn unig, ar y mwyaf, o bwyntiau a wnaed mewn trafodaeth, yn ychwanegol at gofnod o’r penderfyniad. Ni chyhoeddwyd cofnodion y PPC.
Roedd Rheol 16 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn amodi, lle’r oedd y PPC wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio achos at y PCC neu’r HC, nid oedd unrhyw achwynydd, hysbysydd nag ymarferydd i gael unrhyw hawl mynediad at unrhyw ddogfennau’n ymwneud â’r achos a gyflwynwyd i’r GMC gan unrhyw berson arall. Nid oedd unrhyw achwynydd, hysbysydd nag ymarferydd ychwaith i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i’r PPC ddatgan rhesymau am ei benderfyniad. Atgynhyrchwyd y rheol honno yn Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988. Er gwaetha’r rheol, daeth yn arfer o oddeutu 2000 i’r achwynydd a’r meddyg dan sylw gael llythyr, yn nodi’r rhesymau am benderfyniad y PPC. Hyd hynny, roedd y rhesymau a roddwyd yn y llythyr wedi’u seilio ar gofnod byr o’r penderfyniad a wnaed yn ystod y cyfarfod perthnasol o’r PPC. Er 2000, yn dilyn argymhelliad a wnaed gan y tîm PSI, yr arfer oedd i aelodau’r PPC gytuno’r prif resymau am eu penderfyniadau pan oedd y penderfyniadau hynny’n cael eu gwneud. Cofnodwyd y rhesymau hynny yn ysgrifenedig gan aelod o staff y GMC. Roedd y rhesymau a gofnodwyd yn cael eu hadolygu yn y pen draw gan Gadeirydd y PPC, ac yn cael eu hawdurdodi ganddo fel adroddiad cywir o benderfyniad y PPC. Roeddent wedyn yn ffurfio sail y llythyrau a oedd yn cael eu hanfon at y meddyg a’r achwynydd.
Adolygu Penderfyniadau
Roedd penderfyniadau’r PPC ynghylch cyfeirio achos ai peidio at y PCC neu’r HC yn cael eu gwneud, fel y dywedais, yn breifat. Yr unig fodd o her a oedd ar gael i achwynydd neu feddyg a oedd yn anfodlon â phenderfyniad oedd adolygiad barnwrol. Fel y nodais yn barod ym Mhennod 19, roedd hon yn broses ddrud a braidd yn fygythiol, a phrin y cafodd ei defnyddio hyd at ddiwedd y 1990au.

---  ---
Achosion Euogfarnau yn Gyffredinol
Ym mis Mehefin 1997, cynhyrchwyd Nodyn er mwyn arwain aelodau newydd o’r PPC. Roedd yn nodi’r prawf y dylai aelodau’r PPC ei gymhwyso wrth benderfynu ynghylch cyfeirio euogfarn at y PCC. Roedd yn datgan:
Gan roi problemau cystrawen i’r naill ochr, ni allai’r arweiniad hwn fod wedi bod yn ddefnyddiol i aelodau’r PPC. Nid yw mewn gwirionedd yn fwy na dweud ‘y dylai’r PPC gyfeirio euogfarn at y PCC os yw o’r farn y dylai wneud hynny’. Ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad ynghylch pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd yn rhaid i’r euogfarn fod
. O ddarllen yr arweiniad hwn, does bosib y byddai unrhyw aelod newydd o’r PPC wedi dymuno gwybod pa mor ddifrifol yr oedd yn rhaid i’r euogfarn fod er mwyn cyfiawnhau ymchwiliad cyhoeddus felly. Yn absenoldeb unrhyw arweiniad yn nodi meini prawf a safonau ac yn eu dangos drwy enghreifftiau, byddai aelodau o’r PPC yn cael eu gadael i wneud penderfyniadau ar sail eu canfyddiadau personol gwahanol ynghylch pa bryd y byddai’n briodol i gyfeirio euogfarn at y PCC.
Achosion yn Ymwneud â Honiadau o Gamymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol Potensial
Fel y soniais, nid oedd Adroddiadau Blynyddol y PPC yn trafod y safonau a’r meini prawf y dylid eu cymhwyso gan y PPC wrth benderfynu
‘a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio’
at y PCC. Ym mis Mehefin 1997, roedd y Nodyn i aelodau newydd y PPC, y cyfeiriais ato’n flaenorol, yn cynghori mai’r cwestiwn i’r PPC oedd nid a oedd meddyg wedi cyflawni SPM. Yn lle hynny, roedd rhaid iddo benderfynu a oedd cwestiwn
o SPM yn codi. Os oedd y PPC yn penderfynu bod cwestiwn
o SPM yn codi, yna roedd rhaid iddo benderfynu a ddylai pob un o’r honiadau yn erbyn y meddyg, neu rai ohonynt yn unig, gael eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Roedd y Nodyn yn dweud nad oedd
‘diffiniad absoliwt’
o’r hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roedd yn dyfynnu’r diffiniad a roddwyd gan Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor yn achos
, sef:
‘...“conduct connected with his profession in which the dentist
(roedd y Nodyn yn amnewid y gair ‘meddyg’)
(meddygon)
, and that such falling short as is established should be serious”’.
Aeth y Nodyn ymlaen:
Roedd y Nodyn yn rhoi enghreifftiau hefyd o’r amgylchiadau lle gallai’r PPC anfon llythyr rhybudd at feddyg, yn hytrach na chyfeirio’i achos/hachos at y PCC. Un enghraifft felly oedd:
Mae’r enghraifft honno’n ymhlygu na fyddai’r PPC o reidrwydd yn cyfyngu’i ystyriaeth i’r achos gerbron, ond byddai’n edrych ar yr achos yng nghyd-destun
‘gyrfa gyfan’
y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n eglur beth fyddai’r PPC wedi’i wybod, os unrhyw beth o gwbl, am
‘yrfa gyfan’
y meddyg.
Byddai gan y PPC wybodaeth gyfyngedig am unrhyw gysylltiad blaenorol y meddyg â gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC. Roedd cyngor cyfreithiol a dderbyniodd y GMC ym1998 yn awgrymu y dylai’r PPC fod wedi’i hysbysu am unrhyw gwyn neu adroddiad blaenorol am y meddyg i’r GMC a oedd wedi arwain at bennu sancsiwn gan y PCC, yr HC ne’r CPP. Dylai fod wedi’i hysbysu hefyd am gŵyn flaenorol a oedd wedi arwain at anfon llythyr rhybudd neu rybuddiol gan y PPC, neu at gyfeirio achos y meddyg gan y PPC at yr HC. Ni fyddai wedi’i wneud yn ymwybodol o gysylltiad blaenorol meddyg â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol neu weithdrefnau perfformiad. Ni fyddai gan y PPC unrhyw wybodaeth am achosion a oedd wedi arwain at ‘ryddfarn’ gerbron y PCC, hyd yn oed lle’r oedd y ffeithiau a oedd wedi ffurfio sail yr honiad(au) wedi’u profi, a bod y ‘rhyddfarn’ yn arwain o ganfyddiad nad oedd ymddygiad y meddyg, er ei fod yn annerbyniol, yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ni fyddai gan y PPC ychwaith unrhyw wybodaeth am achos lle’r oedd y PPC wedi penderfynu peidio gweithredu, oni bai bod yr achos cynharach wedi’i ‘adfywio’ o fewn y cyfnod dwy flynedd a bennwyd dan y Rheolau. Ni fyddai gan y PPC fynediad at unrhyw wybodaeth am gwynion blaenorol yn ymwneud â’r meddyg nad oeddent wedi’u cyfeirio gan y sgriniwr meddygol at y PPC, hyd yn oed lle’r oedd llythyr Pennod XV wedi’i anfon at y meddyg. Nid oedd hawl gan y PPC gael gwybodaeth am unrhyw achos a oedd wedi’i gyfeirio’n flaenorol gan y PPC at y PCC ond nad oedd wedi’i wrando eto. Byddai gwybodaeth o’r fath a ddylai fod ar gael hyd yn oed wedi’i rhoi gerbron y PPC yn unig pan fyddai systemau adfer data y GMC wedi galluogi olrhain y papurau perthnasol, os nad oed papurau achos blaenorol wedi’u taflu ac os oedd y meddyg wedi’i nodi’n briodol mewn unrhyw gwynion blaenorol yn ei gylch/chylch. Hyd yn oed os oedd y systemau’n gweithio fel y dylent, ni fyddai’r wybodaeth o reidrwydd wedi rhoi darlun cyflawn o
‘yrfa gyfan’
y meddyg yn nhermau unrhyw gysylltiad a fu ganddo/ganddi yn flaenorol gyda gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC.
Wrth asesu’r graddau y byddai’r PPC wedi gallu ystyried
‘gyrfa gyfan’
y meddyg, mae’n bwysig hefyd ystyried faint fyddai’r PPC wedi’i wybod am unrhyw gwynion a wnaed am y meddyg yn yr ardal lle’r oedd yn ymarfer. Pan oedd cyflogwr neu PCO meddyg yn cyfeirio achos at y GMC lle bu gwrandawiad pwyllgor gwasanaethau meddygol (MSC) neu wrandawiad panel adolygu annibynnol (IRP) neu achos disgyblu arall, roedd y wybodaeth a oedd yn cael ei rhoi i’r GMC gan y cyflogwr neu’r PCO yn cynnwys weithiau manylion am ddigwyddiadau tebyg blaenorol yn ymwneud â’r un meddyg na fu’n destun cyfeiriad blaenorol at y GMC. Fe allai’r wybodaeth, neu beidio, gynnwys manylion cwynion neu bryderon blaenorol am y meddyg na fu’n destun gwrandawiad ffurfiol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 18, nid oedd yn arferiad y GMC yn y gorffennol, pan oedd cwyn yn cael ei gwneud gan unigolyn preifat, i wneud ymholiadau penodol i gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg ynghylch unrhyw gŵynion neu broblemau blaenorol mewn perthynas â’r meddyg. Hyd yn oed pe bai ymholiadau felly wedi’u gwneud, ni fyddai cyflogwr neu PCO o reidrwydd wedi bod yn ymwybodol o wrandawiad MSC neu IRP neu achos disgyblu arall a oedd wedi digwydd tra bod y meddyg yn gweithio mewn ardal arall, neu am gŵynion blaenorol a wnaed, neu bryderon a gafodd eu mynegi am y meddyg. Nid oes unrhyw un ffynhonnell y gellir cael gwybodaeth ohoni am
‘yrfa gyfan’
meddyg.
Mae’n anodd gweld, felly, sut y gallai’r GMC fod wedi honni bod y PPC yn gallu edrych ar achos yng nghyd-destun
‘gyrfa gyfan’
y meddyg. Os oedd golwg y PPC i’w seilio’n unig ar wybodaeth a oedd gan y GMC, fe allai yn wir fod wedi bod yn anghyflawn. Ymddengys mai arfer y GMC oedd derbyn tystlythyrau a geirdaon a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg. Mae’n rhaid i mi gyfaddef fy mod yn teimlo’n bryderus ynghylch hynny. Yn gyntaf, nid oedd deunydd cefndir felly’n berthnasol i ystyriaeth o’r cwestiwn a oedd y dystiolaeth yn dangos cwestiwn
o SPM. Yn ail, os oedd gwybodaeth gefndir i’w hystyried, dylai fod wedi bod yn gytbwys. Dylai hynny a oedd yn ymwneud â chwynion neu bryderon blaenorol fod wedi bod yn gyflawn, a dylai gwybodaeth yn ymwneud ag ymagwedd gyffredinol a gallu’r meddyg fod wedi bod ar gael i rywun annibynnol iddo/iddi. Ni ddylai canmoliaeth fawr gan gleifion nad oeddent yn gysylltiedig â’r materion gerbron y PPC fod wedi’u derbyn ganddo. Dim ond cuddio’r cwestiwn a oedd i’w benderfynu y gallent fod wedi’i wneud. At hynny, eu hunig effaith allai fod i ddylanwadu’r PPC o blaid y meddyg.
Yn ddiweddarach, cynhyrchodd y GMC ddogfen o’r enw ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ i aelodau’r PPC. Y fersiwn a oedd yn gyfredol ym mis Ionawr 2002 sydd gan yr Ymchwiliad. Roedd y ddogfen yn rhoi sylw i nifer o gwestiynau ymarferol a gweinyddol. Roedd yn rhoi gwybodaeth gyffredinol hefyd am y gweithdrefnau FTP ac am y llwybrau gweithredu a oedd ar agor i’r PPC wrth wneud ei benderfyniadau. Fodd bynnag, ychydig o arweiniad yr oedd yn ei gynnwys a fyddai wedi cynorthwyo wrth wneud y penderfyniadau hyn. Roedd yn disgrifio SPM yn y termau canlynol:
Mae annigonolrwydd yr arweiniad hwn yn amlwg ac mae’n cyfrif am lawer o’r dryswch a’r anghytundeb ynghylch SPM ymhlith aelodau o’r PPC y sylwodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr arnynt; cyfeiriaf at hynny ym mharagraff 20.94.

---  ---
Yn ystod y 1990au cynnar, cynyddodd nifer yr achosion a ystyriwyd gan y PPC yn raddol nes yr oedd, rhwng 1994 a 1996, yn ystyried rhyw 240 o achosion y flwyddyn. Yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng 1994 a 1996, cyfarfu’r PPC ryw pum gwaith y flwyddyn am hyd at ddiwrnod ar y tro. Roedd cyfarfodydd ychwanegol byr achlysurol yn angenrheidiol er mwyn ystyried achosion brys, ond anaml y byddai fwy nag un cyfarfod felly y flwyddyn. Mae’n glir ei bod yn rhaid bod nifer yr achosion i’w hystyried gan y PPC ymhob un o’i gyfarfodydd yn sylweddol iawn.
Ar ôl 1996, cafodd y cynnydd yn y defnydd o’i rym i wneud gorchmynion interim effaith sylweddol ar faich gwaith y PPC. Roedd meddygon dan fygythiad gwneud gorchymyn interim yn arfer eu hawl i wrandawiad yn aml. Roedd gwrandawiadau felly’n cymryd yn hwy nag ystyriaeth arferol achos ar bapur. Nid oedd yn beth anghyffredin i wrandawiad gymryd awr neu fwy neu hwy. Arweiniodd y ffactorau hyn, law yn llaw â’r cynnydd yn nifer yr achosion yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC yn gyffredinol (cyfeiriwyd dros 300 ym 1998 a dros 400 ym 1999), at gynnydd sydyn yn nifer y cyfarfodydd ac ym maint y gwaith i’w drafod yn y cyfarfodydd hynny. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls, pan ymunodd â’r PPC ym mis Medi 1999, roedd cyfarfodydd rhyw ddeuddydd bob mis. Roedd cyfarfodydd bob diwrnod yn cynnwys gwaith darllen o ryw ddiwrnod i ddiwrnod a hanner er mwyn paratoi. Roedd nifer fawr o achosion yn cael eu hystyried ym mhob cyfarfod.

---  ---
Cynhaliodd y tîm PSI ddadansoddiad manwl o niferoedd a mathau‘r achosion y deliodd y PPC â nhw yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1997, 1998 a 1999. Nodwyd y canlyniadau yn ei Adroddiad 2000. Archwiliodd ganlyniadau’r achosion hynny hefyd. Ei brif ddiben wrth gynnal yr ymarferiad hwn oedd canfod a oedd unrhyw wahaniaeth rhwng y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achosion yn ymwneud â meddygon a ymgymhwysodd dramor a’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU ac Iwerddon (er hwylustod, cyfeiriaf at y ddau fel y ‘DU’). Fodd bynnag, roedd goblygiadau llawer ehangach i’w ganfyddiadau.
Gwahaniaethau Anesboniadwy yng Nghyfraddau Cyfeirio’r Rheiny’n Ymgymhwyso yn y DU a Thramor
Ym 1997, cafodd 30% o’r achosion a ystyriwyd gan y PPC eu cyfeirio ymlaen gan y PPC at y PCC. Erbyn 1999, roedd y ffigur hwn wedi codi i 40%. Gydol y cyfnod 1997 i 1999, roedd cyfrannau cyson uwch o feddygon a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor o gymharu â’r rheiny a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso yn y DU wedi’u cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC. Ym 1999, cafodd 33% o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU y daeth eu hachosion gerbron y PPC eu cyfeirio at y PCC, tra cyfeiriwyd 54% o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor. Arweiniodd y patrwm cyffredinol o gyfeiriadau, felly, at y posibilrwydd bod y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn cael eu trin yn annheg.
O’r meddygon y cafodd eu hachosion eu hystyried gan y PPC ym 1997, derbyniodd 39% lythyr rhybuddiol neu lythyr cyngor. Ym 1998 a 1999, y cyfrannau oedd 49% a 41%, yn y drefn honno. Ym1998 a 1999 (ond nid 1997), roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU yn llawer mwy tebygol na’u cymheiriaid tramor o dderbyn llythyr rhybudd neu gyngor, yn hytrach na chael eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Hefyd, roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU gryn dipyn yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor i gael eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Rhan o’r esboniad am hyn oedd y ffaith bod llawer o’r euogfarnau y deliodd y PPC â nhw am droseddau yfed a gyrru, ac roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU ddwywaith yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor i gael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau felly. Fodd bynnag, ni allai hynny gyfrif yn gyfan gwbl am y gwahaniaeth. Cododd y gwahaniaethau hyn y posibilrwydd eto bod rhagfarn yn y PPC yn erbyn y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor.
Nid oedd esboniad amlwg am y gwahaniaethau. Yn ystod yr un astudiaeth, roedd y tîm PSI wedi darganfod gwahaniaethau tebyg yn y penderfyniadau yn cael eu gwneud gan sgrinwyr. Fodd bynnag, roedd wedi canfod esboniad posibl am y gyfran uwch o feddygon a ymgymhwysodd dramor a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC gan sgrinwyr. Gellid ei esbonio gan y ffaith bod achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y GMC gan gyrff cyhoeddus (lle’r oedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor ddwywaith yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU i fod yn destun cwyn) yn fwy tebygol yn gyffredinol o gael eu cyfeirio gan sgrinwyr at y PPC nag achosion yn dod gan unigolion preifat. Felly, gellid fod mai’r ffaith bod achos wedi’i gyfeirio gan gorff cyhoeddus (yn hytrach na’r ffaith ei fod yn ymwneud â meddyg a ymgymhwysodd dramor) a oedd yn cyfrif am ei gyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC.
Ni allai’r un esboniad gyfrif am y gwahaniaethau nodedig mewn canlyniad pan oedd achos yn cyrraedd y PPC. Fel y sgrinwyr, roedd y PPC yn fwy tebygol o gyfeirio ymlaen at y PCC achosion a oedd yn dod gan gyrff cyhoeddus nag achosion gan unigolion preifat. Fodd bynnag, ymhlith achosion yn deillio o gyrff cyhoeddus, anfonodd y PPC gyfran gryn dipyn yn uwch o achosion yn ymwneud â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor (55% o achosion felly a ystyriwyd gan y PPC ym 1999) na’r rheiny’n ymwneud â meddygon a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU (36% ym 1999). Hyd yn oed ymhlith achosion yn dod gan unigolion preifat, roedd gwahaniaeth yn y gyfran o achosion a gyfeiriwyd gan y PPC at y PCC o gymharu’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a thramor. Gwelwyd gwahaniaethau tebyg yn y modd y deliodd y PPC â phob categori o gŵyn (e.e. cwynion am anonestrwydd neu droseddoldeb, neu am driniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon, etc). Gan nad oedd y PPC, bryd hynny, yn rhoi rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau, roedd yn amhosibl i’r tîm PSI ddweud pam yr oedd y gwahaniaethau hyn yn digwydd.
Gwahaniaethau Anesboniadwy yn y Modd yr Ymdriniwyd â’r Rheiny a Ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a Thramor a Gafodd eu Dyfarnu’n Euog o Droseddau
Fe wnaeth y tîm PSI archwilio’r patrwm cyfeirio ar gyfer euogfarnau. Roedd hyn yn bwysig gan y gellid fod wedi disgwyl mwy o unffurfiaeth triniaeth pan oedd y PPC yn delio â meddygon a oedd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau, yn hytrach na meddygon a oedd wedi’u cyhuddo o amrywiaeth o fathau eraill o gamymddygiad. Yn y cyfnod o 1997 i 1999, roedd rhwng 17% a 23% o’r holl achosion y deliodd y PPC â nhw yn achosion o euogfarnau. Roedd cyfran sylweddol o’r euogfarnau hynny am droseddau yfed a gyrru. Roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU yn cynrychioli cyfran uwch o achosion o euogfarnau na’u cymheiriaid tramor ym mhob un o’r tair blynedd, am droseddau yfed a gyrru ac am droseddau eraill.
Ym 1997, cafodd 13% o achosion euogfarnau eu hanfon gan y PPC at y PCC. Y ffigurau ar gyfer 1998 a 1999 oedd 16% a 29%, yn y drefn honno. Pe gadewid achosion yfed a gyrru allan o’r cyfrifiad, roedd cyfran yr achosion euogfarnau a gyfeiriwyd gan y PPC at y PCC yn codi i 35% o achosion a gafodd eu hystyried gan y PPC ym 1997, 28% ym 1998 a 58% ym 1999. Gydag achosion yfed a gyrru neu hebddynt, cafodd cyfran sylweddol uwch o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor a chanddynt euogfarnau, eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC na’u cymheiriaid yn y DU. Ym 1999, cyfran y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a chanddynt euogfarnau (ac eithrio am yfed a gyrru) a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC oedd 38%; ar gyfer y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor, y gyfran oedd 85%. Roedd hwn yn dangos gwahaniaeth amlwg rhwng y modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor.
Ym 1997, cafodd 41% o achosion euogfarnau y deliodd y PPC â nhw eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Ym 1998 a 1999, y cyfrannau oedd 15% a 24%. Bu newid gweithdrefn ar gyfer achosion yfed a gyrru ym 1998. Effaith hynny oedd bod rhai meddygon a fyddai’n flaenorol wedi cael eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, eu cyfeirio yn lle hynny at y gweithdrefnau hynny ar gyfnod cynharach, ac felly nid oedd eu hachosion fyth yn cyrraedd y PPC. Pan adawyd achosion yfed a gyrru allan o’r cyfrif, cyfrannau’r achosion euogfarnau a gyfeiriwyd at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol oedd 22% ym 1997, 19% ym 1998 ac 19% ym 1999. Cafodd cyfrannau sylweddol uwch o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor eu cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ym mhob un o’r blynyddoedd.
Ym 1997, arweiniodd 35% o achosion euogfarnau at lythyr rhybuddiol neu lythyr cyngor. Ym 1998 a 1999, y ffigurau oedd 63% a 45%. Pan hepgorwyd achosion yfed a gyrru, y ffigurau oedd 22%, 44% ac 19%. Anfonwyd llythyrau cyngor neu lythyrau rhybuddiol at gyfrannau sylweddol uwch o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor ym mhob un o’r blynyddoedd. Eto, arweiniodd y canlyniadau hyn at y posibilrwydd bod y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn cael eu trin yn anghyfartal.
Cydnabu’r tîm PSI ei bod yn bosibl y gallai’r troseddau yr oedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog ohonynt fod wedi bod yn fwy difrifol na’r troseddau a gyflawnwyd gan y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU. Byddai hyn yn esbonio’r gwahaniaethau amlwg mewn triniaeth rhwng y ddau grŵp. Fodd bynnag, gan nad oedd y PPC yn rhoi rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau, roedd yn amhosibl cadarnhau hyn. Nid oedd yn bosibl ychwaith i ddiystyru’r posibilrwydd bod rhagfarn hiliol wedi achosi’r gwahaniaethau. Ar sail y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael, ni ellid profi na gwrthbrofi presenoldeb rhagfarn hiliol. Nododd y tîm PSI y byddai dadansoddiad manwl o achosion unigol yn angenrheidiol er mwyn canfod pam yr oedd euogfarnau a oedd, o’r disgrifiad byr a oedd yn ymddangos ar gronfa ddata’r GMC, yn swnio’n debyg, ond a gafodd eu trin yn wahanol serch hynny. Cyn belled ag y mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol, nid oes unrhyw ddadansoddiad felly wedi’i gynnal.
Y Modd yr Ymdrinnir ag Achosion Euogfarnau yn Gyffredinol
Roedd gan y tîm PSI bryderon ynghylch y modd yr oedd y PPC yn delio’n gyffredinol ac achosion euogfarnau, ar wahân yn llwyr i’r gwahaniaethau anesboniadwy rhwng y modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU â’u cymheiriaid tramor. Yn ei Adroddiad 2001, tynnodd y tîm PSI sylw at yr amrywiad ym mhatrwm y canlyniadau mewn achosion euogfarnau o flwyddyn i flwyddyn. Ym 1997, fel y dywedais, roedd 35% o’r holl euogfarnau (ac eithrio euogfarnau yfed a gyrru) a gafodd eu hystyried gan y PPC wedi’u cyfeirio at y PCC; ym 1999, y gyfran oedd 58%. Roedd hwn yn amrywiad sylweddol ac nid oes esboniad iddo yn ôl pob golwg. Awgrymodd y tîm PSI y gallai dadansoddiad manwl o’r math y soniwyd amdano uchod fod o gymorth wrth esbonio pam yr oedd amrywiadau felly’n digwydd.
Roedd y tîm PSI yn pryderu bod ei ddadansoddiad ei hun yn dangos diffyg cysondeb cyffredinol wrth ddelio ag euogfarnau. Nododd Adroddiad PSI 2000 ei bod yn hanfodol, er cysondeb, yn ogystal ag er mwyn atal rhagfarn, na ddylid arfer unrhyw ddisgresiwn wrth benderfynu a ddylai euogfarn gael ei chyfeirio at y PCC. Argymhellodd yr adroddiad felly y dylai pob euogfarn yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC, ac eithrio euogfarnau yfed a gyrru, gael eu cyfeirio’n awtomatig ymlaen at y PCC. Nododd fod angen sicrhau effeithlonrwydd a chyflymder wrth ddelio ag euogfarnau, gan y gallai achosion felly gael eu hystyried yn awtomatig eu bod yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad meddyg.
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan yr Athro Allen, a arweiniodd y tîm PSI, ei bod hi a’i chydweithwyr yn bryderus iawn ynghylch nifer yr euogfarnau nad oeddent yn cael eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC. Roedd anomaleddau na allent ddod o hyd i unrhyw esboniadau amdanynt, naill ai o’r ystadegau nac o’u harsylwadau o’r PPC ar waith. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen mai ei barn bersonol hi oedd bod goblygiadau ynghylch addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer mewn unrhyw euogfarn, ac eithrio mân droseddau ffordd neu euogfarn yfed a gyrru. Mynegodd y farn hefyd, os oedd polisi yn cael ei fabwysiadau i gyfeirio pob achos euogfarn at y PCC, byddai hynny’n atal yr angen i gyfiawnhau’n fanwl pam y dylai un euogfarn gael ei hanfon at y PCC a pham na ddylai euogfarn arall gael ei hanfon.
Yr Angen i’r Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol i Roi Rhesymau
Fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr gwblhau’r adran berthnasol o’u Hadroddiad 2000 trwy ddweud bod angen ar fyrder i’r PPC nodi’n amlwg ei resymau am gyfeirio achosion at y PPC ac am benderfyniadau eraill. Yn absenoldeb rhesymau amlwg, roedd
‘gwahaniaethau anesboniadwy’
rhwng y canlyniadau ar gyfer rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn y cyfnod hwn o’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Rhoddwyd yr argymhelliad hwn ar waith yn fuan wedi hynny, pan fabwysiadodd y PPC yr arfer o gytuno’r prif resymau am ei benderfyniadau pan oedd y penderfyniadau hynny’n cael eu gwneud. Cyn belled ag y mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol, nid oes unrhyw ddadansoddiad dilynol o benderfyniadau’r PPC wedi bod, trwy gyfeirio at y rhesymau hynny.
Dadansoddi’r Dull o Gynnal Cyfarfodydd y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Yr Arsylwadau
Yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng mis Mehefin 1999 a mis Ionawr 2000, arsylwodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr 11 o gyfarfodydd o’r PPC. Ym mis Tachwedd 1999, fel yr esboniais, bu newidiadau sylweddol i gyfansoddiad y PPC. Cyn yr amser hwnnw, roedd y PPC wedi’i gadeirio gan Dr Steel, y prif sgriniwr meddygol. Roedd tri sgriniwr arall (dau sgriniwr meddygol ac un sgriniwr lleyg) yn aelodau o’r PPC. Roedd sgrinwyr eraill yn cael eu gwahodd i fynychu cyfarfodydd o’r PPC fel arsylwyr, a gellid galw arnynt i roi sylwadau ar achosion yr oeddent wedi’u sgrinio. Nid oedd sgrinwyr nad oeddent yn aelodau o’r PPC yn mynychu pob un o’i gyfarfodydd o reidrwydd, felly mater o siawns oedd hi pa un a oedd sgriniwr yn bresennol i roi sylw ar ei benderfyniad/phenderfyniad sgrinio ei hun. Galwyd ar sgrinwyr ‘arsylwi’ weithiau i ddirprwyo dros aelodau o’r PPC a oedd yn absennol, ac i sicrhau felly bod cworwm, sef pump ar y pryd. Os nad oedd hynny’n bosibl, galwyd ar aelodau eraill o’r GMC i ddirprwyo ar sail
O fis Tachwedd 1999, nid oedd sgrinwyr yn gymwys mwyach i’w hethol i’r PPC ac nid oeddent yn mynychu’i gyfarfodydd mwyach. Mr Nicholls, aelod lleyg o’r GMC a chyn sgriniwr lleyg, oedd Cadeirydd newydd y PPC. Nid oedd gan yr un o’r aelodau eraill o’r PPC a oedd newydd ei sefydlu, unrhyw brofiad o sgrinio.
Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr bod y papurau mewn achosion yn dod at y PPC yn aml yn gannoedd o dudalennau o hyd, gan gynnwys cofnodion meddygol ac adroddiadau am wrandawiadau blaenorol gan gyrff y GIG a chyrff eraill. Ni ddarparwyd unrhyw grynodeb o’r achos, ac eithrio’r llythyr at y meddyg yn nodi’r honiadau yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Nid oedd aelodau’r PPC ychwaith yn derbyn y ffurflen penderfyniad sgrinio na’r memorandwm a baratowyd gan weithiwr achos er cymorth i’r sgrinwyr. Byddai’r PPC fel arfer yn cael ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn, ar ffurf llythyr yn aml gan sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol neu gyfreithwyr y meddyg. Byddai dogfennau eraill yn cael eu hamgáu weithiau gyda’r ymateb. Nid oedd yn anarferol i’r ymateb yn cael ei gyflwyno gan feddygon gael ei dderbyn ychydig amser yn unig cyn cyfarfod y PPC. Byddai aelodau’r PPC yn aml yn gorfod darllen swp o ymatebion felly (ynghyd ag unrhyw ddeunydd arall a gyflwynwyd) ar ddiwrnod y cyfarfod. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai hyn yn aml fod yn dystiolaeth a gwybodaeth bellach a oedd ‘yn aruthrol o ran maint’. Mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi bod yn anodd iawn i aelodau lyncu’r deunydd newydd a’i roi yng nghyd-destun pob achos unigol. Bryd hynny, nid oedd hawl gan achwynydd (yn gorff cyhoeddus neu’n unigolyn preifat) i weld ymateb y meddyg i’r gŵyn na chynnig sylwadau arno. Felly, nid oedd unrhyw gyfle i achwynydd gywiro unrhyw anghywirdeb yn adroddiad y meddyg neu ddelio ag unrhyw gwestiynau ychwanegol yn cael eu codi ganddo/ganddi.
Bu’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr yn bresennol mewn chwe chyfarfod o’r PPC cyn mis Tachwedd 1999, a phum cyfarfod wedi hynny. Ni welont yr un cyfuniad o aelodau ac aelodau cyfetholedig yn eistedd ar y PPC fwy nag unwaith. Fe wnaethant ddadansoddi papurau’r cyfarfod ymlaen llaw a chofnodi adroddiadau gair am air o’r trafodaethau. Yna, dadansoddwyd nodweddion amrywiol o’r trafodaethau yn y cyfarfodydd ganddynt. Cafodd y Cadeirydd ei gyfweld ganddynt, ynghyd ag wyth aelod neu aelod cyfetholedig o’r PPC fel yr oedd ei gyfansoddiad cyn mis Tachwedd 1999.
Cysondeb, Tryloywder a Thegwch
Wrth gynnal eu dadansoddiadau, edrychodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr i weld a oedd y PPC yn cymhwyso egwyddorion gwneud penderfyniadau da ac yn cyflawni’u hamcanion, sef cysondeb, tryloywder a thegwch. Ym mis Mai 1996, ymrwymodd y GMC ei hun yn gyhoeddus i’r egwyddorion hyn. Roedd wedi dweud:
Yr egwyddorion oedd:
there should be agreement on the criteria to be applied in reaching a decision
the criteria used in considering each case should always be the same
they should be applied within each meeting by each member for each case in the same way
they should be applied across meetings in the same way
it should be clear how the criteria have been applied in reaching a decision
the reasons for each decision should be clearly stated
each case should be treated by giving due consideration to all pieces of evidence
each case should be assessed on its merits
it should be made clear what weight has been applied to the different pieces of evidence.’
Roedd y dadansoddiadau a wnaed gan y tîm PSI yn ymwneud â’r broses gwneud penderfyniadau ac â chynnwys penderfyniadau’r PPC.
Y Dull o Gynnal Cyfarfodydd
Sylwodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr, cyn y newidiadau sylweddol i’w gyfansoddiad ym mis Tachwedd 1999, bod y PPC fel arfer yn delio â rhwng 30 a 50 o achosion ym mhob cyfarfod. Deliwyd â hanner yr achosion mewn tair munud neu lai; daethpwyd â 76% o achosion i ben mewn pum munud neu lai. Dim ond 10% a gymerodd ddeng munud neu hwy. Ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999, dim ond 13% o achosion y daethpwyd â nhw i ben mewn tair munud neu lai, a 29% mewn pum munud neu lai; 47% o achosion a gymerodd ddeng munud neu fwy. Nid oedd yr amseroedd hyn yn cynnwys gwrandawiadau’n ymwneud â gorchmynion interim, a allai gymryd lawer yn hwy, fel yr esboniais uchod.
Roedd rhan o’r esboniad o leiaf am y cynnydd yn yr amser a gymerwyd dros bob achos ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999 yn y modd yr oedd y trafodaethau am achosion unigol yn cael eu cynnal. Nododd Adroddiad PSI 2000, cyn mis Tachwedd 1999, roedd cyfranogaeth mewn trafodaeth am achos unigol wedi’i chyfyngu i’r Cadeirydd (a fyddai’n cyflwyno bob achos) ac un neu ddau arall yn unig. Roedd rhai aelodau’n cael eu gwahodd i gymryd rhan mewn trafodaethau i raddau helaeth nag eraill. Ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999, roedd cyfarfodydd yn cael eu cynnal mewn dull mwy strwythuredig a oedd yn annog llawer mwy o gyfranogaeth, a chyfranogaeth fwy cyfartal, gan bob aelod o’r PPC. Yn gyffredinol, gofynnwyd i bob aelod am ei farn/barn mewn perthynas â phob achos dan ystyriaeth. Yn anochel, fe wnaeth hyn gynyddu’r amser a oedd yn cael ei dreulio ar achosion, ond golygai bod barnau pob aelod yn cael eu casglu. Cyn mis Tachwedd 1999, byddai penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud yn aml heb gymryd pleidlais, hyd yn oed lle’r oedd anghytundeb ynghylch beth ddylai canlyniad achos fod. Roedd yn fwy cyffredin i’r Cadeirydd roi canlyniad awgrymedig ymlaen, gan ei gadael i’r rheiny a oedd yn anghytuno i leisio’u hanghytundeb os oeddent yn dewis gwneud hynny. Ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999, roedd pleidleisiau’n cael eu cymryd yn amlach.
Dangosodd arsylwadau a dadansoddiadau’r tîm PSI mai nifer fach o drafodaethau o fewn y PPC, cyn mis Tachwedd 1999 neu wedi hynny, a gadwodd at yr egwyddorion gwneud penderfyniadau da yr oedd y GMC wedi ymrwymo iddynt yn flaenorol. Roedd absenoldeb meini prawf wedi’u cytuno a’u cymhwyso’n gyffredinol. Roedd yn amhosibl yn aml i ddweud pam yr oedd rhai achosion wedi’u cyfeirio at y PPC a pham na chafodd achosion eraill eu cyfeirio. Roedd hyn yn arbennig o wir mewn achosion o driniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon, ond roedd yn wir hefyd am euogfarnau ac achosion eraill yn ymwneud ag anonestrwydd ac ymddygiad personol camweithredol a oedd wedi’i ddynodi yn ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’ at ddibenion sgrinio. Ni chafodd llawer o’r achosion hynny eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC.
Sylwodd y tîm PSI ar ddryswch ac anghytundeb ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM a beth ddylai’r trothwy fod ar gyfer SPM. Awgrymwyd gan rai aelodau o’r PPC
‘I fod yn spm mae’n rhaid bod rhyw dystiolaeth o ddiofalwch a dylai’r gweithredu fod yn afresymol ...’
. Roedd barnau gwahanol iawn ynghylch yr hyn a oedd ac nad oedd yn
‘afresymol’
. Daeth aelodau’r PPC â’u barnau eu hunain i’r trafodaethau ynghylch y safonau a oedd i’w disgwyl gan ‘feddyg rhesymol’, ac roedd aelodau unigol yn amlwg yn cymhwyso safonau gwahanol. Roedd gwahaniaeth barn hefyd ynghylch lwfansau gwallau a oedd yn cael eu derbyn. Roedd tueddiad i ddamcaniaethu ynghylch pam y gallai rhywun fod wedi gwneud rhywbeth. Roedd priodweddau neu ymddygiad yn cael eu priodoli i feddyg lle nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth am hynny. Byddai aelodau o’r PPC yn damcaniaethu ynghylch sut y gallai sefyllfaoedd penodol fod wedi codi lle nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth i seilio damcaniaethau felly arni.
Un pwynt anghytundeb a oedd yn codi dro ar ôl tro oedd pan un a oedd y ffaith fod ymddygiad meddyg wedi arwain at ganlyniad gwael i glaf yn berthnasol i’r mater a oedd yr ymddygiad hwnnw’n gyfystyr ag SPM. Dyfynnodd Adroddiad PSI 2000 un sgwrs ar y pwnc hwn:
‘Aelod 1: “The outcome is totally irrelevant. Get rid of the idea that it is more serious if the patient dies than if he didn’t.”
Aelod 2: “It does matter to the patient if the outcome is death. It is the duty of a doctor to sort out the urgent and important.”’
Cafwyd cryn anhawster wrth ddelio â barn arbenigol. Weithiau, roedd y papurau mewn achos yn cynnwys adroddiadau arbenigol a gafwyd yn ystod ymchwiliad i’r gŵyn gan gorff arall; weithiau, roedd y meddyg yn cyflwyno tystiolaeth arbenigol i gefnogi’i amddiffyniad/hamddiffyniad. Mewn achosion eraill, roedd y sgrinwyr wedi galw am farn arbenigol. Roedd yr arbenigwyr yn aelodau o’r GMC weithiau, ac weithiau nid oeddent. Ar brydiau, roedd yr arbenigwyr yn anghytuno â’i gilydd. Nododd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr bod anhawster go iawn ar ran aelodau’r PPC o ran gwybod pa bwys i roi ar farnau’r arbenigwyr a sut i ddelio â gwrthdaro yn y dystiolaeth arbenigol. Weithiau, byddai’r PPC yn penderfynu yn unol ag un farn arbenigol, yn hytrach nag un arall, heb fod yn glir ynghylch pam yr oedd un farn wedi’i ffafrio. Daeth y sefyllfa yn fwy cymhleth fyth pan oedd ymarferydd yn y maes perthnasol yn y cyfarfod. Mater o siawns oedd hi ynghylch a oedd ymarferydd yn bresennol mewn cyfarfod. Beth bynnag, roedd y pwysau a oedd yn cael ei roi i arbenigedd aelod a oedd yn ymarferydd yn amrywio rhwng cyfarfodydd.
Diffyg Dealltwriaeth o’r Prosesau
Roedd aelodau’r PPC yn mynegi ansicrwydd yn aml ynghylch gweithdrefnau a phrosesau’r GMC. Weithiau, nid oedd aelodau i weld eu bod yn gwerthfawrogi nad oedd yn agored iddynt gyfeirio achos at y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Roedd diffyg dealltwriaeth, ar ran rhai, o’r gwahaniaeth rhwng y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol a’r HC. Roedd ansicrwydd hefyd ynghylch yr amgylchiadau lle dylai meddyg gael y cyfle i ddileu ei enw/henw yn wirfoddol o’r gofrestr. Roedd meysydd eraill ansicrwydd hefyd ymhlith aelodau a gyfrannodd at yr anhawster yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau.
Soniwyd yn aml mewn trafodaethau am fodolaeth bosibl amgylchiadau lliniarol (e.e. methiannau systemau, rheolaeth wael, ymarfer mewn ardal ddifreintiedig, rhestr cleifion faith). Soniwyd yn aml am y ffaith bod meddyg wedi ymddiheuro neu wedi cydnabod rhywfaint o fai. Nododd y tîm PSI:
‘... roedd yn amlwg bod aelodau yn aml yn chwilio am esboniadau am ymddygiad meddyg. Fe allai’r rhain fod yn gysylltiedig yn uniongyrchol ag amgylchiadau’r meddygon eu hunain, neu gallent fod yn gysylltiedig â’r amgylchiadau lle’r oeddent yn gweithio. Roeddent yn sicr yn cael eu hystyried pan oedd gwahaniaethau barn yn digwydd o fewn pwyllgor, yn enwedig mewn perthynas ag achosion triniaeth/arfer clinigol is na’r safon.’
Ystyried Cryfder y Dystiolaeth
Un thema a oedd, yn ôl yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr,
‘fyth ymhell o dan y wyneb’
mewn llawer o drafodaethau’r PPC oedd y mater pa un a oedd graddfa a natur y dystiolaeth o’r fath y byddai’r achos yn ‘rhedeg’ yn y PCC. Arsylwyd trafodaethau maith ganddynt ynghylch faint o dystiolaeth yr oedd ei hangen i anfon achos at y PCC. Weithiau, yn ystod y trafodaethau hyn, roedd anghytundeb rhwng aelodau’r PPC a’r asesydd cyfreithiol. Byddai’r olaf yn cynghori mai swyddogaeth y PPC yn unig oedd sicrhau bod achos
ac na ddylai’r PPC geisio datrys gwahaniaethau neu wrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth yn ystod cwrs ei ystyriaethau ar ba un a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PC neu beidio. Roedd aelodau’n anhapus ynglŷn â hyn. Er gwaetha’r cyngor cyfreithiol, roedd aelodau yn tueddu trafod digonolrwydd, a gwrthdaro yn, y dystiolaeth. Nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn cyfeirio at achos adolygiad barnwrol
, sy’n dangos y broblem a ddisgrifiwyd gan yr Athro Allen. Yn yr achos hwnnw, roedd y PPC yn amlwg wedi trafod y gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth ac wedi’i ddatrys o blaid y meddyg, mewn amgylchiadau lle cyfeirio’r achos at y PCC ddylai’r penderfyniad fod wedi bod.
Dywedodd yr Athro Allen wrth yr Ymchwiliad iddi gael si synnu gan y raddfa yr oedd y PPC yn trafod y rhagolygon llwyddiant tebygol yn y PCC. Yn benodol, roedd yn bryderus ynghylch y pwyslais ar dystiolaeth. Fel yr esboniais, nid oedd yn arfer y GMC bryd hynny i gasglu tystiolaeth (ac eithrio am ymateb meddyg ac unrhyw dystiolaeth yr oedd yn dymuno’i gwirfoddoli) yn ymwneud â chwyn oni bai a hyd nes bod yr achos wedi’i gyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC. Pan oedd achos wedi’i gyfeirio at y PCC, roedd cyfle i gyfreithwyr y GMC i gasglu mwy o dystiolaeth er mwyn paratoi ar gyfer y gwrandawiad. Dywedodd yr Athro Allen ei bod yn pryderu bod y PPC weithiau’n edrych ar achosion ar sail gwybodaeth gyfyngedig iawn, a’i fod yn gwneud penderfyniadau am ddigonolrwydd y dystiolaeth ar adeg pan nad oedd mewn unrhyw sefyllfa i wybod a fyddai modd casglu gwybodaeth bellach yn y dyfodol.
Dadansoddi Canlyniadau a Chasgliadau
Roedd dadansoddiad y tîm PSI o ganlyniadau cyfarfodydd PPC yn dangos bod gwahaniaeth nodedig rhwng canlyniadau’r rheiny a gynhaliwyd cyn mis Tachwedd 1999 a’r rheiny a gafodd eu cynnal wedi hynny. Yn y cyfnod o fis Mehefin i fis Tachwedd 1999, cafodd 35% o achosion a ystyriwyd gan y PPC eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Rhwng mis Tachwedd 1999 a mis Ionawr 2000, cyfeiriwyd 47%. Roedd yn ymddangos mai’r rheswm am hyn oedd bod y PPC ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999 yn gweithredu trothwy is ar gyfer cyfeirio achosion at y PCC. Fodd bynnag, nododd Adroddiad PSI 2000 ei bod yn aneglur, mewn perthynas â’r naill gyfnod, beth oedd y trothwy hwnnw. Roedd y PPC, yn ôl ei gyfansoddiad ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999, yn fwy tebygol na’i ragflaenydd i gyfeirio achosion at y PCC os oedd gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth a oedd heb ei ddatrys, neu os credwyd bod yr achos yn codi mater o SPM, hyd yn oed lle nad oedd y dystiolaeth i weld yn sylweddol. Roedd yn llai tebygol na’r PPC cynharach i benderfynu bod tystiolaeth annigonol i gyfeirio achos at y PCC. Fel arall, roedd yr un problemau ac ansicrwydd yn parhau i nodweddu trafodaethau’r PPC, hyd yn oed ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999. Gwnaeth Adroddiad PSI 2000 y sylw,
Nododd Adroddiad PSI 2000 mai’r prif gwestiwn a oedd heb ei ateb oedd pam gafodd cyfran mor fach o achosion a gafodd eu hystyried gan y PPC eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Gofynnodd yr Adroddiad y cwestiwn hwn:
Mae’n eglur, fel y nodais ym mharagraff 20.21, bod yr Athro Allen o’r farn bod y prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr fwy neu lai’r un fath â hwnnw a oedd i’w gymhwyso gan y PPC.
Aeth Adroddiad PSI 2000 ymlaen i gyfeirio at absenoldeb safonau cytûn y gellid gwneud penderfyniad yn eu herbyn ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM ai peidio. Nododd:
Holodd y tîm PSI a oedd y PPC yn fforwm priodol ar gyfer trafod pa un a oedd triniaeth wael neu arfer clinigol is na’r safon yn codi materion SPM. Cyfeiriodd at y diffyg cysondeb, yng nghyfansoddiad y PPC (gyda chyfuniadau gwahanol o bobl yn mynychu pob cyfarfod) ac yn argaeledd arbenigedd ymhlith ei aelodau.
Yn olaf, argymhellodd Adroddiad PSI 2000 y dylai’r GMC egluro’r gwahaniaethau rhwng rôl a swyddogaeth y PPC a rôl a swyddogaeth sgrinwyr. Nododd bod rolau a swyddogaethau’r ddau i weld yn debyg iawn. Awgrymwyd, os bwriadwyd i’r PPC gymhwyso profion a meini prawf gwahanol ar gyfer cyfeirio achosion ymlaen i’r rheiny’n cael eu defnyddio gan y sgrinwyr, dylai’r profion a’r meini prawf hynny gael eu diffinio a dylai arweiniad gael ei roi ar y modd y dylid eu cymhwyso. Yn wir, awgrymwyd y dylai’r GMC ystyried a oedd angen iddo gadw swyddogaethau ar wahân sgrinwyr a’r PPC o gwbl. Soniais yn gynharach y byddai’n arferol i’r sgrinwyr a’r PPC gael yr un faint o wybodaeth o’u blaenau. Yn y gorffennol, bu un gwahaniaeth sylweddol: byddai esboniad y meddyg gan y PPC, lle na fyddai gan y sgriniwr. Dilëwyd y gwahaniaeth hwnnw ym 1997. Efallai y rhagwelwyd yn wreiddiol y byddai’r PPC yn defnyddio’u bwerau i ohirio ar gyfer gwneud ymchwiliadau er mwyn ei roi ei hun mewn sefyllfa well na’r sgrinwyr. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, prin y gwnaethpwyd hyn fyth.
Mae’r disgrifiadau o’r hyn ddigwyddodd mewn cyfarfodydd y PPC a’r trafodaethau a ddisgrifiwyd gan yr Athro Allen yn atgoffaol iawn o rywfaint o’r dystiolaeth a wrandawyd yn yr Ymchwiliad. Byddai rhai o’r tystion, pan ofynnwyd iddynt esbonio penderfyniad mewn achos penodol, yn damcaniaethu ynghylch pam y byddai’r meddyg dan sylw wedi gweithredu fel y gwnaeth, gan geisio dod o hyd i esboniad derbyniol yn aml am yr hyn ddigwyddodd. Roedd yn eglur, pe bai bwlch yn y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael (fel ag yr oedd yn aml mewn achosion yn cael eu hystyried gan y PPC, oherwydd y byddai cyn lleied o dystiolaeth yn cael ei chasglu yng nghamau rhagarweiniol y broses), byddai’r sawl a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau yn llenwi’r bwlch gyda rhagdybiaethau, a oedd yn ddieithriad yn ffafriol i’r meddyg yr oedd yr honiad wedi’i wneud yn ei erbyn/herbyn. Byddai meddygon y gofynnwyd iddynt gan yr Ymchwiliad i fynegi barn - am, er enghraifft, ymddygiad Shipman yn achos Mrs Renate Overton - yn rhoi barn yn seiliedig, yn rhannol, ar ddamcaniaeth ynghylch beth allai fod wedi digwydd neu pam fyddai Shipman wedi gweithredu fel y gwnaeth. Nid damcaniaethau oedd y rhain ynghylch pa mor ddifrifol y gallai goblygiadau ei ymddygiad fod; ymgeisiau oeddent i gynnig esboniad am ei ymddygiad a fyddai’n ei wneud yn dderbyniol, neu, beth bynnag, yn llai difrifol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad am dueddiadau tebyg a ddaeth i’r golwg mewn dadleuon mewn cyfarfodydd o’r Pwyllgor Cynghori Meddygol, fel y disgrifiais ym Mhennod 6. I gyfreithiwr, mae cynnwys y fath ddeunydd amherthnasol wrth ystyried achos yn amlwg yn anghywir. Eto ymddengys, i lawer o feddygon, nad yw hyn yn amlwg.
Yn fwy cyffredinol, mae’r dadansoddiad a wnaed gan y tîm PSI i weithrediad y PPC yn rhoi darlun digalon o anghysondeb a diffyg tryloywder. I benderfyniadau pwysig fel y rheiny’n cael eu gwneud gan y PPC i gael eu gwneud ar wybodaeth anghyflawn gan bobl a oedd yn gweithredu ar eu barnau personol, heb fantais unrhyw fath o fframwaith o safonau neu feini prawf - neu hyd yn oed casgliad o hen achosion i weld oddi wrthynt sut yr oedd penderfyniadau wedi’u gwneud yn y gorffennol - mae hynny’n ymddangos i mi fel rysáit ar gyfer canlyniad annheg. Mae’n amlwg nad oedd y GMC, bryd hynny, yn cyflawni’i amcanion cysondeb, tryloywder a thegwch yn y broses gwneud penderfyniadau. Gall fod, ar rai achlysuron, bod yr anghysondeb wedi arwain at annhegwch i feddygon. Fodd bynnag, ar rai achlysuron, mae’n rhaid ei fod wedi arwain at fethiant i ddiogelu cleifion.

---  ---
Trafodwyd rolau’r PPC a’r sgrinwyr gan Meistr Ustus Lightman yn ei ddyfarniad yn achos
. Traddodwyd y dyfarniad ym mis Mehefin 2000. Amlinellais ffeithiau’r achos hwnnw ym Mhennod 19. Roedd y ddadl yn
yn ymwneud â dau benderfyniad gan sgriniwr meddygol. Ni chyrhaeddodd yr achos y PPC fyth. Fodd bynnag, cymerodd y Barnwr y cyfle i roi arweiniad ar rolau priodol y sgrinwyr a’r PPC.
Nododd y Barnwr bod gwahaniaeth mewn iaith rhwng rheol 6(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, a oedd y rheoli rôl sgrinwyr, ac adran 42(2) o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983, a oedd yn rheoli rôl y PPC. Cadarnhaodd ei bod yn
‘ffaith amlwg’
na ellid fod wedi bwriadu i rolau’r sgriniwr a’r PPC ddyblygu‘i gilydd a
. Dim ond yr achosion hynny a oedd yn ymddangos iddo/iddi
‘nad oedd angen iddynt fynd ymhellach’
y gallai’r sgriniwr eu hidlo allan. Yr unig gasgliad ar rinweddau’r gŵyn a oedd yn ofynnol gan y sgriniwr cyn y byddai’n caniatáu i gŵyn fynd ymlaen oedd bod y materion a nodwyd
‘i weld yn codi cwestiwn’
ynghylch a oedd y meddyg wedi cyflawni SPM. Fodd bynnag, roedd gan y PPC y dasg o benderfynu pa un
‘a ddylai’r gŵyn fynd ymhellach’
. Er i’r Barnwr ystyried ei bod yn amlwg na allai rolau’r sgriniwr a’r PPC fod yr un fath, roedd yr Athro Allen wedi deall nad oedd gwahaniaeth gwirioneddol rhyngddynt, ac, i fod yn deg iddi hi, roedd geiriad y ddau brawf mor gyffredinol bod ei safbwynt hi’n ddealladwy.
Aeth y Barnwr ymlaen i dynnu sylw at ddwy nodwedd benodol o weithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC. Yn gyntaf, nododd nad oedd gan yr achwynydd unrhyw hawl i weld sylwadau’r meddyg am y gŵyn nac i weld unrhyw ddeunydd arall a oedd yn cael ei roi gerbron y PPC. Yn ail, nododd mai
‘nodwedd ganolog’
y gweithdrefnau oedd ymchwiliad i gwynion gan y PCC. Dim ond gerbron y PCC, nododd, yr oedd datgeliad llawn o ddogfennau a thystiolaeth, a rhyw ffurf ar wrandawiad lle gallai’r achwynydd a’r cyhoedd weld, a chael eu sicrhau trwy weld, rhinweddau’r gŵyn yn cael eu harchwilio’n briodol. Aeth ymlaen:
Nododd y Barnwr y dylai’r sgriniwr a’r PPC fod yn arbennig o araf wrth stopio cwyn yn erbyn meddyg a oedd yn parhau i ymarfer, yn hytrach nag un a oedd wedi ymddeol ers hynny. Mae’n rhaid mai’r ystyriaeth bwysicaf, meddai, yw diogelu’r cyhoedd mewn perthynas â’r rheiny sy’n parhau i ymarfer.
Ar ôl Adroddiad 2000 y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi ac Achos
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad, o ganlyniad i’r argymhellion yn Adroddiad PSI 2000, bod amryw newidiadau wedi’u gwneud i weithdrefnau’r PPC. Y pwysicaf oedd y newid y cyfeiriais ato’n barod, lle byddai aelodau o’r PPC yn cytuno’r prif resymau am eu penderfyniadau, a oedd wedyn yn cael eu cofnodi gan aelod o staff. Hefyd, cyflwynwyd system lle byddai memorandwm gan sgriniwr yn nodi’r rhesymau am y cyfeiriad yn mynd law yn llaw â’r holl achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PPC. Newid arall oedd, o fis Gorffennaf 2000, mai polisi’r GMC oedd y dylai ymateb y meddyg i gŵyn gael ei ddatgelu i’r achwynydd, a oedd yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd i ddarparu sylwadau cyn bod yr achos yn cael ei sgrinio. Os oedd yr achwynydd yn darparu sylwadau, roeddent yn cael eu datgelu i’r meddyg iddo yntau/hithau gael gwneud sylwadau pellach.
Yn ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Nicholls y gallai ddeall sut y cafodd yr awgrym bod y PPC yn rhoi gormod o bwyslais ar y cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd digon o dystiolaeth i’r achos ‘redeg’ yn y PPC, a gynhwyswyd yn Adroddiad PSI 2000, ei wneud. Fodd bynnag, awgrymodd bod ymagwedd y PPC, i ryw raddau o leiaf, yn cael ei chyfiawnhau gan y farn a fynegwyd gan Lightman J yn
, sef bod hawl gan y PPC archwilio a oedd gan y gŵyn unrhyw obaith go iawn o lwyddo. Mae’n eglur, fodd bynnag, o achos
, y byddaf yn ei drafod isod ac a oedd yn ymwneud â phenderfyniad y PPC a wnaed ym mis Mawrth 2000, bod y PPC yn mynd ymhell y tu hwnt i’w gylch gwaith yn y modd yr oedd yn ystyried y dystiolaeth mewn achos.
Credai Mr Nicholls bod y penderfyniad yn Toth wedi peri i’r PPC ohirio’n amlach er mwyn i ymchwiliadau pellach gael eu gwneud. Teimlai, cyn hynny, nad oedd y PPC wedi gohirio digon at y diben hwnnw. Mae’n amhosibl dweud o’r ystadegau ai felly’r oedd hi.

---  ---
gan Meistr Ustus Sullivan ar 18 Rhagfyr 2000. Roedd yn ymwneud â chais am adolygiad barnwrol o benderfyniad y PPC i beidio cyfeirio cwyn a wnaed gan Ms Joanne Richards at y PCC.
Roedd y gŵyn yn ymwneud â thriniaeth chwaer Ms Richards, Miss Jane Wetherell, gan feddyg teulu, Dr S K Pathak. Roedd Miss Wetherell wedi marw o emboledd yr ysgyfaint ar 19 Ionawr 1995, yn 36 oed. Roedd ganddi nifer o ffactorau risg ar gyfer emboledd yr ysgyfaint, gan gynnwys y ffaith ei bod yn ddifrifol dros bwysau, ei bod yn ysmygu a’i bod yn cymryd y bilsen atal cenhedlu. Roedd y gŵyn yn canolbwyntio ar ymgynghoriad â Dr Pathak a oedd wedi’i gynnal wyth niwrnod cyn marwolaeth Miss Wetherell. Y mater oedd pa un a oedd Miss Wetherell wedi cwyno neu wedi dangos arwyddion o ddiffyg anadl neu broblemau anadlu yn yr ymgynghoriad. Dywedodd Ms Richards bod Miss Wetherell wedi dweud wrthi iddi sôn am symptomau felly wrth Dr Pathak. Dywedodd cydweithiwr i Miss Wetherell bod Miss Wetherell wedi gwneud apwyntiad brys ar ddiwrnod yr ymgynghoriad er mwyn trafod ei phroblemau anadlu’n benodol. Dywedodd y cydweithiwr ei bod yn bresennol ar yr adeg pan wnaethpwyd yr apwyntiad, ac iddi glywed Miss Wetherell yn cwyno i’r derbynnydd na allai anadlu’n iawn.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan Dr Pathak yn y cwest i farwolaeth Miss Wetherell. Gwadodd ei bod wedi cwyno neu ddangos tystiolaeth o broblemau anadlu yn yr ymgynghoriad. Dywedodd ei bod yn cwyno, nid o ddiffyg anadlu, ond yn hytrach ei bod yn teimlo cyfog ac ‘wrin cryf’. Roedd wedi cyfeirio Miss Wetherell i’r ysbyty i gael adroddiad endrocrinoleg. Mae’n eglur y byddai profion yn cael eu cynnal cyn gwneud adroddiad. Cofnododd ei nodyn meddygol ei bod wedi dod ato i gael
‘archwiliad y bilsen’
Yn ei grynhoad i’r rheithgor, dywedodd y Crwner, pe bai’r claf wedi cwyno o ddiffyg anadlu i’r meddyg, dylai’r bilsen atal cenhedlu fod wedi’i hatal. Gwnaeth sylw ar annigonolrwydd nodiadau Dr Pathak. Yn yr adolygiad barnwrol, ni ddywedodd y Barnwr beth fu canlyniad y cwest. Yn dilyn y cwest, cwynodd Mr Richards i’r Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSA) lleol. Gwrthododd yr MSC ei chwyn; nid yw’n eglur a fu gwrandawiad bryd hynny, ond ymddengys yn annhebygol. Apeliodd Ms Richards. Gwrandawyd ei hapêl gan banel apêl, a gafodd ei wysio fwy na thebyg gan yr Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSAA). Rhoddodd Dr Pathak dystiolaeth eto, yn gwadu y bu unrhyw sôn am broblemau anadlu yn yr ymgynghoriad. Yn ystod ei dystiolaeth, addefodd nad oedd Miss Wetherell, mewn gwirionedd, wedi dod ato i gael
‘archwiliad y bilsen’
, fel y datganodd ei nodyn. Yn hytrach dywedodd iddi fynd i Glinig Merched Iach a oedd yn cael ei gynnal gan nyrs ei feddygfa. Roedd y nyrs wedi cyfeirio Miss Wetherell ato, meddai, oherwydd y teimlad cyfog a oedd ganddi ac oherwydd nad oedd yn gallu colli pwysau.
Roedd chwaer Miss Wetherell wedi cael gafael ar gofnodion yr ysbyty erbyn hyn, gan gynnwys yr adroddiad endrocrinoleg. Roedd y llythrennau
arno, sef talfyriad meddygol cyffredin am brinder anadl (‘shortness of breath’). Dywedodd tyst ysbyty ei bod yn debygol iawn bod
wedi ffurfio rhan o’r manylion clinigol a ysgrifennwyd gan Dr Pathak ar y ffurflen yn gofyn am i brofion endrocrinolegol cael eu cynnal. Ymatebodd Dr Pathak trwy ddweud, ar adeg yr ymgynghoriad perthnasol, yr hyn a oedd ganddo o’i flaen oedd manylion ymgynghoriad yr oedd Miss Wetherell wedi cael gyda’i wraig (partner yn ei feddygfa deulu) ym mis Rhagfyr 1994, pan soniwyd am ddiffyg anadl. Mae’n debygol, meddai, ei fod wedi ysgrifennu
ar y ffurflen gais fel rhan o’r hanes clinigol blaenorol. Parhaodd yn bendant ei feddwl na soniwyd amdano yn yr ymgynghoriad dan sylw. Nid oedd y ffurflen gais wreiddiol ar gael mwyach, gan iddi gael ei dinistrio gan yr ysbyty yn unol â’r drefn arferol.
Fe wnaeth y panel apêl a wysiwyd gan yr FHSAA, a oedd yn cynnwys cadeirydd â chymwysterau cyfreithiol a dau aelod â chymwysterau meddygol, wrando tystiolaeth gan 11 o dystion dros bedwar diwrnod. Roedd Dr Pathak yn cael ei gynrychioli gan gwnsler. Roedd yr achwynydd yn cael ei chynrychioli hefyd. Canfu’r panel apêl bod Miss Wetherell wedi gwneud apwyntiad brys a’i bod yn dioddef o ddiffyg anadl sylweddol yn yr ymgynghoriad. Canfuwyd hefyd bod nodyn clinigol Dr Pathak wedi’i ysgrifennu ar ôl marwolaeth Miss Wetherell pan fu cwyn, neu pan gredodd bod cwyn yn debygol o gael ei gwneud. Canfu’r panel apêl bod Dr Pathak wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth wrth beidio cyfeirio Miss Wetherell at ymgynghorydd, er iddo ystyried mai
‘mân achos’
o dorri telerau ydoedd. Yr agwedd
‘fwyaf difrifol’
ar yr achos, fe ganfu, oedd yr ymgais gan Dr Pathak i gelu’r achos o dorri telerau. Rhoddwyd penderfyniad y panel apêl ym mis Mehefin 1998, dair blynedd a hanner ar ôl y farwolaeth.
Ymddengys, o ganlyniad i ganfyddiadau’r panel apêl, bod yr FHSA wedyn wedi cyfeirio achos Dr Pathak at y GMC. Hefyd, gwnaeth Ms Richards gŵynion i’r GMC ynghylch Dr Pathak a’i wraig a fu, fe honnwyd, yn gyfrannog mewn ffugio cofnodion. Deliaf yn unig â’r gŵyn yn erbyn Dr S K Pathak.
Y Penderfyniad Cyntaf gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Aeth y gŵyn at y sgriniwr meddygol, a’i cyfeiriodd at y PPC. Ystyriwyd y gŵyn gan y PPC ym mis Mehefin 1999. Gall fod bod yr Athro Allen yn bresennol yn y cyfarfod lle cafodd yr achos ei drafod. Yn dilyn y cyfarfod hwnnw, anfonwyd llythyr o benderfyniad at Ms Richards. Nododd y llythyr bod y panel apêl wedi gwneud ei ddyfarniad ar gydbwysedd tebygolrwydd, lle’r oedd y safon prawf yng ngwrandawiadau’r PCC
‘y tu hwnt i amheuaeth resymol’
. Roedd y PPC wedi dod i’r casgliad bod tystiolaeth annigonol ar gael (a dim tebygolrwydd o gael y dystiolaeth angenrheidiol) i roi gobaith rhesymol o brofi’r cyhuddiad bod y meddygon wedi gwneud newidiadau i’r cofnodion ac wedi camarwain, neu geisio camarwain, ymholiadau dilynol i’r farwolaeth.
Aeth y llythyr ymlaen i fynegi pryder aelodau’r PPC am ymddygiad Dr Pathak wrth fethu cyfeirio Miss Wetherell i’r ysbyty; cymerwyd y farn ganddynt y dylai fod wedi gwneud hyn, ym mha fodd bynnag yr oedd hi wedi esbonio ei symptomau iddo. Roeddent o’r farn hefyd nad oedd ei nodiadau i fyny i’r safonau yr oeddent yn disgwyl eu gweld. Fodd bynnag, nododd y llythyr na wnaeth y PPC
(h.y. Dr Pathak neu ei wraig)
. Yn lle hynny, roedd y PPC wedi cyfarwyddo y dylid anfon llythyr at Dr Pathak yn ei gynghori am bryderon y PPC ac yn ei rybuddio ynghylch ei ymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Wrth fynd heibio, nodaf fod y llythyr hwn yn syml yn atseinio ffurfiau’r geiriau a ddefnyddiwyd yn y Nodyn a oedd yn cynnwys arweiniad i aelodau newydd y PPC a gafodd ei gyhoeddi ym mis Mehefin 1997; ni fyddai wedi helpu’r achwynydd i ddeall pam y cafodd yr achos ei gau.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 1999, fe wnaeth cyfreithwyr a gyfarwyddwyd gan yr achwynydd ysgrifennu at y GMC, yn dadlau nad oedd penderfyniad y PPC yn rhesymol, a chan nodi’r rhesymau. Gwahoddwyd y PPC ganddynt i wrthdroi ei benderfyniad, ac os nad oedd yn gwneud hynny, y byddai cais yn cael ei wneud am adolygiad barnwrol. Cafodd y GMC gyngor cyfreithiol a oedd yn awgrymu bod penderfyniad y PPC wedi bod yn ddiffygiol. Cytunodd y GMC wedyn i ganiatáu gorchymyn, yn diddymu penderfyniad y PPC. Cymeradwywyd y gorchymyn hwnnw gan y Llys ym 1999. Roedd datganiad o resymau wedi’i atodi i’r gorchymyn, lle’r oedd y partïon (h.y. Ms Richards a’r GMC) wedi cytuno bod tri rheswm dros ddiddymu’r penderfyniad. Yn gyntaf, roedd y PPC wedi cymhwyso’r prawf anghywir, wrth ystyried beth oedd
‘y tebygolrwydd’
o gael tystiolaeth ddigonol. Yn ail, nid oedd y modd yr oedd y PPC wedi asesu’r dystiolaeth yn cefnogi’r casgliad y daethpwyd iddo yn y pen draw; mae’n rhaid y casglwyd bod y PPC wedi derbyn canfyddiadau’r panel apêl a bod hyn yn ddigon i
‘godi cwestiwn’
ynghylch a fu SPM. Yn drydydd, cytunwyd bod y PPC wedi camgyfeirio’i hun ar y dystiolaeth. Roedd rhywfaint o dystiolaeth bod Dr Pathak wedi dweud celwydd yn y cwest, ei fod wedi ffugio nodiadau meddygol Miss Wetherell i ddiogelu ei hun, a bod Miss Wetherell, yn groes i’w wadiadau, wedi cwyno o brinder anadl yn yr ymgynghoriad dan sylw. Cytunwyd y dylai’r dystiolaeth hon fod wedi bod yn ddigonol i berswadio’r PPC bod y gŵyn yn
‘codi cwestiwn o’
SPM. Fod bynnag, roedd y PPC wedi methu gwerthfawrogi pa mor berthnasol a phwysig ydoedd. Byddai unrhyw un a oedd yn darllen y datganiad rhesymau wedi casglu bod y GMC wedi deall mai’r prawf y dylai’r PPC fod wedi bod yn ei gymhwyso oedd pa un a oedd y gwyn ‘yn codi cwestiwn o’ SPM.
Ail Benderfyniad y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Cafodd y gwyn ei hanfon yn ei hôl wedyn at banel o’r PPC â chyfansoddiad gwahanol na ddywedwyd wrtho am gefndir yr achos. Mewn gwirionedd, ers i’r panel PPC blaenorol ystyried y gwyn, bu newid Cadeirydd ac aelodaeth y PPC, fel y disgrifiais ym mharagraff 20.13. Cadeirydd y panel ar yr ail achlysur oedd Mr Nicholls.
Gwnaethpwyd cyflwyniadau pellach i’r PPC ar ran Ms Richards a Dr Pathak eu dau; ni welodd yr un gyflwyniadau’r llall cyn i’r PPC wneud ei benderfyniad. Cyfarfu panel y PPC ym mis Mawrth 2000. Anfonwyd llythyr penderfyniad at y partïon ym mis Ebrill 2000. Yn fyr, daeth y PPC i’r casgliad, hyd yn oed os oedd Miss Wetherell wedi cwyno o brinder anadl yn yr ymgynghoriad dan sylw, nid hwnnw fyddai’r allwedd i’r diagnosis a’r canlyniad. Byddai wedi bod yn bosibl i’r cyflwr fod yn un nad oedd modd ei ganfod, er gwaethaf unrhyw brinder anadl. Ystyriodd y PPC bod nodiadau Dr Pathak o’r ymgynghoriad yn rhai gwirioneddol a digonol. (Roedd y panel apêl, fel y dywedais, wedi dod i’r casgliad bod y nodiadau wedi’u hysgrifennu ar ôl marwolaeth Miss Wetherell, ar adeg pan oed Dr Pathak yn gwybod bod cwyn wedi’i gwneud neu’n debygol o gael ei gwneud.)
Yn unol â’r newidiadau diweddar mewn arfer, roedd y llythyr penderfyniad ar yr achlysur hwn yn llawer llawnach. Soniodd am ddatganiad Ms Richards bod Miss Wetherell wedi dweud wrthi ei bod wedi cwyno o ddiffyg anadl yn ei hymgynghoriad â Dr Pathak. Dywedodd bod y datganiad yn dystiolaeth achlust ac y byddai, felly, yn annerbyniol gerbron y PPC. Pe bai’n cael ei derbyn (roedd gan y PCC ddisgresiwn i dderbyn tystiolaeth achlust os oedd yn fodlon bod ei
‘ddyletswydd i ymholi’n briodol i’r’
achos yn ei gwneud yn
‘ddymunol’
i dderbyn y dystiolaeth), mae’n debyg na fyddid wedi rhoi
‘llawer iawn o bwys’
iddi, fel nododd y llythyr penderfyniad. Dywedodd y llythyr, oherwydd hyn, na fyddai’r PPC wedi disgwyl i dystiolaeth Ms Richards wneud unrhyw wahaniaeth i’r canlyniad cyffredinol. Mewn perthynas ag ymddangosiad y llythrennau
ar yr adroddiad endocrinoleg, dywedodd y llythyr penderfyniad bod aelodau’r PPC wedi sylwi, yn eu profiad, ei bod yn gyffredin iawn i wybodaeth ddod o hyd i’w ffordd i adroddiadau felly trwy fodd ac eithrio’r meddyg cyfeirio yn ei hysgrifennu ar y ffurflen gais. Ni wnaeth y PPC, felly, dderbyn bod cynnwys
ar ffurflen yr adroddiad yn achos Miss Wetherell yn golygu bod Dr Pathak wedi bod yn ymwybodol o’r symptomau diffyg anadl ar adeg yr ymgynghoriad. Yng ngolwg y ffaith bod y ffurflen gais wreiddiol ar goll, a’r amser a oedd wedi mynd heibio ers y digwyddiadau perthnasol, roedd y PPC o’r farn nad oedd unrhyw fodd ymarferol o ganlyn y mater hwnnw ymhellach.
Nododd y llythyr penderfyniad nad oedd y PPC yn derbyn bod Dr Pathak wedi ffugio nodiadau meddygol Miss Wetherell yn fwriadol, ac wedi camarwain ymholiadau dilynol i’r digwyddiadau’n arwain at y farwolaeth. Nododd y llythyr nad oedd unrhyw beth i’w ffugio. At hynny, yn absenoldeb arwyddion o brinder anadl yn yr ymgynghoriad, ni ofynnwyd am gyfeiriad at driniaeth arbenigol. Ni chredai’r PPC ei bod yn iawn i feirniadu Dr Pathak am ei fethiant i wneud cyfeiriad felly.
Nododd y llythyr penderfyniad bod y PPC yn anghytuno â chanfyddiadau’r panel apêl. Fel y dywedais, roedd y panel hwnnw wedi eistedd am bedwar diwrnod ac wedi gwrando tystiolaeth gan 11 o dystion, gan gynnwys Dr Pathak ei hun. Daeth y llythyr i’r casgliad drwy ddatgan bod y deunydd gerbron y PPC:
‘... did not appear to raise a question whether the serious professional misconduct had been committed, taking into account (amongst other things) the criminal standard of proof to be applied by the PCC’.
Cyn mynd ymhellach, tynnaf sylw’r darllenydd at y modd yr oedd yr ail banel PPC hwn wedi datrys pob mater o blaid y meddyg, hyd yn oed yn wyneb casgliadau y daeth y panel apêl iddynt ar ôl gwrandawiad pedwar diwrnod. Hefyd, cafodd unrhyw ansicrwydd ym meddwl y PPC (e.e. am ymddangosiad
ar yr adroddiad endocrinoleg) ei ddatrys trwy ddod i gasgliad o blaid y meddyg.
Y penderfyniad hwnnw oedd testun cais am adolygiad barnwrol. Yn ei ddyfarniad, cyfeiriodd Sullivan J at benderfyniad Lightman J yn
, a roddwyd chwe mis yn gynharach.
Mewn dadl gerbron Sullivan J, beirniadodd y GMC y penderfyniad yn
, gan ddadlau bod gan y PPC ddisgresiwn llawer ehangach i ystyried pa un a ddylai cwyn
‘gael ei chyfeirio ar gyfer ymchwiliad’
gan y PCC, nag a awgrymwyd gan Lightman J. Cynigiwyd bod rhaid i’r PPC
‘dorchi’i lewys’
, a bod rhaid iddo edrych ar y dystiolaeth ac asesu ei phwysigrwydd er mwyn gweld a oedd modd dadlau’n briodol am gŵyn. Wrth wneud hynny, roedd hawl gan y PPC, dadleuwyd, i ddatrys gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth, yn enwedig os mai tystiolaeth ddogfennol oedd honno’n bennaf ac mai ychydig o obaith oedd iddi gael ei hategu gan dystiolaeth lafar dderbyniol mewn gwrandawiad y PCC. Beth bynnag, dadleuwyd, roedd ail lythyr penderfyniad y PPC yn cydymffurfio â’r arweiniad a roddwyd gan Lightman J yn
Darparodd Mr Nicholls ddatganiad tyst i’w ddefnyddio yng ngwrandawiad yr adolygiad barnwrol. Ynddo, rhoddodd fanylion ei brofiad ar y PPC. Bu’n aelod o’r PPC er mis Medi 1999, a daeth yn Gadeirydd arno, fel y dywedais, ym mis Tachwedd 1999, ychydig dros flwyddyn cyn gwrandawiad yr adolygiad barnwrol. Dywedodd, ers dod yn Gadeirydd, ei fod wedi cadeirio 13 o gyfarfodydd, dros gyfanswm o 28 diwrnod, lle cafodd 314 o benderfyniadau eu gwneud. Hefyd, bu’n gysylltiedig ag 89 penderfyniad arall cyn dod yn Gadeirydd. Disgrifiodd Mr Nicholls hefyd arbenigedd a phrofiad yr aelodau meddygol o’r PPC a fu’n bresennol yn y cyfarfod perthnasol. Ymhelaethodd ar y rhesymau a nodwyd yn llythyr penderfyniad y PPC. Esboniodd bod y cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd Miss Wetherell wedi cwyno, neu sôn, am brinder anadl yn yr ymgynghoriad yn
‘fater eilaidd’
wedi i’r PPC benderfynu nad oedd
‘yn afresymol o gwbl’
i emboledd yr ysgyfaint fod heb ei ganfod neu’i ddiagnosio. Hyd yn oed pe bai wedi bod yn brin o anadl, dywedwyd, nid oedd digon o symptomau i’w gwneud yn rhesymol i ddisgwyl cyfeiriad at arbenigwr. Roedd penderfyniad aelodau’r PPC (yn aelodau meddygol a lleyg) wedi bod yn unfrydol.
Cytunodd Sullivan J y dylai’r PPC fabwysiadu’r ymagwedd a awgrymwyd gan Lightman J yn
, yn amodol ar ddau sylw. Yn gyntaf, roed Lightman J wedi dweud y dylai’r PPC arfer
‘y gofal pennaf’
wrth benderfynu peidio cyfeirio cwyn at y PCC ar y sail nad oedd ganddi unrhyw obaith gwirioneddol o gael ei chadarnhau, wedi iddo’i hun gynnal ymchwiliad rhagarweiniol i’w ragolygon ar y dogfennau’n unig. Awgrymodd Sullivan J, er bod angen gofal, fe ellid dadlau ynghylch yr angen am
‘y gofal pennaf’
ym mhob achos. Fodd bynnag, awgrymodd bod
‘y gofal pennaf’
yn angenrheidiol mewn achos fel
, lle’r oedd y PPC yn anghytuno â chasgliad corff arall gydag arbenigedd meddygol, casgliad y daethpwyd iddo ar ôl gwrandawiad cyhoeddus lle’r oedd tystiolaeth lafar wedi’i chyflwyno. Yn ail, ni wnaeth Sullivan J ddehongli sylw Lightman J nad rôl y PPC oedd datrys gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth i olygu na ddylai’r PPC fyth dan unrhyw amgylchiadau ddatrys unrhyw wrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth. Roedd yn well gan Sullivan J ddweud na ddylai’r PPC
‘geisio datrys gwrthdaro sylweddol mewn tystiolaeth fel arfer’
. Byddai gwneud hynny, meddai, yn mynd y tu hwnt i’w rôl sgrinio ac yn tresmasu ar swyddogaeth y PCC.
Nododd Sullivan J bod lles cyhoeddus yn y PCC yn ymchwilio’n drylwyr ac yn agored i gŵynion o SPM mewn gwrandawiad cyhoeddus. Gallai cyfarfodydd (fel cyfarfodydd y PPC) i ystyried dogfennau’n breifat, meddai, weithio i gynnal safonau, ond ni fyddai’n
‘sicrhau hyder y cyhoedd yn y broses’
. Tynnodd sylw at nifer yr achosion y deliodd y PPC â nhw mewn cyfarfodydd, a roddwyd gan Mr Nicholls. Derbyniodd y Barnwr bod penderfyniad y PPC yn achos
wedi cael gofal a sylw arbennig. Serch hynny, dywedodd bod trwygyrch felly o achosion wedi rhoi syniad o lefel yr archwilio yr oedd y PPC yn gallu rhoi i gŵyn unigol. Roedd hyn mewn cyferbyniad i’r gwrandawiad llafar pedwar diwrnod gerbron y panel apêl.
Canfu Sullivan J bod llythyr penderfyniad y PPC yn dangos bod y PPC wedi ceisio datrys gwrthdaro sylweddol mewn tystiolaeth. Roedd y PPC wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd y mater ynghylch a oedd Miss Wetherell yn dioddef o brinder anadl yn bwysig. Roedd y canfyddiad hwnnw’n gwrthdaro â barnau’r Crwner, tystiolaeth Dr Pathak ei hun (a oedd, pe bai cwyn o brinder anadl, byddai wedi cofnodi hynny yn ei nodiadau), gyda chasgliad y panel apêl a (er nad oedd yr ail banel PPC yn ymwybodol ohono) barn panel cyntaf y PPC. Nododd iddo’i chael yn:
‘...amhosibl i ddeall sut y gallai
(h.y y PPC)
fod wedi dod i’r casgliad yn rhesymol nid yn unig ei fod yn anghytuno â’r casgliadau hyn gan y Crwner a’r Awdurdod Iechyd
(mae’n rhaid mai’r panel apêl a olygai gan hyn)
, ond nad oedd bodolaeth y casgliadau gwahanol iawn hyn yn ymddangos eu bod yn codi cwestiwn i’r PCC’.
Canfu Sullivan J bod casgliad y PPC bod cofnodion yr ymgynghoriad yn rai
‘gwirioneddol a chywir’
yn anoddach fyth i’w ddeall. Roedd y Crwner wedi dod i’r casgliad bod y nodiadau’n annigonol. Roedd y panel apêl wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd y nodiadau’n cofnodi prinder anadl a oedd yn bresennol ar adeg yr ymgynghoriad. Roedd Dr Pathak wedi derbyn bod y nodyn fod Miss Wetherell wedi mynychu ar gyfer
‘archwiliad y bilsen’
yn anghywir. Dywedodd y Barnwr na allai ddeall sut y gallai unrhyw bwyllgor rhesymol gael ei berswadio felly ynghylch cywirdeb y nodiadau iddynt ddod i’r casgliad nad oedd unrhyw gwestiwn yn cael ei godi i’r PCC.
Daeth y panel apêl i’r casgliad hefyd (er mai ar gydbwysedd tebygolrwydd oedd hynny) bod Miss Wetherell yn ddioddef o brinder anadl sylweddol yn ei hymgynghoriad â Dr Pathak. Roedd y PPC wedi anghytuno â’r casgliad hwnnw. Roedd wedi ystyried tystiolaeth Ms Richards ac wedi’i diystyru fel tystiolaeth achlust. Canfu Sullivan J, er y byddai’r dystiolaeth yn annerbyniol yn gyfreithiol, fe allai’r PCC fod wedi dewis defnyddio’r disgresiwn a roddwyd iddo dan y Rheolau i gael y dystiolaeth. Nododd:
‘...wrth arfer y disgresiwn hwnnw byddai’r PCC yn ddiau yn cadw mewn cof nid yn unig buddiannau’r achwynydd unigol a’r meddyg, ond hefyd lles y cyhoedd wrth sicrhau bod ymchwilio trylwyr i gŵynion. Nid yw’r PCC yn yr un safle’n union â llys troseddau. Mae ganddo rôl ymchwilio a rheoleiddio er lles y cyhoedd ... A fyddai derbyn y dystiolaeth hon yn “ddymunol” er lles “gwneud ymchwiliad priodol”? Mewn amgylchiadau lle nad yw tystiolaeth uniongyrchol ar gael oherwydd bod y claf wedi marw a lle honnir bod hyn yn sgil camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol y meddyg, gall yn wir fod er budd gwneud ymchwiliad priodol i dderbyn tystiolaeth achlust o’r hyn y dywedir bod y claf wedi dweud wrth y meddyg. Bydd y pwys sydd i’w briodoli i dystiolaeth felly wrth gwrs yn dibynnu ar yr holl amgylchiadau, gan gynnwys y graddau y mae’r dystiolaeth yn cael ei gwrthwynebu neu’i chefnogi gan dystiolaeth dderbyniol arall.’
Mewn perthynas ag ymddangosiad y llythrennau
ar yr adroddiad endocrinoleg, nododd Sullivan J bod y PPC wedi cymryd arno’i hun i wneud casgliadau (er mai ar adolygiad anghyflawn o’r dystiolaeth oedd hynny) ac i ddatrys maes dadl critigol. Nododd bod gwybodaeth bellach (a oedd yn tueddu tanseilio canfyddiad y PPC) wedi’i chael gan yr ysbyty ers penderfyniad y PPC, a dywedodd ei bod yn dangos:
‘... y peryglon o ddod i gasgliadau terfynol ar agweddau dadleuol iawn ar gŵyn mewn cyfarfod preifat lle nad yw’r naill barti yn bresennol, a heb wneud ymchwiliad pellach ...’.
Nododd y Barnwr mai oherwydd arbenigedd y PPC efallai yr oedd wedi
‘mynd ati i ateb y materion a oedd yn destun dadl yn hytrach na phenderfynu ynghylch a oedd cwestiwn i’r PCC ei ateb’
. Daeth i ben gan ddweud:
‘Rwy’n deall y sail y daeth aelodau’r PPC i’w casgliadau (unfrydol) eu hunain ynghylch gofal clinigol ac ynghylch a oedd Miss Wetherell wedi dweud wrth Dr S K Pathak am neu wedi dangos anawsterau anadlu. Fodd bynnag, yng ngolau’r holl dystiolaeth, nid wyf yn deall sut y gallai corff gyda swyddogaeth sgrinio, hyd yn oed corff mor arbenigol â’r PPC hwn, yn wir fod wedi ffurfio’r farn nad oedd y deunydd o’u blaenau dan y ddau bennawd hwn hyd yn oed yn “codi cwestiwn pa un a oedd camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol wedi’i gyflawni”.’
Diddymwyd y penderfyniad gan Sullivan J a rhoi’r achos yn ei ôl i drydydd panel PPC. Roedd ei ystyriaeth i’w gynnal yng ngolau’r holl wybodaeth a oedd ar gael bryd hynny, gan gynnwys gwybodaeth am ddau benderfyniad blaenorol y PPC.
Sylw ar Achos
Mae’r ddau benderfyniad hwn gan y PPC (un a wnaed cyn y newid Cadeiryddiaeth ac un wedi hynny) yn dangos llawer o’r problemau yr ysgrifennodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr amdanynt yn ei Hadroddiad PSI 2000, ac y siaradodd amdanynt wrth roi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Maent yn dangos beth sy’n digwydd pan fydd penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud gan bwyllgor nad oes ganddo ddealltwriaeth glir o’i swyddogaethau nac o’r cyfyngiadau ar ei bwerau. Maent yn dangos beth sy’n digwydd pan fydd penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud mewn modd di-strwythur a heb fantais safonau a meini prawf gwrthrychol y gellir eu cymhwyso’n gyson. Maent yn dangos yr hyn y disgrifiodd yr Athro Allen a’r hyn a nodais innau fel tueddiad i edrych am esboniadau derbyniol am weithredoedd y meddyg. Pan ystyrir y ddau benderfyniad hwn ar y cyd ag Adroddiad PSI 2000, tystiolaeth yr Athro Allen ac achosion PPC eraill a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, ymddengys yn eglur i mi nad camgymeriadau anffodus - ond unigol - yn unig oedd y penderfyniadau yn
. Mae’n amlwg ei bod yn rhaid bod y broses gwneud penderfyniadau yn y PPC wedi bod yn ddiffygiol am flynyddoedd, os nad erioed.
Mae nifer o achosion penodol i bryderu. Un yw bod penderfyniad i gau achos weithiau wedi’i wneud ar y sail bod y dystiolaeth yn dystiolaeth achlust a’i bod felly yn annhebygol o gael ei derbyn gan y PCC. Fel y nododd Sullivan J, roedd gan y PCC ddisgresiwn i dderbyn tystiolaeth achlust, hyd yn oed, yn gyffredinol, ei fod yn cymhwyso’r rheolau tystiolaeth a oedd yn gymwysadwy mewn treial troseddol. Pa un a yw’n briodol i gorff disgyblu sydd â chyfrifoldeb i ddiogelu cleifion a’r cyhoedd i weithredu dan reolau gweithdrefn droseddol, mae hynny’n gwestiwn gwahanol i ddelio ag ef nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn. Fodd bynnag, mae’n destun pryder bod y PPC wedi seilio penderfyniad, hyd yn oed yn rhannol, ar y rhagdybiaeth na fyddai’r PCC yn cymryd fawr o sylw neu ddim sylw o dystiolaeth achlust y gallai fod wedi’i derbyn pe bai’n meddwl bod hynny’n addas.
Achos penodol arall sy’n peri pryder yw bod y GMC, yn
, wedi dadlau ei bod yn briodol y dylai’r PPC
‘dorchi’i lewys’
wrth ystyried achosion. Casglaf o hyn bod y GMC o’r farn y dylai fod rôl gyffredinol gan y GMC mewn datrys tystiolaeth ddadleuol mewn achosion FTP. Fel corff sgrinio, ni ddylai fod wedi gwneud hyn fel arfer ac ni ddylai erioed fod wedi’i wneud lle’r oedd tystiolaeth, y gellid ei chredu, i gefnogi’r honiad. Mae’n rhyfeddol bod y PPC wedi meddwl ei bod yn briodol i wneud hynny mewn achos lle’r oedd yr ymarferiad hwnnw’n golygu anghytuno â chasgliadau panel â chymwysterau meddygol a oedd wedi gwrando tystiolaeth dros gyfnod o bedwar diwrnod.
Ar ôl Achos
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod yn cofio ‘rhywfaint o anobaith’ yn dilyn y penderfyniad yn
. Gallaf ddeall pam. Byddai gwneud un camgymeriad ymagwedd sylfaenol wrth ddelio ag achos unigol yn peri cryn embaras, ond mae’n rhaid yn wir bod gwneud dau gamgymeriad mewn perthynas â’r un achos - lle’r oedd toreth o wybodaeth o safon - wedi creu ymdeimlad o anobaith. Roedd Mr Nicholls yn cofio bod adolygiad barnwrol arall tua’r un adeg. Achos
fyddai hwnnw, a byddaf yn delio ag ef nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon. Rhoddwyd caniatâd i’r hawlwyr yn yr achos hwnnw i wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol ychydig cyn i’r dyfarniad gael ei draddodi yn achos
Yr Aide Memoire
Yng ngolau achos
, gofynnodd y GMC am gyngor gan y cwnsler ynghylch y modd y dylai’r PPC fynd ymlaen yn y dyfodol. Lluniodd y Cwnsler
i’w ddefnyddio gan y PPC wrth wneud ei benderfyniadau. Roedd y fersiwn gyntaf ar gael ym mis Ionawr 2001. Mae hwn yn darllen fel a ganlyn:
(mewn gwirionedd, fel y dywedais, polisi’r GMC o fis Gorffennaf 2000 oedd y dylid cael ymateb yr achwynydd a’i roi gerbron y sgrinwyr)
(h.y. y grym i beri i ymchwiliadau eraill gael eu gwneud cyn dod i benderfyniad)
Ym mis Mawrth 2001, newidiwyd yr
ychydig (a’i ail-rifo) i gynnwys y paragraff canlynol:
‘(8) before referring to the Health Committee, should consider any causal connection between the alleged misconduct and some potential serious mental or physical impairment and should be mindful of the PCC’s own power to refer; ...’.
Cafodd y fersiwn gyntaf o’r
ei chymeradwyo gan Meistr Ustus Burton yn achos diweddaraf
, gyda newid bach ym mharagraff (4) i adlewyrchu’r ffaith efallai nad oes achwynydd ym mhob achos.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad iddo gael y diffiniad o SPM a gynhwyswyd yn Nodyn 1997 (gweler paragraff 20.61), a oedd wedi ffurfio’r arweiniad i’r PPC hyd at yr amser hwn, ‘braidd yn gylchol’. Roedd yr anhawster yn canolbwyntio ar y gair ‘difrifol’, gan nad oedd ei ystyr yn glir. Dywedodd, i achwynydd, y gallai ‘difrifol’ fod yn ganlyniad achos (h.y. pa un a oedd y claf wedi marw neu wedi dioddef niwed difrifol o ganlyniad i ymddygiad y meddyg). Fodd bynnag, i’r proffesiwn meddygol, golygai ‘difrifol’ pa un a oedd amheuaeth yn mynd i gael ei godi ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg. Dywedodd bod dadleuon yn ei ddyddiau cynnar ar y PPC ‘ynghylch difrifol - difrifol i bwy ac am beth?’ Roedd yr
wedi setlo’r dadleuon hynny. Roedd yn glir wedyn, meddai, bod ‘difrifol’ yn golygu ymddygiad digon drwg, digon isel dan y safon a ddisgwyliwch, a digon gwael i godi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg’.
Gallaf weld y gallai’r
fod wedi datrys y broblem benodol a oedd wedi pryderu Mr Nicholls a rhai o’i gydweithwyr ar y PPC, ond nid aeth i’r afael â’r anhawster arall, sef gwybod pa mor ddifrifol y mae’n rhaid i gamymddygiad neu berfformiad diffygiol meddyg fod cyn ei fod yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad.
Pan ofynnwyd iddo pa ymddygiad y byddai’n ei ystyried fel ymddygiad a oedd yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad meddyg, dywedodd Mr Nicholls y byddai’n edrych ar ‘Good Medical Practice’, byddai’n edrych ar y digwyddiad, ac ar amlder yr ymddygiad, ac ar ba un a oedd y digwyddiad yn un ‘unigryw’ neu a oedd patrwm yn yr ymddygiad. Byddai’n ystyried pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad mor bell islaw’r safon a ddisgwylir gan feddyg ar y lefel honno ei fod yn codi amheuaeth ynghylch cofrestriad y meddyg.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad, ar ôl cyflwyno’r
ym mis Ionawr 2001, teimlai bod y PPC yn cyflawni mwy o gysondeb nag a oedd Adroddiad PSI 2000 wedi awgrymu ym 1999 ac yn gynnar yn 2000. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd, dan weithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC, y byddai’n hoffi gweld ‘mwy o brosesau penderfynu seiliedig ar feini prawf’ y gellid eu monitro wedyn a sicrhau eu hansawdd. Deallais iddo ddweud ei fod o’r farn bod y PPC wedi cymhwyso meini prawf mwy cyson ers cyflwyno’r
, ond na ellid dangos hyn yn ddigonol. Croesawodd y syniad o gael canllawiau i gynorthwyo’r rheiny a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau, ond pwysleisiodd y dylai fod lle i farn unigol o fewn y broses. Roedd yn ofni, os nad oedd, y byddai’r broses yn mynd yn ‘rhy fecanistig’. Teimlai y byddai dychwelyd i restr o feini prawf cyhoeddedig yn nodi’r mathau o ymddygiad a fyddai’n arwain y GMC i weithredu yn erbyn cofrestriad meddyg yn wrthgynhyrchiol ac yn groes i swyddogaethau eraill y GMC o godi safon gyffredinol ymarfer ac addysgu meddygon ar gyfer y dyfodol. Addefodd na ellid esbonio’r gwahaniaethau a amlygwyd yng ngwaith ymchwil y PSI hyd yn oed ar yr adeg pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, oherwydd nad oedd gan y GMC y data angenrheidiol.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls, ar ôl cynhyrchu’r
, mai ‘prin iawn’ y byddai’r PPC yn gwneud penderfyniad a oedd yn gwrthdaro â phenderfyniad IRP a oedd wedi cael cyngor meddygol neu â phenderfyniad cwest crwner. Os oedd, roedd yn rhaid iddo ddangos yn glir iawn pam y gwnaeth hynny.

---  ---
Mae’n eglur o dystiolaeth Mr Nicholls yn achos
bod baich gwaith y PPC yn 2000 yn drwm iawn yn wir. Eisteddodd ar 314 o achosion rhwng mis Tachwedd 1999 a’r adeg pan wnaeth ei ddatganiad tyst ar gyfer y gwrandawiad, a gafodd ei gynnal ym mis Rhagfyr 2000. Gwnaethpwyd nifer fawr o orchmynion interim gan y PPC yn y cyfnod hyd at fis Awst 2000, a bryd hynny trosglwyddodd y cyfrifoldeb am wneud gorchmynion interim i’r IOC. Yn 2000, ystyriodd y PPC 423 o achosion. Yn 2001, cynyddodd y nifer o achosion a ystyriwyd gan y PPC i 571, ac eisteddodd y PPC am 35 diwrnod. Yn 2002, deliodd y PPC â 610 o achosion dros 35 diwrnod. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls mai’r targed a osodwyd ar gyfer y PPC oedd i ddelio ag 20 achos ym mhob cyfarfod. Byddai’r canlyniad ar gyfer rhai o’r achosion hynny yn amlwg iawn, a byddai hynny’n cynorthwyo’r PPC i gyflawni’i darged. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r PPC yn methu’i darged yn eithaf aml, o ganlyniad i achosion yn cronni. Yn ystod yr amser hwn, byddai panelau gwahanol o’r PPC yn eistedd gyda chadeiryddion gwahanol; roedd defnydd yn cael ei wneud o aelodau cyfetholedig o’r GMC ac aelodau cysylltiol.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls, ar yr amser pan ymunodd â’r PPC gyntaf, roedd yr amser a oedd yn cael ei ganiatáu i drafod achosion mewn cyfarfodydd yn rhy fyr i roi ystyriaeth a barn briodol i rai achosion, ac, yn benodol, i’r mater anodd iawn o ba un a oedd ymddygiad meddyg yn ddigon difrifol i godi amheuaeth ynghylch ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad. Mae’r farn hon yn cydsynio â sylwadau’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr a gynhwysir yn Adroddiad PSI 2000. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod y cynnydd yn nifer y dyddiau eistedd, yn rhannol, i ganiatáu mwy o amser i’r achosion anoddach. Hefyd, fe wnaeth y system ar gyfer archebu’r papurau a oedd yn cael eu rhoi i aelodau’r PPC wella o ganlyniad i argymhellion y tîm PSI. Mabwysiadwyd system o fynegeio’r papurau, a’i gwnaeth yn haws i aelodau ddod o hyd i’w ffordd drwy’r hyn a allai fod yn ffeil fawr o bapurau. O fis Gorffennaf 2000, roedd memorandwm y sgriniwr, a oedd yn nodi rhesymau’r sgriniwr am gyfeirio’r achos, yn cael ei gynnwys yn y papurau. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed gyda’r gwelliannau hyn, dywedodd Mr Nicholls y byddai’n cymryd rhwng un diwrnod ac un diwrnod a hanner iddo baratoi ar gyfer diwrnod o eistedd o hyd.
Mae’r ffaith fod Mr Nicholls wedi sôn nad oedd amser digonol i drafod y cwestiwn anodd ynghylch a oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SMP yn awgrymu bod y PPC yn gofyn y cwestiwn anghywir iddo’i hun. Pe bai, ar fater difrifoldeb, wedi’i gyfyngu’i hun i ystyried pa un a allai’r PCC ddod i’r casgliad bod yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM, byddai hynny wedi lleihau’r angen am ddadleuon hir. Ymddengys i mi mai confensiwn defnyddiol i bwyllgor fel y PPC fyddai, pe bai un aelod o’r farn y gallai’r ymddygiad (o’i brofi) fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, dylai’r gweddill dderbyn y farn honno a gweithredu arni. Mae confensiwn tebyg yn arwain y Llys Apêl (Aran Droseddol), pan fydd yn ystyried ceisiadau llafar am ganiatâd i apelio yn erbyn euogfarn neu ddedfryd. Os oes un aelod o’r Llys o’r farn y dylid rhoi caniatâd, mae’r lleill yn cydsynio ar unwaith.

---  ---
Ym mis Mawrth 2001, fe wnaeth Meistr Ustus Sullivan, a wrandawodd achos Richards, wrando ar gais o’r newydd am ganiatâd i wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol o benderfyniad y PPC yn achos
. Roedd yr achos yn ymwneud â chwynion a wnaed yn erbyn tri meddyg. Nid wyf yn bwriadu disgrifio’r achos yn fanwl gan nad oedd yn sefydlu unrhyw egwyddorion newydd. Soniaf amdano’n rhannol rhag i rywrai feddwl fy mod wedi canolbwyntio’n rhy fanwl ar achosion lle canfuwyd bod y GMC yn ddiffygiol ac nad wyf wedi sylwi ar y rheiny lle canfuwyd gan y Llys bod ymagwedd y GMC yn gywir. Y rheswm arall dros sôn amdano yw bod y Barnwr wedi cadarnhau hynny nad wyf yn meddwl fu erioed dan amheuaeth, sef mai’r GMC yw’r cyflafareddwr o’r hyn sydd ac nad ydyw’n gyfystyr ag SPM. Yn fyr, gwrthododd y Barnwr ganiatâd i ofyn am adolygiad barnwrol ar y sail bod penderfyniad y PPC wedi’i wneud yn gyfreithlon. Canfu nad oedd, fel yr honnwyd, wedi datrys gwrthdaro mawr mewn tystiolaeth; nid oedd ychwaith wedi dod i gasgliadau ffeithiol a oedd yn groes i ganfyddiadau Comisiynydd y Gwasanaeth Iechyd (ac IRP o bosibl) a oedd wedi ymchwilio i’r achos. Dywedodd y Barnwr bod yr achos i’w wahaniaethu oddi wrth achos Richards oherwydd nad oedd unrhyw gwestiwn gwirioneddol bod y meddygon wedi methu cyrraedd y safon gofal y byddai meddyg cydwybodol wedi darparu yn yr amgylchiadau. Roedd y cwestiwn a oedd ar ôl, meddai,
‘yn fater i raddau helaeth i’r pwyllgor farnu’n broffesiynol yn ei gylch: a oedd yn ddadleuol bod eu methiannau mor ddifrifol ei fod yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’
Nododd y Barnwr nad oedd
‘pob camgymeriad gan berson meddygol’
yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roedd y cyrff eraill a oedd wedi edrych ar yr achos wedi nodi, o leiaf yn achos dau o’r meddygon,
‘camgymeriadau penodol ac unigol yn hytrach na chwrs ymddygiad’
. Roedd y cyrff eraill wedi bod yn ystyried pa un a oedd y safon gofal a roddwyd gan y meddygon islaw’r safon i’w disgwyl gan feddyg teulu cydwybodol. Byddai wedi bod yn berffaith bosibl i ateb y cwestiwn hwnnw yn gadarnhaol, ac eto ar yr un pryd dod i’r casgliad nad oedd y methiant yn fethiant ei fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dyna, meddai’r Barnwr, oedd y rheswm am gasgliad y PPC. Derbyniodd y gallai PPC â chyfansoddiad gwahanol fod wedi llunio barn wahanol. Nid oedd hynny i ddweud ei bod yn agored i’r
‘pwyllgor arbenigol iawn hwn’
lunio’r farn a wnaeth. Gwrthododd ganiatâd felly i wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol.
Soniaf hefyd am achos
, y cyfeiriais ato’n o faith ym Mhennod 19. Roedd yr achos hwnnw’n ymwneud â nifer o feddygon yr oedd eu hymddygiad yn destun beirniadaeth yn adroddiad Ymchwiliad y Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital (Ymchwiliad Alder Hey). Darparodd Mr Nicholls ddatganiad tyst mewn perthynas â naw meddyg yr oedd eu hachosion wedi cael eu hystyried a’u cau gan y PPC. Cyfeiriodd at yr
a haerodd bod y PPC wedi gweithredu’n unol â’i arweiniad. Cymeradwyodd y Barnwr y cyngor a roddwyd yn yr
a derbyniodd bod y PPC yn wir wedi dilyn ei arweiniad. Mewn perthynas â holl benderfyniadau’r PPC, methodd y cais am adolygiad barnwrol.
13 Mawrth 2001 (heb adrodd).

---  ---
Ym Mhennod 19, nodais amgylchiadau achos
R v General Medical Council ex parte Holmes
ac eraill, a benderfynwyd gan Meistr Ustus Ouseley ym mis Ebrill 2001. Roedd yn ymwneud â cheisiadau am adolygiad barnwrol yn herio, ymhlith pethau eraill, penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr meddygol a lleyg mewn perthynas â chwyn yn erbyn Dr M M Rahman a phenderfyniad y PPC yn ymwneud â chwyn yn erbyn Dr S Sengupta. Diddymwyd pob un o’r penderfyniadau gan y Barnwr. Trafodais y penderfyniad yn achos Dr Rahman ym Mhennod 19. Ystyriaf yn awr benderfyniad y Barnwr yn achos Dr Sengupta. Cafodd yr achos hwn ei ystyried hefyd gan y Llys Apêl ym mis Hydref 2002
Roedd yr achos yn ymwneud â chwynion gan y partner, Ms Caryl Nancy Holmes, a rhieni (cyfeiriaf at y tri ohonynt fel ‘yr hawlwyr’) Mr Derrick Marcus Dean, a fu farw ar 26 Gorffennaf 1995, yn 34 oed, o syst coloidaidd ar yr ymennydd. Roedd y cwynion yn ymwneud â’r safon gofal a roddwyd i Mr Dean gan ei feddyg teulu, Dr Rahman, a chan feddyg dirprwyo, Dr Sengupta. Roedd Mr Dean wedi gweld Dr Rahman yn ei feddygfa ddau ddiwrnod cyn ei farwolaeth. Ar y noson cyn iddo farw, cafodd ei weld yn ei gartref gan Dr Sengupta. Cafodd ei dderbyn i’r ysbyty wedi hynny, lle bu farw. Nid yw union natur methiant y safon gofal a honnir gan yr hawlwyr yn eglur o’r dyfarniad. Ymddengys yn debygol bod yr hawlwyr wedi honni methiant gan y ddau feddyg i werthfawrogi difrifoldeb cyflwr Mr Dean.
Yn dilyn marwolaeth Mr Dean, cwynodd Ms Holmes i’r FHSA lleol am y ddau feddyg. Ym mis Mawrth 1996, daeth MSC i’r casgliad bod Dr Sengupta wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth ond nad oedd Dr Rahman wedi gwneud hynny. Caniatawyd yr apêl, ac, ym mis Mehefin neu fis Gorffennaf 1998, cyfarwyddodd yr SoS dros Gymru y dylai’r gŵyn yn erbyn Dr Rahman gael ei chyfeirio at y GMC. Ym mis Gorffennaf 1998, gwnaeth yr hawlwyr gŵyn i’r GMC yn erbyn Dr Sengupta. Ryw amser yn gynnar ym 1999, penderfynodd y prif sgriniwr meddygol, Dr Steel, a sgriniwr meddygol arall, yr Athro Hilary Thomas, na ddylai’r cwynion yn erbyn Dr Sengupta a Dr Rahman eu dau gael eu cyfeirio at y PPC; cytunodd sgriniwr yn achos Dr Rahman. Caewyd ei achos, ac fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 19, diddymwyd y penderfyniad hwnnw’n ddiweddarach ar adolygiad barnwrol. Fodd bynnag, yn achos Dr Sengupta, anghytunodd y sgriniwr lleyg gyda barn y sgrinwyr meddygol a chafodd achos Dr Sengupta ei gyfeirio felly at y PPC.
Penderfyniad y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol
Ystyriodd y PPC y gŵyn yn erbyn Dr Sengupta ar 9 Medi 1999. Cadeiriwyd y cyfarfod gan Dr Steel. Mae’n rhaid mai hwn oedd un o’r achosion olaf lle’r oedd panel PPC wedi’i gadeirio gan y person a fu’n gyfrifol am sgrinio’r gŵyn. Hyd at fis Tachwedd 1999, roedd hwn yn ddigwyddiad aml iawn, ond, i lygaid modern, roedd yn amlwg yn anfoddhaol. Go brin y gellid disgwyl i berson yn y sefyllfa honno i fynd i’r afael â’r achos gyda meddwl agored a phrin iawn oedd y siawns y byddai’n newid ei feddwl/meddwl ac yn cefnogi cyfeirio’r achos at y PCC. Roedd yr Athro Allen wedi nodi ar yr adeg hon mai bach iawn o drafodaeth oedd o achos wedi i’r Cadeirydd ei gyflwyno. Heb fod yn syndod, penderfynodd y PPC i beidio cyfeirio achos Dr Sengupta at y PCC ond, yn hytrach, i anfon llythyr rhybudd at Dr Sengupta. Roedd y cofnod a oedd yn cofnodi penderfyniad y PPC yn datgan:
(h.y. llythyr rhybudd (warning letter))
on the basis that this is a single case, patient had been seen very recently in hospital, doctor offered review in 12 hours and condition difficult for GP to diagnose. But Ctte did not accept he’d carried out an adequate examination and also were critical of the fact that this assessment was not documented. Letter should also say Ctte reinforced decision of MSC.’
Wedi hynny, ysgrifennodd y GMC at gyfreithwyr yr hawlwyr ac at Dr Sengupta, yn eu hysbysu am benderfyniad y PPC. Roedd y llythyr i gyfreithwyr yr hawlwyr, a ysgrifennwyd gan weithiwr achos, yn datgan bod y PPC wedi penderfynu na fyddai’n angenrheidiol cyfeirio’r achos at y PPC ar gyfer ystyriaeth bellach o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Aeth ymlaen:
However, the Committee took into account that this was a single case and that Mr Dearn had recently been seen in hospital. They noted that Dr Sengupta had offered to review Mr Dean’s condition in 12 hours and the condition which Mr Dean had was, of itself difficult to diagnose.
Aeth y llythyr ymlaen i ddweud bod y Pwyllgor wedi gofyn i awdur y llythyr esbonio bod dyletswydd gan y Pwyllgor i archwilio gweithredoedd unigol y meddyg ac efallai nad oedd camgymeriad neu ddiffyg (hyd yn oed lle chafodd hyn ganlyniadau difrifol) yn
. Datganodd y llythyr fod Dr Sengupta wedi’i atgoffa am ei rwymedigaethau proffesiynol a’i rybuddio y gallai’r mater gael ei ailystyried pe bai’r GMC yn derbyn gwybodaeth bellach am ei arfer yn y tair blynedd nesaf. Mae’r cyfeiriad at dair blynedd yn awgrymu yr ystyriwyd y gallai’r mater gael ei ystyried mewn achos perfformiad (yn hytrach nag ymddygiad) yn y dyfodol. Fel yr esboniais, roedd terfyn dwy flynedd yn gweithredu ar gyfer adfywio materion ymddygiad, ond ymddengys bod y GMC wedi gweithredu pwynt torri tair blynedd answyddogol ar gyfer honiadau perfformiad.
Proses yr Adolygiad Barnwrol
Cyhoeddodd yr hawlwyr weithrediadau achos barnwrol, yn herio penderfyniad y GMC mewn perthynas â’r ddau feddyg. Roedd y meddygon wedi’u huno yn yr achos fel cyfranogion. Cafodd sail y gwrthwynebiad ei gofnodi gan y GMC a’r meddygon. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2000, rhoddwyd caniatâd i’r hawlwyr wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol. Roedd hynny ryw chwe mis ar ôl y penderfyniad yn
ac 13 diwrnod cyn y penderfyniad yn
, a draddodwyd ar 18 Rhagfyr 2000. Yn fuan iawn wedyn, hysbysodd y GMC gyfreithwyr y meddygon ei fod yn bwriadu caniatáu’r hawliad oherwydd amheuon ynghylch cyfreithlondeb penderfyniadau’r sgrinwyr (yn achos Dr Rahman) a’r PPC (yn achos Dr Sengupta). Wedi hynny, penderfynodd y GMC i ganiatáu diddymu’r ddau benderfyniad ar y sail, wrth ddod i’r penderfyniadau hynny, bod y profion cyfreithiol anghywir wedi’u cymhwyso. Cytunwyd ar orchymyn caniatâd rhwng y GMC a’r hawlwyr. Gwrthwynebwyd y cais gan y meddygon mewn gwrandawiad gerbron Ouseley J. Fel y dywedais yn flaenorol, arweiniodd hyn at ffurf anarferol o wrandawiad.
Cafodd y rhesymau pam y cytunodd y GMC bod y penderfyniad yn achos Dr Sengupta yn anghynaladwy eu nodi mewn datganiad tyst a ddarparwyd gan gynrychiolydd cyfreithwyr y GMC. Dywedodd bod y llythyr at gyfreithwyr yr hawlwyr a’r meddyg mewn
‘iaith PCC’
. Roedd yn atseinio prawf y PCC ac nid oedd i weld yn gyson â’r prawf a oedd i’w gymhwyso gan y PPC. Nododd bod y PPC wedi dod i gasgliadau neu ganfyddiadau ynghylch y camgymeriadau yr oedd Dr Sengupta wedi gwneud. Aeth y datganiad tyst ymlaen:
(h.y. y PPC)
Aeth y datganiad tyst ymlaen i sôn am y cyfeiriad yn llythyr y GMC at y grym i ddiddymu trwydded meddyg i ymarfer
‘yn barhaol’
. Nododd:
Nododd Ouseley J na dderbyniodd unrhyw dystiolaeth gan y GMC ynghylch y profion a oedd wedi’u cymhwyso gan y sgrinwyr neu’r PPC. Nododd:
Roedd yn eglur o’r safbwynt a gymerwyd gan y GMC ei fod wedi cydnabod nad oedd ei wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau wedi mabwysiadu’r ymagwedd gywir. Cyfeiriaf yn ôl at sylwadau’r Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ei bod yn ymddangos nad oedd gan wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau’r GMC syniad clir iawn o’u rôl na’r profion y dylent fod yn eu cymhwyso.
Dywedodd Ouseley J nad oedd wedi’i berswadio nad oedd y rhan o’r llythyr a ddyfynnais ym mharagraff 20.165, o’i gymryd ar ei ben ei hun, yn dystiolaeth o gamgymeriad cyfreithiol. Nid oedd unrhyw ganfyddiad anghaniataol o ffaith ychwaith, gan fod y PPC wedi cymryd yr achos yn erbyn y meddyg ar ei uchaf. Fodd bynnag, roedd hynny’n gadael y mater
‘trwblus iawn’
o’r defnydd o’r gair
‘parhaol’
‘... I do consider the language shows that the range of conduct capable of constituting serious professional misconduct was unduly narrowed because other and lesser penalties exist for serious professional misconduct which are relevant to the judgment of the quality of conduct as capable of constituting serious professional misconduct.’
O ganlyniad, daeth Ouseley J i’r casgliad y bu camgymeriad cyfreithiol a diddymodd benderfyniad y PPC. Gwnaeth Dr Sengupta gais i’r Llys Apêl am ganiatâd i apelio yn erbyn penderfyniad y Barnwr. Gwrthodwyd caniatâd yn y lle cyntaf, ond fe’i rhoddwyd wedi hynny mewn gwrandawiad llafar.
Gwrandawiad y Llys Apêl
Cyn gwrandawiad yr apêl, cofnododd y GMC Hysbysiad Ymatebydd yn dadlau, fel rheswm ychwanegol am gynnal penderfyniad y Barnwr (a fu, wrth gwrs, i ddiddymu penderfyniad y PPC), bod y datganiad yn llythyr y GMC bod y PPC
wedi gosod y trothwy yn rhy uchel. Roedd Ouseley J wedi gwrthod y ddadl honno. Roedd y GMC wedi addef hefyd bod y llythyr cyfan yn frith gan dermau gwneud penderfyniadau ar rinweddau’r achos. Yn fy marn i, mae’n glod mawr i’r GMC a’i dîm cyfreithiol ei fod wedi mabwysiadu’r ymagwedd hon yn y Llys Apêl. Roedd y GMC i bob pwrpas yn gwahodd y Llys i ystyried y bu’r PPC yn anghywir ar ddau gyfrif ac nid ar un cyfrif yn unig fel a ganfu’r Barnwr.
Wrth roi dyfarniad yn y Llys Apêl, dywedodd yr Arglwydd Ustus Parker:
‘... the terms of that letter
(h.y. llythyr y GMC)
, read as a whole, are consistent only with the PPC having applied the wrong legal test in reaching its decision, in that (a) it regarded itself as having a fact-finding role, and (b) it treated the range of “serious professional misconduct” as being restricted to conduct which would attract “permanent” erasure from the register of practitioners, and in doing so left out of account conduct which would justify a lesser penalty’.
Derbyniodd argymhelliad y GMC y bu’r Barnwr yn anghywir wrth beidio dod i’r casgliad bod y PPC wedi ymgymryd â rôl canfod ffeithiau. Hefyd, yn ei farn ef, roedd y defnydd o’r gair
‘parhaol’
yn gyson yn unig â’r PPC yn camgyfeirio’i hun ynghylch ei rôl wirioneddol. Fe wnaeth aelodau eraill y Llys Apêl gytuno â Parker LJ a gwrthodwyd apêl Dr Sengupta. Roedd y camgymeriadau a wnaed gan y PPC yn achos
yn sylfaenol o ran natur. Nid oedd y camgymeriadau a ddatgelwyd yn achos
wedi bod yn gamgymeriadau unigol.

---  ---
Papur 2003 y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi
Fe wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ddadansoddi canlyniadau achosion a gyfeiriwyd at y PPC yn ystod y cyfnod o 1999 i 2001. Cyhoeddwyd y canlyniadau yn eu Papur 2003.
Roedd cyfran yr holl feddygon y cyfeiriwyd eu hachosion gan y PPC at y PCC wedi cynyddu’n nodedig, o 30% o’r holl achosion a ystyriwyd gan y PPC ym 1997 a 31% ym 1998, i 41% ym 1999 a 2000. Disgynnodd y gyfran eto i 34% yn 2001. Roedd cyfran y meddygon a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a anfonwyd gan y PPC at y PPC lawer yn is na’r gyfran o feddygon a ymgymhwysodd dramor ym mhob un o’r pum mlynedd.
Dros y blynyddoedd 1999, 2000 a 2001, roedd y PPC wedi anfon llai na hanner y meddygon a gafodd eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau (ac eithrio yfed a gyrru) at y PCC. Ym mhob un o’r tair blynedd 1999, 2000 a 2001, roedd cyfran y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor a chanddynt euogfarnau a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC gryn dipyn yn uwch na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU. Roedd hyn yn ddryslyd, gan y byddai rhywun wedi disgwyl i’r PPC fabwysiadu ymagwedd gyson wrth ddelio â meddygon a oedd wedi cyflawni troseddau. Unwaith eto, cafodd cyfran uwch o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor ei chyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd, gan godi’r posibilrwydd bod y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn cael eu trin yn annheg o gymharu â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU.
Ar yr achlysur hwn, roedd y tîm PSI wedi’i gomisiynu gan y GMC i gynnal dadansoddiad meintiol pur. Ni wnaeth yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr gynnal unrhyw ddadansoddiad o ansawdd, fel dadansoddiad o’r rhesymau a roddwyd gan y PPC am ei benderfyniadau. Nid oeddent yn gallu dod o hyd i esboniad am yr anomaleddau. Roedd y cyfraddau cyfeirio anghymesur parhaus o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor a gafodd eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau yn arbennig o anodd i’w hesbonio. Yn ei Bapur 2003, rhybuddiodd y tîm PSI, hyd nes bod rhyw fesurau gwrthrychol, a allai ddangos bod y cyfraddau cyfeirio anghymesur wedi digwydd am reswm da a’u bod yn deg ac yn rhesymol, roedd y GMC yn parhau’n agored i gyhuddiadau o ragfarn. Ategodd Papur 2003 yr angen am feini prawf a throthwyau wedi’u cytuno’n gyffredinol i’w cymhwyso wrth lunio dyfarniadau ynghylch difrifoldeb achosion a’r modd y dylid delio â nhw.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod cynnwys Papur PSI 2003 yn siomedig iawn i’r GMC. Nid oedd unrhyw esboniad o hyd am y gwahaniaethau a ddatgelwyd gan y dadansoddiad a gynhaliwyd gan y tîm PSI. Nid oedd hyn yn syndod, wrth gwrs, gan fod y tîm PSI, ar yr achlysur hwn, wedi’i gomisiynu i gynnal dadansoddiad ystadegol yn unig o’r achosion y deliwyd â nhw yn ystod y cyfnod perthnasol. Nid oedd wedi cynnal unrhyw waith ymchwil i’r prosesau gwneud penderfyniadau. Nid oedd y GMC ei hun ychwaith wedi gwneud unrhyw ymchwil felly. Ac, er gwaetha’r holl newidiadau, nid oedd gan y bobl a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau ar ran y GMC - ac yr oedd cannoedd ohonynt erbyn hyn - unrhyw safonau a meini prawf o hyd i’w defnyddio yn y broses. Yr hyn a ddangosodd y dadansoddiad oedd bod problem barhaus yr oedd angen delio â hi. Roedd angen esboniad yn benodol am y gwahaniaeth yn y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag euogfarnau. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls mai barn y PPC oedd y dylai gwaith ymchwil gael ei wneud er mwyn archwilio’r rhesymau am y gwahaniaethau ymddangosiadol. Nawr bod y PPC wedi cofnodi rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau, dywedodd y byddai modd gwneud astudiaeth ôl-dremiol. Yn ychwanegol at hynny, roedd angen monitro ac archwilio parhaus.
Newidiadau yn y Modd yr Ymdrinnir ag Euogfarnau
Ar yr wyneb, mae’r gyfran o achosion euogfarnau a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC i weld yn hynod o isel. Fel yr esboniais hefyd, fe wnaeth ymchwil y PSI amlygu gwahaniaeth rhwng y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn y modd yr ymdriniwyd ag achosion lle’r oedd meddygon wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau. Roedd y tîm PSI yn bryderus ynghylch y ddwy set o ganfyddiadau.
Mae’n wir bod nifer yr euogfarnau (ac eithrio achosion yfed a gyrru) a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PPC yn fach (23 ym 1997, 32 ym 1998 a 31 ym 1999). Roedd gweithdrefnau’r GMC yn caniatáu euogfarnau llai pwysig i gael eu hidlo allan gan staff y GMC (yn achos mân droseddau moduro) a (yn achos mân droseddau eraill) gan y sgrinwyr meddygol, ac felly ni fyddent wedi cyrraedd y PPC. Fel y dywedais ym Mhennod 19, roedd y sgrinwyr meddygol am lawer o flynyddoedd wedi’u hawdurdodi i ddefnyddio’u disgresiwn wrth benderfynu ynghylch cyfeirio achosion yn ymwneud â throseddau a gyflawnwyd dros bum mlynedd cyn hysbysu’r GMC. Roedd y sgrinwyr meddygol wedi cael disgresiwn hefyd i beidio cyfeirio euogfarnau am fân droseddau nad oeddent i bob golwg yn ymwneud ag arfer proffesiynol meddyg, nac yn ymwneud â graddfa o anonestrwydd a fyddai’n dod ag anfri ar y proffesiwn meddygol. Hefyd, nid oedd yr achosion ‘euogfarnau’ a ystyriwyd gan y PPC yn cynnwys achosion lle’r oedd rhyddhad diamod neu amodol wedi’i bennu gan y llysoedd. O gofio na fyddid yn galw ar y PPC i ddyfarnu ar y mathau o achos a disgrifir uchod, mae’n rhaid ei bod yn dilyn bod yr achosion euogfarnau yr oedd y PPC yn penderfynu peidio’u cyfeirio at y PCC yn droseddau o ddifrifoldeb uwch.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls bod rhai mân euogfarnau (disgrifiodd y rhain fel ‘one-offs’) lle’r oedd y Llys wedi pennu dedfryd isel iawn a lle gallai’r PPC gymryd y farn bod llythyr rhybudd yn ddigonol. Roedd dogfen a gyhoeddwyd yng ngweithdrefnau ymddygiad y GMC, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, yn awgrymu y byddid yn delio ag euogfarnau cyntaf am ‘ddwyn o siop’ gyda llythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor. Dyma’r math o achos yr oedd Mr Nicholls yn cyfeirio ato yn ôl pob tebyg.
Dywedaf ar draws hynny ei bod yn ymddangos bod y GMC, yn y gorffennol, wedi tueddu asesu difrifoldeb ymddygiad meddyg drwy gyfeirio at y gosb a bennwyd gan y llys. Wrth eistedd fel barnwr (a, chyn hynny, wrth ymddangos yn y llys fel cwnsler), rwyf wedi gwrando pleon lliniaru yn cael eu gwneud ar ran meddygon a ddyfarnwyd yn euog o droseddau, lle cafodd y llys ei annog i drin y meddyg yn drugarog oherwydd bod ei yrfa/gyrfa - neu fywyd hyd yn oed - yn deilchion o ganlyniad i’r camau gweithredu a fydd yn anochel yn cael eu cymryd gan y GMC o ganlyniad i’w euogfarn/heuogfarn. Yr ymhlygiad yw y bydd y meddyg yn colli’i fywoliaeth/bywoliaeth ac y bydd yn wynebu cywilydd proffesiynol. O wynebu’r math hwnnw o ble lliniaru, nid yw’n syndod os yw llys yn teimlo dan orfodaeth i bennu dedfryd fwy trugarog na fyddai’n meddwl fyddai’n briodol fel arall. Byddai’r llys yn ddiau yn synnu o glywed bod y GMC yn ddiweddarach wedi cymryd golwg drugarog o’r achos oherwydd bod y barnwr wedi pennu dedfryd drugarog. Ymddengys i mi bod y ddedfryd a draddodir gan lys troseddau o berthnasedd cyfyngedig iawn i ddifrifoldeb ymddygiad y meddyg o safbwynt y GMC. Beth ddylai gyfrif i’r GMC yw addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer fel meddyg a pha un a yw hi/ef yn risg i gleifion. Nid y rheiny yw’r materion y byddai’r llys wedi canolbwyntio arnynt. Byddaf yn mynd yn ôl at y pwnc hwn nes ymlaen yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Fel y dywedais, roedd y tîm PSI wedi argymell y dylai pob euogfarn (ac eithrio’r rheiny am yfed a gyrru) gael eu cyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at y PCC heb ymyriad y sgrinwyr neu’r PPC. Ni fabwysiadwyd yr argymhelliad hwn. Yn lle hynny, daethpwyd â rheol llawer fwy cyfyngedig i rym. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 er mwyn caniatáu i bob euogfarn lle’r oedd dedfryd o garchar ar unwaith (h.y. heb fod wedi’i gohirio) wedi’i phennu gael eu cyfeirio gan y Cofrestrydd yn uniongyrchol at y PCC oni bai ei fod o’r farn na fyddai cyfeiriad uniongyrchol er lles y cyhoedd.
Esboniodd Mr Scott nad oedd y GMC wedi symud ar unwaith i weithredu argymhellion tîm y PSI yn llawn oherwydd gwrthwynebiad gan rai aelodau o’r Cyngor. Eu cred nhw oedd y dylai fod cyfle i arfer disgresiwn (gan y PPC yn ôl pob tebyg, ac, i raddau llai, gan y sgrinwyr meddygol), hyd yn oed mewn achosion lle’r oedd meddygon wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau. Dywedodd Mr Scott, yng ngolau’r gwrthwynebiad hwn, y bu’n bosibl gwneud cynnydd mewn camau’n unig, yn hytrach nag mewn un naid. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai ei farn bersonol ef oedd y dylai’r GMC symud mor gyflym â phosibl i sefyllfa lle byddai pob euogfarn ac eithrio’r euogfarnau mwyaf mân yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PCC (neu, yn y dyfodol, at banel FTP). Fodd bynnag, nid ef oedd i wneud y penderfyniad ond yn hytrach aelodau etholedig. Dywedodd Mr Scott nad oedd ganddo unrhyw amheuaeth y byddai’r GMC yn ‘parhau i symud y ffiniau’ ac y byddai mewn amser yn gweithredu argymhelliad y tîm PSI. Yn y cyfamser, wrth roi sylw i’r cwestiwn pam na chafodd pob euogfarn eu cyfeirio fel mater o drefn at y PCC yn flaenorol, dywedodd Mr Scott:
‘... nid wyf yn meddwl y gallaf esbonio hynny’n onest ac eithrio yn y termau yr oedd gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau’n arfer disgresiwn yr oedd hawl ganddynt i’w arfer ac roeddent yn gwneud penderfyniadau na fyddai eraill efallai wedi’u gwneud’.
Pe bai gan y PPC hanes da am arfer ei ddisgresiwn yn gyson ac mewn modd a oedd yn briodol er lles cyhoeddus, efallai y gallwn fod wedi deall pam nad oedd y GMC yn dymuno symud i’r sefyllfa a argymhellwyd gan y tîm PSI. Gallaf weld pam y gellid teimlo na ddylai pob achos unigol lle’r oedd meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog fynd at y PCC. Fodd bynnag, nid felly’r oedd hi. Gallai’r GMC weld o’r ystadegau a luniwyd gan y tîm PSI nad oedd cyfran sylweddol o’r achosion euogfarnau mwy difrifol yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd yn eglur nad oedd y PPC yn cyfeirio llawer o achosion y dylid fod wedi’u cyfeirio. Yn hytrach na gadael i’r sefyllfa hon barhau, dylai’r GMC, yn fy marn i, fod wedi gosod rheolau eglur ynghylch pa euogfarnau y dylid eu cyfeirio a pha rai nad oedd angen eu cyfeirio. Fel yr oedd hi, roedd y GMC yn caniatáu i’r
barhau ac ni wnaeth hyd yn oed ddarparu unrhyw arweiniad neu feini prawf ar gyfer y PPC, heb sôn am reol eglur. Deilliodd dwy broblem o hyn. Yn gyntaf, roedd potensial gwirioneddol am annhegwch fel rhwng meddygon. Yn ail (fel y datgela archwilio’r achosion), o ran achosion a ddylai, er lles y cyhoedd, er anrhydedd y proffesiwn meddygol ac enw da’r GMC, fod wedi cael gwrandawiad, ni chawsant wrandawiad.
Roedd yn eglur i mi, o archwilio rhai o’r ffeiliau achos a gyflwynwyd i’r Ymchwiliad, pam yr oedd y PPC wedi methu cyfeirio achosion euogfarnau a ddylid fod wedi’u cyfeirio. Roedd gan y PPC duedd i ganolbwyntio ar amgylchiadau’r meddyg yn hytrach na difrifoldeb y drosedd. Wrth gwrs, dylai amgylchiadau’r meddyg gael eu hystyried gan y PCC wrth benderfynu ar gosb, ond nid gan y PPC. Cymerwch, er enghraifft, achos lle’r oedd meddyg wedi dwyn arian tra’n gweithio mewn ysbyty. Yn lle canolbwyntio ar y ffeithiau a oedd yn waelodol i’r euogfarn a phenderfynu ynghylch a oedd yr ymddygiad yn ddigon difrifol i warantu cyfeiriad, roedd y PPC yn tueddu canolbwyntio ar agweddau lliniaru. Gallai fod wedi ystyried y ffaith fod y meddyg dan bwysau, ei fod yn cael ei orweithio neu fod ganddo broblemau personol. Fe allai fod wedi derbyn geirdaon mewn perthynas â galluoedd clinigol y meddyg. Ar y seiliau hynny, fe allai’r PPC yn wir fod wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio achos. Mewn gwirionedd, yr ymagwedd gywir fyddai archwilio’r ymddygiad a oedd wedi arwain at yr euogfarn, penderfynu pa un a oedd yn gwarantu cyfeiriad a gadael materion lliniaru i’r PCC. Nid yn unig y byddai ymagwedd felly wedi bod yn gywir yn gyfreithiol, ond byddai wedi sicrhau hefyd y byddai’r cyhoedd (neu’r adran honno o’r cyhoedd a oedd yn ymwybodol o’r achos) wedi gwybod sut yr oedd y GMC wedi delio â’r meddyg a pham yr oedd wedi delio ag ef/hi fel y gwnaeth. Yr anhawster i’r PPC oedd nad oedd ganddynt unrhyw safonau i’w cymhwyso wrth ystyried a ddylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio.
Dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, ymddengys y bydd rhywfaint o ddisgresiwn yn cael ei arfer gan staff y swyddfa, archwilwyr achos ac, o bosibl, y Pwyllgor Ymchwilio (IC), mewn perthynas â rhai mathau o euogfarnau. Byddant yn gallu penderfynu, mewn rhai enghreifftiau, pa un a ddylai achos euogfarn fynd ymlaen at wrandawiad cyhoeddus gerbron panel FTP. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r cynigion ar gyfer ymdrin ag euogfarnau dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ym Mhennod 25.
Yr Ystadegau Diweddar
Yn ei Adroddiad 2000, roedd y tîm PSI wedi gofyn pam yr oedd cyfran mor uchel o achosion (dwy ran o dair ohonynt yn ystod ei arsylwadau o gyfarfodydd cyn mis Tachwedd 1999 a dros hanner ar ôl mis Tachwedd 1999) a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio gan y sgrinwyr at y PPC, heb eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Mae ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC yn dangos mai 35% yn unig o’r meddygon hynny y deliodd y PPC â nhw yn 2002 a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PCC. Yn 2003, canran y meddygon a gyfeiriwyd gan y PPC at y PCC oedd 30%.
Dywedodd Mr Nicholls na chafodd ei synnu gan gyfran yr achosion a anfonwyd at y PCC. Roedd y sgrinwyr yn gweithredu trothwy isel, yn enwedig ar ôl yr adolygiadau barnwrol (y rheiny yn achosion
yn ôl pob tebyg), pan oedd ‘mwy o nerfusrwydd’ ynghylch eu ‘pwerau cyfyngedig’. Roedd y PPC, ar y llaw arall, yn edrych ar ba un a oedd gobaith realistig o brofi SPM. Nododd Mr Nicholls bod y PPC, mewn llawer o achosion na chafodd eu cyfeirio at y PCC, wedi cymryd ‘rhyw gamau er lles y cyhoedd yn erbyn y meddyg’ drwy anfon llythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor. Yn 2002, anfonwyd llythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor ar 43% o feddygon y deliodd y PPC â nhw. Yn 2003, 44% oedd y ffigur. Yn 2002, deliwyd â 61% o achosion euogfarnau trwy lythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor. Yn 2003, 65% oedd y cyfanswm. Byddai rhai o’r rhain yn achosion yfed a gyrru, ond ymddengys y deliwyd ag euogfarnau eraill yn y modd hwn hefyd. Mae’n rhaid bod llythyrau rhybudd a llythyrau cyngor wedi’u hanfon mewn achosion ymddygiad hefyd lle’r oedd rhai neu’r cyfan o’r ffeithiau wedi’u profi neu’u cyfaddef gan y meddyg dan sylw neu lle’r oeddent y tu hwnt i amheuaeth. Ymddengys i mi bod yr esboniad am gyfran uchel yr achosion nad oeddent yn cael eu hanfon drwodd at y PCC yn amharodrwydd parhaus y PPC fwy na thebyg i gyfyngu’i hun i asesu’r materion priodol ac yn ei duedd i ystyried ffactorau lliniaru.
Mewn tystiolaeth, holwyd Mr Nicholls am y ffaith bod y PPC, yn 2002, wedi cyfeirio at y PCC 23 yn unig (28%) o’r 82 o achosion o ymosod yn rhywiol ac anwedduster a oedd wedi’u cyfeirio ato gan sgrinwyr. Nid achosion oedd y rhain lle bu euogfarn, gan yr oedd euogfarnau’n cael eu rhestru ar wahân yn yr ystadegau FTP blynyddol. Credai Mr Nicholls mai’r rheswm mwyaf tebygol dros benderfyniad i beidio cyfeirio oedd yr anhawster o ran sefydlu’r honiadau i’r safon prawf troseddol a oedd yn ofynnol gan y PCC. Fodd bynnag, nododd fod llythyrau rhybudd wedi’u hanfon mewn 21 o’r achosion o ymosod yn rhywiol neu anwedduster. Gan y bydd llythyrau rhybudd yn cael eu hanfon yn unig mewn achosion lle mae’r honiad wedi’i brofi neu’i gyfaddef neu lle mae y tu hwnt i amheuaeth, mae’n anodd gweld sut y gallai anawsterau tystiolaethol gyfrif am y ffaith na chafodd yr achosion hynny eu cyfeirio. Mae ffigurau diwygiedig a gynhyrchwyd yn ddiweddar gan y GMC (yn seiliedig ar nifer y meddygon yr oedd honiadau wedi’u derbyn amdanynt, yn hytrach nag ar nifer yr honiadau unigol) yn dangos bod 33% o’r 51 o feddygon yr oedd honiadau o ymosod yn rhywiol neu anwedduster wedi’u gwneud yn eu herbyn, wedi’u cyfeirio at y PCC yn 2002. Y ffigur ar gyfer 2003 oedd 30%. Cafodd llythyrau rhybudd neu gyngor eu hanfon at 45% o feddygon yr oedd honiadau o ymosod y rhywiol neu anwedduster wedi’u gwneud yn eu herbyn yn 2002 ac at 39% o feddygon felly yn 2003.
Holwyd Mr Nicholls hefyd am y ffaith, ar sail y ffigurau a oedd ar gael ar y pryd, ei bod yn ymddangos, yn 2002, bod y PPC wedi cyfeirio 38 (55%) yn unig o’r 69 o achosion o anonestrwydd (achosion heb fod yn euogfarnau eto) at y PCC. Mewn 15 o achosion o’r fath (22%), roedd llythyr rhybudd wedi’i anfon, a llythyr cyngor mewn wyth achos. Eto, awgrymodd Mr Nicholls, gan na fu unrhyw euogfarn yn yr achosion hyn, fe allai fod problemau tystiolaethol o ran bodloni’r safon prawf troseddol. Fodd bynnag, ni allai hyn gyfrif am achosion lle’r oedd llythyr rhybudd wedi’i anfon. Dywedodd Mr Nicholls y byddai rhai troseddau ‘mân iawn’ yn y categori anonestrwydd. Mae’r ffigurau diwygiedig yn dangos bod 45% o feddygon a wynebodd honiadau o anonestrwydd yn 2002 wedi’u cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC yn 2002 a bod 35% wedi’u cyfeirio yn 2003. Yn 2002, deliwyd â 43% o feddygon felly trwy lythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor. Yn 2003, 57% oedd y ffigur hwnnw.

---  ---
Roedd Rheol 19 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1980 yn amodi:
(h.y. y PCC)
(appointed by the GMC)
shall give notice thereof to the practitioner and to the complainant (if any)’
Yn y cyswllt hwn, gallai swyddogaeth y Llywydd gael ei harfer gan yr aelod a benodwyd i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol yn ei le.
Yn Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, newidiwyd Rheol 19. O’r amser hwnnw, gallai swyddogaeth y Llywydd gael ei harfer gan yr aelod a benodwyd i weithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol yn lle’r Llywydd pan oedd hefyd wedi’i benodi/phenodi gan Gadeirydd y PPC yn unig. Roedd yn rhaid i’r Llywydd (neu Gadeirydd y PPC) ymgynghori â’r PPC ynghylch canslo. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn ofynnol i’r PPC gyfarfod at ddiben yr ymgynghoriad hwn. Os oedd y PPC yn cytuno, roedd gan y Llywydd (neu Gadeirydd y PPC) y grym i gyfarwyddo na ddylai gwrandawiad y PCC gael ei gynnal. Os oedd yn digwydd bod y pleidleisiau wedi’u rhannu’n gyfartal, byddai gan y Llywydd neu Gadeirydd y PPC bleidlais fwrw ychwanegol. Roedd y rhwymedigaeth i ymgynghori â’r achwynydd wedi’i chadw. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, dim ond os oedd yr achwynydd yn unigolyn preifat yr oedd hyn yn cael ei wneud. Os oedd y meddyg wedi’i gyfeirio/chyfeirio at y GMC gan gorff cyhoeddus fel ymddiriedolaeth GIG, ni fyddid wedi ymgynghori â’r corff hwnnw.
Yn 2000, cafodd y grym i gychwyn y weithdrefn ar gyfer canslo gwrandawiad PCC ei roi i Gadeirydd y PPC. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, fel y dywedais ym mharagraff 20.185, newidiwyd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 er mwyn caniatáu i bob euogfarn lle’r oedd dedfryd uniongyrchol o garchar wedi’i phennu, gael eu cyfeirio gan y Cofrestrydd yn uniongyrchol at y PCC oni bai ei fod o’r farn na fyddai cyfeiriad uniongyrchol felly er lles y cyhoedd. Ar yr un pryd, ychwanegwyd rheol 19(3) newydd:
Cyn belled ag y mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol, ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad ac ni phennwyd unrhyw feini prawf mewn perthynas â’r amgylchiadau lle dylai’r Cofrestrydd neu staff y GMC a oedd yn arfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol ddefnyddio’r pŵer hwn i ganslo gwrandawiad PCC mewn achosion o euogfarn a oedd wedi’i gyfeirio’n uniongyrchol at y PCC gan y Cofrestrydd neu staff. Gallaf weld y gall fod yn briodol i wrandawiad gan y PCC gael ei ganslo os yw apêl meddyg yn erbyn euogfarn droseddol yn cael ei ganiatáu, neu os yw’r meddyg yn marw neu os canfyddir bod ganddo/ganddi salwch terfynol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n eglur ai’r bwriad oedd y dylai’r grym gael ei arfer mewn unrhyw amgylchiadau eraill.
Nid ymddengys ychwaith bod unrhyw arwydd o’r meini prawf y dylai’r PPC eu cymhwyso wrth benderfynu a ddylid canslo gwrandawiad gan y PCC mewn achos ymddygiad. Roedd penderfyniadau felly’n cael eu gwneud yn breifat ac nid oedd angen iddynt gael eu gwneud mewn cyfarfod er, yn ymarferol, ymddengys bod achosion o ganslo’n cael eu hystyried a’u cofnodi yng nghofnodion cyfarfodydd y PPC.
Am y rhan fwyaf o flynyddoedd, nid oes unrhyw ffigurau yn dangos nifer y gwrandawiadau PCC a ganslwyd yn ymddangos yn ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC. Ar gais yr Ymchwiliad, darparodd y GMC wybodaeth am nifer yr achosion lle cafodd cyfeiriad cychwynnol gan y PPC o achos ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan y PCC ei ganslo wedi hynny dan ddarpariaethau rheol 19. Dengys y wybodaeth honno bod y gwrandawiadau mewn 13% o’r achosion a gafodd eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC yn 2000 wedi’u canslo wedi hynny. Y ffigurau dilynol yw 15% o’r achosion a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PCC yn 2001, 20% o’r rheiny a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PCC yn 2002 ac (fel ag yr oedd ar ddechrau mis Awst 2004) 11% o’r achosion a gafodd eu cyfeirio at y PCC yn 2003.
Darparodd y GMC ddadansoddiad o’r rhesymau dros ganslo gwrandawiadau fel y’u cofnodwyd hwy yn y ffeiliau perthnasol. Dywedwyd mai’r rhesymau mwyaf cyffredin oedd
‘achwynydd neu dyst amharod/annibynadwy’
‘anawsterau tystiolaethol arall’
. Mewn cyfran sylweddol o achosion, dywedwyd nad oedd yr adroddiadau arbenigol a gafwyd yn ategu’r achos. Mewn ychydig o achosion, y rheswm a roddwyd oedd
‘gwybodaeth newydd’
, ac mewn dau achos roedd apeliadau troseddol wedi llwyddo. Roedd un meddyg wedi marw. Roedd un achos (a ganslwyd yn 2000) lle mai’r rheswm a roddwyd oedd
‘annhebygol o gyrraedd y trothwy SPM’
. Roedd y wybodaeth a ddarparwyd gan y GMC yn dangos bod meddygon weithiau’n gwneud cais y dylai’r gwrandawiad yn eu hachosion gael eu canslo am resymau yn ymwneud â thystiolaeth neu resymau eraill. Os oedd cais cyntaf yn cael ei wrthod, fe allai’r meddyg adnewyddu’i gais/chais ar gyfnod diweddarach.
Ymddengys i mi bod angen i’r Cyngor ystyried yr ystadegau hyn ymhellach. Gall fod bod newid ymagwedd y PPC (gyda llai o bwyslais ar ystyriaeth o ba un a oedd y dystiolaeth yn debygol o ddal dŵr gerbron y PCC) wedi arwain at y PPC yn pasio rhai o’r achosion drwodd a ganfuwyd, wrth i gyfreithwyr y GMC archwilio ymhellach, bod anawsterau tystiolaethau difrifol ynddynt. Os felly, byddai hynny’n rhesymol er, os mai felly’r oedd hi, byddai’n tanlinellu’r angen am broses well o gasglu tystiolaeth ar gyfnod cynharach o’r broses. Fodd bynnag, mae 20% yn gyfran uchel iawn o achosion i’w canslo. Nid oedd y ffigurau yn cael eu hadrodd i’r Cyngor yn yr ystadegau FTP blynyddol.
Dywedwyd bod cymaint â 30 o achosion a gafodd eu canslo yn 2002 yn ymwneud ag achwynydd neu dystion amharod. Fe allai hyn fod oherwydd oedi, oherwydd bod yr achwynydd neu’r tystion wedi rhoi tystiolaeth yn flaenorol mewn gwrandawiad arall, neu oherwydd ei fod/bod yn teimlo dan fygythiad mewn rhyw ffordd. Byddai rhywun wedi meddwl y byddai’r GMC wedi pryderu bod achosion yn cael eu ‘colli’ oherwydd achwynwyr a thystion amharod, a byddai wedi eisiau gwybod beth oedd y tu ôl i hyn. Mae’n bosibl y gallai tystion felly wedi cael eu cynorthwyo yn y dyfodol gan y darpariaethau i dystion agored i niwed sy’n cael eu cynnig yn y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Fe allai ymchwilio gwell yn gynharach ddileu hefyd rhai o’r achosion nad oes gobaith iddynt lwyddo. Fodd bynnag, mae achos i bryderu oherwydd bod y cynigion dros ganslo achosion yn llawer mwy llac dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r ystadegau llawn gael eu cyhoeddi’n flynyddol, yn dangos yn eglur canran yr achosion a gyfeiriwyd sydd wedi’u canslo wedi hynny. Dylai’r rhesymau am y canslo, yn ogystal â’r ystadegau, fod ar gael yn hawdd. Dylai gwaith ymchwil gael ei wneud i’r rhesymau pam fod achosion yn methu yn y cam hwn, a dylai camau gael eu cymryd i leihau achosion felly gymaint â phosibl.

---  ---
Gwnaeth yr Ymchwiliad gais am ddatgelu’r ffeiliau’n ymwneud â dosbarthiadau penodol o achos a gafodd eu hystyried gan y PPC. Roedd y cais yn ymwneud â thri mater penodol yr oedd yn rhaid i’r Ymchwiliad ddelio â nhw. Yn gyntaf, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn dymuno canfod sut, dros y blynyddoedd, yr oedd y GMC wedi ymdrin ag achosion meddygon a oedd wedi’u dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau rheoledig (fel y rheiny y cafodd Shipman ei ddyfarnu’n euog ohonynt ym 1976) a’r rheiny y credwyd bod eu hymddygiad yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Cafodd llawer o achosion felly eu cyfeirio at y PPC. Yn ail, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn dymuno cael gwybod sut yr oedd y GMC (a’r PPC, yn benodol) wedi ymdrin ag achosion o driniaeth glinigol honedig is na’r safon yn ystod y 1990au, pan adroddwyd i’r GMC am Shipman yn dilyn dau ganfyddiad croes gan MSC. Hefyd, roedd gan yr Ymchwiliad ddiddordeb i ganfod sut y byddai’r PPC wedi delio â chwyn, os oedd cwyn wedi’i gwneud, yn codi o achos Mrs Renate Overton, a ddisgrifiais ym Mhennod 10. Nid yw’r drafodaeth ganlynol yn delio â’r holl ffeiliau achos a ddatgelwyd. Mae’n canolbwyntio ar yr achosion hynny sydd â rhywfaint o debygrwydd i amgylchiadau cyfeiriadau Shipman, neu sy’n codi mater o ddiogelu cleifion sy’n destun pryder i’r Ymchwiliad.
Achosion yn Ymwneud â Chyffuriau Rheoledig
Fel y gwelir, y thema gyffredinol sy’n waelodol i’r holl achosion sy’n ymwneud â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig yw y byddai’r PPC yn cyfeirio’r meddyg at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, hyd yn oed os oedd wedi bod yn euog o gamymddygiad eithaf difrifol a oedd yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch neu les cleifion. Mae un achos diweddar, sef achos Dr JO 09, sy’n nodweddiadol o’r ffordd y deliodd y PPC â meddygon yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau, yn cael ei ddisgrifio ym Mhennod 23.
Yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion lle’r oedd y PPC wedi cyfeirio meddyg at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, roedd rhywfaint o dystiolaeth o gaethni neu ddibyniaeth o’r math a fyddai’n cyfiawnhau’r cyfeiriad hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, yn achos Dr JO 04, nid oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o gaethni a dim tystiolaeth a allai, i fy llygaid i o leiaf, gyfiawnhau cyfeiriad at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Eto dyna oedd y canlyniad. Tra’n gweithio fel uwch swyddog tŷ yn Ysbyty A, arweiniodd ymddygiad Dr JO 04 at amheuaeth ei fod yn dwyn fentanyl ac yn chwistrellu’i hun. Ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau ar y pryd. Gadawodd y meddyg yr ysbyty hwnnw a dechreuodd weithio yn Ysbyty B. Beth amser yn ddiweddarach, hysbyswyd Ysbyty B gan aelod o staff yn Ysbyty A am y pryderon a’r amheuon a oedd wedi codi. Ychydig fisoedd yn ddiweddarach, cafodd yr amheuon hyn eu rhoi gerbron y meddyg mewn cyfweliad lle’r oedd aelod o staff o bob un o’r ysbytai’n bresennol. Cyfaddefodd ei fod wedi bod yn camddefnyddio fentanyl yn y gorffennol er nad oedd hyn, honnodd, erioed wedi peryglu ei ofal o gleifion. Gwrthododd roi sampl o wallt ar gyfer prawf, gan honni ei fod wedi cymryd canabis mewn parti bedwar diwrnod yn gynharach. Cafodd ei atal neu’i anfon ar seibiant salwch ac adroddwyd wrth y GMC amdano.
Ar ôl ystyriaeth gychwynnol, cafodd yr achos ei gyfeirio at sgriniwr meddygol, a argymhellodd y dylai’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PPC a’r IOC. Dywedodd bod pryderon ynghylch SPM ac ynghylch diogelwch cleifion. Yn y gwrandawiad gerbron yr IOC, dywedodd y cwnsler ar ran y meddyg bod y meddyg wedi tynnu’i gyfaddefiad ei fod wedi bod yn camddefnyddio fentanyl, yn ôl. Ei achos ef oedd ei fod wedi cymryd y cyffur unwaith ar y tafod (nid drwy chwistrelliad) tra’r oedd yn Ysbyty A, ond byddai unrhyw awgrym ei fod wedi’i ddefnyddio dros gyfnod yn cael ei wadu’n gryf. Roedd o’r farn bod
‘tystiolaeth prima facie gref a chredadwy o gamddefnyddio sylwedd’
. Mae’n eglur bod llythyrau’n bodoli gan dystion o Ysbyty A lle’r oedd y camddefnyddio cyffuriau wedi digwydd.
Yn ddiweddarach yr wythnos honno, daeth yr achos gerbron y PPC, a ohiriodd yr achos er mwyn cael adroddiadau meddygol. Roedd yr adroddiad meddygol cyntaf yn ddogfen hynod lle’r aeth yr archwilydd ymhell y tu hwnt i roi barn feddygol. Yn gyntaf, nododd, yn gwbl briodol, bod yr honiad o gamddefnyddio fentanyl wedi’i wadu gan Dr JO 04 ac nad oedd unrhyw gyffuriau wedi’u canfod ar brawf gwallt diweddar. Fodd bynnag, aeth yr archwilydd ymlaen wedyn i drafod cryfder y dystiolaeth mewn perthynas ag arfer Dr JO 04 yn y gorffennol o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Soniodd am dystiolaeth y tyst o Ysbyty A a’r ffaith fod Dr JO 04 wedi osgoi cymryd prawf gwallt yn Ysbyty B pan gafodd gyfle i ddangos ei fod yn rhydd o gyffuriau. Aeth yr archwilydd ymlaen i ddweud wedyn bod
‘cydbwysedd cyfartal’
yn y dystiolaeth, ond daeth i’r casgliad, ar gydbwysedd tebygolrwydd ac yng ngholau’r ffaith bod y meddyg wedi tynnu’i gyfaddefiad yn ôl, nad oedd y dystiolaeth yn ddigonol i awgrymu bod gan Dr JO 04 broblem gyfredol neu flaenorol o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau a fyddai’n effeithio ar ei allu i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, roedd Dr JO 04 wedi cyfaddef iddo ddefnyddio cocên yn y gorffennol ac roedd yr archwilydd o’r farn y dylid ei gadw dan wyliadwriaeth er mwyn sicrhau nad oedd yn defnyddio sylweddau’n anghyfreithlon.
Dywedodd adroddiad meddygol arall bod yr archwilydd wedi’i chael yn anodd i lunio casgliadau pendant ynghylch arfer Dr JO 04 o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Fodd bynnag, oherwydd y risg uchel i gleifion a fyddai’n deillio pe bai’n camddefnyddio cyffuriau, argymhellodd y dylid parhau i atal y meddyg nes y gallai gwrandawiad llawn asesu’r dystiolaeth. Argymhellwyd goruchwyliaeth feddygol mewn trydydd adroddiad.
Mae cofnodion o’r ystyriaeth a ail-agorwyd o’r achos hwn gan y PPC yn peri pryder. Yn gyntaf, ymddengys y bu trafodaeth ynghylch priodoldeb ymddygiad y staff yn Ysbyty A. Ymddengys iddynt fod yn ymwybodol o bryderon beth amser cyn i Dr JO 04 adael Ysbyty A, ond roeddent serch hynny wedi cymeradwyo ei ddyrchafiad o fewn yr ysbyty. Nid oedd y pryderon wedi’u codi’n iawn hyd nes bod Dr JO 04 wedi symud ymlaen i Ysbyty B. Ar y wyneb, nid oedd hynny i weld yn foddhaol, ond roedd yn gwbl amherthnasol i’r mater ynghylch a fu Dr JO 04 yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau, ac, os felly, beth ddylai ddigwydd iddo. Yna trafododd y PPC y ffaith nad oedd llawer o dystiolaeth o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau nawr bod yr addefiadau wedi’u tynnu’n ôl. Dywedwyd mai tystiolaeth achlust oedd yr holl dystiolaeth arall. Teimlwyd mai rhagolygon gwael oedd o brofi’r honiadau yn y PCC. Nododd y PPC bod yr archwilwyr meddygol wedi argymell goruchwyliaeth. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oeddent. Dim ond un oedd wedi gwneud hynny. Mae’n debyg bod Dr JO 04 yn amharod i gael ei oruchwylio. Mae rhywun yn siŵr o dybied pam fyddai wedi gwneud hynny, os nad oedd ganddo broblem gyffuriau ac na fu ganddo broblem erioed. Penderfyniad y PPC oedd gohirio
er mwyn galluogi delio â’r meddyg dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Wrth roi tystiolaeth am yr achos hwn, gofynnwyd i Mr Nicholls esbonio pam yr oedd y PPC wedi meddwl mai tystiolaeth achlust oedd yr unig dystiolaeth o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau (ac mai honno yn ôl pob tebyg oedd yr unig dystiolaeth a allai fod fyth). Dywedodd bod y PPC yn credu bod rhagolygon yr achos i gael ei brofi yn y PCC yn wael iawn. Roedd oedi wedi bod ac ni chynhaliwyd unrhyw ymchwiliad lleol. Pan awgrymwyd y byddai tystiolaeth wedi bod ar gael am yr amgylchiadau lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi gwneud ei addefiad a thermau’i addefiad, dywedodd Mr Nicholls y credai y byddai’n ‘drafferth fawr’ cael tystiolaeth bellach am yr addefiad. Cytunodd mai effaith penderfyniad y PPC oedd na chafodd y mater ynghylch a oedd y meddyg wedi bod yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau ei ddatrys erioed. Derbyniodd hefyd nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth feddygol bod gan y meddyg unrhyw broblem feddygol neu seiciatryddol o’r fath a fyddai’n cyfiawnhau cyfeiriad at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Esboniodd Mr Nicholls benderfyniad y PPC ar y sail bod posibilrwydd bod y meddyg wedi bod yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau, a’i bod yn well, er lles diogelwch cleifion, iddo gael ei wneud yn destun ryw oruchwyliaeth wirfoddol na bod yr achos yn ei erbyn yn methu’n gyfan gwbl yn y PCC.
Gallaf weld ei bod yn rhaid bod datrysiad y PPC i weld yn fodd pragmataidd o ddelio â phroblem dystiolaethol a oedd, rwy’n sicr, yn anorchfygol. Fodd bynnag, mae’r achos hwn yn dangos y PPC yn camgyfeirio’i hun mewn nifer o agweddau. Yn gyntaf, roedd y drafodaeth am ymddygiad y staff yn Ysbyty A yn gwbl amherthnasol i’r materion gerbron y PPC. Yn ail, roedd ei asesiad o argaeledd ac argyhoeddiad y dystiolaeth ar gael yn anghywir. Roedd yn wahanol iawn, gyda llaw, i’r asesiad a wnaed o’r un dystiolaeth gan yr IOC. Nid yw’n feirniadaeth bersonol o Mr Nicholls nac unrhyw aelod o’r PPC os dywedaf ei bod yn ymddangos i mi nad oeddent yn deall y rheol achlust; nid cyfreithwyr mohonynt. Ond y drafferth yw eu bod wedi gwneud penderfyniadau yn seiliedig ar eu camddealltwriaeth o’r rheol honno. Ni ddylai’r PPC fod wedi seilio’i benderfyniadau ar gryfder nag argaeledd tystiolaeth ac eithrio yn yr amgylchiadau mwyaf amlwg a syml.
Achos arall a barodd cryn bryder oedd achos Dr JO 10. Roedd y meddyg yn anaesthetydd y canfuwyd ei fod wedi bod yn camddefnyddio amrywiaeth o gyffuriau anaesthetig. Yn y lle cyntaf, cymerai gyffuriau a oedd yn weddill yn dilyn gweithdrefnau clinigol lle’r oedd wedi cymryd rhan. Byddai’n archebu ampylau mwy nag oedd eu hangen ar gyfer y cleifion. Yn ddiweddarach, dechreuodd dynnu rhan o gynnwys ampwl agored a rhoi dŵr yn lle’r hyn yr oedd wedi’i gymryd. Felly, roedd y cleifion yn cael llai na ddylent fod yn cael. Pan wynebwyd ef yn y pen draw â’r materion hyn, fe’u haddefodd. Cafodd yr achos ei gyfeirio at y GMC. Roedd y Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol yn yr ysbyty lle’r oedd Dr JO 10 yn gweithio o’r farn bod cleifion wedi’u rhoi mewn risg nid yn unig gan nad oeddent wedi cael meddyginiaeth briodol ond oherwydd hefyd bod y meddyg wedi bod dan ddylanwad cyffuriau tra’r oedd ar ddyletswydd.
Nid oedd unrhyw euogfarn wedi’i chofnodi yn erbyn y meddyg. Aeth yr achos at y sgriniwr meddygol fel achos ‘SPM trwy ddiffiniad’. Fe wnaeth y sgriniwr, yn briodol iawn, gyfeirio’r achos at yr IOC a’r PPC. Pennodd yr IOC gyfres o amodau interim. Pan ddaeth yr achos i’w ystyried gan y PPC, roedd adroddiad seiciatryddol a oedd yn dweud bod y meddyg wedi bod yn rhoi cyffuriau iddo’i hun am dros flwyddyn, a’i fod yn defnyddio rhwng 10 a 15 o chwistrelliadau’r dydd; ni phennwyd y maint. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd yr adroddiad nad oedd y meddyg yn dioddef o unrhyw anhwylder corfforol nag unrhyw anhwylder seiciatryddol canfyddadwy. Dywedwyd bod y prognosis yn dda. Cyfeiriodd y PPC yr achos at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad yn gwybod beth oedd y rhesymau am y penderfyniad hwn. Ymrwymodd y meddyg yn wirfoddol i’r amodau yr oedd yn ymarfer o danynt a chafodd yr amodau interim a bennwyd gan yr IOC eu diddymu’n ddiweddarach.
Wrth roi tystiolaeth am yr achos hwn, dywedodd Mr Nicholls, a oedd yn cadeirio’r panel PPC a benderfynodd yr achos, ei fod yn teimlo’n ‘anesmwyth’ ynglŷn â’r penderfyniad hwn. Teimlai nawr y dylai fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y PCC. Cytunodd bod tystiolaeth eglur o SPM a dim anawsterau tystiolaethol. Yn fy marn i, mae’n iawn; dylai’r achos fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y PCC. Ar y dystiolaeth, nid oedd gan y meddyg hwn broblem iechyd. Ni roddwyd sylwadau erioed ar ei anonestrwydd. Nag ar ei barodrwydd i ymgysylltu cleifion â’i weithgareddau cymryd cyffuriau ac i beryglu cleifion wrth weithio dan ddylanwad cyffuriau. Fe allai’r PPC fod wedi bod o’r farn, neu fel arall, ei bod yn briodol i bennu amodau a fyddai wedi’i gwneud yn ofynnol i’r meddyg gael goruchwyliaeth feddygol. Ond byddai’r mater wedi cael ei ystyried yn agored ac yn drylwyr ym mhresenoldeb y meddyg, yn lle mewn gweithdrefn breifat sydd, yn ôl ei natur, yn llawer llai trylwyr a thryloyw.
Dygodd Dr JO 06 ffurflenni rhagnodion o’r feddygfa lle gweithiai fel meddyg locwm. Rhoddodd ragnodion am diasepam yn enwau cleifion ffug, gan ffugio llofnod y meddyg teulu yr oedd y rhagnodion wedi’u dwyn oddi wrtho. Ni chafodd ei erlyn. Nid yw’n eglur pam; ymddengys yr awgrymwyd nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol ond, mewn gwirionedd, cafodd y rhagnodion ffug eu hadfer yn y pen draw. At hynny, ysgrifennodd Dr JO 06 at y meddyg yr oedd wedi dwyn y rhagnodion oddi wrtho, gan gyfaddef yr hyn yr oedd wedi’i wneud ac ymddiheuro. Beth bynnag, adroddwyd i’r GMC am yr achos a chyfeiriwyd yr achos at y PPC gan y sgriniwr meddygol, Dr Krishna Korlipara. Ar yr achlysur cyntaf yr ystyriwyd yr achos gan y PPC, cafodd adroddiad seiciatryddol, a ddywedodd bod y meddyg yn gwneud yn dda. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y PPC gael dau adroddiad seiciatryddol arall. Pan oedd y rhain ar gael, fe wnaeth y PPC ailystyried yr achos. Roedd y meddyg wedi cyfaddef i’r ddau seiciatrydd iddo fod yn gaeth i bensodiasepinau am ryw bum mlynedd a’i fod wedi dwyn ffurflenni rhagnodion a ffugio llofnod meddyg arall er mwyn cael cyflenwadau. Roedd y ddau seiciatrydd o’r farn bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer yn amodol ar oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Mae cofnod penderfyniad y PPC yn cofnodi, yn gyntaf, nad oedd y meddyg i weld yn fygythiad i ddiogelwch cleifion ond ei bod er ei les ei hun i barhau â goruchwyliaeth feddygol dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Cofnododd wedyn, ar ôl ystyried yr amgylchiadau lliniarol a’r llythyrau cefnogaeth a gyflwynwyd ar ran y meddyg, y byddai’n briodol i anfon llythyr rhybudd at y meddyg a gohirio
er mwyn gallu delio ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, lle’r oedd i gael goruchwyliaeth gan y sieiciatrydd a oedd wedi darparu’r adroddiad gwreiddiol. Dyna ddigwyddodd.
Mae’r achos yn peri pryder oherwydd yr ymddengys bod y PPC wedi colli golwg ar ei brif swyddogaeth. Roedd hwn yn achos gwael o anonestrwydd, a oedd yn amlwg yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Eto, nid yw cofnod y PPC yn sôn am hynny. Yn lle hynny, ymddengys ei fod wedi canolbwyntio ar yr agweddau meddygol a’r lliniariad a gyflwynwyd, gan gynnwys llythyrau cefnogi. Nid oedd Mr Nicholls yn cadeirio’r panel PPC ar yr achlysur hwn. Fodd bynnag, ceisiodd gynorthwyo’r Ymchwiliad drwy esbonio beth oedd yn debygol o fod ym meddwl y PPC. Dywedodd y byddai’r PPC wedi ystyried anonestrwydd y meddyg i fod yn symptom o’i afiechyd. Byddai’r PPC wedi nodi na chafodd ei weithredoedd effaith niweidiol ar gleifion a’i fod wedi dangos mewnwelediad ac yn ymateb yn dda i driniaeth. Credai Mr Nicholls y gallai’n wir fod anawsterau tystiolaethol; roedd dan yr argraff bod y rhagnodion wedi’u dinistrio. Gall fod bod un rhagnodyn a ffugiwyd wedi’i ddinistrio ond, yn sicr, roedd tri yn ffeiliau’r GMC. Ymddengys i mi bod hwn yn achos lle na allai fod unrhyw lwybr gweithredu priodol i’r PPC mewn gwirionedd ac eithrio cyfeirio’r achos at y PCC. Roedd hwn yn achos amlwg o SPM heb unrhyw anawsterau tystiolaethol. Wrth waredu’r achos, fe wnaeth y PPC dresmasu ar swyddogaethau’r PCC.
Roedd achos Dr JO 05 yn eithaf tebyg er bod y meddyg, yn yr achos hwn, wedi’i dyfarnu’n euog o ffugio llofnod meddyg arall ar ragnodyn mewn ymgais i gael cyflenwad o deuhydrocodin, yr oedd yn gaeth iddo. Adroddwyd i’r GMC am yr achos ac fe gafodd ei gyfeirio at y PPC. Roedd tystiolaeth seiciatryddol bod y meddyg wedi bod yn gaeth i’r cyffur am flynyddoedd lawer. Y dystiolaeth feddygol oedd bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer ar yr amod na allai ragnodi. Gohiriwyd yr achos gan y PPC
er mwyn galluogi delio ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Nid yw cofnod ei benderfyniad yn gwneud unrhyw gyfeiriad at y cwestiwn ynghylch pa un a allai’r ymddygiad fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Y ffactor penderfynol oedd bod tystiolaeth o broblem iechyd.
Ymddengys mai’r ymagwedd yn y ddau achos olaf hwn oedd, er bod y ffeithiau’n amlwg yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac nad oedd unrhyw broblemau tystiolaethol, roedd dull gwell o ddelio â nhw ym marn y PPC. Fe allai’r ymagwedd hon fod wedi ymddangos yn un synhwyrol a dyngarol. Nid wyf yn amau bod y PPC yn meddwl ei fod yn rhoi ystyriaeth briodol i ddiogelwch cleifion. Ond, roedd y PPC yn defnyddio gweithdrefn answyddogol nad oedd wedi’i sancsiynu gan y Rheolau. Hefyd, cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad, nid oedd gan y PPC unrhyw dystiolaeth ynghylch pa un a oedd ymddygiad y meddygon, ac os felly i ba raddau, wedi effeithio ar eu harfer clinigol neu a oeddent wedi cael unrhyw effaith ar eu cleifion.
Achosion yn Ymwneud â Chamgymeriadau Clinigol
Rwy’n bwriadu trafod dau achos yn unig dan y pennawd hwn, y ddau ohonynt yn ymwneud â chamgymeriadau mewn rhagnodi neu roi cyffuriau. Mae’r achosion hyn o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad oherwydd y posibilrwydd y gallai Shipman fod wedi bod yn destun adroddiad i’r GMC yng nghanol y 1990au gyda honiad ei fod wedi rhoi dogn cwbl amhriodol o forffin i Mrs Overton a oedd wedi arwain at iddi ddioddef niwed i’r ymennydd a pharhau mewn cyflwr disymud parhaol nes ei marwolaeth 14 mis yn ddiweddarach.
Roedd Dr JK 07, llawfeddyg ymgynghorol locwm, wedi rhoi dogn gormodol o 2% lignocaine i glaf fel anaesthetig lleol cyn llawdriniaeth. Bu farw’r claf. Nid oedd y prawf post-mortem yn cynnwys unrhyw brofion gwenwynegol. Priodolwyd y farwolaeth i gyflwr hirsefydlog yr ymadawedig, sef dystroffi’r cyhyrau. Roedd ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty yn bryderus ynghylch y farwolaeth a gwnaeth ymchwiliad mewnol. Daeth yn amlwg bod anghysonder difrifol rhwng maint y cyffur y dywedodd y nyrsys oedd wedi’i roi (13.5ml) a hynny yr oedd y meddyg wedi’i gofnodi yn y nodiadau (5ml). Byddai’r dogn priodol wedi dibynnu ar bwysau corff y claf. Eto roedd yn eglur nad oedd y meddyg wedi gwneud unrhyw ymgais i bwyso’r claf. Yn anffurfiol, roedd ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty wedi gofyn am gyngor arbenigol. Pan oedd ar gael, awgrymodd hwn bod y dogn a roddwyd yn ormodol ac y gallai fod wedi achosi’r farwolaeth. Roedd y Crwner lleol i weld yn amharod i agor cwêst, felly cafodd yr achos ei adrodd i’r GMC gan yr ymddiriedolaeth.
Cafodd y GMC farn arbenigol gan athro anaesthesia paediatrig amlwg, a oedd hefyd yn aelod o’r GMC. Roedd yn cytuno â chasgliadau’r arbenigwyr yr ymgynghorodd yr ymddiriedolaeth â nhw. Dywedodd, pe bai 13.5ml wedi’i roi, byddai hynny’n orddos affwysol o gofio pwysau’r claf ymadawedig (ymddengys o’r ffeil bod y rhieni wedi amcanu mai 4.5 stôn ydoedd, h.y. oddeutu 28kg). Mynegodd yr arbenigwr syndod ar fethiant y meddyg i bwyso’r claf, gan fod ei gyflwr, dystroffi’r cyhyrau, wedi arwain at leihad ym màs y cyhyrau. Os mai 5ml lignocaine yn unig oedd wedi’i roi, byddai hynny ychydig uwchlaw’r dogn uchaf yn cael ei argymell ar gyfer person o bwysau’r claf ymadawedig. Os rhoddwyd 13.5ml, byddai hynny’n gwbl eithafol a byddai’n gyfystyr ag SPM.
Cafodd y meddyg ei rybuddio bod yr achos i’w gyfeirio at y PPC. Roedd tri honiad i’w hystyried: y methiant i bwyso’r claf; rhoi 13.5ml, a oedd yn ormodol, a gwneud cofnod ffug yn y cofnodion clinigol i’r perwyl mai 5ml yn unig a roddwyd. Atebwyd y GMC gan Gyfreithwyr Dr JK 07 ar ran eu cleient, gan ddweud bod y meddyg wedi gwneud camgymeriad gwirioneddol wrth gofnodi mai 5ml yn unig yr oedd wedi’i roi; mewn gwirionedd, roedd wedi rhoi 10ml. Addefodd bod mwy na 10ml wedi’i ddisbyddu o’r chwistrell, ond roedd rhywfaint wedi’i wastraffu. Dywedaf ar draws hynny bod y nyrsys wedi dweud bod chwistrell yn cynnwys 10ml wedi’i roi i’r meddyg a’i fod wedi chwistrellu’r cyfan. Dywedwyd ganddynt iddo ofyn am fwy ychydig yn ddiweddarach; rhoddwyd 10ml arall iddo, a phan oedd wedi gorffen chwistrellu, roedd 6.5ml ar ôl. Roedd adroddiad y meddyg yn wahanol. Honnodd, ar sail ei amcangyfrif o bwysau’r claf, iddo gredu y gallai ddefnyddio hyd at 10ml o 2% lignocaine yn ddiogel. Cymerodd chwistrell yn cynnwys 10ml a chwistrellu 5ml. Yn ystod y weithdrefn hon, collwyd rhywfaint o lignocaine; dim ond 3.5ml oedd ar ôl. Ar ôl ysbaid tra bod y cyffur yn cael effaith, dechreuodd y lawdriniaeth. Roedd yn amlwg bod y claf mewn poen, a chwistrellodd y meddyg y 3.5ml a oedd ar ôl wedyn. Roedd y claf i weld yn ddi-boen wedyn a dechreuwyd y driniaeth eto. Rywfaint o’r ffordd drwy’r weithdrefn, roedd y claf yn cwyno ei fod yn boenus eto, a gofynnodd y meddyg am fwy o lignocaine. Rhoddwyd chwistrell iddo yn cynnwys 10ml. Ar yr achlysur hwn, dim ond rhyw 0.5ml a lwyddodd y meddyg i chwistrellu’n llwyddiannus, a chollodd oddeutu 1.5ml drwy ei ollwng. Ailgychwynnodd y driniaeth. Unwaith eto, cwynodd y claf ei fod yn boenus, a rhoddodd y meddyg 1ml arall gan golli 0.5ml arall. Perwyl cyffredinol adroddiad y meddyg oedd bod y claf wedi cael 10ml a bod 3.5ml wedi’i golli.
Dywedwyd ar ran y meddyg bod y meddyg, wrth wneud ei nodyn, wedi gwneud cyfanswm o’r meintiau bach amrywiol a chwistrellwyd, ond ei fod wedi anghofio am y 5ml cyntaf a chwistrellodd. Roedd wedi cofnodi 5ml fel cyfanswm hynny a chwistrellwyd pan ddylai fod wedi cofnodi 10ml. Pan ofynnwyd iddo ysgrifennu adroddiad am y digwyddiad ychydig ddyddiau’n ddiweddarach (at ddibenion ymchwiliad mewnol), roedd ei nodyn ganddo o’i flaen ac roedd wedi parhau â’i gamgymeriad. Ni fu unrhyw fwriad i gamarwain.
Cafodd yr achos ei ystyried gan y PPC cyn yr amser pan oedd cofnod yn cael ei wneud o’r rhesymau am ei benderfyniadau fel mater o drefn arferol. Yn anhygoel, fel yr ymddengys i mi, roedd y PPC wedi penderfynu peidio cyfeirio’r achos at y PCC, ond yn hytrach ei gau heb rybudd. Roedd teulu’r claf ymadawedig yn ddig iawn o glywed y penderfyniad, a gofynnwyd am resymau llawn. Esboniodd ymateb y GMC bod y gweithiwr achos wedi siarad â Chadeirydd y PPC a oedd wedi esbonio’r penderfyniad ar y sail nad oedd y PPC o’r farn bod camgymeriadau’r meddyg yn gamgymeriadau o’r fath a fyddai’n cyfiawnhau’r GMC yn cyfyngu neu’n atal ei arfer meddygol.
Esboniodd Dr Steel, a oedd yn Gadeirydd y PPC pan wnaethpwyd y penderfyniad, mewn datganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad, bod hwn yn achos ffiniol yn ei farn ef. Roedd o’r farn bod y meddyg wedi rhoi rheswm boddhaol am fod wedi gwneud camgymeriad yn y nodiadau meddygol. Roedd wedi
‘cyfaddef’
iddo roi 10ml a bod 13.5ml wedi’i ddisbyddu o’r chwistrell (fel yr honnodd y nyrsys). Roedd y meddyg wedi cydnabod hefyd y dylai fod wedi pwyso’r claf, ond roedd wedi gwneud
‘asesiad diffuant’
bod y claf wedi pwyso rhwng 40 a 50kg. Dywedodd Dr Steel y byddai’r PPC, yn yr amgylchiadau, wedi dod i’r casgliad ei bod yn amheus ynghylch a oedd rhoi 10ml yn anghyfrifol.
Gwnaeth Dr Joan Trowell, Cadeirydd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer, sylw ar yr achos hwn yn ei thystiolaeth ysgrifenedig i’r Ymchwiliad. Derbyniodd y dylai’r achos fod wedi mynd at y PCC ar gyfer ymchwiliad llawn. Dywedodd y byddai 10ml o lignocaine wedi bod yn ddogn gormodol. Fodd bynnag, ni chredai bod unrhyw wrthdaro gwirioneddol mewn tystiolaeth rhwng y meddygon a’r nyrsys; roedd yn eithaf posibl, meddai, i golli gymaint â thraean o’r hylif tra’n chwistrellu. Rhaid i mi ddweud y gall fod felly yn wir, ond ni ddylai aelodau’r PPC lunio barn felly am y math hwnnw o fater heb wrando’r dystiolaeth. Pe bai’r PCC, ar ôl gwrando’r nyrsys a’r meddyg, wedi bod yn ansicr ynghylch y dystiolaeth am ollwng, byddai wedi bod yn gwbl briodol iddo ystyried ei wybodaeth am yr hyn allai ddigwydd; ond nid oedd yn briodol iddo wneud hynny pan nad oedd y dystiolaeth wedi’i harchwilio.
Gwnaeth Syr Donald Irvine, Llywydd y GMC o 1995 hyd at 2002, sylw ar yr achos hwn hefyd, gan ddweud ei bod yn eglur iddo yntau y dylai’r achos fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio at y PCC. Ymddengys yn drueni i mi na wnaeth y teulu ddod ag achos am adolygiad barnwrol. Pe baent wedi gwneud hynny, mae’n rhaid y byddai’r cais wedi llwyddo yn fy marn i. Roedd y PPC yn amlwg wedi mynd y tu hwnt i’w swyddogaeth o ystyried pa un a allai’r ymddygiad a oedd yn destun cwyn, o’i brofi, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ar sail ei ‘addefiad’ honedig, roedd y meddyg wedi rhoi 10ml, a fyddai, yn ôl yr arbenigwr a gyfarwyddwyd gan y GMC, wedi bod yn ddwbl y dogn argymelledig uchaf o hyd. Ni ofynnwyd i’r arbenigwr am ei farn am ba mor ddifrifol y byddai camgymeriad o roi 10ml wedi bod. Ymddengys i mi bod yr achos yn amlwg yn codi cwestiwn o SPM, a bod tystiolaeth ar gael i gefnogi’r honiad bod 13.5ml wedi’i roi, er bod hynny’n gwrthdaro â hynny a oedd yn cael ei gynnig ar ran y meddyg. Beth bynnag, nid gwaith y PPC, ond yn hytrach y PCC, oedd penderfynu a oedd ‘addefiad’ y meddyg yn wir mewn gwirionedd. Roedd tystiolaeth gan y nyrsys ei fod wedi rhoi 13.5ml, ac nid oedd unrhyw un wedi ymchwilio i’r hyn fyddai’r nyrsys yn dweud am yr honiad bod 3.5ml wed’i ollwng a bod y cyffur wedi cael ei roi mewn nifer o feintiau bach. Ymhellach, gwaith y PCC, ac nid y PPC, oedd penderfynu pa un ai i dderbyn bod y cofnod hwnnw yn y nodiadau wedi bod yn gamgymeriad diffuant neu’n gofnod ffug bwriadol. Fe allai rhai awgrymu bod honiad y meddyg ei fod wedi anghofio am yr ampwl 5ml cyntaf yn swnio braidd yn anargyhoeddiadol. Wedi’r cyfan, mae’n rhaid ei fod yn brofiad eithaf anarferol ym mywyd proffesiynol llawfeddyg unigol bod claf yn marw ar y bwrdd llawdriniaeth; mae’n rhaid bod y meddyg wedi cael digon o amser i feddwl dros ei weithredoedd, yn y cyfnod ar ôl y farwolaeth. Eto ni chynigiodd ei esboniad nes ei fod yn wynebu’r posibilrwydd o achos yn y GMC. Nid fy lle i yw dyfarnu ynghylch a oedd y cofnod yn y nodiadau yn gamgymeriad diffuant. Fodd bynnag, nid gwaith y PPC oedd gwneud hynny ychwaith.
Er mwyn cyflawnrwydd, adroddaf hanes pellach yr achos hwn. Yng ngolau penderfyniad y PPC, rhoddwyd pwysau pellach gan y teulu ar y Crwner i gynnal cwêst. Gofynnodd y Crwner i gael gweld papurau’r GMC. Awgrymodd cyfreithwyr yn gweithredu ar ran y GMC y dylai’r Dirprwy Grwner gael y papurau perthnasol gan ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty. Datgelodd y cyfreithwyr fodolaeth ymateb Dr JK 07 a dweud y byddai’r GMC yn gofyn am ganiatâd y meddyg i’w ddatgelu. Ni ddatgelodd y GMC fodolaeth yr adroddiad arbenigol, ond soniodd iddo gael cymorth cyngor gan ei aelodau. Roedd hyn yn amhriodol, gan yr oedd y Dirprwy Grwner wedi dweud yn glir nad oedd bryd hynny’n bwriadu derbyn honiad y teulu bod gan y GMC dystiolaeth o’i flaen o anallu clinigol. Fel y bu hi, perswadiwyd y Crwner i gynnal cwêst a thraddodwyd dedfryd o anffawd. Ymchwiliodd yr heddlu, ac, yn ei dro, cyhuddwyd Dr JK 07 o ddynladdiad. Ei amddiffyniad oedd, er iddo fod yn esgeulus, ni fu’n affwysol o esgeulus. Cafodd ei ryddfarnu o ddynladdiad, ond gwrthododd Barnwr y treial orchymyn am gostau, penderfyniad sy’n ymhlygu mai barn y Barnwr oedd bod y diffynnydd wedi tynnu’r erlyniad yn ei ben.
Roedd y gŵyn yn achos Dr JK 09 yn cynnwys honiad bod y meddyg, wrolegydd ymgynghorol, wedi rhagnodi dogn gormodol o alffa-atalydd, terazosin (Hytrin), ac y bu’r claf farw o ganlyniad iddo. Derbyniwyd y claf i’r ysbyty yng nghanol y 1990au gyda hanes tair wythnos o ddiffyg anadl a phroblemau troethiad. Datblygodd beswch anghynhyrchiol a diffyg anadl wedi hynny. Cafodd methiant gorbwyseddol y galon ei ddiagnosio, a rhagnodwyd meddyginiaeth ar ei gyfer. Chwe diwrnod yn ddiweddarach, roedd ei bwysedd gwaed a’r methiant ar y galon dan reolaeth well, ond roedd yn dal i gwyno o anhawster wrth ollwng wrin. Cafodd ei feddyginiaeth ei haddasu ac fe’i cyfeiriwyd ef at Dr JK 09. Naw niwrnod wedi i’r claf fynd i’r ysbyty, cafodd ei adolygu gan Dr JK 09 a rhagnododd 5mg o Hytrin. Mae’r gwneuthurwyr yn argymell na ddylai’r dogn cyntaf o’r cyffur hwn fod yn fwy nag 1mg, ac y dylai’r cyffur gael ei gymryd
‘cyn mynd i’r gwely’
. Pan welodd y fferyllydd y rhagnodyn, ffoniodd y ward i ddweud bod hwn yn ddogn braidd yn uchel ac y byddai angen monitro pwysedd gwaed y claf yn fanwl ar ôl rhoi’r dogn. Nid oedd y cyffur ar gael nes y diwrnod wedyn. Am 11am y diwrnod canlynol, canfuwyd y claf wedi ymgwympo. Nid oedd unrhyw Hytrin wedi’i roi iddo ac nid oedd i’w gymryd tan ‘amser gwely’. Roedd curiad ei galon yn gyflym ac yn afreolaidd. Roedd y pwysedd gwaed yn sefydlog ar 130/80. Dechreuwyd trin â digocsin. Roedd y claf i weld yn ymadfer. Am 10.05pm, rhoddwyd Hytrin yn unol â chyfarwyddiadau Dr JK 09. O fewn amser byr, roedd pwysedd gwaed y claf wedi disgyn i lefelau peryglus o isel. Bu farw wythnos yn ddiweddarach a chanfuwyd mai’r achos marwolaeth oedd niwed hypocsig ar yr organ yn sgil isbwysedd a barwyd gan gyffuriau. Roedd cwêst y crwner yn cofnodi dedfryd o anffawd a bod y farwolaeth yn ganlyniad i ragnodi i’r claf dogn o Hytrin a oedd yn fwy na’r dogn argymelledig.
Gwnaeth merch y claf ymadawedig gŵyn i’r GMC a chyflwynodd ddalen data Cyffurlyfr Cenedlaethol Prydain ar gyfer Hytrin. Gofynnwyd i Dr JK 09 am ei esboniad a chyflwynodd affidafid ar lw lle’r oedd yn cytuno ei fod wedi rhagnodi dogn a oedd yn fwy na’r dogn argymelledig, ond dywedodd iddo wneud hynny ar sail trafodaeth yr oedd wedi’i chael gyda chynrychiolydd lleol cwmni cyffuriau a oedd yn ei gyflenwi neu’i weithgynhyrchu. Dywedodd iddo gael ei gynghori bod y dogn mwy hwn yn cael ei ragnodi gan feddygon a bod ‘sgil effeithiau’n brin’. Dywedodd na allai gadarnhau’r sgwrs hon ond na fyddai fyth wedi mynd yn groes i gyngor y ddalen data heb fod wedi cael arweiniad. Honnodd ei fod wedi trin cleifion eraill â dogn 5mg heb effaith niweidiol. Dywedodd hefyd ei fod, wedi hynny, wedi mynychu cynhadledd wrolegwyr, lle’r oedd papur wedi’i gyflwyno a oedd yn adrodd am astudiaeth o 30 o ddynion oedrannus a oedd wedi’u trin yn ddyddiol â 5mg o Hytrin. Roedd dau wedi dioddef penysgafnder ond, fel arall, nid oedd unrhyw sgil effeithiau difrifol. Roedd wedi ceisio cysylltu â’r wrolegwyr a oedd wedi cyflwyno’r papur, ond yn aflwyddiannus. Nid oedd ychwaith wedi gallu cael copi o’u papur. Cyflwynodd grynodeb o’r papur o gylchgrawn Prydeinig, ond nid oedd hwn yn sôn am y dogn a ddefnyddiwyd yn yr arbrawf. Ychwanegodd Dr JK 09 hefyd na ddywedwyd wrtho am ymgwympiad y claf yn ystod bore’r diwrnod a ddigwyddodd. Pe dywedwyd wrtho, byddai wedi dweud na ddylid rhoi Hytrin, gan mai ar gyfer gollyngdod symptomau’r llwybr wrinol yn unig ydoedd. Roedd yn feirniadol hefyd o’r modd yr ymdriniwyd â’r argyfwng yn dilyn rhoi’r cyffur. Roedd o’r farn y dylid fod wedi mynd â’r claf i ofal dwys, ond yn hytrach cafodd ei drin gan staff iau ar y ward.
Daeth yr achos gerbron y PPC, a benderfynodd peidio’i gyfeirio at y PCC. Roedd y llythyr esboniad a anfonwyd at yr achwynydd yn esbonio’r penderfyniad ar y sail bod y meddyg
(the patient’s)
Yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Dr Steel bod hwn yn
‘benderfyniad ffiniol’
. Dywedodd, ar ôl ystyriaeth ofalus, y byddai’r PPC wedi penderfynu, at ei gilydd, nad oedd yr enghraifft unigol hon o gamfarnu clinigol, yr oedd y meddyg wedi dweud ei bod yn edifar ganddo, yn achos priodol i’w gyfeirio at y PCC. Byddai’r PPC wedi defnyddio arbenigedd clinigol ei aelodau ei hun wrth ddod i’r penderfyniad.
Roedd Dr Trowell o’r farn y dylai’r achos fod wedi’i gyfeirio ymlaen. Byddai cyfreithwyr y GMC wedyn wedi cael y cyfle i ymchwilio ymhellach i’r hawliadau amrywiol a oedd yn cael eu gwneud gan y meddyg yn ei ymateb. Mynegodd y farn, be bai’r achos hwn wedi dod at y PPC ar ôl achos
, yn hytrach na chyn hynny, byddid wedi ymdrin ag ef yn wahanol. Roedd yn hyderus hefyd, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, y byddai achos fel hwn yn cael ei ymchwilio’n llawn ar gyfnod cynnar cyn bod unrhyw benderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud.
Mae’n eglur, fel y cydnabu Dr Trowell, bod y PPC, yn yr achos hwn, wedi mynd y tu hwnt i’w bwerau eto. Dylai fod wedi cyfeirio’r achos hwn ymlaen er mwyn gallu ymchwilio i hawliadau amrywiol y meddyg. Fel yr oedd hi, derbyniodd y PPC bob un o’r hawliadau fel rhai gwir, ac yna llunio barn ynghylch y modd y dylid delio â’r achos hwn. Dylai fod wedi ystyried pa un a allai rhagnodi dogn bum gwaith y dogn argymelledig fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Pe gallai (ac yn amlwg, fe allai), dylai’r achos fod wedi cael ei gyfeirio. Addefwyd y ffeithiau sylfaenol. Gwaith y PCC, nid y PPC, oedd penderfynu ar wirionedd esboniad y meddyg a pha un a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg mewn gwirionedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM.

---  ---
Mae’r ddau achos adolygiad barnwrol (
), y cyfeiriais atynt, yn dangos yn glir bod y PPC, yn yr achosion hynny, wedi mynd y tu hwnt i’w bwerau trwy ddod i ddyfarniad terfynol ynghylch a allai’r materion honedig fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM a’i fod, yn achos
, wedi camgyfeirio’i hun ynghylch ystyr SPM. Yn achos
, roedd y GMC yn amlwg wedi derbyn beirniadaethau’r Llys; yn wir roedd wedi gofyn amdanynt. Fodd bynnag, yn nhystiolaeth ei dystion a’i argymhelliad i’r Ymchwiliad, ei safbwynt oedd nad oedd yr achosion adolygiad barnwrol yn cynrychioli safon gyffredinol penderfyniadau’r PPC. Beth bynnag, dywedwyd, wedi i’r
gael ei gynhyrchu i arwain aelodau’r PPC, fe allai unrhyw broblemau yno fod wedi’u datrys. Gallaf weld na ddylid dweud bod y PPC yn camgyfeirio’i hun yn gyson gan y canfuwyd iddo wneud hynny mewn dau achos adolygiad barnwrol. Ond roedd y problemau yn yr achosion hynny’n sylfaenol iawn. Roeddent yn ymwneud â thri phenderfyniad ar wahân. Mae’n naturiol mai ychydig iawn o achosion sy’n mynd ymlaen at adolygiad barnwrol; ni chafodd y feddyginiaeth ei defnyddio o gwbl yn erbyn y GMC nes diwedd y 1990au. Ymddengys yn debygol i mi bod y camgymeriadau a ddatgelwyd yn yr achosion adolygiad barnwrol yn nodweddiadol o ymagwedd y PPC.
Fodd bynnag, nid yr achosion adolygiad barnwrol yw’r unig dystiolaeth sydd ar gael mewn perthynas ag ansawdd penderfyniadau’r PPC. Arsylwodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr weithrediad y PPC mewn nifer fawr o achosion a mynegi’u pryder nad oedd aelodau’r PPC i weld yn deall eu rôl na’r prawf yr oeddent i’w gymhwyso. Mae’r achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn taflu goleuni hefyd ar weithrediad y PPC. Roedd panelau PPC yn eistedd yn breifat ac nid oedd unrhyw fodd i fonitro nac archwilio’u canlyniadau. Mae’r adolygiadau barnwrol a’r nifer fach o achosion yr edrychodd yr Ymchwiliad arnynt yn gipolwg yn unig i’r cyhoedd o’r hyn a oedd yn digwydd yno. Mae arsylwadau’r tîm PSI, yr achosion adolygiad barnwrol a thystiolaeth yr Ymchwiliad ei hun bob un ohonynt yn cyflwyno darlun tebyg. Gyda’i gilydd, mae’r ffynonellau tystiolaeth gwahanol hyn yn fy arwain i’r casgliad bod y PPC, wrth wneud penderfyniadau, yn aml yn mynd y tu hwnt i’w bwerau ac yn cymhwyso’r prawf cyfreithiol anghywir. Wrth gwrs, nid wyf yn dweud bod y PPC yn anghywir bob tro pan oedd yn gwrthod cyfeirio achos ymlaen at y PCC. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cael fy ngyrru i’r casgliad ei fod yn anghywir mewn nifer sylweddol o achosion a bod yr achosion hynny yn peri pryder go iawn bod y PPC wedi cael ei ddylanwadu llawer gormod gan ei ddymuniad i fod yn ‘deg i feddygon’ a’i fod yn ymboeni rhy ychydig o lawer am ddiogelu cleifion a’r cyhoedd.
Yr hyn sy’n peri pryder arbennig i’r Ymchwiliad yw’r dystiolaeth ystadegol sy’n dangos bod llawer o achosion o euogfarnau (o natur go ddifrifol yn ôl pob golwg) wedi’u cau gan y PPC. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi archwilio’r achosion hyn yn fanwl, ond mae’r ffigurau’n peri pryder ac yn codi ofn bod y GMC, yn hyn o beth hefyd, wedi bod yn methu diogelu cleifion.
Rwy’n bryderus hefyd ynghylch y modd y cafodd rhai achosion eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol er gwaetha’r ffaith bod tystiolaeth amlwg o ymddygiad a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM a dim tystiolaeth go iawn o afiechyd. Rwy’n derbyn, wrth gwrs, y gall cyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol fod yn fodd priodol - y modd gorau hyd yn oed - o ddiogelu cleifion a’r cyhoedd mewn rhai achosion. Fodd bynnag, yn achos Dr JO 04, ni ellir dweud hynny. Ni chafodd y gwir ynghylch ymddygiad anonest ac anfoesegol honedig y meddyg ei sefydlu erioed ac nid oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth feddygol iddo gael ei yrru i gael gafael ar gyffuriau drwy fodd anonest o ganlyniad i gaethni. Ar ôl ychydig o amser dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, bydd y meddyg yn ddiau yn rhydd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad ac eto, am a ŵyr neb, fe all fod yn gwbl anonest.
Ymddengys i mi bod nifer o achosion gwaelodol am fethiannau’r PPC. Yn gyntaf, nid oedd pwerau a dyletswyddau statudol y Pwyllgor wedi’u pennu’n eglur yn y ddeddfwriaeth. Roedd yn rhaid i’r PPC benderfynu pa un a ddylai unrhyw achos
‘gael ei gyfeirio ar gyfer ymchwilio’
gan y PCC. Roedd y Rheolau’n amodi’n unig y dylai, wrth gyfeirio achos at y PCC, nodi’r materion a oedd, yn ei farn ef,
‘i weld yn codi cwestiwn ynghylch a yw’r ymarferydd wedi cyflawni camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’
. Ym Mhennod 17, disgrifiais yr anhawster a gafwyd dros gyfnod o flynyddoedd lawer wrth ddiffinio ac esbonio SPM. Ymddengys yn amlwg i mi, at ddibenion sicrhau cysondeb a thegwch, y dylai’r GMC, fel corff, fod wedi rhoi ystyriaeth ofalus iawn i swyddogaeth briodol y PPC, o gymharu â swyddogaethau’r sgrinwyr a’r PCC, a dylai fod wedi datblygu canllawiau clir ar gyfer ei weithredu. Ymddengys, hyd at 2001, pan gynhyrchwyd yr
, credwyd nad oedd angen unrhyw arweiniad gan fod aelodau’r PPC yn bobl broffesiynol uchel eu parch ac yn aelodau lleyg o’r Cyngor a gyflawnai eu dyletswyddau mewn modd cydwybodol. Nid wyf yn amau eu cydwybodolrwydd, ond mae’n eglur bod eu dealltwriaeth o natur eu swyddogaeth yn ddiffygiol, fwy na thebyg oherwydd bod llawer ohonynt yn gweithredu fel sgrinwyr ar brydiau, ac fel aelodau o’r PCC droeon eraill, a’u bod yn drysu’u rolau amrywiol. At hynny, gadawodd y diffyg arweiniad i unigolion ffurfio’u barnau eu hunain ar ystod eang o bynciau, gan gynnwys, er enghraifft, y trothwy ar gyfer SPM a rôl tystiolaeth achlust yng ngwrandawiadau’r GMC.
Problem sylfaenol ddifrifol arall fu diffyg meini prawf priodol ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau. Ni fu ymgais unedig erioed i ddiffinio trothwyau ar gyfer SPM, y gellid eu cymhwyso ar gyfer ffurfiau amrywiol o gamymddygiad. Ar brydiau, roedd enghreifftiau o’r hyn a allai neu na allai gael eu hystyried fel SPM yn cael eu rhoi, ond nid oedd y rhain fyth mwy na chasgliad amrywiol wedi’i dynnu o amrywiaeth eang o wahanol fathau o ymddygiad. Ni fu erioed yr hyn a alwodd yr Athro Allen yn ‘hierarchaeth’ o enghreifftiau o gamymddygiad y gellid sefydlu trothwyau oddi wrtho. Er bod yr
yn ddiau wedi cynorthwyo wrth gyfeirio meddwl y PPC i’r mathau o gwestiynau y dylai fod wedi bod yn eu gofyn (a’i gymell i beidio ystyried ystyriaethau amherthnasol), ni ddarparodd unrhyw gymorth o gwbl wrth benderfynu a oedd achos yn cyrraedd neu heb fod yn cyrraedd y trothwy gofynnol er mwyn cyfeirio at y PCC. Hyd nes yr eir i’r afael â’r broblem hon, bydd anawsterau gydag unrhyw berson neu gorff sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau o fewn y GMC.
Cyn bo hir iawn, ni fydd y PPC yn bodoli mwyach. Gellid dweud, am y rheswm hwnnw, y bu fawr o bwynt mewn archwilio’i weithrediad, gan mai o ddiddordeb hanesyddol yn unig yw ei fethiannau. Nid wyf yn derbyn hynny, am dri rheswm. Yn y dyfodol, bydd swyddogaethau hidlo’r PPC yn cael eu cyflawni gan archwilwyr achos yn bennaf, na fyddant yn aelodau Cyngor ond a fydd dan gontract i’r GMC i ymgymryd â’r gwaith ac a fydd yn cael eu cyfarwyddo a’u rheoli gan aelodau’r Cyngor a staff. Yn ddamcaniaethol, mae hynny i weld yn syniad da; rhaid aros i weld sut y bydd yn gweithio’n ymarferol. Fodd bynnag, pa bryd bynnag y bydd archwilwyr achos yn anghytuno ynghylch a ddylai achos gael ei gyfeirio at banel FTP ar gyfer gwrandawiad, bydd rhaid i’r IC benderfynu beth ddylai ddigwydd. I’r graddau hynny, bydd yn olynydd i’r PPC. Yn ail, hyd at yn ddiweddar, mae aelodau panelau PPC wastad wedi bod yn aelodau o’r GMC. Mae archwilio ethos y PPC yn berthnasol i fy asesiad o ethos y GMC fel cyfanrwydd ac i’m hargymhellion i mewn perthynas â pha un a yw’r GMC yn barod i, ac yn gallu, darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion yn y modd y mae’n rheoleiddio meddygon yn y dyfodol. Yn drydydd, ym 1996, ymrwymodd y GMC i ddatblygu gweithdrefnau a phrosesau a fyddai’n deg, yn wrthrychol ac yn dryloyw. Roedd y rheiny’n eiriau teg a phriodol. Bu’n bwysig archwilio penderfyniadau gwirioneddol y PPC, i ganfod sut maent wedi cymharu’n ffafriol â dyheadau’r GMC. Mae canlyniad yr archwiliad hwnnw’n awgrymu i mi bod bwlch rhwng y dyhead a realiti.

---  ---
Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Swyddogaeth a Phwerau'r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Y Weithdrefn mewn Gwrandawiad gerbron y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Gweithgor y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol
Datblygiadau Diweddar
Adfer i'r Gofrestr Feddygol
Apeliadau a Chyfeiriadau
Trafodaeth

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais, dan yr hen weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP), y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) oedd pwyllgor disgyblu y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC). Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio swyddogaeth a phwerau’r PCC ac yn archwilio’i weithdrefnau a’r sancsiynau a oedd ar gael iddo. Byddaf yn ystyried rhai o benderfyniadau’r PCC ar sancsiynu, yn enwedig fel y maent a wnelo â materion sydd o ddiddordeb a phryder i’r Ymchwiliad. Byddaf yn ystyried gweithdrefnau’r PCC a phenderfyniadau a wnaethpwyd gan Weithgor ym 1999. Byddaf yn ystyried effaith penderfyniadau Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor (ac yn fwy diweddar yr Uchel Lys) ar weithrediad y PCC. Byddaf yn archwilio datblygiadau mwy diweddar yn ogystal, gan gynnwys newidiadau i’r trefniadau ar gyfer adfer i’r gofrestr. I gloi, byddaf yn trafod rhai o’r prif anawsterau a wynebodd y PCC yn y gorffennol a’r modd y gellid delio â’r anawsterau hynny yn y dyfodol.
Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth gan yr Athro Graeme Catto (Llywydd y GMC), Mr Finlay Scott (Prif Weithredwr) a Syr Donald Irvine (cyn Lywydd uniongyrchol) mewn perthynas â rhai o’r materion sy’n cael eu trafod yn y Bennod hon. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth hefyd gan Dr Krishna Korlipara, a fu’n aelod o’r GMC er 1984 ac a oedd yn aelod o’r PCC ar adegau amrywiol rhwng 1984 a 1997. Darparwyd datganiad tyst gan Dr Joan Trowell, Cadeirydd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer. Fe wnaeth yr Athro Isobel Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi (PSI) Prifysgol Westminster, wneud dadansoddiad o ganlyniadau achosion PCC, a chyhoeddwyd y canlyniadau yn eu Hadroddiadau ym 1996 a 2000 a’u Papur yn 2003. Wrth ysgrifennu’r Bennod hon, tynnais ar eu gwaith hwythau a hefyd ar lawer o ddogfennau a ddatgelwyd gan y GMC. Ymysg y dogfennau hyn oedd Adroddiad Gweithgor y PCC a gynhyrchwyd ym mis Mai 1999 a’r Indicative Sanctions Guidance (ISG), a gyhoeddwyd gyntaf yn 2001 ac a ddiweddarwyd yn 2003 ac eto yn 2004. Cafodd yr arweiniad ei gynllunio i gynorthwyo aelodau o’r PCC i ddod i benderfyniadau cyson ar sancsiynau, a bwriadwyd iddo roi cymorth tebyg i aelodau o banelau FTP dan y gweithdrefnau newydd.

---  ---
O’i sefydlu ym 1980, roedd cyfansoddiad y PCC yn cael ei reoli’n olynol gan Orchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Rheolau’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer) (y Rheolau Cyfansoddiad) 1980, 1986 a 1996. Rhwng 1980 a 1986, roedd y PCC yn cynnwys y Cadeirydd, Dirprwy Gadeirydd, 16 aelod meddygol a dau aelod lleyg o’r GMC (h.y. 20 aelod i gyd). Cworwm cyfreithiol y PCC oedd pump. Roedd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad yn amodi na ddylai mwy na deg aelod o’r PCC gael eu gwahodd i eistedd ar banelau ar gyfer gwrando achosion. Roedd yn rhaid i’r rheiny a oedd yn cael ei gwahodd i fod yn bresennol mewn gwrandawiad panel gynnwys naill ai’r Cadeirydd neu’r Is Gadeirydd neu’r ddau, wyth aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg o’r PCC. Yn amodol ar y gofynion hynny, roedd aelodau panel i’w dewis, cyn belled ag yr oedd yn ymarferol, yn eu tro o blith pob aelod o’r PCC.
O 1980, roedd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad yn caniatáu’r Llywydd i ddewis pa un i eistedd fel Cadeirydd y PCC neu beidio. Os oedd y Llywydd yn dewis peidio gwneud hynny, roedd yn ofynnol iddo benodi aelod arall o’r GMC fel Cadeirydd. Rhwng 1980 a 1996, roedd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r Llywydd benodi un aelod o’r GMC fel Dirprwy Gadeirydd y PCC. O 1980, roedd unrhyw benodiadau i Gadeiryddiaeth a Dirprwy Gadeiryddiaeth y PCC yn amodol ar gymeradwyaeth y Cyngor llawn. Roedd Aelodau’r PCC (ac eithrio’r Cadeirydd a’r Dirprwy Gadeirydd) yn cael eu hethol yn flynyddol.
Ym 1986, 1987 a 1994, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad i ganiatáu cynnydd yn aelodau‘r PCC. Erbyn 1994, roedd gan y PCC 34 o aelodau, yn cynnwys 26 o aelodau meddygol (gan gynnwys y Cadeirydd a’r Dirprwy Gadeirydd) ac wyth aelod lleyg. Cafodd nifer yr aelodau a wahoddwyd i eistedd ar wrandawiad ei leihau i wyth. Roedd yn rhaid i wyth o’r rheiny fod yn aelodau lleyg o’r PCC. Y cworwm cyfreithiol ar gyfer panel PCC oedd pump, i gynnwys o leiaf un aelod lleyg.
Ym 1994, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad ymhellach i ddarparu ar gyfer y sefyllfa lle’r oedd nifer annigonol o aelodau i wneud cworwm. Rhoddwyd y grym i’r Llywydd i benodi i’r PCC dros dro unrhyw aelod o’r GMC a fyddai wedi bod yn gymwys i sefyll i gael ei ethol/hethol i’r PCC. Ym 1996, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad eto i leihau aelodaeth y PCC i 30. O’r amser hwnnw, Roedd yn ofynnol i’r Llywydd benodi dau aelod o’r GMC fel Dirprwy Gadeiryddion, a fyddai’n cadeirio gwrandawiadau yn absenoldeb y Cadeirydd. Bu cynnydd sylweddol yn nifer yr achosion a oedd yn cael eu cyfeirio at y PCC yn ystod canol y 1990au a galluogodd penodi Dirprwy Gadeirydd ychwanegol nifer fwy o wrandawiadau gael eu cynnal gan banelau o’r PCC â chyfansoddiad gwahanol. O 1996, roedd cyfanswm aelodaeth y PCC yn cynnwys 23 aelod meddygol a saith aelod lleyg.
Yn 2000, newidiwyd Rheolau’r Cyfansoddiad i leihau cworwm cyfreithiol panel PCC i dri, gan gynnwys o leiaf un aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio y rhoddwyd y grym i’r GMC yn 2000 hefyd i gyfethol pobl nad oeddent yn aelodau o’r GMC neu ‘gyfranogion’, gyda chymwysterau meddygol neu’n lleyg, i eistedd ar ei bwyllgorau FTP. Bryd hynny, roedd gan y PCC ôl-groniad mawr o achosion ac roedd oedi difrifol o ran dod ag achosion at y cam gwrandawiad. Fe wnaeth benodi nifer fawr o gyfranogion hi’n bosibl i banelau lluosog o’r PCC eistedd ar yr un pryd. Yn 2000, eisteddodd panelau PCC am gyfanswm o 129 diwrnod. Yn 2001, cynyddodd hynny i 242 diwrnod ac, yn 2002, i 631 diwrnod. Yn 2003, disgynnodd y ffigur ychydig i 595 diwrnod. Er mis Gorffennaf 2003, pan leihawyd nifer aelodau’r Cyngor i 35, nid yw aelodau wedi eistedd ar banelau PCC oni bai y profwyd ei bod yn amhosibl dod o hyd i nifer digonol o gyfranogion i wneud hynny.

---  ---
Swyddogaeth y PCC oedd dyfarnu ar achosion disgyblu.
Achosion Euogfarnau ac Achosion Ymddygiad
Roedd Adran 7(1) Deddf Meddygaeth 1978 (a ddaeth i rym ym mis Awst 1980) yn pennu pwerau’r PCC. Amododd:
Atgynhyrchwyd y pwerau hyn yn adran 36(1) Deddf Meddygaeth 1983 (Deddf 1983) ac aros yn ddigyfnewid yn eu hanfod. Felly, swyddogaeth y PCC oedd penderfynu’n gyntaf a oedd meddyg a oedd wedi cael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio ato wedi bod yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM) neu wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd. Os felly, roedd yn rhaid iddo fynd ymlaen i ystyried pa sancsiwn, os o gwbl, oedd yn briodol.

---  ---
Roedd y weithdrefn a oedd i’w mabwysiadu gan y PCC mewn gwrandawiad achos yn cael ei nodi yn Atodlen 4 i Ddeddf 1983 (Atodlen 4 i Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978 yn flaenorol) ac yng Ngorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefnau) 1988 (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 i raddau helaeth yn atgynhyrchu’r darpariaethau a oedd wedi’u cynnwys yn flaenorol yng Ngorchymyn Cyfrin Gyngor Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (Gweithdrefnau) 1980. Byddaf yn crynhoi’r weithdrefn fel ag yr oedd ar adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Tachwedd a mis Rhagfyr 2003.
Gwrandawiad Cyhoeddus
Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol, ac eithrio mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol, y dylai gweithdrefnau’r PCC gael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus. Gallai aelodau panel, fodd bynnag, gydymgynghori (h.y. trafod eu canfyddiadau a’u penderfyniadau ar sancsiynau, ynghyd ag unrhyw faterion eraill a oedd yn codi yn ystod y gwrandawiad) yn breifat.
Rôl yr Asesydd Cyfreithiol
Cyfeiriais ym Mhennod 20 at rôl a dyletswyddau‘r asesydd cyfreithiol. Roedd aelodau’r panelau PCC yn cael eu cynghori mewn gwrandawiadau gan asesydd cyfreithiol. Roedd yn rhaid i unrhyw gyngor a oedd yn cael ei roi i banel y PCC gan asesydd cyfreithiol gael ei roi ym mhresenoldeb y partïon a oedd yn bresennol yn y gwrandawiad neu’u cynrychiolwyr. Roedd hawl gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol fynd gydag aelodau o’r panel PCC wrth iddynt gydymgynghori’n breifat ac i roi cyngor fel yr oedd yn briodol. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn ofynnol i’r asesydd cyfreithiol hysbysu’r partïon neu’u cynrychiolwyr yn gyhoeddus am unrhyw gyngor a roddwyd (ac am unrhyw gwestiwn a oedd wedi arwain at y cyngor hwnnw) cyn gynted â phosibl wedi i’r cyngor gael ei roi. Roedd yn rhaid i’r cyngor a oedd yn cael ei roi i’r partïon gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol gael ei gofnodi ac roedd rhaid bod copi o’r cofnod yn cael ei roi i bob parti neu gynrychiolydd. Os nad oedd aelodau o banel PCC yn derbyn cyngor yr asesydd cyfreithiol, roedd rhaid gwneud cofnod o’r cwestiwn a gafodd ei gyfeirio ato/ati, y cyngor a roddwyd a’r gwrthodiad i dderbyn y cyngor, ynghyd â’r rhesymau dros ei wrthod. Roedd yn rhaid i gopi o’r cofnod hwnnw gael ei roi i bob parti, neu berson yn cynrychioli parti, yn y gwrandawiad.
Yr Achosion Lled-Droseddol
Roedd gweithdrefnau panel PCC yn debyg i weithdrefnau llys troseddau. Roedd y gwrandawiad yn un gwrthwynebus yn hytrach nag un chwilysaidd. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd y ddwy ochr yn cystadlu, bob un ohonynt yn ceisio perswadio’r panel am wirionedd ei dystiolaeth a chadernid ei haeriadau. Roedd ‘achos yr erlyniad’ (yn gŵyn neu’n euogfarn) yn cael ei gyflwyno fel arfer gan gyfreithiwr neu gwnsler wedi’i gyfarwyddo gan y GMC. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau (ac mewn achos ymddygiad yn unig) roedd yn agored i achwynydd, yn bersonol neu drwy gynrychiolydd cyfreithiol, i gynnal ei achos/hachos ei hun. Roedd hyn yn cael ei wneud weithiau, ond roedd yn fwy arferol, pan oedd yr achwynydd yn unigolyn preifat, i’r GMC ‘gymryd drosodd’ y gŵyn ac i gynnal yr achos yn y gwrandawiad gerbron y panel PCC. Fel arfer, roedd meddygon a oedd yn ymddangos gerbron panel PCC yn cael eu cynrychioli gan gyfreithiwr, trwy eu sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol yn gyffredinol.
Gallai tystion gael eu gwysio ac roedd tystiolaeth yn cael ei rhoi ar lw. Roedd Rheol 50 Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi y gallai’r PCC derbyn tystiolaeth lafar, dogfennol neu dystiolaeth arall o unrhyw ffaith neu fater a oedd i weld yn berthnasol i’w Ymchwiliad i’r achos ger ei fron. Roedd Rheol 50 yn amodol i’r profiso, lle’r oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth yn cael ei rhoi na fyddai’n dderbyniol mewn achos troseddol yn Lloegr, ni ddylai gael ei derbyn oni bai, ar ôl ymgynghori â’r asesydd cyfreithiol, bod y PCC yn fodlon bod ei ddyletswydd i wneud ymchwiliad priodol i’r achos ger ei fron yn ei gwneud yn ddymunol i dderbyn y dystiolaeth honno. Cyfeiriais ym Mhennod 20 at sylwadau Meistr Ustus Sullivan yn achos
am y modd y byddai wedi disgwyl i’r PCC arfer ei ddisgresiwn o ran derbyn tystiolaeth a fyddai fel arall yn annerbyniadwy. Nododd Sullivan J nad yw’r PCC yn union yr un sefyllfa â llys troseddol. Mae ganddo rôl ymchwilio a rheoleiddio bwysig er lles y cyhoedd, ac mae’n rhaid iddo, felly, ystyried lles y cyhoedd drwy sicrhau ymchwilio’n drylwyr i gwynion. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi, o archwilio achos
ac achosion eraill yr edrychais atynt, beth bynnag oedd agwedd y PCC tuag at dystiolaeth annerbyniadwy, mai barn y rheiny a oedd yn gwneud penderfyniadau yng nghyfnodau cynnar y gweithdrefnau FTP oedd, os mai achlust oedd y dystiolaeth, roedd yn annhebygol o gael ei derbyn gan y PCC neu, o’i derbyn, ychydig o bwys fyddai’n cael ei rhoi iddi. Mae’n bosibl bod rhyw rai wedi cael profiad o’r ymagwedd hon wrth eistedd ar y PCC yn y gorffennol.
Roedd Rheol 50(4) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn rhoi’r grym i’r PCC beri i unrhyw berson gael ei alw fel tyst mewn unrhyw achos ger ei fron, pa un a oedd y partïon yn cydsynio neu beidio. Roedd y grym gan y PCC hefyd i holi unrhyw dyst ei hun neu drwy’r asesydd cyfreithiol. Roedd hawl gan y meddyg roi tystiolaeth lafar ond nid oedd dan unrhyw rwymedigaeth i wneud hynny.
Achosion Euogfarnau
Mewn achos euogfarn, wedi i’r euogfarn gael ei phrofi (drwy gyflwyno’r dystysgrif euogfarn fel arfer), nid oedd rhaid i’r ffeithiau a arweiniodd ati gael eu profi yn y gwrandawiad. Roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn caniatáu cynrychiolydd y GMC i nodi tystiolaeth am yr amgylchiadau’n arwain at yr euogfarn ac am gymeriad a hanes blaenorol y meddyg.
Roedd y geiriau ‘hanes blaenorol’ yn gyfeiriad at hanes FTP y meddyg, h.y. unrhyw sancsiwn blaenorol a bennwyd ar y meddyg gan y PCC, y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC) neu’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP). Ni fyddai gan y PCC, wrth gwrs, unrhyw wybodaeth yn ymwneud â materion fel cwynion blaenorol i’r GMC am y meddyg a gafodd eu cau gan staff y GMC, neu a gafodd eu cau gan y sgrinwyr neu’u gwrthod gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC). Ni fyddai gan y PCC unrhyw wybodaeth ychwaith am gŵynion blaenorol at, neu gamau disgyblu gan, unrhyw gorff GIG, oni bai bod y gŵyn neu’r gweithredu yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â chynnwys yr euogfarn neu’r gŵyn yr oedd y PCC yn delio â nhw ar y pryd. Y canlyniad oedd y gallai’n wir fod darlun anghyflawn gan y PCC o hanes blaenorol y meddyg.
Roedd hawl gan y meddyg neu’i gynrychiolydd/chynrychiolydd wedyn i annerch y PCC er mwyn lliniaru, a nodi’i dystiolaeth/thystiolaeth ei hun am yr amgylchiadau’n arwain at yr euogfarn ac am ei gymeriad/chymeriad a hanes blaenorol. Fe allai’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth ei hun ond nid oedd yn gorfod gwneud hynny, ac, yn ymarferol, nid oedd yn gwneud hynny’n aml. Roedd yn arferol i’r meddyg gyflwyno tystlythyrau gan gleifion a/neu gydweithwyr. Roedd yr ISG a gynhyrchwyd gyntaf yn 2002, fel y dywedais, yn cynnwys rhybudd y dylid cymryd gofal wrth lunio casgliadau o dystlythyrau felly. Rhybuddiodd, yn benodol, bod rhai tystlythyrau’n cael eu hysgrifennu gan bersonau a gredai nad oedd y meddyg dan sylw yn euog o’r camymddygiad honedig; roedd dilysrwydd barn felly yn amlwg yn amheus os oedd y meddyg wedi’i ganfod/chanfod yn euog ers hynny. Hefyd, rhybuddiodd yr ISG y gallai fod rhesymau diwylliannol am absenoldeb tystlythyrau. Ni ddylai aelodau panel ragdybio na fyddai tystlythyrau ar gael o ofyn amdanynt.
Byddai’r panel PCC yn mynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried cwestiwn sancsiynu. Byddaf yn mynd yn ôl at bennu sancsiynau nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Achosion Ymddygiad
Mewn achos ymddygiad, byddai’r meddyg yn wynebu cyhuddiad, neu gyfres o gyhuddiadau, bob un ohonynt yn cynnwys un neu fwy o honiadau ffeithiol. Fe allai rhai honiadau neu gyhuddiadau cyfan gael eu haddef, a rhai eraill eu gwadu. Fe allai’r cyfan gael eu haddef, neu’u gwadu.
‘Achos yr Erlyniad’
Byddai cynrychiolydd y GMC (neu’r achwynydd) yn nodi tystiolaeth o’r ffeithiau honedig na chawsant eu haddef gan y meddyg.
Argymhelliad Dim Achos
Fel mewn treial troseddol, pan fyddai ‘achos yr erlyniad’ yn cael ei gau, roedd yn agored i’r meddyg argymell nad oedd tystiolaeth ddigonol wedi’i nodi mewn perthynas ag unrhyw rai neu’r cyfan o’r ffeithiau a oedd yn destun dadlau, ac nad oedd panel y PPC felly yn gallu canfod y ffeithiau hynny wedi’u profi. Fe allai’r meddyg argymell hefyd, mewn perthynas ag unrhyw newid, bod y ffeithiau yr oedd tystiolaeth wedi’i nodi amdanynt neu’r ffeithiau a oedd wedi’u haddef, yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM. Roedd cynrychiolydd y GMC (neu’r achwynydd) yn cael cyfle wedyn i ateb yr argymhelliad ac roedd y meddyg yn cael cyfle i ateb. Byddai panel y PCC wedyn yn penderfynu a ddylai argymhelliad y meddyg gael ei gynnal. Os oedd yr argymhelliad yn cael ei gynnal, canfyddiad y panel PCC fyddai nad oedd y meddyg yn euog o SPM mewn perthynas â’r materion yr oedd y cyhuddiad perthnasol yn ymwneud â nhw.
‘Achos yr Amddiffyniad’
Os nad oedd y meddyg yn gwneud unrhyw argymhelliad (neu os oedd yn gwneud argymhelliad ond ei fod yn aflwyddiannus), byddai ef/hi (drwy ei gynrychiolydd/chynrychiolydd fel arfer) yn cael y cyfle wedyn i annerch panel y PCC mewn perthynas ag unrhyw gyhuddiad a oedd heb ei benderfynu, a gallai bryd hynny nodi tystiolaeth, lafar neu ddogfennol, yn ei amddiffyniad/hamddiffyniad. Fel y dywedais, roedd yn agored i’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth ei hun.
Tystiolaeth ac Argymhellion Pellach
Ar ddiwedd y dystiolaeth a alwyd gan neu ar ran y meddyg, fe allai cynrychiolydd y GMC (neu’r achwynydd), gyda chaniatâd panel y PCC, nodi tystiolaeth i wrthbrofi unrhyw dystiolaeth a oedd wedi’i nodi gan y meddyg. Roedd cynrychiolydd y GMC (neu’r achwynydd) yn cael annerch panel y PCC wedyn. Y meddyg (neu ei gynrychiolydd/chynrychiolydd) oedd yn cael y gair olaf. Yn y cam hwn, byddai argymhellion y partïon wedi’u cyfeirio at berswadio panel y PCC pa ganfyddiadau y dylai eu gwneud mewn perthynas â’r ffeithiau a oedd yn sail i’r honiadau yn erbyn y meddyg ac mewn perthynas â pha un a oedd y ffeithiau hynny y gallai’r panel PCC ganfod eu bod wedi’u profi neu a gafodd eu haddef, yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM. Y rheiny oedd y ddau fater yr oedd yn ofynnol i’r panel PCC eu datrys yn y cam hwn o’r gweithrediadau.
Penderfyniad y Panel ar y Ffeithiau ac ar Annigonolrwydd
Roedd y ddau fater hynny wedi’u nodi yn rheol 27(2) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i’r PCC ystyried a phenderfynu, mewn perthynas â phob cyhuddiad:
(ii) whether such facts as have been so found proved or admitted would be insufficient to support a finding of serious professional misconduct ...’.
Roedd yn ofynnol i’r panel PCC ddod i benderfyniad ar y ffeithiau yn gyntaf. Er nad oedd y Rheolau yn pennu’r safon prawf a oedd i’w chymhwyso, yn ymarferol mae’r GMC wastad wedi bod o’r farn bod rhaid profi honiadau ffeithiol i’r safon prawf troseddol, h.y. y dylai aelodau panel y PCC fod yn fodlon fel eu bod yn siŵr bod y ffeithiau fel yr honnir eu bod. Mae awdurdod y Cyfrin Gyngor i gefnogi’r farn bod y safon prawf troseddol yn briodol mewn achosion disgyblu. Yn
, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor o’r farn bod y safon prawf troseddol yn briodol mewn achosion yn erbyn eiriolwr yr honnwyd ei fod/bod wedi twyllo neu gamarwain y Llys yn fwriadol. Eto, yn achos
, gwnaeth y Cyfrin Gyngor wahaniaeth rhwng achosion lle’r oedd yr honiad a oedd yn cael ei ystyried gan y corff disgyblu yn gyfystyr â chyhuddiad troseddol difrifol (ac os felly dylai’r safon prawf fod yn safon treial troseddol) ac achos lle nad oedd. Yn yr achos olaf, nid oedd
‘yn angenrheidiol nac yn ddymunol’
bod y cyhuddiad yn cael ei brofi i safonau a gweithdrefnau treial troseddol. Yr hyn a oedd yn bwysig oedd y dylai’r gweithrediadau fod yn deg i’r meddyg ym mhob agwedd.
Roedd Rheol 52(3) o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn nodi’r system bleidleisio. Roedd mwyafrif main o banel y PCC yn ddigonol i wneud penderfyniad. Os oedd y pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, roedd y rheol yn amodi bod rhaid tybio bod y cwestiwn wedi’i ddatrys o blaid y meddyg. Os oedd panel y PCC yn canfod nad oedd yr un o’r ffeithiau a honnwyd yn y cyhuddiad wedi’u profi i’r safon ofynnol, byddai canfyddiad ‘dieuog’ yn cael ei wneud.
Dylid nodi nad oes, ac na fu erioed, unrhyw ofyniad i’r PCC roi rhesymau am ei ganfyddiadau o ffaith. Mae rhesymau’n ofynnol erbyn hyn ar gyfer casgliadau ond nid ar gyfer canfyddiadau ffeithiau sylfaenol.
Roedd is-baragraff (ii) o reol 27(2) yn pennu gofyniad y dylai panel y PCC wedyn ystyried a phenderfynu, nid a oedd y ffeithiau a gafodd eu profi neu’u haddef yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ond pa un a oeddent yn
‘annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad’
o SPM. Yn y cam hwn, gofynnwyd i banel y PCC i wneud penderfyniad (y penderfyniad annigonolrwydd) ar sail y dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael, ac, os oedd yn penderfynu y byddai’r ffeithiau a brofwyd yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM, roedd yr achos ar ben. Os oedd panel y PCC yn penderfynu na fyddai’r ffeithiau yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM, byddai’r achos yn parhau. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai penderfyniad gan banel y PCC eto bod y ffeithiau a ganfu wedi’u profi neu a addefwyd yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Roedd y penderfyniad annigonolrwydd hwn yn cael ei wneud yn absenoldeb unrhyw wybodaeth am hanes FTP blaenorol y meddyg. Roedd yn bosibl y gallai panel PCC fod wedi canfod, er enghraifft, bod meddyg wedi methu mynd at glaf yr oedd angen triniaeth arno/arni, ond bod y ffeithiau’n
‘annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad’
o SPM. Byddai hynny’n anffodus os oedd y meddyg, mewn gwirionedd, wedi’i rybuddio/rhybuddio’n flaenorol am fethiant tebyg. Byddai ailadrodd ymddygiad felly wedi bod yn fwy difrifol na digwyddiad ar ei ben ei hun. Ymddengys i mi bod y broses hon o wneud penderfyniad rhagarweiniol ynghylch a oedd y ffeithiau’n
‘annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad’
o SPM yn gofyn am gyfarwyddyd gofalus iawn gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol. Y cyfarwyddyd y dylid fod wedi’i roi oedd na ddylai panel y PCC ganfod bod y ffeithiau’n
‘annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad’
o SPM oni bai ei fod yn fodlon, hyd yn oed pe bai gwybodaeth berthnasol yn cael ei chyflwyno’n ddiweddarach a oedd yn niweidiol difrifol i’r meddyg, ni fyddai’n canfod o hyd bod y ffeithiau a brofwyd neu a addefwyd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mewn geiriau eraill, dylai’r penderfyniad annigonolrwydd fod wedi’i wneud ar y rhagdybiaeth y gallai ymddygiad y meddyg, o’i roi mewn cyd-destun, ymddangos yn llawer mwy difrifol nag a wnaeth pan oedd y penderfyniad yn cael ei wneud. Rwy’n falch o weld, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, na fydd yn ofynnol i banel FTP wneud y penderfyniad annigonolrwydd rhagarweiniol hwn a oedd, yn fy marn i, yn anodd a braidd yn artiffisial ac yn debygol o arwain at achosion yn cael eu diystyru pan na ddylent. Yn fy marn i, mae’n amheus a oedd aelodau panel yn deall ac yn cymhwyso cyfarwyddyd yr asesydd cyfreithiol yn gywir. Hefyd, ni allaf weld pam yr oedd unrhyw angen am y penderfyniad annigonolrwydd. Ymddengys i mi mai’r unig beth a wnaeth oedd darparu rhwystr arall ar gyfer yr erlyniad a rhoi cynnig arall arni dros yr amddiffyniad.
Tystiolaeth a Chanfyddiadau ar Fater Camymddygiad Proffesiynol Difrifol
Roedd Rheol 28 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi, lle’r oedd panel PCC yn canfod y ffeithiau, neu rai o’r ffeithiau, a honnwyd mewn cyhuddiad a brofwyd neu a addefwyd (ac, yn ôl pob tebyg, nad oeddent yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM), dylai wahodd cynrychiolydd y GMC neu’r achwynydd) wedyn i’w annerch:
‘... as to the cicumstances leading to those facts, the extent to which such facts are indicative of serious professional misconduct on the part of the practitioner, and as to the character and previous history of the practitioner. The Solicitor or the complainant may adduce oral or documentary evidence to support an address under this rule.’
Roedd y meddyg (neu ei gynrychiolydd/chynrychiolydd) yn cael ei wahodd/gwahodd wedyn i annerch panel y PCC mewn lliniariad ac i nodi tystiolaeth i gefnogi os oedd yn dymuno. Wedi hynny, byddai panel y PCC yn cydymgynghori eto. Byddai’n ystyried pa un a oedd y ffeithiau a brofwyd yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac, os felly, pa sancsiwn a ddylid ei bennu. Yn fy marn i, roedd y ddau yma’n faterion i banel y PCC ddyfarnu yn eu cylch, yn hytrach na materion i’w profi. Fodd bynnag, mae arwyddion yn nogfennau’r GMC bod rhai pobl o’r farn bod rhaid profi SPM
. Er enghraifft, mewn dogfen o’r enw ‘Establishing the appropriate standard of proof for GMC hearings into conduct, performance and health: key issues for consideration’, a gynhyrchwyd gan Gronfa’r Brenin ym mis Hydref 2000, a fwriadwyd i ffurfio fframwaith ar gyfer trafodaeth am y safon prawf priodol i’w gymhwyso mewn gwrandawiadau FTP, dywedwyd y gallai’r safon prawf gael ei gymhwyso mewn unrhyw un o’r tri chyfnod: wrth wneud canfyddiadau o ffaith, wrth asesu pa un a oedd y ffeithiau’n gyfystyr ag SPM ac wrth benderfynu’r gosb os oedd SPM yn cael ei brofi. Yn fy marn i, dim ond y ffeithiau a oedd yn fater i’w ‘profi’; roedd y materion eraill yn faterion i ddyfarnu yn eu cylch. Mewn Papur Ymgynghorol ym mis Mawrth 2001, dywedodd y GMC bod barnau’n gwahaniaethau ynghylch a ddylai’r safon prawf troseddol gael ei gymhwyso i’r penderfyniad pa un a oedd y ffeithiau a ganfuwyd wedi’u profi yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac i sancsiynu. Rwy’n deall bod y GMC o’r farn bellach mai’r ffeithiau’n unig y mae angen eu profi i’r safon droseddol, a bod y mater ynghylch pa un a yw’r ffeithiau sydd wedi’u profi’n gyfystyr ag SPM yn fater i ddyfarnu yn ei gylch.
Wedi canfod y ffeithiau (neu rai ohonynt) wedi’u profi, fe allai panel y PCC fod wedi dod i’r casgliad bod ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad proffesiynol o natur a oedd yn annerbyniol, ond nid mor annerbyniol ei fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Pe ddigwydd hynny, ni allai’r panel weithredu o gwbl. Ni allai roi rhybudd ei hun. Ni allai anfon yr achos yn ei ôl at y PCC gyda golwg ar lythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor yn cael eu rhoi. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, roedd panel y PCC (a’r GMC, felly) i bob pwrpas, yn ddi-rym i weithredu. Nodwyd yn adroddiad Gweithgor y PCC ym 1999 y gallai panel PCC, yn unol â rheol 34, os oedd yn dymuno, wneud sylwadau ar ymddygiad y meddyg, hyd yn oed os oedd wedi canfod nad oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Wrth gwrs, roedd hynny’n iawn; fe allai’r panel wneud sylwadau. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd sylw felly’n gyfystyr â rhybudd neu gerydd swyddogol ac ni fyddai’n ffurfio rhan o hanes FTP y meddyg. Nodaf, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, y bydd y grym gan banel FTP i roi rhybudd mewn achosion lle mae’n canfod nad amharwyd ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer.
Effaith Lliniaru
Fe wnaeth yr arfer, fel y caniatawyd gan reol 28 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, sef derbyn tystiolaeth am gefndir y meddyg yn y cam cyn bod panel y PCC wedi penderfynu pa un a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM, beri cryn bryder i mi. Ymddengys i mi ei fod yn debygol iawn o fod wedi arwain at banel y PCC, wrth benderfynu a oedd y meddyg yn euog o SPM, yn ystyried deunydd a oedd, fel mater o resymeg ac egwyddor, yn amherthnasol i’r mater hwnnw. Roedd unrhyw dystiolaeth (gan gynnwys, wrth gwrs, tystiolaeth liniarol) a oedd yn effeithio ar ddifrifoldeb yr ymddygiad dan ystyriaeth yn berthnasol i’r cwestiwn pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad hwnnw’n gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae’n iawn hefyd, wrth wneud dyfarniad ynghylch a oedd gweithredoedd y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM, bod rhaid edrych ar y gweithredoedd hynny mewn cyd-destun. Byddai tystiolaeth o gyd-destun wedi’i chyflwyno fel arfer yn ystod cam cyntaf y dystiolaeth. Wedi i’r penderfyniadau ar y ffeithiau ac ar annigonolrwydd gael eu gwneud, fe allai tystiolaeth yn ymwneud â materion eraill yn wir fod wedi’i chyflwyno. Er enghraifft, yn dilyn canfyddiad bod y meddyg wedi torri cyfrinachedd claf, byddai wedi bod yn briodol i banel y PCC wrando tystiolaeth bod y meddyg, ar achlysur blaenorol, wedi’i gael/chael yn euog gan PCC o gamymddygiad tebyg. Byddai hynny wedi gwneud yr achos o dorri cyfrinachedd dan ystyriaeth yn fwy difrifol. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai tystiolaeth bod y meddyg wedi’i gael/chael yn euog gan y PCC o gamymddygiad yn codi o gamgymeriad rhagnodi difrifol wedi bod yn berthnasol i ddifrifoldeb yr achos o dorri cyfrinachedd dan ystyriaeth. Ni fyddai wedi’i wneud yn fwy na llai difrifol. Ni fyddai’r ffaith ychwaith na fu’r meddyg yn destun unrhyw gŵyn flaenorol i’r GMC wedi gwneud yr achos o dorri cyfrinachedd yn fwy na llai difrifol.
Yn yr un modd, roedd rhai ffurfiau o dystiolaeth liniarol yn berthnasol i ddifrifoldeb y camymddygiad dan sylw, ac roedd ffurfiau eraill nad oeddent. Er enghraifft, byddai’r ffaith bod meddyg wedi ymddiheuro i’r claf yn syth ar ôl i’r achos o dorri cyfrinachedd ddigwydd wedi bod yn berthnasol i ddifrifoldeb y camymddygiad. Ond ni fyddai’r ffaith fod llawer o gleifion y meddyg yn ei gael/chael yn feddyg sylwgar, gofalgar a chydymdeimladol wedi bod yn berthnasol. Byddai tystiolaeth felly am gymeriad y meddyg wedi bod yn berthnasol i sancsiynu’n unig. Roedd Rheol 28, fodd bynnag, yn caniatáu i’r meddyg roi gerbron y panel PCC, nid yn unig unrhyw liniariad yn ymwneud â’r drosedd nad oedd ef/hi wedi’i gynnig yn gynharach, ond unrhyw liniariad personol pur arall hefyd, a allai’n wir fod wedi bod yn gwbl amherthnasol i’r mater SPM. Er enghraifft, roedd yn beth cyffredin iawn i’r meddyg gyflwyno tystlythyrau gan gleifion a chydweithwyr am ei allu/gallu cyffredinol a’i gymeriad/chymeriad. Fe allai’r materion hynny’n wir fod wedi bod yn berthnasol i sancsiynu, ond roeddent yn gwbl amherthnasol i’r cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd y meddyg yn euog o SPM. Fe allai ystyried deunydd felly fod wedi arwain at ganfyddiad fod yr un ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn achos un meddyg ac nid yn achos meddyg arall. Wrth ystyried a oedd yr ymddygiad a brofwyd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, dylai panel y PCC, fel mater o egwyddor, fod wedi canolbwyntio ar ddifrifoldeb yr ymddygiad yn unig. Eto rwyf wedi gweld penderfyniadau lle mae’n amlwg, wrth benderfynu pa un a oedd y meddyg yn euog o SPM, bod panel y PCC wedi ystyried lliniariad personol pur o dystlythyrau.
Un enghraifft oedd achos
, a gafodd ei benderfynu gan banel PCC ar ddechrau 2004. Canfu panel y PCC bod y meddyg (meddyg teulu), dros gyfnod o fisoedd, wedi methu archwilio’i glaf yn ddigonol ac wedi methu ystyried cwynion am symptomau a wnaed gan y claf ei hun a chan aelodau o’i theulu. Roedd wedi priodoli cyflwr y claf (a oedd, mewn gwirionedd, yn ganser yr ysgyfaint, gyda symptomau o golli pwysau sylweddol a pheswch gwaed) i rhinitis, yn cael ei waethygu gan ffactorau seicosomatig. Addefodd fod ei ymddygiad wedi bod yn amhriodol, heb fod er lles y claf ac islaw’r safon gofal a oedd i’w ddisgwyl gan ymarferydd meddygol cofrestredig. Gwadodd i’w ymddygiad fod yn anghyfrifol, ond canfu panel y PCC iddo fod. Fodd bynnag, er gwaetha’r canfyddiad hwnnw, canfu panel y PCC nad oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Wrth ddod i’r casgliad hwnnw, fe wnaeth panel y PCC ystyried (yn ychwanegol at rai ffactorau lliniaru perthnasol yn ymwneud â’r camymddygiad ei hun) rhai ffactorau nad oedd yn fwy na lliniariad personol pur. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys nifer o dystlythyrau yn dweud bod y meddyg yn ymarferydd da a gofalgar. Soniodd am fewnwelediad y meddyg i’w fethiannau a’r ffaith ei fod wedi cymryd camau i unioni ei ddiffygion. Byddai pob un o’r materion hyn wedi bod yn berthnasol i fater sancsiynu, ond yn gwbl amherthnasol i’r mater ynghylch a oedd yr ymddygiad wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Nid wyf yn beirniadu panelwyr y PCC a ystyriodd ddeunydd felly. Roedd rheol 28 yn caniatáu deunydd felly gael ei roi ger eu bron, ac roedd yn naturiol y byddent yn cael eu dylanwadu ganddo. Nid cyfreithwyr oeddent. At hynny, roedd yr arfer o ystyried lliniariad personol amherthnasol wrth benderfynu pa un a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM yn cael ei annog gan rai penderfyniadau gan y Cyfrin Gyngor. Yn achos
, roedd panel PCC wedi pennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg yn dilyn canfyddiad o SPM. Roedd y meddyg wedi methu ymweld â chlaf mewn amgylchiadau pan ddylai fod wedi gwneud; roedd wedi holi gwraig y claf dros y ffôn, wedi dod i’r casgliad nad oedd unrhyw beth difrifol o’i le, ac wedi cynnig cysur. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd gwraig y claf wedi adrodd am symptomau o syanosis ac roedd y claf yn sâl iawn, a bu farw yn ystod y nos. Canfu panel y PCC fod y meddyg wedi gwneud
‘camgymeriad sylfaenol’
nad oedd yn gydnaws ag arfer meddygol da; yn ei farn ef, roedd y camgymeriad hwnnw’n gyfystyr ag SPM. Apeliodd y meddyg i’r Cyfrin Gyngor, gan honni bod panel y PCC wedi bod yn anghywir i’w ganfod yn euog o SPM. Roedd wedi addef iddo weithredu’n esgeulus, ond dadleuodd nad oedd ei esgeuluster o’r fath natur a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dadleuodd fod y cyngor a roddwyd i’r panel gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol wedi bod yn gamarweiniol ynghylch yr hyn a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM yng nghyd-destun yr achos. Ystyriodd y Cyfrin Gyngor, yn gyntaf, rôl yr asesydd cyfreithiol, ac yna, yr hyn a oedd yn ofynnol ar gyfer canfyddiad o SPM yng nghyd-destun achos o driniaeth esgeulus. Yn y cyd-destun hwnnw, dyfynnwyd dau ddarn o achos y Cyfrin Gyngor
. Roedd y cyntaf yn ddarn ym mharagraff 28 o’r dyfarniad yn yr achos hwnnw, a ddatganodd:
Yn y dyfarniad yn
, cafodd y dyfyniad hwn o baragraff 28 o
ei ddilyn yn uniongyrchol gan ddarn a gymerwyd o baragraff 29 o’r dyfarniad yn
‘That for every professional man whose career spans, as this appellant’s has many years and many clients, there is likely to be at least one case in which for reasons good and bad everything goes wrong - and that this was his, with no suggestion that it was in any way representative of his otherwise unblemished record’.
Yn
, dyfynnwyd y darn hwn fel pe bai’n rhan o ddyfarniad y Llys. Mewn gwirionedd, nid ydoedd; roedd yn ddyfyniad o argymhelliad y Cwnsler dros Mr Preiss, lle’r oedd y Cyfrin Gyngor o’r farn
‘bod rhywfaint o rym’
. Ymddengys bod y dyfyniad yn
o’r darn hwnnw o baragraff 29 o
yn uniongyrchol ar ôl y darn o baragraff 28 o
, sy’n delio â difrifoldeb esgeuluster a allai fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn awgrymu bod y Cyfrin Gyngor yn
yn dweud bod cofnod di-fai yn berthnasol i’r mater pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad dan sylw yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn dweud y fath beth. Fodd bynnag, ni fu unrhyw drafodaeth o’r mater hwnnw bryd hynny yn
, a symudodd y dyfarniad ymlaen i ystyried a oedd y cyngor a roddwyd gan yr asesydd cyfreithiol yn ddryslyd neu’n anghywir. Y canfyddiad oedd bod y cyngor yn amwys ac yn gamarweiniol, ac y gallai fod wedi tanseilio dilysrwydd penderfyniad panel y PCC.
Yna rhestrodd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn
y ffactorau y dylai panel y PCC fod wedi’u hystyried wrth benderfynu pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dywedwyd y dylai panel y PCC fod wedi dechrau o’r rhagosodiad bod hwn yn achos ffiniol o SPM yn seiliedig ar ddigwyddiad unigol. Aeth y penderfyniad ymlaen:
Fel y bu hi, ni chafodd yr Arglwyddi eu hargyhoeddi, pe bai’r cyngor cyfreithiol wedi bod yn gywir, y byddai panel y PCC yn anochel wedi penderfynu bod yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Roeddent o’r farn y dylai canfyddiad panel y PCC o SPM gael ei roi o’r neilltu. Mae’r geiriau a ddyfynnais uchod i weld yn ymhlygu y byddai’n briodol i’r PCC, wrth benderfynu pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM, i ystyried gwasanaeth 25 mlynedd y meddyg gyda chofnod di-fai. Yn fy marn i, os oedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn awgrymu bod lliniariad personol yn berthnasol i’r mater pa un a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM, byddai hynny’n groes i egwyddor gyffredinol. Fel y dywedais, mae lliniariad personol yn berthnasol i sancsiynu ond ni ddylai, fel mater o egwyddor, effeithio ar ba un a yw ymddygiad a brofwyd mewn achos penodol yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Nid yw’r penderfyniad yn achos Rao yn dweud yn glir y dylai
‘gyrfa ddi-fai’
gael ei hystyried wrth ystyried pa un a yw ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu beidio, er ei fod yn ymhlygu hynny. Teimlais ei bod yn angenrheidiol i dynnu sylw at y pwynt hwn oherwydd, bedwar mis ar ôl
, yn
, datganodd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn eglur y dylai cofnod da yn y gorffennol gael ei gymryd i ystyriaeth wrth ystyried a yw camymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Yn achos Silver, canfu panel y PCC y meddyg yn euog o SPM a phennodd amodau am gyfnod o 12 mis. Yr honiad, y cafodd panel y PCC ei fod wedi’i brofi, oedd bod y meddyg wedi methu’n barhaus, dros gyfnod o naw niwrnod, i ymweld â chlaf oedrannus yr oedd angen gofal arno/arni, ac, yn y pen draw, ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at yr ysbyty. Roedd y meddyg yn ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun. Canfuwyd bod y methiant i ymweld wedi deillio o fethiannau rheoli, trefnu a chyfathrebu o fewn y feddygfa. Yn fyr, er gwaethaf nifer o geisiadau i’r feddygfa am ymweliad - nid yn unig gan deulu’r claf ond gan weithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill hefyd - ni dderbyniodd Dr Silver y neges erioed ac ni aeth fyth i weld y claf. Canfu’r panel PCC, fel ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun gyda chyfrifoldeb am reoli’r feddygfa, ei fod yn gyfrifol am y methiannau hyn a’u bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Apeliodd y meddyg ar nifer o seiliau, nad oedd angen crybwyll y rhan fwyaf ohonynt gan nad oeddent yn llwyddiannus. Y sail a lwyddodd, ac sy’n berthnasol i’r pwynt sy’n cael ei drafod fan hyn, oedd nad oedd yr ymddygiad y canfuwyd oedd wedi’i brofi yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ac roedd ymagwedd panel y PCC wedi bod yn
‘llawdrwm ac annheg’
. Dywedwyd bod yr ymddygiad yn fethiant unigol, ac nid oedd unrhyw honiad o natur eang yn erbyn y meddyg. Ymddengys o’i benderfyniad bod panel y PCC wedi ystyried difrifoldeb yr ymddygiad, ei fod wedi dod i’r casgliad ei fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac wedi mynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried materion lliniarol amrywiol. Y cyntaf oedd bod y meddyg yn gweithio mewn ardal ddifreintiedig lle’r oedd yn anodd cael staff. Roedd y lliniariad hwnnw’n amlwg yn berthnasol i ddifrifoldeb y camymddygiad. Yn ail, soniodd panel y PCC bod gan y meddyg restr faith o gleifion yr oedd wedi’u gwasanaethu am 40 mlynedd fel ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun. Gall fod y gallai maint rhestr y meddyg fod yn ffactor i’w ystyried i liniaru’r drosedd os nad oedd ganddo ddigon o staff a’i fod yn cael ei orymestyn. Fodd bynnag, mae’n eglur bod y ffaith iddo fod yn ymarferydd ar ei ben ei hun yn yr ardal am 40 mlynedd yn lliniariad personol pur. Yn drydydd, soniodd panel y PCC mai hon oedd y gŵyn gyntaf a gofnodwyd yn erbyn y meddyg, a’i fod wedi cyflwyno nifer fawr o dystlythyrau. Roedd hynny’n lliniariad personol pur. Er gwaetha’r lliniariad, fodd bynnag, canfu panel y PCC bod y meddyg yn euog o SPM.
Heb sôn am feirniadu panel y PCC am ystyried lliniariad personol yn y cam hwn, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor o’r farn bod panel y PCC wedi talu sylw annigonol i’r lliniariad personol wrth benderfynu ynghylch a oedd y camymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Wrth roi dyfarniad y Pwyllgor Barnwrol, dywedodd Syr Philip Otton ei bod yn
‘hunanamlwg’
, wedi i’r canfyddiadau o ffaith gael eu gwneud, bod rhaid ystyried yr holl amgylchiadau perthnasol
y gellid gwneud canfyddiad o SPM. Roedd hynny wrth gwrs yn wir. Fodd bynnag, aeth yr Arglwyddi ymlaen i ddweud bod yr holl liniaru, yn eu barn nhw, yn berthnasol i’r penderfyniad ar SPM.
I gefnogi’r cynnig hwn, fe wnaeth yr Arglwyddi ddyfynnu darn o achos
, a oedd yn trafod elfennau cyfansoddol SPM ac a oedd yn cyfeirio’n ôl at achos
, a ddyfynnais ym Mhennod 17. Nid yw’r darn o Roylance yn dweud dim am ffactorau lliniarol. Wedyn dyfynnodd yr Arglwyddi’r un darn o baragraff 28 o’r dyfarniad yn
a’i redeg ynghyd â’r un darn o argymhelliad y Cwnsler a ddyfynnwyd ym mharagraff 29, a ddyfynnais uchod. Unwaith eto, fel yn
, trwy redeg y ddau ddarn hwn ynghyd, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn ymhlygu fod
yn awdurdod dros y cynnig bod tystiolaeth o gofnod da yn y gorffennol yn berthnasol i’r cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad penodol yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, mae archwilio adroddiad
yn dangos nad oedd y Cyfrin Gyngor yn dweud hynny. Ym mharagraff 28 o’r achos hwnnw, dywedodd yr Arglwydd Cooke o Thorndon, fel y dyfynnais, nad yw SPM yn gofyn am ysgelerder moesegol, y gall esgeuluster difrifol fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM a bod angen rhywbeth mwy na’r raddfa esgeuluster a all arwain at atebolrwydd sifil. Mae hynny’n ddiamheuol gywir. Fodd bynnag, ym mharagraff 29, trodd yr Arglwydd Cooke at y cwestiwn sancsiynu ac yn y cyd-destun hwnnw y dywedodd bod
‘rhywfaint o rym’
i argymhelliad y Cwnsler (am y dyn â blynyddoedd lawer o wasanaeth sydd yn cael un achos lle mae popeth yn mynd o le). Mae’n eglur ei fod yn dweud bod tystiolaeth o wasanaeth hir a di-fai yn berthnasol i sancsiynu. Mae hynny’n amlwg yn iawn. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi, yn
, bod y dyfyniad o
wedi’i dynnu allan o gyd-destun a’i fod wedi’i gamddeall. Yn fy marn i, wrth ofyn y cwestiwn ynghylch a yw digwyddiad neu ymddygiad penodol yn gyfystyr ag SPM, roedd y ffaith bod y meddyg fel arall wedi bod yn ddi-fai am 10, 20 neu 40 o flynyddoedd, yn amherthnasol. Roedd, fodd bynnag, yn berthnasol iawn i ba sancsiwn ddylid ei gymhwyso pe bai’n cael ei benderfynu bod yr ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Yn olaf, yn achos
, dyfynnodd y Cyfrin Gyngor ei benderfyniad ei hun yn
. Fodd bynnag, fel yr wyf newydd ei ddweud, roedd y penderfyniad hwnnw hefyd yn seiliedig ar gamddarlleniad neu gamddehongliad o’r hyn yr oedd yr Arglwydd Cooke wedi’i ddweud yn
. Nid oedd y Pwyllgor Barnwrol yn
nac yn
wedi dibynnu’n unig swydd ar Reolau’r GMC fel rhai a oedd yn caniatáu arfer a fyddai fel arall yn groes i egwyddor; nid oedd yn ymhlygu (yn
) nac yn datgan (yn
) bod lliniariad personol yn berthnasol i ba un a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Gyda pharch mawr i aelodau amlwg y Pwyllgor Barnwrol, mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud bod y penderfyniadau (i’r graddau y maent yn ymwneud â’r mater hwn) yn
yn anghywir yn fy marn i.
Dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, derbyniodd panelau’r PCC pob math o ddeunydd lliniarol cyn iddynt benderfynu a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fe wnaeth ystyried deunydd a oedd yn amherthnasol i’r mater ‘faeddu’r dyfroedd’ ac arwain yn anochel at achosion o gamymddygiad difrifol yn cael eu hesgusodi oherwydd bod hanes blaenorol da gan y meddyg. Mae’n rhaid bod hyn wedi arwain at rai meddygon a oedd mewn gwirionedd yn euog o SPM yn osgoi canfyddiad i’r perwyl hwnnw, gyda goblygiadau amlwg i ddiogelwch cleifion. Mae’n rhaid hefyd ei fod wedi achosi trallod mawr i gleifion a theuluoedd a fydd wedi cael yr argraff bod y camymddygiad a gafodd ei arddangos yn dderbyniol rywsut i’r GMC. Mae penderfyniadau gwael felly yn lleihau hyder y cyhoedd yn y GMC ac yn arwain at honiadau ei fod yn ‘rhy dyner i feddygon’.
Ni ddylai’r broblem hon o ystyried lliniariad amherthnasol godi dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, lle mai’r cwestiwn i’r panel FTP fydd nid a oedd yr ymddygiad a gafwyd wedi’i brofi yn ddigon difrifol i fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM ond pa un ai, yn yr holl amgylchiadau, a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac, os oes, a yw’r amhariad yn ddigonol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Felly mae’n rhaid i’r panel lunio barn ‘yn ei chrynder’ ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer a bod pob lliniariad yn berthnasol.
Achosion Lle’r Oedd Iechyd y Meddyg Dan Sylw
Roedd Atodlen 4, paragraff 4 i Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983 yn atgynhyrchu darpariaethau Atodlen 4, paragraff 4 i Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1978. Roedd yn delio â’r sefyllfa lle’r oedd cwestiwn yn codi, yn ystod gwrandawiad PCC, ynghylch a allai ei gyflwr/chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol fod yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Pan oedd cwestiwn felly’n codi, roedd gan banel y PCC rym i gyfeirio’r cwestiwn at yr HC i benderfynu yn ei gylch. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael archwiliad meddygol a byddai’r HC, ar ôl ystyried canlyniadau’r archwiliad, yn llunio barn ynghylch a oedd amharu difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Os nad oedd amharu difrifol, ym marn yr HC, roedd yn ofynnol iddo ardystio’i farn i’r PCC. Byddai panel y PCC wedyn yn ailddechrau ei ystyriaeth o’r achos ac yn ei waredu. Os, ar y llaw arall, mai barn yr HC oedd bod ei gyflwr/chyflwr yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, roedd yn ofynnol i’r HC ardystio’i farn i’r PCC ac yna i fynd ymlaen i waredu’r achos. Byddai’r PCC wedyn yn peidio cyflawni’i swyddogaethau mewn perthynas â’r achos. Trwy gyfeirio achos at yr HC am ei farn, felly, nid oedd y PCC o reidrwydd yn colli’i awdurdodaeth dros achos. Os na chanfuwyd bod amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, gallai’r PCC fynd ymlaen i ddelio â’r achos. Nid oedd gan y PCC unrhyw rym i gyfeirio achos at sgriniwr iechyd er mwyn delio ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Mae’r berthynas rhwng y PCC a’r HC yn cael ei dangos yn dda gan achos y Cyfrin Gyngor
. Penderfynodd panel PCC ddileu enw Dr Crabbie oddi ar y gofrestr yn dilyn ei dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau o achosi marwolaeth trwy yfed a gyrru’n beryglus, y cafodd ei dyfarnu i bum mlynedd o garchar amdano. Gerbron panel y PCC, nodwyd tystiolaeth bod afiechyd, sef dibyniaeth ar alcohol, wedi amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd Dr Crabbie i ymarfer. Dadleuwyd ar ei rhan y dylai panel y PCC gyfeirio’i hachos at yr HC. Gwrthododd panel y PCC â gwneud hynny, gan ddweud bod yr euogfarnau mor ddifrifol nad oedd y sancsiynau a oedd ar gael i’r HC yn ddigonol i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd; roedd yr achos mor ddifrifol mai dileu o’r gofrestr yn unig oedd yn briodol. Apeliodd y meddyg i’r Cyfrin Gyngor, gan ddadlau bod panel y PCC wedi gwneud camgymeriad wrth wrthod cyfeirio’r achos at yr HC, a, beth bynnag, bod y sancsiwn dileu yn anghywir mewn egwyddor ac yn amlwg yn rhy llym. Dywedwyd y dylid fod wedi delio â’r achos drwy bennu amodau a fyddai wedi sicrhau na allai’r meddyg ailddechrau ymarfer meddygaeth nes ei bod yn abl i wneud hynny. Cynghorodd y Cyfrin Gyngor y dylai’r apêl gael ei wrthod. Ni ddatgelodd rhesymeg panel y PCC unrhyw gamgymeriad cyfreithiol ac roedd ei gasgliad yn amlwg yn agored iddo. Mynegodd y Cyfrin Gyngor y farn, gan nad oedd gan yr HC unrhyw rym i gyfarwyddo dileu, ni ddylai’r PCC gyfeirio achos at yr HC os oedd dileu yn
‘bosibilrwydd o ddifrif’
, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod tystiolaeth dda bod afiechyd yn amharu ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Achosion Lle’r Oedd Perfformiad y Meddyg Dan Sylw
Dylid nodi hefyd, wrth gyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1997, rhoddwyd y grym i’r PCC gyfeirio achos at y CPP. Ni roddwyd unrhyw rym penodol iddo ychwaith i gyfarwyddo y dylai meddyg gael asesiad perfformiad. Yn ymarferol, roedd hyn yn cael ei gyflawni weithiau drwy wneud asesiad perfformiad yn amod o barhau i fod yn gofrestredig. Os oedd yr asesiad yn datgelu bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddiffygiol difrifol, ni allai panel y PCC gyfarwyddo y dylai’r meddyg gael ei fonitro/monitro gan CPP neu gan gydlynydd achosion perfformiad dan ddatganiad gwirfoddol o ofynion. Fodd bynnag, fe allai’r asesiad fod o werth i’r graddau y gallai fod wedi cynorthwyo panel y PCC wrth ffurfio barn ynghylch unrhyw amodau y dylid eu pennu i gofrestriad y meddyg pan oedd yn cael ei ddwyn/dwyn yn ôl gerbron y panel. Fodd bynnag, roedd y diffyg grym i gyfeirio achos at y CPP (yn y modd y gallai gyfeirio meddyg at yr HC) yn fwlch ym mhwerau’r PCC. Bydd hyn yn cael ei unioni dan y gweithdrefnau newydd lle bydd panel FTP yn gallu cyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad a gweithredu arno.
Gohirio Penderfyniad
Pan oedd panel PCC wedi penderfynu bod meddyg yn euog o SPM, neu fod ffaith euogfarn wedi’i haddef neu’i phrofi, byddai’n mynd ymlaen i ystyried, yn gyntaf, pa un a oedd yn angenrheidiol ac yn briodol i ohirio ei benderfyniad ynghylch pennu sancsiwn neu beidio. Fe allai, os oedd ei aelodau o’r farn ei bod yn addas, ohirio’i benderfyniad i ryw ddyddiad yn y dyfodol er mwyn cael ac ystyried tystiolaeth bellach am ymddygiad y meddyg. Nid yw’n eglur i mi pa mor aml y defnyddiwyd y grym hwn. Mae’r dogfennau a welais yn awgrymu mai prin y’i defnyddiwyd ar ddiwedd y 1990au. Lle’r oedd penderfyniad yn cael ei ohirio, fe allai panel y PCC wahodd y meddyg i ddarparu enwau cydweithwyr proffesiynol a
‘phersonau eraill uchel eu parch’
y gallai’r GMC wneud cais iddynt am wybodaeth gyfrinachol am eu gwybodaeth am ymddygiad y meddyg ers adeg y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol. Os oedd panel y PCC yn penderfynu nad oedd gohiriad yn angenrheidiol, byddai’n mynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried a oedd sancsiwn yn briodol.
Terfynu’r Achos heb Sancsiwn
Os oedd panel y PCC yn penderfynu nad oedd gohiriad yn angenrheidiol, roedd yn rhaid iddo fynd ymlaen wedyn i ystyried a oedd yn ddigonol i beidio rhoi unrhyw gyfarwyddyd ac i derfynu’r achos. Os oedd yn penderfynu’n gadarnhaol ynghylch y cwestiwn hwnnw, fe allai benderfynu rhoi cerydd. Nid oedd cerydd yn
‘gyfarwyddyd’
ond, mewn rhai dogfennau GMC, roedd yn cael ei ddisgrifio fel
‘sancsiwn’
Rhoi Cerydd
Hyd at yn ddiweddar, y term a oedd yn cael ei ddefnyddio oedd ‘admonishment’ ond, ym 1999, newidiwyd y term i ‘reprimand’, gan yr ystyriwyd bod y gair ‘admonishment’ braidd yn hen ffasiwn. Cynhwyswyd y grym i geryddu yn rheol 34 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, a amododd:
Nid oedd cerydd yn effeithio ar gofrestriad meddyg. Fodd bynnag, gan iddo gael ei roi mewn gwrandawiad cyhoeddus, roedd y cerydd yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus, ac, os oedd ymholiad penodol yn cael ei wneud ynglŷn â hanes FTP meddyg, dylai’r ffaith fod y meddyg wedi cael ei geryddu/cheryddu fod wedi cael ei ddatgelu gan y GMC.
Nid oedd statws cerydd yn gwbl eglur. Fe ellid yn synhwyrol ei ystyried fel ‘gweithredu ar gofrestriad’. Roedd
y PPC, a ddisgrifiais ym Mhennod 20, yn cynghori aelodau o’r PPC y gallai SPM gael ei ystyried yng nghyd-destun ymddygiad a oedd
. Roedd hynny’n codi’r cwestiwn, pan oedd y PPC yn ystyried pa un ai i anfon achos drwodd at y PCC ai peidio, dylai fod wedi ystyried, er nad oedd unrhyw gyfyngiad at gofrestriad y meddyg yn debygol o gael ei ystyried gan banel y PCC, fe allai’r panel yn wir fod wedi ystyried y byddai cerydd wedi bod yn briodol. Os felly, a ddylai’r achos fod wedi’i gyfeirio at y PCC? Dywedodd Mr Robert Nicholls, cyn Gadeirydd y PPC, mai’r prawf i’r PPC oedd pa un a oedd yr ymddygiad perthnasol â’r potensial i warantu cofrestriad amodol, ataliad neu ddileu. Er y cydnabuwyd y gallai cerydd fod yn ganlyniad cyfeiriad at y PCC, nid oedd y posibilrwydd hwnnw ym meddyliau aelodau’r PPC wrth benderfynu ynghylch cyfeirio’r achos ymlaen. Ymddengys, os oedd y PPC o’r farn y byddai cerydd wedi bod yn ddigonol, byddai’n rhoi llythyr rhybudd ei hun. Roedd gweithredu yn y modd hwnnw yn osgoi’r risg, mewn achosion ffiniol, y gallai’r meddyg ei gael/chael yn ‘ddieuog’ o SPM, gyda’r canlyniad na fyddai’r PCC wedyn yn gallu rhoi rhybudd neu gerydd. Gallaf weld rhesymeg yr ymagwedd honno mewn achosion ymddygiad. Fodd bynnag, mewn achosion euogfarnau, byddai gan y PCC awdurdodaeth yn bendant i bennu sancsiwn, os oedd o’r farn ei bod yn briodol i wneud hynny, a’r PCC, yn hytrach na’r PPC, yn fy marn i, ddylai benderfynu ar sancsiwn. Beth bynnag, byddai’r euogfarn eisoes yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus ac roedd gan y cyhoedd ddiddordeb go iawn i wybod sut yr oedd y GMC yn delio â meddygon a oedd yn cael eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau, a phaham.
Roedd ISG 2003, a gynhyrchwyd, fel y dywedais, i gynorthwyo panelwyr PCC, yn cynghori y gallai cerydd gael ei ystyried lle’r oedd y rhan fwyaf o’r ffactorau canlynol yn bresennol:
‘Evidence that behaviour would not have caused direct or indirect patient harm.
Insight into failings.
Isolated incident which was not deliberate.
Genuine expression of regret/apologies.
Action under duress.
Previous good history.
No repetition of behavour since incident.
Rehabilitative/corrective steps taken.
Relevant and appropriate references and testimonials.’
Roedd ISG 2003 yn pwysleisio nad oedd y rhestr ffactorau yn un gynhwysfawr. Yn fy marn i, roedd pob un o’r ffactorau hyn yn ddiau yn berthnasol i fater sancsiynu. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn ddiogel i ystyried materion felly lle’r oedd sail dystiolaethol resymol amdanynt yn unig. Fe allai’n wir fod wedi bod yn anniogel i banel y PCC dderbyn, heb dystiolaeth a ategwyd, fod y digwyddiad, er enghraifft, yn fethiant unigol neu na fu unrhyw ailadrodd o’r ymddygiad ers y digwyddiad. Yn y gorffennol, ymddengys ei fod yn cael ei ragdybio mai felly’r oedd hi yn absenoldeb tystiolaeth i’r gwrthwyneb. Prin y byddai unrhyw ymchwiliad a phrin yr oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth amdanynt, os fyth. Roeddent yn dibynnu fel arfer ar haeriad cwnsler - wedi’i wneud, yn ddiau, yn ddiffuant. Ymddengys i mi, o’r achosion a ddarllenais, bod rhagdybiaethau’n cael eu gwneud yn hawdd o blaid y meddyg, heb unrhyw sail dystiolaethol foddhaol.
Wrth ystyried y modd y gallai’r GMC fod wedi ymdrin â Shipman pe bai ei ymddygiad yn achos Mrs Renate Overton wedi’i adrodd i’r GMC (gweler Pennod 10), archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer o achosion a gafodd eu hadrodd i’r GMC yng nghanol y 1990au a lle’r oedd gorddos o gyffuriau wedi’i rhoi gyda chanlyniadau difrifol neu farwol. Un achos felly oedd achos Dr JM 03, a gafodd gerydd
ar derfyn gwrandawiad gan y PCC.
Roedd y meddyg yn gofrestrydd arbenigol mewn anaesthesia. Yn hwyr un noson, galwyd arni i ddarparu analgesia wedi llawdriniaeth gan ddefnyddio dyfais o’r enw Abbott Provider. Nid oedd y meddyg yn gyfarwydd â’r cyfarpar ac fe’i ailosododd yn anghywir (ac yn ddiangen), a chafodd y claf ddeng waith fwy na’r dogn priodol o’r cyffur, sef fentanyl. Roedd yr effaith yn farwol. Adroddwyd i’r GMC am yr achos, ond ni allai fynd ymlaen am gryn amser gan fod achosion eraill yn mynd rhagddynt. Ymchwiliodd yr heddlu i’r farwolaeth ond penderfynodd beidio erlyn y meddyg. Daeth cwest y Crwner i ben gyda dedfryd o ladd anghyfreithlon. Fe wnaeth y Gweithgor Iechyd a Diogelwch erlyn ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty yn llwyddiannus dan Ddeddf Iechyd a Diogelwch wrth Weithio 1974 am ei fethiant i ddarparu hyfforddiant digonol wrth ddefnyddio’r Abbott Provider. Nid oedd yr ymddiriedolaeth yn gallu disgyblu’r meddyg gan iddi adael ei chyflogaeth erbyn i’r erlyniad orffen.
Yn ei dro, cafodd yr achos ei gyfeirio ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan y PCC. Yr honiadau oedd bod y meddyg wedi mynd ati i ddefnyddio’r Abbot Provider er ei bod yn anghyfarwydd ag ef; ni ofynnodd am gyngor uwch gydweithiwr na chydweithiwr mwy profiadol; ni chafodd y llawlyfr cyfarwyddiadau ychwaith; ailosododd yr Abbott Provider pan nad oedd angen iddi wneud. Pan edrychodd ar sut yr oedd yn gweithio, methodd sylweddoli ei bod wedi camgyfrif y dogn. Gwyddai (neu dylai fod wedi gwybod) bod ail osod y ddyfais yn anghywir yn creu risg y byddai’r claf yn cael dogn marwol. Cafodd ffeithiau’r achos a’r beirniadaethau amrywiol eu haddef i gyd. Addefodd y meddyg yn arbennig bod ei gweithredoedd wedi bod yn ddiofal ac yn anghyfrifol. Fe’i cafwyd yn euog o SPM gan banel y PCC. Mewn lliniariad, ystyriodd onestrwydd addefiadau’r meddyg. Roedd nifer o dystlythyrau wedi’u cyflwyno a chanfu panel y PCC bod y meddyg
‘yn feddyg gofalgar a chydwybodol a oedd yn uchel ei pharch’
. Fe wnaeth panel y PCC ystyried hefyd fethiant yr ymddiriedolaeth i ddarparu hyfforddiant digonol i’r meddyg wrth ddefnyddio’r Abbott Provider, fel y dangoswyd gan ei euogfarn. Mynegodd panel y PCC y farn hefyd y gallai dull dryslyd o ddisgrifio cynnwys toddiannau cyffuriau fod wedi cyfrannu at gamgymeriad y meddyg. Dywedodd panel y PCC bod y meddyg wedi dysgu llawer iawn o’r digwyddiad, a oedd yn gamgymeriad unigol mewn gyrfa a oedd fel arall yn ddi-fai. Yn yr amgylchiadau penodol, ymddengys i mi bod y penderfyniad hwn yn ddefnydd derbyniol o’r grym i geryddu, er y byddai rhai efallai’n dadlau y byddai cofrestriad amodol gyda gofyniad i ymgymryd â rhaglen addysgol fod wedi bod yn fwy priodol.
Sancsiynau
Os oedd panel PCC yn penderfynu na fyddai’n ddigonol i derfynu achos heb sancsiwn yn cael ei bennu ar y meddyg, roedd yn rhaid iddo ystyried wedyn pa rai o’r sancsiynau a oedd ar gael i’w pennu.
Sancsiynau: Eu Diben
Mae’r GMC yn datgan mai nid bod yn gosbol yw diben sancsiynau. Yn hytrach, eu diben yw diogelu lles y cyhoedd, er, wrth gyflawni’r diben hwn, fe allant gael effaith gosbol ddamweiniol. Mae ‘lles y cyhoedd’ yn cynnwys nid yn unig diogelu cleifion, ond cynnal hyder y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn meddygol hefyd a datgan a chynnal safonau ymddygiad priodol.
Datganodd ISG 2003 y gallai ‘
lles y cyhoedd’
) gynnwys hefyd
. Cynghorodd ISG 2003 hefyd, wrth bennu pa sancsiynau i’w pennu, ni ddylai panel y PCC gymhwyso’r
, gan bwyso buddiannau’r cyhoedd yn erbyn buddiannau’r meddyg, a’r buddiannau’r olaf yn cynnwys
. Hefyd, cynghorodd ISG 2003 y byddai angen i banel y PCC ystyried unrhyw liniariad mewn perthynas â difrifoldeb yr ymddygiad dan sylw.
Sancsiynau: y Drefn y Cawsant Eu Hystyried
Roedd Rheol 31 o Reolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn datgan y dylai panel PCC ystyried a phenderfynu yn gyntaf a oedd yn ddigonol i gyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg fod yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth/chydymffurfiaeth, am gyfnod o dair blynedd ar y mwyaf, gyda gofynion y gallai panel y PCC ystyried eu bod yn briodol i’w pennu er mwyn diogelu’r cyhoedd neu er ei fuddiannau/buddiannau ei hun. Gelwir y sancsiwn hwn yn ‘gofrestriad amodol’ fel arfer. Pe bai panel y PCC yn penderfynu nad oedd yn ddigonol i bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg, roedd yn rhaid iddo ystyried a phenderfynu nesaf a oedd yn ddigonol i gyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg gael ei atal am uchafswm cyfnod nid hwy na 12 mis. Os nad oedd panel y PCC o’r farn bod atal yn ddigonol, roedd yn rhaid iddo wedyn gyfarwyddo bod enw’r meddyg yn cael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Roedd yn ofynnol i banel PCC, felly, ystyried y sancsiynau a oedd ar gael mewn trefn difrifoldeb o chwith. Y cyntaf y byddai’n ei ystyried oedd cofrestriad amodol.
Sancsiwn Cofrestriad Amodol
Fel y dywedais, fe allai panel PCC wneud cofrestriad meddyg yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth/chydymffurfiaeth â gofynion datganedig am gyfnod nid hwy na thair blynedd yn y lle cyntaf, yn adnewyddadwy am gyfnodau o hyd at 12 mis wedi hynny. Diben cofrestriad amodol yw galluogi meddyg unioni unrhyw ddiffygion yn ei arfer/harfer ac, yn y cyfamser, diogelu’r cyhoedd neu’r meddyg rhag niwed. Datganodd ISG 2003 y byddai cofrestriad amodol yn briodol
. Roedd yr arweiniad hwn i weld yn awgrymu bod pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg yn briodol mewn achosion lle’r oedd y camymddygiad a brofwyd yn gyfwerth â pherfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP). Ymddengys i mi ei bod yn rhaid bod y panelau PCC wedi cael anhawster weithiau o ran gwahaniaethu rhwng camymddygiad proffesiynol a pherfformiad diffygiol. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y dystiolaeth yr oedd panel PCC yn gweithredu arni yn asesiad o berfformiad cyffredinol y meddyg, ond yn adroddiad am un digwyddiad penodol - neu ychydig o ddigwyddiadau penodol - ar y mwyaf . Roedd panel y PCC yn annhebygol o fod â darlun llawn o allu neu ddiffygion y meddyg. Yn y dyfodol, bydd defnyddio asesiad perfformiad (yn fersiwn dalfyredig o’r asesiad hir a drud presennol o bosibl) yn erfyn defnyddiol i banel FTP yn y cam hwn o’r broses.
Roedd ISG 2003 yn cynghori y gallai cofrestriad amodol fod yn sancsiwn priodol pan oedd y rhan fwyaf neu’r cyfan o’r ffactorau canlynol yn amlwg:
Identifiable areas of doctor’s practice in need of assessment or retraining.
No evidence of general incompetence.
Potential and willingness to respond positively to retraining.
Patients will not be put in danger either directly or indirectly as a result of conditional registration itself.
The conditions will protect patients during the period they are in force.
It is possible to forumulate appropriate and practical conditions to impose on registration.’
Roedd ISG 2003 yn dweud yn glir nad oedd y rhestr ffactorau yn un gynhwysfar.
Gall amodau bennu cyfyngiadau manwl a thrylwyr ar arfer meddyg (e.e. efallai na fydd yn cael caniatâd i ymarfer, ac eithrio dan oruchwyliaeth meddyg cofrestredig arall) neu gall fod yn llawer llai beichus (e.e. efallai y bydd rhaid iddo/iddi gymryd a dilyn arweiniad am agwedd benodol ar ei arfer/harfer).
Gwrandawiadau a Ailagorwyd
Mewn achos lle’r oedd panel PCC wedi pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, roedd yn agored iddo, wrth gyhoeddi’i benderfyniad, i gyhoeddi hefyd y byddai’n ailagor ystyriaeth o’r achos mewn gwrandawiad i’w gynnal cyn bod cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol yn dod i ben. Yn y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, fe allai panel y PCC benderfynu diddymu’r amodau a wnaed yn flaenorol, i’w hamrywio, neu i bennu cyfnod pellach o gofrestriad amodol nid hwy na 12 mis. Byddai gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd wedi rhoi cyfle i ‘bwyso a mesur’ y cynnydd a wnaed gan y meddyg yn ystod y cyfnod ers i’r amodau gael eu pennu, ac i ystyried pan un a oedd y meddyg wedi cyrraedd y cam o fod yn addas i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad.
Ni soniodd ISG 2001 am gynnal gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd mewn achos lle’r oedd amodau wedi’u pennu ar gofrestriad meddyg. Gall fod nad oedd gwrandawiadau a ail-agorwyd yn cael eu cynnal, neu ddim yn cael eu cynnal yn aml, mewn achosion lle’r oedd cofrestriad amodol wedi’i bennu. Soniwyd am wrandawiadau a ail-agorwyd yn ISG 2001 yn unig mewn cysylltiad ag atal cofrestriad. Fodd bynnag, soniodd ISG 2003 am wrandawiad a ail-agorwyd fel posibilrwydd mewn achos lle’r oedd amodau wedi’u pennu ar gofrestriad, er bod y pwyslais o hyd ar wrandawiadau a ailagorywd mewn achosion o atal cofrestriad.
Os nad oedd gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd yn cael ei gynnal, ymddengys, ar ddiwedd cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol, bod yr amodau’n syml yn darfod ac roedd y meddyg yn mynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad heb fawr o ffwdan. Rwy’n gwerthfawrogi y byddai galw gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd wedi bod yn dreth ychwanegol ar adnoddau. Fodd bynnag, credaf y byddai wedi bod o werth i gynnal gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd. Byddai wedi canolbwyntio meddwl y meddyg ar yr hyn y byddai disgwyl iddo/iddi fod wedi cyflawni erbyn adeg y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd. Byddai wedi rhoi rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i banel y PCC hefyd i weithrediad ymarferol y sancsiwn yr oedd wedi’i bennu. Yn y modd hwnnw, byddai panelau PCC wedi dysgu beth oedd yn gweithio’n dda neu beth nad oedd yn gweithio gystal fel adferiad am fathau penodol o broblem.
Os nad oedd panel y PCC yn cyhoeddi ei fod yn bwriadu ailddechrau ystyriaeth o achos lle’r oedd amodau wedi’u pennu ar gofrestriad meddyg, roedd Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn caniatáu i’r achos serch hynny gael ei gyfeirio’n ôl at banel y PCC os oedd gwybodaeth yn dod i’r golwg am ymddygiad neu euogfarn y meddyg ers y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol neu os oedd yn ymddangos nad oedd y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’r amodau gwreiddiol. Fe allai panel y PCC ystyried wedyn pa un a ddylai cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol gael ei ymestyn, neu a ddylid amrywio neu ddiddymu’r amodau, neu a ddylid atal cofrestriad y meddyg neu ddileu ei enw/henw o’r gofrestr. Os oedd awgrym wedi’i roi yn y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol y byddai’r gwrandawiad yn cael ei ailagor, gellid dod â’r achos yn ôl yn gynharach na’r bwriad os oedd gwybodaeth berthnasol yn cael ei derbyn.
Mae’n eglur bod manteision mewn pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg. Yr amodau hyn yw’r unig fodd o orfodi camau unioni gyda’r gobaith o gyflawni canlyniad sy’n fuddiol i’r meddyg, ac yn y tymor hwy, i’r cyhoedd. Yr anfanteision yw y gall ganiatáu i feddyg ymarfer dan amodau roi’r cyhoedd mewn sefyllfa agored i risg botensial. Yn gyntaf, mae’r meddyg fel arfer yn cael ymarfer tra’n ymgymryd ag ail-addysg ran-amser. Gall fod risg i’r cyhoedd tra bod y broses honno’n mynd rhagddi. Gall fod yn anodd i’r GMC fonitro cydymffurfiaeth y meddyg ag amodau. Yn ail, oni bai bod y meddyg yn cael ei asesu/hasesu ar ddiwedd y cyfnod, nid oes unrhyw sicrwydd bod yr ymarferiad wedi bod yn effeithiol. Byddai hyfforddiant adferol amser llawn am gyfnod dwys gydag asesiad ar y diwedd, mewn rhai achosion, yn broses llawer mwy effeithiol - ond yn ddrud iawn. Yn drydydd, ymddengys i mi y dylai’r GMC ddangos yn eglur, mewn geiriau a chan ei weithredoedd, os na all y meddyg ddangos bod yr amcanion sy’n sylfaenol i’r amodau wedi’u cyflawni’n foddhaol, bydd dileu cofrestriad yn dilyn.
Achosion Lle Bennwyd Amodau ar Gofrestriad y Meddyg
Wrth archwilio achosion a oedd yn berthnasol i achos Mrs Overton, daeth yr Ymchwiliad ar draws rhai enghreifftiau o achosion lle’r oedd amodau wedi’u pennu.
Un achos felly oedd achos Dr JC 02, a gafodd ei ddwyn gerbron y PCC ar ddechrau 1990 yn dilyn dau ddigwyddiad lle’r oedd wedi rhoi (yn esgeulus) gorddos o ddiamorffin. Roedd y ddau glaf wedi marw. Cyhoeddodd y Crwner reithfarnau o anffawd yn y ddau achos, ac, ar yr ail achlysur, roedd pwyllgor gwasanaeth meddygol (MSC) wedi canfod bod y meddyg yn torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Canfu’r PCC fod SPM wedi’i brofi ond y sancsiwn oedd pennu amodau am wyth mis gyda gofyniad y dylai’r meddyg gael ei ailhyfforddi mewn defnyddio
‘meddyginiaethau therapiwtig’
ac na ddylai ragnodi diamorffin na chael diamorffin yn ei feddiant. Ar ddiwedd y cyfnod, roedd gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd i’w gynnal lle’r oedd y meddyg i gyflwyno tystysgrifau a thystlythyrau i ddangos ei fod wedi cael ailhyfforddiant. Yn y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, cafodd y meddyg ei gyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd.
Mewn achos arall, sef achos Dr JG 03, a wrandawyd yng nghanol y 1990au ac y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 10, roedd panel y PCC wedi pennu cyfnod o gofrestriad amodol yn dilyn euogfarn y meddyg am wyrdroi cwrs cyfiawnder a chanfyddiad o SPM. Dair blynedd yn gynharach fu’r digwyddiadau. Roedd claf a oedd yn dioddef o asthma wedi ymgynghori â’r meddyg. Ar y pryd, nid oedd asthma yn ei thrwblu, ond roedd wedi bod yn dioddef crychguriad y galon. Roedd y meddyg wedi rhagnodi propranolol, cyffur sy’n cael ei wrtharwyddo ar gyfer pobl yn dioddef o asthma. Y diwrnod canlynol, dioddefodd y claf ymosodiad difrifol iawn o ddiffyg anadl a bu farw. Dywedwyd wrth y meddyg beth oedd wedi digwydd. Gwnaeth nifer o newidiadau wedyn yn y cofnodion meddygol ar y cyfrifiadur, gan ddileu nifer o gyfeiriadau at hanes y claf o asthma. Yn ystod yr ymchwiliad a ddilynodd, ac wrth roi tystiolaeth yn y cwest, honnodd nad oedd wedi bod yn ymwybodol bod y claf yn dioddef o asthma. Honnodd mai mynediad at y cofnodion llawysgrifen yn unig oedd ganddo ar y diwrnod dan sylw; nid oedd wedi gallu darllen llawysgrifen ei bartner ac nid oedd wedi adnabod unrhyw gyfeiriad at asthma. Yn ddiweddarach, canfuwyd ei fod wedi ffugio’r cofnodion cyfrifiadur; cafodd ei erlyn, ei ddyfarnu’n euog a’i ddedfrydu i chwe mis o garchar.
Yn ystod yr ymchwiliad, daeth tystiolaeth i’r golwg bod y meddyg wedi ffugio cofnodion meddygol ar achlysur arall, er mwyn celu camgymeriad a fu’n destun cwyn ar wahân i’r MSC lleol. Fodd bynnag, ni ddygodd y GMC achos mewn perthynas â’r achlysur cynharach; ystyriodd yn unig y camgymeriad rhagnodi yn arwain at farwolaeth y claf asthmatig a’r euogfarn am wyrdroi cwrs cyfiawnder. Canfu panel y PCC bod gofal y meddyg o’r claf wedi syrthio’n druenus islaw safon resymol a’i fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Oherwydd bod y meddyg wedi treulio cyfnod yn y carchar ac oherwydd ffactorau eraill a ystyriwyd fel rhai a oedd yn lliniaru difrifoldeb y drosedd, penderfynodd bennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am flwyddyn. Roedd gofyniad ar y meddyg i ymgynghori â’i Gynghorydd Rhanbarthol mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol, i gael asesiad o’i fedrau ymgynghori, nodi hanes ac archwiliadau corfforol, ac i ddilyn cyngor y Cynghorydd Rhanbarthol ynghylch unioni unrhyw ddiffygion mewn gwybodaeth a nodi hanes ac ynghylch cadw cofnodion cywir a chyfoes.
Dywedodd Dr Korlipara wrth yr Ymchwiliad, er iddo eistedd ar banel y PCC a wrandawodd yr achos hwn, nid oedd ganddo unrhyw atgof ohono. Cafodd ei synnu bod panel y PCC wedi pennu amodau a dywedodd y byddai wedi bod yn fwy arferol i gyfarwyddo dileu neu gyfnod hir o atal fan lleiaf. Dywedaf ar draws hynny mai’r cyfnod atal hiraf sydd ar gael yw blwyddyn. Cytunodd Dr Korlipara na allai anonestrwydd gael ei unioni drwy ailhyfforddiant. Adolygwyd yr achos gan banel y PCC mewn gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd 11 mis ar ôl y gwrandawiad cyntaf. Derbyniodd ohebiaeth gan y cynghorydd rhanbarthol a ddywedodd bod y meddyg wedi gwneud cynnydd boddhaol. Caniatawyd i’r meddyg ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad wedyn.
Fel troednodyn i’r achos hwn, ryw saith mlynedd yn ddiweddarach, daeth y GMC yn ymwybodol o gŵyn am Dr JG 03, a ddywedwyd iddo fethu diagnosio meningitis mewn babi bach. Cafodd yr achos ei gau gan staff y swyddfa gan nad oedd y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u cwblhau eto. Nid oes unrhyw arwydd ar y ffeil bod unrhyw gamau wedi’u cymryd i fonitro neu ddilyn ymlaen cynnydd y gŵyn leol. Cytunodd Dr Korlipara y dylai’r GMC ganlyn cwynion felly’n rhagweithiol yn achos meddyg â hanes disgyblaethol difrifol fel Dr JG 03.
Yn fy marn i, roedd pennu amodau yn achos Dr JG 03 yn amhriodol. Rwy’n ei chael yn anodd derbyn y gallai aelodau panel y PCC fod wedi cael yr angen i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd ar flaen eu meddyliau. Roedd pryderon difrifol ynghylch gonestrwydd y meddyg. Credaf y byddai llawer o aelodau’r cyhoedd yn ystyried bod anonestrwydd o’r math hwn yn dangos anaddasrwydd i ymarfer gan na ellir ymddiried yn y meddyg. Rwy’n cydnabod y gallai agweddau fod wedi caledu ers y canfuwyd bod Shipman yn ffugio cofnodion meddygol yn gyson. Ond, hyd yn oed heb hynny, credaf fod y cyhoedd yn teimlo y dylent allu ymddiried mewn meddygon - nid i osgoi gwneud camgymeriadau o hyd ond o leiaf, pan fydd un yn cael ei wneud, i beidio dweud celwydd yn ei gylch. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine wrth yr Ymchwiliad y dylai’r GMC, yn ei farn ef, geisio dod i gonsensws gyda’r cyhoedd ynghylch sancsiynau priodol. Ymddengys i mi y byddai hwnnw’n weithredu synhwyrol mewn perthynas â’r holl sancsiynau, ond yn arbennig mewn perthynas ag achosion o anonestrwydd. Cytunodd Dr Korlipara y byddai trafodaeth gyda’r cyhoedd am faterion felly yn ddefnyddiol.
Roedd achos Dr JM 04 yn ymwneud hefyd â chamgymeriad rhagnodi difrifol, ond, yn yr achos hwn, nid oedd unrhyw ymgais i ‘gelu’. Galwyd y meddyg allan i weld claf a oedd yn dioddef o boen difrifol. Diagnosiodd y meddyg colig arennol ac, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod y claf wedi dweud bod ei boen wedi cilio, rhoddodd 75mg o Voltarol a 30mg o ddiamorffin yn fewngyhyrol. Roedd hwn yn orddos difrifol a bu’r claf farw ryw awr yn ddiweddarach, yn sgil gwenwyndra morffin. Ymchwiliodd yr heddlu i’r farwolaeth. Nid oeddent yn gallu canfod naill ai rhagnodyn am 30mg o ddiamorffin na chofnod yng nghofrestr cyffuriau rheoledig y feddygfa. Ym mag y meddyg yn ei gartref, canfuwyd tri ampwl 30mg ac un ampwl 10mg o ddiamorffin, yn ogystal â chyffuriau eraill a chopi o Gyffurlyfr Cenedlaethol Prydain. Byddai’n ymddangos felly bod y meddyg yn cadw cyflenwad o ddiamorffin a’i fod wedi defnyddio rhywfaint o’i stoc ar y claf a fu farw. Nid oedd wedi cydymffurfio â’r gofynion statudol yn rheoli’i ddefnydd. Cafodd y meddyg ei gyhuddo a’i ddyfarnu’n euog o ddynladdiad, ac fe’i dedfrydwyd i 12 mis o garchar, wedi’i atal am ddwy flynedd.
Yn fuan ar ôl i’r GMC gael ei hysbysu am yr euogfarn, canfuwyd bod Dr JM 04 wedi bod yn destun cwyn arall, yr ymdriniwyd â hi’n lleol. Roedd y digwyddiad hwn wedi digwydd ychydig wythnosau’n unig cyn y camgymeriad rhagnodi. Roedd wedi methu mynd at glaf a oedd yn sâl ac yn cwyno ei fod yn chwysu; roedd y claf wedi marw o niwmonia yn fuan wedyn. Roedd yr awdurdod iechyd lleol (HA) wedi cymryd camau disgyblu, lle’r oedd mam y claf ymadawedig wedi rhoi tystiolaeth. Canfuwyd bod y meddyg wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Roedd y fam yn barod i lofnodi datganiad i’r GMC, ond dywedodd y byddai’n ei gael yn brofiad rhy drallodus i ailadrodd ei thystiolaeth lafar mewn gwrandawiad PCC. Gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniad yn y GMC y byddai’n amhriodol i roi
i’w gorfodi i fynychu, ac na ddylid gweithredu ar yr ail gŵyn. Dywedaf ar draws hynny nad ymddengys bod unrhyw ymgais wedi’i gwneud i ymweld â’r fam na hyd yn oed siarad â hi ar y ffôn i esbonio pwysigrwydd ei phresenoldeb gerbron y PCC iddi, a chanlyniadau’r ffaith ei bod yn gwrthod rhoi tystiolaeth lafar. Beth bynnag, gallai’r GMC fod wedi gwneud cais i banel y PCC i’w thystiolaeth gael ei derbyn ar ffurf ysgrifenedig; gallai panel y PCC fod wedi’i derbyn. Roedd rheol 50(1) o Reolau’r Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988 yn amodi y gallai’r PCC dderbyn tystiolaeth lafar, ddogfennol neu dystiolaeth arall o unrhyw ffaith a oedd yn ymddangos iddynt yn berthnasol i’w ymchwiliad i’r achos ger ei fron. Ymhellach, i’r graddau y cynigiwyd unrhyw dystiolaeth na fyddai wedi bod yn dderbyniadwy mewn achosion troseddol yn Lloegr (ac nid yw datganiadau ysgrifenedig o dystiolaeth yn dderbyniadwy fel arfer), ni allai’r PCC ei derbyn oni bai, ar ôl ystyriaeth, ei fod yn fodlon bod ei ddyletswydd i wneud ymchwiliad priodol yn ei gwneud yn ddymunol i dderbyn y dystiolaeth honno. Felly, gellid fod wedi defnyddio rheol 50 i sefydlu cais i gyflwyno tystiolaeth ysgrifenedig mam y claf ymadawedig yn yr achos hwn. Fel ag yr oedd hi, ystyriodd y panel yr honiad yn ymwneud â rhoi diamorffin yn unig.
Canfu panel y PCC bod gweithredoedd y meddyg wrth roi 30mg o ddiamorffin wedi bod yn anghyfrifol iawn. Esboniad y meddyg, a gyflwynwyd drwy’r cwnsler, oedd ei fod wedi ymgymhwyso dramor, mewn gwlad lle nad oedd diamorffin yn cael ei ddefnyddio’n gyffredinol; felly, roedd yn anghyfarwydd â’i nodweddion. Roedd wedi bod yn awyddus iawn i liniaru poen y claf, ac wedi credu bod y dogn a roddodd yn briodol. Cyflwynwyd llawer o dystlythyrau a chanfu’r panel bod y meddyg yn
‘feddyg teulu gofalgar a oedd wedi gwneud camgymeriad trasig’
. Roedd, wrth gwrs, yn gwbl anymwybodol o ganfyddiadau’r MSC lleol mewn perthynas â’r ail ddigwyddiad. Pennodd panel y PCC amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am gyfnod o 12 mis. Amodau goruchwyliaeth gyffredinol oedd y rhain, sef hysbysiad ynghylch ble fyddai’n ymarfer a darparu adroddiadau ar ei berfformiad i’r GMC. Nid oedd amod penodol mewn perthynas â’i hawl i ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig nac at unrhyw ailhyfforddiant mewn perthynas â’u defnyddio.
Dywedodd Dr Korlipara bod penderfyniad panel y PCC yn yr achos hwn wedi bod yn ‘gydymdeimladol’ ac y byddai dileu neu gyfnod ‘hir’ o atal wedi bod yn fwy arferol. Ceisiodd gyfiawnhau penderfyniad panel y PCC ar y sail y credwyd bod hyn yn gamgymeriad unigol yng ngyrfa meddyg da. (Roedd y GMC yn gwybod hynny, ond ni ddywedwyd wrth banel y PCC). Soniodd Dr Korlipara na fyddai’r camgymeriad dogn erioed wedi digwydd pe na bai’r meddyg mor ofalgar ac mor awyddus i liniaru poen y claf. Roedd panel y PCC wedi ceisio diogelu’r cyhoedd trwy drefnu goruchwyliaeth. Ni chredai y byddai wedi bod yn angenrheidiol na’n briodol i’r GMC ymchwilio i unrhyw bryderon posibl ynghylch arfer y meddyg o gadw diamorffin yn ei fag (er nad oedd yn ôl pob golwg yn gyfarwydd â’i ddefnyddio) ac ynghylch ei fethiant i gydymffurfio â’r gofynion statudol. Roedd hwnnw, meddai, yn fater i gyrff lleol y GIG.
Yn fuan ar ôl cyhoeddi penderfyniad panel y PCC, derbyniodd y GMC lythyr gan gydweithiwr i Dr JM 04. Roedd yn gallu rhoi gwybodaeth am yr amgylchiadau’n ymwneud â’r achos o roi diamorffin a oedd wedi arwain at euogfarn, ac fe wnaeth fwrw amheuaeth hefyd ar gywirdeb rhai o’r materion lliniarol a gynigiwyd. Os oedd y wybodaeth hon yn wir, byddai wedi rhoi gwedd wahanol ar yr achos, a gallai’r canlyniad yn wir fod wedi bod yn wahanol. Fel y dywedais, ni fu’n arfer gan y GMC i gysylltu â chyflogwyr neu gydweithwyr fel rhan o’i ymchwiliad.
Rwy’n dymuno gwneud tri sylw. Yn gyntaf, ymddengys bod posibilrwydd go iawn bod panel y PCC wedi delio â’r achos hwn ar sail gwybodaeth anghyflawn am amgylchiadau’r camymddygiad a oedd yn sylfaenol i’r euogfarn a lliniariad ffafriol na ellid ei gyfiawnhau. Fe allai’n wir fod mai’r canlyniad oedd pennu sancsiwn nad oedd yn rhoi diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd na chleifion y meddyg yn y dyfodol. Yn ail, ymddengys i mi y byddai’n synhwyrol, yn enwedig mewn achosion euogfarnau, i’r GMC wneud ymholiadau i bartneriaid neu gydweithwyr y meddyg a’i gyflogwr/chyflogwr neu ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol. Fel arall, ni all y GMC osod ffeithiau’r euogfarn mewn cyd-destun. Nid yw mewn sefyllfa ychwaith i wirio gwirionedd materion lliniarol a gynigir gan y cwnsler ar gyfarwyddyd. Yn drydydd, yn fy marn i, byddai’n well i banel PCC, wrth ystyried pennu cofrestriad amodol, i wahodd y meddyg i roi tystiolaeth. Nid wyf yn gweld sut y gall panel asesu agwedd y meddyg tuag at ei gamymddygiad/chamymddygiad a’i ymrwymiad/hymrwymiad i ailhyfforddi ar sail anerchiad gan eiriolwr.
Cafodd pwysigrwydd gwrando tystiolaeth gan feddyg yn ystod gwrandawiadau PCC ei gydnabod gan y GMC yn achos
. Cafwyd Dr Ghosh yn euog o SPM ym mis Ebrill 1998 ar gyhuddiadau o fethu ymweld â chleifion pan oedd yn angenrheidiol. Pennodd panel y PCC amodau am ddwy flynedd. Gwnaethpwyd trefniadau rhagorol ar gyfer ail-addysgu Dr Ghosh dan oruchwyliaeth Deon Cyswllt addysg Olraddedig i Feddygon Teulu. Fe’i rhoddwyd mewn meddygfa lle’r oedd y partneriaid yn barod i’w goruchwylio. Fodd bynnag, roedd arwyddion yn fuan nad oedd Dr Ghosh yn derbyn yr angen am oruchwyliaeth nag am unrhyw newid yn ei hagwedd ac, yn ei dro, daeth yn amlwg nad oedd yn cydymffurfio â’r amodau a bennwyd. At hynny, derbyniwyd cwyn ddifrifol ym mis Gorffennaf 1999 nad oedd y meddyg wedi mynd at glaf yr oedd wedi addo mynd ati ac a oedd angen sylw arni ar frys. Yn fuan wedyn, aeth Dr Ghosh dramor am ddeufis a hanner heb rybuddio’r feddygfa. Rhoddodd y feddygfa a’r Deon Cyswllt y gorau i’w hymdrechion i’w goruchwylio. Ysgrifennodd y Deon Cyswllt at y GMC yn ei annog i ddod â’r achos yn ei ôl ar gyfer ei adolygu yn gynharach na’r dyddiad a ragwelwyd yn wreiddiol ar gyfer y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd. Ym mis Hydref 1999, fe wnaeth yr HA a oedd wedi cyflogi Dr Ghosh yn ystod ei chyfnod o oruchwyliaeth ei diswyddo am gamymddygiad difrifol mewn perthynas â’r digwyddiad ym mis Gorffennaf 1999. Gofynnodd Dr Ghosh i’r GMC wedyn am ganiatâd i weithio mewn lleoliadau amrywiol, a chwynodd na fyddai’r Deon Cyswllt yn ei helpu
‘oherwydd ei bod yn sâl’
. Methodd dro ar ôl tro i ddarparu gwybodaeth i’r GMC am ei gweithgareddau.
Ym mis Hydref 2000, daeth Dr Ghosh yn ôl gerbron panel PCC. Ymddangosodd drwy gwnsler ac ni roddodd dystiolaeth. Honnwyd ar ei rhan ei bod wedi cymryd camau priodol i ail-addysgu’i hun. Fel enghraifft, cyflwynodd lythyr gan feddyg a ddywedodd ei bod wedi mynychu clinigau cyn-geni fel arsyllwr yn ystod mis Awst, mis Medi a mis Hydref 1999. Pan nodwyd ei bod, am lawer o’r amser, wedi bod dramor, dywedwyd ar ei rhan bod y meddyg a ysgrifennodd y llythyr wedi gwneud camgymeriad mewn perthynas â’r dyddiadau; fodd bynnag, roedd wedi dechrau mynychu’r clinig pan ddaeth yn ôl i’r wlad hon, ac roedd yn parhau i wneud hynny. Gofynnodd panel y PCC i’r cwnsler pa dystiolaeth oedd bod y meddyg wedi mynychu, a dywedodd y cwnsler ei bod yn dibynnu ar ei chyfarwyddiadau. Nododd panel y PCC nad tystiolaeth oedd hynny, a dilynodd rhywfaint o drafod ynghylch a fyddai Dr Ghosh yn tystio. Ni wnaeth hynny. Mae’n eglur o’r rhesymau a roddwyd gan banel y PCC am ei benderfyniad bod y methiant hwn ar ei rhan yn ffactor pwysig yn ei benderfyniad i wrthod honiadau Dr Ghosh ac i ddileu ei henw o’r gofrestr. Apeliodd Dr Ghosh i’r Cyfrin Gyngor yn erbyn y dileu, ond heb lwyddiant.
Cydnabyddir yn gyffredinol, fe gredaf, bod amodau sy’n gofyn am ailhyfforddi yn debygol o lwyddo’n unig pan fydd y meddyg wedi ymrwymo iddynt yn wirioneddol. Dywedaf eto, dylai panel y PCC (ac, yn wir, pwyllgorau neu banelau eraill â’r grym i bennu amodau), yn fy marn i, fod wedi’i gwneud yn ofynnol i feddyg ateb ei gwestiynau/chwestiynau yn bersonol cyn penderfynu pennu amodau. Rwy’n amau, yn achos Dr Ghosh, y byddai wedi bod yn eglur nad oedd yn bwriadu cydweithredu. Mewn achos felly, os teimlwyd bod dileu ar unwaith yn amhriodol ac mai amodau oedd yr unig ddull posibl o weithredu, does bosib y byddai wedi bod yn well i drefnu adolygiad cynnar o’r achos yn hytrach na gadael materion am gyfnod cymaint â dwy flynedd. Nid oes tystiolaeth bod Dr Ghosh wedi ymarfer yn groes i’w hamodau, ond mae’n rhaid bod risg y byddai’n gwneud hynny wedi i’r trefniadau ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth fethu.
Yn olaf yn yr adran hon sy’n delio â chofrestriad amodol, mae’n rhaid i mi sôn am achos Dr JF 02. Derbyniodd y GMC ddwy gŵyn am y meddyg hwn ar ddechrau’r 1990au. Roedd un honni archwiliad mewnol amhriodol, lle na chynigiwyd gwarchodwraig; roedd y llall yn honni bod rhoi gorddos affwysol o ddiamorffin (100mg) wedi’i rhoi yn fuan cyn i’r claf gael ei gludo i’r ysbyty mewn ambiwlans. Dioddefodd y claf ataliad anadliadol, ond cafodd ei ddadebru pan gyrhaeddodd yr ysbyty. Cyfeiriwyd y ddau fater at sgriniwr meddygol a ofynnodd am weithredu uniongyrchol ac ar fyrder yn achos y gorddos, a chyfarwyddodd y dylid gofyn i’r achwynydd a oedd yn fenyw yn yr achos archwiliad amhriodol i ddarparu datganiad statudol. Anfonwyd llythyr cais, ond ni chafwyd ateb, ac, ac eithrio cyfeiriad at y ffaith bod y meddyg yn dadlau yn erbyn yr honiad, nid oes cofnod pellach o’r gŵyn hon yn y ffeil. Yng ngolau digwyddiadau dilynol, bydd difrifoldeb y canlyniad o beidio canlyn y gŵyn honno yn cael ei ddeall.
Cafodd y gŵyn diamorffin ei chyfeirio at y PCC, a hysbyswyd y meddyg. Cyflwynodd ei gyfreithwyr ei esboniad, sef bod angen cyffuriau lladd poen cryf arno ar gyfer y claf; aeth i’r fferyllfa a gofynnodd am forffin neu rywbeth tebyg. Rhoddwyd diamorffin iddo, nad oedd erioed wedi’i ddefnyddio o’r blaen. Edrychodd ar y daflen gwybodaeth am gyffuriau, ac mae’n rhaid ei fod wedi’i chamddarllen, gan iddo roi gormod. Anfonodd y PPC yr achos at y PCC. Bum mis wedi i’r gŵyn gael ei chofnodi gan y GMC, cafodd y meddyg ei ganfod yn euog o SPM, ac fe’i rhoddwyd ar gofrestriad amodol am gyfnod o chwe mis; yn ystod yr amser hwnnw roedd i ganlyn rhaglen strwythuredig o hyfforddiant mewn defnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Ar ddiwedd cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol, roedd y meddyg yn rhydd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad, wedi iddo yn ôl pob golwg orffen ei ailhyfforddiant.
Ddeufis yn unig yn ddiweddarach, derbyniodd y GMC gŵyn bod Dr JF 02 wedi cynnal archwiliad mewnol amhriodol ar glaf benywaidd oedrannus. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y GMC beidio gweithredu oherwydd ei fod o’r farn mai’r prif fater oedd pa un a oedd y meddyg wedi cael caniatâd dilys cyn archwilio’r claf. Ysgrifennodd y GMC at yr HA, a oedd wedi adrodd am y mater, gan awgrymu y dylai’r claf gymryd camau sifil drwy’r llysoedd, a, phe bai’n cael ei sefydlu nad oedd y meddyg wedi cael caniatâd, byddai’n agored i’r claf adnewyddu’i chwyn i’r GMC. Gan aros yn y fan honno yn yr hanes, mae hynny’n ymddangos i mi fel ymateb cwbl amhriodol i gŵyn felly. Dylai’r GMC fod wedi ymchwilio i’r honiad hyd yn oed pe bai wedi sefyll ar ei ben ei hun; roedd yr angen i wneud hynny’n fwy fyth yng ngolwg yr honiad cynharach o archwiliad amhriodol a dderbyniwyd y flwyddyn flaenorol. Roedd gan y GMC ddau honiad potensial nawr o gamymddygiad rhywiol, o ffynonellau anghysylltiedig yn ôl pob golwg, ac nid ymchwiliwyd i’r un ohonynt.
Ryw ddwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach, ysgrifennodd yr HA yr oedd y meddyg yn ymarfer yn ei ardal, yn mynegi pryder ynghylch nifer o faterion yn ymwneud â Dr JF 02. Dywedwyd bod ei ragnodi yn dangos
‘patrwm perfformiad diffygiol difrifol’
. Roedd wedi bod yn rhagnodi methadon yn amhriodol ar gyfer caethion, ac roedd hefyd yn rhagnodi bensodiasepinau ar gyfer cleifion ifainc dros gyfnodau hir. Nododd memorandwm gan y GMC y gallai’r pryderon hyn fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, credwyd nad oedd tair cwyn arall a anfonwyd ymlaen gan yr HA yn codi cwestiynau o SPM, ac fe’u sgriniwyd allan. Roedd y rhain yn ymwneud ag anfoesgarwch, cyswllt corfforol gormodol â chlaf, cyflawni archwiliad mewn modd ymosodol a gwrthod rhoi cymorth i ferch mewn damwain car. Ysgrifennodd yr HA yn mynegi ei siom ynghylch y penderfyniadau i sgrinio’r cwynion hyn allan, dywedodd ei fod yn bryderus ynghylch lles cleifion a rhoddodd fanylion pryder penodol arall. Roedd hwn yn ymwneud â chlaf benywaidd, yr honnwyd bod Dr JF 02 yn cael
‘perthynas heb fod yn berthynas broffesiynol’
; roedd yn cyflenwi rhagnodion iddi ar gyfer meintiau mawr o bensodiasepinau a phoenladdwyr opiad, gan gynnwys toddiant Oramorph. Cyfeiriodd y PPC yr honiadau o ragnodi methadon yn anghyfrifol, at y PCC. Ar yr un pryd, hysbyswyd y GMC gan yr HA fod Dr JF 02 wedi cael ei gyhuddo ar naw cyfrif o ymosod yn anweddus, a 30 cyfrif o gael gafael ar gyffuriau trwy dwyll. Yn fuan wedyn, cafodd y meddyg ei atal o restr yr HA gan Dribiwnlys y GIG ar sail interim.
Cafodd gwrandawiad y PCC ei ohirio tra’n disgwyl canlyniad yr achos troseddol, a ddaeth i ben ddeng mis yn ddiweddarach. Canfuwyd y meddyg yn euog ar un cyfrif o ymosod yn anweddus, ac yna plediodd yn euog i bum cyfrif o ddwyn cyffuriau. Cafodd ei ddedfrydu i bum mis o garchar am ymosod yn anweddus, ac i bedwar mis o garchar am ddwyn, y ddwy ddedfryd i’w gohirio am ddwy flynedd. Cafodd yr holl gyhuddiadau a oedd yn weddill eu ‘gadael ar y ffeil’. Golygai hynny na fyddent yn mynd ymhellach oni bai bod y llys, oherwydd ryw amgylchiad eithriadol na ragwelwyd, yn penderfynu y dylent fynd ymlaen. Nid oedd unrhyw waharddiad, wrth gwrs, ar y GMC yn gwrando tystiolaeth mewn perthynas â nhw, ac, yn benodol, mewn perthynas â’r honiadau o ymosod yn anweddus, y mae’n rhaid bod y naill a’r llall wedi codi cwestiwn o SPM. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth y GMC hynny.
Yn fuan wedi dyfarnu’r meddyg yn euog, dywedodd yr HA bod cwynion pellach yn ei gylch i’w hanfon ymlaen, a mynegodd bryder ynghylch yr oedi a oedd eisoes wedi digwydd a’r cyfnod amser y gallai gymryd i ddod â’r holl faterion hyn at y PCC. Anogodd y GMC i weithredu ar unwaith. Cyfaddefwyd mewn llythyr at yr HA gan Mr Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, y gallai’r GMC fod
‘wedi gwneud yn well’
, ac addawodd y byddai’r achos yn cael ei ystyried yng nghyfarfod nesaf y PPC. Y mis dilynol, anfonodd yr HA fanylion am y pryderon ychwanegol. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys honiad bod yr heddlu wedi dod o hyd i ddeunydd pornograffig yng nghartref y meddyg a’i feddygfa. Ystyriodd y PPC ataliad interim yn ei gyfarfod nesaf (roedd hyn cyn sefydlu’r Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Interim (IOC)) ond ni wnaeth orchymyn. Ni ddaeth yr achos gerbron y PCC nes pum mis yn ddiweddarach. Yna, yr unig faterion gerbron panel y PCC oedd yr euogfarnau a’r honiad o ragnodi methadon yn anghyfrifol i gaethion. Ar y cyhuddiad olaf hwn, canfu panel PCC bod SPM wedi’i brofi. Y sancsiwn a bennwyd mewn perthynas â’r euogfarnau a’r canfyddiad o SPM oedd ataliad am 12 mis.
Mae’n rhaid i mi wneud dau sylw. Yn gyntaf, hyd yn oed ar sail y deunydd gerbron panel y PCC, mae’r penderfyniad hwn i weld yn un rhy drugarog. Deliwyd â’r meddyg am anwedduster, anonestrwydd a rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfrifol. Byddwn wedi meddwl mai dileu enw’r meddyg yn unig allai ddarparu diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd. Credaf, pe bai penderfyniad felly’n cael ei wneud heddiw, y byddai’r Cyngor dros Reoli Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (sy’n cael ei adnabod fel y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE)) yn cyfeirio’r achos at yr Uchel lys fel un rhy drugarog. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y CRHP/CHRE yn bodoli bryd hynny. Yn ail, ni wnaeth y GMC unrhyw ymgais i ddatrys yr holl gŵynion eraill a wnaed a’r pryderon a fynegwyd am y meddyg hwn. Roedd nifer o gŵynion wedi’u sgrinio allan oherwydd, ar eu pennau’u hunain, ni allent fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. O ran cwynion eraill, fel yr honiadau o ymosod yn anweddus, na chafodd eu rhoi ar brawf mewn llys, yn syml iawn, ni ddeliwyd â nhw. Gall fod - ni allaf ddweud - pe bai’r dystiolaeth am yr holl faterion eraill wedi’i rhoi gerbron panel y PCC, efallai y byddai’r meddyg wedi cael ei ryddfarnu ar bob un ohonynt, ac os felly, deliwyd ag ef ar sail briodol. Fodd bynnag, yng ngolau digwyddiadau dilynol, ymddengys yn annhebygol iawn, be bai cyhuddiadau eraill wedi’u rhoi, byddai canfyddiadau pellach yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Ymddengys i mi bod y GMC yn ymwybodol wedi delio â’r meddyg hwn ar sail gwybodaeth anghyflawn. Nid oedd y broses lle’r oedd cwynion yn cael eu hystyried ar eu pennau’u hunain, a’u sgrinio allan os na allent, ohonynt eu hunain, fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM, yn darparu diogelwch digonol i gleifion. Efallai na fydd meddyg sy’n ymddwyn yn annerbyniol ar dri achlysur (er enghraifft, drwy fod yn anfoesgar neu’n ymosodol tuag at glaf) fod yn euog o SPM ar bob achlysur unigol, ond, pan ystyrir y tri honiad ynghyd, does bosib bod rhaid edrych ar ei ymddygiad/hymddygiad mewn golau llawer mwy difrifol.
Fe wnaeth panel PCC adolygu’r achos mewn gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, a datganodd nad oedd yn fodlon y byddai’n ddiogel i ganiatáu i’r meddyg fynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad. Pennodd amodau ar ei gofrestriad am 12 mis. Gadawyd i’r meddyg ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth gyffredinol meddyg arall yn unig, ac nid oed i ragnodi cyffuriau caethiwus neu’u hamnewidion i gleifion yr oedd yn gwybod neu’n amau eu bod yn gaethion i gyffuriau.
Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, gwnaeth Tribiwnlys y GIG orchymyn terfynol, yn dileu’r meddyg o bob rhestr GIG. Ystyriodd y Tribiwnlys amrywiaeth eang o honiadau, gan gynnwys ymosodiadau anweddus, ymddygiad rhywiol amhriodol, cadw fideos anweddus yn ei feddygfa, anfoesgarwch a haerllugrwydd, anonestrwydd ac anallu clinigol, yn gyffredinol ac yn benodol mewn perthynas â thrin dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau. Canfu Tribiwnlys y GIG bod Dr JF 02 yn
‘feddyg gwael y tu hwnt i wella’
na ddylai gael trin cleifion y GIG. Dylid nodi bod y rhan fwyaf o’r honiadau a ystyriwyd gan Dribiwnlys y GIG wedi’u hadrodd i’r GMC. Rwyf wedi darllen penderfyniad Tribiwnlys y GIG. Mae’n eglur ei fod wedi gwrando llawer iawn o dystiolaeth, ac wedi delio â phob honiad yn ofalus. Caiff ei ganfyddiadau eu hesbonio’n eglur, ac ymddengys i mi bod cyfiawnhad llwyr iddynt ar y dystiolaeth. Yn bwysicach, oherwydd ei barodrwydd i wrando’r holl faterion gyda’i gilydd, roedd y Tribiwnlys yn gallu cael golwg holistaidd o ymddygiad, arfer a chymeriad y meddyg. Trwy ddelio â honiadau bob yn dipyn, nid oedd y GMC wedi gallu gwneud hynny. Yn dilyn penderfyniad Tribiwnlys y GIG, parhaodd y meddyg yn rhydd i ymarfer yn y sector preifat.
Wedi hynny, ailddechreuodd panel y PCC ei ystyriaeth o achos Dr JF 02. Canfu nad oedd y meddyg wedi gallu ymarfer yn y GIG oherwydd dyfarniad y Tribiwnlys. Nid oedd yn torri’r amodau a bennwyd yn flaenorol gan banel y PCC. Fe’i rhoddwyd ar gofrestriad amodol am 12 mis arall. Ymddengys, y flwyddyn ddilynol, bod y meddyg wedi cael gwaith mewn clinig llawdriniaeth gosmetig yn y sector preifat. Wedi hynny, adroddodd y clinig am bryderon yn ei gylch i’r Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol. Roedd y pryderon hyn yn ymwneud â safonau hylendid gwael y meddyg ac ymddygiad rhywiol amhriodol. Daethpwyd â sylwedd y pryderon hyn at sylw panel y PCC pan ailystyriodd achos Dr JF 02 ar ddiwedd cyfnod ei gofrestriad amodol. Serch hynny, penderfynodd panel y PCC adnewyddu’r cofrestriad amodol am flwyddyn arall, ac yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw roedd y meddyg i gael asesiad o’i berfformiad. Parhaodd yn rhydd i ymarfer yn y sector preifat.
Mewn datganiad tyst a wnaed ar gyfer yr Ymchwiliad, disgrifiodd Syr Donald Irvine hyn fel
. Rwy’n cytuno. Rwy’n falch i adrodd bod y PCC, wedi hynny, wedi cytuno i gais Dr JF 02 am i’w enw gael ei ddileu’n wirfoddol o’r gofrestr. Ni fyddwn yn rhagweld y byddai unrhyw gais am adfer yn llwyddo.
Y Sancsiwn Atal
Fel yr esboniais, os nad oedd o’r farn bod pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg yn ddigonol, roedd yn rhaid i banel PCC ystyried nesaf pa un a fyddai’n ddigonol i gyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg gael ei atal am gyfnod nid hwy na 12 mis.
Roedd ataliad yn dod i rym fel arfer 28 diwrnod ar ôl dyddiad gorchymyn y PCC, oni bai bod y meddyg yn arfer ei hawl i apelio i’r Uchel Lys (hyd at 2003, y Cyfrin Gyngor). Fodd bynnag, os oedd panel PCC yn penderfynu pennu cyfnod o ataliad neu i ddileu cofrestriad y meddyg, ac os oedd yn ymddangos i banel y PCC y gallai fod rhesymau (naill ai er lles y cyhoedd neu fuddiannau’r meddyg) am bennu ataliad ar unwaith, roedd y grym ganddo i wneud hyn, cyhyd a’i fod yn gwahodd sylwadau ar y cwestiwn cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad.
Cynghorodd ISG 2003 y gellid defnyddio ataliad i
‘anfon arwydd’
at y meddyg, at y proffesiwn ac at y cyhoedd ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn cael ei ystyried fel ymddygiad annerbyniol. Nododd ISG 2003 bod ataliad yn cael effaith gosbol, yn ei fod yn atal y meddyg rhag ymarfer, ac, felly, rhag ennill bywoliaeth fel meddyg yn ystod cyfnod yr ataliad. Aeth ISG 2003 ymlaen:
Fel arwydd, gall ataliad fod yn effeithiol, ond fel sancsiwn gall fod yn wrthgynhyrchiol. Oni bai bod y meddyg wedi ymgymryd â rhaglen ail-addysgu, neu ei fod/bod fel arall wedi defnyddio’r amser yn gynhyrchiol, bydd yn dod allan o’r ataliad â llai o sgiliau, wedi’i ddigalonni/digalonni a fwy na thebyg yn feddyg llai effeithiol nag yr oedd pan gafodd ei atal/hatal yn wreiddiol.
Cynghorodd ISG 2003 y gallai ataliad fod yn briodol pan oedd rhai neu’r cyfan o’r ffactorau canlynol yn amlwg:
Datganodd ISG 2003 yn eglur nad oedd y rhestr ffactorau yn un gynhwysfawr.
Gwrandawiadau a Ailagorwyd
Fel yn achos cofrestriad amodol, pan oedd panel PCC yn atal meddyg, gallai ddatgan, wrth gyhoeddi’i benderfyniad, y byddai’n ailddechrau ystyried yr achos cyn diwedd cyfnod yr ataliad. Nid oedd ISG 2003 yn rhagweld y byddai angen gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd ym mhob achos. Datganodd:
Byddwn wedi meddwl mai achos ataliad prin fyddai hwnnw nad lle nad oedd yn briodol i adolygu’r sefyllfa ar ddiwedd cyfnod yr ataliad. Credaf ei bod yn briodol hefyd y dylai unrhyw banel disgyblu gael y cyfle i holi’r meddyg yn bersonol, yn ychwanegol at gael unrhyw adroddiadau ysgrifenedig. Wrth gwrs, ni ellir gorfodi meddygon i roi tystiolaeth, ond dylai fod disgwyliad y byddant yn fodlon cael eu holi, ac y gellid dod i gasgliadau croes pe gwrthodwyd gwneud hynny.
Yn y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, roedd gan banel PCC y grym i gyfarwyddo y dylai cyfnod yr ataliad gael ei ymestyn am gyfnod pellach, nid hwy na 12 mis, o’r amser pan fyddai fel arall yn dod i ben. Roedd yn agored hefyd i banel y PCC bennu cyfnod (nid hwy na thair blynedd) o gofrestriad amodol, neu, os nad oedd o’r farn bod yr un o’r dewisiadau blaenorol yn ddigonol, i gyfarwyddo y dylai enw’r meddyg gael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Gellid dod ag achosion yn ôl at banel y PCC lle nad oedd unrhyw awgrym wedi’i roi y byddai gwrandawiad yn cael ei ailagor, neu cyn y dyddiad bwriadedig ar gyfer y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, mewn amgylchiadau tebyg i’r rheiny a oedd yn berthnasol i gofrestriad amodol.
Cynghorodd ISG 2003 y gallai fod achosion lle gallai panel PCC ddymuno pennu cyfnod o ataliad, ac, ar yr un pryd, gyfarwyddo gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, ac i argymell y math o raglen addysgol y gallai’r meddyg ymgymryd â hi, neu’r camau y gallai ddymuno’u cymryd, yn ystod cyfnod ei ataliad/hataliad. Gallai hwn fod yn erfyn defnyddiol potensial os oedd yr amcanion yn cael eu nodi’n glir ar y cychwyn, ac os oedd tystiolaeth briodol am yr hyn a oedd wedi’i gyflawni yn y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd. Fodd bynnag, nid yw geiriad ISG 2003, a awgrymodd y gallai panel y PCC argymell rhaglen addysgol y byddai’r meddyg
neu gamau y byddai’r meddyg
, yn swnio fel bod bwriad y dylai fod amcan clir yr oedd disgwyl i’r meddyg ei chyflawni neu y gallai canlyniadau methiant fod yn ddifrifol.
Achosion Lle Cafodd Cofrestriad y Meddyg Ei Atal
Rwyf wedi dweud bod gan yr Ymchwiliad ddiddordeb mewn achosion lle canfuwyd bod meddygon wedi bod yn anonest. Roedd gan yr Ymchwiliad ddiddordeb penodol hefyd mewn achosion lle’r oedd meddygon wedi ffugio cofnodion meddygol i gelu camymddygiad. Gwnaeth Shipman hyn lawer gwaith. Archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad rai achosion felly a chanfod mai cyfnod o ataliad oedd y sancsiwn a gafodd ei bennu weithiau.
Dr JF 04 a Dr JF 03
Mae achosion cysylltiedig Dr JF 04 a Dr JF 03 yn enghraifft o hyn. Roedd Dr JF 04 a Dr JF 03 yn ŵr a gwraig ac yn ymarfer gyda’i gilydd. Ar ddechrau’r 1990au, gwnaethpwyd cwyn i’r Awdurdod Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (FHSA) lleol bod Dr JF 04 (y gŵr), ychydig amser yn gynharach, wedi methu archwilio claf A yn briodol ac wedi methu’i chyfeirio ar gyfer archwiliad arbenigol. Hefyd, honnwyd iddo fod yn anfoesgar i’r claf. Yn ddiweddarach y flwyddyn honno, pan oedd y gŵyn dan ymchwiliad, cyflwynodd Dr JF 04 gofnodion cleifion i’r FHSA a oedd wedi cael eu ffugio gan Dr JF 04 a Dr JF 03 eu dau, er mwyn camarwain yr FHSA yn ei ymchwiliad. Yn fuan wedi derbyn y gŵyn gyntaf, derbyniodd yr FHSA gŵyn arall ar ran claf B, a honnodd bod y ddau feddyg wedi methu archwilio’r claf yn briodol, wedi methu canfod achos ei symptomau, ac wedi methu ei gyfeirio ar gyfer ymchwiliad arbenigol pan oedd ei gyflwr yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol am gyfeiriad felly. Yn ddiweddarach y flwyddyn honno, pan oedd yr FHSA yn ymchwilio i’r gŵyn, cyflwynodd y meddygon gofnodion a oedd wedi cael eu ffugio gan y ddau ohonynt er mwyn camarwain yr FHSA.
Cafodd y ddau feddyg eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC, a gwrandawyd eu hachosion dros ddwy flynedd wedi iddynt gael eu cyfeirio at y GMC yn y lle cyntaf. Cafodd rhai o’r honiadau (gan gynnwys ffugio cofnodion) eu haddef, a chafwyd rhai eraill wedi’u profi. Canfuwyd nad oedd rhai honiadau wedi’u profi. Canfu panel PCC bod y ddau feddyg yn euog o SPM. Ar ôl derbyn deunydd lliniarol (a oedd yn cynnwys nifer fawr o dystlythyrau gan gleifion), cafodd y ddau feddyg eu hatal rhag ymarfer am dri mis. Gan oedi yn y fan honno, credaf y byddai’r penderfyniad hwn wedi taro llawer o aelodau’r cyhoedd fel un rhy drugarog. Yn wir, yn ei datganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, mynegodd Dr Trowell y farn y dylai enwau’r meddygon hyn fod wedi cael eu dileu o’r gofrestr. Teimlai ei bod yn rhaid bod panel y PCC wedi cael argraff fawr gan y lliniariad a gynigiwyd, gan iddo bennu ataliad tri mis yn unig. Fel y gwelwn, nid oedd y lliniariad y cyfan yr oedd yn ymddangos ei fod.
Fel yr esboniais, roedd ataliad yn dod i rym 28 diwrnod ar ôl dyddiad y gorchymyn fel arfer, oni bai bod y meddyg wedi arfer ei hawl i apelio i’r Uchel Lys (y Cyfrin Gyngor bryd hynny). Ni wnaeth y wraig apelio a ‘gwnaeth’ ei chyfnod ataliad. Apeliodd y gŵr i’r Cyfrin Gyngor, gan hynny’n gohirio’i ataliad. Tynnwyd yr apêl yn ôl yn y mis y daeth cyfnod ataliad ei wraig i ben, a derbyniwyd hynny gan y Cyfrin Gyngor ym mis Gorffennaf. Mae’n eglur mai apêl dactegol oedd hon, wedi’i bwriadu i sicrhau bod y ddau bartner wedi’u hatal ar adegau gwahanol.
Ychydig wythnosau ar ôl gwrandawiad y PCC, derbyniodd y GMC wybodaeth bod rhai o’r tystlythyrau a gyflwynwyd i banel y PCC wedi’u cael mewn amgylchiadau amheus. Mewn un achos, roedd tystiolaeth bod y wraig wedi gofyn i glaf ysgrifennu llythyr a hithau’n arddweud, heb esbonio pam oedd angen y llythyr. Pan aeth y claf yn ôl i’r feddygfa i fynegi pryder ynghylch hyn, dywedodd y gŵr wrthi na fyddai’n cael ei ddefnyddio. Mewn gwirionedd, cafodd ei ddefnyddio. Roedd chwe achos arall lle cafodd cwynion gwahanol eu gwneud. Mewn un, cwynodd y claf bod y wraig wedi cyfansoddi’r llythyr a bod y claf wedi teimlo iddo gael ei
‘wthio’
i’w ysgrifennu; mewn achos arall, roedd y claf wedi cytuno i ysgrifennu llythyr cefnogi, ar gais y wraig, ond ni ddywedwyd pam yr oedd angen y llythyr. Daeth y cwynion hyn gerbron y PPC dri mis ar ôl cyfnod ataliad y wraig ddod i ben. Yn ôl pob tebyg, mae’n rhaid bod y sgriniwr wedi meddwl eu bod yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Addefodd y gŵr yr honiad yn ei erbyn, ac ymddiheurodd nad oedd wedi talu sylw i gais y claf a oedd wedi gofyn i gael tynnu ei llythyr yn ôl. Cyn belled ag y gwelaf o’r ffeil, nid atebodd y wraig i’r llythyr yn ei hysbysu am yr honiadau.
Penderfynodd panel y PPC beidio cyfeirio’r cwynion newydd at y PCC. Yn lle hynny, cyfarwyddodd y dylai llythyr rhybudd gael ei anfon at y wraig, ac y dylai llythyr rhybuddiol gael ei anfon at y gŵr. Yn ei ddatganiad i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Dr Robin Steel, a oedd yn Gadeirydd y PPC ar y pryd, na fyddai’r PPC wedi anfon y cwynion ymlaen at y PCC gan y byddai wedi meddwl y byddai’n annhebygol iawn y byddai’r PCC wedi dymuno cymryd unrhyw gamau ychwanegol ar gofrestriad, gan gofio ei fod eisoes wedi pennu ataliad tri mis. Datganodd hefyd yr
‘ymchwiliwyd’
i bob un o’r tystlythyrau a gyflwynwyd gan y meddygon, ac mai cyfran fach yn unig a gafwyd mewn amgylchiadau amheus. Mae’r achos hwn yn gadael yr argraff arnaf fod y ddau feddyg anonest yma wedi rhoi tri thro am un i’r GMC.
Achos arall lle pennodd panel PCC gyfnod ataliad ar feddyg a gafwyd y euog o arfer is na’r safon ac anonestrwydd, oedd achos Dr JP 01. Roedd y meddyg wedi methu cynnal archwiliad digonol o glaf yn 2000. Aethpwyd â’r claf i’r ysbyty wedi hynny a bu farw. Roedd y meddyg wedi methu gwneud nodyn cyfoes o’i archwiliad, a gwnaeth nodiadau ffug yn ddiweddarach yn y cofnodion yn ymwneud â’r achlysur hwnnw ac ymgynghoriad blaenorol ryw 16 mis yn gynharach. Yn y gwrandawiad yn 2003, canfu panel y PCC bod gweithredoedd y meddyg yn anghyfrifol, yn anonest ac wedi’u bwriadu i gamarwain. Fe’i cafwyd yn euog o SPM a’i atal rhag ymarfer am chwe mis. Yma eto, credaf y byddai’r cyhoedd yn teimlo bod y sancsiwn hwn yn rhy drugarog. Fy marn fy hun yw bod angen diogelu’r cyhoedd rhag y math hwn o feddyg na ellir ymddiried ynddo. Beth bynnag, credaf fod angen ymgynghori â’r cyhoedd ynghylch y sancsiynau priodol ar gyfer camymddygiad, yn enwedig y rheiny’n ymwneud ag anonestrwydd.
Y Sancsiwn Dileu
Y sancsiwn mwyaf difrifol sydd ar gael i’r PCC yw dileu enw meddyg o’r gofrestr feddygol. Cynghorodd ISG 2003 bod dileu o’r gofrestr yn briodol lle mai hwn oedd yr unig fodd o ddiogelu cleifion a chynnal hyder y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn meddygol. Cynghorodd bod dileu yn debygol o fod yn briodol pan oedd yr ymddygiad dan sylw yn
a’i fod yn ymwneud ag unrhyw rai o’r canlynol:
Serious departure from the relevant professional standards as set out in Good Medical Practice.
Doing serious harm to others (patients or otherwise), either deliberately or through incompetence and particularly where there is a continuing risk to patients.
Abuse of position/trust (particularly involving vulnerable patients) or violation of the rights of patients.
Dishonesty (especially where persistent and covered up).
Persistent lack of insight into seriousness of actions or consequences.’
Unwaith eto, pwysleisiodd ISG 2003 nad oedd y rhestr ffactorau yn un gynhwysfawr.
Achosion Lle Cafodd Enw’r Meddyg Ei Ddileu oddi ar y Gofrestr
Rwy’n dymuno trafod ychydig achosion lle’r oedd panel PCC wedi cyfarwyddo dileu o’r gofrestr feddygol. Cafodd rhai o’r achosion hyn eu hapelio i’r Cyfrin Gyngor - rhai ohonynt yn llwyddiannus, rhai’n aflwyddiannus. Dewiswyd yr achosion hyn oherwydd eu bod yn delio â materion sydd o ddiddordeb penodol i’r Ymchwiliad o gofio nodweddion tebyg i rai agweddau ar ymddygiad Shipman. Pwysleisiaf nad yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi gwneud adolygiad systematig o benderfyniadau’r PCC. Gyda’r cafeat hwnnw, fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud ei bod yn anodd canfod unrhyw linyn cyson o ddifrifoldeb neu ffactorau lliniarol sy’n esbonio pam y deliwyd ag un achos drwy ddileu, tra bod achos arall wedi arwain at ataliad neu bennu amodau. Argraff o anghysonder a geir. Cydnabuwyd hyn gan Weithgor y PCC yn ei adroddiad ym 1999.
Soniais yn gynharach, oherwydd achos Mrs Overton, bod diddordeb arbennig gan yr Ymchwiliad mewn achosion lle’r oedd meddyg wedi rhoi gorddos o gyffur opiad. Un achos a ddygwyd i sylw’r Ymchwiliad yn y cyd-destun hwn oedd achos Dr JM 08. Tra’r oedd yn gweithio i wasanaeth dirprwyo yn 2000, galwyd Dr JM 08 i weld claf a oedd yn dioddef o ganser ar yr ysgyfaint a bronco-niwmonia. Rhoddodd 45mg o forffin i’r claf, nad oedd erioed wedi cael y cyffur hwnnw o’r blaen. Roedd hwn yn ddogn gormodol difrifol. Bu’r claf farw ddwy awr yn ddiweddarach, a chanfu’r awtopsi mai gwenwyno â morffin oedd un o achosion y farwolaeth. Ymchwiliodd yr heddlu i’r farwolaeth, ond penderfynodd beidio ag erlyn; cafodd yr achos ei adrodd i’r GMC. Cyfeiriodd y PPC yr achos at y PCC ac at yr IOC hefyd. Ryw dri mis yn ddiweddarach, gwnaeth yr IOC orchymyn yn pennu amodau interim ar arfer y meddyg. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys gofynion i beidio gweithio fel locwm nac mewn meddygfa ag un meddyg, ac i beidio ymgymryd â gwaith allan o oriau. Y bwriad yn amlwg oedd sicrhau graddfa o oruchwyliaeth o waith y meddyg. Roedd i hysbysu unrhyw gyflogwr am yr amodau. Mewn gwrandawiad adolygiad dri mis yn ddiweddarach, honnodd y meddyg nad oedd wedi gweithio o gwbl ers i’r gorchymyn interim gael ei wneud. Mewn gwirionedd, fel y daeth i’r golwg yn yr adolygiad nesaf dri mis yn ddiweddarach, nid oedd hynny’n wir. Roedd wedi gwneud gwaith locwm mewn meddygfa ag un meddyg, ac wedi gwneud gwaith allan o oriau. Yn syndod braidd, ni wnaeth yr IOC bennu ataliad interim, ond yn hytrach gadawodd i’r meddyg barhau i weithio, dan amodau fel ag o’r blaen.
Yn y gwrandawiad gwirioneddol gan banel PCC, a gynhaliwyd ryw 19 mis wedi i’r achos gael ei gyfeirio at y PCC gan y PPC, cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o SPM a diddymwyd ei enw oddi ar y gofrestr. Mae’n amlwg o’r penderfyniad mai ffactor pwysig yn rhesymeg panel y PCC oedd dirmyg y meddyg i’r gorchymyn a wnaed gan yr IOC a’i barodrwydd i gamarwain y GMC.
Roedd rhai o’r achosion lle’r oedd panelau PCC wedi cyfarwyddo dileu enw meddyg o’r gofrestr yn achosion yn ymwneud â honiadau o anonestrwydd. Un achos felly oedd achos
. Yn yr achos hwnnw, roedd y meddyg wedi pledio’n euog i’r Llys Ynadon ym mis Mai 2000 i bum cyhuddiad o gyfrifo ffug a gofynnod i bum cyhuddiad arall gael eu hystyried. Roedd wedi cael arian o’r HA lleol yn anonest. Cafodd ddirwy o £7500. Yn y GMC, cyfeiriwyd ei achos at y PCC. Cymerodd panel y PCC olwg ddifrifol o’r camymddygiad hwn, ac, ar ôl ystyried y lliniariad a gynigiwyd, penderfynodd ddileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr. Apeliodd i’r Cyfrin Gyngor ar y sail bod y sancsiwn yn rhy llym, yn enwedig yng ngolau ei gofnod di-fai hir a llawer o agweddau cadarnhaol ei yrfa. Yn bwysig, dywedwyd wrth y Cyfrin Gyngor na fu unrhyw feirniadaeth o’i driniaeth o gleifion nac amheuon am ei allu yn ôl pob golwg. Caniatawyd yr apêl gan y Cyfrin Gyngor, a phennodd gyfnod ataliad am dri mis.
Nid oedd ffeithiau achos
yn anhebyg i’r rheiny yn achos
, er bod un nodwedd ychwanegol, sef bod cofnodion cleifion wedi’u ffugio. Yn
, roedd y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog yn y Llys Ynadon o gyhuddiadau lluosog o gyfrifo ffug a dau gyhuddiad o gael arian trwy dwyll. Roedd wedi cyflwyno ceisiadau i’r HA am dâl am brofion sgrinio iechyd yr honnodd yr oedd wedi’u cynnal, ond nad ydoedd. Talwyd £7.10 iddo am bob prawf. Yn ôl pob golwg, roedd wedi gwneud hyn ar dros fil o achlysuron. Roedd wedi gwneud nodiadau mewn cofnodion cleifion hefyd, yn cofnodi profion sgrinio iechyd nad oeddent wedi’u cynnal yn ôl pob golwg. Fe wnaeth panel PCC ddileu ei enw o’r gofrestr, ac apeliodd y meddyg i’r Cyfrin Gyngor, yn dadlau bod y PCC wedi methu rhoi sylw priodol i ddiben achosion disgyblu, sef diogelu’r cyhoedd a chynnal safonau yn y proffesiwn. Honnwyd ei bod yn anghywir i’r GMC bennu cosb bellach pan oedd eisoes wedi cael ei gosbi gan y Llys. Methodd yr apêl. Roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor o’r farn bod hawl gan banel y PCC lunio’r farn bod ymddygiad y meddyg wedi tanseilio hyder yr HA yng ngonestrwydd ymarferwyr, a bod hyn yn adlewyrchu ar safonau ac enw da’r proffesiwn cyfan. At hynny, roedd ffugio cofnodion wedi peri risg i gleifion. Nid oedd y sancsiwn yn ormodol.
, roedd y meddyg wedi pledio’n euog i ddau gyhuddiad yn ymwneud â chynhyrchu adroddiadau meddygol ffug i’w defnyddio mewn hawliadau damweiniau twyllodrus yn erbyn cwmnïau yswiriant. Roedd panel PCC wedi’i ddileu o’r gofrestr, ac apeliodd. Wrth wrthod yr apêl, dywedodd y Cyfrin Gyngor bod y gorchymyn dileu yn ofynnol er lles y cyhoedd.
Edrychodd yr Ymchwiliad ar rai achosion hefyd yn ymwneud ag arfer clinigol gwael lle’r oedd panel y PCC wedi gwneud gorchymyn dileu. Yn achos
, roedd y Cyfrin Gyngor wedi gwyrdroi penderfyniad panel PCC i ddileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr. Roedd y meddyg, wrolegydd ymgynghorol, wedi cyflawni llawdriniaeth ‘twll clo’ i dynnu carreg ar yr aren. Roedd y driniaeth yn anoddach na’r disgwyl, a chollodd y claf lawer o waed. Rhoddwyd trallwysiadau gwaed, a rhoddodd yr anaesthetydd gyngor ynghylch rhoi’r gorau i’r driniaeth. Yn y pen draw, rhoddwyd y gorau i’r llawdriniaeth oherwydd bod y claf mewn cyflwr gwael iawn. Er gwaethaf cyflwr gwael y claf, gadawodd y llawfeddyg yr ysbyty ac aeth adref. Yn fuan wedi hynny, dioddefodd y claf waedlif difrifol. Ni lwyddwyd i gysylltu â’r llawfeddyg. Daethpwyd o hyd i lawfeddyg arall, a chlampiodd safle’r gwaedu a sefydlogwyd cyflwr y claf. Fodd bynnag, bu’r claf farw deuddydd yn ddiweddarach.
Ymddangosodd y llawfeddyg cyntaf gerbron panel PCC, wedi’i gyhuddo o ddwy drosedd: methu rhoi’r gorau i’r llawdriniaeth ar adeg briodol a gadael y claf tra’r oedd mewn cyflwr ansefydlog. Canfu panel y PCC bod y llawfeddyg yn euog o SPM, a chyfarwyddodd dileu. Lluniodd y farn bod penderfyniad y llawfeddyg i adael yr ysbyty yn
‘anghyfrifol difrifol ac yn esgeuluster affwysol o safonau proffesiynol priodol’
. Roedd o’r farn hefyd bod diffyg mewnwelediad ganddo, a deallodd y Cyfrin Gyngor bod hynny’n ymwneud â’i agwedd mai ei waith ef oedd tynnu’r garreg ar yr aren a gwaith yr anaesthetydd oedd cadw’r claf yn fyw. Ymddengys bod pryder hefyd ynghylch methiant y meddyg i gyfathrebu’n ddigonol ag aelodau eraill y tîm. Gan oedi yn y fan honno, ymddengys i mi bod y penderfyniad i ddileu yn rhesymol.
Yn wir, ni ddywedodd y Cyfrin Gyngor nad ydoedd. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl atgoffa’i aelodau o’r gochelgarwch traddodiadol yr oedd ei awdurdodaeth i ddyfarnu yn erbyn y PCC mewn materion barn wedi’i harfer fel rheol, caniataodd yr apêl serch hynny. Gwnaeth hynny am ei fod yn teimlo nad oedd yn
‘angenrheidiol’
i ddileu enw’r meddyg yn yr achos arbennig hwn. Dywedodd fod y PCC
‘yn iawn i bryderu ynghylch hyder y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn a’i weithdrefnau ar gyfer delio â meddygon sy’n methu safonau proffesiynol’
. Ond, aeth ymlaen,
‘ni ddylai hyn gael ei gyflawni i’r graddau ei fod yn teimlo ei bod yn angenrheidiol i aberthu gyrfa meddyg galluog a defnyddiol fel arall nad ydyw’n creu perygl i’r cyhoedd, er mwyn bodloni galw am feio a chosbi’
. Dyfynnodd ddarn o ‘A Commitment to Quality, A Quest for Excellence’, a oedd yn ddatganiad a wnaed ar ran y Llywodraeth, y proffesiwn meddygol a’r GIG, lle dywedwyd:
Yn ddiau mae hyn oll yn berthnasol ac yn ddoeth, ond ni allaf weld bod unrhyw dystiolaeth yn achos
bod panel y PCC wedi gweithredu er mwyn
‘bodloni galw am feio a chosbi’
. Nid fy lle i yw dweud pwy oedd yn iawn ynghylch Mr Bijl a phwy oedd yn anghywir. Mae penderfyniadau o’r math hyn yn cael eu seilio ar farn gyfunol aelodau unigol panel y PCC neu aelodau cyfansoddol Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg y bydd panelau’r PCC sydd â chyfansoddiad gwahanol yn dod i gasgliadau gwahanol ynghylch ffeithiau tebyg, ac felly hefyd, yr ymddengys, cyfansoddiadau gwahanol o’r Cyfrin Gyngor. Ar hyn o bryd, mae llawer gormod o le, yn fy marn i, i arfer disgresiwn. Mae gormod yn dibynnu ar argraff ac agweddau gwahanol grwpiau unigol o wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau. Yn fy marn i, mae angen ar fyrder am arweiniad mwy strwythuredig yn y modd y mae penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud.
[1956] 3 AII ER 742.
[2002[ Lloyd’s Rep Med 68.

---  ---
Mewn Penodau blaenorol, rwyf wedi esbonio cefndir gwaith y tîm PSI a rhai agweddau ar ei waith. Roedd y gwaith hwn yn cynnwys dadansoddiad o achosion y deliodd y PCC â nhw. Fodd bynnag, dadansoddiad meintiol yn unig oedd hwn. Ni wnaeth y tîm PSI arsylwi’r PCC wrth ei waith, fel y gwnaeth gyda’r PPC. Ni wnaeth ddadansoddiad ychwaith o ansawdd proses gwneud penderfyniadau panelau PCC.
Adroddiad 1996
Yn y gwaith ymchwil a wnaed ar gyfer Adroddiad PSI 1996, canfu‘r Athro Allen, a arweiniodd y tîm PSI, a’i chydweithwyr, bod meddygon, yn y PCC, a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor yn fwy tebygol na’u cymheiriaid yn y DU o’u canfod yn euog o SPM. Fodd bynnag, wedi’u cael yn euog, roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU o gael eu ceryddu neu’u gwneud yn destun cofrestriad amodol. Roedd y ffigurau atal ar gyfer y ddau grŵp yn debyg iawn. Roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn hanner mor debygol yn unig â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU o gael eu dileu o’r gofrestr.
Awgrymodd y tîm PSI reswm posibl am y ffaith fod triniaeth fwy trugarog wedi’i rhoi yn ôl pob golwg gan y PCC i’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor a gafodd eu canfod yn euog o SPM. Y rheswm hwn oedd bod y gallai’r trothwy ymddygiad yr oedd meddyg a oedd yn ymgymhwyso yn y DU yn gorfod ei groesi cyn bod ei achos/hachos yn cael ei gyfeirio at y PCC yn uwch na’r trothwy a oedd yn berthnasol i feddyg yn ymgymhwyso dramor. Os felly, byddai’r cwynion yn erbyn y rheiny a oedd yn ymgymhwyso yn y DU a oedd yn cyrraedd y PCC (neu rai o’r cwynion hynny) yn fwy difrifol na’r cwynion yn erbyn y rheiny a oedd yn ymgymhwyso dramor, ac felly byddent yn haeddu sancsiynau mwy difrifol. Nododd y tîm PSI y byddai’i ganfyddiadau’n gyson â’r awgrym hwnnw.
Eiriolodd y tîm PSI y dylai
‘dadansoddiad trylwyr’
gael ei gynnal o achosion lle’r oedd canfyddiadau o SPM wedi’u gwneud gan y PCC mewn blynyddoedd diweddar. Gobeithid y byddai dadansoddiad felly’n cynorthwyo wrth ddatblygu canllawiau clir ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, mewn achosion cyffredinol ac achosion penodol.
Adroddiad 2000
Fe wnaeth dadansoddiad o ganlyniadau achosion PCC a gynhaliwyd ar gyfer Adroddiad PSI 2000 ddangos, os oedd euogfarnau’n cael eu hepgor o’r cyfrif, mai cyfran yr achosion a wrandawyd gan y PCC lle cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o SPM oedd 79% ym 1997. Cynyddodd y gyfran hon i 85% ym 1998 a disgyn i 78% ym 1999. Ym 1997, canfuwyd cyfran uwch o feddygon a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso yn y DU na meddygon a oedd wedi ymgymhwyso dramor yn euog o SPM; ym 1998 a 1999, canfuwyd cyfran uwch sylweddol o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn euog. Ym 1998, canfuwyd 71% o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU yn euog o SPM o gymharu â 100% o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor. Ym 1999, y cyfrannau oedd 70% ac 80%, yn y drefn honno.
O ran sancsiynau, canfu’r tîm PSI bod cwynion, ym 1997, yn erbyn y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a thramor, wedi arwain at ganlyniadau gweddol debyg yn y PCC. Ym 1998, cafodd cyfrannau tebygo o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a thramor eu henwau wedi’u dileu o’r gofrestr. Ym 1999, fodd bynnag, cafodd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor eu cosbi’n llymach yn gyffredinol. Sylwodd y tîm PSI bod patrwm y canlyniadau yn un cymhleth. Pwysleisiodd y gallai’r canlyniadau ymwneud yn wir â difrifoldeb yr achosion yn erbyn y meddygon dan sylw, yn hytrach nag unrhyw ragfarn ar ran y PCC. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn amhosibl, heb ddadansoddiad ansoddol, i fod yn sicr o hyn.
Nododd y tîm PSI bod meddygon mewn achosion euogfarnau yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny mewn achosion ymddygiad o gael eu henwau wedi’u dileu o’r gofrestr. Gan yr oedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn cyfrif am gyfrannau uwch o achosion euogfarnau yn y PCC, cynyddodd hyn eu cynrychiolaeth ymhlith y meddygon hynny a gafodd eu henwau wedi’i dileu. Nododd Adroddiad 2000, gan yr oedd y PCC i weld yn ystyried euogfarnau mor ddifrifol, roedd y cwestiwn yn codi pam na chafodd mwy o euogfarnau eu cyfeirio gan y PPC at y PCC.
Aeth yr Adroddiad ymlaen i ddweud bod y PCC yn cynrychioli cam
‘llawer mwy tryloyw’
o weithdrefnau’r GMC na’r camau cynharach. Serch hynny, nid oedd yn eglur bob tro o hyd o drafodaethau’r PCC pam yr oedd o’r farn bod rhai achosion yn gyfystyr ag SPM ac eraill heb fod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Eiriolodd y tîm PSI
‘ymagwedd fwy strwythuredig’
i gofnodi rhesymau gan banelau PCC. Roedd ymchwil y PSI wedi dangos
‘gwahaniaethau nodedig mewn canlyniad’
o flwyddyn i flwyddyn, a oedd yn anodd eu hesbonio yn absenoldeb unrhyw ddatganiad o’r meini prawf yr oedd pob achos yn cael eu barnu arnynt. Nododd y tîm PSI bod cyfansoddiad y PCC yn wahanol ar y rhan fwyaf o’r achlysuron pan oedd panel PCC yn eistedd. At hynny, roedd y cyfansoddiad yn debygol o fod yn agored i hyd yn oed fwy o newid yn y dyfodol agos, gan i’r GMC recriwtio pobl o’r tu allan i aelodaeth y GMC (h.y. cyfranogion) mewn ymgais i leihau’r nifer o achosion a oedd yn cronni. Awgrymodd Adroddiad 2000 y gallai’r GMC ddymuno ystyried a fyddai mwy o gysondeb yn cael ei gyflwyno drwy gyfyngu aelodaeth y PCC i nifer fach o unigolion parhaol, wedi’u hyfforddi’n drylwyr.
Nododd y tîm PSI hefyd yr angen i archwilio’n fanwl y diffiniad o SPM. Ailadroddodd yr angen am ddealltwriaeth gyffredin o’r hyn a oedd ac nad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ac am ganllawiau clir ar y ffactorau i’w hystyried, a’r safonau i’w cymhwyso, wrth wneud penderfyniadau. Pwysleisiodd bwysigrwydd cysondeb ar lefel y PCC, er mwyn gallu bwydo’r meini prawf a’r safonau a oedd yn cael eu cymhwyso yng nghamau terfynol y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad yn ôl drwy’r camau cynharach.
Papur 2003
Yn ei Bapur 2003, fe wnaeth y tîm PSI ddadansoddi’r cwynion a ystyriwyd gan y PCC yn ystod y blynyddoedd 1999, 2000 a 2001. Yn 2000, cynyddodd nifer y meddygon a ymddangosodd gerbron y PCC (ac eithrio achosion a ailagorwyd a cheisiadau am adfer) i 101. Roedd cynnydd pellach yn 2001 i 122.
Canfu’r tîm PSI bod y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor, ym mhob un o’r tair blynedd, yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU o’u cael yn euog o SPM. Mewn gwaith blaenorol, roedd wedi canfod fod cyfran gyffredinol y meddygon y cafodd eu henwau eu dileu o’r gofrestr gan y PCC wedi cynyddu o 25% ym 1997 i 47% ym 1998. Dywedwyd mai ffactor cyfrannol tebygol i’r cynnydd hwn oedd y cynnydd yn nifer yr achosion euogfarnau. Roedd cyfran y meddygon a gafodd eu dileu wedi disgyn ychydig wedyn (i 43% neu 45%) ym 1999. Yn y dadansoddiad diweddarach, sylwyd ar ostyngiad pellach. Yn 2000, 34% oedd y gyfran; yn 2001, 26% ydoedd. Ym 1999, cyfarwyddwyd dileu mewn cyfran sylweddol uwch o achosion yn ymwneud â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU. Yn 2000, roedd y gwahaniaeth yn llai, ac, yn 2001, cafodd cyfran ychydig yn uwch o’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU eu henwau wedi’u dileu. Ym mhob un o’r tair blynedd, roedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU yn fwy tebygol na’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor o gael eu cystwyo neu’u ceryddu, tra’r oedd y rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn fwy tebygol o gael eu hatal neu gael amodau wedi’u pennu ar eu cofrestriad.
Roedd meddygon mewn achosion euogfarnau’n fwy tebygol o gael eu henwau wedi’u dileu na’r rheiny mewn mathau arall o achosion. Roedd cyfran yr euogfarnau y deliwyd â nhw drwy ddileu dros 80% fel arfer (73% ym 1999). Fodd bynnag, yn 2001, pennwyd dileu mewn hanner yr achosion yn unig y deliwyd â nhw.
Canfu’r dadansoddiad wahaniaethau parhaus rhwng canlyniadau achosion yn ymwneud â’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd yn y DU a’r rheiny a ymgymhwysodd dramor yn y PCC. Ni ellid pennu’r ffactorau a oedd yn achosi hyn heb wneud dadansoddiad manwl o’r rhesymau am y penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud gan y PCC.

---  ---
Ym mis Mai 1999, fe wnaeth Gweithgor y PCC, a sefydlwyd gan y Pwyllgor Polisi Addasrwydd i Ymarfer, adrodd ar bwerau ac arfer y PCC. Y cefndir i’w waith oedd pryder o fewn y GMC ynghylch beirniadaeth gyhoeddus a beirniadaeth yn y cyfryngau o benderfyniadau’r PCC fel rhai amhriodol ac anghyson â phenderfyniadau blaenorol. Un o dasgau’r Gweithgor oedd canfod a oedd, neu a oedd yn ymddangos bod, anghysondeb yn y modd yr oedd sancsiynau yn cael eu cymhwyso gan y PCC.
Fe wnaeth y Gweithgor adolygu’r holl benderfyniadau ar sancsiynu a wnaed gan y PCC dros y cyfnod o 1988 i 1997. Dywedodd yr adroddiad bod y penderfyniadau a adolygwyd yn achosion lle
‘canfuwyd bod SPM wedi’i brofi’
. Mae’n bosibl eu bod yn cynnwys euogfarnau hefyd. Y sancsiwn mwyaf cyffredin (a bennwyd mewn 37% o achosion) oedd dileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr. Mynegodd y Gweithgor syndod, fodd bynnag, bod 20% o achosion wedi’u terfynu gyda cherydd. Credai aelodau’r Gweithgor y dylai canfyddiad o SPM arwain fel arfer at bennu sancsiwn, oni bai bod
‘ffactorau lliniarol cryf’
Edrychodd y Gweithgor yn benodol ar achosion yn ymwneud â chamymddygiad rhywiol (ac eithrio perthnasoedd rhywiol cydsyniol) a gofal clinigol annigonol neu amhriodol. Canfu fod dwy ran o dair o droseddau rhywiol a brofwyd wedi arwain at ddileu. Yn y traean a oedd yn weddill, roedd ystod eang iawn o sancsiynau wedi’u pennu gan y PCC, gan gynnwys (mewn 7% o achosion) cerydd. Yn achos triniaeth glinigol, roedd sancsiynau wedi’u dosbarthu’n gyfartal iawn, gyda 26% yn arwain at ddileu ac 20% at gerydd.
Nododd y Gweithgor na allai’r
‘ystadegau moel’
ddangos pam yr oedd penderfyniadau unigol wedi’u gwneud. Nid oedd aelodau’r Gweithgor ychwaith wedi canfod fod cofnodion swyddogol yr achosion, a wnaethpwyd ar y pryd, yn fawr o gymorth. Nid oedd yn arfer bryd hynny i gynnwys yn y penderfyniad ar ddiwedd achos unrhyw beth mwy nag esboniad byr iawn o paham yr oedd sancsiwn penodol wedi’i bennu. Nododd yr adroddiad:
Fe wnaeth yr Adroddiad wrthod y syniad o ddefnyddio tariffau dedfrydu fel un na ellid ei weithredu. Credai’r Gweithgor fod yr ymagwedd hon yn amhriodol oherwydd, mewn cyferbyniad â’r llysoedd troseddau, roedd y PCC yn delio, nid â nifer o droseddau wedi’u diffinio’n glir y gellid pennu ‘tariff’ ar eu cyfer, ond â throsedd unigol o SPM. At hynny, roedd y Gweithgor o’r farn y byddai dull gweithredu â thariff yn
‘rhoi cyfyngiad annymunol ar ddisgresiwn y Pwyllgor’
. Yn lle hynny, argymhellodd y Gweithgor datblygu datganiad ynghylch diben y sancsiynau yn gyffredinol, a phob sancsiwn yn benodol. Awgrymodd y byddai hyn yn gymorth hyfforddi defnyddiol. Yr awgrym hwn a arweiniodd, ddwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach, yn 2001, at gynhyrchu’r fersiwn gyntaf o’r ISG.
Hefyd, mewn ymgais bellach i hyrwyddo cysondeb mewn gwneud penderfyniadau, argymhellodd y Gweithgor cylchreded cofnodion pob cyfarfod o banel PCC i holl aelodau’r PCC. Argymhellodd hefyd cynnal cyfarfodydd rheolaidd o aseswyr, cadeiryddion pwyllgorau ac aelodau o bwyllgorau. Argymhellodd y dylai sgrinwyr ac aelodau o’r PPC a’r PCC gyfarfod yn gyson hefyd. Awgrymodd paratoi llawlyfr hyfforddi a soniodd am
Cynghorodd y Gweithgor hefyd y dylai’r PCC roi esboniad llawnach am ei resymau. Nododd y byddai hynny’n galluogi pawb â diddordeb yn y penderfyniad - y meddyg, yr achwynydd, y cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn - i wybod pam yr oedd y penderfyniad wedi’i wneud. Byddai hefyd yn galluogi panel a allai fod angen ystyried ymddygiad y meddyg yn y dyfodol gael gwerthfawrogiad llawnach o feddylfryd y panel cynharach. Ni wnaeth y Gweithgor awgrymu y dylai’r PCC roi rhesymau am ei ganfyddiadau o ffaith.
Mae’r barnau a fynegwyd gan y Gweithgor yn debyg i’r rheiny a fynegais yn gynharach, sef bod anghysonderau i weld rhwng penderfyniadau’r PCC. Mae’n amlwg yn ddymunol y dylai rhywbeth gael ei wneud am hyn. Nid ymddengys i mi bod ymyrraeth gan y Cyfrin Gyngor (a wnaeth, mewn blynyddoedd diweddarach, ddangos llai o barch i farnau’r PCC nag a wnaethpwyd yn flaenorol) yn gallu helpu; nid oedd yn gwrando digon o achosion i sefydlu fframwaith o sancsiynau. Mae’r un peth yn debygol o fod yn wir am yr Uchel Lys, y mae apeliadau’n cael ei gyfeirio ato bellach. Mae datblygu’r ISG yn amlwg wedi bod yn gam ymlaen yn yr ymgyrch i sicrhau cysondeb. Fodd bynnag, mae’r ISG yn canolbwyntio ar ba fath o sancsiwn sy’n briodol ym mha fath o achos ac nid yw’n ceisio darparu enghreifftiau penodol o’r hyn a gredwyd a oedd yn briodol mewn achosion penodol yn y gorffennol. Roedd adroddiad y Gweithgor yn dweud na fyddai’n ymarferol i
‘wneud defnydd systematig o gynseiliau’
wrth ddod i benderfyniadau ynghylch sancsiynau. Y rhesymeg oedd, oherwydd bod SPM yn cwmpasu ystod mor eang o ffurfiau posibl o gamymddygiad, nid oedd modd categoreiddio achosion a phennu pa sancsiynau oedd yn briodol ar gyfer pa gategori o achos.
Nid wyf yn cytuno. Mae’r Llys Apêl (Adran Droseddau) yn gallu gwneud hynny, pan fydd yn pennu canllawiau dedfrydu. Mae’n wir, mae’n gwneud hynny yng nghyd-destun troseddau penodol. Mae sefyllfa panel PCC yn wahanol i sefyllfa barnwr yn pennu dedfryd. Mae’n rhaid i banel PCC bennu sancsiynau mewn amrywiaeth eang o achosion, bob un ohonynt yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, mae’r gwahaniaeth yn fwy amlwg na gwir. Ymddengys i mi bod mathau o SPM sy’n digwydd dro ar ôl tro. Wrth gwrs, mae’r union amgylchiadau’n newid, ond mae nifer o themâu sylfaenol. Byddai’n eithaf posibl, yn fy marn i, i ddatblygu arweiniad ar sancsiynau sy’n ymwneud â mathau penodol o gamymddygiad. Wrth gwrs, mae’n bwysig nad yw arweiniad felly’n cyfyngu ar hawl y panel i arfer ei ddisgresiwn ar ffeithiau’r achos unigol, fwy nag y mae’r Llys Apêl yn ceisio atal hawl barnwr neu gofnodwr i ystyried amgylchiadau unigol wrth ddedfrydu.

---  ---
Yn ystod diwedd 2003 a 2004, roedd dau ddatblygiad yn y ffordd yr oedd y GMC yn ceisio darparu arweiniad i’w wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau.
Yr Is-Grŵp Archwilio Penderfyniadau
Y cyntaf o’r datblygiadau hyn oedd ffurfio’r Is-grŵp Archwilio Penderfyniadau (DASG). Ei swyddogaeth oedd monitro penderfyniadau pwyllgorau FTP, nodi pwyntiau dysgu i’w bwydo i sesiynau hyfforddi, hysbysu’r Llywydd am faterion yn codi o benderfyniadau FTP (gan gynnwys pryderon ynghylch penderfyniadau amhriodol) ac adrodd i’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer yn gyson. Pan gafodd ei gychwyn, roedd y DASG yn cynnwys tri aelod profiadol o’r Cyngor, un ohonynt yn aelod lleyg â chymwysterau cyfreithiol. Nid wyf yn sicr beth yw’r cyfansoddiad presennol; mae’r aelod lleyg â chymwysterau cyfreithiol wedi mynd yn farnwr yn ddiweddar, ac wedi gadael y GMC. Beth bynnag, ymddengys i mi bod ffurfio’r DASG yn ddatblygiad i’w groesawu’n fawr. Nid oedd unrhyw ddull systematig hyd yn hyn o ddadansoddi penderfyniadau pwyllgor FTP (ac eithrio adolygiad ‘unigryw’ gan Weithgor y PCC) a dim ymgais i gywiro neu ddysgu o benderfyniadau neu arferion a oedd yn anfoddhaol.
Adroddwyd am ffrwythau cynnar llafur y DASG yn argraffiad cyntaf cyhoeddiad newydd gan y GMC, y Fitness to Practise Bulletin, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mai 2004. Mae’r Bulletin yn cynnwys gwybodaeth arall ar wahân i adroddiad y DASG. Bydd yn cael ei gyhoeddi tair neu bedair gwaith y flwyddyn ac mae’n targedu panelwyr FTP. Mae hwn yn ddatblygiad i’w groesawu hefyd. Mae’n eglur bod y broses monitro wedi arwain at nodi nifer o’r un problemau gyda phenderfyniadau FPT a sylwais arnynt yn yr achosion a ddarllenais, rhai ohonynt y soniais amdanynt ynr yr Adroddiad hwn. Er enghraifft, adroddodd y DASG bod y rhesymau a roddwyd gan banelau PCC yn annigonol mewn rhai achosion lle’r oedd y canlyniad wedi ‘ymddangos yn syndod’, ac nid oeddent yn esbonio’r casgliadau y daethpwyd iddynt. Roedd yn cynghori bod rhaid rhoi rhesymau digonol y gellid eu cyfiawnhau yn gyfreithiol. Enghraifft arall oedd cyfeiriad at duedd rhai panelwyr PCC i ragdybio, pe na ddywedwyd wrthynt fod hanes FTP croes gan feddyg, ei bod yn rhaid bod ganddo/ganddi
‘yrfa ddi-fai yn flaenorol’
. Cynghorodd adroddiad y DASG na ddylid rhagdybio hyn, gan nad oes gan y GMC fynediad at wybodaeth lawn.
Prif fyrdwn adroddiad y DASG, fodd bynnag, oedd cynghori bod rhaid i banelau yn gwrando achosion DTP sicrhau bod eu penderfyniadau (ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM neu SDP ac ar sancsiynau) yn cydymffurfio â safonau a pholisi’r GMC. Dywedodd:
‘Although panels exercise their judgment in making decisions they must do so within the framework set out by the Council. The determination of policy and the setting of standards is a matter for the Council; when reaching their decisions on serious professional misconduct, panels must have regard to the Council’s policy/standards.’
Popeth yn iawn hyd yma. Rwy’n falch iawn o weld y GMC yn cydnabod yma bod rhaid cadw at fframwaith o safonau. Aeth adroddiad y DASG ymlaen wedyn i esbonio ble’r oedd yr arweiniad hwn ar gael. Cyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Good Medical Practice’ oedd y brif ffynhonnell. Yn ychwanegol at hynny, dywedwyd, roedd y GMC wedi darparu arweiniad ar nifer o destunau arwahanol eraill, fel caniatâd, cyfrinachedd, ymchwil, defnyddio cyffuriau colli pwysau, archwiliadau manwl, clefydau trosglwyddadwy difrifol a nifer o destunau eraill. Mae cyfreithwyr yn cynrychioli achos y GMC mewn gwrandawiadau wedi’u cyfarwyddo i dynnu sylw’r panel at unrhyw arweiniad sy’n berthnasol i’r materion gerbron y panel.
Mae popeth yn iawn cyn belled ag y mae’n mynd. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n mynd yn ddigon pell. Ni wnaeth y GMC gyhoeddi unrhyw ddeunydd a allai gynorthwyo meddygon neu banelwyr FTP adnabod achos o SPM neu SDP pan fyddent yn gweld un. Mewn geiriau eraill, nid oedd unrhyw arweiniad ar drothwyon, a dim byd a allai fod o gymorth i unrhyw un ddweud lle dylid tynnu’r llinell. Ym Mhennod 17, disgrifiais sut y daeth ‘Good Medical Practice’ i gael ei ysgrifennu, a’r modd y disodlodd yr hen ‘Lyfrau Glas’. Roedd y Llyfrau Glas yn arfer rhoi ychydig o enghreifftiau o’r math o ymddygiad a fyddai’n arwain at gamau disgyblu. Fodd bynnag, roedd y rhain yn gyfyngedig o ran cwmpas. Esboniais hefyd mai diben ‘Good Medical Practice’ oedd bod yn ‘gadarnhaol’ ac i annog arfer da; roedd i osgoi canolbwyntio mewn modd negyddol ar arfer gwael. Awgrymwyd ar un cyfnod y dylai’r ddau lyfryn gael eu cyhoeddi ond, fel y bu hi, rhoddwyd y gorau i’r Llyfrau Glas gan yr oedd y GMC yn dymuno canolbwyntio ar ei neges gadarnhaol. Soniais am farnau rhai o uwch aelodau staff y GMC a ddywedodd, er eu bod yn deall pam yr oedd y newidiadau hyn wedi’u gwneud, roeddent yn teimlo bod rhywfaint o eglurder wedi’i golli ynghylch y math o amgylchiadau lle gallai meddyg gael ei ddisgyblu/disgyblu. Dyfynnais farn yr Athro Allen, a ddywedodd bod ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn ‘berffaith iawn’ at y dibenion yr oedd wedi’i ysgrifennu, ond nad oedd o gymorth go iawn pan oedd yn dod i ddiffinio neu adnabod SPM.
Mae argraffiadau diweddar o ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn rhoi’r rhybudd hwn i feddygon:
. Ond dyna’r cyfan a ddywedodd. Nid yw’r arweiniad arall y soniais amdano yn fwy eglur. Nid yw rhai ffynonellau’n cyfeirio o gwbl at faterion disgyblu. Mae rhai eraill yn rhoi rhybudd cyffredinol y gall ymddygiad penodol, er enghraifft rhoi triniaeth heb ganiatâd, arwain at her yn y llysoedd neu gŵyn at gyflogwr neu’r GMC. Mae’r cyngor cryfaf yn cael ei roi mewn cysylltiad â masnachu organau dynol, lle dywedir y bydd cysylltiad ag arfer felly yn gwneud y meddyg yn
. Mae’n wir bod rhai o’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol wedi cyhoeddi arweiniad mwy arbenigol sy’n cymhwyso egwyddorion ‘Good Medical Practice’ i’r arbenigedd dan sylw. Mae Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu wedi gwneud hynny ac wedi cynnwys nifer o enghreifftiau o arfer rhagorol ac, mewn cyferbyniad, arfer annerbyniol. Ond nid swyddogaeth y Colegau Brenhinol yw cynghori ynghylch camymddygiad a pherfformiad diffygiol neu addasrwydd i ymarfer. Gwaith y GMC, fel y corff rheoleiddio sy’n gyfrifol am y gweithdrefnau FTP, yw gwneud hyn. Fel y dywedais, nid oedd unrhyw beth y gallai unrhyw un fesur yn ei erbyn a oedd yr hyn yr oedd meddyg wedi’i wneud yn debygol o gael ei gategoreiddio fel SPM neu SDP, neu a fydd yn cael ei ganfod, yn y dyfodol, bod amharu ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Rhaid mynd i’r afael â’r broblem hon.
Cyhoeddi Astudiaethau Achos
Roeddwn wedi meddwl bod y GMC wedi cydnabod yr angen am arweiniad llawer mwy penodol am y trothwy ar gyfer SPM ac SDP. Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, ar yr adeg pan oedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn cael eu sefydlu, pan oedd yntau’n Llywydd, roedd y syniad o gyhoeddi astudiaethau achos wedi cael ei drafod. Y syniad fyddai dangos drwy enghraifft y mathau o ymddygiad a fyddai ac na fyddai yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Credai fod hwn yn syniad da, ac roedd yn edifar ganddo na wnaethpwyd hyn bryd hynny. Soniodd pa mor ddefnyddiol y cafodd y crynodebau achosion dienw sy’n cael eu cyhoeddi o dro i dro gan y sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol, a dywedodd hefyd, ar brydiau, pan oedd wedi gorfod edrych ar adroddiad cyfraith, roedd wedi canfod bod gallu darllen y manylion wedi ‘dod â’r achos yn fyw’. Credai y byddai crynodebau felly’n ddefnyddiol iawn i aelodau pwyllgorau GMC a oedd yn gorfod penderfynu ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad yn gyfystyr ag SPM.
Mewn tystiolaeth, fe wnaeth Syr Graeme Catto atseinio barn Syr Donald Irvine a mynegodd frwdfrydedd dros y syniad o gyhoeddi cyfres o adroddiadau achos. Ar y pwnc hwnnw dywedodd:
‘Credaf ei bod yn ddiffyg ar ein rhan ein bod yn sôn am fod yn sefydliad dysgu a’n bod yn helpu’r cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn i fod yn ymwybodol o’r problemau sy’n codi mewn arfer meddygol, ac eto rydym wedi bod yn o ddiffygiol o ran gwneud hynny. Gwn yr oedd Syr Donald yn awyddus i wneud hynny. Rwy’n gwbl benderfynol y bydd yn digwydd.’
Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’r astudiaethau achos (neu o leiaf y set gyntaf ohonynt) yn cael eu cyhoeddi ym mis Chwefror 2004. Fel y deallais, roeddent i gynnwys crynodebau o achosion lle’r ystyriwyd bod y penderfyniad gan banel PCC yn un da ac yn enghraifft i’w dilyn. Roeddwn yn gobeithio y byddai’r rhain yn darparu enghreifftiau defnyddiol o’r math o ymddygiad a oedd ac nad oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM, ac arweiniad hefyd ar sancsiynau priodol. Roeddwn yn meddwl y byddent yn galluogi’r rheiny sy’n eistedd ar banelau PCC ‘fagu llygad’ mewn perthynas â’r hyn, yn y gorffennol, oedd wedi’i ystyried fel penderfyniad da a phaham. Ar sancsiynu, roeddwn yn gobeithio y byddai’r astudiaethau nid yn unig yn eu helpu ar faterion cymesuredd, ond y byddent hefyd yn dangos y pwysau a oedd wedi’i roi ar ffactorau lliniarol amrywiol. Roeddwn wedi gobeithio y byddai eu cynhyrchu yn nodi cam go iawn tuag at gysondeb mewn gwneud penderfyniadau.
Cafodd y grŵp cyntaf o ‘astudiaethau achos’ ei gyhoeddi ym mis Medi 2004. Mae’n ofid i mi ddweud eu bod yn siom fawr. Yn gyntaf, dim ond pump ohonynt sydd, ac maent yn gyfyngedig iawn o ran cwmpas. Mae dau yn ymwneud â methiant i gael caniatâd, dau yn ymwneud ag anonestrwydd ac roedd y llall yn achos o dorri cyfrinachedd. Mae’r ‘astudiaethau’ mor fyr eu bod yn ddiwerth bron. Er enghraifft, mewn un o’r ddau achos o anonestrwydd, roedd y meddyg wedi’i dyfarnu’n euog ar naw cyfrif o gael arian trwy dwyll trwy wneud
‘hawliadau yswiriant ffug dro ar ôl tro’
, ac fe’i dedfrydwyd i naw mis o garchar. Cafodd ei henw ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Ni ddywedir wrthym beth oedd natur unrhyw anwireddau anonest a wnaed neu ba un a oedd yr hawliadau’n gysylltiedig ag arfer proffesiynol y meddyg. Nid ydym hyd yn oed yn gwybod beth oedd cyfanswm y swm dan sylw - fe allai fod wedi bod yn anferth. Nid ydym yn gwybod ychwaith dros ba gyfnod y cafodd y troseddau eu cyflawni. Rhoddir rhyw wybodaeth ddibwys i ni am fethiant y meddyg i ateb mechnïaeth heddlu. Wrth benderfynu dileu enw’r meddyg, dywedodd panel y PCC
‘ni all fod lle yn y proffesiwn meddygol i feddygon anonest, yn enwedig lle mae twyll yn cael ei ailadrodd’
Os mai’r neges sydd i’w chyfleu i ddarllenydd yr ‘astudiaethau’ hyn yw y bydd anonestrwydd parhaus yn ymwneud â symiau sylweddol o arian yn arwain at ddileu, mae’r darllenydd yn debygol o gael ei ddrysu gan ganlyniad yr achos arall o anonestrwydd a ddisgrifir, lle na chafodd y meddyg ei ddileu, ond yn hytrach ei atal am flwyddyn. Yn yr achos hwnnw, cafodd y meddyg, a oedd yn feddyg teulu, afael yn anonest ar bron i £36,000. Roedd yn cael rhent ‘tybiannol’ gan ei HA am ei fflat o fewn adeilad ei feddygfa. Roedd hefyd yn gosod y fflat i denant ac yn cadw’r rhent, gan dderbyn dau rent am un fflat felly. Ymddengys na chafodd ei erlyn, ond ni wyddwn ai mai oherwydd nad adroddwyd i’r heddlu am ei ymddygiad oedd hyn neu a wnaethant lunio’r farn nad oedd ei ymddygiad yn droseddol. Fe allai’r ymddygiad fod wedi bod yn droseddol; ni ellir dweud. Beth bynnag, roedd yn amlwg yn ymddygiad anonest ac yn ymddygiad gwarthus i feddyg. Yn ôl pob golwg, lluniodd panel y PCC y farn fod ei ymddygiad wedi bod yn
‘anonest, yn gamarweiniol ac yn groes i ddatganiad ffioedd a lwfansau Gwasanaethau Medygol Cyffredinol y GIG’
. Ni allaf weld sut y gall unrhyw un sy’n darllen yr astudiaethau achos hyn ddeall pam yr oedd yn briodol i’r meddyg mewn un achos gael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr, ac i’r llall gael ei atal. Os oedd y rhesymeg yn yr achos cyntaf yn gywir, ni fyddai
‘lle yn y proffesiwn meddygol’
i’r meddyg yn yr ail achos. Rhagdybiaf fod rhesymau da am y gwahaniaeth, ac eithrio’r ffaith bod un meddyg wedi cael ei erlyn a’r llall heb gael ei erlyn. Fel arall, ni ellid cynnig y ddau fel enghreifftiau o sancsiynau priodol.
Rwyf wedi drysu ynghylch pam y cymerodd gymaint o amser i gynhyrchu’r astudiaethau achos hyn a pham yr oeddent mor annigonol wedi iddynt gyrraedd. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, roedd y Llywydd yn amlwg wedi adnabod yr angen iddynt ac roedd ei frwdfrydedd yn amlwg. Ym Mhennod 27, rwyf wedi awgrymu sut y dylid paratoi astudiaethau achos. Yr hanfodion yw y dylai’r ffeithiau a ganfyddir gael eu crynhoi er mwyn i’r darllenydd allu deall pam ganfu’r panel eu bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dylai’r lliniariad gael ei grynhoi er mwyn i’r darllenydd allu deall pam y penderfynodd y panel fel y gwnaeth ar sancsiwn. Mae angen i’r gwaith hwn gael ei wneud o hyd, er gwaethaf dyfodiad y gweithdrefnau newydd. Bydd rhaid i’r panelau FTP newydd ystyried a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer a pha un a yw’r amhariad o raddfa sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Mae geiriad y prawf yn newid, ond ni fydd y math o ymddygiad y bydd yn rhaid i’r panelau ei ystyried yn newid. Bydd yr hen achosion yn dal i fod yn ganllaw defnyddiol ar amhariad a sancsiwn. Dylai’r broses o gasglu astudiaethau achos barhau wedyn dan y gweithdrefnau newydd.

---  ---
Yn groes i ganfyddiad y cyhoedd, nid yw dileu o reidrwydd yn golygu terfynu arfer proffesiynol meddyg am byth. Nid oes unrhyw rym gan y PCC i bennu dileu parhaol na thelerau dileu sefydlog. Mae cyfarwyddyd bod enw meddyg i’w ddileu o’r gofrestr wastad yn amodol ar gais gan y meddyg yn y dyfodol i’w adfer i’r gofrestr. Hyd at fis Awst 2000, gellid gwneud cais am adfer i’r gofrestr ar unrhyw adeg ar ôl i ddeg mis fynd heibio o ddyddiad y dileu. Pe bai cais yn cael ei wneud a’i fod yn aflwyddiannus, gellid gwneud cais pellach am adfer ar ôl i ddeg mis arall fynd heibio. Gellid adnewyddu ceisiadau am adfer bob deg mis wedi hynny.
Ym 1999, cydnabu’r GMC bod cryn bryder cyhoeddus bod meddygon yn cael eu hadfer i’r gofrestr yn rhy fuan ac yn rhy hawdd. Yng ngolau’r pryder ynghylch mater adfer, gwnaeth Gweithgor y PCC adolygiad o ganlyniadau ceisiadau am adfer y deliodd y PCC â nhw rhwng 1988 a 1997. Yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, roedd 131 o feddygon wedi’u dileu. Yn yr un cyfnod, roedd 35 o feddygon wedi’u hadfer i’r gofrestr allan o 80 o feddygon a wnaeth gais. Gwnaeth y Gweithgor ddadansoddiad o’r mathau o ymddygiad neu euogfarn a oedd wedi arwain at ddileu’r meddygon hynny a gafodd eu hadfer wedi hynny. Roedd 10 o’r meddygon hynny wedi’u dileu’n wreiddiol oherwydd SPM yn codi o driniaeth glinigol; roedd pedwar yr un wedi’u dileu am dwyll clinigol, perthnasoedd amhriodol ac ymosod yn rhywiol. Roedd tri meddyg wedi’u dileu am droseddau’n ymwneud â chyffuriau, a thri arall am dwyll (heblaw am dwyll clinigol). Roedd dau feddyg wedi’u dileu am hawliadau ffug ynglŷn â chymwysterau a dau am ddeisyf arian; roedd un meddyg wedi’i ddileu am drais, un am ymddygiad difrïol ac un am ddwyn.
Gwnaeth y Gweithgor y sylw:
‘Nid oes cwestiwn bod y penderfyniadau i adfer rhai meddygon, ar y wyneb, i weld yn syndod. Teimlem yn gyffredinol bod anghysondeb i’w weld. I gymryd dwy enghraifft yn unig, er nad adferwyd mwyafrif helaeth yr ymgeiswyr a gafodd eu dileu am ymosodiadau rhywiol neu ymddygiad anweddus, cafodd pedwar meddyg a oedd yn euog o ymddygiad a oedd i weld o ddifrifoldeb tebyg, eu hadfer. Cafodd pob un o’r pedwar meddyg a ddilëwyd am dwyll ymchwil yn y cyfnod eu hadfer.’
Nododd y gweithgor bod rhaid i unrhyw gasgliadau o adolygiad o’r math hwn gael eu gwneud yn ochelgar iawn. Nid oedd unrhyw ffordd sicr o wybod pam yr oedd penderfyniadau wedi’u gwneud neu ba ffactorau, heblaw am natur y drosedd, y gellid (yn gwbl briodol) fod wedi’u hystyried. Y rheswm am hyn oedd na fu’n arfer gan y PCC i ddarparu unrhyw esboniad o gwbl am benderfyniadau adfer. Dywedodd adroddiad y Gweithgor, o ganlyniad:
Argymhellodd y Gweithgor y dylai panelau PCC ddarparu esboniad am eu penderfyniadau am yr holl geisiadau adfer, beth bynnag yw eu canlyniad. Ymddengys bod hyn yn cael ei wneud bellach.
Dangosodd yr adolygiad hefyd bod 17 allan o 35 (h.y. bron i hanner) y meddygon a adferwyd i’r gofrestr wedi’u hadfer cyn pen tair blynedd i’r dileu (adferwyd saith cyn pen 17 mis). Cafodd dwy ran o dair o feddygon a adferwyd eu hadfer cyn pen tair blynedd a hanner i’r dileu. Ystyriodd y Gweithgor yr achos dros argymell ymestyn y cyfnod dileu byrraf cyn gellid gwneud cais i adfer i, dyweder, ddwy flynedd, ond penderfynodd beidio gwneud hynny.
Aeth y Gweithgor ymlaen i ddweud mai
‘problem barhaus’
i’r PCC fu’r anhawster o sefydlu pa un a oedd meddyg a oedd yn gwneud cais i’w adfer/hadfer yn addas i ymarfer, ac, yn benodol, a oedd ei sgiliau, gwybodaeth ac agweddau yn foddhaol. Trafododd ei aelodau y farn a oedd gan rai mai’r modd priodol o ddelio â’r broblem honno oedd rhoi’r grym i’r PCC bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg a oedd yn cael ei adfer/hadfer. Byddai’r amodau hynny’n cael eu codi’n unig os a phan oedd y meddyg wedi dangos ei fod/bod yn addas i ailddechrau ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad. Fel y bu hi, penderfynodd y Gweithgor i beidio argymell y dylid rhoi grym felly i’r PCC. Ei farn unfrydol oedd, pe bai’r grym ar gael, byddai risg wirioneddol y gallai meddygon nad oeddent yn addas i ymarfer gael eu hadfer. Dywedodd yr Adroddiad:
Argymhellodd y Gweithgor felly y dylai adfer barhau i fod yn
. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd mai ffordd arall ymlaen oedd ystyried pa un a allai’r GMC ddefnyddio dulliau asesu a gafodd eu datblygu ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau perfformiad er mwyn asesu sgiliau, gwybodaeth ac agweddau meddyg a oedd yn dymuno cael ei adfer/hadfer. Argymhellodd y Gweithgor y dylai gwaith pellach gael ei wneud i archwilio ymarferoldeb y cynnig hwnnw.
Ym mis Awst 2000, newidiwyd Deddf Meddygaeth 1983 i amodi na allai unrhyw gais am adfer i’r gofrestr gael ei wneud cyn bod pum mlynedd wedi mynd heibio o ddyddiad y dileu, neu cyn pen 12 mis o gais aflwyddiannus i adfer. Yn dilyn ail gais aflwyddiannus i adfer yn ystod yr un cyfnod dileu, rhoddwyd y grym i’r PCC gyfarwyddo y dylai’r hawl i wneud ceisiadau pellach gael ei hatal am gyfnod amhenodol. Gellid adolygu gorchymyn felly bob tair blynedd. Ymddengys i mi bod yr achos dros asesiad perfformiad, gan gynnwys prawf gwybodaeth, yn gryfach nawr nag oedd ym 1999. Mae’n rhaid bod gallu unrhyw feddyg sydd wedi bod i ffwrdd oddi wrth ymarfer am bum mlynedd yn destun amheuaeth.
Yn 2000 hefyd, cyflwynwyd gweithdrefn tri cham newydd ar gyfer penderfynu ar geisiadau am adfer i’r gofrestr. Roedd y cam cyntaf yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i banel y PCC benderfynu (gan roi ystyriaeth i’r rhesymau pam gafodd enw’r meddyg ei ddileu o’r gofrestr, i’r cais ei hun, i ymddygiad y meddyg ers y dileu ac i unrhyw sylwadau a wnaed i banel y PCC) a ddylai enw’r meddyg gael ei adfer i’r gofrestr, yn amodol ar ei fod/bod yn bodloni panel y PCC ynghylch ei gymeriad/chymeriad da, gallu proffesiynol ac iechyd.
Os oedd y panel yn penderfynu ar y cwestiwn hwnnw o blaid y meddyg, yr ail gam oedd i’r PCC benderfynu pa asesiad ddylai’r meddyg ei gael er mwyn bodloni panel y PCC ynghylch ei gymeriad/chymeriad da, gallu proffesiynol ac iechyd ac i orchymyn y dylai’r asesiad priodol gael ei gynnal. Trydydd cam y broses oedd i banel y PCC ystyried adroddiad yr asesiad ac i benderfynu a ddylai enw’r meddyg gael ei adfer i’r gofrestr. Mae’r weithdrefn newydd hon i weld yn syniad da iawn i mi. Nid wyf yn gwybod sut mae’n gweithio. Gan fod rhaid i bob achos o ddileu er 2000 weithredu am bum mlynedd o leiaf, gall fod mai ychydig iawn o geisiadau sy’n cael eu gwneud i adfer ar hyn o bryd.
Hyd at 2000, roedd y cyfnod dileu byrraf yn hynod o fyr. Gallai’r hyn a oedd yn swnio fel sancsiwn llym fod yn ddim mwy, i bob pwrpas, na blwyddyn o ‘ataliad’. Yn sicr nid oedd y gosb ddidrugaredd y credai’r cyhoedd iddi fod. Mae’r cyfnod byrraf newydd o bum mlynedd, credaf, yn fwy unol â’r hyn y mae’r cyhoedd yn ei ddisgwyl pan fydd enw meddyg yn cael ei ddileu. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid bod posibilrwydd, nawr bod dileu’n golygu o leiaf pum mlynedd oddi ar y gofrestr, y bydd panelau FTP yn amharod i’w bennu ac eithrio yn yr achosion mwyaf difrifol.
Tynnodd y Gweithgor sylw at anghysonderau rhwng ymagwedd panelau gwahanol at gwestiwn adfer. Mae angen safonau a meini prawf ar banelau os ydynt i gyflawni cysondeb mewn gwneud penderfyniadau. Dylai fod modd datblygu meini prawf felly o benderfyniadau gwirioneddol nawr bod rhesymau’n cael eu rhoi am benderfyniadau. Eto, dylai’r broses chwynnu allan unrhyw benderfyniadau amhriodol a rhai â rhesymau annigonol. Dylai’r gweddill gael eu casglu a’u harchwilio, a gallent ffurfio’r sail ar gyfer paratoi set o safonau a meini prawf. Byddai adroddiadau neu grynodebau o benderfyniadau priodol yn helpu aelodau panel hefyd i ‘fagu llygad’.
Mae’r weithdrefn tri cham ar gyfer adfer i weld yn syniad rhagorol. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd asesiad yn cael ei orchymyn ym mhob achos. Ni allaf ddychmygu unrhyw achos lle byddai’n briodol i ganiatáu i feddyg fynd yn ôl i ymarfer ar ôl absenoldeb pum mlynedd heb ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo/iddi gael asesiad gwrthrychol. Gallaf ddeall pam y cynghorodd y Gweithgor y dylai adfer fod yn
, a’i fod wedi gwrthod derbyn unrhyw gyfnod o gofrestriad amodol. Tybed a fyddai’r un gwrthwynebiad yn cael ei nodi i’r cynnig bod rhaid i feddyg, o’i adfer/hadfer i’r gofrestr, gael goruchwyliwr neu fentor, wedi’i gymeradwyo/chymeradwyo gan y GMC, a chanddo/chanddi ofyniad i roi addewid i ddod ag unrhyw bryderon sydd ganddo/ganddi ynghylch arfer, ymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd y meddyg sydd newydd ei adfer/hadfer at sylw’r GMC. Credaf y byddai hynny’n syniad da, a gobeithiwn na fyddai’r wybodaeth y byddai hynny’n digwydd yn peri i banelau FTP ostwng y trothwy ar gyfer adfer yn rhy bell.

---  ---
Apeliadau gan Feddyg
Roedd apeliadau o benderfyniadau’r PCC yn cael eu rheoli gan adran 40 Deddf 1983. Hyd at fis Ebrill 2003, roedd gan feddyg a oedd yn destun canfyddiad SPM neu gyfarwyddyd ar gyfer dileu, atal neu gofrestriad amodol (neu amrywiad o’r amodau a bennwyd gan gyfarwyddyd ar gyfer cofrestriad amodol) hawl i apelio i Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor. Ar ôl mis Ebrill 2003, roedd unrhyw apêl yn mynd i’r Uchel Lys.
Yn y gorffennol, roedd y broses apelio i’r Cyfrin Gyngor yn arwain at ddarparu datganiadau o egwyddor ac ymagwedd ddefnyddiol, ond nid oedd yn arwain at ddatblygu cyfreitheg ar benderfynu ar faterion yn ymwneud ag SPM neu sancsiynu. Hyd oddeutu 2000, roedd yn bolisi’r Cyfrin Gyngor i ddangos rhywfaint o barth i arbenigedd proffesiynol a phrofiad y PCC. Roedd y parch hwnnw i weld yn lleihau mewn blynyddoedd diweddarach, o bosibl yn sgil Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 yn dod i rym ym mis Hydref 2000. Nid yw’r nifer o apeliadau a wrandawyd ers hynny wedi caniatáu datblygu fframwaith cydlynol o egwyddorion. Nac ychwaith y broses apeliadau i’r Uchel Lys eto. Mae’n ddyddiau cynnar iawn.
Cyfeiriadau gan y Cyngor ar gyfer Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd
Dan ddarpariaethau adran 29 Deddf Diwygio’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol a Phroffesiynau Gofal Iechyd 2002, roedd gan y CRHP/CHRE y grym, o fis Ebrill 2003, i gyfeirio
‘penderfyniad perthnasol’
gan y PCC i’r Uchel Lys. Mae Adran 29(4) yn amodi y gallai’r Cyngor wneud hynny os oedd o’r farn:
and that it would be desirable for the protection of members of the public for the Council to take action under this section...’.
Mae Adran 29(1)(a) i (h) yn rhestru’r cyfarwyddiadau a’r penderfyniadau a wnaed gan y cyrff disgyblu amrywiol y mae’r adran yn berthnasol iddynt. Yn (c) a (d) mae’n cynnwys cyfarwyddiadau a wnaed gan y PCC a’r CPP o’r GMC. Maent yn ‘benderfyniadau perthnasol’ felly. Mae Adran 29(2)(a) yn amodi bod adran 29 yn berthnasol hefyd i:
‘a final decision of the relevant committee not to take any disciplinary measure under the provision referred to in whichever of paragraphs (a) to (h) of subsection (1) applies’.
Nid yw ymadrodd
yn cael ei ddiffinio gan y Ddeddf. Mae’r Ddeddf yn amodi, os yw achos yn cael ei gyfeirio ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan yr Uchel Lys, dylid ei drin fel apêl gan y CRHP/CHRE.
Apeliadau yn erbyn Sancsiwn Rhy Drugarog
Pan ysgrifennwyd hwn, dim ond nifer fach o apeliadau sydd wedi’u gwrando. Fodd bynnag, mae dau achos, sef achos
Y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd v Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a Solanke
Y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd v Y Cyngor Nyrsio a Bydwreigiaeth a Truscott
yn dangos y modd y mae’r Llys yn debygol o fynd i’r afael â’i dasg mewn apeliadau yn erbyn sancsiwn. Yn y ddau achos, apeliodd y CRHP/CHRE ar y sail bod y sancsiwn a bennwyd gan y corff rheoleiddio yn rhy drugarog. Yn y ddau achos, datganodd y Llys yn eglur y byddai, wrth ystyried pa un a oedd penderfyniad wedi bod yn rhy drugarog, yn cymhwyso’r un prawf â hwnnw sy’n cael ei gymhwyso gan y Llys Apêl (Adran Droseddau) wrth ystyried, ar gais y Twrnai Cyffredinol, a yw ddedfryd a draddodwyd gan lys troseddau yn rhy drugarog. Y prawf yw pa un a yw’r sancsiwn a bennwyd y tu allan i ystod y sancsiynau y gallai’r tribiwnlys, gan roi ei feddwl ar yr holl ffactorau sy’n berthnasol i’w awdurdodaeth, ystyried yn briodol yn rhesymol. Bydd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol hefyd i fod yn fodlon bod ymyrraeth yn
‘ddymunol er mwyn diogelu aelodau’r cyhoedd’
. Fodd bynnag, fel nododd Collins J yn achos
, bydd hynny’n dilyn fel arfer os canfyddir bod y sancsiwn yn rhy drugarog.
, roedd y GMC wedi cael y meddyg yn euog o SPM. Roedd wedi cael perthynas rywiol gyda chlaf; at hynny, roedd y claf yn dioddef o iselder ac roedd braidd yn agored i niwed. Daeth y mater i’r golwg rywbryd wedi i’r berthynas ddod i ben yn ôl pob golwg, pan ddywedodd y ddynes wrth feddyg teulu arall amdani. Addefodd y meddyg wirionedd yr honiad. Nid oedd y ddynes yn dymuno bod yn gysylltiedig ag unrhyw gamau disgyblu, ac nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw wybodaeth am y modd yr oedd y berthynas wedi cychwyn, na pha bryd. Roedd y meddyg yn euog o ffurf arall o gamymddygiad yn ogystal. Roedd wedi ffugio’i dystysgrif geni ei hun, ac, yn ystod ei yrfa feddygol, roedd wedi defnyddio
a oedd yn haeru ei fod chwe blynedd yn ieuengach nag yr oedd mewn gwirionedd.
Yng ngwrandawiad y PCC, rhoddodd y meddyg dystiolaeth, ond ni ofynnwyd unrhyw gwestiynau iddo ynghylch y modd yr oedd y berthynas rywiol amhriodol wedi cychwyn. Dywedodd yn unig fod y berthynas wedi dechrau a gorffen drwy gydsyniad. Roedd wedi para oddeutu chwe mis. Ar y pryd, dywedodd, roedd ei briodas wedi torri ac roedd ei wraig yn gwrthod mynediad iddo i weld ei blant. Cydnabu bod ei berthynas â’r claf wedi bod yn anghywir, a dywedodd ei fod wedi cymryd cyngor wedi hynny. Canfu’r PCC fod SPM wedi’i brofi, a phennodd gyfnod atal o dri mis. Dywedodd ei fod wedi ystyried y ffaith nad oedd y meddyg wedi gweithio am chwe mis gan iddo gael ei atal gan y feddygfa lle’r oedd wedi gweithio.
Ar apêl gan y CRHP/CHRE, sefydlodd Leveson J yn gyntaf y prawf y dylid ei gymhwyso, ac yna daeth i’r casgliad, ar y deunydd a oedd ar gael, ei fod o’r farn fod y sancsiwn a bennwyd yn drugarog. Ei argraff ef oedd na allai ddweud ei fod yn rhy drugarog. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod ei ddyfarniad, roedd Leveson J yn feirniadol o’r GMC am brinder y wybodaeth yr oedd wedi’i chasglu am yr amgylchiadau’n ymwneud â’r camymddygiad hwn. Nododd ei bod yn anodd i wneud amcangyfrif dibynadwy o’r risg y gallai’r meddyg ailadrodd y math hwn o ymddygiad heb gael rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i amgylchiadau manwl dechrau a gorffen y berthynas. Nid oedd y ffaith bod y ddynes wedi bod yn amharod i ddarparu gwybodaeth yn esgusodi’r GMC rhag ei ddyletswydd i ymchwilio i’r achos yn briodol. Er bod ei opsiynau yn gyfyngedig yn sgil ei gwrthodiad hi, cafodd y cyfle i holi’r meddyg pan roddodd dystiolaeth. Nid oedd y cwnsler i’r GMC nac aelodau panel y PCC wedi holi’r meddyg ynghylch y materion diogelu cleifion pwysig hyn, ac nid oedd panel y PCC wedi’i roi ei hun mewn sefyllfa i farnu yn eu cylch. Ystyriodd Leveson J a oedd y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael mor annigonol nad oedd yn gallu dweud a oedd y sancsiwn wedi bod yn rhy drugarog, ac os felly, byddai’n caniatáu apêl ac yn anfon yr achos yn ei ôl ar gyfer ail-wrandawiad. Cydnabu na fyddai unrhyw rwymedigaeth ar y meddyg i fodloni cael ei holi eilwaith. Penderfynodd, yn yr amgylchiadau, na fyddai’n anfon yr achos yn ôl ar gyfer ymchwilio ymhellach. Canfu nad oedd y sancsiwn yn rhy drugarog a gwrthododd yr apêl.
Trafododd Leveson J hefyd darddiad a diben yr ISG, a mynegodd y farn bod hwn yn ddefnyddiol iawn. Dywedodd yn eglur, os oedd y pwynt yn codi, ni fyddai’r ISG yn gyfrwymol ar y Llys. Ni feddyliodd ychwaith y byddai’n briodol i’r Llys awgrymu addasiadau i’r ISG. Fodd bynnag, credai bod y CRHP/CHRE mewn sefyllfa ragorol i gymryd rhan yn y broses adolygu’r ISG.
Fe wnaeth y digwyddiadau a arweiniodd at y camau disgyblu yn erbyn Mr Truscott, nyrs paediatrig, ddigwydd tra’r oedd yn gweithio ar ward wedi’i neilltuo i ofalu am gleifion ifainc o’r ddau ryw. Tra’r oedd ar ddyletswydd nos, bu’n ‘pori’ ar y rhyngrwyd ar chwe achlysur ar wahân, ac aeth i mewn i nifer o safleoedd yn darparu deunydd pornograffig. Cafodd ei ddiswyddo ac adroddwyd i’r Cyngor Nyrsio a Bydwreigiaeth (NMC) amdano. Penderfynodd yr heddlu beidio ag erlyn, gan nad oedd modd dangos, yn ôl pob golwg, bod y deunydd y cafodd fynediad ato yn ‘bornograffi plant’, neu ba un a oedd y ffotograffau mewn gwirionedd yn oedolion wedi’u gwneud i edrych fel plant. Roedd rhywfaint o’r deunydd i weld yn dangos plant noeth, ond nid oeddent ynghlwm â gweithredoedd rhywiol. Anhawster arall oedd nad oedd yn eglur faint o safleoedd yr oedd y nyrs wedi mynd i mewn iddynt yn fwriadol, a faint oedd wedi’u hagor iddo gan yr effaith ‘rhaeadr’. Beth bynnag, pa un a oedd y pornograffi yn dangos oedolion neu blant, roedd ymddygiad Mr Truscott yn amlwg yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad, a chanfu’r NMC mai dyna ydoedd. Penderfynodd rhoi rhybudd iddo am ei ymddygiad. Apeliodd y CRHP/CHRE ar y sail bod hynny’n rhy drugarog, ac mai dileu yn unig allai roi diogelwch digonol i’r cyhoedd. Roedd yr egwyddorion a oedd yn sylfaenol i ymagwedd Collins J yr un fath â’r rheiny i’w hesbonio gan Leveson J ychydig wythnosau’n ddiweddarach yn
. Roedd Collins J o’r farn nad oedd yn eglur bod Mr Truscott wedi torri’r gyfraith; nid oedd yn glir ychwaith pa safleoedd yr oedd wedi mynd i mewn iddynt yn fwriadol. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, ystyriodd bod y sancsiwn a bennwyd yn drugarog ond nid yn rhy drugarog.
Apeliodd y CRHP/CHRE y penderfyniad hwn. Eu pryder oedd, heb ystyried pa un a oedd Mr Truscott wedi mynd i mewn i’r safleoedd yn fwriadol a oedd yn dangos neu i weld yn ymddangos plant noeth, roedd y ffaith fod ganddo ddiddordeb afiach mewn pornograffi a’i fod yn barod i edrych arno tra’n gweithio ar ward pobl ifanc yn peri pryder ynghylch diogelwch cleifion. Gwrthodwyd yr apêl gan y Llys Apêl. Cymeradwyodd y prawf a gymhwyswyd gan Collins J, a dweud bod hwn yn achos lle’r oedd yn iawn i ddangos rhywfaint o barch i farnau pwyllgor y corff disgyblu, nad oedd wedi gwneud unrhyw gamgymeriad egwyddor.
Gallaf ddeall pam y teimlodd y CRHP/CHRE bod y sancsiwn hwn yn rhy drugarog. Y broblem oedd nad oedd yr achos erioed wedi’i roi yn erbyn Mr Tuscott ar y sail bod ei ddiddordeb mewn lluniau pornograffig o bobl a oedd yn edrych fel plant hyd yn oes os mai oedolion oeddent yn golygu ei fod yn risg i’w gleifion a oedd yn bobl ifanc. Rhoddwyd llawer iawn o bwyslais ar y cwestiwn ynghylch a oedd wedi torri’r gyfraith ai peidio. Hwn yw’r pwyslais yn niwygiad diweddar y GMC i’r ISG hefyd. Mae hyn yn dangos yn glir y dylai panelau PCC ystyried sancsiwn dileu ar gyfer meddygon sy’n eu cael yn euog o droseddau’n ymwneud â phornograffi plant. Gallaf weld pam fod yr arweiniad wedi’i ddrafftio yn y modd hwnnw; fel arfer bydd pryder ynghylch mynediad i bornograffi yn codi o ganlyniad i erlyniad. Fodd bynnag, fel ag yn achos Mr Truscott, nid oedd erlyniad. A ddylai hynny fod yn ddiffiniol o ganlyniad achos disgyblu? O safbwynt corff disgyblu â dyletswydd i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd, does bosib mai’r ffaith bod y meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog, neu heb ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog, yw’r prif gwestiwn. Rhaid mai’r prif gwestiwn yw a yw ymddygiad y gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn dangos ei fod/bod yn risg i gleifion.
Yr Hawl i Apelio yn erbyn Rhyddfarn
Mae’r sefyllfa mewn perthynas â hawl y CRHP/CHRE i apelio yn erbyn rhyddfarnu meddyg ar gyhuddiad o SPM wedi profi ychydig yn fwy problemus. Yn achos
Y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd v Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a Ruscillo
, cafodd y meddyg ei gyhuddo o SPM. Addefodd iddo fod mewn perthynas emosiynol a rywiol gyda chlaf. Roedd manylion y cyhuddiad wedi cynnwys honiad bod gan y claf
a’i bod felly yn
. Honnwyd ymhellach bod y meddyg yn ymwybodol o hanes y claf. Fodd bynnag, yn y gwrandawiad, gwnaeth y GMC gais i newid y cyhuddiad a’i gyfyngu i hanes o
, yn hytrach na
, ac i hepgor y cyfeiriadau at y claf yn
ac at wybodaeth y meddyg am yr hanes. Newidiwyd pennawd y cyhuddiad yn briodol ac fe’i addefwyd gan y meddyg wedyn. Yr unig bennawd cyhuddiad a oedd yn parhau yn destun dadl oedd bod gweithredoedd y meddyg wedi bod yn
y claf a’u bod yn
. Ni alwodd y GMC unrhyw dystion a dewisodd y meddyg beidio rhoi tystiolaeth. Canfu panel y PCC nad oedd pennawd y cyhuddiad a oedd yn destun dadl wedi’i
‘proved in its entirety’
gan nad oedd yr un o’r honiadau wedi’u canfod. Wrth gyhoeddi penderfyniad y panel, gwnaeth Cadeirydd y PCC gyfeiriad at ddiffyg tystiolaeth yn yr achos. Canfu’r panel bod y ffeithiau a oedd wedi’u haddef yn annigonol i gefnogi canfyddiad o SPM. Roedd yr achos yn erbyn y meddyg, felly, wedi’i derfynu. Daeth i’r golwg ar ôl gwrandawiad y PCC y gallai cofnodion meddygol wedi’u gwneud ar gael a fyddai wedi darparu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol i brofi agweddau ychwanegol y cyhuddiad, a bod partneriaid y meddyg wedi bod yn barod ac ar gael i roi tystiolaeth gerbron panel y PCC, ond na chawsant eu galw. Mewn geiriau eraill, roedd pryder nad oedd yr achos wedi’i erlyn yn ddigonol. Apeliodd y CRHP/CHRE i’r Uchel Lys. Ar ran y meddyg, codwyd dadl ragarweiniol; dadleuwyd nad oedd adran 29 yn darparu ar gyfer apêl yn erbyn penderfyniad i ganfod meddyg yn ddieuog o SPM. Dadleuodd y CRHP ei bod. Wrth wrando’r ddadl ragarweiniol hon, roedd Leveson J o’r farn nad oedd
‘penderfyniad perthnasol’
o fewn adran 29 yn gyfyngedig i benderfyniad ynghylch y sancsiwn priodol, ond roedd yn cynnwys penderfyniad i ryddfarnu meddyg o SPM.
Cafodd yr apeliadau yn achosion
eu gwrando gyda’i gilydd a thraddodwyd y dyfarniadau ym mis Hydref 2004. Roedd y Llys Apêl o’r farn bod gan y Cyngor, dan adran 29, y grym i gyfeirio penderfyniad y PCC i ryddfarnu’r meddyg o SPM at y Llys. Fodd bynnag, dehonglodd y Llys y geiriau
yn s29(2)(a) i olygu penderfyniad i beidio pennu cosb neu sancsiwn. Felly, roedd cwmpas yr adran, meddai’r Llys, yn gyfyngedig i’r achosion hynny lle mae penderfyniad perthnasol wedi bod yn rhy drugarog, pa un ai oherwydd bod y canfyddiadau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol yn annigonol neu oherwydd nad yw’r gosb yn adlewyrchu’n ddigonol y canfyddiadau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol sydd wedi’u gwneud, neu’r ddau. Yn fyr, bydd gan y Cyngor y grym i gyfeirio rhyddfarn at y Llys dim ond os yw’r ‘canfyddiadau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol yn annigonol’. Felly, yn achos
, lle‘r oedd y Cyngor o’r farn bod yr achos heb ei erlyn yn ddigonol, roedd grym cyfeirio.
Er mwyn cyflawnrwydd, soniaf am y penderfyniad mwyaf diweddar dan adran 29 o Ddeddf 2002. Achos
Y Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd v Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a Leeper
oedd hwn. Roedd y Llys o’r farn bod y sancsiwn a bennwyd (sef pennu amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg) yn rhy drugarog, ac y dylai’r meddyg fod wedi’i atal. Roedd y meddyg wedi addef bod ei ymddygiad wrth fynd i berthynas rywiol amhriodol gyda chlaf wedi bod yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Mae’r achos o ddiddordeb gan i’r Barnwr, Meistr Ustus Collins, wneud rhai sylwadau am raddfa’r datgeliad y mae’n rhaid ei roi i’r CRHP/CHRE mewn achosion lle mae’r dystiolaeth wedi’i chyflwyno i’r PCC fel datganiad o ffeithiau a gytunwyd. Roedd hynny wedi’i wneud yn yr achos hwn. Roedd y CRHP/CHRE eisiau bodloni’i hun bod y datganiad o ffeithiau a gytunwyd yn adlewyrchu’n ddigonol difrifoldeb camymddygiad y meddyg - mewn geiriau eraill, roedd eisiau bod yn siŵr nad oedd yr achos heb ei erlyn yn ddigonol. Roedd y GMC wedi bod yn amharod i ddatgelu datganiadau gwreiddiol y prif dystion am resymau cyfrinachedd. Dywedodd y Barnwr bod rhaid i’r GMC eu datgelu. Fel y bu hi, wedi iddynt gael eu harchwilio, ni honnwyd bod yr achos heb ei erlyn yn ddigonol; roedd y datganiad o ffeithiau a gytunwyd yn deg i’r ddwy ochr. Y pwynt yw bod rhaid i’r CRHP/CHRE allu gwirio bod hyn yn wir.
Mae sefydlu proses apeliadau dan adran 29 i’w groesawu. Bydd yn darparu mecanwaith ar gyfer gwrthod penderfyniadau ar sancsiwn sydd y tu allan i fand yr hyn a oedd yn rhesymol yn yr amgylchiadau. Er bod y Llys Apêl wedi datgan yn
bod adran 29 yn rhoi’r grym i’r CRHP/CHRE gyfeirio rhyddfarn at y Llys, dywedodd nad oedd yr adran wedi’i drafftio’n dda. Mae’n amlwg o’r dyfarniad bod lluniad yr adran yn peri anhawster go iawn. Ymddengys i mi, pan gyfyd y cyfle, dylai adran 29 gael ei diwygio i ddatgan yn eglur y tu hwnt i unrhyw ddadlau bod gan y CRHP/CHRE y grym i gyfeirio at y Llys unrhyw benderfyniad gan bwyllgor neu banel disgyblu y mae o’r farn ei fod yn anghywir, ac yr ystyria y dylai weithredu mewn perthynas ag ef, er mwyn diogelu cleifion.

---  ---
Ymddengys i mi bod nifer o broblemau gyda hen weithdrefnau‘r PCC. Bydd, neu fe allai, rhai o’r rhain gael eu hunioni dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Fodd bynnag, efallai y bydd rhai eraill yn cael eu parhau. Soniaf am yr hyn yr ymddengys i mi oedd y prif anawsterau yn y gorffennol.
Trefniadaeth Droseddol
Sefydlwyd ers tro bod y PCC yn cynnal ei achosion yn null treial troseddol. Y cyfiawnhad am hyn yw, oherwydd bod posibilrwydd y bydd y meddyg yn cael ei ddileu/dileu o’r gofrestr, bod rhaid darparu dulliau diogelu priodol er mwyn sicrhau tegwch i’r meddyg. Mae hynny’n ddealladwy. Fodd bynnag, mae ffactor pwysig arall i’w ystyried: diogelu’r cyhoedd. Mewn rhai agweddau ac ar rai achlysuron, mae’r ddau ffactor hwn yn gwrthdaro.
Y Disgresiwn i Dderbyn Tystiolaeth ‘Annerbyniadwy’
Yn y gorffennol, roedd y PCC yn mynnu fel arfer y dylai unrhyw ffeithiau nad oedd y meddyg yn eu haddef gael eu profi gan dystiolaeth lafar. Felly’r oedd hi hyd yn oed lle’r oedd y tyst wedi rhoi tystiolaeth a lle’r oedd wedi cael ei groesholi/chroesholi gan neu ar ran y meddyg ar achlysur arall. Felly’r oedd hi hyd yn oed er bod gan y PCC ddisgresiwn i dderbyn tystiolaeth na fyddai fel arall yn cael ei derbyn, os oedd yn fodlon fod ei
‘ddyletswydd i ymchwilio’n briodol’
i’r achos
‘yn gwneud derbyn y dystiolaeth yn ddymunol’
. Yn achos Dr JM 04, y cyfeiriais ato’n gynharach ym mharagraffau 21.79-21.84, cafodd y gwrthdaro rhwng buddiannau’r ddau yma eu datrys o blaid y meddyg ac yn erbyn lles diogelu cleifion. Roedd Dr JM 04 yn wynebu cyhuddiadau gerbron y PCC mewn perthynas â rhoi gorddos affwysol o ddiamorffin a oedd wedi arwain at farwolaeth y claf. Cafodd ei ddyfarnu’n euog o ddynladdiad. Cyn gwrandawiad y PCC, canfu’r GMC bod y meddyg wedi bod yn destun cwyn eithaf difrifol arall, y deliwyd â hi’n lleol, a chan arwain at ganfyddiad bod y meddyg wedi torri’i delerau gwasanaeth. Arweiniodd yr honiad yn amlwg at gwestiwn o SPM. Fel yr esboniais, penderfynodd y GMC i beidio dwyn achos mewn perthynas â’r ail gŵyn oherwydd bod y prif dyst yn amharod i fynd trwy ei thystiolaeth yn llafar am yr ail dro. Roedd eisoes wedi rhoi tystiolaeth unwaith, ac wedi’i chroesholi yn ystod y gweithdrefnau lleol. Gallai’r GMC fod wedi rhoi
ond penderfynodd y byddai wedi bod yn ansensitif i wneud hynny; gallai fod wedi ceisio perswadio’r tyst i newid ei meddwl; gallai fod wedi gwahodd panel y PCC i dderbyn cofnod o’r hyn a ddywedwyd yng ngwrandawiad yr MSC. Gall fod, yn absenoldeb tystiolaeth lafar, na fyddai panel y PCC wedi canfod bod ymddygiad y meddyg i’w feirniadu mewn perthynas â’r ail ddigwyddiad. Bydded felly. Y pwynt yw na wnaeth y GMC roi unrhyw gynnig arni; penderfynodd yn syml i beidio mynd ymlaen mewn perthynas â’r ail fater.
Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd gan banelau FTP ddisgresiwn tebyg i dderbyn tystiolaeth na fyddai’n fanwl gywir yn cael ei derbyn mewn treial troseddol. Rhaid aros i weld a fydd y GMC, yn y dyfodol, yn fwy parod na fu yn y gorffennol i wahodd panelau i dderbyn y pwerau hyn. Ymddengys i mi mai’r hyn sydd ei angen yw mwy o benderfyniad i erlyn pob achos yn llawn, gan ddod â’r holl ffeithiau gerbron y panel, ac nid yn unig y rheiny y mae tystiolaeth lafar ar gael yn barod ar eu cyfer.
Yn ystod y gwrandawiadau, mynegais fy mhryder bod y PCC wastad wedi cymhwyso’r safon prawf troseddol wrth ddod i gasgliadau ar y ffeithiau. Roeddwn yn pryderu efallai na fyddai’r safon prawf uchel yma’n briodol mewn awdurdodaeth â phrif bwrpas i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd rhag meddygon nad ydynt yn addas i ymarfer. Nid oeddwn bryd hynny wedi sylwi (fel yr wyf wedi sylwi bellach) y gallai penderfyniadau’r PCC gael eu gwneud ar fwyafrif main o’r panel. Roeddwn wedi sylwi bod Miss Jean Ritchie CF, a gynhaliodd Ymchwiliad i ymddygiad Rodney Ledward, wedi argymell y dylai safon prawf sifil gael ei chymhwyso mewn gwrandawiadau PCC. Roedd Ledward yn gynaecolegydd a oedd, dros y blynyddoedd, wedi cyflawni nifer fawr o driniaethau ‘a fwnglerwyd’ ac wedi achosi llawer iawn o niwed. Cafodd ei ddileu o’r gofrestr feddygol yn y pen draw ym mis Medi 1998. Fel y deallaf, pryder Miss Ritchie oedd efallai nad yw’r cyhoedd yn cael eu diogelu’n ddigonol gan gorff disgyblu a allai weithredu’n unig os oedd y ffeithiau wedi’u profi i safon sicrwydd uchel iawn. Rwy’n rhannu’r pryder hwnnw.
Yng ngolau argymhelliad Miss Ritchie, yn 2000, cynhaliodd y GMC gynhadledd i drafod doethineb cymhwyso ‘safon prawf sifil symudol’. Byddai hynny’n golygu y byddai’n rhaid i banel y PCC fod wedi bod yn fodlon i raddfa tebygolrwydd a oedd yn briodol i ddifrifoldeb yr honiadau dan ystyriaeth a difrifoldeb y sancsiwn tebygol. Mewn achosion lle’r oedd yr honiad yn gyfystyr â throsedd ddifrifol, byddai safon prawf uwch yn ofynnol nag mewn achos lle’r oedd yr honiad, dyweder, yn un o esgeuluster difrifol. Penderfynodd y gynhadledd y dylai’r PCC barhau i gymhwyso’r safon prawf troseddol ym mhob achos. Teimlwyd na fyddai’n deg i amddifadu meddyg o’i fywoliaeth/bywoliaeth ac eithrio ar dystiolaeth a oedd yn cyrraedd safon prawf uchel. Felly, ar y wyneb, roedd y cysyniad o fod yn deg i’r meddyg i gael trechu’r angen i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd.
Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r broblem yn union fel yr oeddwn wedi credu ei bod. Roeddwn wedi meddwl ei bod yn rhaid bod llawer o achosion lle’r oedd honiad o SPM wedi methu gan nad oedd y PCC yn fodlon bod y ffeithiau wedi’u profi i safon droseddol. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, yn ei flynyddoedd ar y PCC, roedd wedi canfod bod anawsterau ac anghytundebau’n codi, nid ynghylch a oedd y ffeithiau wedi’u profi i’r safon ofynnol, ond ynghylch a oedd y ffeithiau hynny a brofwyd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Dywedodd hefyd bod anghytundeb yn aml ynglŷn â sancsiynu. Cefais fy synnu’n fawr gan hyn. Mae fy mhrofiad i fel barnwr yn llywyddu dros dreialon â rheithgor wedi fy arwain i gredu, pan fydd grŵp o bobl yn gorfod bod yn fodlon o ffeithiau i safon prawf uchel, bod anawsterau ac anghytundebau’n codi’n aml. Ymddengys i mi bod tri esboniad posibl am yr absenoldeb anhawster ymddangosiadol fel yr adroddodd Syr Donald. Un esboniad posibl yw mai’r achosion hynny lle’r oedd y dystiolaeth yn glir iawn oedd byth yn cyrraedd y PCC. Esboniad posibl arall yw nad oedd panel y PCC mewn gwirionedd yn cymhwyso’r safon prawf uchel, ond yn hytrach safon is. Posibilrwydd arall, sy’n eithaf damcaniaethol, yw bod y safon uchel yn cael ei chymhwyso ond bod penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud weithiau, nid yn unfrydol, ond gan fwyafrif; dan Reolau’r GMC mae mwyafrif main yn ddigon. O ran y posibilrwydd olaf hwn, mae’r ffaith bod mwyafrif main yn ddigon, yn fy marn i, heb fod yn amhriodol mewn ‘awdurdodaeth amddiffynnol’. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhyfedd fod y GMC yn pryderu gymaint ynghylch cynnal y safon prawf uchel er mwyn bod yn deg i’r meddyg, pan ellir gwneud canfyddiad ar sail mwyafrif main. Gan ddelio’n unig â chanfyddiadau o ffaith, byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai mwy o ddiogelwch i’r meddyg wrth ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob aelod o’r panel fod yn fodlon i’r safon sifil ynghylch yr hyn yr oedd y meddyg wedi’i wneud, na chaniatáu i benderfyniad gael ei wneud lle’r oedd (gan ragdybio panel o bump) tri aelod o’r panel yn fodlon ynghylch set o ffeithiau i’r safon droseddol, ond lle gallai’r ddau arall hyd yn oed feddwl nad oedd y meddyg wedi gwneud unrhyw beth o’i le o gwbl.
Ymddengys i mi y dylai’r GMC ailagor ei drafodaeth fewnol am gymhwyso safonau prawf, a dylai ystyried cwestiwn penderfyniadau mwyafrif yn ogystal. Dylai proses gwneud penderfyniadau da, os yw hynny’n bosibl, fod yn seiliedig ar unfrydedd. Dylai ymgais gael ei gwneud bob tro i sicrhau unfrydedd, ac os yw hynny’n amhosibl yn unig y dylai penderfyniad mwyafrif fod yn dderbyniol. Yn gyffredinol, mewn awdurdodaeth amddiffynnol, bydd y safon prawf sifil yn briodol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n sicr yn ddadleuol y byddai’n briodol i gadw’r safon prawf troseddol lle mae’r honiad yn gyfystyr â throsedd ddifrifol.
Cadeirydd â Chymwysterau Cyfreithiol
Yn ei hadroddiad yn achos Ledward, argymhellodd Miss Ritchie y dylai panelau PCC gael eu cadeirio gan farnwr cylchdaith neu gofiadur profiadol Llys y Goron. Ei meddylfryd oedd y byddai hyn yn sicrhau bod achosion yn cael eu cynnal yn deg ac yn annibynnol. Ymddengys i mi hefyd y byddai cael cyfreithiwr profiadol fel cadeirydd y panel yn dod â chadernid cyfreithiol mwy i’w benderfyniadau nag a wna cyngor asesydd cyfreithiol. Er enghraifft, byddai cadeirydd felly’n gallu sicrhau nad oedd y panel yn ystyried ystyriaethau amherthnasol a byddai’n gallu eu harwain yn fanylach ar faterion fel y safon prawf.
Mantais arall cael cadeirydd â chymwysterau cyfreithiol fyddai y byddai ganddo/ganddi flynyddoedd lawer o brofiad o’r broses fforensig, a byddai’n gallu ymateb yn briodol yn well o lawer i ddigwyddiadau annisgwyl, sydd yn digwydd weithiau. Rwyf wedi sylwi o rywfaint o’r deunydd a ddefnyddiwyd i gynorthwyo panelwyr PCC a chadeiryddion pan fyddant yn eistedd, na ellir tybio y bydd ganddynt unrhyw syniad ynghylch beth ddylid ei ddweud neu’i wneud mewn sefyllfaoedd penodol. Darperir ffurfiau geiriau iddynt ddefnyddio yng nghamau amrywiol y broses. Byddai mantais go iawn, ymddengys i mi, o gael cadeiryddion sy’n gwybod, o brofiad maith, beth i wneud a pha fath o beth i’w ddweud ym mhob cam o’r broses. Yn y dyfodol, efallai y bydd rhaid i banelau FTP ystyried amrywiaeth o honiadau, rhai ohonynt yn ymwneud â chamymddygiad a rhai’n ymwneud â pherfformiad diffygiol neu amhariad ar iechyd hyd yn oed. Fe all gwrandawiadau panelau FTP fod yn fwy cymhleth yn y dyfodol. Rwy’n ofni y gall panelau FTP ei chael yn anodd i ddidoli pa dystiolaeth sy’n berthnasol i ba faterion, ac, fel y gall fod yn rhaid iddynt wneud yn wir, cymhwyso safonau prawf gwahanol i agweddau gwahanol ar yr achos. Byddai arweiniad cadeirydd â chymwysterau cyfreithiol, yn fy marn i, yn amhrisiadwy.
Nodaf fod y GMC, mor ddiweddar â mis Mai 2003, yn ystyried y posibilrwydd o ddefnyddio cadeirydd â chymwysterau cyfreithiol yn yr achosion mwy cymhleth, er yr ymddengys y rhoddwyd y gorau i’r syniad hwn nawr. Ymddengys i mi y byddai hwnnw’n ffordd dra synhwyrol o fynd ymlaen. Efallai y canfyddir, gymaint yw’r manteision, y gall yr arfer gael ei ymestyn i bob achos ac eithrio’r achosion symlaf.
Anallu’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol yn y Gorffennol i Gymryd Golwg Holistaidd
Yn y gorffennol, roedd y GMC yn cael ei atal gan ei weithdrefnau ei hun rhag cymryd golwg holistaidd o broblemau meddygon. Roedd yn rhaid i achos gael ei ddosrannu naill ai i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, iechyd neu berfformiad. Fel y mae’r GMC yn deall yn iawn, nid yw’r cyflwr dynol yn ei fenthyg ei hun i adrannu felly, ac mae llawer o feddygon yn dod gerbron ag amrywiaeth o broblemau gwahanol. Nid wyf am ymhelaethu ar yr anhawster hwn yn y gorffennol gan fy mod yn optimistaidd y caiff ei ddatrys pan ddaw’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith yn fuan iawn.
Diffyg Safonau a Meini Prawf
Ni allaf gymryd yr un olwg optimistaidd ar gyfer y dyfodol wrth i mi fynd yn ôl i drafod ymhellach yr angen am safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau ar gyfer gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau FPT. Roedd eu hangen yn y gorffennol, mae hynny’n amlwg. Cynghorodd yr Athro Allen ynglŷn â hyn ym mhob un o’r adroddiadau PSI. Ei phrif bryder oedd nad oedd canfyddiad a gytunwyd yn gyffredinol ynghylch beth oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Yn ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, soniodd Syr Donald Irvine am y gwahaniaethau barn ymhlith gweithwyr proffesiynol ar SPM. Roedd yr un broblem yn bodoli mewn perthynas â’r cysyniad o SDP. Rwyf wedi cyfeirio at farn Gweithgor y PCC hefyd, sef yr oedd angen am fwy o gysondeb wrth gymhwyso sancsiynau. Mae cysondeb mewn gwneud penderfyniadau yn angenrheidiol: yn gyntaf, er mwyn darparu graddfa briodol o ddiogelwch i gleifion, yn ail, er mwyn bod yn deg i feddygon ac yn drydydd, i alluogi’r GMC fynnu hyder y cyhoedd ac i gynnal enw da’r proffesiwn meddygol.
Yn ei gyflwyniad i’r Ymchwiliad, awgrymodd y GMC nad oedd safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau sefydledig yn briodol nac yn angenrheidiol. Nid ydynt wedi bod yn angenrheidiol, meddai, gan fod gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau y gorffennol yn aelodau profiadol ac uchel eu parch o’r proffesiwn meddygol, a phob un ohonynt yn aelodau o’r GMC. Yn ei hanfod, dywedir, gellid ymddiried yn eu barn. Mae’r GMC yn awgrymu hefyd bod, ac y bydd, panelwyr y presennol a’r dyfodol yn cael eu dewis ar deilyngdod ac yn cael eu hyfforddi ar gyfer y dasg. Gall hynny i gyd fod yn ddigon gwir, ond maent, ac fe fyddant, yn unigolion bob un ohonynt, a, pha mor gydwybodol bynnag y bont, byddant yn dod i benderfyniadau anghyson oni chânt eu harwain gan safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau sefydledig. Mae’r GMC wedi awgrymu hefyd nad yw safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau sefydledig yn briodol gan eu bod yn rhwystro rhyddid gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau rhag ystyried amgylchiadau unigol y meddyg a’r achos. Yn syml iawn, nid yw hynny’n wir. Nid oes neb yn awgrymu asesiad mecanistig a fydd yn arwain at achosion yn cael eu rhoi mewn twll colomen penodol. Yr hyn sydd ei angen yw fframwaith y gellir ystyried amgylchiadau unigol oddi fewn iddo heb gynhyrchu penderfyniadau afresymol. Ymddengys o adroddiad y DASG yn yr argraffiad cyntaf o’r Fitness to Practice Bulletin, y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 21.150, bod rhai aelodau o’r GMC yn cydnabod hyn.
Rwy’n gadarn o’r farn bod safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau sefydledig wedi bod yn angenrheidiol yn y gorffennol, ac y bydd eu heisiau llawn gymaint yn y dyfodol, hyd yn oed yn fwy o bosibl, oherwydd, fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 25, mae’r profion sydd i’w cymhwyso dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, os rhywbeth, yn fwy agored i ddehongliad personol na’r rheiny a gymhwyswyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Rwy’n gadarn o’r farn hefyd, os yw’r GMC i ennill ymddiriedaeth a hyder y cyhoedd, mae’n rhaid i aelodau o’r cyhoedd a chynrychiolwyr cleifion fod â rhan weithredol yn y broses o osod y safonau, y meini prawf a’r trothwyau.
O ran sancsiynau, mae’r ISG yn amlwg yn ddefnyddiol a byddai cyhoeddi astudiaethau achos priodol fanwl yn ddefnyddiol hefyd. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn credu y byddai mesurau felly yn ddigonol i adfer hyder y cyhoedd ym mharodrwydd a gallu’r GMC i gymhwyso sancsiynau priodol i feddygon cyfeiliornus. Rwy’n cydnabod, wrth ffurfio’r ISG (ac wrth ddatblygu arweiniad newydd ar destunau penodol), bod y GMC, i ryw raddau, yn ymgynghori â chyrff sy’n cynrychioli cleifion. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, yr hyn sydd ei angen yw consensws rhwng y GMC a’r cyhoedd ynghylch yr ystod o sancsiynau priodol yn y mathau o achosion sy’n ailddigwydd yn gyson. Fel model ar gyfer dod i gonsensws, byddwn yn annog y GMC i archwilio gweithrediad y Panel Cynghori ar Ddedfrydu, sy’n darparu cyngor i’r Llys Apêl (Adran Troseddau) ynghylch mathau arbennig o achos. Mae’r Panel yn cynnwys aelodau o ystod eang o gefndiroedd: barnwyr, bargyfreithwyr, ynadon, academyddion a phobl leyg. Mae’r Panel yn ymgynghori’n ehangach hefyd pan fydd yn mynd ati i ystyried pob pwnc newydd. Mae adroddiadau’r Panel yn cynnig barn gytûn sydd, oherwydd ei tharddiad, yn ennyn parch y Llys Apêl (Adran Troseddau) sef, i bob pwrpas, y corff sy’n gosod safonau ar gyfer y gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau yn y lle cyntaf, y farnwriaeth a’r ynadaeth. Dylai barnau felly ennyn hyder y cyhoedd yn ogystal. Mae ymgynghori’n galluogi’r gweithwyr proffesiynol mewn cyfiawnder troseddol ddeall safbwynt y cyhoedd a
. Ymddengys i mi y gallai’r math hon o broses gael ei haddasu’n hawdd er mwyn darparu arweiniad i’r GMC. Gall fod y dylai cyngor ymgynghorol gael ei sefydlu dan nawdd y CRHP/CHRE.

---  ---
Gweithdrefnau Lleol ar gyfer Delio â Phryderon am Iechyd Meddygon
Ffynonellau Adroddiadau am Iechyd Gwael Meddyg
Y Broses Gychwynnol ar gyfer Delio ag Adroddiadau am Iechyd
Y Gweithdrefnau Iechyd Gwirfoddol
Y Pwyllgor Iechyd
Gweithrediad y Gweithdrefnau Iechyd
Dyfodol y Gweithdrefnau Iechyd

---  ---
Rwyf wedi esbonio eisoes sut yr oedd pryder cynyddol, yn y 1960au a’r 1970au cynnar, am allu’r system reoleiddio bresennol i ddelio’n ddigon da â’r broblem o feddygon yr oedd iechyd gwael yn amharu ar eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Nid oedd gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) unrhyw bŵer i ddelio â meddyg a oedd yn sâl, oni bai bod ef/hi wedi’i ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd neu’n euog o ymddygiad a fyddai’n golygu camymddwyn proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Ni amddiffynnwyd cleifion yn ddigon da, er enghraifft, rhag yr alcoholig cronig na chafodd ei ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd ac na fu, er gwaethaf cyflwyno risg amlwg i gleifion, yn euog o unrhyw gamymddwyn y byddai’r GMC wedi ystyried ei fod yn syrthio o fewn y diffiniad o SPM.
Y broblem arall oedd, mewn achosion lle‘r oedd yn bosibl defnyddio gweithdrefnau disgyblu’r GMC i ddelio â meddyg sâl, fod y gweithdrefnau hynny yn gosbol eu natur ac nid oeddent yn cynnig unrhyw fecanwaith ar gyfer goruchwylio meddyg, ar gyfer cefnogi ei ymdrechion/ei hymdrechion i adsefydlu neu ar gyfer cyfyngu ar ei waith/ei gwaith meddyg yn ystod y broses adsefydlu. Cynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau disgyblu yn gyhoeddus heb roi unrhyw gyfrinachedd meddygol i’r meddyg. Teimlai llawer o bobl fod y math hwn o wrandawiad cyhoeddus yn ffordd amhriodol - a chreulon hyd yn oed - o ddelio â meddygon a oedd yn dioddef salwch corfforol neu salwch meddwl. Roedd meddygon yn amharod i achwyn am gydweithwyr a oedd yn risg hysbys i gleifion oherwydd eu salwch. Priodolwyd yr amharodrwydd hwn, yn rhannol o leiaf, i’r moddau annigonol a oedd ar gael ar gyfer delio â meddygon sâl.
Yn ei Adroddiad, a gyhoeddwyd yn 1975, argymhellodd Bwyllgor yr Ymchwiliad i Reoleiddio’r Proffesiwn Meddygol, a gadeiriwyd gan Dr (Syr yn ddiweddarach) Alec Merrison (Pwyllgor Merrison), gosod y trefniadau a fyddai’n cael eu hadnabod fel ‘gweithdrefnau iechyd’ y GMC. Cyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn Neddf Feddygol 1978 (Deddf 1978) a daethant i rym ym mis Awst 1980. Gosodwyd y darpariaethau perthnasol yn ddiweddarach yn Neddf Feddygol 1983 (Deddf 1983). Yn ystod y cyfnod yr oeddent mewn grym, ychydig iawn a newidiwyd ynddynt. Yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau fel yr oeddent ar waith ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, adeg y gwrandawiadau Ymchwiliad perthnasol. Lle bu newidiadau sylweddol rhwng cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau a mis Rhagfyr 2003, byddaf yn disgrifio’r newidiadau hynny.
Amlinellu’r Gweithdrefnau
Adran Iechyd y GMC oedd yn trin achosion iechyd. Roedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn cynnwys dwy broses wahanol ar gyfer delio â meddygon yr oedd eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer wedi’i amharu’n ddifrifol, neu y gallai fod, oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Cafodd y broses gyntaf ei hadnabod yn gyffredin fel gweithdrefnau iechyd ‘gwirfoddol’. Diben y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol oedd amddiffyn y cyhoedd rhag meddygon yr oedd eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer wedi’i amharu’n ddifrifol ar sail iechyd ac i helpu’r meddygon dan sylw i ddilyn rhaglen goruchwylio ac adsefydlu meddygol.
Dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, cafodd y GMC dystiolaeth feddygol ar gyflwr y meddyg dan sylw. Os byddai’r dystiolaeth yn datgelu bod y meddyg yn dioddef o nam difrifol ar ei iechyd, ac o ganlyniad nad oedd ef/hi yn addas i ymarfer neu ddim ond yn addas i ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol, gyda chyfyngiadau ar ei waith/ei gwaith meddyg a/neu amodau eraill, gellid yna wahodd y meddyg i roi ymrwymiadau yn seiliedig ar unrhyw argymhellion a wnaed gan yr archwilwyr meddygol a ddarparodd y dystiolaeth feddygol. Byddai’r ymrwymiadau yn gysylltiedig â materion fel derbyn goruchwyliaeth feddygol, ymwrthod ag alcohol a chyffuriau (os yn briodol) ac unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar waith proffesiynol y meddyg y tybiwyd eu bod yn angenrheidiol. Os cytunai’r meddyg â’r ymrwymiadau arfaethedig, a chydymffurfio â hwy, byddai ei achos/ei hachos yn cael ei reoli, ei oruchwylio a’i adolygu yn rheolaidd heb fod angen am wrandawiad ffurfiol. Os gwellai’r meddyg yn dda o’r cyflwr a oedd yn amharu, byddai ef/hi yn cael ei ryddhau/rhyddhau o’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau gyda hynny a byddai’n rhydd i ymarfer eto heb oruchwyliaeth na chyfyngiad.
Digwyddai’r ail broses pe byddai meddyg yn penderfynu herio’r angen am archwiliad meddygol neu’n gwrthod derbyn goruchwyliaeth feddygol neu unrhyw gyfyngiadau arfaethedig ar ei waith/ei gwaith neu pe byddai ei iechyd/ei hiechyd yn gwaethygu neu pe byddai ef/hi yn torri unrhyw ymrwymiadau a wnaed yn flaenorol. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, byddai ei achos/ei hachos yn cael ei atgyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC), yr oedd ganddo’r grym i atal cofrestriad y meddyg, neu orfodi amodau arno. Nid oedd gan yr HC unrhyw rym i ddileu cofrestriad meddyg ond gallai, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, atal cofrestriad meddyg am gyfnod amhenodol.
Adeg Adroddiad Merrison, tybiwyd mai’r categori mwyaf o achosion a oedd yn debygol o godi dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd newydd oedd y rheiny a ddeilliai o gam-drin alcohol a chyffuriau eraill. Profwyd yn wir bod hynny’n wir ac, am lawer blwyddyn ar ôl eu cyflwyno, roedd nifer yr achosion a atgyfeiriwyd at y gweithdrefnau iechyd a syrthiai i’r categori hwn gymaint â 75% i 80%. Weithiau, cyfunwyd y cam-drin alcohol neu gyffuriau â rhyw gyflwr seiciatrig arall. Dywedodd Dr Sheila Mann, ymgynghorydd seiciatrydd, a oedd yn aelod o’r GMC o 1996 i fis Gorffennaf 2003 ac a oedd yn sgriniwr iechyd o 1996 tan 2004, wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai ei hargraff hi oedd bod tua hanner o’r achosion y mae’r Adran Iechyd yn eu trin yn cynnwys cam-drin sylweddau mewn un ffordd neu’r llall. Atgyfeiriwyd ychydig achosion yn ymwneud â nam corfforol yn unig at y GMC. Mae’n debygol y bydd gan feddyg sy’n dioddef o gyflwr o’r fath fewnwelediad i effaith ei gyflwr/ei chyflwr ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ac y bydd yn gwirfoddoli i orffen gweithio os bydd ef/hi yn sylweddoli mai dyma sy’n briodol. I’r gwrthwyneb, gallai meddyg sy’n dioddef o salwch seiciatrig, neu sy’n cam-drin alcohol neu gyffuriau, barhau i weithio pan nad yw mewn cyflwr i wneud hynny.
Roedd gan yr Ymchwiliad ddiddordeb yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd am nifer o resymau. Yn gyntaf, roedd yr Ymchwiliad yn awyddus i weld sut yr oedd y GMC wedi trin achosion yn ymwneud â cham-drin alcohol neu gyffuriau, yn enwedig y rheiny ag elfen o gamymddwyn, fel anonestrwydd. Roedd angen i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried sut y byddai Shipman wedi cael ei drin petai’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ar waith pan ystyriodd y GMC ei achos ef. Roeddwn yn dymuno gweld beth a ddigwyddai i achosion o’r fath yn ymarferol. Roeddwn yn dymuno asesu a yw’r gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi rhoi amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion. Byddaf hefyd yn edrych ar rai o’r newidiadau a gynigiwyd yn ddiweddar ar gyfer trin achosion ag elfen iechyd dan y gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) newydd.
Yn ogystal â chael tystiolaeth ar lafar gan Dr Mann, clywodd yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Alan Howes, a gyflogwyd gan y GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002 ac a oedd yn Bennaeth ar Adran Iechyd y GMC o fis Awst 1985 i fis Hydref 1986 ac o 1997 i fis Ebrill 2001, a chan Miss Jackie Smith, y mae’r GMC wedi’i chyflogi ers 1998 ac a oedd yn weithiwr achos uwch yn Adran Iechyd y GMC o fis Ionawr i fis Medi 1998 ac yn Bennaeth ar Adran Iechyd y GMC o fis Ebrill 2002 tan fis Mai 2003. Rhoddwyd tystiolaeth am y gweithdrefnau iechyd hefyd gan Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, gan yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, y Llywydd presennol, a chan Syr Donald Irvine, y Llywydd cynt.
O 1981, yn ôl Rheolau Sefydlog y GMC, roedd yn ofynnol i’r sgriniwr iechyd a’r HC gyflwyno Adroddiadau ar eu gweithgareddau i’r Cyngor llawn o leiaf unwaith y flwyddyn. Am flynyddoedd lawer, roedd yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol hyn yn cynnwys cryn dipyn o wybodaeth am yr achosion a drafodwyd yn Adran Iechyd y GMC, am broblemau a gafwyd ac am newidiadau i arferion a gweithdrefnau. Roeddent yn rhoi gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol iawn am ddatblygiad a gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn ystod yr 1980au a’r 1990au. Yn ddiweddarach, mae’r Adroddiadau Blynyddol wedi’u cynnwys yn ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC ac maent yn cynnwys llai o wybodaeth.
Rhwng 1998 a 1999, cynhaliodd dîm o’r Adran Gwyddoniaeth Iechyd Cyhoeddus, King’s College Llundain ac Athrofa Iechyd Nuffield, Prifysgol Leeds (tîm King’s College), werthusiad o weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC. Adroddwyd canlyniadau’r gwerthusiad i’r GMC ym mis Tachwedd 1999. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at yr adroddiad hwn fel Adroddiad Gwerthusiad 1999. Comisiynwyd y gwerthusiad fel rhan o fenter gan y Llywydd bryd hynny, sef Syr Donald Irvine, i wneud gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn destun adolygiad annibynnol. Roedd y gwerthusiad yn cynnwys adolygiad ôl-syllol o’r modd y rheolai’r GMC achosion iechyd. Roedd yr adolygiad yn seiliedig ar nodiadau achos yn gysylltiedig â meddygon a atgyfeiriwyd at Adran Iechyd y GMC rhwng 1980 a 1996. Cynhaliodd dîm King’s College astudiaeth ansoddol o’r 771 o achosion yr oedd nodiadau achos ar gael ar eu cyfer. Archwiliodd y tîm hefyd hapsampl o adroddiadau a gyflwynwyd i’r GMC gan oruchwylwyr meddygol yn achosion 40 o feddygon a roddwyd dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol yn y cyfnod 1989 i 1996 ac yr oedd eu hachosion wedi’u cwblhau. Darparodd Adroddiad Gwerthusiad 1999 fewnwelediad defnyddiol i’r modd y gweithredwyd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn ystod y 1990au hwyr a byddaf yn cyfeirio at ei gynnwys yn ystod y Bennod hon.
Teitl dogfen arweiniad fewnol ffurfiol gyntaf y GMC a aeth i’r afael â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd oedd ‘Sgrinio Iechyd: Arweiniad ar gyfer Sgrinwyr a Staff yr Adran Iechyd’. Fe’i lluniwyd ym mis Tachwedd 1999. Byddaf yn cyfeirio ati fel ‘Arweiniad 1999’. Cafodd ei pharatoi ar adeg pan fyddai’r GMC wedi gwybod canfyddiadau tîm King’s College. Roedd heb amheuaeth yn adlewyrchu newidiadau mewn arfer a gyflwynwyd o ganlyniad i’r canfyddiadau hynny. Roedd Arweiniad 1999 (er ei fod wedi dyddio mewn rhai ffyrdd) yn cael ei ddefnyddio o hyd ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, pan glywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ar lafar am weithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd.

---  ---
Os yw meddyg yn sâl a daw ei gyflogwyr/ei chyflogwyr neu gydweithwyr yn ymwybodol bod ei iechyd/ei hiechyd yn effeithio ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer, neu y gallai fod, fel arfer bydd yna ryw ymdrech i ddelio â’r mater yn lleol. Gall ymddiriedolaeth ysbyty ddefnyddio ei chyfleusterau iechyd galwedigaethol ei hun i drefnu archwiliad meddygol a gall wedyn roi unrhyw gyfyngiadau angenrheidiol ar waith y meddyg. Ar gyfer meddyg teulu (GP) sy’n gweithio fel contractwr annibynnol, fodd bynnag, gall fod yn anoddach rheoli problem iechyd. Tan yn ddiweddar, nid oedd gan sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOs) GIG fawr iawn o rym i ddelio â meddygon sâl. Mae’r pwerau rheoli rhestri a gawsant yn ddiweddar, fodd bynnag, yn golygu y gall ymddiriedolaeth gofal sylfaenol (PCT) bellach waredu neu wahardd meddyg o’i rhestr neu orfodi amodau ar ei gynhwysiant/chynhwysiant parhaus ar y rhestr. Dylai hyn ei gwneud yn bosibl i’r PCT, mewn achos priodol, roi pwysau ar feddyg i dderbyn cyngor a thriniaeth feddygol ac i gyfyngu ar ei waith/ei gwaith yn ôl yr angen.
Yn aml, fodd bynnag, efallai na fydd ei PCT yn ymwybodol o salwch meddyg teulu. Gall fod yn amlwg ddim ond i feddygon eraill yn ei feddygaeth/ei meddygaeth (os o gwbl) ac i’r meddyg sy’n ei drin/ei thrin (os o gwbl). Nid oes gan bob meddyg berthynas sefydledig gyda meddyg teulu. Mae rhai yn trin eu hunain. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, efallai nad yw’r broblem wedi’i chydnabod o gwbl neu, os yw wedi’i chydnabod, efallai yr ymdrechir i gadw’r broblem yn breifat, heb i’r PCT wybod amdani nac ymyrryd. Mae yna amryw o grwpiau cymorth sy’n cynnig cymorth i feddygon â phroblemau iechyd, yn enwedig y rheiny sy’n cam-drin alcohol a chyffuriau.
Mewn llawer achos, gellir datrys problemau iechyd yn lleol, heb gynnwys y GMC. Fodd bynnag, mae yna achosion lle nad oes gan y meddyg fewnwelediad i’w gyflwr/ei chyflwr a/neu mae’n parhau i weithio fel meddyg pan nad yw’n addas i wneud hynny, gan felly roi cleifion mewn perygl. Dyma’r math o achos lle mae angen i’r GMC weithredu. Mewn rhai achosion, gall ymddiriedolaeth PCT neu GIG weithredu ar y cyd â’r GMC.

---  ---
Gellir tynnu at sylw’r GMC y ffaith bod meddyg yn dioddef, neu y gallai fod yn dioddef, o gyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol sy’n ddigon difrifol i amharu ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer, mewn sawl ffordd. Gall cydweithiwr proffesiynol i’r meddyg roi gwybod am hyn, neu ei gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr neu PCT neu fferyllydd, claf neu aelod o’r cyhoedd. Gall ddod o’r Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA) o ganlyniad i asesiad perfformiad ganddo. Weithiau, gall y meddyg ei hun roi gwybod i’r GMC neu aelod o’i deulu/ei theulu neu’r meddyg sy’n ei drin/ei thrin. Yn aml, bydd y wybodaeth gychwynnol yn arwain nid at adroddiad ond at ymchwiliad i weld a yw adroddiad yn briodol. Weithiau, ceir y wybodaeth trwy hysbysiad gan yr heddlu fod meddyg wedi’i ddyfarnu’n euog o drosedd a allai ddangos presenoldeb problem iechyd greiddiol. Yr enghreifftiau mwyaf cyffredin yw collfarnau yfed a gyrru a chollfarnau troseddau sy’n gysylltiedig â chyffuriau. Gall y ffaith bod meddyg yn sâl, neu y gallai fod yn sâl, hefyd ddod i’r amlwg wrth ystyried achos meddyg dan weithdrefnau ymddygiad neu berfformiad y GMC.
Daw’r GMC yn ymwybodol o’r achosion hynny y cyfeirir ato yn unig. Nid oes ganddo unrhyw fodd o wybod faint o feddygon â phroblemau iechyd sy’n cael eu rheoli’n lleol a chyda faint o lwyddiant. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad yr ymddangosai, yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf, fod lefel llawer uwch o ymwybyddiaeth ymhlith aelodau o’r proffesiwn meddygol am eu dyletswydd i roi gwybod am gydweithwyr sâl. O ganlyniad, bu cynnydd yn nifer yr achosion a atgyfeirir at y GMC, ynghyd â chynnydd mewn ymholiadau ynghylch a ddylid eu hatgyfeirio ai peidio.
Dywedodd Dr Mann mai’r pwynt cyswllt arferol ar gyfer y GMC oedd partneriaid y meddyg (os meddyg oedd y meddyg teulu) neu ei feddyg/ei meddyg teulu neu seiciatrydd sy’n ei drin/ei thrin. Cysylltir weithiau â’r pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC) perthnasol. Roedd yn llai arferol i PCT meddyg teulu gysylltu â’r GMC. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd fod cyfarwyddwyr meddygol PCTs wedi ymroi’n fwy yn ddiweddar. Roedd gan Dr Mann brofiad o ddau PCT yn defnyddio eu pwerau rheoli rhestri i orfodi amodau ar gynnwys meddygon ar eu rhestri a oedd yn dioddef o broblemau iechyd. Roedd o’r farn fod hyn yn ddatblygiad calonogol. Fodd bynnag, roedd ganddi rai pryderon am allu PCTs arunig, bach iawn i ddelio â phroblemau iechyd meddygon.

---  ---
Llywodraethwyd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn olynol gan Orchymyn Cyngor Rheolau Pwyllgor Iechyd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Gweithdrefn)1980 (Rheolau Iechyd 1980) a Gorchymyn Cyngor Rheolau Pwyllgor Iechyd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Gweithdrefn) 1987 (Rheolau Iechyd 1987).
Y Sgrinwyr Iechyd
Yn ôl Rheol 5(2) Rheolau Iechyd 1987, roedd yn ofynnol i’r GMC benodi naill ai Llywydd neu ryw aelod arall o’r GMC i sgrinio achosion a gododd gwestiwn ynghylch iechyd meddyg. Os cynigiai’r Llywydd fod ar y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC), neu os na ddymunai fod yn sgriniwr iechyd am ryw reswm arall, roedd yn ofynnol iddo enwebu aelod arall o’r GMC i’w benodi i’r swydd. Roedd Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn rhoi’r grym i’r Llywydd enwebu ail aelod o’r GMC i gynorthwyo wrth sgrinio achosion iechyd pan, am unrhyw reswm, nad oedd y Llywydd na’r sgriniwr iechyd a benodwyd yn ei le yn gallu gweithredu. Mewn gwirionedd, penodwyd sgriniwr iechyd ychwanegol i gynorthwyo’r Llywydd ers 1984.
Ym 1980, penodwyd yr Athro Syr Denis Hill fel sgriniwr, ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad ac achosion iechyd. Ar ôl marwolaeth Syr Denis ym mis Mai 1982, cymerodd Dr Philip Connell y cyfrifoldeb am sgrinio achosion iechyd (ond nid achosion ymddygiad). Ym mis Tachwedd 1984, daeth y Llywydd ar y pryd, sef Syr John (ac Arglwydd yn ddiweddarach) Walton, yn sgriniwr ar gyfer achosion iechyd ac achosion ymddygiad. Syr John oedd y Llywydd olaf i fod yn sgriniwr. Cafodd ei gynorthwyo, mewn cysylltiad ag achosion iechyd, gan Dr Connell. Ym mis Tachwedd 1987, penodwyd yr Athro Neil Kessel i roi cymorth pellach wrth sgrinio achosion iechyd. Ym mis Chwefror 1989, ar ôl i Lywyddiaeth Syr John ddod i ben, daeth Dr Connell yn sgriniwr iechyd a phenodwyd yr Athro Kessel fel sgriniwr iechyd ychwanegol. Ym 1991, gwnaeth Dr Connell ymddeol fel sgriniwr iechyd a chymerodd yr Athro Kessel ei le. Penodwyd Dr Thomas Bewley fel sgriniwr iechyd ychwanegol. Gwnaeth yr Athro Kessel ymddeol ym mis Chwefror 1995 a chymerodd Dr Bewley ei le, gyda’r Athro Andrew Sims fel sgriniwr iechyd ychwanegol. Ar ymddeoliad Dr Bewley ym mis Gorffennaf 1996, daeth yr Athro Sims yn ei le a phenodwyd Dr Mann, a oedd yn aelod newydd o’r GMC ar y pryd, fel sgriniwr iechyd ychwanegol. Ym 1999, gwnaeth yr Athro Sims ymddeol fel sgriniwr iechyd a chymerodd Dr Mann ei le. Penodwyd Dr Michael Wilson, meddyg teulu, hefyd yn sgriniwr iechyd ar y pryd. Parhaodd Dr Mann a Dr Wilson yn eu swyddi tan rywbryd yn 2004. Yn y gorffennol, roedd rhan fwyaf y sgrinwyr iechyd yn ymgynghorwyr seiciatryddion. Roedd hyn yn adlewyrchu’r ffaith mai problemau seiciatrig oedd gan ran fwyaf y meddygon a drafodwyd yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd.
Fel a fydd yn amlwg bellach, ychydig iawn o bobl a fu’n ymwneud â sgrinio achosion iechyd ers dechrau’r gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yn ôl y system, trosglwyddwyd gwybodaeth a phrofiad pob sgriniwr iechyd olynol i’w gydweithiwr/ei chydweithiwr iau. Pan benodwyd Dr Mann gyntaf, ni chafodd unrhyw hyfforddiant ffurfiol ar gyfer y swydd. Darllenodd lenyddiaeth y GMC am y gweithdrefnau iechyd a chafodd gyngor gan yr Athro Sims. I ddechrau, roedd yn gyfrifol am achosion meddygon a oedd eisoes yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ac a oedd dan oruchwyliaeth, tra bod yr Athro Sims yn delio ag achosion newydd a’r achosion hynny i’w hatgyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd. Yn y modd hwnnw, dysgodd Dr Mann yr hyn yr oedd swydd sgriniwr iechyd yn ei olygu.
Rôl y sgriniwr iechyd oedd cyfarwyddo gweithrediad mewn achosion newydd nes bod meddyg yn cael ei roi dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol. Roedd y sgrinwyr iechyd yna’n gyfrifol am fonitro cynnydd y meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth. Roeddent hefyd yn cyfarwyddo’r paratoadau ar gyfer gwrandawiadau o flaen y Pwyllgor Iechyd ac ar gyfer gwrandawiadau yr ailgydiwyd ynddynt. Yn y gorffennol, sgriniwr iechyd oedd yn gwneud unrhyw benderfyniadau a effeithiai mewn unrhyw ffordd ar sut y dylid trin achos iechyd, er bod staff y GMC yn gwneud trefniadau gweinyddol. Dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, mae’n ymddangos yn debygol y bydd gan staff Adran Iechyd y GMC lawer mwy o gyfrifoldeb am wneud penderfyniadau mewn achosion iechyd ac achosion iechyd posibl. Mae’n ymddangos y bydd y cyfrifoldeb am lawer o’r penderfyniadau ar drin yr achosion yn trosglwyddo o aelodau GMC gyda chymwysterau meddygol i staff heb gymwysterau meddygol, er bod ganddynt lawer o brofiad o bosib. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at y newidiadau hyn ymhellach ym Mhennod 25.
Atgyfeirio Achos at y Sgrinwyr Iechyd
Staff y Swyddfa yn Atgyfeirio Achos
Roedd Rheol 6(1) Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi:
‘Lle caiff y Cofrestrydd wybodaeth yn ysgrifenedig neu gŵyn yn ysgrifenedig am unrhyw feddyg sy’n codi cwestiwn a yw ei gyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, bydd y Cofrestrydd yn cyflwyno’r wybodaeth i’r Llywydd.’
Staff y GMC oedd yn cyflawni swyddogaethau’r Cofrestrydd yn ymarferol, a’r sgrinwyr iechyd oedd yn cyflawni swyddogaethau’r Llywydd.
Lle’r oedd y wybodaeth neu’r gŵyn (byddaf yn cyfeirio at y ddau fel ‘gwybodaeth’ er crynoder) a gafodd y GMC yn amlwg yn codi mater iechyd, roedd Adran Iechyd y GMC yn delio ag ef. Gallai ddod yn uniongyrchol o Adran Iechyd y GMC neu wedi’i drosglwyddo i Adran Iechyd y GMC o’r Adran Sgrinio Ymddygiad. O fis Ebrill 2003, roedd system ddosbarthu ar waith, lle byddai rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried unrhyw wybodaeth ysgrifenedig a gafwyd ac yn llunio asesiad cychwynnol. Yna, byddai ef/hi yn gwneud argymhelliad ynghylch y camau priodol i’w cymryd a byddai’n dirprwyo cyfrifoldeb i weithiwr achos am gynnal yr achos o ddydd i ddydd. Byddai’r rheolwr gwaith achos yn ystyried a allai’r achos warantu sylw’r sgriniwr iechyd gyda’r bwriad o atgyfeirio’r achos at y Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Dros Dro (IOC). Byddai ef neu hi hefyd yn ystyried a oedd yr achos yn achos iechyd ‘clir’ neu a oedd ganddo elfennau o ymddygiad a/neu berfformiad; os felly, efallai y byddai wedi bod yn briodol ei atgyfeirio ar y dechrau at sgriniwr meddygol ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad a pherfformiad. Os nad ymddangosai un o’r ffyrdd hyn o weithredu yn briodol, byddai’r gweithiwr achos yn paratoi’r achos ar gyfer ei gyflwyno i sgriniwr iechyd. Yna, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn penderfynu a oedd y dystiolaeth yn codi cwestiwn o nam difrifol posibl ar addasrwydd i ymarfer.
Sgriniwr Meddygol yn Atgyfeirio
Hyd yma, rwyf wedi delio ag achosion a nodwyd ar unwaith yn achosion iechyd posibl gan y GMC. Fodd bynnag, daeth rhai achosion at y sgriniwr iechyd trwy sgriniwr meddygol. Os, er enghraifft, cafwyd meddyg yn euog o drosedd, roedd yn ofynnol yn ôl Gorchymyn Cyngor Rheolau Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol a Phwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (Gweithdrefn) 1988 fel a ddiwygiwyd (Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988) y dylid atgyfeirio’r gollfarn (ac eithrio collfarn moduro ddibwys) at sgriniwr meddygol a benodwyd i ddelio ag achosion ymddygiad. Gallai fod ‘elfen iechyd’ i gollfarn o’r fath. Mewn achos lle na fu unrhyw gollfarn, ond lle’r oedd cyhuddiad o gamymddwyn, efallai na sylweddolwyd ar unwaith fod yna elfen iechyd, neu y gallai fod elfen iechyd, yn yr achos. Gallai fod nifer o elfennau i’r achos hwn, ac iechyd yn un ohonynt yn unig. Yn yr holl amgylchiadau hynny, byddai aelodau o staff y GMC yn atgyfeirio’r achos yn gyntaf at y sgriniwr meddygol, a fyddai’n penderfynu wedyn sut y dylid mynd i’r afael â’r achos.
Yn ôl Rheol 7 Rheolau Ymddygiad Proffesiynol 1988, roedd gan y sgriniwr meddygol ddau opsiwn ar gyfer delio ag achos lle ymddangosai iddo/iddi y gallai cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol meddyg fod yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Yr opsiwn cyntaf oedd cyfarwyddo’r staff i roi gwybod i’r meddyg am safbwynt y sgriniwr meddygol am y nam posibl ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn sgil salwch ac i wahodd y meddyg i roi tystiolaeth feddygol i’r Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol ei hystyried. Dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai achos o’r fath, yn ymarferol, yn cael ei atgyfeirio at y sgriniwr iechyd, a fyddai’n trefnu i’r meddyg gael archwiliad gan archwilwyr meddygol o restr y GMC. (Byddaf yn cyfeirio at rôl a swyddogaeth archwilwyr meddygol o’r fath yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon). Byddai wedyn yn agored i’r PPC, ar ôl ystyried y dystiolaeth feddygol a chael cyngor y sgriniwr iechyd, atgyfeirio’r achos at y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) ar gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu, neu at y sgriniwr iechyd ar gyfer gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol neu at y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC).
Yr ail opsiwn a oedd gan y sgriniwr meddygol oedd ailgyfeirio’r achos at y sgriniwr iechyd ar gyfer gweithredu dan Reolau Iechyd 1987 fel dewis arall i atgyfeirio’r achos at y PPC. Dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud pan ymddangosai’n well gan y sgriniwr meddygol y dylid gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd, yn hytrach na’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Yn ôl Arweiniad 1999, gallai sgriniwr meddygol atgyfeirio achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol heb gytundeb sgriniwr lleyg, ar yr amod nad oes unrhyw gwestiwn o gamymddwyn proffesiynol difrifol (SPM) yn codi. Os byddai cwestiwn o SPM yn codi ond bod y sgriniwr meddygol yn credu y dylid trosglwyddo’r achos serch hynny i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd er lles y cyhoedd, gellid gwneud hyn, ond dim ond â chytundeb sgriniwr lleyg. Nid oedd unrhyw ofyniad i’r sgriniwr lleyg gytuno mewn achos collfarn.
Dywedodd Dr Mann mai ‘ychydig iawn’ o achosion yn unig a gyrhaeddai’r sgriniwr iechyd trwy’r sgriniwr meddygol. Dywedodd y byddai weithiau, yn ogystal â chael atgyfeiriadau ffurfiol, yn cael ceisiadau anffurfiol am gyngor gan sgrinwyr meddygol ynghylch a allai iechyd fod yn amharu’n ddifrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer ac a fyddai’n briodol cael adroddiad meddygol cyn atgyfeirio achos at y PPC.
Y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol yn Atgyfeirio
Fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 20, roedd yn gyffredin i sgriniwr iechyd fod yn bresennol mewn cyfarfodydd PPC lle ystyriwyd achosion ymddygiad gydag elfen iechyd bosibl. Fel arfer, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn cynghori a ymddangosai’n briodol rhoi archwiliad meddygol i feddyg. Os cynghorai ef/hi ei bod yn briodol, ac os penderfynai’r PPC ddilyn y llwybr hwnnw, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn trefnu gwahodd y meddyg i gael archwiliad meddygol a byddai’r PPC yn gohirio ystyried yr achos at y diben hwnnw. Cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn cytuno, byddai’r archwiliad yn digwydd ac, os yn briodol, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Os cytunai’r meddyg i wneud hyn, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn adrodd yn ôl i’r PPC, a fyddai wedyn yn cau’r achos dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Byddai atgyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn digwydd yn ffurfiol pan fyddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i’r ymrwymiadau. Pe na fyddai meddyg yn cydweithredu â’r archwiliad, neu pe byddai’n gwrthod cytuno i’r ymrwymiadau, byddai’r achos yn dychwelyd at y PPC a fyddai wedyn yn ystyried pa gamau pellach oedd yn angenrheidiol. Efallai byddai’r PPC wedyn yn atgyfeirio’r achos at y PCC neu at y HC.
Euogfarnau ar gyfer Troseddau Yfed a Gyrru
Tan 1995, nid oedd y PPC yn mynnu yn rheolaidd y dylai meddygon a gafwyd yn euog o droseddau yfed a gyrru gael archwiliad meddygol gyda’r bwriad o ddarganfod a oedd eu collfarnau yn ganlyniad bod yn gaeth i alcohol. Yn hytrach, byddai’n mynnu bod y sgriniwr iechyd yn trefnu archwiliad meddygol dim ond mewn achosion lle’r oedd lefel alcohol y meddyg o leiaf dau a hanner gwaith yn fwy na’r cyfyngiad cyfreithiol neu lle’r oedd ganddo/ganddi gollfarn yfed a gyrru flaenorol. Erbyn 1995, fodd bynnag, roedd yna bryder y gallai fod achosion nad oedd yn bodloni’r naill faen prawf ond lle y gallai’r meddyg serch hynny fod yn dioddef o broblem iechyd a fyddai’n elwa ar ymyrraeth gynnar. O ganlyniad, o’r adeg honno, gohiriodd y PPC achosion yr holl feddygon y’u cafwyd yn euog o drosedd yfed a gyrru fel y gellid eu harchwilio’n feddygol. Datgelodd ganlyniadau’r archwiliadau hynny fod rhai meddygon a gafwyd yn euog o un drosedd yfed a gyrru yn unig ac yr oedd eu lefelau alcohol yn llai na dau a hanner gwaith y cyfyngiad cyfreithiol, serch hynny, yn dioddef o gyflwr a amharai’n ddifrifol.
Ym 1998, bu newid gweithdrefn lle byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn trefnu archwiliad meddygol cyn i’r PPC ystyried yr achos. Mae’n ymddangos yn debygol, os oedd yn amlwg o’r adroddiad fod gan y meddyg broblem iechyd, y byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn gwahodd y meddyg i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Os nad oedd y sefyllfa’n glir, neu os nad oedd y meddyg yn fodlon rhoi ymrwymiadau, byddai’r achos yn cael ei atgyfeirio’n ôl at y PPC ar gyfer penderfyniad.
Dywedodd Dr Mann y canfyddir bod mwyafrif y meddygon y cânt eu dyfarnu’n euog o droseddau yfed a gyrru yn addas i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Fodd bynnag, canfyddwyd bod gan tua un o bob tri broblem iechyd. Rhoddwyd rhai o’r rhain dan oruchwyliaeth yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Pŵer y Sgriniwr Iechyd i Ymchwilio
Yn ôl rheol 6(3) Rheolau Iechyd 1987, ar ôl atgyfeirio achos ato/ati, roedd gan y sgriniwr iechyd y pŵer i gynnal ymchwiliadau o’r fath yn y modd y gwelai ef/hi yn addas. Dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai weithiau’n awgrymu pobl y gallai’r staff gysylltu â nhw i gael gwybodaeth. Gallai hyd yn oed awgrymu ysgrifennu at y meddyg ei hun ar yr adeg honno.
Y Sgriniwr Iechyd yn Ystyried Achos
Digonolrwydd y Dystiolaeth
Dywedodd Dr Mann wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r cwestiwn cyntaf yr oedd rhaid i sgriniwr iechyd ei ystyried oedd a oedd digon o dystiolaeth y gallai fod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Pwysleisiodd fod rhaid cael digon o dystiolaeth uniongyrchol.
Weithiau, nid oedd y person (meddyg fel arfer) a oedd wedi adrodd y pryder i’r GMC yn y lle cyntaf yn fodlon rhoi tystiolaeth y gallai’r GMC weithredu ar ei sail. Rhaid oedd rhoi’r wybodaeth berthnasol ar bapur. Yn ogystal, tan fis Tachwedd 2002, mewn achos lle cafwyd gwybodaeth am iechyd meddyg gan unigolyn preifat, ni fyddai’r wybodaeth honno’n cael ei chyflwyno i’r sgriniwr iechyd tan y darparwyd, ac oni bai y darparwyd, datganiad statudol (h.y. datganiad yn cadarnhau gwirionedd y wybodaeth, wedi’i dyngu o flaen cyfreithiwr neu aelod o rai dosbarthiadau cyfyngedig eraill o berson). Roedd y rheol yn berthnasol hyd yn oed pan ddaeth y wybodaeth o gydweithiwr meddyg neu’r meddyg a oedd yn ei drin/ei thrin. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, fel yr esboniais yn flaenorol, gwaredwyd y gofyniad ar gyfer datganiad statudol. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod y gofyniad hwn wedi achosi problemau a’i fod yn ‘eithaf trafferthus’ i rai aelodau o’r cyhoedd. Dywedodd ei bod yn ‘falch iawn’ ei fod wedi’i waredu.
Trwy gydol y 1980au a dechrau’r 1990au, mynegwyd pryder sylweddol yn Adroddiadau Blynyddol y sgriniwr iechyd am y ffaith nad oedd rhai meddygon yn barod i gydweithio trwy ddarparu’r wybodaeth yr oedd y GMC ei hangen ar y ffurf gywir. Mae’n debyg mai rhan o’r broblem oedd y gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol. Roedd amharodrwydd y GMC i wneud ei archwiliadau ei hun ac i gasglu tystiolaeth ei hun hefyd yn ffactor heb amheuaeth. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg hefyd y bu teimlad ar ran rhai meddygon eu bod wedi ‘gwneud eu rhan’ ar ôl iddynt fynegi eu pryderon i’r GMC, ac nad oedd unrhyw rwymedigaeth iddynt wneud mwy. Yn Adroddiad Blynyddol 1991 y sgriniwr iechyd, gwelwyd bai ar yr agwedd hon fel
‘methiant o ran dyletswydd i gleifion ac i’r meddyg sâl’
. Dros y blynyddoedd, cafodd nifer sylweddol o achosion eu cau oherwydd diffyg tystiolaeth.
Datgelodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 y caewyd 10% o’r 771 achos a archwiliwyd gan dîm King’s College, rhwng 1981 a 1996, gan yr ystyriai’r GMC nad oedd ganddynt ddigon o dystiolaeth i warantu gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau iechyd. Ymhlith enghreifftiau yr oedd achosion lle nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol (yn hytrach na thystiolaeth achlust) fod diogelwch y claf yn cael ei gyfaddawdu neu lle’r oedd gwybodaeth uniongyrchol ar gael, ond nid ar y ffurf gywir. Dangosodd yr Adroddiad y caewyd canran sylweddol is o achosion am y rheswm hwn yn ystod y cyfnod o 1989 i 1996 nag yng nghyfnod cynharach 1980 i 1988; caewyd 14% yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng 1980 a 1988, o gymharu â 7% yn y cyfnod diweddarach.
Nododd dîm King’s College fod un o bob tri achos a gaewyd oherwydd tystiolaeth annigonol, ar y cyfan, wedi dychwelyd yn ddilynol at y GMC gydag ail atgyfeiriad yn gysylltiedig ag iechyd. Roedd y ffigur ar gyfer achosion o’r fath o’r cyfnod 1989 i 1986 yn 40% bron.
Argymhellodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 y dylai’r GMC, ar ôl i rywun gysylltu ynghylch iechyd meddyg, fod yn fwy rhagweithiol wrth ddilyn y wybodaeth (yn rheolaidd os yn angenrheidiol) tan ei fod yn sicr nad oedd y meddyg yn risg i gleifion. Awgrymodd yr Adroddiad y gellid anfon gweithwyr achos allan i siarad â chyfeirwyr posibl am eu pryderon. Argymhellodd hefyd y dylai fod mwy o gymorth a chyngor ar gael i gyfeirwyr posibl.
O gynnwys Arweiniad 1999, mae’n debyg y cymerodd y GMC rai camau i weithredu’r argymhellion hynny. Mae’n debyg y rhoddwyd cyngor i gyfeirwyr ynglŷn â gwneud datganiad statudol. Weithiau, gallai’r GMC drefnu i gydweithwyr meddyg a ddymunai roi gwybodaeth i’r GMC am iechyd y meddyg osgoi’r angen am ddatganiad statudol trwy sianelu eu hadroddiadau trwy awdurdod ysbyty, PCO neu LMC. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd hysbyswyr eisiau gwneud hyn bob amser ac nid oedd y sefydliadau perthnasol bob amser yn fodlon cynorthwyo. Mewn rhai achosion, gellid trefnu atgyfeirio trwy gyfreithwyr y GMC neu roi cymorth ariannol i unigolyn preifat, i alluogi iddo/iddi wneud datganiad statudol. Datblygwyd system o olrhain ymholiadau am atgyfeirio.
Mae’r ystadegau FTP blynyddol yn datgelu bod canran yr achosion a gaewyd ar sail tystiolaeth annigonol, o 1996, yn amrywio’n helaeth. Er enghraifft, ym 1999, mae’r ystadegau’n dangos mai dim ond un o’r 157 achos iechyd a atgyfeiriwyd a gaewyd am y rheswm hwn. Fodd bynnag, yn 2001, y ffigur oedd 30 allan o 181 achos. Y ffigyrau ar gyfer 2002 a 2003 oedd 13 (allan o 202 achos) a chwech (allan o 143 achos) yn y drefn honno. Nid yw’n hysbys faint o’r achosion hyn a ddilynwyd gan atgyfeiriad pellach yn gysylltiedig ag iechyd yn hwyrach neu yn y dyfodol.
Ym Mhenodau 18, 19, 20 a 21, mewn cysylltiad â’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, trafodais ganlyniadau amharodrwydd y GMC i gasglu tystiolaeth neu archwilio cwynion yn rhagweithiol tan gyfnod hwyr iawn yn y broses ddisgyblu. Mynegais y farn bod yr amharodrwydd hwn wedi arwain, mae’n siŵr, at golli rhai achosion i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Mae’n debyg, ar adegau ac i ryw raddau, bod problem debyg wedi effeithio ar y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Cefais yr argraff o dystiolaeth Dr Mann y byddai’n cychwyn archwiliad ar ôl i achos gael ei atgyfeirio ati. Ond mae’n ddigon posibl y caewyd achosion, ar adegau, oherwydd diffyg tystiolaeth uniongyrchol cyn iddynt gyrraedd y sgriniwr iechyd. Mae’n debyg mai’r gofyniad am ddatganiad statudol oedd achos y broblem mewn rhai achosion. Y cyfiawnhad a nodwyd am fynnu datganiad statudol yn y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad oedd amddiffyn meddygon rhag cael eu poenydio gan gwynion di-sail neu faleisus. Rwy’n ei chael yn anodd dychmygu pam yr ystyrir bod mesurau o’r fath yn rhai angenrheidiol yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd, a gynlluniwyd i amddiffyn y cyhoedd ac i gynorthwyo’r meddyg heb ei gosbi/ei chosbi. Ond cadwyd y gofyniad tan 2002.
Difrifoldeb y Nam
Ystyriaeth arall ar gyfer y sgriniwr oedd a oedd y wybodaeth a gafwyd yn codi cwestiwn nam ‘difrifol’, yn hytrach na ryw salwch ysgafn. Dangosodd rai o’r achosion a ystyriwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad y gallai materion eithaf anodd godi pan yr oedd rhaid i’r sgrinwyr iechyd benderfynu ‘derbyn’ achos a chyfarwyddo archwiliad meddygol, neu ei gau. Nid yw’n ymddangos y bu unrhyw arweiniad ar y materion hyn erioed. Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd ots am hyn i bob tebyg, gan fod un o ddau sgriniwr iechyd, a oedd yn brofiadol iawn, yn gwneud penderfyniadau o’r fath. Fodd bynnag, ar gyfer y dyfodol, mae’n debyg i mi y bydd angen rhywfaint o arweiniad a meini prawf.
Digonolrwydd Unrhyw Weithredu Lleol
Roedd Rheol 6(4) Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn datgan y dylai’r sgriniwr iechyd ddechrau’r camau cychwynnol yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd oni bai yr ymddangosai iddo/iddi
. Dywedodd Dr Mann, wrth ystyried a oedd
i fater fynd ymhellach, roedd rhaid iddi ystyried a oedd y broblem wedi’i datrys gan weithredu lleol, neu a allai gael ei datrys fel hyn. Byddai tystiolaeth o unrhyw risg gwirioneddol neu bosibl i gleifion yn ystyriaeth berthnasol. Pe byddai problemau meddyg yn cael eu trin yn lleol, byddai’n ystyried a oedd y meddyg yn dangos mewnwelediad, a oedd ef/hi yn derbyn cyngor am driniaeth ac am ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ac a oedd ef/hi yn cael triniaeth a moddion priodol. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod maint ei bractis/ei phractis yn berthnasol yn achos meddyg teulu. Mewn practis grŵp, byddai’n haws adnabod problem a gwneud trefniadau pe byddai’r meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer. Dywedodd Dr Mann yr hoffai feddwl, mewn byd delfrydol, y byddai mesurau lleol fel arfer yn ddigon ar gyfer meddyg mewn cyflogaeth gadarn. Fodd bynnag, roedd yna broblemau gyda meddygon a symudai o gwmpas. Yn aml, nid oedd unrhyw le lle gellid rheoli eu problemau yn gyson. Byddai’r GMC fel arfer yn gwahodd meddyg o’r fath i gael archwiliad meddygol. Roedd y GMC mewn gwell sefyllfa na sefydliad lleol i ddelio â meddygon peripatetig gan y gallai drefnu goruchwyliaeth ledled y wlad ac atgyfeirio meddyg at y HC pe na fyddai ef/hi yn cadw mewn cysylltiad â’i oruchwyliwr/ei goruchwyliwr enwebedig.
Datgelodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 y caewyd 7% o achosion a atgyfeiriwyd at y sgriniwr iechyd, rhwng 1980 a 1996, ar y sail bod mesurau lleol yn eu rheoli’n ddigonol. Arweiniodd 28% o’r achosion hynny at atgyfeiriad dilynol yn gysylltiedig ag iechyd. Roedd llawer llai o ail atgyfeiriadau (15% o gymharu â 46%) ymhlith yr achosion a gaewyd rhwng 1989 a 1996 nag ymhlith y rheiny a gaewyd rhwng 1980 a 1988. Fodd bynnag, nododd yr Adroddiad y bu llai o amser, erbyn 1999, ar gyfer ailgydio mewn achosion a gaewyd yn fwy diweddar.
Argymhellodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 y dylid gosod meini prawf a chanllawiau clir i gynorthwyo sgrinwyr iechyd wrth asesu pryd y rheolir achos yn ddigonol gan fesurau lleol a phryd y mae angen ymyrraeth y GMC. Pe byddai achos yn parhau i gael ei reoli’n lleol, awgrymwyd bod angen system o fonitro cyfnodol gan y GMC. Adroddiad Gwerthusiad 1999 oedd yr ail achlysur i gorff allanol alw ar y GMC i osod meini prawf a chanllawiau clir i gynorthwyo pobl a wnâi benderfyniadau. Soniais eisoes yn y Penodau sy’n delio â gweithdrefnau ymddygiad fod yr Athro Isobel Allen wedi galw am osod safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon clir at ddefnydd penderfynwyr wrth ddelio ag achosion ymddygiad. Roedd Arweiniad 1999 a luniwyd gan y GMC yn cynnwys rhai achosion sampl i ddangos y math o broblem y gellid ei rheoli’n lleol a’r math o achos y dylid ei atgyfeirio at y GMC. Er bod y GMC yn honni i Arweiniad 1999 osod meini prawf, nid yw hyn yn amlwg imi. Roedd yr achosion sampl yn ddefnyddiol, heb amheuaeth, ond ni wnaethant osod meini prawf at ddefnydd y sgrinwyr iechyd.
Ar ôl cael Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999, datblygodd Adran Iechyd y GMC system lle byddai’n dilyn achos meddyg yr oedd yn cael ei drin yn lleol i sicrhau bod popeth yn iawn. Gallai hyn ddigwydd ar ôl dau, pedwar neu chwe mis, gan ddibynnu ar ddifrifoldeb yr achos a pha mor gadarn y tybiwyd bod y gweithdrefnau lleol. Weithiau, byddai proses olrhain rheolaidd dros gyfnod hir.
Atgyfeirio at Sgriniwr Meddygol neu Ymgynghoriad â Sgriniwr Meddygol
Dywedodd Dr Mann, pe byddai agwedd ymddygiad neu berfformiad ar achos yr atgyfeiriwyd ati’n uniongyrchol fel sgriniwr iechyd, y byddai’n atgyfeirio’r achos at sgriniwr meddygol. Ar yr un pryd, gallai ddechrau’r gweithdrefnau iechyd trwy ofyn i’r staff ysgrifennu at y meddyg. Mewn rhai achosion, byddai’r sgrinwyr iechyd a’r sgrinwyr meddygol yn trafod (naill ai wyneb yn wyneb neu ar bapur) y ffordd orau i drin achos.
Gweithredu Dros Dro
Ar ôl sefydlu’r IOC ym mis Awst 2000, roedd hefyd yn bosibl i’r sgriniwr atgyfeirio meddyg at y Pwyllgor hwnnw, mewn achos priodol. Cyn yr adeg honno, roedd gan y sgriniwr iechyd bŵer i atgyfeirio achos at y PPC i ystyried llunio gorchymyn dros dro, ond dim ond lle gwnaed penderfyniad eisoes i atgyfeirio’r achos at y HC a lle credai’r sgriniwr iechyd y gall fod yn ddymunol gwneud gorchymyn dros dro wrth aros i’r HC ystyried yr achos. Os atgyfeiriwyd yr achos at y PPC at ddiben gorchymyn dros dro, nid oedd modd i’r PPC atgyfeirio’r meddyg at y PCC, dim ond at y HC.
Dywedodd Dr Mann y bu’n ‘ddiolchgar iawn’ am sefydlu’r IOC. Cyn ei sefydlu, weithiau nid oedd unrhyw beth y gallai wneud am feddygon a oedd yn ddifrifol sâl, fel arfer ag anhwylderau seicotig, ond a oedd yn gweithio o hyd. Yn ôl pob tebyg, roedd y rhain yn achosion lle nad oedd yn briodol atgyfeirio’r meddyg at y HC oherwydd na wrthodwyd ef/hi eto rhag cydweithredu â’r gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol. Rwyf wedi sylwi, mewn cysylltiad â’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, ei bod yn rhyfeddol na gymerodd y GMC unrhyw gamau, tan 2000, i gael pwerau cynhwysfawr i wneud gorchmynion dros dro er mwyn amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Rhaid y bu llawer achos lle y byddai’r ac y dylai’r pŵer fod wedi’i ddefnyddio. Ond eto nid yw’n debyg y cydnabuwyd yr angen amdano tan gydnabuwyd na allai’r GMC wneud unrhyw beth i atal Shipman rhag bod yn feddyg er ei fod dan archwiliad am lofruddio cleifion. O dystiolaeth Dr Mann, mae’n debyg yr oedd angen hefyd am bŵer hyblyg i wneud gorchmynion dros dro mewn achosion iechyd. Byddai rhywun yn tybio y byddai’r GMC wedi cydnabod y
hwn yn ei bwerau cyn y gwnaeth.
Y Gwahoddiad i Gael Archwiliad Meddygol
Os penderfynai’r sgriniwr iechyd y dylai achos fynd yn ei flaen, roedd yna’n ofynnol iddo/iddi gyfarwyddo staff y GMC i ysgrifennu at y meddyg, gan ei hysbysu bod y GMC wedi cael gwybodaeth yr ymddangosai ei bod yn codi cwestiwn a oedd nam difrifol ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ac y nodai natur y nam honedig hwn. Dywedodd Dr Mann ei bod weithiau’n amhosib nodi’r nam yr adeg honno a bod angen defnyddio rhyw derm disgrifio cyffredinol fel ‘cam-drin sylweddau’. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i gael archwiliad gan o leiaf dau archwiliwr meddygol, i’w dewis gan y sgriniwr iechyd, ac i gytuno y dylai’r archwilwyr ddarparu adroddiadau ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Roedd Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn caniatáu 14 diwrnod i’r meddyg ymateb i’r gwahoddiad.
Archwilwyr Meddygol a Ddewiswyd gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Dewiswyd archwilwyr meddygol gan y sgriniwr iechyd o restri o feddygon a enwebwyd at y diben gan sefydliadau proffesiynol, gan gynnwys y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol (Coleg Brenhinol y Seiciatryddion yn bennaf) a phwyllgorau amrywiol Cymdeithas Feddygol Prydain. Roeddent fel arfer mewn swyddi sylweddol uwch. Seiciatreg oedd yr arbenigedd mwyaf cyffredin a oedd gan yr archwilwyr meddygol hyn. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod y sgrinwyr iechyd yn ymdrechu’n fawr iawn i nodi archwilwyr a oedd yn briodol ar gyfer y cyflwr penodol a ddioddefai’r meddyg. Byddai ymgynghorwyr seiciatryddion yn delio ag achosion dibyniaeth ar alcohol a chyffuriau, ac roeddent fel arfer yn arbenigwyr mewn cam-drin sylweddau. Byddai archwiliadau yn digwydd yn ardal y meddyg pan yn bosibl.
Archwilwyr Meddygol a Enwebwyd gan y Meddyg
Dan y weithdrefn wreiddiol a osodwyd yn rheol 6(3)(c) Rheolau Iechyd 1980, cafodd y meddyg wybod hefyd fod hawl ganddo/ganddi enwebu meddygon eraill i’w archwilio/ei harchwilio ac i adrodd i’r sgriniwr iechyd ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddai’r adroddiadau hyn yn cael eu paratoi ar draul y GMC. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, newidiwyd y rheol i waredu hawl y meddyg i enwebu meddygon eraill i’w archwilio/ei harchwilio. Dywedodd Dr Mann na ymarferwyd yr hawl i unrhyw raddau helaeth. Nid oedd yn siŵr pam y cafodd ei waredu. Dywedodd ei bod, mewn gwirionedd, yn bosibl o hyd i feddyg enwebu archwiliwr meddygol os dymunai ef/hi wneud hynny. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r GMC yn talu am yr adroddiad.
Gwybodaeth Arall a Gyflwynwyd gan y Meddyg
Yn ogystal, ar yr un pryd ag y gwahoddwyd ef/hi i gael archwiliad meddygol, gwahoddwyd i’r meddyg roi unrhyw ymrwymiadau neu dystiolaeth arall y gallai ef/hi ddymuno eu cynnig ynghylch ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. O fis Tachwedd 2002, amododd y Rheolau yn benodol y gallai
‘tystiolaeth arall’
o’r fath gynnwys tystiolaeth feddygol. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed cyn yr adeg honno, nid oedd yn anarferol i’r meddyg gyflwyno tystiolaeth feddygol i’r GMC yr adeg hon yn y broses neu yn gynharach eto, pe byddai’r meddyg yn ymwybodol adeg ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio at y GMC ei fod/ei bod wedi ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio. Yn achos collfarn, gallai’r dystiolaeth feddygol a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg gynnwys adroddiadau a baratowyd ar gyfer y gwrandawiad llys blaenorol. Fel arall, gallai gynnwys adroddiad gan seiciatrydd sy’n ei drin/ei thrin, neu gan feddyg teulu’r meddyg. Amcangyfrifodd Dr Mann fod meddygon yn darparu tystiolaeth feddygol eu hunain mewn tua chwarter o achosion. Dywedodd fod y sgrinwyr iechyd yn ystyried tystiolaeth o’r fath. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad, oni bai bod tystiolaeth glir nad oedd nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac nad oedd y cleifion mewn perygl, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i gael archwiliad gan archwilwyr a ddewiswyd gan y GMC, hyd yn oed pe bai ef/hi wedi cyflwyno tystiolaeth feddygol ei hun. Byddai’r archwilwyr a ddewiswyd gan y GMC yn gyfarwydd â gofynion y GMC ar gyfer cynnwys adroddiad archwiliad a byddent hefyd yn darparu asesiadau gwrthrychol. Dywedodd y bu achlysuron lle’r oedd meddyg wedi cyflwyno adroddiad gan feddyg a oedd ar restr y GMC o archwilwyr meddygol a lle’r oedd y GMC wedi derbyn y dystiolaeth honno a gweithredu ar ei sail. Yn gyffredinol, fodd bynnag, byddai’r GMC eisiau cael dau adroddiad annibynnol.
Adroddiadau ar Archwiliadau Meddygol Blaenorol
Gall y wybodaeth a gawsai’r GMC yn wreiddiol, gan roi gwybod iddo am bryderon ynghylch iechyd meddyg, gynnwys adroddiadau wedi’u hysgrifennu gan feddygon a archwiliodd y meddyg yn ddiweddar. Er enghraifft, gallai’r meddyg fod wedi cael archwiliad meddygol a drefnwyd gan ei gyflogwyr/ei chyflogwyr, a allai fod wedi anfon yr adroddiad ymlaen at y GMC.
Roedd Rheol 6(4)(b)(ii) Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi, yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, a phe ymddangosai i’r sgriniwr iechyd fod yr adroddiadau hynny yn rhoi digon o dystiolaeth feddygol y gallai fod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol, y dylai’r sgriniwr iechyd gyfarwyddo’r staff i roi gwybod i’r meddyg am y ffaith honno. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, byddai gwahoddiad i’r meddyg gael archwiliad meddygol yn cael ei ddosbarthu. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, roedd yn bosibl o hyd i’r meddyg, yn yr amgylchiadau hyn, enwebu ei feddygon/ei meddygon dewisedig i archwilio ef/hi ac i baratoi adroddiadau ar draul y GMC, yn ogystal â’r rheiny a gyflwynwyd gan y person neu’r corff a atgyfeiriodd yr achos yn y lle cyntaf.
Datgelu Gwybodaeth i’r Meddyg
Roedd Rheol 6(5) Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi y gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd gyfarwyddo’r staff i anfon at y meddyg, ar yr un pryd â hysbysiad y derbyniwyd y wybodaeth am ei iechyd/ei hiechyd, grynodeb o’r wybodaeth honno, ynghyd â chopïau o unrhyw adroddiadau gan feddygon a oedd wedi archwilio’r meddyg yn ddiweddar. Gwnaed hyn fel mater o arfer. Os ystyriai’r sgriniwr iechyd fod yna unrhyw ddeunydd yn yr adroddiadau nad oedd yn berthnasol i addasrwydd cyfredol y meddyg i ymarfer, neu na fyddai er lles y meddyg i’w weld, galluogai’r Rheolau eithrio deunydd o’r dogfennau a anfonwyd at y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, ni ellid cyflwyno unrhyw ddeunydd a eithriwyd yn y modd hwnnw i’r PPC neu’r HC yn ddilynol.
Dywedodd Dr Mann na allai gofio achlysur pan eithriwyd tystiolaeth dan y ddarpariaeth hon. Credai fod yna mwy o onestrwydd bellach ynghylch datgelu gwybodaeth i gleifion am eu cyflwr nag y bu pan ddrafftiwyd y Rheolau yn wreiddiol.
Rhybuddio’r Meddyg am Ganlyniadau Gwrthod Cael Archwiliad
Cyflwynodd Reol 6(4)(e) Rheolau Iechyd 1987 ofyniad newydd, sef y dylai meddyg gael gwybod y gellid atgyfeirio ei achos/ei hachos at y HC, petai ef/hi yn gwrthod cael archwiliad, neu petai ef/hi yn methu cael archwiliad meddygol ar ôl cytuno, neu pe na fyddai ef/hi yn ateb ymhen 28 diwrnod i ohebiaeth y GMC. Ychwanegwyd y ddarpariaeth hon i bob tebyg gyda’r bwriad o roi anogaeth ychwanegol i’r meddyg i roi ymateb cadarnhaol ac amserol i’r gwahoddiad i gael archwiliad meddygol.
Datgelu i Gyflogwr y Meddyg neu Sefydliad Gofal Sylfaenol
Yn ôl adran 35(B) Deddf 1983, a ychwanegwyd ym mis Awst 2000, roedd yn ofynnol i’r GMC ddatgelu i unrhyw berson yn y DU a gyflogai feddyg i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol, neu yr oedd ganddi/ganddo drefniant ag ef i wneud hynny, y ffaith bod y meddyg dan archwiliad i bennu a oedd nam difrifol ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd ei gyflwr/ei chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Rhaid oedd gwneud y datgeliad cyn gynted ag yr oedd yn rhesymol ymarferol ar ôl gwahodd y meddyg i gytuno i gael archwiliad meddygol neu ar ôl rhoi gwybod i’r meddyg yr ymddangosai adroddiadau meddygol a dderbyniwyd eisoes gan y GMC fel petaent yn darparu tystiolaeth y gallai fod nam difrifol ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Datgelir felly i PCO meddyg teulu. Cyn bodolaeth y ddyletswydd i ddatgelu, roedd yn bosibl na fyddai cyflogwr neu PCO meddyg (yn enwedig yr ail) yn ymwybodol bod meddyg yn cael ei drin yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Nid yw’n glir i mi a ddylid fod wedi gwneud datgeliad hefyd, yn ôl yr arfer, i aelodau eraill ei bractis/ei phractis. Mewn gwirionedd, mae’n ymddangos i mi y gallai partneriaid meddyg teulu yn wir fod yn bobl y mae gan y meddyg drefniant gyda hwy i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai cytundeb partneriaeth practis cyffredinol wedi dod o fewn y ddarpariaeth eithaf eang honno. Beth bynnag, byddai wedi bod gan y GMC y pŵer i wneud datganiad i aelodau’r practis dan adran 35(B)2 ar sail lles y cyhoedd. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg nad yw’r GMC, fel rheol, yn rhoi gwybod i’r partneriaid fod meddyg teulu dan archwiliad. Yn ymarferol, byddai partner neu gyflogwr neu PCO yn aml wedi atgyfeirio’r achos at y GMC ac felly’n hollol ymwybodol o’r sefyllfa. Fodd bynnag, efallai na fyddent yn ymwybodol o achos o atgyfeirio gan aelod o’r cyhoedd, cydweithiwr meddyg, neu feddyg sy’n ei drin.
Nododd Dr Mann y bu’r ddyletswydd i ddatgelu yn welliant sylweddol cyn belled ag y bo cyflogwyr a PCOs dan sylw. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd y byddai’n well ganddi petai’r cyswllt ar lefel leol (h.y. meddyg yn rhoi gwybod i’w gyflogwyr/ei chyflogwyr neu PCO am broblem iechyd), yn hytrach na’r GMC yn ‘anfon y wybodaeth i lawr o uchder’. Credai mai’r ‘ffordd orau o sicrhau bod meddygon yn parhau’n addas i ymarfer yw cael dealltwriaeth o’u hanghenion fel eu bod yntau felly yn onest gyda’u cyflogwr’.
Cytunaf fod trafod y mater yn agored rhwng meddyg a’i gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr neu PCO yn llawer gwell na’r cyflogwr neu PCO yn cael gwybod am broblemau’r meddyg gan drydydd parti. Serch hynny, mewn rhai achosion, bydd natur salwch meddyg - ynghyd â phryderon ynghylch ei effeithiau posibl ar ei iechyd/ei hiechyd - yn anochel yn golygu na fydd hyn yn digwydd. Mae datgeliad gan y GMC yn golygu o leiaf y gall cyflogwyr a PCOs fod yn ymwybodol o’r broblem ar gyfnod cynnar yng ngweithrediadau’r GMC ac y gallant gymryd pa bynnag gamau y tybiant eu bod yn angenrheidiol i gefnogi’r meddyg ac i ddiogelu cleifion. Mae’n ymddangos i mi ei bod yn ddymunol iawn hefyd y dylai aelodau eraill o bractis meddyg teulu fod yn hollol ymwybodol o unrhyw adroddiad o broblemau iechyd a wneir i’r GMC.
Y Trefniadau ar gyfer Archwiliad Meddygol
Roedd Rheol 7 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi y byddai’r Cofrestrydd, pe byddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i gael archwiliad gan archwilwyr meddygol a enwebir gan y GMC (sef staff y GMC i bob pwrpas), yn gwneud trefniadau i gynnal yr archwiliadau. Byddai’r wybodaeth a gawsai’r GMC yn cael ei hanfon at yr archwilwyr meddygol a byddai gofyn iddynt adrodd, yn gyntaf, ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, naill ai’n gyffredinol neu ar sail gyfyngedig, ac, yn ail, ar eu hargymhellion, os o gwbl, ynghylch rheoli ei achos/ei hachos. Er y byddai’r GMC yn gyfrifol am drefnu’r archwiliad meddygol i bob pwrpas, rhaid oedd i’r meddyg a’r archwiliwr meddygol gytuno ar fanylion ymarferol fel amser a lle. Gallai problemau godi yr adeg hon pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn cydweithio neu’n mynychu apwyntiadau.
Wrth baratoi eu hadroddiadau, gofynnwyd i’r archwilwyr meddygol gysylltu â meddyg teulu’r meddyg ac unrhyw feddyg arall sy’n ei drin/ei thrin. Cawsant eu hannog i gyfweld â hysbyswr arall, fel gŵr neu wraig y meddyg, neu aelod o’i deulu neu ffrind iddo. Nid oedd hyn bob amser yn bosibl; gall fod nad oedd unrhyw un ar gael, neu na fyddai’r meddyg yn caniatáu cyfweliad o’r fath. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod yr archwiliad i raddau helaeth yn dilyn patrwm archwiliad meddyg o glaf newydd. Fodd bynnag, atgyfeiriwyd sylw’r archwiliwr hefyd at faterion fel y risg i gleifion, addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac a oedd nam difrifol yn bresennol. Mewn achos yn cynnwys cam-drin cyffuriau, byddai un o’r archwilwyr meddygol yn cynnal profion gwrthrychol am bresenoldeb cyffuriau. Byddai’r archwilwyr meddygol yn trafod ymysg ei gilydd i drefnu sut y dylid gwneud hyn a phwy a ddylai wneud hyn. Fel arfer, ni welai’r archwilwyr adroddiadau ei gilydd.
Gweithredu ar y Dystiolaeth Feddygol
Cynnwys yr Adroddiadau Meddygol
Ar ôl eu cwblhau, anfonwyd adroddiadau’r archwiliadau meddygol at y GMC i’w hystyried. Yn ogystal â’r elfennau a gynhwysir fel arfer mewn adroddiad meddygol, byddai’r archwilwyr meddygol hefyd yn nodi eu hargymhellion am faterion megis goruchwyliaeth feddygol, triniaeth a chymorth. Byddant hefyd, mewn achos priodol, yn argymell pa gyfyngiadau y dylid eu gorfodi ar waith y meddyg. Gallant argymell y dylai’r meddyg stopio gweithio am gyfnod.
Pwysleisiodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 yr angen i archwilwyr y GMC gydbwyso lles y meddyg unigol a’r boblogaeth ehangach o gleifion, wrth lunio eu casgliadau am addasrwydd i ymarfer ac wrth wneud eu hargymhellion. Cafodd tîm King’s College yr argraff y gallai’r archwilwyr, weithiau, fod wedi rhoi
‘pwysigrwydd diangen’
ar yr effeithiau ymddangosiadol i’r meddyg. Os oedd yr argraff hon yn wir, mae’n peri gofid, gan mai prif amcan y gweithdrefnau iechyd o reidrwydd yw amddiffyn cleifion.
Datgelu’r Adroddiadau Meddygol i’r Meddyg
Roedd Rheol 8 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn mynnu, pan fyddai adroddiadau unrhyw archwiliadau meddygol ar gael, bod y sgriniwr iechyd yn trefnu anfon copïau at y meddyg dan sylw. Roedd yn bosibl i’r sgriniwr iechyd ddileu o adroddiadau’r archwilwyr meddygol a ddewiswyd gan y GMC unrhyw ddeunydd yr ystyriai ef/hi ei fod yn amherthnasol neu na fyddai er lles y meddyg i’w weld, yn amodol ar y ffaith y byddai’r deunydd wedyn yn cael ei eithrio o ystyriaeth ddilynol gan y PPC, yr HC neu’r IOC. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod y cyfnod hyd at fis Tachwedd 2002, pan yr oedd yn bosibl o hyd i’r meddyg ei hun enwebu meddygon i’w archwilio/ei harchwilio ac i adrodd, ni allai’r sgriniwr iechyd ddileu unrhyw ddeunydd o adroddiadau a baratowyd gan yr archwilwyr a enwebwyd gan y meddyg. Dywedodd Dr Mann, pan gawsai deunydd ei ddileu o adroddiadau archwiliadau meddygol, y byddai’r dileadau ‘bron bob amser’ yn gysylltiedig â gwybodaeth a ddarparwyd i’r archwilwyr meddygol gan drydydd parti.
Dim Nam Difrifol ar Iechyd
Gallai’r archwilwyr meddygol gytuno nad oedd unrhyw nam difrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Digwyddai hyn amlaf mewn achosion lle cafwyd archwiliad meddygol ar ôl cael meddyg yn euog o drosedd yfed a gyrru. Nid oedd yn ganlyniad cyffredin mewn mathau eraill o achosion. Pan ddigwyddai, ni allai’r sgriniwr iechyd gymryd unrhyw gamau pellach a, fel arfer, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau. Yr eithriad oedd pan atgyfeiriwyd achos ar gyfer archwiliad meddygol o’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad neu berfformiad, pan allai’r gweithdrefnau hynny ailddechrau.

---  ---
Lle Cytunai’r Archwilwyr Meddygol fod Meddyg yn Anaddas i Ymarfer neu’n Anaddas i Ymarfer heb Amodau
Canlyniad mwyaf cyffredin archwiliad meddygol fyddai canfod bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, yn amodol ar gyfyngiadau ac amodau a argymhellwyd gan yr archwilwyr meddygol. Roedd Rheol 8 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi, mewn achos lle’r oedd yr holl archwilwyr meddygol o’r un farn nad oedd y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer oni bai ar sail gyfyngedig neu dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol neu’r ddau, y dylai’r sgriniwr iechyd gyfarwyddo’r staff i gael cytundeb y meddyg i gydymffurfio’n wirfoddol â’r argymhellion yn yr adroddiadau ynghylch rheoli ei achos/ei hachos, gan gynnwys unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ei waith/ei gwaith a allai fod wedi’u hargymell. Os na ystyriai’r archwilwyr meddygol fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, hyd yn oed ar sail gyfyngedig, byddai gofyn iddo/iddi roi’r gorau i weithio yn gyfan gwbl.
Roedd yna ddau fath o ymrwymiad. Roedd y math cyntaf yn cynnwys y rheiny yn gysylltiedig â thriniaeth feddygol cyflwr y meddyg. Gallai ymrwymiadau o’r math hwn fod i ymwrthod ag alcohol neu gydymffurfio â’r profion am bresenoldeb alcohol a chyffuriau eraill. Roedd yr ail fath yn gysylltiedig â gwaith y meddyg. Gallai’r rhain gynnwys ymrwymiad i beidio â gweithio o gwbl fel dirprwy feddyg neu ddirprwy neu ar gyfer gwasanaeth dirprwyo, neu hyd yn oed ymrwymiad i beidio â gweithio o gwbl. Wrth ffurfio’r ymrwymiadau, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn cyfyngu ei hun yn fras i gynnwys adroddiadau’r archwilwyr, ond gallai ychwanegu rhai ymrwymiadau eraill fel yn briodol. Roedd telerau’r ymrwymiadau fel arfer yn deillio o restr o ‘ymrwymiadau safonol’ a ddatblygwyd gan y GMC dros amser. Byddent yn cael eu haddasu yn ôl yr angen i weddu i amgylchiadau unigol.
Ni wnaeth Reolau Iechyd 1980 unrhyw ddarpariaeth ffurfiol ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth feddygol meddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. O’r cychwyn cyntaf, fodd bynnag, goruchwyliaeth feddygol oedd un o gydrannau pwysicaf y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ac roedd gofyn i feddygon dderbyn a chydweithio â goruchwyliaeth feddygol. Parhaodd hyn yn ymrwymiad safonol gorfodol. Ymrwymiadau gorfodol eraill oedd cytuno (yn achos cam-drin sylweddau) i gael profion o samplau o anadl, gwaed, troeth neu wallt am bresenoldeb alcohol neu gyffuriau, ac i ganiatáu cyfnewid gwybodaeth rhwng y goruchwyliwr meddygol a rhywun yng ngweithle’r meddyg. Os na fyddai’r meddyg yn fodlon rhoi un o’r ymrwymiadau gorfodol, byddai ei achos/ei hachos yn cael ei atgyfeirio at yr HC. Dywedodd Dr Mann, pe byddai’r meddyg yn gweithio, ei bod yn arferol cynnwys gofyniad y dylai ef/hi gael cymeradwyaeth flaenorol ei oruchwyliwr/ei goruchwyliwr cyn dechrau swydd newydd ac y dylai roi’r gorau i weithio ar unwaith os cynghorir felly. Dywedodd ei bod yn bwysig hefyd sicrhau bod y meddyg wedi’i gofrestru â meddyg teulu a bod y goruchwyliwr meddygol mewn sefyllfa i gyfnewid gwybodaeth â’r meddyg teulu hwnnw. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod weithiau rywfaint o ‘drafod’ am rai ymrwymiadau. Fodd bynnag, nododd mai’r prif bryder oedd amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai angen yn aml i sgrinwyr iechyd gael ymrwymiad na fyddai meddygon teulu â phroblemau iechyd yn gweithio mewn practis ar eu pennau eu hunain, ond yn hytrach yn gweithio mewn cytundeb grŵp neu bartneriaeth.
O tua 1997, roedd yn orfodol i feddyg yn ymuno â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol gytuno y gellid datgelu ymrwymiadau yn gysylltiedig â’i waith/ei gwaith i’w gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr ac i unrhyw un sy’n chwilio am wybodaeth am ei statws cofrestru. Os na chytunai ef/hi i ddatgeliad o’r fath, byddai ei achos/ei hachos yn cael ei atgyfeirio at yr HC. Nid oedd unrhyw ofyniad i ddatgelu ymrwymiadau yn gysylltiedig â thriniaeth feddygol y meddyg a chânt eu hystyried yn gyfrinachol. Diben y gofyniad i ddatgelu oedd rhoi meddygon yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn gyfartal â’r rheiny a atgyfeiriwyd at yr HC, a sicrhau bod gan aelodau o’r cyhoedd a chyflogwyr fynediad i’r un wybodaeth am y ddau. Gofynnwyd i bob meddyg a oedd eisoes yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol gytuno i ddatgeliad. Mae’r datgeliad, i gyflogwyr ac i aelodau o’r cyhoedd sy’n ymholi, o ymrwymiadau sy’n gysylltiedig â gwaith y meddyg yn ddefnyddiol ond nid yw’n darparu darlun cyflawn. Gallai’r llythyr datgelu, y gwelodd yr Ymchwiliad enghreifftiau ohono, adael cyflogwr mewn penbleth ynghylch natur problem y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, fel y sylwodd Dr Mann, byddai’n agored i gyflogwr gysylltu â’r person y cyfarwyddwyd iddo weithredu fel goruchwyliwr y meddyg, er na fyddai ef/hi yn gallu datgelu mwy o wybodaeth heb ganiatâd y meddyg. Mae’n fwy tebygol, efallai, y byddai cyflogwr yn siarad yn uniongyrchol â’r meddyg ac yn mynnu datgelu manylion llawn y broblem, pe bai’r meddyg am barhau yn y gwaith.
Dywedodd Mr Howes y credai, tuag at ddiwedd ei amser yn Adran Iechyd y GMC yn 2001, y byddai’r GMC wedi rhoi gwybod i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg am gynnydd ac am ymrwymiadau yn berthnasol i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r GMC yn hysbysu partneriaid proffesiynol meddyg teulu. Credai y byddai’r GMC yn dibynnu ar y goruchwyliwr meddygol i gadw partneriaid y meddyg yn ymwybodol o’r hyn a ddigwyddai. Nododd y gallai’r partneriaid fod yr hysbyswyr gwreiddiol, ac os felly y byddent yn hollol ymwybodol o’r amgylchiadau. Sylwodd Mr Howes, ‘Erbyn i mi adael y gwaith hwn, ein polisi oedd sicrhau bod pawb yr oedd angen iddynt wybod, yn gwybod - a bod pawb â diddordeb dilys mewn gwybod, yn gwybod.’
Yn sgil Reolau Iechyd 1987, roedd yn bosibl am y tro cyntaf i wahodd meddyg i roi ymrwymiad mewn amgylchiadau lle’r oedd ef/hi wedi gwella o gyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol rheolaidd neu episodaidd a oedd wedi ysgafnhau adeg yr archwiliad, ond y gall fod disgwyl iddo effeithio’n wael ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn y dyfodol.
Lle Anghytunai’r Archwilwyr Meddygol
Mewn achos lle nad oedd yr archwilwyr meddygol yn adrodd o’r un farn, roedd rhaid i’r sgriniwr iechyd benderfynu pa drefniadau ar gyfer rheoli achos y meddyg (gan gynnwys cyfyngiadau ar ei waith/ei gwaith) oedd yn briodol
‘yng ngoleuni cydbwysedd y farn yn yr adroddiadau’
. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd wedyn i ymrwymo i gydymffurfio â’r trefniadau hynny.
Dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai un archwiliwr meddygol, weithiau, yn dweud bod meddyg yn addas i ymarfer a byddai’r llall yn dweud nad oedd ef/hi yn addas i ymarfer. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, byddai’n ‘tueddu bod yn ofalus’ ac yn drafftio ymrwymiadau ar sail adroddiad yr archwiliwr meddygol a oedd wedi mynegi’r farn nad oedd y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, gan obeithio y byddai’r meddyg yn cytuno iddynt. Pe byddai un meddyg yn argymell y dylai telerau’r ymrwymiadau fod yn fwy llym nag y gwnaeth y llall, byddai fel arfer yn gwahodd y meddyg i gytuno i’r ymrwymiadau llymach, gyda’r posibilrwydd o ysgafnhau eu telerau gydag amser, pe bai’r meddyg yn gwneud cynnydd boddhaol.
Ymateb y Meddyg
Lle Cafwyd Ymrwymiadau gan y Meddyg
Os ymrwymai’r meddyg i gydymffurfio â’r argymhellion a gafwyd yn yr adroddiadau meddygol (neu, lle nad oedd yr adroddiadau meddygol o’r un farn â’r rheiny a gynigiwyd gan y sgriniwr iechyd), gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd wedyn, os yn fodlon y glynir wrth yr ymrwymiadau, ohirio gweithredu pellach ar yr achos. Yna, roedd y meddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Ar ôl i’r meddyg fod yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, ni ellid atgyfeirio ei achos/ei hachos yn ôl at y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad neu berfformiad.
Lle Gwrthodai’r Meddyg Gydweithredu
Pe na chytunai meddyg i roi ymrwymiadau, neu pe fethai ymateb o fewn y cyfnod penodedig, neu pe anghytunai neu methai ef/hi gydymffurfio ag archwiliad meddygol gan yr archwilwyr meddygol a benodwyd gan y GMC, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd atgyfeirio’r achos at yr HC, pe dybiai ef/hi bod hyn yn addas. Yn ymarferol, ychydig feddygon a wrthodai gydweithredu yn y cyfnod hwn.
Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, roedd yna elfen ychwanegol i’r broses. Cyn atgyfeirio at yr HC, roedd gofyn i’r sgriniwr iechyd ymgynghori ag o leiaf dau aelod arall o’r GMC. Roedd y GMC yn cynnal panel o chwe aelod (‘y panel o chwech’) a benodwyd at y diben hwn. Penodwyd aelodau’r panel (na allent hefyd fod yn aelodau o’r HC) gan y Llywydd gyda chymeradwyaeth y Cyngor. Nid oedd eu barnau o reidrwydd yn benderfynodol o benderfyniad y sgriniwr iechyd i atgyfeirio achos at yr HC ai peidio, ond roedd gofyn i’r sgriniwr iechyd ystyried y barnau hynny wrth wneud ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad. Fodd bynnag, pe ystyriai’r sgriniwr iechyd y dylid atgyfeirio’r achos at yr HC, er lles y cyhoedd, fel mater brys, roedd ganddo/ganddi’r pŵer i roi cyfarwyddyd dros dro i’r perwyl hwnnw cyn ymgynghori â’r aelodau eraill.
Dywedodd Dr Mann fod ymgynghori â’r panel o chwech yn achosi rhywfaint o oedi. Roedd yn galluogi sgriniwr iechyd i gael barn arall ar yr achos, a oedd yn ddefnyddiol. Ar y cyfan, fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn ychwanegu unrhyw beth at y gweithdrefnau. Dywedodd mai diben gwreiddiol y gofyniad i ymgynghori ag aelodau eraill o’r GMC fu amddiffyn meddygon yn erbyn sgrinwyr yr ofnai’r proffesiwn y byddent eisiau atgyfeirio pob achos at yr HC. Fel y bu hi, ni chyfiawnhawyd ofnau’r proffesiwn. Gwaredwyd â’r panel o chwech ym mis Tachwedd 2002.
Lle nad oedd y Meddyg yn Addas i Roi Ymrwymiadau
Mewn rhai achosion, gallai’r adroddiadau meddygol ddatgelu bod y meddyg yn dioddef o gyflwr (fel arfer, cyflwr seiciatrig) a olygai nad oedd ef/hi yn addas i roi ymrwymiadau neu na ellid dibynnu arno/arni i gydymffurfio â’r ymrwymiadau, hyd yn oed os cawsant eu rhoi. Mewn achos o’r fath, roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr iechyd atgyfeirio’r achos at yr HC heb geisio ymrwymiadau gan y meddyg yn gyntaf.
Oedi wrth Ddod â Meddygon dan Oruchwyliaeth
Mynegodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 bryder ynghylch yr amser a gymerai o Adran Iechyd y GMC yn cael adroddiad am iechyd meddyg i roi meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth. Yn ystod y cyfnod o 1989 i 1996, cymerodd amser cymedrig o 50 wythnos bron. Roedd yn hysbys bod 40% o feddygon y canfuwyd yn ddilynol eu bod yn anaddas i ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth a heb gyfyngiadau yn gweithio adeg yr atgyfeiriad. Roedd rhai o’r meddygon hynny yn cael triniaeth ac yn cyfyngu ar eu hymarfer yn wirfoddol o bosibl, ond mae’n bosibl nad oedd llawer yn gwneud hyn. Cynrychiolai’r oedi wrth ddod â’r meddygon hyn dan oruchwyliaeth risg amlwg i ddiogelwch cleifion. Tan fis Awst 2000, fodd bynnag, pan sefydlwyd yr IOC, nid oedd gan y sgriniwr iechyd unrhyw bŵer i atgyfeirio achos at y PPC ar gyfer llunio gorchymyn dros dro oni bai a hyd nes y gwnaed y penderfyniad i atgyfeirio meddyg at yr HC. Ni ellid gwneud hynny oni bai bod tystiolaeth bod y meddyg yn gwrthod cydweithredu neu gydymffurfio.
Nododd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 nifer o ffactorau a gyfrannai at yr oedi. Yn y cyfnodau cychwynnol, roedd angen weithiau aros am ganlyniad archwiliadau’r heddlu neu achosion llys. Ffactor arall oedd yr amser a gymerai rai pobl a roddai gwybod i’r GMC am feddygon i roi’r wybodaeth yr oedd ei hangen ganddynt. Trydydd ffactor oedd yr amser a gymerai meddygon i ymateb i ohebiaethau gan y GMC.
Sylwodd dîm King’s College fod y GMC, yn rhai o’r 40 achos sampl yr archwiliodd yn fanwl, wedi cymryd camau cadarnhaol i gael gwybodaeth, weithiau trwy gyfarwyddo ei gyfreithwyr i archwilio. Fodd bynnag, mewn achosion eraill, roedd y GMC wedi aros am achwynydd i gysylltu, yn hytrach na dilyn y gŵyn yn weithgar. Hyd yn oed pan gymerai’r GMC gamau cadarnhaol, cymerai hyn amser hir. Roedd yr amser a ganiatawyd gan Reolau Iechyd 1987 i feddygon gytuno i archwiliad (14 diwrnod) ac i ymateb i adroddiadau’r archwilwyr meddygol (28 diwrnod) hefyd yn arafu’r broses. Roedd hwn yn fater y soniwyd amdano yn Adroddiadau Blynyddol y sgriniwr iechyd mor gynnar â 1982. Disgrifiodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 sut yr oedd y GMC, ar adegau, wedi oedi wrth benodi archwilwyr ac wrth ddelio â phroblemau a godai rhwng archwilwyr a meddygon. Weithiau, ni fyddai meddygon yn ymateb yn brydlon a byddent yn colli apwyntiadau. Mewn 4 o’r 40 achos, ni chafwyd adroddiadau’r archwilwyr meddygol am gyhyd â thri i chwe mis ar ôl yr archwiliad. Bu hefyd anawsterau ac oedi wrth benodi goruchwylwyr meddygol.
Nododd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 fod meddygon yn rhydd i ymarfer yn ystod y cyfnod atgyfeiriad at oruchwyliaeth feddygol ac y gallai cleifion felly fod mewn perygl yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Argymhellodd y dylai’r GMC olrhain cychwyniad y trefniadau rhwng meddygon ac archwilwyr i sicrhau y gwnaed apwyntiadau a bod archwiliadau wedi cymryd lle. Dylid olrhain archwilwyr a aeth heibio’r amseroedd targed ar gyfer cyflwyno adroddiadau. Hefyd, pe fethai archwiliwr ddarparu gwybodaeth y gofynnir amdani, dylai fod gofyn iddo/iddi wneud hynny. Os gwelai’r GMC fod archwiliwr methu cyrraedd targedau neu roi gwybodaeth ofynnol yn gyson, dylid dod i ben â defnyddio’r archwiliwr hwnnw. Dylai’r GMC fonitro ansawdd yr oruchwyliaeth a ddarparwyd a newid goruchwyliwr lle‘r oedd goruchwyliaeth yn wael.
Mewn ymateb i’r Adroddiad hwn, ym mis Gorffennaf 2000, cyflwynodd y GMC safonau gwasanaeth, a aeth i’r afael yn effeithiol â phroblemau oedi. Diweddarwyd y safonau hyn ym mis Ebrill 2003. Caniataodd safonau 2003 tua mis ar gyfer sgrinio, deufis ar gyfer archwiliadau a deufis i wneud penderfyniadau. Erbyn hynny, naill ai y byddai’r meddyg wedi derbyn ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol neu byddai ef/hi wedi’i atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio at yr HC. Felly, o fewn pum mis o’i gael, dylid fod wedi cau’r achos neu weithredu. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, cyflawnodd y GMC y targed hwn mewn 86% o achosion, ychydig yn llai na’r targed o 90% yr oedd wedi ei osod i’w hun. Pe ystyrid fod cleifion mewn perygl, roedd yna opsiwn i atgyfeirio’r achos at yr IOC. Yn ôl safonau gwasanaeth 2003, roedd gofyn clywed pob achos a gyfeirir at yr IOC o fewn mis. Yn sgil y safonau gwasanaeth hyn, ‘tynhawyd’ ar y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn sylweddol.
Goruchwylio Meddygon yn y Gweithdrefnau Iechyd Gwirfoddol
Fel y dywedais, nid oedd Rheolau Iechyd 1980 yn cynnwys unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol ar gyfer goruchwylio meddygon a oedd wedi ymuno â gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, roedd yn ofynnol bob amser i feddygon yn ymuno â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ymroi i dderbyn goruchwyliaeth feddygol. Roedd Rheol 9 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn ffurfioli’r arfer hwn. Rhoddodd rym i’r sgriniwr iechyd, mewn achos y deliwyd ag ef dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, ofyn am un meddyg neu fwy i oruchwylio rheolaeth achos y meddyg ac i adrodd pe byddai angen ar y modd y dilynai ei ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau ac ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Diben yr oruchwyliaeth hon oedd bodloni’r sgriniwr iechyd fod y meddyg yn dilyn ei ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau.
Byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn dewis meddyg addas i oruchwylio’r meddyg. Gallai’r goruchwyliwr meddygol fod yn un o’r meddygon a archwiliodd y meddyg ar ran y GMC. Gallai ef neu hi fod yn feddyg a oedd eisoes yn trin y meddyg. Rôl y goruchwyliwr meddygol oedd monitro cynnydd y meddyg ac addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac adrodd i’r GMC. Roedd gofyn hefyd i’r goruchwyliwr meddygol sicrhau bod y meddyg yn cael y cymorth a’r driniaeth angenrheidiol i’w gynorthwyo/ei chynorthwyo i wella. Rhaid oedd i’r goruchwyliwr hefyd ddarganfod a oedd y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau; byddai ef/hi yn gwneud hyn trwy gynnal profion am bresenoldeb alcohol a chyffuriau a thrwy gasglu gwybodaeth o hysbyswyr annibynnol a meddygon eraill sy’n rhoi triniaeth. Roedd amlder y cyswllt rhwng y meddyg a’i oruchwyliwr/ei goruchwyliwr meddygol yn fater i’r goruchwyliwr ei hun.
Pe byddai’r meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer, byddai angen i’r GMC benodi goruchwyliwr proffesiynol. Dewiswyd y goruchwyliwr proffesiynol gan y meddyg (mewn ymgynghoriad, os yn berthnasol, â’i gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr). Ni fyddai’r GMC yn arddweud pwy ddylai lenwi’r rôl hon. Byddai’n rhywun mewn swydd uwch gyda phrofiad personol o waith y meddyg. Pe bai’r meddyg yn feddyg teulu, gallai fod partner uwch y practis meddyg teulu lle gweithiai’r meddyg. Dywedodd Dr Mann ei bod yn haws cael adborth gwrthrychol petai meddyg yn gweithio mewn sefydliad neu ysbyty, gan y byddai’r meddyg yn cysylltu â mwy o bobl. Pe bai ef/hi yn feddyg teulu, byddai angen dibynnu ar bartneriaid, a allai fod â theimladau cymysg am y meddyg yn ymarfer, neu ar gydweithiwr mewn sefydliad fel LMC neu PCT. Byddai’r person hwnnw’n gweithio o bell ac ni fyddai ganddo’r un cyswllt personol â’r meddyg. Dywedodd Dr Mann, pe byddai rhywun mewn practis meddyg teulu yn fodlon rhoi gwybodaeth am gynnydd y meddyg, y byddai’n debygol y byddai’r wybodaeth y gallai ef/hi ei rhoi yn werthfawr, gan y byddai’n seiliedig ar gyswllt agos â’r meddyg.
Mae’n debyg i mi fod yr anhawster o gael gwybodaeth ddibynadwy am waith y meddyg yn cynrychioli gwendid yn yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd. Byddai wir angen i’r sgriniwr iechyd gael cyswllt personol â rhywun a welai’r meddyg yn rheolaidd. Byddai angen i’r sgriniwr gael rhyw ‘deimlad’ am lefel y pryder a gafwyd am ymarfer y meddyg. Gallaf ddeall pam na sefydlodd y sgrinwyr iechyd gyswllt personol â’r meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth; roedd angen iddynt gadw hyd braich. Fodd bynnag, roedd angen ffynhonnell gwybodaeth ar y sgrinwyr yn agos at y meddyg ac ni fyddai hyn ar gael bob amser.
Mewn achos o gam-drin sylweddau, roedd disgwyl i’r goruchwyliwr meddygol adrodd unrhyw gwymp i’r GMC yn ymddygiad y meddyg a allai effeithio ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddai’r GMC yn gofyn am adroddiadau cynnydd. Dywedodd Dr Mann y gofynnwyd fel arfer am yr adroddiad cyntaf dri mis i chwe mis ar ôl rhoi’r meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth. Gofynnwyd am ail adroddiad ar ôl cyfnod pellach o tua chwe mis. Wedi hynny, roedd yr amseru’n amrywio yn ôl amgylchiadau ac argymhellion y goruchwyliwr meddygol. Weithiau, byddai’r GMC yn cael adroddiad na ofynnwyd amdano gan oruchwyliwr meddygol. Gallai hwn roi newyddion o newid am y gwaethaf, ond byddai weithiau’n rhoi gwybod i’r GMC am newid am y gwell a byddai’n awgrymu y dylid llacio ymrwymiadau’r meddyg. Lle gofynnai’r GMC am adroddiad cynnydd, byddai ei lythyr cais yn cynnwys rhestr o gwestiynau i’w hateb a byddai gofyn i’r goruchwyliwr gasglu gwybodaeth o wahanol ffynonellau ac i gynnwys y wybodaeth honno yn ei adroddiad/ei hadroddiad. Byddai gofyn hefyd am farnau’r goruchwyliwr ynghylch a ddylai’r GMC gau’r achos, neu a oedd angen monitro’r meddyg ymhellach.
Ni fyddai gan sgrinwyr iechyd unrhyw gyswllt personol â’r meddyg dan sylw a byddent yn dibynnu’n llwyr ar y goruchwylwyr meddygol i gadw mewn cysylltiad rheolaidd â’r meddyg, i gasglu gwybodaeth amdani/amdano ac i fod yn fanwl gywir wrth gynnal profion gwrthrychol, lle‘r oedd yn briodol, am alcohol neu gyffuriau. Yn ôl Dr Mann, roedd argaeledd profi gwallt (a all ddatgelu presenoldeb opiadau cymaint â thri mis ar ôl eu llyncu) a chynnal hapbrofion yn arfau gwerthfawr yn y broses oruchwylio. Fel arfer, ni fyddai unrhyw gyfathrebu uniongyrchol rhwng y sgriniwr iechyd a’r goruchwyliwr proffesiynol. Byddai’r ail yn rhoi gwybodaeth i’r goruchwyliwr meddygol.
Pwysleisiodd Dr Mann fod rôl y goruchwyliwr meddygol yn rôl feichus ond yn rôl foddhaus. Roedd yn cynnwys llawer iawn o gyfrifoldeb, i’r cyhoedd ac i’r proffesiwn. Nid oedd yn uchel ei chyflog. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod llawer o feddygon yn ystyried ei bod yn ddyletswydd arnynt i gyfrannu at les y proffesiwn trwy fod yn oruchwylwyr GMC. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn anodd i rai meddygon drin meddygon eraill.
Y Meddyg sy’n Rhoi’r Driniaeth fel Goruchwyliwr Meddygol
Mynegodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 bryder am y ffaith y byddai’r goruchwyliwr, mewn 22 o’r 40 achos lle archwiliwyd adroddiadau goruchwylwyr meddygol, yn feddyg a oedd eisoes yn trin y meddyg. Nododd yr Adroddiad fod y lluosogrwydd hwn o ran rolau yn cynyddu’r anhawster i oruchwyliwr meddygol wrth gydbwyso lles y meddyg a lles y boblogaeth ehangach o gleifion. Heblaw mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol, argymhellodd na ddylai’r GMC benodi meddyg sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth yn oruchwyliwr meddygol.
Dywedodd Dr Mann fod rhan fwyaf yr achosion yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn cynnwys salwch meddwl, alcoholiaeth, cam-drin cyffuriau neu gyfuniad o fwy nag un o’r nodweddion hyn. Fel arfer, felly, byddai’r goruchwylwyr meddygol yn seiciatryddion. Yn gyffredinol, byddai’r sgrinwyr iechyd yn ceisio penodi goruchwyliwr meddygol nad oedd yn seiciatrydd sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth. Fodd bynnag, roedd y sefyllfa’n eithaf gwahanol gydag achosion o gam-drin sylweddau. Dywedodd Dr Mann y bu cryn ddadlau ynghylch manteision ac anfanteision cyfuno rolau’r seiciatrydd sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth a’r goruchwyliwr meddygol mewn achosion o gam-drin sylweddau. Y broblem gyda chyfuno’r ddwy rôl oedd y gallai’r seiciatrydd fod yn destun gwrthdaro ffyddlondeb, sef rhwng y meddyg, y GMC a’r cyhoedd. Gallai fod yn anodd ymdopi â’r gwrthdaro hwnnw. Yr ail broblem oedd y teimlad efallai na fyddai goruchwyliwr meddygol a oedd hefyd yn seiciatrydd sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth yn hollol annibynnol.
Ar y llaw arall, esboniodd Dr Mann fod yna fanteision amlwg wrth gyfuno’r ddwy rôl. Yn gyntaf, roedd ychydig o feddygon yn unig a arbenigai mewn cam-drin sylweddau. Roedd seiciatryddion cyffredinol yn aml heb yr arbenigedd angenrheidiol ac ni allent gynnig yr un cymorth a chefnogaeth i feddygon sâl, p’un ai fel seiciatrydd sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth neu fel goruchwyliwr. Pe byddai’r meddyg eisoes yn cael triniaeth gan arbenigwr cam-drin sylweddau, byddai’n llai o wastraff adnoddau, a gallai fod yn fwy buddiol i’r meddyg, i benodi’r person hwnnw fel goruchwyliwr hefyd. Ail reswm dros gyfuno’r ddwy rôl oedd sicrhau bod yr holl wybodaeth y dylid ei chyfathrebu i’r GMC yn hysbys i’r goruchwyliwr. Fel yr esboniais, roedd disgwyl i’r goruchwyliwr meddygol adrodd unrhyw ddirywiad i’r GMC yn ymddygiad y meddyg yr oedd ef/hi yn ymwybodol ohono. Os nad y meddyg sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth oedd y goruchwyliwr, byddai ef/hi yn dibynnu ar y meddyg sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth i drosglwyddo gwybodaeth am, er enghraifft, y meddyg yn dychwelyd at gymryd alcohol neu gyffuriau. Dywedodd Dr Mann ei bod yn haws i un person ‘ddal yr holl awenau yn ei ddwylo’. I’r gwrthwyneb, gallai fod problem pe na fyddai’r meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth yn ymddiried yn llwyr yn ei feddyg/meddyg sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth oherwydd bod y meddyg hwnnw mewn rôl oruchwylio hefyd. Rwy’n amau nad oes unrhyw ateb perffaith i’r broblem hon.
Problemau gydag Adroddiadau Goruchwylwyr Meddygol
Rwyf wedi esbonio bod tîm King’s College wedi archwilio sampl o adroddiadau a gyflwynwyd i’r GMC gan oruchwylwyr meddygol yn achosion 40 o feddygon a fu dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol yn y cyfnod 1989 i 1996. Nododd Adroddiad Gwerthusiad 1999 mai adroddiadau cynnydd y goruchwylwyr fu prif ffynhonnell gwybodaeth y GMC am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Un nodwedd a nodwyd gan dîm King’s College oedd oedi. Mewn 16 allan o’r 40 achos, disgrifiwyd un neu fwy o adroddiadau yn y nodiadau achos yn bendant fel adroddiadau hwyr neu adroddiadau y gofynnwyd sawl tro am eu darparu. Mewn 18 o achosion, cafwyd yr adroddiad cynnydd cyntaf fwy na deufis ar ôl yr amser y gofynnwyd amdano. Achoswyd oedi gan feddygon yn methu gwneud trefniadau gyda goruchwylwyr, gan yr amser a gymerai i gael gwybodaeth gan hysbyswyr annibynnol a’r amser a gymerai goruchwylwyr i ymateb i geisiadau am adroddiadau. Cafwyd oedi sylweddol hefyd wrth ddarparu adroddiadau cynnydd dilynol. Oherwydd y seibiannau hir rhwng adroddiadau, caewyd tri allan o’r 40 achos ar ôl cael dau adroddiad yn unig gan y goruchwyliwr meddygol. Mewn un achos, ni chafwyd unrhyw adroddiadau o gwbl.
Mewn 16 o’r 40 achos, roedd gwybodaeth sylweddol ar goll o adroddiad y goruchwyliwr. Yn bennaf, roedd hyn yn gysylltiedig ag addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, yn aml oherwydd diffyg gwybodaeth gan berson annibynnol am berfformiad y meddyg o’i waith/ei gwaith proffesiynol. Weithiau, ni fyddai goruchwylwyr yn barod i fynd at gydweithwyr y meddyg. Mewn rhai achosion, nid oedd unrhyw ganlyniadau profion am bresenoldeb alcohol neu gyffuriau, yn aml gan fod y goruchwyliwr yn amharod i gynnal hapbrofion. Nododd un goruchwyliwr nad oedd ef/hi eisiau
‘gweithredu fel ditectif’
. Weithiau, cofnodwyd gwybodaeth a oedd ar goll mewn adroddiadau diweddarach, ond gallai hyn fod cymaint â 9 i 16 mis yn ddiweddarach. Weithiau, ni fyddai’n cael ei darparu o gwbl. Caewyd un achos ar ôl tair blynedd heb gael canlyniadau unrhyw brofion. Honnai’r goruchwyliwr dro ar ôl tro ei fod
‘yn gweithio ar drefniant i gynnal hapbrofion’
. Mewn rhai achosion lle nad oedd y wybodaeth berthnasol ar gael, roedd y GMC wedi amrywio ymrwymiadau’r meddyg mewn ymdrech i atal risg i gleifion. Caewyd tri o’r achosion sampl heb gael y wybodaeth y gofynnwyd amdani i gefnogi casgliad bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer.
Mewn 11 o’r 40 achos, datgelodd y ffeil anfodlonrwydd ar ran y sgriniwr iechyd gyda’r modd y rheolai’r goruchwyliwr meddygol y meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth. Roedd yna atgyfeiriadau at broblemau gyda chynnwys ac amseroldeb adroddiadau, at fethiant y goruchwyliwr i orfodi’r cyfyngiadau ar waith y meddyg ac at ddiffyg cyfathrebu neu golli cysylltiad rhwng goruchwylwyr a meddygon. Mewn 6 o’r 11 achos, roedd y mater yn ddigwyddiad unigryw a gawsai ei ddatrys. Fodd bynnag, mewn pum achos, roedd yna bryder neu feirniadaeth fwy parhaol. Mewn achosion lle’r oedd anfodlonrwydd gyda’r drefn bresennol, ystyriwyd newid goruchwyliwr yn aml. Fodd bynnag, ni weithredwyd unrhyw newid mewn unrhyw achos. Y rheswm dros hyn weithiau oedd yr anawsterau ymarferol ynghlwm wrth ddod o hyd i oruchwyliwr arall. Yn aml, fodd bynnag, derbyniwyd dadleuon gan y goruchwyliwr a’r meddyg am y manteision o barhau eu perthynas therapiwtig fel rhesymau dros barhau perthynas oruchwylio a oedd, fel arall, yn anfoddhaol.
Argymhellodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 y dylai’r GMC olrhain gwybodaeth yn weithgar na chawsai ei darparu mewn adroddiadau goruchwylwyr ac y dylai gyrraedd cytundebau cliriach â goruchwylwyr am gynnal profion am alcohol a chyffuriau. Argymhellodd hefyd y dylid rhoi mwy o bwyslais ar fonitro ansawdd goruchwyliaeth ac ar newid goruchwyliwr na fyddai’n cydymffurfio â gofynion y GMC.
Dywedodd Mr Howes y bu amharodrwydd sylweddol, yn niwrnodau cynnar y gweithdrefnau iechyd, ar ran goruchwylwyr meddygol i roi hapbrofion i feddygon am alcohol a chyffuriau eraill. Dywedodd ei fod ‘yn groes i’r graen’ i feddygon orfodi gweithdrefnau o’r fath ar eu cleifion. Roedd hefyd rywfaint o amheuaeth am ddefnyddioldeb profion o’r fath. Yn fwy diweddar, fodd bynnag, daeth y GMC yn llawer mwy cadarn gyda goruchwylwyr. Pe na fyddent yn cydweithredu, ni fyddent yn cael eu defnyddio mwyach. Cytunodd Dr Mann fod y GMC bellach yn llawer mwy llym yn y gofynion a wnâi o oruchwylwyr. Roedd yn ofynnol i bob goruchwyliwr mewn achosion cam-drin sylweddau sicrhau y cynhaliwyd profion gwrthrychol am bresenoldeb alcohol a chyffuriau eraill yn gyfnodol ac i roi canlyniadau’r profion hynny i’r GMC. Pe wrthodent wneud hyn, neu pe na fyddent yn cydymffurfio â gofynion eraill y GMC, gellid eu tynnu oddi ar achos penodol, neu oddi ar restr y GMC yn gyffredinol. Dywedodd Dr Mann na ddigwyddai hyn ‘mor aml efallai ag y dylai fod wedi’, ond ei fod wedi digwydd o bryd i’w gilydd. Roedd mwy o bwyslais ar ddarparu adroddiadau cynnydd mewn pryd ac ar y wybodaeth y dylid ei chynnwys mewn adroddiadau o’r fath.
Yn ogystal, roedd y GMC wedi sefydlu cysylltiadau agosach â’i oruchwylwyr a’i archwilwyr meddygol. Lluniwyd taflen yn esbonio rôl y goruchwyliwr meddygol a’i gyfrifoldeb/ei chyfrifoldeb am reoli meddyg sâl. Ym mis Hydref 1998, cynhaliwyd y diwrnod hyfforddi cyntaf ar gyfer goruchwylwyr meddygol ac archwilwyr meddygol. Dilynwyd hwn gan gyfres o ddiwrnodau a gweithdai hyfforddi. Dywedodd Dr Mann y bu cyfarfodydd ag archwilwyr a goruchwylwyr meddygol yn gyfle gwerthfawr i gyfnewid safbwyntiau am broblemau ac i drafod atebion posibl i’r problemau hyn. Roedd wedi rhoi ‘ymdeimlad o gysondeb’. Bu trafodaethau defnyddiol ynghylch, er enghraifft, manteision ac anfanteision penodi arbenigwr cam-drin sylweddau a fyddai eisoes yn trin y meddyg yn oruchwyliwr meddygol. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod y GMC, dros y blynyddoedd diwethaf, wedi symud at benodi goruchwylwyr fel carfan o feddygon a ddeallai gweithdrefnau’r GMC ac a gydnabyddai fod angen ymagwedd ychydig yn wahanol wrth oruchwylio meddyg na’r ymagwedd honno a oedd yn arferol wrth drin y meddyg yn unig. Bu ymdrechion hefyd i ddefnyddio archwilwyr meddygol fel goruchwylwyr er mwyn hybu gwell dealltwriaeth o weithdrefnau a gofynion y GMC. Pan roddodd Dr Mann dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, ni fu unrhyw gyfarfodydd ag archwilwyr neu oruchwylwyr meddygol ers tua blwyddyn. Roedd Adran Iechyd y GMC yn aros hyd nes bod y trefniadau ar gyfer delio ag achosion iechyd dan y gweithdrefnau newydd yn glir cyn trefnu unrhyw gyfarfodydd pellach.
Gweithredu wrth Gael Adroddiad Cynnydd gan Oruchwyliwr Meddygol
Yn ystod cyfnodau cynnar goruchwyliaeth meddyg, pe ymddangosai o adroddiad y goruchwyliwr meddygol ei fod/ei bod yn cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau ac yn gwneud cynnydd, gellid gadael yr ymrwymiadau heb eu newid.
Amrywio Ymrwymiadau’r Meddyg
Fodd bynnag, mae’n bosibl y bu amgylchiadau a olygai ei bod yn briodol llacio neu gryfhau’r ymrwymiadau. Cyflwynodd Reol 9 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 bŵer i amrywio ymrwymiadau meddyg. Pe ymddangosai i’r sgriniwr iechyd, o ganlyniad i adroddiad gan oruchwyliwr meddygol neu wybodaeth gan ffynhonnell arall, y dylid amrywio telerau ymrwymiadau’r meddyg, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd wahodd y meddyg i gytuno i hynny.
Dywedodd Dr Mann, er bod pob achos yn wahanol, mai’r patrwm arferol mewn ‘achos cyffredin’ oedd llacio ymrwymiadau yn raddol i roi mwy o ryddid i’r meddyg yn ei ddewis/ei dewis o swydd a, phe gyfyngwyd ar ei hawl ef/hi i ragnodi, trwy lacio’r cyfyngiad hwnnw. Gallai llacio o’r math hwn ddigwydd dwy neu dair gwaith dros gyfnod o ddwy flynedd cyn ystyried bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth na chyfyngiad.
Mae’n amlwg o Adroddiadau Blynyddol y sgriniwr iechyd fod y sgrinwyr iechyd, yn y 1990au cynnar, yn defnyddio’u pŵer i amrywio ymrwymiadau i’w gwneud yn fwy llym. Er enghraifft, cofnododd yr Adroddiad Blynyddol ar gyfer 1990 mai cam cyntaf y sgrinwyr iechyd ar ôl nodi bod meddyg wedi torri ymrwymiadau oedd anfon
‘llythyr cadarn’
at y meddyg, gan dynhau’r cyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Erbyn y 1990au hwyr, fodd bynnag, daeth y GMC i gredu nad oedd y pŵer i amrywio ymrwymiadau yn cynnwys y pŵer i’w gwneud yn llymach. Yn hwyrach, newidiodd y farn hon eto a, lle‘r oedd yr amgylchiadau yn ei gwneud yn briodol, byddai meddyg yn cael gwahoddiad i gytuno i ymrwymiadau a orfodai gofynion neu gyfyngiadau mwy arno/arni nag yn flaenorol. Dywedodd Dr Mann y bu’r anallu ymddangosiadol i dynhau’r ymrwymiad yn ffactor cyfyngol. Gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd fod wedi dymuno atal meddyg rhag gwneud gwaith ar alwad neu rhag gweithio fel dirprwy feddyg ond yn methu gwneud y newid angenrheidiol heb atgyfeirio’r meddyg at yr HC. Roedd hon yn broses feichus a gymerai amser.
Terfynu Ymrwymiadau’r Meddyg
Amododd Reol 9 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 hefyd y gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd gyfarwyddo na ddylai’r ymrwymiadau fod yn berthnasol mwyach, gan felly dod i ben â chyfnod goruchwylio’r meddyg, ac unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Dibynnai’r amser y byddai hyn yn digwydd ar natur y nam. Mewn achosion o gam-drin sylweddau, dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai’n anarferol rhyddhau meddyg o’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau o fewn dwy flynedd ar ôl bod dan oruchwyliaeth gyntaf. Pe byddai problem y meddyg yn dychwelyd neu pe gâi ailwaeledd, roedd cyfnod ei oruchwyliaeth/ei goruchwyliaeth yn debygol o barhau cynifer â phum mlynedd. Gallai goruchwyliaeth barhau drwy gydol bywyd proffesiynol y meddyg pe ymddangosai, fel a ddigwyddai weithiau, mai’r oruchwyliaeth (a bygythiad gweithredu gan yr HC) a oedd yn cadw’r meddyg ar ‘y ffordd gul’. Yn fwy arferol, fel y dywedais, byddai’r cyfyngiadau ar ymarfer y meddyg yn cael eu llacio’n raddol dros gyfnod o flynyddoedd cyn gwneud penderfyniad terfynol fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth.
Yn y gwerthusiad gan dîm King’s College o’r 40 achos sampl o’r cyfnod 1989 i 1996, lle deliwyd â meddygon dan y gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol, datgelwyd dau faen prawf a ddefnyddiwyd gan y sgriniwr iechyd wrth asesu a ddylid rhyddhau meddyg o’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau a chaniatáu iddo/iddi weithio heb oruchwyliaeth. Y maen prawf cyntaf oedd gwelliant sylweddol a chyson yn iechyd y meddyg, gyda thystiolaeth fod y meddyg wedi ymwrthod ag alcohol neu gyffuriau am gyfnod sylweddol (fel arfer, dwy flynedd). Yr ail faen prawf oedd cofnod sicr o allu’r meddyg i gynnal perfformiad clinigol da. Cofnododd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999, fodd bynnag, fod archwiliad y tîm o’r achosion sampl yn awgrymu bod achosion, ar brydiau, wedi’u cau heb dystiolaeth sylweddol o welliant nac ymwrthod. Weithiau, cawsant eu cau ar yr ‘amod’ (na fyddai’n orfodadwy) y dylai’r meddyg barhau dan ofal y goruchwyliwr meddygol. Darganfu tîm King’s College mai’r amser cyfartalog yr oedd meddyg yn parhau dan oruchwyliaeth yn ystod y cyfnod 1980 i 1996 oedd tair blynedd a hanner. Mae’n debyg i mi y gall fod yn anodd, mewn rhai achosion, dod o hyd i ‘dystiolaeth’ bod y meddyg wedi cynnal perfformiad clinigol da. Soniais y gall fod yn anodd, i feddygon nad ydynt yn gweithio mewn amgylchedd cyflogaeth a reolir, dod o hyd i oruchwyliwr proffesiynol a oedd â chysylltiad agos â’r meddyg. Er enghraifft, pe byddai goruchwyliwr proffesiynol meddyg teulu yn gydweithiwr ar yr LMC neu yn y PCT, efallai na fyddai’n bosibl i sgriniwr iechyd gael gwybodaeth foddhaol am berfformiad clinigol y meddyg teulu.
Yr Ystadegau
Rhwng 1980 a 1990, nifer y meddygon a atgyfeiriwyd at Adran Iechyd y GMC bob blwyddyn oedd, yn gyffredinol, rhwng 40 a 60. Rhwng 1991 a 1994, amrywiodd rhwng 71 ac 87. Ym 1996, cyrhaeddodd dri ffigur am y tro cyntaf. Datblygodd ôl-groniad difrifol o achosion ym 1996/1997 a olygai fod angen recriwto staff ychwanegol. Cyrhaeddodd nifer yr atgyfeiriadau y gwnaeth Adran Iechyd y GMC ddelio â hwy frig o 188 yn 2000 a 181 yn 2001. Yn y ddwy flynedd ddiwethaf, cwympodd y gyfradd atgyfeirio; atgyfeiriwyd 104 o feddygon yn 2002 a 124 yn 2003.
Yn y cyfamser, mae nifer y meddygon dan oruchwyliaeth wedi codi. Rhwng 1985 a 1990, parhaodd yn gyson rhwng 60 a 68. Cododd i 78 ym 1991 ac, erbyn 1995, roedd wedi dyblu bron i 147. Erbyn 1998, roedd 202 o feddygon dan oruchwyliaeth. Ers hynny, nid yw’r nifer wedi amrywio fawr. Mae ystadegau FTP 2003 yn dangos bod 212 o feddygon yn parhau dan oruchwyliaeth yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, a 54 ohonynt yn feddygon teulu. Parhaodd tua 100 o feddygon dan awdurdod yr HC.

---  ---
Y Sgriniwr Iechyd yn Atgyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Iechyd
Rwyf wedi dweud eisoes y gellid atgyfeirio meddyg at yr HC os yw ef/hi yn gwrthod cael archwiliad meddygol neu gydweithredu ag archwiliad meddygol, neu os yw ef/hi yn gwrthod cytuno i ymrwymiadau neu’n anaddas i gytuno i ymrwymiadau neu gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau. Yn ogystal, gellid ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio at yr HC am dorri ymrwymiad neu pe waethygai ei gyflwr/ei chyflwr.
Pe ddysgai’r sgriniwr iechyd o adroddiad y goruchwyliwr meddygol, neu drwy wybodaeth o ryw ffynhonnell arall, fod y meddyg wedi stopio dilyn ymrwymiad a roddwyd yn flaenorol, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd atgyfeirio’r achos at yr HC. O 1987, gellid atgyfeirio hefyd pe byddai cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol y meddyg yn gwaethygu. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, roedd atgyfeirio at yr HC yn destun ymgynghoriad gyda dau aelod o’r ‘panel o chwech’. Wedi’r adeg honno, gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd gychwyn atgyfeiriad heb ofyniad i ymgynghori. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, byddai’r sgriniwr iechyd yn ymgynghori fel arfer â goruchwyliwr meddygol y meddyg wrth benderfynu atgyfeirio achos at yr HC neu beidio.
Roedd nifer y meddygon a atgyfeiriwyd at yr HC bob blwyddyn bob amser yn gymharol fach. Ni chafwyd llawer o atgyfeiriadau at yr HC gan y pwyllgorau FTP eraill. Daeth rhan fwyaf yr atgyfeiriadau oddi wrth y sgriniwr iechyd. Y rheswm mwyaf cyffredin dros atgyfeirio at yr HC oedd, ar ryw adeg yn amser y meddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, methu cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau.
Yn y gorffennol, ymddangosai fod amharodrwydd ar ran y sgrinwyr iechyd i ymateb i feddyg yn torri ei ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau trwy atgyfeirio’r meddyg at yr HC. Yn y 1990au cynnar, dywedodd y sgriniwr iechyd mewn Adroddiad Blynyddol y byddai meddyg yn cael ei atgyfeirio at yr HC dim ond petai ef/hi yn parhau i dorri ei ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau. Soniwyd hefyd yn yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol am amgyffrediad y sgriniwr iechyd mai ei rôl ef oedd atal meddygon rhag cael eu hatgyfeirio at yr HC. Gallaf werthfawrogi mai nod y sgriniwr iechyd dylai fod adsefydlu’r meddyg o fewn y gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol lle bynnag yr oedd yn bosibl. Fodd bynnag, dylai’r sgriniwr iechyd hefyd fod yn barod i atgyfeirio at yr HC feddyg nad yw’n cydymffurfio â’r amodau a orfodwyd i gynorthwyo ei welliant/ei gwelliant a/neu at ddiben amddiffyn cleifion.
Darganfu tîm King’s College yr adroddwyd am ychydig mwy na hanner o’r meddygon y nodwyd y deliwyd â hwy dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol am dorri un neu fwy o’u hymrwymiadau. Nododd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 fod hyn yn debygol o fod yn amcangyfrif rhy isel o achosion gwirioneddol o dorri ymrwymiad. Bu cyfran fawr o’r meddygon yr adroddwyd eu bod wedi torri eu hymrwymiadau yn gweithio adeg torri’r ymrwymiadau. Roedd rhai wedi torri ymrwymiadau er mwyn cael cyngor eu goruchwylwyr cyn dechrau swydd neu wneud cais am swydd. Roedd rhai wedi ymarfer fel dirprwy feddyg neu feddyg teulu ar ei ben/ei phen ei hun gan dorri ymrwymiad i beidio â gwneud hynny. Y math mwyaf cyffredin o dorri ymrwymiad a adroddwyd oedd ymrwymiad gan feddyg i ymwrthod ag alcohol, neu gyfyngu ar ei alcohol/ei halcohol. Roedd nifer yr achosion o dorri ymrwymiad a adroddwyd yn llai yn y cyfnod o 1989 i 1996 nag yn y cyfnod o 1980 i 1988. Dros y cyfnod cyfan rhwng 1980 i 1996, barnodd yr archwilwyr meddygol fod 73% o’r meddygon a dorrai un neu fwy o’u hymrwymiadau yn addas i ymarfer gyda chyfyngiadau. Tynnodd Adroddiad Gwerthuso 1999 sylw at y risgiau posibl i gleifion a achoswyd gan feddygon a oedd yn ymarfer ond nad oeddent yn cydymffurfio â’u hymrwymiadau.
Dywedodd Mr Howes fod y sgrinwyr iechyd, yn ystod ei ail gyfnod yn Adran Iechyd y GMC (1997 i 2001), wedi ‘tynhau’n sylweddol’ o ran torri ymrwymiadau. Beth bynnag, ni arweiniai bob achos o dorri ymrwymiad at atgyfeiriad at yr HC. Dywedodd Mr Howes y byddai’n rhaid barnu pob achos ar ddifrifoldeb yr achos o dorri ymrwymiad, p’un a roddwyd cleifion mewn perygl, p’un a gyflawnodd y meddyg dwyll, neu p’un a wnaeth ef/hi gyfaddef torri’r ymrwymiad ar unwaith wedyn. Byddai’r goruchwyliwr a’r sgriniwr yn llunio barn am ddifrifoldeb yr achos o dorri ymrwymiad.
Rhwng 1980 a 1997, ni wnaeth nifer y meddygon a atgyfeiriwyd at yr HC gan sgrinwyr iechyd mewn unrhyw flwyddyn gyrraedd ffigyrau dwbl o gwbl. Y rheswm mwyaf cyffredin dros atgyfeirio oedd torri ymrwymiadau’r meddyg. Ym 1998, cododd nifer y meddygon a atgyfeiriwyd at yr HC gan y sgrinwyr iechyd yn sydyn i 21. Roedd 14 o’r atgyfeiriadau hynny yn ymwneud â thorri ymrwymiadau. Dywedodd Dr Mann nad oedd hi’n siŵr a fu newid polisi ymwybodol bryd hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, roedd yna ymwybyddiaeth am bryder am drugaredd a chredai y bu’r sgrinwyr iechyd ‘ychydig yn llymach’ wrth ddelio ag achosion o dorri ymrwymiadau. Teimlai y bu’r GMC, yn flaenorol, yn ‘fwy didaro’ gyda goruchwyliaeth. Ym 1999, atgyfeiriodd y sgrinwyr iechyd 16 o feddygon at yr HC; yn 2000, atgyfeiriwyd 37 ganddynt. Y ffigyrau ar gyfer 2001, 2002 a 2003 oedd 19, 21 a 17 yn y drefn honno.
Atgyfeirio gan Bwyllgorau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Eraill
Gellid atgyfeirio achos at yr HC gan y PCC, y Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad (ARC), y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP) neu’r PPC.
Fel a esboniaf ym Mhenodau 21 a 24, lle godai cwestiwn, wrth ystyried achos, ynghylch a allai fod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer oherwydd ei gyflwr/ei chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol, roedd gan y PCC, yr ARC a’r CPP y pŵer i atgyfeirio’r achos dan sylw at yr HC ar gyfer penderfynu. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael archwiliad a byddai’r HC, ar ôl ystyried canlyniadau’r archwiliad, yn cadarnhau ei farn i’r Pwyllgor perthnasol. Pe byddai’r HC o’r farn nad oedd unrhyw nam difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd salwch, byddai’r Pwyllgor a oedd yn atgyfeirio wedyn yn ailafael yn ei ystyriaeth o’r achos ac yn gwaredu ag ef. Ar y llaw arall, pe byddai’r HC o’r farn bod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer o ganlyniad i salwch, byddai’r HC wedyn yn delio â’r achos ei hun a pheidiai’r Pwyllgor a oedd yn atgyfeirio ymarfer unrhyw swyddogaethau mewn perthynas â’r achos. Wrth atgyfeirio achos at yr HC am ei farn, ni fyddai’r PCC, yr ARC a’r CPP o reidrwydd yn colli eu hawdurdod dros yr achos. Os na ganfuwyd unrhyw nam difrifol, gallant symud ymlaen i ddelio ag ef. Ni allai unrhyw un o’r tri Phwyllgor hwn atgyfeirio achos at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Roedd y sefyllfa’n wahanol gyda’r PPC. Gallai’r PPC, gan ddefnyddio ei bŵer i ohirio, atgyfeirio achosion at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Roedd ganddo’r pŵer hefyd i atgyfeirio achosion yn uniongyrchol at yr HC. Fodd bynnag, pe wnâi atgyfeiriad o’r fath ac nad oedd yr atgyfeiriad yn briodol am ryw reswm (e.e. oherwydd, ar ôl archwiliad, ni nodwyd unrhyw broblem iechyd, neu broblem iechyd ddifrifol), ni allai’r HC weithredu ei hun, nac atgyfeirio’r achos yn ôl at y PPC. Mewn achos o’r fath, nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw bŵer i weithredu, hyd yn oed pe bai tystiolaeth o gamymddwyn (neu gollfarn) a fyddai wedi teilyngu gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad.
Y Weithdrefn a Fabwysiadwyd
Roedd Rheolau 11 a 12 Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn nodi’r weithdrefn i’w mabwysiadu pan benderfynwyd atgyfeirio achos at yr HC. Dan reol 11, roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr iechyd wahodd y meddyg i gael archwiliad meddygol cyn i’r HC ystyried ei achos/ei hachos. Byddai’r archwiliad meddygol yn cael ei gynnal gan un archwiliwr meddygol neu fwy a ddewiswyd gan y GMC a, phe dewisai’r meddyg, gan archwiliwr meddygol a ddewiswyd ganddo/ganddi. Pe cytunai’r meddyg i gael archwiliad, byddai staff y GMC yn gwneud y trefniadau angenrheidiol. Nod y ddarpariaeth hon oedd sicrhau bod gan yr HC dystiolaeth feddygol wrth ystyried yr achos. Gallai’r sgriniwr iechyd gymryd y camau hyn, nid yn unig pan roedd ef/hi wedi penderfynu atgyfeirio achos y meddyg at yr HC ei hun, ond hefyd pan roedd y CPP, yr ARC, y PPC neu’r PCC wedi gwneud y penderfyniad hwnnw.
Roedd Rheol 12 yn mynnu bod y Cofrestrydd yn cyflwyno ‘hysbysiad o atgyfeiriad’ i’r meddyg, gan gynnwys gwybodaeth benodedig. Roedd y wybodaeth honno’n cynnwys nodi’r cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol a achosodd yr honiad fod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Pwerau’r Pwyllgor Iechyd
Cafodd pwerau’r HC eu cynnwys yn adran 37 Deddf 1983, a oedd i bob pwrpas yn atgynhyrchu darpariaethau adran 8 Deddf 1978. Roedd Adran 37(1) yn amodi:
‘Lle y mae’r Pwyllgor Iechyd yn barnu bod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd person cofrestredig llawn i ymarfer oherwydd ei gyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol, gall y Pwyllgor, pe tybiai fod hyn yn briodol, gyfarwyddo -
(a) gwahardd ei gofrestriad yn y gofrestr (hynny yw, ni fydd mewn grym) yn ystod rhyw gyfnod nad yw’n fwy na deuddeg mis fel y gellid ei benodi yn y cyfarwyddyd; neu
(b) y bydd ei gofrestriad yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth, yn ystod rhyw gyfnod nad yw’n fwy na tair blynedd fel y gellid ei benodi yn y cyfarwyddyd, gyda gofynion a benodir fel y cred y Pwyllgor ei bod yn addas i’w gorfodi er mwyn amddiffyn aelodau o’r cyhoedd neu er ei les ef.’
Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC)
Llywodraethwyd cyfansoddiad yr HC yn olynol gan Reolau (Cyfansoddiad Pwyllgorau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer) Gorchymyn Cyngor y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1980, 1986 a 1996 (y Rheolau Cyfansoddiad). Rhwng 1980 a 1996, roedd yr HC yn cynnwys y Cadeirydd, y Dirprwy Gadeirydd, naw aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg o’r GMC (h.y. 12 aelod i gyd).
Roedd Rheolau Cyfansoddiad 1980 a 1986 yn amodi y dylai’r Llywydd ddewis a ddymunai gadeirio’r HC. Pe dewisai peidio, byddai’n ofynnol iddo benodi aelod arall o’r GMC yn Gadeirydd. Byddai’n ofynnol hefyd i’r Llywydd benodi Dirprwy Gadeirydd. Byddai’r ddau benodiad yn amodol ar gymeradwyaeth y Cyngor. Etholwyd aelodau eraill o’r HC gan y Cyngor bob blwyddyn. Cworwm cyfreithiol yr HC oedd pump.
Ym 1996, lleihawyd aelodaeth yr HC o 12 (gan gynnwys y Cadeirydd) i naw. Byddai saith aelod o’r PPC yn aelodau meddygol a byddai dau yn aelodau lleyg. Roedd y Rheolau Cyfansoddiad yn parhau i amodi y dylai’r Llywydd gadeirio’r HC neu, pe dewisai peidio â gwneud hynny, y dylid penodi aelod arall o’r GMC yn ei le. Pe na fyddai Cadeirydd na Dirprwy Gadeirydd yr HC ar gael i gadeirio cyfarfod, roedd gan y Llywydd y pŵer i benodi aelod arall o’r HC i fod yn Gadeirydd. O 1996, cworwm cyfreithiol yr HC oedd pump, gan gynnwys un aelod lleyg. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, lleihawyd y cworwm i dri, i gynnwys o leiaf un aelod meddyg ac un aelod lleyg.
Fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 15, yn 2000, rhoddwyd y grym i’r GMC gyfethol aelodau nad ydynt yn aelodau GMC, sef rhai meddygol a lleyg, i fod ar ei bwyllgorau FTP. Cafodd casgliad o bobl felly, a gafodd eu hadnabod fel ‘dyfarnwyr’ yn gyntaf, ac yna fel ‘partneriaid’, ei recriwtio. I ddechrau, byddai partneriaid yn eistedd gydag aelodau GMC yr HC ar baneli i ystyried achosion. Ar ôl mis Gorffennaf 2003, byddai paneli’r HC fel arfer yn cynnwys partneriaid yn unig.
Cyfarfodydd y Pwyllgor Iechyd
Eisteddai’r HC yn breifat a chafodd ei gynghori gan asesydd cyfreithiol a dau asesydd meddygol. Yn gyffredinol, byddai un o’r aseswyr meddygol yn feddyg o arbenigedd y meddyg ei hun a byddai’r llall yn ymarfer yn yr arbenigedd sy’n gysylltiedig â’r cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yr honiwyd bod y meddyg yn ei ddioddef. Fel arfer, byddai’r asesydd hwn yn seiciatrydd. Byddai hawl gan y meddyg fod yn bresennol a gallai gael cynrychiolaeth gyfreithiol. Gallai ef neu hi hefyd gael cwmni neu gynrychiolaeth gan swyddog o’i sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol, neu ryw sefydliad proffesiynol arall y mae ef/hi’n aelod ohono, neu aelod o’i deulu/ei theulu, neu gyfaill, a gallai hefyd ddod â’i gynghorydd/ei chynghorydd meddygol. Ar ôl 1987, byddai hawl gan yr achwynydd (os o gwbl) ymddangos o flaen yr HC a chael ei gynrychioli/ ei chynrychioli. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai ganddo/ganddi’r hawl i gael unrhyw adroddiadau meddygol neu wybodaeth am gyflwr meddygol y meddyg a allai fod gan y GMC, a chawsai ei eithrio/ei heithrio o’r gwrandawiad oni bai at ddiben rhoi tystiolaeth a chlywed penderfyniad yr HC. Yn ymarferol, ni fyddai achwynwyr yn ymddangos yn aml, os o gwbl.
Yna, byddai cynrychiolydd y GMC yn cyflwyno’r achos ac yn galw ar dystion i roi tystiolaeth ar lafar. Cyflwynodd Reolau Iechyd 1987 ddarpariaeth a alluogai’r meddyg i alw fel tyst ofyn i awdur unrhyw ddogfen at ystyriaeth yr HC gael ei. Byddai’r achwynydd (os o gwbl) neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd yn cael gwahoddiad i annerch yr HC. Wedyn, byddai caniatâd i’r meddyg neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd annerch yr HC ac i grybwyll tystiolaeth ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Yna, byddai cynrychiolydd y GMC yn cael ei wahodd i annerch yr HC, gyda’r meddyg neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd yn cael y gair olaf.
Gohiriad neu Oediad
Ar ddiwedd yr achosion hyn, gallai’r HC ohirio’r achos er mwyn cael mwy o adroddiadau meddygol neu wybodaeth arall am gyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol y meddyg neu mewn perthynas â’i addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Pe na chredai’r HC ei bod yn briodol gohirio’r achos, roedd rhaid iddo ystyried gohirio ei ganfyddiad am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ai peidio. Cyflwynwyd y pŵer i ohirio ei ganfyddiad gan Reolau Iechyd 1987. Diben y pŵer hwn oedd galluogi’r HC i roi meddyg ‘ar brawf’ ar sail ymrwymiadau a roddwyd gan y meddyg i’r HC, gan felly osgoi’r angen i orfodi amodau ffurfiol neu wahardd cofrestriad. Nid yw’n debyg y defnyddiwyd y pŵer hwn o gwbl.
Pe na ystyriai’r HC ei bod yn briodol gohirio’r achos neu ohirio ei ganfyddiad, roedd rhaid iddo ystyried a phennu a oedd nam difrifol ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer oherwydd ei gyflwr/ ei chyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Pe na fyddai’r HC yn canfod unrhyw nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ni fyddai ganddo unrhyw bŵer i gymryd unrhyw gamau pellach. Roedd Rheolau Iechyd 1987 yn amodi y dylai’r HC, wrth lunio’i farn, fod â’r hawl i ystyried nid yn unig cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol cyfredol y meddyg fel nam difrifol cyfredol ond hefyd cyflwr parhaus neu episodaidd, neu gyflwr sydd, er ei fod wedi ysgafnhau ar hyn o bryd, yn bygwth ailadrodd nam difrifol. Yn 2003, darganfu’r HC nad oedd unrhyw nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer mewn 17 o 141 o achosion.
Mewn achos lle gwrthodai’r meddyg archwiliad meddygol neu lle fethai’r meddyg gael archwiliad, roedd gan yr HC hawl, pe tybiai fod hyn yn addas, i ddarganfod bod nam difrifol ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ar sail y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael i’r HC, ynghyd â’r meddyg yn gwrthod neu’n methu cael archwiliad.
Pe barnai’r HC fod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, roedd rhaid iddo ystyried a phennu nesaf a oedd yn ddigonol cyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg fod yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth/ei chydymffurfiaeth â gofynion y tybiai’r HC eu bod yn addas i’w gorfodi naill ai er mwyn amddiffyn y cyhoedd neu er lles y meddyg ei hun. Byddai gofynion o’r fath bob amser yn cynnwys amod fod rhaid i’r meddyg dderbyn goruchwyliaeth feddygol, a gallent hefyd gynnwys cyfyngiadau ar ymarfer y meddyg ac amodau yn gysylltiedig â thriniaeth feddygol. Roedd angen caniatâd y meddyg i unrhyw amodau sy’n gysylltiedig â rheolaeth feddygol ei achos/ ei hachos. Roedd yn ofynnol i’r HC benodi cyfnod ar gyfer y cofrestriad amodol; ni allai’r cyfnod fod yn fwy na thair blynedd. Pe penderfynai’r HC nad oedd yn ddigonol gorfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg, roedd yn ofynnol iddo gyfarwyddo y dylid atal ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis. Mewn achos priodol, gallai’r HC orchymyn y dylai’r ataliad ddigwydd ar unwaith, yn hytrach na chael ei ohirio tan ddiwedd cyfnod yr apêl, neu, pe byddai apêl yn cael ei chyflwyno, tan benderfyniad yr apêl. Nid oedd gan yr HC unrhyw bŵer i atgyfeirio meddyg yn ôl i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Penderfyniad y Pwyllgor Iechyd
Cymerwyd penderfyniadau’r HC ar sail mwyafrif syml. Pe byddai’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, rhaid oedd penderfynu’r cwestiwn dan sylw o blaid y meddyg dan sylw. Amododd Reolau Iechyd 1987 y dylai’r Cadeirydd gyhoeddi penderfyniad neu benderfyniadau’r HC
‘mewn modd y byddai’r Pwyllgor yn ei gymeradwyo’
. Am lawer blwyddyn, ni roddai’r HC unrhyw resymau dros ei benderfyniadau. Yn fwy diweddar, cynhwysai’r HC yn ei benderfyniad arwydd o’r cyflwr a oedd yn nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ynghyd ag esboniad am y sancsiwn a orfodir.
Mewn achos lle cyfarwyddodd yr HC y dylid atal cofrestriad y meddyg neu roi amodau arno, roedd angen hefyd iddo, wrth gyhoeddi ei benderfyniad, nodi y byddai’n ailystyried yr achos cyn diwedd cyfnod yr ataliad neu’r cofrestriad amodol. Wrth baratoi ar gyfer y gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, byddai angen ar yr HC adroddiad gan oruchwyliwr meddygol y meddyg ac, o bosib, o’r meddyg sy’n rhoi’r driniaeth. Gallai’r HC fynnu hefyd i’r meddyg gael archwiliad meddygol pellach cyn ailagor y gwrandawiad. Gwnaed y trefniadau angenrheidiol ar gyfer gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd gan staff y GMC, yn gweithredu dan gyfarwyddiadau’r sgriniwr iechyd. Yn y cyfamser, byddai’n arferol i’r sgriniwr iechyd ofyn am adroddiadau dros dro gan oruchwyliwr meddygol y meddyg, ynghyd â chanlyniadau profion. Pe câi’r sgriniwr iechyd wybodaeth fod y meddyg yn methu cydymffurfio â’r amodau a orfodwyd yn flaenorol ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad neu bod yna reswm dros amrywio’r amodau, gallai ef/hi atgyfeirio’r achos er mwyn ailagor y gwrandawiad yn gynnar.
Pan fyddai’r HC yn atal cofrestriad meddyg, gallai, mewn gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, gyfarwyddo cyfnod pellach o ataliad heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis, i ddechrau ar unwaith ar ôl diwedd y cyfnod cyntaf. Fel arall, gallai gyfarwyddo bod cofrestriad y meddyg yn destun amodau o ddiwedd cyfnod yr ataliad. Gallai gyfarwyddo y dylai’r amodau barhau yn eu lle am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na thair blynedd.
Lle gorfodai’r HC amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, gallai, mewn gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, gyfarwyddo y dylid ymestyn cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis ar y tro. Hefyd, roedd gan yr HC bŵer, mewn gwrandawiad a ailagorwyd, i amrywio neu ddirymu unrhyw rai o’r amodau a orfodwyd. Pe barnai’r HC fod meddyg wedi methu cydymffurfio ag unrhyw rai o’r amodau, gall gyfarwyddo y dylid atal ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis.
Gwaharddiad Amhenodol
Dros y blynyddoedd ar ôl cychwyn y gweithdrefnau iechyd, cynyddodd nifer y meddygon dan awdurdod yr HC yn gyson. Dioddefai rhai meddygon o gyflyrau hirfaith ac roedd yn anhebygol y byddent yn addas i ddychwelyd i ymarfer am lawer blwyddyn, os byth. Tan 1996, yr unig opsiwn a oedd gan yr HC wrth ddelio â meddygon felly oedd eu hatal am 12 mis, dod â nhw yn ôl am adolygiad o’u hachos tuag at ddiwedd cyfnod yr ataliad ac yna eu hatal eto. Roedd hyn yn creu llwyth gwaith trwm diangen i’r HC, yn gwastraffu adnoddau a gallai roi llawer o straen ar y meddyg dan sylw. Archwiliodd yr HC strategaethau posibl amrywiol ar gyfer dileu’r broblem hon; cynigiodd math o wrandawiad byrrach a’r defnydd o gofrestriad amodol yn lle ataliad. Awgrymodd hefyd y dylai gael y pŵer i orfodi cyfnodau hirach o ataliad. Ym 1996, cafodd y broblem ei datrys pan gafodd yr HC y pŵer i atal meddyg am gyfnod amhenodol. Gellid ymarfer y pŵer hwn pan roedd y meddyg eisoes wedi’i atal ers dwy flynedd neu fwy. Gallai’r meddyg wneud cais am adolygiad o gyfarwyddyd ar gyfer ataliad amhenodol, ond nid cyn dwy flynedd ar ôl y dyddiad y cafodd ei roi mewn grym ac yna nid yn fwy nag unwaith mewn unrhyw gyfnod o ddwy flynedd. Galluogodd y pŵer i orfodi ataliad amhenodol yr HC i gau rhai o’i achosion mwyaf anhydrin. Rhwng 1996 a 2003, ataliwyd tua 50 meddyg am gyfnod amhenodol.
Llywodraethwyd apeliadau o benderfyniadau’r HC gan adran 40 Deddf 1983. Tan fis Ebrill 2003, roedd gan feddyg a oedd yn destun cyfarwyddyd am ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol (neu amrywiad o’r amodau a orfodwyd gan gyfarwyddyd am gofrestriad amodol) hawl i apelio i Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor. O fis Ebrill 2003, caniatawyd apeliadau i’r Llys Uwch. Tan 2003, caniatawyd apêl ar gwestiwn o gyfraith yn unig. Yn 2003, gwaredwyd y cyfyngiad hwnnw.

---  ---
Integreiddio’r Gweithdrefnau Iechyd gyda’r Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Eraill
Dywedodd Mr Howes ei bod yn ddigwyddiad eithaf prin i feddyg a oedd yn cael ei drafod yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol fod yn destun adroddiad dilynol o gamymddwyn posibl. Pe byddai adroddiad o’r fath yn cael ei dderbyn, ei ‘reddf’ ei hun fyddai edrych am elfen iechyd, yn gysylltiedig â salwch y meddyg, a allai esbonio’r camymddwyn honedig. Pe na fyddai cyswllt o’r fath yn amlwg, byddai wedi argymell camau ymddygiad. Pe byddai unrhyw ffactor cysylltu amlwg, dywedodd y byddai wedi ‘ei adael i’r sgrinwyr iechyd ac ymddygiad i ddadlau pa lwybr y dylai’r achos ei ddilyn’. Roedd yn brin iawn i feddyg gael achos iechyd ac ymddygiad yn digwydd ar yr un pryd.
Pe byddai achos yn symud trwy’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ac y byddai pryderon iechyd yn codi a warantai atgyfeiriad at y gweithdrefnau iechyd, byddai’r camau perfformiad yn cael eu ‘rhewi’. I’r gwrthwyneb, pe byddai achos yn peri gofidion am iechyd a pherfformiad, tybier bod y problemau perfformiad yn gysylltiedig ag iechyd. Ni fyddai atgyfeiriad i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Ar ôl i’r meddyg gael ei iechyd/ei hiechyd yn ôl, byddai ymdrech i gyflwyno ef/hi yn ôl i ymarfer yn raddol ar ôl rhaglen o ailhyfforddiant a drefnir gan y deon ôl-raddedig lleol ond ni fyddai unrhyw asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei gynnal.
Safbwyntiau am yr Hen Weithdrefnau Iechyd
Dywedodd Dr Mann nad oedd hi o gwbl yn ystyried bod atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn ‘opsiwn hawdd’ o gymharu ag atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Gallai’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol barhau am flynyddoedd, hyd yn oed am weddill bywyd proffesiynol y meddyg. Roedd yr ymrwymiadau yn aml yn eithaf llym, gyda goblygiadau sylweddol ar y meddyg i lynu wrthynt. Dywedodd fod yng nghefn meddyliau pawb y ffaith, pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn glynu wrth y goblygiadau dan y gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol, y gellid ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio at yr HC a allai arwain at waharddiad amhenodol.
Pwysleisiodd Mr Howes nad oedd yn ymddangos iddo, yr adeg a weithiodd yn Adran Iechyd y GMC, fod y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn ‘opsiwn hawdd’ o gymharu â’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Cyfaddefodd na fyddai meddyg yr oedd ei achos yn cael ei drafod dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol mewn perygl o ddilead. Fodd bynnag, nododd, pe byddai meddyg yn cael ei atgyfeirio i’r PCC, gallai gael rhybudd, gellid gohirio dyfarniad neu gellid atal ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad am gyfnod byr. Hyd yn oed pe byddai ei enw/ei henw’n cael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr, gallai ef/hi gael ei adfer/ei hadfer ‘dwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach’ (roedd hyn ar adeg pan ellid gwneud y cais cyntaf am adferiad ddeg mis ar ôl dilead, fel y gallai hyd yn oed meddyg a wnaeth un cais aflwyddiannus gael ei adfer ar ei ail/ei hail gais o fewn dwy flynedd). I’r gwrthwyneb, nid oedd gan yr HC unrhyw bŵer i rybuddio. O ganlyniad, roedd bron pob achos lle canfuwyd nam difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn arwain at ataliad ar gofrestriad y meddyg, neu osod amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Yn rhan fwyaf yr achosion, byddai’r meddyg yn dod yn ôl o flaen yr HC ar un neu ddau achlysur a byddai’n cael ataliad neu amodau pellach. Bu ataliad amhenodol hefyd ar gael yn ddiweddar. Dywedodd Mr Howes y credai fod yr HC ‘yn Bwyllgor eithaf caled erbyn hyn’. Roedd wedi dysgu gwasgu dannedd’. Dywedodd:
‘Hyd yn oed ei fod yn cynnwys meddygon yn bennaf, maent wedi dysgu nad ydynt yn unig yn trin meddyg sâl, maent yn amddiffyn y cyhoedd a gwnaethant ddeall hynny yn eithaf cynnar yn y 1980au. Roedd yn ysgytwad diwylliannol i Bwyllgor o feddygon ond gwnaethant ei ddeall yn eithaf cynnar a dysgu bod gorfodi rhyw fath o sancsiwn yn helpu’r meddyg hyd yn oed mewn llawer achos.’
Nododd Dr Mann mai un o gryfderau’r gweithdrefnau iechyd yw’r ffaith y buont yn dderbyniol i nifer fawr o feddygon (er nad oeddent i gyd yn feddygon) yr amheuwyd eu hiechyd ar ryw adeg neu’i gilydd. Teimlai fod y gweithdrefnau’n darparu gwir gymhelliad i barhau i ymwrthod â diod neu gyffuriau oherwydd goblygiadau ataliad ar fywoliaeth meddyg. Teimlai hefyd fod y GMC wedi datblygu rhwydwaith da o arbenigwyr galluog i archwilio ac i oruchwylio meddygon sâl. Roedd hefyd yn gweithio trwy achosion yn gyflym.
Tybiai Dr Mann mai prif wendid y gweithdrefnau iechyd yw eu harwahaniad o faterion perfformiad. Roedd angen monitro’r ddau ar yr un pryd. Dywedodd y byddai’n braf cael rhyd ‘asesiad hawdd’ o berfformiad meddyg a allai gysylltu ag iechyd a materion eraill. Cymerai asesiadau perfformiad llawn y GMC amser hir, er eu bod yn fanwl ac yn ddefnyddiol, ac roeddent yn feichus ac yn ddrud o ran arian ac amser meddygon. Dywedodd, pe byddai arfarniad yn cynhyrchu tystiolaeth gadarn am berfformiad meddyg ar ôl asesiad, gallai hynny ddatrys y broblem. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos i mi na fydd y broblem yn cael ei datrys yn y modd hwnnw, o leiaf mor belled ag y mae meddygon teulu dan sylw. Ar hyn o bryd, nid yw arfarniad meddygon teulu yn cynnwys unrhyw fath o asesiad.
Dywedodd Mr Howes fod adfer meddygon sâl yn broblem. Pe byddai meddyg yn teimlo bod rhaid iddo/iddi roi’r gorau i waith o ganlyniad i’w salwch (p’un ai’n wirfoddol neu o ganlyniad i ataliad), gallai ef/hi fod yn anghyfarwydd â’r gwaith erbyn iddo/iddi fod yn addas i ddychwelyd i’r gwaith. Yn aml, byddai meddyg yn dymuno newid arbenigeddau yr adeg honno a gallai fod angen arno ddysgu sgiliau newydd er mwyn gwneud hynny. Dywedodd Mr Howes fod y GMC yn ymwybodol iawn o’r broblem a byddai wedi hoffi gweld system (efallai system GIG) lle gallai meddygon felly gael ‘hyfforddiant atgoffa’ yn eu harbengiedd eu hunain, neu gael ailhyfforddiant mewn gwahanol arbenigedd. Fel y bu hi, byddai’r GMC yn dibynnu ar y deonau ôl-raddedig i ddyfeisio cynlluniau atgoffa
i feddygon a oedd yn dychwelyd i’r un arbenigedd ag o’r blaen. Roedd sefyllfa meddyg a ddymunai newid arbenigedd yn fwy anodd. Dros y blynyddoedd, mae’r GMC wedi annog mentrau fel cyflwyno cynghorwyr cysylltu lleol i gefnogi meddygon wrth adfer a darparu swyddi ychwanegol heb gyfrifoldeb clinigol ar gyfer ailhyfforddi ac adfer meddygon a fu’n absennol o’r gwaith ers cryn dipyn ac sydd wedi colli eu sgiliau o ganlyniad.
Dywedodd Dr Mann fod yr ateb i broblem adfer yn amrywio o un achos i’r llall. Dibynnai ar ba ran o’r wlad yr oedd y meddyg. Pe byddai meddyg i ffwrdd o’r gwaith am dipyn o amser, byddai ymdrechion i drefnu rhaglen hyfforddiant. Gallai meddyg ysbyty gael swydd ychwanegol wrth gael ei asesu. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai swydd o’r fath ar gael bob amser a, hyd yn oed pe byddai, efallai na fyddai’r oruchwyliaeth a’r asesu o ansawdd da. Gallai’r deonau ôl-raddedig lleol gymryd rhan ond roeddent ‘dan bwysau’. Mae’n ymddangos i mi fod diffyg unrhyw asesu i sicrhau bod perfformiad a gallu clinigol meddyg yn foddhaol cyn ei ganiatáu/ei chaniatáu i ddychwelyd i ymarfer ar ôl cyfnod o iechyd gwael yn
gwirioneddol yng ngweithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd.

---  ---
Fel a ddywedais, roedd Dr Mann a Mr Howes o’r farn bod y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn gweithio’n dda, yn darparu’r radd gywir o amddiffyniad i gleifion a’r cyhoedd ac nid oeddent yn ‘opsiwn hawdd’ i feddygon. Er mwyn profi’r barnau hyn, ystyriodd yr Ymchwiliad nifer fawr o ffeiliau o achosion a oedd wedi dod at y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Trafodwyd rhai yn ystod tystiolaeth Dr Mann. Roedd gan yr Ymchwiliad, wrth reswm, ddiddordeb mewn achosion a oedd yn debyg mewn rhyw ffordd i achos Shipman ym 1976. Dymunais yn benodol archwilio rhyngweithio’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad ac iechyd mewn achosion a gynhwysai elfennau o gamymddwyn a salwch.
Achosion a Gaewyd gan y Sgrinwyr Iechyd
Ystyriodd yr Ymchwiliad un achos ar bymtheg a gaewyd gan Dr Mann rhwng 2000 a 2003. Ni chododd un o’r achosion hynny unrhyw bryderon y caewyd achos heb rhoi’r ystyriaeth briodol i’r angen i amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Dymunaf sôn am un achos yn unig, sef achos Dr KI 01, gan ei fod yn dangos y modd y deliwyd â materion ymddygiad yn aml ac yn dangos yr annhegwch posibl i feddygon a allai godi trwy weithredu’r gweithdrefnau.
Roedd Dr KI 01 yn llawfeddyg. Ar un achlysur, mynychodd y gwaith dan ddylanwad alcohol. Dechreuodd gynnal llawdriniaeth ac roedd yn amlwg yn fuan i’r staff nyrsio ei fod yn ei chael yn anodd defnyddio’r offer a’r cyfarpar angenrheidiol. Galwodd y staff nyrsio am gymorth ond, cyn i hwn gyrraedd, roedd y meddyg wedi cwympo ar droli offer. Aethpwyd ag ef o’r theatr. Cychwynnodd ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty wrandawiadau disgyblu. Ni ddadleuodd y meddyg y cyhuddiad y bu dan ddylanwad diod feddwol. Derbyniwyd y bu dan straen sylweddol gartref ac yn y gwaith. Roedd wedi yfed ar yr un achlysur hwn i helpu iddo ymdopi â straen. Mae’n ymddangos nad oedd ganddo broblem yfed hirfaith. Rhoddwyd rhybudd ysgrifenedig terfynol iddo a chaniatawyd iddo ddychwelyd i’r gwaith dan drefniadau goruchwyliaeth achos.
Adroddodd yr ymddiriedolaeth yr achos hefyd at y GMC. Tybiodd y GMC fod yr achos yn achos iechyd yn hytrach nag achos ymddygiad ac fe’i atgyfeiriwyd at Dr Mann. Bu cyswllt rhwng y GMC a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty. Ni ddymunai’r Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol gynnwys y GMC. Ystyriai fod y sefyllfa dan reolaeth dda gan yr ymddiriedolaeth. Roedd y mesurau a gymerwyd yn lleol yn gwneud argraff dda ar Dr Mann. Lluniodd y farn bod y sefyllfa dan reolaeth yn sicr ac nad oedd unrhyw resymau amddiffyn cleifion dros gychwyn y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Penderfynodd gau’r achos. Pan ofynnwyd iddi yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad pam nad oedd wedi atgyfeirio’r achos at y sgriniwr meddygol i ystyried y materion ymddygiad, ni allai Dr Mann gofio. Nid yw hynny’n syndod, gan ei bod yn delio â llawer o achosion, ond mae’n tanlinellu’r doethineb o gofnodi rhesymau dros benderfyniad ar y pryd. Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd ychydig o drafod ynghylch pam y gallai fod wedi penderfynu peidio ag atgyfeirio’r achos at y sgriniwr meddygol. Un posibilrwydd oedd fod y meddyg eisoes wedi cael rhybudd ysgrifenedig terfynol yng nghyd-destun ei gyflogaeth a hwyrach y tybiodd Dr Mann nad oedd llawer o bwynt rhoi rhybudd arall iddo gan y PPC neu’r PCC. Fel y digwyddodd, canlyniad penderfyniad Dr Mann oedd bod y meddyg wedi osgoi unrhyw gamau disgyblu gan y GMC ac wedi dianc y posibilrwydd o record FTP. Pe byddai’r achos wedi’i atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, byddai’r sgriniwr mae’n siwr wedi’i atgyfeirio at y PPC. Ni allaf ddweud a fyddai’r PPC wedi atgyfeirio’r achos at y PCC neu gau’r achos gyda llythyr rhybudd neu lythyr cyngor.
Y pwynt yr hoffwn ei wneud yw bod y modd y mae’r GMC yn delio ag achos yn dibynnu’n helaeth ar siawns. Pe byddai’r achos wedi cael ei adrodd, nid gan ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty, ond gan y claf a oedd wedi darganfod yr hyn a ddigwyddodd, byddai’r achos bron yn sicr wedi cael ei ystyried i ddechrau fel achos ymddygiad. Gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol wedi ymgynghori â Dr Mann ynghylch a gododd mater iechyd. Pe byddai Dr Mann wedi trefnu archwiliad meddygol wedyn neu ymgynghori ag ymddiriedolaeth yr ysbyty, byddai wedi llunio’r farn i bob pwrpas, fel y gwnaeth mewn gwirionedd, nad oedd unrhyw reswm cychwyn gweithdrefnau iechyd. Byddai’r achos wedi symud ymlaen fel mater ymddygiad a dylai, o ystyried ei ddifrifoldeb, fod wedi mynd at y PCC. Pe byddai hynny wedi digwydd, ymddengys yn debygol y byddai rhyw fath o sancsiwn wedi’i orfodi, sef rhybudd i bob tebyg. Byddai gan y meddyg record FTP. Mae’r potensial am wahaniaethau o ran triniaeth sy’n dibynnu nid ar ffeithiau’r achos, ond ar siawns, yn peri gofid. Yn ogystal, gallai cofnodi rhybudd, fel hanes FTP, fod yn bwysig i amddiffyn cleifion. Pe byddai digwyddiad tebyg yn digwydd yn y dyfodol, dylid ei ystyried yn erbyn cefndir yr un cyntaf.
Achosion a Drafodir yn y Gweithdrefnau Gwirfoddol
Mae achos Dr JB 08 yn dangos yn dda y ffordd yr oedd y sgrinwyr iechyd, tan y 1990au hwyr, weithiau’n amharod i atgyfeirio achosion at yr HC er gwathaf achosion difrifol, niferus o dorri ymrwymiadau. Yn y 1980au cynnar, cafwyd y meddyg, sef meddyg teulu, yn euog o gael tabledi palfium trwy dwyll a meddiant anghyfreithlon ar y cyffur hwnnw. Ystyriodd y llys nifer fawr o droseddau ac roedd yn amlwg y bu’r meddyg yn cymryd y tabledi hyn ei hun dros gyfnod sylweddol o amser. Ystyriodd y PPC yr achos, a’i ohirio am 12 mis ar yr achlysur cyntaf, a’i ohirio wedyn am bedwar mis pellach ar gyfer adroddiadau meddygol. Pan gafwyd yr adroddiadau, roeddent yn datgelu nad oedd y meddyg yn ddibynnol ar palfium bellach. Yna, caeodd y PPC yr achos heb rybudd. Oedaf i nodi bod ffeithiau’r achos hwn yn debyg i ffeithiau achos Shipman. Er bod y gweithdrefnau iechyd eisoes ar waith yr adeg hon, ni atgyfeiriwyd Dr JB 08 atynt; deliwyd â’i achos yn yr un modd ag y deliwyd ag achos Shipman ym 1976.
Tua tair blynedd yn ddiweddarach, cafodd y GMC wybodaeth o PCO a awgrymai y gallai’r meddyg fod yn dioddef o salwch meddwl a phroblemau yn gysylltiedig â chyffuriau. Mae’n ymddangos ei fod wedi rhoi’r gorau i ymarfer yn ddiweddar. Naw mis yn ddiweddarach, gwahoddodd y GMC i’r meddyg gael archwiliad meddygol. Cafwyd dau adroddiad o wahanol archwilwyr meddygol. Cawsant eu dosbarthu bron blwyddyn ar wahân. Dywedodd y ddau fod y meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd ei fod yn cam-drin alcohol a chyffuriau. Ychydig dan dwy flynedd ar ôl adroddiad y PCO, cytunodd y meddyg roi ymrwymiadau. Byddai’n rhoi ei hun dan oruchwyliaeth, peidio â gwneud unrhyw fath o ymarfer meddygol ac ymwrthod yn llwyr ag alcohol a hunanfeddygaeth. Chwe mis yn ddiweddarach, roedd yr adroddiad cyntaf gan y goruchwyliwr meddygol yn siomedig. Roedd y meddyg yn yfed alcohol a bu’n cyhoeddi presgripsiynau ar gyfer tawelyddion, i’w gydbreswyliwr i bob golwg, ond credai’r goruchwyliwr fod y meddyg yn cymryd o leiaf rhai ohonynt ei hun. Roedd yn amlwg bod yna achosion lluosog o dorri’r ymrwymiadau. Cynghorwyd y meddyg y byddai’n parhau dan oruchwyliaeth a na fyddai’n cael ei atgyfeirio at yr HC yr adeg honno. Casglodd adroddiad nesaf y goruchwyliwr meddygol fod y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau ond ei fod yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd nam anferthol ar ei weithrediadau seicolegol. Chwe mis yn ddiweddarach, adroddodd y goruchwyliwr fod y meddyg yn yfed alcohol. Hefyd, bu’r meddyg yn cymryd bensodiasepinau ar bresgripsiwn gan ei feddyg teulu yn ogystal â’r rheiny ar bresgripsiwn gan y goruchwyliwr meddygol; roedd wedi twyllo ei feddyg teulu i’w rhoi iddo. Eto, ni atgyfeiriodd y sgriniwr iechyd yr achos at yr HC. Dilynodd cyfnod pellach o chwe mlynedd ac yn ystod y cyfnod hwn, roedd holl adroddiadau’r goruchwyliwr ac eithrio dau yn dangos bod y meddyg yn parhau i dorri ei ymrwymiadau. Yn y pen draw, bron i ddeg mlynedd ar ôl i’r PCO adrodd problemau’r meddyg, atgyfeiriwyd yr achos at yr HC. Ataliodd yr HC ef rhag ymarfer ac adnewyddu’r ataliadau yn gyfnodol tan rai blynyddoedd yn ôl, pan waharddwyd ef yn amhenodol.
Derbyniaf nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth fod y meddyg hwn wedi torri ei ymrwymiad i beidio ag ymarfer meddygaeth. Felly, nid oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth ei fod yn risg i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos i mi fod y sgriniwr iechyd yn oddefgar iawn o achosion niferus y meddyg o dorri ymrwymiadau. Yn fy marn i, byddai’n llawer gwell petai’r meddyg wedi’i atgyfeirio at yr HC sawl blwyddyn yn gynt. Yn gyntaf, er ei les ei hun, pe byddai wedi’i atal, ni allai roi cyffuriau ar bresgripsiwn a byddai un math o demtasiwn wedi’i waredu. Yn ail, mae’n ymddangos i mi na all y GMC golli golwg ar ei rôl fel rheoleiddiwr. Mae yna berygl y bydd yn cymryd y rôl o drin meddyg bron. Wrth gwrs, fel y cydnabu Pwyllgor Merrison, wrth argymell cychwyn y gweithdrefnau iechyd, fod rhaid i’r GMC gael ffyrdd dyngarol o ddelio â meddygon sâl. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i’r GMC daro’r cydbwysedd cywir rhwng yr angen am ddyngarwch a rôl briodol corff rheoleiddio. Gallaf weld y gall hyn fod yn anodd gwneud.
Mae achos Dr JE 02 yn dangos llawer o’r anawsterau y gall y GMC eu profi wrth weithredu’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ac yn amlygu rhai o ddiffygion y gweithdrefnau hynny.
Dechreuodd anawsterau Dr JE 02 ar ddechrau’r 1990au pan ddechreuodd ddefnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig, er mwyn lleddfu straen i bob golwg, tra’i fod yn gweithio fel meddyg teulu. Dywedodd wrth ei bartneriaid am hyn; gwnaethant addasu ei lwyth gwaith ac ymddangosai popeth yn dda. Fodd bynnag, tua dwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach, sylwodd un o’r partneriaid y bu’r meddyg yn gwneud nifer fawr o gofnodion yng nghofrestr cyffuriau rheoledig y practis. Gwadodd y meddyg ei fod wedi ailddechrau cymryd cyffuriau ond roedd y partneriaid yn gofidio digon i’w adrodd i’r GMC.
Trosglwyddwyd y gŵyn i’r sgriniwr iechyd. Cyfeiriodd memorandwm y gweithiwr achos at y meddyg yn gwadu cam-drin cyffuriau ac at absenoldeb unrhyw dystiolaeth uniongyrchol ohono. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos fod y sgriniwr iechyd yn ei amau ac y gofynnodd i’r meddyg i gael archwiliad meddygol. Cytunodd y meddyg a chafodd y GMC adroddiadau gan ddau archwiliwr meddygol. Cafodd yr archwiliwr cyntaf drafferth yn cyrraedd casgliad am gam-drin cyffuriau diweddar oherwydd diffyg tystiolaeth glir. Dywedodd,
‘mae’r dystiolaeth sy’n ffafrio’r farn ei fod yn defnyddio opiadau eto ... yn eithaf cymhellgar’
. Nododd yr archwiliwr fod defnydd y meddyg o opiadau, at ddibenion proffesiynol i bob golwg, ddeg gwaith cymaint â defnydd ei bartneriaid. Casglodd y bu Dr JE 02, i bob tebyg, yn cam-drin opiadau a mynegodd y farn nad oedd unrhyw gam-drin yn ganlyniad unrhyw anhwylder meddyliol ffurfiol, nac yn gysylltiedig â hyn. Cynghorodd yr archwiliwr fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer yn amodol ar gyfyngiadau. Nododd yr ail archwiliwr nad oedd llawer o dystiolaeth o gymryd cyffuriau a bod y profion troeth yn negyddol. Cynghorodd fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau.
Felly, ni chafwyd unrhyw gytundeb rhwng yr archwilwyr ynghylch a aeth Dr JE 02 yn ôl at gam-drin opiadau. Pan ofynnwyd iddi a ddylai’r mater hwn fod wedi’i bennu cyn penderfynu sut i symud ymlaen, mynegodd Dr Mann y farn nad oedd yn credu y byddai wedi cyflawni llawer. Roedd y dystiolaeth yn ansicr, ond roedd yna sail wirioneddol am amau y bu’r meddyg yn cam-drin cyffuriau. Felly, byddai’r GMC yn cymryd y farn y dylid rhoi cyfyngiadau ar y meddyg er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion er na sefydlwyd y ffeithiau. Fel a ddywedais yn achos Dr JO 04, a drafodwyd gennyf ym Mhennod 20, roedd yna achlysuron pan ddeliwyd â meddygon dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, er gwaethaf y ffaith na sefydlwyd eu bod yn ddibynnol ar gyffuriau neu’n gaeth iddynt. Gallaf weld y gellir cyfiawnhau ymagwedd o’r fath ar sail amddiffyn cleifion, er yr ymddengys i mi y gallai achosi problemau yn y dyfodol. Gofynnwyd i Dr Mann beth fyddai wedi digwydd, mewn achos fel hwn, pe byddai’r meddyg wedi gwrthod glynu wrth yr ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol ar ôl cytuno iddynt yn wreiddiol. Dywedodd y tybiai y byddai’r weithred o roi ymrwymiadau yn cael ei ystyried fel derbyn yn ddealledig fod gan y meddyg broblem cyffuriau. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai’r achos wedi’i atgyfeirio at yr HC am dorri ymrwymiadau’r meddyg, byddai’n rhaid i’r HC benderfynu a oedd nam difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Mae’n ymddangos yn amheuol iawn i mi y byddai ‘derbyn yn ddealledig’ yn ddigon i sefydlu bod nam o’r fath. Hefyd, pe byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei adrodd i’r GMC eto, yn ddiweddarach, byddai’n agored iddo ddweud na sefydlwyd o gwbl yn flaenorol ei fod wedi cam-drin cyffuriau, neu ei fod wedi dioddef o nam difrifol ar ei addasrwydd i ymarfer oherwydd iechyd gwael.
Fel y bu hi, gofynnodd y sgriniwr iechyd i Dr JE 02 roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol, gan gynnwys ymrwymiadau (i) i ymatal rhag unrhyw hunanfeddygaeth (ii) i gydymffurfio’n llawn â’r rheoliadau cyffuriau rheoledig a (iii) i beidio ag ymgymryd ag ymarfer cyffredinol ar ei ben ei hun. Roedd absenoldeb unrhyw ymrwymiad mewn perthynas â hawliau’r meddyg i ragnodi yn amlwg. Esboniodd Dr Mann i’r Ymchwiliad fod rhywfaint o amharodrwydd, ar yr adeg y dyfeisiwyd yr ymrwymiadau hyn, i roi gwybodaeth am ymrwymiadau i gydweithwyr y meddyg. Pe byddai cyfyngiad wedi’i roi ar ei hawliau i ragnodi, byddai’n rhaid dweud wrth unrhyw feddyg yr aeth i bartneriaeth ag ef. Dywedodd, yr adeg honno, fod torri cyfrinachedd meddyg yn y modd hwn yn drosedd erchyll. Mae gan amddiffyn cleifion broffil uwch erbyn hyn.
Cytunodd y meddyg i ddarparu’r ymrwymiadau a phenodwyd goruchwyliwr meddygol a gyflwynodd ei adroddiad cyntaf chwe mis yn hwyrach. Cyfeiriodd y goruchwyliwr at y ffaith bod Dr JE 02 wedi dechrau gwaith yn ddiweddar mewn practis meddyg teulu newydd ac nad oedd y partner newydd yn gwybod unrhyw beth am broblemau iechyd blaenorol y meddyg. Wrth roi ei thystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, cyfaddefodd Dr Mann fod cuddio’r ymrwymiadau ar ymarfer y meddyg o’r rheiny yr oedd angen arnynt wybod yn ‘ffordd wirion’ o gynnal goruchwyliaeth. O ran y sefyllfa bresennol, dywedodd Dr Mann y byddai disgwyl i feddyg roi gwybod i’w bartneriaid/ei phartneriaid am ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yr oedd ef/hi wedi’u rhoi.
Ychydig ar ôl rhoi ei ymrwymiadau, symudodd y meddyg i wahanol ardal. O ganlyniad, roedd yn anodd cysylltu â’r goruchwyliwr meddygol a mynegodd y sgriniwr iechyd bryder am brinder yr adroddiadau. Yn y pen draw, awgrymodd y goruchwyliwr benodi gwahanol oruchwyliwr yn agosach at weithle’r meddyg. Nododd Dr Mann fod gormod o bellter rhwng goruchwyliwr meddygol a meddyg yn lleihau’r cyfle am oruchwyliaeth effeithiol. Ac felly, wrth gwrs - fel y mae’n debyg i mi - y bydd newid y goruchwylwyr yn aml. Yn yr achos hwn, dros y blynyddoedd, cafodd Dr JE 02 chynifer â phum goruchwyliwr; digwyddodd y newidiadau am sawl rheswm. Nododd Dr Mann fod y diffyg parhad hwn o ran gofal yn broblem benodol pe byddai’r meddyg yn ddirprwy heb unrhyw fan gwaith sefydlog.
Yn dilyn hyn, ysgrifennodd y partner ym mhractis newydd Dr JE 02 at y GMC, gan ddatgan y bu’r meddyg yn archebu llawer iawn o diamorphine a’i fod wedi cyfaddef i roi diamorffin a phethidin i’w hun. Ystyriai’r partner for Dr JE 02 yn anaddas i ymarfer. Felly, ar y cyfnod hwn, roedd y meddyg yn torri ei ymrwymiadau. Ni nodwyd hyn iddo hyd yn oed pan ysgrifennodd y GMC ato am ei ailwaeledd. Ni allai Dr Mann esbonio hyn, gan nad hi oedd y sgriniwr iechyd ar y pryd. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd nad ystyriwyd atgyfeirio at yr HC yn aml bryd hynny. Ers iddi fod yn sgriniwr iechyd, ei harfer hi fyddai peidio ag atgyfeirio meddyg at yr HC am dorri ymrwymiad unwaith er y byddai’n gwneud hynny pe byddai tystiolaeth o’u torri sawl gwaith neu dwyll gwirioneddol. Ychwanegodd nad oedd unrhyw fecanwaith ar gyfer atgyfeirio achos i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, ar ôl rhoi achos yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yr unig ffordd y gallai meddyg ddod yn ôl i’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad oedd pe byddai cyhuddiad arall o gamymddwyn neu gollfarn yn cael ei adrodd.
Yng ngoleuni ailwaeledd y meddyg, penderfynodd y sgriniwr iechyd benodi arbenigwr mewn dibyniaeth ar gyffuriau fel goruchwyliwr meddygol. Esboniodd Dr Mann fod hyn yn arferol bellach. Mynnodd y sgriniwr iechyd hefyd i’r meddyg ymrwymo i ymatal rhag ymarfer meddygol tan roddwyd caniatâd iddo ailddechrau. Nododd adroddiad cyntaf y goruchwyliwr newydd fod Dr JE 02 wedi cyfaddef cam-drin opiadau am tua pedair blynedd a chamddefnyddio cyffuriau o bractisiau meddyg teulu lle’r oedd wedi gweithio. Fodd bynnag, honnodd ei fod bellach yn rhydd o gyffuriau. Cynghorodd y goruchwyliwr fod Dr JE 02 yn addas i ymarfer, cyhyd â’i fod yn parhau’n rhydd o gyffuriau; argymhellodd y goruchwyliwr osod cyfyngiadau, sef na ddylai’r meddyg weithio mewn practis cyffredinol na rhoi cyffuriau Atodlen 2 ar bresgripsiwnn. Yn ddiweddarach, rhoddodd Dr JE 02 ymrwymiadau i’r perwyl hwnnw.
Cafwyd adroddiad nesaf y goruchwyliwr dros flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach. Adroddodd fod y meddyg wedi cael triniaeth breswyl wirfoddol am ei broblem gyffuriau. Roedd yn paratoi ar gyfer gyrfa newydd mewn iechyd galwedigaethol. Bu prawf troeth yn bositif am fensodiasepinau ond yn negyddol am opiadau. Roedd cymryd bensodiasepinau yn golygu achos arall o dorri ymrwymiadau’r meddyg, er nid achos difrifol efallai. Bum mis yn ddiweddarach, adroddodd y goruchwyliwr fod y meddyg wedi dweud wrtho fod y prawf troeth yn bositif gan ei fod wedi cymryd un tabled temazepam i helpu iddo gysgu y noson flaenorol. Dymunai’r goruchwyliwr gael ei ryddhau am resymau daearyddol.
Rhai misoedd yn ddiweddarach, penodwyd goruchwyliwr newydd. Adroddodd fod y meddyg yn gweithio mewn meddygaeth alwedigaethol. Bu ychydig o amheuaeth ei fod wedi dwyn tabled Cyclimorph oddi wrth meddyg teulu ond gwadwyd hyn. Roedd y goruchwyliaeth i barhau. Y flwyddyn ganlynol, roedd adroddiad y goruchwyliwr yn addawol iawn. Bu cydweithrediad llawn a chynnydd ardderchog. Roedd y meddyg yn dal i weithio mewn iechyd galwedigaethol. Erbyn hyn, roedd Dr Mann yn sgriniwr iechyd. Cytunodd i barhau goruchwyliaeth gyda gofyniad ychwanegol y dylai’r GMC allu datgelu bodolaeth cyfyngiadau ymarfer i unrhyw ymholwr. Esboniodd Dr Mann y bu yn awyddus i gyflwyno’r ymrwymiad hwn i bob achos y deliwyd â hwy yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Aeth blwyddyn bron cyn i’r goruchwyliwr meddygol gyflwyno ei adroddiad nesaf. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod yr arfer o adael i 12 mis fynd heibio rhwng adroddiadau wedi dod i ben bellach a’r amlder arferol yw chwe mis. Adroddodd y goruchwyliwr fod Dr JE 02 yn dal i wneud cynnydd ardderchog ac yn cydymffurfio’n llawn â’i oruchwyliaeth a’i ymrwymiadau. Roedd profion cyffuriau yn negyddol eto. Cynghorodd y goruchwyliwr lacio’r ymrwymiadau i alluogi Dr JE 02 wneud swyddi dirprwy. Cytunodd Dr Mann.
Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, roedd yr adroddiad yn hollol ffafriol, unwaith eto. Cynghorodd y goruchwyliwr fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer ac argymhellodd y dylai goruchwyliaeth ddod i ben. Ar ôl nodi y bu’r meddyg heb gyffuriau am fwy na ddwy flynedd ac na fu unrhyw broblemau pan laciwyr ei ymrwymiadau, penderfynodd Dr Mann y gallai’r oruchwyliaeth ddod i ben.
Yn anffodus, fodd bynnag, cafodd Dr JE 02 ailwaeledd bron ar unwaith wedi hynny. Rhododd y goruchwyliwr cynt wybod i’r GMC fod Dr JE 02 wedi bod yn camddefnyddio opiadau ac wedi cael ei ddiswyddo o’i gyflogaeth. Cymerodd y goruchwyliwr y meddyg yn ôl i ofal ar gyfer asesiad claf allanol a thriniaeth bosibl. Roedd dadansoddiad gwallt yn bositif am bethidin a deuhydrocodin. Gan nad oedd y meddyg yn atebol i ymrwymiadau bryd hynny, nid oedd yn torri unrhyw amodau ar ei gofrestriad. Dywedodd Dr Mann ei bod yn siomedig i glywed am ailwaeledd y meddyg. Ymddangosai ei fod yn gallu ymwrthod â cham-drin sylweddau pan fo rheolau allanol yn eu lle ond nid fel arall. Nid oedd hyn yn anghyffredin, er bod y seibiant byr iawn yn yr achos hwn yn anarferol ym mhrofiad Dr Mann. Nododd fod y meddyg wedi cael presgripsiwn am pethidin ar ôl llawdriniaeth y flwyddyn flaenorol a chredai y gallai hyn fod yn ffactor yn ei aelwaeledd.
Trefnwyd archwiliadau meddygol. Fodd bynnag, cyn bod yr adroddiadau ar gael, daeth tystiolaeth bellach i’r amlwg am raddau ailwaeledd y meddyg. Cafodd rybudd gan yr heddlu am beidio â chydymffurfio â rheolau cyffuriau rheoledig. Hefyd, cafodd y GMC gopi o adroddiad gan y seiciatrydd sy’n trin y meddyg. Cynghorodd hwn fod y meddyg yn cydweithredu â thriniaeth, ond y byddai angen goruchwyliaeth amhenodol arno. Roedd y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, ond dylid ei atal rhag ysgrifennu presgripsiynau. Ar ôl cael adroddiadau’r ddau archwiliwr meddygol, ystyriodd Dr Mann fod y meddyg yn hynod o agored i ailwaeledd arall, y dylid cyfyngu ar ei hawliau i ragnodi ac y dylid ei roi dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol am weddill ei fywyd gwaith.
Rhoddodd y meddyg ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol a rhoddwyd ef dan oruchwyliaeth. Roedd yr adroddiad cyntaf o’r goruchwyliwr meddygol yn foddhaol. Dangosodd yr ail gynnydd mor dda nes bod y goruchwyliwr yn argymell dod ag amodau a goruchwyliaeth i ben, heblaw am gyswllt gwirfoddol anffurfiol. Ni chytunodd Dr Mann i hyn, yng ngoleuni’r hanes blaenorol. Dangosodd yr adroddiad diweddaraf y cynhaliwyd y cynnydd. Eto, awgrymwyd dod i ben â’r oruchwyliaeth. Eto, cyfarwyddodd Dr Mann fod rhaid iddi barhau. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn amau y byddai’n bosibl terfynu goruchwyliaeth o gwbl yn yr achos hwn.
Mae’r achos, sy’n ymestyn dros gyfnod o ddeng mlynedd, yn dangos rhai o’r gwelliannau a wnaed yng ngweithrediad y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Yn y gorffennol diweddar, cafwyd adroddiadau’n amlach; rhoddwyd mwy o wybodaeth i gydweithwyr a chyflogwyr ac roedd y sgrinwyr iechyd yn llai goddefgar nag o’r blaen o achosion o dorri ymrwymiadau. Parhaodd pwyslais mawr ar adsefydlu’r meddyg, ond ymddengys fod amddiffyn cleifion yn bwysicach.
Mae’r achos hefyd yn dangos sut gall y gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol gynorthwyo wrth gadw meddyg ‘oddi ar gyfeiliorn’. Mae’r gweithdrefnau’n darparu cymorth, ond cânt eu cefnogi gan fygythiad ataliad pe byddai’r meddyg yn methu neu’n methu cydweithredu. Fodd bynnag, mynegodd Dr Mann y farn y byddai rheolaeth leol yn well i feddygon y mae angen arbynt oruchwyliaeth a chymorth tymor hir. Cytunaf â hi. Ni chredaf fod darpariaeth cymorth tymor hir yn hollol briodol i reoleiddiwr. Credaf y dylai’r GMC geisio ymwrthod â’r swyddogaeth hon, y dylai PCOs neu gyflogwyr lleol ei chymryd yn ogystal. Gall PCO orfodi amodau ar ymarfer meddyg a gall ddarparu pecyn o gymorth a goruchwyliaeth. Cyhyd â’i bod yn amlwg i’r meddyg fod gan y pecyn gymeradwyaeth y GMC ac y bydd methu cydweithredu yn arwain at atgyfeirio yn syth at HC y GMC, ni ddylai’r gweithdrefnau lleol fod yn llai effeithiol na gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol y GMC.
Sylweddolaf, fodd bynnag, pe byddai’r meddyg yn feddyg teithiol, byddai rhaid i’r GMC gadw’r cyfrifoldeb. Yn un o’r achosion a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, sef achos Dr JK 03, roedd y meddyg dan oruchwyliaeth am chwe mlynedd bron.Yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw, symudodd o un ysbyty i’r llall ar dri neu bedwar achlysur. Roedd parhau goruchwyliaeth yn anodd, hyd yn oed i’r GMC, ond byddai’n amhosib bron i ymddiriedolaeth GIG leol.
Roedd achos Dr JO 01 o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad gan ei fod yn dangos y ffordd y gall sefydliad lleol weithio ar y cyd yn effeithiol gyda’r GMC. Roedd y meddyg, sef meddyg teulu, wedi cyfaddef i’w bartneriaid y bu’n cam-drin alcohol a chyffuriau am gyfnod o 10 i 15 mlynedd. Mynychodd Brif Weithredwr y PCT gyfarfod ym mhractis y meddyg ac yna archwiliodd graddau’r broblem trwy ymweld â phractisiau lle gweithiodd y meddyg yn y gorffennol. Ymddangosai y bu’r meddyg yn defnyddio presgripsiynau yn dwyllodrus i gael ei gyflenwadau o gyffuriau. Hefyd, bu pryder ynghylch ei berfformiad yn ei bractis presennol a’i bractisiau blaenorol. Cafwyd adroddiadau ei fod, weithiau, yn ‘amhendant ac yn ddigyswllt’, syrthiai i gysgu yn ystod ymgynghoriadau, ysgrifennai adroddiadau meddygol nad oeddent yn gwneud synnwyr, byddai’n rhoi presgripsiynau amhriodol ar brydiau a siaradai’n amhriodol â chleifion weithiau. Cadwodd y PCT wasanaethau ymgynghorydd a arbenigai mewn dibyniaeth ac a oedd hefyd yn oruchwyliwr meddygol cymeradwy‘r GMC. Gyda’r cymorth hwn, cytunwyd cyfres o ymrwymiadau â’r meddyg. Roedd yr ymrwymiadau’n debyg iawn i’r rheiny y byddai’r GMC wedi gorfodi yn ei weithdrefnau gwirfoddol ac roeddent yn cynnwys goruchwyliaeth feddygol.
Er gwaethaf sefydlu’r pecyn hwn o fesurau, adroddodd y PCT y mater i’r GMC. Atgyfeiriwyd yr achos at y sgriniwr iechyd gyda memorandwm a nododd yr ymddangosai’r mesurau lleol yn
‘gadarn iawn’
. Awgrymodd ef neu hi, gan fod yr ymrwymiadau a oedd eisoes yn eu lle bron yr union yr un fath â‘r rheiny a fyddai‘n ofynnol gan y GMC, efallai na fyddai angen i’r GMC weithredu. Fodd bynnag, daeth y PCT yn ymwybodol fod y gweithiwr achos wedi mynegi’r farn honno a gwnaethant yn glir ei fod eisiau ‘cefnogaeth y GMC’ hefyd. Ymddangosai’r sgriniwr dderbyn yr achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol er gwaethaf y ffaith yr ymddangosai fod y mesurau lleol yn briodol. Ysgrifennodd y GMC i roi gwybod i’r meddyg am hyn ac i’w gynghori y byddai’n cael llythyr ar wahân ynghylch ei ddefnydd twyllodrus ymddangosiadol o bresgripsiynau. Mewn gwirionedd, ni ddilynodd unrhyw achosion ymddygiad.
Cyfarwyddodd y GMC i ddau o’i archwilwyr meddygol cymeradwy archwilio’r meddyg. Cafwyd yr un casgliadau ganddynt i raddau helaeth â chasgliadau ymgynghorydd y PCT ac argymhellwyd mesurau tebyg iawn ganddynt. Cytunodd y meddyg i’r ymrwymiadau a ddrafftiwyd gan y sgriniwr iechyd. Parhaodd y rhain mewn grym ac roeddent yn debygol o wneud hynny am gyfnod sylweddol. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y gwnaeth y PCT ddelio â’r meddyg mewn modd da iawn. Fodd bynnag, gallaf ddeall yn iawn pam y dymunai gael ‘cefnogaeth’ y GMC. Mae’n rhaid i fygythiad ataliad gan yr HC fod yn gymhelliad gwirioneddol i gydymffurfio. Mae’n ymddangos i mi, mewn achos lle cyflwynwyd adroddiadau gan gyflogwr neu PCO sy’n ymddangos y daethant o archwilwyr sy’n annibynnol o’r meddyg dan sylw, y byddai’n rhesymol i’r GMC ddibynnu ar yr adroddiadau a llunio ymrwymiadau i’r meddyg gytuno iddynt ar sail eu cynnwys. Yn fy marn i, dylid osgoi dibynnu ar adroddiadau a gomisiynir gan y meddyg neu ar ran y meddyg.
Mae achos Dr JO 02 o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad gan ei fod yn cynnwys cyhuddiadau o gamymddwyn eithaf difrifol gyda phryderon am ddibyniaeth y meddyg ar gyffuriau. Mae’n dangos y tueddai’r GMC, hyd yn oed yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf, ganolbwyntio ar adsefydlu’r meddyg a thybio fod unrhyw gamymddwyn yn rhan o’r broblem gyffuriau ac na fyddai hyn yn digwydd eto ar ôl i’r meddyg wella o’i ddibyniaeth/ei dibyniaeth.
Cafodd y GMC adroddiad y cafodd y meddyg rybudd gan yr heddlu am gael meddiant anghyfreithlon ar heroin a chanabis. Nid oedd ganddo lawer ohonynt. Yn ddilynol, aeth y meddyg â’i hun i gartref nyrsio preifat lle cafodd ei ‘ddadwenwyno’. Dri mis yn ddiweddarach, a chyn i’r GMC wneud unrhyw benderfyniad am sut i drin yr adroddiad am y rhybudd, cafodd y GMC lythyr gan y fenyw y bu’r meddyg yn byw gyda hi am tuag wyth mlynedd. Honnodd y bu’r meddyg yn cam-drin cyffuriau caled am gyfnod sylweddol ac y bu’n mynd i’r gwaith yn aml, mewn ysbytai amrywiol (a enwyd ganddi), dan ddylanwad cocên, crac cocên a heroin. Synnodd na ymddangosai fod cydweithwyr y meddyg wedi sylwi ar yr arwyddion o gymryd cyffuriau a meddyliodd tybed a oeddent wedi sylwi mewn gwirionedd ond nad oeddent yn fodlon gwneud unrhyw adroddiad. Honnodd hefyd, er bod y meddyg wedi cael triniaeth yn ddiweddar, nad oedd wedi rhoi’r gorau i gymryd cyffuriau; mewn gwirionedd, dywedodd, cymerodd grac cocên ar yr un diwrnod a adawodd y cartref nyrsio. Dywedodd ei fod bellach yn byw gyda meddyg arall a oedd hefyd dan archollet y GMC am broblemau dibyniaeth tebyg ac am ddwyn cyffuriau o ysbytai, yn ôl y sôn. Honnodd hefyd y bu’r meddyg yn gyrru car dan ddylanwad cyffuriau a’i bod wedi gweld sawl achos o yrru diofal neu ymosodol. Dywedodd y rhwystrwyd y meddyg rhag gyrru am gyfnod.
Os yw’r honiadau hyn yn wir yn bennaf, mae’n ymddangos i mi y gallai’r meddyg fod yn euog o SPM; byddai’n mynychu’r gwaith dan ddylanwad cyffuriau. Byddai’n rhoi cleifion mewn perygl. Fodd bynnag, ni ddarganfu unrhyw un a oedd yr honiadau hyn yn wir. Cysylltodd y gweithiwr achos yn yr adran ymddygiad â Dr Mann i weld a chredai y dylid atgyfeirio’r achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd. Roedd y gweithiwr achos o’r farn y gallai’r rhybudd yn unig gyrraedd trothwy SPM. Fodd bynnag, credai y gellid ystyried y camymddwyn hwnnw yn ail i broblem ddibyniaeth y meddyg. Gallai cyflwyno’r achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd fod yn briodol. Credai Dr Mann y dylid delio â’r achos fel mater iechyd. Ystyriodd y dylid
‘ystyried’
y llythyr gan gynbartner y meddyg
‘gyda gofal’
. Yn ei phrofiad hi, byddai cyn-wreigiau a chynbartneriaid yn aml yn gwneud honiadau anghywir ar ôl i’r berthynas ddirywio. Fel y digwyddodd, anwybyddwyd y llythyr oddi wrth y cynbartner yn llwyr. Ni wnaed unrhyw ymdrech i ddarganfod a oedd unrhyw wirionedd ynddo, er y ffaith y gellid fod wedi gwirio rhai o’r honiadau yn hawdd. Mewn gwirionedd, gallai fod rhyw wirionedd yn stori’r cynbartner oherwydd yn ddiweddarach, pan gafodd y meddyg archwiliad meddygol, cyfaddefodd y bu’n cam-drin cocên am saith mlynedd a heroin am flwyddyn. I bob tebyg, bu’n gweithio mewn ysbytai amrywiol, fel yr honnodd y cynbartner, yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw.
Fel y digwyddodd, trosglwyddwyd yr achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Rhoddodd y meddyg ymrwymiadau fel y mynnodd Dr Mann ac, ar adeg yr adroddiad diweddaraf cyn iddi roi tystiolaeth, ymddangosai ei fod yn gwneud yn dda. Roedd ar fin dechrau hyfforddiant galwedigaethol gyda’r bwriad o fod yn feddyg teulu. Parhaodd dan oruchwyliaeth. Ystyriodd Dr Mann fod ei gynnydd yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn arwydd o lwyddiant.
Pan yr oedd Dr Mann yn rhoi tystiolaeth o flaen yr Ymchwiliad, gofynnodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad iddi ba gamau a gymerodd y GMC i ddarganfod a fynegwyd unrhyw bryderon am y meddyg a’i berfformiad yn yr ysbytai lle bu’n gweithio. Atebodd nad oedd hynny’n fater iddi hi; ei rôl hi oedd cynghori a oedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn briodol. Rwy’n derbyn mai fel hyn y mae. Dywedodd hefyd fod disgwyl i archwilwyr meddygol dan gyfarwyddyd y GMC wneud ymholiadau am berfformiad gan bobl a oedd wedi rhoi gwybodaeth i’r GMC. Synnodd ei bod yn ymddangos na adroddwyd unrhyw bryderon am y meddyg hwn. Cytunodd, pe byddai ysbyty yn gofidio am ymddygiad neu berfformiad dirprwy feddyg, efallai na fyddai’n ei gyflogi/ei chyflogi eto yn y dyfodol, yn hytrach na chynnal archwiliad ei hun neu gychwyn adroddiad i’r GMC. Mae’n ymddangos yn eithaf clir i mi mai’r ateb i gwestiwn y Cwnsler oedd na wnaed unrhyw ymholiadau am berfformiad y meddyg. Mae hynny’n amlwg o ffeil y GMC ac o adroddiadau’r archwilwyr meddygol, sy’n canolbwyntio’n gyfan gwbl ar y meddyg, ei deimladau am fywyd ac ymarfer meddygol a’i ‘berthynas gamweithredol’ gyda’i gynbartner. Gwnaeth Dr Mann gydnabod efallai na fu’r GMC mor ddyfal ag y gallent fod wrth gasglu’r wybodaeth berthnasol.
Nid fy lle i yw barnu a oedd llythyr y cynbartner yn anwireddus neu hyd yn oed wedi’i orliwio. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos i mi y methodd y GMC gymryd unrhyw gamau rhesymol i archwilio’r honiadau eithaf difrifol o gamymddwyn, yr oedd iddynt yn amlwg oblygiadau ar gyfer diogelwch cleifion. Derbyniaf yn llwyr fod goruchwyliaeth yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn darparu amddiffyniad i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, ni all y GMC synnu nad oes gan y cyhoedd ffydd ynddo os yw’n anwybyddu honiadau fel y rhai a wnaed yn yr achos hwn heb wneud unrhyw ymdrech i ddatgelu’r gwir.
Roedd yr achos hwn o ddiddordeb i’r Ymchwiliad gan fod yr amgylchiadau’n eithaf tebyg i amgylchiadau achos Shipman ym 1976. Daeth dibyniaeth Dr JO 07 ar gyffuriau a’i hymddygiad troseddol i’r amlwg ychydig flynyddoedd yn ôl pan sylwodd fferyllydd fod y meddyg wedi cyflwyno dau bresgripsiwn preifat am diamorffin yn yr un wythnos. Rhoddwyd gwybod i’r heddlu a darganfuwyd bod y meddyg wedi dwyn diamorffin o’r ysbyty lle gweithiai ac wedi cael y cyffur hefyd trwy’r defnydd twyllodrus o bresgripsiynau. Cafodd ei herlyn, am gyffuriau a chafodd dros gyfnod o tua mis yn ôl pob golwg. Felly, nid oedd ei hymddygiad yn wahanol i Shipman, er ei fod yn hysbys fod ei ymddygiad ef wedi parhau’n llawer hirach na’i hymddygiad hi. Hefyd, adroddodd y meddyg ei hymddangosiad llys a oedd ar ddod yn ddigon gwirfoddol i’r GMC. Gorfododd yr Ynadon orchymyn cosb gymunedol a chyfarwyddo y dylai’r meddyg dalu iawndal.
Yn y GMC, atgyfeiriwyd yr achos i’r IOC. I baratoi ar gyfer y gwrandawiad, cyflwynodd cyfreithwyr y meddyg (dan gyfarwyddiadau ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol) ddau adroddiad seiciatrig. Mynegodd y rhain y farn fod y meddyg wedi dechrau defnyddio diamorffin tra’n dioddef iselder ysbryd. Nid oedd hanes hir o gam-drin sylweddau. Roedd y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, cyhyd â’i bod yn cael goruchwyliaeth a chymorth seiciatrig. Derbyniodd yr IOC yr adroddiadau hyn i bob diben a gorfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am gyfnod o 18 mis. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys gofyniad i gael goruchwyliaeth seiciatrig, i weithio mewn swyddi gyda goruchwyliaeth wedi’u cymeradwyo gan ei deon ôl-raddedig yn unig ac i roi gwybod i bob cyflogwr posibl am yr amodau y byddai’n gweithio oddi tanynt. Chwe mis yn ddiweddarach, adolygodd yr IOC yr achos a pharhau’r cyfyngiadau. Yn fuan wedyn, dywedwyd wrth y meddyg fod ei hachos wedi’i atgyfeirio at y PPC. Ysgrifennodd ei chyfreithwyr at y GMC, gan ofyn y dylid delio â hi trwy’r gweithdrefnau iechyd a, phan ddaeth yr achos at ystyriaeth y PPC, fe’i ohiriwyd i’w ystyried dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Fis yn ddiweddarach, dywedwyd wrth y meddyg y byddai ei hachos yn cael ei drin dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Nid oedd wedi cael archwiliad gan archwiliwr meddygol dan gyfarwyddyd y GMC, nac wedi erioed hyd y gwelaf i. Cafodd wahoddiad i roi ymrwymiadau i dderbyn goruchwyliaeth feddygol, i gyfyngu ar ei hymarfer i swyddi a gymeradwyir gan ei deon ôl-raddedig ac i beidio â rhoi ar bresgripsiwn gyffuriau a restrir yn Atodlenni 1 i 3 o Reoliadau Cam-drin Cyffuriau 2001. Rhoddodd y meddyg yr ymrwymiadau, di-rymwyd gorchymyn yr IOC ac, i bob tebyg, caewyd yr achosion ymddygiad. Roedd adroddiad cyntaf y goruchwyliwr meddygol, a ddarparwyd ymhen tri mis, yn hollol ffafriol. Bryd hwnnw, roedd ychydig dros flwyddyn ers collfarn y meddyg. Awgrymodd yr ail adroddiad, a gafwyd chwe mis yn ddiweddarach, y gallai’r meddyg ymarfer bellach heb gyfyngiad. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y sgriniwr iechyd gynnal yr oruchwyliaeth am chwe mis pellach i fonitro cynnydd parhaus. Dyna oedd y sefyllfa pan gafodd yr Ymchwiliad y ffeil yn 2003. Roedd yn amlwg, pe byddai’r adroddiad nesaf yn foddhaol, y byddai’r meddyg yn cael caniatâd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad. Byddai hynny ychydig dros ddwy flynedd ar ôl ei chollfarn.
Mae’r achos hwn mor debyg i achos Shipman fel yr ymddengys yn debygol fod y ffordd y cafodd ei drin yn arwydd o’r ffordd y byddai achos Shipman wedi’i drin pe byddai wedi’i adrodd yn y gorffennol diweddar. Mae’n ymddangos fod y gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi gweithio’n dda. Nodaf, fodd bynnag, fod y PPC wedi atgyfeirio’r achos hwn i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ar sail adroddiadau a gyflwynwyd gan sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol y meddyg. Er y caniatawyd hyn dan y Rheolau, nid oedd yn ffordd ddelfrydol o weithredu. Fel arfer, mae’n well cael adroddiadau gan archwilwyr cymeradwy‘r GMC ei hun, er mwyn sicrhau annibyniaeth, yn hytrach na derbyn adroddiadau a gomisiynir gan y meddyg neu ar ran y meddyg.

---  ---
Trefniadau Mewnol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, roedd Dr Mann yn disgwyl stopio gweithredu fel sgriniwr iechyd ymhen rhai misoedd. Dywedodd ei bod hi, ei chyd-sgriniwr iechyd Dr Wilson a chydweithwyr eraill yn y GMC yn pryderu y gellid colli’r arbenigedd yr oedd hi a Dr Wilson wedi’i ddatblygu. Yn y gorffennol, bu parhad o sgrinwyr iechyd, gyda’r sgriniwr mwyaf iau yn dysgu o’r sgriniwr uwch ac yna’n cymryd ei le pan fyddai’r sgriniwr uwch yn gadael. Pan roddodd Dr Mann dystiolaeth, roedd y GMC yn dal i geisio recriwtio seiciatrydd ymgynghorydd fel archwiliwr achos a fyddai’n gyfrifol am achosion iechyd. Fodd bynnag, ni lwyddodd i wneud hynny ac roedd Dr Mann yn poeni na fyddai cyfnod digonol o orgyffwrdd rhwng y sgrinwyr iechyd presennol a’r archwiliwr achos a fyddai, fel y disgwyliodd bryd hynny, yn cymryd eu rôl. Un broblem arall oedd bod llawer o’r gweithwyr achos gyda phrofiad o’r gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi gadael gan dybio y byddai Adran Iechyd y GMC yn symud i swyddfa newydd y GMC ym Manceinion. Dywedodd Dr Mann fod hi a Dr Wilson yn ‘awyddus iawn’ i sicrhau na fyddai’r gweithdrefnau yr ymddangosai eu bod yn ‘rhedeg yn llyfnach nawr nag yr oeddent rai blynyddoedd yn ôl’ yn cael eu ‘gwthio’n ôl’.
Rwy’n rhannu pryderon Dr Mann. Yn fy marn i, mae ganddi hi a’i chydweithiwr reswm dros fod yn falch o’r gwaith a wnaethant yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf. Credaf y byddai’n drasiedi pe byddai’r arbenigedd a ddatblygwyd gan Dr Mann, Dr Wilson a’u tîm o staff yn cael ei golli. Fodd bynnag, mae gennyf bryderon eraill am y dyfodol. Mae’n ymddangos bellach na fydd rôl y sgriniwr iechyd yn cael ei throsglwyddo i archwiliwr achos o gwbl. Mae’n debyg, fel y deallaf, na fyddai gan aelodau staff o’r fath gymwysterau meddygol. Yn sicr, ni fyddent yn seiciatryddion ac iddynt enw da a phrofiad hir fel y bu’r sgrinwyr iechyd yn gyffredinol.

---  ---
Fel a nodais, yn fy marn i, mae gan y GMC achos i fod yn falch o’r ffordd y mae’r gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi gweithredu yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf. Un o’r rhesymau eu bod cystal yw bod y GMC, yn y 1990au hwyr, wedi gwahodd gwerthusiad annibynnol o’r gweithdrefnau fel yr oeddent yn gweithredu bryd hynny ac wedi gwella eu gweithdrefnau yng ngoleuni’r gwerthusiad hwnnw. Mae’r gwerthusiad hwn, ac ymateb y GMC iddo - y dylid ei longyfarch amdano, yn fy marn i - yn dangos gwerth safbwynt proffesiynol annibynnol. Trwy archwilio 40 o achosion sampl yn ofalus, dangoswyd y problemau a oedd yn rhemp yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd ar y pryd a galluogwyd iddynt gael eu cywiro.
Un rheswm arall am lwyddiant y gweithdrefnau fu arbenigedd y sgrinwyr iechyd. Grŵp bach ond cadarn y buon nhw a’u staff, sydd wedi gallu datblygu cysondeb o ran arfer a gwneud penderfyniadau. Byddaf yn dychwelyd ym Mhennod 25 at ystyried y ffordd y bydd y gweithdrefnau iechyd yn gweithredu yn y dyfodol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud nawr, os yw arbenigedd a phrofiad y tîm a oedd yno ar ddiwedd 2003 bellach wedi’u colli, y byddant yn cymryd amser hir i’w hailosod.
Wedi dweud hynny, mae’n ymddangos i mi y bu nifer o wendidau ar ôl yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd fel y cawsant eu gweithredu hyd at 2004. Yn gyntaf, nid oedd yr arfer o atgyfeirio achos o gam-drin cyffuriau honedig i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol heb sicrhau ffeithiau’r mater yn foddhaol. Mae’n bosib y bu’n gyfleus ac yr ymddangosai roi amddiffyniad i gleifion mewn achos lle’r oedd risg y gallai’r PCC ddarganfod nad oedd y meddyg yn euog o’r camymddwyn a honnwyd. Fodd bynnag, arweiniodd at osgoi’r materion. Roedd yn angenrheidiol sicrhau’r ffeithiau gwirioneddol am sawl rheswm. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn dod i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol heb sicrhau’r ffeithiau, gallai fod yn amhosibl i’r HC weithredu pe byddai’r meddyg yn torri ei ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau neu pe byddai’r meddyg, ar ôl llacio’r amodau, yn dioddef ailwaeledd. Byddaf yn dweud mwy am yr angen i sicrhau sail ffeithiol cyn delio â meddyg yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ym Mhennod 23.
Hyd yma, ni fu llawer o archwilio i’r graddau y mae problem iechyd o ba bynnag fath wedi effeithio ar ymarfer clinigol y meddyg a sut y gallai wneud hynny yn y dyfodol. Mae gwybodaeth felly yn hanfodol er mwyn teilwra’r amodau a orfodir ar y meddyg yn gywir i’r risgiau y mae’n rhaid iddynt ymdrin â hwy. Gall archwiliadau o’r math hwn gynnwys cryn dipyn o ymchwilio, yn enwedig os yw’r meddyg yn ddirprwy feddyg neu wedi symud o swydd i swydd. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, bu trafodaeth am ddarparu cronfa ddata ganolog a fyddai, ar ôl iddi fod ar waith am rai blynyddoedd, yn darparu gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol am
meddygon. Byddai cronfa ddata o’r fath yn ddefnyddiol iawn i ymholiadau o’r natur hon. Yn y gorffennol, yr archwilwyr meddygol fu’n trin ymholiadau felly a wnaed. Nid yw’n debyg i mi fod hon yn swyddogaeth briodol iddynt. Efallai na dybiant ei bod yn briodol ymchwilio i orffennol y meddyg. Beth bynnag, mae‘n debygol fod ganddynt adnoddau cyfyngedig.
Bu diffyg safonau a meini prawf ar gyfer penderfynu a yw’r meddyg yn dioddef o nam difrifol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn sgil cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Gan y gwnaed penderfyniadau o’r fath yn bennaf gan un neu’r llall o’r ddau sgriniwr iechyd profiadol iawn, nid yw’n ymddangos y bu unrhyw broblem fawr o anghysondeb yn y gorffennol. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai gan aelodau’r HC yr un faint o brofiad â’r sgrinwyr iechyd. Beth bynnag, nid cyflawni cysondeb yw’r unig reswm y dylai fod safonau a meini prawf. Mae eu hangen hefyd er mwyn darparu tryloywder. Dylai fod yn bosibl profi’r penderfyniad yn erbyn cyfres o feini prawf gwrthrychol fel y gellir arddangos ei resymoldeb. Os yw’n debygol, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, y bydd nifer fawr o banelwyr, archwilwyr achos ac aelodau staff yn penderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn sgil iechyd gwael, bydd angen meini prawf clir fel mater brys.
Mae’n debyg i mi y bu’r trefniadau ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth feddygol yn foddhaol yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y trefniadau ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth broffesiynol gystal. Ar gyfer meddyg y caniateir iddo ymarfer dan amodau, mae goruchwyliwr proffesiynol yn hanfodol. Dylai ef neu hi fod yn cysylltu’n aml â’r meddyg dan sylw a dylai hefyd gysylltu’n uniongyrchol â phenderfynwr y GMC. Yn y gorffennol, bu’r cysylltiad yn anuniongyrchol, trwy’r goruchwyliwr meddygol. Rwy’n credu bod angen i benderfynwr y GMC fod â‘gafael’ dda ar sut y mae’r meddyg yn ymdopi yn y gwaith a sut y mae cydweithwyr yn teimlo am weithio gydag ef/hi. Dylai goruchwylwyr proffesiynol gael esboniad o’u rôl, yn yr un modd â goruchwylwyr meddygol.
Roedd yr anallu dan yr hen weithdrefnau i ystyried perfformiad ar yr un pryd â phroblemau iechyd yn anhawster ond dylid ei ddatrys bellach dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Bydd yna rai achosion lle bydd angen asesiad o berfformiad ac iechyd cyn gwneud unrhyw benderfyniad. Mae goblygiadau adnoddau asesiadau felly yn sylweddol. Ar hyn o bryd, mae asesiadau perfformiad yn araf ac yn ddrud. Mae angen proses asesu gyflymach a rhatach. Tybed a fyddai rhywbeth tebyg i’r asesiad NCAA yn ddigonol, o leiaf i sicrhau a oes problem yn bodoli. Gallaf weld y gall fod angen rhywbeth mwy trwyadl er mwyn rhoi tystiolaeth o flaen panel FTP i gefnogi honiad fod yna nam digonol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Credaf hefyd y dylid datblygu ffordd syml o asesu i’w defnyddio pan fod meddyg ar fin dychwelyd i ymarfer ar ôl cyfnod o ataliad neu ymarfer cyfyngedig. Mae gan y GMC gyfleusterau ar gyfer cynnal profion y Bwrdd Asesu Ieithyddol a Phroffesiynol (PLAB). Tybiaf a ellid defnyddio’r cyfleusterau hynny ar gyfer asesiadau o’r math hwn.
Am flynyddoedd lawer, roedd y wybodaeth a ddarparwyd i PCTs ac i bartneriaid meddygon teulu a oedd yn ymwneud â’r gweithdrefnau iechyd yn gyfyngedig iawn. Yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf, mae’r sefyllfa wedi gwella i ryw raddau gan o leiaf eu bod yn cael gwybod bellach fod y GMC yn cael ei gynnwys. Fodd bynnag, mae’r wybodaeth yn dal i fod yn eithaf prin. Mae’n debyg i mi, pe byddai meddyg yn cael caniatâd i ymarfer er bod ganddi/ganddo broblem (fel problem ddiod neu gyffuriau), dylai fod ar yr amod bod partneriaid a PCT y meddyg yn cael yr holl wybodaeth hanfodol; rhaid dweud wrthynt, o leiaf, am ddiagnosis, argoelion ac argymhellion yr archwiliwr meddygol. Mae partneriaid yn gyfrifol am gleifion y practis ac mae gan y PCTs gyfrifoldeb llywodraethu clinigol am ansawdd y gofal a ddarperir gan y practis. Nid yw’n foddhaol iddynt ddibynnu ar y wybodaeth y mae’r meddyg ei hun yn barod i’w datgelu neu’r hyn y mae’r goruchwyliwr meddygol yn barod i ddweud wrthynt.
Ar gyfer y dyfodol, mae’n hanfodol rheoli meddygon dan oruchwyliaeth yn dda yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Yn y gorffennol diweddar, gweithiodd y gweithdrefnau’n dda, gyda sgrinwyr iechyd a staff gyda’u rolau eu hunain. Roedd y system o atgyfeirio meddygon i’r HC pe byddent yn torri eu hymrwymiadau yn gweithio’n dda. Gofidiaf y bydd y trefniadau a newidiwyd dan y gweithdrefnau newydd yn creu risg efallai na fydd y safonau a sicrhawyd yn yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf yn cael eu cynnal. Rwy’n erfyn ar y GMC i ailystyried y penderfyniad i ddefnyddio staff, yn hytrach nag archwilwyr achos, ar gyfer llawer o’r rheolaeth o feddygon dan oruchwyliaeth iechyd.
Dylid datrys un broblem o leiaf cyn gynted ag y mae’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, pan ddyfarnwyd meddyg yn euog o droseddau yn gysylltiedig â phroblem iechyd, ni fyddai’r GMC yn gyffredinol yn nodi natur ddifrifol y gollfarn yng nghyd-destun arfer meddygol. Yn hytrach, byddai’n delio ag achosion felly ar sail adsefydlu lwyr, trwy roi i’r meddyg fantais y cyfle i adsefydlu dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Gellid fod wedi anfon collfarnau ar gyfer cam-drin cyffuriau, er enghraifft, at y PCC ond, mewn gwirionedd, cawsant eu hatgyfeirio heb eithriad at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Felly, ni fyddai’r cyhoedd yn gwybod beth oedd y GMC yn ei wneud am y meddyg. Nid oedd hyn yn wendid y gweithdrefnau iechyd cymaint â gwendid yn y modd y dewisai’r GMC ddelio â math penodol o achos. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, dylid atgyfeirio rhan fwyaf yr achosion collfarn at banel FTP. Bydd yna wrandawiad cyhoeddus ac, os gorfodir amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg yn hwyrach neu os atgyfeirir y meddyg i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, o leiaf bydd y cyhoedd yn ymwybodol y gwnaed hynny.

---  ---
Dau Achos a Ystyriwyd gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol ym mis Tachwedd 2002
Ymagwedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol at Achosion o Gam-drin Cyffuriau
Beth Ddylai Ymagwedd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol Fod mewn Achosion o Gam-drin Cyffuriau?

---  ---
Ym Mhennod 16, disgrifiais sut y deliodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) â’r adroddiad a gafodd am euogfarnau Shipman ym mis Chwefror 1976. Roedd y collfarnau hyn ar gyfer cyfres o droseddau o feddiant anghyfreithlon ar bethidin, cael pethidin yn anonest a ffugio presgripsiynau am bethidin. Bu’n cael llawer iawn o bethidin yn anonest yn Todmordern am gyfnod o tua 18 mis cyn iddo gael ei ddarganfod yn y pen draw. Honnodd ei fod wedi cael y cyffur i fodloni ei ddrwg arferiad ei hun ac, ar ôl ystyried yr holl dystiolaeth, rwy’n fodlon mai dyna oedd yr achos yn wir. Pan adroddwyd y collfarnau i’r GMC, penderfynodd y Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbi (PeCC) gau’r achos gyda rhybudd i Shipman beidio ag ailadrodd ei gamymddwyn blaenorol.
Ar ôl euogfarnau Shipman am lofruddiaeth ym mis Ionawr 2000, roedd yna aflonyddwch sylweddol ymhlith y cyhoedd pan ddaeth yn hysbys y’i gafwyd yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau rheoledig o’r blaen. Mynegodd nifer o berthnasau ei ddioddefwyr y farn na ddylid caniatáu i feddyg sydd wedi cam-drin cyffuriau rheoledig, fel y gwnaeth Shipman, ymarfer meddygaeth byth eto, o leiaf dim heb fonitro a goruchwyliaeth briodol.
Yng ngoleuni’r aflonyddwch cyhoeddus a fynegwyd am y ffordd y caniataodd y GMC i Shipman barhau i ymarfer ar ôl ei gollfarn, roeddwn eisiau archwilio sut y bu’r GMC yn trin achosion tebyg i’w achos ef dros y 30 mlynedd ddiwethaf. Cyfyngir fy nhrafodaeth i achosion lle mae meddyg wedi cam-drin cyffuriau rheoledig trwy eu cymryd ei hun. Ni fyddaf yn delio â’r sefyllfa lle mae’r meddyg wedi rhagnodi’n anghyfrifol i gleifion neu bobl eraill neu fel arall wedi ymgymryd â chyflenwi cyffuriau i eraill. Mae ystyriaethau eithaf gwahanol yn berthnasol i achos o’r math hwnnw.
Ym Mhennod 16, casglais fod ymagwedd y PeCC at achos Shipman yn nodweddiadol o’i ymagwedd at achosion tebyg yn y cyfnod hwnnw. Cymerodd y GMC ymagwedd adsefydlu at achosion o’r fath er nad oedd y gweithdrefnau iechyd wedi’u sefydlu bryd hynny. Disgrifiais y gweithdrefnau iechyd, a ddaeth i rym ym 1980, ym Mhennod 22. Mae’r dystiolaeth a gafodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu y deliwyd â bron pob achos a oedd yn cynnwys cam-drin cyffuriau rheoledig, ers 1980, trwy’r gweithdrefnau hynny. Dywedodd Dr Sheila Mann, sgriniwr iechyd o 1998 tan 2004, wrth yr Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003 y byddai bron yn sicr, pe byddai achos Shipman wedi dod at y GMC bryd hynny, y byddai wedi’i atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, daeth yr Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol o dystiolaeth sy’n awgrymu efallai bod y GMC wedi dechrau cymryd ymagwedd wahanol yn ddiweddar at rai achosion o’r math hwn. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi dod ar draws un achos yn cynnwys meddyg y’i gafwyd yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau y deliwyd ag ef trwy’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad yn hytrach na’i atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, er bod rhywfaint o dystiolaeth fod ganddo broblem seiciatrig gysylltiedig. Y canlyniad oedd i’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) ddileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr. Gall fod achosion eraill o’r fath nad wyf yn ymwybodol ohonynt. Felly ni ellir cymryd, pe byddai Shipman wedi’i gael yn euog ar ddiwedd 2002 neu 2003, y byddai ef wedi cael ei drin yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol o reidrwydd. Yn ogystal, fel yr esboniaf ym Mhennod 25, dan y gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) newydd, mae’n debygol y caiff collfarnau ar gyfer troseddau sy’n gysylltiedig â cham-drin cyffuriau eu hatgyfeirio i banel FTP. Bydd gan y panel bŵer i orfodi amodau ar ymarfer y meddyg neu atgyfeirio’r meddyg i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ond bydd sancsiynau eraill ar gael iddo.
Yn y Bennod hon, cynigiaf archwilio’r achos diweddar lle dilëwyd meddyg a oedd yn cam-drin cyffuriau oddi ar y gofrestr, a’r amgylchiadau a achosodd iddo gael ei drin yn y modd hwn. Byddaf yn ystyried achos arall tebyg a gafodd ei atgyfeirio, bron ar yr un pryd, i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Yna, byddaf yn archwilio’r rhesymeg y tu ôl i ymagwedd y GMC at achosion o’r math hwn a byddaf yn ystyried beth, yn fy marn i, yw’r ymagwedd y dylid ei defnyddio dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Mae’r cwestiynau hyn o gryn bwys gan ei bod yn ofynnol i mi, yn ôl Amodau Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad, argymell unrhyw newidiadau yr ystyriaf eu bod yn angenrheidiol i amddiffyn cleifion yn y dyfodol.
Mae cam-drin cyffuriau yn broblem sylweddol yn y proffesiwn meddygol, er nad yw’n hysbys i ba raddau yn gywir. Yn ogystal, nid yw’n debygol y bydd y broblem yn lleihau. Siaradodd yr Athro Syr Michael Rawlins, cyn-Gadeirydd y Cyngor Ymgynghorol ar Gam-drin Cyffuriau, a Chadeirydd presennol y Sefydliad Cenedlaethol dros Ragoriaeth Glinigol, yn un o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad am broblem sylweddol cam-drin cyffuriau rheoledig gan fyfyrwyr, gan gynnwys myfyrwyr meddygol. Mae arolygon yn awgrymu bod rhwng 10% ac 20% o swyddogion tai cyn-gofrestriad yn defnyddio canabis a bod rhwng 5% a 10% yn defnyddio ‘Ecstasi’. Mae hyn yn ‘gryn ofid ar gyfer y dyfodol’ oherwydd, yn ôl Syr Michael, bydd gan y meddygon hyn fynediad llawer mwy a llawer haws i ‘gyffuriau cryfach’ wrth iddynt symud ymlaen yn eu gyrfaoedd nag sydd gan weddill y boblogaeth.

---  ---
Newid mewn Ymagwedd ar ôl Achos
Cyfarfod y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) a gynhaliwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2002 oedd yr ail gyfarfod ar ôl i’r Cyfrin Gyngor gyflwyno ei farn yn achos
. Dywedodd Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, wrth yr Ymchwiliad y dylai’r achos hwn, mewn egwyddor, gael effaith bwysig ar benderfyniadau a wneir gan y PPC.
, cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o achosi marwolaeth trwy yrru peryglus. Roedd yn achos gwael iawn. Roedd wedi gyrru car modur tra dan ddylanwad diod ac wedi taro cerbyd arall ar ei ben, gan ladd un person ac anafu dau arall yn ddifrifol. Cafodd ei dedfrydu i bum mlynedd o garchar. Er bod tystiolaeth bod ei dibyniaeth ar alcohol yn ddigon i fod yn salwch, atgyfeiriwyd achos Dr Crabbie i’r PPC a dilewyd ei henw oherwydd natur a difrifwch y drosedd, Yn anochel, mae’n rhaid y daeth ag enw drwg i’r proffesiwn. Seiliwyd ei hapêl at y Cyfrin Gyngor ar y ddadl y dylai’r PCC fod wedi atgyfeirio ei hachos i’r Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC) er mwyn gorfodi amodau ar ei chofrestriad. Rwy’n torri ar draws i nodi, pe byddai hynny wedi’i wneud, na ellid fod wedi dileu ei henw o’r gofrestr. Barnodd Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor y bu ymagwedd y PCC yn gywir a’i benderfyniad yn rhesymol. Cyflwynwyd y farn ar 23 Medi 2002.
Ychwanegodd y Cyfrin Gyngor atodiad at ei farn, i’r perwyl na ddylai penderfynwyr y GMC atgyfeirio achos at yr HC pe byddai unrhyw bosibilrwydd y gallai enw’r meddyg gael ei ddileu o’r gofrestr. Ar olwg gyntaf, ymddengys hynny fel dim mwy na synnwyr cyffredin, oherwydd, ar ôl atgyfeirio achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd, ni fyddai dilead ar gael o gwbl a byddai’r GMC wedi gwaredu ffordd bwysig o amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Ni cheisiai’r dyfarniad yn
gymryd yr ymagwedd a gymerodd y GMC yn hanesyddol i unrhyw fath penodol o achos. Ni cheisiai awgrymu y dylai’r GMC fod yn dileu mwy o feddygon oddi ar y gofrestr. Dywedodd yn unig y dylai’r achos, pe byddai dilead yn bosibilrwydd, fynd trwy’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad (at y PCC yn ymarferol) cyn ystyried dilead. Pe byddai dilead yn cael ei ddiystyru, yna gellid atgyfeirio’r achos at yr HC, pe byddai’n briodol. Dywedodd Mr Scott y dylai fod goblygiadau pwysig ynghlwm wrth
ar gyfer y ffordd y deliwyd ag achosion fel achos Shipman. Dywedodd fod collfarnau o’r fath mor ddifrifol fel bod rhaid iddynt beri posibilrwydd o ddilead ac y dylid atgyfeirio, fel mater o egwyddor, pob achos lle’r oedd dilead yn sancsiwn posibl at y PPC (dan yr hen weithdrefnau) neu at banel FTP (dan y gweithdrefnau newydd). Ni ddylai fod yn briodol bellach, mewn unrhyw achos lle’r oedd dilead yn bosibilrwydd, atgyfeirio’r meddyg i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol ar gyfnod rhagarweiniol.
Fel a gyfaddefodd Mr Scott, byddai hyn wedi cynnwys ymagwedd hollol wahanol at achosion yn cynnwys cam-drin cyffuriau i’r ymagwedd a gymerwyd yn flaenorol. Ni ddywedodd Mr Scott fod yr egwyddor newydd eisoes ar waith dan y gweithdrefnau presennol - dim ond fod rhesymeg y dyfarniad yn
yn awgrymu y dylai fod. Er cyfyngodd Mr Scott ei dystiolaeth ar y mater hwn i achosion collfarn, ni allai fod unrhyw wahaniaeth rhesymegol rhwng achosion collfarn ac achosion lle’r oedd cyhuddiad o gam-drin cyffuriau yn cynnwys anonestrwydd ond lle na fu unrhyw gollfarn.
Yng nghyfarfod y PPC ym mis Tachwedd 2002, ystyriwyd dau achos yn cynnwys meddygon y’u cafwyd yn euog o droseddau anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun cam-drin cyffuriau.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2001, plediodd Dr John Rogers, meddyg teulu (GP), yn euog i gyfres o droseddau o gael cyffur rheoledig Dosbarth A trwy dwyll ac o feddiant anghyfreithlon ar gyffuriau rheoledig Dosbarth A. Fe gafodd y rhain i’w defnyddio ei hun. Dyma oedd yr un troseddau y cafwyd Shipman yn euog ohonynt; roedd meddygon eraill yr archwiliais eu hachosion ym Mhennod 22 hefyd wedi cyflawni troseddau tebyg. Anfonwyd Dr Rogers at Lys y Goron gan Lys yr Ynadon i’w ddedfrydu, gweithred a awgrymodd yr ystyriai’r Ynadon fod eu pwerau dedfrydu (mwyafswm o 12 mis o garchar) yn annigonol. Sylwodd y Barnwr fod y troseddau’n golygu achos difrifol o dorri’r ymddiriedaeth yr oedd cymuned yn ei rhoi mewn meddyg teulu. Roedd Dr Rogers wedi niweidio ei enw da ei hun ac enw da’r proffesiwn. Sylwodd nad oedd unrhyw un arall wedi cael niwed yn sgil gweithrediadau’r meddyg. Gallai’r un sylwadau fod wedi cael eu cynnig yn achos Shipman ym 1976 neu, yn wir, mewn unrhyw un o nifer fawr o achosion tebyg rwyf wedi eu hastudio. Ar ôl nodi y bu’r meddyg yn dioddef o iselder ysbryd, rhoddodd y Barnwr ddedfryd ohiriedig o garchar.
Yn y GMC, atgyfeiriwyd achos Dr Rogers at y PPC a ystyriodd yr achos gyntaf mewn cyfarfod ym mis Mai 2002. Roedd un adroddiad meddygol, a baratowyd ar gyfer yr achosion troseddol, eisoes ar gael. Mynegodd y farn bod troseddau Dr Rogers yn eilradd i’w salwch iselhaol hirsefydlog. Gohiriodd y PPC yr achos ar gyfer adroddiadau meddygol pellach, a hynny’n benderfyniad nodweddiadol gan y PPC yn y math hwn o achos. Ystyriwyd yr achos nesaf ym mis Tachwedd 2002, pan roedd dau adroddiad meddygol arall yn barod. Er bod yr adroddiadau hyn yn cadarnhau y bu’r meddyg yn dioddef o iselder ysbryd adeg y troseddau, teimlai o leiaf un o’r archwilwyr meddygol na allai gyrraedd diagnosis clir o raddau problem feddygol Dr Rogers. Roedd y drafodaeth o’r achos hwn yn cynnwys ystyried effaith sylwadau’r Cyfrin Gyngor yn
ar yr achos cyfredol. Lluniodd y PPC y farn bod collfarnau Dr Rogers yn ddigon difrifol ar gyfer posibilrwydd o ddilead. O ganlyniad, atgyfeiriwyd yr achos i’r PCC.
Cynrychiolodd hyn ymagwedd newydd at gollfarnau am droseddau cysylltiedig â chyffuriau. Yn lle cael ei atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, lle byddai’r ffocws ar adsefydlu yn gyfan gwbl, roedd yr achos - yn eithaf priodol - am gael sylw manwl panel PCC, y byddai’r holl opsiynau, gan gynnwys dilead ac atgyfeiriad i’r HC, ar gael iddo. Yn ogystal â hynny, byddai’r gwrandawiad yn gyhoeddus.
Yn yr un cyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2002, roedd rhaid i’r PPC ystyried achos Dr JO 09. Roedd yn ddirprwy swyddog tai uwch. Y flwyddyn flaenorol, bu amheuaeth yn ysbyty A y gallai fod yn dwyn pethidin ond nid oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth o hynny. Symudodd i ysbyty B lle sylwyd ei fod i bob golwg yn defnyddio pethidin ar nifer o gleifion mewn amgylchiadau lle na fyddai’n ymarferol gwneud hynny. Ar un achlysur, gwelwyd y meddyg yn cyfnewid chwistrellau ychydig cyn chwistrellu claf. Chwistrellodd rhywfaint o’r hylif (sef pethidin i fod) a rhoi’r chwistrell i nyrs gyda chyfarwyddiadau i waredu’r cynnwys a oedd yn weddill. Ni wnaeth hynny; yn hytrach, anfonodd yr hylif i’w ddadansoddi a darganfuwyd mai dŵr ydoedd. Roedd y meddyg wedi dwyn y pethidin yr oedd wedi rhoi ar bresgripsiwn (yn ddiangen mae’n siŵr) ar gyfer y claf ac wedi chwistrellu’r claf ag ychydig o ddŵr. Ni adroddwyd y meddyg at yr heddlu. Oedaf i sylwi, pan ddarganfyddir troseddau o anonestrwydd mewn sefydliadau GIG, na chânt eu hadrodd i’r heddlu yn aml. Fodd bynnag, adroddwyd y meddyg i’r GMC.
Yn y GMC, roedd yna wahaniaeth barn rhwng y sgrinwyr ynghylch sut y dylid trin yr achos. Credai’r sgriniwr iechyd fod y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn briodol ond dymunai’r sgriniwr meddygol gadw’r posibilrwydd o achosion ymddygiad yn agored. Cafodd y GMC gyngor gan ei gyfreithwyr am sut y dylai symud ymlaen. Cynghorodd y cyfreithiwr y dylid atgyfeirio’r achos at y PPC er mwyn iddo ystyried yr adroddiadau meddygol a phenderfynu pa lwybr y dylai’r achos ei ddilyn. Atgyfeiriwyd yr achos at y PPC a hefyd at y Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Dros Dro (IOC), a roddodd amodau ar y meddyg a fyddai’n parhau am gyfnod o 18 mis. Dyna oedd y cyfnod mwyaf posibl y gallai’r IOC orfodi amodau. Byddai’n aml yn cymhwyso’r cyfnod mwyaf posibl, fel y byddai’r gorchymyn yn cynnwys yr amser a allai fynd heibio cyn y gellid delio â’r achos o ran sylwedd. Yn ôl yr amodau ar Dr JO 09, roedd yn ofynnol iddo barhau dan oruchwyliaeth feddygol, i beidio â rhoi moddion i’w hun, i gyfyngu ar ei ymarfer meddygol i swyddi dan oruchwyliaeth yn GIG, i beidio â gweithio fel dirprwy feddyg ac i roi gwybod i’w ymgynghorydd goruchwyliol neu unrhyw ddarpar gyflogwr am yr amodau ar ei ymarfer. Yn ei gyfarfod nesaf, gohiriodd y PPC ei benderfyniad a gorchymyn archwiliad meddygol gan ddau seiciatrydd.
Roedd yr adroddiadau meddygol cyntaf yn barod i’w hystyried yng nghyfarfod y PPC ym mis Tachwedd 2002. Dywedodd y seiciatrydd cyntaf nad oedd unrhyw angen i atgyfeirio’r achos i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol; roedd y cyfyngiadau presennol a roddwyd gan yr IOC yn ddigonol. Awgrymodd y dylai’r meddyg gael hapbrofion am gyffuriau. Ystyriodd yr ail seiciatrydd fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer yn amodol ar y cyfyngiadau a roddwyd ar y pryd gan yr IOC. Nid oedd angen cyfyngu ar ei hawliau i ragnodi o gwbl.
‘Nododd’
y PPC
‘y cyhuddiadau’
yn erbyn y meddyg, sef lladrad, ffugio presgripsiynau ac, o ran y digwyddiad a ddisgrifiais, amddifadu claf o bethidin ar ôl iddo gael ei ragnodi ar ei gyfer. Nododd fod y ddau seiciatrydd a gyfarwyddwyd gan y GMC yn ystyried bod angen goruchwyliaeth ar y meddyg. Nododd adroddiad pellach gan y seiciatrydd a oedd yn trin y meddyg ei fod yn gwneud cynnydd da heb fod yn defnyddio cyffuriau o unrhyw fath. Yn eithaf annisgwyl, yng ngoleuni’r penderfyniad a wnaed ar yr un diwrnod yn achos
, penderfynodd y PPC na ddylid atgyfeirio’r achos at y PCC ar gyfer ymchwiliad. Penderfynodd fel arall y dylid atgyfeirio’r meddyg i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol gan ddweud
‘nad oedd unrhyw ddadl lles
cyhoeddus dros atgyfeirio’r cyhuddiad hwn i’r PCC’
. Felly, yn yr achos hwnnw, dilynwyd yr arfer arferol o atgyfeirio achosion o’r math hwn i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Cymharu’r Ddau Achos
Wrth gwrs, mae’n amlwg bod rhaid i benderfyniadau’r PPC droi ar ffeithiau’r achos unigol. Rwy’n cydnabod hefyd efallai na fydd yn bosibl i mi, o’r papurau sydd ar gael i’r Ymchwiliad, lunio asesiad mor fanwl o achos ag sy’n bosibl i’r PPC ei lunio. Fodd bynnag, dylai’r GMC anelu at gysondeb eang wrth drin achosion o fath a difrifoldeb tebyg. Ceisiaf nawr gymharu a gwrthgyferbynnu achosion
a Dr JO 09, mewn ymdrech i ddeall pam y cafwyd gwahanol benderfyniadau ar gyfer y ddau achos hyn gan yr un cyfansoddiad o’r PPC.
Un maen prawf o reidrwydd ar gyfer y PPC bob amser yw difrifoldeb camymddygiad y meddyg. Mae dadansoddiad o gamymddygiad y ddau feddyg hyn yn dangos tebygrwydd helaeth. Gan gymryd, fel y mae’n rhaid i ni at ddibenion presennol, y byddai Dr JO 09 wedi’i farnu’n euog yn ôl y cyhuddiad gan y PCC, roedd ef a Dr Rogers wedi cael cyffuriau rheoledig Dosbarth A mewn ffyrdd twyllodrus. Roedd y ddau wedi gwneud hyn, nid ar un achlysur, ond dros gyfnod o amser. Defnyddiwyd gwahanol fecanweithiau ganddynt i gyflawni hyn, ond roedd eu hamgylchiadau gwaith yn esbonio’r gwahaniaethau hyn. Gall meddyg sy’n gweithio mewn ysbyty gymryd cyfleoedd i ddwyn cyffuriau sydd eisoes wedi’u rhoi ar bresgripsiwn a’u paratoi. Gall fod ganddi/ganddo hefyd fynediad i gwpwrdd neu storfa gyffuriau y gallai ddwyn o stoc. Fel arfer, ni all meddyg teulu wneud hynny. Mae meddygon teulu sy’n cael cyffuriau yn anghyfreithlon yn gwneud hynny’n gyffredinol trwy ffugio presgripsiynau. Felly roedd y dulliau a ddefnyddiwyd gan Dr Rogers a Dr JO 09 yn wahanol ond roedd y ddau feddyg wedi ymddwyn yn anonest. Nid yw’n bosibl dweud a oedd meintiau’r cyffur yn y ddau achos yn wahanol ond, heb yr ystyriaeth honno, roedd difrifoldeb y camymddygiad, yn fy marn i, yn debyg iawn. Roedd ffactor ychwanegol yn achos Dr JO 09 nad oedd yn bresennol yn achos Dr Rogers. Honnwyd y gallai Dr JO 09 fod wedi amddifadu claf o gyffur yr oedd ei angen arno/arni. Awgrymwyd hefyd fod y claf wedi cael chwistrelliad diangen a allai fod wedi golygu ymosodiad troseddol os yn wir. Yn sicr, ymddangosai fod Dr JO 09 yn barod i gynnwys cleifion mewn ffordd nad oedd yn codi yn achos Dr Rogers.
Mae archwiliad o’r dystiolaeth feddygol sydd ar gael yn dangos fod gan y ddau feddyg broblem o ddibyniaeth ar gyffuriau. Yn y ddau achos, dywedwyd bod eu camymddygiad yn gysylltiedig â’r ddibyniaeth. Er ymddangosai fod yr adroddiadau yn achos Dr JO 09 yn canolbwyntio’n fanylach ar fesurau adsefydlu, nid oedd unrhyw reswm, hyd y gwelais i, i dybio nad oedd Dr Rogers yn gallu adsefydlu.
Hyd yma, mae’n anodd gweld pam yr arweiniodd un achos at bosibilrwydd o ddilead ac felly mae’n rhaid ei atgyfeirio i’r PCC, tra bod y llall heb. Fodd bynnag, roedd rhai gwahaniaethau rhwng yr achosion. Un gwahaniaeth oedd y cafwyd Dr Rogers yn euog yn y llysoedd ac, felly, roedd ei gamymddygiad eisoes wedi’i brofi. Nid oedd euogrwydd Dr JO 09 wedi’i brofi eto; byddai hwnnw’n fater i’r PCC ei benderfynu. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos na fu unrhyw ddiffyg tystiolaeth ac, o’r dystiolaeth feddygol, mae’n ymddangos bod y meddyg wedi derbyn bod ganddo broblem gyffuriau. Nid yw’r ffaith bod camymddygiad wedi’i brofi mewn un achos ac nid yn y llall yn gallu cyfiawnhau triniaeth wahanol. Un gwahaniaeth posibl arall y gallai fod yn bresennol ym meddyliau’r PPC, gan fod achos
wedi’i drafod yn gyhoeddus, yw ei fod wedi rhoi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn. Nid oedd Dr JO 09 wedi gwneud hyn, oherwydd na adroddwyd ei gamymddygiad honedig i’r heddlu. Ond ni allai’r gwahaniaeth hwnnw, mae’n siwr, gyfiawnhau gwahanol driniaeth y ddau feddyg hyn. Lwc dda Dr JO 09 oedd y ffaith y dewisodd awdurdodau’r ysbyty peidio â chyflwyno adroddiad i’r heddlu, ond ni olygai fod ei gamymddygiad, pe byddai’n cael ei brofi, yn llai difrifol na chamymddygiad Dr Rogers. Yn fyr, ni allaf weld sut y gallai dadansoddiad priodol o’r materion perthnasol yn y ddau achos hwn arwain at driniaeth mor wahanol.
Y Canlyniadau
Rwy’n troi at ystyried y ddau ganlyniad yn y pen draw. Atgyfeiriwyd Dr JO 09 i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Ni archwiliwyd y cyhuddiadau yn ei erbyn yn llawn o gwbl ac ni chafodd materion pwysig eu datrys o gwbl. Ni wyddwn a oedd ef yn euog o’r camymddygiad honedig ai peidio. Digwyddodd holl achosion y GMC yn breifat. Ni chafodd Dr JO 09 y straen a’r gwarth cyhoeddus posibl a fyddai wedi dilyn pe byddai wedi’i gael yn euog o’r camymddygiad honedig ar ôl ei atgyfeirio i’r PCC. Daeth i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol a gorfodwyd cyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer. Cynlluniwyd y rhain i amddiffyn y cyhoedd ac i lywio adsefydlu’r meddyg. Nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth i awgrymu, yn ei achos penodol ef, na ddarparodd yr amodau a orfodwyd amddiffyniad digonol i’r cyhoedd.
Aeth Dr Rogers o flaen panel PCC a benderfynodd ddileu ei enw o’r gofrestr feddygol. Wrth roi ei resymau, nododd y panel y bu’r meddyg yn dioddef o salwch iselhaol adeg ei droseddau. Mae’n amlwg o’r adroddiad achos fod barn feddygol y bu troseddau’r meddyg yn
‘eilradd i’w salwch’
. Serch hynny, dywedodd panel y PCC ei fod wedi llunio’r farn nad oedd nam difrifol ar gyflwr iechyd cyfredol y meddyg i warantu ei atgyfeirio i’r HC. Trodd y panel wedyn at drafod difrifoldeb ei ymddygiad, yn enwedig ei anonestrwydd. Dywedodd:
‘Mae’r Pwyllgor yn cydnabod na fuoch yn destun gweithdrefnau GMC cyn y gwrandawiad hwn. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r ffactorau hyn yn bychanu eich ymddygiad diesgus ac anonest. Mae’r Pwyllgor yn ystyried anonestrwydd o safbwynt difrifol ar ba bynnag ffurf ac mae’n anghymeradwyo unrhyw weithred sy’n tanseilio ffydd y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn neu sy’n cyfaddawdu’r ymddiriedaeth y mae cleifion yn ei rhoi mewn meddygon. Roedd rhaid iddynt felly ystyried yn ofalus iawn a yw lles y cyhoedd yn mynnu y dylent weithredu ynghylch eich cofrestriad.’
Yna, ystyriodd y PCC addasrwydd y sancsiynau llai difrifol ar gael iddo a phenderfynodd fod rhaid dileu enw Dr Rogers. Oedaf i sylwi, pe byddai Dr JO 09 wedi’i gael yn euog yn ôl y cyhuddiad, byddai’r geiriau a ddyfynnir uchod yr un mor addas iddo ef ag yr oeddent i Dr Rogers ac, os dylid ystyried
‘anonestrwydd ar ba bynnag ffurf’
o safbwynt difrifol, yna dylid fod wedi ystyried y cyhuddiadau o anonestrwydd yn erbyn Dr JO 09 o safbwynt difrifol hefyd.
Apeliodd Dr Rogers at y Llys Uwch ar dair sail. Methodd y cyfan a dim ond dau ohonynt sydd o ddiddordeb yn y cyd-destun presennol. Roedd y sail gyntaf yn gysylltiedig â’r modd y deliodd panel y PCC â’r materion iechyd. Cyfaddefodd y Barnwr, yr Ustus Mitting, y penderfynodd y panel i beidio ag atgyfeirio’r achos i’r HC yn rhy gynnar yn ei ystyriaethau. Nododd y Barnwr na ddylai’r PCC, ar ôl y penderfyniad yn achos
, fod wedi ystyried atgyfeirio i’r HC tan ar ôl iddo ddiystyru dilead fel sancsiwn priodol. Mewn gwirionedd, roedd wedi ystyried (a phenderfynu yn erbyn) atgyfeiriad i’r HC cyn ystyried dilead neu unrhyw sancsiwn arall. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd y Barnwr nad oedd y gwall hwn wedi amharu ar benderfyniad y panel gan ei bod yn amlwg mai ei resymau am orfodi dilead oedd bod y troseddau mor ddifrifol fod lles y cyhoedd yn mynnu dim byd llai.
Dadleuodd Dr Rogers hefyd fod dilead yn sancsiwn rhy lym ac yn anghymesur â difrifoldeb ei droseddau. Ategodd y Barnwr resymeg y PCC ar y mater hwnnw. Nododd farn panel y PCC fod anonestrwydd bob amser yn ddifrifol mewn meddyg, yn enwedig lle’r oedd yn tanseilio’r ymddiriedaeth y mae’r gymuned yn ei rhoi yn y meddyg. Tynnodd sylw at nodweddion gwaethygol amrywiol yr achos: nid yn unig oedd y rhain yn droseddau o anonestrwydd, ond roeddent hefyd yn cynnwys cyffuriau rheoledig Dosbarth A; nid oeddent yn droseddau unigol; nid oeddent yn berifferol i ddyletswyddau proffesiynol y meddyg - yn wir, roeddent yn ymroddedig yng nghwrs ei ddyletswyddau proffesiynol. Oedaf i nodi bod pob un o’r nodweddion gwaethygol hynny’n bresennol yn y cyhuddiadau yn erbyn Dr JO 09. Roedd y ddau achos yn cynnwys torri ymddiriedaeth. Soniodd y Barnwr hefyd am y ffactorau lliniarol yn achos Dr Rogers, absenoldeb unrhyw record flaenorol ac effaith y salwch. Sylwodd fod rhaid i banel y PCC gynnal ymarfer cydbwyso. Nid oedd wedi methu’r gyfraith wrth gyrraedd ei gasgliad. Yn wir, nododd yr Ustus Mitting yn benodol ei fod yn cytuno â barn panel y PCC. Gellid cymryd bod y GMC hefyd yn cytuno â phenderfyniad panel y PCC. Roedd wedi ceisio ei gynnal ar apêl.
Crynhodd yr Ustus Mitting ddifrifoldeb achos Dr Rogers trwy ddweud bod y troseddau’n arddangos camdriniaeth glir o’r ymddiriedaeth a roir mewn unrhyw feddyg ac achos o dorri egwyddorion arfer meddygol da. Dywedodd fod ymddygiad o’r fath yn anochel yn tanseilio’r ffydd y mae aelodau’r cyhoedd yn ei rhoi yn y proffesiwn. Yn fy marn i, gellid dweud yr union yr un fath am ymddygiad Dr JO 09, pe byddai wedi’i brofi, ac am ymddygiad Shipman a sawl meddyg arall sydd wedi’u hatgyfeirio, dros y blynyddoedd, yn breifat i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Nid fy lle i yw dweud bod y penderfyniad yn
yn gywir neu’n anghywir. Ceisiaf dynnu sylw yn unig at y gwahanol ffyrdd y deliwyd â’r ddau achos hwn ac at yr annhegwch posibl a all godi os nad oes gan y GMC feini prawf clir ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau. Roedd Llawlyfr y Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 yn cynnwys cyngor ar effaith y dyfarniad yn
. Nid yw’n glir faint o effaith a gafodd y cyngor hwnnw ar sgrinwyr (ac ar y PPC). Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi cynnal archwiliad o achosion ond mae’n ymddangos y deliwyd â llawer o feddygon (heblaw am ychydig fel Dr Rogers) y’u hadroddwyd i’r GMC am gollfarnau ar gyfer anonestrwydd yn gysylltiedig â cham-drin cyffuriau yn ystod 2002, 2003 a 2004 cynnar dan yr hen arfer a chawsant eu hatgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn hytrach na’r PCC. Ond eto, cyn gynted ag y bo’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith, y bwriad yw y bydd meddygon o’r fath yn cael eu hatgyfeirio at banel FTP, fel ag y dylent yn fy marn i.
Mae’n ymddangos i mi y gellir dysgu rhai gwersi cyffredinol drwy ystyried y ddau achos hyn. Erbyn hyn, mae’r GMC wedi cydnabod bod rhaid atgyfeirio meddygon a adroddir i’r GMC am gollfarnau sy’n codi o droseddau cyffuriau at banel FTP. Caiff cyfarwyddyd sicr ei roi i’r perwyl hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, ni ellir delio â honiadau o ymddygiad o’r math hwnnw yn ôl synnwyr y bawd. Rhaid ystyried yr honiadau’n unigol a’r dystiolaeth sydd ar gael i’w cefnogi. Yr hyn y mae’n rhaid ei egluro i benderfynwyr yw na ddylid atgyfeirio achosion fel achos Dr JO 09 i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol heb ddatrys y materion ffeithiol yn gyntaf. Dylid pennu honiadau o gamymddygiad, os na chyfaddefir, fel y gall fod asesiad cywir o ddifrifoldeb camymddygiad y meddyg. Dim ond wedyn y gellir gwneud penderfyniad, yng ngoleuni’r dystiolaeth feddygol sydd ar gael ac unrhyw nodweddion eraill o ran gwaethygu neu leddfu, a ddylid dileu neu atal y meddyg o’r gofrestr neu a ddylid caniatáu i’r meddyg ymarfer dan amodau. Dim ond wedyn y gall unrhyw wrandawiadau dilynol sy’n cynnwys y meddyg symud ymlaen ar sail ffeithiau hysbys yn hytrach na hanes meddygol.
Yn ail, mae’r ddau achos hyn yn tanlinellu’r angen am ddatblygu meini prawf clir ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau. Fel a ddangosais, mae’n anodd darganfod unrhyw sail resymegol am y gwahaniaeth a gafwyd rhyngddynt. Rwy’n pryderu y ceir y gwahaniaeth o ran triniaeth yn sgil y ffaith bod camymddygiad y meddyg eisoes wedi’i brofi mewn un achos a heb ei brofi yn y llall. Hefyd, mae’n debyg bod pwysigrwydd sylweddol ynghlwm wrth yr hyn a ddywedodd y Barnwr wrth roi dedfryd yn y llys troseddol. Roedd yr hyn a ddywedodd y Barnwr yn synhwyrol ac yn briodol iawn ond mae’n ymddangos mai ei ddiben oedd tanlinellu i’r GMC ddifrifoldeb achos
. Nid oedd unrhyw ddatganiad cyfwerth yn achos Dr JO 09.
Yn drydydd, yn fy marn i, dylid delio â honiadau o gamymddygiad fel a gododd yn y ddau achos hyn yn gyhoeddus. Mae gan y cyhoedd ddiddordeb dilys mewn gwybod yr hyn y mae’r meddyg wedi’i wneud a’r hyn y mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu ei wneud yn ei gylch. Yn fy marn i, mae’r GMC yn methu’r cyhoedd os yw’n delio ag achosion o’r fath yn breifat. Yn ogystal, caiff lles y proffesiwn a’r GMC ei hun ei wasanaethu’n well gan driniaeth agored. Wrth gwrs, mae gan y meddyg hawl i gyfrinachedd meddygol. Gellir cyflawni hyn os yw’r panel FTP yn ystyried y dystiolaeth feddygol yn llawn ond yn cyfeirio ato’n fras yn unig wrth roi’r rhesymau am ei gasgliad dilynol.
Perthnasedd Cyfyngedig y Ddedfryd a Basiwyd gan y Llys Troseddol mewn Achos Euogfarn
, y cyfeiriais ato uchod, gorfododd y Barnwr ddedfryd ohiriedig o garchar. Yn syml, ystyriai fod yr achos yn ddifrifol. Mae’n bosibl bod y ffaith bod collfarn y meddyg wedi arwain at ddedfryd o garchar yn ffactor a achosodd i banel y PCC ddilyn y llwybr a wnaeth; nid oedd hwn yn ffactor y soniwyd amdano ym mhenderfyniad y panel, felly soniaf amdano fel posibilrwydd yn unig.
Mae’n ymddangos, yn y gorffennol, bod asesiad y GMC o ddifrifoldeb camymddygiad y meddyg, mewn achosion lle cafwyd meddygon yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau rheoledig, wedi’i ddylanwadu’n gryf gan ddedfryd a orfodwyd gan y llys troseddol. Ni fu fawr o ymdrech i asesu difrifoldeb o safbwynt effaith neu effaith bosibl y camymddygiad ar ymarfer y meddyg. Ym Mhennod 16, sylwais, pan adroddwyd collfarnau Shipman i’r GMC ym 1976, na fyddai’r Cofrestrydd, Mr Martin Draper, yn caniatáu i’r achos fynd at y PeCC tan fod gwybodaeth fanwl gywir ar gael am swm y gorchmynion dirwy ac iawndal a orfodwyd gan Lys yr Ynadon. Fodd bynnag, ni chafwyd unrhyw archwiliad i’r effaith y cafodd camdriniaeth Shipman o gyffuriau a’i anonestrwydd ar ei ymarfer clinigol. Roedd hynny’n nodweddiadol o’r ffordd yr archwiliai’r GMC achosion o’r fath.
Yn fy marn i, nid yw’r ddedfryd a basiwyd gan y llys troseddol yn berthnasol iawn o gwbl i ddifrifoldeb camymddygiad y meddyg o safbwynt y GMC. Gallaf weld, fel canllaw bras iawn, os yw barnwr yn gorfodi dedfryd o garchar ar unwaith, ei bod yn rhesymol trin yr achos fel achos difrifol. Fodd bynnag, ni ddylid tybio bod y gwrthwyneb yn wir. Ni ddylai’r ffaith bod y llys wedi rhoi cosb isel iawn, neu hyd yn oed dim cosb o gwbl, arwain y GMC at y casgliad nad yw’r achos yn ddifrifol yng nghyd-destun achosion y GMC. Dylai’r GMC, wrth gwrs, roi ystyriaeth i ganfyddiadau ffeithiol y llys a/neu i’r sail ffeithiol ar gyfer y ddedfryd a roddir. Fodd bynnag, mae rôl y GMC wrth amddiffyn cleifion yn cynnwys gwahanol ystyriaethau i’r rheiny a ystyrir gan y llysoedd troseddol wrth basio dedfryd. Er enghraifft, bydd gan drosedd o anonestrwydd neu anwedduster a gyflawnir gan feddyg oblygiadau yng nghyd-destun ymarfer meddygol sydd ymhell y tu hwnt i’r ystyriaethau y bydd y llysoedd yn eu hystyried. Gall yr hyn sy’n ymddangos yn eithaf dibwys yng nghyd-destun y gyfraith droseddol gyffredinol fod yn eithaf difrifol yng nghyd-destun ymarfer meddygol. Dylai’r GMC ofalu nad yw’n seilio ei asesiad o ddifrifoldeb ar y ddedfryd y mae’r llys yn ei phasio yn enwedig lle caiff y meddyg ddedfryd gan Lys Ynadon, lle nad yw’r rhesymau dros basio dedfryd bob amer yn cael eu hesbonio’n llawn. Rhaid cofio hefyd y gallai’r llys fod wedi gosod dedfryd llawer mwy trugarog nag y byddai wedi’i hystyried fel arall oherwydd y dywedwyd ar ran y meddyg ei fod yn debygol o gael ei ‘ddileu’ gan y GMC a bod ei yrfa wedi’i difetha.

---  ---
Fel a ddywedais, ymagwedd y GMC yn y gorffennol at feddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau fu hwyluso adsefydlu fel bod eu cymhelliad i gael cyffuriau yn diflannu, ar ôl trin cyflwr y meddyg yn llwyddiannus, a gellid disgwyl i’r meddyg fynd yn ôl at ei batrymau/ei phatrymau ymddygiad arferol. Wedyn, ar ôl caniatáu i gyfnod rhesymol fynd heibio, pan fo’r perygl o ailwaeledd yn lleihau, cyrhaeddir y pwynt lle gellir dweud yn ddiogel fod y meddyg yn addas i ailddechrau ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth. Gellir cyfiawnhau’r ymagwedd a gymerir trwy ddefnyddio achosion llawer o feddygon a aeth trwy weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol y GMC ac a adsefydlwyd i ymarfer yn llwyddiannus. Cefnogwyd yr ymagwedd honno gan y Senedd yn Neddf Meddygol 1978 ac mewn deddfwriaeth ddilynol. Er caiff meddygon sy’n dioddef o fathau eraill o salwch eu trin hefyd dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd, rhagwelwyd o’r cychwyn y byddai’r gweithdrefnau yn cael eu defnyddio i adsefydlu meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau.
Mae’n amlwg o dystiolaeth Mr Scott i’r Ymchwiliad nad yw’r hen ymagwedd bellach yn dderbyniol. Erbyn hyn, mae’r GMC yn cydnabod bod rhaid iddo gael ei stôr llawn o sancsiynau wrth ddelio â meddygon y’u bernir yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau. Mae’r tybiaethau a wnaed o’r blaen, sef mai’r ffordd orau ym mhob achos felly oedd atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol, wedi mynd. Gobeithiaf y bydd y GMC o’r un farn am achosion lle gwneir honiadau o natur debyg ond lle, am un rheswm neu’i gilydd, nad oes collfarn na rhybudd.
Mae dau gwestiwn yn codi nawr i’w hystyried. Sut dylai’r GMC archwilio achosion sy’n cynnwys cam-drin cyffuriau er mwyn sicrhau’r rheiny y mae’n rhaid iddynt wneud penderfyniadau pwysig ar sancsiwn fod ganddynt yr holl wybodaeth berthnasol sydd ar gael? Beth yw’r meini prawf y dylid eu cymhwyso wrth benderfynu ar sancsiwn?
Ffactorau Cyffredin mewn Achosion o Gam-drin Cyffuriau
Cyn ystyried y ddau gwestiwn hynny, gall fod yn ddefnyddiol amlinellu’r mathau o gamymddygiad y mae’n rhaid eu hystyried. Mae’r ffeithiau a’r amgylchiadau’n amrywio o un achos i’r llall, ond mae yna nifer o nodweddion sy’n nodweddiadol o achosion felly. Mae’n gyffredin i GP gael cyflenwadau drwy ysgrifennu presgripsiynau am gyffuriau rheoledig yn enwau cleifion nad oes arnynt eu hangen. Mae’r meddyg yn cyflwyno’r presgripsiwn mewn fferyllfa ac yn casglu’r cyffuriau, gan ddweud wrth y fferyllydd y bydd ef/hi yn eu dosbarthu i gartref y claf, ond gan eu cadw i’w hun mewn gwirionedd. Dyna a wnaeth Shipman. Weithiau, mae’r meddyg teulu yn ysgrifennu presgripsiwn yn enwau cleifion nad ydynt yn bodoli ac yn casglu’r cyffuriau o’r fferyllfa, gan honni naill ai mai ef/hi yw’r claf neu ei fod ef/ei bod hi yn gweithredu ar ran y claf hwnnw. Weithiau, mae’r meddyg yn datblygu perthynas gydfwriadol â chlaf, gan ragnodi mwy o gyffuriau nag sydd eu hangen ar y claf. Mae’r claf yn casglu’r cyffuriau ac yn rhoi rhan o’r cyflenwad i’r meddyg. Mewn rhai achosion, mae’r meddyg teulu’n archebu’r cyffur o fferyllfa neu gyfanwerthwr ar archeb neu archeb wedi’i lofnodi, gan gynrychioli’n anghywir fod y cyffuriau ar gyfer stoc practis. Bydd ef neu hi’n osgoi gwneud unrhyw gofnod yng nghofrestr cyffuriau rheoledig y practis ac yn cadw’r cyffuriau i’w hun. Dyna a wnaeth Shipman. Caiff meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn ysbytai fwy o gyfle na meddygon teulu i ddwyn cyffuriau o gwpwrdd stoc. Bydd eraill yn rhagnodi cyffuriau ar gyfer cleifion ysbyty nad ydynt eu hangen ac yn cymryd y cyffuriau ar ôl iddynt gael eu dosbarthu i’r ward. Cyfeiriwyd at ddulliau o’r fath mewn ymchwil a wnaed gan y Ganolfan Gaethiwed Genedlaethol ac a gyhoeddwyd ym 1991
, yn seiliedig ar archwiliad o gofnodion meddygol pob meddyg a driniwyd ar gyfer cam-drin alcohol a chyffuriau yn Ysbytai Brenhinol Maudsley a Bethlem dros yr 20 mlynedd ddiwethaf. Mae’r holl ddulliau hyn yn cynnwys anonestrwydd wrth ymarfer.
Ni ellir caniatáu i’r ffeithiau bod cam-drin cyffuriau yn arwain yn aml iawn at anonestrwydd a bod anonestrwydd mewn meddygon yn fater difrifol guddio’r broblem elfennol a achosir gan gam-drin cyffuriau. Bu gan Dr Douglas Fowlie, Ymgynghorydd Seiciatrydd, Gofal Sylfaenol Grampian yr Ymddiriedolaeth GIG, ac aelod amlwg o’r Coleg Seiciatryddion Brenhinol, ddiddordeb arbennig mewn cam-drin sylweddau am lawer blwyddyn. Pwysleisiodd ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad mai un o effeithiau pwysig cymryd cyffuriau yw’r ffordd y mae amgyffrediadau’r person o’r byd a’i werthoedd/ei gwerthoedd cyffredinol yn cael eu hanffurfio. Dywedodd:
‘Mae’n bwysig bod yn ymwybodol ... mai un o elfennau salwch o ddibyniaeth yw amgyffrediad anffurfiedig dethol o’ch ymddygiad eich hun. Wrth i ddibyniaeth gynyddu, blaenoriaeth yr unigolyn yw cael y dos nesaf o’r ddiod neu’r cyffur. Dyma’r flaenoriaeth bwysicaf o bell ac mae pwysigrwydd ffactorau eraill ar wahân i hyn yn lleihau. Pan fydd yr amgyffrediadau yn anffurfio, mae diffyg mewnwelediad yn datblygu, a gall salwch achosi anffurfiant o’r hyn yr oedd yr unigolyn blaenorol nad oedd yn ddibynnol yn ei ystyried yn gywir ac yn anghywir.’
Heb amheuaeth, mae amgyffrediad anffurfiedig o’r fath yn esbonio ymddygiad meddygon sy’n credu ei bod yn dderbyniol defnyddio ffyrdd anonest i gael cyffuriau. Mae’n esbonio hefyd ymddygiad y rheiny sy’n trin cleifion tra’u bod dan ddylanwad cyffuriau neu tra’n dyheu am ddos arall. Gellid tybio bod meddygon sy’n gwneud hyn yn perswadio’u hunain ei bod yn dderbyniol iddynt drin cleifion yn syth ar ôl cymryd cyffur sy’n effeithio ar y meddwl. Caiff eu hamgyffrediad o’u galluoedd eu hunain ac o les eu cleifion ei anffurfio’n wael. P’un a yw amgyffrediadau anffurfiedig o’r fath yn parhau ar ôl i’r ddibyniaeth ddod i ben, nid wyf yn gwybod.
Mae ffeithiau rhai o’r achosion rwyf wedi eu darllen yn dangos sut gall cam-drin cyffuriau rheoledig gael effaith uniongyrchol ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Yn achos Dr JO 09, chwistrellodd y meddyg y claf â dŵr a chadw’r cyffur a ragnodwyd ar gyfer y claf i’w hun. Rwyf wedi darllen adroddiad am feddyg a syrthiai i gysgu o hyd yn y gwaith, hyd yn oed yn ystod ymgynghoriadau. Mewn achos arall y darllenais amdano, darganfuwyd meddyg iau wedi llewygu ar ward ysbyty, ar ôl chwistrellu’i hun â chyffur rheoledig tra’i fod ar ddyletswydd. Llewygodd Shipman sawl gwaith pan roedd yn ymarfer yn Todmorden. Ar y pryd, dadansoddwyd bod hyn oherwydd ‘epilepsi idiopathig’ ond, mewn gwirionedd, canlyniad ei gaethineb ydoedd. Yn yr achosion hyn, mae’r goblygiadau ar gyfer diogelwch cleifion yn amlwg iawn. Mewn sefyllfaoedd eraill, mae’r risgiau i gleifion yn anoddach eu gweld. Fodd bynnag, dylid amau barn meddyg bob amser pan fo’r dyhead am gyffuriau rheoledig yn dominyddu ei feddwl/ei meddwl.
Nid oes unrhyw amheuaeth bod meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau yn cyflwyno risg sylweddol i ddiogelwch cleifion. Mae’n debyg y derbynnir yn gyffredinol na ddylid caniatáu i unrhyw feddyg y tybier ei fod yn defnyddio cyffuriau i ymarfer ac y dylid goruchwylio unrhyw feddyg sydd wedi rhoi’r gorau i’w ddrwg arferiad dim ond yn ddiweddar er mwyn cydnabod unrhyw ailwaeledd yn fuan.
Anonestrwydd mewn Achosion o Gam-drin Cyffuriau
Mae gan yr elfen o anonestrwydd sy’n bresennol yn y categori hwn o achos, heb eithriad bron, oblygiadau pwysig ar gyfer diogelwch cleifion. Mae’n amlwg o ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ yr ystyria’r GMC fod gonestrwydd a chywirdeb meddyg o bwysigrwydd elfennol. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, y Llywydd o 1995 i 2002, yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad mai gonestrwydd yw un o ddaliadau elfennol y berthynas rhwng meddyg a chlaf a bod hynny’n hanfodol i gywirdeb y broses glinigol. Yn ei ddatganiad tyst i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Donald mai’r man cychwyn o reidrwydd ar gyfer ystyriaeth y GMC o achosion sy’n cynnwys anonestrwydd yw bod anonestrwydd yn achos o esgeuluso dyletswydd sylfaenol ac yn golygu camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol; roedd o’r farn, yn absenoldeb rhesymau da iawn o ran lliniaru, y dylai arwain at ddileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr feddygol.
Bryd hwnnw, roedd Syr Donald yn siarad am achosion o anonestrwydd yn gyffredinol, ac nid yng nghyd-destun penodol cam-drin cyffuriau. Dywedodd fod yna
‘fater heb ei ddatrys’
mewn achosion o gaethineb, lle gellid dweud bod anonestrwydd yn eilradd i’r drwg arferiad caethiwus ei hun. Dywedodd fod angen dadlau ehangach ar fater anonestrwydd yn y cyd-destun hwnnw, y gellid ei egluro trwy gonsensws ehangach ar sancsiynau i’w gyrraedd rhwng y cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn meddygol. Cytunaf, a gobeithio y bydd y Bennod hon yn darparu ysgogiadau pellach ar gyfer dadl o’r fath.
Mae’r
‘mater hwn sydd heb ei ddatrys’
yn cynnwys y farn ymddangosiadol fwyaf unfrydol gan seiciatryddion y cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ganddynt fod anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun cam-drin cyffuriau yn ‘rhan o’r salwch hwn’ ac yn gydamrywiad naturiol o’r gamdriniaeth. Ym Mhennod 16, esboniais y gred hon a dyfynnu tystiolaeth Dr Fowlie. Yn fyr, y ddamcaniaeth yw nad yw anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun caethineb i gyffuriau mewn meddyg yn arwydd o bersonoliaeth anonest yn y bôn. Ar y llaw arall, mae’r angen i gael cyffur y caethineb mor gryf nes ei fod yn dod yn gymhelliad ac mae’r person, a fyddai’n eithaf onest fel arfer, yn ymddwyn yn anonest er mwyn cael cyffuriau. Os yw’r ddibyniaeth ar gyffuriau yn gwella, bydd yr anonestrwydd yn diflannu.
Dymunai’r Ymchwiliad, os yn bosibl, archwilio pa mor bell y gellid cymryd y ddamcaniaeth honno mewn gwirionedd. A ddylai fod yn berthnasol ym mhob achos? Os na, ym mha achosion na ddylai fod yn berthnasol? Ysgogwyd y cwestiynau hyn, i ryw raddau, wrth ystyried achos Shipman. Gweithredodd yn anonest er mwyn cael pethidin yn y 1970au. Pan ddarganfuwyd ei gamymddygiad, cafodd ei drin a gwellodd ei ddibyniaeth. Ond, fel a ddarganfyddais yn fy Adroddiad Cyntaf, parhaodd Shipman yn anonest iawn ar ôl y cyfnod hwnnw. Yn yr Adroddiad Cyntaf, disgrifiais nifer o’r ffyrdd y daethai hyn i’r golwg. Defnyddiodd lawer o ddulliau anonest i gael diamorffin i’w ddefnyddio i ladd ei gleifion. Byddai’n dweud celwydd yn aml i deuluoedd y cleifion am amgylchiadau marwolaethau‘r rheiny a laddai. Gwnaeth gofnodion anghywir yng nghofnodion meddygol cleifion i ddarparu esboniadau naturiol am y marwolaethau a achoswyd ganddo. Roedd y gweithrediadau hynny o anonestrwydd yn gysylltiedig â lladd cleifion. Ond roedd yn anonest mewn cyd-destunau eraill hefyd. Yn syth ar ôl darganfod ei ddibyniaeth ar gyffuriau ym 1975, roedd yn dwyllodrus mewn cais am swydd. Ni ddywedodd wrth Awdurdod Iechyd Ardal Durham ei fod yn wynebu erlyniad wrth ymgeisio am swydd mewn iechyd plant. Datgelodd ei gollfarn dim ond oherwydd y cynghorwyd iddo wneud hynny gan yr ymgynghorydd seiciatrydd a oedd yn ei drin a gwnaeth hynny dim ond ar ôl y cynigiwyd y swydd iddo. Wrth gwrs, rwy’n derbyn y gallai fod gan Shipman bersonoliaeth hollol eithriadol. Fodd bynnag, mae ei achos yn cyfiawnhau holi’r cwestiwn a oes yna risg bod yr anonestrwydd a weithredir i fodloni drwg arferiad cyffuriau yn debygol o oroesi y tu hwnt i ddiwedd y drwg arferiad hwnnw. A yw’r risg y bydd anonestrwydd o’r fath yn parhau i olygu bod y meddyg yn annibynadwy yn barhaol ac yn anaddas i ymarfer fel meddyg?
Awgrymodd un tyst i’r Ymchwiliad y gall ymddygiad anonest, ar ôl i berson droi at ymddygiad felly - yn enwedig os ailadroddir yr ymddygiad hwnnw ar sawl achlysur -ddatblygu’n ddrwg arferiad neu ‘sgil-bywyd’ a gall ef/hi fod yn anonest eto mewn cyd-destunau eraill yn y dyfodol. Y syniad oedd, ar ôl i feddyg fod yn anonest er mwyn cael cyffuriau, na ellir ymddiried ynddo/ynddi yn y dyfodol ac felly, yn gyffredinol, nid yw’n addas i ymarfer meddygaeth, o leiaf heb oruchwyliaeth agos. Awgrymir na ellid dibynnu ar berson o’r fath, wrth wynebu sefyllfa glinigol sy’n mynnu gonestrwydd a chywirdeb, i arddangos y nodweddion hynny. Pe byddai ef/hi yn gwneud camgymeriad, er enghraifft, byddai’n fwy tebygol o geisio cuddio’r hyn a ddigwyddodd yn hytrach na bod yn agored amdano. Gall fod hyn yn gywir ond nid oes unrhyw dystiolaeth i awgrymu felly. Yn un cyfnod yn yr Ymchwiliad, meddyliais y byddai’n ddefnyddiol canolbwyntio sylw ar anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun meddygon yn cam-drin cyffuriau. Ar ôl clywed yr holl dystiolaeth, ni chredaf bellach y byddai gwerth gwneud hyn. Mae’n debyg i mi mai un gydran yn unig yw anonestrwydd o gymeriad camweithredol y meddyg sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau.
Gan fod Shipman yn achos hysbys o berson nad oedd yn ffitio’r ddamcaniaeth a dderbynnir yn gyffredinol y bydd anonestrwydd yn diflannu pan fo’r ddibyniaeth yn cael ei gwella, daeth i’m meddwl y gallai fod eithriadau eraill i’r rheol hon ac, os felly, y byddai’n bwysig gallu eu cydnabod; mewn geiriau eraill, byddai’n bwysig cydnabod y meddygon hynny lle mae anonestrwydd yn gydamrywiad o gam-drin cyffuriau yn unig a’r rheiny y mae ei wreiddiau’n ddyfnach ynddynt. Gellid ystyried bod y meddygon hynny’n anaddas i barhau’n feddygon.
Wrth ystyried pa mor bell y gellir cymryd y ddamcaniaeth sylfaenol am anonestrwydd, mae’n ymddangos i mi fod yna nifer o gwestiynau pwysig i’w holi. A yw’r ffordd y mae’r ddibyniaeth yn datblygu yn effeithio o gwbl ar y graddau y bydd yr anonestrwydd yn dadelfennu pan fo’r ddibyniaeth wedi’i gwella? Mae’n debyg i mi y gallai. Rhaid bod cyfnod lle mae’r meddyg yn dechrau cymryd cyffur ond nid yw eto’n gaeth iddo na hyd yn oed yn dibynnu arno. Os yw’r ffyrdd a ddefnyddir yn y cyfnod hwnnw yn anonest, a ellir dweud bod anonestrwydd yn gydamrywiad o ddibyniaeth? Mae’n debyg i mi na ellir. Rwy’n cydnabod bod rhai meddygon sy’n dioddef o salwch organig yn cael cyffuriau poenladdol cryf, sydd weithiau’n cynnwys opioidau, ar ei gyfer ar bresgripsiwn. Ni ddylent ddod yn gaeth i’r cyffuriau hynny os goruchwylir yr hyn a gymerir yn gywir, er gall fod rhai yn dod yn gaeth iddynt. Rwy’n amau bod yna rai meddygon (neu bobl) sy’n dod yn gaeth mewn amgylchiadau felly. Bydd hefyd rhai achosion lle mae’r meddyg yn hunan-feddyginiaethu’n annoeth yng nghyd-destun anhwylder seiciatrig fel iselder ysbryd. Gallaf weld, yng nghyd-destun salwch, sut y gellir effeithio ar ddoethineb meddyg ac efallai na fydd ef/hi yn dilyn y llwybr synhwyrol o gael cyngor meddygol annibynnol. Bydd yna achosion eraill lle bo hunan-feddyginiaeth yn dechrau yn ystod cyfnod o drafferth bersonol o ganlyniad i brofiad fel galar neu ddirywiad priodas. Mewn achosion felly, mae mecanweithiau rheolaeth y meddyg wedi dirywio a gall ef/hi ddechrau ymddwyn mewn modd y byddai ef/hi, mewn amgylchiadau arferol, yn ei gydnabod yn anghywir ac yn ei osgoi. Rwy’n dychmygu bod rhai meddygon mewn sefyllfa fel honno yn dechrau hunan-feddyginiaethu gyda rhywbeth fel bensodiasepin a bod rhai wedyn yn ‘symud ymlaen’ i gyffuriau mwy caethiwus fel opioidau. Rhaid i mi gyfaddef fy mod yn ei chael yn eithaf anodd derbyn bod hyn yn esgus, mewn sefyllfa fel honno, i feddyg symud ymlaen i hunan-feddyginiaethu opioidau. Beth bynnag yw maint y drafferth bersonol, byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai unrhyw feddyg nad yw’n wirioneddol sâl yn cydnabod y perygl o groesi’r llinell hwnnw ac i ymddygiad sydd nid yn unig yn amhriodol ond hefyd bron yn sicr o achosi anonestrwydd.
Yn ogystal â’r achosion hynny lle ceir esboniad dealladwy mwy neu lai am ddechrau’r drwg arferiad, mae’n debyg i mi y mae’n rhaid bod nifer o achosion lle nad oes esboniad boddhaol am y meddyg yn dechrau cymryd cyffuriau. Heddiw, mae eithaf llawer o bobl yn cymryd cyffuriau ar gyfer adloniant. Yn yr achosion hynny, rhaid bod cyfnod ‘tywys i mewn’ lle mae’r meddyg yn penderfynu o’i wirfodd i ‘arbrofi’ gyda chyffuriau. Nid yw dyhead yn cymryd dros ei synnwyr bryd hynny. Mae’n debyg i mi na ddylid ystyried meddyg, a ddylai wybod am beryglon cymryd cyffuriau caethiwus, fel ‘dioddefwr’ diniwed y cyffur yn unig. Credwn y byddai’n annoeth tybio bod meddygon a oedd yn barod i gael gafael ar gyffuriau drwy ffyrdd anonest pan nad oeddent eto’n ddibynnol yn troi’n ôl o reidrwydd at ymddygiad gonest ar ôl gwella’u dibyniaeth. Rwy’n amau hefyd bod llawer o feddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau, ar ôl cael eu ‘darganfod’, yn cyflwyno esboniadau ffug o’r amgylchiadau lle dechreuodd eu dibyniaeth. Ceisiant ddarparu esboniad ‘derbyniol’ am eu hymddygiad anonest. Yn fy marn i, mae gwerth archwilio’r amgylchiadau lle daeth y meddyg yn gaeth bob amser.
Yn ail, gall dyfnder neu gryfder y ddibyniaeth neu’r caethineb amrywio’n helaeth. Rwy’n derbyn yr effeithir ar rai mor ddwfn nes bod cael eu ‘dos nesaf’ yn dod yn obsesiwn sy’n dileu eu meddyliau eraill i gyd. Fodd bynnag, mewn llawer o’r achosion rwyf wedi eu darllen, nid oedd y meddyg yn gaeth i’r graddau hynny. Roedd Shipman yn achos felly. Gallai roi’r gorau i ddefnyddio pethidin ar adegau. Er enghraifft, pan fyddai’n mynd ar wyliau, mae’n debyg yr aethai hebddo. Rwyf wedi gweld adroddiadau meddygol a ddywedai ei fod wedi ‘cynefino’â’r cyffur ond nid yn gaeth iawn iddo. Ni ellir esbonio anonestrwydd mewn achosion o’r fath ar sail cymhelliad neu ddyhead anorchfygol.
Tystiolaeth a Gafwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad
Er mwyn cynorthwyo gyda’r ddealltwriaeth o’r materion sydd ynghlwm wrth feddygon yn cam-drin cyffuriau a sut y dylai’r GMC ddelio ag ef, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth arbenigol gan Dr Andrew Johns, Seiciatrydd Fforensig Ymgynghorol, De Llundain ac Ymddiriedolaeth GIG Maudsley, y mae ganddo brofiad sylweddol yn seiciatreg caethineb. Roedd tystiolaeth Dr Johns yn ymdrin â materion meddygon yn cam-drin sylweddau, y risgiau a gyflwynir gan feddyg wedi’i adsefydlu, tebygrwydd ailddechrau cymryd cyffuriau ac asesu risg ailwaeledd. Roedd ei farnau’n debyg i’r rheiny a fynegwyd gan Dr Fowlie. Dywedodd Dr Johns nad yw ‘anonestrwydd’ yn nodwedd bersonoliaeth sefydlog ond yn fath o ymddygiad y gellid ei ddefnyddio i gyflawni ystod o bethau amrywiol ac y gallai fod ystod o resymau drosto. Dywedodd y byddai’n gamgymeriad, felly, i dybio y byddai ymddygiad anonest gan unigolyn mewn un cyd-destun yn darogan o reidrwydd ymddygiad anonest gan yr unigolyn hwnnw mewn cyd-destun hollol wahanol. Ar ôl trin y caethineb i gyffuriau, mae’r ‘hanfod’ i ffugio presgripsiynau neu ddwyn cyffuriau yn lleihau’n sylweddol. Roedd nifer y cyfranogwyr yn y seminar yn cytuno â’r farn honno.
Dywedodd Dr Johns fod meddygon gyda phroblemau cyffuriau ac alcohol sy’n cael triniaeth briodol yn ‘gwneud yn dda’. Cyfeiriodd at ddata o’r UDA, a ddyfynnir ym mhapur 1991 y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 23.38, a ddangosai fod 75% o feddygon felly, gydag adsefydliad priodol, yn ymarfer a hynny heb gyffuriau ar gyfnodau dilynol o rhwng dwy ac wyth mlynedd. Mae’r data’n dangos cyfradd llwyddiant uchel ganmoladwy ar gyfer trin meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau. Fodd bynnag, golyga hefyd fod nid llai na 25% o feddygon yn dychwelyd at gymryd cyffuriau o fewn wyth mlynedd.
Dywedodd Dr Johns y byddai’n hynod anodd i asesu’r risg o ymddygiad troseddol yn y dyfodol mewn achos unigol o feddyg sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau oherwydd anawsterau rhagweld ymddygiad dynol. Dywedodd y gallai ffactor risg fod yn unrhyw beth gyda chysylltiad ystadegol â digwyddiad yn y dyfodol ac, er y gellid cymryd camau i ddadansoddi risg, ni ellid ei ragweld yn gywir. Dywedodd nad oedd ganddo unrhyw brofiad personol o feddyg yr oedd wedi ei drin ar gyfer cam-drin cyffuriau ac y darganfuwyd wedyn ei fod wedi cyflawni trosedd. Dywedodd ei fod yn amau bod y cyfran o feddygon a aeth ymlaen i gyflawni trosedd bellach o anonestrwydd, ar ôl cyflawni trosedd o anonestrwydd mewn cysylltiad â cham-drin cyffuriau, yn isel iawn. Rwy’n credu ei fod yn cyfeirio at feddygon ac eithrio meddygon a ailddechreuodd gymryd cyffuriau. Ni chredaf ei fod yn nodi bod digwyddiadau o anonestrwydd pellach yn isel; rwy’n credu y derbyniai na fyddai fel arfer yn ymwybodol o’r hyn a ddigwyddai i’w gleifion ar ôl iddynt adael ei ofal.
Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, gwnaeth Dr Fowlie ailadrodd a mwyhau‘r hyn a ddywedodd yn ei ddatganiad tyst. Dywedodd fod ‘egluro’’r ymddygiad anonest, yn ystod y driniaeth ar gyfer y caethineb, yn ‘arf therapiwtig bwysig’. Os gall yr unigolyn wynebu ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad anonest, dywedodd, mae hynny’n ddangosydd prognostig da. Deallaf fod hynny’n golygu bod y rhagolygon ar gyfer adsefydliad llawn a pharhaol yn well os yw’r meddyg wedi derbyn yn llawn ei fod/ ei bod yn anonest a bod yr anonestrwydd hwn yn annerbyniol. Gallai’r gwrthwyneb awgrymu bod meddygon sy’n parhau i wneud esgusodion dros eu hunain (fel ‘dechreuais hunan-feddyginiaethu oherwydd anaf i’m cefn’- sef esboniad a gyflwynwyd gan Shipman) - fod yn llai tebygol o wneud yn dda.
Mae’n debyg i mi fod y dystiolaeth hon yn cyfeirio at ddau gasgliad. Yn gyntaf, hyd yn oed pe byddai meddyg sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau yn cael triniaeth ac yn ymddangos ei fod wedi’i adsefydlu, mae yna risg o ailwaeledd o 25% dros gyfnod rhwng dwy ac wyth mlynedd wedyn. Gall fod y dylid cynnal mwy o ymchwil i ddigwyddiad ailwaeledd ymhlith meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau. Yn ail, mae’n bosibl bod y graddau y gellir ‘esgusodi’ anonestrwydd sy’n gysylltiedig â cham-drin cyffuriau fel rhan o’r salwch a’r graddau y mae disgwyl iddo ddadelfennu ar ôl gwella’r ddibyniaeth yn dibynnu ar ddau ffactor o leiaf, sef cryfder neu ddyfnder y caethineb a’r graddau y mae’r meddyg wedi deall yn llawn a ‘wynebu’ ei anonestrwydd/ei hanonestrwydd. Gall fod yn ddangosydd gwael pan gyflwynir esgusodion anghywir dros y ffordd y dechreuodd y cyfan.
Brooke D, Edwards G, Taylor C (1991). ‘Addiction as an occupational hazard: 144 doctors with drug and alcohol problems’, British Journal of Addiction, Rhifyn 86: tt 1011-1016.

---  ---
Drwy gydol y cyfnod a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, mae’r GMC wedi canolbwyntio ar gael tystiolaeth feddygol i bennu a oedd camdriniaeth cyffuriau’r meddyg yn cael ei drin, a sut os felly, ac ar y rhagolygon ar gyfer adsefydlu. Dylai’r ymagwedd honno newid bellach, yn fy marn i. Ystyriaf ei bod yn hanfodol gwneud canfyddiadau penodol am amgylchiadau’r gamdriniaeth. Rhaid gwneud y canfyddiadau hyn hyd yn oed mewn achosion lle cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o droseddau ac felly mae ei gamymddygiad/ei chamymddygiad wedi’i brofi.
Yn gyntaf, os caiff yr honiad o gam-drin cyffuriau ei herio, rhaid datrys y ddadl yn gywir a rhaid dod o hyd i’r ffeithiau. Ni cheir eu ffugio. Dywedwyd wrthyf pe byddai meddyg, yn y gorffennol, yn rhoi’r ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn ôl gofyniad y sgriniwr iechyd, y byddai hyn yn arwydd o’r meddyg yn cydnabod bod ganddo/ganddi broblem cyffuriau o leiaf. Gallaf ddeall pam yr ymddangosai’r llwybr byr hwnnw i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol yn ddeniadol. Byddai’n osgoi amser a chost archwiliad, yn ogystal â’r risg o ddarganfod bod y meddyg yn ‘ddieuog’. Fodd bynnag, effaith dilyn y llwybr hwn fyddai nad oedd unrhyw ganfyddiadau wedyn am y camymddygiad, os o gwbl, y bu’r meddyg yn euog ohono. Nid oedd unrhyw asesiad o ddifrifoldeb y camymddygiad hwnnw na’i oblygiadau ar gyfer diogelwch cleifion. Mae’n debyg i mi ei bod yn amhosib bron i lunio barn wirioneddol ynghylch a yw meddyg yn addas i ymarfer meddygaeth os na chaiff honiadau difrifol yn ei erbyn/ ei herbyn eu datrys yn y modd hwn.
Yn ail, pe ddaethai i’r amlwg y bu’r meddyg yn cam-drin cyffuriau neu pe gyfaddefai hyn, ni ddylid tybio y bu ef/hi yn ddioddefwr anffodus amgylchiadau y tu hwnt i’w reolaeth/ei rheolaeth. Rhaid i’r GMC geisio darganfod pryd a sut y dechreuodd y gamdriniaeth. Dylai esboniad y meddyg o sut y daeth ef/hi yn gaeth fod yn destun archwiliad gofalus a dylid gwirio’r stori trwy ymgynghori â phobl a fu mewn cysylltiad â’r meddyg ar yr adeg berthnasol ac, os yn briodol, trwy archwilio cofnodion meddygol. Dylai’r GMC ddarganfod am ba hyd y mae’r gamdriniaeth wedi parhau a sut cafodd y meddyg y cyffuriau. Rhaid darganfod pa dwyll a ymarferwyd ac ar bwy. Dylai fod asesiad priodol o ddyfnder a chryfder unrhyw gaethineb neu ddibyniaeth. Os oedd y meddyg yn gallu ymdopi heb gyffuriau yn ôl ei ewyllys neu os tynnwyd ef/hi oddi arnynt yn haws na’r arfer, gellid casglu nad oedd y meddyg yn hollol gaeth iddynt. Os felly, gellid casglu na fyddai’r meddyg yn profi cymhelliad anorchfygol i gael cyflenwadau a dylai’r penderfynwyr eraill fod yn llai parod i anwybyddu unrhyw anonestrwydd y bu’r meddyg yn euog ohono.
Yn drydydd, byddai archwiliad o’r ffordd yr effeithiwyd ar ymarfer y meddyg. A gafodd cleifion eu cynnwys wrth gael cyffuriau? Sut byddai’r meddyg yn ymddwyn tra’r oedd yn gaeth? A effeithiwyd ar ofal cleifion? Gallai’r math hwn o wybodaeth effeithio’n wir ar y penderfyniad ar sancsiwn. Yn benodol, pe ystyrid bod amodau’n briodol, byddai gwybodaeth o’r fath yn helpu’r GMC i lunio amodau priodol. Byddai’r math hwn o wybodaeth yn cael ei chasglu o gydweithwyr y meddyg a byddai’n cael effaith fuddiol ychwanegol gan y byddai’n galluogi’r cydweithwyr a fyddai’n gyfrifol am les cleifion i nodi’r cleifion hynny a fu mewn perygl.
Yn olaf, os a phryd yr awgrymir bod y meddyg wedi adsefydlu, dylid asesu i ba raddau yr oedd y meddyg wedi adennill mewnwelediad ac wedi derbyn yn llawn ddifrifoldeb yr hyn a wnaeth. Mewn rhai adroddiadau meddygol rwyf wedi eu gweld, mae’r seiciatrydd wedi rhoi sylw i’r mater hwnnw; mewn eraill, nid yw’n debyg yr ystyriwyd y ffactor hwnnw ac mae’r pwyslais ar ba hyd y mae’r meddyg wedi llwyddo i ymwrthod â chyffuriau. Nid wyf yn dweud nad yw hynny’n bwysig; mae’n bwysig, ond dylai fod ystyriaethau eraill hefyd.
Heb amheuaeth, bydd angen asesiad o iechyd y meddyg a bydd angen un neu ddau adroddiad seiciatrig i’r perwyl hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, ni ddylid gadael yr archwiliad o ffactorau cefndirol i’r seiciatryddion. Byddai’n afresymol gofyn iddynt gynnal y math o archwiliadau yr wyf yn eu hargymell. Gall fod yn angenrheidiol archwilio cofnodion cleifion a/neu gofnodion practisiau/ysbytai, gan gynnwys cofnodion meddygol y meddyg ei hun. Gall hefyd fod yn angenrheidiol cyfweld â chydweithwyr y meddyg, staff y practis a’r cleifion. Dylai archwilwyr y GMC gynnal yr ymholiadau hyn a dylid rhannu’r wybodaeth a gesglir gyda’r seiciatryddion, gan y gallai effeithio ar eu barn. Am y rheswm hwnnw, fel arfer ni fydd yn briodol derbyn adroddiad o’r seiciatrydd sy’n trin y meddyg; efallai na ddymunai ef/hi balu i faterion cefndirol yn y modd yr wyf yn awgrymu y dylai’r GMC ei wneud. Os cymerir yr holl gamau hyn, dylai’r dystiolaeth daflu mwy o oleuni ar y risgiau y mae camdriniaeth gyffuriau’r meddyg wedi eu cyflwyno yn y gorffennol a’r rhai y gall gyflwyno yn y dyfodol.

---  ---
Mae’n debyg bod achos
wedi ysgogi rhywfaint o ailystyried yn y GMC am sut y dylid delio â meddygon y’u cafwyd yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau. Roedd Mr Scott, beth bynnag, yn deall yn llawn ei oblygiadau o ran collfarnau ac rwy’n siŵr y bydd y GMC wedi gwerthfawrogi bod y goblygiadau hynny’n ymestyn i achosion lle gwnaed honiadau tebyg na brofwyd. Mae’r GMC wedi cyhoeddi arweiniad drafft a ddylai sicrhau y bydd meddygon y’u ceir yn euog o droseddau cyffuriau gael eu hatgyfeirio, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, at banel FTP.
Rwyf wedi esbonio sut y dylid archwilio achosion o gam-drin cyffuriau cyn iddynt gyrraedd gwrandawiad. Rhaid cynnal yr archwiliadau hyn mewn achosion collfarn a’r achosion hynny sy’n cynnwys honiad sydd heb ei brofi eto. Os cymerir y camau archwiliol hynny, bydd y panel FTP mewn sefyllfa lawer gwell nag y bu penderfynwyr erioed o’r blaen i benderfynu a yw’r achos yn gwarantu dilead neu ataliad neu a fyddai gosod amodau yn briodol ac yn amddiffyn y cyhoedd a chleifion yn ddigonol.
Mae yna linyn yn rhedeg trwy lawer o Benodau’r Adroddiad hwn sy’n delio â’r GMC, sef, os yw’r GMC am gyflawni gradd dderbyniol o gysondeb (a disgwyliadwyedd, gan y dylai meddygon wybod beth sy’n debygol o ddigwydd iddynt pe byddent yn troseddu), rhaid iddo sefydlu rhai safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon cytûn. Trwy ‘cytûn’, ni olygaf gytundeb o fewn y GMC yn unig (er y byddai hynny’n ddefnyddiol), ond cytundeb rhwng y GMC a’r cyhoedd. Rhaid cael trafodaeth a dadl gyhoeddus am beth yw’r ymateb cywir i’r mathau o achos sy’n ymddangos dro ar ôl tro, a beth yw’r sancsiwn cywir ar eu cyfer. Dim ond un enghraifft o’r broblem yw meddygon sy’n cam-drin cyffuriau. Tan y gwneir y gwaith hwn ar safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon, bydd yna anfodlonrwydd parhaus gyda’r GMC, a beirniadaeth barhaus ohono.
Nid fy lle i yw gorchymyn sut y dylid gwneud hyn. Fel un opsiwn, rwyf wedi awgrymu dull dadlau ac ymgynghori yn debyg i ddull y Panel Cynghori Dedfrydu. Yn achos
, awgrymodd yr Ustus Mitting y dylid casglu adroddiad o achosion o’r math hwnnw er mwyn gweld ym mha fathau o sefyllfa y credai paneli (neu farnwyr) PCC eraill fod dilead neu ataliad neu amodau yn briodol. Rwy’n cytuno y dylid gwneud hyn, er nad oes braidd unrhyw benderfyniadau felly ar gael ar hyn o bryd. Wrth i achosion o’r fath fynd at baneli FTP ac y gwneir penderfyniadau, dylent, yn fy marn i, gael eu casglu i gorff o adroddiadau achos, sydd ar gael i gyfeirio atynt yn y dyfodol. Byddai hynny at ddau ddiben. Dylai helpu i ddarparu mesur o gysondeb rhwng achosion tebyg ond dylai hefyd ffurfio sail ffeithiol y gellid ymgynghori arni am ba sancsiynau sy’n briodol mewn gwahanol fathau o achosion.
Dylai fod dadl hefyd o fewn y GMC am natur yr amodau y dylid eu gorfodi pan dybier ei bod yn briodol y dylid caniatáu i feddyg y bu’n cam-drin cyffuriau barhau i ymarfer. Yn y gorffennol, sgrinwyr iechyd, sydd wedi datblygu cryn arbenigedd, a gymerai penderfyniadau am amodau fel arfer. Yn y dyfodol, bydd penderfyniadau felly’n cael eu cymryd gan baneli FTP a, lle bo ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol dan sylw, gan archwilwyr achos gyda chymorth staff y GMC. Beth bynnag, bydd angen rhywfaint o arweiniad clir iawn. Ystyriaf hefyd y byddai’n fuddiol pe byddai ymchwil pellach yn cael ei wneud i gyfradd ailwaeledd meddygon a fu trwy weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC. Mae’r ymchwil Americanaidd a ddyfynnwyd gan Dr Johns yn awgrymu bod risg sylweddol o ailwaeledd yn parhau ar ôl y cyfnod dwy flynedd heb gyffuriau y mae’r GMC, yn y gorffennol, wedi ei gymryd fel canllaw bras am bryd y dylid caniatáu i feddyg ailddechrau ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau. Gall fod cyfradd lwyddiant fwy gyda gweithdrefnau iechyd y GMC na’r dulliau Americanaidd. Nid wyf yn gwybod ond credaf y dylai’r GMC ddarganfod hyn. Gallai hyn effeithio ar y cyfnod o amser y credir bod goruchwyliaeth yn angenrheidiol amdano.
Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, trafodais y pŵer a roddwyd i’r Ysgrifennydd Cartref dan adran 12 y Deddf Cam-drin Cyffuriau 1971 i gyfarwyddo y dylid gwaredu neu gyfyngu hawl meddyg i ragnodi cyffuriau rheoledig. Mewn blynyddoedd diweddar, camddefnyddiwyd y pŵer hwn. Mae’n debyg y credir bod y GMC mewn sefyllfa well na’r Swyddfa Gartref i asesu’r angen am orfodi cyfyngiadau o’r fath. Dywedwyd wrthyf fod diddymiad adran 12 dan ystyriaeth. Argymhellais y dylai’r Swyddfa Gartref, cyn cymryd unrhyw benderfyniad ar ddiddymiad adran 12, gomisiynu adolygiad o’r defnydd a wna’r GMC o’i bŵer i orfodi cyfyngiadau rhagnodi ar feddygon. O’r achosion a archwiliais, rwy’n cael yr argraff nad yw’r GMC yn aml yn rhoi amod sy’n atal meddyg rhag rhagnodi neu feddiannu cyffuriau rheoledig. Rwy’n ailadrodd y dylai fod adolygiad o’r achosion lle gorfodir cyfyngiadau o’r fath.

---  ---
Y Fframwaith Deddfwriaethol
Y Broses ar gyfer Delio â Chwynion am Berfformiad
Gweithredu'r Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad
Penderfyniadau Barnwrol ar y Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad
Y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad

---  ---
Ym mis Gorffennaf 1997, cyflwynodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) ei weithdrefnau perfformiad, a alluogodd iddo gymryd camau disgyblu o ran meddygon yr oedd diffyg difrifol ar eu perfformiad proffesiynol. Yn y Bennod hon, bwriadaf archwilio tarddiad y gweithdrefnau hyn, y modd y cawsant eu rhoi ar waith a’r ffordd yr oeddent yn gweithio tan yn ddiweddar. Byddaf yn ystyried nifer o broblemau a gododd yn eu gweithrediad. Yn olaf, byddaf yn ystyried rhai achosion y mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi’u harchwilio. Fel yr esboniaf, ni roddwyd y gweithdrefnau hyn ar waith tan ychydig mwy na blwyddyn ar ôl i Shipman gael ei arestio a stopio ymarfer, felly. Ni fyddai unrhyw un o’r adroddiadau a gafodd y GMC am Shipman yn debygol o arwain at atgyfeiriad i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, hyd yn oed petaent yn bod ar y pryd. Fodd bynnag, mae’r gweithdrefnau’n berthnasol i gylch gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad am ddau reswm. Yn gyntaf, roeddent yn rhan bwysig o storfa’r GMC ar gyfer amddiffyn cleifion yn erbyn meddygon a allai roi niwed iddynt. Yn ail, bydd y gweithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) newydd yn tanategu ailddilysiad y GMC o feddygon. Mae’r ffordd y caiff materion perfformiad gwael eu trin yn y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn amlwg yn bwysig yn y cyd-destun hwnnw, a’r unig ganllaw sydd ar gael ar hyn o bryd ynghylch sut y bydd materion perfformiad yn cael eu trin yn y dyfodol yw sut y cawsant eu trin yn y gorffennol.
Yn y 1980au, roedd pryder cynyddol am gymhwyster rhai meddygon ac anghymwyster y GMC (neu amharodrwydd y GMC yn ôl rhai) i ddelio â materion cymhwyster trwy ei weithdrefnau ymddygiad. Y tu allan i’r GMC, arweiniodd achos Alfie Winn (gweler Pennod 17) ym 1982 at ymdrechion gan Mr Nigel Spearing AS i gyflwyno Mesur Aelod Preifat yn sefydlu trosedd o ‘gamymddygiad proffesiynol’, gyda throthwy’n is na’r trothwy ar gyfer camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol (SPM). Bu’r GMC yn llwyddiannus yn gwrthwynebu’r ymdrechion hynny ac fe fethodd y Mesur. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed o fewn y GMC, roedd rhai aelodau a oedd ar y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC) yn pryderu fwyfwy am achosion lle, er na brofwyd SPM, roedd tystiolaeth o arfer gwael serch hynny. Nid oedd gan y GMC unrhyw bŵer i weithredu mewn achos o’r fath.
Er i Fesur Mr Spearing fethu, arweiniodd ei ymdrechion yn uniongyrchol at sefydlu gweithgor GMC ym 1987, y rhoddwyd y dasg iddo o ystyried yr angen am weithdrefnau cymhwyster, yn ychwanegol i weithdrefnau ymddygiad ac iechyd y GMC. Adroddodd y gweithgor ym 1989. Argymhellodd y dylai’r GMC ystyried sefydlu gweithdrefnau cymhwyster ac y dylid ffurfio cynigion ar gyfer gweithdrefnau o’r fath fel sail i drafodaeth gyda’r proffesiwn a chyrff eraill. Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, cymerwyd penderfyniad i sefydlu gweithgor pellach i
‘ystyried trefniadau ar gyfer nodi a thrin diffyg difrifol mewn perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg a gwneud argymhellion’
Yn ei lyfr ‘The Doctors’ Tale’
, disgrifiodd Syr Donald Irvine, a oedd yn aelod o’r GMC ym 1979 ac yn Lywydd arno o 1995 i 2002, amharodrwydd rhai pobl yn y GMC i fynd i’r afael â phroblemau anghymwyster a pherfformiad gwael. Siaradodd am y pwysau a roddwyd ar y GMC gan y Llywodraeth yr adeg honno i
‘afael yng nghwestiwn y meddyg anghymwys a gafael ynddo’n fuan’
. Pe na fyddai’r GMC yn gwneud hynny, dywedwyd wrtho, byddai’r Llywodraeth ei hun yn gweithredu trwy’r Senedd. Casglodd Syr Donald y rhan hon o’r hanes:
‘...y doethineb a geir heddiw yw bod penderfyniad y GMC i fynd ymlaen â’r hyn a ddaethai’n weithdrefnau perfformiad yn y 1990au yn ganlyniad gweithredu rhagweithiol iawn. Nid oedd hyn yn wir. Rhaid oedd llusgo gweithredu o’r fath allan o’r Cyngor, gan fod llawer o’r aelodau meddygol yn edrych dros eu hysgwyddau, yn eithaf naturiol efallai, ar yr hyn y gallai eu cydweithwyr ei ddweud mewn lleoedd eraill, fel pwyllgorau medrusrwydd y BMA
Cymdeithas Feddygol Prydain
Ym mis Mai 1992, adroddodd y gweithgor, a sefydlwyd dwy flynedd yn gynharach dan Gadeiryddiaeth Llywydd y GMC, Syr Robert (Arglwydd yn hwyrach) Kilpatrick. Argymhellodd sefydlu gweithdrefnau perfformiad wedi’u modelu ar y gweithdrefnau iechyd cymharol newydd. Cynlluniwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad i ddelio ag achosion lle ymddangosai ymddygiad neu weithrediadau meddyg fel petaent yn awgrymu patrwm o berfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP) na ellid delio ag ef yn effeithiol dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad ac iechyd a fodolai. Un elfen unigryw yn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad fyddai’r asesiad perfformiad, a fyddai’n cael ei gynllunio i nodi bylchau yng ngwybodaeth a sgiliau meddyg ac i asesu a fyddai modd ailgyflwyno’r rhain. Yr adeg honno, disgwyliwyd y byddai rhan fwyaf y meddygon a ddaethai i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn cael eu trin trwy weithdrefnau gwirfoddol (fel yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd) ac yn dychwelyd yn y pen draw at ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau ar ôl cyfnod o weithredu adferol. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn methu cydweithredu, neu pe fethai ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad wella ar ôl gweithredu adferol, byddai pwyllgor FTP o’r GMC (a deitlir y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP) wedi hyn) yn gallu atal cofrestriad meddyg neu orfodi amodau arno, a hynny fel dewis olaf.
Cafwyd gwrthwynebiad sylweddol o fewn y proffesiwn i gynigion y gweithgor, a fabwysiadwyd gan y GMC. Roedd pryderon ynghylch y rhagolwg o brofi gwybodaeth neu sgiliau clinigol meddygol. Cafwyd awgrym gan y rheiny’n cynrychioli meddygon ysbyty na ddylai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad eu cynnwys nhw, gan y gallai cyflogwyr eu hunain ddelio ag unrhyw broblemau gyda pherfformiad, ar y cyd â’r BMC neu’r Coleg Brenhinol meddygol perthnasol. Yn y pen draw, fodd bynnag, derbyniwyd yn gyffredinol yn y proffesiwn fod y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn angenrheidiol a bod yn rhaid iddynt fod yn berthnasol i bob meddyg.
Roedd angen deddfwriaeth sylfaenol ar gyfer sefydlu’r gweithdrefnau. Cafwyd hyd i’r amser Seneddol angenrheidiol ym mis Rhagfyr 1995 a phasiwyd Deddf (Perfformiad Proffesiynol) Feddygol 1995 (Deddf 1995), gan wneud y diwygiadau angenrheidiol i Ddeddf Feddygol 1983. Yn y cyfamser, roedd gwaith wedi dechrau ar ddatblygu’r offer i’w defnyddio yn yr asesiadau perfformiad. Ar ôl pasio Deddf 1995, aeth 18 mis arall heibio cyn rhoi’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar waith yn y pen draw ar 1 Gorffennaf 1997.
Dywedodd Syr Donald wrth yr Ymchwiliad y credai y byddai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn cau ‘bwlch aruthrol’ yng ngweithdrefnau’r GMC, bwlch a welai ‘dro ar ôl tro’ tra’i fod ar y PCC. Dywedodd:
‘... byddech yn darganfod na ellid profi ffeithiau, neu na allech gyrraedd penderfyniad am gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol, ond roeddech yn gwybod yn iawn o’r hyn a welwyd yn y dystiolaeth, y cofnodion y gallech fod wedi’u gweld ac ati ... na ddylai’r meddyg fod yn ymarfer.’
Dywedodd, fel meddyg teulu (GP), ei fod yn gwybod am ‘nifer sylweddol’ y bobl naill ai y dylid ‘rhoi rhywfaint o sylw’ i’w hymarfer neu na ddylent fod yn ymarfer o gwbl. Roedd wedi gweld cyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau fel ffordd o gryfhau prosesau a gweithdrefnau lleol. Roedd ganddo ‘ddisgwyliadau uchel’ ohonynt.
Y Gwahaniaeth rhwng ‘Perfformiad’ a ‘Chymhwyster’
Rwyf wedi disgrifio sut cafwyd yr awgrym, ar y cychwyn, y dylai’r GMC sefydlu ‘gweithdrefnau cymhwyster’. Mewn byr amser, fodd bynnag, roedd y pwyslais wedi newid o ‘gymhwyster’ i ‘berfformiad proffesiynol’ ac roedd y gweithdrefnau, pan gawsant eu rhoi ar waith yn y pen draw, yn ymwneud â pherfformiad, yn hytrach na chymhwyster.
Mae ‘cymhwyster’ yn disgrifio gwybodaeth a sgiliau, h.y. yr hyn y ‘gall’ meddyg ‘ei wneud’. Mae ‘perfformiad’ yn disgrifio’r hyn y mae meddyg yn ei ymarfer ei hun, h.y. yr hyn y ‘mae’ ef/hi yn ‘ei wneud’. Ni all meddyg nad yw’n meddu ar y wybodaeth a’r sgiliau gofynnol berfformio’n dda o gwbl. Fodd bynnag, gall fod meddyg yn gymwys (h.y. gall ef/hi feddu ar y wybodaeth a’r sgiliau gofynnol) ond, serch hynny, gall ei agwedd/ei hagwedd neu ymddygiad fod yn achosi i’w berfformiad/ei pherfformiad fod yn ddiffygiol - o leiaf ar adegau. Esboniodd yr Athro y Fonesig Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, yn un o seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, ar adegau, fod gan feddygon sy’n ‘gallu gwneud’ broblem ynghylch a ‘fyddant yn gwneud’. Dywedodd y gall problemau agwedd, sy’n deillio weithiau o bersonoliaeth ffroenuchel, fod yn anodd iawn eu gwella. Cynlluniwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad i ddelio â’r problemau ehangach hyn, yn ogystal ag anghymwyster.
Roedd gan y newid ffocws o gymhwyster i berfformiad oblygiadau ar gyfer casglu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol i brofi SDP Gellir asesu cymhwyster meddyg trwy brofi ei wybodaeth/ei gwybodaeth gyfredol a thrwy arsylwi ei sgiliau clinigol cyfredol. Os yw’r meddyg yn ymarfer o hyd, gellir asesu ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad cyfredol trwy arsylwi ef/hi yn ymgynghori â chleifion neu’n trin cleifion a thrwy adolygu a thrafod cofnodion meddygol mewn achosion cyfredol. Fodd bynnag, os nad yw meddyg yn ymarfer rhagor am ryw reswm (er enghraifft, pe cawsai ef/hi ei atal/ei hatal) neu os yw ef/hi’n gweithio mewn arbenigedd gwahanol i’r arbenigedd yr oedd yn gweithio ynddo adeg y gŵyn wreiddiol yn ei erbyn/ei herbyn, yr unig fesur sydd ar gael o’i ‘berfformiad’/ei ‘pherfformiad yw nid yr hyn y mae ef/hi yn ei ‘wneud’ ond yr hyn y mae ef/hi ‘wedi ei wneud’.
Mecanweithiau Lleol ar gyfer Delio â Pherfformiad Gwael
Pan roddwyd gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC ar waith, roedd gan gyrff GIG lleol - yn enwedig sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOs) - fecanweithiau cyfyngedig iawn ar gyfer delio â pherfformiad gwael. Pe byddai gan PCO bryderon am berfformiad meddyg teulu, gallai geisio cydweithrediad y pwyllgor meddygol lleol (LMC) wrth alw ar y weithdrefn ‘Tri Dyn Doeth’ anffurfiol a cheisio datrys y broblem yn y ffordd honno. Pe byddai claf yn cwyno am fater ‘perfformiad’, gallai hynny fod yn destun gwrandawiad panel adolygu annibynnol (IRP). Pe byddai PCO yn credu bod meddyg teulu wedi torri ei delerau/ei thelerau gwasanaeth, byddai’r posibilrwydd o gamau disgyblu er, ar ôl 1996, roedd gweithredu felly yn brin iawn. Beth bynnag, cynlluniwyd gwrandawiadau IRP ac achosion disgyblu i ddelio’n bennaf â digwyddiadau unigol sy’n achosi cwynion, yn hytrach na digwyddiadau a ailadroddir a allai awgrymu patrwm o berfformiad gwael.
Ar ôl cyflwyno gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC, anogwyd sefydliadau GIG, gan yr Adran Iechyd, i lunio eu gweithdrefnau eu hunain ar gyfer delio â meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael. Un rheswm dros hyn oedd y cynlluniwyd gweithdrefnau’r GMC i ddelio’n unig â meddygon yr oedd eu perfformiad yn ‘ddifrifol’ o ddiffygiol. Cydnabuwyd o’r cychwyn y byddai meddygon yn perfformio ar safon annerbyniol na fyddai’n cyrraedd trothwy’r GMC, ond y byddai angen cymryd rhyw gamau yn eu cylch i amddiffyn cleifion. Ym Mhennod 5, disgrifiais y gweithdrefnau lleol a ddatblygwyd gan PCOs ers 1998. Mae’r broses ddatblygu yn parhau.
Er mwyn cynorthwyo sefydliadau GIG i ddelio â phroblemau perfformiad gwael, ym mis Ebrill 2001, sefydlwyd yr Awdurdod Asesu Clinigol Cenedlaethol (NCAA). Mae’n darparu gwasanaeth o gymorth a chyngor, a hefyd yn cynnal asesiadau perfformiad mewn nifer gyfyngedig o achosion lle tybier bod y rhain yn angenrheidiol. Anelir yr asesiadau hyn at sefydlu a yw meddyg yn addas i weithio yn y lleoliad lle mae ef/hi yn gweithio ar hyn o bryd. Gall yr asesiad arwain at argymhelliad y dylai’r meddyg weithio mewn gwahanol leoliad. Gall argymell rhyw fath o gamau adferol. Nid yw’r NCAA yn gorff rheoleiddio ac ni all gymryd camau disgyblu na gorfodi sancsiynau ei hun. Fodd bynnag, gall atgyfeirio meddyg i’r GMC pe byddai, er enghraifft, pryderon difrifol yn codi yn ystod asesiad, yn enwedig pe byddent yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Gall hefyd gynghori cyflogwr y meddyg neu PCO a yw’n briodol iddynt atgyfeirio i’r GMC.
Datblygu’r Offer ar gyfer Asesu Perfformiad gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Pan benderfynodd y GMC y dymunai gyflwyno gweithdrefnau perfformiad, cydnabuwyd y byddai angen llunio rhyw fath o asesiad gwrthrychol o berfformiad meddyg. Byddai’n rhaid i asesiad o’r fath fod yn deg a byddai’n rhaid i benderfyniadau sy’n seiliedig arno wrthsefyll heriau cyfreithiol. Ym 1994, estynnodd Lywydd y GMC ar y pryd (yr Arglwydd Kilpatrick) wahoddiad i’r Fonesig Lesley Southgate, a oedd bryd hynny’n Brif Weithredwr Coleg Brenhinol yr Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (RCGP), i arwain grŵp a fyddai’n gyfrifol am ddatblygu dull a set o offer ar gyfer asesu perfformiad. Nid oedd unrhyw ddulliau nac offer o’r fath wedi’u datblygu yr adeg honno mewn unrhyw ran arall o’r byd. Daeth y Fonesig Lesley â thîm ynghyd, yn cynnwys pobl o’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol yn bennaf, a, thros gyfnod o dair blynedd, cynhyrchwyd y dull a’r offer a fyddai’n sail i weithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Pan gafodd ei gyhoeddi yn ddiweddarach, cafodd y gwaith hwn gydnabyddiaeth fyd-eang. Disgrifiwyd y dull a’r offer asesu fel y rhai ‘mwyaf modern’ a’r ‘asesu perfformiad uniongyrchol blaenaf’. Maent yn darparu ar gyfer asesiad trwyadl iawn ac, o ganlyniad anochel bron, yn ddrud i’w cynnal.
Fel yr esboniaf yn fanylach yn ddiweddarach, mae asesu perfformiad yn cynnwys dau gam. Mae Cam 1 yn cynnwys adolygiad o berfformiad y meddyg yn ei weithle/ei gweithle gan dîm o aseswyr. Ar ddiwedd Cam 1, os nad yw’r tîm yn fodlon â pherfformiad y meddyg, bydd y meddyg yn ymgymryd â Cham 2, sy’n cynnwys cyfres o brofion gwrthrychol.
Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth ar lafar am y gweithdrefnau perfformiad gan Mr Alan Howes (Pennaeth yr Adran Berfformiad o 1995 tan fis Ebrill 2001), Mr Neil Marshall (Pennaeth yr Adran Berfformiad o fis Ebrill 2001 i fis Mawrth 2002) a Miss Jackie Smith (rheolwraig gwaith achos yn yr Adran Berfformiad o fis Tachwedd 2001 i fis Ebrill 2002 a Phennaeth yr Adran Berfformiad o hynny ymlaen). Cafwyd tystiolaeth berthnasol hefyd gan Syr Donald Irvine (Llywydd y GMC adeg cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad), yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto (y Llywydd cyfredol), Mr Finlay Scott (Prif Weithredwr y GMC ers 1994) a Dr Krishna Korlipara (aelod o’r GMC a sgriniwr iechyd ers 1998). Cafwyd datganiad tyst gan yr Athro David Hatch, Cadeirydd y CPP.
Irvine, Donald (2003), ‘The Doctors’ Tale, Rhydychen: Oxford Medical Press.

---  ---
Ychwanegodd Ddeddf 1995 adran newydd i Ddeddf Feddygol 1983, sef adran 36A a amododd:
‘... (1) Lle darganfu’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol fod diffyg difrifol ar safon perfformiad proffesiynol person cofrestredig llawn, bydd y Pwyllgor yn cyfarwyddo -
(a) atal ei gofrestriad yn y gofrestr, (hynny yw, ni fydd yn effeithiol) yn ystod cyfnod felly heb fod yn fwy na deuddeg mis fel y gellir ei nodi yn y cyfarwyddyd; neu
(b) bydd ei gofrestriad yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth, yn ystod cyfnod felly heb fod yn fwy na tair blynedd fel y gellir ei nodi yn y cyfarwyddyd, gyda’r gofyniadau a nodir felly.’
Dylid nodi y cododd y pŵer i weithredu pan ddarganfu’r CPP y bu perfformiad y meddyg (h.y. yn y gorffennol) yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Ni fyddai arwyddocâd y geiriau hyn yn dod i’r amlwg tan gyflwynwyd her i bwerau’r CPP yn achos
y byddaf yn cyfeirio ato’n ddiweddarach. Dylid nodi na roddwyd unrhyw bŵer i’r CPP gyfarwyddo y dylid dileu enw meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr. Fodd bynnag, ar derfyn cyfnod o ataliad, roedd gan y CPP y pŵer i gyfarwyddo y dylid ymestyn cyfnod yr ataliad hyd at 12 mis a, phan fu meddyg wedi’i atal eisoes am ddwy flynedd o leiaf, roedd gan y CPP y pŵer wedyn i gyfarwyddo ataliad amhenodol. Byddaf yn trafod y sancsiynau hyn yn fanylach yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Mae’n bwysig nodi bod y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn berthnasol yn unig i berfformiad meddyg ar ôl 1 Gorffennaf 1997, sef y dyddiad y daeth Deddf 1995 i rym. Ni ellid defnyddio tystiolaeth o berfformiad gwael cyn y dyddiad hwnnw i gefnogi cwyn am berfformiad gwael yn erbyn y meddyg. Penderfynodd y GMC (yn ôl cyngor cyfreithiol yn ôl pob golwg) nad oedd yn bosibl, yn syth ar ôl cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, i ddelio â meddygon y bu pryderon hir sefydlog amdanynt. Yn hytrach, roedd angen aros nes casglu corff o dystiolaeth ar ôl 1 Gorffennaf 1997 i gefnogi’r honiad y bu perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Golygai hyn y cafodd gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC gychwyniad araf. Gall fod y cyngor cyfreithiol a gafwyd yn gywir, er na allaf weld unrhyw ataliad statudol ar ystyried tystiolaeth o berfformiad gwael a ddigwyddodd cyn dechrau’r pŵer i orfodi sancsiynau ar gyfer SDP. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai’r farn gyferbyniol, o leiaf, yn ddadleuadwy. O ystyried mai diben y gweithdrefnau newydd oedd amddiffyn cleifion, efallai y bu’r GMC yn draddodiadol heb angen i fod â barn mor gul am ddechrau darpariaethau. Beth bynnag, disgwyliwyd y byddai llawer o feddygon y credwyd bod eu perfformiad yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol yn cytuno i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Byddai meddygon felly’n annhebygol o fod yn her gyfreithiol i bwerau’r GMC.

---  ---
Daeth Rheolau (Perfformiad Proffesiynol) Gorchymyn Cyngor 1997 y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (sef Rheolau Perfformiad 1997) i rym ym mis Gorffennaf 1997. Roeddent yn gosod y broses i’w dilyn pan fyddai cwyn neu wybodaeth (byddaf yn defnyddio’r term ‘cwyn’ i ddisgrifio’r ddau) yn cael eu cyflwyno am berfformiad meddyg. Yn fras, roedd y broses yn cynnwys y camau canlynol:
staff yn yr Adran Sgrinio yn ystyried y gŵyn
sgriniwr meddygol yn sgrinio’r gŵyn
pe byddai’r achos yn mynd y tu hwnt i sgrinio, byddai’r meddyg yn cael gwahoddiad i gael asesiad perfformiad
pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i asesiad perfformiad, byddai’r Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad (ARC) yn ystyried yr achos a phenderfynu a fyddai asesiad perfformiad yn angenrheidiol
pe byddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i asesiad perfformiad, neu pe byddai’r ARC yn cyfarwyddo asesiad, byddai cydlynydd achos yn cael ei benodi
byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn penodi tîm asesu, y byddai un aelod ohono yn asesydd arwain
byddai’r asesiad yn cael ei gynnal ac adroddiad yn cael ei ysgrifennu. Byddai’r asesydd arwain yn gyfrifol am hyn
byddai’r adroddiad asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei ystyried gan y cydlynydd achos a, phe byddai ef/hi yn credu bod cynnwys yr adroddiad yn ei warantu, byddai ef/hi’n llunio datganiad o ofynion ar gyfer camau adferol dros gyfnod penodedig
byddai’r meddyg yn cael gwahoddiad i gytuno i ymgymryd â’r camau adferol a nodir yn y datganiad o ofynion
ar ôl diwedd cyfnod y camau adferol, byddai’r meddyg yn cael asesiad pellach.
Mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gellid atgyfeirio’r achos at y CPP, a fyddai’n ystyried yr achos ac yn penderfynu cyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad (pe na fyddai un wedi’i gynnal eisoes) neu orfodi sancsiwn ar y meddyg.
Byddaf yn delio â’r camau amrywiol yn y broses ar wahân. Byddaf yn disgrifio’r broses a oedd yn ei lle ar ddiwedd 2003, pan glywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth am y gweithdrefnau perfformiad.
Ffynhonnell Cwynion am Berfformiad
Yn gyntaf, dylwn sôn am y cwynion a gafwyd gan y GMC mewn perthynas â pherfformiad meddygon. Daw rhan fwyaf y cwynion am berfformiad oddi wrth cyflogwyr meddygon (fel arfer, ymddiriedolaethau GIG) neu PCOs. Yn nodweddiadol, byddai’r sefydliadau GIG hynny wedi bod yn ymdrechu ers cryn dipyn i ddatrys problemau’r meddyg trwy weithdrefnau lleol, ond yn aflwyddiannus yn gwneud hynny. Fel arfer, byddant yn atgyfeirio mater perfformiad i’r GMC pan fyddant o’r farn bod diffygion y meddyg mor ddifrifol mai dim ond gweithredu’r GMC ar gofrestriad fydd yn ddigonol i ddelio â’r broblem. Fel arall, gallai’r meddyg fod yn amharod i gyfranogi mewn camau adferol lleol. Weithiau, ni fyddai gan gorff GIG y cyfle i ddelio â’r broblem: er enghraifft, pan gyflogwyd meddyg fel dirprwy feddyg ac mae wedi symud ymlaen i rywle arall.
Weithiau, mae deoniaid ôl-raddedig, tiwtoriaid a chynghorwyr, neu gydweithwyr meddygol meddyg yn gwneud cwynion am berfformiad. Ceir rhai hefyd gan gleifion, er bod cwynion cleifion yn aml yn gysylltiedig â digwyddiadau unigol, yn hytrach na phatrymau ymddygiad. Gall fod yn amhosibl i unrhyw un wybod a oedd y digwyddiad y cafwyd cwyn amdano, os yn wir, yn esgeulustod unigol neu’n arwydd o broblemau perfformiad ehangach. Fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 18, tan yn ddiweddar, nid oedd yn arfer gan y GMC, wrth gael cwyn gan unigolyn preifat, i wneud ymholiadau am gyflogwr y meddyg neu PCO er mwyn gweld a fu unrhyw gwynion neu bryderon eraill yn gysylltiedig â’r meddyg. Felly, mae’n debygol fod llawer o gwynion i’r GMC, a oedd yn arwyddion o broblemau perfformiad ehangach mewn gwirionedd, wedi’u sgrinio allan oherwydd nad oeddent yn ddigon difrifol i olygu SPM na’n rhan o batrwm a allai olygu SPM (hyd y gwyddai’r GMC). Gobeithir y bydd y trefniadau y dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad eu bod yn eu lle bellach ar gyfer trafodaethau rhwng y GMC a chyflogwyr a PCOs meddygon yn fuan ar ôl cael cwyn yn arwain at well gydnabyddiaeth o werth cwynion cleifion yn datgelu tystiolaeth o broblemau gyda pherfformiad.
Mae rhai cwynion gan gleifion a chydweithwyr meddygol meddyg yn gysylltiedig â pherfformiad meddygon yn y sector preifat. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad na allai hithau gofio atgyfeiriad gan gyflogwr yn y sector preifat, er na allai ddweud nad oedd hyn wedi digwydd erioed. Os na cheir unrhyw atgyfeiriadau felly neu ychydig iawn ohonynt, mae hyn yn peri rhywfaint o ofid, gan yr ymddengys yn annhebygol mai dim ond yn y GIG y digwydd perfformiad diffygiol. Gallaf ddychmygu rhesymau pam efallai na ddymunai sefydliad masnachol weld ei feddygon yn cael eu cynnwys gyda gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Gall fod ofn y bydd enw da’r sefydliad yn cael ei effeithio pe byddai’n dod yn hysbys y cyflogwyd meddyg yr oedd pryderon difrifol wedi codi am ei berfformiad. Gallai sefydliad o’r fath fod yn amharod i ganiatáu i’r GMC gynnal asesiad o’r meddyg yn ei weithle/ei gweithle. Gallai fod yn haws yn syml i ddiswyddo’r meddyg a gwaredu’r broblem. Mae hyn yn achos pryder oherwydd, os na adroddir meddygon y mae eu perfformiad yn peri gofid, maent yn rhydd i symud ymlaen a gallant achosi problemau i gleifion eraill a sefydliadau eraill.
Y Staff yn yr Adran Sgrinio yn Ystyried Cwyn
Yn y blynyddoedd diwethaf, cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau ar ôl cael cwyn yn yr Adran Sgrinio oedd i reolwr gwaith achos asesu, ymhlith pethau eraill
a oedd unrhyw obaith o ddatrys y gŵyn trwy gamau lleol. Mewn achos perfformiad posibl, dymunai’r rheolwr gwaith achos ganfod a ddefnyddiwyd gweithdrefnau perfformiad lleol ac a fu unrhyw ymgynghoriad â’r NCAA. Cynghorodd rhifynnau Tachwedd 2002 ac Ebrill 2003 y Canllaw Gwaith Achos FTP (y Canllaw Gwaith Achos), a baratowyd i gynorthwyo staff yn yr Adran Sgrinio, pe na fyddai’n
‘hollol glir’
y dihysbyddwyd gweithdrefnau lleol, dylai rheolwyr gwaith achos, yn y cyfnod dosbarthu, gysylltu â
r corff atgyfeirio i drafod sut y dylid trin yr achos. Lle
r oedd
‘unrhyw gwestiwn o berygl uniongyrchol i gleifion’
, cynghorodd y Canllaw Gwaith Achos
‘y gall fod angen i’r GMC weithredu’
. Aeth y Canllaw Gwaith Achos ymlaen i nodi mai un canlyniad posibl trafodaeth felly gyda chorff atgyfeirio oedd y byddai
r atgyfeiriwr yn tynnu
r atgyfeiriad yn ôl ac yn cymryd mesurau lleol eraill cyn atgyfeirio
n ôl at y GMC pe byddai angen.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y GMC weithiau
n cael atgyfeiriadau gan gyrff GIG a ddymunai
‘rybuddio’
’r GMC y bu ganddynt anhawster gyda meddyg, ond nad oeddent yn ystyried bod angen cychwyn gweithdrefnau ymddygiad neu berfformiad y GMC yr adeg honno. Mewn achosion eraill, dywedodd y gall fod yn llai eglur a oedd y corff atgyfeirio eisiau i’r GMC weithredu neu beidio. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, byddai staff y GMC yn cysylltu â’r corff atgyfeirio ac yn trafod yr opsiynau amrywiol. Gallai hyn fod wedi arwain at drafodaeth tair ffordd rhwng y GMC, y corff atgyfeirio a’r NCAA. Fel arfer, byddai’r trafodaethau cychwynnol gyda’r corff atgyfeirio yn cael eu cynnal dros y ffôn. Fodd bynnag, ar adegau, gall fod angen cynnal cyfarfod. Nododd Mr Marshall:
‘Rwy’n credu mai’r hyn yr hoffem ei gyflawni yw bod yn berffaith fodlon fod yr holl sefydliadau sy’n ymgymryd ag edrych ar feddyg penodol yn gwybod beth yw eu rôl, yn gwybod sut bydd yr achos yn cael ei gymryd ymlaen ac yn gwybod yn union pa amddiffynfeydd y gallem roi yn eu lle yn y cyfamser.’
Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod staff y GMC, tan ganol 2001, yn dosbarthu achosion yn fuan fel achosion ‘perfformiad’ neu ‘ymddygiad’. Cawsai achosion a ddosbarthwyd yn ‘achosion perfformiad’ eu trin gan dîm sgrinio perfformiad ac yna, os yn briodol, y tîm asesu perfformiad. Cawsai achosion a ddosbarthwyd yn ‘achosion ymddygiad’ eu prosesu yn yr Adran Sgrinio (a oedd yn rhan o’r Adran Ymddygiad a Sgrinio bryd hynny). Dywedodd Mr Marshall y gwnaed penderfyniadau ar ddosbarthiad yn
‘rhy gynnar’
a’u bod wedi
‘arwain at un neu ddau achos efallai’n dilyn y llwybr anghywir’
. Yng nghanol 2001, cymerwyd penderfyniad i ohirio dosbarthiad tan yn ddiweddarach a
‘gadael y penderfyniad hwnnw i’r sgriniwr’
Sgrinio
Ar ôl canol 2001, sgriniwyd pob achos yn yr un lle (yr Adran Sgrinio). Byddai sgriniwr meddygol yn ystyried cwynion a awgrymai y gallai safon perfformiad meddyg fod yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Fel y dywedais yn gynharach, roedd sgrinwyr meddygol hefyd yn gyfrifol am ystyried cwynion o SPM posibl. Ar ôl i’r sgrinwyr wneud penderfyniad, byddai achosion a gafwyd eu ‘sgrinio i mewn’ yn symud ymlaen ar hyd un o’r llwybrau iechyd, ymddygiad neu berfformiad. Arweiniodd y dosbarthiad hwn o achosion at yr hyn a alwai’r GMC yn ‘effaith seilo’. Ar ôl i achos gael ei ddyrannu i un gyfres o weithdrefnau, ni ellid ei symud bob amser i gyfres wahanol, hyd yn oed pe ymddangosai yn ddiweddarach y gallai cyfres o weithdrefnau eraill fod yn fwy priodol. Dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, dylid osgoi’r effaith seilo oherwydd, er y bydd methodoleg wahanol yn cael ei defnyddio wrth ddelio ag agweddau ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad ar achosion, bydd paneli FTP yn gallu ystyried yr holl dystiolaeth sy’n gysylltiedig â meddyg ar yr un pryd.
Y Penderfyniad i’w Wneud gan y Sgrinwyr
Amododd Reol 5(1)(c) Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 na ddylai’r sgriniwr meddygol gymryd unrhyw gamau mewn cysylltiad ag achos oni bai bod y gŵyn yn ysgrifenedig ac oni bai ei bod:
‘yn awgrymu i’r sgriniwr meddygol -
(i) y gall fod safon perfformiad proffesiynol yr ymarferwr yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol; ac
(ii) y gall fod yn briodol i weithredu ...’.
Diwygiwyd y geiriau
‘y gall fod’
ym mis Tachwedd 2002 i ddweud
‘bod’
. Hefyd ym mis Tachwedd 2002, diwygiwyd rheol 5 ymhellach i amodi na ddylai
r sgriniwr meddygol weithredu o ran cwyn neu wybodaeth a gafwyd gan y GMC bum mlynedd neu fwy ar ôl y digwyddiadau a
u hachosodd, oni bai, yn ei farn ef/yn ei barn hi, bod
gweithredu er lles y cyhoedd
‘yn amgylchiadau eithriadol yr achos’
. Achosodd y diwygiad hwnnw gyflwyno i
r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ‘gyfnod cyfyngiad’ yn debyg i
r cyfnod hwnnw a gyflwynwyd ar yr un pryd ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad.
Roedd y
‘gweithredu’
yr oedd rhaid i
r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu ei wneud neu beidio yn cynnwys estyn gwahoddiad i
r meddyg i gael asesiad perfformiad. Roedd y trothwy ar gyfer estyn gwahoddiad i feddyg i gael asesiad yn drothwy isel. Roedd rhaid i
r gŵyn
‘awgrymu’
i
r sgriniwr meddygol
‘y gall fod diffyg difrifol’
yn safon ymddygiad y meddyg ac roedd rhaid i
r gŵyn
‘awgrymu’
i
r sgriniwr meddygol ei bod (tan fis Tachwedd 2002,
‘y gall fod’
) yn
gweithredu.
Y ‘Llythyr Rheol 5’
Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, cyn gwneud penderfyniad terfynol i wahodd meddyg i gael asesiad perfformiad ai peidio, roedd angen rhoi rhybudd iddo/iddi am y ffaith bod cwrs o’r fath yn cael ei ystyried ac i roi cyfle iddo/iddi gyflwyno unrhyw sylwadau a allai fod ganddo/ganddi. Byddai ‘llythyr rheol 5’ yn cael ei anfon at y meddyg, ynghyd â chopïau o’r gŵyn ac unrhyw gŵyn/gwynion blaenorol i’w hystyried (gweler paragraff 24.36) a chopi o unrhyw ddatganiad statudol (pe byddai’r achwynydd yn unigolyn preifat). Yna, byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn ystyried unrhyw sylwadau a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg wrth gyrraedd ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad ynghylch a ddylid cynnal asesiad. Ni roddodd Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 unrhyw gyfle i’r achwynydd (p’un ai’n unigolyn preifat neu’n gorff cyhoeddus) ymateb i sylwadau’r meddyg. Weithiau, byddai cael sylwadau’r meddyg yn arwain at y sgriniwr meddygol yn newid ei feddwl/ei meddwl. Er enghraifft, yn 2000, allan o 126 o achosion lle anfonwyd ‘llythyr rheol 5’, penderfynodd sgrinwyr meddygol beidio â dilyn 12 o achosion ar ôl cael sylwadau’r meddyg. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, gwnaeth ddiwygiad i Reolau Perfformiad 1997 waredu’r rhwymedigaeth i geisio sylwadau rhagarweiniol gan y meddyg ac nid oedd angen y ‘llythyr rheol 5’ rhagor.
Y Pŵer i Geisio Gwybodaeth Bellach
Amododd Reol 5(2) Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 y gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol, at ddiben ystyried achos, geisio gwybodaeth am yr achos neu sylwadau ar yr achos gan unrhyw un a allai ei gynorthwyo/ei chynorthwyo, ym marn y sgriniwr meddygol, wrth benderfynu a allai fod achos credu y bu safon perfformiad proffesiynol y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Felly, roedd yn agored i’r sgriniwr meddygol gychwyn ymholiadau i’w gynorthwyo/ei chynorthwyo wrth benderfynu a ddylai’r achos fynd ymlaen i asesiad. Roedd hyn yn gwrthgyferbynnu â’r sefyllfa mewn achos o SPM posibl, lle nad oedd gan y sgriniwr meddygol bŵer mor benodol.
Cynnwys Sgriniwr Lleyg
Roedd Rheol 5(6) Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 yn mynnu y dylid ymgynghori â sgriniwr lleyg, cyn i’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu nad oedd angen unrhyw weithredu, ac y dylai’r sgriniwr lleyg gytuno. Pe na fyddai’r sgriniwr lleyg yn cytuno nad oedd angen gweithredu o gwbl, rhaid oedd estyn gwahoddiad i gael asesiad perfformiad.
Ystyried Cwyn Gynharach
Lle penderfynai’r sgrinwyr beidio â gweithredu mewn perthynas â chwyn, amododd rheol 4 Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 y gallai sgriniwr meddygol ystyried y gŵyn serch hynny mewn cysylltiad ag ystyried unrhyw gŵyn ddilynol, gyda bwriad o bennu
‘a ydynt gyda’i gilydd yn nodi patrwm o berfformiad proffesiynol sy’n ddifrifol ddiffygiol’
. Fodd bynnag, wrth ystyried cwyn ddilynol, gellid ystyried cwyn gynharach dim ond os, ar yr adeg yr hysbyswyd y meddyg na fyddai unrhyw gamau pellach yn cael eu cymryd mewn perthynas â hi, yr anfonwyd datganiad iddo/iddi yn rhoi gwybod y gellid ystyried y gŵyn gynharach yn y dyfodol pe byddai cwyn bellach yn cael ei derbyn. Rhaid oedd anfon copi o’r datganiad hwnnw at y person neu’r corff a wnaeth y gŵyn gynharach, ynghyd ag esboniad o’r rheswm pam y gwnaed penderfyniad i beidio â gweithredu mewn perthynas â’r gŵyn honno. Ni orfododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 unrhyw gyfyngiad amser na ellid ystyried cwyn gynharach ar ei ôl. Roedd hyn mewn gwrthgyferbyniad â’r sefyllfa lle na weithredwyd ynghylch cwynion o gamymddygiad neu adroddiadau o gollfarnau ar unwaith; gellid eu hadfywio dim ond o fewn dwy flynedd o’r penderfyniad i beidio â gweithredu. Mae’n debyg, o’r cychwyn, fodd bynnag, y gweithredodd y GMC ‘gyfnod terfynu’ anffurfiol o dair blynedd ar gyfer achosion perfformiad.
Pan roddwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar waith, lluniwyd y Llawlyfr cyntaf i sgrinwyr, sef Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997. Cynghorodd y Llawlyfr y dylai sgrinwyr meddygol drin cwyn fel achos perfformiad posibl dim ond ar ôl i’r sgrinwyr meddygol gasglu, yn gyntaf, nad oedd modd cyfiawnhau atgyfeiriad i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd ac, yn ail, na ddylid dilyn yr achos fel achos o SPM. Roedd rhaid i sgriniwr lleyg gadarnhau’r ail gasgliad. Dim ond bryd hynny y gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol fynd ymlaen i ystyried a oedd tystiolaeth o SDP. Pe byddai, dylai’r sgriniwr meddygol ystyried gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Roedd yn agored i sgrinwyr meddygol, gan ymarfer eu pwerau dan reol 5(2) Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, ofyn i staff y GMC wneud ymholiadau i ganfod a oedd y gŵyn ar wahân neu a oedd patrwm o bryder yn lleol ynghylch y meddyg. Awgrymodd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr 1997 y gellid cael gwybodaeth o’r cynghorydd meddygol neu brif weithredwr PCO meddyg teulu, o gyfarwyddwr meddygol ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu uwch weithredwr meddygol sefydliad sy’n cyflogi, o gadeirydd neu ysgrifennydd yr LMC neu o gadeirydd staff meddygol ysbyty. Pwysleisiodd y Llawlyfr yr angen am ‘
dringarwch a phwyll’
a chyfrinachedd wrth wneud ymholiadau o’r fath. Byddai’r meddyg dan sylw’n cael gwybod am y gŵyn cyn gwneud ymholiadau o’r fath. Byddai’n cael ei esbonio i’r sawl y ceisir gwybodaeth amdano fod y GMC yn gwneud ymholiadau rhagarweiniol yn unig ac nad oedd unrhyw benderfyniad am weithredu GMC posibl wedi’i wneud hyd yma. Byddai unrhyw gynnig a wnaed, a’r canlyniad, yn cael eu cofnodi. Ymddengys hyn i gyd yn synhwyrol iawn. Fodd bynnag, mae’r dystiolaeth a chlywais yn awgrymu na ddigwyddodd hyn yn ymarferol. Tan fis Mai 2004, pan fyddai un gŵyn (nad oedd yn ddigon difrifol i godi cwestiwn SPM) yn cael ei chyflwyno, byddai’n cael ei chau heb unrhyw ymholiadau o sefydliadau lleol gyda’r bwriad o ddarganfod a oedd pryderon eraill ynghylch y meddyg neu beidio. Trafodais y broblem hon ym Mhennod 18 a chofnodi ymateb Dr Korlipara i’r awgrym y dylid gwneud ymholiadau o’r fath. Yn fyr, credai nad lle’r GMC oedd mynd i ‘chwilota’ am wybodaeth fel sail i adeiladu achos yn erbyn meddyg. O fis Mai 2004, mae’r GMC wedi cyhoeddi ei fwriad, mewn amgylchiadau penodol, i ymgynghori â chyflogwyr ac ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCTs) yn fuan ar ôl cael cwyn.
Wrth benderfynu a ddylid cymryd cwyn yn ei blaen, cynghorwyd sgrinwyr i ystyried:
A oes tystiolaeth dda yn gysylltiedig â pherfformiad y meddyg ers 1 Gorffennaf 1997, y gallai’r meddyg fod yn methu dro ar ôl tro neu’n gyson o ran cydydymffurfio â’r safonau proffesiynol sy’n briodol ar gyfer y gwaith y mae’r meddyg yn ei wneud?
A yw’r dystiolaeth honno’n awgrymu y gall fod patrwm o berfformiad diffygiol, yn hytrach na thystiolaeth o un neu ddau ddigwyddiad o berfformiad diffygiol yn unig, a allai fod yn gamgymeriadau ar wahân?
A yw’r diffygion honedig mor ddifrifol y gallai fod sail, os nad oes modd eu datrys fel arall, i atal cofrestriad y meddyg neu orfodi amodau arno?’
Cyfarwyddwyd sgrinwyr i fod yn
‘benodol o bryderus’
lle awgrymai
r dystiolaeth y gallai safon perfformiad proffesiynol meddygol fod yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl, neu lle fethai
r meddyg dro ar ôl tro ac yn barhaus i gydymffurfio ag arweiniad y GMC yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’.
Cynghorwyd sgrinwyr meddygol yn y Llawlyfr i Sgrinwyr, mewn achos lle na warantai
r honiadau yn y gŵyn, ym marn y sgriniwr meddygol, weithredu dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad (yr enghraifft a roir yn y Llawlyfr oedd
‘camgymeriad unigol’
o ran perfformiad heb unrhyw
‘batrwm’
o SDP), gallai gweithredu anffurfiol dan Bennod XV Rheolau Sefydlog y GMC fod yn briodol. Disgrifiais weithdrefnau Pennod XV ym Mhennod 19.
Ffurflenni Penderfyniadau Sgrinio
Fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 19, ym 1999 dechreuodd y sgrinwyr ddefnyddio ffurflenni penderfyniadau sgrinio (SDFs) a gynlluniwyd gan y Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi (PSI) mewn ymgynghoriad â’r GMC. Diben yr SDFs oedd cyflwyno gwell strwythur a chysondeb i’r broses sgrinio.
Roedd y fersiwn o’r SDF a ddefnyddiwyd o fis Mehefin 1999 i fis Awst 2001 yn cynnwys y cyngor hwn i sgrinwyr:
‘Nodir SDP fel arfer gan fethiant i gydymffurfio â safonau proffesiynol perthnasol, a hynny dro ar ôl tro neu’n barhaus.’
Ar ôl mis Awst 2001, newidiwyd y cyngor i ddweud:
‘Nodir SDP fel arfer gan batrwm o fethiant difrifol i gydymffurfio â Safonau proffesiynol perthnasol.’
Roeddwn yn pryderu am y newid hwnnw, o leiaf pe byddai sgrinwyr yn ei gymryd yn llythrennol. Oni fyddai un achos o
‘fethiant difrifol i gydymffurfio â safonau proffesiynol perthnasol’
yn gwarantu gweithredu dan y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, gan y byddai’n codi cwestiwn o SPM. Y gwahaniaeth rhwng SDP a SPM oedd y gellid amlygu SDP trwy gyfres o fethiannau na fyddai’n gwarantu gweithredu ar eu pennau eu hunain, ond a fyddai’n gwneud hynny wrth eu hystyried gyda’i gilydd. Ymddangosai’r arweiniad newydd fel petai’n cyflwyno gofyniad o ddifrifoldeb ac ailadrodd cyn y gallai SDP godi. Ymddangosai i mi efallai na fyddai hyn yn amddiffyn cleifion yn ddigon da.
Fodd bynnag, efallai na chafodd y newid hwn mewn iaith unrhyw effaith wael ar benderfyniadau sgrinwyr meddygol oherwydd, ar yr un pryd, rhoddwyd cyngor arall a ymddangosai nad oedd yn awgrymu’r angen am ddifrifoldeb yn ogystal ag ailadrodd. O fis Awst 2001, roedd yr SDF yn cynnwys rhestr o feini prawf y nododd ‘
nad oedd yn gynhwysfawr ond gall fod yn ddangosydd sdp.’
Gofynnwyd i
r sgriniwr iechyd dicio
r holl feini prawf a oedd yn berthnasol i
r gŵyn a oedd yn cael ei sgrinio. Dyma oedd y meini prawf:
tuedd i ddefnyddio technegau amhriodol
diffyg gwybodaeth sylfaenol/ barn wael
diffyg cynefindra â gweithdrefnau clinigol/gweinyddol sylfaenol
methiant i gadw cofnodion wedi’u diweddaru
diffyg mewnwelediad
ystod o anghymwysterau, sef:
technegau hen ffasiwn
agwedd
trefniadau ymarfer annigonol
pryderon am gyfraddau atgyfeirio
cadw cofnodion gwael
trefniadau hylendid annigonol.
Yna, byddai rhaid i’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu a godai’r achos fater o SPM (os felly, dylid ei atgyfeirio at y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol) neu a fu awgrym o SDP (os felly, dylid anfon gwahoddiad i gael asesiad perfformiad). Pe na allai sgriniwr meddygol farnu a oedd yr un yn berthnasol, gallai fod angen gwybodaeth bellach. Pe credai’r sgriniwr meddygol bod yr achos yn codi materion o SPM a SDP, roedd rhaid iddo/iddi ddatgan a ddylai’r achos, yn ei farn ef/ei barn hi, symud ymlaen trwy’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad neu berfformiad. Nododd Llawlyfr Sgrinwyr Tachwedd 2002 (a’r fersiwn ddilynol yn Ebrill 2003 a oedd dal yn cael ei defnyddio adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad) y byddai hyn yn ‘
ddyfarniad anodd’
mewn llawer achos. Pe byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu nad oedd yr achos yn codi unrhyw faterion o SPM neu SDP, rhaid byddai cael cytundeb sgriniwr lleyg cyn cau’r achos.
Gwahoddiad i Feddyg Gael Asesiad Perfformiad
Pe byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn penderfynu y dylai’r achos fynd yn ei flaen, mae Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 yn mynnu rhoi gwybod i’r meddyg am hyn. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, dan ddarpariaethau rheol 6, byddai’r meddyg (a fyddai eisoes yn ymwybodol o’r gŵyn a’r ffaith bod gwahoddiad i gael asesiad yn cael ei ystyried, ar ôl cael y ‘llythyr rheol 5’) yn cael datganiad yn nodi’r rhesymau pam yr ystyriai’r sgriniwr meddygol fod angen asesiad. Byddai ef neu hi hefyd yn cael copi o unrhyw wybodaeth bellach a gafwyd o ganlyniad i unrhyw ymholiadau pellach a gychwynnwyd gan y sgriniwr meddygol ac a ystyriwyd gan y sgriniwr meddygol wrth wneud ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 na ddylid anfon at yr achwynydd ddatganiad y sgriniwr meddygol nac unrhyw wybodaeth y cyfeirir ati uchod.
O fis Tachwedd 2002, pan ddiddymwyd ‘llythyr rheol 5’, y llythyr a anfonir ar ôl penderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol yw rhybudd cyntaf y meddyg o bosib fod cwyn wedi’i gwneud i’r GMC am ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad. Mynnodd y rheol 6 ddiwygiedig anfon yr holl wybodaeth at y meddyg a fyddai wedi’i chynnwys gyda’r ‘llythyr rheol 5’ yn flaenorol, ynghyd â’r gwahoddiad i gael asesiad a anfonir yn unol â rheol 6.
Wedyn, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei wahodd i gytuno o fewn 28 diwrnod (tan fis Tachwedd 2002, 14 diwrnod oedd y cyfnod) o asesiad yn cael ei gynnal ac i gyflwyno yn yr un cyfnod unrhyw sylwadau y dymunai ef/hi eu gwneud ar yr achos. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i gynnal asesiad perfformiad, byddai’r achos yn cael ei drosglwyddo i’r Adran Berfformiad, lle byddai trefniadau ar gyfer yr asesiad yn cychwyn. Pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i asesiad o fewn y cyfnod penodedig, gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol atgyfeirio’r achos i’r ARC. Fel arall, ar ôl ystyried sylwadau’r meddyg neu wybodaeth arall, gallai’r sgriniwr meddygol benderfynu (yn amodol ar gytundeb y sgriniwr lleyg) na fyddai angen unrhyw weithredu pellach mewn cysylltiad â’r achos. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn ymwybodol o achos lle’r oedd sgriniwr meddygol wedi newid ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad gwreiddiol ar yr adeg hon.
Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad yn Ystyried yr Achos
Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 y gellid dadwneud atgyfeiriad i’r ARC pe byddai’r meddyg yn cytuno’n ddilynol y dylid cynnal asesiad neu pe byddai’r sgriniwr meddygol yn cael gwybodaeth yn ddilynol a achosai iddo/iddi benderfynu (gyda chytundeb y sgriniwr lleyg) na fyddai angen unrhyw weithredu pellach mewn cysylltiad â’r achos. Fodd bynnag, pe na fyddai’r atgyfeiriad yn cael ei ddadwneud, byddai’r ARC yn symud ymlaen i ystyried yr achos.
Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad
Llywodraethwyd cyfansoddiad yr ARC gan Reolau (Cyfansoddiad Pwyllgorau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer) Gorchymyn Cyngor 1996 y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (sef Rheolau Cyfansoddiad 1996), fel a ddiwygiwyd. Roedd yn cynnwys 17 o aelodau. Fe’i gadeiriwyd gan y Llywydd, neu ryw aelod arall o’r GMC a benodwyd ganddo. Penodwyd dau aelod gan y Llywydd i fod yn Ddirprwy Gadeiryddion. Rhaid oedd i’r Cyngor llawn gymeradwyo’r penodiadau a wnaed gan y Llywydd. Cafodd y 14 aelod arall eu hethol yn flynyddol. O fis Awst 2000, nid oedd sgrinwyr meddygol a sgrinwyr lleyg yn gymwys i’w hethol i’r ARC. Roedd cyfanswm aelodaeth yr ARC yn cynnwys 13 o aelodau meddygol a phedwar aelod lleyg. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, pump oedd y cworwm cyfreithiol ar gyfer yr ARC, gan gynnwys un aelod lleyg o leiaf. Ar ôl yr amser hwnnw, tri oedd y cworwm ac roedd rhaid iddo gynnwys o leiaf un aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg.
Darparu Cyngor Cyfreithiol a Meddygol
Byddai’r ARC yn eistedd gydag asesydd cyfreithiol ac o leiaf un cynghorydd arbenigol a benodwyd gan y Cadeirydd o banel a benodwyd gan y GMC. Roedd rhaid i un o’r cynghorwyr arbenigol o leiaf fod yn berson a oedd yn ymarfer, neu wedi ymarfer, yn yr arbenigedd lle ymarferai’r meddyg yr oedd ei berfformiad dan archwiliad yn gyffredinol. Swyddogaeth y cynghorydd arbenigol oedd cynghori’r ARC ar y materion meddygol o’i flaen. Byddai ef neu hi’n rhoi cyngor ar unrhyw gwestiwn a gyfeiriwyd ato/ati gan yr ARC. Yn ogystal, gallai roi cyngor o’i wirfodd/o’i gwirfodd pe ymddangosai iddo/iddi fod posibilrwydd o wneud camgymeriad, pe na fyddai’n rhoi’r cyngor hwnnw, naill ai o ran barnu arwyddocâd meddygol unrhyw wybodaeth gerbron yr ARC neu oherwydd absenoldeb gwybodaeth. Roedd rhaid rhoi cyngor y cynghorydd arbenigol ym mhresenoldeb y meddyg a’i gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd, pe byddent yn mynychu’r gwrandawiad. Pe byddai’r cyngor yn cael ei roi ar ôl i’r ARC ddechrau ymgynghori ynglŷn â’i benderfyniad, byddai angen i’r cynghorydd arbenigol roi gwybod i’r meddyg pa gyngor a roddwyd yn ei absenoldeb/ei habsenoldeb.
Swyddogaethau’r Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad
Dywedodd Mr Howes mai diben gwreiddiol yr ARC oedd darparu amddiffynfa yn erbyn y GMC yn dod yn rhy ‘barod’ i anfon meddygon i’w hasesu pan na fyddai’r dystiolaeth yn cyfiawnhau hyn. Nid tasg yr ARC oedd pennu a oedd perfformiad meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol neu beidio. Yn hytrach, ei swyddogaethau dan reol 15 Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 oedd penderfynu a
‘allai’
safon perfformiad meddyg
‘fod yn ddifrifol ddiffygiol’
ac, os felly, penderfynu a oes
‘angen cynnal’
asesiad. Mae’n ymddangos i’r prawf hwn osod trothwy ychydig yn uwch na’r trothwy hwnnw a osodwyd gan y prawf sgrinio, a fynnai y dylai’r gŵyn
‘awgrymu’
i’r sgriniwr y gallai perfformiad meddyg fod yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol a’i
‘bod
(yn flaenorol ‘
gall fod’
yn briodol gweithredu’
. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y prawf ar gyfer yr ARC (i’r gwrthwyneb i’r prawf hwnnw a roddwyd gan y sgrinwyr) yn ddeublyg. Pe penderfynai’r ARC y gallai perfformiad meddyg fod yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol, byddai rhaid iddo ofyn wedyn, ‘er gwaethaf hynny’, a ‘na fyddai eisiau asesu’r meddyg penodol hwn’.
Y Weithdrefn mewn Gwrandawiad gerbron y Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad
Mewn gwrandawiad gerbron yr ARC, cynrychiolwyd y GMC gan gyfreithiwr neu gwnsler. Roedd gan yr achwynydd a’r meddyg hawl hefyd i gael eu cynrychioli. Cyn y gwrandawiad, byddai aelodau o’r ARC yn cael copïau o’r ddogfen a anfonwyd at y meddyg dan ddarpariaethau rheol 6 (rheolau 5 a 6 yn flaenorol) a chopïau o unrhyw sylwadau oddi wrth y meddyg, neu ohebiaeth bellach â’r meddyg.
Cynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau’r ARC yn breifat. Gallai’r ARC gael unrhyw wybodaeth yn ysgrifenedig, neu alw ar unrhyw berson i roi tystiolaeth ar lafar, yr ystyriai y gallai fod o gymorth iddo wrth gyflawni ei swyddogaethau. Gallai’r achwynydd roi tystiolaeth a gallai ef/hi neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd annerch yr ARC. Fodd bynnag, ni allai’r achwynydd glywed y dystiolaeth arall a gyflwynir gerbron yr ARC. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod rhan fwyaf yr achosion perfformiad yn codi o ganlyniad i atgyfeiriadau gan gyrff cyhoeddus. Byddai’r corff atgyfeirio’n cael gwahoddiad i anfon cynrychiolydd i’r gwrandawiad gerbron yr ARC. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn arferol i’r cynrychiolydd hwnnw roi tystiolaeth. Nododd Mr Marshall y byddai’r GMC yn ‘gwneud y ddadl fwyaf cadarn ag y gallai o blaid parhau â’r achos, gan gyfeirio at y papurau mewn llaw. Dywedodd ei bod yn ‘brin iawn’ i’r corff atgyfeirio fod ag unrhyw beth i’w ychwanegu at y papurau a fyddai gan y GMC eisoes. Gallai’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth. Ar wahân i’r achwynydd, y meddyg ac unrhyw berson y dewisai’r ARC alw arno, ni chaniatawyd i unrhyw un arall roi tystiolaeth ar lafar. Mae’n ymddangos yn anfoddus i mi na chaniatawyd i’r achwynydd (sef cynrychiolydd corff cyhoeddus fel arfer) glywed yr hyn a fyddai gan y meddyg i’w ddweud. Ef neu hi fyddai’r person mwyaf tebygol o fod â gwybodaeth fanwl am yr achos ac o wybod a fyddai’r hyn a ddywedai’r meddyg yn rhesymol neu a fyddai modd ei wrthbrofi. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y dylai’r person hwnnw fod yn bresennol drwy gydol y gwrandawiad fel y gallai, os yn briodol, gyfathrebu â chynrychiolydd y GMC.
Pe byddai’r ARC yn penderfynu, ar ddiwedd y dystiolaeth, fod angen cynnal asesiad perfformiad, byddai’n cyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiad a byddai’r achos yn trosglwyddo ar unwaith i’r Adran Berfformiad er mwyn gwneud y trefniadau priodol.
Pe byddai’r ARC yn penderfynu na fyddai angen asesiad, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau. Byddai penderfyniad gan fwyafrif yr aelodau yn cael ei ystyried fel penderfyniad yr ARC. Pe byddai’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, byddai gan y Cadeirydd bleidlais fwrw ychwanegol. Ni fyddai angen i’r ARC roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniadau a, phe byddai’n dyfarnu o blaid y meddyg, ni fyddai’n gwneud hynny. Bu’r absenoldeb hwn o resymau yn peri gofid sylweddol i gyrff GIG na chawsant unrhyw esboniad pam y penderfynwyd (i’r gwrthwyneb i benderfyniad y sgriniwr meddygol) peidio â chymryd camau mewn achos yr oeddent wedi’i ystyried yn ddigon difrifol i’w atgyfeirio i’r GMC. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at y pwnc hwn yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Yr Asesiad Perfformiad
Penodi Cydlynydd Achos
Ar ôl penderfynu y dylid cynnal asesiad perfformiad, roedd rhaid, yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, penodi cydlynydd achos. Tan fis Gorffennaf 2003, roedd rhaid i’r cydlynydd achos fod yn aelod meddygol o’r GMC. Yn ymarferol, awdurdododd y GMC ddau o’r sgrinwyr meddygol i weithredu yn y cymhwyster hwnnw. Y cydlynwyr achos perfformiad cyntaf oedd Dr Robin Steel (y prif sgriniwr meddygol) a’r Athro Hilary Thomas. Ym mis Mawrth 2004, penodwyd dau o’r archwilwyr achos cymwys meddygol a benodwyd yn ddiweddar yn gydlynwyr achos perfformiad, tra’n disgwyl cyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Swyddogaeth gyntaf cydlynydd achos oedd penodi aelodau’r Panel Asesu a fyddai’n cynnal yr asesiad perfformiad. Penodwyd aelodau’r panel o’r rhestr o aseswyr perfformiad a awdurdodwyd gan y GMC i gynnal asesiadau perfformiad.
Aseswyr Perfformiad
Nid yw aseswyr perfformiad yn aelodau o’r GMC. Maent yn bobl â chymwysterau meddygol ac yn bobl leyg a ddewiswyd ac a hyfforddwyd gan y GMC i fod yn aseswyr. I ddechrau, dewiswyd 400 o bobl (250 o bobl feddygol a 150 o bobl leyg), a hyfforddwyd hanner ohonynt yn unig ar unwaith. Hyfforddwyd eraill wrth i’r angen gynyddu am fwy o bobl i gyfranogi mewn asesiadau. Caiff aseswyr perfformiad hyfforddiant dwys (gan gynnwys cwrs preswyl pum niwrnod) yn eu rôl. Ar ôl eu hyfforddiant cychwynnol, cânt hyfforddiant a chymorth parhaus mewn gweithdai a digwyddiadau eraill. Yn ogystal, penodwyd aseswyr nad ydynt ar restr y GMC ar sail
i gynorthwyo ag asesiadau unigol. Pwysleisiodd Syr Donald Irvine a’r Fonesig Lesley Southgate werth y cyfranogiad gan bobl leyg yn y broses asesu.
Y Panel Asesu
Byddai aelodau o’r staff yn yr Adran Berfformiad yn anfon at y meddyg ‘bortffolio’ i’w gwblhau. Byddai gofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu disgrifiad o natur ei arfer/ ei harfer, disgrifiad o’i hyfforddiant a phrofiad proffesiynol a manylion eraill. Yna, byddai’r staff yn ymdrechu i nodi aelodau addas ar gyfer y Panel Asesu. Byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn cymeradwyo cyfansoddiad y Panel Asesu ac yn penodi aelodau’r panel yn ffurfiol cyn cynnal yr asesiad.
Dan Reolau Perfformiad 1997, roedd rhaid i Baneli Asesu gynnwys dau feddyg a pherson lleyg, gyda meddyg yn asesydd arweiniol. Byddai’r asesydd arweiniol yn feddyg o’r un arbenigedd â’r meddyg a fyddai’n cael ei asesu. O fis Tachwedd 2002, amododd y Rheolau y gallai’r cydlynydd achos, lle byddai asesiad yn cynnwys
‘profion strwythuredig o wybodaeth a sgiliau proffesiynol y meddyg’
(sydd, fel y byddaf yn esbonio, fel arfer yn cynnwys Cam II yr asesiad), benodi un neu fwy aelod ychwanegol i’r Panel Asesu. Byddai’r aelodau hynny’n cymryd rhan yn yr asesiad at ddiben asesu perfformiad y meddyg yn y profion hynny yn unig. Byddai penodi aelodau ychwanegol at y diben hwn yn sicrhau y cawsai asesiad perfformiad y meddyg yn Cam II ei ystyried o’r newydd a heb unrhyw ragdybiaethau yn seiliedig ar ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad yng Ngham I.
Gwaith y Panel Asesu
Byddai’r Panel Asesu’n cael yr holl bapurau perthnasol yn yr achos, gan gynnwys y gŵyn wreiddiol a sylwadau’r meddyg amdani. Byddai’r Panel Asesu yn teilwra’r ffordd y cynhaliai’r asesiad i amgylchiadau unigol y meddyg dan asesiad. Byddai’r ‘portffolio’ a gwblhawyd gan y meddyg yn cynorthwyo’r broses hon. Yn ystod yr asesiad, gallai aseswyr perfformiad weithredu ar eu pennau eu hunain neu mewn gwahanol gyfuniadau.
Roedd Cam I yr asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei adnabod fel yr ‘adolygiad cymheiriaid’. Fel arfer, byddai’n cymryd tua dau ddiwrnod a hanner. Byddai’r aseswyr perfformiad yn cyfweld â’r meddyg, fel arfer ar sawl achlysur. Ar un achlysur felly o leiaf, roedd rhaid i’r meddyg gael cyfweliad gan holl aelodau’r Panel gyda’i gilydd. Roedd gan y meddyg hawl i gael cwmni mewn cyfweliadau â’r aseswyr perfformiad, heblaw pan fyddai manylion achosion penodol o gleifion a enwyd yn cael eu trafod. Byddai aelodau’r panel hefyd yn cyfweld â’r achwynydd (pe byddai ef/hi yn cytuno) neu, pe byddai’r achwynydd yn gorff cyhoeddus (fel y byddai’r achos fel arfer), byddent yn cyfweld â chynrychiolydd y corff hwnnw ac efallai’r aelodau o staff gyda gwybodaeth uniongyrchol am y materion a achosodd y pryderon neu’r gŵyn. Byddai’r Panel Asesu’n ymweld â’r meddyg yn ei weithle/ei gweithle (os yn berthnasol) ac yn archwilio nifer o setiau sampl (tua 50 fel arfer) o’i gofnodion/ei chofnodion meddygol. O’r cofnodion hynny, byddai’r Panel yn dewis rhai achosion a fyddai’n ffurfio sail trafodaethau manwl gyda’r meddyg yn ddiweddarach. Gallant hefyd arsylwi sut y cynhaliodd y meddyg ymgynghoriadau gyda chleifion. Pe byddai’r gŵyn yn gysylltiedig â sgiliau llawfeddygol y meddyg ysbyty, gallai’r aseswyr perfformiad ei arsylwi/ei harsylwi wrth waith yn y theatr llawdriniaeth. Byddai aseswyr perfformiad yn siarad hefyd â chydweithwyr meddyg ac eraill gyda gwybodaeth uniongyrchol am berfformiad y meddyg; gallai’r rhain fod yn nyrsys, staff practis (pe byddai’r meddyg yn feddyg teulu) neu’n uwch reolwyr (pe weithiai’r meddyg mewn ysbyty). Yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, gallai’r meddyg enwebu nid mwy na phum person y dymunai iddo/iddi gael cyfweliad yn ystod yr asesiad a byddai gofyn i’r Panel Asesu wneud ymdrechion rhesymol i sicrhau y cawsai’r bobl hynny gyfweliad gan un aelod Panel o leiaf. Yn ystod yr asesiad, gallai aseswyr perfformiad weithredu ar eu pennau eu hunain neu mewn gwahanol gyfuniadau. Wrth i’r asesiad symud yn ei flaen, byddai’r aseswyr yn cofnodi eu sylwadau mewn cronfa ddata a gynlluniwyd yn arbennig. Byddant yn rhoi gradd i bob cofnod, sef ‘derbyniol’, ‘achos pryder’ neu ‘annerbyniol’. Golygai ‘derbyniol’ fod y dystiolaeth yn dangos bod perfformiad y meddyg yn gyson uwch na’r safon ar gyfer addasrwydd i ymarfer. Golygai ‘achos pryder’ fod yna dystiolaeth a awgrymai efallai nad oedd y perfformiad yn dderbyniol ond nad oedd digon o dystiolaeth i awgrymu SDP. Nodai ‘annerbyniol’ fod yna dystiolaeth o SDP.
Yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, roedd gofyn i’r Panel Asesu ddatgelu i’r meddyg unrhyw wybodaeth neu farn ysgrifenedig a gawsai’r Panel y credai’r Panel y gallai ddylanwadu ar ei asesiad, ac i roi cyfle i’r meddyg gynnig sylwadau amdano. Fel arfer, cawsai’r holl gyfweliadau gyda thrydydd parti eu trawsgrifio. Yn y gorffennol, ni fyddai trawsgrifiadau o gyfweliadau trydydd parti bob amser ar gael i’r meddyg tra bod yr asesiad yn cael ei gynnal. Ar ôl y dyfarniad yn achos
, a roddwyd ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, daeth yn glir bod rhaid gwneud hyn, fel y gallai’r meddyg gael cyfle i roi sylwadau ar gynnwys y cyfweliadau hynny cyn paratoi’r adroddiad asesiad terfynol.
Roedd Cam II yr asesiad perfformiad yn cynnwys profion cymhwyster a gynlluniwyd i weddu i arbenigedd y meddyg. Roedd Cam II yn cynnwys prawf gwybodaeth, meddygfa ffug gydag actorion hyfforddedig yn chwarae rôl cleifion, ac archwiliadau clinigol strwythuredig gwrthrychol (OSCEs), lle byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei roi mewn sefyllfaoedd clinigol penodol yr oedd rhaid iddo/iddi ymateb iddynt. Mae’r GMC wedi agor canolfan asesu newydd yn ddiweddar ar gyfer asesu meddygon sy’n dod i ymarfer yn y DU o dramor. Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bwriadwyd defnyddio’r ganolfan asesu hefyd yn y dyfodol i gynnal Cam II asesiadau perfformiad.
Byddai sgoriau’r meddyg ar y profion Cam II yn cael eu hasesu yn erbyn grŵp rheoli o feddygon yn yr un arbenigedd a oedd wedi cwblhau’r un profion. Byddai’r sgoriau lleiafswm ar gyfer y profion yn cael eu gosod yn isel ar bwrpas, ymhell yn is na’r rheiny y byddai mwyafrif helaeth meddygon yn eu cyrraedd. Er enghraifft, byddai 75% o feddygon teulu wedi sgorio 85% neu’n uwch yn y prawf gwybodaeth ond gosodwyd y sgôr a berai ‘achos pryder’ yn yr asesiad ar 68.8%. Yn yr un modd, byddai 75% o feddygon teulu yn sgorio dros 72% yn y profion meddygfa ffug, ond gosodwyd y sgôr a berai ‘achos pryder’ yn yr asesiad ar 50% yn unig. Yn yr OSCEs, byddai 75% o feddygon teulu yn sgorio mwy na 80%, ond gosodwyd y sgôr a berai ‘achos pryder’ ar 70%
Byddai gofyn i’r meddyg symud ymlaen i Gam II dim ond pe byddai’r Panel Asesu, o ganlyniad i Gam I, yn ystyried bod yna broblem bosibl gyda pherfformiad y meddyg. Pe byddai’r Panel Asesu’n cytuno ar ddiwedd Cam I nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol ac na fyddai modd elwa o gwbl trwy symud ymlaen i Gam II, byddai’r asesiad yn dod i ben yno. Yn yr Ymchwiliad, cafwyd rhywfaint o drafodaeth ynghylch a fyddai’n synhwyrol gwrthdroi trefn y ddau Gam. Roedd Cam I yn defnyddio llawer o adnoddau ac felly’n ddrud iawn. Yn aml, gallai gymryd amser eithaf hir i’w sefydlu ac, o ganlyniad, byddai oedi’n digwydd. Byddai Cam I hefyd yn dibynnu i raddau helaeth iawn ar farnau gwrthrychol am ddibynadwyedd sylwadau a wnaed gan y sawl a gawsai gyfweliadau. Ar y llaw arall, roedd Cam II yn fwy gwrthrychol. Y ddadl dros newid oedd y gallai’r Panel, pe byddai meddyg yn perfformio’n dda (neu’n ddigonol hyd yn oed) yn y profion gwrthrychol, gyrraedd y casgliad nad oedd unrhyw bryderon gwirioneddol yn codi. Pe byddai ef/hi’n perfformio’n annigonol, byddai rhaid iddo/iddi gwblhau’r broses asesu (y Cam I presennol). Byddai newid o’r fath yn arbed cost ac amser. Ymddangosai i mi mai’r ystyriaeth bwysicaf oedd a fyddai sefyll profion gwrthrychol Cam II yn darparu dangosydd dibynadwy y byddai’n ddiogel gwneud penderfyniad yn seiliedig arno i derfynu’r broses. Credai’r Fonesig Lesley Southgate na fyddai’n ddiogel. Dywedodd na all meddyg berfformio’n dda oni bai bod ganddo/ganddi sail wybodaeth gadarn. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r gwrthwyneb yn wir; gall meddyg heb sail wybodaeth gadarn berfformio’n wael o hyd. Mae’n ymddangos, felly, nad oes unrhyw ateb hawdd i broblemau adnoddau sy’n ganlyniad yr asesiad Cam I.
Yn y gorffennol, cafwyd oedi difrifol iawn wrth gynnal asesiadau ac wrth lunio’r adroddiadau. Ym mis Awst 2001, cyflwynwyd safon gwasanaeth gyda tharged o gwblhau asesiad o fewn pum mis o’r meddyg yn cytuno, neu’n cael cyfarwyddyd, i gael yr asesiad. Fodd bynnag, gallai asesiadau gymryd yn hirach i’w cwblhau o hyd, yn enwedig pe byddai’n anodd dod o hyd i aseswyr addas a oedd ar gael.
Adolygwyd ffurf yr asesiad perfformiad o bryd i’w gilydd. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r arfer, o’r adeg ychydig cyn iddi roi tystiolaeth, fu cynnal trafodaethau gyda’r meddyg a fyddai’n fwy seiliedig ar achos a gostwng nifer y cyfweliadau gyda thrydydd parti. Awgrymodd profiad diweddar y gallai’r meddyg, mewn gwrandawiad gerbron y CPP, ymosod yn llwyddiannus ar ddibynadwyedd cyfweliadau trydydd parti a/neu’r didueddrwydd a gafwyd wrth eu recordio. Cododd amheuaethau y gwnaed rhai cwynion o ganlyniad i feddyg penodol yn cael ei wneud yn fwch dihangol ar gyfer problem mewn adran neu hyd yn oed o ganlyniad i wahaniaethu hiliol. Mae’n amlwg na ellir croesholi disgrifiadau a roir gan aelodau staff neu gleifion i Banel Asesu a rhaid bod perygl y gall y Panel fod yn llai na gwrthrychol yn ei farnau. Lle seilir barnau ar yr hyn a ddywedai’r meddyg ei hun am ei achosion/ei hachosion, byddai’r risgiau hyn yn lleihau’n helaeth. Hefyd, byddai canlyniadau Cam II, o’u graddnodi drwy gyfeirio at berfformiad nifer fawr o feddygon, yn darparu deunydd gwrthrychol a dibynadwy.
Yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, roedd gofyn i holl aelodau’r Panel Asesu gyfarfod â’i gilydd yn ystod yr asesiad i adolygu ei gynnydd. Byddai gofyn wedyn iddynt gyfarfod eto i ystyried y casgliadau i’w cyrraedd ar yr asesiad a chynnwys eu hadroddiad.
Ar ôl cwblhau’r adroddiad asesiad perfformiad, byddai’n cael ei anfon at y cydlynydd achos oni bai bod yr asesiad yn cael ei gynnal yn unol â chyfarwyddyd y CPP (gweler paragraff 24.93, lle anfonwyd yr adroddiad at y CPP). Roedd rhaid i’r adroddiad gynnwys barn y Panel Asesu ar rai neu’r cyfan o’r materion canlynol, sef:
(a) a fu safon perfformiad proffesiynol yr ymarferwr yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol;
(b) a yw safon perfformiad proffesiynol yr ymarferwr yn debygol o wella trwy gamau adferol;
(c) a ddylai’r ymarferwr gyfyngu ar ei ymarfer proffesiynol, neu derfynu ei ymarfer proffesiynol;
(d)nid oes angen unrhyw weithredu pellach ar yr Adroddiad.’
Byddai gofyn i Banel Asesu roi ei resymau dros y barnau a fynegai. Pe byddai aelodau’r Panel yn anghytuno, byddai gofyn, yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, y dylai’r adroddiad gynnwys datganiad o unrhyw farn anghydffurfiol a’r rhesymau drosti.
Methu Cydweithredu â Phanel Asesu
Pe na fyddai meddyg yn cydweithredu â’r Panel Asesu, byddai ei achos/ei hachos yn cael ei atgyfeirio i’r CPP. Weithiau, ni fyddai’n hawdd gwybod a oedd y meddyg yn methu cydweithredu neu a oedd yna anhawster gwirioneddol yn achosi’r argraff honno. Ni fyddai’n anarferol i feddyg ddweud ei fod/ei bod yn sâl yn ystod yr asesiad perfformiad. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, byddai rhaid i’r cydlynydd achos lunio barn ynghylch a oedd ymddygiad y meddyg mewn gwirionedd yn golygu methiant pwrpasol i gydweithredu neu a ddylid gohirio’r asesiad i ganiatáu i’w iechyd/ei hiechyd wella. Cydnabuwyd y gall bod yn destun asesiad roi pwysau mawr ar feddyg ac y gallai hyn gael effaith wirioneddol ar iechyd meddyg. Pe byddai angen, gellid atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP a gallai’r CPP ystyried atgyfeirio’r achos i’r Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC). Dywedodd Miss Smith y ceisiai staff yn yr Adran Berfformiad ‘beidio â gadael achosion yn aros am fisoedd heb eu datrys’.
Ystyried yr Adroddiad Asesiad Perfformiad
Ceisio Sylwadau’r Meddyg ar yr Adroddiad Asesiad
Pan gawsai’r cydlynydd achos yr adroddiad asesiad, byddai gofyn iddo/iddi anfon copi at y meddyg, ynghyd â gwahoddiad i gyflwyno sylwadau ysgrifenedig yn ei gylch o fewn 21 diwrnod. Ar ddiwedd y cyfnod hwnnw, roedd rhaid i’r cydlynydd achos ystyried yr adroddiad ac unrhyw sylwadau a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg. Dylid nodi yr amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 yn benodol na ddylai’r achwynydd gael copi o’r adroddiad asesiad. Dyma oedd yr achos er gwaetha’r ffaith mai’r achwynydd fel arfer oedd cyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg ac y gallai wneud sylwadau yr un mor berthnasol i’r materion â sylwadau’r meddyg.
Penderfyniad y Cydlynydd Achos: Dim Camau Pellach
Wrth benderfynu ar y dull priodol o weithredu i’w ddefnyddio ar ôl cael yr adroddiad asesiad, ni fyddai’r cydlynydd achos yn rhwym wrth farn y Panel Asesu, er y byddai’n rhan ganolog o’i ystyriaeth/ei hystyriaeth. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod cydlynwyr achos weithiau’n cymryd safbwynt gwahanol i safbwynt y Panel Asesu. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld y papurau mewn un achos o’r fath, sef achos Dr KA 05. Fodd bynnag, nododd Miss Smith na ddigwyddai hyn yn aml iawn.
Byddai tri opsiwn yn agored i’r cydlynydd achos. Yr opsiwn cyntaf oedd cau’r achos heb unrhyw gamau pellach. Pe byddai’r cydlynydd achos o’r farn na ddylid cymryd unrhyw gamau pellach yn yr achos, byddai gofyn iddo/iddi ymgynghori â chynghorwr lleyg cyn cau’r achos. Roedd y cynghorwr lleyg yn aelod lleyg o’r GMC a benodwyd i weithredu at y diben hwn. Dim ond pe byddai’r cynghorwr lleyg yn cytuno y gellid cau’r achos heb gamau pellach. Pe na fyddai’r cynghorwr lleyg yn cytuno â’r cydlynydd achos, rhaid oedd i’r cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio’r achos at y CPP ynghyd â chopi o’r adroddiad asesiad perfformiad, datganiad o’i farn/ei barn a datganiad o farn y cynghorwr lleyg. Byddai penderfyniad gan gydlynydd achos (wedi’i gytuno gan gynghorwyr lleyg) i beidio â chymryd camau pellach yn debygol o godi dim ond pan fyddai’r Panel Asesu wedi adrodd nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod dan yr argraff ei bod yn anarferol i Banel Asesu ddarganfod na fu perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Fodd bynnag, nid yw ystadegau FTP y GMC yn cadarnhau hyn yn gyfan gwbl. Yn 2002, arweiniodd 21% o asesiadau at ganfod bod perfformiad y meddyg yn dderbyniol. Yn 2003, 31% oedd y ffigur. Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate wrth yr Ymchwiliad yn y seminarau yr ymddangosai weithiau y gwnaed cwynion o berfformiad gwael yn erbyn meddyg o ganlyniad i erledigaeth o ryw fath, yn hytrach nag oherwydd bod ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad yn ddiffygiol.
Pan adroddodd Banel Asesu y bu ymarfer nad oedd yn achos o SDP ym marn y Panel, er ei fod yn annerbyniol, dywedodd Miss Smith na fyddai gan y cydlynydd achos unrhyw ddewis heblaw cau’r achos. Dywedodd na fyddai unrhyw gamau eraill yn cael eu cymryd. O ganlyniad, ni fyddai cyflogwyr neu PCO y meddyg (a, phe byddai’n feddyg teulu, aelodau eraill y practis) yn cael gwybod am unrhyw bryderon parhaus am ymarfer annerbyniol y meddyg, fel a ddatgelwyd gan yr asesiad perfformiad, na’n cael unrhyw gyngor am gamau y gallent eu cymryd i fynd i’r afael â hyn.
Penderfyniad y Cydlynydd Achos: Atgyfeirio i’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Yr ail opsiwn a fyddai’n agored i’r cydlynydd achos oedd atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP. Yn ôl Rheol 25 Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, byddai angen i gydlynydd achos atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP pe byddai o’r farn, ar unrhyw adeg ar ôl cynnal asesiad, ei bod yn angenrheidiol ar gyfer amddiffyn aelodau’r cyhoedd neu y byddai er lles yr ymarferwr i gyfarwyddo ataliad neu gofrestriad dan amodau.
Fel arfer, byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP pe byddai’r Panel Asesu wedi adrodd bod yna ddiffygion difrifol ym mherfformiad y meddyg a oedd yn annhebygol o wella trwy gamau adferol. Mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gallai’r cydlynydd achos benderfynu atgyfeirio achos, er gwaethaf barn y Panel fod camau adferol yn debygol o fod yn effeithiol.
Penderfyniad y Cydlynydd Achos: Datganiad o Ofynion
Y trydydd opsiwn i’r cydlynydd achos oedd llunio datganiad ysgrifenedig o ofynion, y byddai’r meddyg yn cael gwahoddiad i gydymffurfio ag ef. Byddai cytundeb y meddyg fel arfer yn cynnwys cytundeb i gymryd rhai camau penodol i wella diffygion a nodwyd. Gallai hefyd gynnwys cytuno i gyfyngiadau a roir ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Wrth ystyried delio ag achos trwy ddatganiad o ofynion neu beidio, byddai cydlynydd achos yn ystyried a fyddai datganiad o ofynion yn amddiffyn cleifion yn ddigonol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’n annhebygol o ystyried datganiad o ofynion lle na fyddai’r meddyg yn cyfaddef i ganfyddiadau’r Panel Asesu neu lle dangosai mewnwelediad cyfyngedig i’w ddiffygion/ei diffygion. Dywedodd Miss Smith mai presenoldeb neu absenoldeb mewnwelediad a difrifoldeb y problemau a nodwyd oedd y ddau ffactor pwysicaf y byddai’n disgwyl i gydlynydd achos eu cofio wrth benderfynu a fyddai datganiad o ofynion yn briodol.
Y Datganiad o Ofynion
Pe byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn penderfynu bod datganiad o ofynion yn briodol, byddai’n mynd yn ei flaen/ei blaen i’w lunio a’i anfon at y meddyg. Rhaid oedd seilio’r datganiad ar y canfyddiadau a’r farn yn yr adroddiad asesiad perfformiad a gallai, fel y tybiai’r cydlynydd achos ei bod yn briodol, gynnwys unrhyw un neu’r cyfan o’r materion canlynol:
(a) yr agweddau ar berfformiad proffesiynol yr ymarferwr y mae gofyn iddo eu gwella;
(b) safon y perfformiad proffesiynol y mae gofyn i’r ymarferwr ei chyflawni;
(c) yr agweddau ar y trefniadau ar gyfer rhedeg ei bractis proffesiynol y mae gofyn i’r ymarferwr eu gwella;
(d) y cyfyngiadau y mae gofyn i’r ymarferwr eu gorfodi ar ei ymarfer proffesiynol’.
Gallai’r datganiad fynnu bod y meddyg yn ymgymryd â hyfforddiant mewn rhyw agwedd ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer a gallai hefyd nodi cyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer, y byddai rhaid i’r meddyg gytuno iddynt. Roedd rhaid i’r datganiad hefyd osod y dyddiad y byddai disgwyl i’r meddyg fod wedi bodloni unrhyw ofynion a’r cyfnod y byddai’r datganiad o ofynion ar waith. Byddai gofyn hefyd cynnwys darpariaeth y byddai asesiad pellach yn cael ei gynnal ar ôl y dyddiad lle byddai disgwyl i’r meddyg fod wedi bodloni’r gofynion. Rhaid oedd i’r dyddiad hwnnw fod dim mwy na blwyddyn o’r dyddiad pan gytunodd y meddyg gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion.
Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 fod rhaid i’r meddyg, lle cytunai gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion, roi arwydd o’i gytundeb/ei chytundeb yn ysgrifenedig o fewn 14 diwrnod a bod rhaid i’r meddyg ymrwymo i gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion a chael ailasesiad ar ôl y dyddiad lle byddai disgwyl iddo/iddi fod wedi bodloni’r gofynion. Byddai gofyn i’r meddyg gytuno hefyd i’r GMC ddweud wrth ei gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr neu bartner proffesiynol neu
‘unrhyw sefydliad neu berson y mae ganddo/ganddi berthynas broffesiynol ag ef’
am ei gytundeb/ei chytundeb i gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion ac am natur y gofynion hynny. Mae’n ymddangos na ystyriwyd y dylid cynnwys cleifion yn y dosbarthiadau o bobl y byddai gan y meddyg
‘berthynas broffesiynol’
â hwy, fel na fyddent yn cael eu hysbysu’n awtomatig. Fodd bynnag, byddai rhaid i’r meddyg gytuno i’r GMC ddatgelu’r wybodaeth i unrhyw berson a wnâi ymholiad penodol am ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Cynlluniwyd y rheol hon i sicrhau y rhoddwyd meddygon a dderbyniai ddatganiad o ofynion yn wirfoddol ar yr un gwastad â meddygon a oedd yn destun cyfarwyddiadau gan y CPP. Byddai modd datgelu cyfarwyddiadau o’r fath mewn ymateb i ymholiadau am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Felly, gallai claf a ganfyddai am orfodi’r gofynion gael gwybod amdanynt ond ni ddywedwyd wrth gleifion yn awtomatig. Fel y dywedais, nid oedd hawl gan gyflogwyr a phartneriaid y meddyg a’r PCT weld yr adroddiad asesiad perfformiad ei hun. Byddai hyn yn berthnasol hyd yn oed lle byddai’r meddyg ei hun wedi cytuno i ddatganiad o ofynion. Pe na fyddai meddyg yn rhoi arwydd o fewn 14 diwrnod o’i gytundeb/ei chytundeb ysgrifenedig i gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion, byddai’r cydlynydd achos wedyn yn atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP.
Cydymffurfio â’r Datganiad o Ofynion
Ar ôl i’r meddyg ymrwymo i gydymffurfio â’r gofynion a nodir, cyfrifoldeb y meddyg ei hun fyddai mynd i’r afael ag unrhyw ddiffygion a nodwyd a threfnu i gael unrhyw ailhyfforddiant neu addysg angenrheidiol. Byddai disgwyl iddo/iddi gysylltu â’r deon ôl-raddedig rhanbarthol neu’r cyfarwyddwr addysg ôl-raddedig lleol at y diben hwn. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai fod yn anodd i feddygon wneud y trefniadau hyn. Gallai dirprwy feddygon gael anhawster penodol yn cael y cymorth angenrheidiol i fodloni’r gofynion hyn. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at yr anawsterau hyn yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Dywedodd Miss Smith hefyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn gyffredin i gydlynydd achos fynnu adroddiad chwarterol ar gynnydd y meddyg gan berson yn cynorthwyo yn ei raglen/ei rhaglen ail-addysgu, i ganfod a oedd y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’r gofynion.
Yn ôl Rheol 25 Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, byddai angen i’r cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP pe byddai’r meddyg, yn ei farn ef/ei barn hi, yn methu cydymffurfio â’r gofynion a nodwyd yn y datganiad o ofynion neu pe byddai’n methu elwa ar, ac yn annhebygol o elwa ar, unrhyw addysg neu hyfforddiant yr oedd yn ymgymryd â nhw yn unol â’r datganiad o ofynion.
Byddai angen i’r cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP hefyd lle byddai ef/hi o’r farn y gallai cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol yr ymarferwr amharu’n ddifrifol ar ei addasrwydd i ymarfer. Ni fyddai gan gydlynydd achos unrhyw bŵer i atgyfeirio’r meddyg yn uniongyrchol at yr HC nac at y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Addasu’r Datganiad o Ofynion
Caniataodd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 i’r cydlynydd achos addasu’r datganiad o ofynion gyda chytundeb y meddyg. Pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn cytuno i addasiad o’r fath, gallai’r cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP neu roi gwybod i’r meddyg y byddai’r datganiad o ofynion gwreiddiol yn parhau.
Asesiad Pellach o Berfformiad y Meddyg
Darparodd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 hefyd ar gyfer cynnal asesiad pellach ar ddiwedd cyfnod y datganiad o ofynion. Byddai ail Banel Asesu’n cael ei benodi gan y cydlynydd achos fel ag o’r blaen. Byddai’r asesiad hwn yn canolbwyntio ar y diffygion a nodwyd yn adroddiad y Panel Asesu cyntaf ac ar y gofynion a gynhwyswyd yn y datganiad.
Tasg yr ail Banel Asesu oedd asesu a oedd y meddyg wedi bodloni gofynion y datganiad yn foddhaol ac a oedd safon ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad wedi gwella’n ddigonol o ganlyniad i alluogi’r Panel Asesu i awgrymu na ddylid cymryd unrhyw gamau pellach. Yn ystod yr ail asesiad, byddai gofyn i’r Panel Asesu gyfweld â’r meddyg ac ystyried unrhyw wybodaeth, neu sylwadau, am yr achos a gafwyd gan unrhyw un a oedd wedi cynorthwyo’r meddyg gydag unrhyw gyngor, addysg neu hyfforddiant mewn cysylltiad ag unrhyw gamau adferol a gymerwyd gan y meddyg yn ystod cyfnod y datganiad o ofynion. Yna, byddai adroddiad y Panel Asesu’n cael ei anfon at y cydlynydd achos.
Pan gawsai adroddiad yr ail Banel Asesu, byddai gofyn i’r cydlynydd achos benderfynu, fel ag o’r blaen, atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP, cymryd dim camau pellach yn yr achos (dim ond gyda chytundeb cynghorwr lleyg) neu geisio cytundeb y meddyg i ail ddatganiad o ofynion. Dywedodd Miss Smith, yn ei phrofiad hi, pe byddai ail Banel Asesu’n teimlo nad oedd y meddyg wedi dangos ei fod/ei bod wedi gwella, byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn amharod i gytuno datganiad arall o ofynion a byddai’n fwy tebygol o atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP. Pe byddai rhyw gynnydd wedi’i wneud, fodd bynnag, gallai’r cydlynydd achos roi mwy o amser i’r meddyg wneud gwelliannau pellach. Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 ar gyfer y posibilrwydd o drefnu trydydd asesiad yn yr un modd ag a ddisgrifiwyd o’r blaen.
Y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol yn Ystyried yr Achos
Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 ar gyfer gwrthdroi atgyfeiriad i’r CPP mewn achos priodol, e.e. pe byddai’r meddyg yn newid ei feddwl/ei meddwl ac yn cytuno i asesiad, neu pe byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn cael gwybodaeth a achosai iddo/iddi gredu na fyddai angen i’r CPP gynnal ymchwiliad i’r achos rhagor. Fodd bynnag, pe na gawsai’r atgyfeiriad ei wrthdroi, byddai’r CPP yn parhau i ystyried yr achos.
Cyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Llywodraethwyd cyfansoddiad y CPP gan Reolau Cyfansoddiad 1996 fel a ddiwygiwyd. Byddai’r CPP yn cynnwys 26 o aelodau. Byddai’r Llywydd yn ei gadeirio neu aelod GMC a benodwyd ganddo. Penodwyd dau aelod gan y Llywydd fel Dirprwy Gadeiryddion. Cawsai’r 23 aelod arall eu hethol yn flynyddol. Byddai cyfanswm aelodaeth y CPP yn cynnwys 21 o aelodau meddygol a phum aelod lleyg. Byddai angen i’r Cyngor gymeradwyo penodiadau’r Llywydd. Eisteddai’r CPP mewn paneli. Tan fis Tachwedd 2002, pump oedd y cworwm cyfreithiol ar gyfer panel CPP, gan gynnwys o leiaf un aelod meddygol ac un aelod lleyg. O 2000, caniatawyd i sawl nad ydynt yn aelodau o’r GMC (sef partneriaid) eistedd ar y CPP a gwnaethant hyn yn rheolaidd. Ar ôl mis Gorffennaf 2003, byddai’n anarferol i aelod o’r GMC eistedd ar banel CPP. Eisteddai paneli CPP gydag asesydd cyfreithiol a chydag o leiaf un cynghorydd arbenigol.
Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 y dylid cynnal achosion y CPP yn breifat, oni bai bod y meddyg yn gofyn iddynt gael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus. Prin y digwyddai hyn. Pe byddai gwrandawiad yn cael ei gynnal yn breifat, byddai’n agored i’r CPP gyfarwyddo y dylid cael gwybodaeth feddygol gyfrinachol am unrhyw unigolyn yn breifat. Yn 2000, ystyriwyd cael newid lle byddai’r CPP yn eistedd yn breifat ond, ar ôl ystyried, ni thybiwyd y byddai unrhyw newid o’r fath yn briodol. Cyhoeddwyd ychydig wybodaeth am achosion lle canfyddai’r CPP fod safon perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol o ddechrau’r gweithdrefnau. Yn ogystal, ar ôl mis Gorffennaf 2003, cyhoeddwyd cofnodion gwrandawiadau’r CPP.
Gwrandawiadau Asesiad
Gallai gwrandawiadau gan y CPP ddigwydd lle na gynhaliwyd unrhyw asesiad. Mewn achos lle na wnaed unrhyw orchymyn am asesiad gan y CPP yn flaenorol (h.y. pe byddai’r meddyg wedi cytuno’n wreiddiol i’r asesiad, ac yna wedi methu cydweithredu, neu pe byddai’r ARC wedi cyfarwyddo’r asesiad a bod y meddyg heb gydweithredu), byddai rhaid i’r CPP benderfynu a ddylid cyfarwyddo cynnal asesiad. Byddai’r weithdrefn ar gyfer gwrandawiadau o’r fath (sef ‘gwrandawiadau asesiad’) yn debyg i’r weithdrefn honno ar gyfer gwrandawiadau gan yr ARC. Pe byddai’r CPP wedi cyfarwyddo’n flaenorol y dylid cynnal asesiad a bod y meddyg wedi methu cydweithredu, byddai’n agored i’r CPP atal neu orfodi amodau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Mewn achos o’r fath, byddai’r gwrandawiad yn debyg i wrandawiad ARC, heblaw’r ffaith na fyddai cyfle i’r achwynydd roi tystiolaeth. Roedd hynny oherwydd y sefydlwyd eisoes fod angen asesiad; y cwestiwn dan sylw oedd pam nad oedd y meddyg wedi cydymffurfio â gofynion y Panel Asesu. Dywedodd Miss Smith ei bod yn ymwybodol o un achos lle penderfynodd y CPP nad oedd angen asesiad, yn dilyn gwrandawiad asesiad ar sail methiant meddyg i gydweithredu â Phanel Asesu. Nid oedd yn glir pam y gwnaed y penderfyniad hwn oherwydd ni roddwyd rhesymau dros benderfyniadau’r CPP bryd hynny. Yn ddilynol, dechreuodd y CPP roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniadau mewn achosion lle canfu fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Yn fwy diweddar, estynnodd y drefn i roi rhesymau ym mhob achos, beth bynnag y canfyddiad.
Gwrandawiadau Perfformiad
Gall gwrandawiadau gerbron y CPP ddigwydd hefyd lle cynhaliwyd asesiad perfformiad a ddatgelodd ddiffygion a oedd mor ddifrifol y credai’r cydlynydd achos ei bod yn briodol i atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP, neu lle anghytunai cynghorydd lleyg gyda phenderfyniad cydlynydd achos i beidio â gweithredu ar ôl cynnal asesiad perfformiad. Roedd y gwrandawiadau hyn yn hysbys fel ‘gwrandawiadau perfformiad’. Amgylchiadau eraill lle gallai gwrandawiad perfformiad ddigwydd oedd lle methai meddyg gytuno i gydymffurfio â datganiad o ofynion neu ddatganiad o ofynion wedi’i addasu, neu lle credai’r cydlynydd achos nad oedd ef/hi yn elwa ar, na’n debygol o elwa ar, unrhyw addysg neu hyfforddiant yr oedd yn eu cael neu lle credai’r cydlynydd achos y gall fod rhyw broblemau iechyd.
Hyd yma, rwyf wedi sôn yn unig am yr amgylchiadau lle gallai cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP. Darparodd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 hefyd ar gyfer meddyg yn atgyfeirio ei achos/ei hachos ei hun i’r CPP. Pan fyddai ARC wedi gorchymyn asesiad perfformiad, gallai’r meddyg ofyn i safon ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad proffesiynol gael ei hystyried gan y CPP.
Mewn gwrandawiad perfformiad, gallai’r achwynydd gael ei gynrychioli a gallai roi tystiolaeth ac annerch y CPP. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai hawl gan yr achwynydd i glywed tystiolaeth arall a roir i’r CPP. Byddai hawl gan gynrychiolydd y GMC hefyd alw ar dystiolaeth gan gynnwys, fel arfer, tystiolaeth gan asesydd arweiniol y Panel Asesu.
Nododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 y dylai’r GMC, cyn y gwrandawiad, roi i’r meddyg gopïau o adroddiadau, datganiadau ysgrifenedig a dogfennau eraill yn yr achos. Byddai gofyn i’r GMC roi gwybod i’r meddyg a fwriadai alw ar awdur adroddiad, datganiad ysgrifenedig neu ddogfen arall i roi tystiolaeth ar lafar yn y gwrandawiad neu beidio. Yna, cawsai’r meddyg y cyfle i wneud sylwadau ysgrifenedig pellach ar yr achos ac arwyddo i’r GMC pe byddai’n dymuno galw ar awdur unrhyw un o’r dogfennau a anfonwyd ato/ati i roi tystiolaeth. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn dymuno galw ar awdur unrhyw ddogfennau perthnasol, byddai trefniadau’n cael eu gwneud i’r person hwnnw fynychu’r gwrandawiad. Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 197 y dylid trin yr asesydd perfformiad arweiniol fel awdur yr adroddiad asesiad perfformiad. Pe na fyddai ef/hi ar gael i roi tystiolaeth yn y gwrandawiad, byddai’r cydlynydd achos yn penderfynu p’un o aelodau eraill y Panel Asesu y dylid galw arno i roi tystiolaeth ar ran yr asesydd arweiniol. Gallai’r CPP ei hun gael gwybodaeth yn ysgrifenedig neu alw ar unrhyw berson i roi tystiolaeth ar lafar lle ystyriai y byddai hyn yn ei gynorthwyo wrth gyflawni ei swyddogaethau. Gallai’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth ar lafar a gallai alw ar dystion. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y meddyg, mewn un achos diweddar, wedi galw ar 36 o dystion a fu’n gyfrifol am ysgrifennu dogfennau perthnasol i achos y meddyg.
Penderfyniad y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Yna, byddai’r CPP yn penderfynu a gredai fod safon perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Pe byddai’r CPP yn canfod na fu unrhyw SDP, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau. Nid oedd unrhyw bŵer i wneud unrhyw beth pe byddai’r CPP yn canfod y bu ymddygiad y meddyg yn ddiffygiol ond nid, ym marn y CPP, i’r graddau sy’n golygu SDP. Cydnabu Mr Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, mewn tystiolaeth fod hyn yn anfoddhaol. Ym Mhennod 25, byddaf yn trafod y modd y cynigir datrys y broblem hon dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd.
Amododd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 fod penderfyniad mwyafrif y CPP a fyddai’n bresennol yn cyfrif fel penderfyniad y CPP. Pe byddai’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, byddai’r penderfyniad o blaid y meddyg. Ni fyddai gofyn i’r CPP roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniad ac yn gyffredinol ni fyddai’n gwneud hynny pan benderfynai na fu perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Roedd y methiant hwn i roi rhesymau yn destun beirniadaeth a newidiwyd yr arfer yn ddiweddar. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at y mater hwn yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Ar ôl clywed y dystiolaeth yn yr achos, pe byddai’r CPP o’r farn bod y meddyg yn euog o SPM neu y gall fod yn euog o SPM (yn ogystal â SDP neu yn lle SDP) ac y gallai ddileu ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad felly yn briodol, ni fyddai ganddo unrhyw bŵer i atgyfeirio’r achos i’r PCC. Cydnabuodd Miss Smith fod hyn yn ‘anfoddhaol’. Bydd yr anhawster hwn yn cael ei ddatrys dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, gan y bydd dilead ar gael mewn achosion gydag elfen berfformiad.
Pe byddai’r CPP yn canfod SDP, byddai wedyn yn dechrau ystyried y sancsiwn priodol. Ni fyddai gan y CPP unrhyw bŵer, ar ôl canfod SDP, i beidio â chymryd unrhyw gamau. Ni allai ychwaith gyhoeddi cerydd. Byddai rhaid iddo orfodi un neu ddau sancsiwn, sef ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol.
Byddai rhaid i atal cofrestriad meddyg, pe byddai’n cael ei orfodi, fod am gyfnod penodedig heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis. Fel arall, gallai’r CPP orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na tair blynedd. Mewn achos priodol, gallai’r CPP orchymyn y dylai ataliad fod yn effeithiol ar unwaith. Ni fyddai gan y CPP unrhyw bŵer i gyfarwyddo dilead ond, fel yr esboniais, byddai ganddo’r pŵer, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, i gyfarwyddo ataliad amhenodol.
Camau Adferol ar ôl Penderfyniad y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Pe byddai amodau ar gofrestriad neu ataliad yn cael eu gorfodi, cyfrifoldeb y meddyg fyddai cychwyn y camau, gyda chymorth y deon ôl-raddedig neu diwtor ôl-raddedig mewn ymarfer cyffredinol, i drefnu unrhyw ail-addysgu neu ail-hyfforddiant angenrheidiol. Ni fyddai unrhyw oruchwyliaeth yn digwydd i sicrhau y gwnaed hyn neu y gwnaed hyn yn brydlon. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai gofyn gan y CPP am adroddiad rheolaidd ar gynnydd y meddyg, fel ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, fel yr oedd yr achos pan ddeliwyd â meddyg trwy ddatganiad o ofynion gwirfoddol. Dywedodd Miss Smith y tueddai’r GMC gael mwy o gyswllt â meddyg a ymarferai dan ddatganiad o ofynion gwirfoddol na meddyg a ymarferai dan amodau a orfodwyd gan y CPP. Byddai rôl y cydlynydd achos yn gyfyngedig, meddai, ar ôl atgyfeirio achos i’r CPP. Weithiau, gallai person a fyddai’n goruchwylio’r meddyg gysylltu â’r GMC heb anogaeth. Fel arfer, digwyddai hyn pan fyddai pethau’n mynd o chwith. Ym mwyafrif yr achosion, fodd bynnag, ni fyddai unrhyw beth yn cael ei glywed am gynnydd y meddyg tan fod y staff yn gofyn am wybodaeth gan y goruchwyliwr, neu’r deon ôl-raddedig neu’r tiwtor ôl-raddedig lleol mewn ymarfer cyffredinol, i baratoi ar gyfer ailgydio mewn gwrandawiad gerbron y CPP. Cytunodd Miss Smith y byddai’n well amddiffynfa pe byddai’n rhaid cael adroddiadau chwarterol, mewn achos y deliwyd ag ef gan y CPP. Fel arall, efallai, gellid fod wedi penodi cydlynydd achos yn y GMC i oruchwylio’r trefniadau adferol. Gan gofio bod y CPP yn delio â’r achosion mwy difrifol a’r achosion lle nad yw’r meddyg yn fodlon cydweithio, ymddengys yn rhyfedd y bu’r oruchwyliaeth yn llai agos yn dilyn gorchymyn gan y CPP nac mewn achos lle’r oedd datganiad o ofynion. Yn fy marn hi, mae angen rhoi sylw i’r anomaledd hwn.
Cafodd yr Ymchwiliad rywfaint o dystiolaeth am y problemau a godai pan orfodai’r GMC amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg a byddai disgwyl i’r deoniaethau ôl-raddedig roi cymorth ac adferiad. Yn gyntaf, nodais astudiaeth
o broses a chanlyniadau atgyfeiriadau gan y GMC ac awdurdodau iechyd i ddeoniaethau dros gyfnod o ddwy flynedd. Yn gryno, canfuwyd, er bod y wybodaeth a ddarperir i’r ddeoniaeth gan y GMC fel arfer yn ddigonol ac yn amserol, y byddai’r GMC weithiau’n gofyn am gamau nad oeddent yn briodol na’n ddichonol. Hefyd, ym mwyafrif yr achosion, rhaid oedd i’r ddeoniaeth dan sylw dalu’r gost o hyfforddiant ac addysg adferol. Tueddai llythyrau a gafwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad ar ddechrau 2004 gan ddau wahanol ddeoniaeth gadarnhau bod y problemau hyn yn dal i fodoli. Dywedodd un Cyfarwyddwr Rhanbarthol Addysg Ôl-raddedig dros dro wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai meddyg teulu’n cael ei adael i wneud ei drefniadau/ei threfniadau gyda’r ddeoniaeth, pan fyddai’r GMC yn gorfodi amodau ar feddyg teulu. Teimlwyd y dylai PCT y meddyg gymryd rhan weithgar mewn gwneud trefniadau a dylai ddarparu’r nawdd angenrheidiol. Teimlai’r ddeoniaeth hon yn gymwys iawn i gynnal yr adferiad addysgol ond nid oedd yn barod i ymroi i adferiad yn gysylltiedig â phroblemau iechyd, ymddygiad neu amgylchiadau personol. Siaradodd deon ôl-raddedig arall am broblemau tebyg. Cadarnhaodd fod y meddygon yn cael eu gadael i wneud eu trefniadau eu hunain ar gyfer adferiad. Dywedodd ei bod yn anodd darparu’r amgylchedd cywir ar gyfer adferiad ac i ddod o hyd i feddygon sy’n barod i wneud gwaith goruchwylio a mentora. Soniodd am bryderon am gleifion yn wynebu meddygon a berfformiai’n wael a allai fod â phroblemau personoliaeth ac eraill. Rhaid oedd cael meddygon profiadol i gynnal adferiad, a oedd eisoes yn brysur gyda’u practisiau eu hunain ac a fyddai’n gorfod cael dirprwy feddygon i weithio’r amser a dreuliant i ffwrdd o’u cleifion. Mae adferiad yn ddrud o reidrwydd a gall ariannu fod yn broblem, yn enwedig os yw’r meddyg yn ddirprwy feddyg heb berthynas sefydledig gyda PCT sy’n barod i gymryd cyfrifoldeb. Er gwaethaf yr anawsterau hyn, mae’r ddeoniaeth hon wedi dechrau rhaglen recriwtio a hyfforddi meddygon mewn practisiau hyfforddiant a fyddai‘n barod ac yn gallu gwneud y gwaith hwn. Cefais yr argraff, yn sicr o’r ymatebwyr hyn, fod deoniaethau’n tueddu bod yn barod iawn ond bod yr adnoddau’n fwy prin na’r angen.
Gwrandawiadau a Ail-agorir
Pan fyddai’r CPP yn atal neu’n gorfodi amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, byddai gofyn yn ôl Rheolau Perfformiad 1997 i’r CPP ddatgan y byddai’n ailddechrau ystyried yr achos mewn gwrandawiad (sef ‘gwrandawiad a ail-agorir’) cyn diwedd cyfnod yr ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol. Byddai gofyn i’r CPP nodi pa wybodaeth y byddai ei hangen arno yn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorir ac a ddylid cynnal asesiad pellach cyn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorir. Yn ymarferol (ac yn wahanol i’r sefyllfa lle cytunwyd datganiad o ofynion), ni fyddai’r CPP yn gofyn am asesiadau pellach bob amser. Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn anarferol i’r CPP gyfarwyddo y dylai rhyw fath o asesiad ddigwydd ond nid oedd hyn yn digwydd yn aml chwaith. Pe byddai’r meddyg wedi’i atal, byddai’r CPP yn disgwyl ei fod/ei bod wedi cymryd camau i wella’r diffygion yn ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer cyn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorir. Byddai’r camau y gallai’r meddyg fod wedi eu cymryd yn gyfyngedig o reidrwydd gan y ffaith na fu’n gallu ymarfer yn ystod y cyfnod hwnnw. Tynnaf sylw at y ffaith fod gofyn i’r CPP gynnal gwrandawiad a ail-agorir cyn diwedd cyfnod ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol tra na fyddai’n rhaid i’r PCC wneud hyn ac na fyddai’n gwneud hyn yn aml. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad (a welodd enghraifft o un achos lle digwyddodd hyn) y byddai’r CPP yn gofyn, ar adegau, i feddyg a oedd wedi methu Cam II yr asesiad perfformiad yn flaenorol (h.y. y profion gwybodaeth a sgiliau) i gael ailasesiad Cam II cyn caniatáu iddo ailddechrau ymarfer.
Gallai’r CPP ddod â’r gwrandawiad a ail-agorir ymlaen, er enghraifft pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’r amodau a orfodwyd ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Cyn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorir, darparodd Reolau Perfformiad 1997 ar gyfer dosbarthu i’r meddyg ac aelodau’r CPP unrhyw ddogfennau perthnasol a ddaeth i fodolaeth ers y gwrandawiad blaenorol (e.e. adroddiad asesiad perfformiad pellach) ac i’r meddyg gael y cyfle i ofyn am alw ar awdur unrhyw ddogfen berthnasol i roi tystiolaeth yn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorir. Byddai’r weithdrefn ar gyfer y gwrandawiad yn debyg i’r weithdrefn ar gyfer y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol, heblaw na fyddai unrhyw ddarpariaeth i’r achwynydd roi tystiolaeth. Mewn gwrandawiad a ail-agorir, byddai gan y CPP y pŵer i ymestyn cyfnod o gofrestriad amodol hyd at dair blynedd, i ddiddymu neu amrywio unrhyw un o’r amodau a orfodwyd yn flaenorol neu i gyfarwyddo y dylid atal cofrestriad y meddyg am hyd at 12 mis. Lle ataliwyd y meddyg yn y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol, gallai’r CPP ymestyn y cyfnod ataliad am hyd at 12 mis neu orfodi cyfnod o gofrestriad amodol am hyd at dair blynedd. Mewn achos lle byddai’r CPP eisoes wedi cyfarwyddo cyfnodau o ataliad yn parhau o leiaf dwy flynedd, gallai’r CPP wneud cyfarwyddyd ar gyfer ataliad amhenodol. Gellid adolygu cyfarwyddyd o’r fath ar gais meddyg, ond nid cyn dwy flynedd ar ôl y dyddiad y daeth y cyfarwyddyd i rym ac nid mwy nag unwaith bob dwy flynedd wedi hynny. Yn y modd hwn, cafodd y CPP yr hyn a oedd bron yn bŵer i ddileu.
Atgyfeirio Achos i’r Pwyllgor Iechyd
Roedd gan y CPP y pŵer i atgyfeirio achos i’r HC. Byddai’r meddyg yn cael archwiliad meddygol a byddai’r HC, ar ôl ystyried canlyniadau’r archwiliad, yn llunio barn ynghylch a oedd nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn sgil cyflwr corfforol neu feddyliol. Pe na fyddai unrhyw nam difrifol, ym marn yr HC, byddai gofyn iddo gadarnhau ei farn i’r CPP. Yna, byddai panel y CPP yn ailddechrau ystyried yr achos ac yn gwneud penderfyniad amdano. Ar y llaw arall, pe byddai’r HC o’r farn bod nam difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn sgil ei gyflwr/ei chyflwr, byddai gofyn i’r HC gadarnhau ei farn i’r CPP ac yna symud ymlaen i wneud penderfyniad am yr achos. Yna, byddai’r CPP yn peidio ag ymarfer ei swyddogaethau mewn perthynas â’r achos. Trwy atgyfeirio achos i’r HC am ei farn, felly, ni fyddai’r CPP o reidrwydd yn colli ei awdurdod dros achos. Pe na fyddai unrhyw nam difrifol yn cael ei ganfod ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, gallai’r CPP symud ymlaen i ddelio â’r achos. Ni fyddai gan y CPP unrhyw bŵer i atgyfeirio achos i sgriniwr iechyd er mwyn delio ag ef trwy’r gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Roedd gan yr ARC bŵer tebyg i atgyfeirio achos i’r HC.
Gorchmynion Dros Dro
Tan 2000, nid oedd unrhyw ddarpariaeth ar gyfer gwneud gorchymyn dros dro o ataliad neu ar gyfer gorfodi amodau dros dro ar gofrestriad mewn achos perfformiad. O fis Awst 2000, roedd gan sgrinwyr meddygol, cydlynwyr achos, yr ARC a’r CPP y pŵer i atgyfeirio achos i’r Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Dros Dro (IOC) pe ymddangosai i unrhyw un ohonynt y gallai’r IOC ddymuno gwneud gorchymyn dros dro. Ar yr un pryd, rhoddwyd y pŵer i’r CPP ddiwygio gorchymyn a wnaed gan yr IOC.
Llywodraethwyd apeliadau o benderfyniadau’r CPP yn ôl adran 40 Deddf Feddygol 1983. Tan fis Ebrill 2003, roedd gan feddyg a oedd yn destun cyfarwyddyd ar gyfer ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol (neu amrywiad ar yr amodau a orfodwyd gan gyfarwyddyd ar gyfer cofrestriad amodol) yr hawl i apelio i Bwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor. Ar ôl mis Ebrill 2003, cyflwynir apeliadau i’r Llys Uwch. Tan 2003, byddai apêl yn seiliedig ar gwestiwn cyfreithiol yn unig. Yn 2003, gwaredwyd y cyfyngiad hwnnw.
Southgate L, Campbell M, Cox J, Foulkes J, Jolly B, McCrorie P, Tombleson P (2001) ‘The General Medical Council’s Performance Procedures: the development and implementation of tests of competence with examples from general practice’, Medical Education, Cyfrol 35 (Atodiad 1): tt 20-28.
Bahrami J ac Evans A (2002) ‘Underperforming doctors in general practice: a survey of referrals to Uk Deaneries’, British Journal of General Practice, tt 892-896.

---  ---
Ym mis Mai 1999 a mis Mai 2000, cyflwynodd yr Adran Berfformiad adroddiadau ar weithredu’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad i Gyngor llawn y GMC. Wedi hynny, mae ystadegau sy’n gysylltiedig ag achosion y deliwyd â hwy dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad wedi’u cynnwys yn ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC.
Niferoedd yr Achosion y Deliwyd â Hwy dan y Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad
Fel y soniais eisoes, dechreuodd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn araf. Daeth yr achosion cyntaf i’r gweithdrefnau ar ddechrau 1998 ac, yn ystod y flwyddyn honno, cychwynnodd y GMC weithredu dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad mewn deg achos (diffiniwyd y ‘cychwyn gweithredu’ yr adeg honno gan y GMC fel anfon ‘llythyr rheol 5’ at y meddyg). Ym mis Mai 1999, roedd naw meddyg wedi cytuno i gael asesiad neu wedi’u gofyn gan yr ARC i gael asesiad. Dim ond tri asesiad llawn a gwblhawyd. Yn ystod 1999, cychwynnwyd gweithredu gan y GMC mewn 26 o achosion.
Yn ei Adroddiad 2000, mynegodd y tîm PSI syndod yr atgyfeiriwyd cyn lleied o gwynion am driniaeth wael neu safon glinigol is-safonol gan sgrinwyr i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Cynhaliodd y tîm PSI ddadansoddiad o’r rhesymau a roddwyd gan y sgrinwyr meddygol yn ystod y cyfnod o fis Mehefin i fis Rhagfyr 1999 dros benderfynu nad oedd achosion yn codi achos o SDP. Y rheswm cyffredin (a roddwyd mewn 33% o’r achosion) oedd nad oedd yr achos yn dangos unrhyw dystiolaeth o SDP. Yr ail ymateb amlaf (24% o’r achosion) oedd
‘nad oedd unrhyw batrwm o berfformiad gwael’
. Y trydydd rheswm a roddwyd amlaf oedd bod
‘yr achos yn dangos un digwyddiad yn unig - a dim patrwm’
. Nid yw’n ymddangos bod hyn wedi arwain at ailystyried yr arfer lle na fyddai’r GMC fel arfer yn ymholi’n lleol am bryderon pellach i ganfod a oedd unrhyw batrwm yn bodoli mewn gwirionedd. Nododd Adroddiad PSI 2000:
‘... roedd sgrinwyr yn amlwg yn teimlo eu bod wedi’u cyfyngu oherwydd y gofyniad i achos ddangos patrwm o berfformiad gwael cyn y gellid ei atgyfeirio dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Gan fod rhan fwyaf yr achosion a welant yn gysylltiedig â digwyddiadau unigol, ac na chafwyd unrhyw archwiliad i weld a oedd yna batrwm o berfformiad gwael, nid oedd yn syndod mai dyma’r casgliad a gafwyd ganddynt.’
Mewn 15% o’r achosion a archwiliwyd gan y tîm PSI, y rheswm a roddwyd oedd bod y gŵyn yn gysylltiedig â materion a oedd wedi digwydd cyn mis Gorffennaf 1997. Mae’n amlwg, felly, fod y penderfyniad i beidio â derbyn tystiolaeth o ddigwyddiadau cyn y dyddiad hwnnw yn dal i gael effaith, hyd yn oed dwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach.
Erbyn mis Mawrth 2000, cwblhawyd wyth asesiad. Fodd bynnag, yn 2000, cyflymodd pethau’n amlwg. Yn ystod y flwyddyn honno, cychwynnwyd gweithredu gan y GMC mewn 126 o achosion. Cwblhawyd 28 o asesiadau yn ystod y flwyddyn honno. Yn 2001, cychwynnwyd gweithredu gan y GMC mewn 70 o achosion a chwblhawyd 57 o asesiadau perfformiad. Yn ystod 2002, cychwynnwyd gweithredu mewn 80 o achosion a chwblhawyd 67 o asesiadau perfformiad.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, dilëwyd y gofyniad i anfon ‘llythyrau rheol 5’. Ailddiffiniwyd y pwynt lle byddai’r GMC yn ‘cychwyn gweithredu’ felly. Yn rhyfedd, cawsai ei ddiffinio bellach fel y pwynt lle gwnaed trefniadau i sefydlu Panel Asesu. Dywedaf ‘yn rhyfedd’ oherwydd y cam cyntaf a gymerir gan y GMC mewn achos lle penderfynai’r sgriniwr fod asesiad yn briodol oedd anfon gwahoddiad i’r meddyg gael asesiad; gellid fod wedi disgwyl, felly, mai anfon y llythyr hwnnw fyddai’n cael ei ystyried fel cychwyn gweithredu. Gallai’r diffiniad newydd egluro’r gostyngiad ymddangosiadol yn nifer yr achosion lle cychwynnwyd gweithredu ar ôl mis Tachwedd 2002. Fodd bynnag, mae’r ffigurau diweddar yn awgrymu bod nifer yr achosion sy’n dod i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad wedi sefydlogi a gall fod yn gostwng hyd yn oed. Yn 2003, cychwynnodd y GMC weithredu mewn 42 achos yn unig a chynhaliwyd yr un nifer o asesiadau perfformiad.
Oediadau
Erbyn 2000, cafwyd pryder sylweddol yn y GMC a’r tu allan iddo am yr oediadau wrth ddelio ag achosion perfformiad. Roedd hyn ar adeg pan roedd y GMC yn ymdrechu i ddelio ag ôl-groniad cynyddol o achosion ac roedd ei weithdrefnau FTP dan bwysau mawr yn gyffredinol. O fewn y GMC, priodolwyd yr oediadau wrth ddelio ag achosion perfformiad i bwysau gwaith yn y swyddfa. Dywedwyd hefyd bod anhawster wrth gael y dystiolaeth angenrheidiol gan gyrff atgyfeirio yn ffactor. Dywedodd Mr Howes wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bu’r GMC yn gweithio ar eu datblygiad am sawl blynedd erbyn yr amser y rhoddwyd gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC ar waith ym mis Gorffennaf 1997. Ni chafodd cyrff GIG lleol yr un cyfnod paratoi â’r GMC ac nid oeddent yn gymwys iawn i ddelio â materion o berfformiad gwael. Dywedodd y daeth cyrff atgyfeirio, gydag amser, yn well ac yn well wrth gatalogio’r problemau a gawsant gyda meddygon ac, wrth i 1 Gorffennaf 1997 bellhau, gallent draethu hanes hwy o broblemau i gefnogi eu pryderon.
Nododd Adroddiad Blynyddol yr Adran Berfformiad, a roddwyd i’r Cyngor ym mis Mai 2000, y rhoddwyd sylw i’r problemau o oedi trwy recriwtio staff ychwanegol a thrwy gysylltu’n well â chyrff atgyfeirio GIG. Fel y dywedais, mae’n ymddangos yn sicr y deliwyd â llawer mwy o achosion yn 2000 nag o’r blaen.
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig â’r Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad
Roedd yr Adroddiadau Blynyddol a’r ystadegau FTP blynyddol hefyd yn cynnwys manylion am weithgareddau’r ARC. Ystyriodd yr ARC saith achos rhwng cychwyn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad a 31 Mawrth 2000. Ym mhob achos ond un, penderfynodd yr ARC y dylid gofyn i’r meddyg gael asesiad. Yn yr achos arall (a glywyd cyn mis Mai 1999), casglodd yr ARC nad oedd y dystiolaeth o SDP posibl ar ôl 1 Gorffennaf 1997 yn ddigonol i gyfiawnhau gorchymyn y dylid asesu’r meddyg. Yn ystod 2000, cafodd yr ARC naw achos a chyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiadau mewn saith o’r achosion hynny. Nid yw ystadegau FTP 2001 yn cynnwys unrhyw wybodaeth am weithgareddau’r ARC. Yn 2002, atgyfeiriwyd 40 o feddygon at yr ARC. Mewn 15 o achosion, cyfarwyddodd yr ARC asesiad perfformiad. Mewn 17 o achosion, penderfynodd nad oedd angen unrhyw asesiad. Mewn wyth achos pellach, dyfarnwyd dilead gwirfoddol. Yn 2003, cafodd yr ARC 19 o achosion. Mewn naw achos, cyfarwyddodd yr ARC asesiad perfformiad. Mewn pedwar achos, penderfynodd nad oedd angen unrhyw asesiad. Dyfarnwyd dilead gwirfoddol mewn dau achos ac roedd pedwar achos yn disgwyl gwrandawiad pan gyfansoddwyd yr ystadegau.
Mae’r ystadegau sy’n gysylltiedig â gwrandawiadau gan yr ARC yn datgelu, yn gyntaf, fod nifer gymharol fawr o feddygon wedi gwrthod cael asesiadau perfformiad pan ofynnwyd iddynt wneud hynny. Ni ragwelwyd hyn pan gyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Yn ogystal, maent yn dangos nifer sylweddol o achosion lle penderfynodd yr ARC beidio â chyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiad perfformiad.
Dywedodd Mr Marshall nad ei le ef oedd ‘dyfalu eilwaith’ benderfyniadau’r ARC, yn enwedig gan nad oedd yn bresennol yn rhan fwyaf y gwrandawiadau ac nid oedd yn gynefin â thrafodaethau’r ARC. Fodd bynnag, nododd ei bod ‘yn syndod yn ôl pob golwg’, yn 2002, y caewyd mwy o achosion yn y cyfnod hwn nag a symudwyd ymlaen ar gyfer asesiad. Roedd hyn yn benodol wir gan fod y prawf y dylai’r ARC fod wedi’i ddefnyddio yn debyg iawn i’r prawf sgrinio. Nododd Mr Marshall fod mwy o wybodaeth (yn enwedig gan y meddyg) ar gael i’r ARC yn aml nag oedd ar gael i’r sgrinwyr. Efallai na fyddai meddyg anghydweithredol wedi ymateb i’r gwahoddiad i gyflwyno sylwadau i’r sgriniwr meddygol. Mewn gwrandawiad gerbron yr ARC, fodd bynnag, gallai ef/hi roi tystiolaeth a byddai dadleuon yn cael eu cyflwyno ar ei ran/ei rhan, fel arfer gan gynrychiolydd cyfreithiol. Fel y soniais eisoes, nid oedd yn arferol galw ar achwynydd (neu gynrychiolydd corff achwynydd) i roi tystiolaeth gerbron yr ARC. Byddai’r gwrandawiad, felly, yn debygol o fod yn broses unochrog.
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig ag Adroddiadau Panel Asesu
Hyd at 2001, roedd yn anarferol i adroddiad Panel Asesu arwain at ganfyddiad bod meddyg yn addas i ymarfer ac na fyddai unrhyw weithredu GMC, felly, yn angenrheidiol. Argraff Miss Smith oedd prin y digwyddai hyn. Fodd bynnag, fel a soniais eisoes, mae ystadegau FTP y GMC ar gyfer 2001, 2002 a 2003 yn dangos y daeth canfyddiad o’r fath yn eithaf cyffredin. Yn 2001, arweiniodd 18 allan o 57 (h.y. 32%) o asesiadau at ganfod bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘dderbyniol’. Yn 2002, y ffigur oedd 14 allan o 67 (h.y. 21%) o asesiadau. Yn 2003, arweiniodd 13 allan o 42 (h.y. 31%) o asesiadau at ganfod bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘dderbyniol’.
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig â’r Datganiad o Ofynion
Ym 1999 a 2000, ychydig iawn o achosion a gafwyd lle, ar ôl asesiad perfformiad, cytunwyd ar ddatganiad o ofynion. Atgyfeiriwyd rhan fwyaf yr achosion at y CPP. Yn 2001, cytunwyd datganiad o ofynion mewn chwech allan o 57 o achosion (h.y. 11%) lle cafwyd asesiadau perfformiad. Yn 2002, y ffigur oedd wyth allan o 67 o achosion (h.y. 12%). Yn 2003, cytunwyd datganiadau o ofynion mewn 17 allan o 42 o achosion (h.y. 40%).
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig â’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Hyd at fis Mawrth 2000, roedd y CPP wedi cynnal pum gwrandawiad perfformiad a chanfod ym mhob achos fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol ac wedi gorfodi cyfnod o atal cofrestriad. Yn 2000, cynhaliodd y CPP bedwar gwrandawiad perfformiad. Ym mhob achos, cafwyd canfyddiad o SDP ganddo. Gorfododd gyfnodau o ataliad mewn dau achos a gorfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y ddau feddyg arall. Yn 2001, cafwyd 23 o wrandawiadau perfformiad. Mewn tri achos, canfuodd y CPP fod perfformiad y meddygon yn ‘dderbyniol’. Mewn 20 o achosion, cafwyd canfyddiad o SDP. Mewn saith achos, gorfodwyd ataliad ac arweiniodd 13 achos at orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Yn 2002, roedd 27 o wrandawiadau perfformiad. Mewn naw achos, canfuwyd bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘dderbyniol’. O’r 18 o achosion eraill, lle canfuwyd SDP, arweiniodd saith ohonynt at ataliad ac 11 ohonynt at orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Yn 2003, allan o 21 o wrandawiadau perfformiad, canfuodd y CPP fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘dderbyniol’ mewn dau ohonynt. Arweiniodd pedwar achos at ataliad a 12 at orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad. O’r tri arall, cafodd ddau eu gohirio ac arweiniodd un at ddilead gwirfoddol.
Dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad na allai ddamcaniaethu ynghylch pam yr oedd y CPP wedi canfod bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘dderbyniol’ mewn cyfran mor sylweddol (33%) o achosion yn ystod 2002. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd, yn ei phrofiad hi, fod yna ddadlau sylweddol mewn gwrandawiadau nid yn unig am y gŵyn wreiddiol ond hefyd am adroddiad y Panel Asesu a’r ffordd y cynhaliwyd yr asesiad. Roedd hyd gwrandawiadau CPP wedi cynyddu dros y blynyddoedd. Soniodd am yr achos diweddar, y cyfeiriais ato, lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi galw ar gynifer â 36 o dystion.
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig â Gwaharddiadau
Mae gwybodaeth a ddarparwyd i’r Ymchwiliad gan y GMC yn datgelu y gwaharddwyd 21 o feddygon rhag ymarfer gan y CPP rhwng 1998 a diwedd 2003. O’r 21 o feddygon hyn, mae pump wedi’u hatal yn amhenodol erbyn hyn, mae deg dan oruchwyliaeth o hyd ac mae dau bellach yn ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau. Mae pedwar wedi’u dileu ers hynny; cymerodd dri dilead gwirfoddol a dilëwyd un am fethu ymateb i ohebiaeth a anfonwyd at ei gyfeiriad/ei chyfeiriad cofrestredig.
Ystadegau yn Gysylltiedig â Gwneud Gorchmynion Dros Dro mewn Achosion Perfformiad
Yn ystod 2002, atgyfeiriwyd 18 o achosion a ddosbarthwyd fel ‘achosion perfformiad’ at yr IOC. Nododd Mr Marshall y gwnaed y dosbarthiad hwn yn ôl-dremiol i bob tebyg oherwydd, pe byddai achos yn cael ei atgyfeirio i’r IOC gan sgriniwr meddygol mewn cyfnod cynnar, ni fyddai o reidrwydd yn amlwg yr adeg honno a fyddai’n achos ymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd. Dengys yr ystadegau y gwnaed chwe atgyfeiriad i’r IOC gan gydlynwyr achos perfformiad ac un yr un gan yr ARC a’r CPP. Mae’n debyg y gwnaed y deg arall gan sgrinwyr meddygol. Dywedodd Mr Marshall wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod yn amau yr atgyfeiriwyd canran uwch o achosion perfformiad at yr IOC nag achosion ymddygiad. Roedd y ffigur o 18 o achosion a atgyfeiriwyd yn 2002 yn cynrychioli 23% o achosion a atgyfeiriwyd i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad a 32% o’r achosion hynny lle’r oedd y GMC wedi cychwyn gweithredu trwy ysgrifennu llythyr rheol 5.

---  ---
Ym mis Tachwedd 2000, rhoddodd y Cyfrin Gyngor ddyfarniad yn achos
. Roedd hyn yn apêl gan feddyg o benderfyniad gan y CPP fod safon ei pherfformiad proffesiynol yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol a chyfarwyddyd y dylid atal ei chofrestriad am gyfnod o 12 mis ar unwaith.
O fis Hydref 1996 tan fis Ionawr 1998 (pan gafodd ei hatal), gweithiodd Dr Manjula Krippendorf yn y DU fel ymgynghorydd mewn pediatreg gymunedol. Cafodd dystysgrif o gofrestriad llawn gan y GMC ym mis Hydref 1996. Cyn yr amser hwnnw, bu’n gweithio dramor mewn arbenigeddau gwahanol i bediatreg gymunedol, ond yn gysylltiedig â phediatreg gymunedol. Ym 1998, achwynodd un o’i chyn-gyflogwyr, sef ymddiriedolaeth GIG, i’r GMC am y technegau a ddefnyddiwyd gan Dr Krippendorf wrth roi brechlynnau BCG i 227 o blant yn ystod rhaglen imiwneiddio ym mis Medi 1997. Dywedwyd yr arweiniodd y technegau hyn at nifer anarferol o uchel o achosion o sgil-effeithiau. Achwynodd yr un ymddiriedolaeth GIG hefyd am rôl Dr Krippendorf fel pediatrydd ymgynghorol mewn dau achos amddiffyn plant posibl. Achosodd y cwynion hyn wahoddiad gan y GMC i Dr Krippendorf gael asesiad perfformiad, a chytunodd i hwn.
Wrth gyflwyno dyfarniad y Cyfrin Gyngor, dywedodd Syr Christopher Slade y cyfeiriwyd yr asesiad perfformiad yn bennaf at asesu cymhwyster proffesiynol Dr Krippendorf mewn nifer o feysydd gwaith, o fewn yr hyn y deallai’r Panel Asesu fu ei swydd-ddisgrifiadau amrywiol ers 1997. Roedd y Panel Asesu wedi ei hasesu ar y gwaith
‘a allai ddod i gyfeiriad pediatrydd cymunedol’
yn y swydd lle’i chyflogwyd ar yr adeg y gwnaed y gŵyn yn ei herbyn. Mynegodd y Panel Asesu’r farn fod angen gwybodaeth am bediatreg cyffredinol a datblygiadol ar bediatryddion cymunedol, a phrofiad ohonynt. Ystyriodd y Panel Asesu fod cymhwyster clinigol yn hanfodol wrth gymryd cyfrifoldeb am ofal clinigol. Canfuodd y Panel Asesu nad oedd gan Dr Krippendorf y wybodaeth a’r profiad angenrheidiol. Roeddent wedi’i phrofi mewn technegau cefnogi bywyd sylfaenol ac wedi canfod nad oedd yn gallu eu perfformio. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yna dystiolaeth yn ôl pob golwg y bu gofyn iddi ddefnyddio technegau o’r fath o gwbl yn ystod ei gwaith yn y DU. Yn ystod Cam I yr asesiad, cynhaliwyd cyfweliadau mewn lleoedd lle’r oedd Dr Krippendorf wedi gweithio, archwiliwyd cofnodion meddygol a chynhaliwyd trafodaethau achos. Roedd Cam II wedi cynnwys profion gwrthrychol o wybodaeth ac arfer pediatrig.
Ar ddiwedd yr asesiad, nododd y Panel Asesu yn ei adroddiad y bu safon perfformiad proffesiynol Dr Krippendorf yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol, fod safon ei pherfformiad proffesiynol fel pediatrydd yn debygol o wella dim ond gydag ailhyfforddiant llawn mewn pediatreg cyffredinol, yn ogystal ag unrhyw arbenigedd penodol fel pediatreg gymunedol, ac y dylai gyfyngu ei hymarfer proffesiynol i waith nad yw’n waith clinigol. Dangosodd yr adroddiad asesiad fod angen ailhyfforddiant arni, hyd yn oed o fewn y cylch hwnnw.
Yn y gwrandawiad gerbron y CPP, nododd gwnsleriaid ar gyfer y GMC, ar ôl i’r asesiad perfformiad ddigwydd, na fyddai’r GMC’n dibynnu ar y cwynion gwreiddiol a wnaed yn erbyn Dr Krippendorf. Ar gais cynrychiolydd Dr Krippendorf, galwyd ar y Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a oedd wedi gwneud y gŵyn wreiddiol (ac y cafodd y GMC ddatganiad ganddo) i roi tystiolaeth. Wrth roi ei thystiolaeth ei hun, cyfaddefodd Dr Krippendorf nad oedd wedi pasio, o farnu ar y sail y cynhaliwyd yr asesiad. Mynegodd hefyd ei bwriad i beidio â gwneud unrhyw waith clinigol yn y dyfodol, oni bai ym maes iechyd cyhoeddus. Derbyniodd y dylai gael ailhyfforddiant mewn rhai agweddau ar y gwaith, hyd yn oed cyn gweithio yn y maes hwnnw, fel a awgrymwyd gan y Panel Asesu. Apeliodd benderfyniad y CPP ar y sail nad oedd y Panel Asesu wedi mynd i’r afael â’i swyddogaeth yn y modd cywir.
Dyfarniad Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor
Canfuodd y Cyfrin Gyngor y dengys yr adroddiad asesiad fod y Panel Asesu wedi gwneud gwall sylfaenol yn y modd y cyflawnodd ei swyddogaeth. Yn ôl Adran 11(1) Rheolau Perfformiad 1997, roedd gofyn i’r Panel Asesu
‘fabwysiadu gweithdrefnau o’r fath sy’n ymddangos yn angenrheidiol, o ystyried natur gwaith yr ymarferwr, iddo asesu safon ei berfformiad proffesiynol’
. Roedd hyn, nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor, yn adlewyrchu geiriad adran 36A Deddf Feddygol 1983, a nododd y dylai’r CPP a’r Panel Asesu droi eu sylw i berfformiad proffesiynol - nid cymhwyster proffesiynol - yr ymarferwr yn y gorffennol yn y gwaith y bu ef/hi yn ei wneud mewn gwirionedd.
Aeth ymlaen i nodi bod:
‘... popeth yn y Rheolau yn awgrymu mai dyletswydd y CPP a’r Panel yw ystyried hanes yr ymarferwr yn y gwaith y bu’n ei wneud mewn gwirionedd. Nid eu swyddogaeth yw cynnal archwiliad sy’n gymesur ag archwiliad bwrdd archwilio myfyrwyr. Mae cwestiynau damcaniaethol yn berthnasol dim ond i’r graddau y gallai’r atebion daflu goleuni ar berfformiad proffesiynol yr ymarferwr yn y meysydd gwaith penodol y bu’n eu gwneud mewn gwirionedd.’
Nid dyma’r ymagwedd a fabwysiadwyd gan y Panel Asesu wrth asesu Dr Krippendorf. Yn ogystal, nid oedd yr adroddiad asesiad yn cynnwys unrhyw archwiliad o’r gŵyn wreiddiol am dechnegau chwistrellu Dr Krippendorf nag unrhyw ganfyddiadau cysylltiedig. Ni roddwyd unrhyw esboniad am hynny. Roedd y Panel Asesu wedi ystyried y gŵyn fel ‘cefndir’ yn unig i’w adroddiad. Ystyriodd fod y gŵyn wedi ysgogi sefydlu’r asesiad, ond nad oedd iddi unrhyw berthnasedd pellach o safbwynt y Panel Asesu. Nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor hefyd yr holwyd llawer o gwestiynau i Dr Krippendorf am ei chymhwyster proffesiynol wrth ddelio â’r math o broblemau y gallai pediatrydd cymunedol ddod ar eu traws wrth ymarfer yn y DU, heb ystyried a oedd rhaid iddi ddelio â’r rhain o gwbl yn ystod ei gwaith gwirioneddol. Parhaodd y dyfarniad:
‘Byddai eu Harglwyddi’n derbyn y gall cwestiynau sy’n cyfeirio at wybodaeth a sgiliau clinigol ymarferwr daflu goleuni ar adegau ar ei berfformiad proffesiynol mewn gwaith y bu’n ei wneud yn wirioneddol, mewn achosion lle ceir achos i amau bod ei berfformiad yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol mewn gwaith o’r fath. Ym marn yr Arglwyddi, fodd bynnag, roedd natur y cwestiynau a gyfeiriwyd at yr apeliwr
(Dr Krippendorf)
ac a atebwyd ganddi yn y Portffolio yn llawer rhy eang a manwl i fod yn rhan wirioneddol o’r sail y caniatawyd y Panel i wneud ei gasgliad arni.’
Wrth wneud ei benderfyniad, nododd y CPP nad oedd wedi dibynnu ar y gŵyn wreiddiol yn erbyn Dr Krippendorf, ond fel arall wedi canolbwyntio ar y dystiolaeth yn yr adroddiad asesiad. Fel y dywedais, canfu’r Cyfrin Gyngor fod yr adroddiad yn wallus. Y rheswm cyntaf dros hynny oedd y ffaith bod y Panel wedi methu asesu perfformiad proffesiynol Dr Krippendorf trwy gyfeirio at y gwaith y bu’n ei wneud yn wirioneddol ers 1997. Yr ail reswm oedd bod yr adroddiad wedi methu delio â’r gŵyn wreiddiol. Dywedodd y dyfarniad:
‘Nid yw eu Harglwyddi’n mynd mor bell â dweud bod angen i’r Panel a’r CPP archwilio ym mhob achos y gŵyn sy’n ysgogi asesiad. O ystyried ffeithiau’r achos presennol, fodd bynnag, dylid fod wedi archwilio’r cwynion, ym marn yr Arglwyddi, gan nad oedd unrhyw beth yn cysylltu’n fwy uniongyrchol â safon perfformiad proffesiynol gwirioneddol yr apeliwr dros y cyfnod perthnasol. Mae methiant y Panel a’r CPP i archwilio’r cwynion yn adlewyrchu’r modd y canolbwyntiwyd yn anghywir ar ei chymhwyster proffesiynol, yn hytrach na’i pherfformiad proffesiynol gwirioneddol ...
Yng nghyd-destun tegwch, ychwanega eu Harglwyddi, yn eu barn hwy, yn amgylchiadau penodol yr achos hwn, y dylid er mwyn tegwch rhoi cyfle priodol i’r apeliwr wrthbrofi’r cwynion difrifol, pe gallai, a gyfeiriai’n uniongyrchol at ei pherfformiad proffesiynol ac a arweiniodd at yr asesiad.
Casglodd y Cyfrin Gyngor fod y CPP wedi camgyfarwyddo’i hun mewn cyfraith wrth wneud ei benderfyniad. Cynghorodd y dylid caniatáu’r apêl ac y dylid dirymu penderfyniad y CPP.
Bu dryswch yn y GMC yn sgil y penderfyniad yn achos
. Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod ef a’i gydweithwyr ‘mewn cryn benbleth’ i glywed y dylai’r GMC fod yn archwilio’r cwynion gwreiddiol, yn hytrach na lansio archwiliad trwy asesiad perfformiad. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine fod effaith achos
yn ‘hynod annifyrrol’. Ar ôl cyflwyno’r penderfyniad hwn, gohiriwyd gwaith ar asesiadau perfformiad er mwyn gwneud rhai addasiadau. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2002, daeth Gorchymyn 2002 (Diwygiad) Deddf Feddygol 1983 i rym. Mae’n cyflwyno darpariaeth i Ddeddf Feddygol 1983 fod
‘“perfformiad proffesiynol” yn cynnwys cymhwyster proffesiynol ymarferwr meddygol’
. Eglurodd hefyd y gallai asesiad o berfformiad proffesiynol meddyg gynnwys asesiad o berfformiad proffesiynol meddyg ar unrhyw adeg cyn yr asesiad, yn ogystal ag asesiad o safon ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad proffesiynol adeg yr asesiad. Y bwriad oedd y dylai hyn ddiweddu’r problemau a gododd yn achos
Roedd achos
yn ymwneud ag apêl i’r Cyfrin Gyngor gan Mr Anthony Peter Sadler, ymgynghorydd mewn obstretreg a gynecoleg, yn erbyn penderfyniad gan y CPP, ym mis Gorffennaf 2002, y bu nam difrifol ar safon ei berfformiad proffesiynol ym maes gofal llawdriniaethol da. Gorfododd y CPP amodau ar ei gofrestriad, a wnaeth yn ofynnol iddo beidio ag ymgymryd ag unrhyw lawdriniaeth gynecolegol fawr, i ymgymryd â rhaglen asesiad a hyfforddiant adferol briodol pe dymunai ddychwelyd i lawdriniaeth gynecolegol fawr ac i roi gwybod i’r GMC ar unwaith am unrhyw benodiad proffesiynol a gawsai.
Ym mis Rhagfyr 1997, roedd Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr ymddiriedolaeth GIG a fu’n gyfrifol am weithle Mr Sadler wedi cwyno i’r GMC am faterion amrywiol, gan gynnwys nifer o ddigwyddiadau penodol yn ystod llawdriniaeth a berfformiwyd gan Mr Sadler. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys dau achos o waedu difrifol ar ôl llawdriniaeth. Erbyn adeg y gŵyn, roedd Mr Sadler wedi’i atal o’i swydd.
Adroddiad y Panel Asesu
Ar ôl ystyried yr achos, cyfarwyddodd y sgriniwr meddygol y dylid gwahodd Mr Sadler i gael asesiad perfformiad. Gwrthododd Mr Sadler y gwahoddiad ond cyfarwyddodd yr ARC y dylid cael asesiad. Canfu’r Panel Asesu fod diffygion difrifol yn ei ymarfer obstetreg a gynecolegol, ond argymhellodd y dylai gael ailhyfforddiant a goruchwyliaeth dargedig, gyda chyfyngiadau rhwystredig ar ei ymarfer. O ganlyniad, lluniodd y cydlynydd achos perfformiad ddatganiad o ofynion yr ymrwymodd Mr Sadler i gydymffurfio ag ef. Ar ôl cyfnod o oedi, dechreuodd ar gyfnod o ailhyfforddiant mewn ysbyty ym Mryste. Ychydig yn ddiweddarach, dechreuodd law-drin dan oruchwyliaeth. Ar y trydydd diwrnod, torrodd bibell dde aren claf tra’n cyflawni hysterectomi abdomenol. O ganlyniad i hyn, terfynwyd ei leoliad ailhyfforddiant. Nid oedd yn gallu cael unrhyw leoliad arall ac felly ni allai gydymffurfio â’r datganiad o ofynion. Atgyfeiriwyd yr achos i’r CPP gan y cydlynydd achos.
Nid oedd yr adroddiad asesiad perfformiad (a baratowyd cyn penderfyniad y Cyfrin Gyngor yn achos
) yn canolbwyntio ar y pum achos llawdriniaethol a nodwyd yn y gŵyn wreiddiol. Yn hytrach, dibynnodd yn helaeth ar gyfweliadau, yn enwedig gyda staff yn yr ysbyty lle digwyddodd yr achosion. Ni chafodd Mr Sadler unrhyw gyfle i herio’r cyfweliadau trydydd parti yn ystod cyfnod paratoi’r adroddiad asesiad, gan na chafodd drawsgrifiadau o’r cyfweliadau hynny tan ychydig yn ddiweddarach.
Y Gwrandawiad gerbron y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol
Yn y gwrandawiad gerbron y CPP, galwyd ar dystiolaeth mewn cysylltiad â thri o’r achosion llawdriniaethol y soniwyd amdanynt yn y gŵyn wreiddiol a hefyd mewn perthynas â’r digwyddiad yn ystod cyfnod lleoliad ailhyfforddiant Mr Sadler. Byddaf yn cyfeirio at y pedwar achos hwn fel yr ‘achosion pennaf’. Galwyd hefyd ar dystiolaeth am yr adroddiad asesiad. Cymerodd y gwrandawiad 16 o ddiwrnodau. Ar y pymthegfed diwrnod, cynghorodd yr asesydd cyfreithiol na ddylai’r CPP ddibynnu ar gynnwys na chasgliadau’r adroddiad asesiad, nac unrhyw beth anffafriol i Mr Sadler yn y cyfweliadau trydydd parti. Roedd hyn gan fod yr adroddiad asesiad yn wallus mewn rhai ffyrdd yn yr un modd ag y bu’r adroddiad asesiad yn
. Yn benodol, nid oedd yn gwahaniaethu rhwng perfformiad yn y gorffennol a chymhwyster ac nid oedd yn archwilio’r achosion pennaf yn agos. Yn ogystal, ni chafodd Mr Sadler unrhyw gyfle i herio’r cyfweliadau trydydd parti yr oedd yr adroddiad yn dibynnu arnynt. Cymerodd y CPP gyngor yr asesydd cyfreithiol ac roedd ei benderfyniad, felly, yn dibynnu ar y dystiolaeth yn gysylltiedig â’r achosion pennaf.
Dyma sut y mynegodd y CPP ei gasgliadau cyffredinol:
‘Mae’r Pwyllgor yn canfod yn ... Achosion 1, 2 a 5 ac yn Achos A
(h.y. yr achosion pennaf)
na wnaethoch fodloni’r safon broffesiynol sy’n briodol i’r gwaith yr oeddech yn ei wneud. Mae’r Pwyllgor yn siwr y datgelodd yr achosion hyn ddiffygion yn eich ymarfer llawdriniaethol a bod y diffygion hyn, wedi’u hystyried yn unigol neu ar y cyd, yn ddifrifol. Mae bob un ohonynt yn datgelu dibynniaeth sy’n peri gofid ar dechnegau llawdriniaethol anniogel nad ydynt yn unrhyw ran o’r arfer a ddilynir ar yr adeg berthnasol gan lawfeddygon yn y wlad hon.’
Dyfarniad Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor
Gerbron Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor, ymosodwyd ar benderfyniad y CPP ar nifer o seiliau. Yn benodol, cyflwynwyd y ffaith na allai achosion pennaf olygu ‘patrwm’ o ymddygiad difrifol o ddiffygiol. Cyfeiriwyd at y diffiniad o SDP yn y cyhoeddiad ‘When Your Proffesional Performance is Questioned’. Nododd rifyn Tachwedd 1997:
“Mae “perfformiad difrifol o ddiffygiol” yn syniad newydd. Rydym wedi ei ddiffinio fel “gwyriad oddi wrth arfer proffesiynol da, p’un a yw canllawiau GMC penodol yn ymdrin ag ef neu beidio, sy’n ddigon difrifol i gwestiynu cofrestriad meddyg”. Golyga hyn y byddwn yn cwestiynu eich cofrestriad os credwn nad ydych chi’n bodloni’r safonau proffesiynol, dro ar ôl tro neu’n gyson, sy’n briodol i’r gwaith yr ydych yn ei wneud - yn enwedig os allech fod yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl. Gallai hyn gynnwys methiant i ddilyn yr arweiniad yn ein llyfryn Arfer Meddygol Da.’
Gwrthododd y Cyfrin Gyngor yr argymhelliad na allai’r achosion mynegai olygu patrwm o ymddygiad a syrthiai o fewn y diffiniad o SDP, gan ddweud:
‘Er yn achos
nid oedd y Bwrdd yn beirniadu’r ymadrodd “dro ar ôl tro neu’n gyson” yng nghanllawiau’r GMC, mae’n bwysig cofio mai cyffredinoliad yw canllaw sy’n ceisio ymdrin ag ystod eang iawn o berfformiad proffesiynol. Mae’r gofynion proffesiynol ar feddyg teulu’n wahanol iawn i’r rheiny a roir ar lawfeddyg ymgynghorol. Gall methiant parhaus i drefnu rheolaeth effeithlon practis cyffredinol (mewn achos digon gwael) olygu perfformiad diffygiol, ond rhaid ei asesu yn natur pethau ar dystiolaeth wahanol iawn i’r dystiolaeth sy’n gysylltiedig â diffygion o ran techneg mewn llawdriniaeth fawr. Byddai’n amlwg yn groes i les y cyhoedd pe na allai’r CPP ddelio â llawfeddyg is-safonol tan ac oni bai iddo wneud yr un gwall dro ar ôl tro yn ystod llawdriniaethau tebyg. Ond, fel rheol gyffredinol, ni ddylai’r GMC (ac nid oes gan eu Harglwyddi unrhyw reswm i gredu y byddai) geisio cydgasglu nifer o ddigwyddiadau hollol annhebyg a diffygion honedig er mwyn gwneud achos o berfformiad difrifol o ddiffygiol yn erbyn unrhyw ymarferwr.’
Casglodd y Cyfrin Gyngor fod penderfyniad y CPP wedi’i gyfiawnhau ac argymhellodd ddiystyru’r apêl. Gwnaeth y sylwadau canlynol ar y dyfarniad yn
‘Ond heb roi unrhyw amheuaeth ar y penderfyniad, teimla eu Harglwyddi na ddylid cymryd y gwahaniaeth rhwng cymhwyster a pherfformiad, a nodwyd yn
Krippendorf,
yn rhy bell. Mae’n bwysig y dylai unrhyw banel asesu roi’r ystyriaeth gywir i’r gŵyn neu’r wybodaeth arall a achosodd yr asesiad yn y lle cyntaf. Ond yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion mae yna gydberthynas amlwg rhwng cymhwyster a pherfformiad. Yn ogystal, mae’r panel asesu’n ymwneud, nid yn unig ag asesu perfformiad proffesiynol yn y gorffennol, ond hefyd â’r hyn y mae angen ei wneud i wella perfformiad ymarferwr, er lles y cyhoedd ac er lles gorau’r ymarferwr ei hun ... Rhaid i’r broses asesu gynnwys llunio barn ynghylch safon perfformiad yn y gorffennol, ond ni chaiff y broses fod yn gyfyngedig i’r math hwnnw o ymarferiad ôl-dremiol os yw am gyflawni ei amcanion.’
Ac
‘... mae eu Harglwyddi’n teimlo ei bod yn gywir ailadrodd bod y broses asesu’n cynnwys nid yn unig archwilio perfformiad yn y gorffennol ond hefyd asesu a chynllunio (ym mhob achos ond y rhai gwaethaf) ar gyfer gwella ac adsefydlu. Mae llawer o asesiadau a datganiadau o ofynion yn arwain at ganlyniad boddhaol, heb angen am wrandawiad ffurfiol gerbron y CPP. Nid yw eu Harglwyddi’n dymuno cyhoeddi neges y dylid ystyried bod asesiad gan banel asesu yn cael ei gynllunio yn unig, neu hyd yn oed yn bennaf, fel proses o gasglu tystiolaeth er mwyn sefydlu achos prima facie yn erbyn ymarferwr. Lle nad oes modd osgoi gwrandawiad ffurfiol gerbron y CPP, gall rhannau o adroddiad y panel asesu fod yn amherthnasol o hyd i benderfyniad y cwestiwn cyntaf y mae’n rhaid i’r CPP ei benderfynu; ond mae’n debygol y bydd yr adroddiad cyfan yn berthnasol i’r mater dilynol o waredu pe byddai’n codi.’
Safon y Prawf
, dywedodd yr asesydd cyfreithiol wrth gynghori’r CPP:
‘Mae’r baich o brofi perfformiad difrifol o ddiffygiol yn faich i’r Cyngor drwy gydol, fel a gyfaddefir, ac ni ddylech wneud canfyddiad o’r fath oni bai eich bod yn sicr yn ôl y dystiolaeth mai dyna oedd yr achos.’
Wrth agor achos
i’r CPP, nododd cwnsler y GMC mai’r safon briodol o brawf oedd y safon droseddol o brawf a bod yr asesydd cyfreithiol yn
wedi cynghori’r CPP yn briodol. Gerbron y Cyfrin Gyngor, ni cheisiodd y cwnsler dros y GMC gyflwyno safon lai o brawf, ond ceisiodd arweiniad ar y safon briodol o brawf ar gyfer achosion yn y dyfodol. Wrth roi arweiniad o’r fath, dywedodd y Cyfrin Gyngor:
‘Nid cosbi yw swyddogaeth y CPP ond, yn hytrach, amddiffyn y cyhoedd ac adsefydlu (os yn bosibl) ymarferwyr y mae eu safonau proffesiynol wedi cwympo’n rhy isel. Yn ei dasg gyntaf (sef penderfynu a fu nam difrifol ar safon perfformiad ymarferwr) mae’n rhaid i’r CPP ganfod y ffeithiau sylfaenol (na allent fod dan amheuaeth ddifrifol mewn llawer o achosion) ac yna gwneud ei ddyfarniad (yn achos rhai o aelodau’r CPP ond nid pob un, eu dyfarniad proffesiynol fel meddygon profiadol). Yn yr ymarferiad hwn, ni ddylai safon prawf y ffeithiau sylfaenol, mewn achosion cyffredinol, fod yn fater sy’n achosi fawr o anhawster. Cyn belled ag y bo’n fater materol, dylai’r safon ym marn yr Arglwyddi, mewn achosion cyffredinol, fod y safon sifil arferol o brawf. Gall fod achosion eithriadol (yn ôl pob tebyg, achosion lle bo’r ymarferwr yn ffodus i wynebu’r CPP yn hytrach na’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol) lle gallai safon sifil uwch fod yn briodol ...’.
Aeth y Cyfrin Gyngor ymlaen i atseinio yr hyn a ddywedwyd yn flaenorol gan y Cyfrin Gyngor yn achos
‘Mewn cyhuddiadau yn erbyn meddyg lle byddai’r digwyddiadau sy’n peri’r cyhuddiadau hefyd yn sefydlu cyhuddiadau troseddol difrifol, gall fod yn briodol i faich a safonau’r prawf fod y rheiny sy’n berthnasol i dreial troseddol. Fodd bynnag, bydd yna lawer o achosion, lle na allai’r cyhuddiadau y mae’n rhaid i feddyg eu hwynebu gerbron y pwyllgor fod yn destun cyhuddiadau difrifol nac unrhyw gyhuddiadau troseddol o gwbl. Cyfansoddir y pwyllgor yn gyfan gwbl o ddynion a menywod meddygol sy’n hyddysg yn eu proffesiwn ac, ym marn yr Arglwyddi, nid yw’n angenrheidiol na’n ddymunol mynnu bod rhaid profi pob cyhuddiad o gamymddygiad iddyn nhw fel petaent yn rheithgor o leygwyr. Yr hyn sydd bwysicaf yw y dylai’r cyhuddiad a’r modd y cynhelir yr achosion fod yn deg i’r meddyg dan sylw ym mhob ffordd.’
Nododd y Cyfrin Gyngor nad oedd y detholiad o
yn gyfan gwbl addas i bwyllgor y mae’n rhaid bod ganddo o leiaf un aelod lleyg bellach ond, yn amodol ar y cymhwyster hwnnw, nodwyd ganddo fod y detholiad yn fwy perthnasol eto i wrandawiad gerbron y CPP na gwrandawiad gerbron y PCC. Dylid nodi y gwnaed sylwadau’r Cyfrin Gyngor ar safon prawf ar adeg pan na allai canfyddiad o SDP arwain at ddilead. Mae’n bosibl y gallai ei farn fod yn wahanol pe byddai dilead ar gael, fel y bydd yn y dyfodol.
Cyn gadael achos
, dymunaf dynnu sylw at sefyllfa a amlygwyd gan ffeithiau’r achos, sef sefyllfa cleifion a drinnir gan feddygon y canfuwyd bod eu perfformiad naill ai’n ddifrifol o ddiffygiol neu wedi peri pryderon difrifol ac y maent yn llaw-drin dan delerau datganiad o ofynion. Nid yw’n glir i mi a ddywedir y ffeithiau llawn wrth gleifion am statws meddyg sydd ar fin llaw-drin arnynt. Ym 1999, roedd y Gweithgor Materion Perfformiad (PIWG) (dan Gadeiryddiaeth yr Athro Hatch) yn archwilio materion amrywiol yn cynnwys
‘caniatâd i drin mewn achosion lle rhoir triniaeth gan feddyg sy’n cael hyfforddiant adferol ar ôl asesiad perfformiad’
. Argymhellodd y PIWG i’r Cyngor fod rhaid rhoi gwybodaeth ddigonol i gleifion i alluogi iddynt ganiatáu’n wybodus driniaeth gan feddyg sy’n cael ailhyfforddiant. Drafftiodd y PIWG rai llythyrau sampl y gellid eu hanfon at gleifion. Yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 1999, penderfynodd y GMC y dylid gwneud gwaith pellach ar y materion hyn. Mae’n ymddangos nad oes unrhyw gynnydd pellach wedi’i wneud. Ym Mhennod 27, rwyf wedi gwneud argymhelliad am ddarparu gwybodaeth i gleifion yn gysylltiedig â meddygon sy’n cael eu hailhyfforddi.

---  ---
Yn ogystal ag achosion
, archwiliodd yr Ymchwiliad ffeiliau pum achos, a ddarparwyd gan y GMC, a ystyriwyd gan y CPP ers 2000. Maent yn ddefnyddiol gan eu bod yn dangos nifer o’r anawsterau a gafodd y GMC mewn cysylltiad â gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, a darparant sail ar gyfer trafodaeth am welliannau posibl yn y gweithdrefnau. Y prif broblemau yw problemau oedi, cymhlethdod y gweithdrefnau a’r anhawster wrth drefnu adferiad. Mae’r achosion hefyd yn peri gofid am absenoldeb unrhyw asesiad ffurfiol, mewn rhai achosion, cyn caniatáu i’r meddyg ailddechrau ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau. Wrth drafod yr achosion hyn, rwyf yn awyddus i gynnal anhysbysrwydd y meddygon dan sylw. Oherwydd y rheswm hwnnw, nid wyf wedi dyfynnu dyddiadau’r prif ddigwyddiadau. Fodd bynnag, mae’r cyfnod y mae’r achosion yn ymdrin ag ef yn fater pwysig. Rwyf felly wedi esbonio’r gronoleg trwy gyfeirio at yr amser a aeth heibio ers adeg yr adroddiad cyntaf i’r GMC.
Achosion KA 01 i KA 05
Yn achos Dr KA 01, a oedd yn feddyg teulu ar ei liwt ei hun, adroddodd y PCO bryderon am berfformiad cyffredinol y meddyg i’r GMC. Nododd asesiadau llywodraethu clinigol fod ei berfformiad yn ‘ddifrifol o ddiffygiol’. Cafwyd cwynion niferus amdano gan gydweithwyr a chleifion. Credwyd bod gwallau difrifol wrth ragnodi yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl niwed. Sgriniwyd yr achos i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad a, thri mis ar ôl yr adroddiad cyntaf, cytunodd y meddyg i gael asesiad. Roedd yr adroddiad asesiad yn barod yn y cyfnod wyth mis. Casglodd fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Yn benodol, nodaf fod y meddyg wedi methu pob un o dair elfen Cam II. Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate wrth yr Ymchwiliad na all meddyg fod yn perfformio’n dda os nad oes ganddo/ganddi sail wybodaeth ddigonol.
Fodd bynnag, mynegodd yr adroddiad asesiad y farn bod y meddyg yn ymwybodol o’i ddiffygion ac yn awyddus i’w gwella. Credai’r Panel Asesu y gallai adferiad fod yn effeithiol. Cynigiodd cyfres o ymrwymiadau, a fyddai wedi gadael y meddyg teulu’n ymarfer, ond nid ar ei ben ei hun. Byddai’n cael mentor ac yn gweithio mewn ffyrdd amrywiol tuag at wella’i systemau gwaith. Byddai’n cael ei asesu’r eilwaith mewn 12 mis. Cytunodd i’r ymrwymiadau. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y PCO yn hapus am y trefniadau. Roedd bellach yn flwyddyn bron ers atgyfeirio’r achos i’r GMC ac roedd ei swyddogion yn gofidio’n fawr am y posibilrwydd o oedi am 12 mis arall pan, dywedwyd ganddynt,
‘ei fod yn gwneud niwed bob dydd’
. Yn gywir iawn, atgyfeiriodd gydlynydd achos y GMC yr achos i
r CPP.
Dilynodd gwrandawiad; a digwyddodd 14 mis ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol. Canfuwyd bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol mewn chwe ffordd ac fe
i wnaed yn destun amodau am ddwy flynedd. Yn y bôn, byddai
r meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer (er nid ar ei ben ei hun) a byddai
n cymryd rhan mewn amrywiaeth o weithgareddau adferol. Byddai dau o
r rhain, a oedd yn sylweddol bwysig, yn cynnwys dilyn cyngor ar ailhyfforddiant a roddir gan y deon ôl-raddedig ac Arweinydd Llywodraethu Clinigol y PCO. Ar ôl y gwrandawiad, cyflogwyd partner cyflogedig i weithio ym mhractis y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, naw mis yn ddiweddarach (23 mis ers yr adroddiad gwreiddiol), darganfu
r GMC nad oedd y meddyg wedi cysylltu â
r deon ôl-raddedig na
r Arweinydd Llywodraethu Clinigol. Y mis dilynol, gofynnwyd i
r meddyg esbonio hyn; dywedodd y credai y byddai
r bobl hyn yn cysylltu ag ef. Anfonwyd llythyr o rybudd ‘ysgafn’ ato.
Ychydig dros flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach (sef tair blynedd a mis ers y gŵyn wreiddiol), darganfuwyd na fu’r meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’r amod a ofynnai iddo dderbyn cyngor y deon ôl-raddedig a’r Arweinydd Llywodraethu Clinigol. Mae’n debyg y cafodd ei atgyfeirio i’r IOC, a wnaeth orchymyn yn ei atal rhag ymarfer ar unwaith. Y mis dilynol, cafwyd gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd gan y CPP, gan fod y ddwy flynedd ers gorfodi’r amodau yn wreiddiol ar fin dod i ben. Ni fynychodd y meddyg y gwrandawiad. Cafodd banel y CPP ychydig dystiolaeth ei fod wedi cydweithredu yn ei adferiad. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yn fodlon bod ei ymarfer clinigol wedi gwella. Penderfynodd banel y CPP fod y meddyg yn dal i gyflwyno risg i ddiogelwch cleifion ac na fyddai’n ddigonol ar gyfer amddiffyn y cyhoedd i orfodi amodau ar ei gofrestriad. Felly, ataliwyd cofrestriad y meddyg am gyfnod o 12 mis. Yn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd, a fyddai’n digwydd ychydig cyn i’r ataliad ddod i ben, byddai’r meddyg yn gallu cyflwyno tystiolaeth o gamau a gymerwyd i wella ei ddiffygion.
Mae’r hanes yn dangos bod y meddyg wedi ymarfer am gyfnod o dair blynedd ar ôl ei adrodd i’r GMC. Drwy gydol yr amser hwnnw, cyflwynai risg i ddiogelwch cleifion. Mae’r achos wedi amlygu’r angen i’r GMC gymryd rhyw gamau rhagweithiol i sicrhau o leiaf bod y meddyg sy’n destun amodau yn cydymffurfio â hwy. Ni fyddai hynny hyd yn oed yn sicrhau na fyddai ef/hi yn ymarfer ar lefel ddifrifol o ddiffygiol, ond o leiaf y byddai’n amddiffyn cleifion i ryw raddau. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, pan dderbyniai meddyg ddatganiad o ofynion gwirfoddol, byddai’r GMC yn mynnu adroddiad chwarterol o gynnydd. Gobeithiaf fod y GMC bellach yn cydnabod yr angen am drefniant tebyg mewn achosion lle gorfodir amodau gan bwyllgor neu banel, yn hytrach na’u cytuno’n wirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn siwr fod hyn wedi’i gydnabod, gan na allaf weld unrhyw ddarpariaeth ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth yn y gweithdrefnau newydd. Meddai’r GMC, ac rwy’n deall ei bwynt yn iawn, nad yw’n gyfrifol am wneud y trefniadau sy’n angenrheidiol ar gyfer cydymffurfio ag amodau meddyg; dyna yw cyfrifoldeb y meddyg ei hun. Fodd bynnag, er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion, rhaid i’r GMC fod yn ymwybodol a yw’r meddyg yn cydymffurfio neu beidio oherwydd, os nad ydyw, dylid dod ag ef/hi yn ôl er mwyn ystyried mesurau mwy caeth. Mae’n debyg i mi fod yr achos hwn hefyd yn cwestiynu doethineb gorfodi amodau am gymaint â dwy flynedd (neu dair blynedd hyd yn oed) heb unrhyw wrandawiad canolradd. Gall ymddangos bod gorfodi amodau am dair blynedd yn sancsiwn mwy llym nag amodau am flwyddyn; ond, pe byddai’n gadael y meddyg i ymarfer ar lefel ddifrifol o ddiffygiol am dair blynedd, byddai’r sancsiwn mewn gwirionedd yn annigonol ac yn gadael y cyhoedd mewn perygl.
Adroddodd PCO amrywiaeth eang o bryderon i’r GMC am Dr KA 02, sef meddyg teulu. Ymhlith y rhain oedd pryderon am gymhwyster a synnwyr cyffredin clinigol, annibynadwyedd mewn perthynas â dyletswyddau y tu allan i oriau gwaith, hylendid gwael yn adeiladau’r feddygfa, torri cyfrinachedd cleifion, diffyg archwiliad, methiant i ymgymryd ag addysg barhaus, diystyru rheoliadau cyffuriau rheoledig a diffyg mewnwelediad o ran ei ddiffygion. Blwyddyn yn ddiweddarach bron, cafodd y meddyg wahoddiad gan y GMC i gael asesiad, a chytunodd i hyn. Digwyddodd Cam I 14 mis ar ôl yr adroddiad gwreiddiol. Roedd yr asesiad yn cyflwyno anawsterau sylweddol gan fod y meddyg wedi gadael ei bractis blaenorol lle gweithiai ar ei liwt ei hun ac wedi cymryd swydd mewn practis arall. Cafodd y swydd hon ei therfynu ac, adeg yr asesiad, dim ond tua 56 o gleifion oedd gan y meddyg. Mynegodd adroddiad Cam I lawer o bryderon am y gofal clinigol a ddarparwyd. Ni chwblhawyd Cam II tan ddeg mis yn ddiweddarach oherwydd iechyd gwael y meddyg. Methodd y meddyg rai agweddau ar y profion yn eithaf gwael ond roedd ei ganlyniadau cyfunedig yn dderbyniol o drwch blewyn. Lluniwyd yr adroddiad asesiad ddwy flynedd a hanner ar ôl adrodd y pryderon gwreiddiol. Casglodd y Panel Asesu fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol mewn nifer sylweddol o ffyrdd ac argymhellodd na ddylai ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth tan ei fod wedi cwblhau cyfnod o hyfforddiant adferol diffiniedig dan arweiniad meddyg teulu gyda’r cymwysterau addas. Derbyniodd y meddyg yr adroddiad a’r argymhellion.
Er bod y meddyg wedi derbyn, atgyfeiriwyd yr achos (yn briodol) i’r CPP a chafwyd gwrandawiad ddwy flynedd ac wyth mis ar ôl yr adroddiad gwreiddiol. Canfuwyd bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol a gorfodwyd amodau am 12 mis. Yn bennaf, caniatawyd i’r meddyg weithio dan oruchwyliaeth hyfforddwr meddyg teulu yn unig mewn practis hyfforddiant; ni allai weithio i wasanaeth dirprwyo. Roedd rhaid iddo geisio cyngor y deon ôl-raddedig ac roedd gofyn iddo roi gwybodaeth i’r GMC am ei weithgareddau. Yn ôl yr arfer gydag achosion CPP, ni chafwyd unrhyw adborth am gynnydd; dywedodd Miss Smith wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai dim ond pe byddai pethau’n mynd o chwith y daethai adborth.
Yn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd, dair blynedd ac wyth mis ar ôl yr adroddiad gwreiddiol, adnewyddwyd yr amodau am chwe mis pellach; yn y gwrandawiad nesaf, cawsant eu diddymu. Dywedodd y CPP y teimlai fod tystiolaeth ddigonol o welliant i warantu’r penderfyniad hwnnw, er na chynhaliwyd unrhyw asesiad pellach. Yn ôl pob tebyg, cafodd y CPP adroddiad gan y goruchwyliwr. Hefyd, roedd y meddyg wedi llofnodi ymrwymiad i beidio ag ymarfer ar ei liwt ei hun. Rhoddwyd yr ymrwymiad hwnnw’n wirfoddol heb amheuaeth. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn gweld sut y byddai modd ei orfodi.
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, mynegais bryder fod modd gwaredu amodau meddyg a gafodd amodau ar ei gofrestriad heb unrhyw asesiad ffurfiol pellach. Yn achos datganiad o ofynion gwirfoddol, rhaid cael ail asesiad yn ôl y Rheolau cyn dileu’r cyfyngiadau. Nid oedd hyn yn wir gydag amodau a orfodwyd gan y CPP. Yn ei gyflwyniadau terfynol i’r Ymchwiliad, derbyniodd y GMC fod y trefniadau dan yr hen weithdrefnau yn rhoi argraff o anghysondeb ac na ddylid dileu amodau neu gyfyngiadau heb dystiolaeth ddigonol fod hyn yn briodol. Gallaf weld, mewn rhai achosion, efallai nad yw asesiad ffurfiol yn angenrheidiol: er enghraifft, lle mae meddyg wedi gweithio dan oruchwyliaeth agos a lle cafwyd adroddiad manwl gan ei oruchwyliwr/ei goruchwyliwr. Fodd bynnag, lle bu’r oruchwyliaeth o’r math mentora neu gynghori, rwy’n pryderu efallai nad yw’r goruchwyliwr mewn sefyllfa i roi barn ddigon manwl o gynnydd y meddyg i alluogi gwneud penderfyniad diogel i waredu’r amodau. Hefyd, byddwn wedi meddwl, lle mae meddyg wedi methu unrhyw agwedd ar y profion Cam II hyn, dylid bod gofyn iddo/iddi eu hail-sefyll ac ni ddylai fod yn rhydd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiad oni bai a nes bod y canlyniadau’n foddhaol.
Roedd y pryderon a fynegwyd am Dr KA 03, meddyg teulu, yn gysylltiedig ag amrywiaeth o broblemau, yr oedd rhai ohonynt yn ymddangos yn fwy fel camymddygiad na pherfformiad gwael. Er enghraifft, ymddangosai y gwaredwyd nifer fawr o gleifion oddi wrth system adalw sytoleg serfigol y meddyg ac roedd y ffaith y gwnaed hyn, nid am resymau clinigol, ond i ganiatáu’r meddyg i gyrraedd targed penodol (a fyddai, rwy’n credu, yn ysgogi tâl) yn achos pryder. Fodd bynnag, cafwyd pryderon hefyd ynghylch ei arferion rhagnodi, yn enwedig mewn perthynas â chyffuriau rheoledig, a’r modd y rheolai ail bresgripsiynau. Ymddangosai fod gwraig y meddyg, a oedd yn rheolwraig ar y practis, yn cyfarwyddo llawer o’r gweithgaredd clinigol yn y practis. Ar ôl rhywfaint o drafod rhwng Mr Howes a sgriniwr meddygol, cytunwyd y dylid cael gwybodaeth bellach, fanylach. Fodd bynnag, oherwydd ‘diofalwch’, ni wnaed hyn ac aeth yr achos yn ôl at y sgriniwr meddygol saith mis ar ôl yr adroddiad gwreiddiol. Penderfynodd y sgriniwr mai achos perfformiad yn unig oedd hwn. Dri mis yn ddiweddarach, cytunodd y meddyg i gael asesiad. Digwyddodd Cam I ychydig dros flwyddyn ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol a Cham II ddeufis arall wedi hynny. Lluniwyd yr adroddiad 18 mis ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol. Disgrifiwyd perfformiad y meddyg yn yr adroddiad yn annerbyniol mewn sawl ffordd ac yn
‘achos pryder’
mewn ffyrdd eraill. Methodd y meddyg ddau o’r tri phrawf yng Ngham II. Serch hynny, ystyriodd y Panel Asesu y dylid caniatáu i’r meddyg barhau i ymarfer, cyhyd â’i fod yn cael goruchwyliaeth, a chyhyd â na fyddai’n cymryd mwy o gleifion o gwbl a bod cynllun datblygu ar gyfer ei ail-addysgu. Hefyd, byddai gofyn i’r meddyg wella adeiladau ei feddygaeth. Ni dderbyniodd y meddyg yr adroddiad asesiad ac atgyfeiriwyd yr achos i’r CPP ar gyfer gwrandawiad.
Digwyddodd gwrandawiad panel y CPP dri mis ar ôl llunio’r adroddiad asesiad. Canfu panel y CPP fod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol mewn sawl ffordd bwysig. Nodaf, gyda chryn ddiddordeb, y gwnaed y canfyddiad hwn er cafwyd nifer fawr o dystlythyrau a deiseb cleifion i gefnogi’r meddyg. Soniaf am hyn oherwydd ei fod yn dangos efallai nad yw cleifion yn ymwybodol o ddiffygion ym mherfformiad eu meddyg. Hefyd, credaf eu bod weithiau, yn aml efallai, yn fodlon ysgrifennu llythyr o gefnogaeth heb ddefnyddio’u holl gyneddfau beirniadol. Gwrthododd y CPP awgrymiadau’r Panel Asesu am adferiad gan eu bod yn anymarferol ac ataliodd gofrestriad y meddyg am flwyddyn. Yn y cyfamser, awgrymwyd y dylai’r meddyg gymryd cyngor y cyfarwyddwr addysg ôl-raddedig ynghylch y camau i’w cymryd i wella ei ddiffygion. Flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, caniatawyd i’r meddyg ymarfer dan amodau. Byddai’n gweithio mewn practis wedi’i oruchwylio. Ni allai weithio i wasanaeth dirprwyo. Gallai ragnodi bensodiasepinau a chyffuriau rheoledig eraill dim ond gyda chytundeb ei oruchwyliwr. Dywedwyd wrth y meddyg y byddai angen iddo gael ailasesiad cyn y gellid gwaredu’r amodau hyn neu, fel arall, dangos ei fod wedi pasio’r arholiad ar gyfer Aelodaeth yr RCGP. Naw mis yn ddiweddarach, safodd y meddyg yr arholiad Aelodaeth ond methodd. Gwnaeth ailsefyll hefyd y profion Cam II. Sgoriodd ychydig yn fwy na’r lleiafswm yn nau o’r tri phrawf a methu’r trydydd o drwch blewyn. Bedwar mis yn ddiweddarach, mewn gwrandawiad, cafodd y CPP adroddiadau ar gynnydd y meddyg a nodi ei fod yn fodlon bod
‘y cyhoedd bellach wedi’u hamddiffyn yn ddigonol’
er mwyn iddo waredu’r cyfyngiadau ar gofrestriad.
Mae’r achos hwn yn codi dau fater o ddiddordeb. Mae’r cyntaf yn holi pa brawf y dylai’r CPP fod wedi’i ddefnyddio cyn penderfynu gwaredu cyfyngiadau neu beidio. Nid oedd Deddf Feddygol 1983 yn nodi’r prawf y dylid ei ddefnyddio yn y cyfnod hwn. Fodd bynnag, roedd awdurdod y GMC mewn achosion perfformiad yn seiliedig ar berfformiad ‘difrifol o ddiffygiol’. A olygai hyn pe byddai’n cael ei ganfod, wrth ystyried achos meddyg y canfuwyd yn gynharach fod ei berfformiad yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol yn ddiweddarach, bod safon ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad wedi codi i ychydig yn uwch na’r lefel ‘ddifrifol o ddiffygiol’, bod rhaid gwaredu’r cyfyngiadau, er bod ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad yn dal i achosi rhai pryderon ar gyfer lles cleifion? Yn ôl pob golwg, nid y prawf ‘difrifol o ddiffygiol’ a ddefnyddiwyd yn achos Dr KA 03; dywedwyd mai prawf uwch o ‘amddiffyniad digonol ar gyfer y cyhoedd’ ydoedd. Mae hynny’n ymddangos fel prawf mwy synhwyrol a boddhaol, ond nid wyf yn siwr a fyddai’n gwrthsefyll her gyfreithiol gan feddyg. Beth bynnag, nid wyf yn siwr a ystyriodd y CPP yn ymwybodol pa brawf y dylai ei ddefnyddio; gall fod y panel wedi tybio y dylid gwaredu’r amodau.
Yr ail fater o ddiddordeb yw y canfu’r CPP fod y meddyg wedi pasio’r prawf uwch o ‘amddiffyniad cyhoeddus digonol’ er gwaethaf ei berfformiad gwael yn yr ailasesiad Cam II. Profion gwrthrychol yw’r rhain a osodir ar lefel lle byddai’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn pasio’n hawdd. Os hyn oedd y gorau y gallai’r meddyg hwn ei wneud ar ôl cyfnod eithaf dwys o adferiad ac astudiaeth ar gyfer yr arholiad Aelodaeth RCGP, nid yw’n ennyn hyder yn ei berfformiad ar ôl dychwelyd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau. Yn fyr, mae’r achos hwn yn dangos, o leiaf mewn rhai achosion, y gallai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad geisio’n unig godi meddygon difrifol o ddiffygiol oddi ar ris gwaelod yr ysgol berfformiad i ris ychydig yn uwch na’r lefel honno. Mae hyn o bwysigrwydd sylweddol yng nghyd-destun ail-ddilysu meddygon, sy’n bwnc y dychwelaf ato yn ddiweddarach yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Roedd Dr KA 04 yn feddyg teulu yn gweithio mewn ardal ddifreintiedig gyda rhestr hir iawn o gleifion. Mynegodd y PCO bryderon amdano a oedd yn ddifrifol iawn ac yn ymdrin â llawer o agweddau ar ofal cleifion, gan gynnwys rhagnodi, gwybodaeth glinigol, cadw cofnodion, cymryd nodiadau, nodi hanes, archwiliadau corfforol, sgiliau cyfathrebu a chysylltu ag asiantaethau eraill. Dywedwyd hefyd ei fod yn llofnodi presgripsiynau gwag a’u rhoi i’w staff i ysgrifennu ail bresgripsiynau. Bedwar mis ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol, cytunodd y meddyg i gael asesiad. Fodd bynnag, ychydig yn ddiweddarach, daeth yn sâl ac roedd i ffwrdd o’r gwaith am bum mis. Penodwyd Panel Asesu bedwar mis wedi hynny ac ni chwblhawyd yr asesiad tan 15 mis ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol. Methodd y meddyg ddau o’r profion Cam II a phasiodd un. Cymerodd ddau fis arall i lunio’r adroddiad. Adroddodd y Panel y bu perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol ac y bu hyn yn anochel oherwydd yr amodau ar ei ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, credai’r Panel Asesu bellach nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol rhagor. Rhestrodd rhai agweddau lle’r oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn achos pryder o hyd. Ni ymatebodd y meddyg pan anfonwyd copi o’r adroddiad ato. Teimlodd y cydlynydd achos nad oedd digon o dystiolaeth nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol rhagor ac atgyfeiriodd yr achos i’r CPP.
Cafwyd y gwrandawiad ddwy flynedd a mis ar ôl yr adroddiad cychwynnol. Yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, bu’r meddyg yn ymarfer, heblaw am y pum mis pan oedd ei iechyd yn wael. Canfu panel y CPP y bu perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Yn benodol, dywedodd fod ei ddull o gadw cofnodion yn
‘ddryswch anhreiddiadwy’
a bod hyn yn rhoi cleifion mewn perygl, o gofio’r defnydd helaeth a wneir o ddirprwy feddygon yn y practis. Nid cofnodion oedd yr unig achos pryder; roedd asesiad y meddyg o gyflwr cleifion a’i ddarpariaeth o archwiliadau a thriniaeth yn anfoddhaol. Gorfododd panel y CPP amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg am 12 mis. Yn gryno, mynnai’r rhain iddo sefydlu cysylltiadau gyda mentor a’r Arweinydd Llywodraethu Clinigol lleol a gweithio gyda hwy ar raglen barhaus o addysg ac adferiad. Byddai rhaid iddo dalu sylw i gyngor y PCO am faint ei restr ac am drefniadau ar gyfer staffio ei bractis.
Chwe mis yn ddiweddarach bron (h.y. dwy flynedd a hanner ar ôl iddo adrodd ei bryderon am Dr KA 04), ysgrifennodd y PCO at y GMC, gan fynegi pryderon pellach. Dywedodd y llythyr fod yna fylchau enfawr yng ngwybodaeth y meddyg ac ymddangosai na allai wella. Roedd cleifion mewn perygl. Roedd y PCO yn ymgynghori â’r NCAA ac yn cymryd camau i ddarganfod a oedd gan y meddyg broblem feddygol. Yn fuan wedyn, defnyddiodd y PCO ei bwerau rheoli rhestr newydd ac atal y meddyg rhag ymarfer fel meddyg teulu. Byddai’r meddyg wedyn yn gweithio mewn arbenigedd newydd.
Yn y gwrandawiad a ail-agorwyd (ychydig dros dair blynedd ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol), ystyriodd banel y CPP a ddylid atgyfeirio’r meddyg i’r HC ond penderfynodd nad oedd digon o dystiolaeth i wneud hynny. Ystyriodd fod y meddyg wedi ymdrechu i gydymffurfio â’i amodau ond na allai wneud hynny oherwydd amgylchiadau anodd. Gorfododd amodau newydd am gyfnod o naw mis. Yn y bôn, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth ac yn ei arbenigedd newydd yn unig. Mewn gwrandawiad pellach naw mis yn ddiweddarach (ychydig yn llai na phedair blynedd ar ôl y gŵyn wreiddiol), mae’n debyg y cafwyd cytundeb sylweddol rhwng y cyfreithwyr a gynrychiolai’r meddyg a’r rheiny a gynrychiolai’r GMC. Roedd hwn yn ymdrin â’r dystiolaeth a’r amod arfaethedig, am dair blynedd, y byddai’r meddyg yn ymarfer yn ei arbenigedd newydd yn unig. Nid oedd unrhyw ofyniad am oruchwyliaeth nac ailasesu. Cytunodd banel y CPP i ddelio â’r achos ar sail yr amod cytûn hwn, er bod ei aelodau wedi mynegi rhywfaint o amheuaeth am natur gyfyngedig y dystiolaeth y gallai’r meddyg ymarfer i’r safon angenrheidiol yn yr arbenigedd newydd hwn. Felly, roedd Dr KA 04 yn rhydd i ymarfer heb oruchwyliaeth yn ei arbenigedd newydd am y tair blynedd ddilynol. Nid yw’r cyfnod hwnnw wedi dod i ben eto.
Mae gennyf ddau bryder am yr achos hwn. Yn gyntaf, caniatawyd i’r meddyg ymarfer yn ei arbenigedd newydd heb gael unrhyw asesiad ffurfiol o’i gymhwyster na hyd yn oed ailsefyll y profion Cam II a fethodd yn flaenorol. Ni fu gofyn am hynny, er y ffaith y bu achos i amau na fyddai ei berfformiad yn y ffordd honno wedi gwella. Yn ail, cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’r amod y dylai ymarfer yn ei arbenigedd newydd yn unig, ymddangosai’n debygol y byddai’r cyfyngiad yn cael ei waredu ar ddiwedd y cyfnod tair blynedd. Byddai wedyn yn rhydd i ymarfer eto mewn unrhyw gymhwyster lle gallai ddod o hyd i gyflogaeth. Tybiaf a yw’r cyhoedd wedi’i amddiffyn yn ddigonol yn yr achos hwn.
Dyma’r unig un o’r pum achos a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd yn gysylltiedig â meddyg teulu. Am y rheswm hwnnw, ni fyddaf yn ei ddisgrifio’n fanwl. Hwn hefyd yw’r unig un o’r pum achos lle canfu’r CPP nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol, er dyna a fu casgliad y Panel Asesu.
Roedd Dr KA 05 yn ddirprwy lawfeddyg orthopedig. Bu’n destun adroddiad gan Ysbyty P i’r GMC yng nghanol y 1990au. Dywedwyd ei fod wedi cyflawni un llawdriniaeth yn benodol wael. Soniodd adroddiad gan grŵp o ‘Dri Dyn Doeth’ hefyd y dywedwyd ei fod yn gofidio nyrsys, cleifion a staff meddygol. Y flwyddyn ddilynol, cafwyd adroddiad arall gan glaf, gyda llythyr gan ysbyty gwahanol (Ysbyty G), yn mynegi pryder am arfer llawfeddygol y meddyg ac yn dweud hefyd y terfynwyd ei gyflogaeth oherwydd sawl cwyn am ei agwedd a’i ymddygiad. Yr adeg hon, nid oedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar waith a deliwyd â’r achos yn y pen draw ddwy i dair blynedd ar ôl yr adroddiad cyntaf i’r GMC gan lythyr o gyngor dan weithdrefnau Pennod XV.
Ychydig yn ddiweddarach, mynegwyd pryder pellach gan ysbyty arall, sef Ysbyty J. Cyfeiriaf at hwn fel y gŵyn bennaf. Roedd ei chynnwys yn debyg iawn i gynnwys y rhai blaenorol. Cafwyd pryderon am y cyfraddau cymhlethdod a’r cyfraddau haint yn dilyn llawdriniaeth; roedd pryderon hefyd am ‘agwedd’ y meddyg a’i berthnasoedd gwaith. Soniodd yr adroddiad fod yr atgyfeiriad a ddaeth o ysbyty lle gweithiai’r meddyg yn flaenorol (Ysbyty B) yn ffafriol o ran ei gymhwyster technegol ond soniodd am anawsterau mewn perthnasoedd proffesiynol. Mae hynny’n golygu y bu problemau dros berthnasoedd gwaith mewn pedwar gwahanol ysbyty. Fodd bynnag, roedd y GMC wedi cymryd y safbwynt, ers dechrau’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, y gallai ystyried materion a gododd ers mis Gorffennaf 1997 yn unig.
Ar ôl ymholiadau cychwynnol pellach, gwahoddwyd y meddyg i gael asesiad a chytunodd. Roedd hynny wyth mis ar ôl cael y gŵyn bennaf. Oherwydd prinder aseswyr arweiniol mewn orthopedeg, ni chafwyd yr asesiad am flwyddyn arall. Erbyn hynny, roedd y meddyg wedi symud ymlaen, nid unwaith ond dwy. Yn gyntaf, gweithiodd yn Ysbyty T ac awgrymodd y dylai’r Panel gyfweld â dau gydweithiwr yno. Fodd bynnag, pan ddaeth ei leoliad i ben a symudodd yn ôl i Ysbyty B, ni ddymunai i’r ddau gydweithiwr o Ysbyty T gael cyfweliad. Digwyddodd yr asesiad yn Ysbyty J ac Ysbyty T. Aeth chwe mis arall heibio cyn bod yr adroddiad yn barod a chyn ei anfon at y meddyg. Ymddangosai fod y cwynion gwreiddiol am gyfraddau cymhlethdod a haint yn Ysbyty J wedi diflannu i’r cefndir. Gallai’r cyfraddau haint fod oherwydd techneg rhwymo a ddefnyddiwyd gan y nyrsys, ac nid oedd y gyfradd gymhlethdod yn rhy wahanol i gyfradd meddyg arall i ganiatáu llunio unrhyw gasgliad gwael. Roedd ffocws y feirniadaeth bellach ar berthnasoedd gwaith gwael y meddyg. Roedd yn ffroenuchel ac yn ‘siarad i lawr’ ag is-weithwyr. Mynegwyd pryderon tebyg gan staff o Ysbyty T ac roedd hefyd cwyn ei fod wedi gwneud llawdriniaeth y tu hwnt i’w allu er y cynghorwyd iddo beidio. Gwadodd y meddyg fod yna broblemau perthnasoedd a honnodd, yn Ysbyty J, ei fod wedi troi’r nyrsys yn ei erbyn trwy wneud beirniadaethau cyfiawnadwy o’u technegau rhwymo. Roedd unrhyw gwynion eraill o’r math hwnnw yn ddiesgus, meddai. Pasiodd y meddyg yr holl brofion Cam II, er gyda rhai
‘bylchau sy’n peri gofid’
o ran gwybodaeth a phryderon eraill. Dywedodd yr adroddiad am y meddyg ei fod
‘o fewn meysydd eglur a ... chyfyngedig o drawma ... ac orthopedeg yn wybodus ac yn dechnegol gymwys.’
Casglodd yr adroddiad asesiad fod y meddyg
‘yn anaddas ar gyfer ymarfer ymgynghorol annibynnol’
. Penderfynodd y cydlynydd achos atgyfeirio’r achos i’r CPP.
Yn y gwrandawiad, a ddigwyddodd ddwy flynedd a hanner ar ôl y gŵyn bennaf, canfu panel y CPP nad oedd digon o dystiolaeth i gasglu bod perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol. Ni roddodd y CPP resymau dros y casgliad hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, rhoddodd y GMC drawsgrifiad llawn o’r gwrandawiad i’r Ymchwiliad felly rwyf wedi gallu llunio barn am yr hyn a ddigwyddodd. Yn fras iawn, roedd yn amlwg nad oedd y Panel Asesu wedi deall yn llawn yr hyn a oedd yn ofynnol iddo’i wneud ac nid oedd wedi cydymffurfio â nifer o ofynion ffurfiol. Nid oedd yn glir o gwbl pa farn a luniodd am berfformiad cyffredinol y meddyg. Yn ail, roedd yn amlwg naill ai nad oedd y dystiolaeth o anghymhwyster llawdriniaethol yn eang neu nad oedd wedi’i harchwilio’n gywir. Nid oedd yn golygu llawer a gallai’r meddyg gynnig esboniad rhesymol am yr amgylchiadau lle dywedwyd ei fod wedi cyflawni tasg y tu hwnt i’w arbenigedd. Taerodd y meddyg fod y cwynion am broblemau personoliaeth oherwydd, i bob diben, rhagfarn yn ei erbyn, fel dirprwy feddyg. Ni alwyd ar unrhyw rai o’r aelodau staff a siaradodd â’r aseswyr am hyn i roi tystiolaeth ac mae’n debyg y teimlai’r CPP fod rhyw wirionedd yn esboniad y meddyg. Nid oedd, wrth reswm, yn ymwybodol y gwnaed cwynion tebyg amdano rhai blynyddoedd yn flaenorol, cyn rhoi’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar waith.
Rwyf wedi rhoi’r adroddiad hwn oherwydd fy mod eisiau cymryd y cyfle i wneud rhai sylwadau am y modd y cynhaliwyd y gwrandawiad hwn y gobeithiaf y byddant o werth i’r dyfodol. Nid bwriad fy sylwadau yw cyfleu bod panel y CPP wedi dwyn y casgliad anghywir. Fy argraff o ddarllen y trawsgrifiad yw y gwnaed cam â’r GMC mewn dwy ffordd. Yn gyntaf, roedd y Panel Asesu wedi gwneud nifer o gamgymeriadau technegol wrth gwblhau’r broses asesu. Galluogodd hyn i gwnsler y meddyg wneud beirniadaethau dilys a thanseiliodd achos y GMC i ryw raddau. Ond nid wyf yn siwr fod y beirniadaethau hyn yn berthnasol iawn i rinweddau’r achos. Ymddangosant felly, dyna’r cyfan. Yn amlwg, mae’n bwysig bod aseswyr yn cael hyfforddiant cywir ac nad ydynt yn gwneud camgymeriadau technegol. Hefyd, ni alwodd y GMC ar unrhyw un o’r tystion a wnaeth honiadau am broblemau ymddygiad y meddyg; cafodd y CPP yr adroddiad asesiad ysgrifenedig a chlywodd dystiolaeth fyw gan ddau o’r aseswyr. Sylweddolaf y byddai’n anymarferol ac yn annymunol iawn i’r GMC alw ar bawb a oedd wedi rhoi gwybodaeth i’r aseswyr. Fodd bynnag, trwy beidio â galw ar unrhyw rai o’r tystion hynny’n ‘fyw’, galluogwyd i’r meddyg honni bod y tystion yn rhagfarnllyd yn ei erbyn heb unrhyw gyfle i banel y CPP feirniadu ei hun a oedd hynny’n wir.
Mynegodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate bryder i’r Ymchwiliad am y ffordd y gall cyfreithwyr sy’n cynrychioli meddygon gerbron y CPP ‘bigo tyllau’ yn yr asesiadau perfformiad. Cymharodd yr asesiad â darlun pwyntilydd yn cynnwys miloedd o ddotiau bychain. Roedd pob datganiad neu bwynt yn yr asesiad yn ddot a oedd yn rhan o’r darlun cyflawn. Pe gallai’r cyfreithwyr waredu rhai o’r dotiau yn yr asesiad, byddai’n colli ei gryfder a’i hygrededd, yn yr un modd ag y byddai darlun yn dod yn aneglur pe byddai rhai o’r dotiau o baent yn cael eu dileu. Deallaf ei phryder er nad wyf yn ei rannu. Rhaid i gyfreithwyr allu ymosod ar dystiolaeth ar ran eu cleientiaid. Os y cyfan y llwyddant ei wneud yw dileu ychydig ddotiau, dylai panel y CPP fod yn gallu gweld a deall y darlun o hyd. Ond, pe byddai’r cyfreithwyr yn llwyddo i waredu casgliad cyfan o ddotiau, yna gellid tanseilio dilysrwydd yr asesiad.
Soniaf am yr anawsterau fforensig hyn oherwydd mae’n debyg i mi, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, efallai y bydd rhaid i’r GMC gyflwyno achosion eithaf cymhleth i banel FTP. Mae’n bosibl, yn y dyfodol, y bydd rhaid i wrandawiad unigol ystyried honiadau o gamymddygiad a pherfformiad diffygiol a phroblemau iechyd. Pe byddai’r panel yn ystyried achosion mewn modd cyfannol, byddai’n llawer anoddach archwilio’r ffeithiau, paratoi tystiolaeth a rheoli ei gyflwyniad nag y mae ar hyn o bryd. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at y pynciau hyn yn ddiweddarach yn yr Adroddiad hwn.
Sylwadau Pellach ar y Pum Achos
Mae’r holl achosion hyn yn dangos problemau oedi. Dywedodd y GMC ei fod yn cydnabod y bu oedi yn broblem a’i fod, yn y gorffennol diweddar, wedi darparu gwell adnoddau ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw achos i amau mai dyna fel yr oedd. Gwnaeth y Gweithgor Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad, a gyflwynodd adroddiad ym mis Ebrill 2004 ac y byddaf yn cyfeirio ato yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod, dynnu sylw at bryderon am oedi ac anogodd y dylid gwneud ymdrechion pellach i ostwng oediadau a ddigwyddai am resymau o fewn rheolaeth y GMC. Mae’n debyg i mi fod elfen o oedi’n debygol bob amser mewn achosion perfformiad, hyd yn oed gyda gwell adnoddau. Os felly, gall cleifion fod mewn perygl meddygon sydd â diffygion a gydnabuwyd yn lleol ond sydd heb eu profi i’r GMC hyd yma. Gellir amddiffyn cleifion gan fesurau dros dro i atal neu orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg a, fel y dywedais, ar ôl 2000, gwnaeth yr IOC orchmynion dros dro mewn achosion perfformiad. Nodaf, fodd bynnag, na chafwyd atgyfeiriad i’r IOC cyn yr asesiad llawn yn unrhyw un o’r pum achos a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad. Gallaf weld, yn absenoldeb tystiolaeth gadarn o niwed i gleifion, y gallai’r IOC fod yn amharod i orchymyn ataliad dros dro. Sylweddolais, ar ôl y penderfyniad y dylid asesu meddyg, gyntaf yn y byd y caiff ef/hi yr asesiad gwrthrychol Cam II, gyntaf yn y byd y byddai’r IOC mewn sefyllfa i wneud penderfyniad dros dro gwybodus. Fel enghraifft, defnyddiaf achos Dr KA 01. Roedd y PCT wedi mynegi pryder gwirioneddol am ddiogelwch cleifion. Parhaodd y meddyg i ymarfer. Fel y digwyddodd, methodd y tri phrawf Cam II i gyd. Efallai, mewn achosion lle mae’r sefydliad lleol yn pryderu ynghylch diogelwch cleifion, dylai fod atgyfeiriad cyflym i ganolfan Cam II ac atgyfeiriad awtomatig i’r IOC os yw’r meddyg yn methu unrhyw ran o’r prawf.
Arweiniodd achos Dr KA 01 yn anuniongyrchol at drafodaeth yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad am y defnydd o bwerau rheolaeth restr PCT. Yn yr achos hwnnw, mae’n rhaid y bu’r PCT yn poeni’n fawr pan nad oedd unrhyw beth wedi digwydd braidd, ddeg mis ar ôl gwrandawiad y CPP. Roedd wedi adrodd ei bryderon; aseswyd y meddyg a chanfuwyd bod y pryderon yn ddilys. Ond, ddwy flynedd yn ddiweddarach, yr unig newid gwirioneddol oedd bod meddyg ychwanegol yn gweithio yn y practis. Gellid dweud hefyd y gwnaed Dr KA 01 yn hollol ymwybodol o’i ddiffygion. Fodd bynnag, mewn ffyrdd eraill, nid oedd unrhyw beth wedi digwydd i sicrhau na fyddai’r meddyg yn gwneud yr un fath o gamgymeriadau y bu’n eu gwneud yn y gorffennol.
Yn y seminarau, cafwyd ychydig drafodaeth ynghylch a ddylai PCT yn y sefyllfa honno ddefnyddio’r pwerau rheolaeth restr a fu ganddo ers 2002 i atal neu waredu meddyg oddi ar ei restr, er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion. Mynegwyd y farn y byddai PCT yn oedi cyn gwneud hynny lle’r oedd y GMC, y corff rheoleiddio proffesiynol, wedi ystyried yr achos a phenderfynu ar gwrs gwahanol. Byddai’r PCT yn tueddu ildio i farn y GMC. Mae hynny’n ddealladwy, yn enwedig mewn achos fel achos Dr KA 01, lle na fodolai’r PCT hyd yn oed pan atgyfeiriodd ei ragflaenydd y meddyg i’r GMC. Fodd bynnag, mynegodd sawl cyfranogwr y farn y dylai PCTs fod yn barod i ddefnyddio’u pwerau eu hunain ac i ddefnyddio’u hawl i farnu pe byddai’r atebion a gynigir gan y GMC yn ymddangos yn llai na digonol. Nodaf, yn achos Dr KA 04, fod y PCO wedi atal meddyg rhag darparu gwasanaethau meddyg teulu. Bu trwy weithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC a gorfodwyd amodau ar ei gofrestriad. Roedd y PCO yn dal i boeni am ddiogelwch cleifion a defnyddiodd ei bwerau ei hun. Credaf fod hynny’n briodol. Mae’r Senedd wedi darparu’r pwerau hyn, oherwydd ei fod wedi cydnabod bod gan gyrff lleol olwg agosach weithiau ar yr hyn sy’n digwydd na chorff cenedlaethol a gallant asesu anghenion eu cymunedau eu hunain yn well.
Y Grwp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad

---  ---
Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, sefydlodd y Pwyllgor Polisi Addasrwydd i Ymarfer y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad, a gadeiriwyd gan y Fonesig Deirdre Hine, sef cyn-Brif Swyddog Meddygol Cymru a chyn-Gadeirydd y Comisiwn Gwella Iechyd, i gynnal adolygiad o’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Cyflwynodd y Grŵp Adolygu adroddiad drafft ym mis Tachwedd 2003 a’i adroddiad terfynol ym mis Ebrill 2004. Roedd aelodau’r Grŵp Adolygu’n cynnwys yr Athro Alastair Scotland, Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr NCAA, a’r Fonesig Lesley Southgate.
Nododd adroddiad terfynol y Grŵp Adolygu fod gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC yn cynrychioli ‘
cam sylweddol ymlaen wrth foderneiddio rheoleiddio meddygol’
. Aeth ymlaen:
‘Am y tro cyntaf, roedd gan y GMC arfau dibynadwy a gydnabyddir yn rhyngwladol i asesu, yn deg, yn gyson ac yn gywir, safon perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg mewn unrhyw gangen bwysig o feddygaeth. Mae cyflawniadau’r gweithdrefnau fel y maent yn sylweddol.’
Nodwyd y byddai
r gweithdrefnau perfformiad presennol yn dod i ben gyda chyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Cylch gorchwyl y Grŵp Adolygu oedd ystyried a oedd angen diwygio amcanion gwreiddiol y gweithdrefnau a gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer ystyried materion perfformiad yn y dyfodol a defnyddio
r arfau asesu.
Esboniodd y Grŵp Adolygu y bu disgwyl, cyn cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad, y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn cael eu trafod trwy’r gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol (a fodelwyd ar y gweithdrefnau iechyd presennol) fel y byddai’r CPP yn
‘bwyllgor dewis olaf’
. Tybiwyd y byddai rhan fwyaf y meddygon a atgyfeirir i’r gweithdrefnau yn gallu adfer ac yn gallu dychwelyd i ymarfer ar ôl cyfnod o ail-addysgu neu hyfforddiant targedig. Tybiwyd hefyd y byddai meddygon yn barod i ymgymryd ag adferiad ac y byddent yn cytuno i ddatganiad o ofynion gwirfoddol at y diben hwn. Tybiwyd hefyd y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o atgyfeiriadau yn cynnwys ymgynghorwyr ysbytai a oedd wedi methu cadw i fyny â’r technegau diweddaraf, neu feddygon yng nghyfnodau cynnar eu gyrfaoedd, na ellid
‘lladd’
eu problemau
‘yn yr egin’
. Fel y digwyddodd hi, ni chadarnhawyd y tybiaethau hyn ar ôl cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau.
Ystyriodd y Grŵp Adolygu mai nodwedd fwyaf trawiadol y data a gasglwyd ganddo oedd y nifer fechan iawn o achosion rhwng 1998 a 2002 (sef 15) lle cytunwyd datganiad o ofynion. Nododd y Grŵp Adolygu nad oedd yn glir a oedd hyn yn sgil diffyg achosion lle byddai datganiad o ofynion yn briodol, neu oherwydd y bu cydlynwyr achos yn amharod i gynnig datganiadau o ofynion neu oherwydd amharodrwydd ar ran meddygon i dderbyn datganiadau o ofynion. Fodd bynnag, aeth mwyafrif yr achosion at y CPP ar gyfer penderfyniad. Awgrymodd fod ychydig dystiolaeth y cymhlethwyd yr achosion perfformiad a ddaethai i’r GMC gan amharodrwydd y meddygon i gael cyngor neu geisio cymorth.
Tynnodd y Grŵp Adolygu sylw at nifer yr achosion yn 2001 a 2002 lle’r oedd yr ARC wedi gwrthdroi penderfyniad gan sgriniwr meddygol y dylid gwahodd meddyg i gael asesiad perfformiad. Nododd ei adroddiad terfynol ddau reswm posibl dros hyn. Yn gyntaf, gallai’r trothwy sgrinio fod yn rhy isel, ac o ganlyniad atgyfeiriwyd achosion ‘gwan’ ar gyfer asesiad. Yn ail, awgrymwyd y gallai’r ffaith y gallai’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth ar lafar gerbron yr ARC arwain at benderfyniad a oedd
‘yn rhesymol yn y cyfnod sgrinio’
yn cael ei
‘roi i un ochr yn briodol pan ddaw darlun llawnach yn glir’
. Roedd yr adroddiad drafft wedi awgrymu trydydd rheswm, sef, gan na fyddai’r achwynydd yn ymddangos yn y gwrandawiad ARC bob amser efallai, mae’n bosibl y gwnaed y penderfyniad weithiau i beidio ag asesu meddyg mewn amgylchiadau lle, pe byddai’r darlun cyflawn yn hysbys, y byddai’n fwy priodol cael asesiad o’r fath. O ystyried y ffaith na fwriedir y dylai’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd gynnwys unrhyw beth cyfwerth â’r ARC, ni aeth y Grŵp Adolygu ymlaen i ystyried p’un o’r esboniadau posibl oedd y mwyaf tebygol. Fodd bynnag, gallai fod yn werthfawr dadansoddi’r rhesymau pam y gwnaeth yr ARC wrthdroi penderfyniadau sgrinio. Gall fod effaith ‘gwrandawiad unochrog’ (heb fantais tystiolaeth yr achwynydd) yn tueddu rhoi canlyniad penodol. Os felly, dylid osgoi gwrandawiadau o’r fath yn y dyfodol.
Cyfeiriodd y Grŵp Adolygu hefyd at y cynnydd yn hyd gwrandawiadau perfformiad gan y CPP. Hyd cyfartalog gwrandawiadau perfformiad oedd dau ddiwrnod ym 1999 a mwy na thri diwrnod yn 2002. Eisteddodd panel y CPP am 15 diwrnod yn 2000, 54 diwrnod yn 2001, 120 o ddiwrnodau yn 2002 a 90 diwrnod hyd at fis Medi 2003. Cymerodd achos
yn unig 16 diwrnod.
Cyfeiriodd y Grŵp Adolygu at y rhan a chwaraewyd gan weithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn y fframwaith ehangach ar gyfer amddiffyn cleifion. Amlygodd amgyffrediad nad oedd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn darparu adborth digonol i’r rheiny gyda chyfrifoldeb lleol am feddygon. Yn benodol, tynnodd sylw at y ffaith nad oedd adroddiadau asesiad perfformiad ar gael i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg. Beirniadodd y Grŵp Adolygu yr ymagwedd hon, gan ddweud:
‘Os yw adroddiad asesiad yn datgelu bod gan feddyg broblemau perfformiad difrifol, mae’n bwysig bod y sefydliad sy’n gyfrifol am reoli’r meddyg yn lleol yn gweld yr adroddiad asesiad. Ni ellir ei ystyried fel dogfen breifat rhwng y GMC a’r meddyg.’
Ni fynegodd y Grŵp Adolygu unrhyw farn bendant ynghylch a ddylid datgelu adroddiadau asesiad i gyflogwyr neu PCOs mewn achosion lle canfuwyd nad oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol, neu lle datgelwyd diffygion na dybiwyd eu bod yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, ond yn ddigon serch hynny i warantu cyhoeddi rhybudd. Argymhellodd y Grŵp Adolygu y dylai’r GMC ystyried y materion hyn ymhellach. Yn fy marn i, dylid datgelu pob adroddiad asesiad i gyflogwyr a PCOs.
Soniodd y Grŵp Adolygu hefyd am fethiant yr ARC a’r CPP i roi rhesymau am benderfyniadau o blaid y meddyg. Nododd ei adroddiad drafft, hyd yn oed pan roddwyd rhesymau, eu bod yn
‘rhy brin i alluogi deall y sefyllfa’n gywir’
. Nododd y Grŵp Adolygu fod cyhoeddi penderfyniadau
r CPP, o 1 Gorffennaf 2003, ar wefan y GMC yn
‘gam ymlaen’
. Fodd bynnag, ystyriodd fod angen cymryd mesurau pellach er mwyn sicrhau adborth effeithiol. Nododd:
‘... mae’n hanfodol i’r GMC roi rhesymau am bob penderfyniad a wna ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, gan gynnwys penderfyniadau i beidio â gweithredu. Mae rôl cyflogwr yn anoddach os nad oes unrhyw wybodaeth ar gael i esbonio pam nad yw pryderon sy’n ddifrifol yn ôl pob golwg wedi’u cymryd ymlaen.’
Mae’r GMC wedi derbyn yr argymhelliad hwnnw ac, yn y gorffennol diweddar, roedd yn arfer i’r CPP roi rhesymau am ei holl benderfyniadau.
Cyfeiriodd y Grŵp Adolygu hefyd at y ffaith y cynhaliwyd gwrandawiadau’r CPP yn breifat, oni bai bod y meddyg yn gofyn am wrandawiad cyhoeddus. Mynegodd y farn y dylid cynnal asesiadau perfformiad yn gyhoeddus fel arfer, oni bai bod panel y CPP yn penderfynu fel arall. Yn ei adroddiad drafft, roedd y Grŵp Adolygu wedi nodi
‘nad yw gwrandawiadau preifat yn cyd-fynd â didwylledd, tryloywder ac atebolrwydd’
Aeth y Grŵp Adolygu ymlaen i roi sylw i fater tystiolaeth. Nododd yr adroddiad (yn wahanol i’r sefyllfa a fodolai pan gyflwynwyd y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn gyntaf) ei bod yn debygol y bydd meddygon a atgyfeirir i’r GMC yn y dyfodol wedi bod trwy ryw fath o broses adfer leol y tybiwyd ei bod wedi methu. Cododd yr adroddiad y cwestiwn a ddylai fod y GMC yn gallu defnyddio tystiolaeth a allai fod ar gael o ffynonellau eraill adeg yr atgyfeiriad. Hyd yma, nid yw tystiolaeth o’r fath wedi chwarae rhan fawr ar ôl i benderfyniad gael ei wneud i gael asesiad GMC. Nododd yr adroddiad:
‘... y bwriad
(yn ôl pob tebyg, mae hyn yn cyfeirio at fwriad y GMC)
yw symud tuag at fodel lle caiff gwybodaeth ddibynadwy a gasglwyd yn lleol neu gan sefydliadau eraill ei hystyried yn fwy systematig a lle mae’n chwarae rhan fwy yn archwiliad ac asesiad cyffredinol y GMC o addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer’.
Byddai ymagwedd o’r fath, nododd yr adroddiad, yn osgoi dyblygu amser, adnoddau ac ymdrech. Byddai hefyd yn gyson ag
‘ymagwedd tîm’
at amddiffyn cleifion a chynnal safonau.
Awgrymodd y Grŵp Adolygu mai ffynonellau posibl o dystiolaeth y gallai’r GMC eu defnyddio fyddai cwynion (wedi’u cadarnhau’n lleol neu beidio), adroddiadau o wrandawiadau IRP neu archwiliadau Ombwdsman neu ganfyddiadau eraill o’r fath, canlyniadau
‘archwiliadau arferol neu eithriadol’
ac adroddiadau asesiadau a gynhelir gan yr NCAA neu gyrff cyfwerth mewn rhannau eraill o’r DU. Soniwyd hefyd am y ffaith, yn y dyfodol, y gellid cynnal asesiadau yn dilyn model yr NCAA hefyd ar lefel leol. Cyfeiriodd y Grŵp Adolygu at y gwahaniaeth rhwng cymeriad cyfansymiol (h.y. pasio/methu) y gweithdrefnau perfformiad (a allai, er gwaethaf eu pwyslais ar adferiad, arwain at ataliad a allai yn y dyfodol arwain at ddilead) a natur ffurfiannol (h.y. addysgol) y gweithdrefnau perfformiad lleol a’r ymyriad gan yr NCAA. Anelwyd yr ail at weithredu adferol. Serch hynny, awgrymodd yr adroddiad y dylai fod yn bosibl, lle’r oedd tystiolaeth ar gael eisoes, i
‘adeiladu’
darlun o berfformiad yn ei holl agweddau, gan ddefnyddio’r dystiolaeth honno. Ystyriodd y Grŵp Adolygu fod rhaid i unrhyw dystiolaeth a ddefnyddir yn y modd hwn fod yn briodoladwy i berfformiad y meddyg unigol (ac nid timau neu systemau), rhaid ei chael a’i chyflwyno’n deg, rhaid iddi fod yn gadarn ac yn ddibynadwy a bod rhaid ei defnyddio i gyflawni barnau teg a chyson ar draws yr holl feysydd yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Er mwyn sicrhau bod y meini prawf hynny’n cael eu bodloni, awgrymodd yr adroddiad:
‘... y bydd angen ar gyflogwyr a chyrff lleol arweiniad clir (naill ai gan y GMC neu drwy “ganolfannau rhagoriaeth” a nodwyd neu a grëwyd i ledaenu arfer da) am sut i sicrhau bod eu prosesau’n arwain at dystiolaeth sy’n bodloni’r safonau hyn. ...
Yn amlwg, byddai proses o’r fath yn cymryd amser, ymdrech ac adnoddau.’
Ystyriodd y Grŵp Adolygu mai
‘cyfeiriad y daith’
dylai fod symud tuag at ddefnyddio tystiolaeth leol lle bynnag y bo’n bosibl. Dim ond lle mae’r dystiolaeth leol yn annigonol neu’n amhriodol y dylai’r GMC ddefnyddio ei arfau asesu ei hun i archwilio perfformiad y meddyg ymhellach. Ystyriodd y Grŵp Adolygu y byddai’n well, yn y tymor hir, pe byddai un corff cenedlaethol yn cynnal yr holl asesiadau i safonau cenedlaethol diffiniedig. Ni cheisiodd fynd i’r afael â’r cwestiwn o bwy a ddylai wneud hyn.
Nododd yr adroddiad fod y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, o’u cychwyn, wedi pwysleisio adferiad llawer yn fwy na fu’r arfer yn y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad. Nododd:
‘Roedd y ffaith y gallai spm arwain at ddilead tra na allai sdp, yn arwydd pwerus ar ei ben ei hun.’
Nododd y Grŵp Adolygu, pan ddyfeisiwyd y gweithdrefnau:
‘... y gwnaed adferiad yn thema ganolog i’r model polisi yn briodol, gan ei bod yn ddymunol i gyflawni consensws proffesiynol ar y gweithdrefnau newydd, ac oherwydd y bu absenoldeb llwyr bron o drefniadau lleol, strwythuredig i gefnogi meddygon mewn trafferth’.
Cydnabu’r Grŵp Adolygu y byddrhan fwyaf y meddygon a atgyfeirir i’r GMC gyda phroblemau perfformiad, yn y dyfodol, wedi ymgymryd â phroses adferol sydd wedi methu, neu y tybiwyd ei bod wedi methu. Nododd y Grŵp Adolygu fod rhai pobl wedi awgrymu y dylai’r GMC hepgor yn llwyr unrhyw uchelgais i alluogi adfer arfer gwael ac y dylai’n hytrach ganolbwyntio’n llwyr ar ba gamau sydd angen eu cymryd i amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Serch hynny, roedd y Grŵp Adolygu o’r farn fod yna
‘resymau cadarn’
i’r GMC gadw adferiad yn nod ac felly cynnal y cyfleuster i gynnig llwybr gwirfoddol ar gyfer delio â phryderon perfformiad. Awgrymodd yr adroddiad, yn bwysicaf, fod llwybr gwirfoddol o’r fath yn darparu cymhelliad i feddyg gydweithredu â’r broses. Credai’r Grŵp Adolygu, pe byddai’r GMC yn gwaredu’r gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol presennol yn syml, y byddai pob meddyg a atgyfeirir i’r GMC gyda phroblem perfformiad difrifol yn herio’r broses o ganlyniad ar bob cyfnod. Byddai hyn yn cynnwys cost ac oedi sylweddol. Credai’r Grŵp Adolygu, hyd yn oed pe gellid cyfiawnhau ymagwedd o’r fath o ran cymesuredd (ac nid oedd yn credu y gellid gwneud hyn), ni fyddai oedi o’r fath er lles gorau’r cyhoedd a byddai’n ddefnydd aneffeithiol iawn o adnoddau.
Yn ei adroddiad drafft, nododd y Grŵp Adolygu
‘y dylai’r pwyslais fod ar amddiffyn cleifion bob amser’
serch hynny. Dylai hyn fod yn benodol wir pan ystyrir bod y llwybr gwirfoddol yn amhriodol a bod achos wedi’i atgyfeirio i wrandawiad. Er na ddylid anghofio am adferiad, dywedwyd mai amcan y CPP (sef panel FTP yn y dyfodol) yn bennaf dylai fod i benderfynu pa gamau y mae angen eu cymryd i amddiffyn cleifion a’r cyhoedd mewn achos lle gwnaed canfyddiad bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Ymddangosai hyn gyfleu y dylid, ar ôl anghofio am adferiad yn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, symud y ffocws i ffwrdd o ymdrechion i wella’r meddyg ac, yn hytrach, ei gyfeirio at ei atal ef/hi rhag ymarfer naill ai dros dro neu’n barhaol. Fel yr esboniaf yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon, dyma oedd prif bwyslais tystiolaeth lafar Mr Scott.
Yn adroddiad terfynol y Grŵp Adolygu, addaswyd y darn perthnasol ac ni ymddangosai rhagor fel petai’n awgrymu unrhyw newid ffocws i ffwrdd o adferiad.

---  ---
Er gwaethaf yr addasiad yn yr adroddiad terfynol yr wyf newydd gyfeirio ato, bydd gwaith y Grŵp Adolygu o werth posibl mawr i’r GMC wrth iddo ddechrau oes ei weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Un o’r pwyntiau a godwyd yn ei adroddiad ac a bwysleisiwyd hefyd i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mr Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, yw y bydd llawer o’r meddygon a atgyfeirir i’r GMC yn y dyfodol ar sail perfformiad gwael wedi bod trwy ryw fath o asesiad lleol ac ymdrechion i adfer. Ar hyn o bryd, gall meddyg y mae ei ymarfer yn achos pryder gael asesiad naill ai gan ei gorff/ei chorff GIG lleol (yn debyg i’r asesiad a gynlluniwyd gan NCAA) a/neu, o bosibl, gan yr NCAA ei hun. Ar ôl yr asesiad hwnnw, gallai’r meddyg ymgymryd â rhaglen o adferiad, a allai gynnwys ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth a/neu gyswllt eang â deon ôl-raddedig. Pe byddai’r mesurau hynny’n methu, mae’n bosib iawn y gellid adrodd y meddyg i’r GMC.
Yn y gorffennol, pan adroddwyd meddyg i’r GMC, byddai rhaid cael asesiad hollol newydd. Nid oedd yr asesiad lleol neu NCAA yn addas fel sail i weithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Nid oedd wedi’i gynllunio i wrthsefyll y math o her gyfreithiol yr oedd rhaid i asesiadau’r GMC ei gwrthsefyll. Ni ddywedaf hynny fel unrhyw fath o feirniadaeth. Gwnaeth dystiolaeth yr Athro Scotland, a esboniodd ymagwedd gyfannol yr NCAA at asesu perfformiad, argraff dda arnaf. Mae’r NCAA yn cydnabod y gall fod problemau iechyd, personol neu bersonoliaeth gyda’r meddyg, neu broblemau yn ei amgylchedd/ei hamgylchedd gwaith. Mae gan asesiad sy’n seiliedig ar egwyddorion NCAA dair phrif elfen: sef iechyd galwedigaethol, ymddygiad ac arfer clinigol. Yn fyr, diben yr asesiad yw darganfod beth sy’n bod a pham, gyda’r bwriad o wneud pethau’n well. Ni chafodd ei gynllunio i alluogi gwneud penderfyniad ar feini prawf gwrthrychol a yw perfformiad y meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol; ni fyddai chwaith, yn y dyfodol, yn darparu sail y gallai panel FTP benderfynu arni a yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer.
Mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu, am amrywiaeth o resymau, nad yw’n ddymunol i feddyg gael asesiadau dro ar ôl tro. Maent yn gostus, yn cymryd amser ac yn achosi llawer o straen. Dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y GMC yn trafod gyda’r NCAA ar hyn o bryd ynghylch datblygu un math o asesiad a fyddai’n darparu ar gyfer pob diben. Nid wyf yn gwybod a fydd hyn yn ddichonol. Yn amlwg, byddai un math o asesiad yn well am sawl rheswm, pe gellid ei ddyfeisio er mwyn iddo gyflawni ei holl ddibenion dymunadwy. Byddwn yn tybio y gallai proses fesul camau neu fodiwlau, lle cesglir gwybodaeth ar hyd y ffordd, ddarparu’r ateb. Dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto a Mr Scott fod casglu tystiolaeth yn fodiwlaidd i gefnogi achos perfformiad yn cael ei ystyried; ar adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd trafodaethau’n cael eu cynnal gyda’r NCAA am brotocol cyffredin ar gyfer casglu tystiolaeth ac am safoni asesiadau perfformiad.
Pan ddaw problemau perfformiad i’r amlwg yn gyntaf, rhaid mai’r nod pennaf yw eu hasesu a’u datrys ar lefel leol. Byddwn wedi meddwl y dylai tair elfen yr asesiad NCAA i gyd fod yn nodweddion hanfodol ar unrhyw broses sy’n ceisio datrys neu wella problemau’r meddyg. Rwy’n cael yr argraff eu bod yn ffurfio gwell sail i ddyfeisio mesurau adferol arni na gweithdrefnau’r GMC ac nad yw gweithdrefnau’r GMC yn addas iawn i’r broses honno. Gallaf fod yn anghywir am hynny; gall fod yr anawsterau wrth ddyfeisio mesurau adferol addas wedi codi oherwydd na fu Paneli Asesu’r GMC ac aelodau o baneli’r CPP yn arbenigwyr mewn dyfeisio adferiad, tra bod cynghorwyr NCAA a deoniaid ôl-raddedig yn arbenigwyr. Pe gallai math NCAA o asesiad yn y pen draw ffurfio rhan o’r dystiolaeth y bydd y GMC yn dymuno dibynnu arni, bydd rhaid ei gynnal i safon uchel ac yn unol â phrotocolau cytunedig. Dylai ymgorffori rhywfaint o fethodoleg gwaith y Fonesig Lesley Southgate. Gan dybio y gellid dyfeisio protocol asesu o’r fath, ni chredaf y gellid disgwyl i gyrff GIG lleol gynnal yr asesiad heb gefnogaeth a chyngor. Rwy’n argyhoeddedig am yr angen i’r NCAA (neu gorff tebyg iawn iddo) ddarparu cyngor a chefnogaeth o’r fath. Byddwn yn credu hefyd y byddai angen rhywfaint o gymorth arbenigol wrth werthuso’r canlyniadau a dyfeisio adferiad priodol. Rhaid i adferiad gynnwys y deoniaethau ôl-raddedig, mewn cysylltiad â’r corff GIG lleol. Mae gan y deoniaethau arbenigedd yn y maes hwn na fydd gan gorff GIG lleol. Hefyd, dylid annog y deoniaethau i sefydlu cyrsiau a darparu lleoliadau mewn practisiau lle bo’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol ar gael ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth a mentora. Dylai’r corff GIG lleol fod yn gyfrifol am ariannu adferiad a goruchwyliaeth gyffredinol cynnydd y meddyg, i’w gweithredu trwy sylw agos at fesurau llywodraethu clinigol. Gall fod angen iddo ddefnyddio’i bwerau rheolaeth restr os nad yw’r meddyg yn barod i gydweithio neu os nad yw’n gwneud unrhyw gynnydd gyda’i adferiad/ei hadferiad.
Os yw popeth yn mynd iawn a’r meddyg yn gwella, nid oes angen cynnwys y GMC o gwbl. Ond, os yw’r mesurau adferol yn methu neu os ‘tybier eu bod yn methu’ oherwydd nad yw’r meddyg yn cydweithio, yna rhaid i’r GMC gymryd y llyw a phenderfynu a yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer. Erbyn hyn, dylai fod ffeil o dystiolaeth ar y meddyg, gan gynnwys yr asesiadau a’r adroddiadau cychwynnol gan y rheiny sy’n ymwneud ag adfer a goruchwylio’r meddyg. Cyhyd â bod y cofnodion a’r adroddiadau hyn o safon ddigon uchel, ni allaf weld pam na ddylent fod yn rhan o’r dystiolaeth y mae’r GMC yn dibynnu arni. Fodd bynnag, ni chredaf y byddent yn ddigon. Credaf, yn y cyfnod hwn, y byddai angen rhywfaint o brofion gwrthrychol ar y meddyg a fyddai’n gwrthsefyll her gyfreithiol ar ei ben ei hun. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai gan y profion Cam II presennol rhan i’w chwarae. P’un a fyddai’n rhaid cael rhywbeth mwy, ni allwn ddweud. Mae’n debyg i mi mai’r hyn sydd ei angen yn y cyfnod hwn yw deunydd mor wrthrychol â phosibl. Byddwn wedi meddwl, pe byddai meddyg yn methu’r profion gwrthrychol hyn, y gellid eu gosod, ar gyfer meddyg teulu, ar lefel asesiad cyfansymiol, y byddai’n briodol atal y meddyg ar unwaith oni bai a than iddo/iddi basio’r profion hynny i lefel foddhaol. Pe byddai pryderon eraill, fel y gallai fod yn ddigon posibl, byddai’n rhaid anfon yr achos ymlaen i banel FTP, lle byddai’n rhaid i’r GMC gyflwyno cymysgedd o dystiolaeth ffeithiol a barn er mwyn darparu darlun digon clir o’r meddyg i ganiatáu llunio barn wrthrychol.
Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley wrth yr Ymchwiliad y deallai yr hoffai’r GMC ymwrthod â’r cyfrifoldeb am gynnal asesiadau perfformiad. Dan yr ymagwedd fodiwlaidd neu gronnol a ddisgrifiais, ni fyddai’r GMC, beth bynnag, yn ymwneud â’r asesiadau cynnar a gynhelir gan gyrff GIG lleol. Efallai y byddai’n rhaid iddo gynnal asesiadau o feddygon yn gweithio yn y sector preifat na fyddai unrhyw fecanwaith arall ar eu cyfer. Mae’n debyg i mi y byddai’n synhwyrol i’r GMC gadw rheolaeth dros y cyfnod olaf. Pe na fyddai’n gwneud hynny, byddai’n rhaid iddo o leiaf osod y safonau i’w defnyddio yn y cyfnod hwnnw a sicrhau y sicrheir ansawdd y gweithdrefnau. Pwy bynnag a fydd yn cynnal asesiadau, mae’n debyg i mi fod angen brys am broses sy’n wrthrychol i raddau helaeth ac nad oes modd i honiadau o ragfarn neu ymosodiad ar y gweithdrefnau a fabwysiadir gan y tîm asesu effeithio arni. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai asesiad cyfansymiol, ar gyfer meddyg teulu o leiaf, yn darparu archwiliad cytbwys a safon y gellid disgwyl i unrhyw feddyg teulu ei chyflawni.
Problem arall y mae’n rhaid i’r GMC ei hwynebu yw’r broblem o baneli’n gwneud penderfyniadau. Rhaid iddo benderfynu ar y safonau i’w cymhwyso’n gyffredinol pan fo materion perfformiad yn codi. Yn y gorffennol, ymgorfforwyd y safonau i’w cymhwyso yn yr asesiad ei hun. Byddai’r asesiad yn cynnwys barn ynghylch a oedd perfformiad y meddyg yn ‘ddifrifol o ddiffygiol’. Golygai hyn fod tasg y CPP yn eithaf syml. Dyma a ddywedodd Syr Donald Irvine, a eisteddodd ar rai o’r achosion perfformiad cynharaf:
‘Roedd yn fater o glywed y dystiolaeth, holi cwestiynau am yr asesiad ... ond nid mater o geisio “ail ddyfalu’r” asesiad mewn gwirionedd.’
Yna, dywedodd, daethai’r broses yn gymhleth, oherwydd achos
i raddau. Datblygodd linell holi lle tueddai’r CPP geisio cynnal ail asesiad. Ymddangosai y daeth yn amhosibl i banel y CPP gymhwyso trothwy is na’r aseswyr eu hunain ‘na allai fod yn gywir’, meddai Syr Donald. Siaradodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate am ei phryder (a synhwyrais ei siomedigaeth) ynghylch y ffordd y ‘pigodd’ y cyfreithwyr ar ganlyniadau’r asesiadau a oedd yn seiliedig ar yr arfau a ddyfeisiwyd gan ei thîm, a oedd yn debyg i ddarlun pwyntilydd meddai, ac o ganlyniad y gallai’r CPP golli golwg ar y prif ddarlun a chanfod bod perfformiad y meddyg yn dderbyniol lle, yn ei barn hi, roedd yr asesiad wedi dangos yn amlwg ac yn wrthrychol nad oedd yn dderbyniol. Ni ddylai colli ychydig o ‘bwyntiau’ o’r asesiad gael yr effaith hon. Fodd bynnag, pe dangosir bod beirniadaeth bwysig yn yr asesiad yn ddigyfiawnhad, gallai’r panel gasglu nad yw’r hyn sy’n weddill yn ddigon ar gyfer canfyddiad gwael. Yr hyn na all y panel ei wneud yw cymhwyso gwahanol safonau i’r rheiny a gymhwyswyd yn yr asesiad.
Yn y dyfodol, pan nad yw’n fater i’r panel FTP a yw SDP wedi’i brofi ond yn hytrach a
‘oes nam digonol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’
, bydd y paneli FTP mewn helbul llwyr oni bai y darperir strwythur priodol ar eu cyfer. Nid oedd SDP yn gysyniad syml neu hollol wrthrychol, er bod y defnydd o’r arf asesu yn darparu meini prawf defnyddiol. Yn ogystal, cafodd yr aseswyr hyfforddiant, er rhaid cyfaddef nad oeddent bob amser yn cynnal yr asesiad yn y modd y dylent. Pe na fyddai’r arf asesu presennol yn cael ei ddefnyddio rhagor, byddai’r meini prawf hynny ac arbenigedd yr aseswyr yn cael eu colli. Hyd yn oed gan gymryd y gellid cyflwyno fformat safonedig ar gyfer asesu lleol, ni all gynnwys dyfarniadau y gallai’r GMC ddibynnu arnynt; byddai rhaid i’r panel FTP ei ddefnyddio fel ffynhonnell o dystiolaeth yn unig. Bydd rhaid i aelodau’r panel FTP llunio’u barnau eu hunain. Os yw’r barnau hynny am fod yn deg, yn gyson ac yn ddibynadwy, bydd rhaid iddynt gael eu harwain gan safonau a meini prawf clir. Gallai’r broblem ar gyfer y panel FTP gael ei chymhlethu hefyd trwy gynnwys materion iechyd ac ymddygiad. Pe na ddarperir safonau a meini prawf, bydd yna annhegwch i feddygon a methiant posibl i amddiffyn cleifion.
Siaradodd Mr Scott yn yr Ymchwiliad am agwedd y GMC yn y dyfodol at ymdrechion ar adferiad. Dywedodd mai’r
‘neges fer’
gan y GMC bellach oedd bod
‘adferiad yn bwysig iawn o hyd, ond nid i ni’
. Fel y deallais, roedd yn dweud na fyddai’r GMC yn gorfodi amodau rhagor yn cynnwys adferiad fel math o gymorth i’r meddyg neu fel ‘moronen’ i annog gwelliant. Yn y dyfodol, dylid cwblhau’r cyfnod hwnnw’n gyfan gwbl cyn i’r achos gyrraedd y GMC. Dylai’r GMC fod yn defnyddio’i bŵer i atal neu orfodi amodau ar feddyg yn fwy fel ‘ffon’ i orfodi’r meddyg i adfer neu gael ei ddileu fel arall. Byddai hynny’n cynrychioli newid sylweddol ar ran y GMC o’r athroniaeth sydd wedi’i arwain yn y gorffennol. Dywedodd Syr Donald wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y gweithdrefnau perfformiad, yn y diwrnodau cynnar, yn ‘canolbwyntio ar y meddyg’. Yn wir, roedd wedi gweld y CPP yn ‘gwneud ei orau glas i achub y meddyg’. Roedd yna bwyslais mawr ar adferiad. Nid oedd yn gwrthwynebu hynny ond credai y gallai gormod o bwyslais ar adferiad ‘anffurfio’r penderfyniad am amddiffyn y cyhoedd’. Dylanwadwyd ar farn Mr Scott yn amlwg gan gynnwys adroddiad drafft y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad. O ystyried y newid ymddangosiadol mewn barn a geir yn yr adroddiad terfynol, nid yw’n sicr a fydd agwedd y GMC at adferiad yn newid yn y dyfodol.
Yn fy marn i, roedd y newid athroniaeth a awgrymwyd yn adroddiad drafft y Grŵp Adolygu yn ddeniadol. Ni ddylai fod yn swyddogaeth rheoleiddiwr i roi cymorth a chefnogaeth; mae honno’n swyddogaeth bwysig ond dylai fod yn gyfrifoldeb i eraill. Dylai swyddogaeth rheoleiddiwr fod i benderfynu pwy sy’n addas i fod ar y gofrestr a phwy sydd ddim. Fodd bynnag, efallai nad yw’n hawdd i’r GMC osgoi ymwneud ag adferiad. Ni fydd gweithdrefnau lleol yn cyflwyno set ‘berffaith’ o ganlyniadau. Ni fydd pob achos a atgyfeirir i’r GMC yn gwarantu naill ai ataliad neu ddilead. Yn wir, pe byddai, byddai’n golygu bron yn sicr na fyddai digon o achosion yn cael eu atgyfeirio i’r GMC. Yn ogystal, pe byddai’r ddarpariaeth leol ar gyfer cymorth ac adferiad yn parhau’n fylchog, bydd yna rai achosion lle bydd y GMC yn teimlo bod rhaid iddynt roi cyfle pellach am newid. Fodd bynnag, wedi dweud hynny, mae’n ymddangos i mi fod y newid mewn athroniaeth yn synhwyrol a dylid gobeithio y bydd yn bosibl i’w rhoi ar waith.
Ar hyn o bryd, nid yw’n hollol glir sut bydd achosion o berfformiad diffygiol yn cael eu trin pan ddaw’r gweithdrefnau newydd i rym. Mae’n amlwg bod gan y GMC ddatblygiadau mewn golwg ar wahân i’r newidiadau gweithdrefnol sydd ar fin digwydd. Yn fy marn i, os yw’r GMC am barhau i orfodi amodau gyda’r bwriad o adferiad ar gofrestriad meddyg y canfuwyd y bu ei berfformiad yn ddiffygiol i raddau difrifol, rhaid iddo fynd i’r afael â’r diffygion y cyfeiriais atynt wrth drafod y pum ffeil achos. Yn benodol, rhaid iddo dderbyn cyfrifoldeb nid am drefnu’r adferiad ei hun ond am sicrhau bod cynnydd yn dal i ddigwydd ac nad yw’r meddyg yn aros ‘in limbo’ i rywbeth i ddigwydd. Rhaid iddo hefyd, yn fy marn i, sicrhau y gwneir asesiad digonol o berfformiad y meddyg cyn gwaredu amodau a chaniatáu i’r meddyg ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau.

---  ---
Paratoi ar gyfer Newid
Gweithredu'r Gweithdrefnau Newydd: Crynodeb
Gwahanu Swyddogaethau yn y Gweithdrefnau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Y Profion i'w Cymhwyso
Rolau'r Pwyllgor Archwilio a'r Archwilwyr Achos
Y Cyfnod Archwilio
Y Cyfnod Dyfarnu

---  ---
Yn y Penodau blaenorol, rwyf wedi disgrifio’n fanwl iawn weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) fel y buont yn gweithredu dros y blynyddoedd ers i’r GMC ystyried achos Shipman ym 1976. Bydd yn amlwg y bu llawer o newidiadau yn ystod yr amser hwnnw, gan gynnwys cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau iechyd a pherfformiad. Mae’r gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, gan gynnwys ffordd y GMC o ddelio â meddygon y’u cafwyd yn euog o droseddau, wedi newid yn esblygol ond nid yn radical. Am rai blynyddoedd, gan ddechrau ar ddiwedd y 1990au, roedd y GMC yn ymwybodol nad oedd ei weithdrefnau’n foddhaol, a bod angen newid elfennol arnynt. Erbyn mis Tachwedd 2003, pan roedd ffocws gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ar y GMC, roedd y broses o newid ar y gweill ers tro a disgwyliwyd y byddai’r gweithdrefnau ‘newydd’ ar waith erbyn gwanwyn 2004. Fel y bu hi, cafwyd ychydig oedi a dim ond yn ddiweddar y rhoddwyd y Rheolau perthnasol ar waith, ar 1 Tachwedd 2004.
Yn y Bennod hon, bwriadaf archwilio’r ffordd y disgwylir i’r gweithdrefnau newydd weithredu. Fel y bydd yn amlwg o’r Bennod hon, mae’r cynigion wedi newid yn sylweddol hyd yn oed yn ystod y cyfnod lle bu’r Ymchwiliad yn canolbwyntio ei sylw arnynt. Fodd bynnag, mewn cyfarfod Cyngor ar 15 Medi 2004, cymeradwyodd y GMC y Rheolau drafft a fyddai’n sail i’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Ac eithrio rhai mân newidiadau, roedd y Rheolau hynny’r union yr un fath â’r Rheolau a ddaeth i rym ym mis Tachwedd. Trwy gyfeirio at Reolau Tachwedd 2004 y byddaf yn trafod gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau newydd. Fodd bynnag, i ryw raddau, mae fy ngwaith yn debygol o ddyddio hyd yn oed wrth i mi ysgrifennu, oherwydd ei bod yn anochel bron y gwneir rhai newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau newydd o ganlyniad i brofiad cynnar.
Mae’n bwysig, yn fy marn i, fod yr Ymchwiliad yn ystyried y gweithdrefnau newydd yn fanwl. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi nodi diffygion amrywiol yn y ffordd y gweithredai’r hen weithdrefnau. Mewn rhai ffyrdd, nid oeddent yn darparu amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion. Cafodd rhai achosion y dylent fod wedi mynd at y gweithdrefnau eu cau gan y staff gweinyddol yn y cyfnod cychwynnol. Yn gyffredinol, ni chafwyd unrhyw archwiliad yn y cyfnodau cynnar, felly ni fyddai difrifoldeb posibl rhai honiadau yn cael ei werthfawrogi’n llawn a byddai eraill, er eu bod yn amlwg ddifrifol, yn dymchwel. Caewyd rhai achosion yn y cyfnod sgrinio neu gan y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) o ganlyniad i gymhwyso’r profion priodol yn anghywir neu gymhwyso’r profion anghywir. Byddai diffyg safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau yn arwain at ganlyniadau anghyson. Gall unrhyw un o’r diffygion hyn achosi perygl nad yw meddyg sy’n cyflwyno risg i gleifion yn cael ei ddarganfod a’i drin. Problem arall gyda’r hen weithdrefnau oedd eu diffyg tryloywder. Yn y byd modern, mae’r cyhoedd yn disgwyl gweld yr hyn y mae corff rheoleiddio yn ei wneud a deall pam ac mae ganddo’r hawl i hyn. Am y rhesymau hynny, mae’n bwysig i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio i ba raddau y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cywiro diffygion yr hen rai.
Ystyriaf hefyd ei bod yn bwysig gweld sut y mae’r cynigion ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau newydd wedi datblygu dros y tair blynedd diwethaf. Fel y daw’n amlwg, bu llawer o newidiadau o ran cyfeiriad: rhai eithaf mân, rhai mawr. Yng nghyd-destun datblygu’r gweithdrefnau newydd, mae rhai newidiadau yn anochel. Mae rhai wedi arwain at well cynigion a fydd yn arwain at well cysondeb a didwylledd, ac yn darparu gwell amddiffyniad i gleifion. Gwnaed y newidiadau hynny yn rhannol o ganlyniad i ymgynghori ac yn rhannol o ganlyniad i ymwybyddiaeth y GMC am y dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad hwn. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y bu newidiadau eraill yn wrthredol. Mae’n bwysig, yn fy marn i, archwilio’r newidiadau hynny a cheisio deall pam y mae’r GMC wedi eu gwneud. Os yw’r GMC wedi gwneud newid sy’n arwain at lai o amddiffyniad i gleifion neu lai o dryloywder, mae hynny’n achos pryder, gan y gallai awgrymu nad yw’r GMC wedi derbyn yn llawn yr angen i wella amddiffyniad i gleifion a thryloywder. Mae’n cyflwyno’r risg y gallai newid pellach o’r fath ddigwydd yn y dyfodol.
Ar adegau yn y Bennod hon, awgrymaf y dylai’r GMC ystyried gwneud pethau mewn ffordd wahanol. Gellid dweud nad yw’n rhan o’m cylch gorchwyl i wneud argymhellion manwl am faterion mewnol. Yn fy marn i, mae’n rhan o’m cylch gorchwyl. Pe byddwn wedi dwyn y casgliad y dylwn argymell y dylai’r GMC golli ei swyddogaeth FTP yn gyfan gwbl, yna ni fyddai unrhyw ddiben gwneud awgrymiadau manwl am newid. Fodd bynnag, gan nad wyf wedi gwneud hynny, credaf ei bod yn angenrheidiol archwilio manylion yr agweddau hynny ar y gweithdrefnau newydd yr ystyriaf nad ydynt yn darparu amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion. Gwnaf yr argymhellion hyn mewn modd adeiladol gyda’r gobaith y bydd y GMC yn eu hystyried yn ddifrifol a hefyd gan y gallant fod yn ddefnyddiol i’r Cyngor Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (sy’n cael ei adnabod bellach fel y Cyngor Rhagoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE)), wrth geisio hyrwyddo amddiffyn cleifion a thryloywder ar draws yr holl systemau rheoleiddio gofal iechyd.
Fel ag o’r blaen, gwneir pob cyfeiriad at yr hen weithdrefnau yn amser y gorffennol a byddaf yn siarad am y gweithdrefnau newydd fel pe byddent yn dod i rym yn y dyfodol.

---  ---
Ym 1997, sefydlwyd Pwyllgor Polisi Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (FPPC) y GMC. Fe’i gadeiriwyd gan y Llywydd ar y pryd, Syr Donald Irvine. Roedd swyddogaethau’r FPPC yn cynnwys bod yn gyfrifol am adolygu’r fframwaith statudol sy’n llywodraethu’r gweithdrefnau FTP ac am wneud cynigion ar gyfer diwygio lle bo’n briodol.
Sefydlodd yr FPPC sawl gweithgor, gan gynnwys Gweithgor y Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC), y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 21, a’r Gweithgor Sgrinio a PPC. Ym 1999 y daeth adroddiadau’r ddau Weithgor ar gael. Ar ôl cyhoeddi’r adroddiadau hyn, a’r ddadl a ysgogwyd ganddynt, lluniodd yr FPPC ddogfen drafodaeth, yn ceisio syniadau am newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Ceisiodd y ddogfen drafodaeth farnau gan aelodau o’r GMC ar ystod eang o faterion, gan gynnwys diben gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC, sancsiynau priodol, gorchmynion dros dro, dychwelyd i’r gofrestr, integreiddiad posibl y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad a gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau FTP yn gyffredinol.
Ym mis Mawrth 2001, cyhoeddodd y GMC Bapur Ymgynghori, sef ‘Acting fairly to protect patients: reform of the GMC’s fitness to practise procedures’ (Papur Ymgynghori 2001), a nododd nifer o opsiynau ar gyfer diwygio’r gweithdrefnau FTP a cheisio barnau amdanynt. Nododd hefyd rai egwyddorion yr ystyriwyd y dylent fod wrth wraidd datblygu’r gweithdrefnau newydd, ynghyd â meini prawf y dylid eu defnyddio i’w barnu. Mynnai’r meini prawf fod rhaid i’r gweithdrefnau fod,
inter alia,
yn deg, yn wrthrychol, yn dryloyw, yn rhydd o wahaniaethu, yn effeithiol, yn ddi-oed, yn gymesur, yn ddealladwy, yn cyd-fynd â Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 ac yn cael eu hystyried gyda ffydd gan y cyhoedd a’r proffesiwn.
Nododd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 y nodweddion hynny yr ystyriai’r GMC eu bod yn gryfderau’r hen weithdrefnau FTP. Y cyntaf o’r rhain oedd y gellid delio ag ymholiadau a oedd
‘yn amlwg yn ddibwys neu’n ddigyswllt’
‘nad oeddent yn berthnasol i rôl y GMC’
yn gyflym yn swyddfa’r GMC. Yn ail, dywedwyd y golygai’r pwerau a gafwyd yn ddiweddar (yn 2000) i orfodi ataliad neu amodau dros dro ar gofrestriad wrth ddisgwyl archwiliad a phenderfyniad am gŵyn yn erbyn meddyg y gallai’r GMC weithredu’n gyflym pe ymddangosai fod meddyg yn berygl i’r cyhoedd neu ei hun. Yn drydydd, nododd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 fod y gweithdrefnau perfformiad newydd yn galluogi i archwiliadau fynd yn eu blaenau ar hyd llwybr ffurfiol, ond gwirfoddol, gyda chydweithrediad y meddyg, fel y gellid archwilio problemau’r meddyg ac, os yn bosibl, eu cywiro
‘heb yr oedi a’r gost o’r meddyg yn gorfod ymddangos gerbron pwyllgor dim ond i gytuno pwyntiau sydd eisoes wedi’u cyfaddef’
Nododd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 hefyd anfanteision penodol yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad a pherfformiad. Yn gyntaf, cafwyd archwiliad cyfyngedig cyn penderfynu beth i’w wneud gydag achos. Yn ail, dywedwyd bod trothwyon isel iawn gan y profion a ddefnyddiwyd wrth benderfynu a ddylai achos fynd yn ei flaen. Awgrymwyd y gallai hyn arwain at
‘achosion heb sail’
yn cael eu hatgyfeirio i’r PCC. Yn ogystal â’r trothwyon isel iawn, awgrymwyd bod y profion a ddefnyddiwyd mewn achosion ymddygiad ym mhob un o’r cyfnodau treiddio amrywiol (gan staff y swyddfa, y sgriniwr a’r PPC) yn debyg iawn, ac roedd hyn yn codi’r cwestiwn a oedd angen y tri chyfnod i gyd. Yn bedwerydd, dywedwyd y gwnaed y penderfyniad sut i gymryd achos ymlaen (yn enwedig y dewis rhwng y llwybrau ymddygiad a pherfformiad) yn gynnar iawn ac ni fyddai modd ei wrthdroi yn ddiweddarach, hyd yn oed pan fyddai tystiolaeth bellach yn gwneud hyn yn ddymunol. Yn olaf, nododd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 bod diffyg tryloywder i’r trefniadau ar gyfer cyhoeddi llythyrau o gyngor i feddygon ac ni ystyriai achwynwyr na meddygon eu bod yn deg nac yn effeithiol.
Cydnabu Papur Ymgynghori 2001 hefyd nad oedd yr hen weithdrefnau’n bodloni rhan fwyaf y meini prawf yr awgrymodd y dylid eu defnyddio i farnu’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Nododd y gallai’r prosesau yn y gweithdrefnau FTP presennol fod yn araf ac yn feichus a’u bod yn cynnwys dyblygu sylweddol o ran ymdrech gan aelodau a staff swyddfa’r GMC. Roedd hefyd diffyg tryloywder iddynt. Cyfeiriodd at adolygiadau barnwrol olynol o achosion ymddygiad lle dehonglwyd, dywedwyd, y profion a gymhwyswyd yn y cyfnodau cynnar yn rhai a oedd yn galluogi ychydig iawn o wahaniaethu i benderfynwyr, ac o ganlyniad nid oedd y cyfnodau hynny’n treiddio’n effeithiol yr achosion na ddylai’r PCC orfod eu hystyried yn llawn. Awgrymodd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 nad oedd y gweithdrefnau FTP yn ennyn ffydd y cyhoedd na meddygon. Roedd angen ymagwedd newydd
‘sy’n adeiladu ar gryfderau’r system bresennol ond sy’n rhoi sylw i’w gwendidau strwythurol’
. Nid wyf yn siwr fod y gwendidau a nodwyd yn rhai strwythurol yn unig. Fodd bynnag, mae’n amlwg bod y GMC yn ystyried newid radical.
Ym mis Mai 2001, adroddodd y Grŵp Adolygu Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (y Grŵp Adolygu FTP) ganlyniadau’r broses ymgynghori i’r Cyngor llawn. Datblygwyd cynigion manwl wedyn ac ystyriwyd papur (a luniwyd gan y Grŵp Adolygu FTP mae’n debyg) gan y Cyngor yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2001. Yn y cyfarfod hwnnw, cymerwyd nifer o benderfyniadau pwysig o egwyddor yn gysylltiedig â’r gweithdrefnau newydd; byddaf yn cyfeirio at rai o’r rhain yn eu tro. Yn ystod 2002, cafwyd trafodaethau pellach yn y GMC am fanylion y cynigion ar gyfer diwygiad. Arweiniodd y trafodaethau hynny at lunio papur trafodaeth fewnol, sef ‘Review of Fitness to Practise: The New Model’, ym mis Hydref 2002. Yn ddilynol, diwygiwyd y papur hwnnw; mae’r fersiwn yn eiddo’r Ymchwiliad yn ddyddiedig 22 Tachwedd 2002. Trafodwyd papur pellach a luniwyd gan yr FPPC gan y Cyngor yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2002. Gwnaed rhai diwygiadau i’r cynigion yr adeg honno.
Cyn yr oedd modd mabwysiadu’r gweithdrefnau newydd, roedd angen newidiadau i’r ddeddfwriaeth. Felly, ym mis Rhagfyr 2002, cafodd y GMC rai diwygiadau i Ddeddf Feddygol 1983 (Deddf 1983). Gwnaed y rhain yn effeithiol gan Orchymyn 2002 Deddf Feddygol 1983 (Diwygiad). Roedd angen hefyd reolau newydd. Felly, ym mis Gorffennaf 2003, cyhoeddodd y GMC Reolau (Addasrwydd i Ymarfer) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 2003 (Rheolau drafft 2003) gydag Arweiniad yn atodol. Dilynodd cyfnod o ymgynghori ar Reolau drafft 2003. Daeth y cyfnod ymgynghori hwnnw i ben ar ddiwedd mis Hydref 2003.
Ym mis Tachwedd a mis Rhagfyr 2003, rhoddodd dystion o’r GMC dystiolaeth ar lafar i’r Ymchwiliad. Rhoddodd rai ohonynt - yn benodol Mr Finlay Scott, y Prif Weithredwr, a’r Athro Syr Graeme Catto, y Llywydd - dystiolaeth am y gweithdrefnau newydd. Fel y dywedais, y bwriad oedd y byddai’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn eu lle erbyn gwanwyn 2004. Erbyn adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, fodd bynnag, roedd yn amlwg y byddai eu cyflwyniad yn cael ei oedi. Ar ddechrau 2004, adolygodd y GMC ei gynigion ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau newydd. Cynhaliwyd yr adolygiad hwn yn rhannol mewn ymateb i bryderon a godwyd yn yr Ymchwiliad am y cynigion gwreiddiol ac yn rhannol o ganlyniad i faterion a ddaeth i’r amlwg o’r broses ymgynghori. Arweiniodd yr adolygiad at newidiadau pwysig i’r gweithdrefnau newydd a olygai felly bod angen newidiadau sylweddol i Reolau drafft 2003. Ym mis Mai 2004, cyhoeddodd y GMC fersiwn ddiwygiedig o’r Rheolau drafft (Rheolau drafft Mai 2004), ynghyd ag Arweiniad pellach. Dilynodd gyfnod byr o ymgynghori ar Reolau drafft Mai 2004.
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, cyhoeddodd y GMC drydedd fersiwn y Rheolau drafft (Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004). Cafwyd Arweiniad pellach hefyd. Roedd Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 yn cynnwys newidiadau sylweddol pellach i’r gweithdrefnau newydd arfaethedig. Dilynodd bedwaredd fersiwn y Rheolau drafft ym mis Medi 2004. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys mân newidiadau’n unig i Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004. Cafwyd Arweiniad pellach eto. Mabwysiadwyd Rheolau drafft Medi 2004 (gyda rhai mân newidiadau pellach) gan y GMC yn ei gyfarfod Cyngor ar 15 Medi 2004 a daethant i rym, fel y dywedais, ar 1 Tachwedd 2004. Cyfeiriaf at y bedwaredd fersiwn hyn fel Rheolau Tachwedd 2004.
Yn ystod y pum mlynedd y trafodwyd y gweithdrefnau newydd, bu nifer o newidiadau elfennol i’r trefniadau a gynigir. Nid wyf yn bwriadu olrhain yr holl newidiadau hynny yn fanwl. Yn hytrach, byddaf yn trafod y gweithdrefnau newydd fel y’u cynigiwyd yn 2003, pan gyflwynwyd y set gyntaf o Reolau drafft. Yna, byddaf yn archwilio’r gweithdrefnau gwahanol iawn a gynigir erbyn hyn. Cyn gwneud hynny, byddaf yn crynhoi’n fyr y ffordd y bwriedir y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn gweithredu.

---  ---
Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd achosion yn cael eu trafod mewn dau gyfnod: sef y cyfnod archwilio a’r cyfnod dyfarnu. Mae adran newydd 35C(4) Deddf 1983, fel a ddiwygiwyd, yn amodi, pan gaiff y GMC honiad bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, y bydd Pwyllgor Archwilio (IC) y GMC yn archwilio’r honiad ac yn penderfynu a ddylai panel FTP ei ystyried. Dan adran 35C(2), ystyrir bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer dim ond oherwydd camymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, collfarn neu rybudd, iechyd corfforol neu feddyliol gwael neu oherwydd dyfarniad corff rheoleiddio proffesiynol perthnasol arall i’r perwyl bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Er mwyn bod yn gryno, byddaf yn cyfeirio at y sail ddiwethaf hon fel ‘dyfarniad’.
Fel y dywedais, diben y cyfnod archwilio yw penderfynu a ddylai honiad gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP. Nid yw Deddf 1983 yn gosod prawf i’w gymhwyso wrth wneud y penderfyniad hwn. Nid yw’r Rheolau chwaith. Fodd bynnag, mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu mai’r prawf hwn (sef prawf y cyfnod archwilio) dylai fod a oes gobaith realistig o sefydlu bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Dim ond achosion sy’n bodloni prawf y cyfnod archwilio fydd yn symud ymlaen i’r cyfnod dyfarnu.
Gwneir penderfyniadau ar adegau amrywiol yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio (gan ddibynnu ar amgylchiadau’r achos) gan aelodau o staff y GMC (a fydd, yn yr un modd â dan yr hen weithdrefnau, yn ‘dadansoddi’ achosion yn rhagarweiniol), gan bobl feddygol a lleyg a gontractir i weithio i’r GMC (a fydd yn hysbys fel archwilwyr achos), a chan baneli’r IC. Mae’n debygol na fydd mwyafrif helaeth yr achosion a adroddir i’r GMC yn symud ymlaen y tu hwnt i’r cyfnod archwilio.
Yn y cyfnod archwilio, pe penderfynir na ddylai panel FTP ystyried yr achos, gellid penderfynu naill ai rhybuddio’r meddyg am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y dyfodol neu gau’r achos. Bydd hefyd achosion sy’n cynnwys elfen iechyd neu berfformiad lle bodlonir prawf y cyfnod dyfarnu, ond lle na fydd yr achos yn symud ymlaen i’r cyfnod dyfarnu serch hynny. Bydd achosion o’r fath yn cael eu trin trwy’r meddyg yn rhoi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn yr un modd a fu’n bosibl o’r blaen dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd a pherfformiad gwirfoddol. Mae’r GMC yn ystyried y posibilrwydd o ymestyn argaeledd ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol i achosion o bob categori; byddaf yn trafod y cynnig hwn yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Bydd achosion sy’n cael eu trin trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn parhau yn y cyfnod archwilio, gyda’r posibilrwydd o gael eu hatgyfeirio i’r cyfnod dyfarnu pe byddai’r meddyg dan sylw, ar unrhyw adeg, yn methu derbyn neu gydweithredu â’r trefniadau gwirfoddol neu pe byddai ei iechyd/ei hiechyd neu berfformiad yn dirywio neu’n cyflwyno achos pryder pellach am ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Dylid nodi bod hyn oll yn amodol ar yr amod y gall fod newidiadau i’r trefniadau yn y dyfodol ar gyfer achosion sy’n cynnwys materion iechyd neu berfformiad, o ganlyniad i adroddiad diweddar y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad (y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 24) ac unrhyw argymhellion y gallai’r Gweithgor sy’n cynnal adolygiad o’r hen weithdrefnau iechyd ar hyn o bryd eu gwneud.
Bydd panel FTP yn gwrando ar achosion a atgyfeirir i’r cyfnod dyfarnu. Mae adran newydd 35D Deddf 1983 yn darparu’r pwerau i banel FTP atal neu ddileu cofrestriad meddyg pe byddai’n canfod bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Bydd paneli FTP yn disodli’r paneli pwyllgor a arferai ddelio â materion addasrwydd i ymarfer, sef paneli’r PCC, y Pwyllgor Iechyd (HC) a’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP). Bydd paneli FTP yn cynnwys pobl nad ydynt yn aelodau o’r GMC ond sydd wedi’u penodi, eu dewis a’u hyfforddi gan y GMC am eu rolau fel panelwyr. Bydd llawer o’r aelodau cyswllt a benodwyd gan y GMC, ers 2000, i eistedd ar baneli ei bwyllgorau FTP yn eistedd ar baneli FTP yn y dyfodol. Tasg panel FTP fydd penderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Pe byddai panel FTP yn canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, bydd rhaid iddo benderfynu ar y sancsiwn priodol i’w orfodi neu unrhyw gam arall i’w gymryd.
Bydd yna Banel Gorchmynion Dros Dro (IOP) ar wahân ar gyfer ystyried achosion lle gall fod yn briodol gorfodi gorchymyn dros dro sy’n atal neu’n cyfyngu ar hawl meddyg i ymarfer wrth ddisgwyl archwiliad a dyfarniad o’i achos/ei hachos. Bydd hyn yn disodli’r Pwyllgor Gorchmynion Dros Dro (IOC) sydd wedi delio ag achosion o’r fath ers iddo gychwyn yn 2000.

---  ---
Byddaf nawr yn ystyried un o’r egwyddorion sydd, yn ôl y GMC, wrth wraidd datblygiad ei weithdrefnau FTP newydd, sef gwahanu swyddogaethau yn y gweithdrefnau hynny.
Yn y gorffennol, roedd gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn cynnwys dwy swyddogaeth wahanol. Y cyntaf oedd (yn fras) penderfynu a oedd yna dystiolaeth a godai cwestiwn am ymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd meddyg, y dylid ei atgyfeirio i bwyllgor FTP neu i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd neu berfformiad gwirfoddol, a gwneud unrhyw atgyfeiriad priodol. Roedd modd cymharu’r swyddogaeth gyntaf hon â rôl gwasanaeth erlyn. Roedd yr ail swyddogaeth yn cynnwys pwyllgor FTP yn gwrando ar achosion a gwneud penderfyniad yn eu cylch. Roedd modd cymharu’r swyddogaeth hon â rôl llys neu dribiwnlys ac roedd angen arni gymorth gweinyddol a chymorth arall. I ddechrau, yn ei gynigion ar gyfer newid, galwodd y GMC y ddwy swyddogaeth yn swyddogaethau
‘erlyn’
‘phenderfynu’
. Yn ddiweddarach, mabwysiadodd y termau swyddogaethau
‘archwilio’
‘dyfarnu’
. Dylid nodi bod y term
‘archwilio’
, yn y cyd-destun hwn, yn cyfeirio at archwiliad ynghylch a ddylid atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP, ac nid at
‘archwilio’
o ran casglu tystiolaeth. Mewn geiriau eraill, nid yw’n dynodi
‘archwilio’
yn y ffordd y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o bobl yn deall y term. Mae’r term
‘archwilio’
hefyd yn rhywfaint o gamenwad oherwydd bod cyfnod archwilio gweithdrefnau newydd y GMC yn cynnwys penderfyniad (neu ddyfarniad) ynghylch a yw’r achos yn ddigon difrifol i gael ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP.
Yn hanesyddol, gallai’r un aelodau GMC ymgymryd â’r ddwy swyddogaeth; weithiau, gallent hyd yn oed ymgymryd â’r ddwy swyddogaeth yn gysylltiedig â’r un achos. Tan y 1970au cynnar, er enghraifft, byddai’r Llywydd yn gweithredu fel sgriniwr meddygol ac yn cadeirio’r Pwyllgor Achosion Cosbi (rhagflaenydd y PCC); roedd y ddwy rôl hynny’n rhan o’r swyddogaeth
‘erlyn’
‘archwilio’
gyntaf. Gallai’r Llywydd hefyd gadeirio’r Pwyllgor Disgyblu (rhagflaenydd y PCC) a fyddai’n cyflawni’r ail swyddogaeth
‘penderfynu’
‘ddyfarnu’
. Yn ymarferol, daeth hyn i ben ym 1973, er bod y Rheolau’n ei ganiatáu tan 1980, pan newidiwyd y Rheolau i gyfyngu rôl benderfynu’r Llywydd naill ai i sgrinio a Chadeirio’r PPC neu Gadeirio’r PCC a/neu’r HC. Diwygiwyd y Rheolau hefyd i amodi na ddylai unrhyw aelod o’r GMC eistedd ar achos ar y PCC, yr HC neu’r CPP pe byddai ef/hi wedi ymgymryd yn flaenorol â gwneud penderfyniad yn yr achos yn gynharach, er enghraifft trwy sgrinio’r achos neu drwy fod yn aelod o’r PPC a ystyriodd yr achos.
Erbyn 2000, roedd y GMC wedi penderfynu bod yr amser wedi dod i wahanu’r ddwy swyddogaeth yn gliriach. Ysgogwyd y penderfyniad, i raddau, gan Ddeddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 yn dod i rym ym mis Hydref 2000, a ymgorfforodd i gyfraith y DU yr hawl i berson gael
‘gwrandawiad teg a chyhoeddus ... gan dribiwnlys annibynnol a diduedd’
wrth benderfynu ei hawliau a goblygiadau sifil. Fodd bynnag, roedd y GMC yn argyhoeddedig hefyd bellach fod y trefniadau presennol yn achosi ymddangosiad o annhegwch. Dywedwyd bod meddygon yn sylweddoli bod yr un sefydliad yn eu herlyn ac yn eu barnu, a theimlent fod hynny’n annheg. Penderfynodd y GMC, felly, fod angen gwahanu’r swyddogaethau, fel y gallai pawb sy’n ymgymryd â chwynion am feddygon weld bod y sefydliad a’r bobl a wnâi’r penderfyniad terfynol ar achos yn wahanol i’r rheiny a benderfynai y dylid ei glywed ac yn wahanol i’r rheiny sy’n cynrychioli unrhyw un o’r partïon â diddordeb.
Cododd y GMC ei gynnig i wahanu’r ddwy swyddogaeth mewn Dogfen Ymgynghori, sef ‘The Structure, Constitution and Governance of the GMC’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Hydref 2000. Cafodd y cynnig gefnogaeth gyffredinol.
Yn ei Bapur Ymgynghori 2001, cyflwynodd y GMC bedwar model posibl y gellid eu defnyddio i wahanu’r ddwy swyddogaeth. Yn y model cyntaf, roedd y GMC yn cadw’r ddwy swyddogaeth, er y byddai’r swyddogaethau hynny’n cael eu cyflawni ar wahân yn llwyr gan wahanol grwpiau o bersonél yn y GMC. Y bwriad oedd y byddai staff, rheolaeth, cymorth cyfreithiol a chofnodion y ddau grŵp yn cael eu lleoli mewn dau
‘wahanol strwythur trefniadol’
gyda threfniadau ar wahân ar gyfer
‘adrodd ac atebolrwydd’
. Cyfeiriodd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 at farn cefnogwyr y model hwn fod y swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu yn hanfodol i gorff rheoleiddio a
‘thrwy waredu un neu’r ddwy ohonynt, byddai rheoleiddio a arweinir yn broffesiynol yn gwanhau yn sgil torri’r dolenni adborth rhwng addasrwydd i ymarfer a safonau ac addysg’
. Dyma a ddywedwyd oedd mantais y model hwn:
‘Cedwir perchenogaeth broffesiynol ar y broses benderfynu ym mhob cyfnod, ac i rai o gefnogwyr y model hwn, cadw perchenogaeth sy’n diffinio rheoleiddio a arweinir yn broffesiynol.’
Dywedwyd (ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001) mai gwendid y model oedd y ffaith y byddai penderfyniadau yn y cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu yn parhau i gael eu cysylltu â’r GMC. Yn ogystal, efallai na fyddai’r trefniant yn ymddangos yn deg. Cydnabu Papur Ymgynghori 2001 fod yna
‘risg’
na fyddai’r model yn
‘mynd yn ddigon pell’
i dawelu meddyliau beirniaid y GMC. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn glir ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001 mai’r model hwn oedd yn well gan y GMC.
Roedd yr ail fodel - ac ail ddewis y GMC - yn drefniant lle byddai’r GMC yn cadw’r swyddogaeth archwilio, gyda’r swyddogaeth ddyfarnu’n cael ei
‘rhoi ar gontract gan y GMC i sefydliad allanol, hollol annibynnol’
. Awgrymwyd, yn y model hwn, ‘
mai’r GMC, fel gwarchodwr safonau a gwarantwr lles y cyhoedd, a ddylai nodi achosion a allai godi cwestiynau am addasrwydd meddygon i ymarfer ond y dylai sefydliad arall wneud y penderfyniadau ar yr achosion hynny’
. Dywedwyd mai cryfder y model hwn oedd y gwahaniad llwyr a greai rhwng y swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu. Awgrymwyd y byddai mabwysiadu’r model hwn yn rhyddhau’r GMC oddi wrth fai pan fyddai penderfyniadau dadleuol yn cael eu gwneud a gallai ddiogelu’r GMC rhag y niwed anghymesur i ffydd yn y sefydliad ac yn
‘rheoleiddio a arweinir yn broffesiynol’
a achosir gan ganlyniadau dadleuol achlysurol mewn achosion FTP. Awgrymwyd hefyd y gallai’r cyhoedd, gyda’r model hwn, fod yn fwy ffyddiog fod penderfyniadau’n cael eu gwneud ar rinweddau achos yn unig. Dywedwyd mai gwendid amlycaf y model oedd y byddai’r GMC yn colli rheolaeth ar benderfyniadau yn ymwneud â meddygon unigol a gellid amgyffred o hyd ei fod yn gyfrifol am ganlyniad. Yn ogystal, awgrymwyd y gallai’r ffaith bod sefydliad arall yn gyfrifol am ganlyniad achosion FTP yn y pen draw danseilio ffydd yn y GMC. Dywedwyd mai anfanteision eraill y model oedd y goblygiadau adnoddau sylweddol ynghlwm wrtho a’r ffaith y gallai atebolrwydd wanhau. Torraf ar draws fan hyn i ddweud y bu’r GMC, yn fy marn i, yn gywir i gydnabod manteision y model hwn, er ei fod hefyd wedi nodi rhai anfanteision. Ym Mhennod 27, argymhellaf y dylai’r GMC fabwysiadu’r model hwn, er mwyn gwahanu swyddogaethau fel sy’n ofynnol, i bob diben, gan Ddeddf Hawliau Dynol 1998.
Roedd y trydydd model (a ddisgrifiwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001 fel
‘adlewyrchiad’
o’r ail fodel) yn drefniant lle byddai’r GMC yn cadw’r swyddogaeth ddyfarnu, ond nid y swyddogaeth archwilio. Byddai aelodau GMC ac eraill a benodwyd gan y GMC yn eistedd ar bwyllgorau FTP a byddai staff y GMC yn gyfrifol am drefnu a gwasanaethu’r pwyllgorau hynny. Byddai sefydliad allanol yn gyfrifol am y cyfnod cychwynnol o ddadansoddi cwynion ac atgyfeiriadau a phenderfynu pa achosion a godai cwestiynau am addasrwydd meddygon i ymarfer ac felly a ddylai symud ymlaen. Mynegodd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 y farn y byddai’r GMC, trwy fabwysiadu’r model hwn, yn
‘cymryd y farn bod ei fusnes craidd yn ymwneud yn unig â phenderfynu’r gyfran fechan o achosion a gyrhaeddai’r cyfnod o wrandawiad pwyllgor’
. Nododd risg
‘y byddai’r cysylltiadau rhwng addasrwydd i ymarfer a swyddogaethau GMC craidd eraill yn cael eu gwanhau’
. Torraf ar draws i ddweud nad oedd Papur Ymgynghori 2001 yn esbonio sut y mae’r cysylltiadau hynny’n gweithredu a sut y byddai’r risg o wanhau’n codi. Nid yw hyn yn glir - nid i mi beth bynnag. Datganodd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 fod rhaid i’r broses archwilio, yn benodol y penderfyniadau am ba achosion i’w harchwilio,
‘fod wrth wraidd gwerthoedd y GMC ei hun’
. Soniwyd hefyd am y posibilrwydd y byddai atebolrwydd yn cael ei wanhau gan fod dau sefydliad yn ymwneud â’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001, mynegodd y GMC y farn y byddai
‘gwaredu’r swyddogaeth archwilio ... yn gwanhau’n ddifrifol ffydd y cyhoedd yn y sefydliad fel gwarchodwr lles y cyhoedd’
. Dywedwyd ei bod yn
‘hanfodol i’r ffydd mewn rheoleiddio a arweinir yn broffesiynol’
gweld bod y GMC yn
‘gweithredu’n egnïol ar gwestiynau am addasrwydd meddygon i ymarfer’
. Faint bynnag y ceisiai sefydliad arall seilio ei ymagwedd ar werthoedd a safonau moesegol y proffesiwn fel ag yr ymgorfforir yn y GMC, dywedwyd, mi fyddai bob amser
‘un cam y tu ôl’
Byddai’r pedwerydd model wedi dirprwyo’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu i sefydliadau allanol ar wahân. Byddai un corff yn archwilio cwyn a byddai’r gŵyn yn mynd gerbron corff arall ar gyfer dyfarniad. Ni fyddai’r GMC yn cael ei gynnwys yn y naill gyfnod heblaw, efallai, derbyn y cwynion cyn eu trosglwyddo i’r corff allanol i’w harchwilio. Nododd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 y byddai’r model hwn yn terfynu ymglymiad y GMC wrth addasrwydd i ymarfer i bob pwrpas. Awgrymodd y
‘byddai’n ddatganiad clir na fyddai ganddo
rôl rhagor mewn cadw trefn ar feddygon anaddas’
. Awgrymodd Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 y byddai gan y model
‘ddiffyg cysondeb a hygrededd ac na fyddai’n bodloni disgwyliadau’r cyhoedd na’r proffesiwn o ran yr hyn a ddisgwylir gan gorff rheoleiddio proffesiynol sy’n ymwneud â meddygaeth’
Roedd y model cyntaf yn well gan fwyafrif helaeth y sefydliadau meddygol a’r unigolion a ymatebodd i Bapur Ymgynghori 2001, h.y. y GMC yn cadw’r ddwy swyddogaeth archwilio a dyfarnu. Roedd cynrychiolwyr cleifion yn ffafrio’r model cyntaf fymryn, gyda sawl un yn ffafrio’r ail fodel.
Fel y digwyddodd, mae’n ymddangos bod y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn seiliedig i raddau helaeth ar y model cyntaf a ddisgrifiwyd. Bydd y GMC yn cadw cyfrifoldeb am y swyddogaeth archwilio. Bydd yn cyflawni dadansoddiad rhagarweiniol o’r achosion a bydd yn gyfrifol am benderfynu a ddylai achos fynd ymlaen i gael gwrandawiad llawn neu beidio. Bydd staff y GMC yn cynnal y dadansoddiad rhagarweiniol a bydd archwilwyr achos, a fydd yn bobl feddygol a phobl leyg wedi’u contractio i weithio i’r GMC yn rhan-amser, yn penderfynu a fydd yr achosion hynny sy’n goroesi’r dadansoddiad yn mynd ymlaen i gael gwrandawiad llawn neu beidio. Bydd yr IC yn cymryd rhai penderfyniadau o’r fath.
Bydd y penderfyniadau mewn gwrandawiadau panel FTP yn cael eu cymryd gan aelodau cyswllt, yn rhai meddygol cymwys ac yn rhai lleyg, na fydd yn aelodau o’r GMC ond a fydd wedi’u dewis a’u penodi gan y GMC i eistedd ar y paneli hynny. Ni fydd aelodau’r GMC yn eistedd ar baneli FTP, er bydd rhai o’r panelwyr yn gyn-aelodau. Penodwyd mwy na 200 o aelodau cyswllt eisoes i eistedd ar baneli ac, ers 2000, maent wedi eistedd ar baneli’r hen bwyllgorau FTP. Caiff panelwyr pellach eu penodi pan fydd ac fel y bydd yn angenrheidiol. Disgwylir i banelwyr ymrwymo 20 diwrnod y flwyddyn o leiaf i’w gwaith i’r GMC. Dewisir eu penodi yn erbyn meini prawf penodol ac ar ôl cystadleuaeth agored. Mae penodiad yn amodol ar raglen hyfforddiant ddeuddydd. Y GMC sy’n hyfforddi ac yn gwerthuso panelwyr. Mae’r GMC yn rhoi arweiniad i banelwyr ar yr ymagwedd at sancsiynau a materion eraill a bydd yn parhau i wneud hynny. Bwriedir y bydd y GMC yn gwerthuso ac yn rheoli perfformiad panelwyr yn rheolaidd, ar ôl iddynt gael eu penodi. Pe byddai pryderon yn codi am addasrwydd panelydd i barhau i eistedd ar banel, bydd is-grŵp o’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer yn ystyried y pryderon hynny a gallai derfynu penodiad y panelydd, pe credai fod hynny’n addas. Pe byddai’r GMC yn ystyried bod panel FTP wedi cyrraedd penderfyniad amhriodol, gellid rhoi cyngor i’r cadeirydd, ynghylch ble y mae ef/hi a’i banel/ei phanel wedi mynd o’i le yn ôl bob tebyg. Bydd aelodau o staff y GMC yn cadw cyfrifoldeb am drefnu a gweinyddu gwrandawiadau dyfarnu ac am ddewis aelodau panel i eistedd mewn achosion unigol.
Dechreuodd y GMC o’r cynsail y byddai’n gywir gwahanu’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu. Cafwyd rhesymau da, cadarn dros ddymuno cyflawni’r perwyl hwnnw. Ond nid yw hyn wedi digwydd. Mae’r GMC wedi cadw rheolaeth lwyr ar y swyddogaeth archwilio y mae wedi ei hymestyn fel ei bod yn ymgorffori rhai penderfyniadau ar warediad terfynol heblaw cau (sef rhoi rhybuddion a derbyn ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol) ond nid yw wedi gollwng y rheolaeth ar ddyfarnu. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd ganddo bron yr un radd o reolaeth dros ddyfarnu a oedd ganddo dan yr hen rai. Am lawer blwyddyn, roedd paneli PCC yn cynnwys aelodau GMC yn unig. Fodd bynnag, erbyn 2000, roedd cymaint o bwysau ar y GMC y gorfodwyd iddo recriwtio pobl ychwanegol i fod yn banelwyr wrth ochr aelodau GMC. Fel yr esboniais, ers 2003, pan ostyngwyd nifer aelodau’r GMC i 35, roedd paneli pwyllgor FTP yn cynnwys dim ond aelodau cyswllt yn bennaf. Caiff y sefyllfa hon ei throsglwyddo i’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Felly, er i’r GMC gydnabod yr angen am wahanu swyddogaethau i ryw raddau ac am rywfaint o annibyniaeth yn y cyfnod dyfarnu, ni fydd unrhyw beth yn newid.
Mae’r GMC wedi cadw rheolaeth agos iawn ar y broses ddyfarnu. Mae ganddo’r pŵer i ddewis a phenodi panelwyr FTP. Bydd yn eu hyfforddi, eu gwerthuso ac yn rhoi arweiniad iddynt; gallai eu diswyddo. Ni ddylid meddwl fy mod yn awgrymu nad oes angen hyfforddiant, gwerthusiad ac arweiniad; mae eu hangen. Ond ni ddylid meddwl chwaith fod yna unrhyw wahanu swyddogaethau dim ond oherwydd nad yw’r panelwyr yn aelodau o’r GMC. Ni all y GMC reoli’r canlyniad mewn achos penodol, er, fel y dywedais, bydd yn ‘cynghori’ cadeirydd panel pan ei fod yn ystyried bod panel FTP wedi gwneud camgymeriad. Hefyd, fel yr esboniaf yn ddiweddarach, mae wedi nodi, mewn Arweiniad drafft diweddar, ei fod yn bwriadu rhoi gwybod i feddygon yr atgyfeirir eu hachosion i banel FTP pa ganlyniad y mae’n ei geisio yn eu hachosion; felly, mae’n debyg, mae’r GMC yn gobeithio y gall ddylanwadu’r ffordd y caiff yr achos ei drin (neu o leiaf y sancsiwn a orfodir) gan y panel FTP.
Yn ogystal, mae’n ymddangos y byddai rhai aelodau GMC o leiaf wedi hoffi cadw gradd fwy sylweddol eto o reolaeth ar ganlyniad achosion unigol. Mewn cyfarfod o’r Cyngor ym mis Mai 2004, cynigiwyd y dylai’r GMC (yn amodol ar waith ac ymgynghori pellach) ofyn am ddeddfwriaeth bellach i gyflwyno system lle byddai rhaid i’r GMC gadarnhau penderfyniadau ei baneli FTP cyn i’r penderfyniadau hynny ddod yn effeithiol. Esboniwyd mai’r amcan oedd rhoi’r cyfle i’r GMC ymyrryd pan ystyriai fod penderfyniad yn
‘wrthnysig amlwg’
, i wrthod y penderfyniad ac i atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP arall ar gyfer ail-wrandawiad. Cefnogwyd y cynnig gan y Llywydd, a siaradodd Mr Scott o’i blaid. Nododd nifer o aelodau’r Cyngor y byddai system lle gallai’r GMC, yn ei weithdrefnau ei hun, gadarnhau neu wrthod penderfyniad panel FTP yn hollol anghyson â’r cysyniad o wahanu’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu. Fel y digwyddodd, rhoddwyd y gorau i’r cynnig a phenderfynwyd yn hytrach ceisio deddfwriaeth yn galluogi’r GMC i apelio i’r Llys Uwch yn erbyn penderfyniadau ei baneli FTP. Fodd bynnag, mae’r ffaith yr ystyriwyd system gadarnhau yn ddifrifol o gwbl yn dangos nad yw’n debyg bod rhai yn y GMC yn llawn ddeall y cysyniad o wahanu’r ddwy swyddogaeth.
Mae gennyf bryder pellach am sefyllfa panelwyr FTP. Mae dyfarnu yn sgil y mae angen ei ymarfer yn rheolaidd. Dywedir weithiau fod barnwr neu aelod o dribiwnlys ‘cystal â pha mor aml y mae’n eistedd’. Rwy’n gofidio y gall panelwyr eistedd am gyn lleied â 20 diwrnod y flwyddyn. Ni chânt fawr o gyfle i ddatblygu gwir arbenigedd. Hefyd, mae’r ffaith y bydd yna 200 neu fwy o banelwyr ar unrhyw un adeg yn golygu y mae’n debygol y ceir problemau gwirioneddol wrth sicrhau cysondeb o ran gwneud penderfyniadau. Mae wedi fy nharo fod rhaid i reoleiddwyr gofal iechyd eraill benodi a hyfforddi panelwyr hefyd ar gyfer eu gweithdrefnau FTP. Tybiais a fyddai’n ddichonol penodi corff o banelwyr amser llawn neu bron amser llawn a allai eistedd ar baneli’r holl gyrff rheoleiddio gofal iechyd. Byddai hyn yn rhoi rhywfaint o annibyniaeth rhag unrhyw un corff penodol, fel y GMC, ac yn sicrhau hefyd fod panelwyr yn datblygu profiad ac arbenigedd.

---  ---
Y Cysyniad o Nam ar Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Un o brif amcanion y GMC wrth gyflwyno ei weithdrefnau newydd fu gadael yr ymagwedd adrannol ar ôl a ddatblygodd dan yr hen weithdrefnau am resymau hanesyddol. Y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad oedd sail prosesau disgyblu’r GMC. Ychwanegwyd y gweithdrefnau iechyd a’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym 1980 a 1997, yn y drefn honno. Er yr oedd yn bosibl, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, i drosglwyddo meddyg o un set o weithdrefnau i un arall, ni ellid trafod achos mewn mwy nag un set o weithdrefnau ar unrhyw un adeg. Yn ddealladwy, roedd y GMC eisiau goresgyn yr anhawster hwn. Yr ateb a gafodd oedd mabwysiadu’r cysyniad o ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ fel meddyg. Mae’r cysyniad hwn, a ymgorfforir, fel y dywedais, yn Neddf 1983, yn sail i’r profion i benderfynwyr eu cymhwyso yn nau gyfnod gweithdrefnau newydd y GMC.
Diffinio’r Term
Mantais y cysyniad o ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yw y gall gwmpasu unrhyw un neu’r cyfan o’r mathau o broblem y daw’r GMC ar eu traws fel arfer, h.y. camymddygiad (gan gynnwys torri’r gyfraith droseddol yn arwain at gollfarnau neu rybuddion), perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, iechyd gwael a dyfarniadau.
Anfantais y cysyniad yw nad yw ei ystyr yn glir o gwbl. Ni chaiff y cysyniad ei ddiffinio yn Neddf 1983 nac yn y Rheolau a fydd yn llywodraethu gweithrediad y gweithdrefnau newydd. Yr unig ddarpariaeth ddeddfwriaethol berthnasol a geir yw yn adran 35C Deddf 1983, lle dywedir yr ystyrir bod ‘nam’ ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer dim ond oherwydd camymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, collfarn neu rybudd, iechyd corfforol neu feddyliol gwael neu ddyfarniad. Mae’r adran honno’n cyfyngu ar y llwybrau lle gellir canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, ond nid yw’n gymorth i ddeall beth yw nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Rwyf wedi dweud mewn man arall yn yr Adroddiad hwn fod y mynegiannau ‘camymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol’ (SPM) a ‘perfformiad difrifol o ddiffygiol’ (SDP) yn anodd i’w diffinio neu hyd yn oed i’w cydnabod. Credaf y bydd hyd yn oed mwy o anhawster gyda ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ oni bai y caiff ei ddiffinio’n glir.
Gall y cwestiwn a yw meddyg yn addas i ymarfer fel meddyg olygu llawer o wahanol bethau mewn gwahanol gyd-destunau. Pe byddai meddyg yn dioddef o iechyd gwael (er enghraifft, iselder difrifol), gellid dweud nad yw ef/hi’n addas i ymarfer oherwydd bod ei allu/ei gallu i ganolbwyntiad wedi’i effeithio mewn modd sy’n golygu na all ef/hi wneud penderfyniadau effeithiol ar ddiagnosis a thriniaeth; mae ef/hi’n cyflwyno risg i gleifion. Pe canfyddid bod perfformiad meddyg yn ddiffygiol (er enghraifft, gan ei fod/ei bod wedi ‘cawlio’ un llawdriniaeth neu fwy), gellid dweud nad yw ef/hi’n addas i ymarfer gan na all ddarparu safon ddigonol o ofal i gleifion a’i fod/ei bod yn eu rhoi mewn perygl niwed. Pe canfyddid bod meddyg yn euog o droseddau anweddustra, gellid dweud nad yw ef/hi’n addas i ymarfer oherwydd bod risg y bydd ef/hi’n anweddus tuag at gleifion. Pe canfyddid bod meddyg yn euog o dwyll yswiriant, gellid dweud ei fod ef/hi’n anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd ei fod/ei bod yn gywilydd i’r proffesiwn ac yn rhoi enw drwg iddo. Gallai ystyriaethau tebyg fod yn berthnasol i’r meddyg a gafwyd yn euog o achosi marwolaeth trwy yrru’n beryglus tra’n feddw. Mewn unrhyw un o’r ddau achos diwethaf, gallai’r meddyg fod o’r radd flaenaf o ran ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer clinigol. Pe byddai meddyg wedi ffugio presgripsiynau i gael cyffuriau rheoledig at ei ddefnydd/ei defnydd ei hun, gellid dweud ei fod/ei bod yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd y gallai ef/hi fod dan ddylanwad cyffuriau ar unrhyw adeg ac yn methu gwneud penderfyniadau synhwyrol am ddiagnosis a thriniaeth a/neu oherwydd ei fod/ei bod yn anonest ac na ellir ymddiried ynddo/ynddi. Pe byddai meddyg yn rhoi gwybodaeth breifat i bapur newydd am glaf a oedd yn berson enwog, gellid dweud na fyddai’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer gan ei fod/ei bod wedi torri cyfrinachedd, sef un o ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn. Un daliad arall o’r fath yw’r gofyniad y dylai cleifion ganiatáu triniaeth. Gellid dweud bod meddyg sydd wedi cynnal prosiect ymchwil heb gael caniatâd gwybodus y cleifion yn anaddas i ymarfer.
Mae’r enghreifftiau a roddwyd gennyf yn achosion lle mae’n ddigon posibl y byddai casgliad bod y meddyg yn hollol anaddas i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, mae’r cysyniad o ‘nam’ ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn cyflwyno anhawster. Un diffiniad geiriadurol o ‘nam’ yw ‘wedi’i niweidio; wedi’i anafu; wedi’i wneud yn llai effeithiol; wedi’i ddibrisio’. Mae meddygon fel arfer yn defnyddio’r gair mewn cysylltiad â nam ar swyddogaeth, er enghraifft, nam ar y clyw neu nam ar symudedd. Yn y cyd-destunau hynny, mae’n golygu’n syml ‘gostyngiad’. Mae rhai o’r ffyrdd y gellid arddangos ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ dan adran 35C yn cynnig eu hunain yn rhwydd i’r cysyniad o nam yn ystyr ‘gostyngedig’. Er enghraifft, pe byddai perfformiad meddyg yn ddiffygiol, gellid dweud bod ‘nam’ ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Gall y cysyniad o ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ hefyd fod yn eithaf priodol mewn achosion o iechyd gwael. Ond, yn rhan fwyaf yr achosion o gamymddygiad a chollfarnau, nid yw ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn gysyniad cynorthwyol. Er enghraifft, pe byddai meddyg wedi’i ganfod yn euog o ddwyn pâr o esgidiau o siop, canfuwyd bod ef/hi yn anonest. Gallai rhai ddweud nad oes gan hyn unrhyw beth i’w wneud â’i addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer meddygaeth. Gallai eraill ddweud ei fod ef/hi yn gywilydd i’r proffesiwn ac yn hollol anaddas i ymarfer. Yr unig beth na allech ei ddweud yn synhwyrol yw bod ‘nam’ ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Cymeraf enghraifft arall, yn ymwneud ag ymarfer clinigol y tro hwn. Pe canfyddid bod meddyg wedi ffugio cofnodion meddygol, gallai rhai ddweud ei fod/ei bod yn anaddas i ymarfer oherwydd nad oes modd ymddiried ynddo/ynddi. Gallai rhai ddweud ei fod/ei bod yn gywilydd i’r proffesiwn. Gallai eraill gymryd barn lai difrifol a nodi nad yw ymddygiad o’r math hwn, er bod angen gofidio amdano, yn effeithio ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Er y gallai gwahanol bobl gymryd gwahanol farnau am ddifrifoldeb a pherthnasedd y camymddygiad, ni chredaf y byddai unrhyw un yn ystyried dweud bod ‘nam’ ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Felly, er y gallaf ddeall yn iawn pam y mae’r GMC wedi mabwysiadu’r cysyniad holl-gwmpasol o ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’, ac er fy mod yn cydnabod ei fantais fawr, mae ganddo anfanteision. Nid yw’n hawdd ei ddiffinio; mae’n golygu gwahanol bethau mewn gwahanol amgylchiadau ac, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, nid oes ystyr iddo bron o gwbl. Mae rhai cysyniadau yn anodd i’w diffinio ond yn eithaf hawdd i’w hadnabod pan y’u canfyddir. Dywedir yn aml fod eliffantod yn syrthio i’r categori hwn ond ni ddeallais pam erioed; ni all ddiffinio fod yn rhy anodd. Fodd bynnag, gofidiaf y bydd ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ nid yn unig yn anodd i’w ddiffinio ond hefyd yn anodd i’w adnabod, oherwydd (yn wahanol i adnabod eliffant) mae adnabod ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn ymwneud â llunio barn ar werth.
Hyd yn oed mewn achosion lle bo’r cysyniad o ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn amlwg yn briodol, fel achosion o iechyd gwael neu berfformiad diffygiol, ni fydd pob nam bach yn golygu bod angen i’r GMC ymyrryd. Os oes graddoliad o ran nam, pa lefel fydd yn cadarnhau atgyfeirio achos trwy’r cyfnodau gweithdrefnol ac ar ba lefel y cyfiawnheir gweithredu ar gofrestriad? Bydd pawb sy’n ymgymryd â’r gweithdrefnau FTP yn gwybod na fydd pob nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn cyfiawnhau gweithredu gan y GMC. I gymryd enghraifft eithafol, gellid dweud pe byddai meddyg yn mynd i’r gwaith gyda chur pen, gall fod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ond ni fydd unrhyw un yn awgrymu y dylai’r GMC ymyrryd. Gall y GMC roi arweiniad i’w staff, archwilwyr achos a phanelwyr, ond sut y bydd y cyhoedd yn deall pam y gwnaed penderfyniad a sut y gallai’r llysoedd benderfynu a oedd penderfyniad yn rhesymol os yw’r prawf mor amhendant â‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’? Yn fy marn i, mae angen prawf y mae’r cyhoedd yn ei ddeall ac y gall y llysoedd ei ddefnyddio i feirniadu a oedd penderfyniad yn gyfreithlon o ran cydymffurfio â’r prawf.
Mae problem bosibl arall yn codi gyda’r adeg y mesurir neu yr asesir addasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae Deddf 1983 yn caniatáu panel FTP i weithredu ar gofrestriad pe byddai’n canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae hynny’n cyfleu bod rhaid i’r nam fod yn bresennol adeg y gwrandawiad. Felly, os yw meddyg wedi cyflawni gweithred ddifrifol o gamymddygiad flwyddyn yn ôl, a yw hynny’n nodi bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ar hyn o bryd? Deallaf y cynghorwyd y GMC, er bod adran 35D(2) Deddf 1983 yn cyfeirio at ganfyddiad bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, y gellir seilio nam presennol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer ar faterion yn y gorffennol. Mae hynny’n ymddangos yn synhwyrol. Rhaid mesur addasrwydd cyfredol y meddyg i ymarfer i raddau yn ôl ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y gorffennol. Rhaid ei farnu hefyd trwy gyfeirio at sut y mae ef/hi’n debygol o ymddwyn neu berfformio yn y dyfodol. Wedi dweud hynny, rwy’n credu y bydd dadleuon ynghylch i ba raddau y mae camymddygiad (difrifol) yn y gorffennol yn golygu bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ar hyn o bryd. Byddai’n anfoddhaol iawn pe byddai meddyg yn gallu lleihau’r risg o ganfod bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer trwy oedi gwrandawiad achos.
Rwyf wedi gwneud y sylwadau hyn am gysyniad ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’, nid oherwydd fy mod am awgrymu y dylai’r GMC roi’r gorau iddo ond er mwyn tynnu sylw i rai o’r problemau penderfynu a fydd yn gynhenid yn y gweithdrefnau newydd ac y mae’n rhaid i’r GMC, yn fy marn i, gymryd camau i’w datrys.
Credaf y bydd yn ddefnyddiol, wrth ddatrys y problemau rwyf ar fin eu hamlinellu, i mi ddadansoddi’r rhesymau pam y gallai penderfynwr gasglu bod meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer neu fod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn yr enghreifftiau a drafodais uchod, roedd pedwar rheswm am anaddasrwydd yn dychwelyd, sef (a) bod y meddyg yn cyflwyno risg i gleifion, (b) bod y meddyg wedi rhoi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn, (c) bod y meddyg wedi torri un o ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn a (ch) na ellid dibynnu ar onestrwydd y meddyg. Gallai neu ni allai diffyg gonestrwydd gynnwys risg i gleifion. Gallai neu ni allai roi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn. Gellid ei ystyried yn ddaliad elfennol y proffesiwn. Credaf ei bod yn gywir ei gynnwys fel rheswm ar wahân pam y gellid ystyried bod meddyg yn anaddas i ymarfer, oherwydd ei fod yn berthnasol hyd yn oed pan mae’n codi mewn ffordd sy’n hollol ddigysylltiad â gwaith y meddyg fel meddyg.
Prawf y Cyfnod Archwilio
Bydd y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn dechrau wrth dderbyn yr honiad. Bydd staff y GMC yn dadansoddi honiadau ac ni fydd pob un ohonynt yn cael eu hatgyfeirio i’r cyfnod archwilio. Byddaf yn ystyried y broses ddadansoddi honno yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Pe byddai honiad yn goroesi’r dadansoddiad rhagarweiniol, bydd yn cael ei atgyfeirio (ac eithrio yn achos rhai collfarnau) i archwilwyr achos. Mae’n gyfleus yn y cyfnod hwn i drafod y prawf y bydd yr archwilwyr achos (a’r IC, phan na all yr archwilwyr achos gytuno) yn ei gymhwyso ar ddiwedd y cyfnod archwilio wrth benderfynu atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP neu beidio.
Mae Adran 35C(4) Deddf 1983 yn amodi y bydd yr IC yn archwilio honiad ac yn penderfynu a ddylid ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Nid yw’r adran yn nodi pa brawf y dylid ei gymhwyso yn y cyfnod hwnnw. Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 chwaith nac unrhyw un o’r drafftiau a ddaeth o’u blaenau. Mae hyn yn syndod gan mai’r diffyg prawf uniongyrchol clir oedd yn achosi problemau dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Y problemau oedd diffyg eglurder ynghylch pa achosion a ddylai fynd ymlaen trwy’r prosesau treiddio amrywiol ac anghysondeb o ran penderfyniadau. Os yw’r gweithdrefnau newydd am fod yn dryloyw ac am gynhyrchu penderfyniadau cyson, dylai fod prawf statudol clir ar gyfer pob cyfnod o’r broses. Os nad oes, bydd yna berygl y gellid treiddio achosion a ddylai fynd ymlaen. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, ni fyddai cleifion yn cael amddiffyniad digonol.
Y prawf y mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu y dylid ei gymhwyso ar ddiwedd y cyfnod archwilio yw a oes yna obaith realistig o sefydlu bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Mae gweithredu ar gofrestriad yn golygu dileu, atal neu orfodi amodau ar hawl y meddyg i ymarfer.
Yn ystod gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, mynegais rywfaint o bryder na soniwyd o gwbl am amddiffyn cleifion gan y prawf y bydd y rheiny sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau yng nghyfnodau amrywiol y gweithdrefnau FTP yn ei gymhwyso. Ymddangosai i mi fod y prawf yn canolbwyntio’n unig ar y sancsiwn i’w gymhwyso i’r meddyg ac nid o gwbl ar natur a difrifoldeb ei weithrediadau/ei gweithrediadau na’u heffaith ar gleifion. Mewn ymdrech ymddangosiadol i fodloni’r pryderon hynny, ychwanegodd y GMC ragymadrodd at brawf y cyfnod archwilio, sy’n ymddangos mewn dogfennau arweiniad amrywiol:
‘Rhaid i’r Pwyllgor Archwilio neu’r archwilwyr achos gofio dyletswydd y GMC i weithredu er lles y cyhoedd sy’n cynnwys amddiffyn cleifion a chynnal ffydd y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn, wrth ystyried a oes yna obaith realistig o sefydlu bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad.’
Yr hyn a oedd gennyf mewn golwg mewn gwirionedd oedd prawf a ymgorfforai amddiffyn cleifion fel rhan annatod o’r prawf.
Beth bynnag, mae’n debyg i mi fod prawf y cyfnod archwilio ar ei ffurf bresennol yn achosi nifer o broblemau.
Problem o Egwyddor
Fel mater o egwyddor, mewn unrhyw broses gyfreithiol, er mwyn cael proses ragarweiniol sy’n ceisio treiddio achosion na ddylai fynd ymlaen i ddyfarniad terfynol, dylai’r prawf a gymhwysir i’r broses honno dreiddio allan dim ond yr achosion hynny na allent, ar eu huchaf, fodloni’r prawf i’w orfodi yn y cyfnod terfynol. Mewn proses ddisgyblu, dylai’r broses ragarweiniol, fel mater o egwyddor, dreiddio allan dim ond yr achosion hynny na allant, ar eu huchaf, fodloni’r prawf ar gyfer camau disgyblu.
Y prawf ar gyfer camau disgyblu dan Ddeddf 1983 yw a oes nam ar addasrwydd yr ymarferwr i ymarfer. Os oes, mae gan y panel FTP yr awdurdod i weithredu ar gofrestriad. Fel mater o egwyddor, felly, dylai’r broses sgrinio ragarweiniol adael unrhyw achos drwyddo lle mae’n bosibl (neu, os yw’n well, lle mae’n realistig bosibl) y bydd yna ganfyddiad o nam ar ymarfer. Gan fod ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn gysyniad mor amhendant, byddai’r prawf sgrinio hwnnw’n gosod trothwy isel iawn a byddai’n arwain at atgyfeirio llawer o achosion dibwys iawn i banel FTP. Credaf y mae’n rhaid mai er mwyn osgoi’r canlyniad hwnnw y mae’r GMC wedi gosod prawf y cyfnod archwilio ar drothwy llawer uwch. Bydd yn gadael trwyddo ddim ond yr achosion hynny lle ceir gobaith realistig o ganfod nam sy’n ddigonol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad.
Gallaf ddeall pam y byddai’r GMC yn dymuno gosod y trothwy uwch hwn. Nid yw er lles unrhyw un i gael llawer o achosion dibwys yn mynd trwyddo i wrandawiad panel FTP, gyda dim posibilrwydd o weithredu ar gofrestriad ar ei ddiwedd. Ond, wrth ymdrechu i wneud hyn, mae’r GMC, yn fy marn i, wedi creu problemau o ddehongliad a gylchogrwydd diffiniad sy’n peri diffyg eglurder ym mhrawf y cyfnod archwilio ac a fydd yn arwain at ddiffyg tryloywder o ran gwneud penderfyniadau.
Problem o Ddehongli
Mae’r prawf fel a nodir ar hyn o bryd yn achosi problem o ddehongli. A yw’n golygu:
bod rhaid i’r penderfynwr benderfynu a yw’r hyn a honnir, yn ei farn ef/ei barn hi, pe byddai’n cael ei brofi, yn dangos bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad a bod y dystiolaeth sydd ar gael yn golygu bod gobaith realistig o brofi’r hyn a honnir; neu
bod rhaid i’r penderfynwr benderfynu a oes gobaith realistig y bydd panel FTP yn canfod bod yr hyn a honnir yn dangos bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad a hefyd a yw’r dystiolaeth sydd ar gael yn golygu bod gobaith realistig o brofi’r hyn a honnir?
Ar hyn o bryd, nid yw’r prawf yn gwahaniaethu rhwng y ddau bosibilrwydd hyn. Nid yw’n glir a yw’r penderfynwr i fod i lunio barn bersonol am ddifrifoldeb y materion a honnwyd neu a yw’r broses yn asesu beth y gallai fod barn panel FTP. Dylid egluro hynny. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, nid yw’r naill yn anfoddhaol oherwydd bod y ddau’n cynnwys llunio barn ar werth (naill ai’n uniongyrchol neu’n ail-law) am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer pe byddai’r hyn a honnir am y meddyg yn cael ei brofi. Dylai penderfyniad rhagarweiniol fel y penderfyniad i’w wneud ar ddiwedd y cyfnod archwilio gynnwys cyn lleied o farn ar werth â phosibl; dylai fod yn seiliedig, cyn belled â phosibl, ar drothwy sy’n ganfyddadwy’n wrthrychol.
Y Broblem o Gylchogrwydd
Un broblem bellach gyda phrawf y cyfnod archwilio fel y mae wedi’i ddrafftio ar hyn o bryd yw ei fod yn gylchog. Rhaid i’r archwiliwr achos neu’r IC lunio barn ynghylch a yw’n ymddangos bod y materion a honnir yn dangos nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer a fyddai’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Felly, er enghraifft, mewn achos yn cynnwys cyhuddiad o gamymddygiad, mae’r prawf yn cynnwys ystyried a yw’r hyn yr ymddengys fod y meddyg wedi’i wneud yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Mae’r cwestiwn hwnnw’n ysgogi cwestiwn arall ar unwaith, sef: pa mor ddifrifol y mae’n rhaid i’r hyn y mae ef/hi wedi’i wneud fod er mwyn bod yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad? A’r unig ateb sydd ar gael i’r ail gwestiwn hwnnw yw bod yn rhaid iddo fod yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Rydym wedi troi yn ein hunfan. Nid oes unrhyw feincnod, dim safon wrthrychol. Mae’r ateb i ‘ba mor ddifrifol y mae’n rhaid iddo fod?’ yn cynnwys dyfarniad hollol oddrychol gan y penderfynwr. Rwy’n derbyn, wrth gwrs, y bydd angen rhyw elfen o ddyfarniad diamod bob amser mewn penderfyniadau o’r math hwn; yn aml, mae’n rhaid i benderfynwyr benderfynu ar ba ochr i drothwy y mae achos penodol yn syrthio. Y broblem fan hon yw nad oes unrhyw drothwyon. Mae hyn yn golygu nad oes modd profi penderfyniadau’n ddigonol yn y cyfnod archwilio. Ni all y broses benderfynu fod yn dryloyw o gwbl.
Beth y Dylid ei Wneud?
Awgrymaf y dylai’r GMC ailystyried prawf y cyfnod archwilio. Gan fy mod yn cydnabod ei bod yn hawdd beirniadu gwaith eraill ac yn llai hawdd awgrymu gwell ffyrdd o wneud pethau, rwyf wedi ceisio dyfeisio prawf a fydd yn glir ac yn dibynnu nid ar farn ar werth penagored (yn uniongyrchol neu’n ail-law), ond ar ryw feini prawf mwy gwrthrychol.
Mae gan y prawf a gynigiaf ddau gyfnod. Amcan cyfnod cyntaf y prawf fydd i’r penderfynwr benderfynu a allai’r honiad, pe byddai’n cael ei brofi, ddangos bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Yn yr ail gyfnod, bydd rhaid iddo/iddi ystyried digonolrwydd y dystiolaeth. Yn y cyfnod cyntaf, rwyf wedi cysylltu ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’â’r rhesymau gwaelodol a nodais yn flaenorol pam y gallai fod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Y rhesymau hyn yw ei fod ef/ei bod hi yn risg i gleifion, ei fod ef/ei bod hi wedi rhoi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn, ei fod ef/ei bod hi wedi torri un o ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn neu na ellid dibynnu ar ei onestrwydd/ei gonestrwydd. Mae’r cysyniadau hyn yn llawer haws i’w cydnabod na ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’. Felly, dyma’r ddau gyfnod:
A oes un honiad neu fwy o gamymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol neu iechyd gwael a/neu un adroddiad neu fwy o gollfarn, rhybudd neu ddyfarniad a allai ddangos, pe byddai’n cael ei brofi neu ei gyfaddef, fod y meddyg:
wedi gweithredu yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol o weithredu yn y dyfodol mewn modd sy’n rhoi claf neu gleifion mewn perygl diesgus o niwed; a/neu
wedi yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol yn y dyfodol o roi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn meddygol; a/neu
wedi yn y gorffennol cyflawni achos o dorri (heblaw am achos dibwys) un o ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn meddygol a/neu’n debygol o wneud hynny yn y dyfodol; a/neu
wedi gweithredu’n anonest yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol o weithredu’n anonest yn y dyfodol.
Os felly:
A yw’r dystiolaeth sydd ar gael yn golygu bod gobaith realistig o brofi’r cyhuddiad?
Byddwn yn awgrymu y dylid ystyried bod meddyg yn ‘debygol’ o weithredu mewn modd penodol pe byddai person rhesymol a gwybodus yn ystyried, yng ngoleuni’r hyn sy’n hysbys am yr honiad ac am amgylchiadau’r meddyg yn y gorffennol a’r presennol, bod yna risg gwirioneddol y gallai ef/hi weithredu yn y modd hwnnw. Gallai tystiolaeth un digwyddiad yn y gorffennol fod yn ddigon difrifol, ar ei phen ei hun, i fodloni prawf y cyfnod archwilio. Er enghraifft, byddai tystiolaeth bod meddyg wedi niweidio claf, fel y credwyd bod Shipman wedi niweidio Mrs Renate Overton, trwy roi dos amhriodol o forffin iddi (gweler Pennod 10), yn bodloni’r prawf. Efallai na fyddai tystiolaeth o gamgymeriad llai difrifol, er enghraifft, y math o gamgymeriad rhagnodi a wnaeth Shipman yn achos Mr W (gweler Pennod 6), yn ddigonol ar ei phen ei hun, ond byddai’n ddigonol pe byddai’n cael ei rhoi gyda thystiolaeth arall a awgrymai fod y meddyg yn debygol o wneud camgymeriadau esgeulus. Mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai tystiolaeth o sgiliau cyfathrebu gwael, mewn adroddiad asesiad perfformiad, basio’r prawf, hyd yn oed pe na fyddai unrhyw ddigwyddiad arwyddocaol yn y gorffennol lle achoswyd niwed; gallai basio ar y sail bod y meddyg yn debygol o achosi niwed diesgus yn y dyfodol. Byddwn yn awgrymu y dylid diffinio ‘risg diesgus o niwed’ fel risg o niwed sydd y tu hwnt i’r risg y byddai disgwyl iddo godi o’r cyngor neu’r driniaeth pe byddent wedi’u rhoi gyda sgil a gofal rhesymol. I’r graddau nad oes unrhyw gytundeb ar ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn meddygol (mae rhai ohonynt yn ymddangos yn ‘Nyletswyddau’r Meddyg’), gellid llunio a chytuno ar restr.
Yn fy marn i, byddai defnyddio’r prawf dau gyfnod hwnnw yn rhoi rhywbeth mwy gwrthrychol i archwilwyr achos a’r IC ganolbwyntio arno na ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’. Byddai’n osgoi’r bobl hynny’n gorfod ‘ail ddyfalu’ y farn y gallai’r FTP ei chymryd am yr angen i weithredu ar gofrestriad a dylai hefyd osgoi achosion dibwys yn cael eu hanfon at y panel FTP. Yn olaf, credaf hefyd y byddai’n bodloni disgwyliad rhesymol y cyhoedd am y math o achos a ddylai fynd ymlaen i banel FTP. Pe byddai’n cael ei ddefnyddio’n gywir, dylai sicrhau bod yr holl achosion hynny a ddylai symud ymlaen (am resymau amddiffyn cleifion) yn symud ymlaen mewn gwirionedd i banel FTP.
Prawf y Cyfnod Dyfarnu
Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r prawf i’w ddefnyddio gan y panel FTP wedi’i fframio’n syml yng ngeiriau’r statud. Y prawf statudol yw a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer neu beidio ac nid, fel mae Arweiniad y GMC i Banelwyr yn awgrymu, a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Rwy’n amau y caiff paneli FTP anhawster mawr wrth gymhwyso’r prawf statudol mewn modd cyson. Mae angen ar y prawf farn ar werth nad yw unrhyw feini prawf gwrthrychol yn ei thanategu. Y dyddiau hyn, lle bo statud yn rhoi disgresiwn i benderfynwr, mae fel arfer yn darparu rhestr o’r math o bethau y dylid eu hystyried.
Wrth lunio prawf cyfnod dyfarnu (i’w gymhwyso gan baneli FTP dan Reol 17(2) (k)), rwyf wedi ceisio canolbwyntio meddwl y panel ar ei wir ddiben. Rwy’n awgrymu:
A yw ein canfyddiadau o ffaith o ran camymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, iechyd gwael, collfarn, rybudd neu ddyfarniad y meddyg yn dangos bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn yr ystyr ei fod/ei bod:
wedi gweithredu yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol o weithredu yn y dyfodol mewn modd sy’n rhoi claf neu gleifion mewn perygl diesgus o niwed; a/neu
wedi yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol yn y dyfodol o roi enw drwg i’r proffesiwn meddygol; a/neu
wedi yn y gorffennol neu’n debygol yn y dyfodol o dorri un o ddaliadau elfennol y proffesiwn meddygol; a/neu
wedi gweithredu’n anonest yn y gorffennol a/neu’n debygol o weithredu’n anonest yn y dyfodol.
Pe byddai’r panel FTP yn canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, dylai fynd ymlaen i ystyried sancsiwn dan Reol 17(2)(n). Yn y cyfnod hwn (ac nid cyn hynny) y mae’r cynllun statudol yn mynnu bod y panel FTP yn ystyried a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Yn y cyfnod hwn, rwy’n awgrymu bod y panel yn gofyn i’w hun:
A fyddai aelod rhesymol a gwybodus o’r cyhoedd yn dwyn y casgliad fod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau y dylid, er lles amddiffyn cleifion a/neu gynnal ffydd y cyhoedd a safonau yn y proffesiwn meddygol, dileu neu atal neu orfodi amodau ar gofrestriad y meddyg?
Mewn achos sy’n dibynnu’n gyfan gwbl neu’n bennaf ar ganfyddiadau mewn perthynas ag iechyd gwael y meddyg, ni fydd dilead yn opsiwn. Rwyf wedi ymgorffori yn ail gangen y prawf y farn y byddai aelod gwybodus o’r cyhoedd yn ei chymryd oherwydd fy mod yn credu’n gryf fod rhaid i’r safonau, y meini prawf a’r trothwyon y bydd paneli FTP yn eu defnyddio yn dderbyniol i’r gymdeithas gyfan. Bu’r ffaith na fuont yn dderbyniol yn y gorffennol yn un o’r prif achosion am feirniadaeth gyhoeddus a diffyg ffydd y cyhoedd yn y GMC.
Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd y GMC yn ystyried y profion arfaethedig hyn o ddifrif. Pan fydd penderfyniad terfynol wedi’i gymryd, dylai’r profion ar gyfer y cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu gael eu cynnwys mewn deddfwriaeth. Dylid gwneud hyn am sawl rheswm. Dylai’r GMC allu dweud bod y profion i’w cymhwyso wedi’u sancsiynu gan y Senedd. Dylai’r cyhoedd wybod bod y GMC yn cymhwyso cyfraith gwlad ac nid fformiwla ei hun yn unig. Ni ddylai fod yn bosibl i’r GMC newid y profion i’w cymhwyso heb ymgynghori priodol a heb gymeradwyaeth y Senedd. Yn ogystal, mae’n bwysig y dylai fod profion statudol y gall y llysoedd archwilio unrhyw benderfyniad trwy gyfeirio atynt, p’un ai ar adolygiad barnwrol o ran penderfyniad y cyfnod archwilio neu apêl gan benderfyniad panel FTP.
Adran 35C Deddf Feddygol 1983 a’r Ffyrdd o Brofi Nam
Wrth ddrafftio’r profion yr wyf wedi’u cynnig ar gyfer y cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu, gwelir fy mod wedi mabwysiadu’r pum categori o honiad a ddefnyddir, dan adran 35C Deddf 1983, i ddangos nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, mae yna
yn y pum categori hyn. Mae yna gategori o honiad nad yw’n syrthio’n rhwydd o fewn yr ystod o ‘berfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol’ neu ‘gamymddygiad’. Mae camymddygiad, fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 17, yn gyffredinol yn golygu ymddygiad a gyflawnwyd yn bwrpasol neu’n ddiofal. Er mwyn rhoi awdurdod i’r GMC ddelio ag achosion o esgeulustod difrifol sy’n rhoi cleifion mewn perygl, estynnwyd terfynau SPM i gwmpasu gweithrediadau neu hepgoriadau esgeulus, sy’n codi fel arfer mewn cyd-destun clinigol, cyhyd â’u bod yn ddigon difrifol. Fodd bynnag, byddai disgrifio rhai o’r achosion hyn fel ‘camymddygiad’ yn golygu ‘ymestyn’ y defnydd o’r iaith. Gallai enghraifft nodweddiadol fod o feddyg a roddodd dos gormodol iawn o gyffur peryglus. Gallai ef neu hi fod wedi gwneud hyn gan ei fod/ei bod yn esgeulus am faint yr ampwl a gododd/a chododd neu oherwydd nad oedd wedi ffwdanu darganfod y dos cywir. Enghraifft arall gallai fod llaw-drin ar y fraich, y goes neu’r aren anghywir. Mae’r un mor bosibl - neu’n fwy priodol - y gellid disgrifio achosion felly o esgeulustra difrifol yn achosion o ‘ymarfer clinigol diffygiol’. Gyda dyfodiad y gweithdrefnau perfformiad y daeth y cysyniad o SDP. Fel arfer, nodweddwyd hwn gan batrwm o ymarfer clinigol annerbyniol, er y gallai fod yn gysylltiedig â phroblemau trefniadol neu ymddygiadol. Gallai patrwm o’r fath fod yn ganlyniad anwybodaeth, methu gwybod y diweddaraf, diogi, iechyd gwael neu ddilyniant o anawsterau cymdeithasol neu broffesiynol. Felly, cafwyd dau gysyniad wedyn, sef SPM a SDP, ac roedd y naill ohonynt yn cynnwys yn gyfforddus achos o esgeulustra difrifol fel yr achos a ddisgrifiais uchod. Ni ellid galw achos o’r fath yn SPM yn synhwyrol; nac ychwaith, pe byddai’n ddigwyddiad ‘unigryw’, y gallai fod yn SDP. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, roedd yna wir berygl y byddai achosion o’r fath yn cwympo trwy’r rhwyd ac yn cael eu cau mewn cyfnod rhagarweiniol.
Yn anffodus, mae adran 35C wedi parhau’r broblem hon. Nid oes unrhyw le o hyd ar gyfer y camgymeriad difrifol unigryw neu bron yn unigryw, a gyflawnir nid yn bwrpasol na’n ddiofal, ond yn esgeulus. Nid oes lle chwaith ar gyfer achos o ddau neu dri digwyddiad ‘lefel is’ nad ydynt yn dangos y ‘patrwm’ sy’n angenrheidiol i olygu perfformiad diffygiol ond sy’n rhoi cleifion mewn perygl serch hynny. Mae’n debyg i mi ei bod yn amlwg y dylai achosion o’r fath fynd i’r gweithdrefnau FTP oherwydd gallant fod yn achosion o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Pe byddai’r ddeddfwriaeth yn cael ei diwygio, awgrymaf y dylid ychwanegu categori pellach i’r ffyrdd y gellid profi nam, sef ‘ymarfer clinigol diffygiol’, a allai fod yn gysylltiedig ag un digwyddiad neu fwy nag un digwyddiad. Y nod fyddai sicrhau bod y ‘llwybrau’ i nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer yn cwmpasu’r holl amgylchiadau a allai roi cleifion mewn perygl.
Hyd yma yn y Bennod hon, rwyf wedi trafod y materion eang sy’n gysylltiedig â’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Rwyf wedi gwneud rhai argymhellion ar gyfer newid. Byddaf yn symud ymlaen nawr i ystyried, yn eithaf manwl, y darpariaethau y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn gweithredu oddi tanynt yn y dyfodol uniongyrchol.

---  ---
Cyn disgrifio’r prosesau amrywiol a gynhwysir yn y cyfnod archwilio, byddaf yn esbonio’n gyntaf y rolau a ragwelir ar hyn o bryd ar gyfer yr IC a’r archwilwyr achos. Bydd hyn hefyd yn cynnwys trafodaeth am fwriadau’r GMC o ran cynnwys pobl leyg mewn penderfyniadau a wneir yn y cyfnod archwilio.
Y Pwyllgor Archwilio
Swyddogaethau a Chyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Archwilio: Sefyllfa 2003
Mae adran newydd 35C(4) Deddf 1983 yn mynnu bod yr IC yn archwilio pob honiad a wneir i’r GMC fod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, ni fwriadwyd erioed y dylai’r IC ei hun wneud y penderfyniad ynghylch sut i ddelio â’r honiad ym mhob achos. Mae Adran 35CC Deddf 1983, felly, yn amodi y gellid gwneud Rheolau, gan alluogi’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, aelodau o staff y GMC sy’n ymarfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol) ac unrhyw swyddog arall y GMC (yn ymarferol, yr archwilwyr achos newydd) i ymarfer swyddogaethau’r IC, p’un ai’n gyffredinol neu mewn cysylltiad â’r math o ddosbarthiadau o achosion y gellid eu nodi yn y Rheolau.
Tan yn ddiweddar iawn, roedd y GMC wedi bwriadu y dylai’r IC chwarae rhan ganolog yn y cyfnod archwilio, nid yn unig wrth wneud penderfyniadau mewn perthynas ag achosion unigol (ei ‘swyddogaeth gwaith achos’) ond hefyd wrth oruchwylio a rheoli’r cyfnod archwilio yn ei gyfanrwydd (ei ‘swyddogaeth lywodraethu’).
Mewn cyfarfod a gynhaliwyd ym mis Hydref 2003, ystyriodd y Cyngor bapur briffio yn delio â’r cynigion ar gyfer diben, swyddogaethau, strwythur ac aelodaeth yr IC newydd. Dywedwyd bod y cynigion hyn yn destun yr adolygiad cyffredinol o rôl pwyllgorau’r GMC a’u dulliau gwaith a oedd yn cael ei gynnal bryd hynny. Yn y cyfarfod, cymerodd y Cyngor y penderfyniad ffurfiol y dylai’r IC berfformio swyddogaeth lywodraethu a swyddogaeth gwaith achos. Penderfynwyd hefyd y dylai’r IC gynnwys naw aelod o’r GMC a fyddai’n gwirfoddoli am aelodaeth. Byddai etholiad yn cael ei gynnal dim ond pe byddai mwy o wirfoddolwyr na lleoedd. Y bwriad oedd y byddai’r naw aelod yn rhyddhau swyddogaeth lywodraethu’r IC. Rhagwelwyd yn amlwg hefyd y byddai rhai (os nad y cyfan) o naw aelod yr IC yn eistedd ar baneli IC i ddelio â gwneud penderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol. Cynigiwyd y dylai’r IC gael y pŵer, lle bo’n angenrheidiol, i gyfethol panelwyr ychwanegol o’r rhestr o banelwyr hyfforddedig a benodwyd gan y GMC. Mewn geiriau eraill, cynigiwyd y byddai cymysgedd o aelodau’r GMC a phobl nad ydynt yn aelodau’r GMC yn gwneud y penderfyniadau ar achosion unigol. Byddai swyddogaeth lywodraethu’r IC yn cael ei hymarfer gan aelodau’r GMC yn unig. Byddai gorgyffwrdd o ran aelodau’r IC yn perfformio’r ddwy swyddogaeth. Mae’n debyg o gofnodion y cyfarfod y derbyniwyd y cynigion hyn o ran egwyddor.
Byddai swyddogaeth lywodraethu’r IC yn cynnwys goruchwylio’r cyfnod archwilio a diffinio’r meini prawf i’w cymhwyso gan archwilwyr achos, staff y GMC a phaneli IC wrth wneud penderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol. Byddai’r IC hefyd yn adolygu’r holl agweddau ar y penderfyniadau a wneir yn y cyfnod archwilio a sefydlu a goruchwylio proses sicrhau ansawdd ac archwilio briodol. Byddai’n cytuno safonau gwasanaeth ar gyfer prosesu achosion ac yn adolygu a monitro perfformiad yn erbyn y safonau hynny. Byddai’n adolygu niferoedd a mathau’r achosion sy’n cael eu trin yn y cyfnod archwilio ac yn sicrhau bod y prosesau perthnasol yn gweithio’n effeithiol ac yn effeithlon. Byddai’n adrodd yn rheolaidd i’r Cyngor ar weithrediad y cyfnod archwilio.
Y bwriad gwreiddiol oedd y dylai’r IC, fel rhan o’i swyddogaeth lywodraethu, gael y pŵer i benderfynu i ba raddau y byddai’n briodol dirprwyo ei swyddogaeth gwaith achos i archwilwyr achos ac i staff GMC arall. Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 y dylai naill ai’r IC neu archwilwyr achos gymryd penderfyniadau ynghylch sut y dylid delio ag achos unigol. Y bwriad oedd y byddai’r IC yn penderfynu i ba raddau yr oedd yn barod i ddirprwyo ei bwerau penderfynu ar unrhyw adeg. Y disgwyliad oedd y byddai’n dechrau trwy ddirprwyo ystod gyfyngedig yn unig o benderfyniadau i archwilwyr achos ond y byddai maint y dirprwyo, dros amser, yn cynyddu wrth i’r IC ennyn hyder yng ngalluoedd yr archwilwyr achos i gymryd penderfyniadau priodol. Fodd bynnag, cytunwyd yng nghyfarfod mis Hydref 2003 y dylai dirprwyo gwaith achos
‘ddatblygu’n gyflym’
Adeg cyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Hydref 2003, nid oedd yn amlwg i ba raddau y byddai gan archwilwyr achos yr awdurdod i gymryd penderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol. Awgrymodd bapur briffio a gyflwynwyd i’r Cyngor yn y cyfarfod hwnnw y dylai’r
‘sefyllfa ddechrau ofynnol’
fod na ddylai fod angen cynnwys yr IC dan y gweithdrefnau newydd mewn penderfyniadau nad oedd angen cynnwys y PPC ynddynt dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Cyfeiriodd y papur briffio at
‘fanteision clir’
dirprwyo penderfyniadau i archwilwyr achos ym
‘mwyafrif helaeth yr achosion’
. Roedd yn amlwg yn ystyried y byddai archwilwyr achos unigol yn gwneud rhan fwyaf y penderfyniadau. Parhaodd y papur briffio:
‘Byddai’n cyflwyno effeithlonrwydd a hyblygrwydd ac yn helpu bodloni un o themâu allweddol yr adolygiad Addasrwydd i Ymarfer - sef symleiddio a chyflymu’r broses. Byddai hefyd yn cyfyngu’r adnoddau a fyddai’n ofynnol i wasanaethu pwyllgor gwaith achos a oedd yn gweithredu’n llawn. Byddai’r Pwyllgor
(h.y. yr IC)
yn gosod y protocolau a’r polisi ar gyfer gwneud penderfyniadau ar achosion a byddai’n monitro ac yn adolygu’r canlyniadau ar achosion.’
Dan y trefniadau a ragwelwyd ym mis Hydref 2003, byddai pŵer yr IC wedi bod yn aruthrol, o ystyried y rôl oruchwyliol y bwriadwyd y dylai fod gan yr IC a’r ffaith y byddai’n gyfrifol am osod y meini prawf ar gyfer penderfyniadau yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio cyfan. Byddai hefyd wedi cael y pŵer i benderfynu pa fathau o achos y byddai’n barod i’w dirprwyo i archwilwyr achos a pha rai y byddai’n well ganddo gadw o fewn ei reolaeth ei hun yn unig.
Swyddogaethau a Chyfansoddiad y Pwyllgor Archwilio: Sefyllfa 2004
Disgrifiais uchod y cynigion ar gyfer swyddogaethau a chyfansoddiad yr IC a oedd yn gyfredol ar ddiwedd gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003. Fodd bynnag, erbyn canol 2004, roedd y cynigion hynny wedi newid yn gyfan gwbl. Cafodd y GMC gyngor cyfreithiol i’r perwyl, dan adran 35CC(1) Deddf 1983, mai’r Cyngor ei hun - nid yr IC - sydd â’r pŵer i ddirprwyo swyddogaethau penderfynu‘r IC i archwilwyr achos a staff arall. Yn ogystal, cynghorwyd y GMC y dylid nodi union raddau’r dirprwyo yn y Rheolau perthnasol. Fel y digwyddodd, ar ôl ystyried y mater, roedd yn amhosib gan y GMC i nodi i’w cynnwys yn y Rheolau unrhyw ddosbarthiadau penodol o achos lle ystyriwyd y gallai’r Cyngor ddirprwyo’r cyfrifoldeb am benderfynu i archwilwyr achos.
O ganlyniad, diwygiodd y GMC y trefniadau ar gyfer y cyfnod archwilio. Penderfynodd y dylai’r Rheolau roi pwerau penodol i archwilwyr achos wneud penderfyniad ym mwyafrif yr achosion. Penderfynodd y dylid cyfyngu rôl penderfynu‘r IC i ddau fath o achos yn unig, h.y. yr achosion hynny lle anghytunai archwilwyr achos a’r rheiny lle byddai’n angenrheidiol cynnal gwrandawiad llafar er mwyn penderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd neu beidio. Byddaf yn trafod y mathau hyn o achos yn ddiweddarach yn y bennod hon. O ganlyniad, gostyngwyd llwyth achos tebygol yr IC. Arweiniodd y gostyngiad arfaethedig yn swyddogaeth gwaith achos yr IC at ailystyried ei gyfansoddiad a’i swyddogaeth lywodraethu arfaethedig. Yng nghyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, gwnaeth y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer argymhellion i’r Cyngor am y materion hyn.
Cynigiodd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer na ddylai’r IC gael unrhyw rôl lywodraethu ac y dylai’r cyfrifoldeb hwnnw am oruchwylio’r cyfnod archwilio fynd yn hytrach i’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer ei hun. Cynigiodd y dylai’r IC gael ei ffurfio fel pwyllgor gwaith achos yn unig. Dan y trefniadau newydd arfaethedig hyn, ni fyddai gan yr IC, fel a fwriadwyd yn flaenorol, aelodaeth sefydlog o 9 aelod o’r GMC. Yn hytrach, byddai’n cynnwys paneli’n unig y byddai ganddynt ‘aelodaeth gyfnewidiol’. Byddai paneli’n ymgynnull yn benodol i wneud penderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol. Cynigiwyd y dylid dewis y paneli yn bennaf o gasgliad o aelodau GMC a fyddai’n gwirfoddoli at y diben hwn. Byddai rhaid i’r aelodau GMC hynny gael hyfforddiant ac asesiad. Byddai partneriaid hefyd yn cael eu cyfethol i eistedd ar baneli IC pan fyddai’n angenrheidiol. Er mwyn cadw’r swyddogaethau ar wahân, cynigiwyd y dylid mynnu bod y bobl hynny a gawsai eu dewis a’u penodi i eistedd yn banelwyr yn dewis eistedd naill ai ar baneli IC neu baneli FTP; ni chaniateir iddynt eistedd ar y ddau.
Ystyriodd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer, o ystyried ymglymiad yr IC wrth waith achos, y byddai‘n amhriodol iddo gynnal unrhyw archwiliad neu adolygiad o benderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol. Cynigiodd, felly, y dylai’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer gynnal archwiliadau ac adolygiadau. Yna, byddai gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer gyfrifoldeb trosfwaol am gydlynu a monitro gweithrediad cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu y gweithdrefnau newydd. Mae’r syniad hwnnw’n ymddangos hefyd fel petai’n codi problem o wahanu swyddogaethau. Roedd y disgrifiad o’r model cyntaf ar gyfer gwahanu’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu a nodwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001 wedi darparu’n benodol i’r cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu gael trefniadau ar wahân ar gyfer
: gweler paragraff 25.29.
Amlinellodd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer drefniant amgen, lle byddai’r IC yn cadw aelodaeth sefydlog o aelodau GMC a fyddai’n gyfrifol am lywodraethu’r cyfnod archwilio (gan gynnwys archwilio ac adolygu penderfyniadau), ond a fyddai’n dirprwyo gwaith achos i baneli o bartneriaid. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn well ganddo’r model a ddisgrifiais yn flaenorol.
Pan drafodwyd y cynigion a gyflwynwyd gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer gan y Cyngor yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, cafwyd gwahaniaeth barn sylweddol ymhlith y rheiny a oedd yn bresennol. Dywedwyd bod yr IC (a sefydlir yn ôl statud) yn cael ei ‘israddio’ i ‘bwyllgor gwaith achos yn unig’, tra bod y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer (nad yw’n bwyllgor statudol) yn cymryd y swyddogaethau llywodraethu y bwriadwyd erioed y dylai’r IC eu cynnal. Cefnogodd nifer o aelodau’r Cyngor awgrym y dylai’r IC, ymhell o golli ei rôl lywodraethu, gael y cyfrifoldeb cyfan am oruchwylio’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd (h.y. llywodraethu’r cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu), gyda’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer cyfredol yn dod yn ddiangen. Byddai hyn, wrth reswm, yn golygu ymestyn rôl yr IC ymhell y tu hwnt i’r rôl a ragwelwyd ar ei gyfer yn wreiddiol. Nododd aelodau eraill o’r Cyngor y byddai rhoi i’r IC, sydd â chyfrifoldeb statudol am waith achos yn y cyfnod archwilio, rôl oruchwylio dros y paneli FTP, sy’n gyfrifol am benderfyniadau yn y cyfnod dyfarnu, yn negyddu’n llwyr yr egwyddor o wahanu swyddogaethau. Serch hynny, cefnogodd rai aelodau’r Cyngor yr ateb hwn. Un farn amgen oedd y dylai’r IC gadw, yn ogystal â’i swyddogaeth gwaith achos, rôl lywodraethu gyfyngedig yn cynnwys cyfrifoldeb am archwilio a hyfforddi archwilwyr achos.
Mynegodd y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer hefyd y farn y dylai aelodau‘r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer a’r paneli IC fod yn annibynnol ar ei gilydd, oherwydd y gwrthdaro buddiannau posibl a allai godi pe byddai’r un unigolyn yn ymwneud â gwneud penderfyniadau mewn achosion unigol ac archwilio a sicrhau ansawdd y penderfyniadau hyn. Cytunodd rai aelodau’r Cyngor â’r farn hon a mynegi amheuon am yr egwyddor o gynnwys aelodau Cyngor mewn rôl gwaith achos (fel aelodau o baneli IC) a rôl lywodraethu (fel aelodau o’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer). Awgrymwyd y byddai’n fwy priodol i aelodau cyswllt yn unig ymgymryd â gwaith achos yr IC. Fodd bynnag, ni chytunwyd o gwbl ar y mater hwn.
Fodd bynnag, arweiniodd y ddadl at rywfaint cyfyngedig o gytuno. Mae’r cofnod sy’n cofnodi’r cytuno hwnnw’n nodi:
‘Addasrwydd i Ymarfer: y Pwyllgor Archwilio
11. Cytunodd y Cyngor y dylai fod tri grŵp o swyddogaethau, sef:
a. Polisi, archwilio, goruchwylio a swyddogaethau llywodraethu eraill, sy’n ymdrin ag archwilio a dyfarnu.
b. Gwaith achos archwilio.
c. Gwaith achos dyfarnu.
12. Y bwriad oedd cael un pwyllgor gyda chyfrifoldebau llywodraethu, yn goruchwylio gwaith achos archwilio a gwaith achos dyfarnu. Ar gyfer gwaith achos archwilio a gwaith achos dyfarnu, dylai paneli ymgymryd â phenderfyniadau a gwrandawiadau grŵp. Cydnabu’r Cyngor na ellid cyrraedd nod un pwyllgor o fewn y gyfraith fel yr oedd. Tan y gellid diwygio Deddf Feddygol 1983, dyma a ddylai fod yn gyfrifoldebau:
a. Polisi, archwilio a goruchwylio - y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
b. Gwaith achos archwilio - y Pwyllgor Archwilio (yn cyfarfod yn baneli) ac archwilwyr achos.
c. Gwaith achos dyfarnu - paneli addasrwydd i ymarfer a phaneli gorchmynion dros dro.’
Am y tro, mae Rheolau (Cyfansoddiad Paneli a’r Pwyllgor Archwilio) y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 2004 (sef Rheolau Cyfansoddiad 2004) yn amodi y bydd aelodau‘r IC yn cynnwys panelwyr meddygol a lleyg (gan gynnwys un person o leiaf o’r rhestr o banelwyr sy’n gymwys i eistedd fel Cadeirydd panel) a ddewisir gan y Cofrestrydd i eistedd ar achlysur penodol. Gall aelodau’r GMC fod yn banelwyr IC. Ni fydd gan yr IC unrhyw aelodaeth sefydlog. Y cworwm cyfreithiol ar gyfer panel IC fydd tri, yn cynnwys y Cadeirydd (a all fod yn feddygol cymwys neu’n lleyg), ynghyd ag un panelydd meddygol ac un panelydd lleyg.
Nid yw’n amlwg a fydd yr IC yn y pen draw yn cymryd swyddogaethau’r
‘pwyllgor sengl’
y cyfeirir ato mewn munud. Ni chyrhaeddwyd unrhyw gytundeb am hynny yng nghyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Gorffennaf 2004. Ni chafwyd unrhyw benderfyniad chwaith ar y mater a fyddai paneli IC yn cynnwys cymysgedd o aelodau GMC ac aelodau cyswllt, neu aelodau cyswllt yn unig. Nododd llythyr diweddar a ysgrifennwyd gan y GMC i’r Ymchwiliad, er bod Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn caniatáu i aelodau’r Cyngor eistedd ar baneli IC, mai’r
‘bwriad gweithredol’
yw i’r paneli gynnwys aelodau cyswllt penodedig. Nid yw’n amlwg
‘bwriad gweithredol’
pwy yw hwn, gan nad yw’n ymddangos y bu unrhyw benderfyniad gan y Cyngor i’r perwyl hwn.
Mae’n ymddangos y cafodd y newidiadau hwyr hyn i’r gweithdrefnau newydd eu gorfodi ar y GMC o ganlyniad iddo fethu deall effaith y ddeddfwriaeth ddiwygiedig y gofynnodd amdani. Mae hyn yn rhoi’r argraff nad oedd y GMC wedi ystyried yn ddigonol sut y byddai’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn gweithio cyn iddo ofyn i ddeddfwriaeth gael ei drafftio.
Byddai’r cynigion gwreiddiol wedi achosi sefyllfa anfoddhaol. Buasai’r IC yn hynod bwerus. Nid yn unig y byddai’n gyfrifol am bolisi penderfyniadau’r cyfnod archwilio, gan gynnwys gosod safonau, byddai wedi gwneud llawer o’r penderfyniadau gwaith achos ei hun ac yn gyfrifol am oruchwylio’r archwilwyr achos ac archwilio holl benderfyniadau’r cyfnod archwilio. Nid yw hunanarchwilio’n dderbyniol, ac mae’n debyg bod hyn wedi’i gydnabod bellach.
Am y tro, mae’n debyg y bydd pwerau’r IC yn gyfyngedig i gymryd penderfyniadau ar achosion unigol. Bydd swyddogaethau llywodraethu, goruchwylio, archwilio, gosod safonau a chyhoeddi arweiniad i staff ac archwilwyr achos am y cyfnod archwilio yn cael eu trosglwyddo i’r Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer. Bydd yn rhoi baich sylweddol iawn ar y Pwyllgor hwnnw ond o leiaf - am y tro - bydd swyddogaethau penderfynu a llywodraethu ar wahân.
Ar hyn o bryd, nid yw bwriad sylfaenol y GMC yn amlwg. Yn y cyfarfod ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, awgrymwyd y dylai’r IC fod yn gyfrifol am y cyfnod dyfarnu. Ni chredaf mai dyna’r bwriad bellach, er bod rhai aelodau GMC yn credu ei fod yn briodol. Nid yw’r sefyllfa ar gyfer y dyfodol yn hollol amlwg ac mae’r maint hwn o ansicrwydd yn anffodus ar adeg pan fo’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu rhoi ar waith.
Yn fy marn i, dylid cyfyngu swyddogaethau’r IC i waith achos, fel y bydd yn digwydd yn ôl pob sôn yn y dyfodol agos. Nid yw’n briodol i unrhyw bwyllgor gael cyfrifoldeb llawn am holl agweddau cyfnod archwilio’r gweithdrefnau FTP, hyd yn oed hyd at archwilio ei benderfyniadau ei hun. Mae’n beryglus rhoi rheolaeth lwyr ar yr holl gyfnod archwilio i un pwyllgor bach. Fodd bynnag, mae‘r un mor anfoddhaol i un pwyllgor gael rheolaeth ar lywodraethu’r cyfnod archwilio a’r cyfnod dyfarnu, fel a gydnabuwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001. Sylweddolaf y gallai hyn achosi anawsterau i’r GMC newydd gyda 35 o aelodau yn unig.
Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n debyg mai’r bwriad, ar ôl diwygio Deddf 1983, yw rhoi’r cyfrifoldeb i un pwyllgor am lywodraethu’r cyfnodau archwilio a dyfarnu. Mae’n debyg bod y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer yn ystyried, pe byddai’r ddau bwyllgor yn ymgymryd â llywodraethu’r gwahanol gyfnodau, y byddai dryswch ac anghysondeb. Gallaf weld ei bod yn ddymunol i’r un grŵp o bobl osod y safonau, y meini prawf a’r trothwyon sy’n berthnasol i’r ddau gyfnod; rhaid i’r rhain gyd-fynd. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg i mi y dylid goruchwylio ac archwilio’r ddau gyfnod ar wahân, yn gyntaf gan y byddai pŵer un pwyllgor dros yr holl broses yn ormod - mae rhai gwiriadau a chydbwysedd yn ddymunol - ac, yn ail, gan fod y GMC yn honni ei fod yn dymuno cadw’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu ar wahân i ryw raddau.
Archwilwyr Achos
Mae cyflwyno archwilwyr achos yn nodwedd annatod ar y gweithdrefnau newydd. Yn 2003, penododd y GMC bum person (tri meddygol cymwys a dau leyg) i fodloni rôl yr archwilwyr achos. Penodwyd mwy o archwilwyr achos yn ddilynol ac mae’r GMC wedi hysbysebu am fwy. Pan benodwyd yr archwilwyr achos cyntaf, disgwyliwyd y byddai’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith erbyn gwanwyn 2004. Ym mis Mawrth 2004, pan roedd yn amlwg y byddai cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael ei oedi, penododd y GMC yr archwilwyr achos i weithredu fel sgrinwyr ar gyfer achosion ymddygiad a pherfformiad dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Yn ogystal, penodwyd dau o’r archwilwyr achos meddygol cymwys i fod yn sgrinwyr iechyd a phenodwyd dau i fod yn gydlynwyr achos perfformiad. Byddai’r trefniadau hyn yn parhau tan roi’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ar waith. Roedd penodi’r archwilwyr achos yn sgrinwyr yn amodol ar yr archwilwyr achos yn cael eu mentora gan sgrinwyr presennol ac yn amodol ar 100% eu gwaith yn cael ei archwilio gan staff GMC. Disgwyliwyd, erbyn diwedd mis Mehefin 2004, y byddai’r sgrinwyr blaenorol wedi gorffen cynnal eu dyletswyddau sgrinio ac y byddai’r archwilwyr achos wedi cael cyfrifoldeb llawn am sgrinio.
Contractir yr archwilwyr achos i weithio i’r GMC am leiafswm o wyth niwrnod y mis a, phan eu bod yn gweithio, fe’u lleolir yn swyddfeydd y GMC. Byddant yn cael eu hyfforddi, eu cyfarwyddo a’u harfarnu gan y GMC a, fel y dywedais, bydd eu gwaith yn destun archwiliad. Yn ystod y broses ddewis, rhoddwyd llawer o bwyslais ar yr angen am alluoedd dadansoddi, gallu i wneud penderfyniadau lefel uchel a gallu i ddyfarnu’n ddiduedd ac yn annibynnol. Roedd gofyn i ymgeiswyr meddygol cymwys fod wedi ymarfer yn weithgar yn y tair blynedd diwethaf ac i fod yn
‘cyfranogi mewn ail-ddilysu’
. Nododd y swydd-ddisgrifiad ar gyfer archwilwyr achos y dylent fod â’r
‘gallu i gynnal arfarniad archwiliol i sefydlu ffeithiau’
Mae’n debyg i mi fod nifer o fanteision posibl ynghlwm wrth benodi archwilwyr achos i gynnal y swyddogaethau a gynhaliwyd yn flaenorol gan sgrinwyr. Yn gyntaf, bydd yr archwilwyr achos yn gweithio mewn amser un pwrpas. Roedd rhaid i’r sgrinwyr wneud lle i’w dyletswyddau GMC yn y lleoedd gwag mewn diwrnodau a glustnodwyd eisoes ar gyfer ymarfer meddygol prysur neu swydd feichus. Hefyd, oherwydd y gwneir y gwaith yn adeiladau’r GMC, dylai fod cyfathrebu llawer agosach rhwng archwilwyr achos a staff a rhwng archwilwyr achos. Gweithiai sgrinwyr o gartref ac roedd yn anoddach cyfathrebu. Bydd archwilwyr achos yn cael eu cyflogi gan y GMC a gellid gofyn iddynt gynnal eu dyletswyddau mewn modd penodol. Gallent, er enghraifft, gael cyfarwyddiadau bod rhaid atgyfeirio pob achos o gategori penodol i banel FTP. Nid oedd hyn yn bosibl gyda sgrinwyr; roeddent yn aelodau o’r GMC ac ni ellid gofyn iddynt gydymffurfio â chyfarwyddiadau. Disgrifiais ym Mhennod 19 y ffordd y difrodai rhai sgrinwyr meddygol ymdrechion y GMC i annog cysondeb o ran triniaeth yn y cyfnod sgrinio trwy greu categorïau o gamymddygiad a fyddai’n ‘SPM yn ôl diffiniad’ ond a ddylai fod wedi’u hatgyfeirio’n awtomatig gan sgrinwyr i’r PPC. Mae’n debyg i’r sgrinwyr berswadio aelodau o staff i newid y dogfennau safonol er mwyn osgoi’r system y cytunwyd arni. Mae’n ymddangos yn annhebygol iawn y byddai archwilwyr achos wedi gallu gwneud hynny a, phe byddent, byddent mewn perygl camau disgyblu. Mantais arall yw y bydd gan archwilwyr achos un set o swyddogaethau yn unig. Byddai sgrinwyr yn aml yn eistedd ar y PPC neu’r PCC yn y gorffennol ac mae’n debyg eu bod weithiau’n amharod neu’n methu cyfyngu eu hunain i’w rôl sgrinio.
Yr unig anfantais bosibl o ddefnyddio archwilwyr achos, mae’n debyg, yw bod perygl na allent fod yn ddigon annibynnol; gallent gael eu cyfarwyddo’n rhy agos gan aelodau neu bwyllgorau’r GMC ac efallai na fyddent yn cael defnyddio’u barn broffesiynol. Hefyd, efallai na fyddai ganddynt ddigon i’w ‘ddweud’ am y ffordd yr archwilir achos. Gobeithiaf na fydd y problemau hyn yn codi, gan fod penodi archwilwyr achos yn rhoi cyfle gwirioneddol am wella ar yr hen weithdrefnau. Mae’n hanfodol y dylid gosod safonau a meini prawf a rhoi arweiniad ond, yn y paramedrau hyn, dylai archwilwyr achos fod yn gallu ymarfer eu barn broffesiynol.
Cynnwys Pobl Leyg wrth Wneud Penderfyniadau
Cynigion 2003
Un nodwedd syfrdanol ar gynigion 2003 oedd y byddent wedi galluogi un archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys i gau achos heb ymgynghori â chydweithiwr lleyg neu heb ei gytundeb. Cynrychiolodd y trefniant hwnnw ymadawiad pwysig wrth yr egwyddor - a dderbyniwyd gan y GMC ym 1990 - na ddylai sgriniwr meddygol cymwys gau unrhyw achos a godai cwestiwn o SPM (neu, o 1997, SDP) heb gytundeb sgriniwr lleyg. Cyn cyflwyno sgrinwyr lleyg ym 1990, bu llawer yn pryderu am ddiffyg cynnwys pobl leyg yn y broses sgrinio.
Yn ystod yr ymgynghoriad cychwynnol ar y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, mynegwyd pryder am absenoldebunrhyw ofyniad, dan y cynigion a ystyriwyd bryd hynny, y dylai person lleyg gadarnhau penderfyniad rhagarweiniol gan un archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys i gau achos. Mynegwyd pryder hefyd gan rai unigolion a sefydliadau y byddai‘r model arfaethedig yn rhoi gormod o gyfrifoldeb yn nwylo un unigolyn. Er gwaethaf y pryderon hynny, ni newidiodd y GMC ei sefyllfa. Nododd papur y Grŵp Adolygu FTP, a ystyriwyd gan y Cyngor yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2001, y byddai angen adnoddau ychwanegol sylweddol i ‘ddwbl-drafod’ achosion (lle byddai achosion lle gwnaed penderfyniad rhagarweiniol gan sgriniwr meddygol cymwys i gau’r achos yn cael eu hystyried hefyd gan archwiliwr achos lleyg). Amcangyfrifwyd y byddai archwilwyr achos yn cau 200 o achosion y flwyddyn. Dywedwyd y byddai dwbl-drafod achosion lle cafwyd penderfyniad rhagarweiniol i gau’r achos yn creu 2000 o drafodion sgriniwr ychwanegol y flwyddyn a bron yn dyblu nifer yr archwilwyr achos sy’n ofynnol. Mae archwilwyr achos yn adnodd drud a byddai penodi nifer gynyddol o archwilwyr achos yn cynrychioli cost ychwanegol sylweddol i’r GMC. Awgrymwyd hefyd y byddai oedi yn sgil archwilwyr achos yn dwbl-drafod achosion. Awgrymodd y papur na ddylid gwneud unrhyw benderfyniad yr adeg honno. Yn hytrach, casglodd y Grŵp Adolygu FTP mai’r
‘ymagwedd orau’
fyddai peidio â gwneud penderfyniad am bobl leyg bryd hynny ond yn hytrach
‘caniatáu i’r prosesau manwl esblygu gyda phrofiad’
. Mabwysiadwyd yr awgrym hwnnw a rhoddwyd y mater i un ochr am y tro.
Nid oedd papur mewnol y GMC, sef ‘Review of Fitness to Practise: The New Model’, mis Hydref 2002 (y fersiwn ddyddiedig 22 Hydref 2002) yn rhoi sylw uniongyrchol i’r mater o gyfraniad pobl leyg i benderfyniadau gan archwilwyr achos i gau achosion. Yn hytrach, cyfeiriodd at yr
‘egwyddor bwysig’
y dylai pob achos, heblaw am y rheiny a gaewyd gan staff swyddfa’r GMC, gael ei ystyried gan
‘ddau berson profiadol’
. Yr awgrym ymhlyg, mae’n debyg, oedd y gellid bodloni’r gwrthwynebiadau yn sgil diffyg cyfraniad pobl leyg a chyfraniad un person yn unig at y broses benderfynu gan y ffaith y byddai rhan fwyaf yr achosion yn cael eu hystyried gan
‘aelod o staff profiadol a phriodol uwch’
yn ogystal ag archwiliwr achos. Cynigiodd y papur hwn, pe byddai’r aelod o staff a’r archwiliwr achos yn anghytuno, y dylid atgyfeirio’r achos i archwiliwr achos arall (nid un o’r archwilwyr achos lleyg o reidrwydd). Aeth y papur ymlaen i gynnig y gallai’r IC ddymuno
‘mynnu’
y dylai weld unrhyw achos lle byddai anghytuno neu amheuaeth. Ni osodwyd y trefniadau arfaethedig hyn ar gyfer achosion lle anghytunai aelod o staff ac achos archwiliwr am y ffordd i gau achos yn Rheolau drafft 2003. Nac ychwaith y soniwyd amdanynt yn yr Arweiniad drafft yn atodedig i Reolau drafft 2003 nac yn yr Arweiniad drafft ar gyfer archwilwyr achos, sef ‘Investigation Stage Test - Guidance for Case Examiners’, a luniwyd gan y GMC ar ddiwedd 2003 (Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003). Mae’n debyg, mewn gwirionedd, y rhoddwyd y gorau i’r trefniadau a gynigiwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2002 (lle gellid atgyfeirio achos i’r IC am ‘ail farn’) erbyn hynny ac y penderfynwyd caniatáu un archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys, mewn achos a ddirprwyir i’r IC, i wneud penderfyniad i gau achos heb gael cytundeb unrhyw berson arall yn gyntaf. Yn yr un modd, byddai un archwiliwr achos lleyg yn cael caniatâd i wneud penderfyniad heb unrhyw gyfraniad gan berson meddygol cymwys.
Rwy’n ei chael yn drist gweld, dros y cyfnod o dros ddwy flynedd pan roedd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu datblygu, nad oedd y GMC yn ymddangos ei fod yn cydnabod nac yn derbyn y gofyniad elfennol am gynnwys pobl leyg ym mhob achos y gellid ei gau heb atgyfeiriad i banel FTP. Wrth gwrs, mae rhywun yn cydymdeimlo â phroblemau ariannol ac adnoddau ond mae rhai pethau sydd mor amlwg yn angenrheidiol bod rhaid eu gwneud, beth bynnag y gost. Yn gyntaf, rhoddwyd y broblem i un ochr ac yna, flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach, cafwyd ymdrech i gael ateb a oedd yn amlwg yn anfoddhaol. Yn ddiweddarach fyth, rhoddwyd y gorau i’r ymdrech honno ac anwybyddwyd diffyg cyfraniad pobl leyg. O ystyried ymrwymiad cynharach y GMC i ddefnyddio mwy o bobl leyg, mae’n ymddangos yn rhyfeddol i mi y gellid fod wedi ystyried gwaredu cyfraniad lleyg i benderfyniadau mor bwysig o gwbl.
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr, gofynnwyd i Syr Graeme Catto a Mr Scott am absenoldeb unrhyw gyfraniad lleyg at benderfyniad gan archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys i gau achos. Dywedodd Syr Graeme mai un o’r ffactorau a ddylanwadodd y penderfyniad fu’r oedi a fu yn y gorffennol yn sgil trosglwyddo achosion rhwng gwahanol bobl yn y GMC. Fodd bynnag, bydd archwilwyr achos yn gweithio yn swyddfeydd y GMC, felly mae’n anodd gweld pam y meddyliwyd y byddai oedi’n digwydd. Dywedodd Syr Graeme hefyd y tybiwyd y byddai archwilwyr achos, a fyddai dan gontract i weithio i’r GMC mewn amser un pwrpas, yn fwy proffesiynol a chyda mwy o ffocws na’r sgrinwyr presennol, yr oedd rhaid iddynt wneud lle i’w gweithgareddau sgrinio rhwng eu hymrwymiadau eraill. Braidd y mae hynny’n ateb y pwynt y bydd archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys yn dod â safbwynt meddygol i’r achos a bod angen hefyd safbwynt lleyg. Nac ydy chwaith yn ateb y pwynt y dylid cynnwys mwy nag un person mewn penderfyniad i gau achos. Fodd bynnag, yn ystod eu tystiolaeth, nododd Syr Graeme a Mr Scott fod y GMC yn barod i edrych eto ar y mater. Mae wedi gwneud hyn bellach ac mae’n ymddangos bod ei aelodau wedi cydnabod yn hwyr fod y trefniadau arfaethedig yn annerbyniol ac na fyddent wedi ennyn ffydd y cyhoedd.
Sefyllfa 2004
Amododd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 (fel y mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi) y bydd pob achos sy’n goroesi’r dadansoddiad rhagarweiniol gan staff y GMC yn cael ei ystyried gan ddau archwiliwr achos, un meddygol ac un lleyg. Mae hwn yn symudiad i’w groesawu’n fawr ac, mewn gwirionedd, mae’n darparu ymglymiad lleyg llawer mwy na gafwyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Nid yw ymglymiad ail archwiliwr achos yn gyfyngedig, fel o’r blaen, i achosion lle mae archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys wedi cymryd penderfyniad i gau’r achos neu’n ystyried penderfyniad o’r fath. Yn hytrach, bydd archwilwyr achos lleyg yn ymgymryd ag ystyried pob achos sy’n cyrraedd y cyfnod o gael ei atgyfeirio i archwiliwr achos. Felly, mae gan y trefniant oblygiadau adnoddau llawer mwy na’r trefniant a ystyriwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2001, pan gredwyd y byddai dwbl-drafod yr achosion lle gwnaed penderfyniad rhagarweiniol i gau achos bron yn dyblu nifer yr archwilwyr achos gofynnol. Pe byddai pob agwedd arall ar y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd wedi parhau‘r un fath ag a gynigiwyd yn 2003, byddai angen nifer sylweddol fwy o archwilwyr achos. Fodd bynnag, fel yr esboniaf, cyflwynwyd newidiadau i agweddau eraill ar y gweithdrefnau newydd yn Rheolau drafft Mai 2004 (yn fwyaf nodedig i’r trefniadau ar gyfer delio ag achosion gydag elfen iechyd neu berfformiad ac, yn y cyfnod dyfarnu, ar gyfer paratoi achosion ar gyfer gwrandawiadau adolygu ac adfer). Mae’n debyg bod y newidiadau hyn yn debygol o ostwng yn sylweddol llwyth gwaith yr archwilwyr achos mewn perthynas â’r agweddau hynny.
Bydd y newidiadau yn rôl yr IC y soniais amdanynt eisoes hefyd yn cael effaith sylweddol ar rôl yr archwilwyr achos. Dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, bydd achos yn cael ei atgyfeirio i’r IC dim ond pe na fydd y ddau archwiliwr achos sy’n ei ystyried yn gallu cytuno neu pe bydd gwrandawiad llafar yn angenrheidiol cyn penderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd neu beidio. O ganlyniad, ym mwyafrif helaeth yr achosion (yn sicr ym mwyafrif helaeth yr achosion sy’n cynnwys honiadau o gamymddygiad), bydd yr archwilwyr achos yn penderfynu atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP neu beidio. Bydd gan yr archwilwyr achos, felly, rôl ganolog a phwysig iawn.
Fel y dywedais, mae’r ddarpariaeth gyfredol ar gyfer cynnwys archwilwyr achos lleyg ym mhob penderfyniad (heblaw‘r achosion hynny y mae staff yn eu cau) yn darparu ar gyfer llawer mwy o ymglymiad gan bobl leyg nag a gafwyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Rwy’n cydnabod y mae’n rhaid bod y goblygiadau adnoddau yn sylweddol. Yn fy marn i, mae cynnwys pobl leyg ym mhob penderfyniad yn debygol o arwain at well ansawdd o ran gwneud penderfyniadau. Rwy’n deall y bydd yr archwilwyr achos lleyg yn chwarae rhan lawn a chyfartal mewn gwneud penderfyniadau ac ni fydd eu harchwiliad o achos yn digwydd o reidrwydd ar ôl i archwilwr achos meddygol cymwys ei archwilio. Gobeithiaf mai dyna fydd yr achos. Pe byddai person lleyg yn archwilio ffeil achos gan wybod bod person meddygol eisoes wedi dwyn y casgliad y dylid cau’r achos, gallai ei brosesau/ei phrosesau meddwl gael eu hanffurfio. Mae yna berygl y bydd y person lleyg yn ildio’n isymwybodol i farn y person meddygol. Pe byddai’r person lleyg yn archwilio’r achos heb unrhyw ragdybiaethau, byddai ei benderfyniadau/ei phenderfyniadau yn debygol o fod yn fwy gwerthfawr yn yr ymdrech i amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Yn fy marn i, mae’r cynnydd hwn o ran cynnwys pobl leyg yn debygol o ennyn llawer mwy o ffydd y cyhoedd.

---  ---
Byddaf nawr yn archwilio’r prosesau amrywiol sydd ynghlwm wrth y cyfnod archwilio. Yn benodol, byddaf yn ystyried gweithgareddau staff y GMC, yr archwilwyr achos a’r IC.
Diben y Cyfnod Archwilio
Mae’n bwysig nodi o’r cychwyn, fel yr esboniais yn flaenorol, nad ystyr y term ‘archwilio’ yn y cyd-destun hwn yw proses o gasglu tystiolaeth. Yr ‘archwilio’ sy’n digwydd yn ystod cyfnod archwilio‘r gweithdrefnau FTP yw penderfynu a ddylid atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, gall y broses o gasglu tystiolaeth fod yn un o’r gweithgareddau a wneir yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio.
Y Dadansoddiad Rhagarweiniol o Achosion gan Staff Gweinyddol
Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, roedd aelodau o staff y GMC (gan ymarfer pwerau cyfreithiol y Cofrestrydd) yn cynnal ymarferiad treiddio cychwynnol. Byddent yn cau achosion a syrthiai o fewn categorïau penodol y nododd y GMC nad oeddent yn cynnwys mater o fewn ei gylch gorchwyl. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd y cam cyntaf yn y broses o ddelio â honiadau a adroddir neu a atgyfeirir i’r GMC yn ymarferiad dadansoddi cychwynnol tebyg.
Dan reol 4 Rheolau Tachwedd 2004, bydd angen i’r staff gyfeirio unrhyw
‘honiad’
y maent yn ystyried ei fod yn
‘syrthio o fewn’
adran 35C(2) Deddf 1983 at archwiliwr achos meddygol a lleyg i’w ystyried. Mae Adran 35C(2), y cyfeiriais ati’n flaenorol, yn nodi:
‘Ystyrir at ddibenion y Ddeddf hon fod ‘nam’ ar addasrwydd person i ymarfer dim ond yn sgil -
(a) camymddygiad;
(b) perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol;
(c) collfarn neu rybudd yn Ynysoedd Prydain am drosedd, neu gollfarn rywle arall am drosedd a fyddai’n golygu trosedd pe byddai’n cael ei chyflawni yng Nghymru a Lloegr;
(d) iechyd corfforol neu feddyliol gwael; neu
(e) ddyfarniad gan gorff yn y Deyrnas Unedig sy’n gyfrifol dan unrhyw ddeddfiad am reoleiddio proffesiwn iechyd neu ofal cymdeithasol i’r perwyl bod nam ar ei addasrwydd i ymarfer fel aelod o’r proffesiwn hwnnw, neu benderfyniad gan gorff rheoleiddio rywle arall i’r un perwyl.’
Mae p’un ai yw’r staff yn ystyried bod achos yn
‘syrthio o fewn’
adran 35C(2) yn ymddangos yn ‘brawf’ rhyfedd i’w ddefnyddio. O eiriau’r rheol ei hun, nid yw’n glir i ba raddau y mae angen i’r staff ystyried a allai’r honiad olygu ‘nam’. Pe byddent, byddai’r prawf yn gorfodi trothwy llawer uwch na orfodwyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad, pan roedd rhaid i’r Cofrestrydd (neu aelod o staff) atgyfeirio achos i sgriniwr meddygol pe byddai’n codi cwestiwn o SPM. Os yw’n ofynnol i’r staff ystyried yn unig a yw’r wybodaeth yn cynnwys
‘honiad’
o’r mathau a restrir yn is-baragraffau (a) i (e), bydd y trothwy’n debyg i’r trothwy dan yr hen weithdrefnau, a byddai’n briodol.
Mae Fersiwn 2 y Llawlyfr Archwilio drafft, dyddiedig Tachwedd 2004 (Llawlyfr Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004), a luniwyd i arwain staff y GMC, yn dangos cwmpas bwriadedig disgresiwn y Cofrestrydd (neu ddisgresiwn y staff sy’n ymarfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol). Dylai aelod o staff gau achos ar seiliau penodol yn unig. Yn fras, dylai’r aelodau o staff fod wedi casglu nad yw’r honiad yn codi cwestiwn o unrhyw un o’r ffactorau a restrir ym mharagraffau (a) i (e) adran 35C(2) Deddf 1983.
Mae’n ymddangos bod y GMC yn bwriadu y dylai’r ‘prawf’ yn y cyfnod cychwynnol hwn fod yn debyg i’r prawf dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Gobeithir y gellid dod o hyd i ffurf o eiriau fel bod y Rheolau’n mynegi bwriad y GMC yn gliriach. Rwy’n awgrymu y gellid diwygio’r rheol i nodi: ‘... lle mae’r Cofrestrydd yn ystyried bod yr honiad yn codi cwestiwn a fu’r meddyg yn euog o gamymddygiad, a fu ei berfformiad/ei pherfformiad proffesiynol yn ddiffygiol, a fu ef/hi yn destun collfarn, rhybudd neu ddyfarniad neu wedi dioddef neu’n dioddef iechyd corfforol neu feddyliol gwael (h.y. y ffactorau a restrir ym mharagraffau (a) i (e) adran 35C(2) Deddf 1983)’. Yna byddai’r cyhoedd yn gwybod pa brawf y byddai’r GMC yn ei gymhwyso yn y cyfnod hwn.
Dargyfeirio Achosion i Weithdrefnau Cwynion Lleol
Ar yr adeg hon, mae angen ystyried pa gamau, os o gwbl, y bydd staff yn eu cymryd yng nghyfnod hwn y gweithdrefnau newydd i gyfeirio achosion i weithdrefnau cwynion lleol. Yn y gorffennol, fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 18, caewyd llawer o achosion gan staff y GMC oherwydd bod y gŵyn yn gysylltiedig â thriniaeth dan y GIG neu yn y sector preifat ac ymddangosai naill ai nad oedd y gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u defnyddio o gwbl neu heb eu dilyn i’w diwedd. Cyn cau achos a chynghori achwynydd i gyfeirio ei gŵyn/ei chŵyn i weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, ni ystyriodd y staff (fel yr oedd y Rheolau yn mynnu iddynt wneud) a oedd yr achos yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Byddai staff y GMC yn cynghori achwynydd i ddilyn ei gŵyn/ei chŵyn trwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol ac yn cau’r achos, oni bai bod gan y staff achos i gredu bod y meddyg yn beryglus neu fod yr achwynydd yn mynnu bod y GMC yn ystyried y gŵyn.
Cododd dau bryder o’r arfer hwn. Y cyntaf oedd ei fod yn rhoi’r onws ar yr achwynydd i gymryd materion ymlaen. Yn ail, ni fyddai’r GMC yn olrhain materion ac yn ceisio darganfod a ddilynwyd y gŵyn yn lleol; roedd yna berygl felly y collwyd rhai cwynion a allai olygu SPM i’r system reoleiddio. Rhoddwyd y pryderon hynny i’r tystion o’r GMC a roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Gofynnwyd iddynt pam nad oedd y GMC yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb, mewn achos priodol, am drosglwyddo’r achos i’r corff cwynion perthnasol, yn hytrach na’i adael i’r achwynydd. Gofynnwyd iddynt hefyd pam nad oedd y GMC yn dilyn materion o’r fath i sicrhau na fyddent yn mynd ar goll. Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto fod y mater ‘yn codi i frig ein hagenda (
h.y. agenda‘r GMC
)’.
Nid yw’r materion hyn yn cael eu trafod yn unswydd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004, yr Arweiniad sy’n dod gyda hwy, Llawlyfr Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 na’r ffurflen asesu a phrosesu gychwynnol (IPA). Mae’r IPA yn nodi pob cam o’r cyfnod archwilio a, phe byddai’n fwriad gan y GMC i gau achosion oherwydd na fyddai gweithdrefnau lleol wedi’u dihysbyddu, byddwn wedi disgwyl i’r IPA nodi’r cyfnod lle dylid gwneud hyn a nodi’r meini prawf i’w cymhwyso. Mae’r Arweiniad a ddaw gyda Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi:
‘... gall y Cofrestrydd ... gynghori’r sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad am ffyrdd eraill o ddatrys (fel gweithdrefn cwynion GIG) neu atgyfeirio’r honiad yn uniongyrchol i gorff arall i’w ystyried’.
Fodd bynnag, mae cyd-destun y darn hwn yn awgrymu y dylid rhoi’r cyngor hwn dim ond os yw’r aelod o staff eisoes wedi penderfynu nad yw’r achos yn syrthio o fewn awdurdod y GMC. Byddai’n hollol amhriodol rhoi cyngor o’r fath yn yr amgylchiadau hynny. Mae’n ymddangos i mi bod y meini prawf a nodir yn yr IPA ar gyfer gwneud y penderfyniad i gau wedi’i ddrafftio er mwyn sicrhau bod pob mater sy’n syrthio o fewn awdurdod y GMC yn cael eu derbyn i’r system. Mae’n ymddangos bod y GMC wedi derbyn bod yr hen arfer y mynegodd yr Ymchwiliad bryder yn ei gylch yn mynd i ddod i ben dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Rwy’n cydnabod y bydd hynny’n arwain at lwyth gwaith mwy i’r GMC ond mae’n amlwg yn benderfyniad cywir.
Gellid dweud y byddai’n rhesymol i’r GMC gynghori’r sawl sy’n gwneud honiadau am ffyrdd amgen o ddatrys hyd yn oed mewn achosion lle byddai’r honiad yn syrthio o fewn awdurdod y GMC. Cyhyd â na fyddai’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad wedi cael ei roi dan bwysau a’i fod yn caniatáu’n rhydd i gymryd ei honiad i gorff GIG lleol, beth fyddai’r niwed yn hynny? Yn fy marn i, ni fyddai’n syniad da cynnig cyngor o’r fath. Ar hyn o bryd, nid yw gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG yn briodol ar gyfer llawer o achosion lle mae materion amddiffyn cleifion yn codi; er enghraifft, ar hyn o bryd nid oes unrhyw gyfleusterau digonol ar gyfer archwilio cwyn am feddyg teulu (GP) yng nghyfnod cyntaf gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Gan fod y Comisiwn Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (sy’n hysbys fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd) bellach yn gyfrifol am yr ail gyfnod, mae cyfleusterau o’r fath ar gael bryd hynny, ond ni chredaf y byddai’n briodol awgrymu i achwynydd gymryd y llwybr hwnnw er mwyn i’r honiad gael ei archwilio.
Mae Llawlyfr Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 yn disgrifio gweithdrefn lle gellir atgyfeirio achosion a atgyfeiriwyd i’r GMC gan gorff cyhoeddus i weithdrefn leol. Dylai staff y GMC gysylltu â’r corff atgyfeirio i drafod y ffordd orau ymlaen. Mae hyn yn hollol briodol.
Deialog Anffurfiol
Yn ystod gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, cafwyd trafodaeth am yr angen i’r GMC, wrth gael cwyn (yn enwedig un a ddaw oddi wrth unigolyn preifat), gysylltu â chyflogwr neu sefydliad gofal sylfaenol (PCO) y meddyg er mwyn darganfod a fu unrhyw bryderon lleol am y meddyg. Ni fu hyn yn arfer gan y GMC o gwbl yn y gorffennol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 18, credodd rhai aelodau GMC y byddai arfer o’r fath yn annheg i feddygon. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bwriadai’r GMC ystyried cyflwyno arfer o’r fath.
Ar ôl gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, cyhoeddodd y GMC, o fis Mai 2004, y byddai o hynny ymlaen yn rhoi polisi newydd ar waith ar gyfer delio â chwynion yng nghyfnodau cychwynnol y gweithdrefnau FTP. Y bwriad oedd trafod y rhan fwyaf o gwynion gyda chyflogwyr y meddyg (y mae’r term rwy’n deall yn cynnwys PCOs ac eraill y mae gan y meddyg gontract gyda hwy i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol). Diben y trafodaethau hyn fyddai, yn gyntaf, darganfod a oedd y gŵyn yn fater unigryw neu’n enghraifft o bryder ehangach am y meddyg a gydnabuwyd yn lleol ac, yn ail, rhoi gwybod i’r rheiny gyda chyfrifoldebau llywodraethu clinigol lleol bod y GMC yn ystyried cwyn am y meddyg. Deallaf y rhoddwyd y newid hwn ar waith dan yr hen weithdrefnau a’i fod wedi dod â gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol. Mae’r GMC wedi rhoi gwybod i’r Ymchwiliad y gwnaed, rhwng mis Mai 2004 a mis Medi 2004, datgeliad cynnar i gyflogwyr meddygol yn 87% o achosion. Roedd y 13% a oedd yn weddill yn achosion lle na allai’r cwynion godi mater ar gyfer y GMC.
Mae’r sefyllfa dan y gweithdrefnau newydd yn ymddangos yn Llawlyfr Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004. Mewn achosion Ffrwd 1 (y rheiny y bydd angen archwiliad llawn arnynt yn sicr), ni fydd yr aelod o staff yn cynnal deialog anffurfiol gyda chyflogwr y meddyg; mewn achosion Ffrwd 2 (y rheiny lle nad yw’n glir ar unwaith a fydd angen archwiliad llawn neu beidio), bydd deialog yn digwydd. Bydd angen caniatâd yr achwynydd i’r datgeliad hwnnw a bydd y meddyg yn cael gwybod. Mewn cyfnod diweddarach, bydd yna ddatgeliad ffurfiol o’r honiad i’r cyflogwr neu’r PCO mewn achosion Ffrwd 1 a Ffrwd 2, er bydd hyn mewn llythyr a chydnabyddir efallai na fydd y cyflogwr neu’r PCO yn ymateb.
Mae adroddiadau yn y wasg feddygol wedi awgrymu bod meddygon wedi digalonni o weld y trefniadau newydd. Dywedwyd bod y datgeliad anffurfiol i gyflogwyr a PCOs o’r ffaith y gwnaed cwyn yn ‘annheg i feddygon’ gan y bydd cyflogwyr yn debygol o ddwyn casgliadau gwael o’r ffaith y gwnaed cwyn. Adeg yr ysgrifennu, adroddwyd bod o leiaf dau sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol yn herio hawl y GMC i ofyn am fanylion cyflogaeth meddyg at ddiben cysylltu â’i gyflogwyr/ei chyflogwyr i drafod cwyn a wnaed yn ei erbyn/ei herbyn mewn cyfnod yn gynharach na’r amser ar gyfer datgeliad ffurfiol i gyflogwyr.
Gobeithiaf na fydd y GMC yn cael ei wyro rhag gwneud yr ymholiadau hyn. Mae cael gwybodaeth gan gyflogwr neu PCO yn rhan hanfodol o’r archwiliad. Yn ogystal, ni chredaf fod gwir sail i’r pryderon a leisiwyd yn y wasg feddygol. Rwy’n amau’n fawr iawn y bydd cyflogwr neu PCO yn dwyn casgliad gwael o’r ffaith y gwnaed honiad, oni bai ei fod yn tueddu cadarnhau pryderon y mae’r cyflogwr neu’r PCO eisoes yn eu teimlo. Os dyna’r sefyllfa, mae’n gywir bod y cyflogwr neu PCO yn cael gwybod am yr honiad newydd, er lles diogelwch cleifion, a bod y GMC yn ymwybodol o’r pryderon eraill a fodolai yn flaenorol. Ym Mhennod 27, rwy’n argymell y dylid cynnwys y weithdrefn hon yn y Rheolau ac y dylai’r GMC gael y pŵer i ofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu unrhyw wybodaeth angenrheidiol i alluogi i’r cyfathrebu hwn ddigwydd.
Casglu Tystiolaeth
Byddaf nawr yn ystyried yr hyn y mae’r GMC yn cynnig ei wneud, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, o ran casglu tystiolaeth. Rwyf wedi disgrifio mewn Penodau cynt sut, dan yr hen weithdrefnau, na wnaeth y GMC fawr yn gyffredinol o ran casglu tystiolaeth oni bai a hyd nes y gwnaed penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i’r PCC ar gyfer gwrandawiad. O ganlyniad, byddai penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i’r PPC neu’r PCC neu beidio yn cael ei gymryd weithiau ar sail tystiolaeth annigonol ac, yn y gorffennol, yn cael ei wneud fel arfer heb wybodaeth am unrhyw bryderon blaenorol a allai fod wedi codi’n lleol am ymddygiad neu berfformiad y meddyg. Soniais eisoes bod y GMC, yn ei Bapur Ymgynghori 2001, yn nodi mai un o wendidau’r hen weithdrefnau FTP oedd yr ychydig iawn o archwilio (o ran casglu tystiolaeth) a gynhaliwyd cyn gwneud penderfyniad am yr hyn i’w wneud gydag achos. Cydnabu Mr Scott y gwendid hwn yn ei dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad pan nododd fod yr hen weithdrefnau yn ‘rhoi’r cart o flaen y ceffyl’ yn y modd y penderfynwyd a ddylid atgyfeirio i’r PCC cyn casglu’r dystiolaeth angenrheidiol.
Rhoddodd Reolau drafft 2003 y pŵer i’r Cofrestrydd gynnal archwiliadau pellach, cyn atgyfeirio achos i’r IC neu i archwiliwr achos, fel a fyddai’n briodol yn ei farn ef. Nododd yr Arweiniad a ddaeth gyda Rheolau drafft 2003 y gallai’r archwiliadau hyn gynnwys ysgrifennu at gyflogwyr y meddyg a chael datganiadau tystion. Dan Reolau drafft 2003, byddai archwilwyr achos a’r IC hefyd yn cael y pŵer i gynnal ymholiadau pellach i achosion, neu gyfarwyddo’r staff i’w cynnal, dros ac uwchlaw’r archwiliadau a gynhelir eisoes gan staff.
Er gwaethaf y pwerau sydd yn Rheolau drafft 2003, nid oedd fawr yn y dogfennau eraill a welodd yr Ymchwiliad, cyn i dystion y GMC roi tystiolaeth ym mis Tachwedd a mis Rhagfyr 2003, i awgrymu bod y GMC yn bwriadu cynyddu ei weithgareddau casglu tystiolaeth yn sylweddol yn y cyfnod archwilio. Serch hynny, roedd Mr Scott yn bendant y byddai’r ymagwedd, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, yn eithaf gwahanol i’r ymagwedd a fabwysiadwyd yn flaenorol. Byddai staff y GMC, dywedodd, yn casglu tystiolaeth. Cyfeiriodd Mr Scott at y ffaith bod y GMC yn y broses o greu tîm o gyfreithwyr mewnol, a fyddai’n casglu tystiolaeth. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn amlwg mai’r bwriad pan roddodd dystiolaeth oedd i’r cyfreithwyr mewnol gynnal archwiliadau ar ôl atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP ac nid cyn hynny; ni cheisiodd Mr Scott ddweud fel arall. Nododd fod gan rai o aelodau staff presennol y swyddfa y potensial i wneud gwaith archwilio. Dywedodd Mr Scott y byddai gan yr archwilwyr achos rôl allweddol wrth gyfarwyddo pa fath o waith casglu tystiolaeth y dylid ei wneud ac wrth farnu a oedd y dystiolaeth a gasglwyd yn ddigon i’w galluogi i gyrraedd penderfyniad. Byddai’r archwilwyr achos (yn wahanol i sgrinwyr yn yr hen weithdrefnau) yn cael pwerau i gasglu tystiolaeth ac i gyfarwyddo casglu tystiolaeth. Pwysleisiodd Mr Scott i’r Ymchwiliad ‘natur ddofn’ y newid hwn a fyddai, dywedodd, yn sicrhau bod
‘meddylfryd’
y rheiny’n gweithredu’r gweithdrefnau yn ‘gwbl wahanol’ o ganlyniad.
Dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, gall y Cofrestrydd, cyn penderfynu atgyfeirio achos i’r archwilwyr achos neu beidio, gynnal archwiliadau sy’n briodol yn ei farn ef i ystyried a yw’r honiad yn syrthio o fewn adran 35C(2) Deddf 1983 neu i ystyried addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn awgrymu, fel enghraifft, y gall y Cofrestrydd (yn bersonol neu trwy ei staff) wneud ymholiadau gan gyflogwr y meddyg er mwyn archwilio a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae’r ddogfen ddrafft ‘Making decisions on cases at the end of the investigation stage: Guidance for Case Examiners and the Investigation Committee’, a luniwyd gan y GMC ym mis Medi 2004 (Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004), yn nodi y bydd staff (gyda chymorth cyfreithwyr lle bo’r angen) yn cynnal archwiliadau cychwynnol, er enghraifft, mewn achosion lle nad oes digon o dystiolaeth i ganfod a yw’r honiad yn syrthio o fewn awdurdod y GMC neu a oes angen mwy o wybodaeth i weld a ellir canfod patrwm o ymddygiad. Dywedir y gall archwiliadau o’r fath gynnwys gwneud ymholiadau gan gyflogwr y meddyg, cydweithwyr y meddyg neu eraill, neu gael adroddiadau meddygol neu ddogfennaeth arall. Cyfeiriaf ym mharagraffau 25.153-25.154 at y trefniadau a ragwelir bellach ar gyfer casglu tystiolaeth.
Ar ôl gwneud penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i’r archwilwyr achos, mae’n ofynnol gan Reolau Tachwedd 2004 i’r Cofrestrydd gynnal unrhyw archwiliadau sydd yn briodol, yn ei farn ef, i’r archwilwyr achos ystyried yr honiad. Gellir cynnal archwiliadau o’r fath p’un a oes unrhyw archwiliadau wedi’u cynnal cyn y cyfnod hwnnw ai beidio. Yn rhyfeddol, yng ngoleuni’r hyn a ddywedwyd yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad am y rôl allweddol y byddai archwilwyr achos yn ei chwarae wrth gyfarwyddo’r broses o gasglu tystiolaeth a’r newid elfennol a fyddai’n dilyn o ganlyniad, gwnaeth Reolau drafft Mai 2004 hepgor y pŵer a gafwyd yn Rheolau drafft 2003 i archwilwyr achos wneud ymholiadau i achos, neu gyfarwyddo’r staff i wneud ymholiadau o’r fath. Nid yw’r pŵer hwnnw wedi’i adfer gan fersiynau dilynol o’r Rheolau. Nid wyf yn gwybod am y rhesymau dros yr hepgoriad hwn.
Mae Canllaw Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 yn dweud y bydd gofyn i archwilwyr achos gymeradwyo cynllun archwilio a gallent ddymuno roi cyfarwyddiadau ynghylch mathau pellach o archwiliadau i’w cynnal. Mae’n ymddangos felly mai’r staff fydd yn cychwyn ac yn cynnal yr archwiliadau, ond y dylai archwilwyr achos allu rhoi cyfarwyddiadau, o leiaf o’r adeg lle atgyfeirir achos atynt. Ni adlewyrchir y pŵer hwnnw yn y Rheolau. Dylai gael ei adlewyrchu; dylai fod gan yr archwilwyr achos y pŵer i gyfarwyddo archwiliadau.
Datgeliad i Gyflogwr neu Sefydliad Gofal Sylfaenol y Meddyg o’r Ffaith y Gwnaed Cwyn
Ystyriaf nawr y pwynt yn y broses cyfnod archwilio lle mae rhaid i’r GMC roi hysbysiad ffurfiol i gyflogwr neu PCO meddyg y gwnaed honiad amdano/amdani.
Datgeliad Gorfodol: Sefyllfa 2003
Rwyf wedi esbonio eisoes ym Mhennod 18 fod gofyn i’r GMC, ar ôl 2000, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, ddatgelu’r ffaith ei fod yn archwilio cwyn yn erbyn meddyg i’r Adran Iechyd, ac i unrhyw berson neu gorff a gyflogai’r meddyg neu yr oedd gan y meddyg gontract gydag ef i ddarparu gwasanaethau. Cododd yr amgylchiadau hynny ar ôl i’r GMC benderfynu atgyfeirio meddyg i’r PPC, ei wahodd/ei gwahodd i gytuno i asesiad o’i berfformiad/ei pherfformiad proffesiynol neu ei wahodd/ei gwahodd i gytuno i gael archwiliad meddygol. Mewn geiriau eraill, digwyddai datgeliad ar ôl sgrinio cwyn ac yna dim ond pe byddai’r gŵyn am fynd ymlaen. Er nad oedd atgyfeirio achos i’r IOC yn y rhestr o ysgogiadau ar gyfer datgeliad, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y cawsai ei drin felly.
Gyda chyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn nesáu, roedd rhaid i’r GMC ystyried ar ba adeg yn y gweithdrefnau newydd y byddai’n briodol cael datgeliad. Dan Reolau drafft 2003, byddai datgeliad yn orfodol pan fyddai’r cynharaf o’r digwyddiadau canlynol yn digwydd: atgyfeirio achos i IOC ar gyfer penderfyniad; atgyfeirio honiad i banel FTP, gwneud cyfarwyddyd y dylid cynnal asesiad perfformiad, cyhoeddi gwahoddiad i feddyg wneud ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol neu gyhoeddi rhybudd i feddyg. Mae cynnwys yr olaf o’r digwyddiadau hyn fel ysgogiad i ddatgeliad yn awgrymu yr ystyriwyd ar y pryd y gellid penderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd (yn hytrach nac atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP) cyn hysbysu (ac, yn ôl pob tebyg, cyn cael gwybodaeth gefndirol gan) gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Byddai hynny’n ymddangos fel enghraifft arall o ‘roi’r cart o flaen y ceffyl’, gan y gallai’r math o wybodaeth a fyddai ar gael gan gyflogwr olygu na fyddai rhybudd yn ddigonol i fodloni difrifoldeb yr achos. Dylid nodi na fyddai gwahoddiad i gael archwiliad meddygol, mewn ‘achos iechyd’, wedi ysgogi datgeliad, dan Reolau drafft 2003; yn hytrach, yr ysgogiad perthnasol fyddai gwahoddiad i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol dan yr hyn sydd gyfwerth â’r hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Effaith y darpariaethau hyn fyddai, mewn llawer achos, y byddai datgeliad wedi digwydd yn ddiweddarach dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd nag y bu’r achos ers 2000 dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Nid yw’n glir a oedd y GMC wedi bwriadu mai dyma fyddai canlyniad y newidiadau arfaethedig neu a oedd yr effaith hon yn ddamweiniol. Byddai’n sicr yn giliad anffodus o’r sefyllfa ôl-2000. Byddai wedi golygu y gallai’r wybodaeth berthnasol fod yn eiddo’r GMC am sawl wythnos neu fis heb iddo ddatgelu’r wybodaeth honno i’r person neu’r corff perthnasol.
O ganlyniad i dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad a nododd na fyddai’r cynigion yn ennyn ffydd neu gefnogaeth y cyhoedd, o amheuon a fynegwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd ac o gydnabyddiaeth ymddangosiadol o’i oblygiad ei hun i roi gwybodaeth amserol at ddibenion llywodraethu clinigol, ailystyriodd y GMC ei gynigion gwreiddiol a oedd, y cyfaddefwyd, yn
‘amlwg yn wallus’
. Mewn cyfarfod y Cyngor a gynhaliwyd ym mis Tachwedd 2003, penderfynwyd y dylid dod â’r datgeliad ymlaen i’r pwynt dan y gweithdrefnau newydd lle byddai’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, aelod o staff) neu archwiliwr achos yn penderfynu bod y gŵyn neu bryder arall yn cyfiawnhau archwiliad.
Datgeliad Gorfodol: Sefyllfa 2004
Amododd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 felly mai digwyddiad arall a fyddai’n ysgogi datgeliad ddylai fod penderfyniad gan y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, aelod o staff) i gynnal neu gyfarwyddo archwiliadau cyn neu ar ôl gwneud y penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i’r archwilwyr achos. Byddai hyn yn anfoddhaol o hyd. Byddai’r ysgogiad yn dibynnu’n hollol ar a fyddai unrhyw archwiliadau’n cael eu cynnal neu beidio. Pe na fyddent (fel oedd yr achos bob amser yn y gorffennol), ni fyddai cyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg yn cael gwybod am y gŵyn yn y cyfnod hwnnw. Hyd yn oed trwy ragdybio y byddai’r staff, yn y dyfodol, yn cynnal archwiliadau yn rhan fwyaf yr achosion, mae’n debyg iawn y byddai rhai achosion o hyd lle na fyddai unrhyw archwiliadau. Er enghraifft, pan adroddir y ffaith bod meddyg wedi’i gael yn euog o drosedd, bydd yn agored i’r Cofrestrydd (neu’r staff, sy’n ymarfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol) atgyfeirio’r gollfarn yn uniongyrchol i banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, mewn rhai achosion, efallai na fyddai’n gwneud hynny a bydd yn hytrach yn ei atgyfeirio i archwiliwr achos. Pe byddai’n gwneud hyn heb gynnal unrhyw archwiliadau, fel y mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai, ni fyddai’r ddyletswydd i ddatgelu wedi codi, dan Reolau drafft Mai 2004, tan ar ôl i’r archwiliwr achos wneud ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad.
Newid arall oedd, dan Reolau drafft Mai 2004, fod gwahoddiad i gael asesiad iechyd hefyd yn ysgogi datgeliad. Roedd cyhoeddi gwahoddiad i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn parhau yn y rhestr o ddigwyddiadau ysgogi er na allai fod y digwyddiad cynharaf o gwbl, gan y byddai asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad yn dod cyn hyn bob amser.
Roedd Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 yn cynnwys newidiadau pellach i’r rhestr o ddigwyddiadau a fyddai’n ysgogi datgeliad. Cafodd y rhain eu hatgynhyrchu yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Gwaredwyd cyhoeddi rhybudd oddi ar y rhestr. Yn hytrach, bydd rhaid cael datgeliad yn y cyfnod cynharach o atgyfeirio honiad ar gyfer ystyriaeth gan yr archwilwyr achos. Mae hwn yn newid calonogol. Mae’n rhoi mwy o sicrwydd ac yn golygu y bydd datgeliad, yn gyffredinol, yn digwydd yn gynt nag y byddai dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Mae atgyfeirio i archwilwyr achos yn gam a fydd yn digwydd bob amser mewn achos nad yw’n cael ei gau gan y staff yn y cyfnod cychwynnol, oni bai pan atgyfeirir achos collfarn yn uniongyrchol i banel FTP, ac mae atgyfeiriad o’r fath hefyd yn ddigwyddiad sy’n ysgogi. Pe byddai unrhyw archwiliad yn digwydd cyn yr atgyfeiriad, bydd hyn yn dod â’r broses ddatgelu ymlaen. Mae cyhoeddi gwahoddiad i feddyg roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol wedi’i waredu oddi ar y rhestr o ddigwyddiadau ysgogi.
Trin Collfarnau
Disgrifiais mewn Penodau cynharach y ffordd y cawsai achosion collfarn eu trin dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP. Ni atgyfeiriwyd collfarnau am droseddau moduro dibwys i’r sgrinwyr meddygol ac ni aethant y tu hwnt i staff y swyddfa. Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, rhoddwyd pŵer i’r Cofrestrydd atgyfeirio’n uniongyrchol i’r PCC gollfarnau am droseddau lle gorfodwyd dedfryd o garchar ar unwaith oni bai, yn ei farn ef, na fyddai atgyfeiriad uniongyrchol o’r fath er lles y cyhoedd. Atgyfeiriwyd pob achos collfarn arall i sgriniwr meddygol ac atgyfeiriwyd rhan fwyaf yr achosion hyn gan y sgrinwyr meddygol i’r PPC. Yn 2003, atgyfeiriodd y PPC i’r PCC lai na thraean o’r meddygon y’u cafwyd yn euog o droseddau yr atgyfeiriwyd eu hachosion iddo. Ym Mhennod 20, soniais am yr angen, a gydnabuwyd gan Mr Scott pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, i’r GMC sicrhau bod y modd y mae’n trin achosion collfarn yn fwy cyson.
Roedd cynnwys Rheolau drafft 2003 yn cynnwys cilio rhag sefyllfa ôl-Tachwedd 2002. Roeddent yn amodi, mewn achos lle’r oedd collfarn wedi arwain at orfodi dedfryd o garchar, y
‘gallai’r’
Cofrestrydd atgyfeirio’r honiad yn uniongyrchol i banel FTP. Dywedodd yr Arweiniad a oedd ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft 2003 fod gofyn i’r Cofrestrydd atgyfeirio collfarn yn uniongyrchol i banel FTP lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi cael dedfryd o garchar uniongyrchol a lle
‘ystyriai ei bod er lles y cyhoedd i wneud hynny’
. Byddai hyn wedi gwrthdroi’r dybiaeth a fodolai ers Tachwedd 2002 y byddai pob collfarn a arweiniai at ddedfryd uniongyrchol o garchar yn cael ei hatgyfeirio i banel FTP oni bai na fyddai atgyfeiriad o’r fath er lles y cyhoedd.
Roedd Rheolau drafft Mai 2004 (mae’r darpariaethau heb newid bron yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) yn newid y sefyllfa unwaith eto. Bydd gofyn i’r Cofrestrydd bellach atgyfeirio’n uniongyrchol i banel FTP unrhyw gollfarn sy’n arwain at orfodi dedfryd o garchar, p’un ai’n uniongyrchol neu’n ohiriedig. Mae hwn yn newid calonogol. Mae’n rhoi mwy o sicrwydd yn y dosbarth cyfyngedig hwnnw o achos. Cyhyd â bod unrhyw gollfarn arall dan sylw, bydd gofyn i’r Cofrestrydd ei atgyfeirio’n uniongyrchol i banel FTP
‘oni bai ei fod o’r farn y dylid ei atgyfeirio i Archwiliwr Achos meddygol a lleyg i’w ystyried’
. Er bod yr ail ddarpariaeth hyn yn creu tybiaeth o blaid atgyfeirio, mae’n rhoi disgresiwn eang iawn i’r Cofrestrydd.
Ym mis Medi 2004, cyflwynodd y GMC arweiniad (a ychwanegwyd at Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004) i aelodau o staff ac archwilwyr achos ynghylch sut y dylent ddelio â rhybuddion yr heddlu a chollfarnau na arweiniai at orfodi dedfryd o garchar. Cynghorwyd aelodau o staff y dylent atgyfeirio’n uniongyrchol i banel FTP unrhyw achos lle cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o ‘drosedd arestiadwy difrifol’ yn ystyr Deddf yr Heddlu a Thystiolaeth Droseddol 1984 o drosedd gyda chymhelliad hiliol, o drosedd yn cynnwys pornograffi plant, o drosedd dan Ddeddf Camddefnyddio Cyffuriau 1971 (fel a ddiwygiwyd) ac unrhyw drosedd yn cynnwys elfen o anonestrwydd. Mae’r arweiniad yn nodi bod yna
‘dybiaeth fod natur y collfarnau hyn yn golygu y bydd yr achos yn awtomatig yn cyrraedd prawf y cyfnod archwilio’
Ar ben arall y raddfa, cynghorir aelodau o staff, oni bai bod gan yr achos unrhyw ffactorau gwaethygol eithriadol, y gallant gau achosion sy’n cynnwys dim ond collfarn ar gyfer troseddau moduro cosb benodedig, troseddau a gyflawnwyd yn y DU y mae gweithdrefnau digon tebyg yn delio â hwy, troseddau cyfwerth a gyflawnir dramor ac ar gyfer troseddau lle mai’r
‘prif gynhwysyn’
yw parcio cerbyd modur yn anghyfreithlon.
Mae’r arweiniad i staff yn nodi y dylid atgyfeirio i archwilwyr achos bob collfarn (a rhybuddion yr heddlu, mae’n ymddangos y bwriedir er na nodir yn ffurfiol) nad yw’n syrthio i unrhyw un o’r categorïau a ddisgrifiais eisoes. Dylai archwilwyr achos ddefnyddio prawf y cyfnod archwilio yn yr un modd ag wrth ddelio ag achosion nad ydynt yn rhai collfarn. Cânt eu cynghori bod rhaid iddynt ystyried difrifoldeb yr achos a bod hawl ganddynt ystyried addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer
‘yn ei holl agweddau’
. Lle bu asesiad o iechyd y meddyg (e.e. ar ôl collfarn yfed a gyrru), gall archwilwyr achos awdurdodi’r staff i wahodd y meddyg i gytuno ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, atgoffir archwilwyr achos bod rhaid atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP, lle ceir posibilrwydd realistig o ddilead.
Mae’n debyg i mi bod yr arweiniad hwn yn glir ac yn briodol. Rwy’n croesawu’n benodol yr arweiniad y dylid atgyfeirio pob trosedd sy’n cynnwys elfen o anonestrwydd i banel FTP. Efallai bydd angen arweiniad ar archwilwyr achos hefyd ynghylch y math o achos lle mae posibilrwydd realistig o ddilead. Hefyd, efallai dylai’r arweiniad egluro bod rhaid delio â rhybuddion bob amser yn yr un modd â chollfarnau. Yn fy marn i, dylid egluro hefyd y dylid trin collfarnau sy’n arwain at ryddhad amodol yn yr un modd.
Yn fy marn i, dylid rhoi’r arweiniad hwn yn y maes cyhoeddus. Mae’r cwestiwn a ddylai meddyg y’i gafwyd yn euog o drosedd wynebu panel FTP fod yn gwestiwn y mae gan aelodau’r cyhoedd ddiddordeb dilys ynddo. Dylent gael y cyfle i gyfrannu at ddadl ynghylch pa achosion y dylid eu hatgyfeirio i banel FTP a pha rai na ddylid eu hatgyfeirio. Yn ogystal, dylai’r modd y mae’r system yn gweithredu yn y dyfodol fod yn dryloyw. Dylai’r GMC gyhoeddi ystadegau sy’n dangos dadansoddiad o’r mathau o droseddau a rhybuddion a adroddir i’r GMC a chanlyniadau’r penderfyniadau i atgyfeirio achosion o’r fath i banel FTP neu beidio a’r rhesymau dros y penderfyniadau a wnaed. Awgrymaf y dylai’r ystadegau hefyd ddangos y penderfyniadau terfynol gan baneli FTP mewn achosion collfarn a rhybudd, fel y gall weld yn glir sut mae’r GMC yn delio ag achosion collfarn a rhybudd o’r dechrau i’r diwedd.
Staff y Swyddfa yn Cau Achosion
Pan fo’r Cofrestrydd yn penderfynu peidio ag atgyfeirio honiad i’r archwilwyr achos, rhaid iddo (yn ymarferol, y staff sy’n ymarfer ei bwerau) roi gwybod i’r meddyg, ynghyd ag unrhyw berson a ddaeth â’r honiad at sylw’r GMC, am ei benderfyniad a’r rhesymau drosto.
Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi y bydd y GMC yn datgelu i’r meddyg
‘pob cwyn nad yw’n hollol ddisylwedd’
. P’un a fu datgeliad blaenorol o’r honiad i’r meddyg neu beidio, mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn mynnu bod y Cofrestrydd, cyn gynted ag y bo’n rhesymol ymarferol ar ôl atgyfeirio honiad i’w ystyried gan yr archwilwyr achos (neu atgyfeiriad i banel FTP mewn achos collfarn y mae’r Cofrestrydd yn ei atgyfeirio’n uniongyrchol i’r cyfnod dyfarnu), yn ysgrifennu at y meddyg, gan roi gwybod iddo/iddi am yr honiad a wnaed yn ei erbyn/ei herbyn ac yn nodi’r materion sy’n ymddangos i godi cwestiwn a oes nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae’r Arweiniad yn nodi, pe byddai’r Cofrestrydd yn bwriadu datgelu’r honiad i gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg cyn penderfynu ei atgyfeirio i’r archwilwyr achos neu beidio, fod rhaid dweud wrth y meddyg am y bwriad hwnnw. Dylid anfon at y meddyg hefyd gopïau o unrhyw ddogfennau a gafwyd gan y GMC i gefnogi’r honiad. Gwahoddir i’r meddyg ymateb i’r honiad trwy gynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig o fewn 28 diwrnod a bydd yn cael gwybod y bydd unrhyw gynrychioliadau ganddo/ganddi yn cael eu datgelu, lle y bo’n briodol, i’r sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad (os o gwbl) ar gyfer sylwadau. Amododd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (ac mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi hefyd) y ceir datgeliad o gynrychioliadau’r meddyg i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad dim ond
‘lle y bo
n briodol
’. Nid yw’n glir ym mha amgylchiadau y rhagwelir na fyddai’n briodol i wneud datgeliad o’r fath.
Nid oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn y Rheolau sy’n mynnu y dylai’r sawl sy’n gwneud honiad weld ymateb y meddyg ac, os felly, ar ba adeg yn yr achosion. Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Mr Scott, mewn rhai achosion, y byddai’n amlwg o’r cychwyn y dylai honiad barhau. Pe byddai’r Rheolau’n mynnu y dylid gwahodd y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad i roi sylwadau cyn atgyfeirio’r achos i archwiliwr achos neu banel FTP, gallai hyn achosi oedi. Dywedodd ei bod yn well gadael y penderfyniad a ddylid gwahodd sylwadau gan y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad yn nwylo’r Cofrestrydd neu’r archwilwyr achos. Gallaf weld y byddai hynny’n synhwyrol lle y mae’n glir bod yr achos am barhau, beth bynnag yw ymateb y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai unrhyw amheuaeth ynghylch a ddylai’r achos barhau, mae’n debyg i mi ei bod yn angenrheidiol cael sylwadau’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad cyn gwneud penderfyniad. Wrth roi tystiolaeth, rhoddodd Mr Scott ymrwymiad y byddai sylwadau’n cael eu gwahodd gan y sail a wnaeth yr honiad mewn unrhyw achos lle gallai fod amheuaeth ynghylch anfon yr achos at banel FTP. Nodaf fod Canllaw Archwilio draft Tachwedd 2004 yn cyfarwyddo gweithwyr achos i ddatgelu i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad sylwadau’r meddyg ar y rhannau hynny o’r honiadau a ddaeth wrtho/wrthi. Mae hyn yn ymddangos i wneud ymrwymiad Mr Scott i’r Ymchwiliad yn effeithiol. Fodd bynnag, fel a ddywedais, nid yw’r gofyniad i wneud datgeliad i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad wedi’i ymgorffori yn y Rheolau. Rwy’n credu y byddai’n well gwneud hyn. Dywedodd Mr Scott y byddai’n rhy anodd cynnwys y ddarpariaeth hon yn y Rheolau heb glymu’r GMC wrth geisio sylwadau’r achwynydd ym mhob achos; byddai hynny, dywedodd, yn achosi oedi diangen. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n credu, gydag ychydig ddyfeisgarwch, y gellid llwyddo i wneud hyn.
Casglu Tystiolaeth Bellach
Dywedais eisoes y bydd gofyn i’r Cofrestrydd, dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, ar ôl gwneud penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i’r archwiliwr achos, gynnal archwiliadau sy’n briodol yn ei farn ef/ei barn hi i’r archwilwyr achos yn ystyried yr honiad. Yn benodol, bydd y Cofrestrydd (neu’r staff yn ymarfer ei bwerau) ar yr adeg hon yn gallu cyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiad o berfformiad neu iechyd meddyg. Ymddangosodd y ddarpariaeth hon gyntaf yn Rheolau drafft Mai 2004. Yn flaenorol, ac adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, bwriadwyd mai dim ond archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys neu’r IC a ddylai ymarfer y pŵer i gyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd. Awgrymwyd efallai na fyddai’r IC yn dymuno dirprwyo (o leiaf yn y tymor byr), hyd yn oed i archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys, y penderfyniad i gyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad neu beidio. Byddaf yn trafod y pŵer newydd hwn a roddwyd i’r Cofrestrydd pan fyddaf yn delio â’r trefniadau ar gyfer delio ag achosion sy’n cynnwys materion iechyd a pherfformiad.
Mae Arweiniad CR/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn nodi y bydd achosion yn cael eu pennu i ‘dimau archwilio’ (a phob un yn cynnwys cyfreithiwr, rheolwr archwilio, nifer o swyddogion archwilio ac archwilwyr achos). Dywed yr Arweiniad drafft y bydd cyfarfodydd tîm rheolaidd yn cael eu cynnal, lle gwneir penderfyniadau am yr archwiliadau sy’n ofynnol a lle bydd cynnydd yn cael ei adolygu. Bydd cyfreithwyr (rhai mewnol ac allanol) yn cynnal rhai archwiliadau ac yn cynghori ar y rheiny y mae eu hangen. Mewn llythyr at yr Ymchwiliad, mae’r GMC wedi dweud y bydd archwilio achosion yn
‘broses a arweinir gan gyfreithwyr’
. Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn dweud y gall archwiliadau o’r fath gynnwys cael datganiadau tystion ac adroddiadau arbenigol, yn ogystal â chyfarwyddo asesiadau iechyd neu berfformiad.
Mae’r GMC yn dweud ei fod yn bwriadu cyflogi staff cyfreithiol a staff nad ydynt yn rhai cyfreithiol i gasglu tystiolaeth yn y cyfnod archwilio. Ers gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, rwyf wedi gweld hysbysebion yn y papurau newydd yn chwilio am staff i wneud gwaith archwilio. Mae hwn yn ddatblygiad hynod galonogol. Rwy’n gobeithio y caiff diwylliant ei sefydlu yn y GMC o archwilio rhagweithiol, wedi’i gynnalr gyda phenderfynoldeb a holgarwch gwirioneddol - yn hytrach na thrwy ddilyn protocol sefydlog, yr ystyrir bod yr archwiliad yn gyflawn ar ei ddiwedd, p’un a daethpwyd ‘at waelod’ y materion neu beidio. Byddwn yn gobeithio hefyd y cymerir cyfle cynnar i adfer i’r archwilwyr achos y pŵer, a gynigiwyd dan Reolau drafft 2003, i gyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal unrhyw archwiliadau sy’n angenrheidiol yn eu barn hwythau.
Archwilwyr Achos yn Ystyried Achosion
Byddaf yn troi nawr at archwilio’r broses y bydd yr archwilwyr achos yn ei defnyddio i ystyried achosion ac i wneud penderfyniadau yn eu cylch.
Yn ystod 2003 a 2004, roedd y GMC yn ymgymryd â llunio arweiniad at ddefnydd archwilwyr achos ac (yn ddiweddarach) paneli IC. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi gweld tri drafft o arweiniad o’r fath, sef Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 ac Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004, y cyfeiriais atynt eisoes, ynghyd â’r ddogfen ddrafft, ‘The Investigation Stage Test - Guidance on Criteria and Thresholds’, a luniwyd gan y GMC ym mis Mehefin 2004 (Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004).
Mae’r Ymchwiliad hefyd wedi gweld drafftiau, a luniwyd yn 2003 ac ym mis Mehefin a mis Medi 2004, o ffurflenni penderfyniad yr archwilwyr achos (CEDFs) i’w defnyddio gan archwilwyr achos wrth gofnodi eu penderfyniadau.
Dywedodd y GMC wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod yn bwriadu rhoi’r Arweiniad a’r CEDFs ar brawf yn ystod cyfnod prawf ym mis Hydref 2004, a’u diwygio ymhellach ar ôl hynny yn ôl yr angen.
Y Prawf i’w Gymhwyso
Y prawf i’w gymhwyso ar ddiwedd y cyfnod archwilio fydd, fel y dywedais, a oes yna obaith realistig o ganfod bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Gallai’r nam godi yn sgil camymddygiad, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol neu iechyd gwael, neu o ganlyniad i gollfarn neu rybudd neu ddyfarniad gan gorff rheoleiddio proffesiynol arall. Rwyf eisoes wedi trafod y problemau sy’n codi mewn cysylltiad â’r prawf hwn a fy syniadau ynghylch sut y gellid datrys y problemau hyn ac ni fyddaf yn ailadrodd fy sylwadau yma.
Arweiniad ar yr Ymagwedd i’w Chymhwyso
Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn cynnwys unrhyw feini prawf i’w defnyddio gan archwilwyr achos wrth ddefnyddio prawf y cyfnod archwilio. Fodd bynnag, gellir cael rhywfaint o fewnwelediad i’r ymagwedd y disgwylir i archwilwyr achos ei mabwysiadu o Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003, Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 ac Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004.
Achosion sy’n Peri Tybiaeth o Nam ar Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Yn gyntaf, bydd rhaid i archwilwyr achos werthuso a yw honiad yn ddigon difrifol i nodi y gall fod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn cynghori y dylai archwilwyr achos atgyfeirio rhai categorïau o ymddygiad, sef ymosodiad neu anweddustra rhywiol, trais, perthnasoedd rhywiol/emosiynol amhriodol ac anonestrwydd, i banel FTP oni bai bod
‘rhesymau eithriadol’
dros beidio â gwneud. Y categorïau hyn o ymddygiad yw’r categorïau a olygai’n flaenorol ‘SPM yn ôl diffiniad’, oni bai bod ‘ymddygiad camweithredol’ wedi’i ddisodli bellach gan gategori culach ‘perthnasoedd rhywiol/emosiynol amhriodol’. Mewn achosion o’r fath, bydd yna dybiaeth o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer ac felly ni fydd angen ystyried mater difrifoldeb.
Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn cynghori, lle mae archwilwyr achos yn ystyried nad oes unrhyw bosibilrwydd realistig o sefydlu achos ar dystiolaeth, na ddylent gau’r achos
‘fel arfer’
heb gael cyngor cyfreithiol yn gyntaf. Cynghorir archwilwyr achos i gofnodi ar y CEDF y rhesymau dros eu penderfyniad, gan gyfeirio’n benodol at unrhyw gyngor cyfreithiol a geir.
Roedd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 yn cynghori na ddylai archwilwyr achos
‘fel arfer’
ystyried unrhyw ddadleuon lliniaru a godir gan y meddyg wrth ystyried atgyfeirio achos sy’n cynnwys y categorïau hyn o ymddygiad i banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, cafodd y cyngor hwnnw ei hepgor o Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004. Pryderaf ynghylch yr hepgoriad hwnnw oherwydd credaf fod y cyngor yn bwysig. Mae’n amlwg o’r achosion a archwiliwyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau yr arferai’r sgrinwyr yn aml ystyried ffactorau lliniaru yn eithaf amhriodol.
Ystyriaethau o Ddifrifoldeb
Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 wedyn yn nodi’r ymagwedd i’w mabwysiadu mewn achosion eraill (fel arfer yn cynnwys cwynion am ymarfer clinigol meddyg), lle gall fod methiannau difrifol neu gyson i fodloni’r safonau yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ sy’n codi mater o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae’n cynghori na fydd pob methiant i fodloni safonau yn cynnwys nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n ddigonol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Wrth ystyried a yw’r nam o’r fath radd, cynghorir y dylai archwilwyr achos ystyried natur a difrifoldeb yr honiadau. Bydd angen iddynt ystyried hefyd natur gyson a difrifol unrhyw fethiannau i fodloni’r safonau yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Yna, mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn nodi nifer o amgylchiadau lle mae cwestiwn o addasrwydd i ymarfer yn debygol o godi, sef:
‘Mae perfformiad meddyg wedi niweidio cleifion neu roi cleifion mewn perygl niwed’
‘Mae meddyg wedi dangos diystyrwch pwrpasol neu ddiofal o gyfrifoldebau clinigol tuag at gleifion’
‘Mae meddyg wedi manteisio ar ymddiriedaeth claf neu wedi bradychu awtonomiaeth neu hawliau elfennol eraill claf’
‘Mae meddyg wedi ymddwyn yn anonest, yn dwyllodrus neu mewn modd a gynlluniwyd i gamarwain neu niweidio eraill’
‘Roedd ymddygiad y meddyg o’r fath y gallai ffydd y cyhoedd mewn meddygon yn gyffredinol gael ei danseilio pe na fyddai’r GMC yn gweithredu’
‘Mae iechyd meddyg yn peryglu diogelwch cleifion.’
Mae’r rhestr hon o amgylchiadau yn ddefnyddiol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos i mi bod angen rhai enghreifftiau penodol er mwyn gweld a yw’r trothwy’n cael ei groesi yn yr achos penodol dan ystyriaeth. Yr hyn sydd ei angen yw set gynhwysfawr o enghreifftiau achos sy’n dangos ble dylai’r trothwy orwedd.
Pe byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn ystyried (gan ystyried yr uchod i gyd) bod yr honiad yn ddigon difrifol y gallai gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, rhaid iddynt wedyn ystyried a oes yna obaith realistig o sefydlu’r achos ar dystiolaeth.
Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn cynnwys cyngor ar sut y dylai archwilwyr achos drin y cwestiwn a oes yna ‘obaith realistig’ o sefydlu, mewn achos unigol, bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer i’r radd ofynnol. Mae’r cyngor mewn termau bron yr union yr un fath â’r rheiny yn yr
a luniwyd yn gyntaf ym mis Ionawr 2001 ar gyfer arwain y PPC (er bod yr
yn siarad am obaith
‘gwirioneddol’
‘realistig’
). Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn cynnwys atgofiad bod y safon droseddol o brawf yn berthnasol mewn achosion y mae panel FTP yn eu clywed.
Mae’r cyngor yn Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 na ddylai archwilwyr achos
‘fel arfer’
gau achos am resymau tystiolaethol heb gael cyngor cyfreithiol yn ymddangos fel petai’n ymestyn dim ond i achosion sydd â thybiaeth o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae’n debyg, ym mhob achos arall (y bydd y rhan fwyaf ohonynt yn achosion yn cynnwys honiadau am ymarfer clinigol), y bydd archwilwyr achos yn rhydd i lunio eu barnau eu hunain am faterion tystiolaethol, gydag arweiniad yr
addasedig.
Mae asesu pwysigrwydd tystiolaeth yn broses gyfreithiol yn y bôn a gall fod yn eithaf anodd i bobl nad ydynt yn gyfreithwyr. Gall fod, mewn achosion sy’n cynnwys materion tystiolaethol, y bydd archwilwyr achos yn ceisio cyngor y cyfreithwyr yn eu timau archwilio. Fodd bynnag, mae’n peri gofid i mi nad ydynt yn cael eu cynghori’n benodol i wneud hynny. Mae’n debyg i mi hefyd y gall yr
addasedig fod yn annefnyddiol mewn rhai ffyrdd. Mae’r atgofiad mai’r safon droseddol yw’r safon o brawf yn debygol o greu’r argraff, pe byddai’r meddyg yn amau’r dystiolaeth, na fydd yr honiad yn gallu profi tra, mewn gwirionedd, pe byddai’r panel FTP yn credu’r disgrifiad a roddwyd gan y sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad, gallai ddarganfod bod yr honiad wedi’i brofi.
Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 hefyd yn cynnig cyngor am yr amgylchiadau lle dylai archwilwyr achos ystyried a allai rhybudd fod yn briodol. Cyfeiriaf at y cyngor hwnnw yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Canlyniadau Posibl yr Archwilwyr Achos yn Ystyried Achos
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y bydd gan yr archwilwyr achos meddygol a lleyg nifer o opsiynau wrth benderfynu sut i waredu achos sy’n cael ei atgyfeirio iddynt. Yn gyntaf, gallent gyfarwyddo na ddylai achos barhau ymhellach. Mae’n debyg, pe byddai archwilwyr achos yn cyfarwyddo na ddylai achos barhau ymhellach, y bydd yn agored iddynt hefyd gyfarwyddo y dylid anfon llythyr o gyngor at y meddyg. Nid oes sôn am yr opsiwn hwn yn y Rheolau nac yn Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004. Ystyriaf y mater hwn ymhellach isod.
Yn ail, gall archwilwyr achos benderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd i’r meddyg neu atgyfeirio’r honiad i’r IC ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar, gyda’r bwriad o gyhoeddi rhybudd. Trafodaf yr opsiwn hwnnw ymhellach isod. Yn drydydd, gall yr archwilwyr achos atgyfeirio’r honiad ar gyfer penderfyniad gan banel FTP. Byddaf yn delio â’r weithdrefn sy’n dilyn atgyfeiriad o’r fath yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Yn olaf, gall yr archwilwyr achos argymell y dylai’r meddyg gael gwahoddiad i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau ar ôl asesiad o’i berfformiad/ei pherfformiad neu iechyd wedi’i gyfarwyddo gan aelod o staff y GMC. Pe byddai gwahoddiad o’r fath yn cael ei gyhoeddi a phe byddai’r meddyg yn cadarnhau ei fod/ei bod yn barod i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau o’r fath, bydd yr archwilwyr achos yn dod i ben ag ystyried yr achos ac yna caiff ei drin trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Byddaf yn delio â’r opsiwn hwn yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Rhaid i’r ddau archwiliwr achos gytuno ar sut y dylid delio â’r achos. Heb gytundeb, bydd yr achos yn cael ei atgyfeirio’n awtomatig i’r IC.
Llythyrau o Gyngor
Rwyf wedi esbonio ym Mhennod 19 sut, dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, yr oedd yn agored i sgriniwr meddygol, ar ôl penderfynu peidio ag atgyfeirio achos i’r PPC, anfon llythyr o gyngor i feddyg dan Bennod XV Rheolau Sefydlog y GMC. Anfonodd y PPC lythyrau rhybudd a llythyrau o gyngor hefyd mewn rhai achosion y penderfynodd peidio â’u hatgyfeirio i’r PCC ar gyfer gwrandawiad.
Nid oedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn cynnwys unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol ar gyfer anfon llythyr o gyngor mewn achos lle’r oedd archwiliwr achos wedi penderfynu na ddylai barhau ymhellach. Serch hynny, nododd yr Arweiniad ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft 2003:
‘Lle caiff achos ei derfynu heb unrhyw weithredu pellach, gall y Pwyllgor
(yr IC)
neu’r Archwiliwr Achos gyhoeddi cyngor am ymarfer neu ymddygiad yr ymarferwr yn y dyfodol mewn modd y gwelant yn dda.’
Roedd CEDF drafft 2003 yn cynnwys adran lle byddai archwiliwr achos yn cofnodi ei benderfyniad/ei phenderfyniad i gyhoeddi llythyr o gyngor neu beidio, ynghyd â rhesymau dros y penderfyniad. Awgrymodd CEDF drafft 2003 y byddai’r llythyr o gyngor yn briodol yn ôl pob tebyg lle byddai archwiliwr achos yn
‘fodlon nad yw’r achos yn bodloni prawf y cyfnod archwilio ac nad yw’n gwarantu rhybudd’
. Awgrymwyd tair enghraifft o amgylchiadau lle gallai fod yn briodol anfon llythyr o gyngor. Yr enghraifft gyntaf oedd lle bu
‘achos bach o dorri safonau proffesiynol’
, fel oedi afresymol mewn anfon adroddiad meddygol a addawyd. Yr ail enghraifft oedd lle cafwyd y meddyg yn euog o
‘drosedd ddibwys (fel torri’r heddwch)’
. Y drydedd enghraifft oedd lle byddai’r
wedi’u
‘datrys yn lleol i fodlonrwydd y partïon’
ac y
‘byddai cadarnhad o unrhyw gyngor a roddwyd yn lleol yn ddefnyddiol’
. Roedd papur yr FPPC yr ystyriodd y Cyngor yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Tachwedd 2002 wedi awgrymu y dylid datgelu termau unrhyw lythyr o gyngor a anfonir at feddyg dim ond i’r meddyg a’r achwynydd. Ni fyddai’r llythyr yn cael ei ddatgelu i gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Ni fyddai chwaith yn cael ei ddatgelu i unrhyw un a ymholai yn ddilynol am statws cofrestriad y meddyg. Bwriadwyd, fodd bynnag, y byddai llythyr o gyngor (ynghyd ag unrhyw gwynion yn erbyn y meddyg a gafwyd yn lleol) yn cael ei ystyried fel rhan o’r broses arfarnu.
Nid oedd Rheolau drafft Mai a Gorffennaf 2004 chwaith yn cynnwys unrhyw ddarpariaeth ar gyfer anfon llythyrau o gyngor. Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 chwaith. Nid yw Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 ac Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn sôn o gwbl am lythyrau o gyngor. Mae pob cyfeiriad at lythyrau o gyngor hefyd wedi’i ddileu o ddrafftiau Mehefin a Medi 2004 o’r CEDF. Roedd CEDF drafft Mehefin 2004 yn gofyn i archwiliwr achos, pe byddai ef/hi wedi penderfynu na ddylai achos barhau ymhellach, nodi’r prif bwyntiau i sôn amdanynt yn y llythyr i’w anfon at y meddyg. Ymddangosai’n bosibl y byddai archwilwyr achos yn cael eu cyfarwyddo gan y GMC y gallent gynnwys yn y pwyntiau hynny ryw fath o gyngor i’r meddyg am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad yn y dyfodol. Cafodd yr adran honno ei hepgor o CEDF drafft Medi 2004, sy’n llawer byrrach na fersiynau blaenorol.
Mewn llythyr at yr Ymchwiliad, nododd y GMC:
‘... bydd wrth gwrs yn parhau’n agored i’r GMC roi cyngor i feddyg mewn unrhyw fodd sy’n briodol ganddo pan nad oes angen unrhyw weithredu ffurfiol (gan gynnwys rhybudd), ond ystyrir bod gwneud hyn yn ddymunol er mwyn cynnal safonau proffesiynol da. Disgwylir y bydd y pŵer hwn yn cael ei ddefnyddio yn achlysurol iawn yn unig ac mae’r GMC yn ystyried beth yw’r ffordd orau o adlewyrchu hyn yn ei arweiniad mewnol i staff gan gynnwys Archwilwyr Achos.’
Mae’n ymddangos, felly, er gwaethaf y ffaith bod pob cyfeiriad at lythyrau o gyngor wedi’i hepgor o’r CEDFs a’r Arweiniad drafft, yr ystyrir y bydd achosion, ar adegau, yn cael eu trin trwy anfon llythyr o gyngor. Amser a ddengys a fydd y pŵer hwn yn cael ei ddefnyddio yn achlysurol iawn yn y dyfodol. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, anfonwyd llawer o lythyrau o’r fath.
Nid oes unrhyw beth o’i le yn y bôn gydag anfon llythyr o gyngor; yn wir, gall fod yn syniad da, cyhyd â na chaniateir iddo ddod yn ‘opsiwn hawdd’ ac yn opsiwn amgen i atgyfeirio achos sydd, mewn gwirionedd, yn bodloni prawf y cyfnod archwilio ac y dylid felly ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Ond, pe credir ei bod yn werthfawr cadw llythyrau o gyngor, dylid ysgrifennu’r opsiwn yn y Rheolau a dylid cytuno a sefydlu meini prawf cywir ar gyfer anfon llythyrau o’r fath. Dylid archwilio eu defnydd, er mwyn sicrhau eu bod yn cael eu defnyddio’n briodol. Nid yw’n dderbyniol dechrau’r gweithdrefnau newydd gyda rhan o’r broses ar waith y tu allan i’r Rheolau. Pe cedwir llythyrau o gyngor, gallent fod - ac yn wir dylent fod - yn berthnasol i’r broses ail-ddilysu. Byddai’n annheg i feddygon pe byddai triniaeth anghyson wrth anfon llythyrau o gyngor. Ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001, nododd y GMC mai’r diffyg tryloywder mewn perthynas â llythyrau o gyngor oedd un o wendidau’r hen system. Nid yw’r ansicrwydd presennol wedi gwneud unrhyw beth i waredu aneglurder yr hen drefniadau.
Un nodwedd unigryw ar y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yw’r mecanwaith ar gyfer cyhoeddi rhybuddion ffurfiol i feddygon yn y cyfnod archwilio. Mae Adran 35C(6) Deddf 1983 yn amodi, pe byddai’r IC yn penderfynu na ddylai achos gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP, y gallai gyhoeddi rhybudd i’r ymarferwr am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y dyfodol. Oherwydd nad oes unrhyw brawf statudol unswydd i’w gymhwyso i’r cwestiwn
‘na ddylai’
achos gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP, nid yw’r amgylchiadau lle gellir rhoi rhybudd yn gyfreithiol yn glir o’r statud.
Yr Amgylchiadau lle Gellir Cyhoeddi Rhybudd
Bwriad y GMC yw y bydd rhybudd ar gael pan nad yw honiad, ym marn yr archwilwyr achos neu’r IC, yn gwarantu atgyfeiriad i banel FTP, ond pan ceir tystiolaeth i awgrymu bod ymddygiad neu berfformiad y meddyg wedi syrthio islaw safonau gofynnol i’r graddau sy’n gwarantu cerydd ffurfiol gan y GMC. Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn nodi:
‘Bydd yna hefyd achosion sy’n dangos gwyriadau sylweddol oddi wrth
Arfer Meddygol Da
nad ydynt yn ddigon difrifol i warantu gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg ond y mae angen arnynt ymateb ffurfiol gan y GMC er mwyn cynnal safonau proffesiynol da a ffydd y cyhoedd mewn meddygon. Rhybudd fydd yr ymateb priodol yn y mathau hyn o achosion.’
Bydd rhybudd yn
‘parhau’n ddilys’
am gyfnod o bum mlynedd. Ni wnaed unrhyw benderfyniad hyd yma gan y GMC ynghylch a ddylid ystyried o gwbl bod rhybudd ‘wedi dod i ben’ (ac felly’n ddatgeladwy) ar ôl pum mlynedd. Datgelir y ffaith y cyhoeddwyd rhybudd i gyflogwr neu PCO cyfredol y meddyg ac i’r person neu’r corff a ddaeth â’r honiad i sylw’r GMC. Yn ogystal, caiff ei ddatgelu i unrhyw ddarpar gyflogwr. Caiff ei ddatgelu hefyd i unrhyw ymholwr yn ystod cyfnod dilysrwydd y rhybudd. Fel y deallaf y sefyllfa, byddai’n rhaid i ‘ymholwr’ wneud ymholiad penodol ynghylch a oedd gan feddyg hanes o FTP (nid yn unig a oedd wedi’i gofrestru/ei chofrestru neu a oedd yna gyfyngiadau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad) cyn datgelu’r rhybudd. Mewn cyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth aelodau sut y mae staff swyddfa’n darparu gwybodaeth o’r fath. Maent yn ateb pob cwestiwn a holir yn benodol yn unig ac nid ydynt yn gwirfoddoli unrhyw wybodaeth ychwanegol.
Arweiniad 2003
Cynghorodd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 i archwilwyr achos ystyried pedwar cwestiwn wrth benderfynu a oedd rhybudd yn briodol, sef:
‘a. A oedd ymddygiad y meddyg yn anghyson â’i statws fel meddyg?’
Awgrymodd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 y gallai rhybudd fod yn briodol yn dilyn collfarn am rai categorïau o drosedd (e.e. un digwyddiad o ladrata o siop), lle na ddigwyddodd mewn cyd-destun proffesiynol.
‘b. A yw’r meddyg wedi methu rhoi sylw i bryderon a godwyd gan reolaeth leol?’
Awgrymwyd y gallai rhybudd fod yn
‘ffordd o danlinellu difrifoldeb y pryderon a phwysleisio na cheir ailadrodd unrhyw gamymddygiad’.
‘c. A oes angen sôn wrth gyflogwr/gyflogwyr y meddyg am ein pryderon?’
Awgrymodd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 y byddai’r ffaith bod rhybudd yn cael ei ddatgelu i gyflogwr/gyflogwyr y meddyg yn golygu
‘sicrhau bod cyflogwyr yn ymwybodol y gall fod angen monitro agweddau ar ymarfer y meddyg’.
‘d. A oes unrhyw feysydd y gellir eu nodi o ymarfer meddyg y mae angen arnynt asesiad neu ailhyfforddiant?’
Aeth Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 ymlaen i nodi:
‘Gellir ystyried bod gwyriad oddi wrth Arfer Meddygol Da yn ddigon sylweddol i gyfiawnhau rhybudd lle mae’n ddigon difrifol i ni farcio’r ffaith bod ymddygiad y meddyg yn annerbyniol ac na chaiff ddigwydd eto, ond y byddai’n anghymesur i weithredu yn erbyn cofrestriad y meddyg.’
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, awgrymwyd i dystion o’r GMC (yn benodol, Syr Graeme Catto a Mr Scott) gan y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad y gall y pŵer newydd i gyhoeddi rhybuddion ffurfiol ei wneud yn ddengar i archwilwyr achos neu’r IC, mewn achos lle maent yn ansicr a fyddai panel FTP yn canfod y ffeithiau a brofwyd, ddewis ‘aderyn mewn llaw’ a chyhoeddi rhybudd mewn achos a ddylai gael ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP mewn gwirionedd. Nid yw’n debyg bod y posibilrwydd hwn wedi croesi meddwl unrhyw un o’r tystion o’r blaen, er ei fod wedi ymddangos yn berygl amlwg i’r Ymchwiliad.
Arweiniad 2004
Mae Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn ei gwneud yn glir y dylid ystyried rhybudd dim ond pan fo’r archwilwyr achos wedi penderfynu eisoes nad yw prawf y cyfnod archwilio wedi’i fodloni. Yn ogystal, cynghorir archwilwyr achos y dylid tybio, lle’u bod yn ystyried bod yr honiadau ‘
ar y ffin rhwng gweithredu ar gofrestriad a rhybudd’
, y dylid atgyfeirio’r honiadau i banel FTP. Mae’n ymddangos i mi bod yr Arweiniad hwn, os glynir wrtho, yn delio’n foddhaol â phryder yr Ymchwiliad.
Cynghorodd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 hefyd, lle byddai archwilwyr achos wedi penderfynu bod yr honiadau’n bodloni prawf y cyfnod archwilio, na ddylent ganiatáu i unrhyw ffactorau lliniaru eu perswadio i gyhoeddi rhybudd, yn lle atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP. Yn hytrach, dylid ei adael i’r panel FTP ystyried unrhyw ffactorau lliniaru a’r amgylchiadau priodol. Ystyriais fod hynny’n newid calonogol yn y cyngor oherwydd, fel y soniais yn gynharach, dangosodd archwiliad yr Ymchwiliad o achosion dan yr hen weithdrefnau fod sgrinwyr a’r PPC yn aml yn ystyried lliniaru pan na ddylent. Fodd bynnag, hepgorwyd y cyngor o Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004. Yn wir, mae’r unig gyfeiriad at liniaru yn digwydd pan gynghorir archwilwyr achos, ar ôl sefydlu na fodlonwyd prawf y cyfnod archwilio, y dylent ystyried yr holl dystiolaeth (gan gynnwys lliniaru) wrth benderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd neu beidio. Yn fy marn i, dylid adfer y cyngor ar liniaru a roir yn Arweiniad Mehefin 2004. Rhaid i’r GMC fod yn effro i’r broblem bosibl y gall yr archwilwyr achos ystyried ffactorau lliniaru yn amhriodol. Dylent fonitro penderfyniadau archwilwyr achos i sicrhau nad ydynt yn ystyried ffactorau lliniaru fel camgymeriad ac yn cyhoeddi rhybuddion mewn achosion a ddylai fod wedi mynd i banel FTP. Mae hyn yn bwysig er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion.
Nid yw Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004 yn gwneud unrhyw gyfeiriad at y pedwar cwestiwn a awgrymodd Arweiniad drafft 2003 y dylai’r archwilwyr achos eu hystyried wrth benderfynu a oedd rhybudd yn briodol. Nid yw’n rhoi chwaith unrhyw arweiniad pellach ar sut y dylid trin penderfyniad i gyhoeddi rhybudd neu beidio. Roedd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 yn cynnwys rhai enghreifftiau o’r mathau o achos a allai ddenu rhybudd. Roedd y rhain yn fyr ac nid oeddent yn cynnwys unrhyw fanylion. Cawsant eu hepgor o Arweiniad CE/IC drafft Medi 2004. Yn fy marn i, dylid eu hadfer gan ei bod yn ddefnyddiol rhoi enghreifftiau bob amser. Fodd bynnag, yr hyn y mae ei wir angen yw nid yr enghreifftiau byr hyn ond astudiaethau achos manylach, sy’n ymdrin ag ystod lawer ehangach o bynciau ac sy’n dangos, trwy ddefnyddio mwy nag un achos tebyg, lle tynnwyd y llinell rhannu - yn gywir - a pham.
Gweithdrefn: Rhybudd i’r Meddyg: Cynigion 2003
Mae Rheolau drafft 2003 yn nodi gweithdrefn gymhleth ar gyfer cyhoeddi rhybuddion. Lle ystyriai’r IC neu archwiliwr achos y gallai rhybudd fod yn briodol, byddai’r meddyg yn cael gwybod bod rhybudd yn cael ei ystyried a byddai’n cael gwybod am ei hawl i wneud cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig. Er nad oedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn dweud unrhyw beth ar y pwynt, ymddangosai, pe na gafwyd unrhyw gynrychioliadau, neu pe byddai’r meddyg yn nodi ei fod/ei bod yn fodlon derbyn y rhybudd, byddai rhybudd ysgrifenedig yn cael ei gyhoeddi. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn dadlau na ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd, byddai ei gynrychioliadau/ei chynrychioliadau yn cael eu hystyried gan banel IC neu archwiliwr achos, ac yna penderfynir a fyddai gwrandawiad llafar, i bennu a ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd, yn ddymunol. Byddai’r cwestiwn a ddylid cael gwrandawiad llafar yn fater i archwiliwr achos neu’r panel IC; nid oedd unrhyw hawl i wrandawiad o’r fath.
Gweithdrefnau: Rhybudd i’r Meddyg: Sefyllfa 2004
Dan Reolau drafft Mai 2004, symleiddiwyd y darpariaethau ar gyfer cyhoeddi rhybuddion. Ni fyddai unrhyw gyfle i’r meddyg wneud cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig yn benodol ar y cwestiwn a ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd. Yn ôl pob tebyg, y bwriad oedd y byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn ystyried, wrth wneud eu penderfyniad, unrhyw gynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg pan gafodd ei wahodd/ei gwahodd gyntaf i roi sylwadau ar yr honiad a wnaed yn ei erbyn/ei herbyn. Nid oedd gan feddygon unrhyw hawl o hyd i fynnu gwrandawiad llafar.
Gwnaeth Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (a atgynhyrchir yn y modd hwn gan Reolau Tachwedd 2004) adfer y cyfle i feddyg wneud cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig ar ôl i’r archwilwyr achos nodi eu bod yn ystyried cyhoeddi rhybudd. Rhaid i’r archwilwyr achos ystyried y cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig hynny wrth benderfynu sut i ddelio â’r achos. Rhoddodd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 hawl i feddyg am y tro cyntaf gael gwrandawiad llafar pe byddai ef/hi’n dewis hynny. Bwriad y newid oedd bodloni pryderon meddygon am y gweithdrefnau rhybudd newydd. Cadwyd yr hawl i wrandawiad yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004.
Penderfyniad yr Archwilwyr Achos
Ar ôl cael cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig y meddyg (neu os nad yw ef/hi yn ymateb i’r gwahoddiad i roi cynrychioliadau), mae gan yr archwilwyr achos dri opsiwn ar gyfer delio a’r achos. Yr opsiwn cyntaf yw cyhoeddi rhybudd i’r meddyg. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi, os yw’r archwilwyr achos yn fodlon ‘
na ddylai’r’
honiad ‘
gael ei ystyried gan Banel FTP’
ac os nad yw’r meddyg yn gwneud unrhyw gynrychioliadau, neu os yw’n ymddangos o’i gynrychioliadau/ei chynrychioliadau nad yw ef/hi wedi herio’r ffeithiau y mae’r honiad yn seiliedig arnynt, gall yr archwilwyr achos gyhoeddi rhybudd i’r meddyg os credant fod hynny’n addas.
Yr ail opsiwn yw atgyfeirio’r meddyg ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar gerbron yr IC. Rhaid i archwilwyr achos ddefnyddio’r opsiwn hwn os yw’r meddyg yn gofyn am wrandawiad llafar gerbron yr IC, neu os ydynt yn ystyried ei bod yn briodol am ryw reswm arall i atgyfeirio’r achos ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar. Y trydydd opsiwn (nad yw’n cael ei nodi’n bendant yn y rheol berthnasol ond mae’n rhaid iddo, rwy’n credu, fod yn agored i archwilwyr achos) yw cyfarwyddo na ddylai’r achos barhau ymhellach. Gellir gwneud cyfarwyddyd na ddylai achos barhau ymhellach os yw’n glir bod y meddyg yn dadlau yn erbyn y ffeithiau ac os nad yw’r archwilwyr achos yn ystyried, ar ôl ystyried cynrychioliadau’r meddyg, ei bod yn briodol atgyfeirio’r achos i’r IC ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar.
Dylid nodi nad oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth i roi gwybod i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad am y ffaith bod rhybudd yn cael ei ystyried. Nid oes ychwaith unrhyw ddarpariaeth i ddangos i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad, neu ofyn iddo roi sylwadau ar, gynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig y meddyg ynghylch a ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd.
Gall y broses lle gellir cyhoeddi rhybudd ar ôl i archwiliwr achos benderfynu y byddai hynny’n briodol fod yn gymhleth, gall gymryd amser a gall fod yn ddrud. Gall arwain at wrandawiad gerbron panel IC sy’n defnyddio bron cymaint o adnoddau â gwrandawiad llawn gerbron panel FTP. Gall hyd yn oed arwain at wrandawiad panel FTP, pe byddai tystiolaeth newydd yn dod i’r amlwg yng ngwrandawiad y panel IC. Byddaf yn gwneud rhai sylwadau ac awgrymiadau am y weithdrefn hon pan fyddaf wedi cwblhau fy nisgrifiad o’r holl brosesau lle gellir rhoi rhybudd yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio.
Achosion y mae’r Pwyllgor Archwilio yn Delio â Hwy
Rwyf wedi esbonio y bydd paneli’r IC, dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, yn delio â dau gategori o achos yn unig. Mae’r categori cyntaf yn cynnwys achosion lle na allai’r ddau archwiliwr achos gytuno. Mae’r ail yn cynnwys gwrandawiadau llafar at ddiben penderfynu a ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd.
Bydd y GMC yn cadw rhestr o aelodau cyswllt meddygol a lleyg, a fydd yn gymwys i fod yn banelwyr IC. Fel ag esboniais eisoes ym mharagraff 25.90, er bydd aelodau’r GMC yn gymwys i eistedd ar baneli IC, dan Reolau Cyfansoddiad 2004, nid yw’n sicr eto a fyddant yn gwneud hyn mewn gwirionedd. Ceir rhaniad barn ymhlith aelodau’r Cyngor ynghylch a yw hyn yn briodol. Beth bynnag yw canlyniad tymor hir y ddadl honno, cadeirir paneli IC gan banelwyr sydd wedi cael asesiad ac wedi’u penodi at y diben hwnnw. Gall gadeiryddion paneli fod yn feddygol neu’n lleyg. Cworwm cyfreithiol panel IC fydd tri, gan gynnwys panelydd meddygol a lleyg.
Gwneir penderfyniadau paneli IC yn ôl mwyafrif syml. Os yw’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, aiff y penderfyniad o blaid y meddyg. Bydd paneli IC yn eistedd gydag asesydd cyfreithiol wrth ystyried rhybuddion.
Achosion Lle Mae’r Archwilwyr Achos Wedi Anghytuno
Mewn achosion lle na allai’r archwilwyr achos gytuno, bydd panel IC yn penderfynu’r achos yn breifat ac ar bapur. Ni fydd gan y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad na’r meddyg yr hawl i fynychu na chael eu cynrychioli. Gall y panel fabwysiadu un o bum ffordd o weithredu.
Yn gyntaf, gallai’r panel benderfynu na ddylai’r honiad barhau ymhellach. Mae’n ymddangos, pe byddai’n gwneud penderfyniad o’r fath, y bydd ganddo’r opsiwn o anfon llythyr o gyngor i’r meddyg yn yr un modd ag y gwnaethai’r PPC yn aml dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi pryder nad oes unrhyw sôn yn y Rheolau am lythyrau o gyngor. Pe byddent yn cael eu hanfon, dylid nodi’r amgylchiadau lle byddai hyn yn digwydd yn y Rheolau a dylai fod meini prawf clir ar gyfer yr amgylchiadau lle byddai hyn yn cael ei wneud.
Yr ail opsiwn sy’n agored i’r panel IC fydd cyhoeddi rhybudd i’r meddyg heb wrandawiad llafar. Lle ystyrir rhoi rhybudd, caiff y meddyg yr un cyfle i roi cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig am y mater fel pe byddai’r archwilwyr achos wedi cychwyn y broses rybuddio. Yna, bydd gan y panel IC yr opsiwn, lle nad yw’r meddyg wedi gwneud unrhyw gynrychioliadau neu heb herio’r ffeithiau, o gyhoeddi rhybudd ysgrifenedig heb wrandawiad. Y trydydd opsiwn a fydd gan y panel IC fydd penderfynu a ddylid cynnal gwrandawiad llafar gerbron gwahanol gyfansoddiad o banel IC. Byddai’r panel hwnnw yna’n penderfynu a ddylid cyhoeddi rhybudd. Yn bedwerydd, gall y panel IC atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP ei benderfynu. Mae’r pumed opsiwn yn codi lle mae’r archwilwyr achos wedi methu cytuno a ddylid argymell y dylid gwahodd meddyg i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau ar ôl asesiad perfformiad neu iechyd. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, gallai’r panel IC benderfynu y dylid gwahodd y meddyg i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau fel y mae’r panel yn ystyried yn addas.
Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn rhoi unrhyw bŵer i’r IC gyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal unrhyw archwiliadau, nac i oedi er mwyn cynnal archwiliadau, wrth ddelio ag achos lle mae’r archwilwyr achos wedi anghytuno. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, roedd gan y PPC y pŵer i oedi ar gyfer archwiliadau pellach. Yn ogystal, nid oes gan banel IC unrhyw bŵer i gyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad mewn achosion o’r fath. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r pwerau hyn fod gyda’r IC a byddaf yn argymell y cânt eu darparu.
Gwrandawiadau Llafar at Ddiben Penderfynu Cyhoeddi Rhybudd
Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 y dylid cynnal gwrandawiad llafar yn breifat gan banel IC at ddiben penderfynu cyhoeddi rhybudd ffurfiol. Ynglŷn â’r weithdrefn i’w mabwysiadu mewn gwrandawiad o’r fath, byddai Rheolau drafft 2003 wedi caniatáu i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno (h.y. y sawl sy’n cyflwyno’r achos i’r GMC, fel arfer cyfreithiwr neu gwnsler) amlinellu’r honiadau yn erbyn y meddyg, ond nid i grybwyll tystiolaeth. I’r gwrthwyneb, byddai gan y meddyg neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd yr hawl i grybwyll tystiolaeth lafar neu ddogfennol ac i annerch y panel ar y canlyniad priodol. Ni ddarparodd Reolau drafft 2003 unrhyw gyfle i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno wneud cyflwyniadau pellach am y dystiolaeth a grybwyllwyd gan y meddyg nac am unrhyw gynrychioliadau a wnaed ar ran y meddyg. Nododd Reolau drafft 2003 yn benodol na fyddai gan y sawl a wnaeth honiad unrhyw hawl i ymddangos gerbron y panel IC ac, yn wir, byddai’r person neu’r corff perthnasol bron yn sicr yn anymwybodol bod y gwrandawiad llafar yn cael ei gynnal neu, yn wir, bod posibilrwydd o gyhoeddi rhybudd yn cael ei ystyried. Byddai gofyn i’r panel IC roi
‘rhesymau byr’
yn unig am ei benderfyniad, a fyddai’n cael eu cyfathrebu yn ddilynol i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad.
Adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, roeddwn yn pryderu rhywfaint am y cynnig i gynnal y gwrandawiadau llafar hyn yn breifat. Un newid arwyddocaol - a chalonogol iawn - a gyflwynwyd gan Reolau drafft Mai 2004 (ac a atgynhyrchwyd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) oedd y bydd gwrandawiadau llafar mewn perthynas â rhybuddion yn cael eu cynnal yn gyhoeddus bellach. Roeddwn hefyd yn pryderu ynghylch y weithdrefn arfaethedig mewn gwrandawiadau o’r fath, a fyddai’n hollol unochrog, gyda’r meddyg yn unig yn cael caniatâd i grybwyll tystiolaeth. Newidiwyd y trefniant hwn gan Reolau drafft Mai 2004, a fyddai wedi caniatáu’r Swyddog Cyflwyno i grybwyll unrhyw dystiolaeth lafar neu ddogfennol berthnasol ac i wneud cyflwyniadau pellach ar ôl i’r meddyg roi ei dystiolaeth/ei thystiolaeth. Byddai hyn wedi gwaredu rhan fwyaf y pryderon a oedd gennyf am natur unochrog y broses. Pe byddai darpariaeth i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad fynychu’r gwrandawiad, i roi tystiolaeth os yn briodol ac fel arall rhoi gwybodaeth i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno, byddai fy mhryderon ar y pwnc hwnnw wedi’u tawelu’n gyfan gwbl.
Cyflwynodd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (a atgynhyrchwyd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) newidiadau pellach eto. Mae’r Rheolau’n amodi bellach y gall y meddyg, ar ôl i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno amlinellu’r honiad a’r ffeithiau y mae’n seiliedig arnynt, ymateb i’r honiad. Gall y Swyddog Cyflwyno a’r meddyg grybwyll unrhyw dystiolaeth lafar neu ddogfennol berthnasol dim ond
‘lle mae’r Pwyllgor yn ystyried bod tystiolaeth o’r fath yn ddymunol i alluogi iddo gyflawni ei swyddogaethau’
. Yna, gall y Swyddog Cyflwyno wneud cyflwyniadau pellach o’r fath y bydd y panel IC yn eu caniatáu.
Effaith y newidiadau hyn yw ei bod bellach o fewn disgresiwn panel IC yn llwyr i benderfynu galw ar dystiolaeth lafar neu beidio neu dderbyn tystiolaeth ddogfennol. Mae natur neu raddau’r dystiolaeth i’w derbyn neu i alw arni hefyd o fewn disgresiwn y panel. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi bod:
‘... yna ragdybiaeth na fydd tystiolaeth yn cael ei derbyn, a bod hyn fel y gwêl y Pwyllgor sy’n ystyried yr achos
(h.y. y panel IC)
orau. Gan nad oes gan y Pwyllgor unrhyw bŵer i orfodi sancsiwn a fydd yn effeithio ar gofrestriad ymarferwr, yn gyffredinol bydd hawliau’r ymarferwr, a lles y cyhoedd, yn cael eu gwasanaethu’n ddigonol gan wrandawiad crynodeb o’r math hwn.’
Ni fydd gan y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad unrhyw hawl i gael gwybod am y gwrandawiad er ei bod yn bosibl y bydd y GMC yn galw arno/arni i roi tystiolaeth, os yw’r panel IC yn caniatáu hyn.
I’r gwrthwyneb i’r sefyllfa lle cymerir achos oddi ar y panel IC oherwydd bod yr archwilwyr achos wedi anghytuno, gall y panel IC, cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad, oedi er mwyn cynnal archwiliadau pellach, gan gynnwys asesiad o iechyd neu berfformiad meddyg.
Ar ddiwedd y gwrandawiad llafar, gall y panel gyhoeddi rhybudd neu benderfynu na ddylai’r achos barhau ymhellach. Trydydd opsiwn, sy’n codi pan fo gwybodaeth newydd a grybwyllir yn dystiolaeth yn y gwrandawiad yn nodi y byddai’n briodol gwneud hynny, yw atgyfeirio’r honiad ar gyfer penderfyniad gan banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos yn debygol y byddai hynny’n ddigwyddiad prin os na fwriedir y dylid galw ar dystiolaeth fel arfer.
Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi y bydd unrhyw ddadlau yn erbyn ffeithiau mewn gwrandawiad llafar sy’n gysylltiedig â rhybudd yn cael ei benderfynu ar sail y safon sifil o brawf. Ar ôl cyrradd ei benderfyniad, rhaid i’r panel IC gyhoeddi’r penderfyniad a rhoi ei resymau (mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn mynnu
‘rhesymau’
‘rhesymau byr’
) am y penderfyniad hwnnw.
Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n amhosibl gwybod sut y bydd y gweithdrefnau hyn yn gweithio yn ymarferol. Os yw dadleuon am ffeithiau am gael eu datrys, bydd rhaid i’r panel IC gael tystiolaeth lafar a dogfennol. Gobeithir na fydd paneli’n canfod ffaith ar sail cynrychioliadau yn unig. Os yw tystiolaeth am gael ei chlywed, rhaid ei chlywed o’r ddwy ochr. Mae’r rhagdybiaeth na cheir tystiolaeth yn achosi problemau ymarferol. Os na ddisgwylir y bydd tystiolaeth yn cael ei chlywed, ni rybuddir tystion i fynychu’r gwrandawiad. Wrth gwrs, mae’n debygol y bydd y meddyg yno, ond byddai’n eithaf anghywir i’r panel IC ganiatáu i’r meddyg roi tystiolaeth pan nad yw’r GMC wedi trefnu i’w dystion fynychu hyd yn oed. Ar y llaw arall, byddai’n amlwg yn anfoddhaol pe byddai gofyn i dystion fynychu, dim ond i ganfod na fyddai’r panel IC yn caniatáu iddynt roi tystiolaeth. Gall fod y bydd rhaid cael gwrandawiad rhagarweiniol gerbron yr un panel IC i bennu beth yw’r materion ac a fydd tystiolaeth lafar a dogfennol yn cael ei derbyn. Mae’n debyg i mi, hyd yn oed os na chlywir tystiolaeth lafar, y dylai fod hawl gan y sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad fynychu. Heb bresenoldeb y sawl hwnnw, efallai na fydd unrhyw un i roi gwybodaeth i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno mewn perthynas â’r cynrychioliadau a wnaed ar ran y meddyg a bydd y weithdrefn yn unochrog yn anochel. Ni fyddai proses o’r fath, yn fy marn i, yn rhoi digon o amddiffyniad i gleifion a lles y cyhoedd.
Mae’r trefniadau arfaethedig hyn ar gyfer rhoi rhybuddion yn creu gweithdrefn a allai fod yn gymhleth, a allai gymryd amser ac a allai fod yn ddrud. Er dywedir y bydd y gwrandawiad llafar yn fwy o
‘grynodeb’
na’r gwrandawiad a gynhelir gerbron panel FTP, ni fydd hynny’n wir o reidrwydd. Os bydd tystiolaeth yn cael ei chyflwyno, ni fydd fawr o wahaniaeth. Dywedir bod y weithdrefn hon sy’n fwy fel
‘crynodeb’
yn briodol ac nad yw’n annheg oherwydd nad yw’r sancsiwn y gellid ei ddefnyddio yn effeithio ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Mae hynny’n wir, ond mae rhybudd yn fater difrifol, bydd yn cael ei ddatgelu i ymholwyr ac aiff felly i’r maes cyhoeddus. Dywed y GMC y bydd rhybuddion yn ‘bwydo i mewn i’r’ broses ail-ddilysu, er nad yw’n amlwg i mi ar ba gyfnod y bydd hynny’n digwydd neu ba effaith y byddai rhybudd yn ei chael ar feddyg yn cael ei ail-ddilysu neu beidio. Nodaf, fel mater o ddiddordeb, y cynghorodd Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft 2003 ac Arweiniad Archwilwyr Achos drafft Mehefin 2004 y dylai archwilwyr achos ystyried rhybudd fel
‘sancsiwn difrifol’
‘fater difrifol’
. Mae’r Arweiniad diweddarach yn hepgor y cyngor hwnnw. Serch hynny, mae’n ymddangos i mi bod cyhoeddi rhybudd a ddatgelir i unrhyw un sy’n ymholi yn fater difrifol ac mae’r ffaith bod y GMC yn dymuno rhoi hawl i feddygon i wrandawiad llafar yn dangos ei fod yn cydnabod hynny. Mae rhoi rhybudd hefyd yn fater pwysig o safbwynt y cyhoedd. Mae’r GMC wedi cydnabod hynny, trwy benderfynu y dylid cynnal gwrandawiadau llafar mewn cysylltiad â rhybuddion yn gyhoeddus.
Soniais ym mharagraffau 25.56-25.58 uchod fod prawf cyfnod archwilio‘r GMC, yn fy marn i, wedi’i osod ar y lefel anghywir. Mae camgymeriadau egwyddor fel hyn yn achosi problemau ymarferol fel arfer. Yn fy marn i, mae anawsterau presennol y GMC gyda chyhoeddi rhybuddion yn y cyfnod archwilio yn dangos y broblem honno. Pe byddai’r GMC yn mabwysiadu’r prawf cyfnod archwilio a gynigiais ym mharagraff 25.63, byddai pob achos a allai warantu rhybudd fynd yn awtomatig i banel FTP. Byddai’r archwilwyr achos a’r IC yn canolbwyntio ar feini prawf gwrthrychol ac ni fyddent yn ceisio dyfalu pa sancsiwn a allai gael ei orfodi. Pe na fyddai’r achos yn pasio prawf y cyfnod archwilio, byddai’r achos yn cael ei gau, gyda llythyr o gyngor neu hebddo. Ni fyddai unrhyw rybuddion yn y cyfnod archwilio ac ni fyddai angen dyfeisio gweithdrefn
‘crynodeb’
arbennig gyda disgresiwn i gyflwyno tystiolaeth a’r holl broblemau ymarferol y bydd hynny’n eu creu.
Mae’n ymddangos i mi fod problemau ymarferol y gwrandawiadau llafar arfaethedig yn rhai sylweddol iawn. Os yw’r panel IC am benderfynu’r cwestiwn diamod a fydd tystiolaeth yn cael ei derbyn ym mhob achos unigol, bydd rhaid cael gwrandawiad rhagarweiniol ym mhob achos. Bydd rhaid i hwn ddigwydd gerbron yr un panel IC a fydd yn eistedd ar y gwrandawiad gwirioneddol; ni all rheolwr achos gymryd penderfyniad diamod ar dderbynioldeb tystiolaeth. Bydd y gost yn sylweddol. Yr unig opsiwn arall yw cael gwrandawiad llawn ym mhob achos. Rwy’n deall anfanteision hynny yn iawn, yn enwedig gan fod posibilrwydd (mewn egwyddor o leiaf) y gall achos, ar ddiwedd gwrandawiad o’r fath, gael ei atgyfrieio gan y panel IC i banel FTP, a allai gynnwys ail-glywed yr un dystiolaeth.
Pe byddai’r GMC yn penderfynu cynnal ei sefyllfa bresennol, mae nifer o broblemau’n codi, ar wahân i’r rhai y soniais amdanynt eisoes. Rwy’n pryderu y bydd cymhlethdod y weithdrefn yn arwain at lawer o achosion ffiniol ar ddymchwel heb unrhyw gamau’n cael eu cymryd. Gall fod archwilwyr achos yn cael eu temtio i beidio ag anfon achosion am wrandawiad llafar os oes yna ddadlau sylweddol am y ffeithiau, yn enwedig os yw’n hysbys bod gan yr IC lawer o waith.
Pe byddai’r darpariaethau presennol yn cael eu rhoi ar waith, mae’n hanfodol archwilio eu gweithrediad yn gywir. Bydd angen casglu ystadegau i ddangos faint o achosion sy’n cael eu cau ar ôl cyhoeddi’r gwahoddiad am gynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig ynghylch rhoi rhybudd, h.y. heb unrhyw gamau’n cael eu cymryd. Dylai’r GMC ddadansoddi pa fathau o achosion sy’n cael eu trin trwy rybudd ac a yw hyn yn briodol. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, cyhoeddwyd llythyrau o gyngor a rhybuddion yn aml mewn achosion a ddylai fod wedi symud ymlaen i wrandawiad.
Gobeithiaf y bydd y GMC yn ystyried y sylwadau hyn am roi rhybuddion yn y cyfnod archwilio, ynghyd â’m pryderon am brawf y cyfnod archwilio. Mae cysylltiad agos rhwng y ddau a gellid datrys y ddwy broblem yn y modd a awgrymaf.
Achosion Lle Mae neu Gall Fod Nam ar Addasrwydd Meddyg i Ymarfer yn Sgil Iechyd Gwael
Ar hyn o bryd, disgwylir y bydd trefniadau sy’n debyg i’r hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol mewn llawer ffordd yn parhau dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad y byddai’r ffordd o drin rhai achosion iechyd yn wahanol iawn. Dywedodd y gellid delio ag achosion lle bo’r materion ynghylch nam ar iechyd yn unig ar wahân dan weithdrefn debyg i’r hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai modd gwneud hyn gydag achosion iechyd gyda ‘ffactorau cymhlethu’. Er enghraifft, pe byddai gan feddyg gollfarnau am droseddau cyffuriau, yna, er gwaethaf y ffaith bod yr achos yn cynnwys materion iechyd, byddai’n rhaid iddo fynd at banel FTP. Byddai’n agored wedyn i’r panel FTP gyfarwyddo atgyfeirio’r meddyg yn ôl i’r cyfnod archwilio i gael ei drin trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Pan ofynnwyd iddo sut y disgwyliai y byddai’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn delio ag achos fel achos Shipman ym 1976, dywedodd Mr Scott y byddai’r achos yn mynd at banel FTP. Gallai’r meddyg gael ei wahodd wedyn i roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Byddaf yn gwneud sylwadau ar y weithdrefn arfaethedig hon mewn ychydig.
Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 mai gyda’r IC neu’r archwiliwr achos fyddai’r pŵer i gyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiad o iechyd y meddyg. Byddant yn defnyddio’r pŵer mewn achos lle codai cwestiwn ynghylch a allai fod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer yn sgil iechyd gwael.
Amododd Reolau drafft 2003, pe byddai’r asesiad(au) yn dangos nad yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer (neu efallai na fydd yn y dyfodol), na’n addas i ymarfer oni bai ar sail gyfyngedig neu dan oruchwyliaeth, neu’r ddau, y gallai’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos gyfarwyddo’r Cofrestrydd i wahodd y meddyg i ymroi’n wirfoddol i gydymffurfio ag amodau penodol, a allai gynnwys cyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn rhoi’r ymrwymiadau angenrheidiol, byddai’r panel IC neu archwiliwr achos (pe byddai’n fodlon bod yr ymrwymiadau’n cael eu dilyn) yn gohirio gweithredu pellach ar yr achos. Byddai Rheolau drafft 2003 wedi rhoi’r pŵer i’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos benodi un neu fwy ymarferwr meddygol i oruchwylio’r meddyg a darparu adroddiadau yn ôl yr angen. Byddai’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos hefyd wedi cael y pŵer dan Reolau drafft 2003 i gyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd pellach er mwyn penderfynu a oedd angen i’r meddyg barhau dan oruchwyliaeth y panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos. Byddai’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos hefyd wedi cael y pŵer i wahodd y meddyg i gytuno i’r amrywiad o amodau y byddai ef/hi wedi ymrwymo i gydymffurfio â hwy a, phan yn briodol, rhyddhau’r meddyg o’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn gwrthod cydweithredu, neu’n methu cydymffurfio â’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau neu pe byddai ei iechyd/ei hiechyd yn gwaethygu, byddai Rheolau drafft 2003 wedi rhoi’r pŵer i’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio i banel FTP.
Byddai’r holl drefniadau hyn yn debyg iawn i’r trefniadau dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Rhoddodd Reolau drafft 2003 i’r IC a’r archwilwyr achos y pwerau a ddefnyddiwyd yn flaenorol gan sgrinwyr iechyd. Yn ymarferol, fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos yn debygol y byddai’r IC wedi dirprwyo un neu fwy o archwilwyr achos meddygol cymwys i lenwi rôl y sgrinwyr iechyd dan yr hen weithdrefnau.
Tynnodd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 y pŵer i gyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd oddi wrth yr IC a’r archwilwyr achos a’i roi yn hytrach i’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, staff y GMC). Yr unig eithriad yw y gall panel IC orchymyn asesiad iechyd cyn gwneud penderfyniad mewn gwrandawiad llafar yn gysylltiedig â chyhoeddi rhybudd. Nid oes unrhyw esboniad am y newid pwysig iawn hwn (a gadwyd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) yn amlwg yn y dogfennau a welwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, ac mae’n debyg mai ei amcan oedd lleihau llwyth gwaith yr archwilwyr achos ac felly gostwng nifer yr archwilwyr achos y byddai eu hangen i ddelio â’r trefniadau newydd ar gyfer dwbl-drafod achosion gan archwiliwr achos meddygol a lleyg. Amcan posibl arall oedd dod â phenderfyniadau i gyfarwyddo asesiadau iechyd dan reolaeth staff fel y gellid rhoi cyfyngiadau ariannol arnynt a thargedau gwasanaeth. Gyda phob parch i’r staff - a derbyniaf yn llwyr eu bod yn alluog ac yn gweithio’n galed a bod rhai ohonynt yn brofiadol iawn - ni allaf feddwl y gallai unrhyw un fod wedi dwyn casgliad cadarnhaol y byddai ansawdd penderfyniadau staff yn well nag ansawdd rhai archwilwyr achos. Yn sicr, nid wyf yn ymwybodol o unrhyw dystiolaeth y gellid seilio barn o’r fath arni. Yn fyr, ni allaf feddwl am unrhyw reswm o egwyddor am wneud y newid hwn.
Mae’n ymddangos mai trefn y digwyddiadau a ystyriwyd dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yw y bydd y staff yn cyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd ar ôl penderfyniad i atgyfeirio achos i archwiliwr achos. Gall y staff ymgynghori ag archwiliwr achos cyn gwneud hynny neu beidio. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad y dylent. Yn ôl pob tebyg, pe byddai archwiliwr achos yn credu y dylai fod asesiad iechyd, bydd ef/hi yn gallu gofyn i un gael ei gyfarwyddo ond ni fydd ef/hi yn gallu mynnu. Yn fy marn i, dylid newid y rôl hon fel y gall archwilwyr achos (a phanel IC) gyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiad iechyd. Yn wir, mae’n debyg i mi, oni bai mewn achos lle mae mater iechyd yn codi’n amlwg a lle mae’n glir o ba gangen o feddygaeth y dylai’r ymarferwr a fydd yn cynnal asesiad ddod, dylai’r penderfyniad i orchymyn asesiad iechyd a phwy a ddylai ei gynnal gael ei wneud bob amser gan archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys yn hytrach nag aelod o staff nad yw’n feddygol cymwys.
Pe byddai’r meddyg yn methu cael asesiad o’i iechyd/ei hiechyd neu gydymffurfio ag ef, gallai’r Cofrestrydd (neu’r staff yn defnyddio’i bwerau cyfreithiol) atgyfeirio’r honiad ar gyfer penderfyniad gan banel FTP. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad i ymgynghori ag archwiliwr achos cyn gwneud hyn. Gall y panel FTP wedyn bennu a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac, os felly, gall gymryd camau priodol.
Awgrymodd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 (er nad oeddent yn amodi’n benodol) y byddai’r staff, ar ôl cael adroddiad asesiad iechyd, yn ôl yr arfer, yn atgyfeirio’r adroddiad i’r archwilwyr achos. Dan Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (a Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 bellach), fodd bynnag, rhoir disgresiwn i’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, y staff) i atgyfeirio adroddiad asesiad neu beidio i archwiliwr achos meddygol a lleyg a dim ond os yw’n ystyried ei bod yn
gwneud hynny y dylai wneud hynny.
Rwy’n cymryd bod y ffaith y bydd gan y staff ddisgresiwn i atgyfeirio adroddiad asesiad neu beidio i’r archwilwyr achos yn golygu y gallant gau’r achos pe byddai’n ymddangos iddynt nad yw’r adroddiad asesiad yn datgelu unrhyw dystiolaeth bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Ni wnaeth y staff y math hwn o benderfyniad erioed o’r blaen. Rwy’n pryderu am hyn. Yn fy marn i, os yw achos yn gwarantu asesiad iechyd, mae hefyd yn gwarantu penderfyniad gan archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys. Gall fod Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 a Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 wedi creu sefyllfa na fwriadwyd. Mae’r Rheolau hefyd yn awgrymu y gall y Cofrestrydd (neu aelod o staff) gyfarwyddo asesiad dim ond ar ôl iddo/iddi benderfynu atgyfeirio’r achos i’r archwilwyr achos. Pan fo’r adroddiad asesiad ar gael, os na chaiff ei ddangos i’r archwilwyr achos, mae’n anodd gweld sut y gall yr ail ddod â’r achos i ben. Yn fy marn i, dylid newid y rheol hon. Os yw achos am gael ei gau ar sail asesiad iechyd a gafwyd, dylai archwilwyr achos wneud y penderfyniad, a bydd un ohonynt yn feddygol cymwys, neu banel IC.
Pe byddai’r staff yn atgyfeirio’r adroddiad asesiad i’r archwilwyr achos a byddai’r archwilwyr achos o’r farn nad yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer, neu nad yw’n addas i ymarfer oni bai ar sail gyfyngedig neu dan oruchwyliaeth neu’r ddau, neu bod gan y meddyg rhyw gyflwr (er ei fod mewn seibiant adeg yr asesiad) y gellid disgwyl iddo ei wneud ef/hi yn anaddas i ymarfer yn y dyfodol, gall yr archwilwyr achos argymell y dylid gwahodd y meddyg i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn darparu ar gyfer archwilwyr achos - nid y staff - i wneud y penderfyniad y dylid cynnig ymrwymiadau. Pe byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn argymell bod ymrwymiadau’n briodol, bydd y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, y staff) yn ysgrifennu at y meddyg, gan ei wahodd/ei gwahodd i gydymffurfio â’r ymrwymiadau a benodir gan yr archwilwyr achos. Pe byddai’r meddyg yn cadarnhau ei fod/ei bod yn barod i gydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau, rhaid i’r archwilwyr achos
‘ddod i ben ag ystyried’
yr honiad.
Pe byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn cytuno, wrth ystyried yr adroddiad asesiad, fod ymrwymiadau’n amhriodol neu’n annigonol ar gyfer amddiffyn y cyhoedd, mae ganddynt y pŵer dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004 i atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP. Amododd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (a chadwyd y ddarpariaeth yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) na ddylid cynnig y cyfle i feddyg roi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol lle bo posibilrwydd realistig y byddai ei enw/ei henw’n cael ei ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr pe byddai’r honiad yn cael ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Cynllunnir y ddarpariaeth hon i weithredu sylwadau Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor yn achos
, y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhenodau 21 a 23. Os na all yr archwilwyr achos gytuno ymysg ei gilydd a ddylid delio â’r achos trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol, bydd yn cael ei atgyfeirio’n awtomatig i banel IC.
Amododd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 (fel y mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004) mai’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, staff y GMC), ac nid yr archwilwyr achos, a ddylai fod yn gyfrifol, mewn achos lle mae angen goruchwyliaeth feddygol, am ddewis yr ymarferwyr meddygol i fod yn oruchwylwyr ac am ofyn am adroddiadau cynnydd yn ôl yr angen. Nid oes unrhyw arwydd y bydd rhaid i’r adroddiadau cynnydd hynny gael eu hatgyfeirio i archwilwyr achos. Bydd y staff hefyd yn cymryd y cyfrifoldeb am gyfarwyddo y dylid cynnal asesiadau pellach yn ôl yr angen. Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 (fel Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004) yn darparu ar gyfer unrhyw gyfraniad gan yr archwilwyr achos i’r penderfyniad hwnnw. Eto, byddai’n ymddangos mai bwriad y newidiadau hyn yn y trefniadau yw gostwng llwyth gwaith yr archwilwyr achos.
Yn ogystal, pe byddai meddyg yn methu rhoi’r ymrwymiadau a geisir, neu pe byddai ei iechyd/ei hiechyd yn gwaethygu, neu pe gafwyd gwybodaeth sydd fel arall yn achosi pryder pellach ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, staff y GMC) fydd â disgresiwn i atgyfeirio’r honiad ar gyfer penderfyniad gan banel FTP. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad i ymgynghori â’r archwilwyr achos cyn gwneud hynny. Fodd bynnag, archwilwyr achos fydd yn penderfynu a ddylid amrywio ymrwymiadau neu ddod ag ymrwymiadau i ben.
Rwy’n pryderu’n fawr am y trefniadau hyn. Mae’n hollol briodol y dylai’r staff ymgymryd â llunio’r trefniadau ymarferol ar gyfer goruchwyliaeth feddygol a phroffesiynol meddyg sy’n destun ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol, ond ni all fod yn gywir y dylai’r cyfrifoldeb cyffredinol am gynnydd y meddyg barhau gydag aelod o staff. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd, roedd sgriniwr iechyd yn gyfrifol am bob penderfyniad a byddai’n darparu arbenigedd proffesiynol a pharhad o ran sylw. Ym Mhennod 22, adroddais dystiolaeth Dr Sheila Mann, a oedd yn sgriniwr iechyd o 1996 i 2004. Disgrifiais y gwelliannau i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd a roddwyd ar waith yn ystod yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf. Credais (ac rwy’n credu y credodd Dr Mann) y byddai’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn gweithredu i raddau helaeth fel y buont yn y gorffennol. Dywedodd Dr Mann mai’r bwriad oedd y dylai un person o’r grŵp cyntaf o archwilwyr achos a benodwyd fod yn seiciatrydd, er mwyn cynnal parhad yn y gweithdrefnau iechyd. Fodd bynnag, fel ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, ni fu’n bosibl recriwtio ymgeisydd addas. O ganlyniad, roedd Dr Mann yn pryderu na fyddai digon o gyfnod o orgyffwrdd i alluogi iddi drosglwyddo budd ei phrofiad i’r sawl newydd a benodwyd. Ym mis Mawrth 2004, penodwyd dau o’r archwilwyr achos a benodwyd yn ddiweddar (un ohonynt yn athro seiciatreg) yn sgrinwyr iechyd yn disgwyl cyflwyniad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Gobeithir y cafwyd cyfle iddynt ddysgu o brofiad Dr Mann. Fodd bynnag, fel a ddywedais, bydd eu rôl hwythau yn y dyfodol yn wahanol iawn i rôl sgriniwr iechyd blaenorol. Mae’n hynod siomedig fod y GMC wedi rhoi’r gorau i’w gynlluniau gwreiddiol a hynny, mor bell ag y gwelaf, nid am resymau egwyddor ond am resymau cyfleuster. Gobeithiaf y bydd y GMC yn ailfeddwl. O’r hyn a glywais o dystiolaeth Dr Mann, rwy’n eithaf bodlon bod angen graddau helaeth o arbenigedd proffesiynol wrth ddehongli adroddiadau asesiad. Hefyd, mae rhai o’r penderfyniadau i’w cymryd o natur anodd a thringar. Maent yn effeithio ar ddiogelwch cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Gyda phob parch i’r aelodau staff, gan nad wyf yn ceisio amau eu gallu mewn unrhyw ffordd, rhaid i ymarferwyr meddygol gyda’r cymwysterau priodol wneud y penderfyniadau hyn.
Achosion gydag Elfen Berfformiad
Mae’r gweithdrefnau newydd ar gyfer delio ag achosion lle mae honiad yn awgrymu bod perfformiad proffesiynol meddyg yn ddiffygiol yn debyg iawn yn y bôn i’r rheiny ar gyfer delio ag achosion iechyd. Ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad na allai ddychmygu y byddai’r rheiny a enwyd y ‘gweithdrefnau perfformiad’ bryd hynny yn gweithredu mewn modd tebyg o gwbl yn y dyfodol ag y buont yn y gorffennol. Dywedodd, ar ôl herio addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, y byddai archwilwyr achos yn ystyried a fyddai’n angenrheidiol neu’n briodol gorchymyn adolygiad o berfformiad y meddyg. Pe byddai asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei gynnal a phe byddai’r adroddiad asesiad yn dangos diffygion ym mherfformiad a phe byddai’r meddyg yn derbyn datganiad o ofynion, byddai’r achos yn mynd i ‘waredu trwy gydsyniad’ ac ni fyddai’n mynd ymlaen i banel FTP oni bai bod y meddyg yn anghydweithredol. Byddai’r trefniadau ar gyfer ‘gwaredu trwy gydsyniad’ yn debyg iawn i’r hen weithdrefnau perfformiad gwirfoddol. Mae’n ymddangos mai’r hyn a oedd gan Mr Scott mewn golwg pan ddywedodd y byddai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn wahanol yn y dyfodol oedd y byddai’r athroniaeth waelodol yn newid ac nid y trefniadau ymarferol. Yn ystod eu tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, mynegodd Mr Scott a Syr Graeme Catto y bwriad y dylai’r GMC symud i ffwrdd o ganolbwyntio ar adferiad meddygon a atgyfeirir iddo a dylai yn hytrach gyfeirio’i sylw at ‘achosion lle byddai cyfyngiad ar gofrestriad yn briodol’.
Yn yr un modd ag achosion iechyd, gan y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, staff y GMC), dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, y bydd y pŵer i benderfynu cyfarwyddo asesiad o berfformiad meddyg ac nid, fel y buasai dan Reolau drafft 2003, gan yr archwilwyr achos neu’r IC. Mae hwn yn newid hynod sylweddol oherwydd, adeg ffurfio’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, roedd amheuaeth ynghylch a fyddai’r IC yn dirprwyo’r pŵer i wneud y penderfyniad hwnnw hyd yn oed i archwiliwr achos meddygol cymwys. Disgwyliwyd y byddai’r IC yn cadw ar gyfer ei hun y pŵer i benderfynu a ddylid cynnal asesiad perfformiad, o leiaf mewn rhai achosion. Bwriadwyd, fodd bynnag, y byddai’r IC, ymhen ychydig, yn dirprwyo penderfyniadau o’r fath i un neu fwy o archwilwyr achos. Dyna oedd y sefyllfa yr ymddangosir bod Mr Scott wedi’i rhagweld, pan roddodd dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Siaradodd fel pe byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn cymryd y penderfyniadau hyn. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd eu swydd-ddisgrifiad yn sôn am y swyddogaeth hon.
Cyn Rheolau drafft Mai 2004, y bwriad oedd y byddai’r IC yn penodi archwilwyr achos meddygol cymwys i gymryd y rôl y cydlynwyr achos perfformiad yn yr hen weithdrefnau perfformiad. Ar ôl cynnal asesiad perfformiad ac ar ôl iddo ddwyn y casgliad nad oedd meddyg yn addas i ymarfer neu nad oedd meddyg yn addas i ymarfer oni bai ar sail gyfyngedig neu dan oruchwyliaeth neu’r ddau, byddai archwiliwr achos wedi cymryd dros reolaeth yr achos. Dan gynigion 2003, byddai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad gwirfoddol wedi parhau‘r un fath i raddau helaeth ag yr oeddent dan yr hen weithdrefnau, oni bai am symleiddio rhywfaint ar y gweithdrefnau trwy ddileu atgyfeiriadau i’r Pwyllgor Atgyfeirio Asesiad a gwrandawiadau ganddo.
Mae’r ymagwedd hon wedi newid bellach a, dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, bydd y pŵer i gyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad gyda’r Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, staff y GMC). Yn wir, ni fydd gan archwilwyr achos na’r IC unrhyw bŵer i orchymyn asesiad o’r fath heblaw’n unig y gall banel IC orchymyn asesiad perfformiad cyn gwneud penderfyniad mewn gwrandawiad llafar yn gysylltiedig â chyhoeddi rhybudd. Mae pwerau a swyddogaeth y staff a’r archwilwyr achos bron yr un fath lle cynhelir asesiad perfformiad â phan gynhelir asesiad iechyd. Yr unig wahaniaeth yw, lle mae meddyg yn methu cydymffurfio â gofynion rhesymol y tîm asesu perfformiad, bydd gan y staff y pŵer (heb ymgynghori ag archwilwyr achos) i atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP ar gyfer ystyried atal cofrestriad y meddyg neu orfodi amodau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad.
Un canlyniad posibl achos lle cynhelir asesiad perfformiad fydd cyhoeddi rhybudd. Mae’r archwilwyr achos yn debygol o ystyried rhybudd mewn achos lle mae adroddiad asesiad yn codi achos pryder sylweddol am ymarfer meddyg ond nid pryderon sy’n ddigon i warantu atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Rwy’n pryderu am y cynnig hwn. Yn rhesymegol, os oes achos pryder sylweddol, bydd yr achos wedi pasio prawf y cyfnod archwilio yr wyf wedi’i gynnig a bydd yn gwarantu atgyfeiriad i banel FTP. Gallai’r archwilwyr achos neu’r IC, fel dewis arall i atgyfeiriad i banel FTP, wahodd y meddyg i gytuno i ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Byddai llwybr o’r fath yn well na chyhoeddi rhybudd. Pe byddai rhybudd yn cael ei gyhoeddi, ni fydd unrhyw un i olrhain yr achos pryder ac i weld a yw’r meddyg wedi gwneud unrhyw beth i wella ei ddiffygion/ei diffygion. Gellid dweud y bydd y rhybudd yn cael ei gyfathrebu i’r cyflogwr neu’r PCO a fydd wedyn yn gyfrifol am oruchwylio. Gall hynny fod yn wir a gall gael ei wneud yn dda neu beidio. Fodd bynnag, bydd y GMC wedi rhoi’r gorau i gyfrifoldeb, er gwaethaf presenoldeb ‘achos pryder sylweddol’.
Dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, mewn achosion lle mae asesiad perfformiad wedi’i gynnal a lle rhoir ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol, bydd staff y GMC yn cymryd drosodd llawer o’r swyddogaethau a ymarferwyd, dan yr hen weithdrefnau, gan gydlynwyr achos perfformiad meddygol cymwys. Mae hyn yn wyriad sylweddol iawn oddi wrth yr hen drefniadau ac oddi wrth y rheiny a gynigiwyd yn 2003. Mae’n debygol o gael effaith sylweddol ar weithrediad y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn y dyfodol.
Rwyf wedi mynegi fy mhryder eisoes am y newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau iechyd a fydd, yn fy marn i, yn niweidiol i ansawdd yr oruchwyliaeth a ddarperir gan y GMC. Mae’r un pryderon yn codi, am yr un rhesymau bron, o ran y newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Bydd yr arbenigedd proffesiynol a ddefnyddiwyd a’r parhad o ran rheoli achosion gan gydlynwyr achos meddygol cymwys, a oedd yn nodweddion da dan yr hen weithdrefnau, yn cael eu colli. Rwy’n poeni’n benodol am y posibilrwydd y gall staff gau achos heb ei atgyfeirio i archwilwyr achos. Ond nid honno yw’r unig broblem. Gwelaf o Ganllaw Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 y bwriedir y dylai fod tîm o staff un pwrpas i ddarparu asesiadau perfformiad. Bydded felly. Mae trefnu asesiad yn swyddogaeth briodol i’r staff. Mae penderfynu a ddylid cael asesiad yn fater arall. Mae asesiadau’n ddrud a gellid rhoi aelod o staff dan bwysau i beidio â gorchymyn asesiad am resymau ariannol. Yn wir, mae yna resymau gwirioneddol i ofni y gallai hynny ddigwydd. Mae Canllaw Archwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 yn cyfeirio at
‘dargedau perfformiad yn erbyn gwasanaeth’
o ran asesiadau iechyd a pherfformiad.
Datgelu Adroddiad Asesiad i Gyflogwr neu Sefydliad Gofal Sylfaenol Meddyg
Un datblygiad calonogol iawn a gyflwynwyd yn Rheolau drafft Mai 2004 oedd gofyniad y dylai’r Cofrestrydd, ar ôl cael yr adroddiad o asesiad o berfformiad meddyg, anfon copi nid yn unig at y meddyg ei hun ond hefyd at unrhyw berson a gyflogai’r meddyg i ddarparu gwasanaethau meddygol neu unrhyw berson y byddai gan y meddyg drefniant ag ef i wneud hynny. Mynegwyd pryder yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad (a chan y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad, a gadeirir gan y Fonesig Deirdre Hine, a adroddodd i’r GMC ym mis Ebrill 2004) na roir y wybodaeth hon i’r bobl a’r cyrff hynny gyda chyfrifoldeb lleol am feddygon. Roedd adroddiad y Grŵp Adolygu wedi nodi
‘na ellir ystyried’
adroddiad asesiad perfformiad
‘fel dogfen breifat rhwng y GMC a’r meddyg’
. Byddai cael yr adroddiad asesiad wedi galluogi cyflogwyr a PCOs i ddeall natur a graddau problemau’r meddyg yn well ac i wneud penderfyniad gwybodus am y camau y dylent eu cymryd i ddelio â’r problemau hynny.
Fodd bynnag, hepgorwyd y ddarpariaeth hon o Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 ac nid yw’n ymddangos yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Yn ei lle mae darpariaeth lawer mwy cyfyngedig, lle bydd manylion unrhyw ymrwymiad perthnasol (oni bai am unrhyw ymrwymiad sy’n gysylltiedig yn unig ag iechyd y meddyg) yn cael eu datgelu i gyflogwyr a PCOs ac i unrhyw ymholwr. Gwnaed hyn dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Nid oes unrhyw sôn bellach am ddatgelu adroddiadau asesiad i gyflogwyr ac eraill. Mae’n ymddangos bod y cynnig hwn wedi’i ollwng.
Mae hyn yn hynod siomedig. Mae’n anodd gweld sut y gall cyrff GIG lleol ryddhau eu goblygiadau llywodraethu clinigol yn gywir heb fynediad i’r math hwn o wybodaeth am y meddygon y maent yn gyfrifol amdanynt. Nid wyf wedi dod o hyd i unrhyw gyfeiriad at y newid cyfeiriad hwn yn y papurau briffio a ddosbarthwyd i aelodau’r Cyngor cyn y cyfarfod ym mis Gorffennaf 2004 lle cymeradwywyd Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004. Ni wn am unrhyw esboniad am y newid hwn. Gallaf weld bod y wybodaeth am ymrwymiadau o ryw werth ond ni all gymharu â defnyddioldeb yr adroddiad asesiad ei hun.
Dileu Atgyfeiriadau i Banel Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Fel a esboniais ym Mhennod 20, yn 2002, cafodd 20% o bob atgyfeiriad gan y PPC i’r PCC eu dileu’n ddilynol gan y PPC. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, byddai angen cytundeb y PPC ar benderfyniad i ddileu. Rhaid oedd ymgynghori â’r achwynydd am y cynnig i ddileu; fodd bynnag, gwnaed hyn dim ond pe byddai’r achwynydd yn unigolyn preifat ac nid pe byddai’r achos wedi’i atgyfeirio i’r GMC gan gorff cyhoeddus.
Mae’n amlwg yn bwysig na ddylid dileu achosion sydd wedi’u hatgyfeirio’n gywir ar gyfer gwrandawiad disgyblu heb reswm da.
Dan Reolau drafft 2003, lle ystyriai’r Swyddog Cyflwyno (fel arfer, cyfreithiwr neu gwnsler a gyfarwyddwyd gan y GMC i gyflwyno’r achos gerbron y panel FTP), yng ngoleuni unrhyw dystiolaeth a oedd ar gael iddo/iddi, nad oedd nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer meddyg yr atgyfeiriwyd ei achos i banel FTP neu IOP neu, am ryw reswm arall, na ddylid cynnal yr achosion gerbron y panel, gallai ef/hi fod wedi gofyn i’r IC neu’r archwiliwr achos ailystyried yr achos gyda’r bwriad o ddileu’r atgyfeiriad i banel FTP. Byddai’n agored i’r IC, pe byddai’n dymuno, ddirprwyo i archwiliwr achos y dasg o benderfynu a ddylid dileu atgyfeiriad achos. Ni fyddai’n rhaid rhoi unrhyw rybudd o’r cais i ddileu atgyfeiriad, i’r meddyg nac i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad. Ni roddwyd unrhyw arweiniad chwaith ynghylch sut y dylid ymgymryd â’r dasg.
Roedd Rheolau drafft Mai a Gorffennaf 2004 yn cynnwys newidiadau sylweddol i’r trefniadau arfaethedig ar gyfer dileu atgyfeiriad i banel FTP neu IOP a chadwyd y rhain (gydag ychydig ddiwygio pellach) yn rheol 28 Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Nid y Swyddog Cyflwyno fydd yn cychwyn penderfyniad i ddileu atgyfeiriad bellach, ond y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, aelod o staff y GMC). Gall yr aelod hwnnw o staff atgyfeirio’r achos am benderfyniad i unrhyw aelod o’r IC (h.y. yn ôl pob tebyg, dan y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer cyfansoddiad yr IC, unrhyw berson y mae ei enw’n ymddangos ar y rhestr o bobl sy’n gymwys i eistedd ar banel IC, gan gynnwys rhai aelodau o’r GMC) neu i’r Llywydd. Gall y bobl hynny weithredu ar eu pennau eu hunain a heb ymgynghori ag eraill. Bydd y disgresiwn a roir iddynt yn eang iawn. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn caniatáu gwneud penderfyniad i ddileu gwrandawiad,
pe byddai tystiolaeth yn dod i’r amlwg (byddai Rheolau drafft Mai 2004 wedi mynnu bod y dystiolaeth yn
‘newydd’
ond gwaredodd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 a Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 y gofyniad hwnnw) sy’n awgrymu nad oes nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer neu
‘os yw’n ymddangos am ryw reswm arall, na ddylid cynnal y gwrandawiad gerbron y Panel’
. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad o hyd i roi gwybod i’r sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad fod dilead yn cael ei ystyried, a llai eto i ymgynghori ag ef/hi ynghylch a ddylid gwneud hyn. Ar ôl gwneud y penderfyniad, mae rheol 38 yn mynnu bod y Cofrestrydd yn rhoi rhybudd o’r penderfyniad, ynghyd â’r rhesymau amdano, i’r meddyg a’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad.
Rwy’n poeni’n fawr am y rheol newydd hon am sawl rheswm. Yn gyntaf, mae’r seiliau y mae’r disgresiwn hwn i ddileu achos yn bodoli arnynt yn eang iawn. Gallant gynnwys bron unrhyw ddigwyddiad. Am y rheswm hwnnw, mae pŵer dileu yn agored i gamdriniaeth. Gellid ei ddefnyddio lle bo rhywun (naill ai aelod o’r staff gweinyddol neu aelod o’r GMC neu archwiliwr achos arall) o’r farn bod penderfyniad yr archwilwyr achos i atgyfeirio achos penodol i banel FTP yn anghywir. Cyhyd â bod aelod o staff yn fodlon cychwyn y cais (a gall fod yn anodd iddo/iddi wrthod os gofynnir iddo/iddi), bydd unrhyw banelydd IC yn gallu dileu atgyfeiriad heb unrhyw ffurfioldeb o gwbl, heb ymgynghori ag unrhyw aelod arall a heb roi gwybod i’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad hyd yn oed. Rwy’n poeni y gall staff y GMC, gan boeni am ôl-groniad o wrandawiadau panel FTP neu am ryw anhawster wrth drefnu dyddiad gwrandawiad neu bresenoldeb tystion, wahodd panelydd IC i ddileu gwrandawiad. Mae’n peri gofid mwy i feddwl y gall ddod yn hysbys pa banelwyr oedd yn fodlon cydymffurfio â cheisiadau o’r fath fel y gellid eu ‘dewis yn ofalus’.
Mewn llythyr diweddar at yr Ymchwiliad, dywedodd y GMC y byddai’r pŵer dileu’n cael ei ddefnyddio
‘mewn cyfran fechan o achosion’
lle bo cyfreithwyr y GMC wedi cynghori nad oedd unrhyw werth i’r achos ac na ddylai’r gwrandawiad barhau. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r Rheolau, fel y maent wedi’u drafftio ar hyn o bryd, yn amodi y dylai’r penderfyniad i ddileu gwrandawiad ddod oddi wrth gyfreithiwr, fel y gwnaeth Reolau drafft 2003. Mae’n debyg, felly, fod rhaid rhagweld bellach y gallai aelod o staff nad yw’n aelod o staff cyfreithiol ddechrau’r dilead. Nid wyf yn siwr beth a olygwyd gan y sicrhad y byddai’r pŵer dileu yn cael ei ddefnyddio dim ond mewn cyfran fechan o achosion. Fe’i ddefnyddiwyd mewn cynifer ag 20% yn 2002. Gallaf weld y dylai gwell archwilio yn y cyfnodau cynnar arwain at lai o achosion lle mae problemau tystiolaethol yn codi ar ôl atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, amser a ddengys faint o ddileadau fydd yn digwydd dan y gweithdrefnau newydd.
Yn fy marn i, dylid newid y rheol hon. Ni ddylid dileu gwrandawiad achos a atgyfeiriwyd yn gywir ar chwarae bach; ac ni ddylid gwneud hyn ychwaith yn y tywyllwch. Dylai panel o’r IC wneud penderfyniadau o’r fath ar ôl ystyriaeth ofalus a dylid cofnodi’r rhesymau am y penderfyniad yn ffurfiol. Dylai’r rhesymau a roir fod yn benodol i’r achos ac ni ddylent fod yn gyffredinol neu’n fformiwläig. Dylid rhoi gwybod i’r meddyg a’r sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad gryn dipyn cyn y cyfarfod lle bydd y mater yn cael ei ystyried a dylid dweud wrthynt pam y mae dilead yn cael ei ystyried. Dylent gael y cyfle i wneud cynrychioliadau.
P’un a fydd y GMC yn mabwysiadu’r newidiadau a awgrymaf neu’n penderfynu parhau â’r trefniadau y mae wedi’u gwneud ar hyn o bryd, rhaid monitro ac archwilio’n ofalus iawn niferoedd y dileadau yr ymgeisir amdanynt ac a ganiateir a’r rhesymau am y penderfyniadau. Dylid rhoi’r niferoedd a’r rhesymau (yn ddienw fel sy’n briodol) hyn yn y maes cyhoeddus yn flynyddol. Yn y gorffennol, nid oedd niferoedd yr achosion a ddilëwyd ar ôl atgyfeirio fel arfer yn cael eu cynnwys yn ystadegau FTP blynyddol y GMC. Nid oedd hynny’n dderbyniol oherwydd darparai ddarlun anghyflawn o’r hyn a ddigwyddai’n wirioneddol.
Gwaredu Pob Categori o Achos Trwy Gydsyniad
Yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Mai 2004, cytunodd y Cyngor y dylai’r GMC ofyn am ddeddfwriaeth i alluogi iddo ddelio â phob categori o achos trwy ‘drefniadau gwaredu trwy gydsyniad’, h.y. trwy’r meddyg yn rhoi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu ymarfer yn y dyfodol. Dan y Rheolau presennol sy’n llywodraethu’r gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd gwaredu trwy gydsyniad o’r fath ar gael mewn achosion sy’n cynnwys elfen iechyd neu berfformiad yn unig. Fodd bynnag, os rhoir y cynnig newydd ar waith, gellid gwaredu achosion collfarn, rhybudd a ddyfarniad - yn ogystal â honiadau o gamymddygiad - trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Bydd y GMC yn gofyn i’r Adran Iechyd weithredu’r diwygiad angenrheidiol i’r ddeddfwriaeth trwy orchymyn dan adran 60 Deddf Iechyd 1999. Yn y cyfamser, cynhelir ymgynghoriad a gwaith manwl ar sut y gellid rhoi gwaredu trwy gydsyniad ar waith.
Gall fod yn rhy gynnar i mi roi sylwadau ond credaf y byddai’n ddefnyddiol petawn yn mynegi fy mhryderon am y cynnig hwn. Fy mhryder cyntaf yw bod rhaid delio ag achosion sy’n dibynnu ar adroddiadau o gollfarnau, dyfarniadau gan gorff rheoleiddio arall a honiadau o gamymddygiad, yn fy marn i, yn y maes cyhoeddus. Rwy’n poeni y gall ‘gwaredu trwy gydsyniad’ ddigwydd yn breifat. Yn ail, rwy’n poeni, yn enwedig o ran honiadau o gamymddygiad, y gall na fydd unrhyw ddatrys digonol o’r materion a ddadleuir. Mewn achosion iechyd a pherfformiad, bydd yna adroddiadau asesiad sy’n nodi natur a graddau‘r nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Ni fydd hyn yn wir mewn achos o gamymddygiad. I’r graddau y ceir dadl am y ffeithiau, mae yna berygl gwirioneddol y bydd materion ffeithiol yn cael eu hosgoi gan y GMC yn derbyn disgrifiad y meddyg o ddigwyddiadau, gan gynnwys yr holl liniaru. Gall wneud hynny er mwyn osgoi’r gost a’r ymdrech o wrandawiad a ymleddir. Gall dderbyn ymrwymiadau ar gynnig - fel a ddigwyddodd lawer mewn rhai achosion dan y gweithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol - ar y sail ei bod yn well i’r cyhoedd gael eu hamddiffyn gan ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol na chymryd y risg y gallai panel FTP ganfod nad oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer neu nad oes digon o nam i warantu gorfodi amodau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r GMC barhau â gofal mawr ar y llwybr i waredu pob math o achos trwy gydsyniad, o leiaf os y bwriad yw, fel y deallaf, rhoi gweithdrefnau o’r fath ar waith yn y cyfnod archwilio.
Os bydd modd gwaredu achosion camymddygiad, collfarn a phenderfyniad trwy gydsyniad, rhaid cael gwrandawiad gerbron panel FTP yn eistedd yn gyhoeddus. Mewn gwirionedd, rhaid i waredu o’r fath ddigwydd yn y cyfnod dyfarnu ac nid fel rhan o’r cyfnod archwilio. Mewn achosion collfarn a dyfarniad, dylai’r panel FTP fod yn hollol ymwybodol o’r amgylchiadau gwaelodol. Gallai’r ffordd y gellid gwneud hyn amrywio yn ôl natur yr achosion. Gall fod trawsgrifiad o’r achosion blaenorol. Gall swyddog yr heddlu roi tystiolaeth o amgylchiadau collfarn. Mewn achosion camymddygiad, dylai fod datganiad o ffeithiau cytûn y dylai fod hawl gan y sawl a wnaeth yr honiad wneud sylwadau ysgrifenedig arno. Dylai’r panel FTP weld y datganiad a’r cynrychioliadau fel y gellir cynnal gwrandawiad llawn pe ymddangosai fod yna ddadlau sylweddol am ffeithiau. Dylid rhoi’r datganiad cytûn yn y maes cyhoeddus. Dylai fod gan y panel FTP yr holl ffeithiau perthnasol sydd gan y GMC, gan gynnwys unrhyw record FTP blaenorol wrth gwrs. Dylai’r panel FTP fodloni ei hun fod yr ymrwymiadau arfaethedig yn ddigon i amddiffyn y cyhoedd ac i adlewyrchu difrifoldeb unrhyw drosedd. Wedyn, dylid monitro cydymffurfiaeth y meddyg â’i ymrwymiadau/ei hymrwymiadau a dylai fod darpariaeth ar gyfer dychwelyd yr achos i’r panel FTP pe byddai achos o dorri’r ymrwymiadau. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai’r weithdrefn hon yn wahanol iawn i’r weithdrefn a ddilynir ar hyn o bryd, lle mae’r meddyg yn gwneud cyfaddefiadau ac y gorfodir amodau.
Ailgodi Honiadau
Dan yr hen weithdrefnau, gellid ‘ailgodi’ achosion collfarn ac achosion sy’n cynnwys cwynion am ymddygiad meddyg a gaewyd gan y sgrinwyr neu gan y PPC pe byddai’r GMC yn cael gwybod yn ddilynol am gollfarn neu gŵyn arall am yr un meddyg. Darparodd y Rheolau ar gyfer ‘cyfnod cyfyngiad’ o ddwy flynedd, ac ni ellir ailgodi adroddiad neu gŵyn gynharach ar ôl hynny. Ym Mhennod 20, cwestiynais a oedd cyfnod cymharol fyr o’r fath yn amddiffyn cleifion yn ddigonol. Gellid ailgodi hefyd achosion yn cynnwys cwynion am berfformiad; ni phenodwyd unrhyw gyfnod cyfyngiad yn y Rheolau ond, yn ymarferol, roedd y GMC yn gweithredu ‘torbwynt’ ar ôl tair blynedd.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2001, pan roedd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu datblygu, cytunodd y Cyngor y dylai fod yn bosibl ailgodi cwyn a gaewyd yng nghyfnodau cynnar y gweithdrefnau pe byddai cwyn newydd yn cael ei derbyn. Fodd bynnag, ni ymddangosodd unrhyw ddarpariaeth o’r fath yn Rheolau drafft 2003, nac mewn unrhyw ddrafft dilynol. Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn gwneud unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol ar gyfer ailgodi honiadau.
Mae’n debyg i mi y dylai fod darpariaeth briodol ar gyfer ailgodi honiadau a gaewyd yn flaenorol. Mae’n hawdd dychmygu amgylchiadau lle bo honiad a ymddangosai’n eithaf dibwys pan gafodd ei ystyried yn dod yn fwy sylweddol pan geir cwyn debyg yn ddilynol. Mae hyn yn benodol wir mewn achosion sy’n cynnwys honiadau o berfformiad diffygiol. Mae’n bwysig er lles cleifion y dylai’r GMC, yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, allu edrych ar y darlun yn ei gyfanrwydd, yn hytrach na chael ei gyfyngu’n artiffisial i ystyried yr honiad dilynol yn unig. Os yw honiadau a gaewyd am gael eu hailgodi mewn rhai amgylchiadau, mae’n bwysig cynnwys y darpariaethau perthnasol yn y Rheolau - o leiaf fel y gall meddygon fod yn ymwybodol o’r posibilrwydd o ailagor honiad yn eu herbyn ac o’r amgylchiadau lle gellir gwneud hyn. Yn fy marn i, mae’n hollol briodol y dylai fod cyfnod cyfyngiad lle na ddylai fod yn briodol ailagor cwyn flaenorol, oni bai mewn amgylchiadau hollol eithriadol ac er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion. Byddwn yn awgrymu y dylai’r cyfnod hwnnw fod yn sylweddol fwy na’r ddwy neu dair blynedd a weithredwyd yn flaenorol. Byddwn yn awgrymu cyfnod o bum mlynedd.
Adolygiad o Benderfyniadau’r Cyfnod Archwilio
Rheolau Drafft 2003
Dan Reolau drafft 2003, cawsai paneli IC ac archwilwyr achos y pŵer i adolygu un o’u penderfyniadau eu hunain i atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP neu beidio neu waredu’r achos trwy rybudd. Byddai adolygiad o’r fath yn digwydd dim ond lle daethdai tystiolaeth neu wybodaeth newydd i’r amlwg a olygai fod adolygiad o’r fath yn ddymunol er mwyn amddiffyn aelodau’r cyhoedd neu fel arall er lles y cyhoedd. Ymgynghorir â’r meddyg a byddai’r panel IC neu’r archwiliwr achos yn ystyried lles y meddyg, yn ogystal â lles y cyhoedd. Nid oedd unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn Rheolau drafft 2003 ar gyfer ymgynghori â’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad am y cynnig i adolygu penderfyniad - nid hyd yn oed penderfyniad blaenorol i atgyfeirio’r achos i banel FTP - er y gallai’r person hwnnw fod mewn sefyllfa i roi sylwadau ar y dystiolaeth neu’r wybodaeth newydd a byddai ganddo’n amlwg ddiddordeb mewn gwybod bod adolygiad am gael ei gynnal.
Trafodaeth yn yr Ymchwiliad
Cafwyd ychydig drafodaeth yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Ionawr 2004 am yr angen am ffordd gyflym o adolygu penderfyniadau a wneir yn y cyfnod archwilio. Yn y gorffennol, mae mwyafrif helaeth yr achosion a adroddwyd i’r GMC wedi’u cau mewn cyfnod rhagarweiniol ac yn breifat, a disgwylir y bydd hynny’n parhau dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Credwyd, felly, pe byddai anfodlonrwydd cyhoeddus yn cael ei osgoi, y dylai fod rhyw ffordd o adolygu penderfyniadau i gau achosion a wneir mewn cyfnod rhagarweiniol. Roedd yna gytuno mawr y dylai adolygiad o’r fath fod ar gael i’r sawl a wnâi’r honiad ac i’r meddyg dan sylw. Fodd bynnag, credai rhan fwyaf y cyfranogwyr y dylid cyfyngu mewn rhyw ffordd ar hawl y meddyg neu’r sawl a wnâi’r honiad i geisio adolygiad. Ofnwyd, pe byddai meddygon ac achwynwyr yn cael hawl awtomatig i apelio, y byddai’r GMC yn boddi dan geisiadau annheilwng. Gallaf weld grym hynny. Fodd bynnag, clywodd yr Ymchwiliad, yn nhalaith Québec yng Nghanada, fod gan unrhyw achwynydd sy’n anfodlon gyda phenderfyniad rhagarweiniol y corff sy’n perfformio’r swyddogaeth ‘sgrinio’ sydd gyfwerth â swyddogaeth cyfnod archwilio’r gweithdrefnau newydd (Adran Ymchwilio Collège des Médecins du Québec) yr hawl i adolygiad gan banel adolygu. Mae’n debyg nad oes unrhyw broblem yno gyda boddi dan geisiadau. Mae’n debyg, os cymerir penderfyniad yn y cyfnod ‘sgrinio’ i beidio ag atgyfeirio achos i wrandawiad disgyblu, y caiff yr achwynydd lythyr sy’n nodi’r rhesymau am y penderfyniad yn fanwl. Rwy’n amau mai oherwydd y caiff yr achwynydd esboniad llawn a manwl o’r rhesymau am y penderfyniad nad oes gormod o geisiadau annheilwng am adolygiad.
Newidiodd y darpariaethau arfaethedig sy’n llywodraethu adolygiadau yn 2004. Gwaredodd Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 y pŵer adolygu oddi ar baneli IC ac archwilwyr achos a chyfyngu’r penderfyniadau y gellir eu hadolygu. Dyma yw’r sefyllfa o hyd dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004. Maent yn amodi y gall y Llywydd (a’r Llywydd yn unig) adolygu penderfyniad i beidio ag atgyfeirio honiad i banel FTP, penderfyniad i gyhoeddi rhybudd, neu benderfyniad gan yr archwilwyr achos i dderbyn ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol meddyg ar ôl asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad. Ni ellir adolygu penderfyniad gan banel IC neu archwiliwr achos i atgyfeirio achos i banel FTP. Nac ychwaith, fel y darllenaf y Rheolau, y gall y Llywydd adolygu penderfyniad gan y Cofrestrydd (neu aelod o staff) i beidio ag atgyfeirio achos i archwiliwr achos.
Dim ond ar ddwy sail y gellir cymeradwyo adolygiad. Un yw y ceir gwybodaeth fod y GMC wedi gwneud camgymeriad gweinyddol wrth drafod yr achos a bod angen adolygiad er lles y cyhoedd. Yr ail yw y ceir tystiolaeth neu wybodaeth newydd sy’n golygu bod angen adolygiad o’r fath i amddiffyn y cyhoedd neu i atal anghyfiawnder â’r meddyg, neu fod angen adolygiad fel arall er lles y cyhoedd. Mae’n dilyn y bydd rhaid i unrhyw feddyg neu sawl sy’n gwneud honiad nad yw eu cais am adolygiad yn syrthio o fewn y cyfyngiadau cul hynny ond sydd serch hynny’n anfodlon gyda’r penderfyniad wneud cais am adolygiad barnwrol. Rwy’n siomedig nad yw’r GMC wedi teimlo y gall weithredu ar brofiad y Collège des Médecins du Québec, Montreal, a chynnig hawl rhydd i adolygiad. Pe byddaipobl sy’n gwneud honiadau nad ydynt yn mynd i symud ymlaen i wrandawiad yn cael llythyr llawn o esboniad o’r penderfyniad, ynghyd â chopi o’r CEDF, fel y bwriada’r GMC, mae’n debyg na fyddai unrhyw berygl gwirioneddol o foddi dan geisiadau.
Rhaid rhoi gwybod i’r meddyg a’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad am benderfyniad gan y Llywydd i adolygu achos a rhaid darparu, lle bo’n briodol, gopïau iddynt o unrhyw dystiolaeth newydd a gafwyd. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn gofyn bod rhaid ceisio eu cynrychioliadau ar yr adolygiad arfaethedig. Lle bo’r Llywydd yn penderfynu adolygu penderfyniad, gall benderfynu y dylai’r penderfyniad gwreiddiol aros neu gall atgyfeirio’r honiad i ddau archwiliwr achos i’w ystyried fel petai’n honiad sy’n cael ei ystyried ganddynt am y tro cyntaf.
Rhaid rhoi gwybod am y penderfyniad ar adolygiad i’r meddyg dan sylw a’r sawl a wnaeth yr honiad, ynghyd ag unrhyw berson arall y mae’r Cofrestrydd yn ystyried bod ganddo ddiddordeb mewn cael gwybod.
Mae’r trefniadau newydd hyn mewn rhai ffyrdd yn welliant sicr ar gynigion 2003. Mae’r ffaith bod y sawl sy’n gwneud yr honiad yn cael ei gynnwys bellach yn y broses hon yn newid calonogol dros ben. Hefyd, mae’r penderfyniad wedi’i gymryd i ffwrdd o’r IC neu’r archwiliwr achos. Ni fyddai’n foddhaol pe byddai wedi’i adael yn eu dwylo hwythau, gan na fyddai unrhyw ‘olwg newydd’ ar yr achos. Gwelliant arall yw nad yw’n bosibl dan y darpariaethau hyn i adolygu penderfyniad i atgyfeirio honiad i banel FTP. Mae hynny’n galonogol, er y gall gynyddu’r perygl o ddileadau llechwraidd, y mynegais fy mhryder yn eu cylch ym mharagraff 25.247. Rwy’n poeni, fodd bynnag, am y ddarpariaeth mai’r Llywydd yn unig a ddylai ymarfer y pwerau hyn yn bersonol. Mae yna ddau reswm am hyn: un o egwyddor ac un o ymarferoldeb. Byddai llawer i’w ddweud o blaid rhoi’r pŵer adolygu i rywun y tu allan i’r GMC. Byddai’n lleddfu pryder cyhoeddus fod y GMC yn ‘siop caeëdig’ ac yn amddiffyn meddygon. Byddai hefyd yn darparu ffordd ddefnyddiol o archwilio allanol. Yr ail reswm yw bod rôl y Llywydd eisoes yn hynod feichus a thybiaf a yw’n synhwyrol gorfodi’r baich ychwanegol hwn arno. Nid yw maint y gwaith hwn yn sicr hyd yma. Mae rhai ffeiliau achos yn sawl modfedd o drwch. Pe byddai’r Llywydd yn cyrraedd penderfyniad personol ym mhob achos, yn lle cadarnhau penderfyniad a awgrymir gan aelod o staff, byddai rhaid iddo ddarllen y ffeil achos cyfan, gan gynnwys efallai archwiliad agos o gofnodion meddygol neu adroddiad asesiad perfformiad. Mae’n bosibl y byddai’n rhaid iddo ddirprwyo’r dasg i eraill.
Fel y soniais uchod, mae’n ymddangos nad yw’r darpariaethau presennol yn caniatáu i adolygiad gywiro gwall a wneir gan aelod o staff wrth wrthod honiad yn y cyfnod cynharaf, cyn atgyfeiriad i archwiliwr achos. Os felly, dylid gwella’r
hwn.

---  ---
Fel a esboniais ym mharagraff 25.23, bydd IOPs yn cymryd lle‘r hen IOC. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y bydd yn agored i’r Cofrestrydd ar unrhyw adeg i atgyfeirio honiad i IOP ystyried gwneud gorchymyn dros dro. Gall un archwiliwr achos gyfarwyddo’r Cofrestrydd i atgyfeirio achos i IOP. Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn cynnwys unrhyw bŵer tebyg ar gyfer yr IC. Fodd bynnag, mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth y Rheolau drafft yn awgrymu y bydd yn agored i’r IC wneud
‘argymhelliad’
y dylid atgyfeirio achos.
Yn gyffredinol, cynhelir gwrandawiadau gerbron IOP yn breifat, oni bai bod y meddyg yn gofyn fel arall, neu fod yr IOP yn ystyried ei bod yn briodol am un o nifer o resymau i glywed yr achos yn gyhoeddus. Gall IOP orfodi gorchymyn dros dro am gyfnod o hyd at 18 mis. Bydd gorchmynion yn destun adolygiad cyfnodol.

---  ---
Byddaf nawr yn ystyried y prosesau yn y cyfnod dyfarnu. Dechreuaf drwy archwilio cyfansoddiad y paneli FTP a fydd yn clywed honiadau sydd wedi’u hatgyfeirio i’r cyfnod dyfarnu.
Paneli Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Cyfansoddiad y Panel
Fel y dywedais eisoes, ni fydd aelodau GMC yn gymwys i eistedd ar baneli FTP. Fodd bynnag, bydd y paneli’n gweithio mewn fframwaith trefniadol a pholisi a sefydlir ac a gefnogir gan y GMC. Bydd y paneli’n cynnwys aelodau cyswllt, rhai ohonynt yn feddygol cymwys a rhai ohonynt heb gymwysterau meddygol. Byddant yn cael eu penodi, eu dewis a’u hyfforddi gan y GMC, a fydd hefyd yn rheoli, yn monitro ac yn arfarnu eu perfformiad. Bydd gwasanaeth parhaus fel aelod o banel FTP yn dibynnu ar berfformiad boddhaol.
Bydd paneli’n cael eu cadeirio gan banelwyr sydd wedi cael asesiadau ac sydd wedi’u penodi i fod yn gadeiryddion. Gall cadeiryddion fod yn feddygol neu’n lleyg. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, cafwyd ychydig drafodaeth am ddoethineb cael cadeirydd cyfreithiol cymwys. Trafodais y mater hwn ym Mhennod 21 a thynnais sylw hefyd i argymhelliad Miss Jean Ritchie QC yn ei hadroddiad i ymddygiad Rodney Leward. Mynegodd y farn y dylai cadeiryddion paneli PCC fod yn gyfreithiol gymwys. Yn amlwg, mae angen cyngor ac arbenigedd cyfreithiol ar baneli FTP. Yn y gorffennol, darparwyd hyn gan asesydd cyfreithiol ac, yn y dyfodol uniongyrchol o leiaf, bwriedir y dylai hyn barhau. Mae rhai aseswyr cyfreithiol yn dda iawn heb amheuaeth. Rwyf hefyd wedi gweld trawsgrifiadau o gyngor a roddwyd gan aseswyr cyfreithiol a fu’n aneglur neu’n anghywir mewn gwirionedd. Hyd yn oed os yw’r asesydd cyfreithiol yn hollol gymwys, mae yna gyfyngiadau ar y rôl y gall ef/hi ei chwarae. Ni all ef neu hi gyfarwyddo llwybr penderfyniadau’r panel FTP er mwyn sicrhau yr ystyrir materion mewn trefn resymegol ac yr ystyrir y dystiolaeth sy’n berthnasol i’r mater dan sylw yn unig. Mae’n anodd addysgu’r sgiliau hyn i gadeirydd nad yw’n gyfreithiol a allai eistedd ar banel GMC ychydig weithiau’r flwyddyn yn unig. Hefyd, fel y nodais ym Mhennod 21, mae’n rhaid i’r GMC addysgu ei gadeiryddion sut i gynnal gwrandawiad a’r hyn i’w ddweud ym mhob cyfnod o’r achosion. Byddai materion o’r fath yn reddfol i berson gyda chymwysterau cyfreithiol.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2001, cytunodd y Cyngor (gan 36 pleidlais i 35) y dylai paneli FTP sy’n gwrando ar achosion ymddygiad a fodlonai feini prawf priodol, dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, gael cadeirydd cyfreithiol gymwys. Rhagwelwyd y byddai cadeirydd cyfrethiol cymwys yn cael ei benodi mewn achosion hir neu gymhleth, mewn achosion yn cynnwys llawer o faterion cyfreithiol neu weithdrefnol anodd ac mewn rhai achosion proffil uchel neu ddadleuol iawn. Byddai penderfyniad ynghylch a ddylid penodi cadeirydd cyfreithiol yn cael ei gymryd yn y cyfnod rheoli achos. Mae dogfennau GMC mewnol yn dangos bod penderfyniad Tachwedd 2001 yn dal i fodoli flwyddyn yn ddiweddarach. Ym mis Mai 2003, cytunodd y Cyngor, pe byddai cadeirydd cyfreithiol cymwys yn cael ei benodi i gadeirio achos ymddygiad, y dylid penodi asesydd cyfreithiol hefyd. Ers mis Mai 2003, mae’n debyg y rhoddwyd y gorau i’r bwriad o ddefnyddio cadeiryddion cyfreithiol cymwys. Dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y GMC wedi trafod y syniad o ddefnyddio cadeiryddion cyfreithiol yn y gorffennol diweddar ac wedi penderfynu gadael ‘yr opsiwn hwnnw’n agored’. Dywedodd fod rhai aelodau cyswllt sy’n gymwys i eistedd ar baneli PCC yn gyfreithiol gymwys; ni wyddai a oes unrhyw un ohonynt wedi cadeirio panel erioed.
Fy marn i ar y mater hwn yw, pe byddai’r GMC yn cadw rheolaeth ar y cyfnod dyfarnu, y dylai ymrestru rhai cadeiryddion cyfreithiol cymwys a rhoi cyfle iddynt, gan ddechrau gyda’r achosion mwyaf cymhleth. Pe canfyddid eu bod yn llwyddiant, dylid ymestyn yr arfer. Mae’n debyg i mi fod y gweithdrefnau newydd yn sicr o ddatgelu pwyntiau cyfreithiol newydd. Mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai rhai ohonynt fod yn gymhleth. Gallai presenoldeb cadeirydd cyfreithiol cymwys helpu sicrhau bod penderfyniadau ar bwyntiau felly yn gywir, o’r cychwyn. Pe byddai’r syniad yn cael ei ddefnyddio o gael corfflu o banelwyr a fyddai’n eistedd ar achosion yr holl gyrff rheoleiddio gofal iechyd, byddai’n bosibl cael cadeiryddion cyfreithiol cymwys amser llawn.
Yn ogystal ag asesydd cyfreithiol, gallai paneli FTP, mewn achos sy’n cynnwys elfen iechyd neu berfformiad, gael cyngor gan un neu fwy o gynghorwyr iechyd arbenigol neu gynghorwyr perfformiad arbenigol a ddewisir gan y Cofrestrydd o banel a gynhelir at y diben. Cworwm cyfreithiol ar gyfer y panel FTP fydd tri, gan gynnwys o leiaf un panelydd lleyg ac un panelydd meddygol. Bydd staff y GMC yn gweithredu fel ysgrifenyddion a chlercod i’r paneli FTP. Mae Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr yn awgrymu y gall meddyg wneud cais am benodi cynghorydd arbenigol mewn achos sy’n cynnwys honiadau o gamymddygiad. Credaf mai bwriad hwn yw rhoi cyngor i banelwyr am yr arfer a’r safonau sydd i’w disgwyl mewn arbenigedd meddygol penodol.
Hysbysiad o Atgyfeiriad i Banel Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Ar ôl penderfyniad i atgyfeirio meddyg i banel FTP, bydd ef/hi yn cael hysbysiad o atgyfeiriad yn cynnwys rhyw wybodaeth benodedig. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi bod rhaid rhoi manylion o’r honiad(au) a’r ffeithiau y maent yn seiliedig arnynt. Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn gofyn iddynt gael eu crynhoi yn unig. Mae’n rheol elfennol o gyfiawnder naturiol fod rhaid i berson sy’n wynebu unrhyw fath o broses ddisgyblu gael rhybudd digonol o’r cyhuddiadau y bydd ef/hi yn eu hwynebu. Pe byddai meddyg yn wynebu honiad penodol o gamymddygiad, byddai’n hanfodol dweud wrtho/wrthi yn union yr hyn a honnir. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg i mi, mewn rhai mathau o achosion (er enghraifft, achos sy’n dibynnu i raddau helaeth ar asesiad perfformiad neu iechyd), y byddai’n ddigon pe byddai’r meddyg yn cael gwybod (gan fabwysiadu geiriau prawf y cyfnod dyfarnu a gynigiwyd gan y GMC) yr honnwyd bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer (i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad) yn sgil y materion yn yr adroddiad asesiad. Hyd yn oed mewn achosion ymddygiad, rwy’n amau bod graddau’r manylder yr ymddangosir y rhoddwyd yn y gorffennol yn angenrheidiol ar gyfer rhoi hysbysiad priodol i’r meddyg. Gan ddarllen rhai penderfyniadau PCC, mae’n ymddangos bod yr achosion wedi’u torri i lawr i ystyried pob un elfen y mae’n rhaid ei phrofi er mwyn cefnogi’r honiad o SPM. Tybiaf a yw hyn wir yn angenrheidiol; mae’n creu’r argraff mai achosion troseddol yw’r rhain, pan nad dyna mohonynt.
Nododd yr Arweiniad ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 (ac mae’r detholiad hefyd yn ymddangos yn yr Arweiniad ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004):
‘Lle bo’n briodol, bydd y GMC hefyd yn rhoi gwybod i’r ymarferwr pa ganlyniad y bydd yn ei geisio yn y gwrandawiad perthnasol.’
Ni ddarperir ar gyfer y broses hon yn y Rheolau. Y syniad yw y byddai’n ddefnyddiol ac yn deg i feddygon. Mewn gwirionedd, mae’n rhoi gwybod iddynt y gwaethaf a allai ddigwydd iddynt. Gallaf weld y gallai arwydd nad yw’r GMC yn ceisio dilead neu ataliad annog y meddyg i wneud cyffesion, yn ddiogel yn y wybodaeth mai’r gwaethaf a allai ddigwydd yw gorfodi amodau neu gyfyngiadau. Mae’n bosib y gallai ef neu hi drafod cyfres o amodau y gellid ymrwymo iddynt yn wirfoddol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg i mi fod gwir anfanteision mewn arfer o’r fath. Yn y lle cyntaf, ar ôl i’r GMC nodi‘r canlyniad y mae’n awyddus i’w gael ar lefel benodol - er enghraifft, gorfodi amodau - bydd yn anodd iawn i banel FTP orfodi sancsiwn mwy difrifol. Yr effaith fydd clymu dwylo’r panel. Yn ail, mae arwydd cynnar o’r canlyniad y mae’n awyddus ei gael yn debygol o liwio paratoadau’r meddyg a’r GMC ar gyfer y gwrandawiad. Pe byddai’r panel FTP yn benderfynol o gymryd gwahanol safbwynt, byddai’r posibilrwydd o annhegwch i’r meddyg. Yn drydydd, atgoffaf y darllenwr fod y GMC, wrth feddwl am ffurf ei weithdrefnau newydd, yn dymuno creu rhywfaint o wir wahaniad rhwng y swyddogaethau dyfarnu ac archwilio. Dewisodd gadw’r swyddogaeth archwilio yn fewnol ac roedd y paneli FTP i fod i gael rhywfaint o wir annibyniaeth. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oes llawer ganddynt o gwbl. Mae panelwyr am gael eu dewis, eu penodi a’u hyfforddi gan y GMC, a bydd y GMC yn eu harwain, eu gwerthuso ac yn eu diswyddo o bosib. Pe byddai’r GMC, yn ogystal, yn ceisio’n effeithiol i orfodi terfyn uwch ar y sancsiwn sydd ar gael mewn achos unigol, bydd annibyniaeth paneli FTP yn lleihau ymhellach.
Yn ogystal, mae’n debyg y gallai’r cynigion presennol fynd y tu hwnt i roi arwydd o ba sancsiwn y bydd y GMC yn ei geisio. Gallai
‘canlyniad’
gynnwys rhoi ymrwymiadau a allai gael eu derbyn heb unrhyw ganfyddiadau o ffaith neu benderfyniad am nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi fy marnau am yr angen, er lles y cyhoedd, am eglurder wrth ddatrys achosion sy’n cynnwys camymddygiad, collfarnau a dyfarniadau.
Credaf y dylai’r GMC ailystyried yr holl syniad hwn. Ni chredaf y dylid rhoi unrhyw arwydd o ganlyniad ffafriedig y GMC cyn y gwrandawiad. Byddai’n creu disgwyliad ar ran y meddyg a fyddai’n annheg iddi/iddo, pe na fyddai’n cael ei wireddu, ac efallai na allai ddarparu amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion, pe byddai’n cael ei wireddu. Yn ogystal, gall fod, pe byddai’r achos yn cael ei ymladd, y daethai’n fwy difrifol wrth i’r dystiolaeth ddatblygu. Pe byddai’r GMC am gyflwyno’i farnau ar y canlyniad priodol, dylid gwneud hyn, yn fy marn i, fel a wnaed yn y gorffennol diweddar, yn y gwrandawiad gerbron y panel FTP. Pe byddai’r llwybr hwn yn cael ei ddilyn, dylid gwneud yn glir i bawb mai dim ond gwneud argymhelliad y mae’r GMC ac nad oes unrhyw rwymedigaeth ar y panel FTP i gymryd sylw ohono.
Nid yw’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn sôn o gwbl am y cwestiwn o bwy yn y GMC fydd yn penderfynu pa ganlyniad y bydd y GMC yn ei geisio mewn unrhyw achos unigol (er rhoir cyfrifoldeb i’r Cofrestrydd am roi hysbysiad o’r atgyfeiriad). Ni wn pwy y bwriedir y dylai benderfynu ar ba lefel y dylid rhoi’r canlyniad y mae’n awyddus i’w gael. Nid wyf yn ymwybodol o unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn y Rheolau sy’n gysylltiedig â’r hen weithdrefnau neu’r gweithdrefnau newydd sy’n rhoi hawl i unrhyw berson neu banel neu bwyllgor penodol i wneud penderfyniadau o’r fath. Pe byddai penderfyniad mor bwysig â hwn yn cael ei wneud, dylai’r person neu’r corff sy’n ei wneud gael awdurdod ffurfiol i wneud hynny ar ran y GMC a dylid cytuno a chyhoeddi meini prawf priodol.
Nid yw Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr yn rhoi unrhyw gyngor ynghylch sut y dylai panelwyr FTP drin achosion lle mae’r GMC wedi rhoi arwydd o’r canlyniad y mae’n awyddus i’w gael. Yn wir, nid yw’n sôn am y ffaith y gellid rhoi arwydd o’r fath. Mae’r rhain yn faterion pwysig y dylid rhoi arweiniad yn eu cylch mae’n siwr.
Nid yw’n ymddangos bod Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn cynnwys unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol ar gyfer archwilio achos ymhellach ar ôl atgyfeiriad i banel FTP. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn dweud y bydd y Cofrestrydd, cyn anfon hysbysiad o atgyfeiriad, yn ymgymryd ag archwiliadau pellach o’r fath (gan gynnwys cyfarwyddo cyfreithwyr i gael datganiadau tystion a thystiolaeth ddogfennol arall) fel sy’n angenrheidiol er mwyn cyflwyno achos y GMC yn foddhaol yn y gwrandawiad. Yn fy marn i, dylid ymgorffori yn y Rheolau bŵer penodol i archwilio ymhellach. Dylai hyn alluogi’r GMC i fynnu bod tystiolaeth yn cael ei chyflwyno, yn ddogfennol neu fel arall, pe byddai unrhyw un yn ceisio rhwystro’r fath archwiliadau.
Rheolaeth Achos
Yn y gorffennol, cododd problemau sylweddol gyda’r trefniadau ar gyfer gwrandawiadau gerbron paneli PCC. Ni chafwyd unrhyw fecanwaith ffurfiol ar gyfer rheolaeth achos. O ganlyniad, ni chafwyd unrhyw drefniadau priodol ar gyfer datgelu tystiolaeth nac unrhyw ffordd ddibynadwy o ganfod hyd tebygol achosion neu o’u hamserlennu ar amseroedd pan fyddai’r partïon a’r tystion ar gael. Arweiniodd hyn at ohirio achosion yn aml, gydag anghyfleuster, oedi, cost ac, heb amheuaeth, gofid i dystion ac i’r meddygon dan sylw o ganlyniad. Yn y gorffennol diweddar, ymgymerwyd ag ychydig reolaeth anffurfiol o achosion a atgyfeiriwyd i banel PCC. Fodd bynnag, roedd cyfranogiad yn hollol wirfoddol. Un agwedd galonogol iawn ar y gweithdrefnau newydd yw cyflwyno system ffurfiol o reolaeth achos gydag adolygiadau rheolaeth achos cyn gwrandawiad.
Mae’r darpariaethau rheolaeth achos yn berthnasol i atgyfeiriadau cychwynnol i banel FTP a hefyd i wrandawiadau dilynol i adolygu achos (lle ataliwyd neu rhoddwyd amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg) ac i geisiadau am adfer cofrestriad meddyg. Cynhelir yr adolygiadau rheolaeth achos gan Reolwr Achos cyfreithiol cymwys. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y dylai’r Rheolwr Achos weithredu’n annibynnol wrth y partïon hyn. Bydd ef neu hi yn ffigwr led-farnwrol, a fydd ar gontract rhan-amser gan y GMC i ddelio ag adolygiadau rheolaeth achos. Fel arfer, bydd adolygiadau rheolaeth achos yn cymryd lle drwy gynhadledd ffôn. Bydd y Rheolwr Achos yn rhoi cyfarwyddiadau i sicrhau bod y gwrandawiad gerbron y panel FTP yn rhedeg yn
‘deg, yn hwylus ac yn effeithiol’
Nododd Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 ddarpariaethau manwl ar gyfer un neu fwy o adolygiadau rheolaeth achos cyn gwrandawiad panel FTP. Mae’r darpariaethau (sydd wedi’u diwygio’n helaeth ers iddynt ymddangos gyntaf yn Rheolau drafft 2003) yn ymdrin â materion fel datgelu dogfennau, cyfnewid datganiadau tystion, cyfnewid cyngor arbenigol, a chyfnewid dadleuon bras. Maent hefyd yn ymdrin â darparu amcangyfrifon amser a dyddiadau awgrymedig ar gyfer gwrandawiadau. Maent yn darparu i’r partïon nodi a fydd iechyd y meddyg yn cael ei godi fel mater ac i’r meddyg roi hysbysiad o flaen llaw o’r graddau y cyfaddefir ffeithiau a thystiolaeth. Mae yna ddarpariaeth i’r Rheolwr Achos gyfarwyddo’r partïon i ddarparu datganiad o ffeithiau cytûn mewn achos lle cyfaddefir honiad. Yn fyr, dylai’r darpariaethau rheolaeth achos alluogi’r partïon ac aelodau’r panel FTP i baratoi’n briodol ar gyfer gwrandawiadau, dylai osgoi presenoldeb tystion yn ddiangen a lleihau i leiafswm y gohiriadau rheolaidd a oedd yn angenrheidiol yn y gorffennol yn sgil datgelu tystiolaeth bwysig yn hwyr.
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 hefyd yn darparu ar gyfer cyfarwyddiadau ‘awtomatig’ penodol i fod yn effeithiol yn absenoldeb unrhyw gyfarwyddyd gan Reolwr Achos neu gytundeb gan y partïon i’r gwrthwyneb. Mae’r rhain yn berthnasol i wrandawiadau gan baneli FTP ac IC. Mae’r cyfarwyddiadau hyn yn mynnu bod pob parti yn darparu i’r parti arall, o leiaf 28 diwrnod cyn dyddiad y gwrandawiad, restr o bob dogfen y mae ef/hi yn bwriadu ei chyflwyno’n dystiolaeth ynghyd â chopi o bob dogfen nad yw’r parti arall wedi’i derbyn yn flaenorol. Maent hefyd yn mynnu i bob parti hysbysu’r llall, cyn pen 14 diwrnod o gael y rhestr, a yw ef/hi yn gofyn i unrhyw berson fynychu i roi tystiolaeth lafar mewn perthynas â’r pwnc neu lunio dogfen. Hyd yn oed lle mae un parti yn hysbysu’r llall fod angen arno/arni berson yn mynychu, mae gan y panel IC neu FTP ddisgresiwn i waredu’r angen am dystiolaeth lafar mewn rhai amgylchiadau.
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi hefyd y gall panel FTP ddwyn casgliadau fel y mae’n ystyried eu bod yn briodol o ran methiant parti i gydymffurfio â chyfarwyddiadau a gyhoeddir gan y Rheolwr Achos. Cafwyd pryder na fyddai gan y darpariaethau rheolaeth achos unrhyw ‘ddannedd’, gan na fyddai unrhyw sancsiwn ar gael pe na fyddai cyfarwyddiadau yn cael cydymffurfiaeth. Awgrymwyd y dylai’r risg y gellid dwyn casgliadau croes o ganlyniad i fethiant i gydymffurfio fod yn rhwystr. Awgrymwyd hefyd y gellid cosbi parti a fethai gydymffurfio mewn costau. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg na fabwysiadwyd y syniad o orfodi cosb ar gostau; yn hytrach, caniateir dwyn casgliadau croes. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi y gall methiant i gydymffurfio â chyfarwyddiadau’r Rheolwr Achos arwain, nid yn unig at dynnu casgliadau croes, ond hefyd at beidio cyflwyno tystiolaeth yng ngwrandawiad y panel FTP. Nid yw’r ddarpariaeth honno yn y Rheolau, er y tybiaf y gellid dweud bod gan banel IC neu FTP ddisgresiwn i wrthod cyflwyno unrhyw dystiolaeth am reswm da. Rwy’n pryderu braidd am y ddarpariaeth y gellid dwyn casgliad croes yn erbyn parti sydd wedi methu cydymffurfio â gorchymyn rheolaeth achos. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai’n briodol gwneud hynny dim ond mewn achos hollol eithriadol, lle bo gwrthod amlwg i gydymffurfio yn ymwneud yn unig â’r dyhead i guddio darn penodol o dystiolaeth. Yn gyffredinol, byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai’n beryglus dwyn casgliadau croes o’r hyn a allai fod yn fethiant i gydymffurfio oherwydd anghymhwyster a diffyg trefn yn unig. Ni ddylai rhywun golli golwg ar amcan yr achosion, sef cyrraedd y gwirionedd. Credaf y byddai cosb mewn costau fel arfer yn fwy priodol. Gall hynny weithiau ddysgu cyfreithiwr anghymwys i wneud yn well yn y dyfodol. Pe byddai cosb o’r fath ar gael yn erbyn meddyg, byddai’n rhaid iddi fod ar gael hefyd yn erbyn y GMC.
Yn eu cyfanrwydd, rwy’n ystyried bod y darpariaethau rheolaeth achos newydd hyn yn syniad da iawn. Fodd bynnag, bydd eu heffeithiolrwydd yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â maint yr ymdrech a roir ynddynt gan y Rheolwyr Achos. Yn ystod fy ngwaith fel barnwr, rwyf wedi gweld llawer o orchmynion rheolaeth achos sy’n dilyn ffurf safonol yn syml ac nad ydynt wedi’u teilwra’n ddigonol i amgylchiadau penodol yr achos. Mae hynny’n berygl lle caniateir i gyfarwyddiadau awtomatig weithredu neu lle caniateir i’r partïon gytuno gorchymyn. Mae rheolaeth achos dda yn mynnu bod gan y barnwr (neu’r Rheolwr Achos) yr amser a’r awydd i ddarllen y papurau yn drwyadl, i gael gafael clir ar y materion, i ofyn llawer o gwestiynau am y ffordd y bydd yr achos yn cael ei gyflwyno ac i wneud gorchmynion a fydd yn sicrhau bod y partïon yn barod gyda’u tystiolaeth ac nad oes unrhyw un yn cael eu synnu. Gobeithiaf y caiff y darpariaethau hyn yr effaith a ddymunir. Dylai gwaith Rheolwyr Achos fod yn destun archwiliad i ganfod i ba raddau y maent yn cyflawni eu hamcan o osgoi gohiriadau, osgoi tarfu ar wrandawiadau ac osgoi phresenoldeb tystion diangen.
Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn awgrymu efallai nad yw adolygiadau rheolaeth achos yn angenrheidiol i achosion sy’n dibynnu i raddau helaeth ar asesiad perfformiad neu iechyd. Rwy’n cydnabod bod gan y GMC lawer o brofiad o achosion o’r fath. Fodd bynnag, rhaid i mi ddweud mai’r argraff sydd gen i, o ddarllen trawsgrifiadau un neu ddau achos perfformiad, yw y byddai adolygiad rheolaeth achos yn ddefnyddiol iawn. Dywedodd Miss Jackie Smith, Pennaeth yr Adran Berfformiad, wrth yr Ymchwiliad am un achos perfformiad lle’r oedd y meddyg wedi galw ar 36 o dystion. Byddwn wedi meddwl y gallai rheolaeth achos gadarn wedi helpu osgoi sefyllfa o’r fath.
Y Gwrandawiad: y Partïon
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi mai’r ‘partïon’ i wrandawiad gerbron panel FTP yw’r GMC a’r meddyg, neu eu cynrychiolwyr. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, ni fydd yn agored rhagor i’r sawl sy’n gwneud honiad gyflwyno’r ‘achos erlyniad’. Disgwylir i feddygon fynychu gwrandawiadau. Mae hawl ganddynt gael cynrychiolaeth gan gwnsler neu gyfreithiwr, neu gan gynrychiolydd eu sefydliad proffesiynol, neu, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gan aelod o’u teulu neu berson arall. Cynrychiolir y GMC gan y Swyddog Cyflwyno. Pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn ymddangos, gallai’r panel FTP, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, barhau i glywed yr achos yn ei absenoldeb/ei habsenoldeb.
Y Gwrandawiad: Cyhoeddus neu Breifat
Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 fod rhaid i banel FTP eistedd yn gyhoeddus, heblaw wrth ystyried honiad iechyd (ac mewn rhai amgylchiadau arbennig eraill). Fodd bynnag, nododd yr Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft 2003 mai’r amgyffrediad oedd y dylid clywed yr achos yn breifat lle’r oedd panel FTP yn ystyried honiad o iechyd gwael neu berfformiad diffygiol. Roedd y cynigion yn y cyfnod hwnnw, felly, yn creu ansicrwydd ynghylch a fwriadwyd y dylid clywed achos yn cynnwys honiad o berfformiad diffygiol yn gyhoeddus neu’n breifat. Bu’r pwnc hwn yn destun dadl yn y GMC ers cryn dipyn.
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y dylai gwrandawiadau gerbron panel FTP ddigwydd yn gyhoeddus yn gyffredinol. Maent yn amodi y dylai gwrandawiad gerbron panel FTP fod yn breifat pan fo’r panel yn ystyried iechyd corfforol neu feddyliol meddyg. Maent yn amodi hefyd y dylai fod yn agored i banel FTP, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, gynnal gwrandawiad cyhoeddus mewn achos iechyd. Mae’n debygol y bydd gwrandawiadau cyhoeddus o’r fath yn anarferol.
Gall panel FTP, wrth gwrs, ymgymryd â thrafodaethau preifat (h.y. trafodaethau am y penderfyniadau y mae’n rhaid iddo eu gwneud neu am faterion eraill sy’n berthnasol i achos) ar unrhyw adeg mewn gwrandawiad.
Y Gwrandawiad: Safon o Brawf
Ni ddywed Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 unrhyw beth ar y safon o brawf i’w chymhwyso gan baneli FTP. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi:
‘Lle mae’n gwneud canfyddiad ar ffeithiau dadleuol, rhaid i’r panel fod yn siwr o’i benderfyniad.
(Mae hynny’n golygu y cymhwysir y safon droseddol o brawf i ganfyddiadau o ffaith).
Mae’r mater ynghylch a oes nam ar addasrwydd yr ymarferwr i ymarfer, a gorfodi sancsiwn, neu rybudd, yn faterion o farn broffesiynol.’
Aiff yr Arweiniad ymlaen i ddelio â phenderfyniadau sy’n gysylltiedig â sancsiwn:
‘Rhaid i’r panel fod yn siwr fod unrhyw weithredu arfaethedig (i gau achos gyda rhybudd neu heb rybudd, neu orfodi sancsiwn ar gofrestriad y meddyg) yn ddigonol i amddiffyn cleifion a lles y cyhoedd. Os yw’n methu gwneud hyn, rhaid iddo ystyried cymryd camau yn erbyn cofrestriad yr ymarferwr neu orfodi sancsiwn mwy difrifol, fel sy’n briodol.’
Gall paneli IC a FTP, lle byddai’n deg gwneud hynny, ystyried a phennu gyda’i gilydd ddau neu fwy o honiadau yn erbyn yr un meddyg yn yr un categori neu’r categorïau ar wahân o nam a restrir yn adran 35C(2)(a)-(e). Gallant hefyd ystyried a phennu gyda’i gilydd honiadau yn erbyn dau feddyg neu fwy. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi:
‘Bydd gwrandawiadau, felly, yn gyfannol, oherwydd y cymerir honiadau ymlaen yn seiliedig ar gyfanrwydd y dystiolaeth a gafwyd yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio (gan gynnwys, lle bo’n briodol, adroddiadau asesiad iechyd a pherfformiad) a gallant gynnwys cyfuniad o honiadau sy’n gysylltiedig ag iechyd, perfformiad neu ymddygiad meddyg, neu sy’n seiliedig ar rybudd, collfarn neu ddyfarniad.’
Mewn llythyr diweddar at yr Ymchwiliad, nododd y GMC na fyddai’n bosibl trafod mater safon o brawf, fel ag yn y gorffennol, ar y sail y câi ei phenderfynu yn ôl categori’r achos yn cael ei glywed. Nododd y llythyr:
‘... mae’r GMC yn gwerthfawrogi bod yna faterion ymarferol i’w datrys ac felly mae’n trafod ei ymagwedd at y safon o brawf a’r ffordd y bydd gwrandawiadau’n gweithredu yn y modd hwn.’
Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai gwrandawiadau’n cael eu labelu yn rhai ‘iechyd’, ‘ymddygiad’, ‘perfformiad’, ‘collfarn’ neu ‘ddyfarniad’. Yn hytrach, bydd gwrandawiadau’n delio â honiadau o fathau amrywiol, ochr wrth ochr. Ni fydd gwahanol brosesau yn ôl natur yr honiad a wneir. Rhoddodd Mr Scott yr enghraifft o achos perfformiad lle gwnaed cwyn am ddigwyddiad neu ddigwyddiadau penodol. Dywedodd, pe gellid cael tystiolaeth i gefnogi’r gŵyn, yna gellid dweud bod testun y gŵyn yn ffaith ac y byddai’r safon droseddol o brawf yn berthnasol i wneud penderfyniad am y gwirionedd neu fel arall y ffaith honno. Fodd bynnag, pe na fyddai tystiolaeth ar gael i gefnogi’r gŵyn, gellid defnyddio testun y gŵyn fel ‘ysgogiad’ yn unig i gynnal asesiad perfformiad ac ni fyddai’n cael ei gynnwys yn y rhestr o gyhuddiadau. Yna, y dystiolaeth berthnasol gerbron y panel FTP fyddai’r adroddiad asesiad ac ni fyddai’r safon droseddol o brawf yn berthnasol.
Mae’n broblem ddyrys pa safon o brawf y dylid ei chymhwyso mewn achosion GMC. Mae’r GMC wedi pleidio erioed fod rhaid cymhwyso’r safon droseddol o brawf i ganfyddiadau o ffaith mewn achosion ymddygiad, er tegwch i’r meddyg. Ym Mhennod 21, nodais ei bod yn ymddangos yn rhywfaint o baradocs y dylai’r GMC fynnu’r safon droseddol o brawf a’i fod eto’n caniatáu gwneud canfyddiadau o ffaith ar benderfyniad mwyafrif prin. Awgrymais fod y safon sifil yn fwy priodol mewn achosion gydag amffiddyn cleifion a lles y cyhoedd yn amcanion pennaf. Yn achos
, nododd y Cyngor mai’r safon briodol o brawf mewn achos perfformiad oedd y safon sifil. Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, gall panel FTP orfod penderfynu materion o ymddygiad, perfformiad ac efallai iechyd yn ystod yr un gwrandawiad. Byddai’n gais go anodd iddynt gyfarwyddo eu hunain yn gywir ynghylch y gwahanol safonau o brawf, yn enwedig heb arweiniad cadeirydd cyfreithiol cymwys. Yn fy marn i, y safon sifil yw’r safon briodol o brawf mewn awdurdod amddiffynnol. Mewn achosion sy’n effeithio ar les a diogelwch plant, cymhwysir y safon sifil o brawf, er gwaethaf y ffeithiau y gallai’r honiad a ystyrir hefyd olygu trosedd ac y gallai canfyddiad croes arwain yn ddigon posibl at golli cysylltiad â phlentyn. Byddaf yn argymell i’r GMC fabwysiadu’r safon sifil o brawf ar gyfer pob achos, heblaw, efallai, yr honiadau hynny o gamymddygiad sydd hefyd yn golygu trosedd ddifrifol y byddai modd dadlau bod y safon droseddol o brawf yn briodol ar eu cyfer.
Y Gwrandawiad: Gweithdrefn
Nodwyd y weithdrefn i’w dilyn mewn gwrandawiad panel FTP yn Rheolau drafft 2003 ond mae wedi’i diwygio’n helaeth ers hynny. Nid wyf yn cynnig nodi’r weithdrefn yn fanwl. Gellir crynhoi ei phrif elfennau, fel y maent yn ymddangos yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004, yn fras.
Tystiolaeth am y Ffeithiau
Ar ôl unrhyw ddadleuon cyfreithiol rhagarweiniol, bydd y meddyg yn nodi a yw ef/hi yn dymuno gwneud unrhyw gyfaddefiadau. Lle amheuir ffeithiau, bydd y Swyddog Cyflwyno yn agor yr achos i’r GMC a gall grybwyll tystiolaeth a galw ar dystion i gefnogi’r achos. Fel ar hyn o bryd, bydd tystion yn rhoi tystiolaeth ar lw neu byddant yn dwys-haeru. Gellid eu gorfodi i fynychu.
Derbyn Tystiolaeth Achlust a Thystiolaeth Annerbyniol Arall
Nid oes unrhyw newid sylweddol i’r rheol sy’n llywodraethu derbynioldeb tystiolaeth. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y gall panel IC neu banel FTP:
‘...dderbyn unrhyw dystiolaeth yr ystyriant ei bod yn deg ac yn berthnasol i’r achos ger eu bron, p’un ai a fyddai tystiolaeth o’r fath yn dderbyniol mewn llys cyfraith neu beidio’.
Mae’r ddarpariaeth honno hefyd yn amodol ar eithriad:
‘Lle na fyddai tystiolaeth yn dderbyniol mewn achosion troseddol yn Lloegr, ni fydd y Pwyllgor na’r Panel yn derbyn tystiolaeth o’r fath oni bai, ar gyngor yr Asesydd Cyfreithiol, eu bod yn fodlon bod eu dyletswydd o wneud ymchwiliad priodol i’r achos ger eu bron yn ei gwneud yn ddymunol i’w derbyn.’
Mae’r ddarpariaeth hon yn debyg iawn i’r rheol gyfwerth dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Gobeithiaf y bydd paneli FTP, yn y dyfodol, yn fwy parod i dderbyn tystiolaeth achlust nag y buont yn y gorffennol.
Tystion Diamddiffyn
Un datblygiad calonogol yw’r rheol sy’n darparu ar gyfer triniaeth tystion diamddiffyn, gan gynnwys pobl ifanc a thystion sy’n honni iddynt ddioddef camymddygiad rhywiol meddyg. Mae’r rheol yn galluogi panel IC neu FTP i ddefnyddio mesurau fel cysylltiadau fideo, tystiolaeth a recordiwyd o flaen llaw, cyfieithwyr neu ganolwyr, sgriniau a chlywed tystiolaeth yn breifat i gynorthwyo tystion felly. Ni chaniateir i feddyg sydd heb gynrychiolaeth groesholi tyst sy’n honni iddo/iddi ddioddef camymddygiad rhywiol ganddo/ganddi heb ganiatâd ysgrifenedig y tyst. Yn hytrach, rhaid i’r meddyg (neu, heb hynny, y GMC) benodi person cyfreithiol cymwys i groesholi ar ei ran/ei rhan. Rhaid i’r panel FTP neu IC ystyried cyngor yr asesydd cyfreithiol ac unrhyw gynrychioliadau gan y partïon mewn perthynas â thriniaeth tystion diamddiffyn.
Achosion Chwilysol neu Wrthwynebol
Yn hanesyddol, roedd achosion gerbron y panel PCC o natur wrthwynebol. Yn ddiweddar, cafwyd ychydig drafodaeth am y posibilrwydd o fabwysiadu gweithdrefn fwy chwilysol, lle byddai’n agored i banelwyr archwilio meysydd o dystiolaeth nad yw dadleuwyr y partïon wedi ymdrin â hwy.
Yn ei Bapur Ymgynghori 2001, dywedodd y GMC:
‘Mae yna bryder fod gwrandawiadau PCC yn ormesol ac yn annymunol, yn enwedig i dystion. Er na fyddai symudiad i weithdrefn fwy chwilysol yn negyddu’r angen am brofi tystiolaeth tystion yn drylwyr, mae modd dadlau y byddai ymagwedd lai gwrthwynebol yn creu ymdeimlad mwy o archwiliad diduedd o’r ffeithiau ac yn cyflawni’r un canlyniadau, tra’n achosi llai o ofid i’r rheiny a holir. Byddai rhaid i unrhyw newidiadau ddiogelu hawliau meddygon i amddiffyn eu hunain yn llawn. Mae cyfeiriad ffafriedig y GMC tuag at fodel mwy chwilysol, ac mae’n bwriadu comisiynu gwaith, gan dynnu, lle bo’n briodol, ar arfer gorau mewn mannau eraill, i archwilio’r posibilrwydd o ddatblygu proses chwilysol ar gyfer y PCC na fyddai’n peryglu hawl y meddyg i wrandawiad teg.’
Cefnogwyd y symudiad arfaethedig i broses fwy chwilysol gan fwyafrif helaeth yr ymatebwyr i Bapur Ymgynghori 2001, yn rhai meddygol a rhai lleyg.
Ar ôl y broses ymgynghori, archwiliodd y GMC rai enghreifftiau o brosesau chwilysol, ond daeth i’r casgliad y dylid cadw arddull bresennol gwrandawiadau PCC. Wrth ddwyn y casgliad hwnnw, pwysleisiodd y GMC y graddau yr oedd aelodau’r PCC yn ymgymryd â holi tystion. Yn wir, awgrymodd nad oedd y broses cyn y GMC (fel yr ymddangosai ei fod wedi derbyn yn ei Bapur Ymgynghori 2001) yn hollol wrthwynebol, ond yn hytrach yn
, sef ei bod yn ymgorffori elfennau gwrthwynebol a chwilysol.
Mewn gwirionedd, er y gall panelwyr FTP holi rhai cwestiynau, nid ydynt yn cael eu hannog i amrywio eu cwestiynau yn rhy eang. Mae Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr yn cynghori mai
‘diben cwestiynau’r Panel yw ceisio eglurhad, ac nid croesholi’r meddyg neu’r tyst’
. Mae’n ymddangos mai’r bwriad yw y dylai panelwyr holi cwestiynau i egluro materion a godwyd eisoes yn unig. Yn fy marn i, mae hyn yn drueni. Rwyf wedi gweld enghreifftiau o achosion gerbron paneli PCC lle methodd y dadleuwyr ar bob ochr archwilio mater a oedd o wir bwysigrwydd. Un enghraifft oedd achos
y Cyngor Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd v y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol a Solanke
, lle cyfaddefodd y meddyg i’r PCC ei fod wedi cael perthynas amhriodol gyda chlaf diamddiffyn a’i fod, felly, yn euog o SPM. Nid oedd y naill gwnsler wedi ceisio archwilio’r amgylchiadau lle dechreuodd y berthynas. Roedd hwn yn amlwg yn fater pwysig. Canlyniad yr achos oedd gorfodi sancsiwn a ymddangosai i’r CRHP/CHRE yn drugarog heb fod angen. Apeliodd i’r Llys Uwch. Cytunodd y Barnwr, ar sail y wybodaeth a oedd ar gael, fod y penderfyniad ar ben trugarog y sbectrwm ond nid yn drugarog heb fod angen. Nododd, fodd bynnag, na archwiliwyd yr achos yn gywir ac na holwyd unrhyw gwestiynau yn y gwrandawiad am sut yr oedd y berthynas wedi dechrau. Roedd hyn, meddai’r Barnwr, yn ‘ddiffyg difrifol’. Pe ystyrid ei bod yn dderbyniol i banelwyr archwilio materion drostynt eu hunain, gallai hyn fod wedi digwydd yn achos
ac mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai’r holl ffeithiau perthnasol wedi dod i’r amlwg.
Yn fy marn i, dylid newid polisi ar y mater hwn. Nid wyf yn awgrymu y dylai achosion y GMC fod yn hollol chwilysol. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n credu y dylent fod yn fwy chwilysol yn y modd y dylid annog panelwyr i holi cwestiynau ac i archwilio materion sy’n berthnasol yn eu barn hwy, hyd yn oed pe ymddangosai nad yw’r partïon yn bwriadu gwneud hynny. Amcan y gwrandawiad, wedi’r cyfan, yw galluogi’r panel i gyrraedd y penderfyniad cywir ar gyfer amddiffyn cleifion a’r cyhoedd.
Sylwadau a Wneir a Thystiolaeth a Grybwyllir gan y Meddyg
Ar ddiwedd tystiolaeth y GMC, gall y meddyg argymell i’r panel FTP fod y dystiolaeth a grybwyllwyd yn annigonol i alluogi’r panel i ganfod y ffeithiau a brofwyd, neu i gefnogi canfyddiad o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Pe byddai argymhelliad felly o ‘ddim achos’ yn cael ei wneud, rhaid i’r panel FTP ystyried a chyhoeddi ei benderfyniad i gefnogi argymhellion y meddyg neu beidio. Pe na fyddai unrhyw argymhelliad, neu pe byddai argymhelliad yn methu, gall y meddyg agor ei achos/ei hachos wedyn a gall grybwyll tystiolaeth a galw ar dystion i’w gefnogi. Yna bydd cadeirydd y panel FTP yn gofyn i’r cynghorydd/cynghorwyr arbenigol, pe byddai rhai o gwbl, i roi unrhyw gyngor ar y materion meddygol. Gellid gwahodd yr asesydd cyfreithiol i roi cyngor ar bwyntiau cyfreithiol.
Canfyddiadau o Ffaith y Panel
Yna, bydd y panel FTP yn ystyried y dystiolaeth ac yn cyhoeddi ei ganfyddiadau ar y ffeithiau. Amododd Reolau Mai 2004 na ddylai fod gofyn i banel FTP, heblaw mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol, roi rhesymau dros ei ganfyddiadau o ffaith. Ni ymddangosodd y ddarpariaeth honno yn Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004, nac ychwaith yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Nid oedd yn glir i mi i ddechrau a olygai’r newid hwn yn y Rheolau y byddai paneli FTP bob amser yn rhoi rhesymau neu a oedd yn arwydd yn syml nad oedd y GMC yn ystyried bellach bod angen i’r Rheolau ymdrin â’r mater. Gobeithiais mai’r cyntaf oedd yr achos oherwydd ei bod yn bwysig, er mwyn tryloywder, i’r partïon a’r cyhoedd ddeall pam y mae panel FTP wedi penderfynu fel y mae ym mhob cyfnod o’r achosion. Fodd bynnag, dywed Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr na fydd paneli fel arfer yn gorfod rhoi rhesymau dros ganfyddiadau o ffaith oni bai ei bod yn angenrheidiol gwneud hynny. Enghreifftiau a roir yw pan fo angen
‘egluro canfyddiad o ffaith’
‘mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol eraill’
. Ni chredaf fod hyn yn foddhaol o gwbl. Mae’n bwysig, fel yr wyf newydd ddweud, y dylai’r partïon a’r cyhoedd ddeall pam y cyrhaeddwyd penderfyniadau. Ni awgrymaf y dylid rhoi esboniadau cymhleth. Ni ddylai fod angen chwaith i’r panel ddelio â phob un ffaith a ddadleuir. Fodd bynnag, dylai paneli esbonio eu canfyddiadau ar y materion ffeithiol hollbwysig a dylai fod yn bosibl gwneud hyn mewn ychydig frawddegau. Gallaf weld y byddai hyn yn haws i gadeirydd cyfreithiol cymwys na chadeirydd nad yw’n gyfreithiol gymwys.
Tystiolaeth a Chanfyddiadau ar Fater Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Bydd gan banel FTP y pŵer, dan reol 17(4), cyn penderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, i gyfarwyddo asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad. Mae hwn yn ddatblygiad calonogol sy’n golygu y bydd panel FTP yn gallu cael darlun mwy crwn o’r meddyg nag ar hyn o bryd. Wrth gael yr adroddiad asesiad, gall y panel FTP symud ymlaen wedyn i ystyried ac i benderfynu’r honiad a gall, dan reol 17(5)(b), atgyfeirio’r honiad yn ôl i’r Cofrestriad i’w atgyfeirio i’r archwilwyr achos er mwyn iddynt ystyried a fyddai’n briodol delio â meddyg trwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol.
Mae’r ail ddarpariaeth hon yn rhywfaint o achos pryder i mi. Mae’n amlwg yn ddefnyddiol y gall panel FTP gael yr asesiad ond byddai’n hollol anfoddhaol pe gallai’r panel, ar ôl cael yr asesiad, osgoi gwneud canfyddiadau o ffaith neu benderfyniad a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae’n ymddangos mai dyna effaith y ddarpariaeth yr wyf newydd sôn amdani. Felly, er enghraifft, mewn achos lle cafwyd meddyg yn euog o droseddau anonestrwydd yng nghyd-destun caethineb i gyffuriau, bydd yna atgyfeiriad i banel FTP ond gall y panel, ar gael asesiad iechyd, anfon yr achos yn ôl ar gyfer ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol heb fod unrhyw ganfyddiad o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Ni fydd hyn yn gwneud y tro o gwbl. Os yw’r GMC am adennill ffydd y cyhoedd, rhaid i’r cyhoedd weld ei fod yn gweithredu’n briodol. Ar ôl meddu ar achos, rhaid i banel FTP wneud penderfyniad. Gallai anfon yr achos ar gyfer ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol o hyd pe byddai’n ystyried mai dyna a fyddai’n briodol ar ôl penderfynu bod nam i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, y llwybr gwell fyddai i’r panel FTP orfodi amodau ei hun a chael yr un trefniadau goruchwyliol ar gyfer amodau a orfodir gan banel FTP ag ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol.
Ar wahân i ymarfer ei bŵer i orchymyn asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad, gall yr FTP hefyd dderbyn unrhyw dystiolaeth bellach a chlywed unrhyw argymhellion pellach gan y partïon ynghylch a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ar sail unrhyw ffeithiau a brofir.
Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 yn benodol i baneli FTP dderbyn tystiolaeth am hanes meddyg cyn gwneud canfyddiad mewn perthynas â nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Nododd yr Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft 2003 y byddai’r Swyddog Cyflwyno yn gallu crybwyll tystiolaeth am rybuddion blaenorol a gyhoeddwyd gan yr IC a chanfyddiadau gan banel FTP fod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Roedd hyn yn y cyfnod ar ôl i’r panel FTP wneud ei ganfyddiadau o ffaith a chyn iddo wneud penderfyniad ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
I’r gwrthwyneb, nid oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth bendant yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 sy’n gofyn i banel FTP ystyried hanes FTP meddyg. Nid yw’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn dweud unrhyw beth ar y pwynt hwn, yn yr un modd ag Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr. Mae’r hepgoriad hwn yn syfrdanol oherwydd ‘does bosib mai ei fwriad yw na ddylai paneli FTP ystyried y wybodaeth hon. Gall fod y GMC wedi dwyn y casgliad nad oes angen gwneud darpariaeth ar ei gyfer yn y Rheolau. Cafwyd darpariaeth o’r fath yng Ngorchymyn Cyngor Rheolau (Gweithdrefn) Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol a Phwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1988, dan yr hen weithdrefnau, ac mae yna ddarpariaeth yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn llywodraethu gweithdrefn paneli IC wrth ystyried rhybuddion. Pam nad oes darpariaeth felly ar gyfer paneli FTP? Gall fod wedi’i hepgor ar gamgymeriad, ond yna byddai disgwyl gweld cyfeiriad at ystyried hanes y meddyg yn Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr. Ond nid yw yno chwaith. Credaf y dylid nodi’n union pa hanes blaenorol (os o gwbl) y bydd y panel FTP yn ei ystyried ac ym mha gyfnod.
Ym Mhennod 21, soniais am fy mhryder bod paneli PCC yn aml yn ystyried lliniariad hollol bersonol wrth benderfynu a yw achos o SPM wedi’i brofi. Esboniais fy marn fod lliniariad personol o’r fath yn eithaf amherthnasol i faterion SPM, ond y gallai paneli PPC fod wedi’u camarwain gan benderfyniad Pwyllgor Barnwrol y Cyfrin Gyngor yn achos
, a oedd yn seiliedig ar gamddealltwriaeth o’r hyn a ddywedwyd yn achos
. Ni ddylai’r broblem hon godi dan y gweithdrefnau newydd oherwydd bydd lliniariad hollol bersonol yn berthnasol i’r mater a oes nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Bydd y darlun cyfan yn berthnasol gan gynnwys camymddygiad yn y gorffennol, problemau iechyd neu berfformiad yn y gorffennol a lliniariad personol.
Pan fydd wedi cael y dystiolaeth berthnasol bellach, bydd y panel FTP yn cyd-drafod ac yn cyhoeddi ei ganfyddiadau ar nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Rhaid iddo roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniad. Mae Rheol 17(2)(k) Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn gofyn am ganfyddiad ynghylch a oes ‘nam’ ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Nid yw’r rheol yn ychwanegu’r geiriau ‘i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’. Mae’r rheol yn adlewyrchu’n gywir y prawf statudol yn adran 35D Deddf 1983. Yn anghyson â hynny, dywed Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr y bydd paneli FTP yn penderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer
‘i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’
. Mae’r math hwn o anghysondeb yn ddryslyd iawn. Dyma’r sefyllfa. Tasg gyntaf y panel FTP yw penderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Rwyf wedi awgrymu prawf y dylai ei gymhwyso. Pe byddai’n canfod nad oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, fel arfer ni fydd y panel yn gweithredu ymhellach er y gall, dan adran 35D(3), roi rhybudd i’r meddyg am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y dyfodol. Pe byddai’r panel FTP yn penderfynu bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, dylai fynd ymlaen wedyn i benderfynu a yw’r nam yn cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Er bod yr Arweiniad drafft yn cynghori panelwyr y gallant (mewn amgylchiadau hollol eithriadol) benderfynu bod nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer ac eto peidio â gweithredu, rwy’n ei chael yn anodd dychmygu amgylchiadau lle byddai hynny’n briodol pe byddai’r panel FTP yn canfod bod y nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Nid yw’n hollol glir beth gall y panel FTP ei wneud os yw’n canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer nad yw i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Byddaf yn dychwelyd i’r pwynt hwn yn fuan iawn.
Y Gwrandawiad: Ystyried Sancsiynau neu Weithredu Arall
Pe byddai’r panel FTP yn canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, bydd wedyn yn cael tystiolaeth bellach ac yn clywed unrhyw argymhellion pellach gan y partïon ynghylch y sancsiwn priodol, os o gwbl, i’w orfodi. Ar unrhyw adeg cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad ynghylch sancsiwn neu rybudd, gall y panel FTP ohirio er mwyn cael gwybodaeth neu adroddiadau pellach i’w gynorthwyo wrth gyflawni ei swyddogaeth. Mae disgwyl i’r Swyddog Cyflwyno a chynrychiolydd y meddyg gyfeirio at ran(nau) perthnasol Arweiniad Sancsiynau Arwyddol y GMC ar gyfer Paneli Addasrwydd i Ymarfer. Bydd cadeirydd y panel FTP eto’n gwahodd y cynghorydd/cynghorwyr arbenigol, os o gwbl, i roi cyngor ar y materion meddygol a chyfreithiol.
Bydd y panel FTP wedyn yn ystyried ac yn cyhoeddi ei benderfyniad i orfodi sancsiwn neu rybudd neu beidio neu i
ymrwymiadau a gynigiwyd. Rhaid iddo roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniad. Cymerir penderfyniadau’r panel FTP yn ôl mwyafrif syml. Ni chaniateir unrhyw ymataliadau ac nid oes unrhyw bleidlais fwrw. Lle bo’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal, rhaid i’r panel FTP benderfynu’r mater dan ystyriaeth o blaid y meddyg. Mae’r unig eithriadau i’r ail reol hon yn digwydd pan fo panel FTP yn ystyried argymhelliad o ‘ddim achos’ neu lle bo panel FTP yn ystyried cais i adfer enw meddyg i’r gofrestr, lle mae rhaid datrys y mater yn erbyn y meddyg lle bo’r pleidleisiau’n gyfartal.
Mae Adran 35D(2) Deddf 1983 yn amodi, lle bo panel FTP yn canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd person i ymarfer, gall, os yw’n tybio ei bod yn addas:
‘(a) oni bai mewn achos iechyd, cyfarwyddo y dylid dileu enw’r person oddi ar y gofrestr;
(b) cyfarwyddo y bydd ei gofrestriad ar y gofrestr yn cael ei atal ... yn ystod cyfnod nad yw’n fwy na deuddeg mis fel y gellid ei nodi yn y cyfarwyddyd; neu
(c) cyfarwyddo y bydd ei gofrestriad yn amodol ar ei gydymffurfiaeth, yn ystod cyfnod nad yw’n fwy na tair blynedd fel y gellid ei nodi yn y cyfarwyddyd, â gofynion a nodir fel y tybia’r Panel sy’n addas eu gorfodi er mwyn amddiffyn aelodau’r cyhoedd neu er ei les ef’.
Mae’r sancsiynau hyn yr un fath â’r rheiny a oedd ar gael i’r PCC. Yn ogystal, roedd gan y PCC bŵer ychwanegol penodol i geryddu meddyg mewn achos lle’r oedd wedi canfod bod y meddyg yn euog o SPM ond wedi penderfynu peidio â gweithredu. Ar ôl 1999, defnyddiwyd y term ‘reprimand’ yn lle’r term eithaf hen ffasiwn ‘admonishment’. Un newid sylweddol o’r gorffennol yw, lle nad oedd dilead ar gael fel sancsiwn i’r CPP mewn achos perfformiad (er bod ataliad amhenodol ar gael, mewn rhai amgylchiadau), bydd yn bosibl i banel FTP gyfarwyddo y dylid dileu enw meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr pe byddai’n canfod bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer yn sgil perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol. Mae’r pŵer i orfodi sancsiwn yn ddewisol ac felly mae’n agored i banel FTP beidio â gweithredu hyd yn oed ar ôl canfod bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Fel y dywedais, rwy’n ei chael yn anodd dychmygu amgylchiadau lle byddai hynny’n briodol.
Mae hawl gan feddyg apelio i’r Llys Uwch yn erbyn penderfyniad panel FTP. Ni fydd penderfyniad y panel FTP yn effeithiol fel arfer nes i’r cyfnod ar gyfer cyflwyno apêl (28 diwrnod) ddod i ben, neu nes i’r apêl ei hun gael ei benderfynu. Lle bo panel FTP yn ystyried ei bod yn angenrheidiol er mwyn amddiffyn aelodau’r cyhoedd, neu er lles y cyhoedd neu’r meddyg, gall orfodi gorchymyn o ataliad neu amodau a fydd yn effeithiol ar unwaith. Mae’r pŵer i orfodi amodau ar unwaith ar gofrestriad meddyg yn bŵer newydd a chalonogol.
Fel y nodais yn gynharach, mae adran 35D(3) yn amodi, lle bo panel FTP yn canfod nad oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, gall serch hynny gyhoeddi rhybudd am ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y dyfodol. Gallaf ddeall pam y mae’r ddarpariaeth hon wedi’i chynnwys. Byddai’n briodol mewn achos lle bod y meddyg wedi gwneud rhywbeth o’i le, efallai gwneud gwall wrth ragnodi neu golli diagnosis (fel bod nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer ar yr adeg berthnasol honno), ond wedi cymryd camau ar unwaith i gywiro ei ddiffygion/ei diffygion fel na fyddai nam ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer erbyn i’r achos ddod gerbron y panel FTP. Mae Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr yn awgrymu y gellir rhoi rhybudd lle ceir achos pryder sylweddol ar ôl asesiad perfformiad. Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi fy amheuaeth am ddefnyddioldeb y weithdrefn honno, os na fydd unrhyw fath o gamau dilynol.
Yn rhyfedd, nid yw adran 35D yn rhoi’r pŵer i’r panel FTP gyhoeddi rhybudd lle mae wedi canfod nam. Mae’n rhaid bod y
hwn yn anfwriadol a rhaid ei gywiro. Mae’n abs?rd y gall y panel FTP ganfod bod nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, er nad i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, ond na all wedyn gyhoeddi rhybudd. Rwy’n credu bod y GMC wedi drysu oherwydd iddo anghofio mai’r prawf statudol yw ‘nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ ac nid ‘nam i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’. Er mwyn osgoi amheuaeth, rwy’n ailadrodd y dylai’r cynllun, yn fy marn i, fod fel a ganlyn:
os nad yw’r panel yn canfod unrhyw nam, bydd naill ai’n peidio â gweithredu o gwbl neu gallai roi rhybudd dan adran 35D(3)
os yw’r panel yn canfod nam nad yw’n ddigonol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, dylai fod yn gallu cyhoeddi rhybudd a gall beidio â gweithredu mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol
os yw’r panel yn canfod nam sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, dylai orfodi un o’r tri sancsiwn yn y statud.
Ymrwymiadau Ysgrifenedig
Cyflwynodd Reol 17(2)(m) Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 ddarpariaeth newydd a atgynhyrchwyd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Gall panel FTP
unrhyw ymrwymiadau ysgrifenedig (gan gynnwys ymrwymiadau sy’n gysylltiedig â chyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer) gan y meddyg y mae’r panel FTP yn ystyried eu bod yn ddigonol i amddiffyn cleifion a lles y cyhoedd. Rhaid i’r meddyg gytuno’n ffurfiol y dylid datgelu’r ymrwymiadau (heblaw unrhyw rai sy’n gysylltiedig yn unig â’i iechyd/ei hiechyd) i’w gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr neu PCO, i unrhyw ddarpar gyflogwr neu PCO ac i unrhyw ymholwr.
Nid yw’n hollol glir i mi beth yw ystyr
. A yw’n golygu, wrth ystyried pa sancsiwn i’w orfodi ar ôl canfod nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, y gall y panel FTP benderfynu y byddai’r ymrwymiadau a gynigir yn darparu gradd ddigonol o amddiffyniad ac nad yw unrhyw weithredu arall yn angenrheidiol? Os felly, byddai hynny’n rhesymol, cyhyd â goruchwylir yn ddigonol y gydymffurfiaeth â’r amodau a bod achos o’u torri yn cael ei ystyried yr un mor ddifrifol â thorri amodau a orfodir gan y panel FTP ei hun. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn Neddf 1983 na Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 ar gyfer goruchwylio meddyg sy’n destun ymrwymiadau o’r fath neu ddychwelyd achosion lle rhoddwyd ymrwymiadau i’r panel FTP ar gyfer adolygiad arferol neu ailystyriaeth pe byddai achos o dorri ymrwymiad. Nid yw’n ymddangos ychwaith y byddai gan y GMC unrhyw ‘ddannedd’ i’w defnyddio wrth ddelio ag achos o dorri. Gellid cywiro’r materion hynny heb amheuaeth a rhaid gwneud hynny er mwyn defnyddio’r weithdrefn hon. Fodd bynnag, ni allaf weld unrhyw wir reswm pam y dylai fod byth angen i banel FTP
ymrwymiadau wrth ystyried sancsiwn. Os yw’r panel FTP wedi clywed y dystiolaeth, gall orfodi amodau priodol ei hun ac mae’r Rheolau presennol yn gwneud darpariaeth ar gyfer adolygu ac ar gyfer gweithredu pe byddai achos o dorri’n digwydd.
Nid yw’n amlwg o’r Rheolau a fwriedir i’r ddarpariaeth hon gael y cymhwysiad cyfyngedig yr wyf newydd ei ddisgrifio. Mae safle’r ddarpariaeth berthnasol yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 a chynnwys Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 i Banelwyr yn awgrymu mai dyma fydd yr achos. Fodd bynnag, mae’r posibilrwydd yn fy nharo efallai y bwriedir
neu dderbyn ymrwymiadau gan feddyg mewn cyfnod cynharach yn yr achosion. Mae’r ddarpariaeth yn ddigon eang i alluogi hynny. Pe byddai hynny’n cael ei wneud, mae’n bosib na fyddai’r panel FTP byth yn cyrraedd y cyfnod o wneud canfyddiadau o ffaith neu benderfynu a oes nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Ni fyddai hynny’n foddhaol o gwbl. Rwyf eisoes wedi esbonio pam na ddylid ‘ffugio’ canfyddiadau hanfodol. Rhaid cael sail glir y mae’r GMC yn gweithredu arni. Fel arall, nid oes modd amddiffyn lles y cyhoedd yn briodol.
Cyhoeddi Penderfyniadau Panel
Rhoir gwybod am benderfyniad a wneir gan banel FTP, ynghyd â rhesymau, i’r meddyg, ei gyflogwr/ei chyflogwr neu PCO ac i unrhyw berson neu gorff a ddaeth â’r honiad at sylw’r GMC. Yn ogystal, caiff ei gyhoeddi ar wefan y GMC. Yr unig eithriad yw na fydd gwybodaeth gyfrinachol am iechyd meddyg yn cael ei gyhoeddi.
Nododd yr Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 y byddai panel FTP yn adolygu gorchymyn am ataliad neu orfodi amodau cyn diwedd y cyfnod y gorfodwyd yr ataliad neu’r amodau amdano. Mae’r Arweiniad sydd ynghlwm wrth Reolau Tachwedd 2004 yn nodi y bydd gorchymyn o’r fath yn cael ei adolygu
‘yn gyffredinol’
. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod rhesymau eithaf eithriadol dros beidio â chynnal gwrandawiad adolygu. Nid oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn y Rheolau i osod dyddiad gwrandawiad adolygu yn y gwrandawiad panel FTP cychwynnol, fel yr oedd yr arfer dan yr hen weithdrefnau mewn achos iechyd neu berfformiad. Mae gwrandawiadau adolygu yn hynod bwysig, gan mai hwythau yw’r ‘dannedd’ y tu ôl i’r sancsiynau heblaw dilead. Os yw meddyg yn credu y bydd cyfnod o ataliad neu gofrestriad yn amodol yn dod i ben yn syml ac y bydd ef/hi yn cael caniatâd yn awtomatig i ddychwelyd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau, bydd yna achosion lle na fydd yr amcan adfer y tu ôl i orfodi ataliad neu amodau yn cael ei gyflawni a bydd cleifion mewn perygl.
Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn amodi ar gyfer penodi archwiliwr achos i gynorthwyo’r panel FTP wrth gynnal ei archwiliadau ac wrth baratoi tystiolaeth ar gyfer gwrandawiad adolygu. Byddai’r archwiliwr achos penodedig yn gyfrifol,
am gael tystiolaeth ac am wahodd y meddyg i gael asesiad iechyd neu gyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad fel a fyddai’n briodol.
Newidiwyd y trefniadau hyn gan Reolau drafft Mai 2004 (a atgynhyrchwyd yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004), sy’n golygu mai staff y GMC fydd yn ymgymryd â’r holl swyddogaethau hyn bellach ac nid archwilwyr achos. Rwy’n cymryd y gwnaed y newid hwn yn rhan o ymdrech y GMC i liniaru effaith y cynnydd sylweddol i lwyth gwaith yr archwilwyr achos yn sgil cyflwyno, yn Rheolau drafft Mai 2004, dwbl-drafod achosion gan archwilwyr achos. Yn fy marn i, roedd cynigion 2003 yn well a dylid eu hadfer.
Mae’n debyg i mi mai’r hyn sy’n ofynnol yw i rywun fod yn gyfrifol am gadw llygad gwyliadwrus ar gynnydd unrhyw feddyg sy’n destun amodau yn ystod y cyfnod gweithredol. Wrth archwilio’r hen weithdrefnau, deuthum ar draws achosion lle gorfodwyd amodau, gan gynnwys ymarfer dan oruchwyliaeth a phecyn o fesurau adferol, ond lle nad oedd unrhyw beth wedi digwydd ers sawl mis. Dylai rhywun yn y GMC fod yn cadw llygad i sicrhau bod y meddyg yn glynu wrth yr amodau a orfodwyd a, lle bo’n briodol, dylai fynnu adroddiadau cynnydd rheolaidd. Pan ddaw diwedd cyfnod ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol yn agos ac y gwneir paratoadau ar gyfer gwrandawiad adolygu, mae’n debyg i mi, ym mhob achos bron, y dylai fod rhyw fath o asesiad annibynnol o’r agweddau hynny ar berfformiad neu iechyd y meddyg a arweiniodd at y canfyddiad gwreiddiol o nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn y gorffennol, mae’r GMC wedi rhyddhau meddyg yn aml o amodau ar sail adroddiad gan rywun sy’n ymwneud â’i adferiad/ei hadferiad. Nid wyf o gwbl yn argyhoeddedig am ddigonolrwydd rhai o’r adroddiadau hyn fel sail ar gyfer dod â goruchwyliaeth i ben. Nid yw’r rheiny sydd wedi ymwneud â hwyluso adferiad meddyg bob amser yn y sefyllfa orau i asesu ei ganlyniadau. Rydym i gyd yn hoff o feddwl ein bod wedi gwneud job dda ac mae yna berygl difrifol y bydd adroddiad gan rywun sydd wedi ymwneud â’r meddyg yn cyflwyno safbwynt ffyddiog diangen o gynnydd y meddyg. Beth bynnag, mae’n annhebygol y byddai person o’r fath wedi ymgymryd ag unrhyw asesiad gwrthrychol, mesuradwy o berfformiad neu gymhwyster y meddyg. Yn fy marn i, dylid cael rhywbeth sy’n fwy amlwg yn annibynnol ac yn wrthrychol.
Gwrandawiadau Adolygu Cynnar
Ceir hefyd ddarpariaeth ar gyfer ‘gwrandawiad adolygu cynnar’. Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn amodi y gellid cynnal gwrandawiad ar gais y meddyg, pe byddai archwiliwr achos yn cyfarwyddo felly. Yn ogystal, amododd Reolau drafft 2003 y dylai archwiliwr achos fod yn gallu cyfarwyddo gwrandawiad adolygu cynnar lle cafwyd gwybodaeth a awgrymai fod gwrandawiad o’r fath yn
. Rhoddodd Reolau drafft Mai 2004 y pŵer i gyfarwyddo gwrandawiad cynnar i’r Cofrestrydd (h.y. staff y GMC) yn hytrach nag archwiliwr achos. Byddai cyfarwyddyd am wrandawiad adolygu cynnar yn cael ei wneud pan fyddai’r Cofrestrydd o’r farn ei bod yn
gwneud hynny. Dyma’r achos o hyd dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004. Cadwyd hawl y meddyg i ofyn am adolygiad cynnar. Fodd bynnag, hepgorwyd yn Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 y cyfeiriad at gais gan y meddyg am adolygiad cynnar ac ni chafodd ei adfer yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004.
Mae’r ddarpariaeth y dylai fod adolygiad cynnar pan fo’r Cofrestrydd (sef aelod o staff yn ymarferol) yn credu bod hyn yn
yn amwys iawn. Nid oes unrhyw ofyniad bod rhaid cael adolygiad cynnar pe byddai achos o dorri amod neu ymrwymiad. Hefyd, mae’n debyg y bydd yr holl system yn adweitheddol; bydd yn dibynnu ar rywun yn adrodd i’r GMC fod problem wedi codi. Nid yw’n debyg y bydd unrhyw un yn y GMC yn ‘cadw llygad’. Nid oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth hyd yn oed am oruchwyliwr i gyflwyno adroddiad rheolaidd.
Y Weithdrefn ar Wrandawiad Adolygu
Rhaid rhoi rhybudd o leiaf 28 diwrnod i’r meddyg am wrandawiad adolygu a rhaid rhoi rhyw wybodaeth benodedig iddo, gan gynnwys unrhyw dystiolaeth newydd. Bydd gofyn i’r meddyg nodi a yw ef/hi’n dymuno mynychu’r gwrandawiad. Os nad yw ef/hi’n mynychu, caiff ef/hi gyfle i wneud cynrychioliadau ysgrifenedig.
Yn y gwrandawiad adolygu, bydd y Swyddog Cyflwyno sy’n cynrychioli’r GMC yn rhoi gwybod i’r panel FTP am gefndir yr achos a’r sancsiwn a orfodwyd yn flaenorol. Bydd ef neu hi’n cyfeirio sylw’r panel FTP at unrhyw dystiolaeth berthnasol, gan gynnwys trawsgrifiadau o wrandawiadau blaenorol. Amododd Reolau drafft 2003 y dylid caniatáu i’r GMC a’r meddyg alw ar dystiolaeth neu gyflwyno tystiolaeth. Fodd bynnag, byddai Rheolau drafft Mai 2004 wedi caniatáu i’r meddyg yn unig grybwyll tystiolaeth a galw ar dystion, gan olygu bod y gwrandawiad yn broses unochrog. Roedd Rheolau drafft Gorffennaf 2004 yn cynnwys darpariaeth yn caniatáu i’r GMC grybwyll tystiolaeth hefyd ac i alw ar dystion mewn perthynas ag addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 hefyd yn caniatáu i’r GMC alw ar dystiolaeth am unrhyw fethiant ar ran y meddyg i gydymffurfio ag amod a orfodwyd yn flaenorol ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Mae hynny’n hynod galonogol. Ar ôl tystiolaeth y GMC, gall y meddyg gyflwyno ei achos/ei hachos, gall grybwyll tystiolaeth a galw ar dystion i’w gefnogi. Yna, bydd y panel FTP yn cael tystiolaeth bellach ac yn clywed argymhellion ynghylch a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer neu a yw ef/hi wedi methu â chydymffurfio ag unrhyw amod a orfodwyd ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad.
Rhaid i’r panel FTP wedyn ystyried a chyhoeddi ei ganfyddiad ar gwestiwn addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac mewn perthynas ag unrhyw achosion honedig o dorri amodau. Mae’r weithdrefn hon yn dda o ran egwyddor ond, fel a ddywedais, yn fy marn i, dylai fod rhyw dystiolaeth wrthrychol annibynnol ddiweddar am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Gall y panel FTP wedyn gael tystiolaeth bellach a chlywed unrhyw argymhellion pellach gan y partïon am ei derfyniad o’r achos a rhaid iddo wedyn ystyried a chyhoeddi ei benderfyniad am y cyfarwyddyd priodol. Bydd yn agored i’r panel FTP ar yr adeg hon i
unrhyw ymrwymiadau ysgrifenedig gan y meddyg yn yr un amgylchiadau ag a ddisgrifiais yn flaenorol.
Nodir y llwybrau gweithredu amrywiol sy’n agored i banel FTP ar y pwynt hwn yn adran 35D Deddf 1983 ac maent yn amrywio yn ôl y cyfarwyddyd a wnaed yn wreiddiol gan y panel. Lle bo panel FTP wedi rhoi cyfarwyddyd y dylid atal cofrestriad meddyg, mae’n agored i’r panel FTP mewn gwrandawiad adolygu gyfarwyddo y dylid ymestyn cyfnod yr ataliad am gyfnod penodedig heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis y tro. Mae’n agored hefyd i’r panel FTP, heblaw mewn achos iechyd, gyfarwyddo dileu enw’r meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr. Gall y panel FTP hefyd gyfarwyddo y dylai cofrestriad y meddyg, o ddiwedd y cyfnod cyfredol o ataliad, fod yn amodol ar gydymffurfio â gofynion penodedig am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na tair blynedd.
Ym Mhennod 21, trafodais y problemau y gall cyfnod o ataliad eu creu. Pe byddai’r ataliad wedi’i orchymyn fel ‘cerydd llym’ i feddyg a fu’n euog o ryw fath o gamymddygiad nad oedd yn effeithio ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer clinigol, efallai na fyddai’n amhriodol caniatáu’r meddyg i ailddechrau ymarfer yn awtomatig pan ddaw cyfnod yr ataliad i ben. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai’r ataliad yn cael ei orfodi ar sail perfformiad gwael, iechyd gwael neu fath o gamymddygiad a oedd yn effeithio ar ymarfer clinigol, gallai’r ataliad olygu bod y meddyg yn fwy anaddas i ymarfer ar ddiwedd y cyfnod nag ar ei ddechrau. Byddai ef neu hi wedi ‘colli’r ymarfer’ yn y ddwy ystyr. Weithiau, byddai’r panel sy’n gorfodi’r sancsiwn yn cynghori’r meddyg ynghylch pa gamau adferol y dylai ef/hi eu cymryd tra’i fod/ei bod wedi’i atal/ei hatal. Ond credwyd, yn gywir yn fy marn i, na ellid gorfodi unrhyw amodau’n gyfreithlon yn ystod cyfnod o ataliad fel nad oedd goruchwyliaeth yn briodol.
Dan y gweithdrefnau newydd, mae’n ymddangos yn annhebygol y bydd ataliad yn cael ei orchymyn mewn unrhyw achos oni bai bod nam ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i raddau eithaf difrifol. Nid yw’n bosibl gorfodi amodau yn ystod cyfnod yr ataliad, er y gall paneli FTP gynghori meddygon yn synhwyrol ynghylch yr adferiad y tybiant ei fod yn briodol iddynt ymgymryd ag ef tra’u bod wedi’u hatal. Mae’n debyg i mi na ddylid caniatáu i unrhyw feddyg sydd wedi’i atal ailddechrau ymarfer o gwbl heb gael rhyw fath o asesiad. Yn fy marn i, nid yw’n ddigonol gorfodi amodau ar ddiwedd cyfnod yr ataliad. Mae bron yn sicr y bydd angen amodau, ond dylid eu gorfodi ar ôl i’r meddyg llwyddo i basio asesiad o gymhwyster sylfaenol.
Lle’r oedd y cyfarwyddyd gwreiddiol ar gyfer cofrestriad amodol, gall y panel FTP mewn gwrandawiad adolygu gyfarwyddo dilead (heblaw mewn achos iechyd), cyfarwyddo y dylid atal cofrestriad y meddyg, am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na 12 mis, neu gyfarwyddo y dylid ymestyn cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol am gyfnod heb fod yn fwy na thair blynedd. Mae’n agored hefyd i’r panel FTP ddiddymu ei gyfarwyddyd gwreiddiol neu ddiddymu neu amrywio unrhyw un o’r amodau a orfodwyd gan y cyfarwyddyd am weddill y cyfnod cyfredol o gofrestriad amodol. Lle bo meddyg wedi methu cydymffurfio ag amod neu gofrestriad, gall panel FTP, heblaw mewn achos iechyd, ddim ond cyfarwyddo dileu enw’r meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr neu gyfarwyddo y dylid atal cofrestriad y meddyg.
Rwyf wedi sôn eisoes am rai o’m pryderon ynghylch yr hyn y gellid ei ddisgrifio fel ‘ochr fusnes’ y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Nid yw gorfodi amodau neu ataliad yn unig yn ddigon i amddiffyn y cyhoedd rhag meddyg y mae nam ar ei addasrwydd i ymarfer. Rhaid cael goruchwyliaeth briodol ac asesiad digonol o’r meddyg cyn caniatáu iddo/iddi ddychwelyd i ymarfer heb gyfyngiadau. Ni chredaf ei bod yn foddhaol gorfodi cyfnod hir o amodau, gan fod hyn yn golygu y gall y meddyg ddiflannu o’r golwg ac ymarfer dan ychydig iawn o oruchwyliaeth. Gall fod y GMC yn credu y bydd y meddyg yn cael ei oruchwylio’n lleol gan ei PCO. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, dylai’r GMC fod yn gyfrifol. Hefyd, mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai dyddiad cymharol gynnar ar gyfer gwrandawiad adolygu gerbron panel FTP olygu bod y meddyg yn canolbwyntio ar ei adferiad/ei hadferiad. Yn fy marn i, ni ddylai cyfnodau o gofrestriad amodol fod yn fwy na 12 mis i ddechrau. Mae’n ddigon posib y gall fod angen cyfnod adnewyddedig ond bydd y cyfnod cychwynnol byrrach o leiaf yn golygu bod y meddyg yn dod yn ôl am adolygiad mewn amser rhesymol.
Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi fy mhryder hefyd nad oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth yn y Rheolau ar gyfer monitro neu oruchwylio’n rheolaidd feddyg sy’n destun cyfarwyddyd am gofrestriad amodol a orfodwyd gan banel FTP. Mewn geiriau eraill, ni oruchwylir y meddyg cystal ag y gwnaed dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd neu berfformiad gwirfoddol. Mae hwn yn fwlch difrifol ac mae’n golygu y gall amodau a orfodir gan banel FTP fod yn sylweddol llai beichus nag ar gyfer meddyg mewn gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol. (Wrth gwrs, rwy’n cydnabod y gall y trefniadau newydd ar gyfer ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol mewn achosion gydag elfen iechyd neu berfformiad fod yn dipyn mwy llac yn y dyfodol, pan fyddant dan reolaeth staff yn hytrach na’r sgrinwyr iechyd a’r cydlynwyr achos perfformiad a allai ddod ag arbenigedd a pharhad at eu gwaith. Amser a ddengys.) Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg nad oes unrhyw synnwyr mewn dyfeisio system sy’n amlwg yn llai llym mewn achosion lle gorfodir amodau gan banel FTP na phan ceir ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Yn fy marn i, dylid penodi goruchwyliwr proffesiynol ym mhob achos lle mae meddyg yn ymarfer dan amodau, a dylai’r goruchwyliwr proffesiynol hwnnw roi adborth rheolaidd i’r GMC. Dylai fod goruchwyliwr meddygol ym mhob achos iechyd a dylid disgwyl iddo/iddi weithredu i’r safonau a oedd yn ofynnol dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Hefyd, yn fy marn i, rhaid gwneud rhyw fath o asesiad annibynnol cyn codi amodau.
Ceisiadau i Adfer Cofrestriad Meddyg
Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn nodi’r weithdrefn i’w mabwysiadu pan fo meddyg y mae ei enw wedi’i ddileu oddi ar y gofrestr yn gwneud cais am adfer ei enw. Roeddent yn darparu ar gyfer penodi archwiliwr achos i ystyried ac i baratoi’r dystiolaeth i’w rhoi gerbron y panel FTP mewn gwrandawiad adfer. Byddai ef neu hi’n cael yr un pwerau i gael tystiolaeth arbenigol ac arall fel mewn perthynas â gwrandawiad adolygu. Newidiwyd y trefniadau hyn gan Reolau drafft Mai 2004 ac adlewyrchir y drefn sydd wedi newid yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004. Bydd y staff - ac nid archwilwyr achos - yn cyflawni’r swyddogaethau y byddai’r archwilwyr achos yn eu cyflawni’n flaenorol. Rwy’n credu mai cam yn ôl yw hwn. Ni allaf weld unrhyw reswm o egwyddor pam na ddylid gofyn i archwilwyr achos wneud y gwaith hwn; maent yn amlwg yn fwy cymwys i wneud hynny na staff y GMC. Yr unig gasgliad sydd gen i yw mai’r rheswm dros y newid oedd lleihau llwyth gwaith archwilwyr achos.
Nid yw Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn cynnwys unrhyw ofyniad y dylid cynnal asesiad perfformiad neu iechyd yn awtomatig yn achos pob cais i adfer. Gall y staff gyfarwyddo asesiad o berfformiad neu iechyd; mae’n agored hefyd i’r panel FTP sy’n clywed y cais i gyfarwyddo asesiad cyn gwneud ei benderfyniad. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod yn orfodol i feddyg gael asesiad o bob agwedd ar ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer cyn glywir ei gais/ei chais am adferiad. Ers y diwygiad i Ddeddf 1983 a ddaeth i rym yn 2000, bydd y meddyg yn anochel wedi bod oddi ar y gofrestr ac i ffwrdd o ymarfer clinigol am gryn dipyn - sef pum mlynedd os nad oedd y dilead yn wirfoddol.
Mae’r weithdrefn mewn gwrandawiad adfer yn debyg i’r weithdrefn mewn gwrandawiad adolygu, oni bai mai’r penderfyniad a wneir gan y panel FTP yw caniatáu neu wrthod y cais am adferiad. Rhaid i’r panel FTP roi rhesymau dros ei benderfyniad. Mewn achos priodol, gall wneud cyfarwyddyd yn atal yn amhenodol hawl yr ymgeisydd i wneud ceisiadau pellach am adferiad. Nid yw’n agored i’r panel FTP adfer y meddyg i’r gofrestr yn amodol ar amodau. Rwy’n deall bod y GMC yn credu y gallai paneli FTP fod yn rhy awyddus i adfer ymgeiswyr pe byddai’r opsiwn i adfer gydag amodau ar gael. Mae hefyd o’r farn y dylid penderfynu gwrthod adferiad pe byddai amheuon am addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Rwy’n deall y safbwynt hwnnw. Ond rhaid i’r amser ddod lle bo panel yn credu ei bod yn briodol adfer ond lle byddai cyfnod o oruchwyliaeth yn amddiffyniad doeth. Argymhellaf y dylai pob meddyg sy’n cael ei adfer/ei hadfer i’r gofrestr ar ôl dilead gael mentor, sy’n ymrwymo i fonitro ei gynnydd/ei chynnydd ac i adrodd i’r GMC.
Bydd penderfyniadau paneli FTP yn destun apêl gan feddyg ac adolygiad barnwrol ar gais achwynydd. Yn ogystal, bydd y CRHP/CHRE yn gallu atgyfeirio penderfyniad panel FTP i’r Llys Uwch mewn rhai amgylchiadau. Mae’r GMC wedi nodi nad oes ganddo unrhyw bŵer i apelio penderfyniadau a wneir gan baneli FTP. Dywed y GMC y dymuna gael y gallu i gwestiynu’r penderfyniadau hynny nad yw’n ymddangos eu bod yn amddiffyn lles y cyhoedd yn ddigonol. Mewn papur briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Mai 2004, nodwyd y gallai’r GMC wahodd y CRHP/CHRE i gyflwyno apêl ar ei ran; fodd bynnag; awgrymwyd nad oedd hynny’n ffordd amgen foddhaol o allu gweithredu ei hun.
O ganlyniad, cytunodd y GMC yn ei gyfarfod Mai 2004 y dylai, yn amodol ar waith pellach ar fecanweithiau ac ymgynghori, ofyn am ddeddfwriaeth bellach i alluogi’r GMC i apelio i’r Llys Uwch yn erbyn penderfyniadau paneli FTP yr ystyriai yn drugarog yn ddiangen, naill ai ynghylch sancsiwn neu ynghylch a oedd nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ar sail y ffeithiau a ganfuwyd. Yn fy marn i, byddai pŵer o’r fath yn amhriodol ac mae’n ddigon diangen beth bynnag. Byddai’n amhriodol gan fod y GMC yn parhau i ymarfer rheolaeth helaeth iawn ar baneli FTP. Mae’n ddiangen gan fod gan y CRHP/CHRE y pŵer a’r adnoddau i gyflwyno apêl. Os yw’r GMC yn poeni am benderfyniad sy’n ddiangen drugarog, gall wahodd y CRHP/CHRE i weithredu; yn wir, mae eisoes wedi cymryd y cam hwn mewn achos diweddar. Mae gan y GMC ddyletswydd i gydweithredu â’r CHRP/CHRE ac mae’n debyg i mi fod hwn yn faes amlwg am gydweithrediad o’r fath.

---  ---
Yn ystod y Bennod hir hon, rwyf wedi mynegi fy marnau am gynigion y GMC ar gyfer ei weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Mae’n amlwg y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd, mewn rhai meysydd, yn welliant sylweddol ar yr hen rai ac, mewn meysydd eraill, mae’n debyg i mi fod y gwrthwyneb yn wir. Nid wyf yn cynnig, yn y cyfnod hwn, ailadrodd y sylwadau manwl a wnaed gennyf wrth i mi fynd ymlaen. Yn hytrach, rwyf eisiau sefyll yn ôl ac archwilio’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn eu holl agweddau.
Ym Mhennod 15, adroddais yn eithaf helaeth ar yr argymhellion agoriadol i’r Ymchwiliad gan Mr Roger Henderson QC ar ran y GMC. Ni fyddaf yn eu hailadrodd yma. Eu hanfod oedd derbyn y bu llawer yn anfoddhaol dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Fodd bynnag, erfyniwyd arnaf i dderbyn mai’r rheiny oedd ‘yr hen ddyddiau gwael’ ac y byddai’r cyfan yn wahanol yn y dyfodol. Dyma oedd y neges hefyd i’r Ymchwiliad gan dystion y GMC, yn enwedig gan y Llywydd a’r Prif Weithredwr. Ni oedaf o gwbl wrth dderbyn diffuantrwydd eu mynegiannau o fwriad. Fodd bynnag, mae gennyf amheuon difrifol am barodrwydd a gallu’r GMC yn ei gyfansoddiad presennol i newid ei ffyrdd.
Mae’n flin gen i ddweud mai fy ymateb cyffredinol i’r ffordd y datblygwyd y gweithdrefnau newydd yw siom. Er, yn y diwrnodau cynnar, adeg Papur Ymgynghori 2001, y cafwyd pob arwydd fod gan y GMC weledigaeth o’r hyn yr oedd arno eisiau ei gyflawni, mae’r weledigaeth honno wedi’i cholli. Ni chredaf fod y weledigaeth honno, na’r diben neu’r egwyddorion a oedd yn ei thanategu, wedi’u trosglwyddo i’r gweithdrefnau newydd.
Mae’r GMC yn gwybod beth yw diben elfennol ei weithdrefnau FTP neu’r hyn y dylai fod. Cafodd ei nodi’n glir ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001. Dywedwyd mai’r diben elfennol yw hyrwyddo a diogelu lles y cyhoedd, a oedd yn cynnwys amddiffyn cleifion unigol, cynnal ffydd y cyhoedd yn y proffesiwn a datgan a chynnal safonau priodol o ymddygiad. Yn fy marn i, er mwyn bodloni’r diben elfennol hwnnw, mae rhai egwyddorion sylfaenol y dylid eu cymhwyso; er enghraifft, yn amodol ar ofynion cyfrinachedd meddygol, rhaid bod modd archwilio popeth y mae’r GMC yn ei wneud; rhaid ei fod yn dryloyw. Rhaid i’r gwaith a wna’r GMC fod yn drwyadl, yn ofalus ac o ansawdd uchel. Mae hynny’n golygu bod rhaid i bob agwedd ar y gweithdrefnau FTP gael adnoddau priodol. Rhaid i bob proses gael ei ymgymryd gan bobl sydd â chymwysterau addas a’r hyfforddiant priodol i’w gwneud. Er mwyn tegwch a chynnal safonau yn briodol, rhaid dilyn gweithdrefnau a gwneud penderfyniadau mewn modd cyson a thryloyw. Dyna’r egwyddorion bras y dylid fod wedi eu dilyn wrth ddatblygu ymagwedd y GMC at ei weithdrefnau newydd. Dylid fod wedi eu cofio‘r holl ffordd i’r diwedd.
Mae’r meini prawf ar gyfer gwerthuso’r cynigion a gyhoeddwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2001 yn adlewyrchu’r egwyddorion hynny ond ni chawsant eu bodloni. Er mwyn dangos, un maen prawf o’r fath oedd cydymffurfio â Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998, a dywedodd y GMC
‘nad’
oedd
‘yn amau’
ei bod yn angenrheidiol, er mwyn dangos bod ei weithdrefnau yn deg, i wahanu’r swyddogaethau archwilio a dyfarnu. Nid yn unig y byddai hyn yn sicrhau cydymffurfio â Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998, ond hefyd byddai’n magu ffydd y cyhoedd ac yn bodloni’r meddygon hynny a deimlai ei bod yn annheg iddynt gael eu herlyn a’u barnu gan yr un corff. Siaradodd y GMC am y syniad hwn ac yna penderfynu - i bob diben - anghofio amdano. Ni allai aelodau ddarbwyllo eu hunain i ildio rhan o’r broses. Mae’n debyg mai eu cyfiawnhad am hyn oedd eu bod yn credu na allai unrhyw un arall ymgymryd â’r naill swyddogaeth cystal ag y gallent hwy. Ac eto, dyma’r corff a fu’n destun beirniadaeth gyhoeddus ddifrifol ar lawer sail ac a oedd wedi cychwyn diwygiad, yn ôl pob golwg oherwydd ei fod wedi cydnabod grym y feirniadaeth honno.
Mae yna un mater pwysig a oedd yn bresennol ym meddyliau aelodau’r GMC mewn cyfnod cynnar ac nad ydynt wedi cilio rhagddo. Yr angen oedd hwnnw i gael gwared ar y gweithdrefnau ar wahân ar gyfer ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad ac i greu set unedig o weithdrefnau ar gyfer pob math o achos. Maent wedi gwneud hynny ac ni chredaf fod unrhyw un yn amau mai dyma oedd y peth cywir i’w wneud. Pasiwyd y newidiadau deddfwriaethol priodol yn 2002. Ers hynny, ni fu unrhyw wir arwydd o gynllun cyffredinol yn dwyn ffrwyth. Cyhoeddwyd Rheolau drafft 2003, a oedd yn cynnwys ychydig welliannau ar yr hen weithdrefnau ac yn cadw neu’n cyflwyno llawer o nodweddion anfoddhaol. Ers hynny, mae’r GMC wedi ymateb i feirniadaeth o lawer tu, gan gynnwys yr Ymchwiliad hwn. Mae wedi gwneud rhai gwelliannau. Roedd llawer o’r beirniadaethau’n gysylltiedig â materion y gellid fod wedi disgwyl i’r GMC weld ei hun, pe byddai wedi ffurfio gweledigaeth gyffredinol o sut y dymunai i’w weithdrefnau newydd weithredu. Er enghraifft, mae’n syndod i mi fod y GMC wedi cilio rhag ei ymrwymiad, dan yr hen weithdrefnau, i gynnwys pobl leyg yn y prosesau rhagarweiniol ar gyfer dadansoddi cwynion.
Gwnaed y newidiadau sydd wedi digwydd ers 2003 mewn modd tameidiog ac mewn ymateb i feirniadaeth. Ond, yn anffodus, nid yw’r holl newidiadau a wnaed ers Rheolau drafft 2003 yn welliant. Newidiwyd rhai darpariaethau o Reolau drafft 2003 am y gwaethaf. Rwy’n sôn yn benodol am y newidiadau i rôl yr archwilwyr achos. Yn 2003, bwriadwyd y dylent gyflawni amrywiaeth o swyddogaethau, yn ystod y cyfnod archwilio yn bennaf, ond gan gynnwys hefyd ymgymryd â goruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol ac wrth baratoi achosion meddygon sy’n destun amodau, ataliad neu ddilead a oedd yn nesáu at wrandawiad adolygu neu adfer gerbron panel FTP. Nid wyf yn ymwybodol o unrhyw feirniadaeth o’r cynigion y dylai archwilwyr achos gyflawni’r swyddogaethau hynny; yn wir, credais yn bersonol eu bod yn foddhaol. Mae llawer o’r swyddogaethau hyn wedi’u cymryd i ffwrdd o archwilwyr achos bellach a’u rhoi i aelodau o staff nad ydynt yn ddigon cymwys i’w cyflawni. Fel a ddywedais yn gynharach yn y Bennod hon, ni allaf feddwl am unrhyw reswm o egwyddor dros y newidiadau hynny ac rwy’n dwyn y casgliad y’u gwnaed am resymau cyfleuster. Un enghraifft arall o newid am y gwaethaf yw’r ddarpariaeth newydd ar gyfer dileu atgyfeiriadau i banel FTP; mae’r trefniadau newydd yn agored i gamdriniaeth ac nid ydynt hyd yn oed ychydig yn dryloyw. Trydedd enghraifft yw’r trefniadau ar gyfer cyhoeddi llythyrau o gyngor. Nodwyd diffyg unrhyw feini prawf clir ar gyfer eu cyhoeddi yn wendid dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Ond, ar ôl gwelliant arfaethedig cychwynnol, mae gan y trefniadau anffurfiol a gynigir holl wendidau y system flaenorol.
Un pryder penodol y mae’n rhaid i mi sôn amdano yw’r diffyg tryloywder yn y modd y datblygwyd y gweithdrefnau newydd. Newidiwyd y Rheolau drafft o bryd i’w gilydd a chyhoeddwyd arweiniad newydd i fynd gyda’r setiau newydd o Reolau. Nid oes unrhyw beth o’i le gyda hynny, wrth gwrs. Mae’n ddealladwy fod meddylfryd y GMC wedi datblygu dros amser ac o ganlyniad i ymgynghori. Ond, cafwyd ychydig iawn o drafodaeth gyhoeddus yn y GMC am y meddylfryd y tu ôl i’r newidiadau; nid yw’r rhesymau yn amlwg chwaith o bapurau briffio a baratowyd at ddefnydd aelodau mewn cyfarfodydd Cyngor. Nid wyf yn amau o gwbl y trafodwyd y cynigion newidiol yn llawn gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer a derbyniaf ei bod yn hollol briodol y dylai gyfarfod yn breifat. Fodd bynnag, mae’n rhaid y bu’n anodd iawn i feddygon, sefydliadau amddiffyniad meddygol, gweinyddwyr iechyd a’r cyhoedd (fel y bu i’r Ymchwiliad), olrhain datblygiad y gweithdrefnau ac i ddeall yr hyn sydd wedi’i benderfynu a pham. Yn wir, hyd yn oed nawr bod y gweithdrefnau newydd ar waith, mae’n anodd o hyd i ganfod yn union sut y maent am weithredu. Rhaid ei bod yn amlwg o’r Bennod hon na fu’n hawdd i’r Ymchwiliad gael darlun cyflawn. Yn fy marn i, mae yna angen brys am lawlyfr sy’n cynnwys yr holl Reolau, yr holl arweiniad sydd ar waith ar hyn o bryd ac unrhyw safonau, meini prawf a throthwyon i’w cymhwyso wrth wneud penderfyniadau. Dylai’r llawlyfr hefyd roi disgrifiad clir a chyflawn o’r hyn a all ddigwydd ym mhob cyfnod o’r gweithdrefnau. Yn ogystal, rhaid i’r GMC sicrhau bod yr arweiniad y mae’n ei gyhoeddi yn cydymffurfio â’r Rheolau a darpariaethau gwaelodol Deddf 1983. Dylai’r llawlyfr hwn fod ar gael yn hawdd a dylai fod modd ei gyrraedd ar wefan y GMC.
Canlyniad yr holl newidiadau i’r Rheolau drafft yw bod y gweithdrefnau newydd yn debyg iawn i wy’r ciwrad: mae’n ddrwg ac yn dda yn gymysg. Rwyf wedi gwneud llawer o awgrymiadau am newidiadau a fyddai, yn fy marn i, am y gwell. Rwy’n eu gwneud mewn ysbryd adeiladol. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd rhai ohonynt - os nad y cyfan ohonynt - yn cael eu mabwysiadu. Ond bu’r broses o newid yn drofaus ac yn dameidiog. Mae’n siomedig, gan fod hyn yn arwydd i mi, hyd yn oed nawr, ar ddechrau cyfnod newydd, nad oes unrhyw wir ymrwymiad i egwyddorion gwaelodol rheoleiddio da. Nid wyf yn argyhoeddedig bod y llewpard wedi newid ei smotiau nac y bydd yn gwneud hynny byth.

---  ---
Datblygu Cynigion y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol ar gyfer Ail-ddilysu hyd at Ddiwedd 2002
Newid Cyfeiriad
Y Cynigion Ail-ddilysu Adeg Gwrandawiadau'r Ymchwiliad
Datblygiadau ers Dechrau 2004
Pryder Pwysig
I ba gyfeiriad yr â Ail-ddilysu?
A Allai Ail-ddilysu Ddal 'Shipman Arall'?

---  ---
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 15, ar ôl i enw meddyg gael ei dderbyn ar y gofrestr feddygol, mae ganddo/ganddi hawl i ymarfer meddygaeth ac i barhau ar y gofrestr oni bai a nes bod ei enw/ei henw’n cael ei atal neu ei ddileu oddi arni. Am lawer blwyddyn, bu meddygon dan ddyletswydd broffesiynol i gynnal eu cymhwyster proffesiynol. Fodd bynnag, ni fu unrhyw ffordd o sicrhau y gwnânt hynny ac ni fu sancsiwn am fethu gwneud hynny, oni bai a nes bod addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn cael ei gwestiynu o ganlyniad i gŵyn i’r Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (y GMC). Ym 1998, ar ôl o leiaf dau achos proffil uchel lle gwelwyd y bu meddygon yn ymarfer ar safonau annerbyniol o isel dros gyfnod, cafwyd symudiad yn y GMC i gyflwyno gofyniad ar gyfer rhyw fath o asesiad cyfnodol er mwyn adolygu addasrwydd meddyg i barhau ar y gofrestr feddygol. Datblygwyd y cysyniad hwn ac mae’r GMC bellach yn cynnig cyflwyno, yn 2005, gofyniad bod rhaid i bob meddyg sy’n dymuno cadw trwydded i ymarfer ymgymryd, bob pum mlynedd, â phroses i ‘ail-ddilysu’ ei hawl i ymarfer. Dywedir y bydd y broses ail-ddilysu yn gofyn bod meddygon yn dangos yn rheolaidd fod ganddynt ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer’.
Mae gan yr Ymchwiliad ddiddordeb sylweddol mewn ail-ddilysu. Rwyf wedi esbonio yn yr Adroddiad hwn sut y methodd y systemau a ddefnyddiai’r GIG i fonitro ymarfer meddygon teulu yn ystod y cyfnod o fwy nag 20 mlynedd lle gweithiai Shipman fel meddyg teulu i ddatgelu ei fod yn cael gafael ar lawer iawn o ddiamorffin yn anghyfreithlon ac yn lladd ei gleifion. Nid oedd gan y GMC, fel rheoleiddiwr y proffesiwn meddygol, unrhyw drefn bryd hynny ar gyfer monitro meddygon; cyfyngwyd ei rôl yn y broses fonitro i ymateb i gŵynion. Ni chafodd unrhyw gŵynion a allai fod wedi achosi iddo amau y gallai Shipman fod yn lladd ei gleifion. Ers 1998, cafwyd llawer o newidiadau yn y GIG. Disgrifiais rai ohonynt ym Mhennod 5. Ym 1999, cyflwynodd y GIG lywodraethu clinigol, a ddisgrifiais ym Mhennod 12. Pan fydd y newidiadau hyn wedi cael amser i ddod i drefn ac i ddatblygu eu potensial llawn, dylent arwain at fonitro perfformiad meddygon yn llawer gwell, gyda’r ddwy fantais o ddatgelu datblygiad perfformiad is-safonol a chodi safonau yn gyffredinol. Bydd y GMC nawr yn cyflwyno ail-ddilysu, a ddylai, fel y dywedais, gynnwys arddangosiad cyfnodol o addasrwydd yr unigolyn i ymarfer.
Yn y Bennod hon, cynigiaf archwilio cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, y ffordd y bydd ail-ddilysu yn gysylltiedig â llywodraethu clinigol a’r potensial a fydd gan y ddwy broses i ddatgelu perfformiad clinigol gwael neu afreolaidd. Nid wyf yn amau o gwbl fod y problemau a achosir gan feddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael yn sylweddol. Fel y dywedodd yr Athro y Fonesig Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad: ‘Mae yna feddygon i gael sy’n perfformio’n wael ac yn gwneud niwed i gleifion’. Dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto, Llywydd y GMC, wrth sôn at ba ddibenion y byddai ail-ddilysu’n cael ei gyflwyno, nad oedd perfformiad o leiaf 90% o feddygon yn achosi pryderon o gwbl; mae hynny’n awgrymu bod, neu gall fod, problem o berfformiad gwael gyda chynifer â 10%. Mae’n bosibl bod yr amcangyfrif hwnnw’n eithaf uchel; mae eraill wedi sôn am ffigur o 5% neu hyd yn oed 3% o feddygon y mae eu perfformiad yn achosi problemau. Pa bynnag ffigur yw’r un mwyaf cywir, nid yw’r broblem yn ansylweddol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 12, mae’r dulliau o nodi perfformiad gwael trwy weithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol lleol yn gyfyngedig. Gallai ail-ddilysu ddarparu ffordd ychwanegol sylweddol o gyflawni’r perwyl hwnnw.
Yn amlwg, rhaid bod gan unrhyw system ail-ddilysu cofrestriad nodau ehangach na dim ond datgelu gweithgareddau llofrudd torfol sy’n ymarfer fel meddyg teulu. Fodd bynnag, fel prawf brwsh bras, mae’n berthnasol ystyried, pe byddai ail-ddilysu fel a gynigir yn gyfredol mewn grym yn ystod y 1980au a’r 1990au, a fyddai wedi dod â gweithgareddau Shipman i’r amlwg. Fy amcan cyffredinol yn yr Ymchwiliad yw gwneud argymhellion ar gyfer newid i gychwyn darpariaeth systemau rhyng-gysylltiol o fonitro a rheoleiddio a fydd yn datgelu nid yn unig meddygon sy’n niweidio eu cleifion yn bwrpasol ond hefyd y rheiny sy’n eu niweidio am resymau eraill fel anghymhwyster, iechyd gwael neu amharodrwydd i gael gwybod y wybodaeth ddiweddaraf. Rwyf eisoes wedi gwneud yr argymhellion ar gyfer diwygio tystysgrifau marwolaeth ac archwiliadau crwneriaid. Rwyf hefyd wedi argymell y dylid cryfhau’r rheolau sy’n gysylltiedig â defnyddio cyffuriau rheoledig. Credaf y gallai’r argymhellion hynny, pe byddent yn cael eu gweithredu, helpu wrth ddatgelu camweithrediad. Nawr, hoffwn archwilio’r rhan y gallai ail-ddilysu ei chwarae. Pe byddai ail-ddilysu’n cynnwys asesiad cyfnodol o gymhwyster ac addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, gallai wneud cyfraniad enfawr at ddiogelu’r cyhoedd yn erbyn meddyg anghymwys nad oes ganddo’r wybodaeth ddiweddaraf. Mae’n fater arall p’un a fyddai’n dal Shipman arall. Gallai wneud cyfraniad, fel un rhan o’r systemau rhyng-gysylltiol. Yn ogystal ag ystyried ei fanteision posibl, hoffwn archwilio a fydd ail-ddilysu, fel a gynigir yn gyfredol, yn cyflawni ei ddiben bwriadedig mewn gwirionedd.
Prif dyst y GMC ar y materion sy’n gysylltiedig ag ail-ddilysu oedd Mr Stephen Brearley, sy’n ymgynghorydd cyffredinol ac yn llawfeddyg fasgwlaidd, yn aelod o’r GMC ac yn Gadeirydd y Pwyllgor Cofrestru. Cafwyd tystiolaeth am ail-ddilysu hefyd gan Syr Graeme a Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC. Siaradodd Syr Donald Irvine, y Llywydd diwethaf, ar y pwnc yn ystod ei dystiolaeth a chyfrannodd at seminarau’r Ymchwiliad. Cynrychiolwyd y GMC yn y seminarau gan Dr Malcolm Lewis, meddyg teulu a Chadeirydd Cangen Cymru y GMC. Cafwyd cyfraniadau pwysig eraill i’r ddadl am ail-ddilysu gan y Fonesig Lesley, Dr John Grenville (meddyg teulu, a gynrychiolodd Cymdeithas Feddygol Prydain (BMA) yn y seminarau), Dr William Reith (meddyg teulu, ar ran Coleg Brenhinol yr Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (RCGP)) a Dr John Chisholm (meddyg teulu a Chadeirydd Pwyllgor yr Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (GPC) y BMA).

---  ---
Yn y 1970au y codwyd y posibilrwydd yn gyntaf o fynnu bod meddygon yn cael rhyw fath o ail-asesiad cyfnodol o’u haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Ym 1975, cyfeiriodd Pwyllgor Merrison, y soniais am ei Adroddiad ym Mhennod 15, at ddiddordeb cynyddol mewn cysylltu cofrestriad parhaus â phrofion cymhwyster cyfnodol. Fodd bynnag, roedd y Pwyllgor o’r farn bod y mater y tu allan i’w Amodau Gorchwyl. Trosglwyddodd y dystiolaeth a gafodd ar y pwnc i bwyllgor arall, a sefydlwyd gan y proffesiwn meddygol dan Gadeiryddiaeth Syr Anthony Alment, i adolygu,
y dulliau cyfredol o sicrhau cynnal safonau cymhwyster parhaus i ymarfer. Pwysleisiodd Adroddiad Pwyllgor Alment, gyda’r teitl ‘Competence to Practise’, a gyhoeddwyd ym 1976, ei bod yn bwysig bod meddygon yn cael y wybodaeth ddiweddaraf am eu hymarfer a derbyniodd y gallai rhyw fath o aildrwyddedu fod yn werthfawr iawn. Fodd bynnag, daeth i’r casgliad nad oedd unrhyw dystiolaeth i gyfiawnhau cyflwyno aildrwyddedu fel gofyniad gorfodol. Credwyd
‘na ellid seilio system o drwyddedu i bawb ar fesuriadau sy’n ddigon boddhaol i’w chyfiawnhau’
. Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad y dylid, yn hytrach, annog meddygon i gadw’n gyfoes yn wirfoddol. Yn fyr, daeth Adroddiad Alment i’r casgliad fod yna anawsterau ymarferol anorchfygol yn ffordd unrhyw fath o ail-ddilysu. Gellid maddau i’r aelodau hynny o’r GMC sy’n gyfrifol nawr am ddatblygu cynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu am feddwl efallai bod Pwyllgor Alment yn gywir.
Daeth cynigion ar gyfer aildrwyddedu i’r amlwg eto ym 1998 yn syth ar ôl gwrandawiadau’r GMC o honiadau o gamymddygiad proffesiynol difrifol yn erbyn tri meddyg, yn sgil pryderon am y gwasanaeth cardiaidd pediatrig yn Ysbyty Brenhinol Bryste. Mae Syr Donald, a oedd yn Llywydd ar y GMC bryd hynny, yn disgrifio yn ei lyfr, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’
, sut y datblygodd y syniad. Dywedodd, erbyn mis Mehefin 1998, fod ymwybyddiaeth gynyddol am
‘y disgwyliad cyhoeddus clir y dylai rheoleiddio meddygol gynnwys mesurau i sicrhau cleifion bod ymgynghorwyr, a meddygon teulu, yn parhau i berfformio’n effeithiol drwy gydol eu hoes gwaith.’
Yr adeg honno, roedd Syr Donald yn ystyried cyflwyno rhyw fath o ail-ddilysiad dim ond ar gyfer y meddygon hynny a ymarferai heb oruchwyliaeth, h.y. ymgynghorwyr a meddygon teulu sy’n bartneriaid. Rhagwelodd y byddai ail-ddilysu yn gweithredu ar y cyd â’r strategaethau sylfaenol ar gyfer sicrhau a chynnal arfer meddygol da, a fyddai’n cynnwys gosod safonau cyffredinol a phenodol clir, llywodraethu clinigol lleol effeithiol a threfniadau canolog a lleol effeithiol ar gyfer delio ag ymarfer gwael. Awgrymodd nad oedd y gofrestr arbenigol gyfredol (a oedd yn cynnwys enwau’r meddygon hynny gyda’r hawl i ymarfer mewn swyddi heb oruchwyliaeth yn yr arbenigeddau gofal eilaidd amrywiol) yn ‘addas at ddiben’ pe na fyddai unrhyw wiriad ar addasrwydd parhaus y meddygon i ymarfer dros lawer blwyddyn. Awgrymodd y dylai ail-ddilysu ddigwydd bob pum mlynedd. Mewn cyfarfod o arweinwyr y proffesiwn, a gynhaliwyd ym mis Awst 1998, cafwyd cytundeb cyffredinol fod y syniad yn gadarn o ran egwyddor; fodd bynnag, mynegwyd amheuon ynghylch sut i gyflawni ail-ddilysu yn ymarferol.
Yn y misoedd dilynol, cychwynnodd y ddadl am ail-ddilysu yn y proffesiwn yn gyffredinol. Nid oedd cefnogaeth yn gyffredinol. Cafwyd efallai ysgogiad pellach tuag at weithredu - o leiaf yn y GMC - pan ddilëwyd Rodney Ledward oddi ar y gofrestr feddygol ar ddiwedd mis Medi 1998. Bu’n ymarfer fel gynecolegydd ymgynghorol yng Nghaint. Bu ei anghymwyster (a amlygwyd gan gyfradd gymhlethdod anarferol o uchel ar ôl gweithdrefnau llaw-drin) yn amlwg i rai am lawer o flynyddoedd, ond ni chymerwyd unrhyw gamau i’w atal rhag ymarfer. Fel y mae’n digwydd, mis Medi 1998 oedd hefyd y mis yr arestiwyd Shipman ar sail amheuaeth ei fod wedi llofruddio Mrs Kathleen Grundy.
Trafodwyd ail-ddilysu mewn cyfarfod GMC ym mis Tachwedd 1998 ond ni chafwyd unrhyw benderfyniad pendant am yr hyn y dylid ei wneud. Fodd bynnag, mewn cynhadledd arbennig a gynhaliwyd ym mis Chwefror 1999, penderfynodd y GMC, gan fwyafrif sylweddol iawn, gyflwyno ail-ddilysu. Penderfynodd hefyd y dylai ail-ddilysu fod yn berthnasol i bob meddyg, nid ymgynghorwyr a meddygon teulu sy’n bartneriaid yn unig. Penderfynwyd ymhellach y dylai ail-ddilysu fod yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â chofrestriad; mewn geiriau eraill, heb ail-ddilysiad, ni fyddai unrhyw drwydded i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, penderfynodd y GMC hefyd na fyddai’n gwrthod trwydded i ymarfer i unrhyw feddyg oni bai a than iddo/iddi fod trwy weithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC a bod panel y Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP) wedi canfod ei fod/ei bod yn anaddas i ymarfer. Disgrifiais weithrediad y gweithdrefnau perfformiad ym Mhennod 24. Ym mis Chwefror 1999, roedd y gweithdrefnau hyn yn dal i fod yn gymharol newydd, ar ôl eu cyflwyno ym mis Gorffennaf 1997.
Cafwyd trafodaeth yn y gynhadledd arbennig ym mis Chwefror 1999 am sut y byddai ail-ddilysu’n cael ei gynnal. Disgwyliwyd y byddai’r rhan fwyaf yn cyflawni ail-ddilysu heb anhawster ac mai cyfran fechan iawn yn unig a fyddai’n syrthio i gael eu trin dan y gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Yn ôl Syr Donald, yn ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, roedd y cynnig gwreiddiol, a nodwyd yn y papur a baratowyd ar gyfer trafodaeth yn y gynhadledd,
‘yn cyflwyno’r syniad o fodel mewn cyfnodau - proffilio lleol, adolygu, asesu a sicrhau ansawdd allanol rheolaidd’
. Siaradodd lleisiau pwerus yn erbyn unrhyw fath o ‘arholiad’ yn sail i ail-ddilysu. Cytunwyd yn gyffredinol y dylai ail-ddilysu blethu â gweithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol lleol. Gwnaeth y Prif Swyddog Meddygol (CMO) dros Loegr, yr Athro (a Syr yn ddiweddarach) Liam Donaldson, gyfraniad pwysig at y ddadl ac roedd yn cefnogi’r egwyddorion y tu ôl i ail-ddilysu. Ar y pryd, roedd yn ymgymryd yn agos â datblygu llywodraethu clinigol yn y GIG. Dywedodd ei fod yn ystyried bod ail-ddilysu’n
‘rhan bwysig o’r fframwaith cyffredinol o ansawdd yn y GIG ... y mae’n rhaid ei sefydlu’
. Disgrifiodd Syr Donald y modd y siaradodd yr Athro Donaldson am
‘y gyd-ddibyniaeth gref rhwng hunan-reoleiddio proffesiynol - yr oedd hyn
(ail-ddilysu)
yn rhan bwysig ohono - a llywodraethu clinigol a’r ddyletswydd statudol o ansawdd yn y GIG’
. Siaradodd hefyd am botensial ail-ddilysu i wella ansawdd ymarfer. Rhagwelwyd y byddai ail-ddilysu, wedi’i roi ar waith yn briodol, yn cyflawni dau amcan: sef gwaredu meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael er mwyn amddiffyn cleifion, a gwella perfformiad meddygon eraill.
Cafwyd cyfraniad dyheadol arall at y ddadl hon yr hoffwn sôn amdano’n benodol. Dywedodd yr Athro David Hatch, Anesthetydd Ymgynghorol yn Ysbyty Great Ormond Street ar gyfer Plant Sâl, yn ei 30 mlynedd o ymarfer:
‘... nad oes unrhyw un wedi rhoi cyfle i mi ddangos fy mod yn addas i ymarfer a bod gennyf y wybodaeth ddiweddaraf. Byddwn yn croesawu’r cyfle i geisio dangos hynny i rieni’r plant yr wyf yn eu hanestheteiddio a’r plant eu hunain mewn rhai achosion. Byddwn yn gobeithio mai’r Gofrestr, sydd ar gael 24 awr y dydd, saith niwrnod yr wythnos, fyddai’r offeryn ar gyfer gwneud hynny. Gobeithiaf y bydd pobl yn mynd at y Gofrestr, a bydd y ffaith fy mod i arni yn dangos fy mod yn ddiogel i anestheteiddio eu plant.’
Mae’n ymddangos nad oedd pob aelod o’r GMC yn rhannu’r ymagwedd gadarnhaol hon at ail-ddilysu. Ond roedd y rheiny nad oeddent yn rhannu’r ymagwedd hon yn lleiafrif ac, fel y dywedais, rhoddwyd y cynigion ar waith ac roedd ail-ddilysu ar ei ffordd.
Datblygu’r Trefniadau Ymarferol
Ffurfiodd y GMC Grŵp Llywio Ail-ddilysu (RSG) i ddyfeisio cynlluniau ar gyfer rhoi ail-ddilysu ar waith. Ei nod oedd cyflwyno cynigion wedi’u datblygu’n llawn ar gyfer trafodaeth cyn pen dwy flynedd. Y dyddiad targed ar gyfer gweithredu oedd 2002. Adroddodd yr RSG i’r GMC gyntaf mewn cyfarfod Cyngor ym mis Mai 1999. Argymhellodd yr RSG y dylid seilio ail-ddilysu ar yr egwyddorion a nodwyd yng nghyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Fel y deallaf y cynigion bras bryd hynny, bwriadwyd y byddai gwaith yn cael ei wneud i lunio ‘proffil lleol’ o berfformiad lleol. Er nad esboniwyd y term ‘proffilio’, rwy’n cymryd iddo olygu y byddai’r gofynion hanfodol ar gyfer meddygon o bob math penodol yn cael eu dadansoddi, y byddai safonau’n cael eu gosod ac y byddai ffordd o asesu’r meddyg unigol yn erbyn y gofynion hanfodol yn cael ei dyfeisio. Yn y modd hwnnw, byddai pob meddyg yn destun dyfarniad unigol, yn seiliedig ar ddeunydd neu dystiolaeth y byddai ef/hi yn eu cyflwyno. Ni phenodwyd yn fanwl bryd hynny‘r union ffordd y byddai hyn yn cael ei gyflawni. Byddai gwaith datblygu manylach yn cael ei wneud. Yn y cyfamser, ym mis Mai 1999, rhagwelwyd hefyd, pe byddai unrhyw bryderon yn codi am berfformiad meddyg, yn ystod y broses ail-ddilysu, y dylai fod cyfle am gamau adferol lleol a, phe byddai’n angenrheidiol, atgyfeiriad wedyn i weithdrefnau addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP) y GMC a gweithredu ar gofrestriad (h.y. gosod amodau ar gofrestriad neu atal cofrestriad). Pwysleisiodd yr RSG fod rhaid cydlynu datblygiad ail-ddilysu â datblygiad llywodraethu clinigol, a oedd bryd hynny’n newydd o hyd. Yn yr un cyfarfod, cytunodd y Cyngor y dylai fod ymgynghoriad cyhoeddus llawn am ddatblygu ail-ddilysu, yn seiliedig ar gynigion yr RSG.
Parhaodd yr RSG â’i waith. Ceisiodd gyngor y Fonesig Lesley, a oedd wedi arwain y tîm a oedd yn gyfrifol am ddatblygu’r arfau asesu a ddefnyddir gan y GMC yn ei weithdrefnau perfformiad. Rhoddodd y Fonesig Lesley gyngor ac, ynghyd â’r Athro Mike Pringle (Cadeirydd yr RCGP ar y pryd), nododd ei syniadau mewn papur a gyhoeddwyd yn y British Medical Journal (BMJ) ym mis Hydref 1999
. Rhagwelodd y Fonesig Lesley a’r Athro Pringle y byddai rhaid ail-ddilysu meddygon ym mhob agwedd ar y gwaith a wnânt. Ar gyfer pob arbenigedd mawr, byddai nifer o grwpiau ail-ddilysu rhanbarthol neu leol. Efallai y byddai angen un grŵp ail-ddilysu yn unig ar arbenigedd bach i wasanaethu’r wlad gyfan. Byddai aelodau’r grwpiau’n cynnwys cynrychiolwyr o’r arbenigedd dan sylw, y sefydliad proffesiynol lleol, y cyhoedd a’r meddygon mewn rheolaeth gwasanaeth iechyd. Byddai aelodau’r grwpiau yn cael hyfforddiant gan sefydliadau proffesiynol cenedlaethol, fel arfer y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol. Byddai’r sefydliadau hyn yn cael eu cydnabod gan y GMC at y diben hwnnw a hefyd at ddiben gosod y safonau y byddai’n rhaid i’r meddygon ym mhob arbenigedd eu bodloni. Byddai meddyg yn mynd at y grŵp ail-ddilysu sy’n briodol i’w arbenigedd/ei harbenigedd i wneud cais am ail-ddilysu. Byddai’r grŵp yn archwilio’r dystiolaeth a gyflwynwyd ac yn penderfynu argymell ail-ddilysiad neu beidio. Byddai’r grŵp hwn yn ceisio tystiolaeth o safon ddiogel o ymarfer. Byddai’r Coleg Brenhinol perthnasol yn monitro ac yn sicrhau ansawdd gwaith y grwpiau ail-ddilysu. Byddai’n rhaid gwneud gwaith i sicrhau bod safonau cyson yn cael eu cymhwyso yn genedlaethol.
Roedd papur y BMJ hefyd yn nodi’n eithaf manwl y math o ddeunydd y gellid fod rhaid ei gyflwyno gyda’r cais. Dywedwyd y byddai hyn yn amrywio o un arbenigedd i’r llall. Ni chaiff y gofynion roi gormod o faich ar feddygon. Ym mhob achos, dylai fod
‘curriculum vitae estynedig’
, lle byddai’r meddyg yn disgrifio natur ei addysg/ei haddysg, profiad ac ymarfer clinigol. Byddai’r ddogfen hon yn nodi manylion yr addysg feddygol barhaus a wnaed gan y meddyg. Trafododd y Fonesig Lesley a’r Athro Pringle hefyd y posibilrwydd o ddefnyddio deunydd a gesglir at ddibenion llywodraethu clinigol ond pwysleisiwyd ganddynt y byddai’n rhaid gwneud llawer o waith datblygu cyn y gellid defnyddio hwn. Awgrymodd bapur y BMJ hefyd y gallai rhai meddygon ddymuno cymryd gwahanol lwybr i ail-ddilysu, er enghraifft, trwy gyflwyno eu hunain i’r cynlluniau achredu adolygu cymheiriaid sydd ar waith gan rai o’r Colegau Brenhinol. Soniwyd am gynlluniau’r RCGP ar gyfer ennill Cymrodoriaeth neu Aelodaeth i’r Coleg drwy asesiad o berfformiad fel enghreifftiau penodol. Roedd y rhaglenni hyn yn gosod safon uwch na’r safon sylfaenol o gymhwyster y rhagwelwyd y byddai’n berthnasol i’r broses ail-ddilysu. Awgrymwyd y dylai meddygon a allai ddangos eu bod wedi cyflawni’r safonau uwch hynny ac yn eu cynnal gael hawl i ddibynnu arnynt ar gyfer ail-ddilysu.
Ym mis Tachwedd 1999, adroddodd yr RSG eto i’r Cyngor. Yn fras, roedd ei argymhellion yn adlewyrchu’r syniadau a ddisgrifiwyd gan y Fonesig Lesley a’r Athro Pringle yn eu papur BMJ. Argymhellodd yr RSG y dylid seilio ail-ddilysu i ddechrau ar ‘broffilio’ ymarfer y meddyg, yn seiliedig ar dystiolaeth a gesglir yn y maes lle gweithiai’r meddyg. Byddai’r dystiolaeth honno’n cael ei harchwilio gan gymheiriaid y meddyg a chan
‘bobl leyg wybodus’
a fyddai wedyn yn dyfarnu a ddylid argymell ail-ddilysiad neu atgyfeiriad i weithdrefnau FTP y GMC. Argymhellodd yr RSG y dylai’r prosesau lleol a fyddai’n sail i ail-ddilysu gefnogi gwelliant parhaus ac nid nodi ymarfer annerbyniol yn unig.
Papur Ymgynghori Mehefin 2000 y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Ym mis Mehefin 2000, cyhoeddodd y GMC Bapur Ymgynghori, sef ‘Revalidating Doctors, ensuring standards, securing the future’. Nododd y Papur Ymgynghori yr athroniaeth y tu ôl i ail-ddilysu a thynnu sylw i’r manteision ynghlwm wrtho. Byddai’n fuddiol i gleifion trwy eu hamddiffyn rhag meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael, trwy hyrwyddo ymarfer meddygol da a thrwy sicrhau bod y gofrestr yn ddangosydd dilys o addasrwydd cyfredol i ymarfer. Byddai hefyd yn cynyddu ffydd cleifion mewn meddygon trwy roi’r sicrwydd iddynt fod meddygon yn cyflwyno tystiolaeth o gymhwyster yn rheolaidd. Byddai meddygon hefyd yn elwa ar ail-ddilysu; byddai’n helpu meddygon da i fod yn well eto; byddai’n helpu meddygon gyda gwendidau i’w cywiro a byddai’n galluogi meddygon i amddiffyn eu hunain yn well yn erbyn beirniadaethau di-sail am eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn olaf, byddai’n fuddiol i gyflogwyr meddygol trwy roi sicrwydd bod y meddygon y maent yn eu cyflogi yn addas i ymarfer a thrwy ddarparu mecanwaith ychwanegol i nodi ac i ddelio â pherfformiad gwael. Disgrifiodd y Papur Ymgynghori gyd-destun ehangach y diwygiad y mae ail-ddilysu’n rhan ohono. Soniodd am newid graddol mewn diwylliant a oedd wedi digwydd yn y gorffennol diweddar, gan gynnwys hyrwyddo gwella ansawdd a didwylledd a gonestrwydd am gamgymeriadau a pherfformiad gwael. Cafwyd cyfeiriad at y GMC yn datblygu safonau pendant o ymarfer ac at gyflwyno trefniadau llywodraethu clinigol. Cafwyd cyfeiriad penodol at arfarnu fel ffordd y gallai cyflogwyr fonitro a yw meddygon yn cydymffurfio â’u goblygiadau cytundebol. Dywedwyd bod ail-ddilysu cofrestriad meddyg ac arfarnu yn
‘swyddogaethau proffesiynol a rheolaethol cyflenwol’
, y mae angen arnynt graidd gwybodaeth cyffredin am berfformiad proffesiynol. Dywedwyd y cynlluniwyd cynigion y GMC ar ail-ddilysu i wneud y defnydd gorau o’r craidd gwybodaeth cyffredin hwn.
Cyn disgrifio’r broses ar gyfer cynnal ail-ddilysiad, disgrifiodd y Papur Ymgynghori
‘Egwyddorion Ail-ddilysu’
. Yn gryno, y rhain oedd bod rhaid iddo fod yn effeithiol (h.y. mae’n rhaid iddo rannu’r rheiny sy’n addas i ymarfer oddi wrth y rheiny nad ydynt yn addas); rhaid iddo fod yn lleol wrth adlewyrchu ymarfer y meddyg trwy gyfeirio at safonau cenedlaethol; rhaid iddo fod yn dryloyw, yn gynhwysfawr, yn drwyadl, yn gymesur â’r risgiau a achosir gan feddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael, yn deg, yn anwahaniaethol, yn gyson ac yn wiriadwy. Ystyr ‘gwiriadwy’ yw bod rhaid i’r wybodaeth a ddefnyddir i lunio barn am addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer fod yn agored i archwiliad. Dywedwyd hefyd fod rhaid i ail-ddilysiad fod mor syml ag sy’n gyson ag effeithiolrwydd a rhaid iddo adeiladu ar drefniadau presennol a bwriadedig, ac nid eu dyblygu; rhaid iddo hefyd fod yn hyblyg, yn gefnogol ac yn ddatblygiadol, yn rhagweladwy (hynny yw, ni chaiff gynnwys trapiau neu faglau) a rhaid ei fod wedi’i adnoddu’n briodol. Disgrifiodd y Papur Ymgynghori hefyd y safonau o ymarfer da y byddai ail-ddilysu yn seiliedig arnynt. Y man cychwyn ar gyfer pob meddyg fyddai ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’, ond byddai safonau manylach yn cael eu nodi ar gyfer pob un o’r arbenigeddau.
Disgrifiodd y Papur Ymgynghori y broses o ail-ddilysu fel y’i rhagwelwyd bryd hynny. Byddai gan y broses dri chyfnod. Byddai’r cyfnod cyntaf yn cynnwys casglu tystiolaeth y byddai proffilio perfformiad y meddyg yn seiliedig arni. Byddai pob meddyg yn cadw ffolder ail-ddilysu, a ddylai gynnwys gwybodaeth gyfredol o sawl ffynhonnell i ddangos pa mor dda y mae’n ymarfer. Byddai’r wybodaeth yn debygol o gynnwys canlyniadau archwiliad, cofnod o ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus, barnau sampl o gleifion a barnau sampl o gydweithwyr, gan gynnwys y rheiny a atgyfeiriai cleifion at y meddyg neu a dderbyniai atgyfeiriadau ganddo/ganddi. Dywedwyd y byddai’r ffolder ail-ddilysu yn cael ei adolygu’n flynyddol fel arfer; byddai unrhyw ddiffygion yn cael eu nodi gan yr adolygydd a byddai cyngor yn cael ei roi am sut y gallai’r meddyg gywiro’r diffygion hynny. Rhagwelwyd y byddai’r adolygiad blynyddol, yn y GIG - o leiaf yn y lleoliad ysbyty - yn cael ei gynnal trwy systemau arfarnu cyflogwyr.
Ail gyfnod y broses ail-ddilysu fyddai
‘asesiad’
bob pum mlynedd, pan fyddai ffolder ail-ddilysu’r meddyg yn cael ei asesu’n annibynnol gan grŵp ail-ddilysu bach o feddygon a phobl leyg. Byddai’r asesiad yn cael ei wneud yn erbyn safonau a osodir gan y GMC a Choleg Brenhinol meddygol yr arbenigedd perthnasol. Byddai’n rhaid i’r grŵp ail-ddilysu fodloni ei hun fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer a, phe byddai’n fodlon felly, byddai’n argymell ail-ddilysiad i’r GMC. Trydydd cam y broses ail-ddilysu fyddai’r camau y byddai’r GMC yn eu cymryd. Fel arfer, byddai’r camau hynny’n cynnwys ail-ddilysu cofnod y meddyg ar y gofrestr yn unol ag argymhelliad y grŵp ail-ddilysu. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai’r grŵp ail-ddilysu’n ystyried bod angen gweithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg, byddai’n rhaid i’r GMC benderfynu galw ar un o’i weithdrefnau FTP, a allai arwain at ddileu neu atal y meddyg neu orfodi amodau ar ei gofrestriad/ei chofrestriad. Gwnaed yn amlwg, pe byddai gwybodaeth yn dod i’r amlwg, ar unrhyw adeg yn y cylch pum mlynedd - o ganlyniad i fecanweithiau llywodraethu clinigol neu mewn unrhyw ffordd arall - a fyddai’n achosi pryderon difrifol, y dylid rhoi sylw i’r rhain ar unwaith, fel arfer trwy atgyfeirio’r meddyg i weithdrefnau perfformiad lleol ond, mewn achos gwael, trwy atgyfeiriad uniongyrchol i’r GMC. Byddai cyfnod cyntaf ac ail gyfnod y broses ail-ddilysu yn destun sicrhau ansawdd allanol. Byddai hyn er mwyn sicrhau cysondeb, tegwch a diogelwch y cyhoedd.
Mewn darn pwysig ym mharagraffau 20 a 21, esboniodd y Papur Ymgynghori fod rhaid cynnwys sawl gwahanol gorff yn gweithio gyda’i gilydd i sicrhau ansawdd gofal meddygol, a’r GMC yn un ohonynt yn unig. Pwysleisiodd y Papur Ymgynghori hefyd mai’r bwriad oedd y byddai llywodraethu clinigol ac ail-ddilysu yn cyflenwi ei gilydd, gan
‘na fyddai
r naill ar ei ben ei hun yn ddigonol i amddiffyn cleifion
’. Dywedwyd bod cytundeb eang rhwng y cyrff amrywiol dan sylw y dylai ail-ddilysu ddefnyddio systemau lleol presennol ac arfaethedig (er enghraifft, arfarnu yn y GIG), yn hytrach na dyfeisio trefniadau newydd a fyddai’n golygu cymryd meddygon i ffwrdd o’u cleifion.
Mewn adrannau diweddarach, nododd y Papur Ymgynghori yn fanylach sut y byddai’r broses ail-ddilysu’n gweithio yn ymarferol. Disgrifiwyd y math o dystiolaeth y disgwyliwyd y byddai’n ymddangos yn y ffolderi ail-ddilysu a gwahoddwyd sylwadau. Disgwyliwyd y dylai llawer o’r wybodaeth ofynnol gael ei
‘chynhyrchu fel sgil-gynnyrch sicrhau ansawdd yn eu
(h.y. meddygon)
lle gwaith’
. Un awgrym oedd y dylid cynnwys gwybodaeth am gŵynion cleifion. Nododd y Papur Ymgynghori fod y GMC yn gweithio gyda sefydliadau eraill i sicrhau y byddai ei ofynion ar gyfer cynnwys y ffolder ail-ddilysu yn cyd-fynd,
â’r trefniadau newydd ar gyfer arfarnu meddygon yn y GIG. Byddai’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol yn darparu arweiniad manylach ar yr hyn a ddisgwylir ar gyfer pob arbenigedd.
Roedd y Papur Ymgynghori’n cynnwys adran sylweddol yn delio â’r cyswllt rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu. Ceisiwyd barnau ar y mater hwn. Bryd hynny, roedd arfarnu ar gyfer meddygon yn y GIG mewn cyfnod cynnar o ddatblygiad. Byddai’r arfarnwr yn feddyg arall. Nododd y Papur Ymgynghori y byddai’r arfarniad yn broses ffurfiannol, hynny yw, ei fwriad fyddai cefnogi meddygon wrth gynnal a gwella eu perfformiad proffesiynol. Byddai arfarniad yn cynnwysadolygiad o gynnwys ffolder ail-ddilysu’r meddyg, ond ni fyddai’n gyfyngedig i hwn. Dylid nodi unrhyw fylchau yn y ffolder ail-ddilysu a dylai’r arfarnwr roi sylw i unrhyw ddiffygion yn ymarfer y meddyg a nodir trwy drefnu unrhyw gamau datblygiadol neu adferol angenrheidiol. Byddai hynny’n rhoi cyfle i gywiro’r diffygion cyn ei bod yn amser ail-ddilysu. Dylai datganiad fod yn un canlyniad pob arfarniad blynyddol, a fyddai’n mynd i ffolder ail-ddilysu’r meddyg, gan gadarnhau y cafwyd arfarniad boddhaol a nodi unrhyw anghenion datblygiadol. Yn y modd hwn, dylai ail-ddilysiad, pan ddaw, fod yn syml.
Byddai manylion y drafodaeth arfarnu yn gyfrinachol rhwng yr arfarnwr a’r sawl sy’n cael ei arfarnu. Ystyriwyd bod hyn yn angenrheidiol gan y byddai’n niweidio’r broses arfarnu pe byddai’r sawl sy’n cael ei arfarnu yn teimlo’n amharod i godi materion rhag ofn y gallai niweidio ei obeithion am ail-ddilysiad trwy wneud hynny. Ni fyddai’r ffolder ail-ddilysu a ddefnyddir ar gyfer arfarniad yn gyfrinachol. Byddai’r grŵp ail-ddilysu yn archwilio’r wybodaeth yn y ffolder ail-ddilysu, ynghyd ag unrhyw wybodaeth am y meddyg a fyddai ar gael iddo o ffynonellau eraill, a byddai’n asesu cywirdeb, arwyddocâd a digonolrwydd y wybodaeth honno cyn penderfynu a yw’r meddyg wedi dangos ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Nododd y Papur Ymgynghori y byddai angen adolygu’r berthynas rhwng arfarnu a’r asesiad ail-ddilysu pum mlynedd wrth i’r prosesau arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu esblygu.
Cefnogodd y Llywodraeth gynigion y GMC. Yn ddealladwy, roedd yn pryderu’n benodol y dylai’r cynigion hynny blethu â threfniadau llywodraethu clinigol y GIG ac na fyddai’n achosi llawer o waith ychwanegol i feddygon. Ar 6 Gorffennaf 2000, dywedodd Mr John Denham AS, Gweinidog Gwladol yn yr Adran Iechyd, wrth Bwyllgor Sefydlog Seneddol:
‘Rydym eisiau sicrhau bod y system ail-ddilysu y bu’r GMC yn gweithio arni am gryn dipyn yn ffitio’n dda gyda’r system o arfarnu meddygon yn flynyddol yn y GIG a systemau ehangach o lywodraethu clinigol yr ydym wrthi’n eu sefydlu. Rhaid i’r systemau fod yn ddi-dor heb ddyblygu amser ac ymdrech wrth gasglu gwybodaeth. Credaf y bydd y system yr ydym yn ei gosod yn y GIG, os cawn y manylion yn gywir, yn gweithio’n effeithiol gyda’r mesurau newydd o’r GMC i gyflwyno ail-ddilysu, yr wyf yn eu croesawu.’
Cafodd y GMC lawer o ymatebion i’w Bapur Ymgynghori. Roedd rhan fwyaf yr ymatebwyr yn cefnogi’r egwyddorion ail-ddilysu ac yn cymeradwyo’r dulliau arfaethedig o gasglu gwybodaeth, cynnwys arfaethedig y ffolderi ail-ddilysu a’r dull archwilio. Mynegwyd pryderon amrywiol. Yn benodol, teimlwyd y byddai angen ar feddygon llawer iawn o arweiniad. Roedd bron pob ymatebwr yn cymeradwyo’r syniad o gyswllt rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu. Pwysleisiodd llawer yr angen i sicrhau na fyddai natur ffurfiannol arfarnu yn cael ei cholli. Roedd llawer o ymatebwyr yn poeni am gost ail-ddilysu i’r GMC. Awgrymwyd y dylai’r GMC gynnal dadansoddiad cost a budd. Awgrymwyd hefyd y dylid rhoi’r cynigion ar brawf mewn astudiaethau peilot cyn i’r GMC fabwysiadu’r cynigion.
Yn fyr, ni ddatgelodd yr ymgynghoriad cyhoeddus unrhyw wrthwynebiad cytunedig i’r cynigion. Fodd bynnag, cafwyd rhywfaint o wrthwynebiad o’r proffesiwn meddygol. Dywedodd Syr Donald, yn ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, fod rhannau o’r BMA yn gwrthwynebu’r cynigion yn gryf. Daeth y gwrthwynebiad yn benodol gan yr ymgynghorwyr ysbyty.
Yr Astudiaeth Beilot Gyntaf
Penderfynodd y GMC gynnal astudiaeth beilot a digwyddodd hyn rhwng mis Chwefror a mis Ebrill 2001 (astudiaeth beilot 2001). Fe’i chynhaliwyd gan Grŵp Technegol Ail-ddilysu (RTG) a ffurfiwyd gan y GMC. Ei amcan oedd profi dichonolrwydd defnyddio ffolder ail-ddilysu yn ffordd o werthuso addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Gofynnwyd i wirfoddolwyr sy’n feddygon ymgynnull a chyflwyno ffolderi ail-ddilysu. Ystyriwyd ac aseswyd y ffolderi gan grwpiau ail-ddilysu ffug, y dynodwyd pob un ohonynt i ddelio â’r ffolderi ail-ddilysu a gyflwynwyd gan feddygon o arbenigedd penodol. Roedd gan y grwpiau dri opsiwn. Y cyntaf oedd nodi eu bod o’r farn bod gan y meddyg wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer ac argymell y dylid ei ail-ddilysu/ei hail-ddilysu. Yr ail oedd nodi na allent sicrhau bod ganddi/ganddo wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer ac nad oeddent, felly, yn argymell ail-ddilysu. Y trydydd oedd gofyn am wybodaeth bellach gan y meddyg cyn gwneud unrhyw argymhelliad.
Edrychodd pump o’r grwpiau ail-ddilysu ffug ar bob un o’r 20 ffolder ail-ddilysu a gyflwynwyd gan feddygon teulu. Canfuwyd bod amrywiaeth mawr yn nyfnder y wybodaeth a ddarparwyd gan wahanol feddygon a hefyd yn yr amser a dreuliwyd ganddynt yn paratoi eu deunydd. Cymerodd gyfartaledd o 21 munud yr un i aelodau grŵp ddarllen cynnwys ffolder ail-ddilysu a chyfartaledd o 13 munud i grŵp ei ystyried gyda’i gilydd a gwneud penderfyniad. Cafwyd cryn dipyn o anghysondeb rhwng penderfyniadau’r pum grŵp; yn wir, pe byddai penderfyniadau un o’r pum grŵp yn cael eu heithrio’n gyfan gwbl, byddai anghysondeb i raddau rhyfeddol rhwng canlyniadau’r pedwar a oedd yn weddill. Dangosodd y canlyniadau ar gyfer grwpiau’r meddygon teulu fod 86% o’r argymhellion i ail-ddilysu; dim ond mewn 11% o achosion y gofynnwyd am wybodaeth bellach ac mewn 3% yn unig o achosion yr argymhellwyd na ddylid ail-ddilysu’r meddyg. Tybiaf fod y canlyniadau hynny’n eithaf calonogol, yn enwedig gan fod pawb dan sylw yn cyfranogi mewn proses hollol anghyfarwydd. Gellid disgwyl yn rhesymol y bydd y broses yn gwella ac yn cyflymu wrth ei hailadrodd. Byddai ansawdd y deunydd yn y ffolderi ail-ddilysu yn gwella wrth i feddygon gael gwell syniad o’r hyn a ddisgwylir ohonynt. Byddai gwybodaeth fwy gwiriadwy yn dod ar gael gan brosesau llywodraethu clinigol. Hefyd, byddai aelodau grŵp yn ennill profiad.
Roedd adroddiad yr RTG o’r astudiaeth beilot yn obeithiol am y dyfodol yn gyffredinol. Roedd yn cynnwys y sylwadau canlynol:
‘Mae’n amlwg o’r wybodaeth a gynhyrchwyd gan bob panel
(h.y. grŵp ail-ddilysu ffug)
fod yna gydberthyniad agos rhwng argymhellion cadarnhaol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu a’r meddygon hynny sydd wedi cael arfarniad. Mae yna nifer o resymau dros hyn. Yn gyntaf, tueddwyd bod gan feddygon felly y math o wybodaeth wrth law sy’n ofynnol i ail-ddilysu a gallent felly ddarparu’r data gofynnol i wneud argymhelliad cadarnhaol er gwaethaf graddfa amser fer y rhaglen beilot. Yn ail, roedd grwpiau ail-ddilysu yn fwy ffyddiog wrth wneud argymhelliad cadarnhaol lle’r oeddent yn gwybod y bu’r meddyg eisoes yn destun adolygiad ac y bu dogfennaeth o’r adolygiad hwnnw ar gael. Yn drydydd, roedd grwpiau’n amharod yn gyffredinol i wneud argymhellion ail-ddilysu cadarnhaol lle nad oedd unrhyw wiriad trydydd parti o’r data a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg. Nid yw gwiriad trydydd parti yn gyfyngedig i arfarniad ond mae’n amlwg bod cael arfarniad yn ddefnyddiol yn y modd hwn.’
Yng ngoleuni digwyddiadau dilynol, mae’r detholiad hwnnw’n haeddu sylw pellach. Yn gyntaf, adeg yr astudiaeth beilot hon, nid oedd meddygon teulu yn destun arfarniad; cyflwynwyd arfarniad i ymgynghorwyr yn fuan iawn wedyn. Mae’n rhaid, felly, bod yr arsylwad y bu’r grwpiau ail-ddilysu’n fwy ffyddiog i argymell ail-ddilysiad ar gyfer meddygon a oedd wedi cael arfarniad yn gysylltiedig â meddygon ysbyty islaw gradd ymgynghorwyr - mewn geiriau eraill, meddygon mewn graddau hyfforddaint, y gellid dweud eu bod wir yn gweithio mewn ‘amgylchedd rheoledig’. Byddai’r cyfan neu ran fwyaf y wybodaeth a ddefnyddiwyd yn eu harfarniadau wedi’i darparu gan eu cyflogwyr a byddai’n wiriadwy. Yn ail, mae’n debyg nad dim ond y ffaith y cafwyd arfarniad a roddodd hyder i’r grŵp ail-ddilysu, ond hefyd argaeledd y ddogfennaeth o’r arfarniad hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, mae’r datganiad bod grwpiau ail-ddilysu yn amharod i argymell ail-ddilysu oni bai bod y data a gyflwynwyd gan y meddyg wedi’i wirio mewn rhyw ffordd yn ddiddorol ac ychydig yn ddryslyd. Roedd y grwpiau ail-ddilysu wedi argymell ail-ddilysiad mewn 86% o achosion a oedd yn gysylltiedig â meddygon teulu. Mae’n anodd gweld faint o ddata’r meddygon teulu y gellid fod wedi’i wirio. Nid oeddent wedi cael arfarniad eto ac roedd - ac mae o hyd - ychydig iawn o ddata llywodraethu clinigol yn dod o sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol (PCOs) sy’n gysylltiedig â meddyg unigol. Fodd bynnag, heblaw am fod ychydig yn ddryslyd, nid wyf yn synnu o gwbl y byddai’r grŵp ail-ddilysu’n cael cysur o’r wybodaeth bod o leiaf rhywfaint o’r data yr oedd yn ei ystyried wedi’i wirio mewn rhyw ffordd. Mae’n debyg mai ffactor arall fyddai bod gwell syniad gan feddygon a oedd wedi cael arfarniad o sut i lunio ffolder ail-ddilysu sy’n rhoi darlun da o’u hymarfer.
Y Dadansoddiad Cost a Budd
Ar ôl astudiaeth beilot 2001, cynhaliodd y GMC ddadansoddiad cost a budd neu, o leiaf, fe wnaeth ei orau i wneud hynny. Nid yw’n syndod y canfu ei bod yn gymharol hawdd asesu’r costau sydd ynghlwm wrth roi ei gynigion ar gyfer y broses ail-ddilysu ar waith. Fodd bynnag, roedd yn amhosibl bron asesu buddion ail-ddilysu. Nid oedd modd asesu’r buddion yn y tymor byr; byddent yn casglu dros gyfnod hir. Beth bynnag, dim ond un agwedd oedd ail-ddilysu ar yr ysgogiad ar gyfer gwell ansawdd a byddai’n amhosibl priodoli unrhyw welliant penodol i ail-ddilysu, yn hytrach nag unrhyw fesur arall. Galluogodd yr ymarferiad i’r GMC ddarganfod faint y byddai’n ei gostio i roi’r cynigion ar waith ond roedd yn amhendant fel arall.
Dangosodd y dadansoddiad cost, yn dilyn cyflwyniad ail-ddilysu, y gallai cyfanswm y diffyg ariannol blynyddol i’r GMC a fyddai’n ganlyniad cyflwyno ail-ddilysu fod cymaint â£14 miliwn. Yn gyntaf, byddai costau gweithredol blynyddol o £9 miliwn. Yna, byddai swm o bron £5 miliwn a fyddai’n ganlyniad i’r GMC yn colli’r ffioedd cadw blynyddol (ARFs) a delir gan nifer sylweddol o feddygon sydd wedi ymddeol neu nad ydynt yn ymarfer y disgwylir na fyddent yn dewis ceisio ail-ddilysiad ond yn hytrach yn gadael i’w cofrestriad fynd yn ddi-rym. Pe byddai rhai o’r meddygon hynny’n trosglwyddo i’r rhestr atodol, lle byddai ARF gostyngedig yn daladwy, byddai’r colled hwnnw o £5 miliwn yn cael ei ostwng i ryw raddau. Felly, byddai’r gost gyffredinol i’r GMC rhywle rhwng £9 miliwn a £14 miliwn.
Yn ogystal, aseswyd y goblygiadau adnoddau dynol. Byddai’n rhaid i feddygon dreulio amser yn paratoi eu ffolderi ail-ddilysu; byddai rhai’n cael eu cymryd i ffwrdd o waith clinigol i eistedd ar grwpiau ail-ddilysu; byddai rhai’n ymgymryd ag asesu’r rheiny y canfuwyd eu bod yn perfformio’n wael. Ar y cyfan, teimlwyd y byddai angen ar y cynigion ail-ddilysu 204 o feddygon cyfwerth ag amser llawn y flwyddyn.
Datblygiadau yn ystod 2001
Yn ystod 2001, symudodd meddylfryd y GMC i gyfeiriad cysylltu ail-ddilysu ac arfarnu yn agosach. Datblygodd y cyswllt agosach hwn o drafodaethau a gohebiaeth rhwng Syr Donald, Llywydd y GMC ar y pryd, a chynrychiolwyr y BMA. Ni ddaeth yr ohebiaeth berthnasol ar gael i’r Ymchwiliad tan fis Mai 2004, tua phum mis ar ôl i dystion y GMC roi tystiolaeth. Mae’n beth da gan ei fod yn galluogi i mi lenwi bwlch yn yr hanes.
Mae’r ohebiaeth a ddatgelwyd yn dangosy bu Syr Donald, ers rhywbryd cyn mis Mai 2001, yn gohebu â’r BMA ynghylch ail-ddilysu ymgynghorwyr ysbyty. Soniais yn gynharach fod Syr Donald wedi disgrifio yn ei lyfr, ‘The Doctors’ Tale’, sut y gwrthwynebai’r ymgynghorwyr ysbyty y syniad o ail-ddilysu. Cafodd y gwrthwynebiad hwn ei sianelu trwy Pwyllgor Arbenigwyr ac Ymgynghorwyr Canolog (CCSC) y GMC. Yr adeg hon, roedd GPC y BMA yn cefnogi’r cynigion yn gryf, fel ag yr oedd yr RCGP.
Ar 4 Mai 2001, ysgrifennodd Syr Donald at Lywydd y BMA ar y pryd, sef Dr Ian Bogle. Mae’n amlwg yr ysgrifennwyd y llythyr yn erbyn cefndir casgliad llwyddiannus diweddar y trafodaethau rhwng y CCSC a’r Llywodraeth am gyflwyno gofyniad y dylai pob ymgynghorydd sy’n gweithio yn y GIG gael arfarniad blynyddol. Bu’r Llywodraeth yn benderfynol o gyflwyno’r gofyniad hwn ac ni fu’r ymgynghorwyr yn frwdfrydig am y syniad. Fodd bynnag, daethpwyd i delerau, ac nid yw’r manylion yn ddim i’w wneud â’r Ymchwiliad. Byddai arfarniad yn seiliedig ar egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Ar yr adeg hon, ni fu unrhyw gytundeb hyd yma am arfarnu meddygon teulu. Roedd llythyr Syr Donald yn ymwneud ag ail-ddilysu. Mynegodd ei bleser fod y BMA yn ymroddedig i’r egwyddor ail-ddilysu. Aeth ymlaen i bwysleisio pwysigrwydd buddsoddiad y Llywodraeth mewn llywodraethu clinigol, yn enwedig casglu data, archwilio ac arfarnu. Pwysleisiodd fod y GMC eisiau sicrhau bod ail-ddilysu yn seiliedig ar lywodraethu clinigol. Roedd y GMC eisiau i ail-ddilysu fod mor syml â phosibl, yn gyson ag effeithiolrwydd. Y mwyaf effeithiol y byddai trefniadau llywodraethu clinigol y GIG, meddai,
‘yr ysgafnach y gallai cyffyrddiad y GMC fod’
. Cyfeiriodd wedyn at gasgliad y trafodaethau ar arfarniad i ymgynghorwyr a dywedodd:
‘Cyhyd â bod y cytundeb hwn yn cael ei weithredu’n gadarn ac yn effeithiol, dogfennaeth arfarnu y GIG fydd y cyfrwng ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ar gyfer mwyafrif helaeth ymgynghorwyr y GIG. Byddem yn cymryd yr un ymagwedd gyda grwpiau eraill o feddygon sydd â systemau arfarnu. Yn benodol, edrychwn ymlaen at gael manylion, pan gânt eu cytuno, o ganlyniad trafodaethau mewn cysylltiad ag arfarniad ar gyfer meddygon teulu, clinigwyr academaidd, meddygon dan hyfforddiant a dirprwy feddygon sy’n gweithio mewn lleoliad sefydliadol.
Ar ôl rhoi’r trefniadau hyn yn eu lle, a ddylai fod cyn hir, bydd yn bosibl rhoi ail-ddilysiad i fwyafrif helaeth y meddygon yn y wlad ar dir gweithredol cadarn.’
Nid yw’r llythyr hwnnw’n awgrymu y byddai’r syniad o asesiad gan grwpiau ail-ddilysu lleol yn cael ei anghofio a’i ddisodli gan arfarniad GIG. Yr hyn yr oedd Syr Donald yn ei awgrymu oedd mai’r dogfennau a ddaethai o’r arfarniad (h.y. ffurflenni a lenwir gan yr arfarnwr a’r sawl sy’n cael ei arfarnu, y cyfeiriaf atynt fel y ‘ffurflenni arfarnu’) y dylid eu hasesu, yn hytrach na holl gynnwys ffolder ail-ddilysu meddyg.
Yn ddiweddarach yn yr un llythyr hwnnw, siaradodd Syr Donald am fwriad y GMC i sicrhau ansawdd penderfyniadau ail-ddilysu trwy alw am sampl o ffolderi ail-ddilysu meddygon er mwyn i aseswyr GMC archwilio eu cynnwys. Diben yr archwiliad hwn fyddai gwirio ar hap fod canlyniadau arfarniad yn gyson â’r dystiolaeth waelodol y mae’n seiliedig arni a bod y dystiolaeth honno’n cefnogi’r arfarniad yn llawn. Amlinellodd Syr Donald hefyd y rhaglen ar gyfer rhoi’r cynigion ail-ddilysu ar waith. Yn y cyfarfod i’w gynnal yn ddiweddarach y mis hwnnw (Mai 2001), byddai aelodau Cyngor yn cael gwahoddiad i gytuno y dylid mynd at y Llywodraeth ynghylch y diwygiad deddfwriaethol a fyddai’n angenrheidiol er mwyn rhoi’r cynigion ar waith. Gobeithiwyd y byddai’r ddeddfwriaeth angenrheidiol mewn grym erbyn tua mis Mai 2002 ac y byddai ail-ddilysu’n dechrau yn 2004.
Yn ei gyfarfod Cyngor ym mis Mai 2001, ystyriodd y GMC ddisgrifiad manwl o’r broses ail-ddilysu a phenderfynodd yn briodol ofyn i’r Llywodraeth roi’r fframwaith deddfwriaethol angenrheidiol yn ei le, ar y ddealltwriaeth fod llawer o waith manwl i’w wneud o hyd.
Ar 27 Mehefin 2001, ysgrifennodd Syr Donald at Dr Peter Hawker, Cadeirydd y CCSC, i ateb llythyr gan Dr Hawker, nad wyf wedi’i weld. Yn y llythyr hwn, ailadroddodd Syr Donald yr ymrwymiad yr oedd wedi’i roi i Dr Bogle am ddefnyddio dogfennaeth arfarnu fel cerbyd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ymgynghorwyr GIG. Dywedodd na fu’n bosibl profi’r defnydd o ddogfennaeth arfarnu yn astudiaeth beilot 2001 oherwydd na fu unrhyw ddogfennaeth o’r fath ar gael. Roedd hyn yn gyfeiriad at y ffaith, adeg astudiaeth beilot 2001, mai meddygon ysbyty islaw graddau ymgynghorwyr yn unig oedd wedi cael arfarniad ac na chyflwynwyd unrhyw ffurflenni safonol i’w llenwi gan arfarnwyr a’r sawl sy’n cael arfarniad yn ystod y broses arfarnu. Lansiwyd arfarnu ymgynghorwyr ym mis Ebrill 2001 a byddai dogfennaeth arfarnu’n cael ei hystyried mewn astudiaeth beilot bellach.
Ym mis Hydref 2001, ysgrifennodd Mr Scott, Prif Weithredwr y GMC, at Dr Bogle. Ailadroddodd sicrwydd y GMC y byddai dogfennaeth arfarnu, cyhyd â bod arfarnu’n cael ei weithredu yn
‘gadarn ac yn effeithiol’
, yn gerbyd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu mwyafrif helaeth ymgynghorwyr y GIG. Yn ddiweddarach yn yr un llythyr, eglurodd Mr Scott pa ddeunydd ysgrifenedig y byddai’n rhaid i feddyg sy’n dymuno cael ail-ddilysiad ei gyflwyno. Byddai’n rhaid i bob ymgynghorydd gyflwyno Ffurflenni 1 i 4 o’r ddogfennaeth arfarnu ymgynghorwyr ar gyfer pob blwyddyn o’r cyfnod ail-ddilysu. Disgrifiais y ffurflenni hyn ym Mhennod 12 ac mae ffurflenni sampl i’w defnyddio mewn arfarniad meddyg teulu yn Atodiad D. Ni fyddai gofyn i ymgynghorwyr gyflwyno dogfennaeth waelodol fel rheol (h.y. cynnwys eu ffolderi ail-ddilysu) ond byddai’n rhaid iddynt wneud hynny ar gais. Gallai hyn ddigwydd yn rhan o’r samplo rheolaeth ansawdd neu pe byddai angen i’r grŵp ail-ddilysu neu’r GMC
‘edrych yn ddyfnach am resymau eraill cyn bod modd gwneud penderfyniad ar ail-ddilysu’
. Rwy’n casglu o’r llythyr hwn mai bwriad y GMC oedd cael set lawn (h.y. Ffurflenni 1 i 4) o’r ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’u llenwi, a fyddai’n cael eu harchwilio wedyn gan y grŵp ail-ddilysu. Pe byddai’r grŵp ail-ddilysu yn amau a ddylai argymell ail-ddilysiad, byddai’n galw ar y ddogfennaeth waelodol, h.y. cynnwys ffolder ail-ddilysu’r meddyg.
Roedd y papurau briffio a ddosbarthwyd cyn cyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Tachwedd 2001 yn cynnwys adroddiad cynnydd, a oedd yn nodi’r sefyllfa bresennol, fel a ddisgrifiwyd uchod. Y bwriad oedd defnyddio at ddibenion y broses ail-ddilysu y ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’u llenwi ar gyfer pob meddyg a gawsai arfarniad. Roedd Atodiad A i’r papur briffio yn nodi cyflwr datblygiad y trefniadau arfarnu ar gyfer grwpiau amrywiol o feddygon. Mewn perthynas ag ymgynghorwyr y GIG, dywedwyd y byddai arfarniad GIG yn gerbyd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu cyhyd â’i fod yn cael ei weithredu’n gadarn ac yn effeithiol. Disgrifiodd y papur briffio waith parhaus arall, gan gynnwys y gwaith hwnnw gyda’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol a’u Cyfadrannau (h.y. adrannau yn delio ag arbenigeddau bach), a fyddai’n datblygu’r safonau a’r meini prawf a fyddai’n cael eu gorfodi a’r dystiolaeth benodol a fyddai’n ofynnol i feddygon ei chyflwyno ym mhob arbenigedd. Byddai astudiaeth beilot bellach yn cael ei chynnal. Ar bwnc gwahanol, awgrymwyd y dylai’r meddygon hynny nad oeddent mewn ymarfer clinigol (neu nad oeddent yn ymarfer yn amser llawn) fod yn gymwys ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad pe byddent yn cyflwyno canlyniadau asesiad a gynhaliwyd ar eu traul eu hunain.
Pwyso a Mesur y Sefyllfa yn 2001
Mae’n debyg i mi yr ystyriwyd y cynigion ymarferol ar gyfer y broses ail-ddilysu a nodwyd yn y Papur Ymgynghori yn dda. Roeddent yn gyson ag egwyddorion gwaelodol ail-ddilysu. Roedd astudiaeth beilot 2001 wedi dangos bod ail-ddilysu trwy adolygu ffolderi yn ddichonol, er nad oedd y cynnig ar gyfer adolygu ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’i brofi eto. Byddai’r dulliau a ragwelwyd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu yn eithaf drud i’w rhoi ar waith, o ran arian ac adnoddau dynol. Byddent hefyd yn rhoi baich gweinyddol sylweddol iawn ar y GMC, sy’n bwynt y dychwelaf ato yn ddiweddarach. Roedd y cynigion yn cydymffurfio â gofynion y Llywodraeth y dylai fod cyn lleied o ddyblygu ymdrech â phosibl rhwng yr arfarnu a’r ail-ddilysu. Byddai’r meddyg yn paratoi ei ffolder o dystiolaeth i’w ddefnyddio mewn arfarniad; byddai’r arfarniad hwnnw’n cael ei gynnal naill ai gan gyflogwr neu dan drefniadau i’w cytuno ar gyfer meddygon teulu, y byddai PCOs yn gyfrifol amdanynt. Byddai’r wybodaeth yn ffolder y meddyg, lle bo’n bosibl, yn cael ei thynnu o’r wybodaeth honno a gasglwyd yn y broses lywodraethu clinigol. Byddai’r ffolder neu’r ffurflenni arfarnu yn cael eu defnyddio eto mewn ail-ddilysu er, ym mwyafrif yr achosion, ni fyddai’n rhaid cyflwyno’r ffolder.
Mae’n wir y cafwyd rhywfaint o amherffeithrwydd ac ansicrwydd. Yn 2001, roedd arfarnu ymgynghorwyr yn ei ddyddiau cynnar, felly nid oedd yn hysbys faint o wybodaeth a fyddai mewn ffurflenni arfarnu a pha mor ddibynadwy y byddai. Roedd prosesau llywodraethu clinigol trwy’r GIG yn gymharol newydd ac nid oedd llawer iawn o wybodaeth ar gael o ffynonellau o’r fath; ond gellid fod wedi disgwyl yn rhesymol i hyn wella yn y dyfodol. Byddai’r rheiny a oedd yn ymwybodol o’r sefyllfa mewn ymarfer cyffredinol wedi gwybod bod, bryd hynny, ychydig iawn o wybodaeth ‘galed’ am berfformiad meddyg teulu unigol, oni bai ei fod/ei bod yn ymarferwr ar ei ben/ar ei phen ei hun. Casglwyd gwybodaeth am bractisiau meddygon teulu, nid am ymarferwyr unigol. Yn ogystal, nid oedd arfarnu meddygon teulu wedi dechrau eto; roedd wedi’i amserlennu i ddechrau yn 2002 ond, yn 2001, nid oedd yn hysbys sut y byddai’n gweithio’n ymarferol. Cafwyd hefyd pryder mawr a fyddai arfarniad yn cyflawni ei ddibenion ffurfiannol pe byddai’r un ffurflenni arfarnu a’r un ffolder gwybodaeth yn cael eu defnyddio hefyd at ddibenion ail-ddilysu. Trafodwyd pryderon o’r fath yn y proffesiwn ac yn y GMC.
Un pryder na chodwyd yn y cyfnod hwn oedd, mae’n debyg, a oedd y safonau o berfformiad a gymhwyswyd gan y GMC wrth wneud canfyddiadau ar fater perfformiad difrifol o ddiffygiol (SDP) yn ddigon uchel i ddarparu llinell sylfaenol foddhaol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Cofir bod y GMC wedi penderfynu yn gynnar na fyddai meddyg nad oedd yn cael ail-ddilysiad trwy’r broses ail-ddilysu arferol yn colli ei drwydded/ei thrwydded i ymarfer heblaw o ganlyniad i benderfyniad un o’i bwyllgorau FTP. Mae’n rhaid, yn fy marn i, y rhagwelwyd mai’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad fyddai’r math mwyaf tebygol o weithdrefn FTP a allai arwain at golli trwydded ar ôl cais aflwyddiannus i gael ail-ddilysiad. Ni drafodwyd a ellid cyfateb yn briodol y ffaith bod y CPP wedi canfod nad yw perfformiad meddyg yn ddifrifol o ddiffygiol i’r sicrwydd i’w roi i’r cyhoedd y byddai ail-ddilysiad yn golygu bod gan eu meddyg ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer’.
Fodd bynnag, gyda’r
y sonnir amdanynt uchod, mae’n debyg i mi y gosodwyd y sail yn dda ar gyfer system ail-ddilysu a fyddai’n ennyn ffydd y cyhoedd.
Arsylwadau yn Adroddiad Ymchwiliad Bryste
Ym mis Gorffennaf 2001, cyhoeddwyd Adroddiad yr Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus i lawdriniaeth calon plant yn Ysbyty Brenhinol Bryste rhwng 1984 a 1995, sef ‘Learning from Bristol’. Roedd y GMC wedi rhoi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad hwnnw ac wedi esbonio ei gynigion ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Cafodd y rhain gymeradwyaeth gynnes gan Banel yr Ymchwiliad, wedi’i gadeirio gan yr Athro (Syr bellach) Ian Kennedy. Nododd yr Adroddiad fod ail-ddilysu yn cynnwys
‘cyflwyno tystiolaeth i aseswyr allanol o gymhwyster parhaus’
. Pe na fyddai’r meddyg yn gallu dangos cymhwyster parhaus, byddai ei drwydded/ei thrwydded i ymarfer yn cael ei chwestiynu ac yn cael ei thynnu’n ôl yn y pen draw. Nododd fod cynigion y GMC wedi datblygu’n fawr. Roedd y cyhoedd, yn ogystal â’r rheiny yn rhan fwyaf y proffesiynau gofal iechyd (er nid y cyfan ohonynt), eisoes yn cydnabod yn eang werth posibl ail-ddilysu. Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad y dylai ail-ddilysu fod yn orfodol i bob gweithiwr proffesiynol gwaith iechyd ac y dylid datblygu’r prosesau angenrheidiol cyn gynted â phosibl. Pwysleisiodd yr Adroddiad bwysigrwydd asesiad allanol yn y broses ail-ddilysu. Ni chaniateir i’r ffaith y cafwyd rhywfaint o wrthwynebiad yn y proffesiynau gofal iechyd, dywedwyd, sefyll yn ffordd cynnydd. Nododd yr Adroddiad fod hawl gan y cyhoedd i amddiffyniad sicrwydd fod pob gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd wedi cyrraedd lefelau cymhwyster cytûn.
Trafododd yr Adroddiad hefyd ffyrdd y gellid ennill a chadw ffydd y cyhoedd yn y broses ail-ddilysu. Roedd Panel yr Ymchwiliad yn amlwg yn deall y byddai grwpiau ail-ddilysu neu ‘dimau ail-ddilysu’ yn ail-ddilysu meddygon. Argymhellodd yr Adroddiad y dylai’r tîm ail-ddilysu gynnwys
‘presenoldeb allanol’
, h.y. person neu aelod o sefydliad y tu allan i’r proffesiwn ac i’r cyflogwr. Byddai hwn yn rhywun gyda dealltwriaeth o’r buddiant cyhoeddus. Awgrymodd yr Adroddiad hefyd y dylai fod mecanwaith ar gyfer sicrhau bod y systemau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn cael eu hintegreiddio i fentrau eraill ar gyfer amddiffyn cleifion. Cynigiodd y dylai’r dasg o gydlynu’r systemau amrywiol hyn fod yn flaenoriaeth i’r Cyngor Rheoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (sy’n hysbys bellach fel y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd) a fyddai’n cael ei sefydlu’n fuan.
Yr Ail Astudiaeth Beilot
Cafwyd ail astudiaeth beilot y GMC ym mis Ebrill 2002. Eto, cafodd ei gynnal gan yr RTG. Cyhoeddwyd yr adroddiad yn nodi canlyniadau’r astudiaeth ym mis Medi 2002. Diben yr ail astudiaeth oedd archwilio ansawdd y cyswllt rhwng
‘allbynnau systemau arfarnu’
a’r wybodaeth y mae ei hangen ar gyfer y broses ail-ddilysu. Gobeithiwyd y byddai gwell dealltwriaeth yn cael ei hennill o’r ddogfennaeth a fyddai’n dod o arfarniad (h.y. y ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’u llenwi) a’i allu i ddangos addasrwydd i ymarfer yn unol ag ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Ceisiodd yr astudiaeth hefyd gymharu gallu’r ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’u llenwi i ddangos addasrwydd i ymarfer â gallu’r dystiolaeth waelodol yn ffolderi’r meddygon i wneud hynny.
Fel y dywedais, cyflwynwyd arfarnu ymgynghorwyr ym mis Ebrill 2001 ac, erbyn mis Ebrill 2002, roedd y broses o arfarnu ymgynghorwyr ar y gweill. Mae’n amlwg o adroddiad yr ail astudiaeth beilot fod ffurflenni arfarnu ymgynghorwyr yn debyg i’r rheiny a oedd yn dechrau cael eu defnyddio ar gyfer meddygon teulu. Dechreuwyd arfarnu meddygon teulu yn swyddogol ym mis Ebrill 2002. Fodd bynnag, adeg y gwaith paratoi ar gyfer yr ail astudiaeth beilot, nid oedd arfarnu meddygon teulu wedi dechrau ac mae’n debyg nad oedd manylion y ffurflenni arfarnu i’w defnyddio wedi’u cytuno’n derfynol. Roedd yr astudiaeth beilot yn cynnwys grwpiau ail-ddilysu ffug yn ystyried ffurflenni ail-ddilysu a gyflwynwyd gan feddygon ysbyty a oedd wedi cael arfarniad yn ddiweddar. Cafodd ychydig feddygon teulu eu cynnwys hefyd, gan ddefnyddio ffurflenni arfarnu a ddatblygwyd yng Nghymru yn rhan o brosiect peilot arfarnu meddygon teulu.
Archwiliodd rhai o’r grwpiau ail-ddilysu ffug y dystiolaeth danategol a gafwyd yn ffolderi’r meddygon, yn ogystal â’r ffurflenni arfarnu. Ystyriodd grwpiau eraill y ffurflenni arfarnu yn unig. Cafwyd pedair ffurflen. Roedd Ffurflen 1 yn darparu gwybodaeth gefndirol ffeithiol am yrfa a statws proffesiynol y meddyg. Roedd Ffurflen 2 yn disgrifio gweithgareddau proffesiynol cyfredol y meddyg. Roedd Ffurflen 3 yn cynnwys rhestr o’r dogfennau a oedd yn ffolder y meddyg a datganiad am unrhyw ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus a wnaeth y meddyg yn y flwyddyn flaenorol. Roedd Ffurflen 4 yn cynnwys crynodeb cytunedig o’r drafodaeth a gafwyd yn ystod y cyfweliad arfarnu.
Canfu’r astudiaeth beilot, pan archwiliodd y grŵp ail-ddilysu y dystiolaeth yn ffolderi meddygon, y byddai’n ddigonol caniatáu penderfyniad ail-ddilysu cadarnhaol mewn 69% o achosion; yn yr achosion eraill, byddai angen mwy o wybodaeth. Fodd bynnag, pan ystyriwyd y ffurflenni arfarnu yn unig, daethpwyd i’r casgliad, er bod y ffurflenni mewn rhai achosion yn gallu rhoi digon o fewnwelediad i ymarfer y meddyg i ffurfio sail gadarn ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad, nid wnaethant hynny ym mwyafrif yr achosion. Dim ond mewn 32% o achosion y gellid fod wedi gwneud penderfyniad ail-ddilysu cadarnhaol; yn y gweddill, byddai angen mwy o wybodaeth. Yn benodol, roedd pedwar maes penodol o ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ lle’r oedd diffyg gwybodaeth yn aml, sef ‘Gweithio gyda chydweithwyr’, ‘Perthnasoedd gyda chleifion’, ‘Iechyd’ a ‘Chywirdeb’. Serch hynny, casgliad cyffredinol yr adroddiad oedd, pe byddai’r pedair ffurflen i gyd yn cael eu llenwi a phe byddai Ffurflen 4 yn cynnwys crynodeb o
‘drafodaeth arfarnu gadarn’
, gallai fod yn ddigonol at ddibenion ail-ddilysu. Mewn geiriau eraill, cyhyd â bod yr amodau hynny’n cael eu bodloni, ni fyddai unrhyw angen i grŵp ail-ddilysu archwilio’r dystiolaeth danategol o ffolder y meddyg.
Esboniodd yr adroddiad gynlluniau’r RTG ar gyfer gwaith pellach. Bwriadodd yn gyntaf weithio ar ffyrdd y gellid gwella’r ddarpariaeth o wybodaeth, yn enwedig ym mhedwar maes ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ y nodwyd eu bod yn peri anawsterau. Byddai ei waith yn cynnwys datblygu holiadur cleifion a holiadur yn delio â pherthnasoedd gyda chydweithwyr. Yna, cynigiwyd cynnal astudiaethau peilot pellach, gan ddefnyddio’r gwell mathau o wybodaeth hynny. Wedyn, bwriadodd yr RTG ganolbwyntio ar y gweithdrefnau GMC mewnol ar gyfer trafod yr agweddau gwahanol ar y broses ail-ddilysu. Ni chymerwyd y cynlluniau hyn am waith pellach yn eu blaenau byth oherwydd rhoddwyd terfyn arnynt a chwalwyd yr RTG - nid wyf yn siŵr pryd.
Y Ddeddfwriaeth Ddiwygiol
Ym mis Rhagfyr 2002, diwygiwyd Deddf Feddygol 1983 (Deddf 1983) trwy ychwanegu adrannau newydd 29A i 29J. Byddai’r rhain yn dod i rym ar ddyddiad sydd heb ei benodi eto. Rhoddodd Adran 29A ddyletswydd ar y GMC i wneud rheoliadau o ran
‘trwyddedau i ymarfer’
. Byddai’r rheoliadau’n ymdrin â rhoi, gwrthod neu dynnu’n ôl trwydded i ymarfer ac
‘ail-ddilysu ymarferwr meddygol o ddisgrifiad penodol fel amod iddo/iddi barhau i gynnal trwydded i ymarfer’
. Diffiniwyd ail
-
ddilysu yn y Ddeddf fel
‘gwerthusiad o addasrwydd ymarferwr meddygol i ymarfer’
. Mae’n debyg i mi bod y darpariaethau newydd yn rhoi dyletswydd ar y GMC i wneud rheoliadau sy’n ei alluogi i ail
-
ddilysu meddygon, o ran cynnal gwerthusiad o addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Rhoddodd y ddeddfwriaeth bwerau eang iawn i’r GMC fynnu cyflwyno dogfennau a chyflenwi gwybodaeth at ddiben ail
-
ddilysu a, phe byddai meddyg yn methu cydweithredu â’r broses ail
-
ddilysu, gallai’r GMC dynnu’n ôl ei drwydded/ei thrwydded i ymarfer. Pe ystyrid bod nam ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, gellid ei atgyfeirio/ei hatgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Roedd y ddeddfwriaeth felly yn ei lle ar gyfer gweithredu ail
-
ddilysu yn unol â’r trefniadau a ddisgrifiwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2000.
Irvine, Donald (2003) ‘The Doctors’ Tale’. Rhydychen: Radcliffe Medical Press
Southgate, Lesley, Pringle, Mike (1999) ‘Revalidation in the United Kingdom: general principles based on experience in general practice’, BMJ, Cyf. 319.

---  ---
Tan fis Ebrill 2003, byddai aelod gwybodus o’r cyhoedd cyffredinol a fu’n dilyn datblygiad cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu wedi meddwl bod y GMC yn bwriadu bod yn uniongyrchol gyfrifol am ail-ddilysu pob meddyg ac y byddai’r broses yn cynnwys gwerthusiad o addasrwydd y meddyg unigol i ymarfer, gan grŵp ail-ddilysu (fel arfer, grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol), gydag o leiaf un aelod yn berson lleyg. Yr amgyffrediad fyddai mai dau ddiben ail-ddilysu fyddai amddiffyn cleifion a’r cyhoedd rhag meddygon sy’n tanberfformio a gwella ansawdd gofal iechyd yn gyffredinol. Fodd bynnag, ym mis Ebrill 2003, byddai’r aelod gwybodus hwnnw o’r cyhoedd wedi darganfod bod cynlluniau’r GMC wedi newid, ei fod wedi rhoi’r gorau i’r syniad o grwpiau ail-ddilysu’n gwerthuso meddygon unigol a’i fod bellach yn bwriadu ail-ddilysu, heb archwilio pellach yn rhan fwyaf yr achosion, pob meddyg a oedd wedi cael pum gwerthusiad blynyddol olynol - neu, mewn gwirionedd, llai na phump ar ddechrau’r cylch ail-ddilysu.
Prosbectws Ebrill 2003
Ym mis Ebrill 2003, cyhoeddodd y GMC ddogfen y mae bellach wedi’i galw’n ‘Brosbectws’, ond a oedd mewn gwirionedd yn llyfryn a gyhoeddwyd i bob meddyg ar y gofrestr feddygol. Teitl y Prosbectws oedd ‘A Licence to Practise & Revalidation’ a’i fwriad oedd rhoi gwybod i feddygon sut y byddai ail-ddilysu’n gweithio yn ymarferol. Cynlluniwyd y Prosbectws i alluogi meddygon i ddechrau gwneud paratoadau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Esboniwyd diben ail-ddilysu; sef moderneiddio’r system reoleiddio a chynyddu ffydd y cyhoedd. Y nod oedd sicrhau bod gan y meddygon wybodaeth gyfoes a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer trwy gydol eu gyrfaoedd. Cynghorwyd i feddygon
‘ddechrau meddwl nawr’
am sut y byddent yn casglu’r wybodaeth a fyddai’n dangos i’r GMC eu bod yn addas i ymarfer. Dywedodd y GMC y byddai, yn ystod 2004, yn gofyn i bob meddyg ar y gofrestr a oeddent eisiau trwydded i ymarfer. Pe byddent, byddai trwydded yn cael ei rhoi erbyn diwedd 2004, a byddai’n anghyfreithlon ymarfer ar ôl yr amser hwn heb drwydded. Byddai’r drwydded a roir yn drwydded gyffredinol, ac nid yn gysylltiedig ag unrhyw arbenigedd penodol. Byddai’r gofrestr, sy’n ddogfen gyhoeddus, yn nodi a oedd gan y meddyg drwydded i ymarfer.
Dywedodd y Prosbectws y byddai ail-ddilysu’r meddygon hynny a oedd wedi cael trwyddedau i ymarfer yn dechrau ym mis Ebrill 2005 ac, er mwyn cadw ei drwydded/ei thrwydded i ymarfer, byddai’n rhaid i bob meddyg gael ei ail-ddilysu rhywbryd dros y pum mlynedd ganlynol. Byddai ail-ddilysu’n gofyn i’r meddyg ddangos yn bersonol i’r GMC y bu ef/hi yn ymarfer meddygaeth yn unol ag egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’, fel sy’n berthnasol i arbenigedd y meddyg. Nododd y Prosbectws na fyddai’r GMC yn ceisio pennu yn union pa wybodaeth y dylai meddyg ei chasglu at y diben hwn. Yn wir, roedd y GMC wedi llunio’r farn (yn ôl pob tebyg ar sail cyngor cyfreithiol a gafodd) nad oedd ganddo’r pwerau cyfreithiol i wneud hynny. Torraf ar draws i ddweud bod hynny’n fy synnu o ystyried y pwerau cyfreithiol a fydd ganddo pan fydd adrannau 29A i 29J Deddf 1983 (fel a ddiwygir) yn dod i rym; ond dyna a ddywedwyd. Byddai’n rhaid i’r wybodaeth a ddarperir gan y meddyg ymdrin â phob pennawd yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Cyfrifoldeb pob meddyg unigol fyddai penderfynu sut y byddai’n dangos i’r GMC ei bod/ei fod yn addas i ymarfer.
Esboniodd y Prosbectws y byddai dau lwybr posibl i ail-ddilysu: sef y
‘llwybr arfarnu’
a’r
‘llwybr annibynnol’
. Er mwyn cymryd y
‘llwybr arfarnu’
, byddai’n rhaid i’r meddyg ddangos i’r GMC y gweithiai mewn
‘amgylchedd rheoledig’
a’i fod/a’i bod wedi
‘cyfranogi mewn system arfarnu flynyddol’
. Er mwyn i arfarniad fod yn dderbyniol i’r GMC, byddai’n rhaid iddo fod yn seiliedig ar egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ ac
‘wedi’i weithredu mewn system sicrhau ansawdd’
. Dywedwyd bod y GMC yn credu bod
‘cyfranogiad llawn mewn arfarniad blynyddol’
, gyda
‘dogfennaeth gefnogi wedi’i llenwi’
, yn ystod y cylch ail-ddilysu yn
‘ddangosydd pwerus o addasrwydd cyfredol meddyg i ymarfer’
Mae’n debyg bod y GMC wedi cyrraedd y farn hon er gwaetha’r ffaith bod yr ail astudiaeth beilot wedi dangos mai dim ond yn 32% o achosion y bu’r astudiaeth o’r ffurflenni arfarnu wedi’u llenwi yn ddigonol i alluogi penderfynu bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer. Ond mynnodd y Prosbectws fod y GMC yn credu y byddai cymryd rhan mewn arfarniad blynyddol yn unig (y llenwir ffurflenni arfarnu at y diben hwn) yn darparu dangosydd pwerus fod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer. Nid yw’n glir ar ba dystiolaeth y seiliwyd y farn hon.
Esboniodd y Prosbectws y byddai meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn amrywiaeth o leoliadau GIG, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu sy’n gweithio dan Gontract Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS), yn gallu ystyried eu bod yn gweithio mewn
‘amgylchedd rheoledig’
at ddiben ail-ddilysu. Cyfiawnhawyd hynny gan fod meddygon teulu yn cyfranogi mewn cynllun o arfarnu blynyddol gyda sicrhau ansawdd. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n debyg i mi y gellid dweud bod meddygon teulu sy’n bartneriaid, sy’n gontractwyr annibynnol, yn gweithio mewn
‘amgylchedd rheoledig’
yn ystyr arferol y term hwnnw. Dywedodd y Prosbectws, o ran y meddygon hynny a oedd eisoes yn destun arfarniad, nad oedd unrhyw beth ychwanegol yr oedd rhaid iddynt ei wneud i baratoi ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Ni ddylai fod rhaid iddynt gasglu unrhyw ddata ar gyfer ail-ddilysu yn fwy na’r data hwnnw y byddai gofyn iddynt ei gofnodi a’i gadw ar gyfer arfarniad a systemau lleol eraill. Cyhyd â bod meddygon yn ffyddiog, erbyn i’r amser ddod i’w hail-ddilysu, y byddent wedi cael o leiaf un arfarniad, nid oes angen iddynt wneud unrhyw beth yn fwy. Gwnaeth y Prosbectws yn glir na fyddai’r GMC fel arfer yn gofyn gweld y ffolder tystiolaeth y byddai meddyg wedi’i baratoi ar gyfer arfarniad. Fodd bynnag, gallai’r GMC ddymuno archwilio sampl o ffolderi o’r fath.
Yna, amlinellodd y Prosbectws y llwybr annibynnol i ail-ddilysiad. Gall hwn fod yn berthnasol i feddygon sy’n gweithio y tu allan i ofal iechyd prif ffrwd, y rheiny gyda phractisiau ‘portffolio’ neu’r rheiny sy’n cymryd saib o’u gyrfaoedd neu’n gweithio dramor. Ar gyfer meddygon o’r fath, byddai’r onws arnynt hwy i gyflwyno tystiolaeth i ddangos eu bod yn mabwysiadu egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ ac yn ymgymryd â datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus priodol. Byddai tystiolaeth dderbyniol yn cynnwys
‘dangosyddion ansawdd priodol’
, gyda data a gwybodaeth arall yn eu cefnogi lle byddai angen. Esboniodd y Prosbectws fod y GMC yn datblygu ystod o arfau i helpu meddygon a oedd eisiau darparu tystiolaeth annibynnol i’w defnyddio yn y broses ail-ddilysu. Byddai’r rhain yn cynnwys ffurflenni hunan-ddatganiad i ymdrin â phenawdau ‘Cywirdeb’ ac ‘Iechyd’ yn ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Hefyd, byddai holiadur bodlonrwydd cleifion i ymdrin â phennawd ‘Perthnasoedd â chleifion’ ac arolwg cydweithwyr proffesiynol y gellid ei ddefnyddio ar gyfer pennawd ‘Gweithio gyda chydweithwyr’. Dywedodd y Prosbectws y byddai’r dystiolaeth yn cael ei hadolygu mewn modd a fyddai
‘mor effeithlon, effeithiol a chymesur â nodau’r broses â phosibl’
. Dywedodd y GMC na fyddai fel arfer yn gofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu’r holl wybodaeth a ddefnyddiwyd i gefnogi tystiolaeth o ansawdd ymarfer.
Roedd y Prosbectws yn cynghori meddygon y byddent yn cael rhybudd yn ei dro o’r hyn y byddai gofyn iddynt ei wneud a phryd. Nododd hefyd fod y GMC yn bwriadu cynnal
‘profion priodol
’ cyn dechrau ail-ddilysu yn 2005. Ni wnaed yn glir at beth y byddai’r
‘profion’
hyn yn cyfeirio.
Darparodd y Prosbectws hefyd esboniad o’r prosesau a fyddai’n dilyn pe byddai’r meddyg yn methu darparu gwybodaeth ddigonol neu ddigon da, a disgrifiodd yr amgylchiadau lle gellid tynnu trwydded meddyg i ymarfer yn ôl. Esboniodd, pe byddai’n credu bod y wybodaeth a ddarparwyd i ddechrau gan y meddyg yn annigonol, y byddai’r GMC yn gofyn am fwy o wybodaeth. Wedyn, pe byddai’n ystyried
oedd y wybodaeth yn
‘ddigon da’
, byddai’r GMC yn asesu achos y meddyg i weld a oedd:
‘... tystiolaeth gadarnhaol nad ydych chi
(y meddyg)
yn addas i ymarfer.
Os nad oes, byddwn yn eich ail-ddilysu a bydd eich trwydded i ymarfer yn ddilys o hyd. Os oes, byddwn yn eich atgyfeirio i’r weithdrefn addasrwydd i ymarfer briodol. Bydd y broses ynghlwm wrth reolau statudol a bydd gennych yr hawl i apelio yn erbyn ein penderfyniad.’
Ac yn ddiweddarach:
‘Byddwn yn tynnu eich trwydded yn ôl dim ond pe bydd ... panel addasrwydd i ymarfer yn cyfarwyddo y dylid atal neu ddileu eich cofrestriad.’
Ni esboniodd y Prosbectws sut y byddai’r cyfnod rhwng ystyried y wybodaeth yn wreiddiol a’r cyfnod terfynol o atgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau FTP yn cael ei weithredu. Teimlaf fod rhaid i mi dynnu sylw i’r gwahaniaeth rhwng yr iaith a gyfeirir at feddygon a’r iaith a ddefnyddir yn ddiweddarach i esbonio ail-ddilysu i’r cyhoedd. Dywedwyd wrth feddygon y byddent yn cael eu hail-ddilysu oni bai bod yna dystiolaeth gadarnhaol eu bod yn anaddas i ymarfer. Dywedwyd wrth y cyhoedd y byddai’n rhaid i feddygon, er mwyn sicrhau ail-ddilysiad, ddangos bod ganddynt wybodaeth gyfoes a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer.
Dilynwyd yr esboniad hwn gydag adran gyda’r pennawd
‘Cwestiynau ac Atebion’
. Holodd un cwestiwn sut y cymharai’r system ail-ddilysu arfaethedig â systemau sicrhau y tu allan i feddygaeth. Yn yr ateb, nododd y Prosbectws fod yna
‘gymhariaeth broffesiynol dda’
â’r ailasesiad ffurfiol cyfnodol y mae’n rhaid i beilotiaid cwmnïau hedfan ei wneud os ydynt yn dymuno cadw eu trwydded. Dywedwyd bod y broses hon yn ddigon tebyg mewn sawl ffordd i’r trefniadau newydd i feddygon. Yn gyntaf, roedd yn hyrwyddo’r syniad o gadarnhau addasrwydd i ymarfer yn rheolaidd. Yn ail, dywedwyd mai diben ailasesu peilotiaid yw sicrhau eu bod wedi parhau’n beilotiaid da, ac nid darganfod a ydynt yn beilotiaid gwael. Roedd yna ffyrdd lleol a chyflym mwy priodol i nodi peilotiaid gwael. Yn drydydd, dywedwyd na fyddai unrhyw gwmni hedfan yn dibynnu ar ailasesiadau cyfnodol yn unig; mae gan gwmnïau hedfan eu gweithdrefnau rheolaeth leol eu hunain i asesu addasrwydd eu peilotiaid ar gyfer gwaith penodol. Mewn un ffordd, mae’r gymhariaeth hon rhwng meddygon a pheilotiaid yn benodol addas; mae meddygon a pheilotiaid cwmnïau hedfan yn cymryd ein bywydau yn eu dwylo wrth weithio. Gallaf weld hefyd y gall fod mwy o debygrwydd rhwng ail-ddilysu meddygon a’r asesiadau ffurfiol a gaiff peilotiaid. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd yr ateb yn y Prosbectws yn sôn am wahaniaeth pwysig rhwng y ddwy broses, sef bod rhaid i beilotiaid gael cyfres o brofion cymhwyster yn ystod asesiad cyfnodol, tra na fyddai ail-ddilysu, fel a gynigir yn y prosbectws, yn cynnwys unrhyw brofion o’r fath.
Roedd un cwestiwn ac ateb arall yn delio â rôl pobl leyg. Cofir, dan y trefniadau a ragwelwyd hyd at ddiwedd yr ail astudiaeth beilot, a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ebrill 2002, y byddai o leiaf un aelod o’r grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol yn berson lleyg. Esboniodd Prosbectws Ebrill 2003 y byddai pobl leyg yn cael eu cynnwys ar ddwy lefel,
‘wrth gynllunio’r systemau a’u rhoi ar waith’
. Mae’n ymddangos bod y cyfeiriad at gyfraniad lleyg i’r cynllunio yn cyfeirio at y ffaith y cafodd pobl leyg eu cynnwys yn natblygiad ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ ac wrth
‘ffurfio polisi ar ail-ddilysu’
. Roedd yn amlwg y byddai cynnwys pobl leyg yn y llwybr arfarnu i ail-ddilysu yn cael ei gyfyngu i’r ffaith bod
‘Systemau arfarnu yn seiliedig ar
yn mynnu bod meddygon yn myfyrio ar ansawdd eu perthynas â chleifion.’
Dywedwyd y
‘Gall meddygon ddefnyddio holiaduron a lenwir gan gleifion fel ffordd o roi gwybodaeth i ni am ansawdd eu hymarfer proffesiynol.’
Yn ôl pob tebyg, roedd hyn yn gysylltiedig â meddygon a oedd yn ceisio ail-ddilysu trwy’r llwybr annibynnol. Yn drydydd, nodwyd y
‘Bydd ansawdd perthnasoedd meddygon â chleifion yn cael ei ystyried hefyd fel rhan o systemau llywodraethu clinigol.’
Yn olaf, dywedwyd y byddai pobl leyg yn monitro prosesau’r GMC; ni esboniwyd sut y byddent yn gwneud hyn. Dywedwyd y byddai gan baneli penderfynu sy’n ystyried achosion unigol aelod lleyg. Credaf mai’r rhain fyddai’r paneli a fyddai’n clywed apeliadau yn erbyn penderfyniadau trwyddedu. Dywedwyd y byddai Grŵp Atgyfeirio Cleifion y GMC
‘yn ystyried y broses ail-ddilysu yn rheolaidd.’
Yr hyn sy’n glir, mae’n debyg, yw na fyddai pobl leyg yn cael eu cynnwys fel rheol wrth benderfynu ail-ddilysu meddyg unigol. Yn fyr, ciliwyd rhag yr ymrwymiad cynharach i gynnwys pobl leyg yn weithgar yn y broses honno.
Ymddangosai felly, erbyn dechrau 2003, fod y GMC nid yn unig wedi gwrthod y syniad y dylai ail-ddilysu, i’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon, fod yn seiliedig ar werthusiad gan grwpiau ail-ddilysu lleol, ond roedd hefyd wedi symud i sefyllfa lle, fel a roddwyd yn y wasg feddygol ar y pryd,
‘bod pum arfarniad boddhaol yn golygu ail
ddilysiad
’ ar gyfer meddygon sy’n gweithio yn y GIG. Yn wir, yn y blynyddoedd cynnar, gallai un arfarniad yn unig olygu ail-ddilysiad. Ni eglurwyd sut a pham y symudodd y GMC i’r safle hwn.
Rhaid deall goblygiadau’r newid. Roedd y GMC wedi symud o arfarniad gan grŵp ail-ddilysu o addasrwydd meddyg unigol i ymarfer trwy archwilio tystiolaeth (p’un ai’n gynnwys ei ffolder neu’r set gyflawn o ffurflenni arfarnu) i safle lle na fyddai unrhyw arfarniad unigol o gwbl ond, yn hytrach, tybiaeth, pe byddai meddyg wedi bod trwy’r broses arfarnu, y mae’n rhaid bod ganddo/ganddi wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer.
Ymatebion i’r Cynigion Newydd
Rhwng mis Ebrill 2003 a’r adeg pan roedd y GMC i fod i roi tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, cafwyd trafodaeth sylweddol yn y wasg feddygol am y cynigion newydd. Ar y cyfan, ymddangosai fod meddygon yn fodlon â’r cynigion er codwyd rhai gwrthwynebiadau o’r tu mewn i’r proffesiwn. Er enghraifft, adroddodd erthygl a ymddangosodd yn y cyfnodolyn ‘Doctor’, ar 17 Gorffennaf 2003, fod yr Athro Pringle, sef Cadeirydd yr RCGP ar y pryd ac aelod o’r GMC, wedi rhybuddio na fyddai ail-ddilysu dan y cynigion cyfredol yn cyflawni’r hyn yr honnodd ei gyflawni. Dywedodd na fyddai’n cynnig amddiffyniad i’r cyhoedd rhag meddygon gwael neu feddygon sy’n tanberfformio. Byddai’n
‘creu camargraff’
o amddiffyniad yn unig.
Yn ystod ail hanner 2003, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad gryn dipyn o dystiolaeth am arfarniad meddygon teulu, a gyflwynwyd yng ngwanwyn 2002. Erbyn adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, dylid bod wedi cwblhau un cylch o arfarnu meddygon teulu sy’n bartneriaid. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth gan nifer o dystion, yn enwedig gan Dr Chisholm, a hefyd gan Dr Reith, a roddodd dystiolaeth ac a fynychodd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad ar ran yr RCGP. Rwyf wedi cyfeirio at eu tystiolaeth ym Mhennod 12. Roedd y ddau’n frwdfrydig am y cysyniad o arfarnu meddygon teulu - yn wir, pob meddyg - ond mynegwyd pryder ganddynt am ddefnyddio arfarniad fel sail i ail-ddilysiad. Y mwy y clywais, y mwyaf yr oeddwn innau’n pryderu am y posibilrwydd y byddai ail-ddilysu’n dibynnu cymaint ar arfarnu.
Y prif bryder a fynegwyd gan y tystion, a deuthum i dderbyn ei ddilysrwydd, oedd bod yr arfarniad o feddygon teulu wedi’i gynllunio at ddibenion hollol ffurfiannol; bwriadwyd y byddai’n rhoi cyfle i feddygon, mewn amser un pwrpas, feddwl a siarad am eu hymarfer a, thrwy’r broses hon, ei wella. Nid ei fwriad oedd darparu unrhyw fath o asesiad neu arfarniad o’r meddyg. Nid bwriad yr arfarnwyr oedd llunio unrhyw farn am addasrwydd y sawl a arfernir i ymarfer, ac nid oeddent wedi’u hyfforddi i wneud hyn. Byddai arfarniad yn seiliedig ar (er nid yn gyfyngedig i) drafodaeth gyfrinachol ar sail ffolder o ddogfennau a gyflwynir gan y meddyg. Rôl yr arfarnwr fyddai ysgogi hunanarchwiliad gan y sawl a arfernir mewn amgylchiadau hollol gyfrinachol a helpu’r sawl a arfernir i gynllunio ei ddatblygiad/ei datblygiad proffesiynol yn y dyfodol. Byddai meddygon teulu a arfernir yn teimlo’n rhydd i godi pryderon am eu hunain neu eu practisiau heb ofni y byddent yn cael eu ‘beirniadu’ ar eu sail, heb sôn y byddent yn cael eu hadrodd. Dim ond pe byddai pryderon difrifol yn codi y byddai’r arfarnwr yn dod â’r arfarniad i ben ac yn adrodd ei bryderon/ei phryderon i’r PCO. Dyna’r unig achos lle gallai meddyg teulu ‘fethu’ arfarniad. Pe byddai arfarniad yn cael ei ddefnyddio bellach at ddibenion asesu neu werthuso, efallai na fyddai meddygon teulu yn onest ac yn agored gyda’u harfarnwr a byddai gwerth ffurfiannol yr arfarniad yn cael ei golli. I ddechrau, bu meddygon teulu yn amau holl syniad arfarniad ac wedi’i dderbyn dim ond pan oeddent yn fodlon o’i natur ffurfiannol.
Yr ail bryder oedd bod y trefniadau ar gyfer arfarnu meddygon teulu yn gyson â’i ddiben ffurfiannol ac nid yn briodol ar gyfer asesiad neu werthusiad. Y meddyg a fyddai’n cael arfarniad oedd yn dewis holl gynnwys y ffolder gwybodaeth yr oedd yr arfarniad yn seiliedig arno. Nid oedd unrhyw restr o ddogfennau yr oedd yn rhaid i’r meddyg ei chyflwyno. Nid oedd chwaith, yn unrhyw un o’r meysydd a archwiliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad, unrhyw gyfraniad uniongyrchol gan y PCO i’r broses o arfarnu data a gasglwyd gan weithgarwch llywodraethu clinigol. Gallai meddyg gyflwyno data o’r fath pe byddai ganddo/ganddi a phe byddai eisiau ei gyflwyno ond, pe byddai’n well ganddo/ganddi beidio, nid oedd unrhyw oblygiad i wneud hynny. Beth bynnag, fel ag esboniais ym Mhennod 12, ychydig iawn o ddata llywodraethu clinigol sy’n gysylltiedig â meddyg unigol sydd gan PCOs; fel arfer, mae’n gysylltiedig â’r practis meddygon teulu cyfan. Un broblem bellach oedd na fyddai PCOs o reidrwydd yn dweud wrth arfarnwr pe byddai ganddo unrhyw bryder penodol am feddyg. O ganlyniad, gallai PCO fod yn ymwybodol o gŵyn ddifrifol yn erbyn y sawl sy’n cael arfarniad; gallai’r sawl sy’n cael arfarniad ei chodi neu beidio ar gyfer ei thrafod gyda’r arfarnwr ond, pe na fyddai, ni fyddai’r arfarnwr yn ymwybodol ohoni o hyd.
Yn ystod y gwrandawiadau, cefais y cyfle i archwilio rhai ffurflenni arfarnu dienw wedi’u llenwi a ddarparwyd gan Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol (PCT) Tameside and Glossop. Roedd swm a math y wybodaeth ar y ffurflenni a gyflwynwyd yn amrywio’n fawr ond, mewn rhai achosion, roedd yn brin ac ni allai fod wedi darparu sail ar gyfer arfarniad o addasrwydd i ymarfer o gwbl, hyd yn oed pe byddai’r arfarnwr yn gymwys ac wedi’i hyfforddi i wneud y dasg honno. Un pryder pellach oedd, ar wahân i’r adran ar Ffurflen 4 lle nodwyd anghenion hyfforddi’r meddyg ar gyfer y flwyddyn nesaf, ni chafodd rhai PCOs (gan gynnwys PCT Tameside) unrhyw rai o’r ffurflenni arfarnu. Mae’n debyg y bwriadwyd y dylent gael copïau o Ffurflen 4 (a ddylai gynnwys crynodeb o’r drafodaeth arfarnu) ond daeth yn amlwg yn ystod tystiolaeth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd hyn yn digwydd mewn rhai ardaloedd. Yn ogystal, ni ragwelwyd erioed y byddai PCOs yn gweld cynnwys ffolder y meddyg ac, yn ôl y dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, ni wnaethant hyn. Felly, er dywedwyd bod arfarnu yn rhan o lywodraethu clinigol, nid oedd llawer o PCOs yn cyfrannu o gwbl a chawsant ychydig iawn o allbwn.
Roedd pryder arall eto yn gysylltiedig â’r trefniadau amrywiol a wnaed gan wahanol PCTs wrth gyflwyno arfarnu. Mewn rhai lleoedd, roedd llawer o feddygon teulu heb eu harfarnu hyd yma; mewn eraill, roeddent wedi cael arfarniad, ond ymddangosai fod ansawdd arfarnu rhwng PCTs yn amrywiol. Roedd prosesau dewis arfarnwyr hefyd yn amrywiol; mewn rhai lleoedd, roedd PCTs wedi mynnu mai dim ond hyfforddwyr meddygon teulu achrededig a allai fod yn arfarnwyr; mewn eraill, roedd y PCT wedi galw am wirfoddolwyr yn unig. Roedd arfarnwyr yn cael hyfforddiant ond roedd yn fras iawn ac yn aml ni ddarparai llawer mwy na chyflwyniad i’r ddogfennaeth. Darparai rhai PCTs gymorth a hyfforddiant ychwanegol; ni fyddai eraill yn gwneud hyn. Yn sicr, ni chafwyd unrhyw gais i addysgu arfarnwyr sut i arfarnu addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Yn wir, nid yw hyn yn syndod mawr gan nad dyna oedd diben yr ymarferiad. Cynghorwyd arfarnwyr, pe byddai’r digwyddiad annhebygol yn codi lle byddai pryder difrifol yn codi am addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, y dylid dod â’r arfarniad i ben ac adrodd y pryderon i’r PCT. Nid oedd yn glir pa mor ddifrifol y byddai’n rhaid i’r pryder fod cyn i’r arfarnwr gymryd y cam hwnnw. Mae cyngor a gyhoeddwyd gan yr Adran Iechyd yn awgrymu y byddai’n briodol dod ag arfarniad i ben pe byddai’n ymddangos bod ymddygiad, iechyd neu berfformiad y meddyg yn bygwth cleifion. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi clywed am unrhyw achos lle daethpwyd ag arfarniad i ben am y rheswm hwnnw.
Cytunais gyda’r tystion hynny, gan gynnwys Dr Reith, Dr Chisholm a’r Athro Richard Baker, a ddywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad na fyddai’r broses arfarnu hon yn sail briodol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Ni ellid ei chymharu â math o arfarniad y gwn ei fod yn digwydd mewn llawer o sefyllfaoedd cyflogaeth, lle mae cyflogai’n cael arfarniad gan berson uwch sydd â llawer iawn o wybodaeth am berfformiad y cyflogai yn ystod y flwyddyn flaenorol. Nid oedd yn debyg i mi chwaith y gellid ystyried bod arfarniad meddyg teulu yn ddewis amgen addas i archwiliad ffolder meddyg gan grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol. Ymddangosai i mi, dan y trefniadau a ddisgrifiwyd ym Mhrosbectws Ebrill 2003, fod y GMC, mewn gwirionedd, wedi dirprwyo cyfrifoldeb am ail-ddilysu meddygon teulu i arfarnwyr, nad oedd disgwyl iddynt gynnal arfarniad o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac nac oeddent yn gymwys i wneud hynny. Nid oedd y GMC yn bwriadu archwilio ffolderi’r meddygon ac nid oedd yn glir yn y Prosbectws a fyddai’n archwilio’r ffolderi arfarnu. Daeth yn glir wedyn nad oedd unrhyw fwriad archwilio’r ffurflenni. Yn fyr, ni fyddai unrhyw
‘arfarniad’
, fel sy’n ofynnol gan y diwygiadau sydd ar fin dod i Ddeddf 1983. Roedd yn ymddangos i mi fod y GMC yn hytrach yn mynd i adnewyddu, yn awtomatig bron, drwydded i ymarfer unrhyw feddyg a geisiai ail-ddilysiad cyhyd â na fyddai ei arfarniad/ei harfarniad yn dod i ben ar sail pryderon difrifol yn codi am ei addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Dechreuais bryderu na fyddai system o’r fath yn cynnig gwell amddiffyniad i gleifion na’r amddiffyniad a geir gan systemau presennol ac, felly, na allai’r cyhoedd yn rhesymol fod â ffydd mewn ail-ddilysu fel a gynigiwyd bryd hynny.
Pryd a Pham y Newidiodd y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol Gyfeiriad?
Gwahoddodd yr Ymchwiliad i’r GMC ddarparu datganiad tyst yn delio â’i gynigion am ail-ddilysu. Cyflwynodd y GMC ddatganiad ysgrifenedig gan Mr Brearley. Yn fuan cyn i wrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad gyrraedd y cyfnod o drafod ail-ddilysu, cyhoeddodd y GMC addasiad pwysig i’w gynigion blaenorol. Ychwanegiad oedd hwn o ofyniad y dylai meddyg sy’n ceisio ail-ddilysiad gyflwyno ‘tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol’, gyda llofnod swyddog uwch y sefydliad sy’n cyflogi’r meddyg neu, yn achos meddyg teulu, gan swyddog (yr arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol yn ôl pob tebyg) ei PCO. Byddai’r dystysgrif yn datgan na fyddai unrhyw bryderon heb eu datrys (neu unrhyw rai sylweddol) am y meddyg, sy’n codi allan o weithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol. Erys y cynnig sylfaenol, sef y byddai ail-ddilysu yn seiliedig ar arfarniad ar gyfer meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn
‘amgylchedd rheoledig’
. Trafodaf yr addasiad hwn i gynigion y GMC yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Am y tro, ceisiaf ganolbwyntio ar drefn y digwyddiadau yn y misoedd cyn mis Ebrill 2003 a’r rhesymau dros y newid cyfeiriad.
Nid oedd datganiad tyst Mr Brearley yn esbonio’r digwyddiadau a arweiniodd at gyhoeddi’r cynigion newydd ym mis Ebrill 2003. Yn briodol, archwiliais y papurau briffio a chofnodion y cyfarfodydd Cyngor a oedd wedi digwydd yn ystod y cyfnod hwn. Ni allwn ddod o hyd i unrhyw bapur yn delio â’r cynigion ar gyfer y broses ail-ddilysu nac unrhyw gyfeiriad at gynnig am newid yn ystod y cyfnod rhwng mis Medi 2002 a mis Ebrill 2003. Nid yw cofnodion y cyfarfodydd Cyngor yn ystod y cyfnod hwn yn cynnwys unrhyw gyfeiriad at benderfyniad i newid y trefniadau a gynigiwyd yn flaenorol. Mae’n debyg y gallai’r penderfyniad fod wedi’i wneud mewn cynhadledd fewnol arbennig ym mis Chwefror 2003. Nid wyf wedi gweld unrhyw gofnod o’r drafodaeth a ddigwyddodd yno.
Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod yr RTG, y bu hithau’n aelod ohono, wedi chwalu. Ni ddywedodd pryd y digwyddodd hyn. Ymddangosai’n dawedog iawn ar y pwnc hwn ac ni phwysais arni am y peth ond dywedodd ei bod yn credu y chwalwyd y grŵp oherwydd y bu’n ‘anghytuno’â’r GMC ar y cyfeiriad y byddai ail-ddilysu yn ei gymryd. Dywedodd Mr Brearley na wnaed y gwaith pellach y cynlluniwyd y byddai’r RTG yn ei wneud ar ôl yr ail astudiaeth beilot oherwydd diddordeb cynyddol y GMC mewn defnyddio prosesau llywodraethu clinigol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ac ‘ychydig newid cyfeiriad o ran arfarnu tystiolaeth’.
Dywedodd Dr Chisholm wrth yr Ymchwiliad y bu GPC y BMA yn gefnogol iawn o gynigion cynnar y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu ar sail archwiliad o ffolder y meddyg. Roedd wedi gweithio gyda’r RCGP i lunio’r llyfryn ‘Good Medical Practice for General Practitioners’, a fyddai’n sail i’r safonau i’w cymhwyso gan y rheiny yn ymgymryd ag arfarniad ail-ddilysu. Pan ofynnwyd iddo am arfarnu, dywedodd fod ef a’i Bwyllgor yn cefnogi arfarnu’n gryf ac yn awyddus i weld arfarnu’n cael ei adnoddu’n dda a’i weithredu’n dda. Fodd bynnag, mynegodd amheuon am natur y cyswllt uniongyrchol rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu a fu’n bolisi GMC ers cyhoeddi’r Prosbectws ym mis Ebrill 2003. Gwirfoddolodd wedyn ei fod yn credu bod dau reswm pam fod y GMC wedi newid ei bolisi. Yn gyntaf, credodd fod y GMC wedi canfod bod y cysyniad o ail-ddilysu manwl yn ‘eithaf brawychus o ran cymhlethdod y dasg’. Yn ail, dywedodd fod yna ‘frwdfrydedd cryf eithaf gwirioneddol gan gynrychiolwyr y BMA i’r meddygon ysbyty ddilyn y llwybr pum arfarniad boddhaol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu’. Ychwanegodd fod yr Athro Pringle, yn y cyfarfod GMC diwethaf iddo fynychu (a fyddai cyfarfod diwethaf yr ‘hen’ GMC o 104 o aelodau ar 20 a 21 Mai 2003), wedi ‘ymosod yn finiog iawn ar y ffordd y byddai arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu yn cael eu cysylltu bellach’. Ychwanegodd Dr Chisholm fod y ddadl drosodd bellach ac mai cynigion Ebrill 2003 fyddai’r ‘ffordd ymlaen’. Derbyniodd fod hyn yn cynrychioli symudiad sylweddol oddi wrth gynigion cynharach y GMC. Yn ddiweddarach yn ei dystiolaeth, dywedodd y bu gwrthwynebiad parablus i’r cynigion gwreiddiol ac y bu’r GMC yn pryderu ynghylch eu goblygiadau adnoddau. Pan ofynnwyd iddo a fu’r gwrthwynebiad yn llai parablus gan feddygon teulu nag ymgynghorwyr ysbyty a meddygon ysbyty iau, dywedodd y credodd y bu, er ei fod yn fwy ffyddiog yn dweud hynny am arweinwyr y meddygon teulu (a fu’n cefnogi cynigion gwreiddiol y GMC yn gryf) nag am y bobl gyffredin. Dywedodd efallai na fydd llawer o feddygon teulu yn diolch i’r RCGP a’r GPC am ymgyrchu am ‘system fwy cymhleth a thrwyadl’. Pan ofynnwyd iddo a ddylai arweinwyr y proffesiwn roi awgrym i feddygon a’u hannog i dderbyn yr angen am wir arfarniad fel rhan o’r broses ail-ddilysu, dywedodd fod sawl arweinydd y proffesiwn wedi siarad yn gyhoeddus ac yn breifat yn erbyn y cynigion newydd ond y bu ‘sail’ y GMC yn eu herbyn, gan gynnwys lleisiau rhai Colegau Brenhinol meddygol (ond nid yr RCGP) a’r BMA.
Rhoddodd Mr Brearley dystiolaeth lafar ar ran y GMC mewn perthynas â’r cwestiwn newid cyfeiriad. Pwysleisiodd y dystiolaeth hon nad oedd Prosbectws Ebrill 2003 yn cynrychioli newid cyfeiriad mawr o gwbl. Roedd yr egwyddorion gwaelodol yr union yr un fath ag o’r blaen. Cafwyd ychydig o newid cyfeiriad a wnaed er mwyn cyflawni gwelliannau i ail-ddilysu yn unig. Dywedodd fod y trefniadau newydd yn well nag y byddai’r hen rai wedi bod.
Yn ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig, dyddiedig 5 Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Mr Brearley fod astudiaethau peilot 2001 a 2002 wedi datgelu rhai
‘gwendidau’
yn y trefniadau a ystyriwyd ar y pryd. Dyma oedd y gwendidau hynny:
er gwaethaf adolygu lleol rheolaidd, byddai’r ffolderi’n cael eu harchwilio’n ffurfiol unwaith bob pum mlynedd yn unig
byddai’r archwiliad yn digwydd fel arfer heb bresenoldeb y meddyg
ni fyddai unrhyw gyswllt amlwg â llywodraethu clinigol
nid fyddai’r system yn debygol o fod yn gost-effeithiol.
Gyda pharch mawr i Mr Brearley, mae’r tri cyntaf o’r
‘gwendidau’
tybiedig hyn yn hollol anargyhoeddiadol i mi fel rhesymau dros roi gorau i’r cynigion cynharach. Gallaf weld y gall asesiad gan grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol o ffolder neu ffurflenni arfarnu’r meddyg a ddigwyddai’n amlach nag unwaith bob pum mlynedd fod yn well na’r hyn a gynlluniwyd yn wreiddiol, ond ni allaf weld y byddai’n well gwaredu pob archwiliad ffurfiol. Ynglŷn â’r ail ‘wendid’, gallaf weld y gall asesiad gan grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol a fynychir gan feddyg fod yn well nag un lle byddai ef/hi’n absennol. Ond ni fyddai’r ‘gwendid’ hwnnw’n cael ei waredu trwy roi’r gorau i’r asesiad gan grŵp ail-ddilysu lleol yn gyfan gwbl. Yn hytrach, byddai’n taflu i ffwrdd fuddiannau o’r fath a fyddai’n casglu o asesiad yn absenoldeb y meddyg. Ac ni ellir awgrymu’n synhwyrol y gall proses arfarnu ffurfiannol a hollol breifat ddisodli’r archwiliad gwrthrychol a fyddai wedi digwydd dan y cynigion gwreiddiol. Nac ychwaith y gallaf dderbyn y trydydd ‘gwendid’, sef nad oedd y cynigion gwreiddiol yn cynnwys
‘cyswllt amlwg â llywodraethu clinigol’
. Yn wir fe wnaethant, i’r graddau y bwriadwyd y byddai’r ffolder, y byddai arfarniad ac ail-ddilysiad yn seiliedig arno, yn cynnwys gwybodaeth a ddaethai o weithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol. Fodd bynnag, fel yr wyf wedi nodi, ar gyfer meddygon teulu unigol, roedd y cyswllt hwn yn gyfyngedig gan nad oedd, ac nid oes, llawer o ddata ‘caled’ gan lywodraethu clinigol. Dan y cynigion gwreiddiol, o leiaf y byddai pobl sy’n gyfrifol am arfarnu wedi gweld ffolder y meddyg tra, dan y cynigion newydd, nid oedd ac ni fydd unrhyw arfarniad o’r deunydd hwnnw o gwbl.
O ran y pedwerydd ‘gwendid’, rwyf eisoes wedi sôn am y dadansoddiad cost a budd o ail-ddilysu yn ei gyfanrwydd, a geisiwyd yn 2001 ac a ddangosodd nad oedd yn bosibl gwerthuso’r buddion. Hyd y gwn i, ni chynhaliwyd unrhyw ddadansoddiad erioed am ‘werth’ defnyddio grwpiau ail-ddilysu lleol, yn hytrach na ‘gwerth’ unrhyw ddull arall o ail-ddilysu. Rwy’n derbyn yn llwyr y byddai’n ymarferiad anodd. Roedd cost defnyddio grwpiau ail-ddilysu i archwilio’r ffolderi yn hysbys o’r dadansoddiad a gynhaliwyd yn 2001. Mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai fod yn rhatach pe byddai ffurflenni arfarnu yn unig wedi’u gweld. Os hanfod y ‘gwendid’ hwn oedd bod y GMC wedi dwyn y casgliad ei bod yn rhy ddrud i ddefnyddio grwpiau ail-ddilysu, yna gallwn ddeall y safbwynt hwnnw. Yr hyn na allaf ei ddeall na’i dderbyn yw y gellid ystyried bod rhoi gorau i’r grwpiau ail-ddilysu lleol o blaid arfarniad yn welliant yn ei hun ac y gallai gyflawni gradd fwy - neu hyd yn oed tebyg - o amddiffyniad ar gyfer cleifion.
Mewn tystiolaeth lafar, aeth y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad â Mr Brearley trwy Bapur Ymgynghori 2001 a chanlyniadau’r ddwy astudiaeth beilot. Dywedodd Mr Brearley fod yr astudiaethau peilot wedi amlygu nifer o broblemau. Soniodd am rai o’r problemau hynny. Dywedodd y bu’r astudiaethau peilot yn fach ac, oherwydd nifer ac ystod gyfyngedig ymarfer y meddygon dan sylw, ni fu’n bosibl asesu sensitifrwydd y dull gwerthuso a ddefnyddiwyd. Gwelaf resymeg hynny a derbyniaf fod yr astudiaethau peilot yn gadael rhywfaint o ansicrwydd. Fodd bynnag, fel a nodais, gellid fod wedi cynnal astudiaethau peilot pellach. Soniodd Mr Brearley nad oedd unrhyw ‘safon aur’ i fesur effeithiolrwydd y broses archwilio yn ei herbyn. Cytunaf, ond credaf y byddai’n bosibl - er yn ddrud - i ddyfeisio prawf gwrthrychol, efallai trwy orfodi ar grŵp o feddygon y math o asesiad a ddefnyddiwyd gan y GMC yn ei weithdrefnau perfformiad a chymharu’r canlyniadau â gwerthusiad o’u ffolderi neu ffurflenni arfarnu. Yn fyr, er fy mod yn gallu gweld nad oedd yr astudiaethau peilot wedi dangos yn bendant y byddai’r dull arfaethedig yn effeithiol, nid oedd hynny’n rheswm dros roi gorau i’r grwpiau ail-ddilysu lleol yr adeg honno.
Dywedodd Mr Brearley fod yr ail astudiaeth beilot wedi dangos na fyddai archwilio’r ffurflenni arfarnu yn unig yn sail ddigonol ar gyfer gwerthusiad. Byddai angen i grwpiau ail-ddilysu hefyd weld y dogfennau gwaelodol yn ffolderi’r meddygon. Derbyniodd y bu’r ail astudiaeth achos yn werthfawr yn y modd y dangosodd pa fath o wybodaeth a fyddai’n ddefnyddiol at ddibenion gwneud gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Gwnaeth y pwynt, mewn perthynas â’r cynigion cyfredol (lle mae ail-ddilysu’n seiliedig ar gwblhau gwerthusiad), y gellid defnyddio’r hyn a ddysgwyd o’r astudiaeth beilot i wella arfarnu, trwy sicrhau bod y math cywir o wybodaeth yn cael ei chynnwys yn y broses arfarnu. Fodd bynnag, derbyniodd nad oedd y GMC wedi ceisio erioed pennu pa wybodaeth a ddylai fynd i mewn i arfarniad; dywedodd mai rôl y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol oedd hynny. Gobeithiodd weld datblygiad ar y llinellau hynny ac roedd yn siwr y byddai arfarnu yn gwella dros amser.
Fel y dywedais, dywedodd Mr Brearley y bu ‘ychydig newid cyfeiriad o ran gwerthuso tystiolaeth’. Gofynnwyd iddo a fu unrhyw wrthwynebiad i’r cynigion gwreiddiol gan y proffesiwn. Atebodd fod meddygon yn teimlo eu bod dan bwysau aruthrol; roedd meddygaeth yn swydd llawn straen ac roedd cyfraddau alcoholiaeth a hunanladdiad uchel. Hefyd roedd yna gyfradd uchel o feddygon yn rhoi’r gorau iddi. Byddai unrhyw faich ychwanegol yn gwneud pethau’n waeth. Ychwanegodd y gwnaed arfarniad yn ofyniad cytundebol ac yr addawyd y byddai meddygon yn cael amser un pwrpas ar ei gyfer ac ar gyfer y paratoadau angenrheidiol. Fodd bynnag, ni ddarparwyd hyn ac roedd rhaid i’r meddygon wneud yr holl waith yn eu hamser eu hunain. Beth bynnag am hynny, ni allaf weld bod cyflwyno’r ffurflenni arfarnu neu’r ffolder - wedi’u paratoi eisoes - i grŵp ail-ddilysu yn rhoi unrhyw faich sylweddol yn ychwanegol i faich y gofyniad i gael arfarniad.
Dywedodd Mr Brearley wedyn y penderfynwyd newid o grwpiau ail-ddilysu i ddibynnu ar arfarniad a llywodraethu clinigol oherwydd datblygiad cyflym llywodraethu clinigol. Dywedodd fod llywodraethu clinigol yn ei ddyddiau cynnar pan gynlluniwyd y broses gan ddefnyddio grwpiau ail-ddilysu. Derbyniodd fod y GMC, ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2000, wedi siarad am ddyfodiad llywodraethu clinigol a’i fod wedi dwyn y casgliad bryd hynny fod llywodraethu clinigol ac ail-ddilysu fel pethau ar wahân yn angenrheidiol i amddiffyn cleifion. Dywedodd y Papur Ymgynghori na fyddai’r naill yn ddigonol heb y llall. Awgrymodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad ei bod yn anniffuant i ryw raddau i’r GMC honni mai cynnydd llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu oedd wedi gwaredu’r angen ar gyfer gwerthusiad ar wahân at ddibenion ail-ddilysu ac wedi galluogi’r GMC i newid ei gynigion a gwneud ail-ddilysu’n ddibynnol ar arfarnu. Gwrthododd Mr Brearley yr awgrym hwnnw a mynnu, yn 2000, y bu rôl llywodraethu clinigol yn aneglur; dim ond yn ddiweddar y gwelodd y GMC pa ran y gallai llywodraethu clinigol ei chwarae ac y byddai’n ei chwarae yn y dyfodol wrth gyrraedd ei llawn botensial.
Pan awgrymodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol fod y GMC wedi newid cyfeiriad yn sylweddol, awgrymodd Mr Brearley ei bod yn gwneud ‘trafferth mawr iawn’ am y peth. Mynnodd y byddai’r system a gynigiai’r GMC bellach yn well na’r un a gynlluniwyd yn flaenorol. Pan ofynnwyd iddo ym mha agweddau, dywedodd fod y system newydd yn cyflwyno gwybodaeth llywodraethu clinigol na fyddai ar gael fel arall. Dan y cynlluniau ail-ddilysu gwreiddiol, meddai, ni fyddai rhywfaint o’r wybodaeth a fyddai gan yr ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO wedi mynd i mewn i ffolder y meddyg ac ni fyddai wedi’i hystyried gan y grŵp ail-ddilysu oherwydd mater i’r meddyg fyddai cynnwys y ffolder. Fodd bynnag, cytunodd mai’r bwriad gwreiddiol oedd y dylai rhywun o’r ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO, y byddai ganddo wybodaeth am y meddyg, fod ar y grŵp ail-ddilysu. Ond, meddai, ni fyddai’n ymarferol trefnu hynny ym mhob achos. Gallaf weld y gallai fod fel hynny. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n debyg i mi y byddai’n anodd ymgorffori i’r system grwpiau ail-ddilysu gwreiddiol ofyniad y dylai’r ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO ddarparu data llywodraethu clinigol. Mewn gwirionedd, byddai’n bosibl hefyd, pe byddai’n ddymunol, gofyn i’r ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO ddarparu tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol hefyd.
Pan ofynnwyd iddo a oedd y GMC yn ffyddiog bellach fod arfarnu a llywodraethu clinigol yn gweithio’n dda ledled y wlad i’r graddau ei bod yn ddiogel dibynnu arnynt ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, dywedodd Mr Brearley bod rhaid i’r GMC dybio eu bod oherwydd bod cyfraith y wlad yn mynnu ei bod felly. Fodd bynnag, mae’r dystiolaeth a gafodd yr Ymchwiliad wedi dangos nad oedd llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu yn gweithio’n dda ym mhob man. Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at y dystiolaeth a gafodd yr Ymchwiliad mewn perthynas ag arfarnu. Dangosodd dystiolaeth gan y Comisiwn Gwella Iechyd fod llywodraethu clinigol yn gweithredu’n dameidiog ac roedd Adroddiad Medi 2003 y Swyddfa Archwilio Genedlaethol yn dangos darlun tebyg. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd yr Athro Aidan Halligan, Dirprwy CMO dros Loegr a Chyfarwyddwr Llywodraethu Clinigol ar gyfer y GIG, nad oedd llywodraethu clinigol wedi’i ymgorffori i ofal sylfaenol. Dywedodd Mr Brearley ei hun mewn tystiolaeth fod casglu data mewn ysbytai yn ‘hunllefus’. Pan y’i atgoffwyd am hynny, nododd mai dim ond rhan o lywodraethu clinigol oedd casglu data. Derbyniaf hynny, ond mae’n debyg i mi na allai unrhyw un sydd wedi ystyried y dystiolaeth sydd ar gael ddwyn y casgliad bod llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu yn gweithio’n dda ledled y wlad gyfan. Yn wir, derbyniodd Mr Brearley ei hun nad oedd llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu’n gweithio’n berffaith ond dywedodd eu bod wedi gwella’n fawr a’i fod yn ffyddiog y byddent yn parhau i wella. Gall fod yn gywir, ond mae’n anodd deall sut, ar adeg pan benderfynodd y GMC symud i ffwrdd o’i gynlluniau ar gyfer gwerthuso addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, yn seiliedig ar archwilio ffurflenni arfarnu neu ffolderi, i system sy’n dibynnu ar gymryd rhan mewn arfarnu a darparu tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, y gallai fod â ffydd yng ngweithrediad llywodraethu clinigol neu arfarnu. Fel yr esboniaf cyn hir, roedd y GMC, mewn gwirionedd, yn hollol ymwybodol o gyfyngiadau arfarnu a llywodraethu clinigol.
Pan ofynnwyd i Mr Brearley roi sylwadau ar y rhesymau a roddwyd gan Dr Chisholm dros newid agwedd y GMC, ailadroddodd nad un o’r rhesymau hynny oedd y prif reswm. Y prif reswm oedd bod y model newydd yn well. A oedd y GMC wedi canfod bod y posibilrwydd o drefnu archwiliadau unigol o ffolder yn frawychus? Ateb Mr Brearley oedd ‘oedd’, roedd hynny’n dasg fawr ond nid oedd hynny’n broblem. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd unrhyw ddiben i’r GMC wneud rhywbeth ar wahân dim ond er mwyn iddo allu hawlio perchenogaeth ar y system. Pe gallai llywodraethu clinigol ddarparu gwell system, nid oedd unrhyw ddiben i’r GMC ddilyn ei system ei hun. A fu unrhyw wrthwynebiad gan y proffesiwn? Dywedodd Mr Brearley y bu gwrthwynebiad gan rai aelodau o’r proffesiwn oherwydd y gofynion ar eu hamser. A fu cost yn ffactor? Dywedodd Mr Brearley y bu’n ffactor i ryw raddau oherwydd arian y meddygon y mae’r GMC yn ei wario a byddai grwpiau ail-ddilysu yn ddrud. Ond dywedodd, os grwpiau ail-ddilysu oedd yr unig ffordd o wneud y gwaith yn iawn, y byddai’r GMC wedi’u hariannu. Fodd bynnag, os nad oedd yn angenrheidiol gwario’r arian hwnnw, roedd yn synhwyrol peidio â gwneud hynny.
Gofynnwyd i Syr Graeme Catto a Mr Scott hefyd am y newid ymddangosiadol mewn agwedd. Dywedwyd ganddynt hwythau hefyd nad oedd hyn yn newid sylweddol ond yn ‘addasiad’ neu’n ‘goethder’ ar y cynlluniau blaenorol. Dywedwyd ganddynt y bu cydnabyddiaeth y byddai dibynnu ar lywodraethu clinigol yn well ffordd o gyflawni nodau ac amcanion ail-ddilysu. Rhaid i mi ddweud ei bod yn debyg o fod yn newid mawr i mi wrth symud i ffwrdd o drefniant lle byddai’r dystiolaeth sy’n gysylltiedig â’r meddyg unigol sy’n ceisio ail-ddilysiad yn cael ei hasesu gan grŵp ail-ddilysu ac y byddai addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer yn cael ei werthuso, i drefniant lle tybir bod y meddyg yn addas i ymarfer os yw wedi cael arfarniad a dywedir nad oes unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys am ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Yn ogystal, mae’n debyg i mi, cyhyd â bod y deunydd y mae’r asesiad yn seiliedig arno yn ddigonol, y byddai gan y trefniant blaenorol obaith llawer gwell o ganfod a yw’r meddyg yn addas i ymarfer neu beidio a byddai felly yn golygu llawer mwy o amddiffyniad i gleifion.
Tystiolaeth Bellach ar ôl Gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad
Fodd bynnag, darganfuwyd tystiolaeth bellach yn ddiweddarach a oedd yn taflu goleuni ar feddwl y GMC ar ail-ddilysu yn y cyfnod rhwng mis Medi 2002 a mis Ebrill 2003. Mewn tystiolaeth, soniodd Mr Brearley fod y GMC wedi comisiynu ymgynghorwyr rheolaeth (mewn gwirionedd, sefydliad a elwir SHM Productions Ltd (SHM)) i ymgymryd ag astudiaeth o sut y mae ail-ddilysu ac ail-drwyddedu yn cael eu cynnal mewn gwledydd eraill. Cyflwynwyd copi o astudiaeth SHM i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003. Wrth ei darllen, darganfu tîm yr Ymchwiliad ei bod yn cynnwys cyfeiriad at adroddiadau cynharach ar ail-ddilysu. Gofynnwyd am y rheiny yn briodol. Cyrhaeddodd yr ail adroddiad (Mawtrh 2003) yn fuan wedyn. Gwnaed cais pellach am yr adroddiad cyntaf a chyrhaeddodd hwn ym mis Chwefror 2004.
Yr Adroddiad SHM Cyntaf
Roedd adroddiad cyntaf SHM yn ddyddiedig mis Rhagfyr 2002. Ei deitl oedd ‘GMC revalidation proposal - identifying key issues and alternatives’. Cofnododd yr adran gyflwyniadol, gan fod gan ail-ddilysu
‘oblygiadau pellgyrhaeddol ar gyfer y sefydliad a’r proffesiwn cyfan ... mae angen camu’n ôl ac ystyried beth allai fod y peryglon posibl’
. Byddai hyn yn gofyn am werthusiad a dadansoddiad manwl (cam dau) a fyddai’n cael eu cynnal gan SHM y flwyddyn ganlynol (2003). Am nawr, byddai trosolwg o’r materion pwysig a thrafodaeth o brif feysydd y ddadl. Byddai’r adroddiad yn rhoi sylw i bum cwestiwn, sef:
• Beth yw’r cyd-destun cyfredol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu?
• Pa fodelau a ddefnyddiwyd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu a rheoleiddio proffesiynol mewn mannau eraill?
• Beth yn union yw’r cynnig cyfredol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu?
• Pa fodelau amgen y dylid eu hystyried?
• Beth yw’r camau nesaf sy’n ffurfio’r corff o waith sy’n ofynnol yng ngham dau?
Nodwyd pedwar
‘maes’
allweddol, y byddai dadansoddiad SHM yn cael ei gynnal wrth gyfeirio atynt, sef:
Pa dystiolaeth y dylai meddygon ei darparu ar gyfer adolygiad?
Y mewnbynnau.
Sut y dylid cynnal y gwerthusiad?
Y broses adolygu.
Sut y gellir dal ‘calonnau a meddyliau’ meddygon?
Darbwyllo meddygon.
Sut y gellir tawelu meddwl y cyhoedd a’i wneud i deimlo’n “ddiogel”?
Darbwyllo’r cyhoedd.’
Disgrifiodd yr adroddiad weithgareddau SHM yn ystod cam cyntaf y prosiect. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys adolygiad o ddogfennaeth GMC, adolygiad o wybodaeth a gyhoeddwyd yn allanol am ail-ddilysu, cyfweliadau ffôn ag aelodau a staff y GMC, ac adolygiad o fodelau amgen sydd ar waith dramor. Dilynwyd yr adolygiadau hyn gan drafodaeth rhwng tîm SHM a thîm ail-ddilysu’r GMC. Byddaf yn crynhoi casgliadau’r adroddiad.
Daeth yr adroddiad i’r casgliad fod pob ochr yn derbyn yn gyffredinol fod angen rhyw fath o ail-ddilysu, ond cafwyd gwahaniaeth barn sylweddol ymhlith aelodau a staff y GMC ynghylch ar ba ffurf y dylai fod. Dyma’r meysydd o gytundeb a restrwyd:
bod rhyw fath o ail-ddilysu yn angenrheidiol ac yn ddymunol
bod rhaid i’r model a fabwysiadir fod yn syml i’w weithredu
bod rhaid i feddygon a grwpiau cleifion gytuno’r model a fabwysiadir
nad yw adolygu ffolderi tystiolaeth gan 100% o feddygon yn ddichonol oherwydd costau ac adnoddau
y farn gyfredol oedd bod rhyw fath o gyswllt ag arfarnu yn anochel, ond cafwyd pryder bod y
‘llwyfan’
a gynigir gan arfarnu yn
‘dameidiog ar ei orau ac yn sigledig iawn ar ei waethaf’
y prif risgiau oedd ceisio gwneud gormod yn rhy fuan neu fynd i banig a gwneud rhy ychydig. Byddai’r ddau beth hyn yn niweidio hygrededd y GMC
ni allai unrhyw fodel honni y gall atal ‘Shipman arall’
roedd cyfathrebu a dealltwriaeth yn faterion allweddol, i feddygon ac i’r cyhoedd.
Adroddwyd nad oedd fawr o gytundeb am yr hyn y gallai ail-ddilysu ei gyflawni. Cafwyd barnau cryf a safbwyntiau gwahanol ar bron bob agwedd ar y cynigion ail-ddilysu o’r amcanion hyd at y meini prawf ar gyfer llwyddiant. Cafodd y rhain eu dadansoddi’n eithaf manwl. Er enghraifft, mewn perthynas â’r cwestiwn beth a ddylai fod prif gymhelliad tuag at ail-ddilysu, dywedwyd bod rhai yn gweld bod ail-ddilysu wedi codi o’r angen i sicrhau bod gan y cyhoedd ffydd mewn meddygon; roedd eraill yn gweld bod ail-ddilysu wedi codi o ganlyniad i bwysau gan y Llywodraeth ar ôl achosion camymddygiad proffil uchel fel achos Shipman; ac eto roedd eraill yn ei weld fel rhan o duedd fyd-eang tuag at foderneiddio rheoleiddio proffesiynol. Dilynwyd hyn gan drafodaeth am fanteision cyflwyno ail-ddilysu mewn goleuni cadarnhaol yn hytrach na negyddol. Fodd bynnag, nodwyd bod cyflwyno ail-ddilysu fel ffordd o sicrhau safonau proffesiynol uchel yn cael ei danseilio i ryw raddau gan y ffaith y byddai ail-ddilysu yn cyflwyno
‘bar isel iawn’
yn unig i feddygon ei gyflawni. Cofnododd yr adroddiad y sylw gan un person a gyfwelwyd fod ail-ddilysu
‘yn asesiad o allu sylfaenol yn unig’
Un pwnc pwysig arall a drafodwyd yn eithaf manwl oedd y cyswllt rhwng arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu. Dywedwyd y cytunwyd yn gyffredinol fod angen
‘rhyw fath o gyswllt’
. Cafwyd dwy brif ddadl o blaid cyswllt. Yn gyntaf, byddai defnyddio’r un deunydd ar gyfer y ddwy broses yn lleihau’r llwyth gwaith i feddygon. Yn ail, byddai’r cyswllt yn sicrhau bod gan arfarnu
‘fantais’
; roedd rhai o’r rheiny a gyfwelwyd yn anghymeradwyo’r syniad y dylai arfarniad fod yn hollol ddatblygiadol; meddai un,
‘mae’n fath o asesiad ... os sgwrs yn unig yw’r arfarniad, nid yw’n ddefnyddiol o gwbl’
. Dilynodd wedyn restr gynhwysfawr o bryderon am ddefnyddio arfarniad at ddiben ail-ddilysu. Mae’n rhaid y mynegwyd y pryderon hyn yn ystod y cyfweliadau ag aelodau a staff y GMC. Maent yn debyg iawn i’r math o bryderon y clywodd yr Ymchwiliad wrth gael tystiolaeth am arfarnu a’i gyswllt arfaethedig ag ail-ddilysu. Er enghraifft, mynegwyd pryder am
‘anaeddfedrwydd’
arfarnu ac am y modd tameidiog yr oedd yn gweithredu. Mynegwyd amheuon hefyd am allu arfarniad i nodi meddyg gwael. Soniwyd hefyd am y ddeuoliaeth rhwng natur ffurfiannol arfarniad a’i ddefnydd yn y broses ail-ddilysu, a ddylai fod o natur gyfansymiol (h.y. pasio/methu). Dywedwyd bod arfarnu wedi’i gyflwyno fel rhywbeth ffurfiannol a chefnogol, tra bod y Llywodraeth yn ystyried ei fod yn ffordd o reoli perfformiad. Mynegwyd amheuon am alluoedd arfarnwyr a’r manwl gywirdeb wrth gynnal arfarniadau. Roedd un person a gyfwelwyd yn pryderu y byddai meddygon sy‘n tanberfformio yn cael caniatâd i barhau i ymarfer ar sail
‘unrhyw beth am fywyd tawel’
. Nid oedd unrhyw gymhelliad i arfarnwr adrodd perfformiad gwael; byddai adroddiad o’r fath yn siwr o
‘godi gwrychyn’
a niweidio perthnasoedd proffesiynol. Dywedwyd y bu, yn hanesyddol,
‘broblem ddiwylliannol o feddygon yn adrodd eu cydweithwyr’
. Nododd un person a gyfwelwyd na fyddai cyflogwyr efallai’n barod i gyflwyno meddygon nad oeddent yn perfformio’n dda, gan y gallent feddwl ei bod yn
‘well “dal” meddyg gwael na bod heb feddyg o gwbl’
. Hefyd, codwyd mater cysondeb ansawdd arfarnu, a’r deunyddiau y byddai arfarniad yn seiliedig arnynt. Roedd rhai a gyfwelwyd yn poeni am ddiffyg cynnwys pobl leyg mewn arfarniad a allai arwain at amgyffrediad ar ran y cyhoedd y byddai ail-ddilysiad yn digwydd yn y
‘clwb’
. Pwynt arall oedd y gallai ymddangos bod y broses ail-ddilysu gyfan yn cael ei throsglwyddo i gyflogwyr a bod y GMC yn
‘cyfaddef eu trechu’
. Pe byddai’r GMC yn dibynnu ar gyflogwyr, byddai rhaid iddo sicrhau bod systemau’r cyflogwyr yn
‘gryf’
. Daeth yr adran hon o’r adroddiad i ben gyda’r sylw bod y gwrthwynebiadau hyn yn
‘gatalog arwyddocaol’
na ellid ac na ddylid ei
‘ddiystyru ar chwarae bach’
Trafododd adran arall o’r adroddiad y broses y dylid ei defnyddio wrth adolygu’r dystiolaeth a ddarperir gan feddygon at ddibenion ail-ddilysu a phwy a ddylai ymgymryd â’r adolygiad hwnnw. Roedd rhai a gyfwelwyd yn credu ei bod yn hollbwysig bod rhaid cynnwys pobl leyg yn weithgar. Cafwyd gwahaniaeth barn sylweddol ynghylch beth y dylai fod rôl y GMC yn yr adolygiad hwnnw; ar yr eithafion, credai rhai y dylai fod yn hollol gyfrifol am y broses ail-ddilysu a chredai eraill y dylai gyfyngu ei hun i sicrhau ansawdd proses i’w chynnal ar lefel leol. Trafodwyd hefyd rôl cyflogwyr a chofnodwyd ystod ddiddorol o farnau. Er enghraifft, awgrymwyd y gallai cyflogwyr chwarae rôl ddefnyddiol wrth weithredu fel y
‘system rhybudd cynnar
’ ar gyfer nodi meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael cyn i’r broses ail-ddilysu eu nodi. Hefyd, gallent helpu trwy roi’r wybodaeth i’r GMC y byddai gofyn amdani gan feddygon at ddibenion ail-ddilysu. Fodd bynnag, mynegwyd pryder na ellid dibynnu ar gyflogwyr i adrodd meddygon
‘mewn perygl’
. Byddai hynny’n mynnu
‘newid sylweddol mewn diwylliant’
. Yn rhy aml, dywedwyd, roedd ymddiriedolaethau GIG yn caniatáu i feddyg sy’n perfformio’n wael symud ymlaen o swydd i swydd heb ei adrodd/ei hadrodd i’r GMC.
Trafododd adran nesaf yr adroddiad ‘fodelau’ posibl amrywiol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Yn gyntaf, ystyriwyd ymagweddau mewn gwledydd a phroffesiynau eraill. Dosbarthwyd y mecanweithiau a ddefnyddir yn rhai
‘meddal’
(h.y. y rheiny gyda ffocws datblygiadol) ac yn rhai
‘caled’
(h.y. y rheiny a ddibynnai ar asesiad neu brofion). Nodaf fod y golofn sy’n gysylltiedig â pheilotiaid yn y wlad hon yn cofnodi eu bod yn destun y mecanwaith
‘caletaf’
, sef
‘profion’
. Soniaf am hyn oherwydd, yn ei Brosbectws a gyhoeddwyd ychydig fisoedd yn ddiweddarach, ym mis Ebrill 2003, awgrymodd y GMC, fel y soniais yn flaenorol, fod yna
‘gymhariaeth broffesiynol dda’
rhwng ei gynigion newydd ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon a’r ailasesiadau cyfnodol a gaiff peilotiaid cwmnïau hedfan.
Yna, rhestrodd yr adroddiad saith model posibl ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon. Roedd y rhain yn cynnwys un model y dywedwyd ei fod
‘yn cael ei ystyried ar hyn o bryd’
, tri model posibl a oedd eisoes wedi’u hepgor a thri model arall a oedd wedi dod i’r amlwg o drafodaethau rhwng SHM a’r GMC ac y dywedwyd eu bod yn deilwng o archwiliad pellach. Yn achos pob model, gwnaed ymdrech i ddisgrifio sut y byddai’n gweithio’n ymarferol, ac i asesu ei dderbynioldeb posibl i feddygon a chleifion, ei ddichonoldeb a’i gost. Roedd rhaid gwneud tybiaethau ond roedd y rhain yn seiliedig ar drafodaethau gyda staff y GMC.
Nid oedd y model
‘sy’n cael ei ystyried ar hyn o bryd’
yn un o’r modelau a brofwyd yn yr astudiaethau peilot; nac oedd ychwaith y model a fyddai’n dod i’r amlwg ym mis Ebrill 2003. Dan y model hwn, byddai meddygon yn darparu Ffurflen 4 (gan gynnwys eu cynllun datblygiad personol) o’u dogfennaeth arfarnu (er nid eu ffolderi ac nid Ffurflenni 1 i 3). Byddent hefyd yn darparu un
‘holiadur o fath Ramsey’
yn ystod pob cylch pum mlynedd. Disgrifiodd y GMC
‘holiadur o fath Ramsey’
fel holiadur bodlonrwydd cleifion neu adolygiad cymheiriaid. Byddai’r GMC yn
‘adolygu’
’r dystiolaeth (sef Ffurflen 4 a’r holiadur yn ôl pob tebyg). Ni nodwyd sut y byddai’n gwneud hynny. Pe byddai’r dystiolaeth yn foddhaol, byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei ail-ddilysu. Pe na fyddai, gellid gofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu gwybodaeth bellach neu ei atgyfeirio i grŵp ail-ddilysu. Gallai grwpiau ail-ddilysu (a fyddai’n cynnwys pobl leyg a meddygon) ofyn am wybodaeth bellach a gallent atgyfeirio meddyg
‘mewn perygl’
i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Aseswyd bod gan y model hwn dderbynioldeb
‘canolig’
i feddygon, ond y byddai’n debygol o ennyn ffydd gyhoeddus
‘isel’
, gan y byddai gan ran fwyaf aelodau’r cyhoedd
‘rhyw brofiad o arfarniadau eu hunain sy’n golygu eu bod yn sinigaidd am eu gwerth fel cyfraniad at ail-ddilysu’
. Dywedwyd bod dichonolrwydd y model hwn yn
‘isel’
oherwydd y goblygiadau adnoddau i’r GMC o adolygu tystiolaeth pob meddyg. Yn olaf, aseswyd bod y costau’n
‘uchel’
Ystyriwyd wedyn y model gwreiddiol, gan gynnwys archwiliad gan grwpiau ail-ddilysu o’r ffolderi y mae meddygon yn eu llunio. Roedd hwn wedi’i hepgor eisoes. Aseswyd bod ei dderbynioldeb i feddygon a lefel y ffydd gyhoeddus y byddai’n debygol o ennyn yn
‘ganolig’
ond bod dichonolrwydd i’r GMC yn
‘isel iawn’
oherwydd y goblygiadau adnoddau. Aseswyd bod y costau’n
‘uchel’
Byddai’r model nesaf (sydd hefyd wedi’i hepgor eisoes) wedi cynnwys profion ysgrifenedig a/neu ymarferol. Byddai’r rhain yn cynnwys prawf gwybodaeth dewis amrywiol. Gellid ychwanegu at y profion hyn holiaduron bodlonrwydd cleifion ac adolygu cymheiriaid. Aseswyd bod derbynioldeb i feddygon yn
‘isel iawn’
, gan
‘nad yw’
meddygon
‘yn gyffredinol yn croesawu’r cysyniad o roi eu gwybodaeth ar brawf’
. Ar y llaw arall, roedd ffydd gyhoeddus yn y model yn debygol o fod yn
‘uchel’
gan fod
‘y cyhoedd yn hoffi’r manwl gywirdeb y mae prawf yn ei awgrymu’ (mae llawer yn tybio ar hyn o bryd bod meddygon, fel peilotiaid, yn gorfod sefyll profion yn rheolaidd)’
. Dywedwyd y byddai’r GMC yn ystyried bod dichonolrwydd yn
‘isel’
oherwydd y byddai angen ystod fawr iawn o brofion i ymdrin ag ystod eang o feysydd ymarfer arbenigol. Aseswyd bod costau yn
‘ganolig’
. Mae’n ymddangos yn debygol i mi y diystyrwyd y model hwn gan ei fod yn rhy ‘galed’.
Wedi’i ddiystyru eisoes hefyd oedd model a seiliwyd ar dystiolaeth o ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus. Byddai hwn wedi cynnwys hapwiriadau i sicrhau cydymffurfiaeth â chynlluniau cytunedig. Er aseswyd bod derbynioldeb i feddygon ac i’r GMC yn
‘uchel’
, ystyriwyd y byddai ffydd gyhoeddus yn
‘isel’
gan y byddai’r cyhoedd yn credu ei fod yn
‘glyd ac yn aneffeithiol’
. Mae’n debyg i mi y mae’n rhaid y cafodd y model hwn ei ddiystyru gan ei fod yn rhy ‘feddal’.
Nesaf, daeth yr hyn a alwyd y
‘model hunan-ailddilysu’
, a ddisgrifiwyd fel a ganlyn:
‘Byddai cyflogwyr lleol yn defnyddio ystod barhaus o fesurau gan gynnwys arfarnu a chymheiriaid/cleifion
gair wedi’i hepgor, sef holiaduron yn fwy na thebyg
(yn gweithio i safonau GMC) er mwyn nodi unigolion
mewn perygl. Byddai’r achosion hynny’n cael eu hatgyfeirio i’r GMC yn flynyddol (ac fel sy’n ofynnol drwy gydol y flwyddyn) a fyddai wedyn yn defnyddio gweithdrefnau FTP pe byddai angen. Byddai’r GMC hefyd yn ymarfer rheolaeth ansawdd ar y broses arfarnu ac yn cynnal hapwiriadau ystadegol ddilys ar feddygon unigol. Yn ogystal, byddai gofyn i feddygon, bob pum mlynedd, i gasglu tystiolaeth eu bod wedi bodloni gofynion CPD
(h.y. datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus)
ynghyd â chrynodebau o’u harfarniadau a fyddai’n cael hapwiriadau gan y GMC. Mae’r systemau lleol yn canolbwyntio’n bennaf ar ddatgelu (trwy arfarnu, arsylwi, perthnasoedd gwaith, holiaduron cleifion ac ati), tra bod ffocws y GMC ar weithredu.’
Credwyd mai
‘canolig’
fyddai’r derbynioldeb i feddygon, yn ogystal â lefel y ffydd gyhoeddus y byddai’n debygol o ennyn; byddai’r GMC yn ystyried bod dichonolrwydd yn
‘uchel’
ac y byddai’r costau’n
‘isel’
. Y prif risgiau a nodwyd yn y model hwn oedd yr amheuon ynghylch a fyddai arfarniad yn ddigon manwl gywir, ac a fyddai systemau lleol yn ddigon cadarn a chyson. Nodaf yr aseswyd bod derbynioldeb i’r cyhoedd yn
‘ganolig’
. Dibynnodd y model hwn yn drwm ar arfarniad ac roedd yr adroddiad eisoes wedi sylwi y mae’n ddigon posib y gall y cyhoedd fod yn sinigaidd am werth arfarniad. Yn wir, roedd y model arall a ddibynnai ar arfarniad wedi cael gradd
‘ganolig’
am dderbynioldeb cyhoeddus.
Galwyd y chweched opsiwn y
‘model holiadur’
, lle byddai’n rhaid i feddygon gyflwyno holiaduron cymheiriaid a chleifion yn flynyddol. Byddai’n rhaid i feddygon y nodwyd eu bod
‘mewn perygl canolig’
gyflwyno gwybodaeth ychwanegol, yn debyg i’r ffolderi tystiolaeth gwreiddiol, neu gael
‘cyfweliadau strwythuredig ... gan gymheiriaid hyfforddedig’
. Byddai unrhyw feddygon yr ystyrir eu bod mewn perygl yn cael eu hatgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. Ystyriwyd y byddai gan y model hwn dderbynioldeb
‘canolig’
i feddygon ond y byddai’n ennyn gradd
‘uchel’
o ffydd gyhoeddus (yn enwedig o ran cynnwys cleifion yn yr holiaduron ar ffaith y byddai meddygon yn cael eu hasesu gan eu cymheiriaid). Byddai dichonolrwydd i’r GMC yn
‘ganolig’
a byddai costau yn
‘isel’
. Nodwyd y defnyddiwyd y model hwn mewn man arall ond roedd heb ei geisio yn y DU. Nodaf nad oedd unrhyw rai o’r modelau heblaw un wedi cael eu profi yn y DU.
Yn olaf, cafwyd
‘model asesiad’
. Byddai meddygon yn cael asesiad ffurfiol yn seiliedig ar
‘gyfraniadau lluosog’
fel holiaduron cymheiriaid a chleifion, cyfweliad, arsylwad (o ymarfer clinigol yn ôl pob tebyg) a CPD. Byddai’r rhain yn cael eu cynnal yn lleol. Pe byddai angen gwybodaeth ychwanegol, byddai’n cael ei chyflwyno i grŵp ail-ddilysu. Rôl y GMC fyddai sicrhau ansawdd trwy
‘archwilio’r mecanwaith archwiliwr’
. Tybiwyd y byddai gan hyn dderbynioldeb
‘isel’
i feddygon, a fyddai’n gwrthwynebu unrhyw fath o asesiad. Fodd bynnag, nodwyd bod tystiolaeth o ddiwydiannau eraill fod gweithwyr proffesiynol, dros amser, yn dod i dderbyn, a chroesawu hyd yn oed, gwrthrychedd mecanweithiau o’r fath. Byddai ffydd y cyhoedd mewn model o’r fath yn debygol o fod yn ‘
uchel’
. Byddai dichonolrwydd i’r GMC yn
‘ganolig’
, gan y byddai rhan fwyaf y cyfrifoldeb ar lefel leol. Byddai costau’n
‘uchel’
. Byddai risgiau’n cynnwys diffyg cysondeb ac amheuaeth ynghylch cadernid prosesau lleol. Gallai’r goblygiadau adnoddau dynol ddigalonni cyflogwyr a meddygon.
Rwyf wedi nodi’r opsiynau hyn mewn cryn fanylder i ddangos, yn gyntaf, fod yr adroddiad hwn wedi ceisio ystyried opsiynau amrywiol mewn modd gwrthrychol. Fodd bynnag, yr hyn sy’n nodadwy yw na chafwyd unrhyw ymdrech i asesu effeithiolrwydd y dulliau amrywiol wrth werthuso addasrwydd i ymarfer. Ni wnaeth yr adroddiad chwaith ystyried pa fodel a fyddai’n rhoi’r amddiffyniad gorau i gleifion. Roedd yr adroddiad yn ymwneud â derbynioldeb a ffydd y cyhoedd, nid effeithiolrwydd.
Yn olaf, ystyriodd yr adroddiad pa gamau y dylid eu cymryd nesaf. Yn hanfodol, roedd yn argymell ymchwil a dadansoddiad pellach a manylach ac yn gosod nifer o gwestiynau perthnasol iawn i’r GMC eu hystyried. Nid oedd yn cyfeirio tuag at unrhyw un o’r modelau posibl fel yr un mwyaf priodol. Roedd hynny ar gyfer y dyfodol.
Dengys yr adroddiad fod y GMC, ym mis Rhagfyr 2002, yn ystyried ystod eang o opsiynau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Nid yw’n ymddangos i mi fod ganddo, bryd hynny, olwg clir o’r ffordd y bwriadai fynd ymlaen. Mae’n amlwg, erbyn hynny, fod y syniad o gyswllt rhwng ail-ddilysu ac arfarnu eisoes yn cael ei ystyried. Fodd bynnag, cafwyd rhai yn y GMC nad oedd yn ystyried bod y cyswllt hwnnw yn briodol na’n foddhaol - o leiaf pe byddai arfarnu yn parhau’n broses ffurfiannol a chefnogol. Cafwyd pryderon a fyddai arfarniad, a phrosesau lleol yn gyffredinol, yn ddigon cadarn i fod yn sail i ail-ddilysiad. Wrth wraidd y pryderon hyn, roedd yn amlwg fod pryder a fyddai ail-ddilysiad yn seiliedig ar arfarniad yn darparu dangosydd digonol o addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer ac amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion. Roedd Papur Ymgynghori 2000 y GMC wedi rhestru’n gyntaf ymhlith fanteision ail-ddilysu y byddai’n amddiffyn cleifion
‘rhag meddygon sy’n perfformio
n wael
a fydd yn cael eu nodi cyn gynted â phosibl
’. Yn amlwg, cafwyd amheuon ar ran rhai yn y GMC a fyddai ail-ddilysu yn seiliedig ar arfarnu yn gallu bodloni’r diben hwn.
Yr Ail Adroddiad SHM
Adroddodd SHM eto dri mis yn ddiweddarach ym mis Mawrth 2003. Erbyn hynny, roedd y GMC wedi penderfynu y dylai ail-ddilysu fod yn gysylltiedig ag arfarniad, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, ac roedd Prosbectws Ebrill 2003 yn cael ei gynhyrchu. Ni chafwyd unrhyw drafodaeth fanwl yn yr adroddiad am y model yr oedd y GMC wedi penderfynu ei fabwysiadu. Yn hytrach, dibenion yr adroddiad oedd nodi materion allweddol mewn ail-ddilysu yr oedd angen eu datrys o hyd, trafod rôl y GMC yn y broses ail-ddilysu a chynghori’r GMC ar sut i gyfathrebu ei bolisi ail-ddilysu a chyfleu’n effeithiol ei
‘negeseuon allweddol’
i feddygon, sefydliadau partner, y wasg a’r cyhoedd cyffredinol. Mae’n debyg bod llawer o ddatganiadau dilynol y GMC ar gyhoeddi ail-ddilysu yn deillio o’r cyngor a gafwyd yn yr adroddiad hwn. tu
Cyfeiriodd yr adroddiad at y gwahaniaeth barn a fynegwyd adeg adroddiad cyntaf SHM am yr hyn y gallai ac y dylai ail-ddilysu ei wneud. Adroddodd fod bellach
‘lefel uchel o gytundeb pendant’
yn y GMC am ddiben ail-ddilysu, er bod
‘ansicrwydd sylweddol o gyfeiriadau eraill’
. Roedd y GMC wedi diffinio ail-ddilysu bellach fel rhywbeth a gynlluniwyd i
‘hybu ffydd yn y Gofrestr’
trwy
‘sicrhau bod gwybodaeth gyfoes gan feddygon a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer’
. Mewn geiriau eraill, bwriadwyd y byddai’n
‘system gymesur sy’n sicrhau ansawdd y gofrestr’
. Ni fwriadwyd y byddai’n sicrhau ansawdd meddygon unigol. Nododd yr adroddiad fod llunio’r diffiniad hwn wedi arwain at
‘ddryswch a dadlau’
ymhlith lleiafrif o grwpiau rhanddeiliaid a oedd wedi credu y dylid cynllunio ail-ddilysu i ddatgelu meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael. Nododd yr adroddiad mai
‘un o ddaliadau allweddol ail-ddilysu’
oedd na’i fwriadwyd i nodi perfformiad gwael ac na awgrymwyd hynny erioed yng ngohebiaeth y GMC am ail-ddilysu. Mewn gwirionedd, fel a ddywedais, nodwyd datgelu meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2000 y GMC fel y cyntaf o nifer o fanteision a fyddai’n casglu i gleifion o ganlyniad i ail-ddilysu. Nid oedd yn syndod, felly, fod rhai pobl wedi drysu ac yn siomedig â’r diffiniad o ail-ddilysu a ledaenwyd gan y GMC ar ddechrau 2003. Nid oedd yr adroddiad yn cyfeirio at y diffiniad o ail-ddilysu yn y newid i ddeddf 1983 a basiwyd yn ddiweddar; nododd hyn, fel y dywedais, fod ail-ddilysu yn
‘werthusiad o addasrwydd ymarferwr meddygol i ymarfer’
. Ymddengys hyn yn wahanol iawn i’r cysyniad o ‘sicrhau ansawdd y gofrestr’ a oedd yn cael ei gynnig gan y GMC ym mis Mawrth 2003.
Cofnododd yr adroddiad fwy o gefnogaeth am gysylltu arfarnu ag ail-ddilysu nag y bu adeg adroddiad cyntaf SHM, er bod rhai pobl yn rhoi eu cefnogaeth yn
‘anfodlon’
. Cafwyd teimlad y byddai’n rhaid i feddygon dderbyn bod yna elfen o reoli perfformiad mewn arfarniad. Cymerodd rhai
‘ymagwedd fwy gwangalon’
, gan gydnabod
‘unrhyw ddewis amgen realistig’
i arfarniad. Cyfeiriwyd at bryder am hyfforddi arfarnwyr a chynnwys y broses arfarnu, ynghyd â’r ffaith nad oedd unrhyw sicrwydd o annibyniaeth na diffyg bias. Tynnodd yr adroddiad sylw i’r ffaith nad oedd yr union rôl i bobl leyg i’w chwarae mewn ail-ddilysu wedi’i chytuno o hyd. Cafwyd
‘rhywfaint o sinigiaeth’
mewn ymateb i symudiad y GMC i ffwrdd o gynnwys pobl leyg mewn grwpiau ail-ddilysu a fyddai’n archwilio tystiolaeth meddygon unigol. Fodd bynnag, roedd SHM yn obeithiol y byddai’r cynigion ar gyfer cynnwys pobl leyg yn y ffyrdd sy’n cael eu hystyried gan y GMC ar hyn o bryd yn ennyn cefnogaeth gydag amser.
Aeth yr adroddiad ymlaen i drafod sicrhau ansawdd y system ail-ddilysu, gan nodi mai cyfrifoldeb gwahanol sefydliadau fyddai sicrhau ansawdd agweddau amrywiol ar y system. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at ran honno’r adroddiad yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon. Am nawr, soniaf yn unig fod yr adroddiad yn nodi dau
‘risg pwysig’
o rannu cyfrifoldeb am sicrhau ansawdd ymhlith gwahanol sefydliadau. Awgrymodd ei bod
‘yn anochel bron’
y byddai
‘bylchau’
‘dod i’r amlwg rhwng ffiniau gwahanol gyfrifoldebau’
. Nododd y gallai canlyniadau tystiolaeth neu ddyfarniadau yn syrthio trwy’r bylchau hyn fod yn ddifrifol iawn yn wir. Cyfeiriodd hefyd at absenoldeb unrhyw
‘gorff neu fecanwaith cyfrifol cyffredinol clir am ddarparu llywodraethu a chydlynu trosfwaol’
Hoffwn wneud dau sylw am yr adroddiadau SHM a phenderfyniad y GMC i newid cyfeiriad. Yn gyntaf, mae’n ymddangos yn glir i mi y cafwyd cydnabyddiaeth yn y GMC fod y cynnig newydd yn wir yn symudiad sylweddol yn hytrach nag ‘ychydig newid cyfeiriad’ neu ‘fireinio’’r cynigion cynharach. Yn ail, newidiodd y GMC gyfeiriad er gwaethaf y rhybuddion a gafodd (yn adroddiad cyntaf SHM) am ddiffygion, a sylweddolwyd yn y GMC ei hun, arfarniad yn sail i ail-ddilysiad ac (yn ail adroddiad SHM) am y
‘risgiau pwysig’
sy’n gynhenid mewn system sy’n rhannu cyfrifoldeb am sicrhau ansawdd rhwng cynifer o sefydliadau.

---  ---
Y Meddwl y tu ôl i’r Cynigion
Soniais yn gynharach fod y GMC, ychydig cyn i wrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad yn gysylltiedig â’r GMC ddechrau, wedi addasu ei gynlluniau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn
. Ym Mhrosbectws Ebrill 2003, dywedwyd y gallai meddygon o’r fath ddewis y ‘llwybr arfarnu’. Byddai rhaid iddynt ddangos eu bod wedi cwblhau eu harfarniadau blynyddol yn llwyddiannus. Fodd bynnag, erbyn diwedd 2003 (o ganlyniad i dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn ôl pob tebyg), roedd y GMC wedi cydnabod na fyddai tystiolaeth gan y meddyg yn unig ei fod/ei bod wedi cyfranogi mewn arfarniad yn ddigonol i gynhyrchu’r ffydd angenrheidiol mewn ail-ddilysu. Felly, agorodd drafodaethau gyda’r Adran Iechyd ar gyfer darparu cadarnhad uniongyrchol o’r cyfranogiad hwnnw. Ar y pryd, bwriadwyd y dylai ‘cadarnhad’ gynnwys tystysgrif i’w llofnodi gan yr arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol, prif weithredwr neu gyfarwyddwr meddygol y
‘sefydliad rheoledig’
lle gweithiai’r meddyg. Byddai’r dystysgrif i’r perwyl fod y meddyg wedi cyfranogi mewn arfarniad ac
‘nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer wedi codi’n lleol trwy systemau llywodraethu clinigol’
. Nodwyd y telerau hyn yn y papurau briffio ar gyfer y cyfarfod Cyngor ar 25 Tachwedd 2003, lle byddai’r trefniadau newydd yn cael eu trafod. Fel y digwyddodd, cyflwynwyd drafft o dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol arfaethedig (a ddisgrifiwyd gan Mr Brearley ar y pryd fel ‘esgyrn cytundeb’) gan yr Adran Iechyd i’r GMC yn ystod y cyfarfod hwnnw a chytunwyd y telerau arfaethedig (a oedd, fel yr esboniaf, yn eithaf gwahanol i’r rheiny y cyfeiriwyd atynt uchod) wedyn. Yn y dyfodol, byddai’r llwybr arfarnu yn cael ei alw‘r ‘llwybr arfarnu a llywodraethu clinigol’.
Rhoddodd Mr Brearley dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad am gynlluniau’r GMC. O’r cychwyn, pwysleisiodd Mr Brearley nad oedd yn bosibl i’r GMC, fel ceidwad y gofrestr feddygol, i fonitro perfformiad pob meddyg o ddydd i ddydd. Rhaid iddo weithio ar y cyd â phrosesau lleol. Credaf fod ganddo brosesau llywodraethu clinigol mewn golwg gan gynnwys arfarnu. Dywedodd y bu newid diwylliant yn y proffesiwn meddygol a bod meddygon yn fwy parod bellach i gydnabod efallai nad yw cydweithiwr yn perfformio’n ddigon da ac i dderbyn cyfrifoldeb am hynny, trwy geisio helpu’r cydweithiwr hwnnw ond hefyd, pe byddai angen, trwy ei adrodd/ei hadrodd. Fel y deallais ef, ystyriodd Mr Brearley y byddai llywodraethu clinigol, yn yr awyrgylch newydd hwn, yn fwy effeithiol yn datgelu meddygon camweithredol a rhai sy’n perfformio’n wael.
Disgrifiodd Mr Brearley ail-ddilysu fel ‘bodloni dyletswydd broffesiynol’. Dywedodd fod pawb yn cytuno â pharodrwydd fod yna ddyletswydd broffesiynol ar bob meddyg i ‘gynnal safon ymarfer rhywun a chadw’n gyfoes’. Roedd hyn wedi arwain at yr angen i wneud datganiad ffurfiol i gleifion bod gan y meddyg wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer. Dywedodd fod hyn yn ffordd o ‘sicrhau ansawdd y gofrestr feddygol’ a fyddai’n rhoi sail i gleifion ar gyfer gwneud dewis gwybodus o feddyg. Derbyniodd, pe byddai’r gofrestr yn cynnwys dim ond enwau’r bobl yr oedd ganddynt wybodaeth gyfoes ac sy’n addas i ymarfer, byddai rhaid cael ffordd o ddatgelu’r meddygon hynny nad ydynt yn addas i ymarfer. Byddai hynny’n cael ei wneud, meddai, pan ddaethai’r meddyg i ail-ddilysiad, pe na fyddai’r ymarfer camweithredol wedi’i ddatgelu eisoes a’i drin trwy weithredu mesurau llywodraethu clinigol. Gobeithir a chredir y byddai’r rhan fwyaf o ymarfer camweithredol yn cael ei nodi ymhell cyn iddo barhau cyhyd â phum mlynedd.
Yr Elfen Arfarnu mewn Ail-ddilysu
Dymunai’r Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio gyda Mr Brearley sut y credai’r GMC y byddai’r cynigion newydd yn bodloni amcanion ail-ddilysu. Fe’i atgoffodd o amcanion ail-ddilysu fel y nodwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2000. Roedd yn ceisio darganfod sut y gallai arfarniad ddarparu’r gwerthusiad angenrheidiol o addasrwydd i ymarfer a fyddai’n ofynnol, pan fod arfarniad meddygon teulu yn broses hollol ffurfiannol, heb unrhyw ofynion penodol ynghylch pa ddeunydd y byddai’n rhaid i’r meddyg ei ddarparu yn ei ffolder a heb brofion gwrthrychol o unrhyw fath. Roedd yr Ymchwiliad wedi clywed syniadau gan nifer o dystion eraill o sut y gellid gwneud arfarniad yn fwy gwrthrychol ac yn fwy effeithiol fel ffordd o ddatgelu ymarfer camweithredol. Awgrymodd y Cwnsler y gallai dulliau asesu megis arsylwi ymgynghoriadau meddygon gyda chleifion, adolygiadau o gofnodion meddygol, ystyried archwiliad ac ystadegau marwolaeth a thrafod cwynion fod yn effeithiol. Arsylwodd Mr Brearley fod llawer o’r tystion i’r Ymchwiliad yn ‘rhygnu ar eu hoff dant’ a chyfaddefodd fod ganddo un neu ddau ei hun. Ond, meddai, nid oedd unrhyw un o’r dulliau asesu hyn wedi’u dilysu trwy ymchwil. Ei ddewis personol oedd holiaduron cleifion a chymheiriaid. Disgrifiodd y rhain, fel a weithredir gan Fwrdd Meddygaeth Fewnol America, ac esboniodd ganlyniadau rhyw ymchwil a gynhaliwyd. Roedd ei frwdfrydedd yn amlwg. Pan ofynnwyd i Mr Brearley a oedd y GMC yn bwriadu y byddai holiaduron yn rhan o’r broses ail-ddilysu pan ddaethai i rym yn 2005, dywedodd na fyddent i feddygon sy’n dod trwy’r ‘llwybr arfarnu a llywodraethu clinigol’, o leiaf tan gyrraedd y cyfnod pan godwyd pryder am y meddyg sy’n cael ei ail-ddilysu. Pe byddai pryder yn codi naill ai o ganlyniad i’r arfarniad neu oherwydd y ffaith na allai’r meddyg gael y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol angenrheidiol, gellid defnyddio holiaduron o’r fath (ynghyd ag adolygiadau o gofnodion meddygol ac arsylwadau o ymgynghoriadau) at ddiben yr archwiliad manylach a fyddai’n ofynnol bryd hynny. Credodd y byddai’n ddymunol iawn y dylai pob meddyg sy’n dod trwy’r ‘llwybr annibynnol’ ddefnyddio holiaduron.
Ar y cwestiwn a allai’r GMC benodi pa wybodaeth y dylid ei chynnwys yn y ffolder a fyddai’n sail i arfarniad, esboniodd Mr Brearley fod y GMC wedi cael cyngor cyfreithiol ar ddechrau’r trafodaethau am ail-ddilysu ac wedi clywed, fel a ddywedais, na allai bennu’n union pa fath o wybodaeth y dylid ei chyflwyno at ddibenion ail-ddilysu. Gallaf weld na all y GMC bennu pa wybodaeth y mae’n rhaid ei darparu at ddibenion arfarniad; rhaid i hwnnw fod yn fater i’r cyflogwr neu’r ‘prif gontractwr’, y GIG. Fodd bynnag, mae’r diwygiadau yn Neddf 1983 yn rhoi pwerau eang iawn i’r GMC fynnu cyflenwi gwybodaeth neu gynhyrchu dogfennau at ddibenion ail-ddilysu. Gobeithiaf na fydd y GMC yn oedi wrth nodi‘r hyn y mae’n credu sy’n briodol. Gallai ofyn i’r GIG sicrhau y darperir categorïau penodol o wybodaeth at ddibenion arfarniad. Byddai’r deunydd hwnnw ar gael wedyn ar gyfer y GMC pe byddai a phan fyddai’n dymuno archwilio ffolderi rhai meddygon.
Trodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol wedyn i ofyn i Mr Brearley, wrth gynllunio gyntaf sut y dylid ymgymryd â’r broses ail-ddilysu, a oedd y GMC wedi meddwl y gallai meddygon teulu gael unrhyw anhawster penodol wrth gasglu data i roi yn y ffolderi. Yr adeg honno, disgwyliwyd y byddai’r ffolder yn cael ei ddefnyddio at ddibenion arfarniad ac ail-ddilysiad. Dywedodd nad oedd unrhyw anhawster o’r fath wedi’i ganfod. Roedd gan bractisiau meddygon teulu systemau casglu data eithaf da eisoes; yn wir, credai fod y systemau casglu data mewn ymarfer cyffredinol dipyn yn well na’r rheiny sydd ar gael mewn ysbytai a ddisgrifiodd, fel a ddywedais, yn ‘hunllefus’. Gan y cynigiwyd bellach y dylai ail-ddilysu fod yn seiliedig ar arfarniad, roedd y Cwnsler eisiau gwybod a oedd y GMC yn pryderu ynghylch cadernid arfarniad meddyg teulu. Cawsai ei gynnal gan feddyg teulu arall, na fyddai angen arno unrhyw achrediad penodol, a byddai’n seiliedig ar ddeunydd a ddewisir gan y meddyg ei hun. Ni ymddangosai’r ffactorau hyn achosi unrhyw bryder ym meddwl y GMC. Yn wir, roedd Mr Brearley o’r farn bod meddygon teulu wedi ymgymryd ag arfarnu mewn modd trwyadl iawn ac y bu ei gyflwyniad dipyn yn fwy llwyddiannus ar gyfer meddygon teulu nag y bu mewn ysbytai. Er enghraifft, meddai, roedd llawer o bobl a wnâi arfarniadau mewn ysbytai heb gael unrhyw hyfforddiant o gwbl. Ond, er hynny, ymddangosai mai’r bwriad yw y dylai meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn ysbytai allu cyflawni ail-ddilysiad trwy’r llwybr arfarnu a llywodraethu clinigol.
Dywedodd Mr Brearley fod y GMC yn ffyddiog y gellid gwneud arfarniad i feddygon teulu yn broses gadarn. Roedd yn weithgaredd a oedd yn gyflym ddatblygu wedi’i adnoddu’n dda a oedd yn ofyniad statudol ar gyfer ymddiriedolaethau GIG. Ni welai unrhyw reswm pam na ddylai fod elfennau gorfodol i arfarniad; yn wir, dywedodd y byddai’r GMC o blaid hynny. Roedd gan Mr Brearley mewn golwg rhai o’r elfennau a ddisgrifir yn ‘Revalidation Toolkit’, a gyhoeddwyd gan yr RCGP yn yr Alban.
Dywedodd Mr Brearley ei fod yn credu - ac mae’r dystiolaeth rwyf wedi’i chlywed yn achosi i mi gredu hefyd - fod mwyafrif helaeth meddygon teulu yn cymryd arfarniad o ddifrif yn llwyr ac yn rhoi llawer iawn o ymdrech ynddo. I feddygon o’r fath, mae’n fuddiol iawn. Yr anhawster yw sut i ddelio â’r gyfran fechan o feddygon sy’n dymuno cuddio diffygion mewn perfformiad, problemau iechyd gwael a phroblemau eraill rhag yr arfarnwr. Ni all arfarnwyr ymchwilio i feysydd problem posibl nad oes ganddynt unrhyw wybodaeth amdanynt. Cytunodd Mr Brearley y byddai’n ddefnyddiol pe byddai rhaid cyflwyno rhai mathau o wybodaeth a phe byddai gan PCOs yr hawl, a phe byddai disgwyl iddynt, i ddarparu gwybodaeth llywodraethu clinigol (gan gynnwys gwybodaeth am gŵynion a phryderon) yn uniongyrchol i’r arfarnwr, yn ogystal ag i’r sawl sy’n cael arfarniad.
Ymddangosai fod Mr Brearley a’r GMC yn cytuno â’r cynnig cyffredinol y byddai cyflwyno rhai elfennau gorfodol a darparu rhai mathau gorfodol o wybodaeth yn rhoi strwythur i arfarniad ac yn ei wneud yn fwy effeithiol fel sail ar gyfer ail-ddilysu. Ceir sawl elfen bosibl, gan gynnwys arsylwi ymgynghoriadau gyda chleifion neu eu tapio ar fideo, holiaduron cleifion a chymheiriaid, adolygiadau o gofnodion meddygol ac, efallai, profion gwybodaeth (y gellir ei gwneud ar-lein heddiw). Ceir sawl math o wybodaeth y gallai PCOs ei ddarparu i arfarnwyr, fel pennu data a chofnodion o gŵynion neu bryderon am y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, byddai rhaid i unrhyw gyfarwyddiadau i newid fformat arfarniad fynd o’r Adran Iechyd i’r cyrff GIG a effeithir.
Rôl y Dystysgrif Llywodraethu Clinigol
Fel a ddywedais, yn y papurau briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod Cyngor Tachwedd 2003, dywedwyd wrth aelodau GMC y cynlluniwyd y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol i ddarparu cadarnhad bod arfarniad wedi digwydd ac nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am y meddyg wedi codi’n lleol trwy systemau llywodraethu clinigol. Fodd bynnag, daeth yn amlwg nad dyna sut yr ystyriai Mr Brearley y dystysgrif. Dywedodd wrth yr Ymchwiliad y gallai fod hyd yn oed y byddai gan PCOs gwybodaeth ddigonol ar eu rhestri i alluogi iddynt ddarparu tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol a fyddai’n gallu sefyll ar ei phen ei hun fel sail i ail-ddilysiad. Dan y Contract GMC newydd, a ddaeth i rym ym mis Ebrill 2004, meddai, gall PCO fynd i adeiladau practis a chael pob math o wybodaeth ddefnyddiol at ddibenion llywodraethu clinigol. Dywedodd Mr Brearley y byddai hefyd yn mynd mor bell â dweud y gallai dyfarniad y gallai PCO ei wneud am feddyg fod yn ddigon at ddibenion ail-ddilysu, hyd yn oed heb arfarniad. Pe na fyddai’r PCO yn fodlon darparu’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, ni fyddai’r meddyg yn cael ei ail-ddilysu a byddai’n rhaid iddo gael archwiliad manylach gan y GMC. Yn fyr, yn ei farn ef, gallai fod yn eithaf boddhaol seilio ail-ddilysiad ar weithgareddau llywodraethu clinigol lleol. Cefais anhawster cysoni’r farn honno â’r pwyslais y rhoddodd y GMC ar arfarniad yn sail i ail-ddilysiad ers cyhoeddi Prosbectws Ebrill 2003. Fodd bynnag, nid barn Mr Brearley oedd na ddylai arfarniad chwarae unrhyw ran o gwbl yn y broses o ail-ddilysu. Dywedodd y byddai’n chwarae rôl gyfyngedig, ond pwysig, yn y broses gyfansymiol o ail-ddilysu, oherwydd y byddai gofyn i arfarnwyr ddod ag arfarniad i ben pe byddai ‘pryderon pwysig heb eu datrys’ am ymarfer y meddyg yn codi yn ystod y broses. Defnyddiodd hefyd y mynegiant ‘pryderon mawr’. Fodd bynnag, ym marn Mr Brearley, y prif arf cyfansymiol fyddai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol.
Roedd ‘israddio’ pwysigrwydd arfarniad yn y broses ail-ddilysu yn y modd hwn yn cynrychioli newid pwyslais sylweddol o’r ‘llwybr arfarnu’ a ddisgrifiwyd ym Mhrosbectws Ebrill 2003. Yn y ddogfen honno, roedd y GMC wedi datgan ei fod yn credu
‘bod cyfranogiad llawn mewn arfarniad blynyddol, gyda dogfennaeth gefnogol wedi’i llenwi, yn ystod y cylch ail-ddilysu, yn ddangosydd pwerus o addasrwydd cyfredol y meddyg i ymarfer’
. Fel yr wyf wedi nodi’n flaenorol, ni esboniwyd y rhesymau dros y gred honno o gwbl. Ymddangosai o dystiolaeth Mr Brearley nad oedd y GMC yn ystyried bellach fod arfarniad yn ddangosydd pwerus o addasrwydd i ymarfer, ond credai fod y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol; ystyriwyd erbyn hynny mai rhwyd ddiogelwch ychwanegol yn unig oedd arfarniad.
Termau’r Dystysgrif Llywodraethu Clinigol
Yn ystod tystiolaeth Mr Brearley, ceisiodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio digonolrwydd termau’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol arfaethedig. Nid oedd hwn yn fater hawdd i Mr Brearley ddelio ag ef, oherwydd bod y syniad wedi codi’n ddiweddar iawn ac nad oedd termau’r dystysgrif wedi’u cwblhau eto. Llofnododd Mr Brearley ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig o dystiolaeth ar 5 Rhagfyr 2003 a rhoddodd dystiolaeth lafar ar 17 Rhagfyr. Yn ei ddatganiad ysgrifenedig, dywedodd Mr Brearley mai’r hyn yr oedd ar y GMC ei eisiau oedd
‘cadarnhad nad yw unrhyw bryderon am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer wedi codi trwy brosesau llywodraethu clinigol’
. Ar y pryd, y cynnig (a gafwyd gan y GMC yn ei gyfarfod ar 25 Tachwedd) oedd y byddai prif weithredwr, cyfarwyddwr meddygol neu arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol y corff GIG perthnasol yn tystio:
Bod arfarniad wedi’i gynnal a’i lofnodi gan arfarnwr hyfforddedig
Bod yr arfarniad wedi cynhyrchu cynllun datblygiad personol cytunedig
Bod y broses wedi cynnwys data wedi’i ddilysu
Bod y broses yn gadarn
Nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am gywirdeb neu iechyd y meddyg
Nad oedd unrhyw brosesau disgyblu ar y gweill
Nad oedd unrhyw ganfyddiadau disgyblu perthnasol.’
Wrth i’r Cwnsler Arweiniol gymryd Mr Brearley drwy‘r rhestr hon, daeth yn amlwg bod rhai o’r datganiadau yn ddadleuol, o leiaf yng nghyd-destun arfarnu meddygon teulu. Dan y trefniadau presennol, ni allai’r ardystiwr wybod a oedd unrhyw ddata wedi’i ddilysu wedi’i gynnwys yn yr arfarniad. Nid oes gan y PCO yr hawl i weld y ffolder o ddogfennau a luniwyd gan y meddyg at ddibenion arfarniad. Nac ychwaith y gallai’r ardystiwr ddweud a oedd yr arfarniad unigol yn
‘gadarn’
. Byddai wedi digwydd yn breifat a byddai’r trafodaethau a fyddai’n sail i’r arfarniad yn gyfrinachol i’r arfarnwr a’r sawl sy’n cael arfarniad. Cafwyd ychydig drafodaeth ynghylch a oedd eitem
yn gysylltiedig â chadernid y broses arfarnu gyfan fel a weithredir gan yr ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO penodol, neu a fwriadwyd iddo gyfeirio at gadernid yr arfarniad unigol. Os y cyntaf, byddai’r ffaith bod y Comisiwn Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd newydd (y Comisiwn Iechyd bellach) wedi archwilio ansawdd prosesau’r ymddiriedolaeth (fel oedd y bwriad bryd hynny), yn ddigonol i alluogi’r ardystiwr i nodi bod y
‘broses yn gadarn’
. Os yr ail, ni fyddai gan yr afarnwr unrhyw sail wybodaeth i ddibynnu arni. Byddai’r ardystiwr yn gwybod a fyddai’r arfarnwr wedi’i hyfforddi ond ddim llawer arall. Byddai’r dystysgrif ynghylch cywirdeb ac iechyd, esboniodd Mr Brearley, yn ogystal â’r hunan-ddatganiadau a fyddai’n ofynnol gan bob meddyg wrth wneud cais am ail-ddilysiad. Felly, byddai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn darparu rhywfaint o gefnogaeth i’r hunan-ddatganiad er, fel y nododd Mr Brearley, gallai’r llofnodwr lofnodi dim ond ar y sail nad oedd unrhyw wybodaeth i’r gwrthwyneb. O ran ‘
f
’ a ‘
g
’, derbyniodd Mr Brearley, nad yw’n feddyg teulu, pe byddai prosesau disgyblu bron yn anhysbys mewn gofal sylfaenol (fel y bu’r achos ers 1996, er bod y pwerau rheolaeth rhestr newydd bellach), yna ni fyddai unrhyw wybodaeth ar gael o ran yr eitemau hyn. Pwysleisiodd mai’r hyn yr oedd y GMC eisiau ei wybod oedd a oedd unrhyw bryderon am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Fel yr wyf wedi esbonio, roedd y papurau briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod y Cyngor ar 25 Tachwedd 2003 wedi argymell y dylai’r GMC geisio tystysgrif
‘i’r perwyl bod y meddyg yn wir wedi cyfranogi mewn arfarniad, ac nad oes unrhyw bryderon am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer wedi codi yn lleol trwy systemau llywodraethu clinigol’
, er, mewn mannau eraill yn y papur briffio, cyfeiriwyd at
‘bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
. Pan ofynnwyd iddo edrych ar y papurau briffio, cydnabu Mr Brearley ar unwaith nad oedd yr hyn yr oedd y GMC ei eisiau a’r hyn a gynigwyd mewn gwirionedd gan yr Adran Iechyd (gweler paragraffau 26.130-26.131) yn cydweddu’n dda. Roedd cofnodion y cyfarfod yn cofnodi y dylai’r GMC geisio tystysgrif sy’n datgan
‘nad oedd unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
am y meddyg. Roedd Mr Brearley wedi drysu gan na allai gofio unrhyw drafodaeth am gyflwyno’r ymadrodd
‘sylweddol heb eu datrys’
. Nid oedd yn gwybod sut y cafodd y geiriau hynny eu cyflwyno. Dywedodd y credai y dylid dweud wrth y GMC am unrhyw bryderon am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac y byddai’r GMC eisiau gwybod sut wedyn, os o gwbl, y cawsant eu datrys. Dywedodd y byddai’r Pwyllgor Cofrestr, y mae’n Gadeirydd arno, yn berffaith barod i gyflwyno cynigion i adlewyrchu’r bwriad gwreiddiol y dylid dweud wrth y GMC am
unrhyw
bryderon. Ni chlywodd yr Ymchwiliad unrhyw beth rhagor am hyn tan fis Tachwedd 2004 er bod yr Arweiniad drafft a gyhoeddodd y GMC ym mis Medi 2004 (gweler paragraff 26.142) yn nodi, ar wahanol adegau, y bydd y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn tystio
‘nad oes unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
‘nad oes unrhyw bryderon lleol heb eu datrys’
am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Nid yw’r naill eiriad yn yr Arweiniad yn cyd-daro â dymuniadau Mr Brearley.
Yn ogystal, gallai’r ddau eiriad achosi penderfyniadau anodd i’r ardystiwr. Beth yw ystyr
‘sylweddol’
yn y cyd-destun hwn? Nid yw’n glir; dyma oedd un o wrthwynebiadau Mr Brearley. Yn ail, beth yw ystyr
‘heb eu datrys’
? A yw’n golygu heb eu datrys yn gyfan gwbl neu a yw’n ymdrin ag achosion lle mae problem wedi codi ac mae camau wedi’u cymryd i’w datrys ond nid yw’n glir eto a fu’r camau hynny’n hollol lwyddiannus? Gall rhywun weld yn syth y posibilrwydd y gellid cymhwyso gwahanol drothwyon gan wahanol bobl. Credaf fod Mr Brearley yn synhwyrol pan ddywedodd ei fod ef a’i Bwyllgor eisiau i’r GMC gael gwybod am
unrhyw
bryderon.
Yn hollol ar wahân i’r anawsterau hynny, ymddangosai i mi y byddai’n ddadleuol dibynnu ar dystysgrif y byddai un person yn unig yn gyfrifol amdani. Yn gyntaf, byddai’r broblem o fias personol, o blaid neu yn erbyn y meddyg sy’n ceisio ail-ddilysu. Rhaid cydnabod bod cymunedau meddygol lleol yn fach; mae meddygon teulu yn adnabod ei gilydd ac yn aml mae ganddynt berthnasoedd personol a chymdeithasol yn ogystal â’u cysylltiadau proffesiynol. Mae arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol yn debygol o fod yn feddyg teulu y mae’n ddigon posibl ei fod/ei bod wedi ymarfer yn yr ardal; yn wir, gallai ef/hi fod yn gwneud hynny o hyd yn rhan-amser. Mae’n gofyn llawer i ddisgwyl i berson o’r fath wrthod llofnodi tystysgrif i gydweithiwr neu ffrind. I’r gwrthwyneb, byddai’n sicr bron y byddai rhai meddygon teulu yn yr ardal y byddai’r arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol wedi ffurfio argraff wael gyffredinol amdanynt. A fyddai person o’r fath yn cael triniaeth deg? Roedd yn debyg i mi, pe ddibynnid ar dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, y dylai mwy nag un person rannu cyfrifoldeb. Pe byddai pwysigrwydd gwirioneddol ynghlwm wrth y dystysgrif - a phe na fyddai’n gadarnhad yn unig fod arfarniad wedi digwydd - byddai’r peryglon o adael y broses yn nwylo un person yn amlwg.
Yn olaf, rhaid i werth tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol ddibynnu i raddau helaeth iawn ar ansawdd y trefniadau llywodraethu clinigol yn yr ardal lle mae’r meddyg unigol yn ymarfer. Mae’r dystiolaeth rwyf wedi’i chlywed yn peri i mi ddwyn y casgliad fod tipyn o ffordd i fynd cyn rhoir llywodraethu clinigol ar waith yn llawn mewn gofal sylfaenol. Mewn geiriau eraill, ni ellid dibynnu ar ansawdd llywodraethu clinigol ym mhob man.
Effeithiolrwydd Cynigion Ôl-Tachwedd 2003
Roedd ychwanegu tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol at y gofynion ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad trwy’r llwybr arfarnu yn gam yn y cyfeiriad cywir, er cam cymharol fach yn unig. Roedd cynigion ôl-Tachwedd 2003 yn dal yn ddibynnol ar arfarniad. Ni all arfarniad yn ei ffurf bresennol ddarparu gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol o werth ansicr oherwydd ei therminoleg, yr amgylchiadau lle byddai’n cael ei llofnodi ac, yn fwy na dim, oherwydd amrywioldeb ansawdd y gweithgareddau llywodraethu clinigol sy’n ei thanategu. Mewn ardal gyda darpariaeth llywodraethu clinigol dda, gydag arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol sy’n wrthrychol, yn gydwybodol ac yn ddiduedd ac sy’n cymhwyso trothwy isel i’r mynegiant
‘dim pryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
, byddai’r dystysgrif yn werthfawr. Fodd bynnag, hyd yn oed bryd hynny gallai ddarparu sicrwydd negyddol yn unig. Mae ail-ddilysu i fod i roi sicrwydd cadarnhaol yn seiliedig ar werthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. I bob pwrpas, dan gynigion Tachwedd 2003, byddai’r mwyafrif aruthrol o feddygon yn cael eu ‘hail-ddilysu’ heb fynd trwy broses ail-ddilysu, yn ystyr y term hwnnw yn y Ddeddf Feddygol ddiwygiedig. I’r mwyafrif helaeth o feddygon, byddai’r broses yn dibynnu ar weithrediad gweithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol lleol a fyddai’n digwydd p’un a fyddai proses ail-ddilysu neu beidio. I’r mwyafrif helaeth o feddygon a’u cleifion, ni fyddai ail-ddilysu yn darparu fawr o werth uwchlaw’r systemau monitro a roddwyd ar waith gan y GIG. Gallai’r GMC ddarparu rhyw werth ychwanegol trwy sicrhau ansawdd gweithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol trwy archwilio cyfran o ffolderi a gedwir gan feddygon at ddibenion arfarniad, y byddaf yn cyfeirio at y broses hon isod. Fodd bynnag, ni fyddai hynny’n rhoi llawer o gysur i’r claf cyffredin sydd eisiau gwybod a oes gan ei feddyg/ei meddyg wybodaeth gyfoeth ac a yw’n addas i ymarfer.
Gwaith Datblygu Pellach
Ers gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, mae gwaith ar ddatblygu’r broses ail-ddilysu, wrth reswm, wedi parhau. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi dod yn ymwybodol o ddwy haen wahanol, ond cysylltiedig, o waith. Ym mis Awst 2004, cyflwynodd yr RCGP ddogfen ymgynghori â’r teitl ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: a Tool for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’. Mae’n nodi cynigion ar gyfer cynnwys y ffolderi y dylai meddygon teulu eu cadw at y tri diben hyn ar y cyd. Mae’n ceisio sefydlu’r safonau ar gyfer ffolderi o’r fath a’r dystiolaeth y dylent eu cynnwys. Mae’n seiliedig ar egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Mae’n ymddangos i mi ei bod yn ddogfen ddefnyddiol iawn. Pe byddai’n cael ei mabwysiadu, byddai’n sicrhau bod y deunydd yn ffolder y meddyg yn gallu darparu sail ar gyfer gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Er enghraifft, yn adran 3, sy’n ymwneud â gofal clinigol da, byddai gofyn i’r meddyg gyflwyno tystiolaeth o archwiliad clinigol ac archwiliad digwyddiad arwyddocaol. Byddai’r dystiolaeth i’w chyflwyno nid yn unig yn ddatganiad bod yr archwiliad wedi digwydd; byddai rhaid iddo gynnwys rhai adroddiadau archwiliad gwirioneddol a rhyw ymateb i’r hyn a ddysgwyd o’r broses neu sylwadau arno. Byddwn yn gobeithio y byddai hynny’n cynnwys esboniad o’r rôl yr oedd y meddyg unigol wedi’i chwarae yn yr archwiliad, gan fod archwiliadau yn aml yn ymdrech ar y cyd. I fod o werth i ail-ddilysiad, byddai’n rhaid darllen cynnwys yr adroddiadau; ni fyddai’n ddigonol sicrhau y gwnaed yr archwiliad yn unig.
Mae’r Ymchwiliad hefyd wedi cael dogfen a baratowyd gan Grŵp Arbenigol Tîm Cymorth Llywodraethu Clinigol y GIG (NCGST), gyda’r teitl ‘Defining the evidence for Revalidation - supporting the Royal College of General Practitioners’. Diben y gwaith hwn oedd nodi’r dystiolaeth ofynnol y dylid ystyried ei bod yn hanfodol i ganiatáu i arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol lofnodi’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol ar gyfer meddyg teulu. Mae’n debyg y rhagwelwyd y byddai’r dystiolaeth yn cael ei hasesu a’i ‘therfynu’ yn ddigon annibynnol wrth y broses arfarnu. Byddai’r dystiolaeth ar gael wedyn i’w defnyddio yn ystod arfarniad pe byddai’r meddyg yn dymuno. Mae gwaith yr NCGST hefyd yn ddefnyddiol er bod ei gynigion dipyn yn ‘feddalach’ na chynigion yr RCGP. Er enghraifft, dan yr adran sy’n delio ag archwiliad clinigol, mae’r ddogfen hon yn argymell y dylai’r meddyg ddarparu
‘crynodeb o’i ymglymiad/ei hymglymiad wrth archwiliad, gan roi enghreifftiau’
. Gwneir yn glir na fyddai hyn yn mynnu bod y meddyg yn cynhyrchu ei archwiliadau/ei harchwiliadau ei hun ond byddai’n gofyn y byddai’n gallu disgrifio sut y mae ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer wedi datblygu o ganlyniad i ganlyniadau archwiliad. Yn fyr, nid oes angen cyflwyno adroddiad archwiliad. Ar gyfer archwiliad digwyddiad arwyddocaol, rhaid i’r meddyg gyflwyno
‘tystiolaeth o gyfranogiad ystyrlon’
. Nid yw’n glir i mi a fyddai hynny’n gofyn cyflwyno’r adroddiadau. Felly, byddai’r gofynion o ran archwiliad yn llai beichus nag y byddent o dan gynigion yr RCGP. Enghraifft arall o’r gwahaniaeth rhwng y ddau set o gynigion yw, yn yr adran sy’n delio â pherthnasoedd gyda chleifion, bod yr RCGP yn cynnig y dylai’r meddyg gyflwyno gweithdrefnau cwynion y practis, copïau o bob cwyn sy’n cynnwys y meddyg a thystiolaeth bod unrhyw anghenion dysgu wedi’u bodloni. Mae adran gyfatebol y ddogfen NCGST yn awgrymu cyflwyno’r weithdrefn gŵynion a rhestr o gŵynion a gafwyd a’r camau dilynol a gymerwyd. Mae cynnig yr RCGP yn darparu tystiolaeth sydd, pe byddai’n cael ei harchwilio, yn datgelu llawer mwy am safon wirioneddol perfformiad y meddyg. Mae trydedd enghraifft o’r gwahaniaeth yn gysylltiedig â’r ffordd y dylid adolygu cofnodion cleifion. Mae’r RCGP yn galw am archwiliad safonedig wedi’i gynnal gan gydweithiwr annibynnol i ddangos ansawdd priodol cofnodion clinigol y meddyg. Mae’r NCGST yn awgrymu (i ddechrau o leiaf) hunanarchwiliad o gofnodion ar gyfer eglurdeb a chywirdeb i safonau a osodir gan yr RCGP. Yma eto, byddai’r dystiolaeth a awgrymir gan yr RCGP yn fwy defnyddiol at ddiben gwerthuso addasrwydd i ymarfer na’r dystiolaeth honno a awgrymwyd gan yr NCGST.
Cynrychiolodd gwaith y ddau grŵp hyn ddatblygiad pwysig ar y cyfnod a gyrhaeddwyd adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad. Ymddangosai y gallai’r mater o dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol GIG gynnwys rhyw werthusiad cadarnhaol o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddwn yn croesawu proses werthuso gadarnhaol o ffolder meddyg. Fodd bynnag, roeddwn yn pryderu ynghylch dwy agwedd ar y cynigion fel yr ymddangoswyd y cawsant eu rhagweld. Yn gyntaf, ni fyddai cynnwys gofynnol y ffolder fel a awgrymwyd gan yr NCGST yn feichus iawn nac yn datgelu llawer am ansawdd ymarfer y meddyg. Fel y dywedais, mae’n datgelu llawer llai nag y byddai’r cynnwys a gynigiwyd gan yr RCGP. Yn ail, nid oeddwn yn meddwl ei bod yn deg na’n briodol disgwyl i arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol archwilio’r ffolderi ar ei ben ei hun. Byddai’n rhoi baich annioddefol ar yr unigolyn hwnnw, o ran llwyth gwaith a chyfrifoldeb ac, yn y pen draw, o ran atebolrwydd, pe byddai penderfyniad i lofnodi tystysgrif yn anghywir yn y pen draw. Ni ellid disgwyl iddo/iddi ymarfer y radd angenrheidiol o annibyniaeth barn am feddygon y gallai ef/hi eu hadnabod yn bersonol fel ffrindiau neu gydweithwyr. Byddai gwir berygl bias ac anghysondeb. Pe byddai asesiad o’r fath yn cael ei gynnal, fe ddylai, yn fy marn i, gael ei gynnal gan grŵp bach, a ddylai gynnwys (yn ogystal â’r arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol) berson lleyg a meddyg teulu nad yw’n dod o’r un ardal ac nad oes ganddo/ganddi unrhyw wybodaeth bersonol am y meddyg sy’n cael ei asesu.
Gweithdrefnau Mewnol y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Cyfnod Cyntaf Ail-ddilysu
Adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dyma oedd y weithdrefn arfaethedig i’w dilyn gan y GMC wrth drafod ceisiadau am ail-ddilysiad. Byddai disgwyl i’r meddyg gyflwyno ffurflen gais wedi’i llenwi, sy’n rhoi rhyw wybodaeth sylfaenol amdano/amdani. Byddai’n rhaid iddo/iddi ddarparu disgrifiad o’i ymarfer/ei hymarfer yn ystod y pum mlynedd ddiwethaf, neu ers yr ail-ddilysiad diwethaf, pe byddai ail-ddilysiad wedi’i roi am gyfnod yn llai na phum mlynedd. Pe byddai’n ceisio ail-ddilysiad trwy’r llwybr llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu, byddai’n rhaid iddo/iddi ddatgan ei fod/ei bod wedi cael gwerthusiad mewn system sy’n seiliedig ar egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ a byddai’n rhaid iddo/iddi amgáu Ffurflen 4 wedi’i llenwi o’r arfarniad. Byddai’n rhaid iddo/iddi ddarparu hunanardystiad o’i iechyd/ei hiechyd a chywirdeb.
Byddai’r GMC yn archwilio pob cais at ddibenion nodi’r meddyg fel meddyg y galwyd arno ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad. Byddai cynnwys y ffolder yn cael ei wirio i sicrhau bod pob gofyniad wedi’i fodloni. Ni fyddai hynny’n cynnwys darllen y cynnwys. Dywedodd Mr Scott y rhagwelwyd y byddai rhyw fath o archwiliad electronig o’r dogfennau a gynllunnir i nodi atebion annisgwyl. Felly, er enghraifft, yn y dystysgrif gywirdeb, pe byddai ateb ‘ie’ yn ymddangos lle byddai disgwyl ateb ‘na’, byddai’r system yn tynnu sylw i’r meddyg hwnnw a byddai’n edrych ar y mater yn ddyfnach. Ni phenderfynwyd yn derfynol hyd yma a fyddai ffyrdd electronig yn cael eu defnyddio. Yn ail adroddiad SHM ym mis Mawrth 2003, a oedd yn cynnwys cyngor i’r GMC am archwilio a sicrhau ansawdd, disgwyliwyd mai staff swyddfa iau a fyddai’n cynnal yr archwiliad cychwynnol hwn (a fyddai’n cael ei wneud ym mhob achos). Pan ofynnwyd iddo sut y byddai Ffurflen 4 arfarniad y meddyg yn cael ei archwilio, dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad nad oedd y GMC wedi penderfynu eto am y prosesau hyn a’i fod yn bwriadu cynnal astudiaethau peilot pellach gan fod yr astudiaethau peilot gwreiddiol yn gysylltiedig â phroses hollol wahanol. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi clywed am unrhyw astudiaethau pellach, er, wrth gwrs, gall fod rhai wedi digwydd.
Mae’r trefniadau arfaethedig hyn bellach wedi’u haddasu, er dim ond ychydig. Mewn dogfen â’r teitl ‘Licensing and Revalidation Formal Guidance for Doctors (draft)’, dyddiedig Medi 2004 (Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004), esbonnir y dylai meddygon wneud eu ceisiadau fel arfer trwy gysylltiad rhyngrwyd diogel yn uniongyrchol i’r GMC. Rhaid i feddygon sy’n gweithio mewn
‘amgylchedd a gymeradwyir gan y GMC’
ddarparu disgrifiad o’u hymarfer, dangos cyfranogiad mewn arfarniad
‘wedi’i fapio yn erbyn penawdau
a chwblhau Cynllun Datblygiad Personol cytunedig’
, darparu datganiad yn cyhoeddi cymhwyster ar gyfer trwyddedu lleol a darparu tystiolaeth o iechyd a chywirdeb. Bydd y datganiad o gymhwyster yn gofyn i’r meddyg nodi’r cyflogwr neu’r PCO a fydd yn gyfrifol am y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol. Bydd y datganiad o ran iechyd yn cael ei lofnodi gan y meddyg ei hun a rhaid i feddyg trwyddedig arall ei gydlofnodi. Mae’n debyg na fydd gofyn i’r meddyg gyflwyno Ffurflen 4 arfarniad er nad yw’r Arweiniad yn hollol glir ar y pwynt hwn. Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, disgrifiodd Syr Graeme Catto Ffurflen 4 fel y ‘lleiafswm llwyr’ y byddai’r GMC yn disgwyl ei dderbyn.
Mae Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004 yn nodi bod rhaid i’r wybodaeth a gyflwynir fod
‘modd ei gwirio’n annibynnol’
. Caiff y cais ei wirio er mwyn gweld ei fod yn gyflawn a’i fod yn dangos bod y meddyg yn gweithio mewn amgylchedd cymeradwy. Os yw’r cais mewn trefn, bydd y GMC yn gwneud cais am dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol gan y cyflogwr neu’r PCO. Os yw’r dystysgrif yn foddhaol, bydd y rhan fwyaf o feddygon yn cael eu hail-ddilysu yn y cyfnod hwn. Rhybuddir meddygon efallai y bydd angen iddynt gyflwyno ffolder o wybodaeth
‘yn gysylltiedig â phenawdau
Arfer Meddygol Da’
. Gallai hyn fod naill ai oherwydd bod y GMC yn dymuno archwilio ffolder y meddyg at ddibenion rheoli ansawdd neu oherwydd bod rhai amheuon wedi codi ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, o ganlyniad i’r datganiadau iechyd neu gywirdeb neu’r cais am dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn ôl pob tebyg.
Ail Gyfnod Ail-ddilysu
Mae Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004 yn cynnwys ychydig wybodaeth am yr hyn a fydd yn digwydd yn ail gyfnod y broses ail-ddilysu pe byddai’r dystiolaeth y mae’r meddyg wedi’i chyflwyno yn
‘annigonol neu’n codi cwestiwn am addasrwydd i ymarfer’
. Dywedir y gellid cymryd un neu fwy o gamau. Gellid gofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu gwybodaeth neu dystiolaeth benodol bellach. Gellid ceisio mwy o dystiolaeth trwy ddefnyddio arfau eilaidd, fel holiaduron cymheiriaid a chleifion neu arsylwi ymarfer. Gellid atgyfeirio tystiolaeth y meddyg i Banel Penderfyniadau Cofrestru am gyngor. Yn olaf, gellid atgyfeirio’r meddyg i weithdrefnau FTP y GMC ar gyfer archwiliad. Dywedir hefyd, pe byddai
‘gofyn neu ganiatâd’
i feddyg gyflwyno ei ffolder, y
‘bydd arbenigwyr hyfforddedig yn adolygu’r ffolder, gan ystyried unrhyw safonau arbenigedd-benodol perthnasol a ddiffinnir gan y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol neu gyrff awdurdodol eraill’
. Bydd yr
‘arbenigwyr’
yn paratoi adroddiad crynodeb, a fydd yn cael ei ystyried gan Banel Penderfyniadau Cofrestru, a fydd yn argymell i’r Cofrestrydd pa gamau y dylid eu cymryd.
Rhaid i mi fynegi rhywfaint o bryder am anfanyldeb y trefniadau hyn. Nid yw’n glir a fydd camau’n cael eu cymryd ym mhob achos. Mae hynny’n cael ei adael yn agored; gellid cymryd camau neu beidio. Gallaf weld y byddai’n anodd bod yn fanwl am ba wybodaeth bellach union y gallai fod yn ofynnol; rhaid i hynny ddibynnu ar natur yr annigonolrwydd a nodir neu’r cwestiwn sydd wedi codi am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai tystiolaeth bellach yn cael ei chyflwyno, nid yw’n glir pwy fydd yn ei harchwilio ac yn barnu ei digonolrwydd neu ba safonau sydd i’w cymhwyso. Nid ym mhob achos y bydd tystiolaeth yn cael ei hatgyfeirio i Banel Penderfyniadau Cofrestru am gyngor. Pe byddai tystiolaeth meddyg yn cael ei chyflwyno i Banel Penderfyniadau Cofrestru, yn ôl pa safonau y bydd y Panel yn cynghori? Fel y deallaf y sefyllfa, dim ond ffolderi meddygon (ac nid tystiolaeth arall) fydd yn cael eu hadolygu gan yr
‘arbenigwyr’
. Nid yw’n glir a fydd y rhain yn arbenigwyr sy’n feddygol gymwys ac sy’n ymarfer yn yr arbenigedd y mae’r meddyg yn perthyn iddo neu a fyddant yn ‘arbenigo’ mewn archwilio ffolderi. Mae’n bosibl y bydd y gweithdrefnau ail gyfnod hyn yn gadarn ond nid yw’n glir y byddant. Mae cadernid yr ail gyfnod yn hanfodol i’r broses ail-ddilysu. Pe byddai meddyg sy’n methu yn y cyfnod cyntaf yn cael ei ail-ddilysu yn yr ail gyfnod heb werthusiad unigol gofalus o’i addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer, bydd y broses gyfan yn ddi-werth.
Trydydd Cyfnod Ail-ddilysu
Bydd y trydydd cyfnod yn berthnasol dim ond i’r meddygon hynny sydd wedi’u hatgyfeirio i’r gweithdrefnau FTP oherwydd iddynt fethu i fodloni Panel Penderfyniadau Cofrestru. Disgwyliaf y bydd rhan fwyaf yr achosion hynny yn feddygon y mae eu perfformiad wedi achosi pryder. Gallaf weld y gall fod rhai achosion sy’n cael eu hatgyfeirio am resymau iechyd neu gan fod pryderon wedi codi am ryw agwedd ar ymddygiad y meddyg. Fodd bynnag, fel y dywedaf, yn bennaf, perfformiad gwael fydd y rheswm fel arfer.
Pan atgyfeirir meddyg i’r gweithdrefnau FTP ar sail pryderon am berfformiad, bydd gofyn iddo/iddi fel arfer gael asesiad perfformiad GMC llawn. Disgrifiais y broses honno ym Mhennod 24. Yn fyr, mae’n cynnwys dau gam. Mae Cam 1 yn adolygiad cymheiriaid. Mae Cam II yn cynnwys tri math o asesiad gwrthrychol: sef prawf gwybodaeth, llawdriniaeth ffug ac archwiliadau clinigol strwythuredig gwrthrychol, gan roi’r meddyg mewn rhai sefyllfaoedd clinigol y mae’n rhaid iddo/iddi ymateb iddynt. Ar gyfer meddygon teulu, mae safon y profion gwrthrychol yn cael ei graddnodi ar y lefel sy’n ofynnol ar gyfer mynediad i ymarfer cyffredinol, sef asesiad cyfansymiol. Dywedodd Syr Donald Irvine wrth yr Ymchwiliad ei fod yn credu bod y safon yn rhy isel. Hoffai weld yr asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei raddnodi i’r safon sy’n ofynnol gan yr RCGP ar gyfer ei Aelodaeth trwy asesiad. Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate, sy’n aelod o’r Bwrdd Addysg a Hyfforddiant Meddygol i Raddedigion (PMETB), a fydd cyn hir yn cymryd y cyfrifoldeb am oruchwylio hyfforddiant meddygon teulu, mai’r bwriad oedd dyfeisio safon gyffredin ar gyfer mynediad i ymarfer cyffredinol ac ar gyfer Aelodaeth yr RCGP. Byddai’r safon ar gyfer mynediad i ymarfer cyffredinol yn cael ei chodi i ryw raddau. Dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, pan fyddai asesiad perfformiad yn datgelu SDP ond ystyriwyd bod safon perfformiad y meddyg yn debygol o wella trwy gamau adferol, byddai’r meddyg fel arfer yn cael gwahoddiad i gytuno i ‘ddatganiad o ofynion’. Yn y dyfodol, bydd ef/hi yn cael gwahoddiad i gytuno i ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Byddai’r datganiad o ofynion fel arfer yn cynnwys rhyw ofynion ar gyfer ail-addysgu a gallent hefyd gynnwys gofyniad am oruchwyliaeth a gorfodi rhai cyfyngiadau ar ymarfer y meddyg. Fel y deallaf, yn y dyfodol, pe byddai’r meddyg sydd wedi methu’r asesiad perfformiad yn derbyn yr ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol arfaethedig, caiff ei ail-ddilysu/ei hail-ddilysu ar y telerau hynny. Gall yr ail-ddilysiad fod ar gyfer cyfnod byrrach na’r pum mlynedd arferol. Felly, ni fydd gan y meddyg sydd wedi’i ail-ddilysu ‘wybodaeth gyfoes’ ac ni fydd ‘yn addas i ymarfer’ ond bydd yn ymarfer dan amodau. Dywedodd Mr Brearley y byddai hyn yn dderbyniol gan fydd yr amodau’n sicrhau nad yw’r meddyg yn risg i gleifion. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw reswm i ddweud nad yw’n gywir am hynny. Fodd bynnag, rhaid i mi nodi y gall aelod o’r cyhoedd sydd wedi deall bod ei feddyg/ei meddyg wedi’i ail-ddilysu (a felly bod ganddo/ganddi wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer) synnu o glywed bod y meddyg yn ymarfer dan gyfyngiadau ac amodau a orfodwyd er mwyn diogelwch cleifion.
Pe byddai meddyg y cynigir ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol iddo/iddi yn gwrthod eu derbyn neu pe byddai aelod o staff y GMC (sef archwiliwr achos yn ôl pob tebyg) sy’n gyfrifol yn credu nad yw ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn briodol, bydd y meddyg yn cael ei atgyfeirio i banel FTP. Yna, ceir gwrandawiad lle penderfynir a oes nam ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac, os felly, a oes nam i’r graddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Gall y panel FTP benderfynu dileu neu atal y meddyg oddi ar y gofrestr, fel na fydd ef/hi’n cael ei ail-ddilysu/ei hail-ddilysu, neu gall benderfynu gorfodi amodau, lle byddai’r meddyg yn cael ei ail-ddilysu ond rhaid iddo ymarfer yn unol â’r amodau.
Fel y deallaf y gweithdrefnau newydd, bydd panel FTP mewn achos perfformiad yn gweithredu i’r un safonau â’r CPP blaenorol. Mewn egwyddor, i’r safon honno y cynhaliwyd yr asesiad perfformiad, h.y. y safon sy’n ofynnol ar gyfer mynediad i ymarfer cyffredinol. Dywedodd Syr Donald wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai dyna a ddigwyddai pan ddaethpwyd â’r gweithdrefnau perfformiad ar waith i ddechrau. Pe byddai meddyg wedi ‘methu’r asesiad’, byddai’r CPP yn gweithredu ar gofrestriad. Yn hollol ar wahân i’r ffaith y teimlai fod y safon swyddogol yn rhy isel, mynegodd bryder, a adleisiwyd gan y Fonesig Lesley, fod safonau wedi syrthio rhywfaint dros yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf. Gallai meddygon ymosod ar ganfyddiadau cam cyntaf yr asesiad (neu rai ohonynt) a rhaid oedd i baneli’r CPP lunio barn ynghylch dilysrwydd y feirniadaeth yn yr adroddiad asesiad. O ganlyniad, meddai Syr Donald, roedd paneli CPP yn cymhwyso eu barnau eu hunain ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn dderbyniol. Arweiniai hyn at ganiatáu i feddygon barhau i ymarfer yr oedd eu perfformiad (ym marn Syr Donald) yn eithaf annerbyniol. Disgrifiodd Syr Graeme ei hun y safonau a gymhwyswyd yn y gweithdrefnau perfformiad yn ‘rhyfeddol o isel’. Cadarnhaodd y farn honno‘r argraff yr oeddwn i wedi’i chael o’r ffeiliau a ddarllenais. Nododd Syr Donald, pe byddai paneli o’r fath yn darparu’r ‘llinell sylfaenol’ ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, ei bod yn hanfodol sefydlu safonau priodol o ymarfer a pherfformiad. Fel arall, byddai ail-ddilysiad yn ddiystyr fel ffordd o amddiffyn y cyhoedd. Cytunaf ag ef.
Mae’n debyg i mi ei bod yn hanfodol gosod safonau cytunedig at ddefnydd paneli FTP ar ffurf y gellid eu cymhwyso’n hawdd. Gall y GMC sefydlu safonau ar gyfer mynediad i’r proffesiwn a’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol, a’r PMETB yn sefydlu safonau ar gyfer mynediad ar gofrestrau arbenigol. Erbyn hyn, nid yw arholiad at y dibenion hyn yn gyfyngedig i brawf ysgrifenedig. Mae yna ffurfiau amrywiol o asesiad perfformiad, er enghraifft yn asesiad cyfansymiol meddygon teulu. Yn fy marn i, os yw ail-ddilysu am ennyn ffydd y cyhoedd, rhaid bod ganddo ‘linell sylfaenol’ y gellir ei chymhwyso’n wrthrychol ac mewn cyfnod rhesymol o amser. Ym Mhennod 24, esboniais sut y gallai fod oedi am sawl blynedd weithiau cyn cwblhau gweithdrefnau perfformiad. Yn y cyfamser, byddai’r meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer oni bai ei fod/ei bod yn amlwg yn anaddas. Credaf fod rhaid cael trothwy clir y byddai meddyg yn cael ei ‘gymryd oddi ar y ffordd’ islaw hwn nes iddo/iddi wella a chael ailasesiad sy’n nodi ei fod/ei bod yn perfformio ar lefel foddhaol.
Perthnasedd Hanes Addasrwydd i Ymarfer Meddyg
Nid yw’n glir o Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004 ar ba adeg yn y broses ail-ddilysu y bwriedir y dylid ystyried hanes FTP meddyg gyda’r GMC. Nid yw’n glir chwaith sut, os o gwbl, y bydd hanes FTP yn effeithio ar ganlyniad y broses ail-ddilysu. Mae’r Arweiniad yn cyfeirio at gyflwyno system o rybuddion dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, a gyhoeddir gan y GMC lle bu gwyriad sylweddol oddi wrth ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ nad yw’n ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad meddyg. Mae’r Arweiniad yn nodi y bydd ar y GMC
‘eisiau gweld tystiolaeth yr aethpwyd i’r afael â’r problemau a achosodd y rhybudd erbyn ail-ddilysiad nesaf y meddyg’
. Mae’r Arweiniad yn nodi hefyd y deuir â dyddiad ail-ddilysiad y meddyg, lle bo angen, yn nes i sicrhau y rhoir sylw i broblemau yn gyflym. Os nad ydynt wedi cael sylw cyflym, dywedir, gall cofrestriad y meddyg fod mewn perygl. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’n glir ym mha gyfnod y ceisir tystiolaeth am gydymffurfiaeth y meddyg â thelerau rhybudd, a fydd y dystiolaeth yn cael ei cheisio gan y meddyg ei hun neu gan ryw berson neu gorff arall, beth fydd natur y dystiolaeth ofynnol yn debygol o fod, pwy fydd yn ei harchwilio ac yn erbyn pa safon. Bydd angen ceisio tystiolaeth wrthrychol, annibynnol o gydymffurfiaeth â thelerau’r rhybudd ac i’r dystiolaeth honno gael ei harchwilio i safon gytunedig gan berson cymwys (meddygol gymwys yn ôl pob tebyg) neu gan grŵp o bobl, yn rhai meddygol cymwys a lleyg.
Mae Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004 yn nodi y gall y GMC ddymuno hefyd ddod â dyddiad ail-ddilysiad y meddyg yn nes pe byddai ef/hi wedi bod yn ymarfer dan amodau neu ymrwymiadau dan y gweithdrefnau FTP neu pe byddai ef/hi wedi ailddechrau ymarfer ar ôl cyfnod o ataliad neu ddilead. Wedi dweud hynny, nid yw’n glir pa effaith, os o gwbl, y caiff hanes FTP y meddyg ar ganlyniad y broses ail-ddilysu. Nid yw’n glir chwaith a fydd gofyn i’r meddyg ddarparu tystiolaeth ychwanegol yn ogystal â’r ddogfennaeth sylfaenol y mae’n rhaid i bob meddyg ei darparu. Mae’n ymddangos yn debygol, pe bydd gofyn am dystiolaeth ychwanegol gan feddyg sydd wedi cael rhybudd, y bydd ei hangen hefyd gan feddygon sydd neu wedi bod yn destun sancsiynau eraill ac ymrwymiadau. Pe byddai hynny’n digwydd, mae’r un cwestiynau’n codi am natur a ffynhonnell y dystiolaeth honno a sut y caiff ei harchwilio. Ansicrwydd arall yw, pan fo’r GMC yn derbyn cais i ail-ddilysu, a fydd unrhyw wiriad yn cael ei wneud i ganfod a oes unrhyw honiad yn erbyn y meddyg sy’n cael ei archwilio ar hyn o bryd dan y gweithdrefnau FTP ac, os felly, beth fydd y weithdrefn ar gyfer delio â’r cais i ail-ddilysu.
Sicrhau Ansawdd
Soniais yn gynharach fod yr ail adroddiad SHM yn cynnwys rhai cynigion mewn perthynas â sicrhau ansawdd. Nodwyd sawl maes lle’r oedd gofyn am ymyrraeth sicrhau ansawdd. Y cyntaf o’r rhain oedd
‘gosod y safonau sy’n benodol i arbenigedd ar gyfer asesu addasrwydd meddygon i ymarfer’
. Mewn gwirionedd, nid oedd y model y penderfynodd y GMC o’i blaid erbyn hynny yn cynnwys unrhyw ‘asesiad’. Fodd bynnag, bwriadwyd (a bwriedir o hyd) y dylai’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol osod safonau, tystiolaeth a meini prawf y dylid mesur tystiolaeth y meddygon yn eu herbyn. Yr ail faes oedd sicrhau’r safonau a chynllunio systemau lleol a gynllunnir i nodi a gweithredu ar faterion perfformiad ac ymddygiad. Byddai hyn yn gyfrifoldeb ymddiriedolaethau GIG. Byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a chyrff cyfwerth mewn mannau eraill o’r DU yn gyfrifol am sicrhau ansawdd systemau arfarnu ac am lywodraethu clinigol yn gyffredinol (y trydydd maes). Byddai’r GMC yn gyfrifol am archwilio’r dystiolaeth ail-ddilysu a gyflwynir gan feddygon. Rhagwelwyd y byddai hyn yn ôl pob tebyg yn cynnwys gwiriad cyflym ym mhob achos i sicrhau bod meddygon wedi cydymffurfio â’r goblygiad i gyflwyno tystiolaeth a bod y ddogfennaeth yn gyflawn. Yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion, hwnnw fyddai’r unig archwiliad. Mae’n debyg bod y cyngor wedi’i dderbyn i raddau helaeth. Rwyf wedi nodi eisoes, ym mharagraff 26.117, fod yr ail adroddiad SHM yn rhybuddio’r GMC am y risgiau sy’n gynhenid mewn rhannu atebolrwydd am sicrhau ansawdd.
Argymhellodd yr ail adroddiad SHM hefyd archwiliad manylach o sampl o dystiolaeth. Mewn tystiolaeth, dywedodd Syr Graeme a Mr Scott fod y GMC yn bwriadu sicrhau ansawdd cyfnod cyntaf (allanol) ail-ddilysu trwy gymryd sampl bach o feddygon a fyddai fel arall yn cael eu hail-ddilysu ac archwilio eu ceisiadau’n fanwl. Awgrymodd yr adroddiad sampl o 1.4% ar gyfer meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn ‘amgylchedd rheoledig’. Dywedodd Mr Scott wrth yr Ymchwiliad fod y GMC yn ‘ailymweld â’r model samplo’; disgwyliodd y byddai canran yr achosion a samplir yn fwy na’r ganran a awgrymwyd yn wreiddiol. Yr amcan fydd gweld, yn y sampl hwnnw, a yw archwiliad manwl yn cynhyrchu’r un penderfyniad â’r ‘llwybr llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu’. Yn fwy diweddar, dywedodd y GMC ei fod, yn ogystal â chymryd sampl o achosion heb unrhyw ffactorau risg penodol, yn bwriadu archwilio sampl mwy o feddygon a gymerir o grwpiau sy’n cyflwyno ffactorau risg hysbys. Nid yw’r GMC wedi dweud beth fydd y ffactorau risg hyn.
Pan ofynnwyd iddo sut y byddai’r archwiliad manwl hwn yn cael ei gynnal, dywedodd Syr Graeme y byddai’r GMC eisiau gweld y dogfennau gwreiddiol yn ffolder y meddyg, a ddylai gynnwys ychydig wybodaeth wiriadwy sy’n deillio o weithgareddau llywodraethu clinigol ac a gasglwyd gan y PCO. Gallai dogfennau eraill ddeillio o bractis y meddyg, yn hytrach nag oddi wrth y PCO. Byddai’r GMC eisiau eu gweld i gyd. Adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, nid oedd y GMC wedi penderfynu pwy fyddai’n cynnal yr archwiliad. Yn ôl Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004, mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu mai ‘
arbenigwyr wedi
u hyfforddi
n arbennig
’ fydd yn cynnal yr archwiliad hwn. Ni roddwyd unrhyw fanylion pellach.
Pa Werth y mae Ail-ddilysu yn ei Ychwanegu?
Yn ystod tystiolaeth, nodais wrth Mr Brearley, pe byddai ymarfer camweithredol yn cael ei ddatgelu gan weithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol sydd ar waith yn barhaus, ac y bydd arfarniad yn darparu profiad ffurfiannol a ‘rhwyd ddiogelwch’ unwaith y flwyddyn, ymddangosai nad oedd fawr o rôl ar ôl ar gyfer ail-ddilysu fel proses ar wahân. Pa ‘werth ychwanegol’ a ddarparai? Pwynt cyntaf Mr Brearley oedd y byddai’n canolbwyntio meddwl swyddog yr ymddiriedolaeth GIG neu’r PCO y byddai’n rhaid iddo benderfynu a allai lofnodi’n briodol dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, gan ddweud nad oedd unrhyw bryderon heb eu datrys (neu unrhyw rai sylweddol) am y meddyg. Gallwn weld grym hynny, er byddai’r graddau y byddai ei feddwl/ei meddwl yn canolbwyntio yn dibynnu i ba raddau y byddai’r swyddog hwnnw’n atebol pe byddai’n darparu ‘terfyn’ a’i bod yn dod i’r golwg wedyn fod ei ddyfarniad/ei dyfarniad am natur neu ddifrifoldeb pryder hysbys yn anghywir. Pe byddai’r canlyniadau i’r swyddog yn ddifrifol, gallwn weld y byddai gorfod llofnodi’r dystysgrif yn canolbwyntio’r meddwl. Ond pe na fyddai llawer yn digwydd pan fyddai dyfarniad i gyhoeddi tystysgrif yn anghywir yn y pen draw, yna byddai swyddogion yn darganfod hynny’n fuan, a gallai’r effaith ‘canolbwyntio’r meddwl’ fod yn gyfyngedig. Yn ddiweddarach yn ei dystiolaeth, gwnaeth Mr Brearley bwynt cysylltiedig am werth ychwanegol ail-ddilysu, y credaf sydd braidd yn gryfach. Dywedodd, pe byddai arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol PCT yn clywed am bryder na ymddangosai’n ddifrifol iawn, byddai ef/hi’n fwy tueddol o weithredu arno a cheisio’i ddatrys, pe byddai’n gwybod y byddai’n rhaid iddo/iddi benderfynu, mewn dwy flynedd dywed, a allai lofnodi’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol ar gyfer y meddyg hwnnw. Byddai hynny, rwy’n credu, yn ychwanegu rhyw werth.
Mewn perthynas â’r mater o werth ychwanegol, awgrymodd Mr Brearley hefyd fod y GMC, drwy ymgymryd â’r broses ail-ddilysu, yn ‘sicrhau ansawdd’ y gofrestr feddygol. Roedd hyn yn gyfeiriad at y diffiniad o ail-ddilysu a gafodd ei gyhoeddi, yn ôl yr ail adroddiad SHM, gan y GMC ar ddechrau 2003. Gall pobl edrych ar y gofrestr, meddai, a gwybod bod eu meddyg wedi bod trwy broses ac yn addas i ymarfer. Nid yw’n debyg i mi fod hynny’n darparu llawer o werth ychwanegol i gleifion meddygon GIG. Os yw ail-ddilysu am ddibynnu ar lywodraethu clinigol, y cadarnhad gwirioneddol y bydd ar gleifion ei eisiau fydd bod llywodraethu clinigol yn gweithio’n dda ac yn datgelu meddygon sy’n tanberfformio. Nid yw ffaith ail-ddilysu yn ychwanegu braidd dim. Fodd bynnag, i gleifion meddygon na all gymryd y ‘llwybr llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu’, gallai ail-ddilysiad roi cadarnhad gwirioneddol cyhyd â bod y GMC yn rhoi dull digonol o archwilio a gwerthuso ar waith. Gellid dweud yr un peth am feddygon sy’n methu gwneud hynny, er eu bod yn gymwys i gael ail-ddilysiad trwy’r ‘llwybr llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu’, ac y mae’n rhaid iddynt gael archwiliad pellach gan y GMC. Eto, mae’r cadarnhad o werth dim ond os yw’r dulliau’n ddigon da.
Dywedodd Mr Brearley hefyd y byddai gan ail-ddilysiad werth annibynnol oherwydd, trwy ymgymryd â gweithdrefnau sicrhau ansawdd - trwy’r archwiliad manwl o sampl o feddygon a fyddai fel arall yn cael eu hail-ddilysu’n awtomatig trwy dderbyn y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol - byddai’r GMC yn canfod a oedd llywodraethu clinigol wir yn gweithio ac yn datgelu ymarfer camweithredol. Gallwn weld grym y pwynt hwnnw hefyd. Wrth gwrs, mae’r cyfan yn dibynnu ar drylwyredd y mecanweithiau sicrhau ansawdd.

---  ---
Ers cwblhau’r gwrandawiadau ym mis Rhagfyr 2003 a’r seminarau ym mis Ionawr 2004, mae’r GMC wedi parhau i ddarparu dogfennau i’r Ymchwiliad sy’n gysylltiedig â nifer o faterion, gan gynnwys ail-ddilysu. Fel y gellid disgwyl, cafwyd datblygiadau. Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at waith a wnaed gan yr RCGP a’r NCGST.
Ym mis Mawrth 2004, cafwyd cyfarfod cyntaf cyd-weithgor a sefydlwyd rhwng y GMC, yr RCGP, y BMA ac Asiantaeth Moderneiddio’r GIG, gyda’r diben o ystyried ffyrdd o wella llywodraethu clinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol. Yn y cyfarfod hwn, cytunodd y cyd-weithgor ei Gylch Gorchwyl, sef ystyried sut y gall mecanweithiau llywodraethu clinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol nodi ymarfer gwael sy’n dod i’r amlwg a delio ag ef mewn modd sy’n amddiffyn cleifion. Hefyd, byddai’r cyd-weithgor yn ystyried sut y gallai mecanweithiau llywodraethu clinigol gefnogi meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn gofal sylfaenol wrth gasglu data gwrthrychol yn seiliedig ar ymarfer y gellid tynnu tystiolaeth ohono i gefnogi ail-ddilysu. Un o’r materion a drafodwyd yn y cyfarfod cyntaf oedd yr angen i egluro’r safonau a’r dogfennau arweiniad amrywiol sy’n bod ar hyn o bryd ac i ddatblygu ‘arf rhestr wirio’ sy’n egluro pa baramedrau ymarfer nad ydynt yn dderbyniol. Dywedwyd y gallai’r ‘Revalidation Toolkit’, a ddatblygwyd gan yr RCGP yn yr Alban, ddarparu templed defnyddiol i’w ddefnyddio ledled y DU. Cyfeiriwyd at yr angen i gysylltu data llywodraethu clinigol mewn gofal sylfaenol â meddyg unigol. Fel y nodais o’r blaen, mae llawer o ddata yn seiliedig ar bractis ac nid yw’n rhoi gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol am unigolyn. Cafwyd galw hefyd am well cysondeb wrth gymhwyso systemau llywodraethu clinigol ledled y wlad. Credwyd y byddai PCOs yn elwa ar greu grwpiau cymorth llywodraethu clinigol lleol, y byddai ganddynt rôl wrth adolygu gwybodaeth syn hysbys yn lleol am feddygon ac wrth adrodd unrhyw bryderon am feddyg i’r arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol. Mynegwyd y farn y byddai’r grwpiau cymorth llywodraethu clinigol lleol yn elwa ar gyfraniad lleyg, efallai trwy gynnwys cadeirydd o’r grŵp cleifion lleol perthnasol. Credwyd y gallai grwpiau o’r fath gynghori’r arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol am sefyllfa meddygon unigol sy’n ceisio tystysgrif at ddibenion ail-ddilysiad. Hefyd, gallent gynghori ar gamau adferol.
Gwerthfawrogaf fod y cyd-weithgor hwn yn ymwneud yn bennaf â dyfeisio ffyrdd o wella llywodraethu clinigol. Fodd bynnag, ymddangosai i mi y gallai wneud cyfraniad gwerthfawr i’r broses ail-ddilysu. Pe gallai ddatblygu rhai ffyrdd safonedig o gasglu a chyflwyno data llywodraethu clinigol ‘caled’, byddai mwy o obaith y byddai meddygon sy’n tanberfformio a rhai camweithredol yn cael eu canfod. Gallai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol ddod yn sicrwydd cadarnhaol mwy o addasrwydd i ymarfer, yn hytrach na datganiad negyddol ‘nad yw unrhyw beth gwael yn hysbys’. Byddai’r dystysgrif yn llawer mwy gwerthfawr mewn ail-ddilysiad, a gallai ail-ddilysiad ddarparu wedyn gwell sicrwydd i gleifion. Byddai’r broses arfarnu hefyd yn cael ei gwella. Cytunodd y cyd-weithgor hefyd y dylid datblygu meini prawf, safonau a thystiolaeth fanwl ar gyfer meddygon teulu (a meddygon mewn arbenigeddau eraill) ac y gellid eu defnyddio wedyn i gefnogi’r broses ail-ddilysu. Byddai’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol yn cymryd rôl arweiniol yn y gwaith hwn.
Gan oedi yno, ymddangosai’r datblygiadau hyn yn galonogol iawn i mi. Byddai llawer o’r pryderon a deimlais am y cynigion cyfredol ar gyfer ail-ddilysu meddygon teulu yn cael sylw yn adeiladol. Bwriadwyd y byddai’r cyd-weithgor yn cael ei ail gyfarfod ym mis Mai neu fis Mehefin 2004. Nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi cael copi o gofnodion ail gyfarfod. Fodd bynnag, ym mis Tachwedd 2004, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad nodyn o gyfarfod cyntaf is-grŵp y cyd-weithgor, a gynhaliwyd ar 26 Awst 2004. Disgrifiaf ei gynnwys yn fuan.
Yn y cyfamser, yn ei gyfarfod Cyngor ym mis Mai 2004, gofynnwyd i’r GMC gymeradwyo drafft ar gyfer dogfen â’r teitl ‘The Policy Framework for Revalidation: a Position Paper’ (y Papur Sefyllfa drafft). Byddai hwn yn cael ei gyhoeddi ym mis Gorffennaf 2004. Ni fwriadaf grynhoi ei gynnwys heblaw dweud y disgrifiodd bolisi cyfredol y GMC ar ail-ddilysu yn fras fel rwyf wedi’i ddisgrifio yn y Bennod hon. Yn y cyfarfod, cafwyd trafodaeth fanwl am y Papur Sefyllfa drafft. Roedd rhywfaint o’r drafodaeth yn gysylltiedig â phryderon am faterion a hepgorwyd o’r Papur Sefyllfa drafft. Yn benodol, tynnodd yr Athro Pringle sylw i’r materion a drafodwyd yng nghyfarfod cyntaf y cyd-weithgor mynegodd siom nad oedd y syniadau hynny wedi’u hadlewyrchu yn y Papur Sefyllfa drafft. Ni chafwyd unrhyw gyfeiriad yn y Papur Sefyllfa drafft at ddatblygu ffordd safonedig o gasglu data nac at wella ystod y data llywodraethu clinigol sy’n gysylltiedig ag unigolion yn hytrach na phractisiau meddygon teulu. Nid oedd unrhyw gyfeiriad chwaith at y syniad y gallai grŵp cymorth llywodraethu clinigol, gan gynnwys elfen leyg, gynorthwyo a chynghori’r arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol gyda phenderfyniadau ar drwyddedu a materion cysylltiedig. Cynigiodd yr Athro Pringle y dylid sôn am y newidiadau hyn yn y Papur Sefyllfa, pan gaiff ei gyhoeddi. Y canlyniad oedd addasiad o’r Papur Sefyllfa drafft er mwyn darogan rhyw archwiliad tystiolaeth ar lefel leol. Ni wnaed yn glir sut y byddai’r archwiliad hwn yn cael ei gynnal na chan bwy.
Yn y cyfarfod ym mis Mai, nododd yr Athro Pringle fod yna angen i’r GMC ‘ailysgogi’’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol a’u hannog i barhau â’r gwaith o baratoi safonau, meini prawf a thystiolaeth fanwl i’w defnyddio mewn cysylltiad ag ail-ddilysu. Mae hwn yn waith dyfal ac ni ellid ei gyflawni mewn byr amser. Mynegwyd pryder na fyddai’n cael ei gwblhau erbyn lansio ail-ddilysu yn 2005. Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at y cynnydd a wnaed gan yr RCGP yn y modd hwn. Mae’r gwaith hwn yn bwysig gan y bydd wrth wraidd nid yn unig y penderfyniadau a wneir yn ail gyfnod y broses ail-ddilysu ond hefyd archwiliad y sampl fach o achosion a fydd yn cael ei archwilio at ddibenion sicrhau ansawdd.
Cyhoeddwyd y Papur Sefyllfa ym mis Gorffennaf ac fe’i ddilynwyd gan gyhoeddiad Rheolau ac Arweiniad drafft ym mis Medi. Daeth llythyr gyda’r rhain, gan wahodd sylwadau ac awgrymiadau. Mae’n debyg i mi fod y Rheolau drafft yn annadleuol. Darparant fframwaith cyfreithiol ar gyfer yr hyn y mae’r GMC yn bwriadu ei wneud. Fodd bynnag, roedd Arweiniad drafft Ail-ddilysu 2004 yn cynnwys rhai datblygiadau newydd. Yn benodol, mae’r GMC bellach wedi creu cysyniad o
. Soniwyd am y cysyniad hwn ym Mhrosbectws Ebrill 2003 er y cafodd ei ddisgrifio’n wahanol. Amgylchedd gwaith yw hwn lle cymhwysir gweithdrefnau llywodraethu clinigol ac mae’n rhaid i feddygon gael arfarniad cyfnodol. Bydd meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn amgylchedd o’r fath yn gymwys i ail-ddilysu trwy’r llwybr llywodraethu clinigol ac arfarnu. Bydd y cysyniad o
hefyd yn cael ei ddefnyddio mewn cysylltiad â meddygon sydd â thrwydded gyfyngedig i ymarfer (h.y. meddygon sydd â thrwydded i weithio mewn amgylcheddau a gymeradwyir gan y GMC yn unig). Ceir eisoes rhestr hir o ddarparwyr gofal iechyd preifat sydd wedi’u cymeradwyo dros dro at y dibenion hyn a dywedir y gellid estyn y rhestr yn y dyfodol. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw syniad pa mor fanwl gywir y bu’r gweithdrefnau cymeradwyo. Canlyniad y newid hwn yw y bydd ychydig iawn o feddygon mewn ymarfer clinigol y bydd rhaid iddynt gymryd y llwybr annibynnol i ail-ddilysu.
Ar 10 Tachwedd 2004, ychydig iawn cyn roedd cyflwyniad yr Adroddiad hwn i fod, cafodd yr Ymchwiliad nodyn gan y GMC am gyfarfod o is-grŵp cyd-weithgor y GMC, yr RCGP, y BMA ac Asiantaeth Moderneiddio’r GIG a gynhaliwyd ar 26 Awst 2004 ac y cyfeiriais ato eisoes. Rwyf wedi adrodd ar gyfarfod cyntaf y cyd-weithgor eisoes, a gynhaliwyd ym mis Mawrth 2004. Datgelodd y nodyn fod y cynigion ar gyfer darparu tystysgrif lywodraethu clinigol wedi datblygu cryn dipyn. Ymddangosai fod y trafodaethau yn y cyfarfod yn gysylltiedig â’r cynigion hynny ac nid oedd gwneud penderfyniad yn swyddogaeth yr is-grŵp. Fodd bynnag, ymddangosir y cytunwyd rhai pwyntiau. Nid yw ystyr y nodyn yn hollol glir i mi. Byddai wedi’i baratoi ar gyfer y rheiny a fynychodd y cyfarfod ac a fyddai’n deall cyd-destun y drafodaeth. Efallai fy mod wedi‘i gamddeall i ryw raddau. Mewn rhai agweddau, eglurwyd cynnwys y nodyn trwy dderbyn llythyr gan Syr Liam Donaldson, y CMO, ar 11 Tachwedd 2004.
Eglurodd nodyn y cyfarfod ar 26 Awst 2004 mai cyfrifoldeb y GIG fyddai penderfynu sut i
‘gyflwyno ardystio lleol’
. Byddai angen gwaith pellach, ond byddai’r grŵp (sef yr is-grŵp, rwy’n cymryd) a’r cyrff a gynrychiolir yn gweithio gyda’i gilydd i sicrhau parodrwydd ar gyfer cyflwyno ail-ddilysu. Dan y pennawd
‘Grwpiau Cymorth Lleol’
, dywedwyd bod Asiantaeth Moderneiddio’r GIG yn parhau i weithio ar
‘ddiffinio natur grwpiau cymorth lleol’
. Dywedwyd hefyd y byddai
‘grwipau ardystio lleol’
yn cynnwys tri pherson wedi’u tynnu o’r sefydliad trwyddedu, fel PCO. Byddai un o aelodau’r grŵp trwyddedu yn berson lleyg, sef cyflogai neu swyddog neu aelod bwrdd o’r PCO yn ôl pob tebyg. Byddai’r sefydliad trwyddedu yn penderfynu pwy fyddai’r unigolion hynny. Nid wyf yn siwr a yw
‘grŵp cymorth lleol’
yr un fath â
‘grŵp ardystio lleol’
. Fel yr adroddais ym mharagraff 26.160, trafododd y cyd-weithgor, a gyfarfu ym mis Mawrth 2004, y posibilrwydd o grwpiau cymorth llywodraethu clinigol lleol yn adolygu gwybodaeth hysbys leol am feddygon ac adrodd unrhyw bryderon am feddyg i arweiniwyr llywodraethu clinigol. Byddai gan y math hwn o grŵp ryw gyfraniad lleyg. Ymddangosai fod hwnnw’n grŵp gwahanol i ‘grŵp trwyddedu lleol’, y mae ei enw’n awgrymu y byddai’n gyfrifol am lofnodi’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol.
Croesawodd yr is-grŵp y gwaith a wnaed ar arfau ac arweiniad a dywedodd mai cyfrifoldeb y GIG fyddai cynhyrchu hwn ar y cyd â phartneriaid fel y Colegau Brenhinol meddygol. Pwysleisiwyd yr angen am gysondeb ledled y DU. Nodwyd y dylai’r arweiniad fod yn generig a bod modd y gellid ei gymhwyso i bob arbenigedd a phedair gwlad y DU. Nodwyd hefyd y dylid cydlynu cyhoeddiad dogfennaeth ar drwyddedu lleol. Nid yw’n ymddangos bod y paragraff hwn yn y nodyn yn cysylltu â’r gwaith a wnaed gan yr RCGP a’r NCGST y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraff 26.138. Roedd gwaith yr RCGP yn ymwneud â’r dystiolaeth y dylai meddygon teulu ei chyflwyno at ddibenion CPD, arfarnu ac ail-ddilysu. Ceisiai gwaith yr NCGST nodi’r eitemau gofynnol o dystiolaeth y byddai’n rhaid i feddyg teulu eu cyflwyno i ganiatáu arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol i lofnodi tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol.
Cofnododd y nodyn y byddai arweiniad ffurfiol y GMC ar drwyddedu ac ail-ddilysu yn nodi pa wybodaeth am feddygon a fyddai’n ofynnol gan ardystio lleol. Rhagwelodd y GMC y byddai gan ardystio lleol ddwy gydran. Byddai tystysgrif o gyfranogiad mewn arfarnu a thystysgrif o absenoldeb
‘pryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
. Oherwydd y byddai angen i’r rheiny sy’n darparu’r tystysgrifau ddeall arwyddocâd y ddogfen y byddent yn ei llofnodi, byddai gwybodaeth ychwanegol yn cael ei darparu. O ran cyfranogiad mewn arfarniad, byddai ardystio yn cadarnhau pum pwynt, sef bod arfarniad wedi digwydd; bod y broses wedi cynhyrchu cynllun datblygiad personol cytunedig; bod y broses wedi’i chynnal a’i therfynu gan arfarnwr hyfforddedig; bod y broses wedi’i
‘llywio gan ddata wedi’i ddilysu am ymarfer gwirioneddol y meddyg’
, ac y sicrhawyd ansawdd prosesau llywodraethu clinigol lleol gan gynnwys arfarniad. Nid yw’n glir i mi beth a olygwyd wrth y broses yn cael ei
‘llywio gan ddata wedi’i ddilysu’
; nid wyf yn siwr chwaith i ba raddau y sicrheir ansawdd y prosesau llywodraethu clinigol.
O ran y dystysgrif sy’n gysylltiedig â:
‘phryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys, byddai ardystio yn cadarnhau:
i. Nad oes unrhyw bryderon sy’n hysbys yn lleol am iechyd y meddyg.
ii. Nad oes unrhyw bryderon sy’n hysbys yn lleol am gywirdeb y meddyg.
iii. Nad oes unrhyw weithdrefnau disgyblu lleol ar y gweill.
iv. Na fu unrhyw ganfyddiadau disgyblu perthnasol yn lleol dros y cyfnod penodedig.’
Roedd y rhain yn ofynion eithaf penodol ac ymddangosai na fyddai’r dystysgrif yn darparu unrhyw honiad cyffredinol am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer neu hyd yn oed absenoldeb pryderon am faterion eraill.
Cofnododd nodyn y cyfarfod y cytunwyd y dylai’r wybodaeth a fyddai’n
‘tanategu ardystio lleol ... ddeillio o lywodraethu clinigol a data gwiriadwy’
. Ni wn beth y mae hynny’n ei olygu. Pe byddai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn delio dim ond â’r pedair eitem benodol a restrir uchod, ni fyddai’n dibynnu ar wybodaeth sy’n
‘deillio o lywodraethu clinigol’
nac ar
‘ddata gwiriadwy’
. Ni allai’r tystysgrifau iechyd a chywirdeb fod unrhyw beth yn fwy na honiadau nad yw’r corff GIG yn gwybod am unrhyw beth a allai gwestiynu iechyd neu gywirdeb y meddyg. Roedd y drydedd a’r bedwaredd eitem yn faterion o gofnod yn unig. Ni allaf weld pa rôl y gallai
‘data gwiriadwy’
ei chwarae. Dywedodd y nodyn y dylai’r wybodaeth (a fyddai’n tanategu trwyddedu lleol) alluogi sefydliadau trwyddedu i nodi pryderon am ymarfer meddyg. Lle y bo pryderon o’r fath yn bodoli, dylid cymryd camau priodol yn lleol a dylid rhannu gwybodaeth â chyrff eraill, fel y GMC, lle y bo’n berthnasol. Cytunwyd y byddai’r NCGST yn llunio manylebau gwaith manwl ar sut y gallai trwyddedu lleol weithio.
Yng ngoleuni’r ddogfen hon, ymddangosai rhai materion yn weddol glir. Byddai’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn negyddol o ran natur. I bob pwrpas, byddai ddim ond yn dweud nad oes unrhyw beth gwael yn hysbys mewn pedair agwedd benodol: iechyd, cywirdeb, gweithdrefnau disgyblu lleol cyfredol a chanfyddiadau disgyblu lleol yn y cyfnod ail-ddilysu, sef pum mlynedd fel arfer. Ni roddwyd sylw i ddymuniad Mr Brearley y dylid tynnu sylw’r GMC i
bryder am y meddyg. Nid oedd ystyr
‘gweithdrefnau disgyblu’
yng nghyd-destun ymarfer cyffredinol yn glir. Fel y dywedais, nid yw achosion disgyblu yn bodoli braidd heddiw mewn ymarfer cyffredinol; maent wedi’u disodli gan bwerau rheolaeth restr. A yw’r term
‘gweithdrefnau disgyblu’
yn cynnwys ymarfer pwerau rheolaeth restr? Roeddyn weddol glir, fodd bynnag, na fyddai cwyn gan glaf a oedd dan archwiliad ac wedi, er enghraifft, cael ei hatgyfeirio i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn atal cwblhau tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol. Nac ychwaith, yn ôl pob tebyg, y byddai’r wybodaeth bod y meddyg yn cael ei erlyn am iawndal o ran marwolaeth claf, oni bai bod hefyd gweithdrefnau disgyblu lleol wedi cychwyn.
Ymddangosai i mi, pe byddai ail-ddilysu yn dibynnu ar systemau llywodraethu clinigol, y dylid gofyn bod y person neu’r grŵp sy’n darparu’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn ystyried cyfanrwydd y data llywodraethu clinigol sydd ar gael am feddyg cyn llofnodi’r dystysgrif a fyddai’n sail i ail-ddilysiad. Ni ddylai’r dystysgrif fod yn seiliedig ar rai agweddau arwahanol ar y data hwnnw yn unig. Ni fyddai aelod o’r cyhoedd a fyddai’n clywed bod person neu grŵp wedi darparu tystysgrif sy’n dweud
am feddyg yn deall mai’r unig beth a oedd yn cael ei ardystio oedd y bu ac nad oedd unrhyw achosion disgyblu yn erbyn y meddyg ac nad oedd pryderon am ei iechyd/ei hiechyd neu gywirdeb. Byddai ef/hi yn cymryd bod y dystysgrif yn golygu nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am gŵynion a wnaed am y meddyg a oedd heb eto eu datrys, nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer rhagnodi cyffredinol na rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig, nad oedd unrhyw bryderon am ei ddiffyg/ei diffyg cyfranogiad mewn archwiliad - yn wir, nad oedd
‘unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys’
am y meddyg o gwbl. Credaf y byddai aelod o’r cyhoedd yn disgwyl - a byddai hawl ganddo ddisgwyl - i’r person neu’r grŵp adolygu’r holl wybodaeth sydd ar gael cyn dwyn casgliad ynghylch llofnodi’r ddogfen bwysig hon neu beidio. Pe byddai effaith tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn gyfyngedig i ddatganiad nad oes gan y meddyg, mor bell ag sy’n hysbys, unrhyw broblemau iechyd, nad yw’n anonest ac nad yw wedi cymryd rhan o gwbl mewn achosion disgyblu, dylai’r cyhoedd fod yn ymwybodol mai dyma’r achos.
Yr hyn nad oedd yn glir i mi ar ôl darllen nodyn yr is-grŵp oedd a fwriadwyd y byddai unrhyw archwiliad lleol o dystiolaeth meddyg gan arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol (fel a ragwelwyd gan yr NCGST) neu gan grŵp cymorth llywodraethu clinigol lleol neu grŵp ardystio lleol. Pe na fyddai hynny’n digwydd, byddai’n golygu na fyddai unrhyw werthusiad o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Mae hynny, fel yr wyf wedi nodi, yn ofyniad statudol elfennol ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad.
Mae llythyr y CMO, dyddiedig 10 Tachwedd 2004, wedi taflu mwy o olau ar y cynigion am ail-ddilysu, y mae’n ymddangos bellach eu bod yn gyd-gynigion y GMC a’r Adran Iechyd. Yn y llythyr hwn, cyhoeddodd y CMO, yn ei farn ef,
‘yn gyntaf, bod diwylliant a phroses llywodraethu clinigol bellach wedi’u hymgorffori’n gryf mewn sefydliadau GIG lleol ac, yn ail, bod arfarnu meddygon GIG bellach yn sefydledig’
. Nid wyf yn siwr ar ba dystiolaeth y mae’r CMO wedi dwyn y casgliadau hyn. Maent yn wahanol iawn i’r barnau a fynegwyd gan ei ddirprwy, yr Athro Halligan (ac eraill), yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Ionawr 2004 y cyfeiriais atynt ym mharagraff 26.90 uchod. Yn sicr, nid yw’r Ymchwiliad wedi cael unrhyw dystiolaeth gan yr Adran Iechyd (nac unrhyw le arall) i gefnogi’r newid barn hwn. Wrth gwrs, gall fod y CMO yn siarad am y sefyllfa yn y gwasanaeth ysbyty. Mae’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud ag ymarfer cyffredinol yn unig.
Esboniodd y CMO wedyn, oherwydd ei fod wedi dwyn y casgliadau hyn, y byddai’r Adran Iechyd
‘yn cefnogi egwyddor y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol y byddai “ardystio” lleol yn darparu sicrwydd pendant am ymarfer y meddyg adeg ail-ddilysiad’
‘Rhaid bod cadarnhad pendant a chadarnhaol fod tystiolaeth sy’n seiliedig ar ymarfer meddygon wir yn cael ei hadolygu trwy arfarnu blynyddol, gan weithredu mewn amgylchedd sy’n destun llywodraethu clinigol. Byddai ardystio lleol pendant, yn hytrach nag ymhlyg, (wedi’i gyflwyno gan yr arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol neu’r cyfarwyddwr meddygol neu’r prif weithredwr, fel sy’n briodol, ar gyfer y meddygon â’r swyddi uchaf) sy’n ymdrin â dwy gydran - sef bod y meddyg wedi cael arfarniad ac nad oedd unrhyw bryderon lleol heb eu datrys a allai gwestiynu addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer.
Yn achos cyfranogiad mewn arfarniad, byddai ardystio pendant yn cadarnhau:
Bod arfarniad wedi digwydd;
Bod y broses arfarnu wedi llunio Cynllun Datblygiad Personol cytunedig;
Bod y broses arfarnu wedi’i chynnal, a’i therfynu, gan arfarnwr hyfforddedig;
Bod y broses arfarnu wedi’i llywio gan ddata gwiriadwy am ymarfer gwirioneddol y meddyg;
Bod ansawdd prosesau llywodraethu clinigol lleol wedi’i sicrhau - gan gynnwys arfarnu.
Yn achos absenoldeb pryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys, byddai trwyddedu pendant yn cadarnhau:
Nad oes unrhyw bryderon sy’n hysbys yn lleol am iechyd y meddyg;
Nad oes unrhyw bryderon sy’n hysbys yn lleol am gywirdeb y meddyg;
Nad oes unrhyw weithdrefnau disgyblu ar y gweill;
Na fu unrhyw ganfyddiadau disgyblu perthnasol dros y cyfnod penodedig.’
Mae’n debyg bellach mai’r sefyllfa yw y bydd cyfnod cyntaf ail-ddilysu, y bydd gofyn i bob meddyg ymgymryd ag ef, yn cynnwys cyflwyno gwybodaeth bersonol (gan gynnwys datganiadau ynghylch iechyd a chywirdeb) i’r GMC a darparu tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol yn cynnwys yr honiadau a restrwyd am gyfranogiad y meddyg mewn arfarniad yn ogystal â’r rheiny am iechyd, cywirdeb ac achosion disgyblu. Mae’n ymddangos yn glir bellach mai bwriad y GMC a’r Adran Iechyd yw na fydd ail-ddilysu’n cynnwys gwerthusiad o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Fel a ddywedais, ni all arfarniad fel a wneir ar hyn o bryd ar gyfer meddygon teulu ddarparu gwerthusiad o’r fath.
Gall fod y bwriedir y bydd arfarniad yn cael ei ‘wneud yn galetach’. Yn wir, rwyf wedi darllen yn y cyfnodolyn ‘Doctor’ mor ddiweddar â 5 Tachwedd 2004 bod
‘arfarniadau meddygon teulu am ddod yn galetach i sicrhau bod meddygon problemus yn cael eu hatal yn ystod ail-ddilysiad’
. Dywedwyd bod
‘ffynhonnell
yn agos i’r Adran Iechyd wedi dweud bod trafodaethau yn cael eu cynnal am sut y gellid monitro arfarniad i sicrhau ei fod yn ddigon llym i alluogi i ail-ddilysiad nodi meddygon problemus’
. Adroddodd yr un erthygl barnau amrywiol gan adrannau o’r proffesiwn. Credai rhai y byddai ‘gwneud yn galetach’ yn syniad da; credai eraill na ddylid defnyddio arfarniad fel arf ar gyfer nodi perfformiad gwael. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debyg o lythyr y CMO ei fod yn fodlon bod arfarniad eisoes yn sail ddigonol ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad. Mae’n flin gen i ddweud na allaf gytuno.

---  ---
Trwy gydol fy archwiliad o gynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, rwyf wedi teimlo rhywfaint o bryder bod y cyhoedd yn cael ei arwain i ddisgwyl mwy gan ail-ddilysiad nag y gellid disgwyl yn rhesymol iddo ei ddarparu, o ran cadarnhad am gymhwyster meddyg unigol. Mae’n bwysig bod cleifion a phob parti arall sydd â diddordeb yn deall union ystyr ail-ddilysiad a beth yw ei gyfyngiadau. Gwnaeth Mrs Joyce Robins, a gynrychiolodd Patient Concern yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, apeliad y dylid esbonio popeth i gleifion ac y dylid dweud wrthynt beth y mae ail-ddilysu’n ei olygu mewn termau ymarferol a pham ei fod yn haeddu ffydd y cyhoedd. Mae’n bwysig na chaiff ail-ddilysu ei ‘or-werthu’. Mae yna dair sail wahanol, er eu bod yn gysylltiedig, ar gyfer fy mhryder.
Y cyntaf yw, pe byddai aelod o’r cyhoedd yn cael gwybod y bydd ail-ddilysu yn sicrhau bod gan ei feddyg/ei meddyg ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer’, byddai, yn fy marn i, yn cael yr argraff y gall ddisgwyl i’r meddyg fod yn ymarfer ar lefel o gymhwyster sydd uwchlaw’r lefel sylfaenol o dderbynioldeb. Bydd y mynegiant ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer’, ym meddyliau rhan fwyaf aelodau’r cyhoedd, yn cyfleu’r syniad bod y meddyg yn ‘hollol gymwys’- ac nid ei fod/ei bod ‘yn gwneud y tro’ yn unig. Ond eto y sefyllfa yw y bydd meddyg yn cael ei ail-ddilysu oni bai bod ei ymddygiad/ei hymddygiad, perfformiad neu iechyd yn golygu bod panel FTP yn penderfynu bod rhaid iddo weithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg. Hyd yn oed wedyn, gellid ail-ddilysu’r meddyg yn amodol ar gyfyngiadau ac amodau ar ei ymarfer/ei hymarfer. Er mwyn gwrthod ail-ddilysu ar sail perfformiad gwael, rhaid i berfformiad y meddyg fod mor ddifrifol o ddiffygiol bod y panel FTP yn teimlo bod rhaid iddo ei atal/ei hatal neu ei ddileu/ei dileu.
Rwyf eisoes wedi cyfeirio at y safonau isel a gymhwysir mewn achosion perfformiad ac wedi dweud y bydd y safon isel honno yn ffurfio’r llinell sylfaenol ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad. Yn ystod trafodaeth mewn cyfarfod Cyngor GMC ar 12 Mai 2004, soniodd Mr Brearley bod meddygon yn gwybod ‘pe byddent yn cyfranogi mewn ail-ddilysiad a phe byddent yn wael iawn, gall fod eu cofrestriad yn y fantol’. Goblygiad hyn yw dim ond pe byddai’n ‘wael iawn’ y bydd y meddyg yn methu cael ei ail-ddilysu. Nid yw realiti’r safon ‘rhyfeddol o isel’ y bydd meddygon yn cael eu hail-ddilysu os ydynt yn uwch na hi yn cyd-fynd â’r honiad bod ail-ddilysu yn sicrhau bod gan y meddyg ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer’. Yn fy marn i, mae yna wir berygl nad yw’r cyhoedd yn deall hyn.
Yn ystod ei dystiolaeth, esboniodd Mr Brearley mai un o ddibenion ail-ddilysu oedd y dylai cleifion allu wneud dewis gwybodus am eu meddyg. Byddent yn gallu edrych ar y gofrestr a gweld bod eu meddyg wedi cael ei ail-ddilysu. Ond dywedodd Mr Brearley hefyd y gellid ail-ddilysu meddyg ond bod hynny eto’n amodol ar gyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer, wedi’u gorfodi gan banel FTP er mwyn diogelwch cleifion. Ystyriodd fod hyn yn darparu amddiffyniad derbyniol i’r cyhoedd oherwydd y byddai’r amodau’n sicrhau na allai’r meddyg gyfranogi mewn meysydd lle gallai gyflwyno risg i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, ymddangosai i mi, pe byddai cleifion mewn sefyllfa i wneud dewis gwybodus o feddyg, y byddai angen iddynt wybod mwy nag a oedd eu meddyg wedi’i ail-ddilysu yn unig. Byddai angen i gleifion wybod a oedd unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ymarfer y meddyg a, phe byddai, efallai y byddai angen iddynt wybod beth yr oeddent a pham y cawsant eu gorfodi. Ateb Mr Brearley i hyn oedd na fyddai’n briodol datgelu gormod o wybodaeth am y meddyg gan fyddai hyn yn arwain at golli ffydd ynddo/ynddi yn anghymesur. Ystyriodd, pe byddai’r ffaith bod panel FTP wedi gorfodi sancsiwn yn mynd i’r maes cyhoeddus ac yn dinistrio ffydd yn y meddyg fel na allai ymarfer, y byddai paneli FTP yn amharod i orfodi’r sancsiynau hynny. O’r dystiolaeth honno, ymddangosai y bydd y cyhoedd yn cael gwybod bod gan y meddyg, pe byddai wedi’i ail-ddilysu, wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer ac y gallant fod â ffydd ynddo/ynddi. Byddai hynny’n hollol anfoddhaol oherwydd y gwir am y sefyllfa, efallai, yw ei fod/ei bod ar y ffin o fod yn anaddas i ymarfer. Roeddwn yn pryderu am hyn. Gallaf weld, fodd bynnag, o’r Arweiniad drafft a gyhoeddwyd yn ddiweddar, mai bwriad presennol y GMC yw y bydd y gofrestr feddygol yn cynnwys y wybodaeth bod y meddyg wedi’i ail-ddilysu dan amodau. Nid wyf yn gwybod faint o fanylion a ddarperir. Mae’r wybodaeth ‘yn y maes cyhoeddus’ yn yr ystyr pe byddai ymholwr yn ffonio’r GMC ac yn gofyn yn uniongyrchol a yw cofrestriad y meddyg dan amodau, y bydd ef/hi yn cael gwybod. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r wybodaeth hon fod ar gael yn hawdd i’r cyhoedd ar wefan y GMC.
Fy ail bryder am sefyllfa’r cyhoedd yw ei fod yn cael gwybod bod rhaid i’r meddyg, er mwyn sicrhau ail-ddilysiad, ddangos i’r GMC y bu’n ymarfer yn unol ag egwyddorion ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’. Mewn gwirionedd, fel yr wyf wedi esbonio, nid yw’n glir o gwbl y bydd rhaid iddo/iddi wneud unrhyw beth o’r fath. Bydd rhaid iddo/iddi ddarparu disgrifiad o’i ymarfer/ei hymarfer (sef yr hyn y mae’n ei wneud, yn hytrach na sut y mae’n ei wneud), honni ei fod/ei bod wedi cael arfarniad a gwneud datganiad ynghylch ei iechyd/ei hiechyd a chywirdeb. Wedyn, bydd y GMC yn ceisio tystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, a allai gadarnhau bod y meddyg wedi cymryd rhan mewn arfarniad ac nad oes unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys yn gysylltiedig â’i addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Pe byddai’n cael ei rhoi, mae’r dystysgrif yn honni rhywbeth negyddol; i bob pwrpas, nid oes unrhyw beth gwael yn hysbys. Ni fu unrhyw arddangosiad cadarnhaol o safon ymarfer y meddyg. Mae’n bwysig, os yw’r trefniadau presennol am barhau, y gwneir y gwir sefyllfa yn glir. Efallai y bwriedir yn y dyfodol cyflwyno rhyw archwiliad lleol i’r dystiolaeth yn ffolder y meddyg. Ni allaf ddweud.
Fy nhrydydd pryder yw bod y cyhoedd yn cael yr argraff bod rhaid i feddygon sy’n cael ail-ddilysiad basio rhyw fath o brawf gwrthrychol. Ni awgrymir hyn yn gadarnhaol yng nghyhoeddiadau swyddogol y GMC, er y daeth y GMC yn agos iawn at hynny ym Mhrosbectws Ebrill 2003 pan dynnodd gymhariaeth rhwng ail-ddilysu a’r asesiadau cyfnodol y mae’n rhaid i beilotiaid cwmnïau hedfan eu cael. Fodd bynnag, fy ngwir bryder ar y mater hwn yw bod y GMC, ar fwy nag un achlysur, hyd y gwn i, wedi gwneud datganiadau sy’n awgrymu y bydd ail-ddilysiad yn cynnwys naill ai prawf neu ryw fath o wiriad trwyadl o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Dan y cynigion presennol, ni fydd yn gwneud hyn. Yn ystod datganiad agoriadol y GMC i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd y Cwnsler Arweiniol i’r GMC y byddai, yn y broses ail-ddilysu, cymhwyster a pherfformiad pob un meddyg yn cael eu ‘gwirio a’u gwirio eto’, fel y gallai’r cyhoedd fod yn sicr nad oes gan feddygon hawl i’w trin dim ond yn rhinwedd na chanfuwyd eu bod yn ddiffygiol. Yn hytrach, byddai cleifion yn gallu gwybod a bod yn ffyddiog y gwnaed penderfyniad cadarnhaol bod ymarferwyr meddygol cofrestredig yn addas i ymarfer a bod y wybodaeth y mae dyfarniad yn seiliedig arni i’r perwyl hwnnw wedi’i gwirio‘n wrthrychol a’i chadarnhau mewn system y mae ei hansawdd wedi’i sicrhau.
Ar achlysur arall, cymharwyd ail-ddilysiad â’r prawf MOT ar gyfer cerbydau. Mae’r prawf cerbyd MOT yn brawf gwrthrychol o addasrwydd cerbyd unigol i’r ffordd fawr. Archwilir nodweddion amrywiol ar y cerbyd yn erbyn safonau penodedig. Os yw’n methu unrhyw ran o’r prawf, mae’n methu’r prawf cyfan. Nid yw’n bosibl pasio gydag amodau. Mae ail-ddilysiad ar gyfer meddygon yn eithaf gwahanol. Caiff y mwyafrif aruthrol ei ail-ddilysu ar sail arfarniad, nad yw’n brawf o addasrwydd i ymarfer ac nad yw’n ymgorffori unrhyw safonau manwl gyda throthwyon sy’n golygu ei bod yn bosibl methu neu basio. Yr unig drothwy a fyddai’n golygu y gall meddyg fethu cael ei ail-ddilysu yn y pendraw yw, fel a ddywedais uchod, trothwy isel iawn yn wir. Y pwynt yw nad yw’r broses yn brawf o gwbl i’r rhan fwyaf o feddygon ac nid yw’n debyg o gwbl i’r prawf cerbyd MOT.
Disgrifiwyd ail-ddilysu gan Syr Graeme Catto fel ‘rhyw fath o brawf MOT i feddygon’ ar raglen radio BBC, ‘Down With...’, a ddarlledwyd ar 12 Mai 2004. Roedd y rhaglen yn cynnwys dadl ynghylch a oedd y GMC yn gwneud popeth y dylai i ddiogelu ac amddiffyn lles y cyhoedd a chleifion. Dywedodd Syr Graeme fod ‘Arfer Meddygol Da’ yn nodi’r safonau o ran ymarfer a gofal y mae gan gleifion yr hawl i’w cael gan eu meddygon a bod y GMC yn anelu at ‘gynnal a chryfhau’r safonau uchel hyn gyda system ail-ddilysu newydd - fel math o MOT i feddygon’. Siaradodd cyfrannydd arall wedyn, sef Mr Alan Hartley, aelod o’r Gymdeithas Gleifion ac aelod o Grŵp Atgyfeirio Cleifion y GMC. Dywedodd:
‘Tua phob pum mlynedd, bydd meddyg yn cael asesiad ynghylch ei hyfforddiant a bydd rhaid iddo ddangos ei fod wedi cadw’n gyfoes ar hyfforddiant ar ddulliau newydd, felly, o safbwynt y cyhoedd, yr hyn y mae’n ei olygu yw y byddant yn gwybod bod meddyg, pan mae wedi’i ail-ddilysu, yn hollol gyfarwydd â’r pethau newydd diweddaraf a’r triniaethau diweddaraf. Cam enfawr ymlaen.’
Torraf ar draws i dynnu sylw i’r ffordd y cymharwyd ‘bod â gwybodaeth gyfoes ac yn addas i ymarfer’â bod ‘yn hollol gyfarwydd’. Ychydig yn ddiweddarach, cyfeiriodd Syr Graeme eto at ail-ddilysu fel yr ‘MOT i feddygon’. Mynegodd falchder yn y ffaith nad oedd gan unrhyw wlad arall yn y byd system o drwydded o fewn amser penodol sy’n dibynnu ar feddygon yn dangos bod ganddynt wybodaeth gyfoes a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer. Mae galw ail-ddilysu yn MOT i feddygon yn slogan. Mae’n hawdd i’r gwrandäwr ei gofio. Rwy’n credu y bydd llawer o bobl a glywodd y rhaglen honno wedi cael yr argraff bod ail-ddilysiad yn brawf i feddygon, yn union fel yr MOT. Nid yw honno’n argraff gywir.

---  ---
Nid yw’n glir o’r dogfennau a ddarparwyd yn ddiweddar gan y GMC a yw ei gynlluniau ar gyfer ail-ddilysu yn sefydlog. Mae’n deg dweud y cydnabuwyd y bydd ail-ddilysu yn esblygu dros amser ond mae’n debyg, o Arweiniad Ail-ddilysu drafft 2004, nad yw’r GMC yn disgwyl gwneud unrhyw newidiadau sylweddol i’w gynigion yn y dyfodol agos. Yn fy marn i, mae hynny’n siomedig, gan nad yw’r cynigion presennol yn bodloni’r gofynion a amlinellwyd mor glir ym Mhapur Ymgynghori 2000. Nac ychwaith yn fy marn i y byddant yn bodloni’r diffiniad statudol o ail-ddilysu, sef
Mae’n debyg bod y GMC wedi gwrthwynebu ymgymryd â gwerthusiad unigol o bob meddyg. Fodd bynnag, dyna sy’n ofynnol gan y statud. Yn y diwrnodau cynnar, roedd y GMC o’r farn na allai ddirprwyo’r swyddogaeth honno; gwrthododd yr awgrym y gallai’r Colegau Brenhinol meddygol gynnig llwybr amgen i ail-ddilysiad. Mae wedi derbyn bellach y gall ddirprwyo popeth heblaw’r penderfyniad terfynol i ail-ddilysu. Nid yw’n ymddangos bod y statud yn gwahardd dirprwyo. Fodd bynnag, mae’n gofyn am werthusiad o addasrwydd meddyg unigol i ymarfer.
Ar wahân i’r statud, mae’r GMC wedi addo erioed i’r cyhoedd werthusiad unigol o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn fy marn i, nid yw ei gynigion presennol yn bodloni’r addewid hwnnw. Rwy’n cynnig nodi fy syniadau ar gyfer sut y gellid bodloni’r statud a’r addewid - dim ond yng nghyd-destun ymarfer cyffredinol, gan mai dyna yw terfyn fy nghylch gorchwyl. Byddai fy nghynigion yn bodloni dymuniad y GMC i gysylltu ail-ddilysiad yn agos â llywodraethu clinigol. Byddent hefyd, rwy’n credu, yn osgoi gwneud niwed difrifol i natur ffurfiannol arfarniad.
Yn fy marn i, y prif lwyfan ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad dylai fod pob meddyg yn paratoi ffolder tystiolaeth sy’n dangos yr hyn y bu’r meddyg yn ei wneud yn y pum mlynedd ddiwethaf. Byddai rhaid nodi’n benodol rhywfaint o gynnwys y ffolder a byddai’n orfodol. Byddent yn cynnwys data sy’n deillio o lywodraethu clinigol. Byddai’r rhain yn cynnwys, er enghraifft, data rhagnodi a chofnodion o gŵynion neu bryderon gan gynnwys unrhyw adroddiad gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu asesiad GMC neu NCAA. Gobeithiaf, yn y dyfodol, y bydd mwy o wybodaeth o’r math hwnnw ar gael i PCOs. Byddai eitemau gorfodol eraill yn deillio o bractis y meddyg ei hun. Dylai’r rhain, yn fy marn i, fod yn debyg iawn i’r hyn a gynigiwyd gan yr RCGP yn ei bapur ymgynghori. Er enghraifft, dylai fod cofnod o’r gweithgareddau CPD y mae’r meddyg wedi ymgymryd â hwy. Dylid cynnwys copi o Ffurlfen 4 arfarniad, holiadur bodlonrwydd cleifion, canlyniadau archwiliad clinigol a rhai archwiliadau digwyddiad arwyddocaol. Yn ogystal, gallai fod recordiad fideo o’r meddyg yn ymgynghori â chleifion. Byddwn hefyd yn awgrymu y dylai’r folder gynnwys tystysgrif i ddangos y cwblhawyd prawf gwybodaeth yn llwyddiannus. Dywedaf ychydig yn fwy am hynny isod. Wrth gwrs, byddai’n agored i bob meddyg gynnwys deunydd ychwanegol ar wahân i’r eitemau gorfodol. Byddai rhaid i gontract cyflogaeth GIG y meddyg neu gontract ar gyfer gwasanaethau fynnu bod yr eitemau gorfodol hyn yn cael eu cyflwyno.
Byddai gwaith paratoi’r ffolder yn digwydd dros gyfnod o bum mlynedd. Gellid trafod ei ddatblygiad yn breifat ac yn gyfrinachol yn ystod yr arfarniad blynyddol, a gellid rhoi cyngor am beth yn rhagor y byddai angen ei wneud. Byddai gan yr arfarnwr yr hawl i weld yr holl ddeunydd, a byddai’r arfarniad o fwy o werth o ganlyniad; ni fyddai’r meddyg yn gallu cuddio unrhyw broblemau. Ymddangosai’n synhwyrol i mi pe byddai arfarnwyr yn annog meddygon i gynhyrchu un o’r elfennau gorfodol penodol bob blwyddyn, er enghraifft recordiad fideo neu holiadur bodlonrwydd cleifion, fel y gallai’r arfarniad ganolbwyntio ar drafod y pwnc hwnnw.
Mewn ail-ddilysiad, byddai’r ffolder yn cael ei archwilio - nid gan y GMC, ond gan grŵp lleol yn y PCO sydd wedi’i gadeirio gan yr arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol yn ôl pob tebyg. Nid wyf yn honni mai fy syniad i yw hwn; fe’i awgrymwyd gan y cyd-weithgor. Credaf ei fod yn awgrym da iawn. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r grŵp archwilio gynnwys person lleyg o’r tu allan i’r PCO a meddyg teulu o faes arall, nad yw’r meddyg dan sylw yn ei adnabod yn bersonol. Dylai’r meddyg teulu hwnnw gael ei achredu gan yr RCGP fel asesydd i safonau a gymeradwyir gan y GMC. Ni ddylai un person gynnal archwiliad; nac ychwaith y dylid ffurfio panel gydag aelodau neu gyflogeion y PCO yn unig. Un ychwanegiad cadarnhaol efallai yw y gellid gwahodd y meddyg i fynychu’r cyfarfod. Byddai hyn yn goresgyn un o
‘wendidau’
cynlluniau gwreiddiol y GMC a nodwyd gan Mr Brearley. Byddai’r grŵp hwnnw’n gwneud gwerthusiad unigol o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, yn seiliedig ar safonau i’w gosod gan yr RCGP a’u cymeradwyo gan y GMC. Pe byddai’r grŵp lleol yn fodlon, byddai’n argymell ail-ddilysiad i’r GMC; pe na fyddai’n fodlon, byddai’r GMC yn cymryd y llyw ac yn symud ymlaen i’r ail gyfnod.
Ni chredaf y byddai’r trefniadau hyn yn rhoi baich afraid ar PCTs. Ar gyfartaledd, mae ganddynt tua 100 o feddygon teulu yr un. Byddai hynny’n golygu gwerthuso tua 20 o feddygon teulu bob blwyddyn a rhai dirprwy feddygon; nid wyf yn siwr faint o’r rheiny a fyddai. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai hynny’n hydrin. Fodd bynnag, mae sawl ffordd y gellid lleihau’r niferoedd trwy ganiatáu llwybrau amgen i ail-ddilysiad. Er enghraifft, mae Aelodaeth i’r RCGP trwy asesiad perfformiad yn mynnu safon uchel o berfformiad. Dylai unrhyw feddyg sy’n cyflawni hynny yn y cyfnod pum mlynedd, yn fy marn i, gael ei ail-ddilysu’n awtomatig. Pe byddai’r RCGP yn dyfeisio ‘asesiad gloywi’ (y gellid heb amheuaeth ei gymeradwyo gan y GMC yn lle ail-ddilysiad), byddwn yn disgwyl y byddai rhai meddygon yn cymryd y llwybr hwnnw. Credaf, hefyd, y gellid ail-ddilysu’r meddygon teulu sy’n hyfforddwyr cymeradwyedig yn awtomatig yn briodol. Mae’n rhaid i hyfforddwyr gael au hailasesu i safon uchel o berfformiad bob tair blynedd. Ni fyddai modd iddynt fynd trwy’r broses honno’n llwyddiannus o gwbl pe na fyddent yn addas ar gyfer ail-ddilysiad. Un posibilrwydd arall fyddai gwahardd meddyg teulu rhag ail-ddilysu yn ystod y pum mlynedd gyntaf ar ôl pasio’r asesiad cyfansymiol. Byddai hynny hefyd yn lleihau nifer y meddygon y byddai’n rhaid i’r grŵp eu harchwilio. Pe credid y byddai’r cynnig hwn yn dal i roi gormod o faich, awgrymaf y dylid ystyried ymestyn y cyfnod ail-ddilysu o bum mlynedd i saith mlynedd. Un dewis arall fyddai cadw’r cyfnod pum mlynedd ar gyfer meddygon teulu dros 50 oed a chaniatáu cyfnod hwy rhwng ail-ddilysiadau ar gyfer meddygon dan yr oedran hwnnw. Yn fyr, credaf ei bod yn hanfodol y dylai fod gwerthusiad unigol o bob meddyg a chredaf y gellid sicrhau bod y baich y byddai hyn yn ei roi ar PCOs unigol yn ddioddefadwy. Ni chyflwynaf unrhyw gynigion am ail-ddilysu meddygon yn y gwasanaeth ysbyty na’r sector preifat.
O ran yr ail gyfnod, rhaid i’r GMC sicrhau bod hwn yn dryloyw ac yn fanwl gywir. Dylai sicrhau ei fod yn cynnwys digon o bobl leyg. Yn fwy na dim, ni chaiff ganiatáu ail-ddilysu yn yr ail gyfnod feddyg sydd wedi methu cael ei ail-ddilysu yn y cyfnod cyntaf ‘trwy ddiffyg’. Ar hyn o bryd, mae natur ansicr y camau i’w cymryd yn gwneud hynny’n bosibilrwydd gwirioneddol. Rhaid i’r GMC sicrhau hefyd bod y safonau y cymerir penderfyniadau ail gyfnod yn eu herbyn yn glir a bod pawb yn eu deall, gan gynnwys meddygon a’r cyhoedd.
Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi fy mhryder am safonau isel yr hen weithdrefnau perfformiad, a fyddai, oni bai am ddyfodiad y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, wedi tanategu ail-ddilysiad yn gyffredinol. Nid yw’r GMC wedi dweud y bydd y safonau o berfformiad diffygiol a fydd yn cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad dan y gweithdrefnau newydd yn uwch o gwbl na’r rheiny a oedd ar waith o’r blaen. Mae’r safonau hyn yn rhy isel ac nid ydynt yn darparu amddiffyniad digonol i gleifion. Yn fy marn i, rhaid eu codi er mwyn i ail-ddilysu gael hygrededd o gwbl.
Dywedais y dymunais sôn am ddefnyddio profion gwybodaeth. Mae’r dystiolaeth a gafwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad i’r perwyl na all unrhyw feddyg weithio’n dda oni bai bod ei sail wybodaeth yn ddigonol ac yn cadw’n gyfoes, ond nid yw’r ffaith bod y sail wybodaeth yn ddigonol, yn ei hun, yn sicrhau bod meddyg yn ymarfer yn dda. Defnyddir yr ail ffactor hyn yn aml fel rheswm dros beidio â chynnwys unrhyw fath o brawf gwybodaeth yn y broses ail-ddilysu. Yn fy marn i, nid yw hwnnw’n rheswm boddhaol dros wahardd prawf gwybodaeth er ei fod yn rheswm da dros beidio â seilio ail-ddilysiad yn llwyr ar brawf o’r fath. Credaf mai’r gwir reswm pam yr ymddengys cymaint o bobl eu bod yn troi i ffwrdd o’r syniad o brofion gwybodaeth yw eu bod yn credu na fydd meddygon yn eu derbyn. Ni allaf gredu y gellid bod unrhyw wrthwynebiad rhesymol i’r hyn yr wyf yn ei gynnig. Heddiw, gellid gwneud profion gwybodaeth ar-lein ac yn breifat. Gall y meddyg ddarganfod ym mhreifatrwydd ei stydi ei hun a yw ei sail wybodaeth yn foddhaol. Pe byddai’n foddhaol, bydd hynny’n rhoi rhywfaint o gysur i’r meddyg a gall hefyd dynnu sylw i unrhyw feysydd lle datgelwyd bwlch. Rwy’n siwr y byddai rhan fwyaf y meddygon nad ydynt yn gwneud yn dda yn dymuno cywiro’r sefyllfa. Gallai meddyg o’r fath gymryd prawf arall - ac un arall eto pe byddai angen - tan ei fod/ei bod yn cyrraedd safon foddhaol. Pe na allai meddyg ddod â’i sail wybodaeth i safon cyn pen pum mlynedd, mae’n siwr na ddylai ef/hi fod yn ymarfer. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod gofyniad gorfodol i gyflwyno tystysgrif o gwblhau prawf gwybodaeth yn foddhaol a wnaed rhyw bryd yn y cyfnod pum mlynedd.
Yn amlwg, nid mater i’r GMC yn unig yw’r newidiadau a gynigiais. Maent yn galw am ymglymiad agos yr Adran Iechyd. Byddent yn gofyn am ymgynghoriad ac mae’n rhaid y byddent yn achosi rhywfaint o ddryswch yn y proffesiwn. Ni chredaf fod angen iddynt wneud hynny. Credaf fod y proffesiwn wedi derbyn bod gan y cyhoedd hawl i sicrhau bod gan meddygon wybodaeth gyfoes a’u bod yn addas i ymarfer a chredaf y bydd y rheiny i gyd sy’n onest yn ddeallusol, fel y mae’r mwyafrif helaeth yn fy marn i, yn cydnabod bod rhaid iddynt, er mwyn rhoi sicrwydd, gael sylfaen fwy cadarn na’r sylfaen honno sy’n cael ei hystyried ar hyn o bryd.

---  ---
Yn gynnar yn y Bennod hon, dywedais y byddai’n addysgiadol ystyried a allai system ail-ddilysu ganfod ymddygiad camweithredol difrifol Shipman arall. Nid oeddwn yn awgrymu mai ‘dal Shipman arall’ fyddai’r prawf litmws a oedd ail-ddilysu’n werth chweil neu a oedd unrhyw set benodol o gynigion yn briodol. Dylai ail-ddilysiad ganfod ystod lawer ehangach o ddiffygion a diffygion llawer llai difrifol na’r rheiny a welwyd yn Shipman. Pe gallai ail-ddilysiad nodi ‘meddyg sy’n perfformio’n wael’, fe ddylai, byddai rhywun yn meddwl, allu nodi meddyg sy’n ofnadwy o gamweithredol. Nid yw hynny’n angenrheidiol wir, gan nad yw llawer o feddygon sy’n tanberfformio neu feddygon camweithredol yn sylweddoli bod eu hymarfer yn ddiffygiol ac nid ydynt yn gwneud unrhyw ymdrech i guddio eu diffygion. Ar y llaw arall, roedd Shipman yn gwybod beth oedd yn ei wneud. Gallai roi gofal o safon dda yn hawdd ac roedd yn fedrus iawn yn wir wrth guddio’r ffaith ei fod yn lladd ei gleifion.
Yn gyntaf, mae’n glir y tu hwnt i ddadlau y byddai Shipman wedi gwneud yn dda mewn arfarniad, fel y mae’n gweithredu ar hyn o bryd. Byddai wedi cyflwyno tystiolaeth bod llawer agwedd ar ei ofal clinigol o safon uchel. Gall fod wedi cyflwyno canlyniadau archwiliadau; byddai ef ei hun wedi dewis y pynciau ac ni fyddai wedi cynnal archwiliad i’r gyfradd farwolaeth ymhlith ei gleifion. Mae’n ddigon posibl y gallai fod wedi cyflwyno ei ddata rhagnodi; y prif ddiddordeb yn hwnnw fyddai ei daerineb i ragnodi cyffuriau siop ar adeg pan anogwyd meddygon i ddefnyddio dulliau cyfwerth generig. Roedd maint y diamorffin a ragnodai Shipman ar yr ochr uchel ond nid oedd yn achos unigryw a, phe byddai cwestiynau wedi’u holi, byddai wedi cyflwyno cofnodion un neu ddau claf a oedd yn cael eu nyrsio gartref yn ystod eu hafiechyd marwol. Byddai wedi siarad yn hyderus am ei resymau dros fynnu ar y rhyddid i ragnodi fel y credai oedd orau ar gyfer ei gleifion. Byddai wedi esbonio pam ei fod yn aml yn rhagnodi statinau ar adeg yr oedd llawer o feddygon yn amau eu heffeithiolrwydd. Gallai fod wedi dangos y bu’n rhedeg clinigau clefydau hirfaith cyn hired, rwy’n credu, ag unrhyw bractis arall bron yn yr ardal. Byddai ei holiaduron bodlonrwydd cleifion wedi dangos, rwy’n credu, bodlonrwydd bron 100% ym mhob agwedd ar ei ymarfer. Gallai holiadur cymheiriaid fod wedi datgelu nad oedd pobl yn hoff ohono ond ni fyddai wedi datgelu pryderon am ei ymarfer. Cafwyd ychydig iawn o gŵynion amdano ar ôl 1994 a dim rhai sylweddol. Mae hyn yn hynod gan ei fod wedi lladd mwy na 100 o gleifion ym mhedair blynedd olaf ei ymarfer. Nid oes unrhyw bosibilrwydd y gallai fod wedi ‘methu’ arfarniad. Mewn gwirionedd, mae’n eithaf tebygol y byddai fod wedi gwirfoddoli (a chael ei dderbyn) yn arfarnwr.
Ni all fod unrhyw amheuaeth y byddai arweinydd llywodraethu clinigol neu gyfarwyddwr meddygol PCO Shipman wedi llofnodi ei dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol heb oedi am funud. Byddai Shipman wedi’i ail-ddilysu heb anhawster dan y cynigion a fydd yn dod i rym ym mis Ebrill 2005.
A ellid fod wedi canfod Shipman trwy ail-ddilysiad fel y cynigiodd y GMC ei weithredu’n wreiddiol? Ni chredaf, oni bai bod yr RCGP wedi gosod, a’r GMC wedi cymeradwyo, eitemau penodol o wybodaeth y byddai’n rhaid eu cynnwys yn ffolder y meddyg a bod yr eitemau hynny wedi cynnwys rhywbeth a fyddai wedi canfod gwendid Shipman. Wrth gwrs, byddai wedi’i ganfod pe byddai gofyniad am ddadansoddiad o gyfraddau marwolaeth, gyda chefnogaeth data gwiriadwy, ond credaf y byddai hynny’n ofyniad annhebygol iawn. Un gofyniad mwy tebygol fyddai cyflwyno rhai o’i gofnodion cleifion i adolygiad annibynnol. Byddai wedi dod i’r amlwg eu bod o ansawdd gwael yn gyffredinol ac na allent gyfleu swm priodol o wybodaeth i gydweithwyr. Fodd bynnag, dim ond trwy adolygu cofnodion cleifion a fu farw y gellid fod wedi canfod ei ymddygiad troseddol. Dylai adolygiad gofalus o gofnodion y cleifion a fu farw’n ddiweddar wedi datgelu gwir achos pryder, fel ag esboniais yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad. Fodd bynnag, rhaid i mi ddweud y credaf y byddai’n annhebygol iawn y byddai unrhyw un wedi meddwl ei bod yn briodol gofyn am adolygiad o’r fath at ddibenion ail-ddilysiad.
A fyddai’n bosibl canfod ‘Shipman arall’ trwy weithgareddau llywodraethu clinigol, fel y gellid disgwyl iddynt weithredu hyd y gellid rhagweld? Credaf ei fod yn wir bosibilrwydd. Rwyf wedi cyfeirio at hynny ym Mhennod 12.

---  ---
Pan gyhoeddodd y GMC ei Bapur Ymgynghori yn 2000, roedd wedi cydnabod yr angen i ddarparu mecanwaith i ganfod meddygon sy’n perfformio’n wael a meddygon camweithredol heb ddibynnu ar gŵyn gan glaf a gafodd gam neu gyflogwr neu PCO pryderus. Penderfynodd ofyn i bob meddyg a ddymunai ymarfer gael gwerthusiad cyfnodol o’i addasrwydd/ei haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Byddai hynny’n nodi’r meddygon yr oedd yn hysbys, yng ngeiriau’r Fonesig Lesley Southgate, eu bod ‘allan yn niweidio cleifion’ ond gobeithiwyd hefyd y byddai’r dull o gyflawni hyn yn codi safonau ymarfer meddygol yn gyffredinol. Dechreuodd y GMC gydag egwyddorion cadarn, gobeithion uchel a’r bwriadau gorau. Dyfeisiwyd a phrofwyd cynigion cychwynnol ond, erbyn 2002, rwy’n credu bod y GMC wedi sylweddoli bod y dasg yn anoddach na’r disgwyl. Byddai’r cynigion gwreiddiol yn ddrud a byddent wedi rhoi baich gweinyddol sylweddol ar y GMC. Yn ogystal, roedd y cynigion yn amhoblogaidd iawn gyda rhannau mawr o’r proffesiwn. Newidiodd y GMC gyfeiriad. Rhoddodd y gorau i’r egwyddor o werthuso addasrwydd pob meddyg unigol i ymarfer. Penderfynodd seilio ail-ddilysu ar gyfer y mwyafrif helaeth o feddygon ar y ffaith syml eu bod wedi cymryd rhan mewn proses arfarnu a gynhaliwyd naill ai gan eu cyflogwyr neu, ar gyfer meddygon teulu, gan arfarnwr meddyg teulu a gyfarwyddir gan PCO y meddyg. Ar gyfer meddygon teulu, o leiaf, roedd ac mae arfarnu yn broses hollol ffurfiannol ac, yn fy marn i, yn hollol analluog i ddarparu sail ar gyfer gwerthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer. Gwnaeth y GMC y newid hwnnw heb gynnal unrhyw astudiaeth o effeithiolrwydd arfarniad fel ffordd o nodi perfformiad diffygiol. Pan newidiodd gyfeiriad y GMC yn y modd hwnnw, roedd yn gwybod, oherwydd y’i gynghorwyd felly gan ei ymgynghorwyr rheolaeth, SHM, fod llawer o wrthwynebiadau i’r syniad o gysylltu ail-ddilysu ag arfarnu a bod y rhain yn ffurfio
‘catalog sylweddol’
na ddylid ei
. Nid newid cyfeiriad bach ydoedd; nac ychwaith y gellid ei ddisgrifio’n ‘fireinio’’r cynigion blaenorol. Yn fy marn i, roedd y newid cyfeiriad hwnnw’n sylweddol ac fe’i wnaed am resymau cyfleuster ac nid am resymau egwyddor.
Tua chwe mis ar ôl cyhoeddi’r newid cyfeiriad hwn, teimlodd y GMC dan orfodaeth i ymdrechu i wella ei gynigion. Rwy’n fodlon y gwnaeth hynny oherwydd y dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad hwn i’r perwyl na allai arfarniad ddarparu sail foddhaol am ail-ddilysiad. Ymdrechodd i drafod gyda’r Adran Iechyd elfen ychwanegol, sef y dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol, a fyddai’n rhoi sicrwydd i’r GMC nad oedd unrhyw bryderon sylweddol heb eu datrys am addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, cyn belled ag y gwyddai’r llofnodwr. Roedd hyn, fel y dywedais, yn gam i’r cyfeiriad cywir. Fodd bynnag, mae’r dystysgrif llywodraethu clinigol fel y bydd yn cael ei darparu bellach o werth cyfyngedig iawn ac nid yw cynigion y GMC o hyd yn bodloni gofyniad hanfodol ail-ddilysu, sef y dylai fod yn werthusiad o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Ni all y cyhoedd fod â gwir ffydd fod gan meddyg sydd wedi’i ail-ddilysu ‘wybodaeth gyfoes a’i fod/a’i bod yn addas i ymarfer’. Gall y sefyllfa honno newid yn y dyfodol, pe byddai llywodraethu clinigol yn gwella, fel y mae pawb yn gobeithio y bydd, a phe gellid newid y diwylliant o amharodrwydd un meddyg i adrodd diffygion meddyg arall. Gallai’r newidiadau hynny ddigwydd neu beidio. Ond os yw’r GMC yn bwriadu y dylai ail-ddilysiad roi sicrwydd i’r cyhoedd o werth gwirioneddol, yn hytrach na gwerth dychmygol, rhaid iddo dderbyn nad yw ei gynigion presennol yn ddigonol a rhaid iddo ddatblygu system ail-ddilysu sydd, yn ei chyfnod cyntaf, yn cynnwys gwerthusiad cyfansymiol o addasrwydd pob meddyg unigol i ymarfer.

---  ---
Cynigion ar gyfer Newid sy'n Effeithio ar Drefniadau'r GIG ar gyfer Gofal Sylfaenol
Cynigion ar gyfer Newid sy'n Effeithio ar y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol

---  ---
Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi archwilio’r gweithdrefnau a oedd mewn grym yn y GIG ar gyfer monitro ymarferwyr cyffredinol (meddygon teulu) yn ystod gyrfa gyfan Shipman. Rwyf hefyd wedi archwilio’r gweithdrefnau ar gyfer delio â chwynion yn erbyn meddygon teulu a’r ffordd yr oedd pryderon a godwyd ynglŷn â meddyg yn cael eu derbyn a’u trin. Fy nghasgliad i yw na fyddai’r gweithdrefnau hynny ar gyfer monitro wedi canfod esgeulustod gan feddyg teulu yn absenoldeb cwyn yn tynnu sylw uniongyrchol at yr esgeulustod hwnnw. Rwyf hefyd wedi adrodd na wnaed unrhyw gwynion ac na fynegwyd unrhyw bryderon i’r awdurdodau am Shipman ag a fyddai wedi peri amheuaeth bod Shipman yn lladd cleifion, hyd yr adroddiad i’r Crwner gan y diweddar Dr Linda Reynolds ym mis Mawrth 1998. Rwyf wedi dod i’r casgliad, hyd yn oed pe byddai cwynion wedi eu gwneud neu bryderon wedi eu mynegi a fyddai efallai wedi peri amheuaeth o’r fath, mae’n annhebygol y byddai ymchwiliad wedi cael ei gynnal a allai fod wedi datgelu troseddoldeb Shipman. Ymddengys bod y system wedi gweithredu ar y dyb bod pob meddyg yn weddus yn eu hanfod ac yn ymdrechu i wneud eu gorau dros eu cleifion; byddai rhai’n ymddwyn yn esgeulus mewn rhyw ffordd a byddai eraill hwyrach yn methu â darparu safon gofal addas. Byddai awdurdod priodol yn cael eu hysbysu am y rheiny ac yn delio â hwy. Nid achos Shipman oedd yr unig un a oedd yn dangos na ellid gwneud y tybiaethau hyn, ac nid ei achos ef oedd y cyntaf chwaith.
Yn ail hanner y 1990au, roedd y Llywodraeth, y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMC) a’r proffesiwn meddygol wedi dod i delerau â’r gwirionedd annymunol bod y systemau a oedd yn bodoli ar gyfer monitro ymddygiad a pherfformiad meddygon wedi methu â chanfod nifer o ymarferwyr camweithredol difrifol. Roedd y cyhoedd wedi cael eu siomi yn ddifrifol. Roedd rhai yn sylweddoli bod yn rhaid bod y systemau a oedd yn bodoli hefyd yn methu â chanfod camweithredu a oedd yn llai difrifol ond o fath a allai fodd bynnag roi cleifion mewn perygl o niwed. Roedd llawer o bobl yn cydnabod bod yn rhaid newid yr holl system.
Daw amodau gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad i ben trwy ofyn i mi wneud argymhellion o’r fath ar gyfer newid ag yr wyf i yn eu hystyried yn angenrheidiol ar gyfer amddiffyn cleifion. I’r perwyl hwnnw, mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi ceisio olrhain cynnydd newid y systemau a’r gweithdrefnau a ddylai amddiffyn cleifion rhag meddygon camweithredol. Am fod Shipman yn feddyg teulu, roedd angen i’r Ymchwiliad ganolbwyntio ar y systemau a’r gweithdrefnau mewn gweithrediad mewn gofal sylfaenol. Fy nghasgliad cyffredinol i yw bod y newid wedi datblygu llawer, er nad yw’n gyflawn eto. Mae’r awydd i gyflawni newid wedi bod yn amrywiol. Mewn sefydliad mor enfawr a chymhleth â’r GIG ac mewn proffesiwn mor fawr â meddygaeth, nid yw hynny’n syndod. Fy argraff cyffredinol i yw bod awydd sylweddol i greu newid yn y Llywodraeth a rhai sefydliadau proffesiynol, Coleg Brenhinol yr Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol (RCGP) yn bennaf. Cafwyd newid sylweddol yn y GMC er 1998 ac mae mwy o newid ar fin digwydd. Fodd bynnag, mewn rhai meysydd o’r proffesiwn, cafwyd amharodrwydd siomedig i gydnabod yr angen am newid. Yn rhy aml, clywir y farn nad oes unrhyw ddiben i newid wedi’i gynllunio i ‘ddal Shipman arall’ am na fydd un fyth. Mae rhai yn y proffesiwn heb gydnabod bod yr angen am newid yn mynd y tu hwnt i hynny.
Yn y Bennod hon, rwyf yn argymell ystyried pa mor bell y mae’r newid wedi mynd ac i argymell gwneud mwy o gynnydd er budd amddiffyn cleifion. Bydd rhai o’r argymhellion hyn yn eithaf manwl tra bydd eraill yn fwy cyffredinol eu natur, am fy mod wedi gwneud nifer o argymhellion manwl yn y Penodau blaenorol.

---  ---
Newidiadau a Diwygiadau Hyd yn Hyn
Ym 1997, cychwynnodd y Llywodraeth ar adolygiad sylfaenol o weithrediad GIG. Un o brif nodau sylfaenol yr adolygiad oedd rhoi mwy o bwyslais ar ansawdd gofal. Dechreuodd y Llywodraeth ar adolygiad sylfaenol o weithrediad y GIG. Un o brif nodau sylfaenol yr adolygiad hwnnw oedd rhoi mwy o bwyslais ar ansawdd gofal. Canlyneb y nod honno oedd na ddylai cleifion cael eu hamlygu i berygl y gellid ei osgoi trwy law pobl broffesiynol ym myd iechyd. Yn ystod yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi cyfeirio at sawl menter a ystyriwyd a’r newidiadau sydd wedi cael eu gweithredu. Ni fyddaf yn disgrifio’r rhain yn fanwl yma. Ymddengys i mi, yn yr hirdymor, y gallai datblygiad rheolaeth glinigol, a ddisgrifiais ym Mhennod 12, gael yr effaith fwyaf buddiol o’r holl newidiadau yr wyf wedi eu harchwilio.
Datblygiad nodedig arall oedd yn newid yn strwythur y cyrff sy’n gyfrifol am ddarparu gofal sylfaenol. Mae ymddiriedolaethau gofal sylfaenol (PCT) yn sefydliadau bach, sy’n ddigon bach i alluogi eu staff a’r meddygon teulu hynny sy’n uniongyrchol gysylltiedig yn eu gwaith i ddatblygu gwybodaeth bersonol y meddygon teulu ar eu rhestr. Mae gan PCTau lawer o bwerau newydd sy’n eu galluogi i ddelio â meddygon camweithredol eu hunain, heb orfod dibynnu ar Awdurdod Apêl Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teulu (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig) neu’r GMC. Gallant ddileu neu wahardd meddygon o’u rhestrau neu osod amodau ar barhau i’w cynnwys. Mae’n ofynnol arnynt ymgymryd â gweithgareddau rheolaeth glinigol a chânt eu hannog i sefydlu systemau ar gyfer canfod perfformiad gwael a ffurfiau eraill ar gamweithredu ymysg meddygon teulu cyn bod diffygion o’r fath yn achosi perygl difrifol o niwed i gleifion.
Un agwedd ar y meddylfryd y tu ôl i’r newid gan awdurdodau iechyd (HAau) i PCTau oedd y byddai ymarferwyr lleol nawr yn agos gysylltiedig â gwaith y PCT ac wrth wneud penderfyniadau polisi yn effeithio ar wasanaethau meddygol lleol. Mae’n arferol i Gadeirydd Pwyllgor Gweithredol Proffesiynol (PEC) PCT fod yn feddyg teulu. Mae Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol y PCT hefyd yn debygol o fod yn feddyg teulu lleol. Mae manteision ac anfanteision i’r trefniadau hyn. Dylai cynnydd mewn cyfranogiad a ‘pherchnogaeth’ fod yn un fantais. O ganlyniad, dylid lleihau’r teimladau o densiwn a rhaniad rhwng meddygon teulu a’r cyrff sy’n gyfrifol am eu monitro a’u goruchwylio. Anfantais sylweddol yw bod gwrthdaro buddiannau yn bosibilrwydd i’r meddygon teulu hynny sydd yn ymarferwyr lleol ac yn swyddogion PCT. Mae peth gwrthdaro bob amser rhwng y rolau y mae’n rhaid i’r PCT eu cyflawni: weithiau’n cynnig cymorth, weithiau’r gorfod gweithredu fel arolygiaeth.
Mae gan PCTau eu problemau. Maent yn newydd iawn ac nid ydynt eto wedi cael amser i ddatblygu cof corfforaethol. Mae llawer o’u staff heb lawer o brofiad o’r math o swyddogaethau lled-reoliadol a goruchwyliol y mae‘n rhaid iddynt eu perfformio. Un o’r problemau sy’n gynhenid i PCTau am eu bod yn fach yw bod yn rhaid i staff ymgymryd ag ystod eang o swyddogaethau ac yn annhebygol o gaffael arbenigedd gwirioneddol mewn rhai agweddau ar eu gwaith; ni fyddant yn cael y cyfle i ddysgu trwy brofiad rheolaidd. Mae rhai PCTau wedi canfod bod uno â’i gilydd mewn grwpiau at rai dibenion yn ddefnyddiol. Problem arall yw, oherwydd bod llawer o PCTau (dros 300 yn Lloegr yn unig), ceir sawl ffordd wahanol o wneud i’w hadnoddau gynnwys yr holl swyddogaethau y maent i fod eu perfformio. Fy marn gyffredinol i yw bod penderfyniad gwirioneddol i wneud i’r systemau newydd weithio’n dda. Gobeithio y caiff PCTau y cyfle i sefydlu; roedd cyfnod o newid parhaus bron mewn sefydliadau gofal sylfaenol am sawl blwyddyn cyn y mileniwm ac am ryw ddwy flynedd wedi hynny. Yn fy marn i, dylid osgoi newid strwythurol pellach am gyfnod o leiaf. Mae angen i’r PCTau gael y cyfle i ddatblygu arbenigedd a hyder wrth ddefnyddio’u pwerau newydd. Credaf hefyd y gallai cyfnewid syniadau a lledaenu arfer da helpu i sicrhau bod safonau uchel yn cael eu datblygu yn unffurf ar draws y wlad.
Meysydd Lle Mae Angen Newid Pellach
Nodais yn gynharach y gallai rheolaeth glinigol, pe bai’n cael ei wneud gyda phenderfyniad ac adnoddau digonol, wneud gwahaniaeth sylweddol i ddiogelwch cleifion ac i ansawdd gofal cleifion. Ceir pum agwedd benodol ar reolaeth glinigol yn ei ystyr ehangach lle’r wyf yn cynnig gwneud argymhellion, sef ymdrin â chwynion cleifion yn erbyn meddygon teulu a phryderon a fynegwyd gan gydweithwyr meddygol, cydweithwyr proffesiynol eraill ym maes iechyd ac eraill, gweithrediadau disgyblu, defnyddio gwybodaeth rhagnodi, defnyddio ystadegau ac arfarniad marwoldeb. Y prif faes arall lle yr wyf am wneud argymhellion ar gyfer newid yw yn narpariaeth gwybodaeth, at ddibenion GIG mewnol ac i gleifion. Byddaf hefyd yn gwneud nifer o argymhellion amrywiol ynghylch y ffyrdd y gall PCTau wella amddiffyn cleifion a pheri gwelliant yn ansawdd y gofal a ddarperir gan feddygon teulu.
Cafodd syniadau ar gyfer newid yn cynnwys y meysydd diddordeb eang hyn eu cynnwys mewn Papur Ymgynghori gan yr Ymchwiliad ym mis Hydref 2003, o’r enw ‘Diogelu Cleifion: Pynciau i’w Hystyried yn y Seminarau Cam Pedwar’. Roedd y pynciau hyn yn destun trafodaeth yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad a gynhaliwyd ym mis Ionawr 2004. Ceir manylion y seminarau hyn ym Mhennod 2 a byddaf yn cyfeirio at rai o’r trafodaethau a gafwyd yn y seminarau hyn a’r pwyntiau a godwyd gan ymatebwyr i Bapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad, yn ystod y Bennod hon.
Codwyd sawl mater yn ymwneud â chwynion ym Mhapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad. Ymatebodd llawer o sefydliadau ac unigolion. Erbyn y seminarau, roedd llawer mwy o faterion wedi cael eu codi, rhai gan ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, eraill gan yr ymchwiliad ei hun o ganlyniad i dystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd yn ddiweddar. Yn adran hon y Bennod, byddaf yn trafod nifer o’r materion hyn. Yn y drafodaeth hon, byddaf yn cymryd bod y darllenydd wedi darllen Penodau 6, 7 ac 11 o’r Adroddiad hwn a’i fod yn gyfarwydd â’r systemau sydd mewn gweithrediad ar hyn o bryd.
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 7, mae’r Llywodraeth wedi ymgynghori’n helaeth ynghylch diwygio gweithdrefnau cwyno’r GIG. Pan gynhaliwyd seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, roedd Rheoliadau Cwyno drafft wedi cael eu dosbarthu at ddibenion ymgynghori. Roedd y Rheoliadau Cwyno drafft hyn yn argymell newidiadau i gam cyntaf ac ail gam y gweithdrefnau. Yn gyffredinol, ystyriais fod y trefniadau a nodwyd yn y Rheoliadau Cwyno drafft yn synhwyrol ac yn ddefnyddiol ac y byddent yn arwain at welliant sylweddol yn y broses gwyno fel y mae’n gweithredu mewn gofal sylfaenol.
Un o’r prif ddarpariaethau yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft oedd trosglwyddo’r cyfrifoldeb am ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwyno o baneli adolygu annibynnol (IRP) i’r Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (a elwir bellach yn Gomisiwn Gofal Iechyd). Cafodd yr argymhelliad hwnnw gefnogaeth gyffredinol ac roedd y Llywodraeth yn awyddus i weithredu’r newid. Yn unol â hynny, ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, daeth set newydd o Reoliadau, Rheoliadau’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Cwynion) 2004 (Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004), i weithrediad. Fe achosodd y rhain newidiadau i ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwyno ond, o ran practisau meddygon teulu, roedd cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau yr un peth. Cynghorwyd yr Ymchwiliad mai bwriad y Llywodraeth oedd diwygio cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno o ran ei effaith ar bractisau meddygon teulu ar ôl derbyn Adroddiadau’r Ymchwiliad hwn ac Ymchwiliadau Neale ac Ayling. Roeddwn yn hapus â’r trefniant hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, o ganlyniad i wahanu’r trefniadau newydd ar gyfer dau gam y gweithdrefnau cwyno, hwyrach bod y sefyllfa bresennol a’r rhyngberthynas rhwng y ddau gam ychydig yn ddryslyd. Rwy’n hyderus y caiff y sefyllfa ei datrys yn y dyfodol agos.
Rwyf nawr yn mynd i ddelio â nifer o faterion gwahanol sy’n codi mewn perthynas â diwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwyno.
Pwy Ddylai Dderbyn Cwynion?
Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n rhaid i berson sy’n dymuno gwneud cwyn am feddyg teulu wneud y gŵyn honno, i ddechrau, i’r feddygfa lle mae’r meddyg teulu yn gweithio. Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad a chanlyniadau ymchwil a gyhoeddwyd yn awgrymu bod llawer o bobl sydd am wneud cwyn yn cael eu hannog i beidio â gwneud hynny am eu bod yn gorfod ‘wynebu’ aelod o’r staff neu feddyg yn y feddygfa y mae’r gŵyn yn ymwneud â hi. Yn ei Bapur Ymgynghorol, gofynnodd yr Ymchwiliad a ddylai achwynwyr o’r fath allu gwyno wrth y PCT, yn hytrach nag wrth bractis y meddyg teulu. Dywedodd rhai ymatebwyr y byddai cleifion yn croesawu’r dewis oherwydd y rheswm a nodwyd uchod. Roedd yn well gan y rhai nad oeddynt o blaid dewis gadw pethau fel ag y maent, lle y caiff pob cwyn sy’n ymwneud â gofal sylfaenol ei drin i ddechrau gan y practis. Cynigiwyd dau brif reswm o blaid y ddadl honno. I ddechrau, dywedwyd, os caniateir i bractis ddelio â’r gŵyn, mae’r rhagolygon o gadw’r berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a chyfrinachedd rhwng y claf â’r meddyg yn well. Yn ail, dywedwyd bod llawer o gwynion mewn gofal sylfaenol yn ymwneud â materion gweinyddol a/neu eu bod yn rhai pitw; gellir datrys y rhan fwyaf yn foddhaol gan y practis. Byddai’n gorlwytho PCTau os byddai’n rhaid iddynt ddelio â niferoedd mawr o gwynion o’r fath. Fodd bynnag, erbyn amser y seminarau, roedd y Llywodraeth wedi dynodi, yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, ei bwriad i ganiatáu i gleifion ddewis a oeddynt am gwyno i bractis y meddyg teulu neu i’r PCT.
Mae’n ymddangos i mi bod yr angen i roi dewis i gleifion yn hyn o beth yn amlwg o ganfyddiadau’r ymchwil a gynhaliwyd gan y Prosiect Cyfraith Gyhoeddus ac Adroddiad York, y cyfeiriais atynt ym Mhennod 7. Y canfyddiadau hynny oedd bod llawer o gleifion yn amharod i gwyno’n uniongyrchol wrth bractis y meddyg. Os oes angen cadarnhad o hyn, fe’i ceir mewn tystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad. Rwy’n cydnabod pwysigrwydd cadw’r berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a chyfrinachedd rhwng meddyg a chlaf lle y bo’n bosibl, ac rwyf hefyd yn derbyn y gellir delio â llawer o gwynion bach yn gyflym ac yn foddhaol gan reolwr y practis. Fodd bynnag, os yw cleifion yn cael eu hannog i beidio â gwneud cwyn gan y gofyniad i’w wneud yn uniongyrchol i’r practis, mae’n rhaid iddynt gael dewis arall. Bydd y rheiny sy’n barod i gwyno’n uniongyrchol i’r practis yn parhau i wneud hynny a gobeithir y caiff llawer o gwynion o’r fath eu datrys yn gyflym ac yn hawdd heb niwed i’r berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a chyfrinachedd rhwng meddyg a chlaf. Fodd bynnag, dylai’r cleifion hynny nad ydynt yn dymuno gwneud hynny - am ba bynnag reswm - yn fy marn i, allu cwyno wrth y PCT ac, os ydynt yn dymuno, osgoi gorfod gohebu neu drafod yn uniongyrchol â’r practis perthnasol. Rwyf o’r farn ei bod yn debygol mai cwynion llawer mwy difrifol - yn ymwneud â beirniadaeth bersonol o’r meddyg ac/neu’r gofal clinigol a ddarparwyd - a wneir i’r PCT. Nid wyf yn awgrymu y bydd hyn yn digwydd bob amser ond credaf mai dyma’r ffordd y bydd mwyafrif y cleifion yn ymddwyn. Yn unol â hynny, nid wyf yn credu mai canlyniad y newid hwn fydd y PCT yn cael ei lethu gan gwynion pitw. Nid wyf ychwaith yn credu y bydd y trefniant hwn yn niweidiol i’r berthynas rhwng meddyg a chlaf. Os yw’r gŵyn yn ymwneud â matter gweinyddol neu ryw broblem fach arall, byddwn yn disgwyl i’r PCT hwyluso ateb gyda’r bwriad o gynnal neu adfer y berthynas.
Mae, yn fy marn i, yn ddymunol, yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau, bod practisau meddygon teulu yn delio â mwyafrif y cwynion y mae cleifion yn eu gwneud yn uniongyrchol iddynt hwy. Dylid cymryd camau i wella safonau ymdrin â chwynion o’r fath. Mae’r ymchwil yn awgrymu bod ansawdd ymdrin â chwynion mewn practisau yn amrywiol iawn. Dylid helpu practisau meddygon teulu i fabwysiadu ymagwedd gadarnhaol tuag at gŵynion ac i hyfforddi eu staff i ymdrin â chwynion mewn ffordd briodol.
Pryd y Mae’n Rhaid Gwneud Cwyn?
Yn unol â gweithdrefnau cwynion 1996, mae’n rhaid gwneud cwyn o fewn chwe mis o’r digwyddiadau y cwynir amdanynt. Yn unol â’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, byddai’r cyfnod yn cael ei ymestyn i 12 mis, gyda’r posibilrwydd o estyniad pellach mewn rhai amgylchiadau. Yn fy marn i, roedd yr argymhelliad hwnnw’n synhwyrol. Mae yn ei hanfod yn cydnabod y gall achwynwyr fod yn sâl neu’n galaru a heb fod mewn cyflwr i gwyno tan fod cryn amser wedi mynd heibio. Dylai fod gan feddygon nodiadau cyfoes da o’r holl ymgynghoriadau, felly, ni ddylent fod o dan anfantais ddifrifol o ymestyn y cyfnod. Er nad yw annog oedi yn ddymunol, mae’n ymddangos i mi bod 12 mis yn gyfnod mwy rhesymol i’w ganiatáu. Gobeithio y caiff y newid ei ymgorffori yn y set nesaf o Rheoliadau Cwynion.
Adrodd am Gŵynion i’r Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol
Roedd un o’r materion a godwyd ym Mhapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud â’r diffyg gwybodaeth a oedd ar gael i’r PCTau ynglŷn â natur y cwynion a dderbyniwyd gan bractis meddyg teulu ac ynglŷn â’r ffordd y cânt eu trin â’u datrys. Mae’r math hwn o wybodaeth yn bwysig am sawl rheswm sy’n gysylltiedig â chyfrifoldebau’r PCTau dros reolaeth glinigol. Yn gyntaf, mae’r ffordd y caiff cwynion eu trin gan bractisau meddygon teulu yn fater o ddiddordeb a phryder i’r PCT, neu fe ddylai fod. Mae’n ddangosydd pwysig o ansawdd y berthynas sydd gan y meddygon yn y practis â’u cleifion. Yn ail, fel y dywedodd yr Athro Alastair Scotland, Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol yr Awdurdod Cenedlaethol Asesu Clinigol (NCAA), yn y seminarau, mae nifer a natur y cwynion a dderbynnir gan bractis y meddyg teulu yn debygol o fod yn ddangosydd o ansawdd y gwasanaeth y mae’n ei ddarparu. Os yw meddygfa neu feddyg arbennig yn denu nifer o gŵynion - yn enwedig os yw’r cwynion hynny’n debyg - dylai hyn beri pryder. Ar hyn o bryd, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 7, mae PCTau yn canfod faint o gŵynion sy’n cael eu gwneud mewn meddygfa gan wybod dim am gynnwys y cwynion hynny oni bai bod yr achwynydd yn mynd ymlaen i’r ail gam. Yn ogystal, mae’r PCT yn derbyn gwybodaeth am y cwynion trwy ffurflen flynyddol, nid mewn ‘amser gwirioneddol’ wrth i’r cwynion gael eu gwneud. Roedd yn well gan lawer o’r ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol ddarparu mwy o wybodaeth i’r PCT yn fwy rheolaidd.
Erbyn i’r mater gael ei drafod yn y seminarau, roedd yn hysbys bod y Llywodraeth yn argymell gwneud newidiadau a fyddai’n rhoi gwell gwybodaeth i’r PCTau am gŵynion a disgresiwn i benderfynu pa mor rheolaidd y byddai angen iddynt ei darparu. Byddai’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn gofyn i ddarparwyr gofal sylfaenol (h.y. meddygfeydd meddygon teulu) ddarparu gwybodaeth i’r PCTau am gŵynion mor aml ag y nodir gan y PCT unigol. Byddai’n rhaid i’r wybodaeth gynnwys nifer y cwynion a dderbyniwyd a’u cynnwys a byddai’n rhaid iddi nodi sut y cafodd y gŵyn ei thrin, gan gynnwys y canlyniad. Byddai’n ofynnol i’r PCT baratoi adroddiad chwarterol yn cynnwys y wybodaeth hon i’w ystyried gan Fwrdd y PCT. Yn y seminarau, cafwyd trafodaeth ynghylch pa mor aml y dylai meddygfeydd meddygon teulu orfod darparu’r wybodaeth i’w PCT. Roedd rhai cyfranogwyr yn y seminarau o’r farn y dylid hysbysu’r PCTau am gŵynion wrth iddynt gael eu gwneud ac na ddylid eu ‘cadw’ ar gyfer adroddiadau cyfnodol. Hefyd, mynegwyd y farn y dylid anfon y llythyr cwyno ei hun (os oedd y gŵyn yn un ysgrifenedig) neu gofnod y feddygfa ohoni (os gwnaed ar lafar) at y PCT. Dywedodd Mrs Pauline Webdale, yn cynrychioli’r Gymdeithas Ysgrifenyddion Meddygol, Rheolwyr Meddygfeydd, Gweinyddwyr a Derbynwyr (AMSPAR), wrth y seminarau, bod copi o bob cwyn yn y feddygfa lle’r oedd hi’n gweithio, yn cael ei hanfon at y PCT yn fuan ar ôl ei derbyn. Nid oedd hyn yn achosi llawer o waith ychwanegol. Nid oedd y feddygfa’n cael llawer o gŵynion mewn blwyddyn. Fel yr wyf i’n ei ddeall, y ffigur ar gyfartaledd ar gyfer y wlad gyfan yw tua un gŵyn fesul meddyg teulu y flwyddyn.
Roeddwn yn edmygus o’r dadleuon o blaid hysbysu’r PCT ar unwaith am y cwynion a dderbyniwyd gan feddygfa meddyg teulu. Gallaf weld y byddai adroddiad cyfnodol (chwarterol, dyweder), at rai dibenion rheolaeth glinigol, yn addas. Fodd bynnag, mewn un ffordd, byddai hysbysu ar unwaith yn rhoi mantais benodol. Os byddai’r gŵyn yn un ddifrifol, byddai’r PCT yn gallu ymyrryd a chymryd drosodd er mwyn delio â’r gŵyn. Credaf fod yn rhaid cydnabod, lle y caiff cwyn ei thrin mewn meddygfa meddyg teulu, y prif amcan fel arfer bydd ‘bodloni’ yr achwynydd, o ran datrys y gŵyn fel na bydd/fydd mewn sefyllfa i fynd â’r mater ymhellach. O’i ystyried mewn ffordd gadarnhaol, gellir disgrifio hynny fel ‘cynnal perthynas y meddyg/claf’. O ochr arall, gellir ei ystyried fel ‘diogelu eich hun’. Mae’n gofyn llawer i ddisgwyl i reolwr cwynion neu aelod o feddygfa meddyg teulu sy’n gyfrifol am ymdrin â chwynion i ddelio’n wrthrychol â honiadau difrifol yn ymwneud â chamymddwyn neu esgeulustod yn erbyn aelod o dîm meddygfa bach. Yn fy marn i, os digwydd yr annhebygol, ac y caiff cwyn a allai fod yn ddifrifol ei gwneud yn uniongyrchol i feddygfa meddyg teulu (yn hytrach nag i’r PCT), byddai’n well i’r PCT ‘alw’r gŵyn i mewn’ a chymryd drosodd o’r feddygfa. Gellir gwneud hyn os yw’r cwynion yn cael eu gwneud ar unwaith yn unig ac os yw’r PCT yn gweld yr achwynydd, neu os cafodd ei gwneud ar lafar, gofnod llawn ohoni, fel y nodwyd gan y feddygfa.
Gallai argymhellion o’r fath achosi materion yn ymwneud â chyfrinachedd cleifion. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, gellid datrys y rhain. Gellid gofyn i’r claf roi caniatâd i ddatgelu i’r PCT y llythyr neu’r cofnod o’r gŵyn. Os byddai’r achwynydd yn gwrthod rhoi caniatâd, ac mae hynny’n annhebygol, gellid gwneud y llythyr yn ddienw ac, os byddai’r PCT o’r farn ei bod yn ddymunol galw’r gŵyn i mewn, gallai ysgrifennu at yr achwynydd trwy’r feddygfa, i esbonio pam y mae’n dymuno ymchwilio i’r gŵyn. Os byddai’r claf yn gwrthod, a chredaf fod hyn yn annhebygol, mae’n dra phosibl na fyddai’r PCT yn gallu parhau a’i ymchwiliad. Fodd bynnag, yn dibynnu ar gynnwys y gŵyn, hwyrach y byddai’n dymuno archwilio gwybodaeth arall a oedd ar gael am y meddyg neu gychwyn ymholiadau ei hun i weld a fu unrhyw ddigwyddiadau tebyg eraill yn ymwneud â’r meddyg hwnnw. O leiaf byddai’r PCT yn ymwybodol o’r ffaith bod cwyn wedi ei gwneud a byddai’n barod ar gyfer unrhyw gŵyn arall debyg. Felly, byddai’n cael ei chynorthwyo yn ei rôl rheolaeth glinigol.
Yn unol â hynny, rwyf yn argymell y dylid diwygio rheoliad drafft 30 y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i ddarparwyr gofal sylfaenol adrodd i’r PCT ynghylch unrhyw gŵynion o fewn, dyweder dau ddiwrnod gwaith o’u derbyn. Dylai’r adroddiad gynnwys y llythyr neu’r cofnod gwreiddiol o’r gŵyn. Dylai hefyd fod yn agored i PCT ofyn am gopi o unrhyw ohebiaeth rhwng y feddygfa a’r achwynydd, gan gynnwys llythyr esboniad y feddygfa. Dylai’r PCT yna gofnodi’r gŵyn at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol ac, os yw’n ystyried bod materion rheolaeth glinigol yn codi, dylid ‘galw’r gŵyn i mewn’ i’r PCT ymchwilio iddi.
Cyfrifoldeb Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol am Ymchwilio i Gŵynion
Fel y dywedais, rwyf yn dychmygu, yn y dyfodol, y bydd y rhan fwyaf o gŵynion o unrhyw bwys yn cael eu gwneud yn uniongyrchol i’r PCT yn hytrach nag i’r feddygfa meddyg teulu berthnasol. Bydd ymchwilio i gŵynion a cheisio eu datrys yn swyddogaeth newydd i PCT. Hyd yma, maent ond wedi ymdrin â chwynion yn weinyddol yn unig. Mae rheolwyr cwynion wedi ‘paratoi’r ffordd’ i gleifion sy’n cwyno wrth feddygfa meddyg teulu; maent wedi trefnu cymodi a, lle y bo angen, maent wedi gwneud trefniadau ar gyfer adolygiad annibynnol. Os caiff y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft eu deddfu (ac rwy’n gobeithio y cânt, gyda pheth diwygio), bydd PCTau yn gyfrifol am rai ymchwiliadau yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno. Os na chaiff yr ymchwiliadau hynny eu cynnal yn drwyadl ac yn wrthrychol, ni fydd y newidiadau sydd wedi eu hargymell ar hyn o bryd yn achosi’r gwelliannau y gobeithir amdanynt. Yn wir, mewn perthynas â’r cwynion a dderbyniwyd yn y gwasanaeth ysbytai, Mae’r Adran Iechyd wedi cydnabod bod ymchwilio da yn hanfodol, er tegwch i ddwy ochr y gŵyn ac er diben dysgu o brofiad. Yn nogfen fframwaith yr Adran Iechyd, ‘Cynnal Safonau Proffesiynol Uchel yn y GIG’, a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, caiff pwysigrwydd ymchwilio i gŵynion yn brydlon ac yn drwyadl yn erbyn meddygon ysbytai a phryderon yn eu cylch, ei gydnabod. Ym mhob achos, bydd rheolwr achos ac ymchwilydd achos yn cael eu penodi. Mae’n amlwg bod yn rhaid gwneud trefniadau cymaradwy ar gyfer ymchwilio i gŵynion a dderbyniwyd gan y PCTau yn brydlon ac yn drwyadl. Yn fy marn i, darparu trefniadau o’r fath yw’r mater pwysicaf i fynd i’r afael ag ef wrth ddiwygio’r gweithdrefnau cwyno.
Diben Ymchwilio
Efallai y dylwn esbonio yr hyn yr oeddwn yn ei olygu wrth ymchwilio i gŵyn. Trwy ‘ymchwilio’, rwyf yn golygu casglu gwybodaeth a thystiolaeth yn ymwneud â’r amgylchiadau a achosodd y gŵyn. Gall ymchwiliad o’r fath gynnwys gofyn cwestiynau i’r achwynydd a chael datganiad ganddo ef/hi, canfod o’r achwynydd dystion posibl a chymryd datganiadau ganddynt hwy, cael datganiad gan y meddyg y cwynwyd amdano a chan unrhyw dystion y mae ef/hi wedi eu cyflwyno, cael sylwadau gan yr achwynydd (a thystion eraill o bosibl) ynglŷn â geiriau’r meddyg ac i’r gwrthwyneb, a chychwyn ymchwiliadau eraill (e.e. gwirio honiadau gan yr achwynydd neu’r meddyg gyda thrydydd partïon a/neu yn erbyn dogfennaeth gyfredol). Yn achos cwyn am driniaeth glinigol, gall ymchwiliad hefyd gynnwys cael unrhyw gofnodion meddygol perthnasol, canlyniadau profion a dogfennaeth arall a chael tystiolaeth gan arbenigwr yn yr arbenigedd berthnasol.
Mae Rheoliad 20 o’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn gofyn i reolwr cwynion PCT ymchwilio i gŵyn
‘i’r graddau sy’n angenrheidiol ac yn y modd mwyaf priodol i’w datrys yn gyflym ac yn effeithlon yn ei farn ef/hi’.
Gall y rheolwr cwynion ofyn am wybodaeth neu ddogfennau i’w alluogi ef/galluogi hi i ystyried y gŵyn yn iawn. Ni fwriedir unrhyw amheuaeth y bydd arweiniad ar gael i’r PCTau a’u rheolwyr cwynion ynglŷn â’r ffordd i gynnal ymchwiliadau i gŵynion. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n bryderus gweld bod geiriau’r rheoliad drafft yn crybwyll ond un diben y tu ôl i’r ymchwiliad, sef ‘datrys’ y gŵyn. Ni ddywedir unrhyw beth am yr angen i ganfod beth ddigwyddodd ac i ganfod y ffeithiau. Nid oes ychwaith unrhyw gyfeiriad at ddefnyddio ymchwiliad i g ŵyn fel ymarferiad dysgu, ar gyfer canfod camymddwyn neu ymarfer gwael, neu ar gyfer gwella’r gwasanaethau. Hoffwn weld cydnabyddiaeth statudol i bwysigrwydd ymchwiliad cywir i gŵynion ynghylch prosesau rheolaeth glinigol a monitro ansawdd gofal iechyd. Rwy’n credu hefyd, pe byddai PCTau yn wynebu eu dyletswyddau newydd gydag ysbryd dysgu trwy ymchwilio, y canlyniad fyddai mwy o foddhad gan gleifion. Ar hyn o bryd, mae llawer o achwynwyr yn teimlo bod yn rhaid iddynt frwydro i’w cwyn gael ymchwiliad cywir. Maent am deimlo y gallant ddweud wrth y GIG bod rhywbeth wedi mynd o’i le, gan wybod y caiff y mater ei ymchwilio’n llawn. Rwy’n siŵr bod y Llywodraeth yn cydnabod y dylai’r GIG fod yn gallu darparu gweithdrefn gwyno lle nad oes angen i’r claf ‘frwydro’. Os yw’r trefniadau newydd i ddarparu gwell boddhad gan y claf a gwell prosesau dysgu, mae’n rhaid bod ymchwiliad trwyadl.
Y Blaenoriaethu Cyntaf
Roedd yr ymchwiliad yn awyddus i ganfod sawl cwyn y gellid mynd atynt er mwyn bodloni cleifion a chanfod arfer gwael. Ymddengys i’r Ymchwiliad na fyddai’r holl gŵynion wedi peri materion yn ymwneud â chamymddwyn neu arfer gwael neu faterion eraill sy’n adlewyrchiad o ansawdd y gofal neu ddiogelwch cleifion; gallai rhai cwynion ddeillio o achwyniad cwbl breifat. Rwy’n dychmygu y bydd llawer o ‘gŵynion achwyniad preifat’ yn rhai cymharol fach ac yn cael eu gwneud i’r practis yn uniongyrchol. Fodd bynnag, mae’n debygol, yn unol â’r trefniadau newydd, y caiff rhai eu gwneud i’r PCT. Gwahoddodd yr Ymchwiliad drafodaeth ynghylch a fyddai’n bosibl i PCT ddidoli pa gŵynion y dylai eu harchwilio’n fanwl am resymau ‘rheolaeth glinigol’ ac i’w gwahaniaethu o’r cwynion (‘achwyniad preifat’) a allai gael eu trin yn gywir gyda’r bwriad o ddarparu ‘datrysiad’ ar gyfer yr achwynydd yn unig.
Roedd dadl gyffredinol yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad y byddai rhyw fath o ‘flaenoriaethu’ cwynion yn ddefnyddiol, er bod rhai cyfranogwyr o’r farn na fyddai’n hawdd tynnu llinell rhwng y ddau fath o gŵyn ac y gallai cwyn am ‘achwyniad preifat’, wrth ei archwilio ymhellach, fod yn arwydd o broblemau mwy difrifol yn y practis. Er enghraifft, nid yw cwyn bod y meddyg wedi bod yn cyrraedd yn hwyr i’r feddygfa ac wedi cadw’r achwynydd (ac eraill o bosibl) yn aros am amser afresymol yn debygol o godi materion ynghylch diogelwch cleifion. Y canlyniad dymunol, mwy na thebyg, yw esboniad ac ymddiheuriad, ynghyd â sicrwydd bod camau wedi eu cymryd i sicrhau na fydd y broblem yn codi eto. Fodd bynnag, gwnaed y pwynt y gallai cwynion o’r natur hwn, pe byddent yn cael eu gwneud dro ar ôl tro, awgrymu bod problem gyda’r meddyg. Gallaf weld hynny. Serch hynny, credaf na fydd yn anodd i reolwr cwynion PCT adnabod cwyn unigol sy’n peri neu a allai beri pryderon rheolaeth glinigol pan y bydd ef/hi yn ei gweld. Ni fyddai ‘cwynion achwyniad preifat’ fel yr wyf newydd ei disgrifio yn dod o fewn y categori hwn, oni bai bod y rheolwr cwynion yn dod yn ymwybodol o gŵynion mynych o natur debyg yn erbyn yr un meddyg, lle y byddai sail ar gyfer archwilio ymhellach. Mae fy nghyfeiriad at ‘gŵynion mynych’ yn awgrymu y dylid ystyried y gŵyn yng nghyd-destun unrhyw gŵynion neu bryderon blaenorol sydd wedi eu codi ynglŷn â’r meddyg, ac mae’n rhaid gwneud hyn. Weithiau, bydd y cwynion neu’r pryderon blaenorol hynny wedi bod yn gwbl wahanol ac ni fyddant yn berthnasol o gwbl i’r gŵyn sy’n cael eu harchwilio. Ar adegau, fodd bynnag, gall cwynion a phryderon blaenorol fod yn berthnasol iawn.
Roedd yr Athro Scotland o’r farn y byddai’n rhaid cael mewnbwn clinigol i unrhyw benderfyniadau blaenoriaethu i’w gwneud gan PCT. Rwy’n credu ei fod yn teimlo na fyddai rheolwyr cwynion bob amser yn adnabod materion diogelwch cleifion. Fy marn bersonol i, dyweder, o Miss Andrea Horsfall (Rheolwr Gwasanaeth Cwynion, PCT Oldham) a Mrs Janet Parkinson (Rheolwr Cyswllt Defnyddwyr, Awdurdod Iechyd blaenorol West Pennine, a roddodd, ill dwy, dystiolaeth ar lafar i’r Ymchwiliad, yw y byddent wedi bob yn gwbl alluog i adnabod pan fyddai cwyn yn codi mater rheolaeth glinigol, neu o leiaf, byddent wedi adnabod pryd y byddai angen cyngor clinigol arnynt cyn gwneud penderfyniad. Rwy’n credu, gyda’r hyfforddiant priodol, y gallent ymgymryd â’r blaenoriaethu cyntaf yn ddigon diogel a chyda chymorth cyngor pan fyddai ei angen. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n derbyn bod gan yr Athro Scotland fwy o brofiad o reolwyr cwynion nag sydd gen i. Beth bynnag, rwy’n cytuno gydag ef y byddai’r broses o flaenoriaethu yn bwysig ac y byddai’n rhaid i bwy bynnag a oedd yn ymgymryd ag ef feddu ar y profiad priodol a chael mynediad i’r cyngor clinigol perthnasol.
Byddai’r broses flaenoriaethu gyntaf, felly, yn golygu rhannu cwynion i’r rheiny sy’n ‘achwynion preifat’ yn unig a’r rheiny y mae angen eu harchwilio gan y PCT.
Archwilio ac Ymdrin â‘Chwynion Achwyniad Preifat’
Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes gan reolwyr cwynion unrhyw brofiad o archwilio cwynion. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n credu, gyda pheth hyfforddiant, y gallai staff PCT sydd wedi arfer delio â chwynion yn weinyddol, ymdrin â’r mathau hynny o gŵynion nad ydynt yn codi materion ynghylch diogelwch cleifion neu reolaeth glinigol. Bydd cwynion sy’n achwyniadau preifat yn unig, yn gyffredinol, yn gofyn am gysylltu â phractis y meddyg teulu yn unig neu, os bydd hynny’n methu, gymodi. Boddhad y claf, a lle y bo’n bosibl, adfer y berthynas o ymddiriedaeth a hyder rhwng meddyg a chlaf, ddylai’r amcanion fod.
Archwilio ac Ymdrin â‘Chwynion Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Yr Ail Flaenoriaethu
Mae’n rhaid archwilio ‘cwynion rheolaeth glinigol’ gyda’r ddau amcan o ddiogelu’r claf a boddhad a thegwch i feddygon. Bydd PCT hefyd am sicrhau eu bod yn deall yn llwyr y digwyddiadau y tu ôl i’r gŵyn er mwyn cydymffurfio â’u dyletswydd o ran ansawdd y gofal a ddarperir yn eu hardaloedd. Bydd cwynion o’r fath yn amrywio’n fawr o ran eu cymhlethdod â’u difrifoldeb posibl. Ni ddylid eu trin gan reolwr cwynion, ond dylid eu cyfeirio at grŵp bach a ffurfiwyd er mwyn ymdrin â chwynion sy’n codi o faterion rheolaeth glinigol. Gall y grŵp gynnwys dau neu dri o bobl - er enghraifft, y Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu’r Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol, uwch swyddog anfeddygol o’r PCT ac aelod lleyg o’r Bwrdd PCT. Bydd yn rhaid i’r grŵp ystyried yr achos (‘yr ail flaenoriaethu’) a phenderfynu sut y bydd yn cael ei drin. Dylid bod atebolrwydd am y broses hon ar lefel uchel.
Y penderfyniad cyntaf fydd a yw’r gŵyn yn mynd i gael ei harchwilio gan neu ar ran y PCT ei hun neu a fyddai’n briodol i’w chyfeirio ar unwaith at gorff arall, fel yr heddlu, y GMC neu’r NCAA. Os yw’r heddlu’n penderfynu archwilio, dylai’r PCT roi ei archwiliad ei hun i’r ‘naill ochr’. Gall fod yn angenrheidiol i’r PCT gymryd camau ar unwaith i ddiogelu cleifion (e.e. trwy atal y meddyg rhag cael ei gynnwys ar ei rhestr dros dro) neu ofyn i’r GMC i gymryd cam tebyg. Gall trafodaethau gyda’r GMC arwain at y GMC yn derbyn cyfrifoldeb am yr achos neu gellir penderfynu y dylid archwilio’r gŵyn gan neu ar ran y PCT yn y lle cyntaf. Yn yr un modd, gydag achos sy’n amlwg yn codi materion perfformiad gwael, gall yr NCAA penderfynu cynnal asesiad o’r meddyg neu gallai gynghori’r PCT sut i gynnal ei hasesiad ei hun. Os yw’r gŵyn neu’r pryder yn awgrymu y gall fod gan y meddyg broblem iechyd, hwyrach y bydd y PCT yn dymuno gwahodd y meddyg i gael ei archwilio’n feddygol. Dylai pob un o’r camau hyn arwain at eglurhad o’r ffordd y bydd y PCT yn mynd â’r gŵyn yn ei blaen. Fel gyda’r blaenoriaethu cyntaf, mae’n rhaid ystyried y gŵyn yng nghyd-destun unrhyw gŵynion neu bryderon blaenorol ynglŷn â’r meddyg ac yng nghyd-destun gwybodaeth rheolaeth glinigol a ddelir gan y PCT ynglŷn ag ef/hi.
Ceir, fodd bynnag, math pwysig iawn o gŵyn, lle mae’n rhaid i’r flaenoriaeth gyntaf fod i sefydlu beth ddigwyddodd. Wrth ddelio gyda’r math hwn o achos y bydd y PCT yn wynebu ei her fwyaf.
Pwy Ddylai Archwilio ‘Cwyn Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, mewn ymatebion i’r Papur Ymgynghorol ac yn y seminarau, roedd corff sylweddol o’r farn nad oes gan y rhan fwyaf y PCTau, ar hyn o bryd, yr adnoddau a’r arbenigedd i gynnal archwiliad effeithiol o gŵyn gymhleth neu a allai fod yn un ddifrifol.
Dywedodd Ms Linda Charlton, Cyfarwyddwr Archwiliadau, Swyddfa Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd yn Lloegr, bod ei phrofiad hi yn swyddfa’r Ombwdsmon yn awgrymu bod gwaith archwilio o’r fath ag sy’n cael ei wneud ar hyn o bryd gan PCTau, yn amrywiol iawn o ran ansawdd. Cytunodd Dr Malcolm Lewis, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r GMC yn y seminarau, gyda’r farn honno a dywedodd bod achosion sy’n cyrraedd y GMC o PCTau yn amrywio’n helaeth o ran dyfnder y dadansoddi.
Roedd barn gyffredinol, na fyddai gan PCTau, am eu bod yn sefydliadau bach, alw digon cyson am archwilydd medrus i gyfiawnhau cyflogi unrhyw un at y diben hwnnw. Ni fyddai’n foddhaol roi’r dasg i rywun gyda llawer o ddyletswyddau eraill, am na fyddai ganddo ef/hi ddigon o brofiad i wneud y dasg yn effeithiol. Fodd bynnag, mynegwyd y farn i’r gwrthwyneb hefyd. Teimlai rhai PCTau eu bod yn gallu cynnal archwiliad effeithiol. Ymddengys ar adegau, pan mae angen, y byddai archwiliad o’r fath yn cael ei gynnal gan y Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu Gynghorydd Meddygol. Fy marn glir i yw nad oes gan y rhan fwyaf o Gyfarwyddwyr a Chynghorwyr Meddygol y medrau angenrheidiol. Ond, beth bynnag, mae gan y swyddogion hyn ystod eang iawn o ddyletswyddau ac ni fyddai yn ymarferol disgwyl iddynt ganolbwyntio ar archwiliad i’r graddau sy’n angenrheidiol unwaith bod archwiliad ar y gweill.
Yn ystod y gwrandawiadau, gofynnwyd i sawl cyflogai a swyddog PCT ystyried sut y byddent yn archwilio achos damcaniaethol, yn seiliedig yn fras ar y pryderon a allai fod wedi cael eu nodi (os byddai rhai) ynghylch amgylchiadau derbyn Mrs Renate Overton i ysbyty; ysgrifennais am farwolaeth Mrs Overton yn yr Adroddiad Cyntaf a’r Trydydd, yn ogystal â Phennod 10 yr Adroddiad hwn. Y pryder a fyddai wedi’i fynegi oedd bod meddyg teulu wedi gweinyddu 20mg o forffin i glaf 46 oed a oedd yn dioddef o asthma, trwy ei chwistrellu, ac o ganlyniad bod y claf yn gwbl anymwybodol ac yn anhebygol o wella. Roedd ymgynghorydd yn yr ysbyty o’r farn bod gweinyddu gymaint o forffin wedi bod yn
‘anarferol iawn, yn beryglus hyd yn oed’
. Ni fyddai’n hawdd archwilio cwyn neu fynegiad o bryder o’r natur hwn yn dda. Nid oes angen trafod yr awgrymiadau a wnaed gan y tyst yma ynglŷn â’r ffordd y byddent wedi wynebu’r dasg; mae’n ddigonol dweud ei bod yn amlwg i mi y dylai archwilydd sydd nid yn unig wedi ei hyfforddi i gynnal archwiliad a dadansoddi achos fod wedi ymgymryd â’r archwiliad, ond hefyd yn annibynnol i’r graddau fod ei farn ef/barn hi o’r meddyg teulu perthnasol heb ei ddylanwadu gan wybodaeth am hanes y meddyg teulu. Mae’n hanfodol bod yr archwilydd yn mabwysiadu ymagwedd wrthrychol a dadansoddol ac ni ddylai dderbyn yn awtomatig stori unrhyw dyst, gan gynnwyd y meddyg teulu perthnasol, heb brofi pa mor ddibynadwy ydyw yn erbyn yr holl dystiolaeth arall sydd ar gael.
Dangoswyd yr angen i fod yn annibynnol yn fy Ail Adroddiad, lle y disgrifiais ymagwedd Dr Alan Banks, y Cynghorydd Meddygol bryd hynny i’r WPHA, tuag at y dasg o archwilio cofnodion meddygol rhai o gleifion Shipman a oedd wedi marw, gyda’r nod o weld a oedd patrwm o ‘nodweddion cyffredin’ yn y marwolaethau. Roedd Dr Banks yn adnabod Shipman ac yn fawr ei barch tuag ato. O ganlyniad, methodd weld y nodweddion anarferol a oedd yn nodwedd o’r marwolaethau ac a oedd yn amlwg o’r cofnodion meddygol. Ni allai agor ei feddwl i’r posibilrwydd y gallai Shipman fod wedi niweidio claf yn bwrpasol neu hyd yn oed y gallai fod wedi rhoi gofal islaw’r safon iddo ef/hi. Mae’n rhaid i archwilydd da agor ei feddwl bob posibilrwydd.
Mewn rhai PCTau, gwneir gwaith archwiliol o’r fath ag sydd yn rhaid ei wneud gan y pwyllgor neu’r grŵp sy’n gyfrifol am ystyried sut i ddelio â phryderon am berfformiad gwael meddyg. Ymddengys i mi y gallai’r pwyllgorau neu’r grwpiau hyn fod yn addas ar gyfer penderfynu a ddylid ymgymryd ag asesiad o berfformiad meddyg (o bosibl gan neu o dan arweiniad yr NCAA), ac ar gyfer ystyried beth ddylid ei wneud wedi i asesiad gael ei wneud. Fodd bynnag, mae swyddogaethau asesiad ac archwiliad yn wahanol. Os yw PCT yn gofyn am gyngor gan yr NCAA ynglŷn â sut i archwilio, dyweder, digwyddiad gwael, bydd yr NCAA yn gwneud ei orau i helpu trwy roi awgrymiadau. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes unrhyw gorff GIG gyda swyddogaethau cymharol o ran archwilio i’r NCAA o ran asesu, yn bodoli. Ymddengys i mi na fyddai’n foddhaol rhoi dyletswydd archwilio ‘cwynion rheolaeth glinigol’ o unrhyw ddifrifoldeb posibl i bwyllgor neu grŵp yn y PCT, hyd yn oes pe byddai corff ymgynghorol addas ar gael.
Nid wyf o’r farn bod staff PCT unigol yn debyg o fod yn foddhaol fel archwilwyr cwynion yn ymwneud â dadleuon ynghylch ffeithiau, materion barn glinigol neu gamgymeriadau meddygol difrifol o bosibl. Yn y seminarau, roedd cytundeb cyffredinol y dylid archwilio cwyn o unrhyw ddifrifoldeb posibl gan berson neu dîm bach sy’n ymroddedig i’r dasg. Roedd cytundeb cyffredinol bron bod PCTau unigol yn rhy fach, ac y byddai’r angen am y gwasanaeth yn digwydd yn rhy anaml i gyflogi tîm o’r fath.
Cynnwys Cyrff Eraill wrth Archwilio ‘Cwyn Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Gofynnwyd i ymatebwyr y Papur Ymgynghorol i ystyried a ddylai fod corff allanol a fyddai’n gyfrifol am gynghori’r PCTau ynghylch archwiliadau ac a allai, mewn achosion anodd yn enwedig, ymgymryd â’r archwiliad ei hun. Awgrymwyd amryw gyrff i’w hystyried: awdurdodau iechyd strategol (SHAau), yr NCAA, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a thimau ymateb cyflym y Coleg Brenhinol meddygol. Ceisiwyd barn hefyd ynghylch a ddylai corff newydd, annibynnol ar y GIG, gael ei sefydlu i dderbyn am archwilio cwynion.
Awgrymodd sawl ymatebydd y dylid delio â chwynion cymhleth y tu allan i’r YGI. Dywedodd rhai y dylid archwilio cwynion ar lefel SHA, er bod eraill wedi dweud nad oedd gan SHAau ddigon o brofiad archwilio eto. Ond roedd eraill o’r farn na fyddai SHAau yn ddigon annibynnol. Yn y seminarau, dywedodd Mrs Flora Goldhill, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r Adran Iechyd, er y gallai SHAau gynnig cyngor, ni fyddai’n unol â’u swyddogaethau i fod yn gyfrifol am gynnal archwiliad yn uniongyrchol.
Awgrymodd rhai ymatebwyr, gan gynnwys Cymdeithas y Defnyddwyr (a elwir yn Which? erbyn hyn), y gallai Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd archwilio cwynion. Ystyriwyd bod swyddfa’r Ombwdsmon yn gwbl annibynnol ac roedd ei waith archwilio’n cael ei ystyried yn waith o safon uchel. Dywedodd Ms Charlton, er y gallai fod yn briodol i rai cwynion fynd yn uniongyrchol at Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd, y dylid archwilio mwyafrif helaeth y cwynion ar lefel leol.
Roedd rhai ymatebwyr o’r farn y gallai fod yn briodol i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fod yn gysylltiedig ag archwilio’r cwynion. Fodd bynnag, erbyn y seminarau, roedd y Llywodraeth wedi cyhoeddi ei bwriad i wneud y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn gyfrifol am ail gam gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG. Yn unol â hynny, ymddengys yn amhriodol ei fod yn gysylltiedig yn ystod y cam cyntaf. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at rôl y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Sut Dylai Medrau Archwilio Arbenigol Gael Eu Darparu Ar Gyfer Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol?
Awgrymodd Ms Charlton y gellid sefydlu gweithdrefnau archwilio cywir ar lefel leol, ond dim ond os byddai PCTau yn uno, ar draws yr ardal y mae pob SHA yn ei chwmpasu o bosibl, i gyfuno adnoddau archwilio. Cytunodd os byddai trosiant staff uchel mewn PCT, byddai hyn yn golygu diffyg parhad mewn arbenigedd. Byddai uno adnoddau yn lleihau effaith hyn. Cefnogodd yr Athro Richard Baker, Cyfarwyddwr Uned Ymchwil a Datblygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr, hefyd y syniad o uno adnoddau ac awgrymodd y gallai’r tîm delfrydol gynnwys rheolwr, nyrs neu gynorthwyydd meddygol a meddyg. Dylai’r tîm fod yn gallu galw ar gynghorwyr allanol pan fo angen. Roedd yn meddwl y byddai angen i PCTau fod mewn grwpiau o chwech o leiaf i ddarparu’r adnoddau hynny. Daeth i’r amlwg bod tîm archwiliol Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd (sydd wrth gwrs yn llawer mwy na fyddai ei angen ar grŵp o PCTau) yn cynnwys archwilwyr lleyg. Dywedodd Ms Charlton, wrth recriwtio ar gyfer y tîm, fod Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd yn chwilio am bobl gyda phrofiad o ddelio â llawer iawn o wybodaeth, gyda sgiliau dadansoddi da a’r gallu i siarad yn hyderus â meddygon ac achwynwyr am y materion cysylltiedig. Mae gan yr archwilwyr fynediad at gyngor clinigol annibynnol pan fo angen. Mae’r archwilwyr yn casglu ac yn dadansoddi’r dystiolaeth ac yn ysgrifennu adroddiad yn nodi’r casgliadau a’r argymhellion. Roedd Ms Charlton o’r farn y byddai’n well i archwiliadau cwynion ar ran PCTau i gael eu cynnal gan bersonau lleyg gyda mynediad at gyngor clinigol, yn hytrach na chan glinigwyr. Pwysleisiodd ei bod yn bwysig iawn o safbwynt y cyhoedd na ddylai archwilio meddygon gael ei wneud gan feddygon. Cytunodd Dr John Grenville, a oedd yn cynrychioli Cymdeithas Feddygol Prydain (BMA) yn y seminarau, y dylai’r archwiliadau gael eu cynnal gan bersonau lleyg, ond dywedodd bod darparu cyngor clinigol arbenigol, sy’n benodol berthnasol i faes (meysydd) y gŵyn, yn hanfodol bwysig. Cytunodd Mrs Goldhill, dros yr Adran Iechyd, ei bod yn hanfodol bod y PCTau yn cael mynediad at sgiliau archwiliol ansawdd uchel a dywedodd y gallai casglu adnoddau gan PCTau fod yn ateb synhwyrol.
Roedd cytundeb cyffredinol y dylai archwilwyr gael ei hyfforddi’n gywir. Soniodd Mrs Goldhill am y camau i’w cymryd gan yr Adran Iechyd i ddatblygu hyfforddiant o’r fath a soniodd am raglen sy’n cael ei rhedeg gan Brifysgol Middlesex. Dywedodd hefyd bod yr Adran Iechyd yn gweithio ar becyn offer arfer da ar gyfer ymdrin â chwynion gofal sylfaenol.
Rheswm arall a gyflwynwyd o blaid y syniad y dylai PCTau uno gyda’i gilydd i ddarparu tîm archwilio oedd y byddai’n lleihau’r broblem a achosir gan y gwrthdaro buddiannau ymddangosiadol pe byddai PCT yn archwilio (fel y byddai’n rhaid iddi wneud fel arall) cwyn yn erbyn meddyg teulu ar ei rhestr ei hun. Dywedwyd bod y gwrthdaro posibl yn deillio o rôl ddeuol darparu cymorth a chefnogaeth i feddygon teulu ar un llaw ac archwilio neu ‘blismona’ meddygon teulu ar y llaw arall. Fodd bynnag, gallai’r broblem fod yn fwy dwys na hynny. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi dod yn ymwybodol o enghreifftiau lle mae meddyg teulu sy’n cael ei archwilio wedi bod yn aelod o PEC y PCT - y Cadeirydd hyd yn oed - neu o grŵp perfformiad y PCT. Mae’n amlwg bod gwrthdaro uniongyrchol yn y fan honno. Dywedodd yr Athro Scotland y byddai uno adnoddau archwiliol gan grwpiau yn lleihau unrhyw broblem o wrthdaro buddiannau posibl. Rwy’n cytuno, ac yn ychwanegu y byddai hefyd yn cynyddu annibyniaeth a gwrthrychedd yr archwiliad.
Rwy’n credu mai’r trywydd gorau fyddai i grwpiau o PCTau sefydlu timau archwilio ar y cyd. Nid wyf yn mynegi unrhyw farn ynghylch sawl PCT ddylai uno gyda’i gilydd, byddai llawer yn dibynnu ar faint y PCTau a chyfluniad daearyddol y grŵp. Nid wyf yn dweud unrhyw beth am gyfansoddiad y tîm, ar wahân i’r ffaith ei bod yn ymddangos yn synhwyrol i mi i’r Adran Iechyd dderbyn cyngor gan bersonau fel Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd sydd â phrofiad o’r swyddogaeth hon ac i ledaenu’r cyngor hwnnw i’r PCTau.
Cynnal Archwiliad i ‘Gŵyn Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Yn fy marn i, lle yr ymddengys i’r person neu’r grŵp sy’n gyfrifol am gynnal yr ail flaenoriaethu yn y PCT bod ansicrwydd ynghylch y digwyddiadau sy’n achosi’r gŵyn, oherwydd gwrthdaro rhwng cofnod y digwyddiadau a roddir gan y meddyg a’r achwynydd, neu am ryw reswm arall, dylid cyfeirio’r achwynydd i’r tîm archwilio rhyng-PCT. Dylai’r tîm hwnnw gynnal archwiliad tebyg i’r un a ddisgrifir ym mharagraff 27.25. Ei amcan ddylai fod i ddod i gasgliad ynglŷn â’r hyn ddigwyddodd a nodi’r dystiolaeth a’r casgliadau mewn adroddiad a ddylid ei gyflwyno i’r PCT lle mae enw’r meddyg wedi ei gynnwys ar ei rhestr. Efallai y ceir achosion lle mae’n gwbl amhosibl i’r archwilwyr ddod i gasgliad ynglŷn â’r hyn ddigwyddodd oherwydd bod gwrthdaro mewn tystiolaeth. Os digwydd hynny, mae’n rhaid iddynt ddweud hynny yn eu hadroddiad.
Penderfynu Lle Y Mae’r Gwirionedd mewn ‘Cwyn Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Yn y seminarau, roedd trafodaeth ynglŷn â’r ffordd y dylid datrys ffeithiau dadleuol unwaith y bydd archwiliad wedi ei gynnal gan neu o dan nawdd y PCT. Un opsiwn oedd y dylid cynnal gwrandawiad llafar yn lleol ac y dylai panel benderfynu ar y gwirionedd a chanfod y ffeithiau angenrheidiol. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 6, dyna beth oedd yn digwydd cyn 1996. Roedd pob cwyn yr ymddengys ei bod yn ymwneud â thorri amodau gwasanaeth meddyg teulu yn cael ei chlywed gan bwyllgor gwasanaeth meddygol (MSC) y pwyllgor meddygon teulu (FPC) neu, yn ddiweddarach, awdurdod gwasanaethau iechyd teuluol (FHSA). Roedd yr MSC yn gallu datrys unrhyw ddadleuon ffeithiol. Er 1996, ni chafwyd unrhyw gyfleuster i ddatrys dadleuon ynghylch ffeithiau yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno. Gall hyn yn hawdd rhoi cyfrif am ychydig o’r anfodlonrwydd a deimlwyd gan achwynwyr o leiaf. Os yw’r meddyg yn rhoi cofnod gwahanol o’r digwyddiadau i’r achwynydd, mae’n debygol y bydd rheolwyr cwynion y practis neu aelod arall o’r practis yn derbyn fersiwn y meddyg ac yn ceisio ‘datrys’ y gŵyn ar y sail hwnnw. Pan gaiff cwynion o’r fath eu harchwilio gan dîm rhyng-PCT fel yr wyf wedi awgrymu, gobeithir y bydd yr archwilwyr yn llai tebygol o ddangos unrhyw duedd o’r fath. Yn wir, gellid disgwyl i dîm o archwilwyr yn gwasanaethu grŵp o PCTau ymdrin â chwyn gyda llai o annibyniaeth nag y byddai swyddog PCT unigol. Fodd bynnag, gall fod amgylchiadau lle y mae dadlau ynghylch ffaith yn hanfodol i ddatrys cwyn a lle y mae’n amhosibl gwneud penderfyniad teg ar y mater heb wrando ar dystiolaeth ar lafar.
Gweithredu ar Adroddiad yr Archwiliad Lle Y Ceir Dadleuon Ffeithiol Heb Eu Datrys
Yn y seminarau, mynegwyd y farn na fyddai’n briodol cynnal gwrandawiad llafar yn lleol yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno. Dywedwyd bod y profiad yn rhy boenus. Roedd yn well gan eraill wrandawiadau llafar oherwydd eu bod yn galluogi’r rheiny sy’n gysylltiedig i wrando ar yr holl dystiolaeth. Dywedwyd, os y cynhelir gwrandawiad, y dylai’r PCT gyflwyno’r gŵyn i’r gwrandawiad, yn hytrach na gadael yr achwynydd i ‘erlyn’ y gŵyn. Fodd bynnag, rwyf wedi dod i’r casgliad na ddylai fod gwrandawiad llafar yn lleol yn ystod y cam hwn. Os nad yw adroddiad y tîm archwilio yn gasgliadol oherwydd dadl ynghylch tystiolaeth, dylid cyfeirio’r achos, yn fy marn i, i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, o dan y pŵer a gaiff, gobeithio, ei gynnwys yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft diwygiedig y mae’r Llywodraeth yn bwriadu eu gweithredu yn y dyfodol agos. Yn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon, byddaf yn trafod darpariaeth yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft lle y gallai PCT gyfeirio cwyn i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ar unrhyw bryd yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno.
Gweithredu ar Adroddiad yr Archwiliad Lle Mae’r Holl Ddadleuon Ffeithiol Wedi Cael Eu Datrys
Pan fydd adroddiad yr archwiliad yn gyflawn, dylai gael ei ystyried gan y PCT ar lefel uchel. Rwy’n awgrymu y byddai’n briodol i’r un grŵp a wnaeth yr ail flaenoriaethu wneud hyn. Dylid ystyried yr adroddiad yng nghyd-destun hanes y meddyg yn y gorffennol. Efallai bydd y PCT yn dymuno cymryd camau. Gall fod yn briodol yn ystod y cam hwn i gyfeirio’r mater i’r GMC. Gall cyfeirio at yr NCAA fod yn briodol. Os datgelwyd methiant yn y system, hwyrach mai cyfeirio at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fyddai’r cam gorau. Ar y llaw arall, gall yr adroddiad ddatgelu camymddwyn neu ddiffyg mewn perfformiad, ond ddim yn ddigon difrifol i olygu cyfeirio at gorff arall. Efallai bydd y PCT yn teimlo ei bod yn gallu delio â’r mater ei hun, naill ai trwy ei phanel perfformiad neu trwy alw am y pwerau rheoli sydd ar ei rhestr neu’r pwerau disgyblu y byddaf yn argymell bod PCTau yn eu cael. Gall ddymuno cysylltu â’r ddeoniaeth leol ynglŷn â darparu goruchwyliaeth neu ailhyfforddiant ar gyfer y meddyg. Gwnaed y pwynt bod angen sefydlu safonau cliriach ar gyfer cyfeirio ymlaen ac awgrymwyd y dylid llunio protocolau ar gyfer arweiniad y PCT.
Yn y cyfamser, mae wrth gwrs yn bwysig bod yr achwynydd yn cael yr holl wybodaeth am gynnydd yr archwiliad ac, ac eithrio pan y byddai datgelu yn torri rheolau cyfrinachedd meddygol y meddyg, y dylai ef/hi gael yr holl wybodaeth am ganlyniad yr archwiliad a’r camau i’w cymryd o ganlyniad i hynny. Os gellid cynnal yr archwiliad a’r penderfyniad ynghylch sut i fynd ymlaen yn drwyadl ac yn gymharol gyflym, byddai, yn fy marn i, yn dileu llawer o achosion yr anfodlonrwydd sy’n gynhenid i’r trefniadau presennol ar gyfer ymdrin â chwynion. Byddai hefyd yn galluogi cymryd camau prydlon yn yr achosion hynny sy’n codi materion ynghylch amddiffyn cleifion.
Gwrthod Parhau ag Archwiliad Cwyn Rheolaeth Glinigol Os y Bydd Gweithredoedd Cydamserol
Mae’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn darparu ar gyfer amgylchiadau lle y gallai corff GIG wrthod parhau ag archwiliad cwyn lle y gall mathau eraill o weithredoedd fod yn digwydd ar yr un pryd. Un math arall o weithred yw gweithredu sifil am iawndal.
Ym Mhennod 7, soniais, yn unol â gweithdrefnau cwyno 1996, na ellir derbyn cwyn ar gyfer adolygiad annibynnol os mai bwriad yr achwynydd yw dechrau achos cyfreithiol, neu, rwy’n tybio, os yw ef/hi eisoes wedi gwneud hynny. Fel tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad, dywedodd Miss Horsfall ei bod yn teimlo bod hyn yn annheg weithiau. Yn fy marn i, mae nid yn unig yn annheg, ond mae hefyd yn amhriodol.
Er mai un o ddibenion gweithdrefn gwyno yw i ‘fodloni’r achwynydd’, diben llawer mwy pwysig yw canfod beth sydd wedi digwydd ac i benderfynu a oes angen cymryd unrhyw gamau sy’n angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Pan fydd digwyddiad gwael wedi digwydd sy’n codi materion ynghylch diogelwch cleifion, dylai’r sefydliad sy’n gyfrifol gynnal archwiliad mewnol at y diben hwnnw. Ni allaf weld y dylai’r sefyllfa fod yn wahanol oherwydd bod rhywun wedi cwyno. Os yw PCT yn dod yn ymwybodol o ddigwyddiad gwael yn effeithio ar glaf, dylai archwilio’r digwyddiad p’un a oedd cwyn wedi ei gwneud ai peidio gan neu ar ran y claf. Dylid gwneud hynny p’un a yw person wedi mynegi bwriad i gymryd camau cyfreithiol ai peidio.
Yn unol â’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft, darparwyd na fyddai achosion cyfreithiol cydamserol yn rhwystro archwilio cwyn GIG yn gyfan gwbl yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno. Fodd bynnag, byddai cyrff GIG, mewn amgylchiadau penodol, yn gallu penderfynu peidio â dechrau neu barhau ag archwiliad. Roedd cwyn a oedd hefyd yn destun gweithredu sifil hefyd i gael ei ddynodi’n
‘gŵyn gymhleth’
. Galluogodd rheoliad drafft 18 i’r corff GIG perthnasol archwilio
‘cwyn gymhleth’
os oedd yn ystyried na fyddai gwneud hynny’n
‘cyfaddawdu neu’n niweidio’r archwiliad cydamserol’
. Hefyd, gallai corff GIG derfynu archwiliad
‘cwyn gymhleth’
os yw’n ystyried y byddai
‘parhau yn cyfaddawdu neu’n niweidio’r archwiliad cydamserol.
Roedd hyn yn golygu, er enghraifft, os byddai gwraig weddw claf i feddyg teulu yn bwriadu erlyn y meddyg teulu yn ymwneud â marwolaeth ei gŵr, byddai’r PCT yn gallu gwrthod archwilio cwyn gan y wraig weddw mewn cysylltiad â’r farwolaeth. Yn fy marn i, nid yw hyn yn gwbl foddhaol oherwydd gall atal y PCT rhag cyflawni ei dyletswyddau rheolaeth glinigol. Rwy’n ymwybodol, cyhyd â bod cwynion am ofal eilaidd yn y cwestiwn, mae Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 (y cyfeiriais atynt ym Mhennod 7) yn atal corff GIG rhag archwilio unrhyw gŵyn os oes unrhyw gamau cyfreithiol cydamserol. Am yr un rheswm, ymddengys hyn yn gwbl anfoddhaol i mi.
Os yw PCT yn dod i wybod am ddigwyddiad gwael (naill ai oherwydd cwyn a dderbyniwyd neu mewn unrhyw ffordd arall), dylai archwilio a dylai gynnig datgelu sylwedd adroddiad yr archwiliad i’r claf neu’r teulu agosaf, p’un a wnaed cwyn ai peidio a p’un a yw’r meddyg yn cael ei erlyn ai peidio. Dylai’r PCT archwilio am resymau rheolaeth glinigol a dylai gymryd pa bynnag gamau sy’n angenrheidiol er diogelwch cleifion. Ni ddylai ildio i unrhyw bwysau i beidio ag archwilio gan y sefydliad amddiffyniad meddygol sy’n digolledu’r meddyg teulu ac a allai elwa o atal y wybodaeth a fyddai’n dod i’r amlwg mewn archwiliad. Gobeithio y bydd y Llywodraeth yn ailystyried y mater hwn ac yn penderfynu y dylid archwilio cwyn bob amser, hyd yn oed os yw’r camau cyfreithiol wedi eu dylanwadu neu ar y gweill. Rwyf yn argymell yn gryf na ddylai’r ffaith bod camau’n cael eu hargymell neu wedi dechrau atal archwilio cwyn.
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 7, ni fyddai’r ffaith bod corff GIG yn cymryd camau disgyblu yn erbyn meddyg wedi atal parhau â chwyn gan glaf, yn unol â’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft. Fodd bynnag, bydd bodolaeth camau disgyblu gwirioneddol neu rai a argymhellwyd mewn perthynas â sylwedd y gŵyn, yn unol â Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004, nawr yn peri i gŵyn gael ei heithrio o weithredu’r Rheoliadau. Yn fy marn i, nid yw’r ddarpariaeth yn y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft na’r ddarpariaeth yn Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 yn foddhaol. Os ystyrir camau disgyblu yn ymwneud â chynnwys cwyn, mae hynny’n rhagdybio bod y digwyddiad perthnasol eisoes wedi cael ei archwilio. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r achwynydd weld sylwedd adroddiad yr archwiliad y bydd y camau disgyblu yn seiliedig arno.
Mae’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft hefyd yn darparu i’r corff GIG sy’n derbyn y gŵyn allu ohirio neu derfynu archwiliad cwyn os yw’r mater yn cael ei archwilio gan yr heddlu , corff rheoliadol, ymchwiliad statudol neu broses arall. Byddwn yn derbyn, weithiau, mewn sefyllfaoedd o’r fath, bod yn rhaid i gorff GIG ohirio ei archwiliad ei hun i gŵyn neu bryder, ond ni ddylai fyth anghofio’i ddyletswydd i ganfod beth sydd wedi digwydd ac i gymryd pa bynnag gamau sy’n angenrheidiol i amddiffyn cleifion y meddyg perthnasol. Dylai hefyd, yn fy marn i, ddarparu gwybodaeth i achwynydd sy’n cyd-fynd â’r angen, os oes angen, am gyfrinachedd er budd y cyhoedd. Gobeithio y bydd yr Adran Iechyd yn ailddrafftio’r darpariaethau hyn i adlewyrchu’r egwyddorion yr wyf wedi eu datgan.
Rôl y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wrth Archwilio a Phennu ‘Cwynion Rheolaeth Glinigol’
Fel yr wyf wedi dweud, yn ei Bapur Ymgynghorol, cododd yr Ymchwiliad y posibilrwydd o gŵynion yn cael eu harchwilio gan neu gyda chyngor y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. O fis Rhagfyr 2003, daeth yn hysbys mai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fyddai’n gyfrifol am ail gam y weithdrefn gŵyno, a derbyniodd y rôl honno yn dechrau ar 30 Gorffennaf 2004. Mae’n rhy gynnar i ddweud sut mae’r gweithdrefnau hyn yn gweithio yn ymarferol. Mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn sefydliad newydd gyda llawer o gyfrifoldebau amrywiol, a gynlluniwyd i annog gwelliant yn narpariaeth gofal iechyd. Er mwyn cyflawni ei gyfrifoldebau ar gyfer adolygiad yr ail gam, mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wedi sefydlu Adran Gŵynion yn cyflogi tua 70 o archwilwyr.
Mynegwyd y farn yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad y gallai datrys ‘cwynion achwyniad cwbl breifat’ fod yn wastraff o adnoddau’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Gofynnwyd i Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, a benodwyd fel Arweinydd Cwynion y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd cyn gweithredu diwygiad ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwyno, am hyn. Dywedodd, yn unol â’r hyn a oedd bryd hynny yn rheoliad 23, na fyddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn gaeth i dderbyn pob cwyn a, phe byddai’n ymddangos bod y gŵyn wedi ei thrin yn gywir yn ystod y cam cyntaf, y gellid gwrthod cais am adolygiad. Roeddwn yn deall o hynny, os oedd y gŵyn yn ‘achwyniad preifat’ bach, y gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wrthod ei hystyried. Ar y llaw arall, os oedd yn ymddangos nad oedd y gŵyn wedi cael ei thrin yn gywir yn ystod y cam cyntaf gan bractis y meddyg teulu a/neu’r PCT, gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd dderbyn yr achos gyda’r bwriad o gywiro’r gweithdrefnau trin cwynion. Yn yr amgylchiadau hynny, gallai fod yn briodol i ‘gŵyn achwyniad preifat’ gael ei hystyried. Beth bynnag, dylai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fod mewn sefyllfa dda i sicrhau bod unrhyw wersi y gellid eu dysgu o’i ran yn datrys cwynion cleifion, yn cael eu lledaenu yn gywir.
Yn unol â rheoliad 16 Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004, gall y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, wrth dderbyn cwyn, ddewis dilyn un o sawl trywydd gwahanol, gan gynnwys (fel y dywedais) peidio â chymryd unrhyw gamau. Bydd yn gallu cyfeirio cwyn yn ôl at gam cyntaf y weithdrefn gwyno gydag argymhellion ar gyfer camau pellach, neu i archwilio’r gŵyn ei hun (gyda gwrandawiad panel neu hebddo) neu gyfeirio’r gŵyn at reoleiddiwr. Rwy’n disgwyl y caiff y pŵer i gyfeirio cwyn at banel ei ddefnyddio’n bennaf mewn achosion lle mae’n angenrheidiol datrys gwrthdaro o ran ffaith trwy wrando ar wrandawiad llafar.
Yn unol â rheoliad drafft 19, argymhellwyd y dylai fod gan PCT y pŵer i gyfeirio cwyn (yr oeddent yn ei drin yn ystod y cam cyntaf) at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ar unrhyw bryd, cyhyd â bod yr achwynydd a’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn caniatáu hynny. Nid yw’r argymhelliad hwn wedi cael ei ymgorffori yn Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 ond rwy’n gobeithio y caiff ei gynnwys yn y Rheoliadau newydd. Yn fy marn i, mae’n syniad da iawn, oherwydd gellir defnyddio cyfleuster archwilio’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno mewn achosion anodd, yn ogystal ag adolygiadau ail gam achosion llai cymhleth (yn unol â’r trefniadau a gyflwynwyd yn ddiweddar). Byddai’n arbennig o briodol i achos gael ei gyfeirio i fynnu naill ai pe byddai’n angenrheidiol pennu anghydfod ffeithiol neu os yw’r gŵyn yn un arbennig o gymhleth, anodd neu ddifrifol. Dylid gallu cyfeirio at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ar unrhyw adeg yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno. Byddai hynny’n golygu y gellid cyfeirio cwyn yn ystod yr ail flaenoriaethu, os oedd yn glir bod y materion yn rhai cymhleth. Er enghraifft, gallai’r gŵyn gynnwys materion yn ymwneud â gofal sylfaenol ac eilaidd. Gallai’r cyfeirio hefyd ddigwydd yn ddiweddarach os yw tîm archwilio’r PCT yn canfod bod y gŵyn yn codi mwy o faterion cymhleth nag a ragwelwyd.
Fel arall, fel y dywedais ym mharagraff 27.52, gellid cyfeirio pan fyddai’r tîm rhyng-PCT yn canfod na allai ddod i gasgliad oherwydd bod anghydfod ffeithiol yn dal heb ei ddatrys. Byddai gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd y cyfleuster i gynnal archwiliad pellach i’r graddau sy’n angenrheidiol ac, os yn briodol, sefydlu panel i wrando ar dystiolaeth lafar am y ffeithiau y mae anghydfod amdanynt ac i benderfynu ar y gwirionedd.
Ar yr wyneb, ymddengys cyfeirio at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn ffordd ddelfrydol o ddelio ag archwiliadau cymhleth a rhai y mae angen gwrandawiad llafar arnynt. Byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd nid yn unig yn meddu ar yr adnoddau a’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol, ond byddai hefyd yn cael ei ystyried yn annibynnol. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd Mrs Dimond wrth y seminarau mai diben sylfaenol y ddarpariaeth yn rheoliad drafft 19 oedd i alluogi’r PCT i gyfeirio achos yn ystod cam cyntaf y gweithdrefnau cwyno lle‘r oedd achwynydd wedi ‘colli ffydd’ yn y system GIG leol, yn hytrach na’i galluogi i drosglwyddo achosion y tu hwnt i arbenigedd y PCT. Yn wir, roedd yn ymddangos wedi’i synnu gyda’r awgrymiad y gellid cyfeirio achosion oherwydd diffyg arbenigedd. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd y byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd fwy na thebyg yn derbyn cyfeiriadau gan PCT lle nad oedd gan y PCT ddigon o’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol i archwilio. Gobeithio y bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn barod i dderbyn achosion o’r fath ac y bydd ganddo’r adnoddau angenrheidiol i ddelio â hwy.
Un anfantais bosibl o anfon cwynion cymhleth a chwynion y mae angen gwrandawiad llafar arnynt at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn ystod y cam cyntaf fyddai’r diffyg ail gam neu ‘apêl’ ar gyfer yr achwynydd. Yn fy marn i, ni ddylai hynny wneud gwahaniaeth, oherwydd byddai’r achwynydd eisoes wedi gallu manteisio ar adnoddau ac annibyniaeth y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Yn fwy na hynny, os byddai ef/hi yn dal yn anfodlon, byddai atebolrwydd Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd yn bosibilrwydd. Hwyrach na fydd rhai achwynwyr yn gweld pethau fel hyn. Serch hynny, rwyf o’r farn mai dyma’r ffordd orau ymlaen.
Yn y seminarau, cafwyd peth trafodaeth ynglŷn â ffurf y gwrandawiadau llafar a ddylai ddigwydd yn ystod ail gam y gweithdrefnau cwyno newydd fel y maent ar hyn o bryd. Roedd y Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn caniatáu i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd gyfeirio cwyn ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan banel o bobl leyg mewn achos priodol. Yn y seminarau, dywedodd Mrs Dimond y byddai achos sy’n cael ei anfon ar gyfer gwrandawiad gan banel dim ond os yw’r achwynydd yn ‘gyfforddus ynglŷn â’r opsiwn hwnnw’. Roeddwn yn bryderus i glywed hynny. Yn fy marn i, dylid gwneud penderfyniad i gasglu panel ynghyd gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd (ar ôl ymgynghori â’r rheiny sy’n gysylltiedig); ni ddylid caniatáu’r achwynydd i ymarfer gwaharddiad. Mae gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ddyletswydd i fod yn deg i’r meddyg yn ogystal â’r achwynydd, ac mae angen gweithredu er budd y cyhoedd i ganfod y gwir. Rwy’n falch i weld bod Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 bellach yn caniatáu i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd benderfynu a ddylid cyfeirio cwyn at banel ar ôl ymgynghori â’r partïon.
Dywedodd Mrs Dimond hefyd pe byddai panel yn cael ei ymgynnull, byddai’n mabwysiadu ymagwedd ymholgar yn hytrach nag un wrthwynebus. Mae hynny’n synhwyrol rwy’n credu. Dywedodd y byddai’n agored i’r achwynydd wneud cais i’r meddyg gael ei wahardd tra’i fod ef/tra’i bod hi yn rhoi tystiolaeth. Gobeithio nad yw hynny’n golygu, pe byddai ceisiadau o’r fath, y byddai hynny’n cael ei ganiatáu o reidrwydd. Os felly, byddwn yn bryderus am hynny. Y panel ddylai wneud penderfyniadau o’r fath, ar ôl clywed barn y ddau barti. Ni ddylai’r achwynydd, yn fy marn i, gael yr hawl i bennu a yw’r parti arall yn bresennol yn ystod y dystiolaeth. Fodd bynnag, hwyrach na fydd y broblem hon yn codi’n aml. Dywedodd Mrs Joyce Robins, a gynrychiolodd Patient Concern yn y seminarau, mai un o agweddau mwyaf anfoddhaol y broses IRP oedd nad oedd gan yr achwynwyr hawl i wrando ar yr hyn yr oedd gan y meddyg i’w ddweud. Byddwn o blaid rheol gyffredino y dylid caniatáu i’r ddau barti wrando ar dystiolaeth y llall a thystiolaeth y tystion eraill. Dylid, yn fy marn i, osgoi croesholi gwrthwynebus.
Roeddwn hefyd yn bryderus clywed gan Mrs Dimond y gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd annog cymodi mewn achosion lle’r oedd gwrthdaro o ran ffeithiau. Roedd Mrs Robins yn gadarn yn erbyn syniad o’r fath. Dywedodd, lle’r oedd gwrthdaro o ran tystiolaeth, bod angen penderfyniad ynghylch y ffeithiau. Rwyf yn cytuno â hi yn llwyr. Bydd yn amhosibl i PCT wybod pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd er mwyn diogelu cleifion oni bai bod gwrandawiad wedi bod i benderfynu sylfaen ffeithiol y digwyddiadau sy’n achosi ‘cwyn rheolaeth glinigol’.
Cwynion y Sector Preifat
Cafodd mater arall sy’n berthnasol i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ei godi yn y seminarau gan Ms Beverley Cole, sy’n cynrychioli’r Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol (NCSC). Roedd yn bryderus ynglŷn â’r ffordd yr oedd cwynion yn cael eu trin yn y sector preifat. Mae’r NCSC bellach wedi cael ei gynnwys yn y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Er bod gan yr NCSC awdurdod i archwilio cwynion ynglŷn â darpariaeth gwasanaeth yn y sector preifat, mae ei bwerau wedi eu cyfyngu i gŵynion ynghylch torri’r Rheolau perthnasol neu fethiant i gydymffurfio â safonau gofynnol penodol. Fel y cytunodd Ms Cole, yr unig gymorth i rai cleifion sydd wedi cael eu trin yn y sector preifat yw i gŵyno wrth y GMC. Fodd bynnag, fel y mae’r Ymchwiliad hwn wedi ei ddarganfod yng nghyd-destun archwilio gweithdrefnau blaenorol y GMC yn ymwneud ag addasrwydd i ymarfer (FTP), agwedd y GMC tuag at gŵyn ynglŷn â thriniaeth yn y sector preifat, ar ôl sefydlu’r NCSC yn 2002, oedd i gynghori’r achwynydd i ddefnyddio’r gweithdrefnau cwyno lleol os nad oedd y rhain wedi cael eu disbyddu. Os na fyddai’r gweithdrefnau lleol wedi cael eu disbyddu, byddai’r GMC ond yn derbyn y gŵyn os oedd yn ymddangos y gallai’r meddyg roi’r cleifion neu’r cyhoedd mewn perygl neu os byddai’r achwynydd yn mynnu mynd â’r gŵyn i’r GMC. Rwyf eisoes wedi pwysleisio nad oedd hynny, yn fy marn i, yn foddhaol. Does dim amheuaeth bod gan y sefydliadau gofal iechyd mawr systemau ar gyfer archwilio cwynion. Pa mor dda y maent yn gweithredu, pwy a ŵyr. Fodd bynnag, mae gennyf amheuon mawr a fydd gan bob sefydliad masnachol bach, fel clinigau colli pwysau neu glinigau llawfeddygaeth gosmetig, systemau digonol ar gyfer trin cwynion cleifion. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y gall fod yn anodd i glaf sy’n anfodlon â’r driniaeth a ddarparwyd gan sefydliad preifat bach - neu, yn waeth byth, un ymarferydd preifat - i gael archwiliad digonol i’w gŵyn/chwyn. Mae achwynwyr yn y sector preifat dan anfantais arall; nid ydynt yn gallu troi at Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd.
Nid yw’r sefyllfa o dan weithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC yn gwbl glir. Mae’r arweiniad sydd ar gael yn ymwneud â’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn awgrymu y caiff yr holl gŵynion nad ydynt yn amlwg y tu hwnt i gylch gorchwyl y GMC eu derbyn er mwyn eu harchwilio. Fodd bynnag, dyna’n ymddangosiadol oedd y sefyllfa o dan yr hen weithdrefnau FTP, ond nid dyna oedd yr arfer. Rwyf wedi archwilio’r Rheolau sy’n rheoli’r gweithdrefnau newydd a’r holl arweiniad a chyfarwyddyd yr wyf yn ymwybodol ohonynt yn ofalus. Ymddengys i mi bod y GMC wedi penderfynu terfynu ei arfer blaenorol o gynghori achwynwyr i fynd â’u cwynion drwy’r gweithdrefnau lleol. Gobeithio fy mod yn iawn yn hynny o beth.
Ymddengys i mi y byddai’n ddymunol iawn i’r systemau ymdrin â chwynion yn y sector preifat gael eu halinio mor agos â phosibl â’r rheini yn y GIG, fel y gall achwynydd sydd heb gael boddhad o’r sector preifat yn gallu mynd ymlaen at yr ail gam a gynhelir gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Yna, gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd archwilio’r mater yn ddi-oed, os yw’n briodol. Hoffem hefyd pe bai’n gallu derbyn ac archwilio achosion o fynegi pryder (er enghraifft, gan gydweithwyr) yn deillio o feddygon yn gweithio yn y sector preifat, ar wahân i’r pryderon hynny sy’n amlwg yn gofyn am sylw’r GMC. Rwy’n sylweddoli bod y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wedi cael ystod eang o swyddogaethau a bod yn rhaid iddo ymdopi ag adnoddau cyfyngedig yn fwy na thebyg. Fodd bynnag, gobeithio yn y dyfodol y bydd yn gallu datblygu fel canolfan arbenigedd annibynnol mewn archwilio meddygol.
A Ddylai Fod Corff Annibynnol Newydd i Ymdrin â Chwynion?
Am fod yr Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol bod peth anfodlonrwydd gyda’r ffordd y caiff cwynion eu trin yn y GIG, gan ddarparwyr y sector preifat ac yn y GMC, cododd y Papur Ymgynghorol y cwestiwn a ddylai fod corff annibynnol newydd i ymdrin â’r holl gŵynion yn y GIG a’r sector preifat. Gellid cyfeirio’r cwynion a oedd, ym marn y corff cwynion, yn gofyn am sylw’r GMC, ato ar ôl archwiliad. Ni chafwyd lawer o gefnogaeth ymysg ymatebwyr y Papur Ymgynghorol yn y seminar ynghylch y syniad o greu corff annibynnol newydd i ymdrin â chwynion. Y prif reswm am y diffyg brwdfrydedd oedd bod llawer o newid strwythurol wedi digwydd yn y GIG yn ddiweddar a cheir y farn gyffredinol y dylid cael llai o gyrff a sefydliadau yn y system gofal iechyd yn hytrach na mwy. Rwy’n cytuno â’r farn honno. Rwyf hefyd yn credu ei bod yn well bod y rhan fwyaf o gŵynion yn cael eu trin yn lleol fel y gellir cael archwiliad lleol a, lle y bo’n briodol, mesurau cywiro lleol.
A Ddylid Bod Arolygiaeth Annibynnol Newydd?
Awgrymodd dau ymatebwr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, Dr William Pickering a Mr Patrick Tierney, y dylid sefydlu arolygiaeth annibynnol i archwilio ymarfer clinigol gwael a ddatgelir trwy gŵynion a monitro. Roeddent yn rhagweld y byddai’r arolygiaeth yn cynnwys y sector cyhoeddus a’r sector preifat. Pan gafodd y syniad hwn ei gyflwyno ar gyfer trafodaeth, ni chafodd lawer o gefnogaeth, yn arbennig am yr ystyriwyd y byddai creu corff o’r fath yn golygu ad-drefnu sylweddol, neu hyd yn oed ddileu cyrff presennol fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, yr NCAA a’r GMC. Roedd nifer o gyfranogwyr yn y seminarau yn credu y byddai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn datblygu ei rôl arolygiaeth ac y byddai’n ymgymryd â’r swyddogaethau a ragwelwyd gan Dr Pickering a Mr Tierney. Rwyf eisoes wedi mynegi’r gobaith y bydd y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn gallu datblygu ei swyddogaethau archwiliol er mwyn darparu arbenigedd ac annibyniaeth, sef, rwy’n credu, y nodwedd gweld. Wrth gwrs, os daw i’r amlwg dros yr ychydig flynyddoedd nesaf nad yw’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn darparu’r archwiliadau annibynnol a thrylwyr y gobeithiwyd amdanynt, yna, fe fyddai, rwy’n credu, yn angenrheidiol ystyried ateb arall. Ond, yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid rhoi’r cyfle i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i ddatblygu’r swyddogaethau pwysig hyn.
Ymdrin â Phryderon
Un o nodweddion system 1996 o ymdrin â chwynion a oedd yn ymddangos i mi yn afreolaidd ac o bosibl yn anfoddhaol oedd bod cwynion gan glaf neu ei gynrychiolydd/ei chynrychiolydd yn y gorffennol yn cael eu trin yn wahanol i’r pryderon a fynegwyd am feddyg teulu gan, er enghraifft, person proffesiynol arall ym maes gofal iechyd. Gallai cynnwys cwyn a phryder fod yn union debyg; yr unig wahaniaeth rhwng y ddau fyddai’r bobl a oedd wedi cyfleu’r wybodaeth. Ond roedd y dull o’u trin yn wahanol iawn. Byddai pryder fel arfer yn cael ei gyfeirio yn syth at bwyllgor y PCT neu grŵp â chyfrifoldeb am ystyried sut i ddelio â phryderon ynglŷn â pherfformiad gwael, ond efallai na fyddai’r PCT yn cael gwybod am gŵyn claf hyd yn oed os byddai’n cael ei ‘datrys’ ar lefel y practis. Hyd at fis Gorffennaf 2004, byddai ond yn mynd at y PCT os byddai’r achwynydd yn dymuno gwneud cais am adolygiad annibynnol. Ers mis Gorffennaf 2004, fodd bynnag, mae wedi bod yn bosibl i gŵyn osgoi’r PCT yn gyfan gwbl a mynd yn syth o’r cam datrys cyntaf yn syth at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd. Yn seminarau’r Ymchwiliad, derbyniwyd yn helaeth nad yw’n rhesymegol trin cwyn gan glaf yn wahanol i bryder a fynegir gan rywun arall.
Os a phan y bydd PCTau yn cael gwybodaeth lawn am gwynion cleifion ac yn derbyn y rhai mwy difrifol yn uniongyrchol, dylai’r gwahaniaeth hwn mewn triniaeth ddiflannu. Os oes gan PCTau neu grwpiau ohonynt fynediad at dîm o archwilwyr, bydd yn bosibl cyfeirio cwynion a phryderon atynt. Hefyd, os rhagwelir bod y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn mynd i chwarae rôl arwyddocaol wrth archwilio cwynion cymhleth, anodd neu ddifrifol o bosibl, dylai hefyd fod yn gallu ymgymryd ag archwilio pryderon sy’n codi materion anodd neu ddifrifol o bosibl. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft yn rhagweld y bydd PCT yn gallu cyfeirio cwyn claf at y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd (gyda chaniatâd y claf a’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd). Fodd bynnag, ni all y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd dderbyn cyfeiriad nad oedd yn gŵyn wreiddiol gan glaf oni bai bod y cyfeiriad yn dod o’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd. Os y bwriad fydd i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ddatblygu arbenigedd archwiliol er budd y system gofal iechyd gyfan, byddwn yn awgrymu y dylid ystyried diwygio’r ddeddfwriaeth i ganiatáu’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd i dderbyn pryder a gyfeirir ato gan PCT (neu gorff gofal iechyd arall), heb angen cyfeiriad gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol dros Iechyd.
Y Safonau ar Gyfer Pennu Cwynion
Un o ganlyniadau (un nas rhagwelwyd yn fwy na thebyg) o ddatgysylltu camau disgyblu oddi wrth gŵynion cleifion ym 1996 oedd colli unrhyw safon wrthrychol (yn rhannol hyd yn oed) y gellid barnu cwyn. Cyn 1996, byddai cwyn yn cael ei chynnal os canfuwyd bod y meddyg wedi torri amodau ei wasanaeth/gwasanaeth. Roedd y gosb yn dibynnu ar ddifrifoldeb yr achos a hanes y meddyg. I ryw raddau, roedd yn rhaid i’r MSC ymarfer disgresiwn ynghylch a oedd wedi torri amodau, er enghraifft wrth ystyried a oedd meddyg wedi darparu’r holl wasanaethau a ddisgwylir i feddyg teulu eu darparu o dan yr amgylchiadau. Fodd bynnag, o leiaf roedd fframwaith cyfreithiol er mwyn gallu gwneud y penderfyniad.
O 1996, gellid cymryd camau disgyblu am honiadau o dorri telerau gwasanaeth ond, mewn gwirionedd, roeddent yn brin iawn. Gellid gwneud cwynion yn ymwneud â phob mater, p’un a oeddent yn cael eu cynnwys yn nhermau gwasanaeth meddyg teulu ai peidio. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd fframwaith o gwbl i helpu rheolwr cwynion practis y meddyg teulu na’r IRP i benderfynu a ddylid ‘cynnal’ y gŵyn, neu i helpu’r cynullydd i benderfynu a ddylid cynnal IRP. Efallai bod rhai aelodau o’r IRP a oedd wedi eistedd ar MSCau yn flaenorol yn dal i weithredu safonau telerau gwasanaeth lle yr oedd hynny’n bosibl. Ers Ebrill 2004, pan ddaeth Contract newydd y Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol (GMS) i rym, ni fu telerau gwasanaeth hyd yn oed i weithredu fel fframwaith cefndir. Yn ei hanfod, cynhelir cwyn os yw’r gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau yn credu y dylid gwneud hynny. Yn ystod y cam cyntaf, mae’n rhaid bod diffyg unrhyw safonau gwrthrychol neu ganllawiau hyd yn oed yn gwneud tasg rheolwr cwynion y practis neu bartner goruchwyliol practis meddyg teulu yn anodd iawn. Mae bob amser yn anodd bod yn wrthrychol wrth farnu cydweithiwr agos, ond mae’n rhaid ei fod yn llawer mwy anodd heb unrhyw safonau.
Gan y bydd llawer o benderfyniadau am gŵynion bellach yn cael eu cymryd gan PCTau a’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, disgwylir y bydd gan wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau mwy o annibyniaeth yn eu meddwl na rheolwyr practis ac, o bosibl, nag PCTau lleol. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, bydd angen safonau arnynt er mwyn penderfynu a ddylid cynnal cwyn ai peidio. Yn y gorffennol, rwy’n amau bod y mater hwn wedi cael ei wneud rywsut rywsut am nad oedd bob amser yn angenrheidiol gwneud penderfyniad cadarnhaol i gynnal neu wrthod y gŵyn; mae weithiau wedi bod yn ddigonol i ‘fodloni’r achwynydd. Er mwyn cael darpariaeth ar gyfer canlyniadau ariannol, fel yr ystyrir yng nghyhoeddiad yr Adran Iechyd ‘Making Amends’, bydd angen gwneud penderfyniad pendant. Dylid ei wneud p’un a oes canlyniadau ar gael ai peidio.
Mae’n siomedig nad yw’r Rheoliadau Cwynion drafft a Rheoliadau Cwynion 2004 wedi ceisio mynd i’r afael â’r mater hwn. Yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid mynd i’r afael ag ef. Mae’n rhaid cael safon o leiaf er mwyn gallu barnu cwyn yn ei erbyn. Dylai cleifion wybod beth yw eu disgwyliadau rhesymol a dylai fod hawl ganddynt i gael cynnal eu cwynion pan nad yw’r disgwyliadau rhesymol hynny wedi cael eu bodloni. Rwyf wedi nodi rywle arall yn yr Adroddiad hwn yr angen am safonau y gall y GMC benderfynu yn eu herbyn ac, os felly, sut y dylai gymryd camau yn erbyn meddyg. Mae hefyd angen safonau y gall PCTau a chyrff eraill y GIG penderfynu yn eu herbyn a ddylent ddefnyddio pwerau eu rhestrau rheoli neu eu pwerau disgyblu neu a ddylent gyfeirio’r meddyg at y GMC. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n rhaid i’r holl bobl sy’n gwneud y penderfyniadau pwysig hyn wneud hynny ar sail yr hyn y maent yn credu sydd yn iawn. Mae angen brys i safonau gael eu sefydlu at y dibenion hyn. Ymddengys i mi y dylai hyn fod yn dasg i’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, mewn cydweithrediad â’r GMC a’r Adran Iechyd, ar ôl ymgynghoriad â grwpiau cleifion a’r cyhoedd ehangach. Ni ddylai’r safonau sy’n ymwneud â chwynion cleifion a’r rhai y dylai PCTau ac ymddiriedolaethau GIG eraill eu defnyddio i wneud eu penderfyniadau gael eu gosod ar eu pen eu hunain. Mae’n rhaid iddynt gyd-fynd â’r trothwy y bydd y GMC yn erbyn ac yn gweithredu ar honiadau er mwyn ffurfio fframwaith cynhwysfawr. Byddaf yn dychwelyd at fater safonau yn nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Cefnogaeth i Achwynwyr: y ‘Porth Unigol’
Ymddengys y caiff ei gydnabod yn gyffredinol bod peth dryswch ym meddwl y cyhoedd ynglŷn â’r ffordd i fynd ati i wneud cwyn ynglŷn â mater gofal iechyd. Mae llawer o bobl o dan yr argraff y dylid cyfeirio unrhyw gŵyn am feddyg yn gywir i’r GMC. Mewn gwirionedd, yn unol â’i hen weithdrefnau FTP, byddai’r GMC ond yn derbyn cwynion a oedd (yn fras) yn ddigon difrifol i godi cwestiwn ynghylch camymddwyn proffesiynol difrifol (SPM), perfformiad diffygiol difrifol (SDP) neu ddiffyg addasrwydd difrifol i ymarfer oherwydd salwch. Hyd yn oed wedyn, fel y dywedais, os oedd gweithdrefnau cwyno lleol ar gael, byddai’r achwynydd yn cael ei gynghori i ddilyn y gŵyn trwy gyfrwng y rheiny, oni bai bod meddyg yn cael ei ystyried yn beryglus neu fod yr achwynydd yn mynnu bod y GMC yn delio gyda’i gŵyn/chwyn. Yn y dyfodol, yn unol â’i weithdrefnau FTP newydd, bydd gan y GMC un maen prawf ar gyfer derbyn cwyn neu bryder, sef bod honiad wedi cael ei wneud bod diffyg mewn addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Ystyrir bod diffyg mewn addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer trwy resymau camymddwyn, perfformiad proffesiynol diffygiol, collfarn neu rybudd, iechyd corfforol neu iechyd meddwl gael neu benderfyniad gwael gan gorff rheoleiddio arall. Rwy’n credu y bydd llawer o bobl yn ei chael yn anodd penderfynu a fydd y materion y maent yn dymuno cwyno yn eu herbyn yn dod o fewn cylch gorchwyl y GMC. Rwy’n credu, oni bai bod y cylch gorchwyl hwn yn cael ei esbonio mewn iaith gyffredin, mi fydd yn anodd i bobl broffesiynol ym maes gofal iechyd a rheolwyr gofal iechyd - heb son am aelodau’r cyhoedd - i benderfynu a ddylid anfon achos at y GMC. Y ffaith yw nad y GMC yw derbynnydd priodol llawer o gŵynion bach ynglŷn â meddyg.
Mae’n amlwg bod llawer o ddryswch ynglŷn â’r lle cywir i gyfeirio cwyn am feddyg. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod yr NCAA ac Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd ill dau yn derbyn cwynion am feddygon yn uniongyrchol gan y cyhoedd. Mae’n siŵr bod llawer o sefydliadau eraill yn eu derbyn hefyd. Bydd claf sy’n gofyn am gyngor gan naill ai’r NCAA neu Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd ynghylch ble a sut i gŵyno yn cael eu cyfeirio at y cyrchfan priodol, er nad yw’r cwestiwn bob amser yn un hawdd i’w ateb, yn enwedig pan fydd y gŵyn yn cynnwys mwy nag un agwedd ar driniaeth claf. Fodd bynnag, mae llawer o achwynwyr sy’n credu eu bod yn gwybod ble i gyfeirio eu cwynion mewn gwirionedd yn eu hanfod i’r lleoedd anghywir. Ceir problem debyg ar gyfer personau sy’n dymuno llunio adroddiad cyfrinachol yn ymwneud â rhyw fath o amheuaeth o esgeulustod y maent yn pryderu yn ei gylch. Disgrifiais y broblem y maent yn ei hwynebu ym Mhennod 11. Mae’n siŵr y gall rhaglen barhaus i addysgu’r cyhoedd wella’r sefyllfa i achwynwyr a’r rheiny sy’n dymuno nodi cwyn, ond mae’r broblem yn siŵr o barhau i ryw raddau.
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, awgrymodd y GMC ateb posibl i’r broblem hon. Cynigiwyd y dylai fod ‘porth unigol’ lle y gallai unrhyw un a oedd mewn amheuaeth ynghylch ble i gŵyno gyfeirio ei gŵyn/ei chwyn. Gellid cyfeirio unrhyw gŵyn a oedd wedi ei chyfeirio at y man anghywir i’r ‘porth unigol’. Gellid rhoi cyngor ynghylch cyrchfan priodol ar gyfer derbyn a thrin y gŵyn. Mewn geiriau eraill, byddai ‘porth unigol’ yn gweithredu fel arwyddbost yn dynodi cyfeiriad priodol y gŵyn. Er bod pryderon wedi eu mynegi am ymarferoldeb y syniad hwn, derbyniwyd yn gyffredinol yn y seminarau, pe gellid ei wneud i weithio, y byddai’n welliant mawr ar y sefyllfa bresennol.
Cafodd Miss Isabel Nisbet ei secondio o’r GMC i gynnal prosiect ar ran y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r GMC, yn bennaf i archwilio ymarferoldeb sefydlu dull o gyfeirio cleifion ac eraill â phryderon neu gŵynion am ofal iechyd tuag at y llwybr mwyaf priodol. Ym mis Tachwedd 2004, cyflwynodd Miss Nisbet opsiynau amrywiol i Gomisiynwyr y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ar gyfer darparu gwasanaeth o’r fath. Yn gryno, y prif opsiynau a amlinellwyd oedd y rhain:
gwefan (neu ffynhonnell unigol ar y we), yn rhoi’r wybodaeth ddiweddaraf am weithdrefnau cwyno ar ffurf a fyddai’n galluogi’r ymholwr i gael ei dywys i’r llwybr mwyaf addas gan gyfres o gwestiynau
gwefan, fel (a), ond gyda chyfleuster i drosglwyddo’r ymholwr i’r lle iawn drwy e-bost neu gysylltiadau pwrpasol i’r cyrff sy’n ymdrin â’r cwynion priodol (yn lleol ac yn genedlaethol) ac i ffynonellau cyngor a chymorth posibl
gwefan gyda chysylltiadau, fel (a) a (b), ond gyda chyswllt rhyngweithiol hefyd i ateb ymholiadau gan gynghorwyr a chyfryngwyr
gwefan gyda chysylltiadau, fel (a) a (b), ond gyda chyswllt rhyngweithiol hefyd i ateb ymholiadau gan aelodau o’r cyhoedd
trefniant fel (ch), ond wedi ei ymestyn i ddarparu cyngor i achwynwyr, yn ogystal â gwybodaeth i’w helpu i ddethol i lwybr priodol i’w cwyn.
Tra bod (a) yn rhoi’r opsiwn rhataf o’r rhai oedd ar gael, cydnabu Miss Nisbet bod ganddo’r anfantais amlwg nad oes gan tua hanner y boblogaeth fynediad i’r rhyngrwyd ac na fyddent, felly, yn gallu defnyddio’r cyfleuster hwn. Cydnabu Miss Nisbet y byddai rhai sefydliadau cleifion yn siomedig os mai gwefan o’r math hwn fyddai unig ganlyniad y prosiect. Nododd bod yn well gan y rhan fwyaf o’r sefydliadau cleifion yr oedd wedi cysylltu â hwy opsiwn (ch), yn ogystal â gwybodaeth ar y we. Dywedasant fod cleifion, llawer ohonynt yn oedrannus, yn gwerthfawrogi cyswllt â llais person - er enghraifft, trwy linell gymorth - yn hytrach na gwefan neu system negeseuon awtomataidd. Wrth drafod opsiwn (d), sylwodd Miss Nisbet fod y Gwasanaeth Eiriolaeth Cwynion Annibynnol yn Lloegr (ICAS) yn darparu gwybodaeth a chyngor a chwestiynodd beth fyddai i’w ennill o ddyblygu neu gymryd lle’r gwasanaethau a ddarperir gan ICAS. Awgrymodd y dylid datblygu opsiynau (a) a (b). Awgrymodd hefyd y dylid ystyried opsiynau (c) a (ch) ymhellach, gyda’r bwriad o ddarparu gwasanaeth mewn cydweithrediad â sefydliadau cleifion neu trwy atgyfnerthu llinell gymorth bresennol. Mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wedi hysbysu’r Ymchwiliad nad yw’n bwriadu gwneud unrhyw benderfyniadau ynghylch yr amryw opsiynau tan ar ôl cyhoeddi Adroddiad yr Ymchwiliad.
Yn fy marn i, ni fydd unrhyw ateb sy’n dibynnu, yn y lle cyntaf, ar fynediad i wefan, yn foddhaol. Fel y nododd Miss Nisbet, dim ond hanner y boblogaeth fyddai’n gallu ei defnyddio. Yn ogystal ag unrhyw wybodaeth ar y we, gyda chysylltiadau rhyngweithiol neu hebddynt i ateb ymholiadau, mae’n rhaid, yn fy marn i, cael llinell gymorth gyda llais person i siarad â hwy. Fel arall, bydd hanner y boblogaeth yn anhebygol o dderbyn y cymorth angenrheidiol. Mae’r grŵp heb fynediad yn debygol o gynnwys cyfran fawr o bobl oedrannus a diamddiffyn - yr union grŵp sydd angen help fwyaf. Nid wyf yn erbyn y syniad o wefan yn darparu gwybodaeth; gall fod yn ddigonol at rai dibenion. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid cael llinell gymorth hefyd. Gofynnodd Miss Nisbet a oes unrhyw angen darparu cyngor yn ogystal â gwybodaeth am y cyrchfan cywir ar gyfer cwyn gan fod ICAS yn darparu gwybodaeth a chyngor. Yn fy marn i, oes. Nid oes llawer o bobl sydd â phroblem ar eu meddyliau am rywbeth sydd wedi digwydd mewn ysbyty neu ym meddygfa eu meddyg teulu yn debygol o feddwl bod angen gwasanaeth eiriolaeth arnynt. Yr hyn sydd ei angen yw gwasanaeth sydd nid yn unig yn cynghori pobl sydd eisoes wedi penderfynu cwyno neu godi pryder ble i gŵyno neu i fynegi’r pryder hwnnw, ond hefyd yn rhoi gwybodaeth i bobl sy’n ansicr a ydynt yn dymuno cwyno neu fynegi pryder ynghylch ble i gael y cyngor sydd ei angen arnynt. Nid wyf yn awgrymu y dylai’r gwasanaeth porth unigol ddarparu’r math olaf o gyngor ond dylai allu cyfeirio’r galwr, er enghraifft, at sefydliad cleifion, neu sefydliad fel Public Concern at Work (a all ddarparu cyngor cyfreithiol am ganlyniadau mynegi pryder) neu at ICAS o bosibl. Rwy’n credu y byddai’n ddefnyddiol pe byddai’r gwasanaeth porth unigol, yn ogystal â darparu cyngor am y cyrchfan cywir ar gyfer cwyn, yn barod i anfon y gŵyn ymlaen i’r corff priodol. Pa bynnag wedd sydd i’r porth unigol, mae’n rhaid ei hysbysebu’n helaeth. Mae angen iddo fod mor hysbys ag NHS Direct a’r Samariaid.
Cefnogaeth i Achwynwyr: ar ôl y Cynghorau Iechyd Cymunedol
Fel yr esboniais ym Mhenodau 6 a 7, am flynyddoedd hyd at 2003, roedd Cynghorau Iechyd Cymunedol (CHCau) yn darparu cyngor a chymorth i bersonau a oedd yn dymuno cwyno. Cyn 1996, byddai’r CHC yn gohebu â’r FPC neu’r FHSA ar ran yr achwynydd, byddai’n cynghori ynghylch paratoi cwyn ar gyfer gwrandawiad MSC a byddai’n mynd gyda’r achwynydd i’r gwrandawiad, gan weithredu fel cynghorydd ar hyd yr amser. O 1996, byddai’r CHC, ar gais, yn cynorthwyo wrth wneud cwyn neu wneud cais am adolygiad annibynnol. Byddai hefyd yn gohebu â’r awdurdod iechyd/PCT oedd yn gwneud y trefniadau ar gyfer gwrandawiad IRP a byddai’n mynychu ac yn cynorthwyo’r achwynydd yn y gwrandawiad. Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod llawer o’r CHCau wedi gwneud y gwaith hwn yn dda a bod eu gwaith yn cael ei werthfawrogi’n fawr.
Ym Mhennod 7, disgrifiais hefyd y darpariaethau a wnaed yn fwy diweddar ar gyfer cynghori a chefnogi cleifion sy’n dymuno gwneud cwyn. Dywedais nad oeddwn yn gwybod pa mor dda yr oedd y trefniadau hynny’n gweithio. Rwy’n awgrymu y dylid comisiynu adolygiad annibynnol ar weithrediad y trefniadau hynny mewn rhyw ddwy flynedd wedi i’r Rheoliadau Cwyno newydd ddod i rym yn eu cyfanrwydd gyda’r bwriad o ganfod a yw cleifion yn cael y cyngor a’r gefnogaeth briodol a chywiro unrhyw ddiffygion a all gael eu datgelu.
Gweithdrefnau Disgyblu yng Nghyd-destun Rheolaeth Glinigol
Ym Mhennod 7, esboniais nad oedd camau disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon teulu ar lefel leol yn cael eu defnyddio yn fuan iawn ar ôl cyflwyno, ym 1996, y gweithdrefnau cwyno newydd. Mewn rhai lleoedd, roeddent yn dal i gael eu defnyddio weithiau. Roedd eu gweithredu yn dibynnu ar sefydlu sut yr oedd amodau gwasanaeth y meddyg teulu wedi eu torri. Wrth gyflwyno’r Contract GMS newydd ym mis Ebrill 2004, mae amodau gwasanaeth wedi peidio â bodoli. Maent wedi cael eu disodli gan drefniadau contract. Fodd bynnag, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 5, o fis Rhagfyr 2001, mae PCTau wedi cael pwerau newydd rheoli restrau. Gall PCT ddileu neu wahardd meddyg teulu o’r rhestr o berfformwyr meddygol neu roi amodau ar ei gynnwys/ei chynnwys ar y rhestr. Nid oes pwer i orchymyn dal tâl; nid oes chwaith bŵer swyddogol i weinyddu rhybuddion neu geryddu.
Gofynnwyd i ymatebwyr Papur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad a oeddent yn credu ei fod yn briodol y dylai PCTau fod yn gallu delio â chamymddwyn, ymarfer diffygiol neu berfformiad gwael islaw’r trothwy a gweithredir gan y GMC neu islaw’r trothwy y byddai’r PCT yn ymarfer ei phwerau rheoli rhestrau. Gwahoddwyd hwy i ystyried a ddylid datblygu camau disgyblu ar lefel leol i ddelio ag achosion o’r fath. Ceisiwyd barnau hefyd ar gategorïau achos lle y byddai’n briodol defnyddio camau disgyblu ac, yn benodol, a ddylid bod cod ymarfer neu hawliau cleifion, lle y gallai eu torri achosi camau disgyblu.
Roedd mwyafrif ymatebwyr y Papur Ymgynghorol o’r farn bod bwlch yn y pwerau oedd ar gael i’r PCTau. Roedd cefnogaeth sylweddol i’r syniad y dylai PCTau gael ystod eang o sancsiynau ar gael iddynt. Awgrymodd nifer o ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol a chyfranogwyr yn y seminarau y dylai ystod y cosbau oedd ar gael i’r PCT gynnwys ‘cosbau adeiladol’ (e.e. gofyniad bod y meddyg yn cael ailhyfforddiant penodol), yn hytrach na mesurau cosbi. Awgrymodd Cymdeithas Frenhinol Fferyllol Prydain Fawr y dylai ystod eang o opsiynau fod ar gael i PCTau. Yr enghreifftiau a roddwyd oedd rhoi llythyrau cyngor i feddygon teulu yn cynnwys arweiniad ynghylch arfer da, ymweliadau cynghori, mentora, ailhyfforddi a chael ymrwymiadau ysgrifenedig gan feddygon. Awgrymwyd y gallai ymyriad cynnar osgoi canlyniad mwy difrifol.
Yn ei ymateb i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, dywedodd y GMC y byddai’r bwlch a oedd wedi ei nodi yn y system reoleiddio yn cael ei leihau o dan weithdrefnau FTP newydd y GMC, a fydd yn darparu ar gyfer rhoi rhybudd i feddyg lle y mae wedi gwyro yn sylweddol o’r egwyddorion a geir yng nghyhoeddiad y GMC ‘Good Medical Practice’ neu lle mae asesiad perfformiad GMC wedi nodi achos pryder, ond lle nad yw’r GMC yn ystyried bod angen unrhyw gyngor ar gofrestru. Fodd bynnag byddai categori o achosion o hyd na fyddai efallai yn cyrraedd y GMC neu a allai ddod islaw’r trothwy ar gyfer rhoi rhybudd. PCTau ar lefel leol ddylai fynd i’r afael â’r achosion hynny yn ôl y GMC. Roedd Mrs Robins, a oedd yn cynrychioli Patient Concern, o’r farn y dylid ymestyn pwerau’r PCTau a’r broblem fwyaf canolog a sylweddol o ran y system bresennol oedd nad oes gan y PCT y pwer i osod sancsiynau i ddelio â materion bach.
Yn y seminarau, ystyriwyd enghraifft ddamcaniaethol er mwyn caniatáu archwilio addasrwydd pwerau’r PCTau. Cymerwyd bod y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wedi archwilio cwyn claf ac wedi argymell i’r PCT y dylai ofyn i’r meddyg gael ailhyfforddiant. Os byddai’r meddyg yn methu â chydymffurfio â chais y PCT i gael ailhyfforddiant, yr unig sancsiwn ar gael i’r PCT fyddai dileu’r meddyg o’r rhestr, ar sail gwrthod ailhyfforddi. Awgrymwyd, yn achos methiant i gydweithredu ag argymhelliad i ailhyfforddi, bod gweithredu pwerau rheoli rhestrau braidd yn llym ac, yn ymarferol, byddai pwerau rheoli rhestrau’r PCT yn cael eu gweithredu mewn achosion difrifol yn unig. Nid wyf yn credu y byddai’n rhy llym gweithredu dileu meddyg a oedd yn gwrthod cydweithredu wrth ailhyfforddi. Byddai yn ddull effeithiol o berswâd yn ogystal ag yn amddiffyniad i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, gallaf ddychmygu achosion lle byddai difrifoldeb yr amgylchiadau yn dod o dan drothwy ‘rhestr reoli’ a lle y byddai sancsiwn llai yn briodol.
Dywedodd yr Athro Scotland bod angen ymestyn pwerau’r PCTau a phwysleisiodd bod angen yn arbennig defnyddio proses ddisgyblu lai ‘hirfaith’ yn achos materion llai difrifol. Cydnabuwyd bod cymhlethdod gweithdrefnol yn un rheswm pam na ddefnyddiwyd gwrandawiadau disgyblu ffurfiol rhyw lawer ar ôl 1996. Awgrymodd yr Athro Scotland y gallai PCTau weithredu systemau rhybuddio yn debyg i’r systemau rhybuddio sy’n bodoli yng nghyd-destun perthynas cyflogwr/cyflogai. Awgrymodd y gallai fod graddfeydd rhybudd yn dechrau gyda chyngor heb ei gofnodi, yn cael ei ddilyn gan gyngor ar lafar a fyddai’n cael ei gofnodi, ac yn olaf, cyngor ysgrifenedig. Roedd yn credu y dylai rhestr PCT allu cofnodi gwybodaeth am rybuddion.
Cafodd y syniad o gyflwyno system o rybuddion gefnogaeth eang yn y seminarau. Croesawodd Dr Grenville, dros y BMA, y cynnig. Gwnaeth y pwynt bod y system gŵyno, cyn 1996, yn caniatáu PCOs i roi rhybuddion a bod y proffesiwn meddygol wedi bod yn hapus gyda’r system honno. Roedd Syr Donald Irvine, cyn-lywydd y GMC hefyd yn cefnogi’r cynnig. Dywedodd bod natur y berthynas rhwng PCTau a meddygon teulu ar gontract wedi bod yn broblem hirsefydlog. Drwy hynny, rwy’n credu ei fod yn golygu bod PCTau yn gyfrifol am feddygon teulu ond nad oedd ganddynt bwerau disgyblu cyflogwr. Fodd bynnag, dywedodd ei fod yn gwybod am PCTau a oedd wedi cael y cydbwysedd cywir yn y berthynas ac wedi gallu rhoi rhybuddion ynghylch materion a oedd angen sylw. Roedd Mr Martin Staniforth, Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Adnoddau Dynol yn yr Adran Iechyd, hefyd yn ymwybodol o enghreifftiau o PCTau yn gweithredu’n anffurfiol i rybuddio meddygon teulu am eu hymddygiad ac roedd yn cefnogi’r cynnig am gyflwyno system rybuddion.
Pwysleisiodd yr Athro Scotland y byddai angen archwiliad trylwyr o hyd ac y byddai’n angenrheidiol, lle’r oedd gwrthdaro o ran y dystiolaeth, canfod y ffeithiau. Roedd cytundeb cyffredinol ymysg cyfranogwyr y byddai hynny’n angenrheidiol. Yn ôl yr Athro Scotland, y peth gwaethaf a allai ddigwydd y nad ydym yn canfod craidd pryderon.
Awgrymodd Mrs Robins, os byddai system rybuddio yn cael ei chyflwyno, y dylid gwneud lefel mwy difrifol rhybuddio yn gyhoeddus ac y dylid rhoi hysbysiad i fyny yn y feddygfa hyd yn oed. Nid oedd Dr Grenville yn cytuno â hynny. Dywedodd y gallai’r effaith ar y meddyg fod yn ddifrifol iawn. Dywedodd bod cyfraddau hunanladdiad yn y proffesiwn meddygol yn uchel iawn ac y byddai angen gwneud ymchwil ar effaith cyhoeddi rhybuddion o’r fath ar feddygon. Dywedodd Dr William Reith, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r RCGP yn y seminarau ei bod yn bwysig bod y claf sy’n cwyno yn ymwybodol o ganlyniad y camau disgyblu, p’un a yw’r cyhoedd yn cael eu hysbysu ai peidio.
Dywedodd nifer o gyfranogwyr yn y seminarau y byddai’n briodol i’r PCTau gael y pwer i roi cosbau ariannol i feddygon teulu ar gontract. Roedd yr Athro Baker o’r farn y byddai cyflwyno cosbau ariannol yn arbennig o ddefnyddiol wrth ddelio â phractisau sy’n camweithredu yn ogystal â meddygon teulu unigol. Roedd Mrs Robins yn cytuno â’r farn honno a dywedodd y byddai cyflwyno cosb ariannol yn anogaeth aruthrol i bractisau sicrhau bod y broblem, beth bynnag yw ei natur, yn cael ei thrin. Dywedodd Dr Grenville na fyddai cyflwyno cosbau ariannol o reidrwydd yn arwain at welliant mewn gwasanaeth, ac, yn ei brofiad ef, nad oedd cyflwyno cosbau ariannol o dan y system gŵynion cyn 1996 wedi dylanwadu ar ymddygiad meddygon oedd yn ‘broblem’. Roedd o’r farn mai’r nod bwysicaf oedd cyflwyno gwasanaeth yn gywir a, lle yr oedd problemau’n cael eu nodi, ei bod yn fwy pwysig canolbwyntio ar eu hunioni. Roedd yr Athro Scotland o’r farn y gallai cyflwyno cosbau ariannol fod yn briodol yn achos diffygion gweinyddol ond y byddai dulliau eraill o gosbi (rhybuddion er enghraifft, yn gysylltiedig â gofyniad i ailhyfforddi) yn ffordd fwy priodol o ddelio â pherfformiad. Dywedodd hefyd y dylid cofnodi cyflwyno cosb ariannol ar restr y PCT.
Awgrymwyd gan un ymatebydd i’r Papur Ymgynghorol y dylid hysbysu ynghylch camau disgyblu fel rhan o arfarniad meddyg teulu ac y dylid mynd i’r afael ag achos y broblem yng nghynllun datblygiad personol y meddyg. Cytunodd nifer o gyfranogwyr yn y seminarau y dylid cysylltu’r camau disgyblu â’r system arfarnu, ond na ddylai’r broses gymryd lle’r PCT yn gweithredu ar lefel leol.
Gallaf weld fanteision PCTau yn cael ystod eang o sancsiynau ar gael iddynt unwaith eu bod wedi cynnal archwiliad i gŵyn neu bryder ac wedi canfod y gellir ei gyfiawnhau, er nad yw’n ddigon difrifol iddynt ddefnyddio eu pwerau rheoli rhestr neu ei gyfeirio at y GMC neu ryw gorff arall. Nid yw’n ymddangos yn iawn na ddylai PCT gael yr ystod ehangaf o sancsiynau ar gael i ddelio â’r sefyllfa fel y mae wedi’i chanfod. Byddwn yn ffafrio ymestyn pwerau’r PCT i gynnwys rhybuddion a chosbau ariannol. Nid yw hynny’n golygu fy mod yn credu y dylai PCTau dreulio eu hamser yn cynnal camau disgyblu neu reoli rhestr os allant ddelio â’r materion mewn dull symlach sy’n adeiladol ac yn effeithiol. Rwy’n cytuno gyda Dr Grenville mai’r nod pwysicaf yw gwella perfformiad clinigol. Rwy’n credu y dylai PCTau ganolbwyntio ar greu gwelliant trwy roi cyngor - mwy na thebyg gan Arweinydd y Rheolaeth Glinigol - yn hytrach na cheisio cosbi diffygion bach. Os na fydd meddyg yn ymateb i gyngor ynghylch mater y mae angen ei gywiro (er enghraifft, trwy gael rhyw fath o hyfforddiant unioni), yna, yn fy marn i, dylai’r PCT ddefnyddio ei phwerau rheoli rhestr i’w ‘berswadio/ei pherswadio’ i wneud hynny. Os yw’r meddyg yn dal i wrthod cydymffurfio, dylai’r PCT ddefnyddio ei phwerau cryfach. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd PCTau yn cael mwy o hyder wrth ddefnyddio eu pwerau rheoli rhestr. Mae’r Senedd wedi eu rhoi ac mae’n rhaid ei bod wedi bwriadu iddynt gael eu defnyddio.
Defnyddio Gwybodaeth Rhagnodi fel Teclyn Rheolaeth Glinigol
Yn fy Mhedwerydd Adroddiad, fe wnes nifer o argymhellion am y ffyrdd y gellir gwella cywirdeb a chyflawnder gwybodaeth rhagnodi er mwy darparu teclyn mwy gwerthfawr at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Ni wnaf ailadrodd yr argymhellion hynny yn fanwl yn y fan hon. Awgrymais y dylai pob meddyg sy’n ymarfer fel meddyg teulu ddefnyddio ei bad/ei phad rhagnodi ei hun ac y dylid rhoi’r gorau i’r arfer o ganiatáu i feddygon dan hyfforddiant a locwm ddefnyddio pad un o’r prif feddygon teulu yn y practis. Yn y ffordd honno, gellid olrhain pob rhagnodiad i feddyg unigol yn gywir. Awgrymais hefyd ffyrdd y gellid osgoi ‘cymylu’ data rhagnodi trwy gyhoeddi ailragnodiadau. O ran rhagnodi cyffuriau wedi’u rheoli, gwnes argymhellion y dylid cyflwyno ffurflen ragnodi arbennig ac y dylid gwneud rhagnodi preifat ar y ffurflen arbennig hefyd fel y gellid ei gynnwys yn y dadansoddiad gan yr Awdurdod Prisio Rhagnodiadau. Os mabwysiedir y mesurau hynny, dylai fod yn bosibl i PCT gael darlun cyflawn a chywir o ymarfer rhagnodi bob meddyg; felly, bydd y PCT yn gallu canfod rhagnodi annormal yn well. Hefyd, bydd y data sydd ar gael i feddygon unigol yn eu galluogi i archwilio eu harferion rhagnodi eu hunain yn fwy boddhaol.
Yn fy marn i, dylid hefyd rhoi sylw arbennig i ragnodi cyffuriau a reolir gan bob meddyg. Dylai meddygon sydd wedi cael problemau camddefnyddio cyffuriau yn y gorffennol neu rai yr amheuir bod ganddynt broblem gyfredol gael eu harchwilio’n fanwl. Dylid archwilio eu data rhagnodi yn fanwl, a dylid hefyd rhoi sylw i’r wybodaeth ar gofrestrau cyffuriau a reolir (CDRau) a gedwir gan fferyllfeydd. Yn y Pedwerydd Adroddiad, rwy’n argymell sefydlu arolygiaeth cyffuriau a reolir. Un o’i swyddogaethau fyddai archwilio CDRau i ganfod rhagnodi cyffuriau a reolir mewn ffordd annormal ac ymddygiad annormal gan feddygon, fel casglu cyffuriau a reolir o fferyllfa sydd wedi’u rhagnodi ar gyfer claf. Byddai’r arolygiaeth a’r PCT yn gallu cysylltu os byddai ganddynt bryderon ynghylch meddyg unigol yn rhagnodi cyffuriau a reolir. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd y Llywodraeth yn gweithredu ar yr argymhellion hyn.
Defnyddio Data Marwolaeth fel Teclyn Rheolaeth Glinigol
System Fonitro Genedlaethol
Ym Mhennod 14, disgrifiais sut yr oedd yr Ymchwiliad wedi comisiynu astudiaeth o ymarferoldeb defnyddio ystadegau marwolaeth i ganfod annormaleddau a allai awgrymu bod meddyg yn methu darparu safon ddigonol o ofal clinigol dros ei gleifion/chleifion neu hyd yn oed ei fod ef/hi yn eu niweidio’n bwrpasol. Disgrifiais hefyd y drafodaeth yn y seminar arbennig a gynhaliwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad ym mis Hydref 2003. Y casgliad ar ddiwedd y seminar oedd y byddai’n ddymunol gweithredu system genedlaethol ar gyfer monitro cyfraddau marwolaeth mewn ymarfer cyffredinol. Rwy’n cytuno â’r farn honno. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y byddai system o’r fath (yn enwedig ar y cyd â diwygio’r systemau tystysgrifau ac archwiliadau marwolaeth yr wyf wedi eu hargymell yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad) yn debygol o atal meddyg rhag cyflawni gweithgareddau troseddol fel rhai Shipman. Ar wahân i’r manteision posibl hynny, fodd bynnag, rwy’n credu bod casglu a dadansoddi data marwoldeb cleifion meddyg teulu yn rhannau angenrheidiol o broses rheolaeth glinigol ac y bydd deall y data hynny ond yn cael effaith gadarnhaol ar ansawdd gofal cleifion.
Rwy’n cydnabod bod anawsterau ymarferol yn y ffordd o sefydlu system foddhaol, yn enwedig yr anhawster o gysylltu marwolaeth claf unigol â meddyg teulu unigol. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n argymell y dylid gwneud gwaith i ganfod ffyrdd o wneud hyn. Bydd yr Adran Iechyd yn cymryd yr awenau. Awgrymwyd rhai syniadau yn y seminar ac rwyf yn obeithiol y gellir canfod ffordd os dymunir gwneud hynny. Ar ôl gwneud hyn, rwy’n argymell cynnal cynllun peilot ar gyfer monitro cenedlaethol, ar y thema a drafodwyd yn y seminar. Mae’n rhaid i unrhyw system fonitro genedlaethol gael ei chefnogi gan system briodol o archwilio’r achosion hynny lle mae cyfraddau marwolaeth cleifion meddyg yn uwch na’r norm. Mae’n rhaid i’r archwiliadau hynny fod yn drefnus, yn gyson ac yn wrthrychol. Ni ellir eu gadael i PCTau unigol, er y bydd llawer o’r wybodaeth leol a fydd yn llywio archwiliadau o’r fath ar gael gan y PCTau.
Ar adeg y seminar, rhagwelwyd y byddai uned ddadansoddol ganolog ar gyfer monitro yn cael ei gweithredu gan y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ac y byddai archwiliadau yn cael eu cynnal gan swyddfeydd lleol y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, mewn cydweithrediad â’r PCT briodol. Ers hynny, ymddengys y gall bwriad y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd - o ran darparu uned ddadansoddi ganolog a sefydlu swyddfeydd lleol - fod wedi newid. Os felly, bydd yn rhaid i fonitro a dadansoddi cenedlaethol gael ei gynnal gan gorff arall (o dan nawdd yr Adran Iechyd), gydag archwiliadau’n cael eu cynnal gan y timau archwilio medrus rhyng-PCT yr wyf wedi cyfeirio atynt yn flaenorol mewn cysylltiad ag archwilio cwynion a phryderon.
Cofrestrau Marwolaeth Practisau
Fel y dywedais, rwyf o’r farn y byddai data yn ymwneud â marwolaethau cleifion yn ddefnyddiol at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod rhai practisau meddygon teulu yn cadw cofnod neu gofrestr o farwolaethau lle y ceir a chynhelir copi llawn o bob Tystysgrif Meddygol Achos Marwolaeth (MCCD). Ymddengys i mi bod hyn yn arfer da ac y byddai, ymysg pethau eraill, yn darparu’r deunydd angenrheidiol i archwilio marwolaethau. Gallai trafod deunydd o’r fath fod yn bwnc defnyddiol mewn arfarniad. Yn fy Nhrydydd Adroddiad, argymhellais ddiwygio tystysgrifau marwolaeth. Os caiff fy argymhellion eu derbyn, byddai’r ffurflen a fyddai’n cael ei llenwi gan feddyg teulu yn dilyn marwolaeth yn cynnwys llawer iawn mwy o wybodaeth na cheir mewn MCCD ar hyn o bryd. Byddai ffurflenni o’r fath yn sylfaen mwy defnyddiol hyd yn oed ar gyfer archwilio marwolaethau a byddai’n adnodd arbennig o ddefnyddiol pe byddai’n rhaid archwilio cyfradd marwolaeth cleifion meddyg teulu o ganlyniad i fonitro cyfraddau marwolaeth cyffredinol. Ar gyfer marwolaethau cleifion sy’n digwydd mewn ysbytai neu fannau eraill, lle nad yw’r meddyg teulu yn llenwi’r MCCD, dylid cynnwys gwybodaeth gyfatebol ar y gofrestr.
Adolygiad o Gofnodion Meddygol Cleifion Ymadawedig
Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad ar sawl achlysur bod archwilio neu adolygu cofnodion meddygol meddyg teulu yn declyn gwerthfawr wrth asesu ansawdd gofal clinigol a chanfod perfformiad clinigol sydd islaw’r safon. Mae’r broses yn rhan bwysig o’r gweithdrefnau asesu at ddibenion awdurdodi fel hyfforddwr meddyg teulu ac ar gyfer Aelodaeth o’r RCGP trwy asesiad. Gallai fod yn rhan o arfarniad. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn credu y bydd yn ymarferol yn gyffredinol i PCTau ymgymryd ag adolygiadau o’r fath eu hunain; am un peth, byddai problemau cyfrinachedd cleifion. Serch hynny, ymddengys i mi y gellid defnyddio cofnodion cleifion ymadawedig at ddibenion o’r fath. Anfonir cofnodion cleifion ymadawedig i’r PCT. Ni fyddai’n anodd o gwbl i’r PCTau adolygu cofnodion o’r fath. Byddai’n hawdd i enw claf gael ei ddileu gan un aelod o’r staff ac i’r adolygiadau gael eu cynnal gan berson gwahanol, y byddai’n rhaid iddynt fod yn gymwys wrth gwrs. Byddai angen sicrhau bod set gyflawn o gofnodion yn cael eu hanfod at y PCT, gan gynnwys unrhyw gofnodion a gedwir ar gyfrifiadur. Byddai’r defnydd y byddai hynny’n ei wneud o’r teclyn hwn yn dibynnu ar yr adnoddau y gallai’r PCT ei defnyddio ar gyfer y dasg. Yn ddelfrydol, dylai pob meddyg fod yn destun adolygiad cyfnodol o un neu ddau set o gofnodion, yn ymwneud â chleifion y gofalwyd amdanynt yn y gymuned hyd at adeg eu marwolaethau. Mae fy mhrofiad i ar yr Ymchwiliad hwn yn awgrymu y byddai’r gofal a roddwyd i gleifion yn ystod ychydig fisoedd olaf eu bywyd yn ddangosydd arbennig o dda o’r safon gofal gyffredinol a ddarparwyd gan y meddyg. Os na fyddai digon o adnoddau i gynnal adolygiad cyfnodol o rhai cofnodion pob meddyg, gellid cyfyngu’r broses i’r meddygon hynny y mae eu perfformiad yn peri pryder mewn rhyw ffordd arall.
Disgrifiais y system bresennol o arfarnu meddygon teulu ym Mhennod 12 ac ym Mhennod 26. Esboniais yr oedd y ffordd yr oedd cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ail-ddilysu, o leiaf am gyfnod, yn ymwneud yn gyfan gwbl â chwblhau arfarniad yn ‘llwyddiannus’. Yn fy marn i, roedd y sefyllfa honno yn annerbyniol. Mae bellach wedi newid o ran y bydd yn rhaid i feddyg teulu sydd am gael ei ail-ddilysu, ddarparu tystysgrif rheolaeth glinigol yn ogystal â chyflawni arfarniad yn llwyddiannus. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion ynglŷn â’r ffordd yr wyf yn credu y dylid datblygu ail-ddilysu. Rwyf nawr am drafod dyfodol arfarnu, yn bennaf yng nghyd-destun rheolaeth glinigol, ond gan gofio drwy’r amser ei rôl ddisgwyliedig mewn ail-ddilysu.
I ddechrau, mae’n ymddangos i mi ei bod yn hanfodol bod diben arfarnu yn glir. Ei fwriad yw bod yn broses gwbl ffurfiannol neu bwriedir iddo fod yn amlbwrpas - yn rhannol ffurfiannol, yn rhannol gyfansymiol ac yn rhannol reolaeth perfformiad? Mewn diwydiant ac mewn llawer o sefyllfaoedd cyflogaeth, nid oes unrhyw anhawster ynghylch rhoi llawer o ddibenion i arfarnu. Fel yr wyf yn deall y peth, bwriad arfarnu meddygon yn y gwasanaeth ysbytai, ar gyfer y rheini mewn graddau hyfforddi o leiaf, yw bod yn declyn rheolaeth perfformiad. Mae’n seiliedig ar wybodaeth a gesglir gan y cyflogwr, a gall y cyflogwr i raddau helaeth orchymyn y meysydd sy’n cael eu cynnwys gan y wybodaeth honno a’r pynciau i’w trafod yn yr arfarniad. Rwy’n credu mai bwriad gwreiddiol yr Adran Iechyd oedd y dylai arfarnu meddygon teulu fod yn debyg a dylai gael swyddogaeth ffurfiannol a chyfansymiol. Fel y dywedodd Dr John Chisholm, Cadeirydd Pwyllgor Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol y BMA, wrth yr Ymchwiliad, roedd y rheini a oedd yn trafod ar ran y meddygon hyd yn oed yn disgwyl y byddai arfarniad yn seiliedig ar wybodaeth gadarn wedi’i darparu gan y PCT o ffynonellau rheolaeth glinigol. Fel mae’n digwydd, fel y mae wedi’i gweithredu, mae’r broses gwbl ffurfiannol. Mae’n seiliedig ar ddeunydd a ddewiswyd gan y person sy’n cael ei arfarnu. Hwyrach na ellir dilysu llawer o’r deunydd hynny, os o gwbl. Mae’n ymddangos i mi, fel teclyn ffurfiannol, mae mor dda ag yw’r meddyg unigol am iddo fod. Os yw ef/hi am iddo fod yn chwiliol, fel all fod; ond os nad yw ef/hi am iddo fod yn llawer mwy na sgwrs gysurus am feysydd ymarfer y mae ef/hi yn ddigon hyderus yn eu cylch, gellir trefnu hynny. Nid wyf yn awgrymu bod llawer o feddygon yn gwneud hynny. Yn wir, rwy’n cael yr argraff bod y rhan fwyaf ohonynt am wneud defnydd cadarnhaol o’r cyfle y mae arfarnu yn ei gynnig. Ond, os yw arfarnu i gael ei ddefnyddio i unrhyw raddau fel teclyn cyfansymiol, mae’n rhaid ei fod yn gallu canfod grŵp bach o feddygon y mae ganddynt rywbeth i’w guddio. Mae’n rhaid iddo fod yn broses llawer llai ‘meddal’ nad ydyw ar hyn o bryd.
Felly, mae’n rhaid i rywun benderfynu a yw arfarnu i fod yn declyn rheolaeth glinigol (ac os felly mae’n rhaid ei wneud yn fwy ‘llym’) neu a yw i fod yn gyfle preifat ar gyfer datblygiad proffesiynol personol. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw farn gref. Gallaf weld manteision sesiwn cwbl ffurfiannol gyda chydweithiwr, cyhyd â bod y cydweithiwr hwnnw yn rhywun gyda safonau uchel, y mae’n werth dysgu ganddynt. Ar y llaw arall, mae arfarnu yn fusnes costus, ac nid wyf yn siŵr bod yr arian yn cael ei wario’n dda, o leiaf oni bai y gall fod ryw sicrwydd o ansawdd cyfraniad y person sy’n arfarnu. Hwyrach y gellid cyfiawnhau’r amser a’r arian yn haws pe byddai arfarnu’n cael ei seilio ar wybodaeth benodol y gellir ei gwirio. Hwyrach y gellid ei gyfiawnhau yn well pe byddai’r arfarniad yn creu mwy o wybodaeth er bydd swyddogaeth rheolaeth glinigol y PCTau. Mae’r rhain yn faterion i eraill, nid y fi. Pe byddwn yn argymell y dylai arfarniad gynnwys elfen gyfansymiol, ni allaf ddweud a fyddai hynny’n ymarferol. Nid wyf yn gwybod a fyddai’r proffesiwn yn derbyn newid o’r fath. Nid wyf yn gwybod a fyddai’r Llywodraeth yn dymuno mynnu newid o’r fath.
Yr oll y gallaf ddweud yw, os yw arfarnu i aros fel y mae - yn fater preifat yn ei hanfod rhwng yr arfarnwr a’r person sy’n cael ei arfarnu, yn seiliedig ar ddeunydd sy’n cael ei ddewis gan y person sy’n cael ei arfarnu - yna ni ddylid ei ystyried fel teclyn rheolaeth glinigol. Fe all helpu PCT i benderfynu pa fathau o ddatblygiad proffesiynol parhaus y dylai ddarparu. Dyna’i gyd. Ni ddylid ystyried ei fod yn gallu gwneud unrhyw gyfraniad defnyddiol i broses ail-ddilysu. Mae’n rhaid i ail-ddilysu ddibynnu ar rywbeth arall.
Pe byddai’r Llywodraeth a’r proffesiwn yn penderfynu y dylid gwneud arfarnu yn fwy ‘llym’ fel y gellir ei ddefnyddio fel teclyn rheolaeth glinigol, yna byddai gennyf nifer o awgrymiadau i’w gwneud ynglŷn â sut y gellid gwneud hyn. Daw’r syniadau hyn o dystion yr Ymchwiliad, cyfranogwyr yn y seminarau ac weithiau o ddogfennau a gyhoeddwyd fel y Pecyn Cymorth Ailddilysu a gyhoeddwyd gan yr RCGP ar gyfer yr Alban a’r Ddogfen Ymgynghorol ddiweddar, ‘Portfolio of Evidence of Professional Standards for General Practitioners: a Took for Continuing Professional Development, Appraisal and Revalidation’, a gyhoeddwyd gan yr RCGP hefyd.
Ar y sail honno, byddwn yn argymell i ddechrau bod yn rhaid i arfarnwyr gael eu hyfforddi’n fwy trwyadl a dylid eu hachredu yn dilyn rhyw fath o brawf neu asesiad. Byddai’n rhaid iddynt gael eu hyfforddi i werthuso addasrwydd y person sy’n cael ei arfarnu i ymarfer. Dylid arfarnu meddygon teulu gan arfarnwr o PCT arall. Yn ail, mae’n rhaid nodi’r safonau y mae meddyg naill ai wedi ‘eu cwblhau’n llwyddiannus’ neu wedi eu methu. Ar hyn o bryd, mae arfarniad yn cael ei ‘gwblhau’n llwyddiannus’ oni bai bod unrhyw bryderon difrifol yn codi a bod yr arfarnwr yn atal y broses. Nid yw’n glir pa mor ddifrifol y mae’n rhaid i’r pryder fod cyn bod hynny’n digwydd. Yn drydydd, dylid seilio pob arfarniad ar graidd o wybodaeth y gellir ei wirio sy’n cael ei ddarparu i’r ddau barti gan y PCT. Ni fyddai hynny’n golygu na allai’r meddyg gyflwyno deunydd eraill yn ogystal, ond byddai’n rhaid cael craidd gorfodol. Byddai’n rhaid i’r rhestr o elfennau hanfodol gael ei chytuno’n genedlaethol. Y categorïau pwysig fyddai rhagnodi gwybodaeth, gwybodaeth am achwynwyr, gweithgaredd datblygiad proffesiynol parhaus, ystadegau marwolaethau (os yw system fonitro’n cael ei chyflwyno) a chanlyniadau archwilio. Rwyf hefyd yn ystyried y byddai’n briodol cynnal a thrafod un math o weithgaredd bob blwyddyn. Gan y bydd ailddilysu’n digwydd yn gyffredinol bob pum mlynedd, gellid bod cylch o bum gweithgaredd gwahanol. Dylai un fod yn ffilm fideo o ymgynghoriadau cleifion. Dylai un arall fod yn arolwg boddhad cleifion. Nid wyf yn siŵr o werth holiaduron arolwg cymheiriaid yng nghyd-destun ymarfer cyffredinol. Os yw ymchwil yn dangos eu bod o werth, yna gellid eu cynnwys. Dylai adolygu a thrafod detholiad o gofnodion cleifion fod yn weithgaredd arall. Gallai un arall fod yn drafodaeth ar adroddiad ynghylch digwyddiad difrifol neu anweddaidd ac un arall yn drafodaeth am adroddiad archwiliad clinigol. Yn fy marn i, mae’n bwysig bod Ffurflen 4 i gyd (crynodeb o’r drafodaeth a’r cynllun datblygiad personol) fod ar gael i’r rheiny yn y PCT sy’n gyfrifol am reolaeth glinigol. Rwy’n deall bod yr Adran Iechyd yn bwriadu sicrhau bod hyn yn cael ei wneud.
Pe byddai’r newidiadau hynny’n cael eu gwneud i’r arfarniad, fe ellid cyfiawnhau i raddau ystyried y broses yn werthusiad o addasrwydd i ymarfer, a fyddai’n darparu sylfaen addas ar gyfer ailddilysu. A yw hwn yn syniad da neu a yw’n well cadw arfarnu ac ailddilysu ar wahân, ni allaf ddweud.
Cynigion Amrywiol
Y Defnydd gan Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol o’u Pwerau Rheoli Rhestr
Mae pwerau rheoli rhestr y PCTau yn newydd ac mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod rhai PCTau yn ansicr ynghylch pryd ac a ddylid eu defnyddio. Ym mharagraff 5.72, awgrymais y byddai’n ddefnyddiol pe byddai’r Awdurdod Apelio’r Gwasanaethau Iechyd Teuluol (Awdurdod Iechyd Arbennig), y bydd ei bwerau’n cael eu trosglwyddo cyn hir i Awdurdod Cyfreithiad y GIG, yn casglu ac yn dadansoddi’r wybodaeth yn ymwneud â’r PCTau yn defnyddio’r pwerau hyn. Meddyliais y byddai hefyd yn ddefnyddiol pe byddai’n ofynnol i’r PCTau ddynodi pam yr oeddent wedi defnyddio eu pwerau ym mhob achos. Byddai dadansoddiad o’r fath yn cynorthwyo’r Adran Iechyd wrth ddarparu arweiniad i PCTau ynghylch y mathau o amgylchiadau lle y gallent ddefnyddio eu pwerau yn gywir. Hefyd, byddai’n tynnu sylw at y PCTau hynny a oedd yn defnyddio eu pwerau naill ai llawer mwy neu lawer llai na’r cyfartaledd.
Cynlluniau Achredu Ymarfer
Ym mharagraffau 5.111-5.119, disgrifiais amryw gynlluniau achredu ymarfer mewn gweithrediad yn Lloegr a’r Alban. Mynegais y farn y byddai’n werthfawr pe gellid annog pob practis meddyg teulu i gyflawni’r achrediad, fel y bwriadwyd y dylent ei wneud yn yr Alban. Gan fod tâl o dan Gontract newydd y GMS yn seiliedig ar gyfres o gymhellion ariannol, mae’n ymddangos i mi y byddai’n synhwyrol darparu cymhelliant ariannol ar gyfer cyflawni achrediad ymarfer trwy gynllun achredu tebyg i’r un a weithredir gan yr RCGP yn yr Alban. Rwyf yn argymell bod y Llywodraeth yn ystyried ymarferoldeb cynllun cymhelliant o’r fath.
Cefnogaeth ar gyfer Practisau Bach a Phractisau Un Person
Ym mharagraffau 9.134-9.135, ysgrifennais am broblemau penodol staff practis yn gweithio mewn practisau bach neu rai un person. Maent yn wynebu problemau ynysu; hwyrach na fyddant yn gweld ymddygiad neu ymarfer afreolaidd mewn person proffesiynol gofal iechyd am eu bod wedi arfer â’r ymddygiad a heb sylweddoli ei fod yn anarferol. Rwyf wedi awgrymu ffyrdd y gallai PCTau helpu i leihau effeithiau ynysu.
Ym Mhennod 13, trafodais y problemau y gall bractisau bach ac un person eu hwynebu. Disgrifiais nifer o fentrau sydd eisoes ar y gweill mewn rhai rhannau o’r wlad i ddatrys neu leddfu’r problemau hynny. Nid wyf yn argymell ailadrodd y drafodaeth honno yma. Ym mharagraffau 13.69-13.70, rwyf yn argymell y dylid cymryd ymagwedd fwy cadarnhaol i broblemau practisau bach. Dylai’r meddygon sy’n rhedeg practisau o’r fath gael mwy o gefnogaeth ac anogaeth ac, yn ei le, dylid disgwyl mwy ganddynt o ran gweithgaredd grŵp a goruchwyliaeth ar y cyd. Awgrymais y dylid cael casglu syniadau, parodrwydd i archwilio’r ffordd y gwneir pethau mewn gwledydd eraill, fel yr Iseldiroedd, a phenderfyniad i ddatrys y problemau. Rwyf yn argymell bod yr Adran Iechyd yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb dros y fenter hon.
Recriwtio a Phenodi Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol
O dan weithdrefnau cyfredol, mae graddau cyfranogiad PCT wrth lenwi swydd wag mewn practis meddyg teulu yn amrywio yn dibynnu ar y swydd. Mae’r PCT yn gyfrifol am recriwtio i bractisau un person ac i swyddi â chyflog ond, os yw’r swydd wag mewn partneriaeth bresennol, y practis ei hun sy’n dewis ymgeisydd, yn amodol ar ei gynnwys ar restr y PCT. Gofynnwyd y cwestiwn ym Mhapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad a ddylai PCT gael mewnbwn i’r broses o ddethol ar gyfer swydd wag mewn practis ac, os felly, sut ac i ba raddau. Fel y nodais ym mharagraffau 5.50-5.53, mae gan PCTau hawl i wrthod cynnwys meddyg ar eu rhestrau meddygol ar seiliau penodedig.
Gwnaeth yr ymatebwyr hynny i’r Papur Ymgynghorol a chyfranogwyr yn y seminar perthnasol a gefnogodd y syniad o gyfranogiad y PCT wrth recriwtio a phenodi meddygon teulu hynny am ddau brif reswm: yn gyntaf am fod PCTau yn gyfrifol am reolaeth glinigol a byddant felly, i ryw raddau, yn atebol am weithredoedd y meddyg a benodir ac, yn ail, am eu bod yn teimlo nad oedd gan bractisau meddygon teulu yr arbenigedd adnoddau dynol angenrheidiol i recriwtio a phenodi yn foddhaol. Awgrymwyd y gallai’r PCT, neu hyd yn oed yr SHA, ddarparu’r arbenigedd angenrheidiol.
Pwysleisiodd yr Athro Martin Roland, Cyfarwyddwr Canolfan Genedlaethol Ymchwil a Datblygu Gofal Sylfaenol, ac Athro Ymarfer Cyffredinol, Prifysgol Manceinion, bod dau fater gwahanol yn berthnasol i gyfranogiad PCTau wrth benodi meddygon teulu. Y cyntaf oedd y cyfrifoldeb sydd gan PCTau am sicrhau mai meddygon cymwys yn unig sy’n cael eu rhoi ar eu rhestrau. Yr ail fater oedd y rôl y dylai gael ei chwarae gan y PCT wrth benodi meddyg i bractis meddyg teulu. Gwnaeth Dr Grenville, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r BMA, y gwahaniaethiad hwn hefyd a mynegodd y farn y dylid gosod safonau allanol (er enghraifft, rheoli’r gofynion ar gyfer caffael trwydded i ymarfer ac i ymuno â rhestr PCT), ond, cyhyd â bod ymgeisydd yn bodloni’r gofynion hynny, mai’r practis meddyg teulu perthnasol ddylai wneud y penderfyniad penodi.
Roedd cytundeb yn y seminar y dylid cyfyngu rôl PCTau yn y broses benodi a recriwtio i ddarparu cyngor. Pwysleisiodd ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol (gan gynnwys yr RGCP) bod partneriaeth broffesiynol yn cynnwys perthynas bersonol ac ariannol agos a bod yn rhaid i’r presennol yn y pen draw benderfynu pwy ddylai gael eu derbyn mewn practis meddyg teulu.
Roedd, fodd bynnag, cefnogaeth eang i’r cynnig y dylai PCTau ddarparu arbenigedd a chyngor adnoddau dynol. Clywodd yr Ymchwiliad am rai mentrau ar lefel PCT; er enghraifft, yn y seminar, disgrifiodd Ms Fiona Freedland, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfreithiol, Action against Medical Accidents (AvMA), y trefniadau yn PCT City and Hackney, lle’r oedd swyddog swyddi gwag meddygon teulu wedi cael ei benodi i helpu practisau a oedd yn cael trafferth i lenwi eu swyddi gwag. Dywedodd Mrs Webdale, yn cynrychioli AMSPAR, yn ei phrofiad hi, nid oedd gan lawer o feddygon teulu y sgiliau angenrheidiol i recriwtio’n effeithiol; fodd bynnag, nid oedd rhai’n cydnabod hyn ac yn anfodlon ceisio cymorth. Cytunodd Dr Reith, yn cynrychioli’r RCGP, nad oedd meddygon teulu yn brofiadol wrth recriwtio a bod angen cyngor adnoddau dynol arnynt. Er nad oedd yn credu y dylai PCT fod yn gallu gorfodi practis i dderbyn cyngor o’r fath yn erbyn ei ewyllys, roedd yn cydnabod bod gan PCTau gyfrifoldeb i sicrhau bod prosesau recriwtio cywir yn cael eu gweithredu; roedd yn derbyn y byddai lle i ‘drafodaeth gadarn’ rhwng PCT a phractis meddyg teulu a oedd yn amharod i dderbyn cyngor o’r fath.
Roedd yr Athro Baker yn credu y byddai’n ddefnyddiol i bractisau gael mewnbwn gan y PCT wrth lunio swydd-ddisgrifiad a manyleb. Awgrymodd y gallai’r PCT hefyd helpu wrth ddidoli ceisiadau a pharatoi rhestr fer. Ymddengys hwn yn syniad da i mi, os, oherwydd y prinder meddygon teulu ar hyn o bryd, yw’n bosibl llunio rhestr fer. Awgrymodd yr Athro Baker hefyd, yn ystod y cam hwnnw, y gallai’r PCT sicrhau nad oedd unrhyw un o’r ymgeiswyr yn anaddas cyn cynnal y cyfweliadau. Gallaf weld gwerth cynnal rhyw fath o wiriadau addasrwydd yn ystod y cam cyfweld. Ar hyn o bryd, gallai’r PCTau wrthwynebu gan ddweud y byddai angen gormod o amser i wneud yr holl wiriadau angenrheidiol ar gyfer sawl ymgeisydd ar gyfer swydd wag. Fodd bynnag, pe byddai’r GMC yn rhoi mwy o wybodaeth am feddygon ar ei wefan (fel y byddaf yn argymell y dylai wneud) a phe byddai cronfa ddata ganolog o wybodaeth am feddygon yn cael ei chreu (fel y byddaf hefyd yn argymell), byddai’n gyflym, yn hawdd ac yn werth chweil gwneud y gwiriadau hyn cyn y cam cyfweld.
Barn Patient Concern oedd, er mwyn sicrhau cydbwysedd priodol o sgiliau a chymysgedd o arbenigedd mewn maes PCT penodol, dylid cynnwys cynrychiolydd PCT ar y panel sy’n cyfweld ymgeiswyr ar gyfer swydd meddyg teulu. Dywedodd Dr Reith na fyddai’n gwrthwynebu i gyfranogiad ymgynghorol PCT yn ystod y camau llunio rhestr fer a chyfweld. Yn ei ymateb ysgrifenedig i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, mynegodd PCT De Orllewin Caint y farn y dylai aelod o PCT fod yn bresennol yn ystod y broses gyfweld, ond y dylai ei rôl gael ei chyfyngu i arsylwi’r gweithdrefnau. Awgrymodd ymatebydd arall i’r Papur Ymgynghorol y dylai fod mewnbwn proffesiynol gan y PCT yn ystod llunio’r rhestr fer a mewnbwn lleyg yn ystod y cam cyfweld.
Yn fy marn i, dylai PCTau fod yn barod ac yn gallu darparu cyngor ar ymarfer recriwtio da a dylai hefyd fod yn barod i gynnig cefnogaeth wrth lunio drafft o fanyleb swydd a hysbysebion. Os yw’r ymateb i swydd wag sy’n cael ei hysbysebu mor dda bod angen rhestr fer, mae’n siwr y byddai llawer o bractisau yn croesawu help wrth ddidoli’r ceisiadau. Fel y dywedais, rwy’n credu y byddai’n ddefnyddiol pe gellir cynnal gwiriadau rhagarweiniol ar addasrwydd cyn y cam cyfweld. Nid wyf yn credu y byddai’n ddymunol gofyn am eirdaon cyn dethol. Nid wyf ychwaith yn credu ei fod yn briodol i’r PCT chwarae unrhyw ran yn y broses gyfweld oni bai y gwneir cais gan y practis am hyn. Mae’n rhaid mai mater i’r practis perthnasol yw dewis y person iawn o’r ymgeiswyr cymwys.
Rwyf hefyd yn credu y byddai’n synhwyrol pe byddai ffurflen geirda safonol yn cael ei datblygu i’w defnyddio mewn cysylltiad â phenodiadau i bractisau meddygon teulu. Nid yw’n ddigonol i eirda gynnwys datganiad cyffredinol bod y meddyg wedi bod yn foddhaol. Hefyd, yn fy marn i, dylai PCTau fynnu cael geirda gan y cyflogwyr neu’r PCT blaenorol. Yn achos PCT blaenorol, dylai’r Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol neu’r Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol h.y. y person sydd â mynediad i’r wybodaeth rheolaeth glinigol am y meddyg hwnnw, lofnodi’r geirda.
Cyfranogiad Pobl Leyg wrth Recriwtio Meddygon Teulu
Cododd Bapur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad hefyd y mater ynghylch a ddylai cleifion fod yn rhan o’r broses o ddethol meddygon teulu ac, os felly, i ba raddau. Awgrymwyd y gellid cael cynrychiolaeth cleifion ar baneli cyfweld. Ceisiwyd barnau hefyd am y math o gynrychiolaeth cleifion; er enghraifft, gallai un claf neu fwy yn y practis perthnasol gymryd rhan, neu aelodau o’r Fforwm Cleifion lleol neu ryw grŵp cynrychiolaeth arall.
Daeth yr Ymchwiliad yn ymwybodol o enghreifftiau o gyfranogiad cleifion wrth recriwtio meddygon teulu. Nododd Adolygiad Rheolaeth Glinigol PCT Harlow, a gynhaliwyd gan y Comisiwn Gwella Gofal Iechyd (CHI) yn 2003, gyfranogiad cleifion a’r cyhoedd yn llawer o weithgareddau’r ymddiriedolaeth, gan gynnwys cyfranogiad wrth recriwtio meddygon teulu.
Roedd ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol wedi’u rhannu ynghylch cyfranogiad cleifion. Roedd rhai ymatebwyr yn gwbl wrthwynebus i’r syniad. Roedd eraill yn croesawu’r syniad yn ddamcaniaethol ond yn gweld anawsterau ymarferol. Roedd llawer o ymatebwyr yn teimlo bod cyfranogiad cleifion yn bwysig. Roedd nifer yn gweld rôl ar gyfer y Fforymau Cleifion newydd, a allai fod yn uniongyrchol gysylltiedig â’r broses recriwtio, neu y gellid ymgynghori â hwy o leiaf ynghylch blaenoriaethau cyn bod y practis yn cychwyn ar y broses o ddethol. Roedd eraill yn meddwl y dylai aelod lleyg o’r PCT ddarparu mewnbwn lleyg. Awgrymodd AMSPAR sefydlu grwpiau cleifion newydd yn cynnwys sawl PCTau.
Roedd rhai ymatebwyr yn meddwl y byddai’n ddefnyddiol cael mewnbwn lleyg yn ystod creu rhestr fer o ymgeiswyr, tra bod eraill yn teimlo mai’r cam mwyaf priodol oedd yn ystod cyfweld ac y dylai’r panel cyfweld gynnwys cynrychiolydd lleyg. Un awgrym oedd i bob ymgeisydd ar y rhestr fer gyfarfod yn anffurfiol â grŵp o gleifion a fyddai’n rhoi adborth i’r panel cyfweld. Fodd bynnag, roedd gwrthwynebiad i’r syniad hyn ar sail nad oedd yn rhoi llawer o fewnwelediad i ansawdd ymarfer clinigol ymgeisydd. Pwysleisiwyd eto’r angen i aelodau o’r practis wneud y penderfyniad terfynol ynghylch pwy oedd yn cael ei dderbyn.
Roedd barn gyffredinol y byddai angen hyfforddiant ar gyfranogwyr lleyg wrth ddethol ac y byddai angen iddynt fod yn wybodus ynghylch materion mewn ymarfer cyffredinol. Awgrymodd yr Athro Baker yn ei ymateb ysgrifenedig y gallai cyfranogiad anuniongyrchol lefel isel fod yn briodol. Gellid ymgynghori â chleifion mewn practis ynghylch hoffterau: er enghraifft, a fyddai cleifion yn dymuno recriwtio meddyg benywaidd mewn practis a fu yn flaenorol yn un gwrywaidd yn unig. Cododd Dr Grenville, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r BMA, nifer o broblemau posibl gyda chyfranogiad lleyg. Dywedodd y gallai fod yn anodd dod o hyd i glaf neu gleifion a oedd yn wirioneddol yn cynrychioli rhestr cleifion y practis. Rhoddodd, fel enghraifft o’r broblem y cynrychiolydd cleifion gyda mater penodol yr oedd yn teimlo’n gryf yn ei gylch: er enghraifft, efallai bod ef/hi am feddyg a fyddai bob amser yn rhagnodi gwrthfiotigion ar gyfer annwyd, lle y gallai cleifion eraill fod am feddyg na fyddai’n cyflwyno peryglon gwrthfiotigion i gleifion yn ddiangen. Fel yr Athro Baker, roedd Dr Grenville o blaid mewnbwn anuniongyrchol gan y cleifion. Roedd yn credu y gallai grwpiau cyfranogiad cleifion hysbysu practis o feysydd eang pryderon cleifion mewn modd defnyddiol; gallai’r wybodaeth honno wedyn gael ei hystyried wrth recriwtio.
Pwysleisiodd Ms Freedland yn cynrychioli’r AvMA, mai’r hanfod pennaf o safbwynt y claf yw bod y meddyg yn un diogel a bod ystyriaethau eraill yn eilradd i ddiogelwch cleifion. Awgrymodd y byddai cyfranogiad cleifion yn fwyaf defnyddiol wrth asesu sgiliau cyfathrebu a rhyngbersonol meddyg. Roedd yn credu y byddai’n ddefnyddiol i gael claf yn y cyfweliad er mwyn, er enghraifft, profi gallu’r ymgeisydd i esbonio i glaf mewn iaith syml ddiagnosis neu brognosis cymhleth a chynllun triniaeth. Roedd yr Athro y Fonesig Lesley Southgate, Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain, yn cefnogi archwilio dulliau cyfweld arloesol fel yr un a gynigiwyd gan Ms Freedland. Sylwodd bod aseswyr lleyg ar gyfer gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC ar hyn o bryd yn profi sgiliau cyfathrebu mewn ffordd debyg gyda chryn lwyddiant. Dywedodd, mewn ardaloedd daearyddol penodol (fel canol dinasoedd lle mae llawer o bobl yn methu siarad Saesneg), mae agwedd y meddyg yn hanfodol i ddarparu gofal da i gleifion. Ychwanegodd ei bod yn bwysig arsylwi ymgeiswyr mewn sefyllfaoedd ymarferol, yn rhyngweithio gyda chleifion. Roedd yr Athro Aidan Halligan, Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol Lloegr a Chyfarwyddwr Rheolaeth Glinigol ar gyfer y GIG, hefyd yn cefnogi’r cynnig a dywedodd bod egwyddor cyfranogiad cleifion yn un dilys iawn a dylid ei groesawu. Nododd Dr Reith y byddai meddygon sy’n mynd i mewn i ymarfer cyffredinol eisoes wedi cael profion cyfansymiol o’u sgiliau cyfathrebu. Roedd Dr Grenville yn credu bod sgiliau cyfathrebu yn ganolog i waith meddygon teulu ac y dylid profi eu sgiliau cyfathrebu yn rheolaidd. Roedd yn rhagweld, yn y dyfodol, y byddai gan feddygon teulu bortffolio o ymgynghoriadau ar fideo y gellid eu defnyddio wrth wneud cais am swydd newydd. Roedd Syr Donald Irvine o’r farn y byddai’n well profi sgiliau cyfathrebu fel rhan o ailddilysu, er enghraifft, trwy ddefnyddio ymgynghoriadau wedi eu recordio ar fideo.
Roedd Dr Reith a Dr Sarah Wilson, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol Trent SHA, yn credu y byddai’n ddefnyddiol cynnal ymchwil i weld a yw cyfranogiad cleifion yn gwella’r broses recriwtio. Roeddent o’r farn na ddylai gael ei gynnwys yn y broses ‘er mwyn gwneud hynny’. Rwy’n credu y byddai ymchwil o’r fath yn syniad da, er y byddai’n dibynnu ar argaeledd arian ar gyfer prosiect o’r fath.
Fy nghasgliad i am y ddadl hon yw na ddylid ceisio bod yn rhagysgrifiadol ynghylch a ddylai neu sut y dylai bobl leyg gymryd rhan yn y broses o ddethol. Rwy’n cytuno gyda’r Athro Baker a Dr Grenville y dylai practisau drafod ac ystyried barn eu cleifion ynghylch y math o feddyg y mae ei angen ar y practis. Fodd bynnag, byddwn yn gwrthwynebu gosod unrhyw fformat neu broses lle mae pobl leyg yn gysylltiedig â dethol. Yn amlwg mae llawer o syniadau gwahanol yn mynd o gwmpas. Os mae unrhyw bractis meddyg teulu yn dymuno mabwysiadu’r syniadau hyn dylai fod yn rhydd i wneud hynny, ond nid wyf yn credu y dylai fod o dan bwysau i wneud hynny. Mae’n rhaid i mi ddweud fy mod yn hoffi’r syniad y dylid defnyddio deunydd a ddefnyddir yn y broses ailddilysu (fel tâp fideo o ymgynghoriadau) yn y broses recriwtio hefyd. Yn wir, yn y dyfodol, hwyrach y bydd disgwyl i feddygon greu llawer iawn o ddeunydd rheolaeth glinigol er budd cyflogwr neu bartner posibl.
Ffeiliau Personol Ymarferwyr Cyffredinol
Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniwyd gan yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu, o leiaf yn y gorffennol, ei fod wedi bod yn arferol i sefydliad gofal sylfaenol (PCO) gadw gwybodaeth am un meddyg teulu mewn ffeiliau gwahanol, gan ddelio â thestunau penodol (fel cwynion, tâl neu broffil ymarfer), yn hytrach na chadw un ffeil yn cynnwys popeth yn ymwneud â meddyg teulu unigol. Gall cydnabod pwysigrwydd rheolaeth glinigol fod wedi arwain at fabwysiadu arfer gwahanol. Er mwyn osgoi unrhyw amheuaeth, ymddengys i mi yn hanfodol bod pob PCT yn cadw ffeil ar wahân (ar bapur neu ar ffurf electronig) sy’n cadw popeth mewn perthynas â’r meddyg hwnnw, neu o leiaf popeth a allai fod yn berthnasol o gwbl i reolaeth glinigol. Gallai ffynhonnell gwybodaeth ddibynadwy a chynhwysfawr, mewn amgylchiadau penodol, fod yn ddefnyddiol i’r swyddog PCT neu’r grŵp sy’n gyfrifol am lofnodi’r dystysgrif rheolaeth glinigol at ddibenion ailddilysu. Os yw meddyg yn symud o un PCT i un arall, dylid anfon y ffeil honno (neu gopi ohoni) i’r PCT newydd. Ni ddylai fod yn bosibl i’r meddygon gyda chofnod rheolaeth glinigol gwael symud ymlaen a’i gadael ar ôl. Dylai PCTau hefyd gadw ffeiliau ar feddygon sydd wedi cael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau ac sy’n gweithio fel locwm yn yr ardal. Gall fod yn ddefnyddiol i’r Adran Iechyd sefydlu meini prawf cenedlaethol ar gyfer cynnwys ffeiliau o’r fath.
Ym mharagraffau 9.128-9.139, trafodais yr angen am drefniadau i gefnogi aelodau o staff practis meddyg teulu sydd am godi pryder ynghylch unrhyw fater sy’n codi o fewn y practis, yn arbennig am ymarfer clinigol neu ymddygiad gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn y practis. Nid wyf yn golygu ailadrodd manylion y drafodaeth honno yn y fan hon. Mae dweud fy mod yn argymell y dylai bob practis gael polisi ysgrifenedig yn nodi’r gweithdrefnau i’w dilyn gan aelod o staff y practis sy’n dymuno codi pryderon, yn enwedig pryderon am ymarfer clinigol neu ymddygiad gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd yn y practis, yn ddigonol. Rwyf hefyd yn argymell y dylai staff gael eu hannog i fynegi unrhyw bryderon sydd ganddynt yn agored, fel mater o drefn a heb ofni beirniadaeth. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n cydnabod y gall amgylchiadau godi lle mae aelod o staff y practis yn teimlo na all godi ei bryder/phryder yn y practis. Mewn parodrwydd ar gyfer achlysuron o’r fath, awgrymiad y dylai PCTau ddynodi aelod o staff i weithredi fel pwynt cyswllt ar gyfer holl staff practisau. Dylai manylion cyswllt y person hwnnw ymddangos ym mholisïau ‘datgelu cyfrinachau’ y practis. Dylai ef neu hi amlygu ei hun i holl staff practisau sy’n gweithio yn ardal y PCT. Os caiff ‘porth unigol’ ei greu, ar ba bynnag ffurf, dylai’r polisi nodi manylion cyswllt hwnnw hefyd. Dylai’r PCTau hefyd sicrhau, trwy hyfforddiant, bod staff practisau yn deall pwysigrwydd hysbysu ynghylch pryderon a gwybod sut i wneud hynny.
Rwyf yn argymell y dylai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd ofyn i sefydliadau gofal iechyd preifat gael polisi ysgrifenedig clir ar gyfer codi pryderon. Rwyf hefyd yn argymell mai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd a’r GMC ddylai fod y ‘personau a ragnodwyd’ at ddiben derbyn pryderon yn unol â Deddf Datgelu Budd y Cyhoedd 1998 (PIDA), am unrhyw faterion gofal iechyd, p’un a ydynt yn codi yn y sector cyhoeddus neu breifat.
Cefnogaeth ar Lefel Genedlaethol ar gyfer y Rheiny Sy’n Dymuno Codi Pryderon am Ofal Iechyd
Ym Mhennod 11, trafodais ddarparu cefnogaeth a chyngor i’r rheiny sy’n dymuno codi pryderon am unrhyw agwedd ar ofal iechyd. Gwnes nifer o argymhellion am ddiwygiadau posibl i’r PIDA, yn enwedig ym mharagraffau 11.91-11.115 a 11.124. Ni fyddaf yn ailadrodd y drafodaeth yn ymwneud â’r argymhellion hynny yma. Rwyf hefyd yn argymell, ym mharagraff 11.117, y dylai’r polisïau ar gyfer codi pryderon yn y sector gofal iechyd allu cael eu defnyddio mewn perthynas â phersonau nad ydynt yn rhannu cyflogaeth gyffredin. Er enghraifft, dylai fod gan feddyg neu nyrs sy’n gweithio mewn ysbyty lwybr er mwyn gallu codi pryder am feddyg teulu ac i’r gwrthwyneb. Dylai fod gan feddyg neu nyrs sy’n gweithio yn y sector preifat lwybr er mwyn gallu codi pryder am ymarfer gweithiwr proffesiynol gofal iechyd sy’n gweithio yn y GIG ac i’r gwrthwyneb. Rwyf hefyd yn argymell y dylai fod rhyw fath o ddarpariaeth (llinell gymorth fwy na thebyg) i alluogi unrhyw berson, p’un a yw’n gweithio ym maes iechyd ai peidio, i gael cyngor am y ffordd orau o godi pryder am fater gofal iechyd ac am oblygiadau gwneud hynny. Yn fy marn i, dylai hwn gael ei ddarparu ar lefel genedlaethol. Nid wyf wedi gwneud unrhyw argymhellion ynghylch y dull y dylid ei ddarparu. Fodd bynnag, mae’n ymddangos y gall fod yn bosibl cysylltu’r llinell gymorth hon â’r ‘porth unigol’ sy’n cael ei ystyried y soniais amdano ym mharagraffau 27.85-27.88 uchod.

---  ---
Gwybodaeth sydd ar gael i Gyflogwyr a Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol
Un o’r materion a drafodwyd yn eithaf helaeth yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad oedd yr anhawster yr oedd PCTau yn ei gael yn dilysu gwybodaeth am feddygon sy’n gwneud cais i gael eu cynnwys ar eu rhestrau. Rhestrais y gwiriadau y dylid eu cynnal ym mharagraff 5.43. Dywedodd un tyst bod y broses yn golygu gorfod rhedeg ar ôl y wybodaeth. Gall y broses o sicrhau cofrestriad gyda’r GMC, y Swyddfa Cofnodion Troseddol (SCT) a’r Gwasanaeth Rheoli Diogelwch ac Atal Twyll y GIG hyd yn oed gymryd cryn amser. Awgrymodd sawl aelod o staff PCT y byddent yn croesawu dull mwy cyd-drefnus o gynnal y gwiriadau hyn.
Ar wahân i’r wybodaeth y gellir ei chael gan y tair ffynhonnell hynny, ceir llawer iawn o wybodaeth arall am feddygon a fyddai’n werthfawr i PCTau ac i gyflogwyr posibl. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes modd i bersonau neu gyrff o’r fath ganfod yr holl wybodaeth y maent yn ei dymuno am ymgeisydd ar gyfer swydd neu ar gyfer eu cynnwys ar restr. Er enghraifft, byddant yn derbyn geirda gan un cyflogwr neu PCT blaenorol, neu ddau efallai, ond ni fydd ganddynt unrhyw syniad a oes cyflogwyr eraill sydd wedi diswyddo neu ddisgyblu’r meddyg. Ni allant ganfod a wnaed cwyn neu gyfres o gŵynion hyd yn oed. Yn Adroddiad yr ymchwiliad annibynnol i’r ffordd y gwnaeth y GIG ddelio â’r honiadau am ymddygiad Clifford Ayling (Adroddiad Ayling), amlygwyd y broblem o dynnu ynghyd ac olrhain cofnodion cwynion gwahanol am yr un meddyg. Mynegwyd pryder tebyg yn Adroddiad yr ymchwiliad a gynhaliwyd gan CHI i’r cwynion amrywiol a wnaed am y meddyg teulu, Peter Green.
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, daeth y syniad i’r amlwg y dylai fod cronfa ddata ganolog o wybodaeth am bob meddyg yn gweithio yn y DU. Ni fyddai’n agored i’r cyhoedd, ond byddai ar gael i swyddogion cyrff y GIG ac i achredu cyflogwyr yn y sector preifat, yn ogystal â chyrff eraill gyda diddordeb dilys, fel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, y GMC, yr NCAA a’r Adran Iechyd. Byddai sawl dosbarth o wybodaeth yn cael eu bwydo i mewn. Byddai’r rhain yn cynnwys cofnodion cyfredol a ddelir gan y GMC (gan gynnwys unrhyw hanes FTP) er y gallai fod yn fwy cyfleus i greu cyswllt i wefan y GMC, a byddaf yn trafod cynnwys y wefan hon isod. Byddai’n rhaid i’r gronfa ddata gynnwys gwybodaeth a ddarparwyd gan y SCT neu fod yn gysylltiedig yn electronig â’r sefydliad hwnnw. Byddai gwybodaeth y SCT yn cynnwys manylion collfarnau (gan gynnwys y rheiny a arweiniodd at ryddhau cyfan gwbl neu amodol) a rhybuddion; gellid rhoi nodyn wrth wybodaeth arall, mwy sensitif er mwyn gallu gwneud ymholiadau pellach. Yn ogystal, byddai’r gronfa ddata yn cynnwys gwybodaeth gan Wasanaeth Atal Twyll a Rheoli Diogelwch y GIG, cofnod o unrhyw gamau disgyblu gan gyflogwyr, manylion unrhyw weithredu ynghylch rheoli rhestrau gan PCTau, unrhyw adroddiadau gwael a baratowyd yn dilyn archwilio cwyn, unrhyw ganfyddiadau gwael gan banel y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd neu gan Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd ac unrhyw ganfyddiadau o esgeulustod mewn gweithrediadau esgeulustod clinigol a setliadau hawlio am esgeulustod clinigol uwchlaw’r lefel iawndal ragderfynedig. Dylid gosod lefel yr iawndal ar drothwy isel, £5000 dyweder, er mwyn dal achosion yn ymwneud â marwolaethau plant, lle mae’r iawndal yn anhebygol o fod yn fwy na rhyw £11,000 ar atebolrwydd llawn a gallent gael eu setlo am lai na’r gwerth llawn. Yn ogystal, byddai nodyn yn cael ei wneud o ran pob swydd a gymerir gan feddyg mewn cyflogaeth, ac felly’n creu
parhaus. I feddygon hunangyflogedig, byddai’n rhaid nodi pob practis meddyg teulu neu wasanaeth dirprwyo y mae’r meddyg wedi gweithio iddynt. Gellid cynnwys enw sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol y meddyg (os oes un). Hefyd, os oes gan y meddyg unrhyw fuddiannau ariannol y dylid eu datgan, gellid eu hymgorffori hefyd. Byddai meddygon yn gallu cael mynediad i’w nodiadau eu hunain i sicrhau cywirdeb y wybodaeth a gedwir.
Byddwn yn awgrymu y dylai fod yn ofynnol i gyflogwyr y sector preifat ddarparu gwybodaeth berthnasol. Gallai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd wneud hwn yn amod cofrestru. Hefyd, dylai dirprwyo gwasanaethau orfod darparu gwybodaeth i’r PCT lle mae ganddynt gontract, a byddai ganddo wedyn hawl i gael mynediad i’r wybodaeth ar y gronfa ddata, trwy’r PCT berthnasol unwaith eto.
Mae’r GIG eisoes wedi dechrau casglu gwybodaeth am feddygon unigol sy’n gweithio yn y gwasanaeth ysbytai trwy ddefnyddio Cardiau Smart Iechyd Galwedigaethol y GIG. Byddwn yn tybio y gallai’r ddarpariaeth hon gael ei hymestyn yn ddefnyddiol i feddygon sy’n gweithio mewn gofal sylfaenol ac y gellid ymestyn categorïau gwybodaeth y cardiau i gynnwys y rheiny yr wyf wedi eu crybwyll uchod.
Yn y seminarau, cafwyd hefyd drafodaeth ynghylch a ddylid cynnwys honiadau di-sail ar y gronfa ddata ganolog. Yn naturiol, roedd y barnau’n amrywio. Mynegwyd y farn y byddai’n annheg iawn i gynnwys deunydd o’r fath. Roedd eraill o’r farn, yng ngoleuni achosion fel un Peter Green, lle y derbyniwyd nifer o gŵynion di-sail ond heb eu cysylltu, byddai o fudd i ddiogelwch cleifion pe byddai gwybodaeth o’r fath yn cael ei chynnwys ar y gronfa ddata. Yn ystod gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, cafwyd trafodaeth ynghylch tystiolaeth yn cael ei rhoi i’r Ymchwiliad Annibynnol yn deillio o lofruddiaethau Soham, wedi ei chadeirio gan Syr Michael Bichard. Aeth y drafodaeth fel hyn y fras, pe byddai Heddlu Humberside wedi cadw gwybodaeth am gŵynion di-sail yn erbyn Ian Huntley ac wedi eu trosglwyddo i Heddlu Swydd Caergrawnt pan wnaethant eu hymholiadau cyn cyflogaeth, mwy na thebyg na fyddai Huntley wedi cael ei gyflogi yng Ngholeg Cymunedol Soham a hwyrach na fyddai Holly Wells a Jessica Chapman wedi marw. Sylweddolodd y rheiny a oedd yn rhan o’r drafodaeth a oedd wedi gwrthwynebu’n flaenorol i gasglu gwybodaeth am gŵynion di-sail ar unwaith y gallai deunydd o’r fath fod yn bwysig iawn o ran amddiffyn cleifion. Y farn oedd na ddylid cynnwys gwybodaeth o’r fath ar y gronfa ddata ganolog, ond y dylid nodi ei fod yn ddeunydd cyfrinachol wedi ei gadw gan gorff a enwir. Byddai datgelu’r wybodaeth honno yn dibynnu pwy oedd yn gofyn amdani ac at ba ddiben.
Byddai cronfa ddata ganolog nid yn unig yn ei wneud yn llawer symlach i gyflogwr neu PCT gynnal gwiriadau cyn cyflogaeth neu cyn derbyn, byddai dibynadwyedd y gwiriadau hynny’n gwella’n sylweddol. Byddai gan y mwyafrif helaeth o feddygon ddim byd i boeni yn ei gylch; byddai eu gwybodaeth nhw yn cynnwys dim mwy na chymwysterau a’u
. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r meddygon hynny sy’n peri problemau ac sy’n symud ymlaen o le i le yn achosi mwy o broblemau, yn cael eu canfod yn gyflym.
Codwyd y cwestiwn yn ymwneud â phwy ddylai gadw’r gronfa ddata hon. I fod yn ddefnyddiol, dylai gynnwys y DU gyfan a chynnwys meddygon sy’n gweithio yn y GIG, yn y sector preifat ac yn y ddau. Er hynny, ymddengys i mi y byddai’n rhaid iddo gael ei ariannu gan y Llywodraeth a byddai’n rhaid dod o hyd i gynhaliwr addas. Ymddengys mai’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yw’r corff mwyaf addas. Hwyrach y bydd hyn yn cyd-fynd â chynlluniau’r Comisiwn ar gyfer systemau gwybodaeth.
Gwybodaeth Bellach i’w Darparu i Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol
Ym Mhennod 5, disgrifiais y wybodaeth y mae’n rhaid i Feddygon Teulu ei darparu bellach wrth geisio cael eu cynnwys ar restr PCT. Mae’n cynnwys gwybodaeth am gollfarnau, rhybuddion, mathau amrywiol o ganfyddiadau disgyblu neu FTP a gweithdrefnau sy’n parhau. Mae meddygon sydd eisoes ar restr PCT yn gaeth i hysbysu’r PCT ynghylch unrhyw wybodaeth newydd berthnasol. Yn yr Ymchwiliad, cafwyd trafodaeth ynghylch a ddylid cynnwys categorïau eraill o wybodaeth, yn enwedig gwybodaeth ynghylch hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol.
Creodd y ddadl peth gwrthdaro. Ar un llaw, dywedwyd bod hawliad esgeulustod clinigol yn ffordd arall o gŵyno neu fynegi pryder a’i fod yn wirioneddol bwysig at ddibenion rheolaeth glinigol. Ar y llaw arall, dywedwyd y gwneir llawer o hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol nad ydynt yn haeddiannol o gwbl ac felly, na ddylid hysbysu’r PCT yn eu cylch na’u cofnodi mewn unrhyw fodd. Dywedwyd, mewn llawer o achosion, bod llythyr cyn gweithredu’n cael ei ysgrifennu ac yna nad oedd y mater yn mynd ymhellach. Dadleuwyd hefyd bod rhai hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol yn cael eu setlo am symiau eithaf mawr hyd yn oed os nad oeddent yn haeddiannol; gwnaed hyn am resymau masnachol, i osgoi costau. Mae fy mhrofiad hir o ymgyfreitha niwed personol wedi fy nysgu nad yw hyn yn wir. Cynigir setliadau yn aml, mae’n wir, i ddileu’r perygl y bydd y gweithredu yn llwyddo ond nid lle y bernir nad oes unrhyw risg.
Yn fy marn i mae gweithredu sifil yn ddigon tebyg i gŵynion a phryderon. Ni fyddai’n rhesymegol cadw cofnodion o gŵynion a phryderon am y cydnabyddir eu pwysigrwydd o ran rheolaeth glinigol, ac i anwybyddu hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol. Nid yw’r ffaith nad yw’r honiadau a wneir mewn rhai hawliadau o’r fath yn haeddiannol yn ymddangos yn bwysig i mi. Nid yw rhai cwynion yn haeddiannol iawn ond nid yw hynny’n rheswm dros eu hanwybyddu; cydnabyddir gwerth eu harchwilio. Pe byddai cofnod yn cael ei gadw o’r hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol hynny a ddaeth i’r casgliad bod esgeulustod (a does dim llawer) a’r rheini a setlwyd am £5000 neu fwy, nid wyf yn credu y byddai unrhyw anghyfiawnder wedi digwydd a byddai gan y PCT wybodaeth ddefnyddiol a pherthnasol ar ei ffeil. Dylai’r wybodaeth honno hefyd ymddangos ar y gronfa ddata ganolog, pe byddai’n cael ei chreu.
Rwyf hefyd yn ystyried y byddai’n briodol i PCTau roi rhybudd pan y ceir gweithredu. Yn fy marn i, y llythyr hawlio, sy’n cydymffurfio â’r gofynion protocol cyn gweithredu yn y Rheolau Gweithdrefn Sifil (yn cael ei dderbyn gan y meddyg neu ei sefydliad amddiffyn meddygol, neu gynrychiolwyr cyfreithiol y sefydliad hwnnw) ddylai ysgogi hysbysu PCT am weithredu sifil. Anfonir llythyrau o’r fath ond pan ceir bwriad difrifol i fynd ymlaen â’r achos. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod dyletswydd ar feddygon i hysbysu unrhyw PCT y maent ar eu rhestr o’r ffaith bod llythyr hawlio o’r fath wedi ei dderbyn a syniad o’r honiadau a wnaed. Dylent hefyd fod yn gorfod hysbysu ynghylch y canlyniad.
Fel yr wyf wedi dweud, ceir gofyniad parhaus yn unol â darpariaethau Rheoliadau y Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol (Rhestr Perfformwyr) 2004 ar feddygon i wneud y datganiadau perthnasol i’w PCTau. Yn fy marn i, dylai methu â gwneud hyn yn gywir olygu camymddwyn o ddifrifoldeb digonol i achosi cyfeirio’r achos at y GMC.
Gwybodaeth sydd ar gael i’r Cyhoedd a Chleifion
Yn ystod yr Ymchwiliad, roedd trafodaeth ynghylch faint o wybodaeth am feddygon ddylai fod ar gael i’r cyhoedd ac i gleifion y meddygon. Roedd hyn yn briodol yng nghyd-destun Ymchwiliad i weithgareddau meddyg a oedd, 24 o flynyddoedd cyn darganfod ei fod yn llofrudd, wedi cael ei gollfarnu o gyfres o droseddau o anonestrwydd mewn cysylltiad â’i ddibyniaeth ar gyffur rheoledig. Mae’n gwbl naturiol bod perthnasau dioddefwyr Shipman yn dweud , ‘Pe byddem ond yn gwybod.’
Mae’r wybodaeth sydd ar gael i gleifion a darpar gleifion am feddyg teulu unigol yn gyfyngedig iawn o fewn y system bresennol. Gall y cyhoedd ddod yn ymwybodol o gollfarnau troseddol neu faterion disgyblu meddyg trwy sylw yn y wasg. Fodd bynnag, nid oed unrhyw ffordd y gellir cael gwybodaeth gynhwysfawr. Ar adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, byddai’r GMC, mewn ymateb i ymholiad penodol, yn darparu gwybodaeth i aelodau’r cyhoedd am amodau presennol cofrestru meddyg ac am unrhyw ganfyddiadau disgyblu blaenorol. Fodd bynnag, nid oedd y wybodaeth ar gael ar wefan y GMC - ac mae hyn yn wir o hyd - a chaiff ei darparu ond mewn ymateb i ymholiadau penodol dros y ffôn. Yn y seminarau, dywedodd Dr Lewis, yn cynrychioli’r GMC, nad oedd y GMC ar y pryd wedi sefydlu strategaeth ar ddatgelu ond ei fod yn y broses o ddatblygu strategaeth o’r fath trwy ymgynghoriad cyhoeddus a phroffesiynol. Mae hynny wedi digwydd bellach a byddaf yn disgrifio polisi newydd y GMC ar ddatgelu yn ddiweddarach yn y Bennod hon.
Egwyddor Datgelu
Gofynnwyd i ymatebwyr Papur Ymgynghorol yr Ymchwiliad a ddylai cleifion a darpar gleifion gael mwy o wybodaeth am eu meddyg teulu i’w galluogi i wneud dewis gwybodus wrth benderfynu a ddylent fynd at feddyg a ddylent dderbyn triniaeth ganddo/ganddi. Gofynnwyd i ymatebwyr pa wybodaeth ddylai fod ar gael gan gynnwys, fel enghreifftiau, collfarnau troseddol blaenorol, canfyddiadau disgyblu a chyfyngiadau presennol ar drwydded meddyg i ymarfer, neu gyfyngiadau yn y gorffennol. Gofynnwyd i ymatebwyr hefyd i roi sylwadau ar y ffordd y dylid darparu’r wybodaeth i gleifion.
Roedd ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol a chyfranogwyr yn y seminarau yn rhanedig ar egwyddor darparu mwy o wybodaeth i gleifion. Un o eiriolwyr cryfaf bod yn gwbl agored oedd Syr Donald Irvine. Dywedodd bod y mater yn un o ymreolaeth cleifion; mae gan gleifion hawl i gael mynediad i wybodaeth sydd eisoes ym maes y cyhoedd. Dywedodd Syr Donald ei fod yn ymwybodol o ddau achos lle’r oedd cleifion wedi dod yn ymwybodol o hanes meddyg ar ôl i broblem godi; roeddent yn grac bod y wybodaeth wedi cael ei chadw oddi wrthynt yn flaenorol ac nad oeddent wedi cael y cyfle i wneud penderfyniad gan wybod yr holl ffeithiau. Roedd y cleifion yn teimlo bod pethau wedi cael eu ‘celu’. Cytunodd nifer o gyfranogwyr y seminar gyda’r farn hon, gan gynnwys yr Athro Halligan, Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol Lloegr a Chyfarwyddwr Rheolaeth Glinigol y GIG. Dywedodd bod yr angen i hysbysu cleifion ac i’w galluogi i wneud eu penderfyniadau eu hunain ynghylch sut i ddewis gan bwy y maent yn cael triniaeth yn deillio o sefyllfa freintiedig meddygon a’r ymddiriedaeth y mae cleifion, o anghenraid, yn rhoi ynddynt.
Mynegodd nifer fawr o ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol y farn wrthgyferbyniol. Eu dadl hwy oedd mai’r GMC, PCT neu gyflogwr meddyg ddylai benderfynu a oedd meddyg yn addas i ymarfer ac y dylai cleifion fod yn gallu dibynnu ar y cyrff hynny i gyflawni eu rolau perthnasol. Nid oedd (neu ni ddylai fod) angen i gleifion cael mwy o wybodaeth am eu meddygon. Dywedodd y BMA yn ei ymateb ysgrifenedig i’r Papur Ymgynghorol y dylid sicrhau cleifion bod yna safonau gofynnol, sy’n lleihau cyhyd â phosibl, y posibilrwydd o gleifion yn dod i gysylltiad â meddyg teulu a allai eu niweidio. Yn y cyd-destun hwnnw, dywedwyd y dylai’r GMC a’r PCTau fod yn fwy cadarn yn eu hymagwedd tuag at eu rolau perthnasol o drwyddedu a phenodi meddygon. Cytunodd Mr Michael Summers, Cadeirydd Cymdeithas y Cleifion, mai’r GMS a’r PCTau oedd yn gyfrifol am sicrhau addasrwydd i ymarfer. Roedd yn credu y gallai darparu mwy o wybodaeth beri i gleifion boeni, a fyddai’n arbennig o niweidiol i’r cleifion hynny sy’n byw yn rhannau o’r wlad lle nad yw’n bosibl newid meddyg. Â phob parch i Mr Summers, ymddengys i mi nad yw’r mater yn ymwneud â dewis meddyg. Os mai’r unig feddyg teulu y mae gan glaf benywaidd fynediad ato yw un gwrywaidd sydd wedi cael ei gollfarnu o ymosodiad anweddus, hwyrach y byddai’n well ganddi gael cwmni wrth fynd i’w weld.
Nododd nifer o ymatebwyr broblemau ymarferol yn gysylltiedig â darparu gwybodaeth. Dywedodd Dr Grenville, a oedd yn cynrychioli’r BMA, byddai gwybodaeth yn unig am ddigwyddiad yn annigonol i roi dewis gwybodus i glaf ac y byddai angen i’r claf allu gofyn a chael atebion boddhaol i gwestiynau am hanes meddyg. Dywedodd, yn ymarferol, y byddai hyn yn anodd iawn i’w gyflawni. Rwy’n gweld cryfder y ddadl honno. Roedd rhai ymatebwyr o’r farn y byddai darparu rhai mathau o wybodaeth yn ei gwneud yn amhosibl i feddyg teulu barhau i ymarfer, am y byddai cleifion yn amharod i gael eu trin gan y meddyg hwnnw. Fy ymateb i yw, os yw hanes meddyg yn y gorffennol mor wael, efallai fod y cleifion yn wael ac na ddylai ef/hi fod yn ymarfer o gwbl.
Dywedodd yr Athro Roland ei fod wedi bod yn gysylltiedig ag ymchwil i effaith darparu gwybodaeth i’r cyhoedd. Roedd yr ymchwil wedi’i anelu’n benodol at ddarparu gwybodaeth am ansawdd gofal. Roedd wedi dangos bod cyhoeddi gwybodaeth wedi cael mwy o effaith ar feddygon a rheolwyr gofal iechyd nac ar gleifion. Er ei fod yn cydnabod y gallai rhyddhau manylion am, er enghraifft, collfarnau troseddol meddyg achosi cleifion i wrthod cael eu trin gan y meddyg hwnnw, mae’r ymchwil yn awgrymu na fyddai hyn yn wir. Cytunodd Ms Freedland, gan ddweud nad oedd yn meddwl y byddai darparu gwybodaeth i gleifion am feddyg teulu o reidrwydd yn arwain at nifer fawr o gleifion yn gadael. Yn ei ymateb ysgrifenedig i’r Papur Ymgynghorol, dywedodd CHI ei fod yn credu bod angen ymchwil pellach i effaith rhannu gwybodaeth o’r fath gyda chleifion.
Wrth dderbyn tystiolaeth, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad am achos meddyg a gollfarnwyd o ddynladdiad claf ac, fel amod ei gofrestru, roedd angen iddo gael cyfnod o ymarfer gyda goruchwyliaeth. Canfuwyd goruchwylydd addas a phenderfynodd ef ac aelodau eraill o’r practis na allent gadw eu cleifion yn y tywyllwch ynghylch y sefyllfa. Anfonwyd llythyr at y cleifion yn nodi hanes y meddyg, gan ddisgrifio’r rhaglen adferol yr oedd yn ymgymryd â hi ac yn esbonio bod rhagofalon ar waith i amddiffyn cleifion. Roedd ymateb y cleifion yn dda; ymddengys eu bod yn barod i fynd i weld y meddyg.
Categorïau Gwybodaeth y Dylai Cleifion Allu eu Gweld
Ceir sawl categori gwybodaeth y gall cleifion ddymuno eu gweld, gan gynnwys collfarnau troseddol a materion troseddol sy’n parhau, hanes FTP GMC meddyg a materion FTP sy’n parhau, camau a gymerwyd ynghylch cynnwys meddyg ar restr y PCT a chanfyddiadau esgeulustod clinigol. Cafwyd cytundeb eang y dylai gwybodaeth ynghylch cyfyngiadau cyfredol ar drwydded meddyg i ymarfer fod ar gael.
Roedd nifer o’r ymatebwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol a chyfranogwyr yn y seminarau yn credu y dylid defnyddio’r egwyddor arweiniol y dylai unrhyw wybodaeth sydd wedi bod yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd ar unrhyw adeg fod ar gael i gleifion. Fodd bynnag, mae’r egwyddor yn haws i’w cyhoeddi nag ydyw i’w gweithredu. Mae collfarnau troseddol yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd pan fyddant yn digwydd ond mae’r cyhoedd yn anghofio amdanynt yn fuan. Ar ôl rhai blynyddoedd, ystyrir eu bod wedi eu ‘treulio’ yn unol â darpariaethau Deddf Adsefydlu Troseddwyr 1974 (Deddf 1974). Cynlluniwyd Deddf 1974 i ganiatáu pobl sydd wedi’u collfarnu o droseddau i roi’r gorffennol y tu cefn iddynt. Yn gyffredinol, nid oes angen i bersonau o’r fath ddatgelu troseddau wedi’u treulio wrth wneud cais am swyddi. Ceir, fodd bynnag, rai eithriadau i’r rheol gyffredinol hon, un sy’n ymestyn i waith yn ymwneud â darparu gwasanaethau iechyd. Mae gofyn i feddygon ddatgan unrhyw gollfarnau y gall fod ganddynt mewn ymateb i gwestiynau gan ddarpar gyflogwr neu PCO.
O’r ymatebwyr hynny a oedd o’r farn y dylai’r cyhoedd gael mynediad i wybodaeth am gollfarnau troseddol, roedd rhai yn credu y dylai gwybodaeth o’r fath fod ar gael drwy gydol gyrfa meddyg. Roedd eraill yn teimlo y dylai’r wybodaeth fod ar gael tan bod y gollfarn wedi’i threulio yn unig, fel y diffiniwyd gan Ddeddf 1974. Roedd un ymatebydd o’r farn bod angen hyblygrwydd ynghylch digwyddiadau yn y gorffennol ac y dylai gwybodaeth am ddigwyddiadau yn y gorffennol fod ar gael ond os yw’n ‘rhy berthnasol/arwyddocaol i beidio â’i rhannu gyda chleifion’. Gallaf weld grym hynny ond credaf y byddai cynllun o’r fath yn arwain at ansicrwydd a dadleuon diddiwedd. Cafwyd cefnogaeth eang ymysg cyfranogwyr y seminar i’r cynnig na ddylai materion sy’n cael eu harchwilio fod yn rhan o’r wybodaeth sydd ar gael i gleifion hyd nes y canfyddir y ffeithiau.
Cafwyd peth cefnogaeth ymysg cyfranogwyr i’r Papur Ymgynghorol i’r cynnig y dylai gwybodaeth am ganlyniad hawliadau esgeulustod clinigol llwyddiannus yn erbyn meddyg fod ar gael i gleifion. Daw rhai canfyddiadau esgeulustod clinigol yn erbyn meddygon i diriogaeth y cyhoedd am fod llysoedd sifil yn gyffredinol yn cyfarfod yn gyhoeddus a bod canfyddiadau barnwr mewn achos esgeulustod clinigol ar gael yn gyhoeddus. Fodd bynnag, cafwyd peth gwrthwynebiad i’r syniad hwn. Dywedwyd bod achosion esgeulustod clinigol sy’n mynd i diriogaeth y cyhoedd mewn lleiafrif, ac felly byddai eu datgelu yn tangynrychiolaeth ac yn gamarweiniol. Mae’n eithaf arferol i’r achosion gwaethaf o esgeulustod gael eu setlo’n breifat heb wrandawiad cyhoeddus. Hefyd, gall hawlio iawndal fethu, nid am nad oedd y meddyg yn esgeulus ond am na chafwyd y canlyniadau a honnwyd yn sgil yr esgeulustod. Yn olaf, dywedwyd bod esgeulustod ar ran meddyg yn aml yn rhan o fethiant mwy eang a bod cyfraniad meddyg yn anodd i’w bennu.
Awgrymodd Dr Reith y byddai’n synhwyrol gofyn barn cleifion ar y math o wybodaeth y dylent ei chael.
Dulliau Gwneud Gwybodaeth ar Gael
Awgrymwyd amrywiaeth o wahanol ddulliau o ddarparu gwybodaeth i gleifion yn yr ymatebion ysgrifenedig i’r Papur Ymgynghorol yn y seminarau. Dadleuodd un ymatebydd y dylid darparu’r wybodaeth yn rhagweithiol fel bod yr holl gleifion yn ei derbyn, nid yr ychydig a oedd yn ddigon penderfynol ei ganfod yn unig. Roedd gan ymatebydd arall farn gwbl wahanol gan gredu y dylid darparu’r wybodaeth i’r cleifion hynny a oedd yn gwneud cais penodol am y wybodaeth yn unig. Ar ben hynny, roedd yr ymatebydd o’r farn y byddai’n rhaid cyfiawnhau’r cais am wybodaeth; mewn geiriau eraill, dylid rhoi rhesymau dros wneud y cais.
Yn y seminarau, dywedodd Dr Wilson y byddai’n well pe byddai’r wybodaeth yn cael ei darparu i’r cleifion yn unigol gan rywun yn y PCT neu o bractis y meddyg teulu, yn hytrach na thrwy lythyr. Mae’n ymddangos i mi y byddai’n anodd gwneud hynny. Dywedodd y Fonesig Lesley Southgate y dylai’r meddygon eu hunain fod yn gyfrifol am ddarparu gwybodaeth am gyfyngiadau ar eu hymarfer. Awgrymodd mai un dull fyddai llythyr ar y cyd i’w gytuno rhwng Prif Weithredwr y PCT a’r meddyg, yn nodi’r wybodaeth y dylid ei datgelu yn ogystal â’r camau a oedd yn cael eu cymryd i sicrhau nad oedd cleifion mewn perygl, ynghyd ag unrhyw ddeunydd arall a allai fod yn briodol mewn achos unigol. Cytunodd y Fonesig Lesley y byddai systemau o’r fath yn fwy effeithiol yn achos meddyg teulu yn gweithio ar gyfer gwasanaeth dirprwyo.
Posibilrwydd arall yw i’r wybodaeth berthnasol ymddangos ar wefan, lle y gall cleifion a’r cyhoedd fynd ati, fel sy’n digwydd mewn sawl awdurdodaeth dramor.
Safbwynt Rhyngwladol
Fel rhan o’i gyflwyniad i’r Ymchwiliad, siaradodd Dr Rocco Gerace, Cofrestrydd, Coleg Meddygon a Llawfeddygon Ontario, Toronto, am y wefan a weithredir gan y Coleg. O’r wefan, gall cleifion gael gwybodaeth am gyfeirio meddyg i Bwyllgor Disgyblu’r Coleg ynghyd ag unrhyw ganfyddiadau gan y Pwyllgor. Mae’r Coleg ar hyn o bryd yn ceisio newid mewn deddfwriaeth er mwyn ganiatáu cyhoeddi ymgymeriadau gan feddygon mewn achosion nad ydynt yn dod gerbron y Pwyllgor Disgyblu.
Dywedodd Dr Gerace bod categorïau amrywiol o wybodaeth yn cael eu cadw yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd am gyfnodau gwahanol. Byddai canfyddiadau’r Pwyllgor Disgyblu yn ymwneud â cham-drin rhywiol ar ran meddyg, er enghraifft, yn parhau ar y cofnod trwy gydol gyrfa meddyg. Am ganfyddiadau llai, ceir cyfnodau sefydlog pan fyddai gwybodaeth ar gael ac, am gategorïau penodol o weithgaredd, y Cofrestrydd sydd yn penderfynu pa mor hir y dylai’r wybodaeth aros ar y wefan. Pe byddai meddyg yn mynd i mewn i’r hyn sy’n gyfwerth â hen weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC, ni fyddai’r ffaith ei fod ef/ei bod hi mewn gweithdrefnau iechyd yn mynd ar y wefan, ond byddai unrhyw gyfyngiadau ar ei ymarfer/hymarfer yn cael eu cyhoeddi a byddent yn parhau ar y wefan tra byddai’r cyfyngiadau mewn grym. Rwy’n credu y byddai’n werth efelychu’r ymarfer yn Ontario.
Dywedodd Dr Perry Pugno, Cyfarwyddwr Isadran Addysg Feddygol Academi Meddygon Teulu America, yn UDA bod nifer o adnoddau sy’n rhoi gwybodaeth am addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer ar gael i’r cyhoedd. Mae Byrddau Meddygol Taleithiau yn cynnal gwefannau sy’n rhoi gwybodaeth am gamau disgyblu yn erbyn meddygon, collfarnau troseddol a gwybodaeth arall, fel statws trwydded meddyg i ymarfer. Yn ogystal, ceir nifer o wefannau a weithredir ar sail fasnachol ac sy’n cynnwys deunydd tebyg. Un enghraifft y soniwyd amdani gan Dr Pugno oedd ‘Choice Trust’, sy’n cynnwys UDA i gyd. Ariennir y wefan yn rhannol gan hysbysebu, ac mae’r gwasanaeth sylfaenol o sefydlu manylion gweinyddol meddyg am ddim, ond codir tâl am wybodaeth am hanes disgyblu meddyg. Dywedodd Dr Pugno nad yw’r wybodaeth ar y gwefannau sy’n cael eu cynnal yn fasnachol yn gwbl gywir ac, er enghraifft, yn ei achos ei hun, roedd rhai o’r cyfeiriadau a restrwyd ar ‘Choice Trust’ yn anghywir a thros bum mlwydd oed.
Gwybodaeth Sydd Ar Gael Ar Hyn O Bryd Gan y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Ar hyn o bryd, yr unig ddarparwr gwybodaeth swyddogol am feddyg yw’r GMC. Ar adeg ysgrifennu hwn, dim ond gwybodaeth sydd ar y gofrestr feddygol sydd ar gael i’r cyhoedd, er, am resymau y byddaf yn eu hesbonio’n fuan, gall hynny newid yn y dyfodol agos. Wrth gwrs, gall unrhyw un sy’n barod i ddefnyddio cyfleuster chwilio ar y rhyngrwyd ddarganfod llawer mwy.
Ceir dau ddull mynediad i wybodaeth a ddelir ar y gofrestr feddygol. Mae peth gwybodaeth yn ymddangos ar wefan y GMC. Fel arall, gall ymholwr naill ai ffonio neu anfon e-bost at y GMC. Rwy’n tybio y gellir ysgrifennu hefyd. Mae’r wefan yn cynnwys gwybodaeth gyfyngedig iawn. Os yw’r meddyg wedi ei gofrestru ar yr adeg honno ac nad oes unrhyw amodau ynghlwm wrth ei gofrestru, bydd ei gofnod ef/hi yn ymddangos ar y wefan. Mae’r cofnod hwn yn rhoi gwybodaeth ffeithiol sylfaenol, yn nodi a yw’r cofrestriad yn un llawn, yn gyfyngedig neu dros dro ac yn nodi unrhyw gofrestr arbenigol y mae’r meddyg wedi ei chynnwys arni. Os oes unrhyw amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, bydd y wefan yn nodi nad yw’n bosibl dangos cofnod sy’n cyfateb i’r cais ond nad yw hyn yn golygu nad yw’r meddyg wedi ei gofrestru. Darperir rhif ffôn yn ogystal â chyfeiriad e-bost fel y gellir gwneud ymholiadau pellach.
Os yw’r ymholwr yn ffonio’r rhif a roddir ac yn gofyn am gofrestriad y meddyg, dywedir wrtho ef/wrthi hi a yw’r meddyg wedi ei gofrestru ai peidio ac a yw ei gofrestriad yn llawn, yn gyfyngedig neu dros dro. Hyd yn oed os oes amodau ynghlwm wrth ei gofrestru/chofrestru, efallai y dywedir wrth y galwr bod y meddyg wedi ei ‘gofrestru’n llawn’. Mae hynny ond yn golygu nad yw’r cofrestriad dros dro neu’n gyfyngedig. Pe byddai galwr wedi clywed bod amodau ynghlwm wrth gofrestriad ei feddyg ef/ei meddyg hi ac yn ffonio i weld a oedd hyn yn wir, gallai’r datganiad bod meddyg wedi ei ‘gofrestru’n llawn’ roi argraff gamarweiniol, er ei fod, mewn gwirionedd, yn wir. Dim ond os yw’r ymholwr yn gofyn cwestiwn penodol, fel a yw’r meddyg wedi cael ei wahardd neu a yw ef/hi yn gaeth i amodau, y caiff yr ymholwr wybod am faterion o’r fath. Nid yw’r GMC yn gwirfoddoli cyfrif llawn o statws cofrestru’r meddyg; mae’n aros i’r ymholwr ofyn. Yn wir, dim ond gwybodaeth ar yr un lefel ag sy’n ymddangos ar y wefan y gall y person sy’n ateb y ffôn ei darparu. Os yw’r ymholwr am ofyn unrhyw gwestiynau pellach, caiff ei drosglwyddo i rywun arall, mewn adran arall mae’n debyg. Ym mhrofiad aelod o staff yr Ymchwiliad a wnaeth ymholiad ynghylch cofrestriad (yn unol â chyfarwyddyd gennyf i) meddyg yr oedd ei gofrestriad yn gaeth i amodau oedd iddi gael ei chadw’n aros a bod yn rhaid iddi fod yn eithaf taer er mwy cael y wybodaeth yr oedd yn ei cheisio. Yn wir, roedd yn ymddangos yn amheus a fyddai wedi cael y wybodaeth o gwbl pe na fyddai wedi gallu dyfynnu rhif GMC y meddyg. I ddechrau, pan roddodd enw (cywir) y meddyg, dywedwyd wrthi nad oedd meddyg o’r un enw wedi’i gofrestru. Pan wirfoddolodd rif cofrestru’r meddyg, cynghorwyd hi fod y meddyg wedi ei gofrestru ond bod cyplysnod yn ei enw ar gronfa ddata’r GMC.
Mae’n ymddangos i mi nad yw’r broses hon yn ddefnyddiol i’r cyhoedd. Mae’r holl wybodaeth am gofrestriad meddyg yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd a dylai fod ar gael yn hawdd. I’r rheiny sy’n dymuno gweld y wefan, dylid dangos y wybodaeth lawn, gan gynnwys hanes dilead, gwaharddiad, amodau a rhybuddion. I’r rheiny y mae’n well ganddynt ddefnyddio’r ffôn, dylid gwirfoddoli’r wybodaeth lawn, heb i’r ymholwr orfod gofyn cwestiynau penodol. Roeddwn wedi gobeithio, erbyn hyn, y byddai’r GMC wedi gweld y dylid gwneud hyn. Pan roddodd yr Athro Syr Graeme Catto, Llywydd y GMC, dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd, yn ei farn ef, bod i’r GMC wrthod gwneud unrhyw beth sydd eisoes yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd ar gael yn ‘safle gwan i ddechrau ohono’. Derbyniodd nad oedd yn dderbyniol bod yn rhaid i ymholwr ofyn y cwestiynau cywir cyn cael y wybodaeth lawn. Fodd bynnag, ar ddiwedd mis Hydref 2004, nid oedd unrhyw newid yn yr ymarfer o orfodi ymholwyr i ofyn cwestiynau penodol cyn y cawsant y manylion llawn yn ymwneud â chofrestriad y meddyg. Rwy’n gobeithio y gwneir y newid hwnnw yn fuan iawn.
Fel yr wyf wedi dweud, mae amodau a roddir ar gofrestriad meddyg yn faterion sydd yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd. Yn y gorffennol, pe byddai amodau’n cael eu gosod gan y Pwyllgor Iechyd, dim ond yr amodau ar ymarfer y meddyg a fyddai’n cael eu cofnodi ar y gofrestr ac nid unrhyw gyfyngiadau o natur feddygol. Mae hynny’n ymddangos y amhriodol, am y dylid, rwy’n credu, drin unrhyw amodau’n ymwneud â iechyd y meddyg (fel amod ei fod ef/hi yn cael goruchwyliaeth feddygol) yn gyfrinachol, o leiaf cyhyd â bod y cyhoedd yn y cwestiwn. Ar gyfer y dyfodol, yn unol â’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, rwy’n rhagweld y bydd unrhyw amodau ar gofrestru (ar wahân i’r rheiny yn ymwneud â materion meddygol) o osodir gan banel FTP, yn ymddangos yng nghofnod y meddyg ar y gofrestr. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi y dylai amodau a chyfyngiadau y cytunir arnynt yn wirfoddol hefyd ymddangos ar y gofrestr. Mae datganiad o ofynion neu set o ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol y cytunir arnynt yn dilyn asesiad perfformiad, mewn gwirionedd, gymaint yn ‘amod cofrestru’â set o amodau a osodir gan bwyllgor neu banel FTP. Os na fydd y meddyg yn cytuno i’r ymgymeriadau, caiff ef/hi ei chyfeirio at banel FTP. Byddai’r ymgymeriadau ond yn cael eu cynnig yn y lle cyntaf pe byddid o’r farn na allai’r meddyg ymarfer yn ddiogel heb gyfyngiad. Yn yr un modd, os yw’r meddyg yn wirfoddol yn derbyn cyfres o ymgymeriadau oherwydd ei iechyd, maent, yn eu hanfod, yn amodau ar gofrestriad. A yw’n dwyllresymeg i awgrymu nad yw amodau sy’n cael eu derbyn yn wirfoddol yn amodau ar gofrestru. Rwyf yn nodi bod adroddiad y Grŵp Adolygu Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad yn awgrymu y dylid trin cyfyngiadau y cytunir arnynt yn dilyn asesiad perfformiad fel amod ar gofrestru. Yn fy marn i, dylai fod yn amod derbyn ymgymeriadau gwirfoddol eu bod yn cael eu trin yn gyfwerth â’r amodau a osodir.
Newidiadau Sydd Ar Droed i Ymarfer Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Pan roddodd Syr Graeme Catto dystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd bod y GMC yn bwriadu ymgynghori’n gyhoeddus yn 2004 ar gwestiynau datgeliad cyhoeddus. Mae’r ymgynghoriad hwnnw bellach wedi digwydd ac ystyriwyd y canlyniadau mewn cyfarfod o’r GMC ym mis Gorffennaf 2004. Sefydlwyd sawl egwyddor datgelu newydd. Nid wyf yn credu bod y newidiadau hyn wedi cael eu gweithredu eto ond mae’n rhaid eu bod ar droed.
I ddechrau, penderfynwyd, fel egwyddor gyffredinol, y dylid datgelu pob gwybodaeth sydd wedi bod yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd i unrhyw ymholwr. Byddai hynny’n cynnwys unrhyw agwedd ar weithdrefnau’r FTP sydd wedi bod yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd, yn cynnwys y ffaith bod meddyg wedi cael ei gyhuddo o SPM ond wedi ei gael yn ddieuog hyd yn oed. Yn ail, fel egwyddor gyffredinol, dylid ond datgelu gwybodaeth hanesyddol nad yw wedi ei rhoi yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd mewn amgylchiadau cyfyngedig wedi eu diffinio, i’r heddlu, crwner neu
‘ymchwiliad swyddogol’.
Yn drydydd, cytunwyd bod gwybodaeth sydd wedi bod yn nhiriogaeth y cyhoedd ond nad yw bellach yn berthnasol i gofrestriad y meddyg yn cael ei ddatgelu cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn parhau ar y gofrestr. Dengys trawsgrifiad y cyfarfod y cytunwyd y dylid datgelu’r math hwn o wybodaeth i ymholwyr ond y dylid rhoi esboniad gyda’r ateb nad yw’r wybodaeth bellach yn berthnasol i gofrestriad y meddyg.
Y pedwerydd dadansoddiad oedd y dylid datgelu canfod SPM i ymholwyr, p’un a oedd cosb wedi ei gweithredu ai peidio. Dylai hyn barhau cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn parhau ar y gofrestr. Roedd y pumed penderfyniad yn ymwneud â gwybodaeth sy’n berthnasol i ganfod ffeithiau a wnaed yn erbyn meddyg ond nad oedd wedi arwain at ganfod SPM. Ar ôl peth trafodaeth, cytunwyd y byddai gwybodaeth o’r fath yn cael ei darparu i ymholwyr ond bod yn rhaid ei rhoi mewn cyd-destun fel na fyddai’n adlewyrchu’n annheg ar y meddyg. Nodwyd y byddai hyn yn hawdd o ran canfyddiadau diweddar a chanfyddiadau yn y dyfodol am y rhoddir rhesymau bellach, lle, yn y gorffennol, ni wnaed hynny a byddai’n anodd rhoi’r wybodaeth mewn cyd-destun. Yn chweched, cytunwyd, lle y gwnaed canfyddiadau ‘dieuog’ a dim canfyddiadau ‘mewn perthynas â’r honiad’, y byddai’r wybodaeth yn cael ei datgelu i’r ymholwyr, ond eto, y byddai’n cael ei rhoi yn ei chyd-destun.
Yn seithfed, cytunwyd, os oedd rhybudd i’w roi yn y dyfodol gan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, dylid ei ddatgelu i ddarpar gyflogwr ar unrhyw adeg yn ystod y pum mlynedd ddilynol. Penderfynodd y Cyngor ohirio’i benderfyniad ynghylch a ddylai rhybuddion aros ar gofnod y meddyg am gyfnod amhenodol at rai dibenion, gan gynnwys ymholiadau gan ddarpar gyflogwyr. Yn olaf, penderfynodd y Cyngor, yn ystod y cyfnod pum mlynedd cyntaf ar ôl rhoi rhybudd, dylid ei ddatgelu i unrhyw ymholwr, nid i ddarpar gyflogwyr yn unig.
Ymddengys felly y bydd y GMC, yn y dyfodol, yn rhoi atebion llawn i gwestiynau ynghylch hanes FTP blaenorol meddyg. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys na wnaeth y Cyngor gwestiynu’r arfer presennol o roi’r wybodaeth y gofynnwyd yn benodol amdani’n unig. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Finlay Scott, Prif Weithredwr a Chofrestrydd y GMC, bod y GMC yn derbyn oddeutu 1000 o ymholiadau ynghylch cofrestriad yn ddyddiol, ond nad oedd 999 ohonynt yn mynd ymhellach na chanfod a oedd y meddyg wedi’i gofrestru/chofrestru ar hyn o bryd. Nid ymddengys iddo daro’r Cyngor bod hyn yn awgrymu nad yw llawer o ddarpar gyflogwyr (neu PCOau) yn canfod a oes gan y meddyg y mae’n ystyried ei gais/chais hanes FTP, neu hyd yn oed a oes amodau wedi’u pennu arno/arni ar hyn o bryd. Mae hyn yn destun pryder mawr i mi. Mae tystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu bod gwiriadau cyn-cyflogi’n cael eu gwneud gan staff clercio. Byddai’n eithaf posibl i roi i staff felly rhestr o gwestiynau y mae’n rhaid eu gofyn, ond ymddengys o gyngor Mr Scott i’r Cyngor nad yw hyn yn cael ei wneud. Ymddengys i mi y dylai fod llawer mwy o wybodaeth ar y wefan, a dylai llawer mwy o wybodaeth, er budd rheolaeth glinigol, gael ei gwirfoddoli i ymholwyr ffôn pa un a ydynt yn gofyn y cwestiynau iawn ai peidio.
Fframwaith Argymelledig ar gyfer Datgeliad Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC fabwysiadu polisi o ddatgelu mewn haenau. Efallai bod ganddo bolisi felly’n barod; os felly, fy argymhelliad i yw y dylai gael ei addasu yn y ffordd ganlynol.
Yr Haen Gyntaf
Dylai haen gyntaf y datgeliad ymwneud â gwybodaeth sy’n berthnasol i statws cofrestriad cyfredol y meddyg ynghyd â gwybodaeth gyfyngedig benodol am ei hanes FTP blaenorol. Dylai gwybodaeth haen gyntaf gael ei rhoi ar wefan y GMC, a dylai gael ei gwirfoddoli hefyd i unrhyw un sy’n gofyn am wybodaeth am gofrestriad, pa gwestiynau bynnag a ofynnir.
Dylai’r wybodaeth sydd i’w datgelu mewn perthynas â statws cofrestriad presennol y meddyg gynnwys nid yn unig yr amodau hynny a bennwyd gan banel FTP, ond y rheiny hefyd a dderbynnir yn wirfoddol gan y meddyg, ac eithrio’r rheiny sy’n ymwneud â chyflwr neu oruchwyliaeth feddygol y meddyg. Dylai gynnwys hefyd fodolaeth unrhyw orchmynion interim sydd mewn grym. Pan ddaw’r darpariaethau ar gyfer ailddilysu i rym yn 2005, dylai gwybodaeth am statws cofrestriad meddyg gynnwys y flwyddyn y mae’r doctor i’w ailddilysu ynddi, a, phan fydd wedi’i ailddilysu/hailddilysu, y cyfnod y bydd yr ailddilysiad yn effeithiol. Felly, dylai fod modd gweld o’r gofrestr a yw’r meddyg wedi’i ailddilysu/hailddilysu yn y flwyddyn pan oedd i fod i gael ei ailddilysu/hailddilysu.
Bydd yn ofynnol ymgynghori â’r cyhoedd wrth baratoi rhestr o eitemau ychwanegol o wybodaeth y dylid eu datgelu yn yr haen gyntaf. Ni cheisiaf ddarparu rhestr derfynol. Fodd bynnag, mae rhai eitemau hanfodol, a byddaf yn eu nodi.
Os yw meddyg wedi’i ddileu/dileu o’r gofrestr feddygol a’i adfer, rhaid cynnwys y ffeithiau hynny a’r amgylchiadau y tu ôl iddynt. Os oedd y dileu yn wirfoddol, gellir datgan hynny. Os cafodd ei orchymyn gan banel FTP, rhaid i hynny ymddangos, ynghyd â’r rheswm sylfaenol, ar ffurf crynodeb. Er enghraifft, cafodd y meddyg ei ddileu/dileu yn dilyn ei ddyfarnu/dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd o ddynladdiad yn Llys y Goron XXX. Dylai dyddiad y dileu gael ei nodi. Dylai dyddiad yr adfer gael ei nodi. Mewn achos o ddileu yn dilyn canfyddiad o SPM, dylai natur y camymddygiad gael ei hesbonio, er enghraifft, ‘rhagnodi cyffuriau rheoledig yn anghyfrifol’ neu ‘anwedduster gyda chleifion’. Yn fy marn i, dylai gwybodaeth felly fod ar gael cyhyd â bod y meddyg yn parhau ar y gofrestr.
Dylai’r ffaith bod meddyg wedi’i ddileu/dileu o’r gofrestr a’r rhesymau am y dileu fod ar gael i’r cyhoedd ar y lefel haen gyntaf am gyfnod cyfyngedig ar ôl dileu, hyd yn oed os nad yw’r meddyg wedi gwneud cais ac efallai na fydd fyth yn gwneud cais am adfer. Nawr mai pum mlynedd yw’r cyfnod byrraf sy’n gorfod mynd heibio cyn gellir gwneud cais i adfer, byddwn yn awgrymu y dylai gwybodaeth felly fod ar gael am saith mlynedd wedi dileu.
Dylai’r ffaith bod meddyg wedi’i atal/hatal o’r gofrestr gael ei datgelu yn yr haen gyntaf, nid yn unig cyfnod yr ataliad, ond am gyfnod wedi hynny. Byddwn yn awgrymu y gallai cyfnod, dyweder, o bum mlynedd fod yn briodol. Dylai’r ffaith bod amodau wedi’u pennu gael ei datgelu hefyd. Dylai’r cyfnod amser y dylai’r rhain aros ar y gofrestr ddibynnu, yn fy marn i, ar a oedd yr amod yn ymwneud â rhyw ofyniad i ailhyfforddi (ac os felly byddai cyfnod gweddol fyr yn ddigonol) neu a oedd yn golygu rhyw gyfyngiad ar yr amgylchiadau yr oedd y meddyg yn cael parhau i ymarfer, ac os felly, byddai cyfnod hwy yn briodol.
Dylai’r ffaith bod rhybudd wedi’i roi gael ei datgelu yn yr haen gyntaf. Byddwn yn awgrymu mai pum mlynedd fyddai cyfnod priodol ar gyfer datgelu. Dylai esboniad byr am y rheswm gael ei roi: er enghraifft, bod rhybudd wedi’i roi yn dilyn asesiad o berfformiad, neu fod rhybudd wedi’i roi ar ôl derbyn adroddiad am euogfarn am ddwyn nwyddau gwerth £20 o siop.
Dylai euogfarnau blaenorol, yn fy marn i, gael eu datgelu yn yr haen gyntaf waeth beth yw’r sancsiwn, os o gwbl, a bennwyd gan y GMC. Dylai’r cyfnod lle ddylai’r wybodaeth hon aros ar y lefel haen gyntaf, byddwn yn awgrymu, ddilyn y cyfnodau a nodwyd yn Neddf Ailsefydlu Troseddwyr 1974.
Mewn perthynas â hanes FTP neu euogfarnau blaenorol, pan fydd cyfnod datgeliad haen gyntaf wedi dod i ben, dylai nodyn ymddangos ar gofnod y meddyg ar y wefan i’r perwyl bod gwybodaeth bellach am y meddyg y gellir ei chael (yn yr ail haen i bob pwrpas) drwy ffonio rhif y GMC. Dylid dweud wrth unrhyw berson sy’n gofyn am ddatgeliad haen gyntaf dros y ffôn os oes unrhyw wybodaeth bellach y gellir ei datgelu yn yr ail haen.
Yr Ail Haen
Dylai datgeliad ar yr ail haen fod i bobl sy’n gwneud cais penodol am wybodaeth am hanes FTP blaenorol meddyg. Ni ddylid gofyn iddynt ddweud pwy ydynt; ni ddylai fod gofyniad iddynt gyfiawnhau’u cais ychwaith. Dylai’r wybodaeth gael ei rhoi yn ddiymdroi i unrhyw un sy’n gofyn am wybodaeth bellach neu wybodaeth lawn am hanes FTP y meddyg. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd y GMC yn cyfarwyddo’i staff i fod yn barod i roi gwybodaeth yn hytrach na disgwyl i gwestiynau penodol gael eu gofyn. Nid gêm o ‘Ugain Cwestiwn’ ddylai hyn fod.
Yn ei gyfarfod ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, derbyniodd y GMC fel egwyddor gyffredinol bod rhaid iddo ddarparu’r holl wybodaeth am feddyg a fu’n wybodaeth gyhoeddus ar unrhyw adeg. Nid yw wedi penderfynu eto beth i’w wneud ynghylch rhybuddion wedi i bum mlynedd fynd heibio. Credaf fod penderfyniadau’r GMC yn rhai synhwyrol. Rwy’n deall pryderon aelodau’r Cyngor yn iawn y dylai rhai eitemau o wybodaeth flaenorol, am resymau tegwch, gael eu rhoi mewn cyd-destun. Mae hyn yn ymwneud yn benodol ag achosion lle cafwyd bod y meddyg yn ddieuog o honiad o gamymddygiad, ond y ffaith iddo/iddi gael ei gyhuddo/chyhuddo yn gyhoeddus. Ymddengys yn amlwg i mi y dylai gwybodaeth a fu’n wybodaeth gyhoeddus gael ei darparu gan y GMC tra bod y meddyg yn parhau ar y gofrestr.
Effaith yr ail haen fyddai y gallai unrhyw berson a oedd yn ystyried ymuno â rhestr meddyg teulu penodol neu a wyddai ei fod/bod ar fin gael ei gyfeirio/chyfeirio at ymgynghorydd penodol, ganfod yr hyn yr oedd angen iddo/iddi wybod er mwyn gwneud dewis gwybodus, o leiaf cyn belled ag yr oedd unrhyw hanes gyda’r GMC yn berthnasol. Er enghraifft, be bai’r system hon wedi bod ar waith pan oedd Shipman yn ymarfer, byddai unrhyw un a oedd yn ystyried ymuno â’i restr wedi gallu edrych ar ei gofnod ar y wefan, ac wedi gweld bod statws presennol ei gofrestriad yn llawn ac yn ddigyfyngiad, ac nad oedd ganddo unrhyw hanes disgyblu diweddar. Fodd bynnag, byddent wedi cael eu rhybuddio i’r ffaith bod rhywbeth mwy i’w wybod amdano, a byddent, drwy ffonio’r GMC, wedi gallu dod i wybod am ei euogfarnau ym 1976. Credaf fod y trefniant hwn yn darparu cydbwysedd rhesymol rhwng buddiannau’r meddyg wrth allu rhoi’r gorffennol y tu ôl iddo/iddi (a fyddai’n anodd os oedd gwybodaeth lawn yn aros ar y wefan am gyfnod amhenodol), a hawl y cyhoedd a chleifion i gael gwybod popeth a fu unwaith yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus, os ydynt yn barod i wneud galwad ffôn.
Y Drydedd Haen
Mae’r GMC wedi nodi nifer o fathau o wybodaeth y dylid eu datgelu i ddosbarth cyfyngedig o bersonau’n unig y mae angen iddynt wybod amdani er lles y cyhoedd. Mae’n rhaid i’r dosbarthiadau gwybodaeth hyn, fe gredaf, fod yn faterion na fu erioed yn wybodaeth gyhoeddus. Credaf fod yr ymagwedd hon yn gwbl resymol. Byddwn yn galw datgeliad o’r wybodaeth gyfrinachol hon i ddosbarth cyfyngedig o bobl yn ddatgeliad trydedd haen. Pe bai f’argymhellion ar gyfer cronfa ddata ganolog yn cael eu derbyn, byddai’n briodol i’r GMC ‘fflagio’ enwau meddygon yr oedd gwybodaeth gyfrinachol yn cael ei chadw amdanynt.
Gwybodaeth y Dylid ei Rhoi i Gleifion Meddygfa
Hyd yn hyn, rwyf wedi trafod y wybodaeth honno’n unig y dylid ei gwneud ar gael i unrhyw aelod o’r cyhoedd sy’n dymuno’i chael. Fodd bynnag, mae rhai sefyllfaoedd yn codi lle mae dyletswydd bendant, yn fy marn i, i roi gwybodaeth. Soniais uchod am y camau a gymerwyd gan feddygfa deulu a oedd wedi cyflogi, i’w oruchwylio a’i adfer, meddyg a ddyfarnwyd yn euog yn flaenorol o ddynladdiad. Roedd y camau a gymerwyd, yn fy marn i, yn deilwng. Roedd yr amgylchiadau braidd yn anarferol, a gellid dweud y byddai’n amlwg wedi bod yn anghywir i dderbyn y meddyg i’r feddygfa heb hysbysu’r cleifion. Fodd bynnag, yn fy marn i, dylai’r arfer da a fabwysiadwyd yn yr achos hwnnw fod yn berthnasol i bob achos lle mae meddyg yn destun amodau ar ei arfer/harfer. Dylai fod yn berthnasol hefyd, fe gredaf, pan fydd meddyg wedi ailddechrau ymarfer yn dilyn cyfnod o atal neu ddileu. Yn fy marn i, dylai’r feddygfa anfon llythyr o esboniad i’r holl gleifion. Dylai’r drafft gael ei gymeradwyo gan y PCT. Dylai cleifion gael y cyfle i wrthod cael eu trin gan feddyg sy’n destun amodau, neu a gafodd ei atal/hatal neu’i ddileu/dileu yn flaenorol. Fodd bynnag, mae profiad y feddygfa y cyfeiriais ati yn awgrymu na fyddant o reidrwydd yn gwneud hynny.
Nid yw’n rhan o fy nghylch gwaith i wneud argymhellion mewn perthynas â meddygon sy’n gweithio mewn ysbytai. Fodd bynnag, ar ôl darllen yr amgylchiadau a gododd yn achos
, y cyfeiriais ato ym Mhennod 24, gadawaf fy hun i ddweud y dylai unrhyw glaf sydd i gael llawdriniaeth gan feddyg sy’n destun amodau, yn fy marn i, gael gwybod amdanynt, a dylid dweud wrtho/wrthi pa drefniadau sydd ar waith i oruchwylio’r llawdriniaeth. Ni ddylid rhoi’r wybodaeth hon ar gyfnod hwyr pan ofynnir i’r claf lofnodi’r ffurflen gydsynio. Dylid ei rhoi ar adeg pan all y claf, heb amharu ar ei drefniadau/threfniadau personol a chreu anhrefn, wneud dewis i beidio cydsynio i’r meddyg hwnnw/honno gyflawni’r llawdriniaeth.

---  ---
Ym Mhennod 25, esboniais yn o fanwl pam y bu’n angenrheidiol i’r Ymchwiliad archwilio cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ei weithdrefnau FTP newydd. Dywedais fod f’archwiliad o’r hen weithdrefnau FTP wedi nodi nifer o ddiffygion, a’i bod yn bwysig i ganfod a fyddai’r diffygion hynny’n cael eu hunioni dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Yn ystod Pennod 25, adroddais fy marn fod rhai o ddiffygion yr hen weithdrefnau wedi’u hunioni, ond bod yr hen ddiffygion, mewn agweddau pwysig eraill, i’w parhau. Canfûm hefyd bod rhai newidiadau wedi bod yn gam yn ôl. Rwyf eisoes wedi gwneud nifer o awgrymiadau ynghylch y modd y gellid gwella’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Gwneuthum yr argymhellion manwl hyn gan fod Cylch Gorchwyl yr Ymchwiliad yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i mi wneud argymhellion yr wyf yn ystyried eu bod yn angenrheidiol er mwyn diogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol, a chan nad wyf yn bwriadu argymell y dylai’r GMC gael ei amddifadu o’i swyddogaeth FTP. Yn yr adran hon o’r Bennod hon, dof â’r argymhellion hynny ynghyd. Mewn rhai achosion, cyfeiriaf yn ôl yn unig at y darn lle gwnaethpwyd yr argymhelliad gwreiddiol.
Ym Mhennod 18, cyfeiriais at amwysedd canfyddiad y GMC o’i rôl yn y fframwaith rheoleiddio ehangach. Yn y gorffennol, anogodd y cyhoedd i’w weld fel ystorfa ar gyfer pob un o’i gŵynion am feddygon, ond nad oedd ganddo’r adnoddau i ymchwilio i’r holl gŵynion yr oedd yn eu derbyn. Y canlyniad oedd ei fod wedi ceisio ymwrthod â llawer o’r cwynion nad ymchwiliwyd iddynt eisoes gan gyrff eraill, heb hyd yn oed ystyried a oeddent yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. I bob pwrpas, roedd yn ymddwyn fel pe bai’n gorff cyfeirio eilaidd yn hytrach na derbynnydd cyntaf cwynion. Mae’n ymddangos y gallai’r broblem hon fod wedi’i datrys. Yn gyntaf, mae’r GMC wedi cyflogi nifer sylweddol o ymchwilwyr a dylai fod mewn sefyllfa i ddelio â’r holl honiadau a dderbynna sy’n disgyn o fewn ei awdurdodaeth. Yn ail, fel y dywedais ym mharagraffau 25.118-25.119, ymddengys na fydd y GMC yn cau achosion bellach, a chynghori achwynwyr y dylent ganlyn eu cwynion drwy weithdrefnau cwynion lleol, cyn iddo benderfynu a yw’r honiad yn disgyn o fewn ei awdurdodaeth. Bydd yn rhoi cyngor i’r perwyl hynny’n unig wedi iddo benderfynu nad yw’r achos yn disgyn o fewn ei awdurdodaeth. Os felly y mae hi’n wir, bydd yn foddhaol.
Mae’n anochel y bydd cwynion sy’n cael eu cyfeirio at y cyrchfan anghywir. Yn ddiau bydd y GMC yn parhau i dderbyn rhai nad ydynt yn disgyn o fewn ei awdurdodaeth, ac y bydd sefydliadau eraill yn derbyn cwynion a phryderon y dylid eu cyfeirio at y GMC. Fel y dywedais, mae’r GMC wedi awgrymu y dylai fod ‘porth unigol’ i gynorthwyo personau sy’n dymuno gwneud cwyn neu godi pryder wrth gyfeirio’r gŵyn honno neu’r pryder hwnnw at y corff cywir sy’n delio â chwynion. Mae hwn i weld yn syniad da, ac, fel yr wyf eisoes wedi dweud, mae’r Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd yn ystyried dewisiadau amrywiol ar gyfer darparu gwasanaeth felly. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r nifer o gŵynion yn cael eu camgyfeirio, fe gredaf, yn cael ei leihau pe bai’r GMC yn sicrhau bod ei gyhoeddiadau’n cynnwys arweiniad cywir a hawdd i’w ddeall ar y mathau o achos sy’n disgyn ac nad ydynt yn disgyn o fewn ei gylch gorchwyl.
Mae’r GMC wedi dweud, lle mae achos yn cael ei gyfeirio ato gan berson yn gweithredu ar ran corff cyhoeddus (cyflogwr neu PCO fel arfer), gall awgrymu bod y corff hwnnw’n ymchwilio i’r honiad cyn bod y GMC yn cymryd cyfrifoldeb am yr achos. Gellir gwneud hyn er bod yr honiad yn disgyn, neu er y gall ddisgyn, o fewn awdurdodaeth y GMC. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n tybio na fyddai’r weithdrefn hon yn cael ei dilyn pe bai’r achos yn gofyn am gamau interim brys gan y GMC. Mae’r weithdrefn hon yn dderbyniol cyhyd â bod y corff arall, y cyflogwr neu’r PCO, yn fodlon ymchwilio iddo, a bod ganddo’r arbenigedd a’r adnoddau i wneud hynny, a chyn belled hefyd nad yw’r GMC yn colli golwg ar yr achos. Mae’r GMC wedi dweud ei fod yn cydnabod pwysigrwydd dod ag achosion felly yn ôl ar gyfer ystyriaeth bellach wedi iddynt gael eu hymchwilio. Mewn gwirionedd, dylai’r GMC fod yn gallu defnyddio’i ddylanwad gyda’r PCT neu gorff GIG i sicrhau bod yr ymchwiliad yn mynd yn ei flaen yn foddhaol. Gan y bydd y gweithdrefnau hyn yn newydd i staff y GMC, rwy’n argymell y dylai eu gweithrediad gael ei archwilio, yn enwedig yn y dyddiau cynnar. Fel y deallaf, nid bwriad y GMC yw bod y weithdrefn hon yn cael ei chymhwyso i honiadau a wneir gan unigolion preifat. Ni fyddai hynny’n dderbyniol yn fy marn i.
Ym Mhennod 25, adroddais, er gwaetha’r ffaith bod y GMC wedi cydnabod yr angen i wahanu’r swyddogaethau ymchwilio a dyfarnu, mae camau ymchwilio a dyfarnu’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd i fod dan reolaeth y GMC o hyd.
Yn y cam ymchwilio, mae swyddogaeth gwaith achos, a fydd yn cael ei chyflawni’n bennaf gan aelodau staff y GMC ac archwilwyr achos. Bydd y Pwyllgor Ymchwilio (IC) yn ymgymryd â rhywfaint o waith achos hefyd mewn achosion lle mae’r archwilwyr achos yn anghytuno, ac mewn achosion lle mae gwrandawiad llafar i benderfynu ynghylch rhoi rhybudd neu beidio. Bydd gwaith achos yr IC yn cael ei wneud gan banelau. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r Rheolau’n caniatáu i aelodau’r GMC (yn ogystal â chyfranogion) eistedd ar banelau IC. Fodd bynnag, mae’r GMC wedi dweud wrth yr Ymchwiliad mai’r ‘bwriad gweithredol’ yw na ddylent. Os mai’r bwriad yn wir yw y dylai aelodaeth panelau IC gael ei chyfyngu i bersonau nad ydynt yn aelodau o’r GMC, dylai’r Rheolau gael eu newid i adlewyrchu hynny. Mae swyddogaethau rheoli hefyd o fewn y cam ymchwilio. Mae’r rhain yn cynnwys gosod safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau, goruchwyliaeth gyffredinol o’r cam ymchwilio ac archwilio’r gwaith achos yn cael ei wneud gan aelodau staff ac archwilwyr achos, a’r penderfyniadau sy’n cael eu gwneud gan banelau IC. Y bwriad gwreiddiol oedd y byddai’r IC yn ymgymryd â phob un o’r swyddogaethau rheoli, yn ychwanegol at ei swyddogaeth gwaith achos. Yn ddiweddar, fodd bynnag, cydnabuwyd gan rai o fewn y GMC na fyddai hyn yn briodol. Yn y dyfodol agos, bydd y swyddogaethau rheoli sy’n ymwneud â’r cam ymchwilio yn cael eu cyflawni gan y Pwyllgor Addasrwydd i Ymarfer. Fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 25, mae ansicrwydd ynghylch rôl yr IC yn y dyfodol. Beth bynnag yw’r canlyniad yn y pen draw, yn fy marn i, mae’n rhaid i’r swyddogaeth gwaith achos a’r swyddogaeth reoli fod ar wahân yn llwyr. Mae’n amhriodol i un pwyllgor gael rheolaeth lwyr dros yr holl agweddau ar y cam ymchwilio.
Mae llawer mwy o broblemau o ran gwahanu swyddogaethau yn gysylltiedig â’r cam dyfarnu. I gychwyn ystyriodd y GMC gael gwared ar y cam dyfarnu’n gyfan gwbl, ond penderfynodd yn erbyn hynny, gan ffafrio cadw’r dyfarnu a’r ymchwilio o fewn y GMC a bwriadu cyflwyno mesur o wahanu drwy ddefnyddio personau nad oeddent yn aelodau o’r GMC yn unig ar gyfer ei waith achos yn y cam dyfarnu. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys i mi nad oes gwahanu go iawn o gwbl. Fel y nodais, dan y cynigion presennol, bydd y GMC yn dewis y panelwyr FTP (i’w cynnwys ar y rhestr panelwyr, ac i’w cynnwys ar banel mewn achos unigol), yn eu hyfforddi, yn rhoi arweiniad iddynt, yn archwilio’u penderfyniadau, yn arfarnu’u gwaith, ac yn eu galw i mewn ar gyfer trafodaethau am benderfyniadau y mae’n anghytuno â nhw; bydd ganddo’r grym hefyd i’w diswyddo os yw’n anfodlon. Mae’r GMC yn cynnig hefyd, yn y dyfodol, y bydd yn dynodi neu y gall ddynodi i feddyg, cyn gwrandawiad, beth fydd y canlyniad y bydd y GMC ceisio’i gael yn ei achos/hachos. Os yw’n cael ei wneud, fe allai hynny gael yr effaith o gyfyngu panelau FTP i’r sancsiwn y mae’r GMC yn ceisio’i gael. Hyd yn oed heb ddynodiad cyfyngol felly, ychydig iawn o annibyniaeth fydd gan banelwyr. Bydd y GMC yn dewis yr aseswyr cyfreithiol hefyd, ac unrhyw gynghorwyr neu aseswyr arbenigol a all fod eu hangen. Yn 2000, cydnabu’r GMC yn gywir bod gan feddygon hawl, dan Ddeddf Hawliau Dynol 1998, i wrandawiad teg a chyhoeddus gan dribiwnlys annibynnol a diduedd. Credaf y gellid yn wir, yn y dyfodol, honni yn erbyn y GMC nad yw ei banelau FTP yn annibynnol i’r awdurdod ‘erlyn’. Pa un a fyddai’r honiad hwnnw’n dod gan feddyg anfodlon neu gan achwynydd anfodlon, nid yw hynny o bwys mewn gwirionedd. Byddai’r broses yn llawer mwy boddhaol o safbwyntiau diogelu cleifion a thegwch i feddygon pe bai’r swyddogaethau’n cael eu gwahanu.
Rwy’n sylweddoli bod ymdrech fawr wedi mynd i mewn i ddewis a hyfforddi panelwyr FTP, ond mae’n ofid i mi ddweud nad wyf yn credu bod y trefniadau presennol yn foddhaol. Mae’n rhaid i mi argymell bod rhaid dod o hyd i ryw fecanwaith ar gyfer penodi, hyfforddi a rheoli panelwyr FTP lleyg ac â chymwysterau meddygol gan gorff sy’n annibynnol ar y GMC. Byddai’n rhaid i’r corff hwnnw ddarparu cymorth gweinyddol ar gyfer gwrandawiadau hefyd. Rwy’n argymell y dylai ystyriaeth gael ei rhoi i’r syniad o benodi panelwyr a allai eistedd yn amser llawn neu bron yn amser llawn ar banelau disgyblu neu FTP ar gyfer pob rheolydd gofal iechyd. Byddent yn cael llawer mwy o brofiad nag y gall panelwyr GMC ei gael ar hyn o bryd. Pe bai’r syniad hwn yn cael ei fabwysiadu, byddai modd cael cadeiryddion amser llawn â chymwysterau cyfreithiol. Dylai’r GMC hefyd roi’r gorau i’r hawl i benodi aseswyr cyfreithiol; beth bynnag, pe bai cadeiryddion â chymwysterau cyfreithiol yn cael eu defnyddio, ni fyddai angen aseswyr cyfreithiol. Fe allai cadeiryddion â chymwysterau cyfreithiol wneud gwaith rheoli achos hefyd. Beth bynnag, ni fyddai’n briodol i’r GMC benodi rheolwyr achos.
Sut yn union y dylid cyflawni’r gwahanu hwn, ni allaf ddweud. Nid wyf wedi gwrando unrhyw dystiolaeth am y modd y mae cyrff rheoleiddio eraill yn trefnu materion. Mae’n fy nharo y gall fod angen panelwyr annibynnol ar reoleiddwyr gofal iechyd eraill hefyd. Gall fod modd sefydlu cyfleuster ar y cyd. Roeddwn wedi meddwl y gallai’r Cyngor dros Reoleiddio Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd, a elwir y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth mewn Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd (CRHP/CHRE), ymgymryd â’r swyddogaeth hon, ond, wedi meddwl, nid wyf yn meddwl y gallai. Credaf y byddai gwrthdaro rhwng ei rôl o apelio penderfyniadau rhy drugarog a chyfrifoldeb am benodi’r panelau y gallai ddymuno apelio’u penderfyniadau. Wedi diystyru’r CRHP/CHRE, nid wyf yn sicr pa gorff presennol arall allai ymgymryd â’r dasg. Fodd bynnag, rwyf o’r farn bod rhaid dod o hyd i ryw ffordd, gan mai hwn yw’r unig fodd y gall y GMC osgoi’r swyddogaeth o fod yn erlynydd a barnwr yn yr un achos.
Ni fyddai cael gwared ar y swyddogaeth ddyfarnu’n amddifadu’r GMC o bob diddordeb yn y broses ddyfarnu. Byddai rhan gan y GMC o hyd mewn datblygu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau ar gyfer holl gamau’r broses, gan gynnwys y cam dyfarnu. Byddai hefyd yn gallu monitro canlyniadau achosion, gan hynny’n hysbysu’i hun o’r angen am unrhyw addasiad yn y safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau. Ym mharagraffau 27.213-27.230 isod, byddaf yn trafod y dulliau posibl ar gyfer datblygu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau.
Pe ceid gwared ar y swyddogaeth ddyfarnu, fel yr argymhellais, bydd rhai o’r argymhellion sy’n dilyn yn amherthnasol. Fe’u gwnaf serch hynny, os digwydd na fydd hyn yn cael ei wneud.
Ym mharagraffau 25.41-25.69, esboniais pam yr wyf o’r farn y bydd y prawf statudol ar gyfer y cam dyfarnu a’r GMC yn ffurfio’r cam ymchwilio eu dau yn peri anawsterau gweithredu. Nid wyf yn bwriadu ailadrodd y rhesymau hynny yn y fan hon nac ailddatgan yr hyn a gredaf y dylid ei wneud i leihau’r problemau hynny. Rwy’n argymell bod y profion a awgrymais yn cael eu mabwysiadu.
Llwybr Newydd i Amhariad ar Addasrwydd i Ymarfer
Ym mharagraffau 25.70-25.71, esboniais pam yr wyf o’r farn y byddai’n ddymunol i adran 35C o Ddeddf Meddygaeth 1983 (Deddf 1983) gael ei newid i ychwanegu llwybr pellach y gallai fod canfyddiad o amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i gael ar hyd y llwybr hwnnw. ‘Arfer clinigol diffygiol’ fyddai hyn a’i fwriad fyddai cwmpasu’r achosion hynny sy’n ymwneud, dyweder, ag un neu ddau ddigwyddiad o esgeuluster neu arfer clinigol gwael nad ydynt yn gyfystyr â chamymddygiad ac nad ydynt ychwaith yn dangos patrwm o berfformiad clinigol gwael sy’n angenrheidiol er mwyn ysgogi asesiad perfformiad. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r newid hwnnw gael ei wneud ar yr achlysur nesaf pan newidir Deddf 1983.
Safonau, Meini Prawf a Throthwyau
Yr Angen
Mae’r angen am osod safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau i’w cymhwyso gan y rheiny sy’n gwneud penderfyniadau ym mhob cam o weithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn rhedeg fel llinyn drwy ddeg Pennod olaf yr Adroddiad hwn bron. Yn wir, fel yr wyf wedi dweud yn gynharach yn y Bennod hon, mae’r angen am drothwyau wedi’u cytuno ar gyfer safonau ymddygiad proffesiynol a gofal meddygol yn mynd y tu hwnt i’r GMC. Dylai cleifion wybod beth y mae hawl ganddynt ei ddisgwyl gan y system gofal iechyd. Y rheiny yw’r safonau y dylid barnu cwynion cleifion yn eu herbyn. Mae angen safonau ar bobl sy’n gweithio mewn rheolaeth gofal iechyd - ac rwy’n cynnwys y rheiny sy’n gweithio mewn PCOau - y gallant benderfynu yn eu herbyn pa un a ddylent gymryd camau gweithredu yn erbyn meddyg neu alw ar eu pwreau rheoli rhestr. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’n rhaid i reolwyr felly benderfynu drostynt eu hunain pa un a yw’r ymddygiad neu’r arfer dan ystyriaeth yn dderbyniol neu beidio. Mae’n rhaid iddynt benderfynu drostynt eu hunain pa un a yw ymddygiad neu arfer annerbyniol yn ddigon difrifol i gyfiawnhau adroddiad i’r GMC.
Mewn man arall yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi cyfeirio at yr achlysuron pan gafodd y GMC ei annog i ffurfio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau i’w defnyddio gan wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau. Ym1996, 2000 a 2003, fe wnaeth yr Athro Isobell Allen, Athro Emeritws Iechyd a Pholisi Cymdeithasol, Sefydliad Astudiaethau Polisi Prifysgol Westminster, annog y GMC i lunio safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau a gytunwyd y gallai gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau benderfynu yn eu herbyn a oedd set o ffeithiau yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Hyd at yn ddiweddar, ymateb y GMC fu, bod yr holl benderfyniadau ynghylch SPM neu SDP, hyd at 2000 o leiaf, yn cael eu gwneud gan aelodau profiadol o’r GMC a chanddynt gymwysterau uchel. Nid oedd angen iddynt gael safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau gan y gallent adnabod SDP ac SDP pan fyddent yn eu gweld. Roeddent hefyd yn gallu cymhwyso’r profion priodol yng nghamau rhagarweiniol y gweithdrefnau FTP. Ni allaf dderbyn mai felly’r oedd hi. Ym Mhennod 17, disgrifiais yr anawsterau a oedd wedi codi wrth ddiffinio SPM. Adroddais fod Syr Donald Irvine, a oedd â phrofiad maith fel aelod o’r GMC, a gasglwyd mewn chwe blynedd fel ei Lywydd, wedi dweud bod dadleuon ynghylch a oedd set benodol o ffeithiau’n gyfystyr ag SPM wedi esgor ar lawer o ‘wres’ ac ‘emosiwn’. Hefyd, mae’r angen am safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau wedi’i danlinellu gan yr achlysuron lawer yr wyf, yn yr Adroddiad hwn, wedi tynnu sylw at anghysonder mewn gwneud penderfyniadau ym mhob cam o’r hen weithdrefnau FTP.
Mae SPM ac SDP fel cysyniadau wedi diflannu bellach, ond rwyf wedi f’argyhoeddi y bydd y cysyniad ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn anoddach fyth i’w ddiffinio a’i adnabod. Rwy’n derbyn y gall y rhan fwyaf o feddygon gredu y gallant adnabod amhariad, ond, wrth wneud hynny, maent yn cymhwyso’u safonau personol eu hunain. Nid ydynt yn cymhwyso safonau a gytunwyd, ac, oni bai y gellir cytuno ar safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau, bydd penderfyniadau ar ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn anghyson, fel ag yr oedd penderfyniadau ar SPM yn y gorffennol. Ni fydd unrhyw leihad yng ‘ngwres’ ac ‘emosiwn’ y ddadl nac mewn anghysonder canlyniad oni bai bod rhai safonau a gytunwyd.
Mae’r GMC yn dadlau hefyd ei fod yn darparu safonau a meini prawf yn ei gyhoeddiad ‘Good Medical Practice’. Ei safbwynt yw y gall gwyriadau o’r safonau hynny arwain at gyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau FTP, gyda’r posibilrwydd o weithredu ar gofrestriad. Eto mae’n eglur na fydd pob gwyriad o’r safonau yn ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn arwain at gyfeirio at y gweithdrefnau hynny. Y broblem yw nad oes neb yn gwybod pa mor ddifrifol y mae’n rhaid i wyriad o ‘Good Medical Practice’ fod cyn y bydd camau disgyblu yn cael eu cymryd neu cyn y bydd gweithredu ar gofrestriad yn dilyn.
Gwrthwynebiad arall a godwyd gan y GMC i’r awgrym y dylai baratoi safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau a gytunwyd ar gyfer delio â phenderfyniadau ynghylch SPM oedd bod y broses o wneud hynny’n un anodd hyd at bwynt amhosibilrwydd. Gallai SPM, dadleuodd y GMC (ac rwy’n aralleirio), gwmpasu ystod eang iawn o ymddygiad ac arfer. Nid oedd modd dyfeisio trothwy ar gyfer pob amgylchiad unigol lle gellid canfod SPM. Rwy’n cytuno na fyddai’r dasg mewn perthynas ag SPM yn y gorffennol wedi bod yn un hawdd. Bydd y dasg ar gyfer y dyfodol, mewn perthynas ag ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ ac ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i raddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’ yn un anoddach fyth. Ond nid yw’r ffaith ei bod yn dasg anodd yn golygu na ddylid mynd i’r afael â hi. Mae’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ar waith erbyn hyn, ac ychydig iawn o gymorth y bydd gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau’n ei gael wrth benderfynu ar ba ochr o’r ‘llinellau’ amrywiol y bydd achos yn disgyn. Mae’r GMC wedi cynhyrchu rhywfaint o arweiniad drafft ar gyfer archwilwyr achos a phanelwyr yn y cam ymchwilio ac ar gyfer panelwyr yn y cam dyfarnu. Mae’r arweiniad hwn yn un synhwyrol a defnyddiol mewn llawer o agweddau; mae’n nodi ffactorau perthnasol i wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau eu hystyried. Ond nid yw’n mynd yn ddigon pell; nid yw’n eu helpu i benderfynu ble i dynnu’r llinell. Cânt eu gadael o hyd i gymhwyso’u safonau personol eu hunain.
Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, dywedodd Syr Graeme Catto a Mr Scott mai bwriad y GMC oedd darparu cyfres o ‘adroddiadau achos’ a fyddai’n cynnwys enghreifftiau o amgylchiadau lle’r oedd SPM wedi’i ganfod neu heb ei ganfod yn y gorffennol. Y gobaith oedd y byddai’r rhain yn ddefnyddiol i wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau yn y dyfodol. Fel yr adroddais ym Mhennod 21, naw mis yn ddiweddarach, cyhoeddwyd pum astudiaeth achos byr iawn. Mae’r rhain mor fyr eu bod yn ‘anaddas i’r pwrpas’. Hefyd, ymddengys bod dau o’r pum achos yn anghyson â’i gilydd.
Ym Mhennod 25, rwyf wedi awgrymu profion ar gyfer y camau ymchwilio a dyfarnu a fyddai, o’u mabwysiadu, yn gwneud tasg y gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau yn un haws. Byddai’r profion hyn yn helpu gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau i ddadansoddi’r honiad neu’r ffeithiau diymwad i weld a fyddai’r hyn a honnir, o’i brofi neu’i addef, yn gyfystyr ag amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn awgrymu y bydd y profion newydd yn dileu’r angen am safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau. Os mai’r arweiniad presennol, yr astudiaethau achos a’r profion yr wyf i’n eu cynnig yw’r cyfan sydd i’w ddarparu (a gall y rhai olaf hyn gael eu gwrthod gan y GMC), rwy’n rhagweld problemau anghysondeb go iawn ym mhob cam o’r broses gan y bydd unigolion yn cymhwyso’u safonau personol eu hunain.
Ym maes arweiniad ar bennu sancsiynau, mae’r GMC wedi gwneud rhywfaint o gynnydd, i’r graddau ei fod wedi cyhoeddi Arweiniad Sancsiynau Arwyddol (ISG). Mae hwn yn ddefnyddiol; mae’n rhoi syniad cyffredinol o ba fath o sancsiwn sy’n briodol lle mae nodweddion penodol yn bresennol mewn achos. Mae’r arweiniad yn ddefnyddiol yn arbennig lle mae’n rhoi manylion am y modd y dylid mynd i’r afael â dosbarth penodol o achos. Fodd bynnag, er bod yr ISG yn ddefnyddiol, mae angen mwy o gymorth ar banelwyr, yn fy marn i. Rwy’n cydnabod bod modd bellach i apelio unrhyw benderfyniad ar sancsiwn, naill ai am ei fod yn rhy llym neu am ei fod yn rhy drugarog. Fodd bynnag, credaf y byddai’r GMC yn cytuno na fyddai’n dymuno dibynnu ar y broses apêl er mwyn sefydlu fframwaith priodol ar gyfer pennu sancsiynau. Rwy’n sicr y byddai’n cytuno y byddai’n well pe bai’r penderfyniadau’n iawn yn y lle cyntaf.
Beth Ddylid Ei Wneud?
Rwyf wedi dweud digon am yr angen i ddatblygu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau a gytunwyd. Rwy’n derbyn nad yw’r dasg o’u datblygu yn un hawdd. Nodais yn gynharach yn yr Adroddiad hwn ei bod yn haws i feirniadu gwaith pobl eraill na chynnig ffordd well. Rwy’n dymuno bod yn adeiladol. Ymddengys i mi bod dwy ffordd bosibl o fynd i’r afael â’r broblem o osod safonau a throthwyau.
Byddai un dull yn golygu dadansoddi nifer o setiau o amgylchiadau (testunau) y gellid disgwyl iddynt godi mewn gweithdrefnau FTP, a rhagweld graddiadau o enghreifftiau cynyddol ddifrifol o ymddygiad neu arfer o fewn y testun hwnnw a phenderfynu lle dylai’r trothwyau fod. Nid oeddwn yn gwybod a fyddai’r syniad hwn yn un ymarferol. Yn unol â hynny, gwahoddwyd yr Athro Baker gan yr Ymchwiliad i gynhyrchu papur yn nodi’i syniadau am y modd y gellid mynd i’r afael â’r dasg o ddadansoddi testunau a gosod safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau. Mae ei waith wedi’i gyhoeddi bellach ar wefan yr Ymchwiliad. Byddaf yn nodi ei awgrymiadau mor gryno ag a fedraf.
Papur yr Athro Baker
Mae’r Athro Baker yn rhagweld y byddai’n rhaid gwneud ymchwil i’r tebygolrwydd bod nodweddion penodol mewn achos penodol yn ddangosyddion dilys o addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Byddai gwneud y gwaith ymchwil yn gofyn am gasglu tystiolaeth o amrywiaeth eang o ffynonellau. Byddai’r man cychwyn yn gorfod bod yr achosion eu hunain lle’r oedd penderfyniadau wedi’u gwneud, naill ai gan y GMC neu gan ymddiriedolaethau GIG, ynghylch honiadau o gamymddygiad, ac ati. Byddai’n rhaid cael dilyniant systematig o achosion felly er mwyn canfod tystiolaeth o’r tebygolrwydd o gŵynion neu broblemau pellach yn gysylltiedig â chategorïau penodol o gŵynion. Hefyd, byddai’n rhaid cael cymariaethau rhwng meddygon â nodweddion dethol sydd wedi cael neu heb gael cwynion yn eu herbyn. Yn ychwanegol at dystiolaeth o achosion eu hunain, awgryma’r Athro Baker y byddai gofyn cael gwybodaeth bellach hefyd am ddisgwyliadau’r cyhoedd ac am godau moesegol gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd, gan gynnwys codau rhyngwladol. Pan fydd yr holl wybodaeth a’r dystiolaeth hon wedi’u rhoi ynghyd, byddai’n rhaid dod o hyd i ryw fodd o’u cyfuno er mwyn cynhyrchu set o safonau a meini prawf addas i’w defnyddio mewn rheoleiddio meddygol. Byddai’r broses honno’n golygu gwneud dyfarniadau gwerth. Yn unol â hynny, ym marn yr Athro Baker, dylai’r cyhoedd a rheolwyr gofal iechyd fod yn gysylltiedig, yn ogystal ag aelodau o’r proffesiwn meddygol.
Mae’r Athro Baker wedyn yn ystyried nifer o opsiynau ar gyfer ymgymryd â’r broses hon. Trafoda fanteision ac anfanteision y dulliau amrywiol, gan gynnwys eu dilysrwydd, eu hymarferoldeb a’u cost. Mae’n ystyried opsiynau ar gyfer cwmpas y safonau a’r meini prawf, er enghraifft, pa un a ddylai’r cwmpas gael ei gyfyngu i’r materion y mae ‘Good Medical Practice’ yn ymwneud â nhw, neu pa un a ddylai gwmpasu materion a godir mewn ymgynghoriad ehangach o fewn y GMC a thu hwnt. Mae set arall opsiynau yn ymwneud â’r dosbarthiadau o bobl a allai fod yn gysylltiedig â’r broses gosod safonau. Rhagdybia y bydd y GMC wrth galon y broses, ond ystyria fanteision ac anfanteision cynnwys grwpiau eraill. Mae’n archwilio opsiynau amrywiol ar gyfer eu trafod a phenderfynu arnynt yn y grwpiau gosod safonau. Mae’n ystyried opsiynau gwahanol ar gyfer profi a diweddaru’r safonau a’r meini prawf a fyddai’n deillio o’r broses gychwynnol gosod safonau. Nid yw’r Athro Baker yn dweud pa un o’r opsiynau amrywiol hyn y dylid ei fabwysiadu, er ei fod yn dweud ei fod yn ffafrio prosesau sy’n ymwneud ag ystod eang o ymgynghori, gan ei fod o’r farn y bydd y canlyniadau’n fwy tebygol o ddenu a chadw hyder y cyhoedd.
Yn olaf, mae’r Athro Baker yn rhoi enghreifftiau damcaniaethol o’r modd y gellid gosod safonau ar destunau penodol amrywiol, bob un ohonynt wedi’u cymryd o’r egwyddorion a nodir yn ‘Good Medical Practice’. Mae’r rhain yn cynnwys sefydlu hanes clinigol, cymryd camau addas a chyflym, cadw cofnodion eglur, cymryd rhan mewn archwilio, delio â chleifion sy’n gwrthod cymryd rhan mewn addysgu neu ymchwil, codi pryderon ynghylch cydweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd a’r ddyletswydd gonestrwydd mewn cadw cofnodion, paratoi dogfennau ac ardystio. Nid yw’r safonau damcaniaethol sy’n deillio yn dangos trothwyau go iawn, ond maent yn cynhyrchu categorïau o ymddygiad sydd i’w hystyried fel rhai ‘derbyniol’, ‘annerbyniol’ ac ‘annerbyniol difrifol’. Ymddengys i mi, pe gellid cynhyrchu safonau o’r math hyn ar gyfer nifer fawr o destunau, byddai tasg y gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau o fewn y GMC a thu hwnt yn cael ei gwneud yn haws o lawer.
Dull Gweithredu Arall: Defnyddio Crynodebau Achos
Dull gweithredu posibl arall fyddai defnyddio casgliad o grynodebau achos, lle gellid casglu penderfyniadau y cytunir eu bod yn rhai ‘cywir’ i grwpiau testunau a’u cyhoeddi. Ni fyddai casgliadau felly o achosion yn ceisio diffinio trothwyau, ond yn hytrach byddent yn ceisio dangos lle’r oedd y trothwy wedi’i osod (yn gywir) ar achlysuron eraill. Byddai angen cael enghreifftiau sy’n disgyn ar naill ochr unrhyw linell derfyn fel bod y gwneuthurwr penderfyniadau’n gallu ‘magu llygad’ mewn perthynas â pha ochr o’r llinell y dylai’r achos penodol dan ystyriaeth ddisgyn. Mae hon yn broses sy’n cael ei defnyddio’n helaeth mewn gwaith cyfreithiol. Er enghraifft, mae dau wyddoniadur yn bodoli ar y gyfraith gyflogi, yn cynnwys nifer fawr o grynodebau achos y gall ymarferwyr a gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau ddatblygu ‘teimlad’ ohonynt ynghylch a fu gwrthodiad yn deg neu’n annheg. Mae llyfr sy’n cynnwys achosion am ddamweiniau cerbydau ffordd; gall y gwneuthurwr penderfyniadau ‘fagu llygad’ mewn perthynas â pha un a oedd gyrwyr, beiciwr neu gerddwr, mewn set benodol o amgylchiadau, wedi bod yn esgeulus. Mae gwyddoniaduron i gael ar ddedfrydu mewn achosion troseddol ac ar ddyfarnu iawndal mewn achosion anafiadau personol. Nid yw’r un o’r casgliadau achosion hyn yn ceisio darparu’r ‘ateb cywir’ mewn unrhyw achos penodol gan fod ffeithiau pob achos yn wahanol a chan fod rhaid bod elfen o ddisgresiwn ar gyfer y gwneuthurwr penderfyniadau. Ond maent yn galluogi ymarferwyr a gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau i ‘fagu llygad’.
Gan ei bod yn bwysig y dylai gwneuthurwyr penderfyniadau y GMC gael arweiniad ar drothwyau i’w defnyddio yn y camau ymchwilio a dyfarnu, byddai paratoi’r crynodebau achos yn golygu archwilio nifer go fawr o achosion a oedd wedi dod i mewn i’r gweithdrefnau FTP. I gychwyn, fe ellid archwilio’r holl achosion yn dod i mewn i’r gweithdrefnau yn ystod cyfnod tri mis. Byddent i gyd yn ddienw, a byddai’r holl wybodaeth a oedd ar gael yn cael ei chrynhoi gan ddefnyddio templed safonol fel bod modd cymharu achosion gwahanol â’i gilydd yn hawdd. Wedi i’r penderfyniad cam ymchwilio gael ei wneud, byddai’r holl achosion yn cael eu hystyried gan grŵp o aseswyr a fyddai’n penderfynu a oedd y penderfyniad a wnaethpwyd, yn eu barn nhw, yn un ‘cywir’. Byddai achosion â phenderfyniadau ‘anghywir’ yn cael eu bwrw o’r neilltu; byddai achosion â phenderfyniadau ‘cywir’ yn cael eu defnyddio fel arweiniad ar y prawf cam ymchwilio. Byddai achosion a aeth gerbron panelau FPT yn cael eu hystyried hefyd gan y grŵp o aseswyr. Os ystyriwyd bod penderfyniad ar ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ a/neu ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer i raddau sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad’ yn ‘anghywir’, byddai’r achos yn cael ei fwrw o’r neilltu. Byddai’r achosion hynny â phenderfyniadau ‘cywir’ yn cael eu defnyddio fel arweiniad. Byddai’r grŵp asesu hefyd yn ystyried unrhyw sancsiynau a bennwyd neu benderfyniadau i beidio pennu sancsiwn. Unwaith eto, byddai penderfyniadau ‘anghywir’ neu amhriodol yn cael eu bwrw o’r neilltu a ‘rhai cywir’ yn cael eu cadw fel arweiniad. Wrth i fwy o achosion gael eu casglu, byddai modd eu rhannu i grwpiau ac is-grwpiau yn ymwneud â mathau gwahanol o achos a oedd yn digwydd yn gyffredin. Er enghraifft, ni fyddai’n hir cyn y byddai grwpiau o achosion yn ymwneud â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau, anonestrwydd, anwedduster a pherthnasoedd amhriodol â chleifion. Yn ei dro, byddai grwpiau o achosion o lawer o fathau gwahanol, gan gynnwys achosion iechyd a pherfformiad.
Pe bai’r dull hwn yn cael ei fabwysiadu, dylai’r grŵp asesu, yn fy marn i, gynnwys rhai meddygon, gweithwyr proffesiynol gofal iechyd eraill, rheolwyr gofal iechyd a rhai pobl leyg o amrywiaeth o gefndiroedd. Ym Mhennod 21, soniais am y Panel Cynghori ar Ddedfrydu, sy’n cynghori’r Llys Apêl (Adran Droseddau) ar bolisi dedfrydu. Mae rhai o’i aelodau’n farnwyr, yn fargyfreithwyr ac yn gyfreithwyr, ond mae aelodaeth gref o bersonau heb gymwysterau cyfreithiol hefyd. Yr hyn sydd gennyf mewn golwg yw cymysgedd cymaradwy o aelodau meddygol a lleyg. Byddwn yn disgwyl i’r GMC gael llais mwyafrif o fewn y grŵp, ond yr amcan fyddai dod i gonsensws sy’n dderbyniol i’r proffesiwn meddygol a’r cyhoedd.
Nid yw’n fwriad gennyf i argymell defnyddio’r dull a awgrymwyd gan yr Athro Baker na’r dull arall o gasglu crynodebau achos. Ymddengys i mi mai mantais dull yr Athro Baker yw y byddai’r canlyniadau wedi’u seilio’n gadarn ar dystiolaeth wyddonol. Y brif anfantais yw fy mod yn credu y byddai’n cymryd amser maith i gynhyrchu canlyniadau y gellid eu defnyddio gan wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau. Mantais y dull crynodebau achos yw y byddai’n haws i’w sefydlu a gellid disgwyl canlyniadau mewn amser byrrach. Byddai’r canlyniadau wedi’u seilio ar achosion go iawn, a byddent felly’n darparu arweiniad yn fuan ar y mathau o achos sy’n gallu codi’n gyson. Byddai Swyddogion Cyflwyno’r GMC a chynrychiolwyr y meddygon yn ymgyfarwyddo’n fuan â’r astudiaethau achos cyhoeddedig, a byddent yn gallu tynnu sylw panel FTP at unrhyw rai y gellid eu cymharu â’r achos dan ystyriaeth. Ni fyddai disgwyl i banelwyr ymgyfarwyddo â’r holl grynodebau achos. Byddai crynodebau achos felly yn ddefnyddiol i’r llysoedd hefyd wrth ddelio ag apeliadau. Fe all fod syniadau eraill gan y GMC ynghylch y modd y dylid gwneud y gwaith hwn. Fe allai mwy o syniadau fyth ddod o fannau eraill. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd dadl ynghylch y modd gorau ymlaen. Fodd bynnag, mae’n hanfodol nad yw’r broblem hon yn cael ei rhoi o’r neilltu. Mae’n rhaid canfod ffordd - yn fuan - o ddarparu arweiniad ar safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau er mwyn i wneuthurwyr penderfyniadau allu gwneud penderfyniadau rhesymol o gyson yn y camau ymchwilio a dedfrydu.
Ymddengys i mi, pa ddull bynnag o osod safonau sydd i’w fabwysiadu, bydd angen panel neu grŵp o bobl. Mae hyn yn hanfodol os yw’r cyhoedd i gael hyder yn y canlyniadau. Ymddengys i mi y gallai’r CRHP/CHRE chwarae rhan bwysig yma. Yn wir, gall fod y byddai’n croesawu’r cyfle i hwyluso gosod safonau ar draws maes cyfan rheoleiddio gofal iechyd. Mae’n rhaid bod llawer o’r materion sy’n codi mewn achosion GMC, fel anonestrwydd, anwedduster, torri cyfrinachedd a methu cael caniatâd gwybodus priodol, yn codi mewn cyd-destunau eraill. Rwy’n argymell bod y CHRP/CHRE yn cael eu gwahodd i sefydlu panel o bobl broffesiynol a lleyg, yn debyg o ran natur i’r Panel Cynghori ar Ddedfrydu, a fyddai’n gyfrwng ar gyfer pa ddull bynnag o osod safonau sy’n cael ei fabwysiadu yn y pen draw. Gallai barhau i fodoli ac adolygu safonau’n gyfnodol.
Safonau mewn Perthynas â Gweithdrefnau Perfformiad
Yn y darn uchod, rwyf wedi trafod yr angen i osod safonau mewn perthynas â llawer o agweddau ar gamymddygiad ac arfer clinigol. Yn y gorffennol, y broblem fu diffyg cytundeb ynghylch yr hyn a oedd yn gyfystyr ag SPM. Fodd bynnag, cododd problem wahanol mewn perthynas â gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC. Yno, roedd safon wedi’i gosod. Mae offer asesu perfformiad y GMC (ar gyfer meddygon teulu) wedi’u graddnodi yn erbyn y safon asesiad crynodol, y broses a ddefnyddir i asesu a yw gallu a pherfformiad meddyg yn ddigonol iddo/iddi gael mynediad at feddygaeth deuluol. Y broblem yw bod panelau’r Pwyllgor ar Berfformiad Proffesiynol (CPP), yn y gorffennol, i weld ar brydiau eu bod wedi cymhwyso’u safonau personol eu hunain (yn hytrach na’r safon y mae’r offer asesu perfformiad wedi’i gosod) wrth ystyried a oedd perfformiad meddyg yn ddiffygiol difrifol. Rwyf wedi sôn fwy nag unwaith yn yr Adroddiad hwn am y ffaith bod y safonau sydd wedi’u cymhwyso o fewn gweithdrefnau perfformiad y GMC wedi bod yn isel iawn. Ni ddyfynnaf y dystiolaeth yn ymwneud â hyn eto. Nid oes unrhyw arwydd o fwriad i’w codi dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Bydd y safon isel hon, i raddau helaeth iawn, yn tanategu dilysu. Yn fy marn i, am resymau diogelwch cleifion, mae angen ar fyrder i’r safon hon gael ei chodi. Ni all fod unrhyw gyfiawnhad dros farnu perfformiad meddyg teulu profiadol yn ôl safon is na hynny sy’n gyfwerth â’r safon a osodwyd ar gyfer mynediad i feddygaeth deuluol. Nid wyf yn gwybod sut y dylid datrys y broblem hon ond rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC roi ei sylw iddi ar fyrder. Oni wneir hyn, bydd cleifion yn cael eu gadael mewn risg ac ni fydd unrhyw werth i ailddilysu.
Y Broses Nithio Ragarweiniol: y Prawf ar gyfer Awdurdodaeth
Ym mharagraff 25.115, mynegais y farn y dylai’r rheol sy’n nodi’r prawf i’w gymhwyso gan y Cofrestrydd (neu gan aelod o staff y GMC, yn arfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol) wrth dderbyn honiad gael ei newid i roi mwy o eglurder. Rwyf wedi awgrymu geiriad priodol. Gall fod nad oes unrhyw ddryswch o fewn y GMC ynghylch ystyr y rheol. Fodd bynnag, dylai ystyr y geiriau fod yn eglur i bawb. Mae angen i benderfyniadau sy’n cael eu gwneud yn y cam hwn gael eu harchwilio er mwyn sicrhau bod y prawf yn cael ei gymhwyso’n gywir. Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai achosion troseddol lle mae meddyg wedi’i ryddhau/rhyddhau yn amodol gael eu trin fel euogfarnau.
Cynghori’r Rheiny sy’n Gwneud Honiad i Ddefnyddio Gweithdrefnau Cwynion Lleol
Ym mharagraffau 25.116-25.120, trafodais yr arfer (a gafodd ei dilyn, cyn belled ag y gwn i, nes terfynu’r hen weithdrefnau FTP) o gau achosion lle nad oedd gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol wedi’u disbyddu, heb ystyried a oeddent yn codi cwestiwn o SPM. Rwyf wedi dweud, nid yn unig yr oedd yr arfer hwn, yn fy marn i, yn anghyfreithlon, ond nid oedd ychwaith er lles diogelu cleifion. Roeddwn wedi gobeithio gweld datganiad clir a diamwys y rhoddwyd y gorau i’r arfer dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Nid oes unrhyw ddatganiad clir wedi’i wneud. Fel y dywedais, rwyf wedi archwilio’r Rheolau, yr Arweiniad drafft, Llawlyfr Ymchwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004, a’r ffurflen prosesu ac asesu gychwynnol. Mae’r unig gyfeiriad at roi cyngor ynghylch defnyddio gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol yn ymddangos mewn cyd-destun sy’n awgrymu y bydd cyngor felly’n cael ei roi’n unig mewn achosion lle mae’r GMC eisoes wedi penderfynu nad yw’r achos yn disgyn o fewn ei gylch gwaith. Byddwn yn gwbl dawel fy meddwl gan y sefyllfa honno, pe na bai am y ffaith nad oedd unrhyw gyfeiriad at yr arfer hwn dan yr hen Reolau. Aeth ar arfer ymlaen ‘y tu allan i’r Rheolau’ ac fe’i dilynwyd mewn cannoedd o achosion bob blwyddyn. Rwyf eisiau rhoi mantais yr amheuaeth i’r GMC. Rwyf eisiau dod i’r casgliad bod y GMC yn wir wedi rhoi’r gorau i’r arfer gwael hwn dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Nid wyf yn teimlo y gallaf wneud hynny’n hyderus ar hyn o bryd. Byddai wedi bod yn eithaf posibl i’r GMC atal yr arfer ar unwaith ar unrhyw gam o’r gweithdrefnau; ni fyddai unrhyw ddeddfwriaeth wedi bod yn ofynnol. Rwy’n gobeithio bod yr arfer hwn wedi stopio gydag effaith o 1 Tachwedd 2004. Fodd bynnag, mae perygl y bydd yr arfer yn parhau gan fod staff mor gyfarwydd ag ef. Rwy’n argymell y dylid gwneud archwiliad o’r rhesymau dros gau achosion ac achosion lle mae’r GMC yn gohirio ystyriaeth. Dylai’r archwiliad hwnnw gael ei gynnal yn eithaf aml.
Trafodaethau Rhagarweiniol a Datgeliad i Gyflogwyr a Sefydliadau Gofal Sylfaenol
Ym mharagraffau 25.122-25.126, trafodais yr arfer, a gyflwynwyd ym mis Mai 2004, lle bydd y GMC yn cyfathrebu’n anffurfiol â chyflogwyr a PCOau cyn penderfynu pa gamau, os o gwbl, y dylid eu cymryd mewn ymateb i honiad. Dylai cyfathrebiadau felly fod yn ffynhonnell wybodaeth bwysig i’r GMC. Trafodwyd y syniad o fabwysiadu’r weithdrefn hon mewn tystiolaeth yng ngwrandawiad yr Ymchwiliad pan ddywedodd Mr Scott y byddai’r GMC yn ei ystyried. Ers hynny mae wedi adrodd i’r Cyngor bod yr arfer yn cynhyrchu gwybodaeth ddefnyddiol. Nodais yr adroddwyd bod rhai sefydliadau amddiffyn meddygol wedi gwrthwynebu’r weithdrefn newydd hon, ond, gan fod Llawlyfr Ymchwilio drafft Tachwedd 2004 yn darparu ar gyfer staff i gyfathrebu yn y modd hwn, rhagdybiaf fod y GMC wedi penderfynu y dylai barhau. Rwy’n argymell bod y Rheolau’n cael eu newid i wneud darpariaeth ffurfiol ar gyfer yr arfer hwn, ac i roi’r grym i’r GMC i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i’r meddyg roi’r manylion angenrheidiol i’w alluogi i wneud cyfathrebiad felly.
Y Grym i Gyfarwyddo Ymchwiliadau
Rwy’n argymell y dylai archwilwyr achos gael y grym i gyfarwyddo y dylid ymgymryd ag ymchwiliadau penodol. Byddai’r grym hwnnw wedi bod ganddynt dan Reolau drafft 2003. Dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, gan y Cofrestrydd yn unig y mae’r grym i gyfarwyddo ymchwiliadau, sydd, yn ymarferol, yn golygu mai staff y GMC sydd â’r grym hwnnw. Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai panelau IC sy’n gwrando achosion lle mae’r archwilwyr achos wedi anghytuno fod â’r grym i gyfarwyddo ymchwiliadau.
Rwy’n argymell y dylid rhoi cyngor i archwilwyr achos, nad ydynt yn gyfreithwyr, ynghylch dau fater. Ni ddylent ystyried lliniariad sy’n cael ei gyflwyno gan neu ar ran y meddyg. Nid yw’n berthnasol i’w penderfyniad yn y cam ymchwilio: gweler paragraff 25.163. Hefyd, dylid eu cynghori i ymgynghori â chyfreithiwr os ydynt mewn unrhyw amheuaeth ynghylch a oes rhagolwg realistig o brofi’r honiad: gweler paragraff 25.169.
Asesiadau Perfformiad ac Iechyd
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y gall y Cofrestrydd gyfarwyddo asesiad perfformiad a/neu iechyd yn ystod y cam ymchwilio. Rwy’n argymell y dylai archwilwyr achos a’r IC gael y grym hwnnw hefyd. Nid wyf yn gwybod beth fydd y polisi ar gyfer cyfarwyddo asesiadau felly. Gwn bod asesiad perfformiad llawn yn ddrud a llafurus. Gwrandawodd yr Ymchwiliad dystiolaeth bod y GMC yn ystyried posibilrwydd dyfeisio asesiad talfyredig a bod awgrymiadau hefyd y gallai’r gwaith asesu gael ei wneud ar sail modiwlar neu y gellid ei ‘gontractio allan i ffynonellau allanol’. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa ddatblygiadau fu yn hyn o beth. Yn fy marn i, byddai’n ddymunol iawn i gael ffurf dalfyredig ar asesiad y gellid ei ddefnyddio fel erfyn sgrinio i ganfod a oes problem gyda pherfformiad y meddyg, yn hytrach na cheisio mesur ei graddau, fel y gwna’r asesiad llawn. Byddwn wedi meddwl y byddai addasiad o brawf y Bwrdd Asesu Proffesiynol ac Ieithyddol, neu fersiwn addasedig o Gyfnod II o’r asesiad perfformiad cyfredol o bosibl, fod yn ddigon. Yn fy marn i, dylai asesiad talfyredig felly gael ei orchymyn mewn unrhyw achos lle mae honiad yn cael ei wneud sydd â photensial i godi amheuaeth ynghylch arfer clinigol y meddyg, naill ai oherwydd bod mwy nag un honiad o arfer clinigol gwael (fel camgymeriad rhagnodi efallai) neu oherwydd bod honiadau sy’n codi materion mwy cyffredinol o berfformiad gwael. Os nad ymgymerwyd â’r gwaith eisoes, rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC ddatblygu asesiad perfformiad talfyredig a dylai ei ddefnyddio fel erfyn sgrinio. Wrth gwrs, bydd angen erfyn asesu perfformiad llawn ar y GMC hefyd, y gall ddibynnu arno fel tystiolaeth i roi gerbron panel FTP. Er mwyn osgoi aml asesiadau, rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai’r GMC ymchwilio i ddatblygu asesiad modiwlar: gweler paragraffau 24.200-24.205.
Fel yr esboniais ym mharagraffau 25.240-25.241, byddai’r Rheolau drafft a gyhoeddwyd ym mis Mai 2004 wedi amodi y dylai’r Cofrestrydd, o dderbyn adroddiad asesiad o berfformiad meddyg, anfon copi at gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Effaith hyn fyddai sicrhau bod y rheiny â chyfrifoldeb am reolaeth glinigol yn gwbl ymwybodol o unrhyw broblemau perfformiad a allai effeithio ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, ac a allai felly gael effaith ar ddiogelwch cleifion. Fodd bynnag, nid yw’r ddarpariaeth yn ymddangos yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 ac ymddengys y rhoddwyd y gorau iddi.
Nid wyf yn gweld sut y gall cyrff GIG lleol gyflawni’u rhwymedigaethau rheolaeth glinigol yn iawn os nad oes ganddynt fynediad at y math hwn o wybodaeth am feddygon y maent yn gyfrifol amdanynt. Rwy’n argymell felly y dylai’r ddarpariaeth gael ei hailsefydlu cyn gynted â phosibl.
Meini Prawf ar gyfer Llythyrau Cyngor
Ym mharagraffau 25.174-25.180, nodais fod yr amgylchiadau lle’r oedd llythyrau cyngor i’w hanfon at feddygon dan y gweithdrefnau newydd wedi aros yr un mor aneglur ag yr oeddent dan yr hen weithdrefnau. Cydnabu’r GMC yr angen am fwy o dryloywder yn hyn o beth, ond nid yw wedi gwneud unrhyw newidiadau i wella’r sefyllfa. Rwy’n argymell y dylid paratoi meini prawf nawr ar gyfer anfon llythyrau cyngor, a dylai’r grym i anfon llythyrau cyngor gael ei ymgorffori i’r Rheolau. Mae’r angen am dryloywder yn gysylltiedig â diogelwch cleifion. Os nad oes meini prawf clir ar gyfer anfon llythyrau cyngor, mae perygl y bydd y weithdrefn hon yn cael ei mabwysiadu mewn achosion y dylid delio â nhw’n fwy difrifol; mewn geiriau eraill, gellid ei ddefnyddio fel ‘opsiwn ysgafn’. Dylai’r defnydd o lythyrau cyngor gael ei archwilio er mwyn sicrhau nad yw hyn yn digwydd.
Rhoi Rhybuddion yn y Cam Ymchwilio
Ym mharagraffau 25.181-25.196 a 25.204-25.218, rwyf wedi trafod yr anawsterau y credaf fydd y codi mewn cysylltiad â chynigion y GMC i roi rhybuddion yn y cam ymchwilio. Rwy’n ofni y bydd y gweithdrefnau arfaethedig ar gyfer gwrandawiad llafar ‘cryno’ yn anweithredadwy bron. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC ailystyried y cynigion hyn yng ngolau fy sylwadau. Credaf, yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion lle gallai rhybudd gael ei roi yn y cam ymchwilio, y byddai’n fwy priodol i gynnal gwrandawiad llawn gerbron panel FTP a ddylai benderfynu a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Os yw’r GMC yn penderfynu peidio mynd ymlaen â’i gynigion fel y cynlluniwyd, rwyf o’r farn ei bod yn bwysig y dylai arfer archwilwyr achos a’r IC wrth roi rhybuddion gael ei archwilio’n gyson. Yn benodol, dylai’r cwestiwn a fyddai wedi bod yn fwy priodol i’r achos fynd ymlaen at banel FTP gael ei ystyried. Hefyd, dylid archwilio’r achosion hynny lle mae gwahoddiad yn cael ei roi i feddyg i wneud sylwadau ysgrifenedig ynghylch rhoi rhybudd, ond lle, ar ôl derbyn y sylwadau, nad oes unrhyw gamau pellach yn cael eu cymryd wedi derbyn sylwadau’r meddyg.
Y Weithdrefn ar gyfer Canslo
Ym mharagraffau 25.243-25.250, adroddais am gynigion y GMC ar gyfer canslo achosion sydd eisoes wedi’u cyfeirio at banel FTP. Mae diffyg tryloywder yn y darpariaethau hyn, ac maent yn agored i’w camddefnyddio. Rwy’n argymell eu bod yn cael eu newid yn y modd yr awgrymais, fel y dylai penderfyniadau am ganslo gael eu gwneud gan banelau o’r IC, a chofnodi’n ffurfiol y rhesymau am y canslo. Rhaid i geisiadau i ganslo a phenderfyniadau canslo gael eu monitro a’u harchwilio, a dylai’r rhesymau am y ceisiadau a’r penderfyniadau gael eu harchwilio gyda golwg ar gymryd camau i leihau’r nifer o achosion lle mae cyfeiriadau’n cael eu canslo wedi hynny. Dylai nifer yr achosion o ganslo a’r rhesymau gael eu cyhoeddi yn adroddiad blynyddol y GMC.
Ym mharagraffau 25.251-25.253, rwyf wedi seinio nodyn rhybudd ynghylch bwriad y GMC i gyflwyno gweithdrefnau cydsyniol ar gyfer achosion heblaw am y rheiny sy’n codi problemau iechyd gwael neu berfformiad diffygiol. Mae perygl y gall gweithdrefnau felly arwain at osgoi materion ffeithiol. Gallai gweithdrefnau felly fod yn agored i’w camddefnyddio, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 25. Rwy’n argymell, os yw’r GMC yn canlyn ei fwriad presennol i ymestyn gweithdrefnau cydsyniol i bob categori o achosion, dylai gwaredu achosion felly ddigwydd yn gyhoeddus yn y cam dyfarnu ac nid yn breifat fel rhan o’r cam ymchwilio.
Adfywio Honiadau
Ym mharagraffau 25.254-25.256, soniais fod yr arfer o ‘adfywio’ achosion a gafodd eu cau i’w derfynu dan y gweithdrefnau newydd. Rwy’n argymell y dylai fod darpariaeth briodol nawr, wedi’i chynnwys yn y Rheolau, lle gall honiadau a gafodd eu cau gael eu hadfywio. Rwyf wedi awgrymu mai pum mlynedd ddylai’r cyfnod ‘torri’ arferol fod, ond y dylai fod yn bosibl, mewn amgylchiadau eithriadol ac er budd diogelu cleifion, i ailagor achos ar unrhyw adeg.
Adolygu Penderfyniadau Cam Ymchwilio
Ym mharagraffau 25.257-25.264, rwyf wedi croesawu cynnig y GMC i gyflwyno adolygiad o benderfyniadau cam ymchwilio, er mai mewn amgylchiadau cyfyngedig fydd hynny. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n argymell y dylai’r adolygiad gael ei gynnal nid gan Llywydd y GMC, fel y cynigir ar hyn o bryd, ond gan gomisiynydd allanol annibynnol, wedi’i benodi/phenodi at y diben. Gallai’r comisiynydd gael ei benodi gan yr Ysgrifennydd Gwladol. Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai’r hawl i adolygiad gael ei hymestyn i benderfyniadau aelodau o staff i wrthod honiad yn hytrach na’i gyfeirio at archwilydd achos.
Ymrwymiadau Gwirfoddol mewn Achosion gydag Elfen Iechyd
Ym Mhennod 25, mynegais nifer o bryderon ynghylch y modd y bydd rhoi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol mewn achosion ag elfen iechyd yn gweithredu yn y dyfodol. Yn gyntaf, ym mharagraffau 25.223 a 25.232, rwy’n gresynu’r penderfyniad i symud y cyfrifoldeb am weithredu llawer o agweddau ar y gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol oddi wrth archwilwyr achos at staff GMC, nad oes ganddynt gymwysterau meddygol. Dan Reolau drafft 2003, roedd yn ymddangos y byddai’r gweithdrefnau gwirfoddol yn cael eu gweithredu i raddau helaeth fel y cawsant eu gweithredu dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd, gydag archwilydd achos â chymwysterau meddygol priodol yn cymryd yr holl gyfrifoldebau a arferai fod gan y sgrinwyr iechyd. Roedd yr hen drefniadau hynny’n gweithio’n dda, ac i mi mae i weld yn anghywir i’w newid heb reswm da. Rwy’n argymell bod y GMC yn mynd yn ôl at ei fwriad gwreiddiol yn hyn o beth, a’i fod yn cyflogi un neu ddau o archwilwyr achos cymwys i gyflawni hen rôl y sgrinwyr iechyd. Rwy’n argymell y dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu newid er mwyn amodi y dylai’r trefniadau ar gyfer cael ac ystyried asesiadau iechyd ac ar gyfer rheoli a goruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn ymwneud ag iechyd, gael eu cyfeirio gan archwilydd achos â chymwysterau meddygol. Os yw achos i’w gau ar sail asesiad iechyd, dylai’r penderfyniad gael ei wneud gan ddau archwilydd achos, un â chymwysterau meddygol ac un lleyg, ac, os ydynt yn anghytuno, gan banel IC.
Pe bai’r argymhelliad hwnnw’n cael ei dderbyn, mae fy unig argymhellion eraill mewn perthynas ag achosion yn cynnwys elfen iechyd yn ymwneud â materion amrywiol sy’n codi allan o oruchwyliaeth a darfod goruchwyliaeth. Gan fod y materion hyn yn codi mewn achosion y delir â nhw drwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol ac mewn achosion lle pennir amodau gan banel FTP, byddaf yn delio â nhw nes ymlaen yn y Bennod hon.
Ymrwymiadau Gwirfoddol mewn Achosion ag Elfen Perfformiad
Ym mharagraffau 25.238-25.239, mynegais fy ngofid y bydd y rhan fwyaf o’r swyddogaethau a arferai gael eu cyflawni gan gydlynwyr achosion perfformiad â chymwysterau meddygol, bellach yn cael eu cyflawni gan staff GMC, nad oes ganddynt gymwysterau meddygol, yn hytrach na chan archwilwyr achos â chymwysterau meddygol. Dan Reolau drafft 2003, roedd swyddogaethau cydlynwyr achosion i’w trosglwyddo i archwilwyr achos, ond, yn 2004, cafodd y rhan fwyaf ohonynt eu trosglwyddo i aelodau o staff. Ym Mhennod 25, rwyf wedi esbonio pam fy mod yn ystyried y newid hwnnw fel cam yn ôl. Rwy’n argymell y dylai Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 gael eu newid er mwyn amodi y dylai’r trefniadau ar gyfer cael ac ystyried asesiadau perfformiad ac ar gyfer rheoli a goruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn ymwneud â pherfformiad, gael eu cyfeirio gan archwilydd achos â chymwysterau meddygol, a ddylai gyflawni’r swyddogaethau a arferai gael eu cyflawni gan gydlynydd achosion perfformiad. Os yw achos i’w gau ar sail asesiad perfformiad, dylai’r penderfyniad gael ei wneud gan ddau archwilydd achos, un â chymwysterau meddygol ac un lleyg, ac, os ydynt yn anghytuno, gan banel IC.
Mewn tystiolaeth, dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y GMC, yn y dyfodol, yn bwriadu canolbwyntio ar reoleiddio a pheidio bod yn gysylltiedig â’r broses hirdymor adfer meddygon yr oedd eu perfformiad yn ddiffygiol. Nid wyf yn sicr ai hynny yw bwriad y GMC o hyd. Roedd yn ymddangos fel newid ymagwedd priodol i mi.
Panelau Addasrwydd i Ymarfer a Gweithdrefnau mewn Gwrandawiadau Panel
Rwy’n argymell y dylai fod grym penodol yn y Rheolau i ganiatau i’r GMC ymgymryd ag unrhyw ymchwiliadau pellach y teimla sydd eu hangen wedi i achos gael ei gyfeirio at banel FTP a chyn y gwrandawiad. Fe all grym felly fod yn ddealledig, ond mae’n rhaid i’r sefyllfa fod yn eglur.
Rwyf eisoes wedi argymell y dylai’r GMC feddwl eto ynghylch ei benderfyniad i gadw rheolaeth ar y cam dyfarnu, a dylai roi’r gorau i’r hawl i benodi, hyfforddi a rheoli panelwyr. Fodd bynnag, os yw’r GMC yn penderfynu parhau ar ei lwybr presennol, mae gennyf rai argymhellion i’w gwneud mewn perthynas â’r cam dyfarnu.
Rwyf wedi croesawu cyflwyno darpariaethau rheoli achosion, er bod rhaid i mi nodi ei bod yn amhriodol y dylai’r GMC fod â chyfrifoldeb am ‘reoli’ rheolwyr achosion. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r pwyllgor sy’n gyfrifol am reoli’r cam dyfarnu archwilio gwaith rheolwyr achos er mwyn sicrhau bod y gorchmynion sy’n cael eu gwneud wedi’u teilwra’n ddigonol at anghenion achosion unigol ac i gyflawni’r effaith ddymunol. Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai rheolaeth achosion fod yn berthnasol i achosion ag elfen perfformiad.
Am resymau a esboniwyd ym mharagraff 25.285, rwy’n argymell y dylai panelwyr gael eu cynghori i fod yn ofalus rhag dod i gasgliadau croes o fethiant i gydymffurfio â gorchmynion rheoli achos.
Os yw’r GMC yn penderfynu parhau i fod yn gyfrifol am ddyfarnu, er gwaethaf fy argymhelliad y dylai gael gwared ar y cyfrifoldeb, rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC benodi nifer o gadeiryddion â chymwysterau cyfreithiol a ddylai, fel arbrawf neu gynllun peilot, lywyddu dros y gwrandawiadau FTP mwy cymhleth. Dylai canlyniadau’r cynllun peilot gael eu harchwilio i weld a oes buddion yn nhermau arfer gwell wrth gynnal gwrandawiadau, canlyniadau mwy cyson, rhesymau gwell a llai o apeliadau.
Rwy’n argymell y dylai panelwyr FTP, fel rhan o’u hyfforddiant, gael eu cynghori ynghylch eu disgresiwn i dderbyn tystiolaeth achlust a ffurfiau eraill ar dystiolaeth nad ydynt yn dderbyniol mewn treial troseddol. Mae panelau wedi cael grym disgresiwn felly am flynyddoedd lawer, ond mae’r dystiolaeth a dderbyniodd yr Ymchwiliad yn awgrymu na chafodd ei ddefnyddio mor hyblyg neu mor aml ag a ddylai fod wedi’i wneud. Dylai panelwyr gael eu cynghori hefyd, yn ystod hyfforddiant, ei bod yn gwbl briodol iddynt ymyrryd a gofyn cwestiynau os ydynt yn teimlo nad yw unrhyw fater yn cael ei archwilio’n ddigonol. Ni ddylai’r gweithrediadau fod yn wrthwynebol yn gyfan gwbl; mae gan y panel FTP swyddogaeth holi.
Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC ailagor ei ddadl ynghylch y safon prawf i’w chymhwyso gan banelau FTP. Mae’r GMC wedi cydnabod y bydd panelau FTP weithiau, yn y dyfodol, yn gorfod ystyried honiadau o gamymddygiad a pherfformiad diffygiol yn yr un gwrandawiad. Fe all cymhwyso safonau prawf gwahanol beri anhawster. Hefyd, dylai fod cydnabyddiaeth lawn mai prif swyddogaeth y GMC yw arfer awdurdodaeth amddiffynnol ac nid un gosbol. Golyga hynny y bydd y safon prawf sifil yn briodol fel arfer. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC gyflwyno’r safonau prawf sifil ar gyfer pob penderfyniad FTP. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n derbyn ei bod yn ddadleuol y gall y safon prawf troseddol fod yn briodol ar gyfer honiadau sydd hefyd yn gyfystyr â throsedd.
Am resymau a esboniais ym mharagraffau 25.274-25.279, rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC roi’r gorau i’w fwriad i hysbysu’r meddyg am ganlyniad dymunol achos cyn y gwrandawiad. Nid yw’n amhriodol i gynrychiolydd y GMC wneud argymhelliad ynghylch canlyniad wedi i’r dystiolaeth gael ei gwrando, ond mae’n rhaid ei bod yn eglur mai argymhelliad yn unig yw hwn ac ni all mewn unrhyw ffordd rwymo’r panel.
Am y rhesymau a roddwyd ym mharagraff 25.309, rwy’n argymell y dylai fod yn ofynnol i banelau FTP roi rhesymau byr am eu prif ganfyddiad o ffaith.
Ym mharagraff 25.310, nodais, cyn penderfynu a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, bydd y grym gan banel FTP i orchymyn asesiad iechyd neu berfformiad. Mae’r grym hwnnw’n codi dan reol 17(4). Croesewais y datblygiad hwnnw. Fodd bynnag, mynegais bryder, dan reol 17(5)(b), wrth dderbyn adroddiad yr asesiad, bod y grym gan y panel FTP (heb benderfynu a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer neu hyd yn oed heb wneud canfyddiadau o ffaith) i anfon yr achos yn ôl at y cam ymchwilio er mwyn i archwilwyr achos allu ystyried a fyddai’n briodol delio â’r meddyg drwy ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol. Dywedais na fyddai llwybr felly’n foddhaol ac esboniais pam. Mae Rheol 17(5)(b) yn amddifadu’r gweithrediadau o dryloywder. Rwy’n argymell y dylai rheol 17(5)(b) gael ei diddymu.
Ym mharagraffau 25.313 a 25.317, tynnais sylw at y ffaith nad oes unrhyw ddarpariaeth benodol yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 sy’n pennu gofyniad ar neu’n galluogi panel FTP i ystyried hanes FTP meddyg wrth ystyried materion amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer a sancsiynu. Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 wedi cynnwys darpariaeth felly. Mae’r hepgoriad yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn ddryslyd, oherwydd go brin mai’r bwriad yw na ddylai panelau FTP ystyried y wybodaeth hon. Mae’n fwy o syndod fyth gan fod y rheolau sy’n rheoli gweithdrefn panelau IC yn eu galluogi’n benodol i ystyried hanes FTP meddyg gyda’r GMC neu unrhyw gorff rheoleiddio arall wrth benderfynu ynghylch rhoi rhybudd neu beidio. Argymhellais y dylai rheol 17(2)(j) gael ei newid i ddatgan yn eglur pa fathau o dystiolaeth bellach y dylid eu derbyn cyn bod panel yn penderfynu a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Yn fy marn i, dylai hynny gynnwys tystiolaeth o hanes FTP y meddyg. Roeddwn hefyd wedi rhagweld y byddai’n cynnwys unrhyw dystiolaeth liniarol yr oedd y meddyg yn dymuno’i chynnig, gan gynnwys lliniariad personol pur. Hefyd, dylid newid rheol 17(2)(l) i ddatgan yn glir pa gategorïau o dystiolaeth y gellid eu derbyn ar ôl canfyddiad o amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer ond cyn penderfynu ar sancsiwn. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa dystiolaeth bellach y mae’r GMC yn ystyried y gellid ei derbyn yn y cam hwn.
Ym mharagraff 25.316, cyfeiriais at yr anghysonder rhwng, ar yr un llaw, darpariaethau adran 35D o Ddeddf 1983 a rheol 17(2)(k) o Reolau Tachwedd 2004 ac, ar y llaw arall, cynnwys Arweiniad drafft Medi 2004 ar gyfer Panelwyr. Mae’n rhaid cywiro’r Arweiniad drafft gan y bydd yn drysu panelwyr. Rwyf wedi cyfeirio hefyd at yr hyn rwy’n ystyried yw afresymegolrwydd y canlyniadau amrywiol sy’n agored i banel FTP. Fel yr esboniais, mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i banel FTP benderfynu a oes amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Os yw’r panel FTP yn penderfynu
nad
oes amhariad ar ei addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer, mae’r grym gan y panel FTP, dan Ddeddf 1983, i roi rhybudd i’r meddyg mewn perthynas â’i ymddygiad/hymddygiad neu berfformiad yn y dyfodol. Er bod hyn i weld yn rhyfedd ar yr olwg gyntaf, gallaf ddeall y gall rhybudd fod yn briodol mewn achos lle mae meddyg wedi gwneud rhywbeth o’i le yn y gorffennol, ond lle mae’r panel o’r farn nad oes amhariad presennol ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, os yw’r panel FTP yn canfod bod amhariad ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, nid oes ganddo rym i roi rhybudd. Yr opsiynau sy’n agored iddo pe bai hynny’n digwydd yw peidio gweithredu o gwbl, neu i weithredu ar gofrestriad y meddyg - trwy bennu amodau ar neu atal cofrestriad, neu drwy ddileu enw’r meddyg o’r gofrestr. Rwy’n argymell bod y ddeddfwriaeth yn cael ei newid i ganiatau i banel roi rhybudd lle mae wedi canfod bod amhariad, ond nid amhariad i’r graddau ei fod yn cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad.
Ym mharagraffau 25.324-25.326, cyfeiriais at y ddarpariaeth newydd (rheol 17(2)(m)) a fyddai’n caniatáu panel FTP i ‘ystyried’ unrhyw ymrwymiadau ysgrifenedig (gan gynnwys ymrwymiadau yn ymwneud â chyfyngiadau ar ei arfer/harfer) gan y meddyg yr oedd y panel FTP o’r farn eu bod yn ddigonol i ddiogelu cleifion a lles y cyhoedd. Dywedais nad oedd yn eglur i mi ar ba bwynt yn y gweithrediadau y bwriadwyd bod ymrwymiadau felly’n cael eu hystyried. Pe bai’r panel FTP i ystyried ymrwymiadau yn y cam penderfynu pa sancsiwn i’w pennu (e.e. trwy dderbyn yr ymrwymiadau yn hytrach na phennu amodau ffurfiol), fe allai hynny fod yn dderbyniol cyhyd â bod darpariaeth o fewn y Rheolau ar gyfer goruchwylio’r meddyg er mwyn sicrhau cydymffurfio â’r ymrwymiadau ac ar gyfer delio ag achos o dorri ymrwymiad. Byddai’n rhaid cael darpariaeth hefyd ar gyfer gwrandawiadau adolygu mewn achosion lle’r oedd ymrwymiadau wedi’u rhoi. Ar hyn o bryd, nid oes darpariaeth felly ac rwy’n argymell, os yw rheol 17(2)(m) i’w chadw, dylid newid y Rheolau ar fyrder i gynnwys darpariaeth felly. Os nad oes unrhyw fodd o ganfod a yw meddyg yn cydymffurfio ag ymrwymiadau y mae wedi’u rhoi, a dim modd o ddelio ag ef/hi os nad yw’n cydymffurfio, ni ellir diogelu cleifion yn ddigonol. Wedi dweud hynny, nid wyf yn gweld yr angen i ymrwymiadau gael eu rhoi yn y cam sancsiynu. Erbyn hynny, bydd y panel FTP wedi gwneud ei ganfyddiadau mewn perthynas ag amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer a gweithredu ar gofrestriad, a bydd wedi gwrando tystiolaeth a/neu gyflwyniadau. Bydd mewn sefyllfa i bennu amodau o’i ddewis ei hun. Os gwna hynny, mae darpariaeth ar gyfer gwrandawiadau adolygu ac ar gyfer gweithredu os torrir ymrwymiad yn cael eu cynnwys o fewn y Rheolau presennol. Ni allaf weld unrhyw beth i’w ennill gan y ddarpariaeth newydd, ac rwy’n argymell mai’r dull gorau o weithredu yw diddymu rheol 17(2)(m).
Fy mhryder yw y gall fod mai’r bwriad yw y dylai panel FTP ‘ystyried’ ymrwymiadau cyn iddo wneud ei ganfyddiadau o ffaith a/neu benderfyniad ar amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer. Mae’r ddarpariaeth yn ddigon eang i ganiatau hyn. Gallai hynny arwain at osgoi’r materion pwysig hyn a byddai hynny’n gwbl anfoddhaol. Rwy’n argymell, os yw’r rheol i’w chadw, dylai gael ei hailddrafftio i ddatgan yn eglur y gellir ystyried ymrwymiadau yn y cam penderfynu ar sancsiwn yn unig wedi i ganfyddiadau o ffaith neu amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer gael eu gwneud.
Rwy’n argymell, gydol y cyfnod y mae cofrestriad meddyg yn destun amodau, dylai rhywun o fewn y GMC (byddwn yn awgrymu archwilydd achos) gymryd cyfrifoldeb am fonitro cynnydd y meddyg ac am sicrhau, cyn belled ag y bo modd, ei fod/bod yn cydymffurfio â’r amodau a bennwyd. Mae hynny’n hanfodol ar gyfer diogelu cleifion. Rwy’n argymell ymhellach, ym mhob achos lle mae meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer dan amodau, dylai goruchwyliwr proffesiynol gael ei benodi/phenodi i oruchwylio cynnydd y meddyg. Rwy’n argymell y dylai goruchwylwyr proffesiynol felly fod â chyswllt uniongyrchol â’r archwilydd achos yn cael ei benodi/phenodi gan y GMC, a dylai fod yn ofynnol iddo/iddi (fel goruchwylwyr meddygol dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol) ddarparu adroddiadau ysgrifenedig cyson ar gynnydd y meddyg a’i gydymffurfio/chydymffurfio ag amodau a chyfyngiadau ar ymarfer. Rwyf o’r farn y byddai cyfraniad uniongyrchol y goruchwyliwr proffesiynol yn gwella’r oruchwyliaeth gyffredinol, ac yn lleihau’r risg felly i gleifion yn sgil gadael i feddygon felly barhau i weithio. Mewn achos lle mae iechyd y meddyg dan sylw, dylai goruchwyliwr meddygol gael ei benodi/phenodi fel dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol.
Dylai unrhyw achos o dorri amod a bennwyd gan banel FTP (ac eithrio’r achos lleiaf o dorri amod) arwain at y meddyg yn cael ei ddwyn yn ôl gerbron y panel er mwyn gallu rhoi ystyriaeth i bennu sancsiwn sy’n rhoi mwy o ddiogelwch i’r cyhoedd.
Hyd yn hyn, rwyf wedi cyfeirio at yr angen i oruchwylio meddygon sy’n destun amodau a bennwyd gan banel FTP. Fodd bynnag, mae’r un ystyriaethau’n berthnasol i feddygon sydd wedi rhoi ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol neu a gafodd ymrwymiadau ‘wedi’u hystyried’ gan banel FTP. Lle mae’r achos yn codi mater iechyd, dylai’r meddyg fod yn destun goruchwyliaeth feddygol fel dan yr hen weithdrefnau iechyd gwirfoddol. Ym mhob achos lle mae ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol a bod y meddyg yn parhau i ymarfer, dylai goruchwyliwr proffesiynol gael ei benodi/phenodi. Rwy’n argymell y dylai goruchwylwyr proffesiynol felly fod â chyswllt uniongyrchol â’r archwilydd achos yn cael ei benodi/phenodi gan y GMC, hyd yn oed mewn achosion iechyd lle, yn y gorffennol, y trefniant fu i oruchwyliwr proffesiynol fod â chyswllt uniongyrchol yn unig, drwy’r goruchwyliwr meddygol.
Mae’r arweiniad mwyaf diweddar gan y GMC yn awgrymu, lle mae cyfnod o ataliad neu amodau ar gofrestriad wedi’u pennu, bydd
un neu fwy o wrandawiadau adolygu lle gall y panel FTP, ymhlith pethau eraill, ymestyn cyfnod yr ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol neu ddiddymu neu amrywio’r amodau neu ganiatau i’r meddyg ailgychwyn ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad pan ddaw cyfnod yr ataliad neu’r cofrestriad amodol i ben. Mae gwrandawiadau adolygu’n bwysig eithriadol. Y rhain yw’r ‘dannedd’ y tu ôl y sancsiynau ac eithrio dileu, a dylent ganolbwyntio meddwl y meddyg ar yr angen i gymryd unrhyw gamau unioni angenrheidiol. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r Rheolau gael eu newid er mwyn sicrhau bod o leiaf un gwrandawiad adolygu ym mhob achos felly, oni bai bod rhesymau eithriadol pam na ddylai gwrandawiad gael ei gynnal. Dylai’r cyfnod y mae’r gwrandawiad adolygu cyntaf i’w gynnal gael ei bennu yn y gwrandawiad gwreiddiol, a dylai fod fewn cyfnod rhesymol o fyr (nid mwy na blwyddyn mewn achos lle mae amodau wedi’u pennu); bydd hyn yn galluogi’r panel FTP i sicrhau bod y meddyg yn cydymffurfio â’i amodau/hamodau ac yn gwneud cynnydd. Gall ail wrandawiad adolygu gael ei bennu wedyn ar gyfer amser gerllaw’r adeg pan fydd cyfnod y cofrestriad amodol yn dod i ben lle gall addasrwydd y meddyg i fynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad gael ei ystyried. Dylai fod disgwyliad y bydd y meddyg yn rhoi tystiolaeth ac yn ateb cwestiynau gan y panel FTP.
Mae Rheolau Tachwedd 2004 yn amodi y gall y Cofrestrydd (yn ymarferol, y staff yn arfer ei bwerau cyfreithiol) gynnal unrhyw ymchwiliad angenrheidiol a chael unrhyw dystiolaeth arbenigol neu dystiolaeth arall y mae’n ystyried sy’n angenrheidiol i baratoi ar gyfer gwrandawiad adolygu. Gall hefyd wahodd y meddyg i gael asesiad o’i berfformiad/pherfformiad neu iechyd. Dan Reolau drafft 2003, byddai’r swyddogaethau hyn wedi cael eu cyflawni gan archwilydd achos dynodedig. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r trefniadau a nodwyd yn Rheolau drafft 2003 gael eu hailsefydlu. Dylai’r math o ymchwiliadau sydd i’w cynnal (yn benodol, comisiynu ac ystyried adroddiadau ac asesiadau arbenigol) gael eu cynnal gan archwilwyr achos â chymwysterau meddygol. Wrth gwrs, bydd angen cymorth staff arnynt wrth weinyddu’r trefniadau, ond archwilydd achos ddylai wneud y penderfyniad ynghylch math a graddfa tystiolaeth y bydd yn ofynnol gan y panel FTP yn y gwrandawiad achos. Os yw’r archwilwyr achos, fel yr awgrymais, i gael cyfrifoldeb am fonitro cynnydd meddygon sy’n destun amodau, bydd hyd yn oed yn fwy priodol iddynt gyfarwyddo’r paratoadau ar gyfer gwrandawiadau adolygu.
Yn y gorffennol, mae meddygon wedi cael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer wedi i gyfnod ataliad neu gofrestriad amodol ddod i ben heb unrhyw wrandawiad pellach o’u hachosion gan banel o’r Pwyllgor Ymddygiad Proffesiynol (PCC). Weithiau, mae’r meddyg wedi cael ei ryddhau o amodau ar gofrestriad ar sail adroddiad gan y person sy’n goruchwylio’i adferiad/hadferiad. Ni fu’n anarferol i’r PCC a’r CPP ganiatau i feddyg fynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad heb unrhyw asesiad gwrthrychol yn cael ei wneud er mwyn sicrhau bod y diffygion a arweiniodd at bennu’r sancsiwn gwreiddiol wedi’u hunioni, a bod y meddyg yn wir yn addas i ymarfer. Dan Reolau Tachwedd 2004, fel y dywedais, mae’r grym gan y Cofrestrydd i wahodd y meddyg i gael asesiad perfformiad neu iechyd, ond nid oes gofyniad y dylai’r Cofrestrydd wneud hynny. Yn fy marn i, mae hyn yn anfoddhaol ac nid yw’n rhoi diogelwch digonol i gleifion.
Rwy’n argymell, ym mhob achos ac eithrio achosion eithriadol, y dylai fod gofyniad ar feddyg yr ataliwyd ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad gael asesiad gwrthrychol o’i addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer cyn cael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer. Y math o amgylchiadau eithriadol rwy’n eu rhagweld yw pan fydd y meddyg wedi cael ei atal/hatal am gyfnod fel ‘math o gerydd’ am ddigwyddiad o gamymddygiad nad effeithiodd ar ei arfer/harfer clinigol na pherfformiad. Ym mhob achos arall, mae’n debygol y bydd canfyddiad bod amhariad difrifol ar addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer ac y bydd y cyfnod allan o ymarfer wedi’i wneud/gwneud hyd yn oed yn llai addas i ymarfer nag o’r blaen. Mae asesiad, felly, yn gwbl hanfodol. Dylai’r asesiad hwnnw gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP a phenderfyniad gael ei wneud ynghylch addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Hyd yn oed pan ganfyddir bod meddyg sydd wedi bod yn destun ataliad yn addas i fynd yn ôl i ymarfer, bydd yn y rhan fwyaf o achosion yn briodol iddo/iddi fod yn destun amodau (amod o oruchwyliaeth broffesiynol yn benodol) am gyfnod wedi iddo/iddi fynd yn ôl i ymarfer, ac i wrandawiad pellach gael ei drefnu lle gellir ystyried ei gynnydd/chynnydd wrth ymarfer a phenderfyniad gael ei wneud ynghylch a yw’n addas i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad.
Lle mae meddyg wedi bod yn destun amodau ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad, dylai fod yn ofynnol iddo/iddi gael asesiad gwrthrychol o’i addasrwydd/haddasrwydd i ymarfer cyn cael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad. Dylai’r asesiad hwnnw gael ei ystyried gan banel FTP mewn gwrandawiad adolygu yn y modd a ddisgrifiais uchod.
Bydd natur yr asesiad yn amrywio yn ôl yr agweddau ar berfformiad, iechyd neu ymddygiad y meddyg a arweiniodd at yr ataliad neu’r amodau. Nid yr asesiad perfformiad llawn fydd hwnnw o reidrwydd, er, mewn achosion lle bu nifer o ddiffygion, fe all hyn fod yn angenrheidiol. Mewn achos lle mae gallu’r meddyg wedi bod yn ddiffygiol, gall fod yn briodol iddo/iddi gael asesiad yn cynnwys Cyfnod II yn gyfan neu ran o Gyfnod II o’r asesiad perfformiad. Lle bu’n ofynnol i’r meddyg gael math penodol o ailhyfforddiant, fe all asesiad yn seiliedig ar ei allu/gallu neu berfformiad yn y maes arbennig hwnnw o ymarfer fod yn addas. Yr hyn sy’n hanfodol yw na ddylai’r meddyg gael mynd yn ôl i ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad oni bai a hyd nes y delir yn llwyddiannus â’r diffygion a arweiniodd at gamau’n cael eu cymryd ar ei gofrestriad/chofrestriad, a’i fod/bod yn bodloni safon ymarfer dderbyniol. Ar hyn o bryd, y safon briodol ar gyfer meddygon teulu yw honno a osodwyd ar gyfer asesiad crynodol; i’r safon honno y mae’r offer asesu perfformiad yn cael eu graddnodi.
Os yw meddyg yn cael asesiad i ganfod a yw’n addas i fynd yn ôl i ymarfer neu ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad, a bod yr asesiad yn datgelu nad yw’n bodloni’r safon ofynnol, nid yw’n ddymunol iddo/iddi ‘bydru ymlaen’ gyda chyfnodau dro ar ôl tro o gofrestriad amodol. Fe ddaw’r amser pan ddaw’n amlwg nad yw’r meddyg fyth yn debygol o fodloni’r safon ar gyfer ymarfer yn ddigyfyngiad. Ar adeg gwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, ymddengys bod y GMC wedi cydnabod, os yw meddyg wedi cael cyfle i wella ac nad yw’n gallu neu ei fod/bod yn amharod i wneud hynny, mae prif ddyletswydd y GMC i ddiogelu cleifion yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol iddo i’w symud ef/hi allan o ymarfer. Nid wyf yn sicr ai hyn yw polisi’r GMC o hyd. Roeddwn yn meddwl mai hwnnw oedd y polisi iawn, ac argymhellais y dylai gael ei fabwysiadu. Mewn achosion o’r math hwn, fe all fod yn angenrheidiol i gomisiynu asesiad llawn newydd gyda golwg ar ddileu’r meddyg. Nid wyf yn awgrymu na ddylai’r polisi hwn gael ei fabwysiadau mewn perthynas ag amhariad a achoswyd gan iechyd gwael. Mewn achosion felly, nid yw dileu ar gael a iawn yw hynny, a gall ataliad am gyfnod amhenodol fod yn briodol.
Mae’n bwysig, yn fy marn i, y dylai’r un safonau goruchwylio, adolygu ac ailasesu fod yn berthnasol mewn achosion lle mae ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol wedi’u derbyn neu’u ‘hystyried’ gan banel FTP, ag sy’n berthnasol lle mae amodau wedi’u pennu. Dylai unrhyw achos o dorri ymrwymiadau felly gael ei gyfeirio at banel FTP; dylai hynny ddigwydd nawr, er bod yr Ymchwiliad wedi gwrando tystiolaeth nad yw wastad yn digwydd pan ddylai. Dylai fod ailasesiad cyn bod ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol yn cael diffygio. At hynny, ni ddylai ymrwymiadau gwirfoddol gael parhau mewn grym a’u hadnewyddu am gyfnod amhenodol. Dylai’r amser ddod pan fydd digon o gyfle i wella wedi’i roi. Yn fy marn i, os oes ymrwymiadau wedi’u rhoi yn y cam ymchwilio, yr archwilydd achos ddylai benderfynu pan fydd yr amser wedi dod i gyfeirio’r meddyg at banel FTP gyda golwg ar gamau pellach yn cael eu cymryd.
Ceisiadau am Adfer i’r Gofrestr
Roedd Rheolau drafft 2003 yn darparu ar gyfer penodi archwilydd achos i ystyried a pharatoi’r dystiolaeth i’w rhoi gerbron panel FTP yn y gwrandawiad o gais meddyg i gael ei adfer/hadfer i’r gofrestr. Roedd yr archwilydd achos i gael yr un pwerau i gaffael tystiolaeth arbenigol a thystiolaeth arall ag mewn perthynas â gwrandawiad adolygu. Ar ôl hynny, cafodd y trefniadau arfaethedig hyn eu newid, ac, yn Rheolau Tachwedd 2004, bydd y swyddogaethau a oedd yn flaenorol i’w cyflawni gan archwilwyr achos yn cael eu rhoi i aelodau o staff y GMC. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r trefniadau sy’n cael eu hystyried dan Reolau drafft 2003 gael eu hailsefydlu. Gwnaf hynny am yr un rhesymau a nodais yn flaenorol mewn perthynas â gwrandawiadau adolygu. Bydd gwaith paratoi’n cynnwys comisiynu asesiad priodol yn delio ag addasrwydd y meddyg i ailgychwyn ymarfer, a gall hefyd gynnwys cael tystiolaeth arbenigol arall. Gall hefyd olygu ystyried tystiolaeth gymhleth yn ymwneud â’r digwyddiadau a arweiniodd at y dileu gwreiddiol. Ymddengys i mi bod yr holl swyddogaethau hyn yn gofyn am gyfraniad archwilydd achos, un â chymwysterau meddygol yn ddelfrydol. Yn amlwg bydd angen cymorth gan staff gweinyddol (a chyfreithiol fwy na thebyg) staff y GMC, ond dylai’r paratoadau ar gyfer y gwrandawiad, yn fy marn i, gael eu cyfarwyddo gan archwilydd achos.
Fy nealltwriaeth i yw, er 2000, y bu gofyniad ar bob meddyg y mae ei gais/chais am adfer i’r gofrestr wedi cyrraedd ail gam y weithdrefn, i gyflwyno asesiad er mwyn bodloni panel y PCC ynghylch ei gymeriad/chymeriad da, gallu proffesiynol ac iechyd. Rwy’n cytuno’n llwyr ei bod yn hanfodol y dylai fod asesiad gwrthrychol annibynnol o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer. Dylai hyn gael ei gyfeirio’n rhannol at y diffygion a arweiniodd at ei ddileu/dileu yn wreiddiol, ond rhaid iddo ystyried hefyd, hyd yn oed os nad oedd y broblem yn broblem perfformiad gwael, yn dilyn cyfnod o fwy na phum mlynedd allan o ymarfer clinigol, mae’n rhaid bod amheuaeth ynghylch ei allu/gallu a’i sgiliau clinigol hefyd. Mae’n rhaid i’r asesiad, felly, gael ei gyfeirio at bob agwedd ar addasrwydd i ymarfer, ac ni ddylai’r meddyg gael ei adfer/hadfer oni bai ei fod/bod wedi bodloni’r safon ofynnol. Mae angen arweiniad ar banelau sy’n ystyried ceisiadau adfer ynghylch y safonau a’r meini prawf sydd i’w cymhwyso. Rwy’n argymell bod hyn yn cael ei ddarparu trwy gasgliad o grynodebau achos.
Rwy’n deall y rhesymau pam mae’r GMC wedi penderfynu yn erbyn pennu amodau’n awtomatig ar gofrestriad meddyg sydd wedi’i adfer/hadfer i’r gofrestr, ac nid wyf yn bwriadu argymell y llwybr hwnnw. Yn lle hynny, rwy’n argymell, fel mesur diogelwch ychwanegol i gleifion, y dylai fod gofyniad ar feddygon sy’n cael eu hadfer i’r gofrestr gael mentor â thasg i fonitro’u cynnydd wrth ymarfer, ac i adrodd i’r GMC am eu cynnydd. Rwy’n awgrymu y dylai’r adroddiadau hynny gael eu hystyried gan yr archwilydd achos a benodwyd i ddelio â’r cais adfer. Os yw’n ymddangos o adroddiadau’r mentor bod problemau pellach yn codi, bydd ef/hi yn gallu cymryd camau priodol o fewn y gweithdrefnau FTP.
Achosion yn Ymwneud â Chamddefnyddio Cyffuriau
Ym Mhennod 23, rwyf wedi trafod yr angen am archwiliad manylach o’r amgylchiadau sy’n sylfaenol i honiadau o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau gan feddygon, ac euogfarnau am droseddau’n gysylltiedig â chamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Rwyf wedi dweud bod rhaid datrys unrhyw ddadleuon ffeithiol, a rhaid cael ymchwiliad mwy trylwyr o’r modd y dechreuodd arfer y meddyg o gamddefnyddio cyffuriau. Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai’r GMC gomisiynu ymchwil i ganlyniadau achosion y meddygon hynny sydd wedi mynd trwy weithdrefnau iechyd y GMC. Mewn achosion blaenorol, mae gan y GMC fynediad at gronfa o wybodaeth werthfawr. Fe allai’r gwaith ymchwil hwn yn wir gyfrannu at ddatblygiad dulliau newydd neu well o oruchwylio; byddai’r GMC yn gallu canfod beth oedd wedi gweithio orau yn y gorffennol. Hefyd, trwy ganfod pa feddygon yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau oedd wedi mynd yn ôl at eu hen arferion neu a oedd fel arall heb ‘wneud yn dda’, byddai’r GMC yn cael mewnwelediad gwerthfawr i nodweddion meddygon yn camddefnyddio cyffuriau.
Rwyf wedi dweud ei bod yn bwysig bod prosesau’r GMC yn dryloyw. Dylai meddygon, y rheiny sy’n eu cynrychioli a’r cyhoedd fod yn gallu deall yn union beth mae’r GMC yn ei wneud a pham. Dylai’r trefniadau presennol gael eu gwella mewn nifer o agweddau. Yn gyntaf, mae rhai materion y dylai’r Rheolau eu cwmpasu, ond nad ydynt. Mae enghreifftiau’n cynnwys y profion sydd i’w cymhwyso ym mhob cam o’r broses a’r darpariaethau ar gyfer rhoi llythyrau cyngor. Rwy’n argymell y dylai pob agwedd ar y gweithdrefnau lle mae gan feddygon neu wneuthurwyr honiadau ddiddordeb uniongyrchol, ymddangos yn y Rheolau. O ran gweithdrefnau mewnol pur, gallaf weld y byddai’n anymarferol ac yn gyfyngol pe bai pob agwedd ar y gweithdrefnau’n gorfod cael eu cynnwys yn y Rheolau. Fod bynnag, nid yw hynny i ddweud y dylai’r gweithdrefnau mewnol gael eu celu rhag llygaid y cyhoedd. Rhaid peidio eu celu. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC gyhoeddi llawlyfr FTP yn cynnwys pob un o’i Reolau perthnasol ac arweiniad ar gyfer panelwyr, archwilwyr achos a staff ac unrhyw Orchmynion Sefydlog perthnasol. Byddai hyn yn cynnwys dogfennau fel yr ISG a’r ffurflenni safonol sy’n cael eu defnyddio gan staff ac archwilwyr achos wrth gofnodi’u penderfyniadau. Gall fod yn synhwyrol i hwn gael ei gynhyrchu ar ffurf dalenni rhydd er mwyn gallu’i newid o dro i dro. Fe allai fynd ar wefan y GMC hefyd er mwyn i unrhyw un y mae arnynt angen ei ddefnyddio allu cael mynediad ato’n hawdd.
Ar amryw bwyntiau yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi sôn am yr angen am wybodaeth ystadegol glir i’w darparu gan y GMC. Er enghraifft, ym mharagraff 25.148, dywedais y dylai’r modd yr ymdrinnir ag adroddiadau am euogfarnau gael ei esbonio’n eglur i’r cyhoedd. Categorïau eraill o wybodaeth a ddylid eu gwneud yn gyhoeddus mewn ffurf eglur a dealladwy yw’r niferoedd o achosion o ganslo cyfeiriadau at banel FTP ac adolygiadau o benderfyniadau yn cael eu gwneud ar ddiwedd y cam ymchwilio. Rwy’n argymell y dylai’r GMC gyhoeddi adroddiad blynyddol a ddylai fod yn ddatganiad tryloyw o weithgareddau’r flwyddyn mewn perthynas â’r gweithdrefnau FTP ac ailddilysu.
Ym Mhennod 26, mynegais fy mhryder a’m hanfodlonrwydd ynghylch cynigion presennol y GMC ar gyfer ailddilysu. Mae’r GMC wedi dweud wrth y cyhoedd y bydd ailddilysu yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i bob meddyg ddangos bod ganddo/ganddi wybodaeth ddiweddar a’i fod/bod yn addas i ymarfer. Mae Adran 29A o Ddeddf 1983 yn pennu dyletswydd ar y GMC i wneud rheoliadau yn darparu ar gyfer ailddilysu meddygon. Yn Adran 29A, diffinnir ailddilysu fel
‘gwerthusiad’
o addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer. Rwyf wedi esbonio nad yw’r broses y mae’r GMC yn bwriadu ei defnyddio ar gyfer ailddilysu yn golygu gwerthuso addasrwydd i ymarfer. Yn fy marn i, nid yw’r broses hon yn addas i’r pwrpas y bwriedir iddi fod.
Ym mharagraffau 26.191-26.197, rwyf wedi nodi rhai awgrymiadau ar gyfer y modd y dylai proses ailddilysu meddygon gael ei chyflawni. Yn fyr, rwy’n awgrymu y dylai panel o dri asesydd o leiaf archwilio’r ffolderi tystiolaeth y mae’n rhaid i bob meddyg sy’n gweithio yn y GIG eu llunio at ddibenion arfarnu. Un o’r aseswyr fyddai arweinydd rheolaeth glinigol PCT y meddyg. Meddyg teulu o ardal arall fyddai asesydd arall, wedi’i achredu/hachredu gan yr RCGP fel asesydd i safonau a gymeradwywyd gan y GMC. Byddai’r trydydd yn berson lleyg. Byddai’n rhaid i’r ffolder gynnwys rhai eitemau tystiolaeth penodol, i’w pennu gan y GMC mewn ymgynghoriad â’r RCGP. Rwyf wedi cynnig hefyd y dylai fod amryw o ddulliau ‘dirprwyol’ o gyflawni ailddilysu.
Argymhelliad yn Ymwneud â’r Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth mewn Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd
Ym mharagraff 21.187, dywedais fod darpariaethau adran 29 Deddf Diwygio’r Gwasanaeth Iechyd Gwladol a’r Proffesiynau Gofal Iechyd 2002 wedi peri cryn anhawster adeiladu yn achos
. Rwy’n argymell, y tro cyntaf y bydd y Ddeddf yn cael ei newid, y dylid cymryd y cyfle i egluro bod y Ddeddf yn darparu ar gyfer y CRHP/CHRE i apelio yn erbyn ‘rhyddfarnau’ neu ganfyddiadau o ‘ddim amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’ yn ogystal ag mewn perthynas â sancsiynau y cred yr oedd yn rhy drugarog. Yn y dyfodol dylid cael adolygiad o bwerau’r CRHP/CHRE gyda golwg ar ganfod a yw’n angenrheidiol i ymestyn ei bwerau a’i swyddogaethau er mwyn ei alluogi i weithredu’n effeithiol er mwyn sicrhau bod cleifion yn cael eu diogelu’n ddigonol gan y GMC.
Wrth ystyried pa argymhellion y dylwn eu gwneud ar gyfer diogelu cleifion yn y dyfodol, rwyf wedi gorfod ystyried a ddylai’r GMC, yn fy marn i, gadw cyfrifoldeb am gynnal y gweithdrefnau FTP sydd, fel yr esboniais ym Mhennod 2, yn ffurfio rhan annatod o’r systemau presennol ar gyfer monitro a goruchwylio meddygon, gan gynnwys meddygon teulu. Y rhain yw’r gweithdrefnau y dylai’r GMC eu dilyn er mwyn diogelu cleifion rhag meddygon camweithredol, h.y. meddygon sydd, oherwydd eu camymddygiad, iechyd gwael neu berfformiad diffygiol, yn creu risg niweidio cleifion. Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi cael tystiolaeth a chyflwyniadau o rai mannau sy’n awgrymu na ddylai’r GMC gyflawni’r swyddogaeth honno mwyach. Awgrymwyd nad yw diogelu cleifion yn flaenoriaeth gyntaf gan y GMC; dywedir, yn hytrach, mai ei flaenoriaeth yw diogelu buddiannau’r proffesiwn meddygol. Rwyf eisoes wedi nodi nad yw’n fwriad gennyf argymell y dylai’r GMC gael ei amddifadu o’i swyddogaeth FTP. Mae’n bwysig fy mod yn esbonio fy rhesymau am ddod i’r casgliad hwnnw.
Y geiriau sydd wedi ymddangos yng nghornel dde uchaf bron pob gohebiaeth a ddosbarthwyd gan y GMC yn y gorffennol diweddar yw ‘Protecting Patients - Guiding Doctors’. Mewn iaith fodern, dyma fu ‘stribed slogan’ y GMC. Bwriad y geiriau yw crynhoi nodau ac athroniaeth y GMC. Rwy’n deall y byddant o bosibl yn cael eu newid yn fuan, er nad wyf yn gwybod pa eiriau sy’n cael eu cynnig. Dylai’r nodau a’r athroniaeth honno fod wedi’u cymhwyso i holl weithgareddau’r GMC, ond efallai eu bod yn fwyaf perthnasol i weithrediad y gweithdrefnau FTP. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi disgrifio’r gweithdrefnau FTP fel y buont yn gweithredu dros y 30 mlynedd diwethaf. Rwyf wedi ceisio archwilio’r graddau y mae eu gweithredu wedi diogelu cleifion yn unol â phrif ddiben y GMC. I’r rheiny a chanddynt yr amynedd a’r dygnwch i ddarllen Penodau 15 i 24, ni fydd yn syndod iddynt fy mod wedi dod i’r casgliad nad yw’r GMC, yn y gorffennol, wedi llwyddo, yn y prif ddiben hwnnw. Yn lle hynny, mae, i raddau sylweddol, wedi gweithredu er buddiannau meddygon. Wrth gwrs, rwy’n derbyn bod gan y GMC ddyletswydd tuag at feddygon yn ogystal; mae’n rhaid iddo fod yn deg yn ei holl drafodion â nhw. Ond, yn y gorffennol, mae’r cydbwysedd wedi bod yn anghywir ac, fel y dangosais, roedd yr anghydbwysedd yn sgil diwylliant o fewn y GMC, set o agweddau ac ymagwedd a roddodd yr hyn a welwyd fel ‘bod yn deg i feddygon’ o flaen yr hyn a oedd yn angenrheidiol i ddiogelu cleifion. Mae Penodau 15 i 24 yn cynnwys llawer o enghreifftiau o’r modd yr oedd y diwylliant hwn yn gweithredu. Nid wyf yn bwriadu eu hailadrodd yma.
Mae’n bwysig i’r Ymchwiliad ystyried a yw’r diwylliant o fewn y GMC wedi newid. Mae agweddau a diwylliant corfforaethol y GMC yn sylfaenol i’w allu i weithredu er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd, fel sy’n ddyletswydd arno i wneud. Mae’n bwysig hefyd y dylai’r GMC gydnabod diffygion ei hen weithdrefnau FTP a’i anallu i ganfod meddygon yr oedd eu harfer naill ai’n afreolaidd neu’n is na’r safon. Pe na bai rhywfaint o newid diwylliant yn y GMC, a chydnabyddiaeth o’r angen i newid, ni fyddwn wedi oedi rhyw lawer o ran cynghori’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol bod rhaid iddo wneud darpariaeth ar gyfer rhyw ffordd arall o ddelio â meddygon y codwyd amheuaeth ynghylch eu haddasrwydd i ymarfer. Fodd bynnag, cydnabuwyd yr angen am newidiadau i’r gweithdrefnau FTP, fel yr angen am ddull gwell o ganfod ymddygiad afreolaidd a pherfformiad gwael. Hefyd, am resymau y byddaf yn eu hesbonio, credaf y bu rhywfaint o newid agwedd a diwylliant, er nad yw’r newid hwnnw’n gyflawn o bell ffordd.
Mae’n eglur bod y GMC wedi cydnabod yr angen am newid heb unrhyw anogaeth o’r tu allan. Mae’n rhaid bod ymddangosiad nifer o sgandalau meddygol yn ystod diwedd y 1990au wedi chwarae rhan bwysig yn natblygiad penderfyniad i ddiwygio. Nid oes gennyf unrhyw amheuaeth bod rhai pobl o fewn y GMC a oedd am flynyddoedd lawer wedi dymuno gweld newid diwylliant ac arfer. Fodd bynnag, ymddengys bod sgandalau fel y rheiny’n ymwneud â Shipman, Ledward, Green ac eraill fod wedi cael yr effaith o ddod â’r mwyafrif o fewn y GMC i’r farn bod diwygio’n angenrheidiol. Ers yr amser hwnnw, mae’r GMC wedi bod mewn cyflwr o drawsnewid.
Mae’r trawsnewid wedi cynnwys tri phrif ddiwygiad. Yn gyntaf, newidiwyd cyfansoddiad y GMC yn effeithiol o fis Gorffennaf 2003. Cafodd y Cyngor ei leihau o ran maint o 104 i 35 o aelodau, a chynyddwyd cyfran yr aelodau lleyg o 25% i 40%. Fodd bynnag, mae aelodau meddygol etholedig yn dal â mwyafrif cyffredinol. Byddaf yn mynd yn ôl at faterion cyfansoddiadol nes ymlaen. Yr ail brif ddiwygiad oedd datblygu a chyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, a ddaeth i rym ar 1 Tachwedd 2004. Y trydydd oedd datblygiad y broses ailddilysu, sydd i ddod i rym ym mis Ebrill 2005. Ni ellir gwybod eto beth yw effeithiau ymarferol y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd a’r ailddilysu. Yn ychwanegol at wneud paratoadau ar gyfer y prif ddiwygiadau hynny, yn ystod y pum mlynedd diwethaf, mae’r GMC wedi cyflwyno rhai newidiadau llai i’w weithdrefnau FTP. Nid oedd y rhain yn ddibynnol ar gyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Rhestraf nifer fach ohonynt gan fod yr amgylchiadau y cyflwynwyd y newidiadau hyn ynddynt o gryn arwyddocâd wrth ystyried graddfa’r newid diwylliant dros y pum mlynedd diwethaf.
Ar ddiwedd 1999, rhoddodd y GMC y gorau i’w arfer lle gallai sgrinwyr meddygol eistedd ar y Pwyllgor Achosion Rhagarweiniol (PPC) yn ogystal; wedi hynny, ni allai sgrinwyr gyflawni’r ddwy swyddogaeth. Ymddengys i’r newid hwn gael ei wneud gan ddisgwyl Deddf Hawliau Dynol 1998 ddod i rym, a oedd i ddigwydd ym mis Hydref 2000. Yn 2000, cymerodd y GMC bwerau llawer mwy i wneud gorchmynion interim yn atal neu’n pennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg mewn achos lle mae’n angenrheidiol er mwyn diogelu aelodau’r cyhoedd, neu er lles y cyhoedd neu er buddiannau’r meddyg dan sylw. Gwnaethpwyd y newid hwn gan nad oedd y GMC wedi gallu gweithredu i atal Shipman o’r gofrestr ym mis Awst 1998, pan oedd dan ymchwiliad am lofruddio’i gleifion. Tua’r un adeg, yn 2000, cyflwynwyd deddfwriaeth hefyd i’w gwneud yn ofynnol i’r GMC ddatgelu gwybodaeth groes benodol am feddygon i gyflogwyr a PCOau. Hyd yn hyn, roedd y GMC wedi bod yn amharod i ddatgelu gwybodaeth felly gan y credwyd y gallai hyn fod yn annheg i feddygon. Roedd y Llywodraeth wedi mynnu’r newid hwn; fel prif gyflogwr meddygon, roedd y GIG eisiau’r wybodaeth. Yn ddiau cafodd y newid hwnnw ei ysgogi, yn rhannol o leiaf, gan achos Shipman.
Ym mis Tachwedd 2002, diddymwyd y rheol a oedd yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i gŵyn gan unigolyn preifat gael ei chefnogi gan ddatganiad statudol. Roedd y newid hwnnw wedi’i argymell gan yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr ym 1996. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Alan Howes, a gafodd ei gyflogi gan y GMC rhwng 1977 a 2002 ac a oedd yn Bennaeth yr Adran Ymddygiad o 1987 i 1994, y bu tensiwn ynghylch y mater hwn rhwng rhai aelodau o’r Cyngor a oedd eisiau i’r rheol gael ei diddymu, ac aelodau eraill a oedd eisiau cadw’r rheol er mwyn diogelu meddygon rhag cwynion ffug neu ddisylwedd. Cymerodd amser maith i’r mwyafrif dderbyn yr angen i ddiddymu. Yn yr un mis, sef mis Tachwedd 2002, rhoddwyd y grym i’r Cofrestrydd anfon adroddiadau am euogfarnau difrifol yn uniongyrchol at banel PCC, oni bai bod rhesymau lles cyhoeddus am beidio gwneud hynny. Yn flaenorol, roedd achosion felly wedi gorfod cael eu hystyried gan sgriniwr a’r PPC. Cafodd y newid hwn ei argymell gan yr Athro Allen yn 2000.
Ym mis Mai 2004, cyflwynodd y GMC arfer o gael trafodaeth anffurfiol gyda’r cyflogwr neu’r PCO perthnasol mewn perthynas â meddygon y derbyniwyd cwynion yn eu cylch. Nid oedd hyn erioed wedi’i wneud yn flaenorol, ac roedd yn cael ei ganfod gan rai ei fod yn annheg i feddygon, gan y golygai datgelu i’r cyflogwr neu PCO bod cwyn wedi’i derbyn. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad gan Mr Neil Marshall, a oedd wedi’i gyflogi gan y GMC er 1996, y bu dadl o fewn y GMC rhwng mis Rhagfyr 1998 a mis Ebrill 2000, ynghylch gofyn am wybodaeth gefndir am feddyg. Dywedodd ei bod wedi dod yn amlwg y gallai’r GMC, trwy beidio gwneud chwiliadau felly, fod yn methu yn ei ddyletswydd i ddiogelu’r cyhoedd. Yn y pen draw, penderfynwyd y dylai trafodaethau gael eu cynnal, ond mewn ‘achosion mwy fel achosion perfformiad’ yn unig. Roedd yn eglur o’r dystiolaeth, fodd bynnag, ei bod yn gyffredin i drafodaethau felly beidio cael eu cynnal. Ymddengys i’r newid gael ei wneud o ganlyniad i dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad hwn. Gwnaethpwyd newid arall o ganlyniad i sylwadau a wnaed yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad. Hyd at yn ddiweddar, ni fu’n ofynnol i feddygon a oedd yn cael eu cyhuddo neu’u dyfarnu’n euog o drosedd i adrodd i’r GMC am y ffaith. Mae’r GMC bellach yn ei gwneud yn ofynnol i feddygon adrodd am y materion hyn a byddai meddyg yn euog o gamymddygiad proffesiynol pe bai’n methu gwneud hynny. Mae enghraifft arall o newid a wnaethpwyd o ganlyniad i dystiolaeth a roddwyd i’r Ymchwiliad yn ymwneud â nodi adnabyddiaeth meddygon y mae cwynion wedi’u gwneud yn eu herbyn. Yn 2003, adroddodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr na chafodd adnabyddiaeth 25% o feddygon y gwnaethpwyd cwynion amdanynt yn 2001 erioed ei nodi. Golygai hynny na allai’r GMC ganfod a oedd gan y meddyg hanes FTP blaenorol a, phe bai cwyn debyg arall ynghylch yr un meddyg yn cael ei derbyn, ni ellid cysylltu’r ddau. Ni allai’r GMC hyd yn oed gadarnhau bod y ‘meddyg’ a oedd yn destun cwyn hyd yn oed ar y gofrestr feddygol. Yng ngwrandawiadau’r Ymchwiliad, cydnabu Mr Marshall y dylai’r GMC ystyried gwneud mwy o ymdrech i ganfod adnabyddiaeth meddygon yr oedd cwynion yn cael eu gwneud yn eu herbyn. Roedd yn eglur o’r dystiolaeth mai’r cyfan yr oedd ei angen, mewn rhai achosion, oedd galwad ffôn. Dywedwyd wrth yr Ymchwiliad bod y GMC, ers y gwrandawiad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003, wedi cymryd camau i wella’i systemau ar gyfer nodi adnabyddiaeth meddygon yr adroddir iddo amdanynt.
Roedd pob un o’r newidiadau hynny er gwell. Fe wnaethant wella sefyllfa achwynwyr a gallu’r gweithdrefnau FTP i ddiogelu cleifion. I ryw raddau, mae’r GMC i’w longyfarch ar wneud y newidiadau hynny. Fodd bynnag, y nodwedd siomedig yw yr ymddengys bod yr holl newidiadau wedi’u gwneud fel adwaith i ryw ffurf ar bwysau neu gyngor allanol. Nid ymddengys bod yr un ohonynt wedi’u gwneud oherwydd bod y GMC wedi sylweddoli ohono’i hun nad oedd yn gweithredu er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Nid yw’r newidiadau hynny’n dangos y bu llawer o newid diwylliant o fewn y GMC.
Yn ystod yr un cyfnod, methodd y GMC i wneud nifer o newidiadau a fyddai, yn fy marn i, wedi’u gwneud pe bai diogelu cleifion ar flaen ei feddwl cyfunol. Soniaf am bedwar. Hyd at yn ddiweddar iawn, nid yw’r GMC wedi cyflogi staff er mwyn ymchwilio i gŵynion neu honiadau yn erbyn meddygon. Yn gyffredinol, mewn achos ymddygiad, mae wedi derbyn y gŵyn, wedi cael ymateb y meddyg, wedi cael ymateb yr achwynydd i ymateb y meddyg, ac wedi penderfynu wedyn ynghylch anfon yr achos drwodd at y PCC ar gyfer gwrandawiad. Wedi hynny, os oedd yr achos i fynd ymlaen at y PCC, byddid yn ymchwilio iddo. Fel y nododd Mr Scott yn yr Ymchwiliad, roedd hynny’n fater o ‘roi’r cart o flaen y ceffyl’. Gwyddai’r GMC mai dyma oedd yr arfer, a dylai fod wedi sylweddoli nad oedd yn foddhaol er lles diogelu cleifion. O ganlyniad i’r arfer, roedd yn anochel y byddai rhai cwynion yn erbyn meddygon yn methu yn y camau cynnar oherwydd diffyg ymchwilio. Roedd yr Athro Allen wedi gwneud y pwynt hwn ym 1996. Mae’n wir nad oedd gan y GMC bwerau statudol i orfodi cyflwyno tystiolaeth cyn y cam pan oedd achos yn cael ei gyfeirio at y PCC; ond nid oedd hynny’n gwahardd ymchwilio. Dim ond nawr, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, y bwriedir y dylai’r GMC ymchwilio i achosion yn gynnar.
Mae fy ail enghraifft yn ymwneud ag arfer y GMC o gau cwynion gan unigolion preifat a chynghori’r achwynydd i ddefnyddio gweithdrefnau cwynion lleol; roedd hyn yn cael ei wneud heb ystyried a oedd y gŵyn yn codi mater o SPM a chan wybod bod gweithdrefnau cwynion y GIG yn ddiffygiol difrifol. Roedd yn arfer a oedd yn amlwg yn rhoi achwynwyr dan anfantais ac yn lleihau gallu’r GMC i ddiogelu cleifion drwy ddelio’n gyflym â’r holl honiadau potensial o SPM. Roedd Mrs Jean Robinson, cyn aelod lleyg o’r GMC, wedi tynnu sylw at yr arfer a’i effeithiau, ym 1988. Roedd yr Athro Allen wedi tynnu sylw ato eto ym 1996 ac wedi nodi bod rhai o’r cwynion a oedd yn cael eu hailgyfeirio o natur ddifrifol. Ni roddwyd y gorau i’r arfer, er y gellid fod wedi gwneud hynny ar unrhyw adeg gan nad oedd wedi’i sancsiynu gan y Rheolau; yn wir, roedd yn achos o dorri’r Rheolau. Ymhell o roi’r gorau i’r arfer, ym mis Tachwedd 2002, ymestynnwyd yr arfer i gŵynion ynghylch triniaeth yn y sector preifat. Bu’r arfer yn destun trafodaeth a rhywfaint o feirniadaeth yn yr Ymchwiliad ym mis Rhagfyr 2003. Mae’r papurau briffio ar gyfer cyfarfod y Cyngor ym mis Gorffennaf 2004 yn awgrymu bod yr arfer yn dal ar waith ar y dyddiad hwnnw. Cyn belled ag yr wyf i’n ymwybodol, parhaodd ar waith nes darfod yr hen weithdrefnau FTP ar ddiwedd mis Hydref 2004.
Mae fy nhrydedd enghraifft yn ymwneud ag amharodrwydd y GMC i sefydlu safonau, meini prawf a throthwyau wedi’u cytuno, y gallai’r gweithdrefnau FTP, ac yn benodol yr hen weithdrefnau ymddygiad, weithredu yn eu herbyn. Tynnodd yr Athro Allen a’i chydweithwyr sylw at yr angen amdanynt yn eu Hadroddiadau o 1996 a 2000 ac yn eu Papur 2003. Fe wnaethant ddatgan yn eglur bod absenoldeb safonau yn arwain at anghysondeb wrth wneud penderfyniadau a diffyg tryloywder. Roedd y goblygiadau i ddiogelwch cleifion yn amlwg. Nid oes unrhyw gynnydd go iawn wedi’i wneud.
Yn olaf, cyfeiriaf at ddatgelu gwybodaeth yn ymwneud â statws cofrestriad meddyg i bersonau sy’n gwneud ymholiad i’r GMC. Disgrifiais ym mharagraffau 27.174-27.178 y modd y caiff y wybodaeth hon ei rhoi. Esboniais, yn y cyfarfod o’r Cyngor ym mis Gorffennaf 2004, bod Mr Scott wedi esbonio bod gwybodaeth yn cael ei rhoi mewn ymateb yn unig i gwestiynau penodol, a bod 999 allan o 1000 o’r rhai a oedd yn galw yn gofyn a oedd y meddyg wedi cofrestru yn unig. Nid oedd unrhyw gwestiynau pellach yn cael eu gofyn fel arfer. Ni wnaeth unrhyw aelod o’r Cyngor unrhyw sylw ynglŷn â hyn. Ni wnaeth neb ddweud ei bod yn ymddangos felly bod llawer o ddarpar gyflogwyr yn cael gwybodaeth anghyflawn am statws cofrestriad y meddygon yr oeddent ar fin eu cyflogi. Roeddent yn rhoi’r ffôn i lawr wedi’u sicrhau eu hunain bod y meddyg wedi cofrestru, ond nid oeddent wedi canfod a oedd y meddyg yn destun amodau neu hyd yn oed a oedd ganddo/ganddi hanes FTP diweddar. Yn yr un modd, nid oedd yn ymddangos ei fod yn cael ei werthfawrogi nad oedd aelodau’r cyhoedd efallai’n cael y wybodaeth yr oeddent yn chwilio amdani. Yn fyr, nid ymddengys bod neb wedi sylwi nad yw’r modd y mae’r GMC yn ymdrin â’r ymholiadau hyn er lles diogelu cleifion.
Mae f’archwiliad o ddigwyddiadau‘r pum mlynedd diwethaf yn fy arwain i ddod i’r casgliad, er bod y GMC wedi gwneud nifer o newidiadau buddiol, nid yw ei ddiwylliant wedi gwella’n sylfaenol. Fodd bynnag, byddai’r GMC yn fy nghael i gredu, i’r graddau yr oedd angen erioed am newid mewn diwylliant, ei fod eisoes wedi digwydd. Yn ei gyflwyniad agoriadol i’r Ymchwiliad, a wnaed ym mis Tachwedd 2003, fe wnaeth y Cwnsler Arweiniol dros y GMC, Mr Roger Henderson CF, dderbyn ar ran y GMC, nad oedd ei weithdrefnau FTP, mewn llawer o ffyrdd, fel y dylent fod. Bu problemau anhyblygrwydd, annigonolrwydd hyfforddiant ac arweiniad ac anghysonder wrth wneud penderfyniadau yn sgil hynny. Derbyniwyd, rwy’n credu, ei bod yn rhaid bod y diffygion hyn wedi arwain ar brydiau at y GMC yn methu gweithredu er lles cleifion ac i’w diogelu. Cydnabu Mr Henderson bod rhai achosion wedi’u cau na ddylent fod wedi’u cau. Fodd bynnag, ni wnaeth wirfoddoli derbyn y bu unrhyw beth sylfaenol o’i le ag agweddau neu ddiwylliant y GMC. Byrdwn y dystiolaeth a gyflwynwyd i’r Ymchwiliad gan y GMC oedd bod ei flaenoriaethau’n eglur; ei brif ddyletswydd oedd diogelu cleifion a dyna oedd yn ei wneud.
Y trawsnewidiadau pwysicaf sydd wedi’u gwneud dros yr ychydig flynyddoedd diwethaf fu’r paratoadau ar gyfer cyflwyno’r gweithdrefnau FTP newydd ac ailddilysu. Trof i ystyried pa un a yw ymagwedd y GMC at y datblygiadau newydd pwysig hynny yn dangos newid diwylliant ac agwedd.
Ym Mhennod 25, archwiliais ddatblygiad y cynigion ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd yn fanwl - fe allai rhai ddweud yn rhy fanwl. Roeddwn yn dymuno deall y feddylfryd y tu ôl i’r datblygiad hwnnw. Roedd gweledigaeth y GMC ar gyfer y gweithdrefnau yn y dyfodol wedi’u nodi’n eglur yn ei Bapur Ymgynghorol a gyhoeddwyd yn 2001. Dangosodd y papur hwnnw ymrwymiad cadarn at weithdrefnau FTP a fyddai’n gweithredu er diogelu cleifion, heb gyfaddawdu’r angen i fod yn deg i feddygon. Ar sail y ddogfen honno, byddwn wedi dweud y bu yn wir newid yn niwylliant y GMC. Fodd bynnag, mae trawsnewid y weledigaeth yn realiti wedi bod yn siomedig mewn rhai agweddau. Fel yr esboniais yn fy nghasgliadau i Bennod 25, canfûm na fu trawsnewid cyson o’r weledigaeth wreiddiol i weithredu’r gweithdrefnau newydd. Y prif newid yw bod hen ‘seilos’ y gweithdrefnau ymddygiad, iechyd a pherfformiad wedi mynd, ac i’w disodli gan sylfaen unigol ar gyfer pwerau’r GMC i ddileu, atal neu bennu amodau ar gofrestriad meddyg, sef ‘amhariad ar addasrwydd i ymarfer’. Bu llawer o newidiadau eraill, rhai ohonynt er gwell, rhai er gwaeth. Bu cryn dipyn o ‘newid o un peth i’r llall’ ym manylion y cynigion, ac yn aml mae’n anodd gweld unrhyw egwyddor resymegol y tu ôl i’r newidiadau. Mae’r GMC wedi mabwysiadu nifer o awgrymiadau sydd wedi’u gwneud mewn tystiolaeth i’r Ymchwiliad. Mae wedi ymateb yn gadarnhaol i rai o’r beirniadaethau a’r pryderon yr holwyd tystion y GMC yn eu cylch. Ond nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus bod y GMC wedi cynnal yr eglurder pwrpas a ddangosodd pan gyhoeddodd ei Bapur yn 2001. Nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus bod penderfyniad ar hyn o bryd y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu gweithredu gyda’r prif amcan o ddiogelu cleifion.
Mae archwilio datblygiad cynigion y GMC ar gyfer ailddilysu yn fy arwain at gasgliad tebyg. Ym Mhennod 26, disgrifiais y modd, ar ddiwedd y 1990au, yr oedd y GMC wedi cydnabod, er mwyn diogelu cleifion yn ddigonol, bod rhaid iddo gymryd camau rhagweithiol i nodi meddygon a oedd yn tanberfformio, yn lle disgwyl i rywun wneud cwyn neu honiad. Roedd yn nodi’i egwyddorion yn eglur ym Mhapur Ymgynghorol 2000. Roedd hon yn ddogfen arloesol arall, yn nodi cynigion a oedd wedi’u cynllunio’n amlwg i ddiogelu cleifion. Eto, ar sail y ddogfen honno, byddwn wedi dweud bod y GMC wedi newid ei ddiwylliant. Ond eto, mae’r gweithrediad wedi bod yn siomedig; enciliwyd o’r dedfrydau cynnar. Roedd y broses ailddilysu i fod i gynnwys gwerthuso addasrwydd i ymarfer pob meddyg unigol a oedd yn dymuno dal trwydded i ymarfer. Cafodd dull ei ddyfeisio a chynhaliwyd astudiaethau peilot. Daeth yn amlwg wedyn bod y dasg o werthuso pob meddyg bob pum mlynedd yn dasg fwy digalon nag a feddyliwyd. Byddai’r broses yn un ddrud a byddai’r meddygon yn gorfod talu amdani. At hynny, roedd y cynigion yn amhoblogaidd ymhlith adran bwerus o’r proffesiwn. Felly enciliodd y GMC o’i weledigaeth gynharach a dyfeisiodd system y mae’n ei alw’n ‘ailddilysu’, ond nad yw’n golygu unrhyw werthusiad o addasrwydd y meddyg i ymarfer, yn sicr lle mae meddygon teulu dan sylw. Gwn bod yr encilio wedi achosi anghytundeb o fewn y GMC, ond cafodd ei dderbyn gan y mwyafrif. Rwy’n cael fy ngyrru i’r casgliad, i fwyafrif aelodau’r GMC, mae’r hen ddiwylliant o ddiogelu buddiannau meddygon yn parhau.
Nid yw’n bosibl i mi ddeall dynameg fewnol y GMC. Gallaf weld o’r trawsgrifiadau o’r trafodaethau cyhoeddus yn y Cyngor bod dadl fywiog yn digwydd weithiau. Mae hynny, wrth gwrs, fel y dylai fod. Nid wyf yn gwybod ac ni allaf ddweud pa bryd na pham y bydd y GMC yn gwneud rhai o’i benderfyniadau. Er enghraifft, yn 2003, penderfynodd y GMC, dan y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd, pan oedd adroddiad asesiad perfformiad yn cael ei dderbyn, byddai’n cael ei anfon at gyflogwr neu PCO y meddyg. Ar ryw adeg, mae’r penderfyniad hwnnw wedi’i wrthdroi; ni fydd hynny’n digwydd nawr. Mae’r penderfyniad hwnnw’n gam yn ôl, ond nid wyf yn gwybod pa bryd na pham y gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniad. Yn yr un modd â’r penderfyniad i ganiatáu i achosion FTP gael eu canslo ar orchymyn aelod unigol o’r IC, y cyfeiriais ato ym mharagraffau 25.243-25.250. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa bryd na pham y gwnaethpwyd y penderfyniad hwnnw. Yn fyr, nid wyf yn gwybod beth sy’n mynd ymlaen, ond rwy’n cael yr argraff nad yw’r hen ddiwylliant wedi diflannu’n llwyr.
Pam felly nad wyf wedi argymell i’r Ysgrifennydd Gwladol na ddylai’r GMC fod yn gyfrifol am y gweithdrefnau FTP mwyach? Mewn gwirionedd, rwyf wedi argymell y dylai’r cyfrifoldeb am y cam dyfarnu gael ei roi i sefydliad annibynnol. Fodd bynnag, rwyf wedi argymell hynny oherwydd ei bod yn amhriodol i’r GMC reoli’r cam ymchwilio a’r cam dyfarnu o’r broses. Byddwn wedi gwneud yr argymhelliad hwnnw hyd yn oed pe na bai unrhyw awgrym y gellid beirniadu diwylliant y GMC. Mae pedwar rheswm pam nad wyf wedi argymell y dylai’r GMC beidio bod yn gyfrifol am y swyddogaeth FTP.
Yn gyntaf, mae cysylltiad agos rhwng addasrwydd i ymarfer ac ailddilysu. Mae cysylltiad agos rhwng ailddilysu a chofrestriad. Mae’n well felly bod addasrwydd i ymarfer a chofrestriad dan reolaeth yr un corff. Nid wyf o’r farn bod fy Nghylch Gwaith yn fy nghaniatáu i ystyried a allai’r GMC golli ei gyfrifoldeb am gofrestriad (neu yn wir am bennu’r safonau ar gyfer cynnwys ar y gofrestr a’r holl gyfrifoldebau addysgol sy’n mynd law yn llaw â’r swyddogaeth honno). Byddai hynny, i bob pwrpas, yn argymell diddymu’r GMC. Ni allwn wneud hynny. Ymchwiliad Cyhoeddus yw hwn, nid Comisiwn Brenhinol ar reoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol. Pe bai datgysylltu’r swyddogaeth FTP yn cael ei argymell, byddai’n creu anawsterau ymarferol ar gyfer y dyfodol, er nad wyf yn credu y byddent yn rhai anorchfygol.
Yn ail, ni fyddai’r dasg o greu corff i gymryd y swyddogaeth FTP yn un hawdd. Pe gellid gwneud gwelliannau i’r GMC, er mwyn iddo weithredu’n fwy cyson er buddiannau cleifion a’r cyhoedd, byddai hwnnw i weld yn llwybr gwell i’w ddilyn yn fy marn i.
Hyd yn hyn, rwyf wedi rhoi dau reswm; mae’r ddau yn negyddol. Mae rhai rhesymau cadarnhaol dros fy nghasgliad. Mae’r GMC newydd gyflwyno set newydd o weithdrefnau FTP. Nid wyf yn gwybod pa mor dda y byddant yn gweithredu er lles diogelu cleifion. A siarad yn fras, mae’r gweithdrefnau newydd yn welliant ar yr hen weithdrefnau. Bu’r newid i’r cyfeiriad iawn. Yn ddiau bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn cael eu newid mewn rhai agweddau yn ystod y blynyddoedd nesaf yng ngolau profiad. Ymddengys i mi ei fod yn synhwyrol i adael i’r gweithdrefnau newydd ddatblygu a sefydlu cyn barnu eu digonolrwydd a’u haddasrwydd i’r pwrpas. Bydd yn bwysig gweld a yw unrhyw newidiadau yn y dyfodol yn symud i’r cyfeiriad iawn.
Mae un rheswm pennaf dros obeithio a disgwyl y gall y newid er gwell barhau. Fe ellir disgwyl i’r CRHP/CHRE chwarae rhan bwysig yn natblygiad pellach y gweithdrefnau FTP newydd. Mae’r CRHP/CHRE yn gorff newydd; daeth i fodolaeth yn 2003 o ganlyniad i argymhelliad yr Athro (Syr bellach) Ian Kennedy yn ei Adroddiad ar Ymchwiliad Bryste. Mae’r CRHP/CHRE eisoes wedi gwneud ei farc drwy arfer ei rym i gyfeirio ar yr Uchel Lys unrhyw benderfyniad gan y GMC y mae o’r farn ei fod yn rhy drugarog ac a ddylai gael ei adolygu er lles y cyhoedd. Mae’r grym ganddo hefyd i gyfeirio achosion at yr Uchel Lys lle mae’r meddyg wedi’i ‘ryddfarnu/rhyddfarnu’ o SPM, a bydd ganddo’r grym yn y dyfodol, mewn rhai amgylchiadau, i gyfeirio achosion lle’r oedd methiant panel FTP i ganfod amhariad ar addasrwydd meddyg i ymarfer, neu ei fethiant i ganfod amhariad o raddfa sy’n cyfiawnhau gweithredu ar gofrestriad, yn ‘rhy drugarog’. Fodd bynnag, nid yw pwerau’r CRHP/CHRE wedi’u cyfyngu i gyfeirio penderfyniadau unigol at y Llys. Mae ganddo bwerau goruchwylio eang dros swyddogaeth FTP y GMC. Gall archwilio canlyniadau achosion; gall archwilio’r prosesau a gall wneud newidiadau i’r rheolau yn ofynnol. Nid yw hynny i ddweud y gallai neu y dylai’r CRHP/CHRE geisio ‘rheoli’ y GMC. Byddai hynny’n anymarferol ac yn amhriodol. Ond bydd y ffaith ei fod yn bodoli a’i fod wedi dangos ei fod yn bwriadu defnyddio’i bwerau yn cael effaith bwysig ar y GMC yn fy marn i. Mae’n rhaid bod y GMC yn gwybod, pe bai’n methu gweithredu er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd, y bydd y CRHP/CHRE yn ymyrryd. At hynny, mae’r Ymchwiliad hwn wedi taflu llawer iawn o oleuni ar arferion y GMC, yn enwedig ar y rheiny nad ydynt fel arfer yn agored i’r cyhoedd eu harchwilio. Rwy’n gobeithio y bydd yr hyn y mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi’i ddatgelu yn helpu’r CRHP/CHRE yn y bydd yn gwybod ble i edrych i weld pa mor dda mae’r GMC yn gwneud ei waith.
Mae’r Ymchwiliad wedi datgelu llawer o ddiffygion yn y modd yr oedd y GMC yn gweithredu’i hen weithdrefnau FTP. Nid oes modd dweud sut y bydd y gweithdrefnau newydd yn gweithredu’n ymarferol. Mae’n bwysig yn fy marn i, er lles y cyhoedd, y dylai fod adolygiad trylwyr mewn rhyw dair neu bedair blynedd o weithrediad y gweithdrefnau newydd, i’w gynnal gan sefydliad annibynnol. Ymddengys i mi y dylai’r dasg gael ei chyflawni gan neu ar gyfarwyddiadau y CRHP/CHRE. Arian cyhoeddus ddylai ysgwyddo’r gost yn fy marn i. Ni ddylai’r adolygiad hwnnw gael ei gyfyngu i ystyried systemau gweinyddol, ond dylai’r grym fod ganddo i archwilio penderfyniadau gwaith achos ar bob lefel yn ogystal.
Hoffwn feddwl y byddai diwylliant y GMC yn parhau i newid yn y cyfeiriad iawn yn rhinwedd ei fomentwm ei hun. Fodd bynnag, nid wyf yn teimlo’n hyderus y gwnaiff hynny. Rwy’n sicr bod llawer o bobl o fewn y GMC, yn aelodau ac yn staff, sydd eisiau gweld rheoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol yn cael ei seilio ar egwyddorion meddyginiaeth ‘canolog ar gleifion’ a diogelwch cyhoeddus. Yn wir, credaf ei bod yn debygol bod yr holl aelodau o blaid yr egwyddorion hynny’n ddamcaniaethol. Ymddengys i mi mai’r broblem yw, pan fydd materion penodol yn codi, bod barnau croes yn cael eu llunio, ac, fel yn y gorffennol, mae’r cydbwysedd weithiau’n pwyso o blaid buddiannau meddygon.
Ym Mhennod 15, nodais, i sefydliad fel y GMC, bod materion yn siwr o godi lle mae gwrthdaro rhwng buddiannau meddygon a buddiannau cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Mae aelodau’n gorfod delio â’r gwrthdaro hwnnw. I wneud eu gwaith yn iawn fel aelodau o gorff rheoleiddio, mae’n rhaid iddynt roi lles y cyhoedd yn gyntaf. Mae hynny’n anodd iawn i aelod sy’n dibynnu ar etholaeth o feddygon am ei swydd. Rwy’n siwr bod rhai’n llwyddo i wneud hynny. Credaf fod eraill yn ei chael yn anoddach. Ar hyn o bryd, mae’r GMC yn cael ei reoli’n effeithiol gan aelodau etholedig. Ymddengys i mi mai un o’r problemau sylfaenol i’r GMC yw’r canfyddiad, a rennir gan lawer o feddygon, bod y GMC i fod yn eu ‘cynrychioli’ nhw. Nid ydyw; mae’n eu rheoleiddio. Gall fod bod y canfyddiad hwn yn mynd yn ôl i’r 1970au, pan wrthwynebodd y proffesiwn yn sgil gofyn iddo dalu ffi cadw blynyddol a chodwyd y gri ‘dim treth heb gynrychiolaeth’. Os mai canfyddiad y proffesiwn yw bod y GMC i fod i’w gynrychioli, byddai hynny’n esbonio pam mae rhai aelodau o’r GMC yn tueddu mabwysiadu rôl gynrychioliadol. Mewn gwirionedd, mae gan y proffesiwn meddygol gorff cynrychioliadol effeithiol iawn yn y BMA; nid oes angen dau arno - ac ni ddylai gael dau.
Rwyf wedi dod i’r casgliad bod un o’r rhesymau pam nad yw’r GMC wedi gallu gwaredu’i hun o’r hen ddiwylliant yn ei gyfansoddiad a’r mwyafrif cyffredinol o aelodau ‘cynrychioliadol’ etholedig. Credaf y dylai’r GMC edrych eto ar ei gyfansoddiad. Gwn bod y cyfansoddiad wedi’i newid mor ddiweddar â mis Gorffennaf 2003. Rwy’n sylweddoli na fyddai cynnwrf pellach yn cael ei groesawu. Fodd bynnag, fy marn ystyriol i yw nad yw’n briodol y dylai’r GMC gael ei ddominyddu gan aelodau etholedig. Yn sicr dylai gael ei ddominyddu gan aelodau meddygol; nid wyf yn awgrymu y dylai fod unrhyw gynnydd yng nghyfran yr aelodau lleyg. Ond rwyf yn awgrymu y dylai fod mwy o aelodau meddygol wedi’u penodi - pobl nad ydynt yn ddyledus i etholwyr ac nad ydynt yn gweld eu hunain mewn safle cynrychiolwyr y proffesiwn. Yn hytrach, dylent weld eu hunain fel gweision lles cyhoeddus.
Yn unol â hynny, rwy’n argymell bod y cyfansoddiad yn cael ei ailystyried. Mae’n fy nharo bod y gostyngiad sydyn o ran maint a ddigwyddodd yn 2003 wedi mynd ychydig yn rhy bell efallai. Efallai y dymuna’r GMC ystyried a oes angen ychydig mwy o aelodau meddygol arno nag sydd ganddo. Mae angen aelodau meddygol arno ar gyfer llawer o dasgau na allant gael eu cyflawni gan bobl leyg, fel datblygu polisïau ac arweiniad meddygol. Nid argymhelliad yw hwn, ond awgrym yn unig. Fel y nododd Syr Donald Irvine, gall fod yn well i’r GMC ‘hurio’r’ arbenigedd meddygol y mae ei angen arno gan arbenigwyr mewn meysydd penodol. Yr hyn rwyf yn ei argymell, fodd bynnag, yw y dylai cydbwysedd y Cyngor gael ei newid fel nad oes gan yr aelodau etholedig fwyafrif cyffredinol.
Rwy’n argymell hefyd y dylai aelodau meddygol ac aelodau lleyg sy’n cael eu penodi (gan y Cyfrin Gyngor) gael eu dewis i’w henwebu i’r Cyfrin Gyngor gan y Comisiwn Penodiadau Cyhoeddus yn dilyn cystadleuaeth agored. Byddai’n ymddangos yn synhwyrol i’r prifysgolion a’r Colegau Brenhinol gael yr hawl i enwebu ymgeiswyr â chymwysterau meddygol i gael eu hystyried. Fodd bynnag, dylai’r gystadleuaeth fod yn agored hefyd i bersonau â chymwysterau meddygol sy’n dymuno ymgynnig eu hunain. Rwyf wedi gweld, o brosbectws yr Adran Iechyd yn gwahodd ceisiadau ar gyfer swydd aelodau lleyg yn 2003, bod y pwyslais wedi’i roi - yn gwbl gywir - ar ddyletswydd yr aelodau lleyg i ddiogelu lles y cyhoedd. Hoffwn weld yr un pwyslais ar les y cyhoedd yn cael ei gymhwyso i benodi aelodau meddygol.
Yn ystod y dystiolaeth, mynegwyd pryder ynghylch nifer yr aelodau lleyg a chanddynt gefndir mewn rheoli gwasanaeth iechyd. Ym Mhennod 15, mynegais y farn y byddai’n ddymunol y dylai aelodau lleyg ddod o ystod eang o gefndiroedd.
Yn y gorffennol, bu’r GMC yn atebol i’r cyhoedd mewn termau cyffredinol iawn. Mae ganddo ddyletswydd i reoleiddio’r proffesiwn meddygol er lles cleifion a’r cyhoedd. Fodd bynnag, ni fu unrhyw berson na chorff y bu’r GMC yn uniongyrchol atebol iddynt. Er 2003, bu’r grym gan y CRHP/CHRE i oruchwylio a chywiro rhai agweddau ar waith y GMC. Cydnabu’r GMC ei hun, a thynnu sylw’r Ymchwiliad at y ffaith, er bod y GMC yn cael ei bwerau o’r Senedd, nid yw’n uniongyrchol atebol i’r Senedd am y modd y mae’n arfer ei bwerau. Awgrymodd y GMC y gallai fod yn briodol pe bai’n uniongyrchol atebol. Credaf fod hynny’n syniad da. Yr hyn sydd gennyf mewn golwg yw y byddai’n ofynnol i’r GMC gyhoeddi adroddiad blynyddol am ei weithgareddau, a allai gael ei archwilio gan Bwyllgor Dethol. I hyn fod yn ymarferiad gwerth chweil, byddai’n rhaid i’r adroddiad gynnwys categorïau penodedig o wybodaeth, gan gynnwys gwybodaeth ystadegol, ar ffurf a oedd yn hawdd i’w deall ac, i bob pwrpas, yn dryloyw.

---  ---
Yn ystod yr Adroddiad hir hwn, bûm yn feirniadol lawer gwaith o’r GMC, ei weithdrefnau a’i agweddau. Rwy’n sylweddoli ei bod yn rhaid bod y ffaith bod yr Ymchwiliad hwn wedi’i gynnal yn gyhoeddus ac y bydd fy Adroddiad i yn cael ei gyhoeddi, wedi gwneud y beirniadaethau hynny’n fwy digroeso fyth na phe baent wedi’u gwneud yn breifat. Yn wir, rwy’n cydnabod bod eu heffaith yn debygol o fod yn boenus. Nid oedd yn fwriad gennyf i fod yn greulon nac yn wir yn feirniadol o unrhyw unigolyn yn y GMC. Mae fy meirniadaethau wedi ymwneud â’r gorfforaeth gorfforedig a’i gweithredoedd cyfunol. Rwyf wedi gwneud nifer fawr o argymhellion sy’n effeithio ar y GMC, ac rwy’n sylweddoli na fydd croeso i rai ohonynt. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n gobeithio y derbynnir bod yr argymhellion wedi cael eu gwneud mewn ysbryd adeiladol a chyda’r bwriad o helpu’r GMC gyflawni’i brif ddiben sef ‘Protecting Patients - Guiding Doctors’.
Yn y Cam hwn o’r Ymchwiliad, rwyf wedi archwilio’r rhannau sydd yn cael eu chwarae neu y gellid cael eu chwarae gan y Llywodraeth, y GMC, y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd, y CRHP/CHRE, sefydliadau GIG, staff meddygfeydd, cleifion ac aelodau’r cyhoedd wrth ddiogelu cleifion a all fod mewn risg gan feddyg teulu sy’n ymddwyn yn afreolaidd neu’n perfformio’n wael. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi gwneud nifer fawr o argymhellion sydd, law yn llaw a’r argymhellion yn fy Nhrydydd a’m Pedwerydd Adroddiad, wedi’u hamcanu i ymestyn a gwella’r fframwaith presennol o systemau diogelu. Yn yr Adroddiad hwn, rwyf wedi argymell gwelliannau i systemau rheolaeth glinigol; yn benodol rwyf wedi pwysleisio’r angen i ymchwilio’n briodol i gŵynion a’r angen am system o fonitro ystadegau marwolaethau. Rwyf wedi argymell ffyrdd ar gyfer gwella rôl amddiffynnol y PCTau, er enghraifft trwy roi gwybodaeth well iddynt am feddygon neu drwy ofyn am fynediad at eu rhestrau. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion a fydd yn rhoi mwy o wybodaeth i gleifion am eu meddygon ac a fydd yn eu galluogi i arfer rhywfaint o ddewis, er mai dewis cyfyngedig fydd hwnnw. Rwyf wedi gwneud argymhellion â’r bwriad o sicrhau bod gweithdrefnau FTP y GMC yn gweithio’n effeithiol er mwyn diogelu cleifion a’u bod hefyd yn deg i feddygon. Yn olaf, rwyf wedi argymell ffordd y gellid gwneud i’r broses ailddilysu gydymffurfio â gofynion Deddf 1983 ac i fodloni dyheadau’r rheiny sydd wedi ceisio hyrwyddo’r broses honno.
I ryw faddau, mae’r argymhellion hyn yn siŵr o beri tensiwn a gwrthdaro rhwng buddiannau’r rheiny yr effeithir arnynt. Fodd bynnag, rwy’n hyderus bod corff mawr o farn o fewn y proffesiwn meddygol a thu hwnt a fydd yn cydnabod yr angen i bawb sy’n gysylltiedig weithio gyda’i gilydd a thynnu i’r un cyfeiriad. Wrth wneud yr argymhellion hyn, rwyf wedi ymdrechu i gyflawni tri pheth: yn gyntaf, pe bai Shipman potensial arall fyth eto, byddai’n cael ei ganfod yn gyflym iawn; yn ail, dylai’r rhagolygon o ganfod pob ffurf ar ymddygiad afreolaidd neu berfformiad is na’r safon mewn meddygon gael eu gwella; ac, yn drydydd, y dylai ansawdd da y gofal sy’n cael ei ddarparu gan fwyafrif helaeth y meddygon gynnig lle a chyfle ar gyfer gwelliant parhaus.

---  ---
ATODIAD A - Cyfranogwyr yng Nghyfnod Dau, Cam Pedwar yr Ymchwiliad a'u Cynrychiolwyr
ATODIAD B - Cyfranogwyr yn Seminarau'r Ymchwiliad: 19-30 Ionawr 2004
ATODIAD C - Ymatebwyr i Bapur Ymgynghorol Cam Pedwar yr Ymchwiliad
ATODIAD D - Ffurflenni Arfarnu ar gyfer Meddygon Teuluyn Gweithio yn y GIG
ATODIAD E - 'Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care' Atgynhyrchwyd gyda Chaniatâd gan The Lancet
ATODIAD F - Cyfranogwyr yn Seminarau'r Ymchwiliad: 13-14 Hydref 2003
ATODIAD G - 'Good Medical Practice' Llyfryn y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol

---  ---
Cwnsler i’r Ymchwiliad
Miss Caroline Swift CF
Mr Christopher Melton CF
cyfarwyddwyd gan Mr Henry Palin, Cyfreithiwr i’r Ymchwiliad
Cyfranogwyr
Cynrychiolwyr
Mr David Pittaway CF, cyfarwyddwyd gan Mr Chris Horsefield, Beachcroft Wansbroughs Solicitors, Leeds
Mr James Maxwell-Scott, cyfarwyddwyd gan Mr Barrie McKay, Swyddfa Cyfreithiwr y Trysorlys
Mr Roger Henderson CF, Miss Beverley Lang CF a Mr Adam Heppinstall, cyfarwyddwyd gan Mr Tom Rider a Mr Matthew Lohn, Field Fisher Waterhouse Solicitors, Llundain
Ms Katharine Gollop, cyfarwyddwyd gan Adran Gyfreithiol y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol, Leeds
Mr Peter Southeran, Beachcroft Wansbroughs Solicitors, Manceinion
Staff y Feddygfa yn 21 Market Street, Hyde
Mrs Kate Oldfield, Davis Blank Furniss Solicitors, Manceinion
Grŵp Cymorth Teuluoedd Tameside
Mr Richard Lissack CF, Mr Andrew Spink CF, Mr Paul Gilroy a Miss Harriet Jerram, cyfarwyddwyd gan Ms Ann Alexander, Alexander Harris Solicitors, Altrincham, Swydd Gaer
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Tameside a Glossop
Ysbyty Cyffredinol Tameside
Awdurdod Iechyd West Pennine
Mr Gerard McDermott CF, Mr David Eccles a Mr Phillip Holmes, cyfarwyddwyd gan Mr Charles Howorth, George Davies Solicitors, Manceinion

---  ---
Sefydliadau
Cynrychiolydd(Cynrychiolwyr)
Ms Fiona Freedland, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfreithiol
Cyngor Ymgynghorol ar Gamddefnyddio Cyffuriau
Yr Athro Syr Michael Rawlins DL, Cyn Gadeirydd; Cadeirydd y Sefydliad Cenedlaethol dros Ragoriaeth Glinigol; Ymarferydd Meddygol Cofrestredig, Newcastle upon Tyne
American Academy of Family Physicians, UDA
Dr Perry Pugno, Cyfarwyddwr, Adran Addysg Feddygol
Y Gymdeithas dros Nyrsys yn Rhagnodi
Mrs Stephanie Farr, Aelod; Pennaeth Gwasanaeth (Plant) ar gyfer Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Castlepoint a Rochford
Cymdeithas yr Ysgrifenyddion Meddygol, Rheolwyr, Gweinyddwyr a Derbynyddion Meddygfeydd
Mrs Pauline Webdale, Cymrawd a Chyn Gadeirydd Cenedlaethol
Dr John Grenville, Meddyg Teulu, Derbyshire
Dr André Jacques, Cyfarwyddwr, Adran Gwella Arfer
Coleg Meddygon a Llawfeddygon Ontario, Toronto
Dr Rocco Gerace, Cofrestrydd
Y Comisiwn dros Archwilio ac Arolygu Gofal Iechyd (Y Comisiwn Gofal Iechyd)
Mrs Elizabeth Dimond, Arweinydd Cwynion
Cymdeithas y Defnyddwyr (gelwir yn Which? bellach)
Mrs Frances Blunden, Prif Gynghorydd Polisi
Y Cyngor dros Reoli Gweithwyr Proffesiynol Gofal Iechyd (Y Cyngor dros Ragoriaeth mewn Rheoleiddio Gofal Iechyd)
Mr Sandy Forrest, Cyfarwyddwr
Yr Adan Iechyd
Mrs Debbie Mellor, Pennaeth y Gangen Polisi Cyflogaeth, Cyfarwyddiaeth Adnoddau Dynol
Mrs Flora Goldhill, Rheolwr y Rhaglen Gwella Profiadau Cleifion
Mr Martin Staniforth, Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Adnoddau Dynol
Dr Kit Harling, Cyfarwyddwr NHS Plus
Dr Malcolm Lewis, Cadeirydd, Cangen Cymru o’r Cyngor, Y Pwyllgor Cofrestru, Pwyllgorau Achosion Rhagarweiniol ac Ymddygiad Proffesiynol, Sgriniwr Meddygol Penodedig, Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol; Is-Ddeon Rhanbarthol a Chyfarwyddwr Addysg Ôl-raddedig ar gyfer Meddygaeth Deuluol yng Nghymru; Pennaeth mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol, Abertawe
Mr Robin Macleod, Aelod Lleyg, Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol; Adolygwr Rheolaeth Glinigol a Strategol ar ran y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd; Darlithydd yn Ysgol Feddygol Prifysgol Newcastle, Prif Weithredwr wedi Ymddeol o Awdurdod Iechyd Gogledd Cumbria
Y Comisiwn Safonau Gofal Cenedlaethol
Ms Beverley Cole, Rheolwr Prosiectau Trawsnewidiol; Rheolwr Gwasanaethau Difrifol, Gofal Iechyd Preifat a Gwirfoddol
Yr Awdurdod Asesiadau Clinigol Cenedlaethol
Yr Athro Alastair Scotland, Prif Weithredwr a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol
Y Gwasanaeth Cynghori Cenedlaethol i Feddygon Sâl
Dr Jolyon Oxley, Ysgrifennydd Anrhydeddus
Swyddfa Ombwdsmon y Gwasanaeth Iechyd
Ms Linda Charlton, Cyfarwyddwr Ymchwiliadau
Cymdeithas y Cleifion
Mr Michael Summers, Cadeirydd
Mrs Joyce Robins, Cyd-Gyfarwyddwr
Ms Anna Myers, Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr
Dr William Reith, cyn Ysgrifennydd Anrhydeddus; Pennaeth mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol, Grŵp Meddygol Westburn, Aberdeen
Y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol
Mrs Sue Antrobus, Cyfarwyddwr, Rhaglen Arweinyddiaeth Wleidyddol y Coleg Nyrsio Brenhinol, Rhanbarth y Gogledd Orllewin
Coleg Brenhinol y Seiciatryddion
Dr Douglas Fowlie, Seiciatrydd Ymgynghorol, Gogledd Aberdeenshire
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Trent
Dr Sarah Wilson, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol
Cyfranogwyr Unigol
Swyddi a Ddelir
Yr Athro Richard Baker OBE
Cyfarwyddwr, Uned Ymchwil a Datblygu Rheolaeth Glinigol, Prifysgol Caerlŷr
Yr Athro Aidan Halligan
Dirprwy Brif Swyddog Meddygol dros Loegr; Cyfarwyddwr Rheolaeth Glinigol dros y GIG
Syr Donald Irvine CBE
Llywydd, Y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol 1995-2002
Seiciatrydd Fforensig Ymgynghorol, Ymddiriedolaeth GIG De Llundain a Maudsley
Yr Athro David Newble
Athro Addysg Feddygol, Pennaeth yr Adran Addysg Feddygol, Cyfarwyddwr Dysgu ac Addysgu, y Gyfadran Feddygaeth, Prifysgol Sheffield
Comisiynydd Iechyd ac Anabledd, Seland Newydd
Yr Athro Martin Roland CBE
Cyfarwyddwr, Canolfan Ymchwil a Datblygu Gofal Sylfaenol Cenedlaethol; Athro Meddygaeth Deuluol (Prifysgol Manceinion) a Phennaeth mewn Meddygaeth Deuluol, Canolfan Iechyd Rusholme, Manceinion
Yr Athro y Fonesig Lesley Southgate DBE
Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol Llundain
Yr Athro Chris van Weel
Pennaeth yr Adran Feddygaeth Deuluol a Meddygaeth Gymdeithasol, Prifysgol Nijmegen, Yr Iseldiroedd

---  ---
Awdur (os enwir)
Mr Peter Walsh, Prif Weithredwr
Cymdeithas Prif Swyddogion yr Heddlu yn yr Alban
Prif Gwnstabl William Rae, Ysgrifennydd Anrhydeddus
Ms Barbara Stuttle, Cadeirydd
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Avon, Gloucestershire a Wiltshire
Dr M Durkin, Cyfarwyddwr Ansawdd Clinigol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Bamsley
Dr Joan Miller, Ymgynghorydd mewn Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Billericay, Brentwood a Wickford
Mr David Gibbins, Cyfarwyddwr Moderneiddio a Chomisiynu
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Penbedw a Wallasey
Mr John South, Cyfarwyddwr Gofal Sylfaenol
Ms Sally Watson, Cyfarwyddwr Gweithgareddau Gwleidyddol a Chynrychioliadol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Burntwood, Lichfield a Tamworth
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Calderdale
Ms Ruth Lumb, Rheolwr Rheolaeth Glinigol
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Swydd Gaer a Glannau Merswy
Dr Iqbal Sram, Cyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol, Perfformiad Clinigol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gorllewin Swydd Gaer
Dr Maureen Swanson, Cynghorydd Meddygol ac Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol
Gweithdy Arfarnwyr Meddygon Teulu City a Hackney
Pwyllgor Cyfarwyddwyr Addysg Meddygaeth Deuluol
Dr Pat Lane, Cadeirydd
Dr Jocelyn Cornwell, Prif Weithredwr Dros Dro
Mrs Frances Blunden, Prif Gynghorydd Polisi - Iechyd
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Cumbria a Lancashire
Dr Stephen Ward, Cynghorydd Meddygol, Gofal Sylfaenol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Daventry a De Northants
Ms Julia Squire, Prif Weithredwr
Mrs Janet Walden, Pennaeth yr Uned Ymchwiliadau ac Ymholiadau
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Dorset a Gwlad yr Haf
Syr Ian Carruthers OBE, Prif Weithredwr
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Dwyrain Hampshire
Dr John Hughes, Cadeirydd, Pwyllgor Gwaith Proffesiynol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol East Kent Coastal Teaching
Ms Cathy Bolton, Rheolwr Busnes Corfforaethol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Dwyrain Staffordshire
Gwasanaethau Cymorth Gofal Sylfaenol Dwryain Sussex, Brighton a Hove
Mr Derek Billett, Prif Reolwr (Rheolaeth)
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Dwyrain Caerlŷr
Miss Carolyn Clifton, Prif Weithredwr Ms Madeleine Dent, Ysgrifennydd Bwrdd y PCT
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Epping Forest
Mr Aidan Thomas, Prif Weithredwr
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Essex
Mr Terry Hanafin, Prif Weithredwr
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Greater Manchester
Meistri George Davies, Cyfreithwyr
Heddlu Greater Manchester
Mrs Sandra Pope, Cyfreithiwr yr Heddu
Y Sefydliad Iechyd a’r Gyfraith
Dr James Caveney Sharp, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd a Chyfraith Feddygol
Fforwm y Meddygon Annibynnol
Dr Martin Scurr, Cadeirydd
Yr Athrofa Rheoli Gofal Iechyd
Ms Rosey Foster, Dirprwy Brif Weithredwr
Y Cyd-bwyllgor ar Hyfforddiant Ôl-raddedig i Feddygon Teulu
Dr John Toby, Cadeirydd
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Caint a Medway
Ms Candy Morris, Prif Weithredwr
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Luton
Ms Tonia Parsons, Cyfarwyddwr Gweithredol Comisiynu a Gwella Iechyd
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Maidstone Weald
Dr Caroline Jessel, Arweinydd Rheolaeth Glinigol Feddygol
Gofal Canser Marie Curie
Dr Teresa Tate, Cynghorwr Meddygol
Y Cyngor Meddygol ar Alcohol
Dr G E Ratcliffe, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol
Yr Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol
Ms Mary-Lou Nesbitt, Pennaeth Cysylltiadau Llywodraethol ac Allanol
Undeb Amddiffyn Meddygol a Deintyddol yr Alban
Dr I G Simpson, Prif Weithredwr ac Ysgrifennydd
Dr Gerard Panting, Cyfarwyddwr Cyfathrebu a Pholisi
Pwyllgor Meddygol Lleol Morecambe Bay
Mr David Noblett, Prif Weithredwr ac Ysgrifennydd
Y Comisiwn Meddyginiaethau
Ms Sue Jones, Ysgrifennydd
Cymdeithas Genedlaethol Cydweithfeydd Meddygon Teulu
Dr Jamie MacLeod, Ysgrifennydd; Meddyg Teulu
Cymdeithas Genedlaethol yr Addysgwyr Gofal Sylfaenol
Mr Ron Kerr, Prif Weithredwr
Asiantaeth Genedlaethol Diogelwch Cleifion
Ms Sue Osborn/Ms Sue Williams, Prif Weithredwyr ar y Cyd
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol New Forest
Addysg GIG ar gyfer yr Alban (Cynllun Arfarnu Meddygon Teulu yr Alban)
Dr Johnstone Shaw, Cydlynydd Cenedlaethol Arfarnu Meddygon Teulu
Addysg GIG ar gyfer yr Alban (Rhanbarth Gorllewin yr Alban)
Yr Athro Stuart Murray
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Norfolk, Suffolk a Swydd Gaergrawnt
Ms Sandra Corry, Arweinydd Rhaglen - Rheolaeth Glinigol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gogledd Dyfnaint
Dr Ian Jack, Cadeirydd y Pwyllgor Gwaith
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Gogledd Ddwryain Llundain
Ms Sheila Adam, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus Dr Ben Essex, Cynghorydd Meddygol Mr Rigo Pizarro, Cyfarwyddwr Cynorthwyol dros Ofal Sylfaenol
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Gogledd a Dwyrain Swydd Efrog a Gogledd Lincolnshire
Dr David Johnson, Prif Weithredwr
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gogledd Lincolnshire
Dr Brian Crompton, Rheolaeth Glinigol/Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gogledd Sheffield
Dr Paul Schatzberger, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygaeth Gofal Sylfaenol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gogledd Stoke
Y Swyddfa Ystadegau Gwladol
Mr John Pullinger, Cyfarwyddwr Gweithredol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Plymouth
Dr Peter Williams, Cadeirydd, Pwyllgor Gwaith Proffesiynol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Rotherham
Dr John Radford, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Coleg Brenhinol yr Anaesthetyddion
Mr Charles McLaughlan, Cyfarwyddwr Safonau Proffesiynol
Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon Teulu, yr Alban
Coleg Breninol y Bydwragedd
Miss Louise Silverton, Dirprwy Ysgrifennydd Cyffredinol
Ms Lynn Young, Cynghorydd Gofal Iechyd Sylfaenol
Coleg Brenhinol y Meddygon
Dr Christopher Evans, Swyddog Adolygu Gwasanaethau Gwahoddedig
Coleg Brenhinol Meddygon a Llawfeddygon Glasgow
Dr K R Paterson, Ysgrifennydd Anrhydeddus
Coleg Brenhinol Meddygon Caeredin
Dr Andrew Fairbairn, Cofrestrydd
Coleg Brenhinol y Radiolegwyr
Mr Andrew Hall, Prif Weithredwr
Coleg Brenhinol Llawfeddygon Caeredin
Dr J A R Smith, Llywydd
Cymdeithas Fferyllol Frenhinol Prydain
Miss Mandie Lavin, Cyfarwyddwr Addasrwydd i Ymarfer a Materion Cyfreithiol
Comisiwn yr Alban dros Reoleiddio Gofal
Dr Graham Strang, Cynghorydd Meddygol
Gweithgor yr Alban (Adran Iechyd)
Mr Richie Malloch, Gwasanaethau Meddygol Cyffredinol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol De Ddwyrain Sheffield
Dr Paul Redgrave, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Gorllewin Sheffield
Dr John Poyser, Cadeirydd, Pwyllgor Gwaith Proffesiynol
Ymddiriedolaethau Gofal Sylfaenol Shropshire County a Telford a Wrekin
Dr Anthony Rathbone, Cynghorydd Meddygol Gofal Sylfaenol
Cymdeithas y Meddygfeydd Bach
Dr Michael Taylor, Cadeirydd
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol De Ddwyrain Llundain
Mr Duncan Selbie, Prif Weithredwr
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol De Leeds
Dr Mark Williamson, Cyfarwyddwyr Meddygol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol De Lerpwl
Mr T B Penn, Pennaeth Cymorth FHS
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol De Orllewin Caint
Mr Steve Ford, Prif Weithredwr
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol South West Peninsula
Ms Thelma Holland, Prif Weithredwr
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol De Swydd Efrog
Dr Colin Hardisty, Cynghorydd Meddygol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Southampton
Dr David Paynton, Cadeirydd y Pwyllgor Gwaith Proffesiynol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Southend on Sea
Mr Neil Smillie, Cyfarwyddwr Cysylltiol Gofal Sylfaenol a Chomisiynu
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Southport a Formby
Ms Jane Beenstock, Prif Weithredwr
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Staffordshire Moorlands
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol St Albans a Harpenden
Ms Sue Brassington, Rheolwr Rheolaeth Glinigol
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol St Helens
Ms Morag P Day, Prif Weithredwr
Awdurdod Iechyd Strategol Surrey a Sussex
Dr Diana Grice, Cyfarwyddwr Meddygol a Chyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Thurrock
Mr Gary Scott, Dirprwy Brif Weithredwr
Dr Sarah Harriet Wilson, Cyfarwyddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus a Chyfarwyddwr Meddygol
Coleg Meddygaeth Prifysgol Cymru
Dr Phil Matthews, Dirprwy Gyfarwyddwr Addysg Ôl-raddedig dros Feddygaeth Deuluol
Llywodraeth Cynulliad Cymru
Mrs Ann Lloyd, Cyfarwyddwr, GIG Cymru
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Witham, Braintree a Halstead
Dr Paul Zollinger-Read, Prif Weithredwr
Unigolion
Swydd a Ddelir/Rheswm am Ddiddordeb yn yr Ymchwiliad
Tiwtor Meddygon Teulu, Swydd Amwythig; Prif Feddyg Teulu
Meddyg Teulu, Derbyshire
Cyn Swyddog Archwilio Fferyllfeydd, Heddlu Thames Valley
Meddyg Teulu
Seiciatrydd Fforensig Ymgynghorol ac Uwch Ddarlithydd Anrhydeddus, Ymddiriedolaeth GIG De Llundain a Maudsley
Tiwtor Meddygon Teulu, Gogledd Birmingham a Meddyg Teulu
Swyddog Ardal Diogelu Plant (wedi ymddeol)
Dr Willam G Pickering
Prif Feddyg Teulu/Partner
Athro Gofal Sylfaenol ac Addysg Feddygol, Coleg Prifysgol, Llundain
Uwch Archwilydd, Arolygiaeth Cangen Cyffuriau’r Swyddfa Gartref (wedi ymddeol)
Meddyg Teulu
Mab Mrs Angela Tierney
Prif Feddyg Teulu (wedi ymddeol)
Swydd a Ddelir/Rheswm am Ddiddordeb yn yr Ymchwiliad
Yr Athro Tim van Zwanenberg
Athro Meddygaeth Deuluol Ôl-raddedig a Chyfarwyddwr Addysg Feddygaeth Deuluol Ôl-raddedig, Prifysgol Newcastle upon Tyne
Mr Richard Wakeford a Dr Mei Ling Denney
Cynghorydd Addysgol, Ysgol Meddygaeth Glinigol, Arweinydd Arfarnu Addysgol Prifysgol Caergrawnt, Partneriaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Greater Peterborough

---  ---
Ffurflenni Arfarnu ar gyfer Meddygon Teuluyn Gweithio yn y GIG

---  ---
‘Following Shipman: a pilot system for monitoring mortality rates in primary care’ Atgynhyrchwyd gyda Chaniatâd gan The Lancet

---  ---
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Adur, Arun a Worthing
Ms Julie Billett, Hyfforddai Arbenigol Iechyd Cyhoeddus Aml-Ddisgyblaethol
Yr Athro Gwyn Bevan, aelod o’r Tim Trawsnewid (wedi’i secondio o Gyfarwyddwr y Swyddfa Gwybodaeth am Berfformiad Gofal Iechyd, y Comisiwn dros Wella Iechyd)
Ymddiriedolaeth Gofal Sylfaenol Croydon
Mrs Catherine Scott, Arbenigwr mewn Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Dr John Fox, Cyfarwyddwr Ystadegau
Sefydliad Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Dr David Spiegelhalter, Uned Bioystadegau y Cyngor Ymchwil Meddygol, Caergrawnt
Gwasanaeth Hysbyseg Iechyd Swydd Gaerlŷr
Dr Hanna Blackledge, Dadansoddwr Iechyd Cyhoeddus
Dr Peter Goldblatt, Prif Ystadegydd Meddygol
Dr Maureen Baker CBE, Ysgrifennydd Anrhydeddus
Grŵp Rhanbarthol Marwolaethau Meddygaeth Deuluol Gogledd Iwerddon
Dr Kathryn Booth, Cadeirydd
Uwch Ddarlithydd Clinigol mewn Epidemioleg ac Iechyd Cyhoeddus, Coleg Meddygaeth, Gwyddoniaeth a Thechnoleg Imperial College, Llundain
Uwch Ddarlithydd mewn Ystadegau, Coleg Meddygaeth, Gwyddoniaeth a Thechnoleg Imperial College, Llundain
Ymchwilydd, Coleg Meddygaeth, Gwyddoniaeth a Thechnoleg Imperial College, Llundain
Uwch Gymrawd Ymchwil, Adran Iechyd Cyhoeddus ac Epidemioleg, Prifysgol Birmingham
Uwch Ddarlithydd mewn Ystadegau Meddygol, Ysgol Epidemioleg a Gwyddorau Iechyd, Prifysgol Manceinion

---  ---
‘Good Medical Practice’ Llyfryn y Cyngor Meddygol Cyffredinol
