The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Ashworth
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Ashworth (known as Sally) died at her home, 'Bella Vista', 8 Bowlacre Road, Hyde on Saturday, 17th
April 1993 at the age of 74. She had been a widow for many years and lived alone. Mrs Ashworth had been a patient of Shipman for several years, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of Mrs Ashworth's death was left ventricular failure due to congestive heart disease.
In September 1998, Mrs Ashworth's son, Mr John David Ashworth, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and Mrs Ashworth's body was exhumed and sent for post-mortem examination. The police took witness statements from Mr Ashworth and from one of Mrs Ashworth's daughters, Mrs Susan Merfyn Goodman. Statements were also obtained from Mrs Jane Margaret Ashworth (Mrs Ashworth's daughter-in-law), Dr Christopher Robert Payne (Mrs Ashworth's consultant physician), Mr John Frank Fulton (a funeral director and embalmer), Mrs Alison Massey (the practice manager at the Market Street Surgery), Dr John David Rutherford (consultant forensic pathologist), Mrs Julie Evans (forensic scientist) and Dr John Grenville.
On post-mortem examination Dr Rutherford was unable to confirm or refute the cause of death, as certified by Shipman. Tissue samples were sent for analysis by Mrs Evans. She found some inconclusive evidence of the presence of morphine and amphetamine-related drugs in the liver and muscle tissues. Accordingly, she was not able to say whether or not morphine was a factor in Mrs Ashworth's death.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Ashworth but an inquest into the death was held on 15th
August 2000, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry took further statements from Mr John Ashworth, Mrs Jane Ashworth and Mrs Goodman and also obtained a statement from Mrs Ashworth's other daughter, Mrs Jane Vivien Parton. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Ashworth's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ashworth's health had been deteriorating for some years before her death, although she was still able to live a full and active life. She still drove a car and did her own housework and shopping. She had heart disease with atrial fibrillation, some signs of cardiac failure and chronic obstructive airways disease, caused by cigarette smoking. She lost faith in Shipman as her general practitioner in about 1991, following what she believed to be his failure to diagnose her heart condition. At this time, she consulted privately with Dr Payne, a consultant physician. He diagnosed heart failure and prescribed medication to which Mrs Ashworth responded well. After that, Mrs Ashworth usually consulted Dr Payne if she was concerned about her health. She usually only asked Shipman to provide repeat prescriptions for the medication advised by Dr Payne.
Following her initial admission to hospital under Dr Payne in 1991, Mrs Ashworth had had two further brief admissions, the second of which was in December 1992. She had been complaining of breathlessness, which was at times quite acute. Three days after the December admission, she was well enough to go home, but there was no clear diagnosis as to the cause of the problem. In his letter to Shipman, Dr Payne observed that Mrs Ashworth's renal function was deteriorating, for which nothing could be done. Two weeks later, Dr Payne found Mrs Ashworth in a satisfactory condition but felt there was a slow but definite general deterioration. In March 1993, Dr Payne reported that Mrs Ashworth was feeling generally well; she was not significantly breathless and had no signs of cardiac failure. Blood pressure was reasonable at 170/80. He proposed to see her again in four months' time.
This account is entirely consistent with the recollection of the family that Mrs Ashworth was quite well shortly before her death. During the week before her death, she had driven to Derbyshire and back. On the day before her death, she was in good health and spirits and she had driven her daughter, Mrs Goodman, to the railway station following a visit. She spoke to her daughter that evening and did not complain of feeling unwell.
The Day of the Death
There is an entry in the visits book, made by Mrs Massey on 17th
April, recording Mrs Ashworth's name, address and telephone number and the words
'coughing no phlegm diff breathing. No pain'
. It appears that Mrs Ashworth telephoned Shipman's surgery, asking for a visit. This was most unusual. Not only had she been in the habit of speaking directly to Dr Payne if she felt ill, she would usually tell her son John if she had any problem at all. She did not tell him that she felt ill that morning.
Shipman visited Mrs Ashworth at some time on the morning of Saturday, 17th
April. While at Mrs Ashworth's house, Shipman telephoned the home of Mr John Ashworth. He spoke to Mr Ashworth's wife and told her that Mrs Ashworth had had 'a turn' and that he was at her house with her. He then went on to say that she had died. Mr Ashworth took over the telephone and Shipman told him that his mother had been ill in the morning and had contacted the surgery. Shipman had gone round to see her and, as he was treating her on the bed and talking to her, she had fallen back on the bed and died. He said that he had given her an injection for heart failure but there was nothing more he could have done.
There is some uncertainty about the time of Shipman's visit and the telephone call to Mr Ashworth's home. He and his wife recall that they were telephoned by Shipman at about 11am -11.15am. However, perusal of the surgery records indicates that it is unlikely that Shipman would have been able to visit Mrs Ashworth until later in the morning. He had a full list of patients to see in surgery and also visited Charnley House, a local residential home for the elderly, at 11am, to certify the death of a resident. It seems unlikely that Shipman could have visited Mrs Ashworth until about 11.30am and he probably did not telephone Mr Ashworth until at least 11.45am. However, nothing turns on this point.
Mr and Mrs Ashworth went separately to Mrs Sarah Ashworth's house. Shipman had gone. They found Mrs Ashworth's body lying on the bed, fully dressed. They noticed a skin tear on the back of the right hand. Her facial expression was not 'peaceful'. Shipman returned about an hour later and gave an account of events. Mr Ashworth's recollection is that Shipman said he had found Mrs Ashworth on the settee, feeling unwell. He had told her to lie on the bed while he examined her and he gave her an injection. He said that, while he was injecting her, she died. He did not say he had called an ambulance or tried to resuscitate her. Someone asked him about the tear and he said he had made it when he was giving the injection. Mrs Margaret Ashworth's recollection is slightly different. She recalls Shipman saying that Mrs Ashworth had been well when he arrived. He had gone back to his car for his bag and, when he returned, she was going into heart failure. He said he did everything he could but couldn't save her. She understood that Shipman had given Mrs Ashworth an injection. Mr and Mrs Ashworth were puzzled and concerned because Mrs Ashworth had not telephoned them that morning to say that she was not feeling well.
The Aftermath
Mr Ashworth went to see Shipman the following week to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He asked whether there would be a post-mortem examination and Shipman said this would not be necessary. Mr Ashworth asked Shipman why he thought Mrs Ashworth had not telephoned to tell him she felt unwell. Shipman suggested that she might have been too ill to do so.
Shipman certified that the death was due to left ventricular failure due to congestive heart disease. He said that hypertension had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition causing death. He affirmed that he had last seen Mrs Ashworth alive on the day of her death.
Mrs Ashworth was buried at Dukinfield Cemetery, so there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Rutherford found the body to be in a state of moderately advanced decomposition. He said that it was not possible to confirm or refute the cause of death as stated by Shipman. Toxicological examination revealed some evidence of the presence of morphine in the groin and thigh muscles and liver tissues but there were also positive results for amphetamine-type drugs. The forensic scientist, Mrs Evans, pointed out that the state of decomposition of the tissues could have given rise to false positives in the screening tests (notably those for amphetamine-type drugs). She also considered that it was possible that morphine was present in substantial amounts at the time of the death and had subsequently been broken down by the decomposition processes. The results were described as ambiguous and inconclusive.
Dr Grenville observed that there is no record in Mrs Ashworth's medical notes that she was ever given morphine or a preparation containing morphine. The medical records show no sign of Mrs Ashworth having been seen by Shipman in the five months before her death, save that, on the day of her death, a handwritten note reads:
'Acute LVF 11.00.
. Son informed'
.
This record contains no reference to any treatment Shipman gave or injection he administered.
Dr Rutherford considered explanations for the possible presence of morphine in the body tissues. He suggested that the tear to the hand might well have been caused by an injection. It was possible that a doctor attending Mrs Ashworth might have been medically justified in giving a small quantity of morphine, if the doctor believed that she was suffering from heart failure or myocardial infarction. Dr Rutherford observed that Mrs Ashworth had a history of chronic obstructive airways disease of sufficient severity to deter her medical advisors from undertaking surgery for an aortic aneurysm. With such a patient, a medical practitioner should be very cautious before administering an opiate drug because of the known respiratory depressant effect. The other explanation was that the morphine had been administered illicitly, as a criminal act.
Police investigations revealed that Shipman obtained a prescription in the name of Mrs Ashworth for one 30mg ampoule of diamorphine from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy in Hyde on the day of her death. It is not known whether this was before or after the home visit. The medical records do not record the diamorphine prescription or the administration of the same.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that Mrs Ashworth's health had been deteriorating gradually for some months before her death and that her heart condition was serious. Death from heart failure was a real possibility. However, this death occurred in the presence of Shipman, at a time when Mrs Ashworth had appeared to be in quite good health. Other general practitioners find that patients very rarely die in their presence during a visit, unless the patient is terminally ill or the doctor has been called out in an emergency on account of acute symptoms of a serious nature, indicating for example a heart attack or stroke. Mrs Ashworth was not terminally ill and there is no evidence that Shipman was called out as an emergency on 17th
April. That Mrs Ashworth died suddenly in Shipman's presence gives rise to grave suspicion that he killed her.
There is some evidence that morphine was found in the tissues but the evidence is not conclusive because of the state of decomposition of the body. In any event, as Dr Rutherford pointed out, it would be acceptable practice for a doctor to administer morphine to a patient who was suffering from heart failure or a heart attack but great care should be taken in the administration of such a drug in all cases. The drug should be administered very slowly, the doctor observing the effect. In a patient with a history of chronic obstructive airways disease, the need for caution is even greater. If diamorphine had been administered in these circumstances, one would expect to see the fact recorded in the records. Here, Shipman was obliged to admit to having given an injection of some kind, because of the skin tear on the hand, but has not made any record of what he gave. The finding of morphine in the body, although uncertain, is a cause for suspicion, as is the absence of any record of drug administration.
The fact that Shipman obtained 30mg of diamorphine in Mrs Ashworth's name on the day of her death is significant but not conclusive. At his trial, Shipman said that he did not routinely carry diamorphine (or any controlled drug) in his bag, although this was proved to be a lie. He admitted that he was in the habit of prescribing a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine for patients who needed pain relief, although this is far more than would usually be given to a patient who is not accustomed to the effect of the drug. In this case, it is possible that Shipman obtained the prescription for Mrs Ashworth before the visit and equally possible that Shipman obtained it after her death. Police enquiries have shown that one way in which he obtained his illicit supplies of diamorphine was to prescribe for a patient who was already dead. This prescription is a cause for suspicion but is not conclusive.
Although none of the suspicious factors I have mentioned is in itself conclusive, when taken together they amount to strong circumstantial evidence that Shipman killed Mrs Ashworth. I am sure that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001