The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ada Ashworth
Introduction
Mrs Ada Ashworth, known to her friends as Ashy, died at her home, 8 Spring Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 27th
November 1984 at the age of 87. She lived alone, having been widowed about 20 years earlier. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she liked him. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction, Mrs Valerie Wood (formerly Mrs Valerie Mallinson, Mrs Ashworth's next door neighbour) contacted the police expressing concern over the manner of Mrs Ashworth's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Wood. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Wood and Mrs Ashworth's great-niece, Dr Anne Elizabeth Myers. Mrs Ashworth's general practitioner and hospital records have not survived. The Inquiry has, however, obtained the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil completed by Shipman and his visits book for 1984.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Wood enjoyed a close relationship with Mrs Ashworth and they would see each other regularly. Mrs Wood described Mrs Ashworth as 'fabulous', 'popular' and a 'super neighbour'. According to Mrs Wood, Mrs Ashworth normally enjoyed good health and would regularly walk into Hyde. Some months before her death, however, she broke her hip and femur. She appeared to be making a good recovery from this injury, mobilising with a wheeled Zimmer frame. She still needed some help with cooking and housework. She had poor eyesight as a result of cataracts.
Mrs Ashworth's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book during the month before her death. I infer that she was in reasonably good health during that time.
The Day of the Death
On 27th
November 1984, Mrs Wood visited Mrs Ashworth at home some time between 12.30pm and 1pm. They chatted for about 15 minutes, during which time Mrs Ashworth appeared perfectly well. Mrs Wood left some time after 1pm, saying she would call again at 'teatime'.
Some time between 3pm and 4pm the same day, Mrs Wood was at home with her then husband, Mr Derek Mallinson, who has since died, when Shipman knocked at their door. He explained that he had been next door to see Mrs Ashworth in order to take a sample of blood. He went on to say that he thought Mrs Ashworth had died. He asked Mrs Wood to go with him to Mrs Ashworth's home to confirm that she had in fact died. Mrs Wood asked Mr Mallinson to go also and they accompanied Shipman into Mrs Ashworth's house. Mrs Wood could see Mrs Ashworth sitting in her rocking chair by the side of the gas fire which was turned on. Shipman approached Mrs Ashworth and appeared to check for a pulse. Then he said that Mrs Ashworth was dead. It struck Mrs Wood at the time that Shipman appeared very indecisive when confirming Mrs Ashworth's death. He made no attempt at resuscitation.
Shipman asked whether Mrs Wood knew whom to contact. Mrs Wood spoke to a member of Mrs Ashworth's family and then contacted Mr Stanley Armitage, a funeral director who had known Mrs Ashworth personally. He attended and removed Mrs Ashworth to the chapel of rest.
The Aftermath
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The counterfoil, which has been recovered, shows that he certified that the death was due to old age. He claimed that he had last seen Mrs Ashworth alive on 20th
November, a week before the death. The visits book for 20th
November contains no reference to Mrs Ashworth
Dr Myers was responsible for registering the death. Shipman did not speak to Dr Myers when she called at his surgery to collect the MCCD, which Dr Myers thought was most unusual.
When she reported the death to the registrar, Dr Myers expected him to comment on the stated cause of death as old age but he did not do so and she did not mention it to him. Mrs Ashworth was buried in Hyde cemetery.
Conclusion
Mrs Ashworth was a typical Shipman victim, an elderly woman living alone.
I am satisfied from the evidence of Mrs Wood that Mrs Ashworth was in reasonable general health at 1pm on the day of her death. I think it unlikely that she had asked Shipman to visit her. Had she been expecting him, she would have mentioned it to Mrs Wood. Shipman might have been making a routine visit to monitor Mrs Ashworth's progress after her fall but I think it more likely, in view of the explanation he gave to Mrs Wood and her husband, that he made an unsolicited visit to Mrs Ashworth some time during the afternoon. From what Shipman told Mrs Wood and Mr Mallinson, it appears that he had been inside Mrs Ashworth's house before he went to see them. He did not say he had seen Mrs Ashworth through the window. He could have gained access to the house, whether Mrs Ashworth was dead or alive at the time of his arrival, as the back door was left unlocked. It is possible that she was dead when he arrived, but it is also possible that she was alive and that he made an excuse to give her a lethal injection. My knowledge of cases in which Shipman has killed makes me highly sceptical of any claim by Shipman that he found a patient dead when he arrived at the house. Such an event is rare in practice, but with Shipman it apparently happened frequently.
Shipman's conduct after the death was typical of cases in which he had killed. Any reasonable doctor, on finding Mrs Ashworth unconscious, would either have examined her thoroughly in order to ascertain that she was dead or, if still unsure of death, would have called an ambulance. Instead, Shipman went to the neighbours' house and asked them to go in to Mrs Ashworth's while he confirmed that she was dead. Yet, when the three of them went back to Mrs Ashworth's house, he carried out only the most cursory examination. It appears to me highly likely that he well knew she was dead.
Shipman's subsequent conduct in respect of the MCCD also gives rise to suspicion. Whilst elderly, Mrs Ashworth was far from being so infirm that her death could reasonably be ascribed to old age. The circumstances in which Mrs Ashworth was found, sitting upright in her chair, dressed in her day clothes, are not typical of a death from old age but are entirely typical of death caused by the administration of a lethal dose of opiates. If Mrs Ashworth had died suddenly that afternoon, a reasonable doctor would have declined to certify a cause of death and would have reported the case to the coroner. At the very least, one would have expected a doctor to discuss the death with the next of kin. Here, Shipman avoided meeting the next of kin, who was a doctor and who might therefore be expected to be puzzled by the suddenness of the death.
I am also suspicious of Shipman's claim that he had last seen Mrs Ashworth alive on 20th
November. The visits book for that day contains no entry in her name. It is possible that he saw her in the surgery on that day. However, that is unlikely, given her restricted mobility. In any event, if she were fit to travel to the surgery a week before her death, this would be quite inconsistent with a death from old age so soon afterwards. I think it likely that Shipman's claim that he had seen Mrs Ashworth on 20th
November was false and was designed to avoid the risk that the registrar might refer the case to the coroner.
Taking all these factors into account, I have no doubt that Shipman was responsible for the death of Mrs Ashworth. I am sure that he gave her a lethal injection, almost certainly using diamorphine to which he had unrecorded and illicit access.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001