The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Netta Ashcroft
Introduction
Mrs Netta Ashcroft died on Tuesday, 7th
March 1995 at the age of 71. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Lily Bardsley on this day. Mrs Ashcroft was a widow and lived alone in sheltered accommodation at 28 Meadowfield Court, Flowery Field, Hyde. She had been a patient of Shipman for just over two years at the time of her death, registered at the Market Street Surgery. He certified that her death resulted from coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the early publicity concerning Shipman, a local taxi driver, Mr John Shaw, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers, including Mrs Ashcroft. The police investigated Mrs Ashcroft's death and took statements from her cousins, Mrs Isabel Shelmerdine and Mrs Evelyn Hirst. They also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for the death of Mrs Ashcroft but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Ashcroft's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the period. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ashcroft did not enjoy good health and those who knew her thought she was very frail. She had undergone a mastectomy in the 1960s for breast cancer, although there had been no recurrence. In the 1970s and 1980s, there are a number of recorded episodes of palpitations. In early 1986, she began to suffer from chest pains and her general practitioner at the time diagnosed angina and commenced treatment. However, investigations at Manchester Royal Infirmary revealed no evidence of a cardiac problem. A diagnosis of hiatus hernia was made. Treatment for angina was withdrawn with no ill effect. Dr Grenville is of the view that there is no evidence that Mrs Ashcroft had angina and that her palpitations were probably due to anxiety. In 1988, Mrs Ashcroft developed a moderately severe psychotic illness with paranoia. This condition was satisfactorily controlled by medication.
In January 1993, Mrs Ashcroft moved to Hyde to be near her cousin, Mrs Shelmerdine, who arranged for her to join Shipman's list. Shipman first examined Mrs Ashcroft on 1st
February 1993 and the note of this consultation does not refer to any heart condition. At an appointment on 5th
or 6th
March 1993,
'Episodes of palp-
(
palpitation
)
regular tachycardia'
were noted by the locum general practitioner, Dr Woodhouse, who referred Mrs Ashcroft to Tameside General Hospital with a request for an electrocardiogram (ECG). The ECG was considered by Shipman later that month and the letter accompanying the trace was marked with his instruction to file it as being
'OK'
. There is no further mention of any heart problem until the day of Mrs Ashcroft's death.
After 1993, Mrs Ashcroft's problems seem to have been predominantly associated with epigastric discomfort and difficulty in swallowing solids. In April 1994, when investigated by a geriatrician, she was said to be a bit breathless on effort and showed mild ankle oedema. The jugular venous pressure (JVP) was normal. In the computerised records for July 1994, Shipman mentions achalasia of the cardia. This is not a heart condition but a form of oesophageal disease. In February 1995, Mrs Ashcroft was diagnosed as suffering from diverticular disease, according to a letter from a locum registrar at Tameside General Hospital.
The Day of the Death
On the day of her death, Mrs Ashcroft telephoned Mrs Shelmerdine and said she felt unwell. Mrs Shelmerdine advised her to telephone Shipman and Mrs Ashcroft said she would. The surgery visits book records a request which appears to read:
'sore throat. cant down want to see you'
. Plainly Mrs Ashcroft had a sore throat and wanted to see Shipman. The meaning of
'cant down'
is not clear. It might have meant that Mrs Ashcroft's throat was so sore she could not swallow, or it might have meant that she could not travel to the surgery.
Later that day, after returning home from shopping, Mrs Shelmerdine telephoned her cousin at about 3pm but there was no reply. At about teatime, Mrs Shelmerdine tried again but there was still no reply and she became concerned. She told her sister and brother-in-law, Mrs and Mr Hirst, and they all went to Mrs Ashcroft's flat. Mrs Shelmerdine let them in with her key. It was dark but the curtains were still open. Mrs Ashcroft was found sitting in her armchair with her hands resting on her knees and her head lying slightly sideways on the back of the chair. She was wearing normal day clothes and looked very peaceful.
Mrs Shelmerdine telephoned Shipman who arrived at the flat a short time later. He did not examine Mrs Ashcroft but merely touched her neck and said that rigor mortis had already set in. He remarked that he had seen Mrs Ashcroft earlier that day. She had waved to him as he drove off. Mrs Shelmerdine thought this to be unusual because her cousin was a rather timid and hesitant person who would not have done that. The family asked Shipman whether there should be a post-mortem. Shipman said it was unnecessary as Mrs Ashcroft had had angina. Mrs Shelmerdine was unaware of this but accepted it at the time.
Certification
Shipman later completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), on which he recorded the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease with schizophrenia as a contributory condition. Dr Grenville has explained that Mrs Ashcroft's psychiatric illness cannot have contributed to her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'About 1400hrs'
on 7th
March 1995. He said that he had last seen Mrs Ashcroft about two hours before her death and that she had a chest infection. He saw her again five hours after death. He claimed that he had attended Mrs Ashcroft for two to three hours during her last illness. The last illness is supposed to be the condition that leads to the death. Thus, it appears that Shipman was suggesting that he had treated Mrs Ashcroft for two to three hours for a heart condition. He reported that death had occurred by way of syncope of only seconds' duration. As he recorded that no one was present at the death, this must have been surmise on his part. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. Shipman said that Mrs Ashcroft's niece had found her in her chair. This appears to be a reference to Mrs Shelmerdine or Mrs Hirst. Form C of the cremation certificate was completed by Doctor Raj Patel.
The Expert Evidence
The handwritten note for the day of death is difficult to read but appears to say:
'7.3.95 V
(
visit
)
(
illegible word, possibly 'local'
)
flu Amoxil
Co-Codamol'
.
That would indicate that Shipman diagnosed flu and prescribed Amoxil, an antibiotic, and Co-codamol for pain relief. There is a line drawn roughly below that part of the entry, as if to show that the entry was complete, but more writing appears below, as follows:
'Dyspnoea on exercise
palpitations always of late
even in bed. 1 hr or so'
.
This suggests that Mrs Ashcroft also complained to Shipman of shortness of breath on exercise and palpitations lasting for an hour or so, even when in bed.
The computerised notes contain the following entries for the day of the death:
'7/3/1995 ...
Upper respiratory tract infection NOS
(
not otherwise specified
)
amoxil
7/3/1995 ...
Palpitations
worse of late had angina tluk
(
to let us know
)
7/3/1995 ...
O/E - dead
ct ihd schizophrenia
(
ct is coronary thrombosis; ihd is ischaemic heart disease
)
7/3/1995 ...
Liver function tests normal'
.
In both records, the references to dyspnoea (which appears only in the written record), palpitations and angina (which appears only in the computerised record) appear to be an afterthought. They bear no relation to the reason why Shipman had been called out. It is not possible to discover when the various computerised records were made as the audit trail facility was not installed on the computer until October 1996. It should also be noted that, despite the Manchester Royal Infirmary investigations of 1986, Shipman had included angina in the computerised summary card, claiming that it had been present since 1986. This could have been a mistake on his part, but could also have been a deliberate attempt to create evidence of past history of angina.
The entry relating to liver function tests gives rise to suspicion. There is no reference to this in the handwritten note. However, Dr Grenville found the results of a laboratory analysis of a blood sample taken on 7th
March. He explains that there is no plausible reason why Shipman would have needed to take a blood sample or conduct a liver function test on that day. Dr Grenville suggests that the taking of a sample would require the use of a needle and would have provided Shipman with an excuse to introduce a needle into Mrs Ashcroft's vein. In addition, if Shipman gave Mrs Ashcroft an injection, which had caused some bleeding and had left a mark, he might then have taken a blood sample in order to provide an explanation for the mark.
Dr Grenville expressed the view that Mrs Ashcroft had never been reliably diagnosed as suffering from angina. Nor was there sufficient evidence to conclude that she had suffered from ischaemic heart disease. In his statement to the Inquiry he observed:
'... There is no corroborative evidence that Mrs Ashcroft was suffering from increasing breathlessness or increasing palpitations in the period before her death. It is theoretically possible that Mrs Ashcroft may have had a heart attack coincidentally on the day on which Shipman visited her because she had a sore throat. In my opinion this stretches credibility beyond its limits, especially when one considers the frequency with which such an event is supposed to have happened to Shipman's patients. In my opinion it is several orders of magnitude more likely that Shipman was involved in Mrs Ashcroft's death'
.
Dr Grenville noted that Mrs Ashcroft's appearance in death was not consistent with her having suffered a heart attack.
Dr Grenville also concluded that, because Mrs Ashcroft had suffered a sudden and unexpected death, Shipman should have referred the death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination. Dr Alan Banks and Professor Richard Baker expressed similar views. Professor Baker considered Mrs Ashcroft's death to be highly suspicious, upon the basis of the medical records and the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious features in the circumstances of Mrs Ashcroft's death.
The death was discovered in the late afternoon following a visit by Shipman, which probably took place in the early afternoon. There is no evidence that Mrs Ashcroft was seen alive or spoken to by anyone after Shipman's visit. That factor, in itself, gives rise to a high degree of suspicion.
There is no reliable evidence that Mrs Ashcroft ever suffered from heart disease. All investigations of her chest pain had concluded that her problems related to her digestive system. Although it would have been possible for Mrs Ashcroft to have a heart attack in March 1995, such an event was unlikely.
Mrs Ashcroft had requested a visit from Shipman on the day of her death, complaining of a sore throat. Shipman recorded that she had flu or an upper respiratory tract infection, which conditions might well entail a sore throat. However, Shipman then claims that Mrs Ashcroft made complaints that might indicate an unstable heart condition. Shipman's records can never be accepted as honest and accurate unless their contents are in some way corroborated by evidence from another source. There is no such corroboration here.
Mrs Ashcroft was found in a position consistent with having received a lethal dose of opiates and inconsistent with having suffered a heart attack.
If Mrs Ashcroft had indeed waved Shipman off after his visit as he claimed, he should and would have been very surprised indeed to find her dead only a few hours later. In those circumstances, any honest doctor would examine the body carefully to ensure that the patient was indeed dead. Shipman did not examine Mrs Ashcroft at all, apart from touching her neck. A possible explanation for this is that he already knew Mrs Ashcroft was dead. Also, in those circumstances, any honest doctor would have felt unable to certify the cause of death and would have informed the coroner of that fact. Shipman did not do so. I infer from the fact that Dr Patel was prepared to confirm the cause of death that Shipman probably gave him a false, but convincing, account of a medical history of heart disease. These factors demonstrate that Shipman was probably anxious to avoid a post-mortem examination of Mrs Ashcroft's body.
Considering these factors and accepting, as I do, Dr Grenville's opinion on this death, I am driven to the conclusion that it is overwhelmingly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Ashcroft. I am satisfied so as to be sure of this.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001