The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Emma Andrew
Introduction
Miss Mary Emma Andrew died at her home, 8 Mona Street, Hyde on Thursday, 8th
April 1993. She was 86 and had never married. She had lived alone since the death of her sister in 1992. Miss Andrew had been a patient of Shipman since her arrival in Hyde in 1997 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure, in turn caused by ischaemic heart disease.
Miss Andrew's death came to the attention of the police when she was seen in the records of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy to have been prescribed a quantity of diamorphine. The police investigated her death and took statements from Mr Fred Andrew (her brother), Mrs Judith Kathleen Page and Miss Angela Page (her neighbours) and Ms Ghislaine Brant (pharmacist at Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Andrew but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry obtained a statement from Mr Andrew. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Andrew's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Andrew's medical records show that she suffered from ischaemic heart disease and had probably had a heart attack in 1989. She had long-standing atrial fibrillation (irregular heartbeat) and congestive heart failure, which was controlled by medication. She was in receipt of attendance allowance, from which I infer that she had probably become quite frail. She had seen Shipman on 8th
February 1993, complaining of pain in the chest wall on the right side. Air entry was equal on both sides and breath sounds were normal, which suggests that there was no infection. Nothing was prescribed. The last time she had seen Shipman before her death was on 23rd
March 1993, when the note reads
'CHF OK'
which suggests that whatever congestive heart failure had been present was not then a problem. Her medication was adjusted slightly and various repeat prescriptions were provided.
Miss Andrew spoke to her brother over the telephone on the evening before she died. She was cheerful but was complaining of pain in her back. She said she was going to ask the doctor to visit her. There was nothing to suggest that she was seriously ill.
The Day of the Death
There is an entry in the surgery visits book for 8th
April 1993 which gives Miss Andrew's name and states
'Pain in top of back (very painful)'
.
Miss Andrew's name also appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
During the morning of that day, Miss Andrew's good friend and neighbour, Mrs Page, visited her. Miss Andrew told Mrs Page that Shipman was coming to visit her later that day. Mrs Page left Miss Andrew at about midday and went to visit her own parents. Miss Andrew's next visitor was another neighbour, Mrs Marley, who has since died. According to what Mrs Marley later told Mr Andrew, she left when Shipman arrived. Both Mrs Marley and Mrs Page confirmed that Miss Andrew seemed well.
At about 12.50pm, Shipman telephoned Mr Andrew and said that he had some bad news. Mr Andrew told the Inquiry that Shipman said he had given Miss Andrew an injection; he told the police that Shipman said the injection was of morphine. Shipman then said that he had gone up the street to ask Mrs Page to keep an eye on Miss Andrew but found she was out. He said he then called on Mrs Marley and asked her to keep an eye out for Mrs Page. Shipman said that when he returned to Miss Andrew's house, he found that she had died in the back living room. Mr Andrew was stunned. Shipman asked if Mr Andrew would like him to arrange for an undertaker to attend. Mr Andrew, who lived far away, accepted Shipman's offer.
At about 1 to 1.30pm, Mrs Page's daughter, Angela, was walking home when she saw Shipman leaving Miss Andrew's house. As she approached, he stopped her and told her that Miss Andrew had died. Miss Page immediately went home and telephoned her mother. On receiving the news, Mrs Page returned home and played the messages on her answering machine. There was a message from Shipman asking her to telephone the surgery before she went to Miss Andrew's house. Mrs Page telephoned Shipman. He said that he had found Miss Andrew dead, had informed her brother and instructed the undertakers to collect the body. Mrs Page could not believe that Miss Andrew had died because there had not appeared to be anything wrong with her earlier that day.
At about 3pm, Mrs Page went into Miss Andrew's house. She saw Miss Andrew's body, seated in a chair, fully dressed. A sheet had been placed over the body.
The Aftermath
Mr Andrew and his wife travelled to Hyde two days later. Mr Andrew spoke to Mrs Marley who told him that she had been having a cup of tea and a chat with Miss Andrew when Shipman had arrived. Mrs Marley had then left. She said that Miss Andrew had been fit and well at the time.
Mr Andrew wanted to speak to Shipman about his sister's death. The surgery was busy and Shipman was very short with him. Shipman asked, 'What have you come for? I told you I gave her an injection.' He did not explain how or why Miss Andrew had died and he did not mention a post-mortem examination.
Shipman subsequently completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the immediate cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure caused by ischaemic heart disease. He stated that the approximate interval between the onset of coronary thrombosis and the time of death was
'? 24 hrs'
.
Miss Andrew was buried at Hyde Chapel. At the funeral, according to Mr Andrew, Mrs Debbie Bambroffe, of Massey's Funeral Directors, said that when she had gone round to the house, she had found Miss Andrew sitting peacefully in her usual chair.
In the handwritten medical notes, Shipman recorded a consultation in a note dated either 8th
April 1993 altered to the 7th
or 7th
April altered to the 8th
. He recorded that Miss Andrew complained of pains in her chest. Heart sounds were normal and the pulse rate was low at 40 beats per minute. Air entry was equal on both sides and breath sounds were normal. There was
'no sign of failure'
. Blood pressure was low at 90/40. Miss Andrew said she had suffered pain on and off all night, like indigestion. Shipman recorded a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis and congestive heart failure, despite the fact that he previously noted there were no signs of failure. He recorded that he gave 10mg of morphine intravenously. There is then a further note which reads
'Patient did not '
(the meaning of this is not clear)
.
Finally, it is stated that the patient had died at
'13.30 hrs'
.
The Expert Evidence
On consideration of the medical notes and records, Professor Richard Baker classified the death as highly suspicious. He appears to have thought that it was possible that Miss Andrew could have had a coronary thrombosis that day, bearing in mind her past medical history. However, Shipman did not appear to have given Miss Andrew any treatment for her slow pulse. Nor did he call an ambulance, although there was obviously time to have done so.
I note that Shipman says that he gave 10mg of morphine. A small dose of morphine, given very slowly, might have been an appropriate treatment for Miss Andrew if she really was suffering from quite severe pain. However, according to Mrs Marley, Miss Andrew did not appear to be in pain when Shipman arrived. The Inquiry is aware that Shipman did not keep a controlled drugs register and was therefore not supposed to carry morphine in his bag. We also know that he did carry diamorphine.
During the course of their investigations into Shipman, the police discovered that on 12th
April 1993, a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine was dispensed from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy for Miss Andrew, following the presentation of a prescription issued by Shipman.
Conclusion
Miss Andrew had suffered from heart disease for some time before her death and she must have been at risk of a cardiac death. She was suffering from pain in the back during the evening of the previous day and it was severe enough for her to describe it as
'very painful'
when she telephoned the surgery. However, all the available evidence suggests that she was not seriously ill when Shipman called on her. She was not in obvious pain and she did not mention pain to either of her friends. It appears to me possible, but unlikely, that Miss Andrew was suffering from angina or might have had a coronary thrombosis.
Shipman's account of his consultation with Miss Andrew cannot be taken at face value, as he is known to have made false records in many cases in order to conceal his unlawful activities. His note, if true, might support the assertion that Miss Andrew had had a heart attack. However, if Miss Andrew had displayed the signs described, one would have expected Shipman to call an ambulance, as she needed hospital treatment. Instead, he claims to have administered 10mg of morphine. He does not say that Miss Andrew was in severe pain. Having given the morphine, Shipman claims to have left the house and, within a very short time, Miss Andrew was dead. In my view, the claimed administration of 10mg of morphine is highly suspicious. Shipman usually carried diamorphine, not morphine. Moreover, at this time, he usually carried it in 30mg ampoules. I think it is highly likely that he administered either all or a substantial part of a 30mg ampoule of diamorphine to Miss Andrew. Such a dose would result in death within a very short time.
Shipman's note does not mention that he ever left the premises and returned to find Miss Andrew dead. There is no evidence to confirm that he did. It seems to me more likely that, knowing of Mrs Page's close friendship with Miss Andrew, he telephoned Mrs Page from Miss Andrew's house to ask her to speak to him before going to Miss Andrew's house. Then, on leaving the house, he met and spoke to Mrs Page's daughter. In my view, his claim to Mr Andrew that he had gone in search of a neighbour to keep an eye on Miss Andrew was probably a fabrication, designed to make it appear that Shipman was not present at the moment of death.
Miss Andrew died during Shipman's visit, a highly suspicious feature in itself. She was found sitting peacefully in her chair, fully clothed. Her appearance in death was not consistent with the appearance of a person who has died of a coronary thrombosis. It was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking these factors into account, it appears to me that, despite Miss Andrew's vulnerability to a sudden cardiac death, the overwhelming likelihood is that she was killed by a lethal injection of diamorphine administered by Shipman. I am sure that this is what happened.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001