The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dora Elizabeth Ashton
Introduction
Mrs Dora Elizabeth Ashton died at Shipman's surgery, 21 Market Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 26th
September 1995. She was 87 and a widow. She had been a patient of Shipman for 11 years and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebral embolus due to atrial fibrillation and ischaemic heart disease.
In September 1998, Mrs Ashton's granddaughter, Mrs Tracey Hulme, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Ashton's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Hulme, Mr James Ashton (Mrs Ashton's son) and Mrs Carol Chapman, a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Ashton but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Ashton's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a further statement from Mrs Chapman and a further report from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ashton's family and friends considered that she was fit and healthy for her age. However, medical records reveal that, as might be expected for a woman of 87, she suffered from a number of chronic conditions. She had had diabetes since 1990 and hypertension since 1983. These conditions were monitored regularly and were well controlled. Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure in 1991 but, as Dr Grenville has observed was commonly the case with Shipman, there is little evidence that Mrs Ashton did indeed suffer significant heart failure. As for ischaemic heart disease, a letter from Dr Kenyon, consultant physician, dated 8th
October 1985 describes signs of possible minor ischaemia. The handwritten and computerised summary entries in the general practice notes suggest that in 1985 a diagnosis of heart attack was made, although this was on clinical grounds alone. Dr Grenville questions this diagnosis of a heart attack, first because the diagnosis was made on clinical grounds alone and also because an electrocardiogram (ECG) commented on by Dr Kenyon in his letter of 8th
October 1985 does not confirm a heart attack.
Not long before Mrs Ashton's death, Shipman requested a domiciliary visit by Dr Wan as Mrs Ashton was suffering from headaches following an ear infection. Dr Wan attended Mrs Ashton on 4th
August 1995 and later advised Shipman that whilst her left-sided headache was connected with her recent ear infection, Mrs Ashton was also suffering from atrial fibrillation. Dr Grenville says that it is impossible to know for how long Mrs Ashton had suffered this common condition of irregular heartbeat.
Dr Wan advocated some adjustment of her medication. After 4th
August, there appears to have been no further medical consultation until Mrs Ashton attended the practice nurse for routine checks of diabetes and asthma on 8th
September 1995. Following that, the next visit was on the day of her death.
Mrs Ashton's death was wholly unexpected to her family who thought she was in good health in the days and weeks before her death. On the evening before her death, Mrs Ashton went out for a drink with her son, Mr James Ashton, and was in good spirits.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of her death, Mrs Ashton had an appointment at Shipman's surgery for 9.45am. Her son, who lived with her, offered to call a taxi to take her into Hyde, but she refused the offer, preferring to walk to the surgery, despite the fact that it was raining. Mr Ashton thought that his mother's appointment was for a routine health check. However, such routine checks were usually carried out by the practice nurse, rather than by Shipman. This appointment was with Shipman. Mrs Ashton had last attended the surgery on 8th
September for routine checks on her diabetes and asthma. The record, apparently made by the practice nurse, says that she was to be reviewed in three weeks. That review would have been due on 29th
September and it is possible that Mrs Ashton had for some reason decided to go in for that review a few days earlier than necessary. It is also possible that she might have felt unwell and wished to see her doctor. In any event, Mr Ashton was unaware of any illness or complaint for which his mother might have wished to see her doctor.
Mrs Ashton was seen waiting in the surgery by the receptionist, Mrs Chapman, who knew her personally. Mrs Chapman describes Mrs Ashton as looking her 'normal healthy self'.
Mrs Ashton was with Shipman for much longer than the scheduled period of seven and a half minutes. After about 15 minutes, Shipman buzzed Mrs Chapman on the intercom and asked her to come through. When she went into his consulting room, Shipman told her that Mrs Ashton was not very well and that he wanted her to go into hospital but that she was refusing. Mrs Chapman looked around the consulting room but could not see Mrs Ashton. Shipman said that she was in the examination room, 'having a lie down'. Shipman told Mrs Chapman to call Mr Ashton to ask him to come down to the surgery and to inform Mrs Ashton once she had done so. Mrs Chapman spoke to Mr Ashton, asking him to come to the surgery as the doctor wanted his mother to go into hospital. While she was on the telephone, Shipman left the room, saying that he was going to see the practice nurse.
Mrs Chapman then went into the examination room to tell Mrs Ashton that her son was coming in. When she entered the room, she found Mrs Ashton seated on the bed, which was folded upwards to support her back. Her head was slumped forwards. As she began to tell Mrs Ashton that her son was on his way, Mrs Chapman took hold of her hand to comfort her. She was shocked to find the hand lifeless. She realised that Mrs Ashton was dead. She immediately went to find Shipman and found him in conversation in the corridor. She told him that Mrs Ashton was dead. Her account to the police has been clarified in a statement made to the Inquiry, from which it would appear that Shipman was not surprised to hear the news. When Shipman went back into the examination room he just felt Mrs Ashton's neck for a pulse and confirmed that she was dead. No attempt at resuscitation was made and no ambulance was called.
When Mr Ashton arrived, Shipman told him that as his mother was walking into his consulting room for her appointment, she fell to the floor, having suffered a minor stroke. After he had managed to sit her down, she had suffered a second stroke, which caused her death.
The written note made by Shipman on the day of death reads as follows:
'26 9 95 a c/o pain (R) leg
O/E (R) CVA plantar
pulse 140/m
irregular
10 00
JVP
liver just palpable
D-Probably embolic CVA
10 05
further CVA unconscious
10 10
Died .
1)
(a) Cerebral embolus mins
(b) AF 4/52
(c) IHD 10 yrs
2)
CHF 4 yrs
Hypertension 5 yrs'
.
Dr Grenville has assisted in the interpretation of this note. The note records that Mrs Ashton attended the surgery on 26th
September, complaining of pain in the right leg. On examination, Shipman found she had had a stroke affecting her right side. The only sign he records to justify this conclusion is that the plantar reflex was upgoing. The pulse was fast at 140 beats per minute and very irregular. He says that the jugular venous pressure was raised and the liver was just palpable. These findings suggest that Mrs Ashton was in atrial fibrillation and that she had a degree of congestive heart failure. Shipman made a diagnosis of probable embolic cerebrovascular accident. That would be a stroke caused by a blood clot which had lodged in the brain. The note then states that at 10.05am, Mrs Ashton had a further stroke and became unconscious. At 10.10am, she died. Shipman recorded the immediate cause of death as cerebral embolus, which had lasted minutes. This had been due to atrial fibrillation (which had been present for four weeks) and ischaemic heart disease (present for ten years). He said that congestive heart failure and hypertension were contributory causes unrelated to the main cause. These had been present for four and five years respectively.
Certification
Shipman later completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), in which he gave the same main causes as appear in the medical notes but identified diabetes mellitus of five years' duration as the second contributory cause, rather than hypertension.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, claiming that he had attended Mrs Ashton during her last illness for four weeks. The nature of the last illness is obscure. Shipman's notes suggest that he had not seen Mrs Ashton since 3rd
August, when she complained of pain in the side of the neck going into the scalp. It was that consultation that resulted in her referral to Dr Wan, which in turn led to the discovery that Mrs Ashton had atrial fibrillation, although for how long that had been present is not known. Given the prominence that Shipman has given to atrial fibrillation in the causation of death, it may be that he was referring to atrial fibrillation as the last illness. It is hard to see what else he could have claimed was wrong with her.
Mrs Ashton did not leave a will but she did leave instructions that, in the event of her death, flowers should not be sent, but donations should be made to Shipman's patient fund. In total £310 was collected for this fund.
The Expert Evidence
On reviewing the entry in the Lloyd George notes made by Shipman on 26th
September, Dr Grenville has explained that patients in atrial fibrillation may develop clots in the left atrium (one of the four chambers of the heart) and that these occasionally move from the heart and lodge in the brain, causing an embolic stroke. Strokes of this kind are more common in patients who are frequently changing spontaneously from atrial fibrillation to a normal heartbeat and back. It is not known whether this was the case with Mrs Ashton. However, it appears that Mrs Ashton was at some risk of an embolic stroke.
Dr Grenville also observed that pain in a limb is an extremely uncommon presentation of stroke. Weakness of a limb is much more common. In view of the fact that Mrs Ashton had not told her son that she had pain in the leg and had preferred to walk into Hyde that morning, it seems unlikely that she had significant pain or weakness in the leg. Mrs Chapman did not notice any problems while Mrs Ashton was waiting to see Shipman. Dr Grenville considers that if she had been developing a stroke which was soon to be fatal, Mrs Chapman would have noticed that Mrs Ashton was not well. Signs of weakness and possible slurring of the speech would have been expected in that situation. Dr Grenville concluded:
'There is a theoretical possibility that Mrs Ashton might have begun to develop the symptoms of a major stroke at the moment that she walked through Shipman's consulting room door. Given that she was attending for a routine appointment and had shown no signs of previous illness this would be an amazing coincidence and stretches credibility beyond its limits. I believe it is several orders of magnitude more likely that Shipman caused Mrs Ashton's death'
.
As Dr Grenville has pointed out, Mrs Ashton was at some risk of suffering a sudden death either as the result of a heart attack or stroke. In summary, the cause of death certified by Shipman has some plausible foundation in the medical history. Mrs Ashton did suffer to some extent from the conditions that Shipman stated had caused her death.
Conclusion
Mrs Ashton was at risk of suffering a sudden death from cerebrovascular accident. Such deaths can occur without much prior warning. However, it seems to me to be unlikely that Mrs Ashton would have walked to the surgery and chatted normally to Mrs Chapman if she had been in the throes of developing an embolus that was about to kill her. If she did, it was a remarkable coincidence that she just managed to reach Shipman's consulting room before it struck. Of course remarkable coincidences do occur. If such an event were to occur once in the professional lifetime of a doctor, I would have no great difficulty in accepting it as a genuine coincidence. But several of Shipman's patients have died suddenly, of a stroke or heart attack, in his consulting or examination rooms after having walked in without apparent difficulty. Such a coincidence stretches credibility beyond its limits. In at least one of those cases, that of Mrs Ivy Lomas, it has been proved beyond doubt that Shipman took the opportunity to inject his patient with diamorphine in the privacy of the consulting room. He plainly had the chance to do the same to Mrs Ashton.
Shipman's record of the consultation during which the death occurred cannot be taken at face value. He is known to have fabricated entries in his patients' records in order to give plausibility to the cause of death he had selected to explain a killing. In this case, no reliance can be placed on the claims that Mrs Ashton had an upgoing plantar reflex, racing pulse and very irregular heartbeat. Nor can it be accepted that she had signs of heart failure. Such signs are not consistent with her healthy appearance and ability to walk into Hyde.
Shipman's behaviour at the time of Mrs Ashton's death was highly suspicious. He told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Ashton had refused to go to hospital, although there is no reference to this in the notes. The notes imply that Mrs Ashton suffered a second stroke and lapsed into unconsciousness in his presence. He then left her alone and asked Mrs Chapman to summon Mr Ashton and to tell Mrs Ashton that her son was coming. Meanwhile he went to chat to someone. When told of the death he was not surprised, let alone shocked. He did not even conduct an adequate examination to diagnose death. He must have known already that she was dead.
Mrs Ashton's position on the examination couch is not typical of that found after a sudden death from stroke. It is, however, entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims.
Whatever may have been Mrs Ashton's susceptibility to stroke, embolic or otherwise, the facts of the case point irresistibly to Shipman's involvement in her death. I am satisfied so as to be sure that Shipman killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001