The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Arrowsmith
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Arrowsmith died at her home, 44 Chartist House, Hyde on Tuesday, 24th
April 1984 at the age of 70. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years at the time of her death and she thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to hypertension.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Arrowsmith's son, Mr Frank Arrowsmith, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death.
The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith (the wife of Mr Frank Arrowsmith) and Mr Harvey Derek Jason Lomax (Mrs Arrowsmith's grandson). The police also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Frank Arrowsmith, Mr Harvey Lomax and Mr Derek Lomax, his father. Mrs Jennifer Unsworth, the warden at Chartist House, also provided a statement. A further report was obtained from Dr Grenville. Mrs Arrowsmith's medical records are no longer available. The surviving relevant contemporaneous documentation comprises the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the duty doctor transfer book and Shipman's own visits book. Mr Harvey Lomax and Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith gave evidence at an oral hearing on 18th
October 2001. Mrs Unsworth gave evidence on 24th
October 2001 and Dr Grenville on 14th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Arrowsmith lived on the fourth floor of Chartist House, where the occupants had the benefit of supervision by Mrs Unsworth. Each room had a pull cord, by which the resident could summon help. Mrs Unsworth used to call on each of her residents every morning to see if they were all right. If they had any problems and in particular if they needed a doctor, she would arrange it.
Mrs Arrowsmith was visited regularly by her daughter, Mrs Valerie Lomax, and by Mr Harvey Lomax and Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith. Mr Arrowsmith saw his mother about once every week or two. Mrs Lomax is now deceased.
According to the family, Mrs Arrowsmith was quite badly affected by arthritis and used a walking frame. She could only walk short distances and then only slowly. She did, however, manage her own cooking, washing and housework, although she had someone in to clean her windows. She was mentally very alert and used to say that the only thing wrong with her was her knees. She used to joke that, if she could be cut off at the knees, she would be fine. Her legs were always bandaged. It appears that she also suffered from an underactive thyroid gland (myxoedema).
Mr Harvey Lomax was about 15 when his grandmother died. He remembers that she also had problems with 'water retention'. She used to take some red tablets, green tablets and tablets for water retention as well as strong painkillers for arthritis. He used to visit her most evenings and would run errands.
The family knew that Shipman called to see Mrs Arrowsmith from time to time. Mr Harvey Lomax had the impression that he would call every few weeks. Shipman was a regular visitor to Chartist House and Mrs Unsworth said that he would sometimes call in on his patients unannounced when he happened to be in the building.
Mrs Unsworth remembers little about Mrs Arrowsmith, except that she could not go out much but was nevertheless very cheerful. Mrs Unsworth also remembers that Mrs Arrowsmith often used to boast that she could still touch her toes.
Both Mr Harvey Lomax and Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith visited Mrs Arrowsmith on Easter Monday, 23rd
April 1984, which was the day before she died. To neither did it seem that she was unwell. When Mr Harvey Lomax spoke to the police in January 1999, he said that he had a vague recollection that his grandmother told him that she was expecting Shipman the next day. By the time he came to make his statement to the Inquiry, he was quite positive that she told him that she was expecting Shipman the next day and that Shipman would come at about 11am. When he gave oral evidence, he said that he thought he had been a little too precise in mentioning a specific time but he repeated that his grandmother was expecting Shipman the next day. Shipman's personal visits book confirms that Shipman intended to visit Mrs Arrowsmith that day and suggests that she would have been his sixth visit of the day.
Mr Harvey Lomax said that when his grandmother was expecting a visitor, she would leave the door unlocked to save herself the trouble of answering the door.
The Day of the Death
There is no direct evidence of Mrs Arrowsmith's state of health on the morning of her death but there is some secondhand evidence that she bumped her head on the bedpost when she got up. This account was given to Detective Constable Denham by Mrs Maureen Best, a daughter of Mrs Arrowsmith, who spoke to her mother on the telephone that morning. There is some confirmation of this in that when Mr Harvey Lomax visited his grandmother's home a few days after her death, a neighbour told him that on the morning of the day of her death, Mrs Arrowsmith had complained of having a bad headache.
Between about 1.30pm and 2pm, Shipman telephoned the Lomax home and spoke to Mr Derek Lomax. He told him that Mrs Arrowsmith was dead. Mr Derek Lomax broke the news to his wife who was very distressed. Later in the afternoon, Mr Harvey Lomax returned from Manchester and was given the news. The news was passed to the other branch of the family. The death was wholly unexpected and came as a great shock to all who knew Mrs Arrowsmith. It appears that later in the day, Mrs Lomax obtained a full account of what was said to have happened, either from Shipman himself or possibly from Mrs Unsworth. The account was that Shipman had knocked on Mrs Arrowsmith's door but there was no reply. He had gone down to ask the warden whether Mrs Arrowsmith might have gone out. Mrs Unsworth said that Mrs Arrowsmith rarely, if ever, went out. They had both then gone up to the flat, where Mrs Unsworth had opened the door using her pass key. On entering the flat, they had discovered Mrs Arrowsmith sitting in her usual chair, fully clothed. She was dead.
Mrs Unsworth told the Inquiry that she had no recollection of Mrs Arrowsmith's death. She had a vague memory of a doctor coming to ask her to let him into a flat and finding a body. The doctor might have been Shipman. She said that, over the 30 years in which she had worked at Chartist House, she had been present at the discovery of a large number of deaths. In quite a number of those, the body had been found seated in a chair. Others had been found collapsed on the floor.
The Aftermath
On the day after the death, Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith, Mrs Best, Mrs Lomax and Mr Harvey Lomax went to the flat to tidy up. They found everything clean and tidy and Mrs Arrowsmith's bed had been made. They noticed that Mrs Arrowsmith had eaten lunch the day before. There were two empty tins on the kitchen unit. One had contained meat and the other vegetables. The dishes had been washed. Mrs Arrowsmith usually had lunch between midday and 12.30pm.
Mrs Arrowsmith was buried. There was no post-mortem examination and Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil is available and shows that the causes of death were given as coronary thrombosis, hypertension and myxoedema. On the counterfoil, Shipman noted that he had last seen Mrs Arrowsmith alive seven days before her death, on 17th
April 1984. No member of the family is able to say whether or not that was so. However, Shipman's visits book indicates that he visited Mrs Arrowsmith on Monday, 16th
April.
Shortly after the funeral, when the family went to the flat to deal with Mrs Arrowsmith's belongings, the lady who lived in the adjacent flat called and told them that, on the morning of her death, Mrs Arrowsmith had complained of a severe headache. When the neighbour had advised Mrs Arrowsmith that she should ask the doctor to give her something for it, she responded that, when her mother had done that, she had died. The meaning of that comment is unclear and I do not think I can accept it as reliable. If it were accurate, it would tend to suggest that Mrs Arrowsmith was not expecting Shipman to visit that day and I am satisfied that he was expected.
According to Mr Arrowsmith, about two months after the death, Mrs Lomax went to see Shipman to ask what had caused her mother's death. He now thinks that Shipman said it was a heart attack but he is sure only that Shipman said it was something to do with the heart. Shipman had also said that he had been surprised at the death as he thought 'she had been good for another ten years'.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville told the police that it would have been an extreme coincidence if Mrs Arrowsmith had coincidentally died a sudden and unexpected death on the day when she was expecting a visit from her doctor. Moreover, it would be unusual for a victim of a coronary thrombosis to have made no effort to summon help, unless, in the case of Mrs Arrowsmith, her arthritis had prevented her from so doing.
Dr Grenville told the Inquiry that, in the absence of medical records, it was difficult to form any view as to whether or not Mrs Arrowsmith was suffering from any heart condition which might have exposed her to an increased risk of suffering a sudden death from heart attack. The information provided by the family was that Mrs Arrowsmith had arthritis and swollen legs. Dr Grenville explained that the swollen legs could be a sign of congestive heart failure. However, swollen legs often occurred in the absence of that condition and were often due to inactivity, particularly in the elderly. Dr Grenville had noticed that Shipman always seemed to assume that swollen ankles were a sign of heart failure. The treatment for swollen ankles would be a diuretic, whatever the cause, and it appears likely that Mrs Arrowsmith was prescribed a diuretic, referred to by her grandson as 'water tablets'. The family had said that Mrs Arrowsmith's legs were kept bandaged, which would be appropriate treatment for varicose veins. Dr Grenville thought it highly likely that Mrs Arrowsmith's swollen ankles were due to vascular damage and immobility. Dr Grenville ruled out the possibility that Mrs Arrowsmith's underactive thyroid (myxoedema) would have caused the ankle swelling. This condition, when very severe, can give rise to a brawny swelling round the shins. This occurs only in very severe cases of hypothyroidism and it did not appear that Mrs Arrowsmith fell into that category.
Dr Grenville was unable to identify the medication described by Mr Harvey Lomax, although he thought that one of tablets sounded like Brufen, which would be appropriate treatment for Mrs Arrowsmith's arthritis.
Dr Grenville considered the possibility that Mrs Arrowsmith might have died as the result of the bump to her head sustained on the morning of the day of her death. Although he acknowledged that there was a theoretical possibility that she had developed a subdural haematoma, which had progressed to cause unconsciousness and then death, he thought this could be ruled out as a practical proposition. The sequence of events would have been that she would have experienced dizziness and vomiting as well as headache before she lapsed into unconsciousness. Not only is there no evidence that she experienced such symptoms, there is evidence from which I can infer that she did not. Had she been sick, I would have expected signs of it to be found. I would also have expected her to telephone a relative if she was feeling sick or dizzy.
Turning to the cause of death that Shipman certified, which was coronary thrombosis due to hypertension, Dr Grenville said that there was no evidence to confirm or refute the diagnosis of hypertension. However, he thought that the family would have known if Mrs Arrowsmith had been told that she had high blood pressure. He also thought that the family would have known if Mrs Arrowsmith had suffered the symptoms of ischaemic heart disease, such as chest pain.
Dr Grenville was of the view that if Shipman had found Mrs Arrowsmith dead, as he claimed to have done, he would not have been in a position to certify that the death was due to a heart attack. He could only have done so if someone who had been with Mrs Arrowsmith shortly before the death had given him a description suggestive of heart disease, such as crushing central chest pain or possibly chest pain associated with shortness of breath. There was no evidence that anyone had seen her before death.
Conclusion
In the absence of medical records, I cannot form a view about the seriousness of Mrs Arrowsmith's heart condition. As there are no cremation forms, I do not have Shipman's own account of the circumstances of the death. As Mrs Unsworth cannot remember the death, I have no account of Mrs Arrowsmith's appearance in death. I only know that she was said to have been found in her chair.
I accept as accurate the evidence of Mrs Maureen Arrowsmith and Mr Lomax that Mrs Arrowsmith appeared to be in her normal state of health on the day before her death. Normal health might not have been very good health and a sudden death was quite possible. I accept that on the day of her death, she was up and dressed, had made her bed and had prepared and eaten a hot lunch. She had washed up afterwards. I infer that Mrs Arrowsmith was still alive and still capable of walking about at 12.30pm or even 1pm. I accept that Shipman telephoned the Lomax house between 1.30pm and 2pm. It follows that Shipman's visit and Mrs Arrowsmith's death both occurred within a very short period, which I estimate at no more than an hour. Of course it is quite possible that Mrs Arrowsmith died a natural death in the short time between eating her lunch and Shipman's arrival. However, it would be an extreme coincidence if Mrs Arrowsmith were to have died a natural death within so short a time before Shipman's visit.
It would have been perfectly possible for Shipman to call on Mrs Arrowsmith at about 1pm. The door might have been left on the latch and he might have been able to walk in. She might have let him in. Even if Mrs Arrowsmith had no particular complaints, Shipman did not find it difficult to make an excuse to give an injection or, more likely, to take a blood sample. He could then have given her a lethal dose of diamorphine, by intravenous injection, which would have caused her to die within a few minutes. He could then have let himself out, locking the door behind him and have gone down to Mrs Unsworth to tell her that there was no reply at Mrs Arrowsmith's flat. He was to use a similar device on other occasions, in particular in the case of Miss Maureen Ward, of whose murder he was convicted. Mrs Unsworth would then accompany him, use her pass key and the body would be 'discovered'.
Knowing what I know of Shipman's later practices, I believe that this death was not natural but was the result of a lethal injection by Shipman. I am sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001