The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Brenda Ashworth
Introduction
Miss Brenda Ashworth died at her home, 30 Meadowfield Court, Hyde in June 1995 at the age of about 63. She had been a patient of Shipman since March 1991 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that her death occurred on Saturday, 17th
June 1995, although she probably died on the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Ms Diane Allen, a clinical psychology counsellor who had treated Miss Ashworth, contacted the police expressing concern over Miss Ashworth's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Leonard Vickers and his sister, Miss Rachel Mary Yates, who, at the time of Miss Ashworth's death, ran the post office in Flowery Field and were her closest friends and neighbours.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Miss Ashworth's death, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Dr Walter Ashworth (a distant relative of Miss Ashworth) and from his wife, Mrs Margaret Ashworth, as well as from Ms Allen and Detective Constable Clare Jane Morgan (née Whitehurst), the police officer who attended following the discovery of the death. Dr Ashworth was Shipman's general practitioner and he and his wife were friends of the Shipmans. They very rarely saw Miss Ashworth, however. Miss Ashworth's medical notes and records were recovered from inside a Kleenex tissue box found during a search of Shipman's home. The Inquiry has had access to the medical records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Ashworth lived alone and had no close family. Meadowfield Court is an elderly persons' complex, serviced by a mobile warden facility.
According to Ms Allen, Miss Ashworth was a tall, stout lady who suffered from arthritis, particularly in her left hip. At the time of her death, she was awaiting a hip replacement operation. She was referred to Ms Allen after she had been diagnosed as suffering from an obsessional thought disorder. She was depressed by her restricted mobility.
Miss Ashworth began a series of ten counselling sessions with Ms Allen on 13th
October 1994. The sessions took place at Miss Ashworth's house because of her mobility problems. On each occasion, Miss Ashworth appeared well presented, clean and tidy. There was no indication that her personal care had lapsed. Ms Allen last saw Miss Ashworth on 4th
May 1995, when she appeared well and seemed pleased at the news that she was going into hospital for her hip replacement.
Ms Allen was due to visit Miss Ashworth on 8th
June 1995. However, for some reason, which she cannot now recall, that meeting was cancelled.
On 15th June, it appears that Miss Ashworth telephoned the surgery to ask for a prescription. In the acute prescriptions book, there is an entry which says:
'Brenda Ashworth
Meadowfield
Chesty cough
bad cold
A/B please
N/A-
Also suffering from Asthma
as well at the moment'
.
This suggests that that Miss Ashworth telephoned to say that she had a chesty cough and bad cold and requested an antibiotic. She said she was also suffering from asthma. Her computerised medical records contain the following entry for that day:
'Acute bronchitis
augmentin'
.
There is no corresponding entry in the handwritten medical records, the appointments sheets or the practice visits book for that date. This suggests that Shipman agreed to prescribe Augmentin, an antibiotic, without seeing Miss Ashworth. Just below the entry relating to Miss Ashworth in the acute prescriptions book, but in different handwriting, is an entry which might relate to Miss Ashworth. It says:
'Urgent for 2.30 pm please'
.
It is possible that this means that she had telephoned to ask that her prescription should be ready by 2.30pm.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Friday, 16th
June 1995, Miss Ashworth telephoned Miss Yates to say that she felt unwell. She asked her to bring over some cigarettes, milk and a sandwich. Miss Yates arrived at Miss Ashworth's flat at around lunchtime with the shopping. She noticed that Miss Ashworth appeared to be 'a bit poorly with some chest problems', but she did not think that her condition was serious. Miss Yates advised Miss Ashworth to telephone her doctor if she felt any worse. She left. That was the last time she saw Miss Ashworth.
The visits book records a request for a visit on 16th
June and is endorsed with the remark:
'not slept all night - very chesty - asthmatic'
.
There is a computerised entry for 16th
June which reads:
'Seen in own home
Pneumonia and influenza
tluk review today'
.
In the manuscript records, the entry for this day says:
'chest infection green catarrh
pulse 40/m 100/60
HS I II
Chesty chest infection on
Amoxycillin
? CT
Chest - for ECG'
.
Thus, according to the computerised records, Shipman diagnosed pneumonia and influenza. Miss Ashworth was to let him know (
'tluk'
). What she was to let him know about is not clear. Shipman often used this expression and in some cases, where he killed the patient, later claimed that he had advised the patient to go to hospital and that they had refused. The patient was to let him know if they had a change of mind. It may be that this is what Shipman intended to suggest in Miss Ashworth's case. In any event, he claimed that he proposed to review her that day. The written records present a different picture. According to them, he found a slow pulse rate, low blood pressure and normal heart sounds, and diagnosed a chest infection and possible coronary thrombosis. He did not, in any event, take any active steps to treat either condition. According to Shipman's handwritten note, Miss Ashworth was already on amoxycillin, although he himself claimed to have prescribed Augmentin the day before. In any event, to leave a patient alone while suffering from pneumonia, with or without a suspected heart attack, does not seem appropriate treatment. All Shipman proposed was that he should take an electrocardiogram (ECG), presumably the following week. I note that there is no sign, in either record, of symptoms on which the diagnosis of pneumonia could have been properly based.
According to the visits book, Shipman was not due to visit Miss Ashworth on Saturday, 17th
June 1995, although he undoubtedly did attend. It appears that he found Miss Ashworth's body. He then contacted the police. Their records begin at 1.22pm that day. The initial report says:
'DOCTOR REQUIRING POLICE ASSISTANCE ... BRENDA ASHWORTH WHO IS THE DRS PATIENT HAS DIED AND HE HAS NO NEXT OF KIN TO CONTACT IS AT THE ADD. WITH THE BODY. DOCTOR WILL ISSUE CERTIFICATE'
.
In response to this request, at 1.30pm, DC Morgan attended Miss Ashworth's home. DC Morgan cannot now recall the specific details of this incident. However, her notebook contains the following entry, which was made no later that 3pm that day:
'1.30 - Attend 30
MEADOWFIELD CRT
BRENDA ASHWORTH
Found deceased
x dr SHIPMAN
21 MARKET ST, HYDE
her G.P. Death
cert. will be
issued. Traced
2nd
cousin
DR ASHWORTH who
attended. Also
Seville Ashworth
(brother)'
.
If, as seems likely, Shipman discovered the body, it is unclear how he gained access to the house, although Ms Allen recalls that, when she used to visit, the door was left on the latch for her. It may well be that that is how the door was left after Shipman's departure from the house on the day before the death was discovered.
Dr Ashworth has told the Inquiry that he never really knew Miss Ashworth and only saw her twice in 20 years. He recalls that he was in his surgery on the morning of 17th
June when he received a telephone call from the police and was told of Miss Ashworth's death. He went to her flat, where a policewoman met him. He thinks the curtains were drawn. He went in and saw Miss Ashworth sitting up in a wing-backed chair in the living room. A blanket had been placed over her head. He looked at her and thought to himself that she must have been dead for a 'few hours', because rigor mortis had started to set in. He thought it unusual that Miss Ashworth was sitting up in a chair. He had not seen many people who had died in such a position. Dr Ashworth recalls that Shipman appeared. He did not seem concerned at Dr Ashworth's presence and said that he had been treating Miss Ashworth for some time, although he did not say when he had last seen her alive.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia that had lasted three or four days. He said that smoking 60 cigarettes a day for more than ten years had been a contributory cause.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'About 8.00hrs'
on 17th
June 1995. He said that he had attended Miss Ashworth during her last illness for a period of two days. He had last seen her alive 18 hours before her death. He saw the body six hours after the death, when he made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was a coma of several hours' duration. When asked whether his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he did not answer the question but wrote:
'Found by neighbour dead.
SAT in ARMCHAIR TV on
Body temp Rigor mortis made her
dead about 0800hrs on the Saturday
17.6.95'
.
It seems to me highly likely that Shipman lied on Form B and that it was he who found the body on 17th
June rather than a neighbour. I think the police would have become aware of the fact if a neighbour had been involved. Shipman also made a false claim that the death occurred at about 8am. As Dr John Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, it is not possible for a general practitioner to estimate the time of death from body temperature or the presence of rigor mortis. Shipman frequently claimed that he could do so, and often used this supposed skill to create a distance between the alleged time of death and his departure from the house following the visit during which he killed the patient.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Miss Ashworth was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
First, it appears that Shipman was the last person to see Miss Ashworth alive. That in itself is a factor which always arouses strong suspicion. It is not clear from Shipman's records whether he visited Miss Ashworth once or twice on 16th
June and it is not clear at what time or times he visited. It appears that Miss Ashworth did not request a visit until about lunchtime. She had not done so when Miss Yates brought her shopping. Shipman might have visited in the afternoon before his afternoon surgery began. In the computerised records, he said that she had pneumonia and that he would review her again that day. He gave her no treatment. It is possible that he returned in the evening on his way home. In any event, there is no evidence that anyone other than Shipman saw Miss Ashworth alive or spoke to her after Miss Yates' departure.
It is not known at what time Miss Ashworth died. Shipman sought to suggest that she had died at about 8am, after being in a coma for
'several hours'
. How he was supposed to know either of these things is not clear. As no one except Shipman had seen Miss Ashworth since lunchtime on 16th
June, the claim that she had been in a coma for several hours was, at best, supposition. In any event, there was no basis on which he could have made an honest assessment of the time of death. I find it suspicious that he should wish to pretend that he knew what time she had died. I suspect that he was seeking to create a substantial period of time between his last visit and the supposed time of death. I suspect that she died in the afternoon or early evening of 16th
June.
Even if she had died at 8am on 17th
June, it does not appear likely to me that Miss Ashworth could have died of bronchopneumonia and certainly not of three to four days' duration, as Shipman claimed on the MCCD. There can be no doubt that Miss Ashworth had a chest infection, which by 15th June was bad enough to cause her to ask Shipman for an antibiotic. When Miss Yates last saw Miss Ashworth, she appeared to be 'a bit poorly with some chest problems'. Miss Yates did not think that Miss Ashworth's condition was serious. She had asked Miss Yates to bring her a sandwich. Dr Grenville told the Inquiry that bronchopneumonia does not usually cause a very sudden death. The illness usually develops over a period of several days, during which the patient deteriorates gradually. He says that, if a patient were going to die of pneumonia, it would be evident to someone who had seen the patient the day before death that they were seriously unwell. Thus, Miss Ashworth's appearance, as witnessed by Miss Yates, and her wish to have some food brought in are inconsistent with a death from bronchopneumonia the next day. Miss Ashworth was not sufficiently ill at lunchtime on 16th
June for it to be likely that she would die from bronchopneumonia at 8am the next day.
I also find it suspicious that Miss Ashworth was found sitting upright in her chair, wearing her day clothes. If her illness had come on gradually, as would be the case with bronchopneumonia, she would almost certainly have gone to bed, where she would be warm and comfortable. Shipman seems to be suggesting that Miss Ashworth must have sat fully dressed in her chair for some hours while she became ill and that she then fell into a coma and eventually died. That does not make sense. On the other hand, Miss Ashworth's appearance in death was entirely consistent with death by a fatal dose of diamorphine. Dr Ashworth, her distant relative, noticed her unusual appearance.
The computerised notes and the Lloyd George cards are inconsistent. The computerised records reveal a diagnosis of pneumonia and influenza, but the handwritten records give a diagnosis of a chest infection and a possible coronary thrombosis. If Miss Ashworth was suffering from pneumonia, she should not have been left alone. She should have been admitted to hospital. If she had refused, the fact should have been noted and arrangements should have been made for some care or supervision at home, probably by the district nurse. Whenever Shipman's records suggest that his actions were not those of a reasonably sensible, competent doctor, I suspect that they do not present a true picture of events. I suspect that in this case.
Shipman's conduct in returning to the scene to 'discover' the body is entirely typical of many cases in which he killed. Shipman would often leave the body of a patient to be found by neighbours or relatives, but if the body was not found within a reasonable time he would return and 'find' it himself. Why he did this is not clear. It may have been in order to avoid the risk that another doctor would be summoned, the police involved and the case referred to the coroner before he had the chance to say that he would certify the cause of death. In this case, it appears that he went to 'find' the body before going home for the weekend.
The several factors that I have mentioned all point to the conclusion that Shipman killed Miss Ashworth. He was the last person to see her alive. The medical records are suspicious. Shipman told lies on cremation Form B. Death from bronchopneumonia does not fit the known facts. Her appearance in death was typical of Shipman's victims. Miss Ashworth probably was at an increased risk of suffering a cardiac death. It is possible that she died of a heart attack or stroke. However, it would be something of a coincidence if Miss Ashworth succumbed to a sudden death between two visits by Shipman.
The overwhelming likelihood in this case is that Shipman killed Miss Ashworth, almost certainly by a lethal injection of diamorphine. I believe I can safely discount the possibility of a natural death. My conclusion is that I am sure that he killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001