The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Acton
Introduction
Mrs Lily Acton was found dead at her home, 34b Harbour Farm Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 24th
December 1980 at the age of 91. It is not known whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman or one of the other doctors at the Donneybrook Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Colin Critchlow, Mrs Acton's great-nephew, who was the informant who registered her death. The Inquiry has taken two statements from Mr Critchlow. Mrs Acton's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for the year 1980, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate').
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Acton was a widow and lived alone in a ground floor flat on Harbour Farm Road. According to Mr Critchlow, she was in reasonable health and able to carry out her own housework and cook her own meals. She was, however, a nervous person and rarely left the house. Mr Critchlow's mother, Mrs Mary Alice Critchlow, who has since died, used to visit Mrs Acton almost every day and did her shopping for her. Mrs Elsie Curry lived opposite Mrs Acton and the two women were good friends. They met most evenings to watch television together at Mrs Curry's house. Mrs Curry is now about 92 and is unwilling to provide a statement for the Inquiry. However, she has given some information to Mr Critchlow, who has passed it on to the Inquiry.
Mr Critchlow says that Mrs Acton was very security conscious and that, whenever he visited, the door was always locked and the security chain in place. Mrs Curry says that there was a Yale lock and confirms that there was also a security chain.
Mr Critchlow last saw his great-aunt alive about a week before she died and remembers her sitting in an armchair in her lounge. She was, as usual, nervous but did not appear to be ill.
Mr Critchlow recalls that, a few weeks before she died, Mrs Acton suffered a fall in the flat and sustained a cut to one of her shins. Mrs Critchlow urged Mrs Acton to see a doctor, but she did not like doctors and she refused. Mrs Curry bandaged her leg.
On Saturday, 20th
December, it appears that Shipman visited Mrs Acton. Her name and address appear in his visits book. As is usual, the visits book does not give any indication of why the visit was made. However, as this was the second visit recorded in the book, I infer that a request for a visit had been made, probably on that day. Shipman also appears to have visited Mrs Acton on Tuesday, 23rd
December, as her name and address appear again.
The Death
Mrs Curry has recently told Mr Critchlow that, on Tuesday, 23rd
December, his mother offered to spend the night at Mrs Acton's house. He assumes that his mother considered that Mrs Acton ought not to be alone but he does not know of any particular reason why she made this offer on that day. I can only infer that Mrs Critchlow was concerned about Mrs Acton and that the reason for her concern was likely to be connected with the reasons for Shipman's visit on that day and on the previous Saturday. In any event, Mrs Acton declined the offer of overnight company. She also refused to let Mrs Critchlow have a key to her flat. I infer that Mrs Critchlow foresaw that she might need to gain access to the flat at a time when Mrs Acton could not let her in.
Mrs Curry told Mr Critchlow that she had also asked Mrs Acton for a key on 23rd
December and Mrs Acton refused her as well. Mrs Acton told Mrs Curry that the doctor had been to visit and that he 'would not let her get past'. Mrs Curry did not understand what that meant. During Mrs Curry's visit on 23rd
December, Mrs Acton was apparently very agitated and angry and was swearing, which was quite out of character for her.
At about 10am on 24th
December, Mrs Critchlow telephoned her son and asked him to come to Mrs Acton's flat. She said she had rung the bell at Mrs Acton's door but there was no reply. By the time Mr Critchlow arrived, about half an hour later, the police had arrived and had broken into the flat. Mrs Curry has recently told Mr Critchlow that the police broke a pane of glass in the door and reached in to unlock the door and remove the chain. When the door was opened, Mrs Acton was found dead, lying on the floor in the hallway and appeared to have been trying to reach the door.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 24th
December, stating that he last saw Mrs Acton alive on 22nd
December, that he had seen the body after the death and that a post-mortem examination would not be held. The cause of death was given as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. It appears that Shipman was wrong in saying that he had last seen Mrs Acton alive on 22nd
December. Whether he made a mistake or whether he deliberately wished to conceal the fact that he had seen Mrs Acton on 23rd
December, I cannot say.
Conclusion
Very little is known about the circumstances of Mrs Acton's death. It is not even known whether she died on 24th
December, as stated on her death certificate, or in the evening of 23rd
December.
In the absence of any medical records it is not possible to discover whether she was suffering from ischaemic heart disease. Although it appeared to Mr Critchlow that his great-aunt was in reasonable health for her age, it is likely that, at 91, she was at some risk of suffering a heart attack. It would appear that, on 23rd
December, there were special reasons for concern about Mrs Acton's health. What they were is not clear.
Shipman probably saw Mrs Acton on 23rd
December. The purpose of the visit is not known. However, it appears from Mrs Curry's evidence that Mrs Acton was alive and walking about after Shipman's visit that day. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay has explained that a lethal dose of opiate administered intravenously will kill within a few minutes and if given intramuscularly will kill within about an hour. Within a short time of such an injection the patient would feel drowsy and possibly sick and anyone watching would realise that something was seriously wrong. Although Mrs Acton appeared angry and agitated on 23rd
December, her condition did not indicate that she had been given an opiate. The time of Mrs Curry's visit to Mrs Acton is not known but it is unlikely to have been within a short time of Shipman's visit. It is possible, but seems highly unlikely, that Shipman administered a lethal dose of opiate during his visit on 23rd
December.
In any event, as the security chain on the front door was found to be in place on 24th
December, Mrs Acton must have been in a position to apply the chain either after she had entered the flat for the last time or, alternatively, after seeing her last visitor to the door. If that visitor was Shipman, he could not have given her a lethal dose of opiate intravenously. That leaves open the possibility that he administered a lethal dose of opiate intramuscularly. However, in all the circumstances, that appears very unlikely.
The position in which Mrs Acton was found is consistent with her having suffered a fatal heart attack. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville said that a patient suffering a fatal heart attack usually has a short time in which he or she realises that something terrible is happening and often tries to seek help. Mrs Acton may have wished to attract attention by going outside. Mr Critchlow says that her position was consistent with an attempt to reach the door.
Although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman gave Mrs Acton an intramuscular injection of a lethal dose of opiate shortly before she spoke to Mrs Curry on 23rd
December, I think that Mrs Acton probably died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001