The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Arrandale
Introduction
Mr Albert Arrandale died at his home, 5 Peveril Terrace, Hyde on either Monday, 11th
May or Tuesday, 12th
May 1981 at the age of 77. He was a patient of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis peritonei due to carcinoma of the sigmoid colon.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, seeking information about a large number of cases in respect of which the Inquiry had only very limited information about the circumstances of the death. In response, Mr John Arrandale, Mr Arrandale's nephew, contacted the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr John Arrandale and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Arrandale's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Arrandale never married and lived alone. He remained active following his retirement, although a few years before his death he was admitted to hospital with suspected duodenal ulcers.
Mr Arrandale met his nephew in Hyde a few weeks before his death and told him that he had severe stomach pains, about which he intended to see Shipman. A few days later, he told his nephew that Shipman had referred him to Tameside General Hospital for investigations. Mr John Arrandale went to the hospital with his uncle. He was detained overnight and then advised to have surgery. Following that, Mr John Arrandale was advised that his uncle had advanced bowel cancer and that his life expectancy was as little as six to eight weeks. The following day, Mr Arrandale was discharged from hospital, and Mr John Arrandale was given a prescription for morphine tablets to relieve his uncle's pain. He remembers that his uncle took the tablets, which did in fact help to reduce his pain.
On the day that Mr Arrandale was discharged from hospital, his nephew telephoned Shipman and asked him to call at the house. The visits book indicates that Shipman probably made his first visit on 30th
April 1981. Shipman examined Mr Arrandale and told him that he had a type of dysentery. He said he would not be able to do anything to help him.
There are further entries in Shipman's visits book dated 6th
May and 8th
May 1981.
The Events of 11th
May 1981
Mr John Arrandale recalls that Shipman visited his uncle during the early afternoon of 11th
May. He thinks that the visit was unannounced and Mr Arrandale's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day. Shipman examined Mr Arrandale while his nephew went to fetch a glass of water. When he returned, Shipman appeared to have completed his examination and he said that Mr Arrandale would now 'quieten down'. When Shipman had gone, Mr Arrandale told his nephew that Shipman had given him an injection, which had been very painful. Soon afterwards, Mr Arrandale became drowsy and went to sleep. At some point, Mr John Arrandale's sister joined him at the house, and then at about 2.30pm he left and went home.
Mr John Arrandale returned to his uncle's house at about 6pm and found his uncle resting on a settee watching television. He made him a cup of tea and then left. He returned again between 9pm and 9.30pm. Mr John Arrandale's sister was also at the house. Mr Arrandale appeared to be drowsy and asked to be helped into bed. When in bed, Mr Arrandale said that he was cold, and asked that the bedclothes be tucked right up to his neck. When Mr John Arrandale put a glass of water on his bedside table, Mr Arrandale said that he might drink it or he might not be there in the morning. When Mr John Arrandale said that he should not talk about dying, his uncle replied, 'I've had it, I won't see morning.' Mr John Arrandale remembers looking at his watch as he left the house at 9.57pm.
The Events of 12th
May 1981
Mr John Arrandale told his sister not to go to Mr Arrandale's house alone on the morning of 12th
May, as he 'was sure that something was going to happen'. Despite this advice, she did go to the house and found her uncle dead, lying in bed. She told her brother who went to the house and confirmed that their uncle was dead. He then telephoned Shipman, who arrived shortly afterwards. He felt Mr Arrandale's head and knees, and then said that he had died at 10pm the night before. Mr John Arrandale thought that this was not possible, but did not say so to Shipman.
Mr Arrandale's name and address appear in Shipman's visits book for 12th
May 1981, together with the word:
'Died'
.
Certification
The MCCD has not been recovered, but the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman stated that the death occurred on 12th
May 1981. He said that he had last seen Mr Arrandale alive on 8th
May 1981. He also said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 12th
May 1981. Mr Arrandale was buried and there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Arrandale died a natural death. He was clearly very unwell and had been advised that he had not long to live. He was in considerable pain and was taking morphine tablets, but these did not control his pain completely. It was therefore appropriate for Shipman to give Mr Arrandale an injection on the afternoon of 11th
May. That was almost certainly morphine or diamorphine. It relieved his pain for a time and he was able to sleep. However, as he awoke from that sleep, the injection cannot have directly caused his death. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given the Inquiry information about the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiate is administered intravenously, death follows within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a fatal injection of opiate will cause death within about an hour. Mr Arrandale was still alive shortly before 10pm, when his nephew left the house on 11th
May, about eight hours after Shipman had administered the injection. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mr Arrandale after his nephew had left him in bed that evening and no possibility that he gave another injection late that night. When his nephew left, Mr Arrandale was very unwell and seems to have sensed that he was about to die. It appears that he died without leaving his bed.
According to Mr John Arrandale, Shipman claimed that he was able to pinpoint the time of Mr Arrandale's death and said it had occurred at 10pm. Dr Grenville has explained that it would not be possible for Shipman to make an accurate assessment. However, Shipman quite often pretended that he could do this, possibly out of conceit. In any event, having declared that Mr Arrandale died at 10pm on 11th
May, he stated on the MCCD counterfoil that he had died on 12th
May. As no one really knows at what time Mr Arrandale died, his death was properly registered as having occurred on 12th
May, the day when the death was discovered.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001