The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ellen Ashton
Introduction
Mrs Ellen Ashton died at Hazeldene, a residential home for the elderly, Beaufort Close, Hattersley, Hyde on Thursday, 10th
August 1978 at the age of 81. It is not clear whether, or for how long, Mrs Ashton was a patient of Shipman. At the time of her death, Shipman had been practising in Hyde for ten months. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia due to congestive heart failure.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Ashton's nephew, Mr Noel Sowter, and has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). No other contemporaneous documentation is available. In particular, the medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ashton was a widow and lived alone in her own home until a few days before her death. She was physically fit, although she had suffered from tuberculosis when younger. She walked with a stick. Mr Sowter helped with errands and she was visited regularly by a home help.
Two or three days before the death, one of Mrs Ashton's neighbours telephoned Mr Sowter to advise him that he should visit his aunt. When he arrived at her house, he found that she was having difficulty in breathing, apparently due to influenza. It appears that someone had decided that she should be admitted to Hazeldene and Mr Sowter went there with her and stayed to see that she was settled. When he left her that night, she was still quite poorly.
Mr Sowter visited the next afternoon and was told that a doctor had visited her that morning. No doctor visited during the two hours that Mr Sowter stayed and he was not told that any further visit was expected. His aunt's condition was very poor. She had not eaten properly, although he was able to feed her a little ice cream.
The Day of the Death
On 10th
August 1978, probably at some time in the morning, a member of staff at Hazeldene telephoned Mr Sowter to say that his aunt had died. He was not surprised. He knew that, in an elderly person, a chest infection could lead to bronchopneumonia.
Certification
Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Ashton's death was bronchopneumonia due to congestive heart failure. On the MCCD counterfoil, he confirmed that she had died at Hazeldene on 10th
August 1978 at the age of 81. He said that he had last seen her on 9th
August 1978, the day before she died, and this is consistent with the recollection of Mr Sowter. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. He completed the counterfoil on the day of the death, probably when he was called out to establish the fact of death.
Conclusion
I think it is highly likely that Mrs Ashton died from natural causes, almost certainly of the cause certified by Shipman.
From the history recounted by Mr Sowter, it would appear that Mrs Ashton developed a chest infection, which developed into bronchopneumonia. She became very poorly and obviously could not manage in her own home. Following her admission to Hazeldene, she appears to have declined steadily towards death. This is typical of the course of bronchopneumonia, as described by Dr John Grenville in his generic evidence to the Inquiry. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no reason to suspect that Shipman did anything to cause or hasten Mrs Ashton's death. It appears that the last time he saw her was probably during the morning or at lunchtime on the day before she died. Mr Sowter visited after the doctor had been that day and, although Mrs Ashton was unwell during his two hour visit, she was obviously conscious. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman administered any type of drug that might have hastened Mrs Ashton's death during that visit. No mention was made to Mr Sowter of a further intended visit from the doctor. However, it is possible that Shipman saw her later that day or on the morning of 10th
August and for that reason I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that he was involved in her death. It would be most surprising if Shipman had killed a new resident in a residential home, with whose staff he cannot have been very familiar, only months after his arrival in Hyde.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001