The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Norman Adshead
Introduction
Mr Norman Adshead died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 5th
December 1979 at the age of 84. It is not known whether, or for how long, he had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was diffuse cerebrovascular disease.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Adshead's daughter, who was the informant named on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1979. No other contemporaneous documentation survives.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Adshead was a retired master tailor. In May 1978, Mr Adshead suffered a stroke, which left him with a weakness on one side of the body. At that time he was living in Kent but after the stroke moved into a local residential home. However, he was unhappy there and moved to Bowlacre in Hyde so as to be near his daughter.
About four weeks before his death, Mr Adshead was admitted to hospital. His daughter is not sure why he was admitted although she recalls that he was suffering from sickness and diarrhoea. Two weeks later he returned to Bowlacre. When Mr Adshead's daughter visited him on Saturday, 1st
December 1979, she found that his condition had deteriorated significantly. On Tuesday, 4th
December, the staff at Bowlacre telephoned her to say that he was very unwell. She visited him that afternoon and stayed until about teatime. He was in a coma. Shipman did not visit while she was there and she does not remember any member of staff mentioning that Shipman had visited or that he was expected to visit.
Mr Adshead's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for any day during the week before the death. The book suggests that Shipman was on holiday from Thursday, 29th
November until Wednesday, 5th
December inclusive, except that he was due to work on Saturday, 1st
December. It appears that, although he was away from the surgery for most of that week, he probably remained in or around Hyde.
The Day of the Death
At about 7am on Wednesday, 5th
December 1979, Mr Adshead's daughter received a message to say that her father had died in the night at about 1am. She was not surprised. She does not recall that any member of staff told her that Shipman had visited her father since her recent visit.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Adshead died of cerebrovascular disease on 5th
December 1979. Diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mr Adshead alive on 29th
November. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
There is no cremation documentation.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Adshead died as the result of natural causes.
The evidence shows that Mr Adshead's health deteriorated gradually before his death and he was in a coma when his daughter visited on 4th
December. His death during the following night was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr Adshead shortly before his death. It appears that Shipman was probably not working for several days before the death and it seems most unlikely that he would have visited Bowlacre late at night, especially while on holiday.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001