The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Clara Ethel Aveyard
Introduction
Mrs Clara Ethel Aveyard died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 12th
April 1980 at the age of 90. She was a patient of Shipman who certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The Inquiry has made contact with Mr Frank Aveyard, Mrs Aveyard's son. He is now in his eighties and he has expressed no concern about the death. No statement has been taken from him. The Inquiry has, however, taken a statement from Mrs Winifred Lanceley, the former owner of Charnley House. The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the Charnley House daily diaries and admission and discharge register. Mrs Aveyard's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mrs Aveyard was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Oldham on 30th
August 1979, seven and a half months before she died. It is likely that she registered as a patient of Shipman shortly after her admission.
Very little is known about Mrs Aveyard's background. Mrs Lanceley has no recollection of her, although she has seen and commented upon a number of entries in the daily diary which relate to Mrs Aveyard. It would seem from the daily diary that Mrs Aveyard was frail and very confused.
The first relevant entry in the daily diary is contained within the night report for Thursday, 10th
April. Mrs Aveyard's breathing was noted to be poor. The morning report for Friday, 11th
April records that she was returned to bed at lunchtime. She was to see Shipman. The staff were to encourage her to take fluids. A later entry for the same day records that Shipman saw Mrs Aveyard and diagnosed
'bronchial pneumonia'
for which he left a prescription. At the foot of the entry it is recorded that
'Dr. Shipman will call Sat'
.
The afternoon report for that day records:
'no change in condition, boiled
water + sugar given in place of meals
NO MILKY FLUIDS TO BE GIVEN.
Relatives informed, aware of her condition'
.
This suggests that Mrs Aveyard's condition was very serious and that Shipman had promised to call again the following day.
The morning entry for Saturday, 12th
April records as follows:
'Mrs Aveyard passed away 10AM...
Mrs Hawkins seen by Dr Shipman eating well'
.
Mrs Lanceley interprets that entry to suggest that Mrs Aveyard died before Shipman visited Charnley House to see Mrs Hawkins. On that basis, she concluded that Shipman did not see Mrs Aveyard alive on the day of her death. She says that, if Shipman had visited Mrs Aveyard before 10am, she would have noted this visit in the daily diary and the entry would have appeared in the daily diary before the entry recording Mrs Aveyard's death. She says that a doctor would not visit Charnley House before 10am. Usually a doctor would see residents at Charnley House some time between 11.30am and midday, after morning surgery. Mrs Lanceley says that when Mrs Aveyard died, she would have telephoned the surgery to inform Shipman of the death, even though he might have been due to visit Charnley House in any event. She cannot explain why there is no record in the daily diary that Shipman certified that Mrs Aveyard had died. Finally, Mrs Lanceley says that if a doctor visited Mrs Aveyard before she died at 10am, the visit would have been arranged by the night staff and, as that request would probably have occurred outside surgery hours, it is likely that a deputising doctor would have attended.
Notwithstanding that evidence, it seems to me that the fact that Mrs Aveyard's death appears in the morning report before the entry relating to Shipman's visit, does not necessarily mean that the events occurred in that sequence. According to the generic evidence of Mrs Lanceley and other members of staff at Charnley House, a shift report was usually written at the end of the shift. Therefore, the daily diary is not strictly contemporaneous and events would not necessarily be entered in strict chronological order. They may have been entered in the order in which they came to the mind of the author or the perceived importance of events.
The possibility that Shipman saw Mrs Aveyard alive on the day of her death cannot be ruled out. The fact that it is not recorded in the daily diary that Shipman saw Mrs Aveyard whilst she was alive does not mean that he did not in fact see her. His visit may not have come to the attention of the member of staff who completed the shift report. Alternatively, it is possible that the member of staff did observe Shipman visiting Mrs Aveyard but forgot to make an entry in the daily diary. That this can happen is demonstrated by the absence of an entry recording that Shipman certified the fact of Mrs Aveyard's death.
Moreover, the fact that Mrs Aveyard died at 10am does not rule out Shipman's involvement. We know from an application made by Shipman in January 1990 that, at that time, his Saturday surgery ran from 8.45am to 10am. There is no evidence to suggest that the surgery times substantially altered during Shipman's time at the Donneybrook Surgery and it is likely that his Saturday surgery ran between those hours in 1980, when Mrs Aveyard died. If Shipman had fewer patients than usual on Saturday, 12th
April 1980, he could well have been at Charnley House by 10am.
Finally, in order to arrive before 10am, Shipman would not have to have been summoned by the night staff. He visited Mrs Aveyard the day before and promised to call the following day, the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman certified that Mrs Aveyard died of bronchopneumonia on 12th
April. He stated that he had last seen her alive on 11th
April. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 12th
April 1980.
Conclusion
Mrs Aveyard had difficulty in breathing on 10th
April. On 11th
April, Shipman diagnosed
'bronchial pneumonia'
. Mrs Aveyard could not eat that day and took only fluids. She was put to bed at lunchtime. Her relatives were informed of her condition. It was the practice of the staff to inform relatives if a resident's condition gave cause for serious concern. Mrs Aveyard's death on 12th
April could not be regarded as sudden or unexpected.
There is no positive evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Aveyard alive on the morning of 12th
April. Such evidence as there is suggests that he did not, but that evidence is far from conclusive. Whenever it is possible that Shipman had access to a patient shortly before the death, I feel bound to consider whether he might have been involved in the death.
In this case, there is some cause for suspicion because we know that Shipman was at Charnley House during the morning of 12th
April 1980 and it is possible that he arrived before Mrs Aveyard died. Mrs Lanceley does not specifically recall the events surrounding Mrs Aveyard's death and has sought to assist the Inquiry by drawing inferences from the daily diaries. Although she is of the view that Shipman could not have attended before Mrs Aveyard died and so could not have been in a position to kill her, I cannot dismiss the possibility that he did so.
So long as that remains a possibility, the Inquiry cannot be sure that Shipman played no part in the death. It is likely, however, that Mrs Aveyard died of natural causes and not as the result of an unlawful act on Shipman's part.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001