The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Ashworth
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Ashworth (known as Cissie) died at her home, 38 Peel Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 26th
August 1981 at the age of 81. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Gladys Driver (Mrs Ashworth's sister-in-law) and from Mrs Beryl Lancaster (Mrs Driver's daughter). The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and to Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mrs Ashworth's medical records have not survived.
The police did not investigate Mrs Ashworth's death and there has been no inquest.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Ashworth was a widow who lived alone for several years before her death. Mrs Driver and Mrs Lancaster are unaware that Mrs Ashworth had any health problems but they recall that she was a heavy smoker. She was independent. She did her own cooking and housework and used to enjoy pottering in her garden.
The Day of the Death
During the afternoon of 26th
August 1981, one of Mrs Ashworth's neighbours went to Mrs Driver's house to tell her that Mrs Ashworth had been taken ill while working in her garden. Mrs Driver and her husband called the doctor and went straight to Mrs Ashworth's house. They found Mrs Ashworth sitting indoors in a chair. She did not seem to be seriously ill. Mrs Driver cannot recall whether Mrs Ashworth was able to speak to them.
Shipman arrived and gave Mrs Ashworth an injection in her arm. Mrs Driver does not know what the injection was. She recalls asking Shipman whether she should put Mrs Ashworth to bed, but he said that she should be left in her chair as she would not 'last long'. Shipman said he would call again later.
Some time later, although Mrs Driver cannot say exactly how long, Shipman returned. Mrs Driver thinks that she had had her tea at Mrs Ashworth's house and that about two hours must have passed since Shipman's first visit. She recalls him asking, 'Is she still here?' Mrs Ashworth was still sitting in the chair and Mrs Driver recalls that she and her husband then realised that Mrs Ashworth had died. She says that she does not know how she and her husband had failed to realise this before.
Mrs Lancaster learned about the circumstances of her aunt's death from her mother and father. She recalls being told that somebody came to her parents' house saying that Mrs Ashworth had collapsed in her garden. They had gone to Mrs Ashworth's house and sent for the doctor. Mrs Lancaster recalls being told that the doctor had given Mrs Ashworth an injection and had said that she would not last long.
The visits book contains a reference to a visit to Mrs Ashworth on the day of her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Ashworth alive on the day of her death. He gave the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident. He said he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Ashworth was buried so there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has provided a brief note in response to my request as to whether he could think of any drug that Shipman might properly have injected into Mrs Ashworth, if he believed she had suffered a cerebrovascular accident. He says that, in the early 1980s, some doctors believed that steroids could reduce brain swelling following a stroke. Steroids are still used today but not in the acute stage immediately after the stroke. However, Dr Esmail says that it would have been highly unusual for Shipman to do this. If he had given a steroid injection, he ought also to have sent Mrs Ashworth to hospital.
Dr Esmail has also advised that it would be difficult for a patient who had suffered a massive stroke to remain sitting in a chair unless the chair provided very good support.
Conclusion
As a heavy smoker, Mrs Ashworth was at increased risk of cerebrovascular accident. It also appears that she was taken ill while working in her garden on the day of her death. It is possible that she had suffered a stroke that afternoon, from which she died naturally a few hours later. However, when Mr and Mrs Driver arrived, Mrs Ashworth did not appear to be seriously ill.
There are reasons to suspect that the death might have been caused by Shipman. The death occurred not long after a visit by Shipman during which he gave Mrs Ashworth an injection. It would not be usual to treat a stroke patient with any injected drug. The usual treatment is to watch and wait. I think it highly unlikely that Shipman gave Mrs Ashworth a steroid drug to reduce brain swelling. He would not have had it with him in his bag. Accordingly, I strongly suspect that the drug was an opiate. I am also suspicious because Shipman seemed to anticipate that Mrs Ashworth would die, rather than survive. Most stroke patients survive and recover to a variable extent. I strongly suspect that Shipman gave an injection which ensured that Mrs Ashworth would die. There is a possibility that he gave an injection for genuine therapeutic reasons but I regard that as most unlikely.
There is some uncertainty about the time of Mrs Ashworth's death. Mrs Driver thinks that Shipman returned to the house about two hours after he had given the injection, although I think she is not sure of how long had elapsed. I am puzzled by her evidence that it was not until Shipman returned that she and her husband realised that Mrs Ashworth had died. It seems quite possible that she had been dead for some time and they had not noticed. Shipman's question, 'Is she still here?', suggests that he expected Mrs Ashworth to be dead.
That Mrs Ashworth remained sitting in her chair suggests that she had not had a stroke. Dr Esmail says that a stroke patient would tend to slump or fall unless very well supported. On the other hand, many of Shipman's victims were found sitting peacefully in a chair.
Although there are some unexplained features of the evidence in this case, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed Mrs Ashworth with a lethal injection of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001