The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Andrew
Introduction
Mr Joseph Andrew died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Sunday, 17th
November 1991 at the age of 84. He had been registered as a patient of Shipman since August 1979, almost two years after Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Andrew's death was cerebroarteriosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Linda Swindells, a former employee at Hyde Nursing Home. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Andrew's computerised and handwritten general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1981, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and various documents from Hyde Nursing Home.
The Inquiry has been in contact with Mrs Kathleen Johnson, Mr Andrew's daughter, who said that she had no suspicions or concerns about the circumstances of her father's death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Andrew had a history of cardiac problems and, in 1987, had a pacemaker fitted at Wythenshawe Hospital.
In February 1991, he was admitted to Tameside General Hospital following a transient ischaemic attack. He was discharged two weeks later on 1st
March 1991. He was admitted again on 26th
September 1991, when his condition was found to have deteriorated. He was becoming increasingly confused and had recently suffered an epileptic attack with convulsions.
On 23rd
October 1991, Mr Andrew was transferred from Tameside General Hospital to Hyde Nursing Home. Mrs Swindells remembers Mr Andrew but cannot recall the circumstances of his death. She remembers that he was 'very poorly' and had not been a patient at Hyde Nursing Home for very long before he died.
The Events Leading up to Death
According to an entry in the handwritten medical records, Mr Andrew's condition deteriorated on 5th
November 1991. The entry, in handwriting that is not Shipman's, reads:
'V
(
visit
)
Deteriorating. More drowsy and
confused. Very chesty.
Apyrexial. No new neuro signs.
RBS = 9. BP 140/80 HS heard.
Agitation typical of cerebral
anoxia. Not periph cyanosed.
JVP
imp = chest infection.
Prev
(
illegible
)
good therefore worth treating'
.
This entry suggests that a doctor visited Mr Andrew and found him drowsy and confused. He was chesty but did not have a temperature. There were no new neurological signs. Blood pressure was normal and heart sounds were heard. There was agitation, typical of that caused by a lack of oxygen reaching the brain. He did not show signs of lack of oxygen in the hands and feet. The jugular venous pressure was reduced. The doctor's impression was that Mr Andrew had a chest infection. I think the recommendation was that, as Mr Andrew's previous response had been good, his infection should be treated. What the treatment was to be, and whether treatment was ever instituted, is not clear.
An entry in the computerised medical records, dated 8th
November 1991, records that Mr Andrew was dying and that he should be given
'TLC'
(
tender loving care
). I assume that record reflects Shipman's view of the situation: it appears that he did not agree with the other doctor and decided that Mr Andrew's infection was not to be treated. On 10th
November, several repeat prescriptions were issued. A later entry, dated 11th
November 1991, also records that Mr Andrew was dying and that there should be no change in his treatment. According to the computerised records, Mr Andrew was seen on 13th
and 15th
November. These entries suggest that he was in hospital. I think this is probably misleading, as it seems unlikely that Mr Andrew was moved from Hyde Nursing Home at this late stage. Mrs Swindells says that the policy at Hyde Nursing Home was not to transfer terminally ill patients to hospital but to allow them to die at the nursing home. On 13th
November, Mr Andrew was said to be conscious, and on 15th
November, it was noted that he was dehydrated. There is no entry in the medical records for 16th
November.
The medical records suggest that Mr Andrew died at 1.40pm on 17th
November 1991. That entry is almost certainly wrong because the attendance docket from the deputising doctor, Dr Osei, records that he attended at the nursing home at 3am on 17th
November 1991, and found that Mr Andrew had died. Although the handwriting is difficult to decipher, the time of death is recorded as either 01.10 hours or 01.40 hours (1.10am and 1.40am). It would appear that someone at the surgery misunderstood Dr Osei and noted that the death had occurred at 1.40pm. The notification of death form, completed by the staff at the home, records that the death occurred at 1.10am.
Mr Andrew's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on 16th
or 17th
November. The duty doctor transfer diary demonstrates that Dr Ian Napier was the Donneybrook doctor on duty for the weekend of 16th
and 17th
November.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Andrew alive on 16th
November 1991. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was cerebroarteriosclerosis. The counterfoil is dated 18th
November 1991.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mr Andrew had died at
'1340'
on 17th
November 1991. That is probably incorrect as explained above, but does not give rise to any cause for concern. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Andrew for six months during his last illness. He said he had last seen Mr Andrew alive 24 hours before death and that he had seen the body 18 hours after death. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting ten days. That entry is inconsistent with the entry in the medical records, which suggests that he was conscious on 13th
November. Mrs Swindells cannot recall whether Mr Andrew was in a coma for ten days. Shipman said his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that Mr Andrew's wife was present at the moment of death.
Mrs Dorothy Mary Andrew, Mr Andrew's widow, signed Form A of the cremation certificate which stated that Mr Andrew died at 1am.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker concluded that Mr Andrew's death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
Mr Andrew's medical history of transient ischaemic attacks and increasing confusion was entirely typical of the effect of cerebroarteriosclerosis, in which the oxygen supply to the brain becomes inadequate. He declined gradually and it would appear that his death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Mr Andrew almost certainly died at about 1am on 17th
November 1991. Shipman thought he had died about 12 hours later. Shipman stated on the MCCD counterfoil that he last saw Mr Andrew alive on 16th
November 1991, and on Form B of the cremation certificate he said that he had last seen him alive 24 hours before death. He clearly meant to suggest that he had seen Mr Andrew at about lunchtime on 16th
November. Shipman used to work on Saturday mornings and it is quite possible that he saw Mr Andrew on the 16th
, but failed to make any entry in the medical records. Shipman was not a careful note taker. It is also possible that Shipman saw Mr Andrew for the last time on Friday, 15th
November, as recorded in the medical records, and made a mistake when completing the MCCD and Form B of the cremation certificate. In any event, there is no evidence at all to suggest that Shipman saw Mr Andrew in the period immediately preceding the death. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Andrew by administering to him a lethal dose of opiates.
The theoretical possibility remains that Shipman might have given Mr Andrew quite large doses of a sedative over a period of two to three days before his death with the intention of keeping him asleep. This might have been a reasonable thing to do, if it was the only way to keep him comfortable. However, if kept asleep for a long period, Mr Andrew would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it because he genuinely considered it to be the only way of keeping Mr Andrew comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening his death.
Although there remains this theoretical possibility, there is no evidence that Shipman did keep Mr Andrew heavily sedated. I note that none of the drugs prescribed for Mr Andrew on 10th
November was a sedative.
Taking the evidence as a whole, I am quite satisfied that Mr Andrew died as a result of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001