The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
James Ashworth
Introduction
Mr James Ashworth died at his home, 38 Peel Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 7th
June 1978 at the age of 81. It is not known whether or not he was a patient of Shipman. At the time of Mr Ashworth's death, Shipman had been practising in Hyde for only eight months. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Ashworth's death was right-sided cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
Despite extensive efforts by the Inquiry team, no witnesses have been traced who know anything of the circumstances of Mr Ashworth's death. The Inquiry believes that the informant in relation to Mr James Ashworth's death, his brother Mr Thomas Ashworth, and Mr Thomas Ashworth's wife, Elizabeth, are both dead. Mr James Ashworth's medical records have not survived and the Inquiry has been unable to recover any contemporaneous documents from the Donneybrook Surgery for 1978.
The Evidence
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Ashworth had died at home on 7th
June 1978 at the age of 87. In fact Mr Ashworth was 81 at the time of his death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Ashworth alive on 5th
June. The cause of death was right-sided cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil was completed on 7th
June.
The death certificate shows that Mr Ashworth was a retired builders' handyman, born on 8th
January 1897. His brother, Mr Thomas Ashworth, lived at 66 Chartist House, Hyde.
Conclusion
Due to the lack of any evidence of the circumstances of Mr Ashworth's death, I am unable to reach a conclusion as to whether or not the death was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001