The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Irene Berry
Introduction
Mrs Irene Berry died at her home, 12a Rufford Avenue, Hyde on Sunday, 15th
February 1998 at the age of 74. She was a widow, living alone in warden-controlled accommodation. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to hypertension.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Berry's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998 and, after preliminary investigation, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police took statements from Mrs Jean Hilda Darlington and Mrs Joan Lesley Huxham (Mrs Berry's daughters), Mr Ralph Darlington (her son-in-law), Mr James Joseph King (her nephew), and Mrs Mary Marsden and Mrs Margaret Doreen Sandiford (her neighbours). They also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Berry, but an inquest was held on 28th
February 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Darlington, who lives in London, Mrs Huxham, and Mrs Berry's nephew, Mr Jeffrey Francis Dudley. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Berry's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books, and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Berry was fit and active, ran her house, still drove a motor car and often helped to look after the other elderly people living nearby. She apparently had a family history of ischaemic heart disease, high blood pressure and raised cholesterol levels. At one time, she had had a gastric ulcer.
About two to three weeks before her death, Mrs Berry developed shingles and went to stay with her daughter, Mrs Darlington, who is a nurse. Before her death, she had recovered sufficiently to return home, although she was still in some discomfort. She had some medication, which she did not think was doing her much good.
The Day of the Death
At some time between 10.30am and 11.30am on 15th
February, Mrs Sandiford noticed a man, fitting Shipman's description, carrying a bag rushing out of Mrs Berry's house. He threw the bag into a dark red car and drove off. About 20 minutes later, she saw him come back and go into Mrs Berry's house.
At 2.45pm that day, Shipman telephoned the home of Mr and Mrs Darlington, at Marple Bridge. Shipman told Mr Darlington that he had visited Mrs Berry that morning and had returned that afternoon. He said that 'things aren't looking very good'. Mr Darlington asked how bad and the response was, 'How bad do you think it could get?' When he then asked whether Mrs Berry had passed away, Shipman said she had. Mr and Mrs Darlington went to Rufford Avenue and found Shipman outside in his car.
In the house, they found Mrs Berry seated in a chair by the fire, with a cup of tea and a book by her side. She looked very peaceful and relaxed. Shipman said words to the effect that there was 'no better way to go'.
Shipman explained that he had had a call from Mrs Berry complaining of chest pain. (Itemised billing of her telephone showed that she had indeed telephoned Shipman's surgery at 8.30am.) Shipman said he had attended and had given her some puffs from a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray, which is the conventional treatment for angina. He said this had not relieved the pain, so he had gone away to fetch his electrocardiograph (ECG) monitor. He had not returned for some hours. When he did so, he had found Mrs Berry dead. She had suffered a 'massive heart attack'. Mrs Darlington, who knew that it was not right to leave a patient alone who might be suffering from cardiac pain, suggested that perhaps Shipman had assumed that the pain was caused by an ulcer. However, he replied: 'No, it was definitely her heart'. Mrs Darlington said that she presumed there would be a post-mortem examination but Shipman said that this would not be necessary.
It appears that Mrs Berry's call was diverted to Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman at that time. The documentation records that Mrs Berry called at 8.31am. Under the heading 'message' appears the following:
'shingles in pain'
. The message was passed to Shipman.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the death was due to coronary thrombosis due to hypertension. Hypercholesterolaemia was said to have contributed to the death but not to be related to the condition causing death. He said that the onset of the coronary thrombosis was about 12 hours before death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death occurred at
'14.30hrs'
. He had attended the deceased for three hours during her final illness. He had last seen her alive at 11.30am. He had seen the body about 30 minutes after death. The mode of death was said to be syncope of seconds' duration. How Shipman could have known the mode of death is hard to imagine as he stated that no one had been present at the moment of death. When asked how far his answers to the questions about cause of death and mode of death were the result of his own observations or were based on the statements of others, he did not answer directly but stated:
'Seen by self 11.30 Neighbour saw her 13.00 Found at 15.00 by self
neighbour. dead.'
The neighbour was not identified. Also, the figure
'13.00'
appears to have been overwritten; Shipman's first estimate appears to have been that a neighbour saw Mrs Berry at 11am. Also the figure '13.00' appears to have been altered to
'15.00'
. It rather looks as though Shipman has been working out what to put. I observe also at this stage that Form B appears to contain a number of lies and inconsistencies. Quite apart from the impossibility of stating the mode of death when no one was present to observe it, there are two important lies. There is no evidence that a neighbour saw Mrs Berry alive after Shipman's first visit. Nor was anyone with Shipman when he 'found' Mrs Berry dead. These lies are typical of the untrue statements Shipman often made on Form B and which were designed to create the impression that the deceased had not died when Shipman was alone with him or her.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville examined the medical records in this case. He expressed the view that the cause of death as given by Shipman is not consistent with the medical condition and treatment as documented in the records. Dr Grenville thought Mrs Berry was at a significantly increased risk of suffering a heart attack. On account of a tendency to high blood pressure, she was also at increased risk of stroke.
At 12.08pm on the day of the death, Shipman made a note of events in the computerised medical records. The following entry appears:
'15/02/98 1
D13
C/O: a pain
Here (this practice)
chest vague tried gtn? effect indegestion
(
sic
)
? ecg
arrange shingles better pain central ? character no
radiation nausea'
.
On the following morning, Shipman recorded a second visit at which Mrs Berry was dead.
Dr Grenville makes the points that, if Shipman's note is an accurate account of events, he could not possibly have known whether her sudden death had been due to a heart attack or a stroke. It was plainly essential that the death be referred to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination.
Dr Grenville has also observed in his generic evidence to the Inquiry that a patient who has suffered a sudden cardiac death is not usually found sitting peacefully in a chair. On the other hand, that is the appearance one would expect in a patient who had been given a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Professor Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on account of the contents of both the medical records and the cremation forms.
Conclusion
Shipman's account of this death, as reconstructed from his completion of Form B, is that he first called on Mrs Berry at 11.30am and left her alive, although suffering from chest pain. He went to fetch an ECG monitor. If that had happened, it is inconceivable that Mrs Berry would not have telephoned Mrs Darlington, her daughter, who lived not far away, to tell her what the doctor had said. No one spoke to Mrs Berry or saw her alive after Shipman had left. I think it is unlikely that she was alive when he left. Shipman claims in Form B that he returned to the house at 3pm. That must be wrong by at least a small margin as he telephoned Mr and Mrs Darlington at 2.45pm to tell them that Mrs Berry had died. However, in my view, Shipman's estimate is probably wrong by much more than 15 minutes. Mrs Sandiford says that he returned to the house only some 20 minutes after she had seen him leave, in the morning. It appears from the evidence that Shipman probably visited Mrs Berry's house three times that day. The first time was the occasion when he was seen leaving by Mrs Sandiford. The second time Mrs Sandiford saw him arriving about 20 minutes after he had left. The third time he came in the afternoon and 'found' Mrs Berry dead. I am satisfied that his account of events in Form B is untrue. I am also satisfied that his statement that a neighbour had seen Mrs Berry alive after his first visit is untrue, as is the statement that a neighbour was present when the body was found.
Although Mrs Berry was at some risk of suffering a heart attack, there is no reliable evidence that she did so. Shipman's account of events cannot be accepted at face value and should not be accepted unless it is consistent with established facts. Here, his account is inconsistent with established facts, as shown above. Moreover, Mrs Berry's appearance in death was not consistent with a sudden cardiac death.
Shipman plainly avoided referring this case to the coroner in circumstances where any honest doctor would have been bound to do so.
I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Berry during his first visit of the day. It may be that he had to leave urgently before he had ascertained that she was dead. That may well be why he returned briefly soon after his first departure. He then returned later in the afternoon to stage a discovery of the body. Thereafter, he created a wholly false picture of events in order to pass off the killing as a natural death. I am sure that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001