The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Edith Brock
Introduction
Mrs Edith Brock died at her home, Flat 4 Carter Place, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
November 1995 at the age of 74. She had been a widow for about seven years and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to his Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Suzanne Elizabeth Bennison (Mrs Brock's granddaughter), expressed her concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Brock's death. The police investigated and took statements from Mrs Bennison, Mr David John Brock (her son), Ms Rachel Hampson (the former wife of Mrs Brock's son Stephen), Mr Steven Darren Bennison (her grandson by marriage) and her neighbours, Mr Thomas Duckworth, Mrs Helen Duckworth and Mrs Mary Hodgkinson. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Brock, but an inquest was held on 28th
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Bennison, Mr Brock and Ms Hampson, and has also had access to Mrs Brock's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, the visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bennison says that her grandmother was a very fit and active woman who would regularly walk into Hyde town centre to do her shopping and would walk to her granddaughter's home and back, a round trip of several miles. She led an active social life and was very keen on dancing. She had suffered from cataracts and had lost the sight of one eye, but this did not affect her general health. She had occasional bouts of diverticulitis. Mrs Bennison was aware that her grandmother had had palpitations from time to time.
The medical records confirm this picture. However, the computerised records contain a single reference to
'chronic myocardial ischaemia'
in 1977, not confirmed by electrocardiogram (ECG). There is nothing to suggest that Mrs Brock was treated for this or for angina. Between May 1994 and 6th
November 1995, there are three references to palpitations, for which beta-blockers were prescribed on a temporary basis. Only one blood pressure measurement is recorded and this was well within normal limits. On 6th
November, Mrs Brock was recorded as having a chest infection as well as palpitations and she was prescribed an antibiotic. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, has said that there is no convincing evidence that Mrs Brock had any significant ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Bennison was very close to her grandmother. She had lived with her for some time following the breakdown of her parents' marriage. Even after her own marriage, Mrs Bennison saw Mrs Brock several times each week and spoke to her on the telephone at least once a day. Mrs Bennison telephoned her grandmother the evening before she died. During the course of the conversation, Mrs Brock said that she felt 'out of sorts' and was aching. She said that she thought she was coming down with something and was going to make an appointment to see her doctor.
The Day of the Death
On Wednesday, 8th
November, at about 9.30am, Mrs Brock received a visit from her neighbour and old friend, Mrs Duckworth. Mrs Brock told Mrs Duckworth that she did not feel well. She was also tearful. Mrs Duckworth recalls that they contacted Shipman's surgery and requested a visit. Mrs Duckworth left Mrs Brock at about 11.30am and returned to her own flat.
Some time after 12.30pm, Mrs Duckworth looked out of her front window and saw that Shipman's car was in the car park outside the flats. Another neighbour, Mrs Hodgkinson, recalls seeing Shipman arrive at the flats some time in the afternoon. She watched him walk to the communal door of the flats and presumed he was visiting either Flat 4 or Flat 6. A short time later, she saw him walk away from the communal door and back to his car. She saw him get into his car and drive away.
At about 3pm, Mrs Duckworth heard noises coming from downstairs. She decided to go down to Mrs Brock's flat. When she was about half way down the stairs, Mrs Duckworth saw Shipman standing at the driver's side of his car. Shipman and Mrs Duckworth looked directly at each other. Mrs Duckworth had the impression that Shipman was going to say something but he just got into his car and drove off.
Mrs Duckworth continued to the bottom of the stairs and walked towards Mrs Brock's front door. She noticed that the front door was wide open and that the hall light was on. This was most unusual as Mrs Brock was quite security conscious. Mrs Duckworth went into the flat and walked into the front room where she saw Mrs Brock slumped back in her chair. Mrs Duckworth went to fetch her husband. When Mr and Mrs Duckworth arrived back inside Mrs Brock's flat, Mr Duckworth checked for a pulse and said that Mrs Brock was dead.
Mrs Duckworth telephoned the Bennisons' house and spoke to Mrs Bennison's husband, Steven. She told him that Mrs Brock had died. Mr Bennison went immediately to Mrs Brock's flat. As he entered the flat, Mr Bennison saw Mrs Brock sitting in her chair in the front room. He telephoned Shipman's surgery, requesting that the doctor re-attend. A short while later, Mr Bennison was joined by his wife and Ms Hampson.
Mrs Bennison went to Mrs Duckworth's flat to telephone her uncle, Mr David John Brock, Mrs Brock's elder son. Mrs Duckworth told her that Shipman had only just left Mrs Brock's flat when she had gone inside to find Mrs Brock dead. Mrs Bennison went in to her grandmother's flat and found her sitting on her chair, with her arms resting on the arms of the chair. Her head was tilted slightly back and to the left. Her eyes were closed and she still had her glasses on. Her upper denture had dropped slightly onto her bottom lip. She was wearing a sleeveless top, a skirt and her slippers. She looked peaceful. At the side of her chair was a pouffe, upon which were a telephone and a cup of either tea or coffee. The room was tidy.
Shipman arrived some time later. He did not examine the body. Mrs Bennison was shocked and distressed and cannot remember everything that was said between them. However, she recalls that Shipman shrugged his shoulders and said, 'She's had a good innings'. He also told Mrs Bennison that Mrs Brock had had a heart attack. Mrs Bennison said, 'You were just leaving'. Shipman replied, 'It can happen in a moment. She's suffered from angina for years'. Both Mrs Bennison and her mother said that Mrs Brock had never suffered with angina. Shipman said that he would issue a death certificate in the morning, which the family should collect.
Shipman made two entries in the Lloyd George record cards for 8th
November 1995. The first said:
'V
(
visit
)
Chest palpitations
120/80 HS I II
(
illegible
)
no oedema
Vague chest pain ? (L) arm pain
feels OK other than
irregular heart beat
ref D/V ?Arrhythmia'
.
I interpret this entry to say that Shipman visited Mrs Brock and found that she was complaining of palpitations in the chest. On examination, the blood pressure was 120/80, which is very good, especially for a woman of her age. He listened to the heart sounds, which were normal. There was no swelling. She complained of a vague chest pain and pain in the left arm. She said she felt 'OK' other than for the irregular heartbeat. Shipman was to arrange a domiciliary visit. He considered a possible diagnosis of arrhythmia.
Then there was a second entry as follows:
'1600 hrs: found Dead by
Granddaughter
CT IHD'
.
The computerised records contained two entries for 6th
November 1995. The first suggests that Mrs Brock complained of palpitations and was prescribed
'inderalh'
(half strength Inderal). The second suggests that she had a chest infection, not otherwise specified, for which she was prescribed Amoxil, an antibiotic. There is an entry dated 8th
November, which suggests that an ECG was taken although the record is not available (if it ever existed). The ECG was said to show supraventricular arrhythmia and that Mrs Brock was to be referred for a domiciliary visit, presumably by a cardiologist, although this is not specified. The last record says that Mrs Brock has been found dead at
'1600hr'
. The cause of death indicated is coronary thrombosis and ischaemic heart disease.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that the interval between the onset of the coronary thrombosis and the death was
'seconds'
. He said that Mrs Brock had had ischaemic heart disease for 19 years.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death had occurred at
'About 1600 hrs 8.11.95.'
He had attended Mrs Brock during her last illness
'that day'
and had last seen her alive about two hours before her death. He said that he saw the body within 30 minutes after death and claimed to have made a complete external examination of it. He said that the mode of death was
'collapse'
of only seconds' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions about the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, Shipman did not answer the question directly but wrote:
'G.daughter/G.son. found her dead'
. He said that no one was present at the time of death.
The picture Shipman sought to present was that he had visited at about 2pm and that the death had occurred two hours later at about 4pm. The first of these times could be accurate, although Mrs Duckworth's evidence is that he left Mrs Brock's flat at about 3pm. At that time, or a few seconds later, Mrs Brock was dead. She was certainly dead well before 4pm. It appears to me that Shipman has deliberately made false entries on Form B in an attempt to make it appear that he was not with Mrs Brock immediately before her death was discovered.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville provided the police with a statement at a time when he did not have access to the manuscript records. The computerised records were extremely brief. Due to the lack of documentation, he felt unable to reach a conclusion as to whether the medical history supported the recording of the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. However, he noted that such evidence as was available suggested that Mrs Brock did not suffer from significant heart disease. In any event, Dr Grenville considered that Shipman's observed behaviour was entirely inappropriate. If he had suspected supraventricular arrhythmia, the appropriate course of action would have been to have arranged immediate admission to hospital.
Dr Grenville also commented upon the evidence of Mrs Duckworth, who had said that she arrived in Mrs Brock's flat within a minute or two of Shipman's departure. By that time, Mrs Brock was dead and looked as if she were sleeping. Dr Grenville observes that the process of dying by heart attack takes two to three minutes and it follows that Mrs Brock must have either been already dead when Shipman left or in the throes of death. It would be quite unacceptable for a doctor to leave a patient in such circumstances.
Dr Grenville was also highly critical of Shipman's failure to examine Mrs Brock's body before certifying death. The process of examination requires the use of a stethoscope to listen to the heart and lungs, and a torch with which to examine the eyes. Also, some painful stimulus should be applied. The onlookers could not have missed these procedures if they had taken place.
At the coroner's inquest in March 2001, Dr Grenville gave evidence that he had now seen the manuscript records and was able to confirm that the only record of heart disease was in summary form and was not verified by ECG. He expressed the view that the medical records did not support the cause of death given by Shipman.
Conclusion
This is an obvious case of unlawful killing. Everything points to that conclusion. Shipman was barely out of Mrs Brock's flat when Mrs Duckworth found her dead. When he left, she must have been dead or very nearly so.
Mrs Brock did not have a history of heart disease or high blood pressure. Her only cardiac symptoms were palpitations and these do not appear to have been thought serious in the past. In fact, Mrs Brock was in good physical condition, as evidenced by her active lifestyle.
Shipman's notes of his consultations with Mrs Brock on the day of her death are inadequate and reveal a standard of care which no doctor would wish to admit to. I am satisfied that Shipman made up the records for that day in order to provide an explanation for the sudden death which would satisfy a confirming doctor and a medical referee. He claimed that Mrs Brock was suffering from supraventricular arrhythmia, which could be associated with ischaemic heart disease. A person with those conditions might have a coronary thrombosis. But if he suspected supraventricular arrhythmia, he should have arranged speedy treatment for Mrs Brock.
Shipman lied to the family about Mrs Brock's medical history, suggesting there was a history of heart disease. He lied on Form B, suggesting that there was an interval of two hours between his departure and the time of death.
I have no doubt whatever that Shipman killed Mrs Brock. The most likely cause of her death was an overdose of opiate, probably diamorphine. Mrs Brock's appearance in death was entirely typical of that of a large number of Shipman's victims.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001