The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Brady
Introduction
Mrs Edith Brady died in Shipman's surgery at 21 Market Street, Hyde on Monday, 13th
May 1996 at the age of 72. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
After Shipman's arrest in September 1998, Mrs Brady's son-in-law, Mr Rodney John Turner, expressed concern to the police about Mrs Brady's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Geoffrey John Walker (Mrs Brady's son), Mrs Pamela Christine Turner and Mr Turner (her daughter and son-in-law), Mrs Lesley Jane Pulford (her granddaughter), Mrs Alison Massey (manager of the Market Street Surgery), Mrs Gillian Morgan (Shipman's practice nurse) and Mr Nicholas Matthew O'Mullane (consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Brady but an inquest was held on 15th
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Turner, Mrs Pulford and Mrs Massey and has also had access to Mrs Brady's general practitioner and hospital records together with appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The picture that emerges of Mrs Brady is that she was very interested in her own state of health and positively enjoyed visiting the doctor. She held Shipman in high esteem. Shipman may have regarded her as something of a nuisance, on account of the frequency of her appointments with him.
Mrs Brady had a number of medical conditions for which she required treatment. These included pernicious anaemia for which she had an injection every three months, usually administered by Mrs Morgan, Shipman's practice nurse. She was mildly diabetic and attended the diabetes clinic at Tameside General Hospital. She was overweight and had high blood pressure. She had an arthritic knee. About three or four years before her death, Shipman had told Mrs Brady that she had heart failure, although some members of the family wondered whether this was really so. Certainly they saw no signs that Mrs Brady's activities were in any way limited by this condition. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, noted that Mrs Brady had been prescribed enalapril for congestive heart failure but considered that there was nothing in the medical records to justify the diagnosis or treatment.
By all accounts, Mrs Brady led a very active life. She did all her housework, drove a car, did the shopping, gardening and decorating and had a busy social life.
On 4th
May 1996, Mrs Brady attended and enjoyed a family barbecue party. Three days before her death, she attended the diabetes clinic at Tameside General Hospital for a routine examination, which revealed no marked deterioration in her condition. The day before her death, 12th
May, she looked after her great-grandchildren, made their tea, mowed the lawn and planted some bulbs. That day, she was in good health and spirits. She mentioned to her granddaughter that she was due to go to the surgery the following day for her regular injection. She walked home, as it was a nice evening, and telephoned her granddaughter to say she had arrived. She was not breathless.
The Day of the Death
On Monday morning, 13th
May, Mrs Brady drove into Hyde, parked her car in the car park at the back of the surgery and walked down to the flea market, where she met and chatted to a friend named Bertha Bennett. She made no complaint of illness. She went to the surgery before 9.30am.
At about 9.30am, Mrs Massey, the surgery manager, was walking along the corridor near to the practice nurse's office when Shipman came walking towards her. Shipman said something like, 'I want you'. His face was red. He was running his hand through his hair. Mrs Massey thought he had a look of surprise, or possibly embarrassment, about him. He said that he needed something from his car and went outside by the back door. He returned to the corridor carrying a small, light-coloured case. Mrs Massey followed Shipman into his examination room, where she saw Mrs Brady lying on the examination couch. She was fully clothed but looked as if all her muscles had gone slack.
According to Mrs Massey's police statement, Shipman pressed Mrs Brady's chest with both of his hands for a short period of time. Then he produced a torch from the case that he had just brought in. He looked in Mrs Brady's eyes, shining the torch into them. He then felt at the back of Mrs Brady's neck and said that he was checking the brain stem. Shipman said, 'There is nothing there, that is it' or words to that effect. Shipman then asked Mrs Massey to get in touch with the relatives so that he could 'have a word' with them.
Mrs Massey tried, unsuccessfully, to telephone Mrs Brady's daughter, Mrs Turner. She then telephoned Ashton Police Station and left a message for Mr Turner to call her. On receiving the message, Mr Turner telephoned the surgery. He was put straight through to Shipman. According to Mr Turner's police statement, Shipman said words to the effect that Mrs Brady had been into the surgery that morning and had collapsed. When Mr Turner asked how serious it was, Shipman's manner changed to being curt and sarcastic. He said: 'How serious do you want it to be? The only way she's going to be leaving is with the help of Robinson and Jordan'. Mr Turner understood this reference to the local undertakers to mean that Mrs Brady had died. He said he would come down to the surgery with his wife as soon as he could.
Mr Turner, his wife and Mr Walker all went to the surgery. Their accounts of their conversation with Shipman differ slightly, but this is not surprising as all three were very shocked at the suddenness of the death. Mrs Turner recalls that Shipman said that Mrs Brady had come into the surgery complaining of breathlessness and indigestion. He had found her pulse to be very fast. He had told her to go into the examination room and get on the bed. He had said he would come in and take an electrocardiogram as soon as he had signed a sick note for another patient. He had gone to her a few minutes later and by then she had 'more or less gone'. He said: 'We worked on her and got her colour back three times. She was pink but by then she was brain dead'. Mr Walker recalls Shipman saying, 'We found her on the floor and we worked on her a long time to get her colour back but she was brain dead.'
Shipman took the family into the examination room. Mrs Brady was lying on the couch as if she were asleep. She was wearing a brown skirt and a light-coloured short-sleeved top. Her clothing was very tidy. Her pale green waist-length jacket had been placed neatly over a chair. Mrs Turner was standing by the bed and was stroking her mother's arm when she thought she saw a movement. She said, 'She has moved!' Shipman brushed past the family and said, 'Oh no, I hope not, don't say that'. He lifted her eyelids, looked into her eyes and said, 'No, she's gone'.
Shipman told Mrs Turner that the family could have a post-mortem examination if they wished but that it was not really necessary. He could issue a death certificate. Mrs Turner asked him about the cause of death and he said that Mrs Brady had probably had a coronary thrombosis.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) stating that the death had been due to coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure resulting from hypertension. Diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition that had caused death. He stated that the onset of the coronary thrombosis was 12 hours before death.
Shipman later completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death had occurred at 10am on 13th
May 1996. He had attended the deceased during her last illness for a period of 30 minutes. He had last seen her alive immediately before death and made a complete external examination immediately after death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration. He said that
'self staff'
were present at the moment of death.
Following the death of her mother, Mrs Turner went to see Shipman to view her mother's medical records. Shipman brought up her records on his computer screen. Mrs Turner spotted one entry that read
'Renal failure'
. Mrs Turner said, 'Oh that's a new one - she didn't know about that'. Shipman then said, 'There was no need to tell her and if she hadn't been on the medication she was on, she would have died years ago'. According to Mrs Turner's second police statement, as she was leaving his consulting room, Mrs Turner turned to Shipman and said, 'Oh well, you will never forget my mother, at least she died in a place she always liked to be'. Shipman said, 'Well, I had one lady that died in the waiting room'. He said that Mrs Brady was the second and added, 'She won't be the last before I've done. It happens'.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observed that Mrs Brady did indeed have mild chronic renal failure, which could have been associated with her diabetes or hypertension. Taking enalapril could also have exacerbated it. In any event, it was stable and was not of a degree to cause symptoms or to contribute to her death.
Mrs Brady was at a higher than normal risk of a heart attack as a result of her hypertension and diabetes. If she really did have congestive heart disease, which Dr Grenville doubted, this might represent a degree of ischaemic heart disease, which could be the forerunner of a heart attack. Thus, Mrs Brady was at risk of a heart attack. Despite the fact that she had shown no signs at all of illness the day before her death or earlier that morning, Dr Grenville said that it was theoretically possible that Mrs Brady could have had a sudden fatal heart attack that morning at the surgery. However, he regarded such an event as too great a coincidence to be accepted.
Dr Grenville was highly critical and suspicious of the records Shipman made of the consultation that terminated in death. There is no written record for this day. The computerised record contains three entries. The first records a blood pressure reading of 140/90, which is very minimally raised. The second is a purely administrative record which states that Mrs Brady was seen by Shipman in the surgery and the third reads:
'Congestive heart failure
75 k hs I II oedema tr creps'
.
Dr Grenville interprets this to mean that Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure on the basis of finding that Mrs Brady weighed 75 kilograms and had normal heart sounds, a trace of oedema and crepitations in the lungs. While the oedema and crepitations might suggest a diagnosis of congestive heart failure, there is no indication that the condition was serious. There is no record of any history and, most surprising of all, there is no mention of the fact that the consultation ended with the death of the patient. Nor is there anything in the note which would justify a doctor in certifying a death as due to coronary thrombosis which had begun 12 hours before. In other words, this note does not make sense.
Dr Grenville is also suspicious of the attempt at resuscitation reported by Mrs Massey. This did not include any mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Nor was an ambulance called. Dr Grenville describes Shipman's efforts as incompetent. Another explanation, which in my view is more likely, is that the brief attempt at resuscitation was pure sham.
Conclusion
Everything about this death points to an unnatural death. Although a cardiac death was a theoretical possibility, it would have been a most remarkable coincidence that the attack should strike at the very moment when the patient was alone with Shipman in his consulting room. The suggestion on the MCCD that the attack had begun 12 hours earlier is a lie. Shipman did not react as any doctor would have reacted if Mrs Brady really had had a heart attack. He would have told the staff to call for an ambulance and would have summoned the most experienced member of staff into the room and instructed her to assist in resuscitation until the ambulance arrived. Shipman's suggestion to Mrs Massey that he could tell that Mrs Brady was brain dead by feeling the back of her neck is bizarre and can have been no more than mumbo-jumbo. His failure to make a proper note of what was supposed to have happened is a very suspicious feature. His account to the family was plainly untrue. Mrs Brady's neat and peaceful appearance was not consistent with a cardiac death involving a vigorous attempt at resuscitation. It was wholly consistent with a death by morphine poisoning.
Like the coroner, I am quite sure that Mrs Brady was killed by Shipman. She had attended for an injection of vitamin B
12
for her anaemia. I am satisfied that Shipman administered a lethal injection, almost certainly of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001