The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Irene Brooder
Introduction
Mrs Irene Brooder died at her home, 53 St Johns Drive, Godley, Hyde on Monday, 20th
January 1997 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman since he moved to Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the early publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, who operated a taxi service in Hyde, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of 21 of Shipman's patients, including Mrs Brooder. The police took statements from Mrs Joyce Brooder (Mrs Brooder's daughter-in-law), Mr John Derek Davis (Mrs Joyce Brooder's stepfather and a friend of Mrs Irene Brooder), Mrs Beryl Dickinson (Mrs Brooder's close friend), Mrs Julie Arrowsmith and Mr Craig Arrowsmith (Mrs Dickinson's daughter and son-in-law). The police later took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Brooder but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Joyce Brooder and Mr and Mrs Arrowsmith. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Brooder's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Brooder had been a widow since 1983. She had an only son, Mr John Anthony Brooder, who died in 1995. After his death, Mrs Brooder had remained close to her daughter-in-law, Mrs Joyce Brooder, who lived in Appleby, Cumbria. They spoke to each other frequently on the telephone.
In the months before her death, Mrs Brooder appeared to her friends and family to be in quite good health. She had been on medication since a heart attack in 1990. She had had a successful hip replacement operation in 1995.
Mrs Brooder's medical notes were recovered from a Tesco bag found at Shipman's house. Dr Grenville has examined them. They confirm that Mrs Brooder suffered a coronary thrombosis in April 1990, from which she appears to have made a good recovery. There is reference to a further possible coronary thrombosis in 1993, although the diagnosis seems to have been made on the basis of a complaint of sweating. On 7th
April 1994, there is an entry recording peripheral oedema and raised blood pressure of 170/120, on the basis of which Shipman diagnosed heart failure and commenced treatment. However, a chest x-ray and an electrocardiogram (ECG) carried out later that month showed no sign of cardiac enlargement. Nonetheless, treatment for heart failure continued. In 1995, Mrs Brooder underwent a hip replacement. It does not appear that heart failure was detected at that time. There are several brief references to congestive heart failure in the computerised records, although it appears that this condition, if present, was well controlled.
On Friday, 17th
January 1997, Mrs Joyce Brooder spoke to her mother-in-law on the telephone. At that time she seemed well, but she did say that she had been having minor chest pains. The following day, when the two spoke again, Mrs Brooder said that, while walking home from Hyde, she had had to stop due to breathlessness, severe chest pain and pain in her back. She said that these pains were like those she had had before, apparently referring to her heart attack in 1990. She was so worried that she had telephoned the surgery and the doctor was going to visit on Monday. Mrs Brooder also telephoned Mr Davis on Saturday, 18th
January and gave him an account similar to that recalled by Mrs Joyce Brooder. She also spoke to him the following day and told him that she was still feeling ill.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Brooder had a neighbour, Mrs Dickinson, with whom she was very friendly. Mrs Dickinson's daughter, Mrs Julie Arrowsmith, gave the Inquiry an account of what her mother had told her. Mrs Dickinson said that on Monday, 20th
January, Mrs Brooder telephoned her at about 7.45am to say that she had been ill all weekend. Mrs Dickinson went to Mrs Brooder's home and saw that she looked unwell. Her face was very pale, almost grey. Mrs Brooder said she had been sweating a lot. Mrs Dickinson contacted the surgery and asked for Shipman to call later that day. She then stayed with Mrs Brooder for about an hour.
An entry in the surgery visits book for that day under Mrs Brooder's name reads:
'tight chest, pains in back - short of breath'
.
Mrs Joyce Brooder spoke to her mother-in-law during the morning. Mrs Brooder still felt unwell and was expecting Shipman to visit that day. Mrs Joyce Brooder said that she would ring later to find out what the diagnosis was.
After her return home, Mrs Dickinson telephoned Mrs Brooder from time to time during the morning and then returned to spend an hour with her from 1pm until 2pm. She left Mrs Brooder at home, waiting for the doctor to arrive. Some time later, possibly as much as an hour, she saw Shipman arrive and go into Mrs Brooder's house. About 15 minutes later, he came out and drove away. Mrs Dickinson waited for about 20 minutes before she telephoned Mrs Brooder. There was no reply, so she went round. This was probably at about 4pm. She found the door unlocked, which was not unusual. In the lounge, Mrs Dickinson found Mrs Brooder sitting in a high-backed chair, with her hands on her lap and her eyes closed. She was not breathing. She looked very peaceful. Mrs Dickinson telephoned Shipman's surgery and asked that he return. The call was timed at 4.08pm. Mrs Dickinson also telephoned her daughter, Mrs Arrowsmith.
Meanwhile, Mrs Joyce Brooder and Mr Davis had been trying to make contact with Mrs Brooder by telephone and were also concerned that there was no reply.
Mrs Arrowsmith went to the house and saw Mrs Brooder sitting upright in a chair with her head slumped forward. It was quite clear to her that Mrs Brooder was dead. She stayed at Mrs Brooder's home with Mrs Dickinson to await Shipman's arrival. Some time later, Mr Davis arrived. At about 5pm, Shipman and Mr Arrowsmith arrived at the same time. Shipman did not take his medical bag into the house. He just walked into the lounge, without asking where Mrs Brooder was. He conducted a perfunctory examination. Mr Davis recalls that Shipman said he had seen Mrs Arrowsmith earlier that day and that he had asked her to call into the surgery the next day for an ECG. Mr and Mrs Arrowsmith do not recall any reference to a visit earlier in the day.
There was no discussion about a post-mortem examination. Shipman told those present that they should gather together Mrs Brooder's valuables because there were people who follow undertakers around, taking advantage of the circumstances to steal from an empty house. Mrs Arrowsmith now believes that a £50 note was missing from the house but she did not mention this in her police witness statement.
In Mrs Brooder's medical records there appears the following handwritten entry for Monday, 20th
January 1997:
'20.1.97
Pain chest on walking 5/7
V
(
visit
)
14.45
episode of dyspnoea
going upstairs at friends
110/70 HS I II irregularly irregular
Trace oedema basal creps JVP o
PH
CT
Probable further CT
Advised rest: ECG mane
No change in Rx
(
treatment
)
no Pain
TLUK
(
to let us know
)
'
.
I interpret that entry as suggesting that Mrs Brooder complained either of chest pain on walking over the past five days or of an episode of chest pain on walking five days earlier. She also said that she had been breathless on going upstairs at a friend's. On examination, Shipman found blood pressure of 110/70. The heart sounds were
'irregularly irregular'
. He found a trace of swelling at the ankles. He heard basal crepitations but noted that the jugular venous pressure was not raised. He noted the past history of a coronary thrombosis and thought Mrs Brooder had probably suffered another. He advised rest and no change in treatment. She should have an ECG the next morning. He advised Mrs Brooder to let him know if she deteriorated or needed further help.
The computerised record for this visit is slightly different. It says:
'last wed/thurs night chest pain into back between shoulders sweaty and cold all night felt like the flu. 120/70 pulse ireg ly ireg 110 /min nil odema see morne for ecg? dig'
.
This paints a slightly different picture: it appears that the pain Mrs Brooder described was a single episode, which occurred the previous Wednesday night. No continuing symptoms are recorded. The blood pressure reading is different. A pulse rate is included. There was no oedema. The reference to
'dig'
probably means digoxin.
A further entry in the computerised record for the same day suggests that Shipman had sent a blood sample to the haematology laboratory for anticoagulation studies. The taking of a blood sample is not mentioned at all in the written record.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at about 4pm on 20th
January. He had treated Mrs Brooder for three hours during her final illness. He had last seen her alive about two and a half hours before death and saw the body about one hour after death. He claimed to have done a complete external examination after death. He said that the mode of death was syncope of a few seconds' duration. However, he also said that no one was present at the death, so how he could have known the mode of death is not clear. In establishing the mode and cause of death Shipman claimed to rely on the statements of 'neighbours' who had seen Mrs Brooder just before her death, and had returned 20 minutes later to find her dead. This timing is not consistent with Mrs Dickinson's evidence.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville agrees that Shipman's diagnosis of a heart attack is reasonable. Mrs Brooder's complaints to Shipman, and the account given to her daughter-in-law and friends, are consistent with that. However, Dr Grenville observes that the finding of irregularity of the heartbeat suggested haemodynamic instability. In his view, if that were a genuine observation, Shipman ought to have arranged for Mrs Brooder to be admitted to hospital immediately. Anticoagulation studies were pointless.
Dr Grenville says that if the observation of irregular heartbeat were genuine, it is possible that Mrs Brooder suffered a sudden fatal arrhythmia soon after Shipman's departure. However, if that were the case, he would not expect her to be found sitting peacefully in her chair. Most patients suffering such a fatal episode have a few seconds in which they realise that something is seriously wrong. They usually try to call help or at least lie down.
Professor Richard Baker regarded the case as highly suspicious on the basis of both the cremation certificate and the medical notes and records. He noted the inadequate treatment of an apparent myocardial infarction. According to Dr Alan Banks, the stated cause of death is consistent with the history recorded in the notes.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Mrs Brooder probably suffered a heart attack over the weekend of 18th
to 19th
January. She still felt unwell when she called Shipman out on the Monday morning. When he arrived at about 2.45 or 3pm, she was still alive and had been able to speak to friends until 2pm. It appears that she was alive when Shipman arrived. However, it is only Shipman who claims that she was alive when he left. She was found dead within about half an hour of his departure and no one had been able to contact her on the telephone during that time. The occurrence of a natural death, so soon after Shipman's departure, would not be impossible. However, other doctors say that such an event is very rare. If Shipman is to be believed, it was commonplace in his practice. I regard the temporal connection between Shipman's visit and Mrs Brooder's death as highly suspicious.
Shipman's record of his visit must be viewed with extreme caution. It is in itself a remarkable account, suggesting that he was prepared to leave alone a patient who had suffered a heart attack and still had arrhythmia. On Shipman's own account, as inferred from the records, he was somewhat reckless of Mrs Brooder's safety. Although the Inquiry has received a number of allegations of incompetence on Shipman's part (which have not been fully investigated as they fall outside the Terms of Reference of this Inquiry), my general impression is that he was not so incompetent as to leave alone and untreated a woman who really had suffered a heart attack and really was still suffering arrhythmia. I think it is more likely that Mrs Brooder was recovering from a fairly minor heart attack and that Shipman invented the signs of arrhythmia so as to render feasible the sudden death soon afterwards.
Although Dr Grenville recognises the possibility of a sudden cardiac death, Mrs Brooder's peaceful appearance in death was not typical of such a death. It was, however, entirely consistent with death by morphine poisoning. I think it unlikely that Mrs Brooder's death was due to a sudden cardiac episode.
Shipman's account of events as given in Form B contains a highly suspicious feature. His claim that neighbours were with Mrs Brooder after he had visited and 20 minutes before she was found dead is not consistent with Mrs Dickinson's account of the events of the afternoon and is clearly designed to suggest falsely that someone had seen Mrs Brooder alive after Shipman's visit.
Shipman claimed that he had carried out a full external examination of the body. That was not true. He gave the body only a perfunctory examination and could not have been satisfied that Mrs Brooder was dead, unless he had already known that she was.
Taking all these factors into account, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Brooder by giving an injection, almost certainly of diamorphine, and probably under the guise of taking a blood sample.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001