The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Bardsley
Introduction
Mr Joseph Bardsley died at his home, 42 Hough Lane, Newton, Hyde on Sunday, 15th
April 1984. He was 83 and had been a widower since 1971. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Bardsley's death was old age.
In February 2000, Mr Bardsley's grandson, Dr Anthony Shenton, contacted the police to express concern about his grandfather's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr John Hopwood (Mr Bardsley's son-in-law) and Mrs Doreen Laithwaite (the warden of the sheltered accommodation in which Mr Bardsley lived). An inquest into the death of Mr Bardsley was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Dorothy Shenton and Mrs Edith Hopwood (Mr Bardsley's two daughters), Dr Shenton and Mr Hopwood. Mrs Hopwood, Mr Hopwood and Mrs Laithwaite gave oral evidence at the hearing on 2nd
July 2001. Mr Bardsley's general practitioner and hospital records have not survived. However, the Inquiry has obtained the duty doctor book and Shipman's visits book for 1984.
Personal Background
Mr Bardsley's elder daughter, Mrs Shenton, lived some distance from her father. The younger daughter, Mrs Hopwood, lived in Hyde and saw her father regularly.
By all accounts, Mr Bardsley was a fit and healthy man, who looked after himself without any assistance from the home help service. He went out most days to buy provisions at the local shops and once or twice a week he would take the bus into Hyde to shop in the town centre. The only medical problem of which Mrs Hopwood was aware was that her father had anaemia, for which he used to have periodic injections administered by the district nurse. However, Mrs Hopwood recalls that he did not like these and had decided not to have any more.
Mr Bardsley's bungalow at Hough Lane was sheltered accommodation forming part of the Bradley Green Community Centre. Mrs Laithwaite, the warden, lived in a flat above the Community Centre and looked after the residents. Each dwelling within the complex had an alarm and intercom connected to the warden's flat. Mrs Laithwaite had been the warden for about 20 years and knew Mr Bardsley very well.
Mrs Laithwaite told the Inquiry that Mr Bardsley did not have a telephone. If he wanted to make an appointment to see the doctor, he would ask her to telephone the surgery. However, she said that the occasions on which he did this were very few indeed and then only for minor ailments. It was Mrs Laithwaite's practice to keep a record of all the visits made by the various doctors who attended the elderly people in her care and to be present at them. I am satisfied that her recollection of the infrequency of Shipman's visits to Mr Bardsley is accurate.
It was Mrs Laithwaite's practice to visit residents every morning to check on their welfare. She explained that she usually began at about 8.30am and went first to those residents whom she knew were in poor health. She would finish at about 10.30am. Mr Bardsley was one who was in good health.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Laithwaite estimated that she would have seen Mr Bardsley at about 10am on the Sunday morning, the day of his death. He was at that time in normal health.
Mr Bardsley's wife had had a cousin, Miss Dorothy Wilde, who used to visit Mr Bardsley quite frequently. It was her habit to call on him on a Sunday morning after church. Miss Wilde has been unable to give evidence to the Inquiry as she is now elderly and her recollection of events has faded. However, Mrs Shenton recalls that, when she told Miss Wilde of Mr Bardsley's death, Miss Wilde explained that she had called on him that Sunday at about 12.30pm, after church, and had taken him a chicken sandwich and a scone for his lunch. She had made a cup of tea and had stayed for about an hour. Mr Bardsley had been in normal health. Had she been at all concerned about him, she would have called the warden or the doctor but she did not do so. Although this evidence is hearsay, I accept it as true and probably accurate as to timing.
At about 3pm on 15th
April 1984, while Mrs Laithwaite was off duty but in her flat, a doctor called at the main door of the Community Centre. Mrs Laithwaite cannot now remember which doctor it was although she knew all the doctors from the Donneybrook practice of which Shipman was one. I am satisfied that this was in fact Shipman. The Inquiry has examined the duty doctor book for April 1984 and it can be seen that Shipman was the member of the practice who was on duty for the weekend. The doctor said that he had been up to see Mr Bardsley but he would not answer the door. He could see Mr Bardsley through the window and had tapped on the glass but Mr Bardsley had still not responded. Knowing that Mr Bardsley had not asked her to request a visit from the doctor, Mrs Laithwaite asked why the doctor had called. Shipman said that he had been in the area and, as he was so close, he had decided to call in for a blood sample from Mr Bardsley. He did not say why he wanted a blood sample. It appears to me that this was an unsolicited visit. This view is supported by the fact that it is not noted in Shipman's visits book for the day. In the light of Mrs Hopwood's evidence that her father had decided to stop having his injections for anaemia, one can well understand why Shipman might want to take a sample of blood from Mr Bardsley. However, to make an unsolicited visit on a Sunday afternoon seems to be an unconventional way of going about it.
Mrs Laithwaite accompanied the doctor to Mr Bardsley's bungalow, for which she had the key. On entering, she saw Mr Bardsley seated on his settee. He was sitting upright and appeared to be watching the television, which was on. Mrs Laithwaite approached him and asked him why he had not let the doctor in. She then realised that he was dead. She described him as looking quite natural. He was dressed in day clothes and was sitting upright in his usual place on the settee.
The doctor did not examine Mr Bardsley. He just looked at him and asked Mrs Laithwaite to inform the next of kin about the death. Mrs Laithwaite telephoned Mrs Hopwood. She also confirmed with the mobile warden service, which covered the complex while she was off duty, that Mr Bardsley had not activated his alarm or called for assistance over the intercom that day.
Mrs Hopwood was too distressed to go to her father's home. Mr Hopwood went to the bungalow alone. He remembers that Mrs Laithwaite told him that Shipman had found his father-in-law's body. He recalls that when he entered the house, he saw Mr Bardsley sitting upright on the couch, dressed in his day clothes, looking as though he had fallen asleep. Nothing appeared unusual except that the room was cold, with no heating on. Mrs Laithwaite apparently said that the doctor had turned off the fire and television and had removed Mr Bardsley's dentures, which were on a side table, although she has no recollection of these events having occurred.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which gave the cause of death as old age. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this Shipman has stated that he last saw Mr Bardsley alive on 3rd
April 1984, that is 12 days before the death. Shipman's visits book suggests that he saw Mr Bardsley on 4th
April, so this entry was only slightly inaccurate. The entry for that day also says
'Stop DN'
, which suggests that it was on that day that Mr Bardsley refused further vitamin injections. Dr John Grenville has explained, in his generic evidence, that old age is only appropriate as a cause of death where the patient has declined gradually over a period of time. It was manifestly not appropriate as a cause of death in Mr Bardsley's case. He had been fit and well that morning.
Although Mr Bardsley was cremated, the cremation certification is no longer available.
Conclusion
The circumstances of Mr Bardsley's death are highly suspicious. Mr Bardsley was in good health at lunchtime and was dead by 3pm. Whilst it must be accepted that elderly people can and do sometimes die suddenly, without any significant prior illness, where such a death occurs, no reasonable and honest doctor will be prepared to certify a cause of death. The death will be referred to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination to establish the cause of death. If Shipman had not killed Mr Bardsley, it is hard to see why he would have sought to avoid what would have been a routine referral to the coroner. But if he had killed Mr Bardsley, and wished to avoid referral to the coroner, he would have to advance a feasible cause of death. As Dr Grenville has explained, it was not acceptable, in a case such as this, for the death to be certified as due to old age, because Mr Bardsley had not suffered a gradual decline. However, it seems likely to me that Shipman had to choose old age because he knew there was nothing in Mr Bardsley's medical history that could provide a plausible explanation for his sudden death.
If Mr Bardsley's death was natural, the most likely cause would be a heart attack or a stroke. In either event, Mr Bardsley would almost certainly have had sufficient time to pull the emergency cord or call for assistance over the intercom. Moreover, as Dr Grenville explained, his appearance in death, sitting peacefully in his chair, as if watching the television, is not typical of a death from either of these causes. It is, however, what would be expected following a death from morphine poisoning.
Shipman's claim to Mrs Laithwaite was that he was passing by and decided to obtain a blood sample from Mr Bardsley. I have already observed that this was a most unusual procedure to undertake on a Sunday afternoon. Shipman then suggested to Mrs Laithwaite that he had not entered the bungalow until he did so with her. He had seen Mr Bardsley through the window and had been unable to attract his attention, ostensibly because he was already dead. However, no reliance can be placed on Shipman's account of events. He has shown himself to be an inveterate liar. If it were feasible for him to have gained entry to the bungalow and to have killed Mr Bardsley, then it would be my view that that is what must have happened. Mrs Laithwaite said it would have been possible for Shipman to approach the bungalow without being noticed. There is no reason to suppose that Mr Bardsley would not have let Shipman in, had he knocked at the door. I have little doubt that Shipman would have been able to persuade Mr Bardsley that it was in his best interests to allow him either to give him an injection or to let him take a blood sample. He could then have given an injection of diamorphine, which would have resulted in a rapid and peaceful death.
In my judgement, the only sensible inference that can be drawn from the circumstances of this case is that Shipman killed Mr Bardsley. I am sure that that is what occurred.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001