The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel Bennett
Introduction
Miss Ethel Bennett died at her home, 6 Cunliffe Street, Hyde on Monday, 19th
December 1988 at the age of 80. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She held him in high regard. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, members of Miss Bennett's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Steven Michael Bennett (Miss Bennett's great nephew), Mr Alan Roy Bennett (Miss Bennett's nephew), Mrs Joan Sykes (her niece-in-law), Mrs Susan Elaine Cropper (her great-niece), Mr Terence Irvin Bennett (her nephew), Mr Joseph Alcock and Mrs Florence Alcock and Mrs Anne Marie Hopley (her next door neighbours).
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Peter Sykes (Miss Bennett's nephew) and from Mrs Sykes, Mr Alan Bennett and Mrs Cropper. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Bennett's general practitioner records and to Shipman's visits book for 1988.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Bennett had never married and lived by herself. However, she had several nephews and they and their families were close to her. She had a small party in June 1988, six months before her death, to celebrate her 80th
birthday. Shipman was among the guests. Had she not died, she would have spent Christmas among her family.
Evidence of Miss Bennett's general health in the months before her death is to some extent conflicting. Some of those who knew her thought she was in quite good health; others thought she was not. There is a consensus that she would not have kept any illness a secret; rather the reverse, she was inclined to talk about herself at some length. In any event, she still did her own shopping and most of the housework, about which she was meticulous. A home help visited only once a week.
Miss Bennett's medical records, found at Shipman's house after his arrest, indicate that she had been healthy for much of her life. Records dating back to 1926 are contained in a slim envelope. In 1987 and 1988 she had lumbago. There is no entry from 1st
November 1988 until the day of her death. However, Mr Alan Bennett recalls that, about ten days before her death, his aunt told him that she had seen Shipman. He had told her that she had pleurisy and would have to go into hospital over Christmas, which she did not want to do. Mr Alan Bennett offered to let her stay at his home to be looked after. However, nothing came of this and members of the family who saw her after this time were not aware of any illness. For example, when Mrs Sykes (Mr Peter Sykes' wife) saw Miss Bennett on 16th
December 1988, she was quite well. If there was a consultation ten days before the death, it is strange that there is no reference to it in the notes. Although Shipman was not a good record keeper, one would have expected him to make good any recent deficiencies when completing the record after the death. I do not think I can accept Mr Alan Bennett's account of this consultation. There is evidence that, after the death, Shipman told relatives that Miss Bennett had been suffering from pleurisy or pneumonia and had been advised to go to hospital but had been unwilling. I think it likely that Mr Alan Bennett has confused the source of this information.
The Day of the Death
Over the weekend of 17th
/18th
December, Miss Bennett seemed well and in good spirits. On Sunday 18th
December, she telephoned Mr Sykes to check the arrangements for Christmas and she sang a Christmas carol to him over the telephone. However, on the morning of Monday, 19th
December, it appears that she telephoned Shipman to ask for a visit. The visits book confirms an intention to visit that day and she was scheduled to be the second visit on Shipman's round. Her nephew, Mr Terence Bennett, called on her between 11am and noon and she told him that she was expecting the doctor. She seemed a bit wheezy and had a cough but she did not appear to be ill. He stayed for about 30 minutes and she saw him off at the door.
At about 2.45pm, Shipman went to the home of Mrs Cropper, to visit her son, Daniel, who was unwell. Shipman told Mrs Cropper that he had just been to see Miss Bennett and that she was very poorly. He said that she had pleurisy and ought to go to hospital but did not want to. He asked Mrs Cropper to go round to try to persuade her. Mrs Sykes now recalls being told by Mrs Cropper that Shipman had also said that he had given Miss Bennett an injection, though this was not mentioned by either witness in their police statements. As soon as Shipman had left, Mrs Cropper tried to telephone her great-aunt, but there was no response, even after several attempts. She telephoned her father, Mr Alan Bennett, who agreed to visit Miss Bennett after work.
Mr Alan Bennett arrived at his aunt's home at about 6pm. He found the door unlocked, which was most unusual. Every member of family says that Miss Bennett was meticulous about security and always kept the chain on the door. He found his aunt dead, sitting in the kitchen chair in which she usually sat for meals. Her eyes were closed and her head drooped forward as if she were asleep. She was wearing her day clothes. The gas fire was on full and the body was quite warm. Mr Alan Bennett did not regard this as strange, as his aunt liked to keep the house warm. Mr Alan Bennett telephoned the surgery, was put through to the 'on call' service and, in due course, Shipman arrived. He went to the body, touched the hand and said, 'Yes, she's gone'. He may have taken Miss Bennett's pulse but did nothing more. Mr Alan Bennett said that he thought the police should be called, as this was a sudden death, but Shipman said it was not. He had seen Miss Bennett earlier that day and she had been 'like this' for some time. Later, when other members of the family had arrived, Mr Alan Bennett asked if there should be a post-mortem examination and Shipman said that there should not. Shipman repeated what he had said earlier to Mrs Cropper about Miss Bennett's refusal to go to hospital.
The medical records show the following entries for 19th
December:
'19.12.88 - V c/o
(
complained of
)
of (L)sided chest pain
for past 7 days or so.
Cough: phlegm, white
odd
green bits
Temp 38.6°C
A/E
(R) base pleural rub
present. creps rhonchi
no relief paracetamol.
Advised ? Hospital ? home
(
illegible but I think it says
)
chooses home
Amoxil 80mg TDS x
(
illegible but I think it says
)
7 days
given Amoxil 250mg BD
(
illegible but I think it says
)
stat'
.
There is a separate entry:
'19.25 found by son. 6.30 hours.
DC bronchopneumonia'
.
I interpret this to suggest that when Shipman visited on 19th
December, Miss Bennett told him that she had had left-sided chest pain for the last seven days. She had a cough productive of mainly white phlegm. Her temperature was slightly raised. Air entry was reduced. There was a pleural rub. On listening to the chest, Shipman claims to have heard very severe crepitations and rhonchi. He recorded that Miss Bennett had had no relief from paracetamol. There is then a suggestion that he advised her about whether to go to hospital. This part of the entry is very difficult to read but I think it says that she chose to stay at home. There is no suggestion that she was advised strongly that she ought to go to hospital. Shipman then claims to have prescribed an antibiotic and I think the note suggests that he gave a very large initial dose. This note does not convey the impression that the patient was ill enough to die of bronchopneumonia within a few hours.
On the evening of 19th
December and on the following day, members of the family went to the house. The house was clean and tidy. They noticed clean pots and pans stacked on the draining board. It appears that Miss Bennett had eaten a proper cooked lunch. Mrs Sykes said that, for the 20 years she had known Miss Bennett, she had never known her to leave the pots out in that way. She had always dried them and put them away. Mrs Sykes infers that Miss Bennett must have been interrupted before she had finished the task and had not gone back to it after the interruption.
Mrs Sykes also believes that somewhere between £50 and £100 in cash was missing from a tin in Miss Bennett's bedroom. This tin was empty. Some electricity stamps also appeared to be missing. Mr Alan Bennett also believes small items were missing from other places.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. This shows that Shipman said that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. He said that the death occurred at
'4pm'
. He stated that he had seen Miss Bennett alive on the day of her death. He had also seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Mr Alan Bennett contacted the undertakers and his name appears on the application for cremation Form A. He denies that this is his signature, although it appears to have been witnessed by the undertaker, Mr Alan Massey. It certainly is different from his signature on both his Inquiry statement and his handwritten police statement. He is also concerned that the time of death is recorded as 6pm. This was not in fact the time of death and the time there given is also inconsistent with information recorded by Shipman.
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He said that the time of death was
'About 1600hrs'
(written over 14.00). Shipman stated that he had last seen Miss Bennett alive about six hours before death and had attended her for six hours during her last illness.
The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting
'hour only'
. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman did not answer directly but wrote:
'Seen by self at 1300 hrs found by son at 1830. Neighbour heard her at 1500 hrs moving about then found sat in chair'
. Police enquiries of the neighbours on both sides of Miss Bennett's house prove that this was not true. The neighbours from one side were out at work all day and the residents from the other side told the police that, not only did they not hear Miss Bennett moving about, they never spoke to Shipman that day. They were in any event elderly and hard of hearing.
The Expert Evidence
Although Dr John Grenville has not provided a report in this case, some aspects of his generic evidence are relevant. He said that patients dying of bronchopneumonia are usually very weak and become exhausted. They are obviously ill for at least several hours before death. They usually lapse into unconsciousness and their respiration becomes increasingly noisy. This is inconsistent with the evidence that Miss Bennett had been able to make and eat a cooked lunch and do the washing up and other housework only a few hours before her death.
Dr Grenville also said that it is not typical for a patient who has died of bronchopneumonia to be found sitting in a chair looking peaceful and appearing to be asleep.
Professor Richard Baker commented that this was a brief history with no indication of signs such as respiratory distress or cyanosis which may have suggested a potentially fatal respiratory infection or been such as to warrant admission to hospital. Professor Baker found the case highly suspicious both on the basis of the cremation certificate and on the basis of the notes and records.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious. The evidence shows that, on the day of her death, Miss Bennett was not in good health; she was suffering from a cough and wheezy chest. However, she was well enough to chat to Mr Terence Bennett, cook and eat lunch and wash up the dishes. She did not appear to have been suffering from a severe infection such as might cause her death in the near future. Shipman visited her at some time between noon and 2.30pm. In my view, he probably interrupted Miss Bennett washing up. He had the opportunity to give her an injection. She was never seen alive after the visit and I am satisfied that she was not heard to be moving about. The fact that she did not put the chain on the door when he left is a strong indication that she was unable to do so, because she was already dead or at least unconscious.
Shipman's claim that Miss Bennett was very poorly when he saw her is almost certainly false. She would not have deteriorated so suddenly after her nephew's departure. The story that a patient had refused admission to hospital was one of Shipman's recurrent themes. Had Miss Bennett really been very ill and had she really refused to go to hospital, he would have telephoned a relative to try to exert pressure on her. As it was, he left her alone and, some time later, told Mrs Cropper that she was ill but would not go to hospital. It is clear to me that by the time of Shipman's visit to Mrs Cropper, Miss Bennett was already dead.
The contents of Form B are, in my view, plainly false. There is an internal inconsistency within the document. In one place Shipman says he last saw Miss Bennett six hours before her death (which on his timings would be 10am) and in another he says he saw her at 1pm, only three hours before the supposed time of death. It would be most unusual for Shipman to visit as early as 10am. A much more likely time is 1pm, although he could have been at Miss Bennett's home rather later than that. Shipman falsely claimed that a neighbour had heard Miss Bennett moving about after his departure. This falsehood was plainly designed to create the impression that Miss Bennett was alive when he left and that the death had taken place some hours after his departure.
Miss Bennett's appearance in death was not consistent with a death from bronchopneumonia but was entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
I cannot make any positive finding about the property which the family says was missing from Miss Bennett's home. There is a suspicion that Shipman might have stolen it but no more.
This death has Shipman's hallmark on it. I am quite sure that Shipman killed Miss Bennett. He must have administered a lethal injection, almost certainly of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001