The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Baddeley
Introduction
Mr John Baddeley died at his home, Flat 6 Rowan Court, Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Saturday, 8th
June 1996 at the age of 80. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Baddeley's death was cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry legal team decided to investigate this case because the cremation certificate revealed a home visit by Shipman very shortly before the death. The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Elizabeth McCarthy, Mrs Christine Bottomley, Mrs Kathleen Mary Wood (Mr Baddeley's daughters) and Mr Norman Harry Wood (Mr Baddeley's son-in-law). The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Baddeley's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
The police have not investigated the death and there has been no inquest.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Baddeley's medical records confirm a long history of raised blood pressure, episodes of dizziness and transient ischaemic attacks during the 1980s. By the time of his death, he had suffered several strokes, had become confused and was dependent on his wife for assistance with his personal care.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 8th
June 1996, Mrs Wood received a telephone call from her mother, informing her that her father was unwell. She and her husband went to her parents' house. They found Mr Baddeley sitting in an armchair. His face was flushed, his mouth open and he was obviously ill. Mr Wood, who was an ambulance man, took Mr Baddeley's pulse and formed the view that he had suffered another stroke. Shipman was called.
When he arrived at about 11am, Shipman confirmed that Mr Baddeley had suffered another stroke. According to Mr Wood, he and Shipman lifted Mr Baddeley into bed. Mrs Baddeley asked Shipman whether he was going to send her husband to hospital. According to Mr Wood, Mrs Baddeley had decided that she wished to nurse her husband at home. Shipman turned to her and said, rather abruptly, 'You know he's going to die'. Shipman then gave Mr Baddeley an injection. Neither Mr nor Mrs Wood knew what the injection was and they cannot recall where it was given. Mr Wood thinks that the reason it was given was because Mr Baddeley had become quite agitated and distressed. Mrs Wood's recollection is that Shipman said that her father had suffered a brain stem haemorrhage and that the injection was given while her father was still in the armchair. Mrs Wood says that her father drifted into unconsciousness soon after the injection was given. Mr and Mrs Wood returned home. Mrs McCarthy remembers that Shipman also made arrangements for a nurse to attend.
Shipman made a brief manuscript note of this visit. It says:
'8.6.96
V
(
visit
)
(R) CVA.
140/90 ® weakness arm/leg
leave at home time being'
.
This suggests that Shipman diagnosed a right-sided stroke and decided to leave Mr Baddeley at home. There is no reference to an injection. The corresponding computerised note confirms that the haemorrhage was thought to be in the brain stem.
Mr and Mrs Wood were told by Mrs Baddeley that Shipman visited Mr Baddeley again at about 5.30pm and that he expressed surprise that Mr Baddeley was still alive. The computerised record contains the following brief report of a visit at 5pm:
'8/6/96
Examination of patient
1700 hr d/n catheter etc'
.
This suggests that Shipman arranged for a district nurse to attend to catheterise Mr Baddeley, which would support Mrs McCarthy's recollection.
Mrs McCarthy was informed that her father's condition was very serious and went to visit him, with her husband, arriving at about 9pm. She, her husband and her mother were at his bedside at 11pm when her father died. Shipman came shortly afterwards and diagnosed a brain stem haemorrhage. Mr and Mrs Wood were told of the death and came to the house.
The final entry in the computerised records is timed at 10.55pm and reads:
'8/6/96
O/E - dead
2255hrs family present'
.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), where he said that the cause of death was
'Cerebro Vascular Accident'
due to
'Arteriosclerotic Vascular Disease'
. He said that he had seen Mr Baddeley alive on the day of the death and had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman said that death occurred at 10.55pm. He said that Mr Baddeley had been in a coma for six hours before death and that Mr Baddeley's wife, daughter and son-in-law were present at the death. Mr Baddeley had been nursed by his
'wife/daughter'
during his final illness. Shipman claimed to have treated Mr Baddeley for 12 hours during his last illness and last to have seen him about six hours before death. Those answers are consistent with the recollections of the family.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker did not find the death suspicious on account either the information contained in the medical records or that contained in the cremation forms.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mr Baddeley died a natural death.
Mr Baddeley had a history of cerebrovascular accidents and on the day of his death seems to have suffered a final stroke. It would be entirely proper practice for Shipman to give a sedative injection to his patient if, as Mr Wood remembers, he was becoming agitated and distressed. Shipman should have noted the injection in the medical records. He was a poor record keeper however, and the fact that he did not note the injection does not, of itself, give rise to any suspicion that the injection was not given for proper therapeutic reasons. I do not believe that the injection he gave contained an overdose of opiate or sedative. It was also appropriate for Shipman to arrange for a district nurse to catheterise Mr Baddeley, as he apparently did.
The only criticism that could be made of Shipman's conduct is his callous attitude towards a family in distressing circumstances, awaiting the death of a loved one.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001