The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Mary Baddeley
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Mary Baddeley died at her home, Flat 6 Rowan Court, Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 21st
November 1997 at the age of 83. She had been widowed in June 1996 and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Baddeley's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998. After a preliminary assessment, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police took statements from Mrs Kathleen Mary Wood (one of Mrs Baddeley's three daughters) and Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Baddeley but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Wood and statements from Mrs Elizabeth McCarthy and Mrs Christine Bottomley (Mrs Baddeley's two other daughters), Mrs Beatrice Ellen Todd (Mrs Baddeley's close friend and neighbour) and Mr David Hampson (Mrs Baddeley's neighbour). Extensive enquiries were made by the Inquiry of neighbours, in an attempt to establish whether Shipman had or had not visited Mrs Baddeley on the day of her death.
The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Baddeley's general practitioner and hospital records, the relevant telephone billing records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Baddeley was in close contact with her three daughters. Mrs Wood lived close to her mother and as a rule would see her every Sunday. Mrs McCarthy, who lived in Harrogate at the time of her mother's death, saw her mother every four to six weeks and was in weekly telephone contact. Mrs Bottomley lived in Zimbabwe and therefore saw her mother less frequently, although they exchanged letters regularly and spoke by telephone about once a month.
All the witnesses describe Mrs Baddeley as a fit and active person. She had nursed her husband during his final illness. She was a regular attender at church and used to drive her friends to church functions and on other outings. Early in 1997, she visited Mrs Bottomley in Zimbabwe and in September 1997 she visited her sister in Canada. Her sister remarked to Mrs McCarthy on how active Mrs Baddeley had been during the visit to Canada.
Mrs Baddeley suffered from osteoarthritis of the spine for which she took painkilling medication in the form of co-proxamol and naproxen tablets. She also suffered from minor heart problems for which she was prescribed regular medication. The subject of her congestive heart failure is discussed in detail below. Before her visit to Zimbabwe, Mrs Baddeley asked Shipman to complete a medical certificate for the purpose of obtaining travel insurance. Shipman completed the certificate and said that Mrs Baddeley suffered from
'Mild CHF oedema dyspnoea'
. That means that she had mild congestive heart failure, ankle swelling and breathlessness. In response to the question as to the extent to which the condition affected Mrs Baddeley's life, from the range of options of none, slight, moderate and severe, Shipman ticked the box 'slight'. However, Mrs Baddeley told her daughter, Mrs Bottomley, that Shipman had told her in 1996 that she had only two years to live on account of her heart problem.
During her visit to Zimbabwe in 1997, Mrs Baddeley suffered from a persistent cough. She consulted her daughter's doctor, who said that she had developed an allergy. Mrs Baddeley thought that this diagnosis was incorrect, as she had never previously suffered from an allergy. She was convinced that the cough was caused by the tablets that Shipman had prescribed for her heart problems. The medical records show that Mrs Baddeley had been taking co-amilozide (a diuretic) from about March 1996. There was no record of any other drug that might have been prescribed to treat the heart condition at this time. Mrs Baddeley had taken Innovace from about 1993 to 1995, when it had been stopped because she had developed a persistent cough. A dry cough is a recognised side effect of Innovace. One can understand why in those circumstances Mrs Baddeley might have convinced herself that her cough was due to her medication. According to Mrs Bottomley, her mother stopped taking her heart tablets whilst in Zimbabwe. However, it appears that she was prescribed them again some time after her return to England, as the records reveal repeat prescriptions for co-amilozide at two-monthly intervals. The last such was dated 14th
October 1997. Mrs Todd remembers that Mrs Baddeley used to collect her prescriptions from the surgery.
In summary, the witness evidence suggests that Mrs Baddeley's heart condition was well controlled by medication and had little effect upon her daily activities. The medical records confirm this impression. In the last year before her death, Mrs Baddeley had routine tests and vaccinations, treatment for an upper respiratory tract infection and periodic monitoring of her congestive heart failure, which gave no cause for concern. The final record before the death is dated 14th
October 1997, when Mrs Baddeley attended the surgery for an influenza injection, routine monitoring and blood tests. The results were within normal limits for her age and did not result in any recall.
Mrs Bottomley and her husband were in England during the week before Mrs Baddeley died and stayed with her until 20th
November, when they went to visit friends and family in Harrogate and stayed overnight. Mrs Baddeley appeared well and Mrs Bottomley had no concerns about her when she left.
The Day of the Death
On 21st
November 1997, it appears that Mrs Baddeley cleaned her car during the morning. She and Mrs Todd had lunch together at Gee Cross. After lunch, they briefly visited an elderly friend. They then went to the library, where Mrs Baddeley changed her books. Mrs Baddeley then drove back to Rowan Court, where they arrived at about 2.30pm. As they parted to go to their respective flats, Mrs Todd told Mrs Baddeley to go in and sit down and have a cup of tea. Mrs Baddeley reminded Mrs Todd of their arrangement to meet the following Monday. At that time, Mrs Baddeley did not complain of feeling ill and Mrs Todd did not notice that she was feeling breathless.
Mrs McCarthy telephoned her mother at about 7pm but there was no reply.
Mrs Bottomley returned from Harrogate at about 9pm. She opened the door to the flat, which was secured by a Yale lock. The flat was in darkness, which alarmed her. At that time of year, the light fades at about 4pm, so Mrs Baddeley might be expected to put on her lights at about 3.30pm. Mrs Bottomley found her mother in the lounge. She was sitting in her usual chair, with one arm across her lap and the other on the arm of the chair. She looked peaceful and was lying back against the chair with her eyes open. She was wearing her usual day clothes. Mrs Bottomley felt her mother's hand, which was cold to the touch. The television was switched off and the curtains were open. On the table in front of Mrs Baddeley was a bottle of pills. Mrs Wood, who arrived later, says that the lid was on. The pills have since been destroyed but Mrs Bottomley thinks that they were those prescribed for her mother's heart condition.
Mrs Bottomley then telephoned her sisters, Mrs Wood and Mrs McCarthy. Mrs Wood came to the house with her husband, who was a paramedic. He confirmed that Mrs Baddeley had died. Mr Wood then telephoned Shipman. When Shipman arrived, he said that Mrs Baddeley had had a heart attack. Mr and Mrs Wood, both of whom had experience as first aiders, thought this strange, as Mrs Baddeley did not have an expression of pain on her face and she was not cyanosed, as they would have expected following a heart attack.
Mrs McCarthy travelled from Harrogate and arrived at Mrs Baddeley's flat at about 11pm. She says her mother was sitting 'in a very false position'. Her feet were perfectly placed, her arms were resting on the arms of the chair and her head was perfectly straight. All members of the family say that Mrs Baddeley looked peaceful.
There is an entry in Mrs Baddeley's computerised medical records, which relates to Shipman's visit, at which he certified the fact and cause of Mrs Baddeley's death. The entry, made at 11.03am the next day, reads:
'O/E - dead
old age chf 1500 hrs seen 2220 daughter present'
.
This suggests that Shipman found Mrs Baddeley to be dead when he visited at 10.20pm. He concluded that the causes of death were old age and congestive heart failure. He considered that the death had occurred at 3pm. It is not clear whether he was suggesting that a daughter was present at the death or at his visit.
Certification
Shipman completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), on which he gave the cause of death as old age. He said that congestive heart failure, from which Mrs Baddeley had suffered for eight years, had contributed to the death but was not related to the cause of death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Baddeley alive on 12th
November. That claim is not corroborated by the medical or surgery records and is probably a lie. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that the time of death was
'About 1500 hrs'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Baddeley during her last illness for about four years. As he said that the death was due to old age, this implies that Mrs Baddeley had been in a gradual state of decline towards death over a period of four years. That was not true. He again said that he last saw Mrs Baddeley alive on 12th
November 1997, nine days before her death. He said that he saw the body about seven hours after death and performed a complete external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD and the mode of death was said to be syncope of seconds' duration. In response to question 11 (as to how far the answers to the questions as to cause and mode of death were based on Shipman's observations or those of others), Shipman wrote:
'Daughter Mrs WOOD'
. He also said that Mrs Wood was present at the moment of death. She was not and she could not have provided Shipman with any information from which he could have reached any conclusions about the cause or mode of death.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of Death
There is no witness evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Baddeley on the afternoon of 21st
November.
The surgery records show that Shipman had only four patients to see in open surgery that morning. He would have finished that by about 10.45am at the very latest. He would then usually do administrative work before going out on his rounds. A minor operation scheduled for 2pm appears to have been cancelled. A scheduled visit from a representative of Beecham Research may have been cancelled as well. The first afternoon appointment was at 3.45pm so it would appear that he was free to do visits between about 11.30am and 3.30pm. Three patients are listed in the visits book and, even if these took longer than usual, Shipman would certainly have had time to visit Mrs Baddeley during the afternoon, after her arrival home at 2.30pm. None of the patients whom he visited lived close to Mrs Baddeley.
Miscellaneous
According to Mrs Baddeley's daughters, a number of items of jewellery were found to be missing from her house.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Baddeley's medical records and commented as follows:
'There is so little recorded about the death, impossible to identify reason for sudden death. She was 83, the records do not indicate the long and gradual decline that might justify old age as a cause of death. ...
The times given with the death are difficult to interpret, but it looks as though the patient was certified dead at 2200, HS guessing that death occurred at 1500 - this raises the possibility of “sudden death in the afternoon” associated with a visit from the GP, the visit on this occasion not being recorded'
.
Dr Grenville examined all the medical records and has seen the police witness statements. He noted Mrs Baddeley's history of congestive heart failure and a record which suggested that she had had a heart attack in 1993. Dr Grenville said that an electrocardiogram (ECG), dated 4th
October 1993, did not demonstrate evidence of congestive heart failure or a recent heart attack. There is an undated record of an echocardiogram in the notes, which suggested a minimal degree of congestive heart failure. Dr Grenville has not commented upon an x-ray report from Tameside General Hospital dated 22nd
October 1992, which records that Mrs Baddeley's heart was enlarged and her upper lobe vessels were somewhat distended. The possibility of early cardiac failure was noted. However, it would appear that the slight degree of cardiac failure noted in 1992 and 1993 did not worsen. When Mrs Baddeley was reviewed every three months for congestive heart failure, the presence of oedema was only occasionally recorded. In early 1997, the travel insurance certificate, referred to previously, recorded that Mrs Baddeley suffered from dyspnoea as well as oedema but Shipman expressed the view that she would not be at increased risk during her visit to Zimbabwe. In short, it is Dr Grenville's view that Mrs Baddeley's congestive heart failure was minimal.
Dr Grenville has advised in this case, as in his generic evidence, that old age may be appropriate as the cause of death in an elderly patient who has been seriously ill for a period of weeks or months, whose condition has gradually deteriorated and where the doctor cannot say with certainty which failing organ finally caused death. This was clearly not the case with Mrs Baddeley. In Dr Grenville's opinion, Mrs Baddeley's death was sudden and unexpected and its cause could not have been known. It should have been referred to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death.
Mrs Baddeley was in good health on the day of her death and her medical history provides no possible explanation for her sudden death. Old age was not an appropriate cause of death for a woman who had been out and about only an hour or so before her death and who had washed her car a few hours earlier. This was a case where any honest doctor should have referred the death to the coroner for post-mortem examination. That Shipman did not do so arouses suspicion as to his involvement. However, I must remind myself that I have come across other cases in which Shipman has certified the cause of a death, which ought to have been referred to the coroner, but where he could not have killed the patient. Accordingly, Shipman's apparent desire to avoid a post-mortem examination is suggestive but not probative of guilty involvement.
The position in which Mrs Baddeley was found was more suggestive of a death due to opiate poisoning than of one due to heart attack or stroke. Dr Grenville has said that it is usual in cases of heart attack or stroke to find the patient collapsed in circumstances which imply an attempt to call for help. The explanation is that, when a stroke or heart attack begins, the patient usually realises that something is seriously wrong and tries to take action. It cannot be said that Mrs Baddeley's position in her chair and peaceful appearance are probative of an unlawful killing by Shipman, but they are suggestive of it.
Shipman told a number of lies on the MCCD and on cremation Form B. First, he claimed that he had seen Mrs Baddeley alive on 12th
November. The medical records and the appointments sheets indicate that he last saw her alive on 14th
October. That would have been more than 14 days before the death. Although it is not necessary for a doctor to have seen a patient within 14 days of the death in order to qualify him or her to certify the cause (it is sufficient if he or she has attended the patient during the last illness and has seen the body after death), many registrars and doctors are under the impression that the doctor cannot certify the cause of death unless he or she has seen the patient within 14 days before the death. Shipman seems to have been under that impression and frequently made false entries suggesting that he had seen the patient within that time limit. He often did this in cases where he had killed the patient and the inference I have drawn is that he would wish to avoid the risk of referral to the coroner. However, sometimes he would make a false entry even where he had not killed the patient. I assume that in such cases he wished to avoid the trouble and potential delay caused by a coroner's referral. Thus, this particular false entry is not significantly probative.
There are, however, other more significant lies. Most important is Shipman's claim on Form B that Mrs Wood was present at the moment of death and was able to provide relevant information about the circumstances of the death. Shipman implies that he knows the time of death, presumably from what he has been told by Mrs Wood. He implies that Mrs Wood has described the mode of death. She was not present. She was not even the daughter who discovered the death. This is an important lie, especially in the context of death supposedly from old age, which is by definition not sudden and where one would expect the patient's family to be in attendance. This lie seems to give the impression that the death was not sudden or unexpected and took place in the presence of a close relative. I cannot see any point in Shipman telling that lie, unless he wished to avoid his medical colleagues asking questions about the cause and circumstances of the death.
Shipman's untruthful claim that he had attended Mrs Baddeley for four years during her last illness is also significant. He is seeking to create the impression that Mrs Baddeley had been declining over a long period. Nothing could have been further from the truth. I can think of no innocent reason for his telling that lie.
Thus, although there is no single factor pointing decisively towards guilt, the features mentioned above are strongly suggestive of it.
On the other side of the scales, there are factors suggestive of natural death and Shipman's innocence.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Baddeley on the day of her death or that he intended to see her on that day. That does not mean that he could not have done so. Stockport Road is a very busy thoroughfare and it would not be surprising if he had come and gone without being noticed or remembered. He certainly had time to visit Mrs Baddeley that day. If he did visit her, the visit was unsolicited. Had she been expecting a visit, she would have told her family or Mrs Todd because she would have had to make sure she was back from her outing before 2.30pm. If the visit was unsolicited, it is hard to see anything that might have triggered it. In some cases investigated by the Inquiry, Shipman seems to have taken the opportunity to visit and kill his patient after that patient had come to his attention for some innocuous reason, perhaps because of a request for an acute prescription. There is here no evidence that Mrs Baddeley came to Shipman's attention in any way in the days preceding her death. Of course, that does not mean that she did not come to his attention. He might have seen her out in her car that day.
How Shipman came to give 3pm as the time of death is not clear. He could not have estimated it from body temperature, as he sometimes claimed to do. It seems to me that he probably heard the family discussing Mrs Baddeley's habits and the fact that she would not usually sit in the dark with the curtains open as evening fell. However, the family would not have known at what time Mrs Baddeley returned home in the afternoon. It is possible that Shipman knew the time of death because he was there. If he did visit Mrs Baddeley, it must have been between about 2.30pm and 3.30pm. His usual practice after a killing would be to state a time of death some hours after his visit and the death. In that way he would distance himself from the death. Here he does not seem to have done that and I think this factor points, albeit not strongly, towards innocence.
In my view, the fact that a bottle of pills was found on the table next to Mrs Baddeley is neutral and supports equally the proposition that Mrs Baddeley put out her pills in the course of a visit by Shipman and the alternative proposition that she felt unwell in the minutes leading up to her death and decided to take a tablet.
There is no reliable evidence that Shipman stole from patients he visited or murdered. There is much suspicion that he did but no item of jewellery found on Shipman's premises was ever identified as belonging to one of his deceased patients. In my view, where property is missing, it is not safe to infer that it was taken by Shipman.
Taking these various factors into account, it seems to me that the weight of the evidence points to this being an unnatural death. I bear in mind that, in late 1997, Shipman was killing patients very frequently. At this time, his murderous conduct had reached a crescendo. My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mrs Baddeley.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001