The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
May Brookes
Introduction
Mrs May Brookes died at her home, 49 Cross Street, Hyde on Friday, 1st
February 1985 at the age of 74. She was widowed at the time of her death and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, members of Mrs Brookes' family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Brookes' daughter, Mrs Margaret Williams and from Mrs Janet Bentley, the daughter of Mr and Mrs Ridings who lived next door to Mrs Brookes. The police also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Brookes' death but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Williams, Mr Andrew James Williams (her son), Mr Michael Francis Reed (a friend of Mrs Williams) and from Mrs Susan Wood (Mrs Brookes' home help). The Inquiry has also had access to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book and Shipman's visits book for 1985. Mrs Brookes' death pre-dated the introduction of the computer at the Donneybrook Surgery and the manuscript medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
By all accounts Mrs Brookes led an active life and enjoyed good health, although she took medication for hypertension and she also suffered from arthritis in her hips and knees. She was very much involved in the community, and helped to raise funds for a number of religious institutions. She enjoyed playing bingo; each Thursday she would have her evening meal with Mrs Williams and her family and then she and her daughter would go to play bingo. This is what she did on Thursday, 31st
January, the day before her death. Mrs Williams recalls driving her mother home after bingo and leaving between 10.30pm and 10.45pm, at which time her mother was 'absolutely fine'.
The Day of the Death
On 1st
February 1985, Mr Williams called in at his grandmother's house between 8am and 8.30am. Mrs Brookes lived near to Hyde railway station and Mr Williams was in the habit of leaving his bicycle at her house before catching the train to college. When he left the house to catch the train Mrs Brookes was well and her condition did not give him cause for concern.
Mrs Wood arrived at Mrs Brookes' house at approximately 11.20am. Mrs Brookes mentioned that Shipman was coming to see her that day in connection with her hip. The two ladies ate lunch together and Mrs Wood left shortly after 1pm. As she was leaving, Mrs Wood, who was also a patient of Shipman, saw him arrive. He recognised Mrs Wood and waved to her as he got out of his car. Mrs Wood does not recall seeing any of Mrs Brookes' neighbours on the street at the time.
Mrs Bentley has provided a statement in which she gives a hearsay account of the events of 1st
February, as described to her by her father, Mr Ridings. Both he and Mrs Brookes were standing outside the front of their houses having a conversation at around lunchtime. Mrs Brookes said that she was expecting a visit from Shipman and that he was going to take a blood sample. Mr Reed also provides an account of what Mr Ridings later said to him about the events of the morning. The account supports that given by Mrs Bentley, and Mr Reed adds that while the two were talking, Mrs Brookes spotted Shipman walking up the road, said goodbye to Mr Ridings and they each went into their respective homes. On both accounts, a short time later Shipman knocked on the Ridings' door, said that Mrs Brookes had died and asked to use the telephone in order to contact her daughter. Mr Ridings was apparently surprised to hear that Mrs Brookes had died because she had seemed 'fine and jolly' when he had been talking to her a short while before.
Shortly after 1.30pm, Shipman telephoned Mrs Williams at the school where she worked and said that he had some bad news for her. He said that he had called in to see her mother and that she had died. Mrs Williams immediately drove to her mother's house and arrived at about 1.45pm. Her mother was sitting in a straight chair with her head upright, her arms on the chair rests and her feet together. She was wearing glasses and her hair and clothes did not appear to have been disturbed. She appeared to Mrs Williams to be asleep and in fact she thought that perhaps somebody was playing an unfortunate joke on her because her mother looked to be alive, although asleep.
Mrs Williams sat down for a few minutes and then went outside and saw Mr Reed, who was clearing furniture from a neighbouring house. Together they went back to Mrs Brookes' house and shortly afterwards, at about 2pm, Shipman returned. He appeared to be surprised that Mrs Williams had arrived at the house already and explained that he had returned to the surgery in order to pick up a death certificate and thought that he would have returned prior to her arrival. He went on to say that he had found Mrs Brookes lying on the floor, dying. Mrs Brookes weighed about 13
stone and Mrs Williams makes reference to the suggestion made by the police that it is unlikely that Shipman would have been able to pick up her mother. Mr Reed shares this view and comments that Mrs Brookes did not have the appearance of somebody who had collapsed and then been lifted into a chair. Her clothing was not ruffled and she looked peaceful, as if asleep. Mr Reed recalls Shipman arriving at the house and recalls that he said Mrs Brookes had been suffering from a heart attack when he first arrived. Mrs Williams does not state that Shipman referred to Mrs Brookes as having suffered a heart attack. It may be that Mr Reed is mistaken in his recollection because Shipman later certified that the cause of Mrs Brookes' death was cerebrovascular accident and not heart attack.
The visits book for 1985 records a visit on 1st
February. There are no further entries in that book for the two week period prior to Mrs Brookes' death.
Certification
Shipman certified the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. Although the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. There it is recorded that Shipman last saw Mrs Brookes alive on 30th
January 1985 and, somewhat inconsistently, that he was present at the death. There is no entry in the visits book for 30th
January 1985, although it is of course possible that Shipman saw Mrs Brookes at the surgery on that date. It is recorded on the MCCD counterfoil that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Mrs Brookes was seen by Shipman after death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death to be
'1400'
. He recorded having been Mrs Brookes' ordinary medical practitioner for a period of seven years and having attended her during her last illness for five minutes. He recorded having been present at the death together with a neighbour,
'Mr Rydings'
. Mr Ridings was, of course, only called after the death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville provided a statement to the police in which he pointed to the fact that in his experience and in the experience of colleagues with whom he had consulted, it is extremely unusual for a patient to die suddenly and unexpectedly just as a general practitioner is visiting. Dr Grenville considers the position where this happens once in a general practitioner's career as unlucky, but notes that, in Shipman's case, it occurred frequently.
In Dr Grenville's opinion, if Shipman's description of events were accurate, as described in Mrs Williams' evidence, there would have been no reason for Shipman to have picked up Mrs Brookes and sat her in a chair.
Taking the evidence as a whole, Dr Grenville concluded that Shipman was involved in the death of Mrs Brookes.
Following consideration of the cremation certificate, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mrs Brookes was highly suspicious.
Other Matters
Mrs Brookes was very fond of jewellery. She had collected six boxes of mainly costume jewellery, although she did own a pair of valuable earrings. When Mrs Williams returned to her mother's house a few weeks after the death, she discovered that the jewellery was missing. She is of the opinion that Shipman took the jewellery, although there is no direct evidence to support this conclusion.
Conclusion
Mrs Brookes' medical records have not been recovered and very little is known about her medical condition prior to death. Although she did suffer from hypertension she led a fit and active life. Despite the lack of medical evidence, there is still good evidence that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Brookes.
The most suspicious feature is the fact that Shipman was present at the moment of death, particularly as Mrs Brookes was not suffering from a terminal illness and Shipman had not been called out as an emergency. As Dr Grenville has commented, there are a number of cases where Shipman has been present at the death of a patient who, not having suffered from a terminal illness, has died suddenly at home. That this should occur in any individual case is a remarkable coincidence. That this occurred on so many occasions cannot be explained by coincidence. This is a highly suspicious feature in its own right.
Mrs Brookes was fit and well when seen by her grandson on the morning of her death and by Mrs Wood immediately before Shipman's visit. She made no complaint of ill health to Mrs Wood and said that Shipman was due to visit her in connection with her hip. Yet on Shipman's account, he found her collapsed on the floor. She was said to be alive but
'dying'
and he therefore lifted her into a chair. Beyond the obvious point that this would be an extraordinary coincidence, a number of further points arise. Where a patient is not suffering from a terminal illness or some obvious serious injury, it is not possible to determine whether a patient is dying. Dr Grenville has commented that there would be no reason for Shipman to lift Mrs Brookes into a chair. In any event Mrs Brookes' appearance was inconsistent with her having collapsed and thereafter being lifted into a chair. Her glasses were straight and her clothing was not ruffled. Further, due to Mrs Brookes' weight, it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible for Shipman to have lifted Mrs Brookes into a chair. I conclude that Shipman lied about having found Mrs Brookes collapsed on the floor.
Had Shipman really found Mrs Brookes in a collapsed state then he should have summoned an ambulance in order for her to receive emergency treatment in hospital. Where a patient is semi-conscious or unconscious, it would be very difficult to diagnose a cerebrovascular accident. For example, the patient could be in a state of hypo or hyperglycaemia. Further, as it would not have been possible for Shipman to diagnose the fact that Mrs Brookes was
'dying'
, he would not have been able to predict future events or that calling an ambulance would be futile. A patient who is unconscious may well regain consciousness and, in any event, survive for some time.
Shipman recorded on Form B that Mr Ridings was present with him at the moment of death. According to the accounts of both Mrs Bentley and Mr Reed, when Shipman first spoke to Mr Ridings he said that Mrs Brookes was dead. I believe that Shipman lied in completing Form B.
Taken as a whole the evidence satisfies me that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Brookes and I am sure that he did so.
It is not possible to determine from the medical records whether Mrs Brookes did in fact require a blood test. If she did, then, considering her good health, she would have been able to attend at the surgery in order for the sample to be taken. Therefore, it would appear likely that the killing of Mrs Brookes was premeditated, and the offer to attend at her home in order to take a blood sample was a pretext and an excuse on Shipman's part to introduce a needle.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001