The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nellie Bennett
Introduction
Mrs Nellie Bennett was found dead at her home on Wednesday, 26th
June 1996. Although the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') records that her death occurred on Wednesday, 26th
June 1996, I have found that, in fact, she died on Tuesday, 25th
June 1996. She was 86 and a widow. She lived in a warden-controlled flat at 1 Ravensfield, Gorse Hall Road, Dukinfield. She had been a patient of Shipman since March 1995 and was registered at his Market Street Surgery at the time of her death. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In November 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Shirley Spencer (Mrs Bennett's daughter) contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr John Hargreaves (a relief warden with Tameside MBC Housing Department).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Bennett but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Spencer. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Bennett's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
For her age, Mrs Bennett appeared to have been in reasonably good health. She had in the past suffered episodes of dizziness, which were attributed to postural hypertension. She had a regular prescription for bendrofluazide (presumably for hypertension), analgesics, lorazepam (for insomnia), laxatives and an antacid. Her mobility was restricted by arthritic problems of the legs and feet and her dizziness.
Mrs Bennett suffered a number of falls caused by her postural hypertension and, in February 1995, one such fall resulted in a broken wrist. After that, she moved to a flat in Hyde and from there to Dukinfield. Despite her mobility problems, Mrs Bennett was able, with the aid of a Zimmer frame, to cross over the road from her flat in order to have lunch at Yew Tree House, an elderly persons' home. This provided a more sociable alternative to meals on wheels. In good weather, Mrs Bennett would even walk to the local shops.
Mrs Spencer took her mother shopping on Monday, 24th
June, in order to buy clothes for a forthcoming family holiday, planned for early July. Mrs Bennett appeared happy, fit and well during the shopping trip. She did not mention feeling unwell or the possibility of calling the doctor.
The Death and its Discovery
Mrs Spencer did not see her mother on 25th
June. However, the person in charge at Yew Tree House later told her that her mother had been there for lunch as usual on that day and had seemed fit and well. Mrs Spencer telephoned her mother during the early evening of 25th
June. There was no reply. Mrs Spencer was not concerned and assumed that her mother was spending the evening with one of her neighbours, as she did from time to time.
On Wednesday, 26th
June, Mr Hargreaves, the relief warden at Ravensfield, carried out his usual morning check on each of the residents.
He arrived at Mrs Bennett's flat at 8.40am and, when she did not answer the door, he entered the flat using his pass key and discovered Mrs Bennett slumped in an armchair in the lounge. She was dead. Her arm was stiff and her skin cold. She was wearing daytime clothing. The curtains in the flat were open. Mr Hargreaves formed the view that Mrs Bennett had 'at least died overnight'. Mr Hargreaves called the ambulance service. He also telephoned Mrs Spencer and spoke to her husband. He told Mr Spencer that it appeared to him that Mrs Bennett had not been to bed. She was fully dressed and the evening newspaper was still behind the door.
Mrs Spencer arrived at Ravensfield at about 10am. On entering the flat, she noticed a copy of the
Manchester Evening News
behind the door, which she believes would have been delivered at about 4pm. Mrs Spencer believes that if her mother had been alive when the newspaper arrived, she would have picked it up and read it.
Mrs Spencer found her mother sitting in her usual armchair with her head tilted a little to one side. Her face did not display any sign that she had experienced pain and she looked 'quite normal'. Mrs Bennett was wearing her dentures and, had she been feeling ill, Mrs Spencer says that her mother would have removed these and put them in a glass. The room was in its usual state. Mrs Spencer noticed a prescription on a side table, which she did not read and which was later destroyed. Mrs Spencer's recollection of events on this day is understandably blurred but she recalls that Mr Hargreaves told her that the paramedics had been and gone. The ambulance service report shows that they arrived at 9.08am, contacted the police and Shipman at 9.12am, and
'relatives'
(presumably Mrs Spencer) at 9.13am. The documentation states:
'Pt
(
patient
)
LAST SEEN 13.15 25/06/96'
. Mrs Spencer assumes that this refers to the time when Mrs Bennett left Yew Tree House, although it is not clear how the paramedics could have obtained this information.
The Aftermath
Shortly after the death, Mrs Spencer visited Shipman at his surgery. His manner was abrupt and offhand. He said that Mrs Bennett had telephoned him and requested a home visit. He said that he had gone to see her and found that her blood pressure was raised. He explained to Mrs Spencer that it was that which had caused the stroke which resulted in her mother's death. He did not mention having left any prescription.
Mrs Spencer was surprised to learn that her mother had requested a home visit on 25th
June. Nevertheless, it seems that she did since there is an entry, made by one of the practice staff, in the visits book for that date, recording Mrs Bennett's name, address and telephone number, together with the word
'Dizzy'
. We do not know at what time that entry was made but it is the last entry for that day and could have been made in the afternoon.
There is no doubt that Shipman did visit Mrs Bennett on 25th
June. He made entries recording his visit in the Lloyd George notes and on the computer. The entry in the Lloyd George notes is as follows:
'V.
(
visit
)
Dizzy 48 hours
flashes of light.
No Pain
HS. I II 160/110.
D - Raised BP
no other signs
off to Llandudno
Try Adalat 10mg R T BD
worried re flashes
TLUK
(
to let us know
)
when back'
.
There are two slightly odd things about this entry. The phrase
'48 hours'
seems to have been written at a different time. There is a suspicion that it might have been an afterthought. Also, the blood pressure reading appears to have been altered from 160/100 to 160/110.
There are three entries on the surgery computer dated 25th
June 1996. The first records a home visit, the second a diagnosis of otogenic vertigo and that Stemetil had been prescribed, and the third records a blood pressure reading of 160/100 (which is inconsistent with the manuscript note as altered) with a prescription for Adalat Retard 10mg tablets and the abbreviation
'tluk'
.
The surgery appointments sheet for 25th
June shows that Shipman was not required in the surgery and was therefore likely to be out visiting patients between about 1pm and 4pm. He is known to have been at the house of Mrs Margaret Vickers at 2.17pm (when he made telephone calls) and for at least half an hour before. Mrs Vickers died at about 2.15pm in Shipman's presence. Her death has been investigated by the Inquiry.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident (CVA) and recording the approximate interval between onset and death as
'seconds'
. He said that the death had occurred on 26th
June and that he had seen Mrs Bennett alive on 25th
June, the day before the death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He recorded the time of death as about 8am on 26th
June and stated that he had attended Mrs Bennett during her last illness for one day. He said that he last saw her alive 18 hours before she died (which, assuming a time of death of 8am would have been at 2pm the previous day), and three hours afterwards (i.e. at 11am), at which time he said he had performed a complete external examination. The mode of death was recorded as collapse of seconds' duration. In response to question 11 (as to how far the answers as to cause of death and mode were based on his own observations or the statements made by others) he recorded the following:
'Found by warden in chair, breakfast
ready. By body temperature 3 hours
had elapsed before I saw her. Seen
at 1800 hrs 25.6.96 by neighbour'
.
It seems to me that this entry is almost certainly deliberately misleading. Mr Hargreaves' police statement does not specifically deal with the issue of whether he observed that Mrs Bennett's breakfast was ready but that information seems inconsistent with his view that Mrs Bennett had 'at least died overnight'. It is also inconsistent with his evidence that at about 8.40am Mrs Bennett's arm was stiff and cold. Shipman could not possibly have made a reliable estimate of the time of death from the body temperature. The suggestion that Mrs Bennett had died at breakfast time on 26th
June is inconsistent with the position of the evening newspaper behind the door. Mrs Spencer is aware of no neighbour who saw Mrs Bennett the previous evening.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the cremation forms and the medical records in this case and concluded on the basis of each that the death is highly suspicious. In particular, Professor Baker comments that the basis for certifying the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident is
'obscure'
.
Dr Alan Banks has also considered this case and concluded that there is nothing in the medical history to support the diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident as the cause of death.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious factors surrounding this death.
Mrs Bennett appeared well to her daughter during a shopping trip on 24th
June. She attended for lunch at Yew Tree House as usual on 25th
June, at which time she also appeared well. She must have telephoned the surgery at some time that day because she felt dizzy. Shipman admitted having visited Mrs Bennett during the afternoon of 25th
June. There is no evidence that Mrs Bennett was seen alive after this time save for Shipman's assertion that this was the case. Although Shipman recorded on Form B that a neighbour saw Mrs Bennett at 6pm on 25th
June, the neighbour has not been traced.
The evidence that the newspaper was found behind the door and the facts that Mrs Bennett was wearing day clothes, the curtains were open and there was no reply to Mrs Spencer's telephone call on the evening of 25th
June, all point to the conclusion that Mrs Bennett died during the afternoon of that day, between her return from lunch and the delivery of the newspaper at about 4pm. I find that that was so. It follows that Mrs Bennett's death occurred at, or very close to, the time of Shipman's visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor. Although it is theoretically possible that Mrs Bennett could have had a sudden massive stroke in the interval between Shipman's departure and the arrival of the newspaper, that is essentially unlikely and stretches coincidence beyond its limits.
Shipman's statement on Form B about breakfast being ready and his assertion, which had no scientific basis, that death had occurred at about 8am on 26th
June are inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Hargreaves. In my view, this was an attempt by Shipman to distance the death from the time of his visit and to obscure the fact that he was the last person to see Mrs Bennett alive.
There is a discrepancy between the blood pressure reading recorded, as altered, in the Lloyd George notes, and the computerised notes. It also appears that Shipman might have added
'48 hours'
to his handwritten note. It appears to me that Shipman has revisited the handwritten note and has made two alterations. He has increased the diastolic blood pressure reading, thereby making Mrs Bennett's blood pressure seem worse, and has stated that the dizziness has lasted for two days. The suggestion that Mrs Bennett experienced symptoms from the afternoon of 23rd
June is certainly at odds with the evidence of Mrs Spencer who states that her mother appeared fit and well during their shopping trip on 24th
June. Although I cannot be sure that Shipman made these alterations, I find that he probably did.
The death, if naturally occurring, should have been referred to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination being carried out. Professor Baker says that the blood pressure reading as stated was
'an inadequate reason for giving CVA as the cause of death'
. Even on Shipman's own note (with the alterations I believe he made), there is no way in which he could have known that she died of a stroke and no way in which he could have known that the mode of death was collapse of seconds' duration. If, which is unlikely, the symptoms recorded by Shipman in the Lloyd George notes had suggested to him that Mrs Bennett was suffering or was likely to suffer a stroke, then he should have contacted her relatives and not left her alone at home.
The position in which Mrs Bennett was found was inconsistent with her having suffered a stroke, but consistent with a lethal dose of opiates having been administered. In his generic statement to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville stated as follows:
'Even in a person suffering a brain stem haemorrhage or subarachnoid haemorrhage I would not expect to find the deceased patient sitting upright in a chair looking peaceful and as if asleep. There is likely to be a period of at least a few seconds to possibly a minute or two after the destruction of vital areas of the brain when there is still sufficient oxygenated blood in the body for muscular activity to be possible. I would expect the patient to attempt to rise to seek help or to lie down. It might be possible for a patient who is deeply asleep and who suffers a brain stem haemorrhage to be found looking as if they remain asleep'
.
All these factors point to the same conclusion, namely that Shipman killed Mrs Bennett by lethal injection during his visit on the afternoon of 25th
June. I am satisfied so as to be sure that that is so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001