The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charlotte Bennison
Introduction
Mrs Charlotte Bennison (known to her family as Lottie) died at her home, 19 Rowbotham Street, Gee Cross, Hyde on Monday, 27th
January 1997 at the age of 89. Following the death of her husband about ten years earlier, she lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She did not often speak of him but appeared to like him. He certified that her death was caused by cerebrovascular accident resulting from atherosclerosis.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Bennison's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in October 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, the police decided to investigate the death. They took statements from Mrs Georgina Kay (Mrs Bennison's niece), Mrs Mary Sudlow (Mrs Bennison's cousin), Mr Derek Williamson (Mrs Bennison's nephew) and his wife Mrs Nadya Williamson.
There was no prosecution arising from the death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Kay, Mr Williamson, Mrs Sudlow, Mr Andrew Williams (a neighbour) and Mr John Bent and Mrs Dorothy Clark (friends of Mrs Bennison). There is also a statement from Ms Nicola Farrell, the paramedic who attended after Mrs Bennison's death. Mrs Kay and Mr Williamson gave oral evidence at a hearing on 9th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Bennison's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville, who also gave oral evidence on 12th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Bennison's sister, Mrs Annie Williamson, lived with her son, Mr Derek Williamson, in a house opposite to Mrs Bennison's. They saw Mrs Bennison regularly, as did her niece, Mrs Georgina Kay. They describe Mrs Bennison as very active and a regular attender at a Women's Society, the Hyde Chapel and a luncheon club. She had many friends and liked to spend time with them as well as with her family. On occasions, however, she did appear to be somewhat weary of life. Members of the family say that she was worried about her son. In recent months, she had been heard to say that she wanted to die.
Mrs Bennison's medical records confirm that she was in good general health. She had a tendency to depression, which had been treated over the years and for which she was admitted to hospital on at least one occasion. She was taking antidepressants in 1994 but the problem is not mentioned thereafter. The manuscript summary card records a history of cerebrovascular accident in 1991 and there is a note to this effect in the computerised records. However, there is no corresponding manual record and no confirmation from any other source that such an event occurred. It is not possible to discover whether the computerised entry was made in 1991, as it claims to have been, as the audit trail facility was not installed until October 1996. All that can be said is that the entry was not added after that date. The family has no recollection of Mrs Bennison having a stroke in 1991 or, indeed, at any time before the day of her death.
The last manuscript entry in Mrs Bennison's notes is dated October 1993 and records that she had a
'flu jab'
. In 1996, she was complaining of haematuria but urinary analysis was normal. The last computer entry before the day of her death was on 29th
November 1996 when Mrs Bennison was said to have attended the surgery for the removal of wax from her ears.
Mrs Bennison's family was aware that she had been generally 'out of sorts' for a short time before her death. A few days before her death, Mr Williamson had seen her in the road. She looked tired and he saw her take a rest by sitting on a wall. This was not like her. Her cousin, Mrs Sudlow, had seen her the Tuesday before her death, when she complained of feeling dizzy, although she was well enough to play whist at the Women's Society and to walk home afterwards. On the following Sunday, the day before her death, Mrs Bennison was not at chapel, which was unusual. Mrs Sudlow telephoned her in the afternoon. Mrs Bennison said again that she was feeling dizzy and unwell. Mrs Sudlow suggested that she should see the doctor. Mrs Bennison made no response to that suggestion.
The Day of the Death
On 27th
January, Mrs Kay received a telephone call from her mother, Mrs Williamson, asking her to telephone Shipman on her aunt's behalf and request a visit. Mrs Kay made the telephone call at 9.05am and it is recorded on a visit request form, where the entry reads:
'VOMIT/RUNS FOR 2 WEEKS'
.
Mrs Kay was promised that Shipman would visit Mrs Bennison that day.
Mr John Bent, a fellow member of the Werneth House luncheon club, called on Mrs Bennison at about 1pm. He found her 'all smiles' and looking a lot better than the last time he had seen her at the luncheon club about two weeks earlier. She made a cup of tea and they had a chat. Mrs Bennison told Mr Bent that she was expecting the doctor that afternoon. Mr Bent asked whether she would soon be coming back to have lunch at Werneth House. She said that she would not be doing that because she was 'under the weather just now'. Mr Bent left at about 1.30pm and did not see Mrs Bennison again.
Mrs Williamson was spending the day with Mrs Kay and they expected Mrs Bennison to telephone them to report on the doctor's visit after it had taken place. When the time had passed when she had expected to hear from Mrs Bennison, Mrs Kay telephoned her aunt, but there was no reply. Mrs Kay thought her aunt must have gone for a rest. She believes that this call was made shortly after 2pm and this accords with her diary note made at the time. However, either it was later than that or she is wrong when she says that Shipman telephoned her very shortly after she had tried to telephone Mrs Bennison. We know from the billing records that Shipman telephoned Mrs Kay at 3.48pm. It is quite possible that Mrs Kay telephoned her aunt soon after 2pm, but it might have been later, some time after 3pm.
When Shipman telephoned Mrs Kay at 3.48pm, he told her that he had been to see Mrs Bennison, who had suffered a small stroke about two weeks before and another that morning. He said that she was going to be 'all right' and he had discussed with her the possibility of admission to an old people's home in the future. Mrs Kay appreciated Shipman's kindness in taking the trouble to keep her informed.
At 4.30pm, Shipman made an entry in the medical records relating to this visit. It reads:
'CVA unspecified
2/51
(
sic
)
vertigo nausea and vomiting. worse again today 130/80 hs I II r
arm leg weak plantar r up must have had a small stroke 2/52 ago and
again today chat re housing'
.
Dr Grenville says that this note is ambiguous. It is not clear whether Shipman is recording a history of vertigo, nausea and vomiting two weeks before or a two week history of continuing symptoms. Perhaps the former is more likely as he seems to have reached the conclusion that Mrs Bennison had had a stroke two weeks earlier. It seems that she told him that she was worse again that day, with similar symptoms. There is no reference to diarrhoea, which is what is recorded on the receptionist's note. Dr Grenville says that this omission could be significant. In my view, it could be suspicious. If a patient complains of vomiting with diarrhoea, the doctor will suspect a possible problem in the gut. If the patient complains of vomiting without diarrhoea, the doctor will suspect some abnormality in the brain. Returning to the note, it appears that, on examination, Shipman had found Mrs Bennison's blood pressure to be 130/80, which is normal. Heart sounds were also normal. He reported that there was weakness of the right arm and leg and that the plantar reflex on the right was upgoing. Dr Grenville says that, if these signs were found, they indicated that there had been a stroke in the left side of the brain. He also observed that, if the patient had been aware of weakness on one side that morning, one would have expected it to be mentioned to the patient's family and to the receptionist. Shipman concluded that Mrs Bennison must have had a small stroke two weeks earlier and another that day. He talked to her about housing.
There is a note on the visit request form to which I have previously referred, which appears to have been made after the first visit. It is in the handwriting of a member of staff and was presumably written as a result of an instruction by Shipman. It reads:
'New Referral.
Can S/S
(
presumably Social Services
)
go
talking about going in home
very frail/small stroke'
.
The note is endorsed
done
. A telephone call was made from the surgery to Tameside and Glossop Community and Priority Services at 4.41pm that afternoon and it may be that this related to Mrs Bennison. However, the Social Services Department of Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council has no record of any referral on that date.
Having telephoned her aunt and failed to get a response, Mrs Kay did not attempt to telephone her again that afternoon. However, Mrs Sudlow tried to contact her between 4pm and 5pm and also had no reply. She telephoned the Williamsons' house and asked them to check that Mrs Bennison was all right. Mr Williamson went over after his meal at about 6.30pm. He let himself in as usual and walked into the back room where his aunt usually sat.
The gas fire was on high and the room was unbearably hot. Mrs Bennison was sitting in a chair fully dressed, as if asleep, with a beaker of tea or coffee beside her. Mr Williamson was uncertain as to whether there was anything wrong and telephoned his wife, who came to join him. She thought that Mrs Bennison was dead and an ambulance was called. The paramedics confirmed the fact of death. They called Shipman, who arrived some time later. He referred again to two strokes and said that it was the latest stroke that had killed her. He remarked that it was lucky he had seen Mrs Bennison that day, as otherwise a post-mortem examination would have been required.
The Aftermath
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), on which the cause of death is given as cerebrovascular accident caused by atherosclerosis.
He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate and gave the time of death as
'About 17.30'
. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Bennison alive about six hours before her death, which on his timings would be at about 11.30am. Shipman also claimed to have attended Mrs Bennison for six hours during her 'last illness'. This implies that the stroke had then begun. These entries must be false. When Mr Bent left at about 1.30pm, Shipman had not yet visited. In any event, Shipman's own schedule, to which I shall refer below, makes a visit as early as 11.30pm highly unlikely. Furthermore, if Mrs Sudlow were right about the time she telephoned, it would seem that Mrs Bennison was dead by 4pm to 5pm. There is good reason to suppose that Mrs Bennison was already dead when Mrs Kay telephoned her earlier in the afternoon, probably at about 3pm. It appears that Shipman was seeking to create a long time interval between his visit and the time of death.
Shipman said that he had seen the body about 2
1
/
2
hours after death, which would be at about 8pm, and had made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was
'Syncope'
lasting
'seconds only'
. He claimed that the observations on which his answer to the question relating to mode of death was based were those of Mrs Bennison's nephew, who
'Saw her at 4.30 then found her dead at 6.30 that evening'
. Mr Williamson did not of course see Mrs Bennison at 4.30pm and the entry is a lie, which I have no doubt was an attempt by Shipman to distance himself from the death and to suggest to others that someone else had seen Mrs Bennison alive after his visit. In any event, as Shipman had to admit, no one had been present at the moment of Mrs Bennison's death. Shipman could only have surmised that the mode of death was syncope lasting only seconds. According to Dr Grenville, there was no proper basis on which Shipman could draw an inference as to the mode of death.
As to Shipman's movements on the day of the death, the appointments sheet shows that he had an open surgery starting at 10.15am with 12 or possibly 13 patients. Assuming that each consultation took the NHS average time of 7
1
/
2
minutes and assuming also a prompt start, Shipman would not have finished that surgery until 11.45am at the earliest. He often overran the allotted time for each patient. He usually did some paperwork before going on his rounds. I estimate that he would probably not have been free to start his visits until about 12.30pm. After that, he would have been free until afternoon surgery, which started at 4pm. He had four visits that day, including Mrs Bennison.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, says that there is nothing in Mrs Bennison's history to suggest that she was at risk of suffering a stroke. He notes the entry suggesting that she had had a stroke in 1991. If she did, it must have been a very minor matter as her family was unaware of it and she plainly made a full recovery. Such measurements of blood pressure as are recorded are within normal limits.
Dr Grenville also observes that there is no evidence to corroborate Shipman's assertion that Mrs Bennison had had even one stroke, let alone two, shortly before her death. For several reasons, Dr Grenville is suspicious about Shipman's note made on the day of death and his diagnosis. In addition to the reasons I have already mentioned, he adds that the normal blood pressure reading is not compatible with a stroke suffered that day. Also, if there had been a stroke two weeks earlier, he would have expected Mrs Bennison to notice some signs of weakness and to mention them to her family. Family members would have noticed signs of weakness for themselves. Dr Grenville also observed that, if Mr Bent's recollection is right, Mrs Bennison was not suffering any one-sided weakness at 1.30pm.
Dr Grenville says that if Mrs Bennison had suffered a stroke, Shipman's treatment of her would have been quite inadequate. If she had reported signs of a stroke that had begun in the last hour, he should not have left her alone. The stroke might evolve. He should have arranged observation, preferably in hospital but if not, at home. If the signs of weakness had begun some hours earlier and Mrs Bennison appeared stable, it would be reasonable to leave her at home, provided she were properly looked after. To arrange a referral to Social Services was quite inadequate. The response time might be a week or more. Shipman's conversation with Mrs Kay did not convey that there was any need for care or supervision.
Dr Grenville considers that the timing of events postulated by Shipman does not hang together. If Mrs Bennison had suffered a stroke on that day, of the type that causes one-sided weakness, she would not have died so quickly. Such occlusive strokes are often not fatal. If they are to be fatal it is because they evolve. The paralysis becomes denser and the patient lapses gradually into unconsciousness. Such a stroke does not lead to a sudden collapse. Shipman had not described the kind of stroke, usually a brain stem haemorrhage, which can lead to sudden collapse and death. In other words, Shipman's account did not make medical sense.
Dr Grenville considers that he can virtually rule out the possibility that Mrs Bennison died as the result of a stroke.
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high upon his consideration of the medical records and the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death. It is known that Shipman visited Mrs Bennison on the day of her death and, so far as is known, no one saw her alive or spoke to her after that visit. There is a remote possibility that someone did see her alive or speak to her and that that person did not communicate with the family after the death. I regard that possibility as so remote that I can dismiss it. I am also quite satisfied that, when Shipman said on Form B that Mr Williamson had seen Mrs Bennison alive at 4.30pm, he was lying. His claim that the death occurred at about 5.30pm is also plainly false. He wanted to make it appear that Mrs Bennison had died several hours after his visit and had been seen alive in the mean time. These factors create a very high degree of suspicion that Shipman killed Mrs Bennison.
As Dr Grenville has said, the medical evidence supporting a death due to cerebrovascular accident is extremely poor. There were no factors creating a risk of a stroke. Blood pressure was well within normal limits; indeed it was good for a woman of Mrs Bennison's age. Shipman's conduct towards Mrs Bennison was inappropriate for a stroke victim. As Dr Grenville has said, the timing of the onset of a supposed stroke, of the occlusive type, and the subsequent quite sudden death are not compatible. It is theoretically possible that Mrs Bennison could have died a natural death, but it seems to me to be highly unlikely. In any event, it is stretching the bounds of coincidence beyond its limits to think that a natural death should occur so shortly after Shipman's visit.
The note made by Shipman of his consultation on the day of the death gives rise to suspicion. It includes reference to some, although not all, of the concerns that Mrs Bennison had mentioned to her family. But it then went on to deal with problems or signs that no member of the family was aware that Mrs Bennison had. This is a very common feature in cases in which Shipman killed. He would often make a note which was partly genuine and would then add on a reference to a problem which was subsequently to be used to explain the sudden death, which followed shortly after. I think that is what he has done here. I do not think Mrs Bennison had had a stroke that day. I think it far more likely that she had vomiting with diarrhoea (indicating a problem in the gut) rather than vomiting without diarrhoea. If she had had a stroke, I think she would have said something about its symptoms to Mrs Annie Williamson, when asking her to arrange for Mrs Kay to telephone the surgery. I think Mr Bent would have noticed something amiss at lunchtime. I believe that this entry in the medical records is largely false and was designed to provide Shipman with an explanation for Mrs Bennison's death. Shipman might well have asked a member of his staff to contact Social Services in connection with Mrs Bennison's future care. If he did, no doubt any arrangement made would soon be cancelled.
Mrs Bennison's appearance in death was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking these factors into account, I am entirely satisfied that Shipman killed Mrs Bennison. There is no reason to think that he used any method other than his usual one, diamorphine injection.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001