The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Battersby
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Battersby (known as Betty) died at her home, 12 Norbury Avenue, Hyde on Monday, 8th
December 1997 at the age of 70. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She considered him to be a good doctor and more of a friend than a doctor. Shipman certified that Mrs Battersby's death was caused by pulmonary embolus resulting from deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
Mrs Battersby's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mrs Olive Elizabeth Gardner and Mr Trevor Gardner (Mrs Battersby's daughter and son-in-law), Mr Steven Vejki (a neighbour), Mr David Stuart Bambroffe (an undertaker) and Detective Sergeant John Ashley. A statement was obtained from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Battersby but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Gardner, Mr Vejki and Mrs Pauline Anne Vejki, who is Mr Vejki's wife. Mr and Mrs Gardner and Mr Vejki gave oral evidence at a hearing on 8th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Battersby's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
Following the oral hearing, Sister Gillian Morgan (a practice nurse at the Market Street Surgery) proffered a statement, as she remembered some of the circumstances of Mrs Battersby's death. The Inquiry also obtained statements from Detective Constable Perry Sinacola (who had taken a statement from Mr Gardner during the police investigation), Detective Chief Superintendent Bernard Postles (the officer in charge of the police investigation) and Mr David Money (the manager of the pathology department of Tameside General Hospital). Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 13th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Battersby was a widow and lived alone. Mr and Mrs Gardner saw her virtually every day. Mrs Gardner describes her mother as being in good health, although she suffered from ulcers on her legs. Mrs Battersby's medical records show that she had had severe ulceration of both legs dating back at least 25 years and possibly longer. In 1973, her previous general practitioner had suspected that she had suffered a DVT. She was admitted to hospital where she underwent an ultrasound scan, which showed that the tentative diagnosis was wrong. Dr Grenville says that it can be difficult to diagnose DVT (which is a blood clot in the deep veins of the leg) in the presence of leg ulcers. Mrs Battersby remained at increased risk of developing DVT. The records show that, from 1977, her ulcerated legs were treated regularly by Shipman and by the practice nurse. Mrs Battersby also suffered from occasional chest infections and vertigo or dizziness. Otherwise, her consultations were virtually all for her ulcerated legs or for routine checks.
Mrs Battersby lived a full, active and independent life. She rose early and did all her own shopping and cleaning. She used public transport and took her young grandson, Ben, and a neighbour's child on outings.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Battersby attended Shipman's open surgery on the morning of 4th
December. Members of her family remember that she went because she thought she might have a DVT. As Dr Grenville explained, DVT is a serious condition. The clot, which forms in the deep vein of the leg, can sometimes break up and a piece of blood clot can move through the circulatory system. As it passes into the lungs and into vessels of decreasing size, it can occlude a blood vessel and deprive the tissues beyond the occlusion of oxygen. If the clot is large and a major vessel is occluded, rapid death can ensue. Such is the risk of sudden death that, whenever DVT is diagnosed or even suspected, the patient should be admitted to hospital for confirmation of the diagnosis and treatment by intravenous administration of heparin. Heparin is an anti-coagulant, which thins the blood and reduces the risk of clotting. Ideally, administration should be continuous, but individual injections may be adequate. Warfarin is also an anti-coagulant but acts much more slowly than heparin. The effectiveness of the anti-coagulant treatment should be monitored by blood tests.
Sister Morgan remembers that, on 4th
December, Mrs Battersby was shown into her consulting room. She found that one of Mrs Battersby's legs was 'solid, swollen, painful and hot', which led her to suspect a DVT. It appeared that these symptoms had been present for two or three days. Sister Morgan asked Shipman to see Mrs Battersby. Shipman diagnosed a DVT and advised Mrs Battersby that she should be admitted to hospital. He advised her that the condition was serious and could lead to a pulmonary embolism. Sister Morgan reinforced this advice. However, Mrs Battersby adamantly refused admission. In the end, it was arranged that Mrs Battersby would go home and Shipman would visit daily to monitor the clotting factor in her blood. Although Sister Morgan does not mention it, it appears likely that a blood sample was taken that day with the intention that it should be sent to the hospital laboratory for analysis.
At about 11.05am, an entry was made in Mrs Battersby's computerised medical records, which reads:
'Deep vein thrombosis...
l leg warafarin
(
sic
)
explained risks side effects keep at home'
.
I interpret that entry to mean that Shipman diagnosed a deep vein thrombosis in the left leg. He prescribed warfarin, explained the risks and the side effects and appears to have agreed that Mrs Battersby should stay at home. As Dr Grenville has pointed out, this note completely fails to do justice to the seriousness of the situation. If Mrs Battersby did indeed have a DVT, her refusal to agree to admission to hospital was such as would put her life at risk. Shipman should have used every endeavour to persuade her to agree to admission. His efforts should have included an attempt to enlist the support of relatives. If all attempts failed and Mrs Battersby was to be treated at home, Dr Grenville would have expected that, for his own protection, Shipman would have made a most careful note of his advice and the patient's rejection of it. However, in the light of Sister Morgan's evidence, I accept that Mrs Battersby did have a DVT, was advised to accept admission to hospital and did indeed refuse.
Dr Grenville also observed that, although hospital admission is highly desirable in these circumstances, it is possible to give heparin treatment at home. The services of the district nurse would usually be required. The only medication mentioned in Shipman's note is warfarin, which is much less effective as initial treatment. The prescription for warfarin shows that 28 tablets were provided with instructions to take
'one tablet as directed'
. It appears to Dr Grenville that Shipman intended Mrs Battersby to take one 3mg tablet per day. If warfarin is to be used to treat a DVT, there should be a large initial dose. It is possible that Shipman gave instructions for two or three tablets to be taken on the first day, although there is no record of such instruction. Dr Grenville expressed concern that if Mrs Battersby had a DVT, her treatment by Shipman left her at grave risk of pulmonary embolism.
Dr Grenville noted that the prescription for warfarin also contained an order for morphine tablets. Prescriptions for controlled drugs must be handwritten, as this one was. This prescription for morphine was not noted in the medical records, as it plainly should have been. It was dispensed, as can be seen from an entry in the controlled drugs register of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy. Dr Grenville says that it is most unusual for morphine to be prescribed for the pain of a DVT. Although the condition is painful, much less powerful analgesics are usually adequate. Whenever I find that Shipman prescribed an opiate drug in unusual circumstances, not long before the patient died, my suspicion is aroused that he might have wished to provide an explanation for the discovery of morphine in the body.
Mrs Gardner knew that Shipman had seen her mother because of leg swelling and she thought that she might have a DVT. After she had seen the doctor, Mrs Battersby told her daughter that Shipman said that she had a deep vein thrombosis and had given her warfarin and some painkillers. He had told her to rest and had warned her that if she banged her leg she could be dead in seconds. Mrs Battersby spent most of the weekend in bed. She was not completely confined to bed and got up to make food and drink and to go to the bathroom. Mrs Gardner visited her several times and found that her mother seemed reasonably well, although she was bored with inactivity. Mrs Gardner noticed that her mother's painkillers were morphine. On the Sunday evening, Mrs Battersby got up and seemed quite well. Mrs Gardner promised to call on her again on her way to work the next day.
I mentioned earlier that it seems likely that a blood sample was taken on the morning of 4th
December. There is no entry in the records for that day to show that a sample was taken and Sister Morgan is adamant that she did not take one that day. Within the medical records was found a hospital laboratory report, which indicates that a sample received at the hospital on 5th December had been found to be insufficient for analysis. Mr Money says that the system was for samples to be collected from doctors' surgeries between 10.30am and 12.30pm and to be delivered to the laboratory soon afterwards, usually by about 12.30pm. The hospital printout for this sample shows that it was received at 2.11pm on 5th
December. It would appear either that Shipman must have taken the sample from Mrs Battersby on 4th
December and have omitted to send it to the hospital that day, or that he visited Mrs Battersby at home on 5th
December and returned the sample to the surgery in time for its collection that morning. As the appointments sheet for 5th
December shows that he was busy that morning, this latter explanation seems unlikely. There is another reason why it seems more likely that the sample would have been taken on 4th
December. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has explained that the British National Formulary advises that a baseline reading should be taken before commencing treatment with warfarin. So a blood sample should have been taken before the treatment began. Further, there would be no point in testing the blood after the warfarin treatment had begun until about 48 to 72 hours after commencement. It appears to me that it is likely that Shipman took a sample on 4th
December and failed to send it to the laboratory until the following day. When analysed it was found to be useless.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 8th
December, Mrs Gardner went to see her mother in the morning and found her up and dressed. Mrs Battersby was doing some housework and asked Mrs Gardner to carry the vacuum cleaner downstairs for her. She also asked Mrs Gardner to collect her pension. Mrs Battersby did not want to go out because she was expecting Shipman to come to take a blood sample. The intended visit to take
'bloods'
is recorded in the surgery visits book. When Mrs Gardner returned with the pension, she saw her mother put some of the money in her rent book and the rest in her purse. Mrs Gardner stayed to chat for a while. When she left at about 10.45am, Shipman had not yet visited.
Mr Gardner recalls that he telephoned his mother-in-law at lunchtime on the day of her death. He has given two different accounts of what she said to him. In 1998, he told the police that Mrs Battersby said to him that Shipman had been to see her and had given her an injection and taken a blood sample. She sounded a lot better than she had done the previous week. In his Inquiry statement and in his oral evidence Mr Gardner said that Mrs Battersby told him that Shipman had not yet been but was coming to take a blood sample. Mr Gardner told his mother-in-law that he would come round when he had collected Ben from school. I have heard Mr Gardner give evidence. His explanation for the discrepancy between his two accounts is unsatisfactory. He does not suggest that this was simply a mistake or misunderstanding. He suggests that, when interviewed by the police, he had been influenced by the investigating police officer's attitude, which was that the allegations under investigation were incredible. As I understood him, he was saying that he adopted the police officer's attitude and did not take the investigation seriously. He therefore gave an account that was what the officer wanted to hear. I know that witnesses are often suggestible. However, Mr Gardner is a police officer and would know the importance of giving an accurate account. DC Sinacola strongly refutes the suggestion that he did not take his enquiries seriously. At the time he took Mr Gardner's statement, he was aware that the preliminary toxicological tests on Mrs Kathleen Grundy's body tissues showed the presence of opiates. He knew the police were dealing with a potentially very serious situation. DC Sinacola recalls that he did not tell Mr Gardner what was known about Mrs Grundy's tests. It appears that, before beginning an interview, it was police practice to tell relatives of potential victims that there was no suspicion surrounding their relative's death. It may be that for some reason Mr Gardner did not give his police interview the careful attention it deserved.
I have heard Mr Gardner and he is adamant that his present account is correct. I am left with a conflict within his evidence, which I find impossible to resolve with confidence.
Mr Vejki recalls that, shortly after 2.20pm, Shipman called at his house, which was next door to Mrs Battersby's house. Shipman told him that he had returned to Mrs Battersby's house in order to collect a stethoscope, which he had left there previously. On his return, he had found Mrs Battersby dead. (I interpose at this stage to say that Shipman gave a similar although not quite identical account to Mr and Mrs Gardner the next day.) Shipman asked Mr Vejki for a spare key so that he could secure the house. Mr Vejki could not remember where Mrs Battersby's spare keys were kept, so Shipman went away, back to Mrs Battersby's house. Mr Vejki does not now recall seeing Shipman again that afternoon. However, I think he must have done for reasons which will shortly appear.
Some time later, Mr Gardner arrived to visit Mrs Battersby with his son, Ben. Mr Gardner thinks that this would have been between 3.30pm and 3.40pm. Mr Vejki was keeping a look-out for him. He now recalls that he did so because he did not want Ben, who was only five, to accompany his father into the house and find his grandmother dead. I am sure that was one matter on his mind but I think it is also likely that Shipman had asked him to look out for Mr Gardner. Mr Gardner recalls that, when he arrived, not only did Mr Vejki tell him of the death, he also gave him some spare keys, which it appears Shipman had found in the house and had given to Mr Vejki before he left.
Mr Gardner left Ben with Mr Vejki and went into Mrs Battersby's house. He found his mother-in-law sitting on the sofa, looking as though she was asleep. She was fully dressed. Near to her was a cup of tea. The only unusual thing was that the curtains were closed. Mr Gardner says that he went straight to the local police station to check whether there had been any police involvement following the death. On ascertaining that there had not, he says that he telephoned Shipman and enquired if he was willing to certify the cause of death. Shipman replied that he was. Mr Gardner said that he made these enquiries because he needed to know whether there would have to be a post-mortem examination. He wanted to know if he could start making funeral arrangements.
The telephone billing for Mrs Battersby's number shows that a call was made from Mrs Battersby's home to Mrs Gardner's mobile telephone at 3.25pm and to the Market Street Surgery at 3.26pm. Despite the fact that these calls are recorded as having been made very close to the time when he recalls arriving at Mrs Battersby's home, Mr Gardner is adamant that he did not make them. He says that he telephoned the surgery from the police station. He suggests that the calls must have been made by Shipman. If Shipman was at Mrs Battersby's house at 3.26pm, he must have been there until only a short time before Mr Gardner arrived. That would conflict with Mr Vejki's recollection which is that over an hour had elapsed between Shipman's departure and Mr Gardner's arrival. Shipman did sometimes telephone the surgery from a patient's house. He did not at that time carry a mobile telephone. It is quite possible that the call to the surgery was made by Shipman. The call lasted only one minute and twenty seconds, which does not seem long enough for Mr Gardner to have discussed the death with Shipman. I am inclined to think it more likely that the 3.26pm call was made by Shipman telephoning the surgery. The call to Mrs Gardner's mobile telephone number is something of a mystery. Mrs Gardner says that she did not receive a telephone call informing her of the death. She did not know of it until she came home from work in the late afternoon, by which time her husband and son were back at home. As the call to her mobile telephone lasted only ten seconds, I am inclined to think it was not an effective call. It occurs to me that it is entirely possible that Shipman wanted to inform Mrs Gardner about the death, found her mobile number, dialled it and was invited to leave a message. He might then have changed his mind and gone across to speak to Mr Vejki, who then promised to keep a look-out for Mr Gardner.
It appears from Shipman's account to Mr Vekji and his later account to Mr and Mrs Gardner, that he was saying that he visited Mrs Battersby's house twice on 8th
December.
There are two notes in Mrs Battersby's computerised records for 8th
December. The first says:
'Blood flow tests...
ptt 1.45'
.
The abbreviation 'ptt' stands for prothrombin time, which is a measure of the effectiveness of the anti-coagulant in thinning the blood. However, Dr Grenville has explained that a figure of 1.45 is not a possible result for a prothrombin time. Such a figure would be a possible result for a reading of the INR (International Normalised Ratio). Dr Grenville says that the result of 1.45 (INR) would indicate that the patient needed an increase in anti-coagulant treatment.
This entry gives cause for suspicion. It appears that it is intended to relate to Shipman's first suggested visit of the day to Mrs Battersby. She was expecting him to take a blood sample. The entry implies not only that the blood sample was taken but also that it was analysed. However, so far as the Inquiry has been able to discover, Shipman did not have the equipment necessary to analyse the blood sample and establish the prothrombin time or the INR. Indeed I am satisfied that he did not analyse it, as within Mrs Battersby's records was found a hospital laboratory report dated 8th
December saying that the blood sample sent to the hospital on 5th
December was insufficient for analysis. If Shipman owned the equipment necessary for the analysis, he would not have sent a sample to the hospital on 5th
December. So if, as it appears, Shipman was suggesting in this note that he had taken and analysed Mrs Battersby's blood sample on 8th
December, he was lying. The entry was a fabrication. It is possible that Shipman was suggesting that he had taken a blood sample, analysed it and found it to indicate that an increase in medication was necessary. That might have given him an excuse to make a further visit.
This entry makes no reference to Shipman giving Mrs Battersby any treatment, for example by injection. Mr Gardner's first account of his conversation with Mrs Battersby was to the effect that Shipman had been, had taken blood and had given her an injection. It is possible that he gave her an injection of heparin, which would have been appropriate treatment but, if he did, why he did not record it is hard to imagine.
An audit trail carried out by DS Ashley revealed that this entry was made on the computer just before 3.52pm on 8th
December.
The second computerised note reads:
'O/E - dead...
3.30 pulm embolus dvt'
.
This suggests that Shipman examined Mrs Battersby at 3.30pm and found her dead. He considered that the cause was a pulmonary embolus following a deep vein thrombosis. The audit trail showed that this note was made immediately after the first note at just after 3.52pm; in other words both were made in one sitting. I note that Shipman himself claims that his second visit took place at 3.30pm, at about the time the two telephone calls were made from Mrs Battersby's house. This tends to confirm my impression that Shipman made those calls.
The appointments sheet for 8th December shows that Shipman had an open surgery starting at 10.15am at which nine patients were listed to attend. Assuming a prompt start and an appointment time of 7.5 minutes for each patient, Shipman might have finished his surgery by about 11.15am. However, he often overran. Also, he usually did paperwork after surgery and before he went out on his visits. It seems likely that he would not have been free to start his visits until about noon at the earliest. He was not expected back in the surgery until the start of afternoon surgery at 4pm. However, we know that he was back in time to make entries in Mrs Battersby's notes at 3.52pm. He had four visits on his list for that day, including Mrs Battersby.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr and Mrs Gardner went to Shipman's surgery to collect the MCCD. Shipman told them that Mrs Battersby had died of a sudden pulmonary embolism. He said that he had called on her in the morning to take blood and had had a chat with her. He then left and called back later in the day to collect a tourniquet which he had left behind. On his return, he had found Mrs Battersby dead on the sofa. He said that Mrs Battersby had been 'one of his best patients'. He reassured the Gardners that there was no need for a post-mortem examination.
Mr and Mrs Gardner say that about £30 was missing from Mrs Battersby's purse.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, recording the cause of death as pulmonary embolus, the approximate interval between onset and death being stated as
'minutes'
. The embolus was recorded as having been caused by a deep venous thrombosis, the onset of which was five days before death. He said that chronic leg ulcers had contributed to the death. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Battersby alive on 8th
December, the day of her death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B, in which he recorded the time of death as
'About 15.00'
. He claimed to have attended Mrs Battersby for six days during her 'last illness', having last seen her alive about three hours before her death, which, on his timings, would be at about midday. He indicated that he had seen the body about 30 minutes after death. This would be at about 3.30pm on his timings. I am inclined to accept that estimate as accurate, bearing in mind the telephone calls. However, if he was innocent, I do not know on what basis Shipman could claim to know at what time the death had occurred. If he was not present at the death, no one was. It is not possible to form an accurate view of the time of death, at least with the material supposedly available to Shipman. I suspect that Shipman's timings are an attempt to give the impression that the death occurred well after his first visit. Shipman stated that the mode of death was
'Syncope'
lasting
'seconds'
. As he also stated that no one was present at the moment of death, this answer must have been based on surmise.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account both of the contents of the medical records and of the information supplied in the cremation forms. He specifically expressed concern over the apparent under-treatment of the DVT.
I have dealt with the evidence of Dr Grenville above.
Conclusion
It appears very likely that Mrs Battersby did suffer a DVT in early December. She was at risk of so doing and Sister Morgan's evidence tends to confirm that this occurred on the Day of Death. It does appear that Shipman advised Mrs Battersby to go into hospital, although he does not seem to have taken all reasonable steps to persuade her to do so. Nor did he protect himself from future criticism by making a full and careful note. Nor does he appear to have given the treatment she needed, which was heparin or at the very least a large dose of warfarin. After her death, I would have expected Shipman to write a full explanation of events, whether or not Mrs Battersby's death had been natural. In the circumstances, she was at risk of a sudden death from pulmonary embolism.
It appears likely that the following sequence of events occurred on the day of the death. Shipman may have visited Mrs Battersby some time before 3pm; in relation to this first possible visit he made a record some time later, saying that he had taken a blood sample, which might or might not have been true. Mrs Battersby mentioned this visit to Mr Gardner when she spoke to him around 1 to 1.30pm. Shipman certainly then went to Mrs Battersby's house at some time after 3pm. Whether she was alive or dead when he arrived is not clear but she was certainly dead or dying when he then went to Mr Vejki's house. Shipman then made one telephone call to the surgery and aborted another to Mrs Gardner's mobile telephone. He then probably went across to Mr Vejki again, told him of the death and left him a key to Mrs Battersby's house. He then returned to the surgery and made two entries on the computerised records. The first he fabricated to suggest that Mrs Battersby's blood test result showed a prothrombin time of 1.45. The second recorded that he had found her dead at 3.30pm of a pulmonary embolus.
The temporal association between Shipman's two visits and Mrs Battersby's death is enough in itself to make me think that Shipman probably killed her, even though I cannot say whether he did it during his first visit or his second. There are other factors within the evidence which point to the same conclusion.
The fabrication of the blood sample result is a highly suspicious factor. It could have had two possible uses for Shipman. First, it might have provided Shipman with an excuse to give Mrs Battersby an injection or a second injection, if he had in fact given her one in the morning. Second, it would provide Shipman with corroboration of his claim that Mrs Battersby was at grave risk of a pulmonary embolism, as it would appear that her blood had not been adequately thinned by the anti-coagulant she had taken at that stage.
The prescription of morphine tablets (unusual treatment for a DVT) would, even if not taken, provide an explanation for the presence of morphine in the body in the unlikely event that it should be forensically examined.
Mrs Battersby's appearance in death was entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been injected with a strong opiate.
My conclusion is that, notwithstanding the uncertainties as to the time of the killing, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Battersby. I also suspect that he stole money from her purse but do not feel able to reach a positive conclusion on that point.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001