The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Bardsley
Introduction
Mrs Lily Bardsley died at her home, 145 Ashton Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 7th
March 1995 at the age of 88. I have found that Shipman killed Mrs Netta Ashcroft, who lived in nearby Meadowfield Court, on that day. Mrs Bardsley had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She held him in high regard. Shipman certified that Mrs Bardsley died as a result of a cerebrovascular accident, caused by arteriosclerosis.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police inquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Bardsley's nephew, Mr Cyril Bardsley Braddock, expressed concern to the police over the manner of Mrs Bardsley's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Mark Andrew Braddock (Mr Braddock's son), Mrs Karen Braddock (Mr Mark Braddock's wife) and Ms Carol Lesley Briggs (his stepsister), who happened at the time to be working as a physiotherapy assistant at Tameside General Hospital. The police also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Bardsley but an inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Mark Braddock and Mrs Karen Braddock. Mr and Mrs Harrison, who were neighbours of Mrs Bardsley, have written to the Inquiry. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Bardsley's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision was made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bardsley was a widow and lived alone. Her house was connected to a warden service, which she could contact if she needed help.
Mrs Bardsley's medical records show that she had a history of hypertension (high blood pressure). She attended the hypertension clinic, where she was seen by the practice nurse. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, observed that Mrs Bardsley's blood pressure was reasonably well controlled by small doses of medication. Her family was under the impression that she suffered from hypotension (low blood pressure). She certainly suffered from dizzy spells and blackouts for which she was prescribed Stemetil. On 7th
February 1995, it was recorded that Shipman visited, she still had vertigo, her blood pressure was 180/90 and it was noted that she tended to fall if she rose too quickly to her feet. This condition, which Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me could have been a side effect of her medication, is known as postural hypotension. This might account for the family's belief that Mrs Bardsley suffered from hypotension.
Mrs Bardsley also suffered from arthritis and for the last few months of her life she was effectively housebound and required the use of a Zimmer frame. She remained mentally very alert.
The Day of the Death
On 7th
March 1995, Mrs Bardsley fell in the kitchen at home. She was taken by ambulance to the accident and emergency department of Tameside General Hospital. At about 10am the warden service contacted Mrs Karen Braddock to tell her of this accident. Mrs Braddock contacted her husband who, in turn, contacted Ms Briggs.
The hospital notes record a history of a fall with no loss of consciousness. They confirm the history of vertigo. Mrs Bardsley had a small laceration over the left eyebrow, which required suturing, and a small laceration inside her upper lip. Her elbow was swollen and bruised and there was also a superficial laceration. Two blood pressure readings were taken. The first reading was 183/110, which is raised, and the second, timed at 12.20pm, was 140/80, which is normal. A form was filled out requesting that the district nurse visit one week later to remove the sutures and to assess and dress the elbow wound.
When Ms Briggs arrived in the casualty department, she found Mrs Bardsley waiting to have her facial cut stitched. They sat together while Mrs Bardsley was treated. During this time Ms Briggs found Mrs Bardsley to be her normal talkative self. She did not complain of any illness.
Mr and Mrs Braddock arrived at the hospital at about 11.30am. They were told that Mrs Bardsley need not stay in hospital. They could take her home and should contact her general practitioner to ask him to visit. Mr and Mrs Braddock thought that although Mrs Bardsley was a little shaken, she was chatting and seemed well.
The witness evidence, the hospital records and the fact that Mrs Bardsley was allowed home all suggest strongly that there was nothing about Mrs Bardsley's condition that aroused any concern that she might be seriously ill.
When they arrived at Mrs Bardsley's house, Mrs Braddock telephoned the Market Street Surgery to ask for Shipman to visit Mrs Bardsley. The receptionist said that Shipman was on his rounds but that he would be given the message when he telephoned the surgery. The visits book for 7th
March says:
'Lily Bardsley - Back from Hosp. after fall'
.
Mr and Mrs Braddock stayed with Mrs Bardsley until about 1.30pm. They left her with a snack. They were not worried about her.
Mr and Mrs Harrison say that they saw Shipman arrive at Mrs Bardsley's house at about 1.45pm. They also saw him leave between 30 and 40 minutes later.
When Mr and Mrs Braddock returned home from work that evening, they found a message from the warden service on their answerphone. This had been left between 3pm and 4pm and asked them to contact the service urgently. Mrs Braddock telephoned the service and was told that Shipman had visited Mrs Bardsley and she had died in his presence. Mrs Braddock later discovered that Shipman had contacted the warden service, using the emergency button available to Mrs Bardsley and had informed them of the death. Mrs Braddock cannot remember whether this information came from Shipman himself or the warden to whom she spoke. The warden service records in this case were not available to the Inquiry, as they are routinely destroyed after 12 months.
Mr and Mrs Braddock immediately went to Mrs Bardsley's home and let themselves in with a spare key. They found Mrs Bardsley lying on her bed in the rear ground floor living room, which she had been using as her bedroom. She was lying straight; her legs were uncrossed and her arms were folded across her lap. She looked as if she had been laid out in that position. She was wearing the clothes she had been wearing earlier but her shoes had been taken off and placed neatly together on the floor next to the bed. She was not wearing her spectacles. She looked very peaceful and there was no sign of facial disfigurement, except for the bruising from her earlier fall.
Later that day, Mrs Braddock spoke to Shipman on the telephone. He sounded genuinely sorry that Mrs Bardsley had died. He said that he had gone to see her at about 2pm. She had taken a long time to answer the door and when she did, she was using her Zimmer frame and was dragging one of her feet. He said that her speech was slurred. Shipman said that he thought she was having a stroke and took her through to the back room to lie on the bed. He said that he was going to call an ambulance but, before he could do so, Mrs Bardsley died. Shipman gave the impression that Mrs Bardsley had died within minutes of his arrival. He said he was very sorry that Mrs Bardsley had died and that she was a lovely lady. He said that there would be no problem with the death certificate, which Mr Cyril Braddock would be able to collect the following day.
There is no entry in the handwritten notes but the computerised records for 7th
March reveal the following entries:
'CVA unspecified
R SIDE
O/E - dead
CVA ARTERIOSCLEROSIS BP'
.
I interpret that entry to suggest that Shipman found that Mrs Bardsley had had a stroke on the right side and that she died soon after his arrival.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) in which he said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis of two years' duration. Hypertension of seven years' duration had contributed.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the time of death was
'1420hrs'
on 7th
March 1995. He said that he had been with Mrs Bardsley for half an hour before her death and was present at the moment of death. He had immediately performed a complete external examination. The certified cause of death was as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was collapse of 10-15 minutes' duration.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville provided a statement to the police, in which he stated that her history of hypertension put Mrs Bardsley at a slightly higher than average risk of stroke. He said that, assuming Shipman's account of events to Mrs Braddock and his computerised records were accurate, it was possible that Mrs Bardsley had indeed suffered a fatal stroke that coincided with Shipman's arrival and that the certified cause of death was therefore justified. In the light of all the circumstances of this case and of the fact that Shipman has falsified records in many other cases, that assumption cannot be made. It is known that Shipman has often lied to relatives when describing a death and also has made false or exaggerated entries in the medical records.
Professor Richard Baker classified Mrs Bardsley's death as highly suspicious after considering the contents of the cremation certificate. He did not examine the medical records.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding Mrs Bardsley's death.
The death occurred in Shipman's presence. Shipman had not been summoned because Mrs Bardsley was showing any sign of having a stroke. On the contrary, she had appeared well enough to be sent home from hospital following treatment for her fall. He was only asked to visit to check on her general welfare. If Shipman is right, Mrs Bardsley suffered a stroke in the short period that elapsed after Mr and Mrs Braddock departed and before Shipman arrived. If that happened, which is theoretically possible, it was a remarkable coincidence of the sort that seemed to occur very frequently in Shipman's professional life. I find it hard to accept that a coincidence of that kind occurred in this case.
Shipman told Mrs Braddock that he had not had time to call an ambulance, yet on Form B he stated that he attended Mrs Bardsley during her last illness for a period of half an hour and that her collapse lasted 10-15 minutes. This is more than enough time in which to call an ambulance. Further, Shipman told Mrs Braddock that he put Mrs Bardsley on her bed and she died before he could telephone for an ambulance, which implies that Mrs Bardsley died within seconds of being placed onto her bed. Shipman has not been consistent in his accounts and it is reasonable to infer that he has lied about this death.
In his generic evidence Dr Grenville has explained that an occlusive stroke of the kind which causes weakness down one side and slurring of speech does not usually cause a sudden death. Usually the patient recovers, although not necessarily completely. If the stroke develops, it does so gradually. The patient deteriorates gradually over a period of two to three days before death. The type of stroke which can cause a sudden death affects the brain stem and does not produce the kind of signs described by Shipman. In any event, as Dr Grenville has explained, it is highly unlikely that a patient would have strokes in two different parts of the brain within so short a time. A far more likely explanation for this very sudden death was that Shipman gave Mrs Bardsley a lethal dose of a strong opiate, probably diamorphine.
The overwhelming likelihood in this case is that Mrs Bardsley was killed by a lethal injection of diamorphine administered by Shipman. Although at the age of 88, it is possible that Mrs Bardsley could have died suddenly either from a stroke or from a heart attack, I am satisfied so as to be sure that her death was not natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001