The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Geoffrey Bogle
Introduction
Mr Geoffrey Bogle died at his home, 12 Lord Derby Road, Hyde on Thursday, 14th
September 1995 at the age of 72. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought well of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Bogle's death was myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Fiona Jane Aldred (Mr Bogle's elder daughter) contacted the police to express her concern about the circumstances of her father's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Aldred, Mrs Kay Darbyshire (Mrs Aldred's friend), Mr Arthur Wilde (a friend of Mr Bogle) and Mrs Margaret Ann Stones (who worked for Mr Bogle as a domestic cleaner). Dr John Grenville, Dr Alan Banks and Detective Sergeant John Ashley also provided statements to the police. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry obtained statements from Mrs Aldred, Name removed at the request of the witness and Mrs Ann Morris (a friend of Mr Bogle). The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), cremation documents, Mr Bogle's bank statements and his general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the documents and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Bogle had a history of severe ischaemic heart disease. In 1993, he had a multiple coronary by-pass and mitral valve operation at Manchester Royal Infirmary. According to Mrs Aldred, he made a good recovery. Dr Grenville told the police that the muscle of Mr Bogle's heart had been significantly damaged and that he remained at a high risk of sudden death from a heart attack.
Mrs Aldred says that, a few weeks before her father's death, she and her family moved in to live with him because he was finding it difficult to look after himself.
At the end of August 1995, Mr Bogle developed a chest infection and, on 29th
August, he was admitted to hospital where he was found to have a pneumothorax. He was treated and discharged on 5th
September. There is an entry for 7th
September in the surgery visits book and a brief entry in the computerised records, indicating that, on that day, Shipman attended the house, had a chat with Mr Bogle and agreed to refer him to a chiropodist. The hospital discharge letter also mentioned that Mr Bogle had wax in his ears, and it seems likely that an arrangement was also made on that day for his ears to be syringed.
The Day of the Death
An appointment for Shipman to visit Mr Bogle was made for 14th
September. The practice visits book for that day confirms that it was Shipman's intention to visit Mr Bogle for his ears to be syringed. Shipman was expected to arrive at about 2.15pm. Mrs Aldred had arranged to go out that afternoon to a garden centre with Mrs Darbyshire. When she told her father she was going out, he seemed a little apprehensive and asked her to stay with him for Shipman's visit. She was usually with him when he saw Shipman. She reassured him and reminded him that his friend, Mr Wilde, was due to visit at about 3pm. She left the house at about 1.30pm. Mrs Aldred's recollection is that her father had been in reasonable spirits that day, although Mrs Stones recalled that he had been coughing in the morning and she thought he was still quite poorly.
Mr Wilde told the police that he arrived at Mr Bogle's home at about 3.45pm and found the front door unlocked. He walked in and went to the front room where he found Mr Bogle seated in a chair. At first he thought Mr Bogle was asleep but he could not find a pulse and realised that Mr Bogle had died. He was very shocked.
A few minutes later, Mrs Aldred and Mrs Darbyshire returned. Mr Wilde told them that he could not wake Mr Bogle. It was obvious to the two women that Mr Bogle was dead. He was sitting bolt upright with both feet on the floor and one hand resting on each leg. He would normally sit with his feet up on a stool because of ankle oedema. Mrs Darbyshire felt his head. He was still warm. His facial appearance was peaceful.
Mrs Aldred contacted Shipman's surgery. The receptionist said she would ask Shipman to attend. When he arrived, he was quite curt with Mrs Aldred. He did not examine Mr Bogle but said that he had suffered a massive heart attack. Mrs Aldred asked Shipman whether Mr Bogle had died peacefully, to which Shipman spoke impatiently, saying something like, 'Does it look as though he's tried to get out of the chair? Does he look as though he's tried to reach for the phone? Of course he has died peacefully'. According to Dr Grenville, if Mr Bogle's death was due to cardiac causes, the most likely mechanisms would be sudden cardiac arrhythmia, secondary to an ischaemic event, or acute left ventricular failure. In either case, Dr Grenville would have expected Mr Bogle to do precisely what Shipman intimated he did not do.
Mr Bogle's handwritten medical records contain the following entry for the day of death:
'V
(
visit
)
ears syringed OK
HS I II BP 130/80
Irregular pulse oedema less
feels OK see 4/52'
.
If this note is genuine, it would appear that Mr Bogle was reasonably well when Shipman visited. His ears were syringed. His blood pressure was not raised; his heart sounds were normal. The pulse was irregular and the ankle swelling was apparently less than usual. However, no reliance can be placed on Shipman's records. He frequently made false entries. There are a number of cases in which Shipman killed a patient and made an entry indicating that all had been well when he left the house.
The next entry relates to Shipman's second attendance on the day of death and reads as follows:
'Patient died about 3.30
found by daughter
CT
(
coronary thrombosis
)
IHD
(
ischaemic heart disease
)
RA
(
rheumatoid arthritis
)
'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, saying that the cause of death was a myocardial infarction lasting seconds, which was due to ischaemic heart disease of nine years' duration. Rheumatoid arthritis of four years' duration was said to be a contributory cause, unrelated to the heart attack.
Mr Bogle was cremated. Mrs Aldred is understandably concerned that, whereas Form A, for which she was responsible, states that her father was found at 3.30pm, on Form B Shipman stated that death had occurred at 3.30pm. He said that he had last seen Mr Bogle alive about two hours before death and examined the body about one hour after death. The mode of death was said to be syncope of seconds' duration. He said his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on the observations of Mrs Aldred and himself. His answers relating to both the cause and mode of death must have been pure surmise as no one was present at the death and Mrs Aldred could not have provided any relevant information. It is possible that Shipman deliberately stated that the time of death was later than it really was in order to increase the time between the death and his own visit. However, it is also possible that he carelessly stated the time of death as the time at which the death was discovered.
Mrs Aldred told the Inquiry of her suspicions that some property and cash may have been missing after the death. The evidence as to this is inconclusive.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents of both the cremation forms and the medical records. I have referred already to the views of Dr Grenville.
Conclusion
Mr Bogle was at high risk of suffering a heart attack and sudden death. The fact that he was reasonably well on the day of his death does not mean that he could not have suffered a sudden cardiac death. He was in reasonable spirits when Mrs Aldred left him at about 1.30pm. He died either during or very shortly after Shipman's visit. No one saw him alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit. Shipman had the opportunity to kill Mr Bogle. That the death should have been discovered so soon after the visit is a highly suspicious factor.
Shipman's note of the home visit indicates that, at that time, Mr Bogle's heart gave no cause for concern. There was no complaint of chest pain and there were no other signs of a pending coronary thrombosis. Shipman often made such entries when he had in fact killed his patient and left the premises. When the body was found, he would say that the patient had been well when he left but must have had a heart attack or stroke since then.
Mr Bogle's appearance in death was entirely consistent with a death from an overdose of diamorphine and was not typical of a death caused by coronary thrombosis.
Shipman attributed Mr Bogle's death to myocardial infarction, without having the benefit of any account of the events that had led to the death. In Dr Grenville's view, Shipman should at least have reported this death to the coroner with a view to asking the coroner to allow him to sign the MCCD, based on his supposition as to the cause of death. The coroner might then have directed a post-mortem examination. In this case, as in many, it appears that Shipman wished to avoid any form of referral to the coroner.
Taken together, these points satisfy me that Shipman killed Mr Bogle by giving a lethal injection of diamorphine. There is a theoretical possibility that Mr Bogle had a sudden fatal heart attack very shortly after Shipman's departure, but I regard that as so unlikely that I feel able to say that I am sure of my conclusion that Shipman killed him.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001