The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Vera Brocklehurst
Introduction
Mrs Vera Brocklehurst died at her home, 1 Queensway, Dukinfield on Friday, 31st
March 1995 at the age of 70. Mrs Brocklehurst lived alone, having been widowed in 1989. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She is said to have 'thought the world' of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, members of Mrs Brocklehurst's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr John Eric Brocklehurst (Mrs Brocklehurst's son) and from Mrs Ann Hotchkiss (the sister of Mr John Brocklehurst's wife, Mrs Sally Brocklehurst). Mrs Hotchkiss was close to Mrs Brocklehurst and used to look after Mrs Sally Brocklehurst's young son, Matthew Brocklehurst.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Brocklehurst, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Brocklehurst, from Mrs Hotchkiss, from Mrs Vera Brocklehurst's daughter, Mrs Margaret Grzebalski, and from an old friend of Mrs Brocklehurst, Mrs Joyce Wallwork. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Brocklehurst's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1987, Shipman referred Mrs Brocklehurst to Tameside General Hospital for an electrocardiograph (ECG). She had had several episodes of chest pain and Shipman wished to discover whether or not she had had a myocardial infarction. At that time, she was on Adalat Retard for hypertension. The ECG showed no significant abnormality and no evidence of infarction.
Mrs Brocklehurst's husband died in 1989 and thereafter she lived alone. Not long after her husband's death, Mrs Brocklehurst was diagnosed as having stomach cancer. For some time, she was extremely ill. In March 1992, she underwent a palliative partial gastrectomy from which she made a remarkable recovery. A letter from the hospital, dated 25th
June 1992, describes how Mrs Brocklehurst had managed to put on weight and had had no recent episodes of vomiting. A further letter, in September 1992, mentioned the risk of liver metastases. All the witnesses suggest that Mrs Brocklehurst continued to make progress and was not further troubled by symptoms of stomach cancer. However, I note that, in March 1994, Shipman prescribed slow release morphine tablets (presumably for pain) and these were prescribed again for pain in January 1995. It is not clear from the records whether Mrs Brocklehurst took morphine regularly from March 1994.
During her hospital admission in 1992 in connection with her stomach cancer, it was noted that Mrs Brocklehurst was hypertensive, but no mention was made of congestive heart failure (CHF). The first reference in her medical records to that condition was in February 1994, and this diagnosis featured on several occasions during the following year. In the computerised records there are seven references to CHF although nowhere is any symptom or sign recorded which might justify the diagnosis. Usually, the blood pressure was well controlled, heart sounds were normal and there was no oedema. On only one occasion, 17th
March 1994, did Shipman note
'oedema just'
.
In the manuscript records, there is a reference to a trace of oedema on 24th
February 1995, but, otherwise, such testing as was performed yielded satisfactory results. It appears that, throughout this time, Mrs Brocklehurst was taking medication designed to control her blood pressure and such medication would also control a tendency to CHF. It is the opinion of Dr John Grenville that Shipman frequently 'over-diagnosed' congestive heart failure and, in Mrs Brocklehurst's case, the diagnosis must be treated with caution.
According to all the witnesses, Mrs Brocklehurst was an active lady. She could easily walk more than a mile from the local shops to her home. She was mentally alert and very much enjoyed the company of her grandson, Matthew.
The Weeks Leading up to Death
Shipman was a regular visitor at Mrs Brocklehurst's home and she enjoyed his visits.
There is a puzzling divergence between the manuscript and computerised notes in early 1995. In the computerised notes for 6th
January, Shipman notes that he saw the patient at home, that everything was
'ok'
and that he would see her again in February. In the manuscript notes for that day, he recorded a visit at which Mrs Brocklehurst's bowels were
'OK'
. Then there is something illegible (probably the name of a drug) followed on the next line by:
'Pain: MST OK'
.
MST is a slow-release morphine preparation.
The first reference in the handwritten notes to any problems with, or signs of, congestive heart failure is on 24th
February 1995. It reads:
'V
(
visit
)
Resp
160/90 HS I II oedema tr
(
trace
)
abdo appetite
no D or V
pain controlled well
ALL
(
illegible
)
6/52'
.
It would appear that this was a review of Mrs Brocklehurst at home at which her blood pressure was 160/90; her heart sounds were normal; some oedema was noted. Her abdomen was satisfactory; her appetite and bowel functions were normal. Her pain was well controlled, presumably by MST. She was to be reviewed six weeks later. The computerised entry for that date says:
'Congestive heart failure all ok Seen in own home'
.
On the day before she died, Mrs Brocklehurst took some flowers to her friend Mrs Wallwork for her birthday. She left at about 5pm and seemed in good spirits. Mr Brocklehurst visited his mother after returning home from work that evening. He recalls that she was well and mentioned that she was expecting a visit from Shipman the following afternoon.
The Day of the Death
The surgery visits book for 31st
March 1995 records Mrs Brocklehurst's name together with the word
'Re-visit'
, indicating that a routine visit was scheduled.
At about lunchtime, Mrs Brocklehurst telephoned Mrs Wallwork. The two ladies chatted. Mrs Brocklehurst was looking forward to visiting her daughter, Mrs Grzebalski, in the south of England. She mentioned that she was expecting Shipman to visit her some time that afternoon. At around 2pm, she telephoned Mrs Hotchkiss to say that she would not call to see her at teatime because she was awaiting Shipman's visit and was unsure when he would arrive. Mrs Hotchkiss formed the impression that Shipman's call was a routine call, 'for a chat and a sherry'. Mrs Brocklehurst asked whether Mrs Hotchkiss needed anything from the shops, because Mrs Brocklehurst planned to do some shopping that afternoon.
The handwritten general practitioner records contain the following entry dated 31st March:
'V
(
visit
)
160/90 HS I II oedema tr
(
trace
)
Abdo
Appetite
no D & V
odd chest pain. Blood for LFTS'
.
This entry is remarkably similar to the previous entry, dated 24th
February 1995, and should perhaps be treated with caution for that reason alone. The reference to 'blood for LFTs' suggests that Shipman took a blood sample for a liver function test. However, it appears that he did not deliver it to the hospital until 3rd
April, by which time it was grossly haemolysed and unsuitable for analysis. The report from the hospital suggests that the sample had been taken as long before as 21st
March 1995, but it appears to me that this was probably a misreading of Shipman's writing and referred to a sample taken on 31st
March.
The computerised entry for 31st
March reads as follows:
'Congestive heart failure
all looks OK bloods
Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman'
.
Thus, according to Shipman's notes, Mrs Brocklehurst had some oedema and an odd chest pain but was otherwise well.
Between about 6pm and 7pm that day, Mr Brocklehurst made several unsuccessful attempts to contact his mother by telephone. He eventually went to her house at about 8.10pm. It was in darkness. He let himself in and found his mother sitting in her armchair. It appeared that she had been doing a crossword puzzle. The other witnesses who attended after Mr Brocklehurst confirm her peaceful appearance.
The ambulance service was called and, according to their records, the paramedics confirmed the fact of death at 8.45pm. The two paramedics now have no recollection of the case. Mr Brocklehurst rang Shipman's surgery and Shipman came out to the house. Mrs Sally Brocklehurst remembers that he said something like,
'These things happen when you're on beta blockers'
, and Mrs Hotchkiss remembers that he said something like,
'It's strange, I was only here a while ago'
.
A copy of the Diagnosis of Adult Death form, completed by the paramedics, was retained within Mrs Brocklehurst's Lloyd George folder and, on the reverse of that document, Shipman wrote:
'Neighbour spoke
at 3.30
seen HFS 3.00
found 8.30. Son.
6.00'
.
Shipman seems here to be recording that he had last seen Mrs Brocklehurst at 3pm, that she had spoken with a neighbour at 3.30pm, that she had died at 6pm, and that her body had been discovered at 8.30pm.
The evidence from the family is that they were completely unaware of any such conversation with a neighbour and no such neighbour has been traced. Mr Brocklehurst says that the only way that Shipman could have known that his mother had spoken to a neighbour at 3.30pm would have been by speaking to that neighbour on his attendance at the house at 8.30pm. Mr Brocklehurst is emphatic that that did not happen. Shipman did not see or speak to any neighbour that evening. The only neighbour that Mrs Brocklehurst would have spoken to would have been Mrs Robinson, but she has confirmed to Mr Brocklehurst that she did not speak either to Mrs Brocklehurst that afternoon or to Shipman that evening.
Shipman said that no post-mortem examination was necessary. He told the family that, when he visited their mother at 3pm that afternoon, she had been well.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving congestive heart failure as the condition leading directly to death. He said that Mrs Brocklehurst had been suffering from that for three years. The underlying cause, he said, was hypertension which had been present for nine years. Stomach cancer had contributed to the death but was not directly related to the immediate cause. Shipman confirmed that he had last seen Mrs Brocklehurst alive on the day of her death. As I have already observed, the first reference to congestive heart failure in the medical records was in February 1994, just over one year before the death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Brocklehurst died at
'1800hrs'
. He claimed that he had attended her during her last illness for four years. This conflicts with his statement on the MCCD that Mrs Brocklehurst had suffered congestive heart failure for three years. He cannot have meant that her last illness was hypertension as she had been suffering from that for much longer than four years and there is no indication in the records that the hypertension became more serious in 1991. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Brocklehurst alive about four hours before her death (which on his timing would have been at 2pm, although he had noted on the back of the paramedics' form that he had seen her at 3pm). He said he had seen the body two hours after the death and had carried out a complete external examination. He confirmed the causes of death identified on the MCCD. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds only. Shipman said that his views as to the mode and cause of death were based on his own observations, and on the statements of the ambulance crew, Mrs Brocklehurst's neighbour and Mrs Brocklehurst's son.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered not long after Shipman had visited Mrs Brocklehurst. He had been alone with her. There is no evidence that anyone had seen her alive or spoken to her after his visit. That factor arouses a high degree of suspicion, which is further heightened by Shipman's entry on Form B of the cremation certificate, where he sought to create the impression that someone had seen and spoken to Mrs Brocklehurst after his departure. I am satisfied that that entry was false and was fabricated in an attempt to demonstrate that he could not have killed Mrs Brocklehurst.
Mrs Brocklehurst's death was sudden and wholly unexpected. The picture painted by all the witnesses is that she was well in the weeks before her death and, in particular, was well on the day of her death while awaiting Shipman's routine visit. The medical records show that she suffered from high blood pressure, which would put her at some increased risk of stroke and heart attack. She might also have had angina, although the evidence of this is not clear. The
'odd chest pain'
,
recorded by Shipman on 31st March, might well have been a fabrication. If she had angina, she would have been at an increased risk of heart attack. The evidence that she suffered from congestive heart failure is unconvincing and must be treated with some suspicion, as the recorded signs are by no means diagnostic of that condition. In any event, it does not appear to me that the medical history as recorded would lead to any expectation that Mrs Brocklehurst might die suddenly.
There could certainly be no expectation that she might die of congestive heart failure. As Dr Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, congestive heart failure is a chronic condition although it can also present as an acute episode, in which case it is usually referred to as left ventricular failure. In the MCCD, Shipman implies that Mrs Brocklehurst died of the chronic condition. That is possible but the signs and symptoms must be much worse than were apparent in this case before the patient will die. Further, a patient dying in an acute episode experiences a very frightening and unpleasant death in which he or she is gasping for breath. Usually lung secretions are found around the mouth. Mrs Brocklehurst's peaceful appearance in death is quite inconsistent with such a death. I conclude that it is very unlikely that Mrs Brocklehurst died from congestive heart failure. Mrs Brocklehurst's peaceful appearance in death was entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by the intravenous administration of a lethal dose of diamorphine.
Shipman claimed that Mrs Brocklehurst had died at 6pm. In my view, that claim is plainly spurious. Shipman could have had no genuine basis for making that estimate. As Dr Grenville has explained, it would not have been possible for him to make a sensible estimate of the time of her death. Shipman often claimed that he could estimate the time of death accurately and then proceeded to give a time of death which would have the effect of distancing him from the death. I am sure that is what he has sought to do in this case.
This was a sudden and unexpected death. There was nothing in the medical records which could have enabled an honest doctor to certify the cause of death. The case should have been referred to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination. In cases where Shipman had killed a patient, he usually avoided such a referral.
The close temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death leads me to the conclusion that he probably killed Mrs Brocklehurst. The other considerations I have mentioned, which all point to the same conclusion, make me sure that that is what happened. I note that Shipman took blood during the final visit. That would have given him the opportunity to introduce a needle into one of Mrs Brocklehurst's veins. I have no doubt that he then used a needle to inject her with diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001