The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nancy Anne Brassington
Introduction
Mrs Nancy Anne Brassington died at her home, 12 Laburnum Avenue, Hyde on Monday, 14th
September 1987 at the age of 71. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In October 1998, one of Mrs Brassington's former neighbours contacted the police expressing concern over her death. That lady does not wish her name to be published and, for that reason, I shall refer to her as Mrs A. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs A, from Mrs Mary Irene Astbury Lancashire (Mrs Brassington's stepdaughter) and Mr Anthony George Lancashire (Mrs Lancashire's husband).
Shipman was not prosecuted in connection with Mrs Brassington's death, but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs A and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1987. The medical records have not been found. Mr and Mrs Lancashire have declined to provide signed statements to the Inquiry.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs A told the Inquiry that, although Mrs Brassington had not been in the best of health during the last few years of her life, she was 'certainly not on her last legs'. She had had bladder cancer for about two years prior to her death and also suffered from spondylitis and pernicious anaemia, for which she received regular vitamin B
12
injections. She had had a minor stroke shortly before her death. She was not particularly mobile following this and her face had dropped on one side. According to Mrs A, she had completely recovered by the time she died.
Mrs Lancashire last saw her stepmother about three weeks before she died. Mrs Brassington did not seem well and appeared to be in considerable pain. Mrs Lancashire believes that she must have spoken to her stepmother by telephone after that time, but cannot recall any information relevant to her state of health.
The Day of the Death
The direct information concerning the circumstances surrounding Mrs Brassington's death comes from Mrs A.
At around lunchtime on Monday, 14th
September 1987, Shipman's car was seen outside Mrs Brassington's house. A short while later, Shipman was seen to leave the house but Mrs Brassington did not show him to the door. Mrs Brassington is said to have been a very well-mannered lady, who would always see her visitors out. Mrs A's husband (who has since died) went over to Mrs Brassington's house only minutes after Shipman had driven away. He knocked on Mrs Brassington's door but received no answer. Through the window, he saw Mrs Brassington, sitting on her settee. He was concerned. He returned home and he and his wife went back to Mrs Brassington's house. They found the front door unlocked. They went into the living room and found Mrs Brassington, sitting upright on the settee with her hands resting in her lap. She was wearing trousers and a long-sleeved top. Her face was not disfigured in any way and she was still warm. She was almost grey in colour. Her eyes were closed and she looked as though she was sleeping. Shipman's stethoscope was on the coffee table in front of Mrs Brassington. Mrs A tried to wake Mrs Brassington by rubbing her hand and calling her name. She did not stir and Mr A realised that Mrs Brassington had died.
Mrs A telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery and said to the receptionist, 'I am at Mrs Nancy Brassington's house. Dr Shipman has just left. I came across to see Nancy and she has collapsed. Please could you ask the doctor to come back'. She did not tell the receptionist that Mrs Brassington had died.
Shipman behaved strangely when he returned to Mrs Brassington's house. He exhibited no sense of urgency. He did not examine Mrs Brassington. He simply lifted her eyelids and said, 'She's gone. She obviously had another massive stroke'. Shipman then opened Mrs Brassington's medical records, which he spread across the coffee table. He referred to Mrs Brassington's medical conditions and indicated that the cancer had spread to her brain. Shipman left Mrs Brassington's neighbours with the overwhelming impression that she would have suffered a great deal had she lived. He did not, however, say anything about Mrs Brassington's condition when he had been with her only a few minutes before Mr and Mrs A had found her dead.
Shipman's 1987 visits book contains no reference to Mrs Brassington in the three month period leading up to her death but there is the following entry for the day of death:
' 12, Laburnum Ave Brassington
'
.
The cross signifies death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself is not available, the counterfoil has been found. This shows that Shipman said that he had seen Mrs Brassington alive on the day of her death. He said he had seen the body after death. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination. He gave the immediate cause of death as cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis. He said that cancer of the bladder and stomach were significant conditions which had contributed to the death but were not related to the immediate cause.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'Approx 1300hrs'
on 14th
September 1987. He said that he had attended Mrs Brassington during her last illness but the duration of this was simply stated as:
'DAY OF DEATH'
.
He said that he last saw her alive approximately ten minutes before her death and made a complete external examination of the body 30 minutes after death. The mode of death was stated to be syncope lasting minutes only. It is wholly unclear what enabled him to say this. In response to the question as to the extent to which his views as to the cause and mode of death were the result of his own observations or were based on statements made by others, he wrote:
'own
neighbours'
. He said that no one was present at the moment of death. He noted that Mrs Brassington had undergone an investigative procedure connected with her bladder cancer at Withington Hospital in January 1987. It is possible that he spoke to the coroner about that procedure, but he would have had little difficulty in persuading him that this procedure had no connection with the death.
Shipman appears to be suggesting that he was with Mrs Brassington for an unspecified period of time until about 12.50pm. Form B gives no clue as to what he then observed or diagnosed. He then left and Mrs Brassington died within about ten minutes. He returned, examined her, found that she was dead and was able to diagnose the cause of death. How he could have done this, and how anyone could have thought that he was able to do so, is hard to imagine, unless Mrs Brassington was already having a stroke when he left. If she was, it is hard to imagine why he left her. How he could have known the mode of death is also hard to imagine save that, if she really was alive when he left, and dead ten minutes later, he would be entitled to say that whatever the mode of death, the event had only taken minutes. The suggestion that the neighbours, presumably Mr and Mrs A, had been able to provide any information about the mode of death is incredible, save that they could say that Mrs Brassington appeared to be dead within a minute or two of Shipman's departure, information which is not included on the form.
Dr Tanna, who signed Form C of the cremation certificate, says that he spoke to Shipman about this death before saying that he was satisfied that the cause of death was a stroke. What Shipman must have said to explain a death which he claimed occurred ten minutes after his departure is hard to imagine.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has classified this death as highly suspicious upon his consideration of the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious.
Mrs Brassington was clearly unwell and appears to have been suffering from cancer. It is likely that she had not long to live and it may well be that her quality of life would not have been good during her remaining days. Having said that, she was certainly not in the terminal phase of her cancer and, indeed, Shipman does not suggest that she died as the direct result of that condition.
There is some evidence that Mrs Brassington had had a stroke some time before her death. Her stepdaughter does not mention this, but Mrs A does. I shall assume that Mrs A is right in her recollection and that would mean that Mrs Brassington was at risk of suffering a further stroke.
The circumstance which suggests compellingly that Shipman killed Mrs Brassington is that her death was discovered within a few minutes of his departure. Mrs Brassington did not see Shipman out, as she usually would with any visitor. The overwhelming inference is that she died while he was with her. For Mrs Brassington to have suffered a fatal cerebrovascular accident within a minute of two of Shipman's departure is so unlikely that the possibility can be safely discounted. The inference that Mrs Brassington was dead when Shipman left is supported by Shipman's attitude on his return. If the receptionist's message had been relayed to him accurately, he should have thought that Mrs Brassington had collapsed. Yet he displayed no sense of urgency. I can only infer that he knew there was no urgency, as Mrs Brassington was already dead.
Mrs Brassington's peaceful appearance in death was not typical of that seen in a death due to cerebrovascular accident but was wholly consistent with a death by lethal injection of opiate.
Shipman's answers on Form B are frank, in that he admitted that the death must have occurred within a very short time of his visit to Mrs Brassington. Presumably he knew that Mrs A had seen him come and go. However, the course of events he describes is so improbable that it is surprising that more penetrating questions were not asked. On any view, this was a sudden and unexpected death for which the cause could not have been known. It should have been referred to the coroner.
Mrs Brassington was a typical Shipman victim. She was a widow, living alone and she was in poor health. Shipman was known to have expressed the view that he did not like 'keeping his patients going'. He seems to have thought that he knew when the right time had come for someone to die. His conduct on this occasion when he suggested to Mr and Mrs A that, if Mrs Brassington had lived, she would have suffered much pain, is consistent with his philosophy.
Despite the absence of the medical records, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Brassington, almost certainly by administering a fatal intravenous dose of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001