The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles Edward Brocklehurst
Introduction
Mr Charles Edward Brocklehurst died at his home, 6 Park Avenue, Hyde on Friday, 31st
December 1993 at the age of 90. He lived with his wife, Mrs Emily Brocklehurst, who was blind and very hard of hearing. Mr Brocklehurst had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed Shipman when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Brocklehurst's death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, the police decided to investigate this death when Professor Richard Baker, who had examined Mr Brocklehurst's general practitioner records and cremation forms, informed them that he regarded the death as highly suspicious. The police took witness statements from Mr Anthony Edward Brocklehurst (Mr Brocklehurst's son) and Mr Paul Edward Brocklehurst (Mr Brocklehurst's grandson). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Brocklehurst but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Anthony Brocklehurst, Mr Paul Brocklehurst and Mr Anthony Brocklehurst's wife, Mrs Christine Brocklehurst. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Brocklehurst's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Members of Mr Brocklehurst's family recall that he suffered from angina and emphysema and that he was prone to attacks of bronchitis. They recall that, around Christmas 1991, Mr Brocklehurst was admitted to hospital with acute breathing problems. They thought that he would not survive this episode but he did and their recollection is that he made quite a good recovery. After that, his activities were very limited. Their recollection of Mr Brocklehurst's problems is borne out by the medical records.
The records show that, in 1988, Dr H H Wan, consultant in geriatric medicine at Tameside General Hospital, informed Shipman that Mr Brocklehurst had diverticular disease, chronic obstructive airways disease causing reduced lung function, signs of ischaemic heart disease and impaired renal function. The general practitioner records mention an emergency visit on 15th June 1991 by a doctor other than Shipman and the relevant entry records a history of chest pain and differential diagnoses of crescendo angina and myocardial infarction. On 25th
June 1991, Dr Wan diagnosed biventricular cardiac failure. Mr Brocklehurst was said to be breathless on slight exertion. In December 1991, he was admitted to hospital for 16 days with breathlessness and chest tightness. Again the diagnoses were chronic obstructive airways disease, ischaemic heart disease and left congestive cardiac failure. In October 1992, he was admitted again with an exacerbation of his lung disease and a chest infection. In June 1993, on review at the out patient clinic, concern was expressed that he was confused about his medication and might be taking tablets that would damage his kidneys. In July, Shipman visited and found Mr Brocklehurst a little wheezy but otherwise there was
'status quo'
. On hospital review in October 1993, Mr Brocklehurst said he was cold all the time and short of breath on exertion. Chest rales and rhonchi were heard but there was no oedema. In November, Shipman recorded that Mr Brocklehurst had bronchitis with green phlegm and prescribed an antibiotic. On 16th
December 1993, Mr Brocklehurst had a surgery appointment for the renewal of prescriptions. No complaints are recorded and Shipman did not note any examination. That was the last entry in the medical records before the day of the death.
Mr and Mrs Brocklehurst spent Christmas Day at the home of their son, Mr Anthony Brocklehurst, and his wife. Mr Brocklehurst was in quite good health and spirits. On about 28th
December, he appeared to develop a chest infection and became quite ill. Mr Anthony Brocklehurst told the Inquiry that he was not unduly concerned about his father's symptoms at this stage and certainly did not think they warranted hospital admission. However, he seems to have been quite unwell. He was tired, weak and breathless. He stayed in bed, where he found it easier to breathe. The family agreed that if he did not improve over the following few days, the doctor would be called out.
The Day of the Death
Mr Brocklehurst's condition did not improve and on 31st
December 1993, his wife telephoned the surgery requesting a visit. The visits book for that day says:
'Charles Brocklehurst - 6 Park Ave - Poorly all wk - in bed 2 day
breathing 'very bad. (Died)'
.
Mr Anthony Brocklehurst visited his father at about 10.15am-10.30am. He found his condition was largely unchanged, although his breathing remained heavier than usual. Mr Brocklehurst asked for some ham for lunch. Mr Anthony Brocklehurst went out to the shops. He recalls that, although he did not think his father was in a critical condition, he was anxious to return from shopping to check that he was still all right.
Mr Paul Brocklehurst remembers that his grandmother telephoned him during the morning, while his parents had gone shopping. She said that they were waiting for the doctor and asked her grandson to come round, as she was afraid that she would not hear Shipman's arrival. Mr Paul Brocklehurst recalls sitting with his grandfather and talking with him. Mr Paul Brocklehurst told the police that his grandfather looked pale and his breathing was worse than usual. At some stage, Mr Paul Brocklehurst went back home to see if his parents had returned from shopping. They were not there so he went back to his grandparents' home. His grandmother told him that Shipman was upstairs with his grandfather. Mr Paul Brocklehurst went to the foot of the stairs and shouted 'hello' to Shipman, who returned the greeting. After a few minutes, Shipman came downstairs and told Mr Paul Brocklehurst that his grandfather had not long to live. Mr Paul Brocklehurst remembers running home to tell his parents. He does not remember returning with them to his grandparents' house, although his parents say that he did.
Mr Anthony Brocklehurst and his wife had just returned home when Mr Paul Brocklehurst arrived to give them the news. They think that this was at 12.30pm They immediately went to the house and up into Mr Brocklehurst's bedroom, where they found him, apparently sleeping peacefully in bed. Shipman said something like:
'He's gone, but I'll just check. We need a time of death. I gave him an injection to help his heart'
.
Shipman made no attempt to revive Mr Brocklehurst. He completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) in the house and handed it to Mr Anthony Brocklehurst.
Shipman made the following entry in Mr Brocklehurst's handwritten general practitioner notes, relating to his visit of 31st December 1993:
'Conscious just 12.10
been breathless 10/7
better if in bed
JVP
creps
bases
HS I II gallop -
IV lasix
80mg Stat
morphine 10mg.stat
wife present
daughter
1240.
DC
CHF
IHD
COAD'
.
Thus, Shipman recorded finding Mr Brocklehurst barely conscious at 12.10pm and obtained a history of breathlessness for 10 days, with the symptoms being relieved when in bed. He recorded a raised jugular venous pressure and basal crepitations in the lungs. He said that the heart was in gallop rhythm. He gave an injection of intravenous Lasix, a strong diuretic, which would be appropriate treatment if Mr Brocklehurst were in severe heart failure. He claimed that he also gave 10mg of morphine. He said that the wife and daughter were present. He claimed that Mr Brocklehurst died at 12.40pm and that the death certificate (in fact, the MCCD) would say that the causes of death were congestive heart failure, ischaemic heart disease and chronic obstructive airways disease.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but its counterfoil has been recovered. On this, Shipman certified that the cause of death was congestive heart failure, which was due to ischaemic heart disease. He identified chronic obstructive airways disease as a morbid condition which contributed to the death but was not directly related to the immediate cause. He said that he had last seen Mr Brocklehurst alive on the day of the death. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Brocklehurst died at
'12.40'
. He said that he had attended him during his last illness, presumably meaning congestive heart failure or ischaemic heart disease, for three years. He said that he was present at the death and had also seen Mr Brocklehurst one week before his death. He said that he saw the body immediately after death and examined it. He gave the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil. He said that the mode of death was collapse lasting 30 minutes. He claimed that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by
'wife
son'
, meaning Mrs Brocklehurst and Mr Anthony Brocklehurst. He said that no one had nursed Mr Brocklehurst in his final illness but that Shipman, Mrs Brocklehurst, Mr Anthony Brocklehurst, Mrs Christine Brocklehurst and Mr Paul Brocklehurst had all been present at the moment of death. Whilst at least some of those people attended shortly after the death, it would appear that only Shipman was present at the actual moment of death.
The Aftermath
The family was shocked by the suddenness of Mr Brocklehurst's death. Mr Brocklehurst's son and his wife made an appointment to see Shipman about two weeks later. Shipman then explained that Mr Brocklehurst had had heart problems and that age and general wear and tear of his organs, in particular of his heart, had caused his death. The family was not in a position to disagree with what Shipman said.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker found the case highly suspicious on account both of the cremation certification and of the contents of the medical records.
Dr Grenville noted the inconsistency between the history of ten days' breathlessness, recorded in the medical records, and the family's account that Mr Brocklehurst only fell ill on Tuesday, 28th
December. However, the visits book for 31st December records that Mr Brocklehurst had been poorly all week but that he had only been in bed for two days. It also records that his breathing was
'very bad'
. It is possible that the family's present recollection is inaccurate.
Although Dr Grenville does not mention this in his report, it is clear that Mr Brocklehurst must have been at a significantly increased risk of sudden cardiac death by reason of his cardiac history.
Dr Grenville's main concern centres on the circumstances of what happened on 31st
December. He infers that only a few minutes passed between Mr Paul Brocklehurst leaving his grandfather, awake and talking, and Shipman finding Mr Brocklehurst supposedly in a barely conscious state. Dr Grenville suspects that Mr Brocklehurst was not barely conscious when Shipman arrived. It may be said that Mr Paul Brocklehurst's recollection of what happened that day is poor, not least because he cannot remember being present in the house after his grandfather had died, whereas his parents say that he was there. It is possible that Mr Paul Brocklehurst's first return to his home was precipitated by a sudden deterioration in his grandfather's condition, shortly before Shipman's arrival. However, I think it highly likely that Mr Paul Brocklehurst would have remembered if his grandfather's condition had deteriorated suddenly during his parents' absence. Dr Grenville goes on to say that it is theoretically possible that Mr Brocklehurst suddenly became critically ill within the few minutes that his grandson was away. However, such a sudden collapse, leading almost immediately to death, would not be consistent with Shipman's claim on Form B that Mr Brocklehurst's collapse had lasted 30 minutes. It would also be an extreme coincidence if, having been quite well until his grandson's departure, Mr Brocklehurst's condition suddenly deteriorated on Shipman's arrival.
Dr Grenville says that, if Mr Brocklehurst's clinical state was as described by Shipman in the handwritten general practitioner records, it would appear that Mr Brocklehurst was in acute left ventricular failure and it would have been appropriate to administer Lasix intravenously, followed by a small dose of morphine. However, a 10mg dose would be a large dose for a patient suffering from chronic obstructive airways disease, whose respiratory function would already be compromised. That amount might be dangerous. However, as Dr Grenville says, Shipman's medical records cannot be accepted at face value, as it is known that he frequently fabricated entries so as to explain the death of a patient he had killed. Dr Grenville suspects that the entry Shipman made on 31st
December was fabricated and that Mr Brocklehurst was not in acute left ventricular failure. For one thing, he gave congestive heart failure as the cause of death, rather than left ventricular failure. But, more significantly, Shipman's account of the history and of the findings on examination is not consistent with the descriptions given by members of the family. If Mr Brocklehurst were not in left ventricular failure or otherwise suffering severe cardiac pain, it would have been entirely inappropriate to give morphine, especially to a patient whose respiratory function was chronically impaired. The suspicion must also arise that Shipman, gave not 10mg of morphine, but a lethal dose of diamorphine.
Conclusion
There are highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death took place in Shipman's presence and while he was alone with the patient. That in itself is a cause for suspicion because Shipman was not called out as an emergency that morning. The family had the impression that Mr Brocklehurst was suffering an exacerbation of his breathing problems and did not think that his condition was in any way critical. However, I note that whoever telephoned the surgery said that Mr Brocklehurst had been poorly all week and that his breathing was bad. I note that Mr Anthony Brocklehurst was anxious to return from shopping as soon as he could. It is possible that the family has failed to recall the seriousness of Mr Brocklehurst's illness.
The central issue in this case is whether or not Mr Brocklehurst's condition at the time of Shipman's arrival was as Shipman claimed. If it was, it was entirely possible that Mr Brocklehurst would die within the next few minutes. If it was not, then it was a remarkable and highly suspicious coincidence that his condition should have deteriorated suddenly and that he should have died within the short compass of Shipman's visit.
I cannot place any reliance on Shipman's records. I have seen many cases in which Shipman has fabricated a description of a patient's condition in order to explain the death that he himself has caused. It is entirely possible that Shipman killed Mr Brocklehurst and fabricated the account in order to explain the sudden death and the presence of morphine in the body, in the event that it might be detected. Such conduct would be typical of him.
One of the features of this case, which strikes me as suspicious, is that Shipman apparently had his book of MCCDs with him. This is a substantial book and a general practitioner does not usually carry it about with him. There was no reason within the medical history or the message received at the surgery for Shipman to suspect that Mr Brocklehurst would have died before he arrived or would die while he was there. I suspect that he decided in advance of the visit that Mr Brocklehurst would die.
There are some slightly suspicious features within Shipman's account contained in the records and Form B. First, he claimed that Anthony, Christine and Paul Brocklehurst were present at the moment of death, when they all think that they arrived after the death. Second, Shipman said that he had seen Mr Brocklehurst a week before his death, implying that Mr Brocklehurst had needed medical attention at that time. If Shipman did see Mr Brocklehurst on about 24th
December, he did not record the fact in the medical notes. The family says that Mr Brocklehurst was well over Christmas.
Dr Grenville's suspicions were particularly aroused by the apparent sudden change in Mr Brocklehurst's condition within the very short time that Mr Paul Brocklehurst was away from his grandfather's side. I agree with Dr Grenville's view but I do not feel able to be certain of the accuracy of Mr Paul Brocklehurst's recollection. I think it is possible that Mr Paul Brocklehurst went back home to see if his parents had returned because he was becoming increasingly concerned about his grandfather's health. That is not to say that I think he had reached the very serious stage described by Shipman. I think Mr Paul Brocklehurst would have remembered if his grandfather had been in a state of collapse or near unconsciousness when he left.
It is not possible to resolve the issue as to Mr Brocklehurst's state with certainty. Mr Brocklehurst's general health was poor and it is possible that he could have deteriorated to the condition described by Shipman. However, taking into account all the factors I have mentioned, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman gave Mr Brocklehurst a lethal injection. I am sure that he killed Mr Brocklehurst by giving him a larger dose of opiate than he admitted in the medical note and one which he knew would be fatal.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001