The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Black
Introduction
Mrs Alice Black died at her home, Flat 32, Plain Pitt Street, Hyde on Thursday, 18th
December 1997 at the age of 73. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years, probably since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Black's daughter, Miss Jenifer Isabel Black, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police took statements from Miss Black, Mr Derek Michael Oldham (Miss Black's boyfriend at the time of the death), Mr Edward Dobson (Miss Black's son), Miss Barbara Burgess (Mrs Black's neighbour), Mr Norman Ludgate (a mobile warden), Mr Robert Henshaw (a local joiner), PC Theresa Hadfield, PC John Fitzgerald, Dr Ziauddin Ahmad (duty doctor), Detective Sergeant John Frederick Ashley and Dr Linda June Reynolds (general practitioner). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Black but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Miss Black, Mr Oldham, Mr Dobson, Miss Burgess and Mr Henshaw. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Black's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to Miss Black, her mother's health was very good. She was active and did all her own shopping, cooking and cleaning. The only health problems of which Miss Black was aware were that she had an underactive thyroid and suffered hypertension for which she took medication. Mrs Black also had episodes when her heart 'raced' but these had been investigated and were not serious. Although her accommodation did not have the benefit of direct supervision by a warden, Mrs Black had access to the Tameside warden service if necessary. To Miss Black's knowledge, Shipman never visited her mother at home. Mrs Black's name does not appear in Shipman's 1997 visits books.
The medical records show that Mrs Black had had long-standing problems with her thyroid gland. In 1968, it was overactive and was treated with radioactive iodine. In 1992, a tumour was excised from the gland and Mrs Black then became hypothyroid and was treated with thyroxine for the rest of her life. In 1985, she had palpitations. Investigations failed to explain them but an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed changes indicative of mild ischaemic heart disease. A further ECG, dated 3rd
June 1996, showed very similar changes. However, there is nothing in the records to suggest that Mrs Black ever complained of symptoms related to ischaemic heart disease or that she was ever treated for that condition. She was found to have slightly elevated blood pressure in 1996 and was started on enalapril for this. However, within a year she developed side effects in the form of palpitations and this treatment was stopped. Her blood pressure was not recorded following the cessation of treatment.
Miss Black remembers that, in the weeks before the death, her mother developed a cough. The computerised general practitioner records show that Mrs Black consulted Shipman on 10th
November 1997 with an upper respiratory tract infection, which was treated with an antibiotic. Shipman saw her again on 3rd
December and recorded that her blood pressure treatment had been stopped and that she had a cough for which he prescribed cough medicine. It appears that Shipman must have taken some blood samples on that day, as a series of test results was returned to the surgery on 9th
December. None of them was markedly abnormal but one report noted that the sample used to measure the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) had not been analysed until two days after it was collected and it was advised that the test should be repeated. It appears that Shipman noted that the test should be redone. Miss Black remembers that her mother was very anxious to know the results of her blood tests.
Miss Black recalls that her mother saw Shipman on the day before her death, although she did not speak to her mother after that appointment. The practice appointments sheet for Wednesday, 17th
December, shows that Mrs Black was due to see Shipman shortly after 10am. The computerised record does not reveal why Mrs Black attended nor whether any diagnosis was made. It simply reads,
'Seen in GP's surgery'
, and there is no corresponding entry in the manuscript records.
Mrs Black's telephone billing records show that she made a call to Tameside General Hospital at 7pm on 17th
December. It is not known why this call was made. It lasted less than a minute. She made no call after that time. The next call from her telephone was made by others after her death.
The Day of the Death
There is evidence that Mrs Black went into Hyde town centre on Thursday, 18th
December 1997. Miss Burgess saw her coming out of the post office at about 12.20pm. The two ladies stopped and chatted for a while. Mrs Black complained that she could not get her breath and said that she had to take rests whilst walking. Miss Burgess noticed that Mrs Black did not look well. Miss Burgess thought from her description of her symptoms that Mrs Black might have angina, as Miss Burgess herself did, and she advised Mrs Black to ask her doctor about this the next time she saw him. Mrs Black agreed to do this, although she did not say when she was next due to see him.
The practice appointments sheet for 18th
December shows that Shipman would probably have been busy in the surgery until about 11.30am. The medical representatives diary suggests that he had an appointment to meet a man named Ian Coxon at noon, possibly in a Chinese restaurant. It seems likely that he would not have gone out on his rounds until about 1.30pm. He was due back in the surgery by 4pm. The visits book for that day shows that he had only three patients to see. Mrs Black was not on the list. However, one of the three lived on Rutland Street, Newton. The time
'3.20pm'
has been written by the side of the Rutland Street address. Rutland Street is only about a quarter of a mile from Plain Pitt Street. The Inquiry contacted the patient from Rutland Street but that person could not say at what time Shipman had visited. The Inquiry has written to a number of Mrs Black's former neighbours in an attempt to establish whether anybody saw Shipman visiting Mrs Black on 18th
December. These enquiries have proved negative. However, all the neighbours say that they regarded Mrs Black's death as sudden.
At about 1.30pm, Mr Dobson spoke to his grandmother over the telephone. She said that she felt well, although she was coughing and sounded a little depressed. She did not mention that she was due to see the doctor.
At about 3pm, because she was worried about her friend's condition earlier that day, Miss Burgess tried to contact Mrs Black by telephone. There was no reply. She did not see her again and learned of her death the following day. She spoke to some of the neighbours after Mrs Black's death. No one mentioned having seen Shipman at the flats that day. However, Miss Burgess was not enquiring about him. It would seem that two neighbours said that Mrs Black had mentioned to them that she intended to see Shipman that day.
Mr Dobson telephoned his grandmother in the early evening; it seems likely that this was at some time between 5pm and 6.15pm. He, too, was unable to obtain a reply. Mr Dobson then telephoned his mother at work and told her of his unsuccessful attempts to speak to his grandmother. Miss Black said that she would call in on her mother after finishing work at 10.30pm. Mr Oldham took Miss Black to her mother's flat and they arrived at about 10.45pm. They saw that two of the windows to the flat were wide open. Miss Black immediately became concerned. There was no reply at the door. She first telephoned Tameside General Hospital to see if Mrs Black had been admitted to hospital. She then telephoned the warden service at 10.54pm.
Mr Ludgate arrived shortly after 11pm. He did not have a key so he contacted Mr Henshaw. He said in his statement to the police that the joiner attended 'and decided the best way to enter the flat would be to go in through a first floor window with the aid of ladders'. The joiner then did so.
Mr Henshaw does not have a clear recollection of this incident. He said to the police 'the warden simply explained he required me to gain access to the flat which was on the first floor. I went round to the rear of the flats and noticed an open window which I managed to climb through having used me (
sic
) ladders to reach it'.
The account that Mr Henshaw gave to the Inquiry is somewhat different. He said that he could not remember the detail of his conversation with Mr Ludgate. He remembers that the door had a mortise lock but cannot remember whether it also had a Yale lock. I accept that it did, as Miss Black has produced evidence to confirm this.
Mr Henshaw has described what his usual practice would be when asked to gain access to locked premises. He says that he would normally first try the door to see if it was locked on the mortise lock and that this is what he would have done on this occasion. He would do this by pressing his foot against the bottom of the door. If it 'gave' or pivoted from the position of the mortise lock, he would assume that the mortise lock was engaged and would then seek an alternative entry route. On this occasion, he concluded that the mortise lock was engaged.
Miss Black says that the position of the Yale lock in the door was very close to the position of the mortise. This cannot be confirmed, as the door has now been changed, but the significance of this evidence is that it would allow the possibility that Mr Henshaw may have confused resistance offered by the Yale lock with resistance from the mortise.
Mr Henshaw told the police that 'as I remember' the front door still had the key in it. He told the Inquiry that he could not specifically remember this and could only say that he 'certainly cannot remember' either having to search for a key or actually finding a key to enable him to open the door from the inside. Miss Black says that Mr Henshaw cannot be right about finding the key in the mortise lock. Her mother would never have left the key in the lock because she was very security conscious. If Miss Black is right about that, Mr Henshaw would have to be mistaken in his impression that the mortise lock was engaged. If the mortise lock was not engaged, Mr Henshaw would have had no difficulty in opening the front door from within, even if the mortise key was not in the lock. He would only have had to turn the lever on the Yale lock.
Mr Henshaw let Mr Ludgate into the flat. Mr Ludgate found Mrs Black sitting on the sofa, fully dressed. Mr Ludgate felt for a pulse but could not find one. He contacted his control centre and requested the attendance of the police and a doctor.
Upon learning that her mother had died, Miss Black became very distressed and felt unable to see her mother's body. Mr Oldham recalls that Mrs Black was leaning back in her chair with her right arm hanging down and her left arm across her abdomen. She looked as if she was asleep. There was no light in the room. The only light was over the stairwell.
The police were called and PC Hadfield attended at about 12.20am. She confirms the appearance of the body and recalls raising Mrs Black's head so that it rested against the back of the settee because it had slumped forward. A short while later, the night duty doctor, Dr Ahmad, attended and he pronounced life extinct at 12.49am. The undertakers attended and removed Mrs Black's body at about 3.10am.
The Aftermath
Early the next morning, Miss Black and Mr Oldham attended Shipman's surgery. Shipman's first words were 'What's the story?' and his attitude was apparently cheerful. Miss Black describes Shipman as being 'very upbeat'. He was not at all sympathetic. Miss Black explained that her mother had died the previous evening and, after consulting his computer, Shipman said that Mrs Black had suffered from angina. Miss Black was astonished by this and said words to the following effect: 'Angina. Well, she never said anything to me about angina. We were over at Derwent Valley the other week walking uphill for three miles. Why didn't she tell me?' Shipman replied that people often said something like that. He explained that he had discussed it with Mrs Black and that Mrs Black had decided that she did not want to tell her daughter about the angina. He said it was patronising to expect people to tell each other everything. He also said that Mrs Black had decided not to take any medication for her angina. Miss Black was amazed at this suggestion because she could not imagine that her mother would refuse treatment. Shipman went on to say that Mrs Black's death was a blessing and that Miss Black would not have coped with her mother if she had suffered two strokes. At the time, Miss Black thought that perhaps Shipman was right. When she asked about a post-mortem examination, Shipman said it would not be necessary.
There is no reference to angina in the medical records.
A few days after her mother's death, Miss Black noticed what looked like traces of vomit around the plughole of the bath. She mentioned this in her witness statement to the Inquiry but not to the police.
Following the death, Miss Black discovered that various items of property were missing. These included jewellery, a wedding ring, an engagement ring, a ring set with a black stone, a necklace, two ornaments, a small red vase and an antique Chinese vase. There is some confusion over the extent of the missing property, possibly due to the passage of time. In her police statement, Miss Black mentioned only that two rings were missing and Mr Dobson mentioned only those items and a watch and locket. Miss Black says that she only later became aware that additional property was missing.
Certification
On the MCCD, Shipman certified that ischaemic heart disease of two years' duration had led to the coronary thrombosis and that hypertension of two years' duration had led to the ischaemic heart disease. He said that hypothyroidism had contributed to the death but was not related to the disease or condition which caused it. Shipman stated that the death had occurred on 19th
December and that he had last seen Mrs Black alive on 17th
December. Although Shipman certified that the death had occurred on 19th
December, the registrar seems to have accepted that the death had occurred on 18th
December, as it clearly had.
Shipman also completed Form B for the purposes of obtaining a cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred on 19th
December 1997 at
'00.49'
hours, which was the time at which the duty doctor had pronounced life extinct. Plainly, the death had occurred some time earlier. The practice Shipman followed here appears to be regarded as acceptable by many doctors. However, it was not Shipman's usual practice to say that death had occurred at the time when a doctor confirmed the fact of death. He usually stated the time when he claimed to believe that the death had actually occurred. He often sought to rely on body temperature as the basis for his estimate, a practice which Dr Grenville says was quite spurious. Shipman's departure from his usual practice is a cause for some suspicion. On Form B, Shipman said that he had been Mrs Black's ordinary medical practitioner for 20 years and that he had attended her during her last illness for four weeks. It is not at all clear what her last illness might have been. He said that he had last seen her alive on 17th
December 1997 and that he saw her body 48 hours after death, when he made a complete external examination. The causes of death were stated as on the MCCD. Shipman said that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. How he was supposed to know the mode or duration of death is hard to imagine, but Dr Grenville has said that many doctors complete this box with their best guess at the mode of death. The box must be filled and many doctors fear that, if they say they do not know the mode of death, the form might be rejected. In response to the question as to whether his views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Working diagnosis was IHD
found by daughter death confirmed
by Duty Doctor'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion to be high on the basis of the contents of the medical records and to be moderate on the basis of the cremation documentation.
Dr Grenville reviewed Mrs Black's medical notes and records. He said that her cardiac investigations could indicate mild ischaemic heart disease but that there was no record to suggest that Mrs Black had ever complained of symptoms related to ischaemic heart disease or been treated for it. Dr Grenville advised that, as a result of her ECG changes and her slightly elevated blood pressure, Mrs Black was at a slightly higher than average risk of suffering from a heart attack.
Dr Grenville said that there was nothing in the medical records to support a 'working diagnosis' of ischaemic heart disease. If, during the four weeks before her death, Mrs Black had complained to Shipman of symptoms suggestive of ischaemic heart disease, he should have recorded them and arranged for further investigation and treatment. Dr Grenville said that, even if Shipman's working diagnosis was ischaemic heart disease, he could not be certain that Mrs Black's subsequent sudden death was due to a coronary thrombosis. This sudden and unexplained death should have been reported to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination to establish the cause of death.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death.
Mrs Black had enjoyed good health and was active at the time of her death. From her medical history it appears that she was at only a slightly increased risk of heart attack. The only evidence of ill health in the period before the death comes from Miss Burgess who thought Mrs Black looked unwell at lunchtime and was sufficiently concerned to wish to speak to her in the afternoon. Save for that small indicator, Mrs Black's death was sudden and unexplained. As such, it should have been reported to the coroner. When Shipman avoided reporting a death to the coroner, in circumstances where a report should have been made, my suspicion is aroused. However, I do recognise that Shipman sometimes failed to report deaths that should have been reported even where it is clear that he had not caused the death. Accordingly, this factor is of limited probative force. However, if Mrs Black's death was from natural causes, it is not known to a satisfactory degree of certainty what the cause was. There is no basis on which it could properly be said that the cause was a heart attack.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Black had had ischaemic heart disease for two years is not borne out by the medical records. Nor was he justified in suggesting that ischaemic heart disease could have provided a working diagnosis to explain her death. If, as he claimed, Shipman had not seen Mrs Black since her appointment in the surgery on 17th
December, he would not have known that she was feeling unwell on the morning of 18th
December and had mentioned symptoms which might have been suggestive of angina. I regard it as very suspicious that Shipman should attribute the death to a coronary heart attack without any proper basis for doing so. Shipman also claimed that he had attended Mrs Black for four weeks during her last illness. Her recent attendances at the surgery had been in connection with her cough and routine blood tests. There was no last illness and this entry on Form B is a significant lie.
The position in which Mrs Black was found and her appearance in death was more consistent with an opiate death than with death from coronary thrombosis or death from any of the common causes of sudden death. Her appearance was typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
The evidence that Shipman told Miss Black that her mother had refused to take medication for her angina is implausible and is reminiscent of his claim in several cases of unlawful killing where he has claimed that the patient had refused to be admitted to hospital.
Shipman certified that the death occurred in the early hours of the morning of 19th
December, when all the evidence suggests that it occurred on 18th
December, probably in the early afternoon. This could well be an attempt by Shipman to distance the death from the time of a visit, if in fact he did visit Mrs Black that afternoon. On the other hand, it could be that Shipman gave as the time of death the time when the deputising doctor pronounced Mrs Black dead because he had no other information on which to base his estimate. I think the former is more likely. As I have said, Shipman usually gave an estimate of the time of the death even though, if the death were natural, he would have had no idea of when it had occurred. I suspect that on this occasion the time at which the deputising doctor confirmed the death provided Shipman with a time of death a long time after his visit and that this suited his purposes.
There are some factors which suggest that Shipman was not responsible for this death. First, there is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Black on the day of her death. He was not seen in the vicinity, although he probably did visit a patient in Rutland Street, only a short distance away. If Shipman killed Mrs Black, he must have visited her between 1.30pm, when her grandson telephoned her, and 3pm when she failed to respond to Mrs Burgess' telephone call. There is no doubt that he could have done so. He was probably out on his rounds from that time and he had only three essential visits listed in his book. Although the evidence suggests that he had never before made an unexpected call on Mrs Black, it is well known that he often did call on patients, especially the elderly, if he happened to be in the area. There is no reason to think that Mrs Black was expecting a visit that day. However, it is possible that Mrs Black was in Shipman's mind because he had seen her in the surgery the day before. All that I can say is that an unsolicited visit was a real possibility.
Second, there is some evidence that Mrs Black's door was locked with a mortise key from the inside. If it was, the only reasonable inference is that Mrs Black locked herself in. If she did, and if Shipman had given her a lethal dose of opiate a short time previously, the injection must have been given in such a way that Mrs Black remained mobile for long enough to see Shipman out and lock the door behind him. That is possible, as an intramuscular or sub-cutaneous injection of a lethal dose of opiate would not take effect for about 15 minutes and would not reach maximal effect until about 30 minutes to an hour after administration. In his Report for the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay said:
'With an intramuscular dose, because of the slower absorption, it is possible that there would be a period of time between injection and the time of maximal effect of the injection during which the victim could walk and talk. As the effect of the drug began to be felt the victim would feel nauseated and could vomit, particularly if they were trying to move about. In the immediate post-injection period an onlooker might not see anything strange, but by 15 minutes, and certainly by 30 minutes, it would be clear that something strange was happening'
.
However, Shipman did not usually kill by intramuscular or subcutaneous injection. Usually he gave an intravenous injection, which takes effect very rapidly, thus enabling him to stay with the patient until he was sure he or she was dead. To leave a patient alive and mobile would be to run a grave risk of detection. If the patient began to feel ill and called for help before lapsing into unconsciousness, there would be a real risk that help would arrive in time to save the patient and allow him or her to tell the tale.
The evidence that the front door was locked on the mortise is not wholly reliable. Mr Henshaw was doing his best to describe what happened by reference to what he would usually do in such circumstances and also what actually happened on this occasion. Almost 12 months passed between the incident in question and the time when he was asked to make his police statement about it. In 1997 he was on call quite frequently and he says in terms that he had had access to many properties previously and on six occasions had found dead bodies. In those circumstances, there is a very real possibility that he is mistaken in his impression that the mortise was locked. If the door was secured only on the Yale lock, Shipman could have visited, given an intravenous injection and let himself out, leaving Mrs Black sitting in her chair.
A small factor that might suggest that the death was natural is Miss Black's report of the possible presence of vomit in the bath. If correct, this might suggest that Mrs Black had had a heart attack. It would also be consistent with her having been given an intramuscular injection of opiate, after which she was able to move about and felt sick. However, it is not consistent with the theory that she had an intravenous injection of opiate. She would not have had time to move to the bathroom before losing consciousness. It is quite possible that she had been sick for reasons totally unconnected with Shipman's attendance.
It is reported that some items were missing from the flat after the death. I note that the windows were wide open, which was unusual for December. Although there is suspicion that Shipman stole property from patients he had killed, the evidence is not strong enough for me ever to be able to infer that he was present and had killed from the mere fact that property was missing.
I have not found this an easy case to decide. There are pointers in both directions. I think the weight of the evidence suggests that Shipman probably killed Mrs Black. I am fortified in that view by the knowledge that, at this time, Shipman was killing a large number of patients. The evidence falls some way short of that which would make me sure that he killed Mrs Black but my conclusion is that he probably did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001