The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Arthur Bent
Introduction
Mr Arthur Bent died at his home, 15 Meadowfield Court, Hyde on Monday, 22nd
May 1995 at the age of 90. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Bent's death was 'natural causes (old age)'.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Bent was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Michael Bent (Mr Bent's son) and Mrs Phyllis Margaret Abbott (Mr Bent's daughter).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Bent but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Michael Bent and Mrs Abbott as well as from Mrs Rose Bradshaw, Mr Bent's home help. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Bent's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Bent was a widower and was living alone in sheltered accommodation. In his youth, he had been a keen sportsman but had become frail with age.
Mr Bent's medical records show that he underwent surgery in October 1992 for the removal of a large lesion on the top of his scalp, which was later found to be an invasive squamous cell carcinoma.
Following the death of his wife in 1993, Mr Bent's health noticeably deteriorated. He lost his balance on a number of occasions and there is some suggestion that he became forgetful.
On 22nd
October 1994, Mr Bent had a fall at home and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital. He told the staff that he had had several such falls in the past year. They were not associated with dizziness or fainting. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a first-degree heart block (which is a minor defect in the electrical conduction of the heart) and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (an intermittent benign disturbance of the heart rhythm). Mr Bent made a good recovery and was allowed home after five days. He rejected the suggestion that he might consider residential care. Later, Dr M A Matin, consultant physician in the care of the elderly, saw him and prescribed amiodarone, in an attempt to prevent the atrial fibrillation.
The general practitioner records show that, on 6th
December 1994, Shipman visited Mr Bent at home, on account of a suspected recurrence of his scalp lesion. Shipman referred him to a consultant at the Christie Hospital. A subsequent biopsy proved negative.
On review at Dr Matin's clinic at Tameside General Hospital in February 1995, Mr Bent was found to be mentally alert. He said he had had no further falls (although his general practitioner records suggest that he had had a fall on 1st
December 1994 and an ambulance was called). He was mobile using a Zimmer frame. He had home help once daily. The district nurse came to dress his head wound three times a week. He had meals on wheels five days a week. On review on 10th
May 1995, he was well, although his thyroid function tests were borderline low. He was to continue taking the amiodarone and would be reviewed in two months' time. There is an entry in the general practitioner records for that day, 10th
May, which records that Mr Bent was to be reviewed in respect of his atrial fibrillation in two months' time. This suggests that Shipman did not see Mr Bent on that day.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mr Bent's son and daughter both remember that their father's condition deteriorated in the weeks prior to his death. Mrs Abbott remembers that Mr Bent became increasingly tired and frail and spent more time sleeping than usual, particularly during the day, when he would rest in his chair. Mr Michael Bent recalls that his father deteriorated to the extent that he began to wonder, on each occasion when he saw his father, whether he would still be alive when he visited the following week. Mrs Bradshaw, the home help, does not remember that Mr Bent deteriorated.
Mr Bent received a great deal of assistance from those around him. His son or daughter visited him nearly every day. As a matter of routine, Mrs Abbott would visit on a Monday, Tuesday, Friday and Sunday, and Mr Michael Bent on a Saturday. Mrs Bradshaw collected Mr Bent's shopping each week and, although she did not call in each day, she has confirmed that one of the other home helps would have called in each day. The meals on wheels service would call at 11.30am to deliver lunch.
Mrs Abbott told the Inquiry that her father would rarely visit the doctor, but Shipman would sometimes 'pop in' to see how her father was. These visits would be made without prior arrangement.
A visit is recorded in both Mr Bent's handwritten notes and the computerised medical records for 12th
May 1995. In the handwritten record, Shipman has merely written
'O
K
'
. That entry appears to have been made using the same pen as the following entry, which relates to the day of Mr Bent's death. On the computer, Shipman has entered for 12th
May,
'Had a chat to patient ok'
. I have some suspicion that this visit might not have taken place. If Shipman had visited to see this elderly patient, one might have expected him to listen to his heart and record the observations. Moreover, Mr Bent's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book. Mr Bent did not mention to Mrs Abbott that the doctor had visited in the days before his death. If Shipman had visited, Mrs Abbott would have expected her father to mention it.
Mrs Abbott was due to go away on holiday on 22nd
May 1995. She and her husband last visited her father the day before, on Sunday, 21st
May. They arrived between 4pm and 5pm and stayed for about one and a half hours. She and her husband talked with Mr Bent about their forthcoming holiday and she remembers that he was in good spirits. He did not complain of feeling unwell or suggest that he needed the doctor.
In his statement to the police, Mr Michael Bent said that he last visited his father on Saturday, 21st
May. The 21st
May was a Sunday, and as he usually visited his father on a Saturday, it is likely that he last saw his father on Saturday, 20th
May. Whichever day the visit took place, Mr Michael Bent recalls that his father seemed his usual self.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Abbott went away on holiday as planned on 22nd
May 1995.
Very little is known about the events of this day, save that it appears likely that Mr Bent died some time after noon. When he was found dead the following day, it was discovered that he had eaten his lunch, which had probably been delivered at about 11.30am on 22nd
May.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mr Bent on 22nd
May. His appointments sheet for that day shows that he would have been detained at the surgery until well after 11.30am as 18 or 19 patients attended the morning open surgery. He would then have been free to carry out his visits until 3.50pm when his afternoon surgery was due to begin. The names of three patients are entered in the visits book for 22nd
May 1995. Mr Bent's name was not one of them. Mr Bent's home was just off Old Road, which Shipman would almost certainly have travelled along on his way to or from one of the patients who had requested a visit. Shipman would almost certainly have had plenty of time to fit in a visit to Mr Bent, had he chosen to do so.
On the morning of 23rd
May 1995, Mrs Bradshaw called at Mr Bent's home at about 8.30am. She found the front door slightly ajar, which was unusual, as the door was usually closed. Mrs Abbott says that the door was fitted with a Yale lock and a security chain. Mrs Bradshaw knocked on the door and, when she received no answer, went through to the living room and found Mr Bent sitting in his usual chair. He was wearing his normal day clothes. His arms were by his side and his head was resting against the back of the chair. His mouth was open and his dentures were hanging out on one side. Mrs Bradshaw initially thought that he had had a stroke but then realised he was dead. She had worked as a home help for many years and Mr Bent's body was the second she had discovered. She telephoned Social Services, who contacted the police. The police arrived soon afterwards, followed by Shipman. Although it cannot be regarded as definitive, police enquiries into attendance by police officers after the death revealed that there was no evidence of such attendance.
Mr Michael Bent remembers that, at about 9.30am, a woman, who identified herself as Mr Bent's home help, telephoned his home and told his wife that she had found Mr Bent dead. He and his wife went immediately to the flat. The home help had left, but Mr Michael Harrop, a relative of the Bents, was at the flat. Mr Harrop later explained that the reason he had gone to the flat was that his father, Mr Brian Harrop, who had the same home help, had received a telephone call from Mrs Bradshaw. She had said that she would be late in arriving at his house because she had been held up at Mr Bent's house.
Mr Michael Bent recalls that his father was sitting in his usual chair dressed in normal day clothes. He had the outward appearance of being asleep, although it was apparent that he had died. His mouth was slightly open and his head was resting against the back of the chair. His glasses were resting on top of a book on the table next to him. The television was not switched on. The picture, as it presented itself, led Mr Michael Bent to believe that his father had died the previous afternoon, because, as part of his afternoon routine, Mr Bent used to sit in his chair and read.
Shipman made the following entry in Mr Bent's handwritten records for 23rd
May:
'V.
(
visit
)
Found dead
. 2000 22/5/95
DC. Natural Causes
(Old Age)
Police + Home Help present'
.
The Aftermath
Mr Michael Bent and Mr Harrop went to see Shipman at the surgery on 23rd
May. Mr Michael Bent told Shipman that he thought his father had died at lunchtime the day before. Shipman apparently expressed his sympathy and said something to the effect that Mr Bent had lived to a good age. He then said,
'I am sure I must have seen him in the last 2 weeks'
, and he may also have said,
'so there is no need for a post-mortem'
. Mr Michael Bent thought that Shipman had
not
seen his father during that period, but he was grateful to him for certifying the cause of death, as it avoided the need for a post-mortem examination.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He certified that the cause of death was
'natural causes (Old Age)'
. He stated that he had last seen Mr Bent alive on 10th
May.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. The time of death is recorded to be
'About 2000hrs'
. Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Bent for two years during his last illness. It was about two years since Mr Bent had an operation on his head but it was nowhere near two years since Mr Bent had been diagnosed as suffering from atrial fibrillation. Shipman said he had last seen Mr Bent alive 12 days before his death, which would have been on 10th
May. Shipman said that he had seen him about 15 hours after death. The cause of death is recorded as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting seconds. As Shipman also said that no one had been present at the death, this answer can only have been based on surmise. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death had been based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Found in chair by Home Help
Police called - certified death
No sign of any injury, no sign of
life: merely died sat in his chair'
.
Shipman said that, within the last 12 months, Mr Bent had undergone a biopsy of the scalp at the Christie Hospital and that no abnormality had been detected. He said that no one had nursed Mr Bent during his last illness.
Mr Michael Bent signed cremation Form A, where it is recorded that Mr Bent died on 22nd
May at
'Time unknown'
.
There is no entry in the visits book or appointments sheets for 10th
May, the day on which Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mr Bent. The entry for that day in the medical records does not appear to suggest any face to face consultation. I think it likely that Shipman had not seen Mr Bent on either 10th
May or 12th
May, as he claimed in the medical records. If he did not see him on either of those two days, the records would suggest that he had not seen Mr Bent since 6th
December 1994. All the intervening entries relate to the results of hospital reviews.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered Mr Bent's medical records and then, separately, the cremation forms. He concluded that both gave rise to a high degree of suspicion that Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Bent. He was particularly unhappy that the death had not been referred to the coroner.
Dr Grenville has prepared a report in this case. In so doing, he had available to him all the documents available to the Inquiry with the exception of Mrs Bradshaw's statement. He noted the history and the circumstances in which Mr Bent's body was found. He concluded that Shipman should have referred the death to the coroner because, although old age is an acceptable cause of death per se, it was unacceptable in this case. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville has said that it would be appropriate to certify the cause of death as old age where an elderly patient had been ill for a significant period of time with multiple organ failure and where death was fully expected. In those circumstances, it might be difficult to determine the specific cause of death and therefore it would be appropriate to certify the cause as old age. In those circumstances, a patient would usually be confined to bed and in receipt of a high level of nursing care. Although Mr Bent received support in his daily living, he did not receive nursing care, as acknowledged by Shipman on Form B.
Dr Grenville noted that Mr Bent's cardiac problems were probably the result of ischaemic heart disease. He considers it possible that he died as the result of a fatal arrhythmia. If this had occurred while he was deeply asleep in his chair, his position and appearance in death would be explicable. However, it would be unusual for this to occur. Dr Grenville would have expected Mr Bent to wake up and rise from his chair in an attempt to seek help. Mr Bent's position and appearance in death were entirely typical of those of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by intravenous injection of opiate.
Conclusion
By the time of his death, Mr Bent was very frail. He was known to suffer from cardiac arrhythmia. His son wondered from week to week whether he would see his father alive again. Mr Bent's death cannot be described as unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr Bent on the day of his death. He could have had access without inconvenience to himself, but there is no evidence that he did. So far, there is no reason to suppose that Shipman was in any way involved in this death.
There are, however, some suspicious features. It is slightly strange that Mr Bent's front door was ajar. This is a feature which is not uncommon in Shipman killings and usually gives rise to some suspicion. However, there is another possible explanation in this case. The meals on wheels staff might have left the door ajar. As the door had a Yale lock, if Shipman had been there, it would have been more typical of him to close it behind him as he left.
A rather more suspicious feature is Mr Bent's appearance in death, which is typical of a Shipman victim. However, the point does not carry much weight, as Dr Grenville says that it is possible to die of a fatal arrhythmia while asleep, in which case the appearance in death would not be inconsistent with a natural death.
Another feature, which raises some suspicion in my mind, is Shipman's claim that he knew the time of Mr Bent's death. He said he had died at about 8pm. There is no way in which Shipman could possibly have known the time of death. Shipman often claimed that he could estimate the time of death so as to create the impression that the death had occurred a considerable time after he had visited the patient. Often he pretended that he could tell the time of death from body temperature, which can only be done if an internal temperature is taken and is, even then, a difficult process. Here Shipman simply stated the time of death. He had no basis for doing so.
There are some other puzzling features to this death. First, Shipman seems to have been anxious to avoid a referral to the coroner. I am quite satisfied that he lied on Form B and the MCCD when he claimed that he had last seen Mr Bent alive on 10th
May. I think he fabricated an entry in the medical records to suggest that he had seen him alive on 12th
May. I do not think he had seen Mr Bent since 6th
December 1994. I think he well knew that he was not qualified to sign the MCCD, even though he had seen the body after death, and I think he knew he ought to refer the death to the coroner. He virtually admitted as much to Mr Michael Bent. That he sought to avoid referral to the coroner does not necessarily imply guilt. Shipman might have wished to save the family the upset of a post-mortem examination. Certainly, Mr Michael Bent was keen to avoid one. Alternatively, Shipman might simply have wanted to avoid the time and trouble of a referral to the coroner.
Second, Shipman certified an inappropriate cause of death. He must have known that Mr Bent had not deteriorated to the extent where such a cause was warranted. But he seems also to have been confident that neither the registrar nor the medical referee would query old age as a cause of death in a man of 90. The odd thing is that, if Shipman had bothered to read Mr Bent's medical records, he could have found a perfectly plausible cause of death, a fatal cardiac arrhythmia due to ischaemic heart disease.
There are reasons to believe that Mr Bent died a natural death. There are other reasons why I suspect that Shipman killed Mr Bent but I do not feel able to make a positive decision either way.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001