The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Broadbent
Introduction
Mrs Lily Broadbent died at her home, 27 Welbeck Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 16th
December 1986 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mrs Broadbent was highly suspicious. The police took a statement from Mrs Broadbent's friend and neighbour, Mrs Lydia Rawson. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Rawson and Mrs Broadbent's daughter, Mrs Kathleen Garside. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1986, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation certificate. Mrs Broadbent's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1968, Mrs Garside emigrated to South Africa but she kept in regular weekly telephone contact with her mother. In 1982, Mrs Broadbent's husband died and thereafter she lived alone. Mrs Garside remembers that her mother was a fit and fairly active lady, capable of doing her own shopping and other tasks. She required medication for 'water retention' but other than this she had no real health problems and rarely visited the doctor.
Mrs Rawson and Mrs Broadbent saw each other frequently and were very close friends. So far as Mrs Rawson knew, Mrs Broadbent did not have any major health problems, although she had a heart condition, for which she took some medication, but Mrs Rawson did not think the problem was serious. Mrs Broadbent used to complain of symptoms of discomfort in her upper chest, which she described as 'heartburn' and for which she used to suck mints. Mrs Broadbent did not speak much about her health. A few weeks before the death, Mrs Rawson noticed that Mrs Broadbent had been to the doctor's surgery rather more frequently than usual, although she did not know why. At about this time, Mrs Broadbent gave her a key to her house, for use in case of emergency. She did not say that she was ill. It does not appear that Shipman was visiting Mrs Broadbent at home during this period as, until the day of the death, there are no relevant entries in the visits book for the months of November and December.
The Day of the Death
At about 10.30am on Tuesday, 16th
December 1986, Mrs Rawson visited Mrs Broadbent. She recalls that Mrs Broadbent said that she was 'not so well' and that she had telephoned to ask Shipman to visit her. She did not say what the problem was. Mrs Rawson was going shopping and asked if Mrs Broadbent wanted anything, but she did not. As Mrs Broadbent was up and dressed and seemed quite well, Mrs Rawson was not concerned about her. She left, promising to call back to see if the doctor had left a prescription. After shopping in Hyde, Mrs Rawson called on Mrs Broadbent again. Shipman had not been, so Mrs Rawson went home, promising to return to deal with the prescription. This was at about 11.45am. Mrs Broadbent still looked alright and Mrs Rawson was still not concerned.
Mrs Rawson returned to Mrs Broadbent's house at about 1.45pm but there was no answer although she knocked and shouted through the letterbox. She returned home to collect the spare key. When she had let herself in, she noticed that the living room was very warm and that the gas fire was on full. This was strange, as Mrs Broadbent never had the fire on full. Mrs Rawson saw Mrs Broadbent lying on her reclining chair. She was dressed as she had been earlier. She appeared to be sleeping. Mrs Rawson knew that the doctor had called because there was a prescription on the coffee table. Mrs Broadbent's next door neighbour came to the house a few moments later. As soon as she looked at Mrs Broadbent, she said, 'She's dead'. Mrs Rawson was too shocked to speak so the neighbour telephoned the police. The police and ambulance arrived at about 2.10pm and the death was confirmed. A while later, Shipman arrived. By this time, Mrs Rawson was in the kitchen and did not hear what was said. As Shipman was leaving the house, he came into the kitchen and briefly expressed his condolences to Mrs Rawson.
The visits book suggests that Shipman was due to see Mrs Broadbent on the day of her death. No other information is recorded.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD and its counterfoil. On the counterfoil, he said that Mrs Broadbent had died of a coronary thrombosis. He said he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mrs Broadbent died at
'Approx 1600 hrs'
at her home address. He stated that he had attended Mrs Broadbent during her last illness for a period of six hours and that he had last seen her alive two hours before her death (which on his timings would be at about 2pm). These timings are not consistent with Mrs Rawson's evidence and it has not been possible to establish who is right. The police and ambulance records, which would contain accurate records of the timing, have not survived. On Form B, the cause of death was given as coronary thrombosis. The mode of death was said to be
'syncope'
lasting
'only minutes'
. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman did not answer the question but wrote:
'seen 2 hours before death with C.T, atrial fibrillation and P.N.D.
(
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
)
Found sat in chair by neighbour'
. Shipman recorded that no one was present at the moment of death. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea is a condition in which the patient suffers from sudden or violent attacks of breathing difficulties at night.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Mrs Broadbent was found dead very soon after a visit from Shipman. Although she was unwell on the day of her death, Mrs Broadbent did not appear to Mrs Rawson to be seriously ill. In Form B, Shipman sought to suggest that Mrs Broadbent had died a sudden natural death about two hours after he left. People aged 75 sometimes do suffer fatal heart attacks without any prior warning. If this were the only case where a patient of Shipman had apparently suffered a heart attack or stroke shortly after he had visited, I would accept without hesitation that the temporal connection was pure coincidence. I would even accept it if it had happened two or three times. But Shipman would have us believe that this type of coincidence happened very frequently. I cannot accept that and I regard this kind of temporal connection as a highly suspicious factor.
There are other causes for suspicion. In Form B, Shipman sought to present a picture of a woman who had been suffering from cardiac symptoms since 10am, whom he visited at about 2pm (possibly for the second time, the first having been at 10am) and found suffering from a coronary thrombosis, atrial fibrillation and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Had Mrs Broadbent been suffering from symptoms of that kind in the morning, I would have expected the surgery staff to treat her request for a visit as an emergency and either to arrange for Shipman to attend quickly or to telephone for an ambulance. I would also have expected Mrs Broadbent to look ill and Mrs Rawson to be concerned about her. Even if the seriousness of the situation had not been appreciated until Shipman's arrival, I would then have expected him to advise Mrs Broadbent to go into hospital. Of course, if we had the medical records, we might see that he claimed to have advised admission but that Mrs Broadbent had refused. A very large number of Shipman's patients refused to accept his advice to go into hospital if Shipman is to be believed. This is a recurring theme in the records of patients he has killed. However, if Shipman had advised admission and if Mrs Broadbent had refused, no reasonable doctor would have left her alone in the condition Shipman claims she was in. Any reasonable doctor would have made arrangements for Mrs Broadbent's care and treatment at home. Whenever I find that Shipman's account indicates that he must have acted in a wholly unreasonable way, I suspect that events did not occur as he claims. This factor increases my suspicion that Mrs Broadbent did not die of a heart attack but died at Shipman's hand.
A further factor which excites suspicion is the gas fire. When Mrs Rawson discovered the body, the gas fire was on a higher setting that usual. Suspicion arises that Shipman turned it up. A very hot room, with the fire full on, has been a feature of several Shipman killings. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has explained that a high ambient temperature would accelerate the onset of rigor mortis and would slow the rate at which the body temperature falls after death. The result of leaving the body in a warm room would be to make it difficult or even impossible for a pathologist to make a reliable estimate of the time of death. I cannot think of any reason why Shipman would wish to achieve that end unless he was concerned about his own role in the death. For that reason I regard the gas fire as a suspicious factor.
If Mrs Rawson's recollection of the timing of events is correct, Shipman appears to have made false entries on Form B. He suggested that his visit was at 2pm and the death at 4pm. Mrs Rawson says she had found the body by about 1.45pm. However, it is possible that her recollection of times is at fault and I do not place reliance on this point. Even so, Shipman's claim that he knew the time of death to be 4pm gives rise to suspicion. If he was not present at the death, he could have not have made a reliable estimate of the time. His pretence at an estimate appears to me to be an attempt to distance himself from the death.
Finally, Mrs Broadbent's position and appearance in death are not typical of those seen in a death following a heart attack. They are, however, entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims, who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
My conclusion is that the overwhelming likelihood is that Shipman killed Mrs Broadbent. Despite the absence of medical records, I feel able to say that I am sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001