The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Violet May Bird
Introduction
Mrs Violet May Bird (known as Vi) died on Thursday, 13th
May 1993 at her home in Hyde at the age of 60. She was a married woman living with her husband. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac arrest due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, following the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Bird's son, Mr Christopher Matthew Bird, contacted the police to express concern about his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Bird's widower, Mr Patrick Joseph Bird.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Bird but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Patrick Bird, from Mr Christopher Bird and from Mrs Marjorie Bingham, the Birds' neighbour. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Bird's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Written advice was sought on a discrete point from Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry. Mr Patrick Bird provided the Inquiry with a copy of his wife's personal diary. No ambulance records are available.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bird's medical records are not easy to decipher. However, it is clear that she did not enjoy good health. She had a number of chronic conditions, including ankylosing spondylitis, osteoporosis and Raynaud's disease (in which the arterial circulation to the digits is impaired). In 1989, she was taking Adalat for this condition, although that drug is usually prescribed for angina. In the past she had had her gall bladder, uterus and appendix removed. She was in receipt of mobility allowance.
In March 1992, Mrs Bird had a bout of bacterial pneumonia and was admitted to hospital for four days. In June, she had sinusitis. In August, she had pain in the cervical spine radiating to the shoulder. She was prescribed pethidine tablets. Also in that month, she was referred to the department of clinical psychology for relaxation training, which it was hoped would relieve her anxiety. She was treated for about two months. The following month she was on Adalat, co-proxamol and pethidine syrup. During the next few months, she was prescribed pethidine, co-proxamol and Oramorph, all of which are pain-relieving drugs. In February 1993, Mrs Bird had pain from the neck to the coccyx and also into the scalp. Shipman said that her dose of Oramorph should be increased.
On 18th
February, there is an entry in the records which appears to say that Mrs Bird went to the surgery and said that she had fainted and fallen to the right. She had no neck stiffness and was treated with Stemetil and Tarivid, an antibiotic. On 22nd
February, Shipman visited and made the following note:
'V
(
visit
)
C/O thumping sensation in chest 48 hrs
HS I II pulse 80/- regular
odd basal crep no oedema 130/90
gets thumping when walks about
dyspnoea on exercise upstairs
Tildiem
(
illegible writing
)
see Thursday
? ECG'
.
I interpret this to mean that Mrs Bird complained that she had had a thumping sensation in her chest for 48 hours. Her heart sounds were normal and the pulse rate was 80 beats per minute and regular. Shipman heard the odd basal crepitation. There was no oedema. Mrs Bird said she had the thumping when she walked about and was short of breath when she went upstairs. She was given Tildiem (for angina) and was told to attend for an electrocardiogram (ECG), which seems to have been carried out at hospital. Shipman's letter to the hospital suggested that she might have angina. Mr Bird has some recollection of this occasion and says that Shipman told Mrs Bird that she had a touch of angina. The ECG taken on 26th
February is marked
'abnormal'
but the report says that there were no signs of ischaemia. On 28th
February, Shipman recorded that the thumping in the chest was less frequent and less severe. The pulse rate was 74 beats per minute.
Mr Bird told the police that Shipman visited Mrs Bird on 2nd
March 1993 to give her the results of the ECG. Mrs Bird wrote in her diary that Shipman had shown her the ECG and that although she had not had a heart attack, she did have angina. There is no record of this visit in the notes. Mr Bird remembers that Shipman said that Mrs Bird had not suffered a heart attack but did have angina.
The only later reference in the notes to the presence or absence of chest pain is on 9th
March 1993 where it was recorded that Mrs Bird's chest was
'OK'
and that there was no radiation of pain to her arms or neck. Mrs Bird felt better. The entry for 23rd
March suggests that Mrs Bird was complaining of feeling
'fluttery'
with palpitations and Shipman increased the dosage of Tildiem. The entry for 26th April 1993 suggests that Mrs Bird had pain in her right hip. Shipman diagnosed sacroiliac joint strain and prescribed Voltarol. Nowhere in Mrs Bird's diary for 1993 does she mention chest pain. There are, however, many references to other ailments.
The surgery visits book contains the following entry for 12th May 1993:
'Violet Bird... - Headaches, swollen
glands, very tired, listless, chest
palpitations, feels sick, body tingling all
over. Stopped
(
sic
)
Tildium last Friday'
.
According to Mr Bird, Shipman visited and issued Mrs Bird with a new prescription. Mrs Bird's medical records contain the following entry for 12th
May 1993:
'V
(
visit
)
Verapamil 40 mg BD stop Tildiem headaches
see 2/52'
.
Verapamil is a similar drug to Tildiem.
That night, Mrs Bird retired to bed as usual.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 13th
May, Mr Bird left home for work at approximately 5am. Later that day, he spoke to his wife whilst he was at work. Mrs Bird asked her husband to come straight home after work, rather than going to the bank, as he had intended. She told him that she felt dizzy.
It appears that Mrs Bird telephoned Shipman's surgery and requested a home visit because the surgery visits book contains the following entry for 13th
May 1993:
'Violet Bird . . . feels funny chest = breathless/heavy feeling - clammy
hands. not got tablets from chemist yet - not nupharm'
.
At about 11am, Mrs Bird telephoned Mrs Bingham and asked if she could put out her washing for her because she was feeling dizzy. Mrs Bingham later called in to see Mrs Bird and noted that she looked 'a bit heavy-eyed' but, other than that, she was well. The two ladies laughed together at a cow outside the house, which was licking a vehicle parked there. Mrs Bird mentioned that she had requested a home visit from Shipman and that she was expecting him shortly.
At the time, Mrs Bingham was working as a dinner lady at a nearby school and she left for work at about 11.55am. Mrs Bingham could see Mrs Bird's house from the school playground and noticed that Shipman arrived at about 12.45pm. Mrs Bingham finished work at about 1pm and saw that Shipman's car was still there. As she walked up the path to her own front door, she looked in through Mrs Bird's window. She saw Mrs Bird sitting in her usual place but could not see Shipman. Mrs Bird smiled and waved.
About five minutes later, Shipman called at Mrs Bingham's house. He asked her to help Mrs Bird to pack her personal belongings because he wanted her to be admitted to hospital in order to rest. As Mrs Bingham passed Shipman in Mrs Bird's doorway, he told her not to be alarmed when she went in. He said that he had given Mrs Bird an injection and had made her comfortable on the floor.
When Mrs Bingham went into Mrs Bird's living room, she found her lying on the floor. She was still wearing her nightdress and dressing gown. Her right arm was straight by her side and her left arm, from the elbow down, was across her middle. Mrs Bingham knelt down in front of Mrs Bird and asked her what she wanted her to put into the bag. There was no response. Mrs Bingham took hold of Mrs Bird's left arm and rubbed it. Mrs Bingham recalls that the sleeves on Mrs Bird's left arm were pushed up to the elbow. Her dentures were on the arm of the settee on which she would normally sit. This surprised Mrs Bingham because she had never seen them there before. Mrs Bingham noted that Mrs Bird's lips were purple and when she mentioned this to Shipman, he said, 'Oh God', and started to perform mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. He carried on doing this for a few minutes until the ambulance crew arrived. Mrs Bingham left when the ambulance crew arrived.
Mrs Bird's medical notes contain the following entry for 13th
May 1993:
'V
(
visit
)
-
Had rung surgery c/o
heavy feeling chest
cold sweating. felt a little
dizzy
About 1.00 visited.
“Pain” heavy central chest
sensation felt dizzy if got
up.
100/70 68/- sweaty
= C.T.
Ambulance informed
IV. 10mg of Diamorph given.
laid in recovery position.
Time of -
1.15.
-
cyanosed
no HR
death
ECM
(
external cardiac massage
)
MTM
(
mouth to mouth
)
Can get pink
(
with
)
pulse
Ambulance 1.25
ECG
(
illegible
)
fibrillation cardiac
shock.
Declared dead
1.30
'
.
This note suggests that when Shipman arrived, Mrs Bird complained of heavy central chest pain and dizziness if she got up. He blood pressure was low at 100/70 and her pulse rate was 68 beats per minute, which is normal. She was sweaty. Shipman diagnosed a coronary thrombosis and called an ambulance. He then administered 10mg diamorphine for pain relief and laid Mrs Bird on the floor in the recovery position. He does not mention that he left Mrs Bird to visit Mrs Bingham. At 1.15pm, he records that he noticed that Mrs Bird was very cyanosed and had no heartbeat. In other words, she had gone into cardiac arrest. He carried out external cardiac massage and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. The next part is difficult to read but appears to show that these measures produced some effect. The ambulance arrived at 1.25pm. I cannot read the next few words but they appear to show that Mrs Bird was in fibrillation and was given cardiac shock. She was declared dead at 1.30pm. In the margin against the time of 1.15pm, Shipman has written,
'Time of death'
. It is hard to equate this account with Mrs Bingham's evidence that Mrs Bird waved to her about five minutes before Shipman came to her door. However, the note is consistent with Mrs Bingham's account that she drew Mrs Bird's cyanosis to Shipman's attention, whereupon he commenced resuscitation.
Whilst he was still at work, Mr Bird received a telephone message from Shipman. He was to go home quickly because his wife was critically ill. Mr Bird left immediately and arrived at about 1.20pm. He saw Shipman's car and an ambulance parked outside his house. The ambulance crew were getting into the ambulance. Mr Bird went inside and saw Shipman standing in the doorway. He asked Shipman what was wrong. Shipman said, 'She's had a massive heart attack'.
Mr Bird went upstairs and into his bedroom where he saw his wife lying on the bed. She was wearing a dressing gown and a nightdress, which was open a little at the top. She looked as though she was asleep. Shipman said to Mr Bird words to the effect that others might want him to have a post-mortem examination but that he, Shipman, could 'fix all that' for him so that there would be no need. Massey's, the undertakers, removed the body to their chapel of rest.
Mr Bird wrote in his wife's diary that the day of his wife's passing was the worst day of his life.
The Aftermath
On 14th
May, Shipman made an entry in the medical notes as follows:
'D.C.
Cardiac Arrest
IHD
minutes
4/12'
.
Shipman certified the cause of death to be cardiac arrest due to ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Bird was buried in Hyde Cemetery on 19th
May 1993.
Mr Bird spoke to Mrs Bingham a few days after his wife had passed away and she told him how she had discovered Mrs Bird's body lying on the floor. Mr Bird could not understand why it had been necessary for his wife to be placed on the floor.
A few weeks after Mrs Bird's death, Mr Bird attended Shipman's surgery and asked him whether his wife had said anything before she died. Shipman said, 'No, I can assure you that she didn't have any pain when she died'. Mr Bird told Shipman that, when he had spoken to his wife over the telephone, on the day of her death, she told him that she didn't have any pain but felt dizzy. Shipman said, 'that's because she had no oxygen going to her brain'. Mr Bird also asked Shipman why his wife had been placed on the floor. Shipman explained that he had given Mrs Bird an injection to relieve her pain and said words to the effect of 'The injection acts very quickly, I didn't want her to fall and that's why I put her on the floor'.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Esmail, who has examined the medical records, says that there is no evidence that Mrs Bird suffered from angina or ischaemic heart disease and she was not therefore at increased risk of dying as a result of a myocardial infarction.
Professor Richard Baker classified this death as highly suspicious on the basis of the medical records. He comments, however, that the history does relate to the stated cause of death and observes that:
'If the ambulance was present and called by HS, this is unlikely to be a murder. Otherwise the case would have many similar features to those regarded as suspicious'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
The death occurred during the course of a visit by Shipman and this factor alone excites a high degree of suspicion. Whilst it appears that Mrs Bird was experiencing dizzy sensations on the day of her death and might even have had chest pain, it is highly coincidental that she should die within a short time of Shipman's arrival. However, if Mrs Bingham's recollection is correct, and I think it is, it seems unlikely that Mrs Bird was suffering chest pain during Shipman's visit, in which case his record of the visit must be inaccurate.
Shipman claims that he gave a 10mg injection of diamorphine, presumably to relieve Mrs Bird's chest pain. I do not think she was suffering from severe chest pain. However, if she were, it would be appropriate for Shipman to have given her a very small dose of opiate. Only the minimum amount necessary to relieve the pain should be given and the injection should be stopped as soon as the desired effect is achieved. Usually this would be a dose of the order of 5mg. A dose of 10mg would be a very large amount to give in such circumstances and might be dangerously large. However, there is every reason to suspect that Shipman gave Mrs Bird a much larger dose of diamorphine than 10mg. At this time in 1993, Shipman had been in the habit of obtaining 30mg ampoules of diamorphine from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy by illicit means. There is no evidence that he legitimately carried 5mg or 10mg ampoules for emergency use, as many doctors do. I think it likely that Shipman gave a dose of diamorphine which was sufficient to kill Mrs Bird.
Shipman's pattern of behaviour in calling for a neighbour is typical of his modus operandi. It would appear that he sought to involve Mrs Bingham so that it would not be he alone who discovered the body of Mrs Bird. Although it was unusual for him to call an ambulance and to make some attempt at resuscitation, this was almost certainly a sham on his part. There would be no danger of Mrs Bird being revived and the paramedics would simply examine her for signs of life and pronounce her dead. I think, on this occasion, Shipman thought that calling an ambulance and giving the kiss of life would make it appear that this was a sudden death from a heart attack.
Taking these factors together, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Bird. I think it highly likely that he gave her a large dose of diamorphine, almost certainly under the pretence of giving her something to help her dizziness.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001