The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nellie Bardsley
Introduction
Mrs Nellie Bardsley died at her home, 32 Rufford Avenue, Hyde on Tuesday, 29th
December 1987 at the age of 69. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about three years and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Carol Chapman, Mrs Bardsley's daughter, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Chapman and Dr John Grenville.
An inquest into Mrs Bardsley's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Chapman. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Bardsley's general practitioner records which were recovered by the police from Shipman's home, but no relevant surgery records have survived, with the exception of Shipman's visits books and the duty doctor transfer diary for the relevant period. The Inquiry has obtained a further report from Dr Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bardsley was a widow and lived alone. She had two daughters, Mrs Chapman and Mrs Norma Miles. Mrs Chapman later worked as a receptionist at Shipman's Market Street Surgery.
In 1983, Mrs Bardsley suffered a heart attack. At the time, she was living in Stalybridge. The discharge summary from Tameside General Hospital records her admission on 13th
September 1983 with a history of chest pains, a diagnosis of myocardial infarction and her discharge 14 days later on 27th
September 1983. Following her heart attack, Mrs Bardsley went to stay with Mrs Chapman for a time. Shipman, who was Mrs Chapman's doctor at the time, visited Mrs Bardsley on two occasions during her stay and gave her an exercise regime to speed up her recovery. After about six weeks, Mrs Bardsley was well enough to return to her home in Stalybridge.
In May 1984, Mrs Bardsley was diagnosed as suffering from late-onset asthma. At that time, Dr Chopra, consultant physician, noted that she had well-established ischaemic heart disease, but said that her consequent angina was fairly well controlled.
Routine examinations following the heart attack demonstrated that Mrs Bardsley's heart condition was stable. Dr Grenville has reviewed Mrs Bardsley's medical records and has concluded that her heart problems were well controlled and did not cause significant symptoms. She nevertheless remained at high risk of heart attack.
In about 1985, Mrs Bardsley moved to Hyde to be nearer her family. Her bungalow in Rufford Avenue was sheltered accommodation, with the benefit of warden supervision. She registered as a patient with Shipman. Mrs Chapman has said that her mother 'suffered from her nerves' but was otherwise well. She was independent and did her own housework and shopping, although she was unable to walk quickly as a result of spondylosis of the spine.
Dr Grenville noted the following entry in Mrs Bardsley's Lloyd George notes:
'3/12/87 a
(
illegible writing, probably a drug and dosage
)
feels OK
Chest OK.
Heart. had episode of palpitations
(
sign for 'with'
)
oedema -
(
illegible writing
)
-
Sleeping
'
.
That entry, if genuine, suggested to Dr Grenville that Mrs Bardsley had symptoms related to ischaemic heart disease in early December 1987. If she did, then Mrs Bardsley was at high risk of suffering a further heart attack at that time. I have examined the original record with care and it appears to me that this entry was probably made at the time it purports to have been made and is therefore genuine. However, I cannot rule out the possibility that this entry was fabricated at the time of Mrs Bardsley's death as part of Shipman's explanation for the death.
Mrs Chapman thinks she last saw her mother alive on 26th
December 1987, at which time she appeared to be well.
The Day of the Death
At about 10.30am on 29th
December 1987, Mrs Bardsley telephoned Mrs Chapman to say that she was not feeling well and had sent for the doctor. She did not describe her symptoms but she said she was not going into hospital. When asked why she might need to go to hospital, Mrs Bardsley said that she was not feeling well. She declined the offer of a visit from Mrs Chapman, because it was cold outside, but she agreed to telephone Mrs Chapman once the doctor had visited. Mrs Bardsley was not in the habit of requesting a home visit from the doctor and Mrs Chapman thinks that this might have been the first time she had asked for a visit since her heart attack. Mrs Bardsley's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
At some time between 11.30am and 12.30pm, Shipman telephoned Mrs Chapman, said that he was at Mrs Bardsley's house and asked her to come over. Mrs Chapman went immediately to her mother's house, which took about five minutes. When she arrived, the warden, Mrs Hindley, who has since died, answered the door. Mrs Chapman noticed that her mother was not sitting in her usual chair and asked where she was. Shipman said that she was on the bed, but, as Mrs Chapman walked towards the bedroom, he stopped her and said that Mrs Bardsley had died. Shipman said that when she had opened the door to him, Mrs Bardsley was blue around the lips and he had asked her to lie down on the bed so that he could give her an injection. He then left her in the bedroom to telephone for an ambulance. On his return, he found her dead and had therefore cancelled the ambulance. As the ambulance service records have not survived, it is not possible to discover whether or not Shipman called an ambulance. However, no ambulance arrived. There are many cases in which Shipman claimed to have called an ambulance but where the records show that he did not. Although she does not mention it in either of her statements, Mrs Chapman said in her Laming Inquiry questionnaire that Shipman told her that, after he had cancelled the ambulance, he called for the warden to attend.
Mrs Chapman went into the bedroom and saw her mother lying on the bed, fully clothed. It appeared to Mrs Chapman that she was asleep, rather than dead. Mrs Chapman wondered whether Shipman was playing a trick on her so she shook her mother's shoulder, which was still warm. Shipman did not attempt to resuscitate Mrs Bardsley in Mrs Chapman's presence, nor did he say that he had attempted to do so. When Mrs Chapman came out of the bedroom, she sat down on the sofa and Shipman put his arms round her and consoled her. She felt at the time that he was very sympathetic towards her.
Mrs Chapman asked Shipman whether a post-mortem examination would be required as, when her husband had died suddenly, a post-mortem had been carried out. Shipman said that it would not be necessary and that he was happy to sign the death certificate. This came as something of a relief to Mrs Chapman, who was keen to avoid a post-mortem.
The final entry in Mrs Bardsley's medical records reads:
'29 12 87 V
(
visit
)
c/o cough
(
?
)
dyspnoea chest pain.
O/E
cyanosed pulse 46/min
BP 80/? A/E poor basal creps
JVP
- CT
(
sign for 'with'
)
LVF
10mg morphine IV.
Died
1310 hrs'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this as recording a history of a cough, shortness of breath and chest pain. Shipman claimed that he found Mrs Bardsley to be cyanosed, with a low pulse rate of 46 beats per minute and a very low blood pressure of 80 systolic. The air entry into the lungs was recorded to be poor and there were crepitations in the base of both lungs. The jugular venous pressure was raised. Shipman recorded a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis with left ventricular failure. Dr Grenville noted that this entry was consistent with left ventricular failure caused by a heart attack, but pointed out that the note is uncorroborated. The question must arise as to whether the note is genuine or fabricated. Shipman claimed that he administered an intravenous injection of 10mg morphine. The question must arise as to whether he administered that amount of opiate or much more.
Certification
Although the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis. Asthma is said to have contributed to the death but not to have been related to the coronary thrombosis. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Bardsley alive on the day of her death. It is recorded that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that Shipman had seen the body after death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the time of death was
'1310 hrs'
. If Mrs Chapman's recollection of the time is correct, Shipman's entry is inaccurate, but he could well be right about this. Shipman stated that he had attended Mrs Bardsley during her last illness for 20 minutes. He had seen her alive immediately before death and had seen the body immediately after death, at which time he performed a complete external examination. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be syncope lasting only minutes. Shipman said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. Shipman claimed that both he and Mrs Hindley, the warden at Rufford Avenue, were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker regarded Mrs Bardsley's death as highly suspicious, both on his consideration of her medical records and of the cremation forms. In his commentary on the medical records, he said:
'The reason for giving asthma as contributing to the death is unclear. The symptoms reported do suggest MI
(
myocardial infarction
)
. But an ambulance was not called, no treatment was given for the slow pulse, no diuretics for the LVF
(
left ventricular failure
)
...
Another sudden death from MI, given morphine but no other treatment and no ambulance called. Since this patient survived long enough to be examined and receive morphine, there was adequate time to call an ambulance - for most GPs this would have been almost the first thing to do. No additional treatment for the recorded symptoms was given - diuretic, atropine for example. This is inadequate treatment. The dose of diamorphine for acute MI is given by the BNF as 5mg by slow intravenous injection (1mg/minute). A further 2.5-5mg may be given if necessary'
.
At the time of Dr Grenville's police statement, Shipman had not been convicted and he did not assume that Shipman had killed any patients. He told the police that, although Mrs Bardsley's heart problems were well controlled and did not cause her any significant problems, having suffered a heart attack in 1983, she remained at high risk of a further heart attack. The symptoms as recorded in the final entry made by Shipman in Mrs Bardsley's medical notes were those of a heart attack with heart failure. Given the recorded condition, the administration of morphine would have been appropriate. In addition, it would have been appropriate for Shipman to have administered frusemide, a diuretic, and also to have attempted resuscitation whilst waiting for an ambulance.
By the time Dr Grenville prepared his report for the Inquiry, Shipman had been convicted of murder and Dr Grenville had examined a very large number of medical records kept by Shipman. His approach was, therefore, rather more cautious and sceptical and he expressed the view (with which I agree) that Shipman's medical notes cannot be relied on as true and accurate unless consistent with other evidence.
There were a number of reasons why he suspected that the notes were not genuine. First, if Shipman's notes were accurate, Mrs Bardsley's first symptoms would have been shortness of breath and chest pain. She certainly had some symptoms at the time of her telephone call to her daughter, as she had already called the doctor. According to Mrs Chapman, her mother did not describe her symptoms but only said that she was feeling unwell. Dr Grenville makes the point that, if she was suffering from chest pain, one might have expected her to tell her daughter. If she was suffering from shortness of breath, one might have expected Mrs Chapman to notice this, even over the telephone.
Second, Dr Grenville considered that Shipman's conduct that day was not what would have been expected of a reasonable doctor faced with a patient in Mrs Bardsley's supposed condition. The first thing one would expect a doctor to do on finding a 69 year old patient suffering a heart attack, would be to call an ambulance. This Shipman claimed to have done, although his claim cannot be checked. As there was an emergency cord in the bungalow, he could have used that to summon the warden, who would have called the ambulance and come round to give assistance and comfort. In addition to the treatment that Shipman claimed to have administered, Dr Grenville said that frusemide should also have been administered by intravenous injection. If and when Mrs Bardsley went into cardiac arrest, as she must have done, Shipman should have attempted to resuscitate her and should have continued his attempts until the ambulance arrived. As and when the warden arrived, she should have been asked to assist in resuscitation. Dr Grenville said that Shipman's failure to attempt resuscitation and his claimed cancellation of the ambulance were entirely inappropriate responses.
In conclusion, Dr Grenville said that if Shipman's records, including that of 3rd
December 1987, were accurate, then it is likely that Mrs Bardsley died naturally of a heart attack. However, he drew attention to the fact that there were a number of similarities between this case and those for which Shipman was convicted of murder. In particular, Dr Grenville noted that Mrs Bardsley was thought to have been in her usual state of health until a few days before her death and to have complained of mild or non-specific illness shortly before her death. She then died in Shipman's presence.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First, the death occurred in Shipman's presence. As Dr Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, it is extremely unusual for a patient to die in the presence of the general practitioner unless the patient is suffering from a terminal illness or the doctor has been called out as an emergency in response to a report of symptoms of, for example, a stroke or heart attack. Mrs Bardsley was not suffering from a terminal illness. Nor do I think she gave the impression to the surgery staff that her request for a visit was an emergency. Had she done so, I think the staff would have arranged for Shipman to attend immediately or, if that were not possible, they would have called an ambulance. As it was, it appears that Shipman attended during the period in which he would carry out his routine visits. I think this was a non-urgent visit and, for Mrs Bardsley to die while Shipman was there, gives rise to a high degree of suspicion that he caused her death.
I acknowledge that Mrs Bardsley was at risk of suffering a further heart attack. If she had had an episode of palpitations in early December, the risk would have been high. I accept therefore that it is entirely possible that Mrs Bardsley was suffering some cardiac symptoms on 29th
December. I do not think she was having a major heart attack, as I think she would have told her daughter or would at least have alerted the warden. If her symptoms had increased significantly during the morning, I think she would have telephoned her daughter again. I bear in mind that it is also quite possible that Mrs Bardsley's reason for calling the doctor was nothing to do with her heart. However, I think it likely that it was, as she seemed to be concerned that Shipman might want her to go to hospital. Experience has taught me that Shipman's patients were most vulnerable to him when they were suffering from a potentially life-threatening condition. The subsequent death would then be readily explained.
My suspicions are heightened in this case by Shipman's supposed conduct on arrival at Mrs Bardsley's bungalow, as recorded in his note. For the reasons I outlined above, Shipman's account of events does not ring true. Whenever I find that Shipman has acted in a way in which no reasonably competent doctor would act, I suspect that events did not take place as Shipman has claimed.
Shipman claimed to have administered 10mg morphine to Mrs Bardsley, which would be appropriate treatment for the relief of the severe pain experienced during a heart attack, provided that the administration were stopped as soon as the pain had been adequately relieved. However, suspicion arises that Shipman did not give 10mg morphine as he claimed. If Shipman were to give any opiate as an emergency during a home visit, he must have taken it from his own bag rather than obtaining it by prescription in the patient's name. It is usual practice for most doctors to carry small amounts of an opiate for use in an emergency. However, Shipman told the police in interview after his arrest that he did not carry controlled drugs in his bag or keep a controlled drugs register because of his convictions for drug abuse in the 1970s. It is known that this is not true and that on many occasions he was carrying enough opiates to kill a patient. The evidence available to the Inquiry suggests that when he obtained opiates by unlawful means, he obtained diamorphine rather than morphine. The suspicion therefore arises that he used diamorphine rather than morphine on this occasion. If his note is inaccurate as to the drug given, it may well be inaccurate as to the amount as well. I have come across several cases in which Shipman claimed to have given 10mg morphine after which the patient has died. In all those cases, and in this case, I suspect that he gave diamorphine rather than morphine and that he gave more than the recorded amount. It is noteworthy that he makes no mention of the presence of a neighbour.
Mrs Bardsley's appearance in death was not typical of that seen in a patient who has suffered a heart attack and acute left ventricular failure. It was typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate. However, as on Shipman's account Mrs Bardsley had received a small dose of morphine to relieve her pain, I can accept that she might have looked peaceful even if she had had a heart attack with left ventricular failure. Accordingly, I do not attach any weight to the evidence of Mrs Bardsley's appearance in death, although I repeat that I treat the note itself with great caution.
Shipman claimed on Form B of the cremation certificate that Mrs Hindley, the warden at Rufford Avenue, was present at the moment of death. As she has since died, it is not possible to find out whether or not she was. Mrs Chapman claimed that Shipman told her he had summoned the warden after he had cancelled the ambulance. If that is right, it is significant for two reasons. First, Shipman should have summoned the warden to assist in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, which is more effectively carried out by two people. Second, his claim on Form B would be false. I have found a large number of cases in which Shipman has killed where he has sought to give the impression on Form B that he was not alone at the death, when the truth is that he was alone with the patient until after the patient had died. In this case, due to the uncertainty surrounding the time of the warden's arrival, I attach less weight than I otherwise might to the possibly false entry on Form B.
My conclusion is that Shipman killed Mrs Bardsley. I think he gave her a much stronger dose of opiate than he recorded in the notes, intending that she should die. I am sure of that conclusion. I dismiss the theoretical possibility that Mrs Bardsley died naturally of a heart attack in his presence.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001