The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Vera Bramwell
Introduction
Miss Vera Bramwell died at her home, 23 Rufford Avenue, Hyde on Friday, 20th
December 1985 at the age of 79. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, on the basis of the information contained in Form B of the cremation certificate, he considered that the death of Miss Bramwell was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Patricia Ann Ardern, Miss Bramwell's niece. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Ardern and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985 and to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Miss Bramwell's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Bramwell never married and lived alone at the time of her death. She came from a large family and was one of seven children. Mrs Ardern's father, Mr Owen Bramwell, was Miss Bramwell's brother. He and all but one of her siblings have since died.
Mrs Ardern remembers that her aunt suffered from diabetes and had a persistent cough. Following the death of her parents, Miss Bramwell continued to live in the family home on Cross Street in Hyde. At some point while living there, she was admitted to Tameside General Hospital in connection with her diabetes. When she returned home, she was unable to manage the stairs and her bed was brought downstairs.
In the early 1980s, Miss Bramwell moved from Cross Street into a warden-controlled bungalow in Rufford Avenue. The reason for the move was in part due to her mobility problems and also because her house required refurbishment. At Rufford Avenue, a warden would check on her each day and she had an emergency cord to attract the warden's attention if required. Miss Bramwell continued to live a life of relative independence whilst at Rufford Avenue and did her own shopping, cooking and housework.
Before the move, Mrs Ardern used to pass the house on Cross Street on her way to work and would see Miss Bramwell regularly, but after the move to Rufford Avenue Mrs Ardern rarely saw her aunt. Mr Owen Bramwell continued to visit his sister on a weekly basis. Mrs Ardern was in regular contact with her father and, from time to time, he would mention Miss Bramwell. Although her aunt's state of health was never discussed in detail, Mrs Ardern formed the impression that Miss Bramwell was reasonably fit and active for her age.
Mr Bramwell visited his sister on Thursday, 19th
December and, following her death, said to Mrs Ardern that she had seemed well at the time.
The Day of the Death
At about 4pm on Friday, 20th
December 1985, Mrs Ardern was at her parents' house when the warden from Rufford Avenue telephoned to say that Miss Bramwell had died. Mr Bramwell was shocked at the news because Miss Bramwell had been well the day before. The warden said that Miss Bramwell's doctor had visited her and had found her dead, sitting in an armchair. Following his conversation with the warden, Mr Bramwell telephoned the undertakers and asked for Miss Bramwell's body to be removed from the bungalow.
At about 7pm, Mrs Ardern, her husband and her parents went over to the bungalow and again spoke to the warden. The warden, who has since died, said that Miss Bramwell had asked her during the morning to telephone her doctor, presumably to request a visit, and that, when the doctor arrived, he had found her dead, sitting in her armchair. The doctor then contacted the warden, who in turn contacted Mr Bramwell. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Ardern said that she was present when the warden explained what had happened but, in her statement to the police, she said that the account was relayed to her by her father at a later stage. Apart from this slight discrepancy, the substance of the two accounts is consistent.
When the family looked in Miss Bramwell's shopping holdall, they found frozen food which had defrosted, indicating that she had been shopping earlier that day.
Miss Bramwell's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 20th
December, although the name of another of Shipman's patients, who lived a few doors away in Rufford Avenue, does appear.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman stated that he had last seen Miss Bramwell alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was recorded as coronary thrombosis. Chronic asthma and diabetes mellitus were said to have contributed to the death but were not related to its immediate cause.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'15.40'
. He said that he had attended Miss Bramwell during her last illness for 40 minutes. He said that he was present immediately before death and immediately after death, when he performed a complete external examination. The mode of death was said to be syncope of five minutes or less in duration. He said he had based his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death on his own observations. Finally, Shipman recorded that he and the warden at Rufford Avenue were present at the moment of Miss Bramwell's death. This conflicts with the evidence of Mrs Ardern, whose understanding is that Shipman told the warden that he had found Miss Bramwell dead and had gone to fetch her afterwards.
Conclusion
Little is known about Miss Bramwell's state of health in the weeks leading up to her death, but there is no note in the visits book of any visits by Shipman. In the absence of the medical records, I cannot discover whether Miss Bramwell had any history of heart disease, which might indicate that she was at particular risk of coronary thrombosis. However, as Shipman did not say that the coronary thrombosis, which caused the death, was due to any underlying condition, I infer that it is unlikely that there was any clear evidence of heart trouble in Miss Bramwell's medical records. Having said that, at her age Miss Bramwell could quite easily have had a fatal heart attack even though there was no previous history of heart trouble.
The reason why Miss Bramwell asked the warden to contact Shipman on the day of her death is not known but it can be inferred that she felt ill. However, I think it unlikely that her condition was critical. Had the warden been seriously concerned, I think it likely that she would have called an ambulance or at least telephoned Miss Bramwell's brother. The evidence does not suggest that Miss Bramwell mentioned symptoms that might indicate the onset of cardiac problems. The request for a visit was made in the morning. The fact that Shipman did not come until the afternoon suggests that the warden did not indicate that there was any urgency. According to what Shipman told the warden, Miss Bramwell must have had a fatal heart attack between the warden's departure and Shipman's arrival. That is believable. However, on Form B, Shipman makes it plain that he was present while the heart attack occurred. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville said that it is a very rare occurrence for a general practitioner to be present at the moment of a patient's death where the patient is not suffering from a terminal illness and the doctor has not been called out in response to an emergency such as a sudden heart attack or stroke. Dr Grenville has said that a doctor might expect a death in his or her presence to occur once in a professional lifetime. Shipman was present at the deaths of a number of patients who died at home. In this case, he would have us believe that Miss Bramwell suffered a fatal heart attack just at the time of his visit. As Dr Grenville said, such a coincidence might happen once, but I cannot accept that it could happen again and again, as Shipman claims. That Miss Bramwell died in Shipman's presence is a highly suspicious feature.
On Form B, Shipman claimed that the warden was present at the moment of death. The warden said that Shipman had told her that he had found Miss Bramwell dead. She did not say that she was present at the moment of death. Of course I must be careful before relying on hearsay evidence, particularly in a case such as this where the witnesses might have been subconsciously influenced by accounts of Shipman's methods reported in the media. However, I note that Mrs Ardern gave her account to the police long before she knew what Shipman had written on Form B. For that reason, I think her account is probably accurate. Shipman claimed in a number of cases that some other person, such as a warden, was present at the moment of death, where the witness evidence suggests that they were not. If Shipman had killed Miss Bramwell, then he would have a motive to lie about the presence of others at the moment of death because their presence would allay any suspicions that medical colleagues might otherwise have when examining Form B.
Shipman claimed on Form B that he had attended Miss Bramwell during the last 40 minutes of her life. There is no suggestion that he telephoned for an ambulance or summoned the warden to assist with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (which is best performed by two people) even though there was an emergency cord in the house. It is clear that Shipman did not even attempt resuscitation alone, as this could not have been carried out while Miss Bramwell was sitting in her chair. Wherever Shipman appears to have behaved in a way that would not be acceptable to most reasonable and competent doctors, I suspect that events did not occur as he claimed. However, I do not attach a great deal of weight to this factor as I recognise that, at least in 1985, some doctors would have thought it inappropriate to attempt resuscitation on a woman of 79.
Although a detailed description of the position in which Miss Bramwell was found is not available, the evidence is that she was found sitting in a chair. In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville has said that such a position is not typical of a patient who has suffered a fatal heart attack, but is consistent with the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by the administration of a lethal dose of diamorphine.
This case has many of the hallmarks of a Shipman killing. Taking all the evidence into account, I am sure that Shipman killed Miss Bramwell.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001