The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Charles Geoffrey Brassington
Introduction
Mr Charles Geoffrey Brassington died at his home, 12 Laburnum Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 7th
May 1986 at the age of 69. At the time of his death he was living with his wife, Mrs Nancy Brassington, who has since died. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records, the death of Mr Brassington was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Brassington's son-in-law, Mr Anthony George Lancashire. Neither he nor his wife has any concern about the circumstances of Mr Brassington's death or Shipman's involvement in it. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has not taken statements in this case. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Brassington's general practitioner records and Shipman's visits book for 1986.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Lancashire told the police that Mr Brassington had suffered from what the family believed were angina attacks for several years. The medical notes and records confirm this and show that he had been hospitalised for a short period of time following an acute myocardial infarction in May 1982. Mr Brassington had a dislike of the medical profession and would only consult a doctor when it was strictly necessary. Shipman did, however, prescribe him regular medication for his heart condition and Dr H H Wan, consultant geriatrician, was monitoring this at Tameside General Hospital.
Mr Lancashire recalls that, on the day before Mr Brassington's death, his mother-in-law told him that she had asked for a doctor to visit her husband at home because he was feeling ill. Shipman was not available and Dr Geoffrey Bills attended instead. Mr Lancashire particularly remembers the identity of the doctor because Dr Bills had been his parents' general practitioner. There is no mention of Mr Brassington in Shipman's visits book for the day of death or any day that year.
The Day of the Death
Between 6pm and 7pm on 7th
May 1986, Mr Lancashire received a telephone call from his mother-in-law, who said that her husband was very ill. Mr Lancashire said that he would visit after his evening meal. He telephoned his own father, Mr Joseph Lancashire, and asked him to visit Mr Brassington. Mr Joseph Lancashire made his way to the Brassingtons' home, a journey that would have taken him about 15 minutes. By the time he arrived, however, Mr Brassington had died. Mr Anthony Lancashire has no recollection of his father mentioning that a doctor or an ambulance attended.
Mr Anthony Lancashire arrived at the house about three quarters of an hour later. He saw Mr Brassington dead in bed upstairs.
There is an entry in Mr Brassington's general practitioner records for the day of death in the following terms:
'7/5/86 V
(
visit
)
19.10 hrs - dead CT'
.
The most recent entry prior to the death is for 24th
April 1986, which is the date on which Shipman claimed on Form B of the cremation certificate to have last seen Mr Brassington alive. That entry reads:
'24/4/86 a all ok change of Rx
(
treatment
)
from Dr WAN'
.
The date has been overwritten, and it is not possible to decipher what the original entry was. Dr Wan had written to Shipman in February and March 1986, but not in April. In February, Dr Wan suggested a change in medication. Dr Wan was not due to see Mr Brassington again until the middle of May. It is distinctly possible that Shipman invented the attendance on 24th
April 1986, so as to avoid the need for referral to the coroner, and in the absence of anything else to record, simply noted the most recent item of correspondence.
Certification
The counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mr Brassington alive on 24th
April 1986.
Mr Brassington was cremated at Dukinfield Crematorium on 13th
May 1986. Form B, completed by Shipman on 9th
May, records that he had last seen Mr Brassington alive on 24th
April, 13 days before his death. Shipman noted that he attended Mr Brassington during his last illness for a period of at least two years. He stated that he made a complete external examination of the body about one hour after death. He said that the mode of death was syncope of only minutes' duration and that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on the observations of Mr Brassington's wife and those of the neighbours. Shipman stated that Mr Brassington's wife and a neighbour were present at death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion to be high, judging by the contents of the medical records, because this was a sudden death and the medical records were very sparse. On the basis of the cremation documentation, he concluded that this death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
The medical records reveal a history of a previous myocardial infarction and frequent angina attacks. It is clear that Mr Brassington was at high risk of suffering another, possibly fatal, heart attack.
The evidence suggests that Mrs Brassington was present at the moment of death and never entertained any suspicion that her husband's death was other than natural. The family has never expressed any concern that Shipman might have been involved in the death.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mr Brassington in the days leading up to his death. Indeed, the evidence suggests that the last doctor to see Mr Brassington alive was Dr Bills and not Shipman.
I am quite satisfied that Mr Brassington died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001