The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Beech
Introduction
Mr Joseph Beech died at his home, 5 Bryce Street, Hyde on Friday, 12th
April 1996 at the age of 80. At that time, he was living with his wife, Mrs Florence Hannah Beech, who died on 4th
May 2000. Mr Beech had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Beech's death was old age.
In March 2001, Professor Richard Baker examined Mr Beech's medical records and the cremation forms and found that the contents of neither gave rise to any suspicion. The police did not investigate and there has been no inquest into the death.
There are no witnesses to the events leading up to Mr Beech's death. Mr Beech's daughter, Mrs Carol Ann Whitworth, has said that she has no concerns about her father's death and has declined to assist the Inquiry. Her husband, Mr Terence Whitworth, has told the Inquiry that his wife does not know whether Shipman visited Mr Beech during the evening prior to his death. He believes that Mrs Beech discovered her husband's death on the morning of 12th
April 1996.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Beech's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Healthcall Medical Services (referred to as 'Healthcall'), the deputising service used by Shipman, has provided its surviving record relating to Mr Beech. The Inquiry has also considered witness statements made by Mrs Primrose Shipman, Shipman's wife, and Mrs Judith Cocker, receptionist at the Market Street Surgery.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Beech suffered from chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD) for some years before his death and was prescribed appropriate medication by Shipman. Despite his breathing problems, Mr Beech continued to smoke cigarettes. From late 1995, Mr Beech was under the supervision of the geriatric department of Tameside General Hospital. At this time he had difficulty in walking and was weak and unsteady. He used a frame. He had lost weight, his muscles were wasted and he had so little strength that he stayed in bed most mornings. Mrs Beech, who was elderly and very deaf, found it difficult to care for him. The couple did not want assistance from Social Services. Mentally, Mr Beech was said to be suffering from depression but not from dementia. He was a little confused at times.
In January 1996, Dr G Indira, clinical assistant to the consultant geriatrician, Dr Wan, reported that Mr Beech had suffered six falls in the previous two months and that these were attributed to vertebral basilar insufficiency. Dr Indira arranged for Mr Beech to attend a geriatric day hospital to improve his mobility. The nursing notes from the day hospital give a clear and detailed account of Mr Beech's condition during the ensuing months. He was not eating well and was prescribed food supplements. In February, Mr Beech was not always well enough to attend. In early March, Shipman asked the district nurse to assess Mr Beech, as he was refusing to get up. Mr Beech attended the day hospital on 11th
March 1996 and ate most of his lunch. However, the family was concerned that he was eating very little at home. On 20th
March, Mr Beech could not attend the day hospital as he had been coughing in the night. On 25th
March, Shipman visited him at home, apparently at Mrs Beech's request. When asked what was wrong with her husband, she seems to have replied,
'Everything'
. By 10th
April, Shipman had told Mrs Beech that her husband was no longer well enough to attend the day hospital.
On 11th
April 1996, Mr Beech's daughter was concerned about her father's deteriorating condition and a domiciliary visit by Dr Wan, the consultant geriatrician, was arranged. However, Mr Beech died before that visit took place.
The Day of the Death
There is no witness evidence as to the events of the day of Mr Beech's death. Mr Whitworth believes that, when Mrs Beech got up on 12th
April, she found that her husband had died in the night.
There are four entries in the computerised medical records for this date. No entry had been made in the handwritten records since November 1995. Where there are several computerised entries for the same day, they do not necessarily appear in the order in which they were made. Accordingly, what I describe as the first entry was not necessarily made before what I shall describe as the last entry.
The first entry records the fact that a home visit was made. The second records that Mr Beech was found to be dead on examination and that the causes of death were old age and COPD, meaning chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This term can be used interchangeably with chronic obstructive airways disease. The third entry records as follows:
'9829 FP81 - higher rate - sent to FPC
(
Family Practitioners Committee
)
HFS CLAIMABLE'
.
The last entry records as follows:
'8CAZ Patient given advice NOS
(
not otherwise specified
)
D/D
(
duty doctor
)
DOA
(
dead on arrival
)
'
.
Inside the Lloyd George folder was found a 'call slip', from Healthcall, which records that a message had been taken from a neighbour at 7.59am on 12th
April and under the heading
'Complaint'
, appear the letters
'D.O.A.'
. The message is recorded as having been passed to Mrs Shipman (presumably at the Shipmans' home) at 8am. Healthcall have been unable to find a record of any earlier calls made by or on behalf of Mr Beech, on 11th
or 12th
April.
In her written statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Shipman described the procedure relating to the deputising service in the following terms:
'In respect of calls dealt with by the deputising service, these would be dealt with by them between 11.00pm and 7.00am independently in the first instance, and then they would report back to my husband. In respect of any call between 7.00am and 8.30am, the deputising service would contact my husband at home to inform him of the relevant details and for a decision to be made as to how such calls would be dealt with'
.
That procedure appears to have applied in this case. It appears that a neighbour telephoned the surgery to say that Mr Beech had died and the call was put through to Healthcall. They contacted Mrs Shipman at 8am and it appears that Shipman agreed to undertake the visit himself. That visit, at which Mr Beech was found to be dead on examination, accounts for the first and second and possibly the fourth computerised entries for that day but does not account for the third.
It cannot account for the third entry (the higher rate claim submitted to the Family Practitioners Committee) because that visit was made after 7am. Mrs Cocker, a receptionist at the Market Street practice, described the circumstances in which a visit made by Shipman could result in a financial claim being made to the Family Practitioners Committee. At paragraph 21 of her statement she said:
'A financial claim could be made...for visits that took place outside of Surgery hours. I do not remember specifically the hours during which a visit would be claimable, however, I recall that maybe between 22:00 or 23:00 and 7:00 or 8:00 any visit would form the subject of a claim to the Health Authority. I was responsible for recording these visits and processing the claims. I would keep a record of the claims, recording whether the visit had been made by Dr Shipman or alternatively a deputising doctor and whether the claim had been paid. The record was kept in the duty doctor book'
.
A reminder for staff of the hours during which a visit would be 'claimable', together with the relevant codes, appears on the inside front cover of the duty doctor diary for 1996. In respect of visits made by Shipman, the following guidance is given:
'9829
Claimable.
10 - 7'
.
It appears therefore that the code '9829' applies to a 'claimable' Shipman visit made between 10pm and 7am. However, the 1996 edition of the NHS General Medical Services Statement of Fees and Allowances Payable to General Practitioners says that a special night payment fee can be claimed for visits carried out between the hours of 10pm and 8am. It is not clear whether those rules were yet in force at the time of Mr Beech's death. However, as Healthcall did not receive their call until 7.59am, Shipman cannot have visited before 8am in response to that request.
The third computerised entry suggests that Shipman visited Mr Beech some time between midnight and 7am, or possibly 8am, on 12th
April. If Shipman did indeed see Mr Beech shortly before his death, some suspicion would arise that he had administered a drug which had hastened his death.
The impression that Shipman visited on 12th
April while Mr Beech was still alive is reinforced by the two entries for 12th
April in the duty doctor diary. This is the book in which notes were made of visits for which a fee could be claimed. The first entry reads as follows:
'10087 Joseph Beech HFS claim
P'
.
The next entry reads as follows:
'10087
Joseph Beech - DOA
message only'
.
The code '10087' is Mr Beech's patient number in Shipman's records. The initial P means 'paid'. So these entries suggest that Shipman made a visit to Mr Beech for which he was paid a fee.
Accordingly, although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mr Beech whilst he was still alive on 12th
April, the medical records, read in conjunction with the evidence of Mrs Cocker and the duty doctor diary, suggest that he did so. That, of course, assumes that the claim for a fee was made legitimately. It is possible that Shipman made a fraudulent claim for a night visit which did not take place.
Certification
On 12th
April, Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death giving the cause of death as old age and stating that COPD had contributed to the death. He stated that he had last seen Mr Beech alive on 4th
April 1996. The computerised records contain an entry for that day. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
On 16th
April, Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Mr Beech died in the
'Early hours'
of 12th
April. He said that he had attended Mr Beech during his last illness for more than six months. He said that he had last seen Mr Beech alive 40 hours before his death, which would have been some time during the day on 10th
April. The medical records do not confirm a visit on that day. The mode of death was said to be
'Exhaustion'
over
'several days'
. It was recorded that no one was present at the moment of death but that Mr Beech was
'found by wife when she got up at 07.00'
. On Form A, signed by Mrs Beech, the time of death is recorded as
'5.AM'
. Shipman said on Form B that he saw Mr Beech's body about four hours after his death, which, if Mr Beech died at 5am, would have been at 9am. He recorded on Form B that his answers to the questions as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and those of Mrs Beech, who had nursed her husband during his last illness.
Conclusion
The medical evidence suggests that Mr Beech died a natural death. He was very unwell in the months leading up to his death. He was very weak, had taken to his bed and was unable to attend the day hospital. Mr Beech's daughter was concerned about his deterioration the day before he died.
There would be no cause for concern about Shipman's role in this death were it not for the possibility that he visited Mr Beech shortly before his death on 12th
April. This possibility cannot be ruled out. The family is unable to say when Shipman last visited Mr Beech. The fact that a financial claim was made in respect of a visit on 12th
April, suggests that Shipman did visit Mr Beech whilst he was still alive. However, it is possible that the financial claim was made in error, perhaps due to an administrative mix-up, and related to the visit that Shipman made after the discovery that Mr Beech had died. The claim may even have been an opportunistic and dishonest attempt on the part of Shipman to gain remuneration for a visit during the night, which did not in fact take place.
If a request for a visit was made during the late evening of 11th
April or early morning of the 12th
, it is difficult to see how Shipman was contacted. According to Mrs Shipman, calls made during the night were dealt with by Healthcall, who have no record of a request for a visit before the telephone call made by the neighbour at 7.59am. It certainly would have been an unusual time for Shipman to make an unsolicited visit, even though Mr Beech's daughter had been in contact with the surgery on 11th
April and, in requesting a domiciliary visit, had presumably expressed concern as to his condition.
The understanding that Mrs Beech found her husband dead at 5am suggests that he was alive when she went to bed the night before. If Shipman had visited during the night, one might have expected the family to be aware of that. As I cannot rule out the possibility of a visit in the night, I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility of Shipman having administered an injection of opiate.
My conclusion is that it is likely that Mr Beech died a natural death, but I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman visited shortly before the death and did something to hasten Mr Beech's end.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001