The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Case Index
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Edith Annie Bill
Introduction
Mrs Edith Annie Bill (known as Annie) died at her home, 60 Mark Lane, Todmorden on Saturday, 22nd
June 1974 at the age of 67. She was registered with Dr Lewin at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, from where Shipman had been practising for a period of about three months at the time of Mrs Bill's death. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mrs Bill's death was heart failure due to myocardial infarction due to atheroma.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Bill's death was one of a number recovered by the West Yorkshire Police in March 2001 in which the cause of death was certified by the coroner. The police decided to investigate the death and took a statement from Mrs Joan Mottershead, a former warden employed by Calderdale Social Services.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Mottershead and has had access to the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Constabulary dated 22nd
June 1974 and a post-mortem report prepared by Dr A T Edwards on 24th
June 1974. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell. Mrs Bill's medical records have not survived, nor have any relevant surgery records.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bill lived in a bungalow with the benefit of warden supervision. The warden responsible for her care, Mrs Mottershead, describes Mrs Bill as a fairly healthy and very independent lady. She suffered from swelling in her feet and ankles. It is noted within the Report of Death that Mrs Bill suffered from ankle oedema and mild congestive heart failure from 1967 onwards. She is also said to have suffered a stroke affecting her left side in 1968, from which time she also suffered from rheumatoid arthritis.
Mrs Mottershead recalls that, on the morning of Friday, 21st
June, Mrs Bill spoke to her on the intercom and requested a visit from the doctor, as she was having problems with her ankles, which were swollen. Mrs Mottershead telephoned the surgery and requested a visit. That was Mrs Mottershead's last contact with Mrs Bill before her death.
Although Mrs Bill was registered with Dr Lewin, the Report of Death says that Shipman attended that day. It says on the front of the Report that Shipman last saw Mrs Bill at 9.10am. This is contradicted by section 7 of the Report, where it is recorded that Mrs Bill contacted Mrs Mottershead at 9.10am and Shipman attended at lunchtime and gave Mrs Bill some tablets. It is likely that the latter account is accurate and that Shipman visited Mrs Bill at about lunchtime on 21st
June.
The Day of the Death
In the early hours of Saturday, 22nd
June, Mrs Mottershead's son, Mr Barry Hartley, told his mother that Mrs Bill had spoken over the intercom and sounded very ill. Mrs Mottershead went immediately to Mrs Bill's bungalow. Mrs Bill did not respond to her knocking. Mrs Mottershead returned to her house to collect the master key. On returning to the bungalow, she found Mrs Bill lying on her bed, dressed in her nightclothes. Her feet were still on the floor and she was lying on her back on the bed. It appeared to Mrs Mottershead that Mrs Bill had been sitting on the bed with her feet on the floor when she had fallen backwards. She looked grey in colour and her lips were blue. She did not look peaceful. On the contrary, her facial expression was that of 'someone who was scared'.
Mrs Mottershead then telephoned for a doctor. Dr Dacre attended at 1.15am on 22nd
June and certified the fact of death. As he did not feel able to certify the cause of death, the police were called and the death was referred to the coroner. PC Walmsley attended at Mrs Bill's bungalow and arranged for her body to be taken to Hebden Bridge Mortuary.
The Post-Mortem Report
A post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, on 24th
June 1974. He noted diffuse bruising on the scalp at the back of the head. In his opinion, this was consistent with a fall to the ground immediately prior to death. Slight to moderate patchy atheroma was noted in the main cerebral arteries at the base of the brain. Bilateral pulmonary oedema, due to left ventricular failure, was found in the lungs. The heart was described as moderately enlarged due to hypertrophy of the left ventricle in the myocardium, where there was noted to be extensive subendocardial myocardial infarction involving the anterior and lateral walls. The coronary arteries showed severe generalised occlusive atheroma affecting all the main branches. Dr Edwards certified that the cause of death was heart failure due to myocardial infarction due to atheroma. Dr Edwards was satisfied that the death was entirely natural.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has considered the report of the post-mortem examination. She noted that Dr Edwards found extensive subendocardial myocardial infarction involving the left ventricle. From this, she inferred that Mrs Bill had had a recent myocardial infarction. She thought this must have taken place within hours or days of death. Professor Whitwell said that the severe occlusive atheroma noted in the coronary arteries would be the underlying cause of the infarction. She observed that the reason for Shipman's visit was that Mrs Bill was suffering from ankle swelling, which is a sign of heart failure. She expressed the view that deterioration in Mrs Bill's heart condition might well have exacerbated the swelling of the ankles. Professor Whitwell concluded that the death was due to myocardial infarction due to occlusive coronary artery atheroma. The acute condition, set against the background of chronic heart disease, was entirely sufficient to account for the death. The circumstances of the death were consistent with the cause discovered at post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Bill's death was entirely natural.
Mrs Bill had a history of ankle oedema, which is often a sign of heart failure. She was clearly unwell and complaining of ankle oedema on the morning of the day before her death. Shipman visited her and prescribed medication, probably at about lunchtime. That medication cannot have caused or hastened Mrs Bill's death. Mrs Bill was still conscious in the small hours of the morning when she spoke to Mr Hartley. That was more than 12 hours after Shipman's visit. Professor McQuay and Dr John Grenville have said in their generic evidence that, if an opiate is injected intravenously, it reaches maximal effect within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, the maximal effect occurs within 30-60 minutes. A lethal injection of an opiate would cause death within one hour of being administered. Nothing that Shipman might have done at lunchtime on 21st
June could have caused or contributed to the death which occurred in the early hours of 22nd
June, given the evidence that Mrs Bill was conscious several hours after his departure.
The post-mortem findings of Dr Edwards confirmed that Mrs Bill had suffered a recent myocardial infarction. Her underlying conditions included severe occlusive atheroma. Professor Whitwell, having examined the report prepared by Dr Edwards, is satisfied that the findings are consistent with a death due to myocardial infarction.
All the evidence points to a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Case Index
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001