The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Brown
Introduction
Miss Alice Brown died at her home, 11 Pexwood Place, Todmorden on Tuesday, 11th
March 1975 at the age of 72. It is not known for how long she had been a patient of Shipman, although, on Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman recorded that he had been her medical attendant for at least one year. This may well have been the case, as Miss Brown died at about the first anniversary of Shipman's arrival in Todmorden. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the bronchus.
Miss Brown's death was one of the 22 deaths for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the West Yorkshire Police investigated the death and took statements from Miss Brown's great-niece, Mrs Janice Hepworth, and Miss Brown's goddaughter, Mrs Renee Sutcliffe.
No inquest was held at the time but an inquest into Miss Brown's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Dr John Michael Grieve, a former partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville and had access to the contemporaneous documentation referred to below. Miss Brown's medical records have not survived, nor have any relevant surgery records. The Inquiry has spoken to Mrs Eileen Ogden, a former district nurse, who can remember nothing of the circumstances of Miss Brown's death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Brown was a single woman, who worked for many years in a cotton mill in Todmorden. She never married. She was an accomplished pianist and was very interested in amateur dramatics.
In late 1974 or early 1975, Miss Brown became ill and was admitted to Halifax General Hospital. In January 1975, Mrs Sutcliffe and her mother visited Miss Brown in hospital. She was sitting up in bed and was able to speak normally. However, she was coughing up phlegm and blood. She said she had pleurisy.
Mrs Hepworth recalls visiting Miss Brown at home in the early part of 1975. She had been discharged from hospital and Mrs Hepworth understood that her aunt was dying of lung cancer. Miss Brown was in bed and was being nursed by another aunt, Mrs Phyllis McLoughlin, who has since died. Mrs Hepworth does not recall a doctor attending during the visit, nor anybody administering any medicine to Miss Brown. She did not know who Miss Brown's doctor was.
When Mrs Sutcliffe returned to Todmorden, about a week before Miss Brown died, she found that her grandmother's health had deteriorated. She was very weak and was bed-bound. She recognised Mrs Sutcliffe but was unable to converse. By that time, Mrs Sutcliffe knew that the diagnosis was terminal lung cancer, and it was clear that Miss Brown was dying.
The Day of the Death
Little is known about the circumstances of the death. Mrs Sutcliffe's mother told her that Mrs McLoughlin had sat with Miss Brown until she died. Mrs McLoughlin has since died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Neither the certificate nor its counterfoil has survived. However, Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded that Miss Brown died at
'0600'
. He said that he had been Miss Brown's ordinary medical attendant for at least one year. He said that he had attended her for four months during her last illness. Shipman said he had last seen her alive on 10th
March (the day before the death) and that he had seen the body within 12 hours of death, when he performed a complete examination. He recorded that Miss Brown had undergone a biopsy in December 1974. He said that District Nurses Crabtree and Ogden had nursed her during her last illness. Importantly, it is recorded that Dr Grieve was present at the moment of death.
Dr Grieve does not recall being present at the death of Miss Brown, although he says it is quite likely that he was. He would not have certified the cause of death because Miss Brown was Shipman's patient, not his. As her doctor, Shipman would have known Miss Brown's history and would have been in a better position to certify the cause of death.
Dr Stella Brown completed Form C of the cremation certificate. She questioned Mr Frank Brown, Miss Brown's brother, and his wife, Mrs Ruby Brown, in their capacity as relatives of Miss Brown.
Having spoken to Mr and Mrs Brown, Dr Brown was satisfied that the cause of death as stated by Shipman was correct.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has examined such evidence as is available in this case and says that, if it is right that Shipman last saw Miss Brown on 10th
March, it is highly unlikely that any medication which he then gave her could have been a direct cause of her death. Dr Grenville concludes that there is no evidence to suggest that inappropriate care of any kind was given.
Conclusion
Mrs Hepworth and Mrs Sutcliffe confirm that Miss Brown appeared to be in the terminal stages of lung cancer. It seems likely that a doctor was visiting every day during the last week or two of her life. Shipman says that he visited on 10th
March. There is no reason to suspect that he visited on the day of the death, as the death occurred at 6am. Even though it is quite likely that he administered some medication on 10th
March, it is extremely unlikely that that medication could have caused or contributed to Miss Brown's death. If a lethal dose of opiates had been administered by intramuscular injection, she would have died within an hour.
It seems highly likely that Mrs McLoughlin, who sat with Miss Brown on the night before her death, called for a duty doctor when Miss Brown deteriorated. That must be why Dr Grieve attended.
I am sure that Miss Brown's death was natural and that Shipman played no part in it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001