The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lydia Edith Butcher
Introduction
Mrs Lydia Edith Butcher (known as Edith) died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 16th
April 1993 at the age of 94. She had been a patient of Shipman for the three weeks in which she was resident at Charnley House. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure (CHF).
Mrs Butcher's medical notes and records were recovered from Shipman's home by the police in August 1998. Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation forms and found no cause for suspicion. The police did not investigate Mrs Butcher's death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Butcher's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to the diaries from Charnley House. No witness statements have been obtained, as it is unlikely that the staff at Charnley House will have a recollection of the case independent of the diary notes.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The notes and records kept by Mrs Butcher's previous general practitioner, Dr Wickenden, of Hattersley, reveal that she was blind in one eye and had poor vision in the other. She suffered from painful osteoarthritis of the knees. She had an ulcer on her leg or foot. She also had late-onset diabetes, which was monitored regularly at Tameside General Hospital. From time to time, she had dizzy spells. In January 1993, she had a fall and it may have been this which precipitated the decision to move her into Charnley House. She required much care and frequent dressings of her leg, for which purpose the district nurse visited. It appears from the notes that Mrs Butcher had swollen ankles, which was probably an indication that she was suffering from a degree of CHF.
Examination of the daily diary from Charnley House confirms that Mrs Butcher was severely ill in the days before she died.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
From about 6th
April, Mrs Butcher's legs were hurting and she began to spend more time in her bedroom. On 8th
April, Shipman was asked to visit and he gave instructions for the treatment of the leg ulcers. On 9th
April, Mrs Butcher's daughter, Mrs Betty Finney, visited.
On 11th
April, Shipman was asked to visit, as Mrs Butcher was not well. He diagnosed heart failure and prescribed Lasix, a powerful diuretic, and enalapril, for blood pressure. That evening, her family visited her. That night, it was reported that Mrs Butcher was sleeping a great deal and was passing a lot of urine, presumably as the result of taking Lasix. Shipman called the next morning, Monday, 12th
April, and said that Mrs Butcher seemed better. The treatment was to be continued and he would call again on the Wednesday. Her family visited again that day. Mrs Butcher went back to bed at 2pm. She was given fluids and toileted frequently. The following day, Mrs Butcher was up for an hour in the morning. Her daughter visited in the afternoon and asked that Shipman be called. He came that afternoon and prescribed additional drugs, including an antibiotic. Shipman talked to Mrs Butcher's daughter about her condition. On 14th
April, Mrs Butcher's granddaughter visited. Mrs Butcher was not well. Her breathing was poor. A physiotherapist called in the late afternoon and helped Mrs Butcher to do some breathing exercises. She was restless in the evening and was given frequent attention. The next day, she seemed a little better and sat out of bed for an hour. Shipman came at lunchtime and was pleased with her progress. Mrs Finney visited in the afternoon and the physiotherapist came again. She gave instructions that Mrs Butcher was to lie on her side in order to help her lungs to drain. Mrs Butcher was obviously in severe heart failure.
Shipman did not make any entry in Mrs Butcher's medical records. It is possible that they had not yet been transferred from the previous doctor. He does not appear to have entered her name on the surgery computer. However, the surgery records confirm his various visits to Charnley House.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 16th
April, Mrs Butcher's family visited her. In the afternoon, she deteriorated. The physiotherapist was unable to give much relief and there appears to have been a discussion about moving Mrs Butcher to hospital, where more sophisticated equipment would have been available for the draining of the lungs. Shipman was asked to visit and saw Mrs Butcher at 6.45pm. He advised that she should remain at Charnley House. He offered to speak to the family. It appears that a member of staff spoke to Mrs Butcher's daughter, who expressed relief that her mother was not to be moved to hospital. She asked to be kept informed. It must have been apparent that Mrs Butcher was close to death.
There is no reason to think that Shipman would have been alone with Mrs Butcher on this or any other visit. The evidence of the staff of Charnley House is that a member of staff almost always accompanied a doctor when he visited a patient within the home. There is no reason to think that this practice was not observed in Mrs Butcher's case.
The night diary records that Mrs Butcher passed peacefully away at 11.30pm and that her daughter was informed. There is no mention that Shipman was there. The diary for the following day says that Shipman came in the morning to certify Mrs Butcher's death. However, within the medical records is a docket, which shows that a duty doctor, Dr M A M Choudhury, known as Dr Mam, was called to Charnley House during the night. He arrived at 1.30am and found that Mrs Butcher had died. He appears to have been informed that she had died at 11.30pm.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil is available. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Butcher alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was CHF.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Butcher had died at 11.30pm on 16th
April. He said that he had attended her during her last illness, which was CHF, over the previous seven days and that he had last seen her alive some hours before her death. This entry is illegible and could be read as four, five or seven hours before the death. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting eight (apparently changed from six) hours. He said that Mrs Butcher had been nursed by the staff at the home, who were present at her death. Despite the confusion about the time at which Shipman last saw Mrs Butcher alive, there is nothing sinister about any of these entries.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Butcher died a natural death from CHF. Although there are no medical records for the period before the death, the Charnley House diary gives a very full account of Mrs Butcher's last days. The diary shows that her condition deteriorated in the days leading up to her death. Her family knew that she was close to death. Shipman visited her at 6.45pm that evening but she was plainly alive when he left because the staff were observing Mrs Butcher frequently and they did not call the duty doctor until Mrs Butcher died much later that night. Mrs Butcher's family can be reassured that her death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001