The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Louisa Boardman
Introduction
Mrs Mary Louisa Boardman, (known as Molly), died at Laurel Bank, a residential home for the elderly, Knott Lane, Hyde on Saturday, 11th
January 1997 at the age of 95. Shipman became Mrs Boardman's general practitioner when she moved to Laurel Bank in January 1996. Shipman certified the cause of death as old age.
The police did not investigate Mrs Boardman's death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has considered Mrs Boardman's general practitioner records, Shipman's appointments sheets, visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period and all relevant documents kept by Laurel Bank. The Inquiry has also had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. No witness evidence has been obtained.
This decision has been written after consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Boardman, a widow, was a fiercely independent woman, who had looked after herself in her own home in Denton until a year before her death. In January 1996, she had a stroke and, soon afterwards, moved to Laurel Bank. She remained quite well for almost a year after her move to the home.
The staff at Laurel Bank kept a diary of the events of each shift. This is clearly a contemporaneous document, completed by several different members of staff. Its contents instil a feeling of confidence in the reader that a full and careful record has been made. From this diary, it has been possible to piece together a clear picture of Mrs Boardman's last days.
The general manager of Laurel Bank has told the Inquiry that it was the policy and practice at the home for a doctor to be accompanied by a senior member of staff when visiting a patient. I have no reason to doubt that this policy was properly observed.
In May 1996, Mrs Boardman had an upper respiratory tract infection and Shipman prescribed an antibiotic. In October 1996, he gave her an influenza vaccination and she remained well until late December when she developed a chest infection. Shipman visited and prescribed amoxicillin, an antibiotic and pholcodine, a cough suppressant. Mrs Boardman seemed to improve.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
At the end of December, Mrs Boardman's health was giving cause for concern. On 31st
December, it was noted in the diary that she was very weak. She could not even hold a cup of tea. Shipman was asked to see her and he reported that her lungs were clear but she had catarrh in her throat. She was to be encouraged to have a lot of fluids. On New Year's Day, she was not well and went to bed just after 'tea'.
By 3rd
January 1997, Mrs Boardman seemed a little better. She sat in the lounge and took her fluids well but the next day she deteriorated and was described as confused and disorientated. She would not take any food and the staff had to encourage her to take some fluids. The next day, she was still not well. She was taking very little fluid and, later in the day, was said to be still very poorly. The daily diary records that she was given TLC (tender loving care) throughout the shift.
On 7th
January, the staff felt that Mrs Boardman was deteriorating rapidly. A bedsore was noticed. Shipman was called. The bedsore was to be treated but, in other respects, nature was to take its course. All medication was to be stopped. The staff were to give her
'lots of TLC'
. Mrs Boardman's friend was told that Mrs Boardman would not live long. However, she was unable to visit, as there was snow on the ground. On 8th
January, Mrs Boardman rallied a little. Shipman saw her and said that she was not as dehydrated as before. He was amazed that she had improved. Strangely, the record Shipman made on his computer that day describes Mrs Boardman as unconscious. She plainly was not. In any event, her improvement did not last long and, by that evening, Mrs Boardman was very poorly. She was given fluids by syringe. The diary says that she was given
'lots of TLC'
. Overnight, there was no change. She had not taken much fluid. In the morning, 9th
January, Shipman visited and said that she was becoming dehydrated. He agreed with the staff that there was nothing more they could do for her. He promised to call again the next day. She was given
'all care'
during the day but took very little fluid. Rather strangely, the medical record suggests that Shipman made a claim for an 'out of hours' visit on 9th
January and the duty doctor diary tends to confirm this. The Laurel Bank diary records a daytime visit but no visit between 10pm and 7am.
On Friday, 10th
January, Shipman called at Laurel Bank. The time of his visit is not clear but an audit trail of the entry he made on the computer shows that at 3.04pm he wrote:
'Terminal care dehydrated not responding no urinary output'
. The Laurel Bank diary entry recorded that Mrs Boardman's chest did not
'sound good'
and that her breathing was more rapid. Shipman had promised to visit the following day.
There is no entry in the Laurel Bank diary to suggest that Shipman made a second visit on 10th January. However, the duty doctor diary contains the following entry:
'Mary Boardman HFS/CLAIM
Laurel Bank
22.36hrs PAID'
.
This entry suggests that Shipman visited Mrs Boardman at 10.36pm on 10th
January.
The Death
The Laurel Bank diary suggests that Mrs Boardman died in the early hours of 11th
January, in the presence of night care staff. The entry, so far as relevant reads:
'The NCA team woke me at 1.50am to
Say Molly has just passed away while
they was with her - T/P G.P. at 2am
& will T/P Romiley Funeral Service
406-7007 when G.P. has been...'
.
There was some delay before a deputising doctor attended at 6.20am to confirm that Mrs Boardman had died.
There is a second entry in the computerised medical records for 10th
January. It says:
'examination of patient
not dead'
.
An audit trail of this entry shows that it was made at 10.41am on 11th
January. It would appear that this entry was intended to relate back to Shipman's visit in the late evening of 10th
January. The final entry, also made at 10.41am on 11th
January, says:
'O/E-dead'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, giving the cause of death as
'old age.'
He said that he had last seen Mrs Boardman alive on the day before her death, Friday 10th
January.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate and gave the time of death as
'0110 hours'
on 11th
January. He said he had attended Mrs Boardman for seven days during her last illness and had last seen her alive two hours before death. That would suggest that he saw her at about 11pm on 10th
January. Shipman repeated that the cause of death was old age and said that the mode of death was coma lasting four to five days. These answers were said to be based on his own observation and statements made by the staff at the home. He said that the staff had nursed Mrs Boardman during her last illness and the night nurse had been present at the death.
There are differences between Shipman's entries on Form B and the Laurel Bank records. Shipman claims that he attended the home late at night on 10th
January 1997. The Laurel Bank diary contains no note of that visit. Shipman claims that Mrs Boardman was in a coma for four to five days before her death. The Laurel Bank diary gives the impression that she was not. This difference does not arouse any real suspicion of unlawful conduct, as Shipman might have had the impression that Mrs Boardman was in a coma when in fact she was not but was sleeping for long periods. That Shipman might have attended late at night and that the staff failed to record his visit does give rise to some concern and suspicion.
Conclusion
It seems to me highly likely that Mrs Boardman's death was entirely natural. The course of her decline is well described in the daily diary and her death on 11th
January was neither sudden nor unexpected.
The only cause for concern and suspicion is that Shipman claims to have visited Mrs Boardman between 10.30pm and 11pm on 10th
January. The Laurel Bank diary makes no mention of this visit; nor does it suggest that there was any reason for the doctor to be called. The diary only records the death, at 1.50am on 11th
January. If Shipman really did visit Mrs Boardman very late at night and if the staff did not record the visit, I would be concerned that he might have given her a drug which caused or hastened her death. That is a possibility. However, I think it is highly unlikely that Shipman visited Laurel Bank that night. He had said that nature was to take its course. Mrs Boardman was beyond treatment. It would be very strange and quite uncharacteristic for him to make a visit at this hour unless summoned in an emergency. There seems to be no suggestion even in the medical record that Mrs Boardman needed urgent medical attention. In respect of this supposed late night visit, Shipman noted only that Mrs Boardman was not yet dead. I think the most likely explanation is that Shipman made a false claim for a late night visit on 10th
January, when he had made no such visit. He may well have done the same for the night of 9th
January. He was a completely dishonest man. I have come across another case, that of Mr Joseph Beech, in which I suspect he may have made a fraudulent claim for an 'out of hours' visit which did not take place. As I have some faith in the accuracy of the Laurel Bank records and as I know that Shipman did not usually visit at night save in a real emergency, I think that is a far more likely explanation than the possibility that he visited Mrs Boardman at 11pm.
I think that Shipman did not see Mrs Boardman after his daytime visit on 10th
January. Shipman cannot have given any drug at that visit which directly caused or hastened her death. She lived for many hours afterwards.
There is no evidence in this case that Mrs Boardman was heavily sedated during her last days. There is evidence that she was declining and taking very little fluid but she appears to have been at least intermittently conscious. I can therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Mrs Boardman's death by over-sedating her so as to make her vulnerable to bronchopneumonia.
My conclusion is that although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman visited late at night and gave a drug which hastened Mrs Boardman's death, I think it is highly likely that she died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001