The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Brookes
Introduction
Mrs Lily Brookes died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Tuesday, 17th
January 1995 at the age of 80. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 or 1978 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was ventricular fibrillation.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Brookes' son-in-law, Mr Williams, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death but no statements were taken.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate and the medical records, Mrs Brookes' death was moderately suspicious. The police re-opened their investigation into the death and took a statement from Mrs Diane Hodgin, an assistant carer who worked at the home. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Hodgin, Mrs Joan Williams (Mrs Brookes' daughter), Mr Kevin Brookes (Mrs Brookes' son), Mr Nigel Wright (Mrs Brookes' grandson) and Mrs Audrey Watson (a former night sister at Hyde Nursing Home). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Brookes' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Brookes' medical records reveal that she had a long history of hypertension but had otherwise enjoyed reasonably good health. In about 1993, she started to become forgetful and by 1994 she had become confused. She was failing to recognise her home and her husband. Dr F Oliver, consultant in old age psychiatry, diagnosed Alzheimer's dementia of moderate severity. By August 1994, Mrs Brookes had deteriorated and was admitted to the department of psychiatry at Tameside General Hospital under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983. She was discharged to Hyde Nursing Home on 8th
September 1994. It appears that Mrs Brookes had no specific physical problems, although Mrs Watson recalls that she had varicose ulcers on one or both of her legs. Mrs Hodgin says that she was often tired during the day as she was agitated at night and did not sleep well. She did not like seeing her doctor and rarely did so.
Shipman's visits book and Mrs Brookes' medical records reveal that Shipman saw Mrs Brookes several times during the last two weeks of her life, although it does not appear that she was suffering from one illness during this time. He saw her once on account of her leg ulcers and on another occasion on account of transient cerebral ischaemia.
The Death
Mrs Williams last saw her mother alive on the day before she died. She recalls that her mother appeared to be in reasonably good spirits and mentioned that Shipman was due to visit her the following day in connection with her medication.
Shortly after Mrs Hodgin commenced her shift at 2.30pm on 17th
January 1995, she went into the kitchen to put the kettle on. The kitchen is located directly across the corridor from the common room and, as Mrs Hodgin walked into the kitchen, she noticed Mrs Brookes seated in the common room together with some of the other residents. Mrs Brookes caught Mrs Hodgin with her walking stick and said, 'Where's my cup of tea?' Mrs Hodgin did not notice anything unusual about Mrs Brookes' condition.
Within no more than two minutes, Mrs Hodgin looked back into the common room and saw that Mrs Brookes had slumped in her chair. She had turned blue and her tongue was hanging out of her mouth. Mrs Hodgin said to a colleague that she thought Mrs Brookes had had a heart attack. Mrs Hodgin and her colleague lifted Mrs Brookes into a wheelchair, wheeled her into her own room and laid her on her bed. Mrs Hodgin believes that Mrs Brookes was dead by this time. She was very shocked by the suddenness of the episode. Mrs Hodgin recalls that an ambulance was called. The paramedics arrived within 10 to 15 minutes and attempted resuscitation, but without success. Shipman was also contacted. He arrived about an hour after Mrs Hodgin observed Mrs Brookes' collapse. He pronounced Mrs Brookes to be dead.
Mrs Brookes' name does not appear in the visits book for 17th
January 1995. The visits book does, however, reveal that Shipman was due to see another patient, Mrs Elaine Dutton, at Hyde Nursing Home that day.
The following entry appears in Mrs Brookes' handwritten medical records for the day of her death:
'1605
Ambulance Paramedics
Staff
Staff
Ventricular fibrillation on ECG
not
resuscitable
D.C.
1 V. Fibrillation
2 Dementia'
.
This entry suggests that at 4.05pm, the ambulance paramedics, the nursing home staff and Shipman himself were all present at the death. It suggests that the paramedics had seen the signs of ventricular fibrillation on the electrocardiogram (ECG) and that Shipman at least, and possibly the paramedics, had formed the view that Mrs Brookes could not be resuscitated. The cause of death which Shipman proposed to put on the MCCD was ventricular fibrillation and he would say that dementia had contributed to the death.
Mrs Williams recalls that she was informed of her mother's death by telephone at about 6pm on 17th
January. She was very shocked, as her mother had appeared to be in good health the previous day.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD and certified that the death occurred on 17th
January 1995. He said that he had last seen Mrs Brookes alive on 14th
January. Mrs Brookes' name appears in his visits book for that date but there is no entry in the medical records.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He recorded that death had occurred at 4.05pm on 17th
January 1995. He said that he had attended Mrs Brookes during her last illness for six weeks. Shipman recorded that he, two paramedics and staff at the home were present at the moment of death and that Mrs Brookes had been nursed during her last illness by staff at the home. He recorded that he made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only minutes. Shipman said that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations.
Mrs Hodgin expressed the view that several of Shipman's entries on Form B were not accurate because they suggested that others were present at the time of the death. She is quite sure in her own mind that Mrs Brookes died before either Shipman or the ambulance arrived.
The Expert Evidence
Upon his consideration of the cremation documentation and the medical records, Professor Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be moderate. He seems to have been surprised by the stated cause of death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that this was a natural death. The evidence of Mrs Hodgin shows that Mrs Brookes collapsed some time before Shipman arrived at the nursing home. It appears likely that she was either dead or very close to death before Shipman arrived.
Viewed in isolation, the contemporaneous documentation does give rise to concern. In particular, the information recorded on Form B suggests that Shipman was present at the moment of death, albeit with others. It seems that Shipman was probably mistaken in recording that he was present at the death, although if he attended whilst the paramedics were still present and when they attempted resuscitation then he may have felt entitled to declare that he was present at the death. This possible inaccuracy does not give rise to any suspicion that Shipman might in some way have caused the death. He plainly did not.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001