The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Norman John Bell
Introduction
Mr Norman John Bell died at his home, 28 Stalybridge Road, Mottram on Tuesday, 12th
February 1980 at the age of 72. He lived with his wife, Mrs Phyllis Bell, who has since died. Mr Bell had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Bell's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
There has been no police investigation into the death and there has been no inquest.
On 3rd
September 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Bell's daughter, Miss Jean Annie Bell, asking her to confirm the accuracy of the information recorded on Form B of the cremation certificate. As Miss Bell replied that Shipman was alone with her father on the day of his death, the Inquiry decided to investigate the death and took statements from her and her sister, Miss Susan Miriam Bell. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1980, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation certificate. Mr Bell's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Bell was a chiropodist and was semi-retired. He still saw a few patients. According to his daughters, Mr Bell enjoyed good health and was very active for his age. He enjoyed swimming and was a former member of the Hyde water polo team. He enjoyed gardening and do-it-yourself. He was also interested in cars and used to service his own vehicle. He was a cigarette smoker.
In about 1965, Mr Bell had undergone an operation for a stomach ulcer. Some years before his death, he had been admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a suspected heart attack. The precise diagnosis is not known but he was readmitted shortly after discharge with a suspected embolism. He was prescribed warfarin and was eventually discharged from out-patient care. At the time of his death, he was no longer taking anticoagulant drugs.
In 1980, Mr Bell's daughters were not worried about their father's health. So far as they knew, he was not suffering from any serious or life-threatening condition. He would always mention his health problems to his daughter, Miss Jean Bell, as she was a nurse. Miss Jean Bell last saw her father on Sunday, 10th
February 1980, when they went swimming together and Mr Bell and his wife stayed for lunch at Miss Bell's home.
The name of Bell appears in Shipman's visits book for 11th
February 1980. There is a line through it, which would suggest that the visit took place. It is not clear whether the visit related to Mr or Mrs Bell. As is usual with Shipman's own visits books, there is no indication of the reason why the visit had been requested.
The Day of the Death
Miss Jean Bell was at work on the morning of 12th
February 1980 when, at about 10.30am, she received a message from her mother to say that her father was very ill and to ask her to come to their house immediately. She arrived at about 11am and her mother told her that her father had died. She went upstairs and found him in bed. He looked quite peaceful and there was no lingering expression of pain on his face. It did not appear to Miss Bell that he had suffered a traumatic death. She recalls that, by the time she arrived, the doctor had attended and had already left the house.
Mrs Bell told Miss Jean Bell that, when he woke that morning, her father said he felt tired. He had painted the kitchen ceiling the previous day and Mrs Bell thought that perhaps he had overexerted himself. She suggested that he should stay in bed and cancel his appointments for that day. She made his breakfast, took it up to the bedroom and then went downstairs. Soon afterwards, she heard a strange 'gurgling' noise and went back to the bedroom. It appeared to her that her husband had collapsed, although he was still in bed. She thought that he had died and telephoned for the doctor. When Shipman arrived, he went up to see Mr Bell. Miss Jean Bell thinks that her mother told her that she did not go upstairs with the doctor because she believed that Mr Bell had already died. Shipman told Mrs Bell that her husband had died of a heart attack.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. It records that Shipman had last seen Mr Bell alive on 3rd
February 1980, although the figure
'3'
is an amendment. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. He said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the death had occurred at 11am on 12th
February. He said that he had been Mr Bell's ordinary medical attendant for two and a half years and had attended him during his last illness for that period. In other words, he was saying that Mr Bell had been suffering from his last illness since Shipman had arrived in Hyde in 1977. He said that he last saw Mr Bell alive on 3rd
February 1980 and had examined the body about 30 minutes after the death. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting 30 minutes. Shipman said that his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by Mrs Bell. Shipman said that Mrs Bell had nursed Mr Bell during his last illness and that she was present at the moment of death.
Miss Jean Bell does not believe that Shipman had attended her father for two and a half years prior to his death, because he seemed to be well prior to his death. There was certainly no need for nursing, as far as she was aware. Further, she does not believe that Shipman saw her father on Sunday, 3rd
February, because this consultation was never mentioned to her. Her father was very open about his health and Miss Bell feels sure that her father would have mentioned this visit, had it taken place. It seems most unlikely that Mr Bell would have attended Shipman at the surgery on Sunday, 3rd
February. There is no entry in the visits book for that day but that does not necessarily mean that Shipman did not see Mr Bell. If he had been called out from home on the Sunday, he might well have not bothered to put the name in the visits book. I think it likely that there was no consultation on that day and that Shipman has fabricated a consultation in order to make it appear that he had seen Mr Bell within 14 days before his death.
Conclusion
It seems to me that Mr Bell must have died a natural death. He and his wife were alone in the house at the time of his death and it does not appear that Shipman arrived at the house until after Mr Bell had died.
Mr Bell's death was extremely sudden and unexpected. However, people do sometimes die very suddenly as the result of a heart attack. Without the medical records, it is not possible to say whether or not Mr Bell had a significantly increased risk of a sudden cardiac death. However, in view of the facts that he was a smoker and had probably had a coronary thrombosis a few years earlier, it seems likely that this was so.
There are one or two slight mysteries surrounding the death. It is strange that Shipman should have said on the MCCD and Form B that he had last seen Mr Bell alive on 3rd
February, when his visits book suggests that he might have seen him only the day before his death. However, that entry in the visits book might have related to Mrs Bell. It would not be unusual for Shipman to claim that he had seen a patient within 14 days of death in order to avoid any risk that the registrar might refer the case to the coroner. That is not necessarily a cause for suspicion, although it is a device which Shipman used in many cases where he had killed the patient. It is also strange that Shipman should have said that Mrs Bell nursed her husband during his last illness, when Miss Jean Bell says that her father was very fit and active until the day of his death. As I say, these are mysteries, but they are not grounds to suspect that Shipman played a sinister role in Mr Bell's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001