The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jane Bridge
Introduction
Mrs Jane Bridge died at her home, 3 Lyne View, Hyde on Saturday, 4th
January 1986 at the age of 80. She lived alone in sheltered accommodation. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
There has been no police investigation into the death and no inquest has been held.
In June 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Bridge's daughter, Mrs Bertha Lever, asking her to confirm the accuracy of the contents of the cremation documentation. Mrs Lever replied to the Inquiry, expressing concern about an injection given by Shipman to her mother '30 hours' before her death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Lever. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits books for 1985 and 1986, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. Mrs Bridge's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until a few months before her death, Mrs Bridge was remarkably healthy for her age. She was independent. She did her own cooking and shopping and managed the house with the assistance of a home help. Mrs Lever saw her mother every day. A few months before her death, Mrs Bridge spent some time in hospital but Mrs Lever cannot remember why. In the last few months of her life, Mrs Bridge became unsteady on her feet and was provided with a wheelchair. Then she began to suffer from pain in her back and stomach and felt poorly from time to time. Shipman started to visit her quite regularly. Mrs Lever did not know the cause or nature of her mother's problems. In the last week or two of her life, Mrs Bridge did not go out and her daughter shopped for her.
Mrs Bridge's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 2nd
, 24th
and 30th
December 1985. On 30th
December, the entry
'Bridge
Blood'
appears. This would indicate that Shipman visited Mrs Bridge on each of these dates and that on 30th
December, his intention was to take blood samples from her.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
During the late morning of Friday, 3rd
January 1986, Mrs Lever called to see her mother. Mrs Bridge told her daughter that she had pains in her stomach and that the warden had telephoned the surgery and asked for Shipman to visit. Mrs Lever decided to wait with her mother until Shipman arrived. When he came, he said that he was going to take a blood sample and Mrs Lever thinks that he did so, although she was not really watching what he was doing. He then left, saying that he would take the blood sample to the hospital to have it tested. Mrs Lever recalls that her mother was in 'some pain', although she was not in agony. Shortly after Shipman left, Mrs Lever's aunts, Mrs Lizzie Bridge and Mrs Nellie Bridge, arrived.
Shipman returned later that afternoon and said that he had the results of the blood tests. Mrs Lever recalls being surprised that he had obtained the results so quickly. He said that there was something wrong with Mrs Bridge's blood, although he did not prescribe any medication. According to Mrs Lever, he then left. It is possible that Mrs Lever is mistaken as to the day on which the blood samples were taken. It may be that she has confused 3rd
January with 30th
December. That would be understandable.
In any event, on the afternoon of 3rd
January, Mrs Lever went home to prepare her family's evening meal. Her mother was in bed and Mrs Lever's aunts were still with Mrs Bridge. Mrs Lever knew that her mother was in pain but she did not think she was close to death. Not long after she had returned home, Shipman arrived at her house. He told her that he had given her mother an injection for her pain. She asked him whether it would be acceptable to give her mother a drink when she woke up, but he said that she would not need anything. Mrs Lever then went back to her mother's house. Her aunts confirmed that Shipman had been and had given Mrs Bridge an injection. They said that, as the injection was given, Mrs Bridge had 'surely shouted', which Mrs Lever interpreted to mean that she had found the injection painful. Mrs Lever's aunts told her that her mother had then fallen asleep. According to Mrs Lever, her mother was asleep when she arrived and never woke up. She stayed with her mother overnight. Her mother continued breathing throughout the night.
The Day of the Death
District Nurse Clegg arrived the following day at about 9am. Mrs Lever believes that she had been called out by Shipman. She said words to the effect that Mrs Bridge would not live long. Mrs Lever recalls that her mother died at about 11am. Soon after the death, Dr Carroll, a member of the Donneybrook practice, arrived to confirm that Mrs Bridge had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. This records that Shipman had last seen Mrs Bridge alive on 3rd
January. He had also seen the body after death and said that there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was said to be old age. Congestive heart failure was said to have contributed to the death but was not related to its cause.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate on 6th
January. He stated that the death had occurred at 9.40am on 4th
January 1986. He said that he had attended Mrs Bridge during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen her alive 12 hours before her death, which would mean that he saw her at 9.40pm the previous evening. He stated that he made a complete external examination of the body two days after death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. Shipman said that the mode of death was a coma of 36 hours' duration. This implies that Mrs Bridge had been in a coma since 2nd
January. Shipman said that he knew the cause and mode of death as a result of his own observations. He said that Mrs Bridge's daughter had nursed her during her last illness and was also present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
It is not possible for me to make a decision as to whether or not Mrs Bridge died a natural death. Her medical records have not survived and Mrs Lever can recall very little about the nature of her mother's final illness. That Shipman certified the cause of death as old age has not helped to throw light on the medical position. Dr John Grenville said in his generic evidence that old age is only appropriate as a cause of death where the patient has declined slowly towards death over a period of time. Usually the patient will have been confined to bed for some weeks and has gradually faded away. In such circumstances, there may be multiple organ failure and it may not be possible for the doctor to specify the precise cause of death. However, it does not appear that Mrs Bridge fell into that category. She seems to have had a relatively short illness and, at least until she became unconscious, her death was not expected. I am not in a position to say whether Mrs Bridge had a condition from which she might have died a natural death.
Mrs Lever's concern about her mother's death arises because Shipman gave her mother an injection not long before her death. It is not clear when the injection was given. According to Mrs Lever's letter to the Inquiry, Shipman gave Mrs Bridge an injection 30 hours before her mother's death. That would suggest that it was given in the early hours of the morning of 3rd
January. In her statement of evidence, Mrs Lever said that Shipman gave the injection in the late afternoon or early evening of 3rd
January. However, that time difference can make very little difference to the question of whether or not Shipman's actions caused or contributed to Mrs Bridge's death.
Assuming that an injection was given, and assuming for the sake of argument that this was a strong opiate or a very large dose of sedative, the crucial question is whether or not Mrs Bridge lapsed into unconsciousness within a fairly short period after the injection was given. The evidence on this point is not clear, although the impression is given that she 'fell asleep' not long afterwards.
Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry about the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal dose of opiate is given intravenously, the patient will become unconscious almost immediately and will die within minutes. If a lethal dose is given intramuscularly, the patient will probably be unconscious within about 15 minutes and will die within about an hour. However, in the case of Mrs Alice Maude Gorton, Dr Grenville considered what would happen if a dose of opiate were given which was almost, but not quite, enough to kill. He said that it was possible that such a dose might cause almost complete cessation of respiration leading to hypoxia and permanent brain damage. The patient might then lie unconscious until he or she died as the result of the brain damage or from bronchopneumonia or a combination of the two. Similarly, a very large dose of a sedative such as Largactil might have put Mrs Bridge into a deep sleep for a long period, during which time she would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia.
Accordingly, it is possible that Shipman caused Mrs Bridge's death by administering an injection of opiate or sedative which was not large enough to kill her outright but was sufficient to cause prolonged loss of consciousness and eventual death. However, it is not possible on the evidence available to reach a conclusion about this. Not enough is known about Mrs Bridge's underlying state of health. It is quite possible that the passage of time has coloured Mrs Lever's recollection of the extent of her mother's illness in the days leading up to her death. This would not be surprising. It is entirely possible that Shipman acted appropriately in giving Mrs Bridge an injection to ease her pain and distress and that her loss of consciousness was due to the natural progression of her underlying disease. There are too many uncertainties in this case for me to reach any decision.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001