The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Brierley
Introduction
Mr Albert Brierley died at his home, 26 Werneth Avenue, Hyde on Friday, 15th
February 1985 at the age of 91. He was a patient of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was old age.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr William Leyland Brierley, Mr Brierley's nephew, who was the informant named in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr William Brierley contacted the Inquiry and has provided a statement. The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1985.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Following the death of his wife in 1978, Mr Brierley lived alone. He suffered from glaucoma and, towards the end of his life, he was virtually blind and effectively housebound. Social Services provided him with a home help and he may also have had the benefit of the meals on wheels service.
Mr William Brierley does not recall that his uncle suffered any illness apart from those mentioned. He last saw his uncle on the Sunday before he died, when he seemed to be his usual self. He did not appear to be ill.
Mr Brierley's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 13th
February 1985.
The Day of the Death
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mr Brierley on Friday, 15th
February. Mr Brierley's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for that day.
Mr William Brierley recalls that he was at work on that day when, at about 3pm, a police officer attended his place of work to inform him of his uncle's death. He went to his uncle's home and found his uncle sitting on the sofa in the front room. He was in an upright position, with his hands on his lap. He looked peaceful, as if he was asleep.
The Aftermath
Mr William Brierley went to see Shipman after his uncle's death. Shipman was cordial. He did not say when he had last seen Mr Brierley alive. He produced Mr Brierley's medical records and asked Mr William Brierley what he should put as the cause of death on the death certificate. Mr William Brierley was understandably surprised at this. Shipman proceeded to look at the notes and then said that Mr Brierley had had cancer when he was 65. He then said that he would certify the cause of death to be cancer and old age.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived, but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Brierley alive on 13th
February, two days before his death. Shipman certified that the cause of death was old age. He said that carcinoma of the prostate had contributed to the death but was not directly related to the cause of it.
Mr Brierley was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
Mr Brierley was 91 and, at his age, a sudden death can never be regarded as wholly unexpected. However, on the evidence now available, it does not appear that Mr Brierley was known to be suffering from any life-threatening condition. It would appear from Shipman's conversation with Mr William Brierley that Shipman was not aware that Mr Brierley was suffering from any condition which might have caused his sudden death. I do not think that old age can have been an appropriate cause of death. Mr Brierley had not deteriorated over a period of time. He was not confined to bed. Indeed, it appears that he was up and dressed on the day of his death. I cannot say why Mr Brierley died. He might have died a natural death; he could have been killed by Shipman.
Mr Brierley's position and appearance in death were not typical of those usually seen after a death from a heart attack or stroke or any of the other common causes of sudden death. They were, however, typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
I feel some concern that Shipman certified the death as due to old age, which was not appropriate. However, as Shipman was extremely casual about his duties of certification and frequently made untrue and inaccurate entries in respect of perfectly natural deaths, I cannot attach great weight to this factor.
I regret to say that the lack of evidence makes it impossible for me to decide whether this death was due to an unlawful act on the part of Shipman or whether it was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001