The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frances Bennett
Introduction
Mrs Frances Bennett died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 27th
May 1981 at the age of 82. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Bennett, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Charnley House daily diary for 1981. Mrs Bennett's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bennett's death certificate suggests that she was a widow. It seems likely that she was admitted to Charnley House at some time in the 1960s. Her name does not appear in the Charnley House admissions register, which lists all admissions from 2nd
February 1970.
It is clear that Mrs Bennett was very poorly towards the end of her life. The daily diary shows that, in the weeks before she died, she had a very poor appetite, was confined to bed and required a great deal of care and attention.
The daily diary records that Mrs Bennett was not well during the night of Wednesday, 13th
May 1981 and that Shipman saw her the following day. He directed that she should be encouraged to take fluids, but she had difficulty in swallowing. She was nursed in bed and turned every two hours. She was able to take very little solid food. She did not improve and, on Saturday, 23rd
May, her condition was said to be very poor. By Sunday, 24th
May, Mrs Bennett was said to be deteriorating rapidly. She was responding very little and was provided with
'all care'
.
The daily diaries for 25th
and 26th
May show that Mrs Bennett's condition remained the same.
The Day of the Death
The night report in the daily diary for Tuesday, 26th
May (which relates to events occurring in the early morning of 27th
May) reads as follows:
'Passed away peacefully 7-55am
continues to be in poor condition,
all care given.
all other ladies had a good night'
.
It would appear that, at the time when the night report was first compiled, shortly before 8am, Mrs Bennett was still alive, although her condition was thought to have remained poor. Then, shortly before the change of shift, the report was amended to show that Mrs Bennett had died.
The record made by the staff on the morning shift records that all necessary details were attended to so far as Mrs Bennett was concerned. Shipman visited later that morning to see another patient.
Shipman's visits book for 1981 confirms that he visited Mrs Bennett on Thursday, 14th
May. There is no record that he visited her again until the day of her death. The entry for the day of her death mentions Mrs Bennett's name and the name of a fellow resident at Charnley House, together with the names of seven other patients whom Shipman was to visit on that day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived, but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was senility and that diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Bennett alive on 20th
May 1981. There is no record of any visit on that day, either in Shipman's visits book or in the daily diary. The daily diary for 20th
May does not mention Shipman's name at all.
Conclusion
The daily diary reveals that Mrs Bennett declined gradually in the weeks before her death. Her death was fully expected. There is no evidence that Shipman saw her after 14th
May, except for the entry in his visits book relating to the day of her death. The overwhelming likelihood is that Shipman entered her name in the book for that day as a reminder that he was to attend Charnley House to deal with the MCCD. On the MCCD counterfoil, it appears that Shipman claimed that he had last seen Mrs Bennett on 20th
May 1981. He probably did not, as no visit is recorded in the daily diary at Charnley House. I have noticed that Shipman was often careless when completing death and cremation certificates. It seems likely that he did not take the trouble to check the date of his last visit. As he had seen the body after death and had seen Mrs Bennett on 14th
May, there could be no suggestion that he was not qualified to certify the cause of death. The fact that he entered a wrong date on the MCCD does not give rise to any suspicion.
The overwhelming likelihood is that Mrs Bennett died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001