The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Bolland
Introduction
Mrs Alice Bolland died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 16th
May 1981 at the age of 80. It is not known whether or for how long she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of deceased persons, for whom the Inquiry had very limited information as to the circumstances of the death and for whom no relatives had been traced. Mrs Bolland's name was on that list and, in response, a local funeral director, Mr David John Cook, contacted the Inquiry and provided the address of Mrs Bolland's son. Neither of these potential witnesses was able to contribute any relevant information apart from that which was already available from contemporaneous documentation.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981, the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mrs Bolland's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bolland was admitted to Charnley House on 30th
October 1979.
According to the daily diary, on 25th
March 1981, Mrs Bolland was visited by Shipman, who said she was anaemic and was to receive a course of injections beginning the following day. As Mrs Bolland was suffering anaemia it is likely that the injections she received were of vitamin B
12
. The diary for 26th
March 1981 confirms that her injections were started.
On Thursday, 30th
April 1981, Mrs Bolland fell and it was arranged that she should be seen by Shipman the following day. Shipman duly attended on Friday, 1st
May. He said that she had heart failure, for which he prescribed tablets. That, he said, was the explanation for the oedema in her legs and feet. She had another fall that afternoon but did not suffer any serious injury. The following day, Mrs Bolland tried to make her own way into the dining room but fell and banged the back of her head.
On Monday, 4th
May 1981, Mrs Bolland was said to be very flushed and dizzy going to bed and it was said that she should be observed. She was complaining of backache.
On Thursday, 7th
May, Mrs Bolland was seen again by Shipman, as arranged. It is noted that he was to be told when her injections were finished. His visits book confirms an intention to visit her that day.
Mrs Bolland's condition deteriorated over the following week. On Thursday, 14th
May 1981, it is recorded that she was given
'all care'
, meaning that all her daily needs were being met by the staff. Shipman's visits book shows that he was due to visit Charnley House that day but not to see Mrs Bolland.
On Friday, 15th
May, 1981, Mrs Bolland was anuric during the day and then vomited a lot during a restless night.
The Day of the Death
The first entry in the daily diary for Saturday, 16th
May 1981 records that Mrs Bolland passed peacefully away at approximately 7.30am. Her relatives were informed and Shipman certified her death. Mrs Bolland's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. As Mrs Bolland died at about 7.30am, the entry in the visits book probably relates to Shipman's intention to visit Charnley House to certify her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil is available. It appears that Shipman completed this on 16th
May 1981, the day of the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Bolland alive on 14th
May 1981. Although the daily diary does not record that Shipman saw Mrs Bolland on that day, it does record that he was in the building and it is quite possible that he had taken the opportunity to look in on Mrs Bolland. He said that the cause of death was senility and identified cardiac failure as a contributory cause.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mrs Bolland died of natural causes. The daily diary shows that she was very unwell in the period leading up to her death. Her death occurred before surgery hours. It would be most unusual for Shipman to visit a patient at that hour of the morning, save in an emergency. There is no suggestion that Shipman visited Mrs Bolland either on the day of the death or the previous day. The overwhelming likelihood is that on 16th
May Shipman attended at Charnley House only after the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001