The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Elizabeth Bowers
Introduction
Mrs Mary Elizabeth Bowers died at Pole Bank Hall, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 10th
November 1981 at the age of 86. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Eric Bowers (Mrs Bowers' son) and Mr James Norris Bowers (Mrs Bowers' stepson). In addition, the Inquiry has taken generic statements from former members of staff at Pole Bank Hall, Mrs Nora Smyth, Mrs Rita Lonsdale and Mrs Marion Hawley. However, none recalls the circumstances leading to Mrs Bowers' death. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mrs Bowers' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bowers was a widow. She had enjoyed good health for most of her life. About ten years before her death, she was found to have Type II diabetes, which was controlled by diet. Towards the end of her life, she became forgetful and could no longer manage in her own home. She moved to Pole Bank Hall about six months before her death. There, her family visited her regularly. Mr Norris Bowers would visit every day and Mr Eric Bowers twice or three times a week.
Mr Norris Bowers recalls that, in the week or so before her death, Mrs Bowers gradually became more frail and weak. About a week before she died, she was moved to what he understood to be the hospital wing at Pole Bank Hall. Mrs Lonsdale says that there was an 'annexe' to which patients would be moved if they were unwell. Mr Norris Bowers found that it was becoming a great effort for his stepmother to make conversation. She told him that she was not feeling well but said that she would be 'all right'. Mr Eric Bowers recalls that at this time his mother seemed to have lost weight and was unable to talk much.
Mrs Bowers' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 4th
November 1981 and the letters
'D/N'
appear after her name. This suggests that Shipman had visited and had decided to ask the district nurse to look after Mrs Bowers. Pole Bank Hall was a residential home, not a nursing home, and Mrs Bowers may have needed nursing care. A few days before her death, both Mr Norris Bowers and Mr Eric Bowers were told that Mrs Bowers had been given a fleece to lie on to relieve the pain in her back. It seems likely that she had developed a pressure sore and the district nurses were probably dressing it and had provided the fleece.
On 9th
November, Mr Norris Bowers found that his stepmother had deteriorated and was drifting in and out of consciousness. The matron told him that Mrs Bowers did not have long to live.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 10th
November, both Mr Eric Bowers and Mr Norris Bowers received telephone calls from the matron at Pole Bank Hall to say that their mother had died. Neither is sure of the time when they received the news, but Mr Norris Bowers says that he received his call at work, so it must have been after 9am. He went straight to Pole Bank Hall.
Mrs Bowers' name appears in Shipman's visits book for 10th
November. However, he was not there when Mr Norris Bowers visited soon after being told of the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman certified that Mrs Bowers died as the result of senility. Diabetes mellitus was said to have contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Bowers alive on the day of the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 10th
November 1981.
Mrs Bowers was cremated, but the cremation certificate has not survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Bowers was very weak, frail and unwell in the days leading up to her death. She was confined to bed and, shortly before her death, was drifting in and out of consciousness. It is clear that she was not expected to live long. Her death on 10th
November was neither sudden nor unexpected.
The main cause for suspicion in this case arises from the fact that, on the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman claimed that he had seen Mrs Bowers alive on the day of the death. His own visits book suggests that he intended to call at Pole Bank Hall to see her on that day, although it is not at all clear whether the request that he should attend was made for the purpose of obtaining treatment for her in life or the certification of her death.
Shipman appears to have seen Mrs Bowers on 4th
November and was entitled to certify the cause of her death, whether or not he had seen her alive on 10th
November. As Shipman had no need to tell lies in order to make it appear that he was entitled to complete the MCCD, it would seem likely that he was telling the truth when he said he had seen her alive on the day of her death.
We do not know the time of Mrs Bowers' death. If she died in the late morning or at about lunchtime, it is entirely feasible to suggest that Shipman might have visited her, found her in a very poor state, given an intravenous injection of opiate, waited the short time before she died and then certified her death. There is no evidence that he did such a thing, but the evidence is such that I cannot rule it out.
Mrs Bowers was very weak and was expected to die at any time. For that reason, my conclusion is that she probably died a natural death. However, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman gained access to her and gave her an injection which hastened her death. Nor can I rule out the possibility that Shipman administered an injection or a series of injections, of a sedative, in the days before Mrs Bowers died. If sedated, Mrs Bowers would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. There is, however, no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Bowers between 4th
November and 11th
November and taking the evidence as a whole, I think it is unlikely that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001