The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel Buckley
Introduction
Mrs Ethel Buckley died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 29th
September 1983 at the age of 89. It seems likely that she had been a patient of Dr Moysey, a colleague of Shipman at the Donneybrook Surgery. It was, however, Shipman who certified the cause of Mrs Buckley's death as acute bronchitis.
Mrs Buckley's son, Mr Thomas Buckley, died in about 1997. The Inquiry has been in contact with his ex-wife, Mrs Bertha Buckley, who remembers that Mrs Buckley was very ill in the days leading up to her death. Mrs Bertha Buckley is quite elderly and does not enjoy good health, and the Inquiry has not taken a statement from her.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book, the duty doctor transfer book and the admission register and daily diary from Charnley House. Mrs Buckley's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It would appear from the death certificate that Mrs Buckley was a retired office cleaner. Her deceased husband, also Mr Thomas Buckley, had been a turner.
Mrs Buckley was admitted to Charnley House on 2nd
June 1981 from her home at 1 Castleton Way, Haughton Green, Denton. At the time of her admission, her social worker informed the staff at Charnley House that she was capable of doing most things for herself but needed motivating to do so. She took sleeping tablets at night.
By September 1983, Mrs Buckley's condition had deteriorated. She was walking with a frame and had frequent falls. After one fall on Tuesday, 13th
September 1983, she was said to be very pale and her lips were blue. A doctor attended and ordered that she was to rest in bed for 24 hours. He promised to return the following day to take a blood sample but did not do so. On 15th
September, Dr Moysey visited and said that he thought Mrs Buckley's problem was just 'old age'. He promised to come the following day and did so, although the Charnley House diary does not record the result of any investigation.
Mrs Buckley's condition deteriorated gradually from that time onwards. On Tuesday, 20th
September, she had a high temperature. On Saturday, 24th
September, she fell and was put in a Buxton chair for her own safety. On Sunday, 25th
September, she was put to bed at 7pm. She was rambling and her breathing was erratic. She looked very white. The doctor was sent for and appears to have said that Mrs Buckley's own doctor should be contacted on Monday, 26th
September. The duty doctor from Donneybrook on the evening of Sunday, 25th
September was Dr Bills. The duty doctor transfer book suggests that he was on duty between 6.30pm and 11pm and so the likelihood is that it was he who visited Charnley House at 8pm that evening.
On Monday, 26th
September 1983, Mrs Buckley was seen by Dr Moysey, who seems to have been her registered medical practitioner. He appears to have suggested that Mrs Buckley should be given nursing care only. That afternoon, Mrs Buckley took no fluids and was given
'all care'
. On Tuesday, 27th
September, there was no change in Mrs Buckley's condition, which was clearly quite serious. On the evening of that day, Mrs Buckley's breathing was very low and erratic. She refused fluids and was kept comfortable. On the morning of Wednesday, 28th
September, her condition was still poor. That afternoon, she managed to take small amounts of fluid. She was breathing quite quickly.
The Day of the Death
The diary entry from Charnley House records only that Mrs Buckley passed peacefully away at 6.05am on Thursday, 29th
September 1983.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 29th
September 1983, the day of Mrs Buckley's death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Buckley alive on 26th
September 1983. In fact, there is no evidence that Shipman ever saw Mrs Buckley and it is Dr Moysey who is recorded as having seen her on 26th
September 1983. Shipman said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. He said that the cause of death was acute bronchitis and that
'CHF'
(
congestive heart failure
)
had contributed to the death but was not related to the primary cause of death.
Shipman's visits book for 1983 confirms that he was to attend Charnley House on Thursday, 29th
September in connection with Mrs Buckley. Her name appears as the fifth in a list of five names for that day. It seems almost certain that Shipman was called out to Charnley House to certify Mrs Buckley's death, some time after it had occurred. It may be that Dr Moysey was unavailable to do so.
Conclusion
It seems overwhelmingly likely that Mrs Buckley died a natural death. Whether the cause of death was acute bronchitis, as Shipman certified, seems rather doubtful, as the Charnley House daily diary gives the impression of a gradual deterioration towards death rather than an acute illness. A few days before she died, Dr Moysey recognised that Mrs Buckley's condition was terminal and that the best that could be done for her was to keep her comfortable.
Although Shipman certified the cause of death, it seems that he could only have been in a position to do so had he discussed Mrs Buckley's condition with Dr Moysey. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman saw Mrs Buckley during the night before her death. The duty doctor transfer book reveals that he was not even on duty that night.
It is a matter of some concern that Shipman might have certified the cause of Mrs Buckley's death without ever having seen her alive. There is no evidence to support his claim that he saw her alive on 26th
September. However, it is possible that he saw her on 13th
September and knew enough of her condition to enable him to certify the cause of her death 16 days later. There is evidence that he saw her body after death and it is possible that he was properly qualified to certify the cause of death. However, given that the stated cause of death is not really consistent with the picture created by the Charnley House diary, I do wonder whether Shipman ever had seen Mrs Buckley. There is a good deal of evidence that Shipman was cavalier about his duties in respect of death and cremation certification. It is possible that the entries on the counterfoil were quite inaccurate. Although this gives some cause for concern, it still does not appear to me that there is any real reason to suspect that Shipman played any part in causing Mrs Buckley's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001