The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Alice Brown
Introduction
Mrs Mary Alice Brown died at Pole Bank Hall, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Sunday, 15th
May 1983 at the age of 85. She had been a patient of Shipman since she moved to Pole Bank Hall in August or September 1982. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has taken statements from two of Mrs Brown's daughters, Mrs Jean Hotston and Mrs Kathleen Holland, both of whom live in the south of England. None of the members of staff working at Pole Bank Hall in 1983 whom the Inquiry has contacted can remember Mrs Brown.
Mrs Brown's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has, however, had access to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, Shipman's visits book for 1983, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate').
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Brown was a widow. Mrs Hotston recalls that her mother suffered from angina and was breathless. She also says that her mother was found to have bowel cancer and was admitted to Tameside General Hospital for an operation after which a colostomy bag was fitted. Whilst in hospital, she fell and broke her hip and underwent a hip replacement operation. Following her discharge from hospital, Mrs Brown had lost confidence and no longer wished to live by herself. She moved into Pole Bank Hall. She seemed to settle in well and became friendly with some of the other residents.
Mrs Brown was very close to her third daughter, Mrs Margaret Hampson, who died in March 1983. Mrs Holland last saw her mother alive on 13th
March 1983, the day of her sister's funeral. Mrs Hotston last saw her mother alive a few weeks after her sister's funeral. Mrs Brown was devastated by her daughter's death but put forward a brave face.
During the last few weeks of their mother's life, Mrs Hotston and Mrs Holland stayed in regular touch with their mother over the telephone. Mrs Holland recalls that she tried to telephone her mother at the home about a week before she died. She spoke to a member of staff who told her that her mother was unwell and unable to come to the telephone.
Mrs Hotston recalls that she received a telephone call from Mr Alan Hampson, Margaret Hampson's widower, on either 13th
or 14th
May 1983, to say that Mrs Brown was not very well. Mrs Hotston made arrangements to travel to Hyde on Sunday, 15th
May 1983. Mr Hampson has since died.
The Day of the Death
Early in the morning of Sunday, 15th
May 1983, Mrs Hotston received a further telephone call from her brother-in-law, who told her that Mrs Brown had died in the early hours of that day. She telephoned her sister with the news.
Mr Hampson told Mrs Hotston and Mrs Holland that he had been contacted by Pole Bank Hall in the early hours of Sunday morning and had driven to the home. His mother-in-law was conscious when he arrived and tried to speak to him but was incoherent. Mr Hampson was very deaf and, unfortunately, he had left his hearing aid at home. He went home to fetch it but, by the time he returned to Pole Bank Hall, Mrs Brown had died.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived but its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Brown died on 16th
May 1983, as the result of senility. It seems that this was an error on Shipman's part because the death certificate records the date of death as 15th
May and this is consistent with the evidence of Mrs Hotston and Mrs Holland. Shipman certified that rectal carcinoma had contributed to the death. He did not record when he had last seen Mrs Brown alive. He recorded that his colleague, Dr Bills, had seen her body after death. The Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book records the initials 'GB' for 14th
May 1983, indicating that Dr Bills was the Donneybrook doctor on call on Saturday, 14th
May. The transfer book shows that he transferred calls to the deputising service at 8.30pm on Saturday evening. There is no record of Mrs Brown's name in Shipman's visits book for 14th
, 15th
or 16th
May. Her name does, however, appear on 13th
May together with the words
'D/V depressed'
, suggesting that she was depressed and should have a domiciliary visit, probably from a geriatrician.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Brown died a natural death.
The evidence suggests that Mrs Brown's health had deteriorated a few days before her death. Mr Hampson was summoned to Pole Bank Hall in the early hours of 15th
May. The staff would not have called him out at that hour unless Mrs Brown had been critically ill. She was alive but very ill when he arrived and died while he was fetching his hearing aid. It appears to me that Mrs Brown's death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Brown in the hours leading up to her death. The duty doctor transfer book indicates that Dr Bills, who was on out of hours duty that weekend, had transferred calls to the deputising service. It think it likely that he came out to see Mrs Brown's body at some time after 8am on the Sunday morning, by which time he would have resumed weekend duty. This would explain Shipman's endorsement on the MCCD counterfoil. It would be most unusual for Shipman to turn out in the middle of the night when not on duty. I think that possibility can be entirely discounted. I, therefore, rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Brown by administering to her a lethal dose of opiates.
When Mr Hampson last saw Mrs Brown shortly before she died, she was conscious and attempted to talk to him. I am satisfied therefore that it is extremely unlikely that Shipman had over-sedated Mrs Brown in the days before her death to the extent that might have indirectly contributed to her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001