The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Miriam Bradshaw
Introduction
Mrs Miriam Bradshaw died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Friday, 13th
January 1984 at the age of 88. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the left breast.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Bradshaw's friend, Mrs Beryl Dickinson, and from Mrs June Brimelow, who was one of the deputy officers at the home from 1978 until 1985. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period, to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Following the death of her husband, Mrs Bradshaw moved to a bungalow on Rufford Avenue, Hyde. While living there, she had a fall and sustained a cut. She subsequently attended hospital and it was found that she had breast cancer. She was told that she was too old to undergo surgery. After that, she found it increasingly difficult to manage on her own. She also suffered from arthritis and rheumatism and found it difficult to walk. A place was found for her at The Sycamores.
Mrs Brimelow recalls that Mrs Bradshaw was frail but still mobile, with a Zimmer frame. She used to take her meals in the dining room and spend her days sitting in the lounge, which was next to her bedroom. She did not complain about her illnesses.
Mrs Dickinson used to visit Mrs Bradshaw once or twice a week. She noticed that Mrs Bradshaw had become more frail since moving to The Sycamores although Mrs Bradshaw never complained about her problems to Mrs Dickinson. Mrs Dickinson recalls that a week or so before she died, Mrs Bradshaw seemed 'off colour'.
Mrs Brimelow does not remember nursing Mrs Bradshaw, as one would expect her to remember if there was a prolonged period when nursing care was required.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Brimelow is unable to remember the circumstances surrounding Mrs Bradshaw's death.
Mrs Dickinson recalls that, on the morning of 13th
January 1984, she received a telephone call from a member of staff at the home informing her that Mrs Bradshaw had taken a turn for the worse. Mrs Dickinson could not leave her house immediately and said that she would go to the home as soon as she was free. A few hours later, she received a further telephone call to tell her that Mrs Bradshaw had died. Mrs Dickinson's daughter drove her to the home and she spoke to the manageress, although she cannot now recall what was said. Mrs Bradshaw's body had already been removed to the chapel of rest.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman recorded that Mrs Bradshaw had died on 13th
January 1984 of carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the left breast. He stated that he had last seen her alive on 11th
January 1984, two days before her death. Mrs Bradshaw's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 7th
January 1984 and 11th
January 1984. It does not appear on the day of her death.
Mrs Bradshaw was cremated but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
Very little is known about the precise nature of Mrs Bradshaw's health. She was, however, a frail lady who had been found to have inoperable breast cancer. The evidence suggests that her health had deteriorated in the days leading up to her death, although it appears that the death was not preceded by a long period of confinement to bed.
There is evidence that Shipman attended Mrs Bradshaw two days before her death but no positive evidence that he saw her alive on the day of the death. However, that does not mean that he could not have done. He did not always make entries in his visits book, especially when called out in an emergency. It is entirely possible that Shipman was called out on the morning of 13th
January because Mrs Bradshaw had deteriorated and that he did not make an entry in his visits book. The nursing records or diary from The Sycamores have been destroyed. If Shipman did visit Mrs Bradshaw on the day of her death, it is quite possible that he gave her some form of pain relief. If she was indeed suffering carcinomatosis, as Shipman certified, it is probable that she was in quite severe pain shortly before her death. The possibility then arises that Shipman could have given a lethal quantity of strong opiate, which caused or hastened Mrs Bradshaw's death.
I feel unable to reach any conclusion in this case, even on the balance of probabilities. There is insufficient evidence. It is possible that Shipman was unlawfully involved in Mrs Bradshaw's death. However, I stress that there is no positive evidence that he was.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001