The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bertha Bagshaw
Introduction
Mrs Bertha Bagshaw died at her home, 12 Walker Close, Hyde on Monday, 17th
November 1980 at the age of 88. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') which named Lily Higgins, Mrs Bagshaw's niece, as the informant. Mrs Higgins is dead and her death has been investigated by the Inquiry. The Inquiry wrote to Mrs Joan Ralphs, Mrs Higgins' daughter, to see whether she could provide any information, but she has replied that she knows nothing of her great-aunt's death. Neither she nor her sister is aware of any other person who would be able to assist.
The police did not investigate Mrs Bagshaw's death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has now obtained the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil completed by Shipman and his visits book for 1980. The medical records have not been recovered and, since the Inquiry has no information about witnesses who may be able to assist, no statements have been obtained.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
As indicated, this is very limited. On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Bagshaw alive the day before her death. He said he had also seen her after death. We have no information as to whether she had undergone the sort of gradual decline which would justify senility as a cause of death.
The visits book discloses no visit by Shipman on the day of death, nor any visit on the day before as claimed. Indeed, no visit is recorded during the fortnight before death. Whilst it may be that Shipman did indeed visit but did not record it in his book, the possibility must exist that he falsely claimed a visit on the day before death in order to avoid the risk that the registrar would refer the death to the coroner. No further evidence is available to the Inquiry.
Conclusion
It is impossible for me to reach any conclusion as to whether or not Shipman played a part in Mrs Bagshaw's death. The fact that he claimed a visit the day before death which was not confirmed by the visits book might raise a suspicion that he had a reason for avoiding a referral to the coroner. However, it is possible that he did visit Mrs Bagshaw on that day but failed to record his intention to do so in the visits book. The Inquiry is aware that this did happen on occasions. Without evidence from a witness with knowledge of the circumstances of the death, no conclusion can be reached.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001