The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
James Edward Barnes
Introduction
Mr James Edward Barnes died at Hyde Nursing Home, on Friday, 29th
October 1993 at the age of 65. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 and had followed him when Shipman moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Barnes' death was cerebrovascular accident due to subarachnoid haemorrhage.
The Inquiry has been in contact with Mr Barnes' son, also called Mr James Edward Barnes, who lives in the Irish Republic. He provided useful background information but it was not considered necessary to take a formal witness statement from him.
The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Barnes' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period and Hyde Nursing Home's Notification of Death form.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Mr Barnes Junior told the Inquiry that his father had been an active person who had worked part time in the family's sandwich shop business until he had a brain haemorrhage some months before he died. He was left permanently paralysed, with severe impairment of facial movement, which left him unable to speak. The discharge summary from Tameside General Hospital dated 21st
September 1993 supports Mr Barnes Junior's recollection. Mr Barnes was transferred from hospital to Hyde Nursing Home on 2nd
September 1993.
Shipman's visits book shows that he called on Mr Barnes on 10th
September 1993 and then on 25th
October and 27th October, when it was noted that there had been a marked deterioration. Mr Barnes Junior recalls that in the early hours of Thursday, 28th
October his sister telephoned him to say that his father had had another stroke. Mr Barnes Junior went to the nursing home and stayed with his father throughout the day. His father seemed to be either asleep or in a coma. Shipman's visits book suggests that he visited again on that day. Mr Barnes recalls that Shipman visited during the evening, at some time between 7pm and 9pm. A nurse was present during the consultation. There was no deterioration following Shipman's visit and, if anything, Mr Barnes believed that his father looked somewhat better after Shipman's departure. When he suggested to the nurse that this might be the case, she drew back the sheets to show that the extremities of Mr Barnes' upper and lower limbs were blue. Mr Barnes Junior and other members of the family stayed at the nursing home overnight.
Early the next day, Friday, 29th
October 1993, a nurse came to the family and told them that Mr Barnes had died. The Hyde Nursing Home Notification of Death form suggests that the death occurred at 6.45am.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil is available. On that, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mr Barnes alive on 28th
October 1993. He had seen the body after death and said that there would be no post-mortem examination. The cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident due to subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He said that Mr Barnes had died at
'about 6.30am'
on 29th
October 1993. He said that he had attended Mr Barnes during his last illness for three days. He said that he had last seen Mr Barnes alive 18 hours before his death, which is not consistent with Mr Barnes Junior's recollection that Shipman visited in the evening before the death. He said that he had seen the body an hour after the death and had carried out a complete external examination. He said that Mr Barnes had been in a coma for 48 hours, which tallies with Mr Barnes Junior's recollection. Shipman said that the staff at Hyde Nursing Home had nursed Mr Barnes and that his son and daughter had been present at the moment of death, both of which assertions were correct.
When Mr Barnes Junior completed the application for cremation, he said that his father had died at 6.15am.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the information contained in the cremation forms and the contents of Mr Barnes' medical records and on both counts he found that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
The medical records show that Mr Barnes suffered a stroke about four months before his death and the evidence suggests that he suffered a second stroke on Wednesday, 27th
October 1993. He was asleep or unconscious from the time that Mr Barnes Junior arrived at the nursing home on Thursday, 28th
October. It is entirely possible that Mr Barnes died as a result of natural causes and that Shipman played no part in hastening his death.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited after 9pm on Thursday, 28th
October. Mr Barnes lived for more than nine hours after that visit. It seems highly unlikely that Shipman would have visited during the night. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman gave Mr Barnes a lethal dose of opiate which directly caused his death.
However, I cannot completely rule out the possibility that Shipman over-sedated Mr Barnes during the last two days of his life and that the sedation caused or contributed to Mr Barnes' unconscious state. Shipman would have had the opportunity to administer sedative drugs when he visited on 25th
October, 27th
October and 28th
October. If deeply unconscious, Mr Barnes would be more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. It is possible that Shipman's actions in this respect could have contributed indirectly to the death. However, there is no positive evidence to suggest that Shipman gave any sedative drugs during the last few days of Mr Barnes' life and no positive reason to suspect that, if he did, the doses were inappropriately large. I think it is highly likely that Mr Barnes died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001