The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edward Buckland
Introduction
Mr Edward Buckland (known as Ted) died at Laurel Bank Residential Home on Thursday, 8th
February 1996 at the age of 84. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was oesophageal cancer.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Buckland's Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and its counterfoil, the cremation certificates, general practitioner and hospital records, as well as visits books and appointments sheets from the Market Street Surgery and the daily diary from Laurel Bank. No witness statements have been taken but members of Mr Buckland's family have indicated that they have no suspicion that Shipman was involved in the death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Buckland was a retired labourer who had lived at 52 Syddall Street, Hyde until his admission to Laurel Bank.
Mr Buckland had a history of minor strokes, heart disease and obesity. In addition, he had a history of severe erosive gastritis. In July 1995, he was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with severe vomiting and resultant dehydration. Investigation revealed inoperable cancer of the lower oesophagus and of the intestines. The poor prognosis was communicated to the staff at Laurel Bank and also to Mr Buckland's sister and next-of-kin, Mrs Amy Kathleen Herod. Mr Buckland was discharged back to Laurel Bank on 18th
August 1995.
Over the following six months Mr Buckland's health gradually declined. He had recurrent vomiting with weight loss.
The Death
Mr Buckland's medical records show that in the days leading up to his death his fluid intake was very poor. Shipman visited on Monday 5th
, Tuesday 6th
and Wednesday 7th
February 1996. The medical records show the visits but do not mention the giving of any treatment.
The Laurel Bank diary records these visits but makes no reference to the giving of any treatment. The diary shows that on the Wednesday, the day before he died, Mr Buckland was extremely unwell. His breathing was shallow and his pulse barely perceptible.
When Shipman came, he instructed that Mr Buckland should be given
'lots of TLC'
or tender loving care. There is no suggestion that any kind of injection was administered. Shipman's computerised clinical note records that Mr Buckland's gullet was obstructed. The diary shows that there was no change in his condition later that afternoon. However, a note made at 8.10pm says that he was
'getting a little distressed at times'
.
The Laurel Bank diary records that Mr Buckland died at 5.40am on Thursday 8th
February. The doctor was called at 6.05am and Massey's the undertakers were called at 6.15am. The surgery visits book contains the following entry:
'Edward Buckland - revisit - died 5.40am. Creamation
(
sic
)
D/D certified him - but no D/cert'
.
These two notes make it clear that Mr Buckland died at 5.40am, probably between 15 and 18 hours after Shipman's most recent visit. A duty doctor certified the fact of death but was not able to certify the cause because he had not seen Mr Buckland when alive.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. The cause of death was said to be
'carcinoma lower 1/3rd oesophagus'
. Although he did not write on the MCCD itself when he had last seen Mr Buckland alive, he did write on the counterfoil that he had done so on 7th February, which is consistent with the other documentation.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. The information provided was consistent with the other contemporaneous documentation. Shipman recorded that death had occurred at 5.30am on 8th
January 1996. This was obviously a mistake as it is clear that the death occurred on 8th
February. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Buckland 15 hours before his death. The cause of death was carcinoma of the oesophagus. He said that Mr Buckland had been in a coma for six days. The Laurel Bank diary suggests that Mr Buckland was conscious at times during the last few days of his life and not therefore in a coma. I have noticed that Shipman often described a patient as being in a coma when the other evidence suggests that he or she was sleeping a great deal but was intermittently responsive. I do not regard that discrepancy as a suspicious factor. On Form B, Shipman stated that Mr Buckland had been nursed during his last illness by the staff at Laurel Bank. They had looked in to see him at 5am and found him alive, but had then found him dead at 5.30am.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined Mr Buckland's medical records and the information contained in the cremation certificate but found that the death was not suspicious on either count.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Buckland died a natural death as certified by Shipman. His oesophageal cancer was diagnosed at Tameside General Hospital. The Laurel Bank diary charted his gradual decline. His death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It appears from the Laurel Bank diary that Shipman did not visit Mr Buckland in the 12 hours before his death. Nor did he attend to certify that Mr Buckland had died. The duty doctor did this. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman gave Mr Buckland an injection of opiate which directly caused his death.
I have also considered whether Shipman might have given Mr Buckland large doses of analgesic or sedative with the intention of keeping him deeply asleep during the last few days of his life and of hastening his death. It is strange that there is no record of any medication given during this period, either in the medical records or Laurel Bank daily diary, which seems to be a comprehensive record. I would have expected that Mr Buckland would have needed some analgesia during the terminal phase of his illness. The absence of any record would lead me to suspect that Shipman might have given drugs from his own supplies rather than those which he had openly prescribed. However, the evidence suggests that Mr Buckland was not deeply asleep or in a coma during the last few days. He was said to be a little distressed during the evening before his death. He cannot have been in a coma or over-sedated. I conclude therefore that it is overwhelmingly likely that, if Shipman was giving any drug treatment, it was only that which was necessary to keep Mr Buckland comfortable and was not designed to hasten his death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001