The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harold Bramwell
Introduction
Mr Harold Bramwell died at his home, 8 Bryce Street, Hyde on Thursday, 7th
December 1978 at the age of 73. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry published a list of cases in which only limited information as to the circumstances of the death was available and in which no relative had been traced. In response, several members of Mr Bramwell's family contacted the Inquiry.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Alan Bramwell, Mr Harold Bramwell's son. Mr Bramwell's medical records have not been recovered and there are no practice records for 1978. The Inquiry has obtained the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), completed by Shipman. There has been no inquest into the death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Bramwell lived with his wife and son, Mr Alan Bramwell. Mr Alan Bramwell worked in the north east of England and was away from Hyde during the week.
Mr Bramwell suffered a heart attack in 1969. He had been a heavy smoker but gave up after this heart attack. At that time he was also diagnosed as suffering from chronic emphysema. He suffered a second heart attack in 1973 or 1974, after which he became less active and began using an oxygen mask to help his breathing. As time went by, he became more dependent on this. During the last few months of his life, Mr Bramwell was confined to bed and kept the oxygen cylinder at his bedside.
Until his second heart attack, Mr Bramwell used to see Shipman at the Donneybrook Surgery but, after that time, Shipman used to visit him at home. Mr Alan Bramwell recalls that, during the last month of his life, Shipman visited his father every week. During the week before he died, Mr Bramwell had great difficulty in breathing despite using his oxygen cylinder.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 7th
December, Mr Alan Bramwell's mother contacted him at work and asked him to return home, as his father's breathing had deteriorated. He came back to Hyde and spent the rest of the day with his father, who was having great difficulty in breathing. In the evening, Mr Bramwell's breathing deteriorated further and he started to panic. Between 10pm and 11pm, Mrs Bramwell decided to call Shipman out. Shipman arrived within about half an hour and examined Mr Bramwell with a stethoscope. Mr Alan Bramwell remembers that his father was barely conscious and his voice was very weak. Shipman said that Mr Bramwell was seriously ill and would not live much longer. He then said that there were a few more things he wanted to check and asked Mr Alan Bramwell and his mother to wait downstairs. Shipman did not say what he wanted to check while he was alone with Mr Bramwell. A short time later, Shipman came downstairs and said, 'He's gone'. He did not provide any further explanation.
Shipman left shortly afterwards and Mr Alan Bramwell and his mother went upstairs to see Mr Bramwell. He was still in bed, propped up with pillows. He looked very peaceful, as if he was sleeping. He was dead.
Certification
Although the MCCD has not been recovered, the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Bramwell alive on the day of his death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was certified to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease, itself due to chronic bronchitis. It is recorded on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') that coronary thrombosis was the cause of death due to ischaemic heart disease. Chronic bronchitis is recorded as a condition contributing to the death but not to the immediate cause.
Conclusion
Mr Bramwell was clearly very unwell in the weeks leading up to his death. His condition deteriorated in the week before he died and particularly on the day of the death. The fact that Shipman was called out in the late evening indicates a high degree of concern about his condition. It would appear that Mr Bramwell was facing death due to respiratory failure. His death at any time would not have been unexpected.
Nevertheless, there are strong grounds to suspect that Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Bramwell. The most suspicious feature is that Mr Bramwell died in the presence of Shipman shortly after members of his family had been asked to leave the room. On the basis of the account given by Mr Alan Bramwell, Shipman manipulated events so that he could be left alone with Mr Bramwell, although he did not say for what purpose he wished to see Mr Bramwell alone. Shortly afterwards, Shipman came downstairs and told the family that Mr Bramwell had died. It is unusual for a doctor to ask to see a patient alone in these circumstances. It is also unusual for a doctor who knows that death is imminent not to summon family members so that they can be present at the moment of death. These circumstances lead me to suspect that Shipman gave Mr Bramwell a drug that hastened his end. That is the most plausible explanation for Shipman's actions.
According to his son, Mr Bramwell was suffering respiratory distress. In those circumstances even a small dose of any drug which affected respiration would be likely to end life. Mr Bramwell was not in pain but it does appear that he was in some distress. It is possible that Shipman felt that some sedative drug was required. However, if that was his view, he should have explained his reasoning to the family and should have warned them that the possible consequence of the drug was that it might hasten the death. Shipman's secretive behaviour was not acceptable practice and leads me to the conclusion that he knew and intended that the drug would end Mr Bramwell's life.
It seems to me rather strange that Shipman should have certified that the cause of death was a heart attack. Although Mr Bramwell had a history of heart disease and must have been at risk of another heart attack, his main problem at the time seems to have been respiratory failure. It would have been a most remarkable coincidence if Mr Bramwell had suffered a fatal heart attack just as Shipman had asked the family to leave the bedroom.
Taking all the circumstances into account, I am driven to the conclusion that it is overwhelmingly likely that Shipman killed Mr Bramwell with some sort of sedative drug, probably an opiate. I think it highly likely that Mr Bramwell had not long to live. It may be that Shipman persuaded himself that he was saving Mr Bramwell and his family from further suffering. Even if he did, under the law of this country, such actions are unlawful, if they are intended to shorten life. I think the circumstances of this death show that Shipman must have intended that consequence. I feel able to say that I am sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001