The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Baxter
Introduction
Mr William Baxter died at his home, 27 Cheetham Fold Road, Hyde on either Wednesday, 3rd
March or Thursday, 4th
March 1982 at the age of 70. He was registered as a patient of Shipman but rarely consulted him until the last few months of his life. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was adenocarcinoma of the stomach.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mr Baxter's death named his daughter, Mrs Edith Barnhill, as the informant. The Inquiry wrote to Mrs Barnhill, who later provided a statement. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1981 and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mr Baxter's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until his retirement at the age of 65, Mr Baxter worked as a welder. When he retired, Mr Baxter and his wife moved to a flat on Cheetham Fold Road. Mrs Barnhill says that, although he was a heavy smoker, her father never suffered from respiratory problems. Until the last few months of his life, he was active and would walk into Hyde each day.
A few years before his death, Mr Baxter began to notice stomach pains but these were not severe. During 1981 they became much worse. Mr Baxter lost weight and became very tired. In January 1982, hospital investigations showed that he had stomach cancer. It appears that he was not offered any treatment but was discharged to his home in mid-February 1982.
Mrs Barnhill says that from this time Shipman visited her father quite regularly. Once, to her knowledge, he called at her father's home unannounced. Initially, Mr Baxter was able to get up each day and potter about the flat. However, his condition deteriorated and for the last week of his life he was confined to bed. He was reluctant to take his medication, which was syrup and was probably some form of analgesic. He complained that it burned his throat.
It appears that Shipman visited Mr Baxter on Monday, 1st
March, as Mr Baxter's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
The Death
On 3rd
March, Mr Baxter again refused to take his medication. Mrs Barnhill, who lived near her parents and visited every day, was concerned about him and contacted the surgery to ask for a visit. Shipman arrived at about lunchtime. Mr Baxter was very distressed, as he had been incontinent. Shipman asked him about his syrup and, when Mr Baxter explained why he did not like it, Shipman said he would have to give him an injection to help him. He wrote out a prescription for some ampoules of morphine and told Mrs Barnhill to collect them. He promised to return at 'teatime' to give Mr Baxter an injection. He then instructed Mrs Barnhill to dispose of the syrup, which she did, in Shipman's presence.
Mrs Barnhill collected the morphine and Shipman returned to the house in the early evening. During the afternoon, Mr Baxter had remained in bed, sleeping on and off. Mrs Barnhill did not think that he had deteriorated. Shipman gave her father an injection. She thinks this was into the arm but is not sure. She cannot recall how many ampoules were used. Following the injection, Shipman lay Mr Baxter on his side, facing Mrs Barnhill. His eyes were open but, when she spoke to him, he did not respond. Shipman said that her father could not see anything and that he had what Shipman called 'the dead eye'. Mrs Barnhill is unsure whether Shipman closed her father's eyes before he left.
Mrs Barnhill decided to stay in her father's room that night. She assumed that he was asleep. She did not check his breathing. She herself slept for part of the time. She says that, so far as she knows, her father did not move at all after Shipman left. She awoke at about 4.30am and decided to make herself a drink. She tried to rouse her father to see if he wanted one, but she could not wake him. When she touched him, his body was cold. She realised that he was dead. She does not know for how long he had been dead and now thinks it is possible that he died immediately after the injection. A while later, Mrs Barnhill telephoned to ask Shipman to come to the house. He came very quickly and said that he had been expecting the death. He took the rest of the morphine away.
Mr Baxter's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 3rd
March. Next to his name appears the word
'Dying'
.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that the death occurred on 4th
March. He stated that the death was caused by cancer of the stomach and that chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mr Baxter alive on 3rd
March. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 4th
March.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mr Baxter had terminal cancer and had not long to live. He was confined to bed and was in some pain and distress. He did not like taking the analgesic syrup, which Shipman had prescribed for him. In those circumstances, it would have been entirely appropriate for Shipman to prescribe an opiate to be given by injection. Provided Shipman gave a dose which was genuinely intended to relieve Mr Baxter's pain and was not intended to shorten his life, the administration of such an injection would be lawful and quite proper.
The difficulty in this case is that we do not know how large a dose Shipman gave or how long Mr Baxter lived after he had received it. A suspicion might arise that the dose might have been excessive and that Mr Baxter might have died very soon afterwards. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have explained that a lethal dose of opiate will kill within a few minutes if the dose is given intravenously. The usual site for an intravenous injection would be into a vein in the crook of the arm or on the hand. If a lethal dose is given intramuscularly, the drug will reach its maximal effect within about 30 to 60 minutes and death will occur within about an hour. The usual sites for an intramuscular injection are the thigh or upper arm. If Mr Baxter died very soon after the injection, there would be grave cause for suspicion that Shipman had given a lethal dose. Having said that there is a suspicion that Mr Baxter might have died very soon after the injection, I do not believe that he did. Mrs Barnhill sat with her father during the evening and I would have thought she would have realised if he had stopped breathing.
A further difficulty arises because, even if it were clear that Mr Baxter had died within an hour of the injection, I would not be able to say with confidence that Shipman had deliberately and unlawfully hastened Mr Baxter's death. As Dr Grenville has explained, it can be difficult for a doctor to assess the optimum quantity of opiate to give to a patient like Mr Baxter. If the doctor errs on the low side, the patient's pain will not be relieved and he or she will suffer. If the doctor errs on the high side, the pain might be quelled but the drug might also shorten life. The appropriate dose cannot be precisely calculated. The effect of a particular dose will vary from patient to patient, depending, for example, on body weight and general condition. A patient with impaired respiratory function should usually not have opiate drugs at all, as they depress respiration. But if the pain is severe, the doctor may take the view that he or she must relieve it even if the consequence is to hasten the death. Mr Baxter may have had impaired respiratory function. Shipman seemed to think he had, as he certified that chronic bronchitis had contributed to the death. It is possible that Shipman gave an injection of opiate intending it to end Mr Baxter's life but it is also possible that he decided to give an opiate injection because it was the only way to relieve Mr Baxter's suffering, even though it might also shorten his life. I would add that a doctor who faces that dilemma should discuss the situation with family before proceeding.
I regret that I am unable to reach a positive conclusion about this case. It is possible that Shipman deliberately gave a lethal injection and Mr Baxter died soon afterwards. It is possible that he gave a proper therapeutic dose and Mr Baxter died some time later due to the natural progression of his disease. It is also possible that Shipman gave a dose which he genuinely considered was appropriate, but which had the unintended effect of hastening Mr Baxter's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001