The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Kathleen May Boardman
Introduction
Mrs Kathleen May Boardman died at her home, 73 Harbour Farm Road, Newton, Hyde on Sunday, 17th
December 1995 at the age of 72. She had been a patient of Shipman since about 1989 or 1990 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. Following a post-mortem examination without an inquest, the cause of her death was certified by the South Manchester Coroner to be acute myocardial insufficiency due to ischaemic heart disease and coronary artery atherosclerosis.
In October 1999, Mrs Boardman's daughter, Mrs Rita Layton, who lives in Essex, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Joseph Boardman, Mrs Boardman's husband. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Boardman's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has had access to the post-mortem examination report prepared by Dr G R Dixon, the ambulance incident database report and the Greater Manchester Police Report of Sudden Death. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Boardman lived in Hyde with her husband and was active until the day of her death. She had been hypertensive since she was 37 and suffered long-standing heart problems. In 1984, she suffered an inferior myocardial infarction. Her husband recalls that she suffered from angina, for which she took tablets, which she placed under her tongue. Her medical records, including hospital correspondence, show that she also suffered from minor aortic valve disease and had an enlarged left atrium.
Mrs Boardman attended the surgery and was seen by Shipman on Friday, 15th
December 1995. Both the handwritten and computerised records are brief in the extreme. The handwritten record reads:
'like a band
Central chest pain on/off
for 5/7 ten minutes no radiation'
.
This record suggests that Mrs Boardman might have been suffering from angina. The computerised record reads:
'Chest pain
ecg'
.
This suggests that Mrs Boardman was complaining of chest pain and that Shipman had decided to obtain an electrocardiograph (ECG).
The Day of the Death
After an uneventful morning, on the afternoon of Sunday, 17th
December 1995, Mr and Mrs Boardman went to play bingo in Stalybridge. As they were walking back to their car at about 5pm, Mrs Boardman suddenly stopped and told her husband that she was not feeling well. She took one of her angina tablets and continued walking to the car. When they reached the car, Mrs Boardman was still feeling unwell and she rested in the car for about 20 minutes before Mr Boardman drove her home. During the journey, Mrs Boardman turned to her husband and said, 'I'm sure I won't last the night'.
They arrived home at about 5.30pm. Mr Boardman helped his wife into the house and sat her in an armchair. She was still complaining of feeling unwell and said that she was in pain. Mr Boardman recalls that he helped her to lie down on the settee, after which she just seemed to stop breathing. Mr Boardman could not detect a pulse. He telephoned his daughter, who explained that he should try artificial resuscitation. He tried but was unsuccessful. He telephoned the ambulance service and an ambulance and paramedics arrived about ten minutes later. The paramedics placed Mrs Boardman on the floor and tried to resuscitate her for some time before they took her away in the ambulance. Mr Boardman thinks that, by the time the ambulance had arrived at Tameside General Hospital, his wife was dead.
The ambulance report form suggests that the call was made at 6.06pm and that the ambulance arrived at 6.10pm. On examination, Mrs Boardman was displaying no vital signs and her pupils were non-reactive and dilated. The paramedics gave adrenaline and atropine but with no effect.
The following entry, in Shipman's hand, appears in Mrs Boardman's handwritten medical records for the day of her death:
'DD holding calls - 1745
Chest pain
Visited 19.30 (lots of “flu”)
no answer
Neighbour
CAS Ambulance
Rang CAS 1945
Patient died
P.M
'
.
That note suggests that some attempt was made to contact Shipman or the duty doctor at about 5.45pm, that the duty doctor was taking calls and that either Shipman or the duty doctor attended at the house, but not until 7.30pm. Whichever doctor attended then learned that Mrs Boardman had been taken to casualty by ambulance. Either Shipman or the deputising doctor then telephoned the hospital and was told that Mrs Boardman had died. Documentation recovered from Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman, confirms that Mr Boardman telephoned and requested a visit at 5.43pm. The note records that Mrs Boardman was complaining of pain in her chest and felt sick. Shipman was apparently informed of Mrs Boardman's condition at 6.57pm and therefore it may well have been Shipman who attended at the house.
A post-mortem examination was performed at the hospital. This revealed severe atheromatous narrowing of the proximal part of the right coronary artery. There was moderate to severe atheroma within both main branches of the left coronary artery. There was an area of fibrosis within the posterior wall of the left ventricular myocardium, measuring 3cm maximum in dimension consistent with previous infarction. The aorta showed severe atherosclerosis, although its main branches were patent. The venous system was congested.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has told the Inquiry that the post-mortem findings were consistent with the history. There was clear evidence of severe ischaemic heart disease and evidence of a previous infarction. The absence of pathological features diagnostic of acute myocardial ischaemia would have caused Professor Whitwell to omit acute myocardial ischaemia as a cause of death, although the other causes were substantiated. She would have concluded that the death was due to natural causes, namely ischaemic heart disease due to coronary artery atheroma.
Conclusion
I have no doubt that this was a natural death.
Mrs Boardman had a history of heart disease and there were clear signs that she was suffering from angina two days before her death. She must have been at real risk of suffering a fatal heart attack.
The history of the onset of pain in the late afternoon and later collapse and cardiac arrest in the early evening of 17th
December sounds quite typical of a heart attack. The post-mortem examination showed that Mrs Boardman had severe ischaemic heart disease and it is clear that the death was due to a cardiac event.
There is no reason to suspect that Shipman saw Mrs Boardman on the day of her death or that the death was caused by an unlawful act on his behalf. Whether Shipman ought to have admitted Mrs Boardman to hospital on 15th
December when she complained of chest pain and whether the outcome would have been different if he had, I cannot say. Questions of negligence are outside the Inquiry's Terms of Reference.
Mrs Layton was concerned about her mother's death because she had died suddenly and Shipman was her general practitioner. I hope this decision will put her mind at rest in that she can at least be assured that Shipman did not murder her mother.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001