The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Squire Barber
Introduction
Mr Squire Barber died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Thursday, 20th
March 1997 at the age of 69. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Barber's death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the prostate.
In September 1998, the police investigated the death of Mr Barber when examination of the diamorphine registers obtained from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy in Hyde revealed that Shipman had prescribed diamorphine in Mr Barber's name, shortly before he had died. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from members of staff at Hyde Nursing Home, dealing with the practices followed there but no statements specifically relating to the death of Mr Barber have been taken. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Barber's general practitioner records, district nursing notes, Hyde Nursing Home records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
In 1995, Mr Barber was found to be suffering from prostate cancer with metastases (secondary cancers) in the spine and pelvis. Despite radiotherapy, his condition deteriorated progressively. He spent a number of short periods in St Ann's Hospice where he received palliative care. He was admitted to Hyde Nursing Home on 4th
March 1997, a little over two weeks before he died.
Mr Barber's condition following admission is recorded in the care assistant notes from Hyde Nursing Home. His condition was poor and deteriorated. He ate very little, and became increasingly weak and confused. From the time of his admission, he was given a daily dose of 240mg of MXL (morphine sulphate tablets) prescribed by Shipman. He continued to take these tablets until 18th
March 1997.
From 14th
March, he was also given Oramorph, a liquid opioid analgesic, prescribed by Shipman with some advice as to frequency of administration given by the district nurse.
According to the nursing home notes, Shipman visited on 19th
March 1997 and the question of pain relief was considered further. Mr Barber was unable to swallow and all oral medication was discontinued. Instead, Mr Barber was prescribed diamorphine to be administered at the rate of 200mg per day via a syringe driver. It is recorded within the notes that District Nurse Gilchrist attended the home to set up the syringe driver. At 4.20pm on 19th
March, 200mg diamorphine were put into the syringe driver and then another 200mg at 4.15pm on the following day. Under this regime, Mr Barber's pain was relieved.
The notes record that, at 11.30pm on 20th
March,
'No vital signs'
were detected and a doctor was contacted to certify death.
Documents from Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman, are included within Mr Barber's general practitioner records. One form records a request for a visit made on 20th
March 1997 at 11.36pm. It records that Dr Ahmad was to visit the home and that the message had been passed on to him at 00.23am on 21st
March 1997. The form contains the following message:
'DOA
(
dead on arrival
)
expected'
. An attendance note completed by the deputising doctor records that Mr Barber was indeed dead on arrival and that he had died at 11.30pm on 20th
March 1997. The note is said to have been completed at
'2.20'
, presumably in the early hours of the following day.
The nursing home notes suggest that Shipman last visited Mr Barber on 19th
March 1997. Mr Barber's name appears in the visits book for that day. However, the visit is not noted in the medical records. Although the time of the visit is not given in the nursing notes, the visit must have taken place before 4.20pm when District Nurse Gilchrist attended at the home.
There is no reference in the nursing home notes to a visit by Shipman on 20th
March. However, Mr Barber's name appears in Shipman's visits book on that day and there is an entry in the computerised medical records, created at 3.30pm on 20th
March, which reads as follows:
'Terminal care
driver concious
(
sic
)
level rousable'
.
A Prescription
Included within the Hyde Nursing Home notes is a photocopy of a prescription made out to Mr Barber, dated 19th
March 1997. That prescription is difficult to interpret, but appears to be for ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine. The dose is stated to be 200mg per day via a syringe driver. The diamorphine register from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy next door to Shipman's surgery on Market Street suggests that only four 100mg ampoules of diamorphine were dispensed in Mr Barber's name under a prescription issued by Shipman and, according to the Hyde Nursing Home diamorphine register, four 100mg ampoules were received at the home on that date. The Patient Drug Record Card kept by the district nurse also records that four 100mg ampoules were obtained in Mr Barber's name on 19th
March.
The photocopy of the prescription found in Mr Barber's nursing home file must remain something of a mystery. It is possible that Shipman presented the prescription at a pharmacy other than those for which the Inquiry has obtained the diamorphine registers, obtained the diamorphine and kept it for his own use. The evidence does not allow that possibility to be either confirmed or refuted.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and said that he had last seen Mr Barber alive on 20th
March 1997. It is not clear from the documentary evidence whether Shipman visited Mr Barber on 19th
March or 20th
March or both. Shipman certified that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the prostate.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Barber had died at 11.30pm on 20th
March 1997. He said that he had attended him during his last illness for two years. He said that he had last seen Mr Barber alive eight hours before death (which would be at about 3.30pm) and had seen the body 12 hours after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma of about 48 hours. Shipman said that these answers were based on his own observations and on statements made by members of staff at the nursing home. Shipman noted that the matron on duty at the home was present at the moment of death. There is no reason to doubt the honesty or accuracy of any of these entries.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Barber was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Barber died of natural causes as certified by Shipman. It is clear that he had terminal cancer and had reached the final phase of his illness. He required large amounts of diamorphine to relieve his pain. This was provided by a syringe driver. The dose prescribed was appropriate. Mr Barber's death on 20th
March 1997 was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Although there is some uncertainty about the time of Shipman's last visit to Mr Barber, there is no real reason to doubt the truth of his claim that he visited in the afternoon of 20th
March. There is no evidence that Shipman administered any additional medication during that visit. Even if there were evidence that he had done so, I would conclude that the medication had not caused the death. Mr Barber lived for about eight hours after that visit. For Shipman to have caused Mr Barber's death, he would have had to visit again much later in the evening of 20th
March. There is no evidence that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001