The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Henry Brown
Introduction
Mr William Henry Brown died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Friday, 24th
February 1978 at the age of 74. He was a patient of Shipman, who, at this time, had been practising in Hyde for about four months. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Brown's death was bronchopneumonia.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') named Mr William Ernest Brown (Mr Brown's son) as the informant. The Inquiry tried to locate Mr William Ernest Brown but found that he had died. His widow, Mrs Miriam Brown, contacted the Inquiry to say that she had no information about the circumstances of her father-in-law's death.
There has been no inquest into Mr Brown's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs June Brimelow and Mrs Edith Izyckyj, both former care assistants at The Sycamores, and has recovered the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Brown's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to the death certificate, Mr Brown was a retired railway checker. Mrs Brimelow remembers that he had been a resident at The Sycamores for a long time before he died. He lived in an upstairs room, away from the matron's office, which probably meant that he was more capable of independent living than many other residents.
Mrs Brimelow remembers that Mr Brown was in reasonable health, but she says she is not surprised to learn that he was said to have died of bronchopneumonia. Although she does not remember any particular chest complaints, she says he was thin and had a poor colour. She thinks he may have suffered some mental health problems.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Izyckyj remembers very little about the circumstances of Mr Brown's death. She recalls only that, when she came on duty at 8am one morning, she was told that he had died in the night. He had been alive at the end of her shift the previous day, which had ended at 8pm.
Mrs Brimelow remembers nothing as to the circumstances of Mr Brown's death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Brown alive on 23rd
February 1978, the day before he died. The death was due to bronchopneumonia. Shipman said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 25th
February 1978.
Conclusion
There is very little evidence about the circumstances of Mr Brown's death. If the evidence of Mrs Izyckyj is correct, he died between 8pm and 8am. However, we do not know whether he died in the early morning of 24th
February or in the late evening of 23rd
February. Shipman claimed on the MCCD counterfoil that he had last seen Mr Brown alive the day before he died. If Shipman visited in the middle of the day (as was usual) on 23rd
February, this would be at least 12 hours before the death and possibly as much as 36 hours. Although it is possible that Shipman saw Mr Brown after this visit during the evening or night of his death, this seems unlikely. There is no positive evidence to suggest that he did so. It follows that I think it very unlikely that Shipman caused Mr Brown's death directly by giving him a lethal dose of opiate. Mr Brown lived for an appreciable period after Shipman's last visit. In any event, I think it extremely unlikely that Shipman would have risked abusing opiate drugs in an institution so soon after his arrival in Hyde.
However, I cannot discount the possibility that Shipman over-sedated Mr Brown in the last day or so of his life. If over-sedated, Mr Brown would have been very vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in the elderly. It is possible that Shipman indirectly hastened Mr Brown's death in this way.
My conclusion is that I think it likely that Mr Brown's death was natural but I cannot completely rule out the possibility that Shipman was unlawfully involved.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001