The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Ivy Birchall
Introduction
Mrs Mary Ivy Birchall died at her home, 170 Lower Bennett Street, Hyde on Sunday, 3rd
June 1984 at the age of 63. It is unclear whether or not she was registered as a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mr Brian William Birchall, Mrs Birchall's son, as the informant. Mr Brian Birchall responded to the Inquiry's request for further information and the death has now been investigated.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Brian Birchall, Ms Mary Edwards (the former partner of Mr Geoffrey Walter Birchall, Mrs Birchall's son, now deceased) and Ms Mary Bradshaw (a friend and neighbour of Mrs Birchall). The Inquiry has also had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Mrs Birchall's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Birchall was a widow and enjoyed good health until the last year of her life. She then began to suffer from stomach pains. Ms Edwards says that, about six months before she died, Mrs Birchall was admitted to hospital for an operation to remove gallstones. During her stay in hospital, it was found that she had cancer. Mr Brian Birchall recalls that the period between the diagnosis of cancer and death was much shorter, only about three weeks. Ms Bradshaw thinks that the cancer was diagnosed three to four months before Mrs Birchall died.
Before being admitted to hospital, Mrs Birchall lived alone. However, on her discharge from hospital, she went to live with Mr Geoffrey Birchall and his partner. Ms Edwards says that, not long after that, she and Mr Geoffrey Birchall were told by the hospital staff that Mrs Birchall had cancer and would not live long. This was not discussed with Mrs Birchall.
Ms Edwards says that Mrs Birchall was registered with a doctor at Clarendon House and that her only contact with Shipman came about because Ms Edwards was registered as a patient with him. Mr Brian Birchall is of the opinion that his mother was formerly registered with Shipman but changed doctors not long before her death. Ms Bradshaw is of the opinion that Mrs Birchall was registered with Shipman.
Ms Edwards says that, soon after Mrs Birchall came to live with her and Mr Birchall, Mrs Birchall deteriorated and was confined to bed for about six months. She could not get up without assistance. She was in pain and was prescribed daily morphine tablets by the hospital doctor. However, in the last few days of her life, Mrs Birchall's pain was worse than usual and Ms Edwards contacted Shipman, her own doctor, who came out to see Mrs Birchall on, she thinks, Thursday, 31st
May 1984. He examined Mrs Birchall alone and then told Ms Edwards that, if Mrs Birchall appeared to be uncomfortable or in pain, she should be given a double dose of morphine. After the dose was doubled, Mrs Birchall became very sleepy.
Ms Bradshaw visited Mrs Birchall a few days before her death, probably on Wednesday, 30th
May, and found that her friend did not recognise her. She formed the view that Mrs Birchall was dying.
Mrs Birchall's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 31st
May. However, it does appear on Monday, 14th
May and Tuesday, 29th
May.
The Day of the Death
Ms Edwards says that, on the morning of 3rd
June 1984, Mrs Birchall awoke at about 8am, as usual. She appeared to be much the same as before and was drifting in and out of sleep. At about 11am, Mrs Birchall started making 'strange noises' and Mr Geoffrey Birchall thought she might want a drink. He fetched a glass of water and lifted her head to give it to her. When he put her head down, she had stopped breathing.
Ms Edwards does not recall Shipman coming to the house on the day that Mrs Birchall died and thinks that Shipman did not see Mrs Birchall in the last few days of her life.
Mr Brian Birchall recalls that his brother came to him at about 12.30pm to tell him of the death. He says that his brother told him that the doctor had visited Mrs Birchall that morning, had given her an injection for her pain and that she had died shortly afterwards. Mr Brian Birchall does not know who that doctor was and was under the impression that his mother had registered with a doctor other than Shipman.
Mrs Birchall's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for Sunday, 3rd
June 1984. According to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, Dr Carroll was on duty on that day, although it is not possible to establish during what hours he remained on duty.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded, in error, that Mrs Birchall had died on 3rd
April 1984, when in fact she had died on 3rd
June 1984. He said that he had last seen her alive on 31st
May. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 4th
June 1984.
Mrs Birchall was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
I am entirely satisfied that Mrs Birchall died a natural death of the causes certified by Shipman. Although the witness accounts differ in some respects, all the witnesses say that she was suffering from terminal cancer and that her life expectancy was short. Mr Brian Birchall now recalls that his mother's death was sudden, in that he had expected her to live longer, even though he knew that she was terminally ill. From the description given by Ms Edwards, it would appear that Mrs Birchall was known to be quite close to death.
The evidence suggests that Shipman last saw Mrs Birchall alive on Wednesday, 31st
May. That is what he stated on the MCCD counterfoil and Ms Edwards agrees. Shipman cannot have given Mrs Birchall a lethal injection of opiates on that day, as, if he had done so, she would not have survived until Sunday morning. Although it is possible that Shipman administered an injection of a sedative on that day, for example Largactil, which could have indirectly hastened her death, in the circumstances it is extremely unlikely that he did so.
Mr Brian Birchall recalls that his brother told him that a doctor had been called out on the day of the death and had given an injection, after which Mrs Birchall died. This is a hearsay account of an event that is said to have occurred about 17 years ago. It is not consistent with the evidence of Ms Edwards, who was present at the house when Mrs Birchall died. On her account, neither Shipman nor any other doctor attended in the hours before Mrs Birchall died. In any event, it appears that Shipman was not on weekend duty on 3rd
June. I think it unlikely that any doctor attended that morning and there is no evidence at all that Shipman was there.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001