The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Doris Bridge
Introduction
Mrs Doris Bridge died at her home, 20 Gower Road, Hyde on Monday, 26th
March 1984 at the age of 83. She was a patient of Shipman and thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis, due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Bridge's niece, Mrs Barbara Sleigh. In her reply, Mrs Sleigh expressed concern about the circumstances of her aunt's death. The Inquiry took statements from Mrs Sleigh, Mr Andrew Sleigh, her son, and Mrs Jacqueline Hodkinson, Mrs Bridge's neighbour. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate').
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Bridge was a widow who lived alone. Mrs Sleigh recalls that her aunt suffered from angina, for which she took glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) tablets. She also had Ménière's disease with tinnitus and vertigo. She had suffered from chronic stomach problems. Mrs Bridge was very open about her illnesses and enjoyed discussing her health with her family. The evidence does not suggest that her health deteriorated in the weeks leading up to her death.
The Day of the Death
Some time after 9am on the morning of Monday, 26th
March, Mrs Bridge telephoned Mrs Sleigh and said that she was in pain. Mrs Sleigh gathered that it was chest pain. Mrs Bridge asked her niece to telephone the surgery and then to come to her house. She said that there was no hurry because she was expecting her home help later that morning. Mrs Sleigh spent quite some time trying to get through to the surgery, which was not unusual when it was busy. She eventually spoke to Shipman who said that, if Mrs Bridge were having a heart attack, she would still be in pain by the time Mrs Sleigh reached her house. He said that, if it were only an attack of angina, the symptoms would last for about half an hour and then subside. After Mrs Sleigh had spoken to Shipman, she immediately went to her aunt's home. She estimates that it took her half an hour to get there and she thinks that she arrived at about 9.45am. Gower Road is off the main A627 Dowson Road, just over half a mile from Shipman's surgery. Shipman would have had time to visit Mrs Bridge in the half hour after he spoke to Mrs Sleigh, but he would usually be very busy with surgery appointments at that time of the morning.
When Mrs Sleigh arrived at her aunt's house, she realised that she had forgotten the key, which was of a Yale type. She looked through the front window and saw her aunt in the sitting room, lying back in her chair facing the window. She thought that Mrs Bridge had suffered a stroke or was dead. She did not look as if she were asleep. Her feet were at a 'funny angle' with her slippers hanging off. Mrs Sleigh went to Mrs Hodkinson's house from where she telephoned her son and asked him to bring the key. Mrs Hodkinson thinks that Mrs Sleigh arrived at her house at about 9.30am.
When her son arrived, he and Mrs Sleigh went into the house. Mr Sleigh recalls seeing his aunt sitting in a chair. He noticed that she was dressed in her normal day clothes and that she looked very comfortable in her chair. Her mouth was open, her head was leaning against the headrest and her face was expressionless. She looked to him as though she had just fallen asleep.
Shipman was contacted and he came to the house very quickly. He lifted Mrs Bridge's eyelids and said, 'The eyes go first'. Shipman told the family that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination because he had seen Mrs Bridge within the last fortnight. Mrs Sleigh doubts this, as she thinks that, if her aunt had seen Shipman, she would have known about it.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Bridge died of a coronary thrombosis on 26th
March 1984. He said that the thrombosis was due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension. He said that he had last seen Mrs Bridge alive on 2nd
March. He stated that he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. Mrs Bridge's name does not appear in the visits book for 2nd
March or at any time between then and the day of the death. It is possible that Shipman had seen Mrs Bridge at the surgery during this time. The Donneybrook appointments sheets have not survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Bridge had a history of angina and was at increased risk of heart attack. The evidence suggests that she may well have been suffering chest pain on the morning of her death, although she herself does not seem to have been unduly alarmed about her symptoms. I think, however, that Mrs Sleigh must have been quite worried, as she appears to have given an account to the receptionists which resulted in a personal telephone conversation with Shipman. That was quite unusual. It is quite possible that Mrs Bridge could have died of a heart attack that morning.
On the other hand, there are some causes to suspect that Shipman might have been involved in the death. Mrs Sleigh obviously told Shipman that her aunt had chest pain. I think there was then a discussion about how long it would take for Mrs Sleigh to reach her aunt's house. It sounds as though she estimated that it would take about half an hour. Shipman then said that, if Mrs Bridge were only suffering an angina attack, it would be over within half an hour. If it were a heart attack, it would still be happening when Mrs Sleigh arrived. What he does not seem to have suggested is that, in case Mrs Bridge were having a heart attack, it would be prudent to call an ambulance or at least arrange for someone to sit with her so that an ambulance could be called if necessary. If Shipman had it in mind to kill Mrs Bridge, as he could have done after this conversation, he would have known for how long Mrs Bridge would be alone. Shipman would have had time to visit in the half hour before Mrs Sleigh could arrive but it would be most inconvenient for him to do so, as he would usually be very busy at that time of the morning. It is possible that he would have felt able to justify the disruption of his surgery appointments on the ground that he had to deal with an emergency. In their generic evidence, the Market Street Surgery staff say that if they received a telephone call of a report of something sounding like a heart attack, Shipman would either attend immediately or instruct them to call an ambulance. When he gave evidence at the trial, Shipman said that, in an emergency, he would leave patients to wait in the surgery. It does not appear that, in this case, there was ever any question of calling an ambulance. It is possible that Shipman 'dropped everything' and went to Mrs Bridge's house. She could have let him in. He could have given her an injection, supposedly to relieve her chest pain and, if the injection were a lethal dose of opiate given intravenously, she would have been dead within a few minutes. Shipman could then have left the house, closing the door behind him, and returned to continue his surgery appointments. What militates against this theory is that he would have had to give some account to the staff when he returned. He obviously could not have said that he had found Mrs Bridge dead. If he wanted to say that, he would have had to stay at the house until Mrs Sleigh arrived. He could not return to say that Mrs Bridge was very ill but still alive, as it would obviously not have been right to leave her. If he had returned to say that she was in a satisfactory state and within a short time Mrs Sleigh had telephoned to say that she had found Mrs Bridge dead, the staff might have been suspicious. However, it must be said that Shipman appears to have had the complete confidence of his staff. The Market Street staff do not appear to have suspected him even when he had killed several patients in the surgery.
Mrs Sleigh's recollection of her aunt's appearance in death is consistent with her having died a natural death due to coronary thrombosis, although it certainly does not exclude death by lethal injection of opiate. Mr Sleigh's recollection is that Mrs Bridge looked as though she was asleep and this suggests that death by intravenous injection is more likely. The evidence as to Mrs Bridge's appearance in death is, therefore, inconclusive.
The history of sudden onset of probable chest pain indicates that this could well have been a natural death. However, the circumstances in which Shipman was alerted to Mrs Bridge's acute condition, and the fact that he had the opportunity to visit her and that she died so quickly, are suspicious features. Although this case gives rise to suspicion, I do not feel able to say whether it is likely that Shipman killed Mrs Bridge or that she died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001