The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Brierley
Introduction
Mrs Edith Brierley died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Wednesday, 11th
February 1998 at the age of 90. She had been a patient of Shipman since moving to Hyde Nursing Home in October 1997, about four months before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
Mrs Brierley's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took witness statements from Mr Kenneth Neil Brierley (Mrs Brierley's son), Dr Alan Banks (the Assistant Director of Primary Care for West Pennine Health Authority) and Detective Sergeant John Ashley of the Greater Manchester Police, who conducted an audit trail of Shipman's surgery computer.
Shipman has not been prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Brierley, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mr Brierley and has had access to Mrs Brierley's general practitioner and hospital records and to the appointments sheets, visits book and other practice documents for 1995 recovered from the Market Street Surgery. The Inquiry has also obtained Mrs Brierley's file from Hyde Nursing Home, containing care assistant notes and daily evaluation records.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Brierley was a widow. She suffered from diabetes and Alzheimer's disease. In August 1997, she was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a history of falls. From there, she was transferred, first, to the Shire Hill Hospital in Glossop and then, in October 1997, to Hyde Nursing Home.
In early 1998, Mr Brierley noticed a slight deterioration in his mother's condition. Members of staff at Hyde Nursing Home told him that Mrs Brierley had suffered a minor stroke. The computerised medical records note a diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident or stroke on 23rd
January 1998, with a further entry recording facial weakness and a stroke on 27th
January 1998. The Hyde Nursing Home notes record Shipman's attendance in respect of the stroke on 27th
January 1998 and 3rd
February 1998.
Mr Brierley last saw his mother alive on Sunday, 8th
February 1998. When he arrived at the Home, Mr Brierley was surprised to find that his mother was in her own room rather than in the sitting room where he usually found her. Although Mr Brierley was able to talk to his mother, she was quieter than usual and drifted in and out of sleep during the visit.
The Hyde Nursing Home notes record that, on 9th
February 1998, Mrs Brierley slept a great deal and was reluctant to eat or drink.
The Events of 10th
and 11th
February 1998
The Hyde Nursing Home note for 10th
February records that Mrs Brierley was wakened at about 11am and was allowed to stay in bed as she was not well. Mrs Brierley's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 10th
February with the entry:
'VERY GREY/VERY CHESTY'
. The care assistant notes record that Mrs Brierley's condition remained poor during the afternoon and that she was seen by Shipman.
The following record, which is dated 10th
February 1998, was entered into Shipman's surgery computer shortly after 3pm on 11th
February:
'CVA unspecified
...
extending no action relatives to be told'
.
The final entry in Mrs Brierley's handwritten medical records appears to be dated 12th
February 1998 but could well relate to the visit on 10th February 1998 and records as follows:
'CVA: further progression
(
illegible
)
poorly
stop Rx
(
treatment
)(
illegible
)
Relatives to be told CVA let nature
take its course'
.
These two entries suggest that Mrs Brierley had had a stroke, which was extending or developing, that Shipman had decided that no action should be taken and that he had asked that Mrs Brierley's relatives should be told, presumably, that she would not have long to live.
Shipman's visit on 10th
February is also recorded in the medical intervention record of the Hyde Nursing Home notes and the reason for the visit is given as
'? Extension to CVA'
. The
'outcome'
was recorded to be:
'Has extended. To discontinue treatment For TLC will visit tomorrow. Family informed'
. TLC means tender loving care.
According to the appointments sheets for 10th
February 1998, Shipman was scheduled to attend the Tai Pan restaurant, probably in Manchester, at 7pm.
Mr Brierley remembers receiving a telephone call from a member of staff at the home between 10pm and 11pm on 10th
February. The member of staff said that she was worried about Mrs Brierley's condition and that she might have to call out a doctor.
The daily evaluation notes from Hyde Nursing Home record that this call was made at 10.30pm. The next entry was made at 2.45am the following morning and records as follows:
'General condition deteriorating
No vital signs
G.P. informed, Son, Mr K Brierley
Informed'
.
The final entry was recorded at 4am and reads:
'Seen by GP. CERTIFIED DEAD
UNDERTAKER INFORMED'
.
An attendance slip from Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman, records that Dr Ahmad had certified the fact of Mrs Brierley's death at 4.21am on 11th
February and that she had died at 2.45am that day.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. The approximate interval between the onset and death was said to be five days. Diabetes mellitus of one year and Alzheimer's dementia of two years were certified to be conditions contributing to death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Brierley alive on 10th
February. The MCCD is dated 11th
February 1998.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Brierley had died at 2.30am on 11th
February 1998. He said he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 18 months, although it appears that he had, in fact, been her ordinary medical attendant for a period of only four months. He said he had attended her during her last illness for seven days. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Brierley alive 12 hours before death and had seen her body three days after the death. The immediate cause of death was given as cerebrovascular accident, as on the MCCD. However, Shipman said that diabetes mellitus was an underlying cause and did not refer to Alzheimer's dementia at all. I am sure that his description of diabetes mellitus as an underlying cause was an error. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 12 hours. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by the staff at the home. He said that
'Night sister Brookes'
had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Brierley's medical records and then separately the cremation certificate. In respect of each he concluded that the death of Mrs Brierley did not give rise to suspicion. He commented:
'The history is compatible with the cause of death - a gradually extending CVA, with death occurring in the early morning'
.
Dr Banks examined Mrs Brierley's medical records and also concluded that the cause of death was consistent with the medical history of cerebrovascular accident.
Conclusion
Mrs Brierley was of advanced years and had become very frail. Her gradual deterioration in the days leading up to her death is documented in the Hyde Nursing Home notes as well as the medical records completed by Shipman. Her death was not unexpected.
It is not known at what time Shipman visited Mrs Brierley on 10th
February 1998. However, the note recording his attendance in the care assistant notes kept by the home comes before an entry timed at 9.45pm, which would suggest that Shipman must have visited before that time. The possibility that Shipman administered a lethal dose of opiates during his visit on 10th
February can be ruled out. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiates were administered intravenously then death would follow within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal dose of opiates would cause death within about an hour. Mrs Brierley did not die until 2.45am on 11th
February, at least 12 hours after Shipman's visit and probably longer. There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Brierley again either later in the day or in the early hours of 11th
February.
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Brierley died of natural causes, almost certainly of a cerebrovascular accident as certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001