The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Mary Burke
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Mary Burke died at her home, 44 Carter Place, Hyde on Tuesday, 26th
September 1989 at the age of 82. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Burke's niece, Mrs Doreen Pritchard, and her husband, Mr Frank Pritchard, and from Mrs Burke's home help, Mrs Angela May Beech. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and a printout of Mrs Burke's computerised medical records, which contains only her personal details.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Burke was a widow who lived alone. Mrs Pritchard has told the Inquiry that her aunt was a very active woman who suffered from angina and diabetes, but was otherwise in good health.
Mrs Beech last saw Mrs Burke during the week before she died, although she cannot now be sure on which day. Mrs Beech recalls that Mrs Burke was not well and was worried about a build-up of fluid in her legs. Mrs Beech advised her that, if she were no better by the weekend, she should telephone for her doctor.
Mrs Pritchard last saw her aunt on the Saturday before her death. She recalls that her aunt had a bad cold but was otherwise in reasonably good spirits. Mrs Burke did not mention that she was expecting a visit from the doctor the following week. Mrs Pritchard has told the Inquiry that her aunt did not complain about fluid build-up in her legs and feels sure she would have mentioned this if it was causing her concern.
The Day of the Death
Between about 10am and 10.30am on Tuesday, 26th
September, Mr Pritchard received a telephone call from Shipman. Shipman said that he was with Mrs Burke and that she had died. He did not say whether Mrs Burke had asked him to visit or whether he had just called in. Mr Pritchard contacted his wife at work and they both went to Mrs Burke's flat. Shipman had left by the time they arrived but a neighbour, who lived in a flat above Mrs Burke, was present. This neighbour has not been identified. It would seem likely that Shipman summoned the neighbour to stay with the body.
Mrs Burke was sitting in a chair. She was wearing her day clothes. She looked very peaceful, as if she was sleeping.
Mrs Burke's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. The computerised medical records are of no assistance.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Burke had died at home on 26th
September 1989 as the result of left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He had examined the body after death and said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Burke was buried in Hyde Cemetery so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
The circumstances of Mrs Burke's death give rise to strong suspicion that Shipman killed her.
Shipman appears to have been present at the death. He said on the MCCD counterfoil that he had seen Mrs Burke alive on the day of the death and that he had examined her body after death. From the telephone call to Mr Pritchard, it appears highly likely that he was present at the death. That factor in itself gives rise to a strong suspicion that Shipman caused this death. Dr John Grenville has said that it is most unusual for a patient to die during a general practitioner's home visit, unless the patient is known to be terminally ill, or the doctor has been called out in an emergency where it appears that the patient is suffering from symptoms of a life-threatening condition such as heart attack or stroke. Here, there is no history of terminal illness or an emergency call. Indeed, the entry in Shipman's visits book is typical of what is seen when he is responding to a non-urgent call. I think it likely that Mrs Burke asked Shipman to visit, either because she was concerned about her swollen ankles or because she had a cold, or possibly both. That she should die during his visit is highly suspicious.
Mrs Burke's peaceful appearance in death does not suggest that she died as a result of left ventricular failure. In giving his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr Grenville said:
'When the left ventricle fails acutely blood from the left ventricle is not pumped out into the rest of the body. The right ventricle continues to pump blood into the lungs but it cannot progress from there into the left side of the heart. Blood therefore accumulates rapidly in the small blood vessels of the lungs. The pressure in these small blood vessels increases and they rupture into the air spaces of the lungs. This causes sudden severe breathlessness. Air cannot be moved into the air spaces of the lungs since they become full of fluid and blood is no longer circulating through the lungs and into the rest of the body so death ensues due to lack of oxygenated blood to the vital organs. The severe breathlessness of acute left ventricular failure is usually accompanied by the appearance of foam, often blood stained at the mouth and nose. This is the fluid which has been released into the lungs and which then rises up through the airways. The mechanism of death in acute left ventricular failure is analogous to drowning or suffocation and the patient is usually extremely distressed. Patients in acute left ventricular failure feel slightly less uncomfortable sitting upright or standing and they often try to get more air by loosening their clothing and opening doors and windows because of the feeling of suffocation'
.
It follows that Mrs Burke's position and appearance in death were not typical of what is seen following death due to left ventricular failure. They were, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by intravenous injection of a lethal dose of strong opiate.
It seems to me highly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Burke. I stop short of saying that I am sure that he did only because I am not quite sure that Shipman was present at the death. However, it seems most likely that he was and, if he was, I am satisfied that he killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001