The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Margery Bateman
Introduction
Mrs Margery Bateman died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), probably on Ward 6, on Tuesday, 25th
August 1970 at the age of 55. She had been admitted to PGI a few days before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was secondary carcinoma of the liver,
‘Probably due to’
melanoma in the right eye, which had been excised six years before. At the time of Mrs Bateman’s death, Shipman was a house officer in surgery.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr John David Bateman, Mrs Bateman’s son. A member of the Inquiry team has also spoken to Mr Arnold Whittle, Mrs Bateman’s nephew. Mr John Bateman senior, Mrs Bateman’s husband, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has also had access to some of Mrs Bateman’s hospital records. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents. However, these are incomplete and do not include the records relating to the period immediately before Mrs Bateman’s death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Bateman was married and living with her husband. She worked in a factory which made electrical components. According to Mr Bateman, about five years before she died, his mother was involved in an accident at work when a piece of wire caught her in the eye. She underwent an operation in Manchester and her eye was removed. The medical records available to the Inquiry cast doubt upon the accuracy of Mr Bateman’s recollection of the nature of the problem leading to the removal of his mother’s eye. However, Mr Bateman says that he is sure that his mother’s eye had to be removed as the result of an accident at work.
Mrs Bateman apparently made a good recovery from the operation and after a while returned to work at the factory. She continued to drive, despite the fact that she had only one eye. Mr Bateman moved to the West Midlands about two years before his mother died and she would drive over to visit him every fortnight. Mr Bateman regularly returned to Pontefract to see his parents. He last saw his mother about two weeks before she died and he recalls that she appeared perfectly normal and did not mention that she was suffering from any illness.
Circumstances Leading to the Death
The precise circumstances of Mrs Bateman’s admission to hospital are not known. A few days before her death, Mr Bateman received a message from his father saying that Mrs Bateman had been taken into hospital. Mr Bateman planned to go to Pontefract that coming weekend. A few days later, on what Mr Bateman thought was a Friday but must have been Monday, 24th
August, his father telephoned and told him that his mother was very poorly. Mr Bateman resolved to return home the next morning. However, early the next morning, he received a telegram which said
‘Mother dead’
. Mr Bateman says that the news came as a terrible shock. He was not aware that his mother had been seriously ill. Mr Bateman’s understanding at the time was that Mrs Bateman had died of
‘yellow jaundice’
. Mr Bateman does not remember his late father ever talking about the circumstances of the death.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker reviewed the available medical records, which date back to 1964. It appears that Mrs Bateman was first referred to PGI in 1964 because her eyesight was poor. At the first attendance in July 1964, it was found that she had a large detachment of the retina of the right eye. The eye was removed and it is clear from the histology that Mrs Bateman was suffering from a malignant melanoma of the uvea.
As I have explained, Mr Bateman does not think that his mother’s eye was removed because of a melanoma. He thinks her eye was injured at work. I do not doubt that that is what Mr Bateman was given to believe. In those days some doctors were reluctant to tell their patients that they had a malignant condition. Also, some patients were reluctant to tell their families and friends that they had such a condition. It is not surprising that Mr Bateman did not know that his mother had ever had a malignant condition.
Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has advised me that it is well recognised that melanomas give rise to a grave risk of secondary cancers. A secondary cancer of the liver would have caused jaundice, or yellowing of the skin. Also, it is entirely possible that Mrs Bateman’s condition progressed quite quickly.
Certification
Shipman certified the cause of Mrs Bateman’s death at a time when he was working as a house officer on a surgical ward. That suggests that Mrs Bateman might have been about to undergo an operation. I think it likely that, if she had recently had an operation, Mr Bateman would have known about it.
As I have said, Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Bateman’s death was secondary carcinoma of the liver,
‘Probably due to’
melanoma in the right eye.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records relating to the period preceding Mrs Bateman’s death, it is impossible to reach any definite conclusion about the nature of her last illness. However, the existence of records dating back to 1964, which record the removal of her right eye and the histology result showing the presence of a melanoma, suggest that the cause of death might well have been carcinoma of the liver, secondary to the earlier melanoma. Mr Bateman’s understanding that his mother died of
‘yellow jaundice’
is not inconsistent with this cause of death. Because the relevant medical records have not survived and there never were any cremation certificates, there is no information available to the Inquiry which sheds light on the part Shipman played in the treatment of Mrs Bateman before her death. However, on the basis of the evidence available to the Inquiry, I feel able to reassure Mr Bateman that there is no reason to suspect that Shipman played any sinister role in his mother’s death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001