The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Charles Lyndon Bailey
Introduction
Mr Charles Lyndon Bailey died at Ackton Hospital, an annexe of Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), on Wednesday, 5th
May 1971 at the age of 46. He had been admitted three or four days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was myocardial infarction. At the time of the death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Bailey’s son, Mr Stuart Anthony Bailey. Mr Bailey’s hospital records are no longer available. No post-mortem examination was performed. Mr Bailey was cremated at Cantley Crematorium but the cremation forms relating to his death have been destroyed.
Members of Mr Bailey’s family were concerned at the time of his death because his warfarin medication was withdrawn shortly before his death. They feared that this might have contributed to the death. His son is now also concerned, understandably, knowing that Shipman might have been involved in treating his father.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Bailey was living at home with his wife, his son (then aged 22) and his daughter. He was an overman in a colliery. About 18 months before he died, Mr Bailey began to suffer occasional chest pains. His general practitioner initially diagnosed indigestion but one night, about a month after the initial onset of chest pain, Mr Bailey suffered what his son describes as a
‘particularly agonising’
attack. He was admitted to hospital and was in intensive care for a week. During that admission, the family was told that there was nothing wrong with Mr Bailey’s heart but that there was a problem with the clotting of his blood, which was, in turn, causing heart problems. He was prescribed warfarin, which thins the blood. After this illness, Mr Bailey was absent from work for six months but eventually returned, apparently fit and well.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Stuart Bailey remembers that, three or four days before his death, his father was admitted to Ackton Hospital for routine tests. Although Mr Bailey was accommodated at Ackton Hospital, the tests were undertaken at PGI, to and from where he and other patients were apparently transported each day by ambulance.
Mr Stuart Bailey and his mother visited Mr Bailey at Ackton Hospital in the evenings. Mr Bailey was well; he had made friends with some of the other patients and would go for a walk in the grounds or sit on the benches talking. On Mr Stuart Bailey’s first visit, his father told him that his warfarin medication had been stopped.
I have discussed the likely explanation for this admission with Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry. He has told me that, at the time of his first admission to hospital, Mr Bailey had probably been diagnosed as having had a myocardial infarction or heart attack. In the 1970s, warfarin was used prophylactically, in an attempt to avoid any further heart attacks. However, it is likely that those treating Mr Bailey were concerned that he should not remain on warfarin in the long term. Long-term use carries the risk of complications. Dr Esmail is not sure why the doctors would have wished to have Mr Bailey in hospital while they withdrew him from warfarin but surmises that they must have wished to carry out some tests on his cardiac function.
The Day of the Death
At about 2.30-3pm on 5th
May, Mr Stuart Bailey received a telephone call at work from his mother. She said that the staff at Ackton Hospital had asked her to go there immediately. An hour earlier, she had been told by her husband that he was ready to go home and could be picked up as soon as was convenient for the family. Mr Stuart Bailey collected his mother from her workplace in Wakefield and they went straight to the hospital. On the bed that Mr Bailey normally occupied, his bag was packed and ready. However, in the bed that was nearest the entrance to the ward, medical and nursing staff were attending to Mr Bailey. The curtains had been pulled around his bed. A young man in a white coat was leaning over him and two or three nurses were actively involved in his treatment. They were trying to put an oxygen mask on him but Mr Bailey was very agitated and was saying words to the effect of
‘why don’t you do something?’
After a few seconds, Mr Stuart Bailey and his mother were taken to the sister’s office. After about ten minutes, they were told that Mr Bailey had died. When Mr Stuart Bailey asked the nurse why his father had been taken off his medication, the nurse said that she did not know and that she was sorry.
Mr Stuart Bailey and his mother then went outside where they met another patient who was in tears. He said that he had been playing draughts with Mr Bailey and that they had been talking about him going home. I deduce from this that Mr Bailey had suddenly collapsed whilst in the company of this other patient.
Certification
As I have said, Shipman certified the cause of Mr Bailey’s death. Shipman would not normally have attended patients at Ackton Hospital but there were occasions when he deputised for Dr Robert Forster, who was the part-time medical officer, later hospital practitioner, at Ackton Hospital. This may have been one such occasion. If Shipman was the doctor who was present at the time of Mr Bailey’s death (and there is no direct evidence that he was), it is also possible that he was summoned there from PGI to attend to Mr Bailey’s collapse rather than being present at Ackton Hospital at or before the time of the collapse. Of course, since it was intended that Mr Bailey should soon return home, there would be absolutely no reason for him to be seen by a doctor unless he suffered a turn for the worse. The decision that he could go home had already been made. It is likely that Shipman was able to sign the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death either because he had been involved in treating Mr Bailey at PGI or because he had treated him at Ackton Hospital.
Conclusion
On the basis of the evidence before me, a fairly clear picture emerges that Mr Bailey had a history of heart disease which had already given rise to one quite serious heart attack. After that, he was being successfully treated with warfarin but it was thought advisable to attempt to end that treatment. After a period of in-patient assessment, Mr Bailey suddenly collapsed and died, just before he was about to go home. This death was particularly sudden and shocking for the family and I can well understand their concern, particularly after learning that Shipman had certified the cause of death. I hope that this decision will serve to reassure them that it is highly likely that Mr Bailey’s death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001