The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Mary Jane Binns
Introduction
Mrs Mary Jane Binns died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 20th
April 1972 at the age of 77. She had been admitted to PGI two or three days previously. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to diabetes mellitus. At the time of Mrs Binns’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Binns’ daughter-in-law, Mrs Dora Binns (the wife of Mrs Binns’ son, Mr Ernest Binns, who is now dead), and her grandson, Mr Brian Binns (Mrs Dora Binns’ son). Mrs Binns’ hospital records are no longer available. No post-mortem examination was performed. Mrs Binns was buried and so there are no cremation forms.
Mrs Dora Binns told the Inquiry that, although the family had been shocked at the suddenness of Mrs Binns’ death, they did not suspect anything untoward until she saw that Shipman had recorded diabetes mellitus as a contributory cause of death. She is certain that her mother-in-law did not suffer from that condition.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Mary Binns was a widow and, at the time of her death, had lived alone for about 15 years. She was fit and healthy. She was of an independent spirit and preferred to do her housework, even heavy work, herself rather than relying on help from others. Right until the time of her admission to PGI, she did her own gardening and brought her coal into the house from the cellar. She had an active social life and regularly used to go out on day trips with friends. She went out and about using public transport. So far as her daughter-in-law was aware, she had no health problems, was not taking any medication and had never been in hospital. Mrs Dora Binns is sure that, if Mrs Binns had had any serious health concerns, she or her husband would have known about them. They lived in York and saw Mrs Binns, who lived in Ackworth, near Pontefract, at least once a fortnight. Mr Brian Binns also saw his grandmother quite regularly.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On the morning of the day she was admitted to PGI, Mrs Binns suffered a fall. A neighbour called for an ambulance, which took Mrs Binns to PGI. At about 11am, the neighbour also telephoned Mrs Dora Binns and gave her the news. The neighbour said that Mrs Binns had not lost consciousness and had not wanted to go to hospital. No physical injuries were apparent and the cause of the fall was not known.
Mr Brian Binns, who was a young police officer at the time, visited Mrs Binns with his father that evening. They stayed for about 30 minutes. Mrs Binns was on the main ward, sitting up in bed and fully conscious, and seemed to be suffering no ill effects from her fall. According to Mr Brian Binns, his grandmother was quite lucid and was able to give a clear account of events. She told him that, when the ambulance crew had arrived to take her to hospital, she had at first thought that it was he who had arrived, because of the similarity of the uniforms they wore. She was speaking normally, did not appear weak and, according to her daughter-in-law, was agitating to go home.
Mr Brian Binns remembers that a doctor told him that Mrs Binns was being kept in hospital to undergo some tests. The doctor did not say what he thought was wrong with Mrs Binns. Mr Brian Binns and his father left PGI feeling confident that Mrs Binns would be discharged after a few days.
Mrs Dora Binns did not visit her mother-in-law in hospital but she says that she formed the impression from conversations with her husband that Mrs Binns was not seriously ill and would soon be coming home. It is not clear on how many occasions, after the first day, Mr Ernest Binns visited his mother and reported her condition to his wife.
The Day of the Death
According to Mrs Dora Binns, on the afternoon of 20th
April, which would have been two or three days after Mrs Binns’ admission to hospital, Mr Ernest Binns received a telephone call informing him that his mother had died. Mr Brian Binns thinks (but is not sure) that the hospital telephoned his father with news of the death (rather than with news of deterioration) and that the telephone call was probably received at some time between 4pm and 7pm. The whole family was shocked by the suddenness of the death.
Certification
Mr Ernest Binns dealt with the arrangements for Mrs Binns’ burial. This means that it was probably he who collected the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death from PGI and it was certainly he who registered the death. He would have been given at least one copy of the death certificate. As I have said, the death was said to have been due to a cerebrovascular accident due to diabetes mellitus. Mrs Dora Binns saw a copy of the death certificate for the first time in 2004 and expressed surprise and disbelief on seeing the reference to diabetes. She is sure that her mother-in-law did not have that condition. It is possible that the condition was of late onset and had not been diagnosed until Mrs Binns was admitted to hospital and that this explains her lack of knowledge.
Conclusion
In the absence of any medical records or any evidence from a witness who visited her shortly before her death, it is impossible to say with any confidence what Mrs Binns’ medical condition was. It is quite possible that her fall occurred because she had had a stroke but that her level of consciousness had not been affected. It is also possible that the stroke progressed during the next few days and that she died a natural death on 20th
April.
In the absence of cremation forms, nothing is known of the circumstances of the death. I regret to say that there is insufficient information for me to reach any conclusion at all about this death.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001