The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Louis Bastow
Introduction
Mr Louis Bastow died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 22nd
May 1972 at the age of 72. He had probably been admitted to PGI two days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis. Uraemia was said to be a contributory cause of death. At the time of Mr Bastow’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Bastow’s daughter, Mrs Mary Long, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). No statement has been taken from Mrs Long, who suffers from impaired hearing, but her daughter, Mrs Angela Lang, provided a witness statement to the Inquiry after discussing the circumstances of Mr Bastow’s death with her mother. Mrs Jennifer Bratley (formerly Miss Jennifer Buckley), who worked as a day sister on Ward 2 at the time, also provided a witness statement. Mr Bastow’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. Mr Bastow’s hospital records are no longer available. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mr Bastow’s death was expected, although Mrs Lang was surprised to note on cremation Form B that Shipman had suggested that Mr Bastow had died of a cardiac arrest lasting minutes. She had always assumed that it was a combination of kidney failure and angina that had killed him.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
At the time of his last admission to hospital, Mr Bastow was living with his wife. He was a retired railway engineer. He had suffered from angina for 20 years and walked with a stick. He took various types of medication. Mrs Lang remembers that her grandfather’s health deteriorated over the last 12 months of his life.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
By the middle of May 1972, Mr Bastow’s health was very poor. He was unable to manage the stairs and his bed had been brought downstairs. His wife was caring for him and his daughter visited every day. He had lost weight, he had little energy and his face was grey and sunken. His granddaughter says that she thinks that
‘he had had enough’
. His general practitioner (GP) visited him every day.
Although neither Mrs Long nor Mrs Lang can remember the precise circumstances that led to Mr Bastow’s admission to PGI, it seems likely that this was recommended by the GP after discussion with Mrs Bastow. Mr Bastow must have been taken to hospital by ambulance; by the time of his admission, he was unable even to sit up in bed.
In-Patient Treatment
Mrs Long visited her father in hospital. She believes that he was in a side room in which his was the only bed. The evidence from the staff at the hospital suggests that patients were accommodated in such cubicles or side rooms when they were seriously ill, or when death was thought to be imminent. On the basis of Mrs Long’s description of her father’s condition, I am sure that that is the reason why Mr Bastow was accommodated in a side room. She recalls that her father’s appearance was
‘horrible’
. He did not recognise her, his eyes were closed for most of the time and he looked very drawn. He was not being given active treatment.
Mrs Long remembers that, at one stage, she and her husband were told by a young doctor that her father had suffered severe kidney damage because of tablets he had been taking for hypertension. That was the only occasion on which Mrs Long remembers seeing or speaking to a doctor.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Long visited her father on the evening of the day of his death. Visiting time was normally between 7pm and 8pm. After she and her mother had returned home following that visit, a member of the hospital staff contacted them to inform them that Mr Bastow had died. Mrs Bastow and other members of the family returned to the hospital, arriving some time after 9pm. Mrs Long did not want to see her father’s dead body, but her sister did. She told Mrs Long that Mr Bastow’s face was black and blue and that
‘it looked as though he’d been fighting it’
. Mrs Bastow and Mrs Long’s sister were very upset after seeing Mr Bastow’s body.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He said that Mr Bastow died at
‘2040 hr’
on 22nd
May 1972. He said that he attended Mr Bastow during his last illness for two days, which was probably correct. He said that he had last seen him alive on the day of his death. He said that he had seen Mr Bastow’s body immediately after death when he had made a
‘Complete’
examination of it. He said that the immediate cause of death was coronary thrombosis and he identified uraemia as a morbid condition contributing to death. He stated that the mode of death was cardiac arrest of
‘minutes’
duration. He asserted that this information about the mode of death was based on his own observations; this would suggest not only that he saw the body immediately after death, but that he was present when or very soon after the cardiac arrest occurred. I note that Shipman had originally written that the duration of the cardiac arrest was
‘1-2 hours’
but that this was deleted and the word
‘minutes’
was written alongside. Shipman stated on Form B that Mr Bastow was nursed by Sister Buckley during his last illness, although he did not suggest that she or any other person was present at the moment of death. It is strange that he should not have recorded his own presence at the moment of death, given the earlier entries to the effect that he had witnessed the cardiac arrest and had seen the body immediately after death.
Dr Surinder Ahuja completed Form C. He said that he had seen and questioned Shipman and Sister Buckley. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Mrs Bratley has no recollection of Mr Bastow. She says that, taking into account Mr Bastow’s age and general condition at the time of his admission, he would not have been on a heart monitor on the ward. In the event that he suffered a cardiac arrest, it is unlikely that any emergency resuscitation procedures would have been put into effect.
Other Events
As shown in Appendices B and C to the Report, Shipman certified the cause of death of three other patients who died on 22nd
May 1972.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied on the basis of all the evidence in this case that Mr Bastow’s condition at the time of his admission to PGI was very grave and that his death was imminent. But for the fact that Shipman was present on Ward 2 around the time of his death, there would be no cause for concern about it. However, on the basis of what Shipman wrote on cremation Form B, he was not only present on the ward that evening, but he also claimed to have observed Mr Bastow suffering a cardiac arrest. Yet he claimed that he was not present at the death and that no nurse was present either.
No reliance can be placed on the truthfulness or accuracy of the contents of Forms B completed by Shipman. They might be accurate; they might be completely untrue. I am always suspicious when I see alterations by Shipman on a Form B. Here, Shipman altered his statement that Mr Bastow had been in cardiac arrest for one to two hours to a statement that the arrest had lasted minutes. That seems to me to be a very odd mistake to make for someone who was supposed to have witnessed it. It occurs to me that Shipman may have realised that his original story would not hold water because Mr Bastow had had visitors until 8pm who would have known that he had not been in arrest when they left. I suspect that the story given on Form B might not be true. If it is not, I suspect Shipman’s motives for telling lies.
However, on the assumption that the account in Form B might be true, it is worth considering what could have happened that evening to account for that set of circumstances. If Shipman had been called by a nurse to see Mr Bastow, because he had suddenly gone into cardiac arrest, the nurse would have stayed at the bedside. Indeed, one might have expected both Shipman and the nurse to stay if the arrest lasted only
‘minutes’
. It is possible that Shipman might have chanced to find Mr Bastow suffering a cardiac arrest and have gone to find a nurse, only to find that Mr Bastow had already died when they returned. However, that would be something of a coincidence. It was not Shipman’s job to go around the beds checking patients and Mr Bastow was in a side room, not on the main ward. On the other hand, if Shipman was not called out by a nurse but slipped into Mr Bastow’s room without a nurse being present, the speed with which the death occurred gives rise to some suspicion. He might well have administered something to hasten the death before going in search of a nurse. In short, he had the opportunity to kill Mr Bastow and I suspect that he may have done. A further cause for concern is the time when Mr Bastow died. After visiting time was over, the ward would be quiet and Shipman would be able to move around unnoticed. Certainly, he would be unobserved if he went into a side room. As Professor Richard Baker has found, a disproportionately high number of deaths certified by Shipman occurred between 6pm and midnight. Taking all these matters into account, I am very suspicious that Shipman hastened Mr Bastow’s death, although I am not in a position to say that he probably did so.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the conerns that were raised about Shipman's conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001