The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
John Brewster
Introduction
Mr John Brewster died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 28th
April 1972 at the age of 84. He had been admitted to PGI earlier that day. Shipman certified that the cause of death was left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Parkinsonism was stated to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of Mr Brewster’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Brewster’s wife, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Margaret Ellis, who is Mr Brewster’s daughter, and from Miss Lesley Clark, who was a relief nursing sister on Ward 2 at the relevant time. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Brewster’s hospital records. Mr Brewster was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was carried out. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available contemporaneous documents.
According to Mrs Ellis, although the family did not query the circumstances of Mr Brewster’s death, they had always thought that it was very sudden.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mrs Ellis was the only child of her parents’ marriage. She was 47 when Mr Brewster died. At the time of the death, Mrs Ellis was living in Doncaster and saw her parents about two evenings a week. She also spent holidays with them and with her own family.
Mr Brewster had worked as a professional gardener and had been fit and active until his retirement at the age of 70. After that, so far as his daughter was aware, he enjoyed generally good health, except that he suffered from back problems. In his later years, however, he had developed a slight shake in his hands.
About two years before he died, Mr Brewster suffered a fall at home and was admitted to PGI with back symptoms. Mrs Ellis recollects that, during that admission, he was diagnosed as having a low pulse rate. During the last year of his life, however, he remained active and his mental condition remained quite good although, according to Mrs Ellis,
‘you could tell he was getting older’
.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
A few days before his death, Mr Brewster was unwell. He stayed in bed and Mrs Ellis suggested to her mother that she should send for the doctor because Mr Brewster was having difficulty in getting up to go to the lavatory. According to Mrs Ellis, her son recalls that, around this time or possibly a few weeks before he died, Mr Brewster was sitting by the fire, shaking, and looking quite ill.
The hospital records confirm that Mr Brewster was admitted at the request of his general practitioner (GP), who had spoken to Shipman by telephone before writing a referral letter outlining why admission was thought necessary. According to the referral letter, the GP had seen Mr Brewster late the previous evening when he had had abdominal pain suggestive of some problem of digestion. The GP had seen Mr Brewster again at midday on the day of admission and found him to be suffering symptoms suggesting a myocardial infarction. He had had a similar episode in the past.
The Day of the Death
At about lunchtime on Friday, 28th
April, Mrs Ellis learned that her father was to be admitted to PGI. She was not told the reason why. She believes that her mother must have asked for Mr Brewster’s GP to visit him. Mrs Ellis went to her parents’ home where she found her father waiting for the ambulance. It arrived and took Mr Brewster to the hospital, accompanied by his wife. Mrs Ellis and her husband followed in their car. En route to the hospital, the ambulance stopped at Mr Brewster’s GP’s surgery to collect something, in all likelihood the referral letter.
On arrival at PGI, Mr Brewster was taken directly upstairs to the ward; he was not admitted via the accident and emergency department. That would confirm that his admission had been arranged by his GP and that the GP was fairly confident that he knew what had happened. Mrs Ellis recollects that this was a general ward overlooking some trees that were in blossom. Mr Brewster was in bed and there were no
‘drips’
or other items of medical equipment attached to him. Mrs Ellis recollects that a doctor, in the presence of a nurse, administered an injection to Mr Brewster’s right arm. The doctor and nurse then left without saying anything to the family. Mrs Ellis does not know what drug had been given. She describes the doctor as being white and of average height with dark hair. Mrs Ellis was not sure of his age. It was probably Shipman.
Mr Brewster then chatted to his family until they departed in the late afternoon. Before leaving, the family asked a nurse if it was all right for them to go home to collect Mr Brewster’s shaving kit and to have a meal. The nurse said there was no need for them to worry and that they could return that evening or the following day.
After leaving the hospital, the family collected Mr Brewster’s shaving kit and went to Mrs Ellis’ house in Doncaster to have something to eat. Mrs Ellis recalls that they were at the table when, at about 8pm, they received a telephone call from the hospital informing them that Mr Brewster had died. Mrs Ellis, who took the call, was so shocked that she dropped the telephone receiver. Her mother was similarly shocked. The death was totally unexpected. They were told that there was no need for them to go to the hospital that night.
Shipman made a detailed admission note, although the time of admission is not recorded. However, from the referral letter, I infer that it must have been some time after midday and this accords with Mrs Ellis’ recollection that her father was admitted some time after 1pm. Near the beginning of the note, Shipman wrote
‘Headlands refusal’
. Headlands Hospital was a geriatric hospital in Pontefract. I infer from this that Mr Brewster’s GP had tried to arrange admission to Headlands Hospital but the staff there had declined to take him and that is why the GP had telephoned PGI. The notes show that Mr Brewster gave a clear history of the development of his current problem. On examination, Shipman recorded Mr Brewster’s respiratory rate as raised (36 breaths per minute), with poor air entry and crepitations and rhonchi in both lungs. His pulse was fast at 140 beats per minute, though regular, and his blood pressure was rather low (100/70). There was a gallop rhythm of the heart and a palpable liver. There was also ankle oedema and raised jugular venous pressure. According to Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, these findings were consistent with a degree of left ventricular failure. The notes indicate that routine blood tests (full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), urea and electrolytes, cardiac enzymes and liver function tests) were ordered together with a chest x-ray and an electrocardiogram. None of the results of these investigations is available in the records. Treatment included the administration of Lasix (frusemide) which is a diuretic, digoxin (a drug used in the treatment of heart failure), intramuscular morphine (presumably for pain relief), and Slow-K, which is potassium and is used to maintain the correct balance of electrolytes when a diuretic is used. The notes do not show how much of these drugs was given, nor whether the Lasix was administered orally or by injection. Professor Baker expressed the view that the treatment given would have been regarded as appropriate in 1972.
The next entry written in the notes is timed at 8.55pm. It was made by Shipman and is conspicuous for its brevity. It reads simply as follows:
‘2055 hr.
pt died
no need to report to coroner
D.C.
1/(a) L.V.F.
(b) C.T.
(c) I.H.D.
2/ Parkinsonism
H F Shipman
(
signed
)
’
.
In a letter to Mr Brewster’s GP, dated 4th
May 1972, Shipman wrote:
‘This patient was admitted to hospital under the care of Dr. Turner on the 28th
April, 1972 after being refused a bed in Headlands Hospital, with a myocardial infarction. He had deteriorated whilst on the road and died later on the day of admission. His death certificate was signed:-
(1a) Left ventricular failure
(1b) Coronary Thrombosis’
.
This letter contains the first suggestion that Mr Brewster’s condition had deteriorated en route to the hospital. No suggestion to that effect was made in the admitting note. Mrs Ellis has not mentioned any such deterioration.
In the light of Shipman’s later conduct, it is surprising and sinister that there is such a lack of detail concerning the circumstances of Mr Brewster’s collapse and death. In the First Report, I found that Shipman often made a very brief note following the death of a patient that he had killed. Also, in the light of Shipman’s later conduct, it is sinister and unusual that he should have emphasised, in such a brief note, that there was no need to refer the case to the coroner. This is particularly so as it was a requirement that the coroner be informed about deaths that had occurred within 24 hours after admission to hospital.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He again recorded that Mr Brewster had died at 8.55pm. He said that he had attended Mr Brewster during his last illness for 18 hours. That cannot have been right as Mr Brewster was seen by his GP at home at midday and was admitted at about lunchtime. In answer to the question,
‘When did you last see the deceased alive?’
Shipman answered
‘yes’
. He said that he had seen and made a complete examination of Mr Brewster’s body within ten minutes of the death, although in a later section of the form he said that he was actually present at the moment of death. The cause of death was stated to be left ventricular failure due to coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. The mode of death was said to be a coma of 40-50 minutes’ duration. Shipman claimed that he knew that from his own observations. Nursing staff at PGI have told the Inquiry that it was usual for relatives to be summoned as a matter of urgency if a patient deteriorated. Mrs Ellis’s clear recollection is that the family was not telephoned until after the death had occurred, which might suggest that the death was very sudden and was not preceded by a coma lasting 40-50 minutes. However, I am satisfied that it was not the invariable practice for the nursing staff to telephone relatives to advise them that a patient had deteriorated and I do not think I should necessarily infer that the death was sudden from the fact that Mr Brewster’s relatives were not warned that he had deteriorated.
Mrs Ellis does not believe that Shipman can be correct in saying that Mr Brewster died at 8.55pm or that he attended Mr Brewster for 18 hours before death. Her recollection is that Mr Brewster was admitted to PGI at about 1pm and cannot have been at the hospital for more than eight hours before he died. In that respect, she is clearly right. She also believes that the time at which the family received the telephone call from the hospital, informing them of the death, was about 8pm and not as late as 8.55pm. I think it most likely that the death occurred shortly before 9pm, which is what Shipman wrote in the hospital records and in cremation Form B.
As I have already said, Shipman said that he was present at the moment of death. He did not suggest that anyone else was present at that moment. Evidence received from nursing staff suggests that it would be most unusual for a doctor to be alone with a dying patient. Usually, as I have said, if a patient deteriorated, the family would be summoned. Even if the family was not warned, it would be usual for a nurse to stay close by.
On Form B, Shipman also stated that
‘Sister Clarke
(
sic
)
’
nursed Mr Brewster during his last illness. Mrs Ellis does not remember this name and Miss Clark does not remember Mr Brewster at all. Shipman’s assertion may be correct.
Cremation Form C was completed by Dr Sibbald, consultant pathologist. Dr Sibbald stated that he had questioned Shipman and no one else about the circumstance of the death. He did not carry out a post-mortem examination of the body. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker, having considered the hospital records and the death and cremation certificates, found that the case gave rise to substantial concern. His reasons were as follows:
Conclusion
Mr Brewster was an elderly man whose GP arranged for his prompt admission to hospital when he showed symptoms suggesting a myocardial infarction in the presence of left ventricular failure. Shipman agreed to the admission after discussing the case with the GP over the telephone and, on the afternoon of that day, having assessed Mr Brewster, organised the administration of initial treatment.
So far as Mr Brewster’s family was aware, Mr Brewster’s condition was giving no cause for concern when they left the hospital at about 6pm. He was awake and alert. However, Dr Esmail has advised me that Mr Brewster was at high risk of suffering another cardiac episode which could well have been fatal. In my view, it is quite possible that Mr Brewster died a natural death during the evening of 28th
April.
That said, there are reasons to suspect that Shipman might deliberately have caused Mr Brewster’s death. According to Shipman’s entry in Form B, Mr Brewster deteriorated into a coma shortly after 8pm. Shipman claims to have known that of his own knowledge. However, there is no entry in the medical notes to confirm that deterioration. To my mind, that is suspicious. If Shipman was called to see Mr Brewster, he should have recorded the fact, together with his findings on examination and any treatment given or prescribed. He did not. If he had happened by chance to notice that Mr Brewster’s condition had deteriorated, he should have summoned a nurse and should have made notes of his observations and any treatment given. He did not. If Mr Brewster had deteriorated and if Shipman was aware of it, I would expect not only that there would be an entry to that effect in the medical records, but also that a nurse would stay close by Mr Brewster’s bed. I would not expect Shipman to stay with Mr Brewster, unless there was some purpose in doing so, such as giving treatment. Yet Shipman recorded in Form B that he alone was present at the moment of death. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, the fact that Shipman claimed on Form B to have been present or present alone at a death does not necessarily mean that he was. There is, however, nothing in this case to indicate that others were or must have been present and I think it is likely that Shipman was present alone.
The brevity of Shipman’s entry in the medical notes, recording only that Mr Brewster had died, also gives rise to suspicion. This note is very reminiscent of notes I have seen in cases where I am satisfied that Shipman had killed the patient. Shipman gave causes of death which were compatible with the condition for which Mr Brewster was admitted, but also recorded expressly - and I regard this as suspicious - that there was no need for the case to be reported to the coroner. This comment, in what was otherwise an extremely brief note, gives me cause for concern, particularly when I know of his subsequent reluctance for cases to be referred to the coroner. This case should have been reported because Mr Brewster’s death had occurred within 24 hours of his admission. I have explained in
Chapter Seven
that there were several reasons why Shipman might have sought to avoid reporting a death to the coroner. In this case, however, taking into account the clear need for a report and Shipman’s explicit reference to the fact that none was needed, I strongly suspect that he wished to avoid any investigation of the circumstances of the death.
I have explained in
Chapters Six and Seven
and earlier in this Chapter that a high proportion of deaths certified by Shipman occurred between the hours of 6pm and midnight. That this death took place during that period raises the level of suspicion against Shipman. It is also suspicious that the coma is said by Shipman to have begun shortly after 8pm, which was the end of normal visiting time. In suggesting that it began at that time, Shipman was avoiding the risk that the family (whom he might have expected to have been on the ward until 8pm) would contradict the assertion that Mr Brewster was in a coma before he died.
I am also concerned that, in the letter that he wrote to Mr Brewster’s GP, Shipman suggested that there had been some deterioration in Mr Brewster’s condition on the way to the hospital. The GP had seen and assessed Mr Brewster on the day of his death and would presumably not have expected him to die if he reached the hospital in the same condition in which he was at the time of the GP’s examination. The very full admission note does not mention any deterioration. The fact that the family left the bedside suggests that, at about 6pm, Mr Brewster was stable, although vulnerable to a further episode. By suggesting that there had been a deterioration en route, it appears to me that Shipman might well have been lying in order to make the rather sudden death more explicable.
These suspicious features of the death have driven me to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mr Brewster. How he did so, I do not know. Nor am I certain that he did so. I stress that Mr Brewster was vulnerable to a fatal cardiac episode. However, in the end, I think it likely that Shipman killed him.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001