The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lilian Cullen
Introduction
Mrs Lilian Cullen died at her home, 96 Foxholes Road, Hyde on Thursday, 30th
May 1996 at the age of 77. She was a widow who lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was right cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In November 1998 Mrs Cullen's son, Mr Robert Cullen, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Cullen and Mrs Marlene Cullen (his wife), and from Mrs Doris Goddard (Mrs Cullen's adoptive sister). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Cullen, but an inquest was held on 3rd
April 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mr and Mrs Cullen, Mrs Goddard and Mrs Goddard's husband, Mr John Goddard. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Cullen's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Cullen and his wife saw his mother very frequently, two or three times each week. They also spoke by telephone quite often. Mr Cullen told the police that apart from having slightly raised blood pressure and occasional episodes of vertigo, his mother was in fairly good health for her age. He said that his mother would spend much of her time doing handicrafts. She enjoyed cooking and gardening. She still drove a car and did her own shopping.
Dr Grenville has examined Mrs Cullen's medical records. He says that she was an obese lady who was first treated for high blood pressure in 1978. This was not always well controlled until 1994, when her medication was changed. The records show that Mrs Cullen suffered from vertigo from 1971. The symptoms were of variable severity and had been treated with a variety of medications over the years. There was nothing else of significance in the history. Dr Grenville said that the history of high blood pressure put Mrs Cullen at a higher than average risk of cerebrovascular accident. However, her vertigo was not directly related to problems of hypertension and did not increase her risk of sudden death.
About a week before she died, Mrs Cullen had an episode of vertigo and spent a few days in bed. After that, she felt better and was up and about. Mr and Mrs Cullen recall that she had some new tablets for her vertigo and blood pressure but she was not sure that they agreed with her. On either Tuesday, 28th
May or Wednesday, 29th
May, she told them that Shipman was coming to see her on Thursday, 30th
May, about the new tablets. At this time, she was a little unwell but there did not appear to be anything seriously wrong.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Goddard telephoned Mrs Cullen on the morning of Thursday, 30th
May. Mrs Cullen sounded well and said that she was expecting Shipman to call later that day to see about her tablets. Mrs Goddard, who was going into Hyde to shop, offered to bring her anything she needed but Mrs Cullen declined as she said she would be going into Hyde when the doctor had been. Also that morning, between about 10am and 10.30am, Mrs Marlene Cullen telephoned her mother-in-law to see how she was. She said she was feeling much better but she still wanted to speak to Shipman about the tablets. The entry in the visits book, which may have been made on the previous day, suggests that Mrs Cullen's vertigo was occurring daily and was preventing her from leaving her house.
At about 2.40pm that day, Shipman telephoned Mr Cullen at home. He said he was at Mrs Cullen's. He had found her collapsed on the floor. He may have said that she was dying or he may have said he was not sure whether she was dying. He said words to the effect that there was no immediate hurry for Mr Cullen to come round. Mr Cullen in fact went straight to his mother's home and arrived within a couple of minutes. In the lounge, he saw his mother lying on her side on the floor near the telephone. She was fully dressed. Mr Cullen immediately thought that his mother was dead. Shipman was sitting on a chair in the lounge. He said that he had found Mrs Cullen collapsed by the telephone and had put her in the recovery position. He said that he thought Mrs Cullen was not quite dead yet. He made no effort to revive her. Mr Cullen asked Shipman whether he had called an ambulance. Shipman replied, 'There's no point, she won't last that long'. Shipman raised one of Mrs Cullen's eyelids and looked into her eyes. He did this on about three occasions. On the first two occasions, he said, 'She's not dead yet'. The third time he said, 'She's dead, the time is 3pm'. Shipman left shortly afterwards, saying that he had other things to do. He told Mr Cullen there was no need for a post-mortem examination, as he had been present at the moment of death. He gave Mr Cullen the telephone number of Massey's, the undertakers. Mr Cullen telephoned them and they came to remove the body.
The entry in the visits book for the day of death reads:
'virtego
(
sic
)
- bad - frightened to go out. Happening everyday'
.
Shipman's notes for the day of the death are extremely brief. The manuscript entry reads:
'Visit - “vertigo really bad”
1435 - collapsed on floor
(R) CVA
recovery position
Son present death at 1505
1) (R) CVA
2) Hypertension'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman visited because Mrs Cullen had previously said that her vertigo was bad, and that, on his arrival, she complained that her vertigo was really bad. As Dr Grenville points out, it is not clear from the note whether Mrs Cullen had already collapsed by the time Shipman arrived. He told Mr Cullen that she had. However, if she had, there would be a mystery as to how he gained access to the house. Mrs Cullen always kept the door locked.
Certification
A day or so after the death, Mr Cullen went to Shipman's surgery to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Shipman had completed it, giving the cause of death as a right cerebrovascular accident of two hours' duration, due to hypertension from which he said Mrs Cullen had suffered for 18 years.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death had occurred at
'1505'
on 30th
May 1996. He said that he had attended Mrs Cullen during her last illness for a period of 20 (apparently changed from 30) minutes. He saw her immediately before and immediately after death, when he made a complete external examination of her body. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD. The mode of death was collapse of
'1 - 1
hours'
duration. From that it is clear that Shipman was contending that Mrs Cullen was unconscious when he arrived. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by Mrs Cullen's son. Both of them had been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has observed that the small amount of information recorded by Shipman in the medical records is not consistent with the diagnosis of right-sided stroke. This is usually diagnosed on the basis of weakness or paralysis of the limbs on the right side, often associated with slurring of speech. It would be difficult or impossible to make this diagnosis in an unconscious patient. In any event, cerebrovascular accidents affecting the right side are the result of a blockage or rupture of a blood vessel in the upper left side of the brain. They do not usually cause sudden loss of consciousness or sudden death. The type of stroke that can lead to sudden loss of consciousness and death is due to rupture or blockage of a vessel in the brain stem. Such strokes do not give rise to one-sided weakness. So, if Mrs Cullen was unconscious when Shipman arrived, it is hard to see how he could have diagnosed a right-sided stroke. If she was conscious and he was able to find signs of a right-sided stroke, he should have admitted her to hospital or arranged for her to be cared for at home. In other words, this medical record does not make medical sense.
Professor Richard Baker thought the death highly suspicious on account of the contents both of the medical records and of the cremation certificate.
Conclusion
This death took place in Shipman's presence. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor. Other doctors report that it is extremely rare for a patient to die in their presence. If Shipman is to be believed, such events took place very frequently when his patients were involved. Although Mrs Cullen was at some risk of suffering a stroke, it would be a remarkable coincidence if she had done so very shortly before Shipman arrived to discuss the vertigo from which she had been suffering for some time.
I do not think Mrs Cullen was unconscious when Shipman arrived. I think she let him in. I think the medical record which he made is a fabrication and that events did not occur as he has described. I think that Shipman must have made some excuse to give Mrs Cullen an injection or take a blood sample. I think he gave her an opiate, almost certainly a lethal dose of diamorphine. Soon afterwards she would have lapsed into unconsciousness. Why Shipman did not follow his usual course of leaving the patient on the chair or sofa on which he had administered the injection, I do not know. For some reason he put her on the floor near the telephone in the recovery position. Possibly this was so as to make it appear that she was seeking help at the time of her collapse.
Shipman then telephoned Mr Cullen. I think he might well have said that there was no need for him to hurry round. Shipman usually waited until his victim was dead. According to his entry on Form B, Shipman was with Mrs Cullen for 20 minutes before she died. Apart from putting her in the recovery position, he seems to have done nothing to help her. He made a note in the records, which purported to diagnose a right-sided stroke, but there is no information on which he could have reached that diagnosis. That record is a fabrication, as are the contents of the MCCD and Form B.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Cullen.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001