The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Valerie Cuthbert
Introduction
Mrs Valerie Cuthbert died at her home, 38 Daisy Bank, Gee Cross, Hyde on Wednesday, 29th
May 1996 at the age of 54. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for just over a year at the time of her death, having re-registered at his Market Street Surgery after returning to the Hyde area. He certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure and hypertension.
In August 1998, Mrs Cuthbert's friend, Mrs Doreen Allen, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Cuthbert's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Ronald George Taylor (Mrs Cuthbert's brother-in-law), Miss Susan Cuthbert (her sister-in-law), and Mrs Ann Elizabeth Wheatley, Mrs Sheila Pauline Bingham and Mr Leonard James Fallows (her friends). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Cuthbert, but an inquest was held on 10th
January 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Margery Taylor (Mrs Cuthbert's sister), together with further statements from Mr Taylor and Miss Cuthbert. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Cuthbert's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Cuthbert was a large, overweight woman. She suffered from raised blood pressure, well controlled by medication, and she also had slightly raised cholesterol levels. These factors put her at increased risk of ischaemic heart disease. In 1986, she suffered a thrombosis in the leg and a pulmonary embolism but she made a satisfactory recovery. She had arthritis and a painful bunion on one foot. Her mobility was rather restricted. To her friends and family she seemed to be in reasonable health. In early 1996, she had a spell of depression, but at the time of her death she had been on a diet and had lost four stones in weight. She was looking forward to a holiday in Turkey with her friend, Mrs Bingham, and had other holiday plans for later in the year.
Mrs Cuthbert's medical records contain no reference to congestive heart failure before the entry made in respect of the day of her death. There is no reference in the records for the last year before death of anything specifically related to the heart. There are references to high blood pressure and some references to possible renal failure. The records contain an electrocardiogram (ECG) dated 1st May 1995 on which Shipman has written:
'no LVH no arrythmia no gross IHD. HFS'
. I interpret this to mean that the trace showed no signs of left ventricular failure or of irregularity of heartbeat or of obvious signs of ischaemic heart disease. Dr Esmail has seen the trace and says that the trace is normal.
Mrs Cuthbert spent Saturday, 25th
May 1996 with Mr and Mrs Taylor. They found her in good health. On Sunday, 26th
May, she spent some time with Mrs Bingham who found her in normal health and spirits.
The Day of the Death
It appears that Mrs Cuthbert requested a home visit from Shipman on 29th
May 1996. There is an entry in the visits book which says:
'Valerie Cuthbert - very inflamed bunion - can't put foot on floor'
.
Some time between 2pm and 3pm on 29th
May 1996, Shipman knocked at the door of Mrs Wheatley, who was a friend and neighbour of Mrs Cuthbert. He told her he had found Mrs Cuthbert dead in her house. He explained that he had seen Mrs Cuthbert that morning and recommended that she should go to hospital but she had refused. He said that he had been worried about her and that was why he had returned. Mrs Wheatley went into Mrs Cuthbert's house with Shipman. Mrs Wheatley saw Mrs Cuthbert sitting on the sofa, looking peaceful. Shipman said she had died from heart failure.
Soon afterwards, Shipman telephoned Miss Cuthbert and told her of the death. She went to Mrs Cuthbert's house where Shipman let her in. She saw the body on the sofa. Shipman told her of his morning visit and that he had returned to find Mrs Cuthbert dead. He said he would be able to sign a death certificate.
A little later in the afternoon, Shipman telephoned Mr Taylor. He told him the same story as he had told Mrs Wheatley, saying that he had called on Mrs Cuthbert in response to a request to visit. He had been extremely concerned about her and had recommended that she go to hospital but she had refused. He had telephoned her at midday and she had said she felt better but he was still so concerned that he had called round again in the afternoon. He had found the door unlocked and had gone in to find her dead.
Mrs Cuthbert's friends and family found it strange that she had refused admission to hospital. As far as they were concerned, Mrs Cuthbert was an intelligent and sensible lady.
The note in the medical records for the date of the death is difficult to decipher but Shipman appears to have written:
'29.5 96 V
(
visit
)
Pain (R) big toe.
oedema breathlessness
not slept 48 hrs
pulse 80 /min regular JVP
(
arrow indicating upward
)
(
Illegible
)
Basal creps gallop rhythm
D-CHF
Refuses to have a trip to hospital
?D.V. will think about it
Increase enalapril to 3 x 20
LASIX
(
Illegible
)
...
1/day
See later'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this entry to suggest that Mrs Cuthbert had told Shipman about her painful big toe and that Shipman had then noticed signs of severe heart failure, including swollen ankles, breathlessness, raised jugular venous pressure, basal crepitations and a gallop rhythm of the heart. He diagnosed congestive heart failure and advised admission to hospital, but Mrs Cuthbert refused. Shipman suggested a domiciliary visit and Mrs Cuthbert promised to think about it. He prescribed or administered Lasix, a powerful diuretic.
There is then a second entry, which suggests that Shipman made a telephone call later from the surgery and found that Mrs Cuthbert was feeling better. The final entry states that at 2.55pm, Mrs Cuthbert was found dead sat on a settee. The causes of death were noted as congestive heart failure, hypertension and renal failure.
Certification
Shipman subsequently completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) stating that the cause of death was left ventricular failure of
'?24 hrs'
duration, due to congestive heart failure of six months' duration and hypertension of two years' duration. He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. Shipman stated that death had occurred at
'About 14.30 hrs'
, although that entry had been altered from
'12.30hrs'
. In response to the question
'When did you last see the deceased alive?'
, Shipman initially wrote
'About 4 hours'
before death and subsequently altered this to
'About 2 hours'
. He said that he saw Mrs Cuthbert's body about 20 minutes after death and made a complete external examination of her body. He said that he had been attending Mrs Cuthbert for six months during her final illness which, when cross-referred to the MCCD, must have been intended to mean since she had (supposedly) been suffering from congestive heart failure. Shipman gave the cause of death as on the MCCD and said that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. However, he said that no one was present at the moment of death, so it is not clear how he could have known how long it had taken for Mrs Cuthbert to die. When asked to state how far his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or the statements of others, Shipman wrote:
'own. : Patient seen about 12.00 Advised hospital needed refused medication altered rang at 14.15 patient said she was better. Revisited 15.45 found dead.'
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that if Shipman had indeed found all the classic signs of severe heart failure on 29th
May as he claimed in his note, it would have been appropriate to admit the patient to hospital and to suggest a domiciliary visit by a consultant physician if she refused admission. He noted that the treatment recorded was appropriate for the condition diagnosed. However, by the time Dr Grenville came to give evidence at the coroner's court on 10th
January 2001, he had examined a very large number of Shipman's patient records. He was aware of the need to scrutinise with care any record relating to the death of one of Shipman's patients. He noted the absence of any history of congestive heart failure and the normal ECG of 1st
May 1995. As I understand his evidence to the inquest, he was saying that he now regarded this entry as suspicious.
In his generic evidence before the Inquiry, Dr Grenville said that death from acute left ventricular failure is a very distressing death. The patient would not be found sitting peacefully on a chair. He or she would usually have made a desperate effort to breathe, sometimes pulling off clothing or staggering to a door or window. Usually there would be secretions from the lungs on the face or clothing.
Professor Richard Baker also examined the medical records and regarded the case as highly suspicious. He noted that the recorded results of the tests of renal function could not justify the conclusion that renal failure had contributed to the death.
Conclusion
Mrs Cuthbert was not in the best of health at the time of her death. Due to her raised blood pressure she was probably at a slightly increased risk of heart attack and stroke. However, she was only 54. There was nothing in her medical history which would give rise to concern that she might die suddenly. A sudden death at this time was possible but not likely. Certainly there was no reason to anticipate a death from left ventricular failure, a condition which rarely manifests itself without warning. The complete absence of any previous sign of congestive heart failure means that a sudden death from left ventricular failure was most unlikely.
I note that Mrs Cuthbert did not complain of feeling ill when she telephoned the surgery on the morning of her death. She only mentioned her painful toe. Nor had she told her sister or any friend that she was feeling unwell. I do not think she was unwell that day, apart from suffering pain in her bunion.
This death was discovered a short time after Shipman had visited Mrs Cuthbert and had been alone with her. No one apart from Shipman claims to have seen or spoken to Mrs Cuthbert after Shipman left. Shipman's claim to have telephoned Mrs Cuthbert from the surgery must be regarded with extreme suspicion. It was then Shipman who 'discovered' the death.
The record of Shipman's consultation with Mrs Cuthbert on 29th
May arouses very strong suspicion that it is not genuine. I have now seen many such entries, which begin with a reference to the condition for which the visit has been requested and then switch to signs of another condition to which Shipman will subsequently attribute the death. Here, the signs described are of congestive heart failure. There is no independent evidence that Mrs Cuthbert was suffering from this condition to a severe degree as suggested by the note. Shipman's claim that Mrs Cuthbert refused to go to hospital is highly unlikely to be true. Her relatives and friends regarded her as a sensible woman. She did not even telephone any friend or relative to tell them that Shipman had advised her to go into hospital. I am satisfied that this note was fabricated to provide an explanation for Mrs Cuthbert's death.
I am also satisfied that the tales Shipman told Mrs Wheatley and Mr Taylor were fabricated. I think he inserted a reference to a telephone call in the medical records and Form B in order to create the impression that Mrs Cuthbert had died later than she really had, and a considerable time after he had visited her.
Mrs Cuthbert's appearance in death was not consistent with the appearance of one who has died of left ventricular failure. It was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine. I am sure that such an injection was the cause of Mrs Cuthbert's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001