The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Erla Copeland
Introduction
Mrs Erla Copeland died at her home, 68 Grosvenor Crescent, Hyde on Thursday, 11th
January 1996 at the age of 79. She had been a widow for about a year and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that she died of 'natural causes'.
In October 1998, following the arrest of Shipman, Mrs Copeland's daughter, Mrs Judith Elizabeth Hamlett, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Hamlett, Mr Malcolm Roy Hamlett (her husband), Mrs Dorothy Phoebe Proctor (Mrs Copeland's sister-in-law), Mrs Jean Malone (Mrs Copeland's neighbour) and Mr Derek Marshall and Mrs Gladys Hague (Mrs Copeland's friends). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Copeland, but an inquest was held on 11th
January 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Hamlett, Mrs Proctor and Mrs Malone and has also had access to Mrs Copeland's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In 1977, Mrs Copeland had been diagnosed as having ischaemic heart disease. She was prescribed a beta blocker, which she continued to take for the rest of her life although she never suffered cardiac symptoms. For some time before her death, Mrs Copeland had raised blood pressure but this was well controlled by medication. Following the death of her husband in early 1995, Mrs Copeland was deeply distressed and suffered from depression for a time. However, after about three months, she was able to stop taking antidepressant medication. In June 1995, she developed abdominal pain and bowel disturbance. Shipman referred her to hospital for investigations but she was still awaiting tests when, in November 1995, the pain became severe and Mrs Copeland was admitted as an emergency. Two weeks later, she was discharged, with a diagnosis of diverticulitis and was said by her friend Mrs Malone to be greatly relieved to know that she did not have cancer. Thereafter she remained reasonably well, taking medication, although there was some continuing pain and discomfort. Shipman visited her from time to time and sometimes took a blood sample.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
On 4th
January 1996, Mrs Copeland requested a visit from Shipman. The surgery visits book contains an entry with her name and address and the words:
'Diverticulosis-no very well'
. It appears that Shipman visited and noted in the computerised records that she had an attack of diverticulitis, which is an exacerbation of the underlying diverticular disease. He prescribed Augmentin, an antibiotic, and slow-release morphine tablets, apparently for pain relief. Dr Grenville told the coroner that he did not think this prescription was appropriate. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, agrees and has explained that morphine should not be given to relieve abdominal pain as it could mask the signs and hinder diagnosis. The handwritten record shows that Shipman took a blood sample with the intention of checking Mrs Copeland's blood count, iron stores, urea and electrolytes. The results of those tests are found in the computerised records. The iron stores, urea and electrolytes were normal; the blood count showed slight anaemia (which Shipman noted as being 'OK') and the white blood cell count was at the upper end of the normal range which was to be expected during a flare-up of diverticular disease. Dr Grenville is of the view that there was nothing in these results which suggested the possibility of a serious problem.
Mrs Copeland's name also appears in the visits book for Saturday, 6th
January, and a note in the computerised record states that the patient was examined, the abdomen was soft and the bowels were open. She was to be seen in three days' time. The visit on 6th January is something of a mystery as Mrs Copeland's daughter, who lives in Bolton, says she spent the day with her from 10am until teatime and did not see Shipman. She found her mother in good spirits and in reasonable health.
On Tuesday, 9th
January, Mrs Copeland's friend Mrs Hague came to spend the day with her. They had lunch together and Mrs Copeland appeared to enjoy the meal. During the afternoon, Shipman arrived. Mrs Hague had the impression that the visit was unexpected, as Mrs Copeland had not mentioned that he was coming. However, the surgery visits book contains an entry relating to Mrs Copeland, stating:
'Re-visit'
, which suggests that Shipman had planned to revisit Mrs Copeland that day. It seems that, if Shipman had visited Mrs Copeland on 6th
January, she probably knew that he would call that day. He sat down in the lounge and had a chat but, according to Mrs Hague, he did not ask about Mrs Copeland's health and did not examine her. After a while, he said he would call back on Thursday to take a blood sample. For that day he made entries in both sets of records. The computerised record suggests that on examination he had found the abdomen soft with tenderness in the right iliac fossa. He proposed to review Mrs Copeland in two days' time. In the handwritten records Shipman put:
'9.1.96 V Soft. B/O soft no blood
Abdo P.U.
eating OK
Review'
.
This suggests that Shipman examined Mrs Copeland and found the abdomen to be soft. She was passing urine and eating satisfactorily. He would review her.
On 10th
January, Mr Hamlett, Mrs Copeland's son-in-law, visited her for about an hour in the afternoon and found her in reasonable health. Mrs Hamlett spoke to her mother on the telephone that evening and she was no worse than usual.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Thursday, 11th
January, Mrs Proctor, Mrs Copeland's sister-in-law, telephoned Mrs Copeland to see how she was. The two women were very close friends and spoke to each other every day. Mrs Proctor knew that Mrs Copeland had been unwell, that Shipman had been to see her and that he was due to visit again that day. That morning, Mrs Copeland told Mrs Proctor that she had had a good night's sleep and was feeling a lot better. Mrs Proctor arranged to call on her later on, in the afternoon.
Mrs Malone, a neighbour, also telephoned Mrs Copeland that morning to enquire about Mrs Copeland's health. Mrs Copeland said that she was feeling a lot better. At about 12.30pm, Mrs Malone called on Mrs Copeland, who was eating lunch. Mrs Malone was very pleased to see Mrs Copeland enjoying her food. She stayed for a while and chatted with Mrs Copeland. Mrs Copeland mentioned that Shipman was due to visit at 2.30pm. Mrs Malone left at about 1.30pm. At about 2.30pm, Mrs Malone looked out of her window and saw Shipman's car parked outside Mrs Copeland's house. She next looked out of her window at about 3pm and saw that Shipman's car was no longer there.
At about 3.15 pm, Mrs Proctor arrived at Mrs Copeland's house and let herself in with her own key. She found Mrs Copeland in the lounge, sitting in her usual armchair. Mrs Copeland looked as though she had fallen asleep; however, she had been sick onto her jumper. Mrs Proctor touched her. She was still warm but Mrs Proctor realised that she was dead. She ran next door to Mrs Malone's house and the two women returned to Mrs Copeland's house. One of them telephoned Mrs Hamlett and also Shipman's surgery. Shipman attended shortly afterwards. When he came in, he said he had not been expecting Mrs Copeland to die. Then he said words to the effect that he would 'bring this in as natural causes because we don't want a post-mortem do we?' He did not examine Mrs Copeland other than to shine a torch into her eyes. Mrs Malone heard Shipman talking to himself. She heard him say, 'What can I put on the death certificate?'
Shipman's computerised note of the consultation of 11th
January says:
'Had a chat to patient very poorly refuses hospital
Blood sample
Haematol Lab hb wbc'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman found the patient very ill, so ill as to require hospital admission, which she refused. He took a blood sample intending to send it for examination of the iron stores and whole blood count. As Dr Grenville has observed, this is a grossly inadequate note. There is no indication of any examination of Mrs Copeland or any explanation as to why Shipman thought it necessary to advise her to go into hospital. Nor is there any note of the fact that she had been found dead later.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that Mrs Copeland had died of natural causes. Hypertension and diverticulosis were other significant conditions contributing to the death but not related to the disease or condition causing death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at about 3.30pm on 11th
January 1996, although he had initially written 12th
January 1996. He said he had last seen Mrs Copeland alive about two hours before her death and that he saw the body about 10 minutes after her death. He said that he made a complete external examination of it. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD, that is, natural causes of an unspecified nature, contributed to by hypertension and diverticulosis. He said that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. However, he also said that no one was present at the moment of death, so how he could have known the mode of death is not clear. He stated that his responses to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based partly on his own observations and partly on statements made by
'sister in law/neighbour..'
.
The Aftermath
The day after the death, when Mrs Hamlett went to Shipman's surgery to collect the MCCD, he told her that he had been to see Mrs Copeland on the morning of her death and that he had with him the results of the hospital tests. He told her that she might have to go into hospital because 'they may have found something'. However, it could have been nothing, he added. In the light of what is known of the results of tests, it would have been plainly untrue if Shipman had said that to Mrs Copeland. Shipman also spoke to Mrs Hamlett about the cause of death and told her what he had put on the death certificate. He said twice that he did not think she would want a post-mortem examination. Being in a state of shock and distress, she accepted that.
A few weeks after her death, Shipman spoke about the death to a friend of Mrs Copeland, Mr Marshall. He said that Mrs Copeland had 'had enough' and had 'given up'. These comments surprised Mr Marshall because he did not think that suggestion was consistent with Mrs Copeland's personality or outlook.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has examined the medical records in this case and explained that diverticulosis is not usually a fatal condition. He also expressed the view that Mrs Copeland's medical history did not reveal anything from which it would appear that she was at a greater than usual risk of dying from a stroke or heart attack. In other words, there was no plausible obvious cause for this death. If Shipman were being honest, he could not possibly have known why Mrs Copeland had died. The death certificate is entirely inadequate. Dr Grenville expressed surprise that the registrar did not report the death to the coroner. He was also surprised that Dr J M Dirckze, the doctor who completed Form C of the cremation certificate, felt able to certify that he was satisfied as to the cause of death.
Conclusion
This is a clear case of unlawful killing. Mrs Copeland was not in the best of health in early January and had had an exacerbation of her diverticular disease. However, her condition was not serious, as is shown by the results of the blood tests taken on 4th
January. It appears that she was recovering from this episode by the day on which she died. There was no medical reason why she should have died on that day. This death should have been reported to the coroner.
Mrs Copeland was found dead within about 15 minutes of Shipman's departure following a visit. No one saw or spoke to her alive after he had left. That in itself is a highly suspicious feature.
Shipman's record of the consultation on the day of death is grossly inadequate. The suggestion that Mrs Copeland refused to go hospital is utterly incredible. She had been admitted a few weeks earlier without objection. There is no explanation as to why Shipman wanted her to go into hospital. She was clearly not very poorly, having enjoyed her lunch and a chat with Mrs Malone only an hour or two before. In my view, this entry in the record is a fabrication, designed to suggest that there was some natural cause for Mrs Copeland's death.
Following the death, it appears that Shipman himself was at a loss as to what he should put on the MCCD. He must have known that the records would reveal no plausible cause for the sudden death.
Shipman also gave inconsistent accounts of events to different people. He told Mrs Hamlett that he had seen her mother in the morning, whereas in fact he saw her in the afternoon just before her death was discovered. He must have done this in order to distance himself from the death. He did not say to Mrs Hamlett that he had found her mother in a very poorly state and that she had refused to go to hospital. He told her that he warned her that she might have to be admitted on account of something suspicious in the test results received from the hospital. It rather sounds to me as though he was trying to plant in Mrs Hamlett's mind the possibility that her mother might have taken her own life. He almost certainly knew that she was very much afraid of a diagnosis of cancer and the suggestion that 'they might have found something' would almost certainly have conveyed to Mrs Hamlett that there was a possibility that her mother had cancer. It is hardly surprising that Mrs Hamlett did not insist on a post-mortem examination.
I note that Shipman prescribed slow-release morphine on 4th
January in circumstances which both Dr Grenville and Dr Esmail consider inappropriate. He might well have done so for a sinister reason. If he had decided to kill Mrs Copeland by diamorphine injection and if the family were to have insisted on a post-mortem examination, he would have been able to explain the presence of morphine in the body.
For the reasons outlined above, I am quite satisfied that Mrs Copeland died as the result of an overdose of diamorphine administered by Shipman. Her appearance in death is entirely typical of that which would be expected after a lethal injection. Her appearance was very similar to a large number of victims of Shipman. Sickness is a well-recognised side effect of diamorphine. I agree with the coroner's verdict that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001