The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas Cheetham
Introduction
Mr Thomas Cheetham died at his home, 17 Garden Street, Newton, Hyde on Wednesday, 4th
December 1996 at the age of 78. He lived with his wife, Mrs Elsie Cheetham. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis due to adenocarcinoma of the rectum.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a local taxi driver, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers, including Mr Cheetham. The police investigated Mr Cheetham's death and took statements from his son and daughter-in-law, Mr Michael Thomas Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Carole Cheetham. Detective Sergeant John Ashley interrogated the practice computer. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mr Cheetham's death but an inquest into his death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has received additional statements from Mr Michael Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Cheetham, together with statements from Mrs Betty Farrow (Mr Thomas Cheetham's niece), Mr Stephen Frank Phelps (the nephew of Mr Cheetham's next door neighbour, Mr Kenneth Smith) and Mrs Alice Cheetham (the sister-in-law of Mr Thomas Cheetham).
Mr Michael Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Cheetham gave oral evidence at the hearing on Friday, 13th
July 2001.
The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Cheetham's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
In 1993, Mr Cheetham was diagnosed as suffering from cancer of the rectum and underwent a major operation to excise the cancer. He was left with a colostomy. At about that time he was found to be diabetic and this condition was monitored regularly thereafter. In March 1996, he suffered an intestinal obstruction, which required surgery, and, in June 1996, he was diagnosed as having secondary cancer of the liver. No further surgery or treatment was deemed appropriate in view of his age and what was described as his 'poor general condition' but it was anticipated that plans would have to be made for his terminal care.
Following his discharge from hospital in April 1996, Mr Cheetham had regular visits from Shipman, as can be seen in the computerised medical records and the surgery visits books. Despite the poor prognosis, it appears that Mr Cheetham recovered quite well from the after- effects of the operation and was not critically ill in the period immediately before his death. His son, Mr Michael Cheetham, says that his father was still fit enough to walk to the local shops to place a bet and was able to visit neighbours. His daughter-in-law did not think he had been able to manage the ten minute walk to the shops after the second operation but she confirmed that Mr Cheetham often spent time at the home of his neighbour, Mr Kenneth Smith. He never stayed in bed on account of his health. He was up and dressed every day and was still enjoying his food.
The Day of the Death
One of the difficulties arising in this case is that the two people who could have given firsthand evidence about the circumstances of Mr Thomas Cheetham's death have died. They are Mr Cheetham's widow, Mrs Elsie Cheetham, and Mr Kenneth Smith. Mr Smith was to die only 13 days after Mr Cheetham. Mrs Cheetham died in the following April. The Inquiry has received accounts of what Mrs Cheetham told her son, daughter-in-law and sister-in-law and what Mr Kenneth Smith told his nephew, Mr Phelps. This account of the events of 4th
December is pieced together from that hearsay evidence. The recollection of Mrs Alice Cheetham differs in some respects from that of the other witnesses. Mrs Alice Cheetham has very frankly admitted that her recollection is not very clear. I have not had the opportunity to hear her oral evidence. Accordingly, where there is any conflict, I have preferred the evidence of Mr Michael Cheetham, Mrs Joyce Cheetham and Mr Stephen Phelps, all of whose evidence I am able to accept as reliable.
On 4th
December, in the early afternoon, Mrs Cheetham went into Hyde to buy some cream for her husband, who was suffering from itchy skin. That she was prepared to leave him gives some indication that she did not at that time regard him as being critically ill. The family does not know whether she knew that Shipman was expected to visit her husband that day. It is quite likely that she did, as it appears that Mr Cheetham knew he was coming. There is an entry in the surgery visits book indicating that Shipman intended to revisit Mr Cheetham that day. It seems likely that this had been arranged at the time of the previous visit.
When Mrs Cheetham left to go into Hyde, Mr Cheetham was at the house next door, sitting with his friend, Mr Smith. According to Mr Phelps, they were watching the horse racing on television. Mr Cheetham was keeping a look-out for Shipman. At some stage (Mr Phelps thought his uncle had said about 3pm but was not sure and accepted that it might have been 2pm) Mr Cheetham saw Shipman's car turn into the road and said that he must go. He left, apparently to return to his own house.
Some time later, Mrs Cheetham arrived back from the shops. As she walked across the playing field opposite the houses, she could see Shipman standing outside her house. She seems to have assumed that he had just arrived and had not seen her husband. She greeted him but he did not stop her or speak to her as she went past him. The front door was open and she went into the house with Shipman following behind. In the living room, she saw her husband sitting on his usual chair, apparently asleep. She went to him and told him to wake up as the doctor had arrived. Shipman then said words to the effect, 'Don't try to wake him, he's dead'. The family understands that Mrs Cheetham then realised that Shipman had already been into the house and had known that Mr Cheetham was dead. Mrs Joyce Cheetham recalls that Mrs Cheetham had said that she had not been out of the house for more than about 45 minutes to an hour.
At some time around 2.30pm, Mrs Joyce Cheetham received a telephone call from Shipman, asking her to contact her husband to tell him that his father had died. She telephoned her husband at work. Mr Michael Cheetham estimates the time of that call at some time between 3pm and 3.45pm. On learning the news, Mr Michael Cheetham went straight to his mother's home. His wife did not accompany him, as she had to be at home when her children returned from school. They were due back some time between 3.30pm and 4pm. When Mr Michael Cheetham reached his parent's home, his mother was there together with his cousin, Mrs Betty Farrow (who had also been notified by Shipman) and Richard, her son. Mr Michael Cheetham saw his father sitting in a chair, as if he was asleep. Mr Michael Cheetham later collected his wife and brought her to the house. Either then or possibly the following day, Mrs Elsie Cheetham gave them her account of what had happened, which I have already related.
The note made by Shipman on the occasion of this visit reads:
'Routine visit 1530 hours.
Found dead wife present
coming back from Bingo.
In chair gas fire on no sign
of struggle.
Body cold temp 35°C no R.M.
(
respiratory movement
)
dead 1?-2 hrs. Say 14.00
(
altered from 12.00
)
hrs.
Carcinomatosis
Adeno Ca of rectum
D.M.'
.
I interpret this note to indicate that Shipman made a routine visit at 3.30pm. He found Mr Cheetham dead in his chair. There was no sign of a struggle. Mrs Cheetham was there, having come back from bingo. He noted that the gas fire was on but the body was cold with a temperature of 35 degrees Celsius. He estimated the time of death at 2pm, that is an hour and a half earlier. It appears from that note that Shipman was anxious to establish a time of death well before his visit. He notes a low body temperature and implies a high ambient temperature. He seems to be suggesting that there is some scientific basis for his estimate of the time of death. For reasons that Dr John Grenville has explained in his generic evidence, this attempt to estimate the time of death was entirely spurious. The time of death cannot be estimated with any degree of precision on the basis of the information Shipman claimed to have.
Certification
On the same day, Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as carcinomatosis of 18 months' onset, due to adenocarcinoma of the rectum of three years' duration. Diabetes mellitus was said to be a condition making a significant contribution to the death though not related to its main cause.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He claimed that he had last seen Mr Cheetham alive on 22nd
November 1996, 12 days before the death, a claim that he also made on the MCCD. There is no entry in the medical records for that date and no note in the practice records of an intention to visit or a surgery appointment. The last recorded visit or consultation was on 16th
November, which was more than 14 days before Mr Cheetham's death. In the ordinary course of events, the death should have been referred to the coroner. That Shipman should claim to have seen Mr Cheetham on 22nd
November gives rise to a suspicion that he lied in order to reduce the risk that this death would be referred to the coroner. However, it must be accepted that Shipman made false entries of this nature in cases in which he was not responsible for the death. It may be that he did so because he wished to avoid the trouble of a referral to the coroner, either for his own benefit or for that of the relatives or possibly both. More importantly, perhaps, Shipman was saying that he did not see Mr Cheetham alive on the day of his death.
On Form B, Shipman estimated the time of death at about 2pm and claimed to have seen the body about two hours after death. So, he was suggesting that he arrived at the house at about 4pm. Not only is this not consistent with the time of his arrival as recorded in the medical records, it does not fit in with the recollections of the witnesses as to the time when Shipman telephoned Mrs Joyce Cheetham. Nor does it fit in well with Shipman's own programme for the day. He had a window of opportunity to carry out a visit from shortly before 3pm but it appears that he was expected back in the surgery shortly before 4pm. From all the evidence of timings, it appears to me highly likely that Shipman was at the house well before 4pm and that his statement on Form B was designed to distance himself from the house at the theoretical time of death.
Shipman gave the mode of death as syncope lasting seconds, saying that view was reliant upon his own and Mrs Cheetham's observations. If, as it appears, he was suggesting that Mr Cheetham had died about two hours before his body was found, it is hard to see how anyone could have known the mode of death or how long the process had taken. He wrongly stated that Mr Cheetham had not undergone any operation within a year before his death.
Conclusion
There are many suspicious features surrounding this death.
Shipman sought to suggest that Mr Cheetham had been found dead when he arrived at the house, either when or shortly before Mrs Cheetham returned home. If the evidence of Mr Phelps can be accepted, that Mr Cheetham was alive and in Mr Kenneth Smith's house as Shipman arrived, then it would follow that Shipman has lied about the circumstances. Although Mr Phelps did not give oral evidence to the Inquiry in connection with this death, he did appear in connection with the deaths of his uncles, Mr Sidney Smith and Mr Kenneth Smith. I formed a favourable impression of Mr Phelps. He seemed to me an entirely reliable witness and I have no hesitation in accepting as accurate his recollection of what Mr Kenneth Smith told him at the time of Mr Cheetham's death. The timing may not be accurate (although I think the estimate that Shipman arrived at about 3pm probably is accurate) but I accept the core of his evidence, which is that Mr Kenneth Smith told him that Mr Cheetham was alive, and in his (Mr Smith's) house, when Shipman arrived. Mr Cheetham was dead shortly afterwards.
That finding alone is enough to enable me to reach a conclusion, but there are other factors which point in the same direction. Shipman certified the death as being due to carcinomatosis but, medically, that does not make sense. A person dying from carcinomatosis deteriorates gradually and is usually confined to bed in a state of extreme weakness for some time before death. It would be most unusual for a death from this cause to be as sudden as this. I note that Shipman said on the MCCD that the onset of the carcinomatosis was 18 months before death. The medical records show that there was no recognised spread of the cancer to the liver until about six months before the death. It appears to me that Shipman was trying to give the impression that the disease was at a more advanced stage than it was.
The position in which Mr Cheetham was found and his appearance in death were entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Finally, Shipman has fabricated the medical records and the entries on Form B in a way suggestive of guilt.
Taking all these factors together, I have no doubt that Mr Cheetham was killed by Shipman and I am sure that this is the case.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001