The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Cheetham
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Cheetham died at her home, 17 Garden Street, Hyde on Friday, 25th
April 1997 at the age of 76. She was a widow and lived alone, following the death of her husband, Mr Thomas Cheetham, on 4th
December 1996. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw (a local taxi driver) contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers, including Mrs Cheetham. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Michael Thomas Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Carole Cheetham (Mrs Cheetham's son and daughter-in-law) and Mrs Judith Cocker (a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Cheetham, but an inquest was held on 4th
April 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Michael Cheetham and Mrs Joyce Cheetham together with statements from Mrs Cheetham's niece, Mrs Betty Farrow, and her sister-in-law, Mrs Alice Cheetham. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Cheetham's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a joint report from Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Cheetham was a healthy woman, although she had suffered for many years from an infection of the left mastoid cavity. Also, she had developed a cataract. In early 1996, she had had a serious chest infection, for which she was admitted to hospital. She made a full recovery. In January 1997, she was diagnosed as suffering from shingles. Strangely, there is only one reference to this illness in the medical records. There are no references to any condition associated with heart disease and Dr Grenville, who has examined all the medical records, says that Mrs Cheetham appears to have had no significant risk factors for ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Cheetham was a keen walker. When shopping, she preferred to walk into Hyde rather than take a bus. She was always a generous and helpful neighbour. When her next door neighbour, Mr Kenneth Smith, lost his brother in August 1996, she kept a watchful eye on him and took him a midday meal every day until his death. Following the death of her husband in December 1996, she was lonely and by April 1997 she may have been a little depressed. However, there was no sign that she was suffering from any physical illness.
Unlike many of Shipman's patients who held him in high regard, it appears that Mrs Cheetham did not like him. Following her husband's death, she told her son Michael that if she was ever ill, he should not call Shipman to her. She did not give any reason why. However, she did not remove herself from Shipman's list. I have found that Shipman unlawfully killed her husband.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 25th
April 1997, Mrs Farrow spoke with her aunt on the telephone. They had a chat and Mrs Cheetham said that she was feeling 'fed up' but did not say that she was unwell.
At some time during the morning or early afternoon, Mrs Cheetham telephoned Shipman's surgery and spoke to Mrs Cocker, a receptionist. Mrs Cocker cannot now remember the details of the conversation but she wrote in the visits book that Mrs Cheetham had had a 'funny do'. Mrs Cocker arranged for Shipman to pay a visit.
That afternoon, Mrs Joyce Cheetham was at her mother's house when she received a telephone call from Mrs Cocker, who told her that her mother-in-law had died. According to Mrs Joyce Cheetham, Mrs Cocker told her that Mrs Elsie Cheetham had telephoned the surgery complaining of feeling unwell and had described her symptoms. Mrs Cocker told Mrs Joyce Cheetham that it sounded to her as though Mrs Elsie Cheetham was having a heart attack. She said that she had spoken to Shipman on his mobile telephone and had described the symptoms. Mrs Cocker said she had asked Shipman whether she should telephone for an ambulance but Shipman had told her not to. He said he was nearby and would go round himself. She told Mrs Joyce Cheetham that, after Mrs Elsie Cheetham had died, Shipman had had to leave her in the house, as he had to return to start his evening surgery. He had locked the house and brought the keys with him. They were available from the reception staff at the surgery.
Mrs Cocker's recollection of events is slightly different. She recalls the incident but cannot now remember Mrs Cheetham's symptoms. She says that she contacted Shipman, who was on his rounds, via his pager. A while later, Shipman contacted the surgery and it was arranged that he would call on Mrs Cheetham. Later still, how long exactly Mrs Cocker is not sure, Shipman contacted the surgery and told her that Mrs Cheetham had died.
Mrs Joyce Cheetham telephoned her husband at work and broke the news to him. Later, they both went to Shipman's surgery to collect the key. At the surgery, Mrs Cocker told Mr and Mrs Cheetham that Shipman wanted to see them the following morning to explain what had happened.
When Mr and Mrs Cheetham arrived at the house in Garden Street, Mrs Cheetham noticed that the living room curtains were drawn. On entering that room, they could see Mrs Elsie Cheetham lying on her side on the settee, curled up as if sleeping. She was fully clothed, wearing her slippers. Mrs Cheetham noticed a small amount of vomit in the sink. Mrs Farrow, who also came to the house, had a similar recollection of Mrs Cheetham's appearance in death.
The last entry in Mrs Cheetham's handwritten general practitioner records is dated February 1996. The only record for 25th
April 1997, the day of her death, is on the computer. It is very brief and reads:
'Coronary thrombosis seen 1400 died 1420'
. Examination of the audit trail within the computer shows that this entry was made at about 8.30am the following morning.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr and Mrs Cheetham went to see Shipman at his surgery as requested. His manner was abrupt. Shipman told them he had been to see Mrs Cheetham at her request. He said that, when he went into the house, Mrs Cheetham was fully conscious but had been sick a couple of times on the floor. He said he had cleaned that up. He said that it was clear to him that she was having a heart attack and that she had slipped into unconsciousness. He said that at first he was unsure whether or not to call an ambulance but it became clear to him that Mrs Cheetham was going to die, so he decided not to. He thought it was better that she died at home. He expressed surprise that she had died because, as far as he was concerned, she was a fit lady and he had expected her to live a lot longer. There was no discussion about a post-mortem examination.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) giving coronary thrombosis as the cause of death. He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate, on which he said that the death had occurred at
'About 1430'
on 25th
April 1997. He stated that he had last seen the deceased immediately before death. He had attended her during her last illness for a period of 10 to 15 minutes. He said that the mode of death was collapse of only minutes' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman replied:
'own
Neighbour'
. However, he said that only he was present at the moment of death. This implies that a neighbour had given him some information about the mode of death or the duration of the process but had then departed from the scene before the death occurred. It is far from clear who this neighbour could have been or what he or she could have contributed to Shipman's information. He was, of his own admission, present throughout the process of dying. Mr and Mrs Cheetham did not learn that a neighbour had been present at any stage. It seems to me that the neighbour was probably invented by Shipman, in order to create the impression that he had not been alone with the patient throughout his visit.
The Expert Evidence
Following examination of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker said that he regarded the case as highly suspicious. He observed that there was no medical history related to the cause of death. He considered that, on the basis of the information contained in the medical records, it would not be possible to certify the cause of death. Professor Baker was also highly suspicious on account of the contents of Form B.
Dr Grenville was not convinced that Mrs Cheetham had had a heart attack. Her medical history did not reveal any risk factors for such an event. Shipman had not provided any information about Mrs Cheetham's condition in the period before death. He had not recorded any examination or findings. He had not described the course of events. He did not appear to have provided any treatment. It appeared that he had not called an ambulance but Shipman had not explained his decision not to do so. Nor had he explained his decision not to attempt resuscitation, if, as is implied, Mrs Cheetham went into cardiac arrest.
In his joint report with Professor McQuay, Dr Grenville said that, in his view, there was a slight possibility that Mrs Cheetham died as the result of a coronary thrombosis. It is not at all uncommon to find that a patient has been sick during a heart attack. However, there are many other explanations for Mrs Cheetham having been sick. Some patients are sick following the administration of morphine. However, as there was vomit in the kitchen as well as the living room (according to Shipman), she had probably been sick before he arrived.
Dr Grenville also observed that Mrs Cheetham's position in death, curled up on the sofa, was not typical of most of Shipman's victims. However, it was not inconsistent with death having been due to an injection of strong opiate. Shipman might have found Mrs Cheetham on the sofa and have given her an injection where she was.
Conclusion
This is an extremely suspicious death. Mrs Cheetham was physically fit and well until the morning of her death. She telephoned the surgery at some time that day to ask for a visit. The only record of her complaint is that she had had a 'funny do'. It is possible, although in my view unlikely, that she described symptoms from which the receptionist suspected a heart attack. I say that I think this is unlikely, as the practice, which I have observed from perusing many entries in the visits book, is that the receptionists usually wrote down every symptom the patient described. I think if Mrs Cheetham had described, for example, chest pain and sweating, that would have appeared in the book. I also think it unlikely that Mrs Cocker would have told Mrs Joyce Cheetham that she had suggested calling an ambulance but that Shipman had vetoed this. I think it is likely that, in a state of shock, as she must have been, Mrs Joyce Cheetham has misunderstood what Mrs Cocker has said about that.
In my view, bearing in mind Mrs Cheetham's previous health record, it is very unlikely that she suffered a heart attack on 25th
April. I accept that it is possible that she could have done so, even though there was no history of heart disease and no indication of any risk factors. I accept that a woman of Mrs Cheetham's age could have had a heart attack completely out of the blue. However, such an event was unlikely. Mrs Cheetham's complaint to the receptionist that she had had a 'funny do' was entirely non-specific and does not sound like a heart attack. It could have been a spell of dizziness with nausea, which might also have entailed a bout of sickness, which would have accounted for the finding of vomit in the sink and on the carpet. Mrs Cheetham's appearance in death was not consistent with a sudden cardiac death. Such deaths are usually painful and the patient does not usually look as though he or she has fallen asleep.
Mrs Cheetham died during a consultation while Shipman was alone with her. That in itself is a factor which arouses suspicion. Other doctors find that such an event hardly ever occurs. If Shipman is to be believed, it was a regular occurrence for him. That day, Shipman had an opportunity to administer a lethal dose of diamorphine.
In my view, the circumstances of Mrs Cheetham's death are more consistent with diamorphine injection than with coronary thrombosis.
Shipman's explanation as to why he did not call an ambulance is unacceptable. I am quite satisfied that it is not possible for a doctor to tell that the condition of a patient suffering a heart attack is hopeless. This woman had no history of heart disease. If she had suffered a coronary thrombosis and had gone into cardiac arrest, there would be every reason to hope for a satisfactory outcome if the ambulance had been called and Mrs Cheetham had been quickly conveyed to hospital for thrombolytic drug treatment.
That Shipman failed to give any proper account of the event and gave a false account in Form B (claiming that a neighbour was present) confirms my view that this must have been an unlawful killing. Like the coroner, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Cheetham.
My decision in this case is one of a group of four cases in which I have found that Shipman killed the occupants of two adjacent houses in Garden Street. These victims were Sidney Smith who was killed in August 1996, Thomas Cheetham who was killed in December 1996, Kenneth Smith who was killed in the same month and Elsie Cheetham who, as I have just found, was killed in April 1997. It is not my duty to speculate on Shipman's motivation in killing his patients in the absence of evidence on the point. It has been suggested that Shipman killed Mrs Cheetham because she knew too much about Shipman's involvement in the deaths of her husband and her two neighbours. That is possible. However, it does not seem likely to me that Shipman would have killed her for that reason. If he were anxious to avoid detection, as one would expect him to be, I would have thought he would have been more likely to avoid further involvement with the Cheetham family. I would have thought that to kill Mrs Cheetham would have greatly increased the risk that the next generation would become suspicious. In fact they did not, but Elsie Cheetham's death must have increased the risk that they would. I think it more likely that Shipman killed Mrs Cheetham simply because he had the desire and the opportunity to do so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001