The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Coutts
Introduction
Mrs Mary Coutts died at her home, 26 Marler Road, Hyde on Monday, 21st
April 1997 at the age of 80. She was a widow and lived alone in a ground floor warden-controlled flat. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1988 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In October 1998, Mrs Gillian Anne Gosling, a niece of Mrs Coutts, contacted the police to express concern about her aunt's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Gosling, Mr Philip Clarke and Mr Ian Clarke (Mrs Coutts' sons by her first marriage), Mr Gary Clarke (Mrs Coutts' grandson), Mrs Mary Clarke (Mr Philip Clarke's wife and Mrs Gladys Atherton (Mrs Coutts' neighbour).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Coutts but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Philip Clarke, Mrs Mary Clarke and Mr Ian Clarke and Mrs Atherton. The Inquiry has also taken statements from Mrs Carol Clarke (Mr Ian Clarke's wife) and Mrs Margaret Mary Davies (Mrs Coutts' home help).
Mr Philip Clarke and Mrs Mary Clarke gave oral evidence at a hearing on Monday, 16th
July 2001. Mrs Atherton has now emigrated to the United States of America and gave evidence to the Inquiry by means of a recorded telephone discussion with Leading Counsel. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Coutts' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville, who gave oral evidence about the death on 24th
July 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Coutts was not in good health at the time of her death. She had suffered quite a severe heart attack in 1981 and had been treated for high blood pressure and angina ever since. Dr Grenville considered that she was at risk of suffering a heart attack at any time. Shipman had diagnosed irritable bowel syndrome and Mrs Coutts had also suffered from psoriasis for many years. Since 1992, she had had chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, necessitating intermittent courses of chemotherapy and periodic blood transfusions. Mrs Coutts was unaware of the diagnosis of leukaemia and believed that she was suffering from anaemia. This was as a result of a decision taken by her family in conjunction with her consultant. The family ensured that one of them was present on each occasion when Mrs Coutts saw a doctor, in order to support her in case her true condition was inadvertently revealed. A member of her family always accompanied her to Shipman's surgery and, until the day of her death, was always present when Shipman visited her at home.
Despite her problems, Mrs Coutts remained active and enjoyed life. She did her own cooking and baking, and washed and ironed for herself, as well as for her neighbour, Mr John Fox, who has since died. She looked after herself, with some assistance from a home help, and generally kept in good spirits. Mr Philip Clarke and Mr Ian Clarke and their families visited regularly.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
Between 20th
and 22nd
March 1997, Mrs Coutts was admitted to hospital for a top-up blood transfusion. She complained of shortness of breath and retrosternal pain. Her leukaemia was found to be quite active and she was given a blood transfusion and started on a course of chemotherapy. She made a good recovery from this episode but in April she caught a bad cold, which developed into a chest infection. On Thursday, 17th
April, it appears that she asked the doctor for something for her cough, but the records indicate that pholcodine was prescribed without an appointment at the surgery or a visit. She had not been confined to bed at this time and went shopping on Friday, 18th
April with her niece, Mrs Gosling.
Mr Ian Clarke and his wife saw Mrs Coutts on the day before her death when she seemed reasonably well apart from a chesty cough. She prepared and ate a meal with the family, who stayed at her house until between 9pm and 10pm. Mrs Coutts also spoke to Mrs Mary Clarke over the weekend.
The Day of the Death
On Monday, 21st
April 1997, Mrs Coutts telephoned Shipman's surgery to request a visit. There is a visit request form and an entry in the visits book, which records that Mrs Coutts had a head cold, was chesty and had a temperature. Mrs Coutts' telephone bill shows that the call was made at 8.54am.
Mrs Atherton, who lived in the first floor flat opposite Mrs Coutts' flat, called to see Mrs Coutts quite early that morning to ask whether she needed anything from the shops. She knew that Mrs Coutts had been unwell. Mrs Coutts was in bed. Her breathing was bad and her chest was wheezy. She told Mrs Atherton that she had sent for the doctor and said that she was worried that the doctor might tell her she must go into hospital, which she did not want to do. Mrs Atherton offered to collect a prescription for Mrs Coutts when the doctor had been but Mrs Coutts said that she would ask her son, Philip, to collect it for her. Mrs Atherton went off to do her shopping and returned to her home some time later.
At some time that morning, Mrs Coutts and Mrs Mary Clarke spoke on the telephone. Mrs Coutts said that she had asked Shipman to visit her because of her cold. Mrs Clarke told Mrs Coutts that she had a dentist's appointment that morning and offered to bring some lunch round for Mrs Coutts afterwards. She intended to be there before 1pm, which was the earliest time Shipman was to be expected. Somewhat reluctantly, Mrs Coutts agreed, although she said she could make her own lunch. However, when Mrs Clarke came out of the dentist's, she was feeling unwell and, at about 11.45am, she telephoned her mother-in-law to say that she would be a little late. Mrs Coutts said that she would make her own lunch and would telephone Mrs Clarke once Shipman had left.
Mrs Atherton said that, because she knew that Shipman was coming to see Mrs Coutts, she kept a look-out from her bedroom window, which was on the front of the house. She did not stay in her bedroom but looked out from time to time. At about 1.45pm, she saw Shipman's car outside Mrs Coutts' flat. The next time she looked out of the window, she saw Shipman outside the door of the flat, which was at the side of the building. She saw Mrs Coutts walk across her lounge to her usual chair, which was near the window. She claimed that she had a good view into the room as Mrs Coutts did not have net curtains at her windows. Mrs Coutts' telephone was at the side of the chair and Mrs Atherton assumed that she was about to telephone her son, to ask him to collect a prescription for her. She then saw Shipman at the back of his vehicle, which was driven away shortly afterwards.
A few minutes later, there was a loud banging on Mrs Atherton's door. It was Mr Fox, who said that he had been to call on Mrs Coutts and could not wake her. Mrs Atherton went across to Mrs Coutts' flat and saw her sitting in her usual chair, which was in the reclining position. She was slumped to one side in a heap, fully dressed but obviously dead. One of her hands was over the side of her chair as if she was about to use the telephone. Mrs Atherton rang Shipman's surgery to ask him to come back. That call is timed at 2.27pm. She then telephoned Mrs Mary Clarke and told her that Mrs Coutts was very ill. She did not want to break the news of the death over the telephone.
Mr and Mrs Philip Clarke had become slightly anxious when they had not heard from Mrs Coutts. When Mrs Atherton telephoned, they went immediately to Marler Road. On arrival, Mrs Atherton explained that Mrs Coutts was dead. Mr and Mrs Clarke went into the front room. Mr Fox was crouched down by the body, holding Mrs Coutts' hand. Mrs Coutts was lying in her chair twisted slightly to one side towards a tea trolley on which the telephone was kept. There was a full glass of blackcurrant cordial on the trolley. Mrs Clarke felt that her mother-in-law looked uncomfortable. Mrs Clarke made a number of telephone calls informing members of the family. She believes that she also telephoned Shipman's surgery, but I am satisfied that, in this respect, she is in error. The telephone bill does not confirm a further call to Shipman's number.
In due course, Shipman attended. He mentioned his earlier visit and said that Mrs Coutts had had bronchopneumonia and he had wanted her to go into hospital. He said that she had not wanted to do so and he had arranged to see her the following day. Mrs Mary Clarke thought it strange that Mrs Coutts would refuse to go to hospital if so advised, as she was accustomed to going in for short periods for her blood transfusions. Also, she did not think Mrs Coutts would have finally refused without speaking to members of the family. Shipman made no external examination of the body to confirm death except for feeling for a pulse in the neck. He walked round the chair and said, 'Well, I don't believe in keeping them going'. Mrs Clarke was very shocked and distressed by this remark. From that moment, she suspected that Shipman had done something wrong to Mrs Coutts. Other members of the family also agree that they found him abrupt and unlike his usual caring self. After a few minutes, he gave some instructions about removing the body and obtaining a certificate and left.
Mrs Mary Clarke asserts that, either then or a while later, Mrs Atherton told her that she had seen Shipman come out of Mrs Coutts' house, go to his car, collect a black box and return to the house. Mrs Atherton asserts that she never saw Shipman do that and she has never said that she saw him do that. They cannot both be right. Mrs Clarke said it was this factor and the strange remark Shipman had made about not 'keeping them going' that made her suspect him. She mentioned her suspicions to her husband but he told her not to be silly. She mentioned them to her sister-in-law and to two friends. However, she did not feel able to express her concerns officially, as Mrs Coutts was not her mother. She felt that it was up to one of the sons to raise any concerns. So it was not until Shipman had been arrested that the matter was raised officially. However, I accept that Mrs Clarke did express these concerns privately, long before Shipman's arrest.
The computerised note made by Shipman on the occasion of his first visit that day reads:
'Chest infection NOS
(
not otherwise specified
)
... flucloxacillin
(
an antibiotic
)
'
.
This entry implies that Shipman prescribed an antibiotic for Mrs Coutts. However, Mrs Clarke was adamant that no prescription was found in the house. Moreover, she asserted that, if Shipman had left a prescription, the first thing Mrs Coutts would have done would have been to telephone her son Philip to ask him to collect it for her. Examination of the audit trail facility shows that the first entry for that day was made just before 2.40pm. There is then a later entry on the same date:
'0/E - dead
14.30 by neighbour bronchopneumonia cll'
.
That entry was made at 3.55pm.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), in which he said that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia of two days' duration and that chronic lymphocytic leukaemia had contributed to the death but was not directly related to the condition causing it.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman recorded that the death occurred at 2.15pm and that he had attended Mrs Coutts for two hours during her last illness. This would suggest that he had arrived at about 12.15pm. He stated that he last saw Mrs Coutts alive at about 1pm. He said that he saw the body about an hour after death and made a complete external examination. The mode of death is recorded as syncope of only minutes' duration and Shipman claimed that he based that assessment on his own observations and those of neighbours. As he also stated that no one was present at the death, his statement as to the mode of death must have been supposition. In any event, the neighbours could not have provided any useful information as to the cause or mode of death. Shipman stated that Mrs Coutts was
'found by neighbour dead in chair'
.
Shipman's Movements
The surgery records throw some light on the timings. The appointments sheet for 21st April shows that Shipman had 13 patients at his open surgery, which started at 10.15am. One patient had an appointment at 11.30am. Shipman would then usually undertake administrative tasks, including the writing of prescriptions requested during the morning. On the appointments sheet, there is an entry that indicates an intention to attend a meeting relating to welfare rights, which was due to last from noon until 2pm. However, the Inquiry has established that Shipman did not attend. Thus, it appears that he probably went out on his rounds shortly after noon. The visits book shows that, on that day, Shipman had a total of six visits, including that to Mrs Coutts and one to view the body of a patient who had died during the previous night. So, it is possible that he arrived at Mrs Coutts' flat as early as 12.15pm, as he implied in Form B. However, the only witness who gave direct evidence as to the time of Shipman's visit was Mrs Atherton. She first noticed his car at about 1.45pm. In my view, it is unlikely that Shipman would already have been there for as long as one and a half hours, or even 45 minutes, without Mrs Atherton noticing his car. Mrs Atherton was keeping watch, not continuously, but I have the impression that she would have looked out every 10 minutes or so. I think it is highly unlikely that Shipman was at Mrs Coutts' flat as early as 12.15pm. I am also quite sure that he did not leave as early as 1pm. Mrs Atherton says that she saw him depart and it was only a few minutes after that when Mr Fox came over to say he could not awaken Mrs Coutts. We know from the subsequent telephone calls that that must have been between 2.20pm and 2.25pm. In my view, the best estimate of the time of Shipman's departure is about 2.10-2.15pm. As it happens, that is the time he has given for the moment of death. He might well be right and have known it. On Form B, Shipman has sought to give the impression that he was with the patient an appreciable time before the death, whereas he was with her only a matter of minutes before her death was discovered. This is a pattern that is often seen in Forms B completed by Shipman in cases in which he has killed.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that the entries in the medical records for the day of the death are quite inadequate and do not explain the basis on which Shipman diagnosed bronchopneumonia. If he had thought Mrs Coutts was so ill that she ought to go to hospital, that fact should have been recorded. If she had refused to do so, that should also have been recorded and Shipman should have sought permission to contact relatives who might persuade her to change her mind. If she was not so ill as to warrant admission, then her death within a short time must have been a sudden and unexpected death, which should have been reported to the coroner.
Dr Grenville also observed that bronchopneumonia does not usually cause a very sudden death. The illness usually develops over a period of several days, during which the patient deteriorates gradually. It is generally associated with some other underlying illness, which has caused the patient to be debilitated. Although Mrs Coutts was suffering from chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, Dr Grenville does not consider that she was debilitated by it. There is no evidence that she had a severe chest infection until the morning of her death. However, Dr Grenville explained that it is possible that Mrs Coutts developed a sudden devastating form of bronchopneumonia, which caused her death within hours. This can occur in patients who are immuno-suppressed. There is a possibility that Mrs Coutts was immuno-suppressed on account of the chemotherapy. However, Dr Grenville is of the view that, if Mrs Coutts had developed this severe form of bronchopneumonia, she would have been unable to let Shipman into her flat. She would also have been unable to walk across the room, either while he was there or soon after he had left, as Mrs Atherton claims to have observed. In any event, if Mrs Coutts had suffered that type of bronchopneumonia, Shipman should have included immuno-suppression on the MCCD. He should also have requested a post-mortem examination, as there would have been a possibility that Mrs Coutts' chemotherapy had contributed to her death.
Dr Grenville mentioned, as another theoretical possibility, that Mrs Coutts might have suffered a sudden heart attack, brought on by her chest infection. However, there is no evidence to support this theory and the possibility could only have been confirmed by post-mortem examination.
Mr Richard Baker found the case highly suspicious on account of the contents of the cremation forms, and moderately suspicious on account of the content of the medical records.
Conclusion
I think it likely that Shipman was at Mrs Coutts' flat from about 1.40pm until about 2.10-2.15pm. As Mrs Coutts was found dead only a few minutes after his departure, the level of suspicion that he caused her death is very high.
For all the reasons given by Dr Grenville, I do not accept that Mrs Coutts died of bronchopneumonia. Save in very unusual circumstances, that condition develops over a period of days. Mrs Coutts was not obviously ill until the morning of the day of her death. If she were so close to death from bronchopneumonia when Shipman was at the house, she would not have been able to get up and dress herself a few hours earlier. Nor is it plausible that Shipman would have left her alone in the house without any arrangements for her care.
Shipman's account to the family that Mrs Coutts had refused to go to hospital does not ring true. I do not think Mrs Coutts would have refused to go to hospital if Shipman had advised her that she was seriously ill and in need of admission. It is one thing to tell a friend that one does not want to go to hospital and quite another to refuse to do so in the face of medical advice.
I am also confident that Shipman has falsified the time of his attendance when completing Form B, so as to make it appear that the death occurred over an hour after his departure.
So far, everything points towards Shipman having killed Mrs Coutts. However, there are two features of this death that are not typical of cases in which Shipman has killed. First, there is clear evidence that Mrs Coutts was not sitting in the relaxed position in which so many of Shipman's victims were found. She was turned to one side, giving the impression that she might have been trying to reach for the telephone. Dr Grenville has observed that this position is consistent with a death by natural causes and is not typical of the appearance following cases in which Shipman has killed. However, he also made the point that the appearance is not necessarily inconsistent with a diamorphine death. Some patients do not like to watch an injection and turn their bodies away from the doctor during the procedure. He also suggested that it is possible that Mrs Coutts may have felt a wave of nausea as she was given the injection and may have turned away from Shipman for that reason.
The second atypical feature arises from the evidence (if it is correct) that Mrs Atherton saw Mrs Coutts walk across the room back to her chair just after Shipman had left. She had the impression that Mrs Coutts had seen him out and then walked back to her chair. Dr Grenville said that Mrs Coutts would not have been able to do this if she had been given a large dose of diamorphine intravenously. However, if the dose had been given intramuscularly, or, if the needle had accidentally come out of the vein during the procedure so that the diamorphine had entered subcutaneously, it would have taken longer for the drug to take effect. If Shipman had decided to leave, Mrs Coutts might have been able to show him out and walk back to her chair, possibly feeling dizzy and wishing to reach the telephone. She could then have lost consciousness and died. However, it was Shipman's usual practice to wait until a patient to whom he had given diamorphine had died. To do otherwise would be very risky. If for any reason the patient was found and resuscitated vigorously, he or she might survive to tell the tale. If Shipman had given Mrs Coutts an injection of diamorphine, it would be unusual for him to leave her alive. However, it is possible that he did so, confident that it would not be long before she lapsed into unconsciousness.
There is another possible factual finding. Mrs Atherton might be wrong when she says that she saw Mrs Coutts walking across the room just at the time Shipman was leaving. Mrs Mary Clarke is sure that Mrs Atherton told her that Shipman had come out of the flat and gone back in, carrying his black box. She could be right and Mrs Atherton could have forgotten that part of the incident. It could have been at that stage that Mrs Coutts showed Shipman out and returned to her chair. That would have been before he had given her an injection.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman was responsible for Mrs Coutts' death. The death was discovered so soon after Shipman's departure that it would have been a quite remarkable coincidence for a natural death to occur within the five to ten minutes that had elapsed between his departure and Mr Fox's arrival.
The problems in this case arise, not in deciding whether Shipman killed Mrs Coutts, but exactly how he did it. There are two possibilities, either of which is feasible. He might have given her an intravenous injection of opiate, in which case she would have died quickly, and would not have been able to see him out and return to her chair. On the other hand, he might have given an intramuscular or subcutaneous injection, in which case Mrs Coutts would have been able to show Shipman out and return to her chair, as Mrs Atherton suggests. I have no doubt that Mrs Atherton is an honest witness doing her best to assist the Inquiry, but I cannot be sure that every detail of her evidence is accurate. I do not know which is the true explanation. But I am sure that Shipman did kill Mrs Coutts.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001