The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hilda Mary Couzens
Introduction
Mrs Hilda Mary Couzens died at her home, 10 Knott Lane, Hyde on Wednesday, 24th
February 1993 at the age of 92. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since September 1992. She always spoke very highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was myocardial infarction due to ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1999, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Couzens' son, Mr Richard Frederick Charles Couzens, contacted the police, expressing concern about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Couzens and a friend of Mrs Couzens, Mrs Sylvia Longe.
There was no prosecution in connection with Mrs Couzens' death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Couzens, Mrs Longe, Mrs Jean Dawson (daughter of Mr Frederick Dawson, who was a friend of Mrs Couzens), Mrs Jean Primrose Hollows (a friend of Mrs Couzens), Mrs Margaret Barr (next door neighbour of Mrs Couzens), Mrs Carol Chapman (a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery) and Ms Hilary Buckley (medical secretary to Dr M A Matin). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Couzens' general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Mr Couzens, Mrs Longe, Mrs Dawson and Mrs Hollows gave oral evidence at a hearing on 25th
October 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Couzens had suffered a myocardial infarction in 1982, after which she had cardiac failure. She had a further suspected infarction the following year. After that, her cardiac health appeared to improve and there are no further references to a heart condition until 1992. In 1989, she was found to have gross osteoporosis with a partial collapse of the bodies of the upper thoracic vertebrae. She fractured the neck of a femur in the same year. Her mobility was somewhat impaired and she had a stairlift installed in her home.
In September 1992, Mrs Couzens was referred to Dr Matin, a consultant physician specialising in the treatment of the elderly. At that time, she was suffering from lack of appetite and episodes of tightness of the chest. Despite her problems, in a letter dated 7th
October 1992 Dr Matin described Mrs Couzens as
'Mentally clear. Slowly mobile with some difficulty'
. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed early changes suggestive of inferior myocardial infarction. Dr Matin diagnosed her as suffering from ischaemic heart disease with angina and inferior infarction. He arranged for her to be admitted to hospital for a short time. The precise date of her discharge is not known but it was probably in early November 1992, as Shipman seems to have visited her at home on 3rd
November 1992 and recorded:
'further CT no CHF present'
.
On 1st
December 1992, he recorded:
'All OK 76/min
(
pulse rate
)
no CHF
(
congestive heart failure
)
some oedema ankles
Appetite OK
feels reasonably well'
.
Mrs Couzens was seen in the Tameside General Hospital out-patients clinic later in December and a letter written by Dr J Peters, registrar to Dr Matin, mentioned that she was
'keeping well'
and was mobile. She had had only two episodes of tightness in her lower chest and had not required the glyceryl trinitrate spray, which she had been prescribed. She was discharged back to Shipman's care.
In January 1993, Mrs Couzens was admitted to hospital again with tightness of the chest and a diagnosis was made of acute coronary insufficiency as well as a hiatus hernia with oesophagitis.
According to her family and friends, Mrs Couzens was a small, slim woman, who, by the time of her death, had become rather frail. She was bright and chatty. She still dressed well and was an excellent cook and baker. She walked with a stick and did not usually go out alone. However, she went out for meals and trips with friends in their cars. She had no official home help but Mrs Longe called two or three times a week to help her with the heavier chores and also to wash her hair and back. Mrs Couzens was very alert, a keen reader and took an interest in current affairs. She had a number of friends who visited her regularly, including Mr Dawson, who drove to see her once or twice a week in the afternoon. Some time before her death, Mrs Couzens' family had been concerned about her ability to look after herself and had moved her into an old people's home. However, she did not like it and after two weeks returned to live independently. She wore an emergency alarm pinned to her dress to enable her to obtain assistance if required. Her friend, Mrs Hollows, and her neighbour, Mrs Barr, said that Mrs Couzens always used to close the curtains in her living room as soon as it went dark. She would often go up to her bedroom quite early in the evening, possibly as early as 7.30pm to 8pm, and would read in bed.
Mrs Couzens' son, Richard, seems now to believe that he last saw his mother on the Saturday before her death and last spoke to her during the morning of the day before her death. Although he was concerned generally about her frailty, he had no specific concerns at that time. He has a vague recollection that she mentioned that Shipman was coming to visit her in connection with her general health and her stomach. Mr Couzens had other serious personal problems at the time. His wife had had a brain tumour removed. He was taking time off work to nurse her. On the weekend before his mother died, his wife was well enough for him to take her away for a few days to the Lake District. Mr Couzens' wife died the following year.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Wednesday, 24th
February 1993, Mrs Longe spent the morning with Mrs Couzens. She washed Mrs Couzens' hair and combed it out shortly before she left at about 1pm, when Mrs Couzens was sitting down to have the lunch which they had prepared together during the morning. Mrs Couzens seemed well and did not mention to Mrs Longe any impending visit by Shipman.
Nevertheless, it is plain that she had requested such a visit. The practice visits book for that day records her name and the words:
'Eyes - stomach - Call at your convenience'
. I infer from the words recorded that Mrs Couzens had not requested a visit as a matter of urgency. Her stomach discomfort was a long-standing problem. She had had some trouble with her vision in 1991 and 1992. I think she asked that Shipman should call in the next few days, when convenient to him. However, Shipman seems to have put her name in his own visits book for that day, intending her to be his last visit of the day (although he seems to have mistaken the number of her house). There were three other visits to be made, of which one was to Mrs Olive Heginbotham, who lived not far from Mrs Couzens.
It is not known at what time Shipman visited Mrs Couzens. Shipman made no note of it in the medical records. However, there is an adhesive note which was written by one of the practice receptionists, Mrs Carol Chapman, and which was stuck onto the latest Lloyd George card in the medical records. She was working at the surgery that afternoon and would have made the note between 1pm and 4pm. She wrote:
'DOMICILIARY
Dr Matin
C31949
TOMORROW 25-2-93
3 coronaries SVT
(
supra ventricular tachycardia
)
In cardiac failure
Slightly syanozed
(
sic
)
Refused'
.
Although Mrs Chapman does not remember writing the note, she can say that Shipman would have told her that he had been to see Mrs Couzens and that he was not happy with her condition. He would have given her the information and some relevant medical history. He appears to have asked her to arrange a domiciliary visit by Dr Matin, the geriatrician at Tameside General Hospital, who had previously treated Mrs Couzens. Shipman must have told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Couzens had refused hospital admission. Mrs Chapman must have telephoned Dr Matin's secretary to arrange the appointment. When it was confirmed that Dr Matin would visit the next day, Mrs Chapman must have written, in red ink in the top right hand corner of the note:
'TOMORROW 25-2-93'
. Although the note is undated, given the fact that the visit by Dr Matin was arranged for 25th
February 1993 ('tomorrow'), it seems clear that this note was written on 24th
February 1993. Dr Matin's diary for 1993 has been destroyed.
There is some evidence that Mrs Couzens received a visit from Shipman on the afternoon of 24th
February but, for reasons that I shall explain, I am unable to take that evidence into account. As I have said, Mr Dawson used to visit Mrs Couzens once or twice a week, in the afternoon. He is now dead, but his daughter, Mrs Dawson, claimed to know when her father last visited Mrs Couzens. In her Inquiry statement, she said that he left their home at about 1.20pm on 24th
February, saying that he was going to visit Mrs Couzens. He would have arrived at about 1.45pm. It was his habit to stay for about two hours, returning before the rush hour traffic and arriving home at about 4.20pm. According to Mrs Dawson's Inquiry statement, her father told her that Mrs Couzens was fine when he returned. If her evidence is accurate, Mrs Couzens was still alive shortly before 4pm.
Mr Couzens gave evidence about his understanding of when Mr Dawson had last seen his mother. In his police statement, nothing had been said on the subject. In his first Inquiry statement, he said that Mrs Dawson (who at that time was known by her married name of O'Pray) had told him that her father had visited Mrs Couzens on the Wednesday afternoon and had left at about 3.50pm, at which time she was alive and well. Mr Couzens said that, before his death, Mr Dawson had expressed to him his amazement at Mrs Couzens' death, as she had been so well on the afternoon of that day.
Shortly before the hearing, Mr Couzens volunteered an additional statement to the Inquiry, in which he stressed that his mother was known to be alive at 3.50pm on the Wednesday afternoon, the time at which Mr Dawson had left. He also asserted that this showed that Shipman must have visited his mother after 3.50pm. He seemed not to appreciate that that assertion was based upon the premise that Shipman had killed his mother. The thinking was that, if she was alive at 3.50pm and if Shipman killed her, Shipman must have visited after 3.50pm. The logic is unassailable if the premise is correct. But where the object of the exercise is to discover whether Shipman killed Mrs Couzens, this kind of retrospective rationalisation is not merely useless, but positively damaging to the processes of investigation and decision making.
By the time Mr Couzens came to give evidence he had realised, from having been shown all the evidence which the Inquiry had collected, that if Shipman did indeed kill his mother, he must have done it early in the afternoon rather than late. When Mr Couzens came to give evidence, he said that he thought Mrs Dawson's recollection that her father had visited Mrs Couzens on the Wednesday must be mistaken. He now thought Mr Dawson must have visited on the Tuesday, as was his habit. It must have been on the Tuesday afternoon that Mrs Couzens had been in such good form. Mr Couzens made no secret of the fact that he and Mrs Dawson had discussed their evidence and had agreed that her earlier account must have been wrong.
When Mrs Dawson came to give oral evidence, she said that she now believed that her father had visited Mrs Couzens on the day before her death. It was her father's habit, she said, to visit on Tuesdays and Thursdays. He only went occasionally on a Wednesday, if he had been to Chelford market and wanted to call in on his way back to drop off some purchases for Mrs Couzens. When asked if she was confident about which version was correct, she eventually said that she was not. It appeared to me that she had learned the first version of her evidence so well that she could no longer be certain of what she was supposed to say.
Mr Couzens' conviction that Shipman murdered his mother and his anxiety that this should be officially recognised can be seen from correspondence between him and the South Manchester Coroner, early in 2001. On 2nd February 2001, Mr Couzens wrote to the coroner informing him that his mother died following a visit from Shipman and asking that an inquest be held. He said there was evidence now available, which had not been uncovered by the police. The coroner promised to look into the matter. On 9th
March 2001, Mr Couzens wrote to the coroner enclosing a statement made by Mrs Dawson. He said that that the statement showed that his mother was well at 3.50pm on 24th
February. He asserted that Shipman visited soon afterwards. The enclosure, written and signed by Mrs Dawson, asserted that she knew that Shipman visited Mrs Couzens in the late afternoon of the 24th
, shortly after her father had left Mrs Couzens in good health.
It will be obvious by now that the evidence of Mr Couzens and Mrs Dawson is worthless. They have sought to give evidence in support of what they wished to prove, rather than stating honestly what they remember. I do not underestimate the grave personal difficulties that Mr Couzens has had in the past few years, for which he has my sincere sympathy. However, his conduct in orchestrating an attempt to bolster the evidence in support of his conviction that Shipman murdered his mother is regrettable. To his credit, he virtually admitted that that is what he had done. Mrs Dawson was less frank. I must reject the evidence of both of them as wholly unreliable.
Fortunately, the interests of justice have not been defeated in this case, because there are three witnesses to the events of 24th
February in whom I have complete confidence. One of them I have already mentioned, and she is Mrs Longe. The second is an old friend of Mrs Couzens, Mrs Hollows, who was driving past Mrs Couzens' house between 7pm and 8pm that night when she noticed that, unusually, no lights were on and the curtains were open. She was somewhat concerned but decided not to call, as she did not want to bring Mrs Couzens downstairs if she had already gone to her bedroom. Instead, she went home and telephoned Mrs Couzens' neighbour, Mrs Barr. She asked her and her husband to go and check on Mrs Couzens. Mrs Barr gave evidence. She is the third witness whom I found wholly reliable. She said that she went and rang Mrs Couzens' doorbell, but there was no reply so she went to fetch her husband. The two of them returned to the house and knocked on the window but there was still no reply. They went to see another neighbour, Mrs Alice Morley, who had a key to the house, and all three of them went inside. They found Mrs Couzens sitting in a chair, facing the gas fire, which was on. She was clearly dead. Mrs Morley, who was unable to give evidence to the Inquiry due to ill health, later told Mr Couzens that his mother looked very peaceful.
The Revd Frederick Barr, who has since died, telephoned the police whilst Mrs Morley telephoned Mr Couzens. The Barrs remained at the house until Mr Couzens arrived later in the evening. In the mean time, the funeral directors had removed Mrs Couzens' body. A deputising doctor, Dr Z Ahmad, attended at 10.25pm, presumably as a result of a request by the police. The note made by Dr Ahmad reads:
'DOA
No idea when had
she been seen by
her G.P.
O/E no signs of life
She might have died any
time before 5pm on 24.2.93
Death certified'
.
It appears to me likely that Dr Ahmad deduced that Mrs Couzens must have died before 5pm because she was found sitting in the dark with the curtains open.
In the night visits book, Shipman recorded the death as occurring at
'21.03'
. This probably reflected the time at which the deputising doctor was called out.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. This shows that Shipman gave the cause of death as myocardial infarction caused by ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had last seen Mrs Couzens alive on the day of her death. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. When Mr Couzens saw Shipman on 25th February, probably to collect the MCCD, Shipman told him that there was no need for a post-mortem examination as he had seen Mrs Couzens on the day of her death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate and stated that Mrs Couzens died
'Between 1400 and 2300 hrs on 24.2.93'
. It is most unusual for Shipman to state a wide bracket in this way. He was usually unrealistically precise in his estimates of the time of death. In any event, the later time is impossible given the time at which Mrs Couzens' body was discovered. Shipman claimed to have attended Mrs Couzens for 12 hours during her 'last illness'. It is not clear to what condition this refers. It is hard to understand how he could say with such precision for how long her last illness had lasted if he did not know, within a bracket of nine hours, when she had died. He stated that he last saw Mrs Couzens alive at 1.40pm on the day of her death. It seems to me that that might well be accurate as that time falls within one of Shipman's windows of opportunity to visit on that day, which are discussed below. The question is whether that is also the time of Mrs Couzens' death.
Shipman said that the mode of death was
'Collapse'
lasting
'seconds only'
. Shipman observed that Mrs Couzens was
'Found in chair collapsed didn't even trigger alarm button fitted on her dress'
. He stated that no one was present at the moment of her death.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
On 24th
February, Shipman had morning surgery as usual, followed by an open surgery at 10.15am. Eleven patients attended open surgery so it was unlikely to have finished until at least 11.30am, probably nearer 11.45am. Shipman would then have had paperwork to do. He would then have gone out on his rounds until he returned for the vaccinations clinic at 2pm. That window of opportunity was from about midday until 2pm. The vaccinations clinic would have finished just before 3pm, giving Shipman another hour for visits before afternoon surgery began at 4pm.
Shipman's red visits book (the one that he took with him on his rounds) for 24th
February shows four visits, including those to Mrs Couzens and Mrs Heginbotham. Mrs Heginbotham and Mrs Couzens lived quite close to each other on the south side of Hyde. The other two visits were on the north side. It would seem likely that Shipman would have made his visits that day in two pairs, two before the vaccinations clinic and two afterwards. The fact that Mrs Chapman was able to write the adhesive note and arrange an appointment with the consultant means that the visit to Mrs Couzens must have been made before the start of the afternoon surgery, probably before the vaccinations clinic.
After 4pm, Shipman had appointments until after 5pm and his open surgery started at 5.15pm. He had 16 patients at that clinic and a new patient to see afterwards. It is unlikely that he would have finished in surgery before 7.15pm to 7.30pm. It is extremely unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Couzens after that time, especially as her request had not been urgent. In any event, by that time, Mrs Couzens would already have switched on her lights and closed her curtains. It is possible that she might even have gone upstairs for the night. The fact that, when she was found dead, the lights had not been switched on and the curtains were not drawn implies strongly that she was dead before darkness began to fall. It was probably the realisation that Shipman would not have had the opportunity to visit between 3.50pm and 5pm that led Mr Couzens to change his evidence and that of Mrs Dawson.
Diamorphine Supplies
The controlled drugs register of the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy reveals that, on 22nd
February 1993, Shipman received two single 30mg ampoules of diamorphine, prescribed in the names of patients who did not need and did not receive the drug. 30mg is a lethal dose. Four days later, on 26th
February, that is two days after the death of Mrs Couzens and Mrs Olive Heginbotham, Shipman obtained two more 30mg ampoules, one of which was dispensed for a prescription in Mrs Heginbotham's name, two days after her death. The other patient did not receive the drug prescribed in his or her name.
Conclusion
Mrs Couzens was a very elderly woman with a history of heart disease and a fairly recent history of coronary insufficiency. She was therefore at considerable risk of dying suddenly from a heart attack.
Shipman said on cremation Form B that he visited her at 1.40pm on 24th
February. That is entirely possible. It seems unlikely that he would have said he had visited her that day if he had not. He made no entry at all in her medical records. He should have done. He asked Mrs Chapman to arrange a domiciliary visit the following day, as (so he said) he was concerned about Mrs Couzens and by the fact that she had refused to be admitted to hospital. This aspect of Shipman's conduct gives rise to strong suspicion. Mrs Couzens had not requested a visit as a matter of urgency or on account of anything that sounded like a cardiac episode. At 1pm she was well, had had her hair washed and set and was enjoying a cooked lunch. In my view it is unlikely that there was anything seriously wrong with her when Shipman arrived. Yet she was never seen alive again. It seems to me highly likely that Shipman killed her, using one of his recently acquired 30mg ampoules of diamorphine and, on arrival back at the surgery, set in train an arrangement which would provide him with some corroboration for his explanation for the death which would soon be discovered.
I have learned to suspect Shipman's claims that his patient has been unwilling to be admitted to hospital. Although I accept that many old people are unwilling, one would usually expect that there would be some discussion with a member of the patient's family before the refusal was accepted. If the patient were ill enough to require admission, one would expect that the patient would need care if he or she were to stay at home. Yet Shipman left without making any such arrangements for Mrs Couzens. Shipman's actions and account, to the extent that it was given, do not make sense.
Mrs Couzens had an alarm pinned to her dress. Dr John Grenville has explained in his generic evidence that patients suffering from a heart attack seldom die without realising that something unusual, even catastrophic, is happening to them. Usually, the patient will get up and make some attempt to seek help, as for example by moving towards the telephone. Mrs Couzens did not activate her personal alarm. That must be because either her death occurred so quickly that she was unable to do so or perhaps she did not realise that she needed help. Dr Grenville's view is that there would usually be time to activate such an alarm in the case of a heart attack. It seems to me, therefore, that it is more likely that Mrs Couzens did not use her alarm because she did not appreciate any need to. She would not have pressed her alarm if her family doctor were with her, giving her an injection or possibly pretending to take a blood sample. As Dr Grenville has also said in his generic evidence, patients who have had a heart attack are not usually found sitting peacefully in an armchair. On the other hand, Mrs Couzens' position and appearance are entirely typical of many of Shipman's diamorphine victims. Patients who have died after a heart attack are often found collapsed on the floor.
There is a startling similarity between Shipman's handling of the cases of Mrs Couzens and Mrs Heginbotham. He gave almost identical instructions to Mrs Chapman, to make arrangements for each woman to receive a domiciliary visit the following day. In each case he would have been able to say to relatives, or to the Form C doctor or medical referee, that he had been sufficiently concerned about the patient's condition to have recommended admission to hospital and, when the patient had refused, he had arranged a visit. This would demonstrate that in neither case was the death unexpected.
Taking these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Couzens. He probably visited her at about 1.40pm as he said on Form B. He probably used one of the ampoules he had obtained two days before. Despite the confusing evidence in connection with Mr Dawson's supposed visit, which I have had to put from my mind completely, I am in the end sure that Shipman killed Mrs Couzens.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001