The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frank Crompton
Introduction
Mr Frank Crompton died at his home, 115 Knott Lane, Hyde at the age of 86. Shipman certified that his death occurred on Sunday, 26th
March 1995, although it seems very likely that he died two days earlier, on Friday, 24th
March.
Mr Crompton had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Crompton's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In January 1999, the Greater Manchester Police investigated Mr Crompton's death as part of their investigations into the means by which Shipman obtained controlled drugs. It was found that, on 28th
February 1995, ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine were dispensed in Mr Crompton's name by the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy. On 18th
March 1995, a further ten 10mg ampoules were dispensed at the same pharmacy. The police took witness statements from Ms Mary Crompton (Mr Crompton's daughter), who lives some distance away, Mrs Ruth Margaret Cooper (his friend and neighbour), Mr Alan Thomas Oakes and Mr John Roberts (ambulance technicians), Ms Ghislaine Brant (a pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy) and PC Michael Levy. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Crompton but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Ms Crompton, Mrs Cooper, Mr Oakes and Mr Stephen Titterington (a neighbour and distant relative). The Inquiry has had access to Mr Crompton's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Crompton was a widower and lived by himself. His medical notes and records confirm his family's recollection that he suffered from mild angina. This appears to have been diagnosed in 1984 and seems to have been relieved by use of a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray.
In August 1994, Mr Crompton was diagnosed as having carcinoma of the prostate. He responded well to treatment by Cyprostat and, on 2nd
February 1995, was noted to be asymptomatic. His treatment was discontinued, at his request and with the agreement of his consultant. He was to be reviewed in six months' time. Mr Crompton was independent at all times. He neither required nor requested the assistance of a home help or the services of the district nurses. From early 1995, Shipman made it his practice to visit Mr Crompton at home. Usually, these visits were unsolicited. From time to time, Shipman would take a blood sample. Mr Crompton did not require or receive the ten ampoules of 100mg of diamorphine that Shipman prescribed in his name on or about 28th
February 1995. At his trial, Shipman claimed that he had given that diamorphine to Mr Crompton because the time would come when he would need it. The medical records show a visit on 27th
February but nothing is said about a prescription for diamorphine.
According to the records, Shipman saw Mr Crompton at home on 16th
March. On that occasion, the records suggest that the prostate was giving rise to no problems and that the
'angina comes goes'
. The record contains no reference to a prescription for diamorphine. In evidence at his trial, Shipman said that Mr Crompton had told him that he had destroyed the diamorphine he had been prescribed earlier as he did not want to become a drug addict. Shipman had therefore talked to him and had persuaded him of the wisdom of keeping a supply on hand. As far as Shipman knew, Mr Crompton had had the second prescription dispensed on 18th
March 1995. He said he did not know what Mr Crompton had done with it. He admitted that, as a morphine naïve patient, Mr Crompton could not possibly have required such a very large quantity of diamorphine, even if his cancer had become painful. Shipman's explanations for writing these two prescriptions were frankly implausible and I am satisfied that Shipman kept the proceeds of both prescriptions for himself.
Ms Crompton would speak to her father over the telephone every Sunday and Wednesday. She last spoke to him on Wednesday, 22nd
March 1995. During the course of their conversation, Mr Crompton mentioned that Shipman had visited him that day. He said that Shipman had taken some blood, although he did not know the reason for this. Mr Crompton said that he was feeling tired but that he was not in any pain. There is no record of this visit in the practice visits book, although the visit appears in the computerised medical records. The taking of the blood sample and its dispatch to the laboratory is confirmed.
Three sets of results from the blood test are contained within the medical notes and records. They indicate that the samples of blood were collected from the surgery on 23rd
March 1995. They were reported on 23rd
and 24th
March. The only report which is stamped as having been seen by Shipman was not stamped until Monday, 27th
March.
The Death and its Discovery
There is no evidence that anyone saw or spoke to Mr Crompton on 24th
or 25th
March.
On the afternoon of Sunday, 26th
March 1995, Ms Crompton tried to contact her father by telephone. There was no reply and she continued to telephone him throughout the afternoon and into the evening. By about 8pm, she had become concerned and she telephoned Mrs Cooper and asked her to go round to check that her father was all right.
Mrs Cooper went upstairs and looked across at the back of Mr Crompton's house. She thought she could see Mr Crompton sitting in a chair in the rear lounge. She went to the front door but it was locked and there was no reply to her knock. She summoned help from Mr Titterington and she recalls that he looked over the back fence, saw that Mr Crompton did not appear to be moving, and dialled 999. She recalls that the police and ambulance arrived at about the same time and forced entry at the front door. Mr Titterington told the Inquiry that, when he found that the front door was locked, he went round to the back of the house, climbed over the fence into Mr Crompton's garden, found that the back door was open, went in and found that Mr Crompton was dead. He then summoned the emergency services. It probably matters not which of them is right. The ambulance staff diagnosed the fact of death and recorded that rigor mortis had already set in. The calls to the ambulance service and the police are timed in the contemporaneous documents at 8.05-8.07pm.
Mrs Cooper told the Inquiry that, when she entered the house, she saw Mr Crompton sitting in his chair, fully clothed, near to the dining table. He looked comfortable and she formed the impression that he had simply fallen asleep after his lunch. She recalls that the police and ambulance men said that Mr Crompton had been out shopping and must have been dead for some time. She noted that shopping was still in bags and recalls that somebody found a receipt with Friday's date on it. Mrs Cooper also told the Inquiry that, on the perpetual calendar that Mr Crompton always kept up to date, the last date showing was Friday, 24th
March 1995. Mrs Cooper cannot now remember whether she noticed the calendar or whether Ms Crompton or somebody else told her about it. Mr Titterington confirmed Mr Crompton's appearance and said that it did not appear that Mr Crompton had tried to get help, or otherwise stirred from his seated position.
Mr Titterington recalls that Mr Crompton had a TV magazine on his lap, which was open on the page for Friday, 24th
March 1995. Mr Titterington has told the Inquiry that, from what he knew of Mr Crompton, he thought that he would keep his front and back doors locked.
The police incident report indicates that Shipman was spoken to and that he said he would issue a death certificate at the family's request the following morning because he had seen Mr Crompton on Thursday, 23rd
March 1995. No one from the family seems to have made any such request. It is not clear who spoke with Shipman or whether this conversation was in person or over the telephone. However, neither Mr Titterington nor Mrs Cooper recalls Shipman attending the house that night and, on Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that he saw Mr Crompton's body 48 hours after his death.
The Aftermath
Ms Crompton travelled to Hyde on Monday, 27th
March. From what she was told and observed, she believes that her father must have died on the previous Friday, after he had been shopping and had eaten his lunch. She believes that he must have sat down to read a book, after considering what he might later watch on television. This is because, when she arrived at the house, she noted that his change and a shopping receipt, dated Friday, 24th
March 1995, were on the mantelpiece and there was fruit next to the fruit bowl. In the waste bin, she found packaging for a pork pie, which was dated 24th
March 1995. The lunch plates were washed and were on the draining board. She too recalls that the
TV Times
was open for Friday, 24th
March.
Ms Crompton spoke to Shipman to thank him after her father's death. He indicated that it was probably a blessing that Mr Crompton had died because his cancer was 'becoming rampant'.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 27th
March. He stated that the death had occurred on 26th
March, that he had last seen the deceased alive on 23rd
March and that he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease, which had begun ten years earlier. He said that adenocarcinoma of the prostate contributed to the death but was unrelated to the heart disease which had caused the death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate on either 27th
or 28th
March. The date has been altered and one cannot tell what the date of signing is supposed to be. He stated that death had occurred at
'1800 hrs.'
on 26th
March. How he could claim to know that is hard to see. The paramedics had found that rigor mortis had already set in when they examined the body at about 8.20pm. Shipman claimed that he had attended the deceased for a period of one year during his last illness. The last illness is supposed to be the condition that leads to the death which, if Shipman's diagnosis of the cause of death was correct, should have been ischaemic heart disease. There is no reference in the medical notes to ischaemic heart disease though angina is referred to as early as 1984.
On Form B, Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Crompton alive on 23rd
March 1995, which he said was three days before his death. He said that he made a complete external examination of the body 48 hours after death. That would mean that he examined the body on 28th
March. This is inconsistent with what he wrote on the MCCD, where he said that he had already seen the body on 27th
March. He gave the same cause of death as on the MCCD and said that the mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration. This can only have been supposition on his part as he stated that no one was present at the moment of death. In answer to question 11, which asked how far the answers to the questions concerning the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on the statements of others, he wrote
'Police Ambulancemen neighbour'
. Insofar as any of those people could have told him anything about the mode of death, they would have said that it did not appear that Mr Crompton had collapsed at all.
The death certificate reveals that, when the death was originally registered, the date of death was recorded as 24th
March 1995. The registrar subsequently corrected this 'error' on 3rd
April 1995 in the presence of Mr Crompton's son, Mr Whyril Frederick Crompton, and in the presence of the superintendent registrar, one B. (Brenda) Clayton. Ms Crompton remembers that her brother had originally tried to register the death as having occurred on 24th
March, but was told that the death had to be registered as having occurred on the day when the body was discovered.
It is worth noting that someone has written
'Death 24.3.95'
in pencil on the Lloyd George envelope. Beneath that, in what appears to be the same ink in which he completed the MCCD on 27th
March, Shipman has recorded the date of death as 27th
March. This is inconsistent with the MCCD, which records the death as having occurred on the 26th
. In my view, these inconsistencies are not evidence of Shipman's involvement in the death and merely demonstrate again his casual attitude towards documentation.
Shipman's Movements
The records show that Shipman visited Mr Crompton on 16th
March. I have already referred to the record of that visit, which mentions that the prostate is
'OK'
and that the angina
'comes goes'
. That is the day on which the second of the two diamorphine prescriptions was issued. Shipman might or might not have visited on that day.
On 22nd
March, the medical records show a visit at which a blood sample was taken. This visit does not appear in the visits book although, as Shipman had only three visits to make that day, he would have had time to visit Mr Crompton if he wished to do so. The laboratory reports of the blood sample show that the sample was delivered to the hospital on 23rd
March. Some of the results were provided on the same day. The liver function sample was said to be haemolysed on receipt, which suggests that it was indeed taken the previous day.
There is no entry in the surgery documents or the medical notes which might suggest that Shipman saw Mr Crompton on 23rd
March, the day on which he claims to have last seen him alive. Shipman had only three visits to pay that day and could have visited Mr Crompton had he wished.
The last entries in the medical records are dated 24th
March and record the results of the blood tests from the sample taken on 22nd
March. The medical record does not suggest a visit and there is no entry in Mr Crompton's name in the visits book or the appointments sheet. The visits book shows that Shipman had four visits to make that day. Shipman would have had time to visit Mr Crompton on that day had he wished to do so.
Shipman has not entered any information about the death in the medical records.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville prepared a medical report for the police and provided a supplementary report during the course of the trial. He said that Mr Crompton's tumour was well differentiated and of low malignancy. By February 1995, the tumour was well localised and he had no symptoms. He had no need for diamorphine. Although Mr Crompton suffered from a degree of angina, there is nothing in the medical notes to support the cause of death certified.
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on the basis of the cremation documentation. He did not see the medical records.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious features of this death but the evidence that Shipman killed Mr Crompton is not at all clear.
I consider first the question of when Mr Crompton died. It seems to me, from the circumstantial evidence of the date of the shopping receipt and the
TV Times
, that he almost certainly died in the afternoon of 24th
March. There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mr Crompton on that day. However, that does not mean that he did not do so as there is evidence to suggest that Shipman was in the habit of visiting Mr Crompton unannounced and that details of his visits would not necessarily be recorded in the practice visits book. It is quite possible that Shipman's attention was drawn to Mr Crompton by the arrival of his blood test results. I have come across cases where Shipman has used the arrival of test results as an excuse to visit and take further blood tests, probably on the pretext that the first set of results had not been technically satisfactory. He would then use that opportunity to give a lethal injection.
Shipman does not suggest that Mr Crompton died as the result of his cancer. All the evidence shows that the treatment he had undergone for that had been successful and he was at the time symptom-free. Shipman lied to Ms Crompton when he said that the cancer was becoming rampant.
It is possible that Mr Crompton died of a heart attack. Although it appears that Mr Crompton's angina had not been troublesome, he could have had a heart attack at any time. However, Mr Crompton's appearance when found was not consistent with death by coronary thrombosis. He was seated and looked peaceful and had not collapsed, as Shipman certified. His appearance in death was typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been injected with diamorphine.
This was an unexpected death of which the cause was not known and should have been referred to the coroner. Shipman was prepared to certify the cause of death when he could not possibly have known what it was.
Shipman's entries on the MCCD, Form B and medical records are riddled with inconsistencies. There are two different dates of death on the face of the Lloyd George envelope. Yet another date is given on the MCCD and Form B. There is an inconsistency between the MCCD and Form B as to the date when Shipman examined the body. I know that Shipman was cavalier in the way he completed official forms, even in cases in which he was not involved in the death. Accordingly I do not attach any significance to those inconsistencies.
I am, however, very suspicious of several other entries on Form B. First, Shipman could not possibly have stated honestly that the death occurred at 6pm on 26th
March. Nor could that time have been intended as a reference to the time at which the body was found. The body was found some time after 8pm. This entry concealed the fact that no one who had provided information knew when Mr Crompton died. When that entry is read in conjunction with Shipman's claim that he had last seen Mr Crompton alive three days before his death, the suspicion is aroused that Shipman was trying to distance himself from the death. He was giving the impression that he knew the time of death and was asserting that it was three days since he had seen Mr Crompton. I am also suspicious of Shipman's statement that he had attended Mr Crompton for one year during his last illness. He implies that Mr Crompton had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease for a year. Although it was not misleading to say that Mr Crompton had angina, and angina is related to ischaemic heart disease, it was misleading to suggest that anything had changed a year before, so as to enable Shipman to mark the commencement of a last illness. The effect is to give the impression that the heart disease was serious and that the death was not therefore unexpected. The truth is that the death was wholly unexpected. Even more sinister is Shipman's claim that the mode of death was collapse and that others had provided information to that effect. That must be a lie, as the people named would, if asked, have described Mr Crompton's position and appearance in death as one which did not suggest collapse. It seems to me that Shipman was deliberately presenting a picture consistent with a heart attack when he must have known that the true picture was not consistent with a death from that cause.
I know from examination of other cases that Shipman sometimes told lies on Form B in order to avoid the need for a referral to the coroner. He did this often in cases where he had killed the patient but, on occasions, he also did it in cases where I am quite satisfied that he was not involved in the death. I do not know his motive for making false entries on those occasions. It might have been to save the family the delay and distress occasioned by a post-mortem examination. In this case, I have asked myself whether these false entries were simply designed to avoid referral to the coroner or whether they were designed to provide a comprehensive and plausible account of the death so as to conceal an act of homicide. I suspect the latter.
I do not attach any significance to the fact that Shipman used Mr Crompton's name to obtain large quantities of diamorphine in the weeks before this death. It is obvious that Shipman had a good stock of the drug at that time, but then I think he usually did.
I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mr Crompton. The factor which influences me most is that I think it unlikely that this was a death from a heart attack. Mr Crompton's appearance in death was not such as would usually be found following a heart attack. Although a death from a heart attack was possible, there is no other aspect of the evidence to suggest that this was the cause. All the other features of the case are either neutral or else give rise to some suspicion that Shipman was involved. There is nothing which points clearly against his involvement. The evidence falls far short of that which would be required to convict Shipman of murder. Nonetheless, I have concluded that he probably caused Mr Crompton's death by administering a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001