The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ann Coulthard
Introduction
Mrs Ann Coulthard (known as Annie) died at her home, 9 Southside, Hyde on Tuesday, 8th
September 1981 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In February 2000, following Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Coulthard's stepson, Mr Roy Ian Coulthard (known as Ian), contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Coulthard's death. The police investigated the death and spoke to Mr Coulthard, his wife, Mrs Helen Joan Coulthard and Mrs Coulthard's niece, Mrs Mary Patricia Gash. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Ian Coulthard and from Mrs Gash, all of whom gave oral evidence at a hearing on 30th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and Shipman's visits book. No other contemporaneous documentation has survived. The Inquiry also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Coulthard lived with her husband, Mr Frank Coulthard. They were a very close and happy couple. Mrs Coulthard had enjoyed good health until her retirement and it was said that during the whole of her working life she had never taken a day off work through sickness. After retirement, however, she was troubled by arthritis and a hiatus hernia. According to Mrs Helen Coulthard, a doctor, possibly Shipman, had said that she had a strong heart.
In July or early August 1981, Mrs Coulthard was taken ill while on holiday with her husband. It is possible that she was admitted to hospital for a short time, although this is not certain. In any event, the couple returned from holiday by coach and were met in Manchester by Mr Ian Coulthard. His recollection is that his stepmother looked 'really poorly'. She was very shaky and ashen in colour. He had the impression that she had had a really bad dose of influenza. Over the next few days, her condition deteriorated and Shipman was called. By this time, Mrs Coulthard's speech appeared slurred and she was very tired and listless. She was very weak on one side and could hardly walk. A bed was brought downstairs. She took to her bed at about that time and was never mobile thereafter. Shipman diagnosed a stroke. He recommended that Mrs Coulthard should not be admitted to hospital. He gave Mr Frank Coulthard the clear impression that nothing useful could be done for her and that he must resign himself to her deterioration and death.
This advice caused something of a rift within the family. Mrs Gash, who is a qualified nurse, felt strongly that Mrs Coulthard should be admitted to hospital for rehabilitation. While working in hospitals, she had seen many stroke patients who had been helped to recovery or at least partial recovery and had enjoyed a reasonable quality of life. Mr Frank Coulthard had complete confidence in Shipman and he refused to discuss the question of hospital admission with Mrs Gash. It may be that he asked his wife if she wanted to go into hospital; if he did, she must have said no. Mr Coulthard told Mrs Gash that 'the doctor knows best'. Mrs Gash says that she tried to arrange a consultation with Shipman but he would not see her.
Over the next four to five weeks, Mrs Coulthard stayed at home and remained in bed. She was nursed by her husband with assistance from Mrs Gash's sister Ann, who was also a niece of Mrs Coulthard, and Mrs Helen Coulthard. Ann has since died. Sometimes a neighbour named Jeannette helped with the nursing. Mrs Coulthard's condition deteriorated gradually. She could hardly speak. She was eating very little.
On the day before Mrs Coulthard died, which would have been 7th
September, her daughter-in-law, Mrs Helen Coulthard, remembers that Shipman called during the morning. She said he was his usual pleasant self. He observed that Mrs Coulthard seemed to be in some pain and said that he would give her an injection. Mrs Helen Coulthard thought her mother-in-law might have been in pain as she had noticed that when her young daughter jumped on the bed, Mrs Coulthard had winced. The injection was almost certainly given in the buttock. After the injection, Mrs Coulthard seemed quieter and very sleepy. This was the first time Mrs Helen Coulthard had noticed any change in Mrs Coulthard's condition after an injection. Although I have no doubt that Mrs Helen Coulthard is an honest witness, I am uncertain as to the accuracy of her recollection about 7th
September. Shipman's visits book, which I usually regard as a fairly reliable record of his home visits, does not contain an entry indicating an intention to visit Mrs Coulthard on 7th
September. It does contain entries for Friday, 28th
August and Wednesday, 2nd
September. It is possible that Mrs Helen Coulthard is mistaken about the day on which the first pain-relieving injection was given. It is also possible that Shipman did visit on 7th
September but failed to enter the name in his book.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Coulthard's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 8th
September 1981. That morning, Mrs Coulthard was being cared for by her husband and her niece, Ann. During the morning, Ann telephoned her sister, Mrs Gash, to say that Shipman had called and had said that Mrs Coulthard was going to die that day. Mrs Gash asked whether Mrs Coulthard had had another stroke but Ann said that she had not; she was just very sleepy. Mrs Gash says she was amazed to receive this information, as she did not think it was possible for a doctor to know when a patient was going to die. However, she and her husband went to the house and sat with Mrs Coulthard until about 4.30pm when they had to leave to attend to their family. During that day, Mrs Coulthard was deeply asleep, as if sedated. Her colour was normal and she was breathing easily. She was not restless and did not seem to be in pain. Mrs Gash now recalls that she spoke to her sister Ann about Mrs Coulthard appearing to be sedated but Ann did not say that Shipman had given her an injection that morning. She thinks Ann would have told her if he had. Mrs Coulthard's condition had not changed when Mr and Mrs Gash left at about 4.30pm.
Mr Ian Coulthard called at the house at about 5.30pm on his way home from work. His father, his cousin Ann and the neighbour Jeannette were there. His stepmother was semi-conscious and appeared to be in pain. She flinched if anyone touched her. At about 6pm, Shipman arrived for what Mr Ian Coulthard thought was a routine visit. He examined Mrs Coulthard and said he was going to give her an injection. It appeared to Mr Coulthard that the injection was to be given in the buttock. Shipman took a syringe in his hand and drew back the bedcovers. Mrs Coulthard's nightdress was lifted up. Mr Ian Coulthard thought it right to leave the room. The others remained. When he went back in, the injection had been given and Shipman said,
'She will be all right now'
, and then left. Mrs Coulthard seemed very sleepy afterwards. It is not possible to discover what drug was injected, as all the records have long since been destroyed. In any event, Shipman's records cannot be trusted.
Soon after that, Mr Coulthard set off home for his evening meal. The journey took about 20 minutes. As he stopped his car outside the house, his wife came out to say that his cousin Ann had telephoned to say that he should return at once, as it was thought that Mrs Coulthard would soon die. He returned to the house and arrived shortly before Mrs Coulthard died. Mr Ian Coulthard thinks that she died at about 7pm to 7.15pm. He estimates that this was slightly over an hour after Shipman had given her the last injection. A doctor was called to certify the fact of death but it was not Shipman who attended.
The Aftermath
On the day after his stepmother's death, Mr Coulthard went to the Donneybrook Surgery to collect the MCCD that Shipman had signed. When he asked Shipman what the cause of Mrs Coulthard's death was, Shipman said that she had given up the will to live. Although this seemed strange to Mr Coulthard, because his stepmother was strong willed, he accepted Shipman's explanation.
The MCCD has not survived but the counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Coulthard alive on the day of her death. He said that the death was due to a cerebrovascular accident and gave ischaemic heart disease as a contributory cause.
Mrs Gash said that she wanted to speak to Shipman about Mrs Coulthard's death but Mr Frank Coulthard asked her not to do so, as he did not want her to upset the doctor.
Mrs Coulthard was cremated but her cremation certificate is not available.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observes that, whilst it is standard practice nowadays to attempt to rehabilitate stroke victims very vigorously, this was not always the case in 1981. In any event, I have to decide whether Shipman killed Mrs Coulthard, not whether his management of her condition was appropriate.
Dr Grenville advises that, if Mr Ian Coulthard's recollection is correct and his stepmother was distressed and in pain on the day when she died, it might well have been appropriate for Shipman to have given an intramuscular injection of opiate, particularly if he had previously been giving such injections for pain. It is also possible that Shipman gave some other type of drug, such as Largactil, which would have made Mrs Coulthard sleep.
Dr Grenville says that, from a medical point of view, it is entirely possible that Mrs Coulthard died of natural causes. She may have had a second stroke shortly before her death, in which case the certified cause of death would be correct. Alternatively, she might have died of a complication of the earlier cerebrovascular accident, such as bronchopneumonia, although if this had been the case Shipman should have recorded it on the MCCD. There is no evidence that Mrs Coulthard suffered from ischaemic heart disease but there is no clear evidence that she did not. It is not, therefore, possible to comment on Shipman's action in giving ischaemic heart disease as a condition contributing to her death.
Conclusion
There seems little doubt that Mrs Coulthard had a stroke soon after her return from holiday. It is possible she had had a minor stroke while away. It is not possible to trace the course of her illness, as her medical records have long since been destroyed. However, it is clear that her health deteriorated gradually over about four weeks and it became clear that she had not long to live.
I found the evidence of Mr Ian Coulthard and his wife to be reliable, despite the passage of 20 years. I accept that in the last few days of her life, Mrs Coulthard was restless and in some pain. The reasons for that cannot now be ascertained. It appears highly likely that Shipman first gave Mrs Coulthard an intramuscular injection within a few days of her death, possibly on the day before. That seems to have made her very drowsy. She did not die, so that injection cannot have been lethal. We do not know what it was. It might have been an opiate; it might have been a sedative.
It seems likely that Shipman came again the following morning and might have given another injection. If he did, it was probably of some form of opiate or sedative. That would be appropriate if Mrs Coulthard was restless and seemed to be in pain. Whatever the injection was, the dosage was not lethal. When Mrs Gash was sitting with her that day, Mrs Coulthard was very sleepy and appeared to be sedated. By late afternoon, Mrs Coulthard was restless again and seemed to be in pain. Shipman gave another intramuscular injection. That might well have been an opiate and might well have been a lethal dose. I say that because, approximately an hour later, Mrs Coulthard died. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville agree that an opiate given intramuscularly provides maximal effect about 30 minutes to an hour after administration. If the dose is lethal, death will follow within about an hour. It is possible that Mrs Coulthard's last injection was of a different nature from the earlier injections or was of a greatly increased dose and was intended to end Mrs Coulthard's life. However, the injection might have been a sedative or an opiate in a quantity which was not lethal and the death might have been natural. It is not possible to say.
A further possibility is that Shipman might have given Mrs Coulthard quite large doses of a sedative over a period of two to three days with the intention of keeping her asleep. This might have been a reasonable thing to do, if it was the only way to keep her comfortable. However, if kept asleep for a long period, Mrs Coulthard would be vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people who have suffered strokes. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he did it because he genuinely considered it to be the only way of keeping Mrs Coulthard comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death.
I regret that I cannot reach a positive decision in this case. There are grounds to suspect that Shipman might have hastened Mrs Coulthard's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001