The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Charlton
Introduction
Mr John Charlton died at his home, 14 Ogden Court, Frank Street, Hyde on Monday, 16th
October 1989 at the age of 81. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He thought highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was cardiac failure due to hypertension.
Mr Charlton's death came to the attention of the police in October 1998 when they interviewed Mrs Christine Simpson (the warden at Ogden Court) in connection with the death of Mrs Maureen Ward, of whose murder Shipman was later convicted. Mrs Simpson raised concern about a number of other deaths in which she suspected that Shipman might have been involved. The police investigated those deaths and in relation to Mr Charlton's case took statements from Mrs Simpson, Mr Peter Charlton (Mr Charlton's son) and Mrs Dorothea Vivien Charlton (Mr Charlton's daughter-in-law).
An inquest into Mr Charlton's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Peter Charlton, Mrs Charlton and Mrs Simpson together with a statement from Mr David John Charlton (Mr Charlton's son and the husband of Mrs Dorothea Charlton). The Inquiry has had access to the diary of Mrs Simpson, Shipman's visits book for 1989 and the cremation documentation. Mr Charlton's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to his family, Mr Charlton enjoyed very good health for most of his life. He suffered from hypertension but this was controlled by medication and, although he was diabetic, he was not dependent on insulin. Mrs Simpson remembers that he had heart problems. He had led an active life, centred round his family and the local Methodist Church. His health had begun to deteriorate in the six months before his death, when he developed shortness of breath, dizzy spells and pains in his legs. He began to sleep in a reclining chair, as he found that he could breathe more easily when propped up. A loose card in Mrs Simpson's diary, containing Mr Charlton's personal details, records that he was diabetic, had blood pressure problems and was on 'water tablets', meaning a diuretic.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mr Charlton's condition in the days before his death can be assessed from the entries in Mrs Simpson's diary. It was her practice to visit each of her residents every morning and, if they were not well, she would record the fact. If there is no entry on a particular day, the inference to be drawn is that the resident was well. The diary contains the following entries relating to Mr Charlton:
Friday, 6th
October 1989:
'No 14 - Feeling O.K. now, not had a very good night,
but doesn't complain very much'
.
Monday, 9th
October 1989:
'No 14 - not too bad, feels he's making good
progress, although admits when he does anything
he is very quickly short of breath'
.
Wednesday, 11th
October 1989:
'No 14 - not too good, managed to get down to
coffee morning'
.
Thursday, 12th
October 1989:
'No 14 - A “bit rough” again this morning'
.
Friday, 13th
October 1989:
'No 14 - not too good again, improves as the day
goes on'
.
The breathing problems identified are consistent with the family's recollection of Mr Charlton's condition.
On the day before his death, Mr Charlton suffered an episode of urinary incontinence whilst he was at church. The family raised this with a friend of theirs, Mrs Dorothy Clegg, who was also the Donneybrook practice nurse. She said that she would arrange for Shipman to visit Mr Charlton as soon as possible and a visit request is recorded in the visits book for the day of the death, 16th
October 1989.
The Day of the Death
On 16th
October, Mrs Simpson visited Mr Charlton during the course of her morning rounds. She cannot now recall his state of health. The relevant part of her diary entry for the day of death reads:
'Seen or spoken to all tenants.
Sent for G.P. for No 16
Everyone reasonably well'
.
Thus, Mr Charlton was probably reasonably well, although his near neighbour at number 16 needed a doctor. Since Shipman's visits book for that day does not refer to any other patient at Ogden Court, it is unlikely that the doctor called out by Mrs Simpson was Shipman.
At about 1.30pm, Shipman called at Mrs Simpson's flat. He told her that Mr Charlton was very ill and said that he needed to telephone for an ambulance to take Mr Charlton to hospital. Shipman asked Mrs Simpson to go up to Mr Charlton's room and to attend to him whilst he made the necessary arrangements for admission.
Mrs Simpson immediately went to Mr Charlton's flat. The door was open and she went into the living room, where she assumed he would be, on his reclining chair. He was not there so she went to the bedroom and found him lying on his bed, flat on his back. She found this strange because she knew he preferred to sleep in his chair on account of his breathing problems. He appeared to be dead. As Mrs Simpson turned to leave the bedroom, she found Shipman standing right behind her. She doubts whether Shipman had had time to telephone the hospital or even for an ambulance. She said, 'I think he's dead', to which Shipman replied, 'Yep, he's dead'. Shipman said that he would leave Mrs Simpson to telephone the family members and added they could get the death certificate from him the following day.
Mrs Simpson's diary entry reads:
'1.20pm. Dr. Shipman came to me, to ask me to go up
to No 14, he was going to ring for ambulance to get
Mr Charlton
into hosp. I went up to the flat to find
""
dead on the bed. Fortunately the G.P.
had followed me upstairs and was at hand to certify
John dead. I rang the N.O.K who came shortly after'
.
Mrs Simpson telephoned Mr Peter Charlton and informed him of the death. He telephoned his brother and then went to his father's flat. He too found it strange that his father was lying on the bed rather than sitting in his reclining chair. Within easy reach of the position in which Mr Charlton had died, was an emergency cord hanging from the ceiling.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. It shows that Shipman certified the cause of death as cardiac failure due to hypertension. He said that diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death but was not related to the cause of death. He said that he had last seen Mr Charlton alive on the day of his death and that there would be no post-mortem examination. He had seen the body after death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that death had occurred at about
'1300 hrs'
on 16th
October 1989. He said that he had attended Mr Charlton during his last illness for a period of ten months and that he last saw him alive about ten minutes before death. He made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The mode of death was said to be coma of only minutes' duration. He knew that from his own observations. He said that no one was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that Mr Charlton's symptoms in the months before his death were suggestive of increasing cardiac failure. However, he does not think that Mr Charlton's incontinence of urine on the eve of his death was indicative of any specific problem. He says that, if Mr Charlton was suffering from an exacerbation of cardiac failure, it might well have been appropriate to admit him to hospital. However, if Mr Charlton was so ill as to be within minutes of death, it was not appropriate for Shipman to leave him alone while calling an ambulance. If Mr Charlton really was very ill, Shipman should have pulled the alarm cord and asked Mrs Simpson to summon an ambulance. Dr Grenville also said that the position in which Mr Charlton's body was found was not consistent with someone dying naturally of an exacerbation of cardiac failure. Such a patient would have become very short of breath and would have felt more comfortable standing, sitting or reclining rather than lying flat. In Dr Grenville's view, the position in which Mr Charlton's body was found was consistent with death due to an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate.
Conclusion
There are some highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death took place in the course of a short visit by Shipman. There is no evidence that Mr Charlton was thought to be seriously ill that day or that Shipman was called out as a matter of emergency. The evidence suggests that he was asked to visit on account of an episode of urinary incontinence which occurred the day before. On the morning of the day of his death, Mrs Simpson had not thought it appropriate to record any concern about Mr Charlton. His condition seems to have been included in the general statement that everyone was
'reasonably well'
. Against that background, the fact that Mr Charlton should die suddenly during Shipman's visit gives rise to grave suspicion.
I accept of course that Mr Charlton probably had a history of congestive heart failure, which would account for his breathlessness and his general illness in the week or so before he died. It follows that I accept that it is possible that Mr Charlton could have died a natural death without much warning.
Shipman's conduct at the time of Mr Charlton's death is highly suspicious. If Mr Charlton was so ill that Shipman formed the view that he must be admitted to hospital, Shipman would have pulled the alarm cord and asked Mrs Simpson to call an ambulance. Instead he chose to walk down to Mrs Simpson's office, leaving Mr Charlton alone. No doctor acting in the genuine interests of his patient would have chosen to do that. I suspect that Shipman had no intention of admitting Mr Charlton to hospital. He then asked Mrs Simpson to go up to the flat. She went immediately and Mr Charlton was already dead. The inference that he was already dead when Shipman left him is very readily drawn.
I suspect that Shipman's statement on Form B, that no one was present at the moment of death, was an attempt to distance himself from the death. By involving Mrs Simpson as he did, he sought to involve another person in the death and its discovery. These are devices that Shipman used in the cases of patients whom he undoubtedly murdered, amongst them another resident at Ogden Court, Mrs Maureen Ward. Another such case was that of Mrs Gladys Saunders, who died on 17th
June 1996 at Ogden Court. In that case Shipman involved Mrs Simpson in the discovery of the death, in much the same way as he did in the present case.
Mr Charlton was found lying on the bed, which he no longer used, in a position in which he found it difficult to breathe. It seems to me that he lay on the bed so that Shipman could examine his abdomen in connection with the urinary incontinence. It might well be that Shipman then suggested that he required a blood sample, to check kidney function. For that he would have introduced a needle into one of Mr Charlton's veins. It would have then been very simple for Shipman to administer a lethal injection of opiate.
Mr Charlton's appearance in death was not consistent with the appearance of someone who had died of cardiac failure. His appearance was, however, entirely typical of someone who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mr Charlton. Notwithstanding the lack of medical records and my inability to establish how serious Mr Charlton's heart failure was in the days before his death, I feel sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001