The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Crompton
Introduction
Mr John Crompton died at his home, 37 Gloucester Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 21st
March 1995 at the age of 82. He had lived alone since the death of his wife ten months before. He had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Crompton's death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and hypertension.
Mr Crompton's daughter, Mrs Meryl Jean Taylor, contacted the police following Shipman's trial because the circumstances of her father's death were similar to some of the deaths for which he had been convicted. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Taylor.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Crompton but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Taylor and Mr Crompton's neighbour, Mrs Jeanette Topping. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Crompton's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Taylor recalls that her father had enjoyed good health until he reached his eighties, when he began to suffer from vertigo and panic attacks. Mrs Topping says that for about a year before the death of Mrs Crompton, she used to do the Cromptons' shopping because Mr Crompton could not manage the walk to the shops, which was uphill. After Mrs Crompton's death, his health declined further and Mrs Taylor did Mr Crompton's shopping for him. His midday meal was brought by the meals on wheels service.
Some weeks before her father's death, Mrs Taylor asked Shipman to visit him. Shipman told Mrs Taylor that her father had a mild heart complaint, which he could live with for many years. For a man in his eighties, according to Shipman, Mr Crompton was in good health.
Mr Crompton's medical records do not present a clear or coherent picture of his state of health. Shipman appears to have used the Lloyd George cards on some occasions and the computer on others. Doing the best I can to establish the medical history, it appears that Mr Crompton was first noted to have raised blood pressure in December 1989, but at that time there was no sign of congestive heart disease. In 1992 and 1993, there were several entries recording raised blood pressure and on 14th
January 1993, there is a reference to oedema, although I cannot make out whether this says
'much'
or
'minimal'
oedema. On 3rd
March 1994, Mr Crompton was said to be better on treatment and that his
'CHF'
(congestive heart failure) was
'OK'
. In August 1994, according to the written records, blood pressure was well controlled at 120/80, heart sounds were normal, lungs were clear, jugular venous pressure was not raised and there was no oedema. In September, the computer records a viral illness. The penultimate entry in the Lloyd George notes reads:
10/10/94 V
(
visit
)
130/90
HS I II no oedema
legs weak
pulses
OK
'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman visited Mr Crompton at home. He found the blood pressure was 130/90, which is not bad for a man of Mr Crompton's age. The heart sounds were normal and there was no swelling of the legs. The next part is very difficult to read but I think it says that the legs are weak but the pulses were satisfactory. There is no entry for that day on the computer.
The next entry appears only on the computer. It is for 13th
December 1994 and is headed
'Congestive heart failure'
for which Mr Crompton was clearly being reviewed. He had blood pressure of 120/80, which is very good, normal heart sounds and no oedema.
The next entry appears only on the computer. It is dated 8th
March 1995. It records an appointment in the surgery, supposedly for a review of his congestive heart failure but no observations are recorded, only the words
'no change'
. The visits book for 7th
March indicates an intention to visit Mr Crompton at home in connection with his congestive heart failure but there is no entry in the medical records for that day. It seems that the entry of 8th
March must relate to this visit, whether by Mr Crompton to Shipman's surgery (as recorded on the computer) or by Shipman to Mr Crompton's home.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Taylor last saw her father alive on the afternoon of Saturday, 18th
March 1995. He seemed to be in particularly good spirits and looked better than he had for some time. She telephoned him on the Sunday or Monday to ask if he needed any shopping. He said nothing about being unwell or needing the doctor.
On Tuesday, 21st
March 1995, as was her routine, Mrs Taylor arrived at her father's house at about 6pm. She found the back door locked, which was surprising because her father usually kept the door on the latch, as his visitors would come in that way. She looked through the window and saw her father slumped in a chair. She went to collect a key and, together with her two sons and her cousin, entered the house.
It was obvious that Mr Crompton was dead. He was sitting in a chair in the rear living room, dressed in his normal day clothes. He was not in his usual rocking chair. There was a newspaper on the floor at his feet, together with his spectacles. Mr Crompton's position was unusual. One leg was sticking out in front of him and Mrs Taylor had the impression that he had tried to get up and had fallen back into the chair. Mrs Taylor noted that her father did not appear to have eaten his evening meal, which he usually made for himself and ate before she arrived at 6pm. He always left the dishes for her to wash but, on this occasion, there were none.
Mrs Taylor telephoned Shipman's surgery and he arrived at about 6.30pm. He took a quick look at Mr Crompton but did not examine him. Mrs Taylor expressed her regret that she had not arrived sooner but Shipman was abrupt and said, 'What do you think you could have done?' Shipman said that Mr Crompton had died of a massive heart attack. He did not say that he had visited Mr Crompton that day. So far as Mrs Taylor knew, Shipman had not visited her father for some weeks and, when she contacted the police to express her concern, she said that she did not know whether or not Shipman had visited her father on the day of his death.
Mrs Taylor says that she later visited Mrs Topping, who was one of her father's neighbours. Mrs Topping was surprised to learn of Mr Crompton's death, because she said she had heard him chopping wood that afternoon. However, Mrs Topping has provided a statement to the Inquiry, in which she says that she cannot confirm this aspect of Mrs Taylor's evidence. At that time, she was recovering from a foot injury and spent the day in her front room, from where she would not have heard sounds coming from the back of the house. Nor does Mrs Topping think that she told Mrs Taylor that she had heard Mr Crompton chopping wood that day, although she agrees that he sometimes did.
For the day of the death, there is an entry in the visits book, said to be a
'RE-VISIT'
. This means that it was Shipman who decided to visit rather than the patient making a request. For that day, there are handwritten and computerised entries. On the Lloyd George card the entry says:
'21 3 95 V
(
visit
)
130/90 HS I II no oedema
legs ok pls ok'
.
That entry is uncannily similar to the one appearing immediately above it on the card dated 10th
October 1994.
The computerised entries for the day of death read as follows:
'Congestive heart failure...
hs I II nil oedema
'O/E
(
on examination
)
- BP reading...
130.00 80.00
'Chest pain...
vague ?? angina tluk'
'Seen in own home
Dr H F Shipman
'[D] found dead
daughter about 17.00
'Death certificate form Med A...
ct
(
coronary thrombosis
)
chf
(
congestive heart failure
)
hypertension'
.
I interpret these entries to refer to two separate occasions on the same day. It is not made clear whether the first consultation took place at home or in the surgery. The account of the first consultation is similar to the written record in that it speaks of congestive heart failure but records observations that do not support the diagnosis. It should be noted that the blood pressure is slightly different from that given in the written record. The record goes on to mention a complaint of chest pain which is vague and might be angina. Mr Crompton was to let us know about something. Possibly this was intended to suggest that he would let Shipman know if his pain recurred. Mrs Taylor has made the valid point that, if her father had been suffering from chest pain that day, he would have telephoned her.
I interpret the second part of the record for the day of death to show that, later in the day, Shipman attended Mr Crompton's home where he was dead, having been found by his daughter at about 5pm. The causes of death were as Shipman was to state on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). I note that the time that Mrs Taylor is said to have found her father is before the time Shipman gives as the time of death. He appears to be providing corroboration for his claim in Form B that the death occurred at 5.15pm in Mrs Taylor's presence.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, giving the causes of death as coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and hypertension, both of which underlying conditions he said had been present for three years. He said that he had last seen Mr Crompton on the day of his death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Crompton had died at
'1715hrs 21.3.95'
. He had last seen Mr Crompton alive four hours before death, and saw the body one hour after the death, when he had performed a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD, and said that the mode of death was collapse of only seconds' duration. His answers to the questions relating to both the cause and mode of death were, he said, based on statements made by Mr Crompton's daughter, who had been present at the moment of death. That was quite untrue; she was not present. Nor was she in a position to give Shipman any information as to the cause or mode of death. Shipman's statement that the death occurred at 5.15pm was also misleading, as nobody knew the time of death. This entry cannot be explained as a mistake as it could have been if the death had been discovered at 5.15pm. It was not discovered until about 6pm. In my view, the claim that the time of death was known with precision is a deliberate lie by Shipman, who wished it to be thought that Mrs Taylor was present at the death and had given him information from which he had been able to diagnose the cause as heart attack.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker, who regarded the first entry in the medical records for the day of the death as suspicious, observed:
'The story is of mild chest pain that might be angina, followed by sudden death. This can happen, but the description of the chest pain is so brief that any assessment of whether this was angina is impossible. Why was GTN
(
glyceryl trinitrate
)
not prescribed? The paper record makes no mention of chest pain'
.
Professor Baker regarded Mr Crompton's death as highly suspicious on the basis of the cremation certificate and the medical notes and records.
Conclusion
This is one of many deaths where a patient was found dead shortly after a visit from Shipman. No one saw Mr Crompton alive or spoke to him after Shipman's visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
Mr Crompton appeared to be well in the days leading up to his death. He did not request a visit from Shipman on 21st
March 1995. If he had wanted to see Shipman, Mrs Taylor would have known about it. It is apparent from the visits book that Shipman had made his own decision to visit. I would not automatically regard an unsolicited visit as sinister as many doctors pay unannounced visits to their very elderly patients. However, it appears that Shipman had planned this visit. According to Mrs Taylor, it was the first time he had paid an unsolicited visit to Mr Crompton. The fact that Mr Crompton was found dead so soon after the visit raises the suspicion in my mind that Shipman might have gone round specifically for the purpose of killing Mr Crompton.
I am also suspicious of Shipman's claim that Mr Crompton complained of chest pain that day. First, if he had had chest pain, he would have told Mrs Taylor about it. Second, if there had been a complaint of chest pain which Shipman suspected might be angina, he would surely have prescribed GTN, as Professor Baker has suggested. If the GTN relieved the pain, Shipman would know that the pain was due to angina. If it did not, the pain would have been due to some other cause. To tell a man of 87 to let the doctor know if his pain recurs is not the action of a reasonable doctor. Whenever Shipman is found to have acted in a way which was not what a reasonable doctor would have done, the suspicion arises that events did not occur as Shipman has claimed. The handwritten entry for 21st
March 1995, which is so strikingly similar to the entry for 10th
October 1994, does not contain any reference to chest pain, angina or contacting the surgery if necessary. I think the medical records are a hotchpotch of untruths.
There are other suspicious features. It is remarkable that Shipman should not tell Mrs Taylor that he had seen Mr Crompton at lunchtime on the day of his death, as I am satisfied that he did. Such concealment is deeply sinister, as are the lies Shipman told on Form B, which, as I have said, seem to me to be designed to give the impression that Mrs Taylor was with her father while he had a heart attack and died.
The locked back door is not consistent with a natural death. It is hard to see why Mr Crompton would have locked his back door, which he always left unlocked. On the other hand, if Shipman had killed Mr Crompton, he could have locked the back door and left by the front door, thereby leaving the house secure and creating the impression that Mr Crompton was alive when he left the house.
Mr Crompton's position and appearance in death were a little different from those of many of Shipman's known victims but were not in my view inconsistent with death following the administration of a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking the evidence as a whole, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mr Crompton. Although I recognise the possibility that this very elderly man could have died naturally from a heart attack or a stroke during the afternoon, the lies told and the deception practised by Shipman have driven me to the conclusion that this cannot have been a natural death. I am satisfied so as to be sure that Shipman killed him.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001