The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eileen Theresa Cox
Introduction
Mrs Eileen Theresa Cox died at her home, 11 Hunters Court, Dukinfield, Cheshire on Monday, 24th
December 1984 at the age of 72. She had been a patient of Shipman since September 1982, when she was widowed and moved to live closer to her daughter, who lived in Hyde. When she later moved from Hyde to Dukinfield, Shipman remained her GP. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Cox's daughter, Mrs Susan Maria Davies, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Davies and from her brother, Mrs Cox's son, Mr Eric Allcock. They also obtained a medical report from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Cox but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Davies and Mr Allcock, both of whom gave evidence at a hearing on 30th
October 2001. Mrs Cox's medical records have not survived. Nor has the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). However, the MCCD counterfoil and the cremation forms have been recovered.
Personal Background
Mr Allcock and Mrs Davies remember that their mother's health was good for her age and that she led an active life. She used to go into Hyde to do her shopping. Nevertheless, they knew that she suffered from angina, bronchitis, and occasional gastroenteritis. Mrs Cox had a spray and some tablets for use if she suffered an angina attack, but Mrs Davies never saw her mother use either of them. She did occasionally complain of breathlessness on exertion. She tried to keep fit and mobile by doing exercises each morning in conjunction with a television programme. Mrs Davies said that her mother was something of a hypochondriac and would see Shipman quite frequently. She often exaggerated her symptoms, but did not seem to mind if Shipman 'brought her down to earth'.
Mrs Davies saw her mother a day or two before she died. She did not appear unwell at that time.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 24th
December 1984, Mrs Cox telephoned her daughter to say that she was not feeling well and had called the doctor. It had been intended that they should travel together to Blackpool to spend Christmas at the home of Mr Allcock. There was to be a large family gathering with nine children, and Mrs Davies had already gathered the impression that her mother was reluctant to go. She was not surprised when her mother said she did not feel well and she suspected that her mother was 'swinging the lead' and the illness was a ruse to avoid going to Blackpool. Mrs Cox told Mrs Davies that she had bronchitis, but Mrs Davies recalls that her mother's voice did not sound as it usually did when she had a bout of bronchitis. Mrs Davies thought that perhaps her mother was starting with a cold. Mrs Cox said that she was expecting the doctor at about midday, so Mrs Davies agreed that she would go to her mother's flat at about lunchtime to collect the prescription that Shipman would almost certainly leave. It would be necessary to have it dispensed that afternoon as it might be difficult the next day.
Not long after noon, Mrs Davies telephoned her mother to see if the doctor had been and to warn her that she was going to be a little later than she had promised. She had made the children's lunch early, but they were taking a long time over it. There was no reply. At first, she felt angry with her mother because she thought she had gone out, when she was supposed to be ill, probably to see a friend in an adjacent flat. After one or two more telephone calls had failed, she became concerned, put the children into the car and drove to her mother's flat.
Mrs Davies entered the flat through the front door, which was on the latch. That was not unusual. She saw her mother in bed in a semi-reclining position with the bedclothes tightly tucked around her chest and arms. She was wearing a nightdress and cardigan. Mrs Davies realised immediately that her mother was dead. She had a peaceful expression and there was no sign that she had been in any pain or distress before she died. It struck Mrs Davies as odd that her mother was tightly tucked in, first because it did not seem that she could possibly have done it herself, but also because Mrs Davies knew that her mother did not like to be closely tucked up in bed. She liked to have the covers left loose.
Mrs Davies telephoned the surgery and asked that Shipman be told that she thought her mother had died. At that stage, she did not know whether or not Shipman had visited. She has some recollection that she saw a prescription, but is now not sure of this. The receptionist promised to inform Shipman as soon as possible. Mrs Davies also made other telephone calls to tell members of the family about the death.
By the time Shipman arrived, other members of the family had begun to assemble. Shipman went into the bedroom alone. When he came out, he said to Mrs Davies that he had visited her mother earlier that day and she was now in exactly the position in which he had left her. She must have died seconds after he had left, he said. He seemed distant and aloof. He might also have said that he had given Mrs Cox an injection to help her.
Mr Allcock remembers that his mother looked 'serene' in death. In the course of his work, he saw many bodies shortly after death. He said, although his mother looked grey, her appearance was as good and as peaceful as any he had seen. He recalls that the funeral director commented favourably upon his mother's appearance. He was so surprised by the death that he wanted a post-mortem examination to be held, but he did not press for it because he knew that his sister did not want one. Indeed, Mrs Davies had already told Shipman of her wishes in this respect, which reflected her mother's wishes, and Shipman had said that no post-mortem examination was necessary.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman recorded that Mrs Cox had died on 24th
December 1984. He did not state when he had last seen her alive. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 24th
December 1984.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that the time of death was at
'About 14.00hrs'
. He said that he had seen Mrs Cox two hours before her death, which on his timing would be at about noon. I suspect that those times are inaccurate, as it appears to me likely that Mrs Davies' unsuccessful attempts to telephone her mother had taken place before 1pm. I think Mrs Cox was dead by then. Shipman also said that he had seen the body one hour after the death. He said that he had attended Mrs Cox during her last illness, although when he specified the period during which he had so attended her he wrote
'seen 2 hours before death'
. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting minutes only. As he also said that no one was present at the death, this must have been intended as supposition. He said that, when he had seen Mrs Cox two hours before her death, she had complained of chest pain and was known to suffer from angina.
The Expert Evidence
According to Dr Grenville, if Shipman visited an elderly patient because of a chest infection and found her to be suffering from chest pain, he should have taken action, by arranging either her admission to hospital or the attendance of someone to care for her. Furthermore, it would be extremely unusual for a patient to die so soon after a visit by a general practitioner unless the patient was known to be terminally ill and the death was expected. As Dr Grenville has said, such an event might be expected to happen once or twice in a doctor's professional lifetime. With Shipman, it appears to have been a frequent occurrence. The coincidence is incredible.
Conclusion
In the absence of medical records, it is difficult to be sure about Mrs Cox's health in the weeks and months before her death. However, I did feel that, in Mrs Davies, I had an unusually reliable source of information. My impression is that Mrs Cox was in quite good general health for her age, but tended to exaggerate any symptoms she had noticed. I accept that her main medical problem was recurrent bronchitis. That Mrs Cox had a spray and tablets for use in angina attacks implies that she had had some signs or symptoms to warrant them being prescribed. However, I am sure that, if chest pain had been a regular occurrence, Mrs Davies would certainly have known of it and would have remembered it.
I accept as accurate Mrs Davies' recollection of the events of the morning of Christmas Eve. I found the details she was able to recall entirely convincing. I accept that she was well able to detect that her mother was not really suffering from a severe bout of bronchitis, but was exaggerating her symptoms of what may well have been the start of a cold. I am quite sure that, if Mrs Cox had been suffering from chest pain, she would have told her daughter. I am sure that she did not.
It is known that Shipman visited Mrs Cox that morning. He says it was at about noon and he could be right about that. What is clear, however, is that no one saw Mrs Cox alive or spoke to her after his visit. That is a highly suspicious factor. It appears to me that Mrs Davies tried to telephone her mother very shortly after Shipman's visit, by which time she was already dead. Knowing what is now known of Shipman's habits and method of killing, it is just too much of a coincidence to suggest that Mrs Cox might have died a natural death within so short a time after Shipman's departure.
Mrs Cox's appearance in death was not consistent with a death following a heart attack. First, her demeanour struck everyone as very peaceful. That is not usual following a heart attack. Second, the way in which Mrs Cox was tucked up in bed is not consistent with her having undergone an 'agonal event'. Quite apart from her personal preferences for having the bedcovers kept loose, it sounds to me as though she could not have tucked herself in and would not have stayed tucked in during a heart attack. On the other hand, her position in bed and her peaceful appearance are entirely consistent with what would be expected if Shipman had visited her, injected her with a strong opiate, and tucked her up before leaving.
The timings given on Form B appear to me to be an attempt by Shipman to distance his visit from the time of death. He might well have given an accurate time for his visit. Noon was the time when Mrs Cox said she was expecting him. But, if Mrs Davies' recollection is reasonably accurate, and I think it is, the time of death was demonstrably earlier than 2pm.
Shipman's claim on Form B that Mrs Cox complained of chest pain at noon and was known to suffer from angina, was intended to provide an explanation for what was otherwise a wholly unexpected death. I do not think that claim was true. But, in any event, as Dr Grenville has said, if it were true, Shipman's conduct in leaving her alone without contacting her daughter would have revealed a quite unacceptable standard of care. In several later cases, I have seen examples of Shipman using this device, of suggesting that the patient was quite seriously ill when last seen but doing nothing about it. Later, the claim of prior illness is used to explain the following death.
There is no evidence available to the Inquiry about Shipman's access to diamorphine or other strong opiate drugs in the 1980s. The drugs registers are no longer available. However, Shipman obtained pethidine and some morphine illegally in the 1970s and he obtained huge quantities of diamorphine by similar methods in the 1990s. Plainly he knew how to obtain such drugs illegally in the 1980s. I infer that he did so.
In summary, this death is entirely typical of many deaths that were to occur in the later years, in which I am quite sure that Shipman has killed his patient. His 'hallmark' is on this case. Despite the absence of medical records and despite the lapse of time since this death, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Cox, almost certainly by injecting her with a lethal dose of strong opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001