The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sydney Hoskins Copeland
Introduction
Mr Sydney Hoskins Copeland died at his home, 68 Grosvenor Crescent, Hyde on Monday, 23rd
January 1995 at the age of 80. He was married. I have found that his widow, Mrs Erla Copeland, was killed by Shipman almost a year later on Thursday, 11th
January 1996. Mr Copeland had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Copeland's death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease.
Mr Copeland's relatives have not expressed any concern that Shipman might have been involved in his death. However, Professor Richard Baker classified the death as moderately suspicious after considering the medical notes and records (although on the basis of the cremation forms he did not consider the death to be suspicious). The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Judith Elizabeth Hamlett (Mr Copeland's daughter) and Mrs Dorothy Phoebe Proctor (his sister-in-law).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Copeland but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Copeland's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Both Mrs Hamlett and Mrs Proctor say that, for some time before his death, Mr Copeland was known to have a heart condition. The medical records confirm this and show that Mr Copeland had signs of congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease. Mrs Hamlett recalls that in November 1994, Mr Copeland fell and injured his knee. Shipman referred him to hospital for treatment. Mrs Hamlett is not aware of Shipman visiting her father again after that date. The medical records confirm the date of the knee injury as 24th
November. That entry is the last entry before the date of Mr Copeland's death.
Mrs Hamlett last saw her father alive on Saturday, 21st
January 1995, when she visited her parents at their home. She recalls that her father seemed to be in better health than he had been for a long time.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Monday, 23rd
January 1995, Mrs Proctor received a telephone call from Mrs Copeland, who said that her husband was ill and that she had telephoned for both an ambulance and Shipman. Mrs Proctor immediately left her home to go to Mr and Mrs Copeland's house. On her way, Shipman drove past her in his vehicle and he arrived at the Copelands' home just before Mrs Proctor. On her arrival, Mrs Proctor saw Mr Copeland sitting in a chair in the kitchen. He was obviously dead. At about this time (it is not clear whether before or after Mrs Proctor or Shipman arrived at the house), the ambulance arrived. The paramedics examined Mr Copeland and pronounced him dead.
Mrs Copeland later told Mrs Hamlett and Mrs Proctor that she and her husband had been sitting at the breakfast table when he let out a sudden cry and collapsed. She had realised immediately that he was dead. She telephoned for an ambulance and for Shipman.
Certification
Shipman subsequently certified the cause of death to be coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease. He stated that he had last seen Mr Copeland alive on 13th
January. On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Copeland alive ten days before his death, which would be 13th
January. However, there is no record of a consultation on this date in either the medical records, the practice appointments sheets or the practice visits books. The last entry in the medical records relates to the consultation about the injured knee on 24th
November 1994. It appears highly likely that those entries on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and on Form B were false. Shipman wished to claim that he had seen Mr Copeland within 14 days of his death. If, as appears to be the case, he had not seen Mr Copeland since 24th
November, Shipman would not have been entitled to certify the cause of death and the case should have been referred to the coroner. It was clearly for that reason that Professor Baker regarded the case as suspicious.
As it happened, the death was referred to the coroner, not by Shipman but by the registrar. It appears that the referral was made because Mr Copeland had been in receipt of a war pension as the result of a shotgun injury to the eye. It appears that the registrar wished to be assured that the death was not related to that past injury. Someone in the coroner's office spoke to Shipman who gave the necessary assurance and then endorsed the back of the MCCD, stating that he had reported the death to the coroner. He added:
'Spoke to Coroner - War pension for eye injury so I can issue certificate'
.
Conclusion
In my view, notwithstanding the coroner's permission, Shipman was not in a proper position to issue the MCCD because he had not seen Mr Copeland since 24th
November, two months before the death, and then not in connection with any last illness. However, having said that, I remain quite satisfied that Mr Copeland died a natural death. The family was right not to feel any concern about Shipman's involvement, which was limited to attendance at the house after the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001