The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Carrington
Introduction
Mrs Alice Carrington died on Tuesday, 4th
July 1995 at Tameside General Hospital, at the age of 75. Although her husband, Mr Fred Carrington, believes she died at or en route to Tameside General Hospital, the entry in the deaths register records the place of death as their home address. Mrs Carrington had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension.
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation forms and considered the death to be moderately suspicious. He also examined the medical records and thought that no suspicion arose from them. As a result of Professor Baker's suspicion in relation to the cremation forms, the police investigated the death in March 2001 and took a statement from Mr Carrington. An inquest into the death was opened by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Carrington's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Carrington has never felt that there were any suspicious circumstances surrounding his wife's death. He told the police that his wife had had a heart attack in the early 1980s. As she aged, her health deteriorated and she continued to suffer from heart problems and high blood pressure. Eventually, she had difficulty in climbing the stairs.
Mr Carrington recalls that his wife visited Shipman at the surgery a few days before she died. Her daughter, Freda, accompanied her. The medical records show that this visit took place on 29th
June 1995. Mrs Carrington's legs were swollen and she was having difficulty walking. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was taken which apparently showed left ventricular hypertrophy. Shipman referred Mrs Carrington to Tameside General Hospital but she died before the referral took place.
The Day of the Death
Between 5am and 6am on Tuesday, 4th
July, Mrs Carrington went to the bathroom but, on her return to the bedroom, she collapsed. Mr Carrington called an ambulance, which arrived a few minutes later. He and his son, who lived nearby, followed the ambulance to the hospital but, on arrival, they were told that Mrs Carrington had died.
Certification
On Form B of the cremation certificate Shipman recorded the cause of death as congestive heart failure due to hypertension. Having examined Form B, it is not clear to me why Professor Baker regarded the death as moderately suspicious.
Conclusion
In any event, I am quite satisfied that there is no cause for concern. Mr Carrington has stated categorically that for several days prior to her death, his wife had not been seen by Shipman. I am quite sure that she died from natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001