The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
James Clough
Introduction
Mr James Clough died at his home, 3 Lanegate, Hyde on Sunday, 11th
June 1995 at the age of 71. He had probably been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman who certified that the cause of his death was carcinomatosis with adenocarcinoma of the colon as a contributory condition.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the medical records, the death of Mr Clough was moderately suspicious. On 12th
January 2001, the police informed Mrs Clough that her husband's death would be investigated as part of their enquiries into Shipman. This upset Mrs Clough. The police officer who spoke to Mrs Clough understood her to say that one Saturday, when her husband was very ill, he was visited by Shipman, who said that he intended to give Mr Clough an injection. Shipman asked the family to contact him when Mr Clough died. Mr Clough died the following morning.
The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Mary Clough (Mr Clough's wife), Mr Graham Clough (Mr Clough's son) and Mrs Janet Clough (Mr Graham Clough's wife). An inquest into Mr Clough's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to the statements and documents arising out of the police investigation and has also examined Mr Clough's general practitioner records.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Clough's medical records reveal the history of carcinoma and various admissions to hospital for bowel obstruction. On 2nd
June 1995, there is an entry in the handwritten records indicating that Mr Clough was also suffering from congestive heart failure. There is no further entry on the Lloyd George cards. The computerised records reveal regular visits by Shipman up to and including the day of death. It appears that severe pain was not the dominant feature of his decline and the only pain relief Mr Clough was receiving in this period was methadone, taken orally.
On 21st
March 2001, two police officers interviewed Mrs Clough. She told the police that her husband was, throughout his working life, a fit and healthy man. In 1994, he started to experience abdominal problems, which were later diagnosed as being due to bowel cancer. In late 1994, he was admitted to Tameside General Hospital where he underwent an operation to remove a section of his bowel. The family was told that the operation was successful and that the cancer had been removed. However, Mr Clough continued to have problems and, in early 1995, he was readmitted for a second operation. After that, the family was told that his condition was terminal. Mr Clough returned home and for a time all seemed well but, in due course, his health began to deteriorate. Shipman called at the house regularly. There was always a member of the family present in the house when he called.
In interview, Mrs Clough told the police that, on Friday, 9th
June, her husband deteriorated. He went to bed and did not get up on Saturday, 10th
June. He was unable to walk and had to be lifted into and out of bed. He was unable to speak. He appeared to be slipping into and out of consciousness. A member of the family telephoned to ask Shipman to visit that morning. Mrs Clough said that she went out of the house with her daughter, Gail, and by the time she returned Shipman had visited and left. She had no knowledge of Shipman having administered any injection. When asked about what she had said to the police on 12th
January 2001, she said that this had been a misunderstanding. She had been out when Shipman called that morning and her son, Mr Graham Clough, had told her that no injection had been given.
Mr Graham Clough told the police that Shipman had arrived at about 11.30am. Mr Graham Clough went upstairs with Shipman to see his father, who was in bed. Shipman examined Mr Clough but did not give him an injection or write a prescription while Mr Graham Clough was present. Mr Graham Clough did not stay in the room all the time while Shipman was there. Before he left, Shipman told Mr Graham Clough that his father was very poorly.
Mrs Janet Clough says that she was present throughout Shipman's morning visit and he did not administer any drug to Mr Clough. Mr Clough was barely able to greet Shipman. She says that Shipman returned to the house between 4pm and 5pm that day. Again, she was present throughout Shipman's visit. Shipman felt Mr Clough's pulse and said that he would be surprised if Mr Clough lasted the night. Shipman left his home telephone number and said that the family could contact him at any time. He did not administer any medication to Mr Clough.
The medical records for 9th
June show that Shipman visited and increased Mr Clough's dose of methadone. On 10th
June, two visits are recorded, which is consistent with the evidence of the family. On the first, Shipman said he had a chat with the patient although the evidence of the family is that Mr Clough was barely able to greet the doctor. The second entry reads: '
(D) coma TLC'
. I infer that that means that Mr Clough was in a coma and was dying. He was to be given tender loving care.
The Day of the Death
Mr Graham Clough and his wife stayed with Mr Clough that night. Mrs Janet Clough says that at one stage during the night, her father-in-law was out of bed and she and her husband put him back into the bed. She recalls that her father-in-law died some time between 2am and 3am on Sunday, 11th
June 1995. She had her arm around Mr Clough's shoulder and she could tell that he had stopped breathing. She contacted Shipman who attended a short while later and confirmed that Mr Clough had died.
The family are all of the view that Shipman offered Mr Clough the very best medical care. They describe Shipman as being very considerate and caring.
Certification
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'0330'
hours on 11th
June 1995. He said that he attended Mr Clough during his last illness for a period of six months. He had last seen Mr Clough alive on 10th
June. He examined the body 30 minutes after death and made a complete external examination. The cause of death was carcinomatosis due to adenocarcinoma of the colon. Shipman stated that the mode of death was a coma of between eight and nine hours' duration. Shipman stated that
'all the family'
were present at the moment of death. Professor Baker's suspicion was not roused by these entries.
The Expert Evidence
The death is recorded in the computerised medical record. Professor Baker did not see the computerised records and I would think he found the death suspicious because there was no written record at all for nine days before the death. He found the death to be not suspicious upon his consideration of the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
Although at one stage the police were under the impression that Shipman had given Mr Clough an injection shortly before his death, it seems, on the totality of the evidence, that this was most unlikely. Mrs Janet Clough is adamant that she was present throughout both visits and no medication was given that day. I have spoken to Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, and he has advised me that it is entirely feasible that Mr Clough's pain could have been adequately controlled by oral methadone, without the need for any additional or stronger opiate. In any event, even if Shipman had given an injection, it cannot have been a lethal dose, as Mr Clough lived for another eight or nine hours after Shipman's 5pm visit. I am quite satisfied that Mr Clough died from natural causes. It appears that Shipman's care was exemplary.
I feel a sense of real regret that a family which has suffered a bereavement and which was wholly satisfied with the treatment and assistance which Shipman gave, should have been troubled by the need for this investigation. The police acted quite properly in seeking to investigate Mr Clough's death, in the light of Professor Baker's suspicion over this death. I can understand why Professor Baker felt some concern over the death. I fear that this train of events was an unfortunate consequence of the need to investigate all deaths where some suspicion had arisen.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001