The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Margaret Ann Conway
Introduction
Mrs Margaret Ann Conway died at her home, 21 Mary Street, Dukinfield on Friday, 15th
February 1985 at the age of 69. She had been a patient of Shipman for several years and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
In October 1998, Mrs Conway's daughter-in-law, Mrs Norma Brown, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her mother-in-law's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Patricia Whittle, Mrs Conway's daughter, and from Mrs Carole Anne Bigg, a volunteer for the Stroke Association, who used to visit Mrs Conway in that capacity.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Whittle and her two sisters, Mrs Joan Duncan and Mrs Christine Porter. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the cremation documentation. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the evidence and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Following the death of her husband in 1982, Mrs Conway moved to a flat in Mary Street, where she lived alone. In November 1983, she suffered a stroke. She made a partial recovery but her speech and mobility remained impaired. She remained independent with a good deal of support from Mrs Whittle, who visited her once or twice a day, the meals on wheels service, who delivered lunch most days, and Mrs Bigg, who visited every Friday. Mrs Whittle recalls that her mother had a speech therapist who visited every Friday at 1pm and usually stayed about an hour.
Not long before her mother's death, Mrs Whittle contacted the Donneybrook Surgery to ask Shipman to visit because she thought her mother had a chest infection. She was also concerned because her mother had become weepy and depressed. Mrs Conway's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 6th
February 1985 but not for any later date until the day of her death. It may be that it was on this day that Shipman visited her although Mrs Whittle told the Inquiry that she thinks Shipman visited her mother on Friday, 8th
February. The uncertainty does not matter.
In any event, Mrs Whittle had hoped to be present during Shipman's visit but when she arrived at her mother's flat, at about 12.40pm, he was just leaving. He said that Mrs Conway was
'not too bad'
and that he had left her a prescription for some antidepressant medication. He said that he would visit again on the following Friday to see how Mrs Conway was. Mrs Whittle recalls that her mother's mood seemed to improve with the medication and she seemed more like her old self.
Mrs Duncan saw her mother on 9th
February and found her well and in good spirits. On Monday, 11th
February, Mrs Duncan spoke to her mother and found that her chest infection had recurred. She spoke to Shipman who promised to visit later in the week. Mrs Duncan spoke to her mother on 13th
and 14th
February and found her improved.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Bigg visited Mrs Conway during the morning of Friday, 15th February 1985. Mrs Conway did not complain of feeling unwell.
Mrs Duncan telephoned her mother from work during her lunch break, which ran from 2pm until 3pm. Mrs Duncan thinks that she telephoned some time between 2.15pm and 2.30pm. Her mother was expecting Shipman to call. Mrs Duncan advised her mother to keep the radio or television turned down so that she would hear him arrive. She also suggested that her mother should leave the door on the catch so that he could let himself in.
Mrs Whittle called at the house with her daughter at about 4.15pm. She let herself in with her key and went into the lounge. There she saw her mother sitting on the sofa. Unusually, the television was on. Mrs Whittle immediately felt that something was wrong and sent her daughter into the kitchen. Mrs Conway's head was on one side leaning against one of the wings of the sofa. She appeared to be sleeping. Her hands were on her lap and her eyes were closed. She was wearing a padded sleeveless body warmer with a long-sleeved jumper beneath. Mrs Whittle touched her mother's body and felt that it was still warm. She pushed her mother's shoulders but this did not wake her. She was unable to detect a pulse and realised that her mother had died.
Mrs Whittle contacted the surgery and asked for a doctor to attend. She also telephoned her husband who came immediately. Whilst waiting for her husband, Mrs Whittle found a note in the kitchen from Shipman. The note has been lost but Mrs Whittle recalls that it said that he had called at 3pm (or possibly 3.15pm), had found Mrs Conway to be 'fine' and had left another prescription. Mrs Whittle thought it was strange for Shipman to leave this note because he had visited her mother whilst she had been alone on many other occasions but had never previously left a note.
Mrs Whittle took her daughter home, leaving her husband at her mother's flat. When her husband arrived home later that evening, he told Mrs Whittle that, when Shipman arrived, at about 6.30pm, he had said that Mrs Conway had had another stroke. Mr Whittle told his wife that Shipman had not examined her mother in any way. While there, Shipman had remarked that there was a caged budgerigar in the room. He said that he had an aunt who liked birds and, if no one else wanted the bird, he would take it for his aunt. Earlier that afternoon, Shipman had taken it upon himself to inform one of Mrs Conway's granddaughters of the death. She was very upset.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Conway alive on the day of her death. He said the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident which was due to arteriosclerosis. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman recorded the time of death as
'approximately 3.30'
(presumably 3.30pm) on 15th
February 1985. He stated that he had attended Mrs Conway during her last illness for a period of two years. He said that he had last seen her alive about two hours before her death, which, on his timing, would have been at about 1.30pm. He said that he had made a complete external examination of the body about three hours after death. He stated the causes of death as on the MCCD. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting only seconds. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'I saw her 14.30
(
he initially wrote “13.30”
)
spoke to daughter over
telephone 15 15
(
he initially wrote “14.15”
)
. Found dead
on settee'
.
I think it likely that the sentence,
'spoke to daughter over telephone 15 15'
, was intended to suggest that Mrs Conway had spoken to her daughter on the telephone after his visit that afternoon. It is possible but unlikely that it meant that Shipman had spoken to one of Mrs Conway's daughters that afternoon. In either case, the claim was untrue. Only Mrs Duncan spoke to her mother in the afternoon of 15th
February and that was before Shipman's visit and well before 3.15pm. None of the daughters spoke to Shipman that afternoon after his visit. Shipman also stated that no one was present at the death. It follows that his suggestion that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds must have been pure surmise.
The Aftermath
A few weeks later, Mrs Whittle took another daughter, who had asthma, to see Shipman. Shipman inquired how the family was coping after Mrs Conway's death. When Mrs Whittle said that she was very upset because her mother had been alone when she died, Shipman said that she would have died very quickly and painlessly.
The Expert Evidence
After examining the cremation certificate, Professor Richard Baker formed the view that Mrs Conway's death was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are highly suspicious.
Shipman visited Mrs Conway for a routine check on her progress some time during the early afternoon of 15th
February. She was found dead at about 4.15pm. No one saw Mrs Conway alive after Shipman's visit. The evidence suggests that no one spoke to her either, although Shipman has tried to create the impression that Mrs Conway spoke to one of her daughters after he had left. I am satisfied that she did not speak to any of her daughters that afternoon after his visit. I have seen many cases in which Shipman has killed a patient and has made a false entry on Form B designed to create the impression that the patient was alive some time after his departure. I believe this is another example of that ruse.
Mrs Conway had had a stroke in 1983 and must have been at risk of another. There is no evidence that her health had deteriorated shortly before her death. However, I accept that a stroke can occur without warning. Having said that, it would seem to be something of a coincidence if Mrs Conway had suffered a fatal stroke in the short period which elapsed after Shipman's visit and her daughter's arrival. Although some strokes are immediately fatal, most are not fatal at all and, in those that are fatal, death usually follows some hours or even days after the onset.
I regard the close temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death as a highly suspicious factor and his attempt to create the impression that Mrs Conway was alive after his visit increases my suspicion.
There are other factors which increase my suspicion. Shipman's note is suspicious. He had never previously left a note when he had seen Mrs Conway alone. I think he was seeking to establish that Mrs Conway was alive and well when he left her. I think the various timings that Shipman gave on Form B and the alterations he made are also suspicious. On the first page of Form B, he says that the time of death was about 3.30pm and that he had last seen her alive at 1.30pm. On the second page, he said that he had seen her at 2.30pm, although he initially said
'seen 13.30'
. If Mrs Whittle's recollection of Shipman's note is accurate, he there wrote that he had seen Mrs Conway at about 3pm. Because it is possible that Mrs Whittle is mistaken about the time written on the note, I shall leave that out of account and consider only what can be seen on Form B. It appears to me that Shipman has changed his mind about the timings and has altered the timings on the second page but has forgotten to alter those on the first page. If Shipman really had left Mrs Conway alive and well at either 1.30pm or 2.30pm and if she really had had a sudden fatal stroke after his departure, he could not possibly have known when it had occurred. It could have occurred immediately after he left or only a few moments before Mrs Whittle arrived. Shipman often pretended to know the time of a patient's death when he could not have done. Usually he did this in order to distance the death from the time of his own visit. Here he began by suggesting a separation of two hours between the visit and the death. Then he changed his mind and suggested an interval of only an hour. I suspect that he must have done this because he knew he had left a note saying what time he had been at the house. To some extent this is speculation. However, what is significant is that Shipman was obviously concerned to 'get his story right'.
Mrs Conway's position and appearance in death were not typical of those of a person who has suffered a fatal stroke. Usually a patient having a stroke is aware that something terrible is happening and gets up in an attempt to seek help. More usually, such patients are found collapsed on the floor. On the other hand, Mrs Conway's position and appearance in death were wholly typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
Finally, if Shipman's account were true and if Mrs Conway really had been found dead only an hour or two after he had left her well, he could not possibly have known the cause of her death and he would have been obliged to refer the case to the coroner. That he chose not to do so is typical of his conduct in many cases in which he had killed the patient. It is true that he sometimes chose not to refer deaths for which he was not responsible. Accordingly I do not attach much weight to this factor.
Taking all the evidence into account, I have reached the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mrs Conway. Notwithstanding the passage of time and the loss of the medical records, I feel sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001