The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Irene Chapman
Introduction
Mrs Irene Chapman died on Saturday, 7th
March 1998 at the age of 74. She was a widow and died at her home, 128 Clarendon Road, Hyde, where she lived alone. She had been Shipman's patient for many years, probably since his arrival at Hyde in 1977. She followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She had little experience of Shipman in connection with her own health, but he treated her daughter. Mrs Chapman regarded him as a good doctor. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis, with smoking as another significant condition contributing to the death.
In September 1998, a member of Mrs Chapman's family contacted the police, concerned about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Celia Anne Saxton (Mrs Chapman's niece), Mr Roy Saxton (Mrs Saxton's husband), Mrs Ethel Hampshire (a neighbour) and Mr Andrew Peter Taylor (Mrs Chapman's son-in-law). They also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
There was no prosecution in connection with Mrs Chapman's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Saxton, who gave evidence at an oral hearing on 22nd
October 2001, Mrs Susan Antrobus (Mrs Chapman's niece), Mr Taylor, Mrs Alison Massey (the practice manager), and Mr John Whieldon, Mr Bradley Keeling, Mr John Palmer and Mr William Walsh, who were carrying out work in the surgery on the day of Mrs Chapman's death. Mrs Primrose Shipman gave evidence about the death on 16th
November 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Chapman's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents covering the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to telephone billing records.
Personal Background
Mrs Chapman's medical records are extraordinarily sparse. She was not a lady who liked to visit the doctor and it is plain that she did not do so with any regularity. The last visit recorded in the notes was in September 1987, more than ten years before her death, when she had a tetanus injection and her blood pressure was found to be somewhat raised at 170/100. A further document suggests that she was prescribed painkillers during 1989. These might have been for her back, which the family says caused problems from time to time. There was a known family history of coronary thrombosis and Mrs Chapman had been a lifelong heavy smoker. Both these factors, according to Dr Grenville, put her at an increased risk of coronary thrombosis. Shortly before her death, she appeared to be in good general health, although she had recently suffered stress as a result of problems within the family.
The Events of the Day before Death
Mrs Chapman's daughter, Dorina, and her then fiancé, Mr Taylor, saw Mrs Chapman on Friday, 6th March, the day before her death. She complained to them of what she called 'heart burn' which Mr Taylor understood was different from, and more painful than, the apparently minor chest pain about which she had been complaining for a long time. Miss Chapman and Mr Taylor advised Mrs Chapman to consult her doctor and eventually she agreed to do so. Although Mrs Chapman was obviously in pain, Miss Chapman and Mr Taylor were not seriously concerned about her condition. Mrs Hampshire, Mrs Chapman's neighbour, also saw Mrs Chapman on that Friday, but Mrs Chapman said nothing to her about being unwell.
The Day of the Death
On the day of Mrs Chapman's death, it being a Saturday, Mrs Shipman was on duty as receptionist at the Market Street Surgery.
It appears that Mrs Chapman took the advice she had been given and telephoned the surgery to ask for a visit. The visits request form, made out at 8.35am, reads:
'Pain Chest'
. It said that Mrs Chapman
'Cannot manage'
to get down to the surgery. The intended visit was entered in the visits book. The telephone call also appears timed at 8.31am on the telephone billing for Mrs Chapman's account. That was the last telephone call made from her number before her death.
Mr Taylor says that he rang Mrs Chapman at about 9.30am and then again, half an hour later. There was no reply and he thought she might be resting. Unfortunately, the times of these calls cannot be checked because unanswered calls are not logged. Meanwhile, Mrs Hampshire saw Shipman arrive to visit Mrs Chapman and leave a short time afterwards. She puts the time of his departure at about 10am but is very unsure about this. She says that Shipman returned an hour or more later with a woman whom she did not recognise but now knows to be his wife.
The Inquiry has obtained no evidence from anyone who saw Mrs Chapman or spoke to her after Shipman's first visit that morning.
Later that day, Mrs Saxton received a telephone call from Shipman who told her that he was at Mrs Chapman's home. The billing record shows that it was made at 1.07pm. Shipman told Mrs Saxton that he had been called out to see Mrs Chapman that morning and had been shocked to find how ill she was. He said that he had tried to persuade her to go into hospital but she had refused. Mrs Saxton was not surprised to hear this, as she knew that Mrs Chapman had a fear of hospitals. Shipman went on to say that he had left Mrs Chapman in order to go to his surgery, but had promised to return. When he did so, after the surgery had been completed, he found her collapsed on her settee. He had been present when she had taken her 'last gasps'. Shipman confirmed that Mrs Chapman was now dead. He asked Mrs Saxton to come to the house, as he had to leave. Mrs Saxton explained that she could not come herself, but would contact her husband. She did so and that call is timed at 1.11pm.
Mrs Shipman said that, after surgery was finished, she and her husband left the surgery together. They drove to Mrs Chapman's house. Shipman went into the house leaving her alone in the car outside. After a while, Shipman came out and asked her to go into the house. She cannot remember his exact words, but her understanding was that Mrs Chapman had died and Shipman wanted her to wait in the house until the relatives arrived. He wanted to visit another patient, whose name also appears in the visits book. Mrs Shipman said that she waited in the front room of the house, in the same room as the body. She said that she could not remember anything of its appearance. However, she was clear in her mind that Mrs Chapman was already dead when she entered the house. While waiting, she took a telephone call from a woman who seemed to be a relative of Mrs Chapman. Then a male relative arrived, who must have been Mr Saxton.
Mr Saxton said that he went straight to Mrs Chapman's house. He must have arrived at about 1.30pm. There, he met Mrs Shipman who told him that Mrs Chapman had died of a heart attack. She explained that Shipman had had to leave in order to make another house call, but that she had remained because he was not allowed to leave a body alone.
Mr Saxton saw Mrs Chapman sitting upright in the middle of the sofa, looking peaceful and as if she was asleep. She was wearing ordinary day clothes, which showed no sign of disturbance. Mr Saxton telephoned his wife and Mrs Chapman's daughter.
Shipman returned to the house some time later. According to Mr Saxton, he brought with him Mrs Chapman's medical records and said that he had not seen her in years. He observed that Mrs Chapman was a heavy smoker and had died from a smoking-related disease. He said that she had been 'breathing her last breath' when he arrived. He said that a post-mortem examination was not necessary and he would issue a certificate. Mrs Shipman says that she has no recollection of hearing any of the conversation between her husband and the family. The Shipmans then left.
Miss Chapman and Mr Taylor arrived and found that two rings, which Mrs Chapman was keeping for their forthcoming wedding, were missing from their boxes which had been in a drawer in one of the bedrooms. A thorough search has failed to trace these rings.
There is a manuscript note relating to Shipman's first visit on 7th
March. Although this note is dated 6th
March, it is apparent that this is an error. The note reads:
'Palpitations
HR 90/m 130/70
(
changed from 160/100
)
irregular pulse
A/E = BS normal Emphysema
Nil oedema
X ray chest
ECG
Propranolol 80mg Tbd
Smoker: 40/day
D
?
?
?
AF - Probably
CT - Possible
Angina
Advised Hospital the best choice
Lives on own no help daughter in
Hollingworth ill
Revisit after surgery? admit
then'
.
I interpret that entry to suggest that Mrs Chapman told Shipman that she had palpitations. He found she had a heart rate of 90 beats per minute. The blood pressure was recorded, first as 160/100 but was later changed to 130/70. I find that change highly suspicious as it does not seem likely that Shipman could have mistakenly recorded the pressure as 160/100 if it was in fact 130/70. 130/70 was significantly lower than previously recorded measurements. Shipman recorded that the pulse was irregular. The air entry was equal on both sides and the breath sounds were normal. He then mentioned emphysema. This is a lung disease, commonly associated with smoking, in which the breath sounds are not usually normal. There was no ankle swelling. Shipman recorded the need for a chest x-ray and an electrocardiogram (ECG). He prescribed propranolol, which is used for hypertension, angina and arrhythmia. As Dr Grenville observed, those plans appear to have been made with the intention of treating Mrs Chapman at home. Shipman observed that Mrs Chapman smoked 40 cigarettes a day. He made tentative diagnoses of atrial fibrillation, coronary thrombosis and angina. He advised that she should be admitted to hospital, but no reason is given to explain the fact that she was not admitted that morning as an emergency. Shipman noted that Mrs Chapman lived alone and that her daughter, who lived in Hollingworth, was ill. He said he would revisit after surgery, when further consideration would be given to hospital admission.
The computerised entry, which was made at about 10.45am, reads:
'Seen in own home...
Chest pain...
central on off 3/7 radiation jaw ? sweaty has a cough has
some reflux timeto
(
sic
)
time walking about no increase in pain
88/min irreg ? af hs I II bp 130/70 (low cf 1987 170/100)
nil oedema chest ok . . ?ct ?AF ?ANGINA REFUSES admission
revisit'
.
I interpret this entry to indicate that Mrs Chapman had been suffering from central chest pain on and off for three days. This radiated into the jaw. I note that the leading symptom in this note is chest pain, whereas in the manuscript note it was palpitations. Shipman then recorded that Mrs Chapman was sweaty and had a cough. She had reflux from time to time. Walking about did not increase her pain. Shipman found her pulse rate to be 88 beats per minute but irregular. He thought there was atrial fibrillation. The heart sounds were normal. Blood pressure was 130/70 and Shipman noted this was low when compared with a reading of 170/100 which had been taken in 1987. There was no ankle swelling and the chest sounds were normal. He made tentative diagnoses of coronary thrombosis, atrial fibrillation and angina. He noted that Mrs Chapman positively refused to go to hospital. He indicated an intention to revisit.
Dr Grenville says that, if the observations recorded in the two sets of notes were accurate, it would appear that Mrs Chapman was suffering from angina and might well have had a heart attack. Shipman would have been justified in certifying her death as being due to a coronary thrombosis without making a referral to the coroner.
There is no manuscript or computerised record of Shipman's second visit to Mrs Chapman nor of her death, although the death is briefly recorded on the envelope in which the records were stored.
The appointments sheet for 7th
March reveals that the morning surgery was due to start at 8.45am, although the first patient did not attend. It seems highly unlikely that Shipman would have had time to visit Mrs Chapman between a call to the surgery at 8.35am and the start of morning surgery. In any event, this would be inconsistent with the evidence of Mrs Hampshire.
Five patients were booked into the surgery, the last appointment being at 9.30am. However, it appears that the patient with the 9.15am appointment also did not attend. Mrs Shipman explained that, if the patient with the 9.30am appointment arrived early, he or she would probably have been seen immediately. It follows that Shipman might have been free by 9.30am or soon afterwards. Although the times written on the appointments sheet suggest that the open surgery was to start at 11am, the first patient was listed for 10am. There were 12 patients to be seen and a new patient was booked in at 11.45am. On this day, a new counter was to be fitted in the reception area. The work was due to begin at noon. Employees of the firm who did the work have been interviewed. They recall arriving at the surgery at about 11.30am and starting work at about 12pm after surgery had ended, finishing their work in the late afternoon.
In my view, it is clear that Shipman must have made his first visit to Mrs Chapman at some time soon after 9.30am. He must then have returned to Market Street for the open surgery. He might have been slightly late for the intended 10am start. Mrs Shipman would have remained in the surgery dealing with patients. He must then have returned to Mrs Chapman's home at the conclusion of the open surgery.
The visits book shows three visits for that day. One was to Mrs Chapman. Another was to the young person whom Mrs Shipman says her husband visited while she stayed at Mrs Chapman's house. The third was a patient who had a new baby. It is not clear whether Shipman visited her that day.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and stated that he last saw Mrs Chapman alive on the day of her death. He gave the cause of death as coronary thrombosis lasting 12 hours. Smoking was said to be another significant condition contributing to the death.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman stated the time of death as
'1300 hrs'
. He claimed that he attended Mrs Chapman during her last illness for three hours; that would imply that he was first present at 10am. He went on to say that he last saw Mrs Chapman alive at 10.30am. This would suggest that he arrived at 10am and stayed for half an hour. That is unlikely, in view of his surgery commitments that morning. There is also an apparent inconsistency between that entry and his claim, made later in the form, that he was present at the moment of death, presumably at 1pm.
Shipman said that he saw Mrs Chapman's body immediately after death and made a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was
'Coma'
lasting
'minutes'
, this answer being based on his own observations and those of his wife. He stated that he and his wife were present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
There are some extremely suspicious features surrounding this death, several of which are typical of a case in which Shipman killed. First, Shipman quite often visited the patient twice on the day of death. He would kill the patient during the first visit and then return later to 'discover' the body. A second typical feature is Shipman's claim that the patient had been advised to accept admission to hospital but had refused. When Shipman returned to 'see if the patient had changed her mind', she was found dead. The death was readily explicable, as Shipman had already noted that the patient was ill enough to require hospital admission.
On this day, Mrs Chapman was certainly not well. She requested a visit as she was suffering chest pain and was not able to travel to the surgery. It appears that Shipman visited soon after 9.30am and that no one saw Mrs Chapman alive or spoke to her after that visit. That is a highly suspicious factor. However, it must be accepted that, as a lifelong heavy smoker, Mrs Chapman was at risk of suffering heart disease and of dying a sudden cardiac death. It would not be surprising if Mrs Chapman did experience the symptoms that Shipman described in the medical record. However, I doubt the genuineness of the records Shipman made of the first visit. In particular, I suspect that the actual blood pressure reading was 160/100 and not 130/70. It appears that Shipman was anxious to make the point that Mrs Chapman's blood pressure was much lower than normal. The only reference he had for normality was a reading taken in 1987, but he implies that that is to be treated as her usual level. The sudden reduction, which he purports to have found on the day of the death, would, if genuine, be indicative of a heart attack. However, I do not think there was any such reduction. I think Shipman was seeking to paint a picture of a heart attack with atrial fibrillation. As he felt the need to fabricate medical signs, I am led to suspect that Mrs Chapman had not had a heart attack.
Even more telling are the lies that Shipman told on Form B. A common feature of Form B in cases where Shipman has killed is a claim that someone else has been present at the moment of death. Shipman seeks to create the impression that he was not alone with the patient at the time of death. Here, he has pretended that his wife was present at the moment of death. Mrs Shipman was quite clear in her evidence. She was not present at the moment of death. Mrs Chapman was already dead when she entered the house. That was why she went in. Painful though it was for Mrs Shipman to admit that fact, which carried the necessary implication that her husband had lied on Form B, she did not seek to offer any explanation. There could not have been any satisfactory explanation. Mrs Shipman could not have been in a position to give Shipman any information about the cause or mode of death. I am satisfied that Shipman lied on Form B. It is hard to think of any reason why he would tell lies involving his wife, unless he felt the need to do so in order to allay any possible suspicion about the circumstances of this death. It is inconceivable that he would have told such lies, if this death had been natural.
Mrs Chapman's position and appearance in death were not typical of what is usually seen after a heart attack. As Dr Grenville has said, a patient who begins to suffer the crushing pain usually associated with a coronary thrombosis generally tries to summon help. The patient is not usually found sitting in a chair, but is more commonly found collapsed on the floor. Nor does the patient usually look entirely peaceful. Mrs Chapman's position and appearance were entirely typical of those of many of Shipman's victims killed by a lethal injection of strong opiate.
Taking these factors together, I have no doubt that Shipman killed Mrs Chapman during his first visit to her house between 9.30am and 10am. His claim that Mrs Chapman was breathing her last when he arrived soon after 1pm was pure pretence.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001