The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Beatrice Helen Clee
Introduction
Miss Beatrice Helen Clee died on Friday, 12th
May 1989 at her home, 4 King Edward Road, Gee Cross, Hyde at the age of 78. She never married. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Miss Clee's brother, Mr James Edward Clee, telephoned the police to express concern about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated her death and took a statement from Mrs Annette Hazel Glenwright, Miss Clee's next door neighbour at the time of her death.
An inquest into Miss Clee's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained a further statement from Mrs Glenwright. Mr Clee declined to be interviewed by the Inquiry. The Inquiry has had access to Miss Clee's general practitioner records and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1989 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. The Inquiry has also considered a letter written in 1989 to Mr Clee and his wife by Mrs Alice Clee, Miss Clee's sister-in-law, who has since died.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Clee had suffered from rheumatic fever as a young child and had been left with mitral valve disease. For many years, she attended the Department of Cardiology at Manchester Royal Infirmary. In August 1983, her situation was described as
'stable'
. It was said that she was able to go out without difficulty in the warmer weather but this was more troublesome when it was cold. Her signs of mitral valve disease were said to be
'moderately severe'
but she was not to be considered for surgery. In July 1984, her condition was described as
'entirely stable with only rather minimal symptoms'
. The clinical signs of her disease were as before. Since the situation had been stable for several years, she was discharged from regular follow-up appointments but maintained on medication, including digoxin, Moduretic and warfarin.
In 1986, Miss Clee had a problem with her left eye in which the vision was said to be very poor. In September 1987, when she needed confirmation that she was fit to travel on holiday, Shipman wrote that Miss Clee was fit and healthy and took her treatment
'religiously'
. In March 1989, she developed a varicose ulcer for which she required hospital treatment. There is no correspondence from the hospital after this date and there are no relevant entries in the general practitioner records.
Mrs Glenwright describes Miss Clee as a happy, independent person who seemed fit for her age. She regularly worked in her garden and would go shopping on her own. Mrs Glenwright considered Miss Clee to be a healthy woman, although she was aware that she had a leg ulcer in the weeks before her death and had a bandage wrapped round her leg. Miss Clee made light of this problem. The Inquiry has considered the contents of a police report in which Mr Clee told the police that his sister was
'very weak with poor eyesight'
when he went on holiday on 3rd
May 1989.
The Day of the Death
A few days after Miss Clee's death, Mrs Alice Clee wrote an account of Friday, 12th
May for the benefit of her brother-in-law and his wife, who were away on holiday at the time. She wrote that, on the Friday morning, she telephoned Miss Clee at about 10am to see whether she wanted any shopping. Miss Clee replied that she would make a list out for the following day. Mrs Clee went shopping and then called in on her sister-in-law at about 3pm and found her dead. This was a terrible shock. She went next door to Mrs Glenwright's to seek help. Mrs Glenwright was also very shocked as Miss Clee had appeared perfectly well when she had last seen her a day or so earlier. Mrs Glenwright recalls that, when Mrs Clee gave her news of the death, Mrs Clee remarked that Shipman had visited (or possibly was due to visit) Miss Clee that morning.
Mrs Glenwright and Mrs Clee then went to Miss Clee's home. The front door was partially open. Mrs Glenwright does not think that Mrs Clee had a key to the house and does not know how she managed to enter the property alone. When they went into the living room, Mrs Glenwright saw Miss Clee sitting in an armchair in front of the gas fire, which was on full, despite the warm sunny weather. Miss Clee was dressed in her day clothes. She was sitting upright in the chair with her head tilted to one side and her arms positioned on the arms of the chair. She seemed relaxed, as if asleep. There was a newspaper on the table next to her, and on the paper was a magnifying glass. There was a shopping list on top of the sideboard. Mrs Glenwright telephoned Shipman, whom she knew to be Miss Clee's doctor.
Within a short time, Shipman arrived at the house. He walked into the living room and abruptly confirmed that Miss Clee was dead. Mrs Glenwright does not recall Shipman making any examination of Miss Clee. Mrs Glenwright asked Shipman if he thought a post-mortem examination should take place. He replied that there was no need as he had been dealing with her. He then made some reference to an undertaker. In her letter, Mrs Alice Clee recorded that Shipman said that her sister-in-law had died at about noon.
The visits book records a visit. There are no other entries relating to Miss Clee during 1989. The general practitioner records note the visit on 12th
May and read as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
leg ulcer status quo
anticoagulant
(
illegible
)
c/o dyspnoea
(
illegible
)
mitral
(
illegible
)
HS I II
(
with
)
murmurs
ankle oedema
(
illegible
)
chest pain as well when
go upstairs
BP 130/80 - Probably angina.
Continue Dig Moduretic review 7/7 TLUK
(
to let us know
)
'
.
I interpret this entry to suggest that Shipman had visited on account of the leg ulcer, which he found to be in the same condition as before. The reference to anticoagulant is partially illegible. He then describes complaints of breathlessness. There is some reference to the heart, although this is mainly illegible. He records that the heart sounds are normal save for the murmurs, which would be attributable to Miss Clee's longstanding heart problem and would have been expected. He records swelling of the ankles which, if present, is often (but not necessarily) a sign of congestive heart failure. Shipman then says that Miss Clee complained of chest pain when going upstairs. Her blood pressure was 130/80. Shipman does not appear to have taken Miss Clee's pulse or listened to the lung sounds. He said he thought she probably had angina but he apparently decided to do nothing. He wished her to continue taking digoxin and Moduretic. He decided to review her in one week's time. She was 'to let him know', presumably if she deteriorated.
Taken at face value, this entry suggests that Miss Clee was having heart problems. Alternatively, Shipman might have been inventing a clinical picture that would make an otherwise unexplained sudden death more readily explicable, as having resulted from coronary thrombosis. In my view, there is a real likelihood that this entry was largely fabricated. It does not make good medical sense. If Shipman thought that Miss Clee really did have angina, he would surely at least have prescribed something for the relief of her symptoms.
There is no entry in the medical records relating to the death itself. The last recorded entry before Miss Clee's death relates to a consultation in April 1989 when it appears that Miss Clee had leg ulcers, worse on the left leg than the right.
Certification
From the MCCD counterfoil, it can be seen that Shipman certified that the death was due to a coronary thrombosis. He said that mitral valve stenosis and RBBB (right bundle branch block, a defect of the connective tissues of the heart) were significant conditions that had contributed to the death but were not related to the immediate cause of death. He said that he had last seen Miss Clee alive on the day of death. He had seen the body after death. The case had not been referred to the coroner.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He recorded the time of death as
'About 1300 hrs'
and said that he attended Miss Clee during her last illness for a period of 12 hours. What he sought to suggest by that, I cannot think, as it seems very unlikely that Shipman had seen Miss Clee in the early hours of that morning. Certainly, there is no record of him doing so. He said that he had seen Miss Clee at midday on the day of her death and about two hours after the death. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds only. How he could have inferred that from the circumstances is not clear. Shipman stated that no one was present at the death. He indicated that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations but mentioned that the deceased was
'found by sister-in-law sat in front of fire newspaper on knee!'
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation certificate and classified the death as highly suspicious, presumably because of Shipman's presence at the scene shortly before the death. Professor Baker did not examine the medical records, which had not been found at the time of his audit.
Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has provided a note, drawing attention to the result of an investigation undertaken by a cardiologist in 1977. The coronary arteries were injected with dye and it was found that all the major vessels were free of significant disease. Dr Esmail says that, if Miss Clee did not have any significant ischaemic heart disease in 1977, at the age of 65, it is unlikely that she would have developed that condition by 1989. She was not therefore at an increased risk of suffering a fatal coronary thrombosis. Dr Esmail noted that the first time there was any reference to angina in her medical records, apart from when she was first referred to the cardiologist in 1976, was on the day of her death. That tends to confirm my suspicion that the medical record made on the day of the death was largely a fabrication.
Dr Esmail advised that Miss Clee was at risk of dying of acute left ventricular failure or from an embolus in her brain or lungs.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious features surrounding this death.
According to the witness evidence and Shipman's entries on Form B of the cremation certificate, there was a visit by Shipman very shortly before the death was discovered. No one saw Miss Clee alive after the visit. If the information in Mrs Clee's letter is accurate (and she wrote it very shortly after the death), Shipman told her that Miss Clee had died at about midday, which was the very time, according to his entry on Form B, that he had visited her. This very close temporal association between the visit and the death excites a high degree of suspicion. Even if Mrs Clee's recollection on this point is wrong, there is still a close temporal association between the visit and Miss Clee's death.
It is not known whether Miss Clee was unwell on the morning of the day she died. It is possible that she was unwell and asked Shipman to visit. On the other hand, it is entirely possible that Shipman's visit was a routine matter, connected with her ulcerated legs. Of the two it seems more likely to me that Shipman made a routine visit to examine Miss Clee's legs. I say that because his medical note begins with a reference to her legs. It then goes on to describe the conditions which he later relied upon as an explanation for her death. I have seen that pattern within the notes of many patients whom Shipman has killed.
Miss Clee's medical condition was not such as to place her at an increased risk of suffering a fatal coronary thrombosis. It is difficult to accept the truth of Shipman's clinical note and his diagnosis of angina, when it represents the only reference to heart problems for many years and the only recorded reference to angina in Miss Clee's life, apart from when she was first referred to the cardiologist in 1976. In my view, Shipman probably fabricated this record in order to explain the death.
Shipman has asserted that he attended Miss Clee during her last illness for a period of 12 hours. He certified the death to have occurred at 1pm, which would mean that he saw her on the day of her death at about 1am. This seems highly unlikely. It is probably a mistake rather than a lie, as I cannot see any purpose in Shipman claiming to have seen Miss Clee at that time.
It is a strange feature of many cases in which Shipman has killed that the victim is found sitting by a gas fire in a room that seems unusually warm. This occurred on enough occasions to make it appear likely that Shipman used to either put the fire on himself or turn it up. Dr Esmail has explained that rigor mortis sets in more rapidly in a warm environment than in a cold one. Also, a body resting in a warm atmosphere would lose heat more slowly than one in a cold room. Shipman often pretended that he could estimate the time of death from body temperature and often referred to body temperature when estimating the time of death on Forms B. He did not do so in this case, possibly because the body was discovered so soon after the death. I think it likely that he turned up the gas fire in Miss Clee's living room in order to make it difficult for a pathologist to make a reliable estimate of the time of death, in the event that his own statement of the time was challenged.
Miss Clee's appearance in death, seated peacefully in her chair, is not typical of that usually seen after a cardiac death or any of the causes of sudden death mentioned by Dr Esmail. It is, however, entirely typical of that seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking all the evidence into account, I feel driven to conclude that Shipman caused Miss Clee's death. In my view, the overwhelming likelihood is that Miss Clee died from a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
The circumstances surrounding the death of Beatrice Helen Clee were also investigated at part of the Inquiry's Sixth Report.
To view the decision presented in the Sixth Report, please
click here
.
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001