The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fanny Clarke
Introduction
Mrs Fanny Clarke died at her home, 10 Darwin Street, Newton, Hyde on Saturday, 18th
May 1996 at the age of 82. She had been widowed in 1987 and lived in sheltered accommodation with the benefit of a warden service. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1984 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mrs Clarke's son, Mr Anthony Joseph Clarke, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Clarke, Mr Alan Chambers (Mrs Clarke's nephew) and Mr Geoffrey Williamson (the mobile warden on duty on the day of Mrs Clarke's death).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Clarke but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Alan Chambers, Mr Clifford Chambers (Mr Alan Chambers' brother), Mr Stephen Clarke (Mrs Clarke's grandson) and Mr Richard Bones (the business manager of Healthcall Medical Services). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Clarke's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice records for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also had access to documentation from Healthcall Medical Services (Healthcall) and from the mobile warden.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Clarke's hospital records reveal that she suffered an inferior myocardial infarction in October 1990 and subsequently developed arrhythmia, which required the insertion of a pacemaker. Thereafter, she made a good recovery. Dr Jolobe, consultant geriatrician, reviewed her in his clinic on 25th
May 1994. He noted that she had no angina or breathlessness and that there was no sign of cardiac failure. On examination, it was noted that she looked well and was fully mobile. Her blood pressure was recorded at 160/95.
On 21st
June 1994, Mrs Clarke was admitted to Tameside General Hospital, complaining of light-headedness, nausea and abdominal pain. Her blood pressure was recorded at 130/80 and her pulse was said to be 68 beats per minute. She had epigastric tenderness. There was no sign of cardiac failure. Her abdominal pain and discomfort settled spontaneously and, by 27th
June 1994, she was well and was discharged.
Mrs Clarke was reviewed in Dr Jolobe's clinic on 16th
February 1995. It was noted that her blood pressure was 130/80 and her pulse was recorded at 72 beats per minute. Examination of the cardiovascular system and respiratory system was normal. There was no ankle oedema and jugular venous pressure (JVP) was said to be normal.
In August 1995, Mrs Clarke was further reviewed at Tameside General Hospital when she reported shortness of breath on exertion and orthopnoea. On examination, her blood pressure was recorded at 150/70 and her pulse was 70 beats per minute. There was no swelling of the ankles but JVP was raised at 4cm.
Mrs Clarke was last reviewed at Tameside General Hospital in January 1996, when she presented with no complaints. Her blood pressure was 140/80 and her pulse was 72 beats per minute. There were no signs of clinical heart failure. It was noted that her medication at that time was amiodarone 200mg daily, omeprazole 20mg daily, Frumil two tablets daily, and aspirin. She was to be reviewed in six months' time.
Mr Stephen Clarke used to visit his grandmother twice a week. He would take her shopping and help her carry her bags. He was aware that she had a heart condition but remembers that she was quite agile and able to do all her own cooking. Mr Clarke has told the Inquiry that, if his grandmother was feeling unwell, she would telephone Shipman's surgery and ask him to visit her.
Mr Stephen Clarke last saw his grandmother alive on the evening of Thursday, 16th
May 1996. She was sitting up in bed reading and looked quite well. Mr Anthony Clarke's wife, Mrs Susan Clarke, spoke with Mrs Clarke over the telephone on the evening of Friday, 17th
May 1996. Mrs Clarke mentioned that there had been a death in the family and said that she would be sending some flowers. She made no mention, however, of feeling unwell.
The Day of the Death
Healthcall provide an out of hours deputising service for general practitioners. The Inquiry is in possession of a Healthcall telephone slip, which has been interpreted by Mr Bones. Mr Bones says that, at 3.05pm on Saturday, 18th
May 1996, Mrs Clarke telephoned Healthcall, complaining of
'chest pain/shoulders'
. It was noted that Mrs Clarke had a pacemaker fitted and that she refused an ambulance. Healthcall contacted Shipman at 3.09pm. Healthcall would always advise a patient who had telephoned complaining of chest pains to attend hospital immediately and would offer to arrange for an ambulance to attend if necessary. If the patient refused an ambulance, it was Healthcall's policy to contact the patient's own doctor. In such circumstances, once contact had been made with the patient's doctor, Healthcall would not normally have any further involvement.
It would appear that Shipman attended at Mrs Clarke's house shortly after being contacted by Healthcall. The evidence of the family is that Mrs Clarke was normally security conscious. If, however, on this occasion, Healthcall had told her that Shipman was going to attend, it could well be that she unlocked the door and left it open in anticipation of his arrival.
Mr Williamson said in his police statement that the emergency cord at Mrs Clarke's address was activated at 3.43pm. He responded to the call and went to her address at 4.04pm. He found Shipman there. Shipman told him that Mrs Clarke had called the emergency doctor service and that the call had been passed to him. He said that, when he arrived, Mrs Clarke was taking her 'last breath' and that he had pulled the emergency cord because he wanted to know the contact details of the next of kin. Mr Williamson recalls that Shipman eventually obtained Mrs Clarke's relatives' details from a list that was near the telephone. Mr Williamson made a contemporaneous note, which is consistent with what he told the police more recently.
The evidence suggests that Shipman was alerted at 3.09pm, attended at Mrs Clarke's house at about 3.30pm and activated the emergency cord at 3.43pm, by which time Mrs Clarke was dead.
There is no entry in the handwritten medical records relating to Shipman's attendance on Mrs Clarke on the day of her death. The following entry does, however, appear in her computerised records for the day of death:
'Coronary thrombosis
O/E - dead
O/E - dead
attempted resusc
1545 relatives telephoned
ct ihd'
.
Mr Alan Chambers was at home when he received a telephone call from Shipman. Shipman asked him, 'Do you know Mrs Clarke?' Mr Chambers replied that Mrs Clarke was his aunt, to which Shipman said, 'Your auntie's died, can you come up?'
Mr Alan Chambers immediately went to Mrs Clarke's house. As he entered the bedroom, he saw Shipman leaning against the window. Mrs Clarke was lying on her bed, propped up by some pillows. Her mouth was wide open and her head was hanging slightly forwards and to the left. Her left arm was dangling over the edge of the bed. Mr Alan Chambers recalls that his aunt was wearing a nightdress with an open collar and short sleeves. The bed did not appear untidy. Shipman looked calm and said something like, 'these things happen'. He explained that Mrs Clarke had suffered a bad heart attack and said that he could not revive her.
Mr Chambers contacted his brother, Mr Clifford Chambers, who went to Mrs Clarke's house and remembers seeing his aunt lying on her back in bed with her head resting on two pillows. He noted that her back was arched upwards and that she was not lying flat on the bed. This struck him as unusual. Her legs were lying straight and flat on the bed and her arms were spread out at her sides. He too recalls seeing her left arm hanging over the side of the bed. He recalls that his aunt was wearing a nightdress with long sleeves that had been rolled down. He remembers that the covers on the bed were neatly turned back and were only covering Mrs Clarke up to her knees. Her body was stiff.
Mr Stephen Clarke was also informed of the death. He believes that he arrived at his grandmother's house at about 11.15am. He noted that his grandmother's head was slightly off the bed and that her right arm was to her side over the bedside table, as if she was trying to reach for the warden's cord. He thinks that his grandmother was wearing a nightdress with sleeves down to the elbow. He has told the Inquiry that it was not unusual for his grandmother to be in bed at that time of day. Apparently, she would normally get up at some time between 10am and noon.
There is some confusion over timings. Mr Stephen Clarke believes that he received the telephone call informing him of his grandmother's death at 11am on the morning of 18th
May 1996. Mr Alan Chambers thinks that he received the call from Shipman informing him of his aunt's death some time between 8am and 9am. Mr Clifford Chambers recalls receiving the telephone call from his brother some time in the afternoon. Given the timings recorded on the Healthcall slip and in Shipman's computerised records, it is clear that Mr Clifford Chambers' evidence is the most accurate in this regard.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death ( MCCD). He said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis which was due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had seen Mrs Clarke alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at 3.45pm on 18th
May 1996. He said that he had been Mrs Clarke's ordinary medical attendant for 19 years and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of 15 minutes. He said that he saw her alive immediately before her death and made a complete external examination of the body immediately after death. The cause of death was stated to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting 20 minutes. His views as to the cause and mode of death were said to be based on his own observations, as well as those of the deputising service, and he stated that he alone was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has classified this death as highly suspicious, both on his consideration of the cremation documentation and the medical records. Professor Baker has observed that, whilst Mrs Clarke could have suffered a sudden infarction or arrhythmia in view of her previous medical history, this is another sudden death in the afternoon at home with Shipman present.
Conclusion
There is strong evidence that Mrs Clarke suffered from ischaemic heart disease and was at risk of further myocardial infarction or heart attack. The evidence suggests that, on the day of her death, Shipman was called to see Mrs Clarke because she was complaining of chest pain. It is, in my view, probable that Mrs Clarke had suffered a heart attack when she called Healthcall.
The position in which Mrs Clarke was found, as to which the evidence is conflicting, does not suggest that she died as the result of an injection of opiate. No one suggests that she looked as though she was asleep.
On the other hand, the fact that Shipman was present at the moment of death excites a considerable degree of suspicion. According to the information supplied by Shipman on Form B, he attended Mrs Clarke for a period of 15 minutes before she died. His note indicates that he attempted resuscitation during this period, but Mrs Clarke's position when she was found was inconsistent with any attempt at resuscitation having been made. In any event, if a resuscitation attempt were to be made, it would be usual to summon an ambulance, as the prospects of success would be greatly enhanced by the skilled efforts of the paramedics, who would also have a defibrillator, not otherwise available to Shipman. Shipman claimed that the mode of death was coma of 20 minutes' duration. This implies that Mrs Clarke was already in a coma when Shipman arrived. In such circumstances Shipman should have contacted the ambulance service immediately. There is no suggestion that he did so. Dr John Grenville has told the Inquiry, in his generic report that:
'During the last 15 years at least, virtually all ambulance services have been able to dispatch a trained paramedic with a defibrillator to a patient whom they are told is in cardiac arrest. It follows that a doctor performing CPR
(
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
)
on a patient in the community should ensure that an ambulance is called with the least possible delay'
.
I think it is highly likely that Shipman did not attempt resuscitation and did not call an ambulance. In other words, he made no real attempt to prevent Mrs Clarke from dying. He might also have ensured her death by administering an injection of opiate but his failure to resuscitate her or call an ambulance is not probative of that. His failure to do those things is equally consistent with a decision to let Mrs Clarke die of the heart attack she had suffered. Such a decision would be entirely consistent with his general philosophy that he did not believe in prolonging life in the elderly.
There is evidence that Mrs Clarke's arm was hanging over the side of the bed. Although there is some confusion in the evidence as to whether this was her left or right arm, this evidence is consistent with her having received an injection from Shipman. If the cause of Mrs Clarke's pain was that she was suffering a heart attack, an injection of diamorphine might have been appropriate. Mr Stephen Clarke suggests that his grandmother had attempted to pull the emergency cord and this too is possible.
There is almost always cause for suspicion in connection with a death which occurred in Shipman's presence. However, in this case, the immediate background to his visit was an independently verified emergency call. Thus, it would not be particularly surprising if Mrs Clarke had died in his presence. However, Shipman does not appear to have made appropriate attempts to help or treat Mrs Clarke. He might simply have decided to let her die or he might have seized the opportunity to ensure her death by injecting her with an excessive amount of opiate. I find I am unable to reach any positive conclusion about this case, although I am suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001