The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Calverley
Introduction
Mrs Edith Calverley was found dead at her home, 19 Mansfield Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 17th
August 1993 at the age of 77. Mrs Calverley's death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Tuesday, 17th
August 1993 but I have concluded from the evidence available to this Inquiry that she died the previous day, Monday, 16th
August 1993. She had been a patient of Shipman since October 1992. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Calverley's daughter, Mrs Lynda Winson, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Winson and Sister Olwyn Jones-Dorrington, a district nursing sister employed by Tameside and Glossop Area Health Authority.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Calverley but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Winson and Mr Philip Calverley, Mrs Calverley's son. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Calverley's general practitioner and hospital records, the appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Calverley worked in a cotton mill for many years. Her husband died in December 1991 and she lived alone in sheltered accommodation. She was quite frail and in poor health. She had a close and affectionate family who looked after her. Her daughter was mainly responsible for her care, although she also had a home help. Her bungalow was fitted with several emergency cords by which the warden could be summoned. She had a telephone by her bed.
Mrs Calverley had emphysema and progressive chronic obstructive airways disease. From about 1990, she began to use an oxygen cylinder to assist her breathing. She took a variety of drugs including Pulmicort, which is prescribed for asthma, via a nebuliser. Her daughter recalls that she took some tablets for her heart. According to her family, she remained determined to enjoy her life as much as possible. After her husband's death in December 1991, however, she became depressed and her health deteriorated.
In July 1992, Mrs Calverley went to North Wales for a holiday with her daughter and her family. While there she became unwell and was admitted to hospital in Bangor for 12 days. The discharge letter, addressed to her general practitioner at the Donneybrook Surgery, said that she had a chest infection and an exacerbation of her chronic obstructive airways disease. The letter listed no fewer than nine different types of medication which Mrs Calverley was taking. It was reported that she had made quite a good recovery. Her medication had been slightly adjusted. She was reviewed at Tameside General Hospital soon after her return home. The report to her general practitioner described her as a
'wheelchairbound lady with severe obstructive airways disease and ischaemic heart disease'
. On examination she was quite well. It was reported that
'her ischaemic heart disease still gives her significant problems'
, although the nature of these problems is not specified. She was also said to suffer multiple side effects from oral prednisolone, a steroid drug. Her medication was to be adjusted slightly.
Mrs Calverley became Shipman's patient in October 1992. He noted her medical history and drug regime. His note mentions angina but does not describe the frequency or severity of any symptoms.
At a further hospital review in January 1993, Mrs Calverley was said to be using oxygen nearly 24 hours a day. Her mobility was poor. She had muscle weakness thought to be the result of long-term steroid use. Her medication was adjusted.
In February 1993, Mrs Calverley attended the ophthalmic clinic where it was found that she had raised intraocular pressure. She was prescribed eye drops. The district nurse began to visit her regularly to apply these.
By this time, Mrs Calverley needed a good deal of care and supervision. Mrs Winson always visited her mother in the morning before she went to work and often called in again either at lunchtime or in the afternoon or evening. She did her mother's shopping. Mrs Calverley could still manage a little cooking and light cleaning. The district nurse came to apply the eye drops. As time went by, Mrs Calverley spent more and more time in bed and less time in the living room. However, she would sit in the living room to receive visitors other than members of the family or very close friends.
In May 1993, Mrs Calverley saw Shipman on account of what was probably an exacerbation of her respiratory problems. The notes are almost illegible. However, it is clear that, within just over a week, she was much better. In particular, her air entry was equal and good and she had no oedema.
At the end of June, there was another acute exacerbation of the respiratory problems. Shipman visited and found poor air entry. There were no crepitations. The pulse rate was high at 104 beats per minute. Heart sounds were normal and Shipman noted that there was no congestive heart failure. He appears to have increased the dose of steroids. Within two days Mrs Calverley was better. That was the last entry in Mrs Calverley's medical records before the day of her death.
In July, Mrs Calverley was reviewed by Dr M P Chopra at the chest clinic at Tameside General Hospital. He reported to Shipman that she was deteriorating slowly. He mentioned that she had had an acute exacerbation two weeks previously and had been confined to bed. He noted that her steroids had been increased. Her other medication was continued.
In late July 1993, Mrs Calverley went on a family holiday to Aberdaron, Wales. The holiday was for two weeks and, during this time, Mrs Calverley did not appear to be any more frail than usual. She had her oxygen machine with her and passed the time sewing and knitting and chatting to her family. She was able to help with the washing up. Mrs Winson recalls that although her mother enjoyed the holiday, she seemed to be missing her husband. The family returned to Hyde on 8th
August and the usual routine was resumed.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Winson visited her mother at about 8.30am on the morning of Monday, 16th
August 1993. She has told the Inquiry that her mother's bungalow had both an outer and an inner door. Mrs Calverley would usually leave both doors open or unlocked during the day but at night would close them both, locking the inner door at about 9.30pm and the outer door at about 11pm. Mrs Calverley was conscious of security and would never leave either door to her bungalow open or unlocked overnight. Mrs Winson would usually arrive in the morning to find the doors locked and would open them with her key.
Mrs Winson recalls that her mother was expecting a visit from Shipman that day, although she cannot now recall what this visit was for. Mrs Calverley's name appears in the surgery visits book but there is no indication of the reason for the visit.
Mrs Winson told the police that she stayed with her mother until about noon, although she told the Inquiry that she thinks she left her mother's bungalow at about 10am. She kept a shop at this time and the shop was due to open at 10am. She thinks that the home help had arrived before she left. Mrs Winson told the police that she had no further contact with her mother that day. However, she told the Inquiry that she believes that she must have visited her mother in the afternoon and must have taken her a custard tart. She does not remember visiting her mother a second time but says that she must have done, because after her mother's death, she noticed that there was a custard tart on a small trolley by the bed. She thinks that she must have delivered the tart to her mother after she finished work on Monday afternoon, some time after 3pm. In an addendum to her Inquiry statement, Mrs Winson says that she must have arrived at her mother's bungalow by 3.30pm and that she must have left by about 4.45pm. She still cannot remember any of this. She says that she did not see Shipman that day. She does not know whether Shipman had already visited her mother when she made her second visit. She hypothesises that Shipman must already have been, because she thinks that if he had not been, she would have stayed with her mother until he arrived. This is all theory and is not based on her recollection.
Shipman's appointments sheet shows that he might possibly have had a little time to visit patients in the late morning but appears to have been free to visit from about 1pm until 4pm. That he did visit is clear. Mrs Calverley's medical records contain the following entry for 16th
August:
'V
(
visit
)
1/7 history of sudden onset of pain
neck
chest dyspnoea
Pain on/off
(
illegible
)
= Angina ?
CT
'
.
This note finishes at the bottom of a Lloyd George card and I have been unable to find another continuation card or piece of paper on which anything further is written. The note appears incomplete. As it stands it suggests that Mrs Calverley gave a history of a sudden onset of pain the previous day. The pain was in the neck and chest. She was also breathless. Shipman thought this was angina and suspected that Mrs Calverley was having or had recently had a coronary thrombosis. No observations are recorded on this card, such as blood pressure or heart rate. There is no mention of a treatment plan.
The Discovery of the Death
At some time between 8.30am and 9am on the morning of Tuesday, 17th
August 1993, Sister Jones-Dorrington went to Mrs Calverley's bungalow. She found that the doors to the property were unlocked and she walked straight in. She found Mrs Calverley sitting in her armchair in the living room. Mrs Calverley was cold to the touch and it was obvious that she had died. Sister Jones-Dorrington telephoned Shipman who eventually attended. She remembers Shipman saying to her,
'That's one off my drug bill'
, a comment which she thought entirely inappropriate.
Mrs Winson recalls that she received a telephone call from Shipman some time between 8am and 9am informing her of the death. She went straight round to her mother's bungalow and found Sister Jones-Dorrington still there, although Shipman had left. Mrs Winson saw her mother sitting fully clothed in an armchair in the living room, leaning to her left and apparently asleep.
Mrs Winson considers that it was very unusual for Mrs Calverley to sit in the chair in which she was found. Her brother does not agree and says that she did sometimes sit in that chair to watch television. Mrs Winson's husband later told her that he had noticed that the television was switched on, although it was only showing a blank screen and was connected to the video channel. Mr Winson said that a video tape, which had been prepared for Mrs Calverley from cine film of previous holidays, was in the video recorder, but had been stopped after about an hour's play time. It appears that Mrs Calverley must have been watching a video when for some reason she was disturbed and stopped the tape. The arrival of her doctor is a possible reason for that.
Mrs Winson noticed the custard tart on a trolley next to her mother's bed. Mrs Winson surmised that her mother must have died on the previous day before she had had a chance to eat it.
Certification
The counterfoil of the MCCD completed by Shipman records that Mrs Calverley died on 17th
June 1993 (which is wrong), and that he last saw her alive on 16th
July 1993, which is also wrong. It is clear that Shipman meant to say that Mrs Calverley had died on 17th
August and that he had last seen her alive on the previous day. He said that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease and that chronic obstructive airways disease had contributed to the death. He dated his signature 17th
August 1993, which was probably correct.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He certified that the death occurred at about midnight on the evening of 16th
August 1993. He stated that he had been the ordinary medical attendant of Mrs Calverley for a period of ten months and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of three weeks. He stated that he had last seen her alive about 12 hours before her death (which on his timings would have been at about midday on 16th
August) and had performed a complete external examination of the body ten hours after death, which would be at about 10am. He gave the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil and said that the mode of death was a collapse lasting seconds. He said that the answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and he added:
'found by D/N on morning
visit - sat in chair
body temperature
gives death
at about midnight'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the cremation documentation in this case and regards the death as highly suspicious.
Conclusion
Mrs Calverley was not in good health at the time of her death. She apparently had a history of ischaemic heart disease and would have been at a significantly increased risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death. Her sudden death was unexpected to her family but cannot be regarded as improbable.
Shipman visited Mrs Calverley on the last day of her life. Why he visited is not known. However, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that the visit was called for as an emergency. If anything, it seems likely to have been a routine matter.
Mrs Calverley's death was discovered early in the morning on the day after a visit by Shipman. It seems likely that he was the last person to see or speak to her before her death, although this cannot be positively asserted. Mrs Winson's recollection of the events of the previous day is far from perfect. However, I think it likely that when Mrs Winson returned to see her mother on the Monday afternoon, as I think she did, Shipman had probably not yet visited Mrs Calverley. If he had already visited, I think Mrs Calverley would have told her daughter that he had and Mrs Winson would not have forgotten about it. If Shipman were the last person to see Mrs Calverley alive, my suspicions would be aroused.
That Mrs Calverley's doors were unlocked in the early morning would suggest that she had almost certainly died before changing into her nightclothes and retiring to bed the night before.
Shipman's note in the medical record for 16th
August appears incomplete. That may be because the remaining part of the note, written on a new card or separate piece of paper, has been lost. However, the note as it stands suggests that Mrs Calverley told Shipman that she had had a sudden onset of pain in the neck and chest a day earlier and had had pain on and off. Although Mrs Calverley suffered from ischaemic heart disease, it does not appear that she often complained of chest pain. I would have thought that, if Mrs Calverley had had chest pain the day before or that morning, she would have told her daughter about it. I am very suspicious of Shipman's claim that Mrs Calverley complained to him of chest pain. I suspect that he has fabricated a note to provide a plausible explanation for her death. He has done this in a large number of cases in which he has killed his patient.
If Mrs Calverley did complain of chest and neck pain and if Shipman had really thought she was having or had had a coronary thrombosis, one would have expected him to do something about it. He might have admitted her to hospital. At the very least, he should have alerted her daughter. It is possible that there was originally more to the medical note than is now available. I cannot be certain that he did not have any treatment plan for Mrs Calverley. However, I am sure that he did not contact her daughter. On his supposed account, he saw Mrs Calverley at about noon and left her alone. No sensible doctor would have done that with an elderly woman suffering a suspected heart attack. I suspect that he came later than he admitted and left Mrs Calverley alone because she was already dead.
Shipman told two important lies on Form B. First, he said that he had been treating Mrs Calverley for three weeks during her last illness. This suggests that she had been suffering from ischaemic heart disease for three weeks before her death. She had not. For two of those weeks she had been on holiday in North Wales. There is not a shred of evidence that he had seen her at all in that three week period. The medical records show that he had not seen her since early July.
Shipman's second lie was to pretend that he could estimate the time of Mrs Calverley's death from her body temperature. It is not possible to make any reliable estimate of the time of death unless an internal body temperature is taken, usually within the rectum. Shipman did not do that. Even if that had been done, it is highly unlikely that Shipman had the expertise to make a reliable estimate. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville says that this is a matter for a skilled pathologist. Shipman often claimed that he could estimate the time of death and used this as a means of creating the impression that the death had occurred a considerable time after he had been with the patient. I think that is what he has done here. He has pretended that the death occurred at about midnight in order to distance the death from his visit the previous afternoon.
The position in which Mrs Calverley was found does not suggest that she died of a coronary thrombosis. Dr Grenville says that most patients who have a fatal heart attack are found collapsed in circumstances which suggest that they have been trying to seek help. If Mrs Calverley had wanted to call for help, she could have pulled on one of her emergency cords. The evidence suggests that she did not. Her appearance in death was, however, similar to that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of opiate.
Taking all these factors into account, I conclude that Shipman probably killed Mrs Calverley. I stop short of saying that I am sure of this conclusion. Mrs Calverley was at some risk of a sudden cardiac death. I cannot be certain that she was not seen alive after Shipman's visit on 16th
August. The missing part of the medical record, if there was more, might contain relevant information. Notwithstanding those uncertainties in the evidence, I think that Shipman probably killed Mrs Calverley.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001