The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Genevieve Challoner
Introduction
Mrs Genevieve Challoner's body was discovered at her home, 261 Reddish Road, South Reddish, Stockport on Tuesday, 10th
July 1990. It seems likely that she had died a few days prior to the discovery of her body. She was 69. Her registered general practitioner, Dr Richard Clark, certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to arteriosclerosis.
In November 1999, Miss Tracy Flanagan, Mrs Challoner's granddaughter, contacted the Greater Manchester Police on behalf of her mother, Mrs Patricia Flanagan (Mrs Challoner's daughter), to express concern about the circumstances of Mrs Challoner's death. The police took a statement from Mr James Henry Clough (Mrs Challoner's son), and also spoke to Mrs Patricia Flanagan.
There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Clough, Mrs Patricia Flanagan, Mrs Beryl Northrop (who occupied the flat directly above that of Mrs Challoner) and Dr Clark.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Challoner was a widow who lived alone in her flat on Reddish Road. The consensus of the witnesses seems to be that Mrs Challoner moved to Reddish from Mottram-in-Longendale at least two years before she died. She was a heavy smoker and had a history of breathing problems and hypothyroidism. According to Dr Clark, she also suffered from angina during the last 12 months of her life.
Mrs Flanagan's Account of Events
Mrs Flanagan's evidence conflicts with the evidence of the other witnesses. Mrs Flanagan says that there is a degree of enmity between her and her brother.
Mrs Flanagan says that about two weeks before Mrs Challoner died, she told Mrs Flanagan that she had decided to change her doctor and had gone to register at a surgery in Stockport. Mrs Challoner said that she had been met on the steps of the surgery by a man who introduced himself as a general practitioner and whom Mrs Flanagan says that she later learned was called Shipman. He said that Mrs Challoner did not need to register at reception and that he would visit her at home. Shipman said that his surgery was in Hyde and that all the paperwork could be completed at her home. He apparently explained that, even though Mrs Challoner lived in Stockport and he practised from Hyde, she could still register with him. Mrs Challoner told her daughter that Shipman had touched her on the shoulder and that she had felt 'touched by evil'.
Mrs Flanagan says that about a week later, her mother told her that Shipman had visited her at home and had brought with him the papers which had to be signed for her to change practices. He was apparently more interested in the flat and its surroundings than Mrs Challoner and commented on an opal ring she was wearing. He is said to have taken out of his bag a metal hammer-shaped object and asked whether she was in contact with her family and specifically whether she was expecting to hear from anyone. Mrs Challoner apparently said that she was waiting to hear from Mrs Flanagan and Shipman then put the instrument back in his bag and left. Mrs Flanagan was concerned and told her mother not to admit the doctor if he called again.
Mrs Flanagan says that a few days later, she was speaking to her mother on the telephone about recent contact between Mrs Challoner, Mr Clough (Mrs Challoner's son and Mrs Flanagan's brother) and Mr Clough's wife, when Mrs Challoner's doorbell rang. Mrs Challoner apparently said that the person at the door was shouting through the letterbox and that it appeared to be Shipman. Mrs Challoner was about to open the door, believing that Shipman's car had perhaps broken down, when Shipman let himself in using a key that Mrs Challoner had given to her son. Mrs Challoner might also have said that Mr Clough was there. Mrs Challoner then put down the receiver and that was the last that her daughter heard from her. Mrs Flanagan says that she tried telephoning later that day and over the days following but received no answer. Over the same period, she was unable to make contact with her brother and she received a number of annoying silent telephone calls, which she now believes were made by her mother, who was perhaps injured and seeking help. Some days later, Mrs Challoner was found dead. Mrs Flanagan says that items of jewellery and money were missing from the flat. According to Mrs Flanagan, her brother told her that Shipman, whom he described as a 'very understanding man', had suggested that Mrs Challoner be cremated and had asked him to absent himself from the room whilst he broke Mrs Challoner's back, a step that he said was necessary before her body could be placed in a 'body bag'.
Other Accounts of the Events Leading up to the Death
Mr Clough saw his mother on average once a week and recalls that when his mother visited Dr Clark, who was based in Mottram, she would call in to see Mr Clough, who also lived in Mottram. He thinks that his mother last saw Dr Clark about two weeks before her death. He last saw his mother about a week before her death, at which time she was suffering from a cold. At no time did she mention to him that she intended to register with a different doctor.
Mrs Northrop says that a week before Mrs Challoner was found dead, she went to check on her, not having seen or heard from her for a few days. Mrs Challoner opened the door and did not look well; she was pale and said that she had been feeling ill. Mrs Northrop picked up some items of shopping for Mrs Challoner and dropped them off later that day. That was the last time that she saw Mrs Challoner alive.
Dr Clark says that he used to see Mrs Challoner regularly for the monitoring of her hypothyroid condition, at least every fortnight. He remembers that several years before she died, Mrs Challoner moved from Mottram to Stockport but that she remained his patient. She never mentioned that she was thinking of transferring to Shipman's or any other practice. They got on very well together and he would have been surprised had she wanted to change to another general practitioner.
The Discovery of the Body
Mr Clough recalls that he went to visit his mother during the afternoon of Tuesday, 10th
July. He was able to open the front door with a key but was unable to open the inner vestibule door, which was locked on the mortise. He went round to the rear of the flat and through the window saw his mother lying on the settee in the living room with a blanket over her. He went to Mrs Northrop's flat and, as she did not have a key to open the vestibule door, he opened it by force. The key was still in the lock. It was obvious to Mr Clough that his mother was dead and he remembers that there was a terrible smell. She was lying on the settee and had a blanket over her, pulled right up to her neck. The police were called. Mr Clough does not remember any discussion concerning the need for a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Northrop confirms Mr Clough's account of the events of 10th
July 1990. It would appear that the police attended, as would be expected in such circumstances.
Mr Clough does not believe that Shipman had anything to do with his mother's death.
Certification
Dr Clark appears to have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Neither the certificate nor its counterfoil has survived. It can be seen from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') that he certified that the death was caused by coronary thrombosis due to arteriosclerosis. According to the death certificate, hypertension had contributed to the death. However, this was probably an error by the registrar, as Dr Clark wrote on cremation Form B that hypothyroidism had contributed to the death. The death was registered as having occurred on 10th
July, although it almost certainly took place some time earlier.
On Form B, Dr Clark said that he had been Mrs Challoner's ordinary medical attendant for 30 years and that he had attended her during her last illness for 12 months. He had last seen her alive ten days before death and he had seen the body three days after death. He said that the mode of death was exhaustion lasting ten days. His views as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. Mr Clough was said to have nursed his mother during her final illness. No one had been present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Challoner died of natural causes and that Shipman played no part in her death whatsoever.
When Mr Clough last saw his mother alive she was unwell and suffering from a cold. Mrs Northrop also says that Mrs Challoner appeared unwell in the days before she died. She smoked and suffered from angina and, although her death may have been unexpected, it must be recognised that she was at considerably increased risk of suffering a heart attack.
The account offered by Mrs Flanagan concerning Mrs Challoner's contact with Shipman is not only implausible and contrary to all other evidence in this case, it is quite bizarre. I cannot accept that there is a word of truth in it.
There is no evidence to support Mrs Flanagan's assertion that Mrs Challoner transferred to Shipman's register and there is positive evidence that she remained a patient of Dr Clark. I do not accept that Mrs Challoner ever had any contact with Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001