The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alfred Cheetham
Introduction
Mr Alfred Cheetham died at his home, 18 St. John's Drive, Godley, Hyde on Thursday, 21st
March 1991 at the age of 73. He had been a patient of Shipman for many years. Shipman certified the cause of his death to be respiratory failure due to chronic obstructive airways disease due to cor pulmonale.
There has been no police investigation into this death and no inquest.
The Inquiry made contact with Mr Cheetham's widow, Mrs Alice Cheetham, in an attempt to verify what Shipman had certified in Form B of the cremation certificate. She expressed some concern that Shipman might have been implicated in the death of her husband. The Inquiry took a statement from Mrs Cheetham and also from District Nurse Clegg, who has no recollection or useful information to give in connection with Mr Cheetham's case.
The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation documentation and Mr Cheetham's general practitioner records, which comprise the Lloyd George cards recovered from Shipman's home and extracts from the computerised records.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Cheetham is 83 years of age and readily admits that her memory of events is not clear. She has told the Inquiry that her husband's health began to decline about two years before his death, when he developed chest problems. A letter from the chest clinic at Ashton-under-Lyne Hospital, written in 1979, describes severe respiratory problems. Mr Cheetham was said to be breathless on minimal exertion. His condition was thought to be due partly to exposure to cotton dust and partly to cigarette smoking.
Correspondence from Tameside General Hospital reveals that Mr Cheetham was admitted to hospital with an acute exacerbation of respiratory problems between 25th
February and 6th
March 1991. He was diagnosed with chronic obstructive airways disease and cor pulmonale with secondary polycythemia (raised haemoglobin levels) and ischaemic heart disease. At home, he was to have at least 16 hours daily oxygen inhalation.
The computerised records show that Mr Cheetham had regular prescriptions for his respiratory problems and suggest that there were continuing reviews of his oxygen treatment, noted to be 24 hourly, after his discharge from hospital.
Other notes and correspondence reveal that a locum doctor visited Mr Cheetham on 16th
March 1991. On 19th
March, it appears that Shipman visited him. Mr Cheetham's name appears in Shipman's visits book and there is a brief entry in the medical records. On 20th
March 1991, Mr Cheetham attended the chest clinic at Tameside General Hospital, when a letter was sent to Shipman asking him to prescribe Frumil, which is a diuretic.
Mrs Cheetham recalls that Shipman visited her husband at about 2.30pm on 20th
March 1991. There is no confirmation of this visit either in the visits book or in the medical records. Mrs Cheetham says that her husband complained of being unable to sleep and Shipman provided him with two loose tablets, which he produced from his bag. The tablets were white and were about the size of Smarties. There is no record of any medication being prescribed on this day, and although a letter had been written to Shipman that day asking him to prescribe Frumil, which comes in tablet form, it is unlikely that the message had reached Shipman that day.
Mrs Cheetham says that after Shipman had left, she and her husband spent the rest of the afternoon together in their flat, during which time her husband was well. She recalls that they had supper and went to bed at about 9.30pm. Mr Cheetham took the two tablets once he was in the bedroom. He then got into bed and chatted to his wife for a short while. He did not say that he felt strange after he took the tablets and his wife did not notice any effects.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Cheetham awoke at about 9am on 21st
March to find that her husband had died. She remembers that he was 'a deep mauve colour from top to bottom'. Shipman arrived at the flat after the police and other family members had attended. Shipman certified the fact of death. Mrs Cheetham recalls that she returned to the bedroom after Shipman had left and saw that the mattress was completely soaked with blood.
There is no record of a visit to the house that day.
Certification
On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Cheetham alive on 20th
March 1991. This accords with Mrs Cheetham's recollection.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate, recording that death had occurred at 9am on 21st
March 1991. That appears to be the time at which the death was discovered. Shipman said that he had attended Mr Cheetham during his last illness for 12 years and, given that his respiratory condition was diagnosed in 1979, that may well be accurate. He said that he had last seen Mr Cheetham alive 24 hours before his death, which would be on 20th
March, and that he had seen the body and made a complete external examination of it about two hours after death. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only minutes. Shipman said that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on statements made by Mr Cheetham's wife, who had nursed him and had been present at the moment of death. However, Mrs Cheetham's evidence to the Inquiry is that she found her husband dead in bed in the morning and this is not consistent with Shipman's statement on Form B that the mode of his death was a collapse lasting only minutes. If Mr Cheetham died in the night while Mrs Cheetham was asleep, she would not know anything about the mode of his death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death not to be suspicious, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation documentation and the medical records.
Conclusion
The medical records show that Mr Cheetham suffered from a severe respiratory disorder for which he received regular treatment and of which there was an acute exacerbation in the period just before he died. In those circumstances, it would not have been surprising had Mr Cheetham died in his sleep, as the result of respiratory failure.
Mrs Cheetham is concerned that Shipman visited on the day before the death and gave Mr Cheetham some tablets, which he took that evening before going to bed. It is not known what those tablets were. If Mrs Cheetham's recollection is right, it would appear that Shipman had acted in a most unorthodox manner in giving his patient tablets from his bag without recording the fact in the medical notes. However, the tablets could have been quite harmless. On the other hand, they could have been an opiate, such as morphine or Diconal. Such a drug would have caused respiratory depression and this could have had a severe effect on Mr Cheetham, whose respiratory function was already severely compromised. A dose of opiate that would be harmless to most people might have had a fatal effect on Mr Cheetham. Even a sedative such as temazepam might well be dangerous for someone like him. Mr Cheetham might have taken the tablets, which would not have had any immediate effect, and then have fallen into a deep sleep. His respiration might then have become depressed and have ceased altogether.
I must bear in mind that Mrs Cheetham accepts that her memory of these events is no longer good. My concern about this death arises because Shipman stated on the MCCD counterfoil and in Form B that he visited Mr Cheetham on 20th
March but did not make an entry in the medical records. I recognise that it is quite possible that Shipman did not visit on 20th
March; indeed in one respect it seems unlikely that he would, as Mr Cheetham was due to attend the hospital that day. My concern is heightened by Shipman's entry in Form B, where he states that the death occurred, quite suddenly, at 9am. If Mrs Cheetham is right when she says she found her husband dead when she awoke, Shipman's entry is misleading. One would have expected him to say that Mr Cheetham died during the night. If Shipman had provided tablets the day before, it could be that he wanted to create the impression that Mr Cheetham died quite a long time after taking them.
If Shipman did give Mr Cheetham two tablets of an opiate drug, intending to hasten his death, it would be an unusual method for him to choose. Shipman usually killed by giving an intravenous injection of opiate, which caused death almost immediately. I have concluded that he might, on occasion, have given an intramuscular injection of opiate to hasten the death of terminally ill patients.
There is no clear explanation for the profuse bleeding which Mrs Cheetham recalls that she found after the death. It seems likely that Mrs Cheetham is confused about this aspect of her husband's death.
Owing to the uncertainties surrounding this case, I do not feel able to reach any conclusion as to whether Mr Cheetham's death was due to natural causes or whether it might possibly have been caused by some intervention by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001