The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marion Carradice
Introduction
Mrs Marion Carradice died at her home, 4 Kensington Street, Hyde on Monday, 14th
August 1989 at the age of 80. She was a widow and lived alone. She was a patient of Shipman and he certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In January 2001, following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's report, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Rita Walker (Mrs Carradice's stepdaughter) and Mrs Mildred Piper and Mrs Elsie Sylvia Rhodes (Mrs Carradice's neighbours). The police also interviewed Mrs Dorothy Mitchell (referred to in a police report as Dorothy Maitland). Mrs Mitchell declined to provide a statement to the police.
There was no inquest at the time of Mrs Carradice's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Rhodes, Mrs Piper and Mrs Walker and a statement from Mrs Walker's husband, Mr Robert Walker. Mrs Mitchell did not wish to provide a statement to the Inquiry. The Inquiry has had access to a single computerised surgery record, which confirms that Mrs Carradice was registered with Shipman, to Shipman's visits book for 1989 and the duty doctor transfer diary. No medical records survive.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Until the age of 60, Mrs Carradice worked as a charge hand machinist for a glove manufacturer in Hyde. Her first husband died in 1970 and in 1972 she married Mr Harry Carradice. They lived together at 4 Kensington Street until his death in January 1989. Thereafter she lived alone. She was independent and did most of her own shopping. She enjoyed going out, especially to play bingo. About twice a week she would walk into Hyde to play bingo, a journey of about ten minutes, and would take the bus back home.
According to all the witnesses, Mrs Carradice had no significant illness. She suffered from arthritis in her knee and hypertension, for which she was prescribed medication. These conditions did not affect Mrs Carradice's active way of life. In either June or July 1989, she went on holiday to Blackpool, as she used to do when her husband was alive.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Walker last spoke to her stepmother on the telephone about two days before she died. Mrs Carradice sounded well and gave no indication that she was in any way unwell.
Mrs Rhodes was an auxiliary nurse at Hyde Hospital and knew Shipman professionally. She also knew that he was Mrs Carradice's general practitioner. In her statement to the police, Mrs Rhodes said that she saw Mrs Carradice in the street one or two days before she died. Mrs Carradice told her that she was not feeling well and was going to see her doctor. Later that day, Mrs Rhodes called on Mrs Carradice, who told her that Shipman had prescribed medication, although she did not say for what condition. Mrs Rhodes recalls that she looked rather red in the face. In her statement to the Inquiry, Mrs Rhodes said that these events took place about two weeks before the death, rather than two days. She also said that she saw Mrs Carradice on most days, just to have a few words, and last saw her a day or so before her death, at which time she cannot recall that there was any mention of ill health or of needing the doctor.
The Day of the Death
The Inquiry has considered the visits book from 1st
May 1989 to 14th
August 1989. Mrs Carradice's name does not feature at all during that period, except for the day when she died, when the following entry appears:
'Carradice 4 Kensington St. CVA
(
meaning died
)
'
.
The accounts given by Mrs Piper and Mrs Rhodes in their witness statements, as to the events of 14th
August, are not easy to reconcile. Mrs Piper's account is supported to some extent by the account of Mrs Mitchell contained within the police report.
Mrs Piper told the police that she called on Mrs Carradice between 10am and 11am. Mrs Carradice told her that she had 'tumbled a bit on the rug'. She said she was not hurt. She had felt a bit dizzy. Mrs Piper asked her if she wanted anything from the shops but she did not, and Mrs Piper went into Hyde. She returned between midday and 1pm and went to see Mrs Carradice, who told her that she had asked the doctor to come, as she was still feeling a bit dizzy. Mrs Piper said she would go home, make a sandwich and keep a look-out for the doctor's car. She would call back when the doctor had been.
Mrs Piper gave a similar account to the Inquiry, although she thought she had first called on Mrs Carradice at about 10am, or a little earlier, and that she had returned later in the morning, possibly towards noon. She found Mrs Carradice sitting on the sofa, as she had been when she had seen her earlier. Mrs Carradice was still sitting there when Mrs Piper left to return to her own home to make her lunch, promising to return when the doctor had been.
Mrs Piper's usual routine was to put away her shopping, feed her dog and then make her lunch. She remembers that, after a short time (she believes at most 10-15 minutes after she returned home, and before she had eaten her lunch), Mrs Mitchell knocked on her door and said, 'Mildred, will you come in. Marion's dead'. Mrs Piper was incredulous, as she had only recently left Mrs Carradice. Mrs Piper went to number 4 with Mrs Mitchell and was surprised to see that Mrs Carradice was not sitting on the settee where she had left her. Mrs Mitchell said that Mrs Carradice was upstairs and she and Mrs Piper walked through the living room and up the stairs. As they did so, Mrs Piper noticed 'a young man with a beard' talking on the telephone. Mrs Piper presumed that he was the doctor and now understands that the man on the telephone was Shipman.
When they reached the top of the stairs, Mrs Mitchell turned left into the back bedroom, where they saw Mrs Carradice, fully clothed and lying on her side. She was wearing normal daytime clothes and her shoes had been taken off. Her dentures were on top of a cabinet by the side of the bed. She looked as though she were asleep. Mrs Piper then recalls that Mrs Rhodes came into the room, and said that she would put Mrs Carradice's false teeth back into her mouth before her jaw set. Mrs Piper then went into the front bedroom, found a sheet, and used it to cover Mrs Carradice. Mrs Piper's account to the police and to the Inquiry are consistent in all respects. Mrs Piper says that she did not see Mrs Rhodes until she joined Mrs Piper in the back bedroom. She agrees that it is possible that Mrs Rhodes might already have been in the house when she arrived.
Mrs Mitchell's account is consistent with that of Mrs Piper. She told the police that, at about lunchtime, Shipman knocked on her front door and asked her to accompany him to Mrs Carradice's house. She went with him and found Mrs Carradice lying on a bed upstairs, apparently dead. She left and went to Mrs Piper's house.
Mrs Rhodes has given two accounts, which differ in some respects from each other and are not consistent with the account of Mrs Piper. She told the police that, on the day of the death, she learned that Mrs Carradice had fallen downstairs. She could not recall how she had found out. She recalled that she went to Mrs Carradice's house at about midday. She did not say what had prompted her to go. She went upstairs and saw Mrs Carradice lying on the bed in the back bedroom. Mrs Piper was also there. Mrs Rhodes said that Mrs Carradice was not dead. She looked pale and Mrs Rhodes was concerned about her. She felt for a pulse, which was weak. She spoke to Mrs Carradice, who did not respond. Mrs Piper said Mrs Carradice had telephoned for the doctor, who was on his way. Mrs Piper then left the house and Mrs Rhodes stayed with Mrs Carradice until the doctor arrived. Shipman arrived soon afterwards. Mrs Rhodes took him upstairs to see Mrs Carradice. She thinks that Mrs Piper might have returned by this time. Shipman took Mrs Carradice's pulse and spoke to her, but she only mumbled in reply. Soon after that, Mrs Rhodes recalls that she was downstairs when Shipman came down and told her that Mrs Carradice had died. He mentioned a heart attack and old age.
In her Inquiry statement, Mrs Rhodes says that she was returning to her home at about noon when she met one of her neighbours, who had just come out of Mrs Carradice's house. She cannot recall whether the neighbour was Mrs Mitchell or Mrs Piper, although she now thinks it was probably Mrs Piper. I shall refer to that person as 'the neighbour'. The neighbour said that Mrs Carradice was unwell in bed and that Shipman was on his way to see her. The neighbour asked Mrs Rhodes to go inside to reassure Mrs Carradice. The two women went into Mrs Carradice's house and upstairs to the back bedroom, where Mrs Rhodes saw Mrs Carradice lying flat on her back on the bed with a blanket covering her up to her chest. Mrs Carradice looked very pale and Mrs Rhodes was concerned for her well-being. She took her pulse, which was very weak. She spoke to Mrs Carradice, who either did not respond or was only able to mutter in reply. According to Mrs Rhodes, all this took place before the doctor arrived.
After a short time, the neighbour told Mrs Rhodes that she had to leave. The two women went downstairs and the neighbour said she would return later. She asked Mrs Rhodes to stay until the doctor arrived. Mrs Rhodes says that she did not know who had called for Shipman or when.
Shipman arrived shortly afterwards. In the time between the neighbour leaving and Shipman arriving, Mrs Rhodes thinks that she went upstairs to check on Mrs Carradice. She says that she was 'still alright' but did not say anything to her.
When Shipman arrived, Mrs Rhodes let him in and told him that Mrs Carradice was upstairs. She thinks she went up with him but is not sure. She cannot now say whether Shipman examined Mrs Carradice, and her account of events at this stage is very vague. Mrs Rhodes recalls that Shipman did not suggest that an ambulance be called, and he might have said that Mrs Carradice was very unwell, or that she did not have long to live. Mrs Rhodes left the room, leaving Shipman alone with Mrs Carradice. A short time later, Shipman came downstairs and said that Mrs Carradice had died.
Mrs Rhodes says that Shipman then asked for the telephone number of Mrs Carradice's next of kin. Mrs Rhodes looked in the address book and gave Shipman Mrs Walker's telephone number. He telephoned Mrs Walker and informed her in a cold manner that her stepmother had died. Following discussion with Mrs Rhodes as to which undertaker should be instructed, Shipman telephoned Robinson's Funeral Services.
Mrs Rhodes recalls that the neighbour (whom by this stage in her statement she refers to as Mrs Piper) came back to Mrs Carradice's house, although she cannot remember whether Shipman was still there or whether Mrs Piper arrived after he had departed. She recalls that they went upstairs together, because Mrs Piper wanted to see Mrs Carradice's body. Mrs Rhodes then saw the false teeth on the table next to the bed and asked Mrs Piper to put them into Mrs Carradice's mouth. Mrs Piper said that she thought that Mrs Rhodes should do this, and Mrs Rhodes thinks that she did in fact put the false teeth in. Mrs Rhodes thinks that Mrs Piper fetched a sheet and put it over Mrs Carradice. She says that she was still at the house when the undertakers came about an hour later to remove the body.
Mrs Walker recalls that Shipman telephoned her between midday and 2pm. He said,
'Dr Shipman here, Mrs Carradice's GP. Just phoned to tell you that she has just died'
. Mrs Walker was so shocked by the news that she confirmed Shipman was at the house and then said she would call back. Mr Walker says that his recollection of what he was told of the death at the time is consistent with his wife's statement.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has. On it, Shipman said that the immediate cause of death was a left-sided cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He said that he last saw Mrs Carradice alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B, in which he recorded that Mrs Carradice had died at
'1430hrs'
and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of 45 minutes. He had last seen her alive immediately before death and he had examined the body immediately after the death. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil. The mode of death was said to be collapse of only minutes' duration. When asked to what extent his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote
'self
neighbour'
. He said that he and a neighbour (whom he did not name) were present at the moment of death.
The Aftermath
Following the death, Mrs Walker travelled to her stepmother's home in Hyde. She thought it strange that there was no money at all in Mrs Carradice's purse or indeed anywhere in the house. She was also puzzled at the disappearance of an antique clock, which had been left to Mrs Walker by her grandmother, but was kept by Mrs Carradice, at her deceased husband's request. The clock was normally kept in Mrs Carradice's bedroom. It was never found.
Following the cremation, a wake was held at 4 Kensington Street. Mrs Walker and her husband talked to the neighbours who had seen Mrs Carradice most recently before her death. There were expressions of shock at the suddenness of the death, as Mrs Carradice had not been unwell before her death.
Conclusion
Although I have not had the advantage of hearing Mrs Rhodes and Mrs Piper in person, I have no hesitation in saying that I find Mrs Piper's account of events to be the more reliable. Not only were her two accounts consistent with each other, they were also consistent with the brief account which Mrs Mitchell gave to the police. Mrs Rhodes' two accounts are inconsistent with each other and are extremely vague in some important particulars. I shall base my conclusions on the account of Mrs Piper.
It appears to me that Shipman must have arrived at Mrs Carradice's house not long after Mrs Piper had left her sitting on the sofa downstairs. I think it likely that Mrs Carradice was still downstairs when Shipman arrived and that Shipman took her upstairs, possibly to facilitate his examination. I think it unlikely that Mrs Carradice, who had been sitting on her sofa, fully dressed, for about two hours, would have decided to go upstairs in the few minutes before Shipman arrived. When next seen by any of her neighbours (the first being Mrs Mitchell), Mrs Carradice was dead. Shipman had been alone with her for no more than ten to fifteen minutes and had then fetched Mrs Mitchell, who had fetched Mrs Piper. These circumstances excite a high degree of suspicion, as it would be quite remarkable if Mrs Carradice had died naturally during such a short time.
There is some evidence that Mrs Carradice suffered from hypertension and was therefore vulnerable to a stroke. There is also evidence to suggest that she might possibly have had a stroke on the morning of 14th
August. On the other hand, the history of a fall on account of dizziness is quite non-specific. Had she had a stroke, one would have expected her to show some signs of weakness of the limbs or slurring of the speech, which Mrs Piper would have noticed.
The evidence suggests that it was Mrs Carradice herself who telephoned for the doctor. The procedure at the surgery would be for the receptionist to note a request for a visit, usually including a brief note of the nature of the problem. The message would be conveyed to Shipman, who would note the name and address in his own visits book but not usually the nature of the problem. In this case, the entry in Shipman's visits book comprises the name and address and the fact that Mrs Carradice had died of a cerebrovascular accident. The references to the fact that Mrs Carradice had suffered a stroke and died must have been entered after the visit. I think it is unlikely that Mrs Carradice suggested to the receptionist that she had suffered a stroke. First, had she done so, the receptionist would probably have asked Shipman to visit as a matter of urgency or would have suggested that an ambulance should be called. Second, the evidence suggests that Mrs Carradice was not unduly worried about herself when Mrs Piper returned at about midday. She was still sitting on the sofa. From the evidence of Mrs Piper, it seems likely that Mrs Carradice told the receptionist that she had had a fall and was feeling dizzy and unwell. In my view, it is possible but very unlikely that Mrs Carradice had a stroke that morning.
While Shipman was with Mrs Carradice in the back bedroom, either he or she removed her dentures. That is a feature that arouses some suspicion. In several cases in which Shipman has killed his patient, the patient has been found with their dentures removed. Dr John Grenville has suggested that Shipman might have had an alarming experience when killing a patient, when the dentures had perhaps slipped out of position as the patient became unconscious and had lodged in the throat. Dr Grenville suggests that perhaps Shipman felt it prudent to remove the dentures to prevent this.
I think that when Mrs Carradice had died, Shipman went to find a neighbour who could help him find the telephone number of the next of kin. That is a further reason why I am sure Mrs Rhodes is mistaken in her account. He would not have done that if Mrs Rhodes had been in the house and was able to give him the telephone number. I think Mrs Mitchell found the address book for him and he made the call while she went to fetch Mrs Piper. When Mrs Mitchell and Mrs Piper arrived together, Shipman was on the telephone and Mrs Rhodes was nowhere to be seen. I think she arrived a while later. She has clearer recollections of such matters as the dentures. I think it likely that she did indeed put Mrs Carradice's dentures back in.
The real question is what happened during the short period in which Shipman was alone with Mrs Carradice. It seems to me that there are really only two possibilities. Either Mrs Carradice died of a stroke that had begun earlier that morning or else Shipman killed her in his usual way, by giving her an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate.
The witness evidence suggests that Mrs Carradice could have had a cerebrovascular accident that morning. That is not to say that she died of it. In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville has said that it is possible for a patient to die very suddenly of a stroke, usually caused by a haemorrhage within the brain stem. However, an occlusive stroke usually develops over a period of time. The initial signs may be very similar to those described by Mrs Carradice, a fall followed by dizziness and a feeling of malaise. Then as it develops, there is usually weakness on one side and other neurological signs such as slurring of the speech. The patient may stabilise and recover or at least improve but, if not, he or she will then suffer a gradual loss of consciousness over a period of hours or even a day or two, and death will usually take place two to three days after the initial stroke. It appears to me that Mrs Carradice did not have a massive stroke of the kind that causes sudden death. She was able to talk to Mrs Piper at least two hours after her fall. Yet she died within a very short time of Shipman's arrival. I think this is highly suspicious and I believe it is likely that Shipman was responsible for her death. It is possible that she had a stroke that morning but I do not think she died from it.
There are a number of features typical of cases in which Shipman killed. In particular, Shipman often called upon a neighbour to come to the house within a very short time of the death. Only very rarely did he call a neighbour in time to be present at the death, although he often claimed in the cremation documents that the neighbour was present at the moment of death. Here, he fetched Mrs Mitchell too late to be present, although I think he tried to suggest that she had been present when he completed Form B. He did not identify the neighbour whom he claimed was present.
My conclusion is that Shipman probably killed Mrs Carradice.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001