The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Albert Cheetham
Introduction
Mr Albert Cheetham died at his home, 11 Brooks Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 1st
April 1987 at the age of 85. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. He thought highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension .
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Cheetham was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Cheetham's son, Mr Neville William Cheetham. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Neville Cheetham and his wife, Mrs Carole Jacqueline Cheetham, and from Mr Peter Hopwood and Mrs Norma Hopwood (friends of Mr Cheetham). The Inquiry has spoken to other neighbours, who can provide no evidence relating to the day of the death but confirm the general picture concerning Mr Cheetham's state of health. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits books for the relevant period and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Cheetham's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Cheetham lived alone after the death of his wife in 1983. He remained active and outgoing. He would regularly walk into Hyde to do his shopping and would often carry out errands for less mobile neighbours. As he got older, he would sometimes take a bus on the return journey. He was an avid reader and a regular visitor to Hyde Library. Mr Neville Cheetham never had any cause for concern in relation to his father's health and never even considered the need for residential care. The only complaint which Mr Cheetham had was in connection with his nerves. He once told his son that he had spoken to his doctor about this and had been given a tonic.
Saturday, 14th
March 1987 was Mr Cheetham's 85th
birthday. Mr Neville Cheetham and his wife spent the evening with him and stayed overnight at his house. In Mr Neville Cheetham's opinion, his father was 'as fit as ever and seemed very well'. Mr Neville Cheetham spoke to his father on each of the following two weekends. The last occasion was probably on Sunday, 29th
March. At no stage in those conversations did Mr Cheetham say anything about ill health.
Mr and Mrs Hopwood confirm that Mr Cheetham was very fit for his age. So infrequently was he ill that they did not even know who his doctor was. They had told him that, if he ever needed anything or was feeling ill, he should not hesitate to telephone them. Mr Cheetham never took advantage of this offer and, indeed, no telephone call was made to the Hopwoods immediately prior to Mr Cheetham's death. The Hopwoods infer that he cannot have been ill before he died. They were shocked to learn of his death, which was not expected by those who knew him.
The Day of the Death
Between 6pm and 7pm on Wednesday, 1st
April 1987, Mrs Carole Cheetham tried to telephone her father-in-law but there was no reply. She was not worried, as she thought he would be chatting to a neighbour across the fence in his backyard.
At some time during the morning of Thursday, 2nd
April 1987, Mr Hopwood received a telephone call from either a neighbour of Mr Cheetham or from the police. He cannot now recall which. The caller told him that Mr Cheetham had been found dead in his favourite chair in the back room of his house. Mr Hopwood telephoned Mr Neville Cheetham and informed him of the death. Mr Neville Cheetham told the police that he remembers being told by Mr Hopwood that the doctor had visited Mr Cheetham, had entered the house by the open front door and had found him dead. However, Mr Hopwood does not confirm this aspect of Mr Neville Cheetham's evidence.
The Aftermath
On Friday, 3rd
April 1987, Mr Neville Cheetham drove from his home in Derbyshire to Hyde. He went to the Donneybrook Surgery where he was told by a receptionist that Shipman wanted to see him. Shipman told him that Mr Cheetham had been one of his first patients when he came to Hyde and that he was very sorry about the death. He explained that he had called in to see Mr Cheetham on Wednesday, 1st
April 1987, after visiting another patient on the same street. Mr Cheetham told the police that Shipman told him that his father had complained of being 'nervy', which is why he agreed to call again the next day. He told the Inquiry that Shipman said that he would return the following morning to issue a repeat prescription. Shipman said that, when he did return, he found the front door open. He told Mr Cheetham that 'Old people often leave the front door open if they're expecting the doctor'. Shipman said that he had entered the property and found Mr Cheetham in his chair with the television and the gas fire on. Shipman added that Mr Cheetham 'had obviously sat down the evening before to watch Coronation Street and had a massive heart attack'. Shipman seemed calm and concerned and spoke in a reassuring manner.
There are reasons to suspect that Shipman's account might not be true. First, there is no reference in the visits book to Shipman having visited either Mr Cheetham or any resident of Brooks Avenue on 1st
April. Second, Mr Neville Cheetham has explained that his father would normally lock his door unless he was expecting a visitor. He would, therefore, have locked it on the evening of 1st
April and would not have unlocked it until the next morning.
Shipman was the Donneybrook doctor on duty during the evening of 1st
April. He was on duty from 6pm until 11pm. There is no record of Mr Cheetham's name in Shipman's visits book for 2nd
April 1987.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. On this, Shipman has stated that Mr Cheetham died on 2nd
April. He said that he had last seen Mr Cheetham alive on 1st
April. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. He certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') records the date of death as 1st
April 1987.
Shipman also completed Form B. He recorded that the death had occurred
'In the evening of 2.3.87'
. This is obviously completely wrong. He said that he had been Mr Cheetham's ordinary medical attendant for nine years. He said that he had attended Mr Cheetham during his last illness for 24 hours. Shipman went on to record that he had last seen Mr Cheetham alive approximately 12 hours before his death and that he had made a complete external examination of the body after death. The immediate cause of death was said to be cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting hours. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote (again including a gross, uncorrected error as to the month):
'own. seen on 1.2.87.
follow up visit found sat in chair, TV
on gas fire on - clearly dead for at least
12 hours'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First, the death was supposedly discovered by Shipman. As far as is known, Shipman had been the last person to see Mr Cheetham alive or to speak to him. This course of events, one visit followed by another at which the patient is found dead, is typical of a Shipman killing and gives rise to strong suspicion. I have already said that there are good reasons to suspect that Shipman's account of how he came to visit Mr Cheetham on both 1st
and 2nd
April might not be true. That Shipman should be concerned to explain that he had found the front door open on 2nd
April and seek to explain why it might be that the door had been left open, only adds to my suspicion, especially as his explanation does not make sense. If Shipman were postulating that Mr Cheetham had died in the early evening, he would not have been expecting the doctor that day and would not have left the door open for him. That the door was open on the morning of 2nd
April suggests to me that Mr Cheetham had not been able to lock it on 1st
April because he was already dead. If it was his practice to leave the door open for a visitor, he might well be expected to lock the door after the last expected visitor of the day. It is of course possible that Mr Cheetham was alive and well when Shipman left on 1st
April and died before he had locked the door. However, the circumstances would be explained if Mr Cheetham were already dead when the doctor departed. He would then be unable to lock the door. In short, the circumstances of this death lead me to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mr Cheetham during his visit on 1st
April, that Shipman was unable to lock the door from inside when he left and was able to gain access the next morning when he went to 'discover' the body.
Whilst the absence of any medical records makes it impossible to be sure about Mr Cheetham's state of health, the witness evidence is consistent and strongly suggests that he enjoyed extremely good health for his age. If Shipman had indeed found Mr Cheetham to be 'nervy' on 1st
April and dead in his chair on 2nd
April, he could not possibly have known the cause of the death. The case ought to have been referred to the coroner. I regard that as a suspicious factor, although I am aware that Shipman often failed to refer a death to the coroner when there was no suggestion that he could have killed the patient.
Shipman said on Form B that Mr Cheetham died in the evening of 2nd
March. That was obviously a mistake and it appears that he meant to say that he died in the evening of 1st
April. He implies that Mr Cheetham had suffered a stroke about 24 hours before his death. That would be in the evening of 31st
March. There is no eyewitness evidence to prove that was untrue. However, one might have thought that Mr Cheetham would have alerted a neighbour, possibly the Hopwoods, if he had been ill that evening or the following morning. Shipman claims that he saw Mr Cheetham about 12 hours before his death. That would be in the morning of 1st
April. It is unthinkable that a doctor, who found an elderly patient suffering from a stroke, would leave the patient completely unattended and make no arrangements for his or her care. Shipman claims on Form B that Mr Cheetham was in a coma for some hours before his death but there is no possible basis on which he could have known that. I am quite sure that Mr Cheetham had not had a stroke. First, Shipman's entries on Form B do not make sense. Second, Shipman's suggestion of a stroke, followed by a visit, followed by a coma, is not consistent with what Mr Neville Cheetham understood from Shipman when he spoke to him after his father's death. Shipman told him that he had called in to see his father on the eve of his death simply because he was in the area at the time. He arranged to see him the following day either because he was feeling 'nervy' or to give a repeat prescription, or both. There was no suggestion, however, at that time of any stroke. Third, it would be an extraordinary coincidence if Shipman had visited Mr Cheetham because he was passing on the very day that Mr Cheetham had suffered a stroke.
These considerations, taken together, lead me to the conclusion that Shipman must have killed Mr Cheetham. Notwithstanding the absence of the medical records, I feel sure of that conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001