The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Wilfred Chappell
Introduction
Mr Wilfred Chappell died at his home, 51 Newton Hall Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 31st
January 1989 at the age of 80. He was a widower and lived alone. He was a patient of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was chronic obstructive airways disease.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Chappell was highly suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Hill. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Hill and has managed to trace and take statements from two of Mr Chappell's friends, Mr James Wilkinson and his wife, Mrs Jean Wilkinson. Mr Chappell used to refer to Mr Wilkinson as his nephew. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. Mr Chappell's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
During the last years of her father's life, Mrs Hill, who lives in the south of England, used to speak to him on the telephone three or four times a month. According to Mrs Hill, her father was a heavy smoker and always had a cough. He was, nevertheless, a strong man who remained independent until the day of his death. Mrs Hill visited her father in November 1988 and found him well. His health had not deteriorated. She last spoke to him at some time over the Christmas period, when he sounded quite well.
Mr Wilkinson and his wife recall that Mr Chappell suffered from Parkinson's disease and that this affected his ability to go out. Mr Wilkinson used to call in to see him about twice a week to see whether he needed anything from the shops. Mr Wilkinson says that Mr Chappell was 'a bit of a character' but that, after his wife died in 1985 or 1986, he did not socialise and seemed to lose interest in life. Mr Chappell did not say very much about his health to Mr and Mrs Wilkinson. They knew that he used an inhaler when he became breathless. They knew that his hands shook and thought this was a sign of Parkinson's disease. They knew he had some bottles of medicine in the house, although they did not know what these were for. However, Mr Wilkinson was never particularly worried about Mr Chappell's health and regarded him as fit and healthy for his age.
Mr and Mrs Wilkinson called on Mr Chappell on Saturday, 28th
January 1989. Mr Chappell said that he had arranged for the doctor to visit him because he was feeling tired and did not feel well enough to go to the surgery. He did not say exactly what was wrong with him and he did not seem seriously ill to either Mr or Mrs Wilkinson, who thought he was just 'a bit under the weather'. Mr Chappell explained that the doctor was due to see him on Tuesday, 31st
January 1989, and Mr Wilkinson promised that he would call in the afternoon, in case there was a prescription to be collected.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's visits book records that Shipman was due to see Mr Chappell on the day of his death.
As promised, Mr Wilkinson called at Mr Chappell's house at about 2pm on 31st
January. To his surprise, he found the front door wide open. He went in and found the interior door also wide open. He immediately thought that something was wrong. He has told the Inquiry that, if Mr Chappell knew that he was due to visit, he would often leave the front door ajar. If he was not expecting anyone, however, the door would be closed and locked.
Mr Wilkinson went into the living room, where he saw Mr Chappell sitting in his usual armchair, in front of the (presumably gas) fire. The fire was on and Mr Chappell was fully dressed. Initially, Mr Wilkinson thought that Mr Chappell was sleeping and tapped on his shoulder. There was no response and Mr Wilkinson realised that he had died. His shirtsleeves were rolled up, although that was not unusual, and he looked as though he had fallen asleep in his chair. Mr Wilkinson telephoned his wife, who telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery to inform them of the death.
Mr Wilkinson recalls that a doctor arrived at Mr Chappell's house at about 2.20pm. He has told the Inquiry that he does not think the doctor was Shipman, whom he thinks he would have recognised. The doctor said words to the effect that Mr Chappell had 'just given up'. The doctor said that another doctor had seen Mr Chappell at 1.30pm that day, although he did not give the name of the doctor. In fact, it seems highly likely that the doctor who attended Mr Chappell after his death was Shipman because, on Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman said that he saw Mr Chappell's body about half an hour after the death. It would also be typical for Shipman to use words such as those remembered by Mr Wilkinson.
Mrs Wilkinson telephoned Mrs Hill later that afternoon to tell her of her father's death. Mrs Hill recalls that, when she attended her father's house the next day, she found that everything was in its usual place. The telephone was within easy reach of her father's chair.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman stated that the death occurred on 31st
January 1989 and was caused by chronic obstructive airways disease. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Chappell alive on the day of the death. He had seen the body after death and said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B, stating that death had occurred at approximately 2.15 pm on 31st
January 1989. He said that he had attended Mr Chappell during his last illness for one hour. He said that he had last seen Mr Chappell alive about one hour before his death and that he saw his body about half an hour after death, when he made a complete external examination of it. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be syncope lasting only minutes. These answers were based on his own observations. Shipman said that no one had nursed Mr Chappell in his last illness. When asked who had been present at the moment of death, Shipman wrote:
'No one
seen by me 1300hrs found by nephew
1430hrs. 31.1.89'
.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Mr Chappell's death was discovered very shortly after Shipman had visited him. No one had spoken to Mr Chappell or seen him alive after Shipman's visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
Very little is known about Mr Chappell's health. His medical records are not available and he did not tell Mr and Mrs Wilkinson a great deal about himself. It seems to me that I must assume that Mr Chappell did suffer to some extent from chronic obstructive airways disease. As Dr John Grenville has said in his generic evidence to the Inquiry, this expression covers a variety of different conditions but usually includes chronic bronchitis. It may well include emphysema and asthma. As Mr Chappell used an inhaler, it seems reasonable to infer that he had some asthma. Mr Chappell's feeling of tiredness and malaise of which he told the Wilkinsons on Saturday, 28th
January, was probably an exacerbation of his chronic disease. However, it does not appear that this was a serious exacerbation because Mr and Mrs Wilkinson were not worried about him and Shipman does not seem to have thought that his forthcoming visit was a matter of urgency. Moreover, when Shipman attended on the day of the death, he does not appear to have thought it necessary to admit Mr Chappell to hospital or to communicate with any relative to express concern about Mr Chappell's health. A death from chronic obstructive airways disease usually follows quite a long period of gradual deterioration during which the patient has increasing difficulty in breathing. Frequently, the patient becomes dependent on oxygen from a cylinder. Usually, the patient is bedridden before the death. Mr Chappell did not die in this way. It is possible that he might have died from a sudden, severe attack of asthma. However, such an attack would be extremely distressing and frightening. Mr Chappell's peaceful appearance following death and his apparent failure to reach for the telephone suggests that he did not die as a result of a sudden asthma attack. His death is very difficult to explain. In any event, it would appear that, if Shipman is right and Mr Chappell died suddenly about an hour after his departure, it was a quite remarkable coincidence. I find the circumstances of this death highly suspicious.
Mr Chappell's position and appearance in death were not what would be expected after death from any of the most common causes of sudden death, such as stroke or heart attack. They were, however, entirely typical of the position and appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of opiate.
All the available evidence suggests that Shipman killed Mr Chappell. My conclusion is that I am sure that he did so. I think he gave him a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001