The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Michael Connors
Introduction
Mr Michael Connors (known as Mick) died at his home, 16 Shade Street, Todmorden on Monday, 28th
April 1975 at the age of 64. He had been a patient of Shipman for about six months and thought highly of him. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mr Connors' death was carcinoma of the left lower lobe bronchus. Portal cirrhosis of the liver was said to have contributed to the death.
The coroner's file relating to Mr Connors' death was one of a number recovered by the West Yorkshire Police in the early part of 2001. The police decided to investigate the death and took statements from Mr Connors' niece, Mrs Agnes Georgina Harrison (formerly Davies) and Dr John Grieve, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Harrison and has had access to the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Constabulary, dated 28th
April 1975, and a post-mortem examination report prepared by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, following a post-mortem examination on 28th
April 1975. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell. Mr Connors' medical records have not survived, nor have any relevant practice records.
This decision was written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Connors was born in the Republic of Ireland. At the time of his death, he was living with his niece, her former husband, Mr Phillip Davies, and her two sons at their house in Todmorden.
Mr Connors worked as a labourer from the 1940s until the early 1960s, when he was diagnosed as suffering from cirrhosis of the liver. In about 1964, he underwent surgery at St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. Although the initial prognosis was pessimistic, he made progress and, after a review the following year, he was discharged from further attendance. He was advised to avoid hard labour but that he could otherwise live a normal life. He was prescribed some medication but his niece does not know what it was.
Mrs Harrison and her family moved to Todmorden in 1968. Mr Connors would visit the family from time to time. Then, in October 1974, he moved in with them on a permanent basis. He registered as a patient of Shipman and saw him fortnightly at the surgery for sick notes. After Christmas 1974, he visited Ireland, having won some money on the football pools, and returned to Todmorden towards the end of February 1975.
At some time during the last two months of his life, Mr Connors said to his niece that Shipman wished to see her. Mrs Harrison is unclear as to when this was, although she is sure that it was more than one week before Mr Connors died. Mrs Harrison duly went to the surgery and, although she did not speak to Shipman, she was told by a member of the reception staff that Shipman wished to ask her how Mr Connors had come to have a scar on his torso. It was explained that Shipman had been unable to obtain Mr Connors' medical notes, and that, due to his broad Irish accent, Shipman had been unable to find out how he came to have the scar. Mrs Harrison explained that the scar was a surgical scar following an operation for cirrhosis of the liver. She explained that the cirrhosis was not caused by excessive alcohol consumption or malnutrition but that it had been diagnosed as a genetic condition.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
About a week before his death, Mr Connors went to see Shipman to collect his sick note. When he returned home, he showed Mrs Harrison some tablets that Shipman had prescribed. He explained that the tablets were morphine-based and that they must be kept out of the children's way. Mrs Harrison was a little puzzled, as she did not think that her uncle was in a great deal of pain. Mr Connors told her that he was to see Shipman the following Friday for 'an injection for his blood'. During the following week, Mrs Harrison recalls that Mr Connors became 'quite foul-mouthed', which was unusual. Otherwise, she did not observe any change in his condition.
On Friday, 25th
April, Mr Connors left the house at about 8.40am, saying that he had an appointment with Shipman at 10am. He walked to the bus stop with Mrs Harrison's two sons. He told Mrs Harrison to leave the washing-up from breakfast and that he would do it when he returned.
Mrs Harrison went to work and returned home at about 12.30pm to make the lunch. The washing-up had not been done and Mr Connors had not returned. Mrs Harrison prepared and ate a hot meal. Soon after that, Mr Connors returned home. This must have been after 1pm. Mr Connors seemed dazed and was dragging his feet. He refused any food. When Mrs Harrison asked where he had been, he said that he had been at the surgery. He then said he was going to bed for an hour and went upstairs. Some time later, Mrs Harrison took a cup of tea upstairs for Mr Connors. He said that he had lost £65 which he had been saving. He said he had had the money in his pocket and he had looked for it before getting into bed and found it was missing. Mrs Harrison recalls that he seemed too dazed to be particularly upset that the money had gone. Mrs Harrison went round to all the places where Mr Connors had been that morning - the surgery, the bus station and a local cafe - but the money had not been handed in.
At approximately 6pm, Mrs Harrison took Mr Connors another cup of tea. He did not drink the tea, saying that it 'tasted funny'. She saw that he had not drunk the cup that she made earlier. He said that he would stay in bed. It appears that he attempted to drink Lucozade later that evening, but it made him vomit.
The following morning, Saturday, 26th
April, Mrs Harrison took breakfast in to Mr Connors. Again, he did not eat or drink. When, later that morning, Mr Connors was unable to keep water down, Mrs Harrison called the surgery. Dr Grieve attended that afternoon and, having examined Mr Connors, said to Mrs Harrison that he was extremely unwell and that she should watch him during the night. He apparently noted the medication that Shipman had prescribed for Mr Connors and said that he did not wish to interfere in the treatment provided by Shipman. Dr Grieve has said that he has no recollection of visiting Mr Connors.
Mrs Harrison watched over Mr Connors during the rest of the weekend. He remained in bed and appeared to sleep for most of the time. It would appear that Mrs Harrison slept for a short while on the Sunday. After she awoke, a neighbour whom she had asked to look after her children told her that Dr Grieve had called again.
The Day of the Death
At about 1am on Monday, 28th
April, Mrs Harrison took a cup of tea in to Mr Connors. They had a short conversation and she then returned to bed. About an hour later, she heard Mr Connors shout, 'Oh my God'. He did not say anything further and Mrs Harrison did not go into his room.
At 7.30am, Mrs Harrison took Mr Connors' breakfast in to him. He was sitting up on the side of the bed, slumped to his right side with his feet on the floor. He was obviously dead. He had taken off his nightclothes. After consulting a friend, Mrs Harrison telephoned the surgery. Dr Dacre attended soon afterwards and confirmed the fact of death. This attendance is recorded in his personal on-call record book. He said that he could not certify the cause of death and that the police would have to be called. Mrs Harrison later telephoned the surgery and asked to speak to Shipman, but she had no further contact with him.
The Report of Death
The account of the circumstances of the death contained within the Report is consistent with the account set out by Mrs Harrison more fully in her witness statement. The only additional detail is that, during the last week of Mr Connors' life, Shipman sent a sample of blood to the Halifax Infirmary for analysis. It does not state the cause of the cirrhosis of the liver.
The Post-Mortem Report
Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, carried out a post-mortem examination at 3.30pm on 28th
April 1975. On external examination he noted that there was no bruising or other sign of violence. Mr Connors was said to be emaciated. A large necrotic, malignant tumour was noted in the left lower lung. There was no obvious spread of the tumour towards the hilum or into the lymph glands. Nor was there evidence of blood-borne spread of the carcinoma. The heart was noted to be normal except for patchy atheroma throughout the coronary arteries. The significant abnormality within the abdomen was cirrhosis of the liver. The spleen was enlarged to about four times its normal size, consistent with portal hypertension.
Dr Edwards expressed the opinion that the cause of death was carcinoma of the left lower lobe of the bronchus. Portal cirrhosis of the liver was said to have contributed to the death.
The Expert Evidence
In preparing her report for the Inquiry, Professor Whitwell considered the police statements of Mrs Harrison and Dr Grieve, the Report of Death, the post-mortem report and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). She did not see Mrs Harrison's Inquiry statement. Professor Whitwell noted the history as set out in the police statement of Mrs Harrison and the post-mortem findings recorded in the report of Dr Edwards.
Histological samples confirmed that the lung tumour was a poorly differentiated large cell carcinoma. Sections of the lung away from the tumour site showed patchy bronchopneumonia with evidence of oedema. The liver showed established cirrhosis but there were no positive features by which the aetiology could be established.
Professor Whitwell noted the presence of established secondary bronchopneumonia with evidence of oedema and commented that this would have been present for at least several hours or possibly days prior to death and was not an acute event. The history of illness during the weekend before the death was consistent with developing bronchopneumonia. She further observed that cirrhosis of the liver is a well-recognised predisposing condition to bronchopneumonia and that Mr Connors had developed one of the major complications of cirrhosis of the liver, portal hypertension. She concluded that, in addition to the bronchopneumonia, Mr Connors might well have suffered from a degree of liver failure.
Professor Whitwell considered that, on the basis of the post-mortem findings, the cause of death should have been expressed as bronchopneumonia due to carcinoma of the lung and cirrhosis of the liver. She said that the death was explained by acute natural disease.
Because I was concerned about the possibility that it would be inappropriate to prescribe an opioid analgesic to someone suffering from cirrhosis of the liver, I asked Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, to consider the point. He advised that opioid analgesics should be avoided in a patient with impaired liver function. The danger is that the patient might go into a coma. He also thought that some of the symptoms described by Mrs Harrison (drowsiness, slurring of speech and irritability) are consistent with the inappropriate prescription of opiates to a patient with severe liver disease.
Conclusion
Shipman last saw Mr Connors on the Friday, three days before he died. This was in consultation at the surgery. It appears that Shipman took a blood sample, which was consistent with his attempts to diagnose and treat Mr Connors' liver complaint. Although Mr Connors felt ill and retired to bed on his return home on the Friday afternoon, the fact that he lived for over two days after leaving the surgery rules out any possibility that Shipman caused his death by the administration of a lethal dose of opiate. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville, in their joint generic evidence, have explained that, if a lethal dose of opiate were administered intravenously, it would take effect within a few minutes. If given intramuscularly, it would take effect within an hour.
Mr Connors' movements between leaving the surgery and returning home on the Friday afternoon are not known. Nor is it known how he came to lose the £65 he had been saving.
The real concern in this case is not that Shipman might have deliberately killed Mr Connors by injecting him with a lethal dose of opiate, but that he might have precipitated his death by prescribing morphine-based tablets inappropriately. If Mr Connors' sleepiness or near coma during the last two days of his life was due to the tablets Shipman had prescribed, and if Mr Connors developed bronchopneumonia while lying in bed, there might be a causal connection between Shipman's decision to prescribe morphine-based tablets and Mr Connors' death. I do not think I can reach any firm conclusion on that because, for one thing, we do not know for certain that the tablets were morphine-based. Nor do I think I can properly reach any decision about whether or not Shipman might have deliberately prescribed medication which was harmful to Mr Connors.
I am afraid I cannot reach a positive conclusion about this case. The fact that Mr Connors was emaciated, had a large necrotic bronchial tumour and a grossly enlarged spleen suggests strongly that he was very poorly for a week before he died.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001