The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Hena Cheetham
Introduction
Mrs Hena Cheetham died in an ambulance on the way to Halifax Royal Infirmary on Wednesday, 9th
October 1974 at the age of 77. Mrs Cheetham was registered as a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice in Todmorden, but it is unclear whether she was registered as a patient of Shipman or one of the other partners. At the time of her death, Shipman had been at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Practice for about seven months. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the Coroner for the Metropolitan District of Calderdale certified that the cause of Mrs Cheetham's death was superior mesenteric artery thrombosis due to atheroma.
In early 2001, the West Yorkshire Police investigated the death, as Shipman had treated Mrs Cheetham prior to her death. The police obtained a statement from Mr Peter Crossley, Mrs Cheetham's grandson.
The Inquiry has obtained the Report of Death prepared by the West Yorkshire Constabulary, dated 10th
October 1974, and the Post-Mortem Report prepared by Dr A T Edwards, consultant pathologist, following a post-mortem examination carried out on 10th
October 1974. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr John Grenville and Professor Helen Whitwell. The general practitioner records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Cheetham's husband, Mr Ernest Cheetham, died in 1960. After his death, Mrs Cheetham continued to live at 21 Ashenhurst Road, Todmorden with her daughter Mrs Kathleen Crossley, Mrs Crossley's husband, Mr Donald Crossley, and their son Mr Peter Crossley. Mrs Crossley was a housewife and was able to look after her mother when necessary.
Mr Peter Crossley says that his grandmother's health was generally good, although she had received treatment for her nerves. His recollection is that the family doctor was either Dr John Grieve or Dr John Dacre. He does not remember that Shipman ever treated any member of his family.
Mr Peter Crossley remembers that his grandmother was unwell for some time before her death and that she remained in bed upstairs. He does not know what was wrong with her.
The Report of Death, dated 10th
October 1974, was compiled probably from information provided by Mr Donald Crossley. It is recorded that two weeks before her death, Mrs Cheetham began to suffer from sickness and diarrhoea. Shipman called to see her every evening. He put her on a diet of salt water and sugar water and as a result her condition improved. However, on Tuesday, 8th
October, the day before she died, Mrs Cheetham again started suffering from diarrhoea and sickness. The report says that Shipman administered an injection of
'Maxilon'
. It is likely that this is a misspelling and in fact Shipman administered an injection of Maxolon, which is an appropriate treatment for nausea, vomiting and gastrointestinal disorders. However, the treatment was not successful.
The Day of the Death
It is recorded in the Report of Death that Shipman attended during the afternoon of 9th
September, although this is obviously a mistake for 9th
October. He was unable to find a cause for Mrs Cheetham's illness and decided to send her to the Halifax Royal Infirmary. The time of Shipman's visit is not stated. However, it is recorded that an ambulance collected Mrs Cheetham at 5.15pm. When the ambulance was some way into the journey, at around Hebden Bridge, Mrs Cheetham started gasping for breath and then died.
Mr Peter Crossley was able to confirm to the police that upon his arriving home on 9th
October, there was an ambulance outside the house and paramedics carried his grandmother out of the house on a stretcher and into the ambulance. Mrs Cheetham's daughter, Mrs Crossley, went with her in the ambulance and returned a short time later. She informed the family that Mrs Cheetham had died on the way to the hospital.
Hebden Bridge is approximately five miles from Mrs Cheetham's home in Todmorden.
The Post-Mortem Report
Dr A T Edwards carried out the post-mortem examination of the body of Mrs Cheetham at 2.15pm on 10th
October 1974. Dr Edwards did not note any external bruising or other marks of injury. The significant finding upon internal examination was gangrene of the small intestine due, in Dr Edwards' opinion, to superior mesenteric artery thrombosis. Dr Edwards concluded that the gangrene had been present for about 48 hours. The superior mesenteric artery was noted to contain a large amount of thrombus. In Dr Edwards' opinion, the cause of death was superior mesenteric artery thrombosis due to atheroma.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has considered Dr Edwards' post-mortem report. She noted the finding on internal examination that the small intestine was gangrenous as a result of superior mesenteric artery thrombosis and that no toxicological examination was performed.
Professor Whitwell noted that Dr Edwards did not comment specifically on the degree of atheroma of the artery, although he did record there was
'a large amount of thrombus'
. Professor Whitwell stated that superior mesenteric artery thrombosis is a well-recognised cause of abdominal pain and is fatal without operative intervention. The history contained within the Report of Death was, in Professor Whitwell's opinion, consistent with a lesser degree of arterial occlusion, with the later thrombus causing ischaemic infarction. The cause of death was conclusive, according to Professor Whitwell. It is impossible to say whether morphine or diamorphine may have been administered. There is, of course, no evidence that any was.
Dr Grenville has also provided a report in this case and his views are consistent with the views of Professor Whitwell. He noted the history and described the mechanism of superior mesenteric artery thrombosis. In short, the blood supply to the small bowel is occluded. The small bowel becomes gangrenous and stops working, often resulting in symptoms of vomiting and diarrhoea. As the gangrene progresses, the bowel may perforate, causing peritonitis, which can cause sudden collapse and death. Dr Grenville noted that thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery is extremely rare, difficult to diagnose at an early stage and therefore has a high mortality rate. In Dr Grenville's opinion, the treatment provided by Shipman for the diarrhoea and vomiting, as described in the Report of Death, was appropriate, as was his decision to arrange for Mrs Cheetham's admission to hospital once her condition became critical. Dr Grenville concluded that there was no evidence that Shipman acted other than appropriately in the circumstances.
Conclusion
Following post-mortem examination, the cause of Mrs Cheetham's death was certified to be superior mesenteric artery thrombosis. Gangrene of the small intestine was noted on post-mortem as was the thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery. These are both physical findings which, according to Professor Whitwell and Dr Grenville, would properly account for Mrs Cheetham's death. The history of Mrs Cheetham's condition in the two weeks prior to death is also consistent with the certified cause of death.
It is not known at what time Shipman visited in the afternoon of 9th
October. Mrs Crossley was almost certainly present. It appears from the Report of Death that some time had elapsed between Shipman's visit and the arrival of the ambulance at 5.15pm. According to Dr David Bunn, a former partner of Shipman, the majority of the practice's home visits were carried out between 11am and 3pm. It seems likely that Shipman last saw Mrs Cheetham alive at least two hours before the ambulance arrived. Mrs Cheetham probably died at about 5.30pm. There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman gave Mrs Cheetham an injection that afternoon. If one supposes that Shipman might have given Mrs Cheetham an injection of opiate that afternoon, it would seem very unlikely that it had any effect upon her subsequent death. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville agree that an opiate injected intramuscularly reaches maximal effect within 30-60 minutes. Therefore, if a lethal injection were administered, death would be expected to occur within one hour. Although I cannot say with certainty that Shipman could not have given Mrs Cheetham a lethal injection of opiate shortly before the ambulance arrived, there is no reason to suppose that he did. Further, the mechanism of death described in the Report, where Mrs Cheetham was said to be gasping for breath, would be inconsistent with death caused by a lethal injection of an opiate.
I conclude that, although Shipman was involved in the treatment of Mrs Cheetham shortly before she died and it is possible that he administered a lethal injection of opiate to her, it is unlikely that he did so. It is highly likely that her death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001