The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Sean Stuart Callaghan
Introduction
Mr Sean Stuart Callaghan died at the Fielden Hospital, Todmorden on Monday, 9th
December 1974 at the age of 18. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was bronchopneumonia.
Mr Callaghan's death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. Following the publication of Professor Richard Baker's clinical audit in January 2001, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Kevin Barry Callaghan, Mr Callaghan's brother, and Mrs Christine Mylan, a former nurse at the Fielden Hospital.
An inquest into Mr Callaghan's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
Mr Callaghan's general practitioner notes have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to Mr Callaghan's hospital notes. The cremation forms are available and have been considered by the Inquiry.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Callaghan was severely disabled from birth and at the age of four was admitted to the Fielden Hospital in Todmorden. He was cared for on the Cherry Ward, a specialist ward for children and young people. The patients at the Fielden Hospital came under the care of the general medical practitioners from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre, where Shipman worked between March 1974 and September 1975.
Mr Kevin Callaghan confirms that his brother was born with severe mental and physical disabilities and that he was admitted to the Fielden Hospital at the age of four.
The Days Leading up to the Death and the Day of Death
Mrs Mylan was a nurse on the ward at the time of Mr Callaghan's death. She remembers Mr Callaghan and the hospital notes have enabled her to refresh her memory about his medical condition and the circumstances surrounding his death. On reading the notes, Mrs Mylan was able to say that he suffered an obvious deterioration in his medical condition prior to his death.
Mr Callaghan was very lethargic and slept for much of the time. He was seen by Dr Grieve on 3rd
December and by Dr Bunn on 4th
December. Dr Bunn prescribed an antibiotic but there was no improvement and, the following day, Dr Dacre prescribed a very large dose of penicillin. At 4.40pm, Mr Callaghan was visited by a priest and baptised 'as a precaution'. The following day, Dr Dacre visited and prescribed further antibiotics. Mr Callaghan remained very ill and barely able to take any fluids. He was given full nursing care but continued to deteriorate and was given the last rites on the evening of 8th
December. He died the following morning at 7.05am.
There is no record of a visit by Shipman in the days before his death. Mrs Mylan states that, when a patient received a visit from a doctor, the visit would be recorded in the notes. Further, a member of staff would accompany the doctor throughout the visit.
Shipman certified the cause of death as bronchopneumonia. He was probably called out to examine the body on the morning of the death. On Form B of the cremation certificate Shipman claimed that he had attended Mr Callaghan during his last illness and when asked for how long, he wrote:
'lasted 7days.all time'
. When asked when he had last seen Mr Callaghan alive he wrote:
'8-12-74. 12 hours'
. Thus Shipman's claims are inconsistent with the hospital nursing notes. I am inclined to think that the nursing notes are more likely to be accurate than Shipman's claims. Later in life, Shipman frequently demonstrated a disregard for the requirements of honesty and accuracy in the completion of statutory forms. It appears that he might have already begun on that course. However, these inaccuracies, if such they were, were almost certainly intended to avoid the inconvenience of having to ask another doctor to complete the forms. There is no reason to suppose that they were sinister.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mr Callaghan died from natural causes. His progressive deterioration is clearly recorded in the nursing notes, which are of a very high quality and give me confidence in their accuracy.
The death was investigated only because Shipman certified the cause of death. From the records, it appears that Shipman did not visit Mr Callaghan until after his death and there is no reason to suspect that Shipman had any involvement beyond certifying the cause of death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001