The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Lily Crossley
Introduction
Mrs Lily Crossley died at her home, 2 Longfield Way, Todmorden on Tuesday, 21st
January 1975. Since her date of birth is stated on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') simply as '1901', she died at the age of either 73 or 74. She was registered as a patient at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre but it is not clear whether she was registered with Shipman or with one of his partners. Shipman had been in practice there since March 1974. He certified that her death was due to carcinoma of the bronchus. He certified the cause of death in relation to three patients who died that day.
Early in 2001, Mrs Crossley's family contacted the police to express concern about Shipman's possible involvement in her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr James Douglas Redmond (Mrs Crossley's brother) and from Mrs Margaret Gilyeat, whose deceased husband, Mr John Redmond, was another of Mrs Crossley's brothers.
An inquest into Mrs Crossley's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Redmond and Mrs Gilyeat as well as from Dr David Bunn, Dr John Michael Grieve and Dr John Alfred Dacre, who are the surviving members of the partnership at the medical centre from the time when Shipman worked there. The Inquiry has also had access to Dr Dacre's on call book for the period in question, the papers relating to the police investigation of Shipman in 1975 and various newspaper extracts both from 1975 and from more recent times. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
Mr Redmond and Mrs Gilyeat both gave oral evidence on 6th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Crossley seems to have enjoyed good health until late on in life. It is said that she was always active and had never suffered from any serious illness. In her later years, however, her health gradually deteriorated and she spent more and more time at home. Mr Redmond remembers that she suffered from pernicious anaemia, as stated on the death certificate, although he cannot say when this began.
According to Mrs Gilyeat, towards the end of her life Mrs Crossley had difficulty in climbing the stairs so a bed was made for her in the living room. She was looked after by her sister, Josephine, and her sister-in-law, Mrs Mary Redmond, both of whom are now dead. It appears that Mrs Gilyeat did not know the nature of Mrs Crossley's illness. However, she does recall that, shortly before Mrs Crossley died, she had developed a growth on one of her shoulders. This growth was not discussed between the two women but Mr Redmond remembers that a biopsy was taken from the area of her neck. Dr Grenville has explained that, if Mrs Crossley was indeed suffering from carcinoma of the bronchus, as Shipman was later to certify, it appears likely that the growth on her shoulder was a secondary cancer and demonstrates that the cancer had spread from the lungs into the surrounding tissues. Dr Grenville says that this condition would have been very painful and Mrs Crossley would have needed strong analgesic drugs. We know from Shipman's police interview in November 1975 that he admitted having diverted pethidine prescribed for Mrs Crossley to his own use. He said that Mrs Crossley received some of the prescribed drugs and he used the rest himself. It would therefore seem likely that Mrs Crossley was on pethidine for pain relief in the later stages of her illness. It is also quite possible that, in the terminal stage of her illness, Mrs Crossley needed something stronger than pethidine, such as morphine or diamorphine.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Gilyeat remembers that she and her husband visited Mrs Crossley in the early evening of 21st
January 1975. Mrs Crossley was in bed downstairs and seemed to be drifting in and out of sleep. She was restless and confused. They did not sit by her bed but kept looking in on her to see that she was all right. The time came when she became very agitated and was pulling the bedclothes about. Mrs Gilyeat decided to call the emergency doctor.
According to Mrs Gilyeat, the doctor came immediately. She does not recall the identity of the doctor. Shipman's colleagues cannot say who it was but Dr Grieve says that it is most likely that the doctor in question was either he or Shipman. The practice did not use a deputising service. Dr Grieve remembers that he and Shipman used to work late and would often do emergency calls. Shipman was always willing to assist, whereas Dr Dacre and Dr Bunn were unable to. For reasons I shall later explain, it seems likely that the doctor was Shipman. The doctor went into the living room where Mrs Crossley was lying and Mr and Mrs Gilyeat remained in the kitchen. After a while, the doctor came to them and said he had given Mrs Crossley an injection which should calm her down. It is not known what the injection was or how it was administered. The doctor then left.
Mr and Mrs Gilyeat kept an eye on Mrs Crossley. They recall that she seemed much calmer after the injection and was breathing normally. Within an hour, they noticed a change in her colour and thought she had died. They telephoned for a doctor and the same doctor attended and confirmed the death. According to Mrs Gilyeat, this was at about 9.15pm.
When he made his statement to the police, Mr Redmond believed that his wife, Mary, and sister Josephine had stayed with Mrs Crossley on the night before the day when she died. That does not accord with the recollection of Mrs Gilyeat, and Mr Redmond now accepts that his earlier statement is probably wrong. Mr Redmond now says that he learned of the death when he returned home from work but he cannot now recall at what time he came in.
At the time of the death, the family did not feel any concern about the treatment Mrs Crossley had received. In January 2001, when he spoke to the police, Mr Redmond said that he did not know whether he felt any concern about Shipman's possible involvement in the death. He now says that he does not believe that his sister's death was suspicious. He denies ever suggesting to the media that Shipman had murdered his sister, a suggestion which has been extensively reported.
Dr Grieve, who has read the witness statements, has suggested that the picture painted by the evidence is of a patient who was in the terminal stages of cancer and became confused, was sedated and finally died. He could not remember Mrs Crossley's case. He said that the usual practice of the doctors at the practice was to prescribe chlorpromazine (Largactil) to sedate a patient in this condition. There is, however, good reason to believe that Shipman had prescribed pethidine for Mrs Crossley at some stage.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that the presence of a growth on Mrs Crossley's neck or shoulder might well have indicated the presence of metastatic lung cancer. This might have meant that she was very ill indeed and it could have been the source of pain. The description provided by Mrs Gilyeat that Mrs Crossley was intermittently sleepy, restless and confused on the day of her death would be consistent with the symptoms of her terminal illness. It would be appropriate in those circumstances to give an injection of a strong opiate.
Conclusion
There is no real doubt in my mind that, shortly before her death, Mrs Crossley was in the terminal phase of lung cancer, which had spread into the tissues of her neck and shoulder. This would have been a very painful condition, which would have warranted the administration of powerful pain-relieving drugs.
On the evening of 21st
January 1975, a doctor attended Mrs Crossley. Although Mrs Gilyeat cannot identify him by name, I think it was probably Shipman. Dr Grieve says it would probably have been he or Shipman. Mrs Crossley was Shipman's patient. I know from the case of Mr Robert Lingard, who died during the same evening as Mrs Crossley, that Shipman was either present at or was called out after Mr Lingard's death, which probably took place at about 7.30pm. I am satisfied, therefore, that Shipman was on duty that evening and it seems likely that he was the doctor who attended Mrs Crossley.
Shipman gave an injection, which he said would calm Mrs Crossley down and it appeared to have that effect. We do not know what he gave or how much. Whenever Shipman gave a drug shortly before death, a suspicion arises that he might have intentionally hastened the patient's death.
Although Dr Grieve says that the usual practice of the doctors from the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre was to give Largactil for pain relief in cases of this kind, it appears that Shipman had prescribed pethidine. Whether he gave any pethidine to Mrs Crossley or whether he kept it all for his purposes, I cannot say. If Shipman gave either Largactil or pethidine shortly before the death, those drugs might well have had the desired effect of calming Mrs Crossley, but they would be unlikely to have caused or contributed to her death within the hour. A very large dose of pethidine would have been required to kill. However, a relatively modest dose of morphine or diamorphine could have killed her. It is entirely possible that Shipman gave a much stronger opiate than pethidine. He would almost certainly have had either morphine or diamorphine in his medical bag for use in emergencies. If he gave a lethal dose of strong opiate intramuscularly, death would have followed within the hour. The evidence of Mrs Gilyeat is that Mrs Crossley died within about an hour of the doctor's visit.
There is, therefore, a real possibility that Shipman gave a lethal injection of opiate and hastened Mrs Crossley's death. I cannot say that he did, as she might have died naturally, due to her advanced cancer. The injection might have done no more than calm her. It is also possible that Shipman gave an injection of opiate in good faith, intending only that it should ease Mrs Crossley's pain but that the drug had the unintended effect of hastening her death. However, knowing what I know about Shipman's later years, and knowing that three patients of his died on 21st
January 1975, I am suspicious that he unlawfully killed Mrs Crossley. I am unable to say that he probably did so. If Shipman did kill her, I think it is clear that he hastened her death by only a short time.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001