The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Hilda Connaughton
Introduction
Mrs Alice Hilda Connaughton died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 12th
March 1987 at the age of 77. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from two members of staff working at Charnley House in 1987. These are Mrs Lilian Stansfield, the manager, and Ms Helen Spencer, the deputy manager. The Inquiry has also had access to the Charnley House diaries and admissions register, Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the duty doctor transfer diary recovered from the Donneybrook Surgery. Mrs Connaughton's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Connaughton was admitted to Charnley House on 18th
November 1984. She was first seen by Shipman on 29th
January 1985 when he diagnosed early Parkinson's disease. On 2nd
May 1986, he saw her and attended to an ear problem. There is no record that Shipman saw Mrs Connaughton after that date.
In early March 1987, Mrs Connaughton, along with many of the other residents, was suffering from diarrhoea, referred to in the daily diary as
'D'
. There is no reference to her being seen by Shipman, although Shipman visited residents Mrs Hilda Hulme and Mrs Ethel Dolan on 3rd
March 1987 and there is reference to a prescription being left for Mrs Connaughton that day. That may well mean that Shipman saw Mrs Connaughton that day.
Mrs Connaughton's bowel problems continued until her death. The staff were trying to ensure that she did not become dehydrated. Her condition deteriorated on Sunday, 8th
March and Dr Ian Napier was contacted for advice. It appears that he did not visit Mrs Connaughton and it is likely that the advice was given over the telephone. Dr Napier was the doctor on duty pursuant to the rota between the Donneybrook doctors for out of hours cover on that day. Dr Napier advised an alteration in medication and the taking of faecal samples.
On Tuesday, 10th
March, Shipman again visited Mrs Dolan and it is noted that a prescription for Mrs Connaughton was taken to the chemist. Shipman probably saw Mrs Connaughton as well, that day.
The Day of the Death
On Thursday, 12th
March, Mrs Connaughton was noted to be very poorly. She took no fluids and her pressure areas were dressed. The reference to pressure areas suggests to Ms Spencer that Mrs Connaughton had been bedridden for some time.
The afternoon report in the daily diary records as follows:
'PASSED PEACEFULLY AWAY AT 1.45pm.
NOTIFIED DOCTOR, ATTENDED THIS AFTERNOON.
SOLICITOR NOTIFIED, HE IS ATTENDING TO
ALL DETAILS, UNDERTAKER CAME AT 7.40PM'
.
In the daily diary, there is no record that Shipman or any other doctor attended at Charnley House before Mrs Connaughton died on 12th
March 1987. Her name appears in his visits book for that date. There is no cross or crucifix sign beside her name, as sometimes appears when he has been asked to attend, following a death, to certify the fact or cause of death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. On that, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Connaughton alive on the day of her death. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 13th
March 1987.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mrs Connaughton died at 2.55pm on 12th
March 1987, that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 18 months and that he had attended to her during her last illness for one week. Although it appears that Shipman did not initially say when he had last seen Mrs Connaughton alive, it appears that the medical referee completed that box with the words
'12 hours'
. That entry seems most unlikely to be accurate, as it implies that Shipman saw Mrs Connaughton in the small hours on the day of her death. Shipman himself stated that he had seen the body within 12 hours of the death. That too is an odd entry, as it implies that he had seen the body late at night or in the small hours of 13th
March. The cause of death was said to be old age and the mode of death was a coma of 12 hours' duration. Shipman claimed that this answer was based on his own observations and statements made by the staff at Charnley House. Ms Spencer says that, if Mrs Connaughton had been unconscious or in a coma at the time that she made her report at the end of the morning shift, she would have noted the fact. She is of the opinion that Mrs Connaughton could not properly be described as having been in a comatose state for 12 hours before she died. On Form B, Shipman said that no one was present at the moment of death.
It appears that Mrs Connaughton did not have any next of kin, and a solicitor, acting as executor, completed Form A of the cremation forms.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that they did not give rise to any suspicion.
Conclusion
Mrs Connaughton's condition in the weeks leading up to death was very poor and she was suffering from severe diarrhoea. Her condition deteriorated in the days leading up to her death and she became dehydrated, weak and bed bound. It appears that her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Cause for suspicion arises from the conflict between the various sources of information as to whether Shipman saw Mrs Connaughton alive on the day of her death. The daily diary suggests that he did not and had not seen her since 10th
March, although I do not think that can be a complete record of his visits. Shipman himself says on Form B and on the MCCD counterfoil that he saw Mrs Connaughton alive on the day of the death. There is some support for that in his visits book, where her name appears without a cross beside it.
Suspicion is increased by Shipman's claim that Mrs Connaughton was in a coma for 12 hours before her death. A death from 'old age' would normally be preceded by a significant period of coma. Yet, the daily diary suggests that Mrs Connaughton was not in a coma at the end of the morning shift. My concern is further increased by Shipman's failure to state on Form B at what time on the day of death he had seen Mrs Connaughton alive. He left the box blank and it was probably completed after the medical referee had spoken to a member of the surgery staff. The answer seems unlikely to be accurate.
In the light of these uncertainties and causes for suspicion, I feel unable to reach any conclusion about this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001