The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Josephine May Carroll
Introduction
Mrs Josephine May Carroll died at Pole Bank Hall Residential Care Home, Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Saturday, 8th
October 1977 at the age of 81. It is not clear from the evidence whether Shipman was her general practitioner; however, at the time of her death, he had been practising in Hyde for only about a week. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
Following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Carroll's daughter, Mrs Betty Davies, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death but they did not trace any former staff members of Pole Bank Hall. They established that no documentation from the home was still available. Their enquiries led no further.
No inquest was held at the time of Mrs Carroll's death but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Davies and has traced three members of staff, Mrs Marion Hawley, Mrs Rita Lonsdale and Mrs Nora Smyth, two of whom have some recollection of Mrs Carroll. The Inquiry has also confirmed with the present owners that no documentation from the home survives. The only documentary materials available are the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following an oral hearing on 4th
December 2001 at which Mrs Davies, Mrs Hawley, Mrs Lonsdale and Mrs Smyth gave oral evidence.
Personal Background
According to Mrs Davies, her mother enjoyed good health and had hardly ever had a serious illness in her life. She had had a hernia repair and an operation to remove gallstones. She was a heavy smoker. When she was widowed in 1970, she lost her confidence. She gradually became forgetful and seems to have begun to suffer from Alzheimer's disease.
Mrs Carroll moved from her home in Burnage into Pole Bank Hall in 1971 and within a short time she settled there. Her mental condition deteriorated but Mrs Davies, who saw her mother several times a week, does not recollect any corresponding worsening in her physical state. She specifically remembers the medication trolley being brought round by the staff, but no medication was ever provided to her mother. Mrs Lonsdale confirmed that Mrs Carroll was one of the more mobile and physically fit residents in the home at that time. She remembers that Mrs Carroll often used to sit in the front vestibule to have a cigarette.
On 8th
October 1977, Mrs Davies was due to go away for a few days whilst some building work was carried out at her home. On Thursday, 6th
October, she went to Pole Bank Hall to tell her mother that she would not be visiting her in the following week. She found her mother in normal health.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Saturday, 8th
October, Mrs Davies visited her mother again to remind her that she was going away and to reassure her that she would be away for only a short while. When she arrived at the home, Mrs Davies was greeted by a care assistant who told her that her mother had a cold and had been taken to the annexe, which was a sickbay with several beds. She had been kept in her nightclothes so that she could not go out. The care assistant said that a doctor was coming to see another resident and that she would ask the doctor to have a look at Mrs Carroll whilst he was at the home. Mrs Davies did not know who that doctor was or, indeed, who was her mother's general practitioner.
The evidence of the staff was that the annexe was used for residents who were chronically ill and required regular attention. A resident would not be moved into the annexe simply because he or she had a cold. However, a resident might be asked to wait in the annexe if he or she were to see a doctor. Also, as the annexe was adjacent to the conservatory, which was one of the only two places in which residents were permitted to smoke, it was possible that Mrs Carroll had been put into the annexe that morning so that she would not sit in the vestibule where it was cold. The conservatory was warm.
The staff also said that, so far as they were aware, the matron always escorted a doctor who had called to see one of the residents.
When Mrs Davies reached the annexe, she found her mother in the conservatory. She was wearing her dressing gown and was smoking a cigarette. Her mother seemed quite well and it crossed Mrs Davies' mind that her mother might not have a cold but was just upset that she was going away. Mrs Davies stayed with her for about 30 minutes, and during that time Mrs Carroll did not mention either that she was unwell or that she was going to be seen by a doctor.
Mrs Davies returned home and then, at about 12.30pm, she was collected by her brother, Mr Terence Carroll, and driven to his home in North Yorkshire, where they arrived at about 4.30pm. Almost immediately, the telephone rang. The call was from someone at the home who said that she had been trying to contact Mrs Davies for a long time. She said that Mrs Carroll had died at about 12.30pm. The staff had gone to see if she wanted any lunch and had found her lying dead in bed. The news came as a shock to all concerned.
Mrs Davies was asked whether she was sure that she visited her mother on Saturday, 8th
October and not the previous day. She said that she was sure of that because she worked as an under-manageress in a confectioner's shop; Fridays were very busy and she worked from 8.45am until 6.30pm.
The Aftermath
Mrs Davies and her brother drove to Hyde on Monday, 10th
October. The matron explained that, at about 12.30pm on the Saturday, when the staff had gone in to see if Mrs Carroll wanted some lunch, they found that she was lying under the bedclothes. When they pulled them back, they found that she was dead.
Mrs Davies and her brother then went to see Shipman. Mrs Davies said that Shipman told them that he had seen Mrs Carroll on the Saturday morning, when she had been perfectly well. This was the first Mrs Davies knew of any such visit. Mrs Davies said that she was sure that Shipman had mentioned Saturday morning and had not said anything like 'the other morning', which might have suggested that he had seen Mrs Carroll on a day other than the Saturday. He said he did not know what had caused the death, but that he would 'put it down to pneumonia'. He laughed. He handed her the MCCD. Mrs Davies remembers that he asked for a fee and that she handed over some money to him for it. He came across as unfeeling and unfriendly.
Certification
Although the MCCD itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Carroll alive on 7th
October 1977, the day before her death. He said that the death had not been referred to the coroner. He also said that another practitioner, not he, had seen the body after death. It would appear, therefore, that it was another doctor who attended after the death was discovered on the Saturday and who certified the fact of death.
Conclusion
We now know that Shipman became a serial killer and that his favoured method of killing was by the administration of a lethal injection of opiate. His typical victims were elderly women in poor health. Mrs Carroll fell into that category, not least because she suffered from a degree of senile dementia. However, this death occurred only a matter of days after Shipman had entered practice at the Donneybrook Surgery in Hyde. He could not have been well known to the staff at Pole Bank Hall at that time. The usual practice was for a doctor to be accompanied by the matron when visiting a patient at the home. While he was so new and unknown, it seems unlikely that Shipman would have risked giving a lethal injection to Mrs Carroll, especially in the presence of a member of staff.
On the other hand, if Mrs Davies' recollection were reliable, it would appear that her mother's death was very sudden. A death from bronchopneumonia is not sudden and it is most unlikely that Mrs Carroll could have been smoking and chatting in the conservatory at 11.30am and die as the result of bronchopneumonia by 12.30pm. However, these events occurred a very long time ago and there is no contemporaneous record which can confirm Mrs Davies' account.
There is no clear evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Carroll on the day of the death. Mrs Davies says that a care assistant told her that a doctor was going to see her mother that day and that Shipman later told her that he had done. On the MCCD, he said that he last saw Mrs Carroll alive on the day before the death. I do not place much reliance on Shipman's claim on the MCCD, as I know that he often lied on such documents when it suited him to do so. However, it would be surprising if he were to lie about this on the MCCD if he had openly admitted to Mrs Davies that he had seen Mrs Carroll in the morning just before she died. It is possible that he did see Mrs Carroll on the Saturday, as Mrs Davies says that he told her. However, despite Mrs Davies' certainty, it is quite possible that when she visited him after the death, Shipman said that Mrs Carroll had been quite well when he saw her 'the other day'. It is also possible that Mrs Davies' recollection of this conversation is mistaken in other respects.
In the absence of the medical records, the cremation certificate and any daily occurrence record from the home, I am left to rely solely on Mrs Davies' evidence for an account of the circumstances surrounding the death. Even taken at its highest, her evidence does not prove that Shipman killed her mother, although it does arouse a real suspicion that he could have done. On the basis of her evidence I would say that Shipman might or might not have killed her mother. However, when I consider Shipman's situation in October 1977, as a newly arrived doctor, I think it is unlikely that he killed Mrs Carroll. My conclusion is that this was probably, although not certainly, a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001