The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eileen Daphne Crompton
Introduction
Mrs Eileen Daphne Crompton died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 2nd
January 1997 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman since she moved to Charnley House from her previous home in Huddersfield in March 1993. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia and identified ischaemic heart disease, Parkinsonism and osteoporosis as other significant conditions contributing to her death, but not related to the disease or condition causing it.
In February 2000, the police were making enquiries at Charnley House when members of staff raised their concerns about the circumstances of Mrs Crompton's death. The police investigated the death and took a witness statement from the deputy manager at Charnley House, Mrs Patricia Heyl. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Crompton but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Rev. Roger Martyn Francis Crompton and Mr Jonathan Terence Crompton (Mrs Crompton's two sons), Mrs Heyl, Mrs Lynda Lanceley (the director of Charnley House) and Mrs Helen Spencer and Mrs Barbara Meadows (two senior members of staff).
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Crompton's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. Charnley House supplied Mrs Crompton's care notes. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
On 3rd
December 2001, Mr Jonathan Crompton, Mrs Meadows, Mrs Spencer, Mrs Heyl and Mrs Lanceley gave oral evidence. Dr Grenville gave evidence on 7th
December.
Personal Background
Mrs Crompton was widowed in 1989. She had never enjoyed the best of health and, after the death of her husband, her health deteriorated further. In late 1991, she moved from Wales to Huddersfield, so as to be nearer to one of her sons.
The medical records show that Mrs Crompton underwent a number of operations in the years between 1952 and 1971. In 1979, she had a heart attack. By the late 1980s, she had diverticular disease, hypothyroidism and hypertension.
In the early 1990s, the records contain references to medication for angina and congestive heart failure.
When Shipman reviewed Mrs Crompton as a new patient on 17th
March 1993, he recorded that her current medication included bendrofluazide, which is treatment for oedema and/or hypertension. Her blood pressure was well controlled at 130/70.
Dr H H Wan, the consultant physician in geriatric medicine at Tameside General Hospital, reviewed Mrs Crompton in Charnley House on 6th
July 1993. He noted that she was frail and had features of advanced Parkinson's disease. He found no signs of heart failure. The heart rate was 80 per minute, blood pressure was 110/70, and her chest was clear.
When Shipman reviewed Mrs Crompton on 18th
August 1993 and 13th
September 1993, he diagnosed congestive heart failure and prescribed Innovace and Lasix. From then on, he monitored her for signs of congestive heart failure and from time to time modified her medication. The last entry in the handwritten general practitioner notes is for 5th
June 1996 and mentions congestive heart failure. The computerised records suggest later attendances during that year. She had a flu injection in October and an upper respiratory tract infection in November 1996, for which she was prescribed amoxycillin.
The Charnley House notes also mention a chest infection in November 1996, following which Mrs Crompton developed a pressure sore, presumably due to immobility. An assessment at Charnley House on 5th
December recorded that her appetite was poor and her mobility restricted. The care notes for the following weeks reflect that her condition did not improve. The pressure sore required frequent attention.
Mrs Crompton's sons confirm that, in the last few weeks before she died, Mrs Crompton's condition deteriorated quite rapidly. She had difficulty in speaking, could not hold up her head and lost control of her facial muscles. She could no longer recognise them. When they visited her at Christmas, they found her mental state to be very poor and sensed that they had 'already lost her'. However, she seemed to be physically quite strong.
During the two weeks before her death, the care notes do not suggest that there was any particular cause for concern about Mrs Crompton's condition. It seems that on some days she ate more than on others. On Boxing Day, she had a
'stuffy nose'
. This condition seems to have lingered, but on both 30th
December 1996 and on 1st January 1997 it was recorded that she had had a good day.
The Day of the Death
The Charnley House records show that Mrs Crompton had a good night's sleep on the night of 1st
to 2nd
January 1997. At about 2pm, Mrs Heyl made the following entry in the records:
'Eileen left in bed this AM. Very flushed, mouth congested again. Doctor sent for. Drinks taken this am. Dr Shipman came at lunchtime. Eileen collapsed suddenly and died whilst doctor was present at 1.30pm. Family notified. Alan Massey dealing with funeral arrangements'.
Mrs Heyl said that, when she started work that morning, she looked in on Mrs Crompton because one of the care assistants had told her that she was poorly. Mrs Heyl thought that Mrs Crompton had a temperature and might be starting a chest infection. Her mouth was congested with mucus. She might also have been breathless. Mrs Heyl decided to call the doctor. A receptionist told her that Shipman would visit at the end of morning surgery. The visits book suggests that Mrs Heyl must have told the receptionist that Mrs Crompton was
'congested'
.
During the morning, Mrs Heyl looked in on Mrs Crompton from time to time. She thought that her condition deteriorated slightly and she seemed not as 'aware' as before. She took small sips of liquid from time to time. Mrs Heyl was not sure that Mrs Crompton understood when she was told that the doctor was coming to see her. Despite this deterioration, Mrs Heyl did not think of telephoning Mrs Crompton's sons. It was the policy of the home to contact relatives if a resident became critically ill.
Shipman arrived at around lunchtime. When Mrs Heyl told Mrs Crompton that the doctor had come to see her, she did not appear to respond. Shipman asked how long Mrs Crompton had been 'like this'. He did not examine her in any way but said that she was in heart failure. In particular, Mrs Heyl said that Shipman did not take Mrs Crompton's temperature or pulse or blood pressure. He did not feel her hands and feet or test her reactions to pin prick. Shipman said that, if he did not give Mrs Crompton an injection immediately, then 'he was going to lose her'. He said that he was reluctant to use the drug, because it was very powerful. He said that the last time he had used it, or seen it used, had been in hospital. Its purpose was to 'kick-start' the heart. Shipman then went out to his car and came back with a syringe and ampoule. He told Mrs Heyl what the injection was, but she cannot remember what he said. She is certain he did not say it was morphine or diamorphine. Shipman then injected Mrs Crompton into the back of her right hand while Mrs Heyl held her left. Instantly, her body jerked. Shipman explained that this was the effect of the injection entering her bloodstream. Within 30 seconds to a minute, Mrs Crompton appeared to be dead. Shipman seemed to acknowledge the fact that Mrs Crompton had died and said,
'Oh dear, this is what I feared would happen'
.
Shipman then suggested that they should leave Mrs Crompton and go to another resident whom he had been asked to visit. When Mrs Heyl and Shipman were about to return to see Mrs Crompton, Shipman said,
'I don't think we will find anything there'
. Once back in the room, Shipman examined Mrs Crompton by checking for a pulse. When it was clear that she was dead, Mrs Crompton's family was contacted and arrangements were made for undertakers to attend.
Mrs Lanceley said in evidence that she probably saw Mrs Crompton on the morning of the day of her death because her usual practice was to see all residents each morning. She remembers that Mrs Heyl came to see her that lunchtime to say that Mrs Crompton had died and that she was very upset. She recalls that Mrs Heyl told her that Shipman had said that he had something in the car that would either 'kill or cure' Mrs Crompton. Mrs Lanceley says that the death came as a complete shock and that she and other members of the staff had not even telephoned Mrs Crompton's sons to say that Mrs Crompton was poorly. All the staff were surprised at her sudden death.
Shipman made the following entry in the computerised general practitioner records:
'2.1.97
Influenza with bronchopneumonia
Not well for a few days with the cold fluid from mouth
Today first day in bed o/e 39.8 pulse 60/min irreg
90/60 peripheral circ failure non responsive to
pinprick rx iv benzyl penicillin.
died at 1330 staff present'
.
Thus, Shipman recorded a history of recent illness. He recorded a high temperature, a low and irregular pulse rate, and very low blood pressure. He suggested that Mrs Crompton's peripheral circulation was failing. He implied that he had found her hands and feet cold. He claimed that she did not respond to pin prick, which implies that she was deeply unconscious. He then claimed to have given her an intravenous injection of benzylpenicillin, which is an antibiotic indicated for pneumonia. She died in his presence.
That record is consistent with the records kept by the staff to the extent that the notes suggest that Mrs Crompton had had a cold; she was congested and had 'a stuffy nose'. It is not consistent with the evidence of Mrs Heyl, who says that Shipman carried out no examination of Mrs Crompton.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death in which he said that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia of 24 hours' duration.
He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate and stated that Mrs Crompton died at
'13:30 hours'
. He said that he had been Mrs Crompton's ordinary medical attendant for three and a half years. He said that he had attended her
'that day'
during her last illness and that he last saw her alive immediately before her death. He said that he saw the body about two minutes after the death when he carried out a complete external examination. He said that the mode of death was coma lasting four hours. He said that his opinions as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and those of the staff at the home. He said that the staff at Charnley House had nursed Mrs Crompton during her last illness and that the matron at the home was present at the moment of her death. He did not say that he himself was present.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville said that, if Shipman's record of his observations were genuine, it would appear that Mrs Crompton had developed a sudden and overwhelming chest infection. That would be quite possible at her age and with her past medical history. This would also be consistent with Mrs Heyl's account that Mrs Crompton had been flushed and breathless and that her level of consciousness had deteriorated during the morning. If Mrs Crompton had exhibited those signs, it might have been appropriate to give intravenous benzylpenicillin in the hope of arresting the deterioration. However, benzylpenicillin was not a drug which could be intended to 'kick-start' the heart. Nor was it a drug which could 'kill or cure'. It might cure the patient or it might not, but it could not have caused Mrs Crompton's sudden death in the way that the injection given appeared to cause it.
Dr Grenville said that he knew of no drug which might be injected intravenously and which might have the effect which Shipman claimed for this one, namely to 'kick-start' the heart. He knew of no drug for heart failure which might 'kill or cure'. Accordingly he was suspicious that Shipman's note might not have been accurate and that the drug given might not have been either benzylpenicillin or any of the drugs which might be given for heart failure.
When he learned that Mrs Heyl had said that Shipman did not carry out any of the examining procedures which he claimed to have done, Dr Grenville said that it appeared that the medical record was false.
Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be moderate upon his consideration of the cremation documentation and the medical records.
Conclusion
I accept the evidence of Mrs Heyl as honest and as accurate as can be hoped for after the lapse of time. I think that she has quite a good recollection of Mrs Crompton's death because of the unusual circumstances and because the death was unexpected.
I think it likely that Mrs Crompton was quite poorly on 2nd
January. It sounds as though she was developing a chest infection and it is quite possible that the condition might have been her final illness. However, I do not think she was yet close to death. She had not yet reached the stage where the staff thought it prudent to call her sons.
As Dr Grenville has said, if his record of the consultation were genuine, Shipman might have been justified in thinking that Mrs Crompton was suffering from an overwhelming infection and that the drastic remedy of intravenous benzylpenicillin was justified. However, if his note was not genuine and if he said the things that Mrs Heyl recalls, then there is a grave suspicion that he gave not an antibiotic but an opiate.
I accept that Shipman did not carry out the examination which he claimed to have done. I am satisfied that his note is fabricated. I am also satisfied that he said to Mrs Heyl that he was going to give a 'kill or cure' injection in the hope of kick-starting Mrs Crompton's heart. In so saying, he was deceiving her. Shipman's medical note was designed to provide a plausible explanation for the death.
Shipman also lied on Form B when he said that Mrs Crompton had been in a coma for 24 hours. He knew she had not, but he said that she had as that would be consistent with the cause of death he had certified, bronchopneumonia.
It may well be that Mrs Crompton had not long to live. However, I am sure that, very shortly before her death, Shipman injected her with a strong opiate with the intention of ensuring that she died immediately.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001