The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Clayton
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Clayton died at Charlotte House, a residential care home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Monday, 21st
October 1991 at the age of 82. She was registered as a patient with Dr Ian Napier of the Donneybrook Surgery, Hyde. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was dementia due to Alzheimer's disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Arthur Clayton (Mrs Clayton's son) and Mrs Janet Aldred (Mr Arthur Clayton's partner). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Clayton's general practitioner records kept on the Donneybrook Surgery computer, Shipman's visits book for 1991, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation documents and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate').
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Clayton was a widow. In her later years, she developed senile dementia. She was admitted to Charlotte House about six months before her death, as she was no longer able to care for herself. Her dementia worsened and, although she received regular visits from her son, towards the end of her life she no longer recognised him.
The computer records from the Donneybrook Surgery confirm that Mrs Clayton suffered from Alzheimer's disease. It appears that at times she was aggressive and was treated with Melleril and Serenace. The records suggest that the last time she was seen by a doctor was on 6th
September 1991, some five to six weeks before her death. At that time, she was said to be
'sleeping away'
.
Mr Clayton and Mrs Aldred visited Mrs Clayton at about 6pm or 7pm on Friday, 18th
October 1991. Mrs Clayton was lying in bed. She was awake but seemed very quiet. They now recall that this situation was unusual in that Mrs Clayton usually sat in a chair in her room and would be quite talkative with visitors. On this occasion, she looked very frail; her face was pale and appeared 'pinched'. Mrs Aldred, who has previously worked as an assistant nurse on a geriatric ward at Withington Hospital, Manchester, says that she could tell that Mrs Clayton was very ill. I think it possible that Mrs Clayton had been confined to bed for rather longer than Mr Clayton now recalls, as the medical records suggest that she had been mainly in bed for several weeks.
The Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book shows that Shipman was the doctor on out of hours duty over the weekend of 18th
, 19th
and 20th
October. Mrs Clayton's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book on 18th
or 19th
October.
The Death
Mrs Clayton's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Sunday, 20th
October. Alongside her name appears a symbol
'
'
and the time
'7.45'
. At first sight, this would seem to suggest that Mrs Clayton had died at 7.45pm on Sunday evening and that Shipman had been called out to certify the cause of death. However, as all the other evidence suggests that Mrs Clayton died on Monday, 21st
October, I think that it is more likely that Shipman went to Charlotte House early on Monday morning, as part of his weekend duty. It is possible to read the visits book in this way; there is a line drawn across the page two lines above Mrs Clayton's name. I think that indicates that the two patients whose names appear below the line were seen on Monday morning.
On Monday, 21st
October 1991, Mr Clayton received a telephone call from a member of staff at Charlotte House to say that his mother had died. The news was not unexpected and Mr Clayton and Mrs Aldred were not surprised.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Clayton had died on 21st
October. He said that he had last seen Mrs Clayton alive on 18th
October. There is no record of Mrs Clayton's name in Shipman's visits book for that day and there is no entry in the computerised medical records to confirm such a visit. However, that does not necessarily mean that he did not see her, as it is possible that he was called out during the evening of Friday, 18th
October. In those circumstances, I would not expect to see the patient's name in the visits book. Shipman used his visits book mainly to record the list of visits he had to make during the working day. Emergency visits often did not appear. Shipman also stated that he had seen Mrs Clayton's body after death and said that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Clayton had died at 7.15am on 21st
October 1991. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for a period of three days although his 'partner' (presumably Dr Napier) had seen her for one year. Shipman claimed that he had attended Mrs Clayton during her last illness for three days and had last seen her alive on 18th
October 1991. He saw the body about 30 minutes after death and made a complete external examination of it. The mode of death was said to be a coma of seven to eight days' duration. Shipman's answers as to cause and mode of death were said to be based on his own observations and on statements made by the staff at Charlotte House. He stated that the staff had nursed Mrs Clayton during her last illness and that the matron had been present at the death.
On Form A, the application for permission to cremate, which was signed by Mr Arthur Clayton, states that the death occurred at 6.45am on 21st
October.
Conclusion
The exact nature of Mrs Clayton's final illness is not clear, but the evidence of Mr Clayton and Mrs Aldred suggests that she was very ill when they last saw her in the early evening of Friday, 18th
October. It appears that her decline had been gradual and quite prolonged. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It is possible that Shipman saw Mrs Clayton on the Friday evening, 18th
October, although I suspect that he might not have done and merely claimed that he had made a visit so that he could say that he had attended her during her last illness. That would enable him to certify the cause of her death. Possibly Dr Napier was away on holiday or otherwise not available. Shipman was quite cavalier about his duties of certification and would not have hesitated to say that he had visited Mrs Clayton when he had not, if it were convenient to do so. It is possible that he called in on the Friday evening because Dr Napier had told him that the death was expected and wished Shipman to be able to certify the cause of death. It is even possible that the staff called Shipman out on the Friday evening. However, I think that is most unlikely. I do not think there was anything which could have been done for Mrs Clayton. She seems to have been slipping quietly away and I do not think the staff would call the doctor in those circumstances. In any event, even if Shipman was called out on the Friday evening, there is no reason to think that he did anything to cause her death. He cannot have given her a lethal dose of opiate; if he had she would have been dead within the hour. It is possible that he gave Mrs Clayton an inappropriately large dose of sedative. If over-sedated, Mrs Clayton would have been more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in the very old. However, there is no evidence to suggest that he did any such thing.
My conclusion is that it is highly likely that Mrs Clayton died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001