The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Amy Chidlow
Introduction
Miss Amy Chidlow died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 2nd
November 1988 at the age of 85. She was a patient of Shipman. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was acute bronchitis with airways obstruction.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Barbara Meadows (the manager at Charnley House at the time of Miss Chidlow's death) and Mrs Patricia Dale (a care assistant at Charnley House at that time). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1988 and the Charnley House diary and admissions register. The Inquiry has also had access to the Post-Mortem Examination Report, the Report of Death to the Coroner, the Greater Manchester Police Report of Sudden Death and the cremation forms. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It appears that Miss Chidlow's health gave rise to no special concerns for some years after her admission to Charnley House on 28th
October 1983. Mrs Meadows recalls that Miss Chidlow suffered from dementia. She was frail and needed care, but had no specific health problems.
The Charnley House diaries reveal that, in the weeks leading up to her death, Miss Chidlow's condition was stable and there is no record of her suffering from breathing difficulties.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Meadows recalls that Miss Chidlow used to eat her lunch on a tray in the lounge at Charnley House. On the menu on 2nd
November was fish and chips. Mrs Meadows remembers that Miss Chidlow finished her lunch, including her dessert, rhubarb crumble. Soon afterwards, one of the care assistants came in to tell her that Miss Chidlow was choking. Mrs Meadows went to Miss Chidlow, who was standing up, apparently choking. Mrs Meadows tried to clear her throat by slapping her on the back. This had no effect so Mrs Meadows tried a technique known as the Heimlich manoeuvre, which entailed squeezing Miss Chidlow below the ribs so as to force out any food which was causing a blockage. After this, Miss Chidlow spat some food out but continued to choke. Miss Chidlow was then taken to her bed. Mrs Meadows says that she does not remember what happened after Miss Chidlow was laid down on the bed. However, Mrs Meadows made the following entry in the Charnley House diary:
'Miss A Chidlow. Died suddenly at 12-45PM. Doctor,
Police & Relatives informed'
.
Lunch would usually have finished shortly before 12.45pm. Having considered the entry in the Charnley House diary, Mrs Meadows now says that Miss Chidlow must have died shortly after she was laid out on the bed, although she has no specific recollection of that being the case.
Mrs Dale recalls being aware that Miss Chidlow was choking after lunch and that Mrs Meadows was trying to dislodge food from her throat. She thought this was successful and that Miss Chidlow was then taken to bed. When she went off duty at 1pm, Mrs Dale was not aware that Miss Chidlow had died. She only discovered this the next day, when she was shocked and surprised at the news.
The Coroner's Documents
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Miss Chidlow died at 3.15pm on 2nd
November 1988. The account of the incident says:
'Appeared to be choking in dining room.
Taken to bedroom where she coughed up a
chip. Later found dead in bed'
.
The Greater Manchester Police Report of Sudden Death also records that the time of death was 3.15pm, but says (apparently inconsistently) that Miss Chidlow's body was found at 12.45pm by Mrs Meadows. These references to the death having occurred at 3.15pm may well indicate that Miss Chidlow was officially pronounced dead by a doctor at 3.15pm. The 'Brief Medical History' records:
'Appeared to be choking in the dining room,
was wheeled into bedroom in wheelchair,
coughed up a chip then put onto bed.
No serious medical problems'
.
It is also recorded that Miss Chidlow was last seen by Shipman on 20th
July 1988.
Dr D L Bee carried out a post-mortem examination on Miss Chidlow's body on 3rd
November 1988. On external examination he found bruising over the upper arms and on the right side of the forehead. On internal examination he noted that the bronchi contained a moderate amount of mucopus. The lungs were noted to show senile emphysema. The stomach contained a recent meal. All else was normal. He recorded his opinion that the cause of death was acute bronchitis with airways obstruction and that the death was due to natural causes. This opinion was accepted by the coroner.
Certification
The application for cremation was signed by Mr Raymond A Massey, funeral director, and records the time of death as 1pm on 2nd
November 1988.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has commented on the post-mortem examination report. She noted the history of airways obstruction with a chip occluding the larynx. Professor Whitwell commented that it is recognised that death can occur quite suddenly in choking, particularly in the elderly. She said that this usually occurs immediately and it is unclear from the reports prepared at the time what period of time elapsed between the choking and death.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Miss Chidlow died from natural causes.
There is clear evidence that Miss Chidlow suffered a violent choking episode soon after lunch on 2nd
November 1988. It appears that she died very shortly afterwards. I think it is unlikely that she lived until 3.15pm. I think that is probably the time at which a doctor attended to pronounce her death. I think she must have died at about 12.45pm. Due to the sudden and unusual nature of the death, the police were summoned.
There is no evidence whatsoever that Shipman was present during or immediately after this choking incident. Accordingly there is no cause for concern that Shipman might have done anything to cause or hasten Miss Chidlow's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001