The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ida Cains
Introduction
Mrs Ida Cains was found dead at her home, 213 Lumn Road, Hyde on Friday, 17th
March 1995 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since January 1992, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the police that he considered Mrs Cains' death as moderately suspicious on the basis of her medical records, although not suspicious on the basis of the cremation forms. The police wished to investigate the death and spoke to Mrs Cains' daughter, Mrs Patricia Smith. She gave the police some information, but declined to provide a statement. The investigation went no further.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Cains but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
When the Inquiry asked Mrs Smith to provide information about her mother's death, she was very distressed and said that neither she nor any member of her family wanted there to be any further investigation into the death. She did say that if she thought she could assist she would do so, but she had not thought there was anything suspicious about the circumstances in which her mother died. While sympathising with the wishes of the family, I do consider that it is necessary to investigate Mrs Cains' death, insofar as the Inquiry is able to do so.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Cains' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documentation for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It appears from a letter found within her medical records that Mrs Cains had worked as a weaver for many years and was rather deaf as a result. She was widowed in 1988 after 49 years of marriage. She suffered a grief reaction after the death of her husband. She lived in residential care for a time, then moved to sheltered accommodation. After some time, she went to live with her daughter and thereafter moved to Lumn Road, which was not far from her daughter's home. It seems that her deafness resulted in some social isolation.
Mrs Smith told the police that her mother had suffered from a number of medical problems, including high blood pressure and depression. Mrs Cains had undergone cataract surgery in 1994 and, in September that year, was on numerous types of medication, including enalapril for hypertension and congestive heart failure. Although the medical records contain several references to congestive heart failure, there are no recorded signs to indicate that this was a major problem. The last reference to congestive heart failure was in October 1994, when all was normal on examination.
Mrs Cains' medical records suggest that Shipman visited her at home on 16th
January 1995. The visits book for that day contains the following entry:
'Ida Cairns
(
sic
)
...noises in head can't sleep - not well'
.
The following entry appears in her handwritten general practitioner records:
'reflex
(L)
Possibly small CVA today
Try 300mg of Aspirin T O/D'
.
Thus, although it would appear that Mrs Cains complained of problems with sleeping, Shipman diagnosed a small stroke for which he prescribed an aspirin tablet, once daily.
Shipman next saw Mrs Cains at home on 24th
February 1995. There is an entry in the computerised records, which says that he diagnosed acute bronchitis and prescribed an antibiotic and cough medicine. There is no record of this visit in the visits book but the following entry appears in the acute prescriptions book for that day:
'Ida Cains...
Chesty cough.
Green phlegm
Feels cold.
N/A
A/B.
Originally wanted visit, but
you had just left, so I
suggested Rx - ready for 5pm.
Call
(
telephone number
)
if u want to visit!'
.
It would appear that Shipman visited Mrs Cains in response to a call to the surgery regarding a 'chesty cough' and prescribed cough medicine and an antibiotic.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Smith told the police what she recalled of the day of her mother's death. She said that she had been telephoned by her mother's home help, who was unable to gain access to Mrs Cains' house. Through the window, the home help could see Mrs Cains in bed. Mrs Smith went to her mother's house and unlocked the Yale lock of the front door. She was unable to recall whether the Chubb lock was engaged. She noticed that the back door was bolted from the inside. She found her mother dead in bed.
Mrs Smith was unable to recall the name of the home help and neither the police nor the Inquiry has been able to identify her. Mrs Smith told the police that she did not know when her mother had last seen Shipman. She said that her mother would have let Shipman into the house if he had called to see her. According to the investigating police officer's report, Mrs Smith said that, if Shipman had killed her mother, he would have been doing what she wanted, as she did not want to live.
There is nothing in the surgery records to suggest any contact between Mrs Cains and the surgery either on 16th
or 17th
March or, indeed, at any stage in the month of March 1995.
It appears that Shipman saw Mrs Cains' body after she had been found on 17th
March. He was probably contacted by Mrs Smith. The following entry appears in the manuscript medical records for 17th
March 1995:
'
found by daughter
certified dead 1500 hrs
dead approx 16.00 16395
1) Old Age
____________
2) CHF
Hypertension'
.
This indicates that Mrs Cains had been found dead by her daughter. She had been certified dead at 3pm, presumably by Shipman. He estimated that she had died at about 4pm on 16th
March. He diagnosed the cause of death as old age, with congestive heart failure and hypertension as contributory causes.
Certification
On the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman stated that death had occurred on 17th
March 1995 and that he had last seen Mrs Cains alive on 3rd
March 1995. He certified the causes of death as diagnosed in the medical records.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Cains died at 6pm on 16th
March 1995, although this seems to have been altered to 17th
March 1995 by someone at the crematorium, probably Dr Hinchliffe, the medical referee. Shipman stated that he had been Mrs Cains' medical attendant for three years and had attended her during her last illness for the whole of that time. It is stated that Shipman had last seen Mrs Cains alive on 13th
March 1995, which is said to be 13 days before the death. In fact, 13th
March was only three days before the death. Shipman said that the mode of death was collapse and that Mrs Cains had died in her sleep. No one was present at the moment of death. His views as to the cause and mode of death were said to be based on his own observations and a statement made by Mrs Smith. There is no record, in the manuscript records, the computerised records, the appointments sheets or the visits book, of Shipman seeing Mrs Cains on either 3rd
March 1995 or 13th
March 1995.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered Mrs Cains' medical records and regarded the death as moderately suspicious. He seems to have been particularly concerned about Shipman's preparedness to certify the cause of death as 'old age', especially as Shipman had not seen Mrs Cains in the two-week period before she died.
Conclusion
It is not possible to say, on the basis of the information available, whether or not Mrs Cains died a natural death.
Mrs Cains had some history of congestive heart failure, although there is no indication in the records that this was ever a serious problem. In the weeks before her death, she was being treated for a suspected stroke, although the basis for that diagnosis is quite unclear. She had also had an attack of bronchitis. Any one or more of these conditions could have developed so as to provide an explanation for a natural death. However, as there is no evidence of Mrs Cains' condition in the days shortly before her death, it is impossible to say whether any of them did so develop. It may be that Mrs Cains was well and did not need to call out Shipman, or it may be that she was unwell and chose not to call him out. It does not seem likely that she called him out, given the absence of documentary evidence to that effect.
There is no evidence whatsoever that Shipman saw Mrs Cains on the day of her death or on the days leading up to it. There is no obvious reason why Shipman should have chosen to call on her that day and she does not appear to be one of those patients upon whom he called regularly and without prior notice. Shipman could have visited her on 16th
March but there is no reason to think that he did. The fact that there is no entry in the records does not count for much, as Shipman often failed to record visits.
It appears that Shipman lied on the MCCD, and possibly in Form B in stating that he last saw Mrs Cains alive either 13 days before her death or on 3rd
or 13th
March. There is no record that he saw her in March at all. It has become clear from other cases investigated by the Inquiry that Shipman displayed a disregard for his duties in respect of the certification of deaths. There are cases in which he has falsely claimed to have seen a patient within 14 days of death, where the death was obviously natural. It is not possible to infer that he must have killed Mrs Cains simply from the fact that he made a false assertion on the MCCD. He seems to have done so on some occasions in which he had not killed the patient and I have inferred that, for the benefit of the family, he must have wished to avoid any risk that the registrar might refer the case to the coroner.
In his generic evidence to the Inquiry, Dr John Grenville explained the circumstances in which 'old age' is appropriate as a cause of death. Where there has been a prolonged period of ill health and a gradual decline towards death, it may be difficult for the doctor to determine which organ has failed so as to precipitate the death. The doctor may then properly give 'old age' as the cause. It appears unlikely that Mrs Cains was in such a condition as to fit that description. It may be that this was simply the best cause that Shipman felt able to proffer in his attempt to avoid the referral to the coroner.
With regret, I am unable to say whether or not Mrs Cains died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001