The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
George Charnock
Introduction
Mr George Charnock died at his home, 56 Church Street, Hyde on Friday, 26th
March 1982 at the age of 81. He had been a patient of Shipman since shortly after Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In April 2001, the Inquiry undertook a review of cases referred to the South Manchester Coroner. A Report of Death to the Coroner, dated 26th
March 1982, was recovered in the name of George
Sharrock
. Mr Charnock's Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil was recovered by the Inquiry in June 2001. It is clear that the name in the Report of Death to the Coroner is an error and that it relates to the death of Mr Charnock.
The death has been investigated by the Inquiry and a statement taken from Mrs Florence Bateson, Mr Charnock's daughter and the informant named on his death certificate. At Mrs Bateson's suggestion, the Inquiry contacted a neighbour, Mr Dennis Loynds. No statement has been taken from him, but his oral account supports the evidence of Mrs Bateson.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the MCCD counterfoil and Shipman's visits book for 1982. The Inquiry has also had access to the short Report of Death to the Coroner. No medical records or other relevant documentation have been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Charnock was a widower. Mrs Bateson's son, Mr Terence Galbraith, lived with Mr Charnock, although he often worked away. Mrs Bateson describes her father as 'very fit for his age' and the only condition from which he suffered was arthritis in the left leg. He was independent. He did his own shopping and housework and tended to his allotment. He was a sociable person who would often stand on his front doorstep 'watching the world go by'. He regularly visited Pensioners' House in Hyde and, as a matter of routine, would eat lunch there on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.
When Mr Charnock wished to consult Shipman, he usually attended at the surgery. So far as Mrs Bateson is aware, Shipman never visited him at home. Her father told Mrs Bateson about consultations with Shipman only after they had taken place. Mr Charnock used to apply non-prescription creams and gels to his arthritic knee and Mrs Bateson was not aware of him taking or using any other medication. As Mr Charnock used to go on holiday with his daughter, she would probably have known if he was taking medication regularly.
Mrs Bateson and her husband were also patients of Shipman. Mrs Bateson has told the Inquiry that Shipman used to call in and see them if they had not been to the surgery for a few weeks. They found him to be a caring person. He used to talk a lot about his mother and once said that he had seen his mother suffer with cancer when he was only 17.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Bateson last saw her father alive on Sunday, 21st
March 1982. She and her husband had invited him over for Sunday lunch and he spent the afternoon with them. He walked to Mrs Bateson's house, a journey of about 25 minutes. He did not complain of feeling unwell during the visit.
Mr Charnock's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 25th
March 1982, the day before he died. The entry simply records Mr Charnock's name and address and does not record the purpose of the visit.
The Day of the Death
Mr Charnock telephoned his daughter at around 8.45am on Friday, 26th
March 1982. He told her that, before going to Pensioners' House for lunch at 1pm, he intended to go to the newsagent to pay his newspaper bill and then to the bank. He asked Mrs Bateson if she and her husband were going to their caravan for Easter. If they were, he would like to come. Mrs Bateson agreed that he could come with them. He did not say anything about feeling unwell or that he was expecting to see Shipman or that he had seen him the day before.
At about 1pm, a police officer came to Mrs Bateson's house and told her that Mr Charnock had been found dead on his front doorstep. He had been taken by ambulance to Tameside General Hospital. Mrs Bateson went to the hospital to identify the body and, upon returning home, informed her relatives of the death.
Some time later (Mrs Bateson cannot recall when), Mr Loynds, Mr Charnock's next door neighbour, gave her an account of what had happened that lunchtime. He was at home when a woman approached him and said, 'I've just spoken to George and he is not answering me'. Mr Loynds went to Mr Charnock's house and found him lying on his front doorstep. Mr Loynds had then telephoned the emergency services. Mr Loynds thought that Mr Charnock was dead at the time that he found him on the doorstep. The front door was open. It later appeared that Mr Charnock had not visited the newspaper shop or Pensioners' House that day.
The Aftermath
Some time after Mr Charnock had died, Mrs Bateson asked Shipman during a consultation whether a post-mortem examination should have been performed on Mr Charnock as he had died a sudden death. Shipman said that a post-mortem examination was not necessary as he had visited him recently before his death.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived, although its counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman has stated that he last saw Mr Charnock alive on 24th
March, two days before death, that the death had not been referred to the coroner and that Shipman had seen the body after death. The certified cause of death is coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 26th
March 1982. There is no entry in Shipman's visits book to confirm that a visit took place on 24th
March.
It is unclear who made out the Report of Death to the Coroner, but it was a police officer, after consultation with Shipman. The time of death is recorded as 11.35am. The Report includes the following comment:
'Last seen by Dr Shipman day prior to death'
. An estimate of Mr Charnock's age is given as
'about 60 years'
. Mr Charnock was stated to have been dead on arrival at hospital.
Conclusion
Little is known of Mr Charnock's medical history, as his records have not survived. He seems to have been a person who did not discuss medical matters with his family. It is quite possible that Mr Charnock had a history of heart disease, as Shipman claimed on the MCCD counterfoil. Whether or not there was any such history, it is entirely possible that he could have succumbed to a sudden death by heart attack. The position in which Mr Charnock was found, collapsed on his doorstep, is consistent with his having suffered a sudden coronary thrombosis while standing outside his house, as he was in the habit of doing.
There is no direct evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mr Charnock on the day of his death. He probably did visit him the day before. Although it is possible that Shipman visited Mr Charnock again on the day of the death, it is very unlikely that he caused his death. Shipman's usual method of killing was to give an intravenous injection of opiate which caused death within minutes. Although it is theoretically possible that Shipman could have given Mr Charnock a lethal injection by the intramuscular route, which would take longer to act, it is most unlikely that Shipman would have given such an injection and left his patient conscious and walking about. The risk of discovery would have been enormous.
There is an inconsistency between the time that Shipman last saw Mr Charnock alive, as recorded on the MCCD counterfoil on the one hand, and what is stated within the Report of Death to the Coroner and Shipman's visits book on the other. It seems likely that what is written in his visits book and the Report of Death to the Coroner is correct and that Shipman was careless in completing the MCCD counterfoil, as he often was. This single inaccuracy does not give rise to suspicion.
I am quite satisfied that Mr Charnock died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001