The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Cartwright
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Cartwright died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 1st
May 1980 at the age of 83. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac failure due to anaemia and a bleeding duodenal ulcer.
The informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') was Mr Thomas Parker Mills. He has been traced and has told the Inquiry that Mrs Cartwright had been the housekeeper to his bachelor uncle for more than 30 years. As far as he is aware, Mrs Cartwright had no close family. He recalls that, towards the end of her life, Mrs Cartwright was living in a nursing home and that she was very ill before her death.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Cartwright's death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1980 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary for 1980.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Cartwright was admitted to Charnley House on 20th
July 1977. Although it now appears that Mr Mills was not related to Mrs Cartwright, he was named as her next of kin in the admissions register.
Mrs Cartwright's health does not appear to have given rise to any real concern until shortly before her death. Her name does not appear in the daily diary during April 1980 until the 27th
of that month. From that I infer that she was reasonably well. On Sunday, 27th
April 1980, it would appear that, at lunchtime, she fell from a chair and injured her head and arm. Her speech was said to be distorted for about five minutes. She was sent to hospital but was returned home at 6.30pm. A letter, presumably from the hospital, was left for Shipman. That letter has not been found. It was probably kept with the medical records which have not survived. That evening, Mrs Cartwright fell out of bed, although she did not appear to have suffered any injury.
Mrs Cartwright's condition had improved on the following day, although on Tuesday, 29th
April 1980, she was said to be very weak and vomited bile stained fluid. Shipman was asked to call if possible and arrived at about 3.30pm. He was informed that Mrs Cartwright had been constipated. There is no reference to any specific treatment, although it appears that Mrs Cartwright might have been suffering from internal bleeding. There is no note in Shipman's visits book that he was to visit that day.
On Wednesday, 30th
April 1980, it was recorded that Mrs Cartwright was quite poorly and by the morning of Thursday, 1st
May, she was said to be very poorly. Her condition deteriorated rapidly during that day. She died at 6.30pm. It was recorded that her
'relations'
were informed and a duty doctor came out to certify the fact of death. It was said that the
'relations'
were to call at the home to collect a note from the duty doctor, which they were to deliver to Shipman. Shipman's visits book suggests that he was off work on 1st
May.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate is not available, the counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman completed it on 2nd
May, when, according to his visits book, he was off work. He certified that the cause of death was cardiac failure and identified anaemia and a bleeding duodenal ulcer as contributory causes of death. On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mrs Cartwright alive on 29th
April 1980, which is supported by the Charnley House diary.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Cartwright died of natural causes and that Shipman played no sinister part in her death.
Mrs Cartwright was plainly quite unwell when she was last seen by Shipman on 29th
April 1980. Thereafter, but not immediately thereafter, her condition deteriorated. There is no suggestion that Shipman was present at the home on the day of Mrs Cartwright's death and it would appear that he had taken the day off work.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001