The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frances Clayton
Introduction
Miss Frances Clayton (known as Fanny) died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde in the early hours of Friday, 7th
January 1983 at the age of 87. She was probably a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mr Ernest Robinson, Miss Clayton's brother-in-law, as the informant in relation to her death. Mr Robinson is now extremely elderly. Since the Inquiry has now had access to good documentary evidence, no attempt has been made to ask Mr Robinson about the circumstances of his sister-in-law's death.
The Inquiry has had access to the death certificate, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1983 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Evidence
Miss Clayton was admitted to Charnley House from Tameside General Hospital on 7th
September 1979. She had previously lived at 129 Curzon Road, Ashton-under-Lyne. She was a retired confectioner.
Miss Clayton had a fall in August 1982 and it appears that she suffered a fracture of the femur. She was in hospital until December 1982, when she returned to Charnley House. She had pressure sores and she was very disturbed at night. The Charnley House daily diary shows that she was very poorly in the weeks leading up to her death. She was sleeping badly, could take only fluids and required intensive nursing. On Wednesday, 5th
January 1983, it was noted that she was not eating and she was to be seen by the doctor on the following day.
On the morning of Thursday, 6th
January, it was difficult to waken her and she was left in bed. The morning report records that Miss Clayton was very poorly when seen by Shipman. He said that nursing care was to be given and that Miss Clayton was to be turned frequently. She was to be given fluids only if she wanted them and her lips were to be kept moist. Her relatives were informed of her condition. Miss Clayton deteriorated rapidly that afternoon and died at 12.46am on 7th
January. There is no record of a visit by Shipman after that on the morning of Thursday, 6th
January. The Charnley House diary for Friday, 7th
January records that Shipman certified Miss Clayton's death at midday.
Miss Clayton's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 6th
January. Shipman was not the duty doctor for the evening of 6th
January 1983 and whoever was on duty that evening handed over to the deputising doctor at 11pm.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on 7th
January, saying that he had last seen Miss Clayton alive on 6th
January. He said there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. He gave the cause of death as senility.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Miss Clayton had died at 12.36am on 7th
January 1983, ten minutes before the time recorded in the daily diary. Shipman said that he had attended Miss Clayton during her last illness for one week and that he had last seen her alive 24 hours before her death. He said that he had seen her body 12 hours after death and had carried out a complete external examination. He said that Miss Clayton had been in a coma for 48 hours. His answers as to the mode and cause of death were said to be based on his own observations and statements made by the staff at Charnley House. The night staff at Charnley House had nursed Miss Clayton in her last illness and were present when she died. Shipman wrote that he had reported the case to the coroner on account of an operation for a fractured femur in December 1982 and that he had issued an MCCD with the coroner's knowledge and permission.
Conclusion
It is quite clear that Miss Clayton was in a very frail physical condition in the days leading up to her death. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected and it is very likely that she died as a result of natural causes.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Miss Clayton in the hours immediately before her death and I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman killed her by administering a lethal dose of opiates.
I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman over-sedated her when he visited on the morning of 6th
January. If over-sedated, Miss Clayton would be more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he had done it with the intention of keeping Miss Clayton comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death.
However, I note that Miss Clayton was already very sleepy before Shipman saw her on the morning of 6th
January and it seems unlikely that he would have given her any drug.
My conclusion is that Miss Clayton probably died a natural death. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman contributed to her death by over-sedating her. However, I think this is unlikely.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001