The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Constance Anne Couldwell
Introduction
Mrs Constance Anne Couldwell died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Friday, 5th
February 1988 at the age of 88. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs June Ferguson, a former owner of Norbury House, who has some limited recollection of Mrs Couldwell. A number of former members of staff from Norbury House have been contacted but none are able to recall the circumstances surrounding Mrs Couldwell's death. The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1988 and the register of residents recovered from Norbury House. Mrs Couldwell's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to the register of residents, Mrs Couldwell was admitted to Norbury House from Tameside General Hospital on 22nd
June 1985. On admission, she was noted to be mobile and able to walk very slowly with the aid of a Zimmer frame. She appeared frail. Mrs Ferguson recalls that Mrs Couldwell's son, Donald, visited her frequently. She also had friends who visited.
Mrs Ferguson says that Shipman was caring towards his elderly patients but he did not visit unless asked to do so. Mrs Ferguson says that it was the policy at Norbury House that a member of staff should be present during any medical consultation with a resident.
The Death
Mrs Ferguson does not remember the circumstances surrounding Mrs Couldwell's death but does recall that Mrs Couldwell deteriorated during the last months and was very weak and confined to bed. She was 'gradually fading away'.
Mrs Couldwell's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Friday, 29th
January 1988 and again on 5th
February, the day of the death.
Certification
The death certificate records that the informant in relation to Mrs Couldwell's death, her son, Mr Donald Couldwell, was present at the moment of death. He has since died.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Mrs Couldwell died at Norbury House on 5th
February 1988 and that he had last seen her alive on that day. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil was dated 5th
February 1988, the day of the death.
There are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Mrs Couldwell deteriorated gradually before her death and that her son was with her at the end. This would indicate that the death was not unexpected. However, there is also evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Couldwell alive on the day of her death. Unfortunately there is no evidence at all about the purpose or circumstances of his visit. It follows that I am unable to form any view about whether Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Couldwell or whether she died as a result of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001