The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ivy Elizabeth Challinor
Introduction
Mrs Ivy Elizabeth Challinor died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 10th
September 1982 at the age of 83. It seems likely that she had been a patient of Shipman since about October 1978 when she moved into Charnley House. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Challinor's daughter, Mrs Dorothy Price, and her granddaughter, Mrs Maxine Fletcher. Both ladies wrote to say that Mrs Challinor's death had followed a long and painful illness with bowel cancer. They had no doubt that she had died from natural causes.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Challinor, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits books and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to her death certificate, Mrs Challinor was a retired printing machine operator. She was the widow of Mr Frank Challinor, a head postman. She was admitted to Charnley House on 16th
October 1978 from her home at 17 Forrest Road, Denton. In late 1979, she spent several weeks in Hyde Hospital before returning to Charnley House on 13th
December, 1979.
According to Mrs Price, her mother had been very ill for a long time with bowel cancer. During her last months, she was in considerable pain and became senile. Mrs Price's recollection is consistent not only with the cause of death as certified by Shipman but also with the entries in the Charnley House daily diary.
Both the Charnley House diary and Shipman's visits book record that Shipman visited Mrs Challinor on Tuesday, 7th
September 1982. He prescribed pain-killing injections and arranged for the district nurse to attend to give the injections morning and evening.
Shipman himself attended on the morning of Wednesday, 8th
September. He said that Mrs Challinor was to be given only fluids and that he would call the following day. The diary records that a nurse called at 5.30pm, gave the injection prescribed and treated a pressure sore.
The Charnley House diary records that Shipman saw Mrs Challinor again on Thursday, 9th
September, when she was said to be very poorly. There is no record of any visit in Shipman's visits book for that day. The Charnley House diary for that evening records that the district nurse attended and gave Mrs Challinor a 64mg intramuscular injection of diamorphine at 5.30pm. She remained very poorly.
The Day of the Death
The Charnley House diary for Friday, 10th
September records that Mrs Challinor was given an injection of diamorphine at 8.20am. She was still very poorly. The district nurse attended at 5.30pm to give a further injection. Shipman is not mentioned in the diary, nor does his visits book suggest that he attended at all that day. Mrs Challinor died peacefully at what could be either 9.45pm or 7.45pm. The diary records that the
'relief doctor'
was called. This must have been Dr Napier, for the night report notes that he certified the fact of Mrs Challinor's death. Massey's undertakers then removed Mrs Challinor's body from the premises.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD counterfoil on Saturday, 11th
September 1982, the day after Mrs Challinor died. He said that he had last seen her alive on 10th
September 1982, which is not consistent either with his visits book entries or with the Charnley House daily diary. It is unlikely that he did in fact see her on that day. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination but that he had seen the body after death and, presumably, he did so on 11th
September.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Challinor died of natural causes. She was in severe pain before her death and needed quite substantial amounts of diamorphine. It would appear that these injections were usually given not by Shipman but by the district nurse at Shipman's behest. The only evidence that Shipman actually visited Mrs Challinor on the day of her death comes from the MCCD counterfoil. It is possible, but unlikely, that he saw her on that day and extremely unlikely that he did so shortly before her death. Had he been on duty that evening, one would expect that it would have been he and not Dr Napier who was called out to certify the fact of death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001