The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Chappell
Introduction
Mrs Alice Chappell died at her home, 320 Market Street, Hyde on Sunday, 23rd
December 1979 at the age of 85. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility due to cardiac failure.
The only information which the Inquiry initially had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Efforts have been made to trace members of Mrs Chappell's family and her name appeared in advertisements placed by the Inquiry in national newspapers in September 2001. Despite these steps, Mrs Chappell's death remains one of the very few in which the Inquiry has been unable to trace any living relative.
The Inquiry has also obtained the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), completed by Shipman on the day after Mrs Chappell's death, and Shipman's visits book for 1979.
The Evidence
The Inquiry has no direct information about Mrs Chappell's personal circumstances or her state of health immediately before her death. However, an examination of the visits book reveals that, during the six months immediately prior to her death, there is one record of a visit to Mrs Chappell, on 5th
November. Beside her name and address appear the letters
'D/N'
. From this, it can be inferred that Mrs Chappell was suffering from some condition which required the attendance of the district nurse. This could have been a serious condition for which she required nursing care; alternatively, it could have been a condition such as varicose ulcers, which required bandaging, but which was not in any way life threatening. Certainly, the visits book does not record the regular pattern of visits which might have been expected had Mrs Chappell's condition been serious.
On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Chappell alive on 18th
December, five days before her death. Although the visits book records no visit for that date, it is of course possible that Mrs Chappell had an appointment at Shipman's surgery, or that the visit, although made, was not recorded.
The visits book records that, on the day before Mrs Chappell's death, a Saturday, Shipman was
'off'
. There are no visits recorded for the day of death. The Donneybrook practice operated a system whereby the doctors covered whole weekends on a rota basis and it appears from the visits book that Shipman was off duty that weekend.
There is no other evidence available to the Inquiry.
Conclusion
The Inquiry has very little evidence about this death.
The entries in Shipman's visits book strongly suggest that he was not on duty over the weekend when Mrs Chappell died. Whilst experience has shown that Shipman was at times available to visit on days when he was nominally off duty, it must make attendance by him much less likely. The MCCD was signed on the day after death, which would be entirely consistent with his having certified death on his return to work on the Monday.
In the circumstances, it appears to me that it is highly likely that Mrs Chappell died from natural causes although, in the absence of evidence from a witness with knowledge of the circumstances of the death, it is impossible to be completely sure that this was the case.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001