The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Wilfred Chadwick
Introduction
Mr Wilfred Chadwick died at his home, 73 Corporation Street, Hyde on Thursday, 15th
December 1977 at the age of 81. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde, a little over two months earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Chadwick's death was heart failure.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Margaret Gratrix, Mr Chadwick's daughter, and has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil. Mr Chadwick's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Chadwick was a widower and lived alone. Mrs Gratrix and her husband visited him virtually every day. Mrs Gratrix says that her father lived independently and was in reasonable health, although she thinks that he suffered from 'something like angina'. He had also had a slight stroke about three years before his death but appeared to have recovered fully. He smoked at least 20 cigarettes a day and had a persistent cough. So far as Mrs Gratrix is aware, her father did not take any regular medication. He was able to walk reasonable distances. Four times each week he would walk into Hyde to have lunch at Pensioners' House. This would take 10 to 15 minutes each way.
A short time before he died, Mr Chadwick told his daughter that he had made an appointment to see Shipman. As Mrs Gratrix was a little concerned about her father living alone, she telephoned Shipman to ask him to consider whether he thought Mr Chadwick was still well enough to live alone. About a week before her father died, Mrs Gratrix received a letter from Shipman, saying that there was no reason why Mr Chadwick should not continue to live alone.
Mrs Gratrix last saw her father alive when she visited him after work on Wednesday, 14th
December 1977. He appeared to be well. Mr Chadwick did not mention that he was expecting a visit from the doctor.
The Day of the Death
At about 10am on Thursday, 15th
December, Mrs Gratrix received a telephone call from a neighbour of Mr Chadwick who had a key to his flat and used to visit him each morning. She said that she had found Mr Chadwick dead in bed. Mrs Gratrix thinks that the neighbour had found the body between 9.30am and 9.45am.
Mrs Gratrix and her husband went to her father's flat. They found him lying on his back in bed. He was wearing pyjamas. His eyes were open. In the room was a cup and saucer and a cigarette butt in an ashtray. Mrs Gratrix thought that her father might have had difficulty sleeping and died after getting up to have a cigarette and a cup of tea.
Mrs Gratrix contacted the Donneybrook Surgery and was told that Shipman was not in. Why that was is not known, although we know from the generic evidence that Shipman worked only a half day on Thursdays. However, he would usually have worked in the morning. Mrs Gratrix recalls that Dr Lutton attended at the house and certified the death. He gave her a piece of paper, which she then gave to the undertakers.
Certification
Shipman telephoned Mrs Gratrix on Friday, 16th
December and said that he had heard about her father's death and that he was surprised by it. He said that he would attend at the undertakers to examine the body.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mr Chadwick had died of heart failure at home on 15th
December 1977. Although the counterfoil has been filled out incorrectly, it appears to record that Shipman last saw Mr Chadwick alive on 8th
December 1977, a week before the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 16th
December 1977.
Mr Chadwick was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
It seems that Mr Chadwick's death was quite sudden and unexpected to both his daughter and Shipman. It appears that he died alone. One might have expected, in those circumstances, that Shipman would refer the death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination. However, Shipman certified the cause of death as heart failure. That is not a very exact cause of death and Shipman did not specify any underlying cause. However, it does not necessarily follow that Shipman had been involved in the death. Mr Chadwick seems to have had some kind of cardiac condition, possibly angina, and may also have had a degree of congestive heart failure. As a smoker, he may well have been at increased risk of suffering a heart attack.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman had had access to Mr Chadwick in the period immediately preceding his death. Mrs Gratrix herself saw her father in the early evening of 24th
August. I can rule out the possibility that Shipman had visited Mr Chadwick and killed him during the early evening. It would be unusual, although not impossible, for Shipman to visit a patient on his way home from the surgery. However, it seems most unlikely that Shipman could have called then and killed Mr Chadwick, as there would, by then, have been no reason for him to change into his pyjamas. It seems highly likely that Mr Chadwick went to bed as usual and died during the night. Whether or not he had got up in the night, I could not say.
My conclusion is that it seems highly likely that Mr Chadwick died a natural death. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman was involved but I think it highly unlikely that he was.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001