The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Norah Cheetham
Introduction
Mrs Norah Cheetham died at her home, 11 Brooks Avenue, Hyde on Monday, 30th
January 1984 at the age of 83. She was a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinoma of the stomach due to partial gastrectomy.
Initially, the only information the Inquiry had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') which named Mr Albert Cheetham, Mrs Cheetham's widower, as the informant. The death of Mr Albert Cheetham has been investigated by the Inquiry and, in the course of that investigation, the Inquiry contacted Mr Neville William Cheetham, Mr and Mrs Cheetham's son and the informant in relation to Mr Cheetham's death. Mr Neville Cheetham has provided information about the deaths of both his parents. There has been no inquest into this death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Neville Cheetham and his wife, Mrs Carole Jacqueline Cheetham. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984. Mrs Cheetham's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In the early 1950s, Mrs Cheetham suffered a burst duodenal ulcer and was admitted to hospital. She underwent a partial gastrectomy in 1952. Thereafter, she always had a small appetite and was very slender. However, she had no major illnesses until shortly before her death.
Mr Neville Cheetham and his wife, Mrs Carole Cheetham, visited his parents regularly from their home in Derbyshire, particularly in the holiday periods and sometimes at weekends.
About a week or so before Mrs Cheetham died, Mr Cheetham telephoned his son and daughter-in-law to say that Mrs Cheetham was very ill and the doctor had been called out. He asked them to come over to see her. Mr Neville Cheetham was unable to go immediately so his wife went alone and stayed with her parents-in-law. Mrs Cheetham was confined to bed but was quite lucid. Her daughter-in-law recalls that Shipman visited every day and gave Mrs Cheetham an injection in the buttocks. Mrs Cheetham found these painful, but Shipman said this was the quickest way to get morphine into her system. He would not consider any other method. Mrs Carole Cheetham felt that Shipman was lacking in compassion. Although Mrs Carole Cheetham did not know this at the time, it is clear that her mother-in-law had cancer and was in severe pain.
Shipman's visits book confirms that he visited Mrs Cheetham on Thursday, 19th
January, Saturday, 21st
January, Thursday, 26th
January and Friday, 27th
January. The entry dated 19th
January has the letters
'D/N'
alongside Mrs Cheetham's name. That would indicate that a district nurse was to attend to her, although Mrs Carole Cheetham does not remember that one visited.
Mrs Carole Cheetham is almost certain that Shipman visited on Sunday, 29th
January, although Mrs Cheetham's name does not appear in his visits book for that day. In fact, no names appear in his visits book for that date. The Donneybrook duty doctor diary shows that Shipman was not on duty that weekend. This would tend to suggest that Shipman did not visit on Sunday, 29th
January. However, it is possible that he did visit, even though he was not on duty and did not record his visit in the visits book.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Carole Cheetham stayed with her mother-in-law throughout the night of 29th
January. Mrs Cheetham's condition had deteriorated and she was sleeping for much of the time. She died at about 4am on Monday, 30th
January.
Mrs Cheetham's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Monday, 30th
January. The entry says:
'Cheetham (Robinsons)'
. Robinsons are a firm of undertakers, so it appears that Shipman was asked to see the body so that he could certify the cause of death.
Mr Neville Cheetham says that it was only after his mother's death that the family, including his father, was told that she had cancer.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. On this, Shipman stated that the death had occurred on 30th
January 1984. He said he had last seen Mrs Cheetham alive on 28th
January. He said that the death was due to cancer of the stomach which had been caused by a partial gastrectomy in 1952. A chronic duodenal ulcer had contributed to the death. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
I am of the opinion that Mrs Cheetham died a natural death. Her husband realised that she was very ill and sent for his son and daughter-in-law. It is clear that Shipman attended regularly and gave pain-relieving injections. It seems very likely that Mrs Cheetham was in the terminal stage of cancer. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mrs Cheetham in the few hours before her death. Shipman claimed that he last saw her on Saturday, 28th
January. His visits book suggests that he last saw her on 27th
January. Mrs Carole Cheetham thinks he probably visited on Sunday, 29th
January. If Mrs Carole Cheetham is right and he visited on the Sunday, it would seem most unlikely that he visited in the evening or late at night. If he had, I think Mrs Carole Cheetham would have remembered. However, even if he had visited at 11pm and had given an intramuscular injection of an opiate, there would be no reason to suspect that he gave a lethal dose. If he had done so, Mrs Cheetham would have died within about an hour. She lived until about 4am.
I feel able to say with confidence that Shipman did not cause or hasten Mrs Cheetham's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001