The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas Condon
Introduction
Mr Thomas Condon died at his home, 60 Windsor Road, Hyde at the age of 73. It is certified that he died on Sunday, 6th
May 1984 but it is possible that he died on the previous day. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cardiac failure due to bronchopneumonia.
Mr Condon's cousin, Mr William Jenkinson, was named as the informant in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mr Jenkinson has since died but the Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Eleanor Jenkinson, his widow. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary, as well as the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Condon's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Condon was a widower and lived alone. He enjoyed taking long walks in the country but, in the months before he died, he complained to Mrs Jenkinson of having 'legs like lead' after completing a walk.
In the weeks before Mr Condon's death, there was an outbreak of influenza in Hyde. Mr Condon caught it, as did Mrs Jenkinson. She remembers that the strain was particularly virulent. She was very unwell and was unable to look after Mr Condon. Mr Condon was cared for by his wife's extended family and Mr Jenkinson. Mr Condon became very weak and a bed was moved downstairs so that he could stay in the warmest room in the house. It appears that Shipman visited him on 30th
April 1984. Mr Condon's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day.
Mrs Jenkinson last saw Mr Condon alive on Friday, 4th
May 1984. She called at his home to make him a meal. He said that she need not have come as he was feeling much better and could manage for himself. He was obviously still weak but Mrs Jenkinson was relieved that he was so much improved.
On Saturday, 5th
May, Mr Jenkinson called in to do some errands for Mr Condon. When he returned home, he told his wife that he thought Mr Condon was improving. There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mr Condon on that day; however, he had seven patients to visit and would have passed close to Mr Condon's house.
The Discovery of the Death
On Sunday, 6th
May 1984, Mrs Jenkinson and her husband called to see Mr Condon. As they approached the front gate, one of Mr Condon's brothers-in-law came to tell them that Mr Condon was dead. He appeared to have died in his sleep. Mr and Mrs Jenkinson were told that Mr Condon's body had been found by his next door neighbour that morning. Mrs Jenkinson cannot identify the neighbour. There was no mention of Shipman having made a recent visit.
Over the weekend of 5th
/6th
May 1984, Shipman was on duty pursuant to the Donneybrook doctors' rota for out of hours cover. According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Shipman did not divert the calls through to the deputising service until 11pm each evening and would have answered calls personally until that time.
Mr Condon's name appears second in a list of 11 names in the visits book for Sunday, 6th
May. Alongside his name appears a crucifix symbol, suggesting that he had died and that the reason for the visit was to certify his death. Alongside that symbol appear the initials
'HFS'
, which suggests that Mr Condon was probably registered with Shipman, as opposed to one of the other doctors at the practice.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived, but its counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Condon alive on 30th
April 1984, which corresponds with the entry in the visits book. He said that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. He certified that the cause of Mr Condon's death was cardiac failure due to bronchopneumonia. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 6th
May 1984.
Conclusion
As Mr Condon's medical records are not available, it is not possible to form an accurate view of his state of health shortly before his death. Mrs Jenkinson's impression was that he was recovering from his recent attack of influenza. He seems to have been up and dressed on the Friday and Saturday. If he were, it would not appear that he was about to succumb to bronchopneumonia. Dr John Grenville says that a patient is usually very weak and ill for a day or two before death from that cause. That Shipman had not visited since 30th
April would also tend to suggest that Mr Condon's health was improving and that he had not suffered a reverse. I also recognise that it is entirely possible that a man of Mr Condon's age might die quite suddenly following a serious attack of influenza.
Shipman was on out of hours duty that weekend. Although there is no evidence that Shipman did in fact call on Mr Condon, I cannot rule out the possibility that he did. He had seen him the previous week and might have called on the pretext of checking his progress. I have come across another case, that of Joseph Bardsley, who died only three weeks before Mr Condon, where Shipman made an unsolicited call while on duty on a Sunday and killed the patient. It is also possible that Mr Condon felt ill and called a doctor on the afternoon or evening of 5th
May, in which case it would have been Shipman who visited.
There is no positive evidence to suggest that Shipman caused Mr Condon's death. However, in the light of the factors I have mentioned above, I cannot rule it out. I regret to say that I am unable to determine whether Mr Condon probably died of natural causes or as the result of an unlawful act of Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001