The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Campbell
Introduction
Mrs Annie Campbell died at her home, 20 Rydal Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 20th
December 1978 at the age of 88. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Patricia Ann Savill, Mr George William Pragnall and Mrs Mary Herod, all grandchildren of Mrs Campbell.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Savill, Mrs Herod, Mr George William Pragnall, Mr George Pragnall (Mrs Campbell's son-in-law), Mr David Pragnall and Mr John Pragnall (both grandsons of Mrs Campbell). Mrs Annie Kellett, a neighbour of Mrs Campbell, has been traced but has been unable to assist in the investigation of Mrs Campbell's death, beyond her recollection that Mrs Campbell did not appear unwell in the days before her death. The Inquiry has had access to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Mrs Campbell's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Campbell was a widow and lived alone. It is not clear whether or not her flat was sheltered accommodation. Her daughter, Mrs Mary Pragnall, who has since died, and son-in-law, Mr George Pragnall, lived nearby. Mrs Campbell enjoyed reasonable health and, although she smoked, she did not appear to have a history of cardiac problems. She was housebound for about the last six months of her life, although she could move about indoors with the aid of a Zimmer frame. She also became confused during the last months of her life and depended heavily on Mrs Pragnall's help with her daily routine. Mrs Pragnall would call in each morning to make Mrs Campbell's breakfast. On weekdays, Mrs Campbell's grandson, Mr David Pragnall, would go with his mother to his grandmother's house before he went on to school. Mrs Pragnall would then do the shopping and housework. She would prepare and deliver her mother's lunch, before having her own at home with her husband. After lunch, she would collect Mrs Campbell's dishes. She would return in the early evening to give her mother an evening meal and again at bedtime to help Mrs Campbell into bed.
Mrs Campbell was unable to travel to Shipman's surgery. She did not have a telephone and if she had needed to see the doctor, Mrs Pragnall would have had to make the arrangement. Mr George Pragnall cannot recall his wife ever calling Shipman out to see Mrs Campbell. However, Shipman used to visit Mrs Campbell as a matter of routine, about once every two months. Mr John Pragnall says that when Shipman visited Mrs Campbell, he would normally do so between midday and 12.30pm, or between 5pm and 6pm. Mr George Pragnall says that Shipman always came in by the back door, which was kept unlocked during the day. The front door was always locked. However, Mr John Pragnall says that Mrs Campbell's front door was always unlocked, even at night. He says that only the family and Shipman were aware of this arrangement. He says that Shipman was told about the front door because he had once called at the Pragnalls' house to say that he could not get into Mrs Campbell's house and Mrs Pragnall had told him that the front door was always open. In any event, it appears that Shipman's usual practice would be to visit Mrs Campbell when convenient and he would gain access through an unlocked door.
Mr George Pragnall and Mrs Herod remember seeing Mrs Campbell over the weekend before she died. She seemed 'her usual self'.
The Day of the Death
Mr David Pragnall recalls going with his mother to see Mrs Campbell on the morning of 20th
December. He thinks that they would have arrived at about 8.30am. Mrs Campbell did not seem unwell. Mr David Pragnall has no memory of his mother having to call Shipman out or that she went down to the surgery. He thinks that if Mrs Campbell had been unwell, his mother would have had to make alternative arrangements for him to be taken to school.
Mr George Pragnall remembers coming home for lunch as usual that day. He always arrived shortly after 12.20pm. He remembers that his wife had made sausages and mashed potatoes and rice pudding and that she had taken the same dishes to her mother. Over lunch, Mrs Pragnall did not mention that her mother was unwell or that she had asked Shipman to visit. Mr George Pragnall thinks that if her mother had been ill, Mrs Pragnall would have said so. After lunch, Mr George Pragnall returned to work. He was due back at 1.15pm. About ten minutes after his return to work, Mrs Pragnall telephoned him to say that Shipman had called at the house and had told her that he had found Mrs Campbell dead, sitting in an armchair in her flat. Mr George Pragnall returned home immediately, but by the time he arrived Shipman had gone. Mrs Pragnall told him that she had gone to Mrs Campbell's flat with Shipman and together they had lifted Mrs Campbell out of her armchair and laid her on the bed. Mrs Pragnall said that Mrs Campbell had eaten her lunch.
Mr David Pragnall remembers seeing his mother upset on the afternoon of 20th
December, presumably after he had returned home from school. He recalls that she told him that not long after she had returned home from taking round her mother's lunch, she had 'met Shipman' who said that he had been to see Mrs Campbell and found her dead. His mother told him that she had then gone to the flat and found her mother sitting in a chair looking very peaceful. Mrs Campbell rarely managed to finish her lunch and Mrs Pragnall had been surprised to see that she had done so on this occasion. Mr David Pragnall has a vague recollection that his mother was upset about the way in which Shipman broke the news of the death to her.
In his first statement to the Inquiry, Mr John Pragnall said that at the time of his grandmother's death, he and his father were working together. He would return home at lunchtime with his father to have lunch with his mother. He recalled arriving home at about 12.30pm on 20th
December to find his mother in a very distressed state. Mrs Pragnall told him that she had found her mother dead that morning. He did not remember whether his mother had told him that Shipman had visited Mrs Campbell that morning. He remembers Mrs Pragnall saying that Shipman had attended after the death at her request, and that he was 'a bit off-ish' and unsympathetic.
In a supplemental statement, Mr John Pragnall says that when giving his first statement, he was mistaken as to the time of the conversation about the death. He now believes that this conversation occurred at about 5.30pm and not at lunchtime. He also says that he remembers his mother saying that it was Shipman who had found his grandmother dead. He also remembers his mother saying that Shipman had been insensitive and 'matter of fact' in the way in which he broke the news of the death.
Mrs Savill says that when she returned home from work on 20th
December, her mother telephoned her to say that her grandmother had died. Mrs Pragnall did not tell her daughter any details of the circumstances of the death. She first learned of the circumstances from her brother, Mr John Pragnall, in September 2001, when the family had seen the Inquiry's advertisement. In her initial letter to the Inquiry, received on 10th
September 2001, Mrs Savill said, '... when all this arose I myself did have concerns about my gran's death', although what she meant by 'when all this arose' is unclear.
Mrs Savill set out the account of events she was given by her brother. She said:
'Apparently on the morning of 20th
December 1979, Gran had been unwell. Mum had been very concerned and she had walked into Hyde to Shipman's surgery and asked him to visit. She then did some shopping in Hyde for Gran and returned to Gran's flat to unpack the shopping for her. Mum went home and prepared lunch for Gran, Dad and herself. She took a cooked meal to Gran's and then returned to her own house and had lunch with Dad. While Mum and Dad were having lunch, Shipman came to Mum's house and told her that Gran had passed away. Mum went to Gran's flat and found Gran dead sat in an armchair in her lounge'
.
In his supplemental statement, Mr John Pragnall says that he does not remember having that conversation with Mrs Savill. Further, he does not remember his mother telling him that Mrs Campbell had been unwell when she had visited on the morning of 20th
December or that she had asked Shipman to visit. Mr John Pragnall says that neither he nor his father was present when Shipman called at the house to tell Mrs Pragnall of the death.
Mrs Herod remembers her mother telephoning her between 3pm and 4pm on 20th
December to tell her of her grandmother's death. Mrs Herod was very shocked by the news. She says that, at the funeral, her mother told her that Shipman had come to the house to say that he had found Mrs Campbell dead in her armchair. She said that Shipman's explanation was that Mrs Campbell had choked on a piece of sausage and would have not have been in any pain. Mrs Herod remembers her mother saying that Mrs Campbell had eaten all her lunch.
Mr George William Pragnall recalls that his mother telephoned to inform him of the death. He now recalls that, at the funeral, his mother told him that Mrs Campbell had died of hypothermia. This came as a surprise to him because whenever he had visited, his grandmother's flat was always warm.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that Mrs Campbell had died on 20th
December 1978 at the age of 88. He said that, he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not take place and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 20th
December 1978.
Conclusion
The evidence of Mrs Campbell's family members is not entirely consistent. Given the passage of time, this is understandable. The only person who had contact with Shipman on the day of the death was Mrs Pragnall and she has since died. I remind myself that I must be cautious before accepting hearsay evidence as accurate, especially when it relates to events which occurred over 20 years ago. I am inclined to attach greater weight to the evidence of Mr George Pragnall than to that of his children. He was more closely involved with the event.
It is clear that Shipman came to Mrs Campbell's house on the day of her death. Whether he visited in response to a request made by Mrs Pragnall or as a matter of routine does not greatly matter. I am inclined to think that his visit was routine because, if Mrs Campbell had been ill, I think it likely that Mrs Pragnall would have told her husband and the death would not have come as so much of a surprise as it appears to have done. Even if Mrs Campbell was unwell that morning, I do not think she can have been suffering from any worrying symptoms, such as chest pain. Otherwise Mrs Pragnall would not have left her alone, as I am satisfied that she did.
I accept Mr Pragnall's evidence that Shipman called at the Pragnall home to say that he had found Mrs Campbell dead. That in itself is a highly suspicious circumstance. Either Shipman killed Mrs Campbell or she died naturally in the quite short interval between Mrs Pragnall's departure, after which Mrs Campbell apparently ate her lunch, and Shipman's arrival. That is of course possible, although something of a coincidence. An elderly woman such as Mrs Campbell could die quite suddenly from cardiac causes without any warning. As there are no medical records, I am unable to assess the extent of Mrs Campbell's risk of such a sudden death. However, this kind of coincidence seemed to occur very frequently in Shipman's professional career. Knowing what is now known about Shipman, I think it is far more likely that Shipman found Mrs Campbell alone and took the opportunity to kill her than that he found her dead.
It is slightly strange that Shipman stated on the MCCD counterfoil that he saw Mrs Campbell alive on the day of her death, as well as seeing the body afterwards. This is not consistent with the story that he found her dead when he arrived. It would, however, be typical of one of his favoured explanations for a death which he had caused, namely that he had arrived to find the patient breathing her last. I am always suspicious in cases where Shipman has seen the patient alive on the day of the death. Unless there is eyewitness evidence of the time or times of his visit or visits, I cannot tell whether he has been present at the death. In the present case, I suspect that there was only one visit and that Shipman's official account, which he would have advanced on cremation Form B had there been one, was that he had found Mrs Campbell close to death, exhibiting symptoms from which he was able to diagnose that the cause of death was a coronary thrombosis.
The close temporal link between Shipman's presence at the flat and Mrs Campbell's sudden death persuades me that he was responsible for her death.
The position in which Mrs Campbell was found, sitting upright in a chair, is not typical of that seen in deaths due to coronary thrombosis but is typical of that in which many of Shipman's victims were found.
Notwithstanding the lack of direct evidence and the loss of the medical records, I feel able to say that I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Campbell.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001