The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX C - Chronological List of Deaths Considered
>
Phyllis Cooling
Introduction
Mrs Phyllis Cooling died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 1st
June 1972 at the age of 58. She had been admitted only a few hours before her death. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was ventilatory failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. At the time of Mrs Cooling’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer (SHO) in medicine.
Mrs Cooling’s two sons, Mr Anthony Cooling and Mr Gerald Cooling, have both provided witness statements. Mrs Cooling’s hospital records are no longer available. There was no post-mortem examination. Mrs Cooling was buried, so there is no cremation documentation.
Both of Mrs Cooling’s sons have always had concerns about the circumstances of their mother’s death. Not only did they regard it as sudden but they also learned on the day of her death that she had been given an injection. Mr Anthony Cooling, at least, has always been of the view that his mother’s death was caused by the giving of this injection. The brothers learned that Shipman had certified the cause of their mother’s death only when they were informed of this by the Inquiry.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Cooling was a widow. She lived in her own home in Pontefract. Mr Anthony Cooling lived with his mother after he left the Army in May 1971. Mr Gerald Cooling lived in Bolton and used to see his mother every fortnight. Both sons recollect that their mother enjoyed very good health. Although she suffered from arthritis, neither was aware of any other health problems, although it does appear that, at least towards the end of her life, she began to suffer from respiratory problems. She smoked cigarettes, although, according to her sons, not many. About three weeks before she died, Mrs Cooling began to feel unwell and developed a productive cough, which her sons say was like
‘a smoker’s cough’
. It appears that it was on account of this cough that she was admitted to hospital.
The Day of the Death
On 1st
June 1972, Mr Anthony Cooling asked his mother’s general practitioner (GP) to come out to see her. By chance, when the GP arrived, Mr Gerald Cooling was also present. After examining Mrs Cooling, the GP said that he would admit her to PGI for tests. At about 11am, Mrs Cooling was taken to PGI by ambulance. Mr Anthony Cooling accompanied his mother and Mr Gerald Cooling travelled separately.
On arrival at the hospital, Mrs Cooling was taken to the ward (this will have been Ward 1, the female medical ward), where her sons spoke to a ward sister. The ward sister confirmed that Mrs Cooling was to have some tests. She also explained the visiting times. Nothing was said or done to suggest that there were any serious concerns about Mrs Cooling’s immediate wellbeing. On the ward, Mrs Cooling was sitting in a chair, talking to a woman in the next bed. Her sons left her shortly before lunch, arranging to return that evening with some fresh fruit and Lucozade.
Mrs Cooling’s sons arrived back home at about noon. At about 2pm, two policemen visited the house and told them to attend the hospital immediately. When they arrived on the ward, an Indian woman, whom they believed to be a doctor, informed them that their mother was dead. They were told that she had been given an injection but that she had not responded to it; she had died peacefully. Mr Anthony Cooling asked why his mother had been given an injection but the doctor said that it was not she who had given it and that she could not answer his question at that time. The two sons were then shown the body. Some time later, in an office on the ward, they saw the Indian woman again and she asked if they had any questions. Again, Mr Anthony Cooling asked about the injection but again she said that she had not given the injection and could not explain why it had been given. Mr Anthony Cooling asked to see the doctor who had given the injection but was told that he was not available at that time. Then, the possibility of having a post-mortem examination was discussed. Mr Anthony Cooling was in favour but Mr Gerald Cooling found the idea very distressing and it was decided not to ask for one. Neither son recollects that there was any reference to reporting the death to the coroner. The Inquiry has been unable to identify the Indian woman who spoke to Mrs Cooling’s sons although there were a number of female Indian doctors who worked at the hospital and it is possible that one of these was providing cover for the medical wards on this occasion.
Certification
Mr Anthony Cooling recalls going back to the hospital to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and his mother’s belongings. He only visited the hospital medical records office and did not see a doctor or a nurse. He registered the death on 2nd
June. Since Shipman’s name appeared on the death certificate, he must have signed the MCCD. He certified that the death was due to ventilatory failure, due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. It is likely that Shipman was the doctor who examined Mrs Cooling on admission to the ward. It is also likely that it would have been Shipman who was responsible for any treatment given to Mrs Cooling soon after admission, including any injection.
Conclusion
In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to discover the nature or gravity of Mrs Cooling’s medical condition at the time of her admission to hospital. In the absence of witness evidence or cremation forms, nothing is known about the immediate circumstances of the death. It is clear, however, that her death was sudden and wholly unexpected to her sons. Whatever had happened, the death should have been reported to the coroner, if only because Mrs Cooling had been in hospital for only about two hours. There may have been another reason why the death should have been reported to the coroner. The Indian doctor who spoke to Mrs Cooling’s sons said that Mrs Cooling
‘had not responded’
to the injection. I find that an odd expression. If Mrs Cooling had been on the verge of death and the treatment had failed to save her life, one might say that she had not responded to the treatment. However, there was no suggestion that Mrs Cooling was on the verge of death when admitted. It is clear that the Indian doctor knew that an injection had been given and that it had been closely associated with the death. I think it likely that she knew that the injection had caused the death but believed that whatever drug had been given had been administered in good faith. I think the expression
‘had not responded’
was a euphemism and that what she really thought was that the injection had had unforeseen and tragic results. Such a death should have been reported to the coroner. Yet, it is clear that Shipman was prepared to certify the cause of death. He plainly should not have done. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, I believe that Shipman sometimes sought to avoid reporting a death to the coroner in cases where he had not been guilty of any criminal activity, possibly for selfish financial reasons or so as to avoid the need for further formalities. However, on this occasion, the need for a report was so obvious that it appears to me likely that Shipman had a pressing reason not to report the death. I think it likely that Shipman did not wish his actions to be scrutinised at an inquest.
The causes for concern in this case are, therefore, as follows. First, Shipman must have been involved in the treatment of Mrs Cooling before her death; otherwise he would not have been in a position to certify the cause of death. I infer that it was probably Shipman who gave the injection that preceded death. Second, Shipman certified the death when it ought clearly to have been reported to the coroner. Third, by this time, Shipman had been the SHO on the medical wards for four months and, during that time, I am satisfied that he had killed at least three patients, possibly more. These factors give rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have killed Mrs Cooling.
However, just because Shipman wished to avoid an inquest is not to say that he had killed Mrs Cooling deliberately. If Mrs Cooling was suffering from breathlessness when she was admitted, it would have been standard treatment at PGI for her to be given an injection of aminophylline. That drug should be administered very slowly by the intravenous route. It is well recognised that there is a small risk that, even if given properly, the drug can cause irregularity of the heartbeat which can be fatal. Collapse and death can occur almost immediately. It is said that the patient dies ‘on the end of the needle’. This risk is much increased if the drug is given too quickly. It is quite possible that Mrs Cooling’s death resulted from an injection of aminophylline, given either in good faith at a proper rate or carelessly or recklessly at too fast a rate. The Inquiry has received evidence of an occasion when Shipman gave an injection too quickly and caused the collapse of the patient. It is possible that Mrs Cooling was the patient involved on that occasion. To a large extent, this is speculation, but the explanation I have suggested would readily explain why Shipman would have wished to avoid a coroner’s inquest; even if he had acted in good faith, he would have faced potential criticism.
There is another factor that militates against the conclusion that Shipman deliberately killed Mrs Cooling. I have formed the impression that, during this period, Shipman was more likely to kill a patient whose death was inevitable than one who had reasonable prospects of recovering and leaving hospital. The evidence of her sons suggests that Mrs Cooling was not seriously ill and had every prospect of receiving successful treatment. Although this factor is not determinative, in my view, it shifts the balance slightly towards the conclusion that the death was more likely to have been the result of an error on Shipman’s part rather than an act done with the intention to kill.
That said, the probability is that Mrs Cooling died soon after being given an injection by Shipman. In the light of my findings that he had already killed at least three patients at PGI and was to become a prolific killer, some suspicion must attach to the circumstances of this death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001