The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Thomas Cullumbine
Introduction
Mr Thomas Cullumbine died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 12th
April 1972 at the age of 54. He had been readmitted to PGI on 8th
April 1972, shortly after two earlier admissions. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was ventilatory failure due to emphysema. Congestive heart failure was said to be a secondary cause of death. At the time of the death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Cullumbine’s daughter-in-law, Mrs Vivienne Mary Cullumbine, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Cullumbine’s daughter, Mrs Marjorie Tetley, and from his son, Mr Dennis Cullumbine. The Inquiry has also had access to the surviving hospital records. Mr Cullumbine was buried and so there are no cremation forms. No post-mortem examination was performed. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents, which give him cause for serious concern.
Mrs Tetley has never felt any concern about her father’s death. Mr Dennis Cullumbine, on the other hand, told the Inquiry that, although he had never suspected foul play, he had always thought that the death had happened extremely suddenly. To put it in Mr Dennis Cullumbine’s own words, he had always felt that his father had
‘had a few more years left in him’
.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Cullumbine had worked as a bus driver and as a lorry driver but he had a long history of respiratory illness and he was unable to work beyond his late 40s. He and his wife had four children. At the time of his death, Mrs Tetley was 31 years of age and Mr Dennis Cullumbine was 35.
Mrs Tetley and Mr Dennis Cullumbine both speak of Mr Cullumbine’s strong character. It appears that he had a mistrust of the medical profession and that he would often refuse to comply with medical advice. He would not willingly go to hospital if he could avoid it. From their descriptions, it is clear that Mr Cullumbine must have been a difficult patient.
Admission to Hospital
The hospital records confirm a long history of chronic bronchitis and emphysema. About a month before he died, on 14th
March 1972, Mr Cullumbine was admitted to PGI with an exacerbation of his chronic bronchitis, which was treated with antibiotics, prednisolone and aminophylline. The first entry to be made by Shipman in Mr Cullumbine’s medical notes was dated 17th
March. Shipman recorded that Mr Cullumbine was complaining constantly of
‘a multiplicity of symptoms’
. He noted that Mr Cullumbine had complained of sleeplessness and yet he, Shipman, had seen him asleep while on the ward in the early hours. He observed that, despite his breathlessness, Mr Cullumbine was constantly up, looking for cigarettes. Shipman’s note displays clear signs of irritation, even hostility, towards Mr Cullumbine.
Mr Cullumbine was next seen by Shipman on 21st
March, when Shipman noted that the
‘bed situation’
was very tight. It appears that it was suggested to Mr Cullumbine that he should be transferred to another hospital but he refused and discharged himself. He was readmitted only two days later at the request of his general practitioner. Shipman made the admission note this time. The patient was unwell with a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, poor air entry to the lungs and widespread noises in the chest. Peak flow rate was recorded as 70 litres per minute, which is very low. Treatment was with prednisone, Lasix, Slow-K tablets, Alupent and salbutamol.
Over the course of the next two weeks, Mr Cullumbine was seen by various doctors. Air entry remained poor. Otherwise, the notes reveal very little. It appears that Mr Cullumbine discharged himself, against medical advice, on 7th
April. He was readmitted on 8th
April and the admitting doctor (not Shipman) made a full note. Mr Cullumbine was complaining of tightness in the chest and difficulty in getting his breath. His daughter-in-law, who was with him, reported that he was having panic attacks and outbursts of temper which aggravated his breathlessness. On examination, he was restless, agitated and complaining. He had an unproductive cough, difficulty in breathing out, mild cyanosis and mild oedema at the ankles. Blood pressure was difficult to measure but appeared to be on the high side. There was raised jugular venous pressure; the pulse rate was raised at 95 beats per minute but heart sounds appeared normal and perfusion was good. Air entry was poor on both sides. There were a few scattered expiratory rhonchi and a few crepitations at the bases of the lungs. The expiratory phase of breathing was prolonged. The doctor’s impression was that Mr Cullumbine had chronic bronchitis and emphysema. His symptoms were aggravated by psychogenic factors. He had mild right-sided heart failure. He was to be treated with aminophylline, prednisolone, Alupent, salbutamol, Valium and oxygen.
The medical notes for 10th
April, which were made by a doctor other than Shipman, record tachycardia and oedema of the ankles. On that day Shipman wrote up prescriptions for digoxin, Lasix and Slow-K tablets. The following day, the notes (again not made by Shipman) record congestive heart failure, ankle oedema, raised jugular venous pressure, the heart in triple rhythm and a pulse rate of 130 beats per minute. The drugs prescribed the previous day were crossed out. These records suggest that Mr Cullumbine was not improving; if anything he was deteriorating. The nursing note for 10th
April describes him as poorly with a very weak pulse and tachycardia. He was taking oxygen as necessary. On 11th
April, he was described as being
‘very ill’
and the nursing notes record that, on the night of 11th
to 12th
April, relatives stayed all night but Mr Cullumbine rested quite well and was much
‘quieter’
in the morning.
The Day of the Death
Mr Dennis Cullumbine’s recollection is that he visited his father during the afternoon of Wednesday, 12th
April and found him reasonably well. His father was asleep and was not taking oxygen. He thinks that he heard of the death from his wife at about 5pm or 6pm that day. Mrs Tetley cannot recall the exact time at which she learned of the death. She was unwell at the time. The hospital records suggest that Mr Cullumbine died shortly before midnight and Mr Dennis Cullumbine accepts that his recollection of the timings may be mistaken.
The hospital records for the day of the death suggest that Shipman was responsible for Mr Cullumbine’s care. The first entry of the day, apparently made during a ward round, confirms the presence of symptoms of congestive heart failure, including raised jugular venous pressure. Shipman’s note is comparable to notes made by medical colleagues during ward rounds on previous days. The nursing note for the afternoon says that Mr Cullumbine remained very ill but was fully conscious. He was breathless and oxygen was given as needed. It was recorded that relatives visited but, apparently, they did not stay the night. The visit by relatives in the afternoon accords with the recollection of Mr Dennis Cullumbine. I infer from the fact that the relatives did not stay the night that it was not thought that Mr Cullumbine’s death was imminent.
At some time on 12th
April, Shipman prescribed 10mg morphine for Mr Cullumbine. The prescription chart shows that it was to be given intramuscularly by way of
‘stat’
(once and for all) dose when required. The medical notes for 12th
April contain a series of six entries, all of them made by Shipman. They culminate in a record of Mr Cullumbine’s death. There are ‘crossings out’ in these entries. The words are not simply struck through; they are crossed out so as to conceal what had first been written. Knowing what I now know about Shipman, this detailed account with deletions causes me to be suspicious that what is written does not reflect what actually happened. The entries are as follows:
‘2230 hr - pt cyanosed not well
given 80mg Lasix IV
500mg aminophylline
very
slowly 10 minutes
+
2300 hr pt seems settled somnolent
2310 hr restless given 250mg aminophylline slowly
(
Some words have been crossed out with the words
‘250mg aminophylline slowly’
written above; it appears that the words crossed out could include the word ‘morphine’
)
2330 hr settled well sleeping BP 130/90
pulse 100/m reg
2340 hr
(
text, possibly the word ‘restless’, crossed out
)
gradually stopped breathing
pt died
2340 hr. Cause of death
12/4/72
1a ventricular failure
b
(
text crossed out
)
Emphysema
2 C.H.F.
HFShipman’
(
signed
)
As I have mentioned, the prescription chart for Mr Cullumbine includes a prescription for 10mg morphine to be given as and when required. The first section of deleted text could have contained the word
‘morphine’
, suggesting that Shipman might have written that he gave morphine at 23.10 and not the second dose of aminophylline. No aminophylline was prescribed on 12th
April.
By contrast with Shipman’s detailed notes, the nursing records relating to Mr Cullumbine suggest that no nurse was called to the bedside or involved in the giving of treatment during the late evening of 12th
April. This seems very strange to me as the evidence received by the Inquiry is that a nurse would certainly be in attendance if a patient deteriorated and died as described by Shipman. Not only was that the practice at PGI, it would be usual practice everywhere. Also, if the patient deteriorated so that death was imminent, it would be usual to summon the family. That was not done; the family was not contacted until after the death.
Medical Evidence
According to Professor Baker, it is clear that Mr Cullumbine was seriously ill with chronic bronchitis, emphysema and congestive heart failure. He describes Shipman’s management of Mr Cullumbine’s last moments as
‘curious’
. Although aminophylline was routinely used in the 1970s to treat bronchospasm, it had to be used with care because it had the potential to disturb the heart rhythm, sometimes with fatal consequences. Although the usual dose would be about 250mg given slowly intravenously, Shipman records having given three times that dosage within a 40 minute period. This could have been enough to cause death. Although Shipman records that Mr Cullumbine fell asleep after the second injection, this would be unlikely in someone very short of breath, according to Professor Baker. The sequence of events is, according to Professor Baker, consistent with death following the intravenous administration of a lethal dose of morphine. The fact that Shipman prescribed morphine (and might originally have written that he gave morphine) raises in Professor Baker’s mind the possibility that Shipman administered a lethal dose of morphine. The fact that this death occurred late in the evening gives rise to additional concern in Professor Baker’s mind.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that, at the time of his admission on 8th
April 1972, Mr Cullumbine was suffering quite severe respiratory illness. It appears that his condition did not improve thereafter and probably became worse. On the night of 11th
April, it seems that there may have been concern for his life, as some members of the family stayed with him. Shipman was on duty on 12th
April and appears to have been in charge of Mr Cullumbine’s treatment. It seems that the family was given the impression that Mr Cullumbine’s life was not in immediate danger. Yet, he died late that evening, in Shipman’s presence.
Shipman entered an elaborate account of the decline before death in the medical records. I have formed the view that that account was probably false. First, if Mr Cullumbine had deteriorated as Shipman claimed, it would be usual for a nurse to be present with the doctor who was giving treatment. If a nurse had been present, I would have expected a note to have been made in the nursing records. The nursing records contain no description of the deterioration leading to the death. I infer that there was no nurse present and that Shipman was alone with the patient before the death. Shipman not only had the opportunity to kill Mr Cullumbine but was also free to write a false account of his death. Second, Shipman’s elaborate note of Mr Cullumbine’s decline towards death and the treatment he claims to have administered is reminiscent of entries that he made later in the notes of patients he had killed. I am particularly suspicious of the deletions and the way in which he stressed that aminophylline had been given
‘
very slowly
’
. Third, I suspect that Shipman did not give aminophylline at all, although he claimed to have given two separate injections of it. No aminophylline was prescribed that day. The last prescription for that drug was written up by Dr Bowden on 8th
April. The only drug Shipman prescribed on 12th
April, was 10mg morphine. I think it likely that Shipman wrote in the medical record that he had given 10mg morphine at 23.10hrs but then deleted the reference to morphine and substituted aminophylline.
A further cause for concern is Shipman’s unconcealed irritation with Mr Cullumbine. In the First Report, I drew attention to the fact that Shipman sometimes killed patients who had irritated or annoyed him in some way. One example was Miss Beatrice Clee, about whom I have added some further relevant information in
Appendix E
to this Report.
Finally, I feel some suspicion that Shipman may have been responsible for ensuring that Mr Cullumbine’s family did not stay with him on the night of 12th
April, although they had stayed throughout the previous night.
For all these reasons, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mr Cullumbine. I think it likely that he did so by giving morphine intravenously. Although 10mg morphine would not usually be a lethal dose, it would be lethal for a patient such as Mr Cullumbine, with severely compromised respiratory function. I think it very likely that, even with the best of treatment, Mr Cullumbine would have died quite soon; he was very poorly and seemed to be deteriorating. In later years, Shipman is known to have hastened the deaths of patients whose quality of life was poor and for whom there was no real prospect of recovery.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001