The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ann Cartwright
Introduction
Mrs Ann Cartwright died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Saturday, 27th
May 1972 at the age of 88. It appears likely that she was admitted to PGI about three days before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was
‘carcinoma of lung’
. At the time of Mrs Cartwright’s death Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mrs Cartwright’s daughter, Miss Mary Cartwright, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’) but she died about four years ago. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Colin Cartwright, Mrs Cartwright’s great nephew and possibly her last surviving relative. Statements have also been taken from a friend of Miss Cartwright, Mr Ian Walker, and from Mrs Linda Byford, who was at the time a junior nursing sister on the ward. Mrs Cartwright’s medical records are no longer available. Her body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Cartwright was a widow. Mr Cartwright did not see her or Miss Cartwright very often and did not see Mrs Cartwright for at least several months before her death. He recalls that she lived independently at home and seemed to enjoy good health. Little is known about her personal background or medical history. In the late 1970s or early 1980s, Mr Walker, who is a builder, befriended Miss Cartwright after doing some building work for her. She occasionally spoke to him about her mother but she never expressed any concerns about the circumstances of her death.
Mr Cartwright has told the Inquiry that he has spoken to his own mother and others who he thought might be able to provide information about Mrs Cartwright’s death. He says that no one recollects that she had cancer. In my view, that does not mean that the death was not due to cancer. In the 1970s, it was not at all uncommon for people to conceal the fact that a person was suffering from cancer or had died from it.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Nothing is known about the circumstances of Mrs Cartwright’s admission to PGI.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mrs Cartwright died at
‘1130hr’
on 27th
May. This is also the time of death stated on Form A, which was signed by Miss Cartwright. It appears that that was her understanding of the time of death and it is probably correct. Shipman recorded that he had attended Mrs Cartwright during her last illness for a period of three days and that he had last seen Mrs Cartwright alive on 27th
May. He said that he saw the body immediately after death and made a
‘complete’
examination of it. He recorded the cause of death as
‘carcinoma of lung with multiple secondary deposits’
. The mode of death was recorded as coma of
‘2-3 hours’
duration; this was said to be on the basis of his own observations. Sister Byford was said to have nursed Mrs Cartwright in her final illness. Shipman recorded that he was present at the moment of death and mentioned no one else as having been present. Mrs Byford has no recollection of the death, which is not surprising given the passage of time.
Mr Leighton Craig Bell, consultant on the surgical wards, completed Form C. He said that that he questioned Shipman and Sister Byford. Mr Bell has been contacted by telephone and he has no recollection of Mrs Cartwright’s death. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
The witnesses in this case, who have only a remote connection with Mrs Cartwright, have provided helpful, but inevitably limited, evidence. As I have suggested, it is quite possible that Mrs Cartwright was suffering from lung cancer with secondary deposits and that this did not become known either to her or to those treating her until around the time of her death. It may be that her daughter became aware of it and chose not to discuss it. I find myself unable to say whether Mrs Cartwright did suffer from that condition, but it is certainly likely that she did. It is highly improbable that Shipman would openly record that Mrs Cartwight had cancer if in fact she did not. Whether she did or did not, however, does not answer the question whether or not Shipman played any sinister role in her death.
The only reason to suspect that Shipman might have had a hand in causing Mrs Cartwright’s death is that he implied on cremation Form B that he was alone with her at the time of the death. It is unusual for a doctor to be present at the death of a patient and most unusual for one to be alone with the patient at the moment of death. Yet Shipman often said that he was alone with dying patients. However, this factor alone is not sufficient for me to say that I am suspicious about his involvement in the death. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, Shipman had a very cavalier attitude towards his duties of certification. I consider that it is quite possible that others were present at the death but that he either chose not to mention their presence or simply did not take the trouble to do so. Also, the time when Mrs Cartwright died was a busy time on the ward when the opportunity for Shipman to act unobserved would be less than at other times of the day.
The evidence in this case is so limited that I am afraid that I am unable to express any concluded view about Shipman’s involvement in Mrs Cartwright’s death.
I very much regret that the Inquiry has had to make these enquiries so many years after the death, and I am sorry for the disturbance this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001