The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Lorna Dean
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Lorna Dean died at her home, 4 Wood Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
January 1997 at the age of 69. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1977, and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Dean's death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in October 1998 and, after a preliminary investigation, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police took statements from Mrs Patricia Mellish (Mrs Dean's daughter), Mr Steven Mellish (her son-in-law), Mrs Kathleen Hague (her sister), Mrs Patricia Lester (her friend), Mr George Lester Moores and Mr James Hadfield (her neighbours) and Mr Arthur Sneath (her former partner). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Dean, but an inquest was held on 13th
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Mellish and Mrs Hague and has also had access to Mrs Dean's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Mellish says that her mother was fit and healthy for her age. She was full of life and very active. Dr Grenville, who has examined the medical records, says that it appears that Mrs Dean had been a reasonably fit and healthy woman. She had had some musculo-skeletal problems, partly due to trauma and partly due to arthritis. She had undergone an operation for a prolapsed uterus and in 1985 had a small tumour removed from her bowel.
Mrs Dean stayed with her daughter's family over Christmas 1996. She left on New Year's Eve to spend the evening in New Mills with other members of her family. She drove herself from South Cheshire to New Mills, despite severe snowy weather. She was dancing that evening. She stayed overnight at her sister's home in Hazel Grove. She went to a pantomime on New Year's Day and then returned home. When Mrs Mellish spoke to her mother on 2nd
January, Mrs Dean said that her ankle was hurting.
By Monday, 6th
January, Mrs Dean had developed a chest infection. She telephoned Mrs Lester and asked her to do some shopping for her. She said that she was waiting for the doctor to call. Mrs Lester arrived at Mrs Dean's house at about 5pm. The doctor had visited and had left a prescription, which Mrs Lester collected from the chemist. When Mrs Lester left that evening, she did not have the impression that Mrs Dean was seriously ill, rather that she 'just did not feel 100 per cent'. The surgery visits book confirms that Shipman was to visit Mrs Dean that day.
There are three computerised entries in Mrs Dean's medical records for 6th
January. These describe a history of viral illness for which the antibiotic Amoxil and the cough suppressant pholcodine were prescribed. That is slightly odd, as an antibiotic will have no beneficial effect on a virus. However, perhaps Shipman might have thought there was a possibility of a bacterial infection as well. In any event, there is no record of any findings on examination relating to this illness. An ankle sprain is also described on this date and this is said to involve the left Achilles tendon, which was tender. Strapping was prescribed plus an anti-inflammatory drug. According to Detective Sergeant Ashley, these entries were made at about 3pm on 6th
January, which is what would be expected if Shipman had visited Mrs Dean in the interval between the morning and afternoon surgeries.
At about 5.30pm to 5.45pm on 7th
January 1997, Mr Hadfield saw Mrs Dean standing on her doorstep talking to a lady. He went across and spoke to her. She said that she had a bit of a cold and was going to settle down to watch television. She looked quite well.
There is one computerised entry in the medical records relating to 7th
January 1997 but no handwritten entry. This records that Mrs Dean was suffering from influenza with bronchopneumonia. There was a comment, which reads:
'cont
(
inue
)
rx
(
treatment
)
tluk if gets worse'
. Dr Grenville noted that this entry had been made at 5.04pm at which time Shipman would usually be busy with the evening surgery. Dr Grenville considered that this would be a slightly strange time to create a routine note of what (if it occurred at all) appears to have been a follow-up visit initiated by the doctor. I say 'if it occurred' for two reasons. First, there is no entry for that day in the visits book and second, the computerised records do not contain an administrative entry saying 'seen in own home' which was usual where Shipman was recording a home visit. Mrs Dean's name does not appear in the appointments sheet for that day.
The Day of the Death
At about 1.30pm on Wednesday, 8th
January 1997, Mr Mellish received a telephone call from Shipman who told him that he had paid a routine visit to see Mrs Dean and found her dead. When Mr Mellish asked Shipman how he had gained access to the house, Shipman said that the door had not been locked. Mr and Mrs Mellish regarded that as strange as Mrs Dean was usually very meticulous about security. Mrs Mellish telephoned Shipman and told him that she did not know that her mother had been ill. Shipman said that Mrs Dean had started with a chest infection, which had turned to pneumonia overnight. Mrs Mellish arranged to go to the house, and asked her uncle who lived much nearer to go round pending her arrival. When she arrived, she found her mother, sitting in the middle of her two-seater sofa. There was a quilt over her lower half. She was wearing pyjamas, a dressing gown and slippers. Her head was tilted back against the sofa and her glasses were on her forehead. There was a little mucus at the corner of her mouth. She looked comfortable and peaceful.
There are three entries in the computerised records for 8th
January 1997 but there is no handwritten note. These record that Mrs Dean was dead, that she was found dead at 3.15pm, that her daughter was contacted, and that Mrs Dean was seated on the sofa with the fire on and her duvet over her and that rigor mortis had set in. It was recorded that a death certificate was issued and that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. These entries were created at about 4.45pm on 8th
January 1997. Dr Grenville considers that it would be reasonable to enter these notes during a gap in the evening surgery.
The Aftermath
Shipman spoke to Mrs Mellish the next day and gave an account of what had happened. He said that Mrs Dean had been to see him in the surgery. She told him she had a bad ankle but then he discovered that she had a chest infection. He had advised her that she should go into hospital but she had refused. He said that it was not unusual for elderly people to succumb to influenza in the winter. Mrs Mellish observed that her mother was only 69 and very fit. Shipman admitted that patients who died were usually in their eighties but said that it was an unusually virulent bug. Mrs Mellish trusted Shipman and accepted his explanation.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Dean alive on 7th
January 1997, and that she had been suffering from bronchopneumonia for four days before her death. The surgery visits book does not contain an entry relating to a visit on 7th
January. If the evidence of Mrs Lester and Mr Hadfield is right, Mrs Dean did not have bronchopneumonia for four days before death, as she was up and about until at least 5.30pm on 7th
January.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Dean had died at about 3am on 8th
January 1997 and, consistent with the MCCD, he said that he had last seen her alive about 12 hours earlier, i.e. in the mid-afternoon of 7th
January 1997. He said that he saw the body about 12 hours after the death, which would be in the mid-afternoon of 8th January. He said that the cause of death was bronchopneumonia, death being preceded by a coma of six to nine hours' duration. As no one had been present at the moment of death, it is difficult to see how he could have known that. He said that Mrs Dean had been seen by her neighbour at
'1900hrs'
and had been found dead
'by neighbour about 1400 hrs
next day'
. The first of these statements could be true in that Mr Hadfield might have seen Mrs Dean a little later than 5.45pm, his estimate when interviewed by the police in October 1998. However, when he saw her, she was not even approaching a comatose state. The statement that Mrs Dean was found by a neighbour at 2pm on 8th
January must be untrue. Shipman told Mr and Mrs Mellish that he had found her himself.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has observed that even an experienced forensic pathologist would have been unable to determine the time of Mrs Dean's death with any degree of accuracy. The best Shipman would have been able to do would be to suggest a window of several hours within which he thought death had occurred. To estimate the time of death with any degree of accuracy, he would have had to take the rectal temperature, which he clearly had not done. Mrs Dean's body had not been disturbed. Thus, it was not possible for Shipman to say that the death occurred at 3am. Dr Grenville said that it would also be impossible for Shipman to state that the mode of death was a coma lasting between six to nine hours.
Dr Grenville also commented on an entry found in Mrs Dean's Lloyd George cards. These cards had not been used at all from 4th
October 1993 until January 1997. Why Shipman should suddenly have decided to make an entry by hand after so long is slightly mysterious. The only entry is dated either 6th
or 7th
January 1997. Both figures appear and it is not possible to say which has been written first. The note reads:
'Cough phlegm green
A/E
(
an arrow is shown, indicating downwards
)
Very dyspnoeic creps/rhonchi
strain (L) achilles tendon.
Amoxycillin/ Pholcodine
Diclofenac'
.
The reference to the strain of the left Achilles tendon and the prescription of amoxycillin, pholcodine and diclofenac accord with the computerised record for 6th
January 1997, but the description of the examination seems to relate much more clearly to the computerised entry dated 7th
January 1997. According to the written entry, Mrs Dean was very breathless. Air entry was reduced and there were a variety of abnormal noises in her chest on auscultation. Such findings could certainly lead to diagnosis of influenza with bronchopneumonia, but would be far too severe to support a diagnosis of viral illness as noted in the computerised records of 6th
January. Dr Grenville says that if Mrs Dean's condition was as described in this note on 6th
January, and if she died of bronchopneumonia on 7th
or 8th
January, it is likely that her condition would have become steadily worse between the time of this examination and the time of her death, and it is unlikely that it would have fluctuated. Anyone seeing her during this time would have been clearly aware of severe breathlessness. Both Mrs Lester and Mr Hadfield, however, saw Mrs Dean after Shipman's visit on 6th
January and she did not seem to them particularly unwell.
Professor Richard Baker considered the medical records and the cremation certificate and found the case highly suspicious on the basis of both sets of documents. Professor Baker would not have been prepared to certify the death as due to bronchopneumonia. He observed that the records do not indicate a life-threatening respiratory infection. The patient was only 69 years old. If Shipman's records are correct, the least that could be said was that Mrs Dean had not been adequately treated.
Conclusion
In my view, this death is highly suspicious. First, it appears that Shipman has lied about his movements on 8th
January. Mr and Mrs Mellish both say that Shipman told them he had found Mrs Dean dead when making a routine visit. He had telephoned them at about 1.30pm to tell them of his discovery. However, on Form B, he says that a neighbour discovered the death. This was not true. That Shipman did not wish to admit that it was he who discovered the body must indicate that he wished to distance himself from the death. An intention to create the impression of an interval of time between his presence and the death is a common feature of many Shipman killings. It appears to me highly likely that Shipman did visit at about lunchtime on 8th
January. He must have gained access to the house, as he telephoned the Mellish number from there. Usually the door would have been locked. It seems to me that the likely explanation is that Mrs Dean was not dead when he arrived, that she let him in, that he killed her in his usual way and then telephoned her daughter.
This theory fits all the known facts. Mrs Dean was not seriously ill after Shipman's visit on the 6th
. Mrs Lester was not worried about her. Shipman created an entry in the computerised medical records, which suggested that she had a viral illness. However, there are no findings to support the diagnosis. Nor was Mrs Dean seriously ill when Mr Hadfield spoke to her on the doorstep in the early evening of 7th
January. Dr Grenville says that if she had been suffering from bronchopneumonia on 7th
January, as Shipman claimed, she would have been growing steadily more ill. It is inconceivable that she would not have contacted her daughter if she had felt ill. There is nothing in the evidence which convincingly supports Shipman's claim to have visited on the 7th
. However, by the evening of the 7th
, he had created a record on the computer, which implied that he had seen her. Yet its terms were so vague as to be almost meaningless. The entries for the 6th
and 7th
taken together would just about adequately correspond with Mrs Dean's true condition, but would also provide Shipman with an explanation for her death if Shipman had the opportunity to kill her on the 8th
. That opportunity arose when Mrs Dean was alone when he visited on the 8th
January. Her peaceful appearance in death was entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims. After her death, Shipman's entries on the MCCD and Form B support a version of events (now seen to be untruthful) which he had previously decided to advance, namely that he had called on Mrs Dean on 6th
and 7th
January but not on the 8th
. The entry in the written records could have been written at any time and seems to be a mixture of the complaints Mrs Dean probably did make at the visit on the 6th
, combined with signs of a more serious situation not recorded anywhere on the computer.
I am driven to the conclusions, not only that Shipman killed Mrs Dean, but also that he planned to do so in advance. I think he laid his plans possibly on 6th
January but certainly by the late afternoon of 7th
January, when he made what I am sure was a false entry on the computer records. Like the coroner, I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Dean.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001