The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joan Edwina Dean
Introduction
Mrs Joan Edwina Dean died at her home, 58 Joel Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 27th
February 1998 at the age of 75. She had been a patient of Shipman for about two years at the time of her death, having transferred to his list from Donneybrook House. She thought highly of him, and the reason for her transfer was that she had friends who were patients of his and who thought well of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Dean's death was coronary thrombosis.
Mrs Dean's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in 1998. The police took statements from Mr Eric Brian Dean (her son), Mrs Harry Durose, Mrs Jean Primrose Hollows and Mr Peter John Bramall (her friends), Mr Andrew John Taylor and Mr Mark Andrew Kingwell Newton (a paramedic and student paramedic respectively with the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service), Police Sergeant Christopher John Gloster and PC Mark A Kelly (Greater Manchester Police officers), Mr Eugene Gilhooley of Healthcall (an out of hours duty doctor service) and Dr M A M Choudhury (a doctor with Healthcall). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Dean but an inquest was held on 30th
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered an open verdict.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Dean and Dr Choudhury. Statements have also been provided by Mrs Deborah Jayne Bambroffe (funeral director), PC Peter Napier (of the Greater Manchester Police and Acting Coroner's Liaison Officer for the Tameside Police Division), Detective Sergeant John Frederick Ashley (of the Greater Manchester Police computer examination unit), Mrs Janet Barlow (Mrs Dean's hairdresser), Mr Dennis Rowarth (her gardener) and Mr Brian Taylor, Mrs Lorna Smith and Miss Michelle Toft (former patients of Shipman). The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Dean's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a joint report from Dr Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without oral evidence.
Personal Background
Mrs Dean was not in frequent contact with her sons, one of whom lives in New Zealand, but she enjoyed a close friendship with Mr Durose and Mr Bramall, who were also the executors of her estate.
Mrs Dean enjoyed a busy social life and was fond of giving parties. She dressed well and liked good jewellery.
According to her friends, Mrs Dean enjoyed generally good health, although for several years she had been treated for high blood pressure. In the weeks and months before her death, her friends had noticed that she was becoming a little absent-minded.
The surgery computer records show that Mrs Dean had a family history of raised blood cholesterol levels. A series of consultations between June 1995 and December 1997 refer to routine monitoring of blood pressure, which was reasonably well controlled, and show the results of associated blood tests. According to Dr Grenville, the blood test results did not suggest increased risk factors but the raised blood pressure put Mrs Dean at a higher than normal risk of suffering a heart attack or stroke.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Friday, 27th
February 1998, Mrs Dean telephoned Mr Durose to discuss arrangements for that weekend. They were due to go to the theatre that evening.
At some time during the morning, Mrs Dean telephoned her hairdresser to rearrange her appointment. She usually had her hair done on Saturdays but on this occasion made an appointment for 4pm on the Friday afternoon.
Mrs Hollows had been a friend of Mrs Dean for more than 40 years. She told the police that Mrs Dean called at her house at about 11am for a coffee and a chat. Mrs Hollows says that Mrs Dean was well and full of life that morning. Mrs Dean said that she had an appointment at the Trustee Savings Bank at noon and she departed, in her car, a few minutes before that time. The bank has confirmed that Mrs Dean attended their Stalybridge branch and carried out three transactions, including the withdrawal of £200 in cash.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Dean on the day of her death. No eyewitness saw him at her house or saw his car in the vicinity. Shipman has never said or asserted in a document that he attended Mrs Dean that day. Mrs Dean's name does not appear in the surgery visits book or on the appointments sheet.
The appointments sheet and diary for 27th
February 1998 show that Shipman was not as busy as usual that day. He had only seven patients in the open surgery, which was scheduled to run from 10.15am until 11am. That was fewer than usual and he might have been able to finish on time. He would then usually do some administrative work before going out on his rounds, possibly at about 11.30am. He would have been required back in the surgery between 2pm and 3pm for the minor operations clinic. He would then be free to undertake visits until 4pm when the afternoon surgery began. There were only four names in the visits book and a note to attend Massey's funeral directors to complete Form C of a cremation certificate. An entry in the diary seemingly relating to lunch that day with a pharmaceuticals company representative in fact refers to an appointment for the previous day. I infer that Shipman probably had some spare time between 11.30am and 2pm and between 3pm and 4pm. Mrs Dean lived about one and a half miles from the surgery. It would have been feasible for him to visit her. I know that Shipman visited Mrs Monica Eddleston in Rufford Avenue in the morning and returned to her house at about 6pm on his way home.
Mrs Dean failed to keep her appointment at the hairdressers at 4pm. At 4.30pm, Mrs Barlow telephoned Mrs Dean's number but there was no reply. She rang periodically until closing time but there was still no answer. It seems that Mrs Dean was already dead.
Mr Bramall and Mr Durose arrived at Mrs Dean's house at about 7pm to take her to the theatre. There was no answer to their knock. A neighbour, Mr Ted Pickup, lent them his spare key and Mr Bramall and Mr Durose entered the house. They found Mrs Dean in the spare bedroom, lying on her back across the middle of the bed with her arms up. She had an expression of distress on her face. There was vomit around her mouth and on the bed. There was also vomit in the lounge downstairs, at the foot of the stairs, at the top of the stairs, at the doorway into the spare bedroom and within that room.
Mrs Dean was wearing black slacks and a black top. These were her working clothes, which she would not have worn outside the house.
Mr Bramall and Mr Durose called an ambulance. On arrival, the paramedics confirmed that Mrs Dean was dead. At 7.30pm, they requested the attendance of a doctor. On this evening, Shipman had passed all his calls to the on-call service at 5.50pm, earlier than usual. Dr Choudhury, the duty doctor, attended at 9.09pm and formed the view that the death was natural. Mr Durose recalls that Dr Choudhury said that he thought Mrs Dean had been dead 'for three or four hours or so'. The police were called. They took the view that the death was not suspicious and authorised the removal of the body to the mortuary at Tameside General Hospital.
Dr Choudhury made a note of his attendance in which he said that he examined the patient externally and found she was dead. That note was delivered to the surgery, probably arriving on Monday, 2nd March. On the reverse, there is a note in Shipman's writing which reads:
'CT.
BP
'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman was noting that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to her raised blood pressure.
The Aftermath
At about 8.30am on 28th
February, Mr Dean, Mrs Dean's son, called at Shipman's surgery. He had been informed of the death the night before. Shipman went to his computer and called up Mrs Dean's records. He said he had not attended the death on the Friday evening as a locum doctor was on duty. Shipman said that Mrs Dean had been complaining of dizziness and numbness in her joints. He had planned some surgical procedure to improve her circulation but she would have had to wait. This surprised Mr Dean, as his mother had private health insurance.
Mr Dean asked Shipman whether a post-mortem examination would be necessary. Shipman said that there would be no need for this. Mrs Dean had probably had a stroke. He said he would speak to the coroner about it on the Monday. Mr Dean thought this was odd because he thought a post-mortem examination would be needed.
Examination of the surgery computer has revealed that, at around 8.30am on 28th
February 1998, Shipman created three backdated entries in Mrs Dean's records. I shall describe these in greater detail below. For the moment, suffice it to say that they are plainly false and that they seek to create an impression that Mrs Dean was suffering from transient ischaemic attacks or mini-strokes. Shipman claimed that Mrs Dean had refused treatment and had refused to be referred to a specialist.
At 9.41am that morning, the surgery was informed by the duty doctor service that a doctor had been called out the night before and had found Mrs Dean dead. Dr Choudhury's note was sent later.
At some time between 9am and 10am, Mr Durose and Mr Bramall visited Shipman at the surgery. Shipman said that he had been very concerned about two incidents. He thought these might indicate that Mrs Dean was having minor blackouts or strokes. He said that he had been in the process of arranging for her to see a specialist, an account not inconsistent with his statement to Mr Dean and the backdated entries he had made a little earlier. Mrs Dean had said nothing to her friends about any such referral. Shipman also said that he had already seen the body at the mortuary. If the coroner agreed, there would be no need for a post-mortem examination. He hoped the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) would be ready for them on Monday, 2nd
March.
Shipman's claim that he had already seen the body is probably not true, as the body remained at the mortuary until Tuesday, 3rd
March, and the hospital porters say that they do not recall admitting Shipman to the mortuary at night. Mrs Bambroffe is adamant that Shipman viewed the body at Massey's funeral parlour after it had been brought from the mortuary. He would be unlikely to view it twice.
Fabricated Entries in the Medical Records
The surgery computer record shows three detailed entries dated 6th
January 1998, 30th
January 1998 and 13th
February 1998. These were all made at about 8.30am on 28th
February and are the backdated records to which I referred above. The first, entered at 8.27am, said:
'odd do felt dizzy arms legs weak all over in 2 min o/e nad ? tia ??'
.
I interpret this to suggest that Mrs Dean had reported an episode of dizziness with weakness of the arms and legs. It had lasted only minutes. On examination by Shipman he had detected nothing abnormal. He tentatively diagnosed a transient ischaemic attack.
For 30th
January, an entry made at 8.30am said:
'Slurred speech...
episode for 5 mins or so face felt funny first thing o/m now
ok chat ? ref no ? aspirin no will see how things develop'
.
I interpret this to suggest that Mrs Dean told Shipman that she had had an episode of slurred speech, lasting about five minutes. Her face had felt funny first thing in the morning but she was all right by the time she saw him. They chatted about a referral to a specialist but she refused. She also refused his suggestion that she should take aspirin. It had been left that they would see how she got on.
For 13th
February, an entry made at 8.32am on 28th
February said:
'Weakness symptoms
woke up felt l leg not hers by lunchtime ok o/e 130/80 hs 1
11 no bruit in neck cns looks ok / 1 plantar up/down
probably a tia advised aspirin to think re ref for opinion'
.
I interpret this to suggest that Mrs Dean gave Shipman a history of feeling, on waking, that her left leg did not belong to her. By lunchtime all was well. On examination he had found her blood pressure to be 130/80, which is normal, and heart sounds were normal, as were all signs in the central nervous system except for an abnormal reflex, which tended to suggest a transient ischaemic attack. He advised aspirin and she agreed to think about a referral for specialist opinion.
A history, such as this, of recurrent transient ischaemic attacks, would put the patient at high risk of suffering a cerebrovascular accident and so a sudden death would suggest that the probable cause was a cerebrovascular accident.
As I have said, these entries are plainly false. Dr Grenville also made the point that no busy doctor would be able to remember accurately the details of consultations occurring between two and eight weeks previously. I am left in doubt as to whether they were made just before or just after Mr Dean's visit. If they were made before his visit, Shipman, if not involved in Mrs Dean's death, would not then have been informed about the death through any usual channel. The inference would be that he already knew of Mrs Dean's death because he was involved in it. If the entries were made after Mr Dean's visit, which must have occurred very shortly after Shipman's arrival at the surgery, Shipman knew of the death when he made them. If he had not been present at the death, he made these entries at a time when he had only a second or third hand account of the death, given to him by Mr Dean who had not been to the house the previous evening.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. On it, he stated that he had last seen Mrs Dean alive on 13th
February and that he had seen the body after death. Both of those statements were probably untrue. The medical record for 13th
February was fabricated and it seems likely that he had not yet seen the body since the death. Shipman certified that death was due to a coronary thrombosis, which had commenced
'minutes'
before death. This was due to ischaemic heart disease from which Mrs Dean was said to have been suffering for five years. Hypertension, said to have been present for 14 years, was said to be a contributory factor to the death but unrelated to the coronary thrombosis.
It appears that by the time Shipman completed the MCCD, he or his staff had been in touch with PC Peter Napier, who was at that time acting as the Coroner's Liaison Officer for Tameside Police Division. On arrival at the hospital mortuary on Monday, 2nd
March, PC Napier became aware of Mrs Dean's death. He cannot remember dealing with this case but, if he followed his usual practice, he would have telephoned Mrs Dean's doctor to ask whether the doctor had seen Mrs Dean within 14 days of her death and whether he or she was able to certify the cause of death. Either Shipman or a member of his staff must have confirmed that Shipman had seen Mrs Dean within that time and was able to certify the cause of death.
The cause of death given by Shipman is consistent with the note Shipman wrote on the back of Dr Choudhury's record, which arrived at the surgery on the Monday morning. Dr Choudhury has recorded that he arrived at 9.29pm and that the patient died at 7.25pm. We know that Mrs Dean died some time before that. She was found dead by her friends at about 7pm but it is likely she was already dead at 4pm, when she missed her hair appointment. Dr Choudhury may have misunderstood the information he was given when he arrived at about 9.30pm but it is quite likely that he gave the time of death as the time at which death had been pronounced by the paramedics. I understand that that is the practice followed by some doctors.
Shipman made entries on the computer on 2nd
March to record Mrs Dean's death. The first entry was made just before 9am. Rather oddly, Shipman's record suggests that Dr Choudhury had arrived at 7.20pm and had said that the death had occurred about an hour earlier, so Shipman has recorded the time of death as 6.30pm. If Shipman had already seen Dr Choudhury's record, he failed to copy it accurately. If he had not, one wonders from where he had obtained his information. The only person he had seen at 9am was Mr Dean, whose account was not firsthand.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate on 4th
March. He said that death had occurred at about 7.30pm on 27th
February 1998. He crossed out his first attempt, which said the time of death was 6.30pm. Shipman gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. He said that he had been Mrs Dean's ordinary medical attendant for 20 years, which was not true. He said he had attended her during her last illness for 15 years. That was not true in several respects. Not only had he not been her doctor 15 years earlier, she had not had a final illness of that duration. Shipman had said that she had had high blood pressure for 14 years but had specifically said that the high blood pressure was a contributory factor not related to the coronary thrombosis of which she is said to have died. He said he had last seen Mrs Dean alive 13 days before her death. That was not true, although it was consistent with the false record he had entered on the computer. He said he had seen the body five days after the death.
He said that the mode of death was syncope of only minutes' duration. When asked to say to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death depended on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote:
'Found by friends collapsed
Paramedics + Deputy Doctor
confirmed death at 1930 hrs.
Harry Durose Peter Bramall'
.
Shipman said that the persons present at the moment of death were Mr Durose, the paramedics, Mr Bramall and the duty doctor. These entries create the wholly misleading impression that Mrs Dean was not already dead when she was found and suggest that she was found alive, in a collapsed state, and died later in the presence of several people.
In response to the question whether the coroner had been notified, Shipman wrote:
'Spoke to Assistant confirming I would issue'
. There is an arrow pointing to the word
'Assistant'
followed by the initials
'C L O'
and the date 2/3/98. CLO stands for Coroner's Liaison Officer. This entry clearly refers to a conversation with PC Napier.
I note the inconsistency between the statement on the MCCD that Shipman had already seen the body by 2nd
March and Form B where he says that he saw it five days after the death, which would be 4th
March. Anyone comparing those two documents would have realised the inconsistency. Any enquiry into the contents of Form B would have shown them to be substantially false.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the cremation certificate and saw no reason to regard the contents as suspicious. However, he was not to know that the contents were substantially false.
Professor Baker also considered the medical notes and records and on the basis of the information contained in them found the death highly suspicious. Professor Baker was unaware that the entries relating to transient ischaemic attacks were false. His concern arose because Mrs Dean had no previous history of heart disease. He found the certified cause of death hard to explain.
Dr Grenville provided statements and gave evidence at the inquest. He says that if the forged entries are disregarded, as they clearly must be, there is nothing in Mrs Dean's notes that would enable any doctor to certify the cause of her sudden death. The written records are very scanty, consisting of only two entries dated later than 17th
June 1987. These are a new patient check on 7th
June 1995 and a blood pressure reading of 170/110 on 10th
December 1995.
Dr Grenville noted that there was no history of heart disease in the medical records. In particular an electrocardiogram (ECG) taken during a routine screening in December 1995 was normal. He said that, in his opinion, Shipman should not have been prepared to sign the MCCD. Dr Grenville pointed out that Shipman's claim to have seen Mrs Dean on 13th
February was significant as it was precisely 14 days before the death. If Shipman had admitted that he had not seen Mrs Dean within 14 days of the death, the registrar would probably have referred the death to the coroner. In my opinion, this explains why Shipman fabricated an entry for 13th
February.
Dr Grenville also said that a patient dying of coronary thrombosis might be able to walk through the house and vomit in the few minutes before death. When asked whether a patient dying of an overdose of morphine might be able to act in that way, he expressed the view that this was possible if the overdose had been administered intramuscularly rather than intravenously. Morphine does cause some people to be sick. If a lethal dose were given intravenously, the drug would take effect so quickly that the patient would not be able to climb upstairs. If Mrs Dean had been given an intramuscular dose of diamorphine, she might have felt ill, have started to vomit and have climbed the stairs, possibly seeking the bathroom. She might then have become drowsy and confused or realised that she needed to lie down and have strayed into a bedroom.
Dr Alan Banks said that the cause of death as shown on the MCCD was not consistent with the medical history. Whilst the notes recorded episodes of transient ischaemic attacks in January and February 1998, there was nothing to indicate a history of coronary thrombosis. Cerebrovascular accident would be a far more likely cause of death. Vomiting would be consistent with death from a stroke. However, if the references to transient ischaemic attacks were fabricated, as they were, there would be no evidence of any symptoms relating to the cerebrovascular system. He said that he would not have been prepared to certify death as due either to coronary thrombosis or stroke and would have referred the death to the coroner.
Conclusion
There is no evidence whatsoever that Shipman saw Mrs Dean on the day of her death. The Inquiry has made extensive efforts to find such evidence. Shipman had time to visit her, but that is all that can be said.
Mrs Dean had enjoyed very good health and was active at the time of her death. She had had raised blood pressure for many years, well controlled by medication. She was probably at an increased risk of suffering a stroke or a heart attack. It is possible that she could have suffered either a fatal heart attack or a fatal stroke on the day of her death. The presence of vomit in the lounge, on the stairs and in the bedroom is consistent with death from either of those natural causes.
If it were not for the false entries made on the surgery computer, in the MCCD and in Form B, there would be nothing to suggest that this was anything other than a sudden unexpected natural death. These false entries arouse real suspicion that Shipman visited Mrs Dean and killed her. It is hard to imagine why he would have gone to such trouble to fabricate a false medical history if Mrs Dean had died a natural death.
It has become clear to me from an examination of other cases, that Shipman frequently disregarded his duties in respect of the registration of deaths. A doctor is entitled to complete the MCCD if he or she has attended the deceased during the final illness and has either seen him or her within 14 days before death or has seen the body after death. There is some confusion about these requirements and some doctors and registrars are under the impression that the doctor cannot certify the cause of death unless he or she has seen the patient within 14 days before death. I think Shipman must have been under this impression, as he frequently made a false claim that he had seen a patient within 14 days of death in cases where the death was obviously natural. I assume that he did this so as to ensure that the registrar would not refer the case to the coroner. What his motives were for this, I do not know. It may be that he wished to spare the relatives the possible distress and inevitable delay resulting from a post-mortem examination. It may be, as the South Manchester Coroner suggested during the inquest in the present case, that Shipman simply did not want to be bothered with the processes involved in a coroner's referral. A desire to avoid a referral to the coroner, which the law plainly required in this case, would explain his decision to falsify the medical records so as create a consultation on 13th
February. I could not draw an inference that Shipman had killed Mrs Dean simply from the fact that he had made false entries that would enable him to sign the MCCD and avoid the risk of referral to the coroner.
A desire to avoid referral would not, however, require him to make other false entries. It was not necessary for him to claim to have already seen the body when he signed the MCCD on Monday 2nd
March. His claim, false though it was, to have seen Mrs Dean alive on 13th
February 1995 would have been enough to satisfy the coroner's liaison officer that Shipman was able to certify the cause of death. Nor did Shipman need to say that he had been Mrs Dean's doctor for far longer than he had been.
Shipman made other false entries, which at first sight appear to be quite pointless if he was not involved in the death and only wished to avoid the need for referral to the coroner. He did not need to create the false entries of 6th
and 30th
January. That he should fabricate so carefully the symptoms and signs of transient ischaemic attacks makes it appear that he was anxious to create a plausible background to a death from a stroke. Yet he certified the death as due to coronary thrombosis. He could easily have created false entries to indicate events that might presage a heart attack. Shipman was not ignorant of the relevant signs and symptoms and, in other cases, he has taken good care to create relevant false entries, helpful to the concealment of his unlawful killings. I find it strange that Shipman fabricated these entries tending to justify a death by stroke and then incompetently certified the death as due to coronary thrombosis.
Nor, if innocent but wishing to avoid a referral to the coroner, did Shipman need to make the false entries on Form B, in which he suggested that Mrs Dean had been alive when found and had died in the presence of several people. There are other cases in which Shipman has told this kind of lie, but in those cases the lie has been designed to create the impression that he was not alone with the patient at the time of death, when the truth was that he had been. Here, there is no evidence that he was alone with Mrs Dean on the day of her death, but if he was alone with her at the time of her death, it would help him to create the impression that others had been with her at the moment of death.
It is said that money and jewellery were missing from the house. Although it has been suggested in other cases that Shipman has stolen from victims he has just killed, the evidence has never been clear enough for me to make a positive finding that he has done so. There is no more than suspicion. Here, the evidence that valuables and money were missing raises a suspicion of theft but I could not possibly say that this suspicion amounted to evidence that Shipman was at the house on the day of the death.
So far in this analysis, I have only been able to say that there is no evidence that Shipman killed Mrs Dean but that there are some very odd and suspicious features to the case. I propose to test the alternative theories.
If Shipman killed Mrs Dean, he must have visited her at some time after her return home from the bank and before 4pm. He could have done so. He was not seen but that does not mean he was not there. If he gave Mrs Dean an injection of diamorphine, it must have been administered intramuscularly. That was not his usual method of killing, although it is possible that he gave excessive doses of opiate, by the intramuscular route to some of his terminally ill patients. There are also a few cases in which I have concluded that the injection he gave probably entered the body subcutaneously, so that the drug did not act with the extreme rapidity characteristic of cases in which Shipman killed. But I know of no Shipman killing where a patient has moved so far and has left so extensive a trail of vomit as to be consistent only with intramuscular injection.
If Shipman did kill Mrs Dean, all the false entries in the MCCD and Form B are explicable as part of a plan to give the impression that the death occurred in the evening (in which he was innocently abetted by Dr Choudhury) and that it occurred in the presence of other people. However, the false entries in the medical records, presaging a death by stroke, are not explicable unless one assumes either that Shipman did not know how best to falsify the records, which I am sure he did, or that he had a mental block and certified the cause of death as heart attack when he meant to certify it as stroke.
If Shipman did not kill Mrs Dean, the circumstances of the death are wholly explicable, although the death was extremely sudden and unexpected. Shipman's desire to avoid a referral to the coroner, wrongful though it was in itself, explains some of the false records. However, I find myself unable to understand why he would have gone to such trouble to enter convincing details of transient ischaemic attacks and why he would have felt the need to give the impression that so many people were present at the death, when they were not. I can think of no satisfactory explanation for the fabrication of the records and the false entries in Form B consistent with innocence.
I have found this one of the most difficult cases to decide. In the end and after much hesitation I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mrs Dean. I reach that conclusion mainly because I cannot believe that Shipman would have gone to such trouble to fabricate entries in Mrs Dean's medical records if he had nothing to hide in respect of her death. I think the most probable explanation is that he visited her during the afternoon of 27th
February and either gave her an intramuscular injection or attempted to give her an intravenous injection and failed to keep the needle in the vein so that at least part of the drug entered the body subcutaneously. If that happened, Mrs Dean might well have felt sick and might well have been able to walk about the house until she eventually collapsed on a bed in her spare bedroom. There are some strange and inexplicable features to the case and I am not sure of my conclusion but I am satisfied that Shipman probably killed Mrs Dean.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001