The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Frederick Dentith
Introduction
Mr Frederick Dentith died at his home, 12 Porlock Walk, Hattersley, Hyde on Friday, 25th
January 1985 at the age of 60. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Dentith's death was carcinoma of the right bronchus.
In February 2000, Mr Dentith's son, Mr Morris Dentith, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his father's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Morris Dentith. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Morris Dentith, Mrs Isobel Shaw (Mr Frederick Dentith's former wife), Mrs Maxine Rossi (Mr Dentith's daughter) and Mrs Laurine Martine Chantal Dentith (his daughter-in-law).
The Inquiry has had access to the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, Shipman's visits book for 1985, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Dentith had enjoyed good health until 1984. He and his wife, who had four children, separated in that year. The separation was amicable. His wife, now Mrs Shaw, remained in the matrimonial home in Hattersley. Mr Dentith took a flat. Not long afterwards, Mr Dentith developed pain in his arm and began to lose weight. He also began to cough blood. A chest x-ray revealed a shadow on the lung. Mr Dentith was referred to Wythenshawe Hospital and in due course was admitted, probably with a view to operative treatment. However, further investigations revealed an inoperable tumour. Mr Morris Dentith and his brother, Mr Paul Dentith, believed that Shipman had negligently failed to diagnose their father's condition at a time when treatment would have been possible. They apparently remonstrated with Shipman on two occasions about the quality of care he had provided to their father. Apparently, a 'heated exchange' took place, although Shipman was very dismissive of their concerns.
Mr Dentith was discharged from hospital in November or December 1984. He first went to stay with Mr Paul Dentith and then, a week or so later, went to stay with his other son. Mr Morris Dentith says that by this stage, his father was very weak and could not walk unaided. In the New Year, Mr Dentith's condition quickly deteriorated, and it was agreed that he should return to the matrimonial home in Hattersley, where his wife would care for him.
The Period Leading up to Death
By the time Mr Dentith moved back to 12 Porlock Walk, he was very ill. He looked gaunt and was very weak. He was helped upstairs and went to bed. He did not come down again. District Nurse Clegg came each day to give personal care. She did not, however, give pain-relieving injections. In the evening a nurse, possibly a Macmillan nurse, would come to give a morphine injection to ease the pain and to help Mr Dentith sleep.
The evidence about the administration of morphine by injection is somewhat conflicting. It is clear that phials of morphine were kept in the house and that the nurses were responsible for them. Mr Paul Dentith used to fetch the morphine prescribed by Shipman. Shipman advised that he should use Battersby's pharmacy on Market Street, Hyde. Mrs Shaw recalls that Shipman visited daily. She may be right, although the visits book confirms visits only on 15th
, 18th
, 22nd
, 23rd
and 25th
January 1985. In any event, Mrs Shaw found Shipman most supportive and compassionate.
Mrs Chantal Dentith says that Shipman called several times a day. She says that she was never present during the consultations and never saw Shipman give an injection. She says that when Shipman arrived at the house he would scoop up any ampoules of morphine from the cabinet downstairs where they were kept and would put them in his pocket. She says that this was so that he could give them to Mr Dentith or return them to the surgery if they were not needed for that visit. I think she is relying on what she has been told and I do not think Shipman did call several times a day.
Mr Morris Dentith says that he was told that Shipman gave his father regular morphine injections. Mrs Shaw, who was at the house all the time, says that Shipman was never left alone with Mr Dentith and that her daughter, Mrs Rossi, was present during all consultations. Mrs Shaw's recollection is that Shipman only gave Mr Dentith one injection, and that was during the week before he died. Her husband had had a fit and the injection was given to calm him down. She says that it was the nurses who gave the injections and that a very close check was kept on the number of ampoules used.
Mrs Rossi, who was spending most of each day at the house to help her mother, does not recall Shipman giving her father any injections and cannot recall whether he was ever left alone with Mr Dentith during consultations. She does, however, say that the family was not 'keeping tabs' on Shipman. She remembers being concerned that Shipman discussed her father's prognosis inappropriately within his earshot. She also remembers that on one occasion Shipman said, 'Perhaps we can help him along', although there was never any overt discussion about the possibility of hastening Mr Dentith's death to prevent further suffering.
It seems likely, on balance, that it was the nurses who gave Mr Dentith his opiate injections rather than Shipman.
In the days leading up to his death, however, Mr Dentith was probably under heavy sedation. He seldom spoke and appeared to be unconscious for much of the time. On the day before the death, Shipman told Mrs Shaw that her husband would die some time in the course of the next 24 hours. Mrs Shaw told her children and she says that Mr Paul Dentith and Mr Morris Dentith stayed overnight at the house.
The Day of the Death
Mr Morris Dentith says that he called to see his father at about 8am on the day of his death. He says that Shipman had already visited and had given his father an injection. Mrs Shaw, on the other hand, does not think that Shipman visited that morning. This visit was not mentioned in Mr Morris Dentith's police statement.
Mrs Shaw remembers that Shipman visited her husband at about 1pm, which was the usual time. According to her, this was the only time he saw Mr Dentith alive that day. He told Mrs Shaw that Mr Dentith could die at any time. She does not believe that Shipman gave an injection. She says that her daughter, Mrs Rossi, was with Shipman during that visit and would have mentioned if Shipman had given an injection. Mrs Rossi does not mention the day of the death in her statement.
Mr Morris Dentith recalls that he contacted his mother at about 11am and she told him that his father's condition had worsened and that death was imminent. He returned to Hyde and arrived in the late morning. He says that to his surprise, he found his father sitting up in bed drinking Guinness. Shipman then arrived at about 1pm. Mr Morris Dentith says that there was a heated discussion downstairs between the family and Shipman about whether Mr Dentith should be allowed to drink Guinness. Mrs Shaw says that this did not happen. Mr Dentith had been unable to eat or drink for the last week of his life and was virtually in a coma.
Mr Morris Dentith also says that Shipman gave another injection at this time, following which his father became comatose. He says that in his view, his father was having too many injections. He also says that Shipman returned at about 6pm and went straight up to his father's bedroom. He then came downstairs and said that Mr Dentith had taken a turn for the worse, that it would be over soon and that he had 'helped him on his way'. From this Mr Morris Dentith understood Shipman to be saying that he had given his father 'more morphine than should be allowed'. Shipman then went back upstairs, came back down again and said, 'It is now just a matter of time'. Shipman then left the house. Mr Morris Dentith says that his father was much worse following Shipman's evening visit, with a rattling chest and irregular breathing. Mrs Shaw does not think that Shipman visited at 6pm. She says that Shipman only visited once that day and that her husband's condition did not significantly deteriorate after that visit.
Mr Morris Dentith says that he and his brother went to sit with their father and were present when he died at about 7.50pm. Shipman was then called out and he arrived back some 20 minutes later. Shipman confirmed the death and, according to Mr Morris Dentith, recommended cremation because 'You don't want all that badness growing into the ground'. Mr Morris Dentith suggests that his sister-in-law, Mrs Chantal Dentith, told him that she had been with Shipman when he last saw Mr Dentith and that Shipman took the opportunity to remove all the morphine tablets and ampoules. He says that he is '99 per cent certain' that he noticed that all his father's medication had been removed when he was in Mr Dentith's room waiting for the undertaker. Mrs Chantal Dentith says that she does not remember any visit on the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman said that Mr Dentith had died on 25th
January 1985 at the age of 60. He said that he had last seen Mr Dentith alive on the day of his death, that he had seen his body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. He gave the cause of death as carcinoma of the bronchus and said that 'secondaries' in the brain had contributed to the death.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate and recorded that death had occurred at
'19.52'
on 25th
January 1985. He said that he had attended Mr Dentith during his last illness for a period of three months and that he had last seen him alive three hours before his death. He recorded that he had made a complete external examination of the body about 15 minutes after death. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 24 hours. Shipman said that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. Shipman recorded that
'Mrs Dentith'
was the only person present at death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found that the death was not suspicious on the basis of the contents of the cremation documentation.
Dr Grenville has confirmed that Mr Dentith suffered from lung cancer that had metastasised or spread to other organs. He thinks it likely that Mr Dentith's tumour was of the type known as Pancoast's tumour. This is a cancer of the lung that occurs in a position where it impinges on the nerves serving the arm. The condition is extremely painful and it can be difficult to provide the patient with sufficient analgesia.
According to Dr Grenville, Mr Dentith's final illness follows a pattern that he would expect in someone with Mr Dentith's condition. It appears that Mr Dentith became comatose in the last few days of his life and, in Dr Grenville's view, it is likely that the amount of morphine needed to relieve pain would have contributed to this. On the assumption that a final injection was given by Shipman two to three hours before the death, Dr Grenville says that it is possible that this injection hastened the death by a matter of minutes or hours, but that it is equally possible that the injection relieved his suffering and allowed his inevitable death to occur without exhaustion and distress, in which case it might have prolonged his life by a matter of minutes or hours. Dr Grenville concludes that, on the basis of the available evidence, Shipman's management of Mr Dentith's last illness was consistent with good practice.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mr Dentith suffered from inoperable lung cancer, probably in the form of a Pancoast's tumour. This is extremely painful and it can be difficult to provide the patient with sufficient analgesia. Mr Dentith was probably receiving a high dose of analgesic and this will have caused or contributed to his comatose condition. I think it likely that the analgesic was of a strong opiate, either morphine or diamorphine, and was given by the district or Macmillan nurses and not by Shipman.
The evidence is conflicting as to whether Shipman administered an injection to Mr Dentith on the day of his death. Mr Morris Dentith suggests that he did and implies that this was intended to and did hasten his father's death. Mrs Shaw's evidence is to the contrary.
These events occurred a long time ago. Both witnesses have a firm view in their minds as to Shipman's integrity and attitude. I think that Mr Morris Dentith's attitude towards Shipman has been affected by his perception that Shipman was guilty of a delay in diagnosing his father's condition. This would be understandable. It would also be understandable if his recollection is affected by the passage of time and by what is now known about Shipman. He has plainly misunderstood the effect of what his sister-in-law told him. It is surprising that he can be '99 per cent certain' about the removal of all his father's medication, given that the events in question occurred so long ago and that he would have no real reason to remember an event which would then have had no obvious significance. Mrs Shaw's recollection may have been affected by her strong view that Shipman was supportive and compassionate. I consider that her view is probably the more reliable, as she was personally responsible for Mr Dentith's care in the terminal stage. He was in her house and she was always there. The family called from time to time, although Mrs Rossi was there a good deal towards the end. Mrs Shaw's recollection of the arrangements is more typical of what was usual at this time for a patient who required regular analgesia. Syringe drivers were not yet available in the community and it would be usual for the district or Macmillan nurses to attend regularly, possibly as much as three times a day, to give injections. It is likely that if Shipman had said that he would help Mr Dentith 'on his way' on the same day that he gave an injection, Mrs Shaw would have remembered this. I think it unlikely that Shipman gave an injection on the day of the death.
However, I recognise that it is possible that Shipman did visit in the late afternoon of the day of the death and it is possible that he gave an injection. If he did, I am quite sure that it did not have the effect described by Mr Morris Dentith of rendering his father unconscious. I am sure that Mr Dentith had been at least semi-conscious for several days. Dr Grenville says that it is possible that an injection at this time might have hastened the death by a small margin or might equally have lengthened life by relieving pain and distress. It appears, however, that any injection given at this time cannot have been the direct cause of the death. It seems that Mr Dentith lived for about two hours, possibly three, after Shipman's last visit. I can rule out the possibility that Shipman gave a lethal dose of opiate which directly caused the death. Had he done that, Mr Dentith would have been dead within the hour.
In Dr Grenville's view, the evidence suggests that Shipman's management of Mr Dentith's last illness was consistent with good practice.
My conclusion is that Mr Dentith's death was almost certainly due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001