The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Cissie Davies
Introduction
Mrs Cissie Davies was aged 73 when she died at home, 59 Lodge Lane, Newton, Hyde in February 1998. Although the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') suggests that she died on Tuesday, 3rd
February, all the circumstances point to her having died the previous day.
Mrs Davies had been a patient of Shipman since he moved to Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
Mrs Davies' death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was therefore one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Davies' son, Mr Robert Patterson Davies and Mrs Davies' friend, Mrs Irmgard Arrowsmith.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Davies. An inquest into her death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Davies, Mr Davies' wife, Mrs Maria Selina Davies and Mrs Arrowsmith. The Inquiry has had access Mrs Davies' GP records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
The decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Davies was a widow and lived alone. She was diabetic but in all other respects enjoyed generally good health. She was active and independent.
For about two weeks before her death, Mrs Davies was suffering from a chest infection. She stayed at home and rested but was not confined to bed. On Monday, 26th
January 1998, it appears from the acute prescriptions book that she telephoned the surgery, saying that she had a cough. Shipman prescribed Alupent, a bronchodilator in syrup form. The records suggest that he did not see Mrs Davies on that day.
On the evening of Sunday, 1st
February 1998, Mrs Davies spoke with her son, Mr Robert Davies, and told him that she was feeling better.
The Death and its Discovery
On the morning of Monday, 2nd
February 1998, Mrs Davies went shopping in Hyde with her close friend, Mrs Arrowsmith. They walked together from Lodge Lane into Hyde, a distance of about a quarter to half a mile. Mrs Davies seemed like her old self and said that she was recovering from her chest infection. They went into various shops and booked a holiday in Bournemouth, which they intended to take together at Easter. Mrs Davies did not complain of feeling unwell and had no difficulty in walking around. They ate fish and chips for lunch in a cafe and left for the bus station between 12.30pm and 1pm.
On the way to the bus station, Mrs Davies called in at the surgery. Mrs Arrowsmith waited for her. In her police statement she said that she waited outside. In her statement to the Inquiry, she said she waited inside the door and saw Mrs Davies speak to someone at the counter. She said that Mrs Davies was not seen by Shipman. Wherever Mrs Arrowsmith waited, her impression that Mrs Davies did not see Shipman is confirmed by the surgery records. The open surgery would usually be over well before 12.30pm. There is an entry in the appointments sheets for that day suggesting that Shipman had arranged to be at Selbourne House at midday. Had Shipman been available to see Mrs Davies when she called in, the usual practice would have been for the surgery staff to make a note of her name on the appointments sheet. Mrs Davies' name is not recorded on that sheet. There is an entry in her name in the acute prescriptions book which says:
'bad cough tight chest can't get it up'
. The procedure with acute prescriptions was that a member of staff would note a request in the book and, when Shipman had some free time, he would consider the request and, if he thought it appropriate, would issue the prescription. It appears from the timed computer record that Shipman prescribed an antibiotic, amoxicillin, for Mrs Davies, just after 2pm. How it was intended that the prescription should reach Mrs Davies is not known. It appears to me that it is highly unlikely that Mrs Davies saw Shipman at the surgery that lunchtime and I find that she did not.
When the two women left the surgery they did not call at a pharmacy. They boarded their bus and at about 1pm Mrs Davies alighted at her stop with her shopping. At about 2pm, Mr Davies spoke with his mother on the telephone for about five minutes. She described her activities that morning and sounded cheerful and well. They arranged to meet the following afternoon. That was to be the last time he spoke to her.
Shipman's movements that afternoon are not clear. Apart from visiting patients, he was not required at the surgery until 4pm. The visits book shows that he planned to visit four patients, one of whom was Mrs Muriel Harrison who lived in Flowery Field Nursing Home and who was to die that afternoon. The question arises as to whether he also visited Mrs Davies at her home.
At 8.44am on Tuesday, 3rd February, presumably shortly after arriving at the surgery, Shipman made an entry in Mrs Davies' computerised records relating to a consultation on 2nd
February. It said:
'Had a chat to patient. feels off bs
(
blood sugar
)
5.8 pains in chest with
coughing dyspnoea noisy chest local flu tluk
(
to let us know
)
if any worse'
.
I interpret that note to suggest that Mrs Davies complained of feeling off colour. Her blood sugar was tested and was within the normal range. She complained of pains in her chest when coughing. She said she was short of breath. Shipman implies that he listened to her chest and heard noises, which would indicate the presence of a chest infection. It should be noted that that record makes no reference to a prescription for amoxicillin, which had been prescribed and recorded on the computer the previous afternoon at 2pm. The entry made at 8.44am on 3rd
February, which purported to relate to a consultation on 2nd
February, does not specify where that consultation took place. I have found that there was no consultation at the surgery, only a request for a prescription. The question arises as to whether Shipman visited Mrs Davies at home on the afternoon of 2nd
February. Although there is no direct evidence from any witness to show that he did, the fact that a note was entered in the records for that day is some evidence from which I could infer that he had visited her at home that afternoon. Also I observe that Shipman certainly had the opportunity to visit her and a potentially genuine reason for doing so. Shipman knew that Mrs Davies was feeling unwell because of her request for a prescription.
The question also arises as to whether the record of the consultation for that day is a truthful record. There are reasons to think it might not be. If Mrs Davies did complain to Shipman of pains in her chest, she did not complain to anybody else that day and she had been well enough to go shopping. She had spoken to her son at 2pm, saying that she was much better. It is possible that Shipman made a false record, suggesting that Mrs Davies was more ill than she really was.
On Tuesday, 3rd
February, Mr Davies telephoned his mother several times from about 2pm and became increasingly worried, as there was no reply. He went to her house between 4pm and 4.30pm. In the hallway, he found the morning newspaper lying on the carpet just inside the door, suggesting that his mother had not come down from her bedroom that morning. Mr Davies called out but there was no response. He went up to his mother's bedroom and saw her head protruding from beneath the quilt. She was lying on her side and she looked as though she was asleep. She was fully clothed. Mr Davies touched his mother's hand but it was cold. He realised that she was dead.
Mr Davies immediately called an ambulance and informed other family members. The ambulance crew confirmed that Mrs Davies was dead. Rigor mortis had set in. Shipman was called. When he arrived, his attitude was abrupt and unsympathetic. When he came downstairs, he said that he had seen Mrs Davies only the day before. He thought she had been dead for a while. Mr Davies recalls that Shipman said something to the effect that rigor mortis sets in after 22 hours. There was some discussion about the likely time of death. Because the fire and light were on, it was thought that the death had probably occurred the previous evening. Shipman said that the cause of death was pneumonia and claimed that the chest infection from which Mrs Davies had been suffering could quickly turn to pneumonia because of her diabetes.
Shipman also said that he had wondered why Mrs Davies had not picked up her prescription from the surgery. It appears that the prescription, which Shipman had signed at 2pm the previous day and was available for Mrs Davies to collect, was still there. That confirms me in my view that Shipman had not seen Mrs Davies at the surgery on 2nd
February. If he had done, he would have given her the prescription then. If he saw her that day, as he claimed, it must have been at home. This remark also casts suspicion on the genuineness of the note of his consultation with her. If he had called upon Mrs Davies and found her as ill as his record suggests, he would surely have given her another prescription or have put in place arrangements for the original prescription to be dispensed and delivered. It appears to me that the only inference I can draw is that Shipman did visit Mrs Davies that afternoon but did not bother to ensure that she received medication.
Certification
Shipman provided the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 3rd
February. He said that the death had occurred on 3rd
February although he appears to have written 2nd
and then changed it to 3rd
February. He said that he had last seen Mrs Davies alive on 2nd
February. He certified the cause of death as bronchopneumonia, which had come on 24 hours before death. Diabetes mellitus was certified to be a condition contributing to the death. Thus, if that diagnosis of the cause of death was correct, Mrs Davies had been shopping in Hyde with her friend while suffering from bronchopneumonia. That is a fanciful idea.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, apparently completed on 4th
February, Shipman said that Mrs Davies had died at 9am on 3rd
February 1998. He said that he had attended her during her final illness, which was bronchopneumonia, for 24 hours. Thus, Shipman was again admitting that he had seen Mrs Davies in the 24 hours prior to her death. He said that he had last seen her alive about 18 hours before her death, i.e. at about 3pm on 2nd
February. That may well be an accurate estimate of the time he last saw her alive. However, it appears to me highly unlikely that the death occurred 18 hours later.
Despite the fact that he had not seen the body until eight hours after the death, according to Form B, Shipman was able to state that the mode of death was coma lasting
'a couple of hours'
. For reasons which it is impossible to fathom, Shipman said that his opinion as to the cause and mode of death was based on the observations of Mr Davies. That is plainly untrue, as Mr Davies had not seen his mother for several days before her death and only came upon her body on the afternoon of 3rd
February. Shipman went further than this and said that it was Mr Davies who had nursed his mother during her last illness. He said that Mrs Davies had died in her sleep. He said this despite the fact that when he saw her in bed she was fully clothed.
Dr Booth signed Form C on Thursday, 5th
February 1998. In Form C, she said that she had not questioned any of Mrs Davies' relatives or anyone who had nursed her during her final illness.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mrs Davies was highly suspicious. He also considered that the cremation forms gave rise to a reasonable degree of suspicion.
Conclusion
Mrs Davies was well on the day of her death, save that she was recovering from a chest infection which was still troubling her to the extent that she sought a prescription from the surgery. Her level of activity that day is, however, totally inconsistent with her suffering bronchopneumonia. It is not feasible to suggest that she could have died so quickly from bronchopneumonia. In the unlikely event that her health had deteriorated suddenly later in the afternoon of 2nd
February, she would certainly have telephoned her son. I am quite sure Mrs Davies did not die of bronchopneumonia. Nor was there any other likely cause of a sudden death.
From the detailed picture that the Inquiry has been able to construct from the witnesses and from the computer audit trail, it would appear that Shipman's interest in Mrs Davies was aroused when he became aware of her request for a prescription for her chest infection. Having logged that request in the computer, he went on his rounds visiting several patients. I am satisfied that he visited Mrs Davies. I am also satisfied that he wished to make it appear that he had seen her at the surgery rather than at her own home. That afternoon, he had the opportunity to administer a lethal dose of diamorphine, which would have killed Mrs Davies in minutes.
It is right to point out that, unlike many of Shipman's victims, Mrs Davies was not found sitting in a chair or on a sofa. His usual method of killing was to administer the lethal injection in the patient's living room. It appears that if he gave Mrs Davies such an injection, he must have done so in her bedroom. She would not have been able to climb the stairs after receiving the dose. However, it is not hard to imagine circumstances in which it was decided that the consultation should take place in the bedroom. Mrs Davies may have been sitting on the bed while she was examined or received some treatment. Shipman could well have covered her over before leaving, making it appear that she had taken an afternoon nap with her clothes on. In fact she was not found until the next day.
When, next morning, Shipman made a computer entry recording a consultation the previous day, he did so presumably not knowing whether he had or had not been observed at the house. When he made that false entry he described symptoms such as chest pain and breathlessness, which are not mentioned by the witness who saw Mrs Davies that day. I am satisfied that Shipman fabricated that entry to lay the basis of the diagnosis he proposed to give for the death.
Finally, the lies and inconsistencies in the death certificate are compelling. Most telling is the assertion that Mr Davies had nursed his mother during her last illness. It appears that Shipman must have been confident that this assertion would not be checked.
Taking all these matters into account, I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Davies during the afternoon of 2nd
February. There is no reason to think that his method would have been anything other than the usual injection of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001