The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Rose Dudley
Introduction
Mrs Mary Rose Dudley (known as Molly) died at her home, 33 The Woodlands, Werneth Road, Hyde on Sunday, 30th
December 1990 at the age of 69. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought he was a good doctor. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In November 1998, Mrs Dudley's death came to the attention of the police during the course of their investigations into the death of another of Shipman's former patients. They investigated Mrs Dudley's death and took witness statements from Mrs Dudley's sons, Mr John Victor Dudley and Mr Jeffrey Francis Dudley, and their respective wives, Mrs Eileen Dudley and Mrs Joyce Mary Dudley. They also took witness statements from a neighbour, Mrs Ivy Murphy, who has recently died, and from her husband, Mr James Murphy.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry took further statements from Mrs Dudley's sons and their wives, all of whom gave evidence at an oral hearing on 29th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Dudley's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1990 and the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
Personal Background
Mrs Dudley was widowed in 1987. She was independent and did her own housework and shopping. She used to walk into Hyde to shop and to play bingo. Until shortly before her death, she used to enjoy the company of a close friend, Mr George Whittingham.
Her family was aware that she suffered from tinnitus which caused or exacerbated bouts of depression. They also knew she was diabetic. She had had an acute episode in early 1990, which had led to the diagnosis of diabetes, but the condition was under control at the time of her death. They were unaware of any heart problems.
Mrs Dudley's computerised medical records, which cover only the period from November 1989 to December 1990, disclose diabetes, depression and sleeping problems and record treatment for those conditions. They do not mention any heart problems.
The handwritten record cards and correspondence from Tameside General Hospital, found within the Lloyd George envelope, reveal that Mrs Dudley did have a heart problem. In early March 1981, she had raised blood pressure. Angina was diagnosed in 1981. On 24th
March 1981, Dr W I Kenyon, a consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, diagnosed myocardial ischaemia on the basis of an electrocardiogram (ECG). Inderal, a drug used to treat hypertension, angina and cardiac arrhythmia, was prescribed in 1981, 1982, 1983 and 1984. Mrs Dudley was admitted to Tameside General Hospital in February 1985 with a collapsed lung and made a good recovery. The family thought that she had had pleurisy. There is no later record of a heart condition and an entry on 24th
December 1990 suggests that heart sounds, liver function tests and bowel sounds were normal.
The Period Leading up to Death
On Christmas Day 1990, Mr Whittingham died. Mrs Dudley was very upset and she stayed with Mr Jeffrey Dudley and his wife for several days after Christmas. By 29th
December, however, it seems that she was concerned about being away from her flat for such a long period and decided to return home. Before doing so, she went shopping with her family in Stockport to buy a new coat for Mr Whittingham's funeral. She was still upset, but seemed well and managed the steps in the car park without difficulty. She was dropped off at her flat at about 6pm and sounded well when her daughter-in-law, Mrs Joyce Dudley, telephoned her later that evening.
It is puzzling to find that Mrs Dudley's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Saturday, 29th
December. It is one of a very large number of names listed on that day.
The following day, Sunday, 30th
December, Mrs Dudley was due to go to Mr John Dudley's house for Sunday lunch. At about 11.30am, she telephoned Mrs Joyce Dudley and told her that she did not feel very well and had called for Shipman to come to see her. She was not specific about the nature of her illness but she did not mention chest pains. She also telephoned her son, Mr John Dudley, and gave him the same news. She did not sound worried and still intended to go to his house for lunch. It was agreed that she would telephone him again when the doctor had been and he would then come round to collect her.
Some time in the late morning, Mrs Dudley called in to see her neighbour Mrs Murphy, who lived in the ground floor flat directly opposite number 33, and told her that she was feeling unwell and had called the doctor. She only stayed for a few minutes. A few minutes after Mrs Dudley left, Mrs Murphy saw Shipman arrive at Mrs Dudley's flat. When he had still not left 15 minutes after arriving, Mrs Murphy went into her neighbour's flat. The door was ajar. She saw Shipman in the hall and asked him how Mrs Dudley was. He said that she was in the bedroom and had died. Mrs Murphy was completely shocked. She went into the bedroom and saw Mrs Dudley lying on the bed, fully clothed, with her feet towards the bed-head. She looked peaceful, as if asleep, and did not appear to have been in pain. Her hands were crossed over the front of her body. Mrs Murphy offered to telephone Mrs Dudley's sons, but Shipman said that he would do it. A few minutes after Mrs Murphy had gone into Mrs Dudley's flat, her husband followed her. He saw Shipman using the telephone and understood that he was speaking to one of Mrs Dudley's family. He too noticed how peaceful Mrs Dudley looked in death.
Shipman telephoned Mrs Joyce Dudley. He said that he was at Mrs Dudley's house and he was sorry to have to say that he did not think that she would live longer than half an hour. In fact, Mrs Dudley was already dead. Mr Jeffrey Dudley immediately left to go to his mother's flat and asked his brother to do the same.
Mr Jeffrey Dudley recollects that Shipman met him at the door of the flat and took him into the bedroom. Shipman explained that when he had arrived, Mrs Dudley had opened the door and she had looked grey, sweaty and short of breath. He said that he gave her some morphine to calm her down but she had died soon afterwards. He did not say that Mrs Dudley had told him that she had been suffering from chest pain. Mrs Joyce Dudley arrived shortly after her husband. Shipman gave her the same account. When Mr John Dudley arrived soon afterwards, Shipman gave the same account again. At no stage did Shipman suggest that he had called an ambulance or attempted resuscitation. All family members agree that Mrs Dudley looked very peaceful, lying on the bed.
After Shipman had left there was some discussion amongst the family members as to the appropriateness of the treatment which Shipman had given, particularly his use of morphine. The consensus was that, as Shipman was a doctor, what he had done must have been all right.
Shipman made the following entry in the Lloyd George cards:
'30 12 90 Grey sweaty 100/20
(
or possibly 100/70
)
(
illegible - but possibly chesty
)
2 hours
chest pain on off 2/52 !!
CT
IV morphine
Dead
13.15
hours son and neighbour'
.
Parts of this note are impossible to decipher, but I interpret it to suggest that Mrs Dudley was grey and sweaty. Her blood pressure was either 100/20, which is extremely low, or 100/70, which is quite low. The next line is partially illegible, but I infer that it must relate to pain of some sort because of the morphine Shipman was to give. Shipman records that Mrs Dudley told him she had had chest pain on and off for two weeks. He diagnosed a coronary thrombosis and recorded that he had given intravenous morphine. He said that death occurred at 1.15pm and seems to suggest that a son and neighbour were present. If he intended to suggest that they were present at the death, that would be untrue.
I have inferred that the illegible part of the note must relate to pain over a period of two hours because otherwise there could be no justification for giving intravenous morphine. Dr John Grenville, in his generic evidence, has explained that when a patient is suffering the severe crushing pain which is characteristic of a heart attack, it is appropriate to give a small dose of morphine or diamorphine, administered slowly over a few minutes. The object is to give just enough to relieve the pain, and the administration should be stopped as soon as that has been achieved. Here, there is no indication of how much morphine was given over what period, an omission that arouses suspicion. However, there are other reasons to suspect the accuracy and honesty of this entry. First, it is hard to believe that Mrs Dudley was grey and sweaty when Shipman arrived. If she had been in that condition 15 minutes earlier, Mrs Murphy would have noticed. If she had been suffering any kind of severe symptom for two hours, she would have told her sons and Mrs Murphy. If she had been suffering chest pain on and off for two weeks, Mr and Mrs Jeffrey Dudley would certainly have known about it. I note that after the death, Shipman did not tell the family about the symptoms Mrs Dudley was supposed to have been suffering. This entry in the medical notes shows every sign of being fabricated to explain the death.
Although it is clear beyond doubt that Shipman visited Mrs Dudley on Sunday, 30th
December, her name does not appear in his visits book.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis. Diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Dudley alive on the day of her death, 30th
December. He had also seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Dudley was buried some days later, on the same day as the funeral of her friend, Mr Whittingham. There are accordingly no cremation documents.
Shipman's Trial
Shipman was asked about his treatment of Mrs Dudley during his trial. The prosecution was seeking to establish that Shipman was lying when he claimed never to carry opiate drugs in his bag. He admitted that he had told Mr Dudley that he had given his mother an injection of morphine to calm her down. He admitted that the morphine he had used had never been entered on any controlled drugs register, as it should have been. He said that it had come from one of his colleagues' desks at the Donneybrook Surgery.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the medical notes and records, which were recovered from Shipman's home, and thought the case was highly suspicious. He queried why no treatment was given for the supposed heart attack, why no attempt at resuscitation was made and why no ambulance was called. As Dr Grenville has said in his generic evidence, as soon as a doctor realises that a patient is suffering a heart attack, he should summon an ambulance. Early admission for stabilisation and thrombolysis is essential. As soon as a patient goes into cardiac arrest, the doctor should summon an ambulance (if he has not already done so) and should begin resuscitation, preferably calling upon any help which is at hand.
Conclusion
The evidence in this case points strongly to an unlawful killing. The death took place in Shipman's presence. Dr Grenville has said that it is extremely unusual for a patient to die suddenly in the presence of a general practitioner, unless the patient is terminally ill or the doctor has been called out in an emergency, on account of symptoms indicating a life threatening condition such as a heart attack. Mrs Dudley was not terminally ill. The circumstances in which Shipman was called out on 30th
December are not entirely clear. However, it does not appear that there was an emergency. That the death should have occurred during his visit gives rise to grave suspicion that he killed Mrs Dudley.
Mrs Dudley had some history of heart disease and was at some risk of suffering a heart attack, which could be fatal. Her state of health on the day before her death is somewhat uncertain. At the oral hearing, I found the evidence of Mrs Dudley's sons and daughters-in-law entirely credible. They said that she was well on Saturday, 29th
December and went shopping to buy a new coat. Yet Shipman's visits book suggests that he intended to visit her on that day. If the family is right, she would not even have been at home. There are several possibilities. One is that the family members are correct and Mrs Dudley was perfectly well and not at home on 29th
December. Shipman's entry might have been intended to relate to a visit on the Sunday, although it is clearly written on Saturday's page. Shipman might have tried to visit Mrs Dudley on the Saturday, as a routine check, and found her not at home. The other possibility is that the family members are mistaken about Mrs Dudley's good health on the Saturday. Possibly they took her shopping on the Friday and returned her to her flat that evening. Possibly she was unwell the next morning and called Shipman out. If so, she cannot have been seriously ill as she was not admitted to hospital and her family was not summoned to look after her. Although there is something of a mystery about whether Shipman saw Mrs Dudley on the Saturday, I am quite sure he saw her on the Sunday, the day of the death.
Thus, although it is possible that she had been unwell for a little longer than the family recalls, I am satisfied that she was not so unwell as to think of cancelling her lunch arrangement or to prevent her from making her habitual visit to her neighbour. She was not apparently unwell when she left Mr and Mrs Murphy's house only a few minutes before Shipman's arrival. Although it is theoretically possible that she could have begun to suffer the effects of a heart attack within that short time, such an event is highly unlikely. Moreover, that is not what Shipman said had happened.
If Shipman did find Mrs Dudley suffering a coronary thrombosis, he did not react appropriately. He should have summoned an ambulance. If morphine was necessary for the relief of severe pain, it should have been given gradually and the dose should have been recorded. If and when the patient went into cardiac arrest, he should have tried resuscitation. Of course, it is possible that Mrs Dudley had a heart attack and Shipman failed to do what he should have done. However, it is clear from other cases of which I have read, that Shipman knew perfectly well what to do in the event of a heart attack. That he chose not to do what any reasonable doctor would have done indicates to me that there was no heart attack and that the morphine or, more likely, diamorphine was given not for the relief of pain but with intent to kill.
Mrs Dudley's appearance in death was not typical of a patient who had just suffered a coronary thrombosis. It was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been given a lethal injection of opiate.
From this evidence, I am driven, without hesitation, to the sure conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Dudley.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001