The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ronnie Devenport
Introduction
Mr Ronnie Devenport was found dead at his home, 116 Chartist House, Hyde on Thursday, 26th
May 1994. He was only 57. The death is registered as having occurred on that day, although in my view the death probably occurred on Wednesday, 25th
May 1994. Mr Devenport had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He had a very high regard for Shipman, who certified that the cause of Mr Devenport's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension.
In September 1998, following publicity surrounding the police enquiries into Shipman's activities, a member of Mr Devenport's family contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of his death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Alan Dickson (Mr Devenport's half-brother), Miss Joyce Linda Dickson (Mr Devenport's half-sister), Mr Jesse Frith (Miss Dickson's partner) and Mrs Jennifer Ann Unsworth (the resident warden at Chartist House). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Devenport but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Dickson, Miss Dickson, Mr Frith, Mrs Unsworth, Mrs Mandy Moore and Mrs Heather Eastmond (Mr Devenport's daughters), Mrs Miriam Harlow (a care worker at Chartist House), Mrs Joyce May Dudley (a meals on wheels worker) and Sister Gillian Morgan (a practice nurse at Shipman's surgery). Mr Dickson, Miss Dickson and Mrs Unsworth gave oral evidence at a hearing on 24th
October 2001. Mrs Dudley gave oral evidence on 29th
October 2001 and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 19th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Devenport's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mr Devenport joined the Royal Navy in his late teens and served for approximately a decade. He had two daughters by his first marriage, Mrs Eastmond and Mrs Moore, and, after his divorce, he married for a second time, although that relationship was short-lived. He had lived alone at Chartist House for several years before his death. He lived on the eleventh floor which was not within that part of the building where the residents had the benefit of supervision by the warden.
Mr Devenport was a somewhat eccentric man who was overweight and had an extremely complex medical history. He is described by his family as a friendly and gentle man. Over the years, he had become increasingly obsessed with his health and the medication he was taking. Whilst still in the Royal Navy, he was diagnosed as having a personality disorder and was in intermittent contact with the psychiatric services from that time onwards. He frequently suffered from feelings of depression and occasionally expressed suicidal thoughts. On at least one occasion, he made a somewhat half-hearted attempt on his own life. He was treated with antidepressant and anxiolytic medication. In addition, he complained of a multitude of physical symptoms. Dr Grenville, who has examined all the medical records, considers that some of Mr Devenport's symptoms were a product of his personality disorder. However, he is of the view that there was an organic basis for the diagnoses of high blood pressure, diverticular disease, irritable bowel syndrome, osteoarthritis of the spine, osteoporosis and oesophageal reflux. Dr Grenville was not convinced that there was any organic basis for the diagnoses of ischaemic heart disease and asthma.
From time to time, Mr Devenport compiled bulletins about his current medical conditions and medication. These demonstrate that Mr Devenport was preoccupied with his health and thought that he had been ill virtually all his life. He felt that he suffered pain for most of every day. He was on a large number of drugs.
On 30th
May 1993, Mr Devenport was admitted to Tameside General Hospital, at Shipman's request, for investigation of his complaint of central chest pain. It is clear from Shipman's letter of referral that he was by no means convinced that the symptoms were of organic origin; he thought they might be due to anxiety. Mr Devenport remained in hospital until 4th
June 1993. The discharge summary records that the findings were essentially negative. The diagnosis was
'ATYPICAL CHEST PAIN'
, which may be coded language for chest pain that is psychosomatic in origin. Mr Devenport was discharged on what was described as a streamlined drug regime. Nonetheless, it comprised no fewer than ten different types of medication, including a glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) spray. He was reviewed in August 1993 and it was reported that he had been free of chest pain since using his GTN spray twice daily. Dr Grenville explained that a GTN spray should normally be used when chest pain is actually experienced or when it is expected to occur. Mr Devenport had been told to take it regularly, twice daily. The fact that he reported that he had no chest pain while taking it indicated that his chest pain had probably been of psychosomatic origin. Mr Devenport believed that he suffered from angina; he took the treatment for angina and it 'cured' the symptoms, thereby proving to himself that he really did have angina. On review the findings were negative, save for raised blood pressure. Mr Devenport was advised to lose weight and was discharged back to Shipman's care with no change to his medication.
By July 1993, Mr Devenport's family had become extremely concerned about his preoccupation with illness and the number and amount of drugs he was taking. On 26th
July, Mr Dickson, his mother and his sister, Miss Dickson, had a consultation with Shipman to discuss Mr Devenport's medication. The discussion, which took place without Mr Devenport's knowledge, was brief and uncomfortable. Shipman told the family that Mr Devenport was not taking as much medication as he claimed but was merely seeking attention. He seemed irritated at being questioned and was dismissive of their fears. They remained unhappy at the way in which Mr Devenport was being treated.
In November 1993, Mr Devenport went to the casualty department at Tameside General Hospital complaining of pain in the groin. He went again the following week, complaining of joint pains. Thereafter, Shipman prescribed slow-release morphine tablets but these failed to abate Mr Devenport's pain. He was referred to the pain clinic at Stepping Hill Hospital. A drug called Triptafen appeared to bring about some improvement and he was discharged from the clinic in March 1994.
On 25th
April 1994, Mr Devenport referred himself to Tameside General Hospital with depression. The admission note says that he was unable to cope with feelings of loneliness and had suicidal thoughts. On 30th
April 1994, he again attended Tameside General Hospital with depression, this time referred by Shipman. His problems on that occasion were of low mood, low appetite, increased crying and irritability, poor sleep and suicidal ideas. He said that he was frightened of going back to Chartist House. He was thought to be a very lonely man who had no identifiable mental illness but personality problems. He stayed overnight in hospital but discharged himself the following day.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
On 3rd
May 1994, Mr Devenport saw Shipman at the surgery. Shipman recorded that the angina was stable and Mr Devenport was doing his shopping, which implies that he was walking about and carrying things without difficulty. However, he was complaining of feeling depressed and Prozac was prescribed. On 5th
May, he had a panic attack and Librium was prescribed. On 14th
May 1994, the record shows a consultation at which the Prozac prescription was increased and he was said still to have anginal pain. There is a corresponding manuscript record in which it is said that Mr Devenport felt very anxious. He said that no one cared about him; his family were no use and had given him up. He had sweaty attacks and felt off colour. He had no contact with anyone. The words
'needs more GTN of late'
seem to have been inserted between two previously written lines.
On 17th
May, Shipman visited Mr Devenport at home; the visit is recorded in the visits book and in the manual records. Shipman reported that Mr Devenport was less panicked but was still anxious. He appeared to be sleeping well and the sweating was
'better'
. There is a corresponding computerised record where he is said to be
'settling down'
.
On 18th
May 1994, Mr Devenport had an appointment with the practice nurse, Sister Morgan, for an electrocardiogram (ECG). According to the note made by Sister Morgan, the ECG showed bundle branch block, right ventricular hypertrophy and ischaemia. However, Dr Grenville has seen the ECG and says that it does not show the features described. He says that the ECG shows no significant abnormalities and is similar to ECGs taken previously. Sister Morgan has volunteered a statement in which she explained that, although she wrote the entry in the records, it was Shipman who had examined and interpreted the ECG trace. This gives rise to the suspicion that Shipman deliberately misinterpreted the ECG trace, with the intention of creating the impression that Mr Devenport had more serious cardiac problems than he had hitherto been shown to have.
On 24th
May 1994, it appears that a letter arrived at the surgery describing Mr Devenport's most recent admission to the psychiatric department at Tameside General Hospital. The computerised GP records read:
'Letter from specialist
personality disord
(
er
)
. own dischar
(
ge
)
'
.
On 24th
May, Mr Devenport also had an appointment in the surgery. There is no manuscript record of the consultation but the computerised record reads:
'Angina control - worsening.
chat med consultant'
.
That is an unsatisfactory entry as there are no details of how the angina control was worsening. It is not clear whether the pains were worse or more frequent or both. It is not clear whether they were still controlled by the use of GTN spray.
On the same day, Mr Frith, the partner of Miss Dickson, saw Mr Devenport in Hyde town centre and noticed that he looked yellow and ill. Mr Devenport told Mr Frith about his ailments and the medication which he was taking. However, the main topic of conversation on that occasion was his desire to leave Chartist House; he seemed to Mr Frith to be panicking and really worried, as if everything was getting him down.
25th
May 1994
On Wednesday, 25th
May, Mrs Harlow was serving lunch to residents in the dining room when she received a message from Mr Devenport asking for his lunch to be taken up to his room, as he did not feel well. She took it up at about 12.30pm. Mr Devenport was lying on top of his bed, fully dressed in a black T-shirt, long black trousers and a cummerbund. He said that he was not feeling well, although he did not look seriously ill. He told Mrs Harlow that he was waiting for the doctor to arrive and would not eat his lunch until he had been. Mrs Harlow believes that she put his lunch in the kitchen, and then left.
The computerised medical records indicate that Shipman visited Mr Devenport on 25th
May. Shipman had of course seen him in the surgery only the day before. There is no indication in the visits book that a visit was intended or that it had been requested. The note in the computerised record reads:
'Had a chat to patient.
re angina ref mri tluk'
.
I interpret this entry to mean that Shipman talked to Mr Devenport about his angina and discussed a referral to Manchester Royal Infirmary. Mr Devenport was to let Shipman know, presumably whether or not he wished to be referred to that hospital. This is a very strange entry, as it does not appear to have taken matters beyond the stage reached the day before when there had been a chat, apparently about a medical consultant.
The Inquiry has no evidence from anyone who saw or spoke to Mr Devenport after that visit.
The Discovery of the Death
On the following day, 26th
May, Mrs Dudley delivered lunch to Mr Devenport. She visited at about midday. The front door of Mr Devenport's flat was ajar as usual. Inside, she found him in his chair. He was grey, his eyes were closed and he looked as if he was peacefully asleep. Mrs Dudley says that he was wearing his pyjamas. Mrs Dudley realised he was dead. She informed Mrs Unsworth, resident warden at Chartist House, who went up to the flat and confirmed the death. Mrs Unsworth then telephoned Shipman. Her call was timed at 12.45pm in the surgery visits book. A short time later, Shipman attended. He telephoned Mr Devenport's mother and she in turn telephoned her son, Mr Dickson, who went to the flat. By the time he arrived, Mrs Unsworth and Shipman had left. Mr Dickson says that Mr Devenport was sitting in his chair, dressed in a T-shirt and shorts. He looked calm. Mr Dickson thought that the T-shirt and shorts must have been his night attire. Thus, although Mrs Dudley and Mr Dickson describe Mr Devenport's clothing quite differently, both had the impression that he was dressed for bed, even though he was sitting in a chair.
The medical records contain the briefest note relating to Shipman's visit after Mr Devenport's death:
'Seen in own home
O/E dead
ct ihd hypertension'
.
Certification
Shipman must have signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered and shows that Shipman had given the primary cause of death as coronary thrombosis. This was said to be due to ischaemic heart disease against which he wrote
'1988'
and hypertension against which he wrote
'1986'
. He said that he had last seen Mr Devenport alive on 25th
May. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Both Mr Dickson and Miss Dickson were unhappy about the circumstances of the death and felt that the excessive quantities of medication that Mr Devenport had been prescribed must have contributed to it. Miss Dickson voiced her concerns to the deputy registrar who registered the death. She advised that Miss Dickson should speak to the coroner if she was not happy and should not go ahead with the funeral arrangements. Nevertheless, the registration of the death went ahead on 27th
May but, as a consequence of their concerns, Miss Dickson and Mr Devenport's daughter, Mrs Eastmond, went to see Shipman on 1st
June to discuss the circumstances of Mr Devenport's death. Mrs Eastmond is a nurse and, during the interview, Shipman gave a technical explanation of the circumstances of her father's death in what appeared to both women to be a condescending and unsympathetic manner.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. Originally, he appears to have recorded in black pen the time of death as
'about 1000'
(changed, in the same pen to
'2200 hrs. 25.5.94'
). There is an endorsement in blue ink above the entry, saying
'spoke with Dr Shipman'
and then the initials of the medical referee. She has also added the words
'death sometime between 22.00 25/5/94 and 01.00 26/5/94'
.
Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Devenport for four weeks during his last illness and last saw him alive 12 hours before death. Assuming a time of death of 10pm (the time originally claimed by Shipman), this would be at 10am, an unlikely time for a visit given Shipman's morning surgery commitments. Shipman also claimed to have seen the body 18 hours after death. On his own timing, this would mean that he attended at about 4pm on 26th
May, significantly later than is likely to have been the case.
Shipman said that the mode of death was
'Collapse'
lasting
'seconds'
. Shipman claimed that that information was based on his own observations and then stated:
'Seen at home agreed referral for
angiogram needed angina worse
found next day by Home help sat in living
room'.
Above this entry the medical referee wrote:
'Agreed Referral for coronary artery surgery'
. From this I must infer that Shipman told the medical referee that Mr Devenport had been offered and had agreed to a referral for surgery. This must be intended to tie in with the discussion about referral to Manchester Royal Infirmary. However, in the medical records Shipman said that Mr Devenport was to let him know about a referral to Manchester Royal Infirmary. On Form B, Shipman stated that no one was present at the death.
The suspicion arises for consideration that Shipman might have killed Mr Devenport during his visit on 25th
May. On Form B, Shipman implied that he had visited at about 10am. That is unlikely, as the appointments sheet for the day shows that he had his usual morning surgery followed by open surgery, which would probably have taken until about 11.45am. Shipman usually did paperwork before going out on his rounds. Mr Devenport was last seen alive by Mrs Harlow when she brought his lunch. He told her he was expecting Shipman. Shipman would have been free to visit in the afternoon until about 2pm, when his vaccinations clinic began, and again from about 2.30pm until 4pm. Shipman had only four visits listed for that day, one of which was cancelled at 10.15am. He would have had plenty of time to visit Mr Devenport. Chartist House is not far from Market Street and he could have visited Mr Devenport before or after the vaccinations clinic. It is also possible that Shipman might have visited Mr Devenport on his way home after surgery. From his list of appointments, it appears that he would have finished work at the surgery between about 6.15pm and 6.30pm. There was evidence that Shipman sometimes called on Mr Devenport after the afternoon surgery, probably when on his way home.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville considers that there is no clear evidence that Mr Devenport ever suffered from angina or its underlying condition, ischaemic heart disease. He says that Mr Devenport presented a very difficult diagnostic problem as all his symptoms were overlaid by anxiety and depression. Ischaemic heart disease had never been objectively established. The ECG, which Shipman claimed showed ischaemic heart disease, did not in fact do so. The extensive investigations carried out in May and June 1993 had all proved negative, although the medication Mr Devenport had been taking for his supposed angina was continued. Mr Devenport's claim that he had less chest pain when using his GTN spray twice daily did not prove that he really had angina. He might have had some non-specific chest pain related to his anxiety. Dr Grenville was of the view that Mr Devenport probably did not have ischaemic heart disease. However, as Mr Devenport never underwent coronary angiography, which is the definitive test for ischaemic heart disease, it seems to me that I cannot reach a positive conclusion that he did not have that condition.
Dr Grenville was of the view that Mr Devenport probably did suffer from hypertension, although the high readings recorded might have been affected by anxiety and could have been inaccurate due to Mr Devenport's obesity. However, even taking account of those possible sources of inaccuracy, Dr Grenville thought that there was hypertension and that this factor together with his obesity put Mr Devenport at higher than average risk of suffering a heart attack. If he did in fact also suffer from ischaemic heart disease, he would have been at quite a high risk of heart attack.
Dr Grenville noted that, on Form B, Shipman had claimed that Mr Devenport died between 10pm and 1am and said that it would not have been possible for him to estimate the time of death as accurately as that. Such an estimate might be possible for a skilled forensic pathologist but not for a general practitioner. In any event, a rectal temperature would have to be taken and there is no evidence that it was.
Dr Grenville also noted that Shipman had claimed that he had attended Mr Devenport for four weeks during his last illness. Yet there had been no significant change in Mr Devenport's condition four weeks before his death. If anything, in early May, he had been reported as being rather better. Taking the records at face value, there had been deterioration about two weeks before the death, but the genuineness of those records is questionable. In particular, Dr Grenville was suspicious of the ECG, which Shipman said showed ischaemic heart disease and ventricular hypertrophy but Dr Grenville says does not. Dr Grenville was also suspicious of the record of worsening angina control, which provided no detail at all. Dr Grenville says that worsening angina is a very serious matter. If that entry were genuine he would expect to see full details of the nature of the worsening and almost certainly an admission to hospital or, at any rate, an immediate referral.
Following his consideration of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Devenport was moderately suspicious, and following his separate consideration of the cremation certificate, that it was highly suspicious.
Dr Grenville also agreed with Dr Alan Banks, who had made the point that Mr Devenport's death should have been referred to the coroner, if only because there had been some fairly recent suggestion of suicidal tendencies.
Conclusion
This case is not straightforward. Mr Devenport was at an increased risk of sudden death due to heart attack. If Shipman's records are genuine, that risk had greatly increased within the last day or two of his life, as Mr Devenport's angina was less well controlled than formerly. So, a sudden death due to heart attack was at least a possibility and might have been a real risk.
Usually in a Shipman killing, there is a close temporal relationship between Shipman's visit and the death or the discovery of it. Here, that close association cannot be clearly established. Mr Devenport was last seen alive at about 12.30pm on 25th
May and was not found dead until about midday on 26th
May. Mr Devenport was not socially active and there is no report of any attempt to contact him between those times. How Shipman arrived at his estimate of a time of death between 10pm to 1am is not known. In any event, Dr Grenville thinks the estimate is unreliable. If Mr Devenport was found wearing nightclothes, it would suggest that he died either during the late evening of 25th
May or quite early in the morning of 26th
May. The time of Shipman's visit on 25th
May is not known. It could have been at about 1pm or between 2.30pm and 4pm or at about 6.30pm. At any of those times, one would normally expect Mr Devenport to be wearing day clothes, although it is possible that he might have changed into nightwear as early as 6.30pm. He was, in any event, somewhat eccentric in habits of dressing, although there is no evidence that his eccentricity extended to wearing nightclothes during the day. Consideration of these aspects of the evidence tends to suggest that Mr Devenport probably died at a time when Shipman would not have been visiting him. However, there are so many uncertainties that it is entirely possible that Mr Devenport died while Shipman was visiting. It is entirely possible that Mr Devenport was wearing a T-shirt and shorts rather than pyjamas and that these were day clothes which others were not accustomed to seeing him in.
That is the evidence that tends to suggest that Shipman did not kill Mr Devenport. It is far from conclusive.
Considering the evidence that suggests that Shipman did kill Mr Devenport, I consider, first, Dr Grenville's suspicions, which I share, about some of the most recent entries in Mr Devenport's medical records. I am particularly suspicious of the ECG taken on 18th
May, which Shipman appears to have instructed Sister Morgan to enter in the records as showing ischaemic heart disease. I accept Dr Grenville's evidence that it does not. It seems to me that Shipman was seeking to create the impression that Mr Devenport was more seriously at risk of heart attack than in fact he was.
Second, I am suspicious of Shipman's decision to visit Mr Devenport at home on 25th
May, only a day after he had seen him in the surgery. If Mr Devenport's condition was truly serious on 24th
May he should have been admitted to hospital there and then. Mr Devenport was not one who would have refused admission. If his condition was not serious on 24th
May it is hard to see why it would be necessary for Shipman to visit him the next day. The notes of neither visit record any physical signs, as one might expect them to do, if there was any concern about worsening angina. Both notes record
'chats'
about referral. There is no detail at all and no explanation as to why two chats were necessary. Some detail creeps in when Shipman came to complete Form B and even more detail was provided when the medical referee spoke to him. Indeed it rather appears that the story is developing with time. Shipman's use of the expression
'tluk'
(to let us know), tends to arouse suspicion in my mind, as it is a record he often made when leaving a patient whom he had killed. I have a strong suspicion that, on 24th
May, Shipman decided to kill Mr Devenport the next day and went to his flat for that purpose.
Third, I am suspicious of Shipman's claim that he could estimate the time of death as having occurred between 10pm and 1am. Dr Grenville says that no estimate is possible. Shipman frequently pretended that he could estimate the time of death and did so in an attempt to create the impression that the death had occurred several hours after his last visit.
Finally, I consider Mr Devenport's peaceful appearance sitting in a chair. Dr Grenville has said in his generic evidence that it is unusual to find the victim of a fatal heart attack sitting peacefully in a chair. More usually the victim is found collapsed on the floor. Usually he or she will have realised that something very serious is happening and will have got up in an attempt to summon help. On the other hand, Mr Devenport's peaceful appearance is entirely typical of that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
Mr Devenport was very vulnerable to Shipman. I now recognise that Shipman had little sympathy with those of his patients whom he thought were not genuinely ill. He had little patience with those of his patients who had psychiatric illness. Examples are Mrs Bianka Pomfret, Miss Joan Harding and Mrs Ivy Lomas. These were all patients who were very frequent visitors to his surgery and whose physical illness was not serious. There is reason to think that he became tired of attending to them. I suspect that Shipman had had enough of Mr Devenport and decided to kill him.
Although the evidence in this case falls far short of that which would be required to convict Shipman of Mr Devenport's murder, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably killed Mr Devenport.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001