The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Miriam Davies
Introduction
Mrs Miriam Davies died at her home, 10 Clarence Street, Hyde on Saturday, 22nd
March 1980 at the age of 66. Mrs Davies' general practitioner was Dr G Bennett of the Clarendon House practice in Hyde. The cause of her death was certified by the South Manchester Coroner, following post-mortem examination without inquest. He certified that the cause of Mrs Davies' death was acute coronary artery insufficiency due to atheroma.
In January 2001, Mrs Davies' grandson, Mr Robert Davies, expressed his concern to the police over the circumstances of her death. Mr Davies knew that his grandmother had been found dead at home and he believed that there had been no post-mortem examination. The police investigated the death and concluded that there were no suspicious circumstances.
The Inquiry has obtained and reviewed the Coroner's file, which contains a post-mortem examination report prepared by Dr Farrand, dated 24th
March 1980, following an examination carried out two days after the death, and a number of reports prepared by officers of the Greater Manchester Police. Mrs Davies' medical records have not survived, but the Inquiry has obtained Shipman's visits book for 1980.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The documents from the Coroner's file show that Mrs Davies had suffered from heart complaints since about 1962. On 21st
March, the evening before her death, Mrs Davies was visited at home by Dr Bennett. He treated her for heart failure. She was last seen alive at about 9.30pm that evening by a friend, Mrs Florence Cleary.
The Discovery of the Death
Mrs Davies' neighbour, Mrs Louie Tunnicliffe, found her dead at 10.15am the next morning. She was lying on the couch in the downstairs front room.
The Post-Mortem Examination Report
The post-mortem examination revealed congested air passages, dense pleural adhesions and bilateral apical fibrosis and calcification. The heart was dilated; the coronary arteries were atheromatous; the main arteries had narrowed; the myocardium showed diffuse fibrosis. The cause of death was said to be acute coronary artery insufficiency due to atheroma.
Conclusion
I am quite sure that Mrs Davies died from natural causes and there is no reason to suspect that Shipman was in any way involved. His visits book discloses no visit to Mrs Davies on the day of her death. I have included this case in my Report because it illustrates the type of concern felt by the residents of Hyde as the result of Shipman's criminal conduct. Mr Davies was understandably concerned about his grandmother's death, as she was found dead in circumstances similar to those of the deaths of many of Shipman's victims. I hope his concern has now been allayed.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001