The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Eric Davies
Introduction
Mr Eric Davies died at Hyde Nursing Home on Thursday, 8th
September 1994 at the age of 72. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was glioma of the parietal lobe, which is a tumour of the brain.
The Greater Manchester Police considered the death as part of their investigation into the means by which Shipman obtained controlled drugs. They took statements in the context of that investigation, although they did not examine the circumstances in which Mr Davies died. There has been no inquest into Mr Davies' death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Norma Lenthall (Mr Davies' daughter), Mrs Lynn Openshaw and her husband Mr John Openshaw (Mr Davies' daughter and son-in-law), Mr Robert Davies (Mr Davies' son) and Mrs Audrey Watson (a night sister at Hyde Nursing Home at the time of the death). The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Davies' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has obtained the admission and discharge register from Hyde Nursing Home and the controlled drugs register from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Davies had enjoyed good health for most of his life and rarely consulted his doctor. In spring 1994, he began to show signs of confusion. Shipman saw him on 13th
April 1994 and made a tentative diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident or stroke. Following a deterioration in his condition, Mr Davies was admitted to Tameside General Hospital on 1st
May 1994, suffering from acute confusion. He was found to have a brain tumour. He remained at Tameside General Hospital for six weeks and, on 15th
June 1994, was transferred to Hyde Nursing Home. He was admitted to the Werneth Court section, which specialised in the treatment of elderly mentally infirm patients. Mr Davies' wife visited him every day and spent most of the day with him. His son and daughters also visited him regularly.
All the witnesses agree that Mr Davies' condition gradually deteriorated after his admission to Hyde Nursing Home. He was immobile and barely able to communicate. He does not appear to have been in pain and Mrs Lenthall doubts whether he required opiates for the purposes of pain relief. Shipman visited Mr Davies regularly during his time at Hyde Nursing Home. The last visit recorded on Shipman's surgery computer is dated 2nd
September 1994.
The Events of 7th
September 1994
Mrs Openshaw visited her father at about 7pm on 7th
September. He was in bed and his breathing appeared heavy and rattly. Shipman was called and arrived at some time before 9pm. Mrs Davies said that she did not want her husband to suffer and Shipman said that he could give him an injection of morphine but that this might kill somebody as ill as Mr Davies. Shipman then gave an injection and immediately Mr Davies' breathing settled. He then took a large intake of breath, which led Mrs Openshaw to think that he was going to die. However, his breathing restarted and soon returned to a regular pattern. Mr Openshaw's recollection is similar to that of his wife.
Mr Robert Davies was also present and recalls that his father's breathing was very noisy. He recalls that Shipman arrived but does not remember any conversation. Nor does he recall that an injection was given. However, he does remember that his father's breathing settled and that his sister, Mrs Openshaw, said that this was because of the injection Shipman had given.
Mrs Lenthall remembers being summoned to the nursing home on the evening of 7th
September. By the time she arrived, at about midnight, the other members of the family had left. She stayed a short time then drove to her mother's house. When she left the nursing home, her father was still alive.
There is no record of Shipman's visit of 7th
September in the handwritten general practitioner records, the computerised medical notes or the visits book.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 8th
September, Mr Robert Davies drove his mother to the nursing home. They arrived at about 9.30am. They found Mr Davies' door locked. It transpired that an elderly lady had wandered in and locked herself in by mistake. When Mrs Davies gained access, she found that her husband had died. His body was still warm and it was thought at the time that he had died very recently.
According to the appointments sheets and visits book, a locum doctor called Dr Cox was on duty at the surgery on Thursday, 8th
September. The visits book contains a note suggesting that the surgery was notified that morning that Mr Davies had died at 9.45am. Further, from records recovered from the Market Street Surgery, it appears that Shipman was attending a full day course at the University of Manchester on that day.
There is an entry in the handwritten general practitioner records dated 8th
September 1994, which records that death was certified at 12.10pm. The note is written in handwriting other than that of Shipman. After that entry appear the initials of Dr Cox.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the cause of death was glioma of the parietal lobe. He said that the approximate interval between onset and death was less than six months. He said that he had last seen Mr Davies alive on 7th
September.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Davies had died at 10.40am and that he had attended him during his last illness for four months. He said he had last seen Mr Davies alive 12 hours before death and had seen the body 36 hours after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting about 24 hours. Shipman said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and on statements made by the staff at the home. He said that Mrs Davies was present at the moment of death, which she almost certainly was not. In other respects, the entries on the MCCD and Form B appear to be fairly accurate and do not give rise to any cause for concern.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that the death of Mr Davies was not suspicious.
Although Dr John Grenville provided a statement in relation to the death of Mr Davies, the focus of the statement is whether Mr Davies required diamorphine; Dr Grenville said that he did not. According to the diamorphine register from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, five 100mg ampoules of diamorphine were prescribed by Shipman in Mr Davies' name on 23rd
July 1994. There is no record of Mr Davies ever having received diamorphine. Shipman was asked about the prescription by leading counsel for the prosecution in the course of his criminal trial. Shipman claimed that the diamorphine was dispensed to a member of staff from Hyde Nursing Home. I think that was a lie.
In their second joint generic report, Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville say that it might be appropriate for a doctor, faced with a terminally ill patient in distress, to give an injection of a sedative drug such as Largactil. In an appropriate dose, of about 25mg, this would have the effect of settling the patient and would usually have no harmful side effects. Only occasionally would such a drug cause a dangerous depression of the respiratory drive. If an excessive dose were given, the patient's death might well be hastened if the respiratory drive were already compromised. However, in the present case, Shipman said that he intended to give an injection of morphine and it seems unlikely therefore that he gave a different type of drug.
Conclusion
It is likely that Mr Davies died a natural death from the cause certified by Shipman. It is clear from the witness evidence and from the medical records that Mr Davies had a brain tumour and had reached the terminal stage of his illness.
There is evidence that Shipman gave an injection during the evening of 7th
September. As Shipman said he would give morphine, he probably did so, although it was more usual for him to carry diamorphine than morphine. If he gave either of those drugs, it is clear that he did not give a lethal dose. Mr Davies lived for about a further 12 hours after the injection. There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr Davies after his visit during the evening of 7th
September. He could not have given a further injection. Because I do not know what dose was given, I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman gave a larger dose than was appropriate for the relief of distress, which might have depressed Mr Davies' respiratory drive and indirectly shortened his life by a small margin. However, as Shipman warned the family, the giving of an opiate does carry this risk. The doctor should weigh the risk against the benefit and estimate the appropriate dose as well as he can. It is quite possible that an appropriate dose might shorten life.
If the injection had been of some drug other than morphine or diamorphine (such as Largactil), it is theoretically possible that Shipman gave a larger dose than was appropriate. If he did, this could have shortened Mr Davies' life by a small margin, as over-sedation can render the elderly or terminally ill more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death. However, I regard this possibility as remote, as Shipman said that he intended to give an opiate.
I wish to make two observations about this case. First, if as seems likely, Shipman openly gave an injection of morphine or possibly diamorphine on the evening of 7th
September, it is remarkable that he did not record this in Mr Davies' medical notes. Second, the prescription for diamorphine made out in Mr Davies' name on 23rd
July 1994 cannot possibly have been intended for him. The quantities are so large they would only be suitable for use in a syringe driver, which would be provided for a person in the terminal stages of a painful cancer. The diamorphine must have been kept by Shipman for his own purposes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001