The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Drummond
Introduction
Mr Joseph Drummond was found dead at his home, 10 Ashley Street, Newton, Hyde on Tuesday, 28th
April 1992 at the age of 85. He was a widower and lived alone. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Following a post-mortem examination on 30th
April 1992, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of Mr Drummond's death was cardiorespiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis, emphysema and ischaemic heart disease.
This death first came to the attention of the Inquiry because Mr Drummond's medical records were found at Shipman's house. The police have not investigated Mr Drummond's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Mavis Drummond and Mrs Joan Drummond, Mr Drummond's daughters-in-law. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Drummond's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1992, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, the Report of Sudden Death prepared by the Greater Manchester Police and the post-mortem examination report prepared by Dr A S Day, consultant pathologist. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Mavis Drummond told the Inquiry that her father-in-law was in good health although, from the age of about 80, he became unsteady on his feet. Mrs Joan Drummond told the Inquiry that he was 'a bit vulnerable on his chest and sometimes found it very difficult to breathe'. She was aware that he took medication for his chest condition.
The general practitioner records reveal that Mr Drummond had a history of chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD). On 19th
November 1990, he was admitted to hospital looking cyanosed and flushed. The x-ray appearances indicated chronic lung disease with superimposed active infection. A diagnosis of exacerbation of chronic obstructive airways disease was made. Mr Drummond improved slowly and was discharged on 10th
December 1990. At review on 21st
February 1991, he was said to feel much better and his chest was clinically clear. He was discharged from further attendance although it was thought likely that he would require long-term medication.
Computerised records from the Donneybrook Surgery suggest that Mr Drummond's last appointment with Shipman prior to his death was on 27th
January 1992. Repeat medication for COAD was recorded on 4th
March 1992, but there is no later entry in either the handwritten or computerised records. The visits book does not show that Shipman visited Mr Drummond in the weeks before he died.
On Saturday, 25th
April 1992, when Mrs Mavis Drummond last saw Mr Drummond, he did not seem unwell.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Joan Drummond went to visit her father-in-law at about 1.30pm on 28th
April 1992. She noticed that the curtains were still drawn, which struck her as very unusual. She knocked at the door but there was no reply. She telephoned the police from a neighbour's house.
A police officer arrived and forced entry to the property. Mrs Drummond followed the officer into the house and saw her father-in-law in the living room. He was sitting in his usual chair near to the fireplace. The gas fire was on and the room was warm. Mr Drummond was fully dressed in his day clothes. His arms were resting on the armchair and his sleeves were half rolled up. His head was leaning against the back of the chair and his mouth was wide open. Mrs Drummond also recalls that the light in the room and the television set were both switched on.
Contained within the Lloyd George folder was a handwritten note in the following terms:
'P.C.Derby
shire
TGR.
Issue D. Cert.
pronounce extinct
broke in
house
Joseph Drummond
10. Ashley St.
Newton
(
telephone number
)
(
telephone number
)
HFS'
.
PC Derbyshire has not been traced. The note was most probably made by a member of the practice staff. It probably signifies that a request was made by PC Derbyshire for a doctor to go round ('TGR') to certify the fact and, if possible, the cause of Mr Drummond's death. Shipman was identified as the doctor who should do so, presumably because he was Mr Drummond's general practitioner.
The Aftermath
According to the Report of Sudden Death submitted by the police to the coroner, death occurred at
'1445 hours'
on 28th April, although this is not consistent with the statement in the same document, that Mr Drummond had been found dead by his daughter-in-law at
'1400 hours'
. It is likely that 2.45pm was the time when the fact of death was certified. Although Dr Bennett is said to be Mr Drummond's usual doctor, the medical records make it quite clear that he had been Shipman's patient for many years. The report also records that Shipman attended the scene after the death.
It is likely that the police referred the death to the coroner, probably because Shipman said he could not sign a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The coroner called for a post-mortem examination. The post-mortem examination report identifies the cause of death as cardiorespiratory failure, due to chronic bronchitis, emphysema and ischaemic heart disease. The report records that the lungs were congested and showed chronic bronchitis with emphysema. The coronary vessels showed moderate to severe degrees of atheromatous changes, whilst the aorta showed severe atheroma.
The Expert Evidence
In Professor Whitwell's opinion, the circumstances of the death and the previous medical history were consistent with the certified cause of death although, strictly speaking, cardiorespiratory failure is a mode, and not a cause, of death. Professor Whitwell told the Inquiry that there is nothing in the post-mortem examination report to indicate any acute pathology, and the diseases certified were chronic and long-standing.
Conclusion
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mr Drummond on the day of his death. Nor is there any evidence that Shipman was in the habit of visiting Mr Drummond at home. There is no suggestion that Mr Drummond was suffering an acute exacerbation of his chronic condition, which might have caused him to request a visit.
If Shipman had killed Mr Drummond, it would be surprising that he did not take the opportunity to certify the cause of death when he was called out to certify the fact of death. That was his typical course of action after killing a patient. He might well have claimed that he had seen Mr Drummond shortly before his death so as to avert the possibility of questions from the registrar.
Finally, the medical records reveal that Mr Drummond suffered from poor health. In Professor Whitwell's opinion, the circumstances of the death and the previous medical history are consistent with the certified cause of death, although firm corroborative pathological evidence is lacking.
In my judgement, it is overwhelmingly likely that Mr Drummond died of the natural causes certified by the coroner.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001