The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fred Davies
Introduction
Mr Fred Davies died at his home, 21 Lumn Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 16th
March 1982 at the age of 76. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Davies' death was carcinoma of the right lung.
In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Kenneth Davies, Mr Davies' son, who was the informant in relation to his death. In reply, Mr Kenneth Davies provided an account of the circumstances surrounding his father's death. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Kenneth Davies and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1982. The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil has been recovered along with the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). No other relevant documents survive.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Davies lived with his wife, Mrs Violet Ann Davies, and his son, Mr Kenneth Davies. In 1980, Mr Davies was diagnosed as suffering from lung cancer. During his final year, he became increasingly unwell and he was bedridden for the last nine months of his life. He received regular care from District Nurse Clegg who remembers him and the fact that he died of cancer. However, she cannot remember the circumstances surrounding his death.
From the time that the diagnosis of lung cancer was made, Shipman visited Mr Davies regularly. According to Mr Kenneth Davies, he came once or twice a week. The visits book from 1982 records Shipman's regular attendance in the weeks leading up to the death and Mr Davies' name appears in the visits book for Thursday, 4th
March, Wednesday, 10th
March and Thursday, 11th
March.
Mr Davies was taking several types of medication, including oral methadone for pain relief. His condition was very poor. He was in pain and had no appetite. A few weeks before he died, Shipman said to Mr Davies that 'he would not let him suffer'. During the last few days of his life, Mr Davies was given his pain-relieving drugs by injection. At about this time, Shipman told Mr Davies that he would not recover. He was abrupt in his manner and Mr Davies was shocked. From that time, he spoke very little. He was semi-conscious and was unable to eat. Mr Kenneth Davies last saw his father alive on 15th
March 1982.
The Day of the Death
Mr Kenneth Davies returned home from work at about 5pm on 16th
March. Mrs Bessie Delaney, a neighbour, came to the house. She went upstairs to see Mr Davies and, a few moments later, called downstairs to say that she thought he had died. Mr Kenneth Davies rushed upstairs and, after looking carefully at his father, concluded that she was right. On the windowsill next to the bed, he noticed a cardboard box containing 'capsules', which contained used and unused capsules of the pain-relieving medication. This was the first time that Mr Kenneth Davies had seen this box.
Mr Kenneth Davies telephoned Shipman at home, but his wife told him that he was at a school governors' meeting. She promised to give him a message. Shipman arrived about ten minutes later, felt Mr Davies' neck and confirmed that he was dead. He told Mr Kenneth Davies to come down to the surgery in the morning to collect the death certificate. He said nothing about having given an injection. During the course of the evening, Mrs Davies said that Shipman had called at lunchtime, but she did not mention an injection. It does not appear that Shipman called a second time while Mr Davies was still alive. Mr Kenneth Davies disposed of the remaining capsules left on the windowsill.
Mr Davies' name appears in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 16th
March.
Certification
It is recorded on the death certificate that Mr Kenneth Davies was the informant who registered his father's death and that he was present at the death.
The MCCD has not been recovered, but the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Davies alive on 16th
March 1982. He said that he had also seen the body after death. A post-mortem examination would not be held. The counterfoil is dated 17th
March, the day after Mr Davies died.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Davies died a natural death. He was clearly in the terminal stage of lung cancer and his death was expected. His pain was such that it was appropriate for Shipman to give him regular injections of an opiate drug. Exactly what was being used is not known.
It is not known how long elapsed after Shipman's last visit before Mr Davies died. Shipman usually carried out his visits between about midday and 3.30pm. Mr Davies died after 5pm, probably at about 6pm. In any event, the death must have been at least two hours after the last injection and was probably more like four hours later. Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing and effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiates were administered intravenously, then death would follow within minutes. If administered intramuscularly, a lethal injection of opiate would cause death within about an hour. As Mr Davies lived for at least two hours after the time of the last possible injection, I can say with confidence that he cannot have been given a lethal dose.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001