The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edgar Dobb
Introduction
Mr Edgar Dobb died at his home, 6 Halton Street, Hyde on Thursday, 7th
February 1980 at the age of 79. It is not known for how long he had been a patient of Shipman but at the time of Mr Dobb's death Shipman had been practising in Hyde for a little under two and a half years. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Dobb's death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In November 2001, the Inquiry attempted to contact Mrs Mary Hannah Dobb, Mr Dobb's widow and the informant in relation to his death. Unfortunately she has died but the Inquiry has been able to contact her sister, Mrs Rose Glithero, who has provided a statement. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1980. Mr Dobb's medical records have not survived.
There has been no police investigation into this death and an inquest has not been held.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Glithero lived near to Mr and Mrs Dobb and used to have lunch with them every day. Mr Dobb had very poor eyesight due to glaucoma. Towards the end of his life, Mr Dobb's health deteriorated generally and Shipman visited him regularly, particularly during the last few weeks. Mr Dobb stayed in bed for the last day or two before he died.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Glithero had lunch with Mr and Mrs Dobb on Thursday, 7th
February. She remembers that Mr Dobb was very unwell and that his bed had been brought downstairs. After lunch, Mrs Glithero stayed at the house until late afternoon. Shipman did not visit whilst she was at the house and although she has said that it is possible he visited in the evening, she does not remember anyone mentioning that he had visited. Mr Dobb's name does, however, appear in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 7th
February, as well as for the day before, Wednesday, 6th
February.
Mrs Glithero was not at her brother-in-law's house when he died. She has said, however, that Mrs Dobb, Mrs Dobb's daughter and son-in-law and Mrs Dobb's brother were present at the time. Unfortunately all those present at the time of death have since died. Mr Dobb was in bed, with his family around him, at the time of his death. The death was fully expected. There is no direct evidence of Shipman's presence at the house either immediately before or at the moment of death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mr Dobb alive on the day of his death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 8th
February 1980, the day after the death.
Conclusion
It seems to me that Mr Dobb died of natural causes. He was clearly very unwell and his death was fully expected. Although there are no medical records, the description of his condition given by Mrs Glithero is compatible with a death from congestive heart failure, the cause of death certified by Shipman.
As Mr Dobb's name appears in Shipman's visits book for 7th
February 1980, the day of the death, it seems likely that Shipman visited the house. Shipman used this book as an aide-memoire when making his scheduled visits and did not necessarily enter all visits he made later in the day when called out as an emergency. I infer therefore that it is quite likely that Shipman visited Mr Dobb in the late morning of the day of the death. He probably also came out later in the day to certify the fact of death. It is possible that he also came out in the late afternoon while Mr Dobb was still alive, but there is no evidence that he was at the house in the period immediately before the death and I am sure that he played no sinister part in Mr Dobb's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001