The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Dixon
Introduction
Mrs Alice Dixon died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 26th
February 1978 at the age of 88. It is not clear whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman, who had been working in Hyde for about four months at the time of her death. He certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
The Inquiry has taken a witness statement from Mrs Irene Goodwin, Mrs Dixon's daughter. The Inquiry has also had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the Charnley House admission register and diary for 1978. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Dixon was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Eccles on 26th
September 1970. According to Mrs Goodwin, her mother remained well until about 1975, when her eyesight and mental faculties began to fail.
The earliest Charnley House diary available to the Inquiry is for 1978. This document would suggest that Shipman was Mrs Dixon's general practitioner. On 13th
February 1978, he visited Mrs Dixon and another resident at Charnley House and decided that a consultant geriatrician should see Mrs Dixon. The geriatrician saw Mrs Dixon on 14th
February 1978 and prescribed
'Largactyl
(sic)
'
, a sedative. During this period, Mrs Dixon had a number of falls.
It appears that, on Thursday, 16th
February 1978, Mrs Dixon fell and it was thought that she had fractured her femur. She was taken to Ashton General Hospital (as it was then called) and was kept in overnight. What treatment she received is not known. She returned to Charnley House the next day. From that time on, she was in some pain, her appetite diminished and her general condition deteriorated.
Shipman visited Mrs Dixon on Monday, 20th
February 1978 and prescribed Diconal and recommended that her Lasix, which is a diuretic, be stopped for the time being. Diconal is an opioid analgesic, taken in tablet form.
On 21st
February 1978, the diary indicates that Mrs Dixon's speech was poor. Her condition did not improve and, by 23rd
February 1978, she had developed pressure sores, due to immobility. On Friday, 24th
February 1978, Shipman came again to see Mrs Dixon and left a spray for her sores. It is clear that, by this time, Mrs Dixon was very poorly. On Saturday, 25th
February 1978, Mrs Goodwin visited and found her mother in bed, breathless, wheezing and barely aware of her surroundings. She was being given sips of water by a carer. Mrs Goodwin thought her mother could not live long. There was no mention of a visit by Shipman that day.
The Day of the Death
The night report for Saturday, 25th
February 1978 records that
'ALL CARE'
was given to Mrs Dixon, but that she died at 7.45am on the morning of Sunday, 26th
February 1978. Mrs Goodwin was informed. The diary entry for that date reveals that Dr Bills certified the fact of Mrs Dixon's death although it was Shipman who was later to certify its cause.
Certification
Shipman certified that the primary cause of Mrs Dixon's death was bronchopneumonia. He stated that epilepsy was a secondary cause. As the medical records have not survived, this cannot be verified. The MCCD itself is not available but the Inquiry has its counterfoil. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Dixon had died at Charnley House on 26th
February 1978 at the age of 88. He said that he had last seen her alive on 24th
February 1978. That is consistent with the Charnley House diary.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Dixon died a natural death.
It is clear from the Charnley House diary that Mrs Dixon's condition declined following the fracture of her femur. Her immobility rendered her vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a very common cause of death in elderly, immobile patients. It is clear from the diary that the death was expected.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Dixon after 24th
February. That day was a Friday. It is very unlikely that Shipman would have visited her again over the weekend, unless called out. It would appear that Dr Bills was the Donneybrook doctor on duty that weekend, as it was he who came out to certify the fact of death.
It appears to me that the overwhelming likelihood is that Mrs Dixon died of bronchopneumonia and that Shipman played no sinister part in her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001