The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Christopher Denham
Introduction
Mr Christopher Denham died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Monday, 26th
March 1984 at the age of 97. He was a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Susan Duggan (Mr Denham's granddaughter) and Mrs Anne Marjorie Urmston (a domestic assistant who has worked at Bowlacre since 1972). The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and Shipman's visits book for 1984. No medical records have survived and there are no documents from Bowlacre.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Denham's daughter was Mrs Winifred Mellor. Shipman was convicted of Mrs Mellor's murder.
Mrs Urmston remembers Mr Denham from her childhood. He and his daughter, Mrs Mellor, ran a chip shop in Gee Cross. Mrs Urmston cannot remember when he moved into Bowlacre but she recalls seeing him there and remembers that Mrs Mellor used to visit him. Mrs Urmston cannot recollect anything about Mr Denham's state of health.
Shipman's visits book suggests that Shipman intended to visit Mr Denham on Monday, 19th
March, Thursday, 22nd
March and Monday, 26th
March.
The Death
Mrs Urmston recalls that, at about 9am on either Sunday, 25th
or Monday, 26th
March 1984, she was asked by the manager of the home, Mrs Sandra Holdsworth, to sit with Mr Denham. She understood that he was seriously ill and was not expected to live long. The policy of the home was that a resident should not be left alone in such circumstances. She recalls that she sat on a chair by the bed. Mr Denham appeared to be unconscious and she did not speak to him. She thinks she sat with him for about half an hour to an hour while waiting for Mrs Mellor to arrive. She does not recall that a doctor came into the room during this time. In due course, she was relieved of her duty. She recalls being told some time later that Mr Denham had died but she cannot say whether this was on the day when she had sat with him or the following day.
Mrs Duggan was 21 years old when her grandfather died. She remembers that her mother used to visit him quite frequently because he was very ill. She recalls that her mother received a telephone call from the home to say that Mr Denham was not expected to live much longer. She spent the night before he died at his bedside and remained with him until his death. Mrs Duggan remembers that he died in the afternoon or early evening. Her mother did not mention to her that Shipman visited on the day of the death and did not say that her father had been given an injection.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that Mr Denham died at Bowlacre on 26th
March 1984. He gave the cause of death as 'old age'. He stated that he had last seen Mr Denham alive on the day of the death. He said that he had examined the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil is dated 26th
March 1984.
The death certificate confirms that Mrs Mellor was present at Mr Denham's death.
There are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
Mr Denham was very elderly and quite unwell in the period leading up to his death. The evidence suggests that his death was neither sudden nor at all unexpected. Mrs Mellor was able to sit with her father until his death.
Although there is no witness evidence that Shipman visited Mr Denham on the day of his death, the MCCD counterfoil and the visits book suggest that he did so. If Mrs Duggan is right in thinking that her grandfather died in the afternoon or early evening, it is likely that Shipman had visited that day while Mr Denham was alive. There is a possibility therefore that Shipman might have given Mr Denham a drug that hastened his end. However, I think this is unlikely as Mrs Mellor was with her father throughout the day until his death.
Although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman hastened Mr Denham's death, I think it highly likely that his death was due to natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001