The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ethel Dolan
Introduction
Mrs Ethel Dolan died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Friday, 17th
April 1987 at the age of 82. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about seven years. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In investigating the death, the Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House. Mrs Dolan's family has been contacted and has no concerns about her death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Dolan was admitted to Charnley House from Tameside General Hospital on Tuesday, 2nd
October 1979. The Charnley House daily diary records that she was very confused. If she was not at that time registered with Shipman, she soon became so and he saw her for various ailments over the ensuing years.
In April 1986, 12 months before her death, Mrs Dolan was seen by Shipman for a chest infection. A month later, on 13th
May 1986, she collapsed whilst having breakfast. She was seen by Shipman, who diagnosed a transient ischaemic attack for which he prescribed daily aspirin. He said that a skull x-ray was not necessary. Mrs Dolan was next seen by Shipman on Thursday, 11th
December 1986. He altered her medication and added halperidol, which is an anti-psychotic drug used for the short-term management of restlessness and agitation in the elderly.
On Tuesday, 6th
January 1987, Shipman saw Mrs Dolan and diagnosed a slight stroke. He adjusted her medication. It is not clear exactly what medication Mrs Dolan was taking at this time but there is no reason to believe that it was inappropriate. Mrs Dolan seems to have recovered quite well from this episode and, by Friday, 9th
January 1987, she was able to get up for short periods during the day.
On Tuesday, 24th
February 1987, Shipman visited Mrs Dolan again and found that she had deteriorated a little since his last visit. He visited her for the last time on Monday, 23rd
March 1987. She was said to be
'poorly'
. She was given
'T.L.C.'
, meaning tender loving care.
During April 1987, Mrs Dolan's condition was quite poor. She was on a fluid diet. She was confined to bed and suffered from pressure sores. She was turned regularly. On Monday, 13th
April 1987, the afternoon report in the Charnley House daily diary records that there was no change in Mrs Dolan's condition although she was breathing a little heavily and had taken only a small amount of nourishing fluids. On Tuesday, 14th
April 1987, Mrs Dolan's condition deteriorated and there was no improvement the next day. On 16th
April, Dr Jeffery Moysey saw her. It is plain that he thought that no treatment was appropriate because it is recorded that he suggested that she be given
'just T.L.C.'
.
It is not clear why Shipman did not visit on that day. There is only one name in his visits book and that has not been scored through or otherwise marked to suggest that he carried out the visit. It was the day before Good Friday and it may be that Shipman was on holiday or perhaps working for only part of the day.
The Day of the Death
The Charnley House diary for Friday, 17th
April, which was Good Friday, records that Mrs Dolan
'passed peacefully away'
at 11am and that Dr Moysey certified the fact of her death at 11.30am. Shipman's visits book has no record of any visits for that day and the likelihood is that he was not working.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD on 18th
April 1987. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman said, incorrectly, that Mrs Dolan had died on that day, 18th
April. He originally wrote that he had last seen her alive on 17th
April 1987, which was the day of her death, but he then changed that and recorded instead that he had last seen her alive on 16th
April 1987. He said that there was to be no post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. It is highly unlikely that he did see Mrs Dolan alive on either 16th
or 17th
April 1987. In the light of what he wrote on the cremation certificate, it is also unlikely that, by 18th
April, he had seen her body.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. In that document, he gave the correct date of death, which was 17th
April 1987, and said that Mrs Dolan had died at 11.25am. He said that he had been Mrs Dolan's ordinary medical attendant for eight years. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for between four and six months. He said that he had last seen her alive two days before her death, which is almost certainly untrue; Dr Moysey saw Mrs Dolan two days before she died. Shipman said that he had seen the body four days after her death, which is wholly inconsistent with what he wrote on the MCCD counterfoil. He wrote in parentheses that his partner had seen Mrs Dolan's body within one hour after the death. Shipman said that he carried out a complete external examination of the body.
Shipman said that the mode of death was coma lasting four to five days and that his views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and statements made by the staff at Charnley House. He said that the staff at Charnley House nursed Mrs Dolan during her last illness and that the staff had been present at the moment of her death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the information contained in the cremation forms and found that there was no cause for suspicion.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Dolan died from natural causes, properly described by Shipman on the MCCD as old age. It is clear from the Charnley House daily diary that Mrs Dolan had deteriorated gradually and had been confined to bed for some time before her death. It is reassuring to know that she was seen by Dr Moysey only a day before she died and that he agreed that nothing could be done for her.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Dolan in the day or so before her death. There is, therefore, no reason to suspect that he did anything which could have caused or hastened her death.
It would seem that Shipman showed his usual disregard for the need for truth and accuracy when filling out the MCCD and the Form B. He entered the wrong date of death on the MCCD counterfoil and it is extremely unlikely that he last saw Mrs Dolan on 16th
April, as he claimed. It is probable that he made this latter false statement simply in order to avoid the time and trouble involved in referring the death to the coroner. Even had he done so, it is most likely that the coroner would have given authority for Shipman to certify the death in any event, because Dr Moysey had seen Mrs Dolan very recently and Shipman was aware of her general condition. The inaccuracies on the certificates do not give rise to any suspicion that Shipman was involved in the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001