The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Drinkwater
Introduction
Mrs Alice Drinkwater died at Norbury House, a residential home for the elderly, Great Norbury Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 7th
July 1992 at the age of 79. She had been a patient of Dr Smith, who also practised from the Donneybrook Surgery. It was Shipman, however, who certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Janet Pugh (Mrs Drinkwater's daughter) and Mrs Julia Anne Mackie (the owner and manager of Norbury House from September 1988 until its closure in April 2001).
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate, Shipman's visits book for 1992, the Donneybrook duty doctor diary and the register of residents from Norbury House. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Drinkwater's medical records.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Drinkwater was a retired cotton worker and the widow of Mr Thomas Harold Drinkwater. She was admitted to Norbury House from Shire Hill Hospital on 23rd
January 1992. The Norbury House register records that she was an insulin-dependent diabetic and this is confirmed by her medical records. She had severe dementia with a short-term memory of only about five minutes.
The immediate background to Mrs Drinkwater's admission to Norbury House is set out in correspondence to Dr Smith from Dr Oliver and Dr Jolobe, both specialists in geriatric medicine. It would appear that Mrs Drinkwater had been admitted to Shire Hill Hospital on 14th
December 1991, with a history of increasing breathlessness. Her history of diabetes was confirmed and it was found that she was suffering paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia and cardiac failure. She seems to have responded well to medication and, at the time of her discharge, was fully mobile and not breathless. As a result of her dementia, however, it was thought that she should be transferred into a nursing home where, once settled and with 24 hour care, her behavioural and medical problems would improve.
Between January and the end of June, it would appear from the computerised general practitioner records that Mrs Drinkwater was seen by Dr Smith with a variety of complaints. On 18th
June 1992, Dr Smith wrote a letter to the local Social Services containing a plea for Night Allowance on Mrs Drinkwater's behalf on the basis of the substantial amount of attention she needed during the night. On 24th
June 1992, Dr Jolobe was asked to make a domiciliary visit. Following his visit, Dr Jolobe wrote to Dr Smith on 7th
July 1992, explaining that Mrs Drinkwater was mentally confused, unsteady on her feet and had a poor appetite. When he examined her, she was in bed and, although she could move all her limbs, she had generalised rigidity and could not walk. In view of her poor appetite, Dr Jolobe recommended to Dr Smith that her insulin be stopped completely to avoid hypoglycaemia and he also recommended that her Frusemide be stopped, lest it cause her to become dehydrated.
The only occasion on which Shipman ever apparently saw Mrs Drinkwater was on Friday, 3rd
July 1992. Her name appears in his visits book for that day and he made an entry in her handwritten general practitioner records. That entry reads as follows:
'Conscious level poor
not eating drinking poorly
urine no sugar'
.
It does not appear that Mrs Drinkwater's condition had improved since Dr Jolobe's most recent visit and in the visits book Shipman noted that a further domiciliary visit should be carried out. This visit, probably requested on the Friday, does not appear to have taken place by the time of Mrs Drinkwater's death on the following Tuesday.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Pugh remembers Mrs Mackie telephoning her on 7th
July 1992 to say that Mrs Drinkwater was extremely unwell. She went immediately to visit her mother who was not in her usual room in the home but in a room downstairs. Mrs Drinkwater was unconscious and remained so for the hour or so that Mrs Pugh sat with her. Mrs Pugh then left the room momentarily to get a cup of tea and, while she was in the kitchen, Mrs Mackie came through and said that her mother had died. Mrs Pugh did not see Shipman at the home.
Mrs Drinkwater's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death. There is an entry in her handwritten general practitioner records for that day, but this is not made in Shipman's hand. It reads as follows:
'Called to confirm death (died 11.50am)
dementia
deterioration over last few wks
O.E. °
Breath sounds ° Heart sounds
pupils fixed
dilated
confirmed dead at
12.30
R.I.P'
.
It would appear that a doctor other than Shipman attended to confirm the fact of death but, judging from the handwriting, this was not Dr Smith.
The next entry in the general practitioner records is in Shipman's hand and it reads as follows:
'
D.C
Old Age
Diabetes mellitus
Cardiac failure'
.
This indicates that Shipman considered that the death was due to old age, diabetes mellitus and cardiac failure. It would appear that Shipman was requested to certify the cause of Mrs Drinkwater's death. He had seen her within 14 days before her death and Dr Smith may have been unavailable.
Mrs Mackie says that she does not remember Shipman ever visiting Mrs Drinkwater who was visited by the geriatrician from Tameside General Hospital whenever a visit was needed. It would seem that she is wrong in this because Shipman did visit on 3rd
July, but her mistake is perhaps understandable given that this seems to have been his only visit. Certainly, she is correct that Mrs Drinkwater was visited on at least two occasions by the geriatrician.
Mrs Mackie says that she has no memory of the aftermath of Mrs Drinkwater's death. She confirms the entry in the register, which reads:
'Alice passed away peacefully 12AM 7.7-92.
Daughter here with her'
.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that Mrs Drinkwater had died on 7th
July 1992 at Norbury House. He said that he had last seen Mrs Drinkwater alive on 4th
July 1992. He said that there would not be a post-mortem examination and that he had seen the body after death. He gave the primary cause of death as old age and identified diabetes mellitus and cardiac failure as secondary causes.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He said that Mrs Drinkwater had died at 11.50am on 7th
July 1992. He also said that he was her ordinary medical attendant, although he did not say for how long he had been so. On any proper interpretation of the facts, it was Dr Smith and not Shipman who was her ordinary medical attendant and this perhaps explains why Shipman did not enter the period for which he had allegedly been her medical attendant. Shipman said that he had attended Mrs Drinkwater during her last illness for 14 days and that he had last seen her alive four days before her death. It is unlikely that Shipman had in fact attended Mrs Drinkwater on any occasion other than on 3rd
July and her name does not appear in his visits book for any of the days when consultations are recorded in the computerised medical records.
Shipman said that he had seen Mrs Drinkwater's body 24 hours after her death and that he had carried out an external examination of it. He said that Mrs Drinkwater had been in a coma for between eight and nine days, which was an exaggeration of the position because, when he had seen Mrs Drinkwater on 3rd
July, he noted that her level of consciousness was poor but did not say she was in a coma. Mrs Pugh has confirmed that her mother was not in a coma in the days before she died. Shipman said that the staff at Norbury House had nursed Mrs Drinkwater during her final illness, which was clearly correct. He said that the matron of the home had been present at the moment of death.
The death certificate records that Mrs Pugh was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered both Mrs Drinkwater's medical records and the information contained in her cremation forms and on neither count did he find the death suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Drinkwater died as the result of natural causes.
Mrs Drinkwater was plainly very unwell in the weeks before her death and her condition was deteriorating. It seems to have been recognised that she had not long to live and Mrs Pugh was summoned to the home. It does not appear that the death was either sudden or unexpected.
Although she was not Shipman's patient, he saw Mrs Drinkwater on 3rd
July 1992. There is no evidence that Shipman saw her alive again. Mrs Pugh was present at the home at the time of the death and did not see Shipman or any other doctor. It was not Shipman who attended the home to certify the fact of Mrs Drinkwater's death. Thus, it is extremely improbable that Shipman was in Norbury House on the day of the death.
It is unclear how Shipman came to certify the cause of Mrs Drinkwater's death, although it may well be that her registered general practitioner, Dr Smith, was not available to do so, perhaps because he was on holiday. Since Shipman had recently seen Mrs Drinkwater during her last illness, there was no reason why he could not legitimately certify the cause of death, although he unfortunately displayed his habitual disregard for the need for accuracy in completing the cremation forms when he said that he was her ordinary medical attendant.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001