The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Fanny Dawson
Introduction
Mrs Fanny Dawson died at her home, 64 Cheetham Fold Road, Hyde on Saturday, 4th
August 1979 at the age of 68. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she liked him. He certified that the cause of her death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis.
Initially, the only information which the Inquiry had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), which named Mr Brian Dawson, Mrs Dawson's son, as the informant. The Inquiry wrote to Mr Dawson, who was able to provide further information about the death. Statements have since been taken from Mr Dawson, Mrs Jean Dorothy Dawson (Mr Dawson's wife) and Mrs Barbara Caldecott (Mrs Dawson's daughter). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979 and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mrs Dawson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Dawson lived with her husband, Mr Ernest Dawson. Throughout her adult life, she worked in the dusty atmosphere of cotton mills. She also smoked. Some years before her death, Shipman diagnosed emphysema. Mrs Dawson did not suffer from any other serious ailments but later events strongly suggest that she had severe respiratory disease.
In May 1979, Mrs Dawson felt unwell and thought she had bronchitis. She was visited by Shipman, who upset her by telling her bluntly that her lungs were
'shattered'
and that she could live
'six days, six months or six years'
.
Mr Dawson went to see Shipman and asked him to explain what he had meant. Shipman said that he had not intended to upset Mrs Dawson. He then showed Mr Dawson some medical books and explained what he thought was wrong with Mrs Dawson's lungs. He said that there was nothing he could do for her and that, in time, she would not be able to walk up the stairs or even have the energy to eat. When Mr Dawson asked Shipman whether he should try to stop his mother from smoking, he said it was too late, as the damage had already been done.
Mrs Caldecott recalls that, in the months before her death, her mother had great difficulty in breathing. She could not leave the house and used an oxygen cylinder. Mr Dawson says that, in the two weeks before his mother died, she could not climb the stairs and had to sleep in the lounge. She could dress herself but was then so exhausted that she would have to rest for the remainder of the day. She had no appetite and lost weight. On Friday, 3rd
August 1979, Mrs Dawson was very weak and did not have the strength to get out of bed or engage in conversation.
Shipman's visits book for 1979 records that he was due to visit Mrs Dawson at home on 19th
July, 26th
July, 1st
August, 3rd
August and 4th
August.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Caldecott arrived at her mother's house at about 8.30am on Saturday, 4th
August 1979. She found that her mother's condition had deteriorated further since the previous day. Mrs Dawson looked pale and grey in colour and was having great difficulty in breathing. She was very weak and could not get out of bed. Mrs Caldecott contacted her brother, Mr Dawson, who went to the surgery to ask Shipman to visit.
Mrs Caldecott recalls that Shipman arrived at her mother's house at about 10am, by which time Mr Dawson and his wife had also arrived. They think it was about noon when Shipman arrived. All three agree that Shipman took them into the kitchen and told them that Mrs Dawson had heart failure. Mrs Caldecott recalls that he said that, within 24 hours, Mrs Dawson would realise that she was dying and would start to fight it. Mrs Jean Dawson recalls that one of the family asked if Shipman could provide anything which would help Mrs Dawson relax and ease her breathing. Mr Dawson and Mrs Caldecott do not remember that, but do recall that Shipman said that he would give her an injection. He either said it would help her to relax or possibly said that it would help her breathing. Shipman then left the house and returned some time later. Mr Dawson and his wife say he returned quite quickly. Mrs Caldecott thinks he was away some time and returned at about midday. In any event, all agree that by the time he returned it was about midday or a little after.
Mrs Caldecott and the Dawsons all recall that, on his return, Shipman produced a bottle or capsule containing liquid and a syringe. Shipman gave Mrs Dawson an injection in the thigh and said, 'She'll be alright now'. Mrs Dawson immediately relaxed and her breathing was easier. She never spoke again, although the family could see she was alive. Shipman gave the family a telephone number and Mrs Caldecott recalls that, before he left, he said, 'I'll be getting a phone call off you about 2 o'clock'. The family stayed at the bedside and, some time later, Mrs Dawson died. Mrs Caldecott recalls that, shortly before she died, Mrs Dawson suddenly sat up and banged her head on a window ledge. She estimates the time of death as about 1.45pm. Shipman was contacted and returned to the house a short while later. He did not conduct a full examination but pronounced Mrs Dawson dead.
Certification
The MCCD has not survived but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. This records that Shipman last saw Mrs Dawson alive on the day of her death. He certified the cause of death as respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
In this case there is cause to suspect that Shipman might have hastened Mrs Dawson's death. There can be no doubt that Mrs Dawson was very ill indeed and had not long to live. The recollections of the various family members differ slightly but the evidence suggests that there was some concern that Mrs Dawson was in distress. It seems to have been agreed that Shipman would give her something to ease her distress. Whether that suggestion came first from Shipman or from the family, does not greatly matter. It seems clear that Shipman gave an injection into the thigh and that Mrs Dawson died not long afterwards.
It is quite possible that Mrs Dawson would have died when she did notwithstanding the injection. It is also possible that Shipman injected a drug knowing and intending that it would hasten Mrs Dawson's death. It seems likely that Mrs Dawson died within about an hour of the injection, when an opiate injected intramuscularly would have reached maximal effect. It is also quite possible that he gave an injection intending only to relieve Mrs Dawson's distress. We do not know what drug was given or how much. If the drug were an opiate, very little would be required to kill Mrs Dawson, as her respiratory function was already severely compromised. Any form of sedative would be likely to have the effect of depressing respiratory function further. It is possible that Shipman gave a very small dose of opiate, intending that it would ease Mrs Dawson's distress rather than shorten her life, but recognising that it might also have that latter effect. Such an action would not have been unlawful. A doctor, faced with a patient in distress on account of respiratory failure, faces a dilemma. He or she knows that whatever is given to relieve the distress might have the effect of shortening life.
There are several possibilities. I cannot resolve these, as it will never be possible to discover what drug Shipman gave or how much of it. All I can say is that there is a suspicion in my mind that Shipman might have deliberately given a dose that was certain to hasten Mrs Dawson's end. I am sure that her death was imminent and that, if Shipman did shorten her life, he did not do so by a long period.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001