The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bessie Delaney
Introduction
Mrs Bessie Delaney died at Charlotte House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Sunday, 25th
May 1997 at the age of 87. She had been a patient of Shipman for several years. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to a squamous cell carcinoma of the uterus.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Delaney's general practitioner records and to the visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Delaney was born in Monk Bretton, Yorkshire on 18th
July 1909. She worked as a canteen manageress until her retirement. At the time of her death, she was a widow.
Mrs Delaney's medical records, including correspondence from Tameside General Hospital, confirm that she suffered from poor health in the later years of her life. She began to suffer from dementia in about 1989 and had a minor stroke in November 1994.
In September 1995, Mrs Delaney was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a history of post-menopausal bleeding. She was found to have uterine cancer. It was felt that she would not tolerate radiotherapy and, at that time, she was relatively symptom-free. It was decided that nature must take its course and only her symptoms were to be treated.
The Events Leading up to Death
Shipman saw Mrs Delaney several times in the weeks before her death.
On 13th
May 1997, Shipman saw her on account of a recurrence of her previous symptoms. She was prescribed Depo-Provera and was to be reviewed.
On Friday, 23rd
May 1997, which appears to have been the last occasion when Shipman saw Mrs Delaney alive, the staff asked Shipman to visit her. The visit request form suggests that the staff said that she was very wheezy and breathless and
'not right'
. Shipman visited and appears to have diagnosed congestive heart failure. He prescribed lisinopril and Lasix. He wrote on the visit request form that he would revisit on Wednesday, 28th
May. Mrs Delaney died on Sunday, 25th
May.
There is no entry in any of the clinical or practice records to suggest that Shipman was asked to visit or did in fact visit Mrs Delaney on the day of her death. There is a note in the duty doctor diary which suggests that the duty doctor was called out to see Mrs Delaney and that she had died before he arrived.
Certification
According to a letter that Shipman wrote to the coroner on 28th
May 1997, he was informed of Mrs Delaney's death at 7.30am on Sunday, 25th
May. The staff at the home told him that the duty doctor had certified the fact of death but understood that they could not allow the body to be removed until Shipman himself had authorised removal. They understood that this was the effect of a ruling made by the coroner. Shipman asked for confirmation that the staff at the home had misunderstood the ruling.
It was not until Tuesday, 27th
May 1997 that Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Delaney alive on 23rd
May 1997, which is consistent with other contemporaneous documents. He said that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to a squamous cell carcinoma of the uterus. Dementia had also contributed to the death.
The Expert Evidence
Mrs Delaney's medical records were considered by Professor Richard Baker, who formed the view that there was a reasonable association between the medical history in her records and the certified cause of death. He did not find that the case was in any way suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Delaney died of natural causes as certified by Shipman. Her squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed at hospital. No treatment was offered. It was to be expected that Mrs Delaney would deteriorate gradually towards death. Her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is clear evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Delaney on 23rd
May and no evidence that he saw her again. A duty doctor certified the fact of her death in the early hours of 25th
May and it appears that Shipman did not learn of the death until 7.30am. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman played any part in Mrs Delaney's death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001