The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elaine Dutton
Introduction
Mrs Elaine Dutton died on Friday, 11th
April 1997 at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde at the age of 73. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In June 1999, Dr Alan Banks, the Assistant Director of Primary Care for the West Pennine Health Authority, produced Mrs Dutton's Lloyd George medical records to the Greater Manchester Police. The police obtained a statement from Dr Banks, who found that the medical history revealed by the records supported the certified cause of death. The police also spoke to Mrs Dutton's son, Mr Norman Dutton, and his wife but no further statements were taken. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Dutton and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has been in contact with Mr Norman Dutton. He has no concerns about his mother's death and he has confirmed the accuracy of the information contained in the cremation certificate.
The Inquiry has taken statements from a number of former members of staff at Hyde Nursing Home, namely, Ms Yvonne Greer (Registered General Nurse), Miss Jane Kelshaw (care assistant), Mr David Jewitt (Registered General Nurse), Ms Elizabeth Williams (Registered General Nurse), Mrs Karen Lee (care assistant) and Ms Sandra Berry (Registered General Nurse). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Dutton's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained notes and records from Hyde Nursing Home.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In December 1992, Mrs Dutton had a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) which caused hemiplegia and dysphasia. She was admitted to Tameside General Hospital but was transferred to Shire Hill Hospital. When discharged in November 1993, she was transferred to Hyde Nursing Home. Her husband visited her there every day.
Mrs Dutton deteriorated quite noticeably in the weeks before she died. Her daily evaluation sheet for 19th
March 1997 records that she was lethargic, pale and poorly. The note for 20th
March 1997 records:
'Very pale this am, became
very floppy after lunch, returned
to bed, unresponsive to speech.
Seen by Dr Shipman
(
diagnosis
)
extension
to CVA. Bed for at least two, if
improving to start sitting out on
Sunday. Turned 2 hrly and all
hygiene needs attended. Husband
John informed'
.
It appears that Mrs Dutton had suffered a further stroke or an extension of a previous stroke and that Shipman directed that she should stay in bed for two days. The note was made by Ms Berry who remembers Mrs Dutton suffering an
'extension of a stroke'
on 20th
March 1997 and Shipman attending that day. There is an entry in Mrs Dutton's computerised medical records for 20th
March which records as follows:
'CVA unspecified...
left plantar up'
.
This confirms that Mrs Dutton had had some sort of cerebrovascular episode on that day. Ms Berry recalls that Mrs Dutton's condition did not improve after 20th
March and that she deteriorated slowly over the following weeks.
Over the weekend of 5th
and 6th
April 1997, Mrs Dutton was suffering from a stomach upset and was dehydrated. She was seen by a deputising doctor who prescribed Rehidrat sachets. Shipman came to see her on Monday, 7th
April and diagnosed gastroenteritis. He recommended a fluid diet with a gradual re-introduction to a normal light diet. There was very little improvement and Mrs Dutton remained in bed. The staff attended to all her personal needs.
The Day of the Death
Miss Kelshaw was on duty at Hyde Nursing Home on 11th
April 1997. Over the preceding days, Mrs Dutton's condition had remained very poor. Miss Kelshaw made the following entry in the care assistant notes:
'Elaine has deteriorated this morning She
has
is
very floppy, pale. Seems no movement in arms
legs. Hard to turn. Has taken sips of fluid
turned 1
1
/
2
hourly. John informed and has
been here for a while. Dr Shipman due to
visit response level poorly. Has open
(
sic
)
her eyes
a couple of times also. Please observe very
frequently. All care given...
urine output very poor despite fluids given'
.
That note is not timed but there is a note in the daily evaluation notes, timed at 10.30am, which records as follows:
'Breathing laboured, conscious level poor, mottling observed to hands
- no movement to arms/legs to painful stimuli (flaccid in appearance)
Dr Shipman contacted re: telephone, receptionist informed of poorly
condition, visit request.
Husband, John, contacted via telephone, informed of deterioration
in condition - advised to visit as soon as possible'
.
There is a visits request form contained within Mrs Dutton's Lloyd George folder, timed at 10.40am on 11th
April 1997, where the following details are recorded:
'UNRESPONSIVE/FINGERS + TOES PURPLE/BREATHING LABOURED
(STAFF DON'T THINK SHE WILL LAST)'
.
There is a note in the daily evaluation records, made at 2.15pm, which records:
'Seen by Dr Shipman
(
diagnosis
)
extension
to C.V.A. no treatment. Dr Shipman
spoke to John Dutton re poor
prognosis'
.
This note was made by Ms Berry who did not initially recall that she had been involved with Mrs Dutton's treatment shortly before her death. Having been shown the daily evaluation notes, however, she now says that she has a 'vague recollection of the events recorded'. According to Ms Berry and Mr Jewitt, it was the policy at Hyde Nursing Home for a qualified nurse to be present at all times during a doctor's visit. They say that, if an injection were administered, this would be entered in the daily evaluation notes. There is no suggestion that Shipman gave Mrs Dutton an injection during his consultation that afternoon; the note says
'no treatment'
. Ms Berry says that she is sure she was present throughout the consultation.
A note timed at 2.45pm records that Mrs Dutton had died and Shipman is recorded to have returned to the home to certify death at 3.45pm.
There are four entries in the computerised medical records for the day of death, including an entry recording the diagnosis of
'CVA unspecified'
and
'concious
(
sic
)
level poor'
. The time of death was recorded as 2.45pm and the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He said that the interval between the onset of the cerebrovascular accident and death was
'?24 hours'
. He said that he had last seen Mrs Dutton alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Dutton had died at 2.45pm. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for seven days. He said that he had last seen her alive one hour before death and that he had seen the body one hour after death. The cause of death was given as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting two to three days. These answers were based on his own observations. He said that the staff at Hyde Nursing Home and Mrs Dutton's husband, Mr John Dutton, were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and concluded that Mrs Dutton's death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
It appears to me to be highly likely that Mrs Dutton died as the result of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
It is clear from the evaluation sheets that Mrs Dutton had suffered at least one, if not two, further strokes in the days before her death. Her condition deteriorated. She was weak and tired. The staff realised that she would not live long and advised Mr John Dutton to come to the home. The death on 11th
April was neither sudden nor unexpected.
The evidence shows that Shipman saw Mrs Dutton quite shortly before she died. The evaluation sheet suggests that he was there half an hour before the death; on Form B, Shipman said that he was there an hour before. It is theoretically possible that, during that visit, Shipman gave Mrs Dutton a drug which hastened her death. However, this seems unlikely, first because Mr John Dutton was at the home and was probably present during the consultation, and second, Ms Berry believes that she would have been present. If she was, and if any injection had been given, I do not think she would have written
'no treatment'
.
There remains a possibility, no more, that Shipman did see Mrs Dutton alone that afternoon and took the opportunity to give her a drug which caused her to die rather sooner than she otherwise would have done. I cannot rule that out.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001