The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Agnes Davidson
Introduction
Mrs Agnes Davidson died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Friday, 14th
April 1972 at the age of 74. It seems likely that she had been admitted some time earlier that week, possibly on the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertensive disease. He stated that a right cerebrovascular accident had contributed to the death. At the time of Mrs Davidson’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Davina Straker, one of Mrs Davidson’s three daughters. Mrs Straker’s sole surviving sister is unwell and is unable to provide any information surrounding the circumstances of her mother’s death. Statements have also been taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor, who was the senior nursing sister on Ward 1 at the relevant time. Mrs Davidson’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed. Although some of Mrs Davidson’s hospital records were made available to the Inquiry, they contain no information concerning her last admission to hospital or her medical history immediately prior to her death. Professor Richard Baker has considered and commented on the available documents.
Although there had always been some surprise in the family at the suddenness of Mrs Davidson’s death, Mrs Straker had not been concerned about the circumstances until she learned that Shipman had stated on cremation form B that he had been present at the death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Davidson was a widow and lived with her two unmarried daughters. She enjoyed reasonably good health and could have lived alone if necessary. She used public transport, did her own gardening and could walk a reasonable distance to do her own shopping. She was a member of the Inner Wheel and used to attend its meetings. She was a smart, well-groomed woman and mentally very alert. Mrs Straker remembers that her mother had been admitted to hospital about ten years before her death, suffering from meningitis. The hospital records show that this occurred in 1964. According to Mrs Straker, Mrs Davidson made a good recovery. Mrs Straker does not remember her mother suffering any other illness until the time of her admission to hospital a few days before she died.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mrs Straker recalls that one of her sisters told her about their mother being admitted to hospital. She understood that Mrs Davidson had gone into Ackworth (the village where she lived) to visit the bank. She had felt unwell and someone had called an ambulance to take her to hospital. Mrs Straker thinks that she went to see her mother in the afternoon of the following day, which she believes was the Friday, the day of the death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Straker went to the hospital with her husband and her two sisters. She found Mrs Davidson in one of the side rooms, which was adjacent to the main ward. Evidence received by the Inquiry suggests that patients tended to be accommodated in these side rooms or cubicles when they were seriously ill or when death was expected to follow shortly. Mrs Straker recalls that her mother was not well but was sitting up in bed and was able to have a conversation. During the afternoon, a nurse brought in a bowl of rice pudding, which Mrs Davidson ate. Mrs Straker was not given any information about her mother’s illness that afternoon. The family group left the hospital at about 5pm. Later that evening, Mrs Straker received a telephone call from one of her sisters and was informed that her mother had died. She was very shocked, as she had not realised that her mother’s life was in danger. The following day, she went to the hospital but she was not given any information about the cause or circumstances of the death. A letter of condolence received by the Strakers and made available to the Inquiry confirms the unexpected nature of the death.
Medical Evidence
Professor Baker found that the case gave rise to some concern because it appeared that Shipman was alone with Mrs Davidson at the time of the death.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mrs Davidson died at
‘22.15hrs’
on 14th
April 1972. He said that he had attended her during her last illness for four days. If that is correct (and it may well be), it suggests that Mrs Davidson was admitted to PGI on Tuesday, 11th
April. If that is so, it suggests either that Mrs Straker’s recollection is imperfect or that her sisters did not inform her of their mother’s admission to hospital until two days later, which seems unlikely. On Form B, Shipman said that he was present at the death, that the mode of death was
‘collapse’
and that the duration of the collapse was
‘10-15 minutes’
. He said that his answers concerning the mode and duration of the death were based on his own observations. He said that Mrs Davidson had been nursed during her last illness by Sister Naylor and, when asked who were the persons (if any) present at the moment of death, he wrote
‘self’
. Thus, although he did not say so in terms, he implied that he was alone with Mrs Davidson at her death. Mrs Naylor has no recollection of Mrs Davidson.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Other Events
Shipman also certified the causes of death in the cases of Mrs Elizabeth Thwaites and Mrs Alice Smith, both of whom died on Ward 1 that evening. I am suspicious about his involvement in both of their deaths.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mrs Davidson had a sudden episode of illness, which resulted in her admission to hospital as an emergency. It seems likely that the sudden episode was due to a problem with her heart. It also appears, however, that she made a reasonable recovery over the following days and that her condition on the afternoon of the day of her death was reasonable. Nevertheless, the fact that she had suffered a recent heart problem put her at increased risk of suffering a further episode. It is entirely possible that she suffered a second, more serious, episode on the evening of 14th
April and that this resulted in her death. However, Mrs Davidson’s death does give rise to some cause for suspicion that Shipman might have been involved. He suggested on Form B that he was alone with Mrs Davidson at the time of her death. That is an unusual circumstance with other doctors. If he was present alone, this is sufficient to make me suspicious about the death although, as I explained in
Chapter Seven
, the fact that Shipman stated that he was present alone at the moment of death does not necessarily mean that he was. That suspicion is increased because the death took place in the late evening. As Professor Baker has pointed out, deaths certified by other doctors at PGI were evenly spread throughout the 24 hour day. However, an abnormal proportion of deaths certified by Shipman took place in the late evening. At that time, there would be little activity on the ward. It would be relatively easy for Shipman to gain access to a patient in the absence of a nurse.
For these reasons, I feel unable to say with confidence that Mrs Davidson’s death was natural. It may have been, but the factors I have outlined above give rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have caused it.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to th Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001