The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Norman Deyes
Introduction
Mr Norman Deyes died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI), probably on Ward 2, on Sunday, 28th
May 1972 at the age of 71. He had been admitted on the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was obstruction of the small bowel due to peritonitis and perforation of a gangrenous appendix. At the time of Mr Deyes’ death, Shipman was a senior house officer (SHO) in medicine.
The Inquiry has obtained a statement from Mr Deyes’ daughter, Mrs Marjorie Campsell. Her husband, Mr Douglas Hinks Campsell, was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). A statement was also taken from Mrs Jennifer Bratley (formerly Miss Jennifer Buckley), who was at the time a nursing sister on Ward 2. Mr Deyes’ medical records are no longer available. A post-mortem examination was performed on Mr Deyes’ body. The post-mortem examination report has not survived although the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which contains brief details of each case in which a post-mortem examination was performed, was provided to the Inquiry. Mr Deyes’ body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F.
Mrs Campsell has no suspicions about the circumstances of her father’s death, although she finds it strange that a doctor whom they saw on the afternoon of the day of the death (who was probably Shipman) told the family that they ought to go home when, as she now knows, her father was close to death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers.
Personal Background
Mr Deyes lived in Goole with his wife. Mrs Campsell was their only child. She and her family lived close to her parents and she saw them regularly. Mr Deyes was quite active until the last two years of his life but, when he was 70, he was diagnosed with diabetes. He lost a lot of weight and the longstanding circulatory problems with his legs and feet became worse. For the last two years of his life, he had to use a wheelchair.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
At lunchtime on Friday, 26th
May, a neighbour told Mrs Campsell that she was needed at her parents’ house. When she arrived there, she found that her father was vomiting black mucus. His general practitioner was called and said that Mr Deyes must go to hospital. Mr Deyes refused. Mrs Campsell tried to persuade him to go to hospital and eventually, the next morning, he agreed. An ambulance took Mr Deyes to PGI at about 8am on 27th
May. Mrs Deyes went with her husband in the ambulance.
Mrs Deyes returned from the hospital later on Saturday, 27th
May and told Mrs Campsell that the doctors had examined her father but had not said much about his condition. Mrs Deyes stayed overnight at her daughter’s house.
The Day of the Death
At about 9am or 10am on Sunday, 28th
May, the police called at Mrs Campsell’s house and told her that her father was critically ill and that she and her mother should go to the hospital as soon as possible. On arrival, they met a doctor, who was to take them to Mr Deyes. Before they went into the side room where Mr Deyes was lying, Mrs Campsell asked if her father needed an operation; the doctor said words to the effect that they could not operate on him because his chest was too bad. His attitude struck Mrs Campsell as uncaring. As Shipman was later involved in certifying the cause of Mr Deyes’ death, I think that the doctor who was on duty that weekend and who spoke to her must have been Shipman.
When Mrs Deyes and Mrs Campsell entered the side room, they found Mr Deyes in bed; he was pale and unconscious. He did not respond when spoken to and Mrs Campsell does not think he was aware of their presence. He was agitated. A splint had been strapped onto his arm to prevent him from removing a tube that ran to his nose. Mrs Campsell and her mother stayed with Mr Deyes until what she recalls was about 4pm, during which time no doctor came into the room. At about 4pm, the doctor who had spoken to them that morning (Shipman) advised them to go home; he said that remaining at the hospital would serve no purpose. Mrs Campsell had to persuade her mother to leave. She told the Inquiry that she realised that her father was very ill but she did not think he was going to die. Had she thought that, she would not have left. However, the two women did leave and went home. They had not been there long when police officers arrived to tell them that Mr Deyes’ condition had deteriorated. They returned to the hospital and were shown into the room by the same doctor. He said nothing but left them there. Mr Deyes was dead. His sleeves were rolled up and his arms were on top of the sheet. The two women stayed for about half an hour and then went home.
Post-Mortem Examination
On the day after the death, Mr Campsell went to collect the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and was told that the hospital wanted to perform a post-mortem examination for which Mrs Deyes’ consent was needed. This was provided and the examination was duly performed.
Although the report of the post-mortem examination report is not available, some information relating to it was recorded in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book and the relevant record has been provided to the Inquiry. It records:
‘PM72/203 30 DEYES Norman 71 Watson PGI
Obstruction Small Bowel, Peritonitis.
Perforation of Gangrenous Appendix ELS.’
This entry indicates that the post-mortem examination (number PM72/203) took place on 30th
May, that Mr Deyes was 71 years old when he died and that his body was referred for post-mortem examination by Dr Leslie Watson, a consultant physician. The cause of death was said to be obstruction of the small bowel, peritonitis and perforation of a gangrenous appendix. The initials
‘ELS’
are those of the consultant pathologist, Dr Simons, who has since died.
Certification
The death was registered on 31st
May 1972. By this time, Shipman must already have provided the MCCD setting out the cause of death contained in the post-mortem examination report. Four days after the death, on 1st
June 1972, Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that death had occurred at
‘1620 hours’
on 28th
May. He stated that he had attended Mr Deyes during his last illness for a period of 24 hours and that he had last seen him alive at 3pm. This is inconsistent with Mrs Campsell’s recollection that she was with her father at 3pm and no doctor came in until just before 4pm. Shipman said that he saw the body about 40 minutes after death and that he had made a complete examination of it. Mrs Campsell believes that Shipman must have seen the body before that because she returned to the hospital before 5pm and was shown into the room by Shipman. The body had already been attended to. It is possible that the times stated by Shipman were inaccurate. The fact is that Shipman was on duty that afternoon and, if he had wanted to, he could almost certainly have had access to Mr Deyes after Mrs Campsell and her mother had left, with or without the presence of a nurse.
Shipman recorded the cause of death as obstruction of the small bowel, due to peritonitis due to perforation of a gangrenous appendix. The mode of death was noted by Shipman to have been coma of
‘5-6hrs’
duration; this was said to be based on his own observations and may well be correct. He stated that Mr Deyes did not undergo any operation during his final illness or within a year before his death, which was also correct. He recorded that Sister Buckley had nursed Mr Deyes during his final illness and had been present at the moment of death. This suggests that Shipman himself was not present at the death. In response to the question whether he had any reason whatever to suppose a further examination of the body to be desirable, he wrote that a post-mortem examination had been
‘done for hospital benefit’
. Dr Simons also completed Form C. He recorded that he questioned Shipman.
Mrs Bratley was working as a day sister on Ward 2 in 1972 and so it is very likely that Shipman was correct when he wrote that she had nursed Mr Deyes. She has no recollection of Mr Deyes or of having been present at the moment of his death. That is not to say that Shipman’s statement was incorrect.
Conclusion
From the documentary evidence and Mrs Campsell’s recollection, I am satisfied that Mr Deyes was severely ill at the time of his admission to PGI. The symptoms described and the result of the post-mortem examination make it clear that Mr Deyes had suffered an obstruction of his small bowel. This condition will be fatal unless it can be corrected by emergency surgery. The decision was taken not to undertake surgery apparently on account of Mr Deyes’ general condition. The decision not to operate is unlikely to have been Shipman’s. If there was to be no operation, Mr Deyes’ death was inevitable.
It was, in my view, very likely that it was Shipman with whom the family had contact on the afternoon of Mr Deyes’ death. He appears to have been the SHO on call on Ward 2 that weekend. The details provided on the cremation certificate suggest that he was responsible for Mr Deyes’ treatment that day. Any case in which Shipman was involved at or around the time of the patient’s death inevitably gives rise to some concern, particularly when the patient was in a side room in which Shipman would be able to act unobserved. However, Mr Deyes was plainly very ill when seen by his relatives on the Sunday afternoon. Given the nature of his condition, as revealed by post-mortem examination, he must have been receiving strong analgesia, quite possibly morphine or diamorphine. It was inevitable that he would die within a fairly short time. Yet Shipman advised Mrs Deyes and Mrs Campsell to go home and, very soon afterwards, Mr Deyes was dead. Shipman might have given this advice because he could not see the point of the family remaining there. Alternatively, he might have wanted the family out of the way, so that he could administer something that would hasten Mr Deyes’ death. By the end of May 1972, Shipman had killed at least three patients at PGI and it is entirely possible that he had decided that Mr Deyes’ life should end sooner rather than later.
Shipman’s Form B account of his contact with Mr Deyes around the time of death suggests that he was not present either just before or shortly after the death. However, Mrs Campsell thinks that the entries on Form B are not accurate. She may well be right. In any event, no reliance can be placed on the timings giving by Shipman; they might have been accurate; they might have been completely fabricated. The contents of Form B do not arouse particular suspicion but nor do they allay suspicion.
One factor which tends to reduce the level of suspicion I feel in this case is that there was a post-mortem examination. I do not know who decided that there should be one. If Shipman made the decision, that would suggest that he had not hastened Mr Deyes’ death. On the other hand, he might have killed Mr Deyes in the expectation that he would be able to certify the death without the need for a post-mortem examination. It is quite possible that the consultant, Dr Watson, decided that one was necessary the following day. The fact that there was a post-mortem examination does not rule out the possibility that Shipman killed the patient.
The evidence in this case does not enable me to reach a clear conclusion. It may well be that Mr Deyes’ death was natural. However, there are some worrying features which give rise to some suspicion that Shipman might have hastened the death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001