The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Doris Earls
Introduction
Mrs Doris Earls died at her home, 35 Brabyns Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Wednesday, 21st
May 1997 at the age of 79. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that Mrs Earl's death had been caused by cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In September 1998, Mrs Althea Rankin, a social worker employed by Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Earls' death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Nigel Trafford (Mrs Earls' nephew), Mrs Pamela Ewing and Mrs Alice Kelly (Mrs Earls' neighbours), Mr Neil Harrop and Mr Eamon O'Carroll (paramedics) and Mr Steven Blezard (a social worker employed by Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council). Statements were also taken from Police Constables Peter Close and Mark Ackers, Detective Sergeant John Ashley, Dr John Grenville and Mrs Judith Cocker, a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Earls but an inquest was held on 7th
February 2001 at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Trafford. The Inquiry has also had access to documents and statements arising out of the police investigation and the inquest. The medical records of Mrs Earls and other practice documentation have also been considered.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Earls was living with her husband, Mr Frederick Earls, who suffered from Alzheimer's disease. Mrs Earls was her husband's main carer. Her own health appeared to be good, although she found her duties as a carer very tiring. The main difficulty she had with her husband was that, from time to time, he would fall and she was unable to lift him without help. When that occurred, she would telephone the ambulance service and a team of paramedics would come out to pick him up. Despite the problems with her husband, she still appeared to enjoy life and was generally cheerful.
Mrs Earls' medical records confirm her friends' impression that she was a healthy woman. The manuscript records are scant. The last entry is dated 11th
August 1994 and relates to an infected wasp bite. The computerised records contain a number of false entries, to which I will refer later in this decision.
The Day of the Death
At about 8.30am on Wednesday, 21st
May 1997, Mr Earls fell and Mrs Earls telephoned for an ambulance to attend. Two paramedics, Mr Harrop and Mr Peter Edge, came to the house, picked up Mr Earls and put him back in bed. They chatted to Mrs Earls, whom they knew quite well. She appeared fit and well.
Later that morning, at about 9.45am, Mrs Earls had to call an ambulance out again. Another ambulance and a different crew, Mr O'Carroll and Mrs Lorna Wood, attended. Mrs Earls explained that Mr Earls had fallen once again. She was very apologetic. The crew picked him up and checked him for injuries. Mrs Earls seemed to be fit and well.
At about 11am, Mrs Ewing called with some shopping. She stayed for a drink and a chat. Mrs Earls was doing some ironing. Mrs Ewing left at about noon to go to the hairdressers. She called in to say hello to Mrs Earls on her return at about 1.30pm. All was well. The dustbins had been emptied that day and, at about 2.30pm, Mr Ewing brought his and Mrs Earls' empty bins back in from the pavement. At about 2.50pm, Mrs Ewing called in to give Mrs Earls a carton of orange juice for her husband before she and her husband went out for the afternoon. When Mrs Ewing left, Mrs Earls was her usual self. It would appear that, at some time after the empty dustbin was returned to her, Mrs Earls must have done some gardening. The following day, hedge clippings were found in the bottom of the bin.
The telephone billing records for the Earls' home show that a call was made from that number to Shipman's surgery at 3.17pm. It appears to have been made by Shipman. At 3.30pm, Mrs Judith Cocker, one of the receptionists at Shipman's surgery, telephoned the Social Services Department at Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council to request urgent respite care for Mr Earls. In fact, he was due to go into hospital six days later but, apparently, Shipman wanted him to be admitted immediately. Mrs Cocker cannot now remember making this call but she believes it must have been Shipman who asked her to do so. I am sure she is right. As soon as Mrs Cocker's call had been received by Social Services, Mr Blezard, a social worker, telephoned Mrs Earls. However, there was no reply.
At about 3.50pm Mrs Kelly knocked on Mrs Earls' door. There was no reply. She says that she looked in through the lounge window and could see Mrs Earls lying on the settee. She told the police that Mrs Earls' tongue was out and her eyes were 'in the top of her head'. Mrs Kelly thought that Mrs Earls was dead. However, she went home and did not summon assistance.
Mr Blezard arrived at the Earls' house at 4.50pm. He knocked but there was no reply. He saw Mrs Earls through the window and thought that she was dead. Mr Blezard discovered that a neighbour had a key to Mrs Earls' property and together with the neighbour he entered the house.
Mr Blezard found Mrs Earls sitting on a chair in her front room, although she appeared to be sliding off it. There was a newspaper on her lap and a cup of tea on a table near to her. Mr Blezard felt for a pulse but there was none. She was dead. He found Mr Earls lying face down on the bedroom floor. Mr Earls was calling out for his wife. Mr Blezard telephoned for the police and an ambulance. He also telephoned Shipman who said that he would attend immediately.
At about 5.15pm, PC Ackers and PC Close attended. PC Close noted that Mrs Earls' body seemed cold but rigor mortis had not yet set in. PC Ackers found that the cup of tea by her side was still tepid. He also found that a small suitcase had been packed which contained Mr Earls' clothing and toiletries. About 40 minutes later, Shipman arrived. He approached Mrs Earls and took hold of her wrist as if to check for a pulse but, much to the officers' surprise, he did not examine her with either a stethoscope or a torch. After a moment he said words to the effect of 'She's been having a heck of a time with him within the last month or so and her blood pressure has been dangerously high. I've been to see her yesterday and spoke to her this morning. It's been too much looking after him'. PC Close asked Shipman whether he would issue a death certificate. Shipman said that he would and added that it looked as though Mrs Earls had suffered a massive stroke. Shipman told Mr Blezard that he was shocked that Mrs Earls had died, as she had seemed fine when he had seen her earlier that afternoon.
Mr Harrop was one of the paramedics who later attended to take Mr Earls to hospital. He was very surprised that Mrs Earls had died as she had been in normal health when he had seen her earlier that day.
There is an entry in the computerised records which reads as follows:
'21/05/97
O/E looks ill
160/110 nil else to find bloods'
.
I interpret this last entry to mean that Shipman saw Mrs Earls on the day of her death and found on examination that she looked ill. He recorded her blood pressure, which was raised, at 160/110. He found no other sign or symptoms and took a sample of blood.
There is no entry in the surgery visits book to suggest that Shipman was due to see either Mr or Mrs Earls on 20th
or 21st
May 1997. Nor is there any record that Mrs Earls had an appointment to see Shipman at the surgery on the day of her death. However, the acute prescriptions book contains two entries for 21st
May 1997 as follows:
'MSG
(
message
)
FRED EARLS FELL IN
THE NIGHT- HAD TO GET
AMBULANCE CREW TO PICK
HIM UP- FELL THIS
MORNING, HAD TO GET
AMBULANCE CREW TO PICK
HIM UP. MRS EARLS AT THE
END OF HER TETHER
? ASSESSMENT?'
and on the next page:
'Fred Earls
35 Brabyns Rd
GX
Message
had an ambulance out 3 times today'
.
These entries suggest that Shipman was informed that Mr Earls had fallen more than once and that Mrs Earls was having difficulty in coping.
Certification
Shipman issued the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) stating that the cause of Mrs Earls' death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. He also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. There he stated that death had occurred at
'about 17.00 hours 21.5.97'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Earls during her last illness for a period of
'2
years'
. He said he had last seen her alive about three hours before her death and had seen the body 30 minutes after her death, when he made a complete external examination. The cause of death was as on the MCCD. When asked to what extent his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made to him by others, he wrote:
'found by social worker visiting for husband collapsed on settee. Martin Unwin'
. Mr Martin Unwin is a mental health social worker but was not apparently connected with Mr or Mrs Earls. It appears that Shipman intended to refer to Mr Blezard.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has considered Mrs Earls' medical records. Although the manuscript records suggest that Mrs Earls was fit and well, the computerised records appear to suggest that she suffered from high blood pressure or hypertension. If she did, she would be at an increased risk of suffering a stroke. There were entries dated 13th
April 1994, 4th
February 1995 and 21st
May 1997 all recording raised blood pressure. However, when DS Ashley traced the origin of these three entries, he found they had all been made at about the same time, 4.20pm on 21st
May 1997, the day of Mrs Earls' death. The entry dated 13th
April 1994 also stated that Mrs Earls had refused treatment for her blood pressure. The entries are as follows:
'13/4/94
Had a chat to patient
pain over scar 1hc bp 170/110 refuses rx says feels ok'
'04/02/95
O/E blood pressure reading
Values 170 110'
.
It is clear beyond argument that Shipman made two false entries relating to Mrs Earls' blood pressure. He could not have recollected what her blood pressure had been on 13th
April 1994 or 4th
February 1995 when he made the entries on 21st
May 1997. It is highly likely that the entry for 21st
May was also false. Dr Grenville says that if the computerised records referred to above are disregarded, there is nothing in Mrs Earls' medical history to suggest that she suffered from high blood pressure. It would follow that she was not at a significantly increased risk of suffering a stroke.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious factors surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Mrs Earls was found dead a short time after Shipman visited her house. No one spoke to her or saw her alive after Shipman had left. That in itself raises a high degree of suspicion. Mrs Earls was fit and well at 2.50pm when Mrs Ewing last saw her alive. Shipman implies that she was not unwell when he saw her. It would have been the most remarkable coincidence for Mrs Earls to suffer a sudden fatal stroke after Shipman had left and before she was found. The period of time would have been very short, as Mrs Earls appears to have been dead by about 3.30pm when Mr Blezard telephoned her. The chances of Mrs Earls having a sudden fatal stroke in the short period between Shipman's departure and Mr Blezard's telephone call are so remote that I can dismiss that possibility. Other doctors find that the death of a patient during or very soon after a visit is an extremely rare occurrence. If Shipman is to be believed, it happened very frequently to him. Coincidences such as this do not happen. There must be another explanation.
I think Shipman told a number of lies on Form B. First he sought to suggest that the death occurred at about 5pm. I am satisfied that it did not; it occurred much earlier. Shipman claimed that he saw Mrs Earls three hours before her death, which would have been 2pm. However, I think it very unlikely that he was there as early as that, as Mrs Ewing spoke to Mrs Earls at 1.30pm and again at about 2.50pm and Mrs Earls did not say that Shipman was expected or that he had been. In my view, the telephone call from Mrs Earls' house to Shipman's surgery probably gives the best clue as to when Shipman was there. Although it is possible that Mrs Earls telephoned the surgery at that time to say that her husband had fallen over again, I think it is more likely that the 3.17pm call was made by Shipman from her house. If the 3.17pm call were made by Mrs Earls, there would have been insufficient time for Shipman to go to her house, see Mr and Mrs Earls and then leave before the time when Mr Blezard obtained no reply to his telephone call. I think it is likely that Shipman went to the house at about 3pm and left soon after he had telephoned the surgery at 3.17pm.
The evidence indicates that Shipman went to the Earls' house because Mr Earls kept falling over. There is no evidence that Mrs Earls was suffering any ill health. However, I believe he must have suggested to Mrs Earls that she should allow him either to give her an injection or take a blood sample. Shipman made at least two false entries in Mrs Earls' medical records at 4.20pm that afternoon. There can be no doubt that the entries for 13th
April 1994 and 4th
February 1995 are false and designed to create the impression that Mrs Earls had a long-standing problem of raised blood pressure for which she refused treatment. This condition would, if it had existed, place Mrs Earls at risk of suffering a cerebrovascular accident. That afternoon, Shipman created a third entry, which I think was also false, in which he suggested that Mrs Earls was unwell (which she was not), had high blood pressure and had provided a blood sample. This entry was designed to provide a plausible explanation for her sudden death that afternoon.
Mrs Earls' appearance in death was not consistent with the appearance of one who had died of a cerebrovascular accident. It was, however, entirely typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I am sure that Shipman must have killed Mrs Earls. In my view, the overwhelming likelihood is that he did it by giving her a lethal injection, while pretending to take a blood sample.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001