The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harold Eddleston
Introduction
Mr Harold Eddleston died at his home, 25 Rufford Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 4th
March 1998 at the age of 77. Mr Eddleston and his wife, Monica, had been patients of Shipman since 25th
February 1998. On Friday, 27th
February 1998, Mrs Eddleston collapsed at home and was admitted to hospital, where she died the following day. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Eddleston's death was carcinoma of the lung. The Inquiry investigated both deaths.
Mrs Eddleston was taken ill in the morning of 27th
February and Shipman was called. He considered that she had suffered an attack of transient cerebral ischaemia and advised that she should rest in bed. However, her condition did not improve and, later in the day, Shipman was called out again and, on this occasion, arranged her admission to hospital, where she died the following morning. Tests and a post-mortem examination showed that she had died following a myocardial infarction. I have concluded that Mrs Eddleston died of natural causes and that Shipman's involvement gave rise to no cause for suspicion.
Mr Eddleston's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was therefore one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mrs Janet Dickson (Mr Eddleston's daughter), Mrs Elizabeth Adie (Health Care Co-ordinator for Tameside and Glossop Community and Priority Services NHS Trust) and Mrs Ghislaine Brant (pharmacist at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Eddleston but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Dickson and statements from Mr Stephen Alan Dickson (Mrs Dickson's husband), Mr Daniel Howarth (Mr Eddleston's grandson), Mrs Joan Downs (a friend of the Eddlestons and a former neighbour), Mrs Mary Marsden (a friend and fellow resident of Rufford Avenue) and Mrs Mary Christine Conley, Mrs Jean Bullock and Mrs Betty Wagstaff (three relief wardens of Rufford Avenue). Mr and Mrs Dickson, Mr Howarth, Mrs Bullock and Mrs Marsden gave oral evidence at a hearing on 17th
July 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Eddleston's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr Grenville who gave oral evidence about the death on 24th
July 2001.
Personal Background
Mr and Mrs Eddleston lived in sheltered accommodation. The accommodation consisted of a group of semi-detached bungalows situated around a small square or close, in the centre of which was a community centre with accommodation for a warden. The Inquiry team visited Rufford Avenue in May 2001.
Mr Eddleston had a long history of severe atherosclerosis and high blood pressure. Blockage of the arteries had eventually led to an above the knee amputation of the left leg in 1986, after which he wore a prosthesis. He had also suffered problems with cataracts and poor hearing. In 1992, he had fractured his left hip in a fall and this had required pinning. Notwithstanding these difficulties, Mr and Mrs Eddleston led active lives. Mr Eddleston had an electric scooter on which he went into the centre of Hyde.
Until February 1998, Mr and Mrs Eddleston's general practitioner was Dr Tanna of Clarendon House, Hyde. At about Christmas 1997, Mr Eddleston became unwell. He had chest pain, was coughing blood, lost his appetite and suffered some weight loss. He also had a persistent cough. He had smoked previously and may have been exposed to asbestos. X-rays proved abnormal and Dr Tanna referred him to a chest physician, Dr Payne, who saw him on 24th
February 1998 and told Mr and Mrs Eddleston that the diagnosis was lung cancer. By the time the consultant wrote an account of the consultation, Mr Eddleston had become a patient of Shipman. The consultant wrote that there seemed to be no doubt about the diagnosis of lung cancer but arranged for a bronchoscopy to confirm this on Monday, 2nd
March. Meanwhile, for pain relief, Dr Payne prescribed fentanyl 25mg patches, a slow release preparation, supplemented by tramadol, a relatively new morphine-related drug. The tramadol tablets made Mr Eddleston very sick and he only took one or two. Sickness is a recognised side effect of drugs of this kind.
On 25th
February 1998, Shipman had his first consultation with Mrs Eddleston at his surgery. Mrs Dickson was with her mother. Mr Eddleston had been due to attend but was too ill to do so. That day, Shipman discussed with Mrs Eddleston and her daughter Mr Eddleston's condition, the care he would need and his expectation of life, which was said to be about six months. They discussed the assistance that could be given by Macmillan nurses and the likely need for a syringe driver to control the pain in the final stages of the illness.
On 26th
February 1998, Shipman visited Mr Eddleston at home. The manuscript note records that Mr Eddleston had given up smoking ten years before, that he had cancer of the lung and was on fentanyl. His blood pressure was said to be raised (although there is no record of a measurement taken that day) and he was said to have arteriosclerosis. There is a note of various drugs prescribed but no reference to tramadol or the efficacy of the fentanyl patches. There is an entry in the computerised records indicating an intention to review in seven days, which would have been 5th
March, the day after Mr Eddleston's death. The revisit was entered in the visits book and crossed out, presumably after Mr Eddleston's death.
Only four days after the diagnosis of Mr Eddleston's cancer, Mrs Eddleston died. According to Mrs Dickson, when she telephoned Shipman on Saturday, 28th
February to inform him of her mother's death, Shipman offered to visit her father and did so on the same day. Mrs Dickson was with her father when Shipman came. She says that he was sympathetic and supportive of her father and she was grateful to him. As Mr Dickson showed Shipman out, he asked the doctor about Mr Eddleston's prognosis, to which Shipman replied, 'I wouldn't buy him any Easter eggs'. Mr Dickson did not take offence at this somewhat unconventional reply, which he thought was typical of Shipman's style.
Despite his wife's death, Mr Eddleston kept his appointment for the bronchoscopy on 2nd
March, which confirmed that he had advanced inoperable lung cancer.
On Tuesday, 3rd
March 1998, Mr Eddleston was seen by one of the wardens at Rufford Avenue, Mrs Bullock, who found him very withdrawn and upset. He told Mrs Bullock that the doctor was coming to see him. At 1.25pm Mrs Bullock recorded in the diary kept by the wardens at Rufford Avenue that Mr Eddleston was
'not too well'
. At 6.45pm, Mr Eddleston was
'not too good'
and the warden telephoned his daughter, who came over to see him.
Mrs Dickson recalls that she stayed with her father overnight on the Saturday, Sunday and Monday, but went home to sleep, late on Tuesday evening. She said that during this time her father was very depressed but was physically unchanged. He was up and dressed, with his leg fitted, and was pottering about.
The Day of the Death
On Wednesday morning, Mr Dickson called in to give Mr Eddleston breakfast on his way to work. In the mid-morning, Mrs Bullock called in and found Mr Eddleston very subdued. Again, he told her that the doctor was coming and Mrs Bullock put that information in the diary. She went off duty at 11.30am.
Mrs Dickson called in to see her father later in the morning. She believes she was there until about 12.40pm, as the bill for her father's telephone for that day shows a call that she made to her home number at 12.33pm. She then went out to make arrangements for her mother's funeral. She left Mr Eddleston alone, having earlier made arrangements for her son, Mr Daniel Howarth, to come in and give him a meal between 2pm and 3pm. When Mrs Dickson left, her father was standing at the sink, cleaning out his budgie's cage.
Mr Howarth arrived at the house between 2.30pm and 3pm. He found his grandfather sitting in his usual chair, fully dressed and apparently asleep. However, Mr Howarth noticed that Mr Eddleston's fingertips were blue. He rushed over to his grandfather and felt for a pulse. He could not find one. His grandfather was cold. He realised that he was dead. He dialled 999 and an ambulance attended with paramedics who confirmed the fact of death. Their arrival is timed at 3.18pm. The paramedics telephoned Shipman. The telephone bill suggests that the call was made at 3.35pm. Shipman arrived afterwards.
Mr Howarth telephoned his mother and told her the news. Then he went to collect her. When she arrived, Shipman told her that he thought that her father had died of a broken heart. He said that he was in a hurry as he was due at the surgery and asked if he could telephone the coroner's office about the question of a post-mortem examination. It appears that he did so. The telephone bill shows a call to the coroner's office at 4.01pm. That call, which lasted 47 seconds, apparently concerned the question of whether the fact that Mr Eddleston had undergone a bronchoscopy would affect the need for a post-mortem examination. It appears that the advice given was that it would not.
Until recently, the family believed that the last time Shipman had seen Mr Eddleston before his death had been on 28th
February. However, the Inquiry's investigations produced a statement from Mrs Downs, the Eddlestons' next door neighbour, who was also a good friend. Mrs Downs was unable to give evidence to the Inquiry but her written statement was received. She said that, just before lunch on 4th
March, she was cleaning her windows when she saw a man she had never seen before go into the Eddlestons' house. She thought that the time was probably just before noon, but I do not think it could have been. If she is right in saying a man went into the house, it must have been later than noon, as Mrs Dickson did not leave until after 12.30pm and nobody called while she was there. Mrs Downs says that, later that afternoon, she saw the same man go in again. This time, a neighbour hailed him as 'Dr Shipman' so she realised who he was. Before going into the house, he said, 'A little more bad news'. Mrs Downs did not know what he was talking about. She later learned of Mr Eddleston's death and told a friend, Mrs Marsden, what she had seen.
Mrs Marsden was able to give evidence to the Inquiry and I found her an impressive witness. She lived on the opposite side of Rufford Avenue and could not see the Eddlestons' bungalow because the community centre blocked her view of it. She knew that Mr Eddleston had lung cancer but she thought he was still quite well in himself and certainly not ill in the way her own husband had been in the weeks before his death from lung cancer. She was shocked to hear of Mr Eddleston's death. She said that she herself had not seen Shipman or his car on Rufford Avenue on the day of Mr Eddleston's death but, as she explained, it was quite likely that she had been out. She had a regular arrangement on Wednesdays to have her hair done and to meet a friend for lunch. She usually returned home at about 2pm. Mrs Marsden recalled that, soon after the death, Mrs Downs had told her that Shipman had visited the Eddleston house twice that day, once around lunchtime and again later in the afternoon.
There are no entries in the practice records indicating that Shipman intended to visit Mr Eddleston on 4th March, although the visits book for the following day shows Mr Eddleston's name and address and an intention to revisit, as previously described.
Certification
Shipman later completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which Mrs Dickson collected from the surgery. Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Eddleston on 28th
February, the day of Mrs Eddleston's death. The cause of Mr Eddleston's death was said to be carcinoma of the lung with other significant conditions being arteriosclerosis and hypertension.
Form B of the cremation certificate puts the death as occurring at
'1300hrs'
and repeats that Shipman had last seen Mr Eddleston on 28th February. It states that he saw him again about three hours after death, which would be at about 4pm according to his timings. The mode of death is said to be syncope lasting minutes. When asked to what extent the answers to the questions concerning the cause and mode of death were dependent on his own observations or the statements of others, he wrote:
'Daughter saw him 12.30 found by G.son 1520. By body temp dead 3 hours
at 16.00'
.
Dr Grenville has said that it is not possible to estimate the time of death with any accuracy unless a rectal temperature reading has been taken and something is known of the ambient room temperature. However, it does not seem to me that anything turns on this point. This may have been nothing more than a rough estimate, although it does rather sound as though Shipman was trying to suggest that his estimate was scientifically based and this may have been an attempt to distract the reader from other matters.
Shipman's Movements
On the day of Mr Eddleston's death, Shipman had his morning surgery, followed by his open surgery as usual. The open surgery was scheduled to start at 10.15am and he appears to have had six patients. At 2pm he had a vaccinations clinic at which seven patients were expected. The practice staff say that, on Wednesdays, Shipman tended to do some of his visits before the vaccinations clinic, which generally took an hour or less, and he would then go out on further visits before his afternoon surgery which took place, as usual, at 4pm. He had three visits to make on 4th
March, one of which was to Massey's, the funeral directors, in connection with a cremation certificate. Massey's premises on Mottram Road are not far from Rufford Avenue.
Aftermath
As a postscript to the evidence in this case, it was found that a prescription was drawn in Mr Eddleston's name by Shipman on 3rd
March for ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine and Nozinan injections. Ampoules of diamorphine of this size would be suitable only for use with a syringe driver for patients being cared for in the community. Mr Eddleston did not have a syringe driver. The prescription is date-stamped 4th
March, which appears to suggest that that was the date on which it was presented, although the controlled drugs register for the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy suggests that the transaction took place on 3rd
March. This is also the date given (presumably in reliance on the register) by Mrs Brant in her police statement. This is something of a mystery, although it may be that the prescription was presented on the 3rd
but not dispensed until the 4th
, possibly because the large quantity required was not held in stock. In any event, I am quite satisfied that this diamorphine was not used for legitimate purposes for Mr Eddleston's benefit. It would be typical of Shipman's practice to make use of a patient who had been diagnosed as suffering from cancer by obtaining diamorphine in his name. I do not think this evidence as to dates is important to the question that I have to decide, which is whether Shipman killed Mr Eddleston.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on account of the contents of the cremation forms and of the medical records.
Conclusion
Mr Eddleston was undoubtedly quite ill in March 1998, but to those about him he did not appear to be close to death. His lung cancer had not yet confined him to his bed. As Dr Grenville observed, the cancer was not at that time sufficiently advanced to provide a mechanism for the death. It seems to me highly unlikely that Mr Eddleston could have died suddenly of lung cancer on 4th
March.
It is possible that Mr Eddleston died a sudden death due to some other natural cause, not lung cancer. He was at an increased risk of sudden death from heart attack and stroke. It seems to me that a sudden death from one of those causes is a real possibility. However, as Dr Grenville has said, it would not be usual to find a person who has suffered a sudden death from stroke or heart attack sitting upright in a chair as if peacefully asleep.
In his report, Dr Grenville raised the possibility that Mr Eddleston might have taken an overdose of tablets, either accidentally or even deliberately. Shortly before his wife's death, he had told one of the wardens, Mrs Conley, that if his wife died he would want to go with her and would find a way of doing so. He had not said anything of that nature after Mrs Eddleston died. However, he was plainly very depressed. Mr and Mrs Dickson were both asked about the possibility of an overdose. They were both of the view that this was highly unlikely. Mr Eddleston did not like taking pills and they thought he would not have had the 'courage' to take his own life. The only drug in Mr Eddleston's possession, which could have caused his death, was the tramadol. As this made Mr Eddleston sick, it is highly unlikely he would have taken a large number, either accidentally or on purpose, and have died, without there being any sign of vomit. In any event, there were no signs of any tablets or a container near the body. I think I can safely discount the suggestion of overdose for those reasons.
Where a patient of Shipman has died suddenly, in circumstances where there is no clear cause of death, there is always a suspicion that he might have been involved. Here, there is no clear evidence that he was with Mr Eddleston at the material time, but there is some evidence from which I can infer that he was. Mr Eddleston was alone in the house for just over two hours in the early afternoon. This was at a time when Shipman would have been out on his visits. For what it is worth, he had to pay one visit not far from Rufford Avenue. Mrs Downs says that he called twice at the Eddleston house, once at about lunchtime and again later in the afternoon. We know that he did call in the mid to late afternoon. If Mrs Downs' evidence can be accepted as to the earlier visit, Shipman paid a visit to Mr Eddleston, after which he was not seen alive. If this earlier visit occurred, Shipman later sought to conceal it. Although Shipman often admitted and asserted that he had been with a patient at or shortly before death, he did not always make this admission. In the course of this Inquiry, I have come across other cases in which Shipman has visited and killed a patient, and has subsequently sought to conceal his presence at the material time. If Shipman did visit shortly after Mrs Dickson had left, we would have the usual pattern of a Shipman diamorphine killing: a visit with a patient alone in the house; no sighting of the patient alive after that visit; the body being found sitting in a chair as if asleep.
I have not had the benefit of seeing Mrs Downs in person. I am aware that she was initially unwilling to provide a statement for the Inquiry but I understand that this was on account of her extremely difficult personal circumstances. I found Mrs Marsden an impressive witness, whose evidence I accept as honest. I am conscious of the fact that both these women provided their evidence a long time after the event of which they were speaking and that, in the intervening period, Shipman has been exposed as a prolific serial killer who preyed on just such people as Mr Eddleston. I must recognise the possibility that both Mrs Downs and Mrs Marsden have become convinced that Shipman visited the Eddleston house twice on that day rather than once. Having said that, Mrs Downs' evidence puts him at the house at about the time when he would have had the opportunity to visit and when Mr Eddleston would have been alone. Mrs Downs would not have known when Mr Eddleston was alone and, not knowing Shipman, she would not have known the times at which he usually made his visits. Accordingly, I have come to accept that the evidence of Mrs Downs, supported as it is by Mrs Marsden, is right. I think Shipman visited at about 1pm.
In my view, all the natural causes of death that I have mentioned are unlikely, although theoretically possible. I discount the hypothesis of drug overdose. The suddenness of the death and manner of death is consistent with diamorphine poisoning. Having accepted that Shipman did visit Mr Eddleston at about 1pm, I can say that I am sure that Shipman unlawfully killed Mr Eddleston.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001