The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Monica Eddleston
Introduction
Mrs Monica Eddleston died at Tameside General Hospital on Saturday, 28th
February 1998 at the age of 75. She lived with her husband, Mr Harold Eddleston, at 25 Rufford Avenue, Hyde. Mr Eddleston died at home only four days later, on 4th
March 1998. Both had become patients of Shipman on 25th
February 1998, only a few days before their deaths.
Mrs Eddleston's death was brought to the attention of the police when they were investigating the death of Mr Eddleston in August 1998. The police also investigated Mrs Eddleston's death and took a statement from Mrs Janet Dickson, the daughter of Mr and Mrs Eddleston.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Dickson, Mr Stephen Alan Dickson (her husband), Mr Daniel Howarth (her son), Mrs Betty Wagstaff, Mrs Mary Christine Conley and Mrs Jean Bullock (all wardens at the Rufford Avenue housing complex). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Eddleston's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr and Mrs Eddleston were a devoted couple and very close to their daughter and her family. The Eddlestons' home was part of a complex of sheltered accommodation set around a small square or close, in the middle of which was a community centre. The residents, who were all elderly, were looked after by a team of wardens. The Eddlestons were well liked and established members of their small community.
Mrs Eddleston had suffered a stroke in about 1995, as a result of which she had some weakness on the left side. She was also known to have some heart disease. However, she was generally well and kept her home immaculate. Mr Eddleston had had a leg amputated and had other health problems but he too remained active and independent. Both husband and wife were registered with Dr Tanna. Mrs Dickson and her family were registered with Shipman and thought highly of him. For some time, Mr and Mrs Eddleston were anxious to transfer to Shipman's list, but it was full. However, in December 1997, Shipman told Mrs Dickson that he would be able to take her parents onto his list. In January 1998, Mr Eddleston was diagnosed as suffering from lung cancer. Nonetheless, Shipman agreed to accept them.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On 25th
February 1998, Mrs Eddleston went to Shipman's surgery to register. Her husband was not feeling well and did not accompany her. Shipman took Mrs Eddleston's medical history and noted her regular medication. Her blood pressure was 160/100. Otherwise, no particular problems were noted.
Mrs Eddleston was taken ill early in the morning of 27th
February. She fell in the bathroom and lost control of her bowels. Mr Eddleston was able to attract the attention of the warden on duty, who came in to help with the practical problems. Shipman was called. Mr Dickson arrived at the house and was present when Shipman arrived and examined Mrs Eddleston. Shipman concluded that Mrs Eddleston had suffered an attack of transient cerebral ischaemia, a diagnosis which, having read all the evidence, Dr Grenville believes was reasonable in the circumstances. Shipman advised that Mrs Eddleston should rest in bed. Mr Dickson stayed at the bungalow with his parents-in-law until mid-afternoon, when Mrs Dickson arrived. By that time, it had become apparent that Mrs Eddleston was not improving. If anything her condition was worsening and she was very sick.
Shipman was called out again. On this occasion he arranged for Mrs Eddleston's urgent admission to hospital. Mrs Dickson accompanied her mother and stayed with her during the evening while various tests were carried out.
The Day of the Death
At 1am on Saturday, 28th
February 1998, Mrs Eddleston was transferred onto the ward and Mrs Dickson returned to Rufford Avenue to be with her father. At about 6am, she was called back to the hospital as her mother's condition had deteriorated. She remained with her mother until her death at about 10.30am. Her death was deeply distressing to Mr Eddleston and the family, particularly as it occurred so soon after he had been diagnosed as suffering from terminal cancer.
The Aftermath
A post-mortem examination was carried out at the hospital. The pathologist, Dr Dixon, reported that death was due to acute myocardial infarction caused by atheromatous coronary artery disease. This report was conveyed to the South Manchester Coroner who decided that an inquest would not be necessary.
The Expert Evidence
The Inquiry invited Dr Grenville to give an opinion on Mrs Eddleston's death. He examined all the documents including the general practitioner and hospital records and the post-mortem report. He concluded that it was clear that Mrs Eddleston had had a myocardial infarction. The electrocardiograph (ECG) tracings, blood tests and post-mortem reports showed consistent results. Her condition on and after admission was consistent with a heart attack and not consistent with opiate overdose. Dr Grenville's opinion was that it was highly likely that Mrs Eddleston had died of natural causes.
Conclusion
I, too, have examined the records from the hospital and the post-mortem report. I agree with Dr Grenville that Mrs Eddleston's death must have been due to natural causes. I am entirely satisfied that Shipman's involvement with Mrs Eddleston's death gives rise to no cause for suspicion. I should add that Shipman was sympathetic with and supportive of the Eddleston family on the day or so after the death. At that time, he behaved in an exemplary fashion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001