The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
William Earnshaw
Introduction
Mr William Earnshaw died at his daughter's house, 58 Ferney Lee Road, Todmorden on Saturday, 9th
August 1975 at the age of 88. In the last year of his life, Mr Earnshaw injured his shoulder and, at that time, he registered with Dr Dacre, a partner of Shipman at the Abraham Ormerod Medical Centre. Shipman certified the cause of Mr Earnshaw's death to be myocardial failure.
Mr Earnshaw's death was one of the 22 for which the cause was certified by Shipman during his time in Todmorden. The West Yorkshire Police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Ronnie Earnshaw and Mrs Eunice Shaw, Mr Earnshaw's son and daughter respectively. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Shaw and Mr Earnshaw, both of whom gave oral evidence at a hearing on 5th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Dr John Grenville.
Personal Background
Mr Earnshaw worked all his life as a skilled lathe operator. He did not retire until he was in his seventies. In retirement, he remained fit and well and enjoyed taking long walks. He never drank or smoked. He was widowed about ten years before his death but continued to live alone in his house at 62 Stansfield Street, Todmorden. When he injured his shoulder in 1974 or early 1975, he went to stay with his daughter, Mrs Shaw, but when he had recovered, he returned home. He remained independent until July 1975, just a month before his death.
In July 1975, Mrs Shaw was away on holiday. Mr Ronnie Earnshaw was keeping an eye on their father. One day, Mr Earnshaw told his son that he had felt faint while out walking the dog. He had only gone about 20 yards when he had been unable to go on. The doctor was summoned. Dr Dacre attended and explained that Mr Earnshaw's heart was 'simply tired and becoming worn out'. He prescribed some tablets. It was obvious to Mr Ronnie Earnshaw that his father could not be left alone. He sent for his sister, who returned from holiday and took her father to live at her home, where he remained until his death. Dr Dacre continued to visit regularly and the district nurse would call in to assist with washing Mr Earnshaw.
Mr Earnshaw became progressively weaker. He became confined to bed and was unable to manage solid foods. During the last days, he could not even swallow liquids.
In the days before Mr Earnshaw died, his son, Mr Ronnie Earnshaw, asked the district nurse how he would know when his father was dying. She said that he would not be able to eat or drink and he would grow cold from the feet up. Mr Earnshaw says that this actually happened and, not long before his father died, he remembers feeling his feet and lower legs and found they were cold to the touch.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mrs Shaw describes an occasion, shortly before her father's death, when Shipman paid a visit. Dr Dacre was away on holiday. At the time, Mr Earnshaw was restless. He was drifting in and out of consciousness and he appeared to be delirious. When Shipman came in, Mrs Shaw showed him into the bedroom. Shipman looked at Mr Earnshaw and then said that his visit was a formality in order to avoid the need for a post-mortem examination. Mrs Shaw was shocked and upset by this insensitive remark and was concerned that her father might have heard it. She indicated to Shipman that he should not talk in that way in her father's presence and tried to usher him out of the room. However, he said that he would stay behind to write up his notes. Mrs Shaw went downstairs to the living room. A few minutes later, Shipman came downstairs and called to her that he would see himself out. She heard but did not see him leave. She went upstairs to see her father and recalls that he was 'laying absolutely peacefully'. He was no longer restless or delirious. After that, he remained quiet and peaceful until his death. Mrs Shaw now wonders whether Shipman had given her father an injection in her absence. There is no direct evidence that he did so.
Mrs Shaw continued to sit with her father and he remained peaceful. She is not sure whether this state of affairs continued until the next day or whether her father died on the same day as Shipman had visited. In any event, while she was with him, she noticed a change in her father's breathing. It became interrupted. She telephoned her brother and other relatives to warn them that she thought the end was near. Mr Ronnie Earnshaw had not far to come and he arrived before his father died.
In his statement to the police, Mr Earnshaw said that his sister told him that Shipman had visited prior to their father's death. In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr Earnshaw said that his sister told him that 'very shortly before my father died a Dr Shipman had visited him'. He is quoted in the Yorkshire Post newspaper as having said that his father died within minutes of Shipman leaving the bedside. In his oral evidence at the hearing, Mr Earnshaw said that his father died within minutes of his arrival but he cannot remember being told that Shipman had been there very shortly before. He does not remember saying to the press that Shipman had been in the house only minutes before the death. He assured the Inquiry that he had never had any suspicions about Shipman's involvement in his father's death. Not only was it expected, he had observed the very signs which the district nurse had told him to look out for.
Certification
Shipman must have completed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although this document is now unavailable it is clear from the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') that he certified that the cause of death was 'myocardial failure' and that bronchitis had contributed to the death. Both Mr Ronnie Earnshaw and Mrs Shaw say that Mr Earnshaw did not suffer from breathing difficulties and are adamant that he did not suffer from bronchitis.
As Mr Earnshaw was buried, there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has provided a report and a supplementary report. He had available to him the statements and documents available to the Inquiry. Dr Grenville noted the history, particularly that Mrs Shaw described how her father became much more peaceful after Shipman had visited. He concluded that Shipman might well have administered an injection of an opiate to Mr Earnshaw during the visit and explained that, because Mr Earnshaw was restless, it might well have been appropriate to administer a small dose of an opiate to relieve Mr Earnshaw's distress and pain.
Dr Grenville concluded that, if Shipman did administer an inappropriately large dose of opiate to Mr Earnshaw and if Mr Earnshaw died soon after the visit, it is possible that the death might have been hastened by a few hours or maybe a day or two.
Dr Grenville noted that Mr Ronnie Earnshaw and Mrs Shaw both said that Mr Earnshaw did not suffer from bronchitis. He commented that it was unclear why Shipman had included this as a contributory factor to the death. He also noted that myocardial failure is a
mode
of death and not a
cause
of death and in the absence of the cause of the myocardial failure, which should have been listed at 1(b) of the certificate, it should not have been accepted by the registrar.
Conclusion
It is clear on the evidence that Mr Earnshaw had been approaching death over a period of some days and had been well cared for by his family. His death was not sudden or unexpected. Although Dr Grenville considers that Shipman's completion of the MCCD was inadequate and although the family is puzzled by the reference to bronchitis, the certificate itself does not give rise to any suspicion that Shipman was responsible for the death.
When Shipman visited in Dr Dacre's stead, his reported conduct towards Mr Earnshaw and Mrs Shaw was unprofessional and inhumane. However, there is no direct evidence that he gave Mr Earnshaw an injection. There is evidence that he had the opportunity to do so. We do not know whether he did or, if he did, what the drug was or how much was given. It is possible that Shipman injected Mr Earnshaw with opiate or some sort of sedative drug. A small dose of either would have been appropriate, as Mr Shaw was unsettled and distressed. Mrs Shaw says that her father was no longer restless or delirious after Shipman's visit. If Shipman considered it appropriate to administer any drug, he should have told Mrs Shaw what he was going to do and why.
Mrs Earnshaw is not now sure whether Shipman's visit occurred on the day of the death or on the preceding day. I have the impression that the death occurred on the day of the visit but not very shortly after it. If so, it is unlikely that Shipman caused or hastened Mr Earnshaw's death. If Shipman had given a lethal injection of opiate, Mr Earnshaw would have died within an hour. If, as I think likely, he survived for more than an hour after Shipman's visit, he had not been killed directly by an injection of opiate but his death might have been slightly hastened by the effect of an injection of an appropriate amount of opiate, given for perfectly proper reasons.
If Mr Earnshaw lived until the following day, his death was not caused or contributed to be an injection of opiate. However, it is possible that Shipman had contributed to Mr Earnshaw's death by giving him an excessive dose of some sort of sedative drug, such as Largactil, which could have had the effect of sending him into a very deep sleep for many hours. During such a sleep, Mr Earnshaw would have been vulnerable to bronchopneumonia and his death might have been hastened on that account. However, these are only possibilities and it is far more likely, on the evidence available, that any drug which Shipman gave served only to relieve Mr Earnshaw's distress.
My conclusion is that I think it is unlikely that Shipman caused or even accelerated Mr Earnshaw's death. It is understandable that members of his family have been distressed, as they have been, by the discovery that Shipman is a serial killer and used opiate drugs to kill. Their concerns have been heightened by the recollection of his callous attitude during the visit. Their distress and worry have been increased by the attention of the press. Although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman accelerated Mr Earnshaw's death, I can say that I think it is unlikely that he did and, if he did, it could only have been by a very short period. I hope that this decision will help to set the family's minds at rest.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001