The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Bethel Anne Evans
Introduction
Miss Bethel Anne Evans (known as Beth) died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 3rd
January 1980 at the age of 92. She was a patient of Shipman and had probably registered with him shortly after moving to Charnley House in 1979. He certified that the cause of her death was senility.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Gordon Boden (whose wife, Mrs Florence Boden, was the niece of Miss Evans), Mr Richard Boden and Mr Roger Boden (both sons of Mr Gordon Boden and Mrs Florence Boden, who has since died) and Ms Sylvia Kilgariff (a former care assistant at Charnley House). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits books for 1979 and 1980, the Charnley House admissions and discharge register, and the Charnley House daily diaries for 1979 and 1980. Miss Evans' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Evans never married. For many years, she lived alone in a rural area of Wales. About two years before her death, she began to find it difficult to cope alone and moved to Denton to live with Mr and Mrs Gordon Boden. While living there, Miss Evans was registered with the Bodens' family doctor. According to the Charnley House admissions register, Miss Evans first moved to Charnley House in February 1979, when she stayed for only ten days. She was then readmitted in September 1979, three and a half months before she died.
Mr Gordon Boden remembers that Miss Evans enjoyed good health. He does, however, say that she complained of occasional heart pains and may have suffered a stroke during the time that she was living with him and his wife. This left her with limited use of one of her hands. She became increasingly confused during her time at Charnley House.
Miss Evans' family visited her regularly: Mr and Mrs Gordon Boden visited three or four times a week. Mr Boden recalls that the front door to Charnley House was always unlocked and he says that he never saw a member of staff during his numerous visits to the home. Mr Boden's sons also say that the front door was unlocked but they recall that members of staff were present when they visited. Ms Kilgariff says that, during the early part of her time at Charnley House, the front door was left open during the day but was always locked at night.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On the night of Saturday, 22nd
December 1979, Miss Evans complained of a severe pain in her side and, the following morning, a doctor was sent for. Dr William Bennett, one of the Donneybrook doctors, attended and said that Miss Evans had a urinary tract infection, for which he prescribed Septrin, an antibiotic. He said that the condition was not serious and that Miss Evans should stay in bed that day but could get up the next.
Miss Evans was in pain again on the night of Monday, 24th
December but the doctor was not called out. She had a further disturbed night on 26th
December 1979 and, the following day, it was noted that her back should be creamed and that she should be given two Normison (benzodiazepine) tablets. It was noted that a specimen of her urine was to be sent to the Donneybrook Surgery to be sent on to the pathology laboratory. Shipman visited the home that day to see another resident, Mrs Dolan, and it is possible that he also saw Miss Evans. That evening, Miss Evans did not eat any tea.
The daily diary records that, on Friday, 28th
December 1979, Miss Evans was put to bed. She had not eaten and the staff were told to encourage her to take medication and fluids. She was to be turned every hour, day and night. Shipman was to be asked to visit the following day. That night, she was in great pain and did not sleep. She was turned every half hour and drinks were given.
There is no note, either in the daily diary or in Shipman's visits book for 1979, to confirm that he visited on Saturday, 29th
December, as had been suggested. Miss Evans appeared to be in pain during that evening and night. However, she apparently spent a good night on 30th
December.
On Monday, 31st
December 1979, Miss Evans' condition was noted to be deteriorating. Shipman was informed and his advice seems to have been to encourage her to take fluids. It was noted that all appropriate care was given and that Miss Evans' niece, presumably Mrs Boden, attended.
On 1st
January 1980, there was no change in Miss Evans' condition. She must have been still confined to bed, as it was noted that she should be turned hourly. That evening, she was very ill, crying out with pain. She had a very bad night and was in constant pain. She was given plenty of fluids, but it was not possible to take a urine sample as she was too poorly.
During Wednesday, 2nd
January 1980, Miss Evans was shouting out all day. She had treatment for a pressure sore on her left hip. She took no food, only fluids. It was noted that she should be turned during the night, if possible. Her condition remained the same that evening. She was given a drink at 7pm. Her relatives visited at 8pm. During that night, her condition remained the same.
I find it puzzling that, although there are many references to Miss Evans' pain, there is no reference to her receiving any medication to relieve it.
Mr Richard Boden remembers visiting Miss Evans with his mother at about 8pm on 2nd
January 1980. He remembers being told by a member of staff that Miss Evans was unwell and was in bed. Together, they went to her bedroom and found Miss Evans in bed. She was conscious but only able to mumble words. She was very frail and Mr Richard Boden thought that she looked 'sunken and defeated' and that she was going to die. Mr Gordon Boden says that, whenever he and his wife visited Miss Evans, she was always dressed and sitting in the lounge. He says that, even over Christmas and New Year, there was no indication that her health had deteriorated. He says that the entries in the daily diary, which he has recently seen for the first time, have come as a complete surprise to him.
The Day of the Death
The words
'Charnley House'
appear in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 3rd
January 1980.
The first entry relating to Miss Evans in the daily diary for 3rd
January 1980 records that there was no change in her condition and that she continued to be given all appropriate care. She was crying out all afternoon. She was given fluids, and her position and linen were changed frequently. That evening, she was crying out and moaning. She seemed to be in constant pain and she was changed, turned and given a drink. Again, there is no reference to her receiving any medication to relieve her pain.
The night report for 3rd
January reads as follows:
'Miss Evans
doctor came at 11-15pm, certified her death
at 11-30pm Undertaker sent for. all care given.
Relatives notified at 7.0am friday morning'
.
This entry appears to me to imply that the doctor, whoever it was, was present at the moment of death. That note was made by Ms Kilgariff. She has examined the entry and said that she was alone on duty that night and, although she does not remember calling a doctor, she accepts that the note suggests that she did. Ms Kilgariff says that she was unaware of any rule at Charnley House that a member of staff should remain present during a consultation with a patient, but she would have stayed with the patient on her own initiative, unless she went to make a drink for the doctor, or if another resident required attention. Ms Kilgariff says that, if she had seen a doctor give an injection, she thinks she would have entered that fact in the daily diary. However, she says that the reference to
'all care given'
in the note could include reference to an injection. She says she has no recollection of seeing an injection given that night, or indeed at any time whilst she was working at Charnley House.
Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 3rd January includes the names of three patients and then a fourth entry which reads simply
'Charnley House'
. Next to each entry appears a tick.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman recorded that Miss Evans had died of senility at Charnley House on 3rd
January 1980. He said that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death. He recorded that there would be no post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 4th
January 1980.
Miss Evans was cremated but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
Miss Evans was clearly unwell during the days before her death. She seems to have been in considerable pain. The cause of her pain does not appear to have been established. She does not seem to have had any pain-relieving medication and there is no record in the daily diary that any doctor attended her after Dr Bennett's visit on 22nd
December. It is possible that Shipman visited on other occasions, for example on 29th
December, and that the visit was not recorded in either his visits book or the daily diary. Miss Evans' family seems to have been unaware of the seriousness of her condition until 2nd
January. However, Mr Richard Boden visited that evening and recalls that Miss Evans seemed close to death. She was 92 years of age. Against that background, her death cannot be described as sudden or unexpected.
Suspicion arises from the fact that a doctor was called to Charnley House shortly before Miss Evans died and appears to have been present at the moment of death. Shipman was later to certify that he had seen Miss Evans alive on the day of her death. I think it is likely that it was Shipman who attended at the home late at night on 3rd
January. However, the matter is not free of doubt. I note that the words
'Charnley House'
appear in Shipman's visits book for the day of Miss Evans' death. That would suggest that he intended to visit the home on his rounds, during the day. Yet, there is no reference in the daily diary to Shipman or any other doctor attending on that day until 11.15pm. I find this puzzling, as Shipman did not usually note emergency visits in the visits book; he seems to have used it as an aide-memoire for his daily rounds. I conclude that it is possible that Shipman visited Charnley House during the day on 3rd
January. If so, his visit has not been noted in the daily diary. If he did, it is possible that the doctor who came at night was another Donneybrook doctor, who happened to be on out of hours duty. However, I think it more likely that the doctor who came late at night was Shipman.
Although Ms Kilgariff does not remember summoning a doctor that night, she must have done and I infer that she did so either because Miss Evans was in severe pain or because Ms Kilgariff thought that she was close to death. The former is more likely, as the staff of Charnley House were accustomed to keeping watch over patients who were close to death and did not usually call out a doctor on that account alone.
The doctor is recorded as attending at 11.15pm and certified death at 11.30pm. According to the daily diary, the doctor, probably Shipman, was at the home for 15 minutes before certifying death. He might well have been left alone with Miss Evans. It follows that Shipman might well have had an opportunity to give Miss Evans an injection. If he gave her an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of an opiate, she would have died within about five to ten minutes. Mrs Stansfield, the matron at Charnley House, said (in connection with the case of Mrs Leah Johnston) that doctors who visited the home would 'administer a drop of morphine to residents if they were in pain'. It is quite possible that Shipman gave such an injection.
A second cause for suspicion arises out of the cause of death that Shipman certified. Although there is some evidence that Miss Evans had become confused, she does not seem to have suffered the gradual decline towards death which would make it appropriate for the doctor to certify that the death was due to senility. That Miss Evans' final illness appeared to begin with a painful condition of the urinary tract, and that her pain continued until death, would suggest that her death was not due to a gradual deterioration and the failure of several vital organs. I suspect that Shipman attributed the death to senility either out of laziness or because he knew that the real cause was morphine poisoning.
Although there is real suspicion that Shipman was present at Miss Evans' death and might well have had an opportunity to hasten her death, I do not think that I could say that it is likely that he did or that he did not. In those circumstances, I regret to say that I am unable to reach any positive conclusion about the circumstances of this death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001