The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Agnes Edge
Introduction
Mrs Agnes Edge died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 20th
March 1979 at the age of 87. It is not known whether or for how long she had been a patient of Shipman, but by the time of her death he had been in practice in Hyde for about 18 months. He certified that the cause of her death was generalised cerebroatherosclerosis.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. In response, on 24th
September 2001, Mr Jeffrey E Edge, Mrs Edge's grandson, wrote to provide information about her death and has since provided a statement. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979, the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Mrs Edge, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and the Charnley House diary and admissions register. A report has been obtained from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
The Charnley House records show that Mrs Edge was admitted on 27th
June 1978. In the first few days she was rather unsettled.
The daily diary shows that in the few weeks before her death, Shipman saw Mrs Edge on a number of occasions. On the night of 13th
February 1979, she was agitated and confused and had a bad morning the next day. Shipman visited and the note of 14th
February indicates that he was to organise a referral to a geriatrician. An entry in Shipman's visits book suggests that he was to visit Mrs Edge at Charnley House on that day. It is not clear from the record what came of the referral.
Mrs Edge's confusion did not improve and she remained unsettled at night. On 8th
March, a Dr Rajapaksa was visiting the home and seems to have been asked to see Mrs Edge. He left two sedative capsules for her. The note for that day also says that Shipman would arrange for her to be seen at a clinic, probably that of Dr Matin, the geriatrician. There are some pages missing from the daily diary, but it appears that Mrs Edge was
'very well, and eating well'
on 6th
March.
On Sunday, 11th
March, Mrs Edge had no breakfast. She was very confused in the evening and had no breakfast again the following morning, Monday, 12th
March. She stayed in bed all that day and Shipman was asked to see her on the following day. That night she fell out of bed and was very confused. On 13th
March, Shipman visited and said she could have a small glass of stout that night. Shipman's own diary for that day includes, after Mrs Edge's name, the word
'ref'
, which suggests that he intended to refer her to Dr Matin. That night Mrs Edge had a glass of stout in addition to the tea and Complan that she had taken that morning. The diary records that she had a good night but still looked very poorly.
The following day, Wednesday, 14th
March 1979, Mrs Edge was very poorly and was given
'all care & attention'
. She took only a small amount of weak tea. It appears that she was confined to bed at this time; she was beginning to develop bedsores.
Mr Edge recalls visiting his grandmother a few days before her death, which must have been at about this time. He recalls that she was unhappy and upset but not confused. She said that she was not feeling well and looked drained and tired. He said that the family did not expect her to die at this time.
Shipman's visits book refers to a visit to Mrs Edge on Friday, 16th
March and this visit is recorded in the daily diary. The note of the visit reads as follows:
'
Mrs Edge
seen by Dr Shipman, lumbar puncture
given. also Valium
injection
, will sleep approx
12 hrs. all care & attention given, please turn
her and cream her back, every 2 hrs thank you.
also, give fluids when she waken's
(
sic
)
'
.
It appears that Mrs Edge did not sleep for 12 hours because, that afternoon, the diary records that she was not sleeping at all but was shouting and moaning. She was turned in bed but was still restless. Although cream was applied to her back at 6pm and 8.30pm, Mrs Edge remained restless and confused. This situation continued during the night and throughout the following day, 17th
March. By that night, however, it seems that Mrs Edge was a little more settled and the following day it is recorded that she was sleeping peacefully.
On Sunday, 18th
March, Mrs Edge's family asked that the priest should visit. That evening, she was very poorly and Father Turnbull of St Paul's Church came to see her. The following morning, Monday, 19th
March, Mrs Edge was said to be sleeping peacefully. In the evening, there was no change but she was very weak. In the night, her lips had to be moistened every half an hour and her daughter telephoned and asked to be kept informed.
The Day of the Death
The handwritten entry for Tuesday, 20th
March 1979 records that Mrs Edge was sleeping peacefully in the morning with no change in her condition, but that she died at 4.40pm. There is no record of a visit by any doctor for the purpose of certifying the fact of her death. The diary records that her body was removed at 7.45pm and that her son would come for the death certificate the following morning.
There is no reference to Shipman in the daily diary for Tuesday, 20th
March 1979. This would suggest that he did not visit at all, whether to see Mrs Edge or any of his other patients. However, Shipman's own visits book suggests that he was to visit Charnley House that day, although the entry does not specify which of his patients were to be seen. I cannot resolve this conflict and say whether or not Shipman visited Charnley House or whether or not he saw Mrs Edge. It is possible that Shipman was called out to certify the fact of Mrs Edge's death but it seems unlikely that the reference to Charnley House in his visits book for 20th
March connoted that visit, as the visits book entry was the first of three visits listed for that day. The entry was therefore probably made long before 4.40pm, the time of Mrs Edge's death. I note that the daily diary records that Shipman visited the following morning, to see two other patients. I cannot say whether or not Shipman saw Mrs Edge alive on 20th
March. If he did, his visit is not recorded in the daily diary.
Certification
The death certificate records that the cause of Mrs Edge's death was generalised cerebroatherosclerosis and that
'hypomonia'
was the secondary cause. This contributory cause should no doubt be 'hypomania'.
On the MCCD counterfoil, Shipman confirmed that Mrs Edge died on 20th
March 1979 at Charnley House at the age of 87. He said that he had last seen her alive on 16th
March 1979, although he appears originally to have written that he saw her on 20th
March. He signed the form on 20th
March. The overwriting of 20th
March tends to increase my suspicion that Shipman might have seen Mrs Edge alive on the day of her death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville noted that in the absence of the medical records, it was difficult to form a clear view of the sequence of events during Mrs Edge's last weeks. He also noted that there was no record of the medication she had been prescribed. Given those limitations, Dr Grenville concluded that it appeared that Mrs Edge was in a poor physical and mental condition, that Shipman managed her in conjunction with a consultant physician, that she was probably returned to Charnley House from hospital because nothing further could be done for her and the staff were asked to keep her as comfortable as possible, pending her imminent death. Dr Grenville was not critical of Shipman's treatment of Mrs Edge.
Dr Grenville did not comment on the rather strange note in the daily diary for 16th
March, which suggests that Shipman gave Mrs Edge a lumbar puncture. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has provided a short note on this subject and has explained that this almost certainly did not happen. Such procedures are usually carried out in hospital. In any event, he can think of no reason why Shipman would want to carry out such a procedure. Dr Esmail is of the view that it is most likely that the care worker misunderstood what Shipman said to her or misunderstood what she saw.
Conclusion
It would appear from the daily diary that from the time of her admission, Mrs Edge was suffering from confusion, a state of mind that may well have been attributable to cerebroatherosclerosis. Moreover, her condition seems to have deteriorated in the days leading up to her death. The record indicates that her daughter was very concerned about her and her relatives asked that a priest should visit her. I infer from these aspects of the evidence that Mrs Edge's death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
There is no satisfactory evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Edge alive after 16th
March. There is some slight suspicion that he did so, raised by the entry in his visits book and the alteration he made on the MCCD counterfoil.
It is likely that Shipman last saw Mrs Edge alive on 16th
March as he claimed on the MCCD counterfoil and as indicated by the daily diary. I do not think he can have given a lumbar puncture. Dr Esmail says that such procedures are usually carried out in sterile conditions in hospital. The object of a lumbar puncture is to take a sample of spinal fluid for the purpose of analysis. I can only think that the person who made the record has misdescribed what Shipman did. It may be that he gave Mrs Edge a spinal injection, possibly of local anaesthetic, in the hope that it would give her relief from the pain of her bedsores. It may be that the note seeks to describe an injection into the buttock. Whatever the treatment was, it seems that Mrs Edge remained unsettled. I have also considered the possibility that Shipman administered an injection of something other than Valium on that day. It is possible that he administered an opiate. Even if he did, I can rule out the possibility that this injection caused or hastened Mrs Edge's death. She did not fall into a deep or prolonged sleep and lived for four days after the injection. By then, its effect would long since have worn off.
I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman saw Mrs Edge alive on 20th
March. If he did and the Charnley House staff did not note his visit, it is possible that he did something to hasten her end. However, it is clear that Mrs Edge was very close to death by the morning of 20th
March. It seems to me likely that Mrs Edge died of the natural causes certified by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001