The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Everall
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Everall died at her home, 16 Commercial Street, Hyde on Sunday, 2nd
November 1980 at the age of 78. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of deaths for which the Inquiry had only very limited information as to the circumstances of the death. In response, the Inquiry was contacted by Mrs Maureen Ramsbottom, Mrs Everall's daughter, and she has provided a statement. Statements have also been taken from Mr Paul Ramsbottom and Mr Neil Ramsbottom (Mrs Ramsbottom's two sons) and from Mr Brian Everall (Mrs Everall's son). The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1980. Mrs Everall's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Everall lived with her husband, Mr Joseph Everall, in a ground floor flat. Mr Everall has since died. He too was a patient of Shipman and his death has been investigated by the Inquiry.
Mrs Everall suffered from osteoporosis. In April 1980, she sustained a fracture of the hip, for which she was treated at Tameside General Hospital. She made an incomplete recovery and was still in severe pain when she was discharged. She also suffered from episodes of confusion, thought by her family to be caused by the pain. Although she was able to walk about inside her flat, with the aid of a calliper, she used a wheelchair out of doors. Her loss of mobility prevented her from attending church. Mr Brian Everall recalls that his mother lost weight and became very thin. He also recalls that his mother was prescribed liquid morphine for her continuing pain.
Mrs Everall was cared for by her family. Mrs Ramsbottom would call in each morning to wash and dress her mother. Mrs Mary English, Mrs Everall's other daughter, would visit each afternoon, and Mr Brian Everall would visit most evenings.
None of the witnesses suggests that Mrs Everall had suffered a stroke. However, it is possible that she had and that any associated problems had been obscured by the more obvious difficulties caused by the hip fracture.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Sunday, 26th
October 1980, Mrs Everall was visited by her family. Mr Brian Everall has said that his mother looked very poorly and that at times during the visit she was confused. Mr Neil Ramsbottom does not recall anything out of the ordinary about his grandmother's condition that day. Mr Paul Ramsbottom remembers that his grandmother was sitting in her armchair on that day with her leg raised. She was 'no different from usual'.
Between 9.30am and 10am on Friday, 31st
October, Mrs Ramsbottom called at her mother's flat with her husband and Mr Neil Ramsbottom. Mrs Everall was still in bed and said that she did not want to get up because of the pain in her hip. Mrs Ramsbottom recalls that she asked Shipman to visit her mother. She says he had not visited at all since her mother's discharge from hospital. In that respect, Mrs Ramsbottom is probably mistaken, as Mrs Everall's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Monday, 27th
October. Mr Brian Everall recalls that Shipman had visited Mrs Everall at home several times following her discharge. Mr Neil Ramsbottom recalls that, by Friday, 31st
October, his grandmother had been unwell for a few days and he may well be correct.
In any event, Shipman arrived at Mrs Everall's flat at about lunchtime on 31st
October. Mrs Ramsbottom's recollection is that her mother was in pain with her back but that she was awake, breathing and eating normally, and that her colour was 'not deathly'. Mrs Ramsbottom says that Shipman pulled back Mrs Everall's bedcovers and flicked her feet with his hands. She remembers him then saying words to this effect: 'You know your mother is dying? She's dying from her feet upwards. I can give her something to ease the pain but then she will go to sleep, so say what you have to say to her now'.
Mrs Ramsbottom was shocked. She remembers saying to Shipman that she wanted a priest to see her mother, and the family priest, Father Cryan, was sent for and arrived within a short time. When Father Cryan came out of Mrs Everall's bedroom, he told Mrs Ramsbottom that her mother's death was imminent. When Mrs Ramsbottom went back into the bedroom, she saw Shipman give her mother an injection, although he did not say what it was. Almost immediately, Mrs Everall started to fall asleep and, by the time other members of the family arrived at about 2pm, Mrs Everall appeared to be unconscious. Although Mrs Ramsbottom remembers that Shipman returned to the flat at some point on 31st
October, she does not mention that there was any further injection. Shipman told her that he had arranged for the district nurse to attend to turn Mrs Everall, presumably to prevent bedsores.
Mr Brian Everall recalls being at his mother's house that afternoon, but does not recall being told that Shipman had given his mother an injection. He stayed at the bedside until the death and recalls no further visit by Shipman.
Mr Neil Ramsbottom's account of the day is broadly consistent with that of his mother. He adds that, before leaving at lunchtime, Shipman told Mr Everall that his wife would die in a certain number of hours, but he cannot remember how many hours Shipman said he expected her to live for. He confirms that, following Shipman's departure, his grandmother was unconscious. Family members were gathered around the bed saying prayers.
Mr Paul Ramsbottom remembers that his mother telephoned him at about 5pm to say that his grandmother was not well. He went straight to the house and saw his grandmother in bed, either asleep or unconscious. He recalls that Shipman arrived at about 6pm. When he had looked at Mrs Everall, Shipman told Mrs Ramsbottom that her mother was not very well and that he could give her another injection to make her more comfortable. This is not, of course, mentioned by his mother and it is inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Brian Everall. According to Mr Paul Ramsbottom, Shipman then went back into Mrs Everall's bedroom while his mother stayed in the lounge.
Although the relatives do not mention Shipman attending Mrs Everall on Saturday, 1st
November, her name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. It may be that the family has confused the events of the two days.
The Day of the Death
Mr Brian Everall and Mrs Ramsbottom were present when their mother died during the early hours of 2nd
November 1980. Mr Brian Everall has said that he felt relief for his mother when she died, as she had been in great pain. Shipman was telephoned and arrived between 7am and 8am. Mrs Ramsbottom remembers that he acted in a cold manner towards her and did not express any emotion.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. Osteoporosis was said to have contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Everall alive on 1st
November 1980, the day before death. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 2nd
November 1980.
Conclusion
In the absence of the records, it is not possible to form a clear view as to the exact nature of Mrs Everall's medical condition. However, it is clear that she was very unwell in the period before her death. It would appear that her final illness had begun by about 26th
October, when Mr Brian Everall thought his mother looked unwell. In any event, it is clear that her condition deteriorated during the ensuing days. I have the impression that her pain was severe and this led to immobility. She might have developed a chest infection and this could have led to bronchopneumonia. On the other hand, it is possible that she had a stroke but that the family has forgotten about it. Bronchopneumonia is a common complication in elderly stroke patients and a frequent mechanism of death. The period of about 36 hours of unconsciousness would be entirely consistent with death following a developing stroke, with or without added bronchopneumonia. Whatever the cause, it appears that the death was not sudden or unexpected.
It appears that Shipman visited Mrs Everall on at least three occasions during her last illness and there is evidence that on at least one occasion, possibly more, he administered an injection which he said was designed to make Mrs Everall more comfortable. If she was in pain, as her son, Mr Brian Everall, says she was, this would have been an entirely proper thing to do. It is possible that Shipman gave Mrs Everall an opiate drug or he might have given a sedative drug such as Largactil. There is no reason to suppose that he gave a lethal dose of opiate. If he had done so, Mrs Everall would have been dead within an hour of the injection. The evidence suggests that she lived for about 36 hours after the last injection. Even if the family has confused the events of the Friday and Saturday, it would appear that she lived for about 12 hours after the lunchtime injection. I think it is unlikely that Shipman gave another injection in the afternoon or at 6pm as suggested by Mr Paul Ramsbottom. Even if he did and even if that injection were given on the Saturday and not on the Friday, it cannot have been a lethal injection of opiate. Mrs Everall lived for about six hours after the time when she might last have been injected.
If the injection or injections were of a sedative or of non-lethal amounts of opiate, it is possible that the dose or doses resulted in Mrs Everall being put into a deep sleep sooner than was appropriate. A patient who is deeply unconscious is more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, which is, as I have said, a common mechanism of death in elderly patients. In this way, Mrs Everall's death might have been hastened by a small margin. However, if the dose was honestly intended to relieve pain or discomfort, it would not have been unlawful to give it, even if the effect was to hasten Mrs Everall's death.
It appears to me highly likely that Mrs Everall's death was natural. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman gave an inappropriately large dose of sedative or opiate which rendered her unconscious sooner than was desirable and might have hastened her death by a small margin. However, there is no evidence that he did so.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001