The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joseph Vincent Everall
Introduction
Mr Joseph Vincent Everall died at his home, 16 Commercial Street, Hyde on Monday, 17th
December 1984 at the age of 80. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Mr Everall thought very highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Everall's death was cerebroarteriosclerosis due to old age.
In January 2001, Mr Everall's son-in-law, Mr Ronald English, contacted the police on behalf of his wife, Mrs Mary English, to express concern about the circumstances of his father-in-law's death. The police undertook an investigation and, at its conclusion, Mr and Mrs English were satisfied that there were no grounds for concern. In June 2001, the Inquiry contacted Mrs English and she confirmed that she had no concerns about her father's death. The Inquiry's file was closed.
In September 2001, however, Mr Everall's other daughter, Mrs Maureen Ramsbottom, contacted the Inquiry to express her concern about the circumstances of the death, and the file was reopened. The Inquiry took statements from Mrs Ramsbottom, Mrs English, and Mr Everall's grandchildren, Mr Neil Ramsbottom, Mr Paul Ramsbottom and Mrs Elaine Biggins. A statement was also taken from District Nurse Dorothy Clegg, who recalls nursing Mr Everall but cannot remember the details of his condition. However, her diaries for 1983 and 1984 have proved invaluable. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for the relevant period and to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Mr Everall's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Everall was a widower who lived alone in his ground floor flat. In late 1983, he was admitted to Tameside General Hospital suffering from pneumonia. While there, he was found to have bowel cancer and he later underwent an operation. Nurse Clegg's diary shows that she dressed Mr Everall's operation wounds for about a month from late December 1983. According to the family, after a brief convalescence, Mr Everall appeared to make a very good recovery. Mrs English remembers, however, that Shipman prescribed oral morphine, apparently on the recommendation of the hospital. During the day, her father was able to cope with his pain and did not need morphine, but he took it at night. Mrs English mixed it with her father's nightly whisky, as Shipman suggested.
Mrs English says that, in June 1984, Mr Everall was readmitted to hospital suffering either from a recurrence of his bowel symptoms or problems with his gall bladder. He underwent surgery either then or later that year. Following her father's discharge, according to Mrs English, Shipman said that he had been told by the hospital that Mr Everall should no longer be given any morphine and none was given. She thinks that her father took paracetamol for pain relief from then until his death.
The family says that despite these setbacks, Mr Everall remained independent and active. He continued to do all his own housework and would walk into Hyde for his shopping. He would attend mass at his local church every Sunday. However, this evidence must be read in the light of Nurse Clegg's diary, which shows that she visited Mr Everall to bath him every Wednesday from March until November 1984. On 26th
September 1984, she also gave him an injection, but she cannot remember what it was.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
In mid-November, Mr Everall was readmitted to hospital, probably for gall bladder surgery. Nurse Clegg's diary shows that Mr Everall was in hospital on 14th
November. The family says that this admission did not impair his independence to any significant degree. Nurse Clegg's diary suggests that Mr Everall was discharged from hospital at the beginning of December and that she attended to dress his wounds every day between Saturday, 8th
December and Friday, 14th
December. However, it appears that the wound must have been healing by then, as Mr Everall's name does not appear in Nurse Clegg's diary for Saturday, 15th
December. Nurse Clegg might have been off duty that weekend. However, she says that she would note the names of her patients who needed visits as a reminder to the nurse who would be on duty. Two names appear in her diary for Saturday, 15th
December but Mr Everall's is not one of them. I infer that Mr Everall probably did not need a visit that weekend.
Although there is disagreement between family members as to detail and timing, the essence of their evidence is the same. They say that Mr Everall had bowel cancer and gall bladder problems. He underwent surgery in connection with both conditions. However, he was not thought to be close to death in the period before he died. Both his daughters saw Mr Everall on the day before his death and say that he appeared to be his 'usual self'. Whilst the evidence of Nurse Clegg might suggest that Mr Everall was less independent than the family remembers, it does appear that she was not seeing him in connection with terminal care. However, that his wounds were still being dressed three days before his death suggests to me that he must have been quite restricted in his activities.
Shipman's visits book shows that he visited Mr Everall on 10th
December 1984.
Mrs Ramsbottom last saw Mr Everall alive after church on the morning of Sunday, 16th
December. She stayed for about two hours. Mr Neil and Mr Paul Ramsbottom also visited that morning. Mr Everall was his usual self. Mrs English last saw her father that same evening. She arrived between 6pm and 7pm. He was watching television and seemed quite well. He did not complain of pain or any illness and was in good spirits.
The Day of the Death
Mr Everall's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Monday, 17th
December 1984. It appears second in a list of six names. Two of the other patients in the list whom Shipman was due to see that day lived near Mr Everall's home. It would be usual for Shipman to set out on his rounds in the late morning, at the end of surgery.
At about 2pm that day Mrs Ramsbottom and her daughter, Mrs Biggins, went to Mr Everall's flat. Mrs Ramsbottom let herself into the flat with her own key. Unusually, Mr Everall was not in the lounge. Mrs Ramsbottom went to his bedroom where she found him lying on his back on his bed, fully dressed. His sleeves were both rolled up. He was still wearing his slippers. Mr Neil Ramsbottom says that his grandfather usually wore his shirt with the sleeves rolled up but Mrs English does not agree. Mrs Ramsbottom recalls that her father made a noise out of his mouth and she put her arms around him to feel for a pulse. She could not find one and realised that he had died. His body seemed still warm.
Mrs Biggins says that her grandfather appeared to be sleeping. She thought it was unusual for her grandfather to lie on his bed during the afternoon. If he had a sleep in the afternoon, he usually sat in an armchair. She says that one of Mr Everall's sleeves was rolled up. Mrs Biggins telephoned for Shipman who arrived within a few minutes. Shipman said words to the effect: 'Well, he's dead, he's gone'. He then mentioned a post-mortem examination and Mrs Ramsbottom expressed concern. Shipman then said words to the effect: 'Well, you don't need one. I've been visiting him. I can square it with the coroner'.
When Mrs English learned of the death at about 5pm she was 'completely shocked'. Although she knew her father had cancer, she had not thought he was near death. The death seemed very sudden. She went to the house, and confirms her sister's evidence as to the position in which Mr Everall was found. She too thought it was unusual for him to lie on his bed in the afternoon. Nor was she used to seeing him with his sleeves rolled up. She formed the impression that her father had done his laundry, which was hanging in the bathroom, earlier that day.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mr Everall alive on 12th
December 1984, five days before his death. The cause of death was given as cerebroarteriosclerosis due to old age. Adenocarcinoma of the descending colon was said to have been a contributory cause.
Mr Everall's name does not appear in the visits book for 12th
December 1984.
Mr Everall was buried so there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious circumstances surrounding Mr Everall's death.
Although it appears that Mr Everall suffered from cancer, the evidence does not suggest that he had yet reached the terminal stage. Indeed, Shipman does not suggest that Mr Everall died of cancer. I have the impression that Mr Everall had been able to go to church and possibly even to walk into Hyde to shop until his most recent surgery. Shipman's visits book does not suggest that Mr Everall was receiving regular visits from Shipman as one would normally expect with a patient in the terminal stage of illness. Nurse Clegg only saw him to bath him and to dress his post-operative wounds. She did not provide terminal nursing care. Thus it appears that, despite his illness, Mr Everall was in reasonable health. His family regarded his death as sudden.
Shipman certified the cause of death to be cerebroarteriosclerosis. This is hardening and narrowing of the cerebral arteries. It is a risk factor, which predisposes the patient to a cerebrovascular accident, which might be fatal. Shipman did not say that Mr Everall died of a stroke but certified that death was due to the underlying condition which might give rise to a stroke. There is no evidence that Mr Everall had cerebroarteriosclerosis. A patient who has that condition to a severe degree might well suffer signs of dementia or have a history of transient ischaemic attacks or strokes. Mr Everall's family does not mention any such signs, symptoms or history. The family's description of his activities would not suggest that Mr Everall was suffering from cerebroarteriosclerosis to the extent that he might die as a result. In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to form a reliable view about Mr Everall's risk factors for suffering a fatal stroke. I suspect that Mr Everall might have died of some cause quite unrelated to cerebroarteriosclerosis.
The immediate circumstances surrounding the death are not suggestive of a stroke. Mrs Ramsbottom had the impression that her father had only just died when she found him at about 2pm on 17th
December. It would appear likely that he had been able to get up that morning and dress himself. The family says that he would not usually go back to bed to rest during the day. If he had had a stroke one would have expected him to subside gradually into unconsciousness and die over a considerable period. A rapid death is possible but uncommon. Dr John Grenville says in his generic evidence that patients who are alone when a stroke occurs usually make some effort to seek help before they collapse. Mr Everall was found lying peacefully on his bed. This is a position in which many of Shipman's patients were found after being killed by means of a lethal injection of opiate.
There is no direct evidence to show that Shipman visited Mr Everall on the day of his death. However, the entry for that day in the visits book suggests that he probably did. Although I recognise that it is possible that this entry was made in the afternoon when Mr Everall's death had been discovered, in my view that is unlikely. Shipman usually compiled the list of names in the book before leaving the surgery to go on his rounds in the late morning. He often did not enter emergency requests in the book. The book was used more as an aide-memoire for visits which had been requested or which he had decided to make. I consider that it is likely that Shipman had put Mr Everall's name in the visits book as a reminder to himself that Mr Everall was due a visit. He had recently been discharged from hospital. Shipman had seen him exactly a week earlier.
These factors give rise to real suspicion that Shipman caused Mr Everall's death. Mr Everall was in many respects a typical Shipman victim. He lived alone and was in poor health. It is likely that he would have required a great deal of medical and nursing support in the coming months if he had remained alive. Shipman might well have taken the view that Mr Everall's quality of life would never again be good. His philosophy seems to have been that he did not believe that such patients should be 'kept going'. Taking all these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed Mr Everall.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001