The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elizabeth Fletcher
Introduction
Mrs Elizabeth Fletcher (known as Betty) died at her home, 40 St John's Drive, Godley, Hyde on Tuesday, 5th
January 1988 at the age of 90. She had been a patient of Shipman for about ten years and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
The police investigated Mrs Fletcher's death in January 2001 because Professor Richard Baker informed them that, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation documents, he considered that the death of Mrs Fletcher was highly suspicious. The police took a statement from Mr Gerald Harrop, widower of Mrs Jean Harrop, Mrs Fletcher's stepdaughter. Mrs Harrop died in 1998. An inquest into Mrs Fletcher's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Harrop. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits books for 1987 and 1988 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Despite her age, Mrs Fletcher was both physically and mentally fit. She led an active and full life. She was an official at Pensioners House, in Hyde and in that capacity she used to organise outings. She was also a member of the concert party at Pensioners House and took part in singing and dancing shows put on for groups of pensioners.
Mr and Mrs Harrop's daughter, Susan, saw her grandmother every day. Susan had a disability and, in 1988, attended a day centre in Hyde. Each day, Monday to Friday, Mr or Mrs Harrop would leave their daughter with Mrs Fletcher, who would look after her before she was taken to the centre and in the afternoon, when she was brought back.
Mrs Fletcher was very friendly with a neighbour, Mrs Lizzie Mellor, who lived in the same block of flats. Mrs Mellor visited Mrs Fletcher regularly. She has since died and the Inquiry has investigated her death.
Mr Harrop does not remember the last occasion on which he saw Mrs Fletcher prior to her death. As Mr and Mrs Harrop shared the responsibility of taking their daughter to Mrs Fletcher's house each day, Mr Harrop thinks that he would have seen Mrs Fletcher during the last few days of her life. Whichever day it was, he recalls that she was in good health. I note that Mrs Fletcher died on 5th
January and it is likely that Susan would have resumed attendance at the day centre on Monday, 4th
January. Whether it was Mr Harrop or his wife who called at Mrs Fletcher's house on the morning and evening of 4th
January and the morning of 5th
January, Mr Harrop is sure that Mrs Fletcher did not complain of feeling unwell. Had she been feeling unwell, then she would have asked either Mr or Mrs Harrop to telephone for a doctor, as she preferred not to use the telephone herself.
Shipman does not appear to have visited Mrs Fletcher after October 1987. Her name does not appear in his visits books after that time.
The Day of the Death
At about 2.45pm on 5th
January, Mrs Mellor telephoned Mr Harrop at work and told him that Mrs Fletcher had died. Mr Harrop's place of work was only half a mile from Mrs Fletcher's home. He went there immediately and arrived about five minutes later. Mrs Fletcher was sitting upright in a chair and looked as though she was asleep. She was wearing indoor clothes and had her usual 'neat and tidy appearance'. Mrs Fletcher's telephone was situated near the chair in which she was sitting. She did not appear to have attempted to reach for the telephone.
Mr Harrop said to Mrs Mellor that he would call the doctor, but Mrs Mellor said that Shipman had already seen Mrs Fletcher and had left a death certificate. Mrs Mellor told Mr Harrop that she had called on Mrs Fletcher that afternoon and had found Shipman in the living room. Shipman told Mrs Mellor that Mrs Fletcher had died a few moments before her arrival. He said that he had been passing Mrs Fletcher's flat and had called in to see her. He said that he could see that she was dying and he had sat with her and held her hand whilst she died. Mr Harrop recalls that Mrs Mellor said that Shipman told her that Mrs Fletcher had suffered a heart attack. Mr Harrop telephoned his wife, who came to her stepmother's flat as soon as she could.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The certificate itself has not survived, although the counterfoil has been recovered. On it, Shipman has recorded that he last saw Mrs Fletcher alive on the day of her death. He said he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. He certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
Mr Harrop recalls seeing a 'death certificate' at Mrs Fletcher's flat. He thinks that that document must have been the MCCD, although his recollection is that the cause of death was said to be a heart attack. He must be mistaken about that, which is not surprising after this length of time.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the time of death was
'14.40hrs'
. He said that he had attended Mrs Fletcher for one hour during her last illness. Shipman did not say at what time he had last seen Mrs Fletcher alive and it seems likely that a member of the staff at the crematorium telephoned Shipman to ask what should be put in answer to that question. In different handwriting, someone has written,
'
hour. by phone'
. The entry is initialled but I cannot decipher the letters. On Form B, Shipman said that he had seen the body immediately after death. He had carried out a complete external examination. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD counterfoil and the mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 20-30 minutes. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote,
'own
sister in law'
. He also claimed that both he and Mrs Fletcher's sister-in-law were present at the moment of death. Mrs Fletcher did not have a sister-in-law. Even if he made a genuine mistake about the identity of Mrs Mellor, it does not appear that he could have honestly said she was present at the death or had any information to impart relevant to the cause or mode of death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr John Grenville has not been asked to provide a report in this case. However, two aspects of his generic evidence are of particular relevance. Mrs Fletcher was found sitting upright in her chair, as if she had fallen asleep. Dr Grenville does not think that it is at all usual for a patient who has died suddenly of a massive stroke to be found sitting upright in this way. At page 31 of his generic report he said:
'Even in a person suffering a brain stem haemorrhage or subarachnoid haemorrhage I would not expect to find the deceased patient sitting upright in a chair looking peaceful and as if asleep. There is likely to be a period of at least a few seconds to possibly a minute or two after the destruction of vital areas of the brain when there is still sufficient oxygenated blood in the body for muscular activity to be possible. I would expect the patient to attempt to rise to seek help or to lie down. It might be possible for a patient who is deeply asleep and who suffers a brain stem haemorrhage to be found looking as if they remain asleep'
.
Dr Grenville has said that his experience as a doctor does not include the discovery of patients who have died as the result of opiate overdose. However, he has considered the deaths of a large number of Shipman's patients and has noted how many are found sitting peacefully in a chair. He advised that this is what one would expect after an intravenous injection of a fatal dose of opiate.
Dr Grenville has also advised that it is most unusual for a patient to die during a routine visit of a general practitioner, where the patient is not terminally ill and the doctor is not responding to an emergency call following the onset of acute symptoms, indicating, for example, a heart attack. He has said that such an event might be expected to occur once in a general practitioner's professional lifetime. Shipman was present at the deaths of a number of his patients who died at home. Mrs Fletcher was not suffering from a terminal illness and there is no indication that she was suffering from acute symptoms that might indicate a heart attack or stroke. Therefore, that Shipman should be present at the moment of death is a highly suspicious feature in its own right.
Conclusion
Very little is known about Mrs Fletcher's health in the days before her death. As her medical records are not available, I cannot say whether she was suffering from hypertension or, if she was, how serious it was. I must approach this case on the basis that she was probably suffering from hypertension and was at increased risk of suffering a sudden death from cardiovascular accident. Even approached on that basis, there is substantial evidence that Shipman killed Mrs Fletcher.
Mrs Fletcher was not terminally ill and Shipman was not visiting her regularly on account of any condition requiring treatment or supervision. He told Mrs Mellor that he called because he happened to be passing. That rules out the possibility that Mrs Fletcher had asked for a visit on account of the sudden onset of illness. That she should die suddenly while he was with her is just too much of a coincidence. If this were the only case in which such a coincidence had occurred, I would accept it as such. If Shipman is to be believed, such coincidences occurred quite frequently. In fact, these deaths were not the result of coincidence, they were killings. This case has Shipman's hallmark on it.
There are other features which point to the same conclusion. Shipman made no attempt to call an ambulance or to summon Mrs Harrop, as any reasonable doctor would have done if he had found Mrs Fletcher in the throes of a stroke. As I have already observed, Shipman probably lied when he claimed that another person was present with him at the moment of death. This is something he often did, in an attempt to make it appear that the death was not wholly unexpected and that relatives or friends were aware of what was happening. Finally, Mrs Fletcher's position and appearance in death were not typical of those seen after a stroke but were entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Fletcher, using his usual method, an intravenous injection of opiate.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001