The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothy Fletcher
Introduction
Mrs Dorothy Fletcher died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 23rd
April 1986 at the age of 74. She had been a patient of Shipman since moving to live at Charnley House, in September 1983. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was bronchopneumonia.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs Fletcher's son, Mr John William Fletcher, contacted the police because he knew that Shipman had certified his mother's death and was concerned about his possible role in her death.
The police investigated the death and examined the daily diary from Charnley House. They did not, however, take any witness statements and nor did they trace Mrs Christine Holland, the staff member who had made the most pertinent diary entry concerning Mrs Fletcher's death.
An inquest into Mrs Fletcher's death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Fletcher and from four members of the Charnley House staff who cared for Mrs Fletcher, namely, Mrs Holland, Mrs Linda Renfrew, Mrs Barbara Meadows and Mrs Lilian Stansfield. The Inquiry has also obtained other witness statements dealing with the running of Charnley House.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), the cremation certificate, the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book, Shipman's visits book for 1986 and the admissions register and daily diary from Charnley House.
This decision has been written following an oral hearing on 3rd
December 2001 at which Mr Fletcher, Mrs Holland and Mrs Meadows gave evidence. Dr John Grenville gave brief oral evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
According to Mr Fletcher, his mother suffered from dementia and her speech had been affected as the result of a slight stroke. Her mental condition was such that she no longer recognised him. She was able to walk only with assistance.
Shipman saw Mrs Fletcher in October 1983, shortly after she registered with him. He did not then see her until February 1986, after which time he saw her several times before she died. He saw her on 28th
February, when he prescribed antibiotic syrup for a
'slight chest infection'
. On 11th
March, he was asked to visit, as Mrs Fletcher's ankles were swollen. He did not think her condition warranted medication. On 13th
March, another bottle of antibiotic syrup was sent for.
Mr Fletcher last saw his mother two weeks before her death. She did not seem physically unwell at that time.
On 12th
April 1986, it is recorded that Mrs Fletcher had fallen on the bathroom floor that morning. She had a large 'bump' on the left side of her forehead. On Tuesday, 15th
April 1986, several residents including Mrs Fletcher were seen by their doctors, as a chest infection was prevalent in the home. All were commenced on antibiotics and encouraged to take fluids. On 16th
April 1986, Mrs Fletcher was put to bed part way through the day. She was taking very little fluid. Her son was told that she had a heavy cold. He said that he would visit her immediately but he was told that this was not necessary. On Thursday, 17th
April 1986, Mrs Fletcher was again given her antibiotics but she was not able to eat any tea. She was given fluids. The following day, she had a little to eat and was put to bed at 7.15pm. Over the next few days, she continued to take antibiotics. On Sunday, 20th
April, her ankles were swollen and her feet were elevated. On Monday, 21st
April 1986, Mrs Fletcher was noted not to be passing urine, and it was asked that she be observed. She did, in fact, pass urine that afternoon but not that night. On Tuesday, 22nd
April 1986, Mrs Fletcher completed her course of antibiotics. She passed urine satisfactorily during the day but not at all during the night.
The Day of the Death
On Wednesday, 23rd
April 1986, the note for the morning shift was completed by Mrs Holland. Of Mrs Fletcher it said:
'MRS FLETCHER: APPEARED VERY POORLY AT BREAKFAST, WOULD
NOT EAT ANYTHING PUT TO BED. DR CONTACTED. ALOT
(
sic
)
BRIGHTER
AT LUNCHTIME, EATEN FULL LUNCH, PASSED URINE THIS A.M.
TUMMY DISTENDED & HARD'
.
Mrs Holland cannot remember anything at all about Mrs Fletcher. She said that, if Shipman was contacted in the morning, he would usually visit after morning surgery but he would not necessarily arrive before 1pm when there would be a shift change. Any doctor's visit should be recorded in the daily diary. According to the record, Shipman did not attend before 1pm when Mrs Holland went off duty.
When Mrs Meadows came to complete the afternoon and evening report, she did not record a visit by Shipman in response to the request made in the morning. Mrs Meadows does not remember this day but says that the absence of any entry in the diary confirming an attendance makes it very unlikely that Shipman came to see Mrs Fletcher that day. Shipman's visits book makes no mention of any visit. This is something of a mystery. Visits requested in the early morning were usually recorded in Shipman's visits book, although he often did not record emergency visits. All doctors' visits should be recorded in the home's daily diary. The staff say that Shipman was punctilious about visiting. Mrs Meadows says that she had never known him not to attend if requested. This accords with my own extensive review of his practice over many years. It is possible that the diary entry that says that a visit was requested is wrong and that no such request was made. It is possible that the request was made and later cancelled. It is also possible that Shipman did visit and that no record was made of it.
Mrs Meadows has no recollection of the death of Mrs Fletcher. She suggested that she might have been found dead by one of the care assistants. She wrote the following entry in the afternoon and evening report:
'Mrs Fletcher. Passed away peacefully at 6:30pm
Dr Shipman CAME AT 7:50pm. Relatives informed
CERTIFIED DEATH'
.
The words
'CAME AT 7:50pm'
and
'CERTIFIED DEATH'
appear to have been written by someone other than Mrs Meadows. Mrs Meadows suggested that she probably wrote the evening report before she finished her shift at 8pm and that, at the time she wrote it, Shipman had still not attended to certify death. She thinks perhaps that she knew that he was expected and left a gap for the night staff to insert the time when he certified the death.
The duty doctor transfer book shows that Shipman was on duty that evening until 10.30pm.
Mr Fletcher remembers that, on the day of his mother's death, he received a telephone call from a care assistant at Charnley House shortly before 6.30pm. He was told that his mother had died. He was extremely distressed. He took some time to calm himself and then drove with his wife to Charnley House from his home in Oldham. They arrived at about 7.30pm and were met by one of the care assistants, who said that the doctor wanted to see them. Shipman arrived a few minutes later. He was very caring. He told them that Mrs Fletcher had been ill and he had been to see her. He encouraged them to look at the body and, when they expressed uncertainty, accompanied them into the bedroom where it lay.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. He said that Mrs Fletcher died of bronchopneumonia on 23rd
April and that he had last seen her alive on the day of her death. That is in contrast with the daily diary kept by the home and Shipman's visits book, both of which suggest that Shipman did not see Mrs Fletcher alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B, where he stated that he had attended Mrs Fletcher during her last illness for three months. The diary shows that Mrs Fletcher was not seen by Shipman from 29th
October 1983 until 28th
February 1986, which was less than two months before she died. He did not then see her until 15th
April (eight days before death) when she had a chest infection, which could possibly be described as her last illness. So the claim that he attended her for three months during her last illness is inaccurate. As the cause of death was said to be bronchopneumonia, he should really have identified the onset of that condition.
Shipman said that Mrs Fletcher died at 6.20pm and that he had last seen her alive 20 minutes before her death. He said that he had seen her body an hour after death, when he carried out a complete external examination. He said that the immediate cause of death was bronchopneumonia and that senile dementia was a morbid condition contributing to the death but not related to the immediate cause. He said that the mode of death was coma, lasting 12 hours. His views as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. He said that Mrs Fletcher was nursed by the staff at Charnley House and that the staff at Charnley House were present at the moment of her death.
These entries suggest that Shipman knew from his own observation that Mrs Fletcher had been in a coma since the early morning of the day of the death. That implies that he visited early in the day. That conflicts with the diary entries, which suggest that Shipman did not attend at all during the day and that, far from being in a coma, Mrs Fletcher ate a full lunch in the middle of the day. I accept the morning record made by Mrs Holland as accurate. Shipman might wish to suggest that Mrs Fletcher had been in a coma for some time, as this would be consistent with a death from bronchopneumonia.
Shipman's claim in Form B that he attended Mrs Fletcher 20 minutes before her death conflicts with the diary entry which suggests that he did not visit the home at all until after the death. Form B implies that, after visiting Mrs Fletcher 20 minutes before her death, Shipman left the building and returned about an hour later. Mr Fletcher suggests that Shipman did indeed arrive at the home between 7.30pm and 8pm.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker regarded the case as moderately suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate.
In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville explained that patients who are about to die of bronchopneumonia are usually very ill indeed for at least some hours before the death. Usually the patient is very ill for about two days but the condition can come on more suddenly if the patient is previously debilitated.
In oral evidence, Dr Grenville was asked whether there was likely to be any significance in the entry made by Mrs Holland on the day of the death, which described Mrs Fletcher's abdomen as distended and hard. He said that this entry was probably not of any significance and that the signs probably indicated that Mrs Fletcher was constipated.
Conclusion
In my view, there are several causes for suspicion in this case.
Mrs Fletcher was quite elderly and had been suffering from a chest infection for some time before her death. She was therefore at risk of developing bronchopneumonia. However, even if this condition develops rapidly, there is still some warning of the death. The decline towards death is noticeable over at least a few hours. I have been told by senior staff at Charnley House that it was their practice to warn relatives if a resident was critically ill. I have seen cases where this has been done. Yet here, there is no evidence that the staff foresaw Mrs Fletcher's death. The family was not warned. I regard that as a suspicious feature. It appears to me that Mrs Fletcher's death was rather sudden, especially as she is said to have eaten a full lunch.
My suspicions are further raised by the inconsistencies between the daily diary and Shipman's entries in Form B. First, there is Shipman's claim that Mrs Fletcher had been in a coma for 12 hours, which I am sure is untrue. Second, Shipman says that he was there shortly before the death and the diary says he did not attend until after the death. My concern is increased by the rather odd entry made by Mrs Meadows in the afternoon and evening report. She appears to have made an incomplete entry, leaving a blank space after Shipman's name. Someone else completed the time of his arrival, which probably reflects the time of his arrival after the death but implies that he had not been at the home before the death. Mrs Meadow's explanation for this odd entry is not satisfactory, not least because it appears that Shipman arrived before Mrs Meadows finished her shift at 8pm. There is a real suspicion that Shipman arrived at the home before Mrs Fletcher's death but that the time of his first arrival was not noted in the diary.
According to the daily diary, Shipman had not seen Mrs Fletcher for eight days before her death. She did not then have bronchopneumonia. Unless he had seen her after that, when the nature of her final illness could be diagnosed, Shipman would be unable to certify the cause of death and should have referred the case to the coroner.
Although this death occurred many years ago and the medical records have not survived, there are contemporaneous records kept by people who had a duty to be honest and careful. Where such records are available, it ought to be possible to piece together a clear picture of the circumstances preceding a death such as this, which occurred in an elderly persons' home. In general, the quality of note keeping at Charnley House is quite high and I usually feel a degree of confidence in its accuracy. I have seen many examples of diary notes that chart the decline before death, the attendance of the doctor and the warning of the relatives. This case seems to be something of an exception. If, during 23rd
April, Mrs Fletcher had been ill enough to die of bronchopneumonia in the early evening, I would have expected the death to be presaged in the notes. I would have expected to see a record of her condition, the summoning of the doctor (and concern if he did not attend), a note of the time of his arrival, the warning of the relatives and possibly a note of the watch being kept. In this case, there is nothing between the record that Mrs Fletcher ate a full lunch before 1pm and her death at 6pm. That Mrs Meadows noted that Mrs Fletcher 'passed away peacefully' does not give rise to suspicion. Her evidence is that she always put something like that, whatever the mode of death, and I have seen many entries to confirm the truth of that statement. Even so, the picture presented by the daily diary does not tally with a death from bronchopneumonia.
It is a matter of some concern that the daily diary does not provide me with a coherent account of the events leading to Mrs Fletcher's death. Whether deliberately or due to carelessness or overwork, it appears that Mrs Meadows, who made the afternoon and evening report, has failed to record important matters. It may be that it is only in recent years that the need for full and accurate notes has been stressed by those in charge at residential and nursing homes.
By 1986, Shipman had already killed a significant number of patients. It is therefore quite possible that he killed Mrs Fletcher. It seems quite possible to me that, having been unwell in the early morning (so that Shipman was asked to attend), Mrs Fletcher improved and was able to eat lunch. It seems quite likely that a member of staff might have cancelled the request for Shipman to visit. Otherwise I would have expected him to visit around lunchtime, as was his usual practice. I think he did not visit during the day. I think he visited in the evening, probably after surgery. He was on duty that evening. I think Mrs Fletcher died, rather suddenly, while he was there. I think it likely that he gave her a lethal injection of opiate. Although some of the Charnley House staff now say that there was always a rule that a doctor should not be left alone with a patient, I have the impression that that rule was not strictly observed in the 1980s. Indeed Ms Kilgariff, who worked there in 1979, was unaware of any such rule. I think it quite likely that, even if a care assistant was present at the start of a consultation, it would be very easy for Shipman to get rid of her. He would only need to ask her to collect an item of equipment or make him a cup of tea.
It is possible that Mrs Fletcher died naturally on 23rd
April 1986 although, if she did, I do not think it could have been from bronchopneumonia. Bearing in mind the suspicious factors to which I have referred, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed her. The evidence falls a long way short of that which would be required before Shipman could be convicted of murder but I think it is likely that this was an unlawful killing.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001