The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marie Antoinette Fernley
Introduction
Mrs Marie Antoinette Fernley died at her home, 22 Darwin Street, Hyde on Monday, 13th
March 1995 at the age of 53. Apart from brief intervals when she lived outside Hyde, Mrs Fernley had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and she had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Fernley's son-in-law, Mr Steven Bernard Whitehead, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Fernley's death.
The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Julia Marie Gregg and Mrs Lorretta Censina Whitehead (Mrs Fernley's daughters), Mr Melvyn John Gregg (Mrs Fernley's son-in-law) and Mrs Doreen Armitage (Mrs Fernley's friend and neighbour). Mrs Fernley was of Maltese origin and, by the time of the police investigation, her body had been repatriated and buried in a family grave. After discussions with the family, who were divided on the issue, it was decided that Mrs Fernley's body should not be exhumed.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Fernley but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Gregg and Mr and Mrs Whitehead. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Fernley's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, the visits book and the other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Fernley's first marriage ended when her daughters were quite young. She married for a second time, but she and her second husband, Mr Fernley, parted in the late 1980s.
It is clear from the evidence that Mrs Fernley was a devoted and much loved mother and grandmother. She lived in a one-bedroom maisonette, with the benefit of supervision by a warden. There was an emergency cord by which the warden could be summoned in an emergency. Mrs Whitehead considers that her mother had been quite fortunate to secure such accommodation because most of her neighbours were older than she. She very much enjoyed the location and accommodation and she used to help her neighbours when she could.
Mrs Fernley had a history of asthma, hypertension, angina and ischaemic heart disease. Her daughters recall that these conditions were well controlled by medication and there is nothing in the medical records to undermine that view. Mrs Fernley had been a smoker. From 1991 until 1994, she was under the care of a consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, who made recommendations about her medication. She was quite a frequent attender at Shipman's surgery. Her family suggests that she was to some extent preoccupied with her health. At one stage, the consultant physician wondered whether some of her physical symptoms were a manifestation of depression.
The Days Leading up to Death
In late February 1995, Mrs Fernley was seen in the outpatient clinic of Tameside General Hospital complaining of abdominal pain with bloating, nausea and episodic vomiting. On 5th
March 1995, she was admitted to the hospital as an emergency with abdominal pain and blood in her urine. She said the pain had been present for 18 months. A range of tests was carried out with negative results. There was no explanation for her pain. She was discharged on Friday, 10th
March. A barium enema was planned as an outpatient procedure and she was to be reviewed thereafter.
Mrs Armitage recalls that, when Mrs Fernley returned home from hospital, she was in good spirits. She had been told by the hospital that so long as she kept to her diet she would be well. I think she had been told she must lose weight. According to Mrs Whitehead, her mother was feeling confident after her discharge from hospital. She had been concerned that she might have cancer but the hospital had diagnosed that she had a simple urinary infection. In fact, tests had not shown a urinary infection.
Mrs Gregg took her children to see her mother on Sunday, 12th
March 1995. She remembers that her mother was 'in fine form'. Mrs Whitehead spoke to her mother on the telephone that evening and she confirms that her mother was in high spirits.
The Day of the Death
It appears that Mrs Fernley must have telephoned the surgery on Monday morning, 13th
March to request a visit. The practice visits book for that day contains the following reference to Mrs Fernley:
'had barium enema, had temp
(
erature
)
in hosp
(
ital
)
(discharged on Friday) B/P up - feels weak
this a.m. Can you visit plse. - thinks her temp is still
up)'
.
Mrs Armitage visited Mrs Fernley that morning. She remembers that Mrs Fernley was in good spirits and told her that she was expecting Shipman to call later in the day.
Mrs Gregg telephoned her mother at about 1.30pm. Mrs Fernley said that Shipman was going to see her that afternoon to check her blood pressure. Mrs Fernley said that she would call back as soon as Shipman left. Mrs Fernley did not telephone her daughter again.
At about 4pm-4.15pm, Shipman telephoned Mrs Gregg. This was the first time he had telephoned her at home. He asked whether she had seen her mother that day. She replied that she had not. Shipman then asked whether her mother had been acting strangely of late or talking in a strange way. He went on to explain that he had found Mrs Fernley was slightly weak on her left side and he thought she had suffered a mild stroke. Mrs Gregg asked whether that meant that her mother had to go to hospital again but Shipman said that it was not his practice to send patients to hospitals when they had suffered a mild stroke because there was nothing the hospital could do for them. He said that there was no need for Mrs Gregg to go to her mother's house that day and said that he would call to see her again the following day.
Mrs Gregg liked to be with her mother when she was seen by the doctor so she asked at what time he intended to visit the following day. After a slight hesitation, Shipman said that he would be there at about 1pm. Mrs Gregg said that she would be there by that time. There is an entry in the practice visits book suggesting an intended revisit on Tuesday, 14th
March 1995.
At some time between 4pm and 5pm that afternoon, Mrs Armitage returned to see Mrs Fernley. She let herself in with a key, as she usually did, and called upstairs but there was no reply. She went up to the bedroom, where she found Mrs Fernley sitting on the bed, leaning against the pillows. There was a puzzle book on her lap. Mrs Armitage thought that she was asleep and so she went to busy herself in the kitchen. After a while, Mrs Armitage went back to the bedroom. She noticed a prescription on top of a cabinet and realised that the doctor must have been. She tried to waken Mrs Fernley by stroking her head but there was no response. Mrs Armitage then tried to find a pulse but there was none. She called her husband for help. He too was unable to find a pulse and they realised that Mrs Fernley had died. Mrs Armitage was very shocked but telephoned Shipman's surgery and Mrs Gregg. She did not tell Mrs Gregg that her mother was dead but asked her to come to the house.
Mrs Gregg was extremely anxious when Mrs Armitage telephoned and when she reached her mother's house and realised that she was dead she became extremely distressed. She remembers that her mother appeared to be asleep. Mr Gregg recalls that, when Shipman came to the house, he did not initially approach Mrs Fernley but simply said that she had had a massive stroke. He then put his finger on her pulse and said, 'She's definitely gone. At least she died quickly'.
Mrs Whitehead, who lived in Huntingdon, travelled to Hyde that evening with her husband.
Shipman's handwritten note for 13th
March 1995 reads as follows:
'V
(
visit
)
15.00h Diverticulitis at TGH
BP 200/130
Enalapril 10mg stat
(
or possibly start
)
(
illegible
)
Review mané bed rest
refuses to go into hospital'
.
Thus, it would appear that, at the time when he made that note, Shipman was suggesting that he was reviewing Mrs Fernley following her recent hospital admission with diverticulitis. He found that her blood pressure was very high at 200/130. He prescribed enalapril 10mg a day. I note from the records that Mrs Fernley had been on this medication previously and it may be that the prescription was no more than a repeat. Shipman claimed that he would review Mrs Fernley the next day. Meanwhile she was to have bed rest. She had refused to go into hospital. I note that there is no record of any clinical examination, other than the blood pressure reading, and no observations from which Shipman could have diagnosed that Mrs Fernley had had a stroke, even a mild one.
The computerised records for that day record:
'O/E - dead
cva hypertension ihd
O/E - BP reading
130
Medication requested
very emotional enalapril to 30'
.
These entries appear to be in reverse order. The second and third entries relate to Shipman's visit while Mrs Fernley was alive. They suggest only that her blood pressure was very high and that she asked for a prescription of enalapril.
The Aftermath
Members of Mrs Fernley's family were concerned about the circumstances of the death and the next day Mr Whitehead and Mr Gregg went to see Shipman in the surgery. Shipman launched into what appeared to Mr Whitehead to be a series of hypothetical questions which he proceeded to answer himself, which led to the conclusion that there was nothing he could have done which might have prevented Mrs Fernley's death. He said that the death had been unavoidable. It had been 'an accident waiting to happen' owing to Mrs Fernley's high blood pressure, angina and obesity. She had had a massive stroke and had died instantaneously. He went on to explain the medical terms which he was going to enter on the 'death certificate'. He was dismissive of the suggestion that there might be a post-mortem examination and said that this was not necessary because he knew why Mrs Fernley had died.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on Tuesday, 14th
March. He said that the death was due to a cerebrovascular accident which was due to hypertension, which had been present for seven years. Arteriosclerosis had contributed to the death. Shipman said he had last seen Mrs Fernley alive on the day of her death. He had also seen the body after death and said that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Mrs Fernley was buried in a family grave in Malta and there are no cremation documents.
Conclusion
There are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered very shortly after a visit by Shipman. Shipman's visit was made in response to a request by Mrs Fernley but was not an emergency visit. Mrs Fernley appeared to be in reasonable health when Mrs Armitage visited her on the morning of her death and when she spoke to her daughter at lunchtime. Mrs Fernley did not telephone her daughter after Shipman's visit, as she had promised to do. The probable explanation for that is that she was not able to make the telephone call. That suggests that Mrs Fernley died either in Shipman's presence (because she was murdered) or of natural causes very shortly after his departure. It appears to me that it would be a remarkable coincidence that she should die suddenly, of natural causes, so soon after Shipman's visit. If this were to happen in connection with another doctor, I would accept it as coincidence. With Shipman, this kind of 'coincidence' happened frequently. I cannot accept it as coincidence. The close temporal connection between Shipman's visit and Mrs Fernley's death is highly suspicious and persuades me that he almost certainly killed her.
All the other evidence points to the same conclusion. Although Mrs Fernley had a number of serious medical conditions, it would appear from the records that her cardiac and respiratory problems were satisfactorily controlled by medication and that her abdominal complaint was troublesome but not serious. Certainly, neither the hospital correspondence nor the general practitioner records would lead anyone to suspect that a sudden death was likely or imminent. Mrs Fernley's blood pressure was high and she must have been at an increased risk of suffering a stroke. However, there is no evidence that she had a stroke that day. Apart from Mrs Fernley's own statement to the surgery staff that she felt weak (a wholly non-specific complaint), there is nothing to suggest that she had a stroke. Even Shipman's own records (which must in any event be distrusted) do not suggest any signs of a stroke and none were observed by Mrs Armitage. If Mrs Fernley had died a natural death, any reasonable doctor would have referred the case to the coroner, as he or she would not have known the cause of death.
In Shipman's handwritten note, he claimed that Mrs Fernley had refused to go into hospital. That increases my suspicion for two reasons. First, it is a common feature of Shipman's killings that his patients are said to have rejected his advice to go into hospital shortly before their deaths. This is plainly a device which Shipman used as part of his explanation of the subsequent death. Second, in this case, it is manifest nonsense that Shipman should have advised Mrs Fernley to go into hospital. The only thing he recorded was wrong with her was her high blood pressure. While there might be cases in which a patient might be admitted simply for the treatment of high blood pressure, such a step would be unusual. The usual course would be for the general practitioner to treat the patient at home and, if appropriate, refer him or her to a consultant for advice on management of the problem. At this time, Mrs Fernley was taking a very small dose of enalapril and the most obvious course of action for Shipman, if he was worried about her blood pressure, would have been to increase her dosage, as he claimed to have done in the computerised medical records. The handwritten note is plainly false.
Finally, Mrs Fernley's appearance in death was not typical of that found following a massive stroke but it was entirely typical of that seen in many of Shipman's patients who had been killed by intravenous injection of opiate.
All the evidence points to the same conclusion. I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Fernley.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001