The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Leah Fogg
Introduction
Mrs Leah Fogg died at her home, 133 Haughton Green Road, Denton on Monday, 10th
June 1996 at the age of 82. She had lived alone since the death of her husband in 1992. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought he was 'wonderful'. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident caused by cerebral arteriosclerotic vascular disease, although in the register of deaths the word
'atherosclerotic'
has been substituted in error for
'arteriosclerotic'
.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Fogg's family contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from a neighbour and friend, Mr John Barry Nield. They also took a statement from Dr Alan Banks and Detective Sergeant John Ashley performed an audit trail of the Market Street Surgery computer.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Fogg but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Marjorie Lesley Stafford (Mrs Fogg's daughter), Mr Maurice Stafford (Mrs Stafford's husband), Mr Joseph Fogg (Mrs Fogg's son), Mrs Madeleine Fogg (Mr Fogg's wife) and Mr Nield. They all gave oral evidence at a hearing on 10th
October 2001. Dr John Grenville gave evidence on 13th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Fogg's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents covering the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Fogg was an active lady who did all her own shopping and housework and had a full social life, centred on the church, the Mothers' Union and her friends.
Her medical history can be seen from the computerised general practitioner records. She suffered from poor eyesight and was registered partially blind. In 1991, she underwent a total knee replacement and thereafter walked with a stick. In 1993, she had two episodes of vertigo for which she was prescribed Stemetil. From 1994, she had cervical spondylosis, which caused intermittent trouble. In early 1994, she had an episode of depression for which she was prescribed Prozac. The depression was associated with the death of her husband and recurred from time to time for the rest of her life. She was reluctant to take medication for it and a supply of Prozac was found at her home after her death.
In May 1994, Mrs Fogg suffered a fall and injured her spine. She was in great pain and eventually it was discovered that she had fractured a lumbar vertebra. She also suffered from digestive problems for which she was prescribed medication. During 1995, she suffered recurrent respiratory problems and, in July 1995, she was referred to Dr M A Matin, a consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital. He diagnosed a lingering chest infection.
On 29th
July 1995, there is an entry in the computerised records where Shipman wrote:
'Cerebral atherosclerosis
dizzy start aspirin 75'
.
No further explanation for the diagnosis appears in the notes and there is no corresponding manual record. Dr Grenville is of the view that it is not possible to diagnose cerebral atherosclerosis merely from an account of dizziness. Only five days later, a letter from Dr Matin explained that Mrs Fogg had complained to him of vertigo, particularly on lying down and looking upwards. He thought it was due to cervical spondylosis, from which she was known to suffer, and he arranged for her to be fitted with a cervical collar. A spinal x-ray confirmed the diagnosis of spondylosis. It seems likely to me that the dizziness, which Shipman attributed to cerebral atherosclerosis, was, in fact, caused by cervical spondylosis.
In the later part of 1995, Mrs Fogg continued to be troubled by respiratory problems and also suffered an accident in which she cut her leg over the site of a varicose vein. An ulcer formed which required regular dressing. In October 1995, she had an influenza vaccination to which, according to her family, she attributed the persistent cough from which she suffered thereafter. She had a chest x-ray in November 1995, which revealed inflammatory changes. She was complaining of a cough later that month. In March 1996, she had paraesthesia of the hand, attributed to her neck problem.
The last note in the manuscript records was made on 19th
April 1996 when she was suffering from persistent catarrh. On 7th
May 1996, a note in the computerised records says that she had a cough.
Dr Grenville says that these records reveal no evidence that Mrs Fogg was at any increased risk of suffering a cardiovascular accident or, indeed, any other common cause of sudden death. In particular, there was no evidence of persistently raised blood pressure and the single reference to cerebral atherosclerosis was probably a mis-diagnosis by Shipman. Dr Grenville says that she was at some risk of a stroke because of her age.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Friday, 7th
June 1996, Mrs Stafford visited Shipman as she was concerned that her mother was still depressed and not coping with the loss of her husband some years before. It seems that, although Mrs Fogg was leading an active social life, she revealed her unhappiness to the close members of her family. She was weepy at times and missed her husband badly. Mrs Stafford had talked to her brother about this and they had agreed that she would talk to Shipman. Mrs Stafford had noticed a sign in Shipman's waiting room that said that counselling services were available at the surgery. Mrs Stafford hoped that Shipman would arrange for her mother to receive some grief counselling. However, she was concerned that her mother should not know that she had been to see Shipman, as it was 'behind her back'. After their talk, Shipman promised to call on Mrs Fogg and said that he would do so unannounced. There was some discussion during this visit about Mrs Fogg's future care, if and when she was unable to manage alone. However, Mrs Stafford's attitude to this was that her mother was coping perfectly well with the physical aspects of living alone. Mrs Fogg wanted to remain in her own home. The family would cross that bridge when it became necessary.
After this consultation, the family expected Shipman to visit Mrs Fogg in the near future. Shipman intended to do so, as confirmed by an entry in the visits book for 11th
June in Shipman's hand, which reads:
' - had chat daughter ?depressed'
.
Mrs Stafford spent much of Friday, 7th
June with her mother. They had lunch together and then went to Mrs Fogg's home where Mrs Stafford set her mother's hair. Mrs Fogg was physically well. On the Sunday, Mrs Fogg went to her daughter's house for lunch. She appeared well. Nothing was said about Mrs Stafford's visit to Shipman.
On Monday, 10th
June, Mrs Stafford spoke to Mrs Fogg at about lunchtime. She said she had been out that morning to visit a friend who had just celebrated her 90th
birthday. She had been to look at the presents. She had probably travelled by bus. She said that she had decided not to go out that afternoon, as previously arranged, but would stay at home and clean out her garden shed that afternoon. It was a lovely sunny day. She was going out that evening with a friend, Mrs Needham. She brought the call to an end, saying that the doorbell had rung. Mrs Stafford later wondered whether the caller had been Shipman. The telephone billing record for Mrs Fogg's home shows a call made to Mrs Stafford's number at 1.33pm; it lasted less than two minutes. If this call is the one described by Mrs Stafford then it is clear that the visitor was not Shipman as very shortly after the end of that call Mrs Fogg telephoned a neighbour, Mrs Kathleen Mills, and then her friend, Mrs Amy Hewitt, who has since died. She spoke to Mrs Hewitt for about 15 minutes. Mrs Stafford believes that she initiated the call to her mother and that it must have taken place after Mrs Fogg's conversation with Mrs Hewitt. However, it has not been possible to confirm that any call was made to Mrs Fogg from the Stafford home on that day. From the telephone billing records, it is clear that Mrs Fogg was still alive at 1.52pm.
In the early evening of the same day, Mrs Needham called to see Mrs Fogg. Mrs Needham did not give evidence to the Inquiry. She is 91 years old and is now totally blind. An Inquiry solicitor spoke to her on the telephone and Mrs Needham said that she went round the back of Mrs Fogg's house, expecting to find her in the garden. She was not there and the back door was open so she went in and found Mrs Fogg dead. She went straight to the home of Mrs Fogg's neighbour and friend, Mrs Winifred Nield, and Mrs Nield's son, John, went to Mrs Fogg's house.
Mr Nield gave the Inquiry an account of what he found at Mrs Fogg's house. He is a prison officer and has worked in the ambulance service in the past. I find that his account was reliable. At about 6.30pm, he went to the door at the side of the house. He found both the inner and outer doors open. Within, he found Mrs Fogg sitting in an armchair. Her head was leaning to one side. Her right arm was hanging over the arm of the chair. Her facial expression was peaceful. Her upper denture had dropped slightly. She was wearing a short-sleeved dress and a pinafore of the type she always wore about the house and garden. Mr Nield checked her pulse and realised that she was dead. In the course of his work as an ambulance man he has seen pain in the faces of many who have just died, but he said that Mrs Fogg appeared to have died without pain. He noticed that her skin temperature was lower than a normal body temperature. He also noticed some blotchiness appearing on the upper arm, which he attributed to post-mortem lividity. He knew that this was a sudden death and that he should call the police. He called both the police and ambulance service. He also telephoned Shipman's surgery and Mrs Fogg's son and daughter. The police report reveals that they arrived first, followed by some family members, probably the Staffords, and then Shipman.
The police incident report shows that they were alerted at 6.45pm by Mr Nield, the message being:
'SUDDEN DEATH
MRS LEAH FOGG (82 YRS). CALLER SAYS SHE WAS FOUND DEAD IN A
CHAIR BUT THE BACK DOOR AND INNER BACK DOOR WERE OPEN'
.
Mr and Mrs Stafford and Mr and Mrs Joseph Fogg described Mrs Fogg's appearance in death. In particular, they all noticed some discoloration of one of her arms but their accounts differed. Dr Grenville said that it was impossible to tell from the descriptions whether this discoloration was due to post-mortem lividity, or bruising such as might have been caused by giving an injection.
Mr and Mrs Stafford recall that Shipman did not examine Mrs Fogg. He may have touched her briefly at the neck and said that she was dead. He said that she had had a stroke and that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary.
Shipman's computerised note of this visit says only:
'O/E - dead'
. There is no corresponding manuscript note.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident lasting seconds, caused by cerebral arteriosclerotic vascular disease, which had been present for two years. As Dr Grenville observed, there is no evidence that Mrs Fogg had had arteriosclerotic disease at all, let alone for two years. Mr Fogg collected the MCCD from Shipman's surgery and thanked Shipman for all he had done for his mother. Shipman's attitude was dismissive and almost offhand.
On the MCCD, Shipman claimed that he last saw Mrs Fogg on 1st
June 1996. There is no support in the medical records for any consultation on this date. Members of the family do not believe that Mrs Fogg had seen Shipman as recently as that. She usually told her daughter if she saw the doctor. I think that, if Shipman had seen Mrs Fogg as recently as 1st
June, he would have mentioned that to Mrs Stafford when she visited him to discuss her mother on 7th
June. The last recorded consultation was on 7th
May, well outside the period of 14 days before death within which Shipman always liked to keep.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the time of death was
'1500 hrs'
. How he could have known this from the information he supposedly had is not clear. He could not have assessed it from body temperature, although he often claimed that he could. He also claimed that he had attended Mrs Fogg for nine days during her last illness. It is not clear what the last illness was supposed to be. He repeated the claim that he had last seen her on 1st
June 1996. He said that he had seen her about four hours after death and had made a complete external examination. The mode of death is recorded as
'Collapse'
lasting
'Seconds only'
and that information is said to be based on the observations of Shipman himself, as well as those of Mrs Fogg's daughter and neighbour. In fact, as Shipman made clear elsewhere on the form, none of those persons was present at the death and none of them knew anything of the circumstances of the death. It seems to me that this document is wholly misleading.
Shipman's Movements
There is no direct evidence of Shipman's presence at Mrs Fogg's home on the day of her death. That does not prove that he did not visit. Mrs Fogg lived on a busy road and in an area where Shipman was not widely known.
The appointments sheet for the day reveals that Shipman had his usual morning surgery followed by open surgery, scheduled to begin at 10.15am. He had 18 patients to see in open surgery, one with a timed appointment at 12pm. He is unlikely therefore to have finished seeing patients before about 12.30pm after which he would usually complete paperwork. That would give him a period of about three hours free before the start of his afternoon surgery at either 3.45pm or 4pm.
The visits book reveals that Shipman had one visit to make that day. There is no reference to Mrs Fogg. The person to be visited lived on the opposite side of Hyde, nowhere near Mrs Fogg's home.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found Mrs Fogg's death moderately suspicious on account of the contents of the medical records and highly suspicious on account of the contents of Form B. I refer elsewhere within this decision to the views of Dr Grenville.
Conclusion
Although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Fogg on the day of her death, I think it is highly likely that he did so. He had promised to visit her when it was convenient. He noted an intention to do so on Tuesday, 11th
June. We do not know when that entry was made, but, if it was made genuinely, it must have been made before Shipman was officially told of Mrs Fogg's death at about 6.45pm on Monday, 10th
June. It is possible that he intended to visit Mrs Fogg on 11th June but found he had time on his hands on the afternoon of 10th
June, when he had only one visit to make. It is also possible that he made the entry for 11th
June dishonestly, at a time when he knew Mrs Fogg was dead, intending to create the impression that he did not know of her death.
Mrs Fogg was in good physical health at the time of her death. She was known to be well and active until shortly before 2pm on the day of her death. There was no history of any condition, apart from her age, that might put her at risk of sudden death. Certainly there was no reliable history of any factors that put her at risk of a stroke. Mrs Fogg's position and appearance in death were not typical of a death due to stroke. I think it is highly unlikely that Mrs Fogg died of a stroke. Although it is theoretically possible, there is no reason to suspect that she died of any other natural cause of sudden death.
Shipman could not possibly have made a genuine diagnosis of death due to cerebrovascular accident. There was no medical evidence to support the conclusion and no account of Mrs Fogg's condition shortly before the death from which he might have inferred the cause. If Shipman had acted honestly, he would have had to refer this death to the coroner. I believe that he told a deliberate lie in saying that he had seen Mrs Fogg on 1st
June in order to avoid a referral to the coroner. If he had told the truth, that he had not seen Mrs Fogg since 7th
May, the registrar would almost certainly have passed the case to the coroner.
The MCCD gives the false impression that Mrs Fogg had been suffering from cerebral arteriosclerotic vascular disease for two years. There was no proper basis on which Shipman could have said that. Form B reveals an attempt by Shipman to give the impression that he had attended Mrs Fogg, supposedly in connection with arteriosclerosis for nine days before her death. I am satisfied that that was a lie. This created the misleading impression that the death had not come as a complete surprise to all who knew her. I have little doubt that this impression was deliberately created in order to allay any possible concerns in the mind of the Form C doctor or the medical referee. Other entries sought to give the impression that others had provided him with information about the death, although not present at the actual moment, from which he had been able to infer how Mrs Fogg had died. This was misleading. No one was able to give any such information.
When the facts of this case are set against the background of Shipman's known activities, I am driven to the conclusion that he killed Mrs Fogg. Despite the absence of positive evidence of his presence, I feel sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001