The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Phyllis Farrell
Introduction
Mrs Phyllis Farrell died at her home, 52 King George Road, Hyde on Monday, 5th
August 1991 at the age of 79. She lived with her husband, Mr Martin Farrell. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and was registered at the Donneybrook practice at the time of her death. He certified that the cause of her death was myocardial infarction.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records, the death of Mrs Farrell was moderately suspicious. He had examined the cremation forms and the medical records although he had concluded on the basis of the cremation forms that the death was not suspicious. The police took a statement from Mrs Bernice Fuggle, Mrs Farrell's daughter. Mr Farrell had died in January 1999. Mrs Farrell's other daughter, Mrs Sheila Naughton, who lived close to the Farrells and who had seen her mother on the day of her death, had also died.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Farrell but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Farrell's general practitioner records and to Shipman's visits book for 1991.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Fuggle told the police that, in 1990, her mother was diagnosed as suffering from cancer of the pancreas. At the request of her family, Mrs Farrell was not told the nature of her illness. She subsequently underwent an operation and appeared to make a good recovery.
Mrs Farrell also had a history of heart disease and there are entries in her medical records which show that she took medication for angina. It appears that she had a heart attack in October 1990.
On Sunday, 4th
August 1991, Mrs Fuggle and her family visited Mr and Mrs Farrell. Mrs Farrell seemed to be well and was in 'good form'.
The Day of the Death
At some time on Monday, 5th
August 1991, Mrs Fuggle received a telephone call from Mrs Naughton to say that Mrs Farrell was not well. She had a 'tummy upset' and the family had sent for Shipman. He had attended and had apparently tried to cheer Mrs Farrell up. He told her to drink plenty of fluids. Mrs Naughton did not say that Shipman had given her mother any drug or treatment. The visit is not recorded in Shipman's visits book although Mrs Farrell's name (crossed out) appears on the page dated 6th
August, followed by the words
'Follow up'
.
Between 7pm and 8pm Mrs Naughton visited her mother. At about 9pm that evening, Mrs Farrell telephoned Mrs Fuggle to tell her of the day's events. She said she had been unwell and that Shipman had visited. She did not say that he had given her any kind of treatment.
At about 10.30pm, Mrs Naughton telephoned Mrs Fuggle to say that their mother had died. Apparently, she had been in bed, speaking to one of her friends on the telephone when she had suddenly stopped talking. The friend told the police that she had thought there was a fault on the line and later heard that Mrs Farrell had died. Mrs Farrell had been alone in the room at the time. Someone, probably Mr Farrell, found her dead at some time before 10.30pm. One of the doctors from the Donneybrook practice came to the house to confirm the death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered and shows that Shipman certified that the cause of death was myocardial infarction with
'Ca Head Pancreas'
as an unrelated contributory cause. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Farrell alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that the death had occurred at
'Approx 2200 hrs'
on 5th
August 1991. He said he had last seen Mrs Farrell alive about six hours before her death and saw the body 18 hours after death, when he examined it externally. The cause of death was myocardial infarction, with carcinoma at the head of the pancreas as a contributory cause. The mode of death was said to be syncope of minutes' duration although, as he also said that no one was present at the death, it is difficult to see how he could have known. In response to question 11, Shipman wrote:
'Husband
daughter
tell me she was ok at 2000 hrs
then found dead'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker thought the death suspicious on the basis of the medical records. This is not surprising, as the medical records available to him were extremely sparse. They record Mrs Farrell's operation and show that she had been prescribed Moduretic, presumably for high blood pressure. The last entry in the manuscript notes records a visit on 5th
August 1991 and a diagnosis of gastroenteritis. That diagnosis also appears in the computerised record, followed by an entry which reads:
'CARCINOMA PANCREAS
DEATH'
.
Shipman later certified the cause of death as myocardial infarction. Although it is not entirely clear, it seems to me that Shipman must have thought that Mrs Farrell had not yet reached the terminal stage of her underlying illness and that her very sudden death must have been due to a heart attack. As she was undoubtedly at risk of a further heart attack, this seems a reasonable conclusion. However, the cause of death must have puzzled Professor Baker, who did not have the computerised records. They have been found only recently. I can understand why Professor Baker thought the death suspicious. Had he seen the computerised records, he would have been aware of the previous history of a heart attack and would, I think, have been reassured.
Conclusion
Unlike Professor Baker, the Inquiry has had the benefit of witness evidence, which shows that this death must have been due to natural causes. Whether the cause of death was in truth heart attack, as Shipman stated, or some other natural cause, we shall never know. However, the family has never expressed any concern about this death and I am sure their confidence was entirely justified.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001