The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hilda Fitton
Introduction
Mrs Hilda Fitton died at her home, 5 Burkitt Street, Hyde on Thursday, 6th
July 1989 at the age of 75. She had probably been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis, due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension.
In February 2000, Mrs Irene Knott and Mrs Sheila Ann Richards, nieces of Mrs Fitton, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of their aunt's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Fitton's neighbour, Mr Leslie Taylor. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Kathleen Gee (Mrs Fitton's sister), Mr William Peacock and Mrs Beverley Peacock (Mrs Gee's son and daughter-in-law), Mrs Richards, Mrs Knott and Mr Taylor. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Fitton's general practitioner records and to Shipman's visits book for 1989, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Fitton was widowed in January 1983 and lived alone until her death. She had a strong character, a modern outlook on life and was probably quite outspoken. Mrs Gee recalls that, although her sister's general health was not bad, she had thyroid problems and had suffered a slight stroke and a heart attack some years before her death. She also suffered from pernicious anaemia for which she received periodic vitamin injections from Shipman at the Donneybrook Surgery.
The medical records suggest that Mrs Fitton had had not one but two heart attacks some years before her death. A letter from Tameside General Hospital, dated 8th
October 1984, records that an electrocardiograph (ECG) showed that Mrs Fitton had suffered a recent inferior myocardial infarction and had signs of an old anterior myocardial infarction. She also had signs of general ischaemia.
The subsequent records suggest that she was quite well until 1989. A letter, dated 13th
June 1989, shows that Mrs Fitton was admitted to Tameside General Hospital on 30th
May 1989 with a history of a sudden onset of breathlessness. Her blood pressure on admission was 180/100. She was clammy and had bilateral basal crackles. An ECG revealed sinus tachycardia with evidence of an inferior myocardial infarction. With treatment, she made a remarkable improvement and was discharged home fully mobile and not breathless.
Mrs Fitton's medical records suggest that she was seen in the surgery by Shipman on 5th
July 1989, in connection with her chest. Although the text is illegible in part, it appears that Shipman thought that no treatment was necessary. The entry reads as follows:
'a
(
appointment
)
150/90 chest
(
illegible
)
rhonchi
(
abnormal lung noises
)
nil
else leave'
.
Mrs Gee spent the evening of Wednesday, 5th
July at her sister's home. They played cards and had a drink together. Mrs Gee stayed overnight. Mrs Fitton was her usual self and did not seem especially unwell, although her sister recalls that she might have been a little 'under the weather'.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Gee went to see Shipman on the morning of Thursday, 6th
July, in connection with an injury to her leg that she had suffered the previous day. Mrs Fitton was up and dressed by the time her sister left. Mrs Gee did not have an appointment and the likelihood is that she was seen in the late morning rather than early, although she believes that she may have been seen as early as 9am.
Mrs Gee does not remember what she did after her appointment with Shipman but in due course she returned home. Mrs Gee remembers telephoning her sister at about 1pm but there was no answer. About 30 minutes later, she tried again but again there was no reply. She then telephoned Mr Taylor and asked him to go to check on Mrs Fitton. Mrs Gee told the Inquiry that she telephoned Mr Taylor at about 1.30pm, although Mr Taylor recalls that he received this telephone call at 9.30am. Mr Taylor originally told the police that he received the call 'sometime during the morning'. There is clearly some confusion as to the timing of events on this day. For reasons which will appear shortly, I think it likely that these events occurred later in the day than Mr Taylor recalls.
Mr Taylor went to Mrs Fitton's home and immediately noticed that the front door was wide open. This struck Mr Taylor as unusual because Mrs Fitton would never leave this door open or even unlocked unless she was sitting at the front of her house on a hot day, talking to her neighbours.
Mr Taylor discovered Mrs Fitton upstairs in her bedroom. She was lying on her bed on her back and was fully clothed. This in itself was unusual, as Mr Taylor had never known Mrs Fitton to lie down on her bed during the day. When he touched her, he found that her body was cold and he realised that she was dead. Mr Taylor returned home and telephoned Mrs Gee to break the news to her.
The visits book records that Shipman was due to visit Mrs Fitton on 6th
July, although no reason has been noted. He may well have made this note himself when Mrs Fitton attended the surgery on the previous day.
The following entry appears in Mrs Fitton's medical records for the day of the death:
'V
(
visit
)
woke in night palpitations
vague chest pains dyspnoea
O/E worried
No CHF pulse 104/m regular
HS I II
? further CT
not wishing hospital TLUK
revisit mane'
.
This entry suggests that Mrs Fitton woke in the night with vague chest pains and shortness of breath. On examination, Shipman found that she was very worried. She had no sign of congestive heart failure. Her pulse was 104 beats per minute and regular. That is a raised pulse rate. Heart sounds were normal. Shipman suspected that Mrs Fitton might have had a further coronary thrombosis. She did not wish to be admitted to hospital. He decided to leave her alone on the basis that she would let him know, presumably if she deteriorated. He decided to revisit her the next day.
The next entry reads
'16.20 Certified Dead'
. This entry is in a hand other than that of Shipman and the initials
'JB'
appear at the end of the entry. Police enquiries of the Donneybrook Surgery failed to identify the person whose initials appear.
Mr Peacock recalls that he received a telephone call from his mother at about 3pm informing him of the death of his aunt. He went to Mrs Fitton's home and arrived at about 3.10pm. No one had seen Shipman visit at any time that day.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that he had last seen Mrs Fitton alive on the day of her death, 6th
July 1989. He certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis which was due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension. He said that he had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman completed Form B. He stated that the death had occurred during the afternoon of 6th
July and had been 'certified' at 4.20pm. He claimed that he had attended Mrs Fitton during her last illness for a period of two weeks and that he last saw her alive within 12 hours before her death, which must mean some time that day. He recorded that he made a complete external examination of the body 48 hours after death. It is very difficult to decipher the date which Shipman has entered on the form below his signature. However, as the doctor who signed Form C (which confirms the cause of death given on Form B) clearly signed it on 7th
July, Shipman must have completed Form B on either 6th
or 7th
July and cannot accurately have stated that he examined the body 48 hours after the death. However, Shipman was extremely careless in completing official forms and this particular inaccuracy is not sinister.
On Form B, Shipman stated the causes of death as on the MCCD counterfoil. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting minutes. He had previously given a different description but has crossed it out so as to be illegible. He said that his answers as to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. When asked who had nursed the deceased during the last illness, Shipman wrote:
'No one (seen by self on morning of death found by neighbour later
afternoon)'
.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on the basis of both the cremation documentation and the medical records. He observed:
'If this was a MI
(
myocardial infarction
)
, there was no treatment
given not
(
sic
)
support arranged - the level of competence does
not impress; but perhaps it was deliberate - suspicious'
.
Conclusion
I recognise that Mrs Fitton was at an increased risk of sudden death by coronary thrombosis because of her previous cardiac history. Such incidents can occur without prior warning, so the fact that Mrs Fitton appeared to be in reasonably good health shortly before her death does not show that she could not have had a heart attack on 6th
July.
Having said that, there are several highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered not long after a visit by Shipman. There is no evidence that anyone saw Mrs Fitton alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit on the day of her death. It is possible that someone did and the evidence has not emerged but that is unlikely as people tend to talk about when they have last seen a person who has died suddenly. The temporal association between Shipman's visit and the death gives rise to real suspicion. Even accepting that Mrs Fitton was at risk of a heart attack, it is a coincidence that it should supposedly happen shortly after Shipman's visit.
My suspicions are increased, as I cannot think of any good reason why Shipman would have visited Mrs Fitton that day. He had seen Mrs Fitton at the surgery the previous day. It appears likely that she had a chest infection but it was not of such severity as to require any treatment. Mrs Fitton's condition does not appear to have justified a visit on the following day. Although it is theoretically possible that Mrs Fitton could have telephoned the surgery asking for a visit in the early morning, that is extremely unlikely, as Mrs Gee (who had stayed the night) would have known if Mrs Fitton was unwell in the morning. I suspect that Mrs Gee's consultation with Shipman, on the morning of 6th
July, acted as a prompt for Shipman's visit to Mrs Fitton. He might well have made the connection. The two might even have spoken about Mrs Fitton. I think he made an unsolicited visit. I regard the fact that Shipman made a visit with no obvious purpose as highly suspicious.
Having made a visit for no good reason, it would be a wholly remarkable coincidence if Mrs Fitton were to have reported chest pains and other signs of a coronary thrombosis in the night. That entry can be seen to be quite false. Mrs Gee would have known if her sister had had such a bad night. Mrs Fitton was up and dressed when Mrs Gee left the house. This entry in the records is quite typical of many I have seen in cases where Shipman has killed a patient. The suggestion that a patient, in this case Mrs Fitton, had refused to go to hospital is a common feature of cases in which Shipman killed. It is incredible in this case. Mrs Fitton had been willing to go to hospital only a few weeks before and had made an excellent recovery while there. Another common feature of cases in which Shipman killed is the expression 'TLUK'. That usually gives rise to suspicion as it does here. If Mrs Fitton really had been suffering from chest pains and breathlessness and if Shipman really did think she had had another coronary thrombosis and if she really had refused to go to hospital, he could not have left her without treatment or care. At the very least, he would have had to ensure that she received attention from a relative. I am quite sure that this note was fabricated in an attempt to provide a plausible explanation for Mrs Fitton's death when it was discovered.
When Mrs Fitton's body was discovered, she was neatly laid out and had a peaceful expression. This is inconsistent with her having suffered a coronary thrombosis but it is entirely consistent with her having been injected with a lethal dose of morphine or diamorphine.
Notwithstanding the fact that Mrs Fitton was at risk of having a heart attack, I am quite satisfied that Shipman killed her when he made an unsolicited visit on 6th
July.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001