The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Thomas Fowden
Introduction
Mr Thomas Fowden died at his home, 40 Mona Street, Hyde on Friday, 6th
June 1986 at the age of 81. He had probably been a patient of Shipman for about nine years. Shipman certified the cause of his death to be left ventricular failure due to chronic obstructive airways disease.
In February 2000, Mr Fowden's nephew, Mr Edwin Fowden, contacted the police to express concern about the circumstances surrounding his uncle's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Edwin Fowden and from Mr Fowden's former home help, Mrs Joan Ralphs. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr Fowden and Mrs Ralphs. The Inquiry has also had access to the visits book for the relevant period, to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil and to the cremation documentation. The medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Fowden had always been an active man. When he was young, he was a good swimmer and played water polo. When he was in his forties, he was thought to have developed tuberculosis and thereafter he suffered from a wheezy chest. At the time of his death, he was a widower and lived alone. His breathing difficulties had increased over the years, but despite this his nephew considered him to be in good health for a man of his age.
Mr Fowden ran his own home with the help of Mrs Ralphs, who visited him once a week. He did his own shopping and cooked all his own meals. He also liked to visit his local working men's club. Mrs Ralphs cannot now remember on which day she worked for Mr Fowden. However, as she worked at his next door neighbour's house almost every day, she would often call in on Mr Fowden to see how he was. She did not have a key to his house. If he was expecting her, he would sometimes leave the door 'off the latch', so that she could walk straight in, but otherwise she would have to knock.
As Mr Fowden's medical records are no longer available, it has not been possible to discover more about his state of health in the weeks before his death. However, Shipman's visits book shows that the last occasion before the day of Mr Fowden's death on which Shipman visited him at home was on Tuesday, 27th
May.
Mr Edwin Fowden thinks that he last saw his uncle alive on the Sunday before he died. He does not remember anything about his uncle's appearance to give him cause for concern.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Ralphs told the police that she visited Mr Fowden on the day of his death, although she does not recall that this was Friday, 6th
June 1986. She cannot now recall if that was the day on which she worked for Mr Fowden or whether she just called in to see him socially. Nor can Mrs Ralphs recall at what time she visited. However, she remembers that she found the door off the latch and went inside. In the living room she found Mr Fowden sitting in his armchair with his head drooped down. She describes him as being floppy. She thinks that his hands were folded across his body and she could see that something was wrong. She sensed that he recognised her and she asked him whether he was all right. He was unable to reply. Mrs Ralphs told Mr Fowden that she was going to fetch the doctor. Mr Fowden did not have a telephone and so she had to leave the house to seek help. She says that she was only with Mr Fowden for a couple of minutes at most before she left to get help. She is sure he was still alive when she left.
Mrs Ralphs cannot now recall whether she actually went to the Donneybrook Surgery, or whether she went to a neighbour's house to use a telephone. It seems likely, however, that she used a neighbour's telephone, because Mr Edwin Fowden recalls receiving a telephone call from Mrs Ralphs on the day of his uncle's death. He recalls that Mrs Ralphs said to him words to the effect of 'Your uncle's not too good this morning. He can hardly get his breath. I have called for the doctor but I think you ought to come over'. Mr Edwin Fowden immediately went to his uncle's house.
Mrs Ralphs thinks she was out of the house for less than ten minutes. When she returned, Shipman was there already. He was standing to the side of Mr Fowden and was leaning over him. Mrs Ralphs thinks that Shipman was touching Mr Fowden. At the time, Mrs Ralphs was relieved to see Shipman there and did not think it odd that he had arrived so quickly. She has now reflected on this and does not think that Shipman could have arrived in response to her request because she was only away from the house for a short time. She cannot understand how, in that space of time, Shipman could have received the message and arrived at Mr Fowden's house before she returned. Shipman did not attempt to resuscitate Mr Fowden; nor did he ask Mrs Ralphs to telephone for an ambulance.
Mr Edwin Fowden recalls arriving at his uncle's house to find that Shipman and Mrs Ralphs were present. Shipman told him that he had given an injection to his uncle and he gave a shrug as he spoke. Mr Edwin Fowden asked why an injection had been given, to which Shipman replied, 'To help him with his breathing on his left side' and, as he said this, he motioned with his right hand up and down over the left side of his chest. Mr Edwin Fowden did not realise that his uncle might be dead. He gently ruffled his hair and said, 'Come on, Tommy'. Mr Fowden did not move or make a sound. Mr Edwin Fowden does not remember whether his uncle's body was warm or cold. He does, however, recall Shipman saying to him, 'You'll not waken him now'. Mr Edwin Fowden asked Shipman what he meant, to which Shipman replied, 'He's practically gone now. We'll give him another half hour'. Mr Edwin Fowden said something like, 'Well, you've given him an injection and that obviously hasn't helped', to which Shipman replied, 'He's that ill, this is it'.
Mr Edwin Fowden thinks that he waited in the living room, together with Mrs Ralphs and Shipman, although he cannot now recall any conversation that took place during this time. After about half an hour, Shipman announced that he was going to certify Mr Fowden dead.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Fowden's death was left ventricular failure, due to chronic obstructive airways disease. He said that ischaemic heart disease had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mr Fowden alive on the day of his death. He had seen the body after death. There would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mr Fowden died at 3pm on 6th
June. He said that he had attended Mr Fowden regularly during his last illness. He said that he had last seen Mr Fowden alive two hours before his death and that he was present at the moment of death. The cause of death was as given on the MCCD counterfoil. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting only minutes. Shipman stated that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations. He recorded that he, the home help and Mr Fowden's nephew were present at the moment of death.
There is no reference to Mr Fowden's name in the visits book for the day of the death.
Conclusion
There are some suspicious features surrounding this death, although the circumstances are not wholly typical of cases in which Shipman killed.
I do not know how Mr Fowden came to be in the condition in which Mrs Ralphs found him. It is possible that her visit coincided with a severe acute exacerbation of his respiratory problems or an acute attack of left ventricular failure. However, his condition does not sound typical of what one would expect in such circumstances. Mrs Ralphs does not say that Mr Fowden was gasping for breath. Rather, she gives the impression that he was about to expire quite gently. It is also possible that Mr Fowden was in the condition in which he was found because Shipman had been at the house a short time earlier and had done something to him. I suspect that that was so for several reasons. First, on Form B Shipman said that he had seen Mr Fowden two hours before the death. That is not necessarily accurate, as Shipman often fabricated entries on Form B. However, it is unlikely that Shipman would have admitted that he had seen Mr Fowden earlier if he had not. Second, I note that Mr Edwin Fowden recalls that Shipman said he had given his uncle an injection. Mrs Ralphs does not mention this and certainly does not seem to have witnessed the administration of an injection. This suggests that the injection was given before her arrival. Third, Shipman seems to have responded with exceptional promptness to Mrs Ralphs' request for help, even taking into account that Mona Street is only a short distance from the surgery. It is quite possible that Shipman did not attend in response to her request but had returned to the house expecting to 'discover' his patient either dead or dying. It would be entirely typical of Shipman's method that he should administer a lethal injection and then leave the patient to die, while he went away for a few minutes, in search of a neighbour whom he would bring back to be present at the moment of death. Alternatively, he sometimes left the patient dead and went about his business, returning an hour or so later to 'discover' the body. Either is possible here. It seems likely that Shipman had been at Mr Fowden's house quite recently. Whether he returned in response to a request or of his own volition, he cannot have been far away.
Shipman's conduct that day is highly suspect. If he had visited Mr Fowden and found him so unwell that he needed an injection of some kind and in such condition that his subsequent death was not a surprise, one might have expected him to do something more for Mr Fowden. He might have telephoned for an ambulance. He might have telephoned Mr Edwin Fowden. He might have gone in search of the home help. What he would not have done is leave Mr Fowden alone for anything approaching two hours, as he appears to suggest on Form B.
One question which arises is why Shipman would have called on Mr Fowden that day, supposedly two hours before his death. Mr Fowden's name is not in the visits book, which suggests that there was no request that morning for a routine or non-urgent visit. It is possible that someone requested an urgent visit, which would not usually be noted in the visits book, but if that had happened, one would have expected that person to have remained on the scene or at least to have identified himself or herself to Mr Edwin Fowden after the death. The remaining possibility is that Shipman decided to make an unsolicited visit. His visits book shows that he had only one visit booked for that day and there is a real possibility that he decided of his own volition to call on Mr Fowden. That would not of itself give rise to any suspicion. Mr Fowden was 81 and it would be good practice to call on him from time to time. However, for a patient to die suddenly during such a visit would be highly suspicious.
The question also arises as to what sort of injection Shipman gave Mr Fowden. If Mr Fowden had been in left ventricular failure, it might have been appropriate for Shipman to give an injection of a strong diuretic, which would relieve the pressure on the heart. However, Mrs Ralph's description is not typical of a person dying of left ventricular failure. It is more suggestive of one dying of gradual respiratory depression. The suspicion must arise that Shipman gave an injection of opiate or some other drug which had the effect of depressing Mr Fowden's respiration. Shipman's usual method of killing was to give an intravenous injection of a lethal dose of opiate, usually diamorphine, which causes unconsciousness and death within a few minutes. In a few cases, I believe he gave an intramuscular injection of a lethal dose of opiate. This would usually take between half an hour to an hour to kill, although it might act more quickly in a patient with poor respiratory function such as Mr Fowden. There are other possibilities, such as a very large dose of Largactil, which might also have the effect of depressing respiration and might well kill a patient with poor respiratory function. It is possible that Shipman gave an intravenous injection of opiate and left Mr Fowden for a few minutes, during which time Mrs Ralphs arrived and found him shortly before he lapsed into unconsciousness. It is also possible that Shipman gave an intramuscular injection of opiate or some other sedative and went away for a longer period, during which time Mrs Ralphs arrived to find Mr Fowden still conscious but unable to speak.
My conclusion is that I think it likely that Shipman killed Mr Fowden, but in the absence of any medical records and any reliable evidence of Shipman's movements on the day of the death, I do not feel able to rule out the possibility that this was a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001