The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edwin Foulkes
Introduction
Mr Edwin Foulkes died at his home, Westwood Farm, Mottram Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 1st
January 1985 at the age of 88. He had lived there alone since the death of his wife in 1976. Mr Foulkes' daughter, Mrs Elizabeth McKeown, and her husband live in a bungalow about 200 yards from Westwood Farm.
Mr Foulkes was a patient of Dr Bills at the time when both Shipman and Dr Bills practised separately from the Donneybrook premises. Dr Bills certified Mr Foulkes' death as being due to left ventricular failure due to myocardial degeneration due to chronic bronchitis. The informant named in the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') was Mrs McKeown, who was said to have been present at the death.
In February 2000, following Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, Mrs McKeown expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her father's death. The police investigated the death but did not take witness statements. Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Foulkes and no inquest was opened into his death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs McKeown and Dr Bills and has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book and the duty doctor transfer diary from the Donneybrook Surgery for 1985. Mr Foulkes' medical records have not survived. Mrs McKeown gave oral evidence to the Inquiry on 29th
October 2001.
Personal Background
According to Mrs McKeown, her father had suffered from chronic bronchitis for most of his life. He had once been admitted to hospital with this condition. He had never, so far as she was aware, suffered any problems with his heart. His blood pressure was not raised. He had glaucoma and a cataract and was treated at the Manchester Eye Hospital. She did not recall that he ever had regular medication, only antibiotics when his bronchitis was troublesome. He remained independent to the end of his life. He looked after himself and cooked his own meals. He had some help with cleaning the house and his daughter did his shopping. He kept himself occupied pottering in his garage. He was a regular churchgoer. For medical treatment, Mrs McKeown would take him to Dr Bills' surgery and, on rare occasions, the doctor would visit her father at home. To the best of Mrs McKeown's recollection, her father was never treated by Shipman.
I think, perhaps, Mrs McKeown remembers her father's state of health up to a short while before his death rather than immediately before his death. Dr Bills recalls that Mr Foulkes' health had been poor for some time before his death and was gradually deteriorating.
Mrs McKeown recalls that in the week before his death, Mr Foulkes was well. She saw him on the afternoon of New Year's Eve. She and her husband went out to a party that evening.
The Day of the Death
Early in the morning on New Year's Day, Mr Foulkes telephoned his daughter to say that he was not well and asked her to come over to see him. She went over straight away, to find her father propped up in bed. She describes him as having been 'a bit croaky' although he was not fighting for breath. He was talking normally. She made him a cup of tea and decided to call the doctor. Her call was diverted to a central control. The operator said that a doctor would be sent out and a doctor arrived as it was just becoming light. This would be at about 8am-8.30am.
Mrs McKeown described the doctor as under 5'8” in height and wearing a beard. He was aged between 40 and 45 years, which was considerably younger than Dr Bills or Dr Carroll, whom she knew well. Mrs McKeown has seen Shipman on television during the last three years and thinks the doctor who came that day was Shipman, although he was then slimmer and had darker hair. Dr Bills has seen Mrs McKeown's description of the doctor and says that it fits Shipman. Mr Foulkes' name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for New Year's Eve or New Year's Day but it can be seen from the surgery duty doctor transfer diary that Shipman was on night duty on New Year's Eve. Shipman often did not enter emergency calls in his visits book. The system then operating at the Donneybrook Surgery was that the seven doctors took turns to be on out of hours duty, from 6pm. In general, they diverted calls received between about 11pm and 8am to a deputising doctor service, Healthcall, but it was up to the individual doctor to decide at what time he would have the calls transferred. Dr Bills was aware that Shipman had an arrangement with the deputising service whereby he would be consulted before the service sent out one of their doctors. Shipman would sometimes prefer to make the visit himself. Dr Bills did not know what financial arrangement Shipman had made with the service. He pointed out that, in 1985, Shipman lived quite close to Westwood Farm and he thinks it is possible that Shipman had agreed to visit Mr Foulkes himself rather than let Healthcall send a doctor out. In the light of this evidence, it seems likely to me that the doctor who attended Mr Foulkes in the early morning of 1st
January 1985 was Shipman.
Mrs McKeown took Shipman (for I have now found that it was he) up to her father's room and remained there with him. Shipman examined Mr Foulkes and said that he had fluid on his lungs. He took out a syringe and said that he was going to give an injection to disperse the fluid. He said that Mr Foulkes would pass a lot of water but would feel better immediately afterwards. He injected the upper part of Mr Foulkes' leg and then immediately packed away his things and left the room. Mrs McKeown was very surprised that he left so quickly and did not accompany him. He let himself out of the house. Mr Foulkes remained in bed. Mrs McKeown recalls that Shipman's car had barely reached the end of the lane when Mr Foulkes let out one or two gasps and died. Mrs McKeown thinks that some fluid came out of her father's mouth as he died.
Mrs McKeown remembers that at some stage she must have telephoned Dr Bills to inform him that her father had died. Dr Bills did not visit the house that morning. She also telephoned the undertakers, Massey's. She did not feel any concern about her father's death except that Shipman had left so precipitately after giving the injection. She did not mention this to Dr Bills.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has provided a short report, which is, in the absence of medical records, based entirely on his interpretation of Mrs McKeown's evidence. He observed that, although Mrs McKeown believed that her father did not suffer from any heart problems, it is extremely common for people of his age to have some degree of atheroma. It is possible for an attack of bronchitis to put significant extra strain on the heart so as to cause quite severe symptoms, even though they are usually asymptomatic. Dr Grenville noted that Mr Foulkes was propped up in bed when Mrs McKeown arrived early that morning. He observed that this position is often more comfortable than lying flat for patients who are suffering from left ventricular failure. However, Mrs McKeown says that her father was only propped up to make it easier for him to drink his tea. He usually slept with only two pillows. Dr Grenville added that, if Mr Foulkes were suffering from left ventricular failure, he would have expected him to be fighting for breath in the period shortly before his death.
Dr Grenville observed that Shipman's description of Mr Foulkes' condition as 'fluid on his lungs' is an accurate description of the effect of left ventricular failure. The decision to give an injection 'to disperse the fluid' would be appropriate treatment. The drug would be a diuretic such as frusemide. I note that the injection was given in the thigh. It must have been given intramuscularly. Dr Grenville is critical of Shipman for leaving so quickly. He should have arranged hospital admission or at least have stayed for about half an hour to see whether the treatment had been effective.
Dr Grenville says that, from Mrs McKeown's description of her father's last moments, it sounds as though he had a cardiac arrest. Certainly death following one or two gasps of breath is not what would be expected if the death were due to opiate poisoning. I observe also that, when Shipman killed patients by injecting diamorphine, he usually injected intravenously. A lethal injection of diamorphine, if given intravenously, would cause death within a matter of five minutes or so. Dr Grenville and Professor Henry McQuay have explained in their generic evidence that, if diamorphine were to be injected intramuscularly, it would take an appreciable time, half an hour to 45 minutes, to reach maximum effect. However, it seems to me that, as Mr Foulkes was clearly quite unwell, a dose of opiate given intramuscularly might have acted quite quickly to depress his respiratory function sufficiently to hasten his death.
Conclusion
There are some puzzling and suspicious features to this case. Mr Foulkes was clearly quite unwell when his daughter called the doctor out early in the morning of New Year's Day. Dr Grenville suggests that the symptoms sound not unlike those of left ventricular failure, although he would have expected Mr Foulkes to be very short of breath. Without the medical records, it is not possible to form a reliable view about Mr Foulkes' underlying condition. Shipman's explanation to Mrs McKeown fits with left ventricular failure and if that is what Mr Foulkes had, it would have been appropriate for Shipman to give a diuretic. Usually, if the patient is very ill and facing death, the injection should be given intravenously as the drug would then act more quickly. Shipman gave an injection in the thigh. It is possible that he was unable to find a vein. Sometimes this can be difficult in very old people. Shipman then left immediately. Dr Grenville regards this as poor treatment. He says that Shipman should either have admitted Mr Foulkes to hospital or, if that was thought not appropriate, he should have stayed with Mr Foulkes to see whether the diuretic provided any relief. I would have thought that the decision whether or not to admit Mr Foulkes should have been taken after consultation with his daughter. Shipman's poor treatment of Mr Foulkes, followed so quickly by Mr Foulkes' death, give rise to the suspicion that Shipman made no real effort to treat Mr Foulkes but left him to die. It rather sounds as though he had formed the view that it was time for Mr Foulkes to die. Where those suspicions arise, it is inevitable that I should suspect that Shipman might have taken a positive step to hasten the death rather than merely leaving Mr Foulkes to die.
It is possible that Shipman's conduct was wholly proper. It may be that he gave Mr Foulkes an intramuscular injection of diuretic, designed to relieve the strain on his heart. Although this was not the treatment of choice, it might have been the best available. It is possible that admission to hospital was discussed and that Mrs McKeown has forgotten. Shipman might have been under great pressure to reach another patient as a matter of urgency. It is possible that Shipman gave substandard treatment and effectively left Mr Foulkes to die. On the other hand, it is also possible that Shipman did not give a diuretic at all but gave a dose of opiate with the intention of hastening Mr Foulkes' death. I think it is, perhaps, unlikely that he would have given a dose of opiate to the patient of another doctor, as that other doctor would be involved in the death certification process and, if he or she were puzzled by the death, it might be referred to the coroner.
I regret to say that I do not feel able to reach a positive decision about this case. I am, however, suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001