The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hilda Fish
Introduction
Mrs Hilda Fish died at Laurel Bank, a residential home for the elderly, Knott Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Saturday, 29th
March 1997 at the age of 97. On 8th
February 1997, she was admitted to Laurel Bank and, shortly thereafter, Shipman became her general practitioner. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
On 3rd February 2000, Mrs Fish's son, Mr John Edward Fish, expressed concerns to the police about the circumstances of his mother's death. The police investigated the death, although no statements were taken.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Fish but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Patricia Connell, supervisor in charge at Laurel Bank at the time of Mrs Fish's death. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Fish's general practitioner and hospital records, contemporaneous records from Laurel Bank and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Fish was admitted to Laurel Bank because her son was finding it difficult to care for her at home.
Laurel Bank has the capacity to house 40 residents and is generally full. During the day, there are about six care attendants on duty, and at night there are half that number. A team leader will be available on the premises at night. It would not be possible for a doctor to visit a resident at Laurel Bank without a member of staff being present. Access can be gained only by ringing a bell. The premises are locked and a security code has to be entered in order to gain access. Shipman would not have been privy to that code.
The staff at the home kept a full running record of the condition of all their residents. It is therefore possible to establish an accurate picture of Mrs Fish's condition in the weeks and days before her death. The nursing home had a policy whereby a senior member of staff always accompanied any doctor who visited a resident. Shipman's visits to his patients at the home are recorded.
The Laurel Bank records show that Mrs Fish developed a chest infection in the second week of March. Shipman visited and prescribed an antibiotic. Her condition seemed to 'clear up', although there were undoubted signs of dementia. Also, her mobility was poor and she was sometimes incontinent. On 19th
March, Mrs Fish's son telephoned the home as a family friend had told him that his mother was not well. He was reassured that her chest infection was much better. However, on 24th
March, Mrs Fish said she was feeling sick and had no appetite. The next day, the staff decided to ask Shipman to visit as Mrs Fish was flushed and was coughing discoloured sputum. The surgery visits book shows that Shipman was asked to visit on the 26th
as the staff feared that Mrs Fish had developed a chest infection.
The diary from the home suggests that, after lunch on 26th
March, Shipman called to see Mrs Fish and left a prescription for tablets for irregular heartbeat and also a different antibiotic from the one previously prescribed. He was to call again on Saturday, 29th
March. There are corresponding entries in Shipman's manuscript and computer records.
On Thursday, 27th
March, Mrs Fish was not well and there was concern at the nursing home. At about 9.15am, a member of staff telephoned the surgery and reported that Mrs Fish had deteriorated overnight. Shipman called and, according to the nursing home notes, said,
'We are doing all we can'
. He did not want to send Mrs Fish to hospital. He was satisfied with the medication he had prescribed and would call again on the Saturday. Later in the day, Mrs Fish was reported to be very confused. Nevertheless, she slept well that night and the following day ate both breakfast and lunch. On Friday, 28th
March, she was said to be
'a little bit more with it today'
, although still confused at times and in a weak condition.
The Day of the Death
The following day, Saturday, 29th
March, the staff noticed a spot of blood on the carpet near Mrs Fish's bed and it was suspected that Mrs Fish might have coughed it up. It was to be mentioned to the doctor when he visited. Mrs Fish had a small breakfast and was comfortable. A member of staff checked her condition every half hour. At 10.30am, she was satisfactory and took some fluid well. However, at 11am, she was found to have died. Shipman was telephoned and visited at 12.30pm, when he certified death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as
'OLD AGE'
. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Fish alive on 27th
March. There is no reason to doubt the truth and accuracy of that statement.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. There are a number of probable inaccuracies on this form. Shipman said that the death occurred at 11.20am, not between 10.30am and 11am, as indicated by the records kept by the home. He stated that he saw the body less than an hour after death, which does not accord with the records. He said that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds only and that his information was based on statements made by staff at the home who were present at the death. In fact, of course, the notes clearly indicate that no one was present at the death, certainly not the nursing officer whom Shipman says was present at the moment of death.
As Shipman appeared to have been eager to suggest that someone was present at the death, and since he gave a description of the mode of death which cannot have been based on any information given to him, the Inquiry obtained a witness statement from the supervisor in charge, Mrs Connell.
Mrs Connell specifically recalls the events of the morning on which Mrs Fish died. She is sure that Shipman did not visit before Mrs Fish was discovered dead by a colleague. She knows that Mrs Fish died between 10.30am and 11am that morning and that Shipman cannot have played a part in her death.
Mrs Connell has been shown the cremation certificate and confirms the numerous inaccuracies contained within it. In particular, Shipman was wrong to say that Mrs Fish died at 11.20am, he was wrong to say that he saw her less than an hour after her death, and it was completely incorrect for him to say that someone was present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
The numerous inaccuracies in Form B completed by Shipman naturally excite some suspicion and concern. In many cases where it is known that Shipman has killed a patient, false entries are found on Form B and sometimes on the MCCD. However, in this case, there is no reason to think that Shipman was in any way involved in the death. This case demonstrates that Shipman displayed a cavalier disregard to his duty to provide accurate and truthful information when completing the statutory documentation.
The clear contemporaneous evidence from Laurel Bank, and the equally clear witness evidence obtained from the staff, confirm that Mrs Fish died of natural causes. Those who knew her can be reassured.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001