The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Harold Freeman
Introduction
Mr Harold Freeman died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Victoria Street, Hyde on Saturday, 20th
February 1993 at the age of 83. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1979 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought highly of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Freeman's death was bronchopneumonia due to congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mr Freeman's death came to the attention of the police in the course of their enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy. They found that a prescription for a single 30mg ampoule of diamorphine had been issued by Shipman, supposedly for the benefit of Mr Freeman, and had been dispensed at the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy on 22nd
February 1993, two days after Mr Freeman's death. The police took statements from his son, Mr Donald Freeman, and from Dr John Grenville, but their enquiry was focused on the prescription of diamorphine and did not investigate the possibility of an unlawful killing. There has been no inquest into the death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Donald Freeman and from various members of staff at the home but no one is able to offer any evidence directly relevant to Mr Freeman's death. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Freeman's general practitioner and hospital records and to the appointments sheets and visits books for the relevant period, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Freeman's first wife died in 1962 and he remarried about ten years later. He lived with his second wife, Mrs Winifred Freeman, at 9 Rydal Avenue, Hyde. Mr Donald Freeman recalls that in about 1980 his father had a leg amputated because of poor circulation and that in about 1986 he suffered a stroke and lost sensation in one side of his face and the sight in one eye. Mr Donald Freeman recalls that his father had a further stroke about two to three years later, although he does not think this left his father with any further disability. His father also had some sort of cardiac episode about 18 months before he died and thereafter his condition gradually deteriorated. Towards the end of his life, Mr Freeman could not look after himself and was receiving daily assistance from Social Services. About two to three weeks before he died, Mr Freeman and his wife moved into The Sycamores. Mrs Freeman survived her husband by only about three weeks. She died on 16th
March 1993 and her death has been investigated by the Inquiry.
Mr Freeman's medical records reveal that he had a long history of atherosclerotic disease and that in 1978 his right leg was amputated above the knee. In 1991, he was admitted to hospital as an emergency following a collapse. A diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia and peripheral vascular disease was made. Mr Freeman was prescribed amiodarone to prevent recurrence of ventricular tachycardia. An entry dated 6th
May 1992 in the handwritten general practitioner records shows an episode of heart failure. Mr Freeman was reviewed at Tameside General Hospital on 9th
September 1992 and noted to be very well, totally asymptomatic and not showing any signs of heart failure. He was advised to continue taking amiodarone indefinitely.
On 19th
September 1992, an entry in the handwritten general practitioner records shows a further episode of heart failure resulting from Mr Freeman's omission to take his medication. Mr Freeman was then seen by Shipman on 18th
December 1992 and 9th
January 1993 with symptoms of gastroenteritis.
The Events Leading up to Death
The handwritten general practitioner records note that Mr Freeman was seen by Shipman on 3rd
February 1993, following which a number of repeat prescriptions were issued, including medication for ischaemic heart disease and heart failure. On 17th
February 1993, Mr Freeman was prescribed Tarivid, an antibiotic, to treat a chest infection. The surgery visits book for that day suggests that Mr Freeman was not eating, had vomited and was feeling nauseous.
The visits book for 19th
February reads as follows:
'HAROLD FREEMAN THE SYCAMORES
BREATHING IS BAD/SHOCKING COLOUR'
.
It would appear that Shipman went on his visits at about 11am because a further entry in the visits book for 19th
February reads:
'11.02
GONE ON VISITS
'
.
The final entry in Mr Freeman's handwritten general practitioner records, dated 19th
February 1993, reads as follows:
'Gastroenteritis
fluid bed rest
(
illegible
)
food tomorrow
Chest
OK
. continue
RX
(
treatment
)
'
.
This would suggest that Mr Freeman had gastroenteritis, was to take fluids and was to stay in bed. He would possibly be allowed food the next day. His chest infection was not giving rise to concern but he was to continue the treatment for that, presumably the antibiotic prescribed on 17th
February. The note suggests that Shipman gave no specific treatment on that day. However, Shipman's notes were not always complete and it is possible that he gave Mr Freeman an injection which he did not record in the notes.
There is no evidence of Mr Freeman's condition in the hours before his death. In particular I do not know whether Mr Freeman was conscious or unconscious during this period. It appears that the optimistic view expressed in Shipman's note proved unfounded, as Mr Freeman died in the early hours of 20th
February. The surgery night visits book contains a deputising doctor visits slip, completed by Dr Ahmad. This shows that Dr Ahmad visited Mr Freeman at 5.55am on 20th
February 1993 and recorded:
'He passed away at
3-15AM. on 20.2.93
O/E no signs of life.
Death certified'
.
The Notification of Death form from the home also states that death occurred at 3.15am.
The Aftermath
Mr Donald Freeman recalls that he received a telephone call at about 4am on the morning of Saturday, 20th
February. He was told that staff at the home had found his father dead in bed. He arrived at The Sycamores at about 6am and saw his father's body. He later attended Shipman's surgery to collect the MCCD. He recalls that Shipman asked him whether it would be acceptable if he took out a prescription in Mr Freeman's name to replace the drugs he had given him. This struck him as slightly odd at the time but, as Shipman was a doctor, he assumed that this was normal procedure. In the event, Shipman prescribed 30mg of diamorphine in Mr Freeman's name, although there is no evidence that Mr Freeman ever needed diamorphine or was ever given any by Shipman.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman recorded that Mr Freeman had died on 20th
February 1993 and that he had last seen Mr Freeman alive on 19th
February. The cause of death was said to be bronchopneumonia due to congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B, where he recorded that death had occurred at
'3.30'
on 20th
February 1993. Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Freeman during his last illness for five days and that he last saw him alive about 12 hours before his death. Shipman claimed that he made a complete external examination of the body about 12 hours after death. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only minutes. Shipman claimed that his answers as to mode and cause of death were based on statements made by staff at The Sycamores. He said that no one was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Following consideration of the information supplied in the cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker did not regard the death as suspicious.
In Dr Grenville's view, in the light of Mr Freeman's history of ischaemic heart disease, he was at high risk of suffering a heart attack. Dr Grenville considers that there is no evidence that Mr Freeman was suffering from bronchopneumonia but thinks that it is likely that the sudden death was due to ischaemic heart disease.
Conclusion
I regret that I am unable to reach a conclusion about Mr Freeman's death. I agree with Dr Grenville that Shipman's medical note suggests that Mr Freeman's chest infection had responded to treatment and was no longer a cause for concern on 19th
February. However, Shipman's notes cannot be trusted and it is quite possible that the chest infection remained serious. Certainly the staff who requested the visit on 19th
February thought that his breathing was bad and his colour
'shocking'
.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman had access to Mr Freeman in the period immediately before his death. The medical records, visits book and Form B all suggest that Shipman last saw Mr Freeman during the day on 19th
February, at least 12 hours before the death and probably more like 15 to 16 hours.
There is a real possibility that during his daytime visit on 19th
February, Shipman decided to ensure that Mr Freeman's chest infection should lead to death. He could have done that by giving an injection, possibly of opiate or possibly of a sedative. If this happened, it is clear that Shipman did not give a lethal dose of opiate, as Mr Freeman lived for about 15 to 16 hours afterwards. However, he could have given a dose which made Mr Freeman deeply unconscious. While unconscious, Mr Freeman would be very vulnerable to the development of bronchopneumonia. His chest infection could have deteriorated and have resulted in death within the 15 to 16 hours between Shipman's visit and death. That is a real possibility.
On the other hand, as Dr Grenville says, Mr Freeman was at risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death. It is also possible that the chest infection took hold and led to death without any intervention by Shipman.
I do not think that the fact that Shipman prescribed 30mg of diamorphine in Mr Freeman's name indicates that Shipman gave Mr Freeman that type of drug. He could have done, as I have said. However, prescribing diamorphine in the name of a deceased patient was one of Shipman's methods of obtaining the drug for his own purposes and a method which he used regularly in 1993.
I regret that I cannot reach a positive conclusion. There are grounds to suspect that Shipman killed Mr Freeman but I cannot say more than that.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001