The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Arthur Floyd
Introduction
Mr Arthur Floyd died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Welch Road, Hyde on Thursday, 5th
July 1979 at the age of 97. It is not known whether he was a patient of Shipman but Shipman certified that the cause of his death was senility.
In 2001, Mr Floyd's granddaughter, Mrs Doreen Entwhistle, informed the Inquiry that, although he was very old, her grandfather's death had been sudden. Through contact with The Sycamores, the Inquiry discovered that a care assistant at the home, Mrs Edith Izyckyj, was also Mr Floyd's niece. The Inquiry took a statement from her. The Inquiry has also had access to the visits book for the relevant period and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) but no other relevant documentation is available.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Floyd had been a resident at The Sycamores for about five years prior to his death. His mobility was poor and he could walk only with the aid of a Zimmer frame. However, he was very independent and reluctant to let others help him. According to his niece, his general health was good. He was mentally alert, had a good appetite and slept well. So far as she was aware, he had never suffered a heart attack or a stroke.
Mrs Izyckyj was working at the home on 4th
July 1979. She saw her uncle in the evening and helped put him to bed. He seemed to be his usual self and, as far as Mrs Izyckyj is aware, he had not been ill during that day.
The Day of the Death
At about 9am on 5th
July 1979, Mrs Izyckyj received a telephone call from The Sycamores informing her that her uncle had died. She went to the home and was told that her uncle had died in his sleep. The practice was for the night staff to check residents at 20-30 minute intervals throughout the night. A member of the night staff had discovered the death. There was no suggestion that Mr Floyd had been taken ill in the night or that a doctor had been called.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mr Floyd alive on 29th
June 1979. Shipman's visits book confirms that Shipman was due to see Mr Floyd on that day. Shipman said that the cause of death was senility, which does not seem appropriate as Mr Floyd had not been ill and was mentally alert.
Conclusion
There are no real causes for suspicion in connection with this death. Mr Floyd was very old and must have been at considerable risk of sudden death. There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mr Floyd in the hours leading up to his death. It appears that Mr Floyd died during the night, when Shipman would be most unlikely to visit unless specifically requested. If Mr Floyd had been ill in the night and Shipman had been called, I would have expected the staff to tell his niece the following day.
Although it seems that it was inappropriate to certify that Mr Floyd's death was due to senility, this factor does not of itself give rise to any suspicion that Shipman might have been involved in the death. Shipman did not take his duties of certification very seriously and his entries were frequently inaccurate. I would think that he gave senility as the cause of death because Mr Floyd was very old and he did not really know the true cause.
The overwhelming likelihood in this case is that Mr Floyd died a completely natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001