The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Moira Ashton Fox
Introduction
Miss Moira Ashton Fox died at her home, 104 Chartist House, Mount Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 28th
June 1983 at the age of 77. It is not known for how long she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 2001, Mr Ralph Unsworth, the former caretaker of Chartist House, expressed concern to the Inquiry about the circumstances surrounding the death of Miss Fox.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Unsworth and Mrs Joan Ellison, whose brother was married to Miss Fox's sister, Mrs Margaret Kemp. The Inquiry has had access to the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and to Shipman's visits book for 1983. Miss Fox's medical records have not survived.
Mrs Jennifer Unsworth, the warden at Chartist House and wife of Mr Unsworth, confirmed in oral evidence to the Inquiry on 24th October 2001 that she had no information that could assist the Inquiry in connection with this death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Fox never married and lived alone in that part of Chartist House which had the benefit of warden supervision. According to Mrs Ellison, Miss Fox did not socialise and had few friends. She was of slim build and pale complexion. She probably did her own housework but she paid for her shopping to be done. According to Mrs Ellison, Miss Fox liked to exaggerate her various ailments and had a tendency to complain about her state of health. Mr Unsworth has told the Inquiry that he considered Miss Fox to be a hypochondriac, who moved from one doctor to another in an effort to obtain treatment for her perceived ailments before eventually ending up with Shipman. In Mr Unsworth's view, Miss Fox appeared quite healthy for her age and he had never heard of her being seriously ill.
The Day of the Death
On the day that Miss Fox's death was discovered, Shipman called at Mr Unsworth's flat to say that he had received a call from Miss Fox earlier in the day asking him to visit her because she was feeling ill. Shipman explained that he had gone to Miss Fox's flat and had found the front door slightly open. He said that he could see Miss Fox lying on the floor behind the door, so as to prevent the door from opening. He said that he had forced it open, pushing Miss Fox's body aside. He had then examined her and found that she appeared to be dead. He asked Mr Unsworth to return with him to Miss Fox's flat.
Mr Unsworth did so. In the bedroom he saw Miss Fox lying on her back on her bed. She looked as though she had been laid out by an undertaker and appeared very peaceful. At the time, Mr Unsworth could not understand how Shipman had been able to lay Miss Fox on her bed so neatly. At the very least, he expected her clothes to look untidy, as Shipman had said he had to force her body from behind the door. Mr Unsworth noticed that the bed was neat, whereas he thought it would have been slightly disturbed.
Shipman asked Mr Unsworth, 'What do you think about her? ... do you regard her as being dead?' Mr Unsworth replied that Shipman was the doctor and that he should know. It should be he who told Mr Unsworth, rather than the other way round. Shipman persisted and said that he would appreciate Mr Unsworth's opinion. He asked Mr Unsworth to check for a pulse. When Mr Unsworth told him that he could not find a pulse, Shipman asked him to see whether Miss Fox's pupils were dilated. Mr Unsworth looked at Miss Fox's eyes, which were still wide open, and reported that her pupils were very dilated. Mr Unsworth rejoined Shipman at the foot of the bed. Shipman again asked, 'Do you regard her as dead?' to which Mr Unsworth replied, 'Yes'. Shipman said, 'So we both agree?' and Mr Unsworth replied, 'Yes'. Whilst they were still standing at the foot of the bed, Shipman addressed Miss Fox's dead body saying, 'You've been a rum old devil and you've led us all on a merry dance, but it's all over for you now so rest in peace'. Shipman asked Mr Unsworth to contact the next of kin and then left the flat. Mr Unsworth was left completely shocked by Miss Fox's death because she had seemed quite well in the previous few days.
Shipman's visits book for 27th
June 1983 contains the following entry:
'Miss Fox 104 Chartist House blood tomorrow'
.
The following entry appears in the visits book for 28th
June:
'Fox - bloods - dead'
.
Thus, it appears from Shipman's visits book that the reason for his visit to Miss Fox on the day of her death was to take blood and was not in response to a request made that morning, as he told Mr Unsworth.
Certification
Shipman appears to have completed the MCCD on 28th
June 1983. The certificate itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that he had last seen Miss Fox alive on 27th
June 1983 and that the death had occurred the following day. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features about this death. First, the death was discovered by Shipman. He claimed that he had visited Miss Fox at her request, although his own visits book suggests that he had decided in advance that he would visit her to take blood samples. This inconsistency alone gives rise to some suspicion. Shipman's account seems inherently unlikely. Miss Fox lived in sheltered accommodation. The warden, Mrs Unsworth, called round every morning to check on the welfare of her residents. If Miss Fox had been ill that morning, she would have told Mrs Unsworth. Probably Mrs Unsworth would have telephoned Shipman. If Miss Fox had begun to feel ill after Mrs Unsworth's visit, I would have expected her to summon the warden by pulling her emergency cord. It appears that she had not done so. I think it likely that Shipman called on Miss Fox of his own volition and not at her request. For him to find her dead, with the door open, when he arrived on what was probably an unsolicited visit, is highly unlikely and his claim that this is what happened gives rise to grave suspicion.
In the absence of the medical records, it is not possible to form a view of Miss Fox's health in the days, weeks and months before her death. The impression created by the witnesses, however, is that Miss Fox appeared to be in quite good health and tended to exaggerate her symptoms. There is no indication that she suffered from a heart condition and it seems that if she had done, she would certainly have told Mrs Ellison, and in all likelihood Mr Unsworth, of it. Mr Unsworth was shocked by her sudden death.
Mr Unsworth describes a series of events which were to become part of the familiar pattern of cases in which Shipman killed. On many occasions in the later years of Shipman's career, he was to discover the body of a patient. In those cases I have concluded that he had killed the patient and had pretended that he had found the body. Sometimes he would visit, kill the patient, leave the premises and return later to discover the body. Sometimes he would arrive, kill the patient and go immediately to find a neighbour or warden to whom he would say that the patient had been dead when he arrived. This case is of the second type. Shipman's extraordinary conduct in asking Mr Unsworth's opinion as to whether Miss Fox was dead is not a common feature of many Shipman killings, but it does nothing to allay my suspicion that he had just killed her.
In the present case, Shipman claimed that the door had been open. There are other cases in which he has made such a claim. Often that claim was implausible. On other occasions, he has claimed that he was unable to gain entry and has gone to find a warden, asking him or her to return with him with a key to the patient's flat. On entry they would find the patient dead. In the present case, Shipman's account is designed to give the impression that Miss Fox had begun to have a heart attack and had gone in search of help. She had opened the door and collapsed behind it. In my view, it would be far more likely that Miss Fox would have summoned the warden by pulling her cord than that she would open her door. In any event, if Shipman had indeed found the body behind the door, the first thing he would have done would have been to summon the warden by pulling the emergency cord. I regard Shipman's account as implausible.
Mr Unsworth noticed that the body seemed to have been laid out and neither the bed nor Miss Fox's clothing were in any way disturbed, as one might expect them to be if Shipman had lifted her single-handed and put her on the bed. This tidy appearance is consistent with Miss Fox having lain on the bed for examination or for the taking of a blood sample. If she had been injected intravenously with a lethal dose of opiate, she would have died where she was. If Shipman told her that he had come to take a blood sample, it would have given him the opportunity to introduce a needle into one of Miss Fox's veins.
This case has the hallmarks of a case in which Shipman killed and it seems to me to be overwhelmingly likely that Shipman killed Miss Fox by injecting her with opiate. Notwithstanding the absence of the medical records and cremation documents, I feel sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001