The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Elizabeth Firman
Introduction
Miss Mary Elizabeth Firman died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Thursday, 5th
March 1981 at the age of 87. It is not known whether, or for how long, she had been a patient of Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was senility.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. Miss Firman's name was on that list but there was no response from anyone who had known her. The Inquiry then traced Miss Firman's nephew, Mr Arnold Firman, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Miss Firman and as her next of kin in the Charnley House admission register. No statement has been taken from him but he has provided helpful information.
The Inquiry has had access to the death certificate relating to Miss Firman, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits books and the Charnley House admission register and daily diary for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Firman was admitted to Charnley House on 12th
October 1979. The Charnley House diary reveals that Miss Firman was very unwell in the weeks leading up to her death.
On Thursday, 26th
February 1981, Miss Firman was not eating and took very little fluid. Arrangements were made for Shipman to visit on the following day. That night, Miss Firman's breathing was irregular and gave cause for concern. She was observed throughout the night.
According to the Charnley House diary, Shipman came to see Miss Firman on the morning of Friday, 27th
February. He discovered that she had a partial paralysis of the palate, which accounted for her inability to swallow. She was to be given Complan. There is no note that Shipman addressed her shallow breathing. His visits book confirms this visit. The relevant visits book entry is one of a group of five entries which physically appear on the page relating to 28th
February, but which are indicated by an arrow, to relate to the previous day.
Miss Firman's condition remained poor over the following days. She seems only to have taken small quantities of fluid and on Tuesday, 3rd
March 1981, her nephew, presumably Mr Firman, was contacted, probably because it was thought that she had not long to live.
On Wednesday, 4th
March, it is noted that Miss Firman's condition deteriorated and she was said to be very poorly that night.
The Day of the Death
After passing a very disturbed night, Miss Firman died at 9.30am on 5th
March. There is no note that any doctor attended at the home at all that day. However, it appears that a doctor must have attended, probably Shipman, as the death certificate was said to have been left for the relatives to collect.
Miss Firman's name appears as the sixth in a list of seven patients whom Shipman was to visit that day. The book in which this entry was made was Shipman's own book into which entries would normally be transferred from a similar book kept in the surgery. Given that Miss Firman died at 9.30am, it is likely that the purpose of the visit was for Shipman to certify the fact or cause of her death rather than to visit her while she was still alive.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman completed this on 5th
March 1981, saying that the cause of death was senility and that he had seen the body after death. This would lend some support to the assumption that Miss Firman's name was entered in the visits book in order for Shipman to certify the cause of death. On the counterfoil, Shipman said that he had last seen Miss Firman alive on 3rd
March 1981. Her name does not appear in his visits book for that day. Nor does his name appear in the Charnley House diary. I think it is unlikely that he visited Miss Firman on 3rd
March. However, there is good evidence that he saw her on Friday, 27th
February, when his visit is recorded in the Charnley House daily diary.
Conclusion
I am sure that Miss Firman died of natural causes. Her death was clearly expected by those who were looking after her, who contacted her nephew shortly before she died, almost certainly to inform him of her deteriorating condition.
Although Miss Firman's name appears in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death, it seems unlikely that he saw her alive on that day. Miss Firman died at 9.30am. Shipman had several patients to see on that day. It seems likely that he was called out to certify the fact or cause of her death, particularly since he signed the MCCD counterfoil on the day of the death.
There is no positive evidence to suggest that Shipman saw Miss Firman after the visit on 27th
February 1981.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001