The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hannah Frith
Introduction
Mrs Hannah Frith died at her home, 2 Stansfield Road, Hyde on Saturday, 7th
November 1992 at the age of 79. She was a patient of Dr Heptonstall of the Clarendon House Surgery. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was congestive cardiac failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
In October 2001, whilst being interviewed by the Inquiry in connection with the death of Mr Frederick Brierley, Mr William Frith and Mrs Vivien Frith (Mrs Frith's son and daughter-in-law), expressed concern about the circumstances of Mrs Frith's death. The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Frith. The Inquiry has had access to the Report of Sudden Death and Report of Death to the Coroner, prepared by the Greater Manchester Police, and to the post-mortem examination report, prepared by Dr D L Bee at Tameside General Hospital. The Inquiry has also had access to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents from the Market Street Surgery for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Frith was a widow who lived alone in sheltered accommodation with the benefit of warden assistance. She suffered from diabetes for which she took medication. She was not dependent on insulin. She had arthritis. She had had cataracts removed about five years before her death.
Mr Frith last saw his mother alive at about 7pm on Friday, 6th
November, when he called to see her on his way home from work. He spent about 10 to 15 minutes with her. She seemed well.
The Day of the Death
Mr Frith went to work as usual, early in the morning of Saturday, 7th
November 1992. At about 10.30am, his wife received a telephone call at home from a woman who did not introduce herself but asked to speak to Mr Frith. She said that his mother was not very well. Mrs Vivien Frith explained that her husband would finish work at midday and would then call to see his mother.
About 15 minutes later, Mrs Vivien Frith received a further telephone call. This time, the caller was a man who was very abrupt and introduced himself as a doctor. He said, 'Is Mr Frith coming round?' Mrs Vivien Frith repeated that he would come round when he finished work at midday, to which the doctor replied, 'I think he should come now. Mrs Frith's dead'.
Mrs Vivien Frith contacted her husband and told him the news. He left work and went home to his wife. He then drove to his mother's flat to find two police officers waiting in a car outside. Mr Frith went inside and found his mother lying dead on the lounge floor. She was lying on her side and looked as though she had stumbled to the floor.
The Report of Sudden Death reveals that the warden, Ms Alison Kelly, had discovered the death at 10.05am on Saturday, 7th
November 1992. The Inquiry has contacted Ms Kelly but she has no recollection of the death. It is quite possible that it was she who made the first call to Mrs Vivien Frith.
There is no reference to Mrs Frith's name in Shipman's visits book for the day of her death or the days leading up to it. The appointments sheets show that Shipman had several patients to see between 8.45am and 9.45am, that he had a new patient to see at 10am, and eight patients to see thereafter. It seems unlikely that he was the doctor who spoke to Mrs Vivien Frith on the telephone that morning. There is no evidence to suggest that he was.
The Post-Mortem Examination
Following the death, Dr Bee undertook a post-mortem examination. Dr Bee found moderate atheroma of the cerebral circulation. The lungs were found to be congested. The heart contained severely calcified atheroma with diffuse fibrosis of the left ventrical and pericardial adhesions. The kidneys were also congested. Dr Bee stated that the cause of death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Conclusion
Shipman was not Mrs Frith's doctor and there is no evidence to suggest that he was in any way involved in her death. It may be that Mr and Mrs Frith thought that he might have been the doctor who spoke to Mrs Vivien Frith because that doctor was rather abrupt, as Shipman sometimes was. However, I can think of no reason why Shipman might have been at Mrs Frith's flat that morning. In any event, it seems most unlikely that Shipman would visit a woman who was not a patient of his, kill her and then allow the death to be referred to the coroner. He was busy in his surgery around the time when the death was discovered and when someone who identified himself as a doctor spoke to Mrs Frith.
The certified cause of death, following post-mortem examination, is consistent with Mrs Frith being found in a collapsed state on the floor and is the likely true cause of death.
All the evidence suggests that this was a natural death and I am quite satisfied that it was.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001