The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John France
Introduction
Mr John France (known as Jack) died at Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Friday, 25th
August 1995 at the age of 84. He had been a patient of Shipman since 1977 when Shipman arrived in Hyde and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular arteriosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Ann Morris, Mr France's daughter, and Ms Diane Hodgin, a care assistant at Hyde Nursing Home. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr France's general practitioner and hospital records and to the appointments sheets, visits book and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr France was married and had two daughters. In January 1995, he suffered serious injuries in a road traffic accident. He was left with brain damage. He was confused and suffered from memory loss to the extent that he could not recognise members of his family. He was treated in Tameside General Hospital until March 1995 when he was transferred to Hyde Nursing Home.
The Events Leading up to Death
The medical notes and visits book suggest that Mr France developed circulatory problems in his feet and legs in July 1995. An entry in the visits book dated 24th
July 1995 records a request for a visit and the following note:
'Chronic cond'n - feet looking unhealthy, swollen, red pain'
.
The computerised medical records for that date record that Shipman visited Mr France and thought that his oedema was worsening. Following a revisit three days later on 27th
July, Shipman diagnosed gangrene in the toes of the right foot and referred Mr France to a surgeon. Mr France was seen by Mr Cooper Wilson at Tameside General Hospital on 21st
August 1995. Following that consultation, Mr Cooper Wilson wrote to Shipman and described Mr France's condition in the following terms:
'...he has evidence of bilateral ischaemia of his feet with critical ischaemia of the right leg with some dry gangrene...
'I think Mr France has aorto-iliac occlusion as well as his other vascular disease and the situation is completely inoperable. I have asked the Nursing Home if they could councel
(
sic
)
Jean and Fanny, his daughters, because I think this ischaemia will be progressing and will kill him within a couple of months, he will need narcotic pain relief in the near future'
.
Ms Hodgin recalls that not long before he died, Mr France complained of severe pain in the big toe of his right foot, which turned to a blue/black colour. She remembers that Shipman said that the toe was infected and gangrenous and that as Mr France was too old to undergo an operation, he would be prescribed morphine.
There is a note in the computerised medical records dated 21st
August 1995 which records that Mr France's condition was
'completely inoperable'
and a note dated 22nd
August says that Shipman had spoken to Mr France about his condition and had prescribed Oramorph, an oral opioid analgesic solution. This visit is confirmed by an entry in Shipman's visits book. No further visits are recorded either in the visits book or in the medical records until after the death. Ms Hodgin recalls that Mr France was given morphine, probably by the staff nurse, during the last few days of his life.
Mrs Morris last saw her father on Tuesday, 22nd
August when she returned from holiday. She was told that her father had seen a consultant at Tameside General Hospital and that he would not live long.
The Day of the Death
Ms Hodgin was with Mr France when he died on 25th
August. A member of the nursing staff had given him a dose of Oramorph at about 10am. Ms Hodgin sat with him and he died at about 10.20am. She says she was the only person present at the time of the death.
Mrs Morris recalls that she received a telephone call from the nursing home at about 10am to say that her father had only hours to live. She went straight there and saw her father lying in bed propped up by his pillows. A member of staff was holding his hand and Mrs Morris was told that he was dying. She thinks, however, that he was already dead by the time she arrived.
Mrs Morris thinks that someone told her that Shipman had visited her father the previous day. She was also told that someone had given him morphine, although she was unsure whether this was Shipman or one of the nursing staff. She was told that he had been complaining of pain in his back during the night and had been given morphine to relieve it.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular arteriosclerosis and said that the approximate interval between the onset and death was 18 months. He said that senile dementia had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mr France alive on 23rd
August. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr France had died at 10.40am. He said he had attended Mr France during his last illness for six months. He said that he had last seen Mr France alive two days before death and saw the body two hours after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 12-18 hours. He said that these answers were based on information provided by the staff on the ward. He said that Mr France's daughter was present at the moment of death.
Form A of the cremation certificate, which was signed by Mrs Morris, records that Mr France died at 10am.
Shipman's claim that he had seen Mr France on 23rd
August, two days before the death, appears to be inaccurate. It seems more likely that he last saw Mr France on 22nd
August.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation forms and then, separately, Mr France's medical records. On the basis of both sources of information he concluded that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr France died of natural causes as certified by Shipman.
Mr France was clearly very unwell and there is independent evidence in a letter from Mr Cooper Wilson that his life expectancy was very limited.
It was on Mr Cooper Wilson's suggestion that Shipman prescribed Oramorph, an opiate analgesic, to Mr France in the days before he died. The letter from Mr Cooper Wilson highlighted the need for
'narcotic pain relief'
and in my view it was appropriate for Shipman to prescribe Oramorph. It appears likely that the nursing staff administered the drug, so there was no need for Shipman to attend regularly.
There is no evidence that Shipman had access to Mr France in the hours before his death. Mrs Morris' impression that someone had told her that Shipman visited her father the day before the death was probably a misunderstanding. I think it likely that a member of staff told her that Shipman had visited and had prescribed morphine; then during the night before his death, Mr France had suffered back pain and morphine had been given. The evidence suggests that the last time Shipman saw Mr France was at least two or probably three days before he died. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman gained access to Mr France and killed him on the morning of 25th
August.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001