The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Freeman
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Freeman (known as Winnie) died at The Sycamores, a residential home for the elderly, Welch Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 16th
March 1993 at the age of 75. She was a patient of Shipman and thought highly of him. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebroarteriosclerosis.
There has been no inquest into Mrs Freeman's death.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Donald Freeman (Mrs Freeman's stepson) and a number of former care assistants who were working at The Sycamores at the time of Mrs Freeman's death. They are Mrs Pamela Jean Ogden, Mrs Ethel Clayton, Mrs Jean Marie Lohan, Mrs Joan Williams and Mrs Eileen Rhodes (née Jones). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Freeman's general practitioner and hospital records and to the surgery appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Freeman and her husband, Mr Harold Freeman, moved to The Sycamores at the end of January 1993. Mr Freeman died on 20th
February 1993, a little over three weeks before Mrs Freeman's death on 16th
March. Both deaths have been investigated by the Inquiry.
Mrs Freeman's general practitioner records show that she suffered from angina from 1984. This was severe at times and in 1989 caused Shipman to refer her to hospital as an emergency, although further examination indicated that she had not had a heart attack. In 1991, she was seen by Dr H H Wan, consultant physician in geriatric medicine at Tameside General Hospital, with a history of involuntary movements of the left upper and lower limbs. Dr Wan diagnosed a probable cerebrovascular accident or stroke.
Thereafter, Mrs Freeman had a number of falls, noted in the medical records. A discharge summary from Tameside General Hospital, dated 5th
February 1993, records that Mrs Freeman was admitted on 21st
November 1992, having suffered a fall and sustained a laceration to the scalp and a fracture to the left clavicle. She was discharged to The Sycamores on 28th
January 1993. A further discharge summary reveals that Mrs Freeman fell in the early hours of 6th
February and sustained a fracture to the neck of the right femur. She underwent a hemi-arthroplasty on 9th
February 1993. On 28th
February 1993, Mrs Freeman was readmitted to hospital with a history of acute urine retention and was discharged on 3rd March 1993.
Dr M A Matin, consultant physician at Tameside General Hospital, saw Mrs Freeman on 11th
March 1993, five days before she died. He noted that, following her admission to hospital for treatment of the fractured femur, Mrs Freeman had become confused, bedfast and incontinent of urine. He concluded that in view of her condition, Mrs Freeman was not a suitable candidate for an elderly persons' home and would require nursing home accommodation. Dr Matin referred Mrs Freeman to Hyde Nursing Home, although she died before the transfer could take place.
Mrs Freeman's name appears in Shipman's visits book on both 9th
and 10th
March 1993, although there do not appear to be any corresponding entries in the medical records. Mrs Freeman's details do not appear on Shipman's surgery computer.
The Day of the Death
The only witness with any recollection of the circumstances of Mrs Freeman's death is Mrs Rhodes. She was sleeping at The Sycamores, on night duty, and recalls that she was wakened by one of the care assistants who told her either that Mrs Freeman was very unwell or that she had just died. She thinks Mrs Freeman was dead by the time the care assistant came to waken her. If not, she died soon afterwards, in the early hours of the morning.
Mrs Freeman's name appears in the surgery night visits book on Tuesday, 16th
March 1993. The note indicates that Mrs Freeman died at 5.08am and that a deputising doctor attended. This is confirmed by an attendance slip found in Mrs Freeman's medical records, which shows that the doctor attended at 6am. Under the heading
'History and Findings'
it is recorded that Mrs Freeman was 'dead on arrival'. Under the heading
'Clinical Findings'
the following is recorded:
'No pulse
No respirations
No Heart Sounds
Pupils dilated & fixed
No Corneal reflex'
.
Death was confirmed.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman stated that the cause of death was cerebroarteriosclerosis. Ischaemic heart disease was said to have contributed to the death. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Freeman alive on 12th
March 1993. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 16th
March 1993.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He said that Mrs Freeman had died at 3.30am and that he had attended her during her last illness for six months. Although Shipman did not initially state when he had last seen Mrs Freeman alive, the medical referee, Dr Betty Hinchliffe, made an entry recording that Shipman had last seen her alive on 13th
March 1993, three days before the death. Shipman claimed to have seen Mrs Freeman's body 12 hours after death and to have carried out a complete external examination. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 12 to 18 hours. He said that his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on information provided by the staff at The Sycamores. He said that the matron of The Sycamores was present at the moment of death. He mentioned that Mrs Freeman had recently undergone a hip replacement at Tameside General Hospital and noted that the coroner had accepted that the operation had not contributed to the death and was content to allow the body to go for cremation.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered Mrs Freeman's medical records and the cremation forms. In relation to both, he concluded that the death was not suspicious.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mrs Freeman died as a result of natural causes.
Mrs Freeman suffered from a number of medical complaints. She had angina and had suffered a stroke. The deterioration in her condition shortly before her death is independently confirmed by Dr Matin's letter written after his domiciliary visit five days before the death. He said that Mrs Freeman was in need of nursing care. It is clear that Mrs Freeman's death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Although Shipman claimed on the MCCD counterfoil that he had last seen Mrs Freeman alive on 12th
March and on Form B that he had last seen her on 13th
March, it appears from the visits book that he last saw her on 10th
March. These discrepancies do not matter, as there is no evidence whatsoever that Shipman saw Mrs Freeman in the period immediately before her death. Although the precise time of death is not clear, it is apparent that she died during the night, at a time when it would be most unlikely that Shipman would have visited her. Her death was confirmed by a deputising doctor. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman killed Mrs Freeman by administering a lethal dose of opiates which directly caused her death. I have considered whether it is possible that Shipman over-sedated Mrs Freeman in the days leading to her death and thereby indirectly hastened her death. There is no evidence to suggest that he visited Mrs Freeman in the three days before she died and, given the deterioration in her condition as independently verified by Dr Matin, I think that it is most unlikely that Shipman was involved in hastening her death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001