The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
George Fisher
Introduction
Mr George Fisher died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Sunday, 16th
April 1972 at the age of 68. He had been admitted to PGI two days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Chronic bronchitis, emphysema and diabetes mellitus were said to have contributed to the death. At the time of Mr Fisher’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Fisher’s wife, Mrs Louisa Elsie Fisher, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mr Dennis Fisher, Mr Fisher’s son. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley) who was, at the time, the senior nursing sister on Ward 2. Mr Fisher’s hospital records are no longer available. His body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mr Dennis Fisher had no concerns about his father’s death, although he has expressed surprise at some of the information recorded by Shipman in cremation Form B.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in this case.
Personal Background
Mr Fisher was married with two sons. Mr Dennis Fisher was aged 44 when his father died. As a rule, Mr Dennis Fisher’s wife and children visited his parents once a week. Mr Dennis Fisher was unable to visit as regularly owing to work commitments.
Mr Fisher had worked as a coal miner but retired at the age of 52, as he was suffering from angina. He was not an active man and took very little exercise. Mr Dennis Fisher does not recall that his father ever suffered from chronic bronchitis or emphysema. He does not remember him ever having a bad chest or a smoker’s cough. Mr Dennis Fisher has no recollection of his father having diabetes although his wife thinks that he did.
Mr Dennis Fisher recalls that his father had an illness about a year before he died and that his health seemed to deteriorate gradually after that. However, he remained in good spirits.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On Friday, 14th
April 1972, Mr Dennis Fisher visited his father at home. He found him in bed. The doctor had visited and had arranged for Mr Fisher to be admitted to PGI. Mr Dennis Fisher does not know why his father had to go into hospital; he was conscious and did not appear to be in pain. However, during the course of the journey by ambulance, Mr Fisher became semi-conscious and confused. He kept asking whether it was his wife’s birthday yet. Mrs Fisher’s birthday was the following day.
Mr Fisher was admitted to the main area of Ward 2. His son stayed with him for about an hour and a half. No doctors or nurses came to see them during this time. Mr Fisher seemed comfortable but kept asking about his wife’s birthday. Mr Dennis Fisher thought that his father would not survive long.
On the evening of the following day, Saturday, 15th
April, Mr Dennis Fisher and his mother visited Mr Fisher. They stayed for about an hour. Mr Fisher seemed brighter and talked a little. Mr Dennis Fisher thought perhaps that his father might recover and come back home. However, the family was given no information by medical or nursing staff.
The Day of the Death
On the following day, Sunday, 16th
April, Mr Dennis Fisher’s wife and mother went to the hospital to visit Mr Fisher. They did not speak to any medical staff during the visit. According to Mr Dennis Fisher, his wife reported that her father-in-law seemed quite well and was more talkative than usual. She thought he would be coming home soon. However, in the early hours of the following morning, Mr Dennis Fisher received a telephone call from someone at the hospital to say that his father had died. Later that morning, Mr Fisher went to the hospital with his mother. The administrative staff told them that Mr Fisher had died in the early hours of the morning. If that was said, it was inaccurate, as it appears from the documentation that the death occurred late in the evening of 16th
April.
Mr Dennis Fisher was not shocked by his father’s death as he had already been concerned about his father’s confusion over his mother’s birthday. However, both his wife and mother were shocked by the death.
Certification
Mr Fisher’s wife signed the completed cremation Form A on which it was stated that the death occurred at 11pm on 16th
April. Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that the time of death was
‘2300hrs’
on 16th
April. He said that he had attended Mr Fisher during his last illness for a period of two days and that he had last seen Mr Fisher alive on
‘16/4/72’
. He said that he was present at the moment of death and saw the body
‘at once’
after death. He said that he made a complete examination of the body. The cause of death was said to be coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. Chronic bronchitis, emphysema and diabetes mellitus were said to have contributed to the death. Shipman recorded that the mode of death was cardiac arrest of 20 minutes’ duration. He stated that he had been present when Mr Fisher had
‘arrested’
and that he was present at the moment of death, apparently 20 minutes later. The inference to be drawn from his statements on Form B is that he was alone with the patient throughout the 20 minute period between the cardiac ‘arrest’ and death. He said that Sister Paley had nursed Mr Fisher during his last illness.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Mrs Calverley told the Inquiry that she thinks that Shipman’s account as recorded on Form B does not make sense. She has pointed out that, if Mr Fisher had gone into cardiac arrest, a resuscitation team would have been called. However, she added that Mr Fisher might not have been considered suitable for resuscitation because of his history of chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
Conclusion
Without the benefit of medical records, it is impossible to reach any firm conclusion about Mr Fisher’s death. As Mr Fisher retired early owing to angina, it seems very likely that he was suffering from ischaemic heart disease. He would be vulnerable to a coronary thrombosis and it seems likely that this is what had happened to precipitate his admission to hospital on 14th
April. Dr Aneez Esmail, Medical Advisor to the Inquiry, has told me that Mr Fisher, having been admitted to hospital following a coronary thrombosis, was at very high risk of suffering another in the 48 hours following admission. Therefore, it is entirely possible that Mr Fisher had a further cardiac episode late in the evening of 16th
April and died naturally as a result.
That said, there are reasons to suspect that Shipman might have caused Mr Fisher’s death. The most striking feature of the information on cremation Form B is that Shipman claims that he was present when Mr Fisher went into cardiac arrest, apparently at about 10.40pm. How and why Shipman should have been present at that moment is not clear. We have neither medical nor nursing records which might have explained it. Shipman might have been summoned by a nurse who had found Mr Fisher to be suffering chest pain and apparently having another heart attack. If so, Shipman might have arrived before Mr Fisher went into cardiac arrest and might have witnessed it as he claimed to have done. However, if that were so, one would have expected that a member of the nursing staff would have stayed with Mr Fisher and that Shipman would have mentioned that person as having been present with him at the death. If Shipman had found Mr Fisher in pain as he was passing by his bed, one would have expected him to call a nurse and that she would have remained at the bedside until death. It was very unusual for other doctors to be present alone at the deaths of their patients. It was not unusual for Shipman to imply on Form B that he had been present alone although, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, claims made by Shipman on cremation Forms B that he was present or present alone at a death cannot always be relied on as being accurate. It is possible that Shipman decided to engineer an opportunity to be alone with Mr Fisher so as to end his life. It would have been very easy for Shipman to give Mr Fisher a drug which would lead to cardiac arrest.
The proportion of deaths certified by Shipman that occurred between the hours of 6pm and midnight was abnormal and far greater than for other doctors. This death occurred during that period. For that reason and because Shipman claims to have been alone with Mr Fisher at the moment of death, I have some suspicion that Shipman may have caused the death. However, the evidence is not sufficiently clear for me to reach a definite conclusion.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001