The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ethel Follon
Introduction
Mrs Ethel Follon died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Saturday, 27th
March 1971 at the age of 60. She had been admitted to PGI probably on Wednesday, 24th
March. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Follon’s death was bronchopneumonia caused by a
‘cerebral tumour, glioma’
. At the time of Mrs Follon’s death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Ann Smalley, Mrs Follon’s niece. Mrs Smalley’s mother was one of Mrs Follon’s four sisters. A witness statement was also taken from Mrs Pauline Burchill, who was a nurse on Ward 1 at the time of Mrs Follon’s death. Mrs Follon’s hospital records are no longer available. Her body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
Mrs Follon’s family has never had any suspicions about the death, which was expected.
This decision has been written on the basis of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mrs Follon’s husband died some years before her death and she moved to Pontefract in order to be closer to her family. In about 1968, she began to suffer from fits. Hospital investigations revealed an inoperable brain tumour. Following this diagnosis, Mrs Follon moved to live with Mrs Smalley’s parents. However, her condition stabilised and, after some months, she returned to live in her own home. She continued to live independently until her health deteriorated and she had to be admitted to PGI, towards the end of March 1971. At this time, Mrs Smalley was living in Rochdale and did not see her frequently. Her parents kept her informed. Mrs Smalley knew that her aunt’s health was declining.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
It appears likely that Mrs Follon was admitted to hospital on 24th
March 1971. Mrs Smalley recalls visiting her aunt but her memory is not clear. She believes that Mrs Follon was not on the main area of the ward but was in a cubicle of her own. As I have explained in
Chapter Two
of this Report, the practice at the time on Ward 1 at PGI was for patients to be accommodated in a side room or cubicle when their condition was very serious or when their death was expected imminently. Mrs Smalley says that her aunt was in a coma and that members of the family were permitted to visit whenever they wished. It was clear that Mrs Follon had not long to live.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Smalley was not at the hospital when her aunt died. She believes that her mother would have been with her aunt if anybody was but she does not know of anybody who was present and has no idea of the time of her aunt’s death.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that Mrs Follon died at 10.50pm on 27th
March 1971. He said that he attended her during her last illness for three days. I have inferred from that that Mrs Follon had been admitted on 24th
March. Shipman said that he had last seen Mrs Follon alive on the day of her death and that she had been in a coma for two days. He was able to say that on the basis of his own observations. He said that Mrs Follon had been nursed during her last illness by Mrs Burchill. In response to the question asking who (if anyone) was present at the moment of death, Shipman wrote
‘self’
.
Mrs Burchill was shown the cremation forms relating to Mrs Follon. She does not remember Mrs Follon but she may well have nursed her as she worked on Ward 1 at the time. She remarks that the only unusual feature of Form B is that Shipman has stated that he was alone with the patient at the time that she died. She finds this unusual. She says:
‘The only real possibility whereby a doctor would be present alone with the patient when they died would be where the doctor had asked the nurse to go and get something and by the time the nurse got back the patient had died. I can never remember this happening.’
Form C was completed by Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain. Dr Hasnain recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had also seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. He had not seen or questioned any of the relatives of Mrs Griffiths or any other person. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
Although Mrs Smalley does not have a detailed recollection of her aunt’s admission to hospital, her evidence about her aunt’s final illness is very helpful. She is able to confirm that Mrs Follon was terminally ill with a brain tumour. The cause of death certified by Shipman is exactly what one would have expected. The death came as no surprise to the family. But for the fact that Shipman was involved in her care and claimed to have been present at the time of her death, there would be no reason to suspect that her death resulted from anything other than natural causes.
However, Shipman was involved in Mrs Follon’s treatment and said on Form B that he was present, apparently alone, at the death. For reasons that I have explained in this Report, and for reasons that are acknowledged by Mrs Burchill, it was very unusual for a doctor to be alone at the death of a patient, although, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, there are several reasons to doubt that he was always present or present alone when he claimed to have been. Whenever Shipman implied that he had been present alone at a death, there would be cause for suspicion that he might have given something to the patient to cause or hasten the death. In this case, suspicion is heightened because there would be no reason for Shipman to be called to see Mrs Follon. She had been in a coma for two days, according to Shipman, and that is supported by Mrs Smalley. She would have been receiving only general nursing care. It is hard to imagine why Shipman would have been called to see her by a nurse until the death had occurred. How and why he could legitimately have been present at the death is puzzling. As the death took place during the evening, there is further cause for suspicion. There were fewer staff on duty during the evening and it would be easier for Shipman to be alone with a patient if he wished to be. If he wished to do so, he could easily slip into a cubicle unobserved and no one would have realised that he was there. Professor Richard Baker has observed that a disproportionately large number of deaths of patients whose deaths were certified by Shipman occurred in the period between 6pm and midnight.
I have already said that Mrs Follon was terminally ill as a result of her brain tumour and had not long to live. Even without any intervention from Shipman, she was likely to die very soon. That said, there are some grounds to suspect, on the basis of what he wrote on Form B, that Shipman may have entered her room alone, late in the evening, and, knowing that she was likely to die soon, given her something which hastened her death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001