The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Muriel Grimshaw
Introduction
Mrs Muriel Grimshaw died on 14th
July 1997 at the age of 76. She was in very good general health. The medical records show regular prescriptions for medication to control her blood pressure and occasional episodes of lumbago. She attended the surgery periodically for routine checks but had not consulted her doctor since May 1997, when she had suffered an episode of back pain. She had recovered from this after buying a new bed. In the weeks before her death, she had been well and had led a full and active life. After exhumation of her body, morphine was found in the tissues consistent with the administration of a lethal dose.
Personal Background
Mrs Grimshaw's daughter, Mrs Ann Brown, used to see her mother regularly on Sundays and Thursdays. They spoke by telephone on most days. On Sunday 13th
July, Mrs Grimshaw and Mrs Brown went to church together. After church, they had a cup of coffee and a chat at Mrs Grimshaw's house. They agreed to have lunch together on the coming Wednesday. Mrs Grimshaw was in good health and spirits on that day.
The Circumstances of the Death
Each Tuesday, Mrs Grimshaw went shopping with her friend, Mrs Ryan. Early on the morning of Tuesday 15th
July 1997, Mrs Barbara Ryan called to collect her. There was no answer when she rang the doorbell, so she contacted Mrs Brown. They entered the house and found Mrs Grimshaw, lying dead on her bed, fully dressed in day clothes. The television had been left on and the curtains were open. It would have been most unusual for Mrs Grimshaw to leave the television on when she went to bed; she always unplugged it at night. Mrs Brown telephoned for Shipman. On arrival, he looked at the body but did not touch it. He announced that Mrs Grimshaw had died at about 5.30pm the previous day. He said that it had been a nice way to go. There would be no need to inform the coroner. He did not say anything about the cause of death.
Later he signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that death had been due to a cerebrovascular accident with hypertension as an underlying condition. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Grimshaw alive on 2nd
July. However, Mrs Grimshaw's medical records did not contain any reference to a consultation on that day and Mrs Brown said that her mother had not seen Shipman since May.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account in evidence, which the jury must have rejected, was that Mrs Grimshaw suffered from hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis. He claimed that he had decided to call on her on 2nd
July because he had noticed that the previous day she had asked for a repeat prescription for her medication. It was true that she had asked for repeat prescriptions; they were recorded on the computer. He said that he recalled that the last time he had seen her, which was when she had lumbago in May, she had not been entirely well. When he visited on 2nd
July, he found her well, although her back was still a little troublesome. Mrs Brown said that, to her knowledge, he had not called and her mother's back was not troubling her in July. Shipman said that he called to see Mrs Grimshaw again at about 1pm on 14th
July. He found her having a cup of tea. She said her back was giving no trouble. He went back to the surgery and made an entry timed at 2.06pm in which he recorded that visit. An entry was indeed made at that time; it said only that Shipman had seen the patient in her own home. He said that the next thing he knew about Mrs Grimshaw was that he was called to her house the next day as her body had been found. He said that he examined the body and found that rigor mortis was setting in. From a discussion with Mrs Brown about her mother's habits, he had been able to estimate the time of death at 6pm. Mrs Brown denied that any such discussion had taken place. Shipman said that he had diagnosed the death as being due to a stroke associated with hypertension. He considered that Mrs Grimshaw had not had a heart attack. The onset of her symptoms had been slow enough to allow her to lie down, whereas, if she had had a heart attack, she would have fallen where she was. At the time, it did not occur to him to think that a post-mortem was necessary. He had offered one to Mrs Brown but she had declined.
The Expert Evidence
Post-mortem examination showed no significant abnormality apart from the presence of morphine in the tissues. There was some atherosclerosis in the coronary arteries but this was not of such severity as to be likely to cause a heart attack in the absence of stress on the heart due to physiological trauma. There was no bleeding into the brain and no sign of either a haemorrhagic or occlusive stroke. Although Dr Rutherford could not rule out the possibility that Mrs Grimshaw had had a stroke, there was nothing to suggest that she had and the presence of morphine in the body tissues drove him to the conclusion that she had died as the result of morphine toxicity. Shipman had no explanation for the presence of the morphine.
The medical records showed that Mrs Grimshaw had had hypertension since 1989 but this was well controlled with medication. Dr John Grenville said that it would not have been possible for any doctor to diagnose the cause of death on the information available and the death should have been reported to the coroner.
Comment
This is a clear case of murder in which morphine was found in the body. Shipman must have made a completely unsolicited visit on 14th
July to a patient whom he had not seen since May and who was in completely normal health. He must have found some pretext for giving her an injection. The significant features are:
The sudden death of this healthy woman was discovered very soon after a visit at which Shipman saw her alone.
When Shipman was summoned, Mrs Brown said that he did not even examine the body sufficiently to establish that Mrs Grimshaw was dead. This is an observation made by many relatives in cases in which Shipman has killed. The inference to be drawn is that he already knew that the patient was dead.
There was no feasible natural explanation for the sudden death and Shipman was not in a position to certify the cause of death. Shipman should have refused to certify the cause of death and the death would then have had to be reported to the coroner. Shipman claimed that Mrs Brown had refused his suggestion that there should be a post-mortem examination. Shipman often said that relatives had refused or had 'not wanted' a post-mortem examination. It is not a matter for the relatives to decide. It is for the doctor to decide whether he or she is in a position to issue the MCCD. In any event, Mrs Brown says that Shipman made no such suggestion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001