The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Alice Maude Gorton
Introduction
Mrs Alice Maude Gorton died at her home, 2 Leigh Fold, Newton, Hyde on Friday, 10th
August 1979 at the age of 76. She had twice been widowed and lived with her son, Mr Brian Moss, who has since died. She had been a patient of Shipman for some time, probably since he moved to Hyde in 1977. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') records that her son, Mr Brian Moss, was present at the death.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction at Preston Crown Court, members of Mrs Gorton's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Gorton's daughter, Mrs Constance O'Neill. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs O'Neill and from her brother, Mr Ian Moss. Dr John Grenville provided a report relevant to Mrs Gorton's case in which he discussed the question of significant delay between a visit by Shipman and the death. He later provided a report on the circumstances of Mrs Gorton's death. Apart from the death certificate, the only surviving contemporaneous documents are the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Shipman's visits book for 1979. Attempts have been made to trace the district nurse who treated Mrs Gorton, but with no success.
Mrs O'Neill and Mr Ian Moss gave evidence at a hearing on 8th
November 2001 and Dr Grenville gave evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs O'Neill lived very near to her mother's bungalow and used to see her mother every day. The two spent a good deal of time together. Mrs O'Neill used to help her mother, especially with her garden. Mrs Gorton was not on close terms with her neighbours in Leigh Fold. She had previously lived in Stalybridge and still enjoyed the company of her friends from there. Her main medical problem was severe psoriasis. She was also mildly diabetic and took medication for angina. Her daughter remembers that Mrs Gorton used to put a tablet under her tongue occasionally, although she does not recall what symptoms would lead her mother to do that. Her son, Mr Ian Moss, remembers that she sometimes suffered from breathlessness. Mrs O'Neill says that, despite her medical problems, Mrs Gorton enjoyed the company of her friends and family and liked to visit a public house and go on day trips from time to time.
According to Mrs O'Neill, Shipman used to visit her mother on Tuesdays, every two to three weeks, usually in the late morning or early afternoon. These routine visits were to treat her psoriasis. Mrs Gorton was very grateful to him because he seemed to go to great lengths to ensure that she had all the preparations she needed to treat this condition. Shipman's visits book for 1979 shows visits on 29th
March, 12th
April, 10th
May, 24th
May and 28th
June. All of those visits were made on a Thursday. There was then no record of a visit until the week of Mrs Gorton's death. Although Mrs O'Neill is adamant that Shipman used to visit her mother on a Tuesday, I am satisfied that her memory is at fault in this respect and that, in 1979 at least, Shipman usually visited Mrs Gorton on a Thursday.
The Events Leading up to Death
According to Mrs O'Neill, Shipman visited her mother on Tuesday, 7th
August 1979, three days before her death. The visits book contains no entry in Mrs Gorton's name on 7th
August but does contain entries for Thursday, 9th
and Friday, 10th
August.
Mrs O'Neill's account is that she visited her mother on the Tuesday morning, and took her eight month old granddaughter with her. They stayed for quite a while and Mrs Gorton enjoyed playing with the baby. Mrs Gorton did not complain of any ill health. The two women planned a trip to Southport for the following week, which was Wakes Week. They were going to visit the newsagents that afternoon to book their seats on the coach. As Mrs O'Neill was leaving her mother's house, Mrs Gorton asked her to leave the door open. She said she was expecting Shipman to call. Mrs O'Neill said that her mother was a little deaf and thought she would not hear Shipman's knock. Mrs O'Neill assumed that this was a routine call, connected with her mother's psoriasis. Mrs O'Neill took the baby back to her home. She is unsure of the time at which she left, although she seems to recall that she had to give the baby her lunch.
Mrs O'Neill recalls that she had only been back in her own home for about half an hour when Shipman came to the door. He told her that Mrs Gorton had been taken ill and he had had to get a neighbour to help him to get her into bed. He asked Mrs O'Neill to come round to her mother's house as soon as possible. He then left and drove his car back to Mrs Gorton's house. Mrs O'Neill followed on foot, pushing the baby in the pram. When she arrived at her mother's house, a few minutes later, she found Shipman standing in the front room. He told Mrs O'Neill that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination. Before Mrs O'Neill had grasped the significance of these words, she heard a loud groan coming from her mother's bedroom. She rushed into the bedroom and found her mother lying unconscious on the bed. She was fully clothed. There was no neighbour present and Mrs O'Neill has always doubted Shipman's claim that he had obtained help from a neighbour. As I have mentioned, Mrs Gorton was not on friendly terms with her neighbours. Moreover, Leigh Fold comprised council bungalows, occupied by elderly people, who would not have been able to help with lifting. No neighbour later called in to ask how Mrs O'Neill's mother was, which she would have expected had one been asked to assist.
Shipman did not call an ambulance or arrange hospital admission. Mrs O'Neill thinks that Shipman said that he had arranged for the district nurse to come, and she asked if Shipman could arrange for Mrs Gorton to be catheterised, so that she did not aggravate her psoriasis in the event that she became incontinent. Mrs O'Neill remembers that a nurse arrived later that day and helped her to change her mother into her nightclothes. The nurse also inserted a catheter.
Mrs O'Neill then recalls that she nursed her mother throughout the Wednesday and Thursday and until her death on Friday, 10th
August. She is adamant that her mother lay unconscious for two and a half days. Mrs O'Neill says that during this time Shipman did not pay any further visit, although she accepts that he might have visited while other members of the family were present.
Mrs O'Neill says that her mother was terrified of needles and if Shipman had tried to give her an injection, her mother would have refused, even to the extent of fighting him off. She claims that her brother told her that, once, when in hospital, Mrs Gorton had bribed the nurses not to give her any injections. I have great difficulty in accepting that evidence, although I have no reason to doubt that Mrs Gorton did not like injections.
Mr Ian Moss recalls that these events occurred over a different time span. He remembers that one day he was summoned home from work, as his mother had been taken ill. When he arrived at her house, Shipman was there. His mother was in bed. Her eyes were closed and she could not communicate. She seemed to be gasping for breath. He remembers that Shipman wrote out a prescription and told Mr Moss to take it to the chemist. Mr Moss cannot remember what the medication was, but recalls that the chemist gave him 'an odd look' when he handed the packet over. When Mr Moss returned to his mother's house, Shipman had gone. Mrs Gorton was not able to swallow the tablets he had brought. His mother then lapsed into unconsciousness. He went to work as usual the next day and when he returned home at the usual time he learned that his mother had died. She had been unconscious for a whole day. Shipman came to the house and asked for the tablets to be returned to him. The death was a shock to Mr Moss as he had thought that his mother was in reasonable health.
Certification
On the counterfoil of the MCCD, Shipman recorded that he had last seen Mrs Gorton on 10th
August, the day of the death. As I have indicated, the visits book contains entries in Mrs Gorton's name for 9th
and 10th
August. There was also an entry for the 11th
, but this was crossed out.
The cause of death as certified by Shipman was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease. It appears that Mrs Gorton had a history of angina, so this cause of death is plausible.
There are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville considered that it was possible that Mrs Gorton suffered a sudden medical emergency just as Shipman visited her, despite the fact that she had been well when Mrs O'Neill left only about 30 minutes earlier. If that happened and if Mrs Gorton remained unconscious until her death either one or three days later, the most likely explanation would be that she had had a stroke. However, he thought that it would be an extraordinary coincidence if Mrs Gorton were to have suffered a stroke during a brief routine visit by the doctor. I infer from Dr Grenville's evidence that he does not think that the course of events as described indicated that Mrs Gorton had had a heart attack.
The other possibility was that Shipman administered an injection of opiate. When asked to consider whether it would be possible for Mrs Gorton to live on, unconscious, after an injection of diamorphine or other strong opiate, Dr Grenville said that this would be possible if the dose had been not quite large enough to kill outright but had been large enough to cause almost complete cessation of respiration leading to hypoxia and permanent brain damage. Mrs Gorton might have lain unconscious or almost so until she died, either as a result of the brain damage or as the result of bronchopneumonia or a combination of the two. He said that he could not understand how it might be that Mrs Gorton let out a groan at the stage where she had almost but not quite stopped breathing. One possibility was that she had aspirated vomit (which is quite a painful experience) and that this might have caused her to groan, even though she was deeply unconscious.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features surrounding this death. The first and most important is that Mrs Gorton was unconscious within a very short time after Shipman had arrived at her house, although she had been in her usual state of health when her daughter left not long before. Had Mrs Gorton been dead when Mrs O'Neill returned to the house, I would have said that that aroused strong suspicion that Shipman had killed her. The fact that she was unconscious rather than dead does not reduce the level of suspicion.
I find some aspects of Mrs O'Neill's evidence unreliable. First, I think she is probably mistaken when she says that Shipman used to visit her mother on a Tuesday. I also think she is probably mistaken when she says that her mother became unconscious on Tuesday, 7th
August and lay in that state for two and a half days. I find Mr Ian Moss' evidence on that issue more reliable. His evidence is consistent with Shipman's visits book. I am satisfied that Mrs Gorton was unconscious for about 24 hours before her death, as Mr Moss says. I think that Shipman had made a routine visit on Thursday, 9th
August.
Although I think Mrs O'Neill is mistaken about the day of the visit, in other respects I accept her evidence as truthful and reliable. I accept that Shipman came to her house and said that her mother had collapsed, that he had asked a neighbour to help to put her on the bed and asked Mrs O'Neill to return to her mother's house. I think she was right when she suspected that what Shipman said about a neighbour was untrue. I also accept that Shipman said that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary and that this was interrupted by a loud groan from the bedroom. This most unusual event might well have made a lasting impression on Shipman. Many years later, when Shipman had just killed Mrs Bessie Swann in 1997, Mrs Swann's son Barry Swann arrived at her house to meet Shipman. Shipman told Mr Swann that he thought Mrs Swann had died. Mr Swann felt his mother's hand and found it was still warm. Shipman then said,
'I'll wait a few minutes in case she wakes up and frightens us all'
. When I read that evidence, I wondered if there had been an earlier occasion when Shipman had had a fright when he had failed to kill someone he had intended to kill. I now think it possible that Mrs Gorton was that person.
Although Dr Grenville suggested that Mrs Gorton might have died a natural death, possibly from a stroke, the fact that she was unconscious so soon after Shipman's arrival leads me to believe that it is more likely that her loss of consciousness was connected with Shipman than that it was due to any natural cause. Dr Grenville explained that, if Shipman had given Mrs Gorton a dose of diamorphine which was just less than what would be required to kill her, she might well have suffered brain damage and might lie unconscious until she died, either as a result of the brain damage or from bronchopneumonia or a combination of the two.
Mrs Gorton's medical records are not available and I have been unable to assess the likelihood of her suffering a sudden fatal heart attack or some other natural event leading to unconsciousness and death. I accept that Mrs Gorton was almost certainly at some increased risk of heart attack because she had a history of angina. I am therefore unable to rule out the possibility that this was a natural death. However, I think it more likely that Mrs Gorton died as the result of Shipman injecting her with a sub-lethal dose of opiate. I cannot say that I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Gorton but I think he probably did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001