The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Godfrey
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Godfrey was found dead at her home, 61 Chartist House, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
May 1996 at the age of 85. Mrs Godfrey's death is recorded in the register of deaths as having occurred on 7th
May 1996 and I have concluded, from the evidence available, that she died on that day. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She was full of admiration for him. He certified that the cause of her death was old age.
In November 1999, Mrs Godfrey's son-in-law, Mr Colin Bowler, contacted the police to express concern about his mother-in-law's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Godfrey's daughter, Mrs Maureen Bowler, and the resident warden at Chartist House, Mrs Jennifer Ann Unsworth.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Godfrey but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mrs Bowler, Mrs Unsworth and a neighbour, Mr Joe Schofield. Mrs Bowler and Mr Schofield gave evidence at a hearing on 18th
October 2001 and Mrs Unsworth gave oral evidence at a hearing on 24th
October 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Godfrey's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Godfrey was a widow and lived alone on the sixth floor of Chartist House, where the residents had the benefit of supervision by the warden, Mrs Unsworth.
Mrs Godfrey enjoyed generally good health for a woman of her age. In the early 1980s, she had suffered from gallstones and underwent a cholecystectomy in 1985. She was asthmatic and diabetic and was monitored regularly for both those conditions at Shipman's surgery. In the late 1980s, she had a number of episodes of vertigo which were investigated at hospital and for which she received medication. However, these appear to have become less frequent in later years. In 1990, her heart was investigated by 24 hour electrocardiograph (ECG) monitoring, which showed no serious abnormalities. Mrs Godfrey was known to be hypertensive and her blood pressure was regularly monitored. From the readings in the medical records, it appears that her blood pressure was reasonably well controlled by medication.
Mrs Godfrey enjoyed life at Chartist House and joined in communal activities such as bingo and day trips. Her daughter, Mrs Bowler, who lived in Bolton, used to visit her on Wednesdays and Saturdays and also spoke to her each evening. Mrs Godfrey was lively and happy and greatly enjoyed the company of her grandchildren and great-grandchildren. She was mentally alert and had a good memory.
During the year before her death, Mrs Godfrey attended Shipman's surgery on a number of occasions. Most of these were for routine checks, carried out by the practice nurse. However, she also consulted Shipman for acute bronchitis, various gynaecological problems and for a frozen shoulder and other aches and pains. The last manuscript note in her records was made on 3rd
January 1996 and relates to the frozen shoulder.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
Mrs Bowler recalls that, in March 1996, Mrs Godfrey was 'under the weather', so much so that she went to stay with her daughter and son-in-law in Bolton for a week or so. It appears from the diary kept by Mrs Unsworth, warden at Chartist House, that Mrs Godfrey went to her daughter's home on 13th
April and stayed probably until 24th
April. On 12th
April, the day before she went to her daughter's, there are entries in the surgery appointments sheet and in Mrs Godfrey's computerised records which suggest that she attended surgery and was found to be suffering from an upper respiratory tract infection, thought to be a local strain of influenza. Antibiotics were prescribed. Mrs Godfrey was said to be dizzy on that occasion. Mrs Bowler is puzzled by those entries, as she does not recall that her mother brought an antibiotic with her. The mystery increases because, on 16th April 1996, there is a note in the visits book of a request to visit Mrs Godfrey, apparently at Chartist House. The note records that Mrs Godfrey was
'not very well - listless etc'
. There is also a note in the computerised records which implies that Mrs Godfrey was seen and was found to be suffering from a chest infection. These entries are a complete mystery, as Mrs Bowler is adamant that her mother was staying with her in Bolton at this time and the Chartist House records suggest that that was so. Mrs Bowler is adamant that she did not bring her mother back for the purpose of seeing Shipman. She recalls that her own doctor in Bolton was called out to see her mother. However, there is no record of that in Mrs Bowler's notes. Because the audit trail facility was not installed on the surgery computer until October 1996, it has not been possible to discover when the entry of 16th
April was made.
Mrs Bowler says that her mother stayed in Bolton until she felt her mother was well enough to return home. I think that Mrs Godfrey must have returned home on 24th
April, as, on the following day, there is a reference to her in Mrs Unsworth's diary which reads:
'Elsie back home, still not too good'
. It appears that Mrs Unsworth might have asked Shipman to visit, as there is an entry in the computerised records which reads:
'Left ventricular failure
add lasix 1 od'.
This suggests that Shipman diagnosed left ventricular failure and added Lasix, a strong diuretic, to Mrs Godfrey's medication. However, there is no entry for this date in the visits book or the appointments sheet and there is no indication in the computerised note as to whether Mrs Godfrey was seen at home or in the surgery. It seems to me quite possible that Shipman was in the building to see another patient and Mrs Unsworth might have mentioned that Mrs Godfrey was back home and was still not well. It would be entirely in accordance with his usual practice, as observed by Mrs Unsworth, that Shipman would then call on Mrs Godfrey. Whether that entry was made contemporaneously cannot be checked, as an audit trail is not possible. It seems that, by 26th
April 1996, Mrs Godfrey's condition had improved as Mrs Unsworth's diary for that day reads:
'Elsie feels a little better today'
.
The practice nurse's diary for 3rd
May 1996 records an appointment for Mrs Godfrey at noon. It is clear that Mrs Godfrey did attend and various routine monitoring tests were carried out. The results of those tests are recorded in the computerised notes. Blood samples were taken and were sent for analysis. I infer from these entries that Mrs Godfrey must have been well enough to go to the surgery. She was due to spend the bank holiday weekend with her daughter in Bolton. Mrs Bowler thought she collected her mother on the Friday but I think it was more likely that she went on Saturday, 4th
May, as Mrs Unsworth's diary for that day reads:
'Elsie away until Tuesday'
.
The next note in the computerised records is on 7th
May 1996 and relates to the results of the blood tests, received from the hospital.
Over the bank holiday weekend, Mrs Godfrey is said to have been well and active, taking a full part in family life. She wanted to return home on Tuesday, 7th
May to attend a lunch at The Pensioners House, a social club situated about a quarter of a mile from Chartist House, which ran activities for the elderly.
The Day of the Death
On 7th
May, Mrs Bowler took her mother back to Chartist House to drop off her weekend bag before taking her on to The Pensioners House, where she dropped her off at about 11.45am. The bag had been left on a luggage rack at the foot of the bed. Mrs Bowler then drove back to Bolton. At about 2pm, Mrs Godfrey telephoned her daughter from Chartist House to make sure that she had returned safely and to tell her about the lunch. During the course of that conversation, Mrs Godfrey mentioned that she was going to telephone some friends of hers, Mr and Mrs Schofield, who were also residents of Chartist House. It was arranged that, having spoken that afternoon, Mrs Godfrey would not ring her daughter again that evening. She was planning to go to bingo at 7pm.
Mr Schofield recalls speaking to Mrs Godfrey that afternoon. He describes her as on 'really good form'. She told him about her weekend with the family. She complained of no illness and did not mention that she was expecting the doctor. The conversation came to an abrupt end when Mrs Godfrey told Mr Schofield that there had been a knock at the door. He hung up to let her answer it. He expected her to ring back when her visitor had gone but she did not.
At about 6.45pm, one of Mrs Godfrey's neighbours, who is now dead and is known to the Inquiry only as Lucy, came to collect her for the bingo session. There was no reply when she knocked and Mrs Godfrey did not appear at bingo. Although he knew that she had returned, Mr Schofield did not think that was unusual.
The Aftermath
At about 11am on 8th
May, Mrs Bowler received a telephone call from Mrs Unsworth. Mrs Unsworth wanted to find out whether Mrs Godfrey was still staying with Mrs Bowler since she had not attended bingo the previous evening and failed to answer the door that morning when Mrs Unsworth made her usual morning visit. Mrs Bowler told Mrs Unsworth that her mother had returned to Chartist House the previous day. She asked Mrs Unsworth to go into her mother's flat using her passkey and check on her. A short time later, Mrs Unsworth rang again to tell Mrs Bowler that she had found her mother dead.
Mrs Unsworth told Mrs Bowler that she had found Mrs Godfrey in her usual chair, looking as though she had fallen asleep. The television was on and the newspaper was on her knee. Mrs Unsworth offered to telephone Shipman and an undertaker. Mrs Bowler accepted this offer and did not go to Chartist House until later in the day, by which time her mother's body had been removed.
On her arrival, Mrs Unsworth gave her the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), which had already been left by Shipman. Mrs Bowler then went to the flat, where she noticed her mother's suitcase still not unpacked and a plate on which there was a knife and the core of a pear on a table near where her mother had been sitting. In oral evidence, she explained that her mother did not usually eat the pudding offered for lunch and would have a piece of fruit on her return. She also said that she would have expected her mother to unpack her suitcase soon after her return and to inform Mrs Unsworth that she was back home. That she had done neither of those things leads Mrs Bowler to believe that her mother died shortly after her return to Chartist House in the early afternoon of the previous day.
The note which appears in Mrs Unsworth's diary for 8th
May reads:
'Elsie did not let me know that she had returned from her daughters (Tues) I got no reply from her to-day, finished my calls and rang her daughter who said she had brought her home last night. I went in her flat and Elsie had died. I sent for Dr Shipman and informed her family'
.
Mrs Unsworth had no recollection of this death, other than by reference to her note. She said that, over the 30 years of her employment at Chartist House, she had discovered a number of dead bodies. She said that, in quite a number of cases, the body had been found sitting in a chair, as if asleep. However, on looking at her own records, between 1984 and 1989, she was able to say that, on each occasion when the body had been found sitting in a chair, the patient had been Shipman's.
Shipman's note after his visit reads:
'O/E - dead
old age hypertension diabetes'
.
Mrs Bowler telephoned Shipman on 9th
May and asked whether her mother would have suffered. Shipman explained the mechanism of her death, suggesting that there had been a blockage that would have prevented blood from reaching the heart. There was no mention of a systems failure due to old age. He reassured Mrs Bowler that her mother would have died very peacefully, as if in her sleep.
Certification
Shipman had certified that the cause of death was old age with other significant conditions contributing to the death being hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Plainly, old age as a cause of death was wholly inappropriately applied to a lady who had been away for the weekend and was out to lunch and planning to go to bingo on the very day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. In it, he gave the time of death as
'1830 hrs'
on 7th
May. As I have already indicated, Mrs Bowler believes that it occurred some time before. Shipman claimed to have attended Mrs Godfrey for over six weeks during her 'last illness'. The only consultations during that time had been for a chest infection and diabetic monitoring, together with the visit a fortnight before death when left ventricular failure had apparently been diagnosed. There was therefore nothing that could be termed a 'last illness'.
Shipman claimed to have last seen Mrs Godfrey alive on 3rd
May. As I have already said, from the practice documents it seems that Mrs Godfrey did see the practice nurse on that day and it is possible that she might have seen Shipman in passing, but there is no evidence of any consultation with him on that occasion. Shipman further stated that he saw Mrs Godfrey about 18 hours after death, which, on his timings, would have been at about noon on 8th
May 1996. That probably was about the time at which he visited in response to Mrs Unsworth's summons. Shipman stated that the mode of death was
'Syncope'
(changed from
'Collapse'
) lasting
'Seconds only'
. He said that Mrs Godfrey had been
'Found by warden dead in chair by body temp died 1830 7.5.96'
. He stated that no one nursed Mrs Godfrey during her last illness and no one was present at her death.
Shipman's Movements
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Godfrey on the afternoon of 7th
May. At that time, there was no form of security to prevent people from coming and going at Chartist House. There is no note in the practice records of any intended visit on that day. Nor is there any note of any visit in the medical records. The entry made on that day related to the results of blood tests four days previously. It is possible that the receipt of the results acted as a prompt for an unannounced visit by Shipman. Mrs Godfrey's immediate neighbour at the time has since died and attempts to find anyone who may have seen Shipman visit the building have yielded no result.
The appointments sheet for that day shows that Shipman had his usual morning surgery, followed by the open surgery attended by eight patients. That was due to start at 10.15am and would have lasted at least an hour. It would have finished no earlier than about 11.15am but, in any event, Shipman usually overran. He would then usually do paperwork. There was an antenatal clinic at noon, which Shipman would do jointly with the midwife. It is unlikely that he went out on his rounds before that. Seven patients attended the antenatal clinic, which usually lasted for about an hour. Shipman then had no further commitments until the start of the afternoon surgery, for which there was a patient timed at 3.50pm.
Shipman was therefore free to go out on his visits between about 1pm and 3.50pm. The visits book discloses that he was to make two visits on that day. Shipman would have been passing not far from Chartist House but, according to the visits book, was not due to visit a patient within the building.
Conclusion
There are a number of suspicious features connected with this death. First, Mrs Godfrey does not appear to have been suffering from any potentially fatal condition. Although it is always possible for a person of her age to die suddenly, for example following a stroke or heart attack, there were no particular risk factors indicated by Mrs Godfrey's medical history. Although there is a reference to left ventricular failure on 25th
April 1996, there is nothing recorded in the notes to explain the basis of that diagnosis. The note merely says that Lasix was to be added to Mrs Godfrey's medication. I am deeply suspicious about that entry. Lasix is a powerful diuretic which Shipman usually prescribed in quite severe cases of congestive heart failure. There is no previous suggestion in Mrs Godfrey's notes that she had been suffering from heart failure. I think that entry is probably false.
Shipman gave a cause of death, old age, which was plainly not justified. Mrs Godfrey had been out for lunch that day. Old age is only appropriate as a cause of death where there has been a gradual failure of the bodily systems and it is not clear to the doctor exactly which organ failure has led immediately to death. In my view, there was no satisfactory explanation for Mrs Godfrey's death.
I accept the reasoning of Mrs Bowler when she explained why she thought that her mother probably died soon after her return to Chartist House after lunch. I accept that, had she been up and about after her unknown visitor had left, she would probably have telephoned Mr Schofield to finish their conversation. She would also have spoken to Mrs Unsworth to let her know of her return and she would probably have unpacked her bag. I infer that Mrs Godfrey probably died soon after the interrupted telephone call with Mr Schofield.
On Form B, Shipman gave a time of death that he could not have justified. If this death was natural and occurred some time between the telephone call with Mr Schofield and the discovery of the body the next day, it would not have been possible for Shipman to estimate the time of death with any precision. He would probably have been able to infer from the presence of rigor mortis that the death had not occurred within the last two or three hours. He might well have inferred, from the domestic circumstances, that it had occurred the previous day. But he purported to assess the time of death, with some precision, from the body temperature. This is something that he quite frequently purported to do and, as Dr John Grenville has explained, such attempts are wholly unscientific, as Shipman must have known. I infer that Shipman wished to give the impression that the death had occurred at 6.30pm because that would mean it was several hours after his visit, which someone might have noticed.
Mrs Godfrey's position and appearance in death were not typical of what is found following a sudden natural death. However, they were entirely typical of the position and appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I have already mentioned that Shipman gave a cause of death that could not have been medically justified. If the death was natural, it was sudden and unexplained and should have been referred to the coroner.
The facts that Mrs Godfrey's television was on and a newspaper was on her knee do not seem to me to be probative one way or the other. Although these matters might indicate that Mrs Godfrey was alone at the time of her death, they do not prove that she was. If she had had the television on or had been reading her newspaper when Shipman arrived, and if she had put down her paper and switched her television off, it would have been a very simple matter for him to switch the television back on and put the newspaper on her knee before leaving.
Although there is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Godfrey on the day of the death, I think it is likely that he did so. I think it is likely that he was prompted to think of her because the results of her blood tests had arrived. Although there was no need for any repeat test, I think it likely that Shipman used the supposed need for a repeat test as an excuse to visit Mrs Godfrey and to give her a lethal injection under the guise of taking blood. It is known that he did this from time to time.
I have come to the conclusion that, despite the lack of any direct evidence of Shipman's visit, it is likely that he did visit Mrs Godfrey and killed her by giving a lethal injection of a strong opiate, probably diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001