The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Rose Garlick
Introduction
Mrs Rose Garlick died at her home, 31 Taylor Gardens, Hyde on Saturday, 22nd
March 1997 at the age of 76. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman for about a year at the time of her death. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 1998, following the discovery of Mrs Garlick's medical records in Shipman's garage, the police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Alison Doyle and Mrs Sheila Wright, Mrs Garlick's neighbours.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Garlick but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Garlick's daughter, Mrs Maureen Davidson, and has had access to Mrs Garlick's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Garlick's daughter, Mrs Maureen Davidson, and her husband were family friends of the Shipmans and they supported Mrs Garlick's decision to transfer to Shipman's list.
Mrs Davidson describes her mother as having been quite well for her age. She smoked for many years and suffered from bronchial asthma for about four years before she died. This did not greatly restrict her activities and Mrs Garlick would often walk to Hyde to go shopping. She would take a taxi back home. Mrs Davidson says that her mother never suffered from any heart complaints prior to her death. These observations are borne out by the medical records.
Mrs Davidson last saw her mother on the Sunday before she died. On that day, she complained of feeling lethargic. Mrs Wright, a neighbour of Mrs Garlick, recalls that, two days before her death, Mrs Garlick mentioned to her that she was having difficulty in breathing and pain in her legs. She said she intended to ask her doctor to visit.
The Day of the Death
On Saturday, 22nd
March 1997, Mrs Doyle, another neighbour, saw Mrs Garlick between 8am and 9am. Mrs Garlick was standing by her door, wearing her nightdress. She looked quite normal. Mrs Doyle asked whether she needed any shopping and Mrs Garlick said that she did not.
At about 9am, Mrs Garlick telephoned her daughter to say that she did not feel very well. She still felt lethargic and had severe pain in her hip. She said that, during the previous night, she had not been able to sleep due to back pain and sweating. She said she intended to ask Shipman to visit. She must have done so, as her name appears in the visits book for that day.
Mrs Doyle saw Shipman entering Mrs Garlick's flat as she left her house to go shopping. She estimates the time as about 10am.
At about the same time, Mrs Wright's telephone rang. She was in the bathroom and did not reach it in time. She dialled 1471 and discovered that the call had been from Mrs Garlick. Just before dialling 1471, she heard a car door closing. She looked out and saw Shipman's car outside. She then prepared her breakfast and ate it, which she thinks would have taken her about ten minutes. After that, she noticed that Shipman's car had gone and she decided to go over to Mrs Garlick's flat. She found the door unlocked and on the latch, which was not unusual. She found Mrs Garlick lying on her bed, fully dressed in her day clothes. Her arms were crossed and Mrs Wright thought that she was having a rest. Mrs Wright tried to awaken Mrs Garlick but without success. At that stage, she realised Mrs Garlick was dead and went for help to another neighbour, Mrs Prokup, who telephoned Mrs Davidson and also called an ambulance. That call was timed on the ambulance service log at 10.54am. Mrs Wright says that no more than five minutes elapsed between her discovery of the body and the telephone calls to the ambulance service. Mrs Davidson arrived at her mother's flat shortly before the paramedics. The ambulance arrived at 11.01am and the crew attempted unsuccessfully to resuscitate Mrs Garlick. A few minutes later, Mrs Davidson's brother, Trevor, arrived. He cleaned some vomit from around Mrs Garlick's mouth.
One of the paramedics telephoned Shipman, who arrived about ten minutes later. After briefly examining the body, Shipman told Mrs Davidson that he had visited her mother earlier that morning and had diagnosed her as having had a heart attack. He had tried to encourage her to go into hospital but she had refused. He had told her that, provided she was well cared for at home, hospital care was not necessary but he had warned her that the next 24 hours would be critical. She would be at an increased risk of having another heart attack. He said he had advised Mrs Garlick to contact her daughter to discuss her options. He said that Mrs Garlick had been very calm while he went through this with her. He then said that Mrs Garlick must have suffered another heart attack that had killed her. Shipman said that back pain was typical of a heart attack. Mrs Davidson recalls that Shipman offered to verify what he was saying by showing her his written notes, but Mrs Davidson was so shocked that she did not look at them properly. Mrs Garlick had not telephoned her daughter following Shipman's visit and the question must arise as to whether she was alive when Shipman left.
The Greater Manchester Ambulance Service form, Diagnosing the Fact of Adult Death, records that Shipman visited Mrs Garlick that day, regarding her hip. It is not clear by whom that information had been provided. It is possible that it came from Shipman but it is more likely that it came from Mrs Davidson, who certainly thought that her mother's problems that day stemmed from her back and hips.
The following entry in Mrs Garlick's computerised medical records was created at 10.53 am on 22nd
March:
'chest hips all night heavy type pain breathless a
little tired no energy ? sweaty hips oa o/e pulse 66
hs 1 11 bp 100/60 nausea probable ct needs admission
not happy revisit bed rest'
.
I interpret this to suggest that Mrs Garlick had complained to Shipman of a heavy type of pain in the chest and hips all night. She was breathless and a little tired. She was sweaty. He thought she had osteoarthritis of the hips. On examination, she had a pulse rate of 66 beats per minute. Heart sounds were normal and blood pressure was 100/60, which was lower than usual. She felt sick. Shipman had diagnosed a probable coronary thrombosis and recommended admission to hospital but the patient had refused and opted for bed rest at home. He intended to revisit.
The early parts of this note are not wholly inconsistent with the complaints Mrs Garlick had mentioned to her daughter at 9am that morning, although Mrs Garlick had not told Mrs Davidson she had had chest pain and had not mentioned feeling sick. The diagnosis of a probable coronary thrombosis was reasonable on the basis of the complaints and observations as recorded. However, if one removes the references to chest pain and sickness and substitutes back pain (in other words, including only references to those symptoms that Mrs Garlick mentioned to her daughter), the diagnosis of probable coronary thrombosis is implausible. The remainder of this note is strongly reminiscent of many I have seen in cases in which Shipman has killed a patient and has left the body to be found later. He would often say that he had recommended admission to hospital but the patient had refused.
In the handwritten record, the entry for 22nd
March 1997 reads:
'V
(
visit
)
10.30. Chest pain overnight
heavy in type ?sweaty
pain in hips as well
66/m 100/60 HS I II
some dyspnoea
OA hips.
Clinically 1) CT. (2) OA hips.
Not
happy with idea of admission
to think about it talk to daughter
will revisit 12 noon'
.
This note is consistent with the computerised note and times the visit at 10.30am. The appointments sheet for the day shows that Shipman would have been free to visit patients between the end of his morning appointments at about 9.45am and his open surgery at 11am.
Certification
On the same day, Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause of death as coronary thrombosis which, he said, had commenced only minutes before the death. He said that asthma had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition causing the death. He said that he had seen Mrs Garlick on the day of her death.
On Form B of the cremation certificate, Shipman gave the time of death as about 11am. He said he had seen Mrs Garlick 45 minutes before death and had examined the body half an hour after death and undertaken a complete external examination. The cause of death was given as on the MCCD. The mode of death is recorded as syncope of seconds' duration. In response to question 11, asking upon whose observations his answers concerning the cause and mode of death were based, Shipman stated as follows:
'Neighbour
Ambulance men.
Neighbour found her collapsed when
returned from phoning 999 dead'
.
That is not accurate. Mrs Wright believes that she found Mrs Garlick dead when she first went into the flat. Even if Mrs Garlick was not dead then, Mrs Wright would say that she found her friend in the same condition when she returned after telephoning for help as she had found her when she first went in. Shipman then states that Mrs Garlick was alone at the moment of death. He appears to be suggesting that Mrs Garlick was alive when Mrs Wright found her and that she died alone while Mrs Wright was telephoning for an ambulance.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the cremation forms and his separate consideration of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mrs Garlick was highly suspicious.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious features in this case. The first and most obvious is that Mrs Garlick was found dead within a very short time of Shipman's departure. Indeed, if Shipman's note of the time of his visit is correct at 10.30 am, and it is known that the ambulance was called at 10.54am, the time span is very short indeed. This is a highly suspicious factor.
Mrs Garlick was feeling lethargic in the days leading up to her death and had back and hip pain during the night of 21st March. However, she had a conversation with a neighbour between 8am and 9am and, shortly afterwards, with her daughter. Neither was concerned by her condition. The quite detailed description of her condition, which Mrs Garlick gave to her daughter, did not include any reference to chest pain or sickness and sounds more like a problem of pain in the hips and back than a heart attack. In my view, it is more likely that Mrs Garlick was suffering from back and hip pain of musculo-skeletal origin than that she had recently had a heart attack. In any event, a post-mortem examination was necessary to establish the true cause of death.
On Shipman's account, Mrs Garlick described symptoms indicative of a heart attack and he diagnosed her as having suffered a heart attack that morning. However, experience has taught me that Shipman's records relating to a patient's death must always be treated with suspicion. These are typical of those frequently made to explain and conceal a killing. The note describes a condition much worse than that perceived by Mrs Doyle and Mrs Davidson and paints a picture of a woman quite seriously ill and requiring medical attention, but refusing the advice offered. This is a common feature of cases in which Shipman has killed. When the patient is found dead a while later, Shipman has his explanation ready. In this case, in an attempt to add weight to this account, Shipman offered to show Mrs Davidson the handwritten note made following his earlier visit. This is an odd thing to do, unless he felt the need to justify his actions. Also, Shipman's claim that back pain is a classic sign of a heart attack, which it is not, sounds like an attempt to bolster his diagnosis.
Shipman's claim that Mrs Garlick had refused hospital admission is particularly implausible in this case. If an elderly patient who had just suffered a heart attack were refusing admission to hospital, the doctor would suggest speaking to a relative there and then. He would not leave him or her unattended even for an hour. That Shipman was a personal friend of Mrs Davidson makes his failure to suggest an immediate discussion about the future quite incredible. Even if Shipman had left Mrs Garlick alone, as he claims, I would have expected her to telephone her daughter as soon as he had gone. The fact that she did not points to an inability to do so, probably because she was already dead.
Shipman's false entries on Form B appear to me to be designed to create the impression that Mrs Garlick was still alive when she was found by Mrs Wright, when in truth she was not.
Shipman recorded that he intended to revisit at noon. This would have been the opportunity for him to 'discover' that Mrs Garlick had died, had Mrs Wright not intervened.
The fact that Mrs Garlick was found to have vomited is consistent with the administration of a high dose of morphine or diamorphine, as it is also consistent with death following a heart attack. Mrs Garlick's position lying on the bed is more consistent with death by opiate overdose than with death by heart attack.
Overall, this death bears many of the typical hallmarks of cases in which Shipman killed. I am satisfied so as to be sure that Shipman killed Mrs Garlick.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001