The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Millicent Garside
Introduction
Mrs Millicent Garside died at her home, Flat 30 St John's Drive, Godley, Hyde on Wednesday, 23rd
October 1996 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver based in Hyde, expressed concern to the police over the circumstances of Mrs Garside's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Keith Garside and Mrs Susan Garside (Mrs Garside's son and daughter-in-law) and Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing Mrs Garside's death but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs Keith Garside and has had access to Mrs Garside's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the evidence and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Garside was a widow and lived alone in her ground floor flat. She was capable of looking after herself although she suffered from angina, asthma and diabetes. Her asthma was particularly troublesome. When short of breath, she panicked and became still more breathless. She was frequently visited at home by Shipman, who prescribed many different types of medication for her various illnesses.
Mrs Garside attended the Diabetes Centre at Tameside General Hospital at the beginning of October 1996. Her diabetes was under control but she mentioned that she had recently had trouble with her asthma and also complained of feeling tired, which the doctor thought might be attributable to her angina. The doctor suggested that Shipman might see her. On Sunday, 6th
October 1996, a duty doctor visited Mrs Garside. He appears to have found that she was complaining of difficulty in breathing. He diagnosed asthma and anxiety and prescribed diazepam. On 8th
October, Mrs Garside had an appointment at Shipman's surgery. The medical records suggest that she had an influenza vaccination. There is also a reference to a panic attack and congestive heart failure. On the appointments sheet, the letters
'CHF'
have been written next to her name. I think those letters were written by Shipman. I make that judgement on the basis of my own recognition of his writing, with which I have become very familiar. It would be most unusual for one of the receptionists to make such an entry on the appointments sheet. I suspect Shipman might have added those letters at some later time. The entry for 8th
October is the last before the day of Mrs Garside's death.
The Day of the Death
Early in the morning of Wednesday, 23rd
October 1996, Mrs Garside telephoned her son, who lived locally, to say that she was feeling short of breath. Mr Garside called in to see her on his way to work, calmed her down until she felt better and then told her to telephone Shipman to request a visit as soon as possible. When Mr Garside left his mother, she seemed better and was pottering about in the house and making her breakfast.
Later that morning, Mrs Garside telephoned the surgery to ask for a visit. An entry was made in the visits book recording that she was experiencing breathing difficulties.
Mrs Susan Garside called in to see her mother-in-law at around 11am. Mrs Garside was again somewhat anxious and breathless. She explained that she was expecting a visit from Shipman at about lunchtime. Her daughter-in-law calmed her down and left shortly before midday.
Mr Garside told the Inquiry that he telephoned his mother at about 2pm and she told him that Shipman had still not arrived. He did not mention that telephone call in his police statement.
Shipman seems to have visited in the middle of the afternoon. A handwritten entry, relating to his visit, reads as follows:
'1500hrs Breathless feels ill
pulse 60/m irregular 110/60
A/E = BS normal basal creps
JVP
CHF: IV lasix 40
Episode of chest pain last night
? (L) arm ? jaw
confused about events
Clearly post MI
wishes to stay at home
will revisit mane
(
tomorrow
)
'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this note to suggest that Mrs Garside told Shipman she was breathless and felt unwell. He found the pulse rate to be 60 beats per minute but irregular. The blood pressure was 110/60. Air entry was equal on both sides with normal breath sounds and basal crepitations. There was raised jugular venous pressure. Shipman diagnosed congestive heart failure and gave an intravenous injection of 40mg of Lasix, a strong diuretic. He also obtained a rather confused history of an episode of chest pain the previous night, possibly radiating into the left arm and jaw. Shipman considered that Mrs Garside had had a myocardial infarction. She apparently expressed a wish to stay at home (rather than be admitted to hospital) and he decided to visit her the following day.
Mr Garside called at his mother's home on his way home from work at about 4.10pm. There was no reply when he knocked on the door. He looked through the living room window and saw his mother in the chair in which she would normally have sat or dozed, but her position suggested to him that she was not asleep. Mr Garside kicked open the door and went in. He found his mother sitting upright with her head leaning to one side. She was drained of any colour. Mr Garside remembers that one or both of his mother's sleeves was rolled up and certainly her right forearm was exposed. He did not mention this detail in his police statement. However, he may well be right, as Mrs Garside had almost certainly had an injection of some sort. Mrs Susan Garside, who arrived later, says that Mrs Garside was sitting in her usual chair. Her head was leaning to the right. Her right arm was outstretched, palm down, along the arm of the chair. That arm was bare to the elbow and was blue and cold to the touch. The left arm was folded on Mrs Garside's lap. Mrs Susan Garside thought her mother-in-law appeared to have dropped off to sleep.
Mr Garside telephoned Shipman's surgery and he arrived about 45 minutes later. He went straight over to Mrs Garside, touched her arm and head and said that she was dead. He performed no other examination. Shipman explained that he had called to see Mrs Garside at about 3pm and said that she had complained of chest pains. He said that he suspected that she had had a slight heart attack and that he had given her an injection of warfarin. In fact, warfarin is not given by injection and it may be that Mr Garside is mistaken in his recollection. Shipman had with him Mrs Garside's medical notes and records. He listed her various medical complaints and held up (but did not show to Mr Garside) a letter, which he said suggested that she had only 20 per cent lung capacity. No such letter exists in the records in the possession of the Inquiry.
Shipman made no handwritten note relating to his attendance after Mrs Garside had died but the computer records show that he visited and diagnosed coronary thrombosis as the cause of death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and certified that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis which, he said, had begun 24 hours before death. He said that the thrombosis was due to congestive heart failure and ischaemic heart disease. Diabetes mellitus and asthma had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Garside alive on the day of her death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Garside had died at
'about 1600 hrs'
and that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of two hours. He stated that he had last seen her alive about two hours before her death and saw the body about 30 minutes after the death. He gave the causes of death as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting seconds. He claimed that his answers to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and statements made by Mrs Garside's son, who, he claimed, had been present at the moment of death. That was untrue. This last entry appears to have been made in place of an earlier entry suggesting that no one had been present at that time.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that, as Mrs Garside had a history of ischaemic heart disease, asthma and Type II diabetes, she was at a high risk of suffering a heart attack.
He also says that if the signs and symptoms noted by Shipman on the day of the death were a genuine record, they would support the diagnosis of a heart attack causing congestive heart failure. It would be appropriate for Shipman to give 40mg Lasix. It might also have been appropriate to give a very small dose of strong opiate such as morphine or diamorphine if Mrs Garside were in pain or distress. There is no note that an opiate was given. Dr Grenville observed that Mrs Garside's position and appearance in death were not consistent with a suddent cardiac death. He would have expected Mrs Garside to have attempted to call for help and would not have expected her to remain in her armchair.
Professor Whitwell says that it is impossible to diagnose coronary thrombosis unless either various investigations are carried out in hospital whilst the patient is still alive or the thrombosis is identified at post-mortem examination by direct inspection of the coronary vessels. I think that when she speaks of investigations carried out in hospital, she is referring to an electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood enzyme analysis, which are usually carried out in hospital but which can be carried out by a general practitioner. In any event, Shipman did not carry out those tests. In Professor Whitwell's opinion, the history in this case was consistent with heart failure secondary to ischaemic heart disease. She says that it is not possible to say that death would have been inevitable. It appears that Professor Whitwell considers that, on the basis of the evidence available to Shipman (assuming he had not killed Mrs Garside), he would not have been able to certify the cause of death and should have referred the case to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination.
Dr Grenville has said in his generic evidence that it would be reasonable for a doctor to certify that a death was due to coronary thrombosis if there was a history of ischaemic heart disease and a relative had been able to give a clear description of the final event.
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate. He did not, however, know that Mr Garside was not in fact present at the death. Professor Baker found the death to be highly suspicious on the basis of the contents of the medical notes and records.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, the death was discovered about an hour after Shipman had visited Mrs Garside and had been alone with her. No one saw Mrs Garside alive or spoke to her after that visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious feature.
Mrs Garside was at a significantly increased risk of suffering a heart attack. If, however, one sets aside the handwritten note made by Shipman himself on the day of Mrs Garside's death, there is no good evidence that she was exhibiting the signs or symptoms of a heart attack or severe congestive heart failure either on the day of her death or on the previous day. Indeed, there is positive evidence to the contrary. It would appear that Mrs Garside was breathless but, when calmed down, she was otherwise well. That her breathlessness settled when she was calm suggests that it was due to asthma and anxiety rather than congestive heart failure or heart attack. For that reason alone, I suspect that Shipman's entry in the medical record for the day of the death was not a genuine account of the history and findings. A further reason for suspecting that Shipman's entry is not genuine is that I find it almost inconceivable that Mrs Garside could have suffered a bad attack of chest pain in the night and not have mentioned it to her son or daughter-in-law. I am also slightly suspicious of Shipman's claim that Mrs Garside said that she wanted to stay at home rather than be admitted to hospital. This is a feature of so many cases in which Shipman killed that it raises suspicion, even though I know that some elderly people do resist the idea of hospital admission. Shipman's account is a clear description of a heart attack associated with congestive heart failure. However, it does not ring true. If Mrs Garside were in the condition he described, he should have tried to persuade her to go to hospital. If she refused, he should have contacted a relative first to make an attempt to persuade her to change her mind and, if she resolutely refused, so that she could be cared for. To inform a relative would be the very least any sensible doctor would do. Shipman says that Mrs Garside was confused about the history of recent events. It would be imperative that her son should be told of the situation so that she could be adequately cared for. In short, this medical record does not make sense and I am sure that it is false.
I note that Shipman's record includes a reference to an intravenous injection. It is quite possible that Shipman gave an intravenous injection, which might well have left a mark, and he would wish to explain that. The question remains whether the injection was of Lasix, as he claimed, or a strong opiate.
Shipman told a number of lies on Form B, which give rise to grave suspicion. First and most obvious, he falsely claimed that Mr Garside was present at the death. He would know that it would not be possible to give a reliable diagnosis that the death was due to a coronary thrombosis unless someone had witnessed the final event. In addition, Shipman often claimed that someone was present at the death when the true situation was that the body was found soon after he himself had visited. He did this to create the impression that someone had seen the patient alive after his own departure.
Second, he claimed to know the time of death and said it had occurred at about 4pm. He also said that this was two hours after his own visit. According to his medical note, his own visit was at 3pm. If Mrs Garside had died a natural death at some time after his departure, as he claimed, there is no way in which he could have known whether it was a minute after his departure or a minute before the body was found. By claiming to know the time of death, Shipman was creating the misleading impression that he could say that the death occurred a considerable time after his own visit.
I attach no weight to the evidence that Shipman is said to have mentioned an injection of warfarin and to have claimed that Mrs Garside had only 20 per cent remaining lung capacity. Those remarks, if made, are not probative of guilt.
Mrs Garside's position and appearance in death were not typical of those seen following a heart attack or indeed any of the common causes of sudden natural death. They were, however, entirely typical of those seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of opiate.
Mrs Garside was at considerable risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death and I cannot rule out the possibility that her death was natural. However, the close temporal association between Shipman's visit and the discovery of her death persuades me that it is overwhelmingly likely that he killed her. I feel able to say that I am sure of my conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001