The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Sheard Greenhalgh
Introduction
Mr John Sheard Greenhalgh (known as Jack) died at his home, 23 Cheetham Fold Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 27th
February 1996 at the age of 88. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Greenhalgh's death was old age.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions for murder, Mrs Edna Strong, Mr Greenhalgh's niece, and her husband, Mr Ronald Strong, expressed concern to the Greater Manchester Police about the circumstances of Mr Greenhalgh's death. The police investigated his death and took statements from Mrs Strong and from Mr Paul Cropper, his home care worker.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mr Greenhalgh but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Strong as well as from Mr Cropper. A member of the Inquiry team has spoken to Mrs Judith Cocker, a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery, although no statement was taken from her. The Inquiry has had access to Mr Greenhalgh's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The Inquiry obtained Mr Greenhalgh's telephone billing records for 1996.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Greenhalgh was a widower and lived alone. For many years before his death he had suffered from osteoarthritis of the knees and had a varus deformity on the left knee and a valgus deformity on the right one. His mobility was poor and in due course he became dependent on a wheelchair. He was hard of hearing and had a cataract in one eye. Despite these disabilities, Mr Greenhalgh was relatively well and remained semi-independent. Mr Cropper would visit him each morning at about breakfast time and then again at lunchtime. The meals on wheels service brought his lunch. He attended a day care centre, probably once a week.
Mr Greenhalgh seldom sought medical advice. In January 1995, a district nurse attended several times to dress his foot, following a scald injury. There is no record that Mr Greenhalgh saw Shipman after 15th
September 1995 until 27th
February 1996, the day of his death.
Mrs Strong has said that, in the weeks before Mr Greenhalgh died, she had several meetings with him and his social worker, Mrs Jennifer Rahman, about the possibility of him moving to sheltered accommodation. Shortly before his death, Mrs Rahman found a flat for Mr Greenhalgh and preparations were made for the move, but Mr Greenhalgh then decided that he wished to stay in his present home.
Mrs Strong and her husband ran a shop at the time of Mr Greenhalgh's death. They used to travel to Manchester each Wednesday to buy stock and would take the opportunity to call in on Mr Greenhalgh. Mrs Strong last saw him alive on Wednesday, 21st
February 1996, when he seemed well.
The Death and its Discovery
Mr Cropper last saw Mr Greenhalgh alive on Tuesday, 27th
February 1996. He did not mention that he was expecting a visit from the doctor and nor did he complain of feeling unwell. When Mr Cropper left after his lunchtime visit, Mr Greenhalgh appeared to be his 'usual self'.
Between 8.30am and 9am on Wednesday, 28th
February 1996, Mr Cropper called at Mr Greenhalgh's flat for his usual morning visit. There was no reply to his knock, so he went to the rear of the property from where he could see Mr Greenhalgh in his wheelchair in the living room, with his head tilted back. He appeared to be asleep but, when he did not respond to a knock on the window, Mr Cropper thought he might have died. Mr Cropper telephoned his office to ask for a key to be brought.
Soon afterwards, at about 9.30am, Mr and Mrs Strong arrived to visit Mr Greenhalgh, as was their usual practice, and they met Mr Cropper. Mrs Strong had a key and all three entered the flat together. They found Mr Greenhalgh dressed in the clothes that Mr Cropper believes he had been wearing the previous day. His head was slumped back and both Mrs Strong and Mr Cropper thought that he was dead. The curtains were open, which indicated to Mrs Strong that her uncle had died before nightfall the day before. This was confirmed by the fact that there were no plates from Mr Greenhalgh's evening meal left in the kitchen. His bed had not been slept in.
Mrs Strong telephoned Shipman, who arrived within the hour. When Mrs Strong asked him whether Mr Greenhalgh was dead, Shipman laughed and said, 'Of course he's dead'. Shipman said that he had seen Mr Greenhalgh the previous afternoon because he had telephoned and requested a visit. He said that Mr Greenhalgh had said that he was 'fed up' because he could not walk and could not see or hear well. They had talked about him going into a home. Mrs Strong was surprised at the suggestion that her uncle had called Shipman out the day before, as he never used to tell anyone if he felt ill. Shipman did not say that Mr Greenhalgh had been ill the previous day.
Mr Greenhalgh's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 27th
February, although the names of three other patients do appear. The telephone billing records for the relevant period do not confirm or refute the suggestion that Mr Greenhalgh asked Shipman to visit that day. They record only telephone calls costing 40 pence or more. A local call to the surgery would cost less than that. It seems unlikely that Mr Greenhalgh would have telephoned the surgery himself. He was rather deaf and it seems more likely that he would have asked Mr Cropper to make the call for him.
Two loose handwritten notes were found in Mr Greenhalgh's medical records. Mrs Cocker says that these are in her handwriting but she is unable to recall the circumstances in which either was made. The first (which is in pencil except for the first line and the last two lines, which are in black ink) reads:
'27/2/96
Nursing 07
S/S
quite happy about
going in home
visual=
auditor
(
sic
)
=
physical=
R/S small stroke as well
not bad
speech not to
(
sic
)
good
grip not good
last wk
Rang Social/S
27/2/96'
.
It is likely that Mrs Cocker compiled this note from information provided by Shipman after he had visited Mr Greenhalgh. It appears that Shipman asked her to contact the Social Services department. He told her that Mr Greenhalgh was quite happy to go into a home. Mr Greenhalgh's vision, hearing and physical condition were unchanged. Shipman said that Mr Greenhalgh had had a small stroke on the right side the previous week. As a result, he was not bad generally but his speech and his grip were not good. The note suggests that Mrs Cocker did as instructed and telephoned Social Services.
The second note is entirely in black ink. It reads as follows:
'John Greenhalgh
23 Cheetham
Fold
see -
hear -
27/2/96
Walk
x
-------------
write cheque
-------------
has social services
has home help
talking about going'
.
It seems likely that this note reflected the information Mrs Cocker imparted or received when she telephoned the Social Services department.
There are three entries in Mr Greenhalgh's computerised medical records dated 27th
February 1996. The first records that there was a home visit. The second says:
'Had a chat to patient
needs part 111 accom'
.
The final entry says:
'H/O: CVA
minor r hard to tell ?5/7 ago'
.
These records suggest that Shipman visited Mr Greenhalgh at home on 27th
February and talked about him going into residential care, which Shipman thought he needed. He recorded that Mr Greenhalgh had had a minor right-sided stroke about five days earlier, although it was hard to tell when it had occurred.
The final entry in the computerised medical records is dated 28th
February 1996 and simply records that, on examination, Mr Greenhalgh was found to be dead and that the cause of death was old age. As the audit trail facility had not then been installed on the computer, it is not possible to establish when the entries were made.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He said that he had last seen Mr Greenhalgh alive on 27th
February 1996. The cause of death was certified as old age.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mr Greenhalgh had died at
'about 20.00 hrs'
on 27th
February 1996. He said that he had attended Mr Greenhalgh during his last illness for three months. According to the medical records, Shipman had not seen Mr Greenhalgh at all during that period. Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Greenhalgh alive six hours before the death, which on his timings would have been at about 2pm. He said he had seen the body 18 hours after death and that he had carried out a complete external examination. The cause of death was again said to be old age. The mode of death was recorded as
'Died in sleep'
. When asked to what extent his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Found by care assistant sat in wheelchair. T.V on etc'
. Mrs Strong is adamant that the television was not on when she entered the house. Mr Cropper also says that the television was off. He recalls that Mr Greenhalgh used to have the television on very loud due to his deafness and thinks that he would have remembered if it had been on. Shipman said that no one had nursed Mr Greenhalgh during his last illness and that no one was present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Following his consideration of the medical records and his separate consideration of the cremation certificate, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mr Greenhalgh was highly suspicous.
Conclusion
There are a number of very suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. The first and most obvious is that the death was discovered not long after a visit from Shipman. No one spoke to Mr Greenhalgh or saw him alive after Shipman's visit. That in itself is a highly suspicious circumstance. I suspect that this was a completely unsolicited visit. There is no record of a visit request in the surgery records and I have already said that I think it unlikely that Mr Greenhalgh would have made such a call himself and more likely that he would have asked Mr Cropper to do it for him. It is entirely possible that Shipman had heard that Mr Greenhalgh had gone back on his agreement to move into sheltered accommodation and decided to speak to him about that.
Although Mr Greenhalgh suffered from a number of disabilities, none of these was of a life-threatening nature. There is nothing in the medical records to suggest that Mr Greenhalgh was at an increased risk of dying a sudden death. Shipman did not suggest that Mr Greenhalgh's death was sudden; he certified that it was due to old age. In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville explained that it is not appropriate to certify that a death was due to old age unless the patient has deteriorated gradually over a period of time and has reached a moribund state. Usually the patient will have been bedridden and in need of nursing care. In those circumstances, it may be difficult for the doctor to specify exactly what organ failure led to the death and it is appropriate to put 'old age'. Mr Greenhalgh did not fall into this category. He was not bedridden. He had been looking after himself with help from his care worker and the meals on wheels service. As Shipman said on Form B, no one nursed him in his 'last illness'. In fact, there was no last illness. Mr Cropper saw him twice daily and knows that he had not deteriorated significantly in the past weeks. Shipman quite often certified a death as due to old age when he had killed a patient and the medical history did not reveal a plausible explanation for the death. His last victim, Mrs Kathleen Grundy, was one such case. I regard an unwarranted certification of old age as the cause of death as a suspicious feature.
Shipman told some deliberate lies on Form B. I have already mentioned his false claim that he attended Mr Greenhalgh for three months during his last illness. He also claimed to know that the death had occurred at about 8pm. There was no rational basis on which he could say that. There were good, common-sense reasons why he could properly say that the death had occurred on 27th
rather than 28th
February. Mr Greenhalgh had obviously not been to bed on the night before his body was found. But there was nothing which would have enabled Shipman to say that the death occurred at 8pm as opposed to 2pm, which was the time of his visit. It seems to me that Shipman was seeking to distance the death from the time of his visit and there was no basis for him to do so. Shipman also painted the picture of a man who had fallen asleep while watching television and had died in his sleep. The evidence is that the television was not on. It is likely that the television would not have been on during a doctor's visit. On Form B, Shipman has sought to paint a false picture of a man who had been ill for three months, whose death was therefore not unexpected, and who died in his sleep.
I have considered the possibility that Mr Greenhalgh might have died quite suddenly from some natural cause. Given his age, this must be a real possibility. However, the medical records do not reveal any likely cause. Shipman has made a rather pathetic attempt to suggest that Mr Greenhalgh had suffered a right-sided stroke about five days before his death. We know that that is not true, as Mr Cropper would have noticed if his speech was slurred and he had weakness on one side. This false entry in the records is another suspicious factor in itself. It indicates that Shipman was trying to create a plausible cause of death. However, it seems very unlikely that Mr Greenhalgh died of a stroke. If a stroke, which had begun five days earlier, was going to prove fatal, it would have developed before 27th
February and the signs would have been obvious to all. I think it highly unlikely that Mr Greenhalgh died of a stroke or any other of the common causes of sudden death. His position and appearance in death were not typical of such deaths. They were, on the other hand, entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal injection of an opiate.
Taking all these factors into account, I have come to the conclusion that the overwhelming probability is that Shipman killed Mr Greenhalgh. I am satisfied so as to be sure of this conclusion. Shipman's method was almost certainly to inject him with a lethal dose of diamorphine.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001