The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Rebecca Gray
Introduction
Mrs Rebecca Gray was certified dead on arrival at Tameside General Hospital on Wednesday, 5th
May 1993 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. Her death was referred to the South Manchester Coroner who, after a post-mortem examination without inquest, certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Gillian Gray (Mrs Gray's granddaughter), and Mrs Ann Hancock (a close friend of Mrs Rosemary Walmsley who is Mrs Gray's daughter and the mother of Mrs Gillian Gray). The Inquiry has had access to the coroner's documents, Mrs Gray's general practitioner and hospital records, and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Gray's husband died in about 1973, after which she lived alone at 48 Mill Lane, Hyde. Mrs Walmsley lived very close to her mother. Mrs Gillian Gray lived with her husband about three miles away but worked in Hyde as a hairdresser.
Mrs Gray's health deteriorated towards the end of her life and she became forgetful. She forgot to eat regularly and Mrs Walmsley arranged for her mother's lunch to be brought each day by the meals on wheels service. Mrs Walmsley did all her mother's housework, as she had become very frail. Mrs Walmsley saw her mother every day. However, Mrs Gray remained mobile and almost independent. Until a little time before her death, she used to walk into Hyde most days and usually called in at the hairdresser's shop where her granddaughter worked. Mrs Gillian Gray does not recall that her grandmother suffered from any serious illnesses. In particular, she does not recall any cardiac problems, although she does remember that Mrs Gray had swollen feet and ankles, which can be a sign of congestive heart failure.
The
'Important Notes'
card in the Lloyd George record contains an entry saying
'COAD'
(chronic obstructive airways disease) in 1989. There are several references to congestive heart failure in the records from January 1988. In November 1988 and March 1989, the congestive heart failure was said to be under control and Mrs Gray was prescribed Innovace and bendrofluazide, commonly prescribed for the treatment of congestive heart failure and oedema. An x-ray report from February 1990 records changes in her chronic obstructive airways disease and slight cardiac enlargement. The final entry in the handwritten general practitioner records, dated 9th
December 1992, states that Mrs Gray had forgotten to take her tablets, that she had signs of congestive heart failure and was
'Advised
Strongly
'
, presumably to take her tablets.
Mrs Walmsley went away on holiday on Tuesday, 4th
May 1993 and was away when Mrs Gray died. Mrs Gillian Gray was left to keep an eye on her grandmother. At this time Mrs Gillian Gray was not working, as she had just had a baby. Mrs Gillian Gray says that her grandmother's health had declined in the weeks before her death.
Mrs Gray's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book or the appointments sheets at any time after the consultation on 9th
December 1992, almost six months before her death.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Gillian Gray says that at about 1.30pm on Wednesday, 5th
May 1993, she was telephoned by Mrs Hancock, who told her that the person who brought the meals on wheels could not gain access to Mrs Gray's house. Mrs Gillian Gray assumed that her grandmother had forgotten that the meals on wheels service was calling and had gone out. She did not rush over to her grandmother's house but waited for her baby to wake up and went over between 3pm and 3.15pm. She describes the house as 'absolutely sweltering', and, when she went into the room at the back of the house, she found her grandmother asleep in a chair in front of the fire. The gas fire was on full; the stove in the kitchen was on and the kettle had boiled dry and burned out. Mrs Gray was fast asleep and snoring. She was wearing her nightclothes.
Mrs Gillian Gray let some fresh air in and tried to rouse her grandmother. She was unable to waken her so, after some time, she contacted Mrs Hancock. Mrs Hancock arrived at about 4pm. She, too, remembers that the house was very hot. Mrs Hancock formed the impression that Mrs Gray had been sitting in the armchair since the previous evening. Mrs Gray's breathing was very heavy.
Mrs Gillian Gray and Mrs Hancock were unable to wake Mrs Gray. Mrs Gillian Gray then telephoned the surgery and asked for Shipman to visit. The receptionist said that Shipman could not come as he was seeing patients in surgery but he had advised that if Mrs Gray was unconscious, an ambulance should be called. Mrs Gillian Gray called an ambulance. Just as it arrived, Mrs Gray made a grunting sound and Mrs Gillian Gray thought that she was waking up. Mrs Hancock recalls that, as the ambulance crew arrived, Mrs Gray 'gasped a final breath'. Mrs Gillian Gray explained to the ambulance men what had happened and also said that on a previous occasion, about two years before, her grandmother had been found collapsed in front of the fire. One of the ambulance crew lifted Mrs Gray's eyelid and said words to the effect, 'I think you'll find it is a bit more serious'. Mrs Gillian Gray was asked to leave the room and she formed the impression that the ambulance men attempted to revive her grandmother. They then said that they could not find a pulse but would take Mrs Gray to hospital. Mrs Gillian Gray followed the ambulance but, when she reached the hospital, she was told that her grandmother had been declared dead on arrival.
The Patient Report Form completed by the Greater Manchester Emergency and Paramedic Service records that an ambulance arrived at the house at 5pm and reached Tameside General Hospital at 5.23pm. Under the
'Treatment'
section, it is recorded that defibrillation was attempted on three occasions with increasing strength, but no response was obtained. The drug treatment section of the form is blank and there is no record of any drug having been administered, by injection or otherwise.
The triage report from Tameside General Hospital records that Mrs Gray had been found dead by her granddaughter in a collapsed condition, that on examination no signs of life were noted and her pupils were fixed and dilated. She was admitted to the hospital at 5.20pm. A diagnosis of cardio-respiratory arrest was made and Mrs Gray was pronounced dead at 5.25pm. The notes record that Mrs Gray was breathing when the ambulance arrived and that her breathing was
'cheyne-stoking'
. Dr John Grenville has described Cheyne-Stokes respiration in his generic evidence to the Inquiry as a cyclical form of breathing in which the patient's breathing is observed to become slower and then stop for several seconds before resuming and then slowing again. There is no record of the administration of any form of medication.
The surgery appointments sheet shows that Shipman had appointments between 8.45am and 10.15am. He then saw 13 patients in the open surgery which was scheduled to finish by about 10.45am but would almost certainly have taken longer. Shipman was probably free to go out on his rounds from about 11.30am and was due back at the surgery for a vaccinations clinic at 2pm. This would have finished by about 2.45pm when Shipman would have been free to resume his visits. Afternoon surgery was due to begin at 4pm.
Shipman's visits book shows that he intended to make seven visits that day. Mrs Gray's name is not on the list. The locations of the visits requested would not have taken Shipman close to Mill Lane. There were three visits to the north and the west of the surgery, and four to the south. Mrs Gray's home was to the west of Hyde.
The Coroner's Documents
The Report of Sudden Death prepared by the Greater Manchester Police records that Mrs Gray was found by her granddaughter at 4.15pm and that she died at Tameside General Hospital at 4.35pm. The medical history is recorded as follows:
'Takes tablets for heart condition. Found unconscious at home address.
Conveyed to Tameside General Hospital. Dead on arrival'
.
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Mrs Gray was found unconscious at home and was dead on arrival at Tameside General Hospital. A history of heart trouble is recorded.
The Post-Mortem Examination
A post-mortem examination was carried out on 7th
May 1993. On external examination venepuncture marks were seen in the right cubital fossa.
Upon internal examination of the thoracic cavity, both lungs were noted to be congested and oedematous. The coronary vessels in the heart were calcified and showed moderate to severe grades of atheromatous change. The aorta also showed moderate to severe grades of atheromatous change. The pathologist concluded that Mrs Gray died of natural causes, stated to be left ventricular failure and ischaemic heart disease.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Helen Whitwell has commented on the report of the post-mortem examination. She noted the history and findings, particularly the atheromatous changes in the coronary vessels and the aorta and the venepuncture marks in the right cubital fossa. She commented that there was evidence of significant underlying heart disease and that the given cause of death was acceptable in the circumstances. The history of the collapse and heavy breathing was consistent with left ventricular failure.
As to the venepuncture marks, Professor Whitwell was unable to say whether resuscitation attempts or other procedures involving venepuncture would normally be recorded in the hospital records. In the absence of toxicological analysis, she felt unable to comment further on the likely origin of the venepuncture marks.
The Aftermath
When she returned from holiday, Mrs Walmsley went to the surgery and asked Shipman why Mrs Gray had died. He told her that she had died 'because of her heart'. He added that, on the last occasion that he had seen her, he had been aware that she was suffering from quite serious heart problems because her lips were either blue or purple in colour and this was a sign of heart disease. If, as it appears, Shipman last saw Mrs Gray in December 1992, this would be consistent with his note that the symptoms of congestive heart failure were present.
Conclusion
It seems highly likely that Mrs Gray died as the result of natural causes.
Mrs Gray's medical records suggest that she suffered from congestive heart disease and was not perhaps as meticulous in taking her medication as she should have been. Although Shipman claimed to have a system to monitor patients with heart problems, it does not appear that he had seen Mrs Gray for about six months before her death. The witness evidence suggests that Mrs Gray had become very frail towards the end of her life. The post-mortem report shows that she had quite severe heart disease. Although Mrs Gray's death seemed very sudden, I do not think it was unexpected from a medical point of view.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mrs Gray on the day of her death. It appears that he had not seen her for about six months. I cannot rule out the possibility that Shipman called on Mrs Gray on 5th
May.
Mrs Gray's mode of death was not typical of a death following a lethal injection of opiate, which was Shipman's preferred method of killing. Following such an injection, given intravenously, the patient's respiration is depressed and he or she falls into a very deep sleep and dies within a few minutes. Mrs Gray appears to have been unconscious for at least two hours, possibly longer, and her breathing was heavy and loud.
The presence of venepuncture marks on Mrs Gray's arm gives rise to the suspicion that she had been given an injection of some sort not long before her death. It seems to me most likely that these marks were made in the course of some procedure carried out at the hospital in an attempt to revive Mrs Gray.
Although I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman was involved in Mrs Gray's death, it seems highly likely that he was not and that her death was entirely natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001