The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Minnie Doris Irene Galpin
Introduction
Mrs Minnie Doris Irene Galpin died at her home, 6 Meadowfield Court, Hyde on Tuesday, 12th
March 1996 at the age of 71. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1984 when she moved to Hyde from Kent, and she followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's conviction at Preston Crown Court, one of Mrs Galpin's daughters, Mrs Barbara Verrall, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Verrall and Dr Ziauddin Ahmad, a doctor employed by Healthcall, the deputising service used by Shipman. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Galpin but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Verrall and her husband, Mr Timothy Verrall. By coincidence, they were neighbours of Shipman, whom they regarded as a family friend. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Galpin's general practitioner and hospital records, the surgery appointments sheets and visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period and to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD).
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Galpin was a widow and lived alone. She was frail and was troubled by osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis affecting her hands, wrists, shoulders and knees. She could move about the house but could only walk a short distance outside. She remained independent with help from her daughters, who shopped and cleaned for her, and her friends who would take her to church by car. She was mentally alert and would not hesitate to telephone Mrs Verrall if she was unwell. On Thursday evenings she used to stay overnight at the Verralls' house.
Dr Grenville, who has reviewed Mrs Galpin's medical records, says that there was no history of cardiac problems except for one, or possibly two, episodes of arrhythmia following orthopaedic surgery in 1990.
At a family New Year's party in 1996, Mrs Galpin fell while walking down a flight of stairs. Although she was not injured, she was quite shaken. Her daughter thinks that she might have 'jarred her joints' which, in turn, aggravated her arthritis. It appears that she consulted Shipman as there is an entry in the handwritten records which says:
'8/1/96
Fall bruising
no #
MST 10mg BD x10'
.
This suggests a fall causing significant bruising but no fracture and that morphine sulphate tablets were prescribed, presumably for pain relief. There is, however, no record of morphine being prescribed in the corresponding entry in the computerised record, which reads as follows:
'Seen in GP's surgery
Dr HF Shipman
Falls
off stairs 1 step all ok'
.
There is no further entry in the handwritten records until the day of Mrs Galpin's death. There are entries in the computerised records for 22nd
and 23rd
February 1996 but these relate to routine tests and their results. I infer that Mrs Galpin was reasonably well during this period.
Mrs Galpin spent the evening of Thursday, 7th
March with her family, celebrating her granddaughter's birthday. She returned home on 8th
March. Mrs Verrall says that her mother was well and that, had she been poorly, she would have remained at the Verralls' home.
On the evening of Monday, 11th
March, Mrs Galpin telephoned Mrs Verrall to let her know what shopping she needed for the following day. Mrs Verrall does not recall anything unusual about that telephone conversation. Mrs Verrall was aware that Shipman was due to visit her mother the following day in connection with her arthritis. She had been told this by her mother either that day or on a previous occasion.
The Day of the Death
An intention to visit Mrs Galpin is recorded in the surgery visits book for 12th
March 1996. Alongside Mrs Galpin's name appears the word:
'arthritis'
.
The following note appears in the handwritten medical records for the day of death:
'V
(
visit
)
Aches and pains all over
foot swollen tender
Prednisolone E/C'
.
This note suggests that Mrs Galpin told Shipman that she had pain all over and a tender and swollen left foot, for which he prescribed a steroid. This entry is entirely consistent with Mrs Galpin's long-standing arthritis problem. The corresponding entry in the computerised medical records reads as follows:
'Seen in own home
Dr HF Shipman
H/O: arthritis
Flare up steroids
Chest pain
Very vague? cardiac 130/80'
.
I note that this entry is consistent with the handwritten entry save for the last two lines. Here Shipman refers to a chest pain of possible cardiac origin whereas the handwritten note contains no such reference. As this entry was made before the audit trail facility was installed on the computer, it is not possible to discover when this entry was made. That Shipman describes a vague chest pain makes me suspect that that part of the entry might have been fabricated so as to enable Shipman to explain the death and the cause he certified. However, it will be seen that, when Shipman later discussed the cause of death with Mr Verrall, he did not refer to this chest pain.
Mrs Verrall went to deliver her mother's shopping between about 6.30pm and 7pm. As soon as she reached the house, she realised that something was wrong. It was dark outside, but the house lights were not on and the curtains were open. Since she knew that Shipman had been due to visit her mother that day, Mrs Verrall's first thought was that he had arranged for her to be admitted to hospital. She looked into the house but could see nothing in the darkness. She then tried the front door and found it unlocked. The door was on a mortise lock. Mrs Galpin always kept it locked because she had had an unpleasant experience in the past involving some local youths. Mrs Verrall went into the sitting room and turned on the light. She saw her mother sitting on the sofa. It was obvious that she was dead. Her mouth was open and her dentures were suspended crookedly in her mouth. Mrs Verrall removed them. Mrs Galpin was sitting in her usual place, surrounded by books. She was upright, leaning slightly back, with her arms by her sides. She looked peaceful. She was wearing her day clothes and Mrs Verrall thinks that she had her spectacles on. She looked as though she had fallen asleep. Mrs Galpin usually sat with her feet on a footstool but Mrs Verrall noticed that her mother's feet were on the floor. Mrs Verrall surmised that her mother must have been about to stand up when she died. There was a telephone near to her and she would have had to stand to reach it.
Mrs Verrall telephoned her husband and her sister, and Mr Verrall telephoned for the duty doctor, Dr Ahmad, who arrived at about 10pm. His note reads as follows:
'Last seen by her G.P.
On 12.3.96
passed away at
3PM on 12.3.96
O/E No signs of life detected
DEATH CERTIFIED
'
.
Dr Ahmad told the police that he must have been told by the family that the doctor had visited. He has no independent recollection of his own attendance.
Shipman's appointments sheet for 12th
March shows that he had a busy morning and would have been unlikely to begin his home visits until about 1pm. He was not then required in the surgery until 4pm. It appears from the visits book that he had five patients to visit, including Mrs Galpin.
The Aftermath
Mr Verrall went to see Shipman at home early the following morning. Shipman told him that he had heard that Mrs Galpin had died, although it is not clear how he had learned of the death. They discussed the cause of death and Mr Verrall explained that he thought Mrs Galpin had been trying to stand up because her feet were not on her footstool and that she had then suffered a heart attack. Shipman said:
'Well, that's not very scientific, but it will do for our purposes'
. Shipman also said:
'You don't want a post-mortem, do you?'
Mr Verrall said that he did not. Mrs Verrall told the police that Shipman told her husband that he had visited Mrs Galpin at lunchtime on the day of her death but, by the time she gave her Inquiry statement, she could no longer remember this and nor could her husband.
Mrs Verrall found in her mother's house a prescription for arthritis medication, made out by Shipman on the day of the death.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, in which he stated that he had last seen Mrs Galpin alive on the day of her death, 12th
March 1996. He said that the cause of death was coronary thrombosis and that the approximate interval between the onset of the coronary thrombosis and the moment of death was
'seconds'
. He did not identify any other disease or condition leading to the coronary thrombosis, although rheumatoid arthritis was said to have contributed to the death.
Mrs Galpin was buried and there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville says that it is highly unusual for a patient who has had a fall but has suffered no significant injury to be prescribed MST tablets. He suspected that Shipman might have prescribed these so as to have a ready explanation if morphine were to be found in Mrs Galpin's body after death.
Dr Grenville finds Mr Verrall's conversation with Shipman regarding the cause of Mrs Galpin's death to be
'somewhat surprising in the light of the computerised entry in the medical records'
. Dr Grenville observes that, if Shipman had obtained a history of chest pain and if he had been concerned that it might have been of cardiac origin, it seems very odd that he did not mention this to Mr Verrall, because this was the only evidence on which Shipman could base a diagnosis of coronary thrombosis. I would add that it seems odd that, if a patient described chest pain of cardiac origin, Shipman should have done nothing at all about it.
Professor Richard Baker considered the death to be moderately suspicious on the basis of the medical records. He noted that there was very little clinical indication in the records that Mrs Galpin might suffer a heart attack. He commented that he would not have been prepared to certify the cause of death on the basis of the information in the records.
Conclusion
There are a number of highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First, and most obvious, is the temporal association between the death and Shipman's visit. Although the time of Shipman's visit is not known, it probably occurred between 1.15pm and 3.45pm. There is no evidence that anyone spoke to Mrs Galpin or saw her alive after Shipman's visit. Although some hours passed between the probable time of Shipman's departure and Mrs Verrall's discovery of the body, it would be something of a coincidence if Mrs Galpin had died naturally in that intervening period. If this were to have occurred with any doctor other than Shipman, I would accept it as a coincidence. After all, natural deaths can and do occur suddenly at any time. However, if Shipman is to be believed, natural deaths very frequently occurred within a short time of his visits. The frequent repetition of such an event cannot be accepted as coincidence. I regard the temporal connection between this death and Shipman's visit as highly suspicious.
There are other causes for suspicion. Mrs Galpin's medical records did not reveal any history from which it would appear that she was at increased risk of suffering a fatal heart attack. That does not mean that she could not have done, but there was no particular reason to expect it. Shipman would have had difficulty in justifying his certification of the cause of death as being due to coronary thrombosis, as he could not or did not wish to claim that he had been present at the death. It appears to me that Shipman has fabricated the computerised record of his visit on the day of the death to create a basis on which he would, if asked, be able to explain the death. I think it is extremely unlikely that Mrs Galpin mentioned any chest pains to Shipman on 12th
March. Had she done so, I would have expected the fact to be recorded in the handwritten records. I would also have expected either Shipman or Mrs Galpin to contact one of her relatives.
If this were a natural death, no reasonable and honest doctor could have certified its cause on the basis of the information supposedly available to Shipman, even supposing there had been a complaint of vague chest pains on the day of the death. This was a sudden and unexpected death for which the cause was not known and should have been referred to the coroner. It appears to me that Shipman seized on Mr Verrall's proffered explanation for the death, based on the family's surmise, and created a little evidence which would support the suggested cause.
Mrs Galpin's appearance in death was not typical of that seen following a death from a coronary thrombosis but was wholly typical of that seen in many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by a lethal dose of strong opiate. I share Dr Grenville's suspicion that Shipman had prescribed MST for Mrs Galpin so that, if her body were subjected to toxicological testing which revealed the presence of morphine, there would be a ready explanation for it.
Taking these factors into account, I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Galpin, almost certainly in his usual way, by administering a lethal injection of diamorphine. I am sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001