The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
William Givens
Introduction
Mr William Givens died at his home, 27 Waverley Road, Hyde on Monday, 28th
September 1981 at the age of 77. He had been a patient of Shipman since May 1981, about four months before he died. He did not like Shipman. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was respiratory failure due to chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
In April 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mr Givens' daughter, Mrs Rita Shawcroft, in connection with the death of her mother, Mrs Violet Givens, whose medical records had been found by the police in the garage at Shipman's home. Mrs Shawcroft told the Inquiry that she had no concerns over the death of her mother but she had often wondered whether Shipman had, in some way, been responsible for the death of her father.
The police did not investigate Mr Givens' death and there has been no inquest.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Shawcroft and from her sister, Mrs Florence Margaret Mary Kime. The Inquiry has also obtained two reports from Dr John Grenville. The only contemporaneous documentation available is the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, the cremation certificate and Shipman's visits book for 1981. Mr Givens' medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Givens lived with his wife, who was to survive him by seven years. In May 1981, they had moved from Denton to Hyde to be closer to their family. The move seemed to take a lot out of them. Mrs Givens suffered from osteoporosis and, in the period leading up to Mr Givens' death, there was a time when Mrs Kime and Mrs Shawcroft were providing 24 hour care for their parents, and Shipman was a frequent visitor to their bungalow. On one occasion, when Shipman visited unexpectedly, Mrs Shawcroft was crying because of the strain of caring for her parents. Shipman saw the daughters' camp bed and advised Mrs Shawcroft that they could not carry on as they were and that some respite care was needed.
Mr Givens suffered from respiratory problems, which had led to his premature retirement from work as a joiner. He smoked about ten cigarettes a day. He had emphysema and suffered frequent chest infections in winter. Mrs Shawcroft says that her father had also begun to suffer from dementia.
Mr Givens had a fall in about July 1981 and Mrs Shawcroft called out Shipman to visit him at home. Mrs Shawcroft thought that Shipman became rather impatient with him when Mr Givens continued to complain of pain and soreness in his ribs. Mr Givens subsequently attended hospital where x-rays revealed that he had broken two ribs. Mr Givens was discharged from hospital on 24th
July 1981. Mrs Shawcroft remembers that Shipman later made some sort of apology for not having made the diagnosis himself.
Mrs Givens suffered a heart attack in August 1981 and was discharged from hospital on 1st
September.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Shawcroft was with her father on the morning of 28th
September 1981. She noticed that he was having difficulty breathing. She telephoned for Shipman who arrived at about 11.30am. Mr Givens' name is in Shipman's visits book for that day. By the time Shipman arrived, Mr Givens looked very unwell. His colour was 'almost bluey'. He was conscious but seemed confused. After examining Mr Givens, Shipman said that he was too ill to go into hospital and that he was going to give him an injection of Largactil to relax him. Largactil is an anti-psychotic drug used by some doctors to sedate patients. As Shipman administered the injection into Mr Givens' thigh or buttock, Mr Givens cried out in pain. Shipman told Mrs Shawcroft to 'get the rest of the family', which she interpreted to mean that her father's death was imminent. She remembers that Shipman's attitude was unfeeling. Shipman said that he would call back later to check on Mr Givens. By lunchtime, Mr Givens was asleep and his breathing had become heavy.
Mrs Givens was shocked by the implication of what Shipman had said. Mrs Shawcroft contacted her sister, Mrs Kime, who arrived at about lunchtime. Mr Givens was asleep and his breathing was heavy. At about 4.30pm, Mrs Shawcroft returned home for a while, leaving her sister at her parents' house. While she was away, Shipman arrived. It was about 6pm. He told Mrs Kime that he intended to give her father another injection to help him to relax. Mrs Kime does not say that she seemed surprised by this, so it may be that her father was suffering some distress. She helped Shipman to turn her father over for the injection. He said her father was very poorly. Shipman implied that her father had not long to live. He gave Mrs Kime his home telephone number. He seemed very caring. Mrs Shawcroft returned during Shipman's visit and learned of the second injection. She assumed that it had been Largactil. Shipman warned her that her father would probably die by midnight. He told her to call him if her father died and not to call a duty doctor or an ambulance. Mrs Kime left the house to get some rest.
Mr Givens' breathing became more and more laboured during the evening and he died shortly before midnight. Mrs Shawcroft telephoned Shipman who arrived within a short time. He checked for a pulse and looked into Mr Givens' eyes. It was clear that he had died. Mrs Shawcroft recalls that Shipman completed an MCCD. She may well be right about this. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 29th
September 1981 and, by the time Shipman was at the house, midnight had probably passed.
Certification
Shipman said on the MCCD counterfoil that the death was due to respiratory failure caused by chronic bronchitis and emphysema. He said that he had last seen Mr Givens alive on the day of death. He stated that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death.
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at midnight on 28th
September 1981. He said that he had been Mr Givens' ordinary medical attendant for a period of four months, which was accurate, and that he had attended him during his last illness for a period of 24 hours. This is significant because it suggests that Mr Givens' acute terminal illness had begun before the morning of 28th
September. Shipman's visits book suggests that, until 28th
September, Shipman had not visited Mr Givens since 15th
August.
Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Givens alive five hours before his death and that 20 minutes after the death he had seen and had made a complete external examination of the body. The mode of death was said to be a coma lasting 12 hours. He said that Mr Givens' wife and daughter nursed him during his last illness and were present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has considered the cremation documentation and concluded that the death of Mr Givens was not suspicious.
Dr Grenville has considered the documents available to the Inquiry and he has said that the description of Mr Givens' condition provided by Mrs Shawcroft suggests that he had an infective exacerbation of his chronic bronchitis that caused him to be acutely confused. Dr Grenville has said that it would be normal in such circumstances to discuss with the patient and/or the relatives the possibility of admission to hospital.
According to Mrs Shawcroft, Shipman said that Mr Givens was too ill to be admitted to hospital. Such a statement seems something of a contradiction in terms and Dr Grenville infers that Shipman had decided not to attempt a cure of Mr Givens' illness but only to make him comfortable. Dr Grenville says that there was no reason for him to have done this, as the evidence does not suggest that Mr Givens was terminally ill before 28th
September. It may be that Shipman thought that Mr Givens was so unwell that it was in his interest not to go to hospital but to die peacefully at home. However, it is not acceptable for a doctor to make such a decision without full discussion with the patient and his or her family. Mrs Givens had been very shocked by Shipman's pronouncement that her husband had not long to live. Had there been a chance of short-term recovery with hospitalisation, the option might well have been accepted. Dr Grenville says that the possibility of admission to hospital ought at least to have been discussed and the patient and family involved in the decision-making process. Although such discussions were not mandatory in 1981, they were increasingly being recognised as good practice.
As to the administration of Largactil, Dr Grenville says that it would relieve the symptoms of confusion but would not tackle the underlying cause. Antibiotics would be required to treat the exacerbation of chronic bronchitis.
Dr Grenville goes on to consider whether the Largactil could have played any part in causing Mr Givens' death. He says that the potential side effects of Largactil include cardiac arrhythmia, which can be fatal. Further, Largactil can produce respiratory depression in susceptible patients. In Dr Grenville's experience, which is very limited with regard to the intramuscular use of Largactil, both side effects are extremely rare.
Dr Grenville concludes that:
'In my opinion it is unlikely that Shipman used Largactil in an attempt to murder Mr Givens, in the same way that he used diamorphine to murder other patients, but the rather sketchy evidence available suggests to me that, by failing to arrange proper treatment, Shipman allowed Mr Givens to die from what might have been a treatable condition'
.
In his second report, Dr Grenville expresses the opinion that it appears that Shipman took upon himself the decision not to treat Mr Givens actively and to sedate him, presumably on the assumption that his death was imminent. Dr Grenville feels it likely that such a decision was unjustified in the context of normal medical practice at that time.
Conclusion
There is no evidence that Shipman murdered Mr Givens in the way that he killed many other patients, by giving him a lethal dose of an opiate. Mr Givens lived for about five or six hours after Shipman had given him the second injection. Had that injection been of a lethal dose, Mr Givens would have died within about an hour. It is possible that Shipman gave a sub-lethal dose of opiate or other narcotic drug, which caused respiratory depression and contributed to the death.
It is entirely possible that the intramuscular injections, said by Shipman to be Largactil, were in fact Largactil. However, we do not know what dosage was given. Mr Givens appears to have gone to sleep soon afterwards and the evidence suggests that he never awoke. It is not clear whether he was in distress at the time of the second injection. I suspect that Shipman might have over-sedated Mr Givens. There would be a risk attached to giving Mr Givens a drug such as Largactil, as it can cause respiratory depression. As Mr Givens' respiratory function was already poor, it would be important not to risk over-sedating him. If Mr Givens were over-sedated, he would become more vulnerable to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly patients with poor respiratory function. The administration of two doses within a few hours gives rise to a suspicion that Shipman might have intended not to relieve distress but to hasten the death.
Concern also arises because it appears that Shipman might have taken a deliberate decision to allow Mr Givens to die. Mr Givens was not seriously ill until the morning of 28th
September. It sounds as though he had a chest infection, probably an infective exacerbation of his chronic bronchitis. The standard treatment would be to prescribe an antibiotic but it appears that this was not done. Usually a seriously ill patient would be admitted to hospital. Shipman gave only an injection of something to make Mr Givens more comfortable. He did not discuss the available options with the family but announced that Mr Givens had not long to live. If this is what really happened, Shipman's actions were, at the very least, negligent. If his decision to withhold antibiotic treatment were taken deliberately, it would be quite unethical and might be unlawful. If Shipman, who owed a duty to Mr Givens, had consciously decided not to give the standard treatment without which he realised Mr Givens would probably die, Shipman would have shown so complete a disregard for Mr Givens' welfare as might well amount to the offence of manslaughter. However, it is not possible for me to make a positive decision on this issue. Shipman might have genuinely believed that nothing could save Mr Givens' life and he might have been right. I am left with a real suspicion that Shipman may have taken it upon himself to decide, without discussion with the patient or family, that the best thing to do was to let Mr Givens die. This would be consistent with Shipman's philosophy that, with elderly or sick patients, he did not approve of keeping them going.
I regret to say that I am unable to reach a positive conclusion on this case. There are grounds to suspect that Shipman might have decided to ensure that Mr Givens died, by a combination of a decision not to give an antibiotic which might have extended his life and by over-sedating him and hastening the end.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001