The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marion Gaskell
Introduction
Mrs Marion Gaskell died at Tameside General Hospital on Friday, 29th
November 1996 at the age of 77. There is no evidence that she was a patient of Shipman. The hospital referred the death to the South Manchester Coroner, who, following post-mortem examination and inquest, certified that the cause of Mrs Gaskell's death was small bowel infarction (operated) due to spontaneous aortic thrombosis resulting from aortic atherosclerosis.
In October 1999, Mrs Diane Hindley, a former neighbour of Mrs Gaskell, contacted the Greater Manchester Police expressing concern as to the circumstances of Mrs Gaskell's death. The police investigated the death, although no witness statements were taken, and concluded that there were no suspicious circumstances.
Mrs Hindley repeated her concerns to the Inquiry. Accordingly, a member of the Inquiry team has spoken to her and to Mrs Kathleen McKee, Mrs Gaskell's niece. No witness statements have been taken. The Inquiry has had access to the Coroner's file, including the post-mortem report, a letter from Mr P R Clothier, consultant surgeon at Tameside General Hospital, and the evidence of Mrs McKee. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Gaskell's hospital records.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Nature of Mrs Hindley's Concern
Mrs Hindley believes that Mrs Gaskell was registered as a patient of Shipman until shortly before her death. She says that Shipman made unannounced visits to Mrs Gaskell's home. She herself had seen him there. She claims that Mrs Gaskell was convinced that Shipman was poisoning her and was treating her badly, in particular by sending her drugs by courier. Mrs Hindley says that there was an occasion when Mrs Gaskell was in hospital at a time after she had changed to another doctor, when Shipman came to see her and asked what she had said about him to the hospital staff.
There is no evidence that Mrs Gaskell was ever registered as a patient of Shipman. Mrs Gaskell's extensive hospital notes contain correspondence addressed to Dr M H G Shaikh, based in Dukinfield. The later correspondence, particularly after October 1993, is addressed to Dr Chand, who was based in Ashton-under-Lyne. Mrs Gaskell's name does not appear on the database of Shipman's patients. Mrs McKee does not remember the name of her aunt's doctor, although she doubts very much that she was registered with Shipman, largely due to the fact that her aunt lived in Ashton-under-Lyne, which was outside Shipman's area. She has no knowledge of Shipman ever having visited her aunt.
Personal Background
According to the evidence that Mrs McKee gave to the coroner, Mrs Gaskell had lived in the Tameside area all her life and had suffered only relatively minor illnesses. She had undergone knee and hip replacements and had recovered well.
Mrs McKee remembers that her aunt was admitted to Tameside General Hospital in early October 1996, and then discharged a week later, but was then readmitted on 21st
October with a history of nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. She understood that her aunt had an operation on 27th
November 1996, and a further operation on 28th
November 1996, following which she died in the early hours of 29th
November 1996.
Included in the Coroner's file is a letter from Mr Clothier, dated 13th
December 1996. That letter says that Mrs Gaskell underwent a laparotomy, performed by Mr Clothier and Mr Jha, on 27th
November 1996. Following the surgery, Mrs Gaskell's condition deteriorated and, according to the letter:
'... she developed all the signs and symptoms of bilateral femoral emboli in the fact that her legs became very blue and cold and she therefore underwent bilateral femoral embolectomy under local anaesthetic. Despite all nursing care, her condition continued to rapidly deteriorate and unfortunately she died later that morning and her death was subsequently reported to the Coroner'
.
Dr John Rutherford, pathologist, carried out a post-mortem examination on 3rd
December 1996. He concluded that Mrs Gaskell died from the toxic and metabolic effects of death of the small bowel, which was secondary to occlusion of its blood supply by blood clot within the aorta which, in turn, was diseased and narrowed by fatty deposits.
Conclusion
There are no grounds to suspect that Shipman was in any way connected with Mrs Gaskell or her death. She was not his patient. She died in Tameside General Hospital following surgery. There was an inquest at which the coroner accepted Dr Rutherford's opinion as to the cause of death. I am sure that Mrs Gaskell died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001