The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Mary Gaunt
Introduction
Mrs Mary Gaunt died at her daughter's home, in Hyde on Sunday, 26th
July 1987 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman for about one year at the time of her death. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach.
The police did not investigate Mrs Gaunt's death and Professor Richard Baker did not regard the death as suspicious after considering the cremation documents. However, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Gaunt's daughter, Mrs Arline Ollerenshaw, enclosing the cremation documents and asking her whether she had any concerns about her mother's death. On 16th
July 2001, she replied:
'Dr Shipman came to see my mother in the morning at our request because she had been very ill during the night. He gave her an injection and she died a few hours later. He took with him after she had died some small glass phials which he had left in her bedroom on a previous visit'
.
In the light of this response, the Inquiry decided to investigate the death and a full statement was taken from Mrs Ollerenshaw. Apart from the cremation documents and copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the only documents available to the Inquiry were Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Mrs Gaunt's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Gaunt was a widow and, until shortly before her death, lived alone at 12 Carter Place, Hyde. She was a very active, healthy woman until May 1987, when she was diagnosed with cancer of the stomach and liver. She was admitted to hospital for an operation but, unfortunately, the cancer was too advanced and Mrs Ollerenshaw was told that her mother's illness was terminal. Mrs Gaunt was unable to do much for herself after her operation and she moved to live with her daughter and son-in-law.
From that time, Shipman visited her regularly, usually about twice a week. His visits book records entries on 13th
, 16th
, 20th
and 25th
July. The district nurse visited daily. Mrs Ollerenshaw believes that her mother had been prescribed morphine by Shipman. She recalls that he brought little phials of liquid to the house about a fortnight before her mother's death. Mrs Ollerenshaw and her husband both assumed that these phials contained morphine.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Ollerenshaw told the Inquiry that her mother was very ill during the night of Saturday, 25th
July 1987. She was in a semi-conscious state and was moaning because of her pain. Mr Ollerenshaw telephoned Shipman at about 9.30am to ask him to visit and he arrived at about 11am. The visit is not recorded in his visits book but it is clear that it was made. Mrs Ollerenshaw took Shipman into her mother's bedroom and she remembers that he gave Mrs Gaunt an injection. Mrs Ollerenshaw cannot now remember whether the injection was given from one of the phials that he had previously brought to the house or whether he took the drug from his own bag. He told her that the injection would sedate her mother and make her more comfortable. He also said that Mrs Gaunt was very ill and, when Mr Ollerenshaw asked Shipman whether he should take the following day off from work, Shipman replied that it would be a good idea. Shipman left after having been in the house for about ten minutes.
Mrs Ollerenshaw stayed with her mother following Shipman's departure, and other members of the family started to arrive. They all sat in Mrs Gaunt's bedroom and talked among themselves. Some time thereafter, and possibly within 30 minutes, Mrs Ollerenshaw noticed that her mother had stopped breathing and said to the family that they should all go downstairs. She told her husband that she thought her mother had died and he then telephoned Shipman a second time. The time was about noon. The timings are uncertain because, in her letter to the Inquiry, Mrs Ollerenshaw had said that a few hours passed between Shipman's visit and the death.
Shipman arrived about an hour after the death. He went into the bedroom and confirmed that Mrs Gaunt had died. He told Mrs Ollerenshaw that she had died because of the cancer and he was very sympathetic. Mrs Ollerenshaw asked what she should do with the remaining morphine and Shipman said he would take it with him.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), but it is no longer available. Neither is the counterfoil. From the death certificate, it can be seen that he certified that the cause of death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach. Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'1315 hrs'
on 26th
July 1987. He said that he had attended Mrs Gaunt during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen Mrs Gaunt about two hours before her death and had made a complete external examination of the body about half an hour after death. The cause of death was as stated on the death certificate and the mode of death was said to be a coma of
'10 minutes or so'
duration. When asked to what extent his replies in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or statements made by others, he wrote,
'Those of daughter
son in law'
. He said that Mrs Gaunt had been nursed by her daughter and the district nurses. He said that her daughter and son-in-law were present at the moment of death.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mrs Gaunt was extremely ill shortly before her death and was in great pain. It seems likely that Shipman gave Mrs Gaunt an injection on the Sunday morning to relieve her pain. We do not know exactly what the injection was. It might have been morphine from her own supply or it might have been diamorphine supplied by Shipman. In any event, we do not know how much was given. Nor do we know to what extent Mrs Gaunt had become accustomed to morphine during the terminal stage of her illness.
It is not clear how long after the injection Mrs Gaunt died. Shipman himself said she died two hours after he saw her. However, Shipman was frequently careless or deceitful when completing cremation forms. It is entirely possible that he wrote two hours on the form because it was two hours since he had seen Mrs Gaunt, rather than two hours before she died. Mrs Ollerenshaw initially told the Inquiry that her mother died 'a few hours' after the injection was given. Later, she said that the death occurred about 30 minutes to an hour afterwards.
Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have told the Inquiry that if a lethal dose of opiate is given intramuscularly, the patient will die within about an hour of administration. It is possible (but by no means clear) that Mrs Gaunt died within about an hour after the injection. Accordingly, it is possible that Shipman had given her an excessive dose of opiate, intending to end her life that day. However, it is also entirely possible that she died after two or more hours had elapsed, in which case the injection cannot have been a lethal dose. At whatever time Mrs Gaunt died, it is quite possible that Shipman gave a dose that he honestly intended should only relieve her pain. Dr Grenville has said that it can be very difficult to assess the right amount of opiate to give a terminally ill patient. In seeking to relieve the pain, the doctor might unintentionally hasten the patient's death. I cannot say whether or not Shipman deliberately hastened Mrs Gaunt's end.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001