The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nora Grundy
Introduction
Mrs Nora Grundy died at Bowlacre, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Friday, 11th
October 1991 at the age of 77. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was multi-cerebral infarction.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Anthony Martin Grundy, Mrs Grundy's son, and Mr Ernest Philip Dyson, her friend and neighbour. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Grundy's general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1991 and the Donneybrook duty doctor diary.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Grundy was widowed in 1984 and then lived alone. She enjoyed good health and remained reasonably active until the last six months of her life. In February 1991, however, she suffered a collapse. She was admitted to hospital, where the diagnoses made were of intracranial aneurysm, hydrocephalus, aneurysm of the thoracic ascending aorta, ischaemic heart disease, probable myocardial infarction and chronic obstructive airways disease (COAD). A ventricular peritoneal shunt was inserted on 4th
April 1991, to drain the fluid from her skull. Mrs Grundy remained in hospital and, in June 1991, was transferred to Bowlacre. Mr Dyson recalls that, following this transfer, Mrs Grundy's speech, memory and appearance deteriorated.
Mrs Grundy's medical records include a note, dated 2nd
October 1991, which appears to record a request for a domiciliary visit from a geriatrician. The note mentions that Mrs Grundy's son was of the view that she was confused but that a doctor and someone from the home did not think that she was. Mr Grundy does not know how the note came into being and does not recall saying that his mother was confused. Shipman's visits book suggests that he saw Mrs Grundy on that day and the medical records suggest that he found her to be suffering from confusion.
Dr Wan, consultant physician in geriatric medicine, saw Mrs Grundy on 8th
October 1991. He noted that Mrs Grundy was becoming increasingly confused and emaciated. He recommended a course of medication. Shipman made an entry in the medical records for 10th
October indicating that the medication recommended had been commenced. This appears to have been ofloxacin, an antibiotic often used to combat urinary or lower respiratory tract infections.
Mr Grundy, who lived some distance from Hyde, was in the habit of visiting his mother about once a week. He last saw her on either Monday, 7th
October or Tuesday, 8th
October 1991, at which time he recalls that she was well.
Mr Dyson, who lived in Hyde and was in the habit of visiting about twice weekly, last saw Mrs Grundy at teatime on Thursday, 10th
October 1991, the day before she died. He was alarmed and distressed by her appearance and thought that she had deteriorated very rapidly. Her eyes were rolling, her speech was slurred and she was experiencing great difficulty in carrying out simple tasks, such as using a tissue.
The Day of the Death
On Friday, 11th
October 1991, a member of staff from Bowlacre telephoned Mr Grundy to say that his mother had died overnight. He received the call between 7am and 7.30am. The death came as a complete shock to him.
According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Dr Napier was the doctor on duty on the night of Thursday, 10th
October 1991, pursuant to the rota for out of hours cover between the Donneybrook doctors. That would mean that if a doctor were called out late on 10th
October or early on 11th
October, either Dr Napier or the deputising service would have responded.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not been recovered, but the MCCD counterfoil, dated 14th
October, is in the possession of the Inquiry. This was completed by Shipman. He appears to have stated that Mrs Grundy died on 12th
October 1991, although he might possibly have given the date as 11th
October, which is the date given on the copy entry in the register of deaths. He said the cause of death was multi-cerebral infarction and that COAD had contributed to the death. He said that he had last seen Mrs Grundy alive on 8th
October. Her name does not appear in his visits book for that day and there is no entry in the medical records to suggest a visit on that day. On the counterfoil, Shipman said that information from a post-mortem examination might be available later and that no medical practitioner had seen the body after death.
Mrs Grundy was buried so there are no cremation documents.
The Aftermath
Mr Grundy went to see Shipman on Monday, 14th
October, to collect the MCCD. He asked Shipman about the cause of his mother's death. Mr Grundy is a veterinary surgeon. Shipman told him that Mrs Grundy had had a series of small strokes, one after the other, and that this was a very common cause of death in the elderly. Mr Grundy was slightly surprised, as he had thought it more likely that his mother would die of cardiac causes. However, he had no reason to dispute Shipman's diagnosis of the cause; nor did he have any other cause for concern about the death.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that, by the evening of 10th
October, Mrs Grundy was very unwell. Although Mr Grundy was shocked by his mother's death, he had not seen her for three or four days. From Mr Dyson's description of her condition on the evening of 10th
October, I do not think it could be said that her death during that night was either sudden or unexpected.
There is no evidence that Shipman saw Mrs Grundy on the day of her death or in the days leading up to her death. Mr Grundy was told that his mother had died in the night. That must have been some hours after Mr Dyson had visited. If the staff had requested a visit from a doctor during the evening or night, it is likely that it would have been Dr Napier or a doctor sent by the deputising service who would have visited and not Shipman. In the circumstances it appears extremely unlikely that Shipman had any contact with Mrs Grundy in the hours leading up to her death. I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman unlawfully killed Mrs Grundy by administering to her a lethal dose of opiates.
When Mr Dyson last saw Mrs Grundy, in the early evening of 10th
October, she was unwell but conscious and I therefore rule out the possibility that Shipman might have over-sedated Mrs Grundy to the extent that it might have contributed to her death.
In my view, it is overwhelmingly likely that Mrs Grundy died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001