The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Alice Garratt
Introduction
Mrs Mary Alice Garratt died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Tuesday, 1st
May 1979 at the age of 86. She was a patient of Shipman. Following a post-mortem examination without inquest, the South Manchester Coroner certified that the cause of her death was ischaemic heart disease due to coronary atherosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Lilian Stansfield, the former manager at Charnley House, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1979 and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. The Inquiry has also had access to the Post-Mortem Examination Report prepared by Dr A S Day of Ashton Hospital, the Report of Sudden Death, the Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death and the Report of Death to the Coroner, all prepared by the Greater Manchester Police. The Inquiry has obtained a report from Professor Helen Whitwell. Mrs Garratt's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mrs Garratt was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Ashton-under-Lyne on 20th
September 1978. She was seen by Shipman on 19th
April 1979 because of gastric problems. He directed that she be seen by Dr M A Matin (a geriatrician based at Tameside General Hospital) as soon as possible. A doctor, either Shipman or Dr Matin, seems to have visited that day and prescribed Lomotil. Shipman called again the following day. Mrs Garratt continued to be unwell, was sick and suffered from diarrhoea. She had disturbed nights and may have been in pain. Shipman saw her on Saturday, 28th
April 1979 and changed her medication. The diary does not record what prescriptions were left.
The following day, 29th
April, the diary records that Mrs Garratt was given two injections but it is not stated what they were or why they were given. Mrs Garratt remained very distressed. On 30th
April 1979, she was given a further injection. She continued to deteriorate and remained distressed. In the evening, she seemed more settled and took half a cup of Horlicks. However, she was disturbed again in the night.
On Tuesday, 1st
May, the diary records that Mrs Garratt was deteriorating. Shipman visited, apparently at some time before the morning shift report was written, so probably before 1pm. The afternoon report records that Mrs Garratt died at 1.45pm and that Shipman had said that there would have to be a post-mortem examination.
The Coroner's Documents
The Medical History in a Case of Sudden Death records that Ms Jessie Simpson (a member of staff at Charnley House) last saw Mrs Garratt alive at 1.35pm on 1st
May 1979. Mrs Garratt is said to have died at 1.40pm. Under the heading 'Brief circumstances of death', the following is recorded:
'Deceased found dead in bed by member of staff
had been confined to bed for the last week owing to
trouble with her water'
.
It is recorded that Mrs Garratt was given an Imferon injection by her own doctor on 1st
May 1979, for her heart condition. In response to question 10 (as to the drug history), the following is recorded:
'Imferon Injections administered twice weekly.
Parentovite Injections administered twice daily.
Losix & Dedestine 100 MG tablets administered once a day
Mogadon Tablets administered at bedtime'
.
I have been unable to discover the nature of some of these drugs. Imferon and Dedestine do not appear in the British National Formulary and the Inquiry's medical advisor has never heard of them. Parentovite was a vitamin B injection widely used in the 1970s. Losix is probably a mistake for Lasix, a diuretic. Mogadon is a sleeping tablet.
The Report of Sudden Death prepared by the Greater Manchester Police (form 751) records:
'Deceased found dead in bed by member of st
(
aff
)
she had been confined to bed for the last
week as she was having trouble with her wa
(
ter
)
Had been treated by her own doctor for hea
(
rt
)
trouble for some time. Had been given an
Imferon Injection am. 1st
May 1979 by own
Doctor'
.
The Report of Death to the Coroner records that Mrs Garratt had a history of heart trouble and mitral stenosis. It is recorded that Mrs Garratt was seen regularly by Shipman and that he had 'no idea' why she had died.
The Post-Mortem Examination
The post-mortem examination was carried out by Dr Day on 3rd
May 1979. He noted that both lungs were congested and oedematous. A small amount of pleural effusion on the right side was noted along with serofibrinous pericarditis. The heart was noted to be enlarged and the left ventricular myocardium measured up to 1.5cm in thickness. The coronary vessels showed severe grades of atheromatous change. The walls of the coronary vessels were calcified and occluded in places. The aorta also showed severe grades of atheromatous change.
All other findings were apparently normal.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Whitwell has commented on the Post-Mortem Examination Report. She observed that Mrs Garratt clearly had ischaemic heart disease with severe coronary arterial narrowing due to atheroma. The extent of the heart disease recorded in the Post-Mortem Examination Report would have been sufficient to account for death, although Professor Whitwell noted that, in the absence of toxicological analysis, it was impossible to say whether or not a noxious substance had been administered shortly before the death. As I understand her report, she was of the opinion that, although the heart disease was sufficient to account for the death, there was no positive evidence that heart disease had in fact caused the death and, if a noxious substance had been administered, that might have been the cause.
Conclusion
It is clear from the Charnley House diaries that Mrs Garratt was very unwell in the days before her death. As her medical records have not survived, it is not possible to discover her medical history or the opinions of Shipman and Dr Matin as to the nature of the illness which afflicted her in late April 1979. In any event, it appears that Mrs Garratt's death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
It seems likely that Shipman was puzzled by the last illness, as it was he who referred the death to the coroner with a view to post-mortem examination. Shipman must have known that Mrs Garratt had heart disease, as he had been treating her for it, as appears from the coroner's papers. I have the impression that Shipman must have thought that the heart disease was probably not the cause of death, as he apparently said that he had no idea why Mrs Garratt had died.
The only cause for suspicion in this case arises out of the fact that Shipman saw Mrs Garratt on the day that she died. The time of the visit is unknown. In the coroner's papers, the visit was said to have taken place in the morning, which implies some time before noon. The Charnley House diary implies that it was at some time before 1pm. There remains a possibility that Shipman could have given an injection of opiate which hastened Mrs Garratt's death, although it seems very unlikely that he would have done so and then have referred the case to the coroner.
My conclusion is that Mrs Garratt almost certainly died of natural causes, probably of the cause certified by the coroner, although the post-mortem examination evidence was not conclusive.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001