The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Donald Anthony Grundy
Introduction
Mr Donald Anthony Grundy died at his home, 17 Spring Avenue, Hyde on Saturday, 8th
September 1984 at the age of 75. He was a patient of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was circulatory failure due to hypertension due to chronic obstructive airways disease.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in several newspapers, seeking further information about a number of cases in which Shipman had certified the cause of death. In response, Mr Anthony Martin Grundy, Mr Grundy's son, contacted the Inquiry and provided a statement outlining the circumstances of his father's death. The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Grundy lived with his wife, Mrs Nora Grundy. For some time before his death, he was in poor health, suffering from chronic emphysema. He had previously been a heavy smoker. For two months before his death, he was completely housebound and was dependent upon an oxygen cylinder.
In the months before her husband's death, Mrs Grundy had telephoned her son on a number of occasions to say that she thought her husband was dying. On each occasion, Mr Grundy had pulled through. His son thought this was largely due to his determination to stay alive. However, in September 1984, Mr Grundy was struggling for breath and his son believed that he was dying.
The Death
On Friday, 7th
September 1984, Mrs Grundy telephoned her son to say that she thought her husband was dying. Mr Anthony Grundy went to his parents' house, where he found Shipman. Shipman's visits book confirms the fact of a visit and states that Mr Grundy was
'Dying'
. Shipman said that there was no doubt that Mr Grundy would die this time. He said that Mr Grundy was in multi-organ failure and his circulatory system had collapsed. Mr Anthony Grundy, who is a qualified veterinary surgeon, also formed the opinion that his father was dying. When Mr Anthony Grundy's wife arrived, Mr Grundy said to her
'I'm going'
. When she asked where, he pointed towards the sky.
Mr Grundy was struggling for breath and was distressed. Shipman gave him an injection while his son was in the room. He did not say what the injection was or why he was giving it but, shortly afterwards, Mr Grundy seemed to improve. Shipman then left, but, before going, predicted that Mr Grundy would die in the early hours of the next day. During the next few hours, Mr Grundy was conscious and much less distressed than before. He was quite lucid and he and his wife talked calmly about their lives together.
Eventually, Mr Grundy went into a sleep from which he did not awaken. An agency nurse came to the house and spent the night watching Mr Grundy. In the early hours, the nurse woke Mr Anthony Grundy to say that his father's breathing had changed, and about two hours after that, at about 3am, Mr Grundy died.
Although Mr Anthony Grundy telephoned Shipman's surgery on Saturday morning, he does not remember seeing Shipman after his father had died.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Grundy died a natural death. He was clearly very ill and his death was expected. On 7th
September, Shipman gave an injection which was probably some form of opiate. However, it was plainly not a lethal dose as Mr Grundy lived for well over 12 hours afterwards. It is clear that this injection was given for a proper therapeutic reason, the relief of pain and distress. It appears to have had a wholly beneficial effect and enhanced the quality of the last few hours of Mr Grundy's life.
Professor Henry McQuay and Dr John Grenville have given joint generic evidence to the Inquiry as to the timing of the effect of opiates. If a lethal injection of opiate is administered intravenously, death can be expected to follow within minutes. Even if administered intramuscularly, a lethal injection of opiate will cause death within about an hour. Mr Grundy remained conscious for some hours after the injection was administered. The possibility that this injection in any way hastened Mr Grundy's death can be discounted.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001