The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Clifford Gess
Introduction
Mr Clifford Gess died at 15 Rufford Avenue, Hyde, the home of his friend, Mrs Edith Griffiths, on Wednesday, 2nd
August 1978 at the age of 65. He was registered as a patient of Shipman, who at that time had been practising in Hyde for only ten months. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Gess' death was respiratory failure due to oat cell carcinoma of the lung.
In September 2001, the Inquiry placed advertisements in a number of newspapers, publishing a list of cases in which the Inquiry had only limited information as to the circumstances of the death and in which no relatives had been traced. Mr Gess' name appeared in that list and a number of witnesses responded to the advertisement. Mrs Edith Griffiths' two sons, Mr John Griffiths and Mr James Arnold Griffiths, and Mr James Griffiths' wife, Mrs Jean Griffiths, have provided statements. Although Mr Gess' son, Mr R K Gess, has been in contact with the Inquiry, he was unable to provide any information about his father's death. The counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has been recovered along with the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'). Neither Mr Gess' medical records nor any relevant practice documents have survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr Gess retired before the age of 65, as he was seriously ill with lung cancer. In the weeks before he died, he was admitted to Wythenshawe Hospital where he underwent surgery to remove one lung and part of the remaining lung. The hospital consultant said that he had been unable to remove all the affected tissue and advised that Mr Gess did not have long to live. Following his discharge from hospital Mr Gess did not return to his own home but went to stay with Mrs Edith Griffiths in her bungalow. He was very weak and unable to walk. He had lost a great deal of weight and became very pale. His breathing gradually deteriorated. Mr Gess was taking medication, believed to be an analgesic. It had the side effect of making him confused. Mr James Griffiths recalls that periodically Shipman would give Mr Gess an injection, but he does not know what these were.
Mr John Griffiths went to his mother's bungalow on Monday, 31st
July, two days before Mr Gess died. Mrs Edith Griffiths told him that Mr Gess had collapsed and Shipman had been called. When Shipman arrived, he went in to see Mr Gess with Mrs Edith Griffiths. When Shipman came out he said that Mr Gess was dying and would not last out the week. He said that he would visit again on the Friday.
The Day of the Death
Mr John Griffiths recalls that he went to his mother's bungalow at about 11am on Wednesday, 2nd
August. At about 12.15pm, Shipman arrived to see Mr Gess. When he came out of the room, he said,
'I've given him an injection. He won't last the day out'
. As Shipman left, he gave Mr John Griffiths his home telephone number and told him to call him, whatever time it was, and he would come straight away. Mr John Griffiths says that he stayed at the bungalow for the rest of the day. He does not mention a second visit by Shipman in the afternoon. He remembers that Mrs Jean Griffiths arrived at some stage. In the evening, at about 7.15pm, Mr Gess asked for a drink of whisky, which he drank. About half an hour later he asked for another, which he also drank. After that, he drifted into unconsciousness and died at about 8pm. Shipman was called and arrived at the bungalow at about 8.30pm.
Mrs Jean Griffiths recalls that she was at the bungalow during the afternoon. Mrs Edith Griffiths had telephoned for the doctor. She says that Shipman arrived to see Mr Gess but does not recall any mention of an injection. At about 4pm, Mrs Jean Griffiths went home to make an evening meal for her family. Then she went back to the bungalow. After some time, she realised that Mr Gess had stopped breathing. She went into the bedroom and realised that he had died. Mrs Jean Griffiths does not mention that her brother-in-law, Mr John Griffiths, was present at the time of the death.
Certification
The MCCD counterfoil records that Shipman last saw Mr Gess alive on the day of his death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held, and that he had seen the body after death. Although Mr John Griffiths recalls that Shipman gave him a completed MCCD on the day of the death, the counterfoil is dated 3rd
August 1978. Mrs Jean Griffiths may well be correct in her recollection that Mr Gess' son collected the MCCD from the surgery.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Gess died a natural death.
It is clear that he was extremely ill and was known to have a terminal illness. He had become very weak and his breathing had deteriorated. It was apparent to all that his death was imminent.
The recollections of Mr John Griffiths and Mrs Jean Griffiths differ as to the exact course of events on 2nd
August, the day of Mr Gess' death. It is common ground that Shipman visited that day. Mr John Griffiths remembers that Shipman gave Mr Gess an injection at around lunchtime and predicted that he would not live out the day. Mrs Jean Griffiths remembers that Shipman visited in the late afternoon, but before 4pm. I think it is highly likely that Shipman gave some form of opiate, and such medication would be entirely appropriate for the relief of pain, provided that the dose was intended to relieve pain and not to hasten the death. It is clear that the dose was not excessive, as Mr Gess lived for about seven to eight hours after its administration. Dr John Grenville has said that a lethal injection of opiate given intramuscularly will kill within about an hour. A dose which is excessive but not lethal might so depress the respiratory function that it would contribute to the death. However, if the patient lived beyond about four hours after the injection, it can safely be said that the injected drug had not caused or contributed to the death. In any event, as Dr Grenville has explained, it can be very difficult for a doctor to assess the appropriate amount of opiate to give a terminally ill patient. It is quite possible that in giving a dose sufficient to relieve pain, the doctor might unintentionally hasten the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001