The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Grimshaw
Introduction
Mrs Annie Grimshaw died at Pole Bank Hall, a residential home for the elderly, Stockport Road, Hyde on Sunday, 6th
May 1984 at the age of 88. It is not known whether she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to cerebral arteriosclerosis.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Grimshaw's son, Mr Ernest Grimshaw, and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1984 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer diary. Mrs Grimshaw's medical records have not survived and there are no records from Pole Bank Hall.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Grimshaw's husband died in about 1955 and she then lived alone in Ashton-under-Lyne. Five or six years before her death, she began to suffer from confusion and was admitted to Pole Bank Hall. Mr Grimshaw used to visit her about every three weeks. He recalls that his mother's mental state deteriorated further. About two years before her death, Mrs Grimshaw suffered a slight stroke from which she made a full recovery. Then, six to eight weeks before she died, she suffered a second, more serious stroke. After that, she did not recover and remained in bed.
The Events Leading up to Death
Mr Ernest Grimshaw and his wife visited Mrs Grimshaw on the evening of Saturday, 5th
May. She was asleep for most of their hour-long visit, although she wakened briefly and asked for a drink of water. It was clear to Mr Grimshaw that his mother was dying.
On the morning of Sunday, 6th
May, Mr Grimshaw received a telephone call from a member of staff at Pole Bank Hall who told him that his mother had died during the night.
Mrs Grimshaw's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Saturday, 5th
May, the day before she died. According to the duty doctor transfer diary, Shipman was on out of hours duty that weekend and transferred calls to the deputising service at 11pm on the Saturday evening.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but the counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. Shipman there recorded that he had last seen Mrs Grimshaw alive on 5th
May 1984, the day before her death. He said that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 6th
May 1984.
Conclusion
I am satisfied that Mrs Grimshaw died as the result of natural causes, as certified by Shipman.
Mr Grimshaw recalls that his mother had a severe stroke several weeks before her death, after which she was confined to bed. When he saw her a few hours before her death she was virtually comatose and he realised that she was dying. It appears that her death was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Shipman claimed that he last saw Mrs Grimshaw alive on the day before her death. Her name is in the visits book for that day. That would suggest that he probably visited her in the morning after surgery, which usually finished at about 10am on a Saturday. It is theoretically possible that he visited her again in the evening after Mr and Mrs Grimshaw had left, either of his own volition or at the request of the staff of Pole Bank Hall. It is theoretically possible that he killed her during that visit. However, it is highly unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Grimshaw late on a Saturday evening. Indeed, he would not usually visit a patient at that time, save in an emergency. The theoretical possibility that he did so can be safely ignored.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001