The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Goddard
Introduction
Mrs Edith Goddard died at Charnley House, a residential home for the elderly, Albert Road, Hyde on Saturday, 28th
December 1985 at the age of 82. She had probably been a patient of Shipman for about 18 months. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Goddard's daughter, Mrs Eva Dearnaley, and from Mrs Lilian Stansfield, formerly the manager of Charnley House.
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) counterfoil, Shipman's visits book for 1985, and the Charnley House admissions register and daily diary. Mrs Goddard's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Goddard was a widow. She was admitted to Charnley House from her home in Tintwistle, on 20th
July 1984, after she had developed senile dementia. The Charnley House diary for the day of her admission records that she was to receive an injection to treat her pernicious anaemia on 27th
July and once every three weeks thereafter.
The evidence suggests that Mrs Goddard was very poorly in the weeks before she died. Her appetite was poor. She was confined to bed and was in pain from pressure sores. Mrs Dearnaley recalls that her mother's condition deteriorated in the weeks leading up to her death. She says that staff at Charnley House found it very difficult to feed her mother, who lost a lot of weight and became very frail.
On Monday, 23rd
December, Mrs Goddard was seen at Charnley House by Shipman, who arranged for a hospital doctor to see her that night in connection with her pressure sores. A doctor did attend and said that her sores should continue to be dressed. He said he would contact Shipman, presumably to discuss Mrs Goddard's future treatment.
On Tuesday, 24th
December, there seems to have been a change in the treatment regime for Mrs Goddard's skin, presumably following a discussion between Shipman and the hospital doctor. A nurse came to visit Mrs Goddard at Shipman's request. She appears to have advised that there was nothing that could be done in hospital that could not be done at Charnley House.
On Christmas Day, a nurse attended to Mrs Goddard's dressings. She also came on Boxing Day. Mrs Goddard did not eat her evening meal and was unwell that night.
The nurse attended again on Friday, 27th
December. The daily diary records that a ripple bed was now needed, presumably because of the extent of the pressure sores. Mrs Goddard was still eating and drinking poorly. The afternoon and evening report notes that Mrs Goddard ate a small tea but that she did not pass urine that afternoon or evening and her feet became very swollen. The report also notes that
'all care'
was given. Mrs Stansfield has told the Inquiry that this indicates that Mrs Goddard was very poorly and would have been completely dependent upon the nurse and the other carers. It was often the case that where the resident was described as having 'all care' given, they were in a state of irreversible decline and close to death.
The Day of the Death
The entry in the Charnley House diary for 28th
December 1985 records only that Mrs Goddard
'passed away peacefully'
at 8.30am. All details were to be attended to and the undertakers came at 2pm. Mrs Stansfield cannot now recall seeing Mrs Goddard that morning, but thinks it possible that she could have checked Mrs Goddard at 8.30am and could have been present when she died. She has told the Inquiry that the phrase 'passed away peacefully' when used by her indicates that Mrs Goddard died in her sleep.
Mrs Dearnaley believes that she was told of her mother's death at some time between 7am and 8am but, given the passage of time, it is quite possible that her recollection is incorrect by an hour or so. She was not in any way surprised by the news.
There is an entry referring to Mrs Goddard in Shipman's visits book for Saturday, 28th
December, which does not make it clear whether he was called out to see Mrs Goddard when she was still alive or whether he was called out to certify her death.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. Shipman completed the counterfoil and dated it 29th
December. He mistakenly wrote that Mrs Goddard died on that day, 29th
December. He stated that he had last seen her alive on 24th
December 1985. There is no record in the visits book or in the Charnley House daily diary that he did so. There is a reference to Shipman in the diary for that day but this relates to advice he had given to the nurse who saw Mrs Goddard, rather than to his attendance at the home. It seems likely that Shipman should have written that he last saw Mrs Goddard on Monday, 23rd
December, when both the visits book and the Charnley House diary record his visit.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Goddard had died at 8am on 28th
December 1985. He said that he had been her ordinary medical attendant for 18 months. He said that he attended her during her last illness for three months. He said that he had last seen her alive four days before her death, which was on 24th
December 1985 which, as I have just observed, was probably wrong. Shipman said that he saw the body within two hours of death and that he carried out an external examination.
Shipman said that Mrs Goddard had been in a coma for 24 hours before her death. His answers as to the mode and cause of death were said to be based on statements made by the staff nurse and the district nurse who was in attendance. Shipman said that Mrs Goddard had been alive at 6am but then had been found dead at 8am. He said that no one had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker examined the cremation certificate and found the death to be not suspicious.
Conclusion
It seems clear that Mrs Goddard's health had deteriorated during the days before her death to the extent that, when she died, her death was not unexpected.
There is no evidence to suggest that Shipman visited Mrs Goddard in the hours before her death. Her name appears in his visits book on the day of the death but it seems likely that this entry would reflect a request that he should visit the home to certify the death.
In all the circumstances I see no reason to suspect that Shipman was in any way involved in Mrs Goddard's death. I am quite satisfied that she died of natural causes.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001