The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Nellie Gee
Introduction
Mrs Nellie Gee (otherwise known as Helen Gee or Ellen Gee) died at her home, 32D Harbour Farm Road, Hyde on Sunday, 6th
April 1980 at the age of 79. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to bronchopneumonia and ischaemic heart disease.
The only information the Inquiry had about this death was the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') and the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The death certificate named Mrs Kathleen Kinsella, Mrs Gee's daughter, as the informant. In August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Kinsella to see whether she could provide any information. Mrs Kinsella telephoned the Inquiry to express concern about the circumstances of her mother's death. The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Kinsella and has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1980.
There has been no police investigation into this death and no inquest.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Gee was a widow and lived alone. She had many friends whom she saw frequently. She did not see her daughter often, as Mrs Kinsella lived in Devon, but they maintained regular telephone contact.
Mrs Kinsella recalls that her mother suffered from angina and took daily medication for raised blood pressure.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
On Thursday, 3rd
April 1980, Mrs Kinsella was contacted by her cousin, Mrs Ramsbotham, who told her that her mother was ill. Mrs Kinsella travelled to Hyde, arriving in the afternoon of 4th
April. She found her mother lying in bed, in a deep sleep. It was apparent that she was very ill and Mrs Kinsella realised that she was dying. For most of that day, Mrs Gee remained asleep but on the few occasions when she awoke Mrs Gee was very distressed and seemed frightened.
Mrs Gee's condition appeared to worsen on Saturday, 5th
April. Mrs Kinsella contacted a priest who came mid-morning to administer the last rites. Shipman arrived at about midday. He asked Mrs Kinsella whether she knew that her mother was dying. She said that she did. He felt her mother's pulse and asked how she had been. Mrs Kinsella told him that she had been agitated and distressed when she woke up. Shipman then said,
'You know that people like this die from the feet up?'
He then pressed Mrs Gee's feet but there was no reaction. Shipman said that he could give Mrs Gee an injection to prevent her from becoming agitated and Mrs Kinsella agreed this would be a good idea. Shipman reached into his doctor's bag and took out a syringe and a bottle of clear liquid. He drew the liquid out of the bottle and into the syringe and then injected Mrs Gee in her left groin. When he had finished, he said,
'She didn't feel it'
. He also said that Mrs Kinsella could contact him should the need arise.
After Shipman had left, Mrs Kinsella remained with her mother. Mrs Elsie Currie, a friend of Mrs Gee, came in to keep her company and the two women waited by the bed. That night, Mrs Gee went into a deep sleep and died at about 3am. Mrs Kinsella telephoned Shipman, who came at about 4am and confirmed that Mrs Gee was dead.
Certification
The counterfoil to the MCCD, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mrs Gee alive on 5th
April 1980 and that death occurred on 6th
April 1980. He certified that the cause of death was congestive heart failure, which he said was due to bronchopneumonia and ischaemic heart disease.
Conclusion
It is likely that Mrs Gee died a natural death. It is clear that she was seriously ill on 4th
April and it was obvious to Mrs Kinsella that her mother had not long to live. Her death on 6th
April was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Shipman last saw Mrs Gee about 15 hours before her death. Before that visit Mrs Gee had been agitated and distressed. Shipman gave her an injection which he said would give relief. It is not known what the injection was, but whatever it was it produced the desired effect. It might have been an opiate or something like Largactil. Whatever it was, I do not think it could have directly caused Mrs Gee's death. A lethal dose of opiate given intramuscularly, as this injection was given, would cause death within an hour. A non-lethal but inappropriately large dose of opiate or a sedative such as Largactil would not kill outright but might depress the respiratory function and, in a patient who was already ill, might indirectly hasten the death. This is a possibility in Mrs Gee's case but I think it very likely that her death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001