The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Edith Graham
Introduction
Mrs Edith Graham died at her home, 61 Werneth Road, Woodley, Stockport on Saturday, 18th
August 1979 at the age of 72. It is not known for how long she had been a patient of Shipman. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the left breast.
The Evidence
The Inquiry has had access to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), Shipman's visits book for 1979 and to the Stockport Crematorium and Cemeteries Register of Cremations. The cremation certificates have not survived. Nor have Mrs Graham's medical records.
Despite extensive efforts by the Inquiry, no witnesses or relatives have been traced, so very little is known about the circumstances surrounding Mrs Graham's death.
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. The certificate itself has not survived, but the counterfoil shows that Shipman certified that Mrs Graham died of carcinomatosis at her home on 18th
August 1979 and that he had last seen her alive on the previous day. There is however, no entry in the visits book for 17th
August. Indeed, Mrs Graham's name does not appear in the visits book at all in the days preceding her death. Shipman stated on the counterfoil that he had seen the body after death. He dated the counterfoil 18th
August, the day of the death. Thus it appears that Shipman saw Mrs Graham's body on the day of the death.
Conclusion
I regret to say that there is insufficient evidence for me to reach any decision. Shipman certified that Mrs Graham had carcinomatosis. She may well have done but there is no evidence that she had reached the point of natural death. Shipman says that he did not see Mrs Graham alive on the day of her death but saw her body that day, after death. That might be true, but it is also possible that Shipman saw Mrs Graham alive, killed her and certified the death during the same visit. I cannot say whether this death was due to an unlawful act on the part of Shipman or whether it was a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001