The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Violet Garlick
Introduction
Mrs Violet Garlick died at Pole Bank Hall residential care home, Stockport Road, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
April 1987 at the age of 86. It appears that she had been a patient of either Shipman or Dr Derek Carroll, another of the Donneybrook doctors, since moving to Pole Bank Hall in 1979. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Garlick's death was old age.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr John Haslam Garlick (Mrs Garlick's son) and from Mrs Melanie Jayne Oakes (the deputy matron at Pole Bank Hall at the time of Mrs Garlick's death). The Inquiry has also had access to Shipman's visits book for 1987 and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book. Mrs Garlick's medical records have not been recovered.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
In about 1979, Mrs Garlick developed senile dementia and reached the stage when she could no longer manage in her own home. After a few months living with her son, Mrs Garlick moved to Pole Bank Hall. Initially, Mr Garlick visited his mother there very frequently but, when her condition had so deteriorated that she was no longer able to recognise him, he visited less often, about once a month. Mr Garlick says that, in addition to senile dementia, his mother suffered from arthritis, which severely restricted her mobility. She had also been taking angina tablets for many years before moving to Pole Bank Hall.
Mrs Oakes recalls that Mrs Garlick suffered a number of strokes, which affected her mobility, and that her health deteriorated gradually during her time at Pole Bank Hall.
The Events of 7th
and 8th
April 1987
Mr Garlick recalls that, during the afternoon of Tuesday, 7th
April 1987, someone from Pole Bank Hall telephoned his wife to say that Mrs Garlick was unwell. When Mr Garlick returned from work, he and his wife went straight to Pole Bank Hall to see her. Mrs Garlick was not in her usual room and had been moved to a small ward on the ground floor. Mrs Oakes refers to this as 'the Annex'. A member of staff told Mr Garlick that the reason for the move was so that they could 'keep an eye on her'. According to Mrs Oakes, patients who were unwell or had a tendency to wander were moved to the Annex.
Mr Garlick found his mother alone in the Annex. A member of staff told him that a doctor had seen his mother and had said that she had 'a touch of pneumonia'. The doctor had said that he would call back later. As far as Mr Garlick is aware, his mother was not prescribed medication for her condition. Mr Garlick does not know who the doctor was who had seen his mother but assumes that it was Shipman, as he recalls that a member of staff had said that Shipman was her doctor. Nor does Mr Garlick know when the doctor had visited but he had the impression that it was during the afternoon or early evening. Mr Garlick could be mistaken in assuming that it was Shipman who had visited. If the visit took place before 6pm, the usual procedure would be for the patient's own doctor to visit. If Mrs Garlick was Shipman's patient, he might well have visited. If the visit took place after about 6pm, it is quite likely that it was Dr Carroll who visited, as he was the Donneybrook doctor on rota duty that evening. He handed over to the deputising service at 8.30pm. Mrs Garlick's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for Tuesday, 7th
April 1987. That does not demonstrate that Shipman did not visit Mrs Garlick that day. The book seems to have been used mainly as an aide-memoire for visits which had been requested before the end of morning surgery, at which time Shipman would first go out on his rounds. Requests made later in the day were often not entered.
Mrs Garlick slept peacefully throughout her son's visit. Her breathing was regular. Mr Garlick hoped to speak to the doctor when he returned but, as he had not arrived by 10.30pm, they went home. As his mother had slept throughout his visit, Mr Garlick thought that she was dying and would probably die within two to three days.
At about breakfast time on Wednesday, 8th
April, a member of staff from Pole Bank Hall telephoned Mr Garlick's home. His wife took the call and passed to him the news that his mother had died during the night. The member of staff did not mention that a doctor had visited Mrs Garlick after they had left the previous night.
Mrs Oakes remembers events slightly differently. She says that, on the day of Mrs Garlick's death, she was working the afternoon shift, which commenced at 2pm and ended at 11pm. She says that Mrs Garlick died while she was on duty. She remembers that Mr Garlick and his wife visited on the day of the death. She recalls that a doctor had visited during the day, although she cannot recall who the doctor was or the time of his visit. Mrs Oakes says that she
assumes
that she was present at the time of the death or shortly thereafter but she cannot recall this with any certainty. Mrs Oakes was not surprised at the death of Mrs Garlick and did not regard her death as sudden.
Mrs Garlick's name appears in Shipman's visits book for Wednesday, 8th
April and alongside her name appears a crucifix symbol, meaning death.
Certification
The Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) has not survived, but the MCCD counterfoil is in the possession of the Inquiry. The counterfoil records the name of the deceased as
'Violet Givens'
but it is clear that this is an error and that the counterfoil relates to the death of Mrs Garlick. Shipman said that he had last seen her alive on 5th
April 1987, that he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination. The MCCD counterfoil is dated 8th
April 1987.
The letters
'DHC'
appear on the MCCD counterfoil after the words
'Pole Bank'
and are circled. These are the initials of Dr Carroll.
Mrs Garlick's name does not appear in Shipman's visits book for 5th
April 1987; nor do the names of any other residents at Pole Bank Hall.
Mrs Garlick was cremated but the documentation has not survived.
Conclusion
Mrs Garlick had been in poor health for some years and her condition had gradually deteriorated. When her son visited her on the evening of 7th
April, she appears to have been unconscious and he realised that she would not live long. Her death during the ensuing night was neither sudden nor unexpected.
Without the medical records or any nursing records from Pole Bank Hall, it is not possible for me to say which doctor visited Mrs Garlick on 7th
April. It might have been Shipman, although when completing the MCCD counterfoil he did not say he had seen Mrs Garlick on 7th
April but said that he last saw her alive on 5th
April. However, Shipman was often careless in the way he completed MCCDs and cremation certificates.
It is quite possible that it was Shipman who visited Mrs Garlick in the late afternoon of 7th
April. Even if he did, he cannot have given her a lethal injection of an opiate because Mrs Garlick was alive when her son left the home at about 10.30pm. A lethal injection of opiate given in the late afternoon would have caused her death long before 10.30pm.
Mr Garlick thinks that a member of staff said that the doctor who had visited earlier would call back later that night. If that doctor were Shipman, there might be a possibility that he came back to the home and gained access to Mrs Garlick. I think that is most unlikely. I think perhaps there was a misunderstanding about the second visit, as it seems most unlikely that a doctor would undertake to return late at night. In any event, Dr Carroll, who was on duty that night, handed over to the deputising service at 8.30pm. It seems to me most likely that the doctor who visited said he would call back the following day rather than that evening. It would be most unusual for Shipman to return late at night, particularly to a home where night staff were available to care for the patient. I feel able to rule out the possibility that Shipman killed Mrs Garlick by administering a lethal dose of opiate late at night.
If Shipman did visit Mrs Garlick on 7th
April, it is possible that he administered an injection of a sedative, for example Largactil, which had the effect of putting Mrs Garlick to sleep. This would have been a reasonable thing to do if it was the only way to keep her comfortable. However, if the dose was very large and if Mrs Garlick was kept asleep for a long time, this would have increased her vulnerability to bronchopneumonia, a common mechanism of death in elderly people who have suffered strokes. If Shipman did this, it would not be possible to say whether he genuinely considered it to be the only way of keeping Mrs Garlick comfortable or whether he used it as an indirect way of hastening her death.
My conclusion is that it is highly likely that Mrs Garlick died a natural death. I cannot absolutely rule out the possibility that Shipman deliberately gave her a large dose of sedative in the late afternoon of 7th
April, which could have had the effect of hastening her death. However, there is no evidence that he did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001