The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Annie Elizabeth Golds
Introduction
Mrs Annie Elizabeth Golds died at her home, 28 Woodbrooke Avenue, Hyde on Monday, 28th
May 1990 at the age of 83. It is not known for how long she had been a patient of Shipman but it is known that she thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Andrew Kidd (Mrs Golds' nephew), Mrs Joy Kidd (his wife) and Mrs Annie Winson (Mrs Golds' next door neighbour). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Golds' computerised general practitioner records, the visits book for 1990, the counterfoil to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation. The handwritten medical records have not survived.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
While Mrs Golds' husband was alive, they lived in the south of England. Following his death, she moved to Hyde to live with and look after her uncle, Mr Richard Johnson, who lived in Woodbrooke Avenue. When he died, she continued to live in that house by herself.
Mr and Mrs Kidd lived in Sheffield and saw Mrs Golds about six times a year. They did not often speak to her on the telephone, as she did not have a telephone in her house. If they wanted to speak to her, they had to telephone a neighbour. Mrs Kidd says that Mrs Golds was a tall woman of medium build. She was a very good cook and had a healthy appetite. She had a heart complaint but this did not stop her from doing her household chores. Mrs Kidd recalls that, although by the end of her life she used a stick, she was still able to walk to the shops. Mrs Kidd believes that if Mrs Golds needed to see her doctor she would always go to the surgery. She says she cannot remember her ever having a day in bed. She recalls that Mrs Golds was very friendly with her next door neighbours, the Winsons, and visited them for a cup of tea and a chat every morning.
Mrs Winson's recollection is slightly different. She recalls that Mrs Golds did not enjoy robust health, although she did not often complain about her health. Towards the end of her life, she was not 'good on her feet' and could no longer walk to the shops. Mr Winson used to drive her to the shops. Also, towards the end, she could not manage the housework and had a home help. Mrs Winson says that each morning, she and Mrs Golds would wave to each other from their kitchen windows. Then, at about 10.30am, she and her husband would go to Mrs Golds' house for a cup of tea and a chat. In the evenings, Mrs Golds would come to their house to watch television. She would leave just before 'News at Ten'. She would always do that unless she had visitors. She was friendly with a number of other people.
Mrs Winson has told the Inquiry that because Mrs Golds found it difficult to walk, she would not travel to the surgery to see the doctor. Instead, Shipman visited her at home, although Mrs Winson cannot recall ever seeing Shipman entering or leaving Mrs Golds' house.
The computerised medical records are scant. The computer was installed at the Donneybrook Surgery in 1989 and it took some time before all patients had been entered on it. The first entry made about Mrs Golds is dated 30th
April 1990. On that day, Mrs Golds was reviewed for heart failure and it was recorded that all was
'OK'
. Prescriptions for Lanoxin and Moduretic were either started or continued.
Mrs Winson cannot now recall exactly when she last saw Mrs Golds alive but it was on the morning or evening of Sunday, 27th
May 1990. She says that Mrs Golds made no complaint of ill health.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Monday, 28th
May (which was Spring Bank Holiday Monday) Mrs Winson went to her kitchen window. She did not, however, see Mrs Golds at hers and so she went over to her house. There was no sign of Mrs Golds and she became worried. She spoke to a neighbour who was in his garden and he came to help. He tried the back door and found it unlocked. They both went inside and found Mrs Golds lying on the floor, dead. It appeared that she had collapsed as she came out of the downstairs lavatory. The neighbour who was with Mrs Winson has left the area and Mrs Winson has forgotten his name. The Inquiry has not been able to trace him.
Mrs Winson recalls that the neighbour took charge of the situation and made a telephone call. He persuaded her to return to her own home. She was not there when either a doctor or the undertaker attended.
Mr and Mrs Kidd were not at home on Monday, 28th
May but, after their return in the evening, they received a telephone call informing them of the death. They went to Hyde the following day to make arrangements.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On that, Shipman wrote that Mrs Golds had died on 28th
May 1990. He had last seen her alive on 15th
May. He said that the cause of death was congestive heart failure, which was due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would not be a post-mortem examination. The counterfoil was dated 29th
May.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that Mrs Golds had been
'found at home death certified at 11.00 28.5.90'
. He said that he had been attending her during her last illness for four years. That would suggest that she had had ischaemic heart disease for that period. He said that he had last seen Mrs Golds alive 13 days before her death. That was consistent with the entry he made on the MCCD counterfoil. However, there is no entry in the medical record to show a consultation on that day; nor does Mrs Golds' name appear in Shipman's visits book. He said that he had examined the body 24 hours after the death. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD counterfoil and said that the mode of death was collapse lasting only minutes. When asked to state how far his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or were based on statements made by others, Shipman wrote,
'Seen by my partner Dr J Moysey at time of death'
.
Shipman's claim that Dr Moysey had seen the body at the time of death is rather puzzling, as the duty doctor transfer diary shows that it was Dr Smith who was on out of hours duty that day and not Dr Moysey. This may well be an innocent error on Shipman's part. Shipman probably did not see the body on the day of the death, as his diary shows that he was off duty all day. It is likely that he saw the body on 29th
May, on his return to work. Mrs Golds' name appears in the visits book for 29th
May, which suggests that Shipman probably went to the funeral directors' premises to see the body so that he could complete Form B.
The Aftermath
Mrs Kidd says that, at the funeral, Miss Deborah Massey, daughter of Mr Alan Massey, the principal of F Massey and Son Funeral Directors, told her that when the funeral directors arrived to take the body from the house on the morning of 28th
May, it was still warm. If that is right, it would suggest that the death had occurred that morning and not the previous evening.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found that the information supplied in the cremation documents excited no suspicion.
Conclusion
It appears to me that Mrs Golds must have died from natural causes, probably associated with her heart condition. The information in the medical records is not sufficient for me to form a clear picture of Mrs Golds' medical history. However, she was being monitored for congestive heart failure. It seems likely that she had ischaemic heart disease and suffered a sudden cardiac episode on the morning of 28th
May. Her collapse on the kitchen floor is consistent with such an episode.
It seems very unlikely that Shipman would have visited Mrs Golds on the morning of 28th
May. He was not on out of hours duty either that day or the day before. In any event, Mrs Golds was not on the telephone so it is hard to see how she could have summoned a doctor without one of her neighbours (probably Mrs Winson) being aware of the fact.
There is some room for concern because Shipman recorded on Form B that he had last seen Mrs Golds alive 13 days before her death, whereas there is no reference to a consultation on 15th
May in the medical records, nor does Mrs Golds' name appear in the visits book for this date. It is clear from many cases investigated by the Inquiry, however, that Shipman was far from meticulous in the way he carried out his duties of certification and this single factor cannot found real suspicion that he caused the death. He may have suggested this recent contact in order to avoid the trouble of a referral to the coroner.
My conclusion is that I am sure that Mrs Golds died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001