The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Ernest Gummerson
Introduction
Mr Ernest Gummerson died on Ward 5, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Monday, 18th
January 1971 at the age of 84. He had been admitted to PGI about a week before he died. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was acute peritonitis due to a perforated duodenal ulcer. At the time of Mr Gummerson’s death, Shipman was a house officer in surgery.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Margaret Pawson, Mr Gummerson’s niece. Mr George Frederick Barraclough, Mr Gummerson’s nephew (and the brother of Mrs Pawson), who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’), has since died. Mr Gummerson’s hospital records are no longer available. A post-mortem examination was carried out on the body. The post-mortem examination report is no longer available although the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, which contains brief details of each case in which a post-mortem examination was performed, was made available to the Inquiry. Mr Gummerson was buried.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Gummerson was married. He did not have children of his own but, from the time that she was about three years old, Mrs Pawson and her brother lived with Mr and Mrs Gummerson during the week and with their parents at weekends. Mrs Pawson and her brother continued to live with their aunt and uncle until the time of Mr Gummerson’s death, by which time Mrs Pawson’s husband and two children were also living with them.
Mrs Pawson recalls that Mr Gummerson was very fit and active. However, she also recalls that he suffered from hardening of the arteries, which was said at the time to affect the blood supply to his brain.
About six months before his death, Mr Gummerson’s wife was admitted to hospital suffering from severe arthritis. She remained there at the time of his death.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
Mr Gummerson was taken ill very suddenly. In the middle of the night, he called out complaining of severe abdominal pain. A doctor was called and diagnosed a perforated ulcer. An ambulance was summoned and Mr Gummerson was admitted to PGI.
Mr Gummerson underwent emergency surgery, after which he was accommodated in a side room or cubicle on the ward. These side rooms or cubicles were normally reserved for patients who were seriously ill. Mr Gummerson clearly fell into that category. Mrs Pawson and her brother visited when they could. Mrs Pawson recalls that her uncle was conscious but unable to get out of bed unaided. She last visited Mr Gummerson on the afternoon of the day before he died.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Pawson received a telephone call from PGI, possibly in the early hours of the morning, to say that Mr Gummerson had died. His death came as a shock to Mrs Pawson, because he had been well until he suffered the perforated ulcer and the illness and death all happened very suddenly.
Post-Mortem Examination
Although no post-mortem examination report is available, some information relating to the examination was recorded in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book. The relevant entry reads as follows:
‘PM71/32 19 GOMERSON
(
sic
)
ERNEST 84 PGI MR. RHIND Acute Peritonitis Perforated Duodenal Ulcer CJP’
This entry indicates that Mr Gummerson’s post-mortem examination (PM71/32) took place on 19th
January 1971, that he was 84 years old when he died and that he was referred for post-mortem examination by Mr James Rhind, who was a consultant surgeon and had almost certainly carried out the emergency surgery. The cause of death was recorded as acute peritonitis due to perforated duodenal ulcer. The initials
‘CJP’
are those of the pathologist.
Conclusion
Very little information is available about the circumstances of Mr Gummerson’s death. However, that which is known suggests that the death was natural and due to the perforation of a duodenal ulcer. There is no reason to suspect that Shipman caused or contributed to the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001