The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Florence May Griffiths
Introduction
Mrs Florence May Griffiths died on Ward 1, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 17th
June 1971 at the age of 70. She had probably been admitted to PGI about two days earlier. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was myocardial infarction due to coronary thrombosis due to atherosclerosis. At the time of Mrs Griffiths’ death, Shipman was a house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs Amy Kew, Mrs Griffiths’ daughter, who was named as the informant on the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’). A statement has also been taken from Mrs Kathleen Naylor, who was at the time the senior nursing sister on Ward 1. Mrs Griffiths’ hospital records are no longer available. Her body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. A post-mortem examination was carried out. The report of that examination is no longer available, although there is a record of it in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book, to which the Inquiry has had access.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
At the time of her death, Mrs Griffiths had been a widow for many years and lived independently. She did her own shopping and took the bus two or three times a week to visit Mrs Kew. Apart from occasional backache, Mrs Kew does not think that her mother suffered any significant health problems.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About two days before Mrs Griffiths’ death, her next door neighbour heard her knocking on the party wall between the houses. She found Mrs Griffiths very unwell and called an ambulance. Mrs Griffiths was taken to PGI. Mrs Kew was informed and she understood that her mother had had a heart attack. She is not now sure at what time of day these events occurred.
Mrs Kew went to the hospital and found her mother on the main ward. Mrs Kew does not remember being told by a doctor what was wrong with her mother. Indeed, there were very few staff about during visiting time.
Mrs Kew visited her mother on the day before her death. Mrs Griffiths was complaining of nausea. At the end of the visit, Mrs Kew asked one of the nurses to contact her if Mrs Griffiths’ condition deteriorated.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Kew telephoned the hospital on the morning of Thursday, 17th
June. She was told that her mother had died. She remembers feeling angry that the hospital had not telephoned her to say that her mother had taken a turn for the worse. She recalls that the nurse said that attempts had been made to contact her during the night. When Mrs Kew got to the hospital, she was shown her mother’s body, which had been placed in a room on its own. She understood that her mother had suffered a heart attack. She was not aware that a post-mortem examination was to take place.
Post-Mortem Examination
The relevant entry in the PGI mortuary post-mortem book states:
‘PM 71/203 17 GRIFFITHS FLORENCE 70 MEIKLE PGI Myocardial Infarction. Coronary Thrombosis. Atherosclerosis. MYS’
.
This entry indicates that Mrs Griffiths’ post-mortem (PM 71/203) took place on 17th
June 1971, that she was 70 years old when she died and that she was referred for post-mortem examination by Dr Robert Meikle, one of the consultant physicians attached to the ward. The cause of death was recorded as myocardial infarction due to coronary thrombosis due to atherosclerosis. The initials
‘MYS’
are those of the pathologist.
Certification
It appears that Shipman certified the cause of death in exactly the same terms as had been used by the pathologist following the post-mortem examination and as appear on the death certificate. Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that the death occurred at
‘0715 hrs’
on 17th
June 1971. He said he was not the usual medical attendant of Mrs Griffiths, but that he had attended her during her last illness for a period of 48 hours. In answer to the question when he had last seen Mrs Griffiths alive, he recorded
‘17/6/71’
. He recorded that he had seen the body 30 minutes after death and had carried out a complete examination of the body. The mode of death was said to be coma of
‘5-6 hours’
in duration. He could say that on the basis of his own observations. Sister Naylor had nursed Mrs Griffiths during her last illness. He stated that no one was present at death. In answer to the question as to whether a further examination of the body was desirable, Shipman recorded:
‘P.M. requested for own benefit. More detailed cause of death’
.
Mrs Naylor has no recollection of the individual circumstances of any of the deaths about which she has been asked, including the death of Mrs Griffiths. She might have nursed Mrs Griffiths or she might have been named on Form B because she was in charge of the nursing team on the ward.
Form C was completed by Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain. Dr Hasnain recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had also seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 1. He had not seen or questioned any of the relatives of Mrs Griffiths or any other person. For reasons that I have explained in Chapter Five of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
There is no reason to suspect that Mrs Griffiths’ death was other than entirely natural. A post-mortem examination was carried out and there must have been pathological evidence that she had suffered a myocardial infarction or heart attack. The information provided by Shipman on cremation Form B appears to me to be consistent with that provided by Mrs Kew. He did not record that he was present at the moment of death. Indeed, he suggested that he did not see Mrs Griffiths’ body until 30 minutes after her death. I am quite satisfied that Mrs Griffiths died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001