The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Joseph Green
Introduction
Mr Joseph Green died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 20th
April 1972 at the age of 47. He had been admitted to the hospital on the day of his death. Shipman certified that the cause of death was left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction and atherosclerosis. A chronic duodenal ulcer was said to have contributed to the death. At the time of Mr Green’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mr Green’s daughter, Mrs Margaret McCormick, and his son, Mr Robert Joseph Green. Although Mr Joseph Green’s widow is still alive, she is in poor health and the Inquiry has not taken a witness statement from her. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley), who was at the time the senior nursing sister on Ward 2. Mr Green’s hospital records are no longer available. There was no post-mortem examination. Mr Green’s body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F.
At the time of Mr Joseph Green’s death, Mr Robert Green had no suspicions, although the death was unexpected. Mr Robert Green has drawn attention to some of the contents of cremation Form B that he regards as surprising.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Green worked as a coal miner when he was young but moved to surface work when he developed duodenal ulcers in his 20s. He then worked as a plant operative. Mr Green was described as a very fit man with a muscular physique. He smoked about 20 cigarettes a day and took Bisodol, an antacid, for his ulcers. As far as Mr Robert Green is aware, his father rarely saw the doctor or took time off work for illness.
About five years before his death, not long after being involved in a car accident, Mr Green developed chest pains, which were different from the pain he suffered from his ulcers. Mr Green saw his general practitioner (GP), who suspected that he had suffered a mild heart attack. Mr Green was admitted to PGI for tests and suffered a heart attack the following day. Mr Robert Green remembers that his father was
‘very groggy’
and grey. Mr Green remained in PGI for two weeks before he was transferred to Warde-Aldam Convalescent Hospital for a period. His health gradually improved and, after about 12 weeks, he was able to return to work. He was also started on warfarin at about this time.
About a year later, Mr Green suffered another heart attack. He was again admitted to PGI for a period following which he spent a few weeks in Warde-Aldam Convalescent Hospital. After about eight weeks, he returned to work, but on lighter duties. The family thought that this heart attack was more serious than the first because Mr Green seemed more tired and a lot of his
‘sparkle’
had gone.
Eighteen months later, Mr Green had a third heart attack. Again, he was admitted to PGI and then to Warde-Aldam Convalescent Hospital. When he returned home, he seemed a completely different man. He did not have the energy to go upstairs and his bed was brought downstairs. Each night, either his wife or his son would sleep downstairs on a camp bed next to him. By this time, Mr Green was receiving daily visits from his GP and he had given up smoking. He remained in bed all the time. In the days leading up to his death, Mr Green appeared to be very uncomfortable. He seemed confused and was slow and tired. By this stage, his condition had deteriorated quite significantly. He told his son that he was dying and had not long to live.
The Day of the Death
Mrs McCormick recalls that, on the morning of Thursday, 20th
April 1972, her father looked very ill. He was drifting in and out of sleep and seemed like an old man. Mrs Green said that she was going to call the doctor. As Mrs McCormick went to school, she was fearful that she would not see her father again. It appears that, during the morning, Mr Green was admitted to PGI. Mr Robert Green’s recollection of events is not clear. He is not sure whether his father was admitted to hospital on the day of his death or a day or so before. Cremation Form B, which was completed by Shipman, implies that Mr Green was admitted on 20th
April. As that accords with his daughter’s recollection, it is likely to be right.
Mr Robert Green has told the Inquiry that he visited his father on Ward 2 at about 4pm on the day that he died. He recalls that his father was sitting up in bed and was bright, lucid and talking. He was not attached to any medical devices or monitors. He had colour in his cheeks and looked a lot better than he had done recently. They chatted together and Mr Green looked more like his old self. Mr Robert Green stayed with him for about an hour. At no point during this time did any medical staff come to treat his father. He told his father he would see him again the next day. Mr Robert Green was relieved about his father’s improved condition and was not worried when he left.
Mr Robert Green spoke to his mother at about 10pm that night. She had visited Mr Green that evening. She said that he was
‘fine’
. Mr Robert Green expected that his father would be home from PGI within a few days.
Later that night, police officers came to the family home to say that Mr Green had died at 11.30pm. Why the family was not informed by telephone is not clear. Mr Robert Green recalls that he told the police that they must have the wrong person, as his father had seemed so well earlier that day. Although Mr Robert Green knew that his father had heart problems and that he was very ill in the days leading up to his death, he could not believe that his father had died given the recent improvement in his condition.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that Mr Green died at
‘23.30’
. The same time of death appears on Form A, which was signed by Mrs Green. Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Green during his last illness for a period of 14 hours. He said that he was present at the moment of death and had seen the body immediately after death, at which time he performed a
‘complete’
examination. He did not name any other person as having been present at the death. The cause of death was said to be left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure due to myocardial infarction and atherosclerotic vascular disease. A chronic duodenal ulcer was said to have contributed to the death. The mode of death was coma lasting 20 to 30 minutes. Shipman said that Sister Paley nursed Mr Green in his final illness.
Mrs Calverley has told the Inquiry that she did not work at night at the time of Mr Green’s death. She might have nursed Mr Green during the day but has no specific recollection of having done so. It may be that Shipman named her in her capacity as sister in overall charge of Ward 2 at the time.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and also that he had seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
Despite Mr Robert Green’s recollection that his father was much improved on the afternoon of the day of his death, it seems to me that his underlying condition was very serious and that he was unlikely to live long. It is, in my view, entirely possible that Mr Green died a natural death in the late evening of 20th
April 1972. However, the fact that Shipman suggested on cremation Form B that he was alone with Mr Green at the time of the death gives rise to some suspicion that he might have caused the death although, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, the fact that he implied on Form B that he was present alone does not necessarily mean that he was. Shipman would not normally be on the ward late in the evening although if he was ‘on call’ he might well be summoned to the ward if a nurse thought it necessary. If a nurse had called him to see Mr Green, I would have expected the nurse to stay with him while he examined the patient and gave any necessary treatment. I accept that it is possible that Shipman might have been in the company of a nurse at the time of the death but omitted to say so on cremation Form B. Also, Mr Green’s death occurred in the period between 6pm and midnight. As I have explained in
Chapter Seven
of the Report, an unusually large proportion of deaths certified by Shipman occurred during this quarter of the day. In my view, the facts that Shipman may have been alone with Mr Green at the time of his death and that the death occurred in the late evening give rise to some suspicion that he may have caused the death.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001