The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Susan Garfitt
Introduction
Susan (‘Susie’) Garfitt died at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Wednesday, 11th
October 1972 at the age of four. She had been admitted to PGI about two weeks before she died. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was cerebral palsy. At the time of Susie’s death, Shipman was a registrar in paediatrics.
Susie’s mother, Mrs Ann Garfitt, provided a statement to the Inquiry. No hospital records or cremation documentation are available.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Susie was diagnosed with cerebral palsy when she was about six months old. She was quadriplegic and had poor vision, difficulties with feeding and no speech. When she was two or three years old, she developed epilepsy. Her epilepsy was severe and her fitting was frequent. According to Mrs Garfitt’s recollection, the doctors treating her said that her condition was deteriorating.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About two weeks before her death, Susie suffered a severe epileptic fit in the middle of the night. Her general practitioner was called out and arranged her immediate admission to hospital.
In-Patient Treatment
Susie remained at PGI until her death. The fit that had led to her admission had inflicted yet more brain damage. She was unable to communicate and Mrs Garfitt believes that Susie was unable to see. She knew that Susie was gravely ill. A day or two before Susie died, she was moved into a cubicle or side room on the ward. Such cubicles were often used at PGI to accommodate patients who were severely ill or whose death was expected imminently.
The Day of the Death
Because of Susie’s medical condition, Mrs Garfitt knew that she would not survive for long. It is, however, the circumstances immediately surrounding her death that give rise to concern about Shipman’s possible unlawful involvement in it and, for this reason, I shall quote directly from Mrs Garfitt’s statement.
‘On the morning of Susie’s death I went to the hospital as usual, accompanied by my friend Barbara. We were both stood by Susie’s cot when a doctor came in to the room. I cannot be sure, but it is possible that he may have been accompanied by a nurse. I am unable to give any details about what the doctor looked like. The doctor came over to us and told me that Susie was very very poorly. He spoke in a soft voice and was very gentle and sympathetic. He said that she had pneumonia and that her lungs were filling up. I think the doctor also said that if Susie was not so severely disabled they could have given her medication to treat the pneumonia. I think that by these comments the doctor was trying to see whether we wanted to keep Susie alive at all costs. I could see that Susie was dying. I told the doctor to be kind to Susie. I gave Susie a kiss and said a little prayer for her and Barbara and I went outside for a cup of tea. We went back inside 10 minutes later and found the door to Susie’s room closed. A nurse came out and said she was sorry but Susie had died. I was very shocked that Susie had died so quickly. I had not expected this. Although I knew that she was dying I did not think that her death was imminent. I had not even rung my husband and I would definitely have contacted him if I had thought she was close to death’
.
Mrs Garfitt’s friend, Barbara, was present when Mrs Garfitt made her statement and agreed with its contents.
Conclusion
It is difficult to provide a decision in this case because of the lack of contemporaneous documentation. The only such documentation that survives is the copy entry in the register of deaths (‘death certificate’) which confirms that the cause of death was certified by Shipman.
Given that it was Shipman who certified the cause of death, I think it almost certain that he was the doctor with whom Mrs Garfitt spoke shortly before Susie’s death. That was an important conversation. I acknowledge the danger of complete reliance on Mrs Garfitt’s recollection of the words used or the sequence in which they were spoken. Even as she recollects it, the conversation is susceptible to more than one interpretation. Shipman may have been asking Mrs Garfitt to give her tacit consent that no further active steps should be taken to keep Susie alive if the only effect of those steps would be to prolong her daughter’s suffering. I think that is, broadly speaking, what Mrs Garfitt understood. He may, alternatively, have been trying to suggest (although this was not Mrs Garfitt’s understanding) that active steps should be taken to hasten Susie’s (inevitable) death. He may have been trying to tell Mrs Garfitt that Susie’s death was imminent.
It may be that Shipman played no part in Susie’s death. As I have sought to emphasise, she was gravely ill and she could not have been expected to survive for long. However, the fact that the death occurred so very shortly after the conversation between Mrs Garfitt and Shipman, combined with what I know about Shipman, gives rise to a significant degree of suspicion that he entered Susie’s room after the conversation and gave her a lethal injection.
I very much regret that I have had to raise these doubts so many years after the death and I am sorry for the inevitable distress this must have caused. As I explained in
Chapter One
, however, it would have been wrong for me to ignore or dismiss the concerns that were raised about Shipman’s conduct at PGI, once those concerns had been communicated to the Inquiry.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001