The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Henry William Garnham
Introduction
Mr Henry William Garnham died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Saturday, 4th
March 1972 at the age of 71. He had been admitted to PGI shortly before he died, almost certainly on the day of his death. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular accident due to atherosclerosis. At the time of Mr Garnham’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer in medicine.
Mr Derek Garnham is Mr Garnham’s son; he and his wife, Mrs Janet Garnham, have provided statements to the Inquiry. A statement was also taken from Mrs Anne Calverley (formerly Miss Anne Paley), who was at the time the senior nursing sister on Ward 2. Mr Garnham’s hospital records are no longer available. Mr Garnham was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. Mr Garnham has always believed that a post-mortem examination was performed. This may be correct but no record of it survives.
Mr Derek Garnham and his wife have never had any suspicions as to the circumstances of Mr Garnham’s death.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Garnham had been a self-employed shopkeeper until he retired in about 1967. He had joined the Royal Air Force in about 1942 but had been medically discharged, suffering from tuberculosis. He went on to make a complete recovery and, apart from occasional headaches and sciatica, he suffered no significant illness prior to his death. He had been a smoker but had given up in later life. In the last ten years of his life Mr Garnham became less active but still did some gardening and light chores. He could manage the stairs in the three-storey house where he lived with his wife.
About a year before his father died, Mr Derek Garnham and his family moved to Kent. Although he remained in frequent contact with his parents, he did not see his father in the period immediately before his death.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
On the day that his father died, Mr Derek Garnham received a telephone call from his parents’ next door neighbour, telling him that his father had been taken ill and had been admitted to PGI. He thinks that he received the call between 11am and midday. He set off for Pontefract within half an hour of receiving the telephone call. Mrs Garnham recalls a later conversation with her mother-in-law in which the latter described how, on the morning of her husband’s death, she had woken and gone to the bathroom; on her return to the bedroom, she noticed that her husband was lying half in and half out of bed. He was unable to speak. Mrs Garnham had then gone to seek help from her neighbour.
Mr Derek Garnham arrived at his parents’ home in Pontefract in the early evening. He there met his uncle, who told him that his father had died. He went to the hospital and saw his father’s body, which was in a side room. Mr and Mrs Garnham never had any suspicions about Mr Garnham’s death and always believed that he had suffered a major stroke.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He stated that the time of death was
‘18.30hrs’
on 4th
March 1972. Mr Derek Garnham has said that this is a little later than he remembers because his father had already died by the time he arrived in the early evening, but he acknowledges that he might have arrived later than he now recalls. Shipman stated that he had attended Mr Garnham for
‘24hours’
. Both Mr and Mrs Garnham are sure that this is incorrect and that Mr Garnham died on the day that he was admitted to PGI. Shipman recorded that
‘Sister Paley’
had nursed Mr Garnham during his last illness and had been present at the moment of death. Mrs Calverley has no recollection of the death. Shipman did not suggest that anyone else had been present. He stated that he saw Mr Garnham’s body ten minutes after death and made a complete examination of it. Shipman certified that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident due to atherosclerosis. The mode of death was recorded as
‘COMA’
of
‘24 hrs’
duration. In answer to the question as to whether a further examination of the body would be desirable, Shipman recorded
‘No’
.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and the nursing staff on Ward 2. He had not questioned any relatives of Mr Garnham. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
Conclusion
There is very little information available in this case. However, that which is available suggests that Mr Garnham’s death was caused by a stroke that occurred on the morning of the day of his death. The only slightly worrying feature of the case is that Shipman claimed to have attended Mr Garnham for 24 hours when he clearly had not. Mr Garnham had been in hospital for less than 12 hours when he died. I have seen other cremation forms on which Shipman has exaggerated the length of time for which he had attended the patient. I believe that he sometimes did this in order to avoid reporting the death to the coroner and he appears to have done that here. A wish to avoid reporting a death to the coroner sometimes arouses suspicion that Shipman might have caused the death. However, as I have explained in
Chapter Seven
, I believe that he sometimes sought to avoid reporting a death even when it was entirely natural, possibly for selfish financial reasons, possibly so as to avoid the need for further formalities. In this case, there is no other reason to suspect that Shipman was responsible for the death. My conclusion is that this was almost certainly a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001