The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The Sixth Report
>
APPENDIX B - Alphabetical List of Deaths Considered
>
Tom Goodliffe
Introduction
Mr Tom Goodliffe died on Ward 2, at Pontefract General Infirmary (PGI) on Thursday, 27th
January 1972 at the age of 62. He had been admitted to PGI from Ackton Hospital on the previous day. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was left ventricular failure. Chronic bronchitis was said to be a contributory condition. At the time of Mr Goodliffe’s death, Shipman was a senior house officer (SHO) in paediatrics.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Goodliffe’s son, Mr Kevin Goodliffe, and his granddaughter, Mrs Claire Cattran. A statement was also taken from Mrs Mary Laing, who was at the time a night nursing sister at PGI. Mr Goodliffe’s hospital records are no longer available. His body was cremated and the Inquiry has had access to cremation Forms A, B, C and F. No post-mortem examination was performed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers in the case.
Personal Background
Mr Goodliffe was married and had three sons, two of whom, Mr Fred Goodliffe and Mr Kevin Goodliffe, lived locally. Mr Michael Goodliffe lived abroad.
Mr Kevin Goodliffe saw his parents about two or three times each week. He remembers that his father suffered from chronic breathing difficulties. He had worked all his life as an underground miner and was also a smoker. He had retired owing to ill health at the age of 60 and Mr Kevin Goodliffe thinks that he probably suffered from emphysema. Mr Kevin Goodliffe says that, although his father was unable to work, he coped reasonably well with other activities.
Circumstances of Admission to Hospital
About a week before he died, Mr Goodliffe began to suffer from severe chest congestion. His breathing difficulties were such that he could barely walk from room to room at home. His general practitioner arranged for his admission to hospital. Mr Goodliffe was initially admitted to PGI but was then transferred to Ackton Hospital where he stayed for about a week. His condition deteriorated and he was transferred back to PGI at about midday on the day before he died.
The Day of the Death
Mr Kevin Goodliffe recalls that, at about 2am on Thursday, 27th
January 1972, two policemen called at his house to say that his father had taken a turn for the worse. He went to pick up his mother and his brother, Mr Fred Goodliffe, and then drove to PGI. They arrived at about 3am. Mr Goodliffe was in a side room off the ward. He was unconscious and did not regain consciousness during the visit. He had an oxygen mask on. The only person to come into the room while the family was there was a nurse.
Mr Kevin Goodliffe recalls that, after a while, his father started what he describes as
‘Cheyne-Stokes breathing’
. During Phase One of the Inquiry, I received evidence from Dr John Grenville about Cheyne-Stokes respiration. He described how the patient breathes in cycles, taking increasingly shallow breaths to the point where s/he appears to stop breathing altogether. Then, after a lapse of some seconds or even minutes, the patient starts breathing again. The cycle can be repeated many times before the patient finally stops breathing and dies.
When his father began to breathe in this way, Mr Kevin Goodliffe went out into the corridor to find a doctor. A doctor and a nurse attended straight away. The family was asked to wait outside. After a period of about five minutes, the doctor and the nurse came out of Mr Goodliffe’s room and told the family that he had died. In the light of the fact that it was Shipman who certified the cause of death and completed cremation Form B, I infer that it was probably he who attended with the nurse. At the time, he was a SHO in paediatrics but there was an arrangement whereby doctors on the paediatric and medical wards would provide cover for each other, if necessary. That probably explains Shipman’s attendance on this occasion.
Mrs Cattran (whose father is Mr Michael Goodliffe) is able to provide only limited information as to the circumstances of her grandfather’s death. At the time of the death, she was six years old and was living in Canada. She has no personal knowledge of the circumstances of the death but remembers that her father had to return to England because his father had died very suddenly. Mrs Cattran’s impression is that the death was unexpected. However, Mr Kevin Goodliffe says that the death was expected.
Certification
Shipman completed cremation Form B. He recorded that Mr Goodliffe died at
‘0445 27/1/72’
. He said that he had attended Mr Goodliffe during his last illness for seven days. He had last seen Mr Goodliffe alive on
‘27/1/72’
. He recorded that he had seen the body five minutes after death, when he had made a complete examination. The causes of death were as stated on the death certificate. The mode of death was said to be
‘coma’
of
‘2 hours’
duration. Shipman’s answers as to mode and duration of death were said to be based on his own observations. Shipman recorded that
‘Sister Langley’
had nursed Mr Goodliffe during his last illness. In answer to the question as to who was present at the moment of death he recorded
‘self + sister’
.
Dr Rizvi Tahzibul Hasnain completed Form C. He recorded that he had seen and questioned Shipman and that he had also seen and questioned the nursing staff on Ward 2. He had not questioned any of the relatives of Mr Goodliffe or any other person. For reasons that I have explained in
Chapter Five
of the Report, I cannot rely on the contents of any of the Forms C signed at PGI for independent confirmation of the facts asserted by Shipman on Form B.
The identity of the nurse who was said to have been present at the death is not clear. There was a Sister Kit Langley working at PGI at that time. She has since died. However, Mrs Laing has told the Inquiry that she thinks it very unlikely that Sister Langley would have been present at the death of Mr Goodliffe or that she had nursed him during his last illness. She says that Sister Langley only worked on the gynaecology ward. Mrs Laing does not think that she had the relevant skills to work on the medical wards. Although there was a shortage of night staff in the early 1970s, Mrs Laing thinks it unlikely that Sister Langley would have been asked to provide night cover. Mrs Laing herself worked on a number of different wards at PGI during this period and she was asked whether it was possible that Shipman was confusing her with Sister Langley when completing Form B. Mrs Laing says that Shipman knew her well and she does not think it possible that he would have mistaken her for someone else. In any event, she does not believe that she was working on the medical wards at that time.
Conclusion
Although there is some confusion about the identity of the nurse who was present with Shipman at the moment of the death, there is really no reason to doubt that a nurse was present with Shipman at that moment. That accords with the recollection of Mr Kevin Goodliffe. There is also no doubt that Mr Goodliffe was very close to death when his relatives arrived at the hospital at about 3am. Mr Kevin Goodliffe plainly recognised the breathing pattern which indicated to him that the end was near. Although there are some features of cremation Form B which appear to be of questionable accuracy, none of them gives rise to any suspicion that Shipman might have caused or hastened Mr Goodliffe’s death. I am satisfied that the death was natural.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001