The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Hannible
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Hannible died at her home, 36 Rydal Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 24th
July 1996 at the age of 85. She was a widow and lived alone in sheltered accommodation. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of death was (right) cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
Mrs Hannible's death certificate was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in October 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, it was decided that enquiries should be made into the death. The police took statements from Mr Stephen Gary McKew (Mrs Hannible's grandson), Mrs Janet McKew (Mr McKew's wife) and Mrs Annie Wood (Mrs Hannible's friend). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hannible but an inquest was held on 14th
March 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mr and Mrs McKew and has also had access to Mrs Hannible's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mr McKew says that his grandmother enjoyed reasonable health for her age. She was partially blind in one eye and suffered from a mild form of Parkinson's disease. Her most serious problem was that she suffered from pain in both legs. However, she looked after herself and took a lively interest in what was going on around her. Mr McKew visited her regularly.
Dr Grenville has reviewed Mrs Hannible's medical records. He says that Mrs Hannible was diagnosed with hypertension in 1981, but this was reasonably well controlled with medication. She developed cataracts in about 1986 and also had macular degeneration. Parkinson's disease was diagnosed in 1987 but did not significantly progress. In 1995, she developed arteriosclerosis in both legs. At about that time she also developed a peripheral neuropathy in the legs, which caused altered sensation.
I note from the medical records that Mrs Hannible's legs had been quite painful during 1996 and several different types of painkillers had been tried. At the time of her death Mrs Hannible was taking tramadol, a quite potent analgesic.
Dr Grenville's opinion was that, on account of her hypertension and arteriosclerosis, Mrs Hannible was at a slightly greater than average risk of suffering a stroke.
Mr McKew last visited his grandmother on Monday, 22nd
July 1996. She seemed well and did not speak of any health problem.
The Day of the Death
It appears that Mrs Hannible must have telephoned Shipman's surgery on the morning of Wednesday, 24th
July 1996 because there is an entry in the visits book giving her name address and telephone number followed by the words:
'up all night - legs very bad - can't walk'
.
At about 1pm that day, Mr McKew's wife telephoned him at work and told him that Shipman had telephoned to say that his grandmother was not well. Mr McKew's place of work was very close to his grandmother's house. He went straight there. On his arrival, he found Shipman standing at the door between the kitchen and living room. Mr McKew asked how his grandmother was. Shipman replied, 'She's just passed away'. Mr McKew found his grandmother sitting back in her chair. Her arms were resting on the arms of the chair. Her head was tilted back against the back of the chair. Her legs were crossed at the ankles. She looked very peaceful. Mr McKew felt her arm and it was warm. When he asked what his grandmother had died of, Shipman said, 'Old age'. Mr McKew said, 'It's probably for the best'. Shipman said that he would issue a death certificate and advised Mr McKew to instruct a good undertaker. He suggested Massey's.
Shipman made entries in the Lloyd George cards and on the computer for the day of death. The handwritten records appear to describe two consultations. The first record does not indicate where the consultation took place. It describes pain in the right leg and indicates that Mrs Hannible was prescribed Relifex, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. The note of the blood pressure is indistinct and could read either 160/90 or 165/90. There was no oedema and the power and tone were said to be
'OK'
. There was no sign of a stroke. Shipman wrote that he might refer Mrs Hannible to the pain clinic and that she was to let him know. The second entry is said to relate to a visit to Mrs Hannible's home at
'13.40'
. There is a diagnosis of right-sided cerebrovascular accident. The grandson is said to be present.
The computerised record almost replicates the second manuscript record. There is the same diagnosis. Mrs Hannible was seen in her own home. It is said that she died at 1.40pm and that her grandson was present.
Certification
Shipman signed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving the cause as right cerebrovascular accident of one to two hours' duration. This was due to hypertension, from which he said Mrs Hannible had suffered for 15 years. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Hannible alive on the day of her death.
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that death had occurred at
'13.40 24/7/96'
. He had attended the deceased during her last illness for a period of 40 minutes. He stated that he had last seen the deceased alive
'7 days and 40 minutes before death'
. This was intended to mean that he had seen her a week earlier and had seen her on the day of death, about 40 minutes before she died. He said that he saw the body immediately after death and made a complete external examination. The cause of death is as stated in the MCCD and the mode of death was said to be a coma of about one to two hours' duration. Shipman stated that Mrs Hannible's grandson was present
'through'
her stroke. He said that he and the grandson were present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
After reviewing the medical records, Dr Grenville advised that there was nothing in the medical records to confirm a diagnosis of a right-sided cerebrovascular accident and nothing to suggest that Mrs Hannible was likely to have one that day.
In Form B, Shipman suggested that Mrs Hannible was in a coma when he arrived at about 1pm. Dr Grenville has explained that it would be extremely difficult to diagnose a right-sided stroke in an unconscious patient. The signs are of weakness in the limbs on the right side, often accompanied by loss of or blurred speech. Such a stroke is due to the rupture or occlusion of a blood vessel in the upper left part of the brain. It does not usually cause sudden loss of consciousness or sudden death. The type of stroke that can cause sudden loss of consciousness and death is due to blockage or rupture of a vessel in the brain stem. This type of stroke does not manifest itself in one-sided signs and symptoms. Thus, Shipman's account of this death does not make sense.
Dr Grenville considered that Shipman had not been justified in certifying the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident. Mrs Hannible's death was sudden and unexpected and should have been reported to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination.
Professor Richard Baker considered the medical records and concluded that the death of Mrs Hannible was highly suspicious. On his separate consideration of the cremation forms, he concluded that the death was moderately suspicious.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are highly suspicious. The fact that Shipman was present at the death gives rise to suspicion. Dr Grenville says that it is extremely unusual for a patient to die during a general practitioner's visit, unless the patient is terminally ill or the doctor has been called out as an emergency, in response to a report of symptoms suggesting a life-threatening event such as a heart attack or stroke. Mrs Hannible was not suffering from a terminal illness and she had not called Shipman out in an emergency. Her request appears to relate to the long-standing problem with her legs. It would, therefore, be something of a coincidence if Mrs Hannible had suffered a stroke in the period between telephoning the surgery and Shipman's arrival at her house and that the stroke proved fatal while he was there. Other doctors find that such coincidences do not happen. If Shipman is to be believed, this kind of coincidence happened to him very frequently. I regard the happening of a sudden death in Shipman's presence as highly suspicious.
Although Mrs Hannible was elderly and at some increased risk of suffering a stroke, there had been no sign that she would do so on that day. I accept that elderly people can suffer strokes without any warning. So, it is possible that Mrs Hannible could have died from a stroke on that day. However, Shipman's account of the death, as set out in the medical records and Form B, does not make medical sense. If she was unconscious when he arrived, he could not have diagnosed a right-sided stroke.
Form B contains at least one demonstrable lie. The grandson was not present
'through'
the stroke. He arrived after Mrs Hannible had died. Shipman often claimed that others were present at the death when in fact he was alone with his patient. I am sure he did this to make it appear that the death was not unexpected. I think it highly likely that Shipman also lied in stating that he had seen Mrs Hannible alive on 17th
July, a week before her death. The surgery records do not show either a visit or a surgery appointment. The acute prescriptions book does not contain any reference to her. The medical records show a request for zopiclone on that day. I suspect that entry might have been inserted after the death but that cannot be checked as at this time the audit trail facility had not been installed on the computer. Even if the entry in the medical record were genuine, it would not suggest a face to face meeting but implies a telephone request. I suspect that Shipman wished to say that he had seen Mrs Hannible more recently than he had, so as to give the impression that she had recently been in need of medical attention and that he was in a good position to diagnose the cause of death.
Mrs Hannible's appearance in death was typical of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection of diamorphine.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Hannible.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001