The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Pamela Marguerite Hillier
Introduction
Mrs Pamela Marguerite Hillier died on 9th
February 1998 at the age of 68. She was a widow and lived alone. She lived a busy, physically active life. She kept a dog, which she walked regularly. She took medication for hypertension.
The Circumstances of the Death
About a week before her death, Mrs Hillier fell and hurt her knee. The injury was not such as to interfere with her usual activities but, on Sunday 8th
February, she found her knee was painful while driving the car. Early the next day, she telephoned Shipman's surgery and asked him to visit. The receptionist's note of the conversation mentioned the painful knee and nothing else. When Mrs Jacqueline Gee, Mrs Hillier's daughter, left shortly before lunch, after spending the morning with her, Mrs Hillier was very well. Mrs Hillier intended to sort out her accounts. The two women spoke by telephone at 1.07pm. Shipman must have visited shortly afterwards. At about 2pm, Mrs Gee telephoned her mother but there was no reply. Later in the afternoon, Mrs Gee made several more attempts to speak to her mother and became worried when there was still no reply. She contacted Mr Peter Ellwood, a neighbour, who went in and found Mrs Hillier. She was flat on her back on the bedroom floor. He arranged for an ambulance to be called and gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation but to no avail. When the paramedics arrived, they said that Mrs Hillier was dead. Mrs Gee arrived soon afterwards. She found the papers relating to her mother's accounts on the table and her lunch in the microwave oven.
Later, Shipman attended. One of the paramedics said that he would have to inform the police, as this was a sudden death at home. Shipman said that would not be necessary. Mrs Hillier had had a stroke. Mr Gee asked if there would be a post-mortem but Shipman said this would not be necessary as he knew Mrs Hillier had had a stroke on account of the way in which she had been lying. If she had had a heart attack, she would have been holding her chest or reaching for something. One witness said that Shipman said, 'Let's put it down to a stroke'. Shipman said he had seen Mrs Hillier earlier and had found her blood pressure rather high. He had told her to take another tablet. He had not increased the dose earlier as she had not complained. Shipman was variously described as abrupt, unfriendly, detached and unsympathetic.
The Day after Death
The following day Mrs Gee and her brother, Mr Keith Hillier, spoke to Shipman about the death. Shipman said that Mrs Hillier had died because of her high blood pressure. Mr Hillier asked why, if the blood pressure had been too high, it had not been possible to increase the medication. Shipman said it was necessary to have three raised readings before the medication could be increased. Mr Hillier again raised the question of a post-mortem. Shipman said it was not necessary. He was sure of the cause of death. It would be an unpleasant thing to do, to put Mrs Hillier through a post-mortem. The death had been instantaneous and painless. He could tell from her position that she had not suffered. If she had been in pain she would have doubled up forwards.
Certification
Shipman signed a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), giving cerebrovascular accident of a few minutes' duration as the immediate cause of death. Hypertension of six years' duration was the underlying cause. As Mrs Hillier was to be cremated, he completed Form B. He stated that the death had occurred at about 2pm, about 30 minutes after he had seen Mrs Hillier. He said he had attended her for 24 hours during her last illness. He said that no one had been present at the death. She had been found by a neighbour, collapsed and dead. He said that the mode of death had been syncope of only seconds' duration. This must have been an assumption on his part.
Dr Richard Fitton signed Form C. He said that Shipman told him about the case. He carried out an external examination but did not expect to see any external signs. He was satisfied that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident.
The Medical Records
The computerised medical records contained a number of backdated entries, made after the death, designed to give the appearance of a developing problem with high blood pressure and some concern over whether Mrs Hillier was taking her medication as prescribed. Shipman invented a consultation on 5th
February (which Mrs Gee said did not take place) at which Mrs Hillier is said to have complained of osteoarthritis, worse in the left knee than the right, and her blood pressure was found to be raised at 150/100. Shipman noted that the patient said she was off colour and one leg was weak. He purported to wonder whether this was due to the knee. He noted that there was no sign of a cerebrovascular accident but the blood pressure was definitely raised. He had had a chat with the patient about her diet and exercise. He wondered whether to increase her tablets, presumably meaning the blood pressure tablets.
Shipman also created a false entry for the day of the death. For the visit to her home when she was alive, he noted that she complained of malaise. Her blood pressure was high at 170/106. He advised her to increase her medication. She was 'to let us know' – about what is not clear. She was to come to the surgery on the Friday. The second entry for that day records that she had been found by a neighbour and an ambulance had been called. She was dead. He stated the time as 14.00 hours. She had collapsed on the bedroom floor and it looked like a cerebrovascular accident.
The Defence Case
Shipman's account in evidence, which the jury must have rejected, was that he had visited Mrs Hillier at 1.30pm. She told him her knees were no better and that the Co-codamol tablets which he claimed he had prescribed for her on 5th
February were not working. He took her blood pressure and found it to be 170/80, which was worryingly high. He said he would have to increase the dosage of her medication. She should take a tablet immediately and then lie down for a couple of hours. She should see him on Friday. Until then, she should take things quietly. For the knee, he would refer her to a consultant orthopaedic surgeon. She then told him that there had been two other occasions (6th
January and 5th
February) on which Mrs Gillian Morgan, the surgery nurse, had taken her blood pressure and found it to be high. Nurse Morgan had told Mrs Hillier to tell Shipman when she saw him but she had not done so as, on the first occasion, she had missed taking a couple of her tablets and the second time she thought the rise was a temporary matter associated with the anniversary of her husband's death. Shipman asked Mrs Hillier if she had other symptoms of raised blood pressure and she admitted that she felt tired and her injured leg felt weak. On his return to the surgery after the visit of 9th
February, he had entered the information she had given him at the dates on which she had said the readings were taken. He said this was not done with an intention to deceive, although the entries were plainly misleading. He said he had intended to ask Nurse Morgan about the raised blood pressure readings but had not done so. He was critical of her for not having told him of the readings. However, none of these matters were put to Nurse Morgan when she gave evidence. This tale was of recent invention.
Comment
The jury convicted although there was no direct evidence of morphine poisoning. The case contains a number of features typical of a Shipman killing:
The deceased was in apparently good health and death was very sudden and wholly unexpected.
The death was discovered shortly after a visit during which Shipman was alone with the patient. No one saw Mrs Hillier alive or spoke to her after Shipman's visit.
Shipman deterred the family from seeking a post-mortem examination (by applying some emotional pressure). He also dissuaded the paramedics from making a report to the police.
He falsified the records to lend credibility to his claimed cause of death. This is one of the cases where the audit trail enabled the prosecution to prove that there had been an elaborate falsification. Mrs Hillier was not suffering from any potentially fatal condition and Shipman found it necessary to create evidence that she was.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001