The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Hilda Mary Hibbert
Introduction
Mrs Hilda Mary Hibbert died at her home, 36 Joel Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 2nd
January 1996 at the age of 81. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Janice Hibbert (Mrs Hibbert's daughter-in-law) contacted the police to express concern about her mother-in-law's death. The police investigated and took statements from Mrs Janice Hibbert, Mrs Jane Mary Ashton-Hibbert (Mrs Hibbert's granddaughter), Mrs Elsie Barrow (Mrs Hibbert's neighbour), Mr Florian Dalibor (estates building manager for Tameside and Glossop Community Services NHS Trust), Mr John Swiatczak (admission and discharge co-ordinator for medical services at Tameside General Hospital), and Mr Robert Hart (a paramedic working from Stockport Ambulance Station). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hibbert but an inquest was held on 9th
January 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Janice Hibbert and Mrs Ashton-Hibbert and has also had access to Mrs Hibbert's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
According to the family, Mrs Hibbert was an independent lady, much involved in her local community. She suffered from mild arthritis and diabetes and she took medication for hypertension. Dr Grenville, who examined Mrs Hibbert's medical records, observed that she was obese and suffered from poorly controlled hypertension and diabetes. He considers that she was at a high risk of suffering a stroke or heart attack.
In the week leading up to her death, Mrs Hibbert complained of feeling slightly unwell. However, she was able to enjoy the Christmas and New Year celebrations with her family and was not unduly tired by a visit to Leeds to see one of her granddaughters, Susan. On the evening of the day before she died, she said that she 'felt awful' and Mrs Janice Hibbert insisted that her mother-in-law saw her doctor. An appointment was made for Shipman to visit on the afternoon of 2nd
January 1996. The entry in the visits book for that day reads:
'Not been well since B4 xmas, 'just poorly'
.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Ashton-Hibbert and her sister, Julia, arrived at Mrs Hibbert's home on the morning of 2nd
January.
Mrs Hibbert was up and dressed and seemed her usual self. She said she was feeling a lot better. They had lunch together and Mrs Hibbert played hide-and-seek with her great-granddaughter and friends. Mrs Ashton-Hibbert left her grandmother's home at about 2.30pm and went into Hyde to pick up her mother, Mrs Janice Hibbert, from work. Mrs Janice Hibbert came out of work at about 2.45pm and the two women and children went to the library. They returned to Mrs Hilda Hibbert's home at about 3.30pm.
At about 3.10pm, Mr Dalibor arrived at Mrs Hilda Hibbert's house to inspect a handrail, which had recently been installed. He found the front door ajar. Not wishing to enter the house alone for fear of frightening Mrs Hibbert, whom he knew was elderly, he went next door and asked Mrs Barrow to accompany him. They went into the house and found Mrs Hibbert sitting in an armchair in front of the fire. Mr Dalibor quickly formed the impression that she had died. He telephoned for an ambulance on his mobile telephone. However, the ambulance service told him that they already knew that an ambulance was needed.
The first call requesting an ambulance had in fact been made by Shipman. At 2.35pm, Mr Swiatczak received a telephone call from a man who identified himself as Shipman. Shipman said that he had examined a patient named Hilda Hibbert of 36 Joel Lane, Gee Cross. He said that some time that morning, Mrs Hibbert had suffered a left-sided cerebrovascular accident, her blood pressure was 160/110, she had a history of diabetes and, at the time of the call, she was responsive. He requested that a bed be booked for her to be admitted to the hospital and that an ambulance be sent to collect her within an hour of the booking. He intimated that Mrs Hibbert would be well enough to be seated in the ambulance.
Mrs Ashton-Hibbert and her mother, Mrs Janice Hibbert, arrived back at 36 Joel Lane to find Mr Dalibor standing outside. Mrs Hibbert went inside and found her mother-in-law sitting in the chair as if she had fallen asleep. Mrs Hibbert touched her face and realised that she was dead. Very shortly afterwards (according to the record, at 3.41pm, which was just about an hour after the booking had been made), an ambulance and two paramedics arrived. Mr Hart, one of the paramedics, thought Mrs Hibbert was in cardiac arrest. He and his colleague began resuscitation procedures with cardiac massage, followed by electrical shock treatment and intubation. These measures had not achieved any result when at about 4pm, Shipman walked in. It is not known whether he had returned of his own volition or in response to a call which Mrs Ashton-Hibbert had made to the surgery a minute or two earlier. He told the paramedics to stop resuscitation. Then he turned to Mrs Janice Hibbert and her daughter and told them that Mrs Hibbert was dead. He said Mrs Hibbert had agreed to be admitted to Tameside General Hospital. He said that there would be no need for a post-mortem examination as he had seen her before her death. He said that he would issue a death certificate, which could be collected the next day. Mrs Ashton-Hibbert is almost sure that Shipman asked whether Mrs Hibbert was to be cremated. The family arranged for an undertaker to remove Mrs Hibbert's body.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). He stated that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident and that the approximate interval between onset and death was
'? 48 hours'
. Hypertension was an underlying condition and diabetes mellitus had contributed to the death.
Shipman subsequently completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at:
'1600 hrs'
on 2nd
January 1996. He said he had attended Mrs Hibbert for two hours during her last illness and had seen her one and a half hours before her death. He said that he had seen her body about ten minutes after her death and had made a complete external examination of her body. The cause of death was as stated on the MCCD and the mode of death was said to be collapse of minutes' duration. When asked whether his answers in respect of the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, he wrote
'Ambulance Paramedics
neighbour'
.
When asked who was present at the moment of death, he wrote
'Death confirmed at 1600 hrs by Paramedics Daughter present'
.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville drew attention to the entry in Mrs Hibbert's computerised medical records for the day of the death. This suggests that she was examined by Shipman and presented with a history and signs of cerebrovascular accident. She was to be admitted to Tameside General Hospital. There is a further entry, again relating to the day of her death, which records that on examination she was dead at
'1600 hours amb present'
. There is nothing in the computerised records to confirm that the history given was that of a cerebrovascular accident and there is no record of any examination.
There is also an entry in the handwritten records for 2nd
January 1996. This records that Shipman visited Mrs Hibbert, who said that she felt generally unwell and had pounding in her head. She claimed that she had been taking her tablets. Her blood pressure was 160/106. It is said that she had a minor weakness in her left arm and that her plantar reflex was upgoing. It is not noted whether this was the left or right plantar reflex or both. The diagnosis is probable minor cerebrovascular accident. It is recorded that Mrs Hibbert was advised to take verapamil twice a day. The computerised records suggest that Mrs Hibbert had previously been taking this medication once a day. There is a note which says
'Revisit mane'
indicating that Shipman intended to revisit Mrs Hibbert the following day. Dr Grenville considers that the history and examination recorded in the handwritten notes are suggestive of a stroke, although the record of the examination is inadequate, in particular because there is no record of the timescale over which Mrs Hibbert said that her symptoms had occurred.
Dr Grenville says that, if a doctor was called back to a patient shortly after making a diagnosis of minor cerebrovascular accident and found that the patient had died, it would be reasonable to assume that the stroke had progressed and caused death. It would then be reasonable to give the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident. Accordingly, Dr Grenville concludes that although the records are of questionable quality, the stated cause of Mrs Hibbert's death is not inconsistent with the medical records. The symptoms of such a cerebrovascular accident would, however, have been obvious to her daughter and granddaughter.
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents both of the cremation forms and of the medical records.
Conclusion
Shipman's story here is that Mrs Hibbert had begun to suffer a stroke some considerable time before his visit. He told the administrator at Tameside General Hospital that it had started that morning. On the MCCD, he claimed it had started
'? 48 hours'
before death, which would be on 31st
December. Neither of these claims fits in with the evidence of the family, and in particular that of Mrs Ashton-Hibbert, who spent much of the day with her grandmother on 2nd
January. The notion of a woman playing hide-and-seek with young children while suffering from a developing stroke is frankly incredible. I think it is highly unlikely that Mrs Hibbert had a stroke either that morning or 48 hours earlier. I think the records are fabricated.
Mrs Hibbert was found dead very shortly after Shipman had visited her. No one saw her alive or spoke to her after he had left. That in itself is a cause for grave suspicion.
It is a common feature in cases where Shipman has killed a patient for him to claim that he had telephoned the hospital to book a bed or had called an ambulance but the patient had died before the ambulance had arrived. Investigation, where it is possible, has often shown that he did no such thing. It is an unusual feature of this case that Shipman did telephone the hospital, did ask for a bed to be booked and did request that an ambulance should attend. However, he asked that it should attend within the hour. If, at about 2.30pm, he had killed Mrs Hibbert by administering an injection of diamorphine, she would be found dead when the ambulance crew arrived. I consider that Shipman's request for an ambulance was no more than a variation upon a common theme.
Although Mrs Hibbert was at risk of having a stroke, I am satisfied that she did not in fact have one on 2nd
January. I am sure that this was an unlawful killing by Shipman.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001