The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Irene Heathcote
Introduction
Mrs Irene Heathcote died at her home, 3 Coronation Avenue, Hyde on Wednesday, 20th
November 1996 at the age of 76. She had been a patient of Shipman for four years at the time of her death. Although Mrs Heathcote initially considered Shipman to be a good doctor, according to her daughter, Mrs Susan McAlpine, her view of him altered and she developed a growing dislike for him and lack of confidence in him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In September 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, a local taxi driver, Mr John Shaw, contacted the police. He expressed concern about the deaths of several of his former customers. Mrs Heathcote's death was among them, and enquiries revealed that she was a former patient of Shipman. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs McAlpine, Mrs Dorothy Thomson, Mr Fred Peat, Mrs Florence Peat, Mr Eric Andrew Robinson, Ms Vivien Leigh, Ms Edna Cuddy and Ms Dorothy Phoebe Proctor (Mrs Heathcote's friends), and PC William Trattles. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Heathcote but an inquest was held on 13th
February 2001, at which the South Manchester Coroner entered a verdict of unlawful killing.
The Inquiry has taken a statement from Mrs McAlpine and has also had access to Mrs Heathcote's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Heathcote was a widow and lived alone. According to Mrs McAlpine, she had arthritis and high blood pressure but she was fit and active and often travelled into Hyde to do her shopping. She loved sequence dancing and by all accounts was rather good at it.
The medical records confirm Mrs McAlpine's belief that her mother was well. Dr Grenville has reported that they show that Mrs Heathcote had enjoyed reasonable health, apart from hypertension, which had been diagnosed in 1994 and was never well controlled, possibly because Mrs Heathcote did not like taking medication. The penultimate entry in the handwritten records is for 31st
October 1995. This date appears to have been altered from 31
s
t September 1995. The entry records her blood pressure as 180/90 and states that she is not on treatment.
Mrs McAlpine had to go to London for a week, starting on Monday, 18th
November, in connection with her employment. She saw her mother on the Sunday, when she was 'fine'. She arranged to see her on the following Friday, on her return.
The Day of the Death
On the Wednesday morning of that week, 20th
November, Mrs Heathcote called on her friend, Mrs Thomson. Mrs Heathcote said that she had a doctor's appointment that morning and wasthen going to do some shopping. It appears that she kept her appointment, although no record of it exists in the appointments sheet or the practice nurse's diary for the day.
Mrs Heathcote returned to Mrs Thomson's house at 11.30am. She said she had not done her shopping because the doctor was coming out to visit her at home. At that time she looked fit and well. She stayed with Mrs Thomson until about 1pm. Mrs Thomson thinks that Mrs Heathcote said she was expecting the doctor at about 3.30pm.
At about 4.15pm that day, Mrs Heathcote's neighbour, Mr Peat, was returning home when he saw Shipman leaving Mrs Heathcote's house. Shipman and Mr Peat acknowledged each other.
At about 4.30pm, Mrs Thomson telephoned Mrs Heathcote but there was no reply. She tried again a few minutes later but there was still no answer.
At about 5.30pm, Mr and Mrs Peat went to visit Mrs Heathcote. As Mr Peat walked past Mrs Heathcote's front door, he saw that the gas fire was on in the front room. This was unusual because Mrs Heathcote usually lived in her back room. They knocked on the front door but there was no reply. They went home and called round several times that evening but there was no response.
The computerised medical records contain two entries relating to 20th
November 1996. The first reads:
'O/E - BP
(
blood pressure
)
reading
190/84'
.
The second says:
'Blackout - symptom
suddenly last night no reason feels ill no signs'
.
Examination of the audit trail shows that both entries were made at about 11.30am that morning, presumably intended to reflect what had been said and what had occurred at her consultation in the surgery. Dr Grenville says that the systolic reading of 190 is raised but is within the range previously noted for Mrs Heathcote. He comments that the diastolic reading of 84 is normal and that the blood pressure was not significantly different from previous measurements which had been recorded for Mrs Heathcote.
The Aftermath
At about 7am the next morning, Mr Robinson and Ms Leigh, Mrs Heathcote's neighbours, noticed that Mrs Heathcote's bedroom curtains were still open. They realised that was strange, so at about 8.30am, they went round to Mrs Heathcote's house with Mr Peat and looked in through the back window. They saw Mrs Heathcote sitting in a chair, apparently dead. They called the police. PC Trattles attended and forced entry to the house.
Mrs Heathcote was found sitting in a chair in the back room. She was fully clothed. She looked peaceful, as if she was sleeping. According to Mr Peat's police statement, Mrs Heathcote's left arm was discoloured. The gas fire in the front room was still on full. The television was on.
PC Trattles telephoned Shipman's surgery, having been informed of his attendance the previous day, and the receptionist promised that Shipman would attend. At 9.20am, Shipman arrived. He approached Mrs Heathcote and placed a thermometer under her armpit. He then said that she had died the previous evening and had had a stroke. He also said that as he had seen her in the last two weeks, he would be able to issue a certificate. According to PC Trattles, there was nothing suspicious about Shipman's manner. In due course, PC Trattles was able to contact Mrs McAlpine's employers and pass on the message that her mother had died.
The last handwritten entry in the medical records is undated but must relate to 21st
November. It reads:
'Death confirmed 0920
(Temp gives 2000hrs as time
of death)
found in chair no other
(
illegible
)
D.c. -
CVA
Hypertension
(
followed by an almost illegible word which might be melaena
)
'
.
For 21st
November, there is a single computerised entry, which says:
'O/E - dead'
.
This entry was made at about 11.20am.
Mrs McAlpine spoke to Shipman by telephone on about 23rd
November 1996. He said that Mrs Heathcote had been to see him on the morning of 20th
November 1996 because she thought she had had a blackout. He said that he had examined her and suspected she had had a mild stroke. He had sent her home and arranged to see her later that afternoon. He said that when he saw her in the afternoon, he examined her again and found her reflexes and blood pressure to be normal, although he still suspected that she had had a mild stroke. He mentioned that she took tablets for her blood pressure. He said that Mrs Heathcote had a major stroke during the evening following his visit. His attitude was 'matter of fact'.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident of minutes' duration, which was due to hypertension from which Mrs Heathcote had suffered for three years. He later completed Form B for the purposes of obtaining a cremation certificate. He stated that the death had occurred at
'About 2000 hrs 20 11 96'
.
He said he had attended Mrs Heathcote for 24 hours during her last illness and last saw her about six hours before death. He said that he saw her body 12 hours after death and made a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. He said that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration. These last two answers were based on his own observations and on statements made by a police officer and neighbours. He commented:
'Found dead police broke in seen by neighbr 1945 20.11.96'
.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville has advised that, because of her high blood pressure, Mrs Heathcote was at a higher risk than normal of suffering a cerebrovascular accident. However, on the day of her death, her blood pressure was not particularly high. Dr Grenville comments:
'Mrs Heathcote's death was sudden and unexpected. There was nothing in her records which could have led Dr Shipman to surmise that she had died of a cerebrovascular accident and there was nothing to suggest any other cause of death. In the circumstances, Dr Shipman should have informed the coroner of the death with a view to a post-mortem examination being performed.'
Conclusion
This is a highly suspicious death. Mrs Heathcote was not seen alive after Shipman's afternoon visit. Nor did she answer her telephone when Mrs Thomson rang. These alone are factors from which I deduce that he killed her. All the other circumstances point to this conclusion.
Mrs Heathcote was well when she saw Mrs Thomson before going to the surgery on the morning of her death. If she had had a blackout in the night, I think it is highly likely that she would have told Mrs Thomson on that occasion. If Shipman's decision to visit her that afternoon had been on account of her report to him that she had had a blackout, I am certain she would have told Mrs Thomson afterwards. I suspect that Mrs Heathcote had her blood pressure taken, possibly by the practice nurse, and that Shipman spoke to her at some point. I do not think she made any complaint of a blackout. I think Shipman decided to visit her that afternoon to kill her and prepared the ground for his explanation for her death by making a false record showing that she had had a blackout.
When Shipman arrived in the afternoon, I think that he administered a lethal injection of opiate, almost certainly diamorphine. Mrs Heathcote would have lapsed into sleep and unconsciousness within a minute or two and I am sure she was dead by the time Shipman left at about 3.45pm, just in time for his afternoon surgery. All efforts to contact Mrs Heathcote after that were doomed to failure. Why the gas fire was on in both rooms is something of a mystery. It may be that Mrs Heathcote put the front room fire on in anticipation of Shipman's visit and he left both fires on when he left. It is just possible that he lit the front room fire and turned up the living room fire so as to keep the body warm. It does appear from some other cases that he has done this in case anyone other than he should try to assess the time of death from body temperature.
The next day, Shipman's claim to be able to assess the time of death by placing a thermometer under the armpit was pure charlatanism. His motive, however, is clear. He wished to create the impression that the death had occurred much later than it really did. Shipman's entries on Form B are inaccurate and deceitful. Mrs Heathcote did not have a final illness for which he attended her for 24 hours. She was well until Shipman arrived at her house. Nor did he last see her six hours before her death. Nor did he carry out a complete external examination of her body 12 hours after death. Nor were the police officer and neighbour able to shed any light on the mode of Mrs Heathcote's death. Finally, and most blatantly of all, he alleged that a neighbour had seen her alive at 7.45pm, which was not true. No one had seen her alive after he left. In short, the contents of this document are a pack of lies.
As Dr Grenville has observed, with this medical history, Shipman could not possibly have known what was the cause of death, unless he himself had caused it.
I am sure that Shipman killed Mrs Heathcote.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001