The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Josephine Hall
Introduction
Mrs Josephine Hall died on Monday, 5th
June 1989, at her home, 11 Garden Street, Newton, Hyde at the age of 69. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1986. She disliked him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy and Shipman's arrest, Mrs Josephine Allen (Mrs Hall's daughter) expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Hall's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Allen.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hall but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mrs Allen, who also gave oral evidence at a hearing on 10th
July 2001. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hall's general practitioner records and to Shipman's visits book for 1989.
Personal Background
Mrs Allen told the Inquiry that her mother's general health was very good although she suffered from agoraphobia, a fear of open spaces, and could rarely be persuaded to leave the house, save after dark when she would walk her dog round the grassy area facing her house. She also had a number of minor problems about which she was somewhat introspective. She thought that Shipman was unsympathetic about her agoraphobia. He once told her that, if he had his way, he would take her to the middle of Hyde and leave her to make her own way home.
The medical records confirm that Mrs Hall had had many psychological problems, particularly since the death of her husband in 1984. She had agoraphobia, insomnia and was depressed and anxious. Until 1986, her general practitioner was Dr Tanna who practised from the Clarendon Surgery. Mrs Hall had regular consultations with him, usually home visits, and was prescribed a variety of drugs including temazepam, Valium and Anafranil (which is prescribed for depressive illness and phobic and obsessional states). She had periodic episodes of dizziness for which she was prescribed Stemetil. She also suffered from high blood pressure for which she took Moduretic and Inderal. She had recurrent problems with her ears. A psychiatric referral did not effect much improvement. She continued to be worried about her health but was not always compliant with the regimes of medication prescribed by her doctor.
In June 1986, Mrs Hall's care passed to Shipman. At the first visit, she was suffering from vertigo and Stemetil was continued. Later in the same month, she had raised blood pressure; Inderal was stopped but she was continued on diazepam, co-proxamol and Moduretic. These prescriptions were continued on the next two consultations. In July 1987, Shipman visited for a check-up. Mrs Hall had
'non specific complaints'
and said that she was dizzy from the district nurse syringing her ear two years before. She was reassured and continued on her previous medication. From September 1987 to April 1988, she consulted Shipman regularly about ear infections and vertigo. Her blood pressure remained high. She was prescribed Innovace and Moduretic and diazepam was continued.
In April 1988, Mrs Hall was seen by a psychiatrist, who thought that she was 'fed up with life', although not actually depressed. There was little to be done for her. Shipman observed in his notes:
'
No use
- ? what do we do?'
.
The medication was continued as before.
In August 1988, Mrs Hall's dog was attacked and she was very shocked. In September 1988, she appeared weepy and irritable and Shipman prescribed Faverin, which is indicated for obsessive or compulsive disorders and depression. Innovace was continued.
In December 1988, Mrs Hall had respiratory problems and, in April, she appears to have complained of shortness of breath. However, Shipman observed that there was no sign of congestive heart failure and he had found nothing physically abnormal.
As a consequence of her medical problems, Mrs Hall did not have much contact with anyone except for her daughter, Mrs Allen, and her two granddaughters. Mrs Hall lived only a few doors away from Mr Thomas Cheetham and his wife, Elsie, and Mr Sidney Smith and his brother, Kenneth, all of whom I have found were later killed by Shipman. Mrs Cheetham would call in two or three times a week to check that all was well. Mr Sidney Smith also called occasionally. Mrs Hall saw her daughter twice a week and they spoke on the telephone almost daily.
The Day of the Death
On Sunday, 4th
June 1989, Mrs Allen spoke to her mother on the telephone. Mrs Hall was quite cheerful although she said she had a headache and the doctor was coming the next day. There was nothing unusual about this and Mrs Allen went to work on the Monday without any undue concern for her mother. Mrs Allen worked split days, doing a spell in the early morning, followed by a break of several hours, and returning to work at about 4pm.
Mrs Allen was at work in the late afternoon when her daughter came to tell her that Mrs Hall had been taken ill. She went to her mother's house, where they were met by PC Quinn of the Greater Manchester Police, who had been called by Mrs Cheetham. Mrs Allen's daughter was pregnant at the time so she stayed outside while Mrs Allen went inside with PC Quinn, who told her that her mother had died. When Mrs Allen went in she saw her mother sitting in a chair with her head slumped slightly forward. She was in what had been her husband's chair. She was wearing a T shirt and a cardigan, which was not completely on. One hand and lower arm was in the sleeve but the rest of the arm and shoulder were uncovered. Mrs Allen's initial thought was that her mother had been struggling to try and get her cardigan on or off at the time of her death. Mrs Cheetham was also at Mrs Hall's house when Mrs Allen and her daughter arrived. She explained to Mrs Allen how she had come to discover Mrs Hall's body. Mrs Cheetham said that she was hanging out some washing at the back of her own house when her attention had been drawn to Mrs Hall's dog, which was always put out in the garden when anyone visited Mrs Hall. He was barking in the garden and Mrs Cheetham decided to go to make sure that all was well. She had gone to the front door, which she found on the catch, let herself in and found Mrs Hall sitting in her chair, obviously dead. Being unable to find Mrs Allen's telephone number, Mrs Cheetham rang the police and, eventually, Mrs Allen's daughter was contacted. It appears that Shipman must also have been called and he attended before Mrs Allen arrived.
Later, when Mrs Allen went to see her mother's body at the undertaker's, she noticed that one lower arm was discoloured as if bruised. Mrs Allen cannot remember which arm this was or whether it was the same arm as had been half in and half out of the cardigan sleeve.
The notes made by Shipman on the day of Mrs Hall's death say:
'V
(
visit
)
Headache weakness ®
arm tingling walks poorly
-?CVA
(
cerebrovascular accident
)
BP 210/120 not felt well so stopped Rx
(
treatment
)
?TCI
(
transient cerebral ischaemia
)
To go back on Rx review mané
? D/V
(
domiciliary visit
)
'
.
I interpret this to mean that Mrs Hall complained of headache, weakness on the right, tingling in the arm and either claimed or was observed to be walking badly. Shipman wondered if this was a stroke. The blood pressure was high at 210/120 and, according to Shipman, Mrs Hall said she had stopped taking her treatment. He told her to resume her treatment and decided to review her the next day. He wondered whether a domiciliary visit by a consultant would be required.
The second note for the day is timed at 4.30pm and begins with a cross, which indicates that the patient is dead. It reads:
'5/6/89 1630
found by neighbour
cold dead 2-3 hrs no more.
Approx time 2.00.
DC
(
death certificate
)
1) CVA
2) hypertension'
.
Shipman issued the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) the next day. The document itself has not survived but the counterfoil has been found. This suggests that Shipman last saw Mrs Hall alive on 5th
May 1989, but this must be an error as the medical records make it plain that he saw her alive on 5th
June, the day of the death. The cause of death is given as cerebrovascular accident resulting from hypertension.
Conclusion
This case arouses suspicion because Mrs Hall died soon after a visit by Shipman. No one saw her alive or spoke to her after his departure. Having said that, Mrs Hall did have a medical history of high blood pressure and must therefore have been at some increased risk of suffering a stroke.
Shipman's note of his first visit on the day of the death provides a plausible account of a developing stroke. Mrs Hall had complained to her daughter of a headache. Dr Aneez Esmail, medical advisor to the Inquiry, has advised that a headache is not usually a sign of a cerebrovascular accident although it can be an indication of a ruptured aneurysm. However, the other symptoms, weakness, tingling and poor gait, are typical signs of a stroke. Experience has shown that Shipman frequently fabricated medical records in order to create a plausible cause of a sudden death. Accordingly, all notes relating to a death must be viewed with suspicion. Shipman would usually select a cause of death that would be feasible in the light of the past medical history. Here, Mrs Hall's high blood pressure made a death by cerebrovascular accident a real possibility.
There are a number of aspects of this record which make me suspect that it is false. First, I think it highly likely that if Mrs Hall had developed weakness on one side or tingling in the arm, she would have telephoned her daughter to tell her. Second, I think it most unlikely that she would have stopped taking her tablets without even mentioning this to her daughter. Third, in the light of Dr Esmail's opinion on this case, I consider that the course of action Shipman claims to have adopted would have been so obviously wrong as to be very unlikely. As Dr Esmail says, no doctor would leave a patient alone if he suspected that he or she might be having a stroke. The stroke could develop over a few hours and the patient could become unconscious. If possible, Shipman should have made arrangements for someone to sit with Mrs Hall. If this was not possible, he should have arranged for the district nurse to call or, at the very least, he should have said he would call back later that day. In this case, it is highly likely that Mrs Allen or one of the granddaughters would have come to sit with her. In any event, it is inconceivable that Mrs Hall would not have telephoned either her daughter or one of her granddaughters immediately after the visit if Shipman had said that she needed either hospital admission or a domiciliary visit from a consultant. The reason she did not do so must be because she was already dead. On close examination, this entry in the medical records and the circumstances surrounding the visit do not make sense. In my view, the entry is probably a fabrication designed to provide an explanation for Mrs Hall's sudden death from morphine poisoning.
The position of Mrs Hall's arm half in and half out of the cardigan sleeve, and the discolouration of her arm observed later, are not conclusive evidence that Shipman gave Mrs Hall an injection although they lend some support to that suggestion.
Shipman's estimate of the time of death found in the second entry for the day is something of a mystery. There is no direct evidence of the time of Shipman's visit. Generally, Shipman would seek to suggest a time of death well after his departure from the house. He would, I believe, take this precaution in case someone had noticed the time of his visit. However, it would seem likely that Mrs Cheetham noticed the barking of Mrs Hall's dog soon after Shipman's departure. That would indicate that the visit and the death had occurred in the mid-afternoon. It is strange that Shipman should suggest that the death had occurred at 2pm if that were before the time of his visit. It is possible that he visited her quite early, soon after noon, and that the dog was very patient. Whatever the explanation for Shipman's quite elaborate and wholly unscientific attempt to suggest a time of death, it makes no difference to my overall view of this case.
In all the circumstances, I am driven to the conclusion that Mrs Hall's death was not a natural one. I am sure that Shipman killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001