The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Joan Milray Harding
Introduction
Miss Joan Milray (or Mylrae) Harding died at Shipman's surgery at 21 Market Street, Hyde on Tuesday, 4th
January 1994. According to the information on her death certificate, she was 82 years of age. She had never married and worked until her retirement as a housing officer. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver based in Hyde, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Miss Harding's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Judith Anne Hughes (Miss Harding's cousin's daughter), Mrs Marian Bolton (Miss Harding's close friend), Mrs Sylvia Lorraine Anne Spoors (a meals on wheels delivery driver), Mrs Gillian Ann Morgan (the practice nurse at the Market Street Surgery) and Mrs Carol Chapman and Ms Lee Francis Ann Leech (two receptionists at the surgery).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Harding, but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Hughes and Mrs Morgan and has also taken a statement from Ms Sheila May Bowen (Mrs Hughes' sister). The Inquiry has had access to Miss Harding's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Professor Helen Whitwell and Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
It appears from the evidence of those who knew her well that Miss Harding's general health was very good, although she was subject to variations in mood. She could be 'up and down' and visited her doctor quite frequently. These impressions are not really supported by the medical records. They reveal a long history of recurrent severe depression, anxiety and cancer phobia. She had problems with her nose and suffered from osteoarthritis of the neck. In 1976, she fractured the neck of her left femur. In 1986, her gall bladder was removed. In 1990, she had a minor eye operation. In 1992, she had a fall and broke her elbow. This was reduced and pinned internally, but continued to give rise to some pain. In that year, she also had a course of physiotherapy for arthritis of the lumbar spine.
Mrs Hughes said that, at Christmas 1993, Miss Harding was in very good form.
On 2nd
or 3rd
January 1994, Miss Harding telephoned Mrs Hughes. Miss Harding told Mrs Hughes she was going to see her doctor on the following day concerning her elbow injury. She sounded in extremely good spirits, and Mrs Hughes remarked on this to her husband because Miss Harding was often low when confined to the house by winter weather.
On 3rd
January, Miss Harding told Mrs Spoors, a meals on wheels driver who brought her lunch, that she was feeling bilious. Mrs Spoors suggested she should see her doctor and asked whether she felt fit enough to drive herself to the surgery. Miss Harding said she did. She appeared quite normal and did not complain of any other problem. On that day, Miss Harding's close friend, Mrs Bolton, visited her. She found Miss Harding in low spirits, and on learning that Miss Harding intended to visit her doctor the next day, Mrs Bolton offered to drive her there.
The Day of the Death
During the course of the journey into Hyde the next morning, Miss Harding said she had pain in her back, which was worse than the pain in her elbow. Mrs Bolton had the impression that the pain was in the upper back. Apart from this complaint, Miss Harding did not seem to be ill.
Miss Harding's name is on the appointments sheet for the open surgery that morning. There is a slight conflict of evidence about her condition on arrival at the surgery. Mrs Bolton said that she parked her car at the rear of the surgery building and that the two women entered the surgery by the back door. Miss Harding had to wait before she could see the doctor, so Mrs Bolton went to buy her a newspaper and then left her in the waiting room while she went to do some shopping. She recalls Miss Harding smiling and thanking her for the newspaper. Mrs Bolton did not think Miss Harding was seriously ill. If she had, she would have stayed with her. Mrs Chapman, the receptionist, on the other hand, recalls that Miss Harding went in to see the doctor immediately on arrival. She recalls that Miss Harding looked 'washed out and pale' when she came in. Mrs Chapman said that Miss Harding was 'closely escorted' as she came into the waiting area. She suggests that this might have implied that Miss Harding could not walk well unaided. She also remembers that Mrs Bolton said to the reception staff on duty that she would be in the car park when Miss Harding came out.
In due course, Miss Harding went in to see Shipman. Some time later, Nurse Morgan, the practice nurse, was seeing a patient in her office, when Shipman came in and said,
'I need you now'
.
Nurse Morgan replied that she would be with him in a minute but he said,
'No. Now'
.
She followed Shipman into his consulting room. Shipman said that a woman had collapsed. On entering the room, Nurse Morgan saw an elderly woman laid out on the examination couch, fully dressed apart from her topcoat. The woman was motionless and looked pale and ill. Nurse Morgan cannot remember seeing signs of cyanosis. She asked Shipman if the woman was dead. Shipman said that they were to attempt resuscitation. He directed Nurse Morgan to perform cardiac massage whilst he conducted mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. These procedures continued for about five minutes. Eventually, Shipman checked for a pulse and decided to stop the resuscitation process. Nurse Morgan does not mention the use of an airway, which should have been readily available in the surgery. Nor does she say that Shipman administered adrenaline, the drug most frequently used in resuscitation, which should also have been available.
According to the receptionist, Mrs Chapman, Miss Harding had been in Shipman's consulting room for around 20 minutes before Shipman buzzed through to reception on the internal telephone. He asked Mrs Chapman to come into the consulting room. Miss Harding was not in the room with him. Shipman said to her,
'She's died. Did she come in with anyone?'
Mrs Chapman said that Miss Harding had come in with a friend and that she would go and find her but that she was not prepared to tell her the news. Mrs Chapman went to find Mrs Bolton, who was in the car park, and brought her in. Shipman gave Mrs Bolton the news in his surgery. He said that Miss Harding's blood pressure was very low and suggested to Mrs Bolton that Miss Harding had had a heart attack. He said he had done all he could to save her.
The medical notes and records were recovered in a Kleenex box from Shipman's house. They show no history of heart problems. The entry for 4th
January 1994 is difficult to decipher but seems to say:
'4.1.94
a c/o pain in elbow.
(
meaning 'to see'
)
FRI Mr Turner
c/o mid thoracic pain
indigestion
no
acid
light headed 2/52 on off worse
today feels unwell
BP 80/40 pulse 60/ min grey
blue lips. HS I II
ectopic beats
D - C .T. ? when
Ambulance
Patient collapsed 11.20
unable to resuscitate CCM
self and P/N Morgan present at death
Relatives - none found
police
informed
D.C. CT'
.
I interpret this record to suggest that Miss Harding's first complaint was of pain in the elbow for which she was to see Mr Turner, an orthopaedic surgeon, on the coming Friday. Next, she complained of mid-thoracic pain. There is a reference to indigestion but it is not clear whether this was suggested as an explanation for the mid-thoracic pain or was a separate problem. Next, she complained of feeling light-headed over a period of two weeks, on and off. She said she was worse that day and was feeling unwell. At this stage, Shipman apparently took her blood pressure, which was very low at 80/40. The pulse was 60, which is slow. It is not clear whether the word
'grey'
means that Miss Harding's face looked grey or whether her lips were grey/blue. In any event, the lips were reported as being either grey/blue or blue. The heart sounds were present but there were ectopic or additional beats, heard between the usual beats. Shipman diagnosed a coronary thrombosis but wondered when it had happened. He called an ambulance. Miss Harding collapsed. He was unable to resuscitate her despite cardiac massage. He and Nurse Morgan were present at the death.
An ambulance log confirms that a 999 call requesting an ambulance was made from the surgery at 11.31am that day for an 81 year old female. However, it was later cancelled. The record indicates that the reason given for the cancellation was
'G.P. Attending'
. Ms Leech, a temporary receptionist, remembers an occasion when she was asked to call for an ambulance and later to cancel it but she cannot say whether it was on this occasion.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman wrote that he last saw Miss Harding alive on the day of her death. He said he had seen the body after death. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis.
According to Form B of the cremation certificate, the death occurred at 11.20am in the surgery. That timing, which coincides with the medical record, indicates that Shipman considered that Miss Harding died at the moment of collapse and that the ambulance was not summoned until about ten minutes after the collapse and death.
In Form B, Shipman says that he had attended Miss Harding for 30 minutes during her last illness. This implies that she was having a heart attack for half an hour before her death. One wonders why Shipman did not call an ambulance during that time. He said that he and Nurse Morgan were present at the death. Shipman also claimed to have seen Miss Harding 13 days before her death. It is possible that he had done. There is mention of a faecal examination in the computerised records for 22nd
December 1993.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker reviewed the cremation certificate and, because this was a death in the surgery, characterised the death as highly suspicious. He was also highly suspicious of the death because the medical notes and records reveal no history of cardiovascular disease.
Dr Grenville provided a report on 7th
June 2001. He has considered all the evidence, including the evidential conflict about Miss Harding's condition on entering the surgery. His concluding remarks merit full quotation:
'I note that Marian Bolton recalls Miss Harding telling her, as they drove to Surgery, that she had a bad pain in her back and I note that Mrs Bolton has the impression that the pain was in the upper part of the back. This would accord with Shipman's record that Miss Harding complained of mid thoracic pain. I note the discrepancy between Marian Bolton, who says that Miss Harding walked into the Surgery in front of her, and Carol Chapman, who says that Miss Harding was closely escorted and, without being specific, suggests that Mrs Bolton may have been supporting Miss Harding. If Miss Harding was, indeed, suffering from a heart attack she might well have looked washed out and pale and have had difficulty walking unsupported. This would accord with Shipman's description of Miss Harding as being grey with blue lips. If, however, Miss Harding did look that ill on going into Shipman's consulting room Shipman should have noticed the fact immediately and should have devoted his attention to finding out what was wrong. His record of the consultation having started with a discussion about Miss Harding's elbow is not consistent with his description of her looking very ill. Mid thoracic pain can be a sign of cardiac problems but this is extremely rare. Similarly, light-headedness may be associated with a so-called “silent myocardial infarct” - that is a heart attack occurring without the classic central chest pain. Silent myocardial infarcts are usually fairly minor and the patient does not usually appear unwell.
If Miss Harding was reasonably well in herself when she arrived at the Surgery, apart from discomfort in her elbow and a mid thoracic pain of some non cardiac origin, as described by Mrs Bolton, there is a theoretical possibility that she may have had a heart attack just as she was describing her other symptoms to Shipman but, in my opinion this would be such a coincidence that it strains credibility beyond its limits.
The examination described by Shipman is consistent with a heart attack but there is no corroborative evidence that this is an accurate account of what he found.
I note that Shipman attempted to resuscitate Miss Harding and that he called for help from Sister Morgan. Shipman's note suggests that it is possible that an ambulance was called for Miss Harding, on the basis that she was having a heart attack, before she collapsed. Lee Leech suggests that there is a possibility that she was asked to phone for an ambulance using 999 but was then told to cancel it. I have stated in my generic report to the Inquiry that cardiopulmonary resuscitation is a method of keeping a patient alive until definitive help arrives. I have also stated that an ambulance crew with their equipment may be able to provide such definitive help. It does not make sense for Shipman to have commenced resuscitation and then to have ceased knowing that an ambulance was on the way and to have cancelled the ambulance.
There is a theoretical possibility that Miss Harding suffered a heart attack coincidentally just as she was visiting Shipman about a long standing elbow problem. As I have indicated, however, this is highly unlikely. Miss Harding collapsed and died in Shipman's surgery and I note that, on this occasion, he made a slightly more realistic attempt to resuscitate her than in a number of other cases that I am aware of where he claims to have attempted resuscitation. Nevertheless, the attempt at resuscitation on Miss Harding was incomplete and did not maximise her chances of surviving.
In my opinion, it is several orders of magnitude more likely that Shipman played a part in Miss Harding's death than that she coincidentally had a heart attack while she was seeing him'
.
Conclusion
The circumstances of this death are suspicious because it occurred on surgery premises and behind closed doors. Such evidence as is available shows that a death in a general practitioner's surgery is very unusual. On the rare occasions when such a death does occur, following a sudden collapse, there is an emergency, an ambulance is called and strenuous and concerted attempts are made to save the patient. This was not the case here.
The level of suspicion increases, as Miss Harding had no history of heart disease of any kind. A sudden death from coronary thrombosis was possible but very unlikely. On any view, this was a case that cried out for referral to the coroner and a post-mortem examination.
Did Miss Harding have a coronary thrombosis or not? If she did not, there does not seem to be any other plausible reason why she might have died a sudden natural death, and the overwhelming inference must be that Shipman killed her. Even if she did have a heart attack, it may be that Shipman gave her an injection of diamorphine that ensured her death. The third possibility is that Miss Harding died of natural causes. If she did, she must either have had a sudden massive heart attack in the consultation room, or the minor symptoms, from which she might have been suffering as she came into Hyde, suddenly became more serious in the consulting room, resulting in collapse, cardiac arrest and death.
The evidence of Mrs Chapman, that Miss Harding looked pale and ill and might not have been able to walk unaided, would, if accurate, be evidence of signs consistent with (but not diagnostic of) the occurrence of an attack of angina or the onset of a heart attack. The pain in the back, of which Mrs Bolton said Miss Harding complained during the journey into Hyde, might be explained as having a cardiac origin. However, there are many other potential explanations for Miss Harding's pallor and pain. One is that it was connected with the complaint of biliousness from the previous day, another is that it was related to her arthritic neck. As Miss Harding had no history of heart disease, other explanations seem more likely. Dr Grenville says that the upper back pain of which Mrs Bolton says Miss Harding complained is not typical of a heart attack. Dizziness might be associated with a silent heart attack but this dizziness had lasted on and off for two weeks. It seems to me that Miss Harding's symptoms of back pain and paleness are likely to have been due to a cause other than cardiac problems. Some cardiac episode is a possibility although I regard it as unlikely. Although there are conflicts between the evidence of Mrs Chapman and Mrs Bolton, I am satisfied that that would be my conclusion however I resolved those conflicts.
The suggestion that Miss Harding might have suddenly suffered a massive heart attack in the consulting room, after coming to the surgery for unrelated problems, seems to me so fanciful that I reject it.
I turn therefore to consider the unlikely possibility that Miss Harding did have pain of cardiac origin as she arrived at the surgery. If she did, what happened and how did it develop? Is there a plausible account of development into a full-blown fatal heart attack?
Shipman's note of the consultation must be examined with care and some suspicion, as he frequently fabricated records to pass off a killing as a natural death. However, for the moment, for the purposes of analysis, I shall assume that the note is genuine. If Miss Harding was having some sort of cardiac episode as she came into the surgery, Shipman's response should have been to recognise that she was ill and to call an ambulance immediately. He does not appear to have done so. According to his note, he let her speak about her elbow, then her back, her indigestion and her dizziness. Then he took her blood pressure, tested her pulse and noticed that her colour was grey. All that appears to have occurred before he noticed that her lips were blue. He then listened to her heart sounds and noted ectopic beats. Then, having diagnosed a heart attack, and having wondered when it might have occurred, he summoned an ambulance. Then he recorded that Miss Harding collapsed, and noted the time, with apparent precision, as 11.20am. I note that the ambulance records show that an ambulance was summoned at 11.31am.
I find it almost incredible that a patient who was supposed to be suffering cardiac pain was able to go through a history of elbow pain, mid-thoracic pain, indigestion and two weeks of dizziness, without the doctor noticing that she looked ill and her face or lips were grey or blue. I think this note makes sense up to the stage where Shipman noted that the patient felt unwell, but thereafter I find it highly suspicious.
I continue with the history, as it must have occurred if Shipman's account is true. After the collapse, he went to fetch Nurse Morgan and made an apparent attempt to resuscitate Miss Harding. Was this genuine? I accept that Nurse Morgan believed that it was. I doubt that it was, as Shipman did not make use of drugs and equipment that would have been available in the surgery. He decided to stop before the ambulance had arrived and did not carry out a thorough examination to ascertain that Miss Harding was dead. Dr Grenville has explained that, when someone is in cardiac arrest, it is very difficult to tell whether he or she is dead. Careful examination is necessary, including listening to the heart sounds with the stethoscope and examination of the eyes. Shipman did neither of those things. Of course, if he knew Miss Harding was already dead or inevitably dying from a large dose of diamorphine, there would be no point in him examining her carefully for signs of life. A perfunctory examination is one of the hallmarks of cases in which Shipman killed. Had this been a genuine attempt to resuscitate, Shipman would have continued the efforts until the ambulance arrived, when a defibrillator could have been used. If it were not a genuine attempt and if Shipman knew throughout that Miss Harding was dying of morphine poisoning, he would wish to call a halt to the efforts and cancel the ambulance before it arrived. I incline to the view that the resuscitation attempt was a sham.
Considering all these factors, I conclude that Shipman's note of the consultation cannot be accepted as genuine. I am satisfied that Miss Harding did not have a coronary thrombosis or suffer cardiac arrest at any time that day.
I conclude that Shipman listened to Miss Harding's problems, which would have comprised the elbow and back pain she had mentioned to Mrs Bolton and probably the biliousness of which she had complained to Mrs Spoors. She may well also have mentioned feeling light-headed. I think it likely that Shipman then decided to kill Miss Harding, asked her to lie on the examination couch and gave her a diamorphine injection. When she was unconscious, he asked a receptionist to summon an ambulance, called for Nurse Morgan and went through a charade of resuscitation. Inevitably the 'resuscitation' failed and, after an appropriate interval, he called it off and cancelled the ambulance. He then created a medical record, giving a plausible account of a heart attack.
I am sure that Shipman unlawfully killed Miss Harding.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001