The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
Lily Higgins
Introduction
Mrs Lily Higgins died at her home, 352 Stockport Road, Gee Cross, Hyde on Tuesday, 17th
March 1998 at the age of 83. She lived alone, having been divorced many years previously. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to arteriosclerosis.
Mrs Higgins' death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and it was, therefore, one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took statements from Mrs Joan Ralphs and Mrs Margaret Rogers (Mrs Higgins' two daughters), Mr Richard Bridge (Mrs Higgins' window cleaner), Mrs Barbara Johnson (the owner of 'Nu-Wave' hairdressing salon) and PCs Simon Brian Meats and John Francis Fitzgerald (both of whom attended after the death). Detective Sergeant John Frederick Ashley provided a report on an audit trail of Mrs Higgins' computerised medical records. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Higgins but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken further statements from Mrs Ralphs and Mrs Rogers and has taken statements from Mr Derek Oldham (Mrs Higgins' neighbour) and Mr David Gill (a paramedic with the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service). Mrs Ralphs and Mrs Rogers gave oral evidence at a hearing on 19th
July 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Higgins' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Ralphs visited her mother every weekday and Mrs Rogers, who worked during the week, saw her mother mainly at weekends.
Mrs Higgins had very good health for her age. Her daughters say that she walked without difficulty and did all her own housework. Her only chronic complaint was a hiatus hernia, for which she took daily medication in the form of Prepulsid or cisapride. She also had the occasional upper respiratory tract infection and one of her daughters reported that she had occasional back pain and sore throats; the latter appeared to be a legacy of a polyp which had been removed from her vocal chord in 1962. The medical records show two blood pressure readings, taken on 16th
July 1994 and 25th
January 1996, which were entirely normal for a woman of her age. The second of these readings was taken at the time of a 'geriatric health examination' (more popularly known as an 'MOT'), offered after Mrs Higgins' 80th
birthday, at which nothing adverse was found. The records show that she saw her doctor infrequently. She made periodic requests for repeat prescriptions. Her last consultation in connection with an illness was in December 1995 when she had a cold. It appears that the last time she went to the surgery was in early 1997. That was over a year before her death.
On Sunday, 15th
March, Mrs Higgins visited Mrs Rogers and her family and went shopping with her niece, Stephanie. She declined a lift home, preferring to make the 15 minute journey on foot.
The Day of the Death
On Tuesday, 17th
March, Mrs Ralphs had a dental appointment at a hospital in Oldham. Mrs Higgins accompanied her daughter to the hospital and to a café for lunch afterwards. The two women then did some shopping at a supermarket before Mrs Ralphs dropped her mother at home at about 1.45-2pm. Mrs Higgins intended to visit an old friend of hers that afternoon, a lady who lived in the Laurel Bank Residential Care Home, which was not far from Mrs Higgins' home. She usually visited this friend on a Tuesday afternoon at about 3.30-4pm and, on that day, had bought some chocolates as a gift. Mrs Ralphs returned to her own home.
During the afternoon, Mrs Higgins' window cleaner, Mr Bridge, was cleaning her windows and saw her sitting on the settee, with her back to the window. He tried to attract her attention and, when he could not, he became concerned and went across the road to the hairdressing salon to ask them to call the police. Mrs Johnson, the owner of the salon, accompanied him to Mrs Higgins' house and looked through the window. She then went back to her salon and telephoned the police. Although Mr Bridge and Mrs Johnson believe that these events occurred earlier, it is clear from the surviving documentation that they happened just after 4pm. The police incident report was created at 4.13pm and the police arrived at 4.18pm. They forced entry to the house and a telephone call was made to Shipman's surgery at 4.25pm. An ambulance was present by 4.26pm and it left the scene at 4.38pm.
The police telephoned Mrs Ralphs from Mrs Higgins' house at 4.29pm and informed her of her mother's death. Mrs Ralphs passed the news to her sister. Then Mr and Mrs Ralphs went to Mrs Higgins' home. Shipman was there, together with two police officers and two paramedics. Mrs Higgins was sitting on the settee, her hands resting on her lap and her head tilted slightly forward and to the right. She was dressed in her day clothes and had slippers on, which was usual when she was in the house. Mrs Ralphs said that her mother did not usually sit on the settee when she was alone; she preferred a chair from which she could see out of the window.
Shipman confirmed the fact of death and said it was due to natural causes. He comforted Mrs Ralphs and said that her mother had probably stood up to go to the television, had felt dizzy and had sat down, had had a stroke and would have been dead in minutes.
Shipman's manuscript note of his visit after Mrs Higgins' death reads:
'Called to home
1640
(
changed from 14.00 or 14.30
)
certified death
Approx 1 hr.
Natural Causes / Old Age'
.
The computerised note reads:
'O/E - dead.
found by window cleaner dead 1400 cert 1640 cva
arteriosclerosis old age'
.
DS Ashley carried out an audit trail on that entry and discovered that it was made two days later on 19th
March 1998 at 12.31pm. He also carried out an audit trail on an entry dated 28th
January 1998, which reads:
'Geriatric screen admin...
...letter sent inviting in seen in market reminded'
.
DS Ashley's audit trail shows that this entry was made on at 3pm on 17th
March 1998, the day of Mrs Higgins' death. This is an important piece of evidence. It shows that, at just about the time that Mrs Higgins must have died, Shipman made an entry in her medical records and backdated it by two months. This is remarkable in view of the fact that, according to the records, he had not seen Mrs Higgins for over a year.
The Aftermath
On the day after Mrs Higgins' death, Mrs Ralphs, Mrs Rogers and their daughters went to Shipman's surgery to pick up the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). They saw Shipman, who produced Mrs Higgins' medical records and observed that Mrs Higgins had not been any trouble to him. He said, 'You know she had hardening of her arteries, don't you?' Both Mrs Ralphs and Mrs Rogers said they were unaware of this. Shipman then told them that this condition had been found, not by him, but by a previous doctor. In fact, there is only one reference to such a condition in Mrs Higgins' notes. There are entries for 1962, 1967 and 1977, at which time Dr John Bennett was Mrs Higgins' general practitioner but these do not mention arteriosclerosis. Then, in Shipman's handwriting, there is an entry for 1991, which says
'Arteriosclerosis'
and for 1992,
'oesophageal reflux'
, which must be a reference to the hiatus hernia. There is no other reference to arteriosclerosis anywhere else in the slim volume of medical records relating to Mrs Higgins. The suspicion must be that the entry on the summary was false, inserted by Shipman to offer some explanation for her death.
There is an unusual piece of evidence in this case. Mrs Ralphs said that, after the death, Mrs Higgins' wristwatch was returned to her by the undertaker, having apparently been found halfway up her arm. Mrs Ralphs explained that Mrs Higgins, being of very slight build, used to wear her watch over the sleeve of her clothing. Mrs Ralphs wondered whether it should be inferred from this that Shipman had given her mother an injection. I accept that that might be a reasonable inference. If Shipman pushed Mrs Higgins' sleeve up and gave an injection at the front of the elbow, it is easy to see how the watch might have been pushed up above the elbow and left behind when the sleeve was pulled down again. I do not think I could draw a positive conclusion from this but I do think this could be an indication that an injection was given in the arm.
Certification
On the MCCD, Shipman gave the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident, with an onset of minutes' duration, due to arteriosclerosis with an onset of seven years. Old age was said to be a contributory condition. Shipman claimed on the MCCD to have last seen Mrs Higgins on 6th
March 1998. There is no mention of that consultation in the computerised notes or in the manuscript notes and no entry in any practice record.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. In that document, he gave the time of death as
'About 1400 hrs'
. Mrs Higgins is said to have been dropped off at home by her daughter at or just before that time. It was over two and a half hours before Shipman attended, and it is difficult to see how he can have had any means of knowing what was the time of death, unless he had been there at the time.
On Form B, Shipman claimed to have last seen Mrs Higgins 11 days before her death, but I am quite satisfied that that was a lie. He also claimed to have attended Mrs Higgins during her 'last illness' for 11 days. All the evidence shows that Mrs Higgins did not have a last illness and was in good health during the last 11 days of her life.
Shipman claimed that the mode of death was syncope lasting seconds. He stated that Mrs Higgins was found by the window cleaner, collapsed, and that paramedics were also present at the death. He said that the window cleaner and paramedics were present at the moment of death. That is quite untrue. None of those people were present until after the death.
In short, Form B contains a pack of lies.
Shipman's Movements
There is no direct evidence of Shipman's presence at Mrs Higgins' house before her death. No visit is mentioned in the practice records and the family was not aware that any was planned. Shipman's contention in the contemporaneous documents is that he had not seen Mrs Higgins for 11 days. During their investigation, the police spoke to neighbours of Mrs Higgins, none of whom had seen Shipman at the house on the day of death. Since the file did not specify who had been contacted, the Inquiry has written to the present occupiers of 12 houses in the immediate vicinity of Mrs Higgins' home. There has been direct telephone contact with the residents of nine of those houses, none of whom saw Shipman on that day, even on the occasion of his undoubted visit
after
Mrs Higgins' death. Mrs Higgins' immediate next door neighbour on one side has died. Stockport Road is a busy main road where residents may well not notice the comings and goings of vehicles and people.
The only information that the Inquiry team has about Shipman's movements on 17th
March comes from the appointments sheet for the day, which reveals that he had six patients at his open surgery, starting at 10.15am. There was then an antenatal clinic, which was shared with the midwife and had six patients. One of those patients may have had an appointment for 1.45pm. There was then a 'first booking' clinic at 2pm, which was usually handled by the midwife alone. The likelihood is therefore that Shipman was free to go on his rounds from about 2pm until 4pm. There were two names in the visits book for that day. Their addresses have been checked and neither was far from Mrs Higgins' house on Stockport Road.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death moderately suspicious on account of the contents both of the cremation forms and of the medical records.
Conclusion
Mrs Higgins was fit and well only two hours before she was found dead. Her medical history gives no indication that she was at risk of a sudden death, whether from cardiovascular accident or any other cause. Her death on that day is not explicable. There should most certainly have been a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Higgins' appearance after death is not what would be expected if she had suffered a sudden death from cardiovascular accident or a cardiac cause. However, it is entirely typical of the appearance of many victims who had been killed by Shipman by means of a lethal injection of diamorphine.
The MCCD and Form B contain a number of lies. I am satisfied that Shipman had not seen Mrs Higgins 11 days before her death. He said that he had because, if the truth had been stated, that he had not seen her for over a year, the death would certainly have been referred to the coroner.
The lies on Form B are, in my judgement, plainly designed to give the impression that Mrs Higgins had been ill for some time (so that her death would not be unexpected) and that responsible and experienced paramedics had been present at the death and would have been able to give a reliable account of what had occurred. A wholly false picture was presented, designed to ensure that the medical referee would authorise cremation.
There is no direct evidence that Shipman had visited Mrs Higgins that afternoon. There is evidence that he had the time to visit her and that he was in the area. That he was not seen visiting her does not mean that he did not do so. He was not seen even when it is known that he visited, after the death. Stockport Road is very busy. He could have visited her before her death.
I am more influenced by the strange entry in the computerised medical records made by Shipman at 3pm on the afternoon of the death. Shipman had not seen Mrs Higgins for over a year. He had not signed a repeat prescription for her for many months. Yet, on the very afternoon of her death, he made an entry in her notes, backdated by about seven weeks, suggesting that he had seen her in the market and had reminded her that she had had a letter from him and was due to come in for a check-up. If, on the afternoon of 17th March, he had suddenly remembered that, seven weeks earlier, he had seen Mrs Higgins and spoken to her in the market and had decided to make a note in the records, it would be the most remarkable coincidence that that thought should have occurred to him, out of the blue, on the afternoon of her death. In my view, coincidences of that kind do not occur. There must be another explanation for Shipman making that entry. If he had been to her house and had killed her, it would be expected that he would take out her medical records on his return to the surgery. I have found that he has done that on many occasions. Here, I think he must have been at a loss to think of anything that he could enter into the records to provide a plausible explanation for her death. There was no chronic illness on which to base an explanation. It seems to me that he must have decided that the best he could do was to suggest that Mrs Higgins had neglected to come in for a check-up, so that her state of health might have deteriorated, without any record having been made.
In my judgement, the evidence of the wristwatch and this false entry in the records provide a sufficient link to Shipman for me to say that I am satisfied that he did visit Mrs Higgins on the afternoon of her death. Notwithstanding the absence of direct evidence of his presence, I am satisfied, so as to be sure, that Shipman killed Mrs Higgins.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001