The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Elsie Harrop
Introduction
Mrs Elsie Harrop died at her home, 32 Frank Street, Hyde on Friday, 22nd
September 1989 at the age of 82. She was a widow and lived alone. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In February 2000, Mr Neil Harrop, Mrs Harrop's son, contacted the police to express concern about his mother's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Harrop and Mrs Beryl Harrop (his wife).
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Harrop but an inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken additional statements from Mr Harrop and Mrs Beryl Harrop, and has taken statements from Mr Neil David Harrop (Mrs Harrop's grandson), Miss Lisa Harrop (Mrs Harrop's granddaughter) and Mr Graham Sydney Schofield and Mr Alan Thomas Oakes (ambulance technicians with the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service). Apart from very basic computerised details, Mrs Harrop's medical records have not survived but the Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989 and to the cremation forms. This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Harrop had been an active and independent widow. As her medical records have not survived, the Inquiry has had to rely on the recollections of the family as to Mrs Harrop's state of health before her death.
The family says that Mrs Harrop enjoyed good health except that she had some dizzy spells, for which Shipman prescribed tablets. Also, her eyesight was failing. However, she still went out alone and would often walk to her brother's house, a round trip of about three miles. She had some help in the house but, according to Mrs Beryl Harrop, Mrs Harrop did most of her housework herself. She enjoyed the company of the home helps when they called. It would appear that Shipman would visit her unannounced from time to time.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of Friday, 22nd
September 1989, Mrs Beryl Harrop either telephoned Mrs Harrop or called upon her to see if she needed any shopping. She then went into Hyde and arrived at her mother-in-law's house, with the shopping, shortly before midday. She found Mrs Harrop well and in good spirits. However, she was expecting a re-visit from Shipman. Mrs Beryl Harrop believes that Shipman had told her mother-in-law that he would call on her as a follow-up visit to his visit on the Wednesday, when she had seen him in connection with her vertigo. Shipman's visits book shows that he had visited Mrs Elsie Harrop at home on Wednesday, 20th
September and confirms an intention to visit on 22nd
September.
Mrs Beryl Harrop waited for Shipman to arrive but at about 1pm she left as she wished to visit her own mother. Mrs Elsie Harrop said that, if Shipman left a prescription, she would telephone her daughter-in-law. She said that she did not know why Shipman was coming to see her. Mrs Beryl Harrop had no concerns when she left the house.
By about 2.30pm that afternoon, Mrs Harrop had not telephoned, so Mrs Beryl Harrop tried to telephone her. However, there was no reply. Mr Neil Harrop went to his mother's house at about 4pm and found her sitting on a chair at the kitchen table. She was upright, dressed in her normal day clothes and looked peaceful, as if asleep. There was a drink and some biscuits nearby. Mr Harrop realised that his mother was dead. He telephoned his wife, who spoke to their son, Mr Neil David Harrop, who is a paramedic. He advised that an ambulance be called. This was done and, on arrival, the paramedics confirmed that Mrs Harrop was dead.
Shipman was also contacted and he attended. He seemed to look at the body but did not examine it. He pronounced Mrs Harrop dead. Mrs Beryl Harrop told him that she had been with her mother-in-law until 1pm and Shipman said that he had last seen her at 1.30pm. Mrs Beryl Harrop was shocked at the suddenness of the death and said, 'I hope she didn't suffer'. Shipman replied with words to the effect, 'It would be just like turning a light switch off. She wouldn't have suffered.' He added that Mrs Harrop had died of a stroke. He said that a post-mortem examination would not be needed because he had seen Mrs Harrop on the Wednesday.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman certified that death was due to cerebrovascular accident. He said that he had last seen Mrs Harrop alive on the day of her death. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B. He stated that death had occurred at approximately 2pm. How he is supposed to have known the time of death is not clear. He said that he had seen Mrs Harrop approximately two hours before her death. On his timing, that would be at about midday but, if the evidence of Mrs Beryl Harrop is accurate, he cannot have done. Shipman had not arrived when she left at 1pm. Shipman also stated that he had carried out a complete external examination of the body about three hours after the death. According to the family, he did not touch the body. He said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident and that he had attended Mrs Harrop for four days during her final illness. There is no evidence that he attended her four days earlier. If this was a reference to the consultation for vertigo on the Wednesday, two days before the death, it would be misleading for Shipman to imply, as he did, that Mrs Harrop had had a stroke four days earlier. Mrs Harrop had been up and about since then and had shown no signs of a stroke. Indeed, the family was quite unaware of any last illness. Shipman said that the mode of death had been syncope of only seconds' duration. As he also said that no one had been present at the moment of death, it is hard to see how he could have known how long Mrs Harrop's death had taken. He also put,
'Found by son sat in chair putting biscuits into a barrel. Seen by me midday - revisit arranged mild CVA then'
.
This is a puzzling or misleading entry, as it might imply that Mrs Harrop was still alive when her son arrived. She was not. She was already dead. In any event, Mr Neil Harrop says that there was no biscuit barrel on the table when he arrived, just a cup of tea and some biscuits. Nor did he tell Shipman that there had been a biscuit barrel on the table. Mrs Beryl Harrop says that her mother-in-law's biscuit barrel was always kept in the pantry. Mr Neil Harrop and Mrs Beryl Harrop think that Shipman might have arrived as Mrs Harrop was putting away her shopping and she might well have had the barrel on the table at that time. It appears to me that this entry is an invention on Shipman's part, designed to make it appear that Mrs Harrop had collapsed while going about her usual duties, after he had seen her when she had suffered a mild CVA.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation certificate and regarded the circumstances of the death as highly suspicious.
Conclusion
Mrs Harrop's body was discovered very soon after Shipman had paid her a visit and had been alone with her. No one saw her alive or spoke to her after his departure. That in itself is a highly suspicious factor.
According to the family, the only symptom of which Mrs Harrop complained in the days before her death was vertigo. The family does not describe signs of a developing stroke. Unfortunately, because the medical records have not survived, it is not possible to discover whether Mrs Harrop was suffering from high blood pressure and if so, to what extent. Mrs Harrop might have been at an increased risk of suffering a stroke. Whatever the underlying risks, it would not be at all likely that Mrs Harrop would die suddenly from a stroke, as suggested by Shipman. It is highly unlikely that she would have been well at 1pm, when Mrs Beryl Harrop left, suffering from mild stroke symptoms soon afterwards when Shipman visited, and dead by 4pm. As Dr John Grenville explained in his generic evidence, the expected course of events after the onset of a mild stroke would be recovery. If the stroke were to develop, there would be a gradual deterioration over a period of two to three days. It is possible that Mrs Harrop could have died suddenly from a catastrophic brain haemorrhage or heart attack, although her appearance in death was not consistent with death from those causes. Any doctor, acting honestly, would have regarded Mrs Harrop's death as sudden and unexplained and would have declined to certify the cause of death. There would then have been a referral to the coroner. Shipman avoided this and declared that a post-mortem examination was not necessary.
On Form B, Shipman appears to have made a number of false or misleading statements. In particular he sought to suggest that Mrs Harrop had died at 2pm. She might have done, but if he was not there, he could not have known the time of death. Dr Grenville has said in his generic evidence that the assessment of time of death is a difficult and complex process, even when undertaken by an experienced pathologist. At the very least, an internal body temperature must be taken. Shipman did not do this. It appears that Shipman was seeking to establish that a period of two hours elapsed between his visit and the death.
Mrs Harrop's appearance in death was not typical of a stroke victim. There was no evidence of any agonal event. Mrs Harrop's appearance was entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims who are known to have been given a lethal injection of diamorphine.
Taking all these factors into account, I am driven to the conclusion that Shipman killed Mrs Harrop. Notwithstanding the absence of the medical records, I am sure of this.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001