The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
The First Report
>
Alphabetical List of Cases
>
John Howcroft
Introduction
Mr John Howcroft died at his home, 6 Leigh Fold, Newton, Hyde at the age of 77. According to the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), he died on Tuesday, 1st
January 1985. He had lived alone since the death of his wife about 12 months previously. He lived in a bungalow within a cluster of similar properties, designed for occupation by the elderly, but not supervised by a warden. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of Mr Howcroft's death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions, Mr Howcroft's grandson, Mr Peter James Howcroft, contacted the police, expressing concern over the manner of Mr Howcroft's death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Peter Howcroft. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken a further statement from Mr Peter Howcroft. The Inquiry has also taken statements from Mrs Barbara Howcroft (Mr Howcroft's daughter-in-law) and Mr William Roylance (Mr Howcroft's grandson by marriage). The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville. Mr Peter Howcroft and Mr Roylance gave oral evidence at the Inquiry on 20th
July 2001 and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence about the death on 24th
July 2001.
Mr Howcroft's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits books and the Donneybrook duty doctor transfer book for the relevant period.
Personal Background
For an account of Mr Howcroft's health in the months before his death, the Inquiry has been dependent upon the recollections of Mr Peter Howcroft, Mrs Barbara Howcroft and Mr Roylance. None of these witnesses saw Mr Howcroft very frequently. Mr Peter Howcroft lives in Yorkshire and only managed to see his grandfather about once a month. However, they spoke frequently on the telephone. Mrs Barbara Howcroft, the widow of Mr Howcroft's only son, lives on the Fylde and says that she used to visit him about once a fortnight. Mr Roylance, who lives in Hyde, only saw Mr Howcroft once every few months. It seems that Mr Howcroft's most regular social contact was with his brother-in-law, Mr Jim Ingham, who lived only a few doors away. They spent a lot of time together. Unfortunately Mr Ingham is now dead.
All three witnesses said that, until well into his seventies, Mr Howcroft had been extremely fit and well. He had been a professional cricketer in the Lancashire Leagues until he was in his fifties. He had always been keen on physical fitness and a healthy diet. When he gave up cricket, he and his wife used to take long walks, often covering more than ten miles a day. This had continued until about three or four years before his death, when he had suffered an illness, which the family believed was a minor stroke. He had some dizziness and developed weakness on one side. His face became slightly distorted for a time. He himself said that the trouble was connected with the inner ear and was akin to Bell's palsy. Mr Peter Howcroft and his wife thought that Mr Howcroft might have been told that, so as not to alarm him. Mr Peter Howcroft thought that Mr Howcroft had recovered well from this episode but said that he became quite frail. However, he thought Mr Howcroft was still able to take the bus into Hyde and go to the supermarket. Mr Roylance's recollection is rather different. He said that, during the last six months of Mr Howcroft's life, he did not go into Hyde. He would only walk as far as the local shops, where he liked to buy his newspaper and place a bet. This was a distance of about a quarter of a mile. He had a home help to do the housework and he received one meal a day from the meals on wheels service. None of the three witnesses was aware that Mr Howcroft had any chronic illness or was taking any particular form of medication. However, I have the impression that Mr Howcroft was rather a private person who would not have discussed such matters with others.
Shortly before Christmas, Mr Peter Howcroft and his wife and two children drove over to Hyde to see Mr Howcroft and to bring him his Christmas presents. He seemed to be in normal health. They were making plans for Mr Howcroft to stay with them in the new year. This would be the first time he would have visited them since the death of his wife the previous January.
Mrs Barbara Howcroft now recalls that she spoke to Mr Howcroft on the telephone about a week before his death. At that time, he made no complaint of any health problem. She next tried to telephone him again quite early in the morning of New Year's Day. She could not get through but she cannot now remember whether the line was engaged or was ringing with no reply. She tried again several times during the day. She now says that she has the impression that the line was engaged, as if the telephone had been left off the hook. However, she also says that, when she could not get through, she was worried in case her father-in-law had been taken to hospital. Then she thought that he might be round at Mr Ingham's house. She would not have had those thoughts if the line were engaged. It seems to me that, if the line had been engaged, she might well have asked British Telecom to check it. However, as she did not attend to give evidence, she could not be asked about those matters.
The Discovery of the Death
On the morning of 2nd
January, Mr Roylance and his wife were in their shop in Hyde when Mr Howcroft's home help came in. It is thought that her name was Janet Holt. The Inquiry has been unable to trace her. Mr Roylance knew her by sight as a regular customer, although he did not know that she was Mr Howcroft's home help. She told him that Mr Howcroft had been found dead and the police had been called. She asked if one of them would go to the house to identify the body. Mr Roylance assumed that she had arrived for work and had been unable to gain access, so had called the police. He went to the bungalow and found two police officers there. He remembered that the name of one of them was PC Titherington. This officer has been located but, unfortunately, the records of his attendance and his pocket book have been destroyed. The officer has no independent recollection of this incident, which is not surprising.
Mr Roylance said that he saw Mr Howcroft's body, sitting on an upright chair at an angle to a table, which was situated close to the window. Mr Howcroft was slumped slightly back in the chair, with his head resting against the wall behind him. The telephone was on the table. He was wearing day clothes.
Mr Roylance gave such information as he could to the police, and he then telephoned Mr Peter Howcroft and Mrs Barbara Howcroft. He told the police which firm of undertakers should be instructed and, in due course, they arrived. Soon afterwards, Mr Roylance was asked to step outside because, as he understood, Mr Howcroft's head had become fixed in an awkward position and it might prove difficult to fit the body into a coffin.
Mr Roylance said that he did not see Shipman at the house. However, it would have been normal practice for the police to call out the general practitioner and they would not have given permission for the body to be removed to the undertakers' premises unless the doctor had said that he or she would be able to provide a Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). As the police allowed the body to be removed, I conclude that Shipman must have been to see the body at the house before Mr Roylance arrived.
The Aftermath
Later that day, Mr Peter Howcroft came over to Hyde to deal with the formalities but, by then, the body had been removed from the house. He dealt only with the undertakers and did not speak to Shipman. When he learned of the death, he recalled that he had received a rather unusual telephone call, either the night before or on New Year's Eve. He had been at home watching television when the telephone rang. When he answered it, no one spoke and he could hear the sound of heavy or difficult breathing. He asked the caller to speak but, when there was no response, he put the receiver down, assuming that the call was either a hoax or that the caller would try again. There was no further call. Thinking back, he did not have the impression that the heavy breathing was deliberate; it sounded genuine. When he heard of his grandfather's death, he began to wonder whether this caller had been his grandfather trying to get in touch with him. From what I have heard of the family relationships, I think it likely that, if Mr Howcroft had been in any trouble, the first person he would have called would have been Mr Peter Howcroft.
Certification
Shipman subsequently signed the MCCD. Although the certificate itself has not survived, the counterfoil has been found. This shows that Shipman said that he had last seen Mr Howcroft alive on 20th
December 1984, which would be 12 days before the death, which he stated had occurred on 1st
January. The cause of death was coronary thrombosis due to ischaemic heart disease with diabetes mellitus as a significant condition which had contributed to the death but was not directly related to the condition causing it.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. On this he said that death had occurred at
'About 22.00 hrs'
on 1st
January. The number
'22'
has been written over the number
'10'
. In brackets, Shipman has explained:
'found 11.00 next day from body temp time of death assumed'
. He said that he had been attending Mr Howcroft during his last illness, in respect of the ischaemic heart disease, for a period of over four years. He said that he saw the body 12 hours after death and performed a complete external examination. He said that no one was present at the death but also stated that the mode of death was syncope of only seconds' duration. When asked to say to what extent his answers to the questions about the cause and mode of death depended on his own observations, or the statements of others, he wrote:
'Found in the chair with the
telephone in his hand and the pad of
numbers on his knee'
.
He said this was from his own observation.
It is not possible to check the veracity of any of these statements. As there are no medical records, it is not possible to check whether Shipman had indeed seen Mr Howcroft on 20th
December, or on any other date within the 14 day period before death. I know, from experience of other cases, that Shipman would claim that he had seen a deceased patient within 14 days of the death, when all the evidence showed that he had not. In some cases, I infer that he did this to avoid the need for a referral to the coroner. However, I do not necessarily infer that Shipman wished to avoid referral because he had murdered the patient. I have come across cases where he falsely claimed to have seen the patient within 14 days of the death and where the death was obviously natural. His motivation may have been to save the relatives the trouble and delay of a post-mortem examination. In this case, I cannot say whether Shipman had seen Mr Howcroft within 14 days of the death. There is no entry relating to Mr Howcroft in Shipman's visits book during that period, but it is of course possible that he could have seen Shipman at the surgery, or that a visit took place but was not recorded in the visits book for some reason.
It is not possible to check whether Shipman had been treating Mr Howcroft for four years for ischaemic heart disease or to make any assessment of the gravity of that condition. Nor is it possible to say whether Mr Howcroft had diabetes mellitus and, if so, how serious it was. Nor can I say whether it is true that Mr Howcroft was found with the telephone in his hand and a pad of numbers on his knee. Mr Roylance has no recollection of a pad of numbers or of the position of the telephone but, as he did not arrive until some time after the death had been discovered, the situation might well have changed before he arrived. I observe that an attempt to make a telephone call while in the throes of death is consistent with Mr Peter Howcroft's evidence of the 'heavy breathing' call. As no one was present at the moment of death, Shipman's claim that the mode of death was syncope of seconds' duration must have been pure guesswork.
Shipman's Movements
Very little is known about Shipman's movements at this time, except that the duty doctor transfer book survives. This book records who was working as the out of hours duty doctor at the Donneybrook practice. 'Out of hours' means in the evening and at weekends and bank holidays. It shows what time the doctor on duty transferred responsibility over to the deputising service. It shows that Shipman was personally on call on 31st
December until 11pm, but that Dr Bills had that responsibility the following evening. We have no information as to Shipman's movements on New Year's Day itself save that his visits book records no visits made on that day.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville was asked about the telephone call received by Mr Peter Howcroft. He said that, if that call had been from Mr Howcroft, it would be consistent with the theory that he was at the time in the throes of a heart attack. He might have felt unwell and have dialled the number but then have become unconscious during the time taken to connect and his breathing would have sounded stertorous. He would have been unable to put the telephone receiver back on the rest. The observations as recorded in Form B fit in quite well with a natural death.
Dr Grenville was also asked about the position of Mr Howcroft's head after death. Mr Roylance recalled that Mr Howcroft was leaning back in his chair with his head against the wall. Dr Grenville thought that was not indicative of a death by natural causes. He thought that, if Mr Howcroft had been in pain and trying to use the telephone, one would expect him to lean forwards. If the pain then increased or if he became unconscious, one would expect him to slump forwards or sideways and fall off his chair. His position against the wall would be more what one would expect if Mr Howcroft had been given a lethal dose of opiates. Dr Grenville regarded that as a suspicious factor.
Dr Grenville was also asked about Mr Roylance's evidence that the undertakers asked him to leave the room because Mr Howcroft's neck had become fixed in an awkward position. He explained that, sometimes, if rigor mortis had set in, it was necessary for some force to be used when straightening the body. This could be distressing for relatives so the process was usually completed in their absence. Dr Grenville said that the presence of rigor mortis would indicate that the death had occurred not less than three hours and not more than three days earlier. He thought that Shipman's supposedly accurate statement about the time of death was charlatanism. He had noticed from other cases that Shipman often pretended to be able to establish a time of death from body temperature. This was quite impossible to do with any precision. If it were to be attempted at all, it would be necessary to take a rectal temperature and to know the ambient room temperature. I too have noted that Shipman often pretended to be able to establish the time of death. I, like Dr Grenville, regard this as a suspicious factor in some cases. That is not to say that every bogus statement as to the time of death points necessarily to an unlawful killing. I think Shipman was a conceited man who liked to impress others with his medical knowledge or supposed medical knowledge. In this case, Shipman's statement that the death occurred at 10pm on 1st
January could be an attempt to deflect any possible suspicion that it had occurred while he was on duty. It is possible that he had visited Mr Howcroft on New Year's Eve, when he was on duty, and had been seen. He would then wish to demonstrate that the death had not occurred until the following evening. The fact is, I do not know at what time Mr Howcroft died, and cannot say whether this entry on Form B is a harmless attempt to impress or a sinister attempt to deflect suspicion.
Conclusion
There are two suspicious features connected with this death. First, Mr Howcroft's position after death is not wholly consistent with a death from natural causes. If he had had a heart attack, Mr Howcroft would have been likely to fall from his upright chair. Second, Shipman has given a time of death on Form B which cannot possibly be a genuine estimate. It was not possible for him to make an accurate estimate with the information available to him. If he had visited Mr Howcroft and feared that he might have been seen, he might have advanced this spurious time of death to deflect suspicion from himself.
On the other hand, Mr Peter Howcroft's recollection that he received a telephone call on the evening of 1st
January, in which someone seemed to breathe heavily in a distressed manner, is consistent with Mr Howcroft having made an attempt to contact his grandson while in the throes of death. The observation by Shipman that, when found, Mr Howcroft had the telephone in his hand and a pad of numbers on his knee, tends to support that theory. However, it is possible that that telephone call did come from Mr Howcroft while in the throes of death but that it was made in the presence of Shipman. So I do not think I can draw any firm conclusion from that circumstance.
As there are no medical records, I cannot form any view as to the likelihood that Mr Howcroft might have suffered a sudden cardiac death.
It is with regret that I feel obliged to say that I am unable to reach a conclusion one way or the other about the true cause of Mr Howcroft's death, although I am suspicious about it.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Alphabetical List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001