The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Christine Hancock
Introduction
Mrs Christine Hancock died at her home, 12 Thistley Fields, Gee Cross, Hyde on Thursday, 13th
January 1994 at the age of 53. She had been a patient of Shipman for many years and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's arrest, Mrs Hancock's widower, Mr Graeme Walter Hancock, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mr Hancock and from Mr Derek Cooper White and his wife, Mrs Shirley White, friends of Mrs Hancock.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hancock but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Hancock, Mr White (Mrs White has since died), Miss Dorothy Marie Knowles (Mrs Hancock's daughter) and Mr David Frederick John Ball (Miss Knowles' partner). The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Hancock's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hancock lived with her second husband, Mr Hancock, whom she had married in April 1986. She had been suffering from multiple sclerosis for several years and she was retired from work. Over the years since the onset of her illness, Mrs Hancock's mobility had deteriorated. She put on weight through lack of exercise. She was unsteady on her feet and needed support when moving about. Despite these difficulties, she managed many household duties and lived a reasonably active life. She was mentally alert and enjoyed the company of many friends. By 1994, she used to stay indoors while her husband was out at work.
The Day of the Death
When giving a statement to the police, Mr Hancock said that, on the morning of 13th
January 1994, his wife told him that she was feeling unwell. Mr Hancock no longer has any recollection of that and does not think his wife made any such complaint. In any event, he went to work at the usual time, leaving his wife in bed. She usually got up later and was able to dress herself.
Whether or not Mrs Hancock told her husband she felt ill, she certainly did feel ill later that day as she telephoned her friend, Mrs White, and told her that she felt unwell and had called the doctor. She said she had left the door on the latch so that he could get in. She asked Mrs White if she would come over to keep her company for a while. Mrs White could not leave the house that day but she said her husband, Derek, would come over as soon as he returned home.
The surgery visits book for 13th
January records:
'CHRISTINE HANCOCK
12 THISTLEY FIELDS
HYDE
VERY ILL'
.
This entry is likely to have been made by one of the surgery staff at the time when Mrs Hancock telephoned the surgery. The time is not stated but the name is the last in a list of seven patients to be visited that day.
There is some confusion as to the time of day when Mrs Hancock telephoned Mrs White. Mrs White said that she could not remember but that she believed it was early afternoon. In his statement to the Inquiry, Mr White says that he believes that the telephone call took place quite early in the morning, shortly before he returned home at about 9.45am to 9.50am. He says that his wife told him about Mrs Hancock's request and he went straight round to see her, arriving soon after 10am. When giving a statement to the police in January 1999, he said that he thought he went to Mrs Hancock's in the early afternoon. Other evidence, to which I shall shortly refer, leads me to think that his first recollection was more accurate and the events that I am about to describe took place in the afternoon of 13th
January.
When Mr White arrived at Mrs Hancock's house, he expected to find the door on the latch but this was not so and he had to knock on the door. It was answered by Shipman. Mr White explained his presence at the house. When giving his police statement, Mr White recalled that Shipman told him that Mrs Hancock had gone into a coma. More recently, his recollection is that Shipman said, 'I'm sorry, I'm afraid it's too late, Christine has had a massive stroke'. Mr White said that he wanted to see her and he walked through to the living room at the back of the house. In the living room, he saw Mrs Hancock, sitting in her usual armchair next to the window, with her hands folded on her lap. She was fully dressed. She looked as though she had sat down and nodded off peacefully. Her face looked quite relaxed. Mr White went over and touched her hands and face and spoke her name, but she did not respond. He felt her hand and it was warm.
Shipman asked Mr White if he knew where Mr Hancock was and he said that he did. He drove to Mr Hancock's place of work to fetch him. The two men then returned to the house. Mr White estimates that he would not have been out of the house for more than 30 minutes. Shipman was still there and Mrs Hancock was still sitting in the armchair. Mr Hancock's recollection is that, on his arrival home, he found Shipman was present and his wife was sitting in her usual armchair in the lounge. She was fully clothed, her head was tilted to one side and her eyes were closed. His account continues:
'She was unconscious. I got on the floor next to her and held her hand. I do not know how long I was there for but at least half an hour later I felt Christine's hand go cold and I knew she had died. Throughout that time, Harold Shipman just stood next to us and did not do or say anything'
.
Mr Hancock said that his recollection of this period is confused because of his distress. Mr White's recent recollection is that, when they went in, Mr Hancock went to his wife and Shipman said, 'I'm sorry, Graeme, she's had a massive stroke'. Mr Hancock knelt down and began hugging his wife, holding her hand and talking to her. According to Mr White, Shipman got up and felt her pulse and sat down again. A while later, he got up again, felt Mrs Hancock's pulse and sat down again. On the third occasion, he turned to Mr Hancock and said, 'I'm sorry, Graeme, she's dead'. Mr White thought this occurred at about noon. However, the recollections of others would indicate that it was about 4pm. In any event, a considerable time had passed and Shipman had done nothing to attempt to revive Mrs Hancock, and had not suggested calling an ambulance or admitting her to hospital.
Miss Knowles recalls that she received a telephone call from Shipman, who told her that her mother had had a stroke. He did not say that she had died. She went to her mother's house and found that her mother was dead. Shipman was not there. She telephoned her partner and called an undertaker. Her partner and the undertaker arrived at about the same time. Later, Shipman returned to the house and there was a discussion about the need for a post-mortem examination which, Shipman said, would not be necessary.
Mr Hancock also recalls that, at some stage, Shipman said that a post-mortem examination would not be necessary. He also recalls Shipman saying that Mrs Hancock had not suffered. Mr Hancock thanked him. Shipman seemed extremely sympathetic. He explained the cause of death in technical terms and then left.
There is an entry in the medical records for 14th
January (overwritten 13th
January) which states:
'V
(
visit
)
Call for visit feels ill
14.55 hrs
Speech slurred
(R) hemiparesis 110/70
unresponsive to stimuli(R)
CVA
neighbour came across
15.15 died pupils dilated'
.
As this entry was made after the death (probably the next day, bearing in mind the overwriting of the date), it must be regarded with suspicion. It might be a genuine entry; it might be a false one, designed to give a plausible explanation for a killing. The most recent entry before that was dated 31st
December 1993, when Mrs Hancock was recovering from an acute viral episode. There does not appear to be any reason to suppose that Mrs Hancock was at risk from suffering a stroke.
The computer records state that death occurred at 3.30pm but are otherwise consistent with the written records. No entries have been removed.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Although the certificate itself has not survived, its counterfoil has been found. On this, Shipman stated that he had last seen Mrs Hancock alive on the day of her death. He said that the cause of death was a cerebrovascular accident and that multiple sclerosis had contributed to the death. He said that there would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate on 14th
January 1994. There are no obvious alterations on it. He stated that Mrs Hancock died at
'15.30 hrs'
on 13th
January 1994 at her home. He said he had attended her during her last illness for 45 minutes and was present at the death, having most recently seen her before then ten days previously. He saw the body immediately after the death and carried out a complete external examination of it. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma lasting 45 minutes, as observed by Shipman himself, Mr Hancock and a neighbour.
All this information is broadly consistent with the picture as it appeared to the family at the time, although the handwritten medical notes suggest that Shipman was present for only 20 minutes before Mrs Hancock died.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker has commented on both the cremation certificate and on the medical notes and records. He finds the case highly suspicious on the basis of both sets of documents. He found it
'curious that this 53 year old normotensive should have a stroke, and die quickly'
. He queried why no ambulance was called when there was a delay of 20 minutes between the time of diagnosis and death.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious because Shipman was alone with Mrs Hancock in the brief interval of time, probably of the order of half an hour, between the telephone call to Mrs White (at which time Mrs Hancock had not had a stroke) and the arrival of Mr White at her house, by which time she was unconscious. If Mrs Hancock did indeed suffer a massive stroke in that short interval, the coincidence is remarkable.
The fact is that Shipman was alone with her in that brief interval and had the opportunity to administer a lethal diamorphine injection. As Dr John Grenville said in his generic evidence, following such an injection, the patient would lapse into sleep which would become deeper, respiration would slow and the patient would die.
Mrs Hancock was feeling ill on the morning of her death and asked Shipman to visit. However, although the visits book entry says that she was
'VERY ILL'
, she cannot have given the impression to the surgery staff member that her condition was serious. If she had given such an impression, the staff member would have advised her to call an ambulance or would have called an ambulance from the surgery. That was the practice. In any event, if Mrs Hancock had been seriously ill, the tenor of her conversation with Mrs White would have been different. It seems to me more likely that Mrs Hancock was suffering from a worse than usual episode of the symptoms attributable to her multiple sclerosis, symptoms with which she would be familiar.
Dr Grenville has said that multiple sclerosis is not a cause of sudden death and patients with that condition are no more likely to die of stroke than others. There was nothing in Mrs Hancock's medical history to indicate that she was at an increased risk of stroke.
Mrs Hancock's position and appearance in death are not typical of what is usually seen following a death from a sudden fatal stroke. That Mrs Hancock was observed sitting peacefully in her chair, with her hands folded on her lap is, however, entirely consistent with, and typical of, death by morphine or diamorphine injection.
In my view, it is highly unlikely that Mrs Hancock had a stroke.
Taking these factors into account and bearing in mind the startling coincidence relied on by Shipman, that Mrs Hancock is supposed to have had a fatal stroke at the very time he visited, I am driven to the sure conclusion that he killed her.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001