The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Mary Emma Hamer
Introduction
Mrs Mary Emma Hamer died at Donneybrook House (the surgery premises of the Donneybrook practice of which Shipman was then a member), Clarendon Street, Hyde on Wednesday, 8th
March 1989 at the age of 81. She had been widowed in 1978 and lived alone at 165 Grange Road South, Hyde. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was coronary thrombosis due to hypertension.
In February 2000, following the publicity surrounding Shipman's convictions at Preston Crown Court, members of Mrs Hamer's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Hamer's daughter, Mrs Marjorie Stafford, who lives some distance away.
An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Stafford, Mr Peter Sadler (Mrs Stafford's partner) and Mrs Kathleen Lee (the receptionist working at the surgery on the day of Mrs Hamer's death). Mrs Hamer's medical records have not survived. The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1989.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hamer was a lively and sociable woman who seems to have enjoyed very good health. She was independent and houseproud. She would still climb a ladder to change her curtains twice a year. She would regularly attend at the Senior Citizens' Club in Hyde where she would play bingo and dance. As far as her daughter was aware, she never suffered with heart trouble and she was not taking any regular medication. Shipman's visits book contains no reference to Mrs Hamer in the three month period before her death. It appears that he was not visiting her at home on account of any chronic condition that prevented her from attending the surgery. The absence of such entries tends to confirm the accuracy of Mrs Stafford's recollections.
Mrs Stafford last saw her mother about three or four weeks before she died, when she and Mr Sadler visited her in Hyde. Mrs Hamer seemed well. During the course of that visit, Mrs Stafford and Mr Sadler were stopped in a traffic jam in Hyde when they saw Mrs Hamer and one of her friends walking through the town at a fast pace.
Mrs Stafford was due to visit her mother on Friday, 10th
March and the two women spoke on the telephone on the Monday to discuss arrangements. Mrs Hamer seemed to be her normal self. She said she was looking forward to the visit. She said nothing about any health problem. Mrs Stafford would have expected her mother to tell her if she was feeling unwell.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Hamer had an appointment at the surgery on Wednesday, 8th
March. Mrs Lee told the Inquiry that when Mrs Hamer came into the surgery, she appeared to be alright and certainly did not look unwell. Mrs Lee was unaware of the reason for Mrs Hamer's appointment since this was not an issue that staff would discuss with patients. A few minutes after Mrs Hamer had entered Shipman's consulting room, Shipman buzzed Mrs Lee in reception and asked her to send the next patient in to see him. He explained that he had taken Mrs Hamer into the examination room to undress and, because she was elderly, this would take some time, which he would utilise to see another patient. About half an hour later, Mrs Hamer had not emerged when Shipman buzzed reception and asked Mrs Lee if there were any more patients for him to see. Mrs Lee estimates that this was about noon. Mrs Lee thinks that two or three patients had been in to see Shipman while Mrs Hamer had been in the examination room. Shipman then told Mrs Lee that he thought Mrs Hamer had died and asked her to come into the examination room whilst he examined Mrs Hamer to ensure that she was dead.
When Mrs Lee entered the examination room, she saw Mrs Hamer lying on her back on the examination bed, fully clothed. She had her hands folded in her lap, one on top of the other. She looked very peaceful. Mrs Lee cannot remember whether either of the sleeves of Mrs Hamer's cardigan was rolled up. She saw Shipman put his hand to Mrs Hamer's neck, as if to take her pulse. He then said that Mrs Hamer had died and asked Mrs Lee to contact a relative.
Soon after, Mrs Lee telephoned Massey's Funeral Services. She spoke to Miss Deborah Massey who attended a short while later. Mrs Hamer's body was taken into the car park through a side door off the main corridor in the surgery. The emergency services were not contacted.
Later that afternoon, Mrs Stafford was informed of the death by a local police officer. She was deeply shocked and found it hard to believe that her mother could have died so suddenly.
The Aftermath
On the following day, Mrs Stafford and Mr Sadler travelled to Hyde and went to Mrs Hamer's house. While there, they spoke to a neighbour, a woman known as Lottie. This woman told them that she 'couldn't get over' the fact that Mrs Hamer had died so suddenly at the surgery. She did not say that Mrs Hamer had complained of feeling unwell.
Mrs Stafford and Mr Sadler then went to Shipman's surgery. The receptionist handed them the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and told them to register the death at Dukinfield Town Hall. She also said that Shipman wanted to see them later. Later that day, Mrs Stafford and Mr Sadler saw Shipman at the surgery. He said that Mrs Hamer had come into the surgery, complaining of pain, and that he had examined her. He said that he had suspected that she might have had a small heart attack a couple of days earlier and he also thought she was having a further heart attack in the surgery. He said that he had told her that he wanted her to go into hospital and that she had agreed to this. This surprised Mrs Stafford because her mother 'hated' hospitals. He said that he had given her some morphine to 'ease the pain' and that he had then left her alone for a few minutes whilst he went into his office to telephone for an ambulance. He said that, when he went back into the examination room, he told Mrs Hamer that he had booked a bed for her in Ashton General Hospital. However, he then realised that she was not moving or responding to him. He noted that her pupils were dilated and, when he checked for a pulse, he realised that she had died. Shipman emphasised that, although he had resuscitation equipment available to him at the surgery, he had not used it because Mrs Hamer might have suffered brain damage. Shipman also said that this was the first death he had had in his surgery.
Certification
The MCCD counterfoil shows that Shipman certified that the death was caused by coronary thrombosis, which was due to hypertension. He said that he had seen Mrs Hamer alive on the day of her death. There was no need for referral to the coroner or a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation forms. He mistakenly recorded that Mrs Hamer's middle name was 'Emily', a mistake initially made on Form A. He said that death had occurred at 10.30am on 8th
March 1989, although it appears that he initially wrote 12.30pm on 7th
March 1989. He said that death had occurred at Donneybrook House, Doctors Surgery, Clarendon Road, Hyde. He said that he had attended Mrs Hamer during her last illness for a period of 20 minutes, although it appears that he initially wrote ten minutes. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Hamer alive on 8th
March 1989, immediately before her death, and that he saw her body immediately after her death. He claimed to have made a complete external examination of the body. He certified that hypertension was the morbid condition giving rise to the coronary thrombosis which had been the immediate cause of death. The mode of death was said to be a coma of minutes' duration. Shipman admitted being present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker considered the cremation documentation available in this case and assessed the level of suspicion to be high.
Conclusion
This death is highly suspicious. The first and most obvious cause for suspicion is that this sudden death occurred in Shipman's presence. This in itself excites a high degree of suspicion. Other doctors say that it is very rare indeed for a sudden death to occur while they are there. With Shipman, such an event occurred quite frequently.
Mrs Hamer's medical records have not been found, but the evidence suggests that she was a healthy and active lady who was not in need of a home visit. In addition, Mrs Lee told the Inquiry that Mrs Hamer did not look unwell when she entered the surgery. It appears to me that Mrs Hamer was not having a heart attack when she walked into Shipman's consulting room. If she had been, she would have looked ill and I am sure Mrs Lee would have noticed. If she did indeed suffer a heart attack, it must have occurred in the few minutes after she went into Shipman's room. Although that is theoretically possible, it is highly unlikely.
Shipman told Mrs Lee that he had asked Mrs Hamer to undress in the examination room and that he wished to see other patients in the meantime. Mrs Lee says he left Mrs Hamer for about 30 minutes and saw two or three more patients. If Shipman's version of events to Mrs Lee is correct, it would mean that Mrs Hamer entered the examination room, climbed onto the examination couch without removing any clothing, folded her hands in her lap and suffered a fatal heart attack. When that attack commenced, she remained lying on the couch and did nothing to alert Shipman to her plight. Such a scenario is wholly unbelievable.
Shipman's account of events, as given to Mrs Stafford, is quite inconsistent with Mrs Lee's recollections. If what Shipman told Mrs Stafford was true, and Mrs Hamer appeared to be having a heart attack in his room, one would not have expected him to see other patients whilst this was going on. He would have an emergency on his hands. If Mrs Hamer was in such pain as to need morphine, Shipman should not have left her alone. His claims that he contacted the hospital and called an ambulance are not supported by Mrs Lee. It is inconceivable that, if he had done either of those things, Mrs Lee would not have known. I am quite sure that Shipman's account to Mrs Stafford was untrue.
Mrs Hamer's appearance in death was not typical of that usually seen in a death following a coronary thrombosis. It was, however, very similar to that of many of Shipman's victims who had been killed by lethal injection.
I am quite sure that Shipman killed Mrs Hamer. In my view, it is highly likely that he took her into the examination room and asked her to lie on the bed. The overwhelming likelihood is that he then administered to her a fatal injection of an opiate, on the pretext of either taking blood or administering some necessary medication. He then left her in the examination room and returned to his consulting room where he proceeded to see other patients for about half an hour. After he had finished his morning surgery, he pretended to Mrs Lee that he had suddenly 'discovered' Mrs Hamer to be dead.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001