The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Florence Heywood
Introduction
Mrs Florence Heywood died at Godley Court, Hyde Nursing Home, Grange Road South, Hyde on Thursday, 10th
November 1994 at the age of 91. She had been a patient of Shipman since January 1994, when she moved to Hyde Nursing Home. Shipman certified that the cause of Mrs Heywood's death was left ventricular failure due to congestive heart failure.
On 17th
August 2001, the Inquiry wrote to Mrs Heywood's son, Mr Harry Heywood, informing him that Shipman had certified the cause of his mother's death and asking him to provide a brief account of the circumstances of the death. He responded by saying that he was concerned about the circumstances. He said that the sister at Hyde Nursing Home had told him that Shipman had given his mother an injection. She had died soon afterwards. The Inquiry investigated the death and took statements from Mr Harry Heywood, his son and daughter-in-law Mr Ian Heywood and Mrs Julie Heywood and their daughter Miss Michelle Heywood. Statements have also been taken from two members of the nursing home staff, Mrs Maria Foster and Mrs Valerie Rowlinson. Dr John Grenville has provided a report. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Heywood's general practitioner and hospital records and to other contemporaneous documentation. The notes and records kept by the nursing home are not available apart from a form notifying the health authority of the death and the Godley Court admissions and discharge book.
This decision has been written following an oral hearing on 6th
December 2001 at which Mr Harry Heywood, Mr Ian Heywood, Mrs Julie Heywood, Miss Michelle Heywood, Mrs Maria Foster and Mrs Valerie Rowlinson gave evidence. Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
Until January 1994, Mrs Heywood lived in an elderly persons' home in Ashton-under-Lyne. During this time her physical and mental health declined. In late 1993, she fell and broke the neck of her left femur. While she was in hospital following an operation to pin the fracture, she suffered a pulmonary embolism and was treated with anticoagulant. In January 1994, when she was ready to be discharged from hospital, it was felt that she required a greater degree of nursing care than could be provided in a residential home and she was transferred to Hyde Nursing Home. At this time, she became Shipman's patient. By then she was immobile and dependent on others for all daily living tasks. She suffered from a degree of senile dementia, although she still recognised her family, who visited her very regularly.
Shipman diagnosed that Mrs Heywood was suffering from congestive heart failure and commenced treatment. A month later, in March 1994, he increased the dose of medication but did not record any symptoms or signs which might have justified the increase. Over the following months, Shipman visited Mrs Heywood periodically and treated her mainly for exacerbations of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. During the last six weeks of her life, Shipman visited several times. On 5th
October, she had pain in her shoulder. On 14th
October, she was agitated and would not get into bed. On 20th
October, Mrs Heywood was said to be wheezy and chesty and Shipman diagnosed acute bronchitis. He prescribed a steroid and an antibiotic. He noted that there was no congestive heart failure. On 7th
November, he visited again. Mrs Heywood was chesty and wheezy. Shipman diagnosed bronchospasm and increased the dose of steroid. He also prescribed a bronchodilator. On this occasion he also recorded that there was no congestive heart failure.
According to Mr Harry Heywood, he and his wife visited his mother on either the day before she died or the day before that. She seemed her usual self.
The staff at the nursing home cannot remember Mrs Florence Heywood but they do remember Mr Harry Heywood's wife, because she used to take home-made cakes for the residents.
The Day of the Death
At about 8.40pm on 10th
November, one of the staff at the nursing home contacted Mr Harry Heywood and asked him to come immediately. He gained the impression that his mother had not long to live. He telephoned his son and asked him to go to the nursing home. Mr and Mrs Harry Heywood and Mr and Mrs Ian Heywood and their daughter went to the nursing home. Mr Ian Heywood, whose evidence I regard as more reliable than his father's on this point, said that the journey took about 20 minutes. If Mr Harry Heywood's estimate of the time of the telephone call is accurate, it seems to me that the family must have arrived at about 9pm or shortly after. Each member of the family has a slightly different recollection of what occurred but there is a common thread running through all accounts.
Mr Harry Heywood said that his son came to collect him and his wife in their car and the whole family went to the nursing home together. On arrival they all rushed in and went straight to Mrs Heywood's bedroom. There they found Mrs Foster standing by the bed. She said that they were too late and that Mrs Heywood had died. Mr Harry Heywood felt his mother's hand and found it warm. He suggested that Mrs Foster must be mistaken and that his mother was still alive. Mrs Foster said, 'No, she's gone'. His mother was lying curled up on the bed. Mrs Foster then said that Shipman had just left and had given Mrs Heywood an injection when he was with her. Mrs Foster did not say what the injection was and Mr Harry Heywood did not ask. Nor did Mrs Foster tell him what his mother had died of. She said that Mrs Heywood had been well earlier in the evening and had eaten a good meal. Then she had been tired and had gone to bed early. Mr Harry Heywood says that as they spoke he could feel his mother's hand go cool and he realised that she was in fact dead. He did not think there was anything untoward about Shipman giving his mother an injection. He just thought it must have been a medical procedure.
Mr Ian Heywood recalls that his father or mother telephoned his house some time after 7pm and told him that his grandmother had taken a turn for the worse. He agreed to go straight to the nursing home and to meet his father and mother there. He, his wife and daughter set off and arrived about 20 minutes later. He thinks they met in the car park as agreed, as they all wanted to go in together. As they approached the door, they saw Shipman coming out. Mrs Harry Heywood recognised him. Mr Ian Heywood thinks Shipman noticed them but he did not speak to them. They went inside and were met in the corridor by Mrs Foster. She told them that Shipman had visited and had given Mrs Heywood an injection. He cannot remember if she said at that stage that Mrs Heywood was dead or just unwell. She said she could not understand it, as Mrs Heywood had had a good meal. Then Mrs Foster took Mrs Harry Heywood to the bedroom. They went ahead of the rest of the family to straighten the body out. Then the rest of the family went in, including Mr Harry Heywood, and it was clear that Mrs Heywood was dead. Mr Ian Heywood took hold of his grandmother's hand and found that it was hot, as if she had just come out of a sauna. He thought that was unusual as she was usually cold to the touch. Mrs Foster did not say what the injection was that Shipman had given and she did not tell them why Mrs Heywood had died.
Mrs Julie Heywood said that it was some time after 6pm when she and her husband received a telephone call and set out to go to the nursing home. The two families met in the car park. As they were approaching the door, they saw Shipman walking towards his car. He looked at them but did not speak. He got into his car and drove off. They all went inside together. Mrs Foster met them in the hallway near the reception area. She spoke to Mr and Mrs Harry Heywood. She said that Shipman had given Mrs Heywood an injection but she had died. Nothing else was said at that time. Then they went into Mrs Heywood's room. Mrs Julie Heywood could see Mrs Heywood lying curled in a ball on the bed. She was clearly dead. No one suggested that she might still be alive. Mrs Harry Heywood straightened the body out. There was no discussion of what the injection had been or why Mrs Heywood had died.
Miss Michelle Heywood was only ten years old at the time of her great-grandmother's death. She remembers being driven to the nursing home. She said that she and her parents met her grandparents in the hallway near the entrance. Her grandparents had arrived before them and were in the hallway when she and her parents arrived. They all walked down towards Mrs Heywood's room and there was a conversation just outside the door. All Miss Heywood can now remember is that the nurse said that her great-grandmother had passed away and that Shipman had given her an injection. The nurse also said that Mrs Heywood had had a good tea and had sat on her chair and felt tired and had been put to bed. When they went into the bedroom, her great-grandmother was laid out nice and straight and she thinks she has been told that her grandmother had done that. She agreed that the family had talked about this event many times, but she said that talking about it had only jogged her memory as it was not something she would forget.
Unfortunately Mrs Foster cannot remember Mrs Heywood's death at all and the nursing notes have been destroyed. However, Mrs Foster said that she could not agree with the family's evidence because she would never tell a relative that a doctor had given an injection without explaining what the injection was and why it had been given. She would always know what injection had been given because she would have to make an entry in the nursing notes. Usually she would take the phial off the doctor so that she knew exactly what had been given. She thought that if any resident had died immediately or soon after a doctor had given an injection she would remember the event. In fact that had happened on one occasion, when Shipman had given one or possibly two injections to a patient who was very seriously ill with congestive heart failure. She thought that one of the injections was of a diuretic and the other might have been morphine. However, she had not been worried about this, as that patient was dying anyway and she thought that Shipman was doing all he could for her.
Shipman's visits book does not contain any reference to Mrs Heywood for the day of the death. However, if he were called out as an emergency during the evening, I would not expect to see an entry in the visits book. There is an entry for the following day either indicating an intention to visit Robinson's Funeral Services to complete the cremation Form B or recording a request that Form B be completed.
Shipman did not make any entry in Mrs Heywood's records to show that he visited her shortly before her death or gave any treatment. Her death is merely noted on the outer cover of the Lloyd George folder.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), saying that he had seen Mrs Heywood on the day of her death. The immediate cause of death was left ventricular failure, which had lasted for two to three hours before death. The underlying cause was congestive heart failure, which had lasted for 12 months. Senile dementia had contributed to the death but was not related to the condition which had caused it.
On 11th
November, Shipman completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at 11pm on 10th
November 1994. He said that he had been Mrs Heywood's ordinary medical attendant for 20 months. He had attended her during her last illness for two hours and had last seen her alive one hour before death. He said that he saw her body 30 minutes after death and made a complete external examination of it. The causes of death were stated as on the MCCD. Shipman said that the mode of death was coma of two hours' duration. He stated that his responses to the questions relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations. Shipman stated that a
'nurse in charge at the Home'
was present at the time of death.
The nursing home notified the health authority of the death on the standard form. This recorded that Mrs Heywood died at 9pm.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville considered Shipman's account of events as derived from the MCCD and Form B. He noted that Shipman claimed that he had visited Mrs Heywood at about 9pm, at which time she had just fallen into a coma, and he diagnosed left ventricular failure. He then either stayed for an hour or went away and returned an hour later and then went away. He claimed that he was not present at the moment of death at 11pm. He claimed that he returned at 11.30pm and carried out a complete external examination of the body. Dr Grenville noted that he also appears to have visited the funeral directors the following day, which suggests that he had not seen the body before. However, as Dr Grenville explains in his report, the entry in the visits book might simply have recorded a request that Shipman should complete a Form B, as Mrs Heywood was to be cremated.
Dr Grenville noted that Shipman claimed on the MCCD that Mrs Heywood had been in left ventricular failure for two to three hours before her death. He explained that, as Mrs Heywood had been suffering from an exacerbation of her pulmonary disease during the previous two weeks, this might have imposed a strain on her heart and it was possible that she might have gone into acute left ventricular failure during the evening of 10th
November. He would then expect the staff to call a doctor. The doctor might well give an injection of a diuretic and, if Mrs Heywood was in distress, a small dose of diamorphine. In his report, he concluded that it was possible that Mrs Heywood died from the natural causes certified by Shipman. However, in oral evidence he added that it would not be usual for a patient who was in acute left ventricular failure to remain in a coma for as long as two hours. He said that once a patient with that condition became unconscious he or she would usually die quite quickly. He also explained that it was not possible to reach any definite view about the medical aspects of this death as there was no evidence of Mrs Heywood's condition before the doctor was called and before any injection might have been given.
Following his consideration of the medical records and cremation forms, Professor Richard Baker concluded that the death of Mrs Heywood was not suspicious.
Conclusion
This is not an easy case. It is most unfortunate that the nursing records are not available. However, I am satisfied that a proper search has been made and that it is likely that these were routinely destroyed before Shipman's crimes came to light.
The first question to arise is what the time of death was. As the nursing home report and the family recollection suggest that the death occurred at about 9pm, I think that is more likely to be accurate than Shipman's entry on Form B.
I find Shipman's other entries on Form B suspicious. Shipman suggests that Mrs Heywood was in a coma for about two hours before she died. Dr Grenville says that is unlikely if she was indeed suffering from left ventricular failure. Shipman claims that he saw Mrs Heywood at about 9pm, at which time she was alive, and then either stayed for an hour or returned to see her again at about 10pm. That conflicts with the evidence of the nursing home staff and members of the family, all of whom say that Mrs Heywood was dead by 9pm. It also conflicts with the members of the family who say that they saw Shipman leaving the nursing home as they were arriving, which they think was at about 9pm or soon after. I think it is unlikely but not impossible that Shipman should stay an hour at Mrs Heywood's bedside. I also think it is unlikely but not impossible that he should return to her bedside at 10pm. I am also suspicious of his claim that he returned to examine the body at 11.30pm. I note that none of this activity is recorded in Mrs Heywood's medical notes. In short I find his account of his movements as described in Form B to be highly unlikely and therefore probably wrong. The question arises whether Shipman's account was inaccurate because he was careless or deliberately untruthful.
I know from other cases involving Hyde Nursing Home that it was the usual practice of the staff to warn relatives as soon as they realised that a resident was critically ill. I infer that the staff did not know that Mrs Heywood was very ill until about 8.30pm. I think it likely that they then telephoned Shipman and the family. It is entirely possible that the nature of Mrs Heywood's sudden illness was acute ventricular failure. If so, it is possible that Shipman arrived before the family, found Mrs Heywood in extremis and gave an injection of a strong diuretic and a small dose of an opiate, which did not prevent her from dying by 9pm. It is also possible that when he arrived he gave not a diuretic but a lethal dose of opiate which ensured that Ms Heywood died immediately, that is at about 9pm. He then left and did not return that night. Whichever of those two possibilities is correct, Mrs Heywood died at about 9pm. I can see that for Shipman to suggest that the death occurred two hours after he left might help to deflect any suggestion that his treatment had caused the death. However, I cannot see how Shipman's rather elaborate and improbable account of his movements would have helped him to conceal his guilt. I have come across a number of cases where Shipman's entries on Form B have been manifestly inaccurate in cases where he has not killed a patient and have concluded that the inaccuracies arose out of carelessness. Although I am not certain of this, on balance I think it is more likely that Shipman's account on Form B was inaccurate due to carelessness rather than deliberately untrue.
I cannot accept the accounts of the various members of the family as wholly reliable. I accept that they are doing their best to recollect events that took place some years ago. However, I fear that their recollections have been affected by the discussions which have taken place between them and their exposure to the newspaper and television coverage of Shipman's crimes. Their memories all focus sharply on the claim that Mrs Foster told them that Shipman had given Mrs Heywood an injection. They recall almost nothing about what she told them about the circumstances of the death. Indeed they suggest that she told them very little. I have seen Mrs Foster and I accept her evidence. I do not think she would have given the bare information that Shipman had given an injection without explaining why the doctor had been called, what the doctor had said and done and what she understood had been the cause of death. It may well be that Mrs Foster told them a history, which included the information that Shipman had given an injection. If she did, I am sure she must have put that information in context. Unfortunately, the family has no recollection of the discussion as a whole. As Mrs Foster cannot remember the event and as the nursing notes are not available, I am left without any information as to the true circumstances of Mrs Heywood's death. I do, however, accept that Mrs Foster was not concerned about the death and did not suspect that Shipman might have done anything wrong.
I think it is highly likely that Mrs Heywood was very ill before Shipman arrived on 10th
November 1994. That is why he was called out and why the family was summoned. Her condition was of sudden onset and I think it likely that she was in cardiac failure. Shipman certified that the cause of her death was left ventricular failure. I think that this makes it quite likely that Shipman administered an injection because the range of appropriate treatments for left ventricular failure includes the intravenous administration of a strong diuretic and, if required, a small dose of opiate. I reach that conclusion despite my reservations as to the accuracy of the family's evidence.
I am satisfied that Mrs Foster was not surprised by Mrs Heywood's death and cannot remember it. It is quite possible that Shipman gave a lethal dose of opiate and lied about the injection he gave, and that Mrs Foster was not surprised by the death because of the severity of the episode that had caused her to summon Shipman in the first place.
I regret that I am unable to say whether Mrs Heywood was probably killed by Shipman or probably died of natural causes. I am, however, suspicious about the death because it occurred during or shortly following Shipman's visit.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001