The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Olive Heginbotham
Introduction
Mrs Olive Heginbotham was found dead at her home, 1 Fawley Avenue, Hyde on Thursday, 25th
February 1993 at the age of 86. Mrs Heginbotham's death is entered in the register of deaths as having occurred on Thursday, 25th
February 1993 but I have concluded, from the evidence available to this Inquiry, that she died on Wednesday, 24th
February 1993. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease and hypertension. Mrs Hilda Couzens also died on 24th February 1993. She lived not far from Mrs Heginbotham. There is a striking similarity between the circumstances of the two deaths.
Mrs Heginbotham's death came to the attention of the police when her name was seen in the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy controlled drugs register. It appeared that she had been prescribed a quantity of diamorphine. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Heginbotham's son, Mr Michael Heginbotham, and her neighbour, Mr Joseph Bowers. They also obtained a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Heginbotham but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has obtained statements from Mr Heginbotham and his wife, Sylvia, and from Mrs Carol Chapman (a receptionist at the Market Street Surgery) and Mrs Hilary Buckley (a medical secretary to Dr M A Matin, consultant geriatrician at Tameside General Hospital). Mr Heginbotham and Mr Bowers gave oral evidence at a hearing on 25th
October 2001 and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on 13th
November 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Heginbotham's general practitioner records and to visits books, appointments sheets and other practice documents for the relevant period.
Personal Background
Mrs Heginbotham was a widow and lived alone. She had a history of cardiac problems. In February 1983, she had suffered a coronary thrombosis after which she developed high blood pressure for which she was treated with medication. After that, she seems to have been well and there are infrequent entries in her medical records during the ensuing years. She had a transient ischaemic attack in 1987 and was put on daily aspirin. Her blood pressure was slightly raised at this time and medication was prescribed. There is a gap in her medical records between 1989 and 1993.
On 4th
January 1993, there is a record of a visit as follows:
'cough worse when lies down
no oedema/yellow phlegm
HS I II gallop
trace oedema JVP
a few basal creps
pulse 90
Innovace 2.5mg
10mg
Bendrofluazide 5mg T'
.
I interpret this entry to indicate that Mrs Heginbotham complained of a cough, which was worse when lying down. She did not think she had any ankle swelling but reported that she was producing yellow phlegm. Dr Grenville says that these entries are slightly confusing. A cough that is worse on lying down might be a sign of heart failure, but the production of yellow phlegm sounds more like a respiratory tract infection. Heart sounds were abnormal, as a gallop rhythm was heard. Shipman then recorded that he found a trace of oedema, which usually referred to ankle swelling. He heard basal crepitations. The pulse rate was 90 beats per minute, which is rather fast. Shipman increased the existing dose of Innovace (an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor used to treat heart failure) from 2
1
/
2
mg to 10mg and prescribed bendrofluazide, a diuretic. Dr Grenville says that this sounds like an episode of quite severe cardiac failure, which was properly treated. A chest x-ray confirmed the presence of cardiac failure. Shipman saw Mrs Heginbotham again on 11th
January 1993, when her condition was settling.
It appears that Mrs Heginbotham asked for a visit on 15th
February, as there is an entry in the surgery visits book which reads:
'Both legs swollen - left leg water running out. Key
at 3 Fawley Avenue if can't get answer'
.
The reference to the key is a complete mystery, as Mr Bowers, who was the occupant of number 3 in 1993, says he has never at any time had a key to Mrs Heginbotham's house. Shipman's manuscript note for that date reads:
'Ankle oedema
.
Innovace increase to 20mg.
Add lasix 40mg...
(
illegible
)
See mane
(
in the morning
)
.
D/N
(
district nurse
)
for bandaging'
.
I interpret that note to indicate that Mrs Heginbotham's ankles were extremely swollen. Shipman prescribed a further increase in the dose of Innovace and also prescribed Lasix, a powerful diuretic. He decided to visit the next day and arranged for the district nurse to visit to bandage Mrs Heginbotham's legs. Dr Grenville says that it sounds as though Mrs Heginbotham had very severe oedema and Shipman treated it properly by increasing the Innovace and prescribing a strong diuretic. Bandaging was also appropriate, as it helps to avoid ulceration. Mrs Heginbotham was suffering from heart failure and was deteriorating.
Mr Heginbotham's son says that there were occasions when his mother had leg ulcers that required attention by the district nurse. The district nursing computer recorded that Nurse Walton attended Mrs Heginbotham on 15th
, 17th
and 23rd
February 1993. The computer does not contain any detail of the treatment given. The nurse's notes have not survived.
It appears that Shipman did revisit as intended on 16th
February, as there is an entry which says:
'Chest OK oedema less
HR 80/m OK
Continue Innovace 10mg.
Burinex
(
a diuretic
)
'
.
I understand from that note that the ankles were less swollen and the heart rate had reduced to an acceptable level. However, Dr Grenville is slightly puzzled as to why the drug regime should have been changed again so soon. In any event, there was some improvement and the episode of heart failure was settling.
Dr Grenville says that, overall, the prognosis from then on was poor and Mrs Heginbotham was at high risk of a sudden death from heart failure. Her medical records did not reveal any other risk factors of sudden death, except that she was 86 years old.
It seems that Shipman might have visited Mrs Heginbotham again on 18th
February. No entry appears in the surgery visits book but Mrs Heginbotham's name appears in the book that Shipman took out on his rounds. However, there is no entry in the medical records for that day.
According to her family, Mrs Heginbotham led a quiet life and was mainly confined to her house and garden. She had a few friends who visited her, and her family did her shopping. Her son, Mr Heginbotham, and his wife, Sylvia, used to shop for her on Saturdays and then stay for an hour or two. Mrs Sylvia Heginbotham used to speak to her mother-in-law on the telephone two or three times a week.
Mr Heginbotham and his wife saw his mother on the Saturday before her death and say that she seemed well. She did not mention to them that she had had recent consultations with Shipman. It appears that Mrs Heginbotham was rather a private person who did not discuss her health with anyone.
The Day of the Death
On 24th
February 1993, Shipman was due to see Mrs Heginbotham again. Her name appears in the visits book and also in the book which Shipman took with him on his rounds. There is a note which was probably made on 24th
February 1993. It reads:
'oedema
pulse AF
(
atrial fibrillation
)
basal creps
.
Increase Burinex to 2 OD
See mane ?Admit
IHD (2) CHF'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman found quite severe ankle oedema. Mrs Heginbotham's pulse was in atrial fibrillation. He heard basal crepitations. He increased the dose of Burinex and decided to see her the following day, with a view to admitting her to hospital.
A further note appears on a Post-it note amongst Mrs Heginbotham's medical records. This was written by Mrs Carol Chapman, a receptionist at the practice. She was working at the surgery in the afternoon that day and would have made the note between 1pm and 4pm. It says:
'DOMICILIARY
Congest Heart Fail
on own
ankle swell.
Fluid on lungs
20mgs Innov
BURINEX PER DAY'
.
NO PROGRESS
Refuse hospital
Although Mrs Chapman does not remember writing the note, she can say that Shipman would have told her that he had been to see Mrs Heginbotham and was not happy with her condition. He would have told her that Mrs Heginbotham had refused to be admitted to hospital and asked her to arrange a domiciliary visit by Dr H H Wan or Dr Matin, geriatricians at Tameside General Hospital. He would have given her the information which she wrote down. She would then have telephoned one of the consultants' secretaries to arrange the appointment. When it was confirmed that Dr Wan would visit the next day, Mrs Chapman must have written in red ink the words
'DR WAN 25.2.93 TOMORROW'
. Although the note is undated, given the fact that the visit by Dr Wan was arranged for 25th February 1993 ('tomorrow') and given the similarities with the medical note already quoted, it seems clear that this note was also written on 24th
February 1993. I note that Shipman appears to have told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Heginbotham had refused to go to hospital, although the medical note indicates that the question was to be considered the following morning. It should be mentioned that Shipman also visited Mrs Couzens on 24th
February and asked Mrs Chapman to arrange a domiciliary visit for her as well.
Dr Grenville says that, if Shipman's medical note of 24th
February about Mrs Heginbotham is genuine, it sounds as though she was having another episode of heart failure. The presence of basal crepitations would show that she was in a serious state. However, if she was in the state recorded, she should have been admitted to hospital that day. If she refused admission, that should have been recorded and it would then have been reasonable for Shipman to arrange a domiciliary visit by a consultant. If that were the chosen course, Shipman should also have arranged nursing care and for someone to be with Mrs Heginbotham. She would have been at high risk of going into acute failure. It was not satisfactory for Shipman to leave her alone with the intention of discussing admission the next day. Dr Grenville noted the inconsistency between the medical note and what Shipman appears to have told Mrs Chapman, namely that Mrs Heginbotham had already refused admission. A suspicion must arise as to whether Shipman's note of the consultation of that day is genuine or whether it was designed to explain the death which he caused that day by giving a lethal injection of diamorphine.
The Inquiry has been able to find no evidence from anyone who saw Mrs Heginbotham alive after Shipman's visit on 24th
February, although it is fair to say that she was a person who, according to her family and neighbours, went out little.
Although Shipman had indicated an intention to visit Mrs Heginbotham on 25th
February, there was no entry in the surgery visits book to confirm that intention. However, there was an entry in his own visits book, from which it appears that he intended Mrs Heginbotham to be the sixth visit of the day. Mrs Couzens was also on his list of visits for the day.
The Discovery of the Death
Some time before noon on Thursday, 25th
February, Mrs Heginbotham's next door neighbour, Mr Bowers, was in his front garden when Shipman spoke to him and asked whether he had a key to Mrs Heginbotham's house. He said that he did not but accompanied Shipman to Mrs Heginbotham's house. Through the window, Mr Bowers could see Mrs Heginbotham sitting on a chair in front of the gas fire looking as if she was asleep. Either he or Shipman knocked on the window but could get no reply. Shipman told him that she was dead. This was at the time when both men were outside the house. Mr Bowers asked Shipman how he could tell. Shipman responded rather curtly and left Mr Bowers to deal with the situation.
Mr Bowers telephoned Mr Heginbotham who, together with his wife, came round to the house. They found Mrs Heginbotham sitting in her favourite chair, with playing cards, cigarettes and a cup and saucer beside her, fully dressed and looking as if she was asleep. She was cold and it was plain to her son that she was dead. To the best of his recollection neither the lights nor the television were on. He did not think that the gas fire was on. However, Mr Bowers, who went in with him, recalls that the gas fire was on but agrees that the lights were not on. He cannot recall whether the television was on. Shortly afterwards, Shipman arrived. He felt for a pulse and said that Mrs Heginbotham had simply 'gone to sleep'. He comforted Mrs Sylvia Heginbotham who was very upset. He made no mention of a visit to Mrs Heginbotham the previous day.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and counterfoil. The certificate has not survived but the counterfoil has been recovered. It confirms that Shipman saw Mrs Heginbotham on 24th
February 1993. On the copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate'), the cause of death is given as congestive heart failure caused by ischaemic heart disease caused by hypertension.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He claimed that Mrs Heginbotham died in the
'early hours'
of 25th
February 1993. That is unlikely, as, when Mrs Heginbotham was found, her curtains were open, the lights were off and she was dressed in day clothes. However, there is some evidence that she sometimes stayed up quite late at night watching television. Sometimes she would leave her curtains open in the evening. I would have thought she would be unlikely to do that on a February night. Shipman stated that he had attended Mrs Heginbotham for four weeks during her 'last illness' and had last seen her alive 12 hours before her death, which, on his timings, would be in the early afternoon of 24th
February. He said that he saw the body 12 hours after death and made a complete external examination.
Shipman said that mode of death was
'Collapse'
lasting
'seconds'
and claimed that the observations on which this statement was based were his own. He added that Mrs Heginbotham was
'found by self and neighbour sat in chair gas fire on estimated time of death 1-2 in the morning'
. It appears from this reference to the gas fire being on, implying a high ambient temperature, that Shipman was suggesting that he had been able to estimate the time of death from body temperature. He did sometimes make that claim. Dr Grenville has explained that it would not have been possible for Shipman to make such an estimate unless he took a rectal temperature. There is no evidence that he took Mrs Heginbotham's temperature at all. On Form B, Shipman also said that no one was present at the moment of Mrs Heginbotham's death. The description of the mode of death could only have been intended as supposition.
There is no evidence that Dr Wan visited Mrs Heginbotham on 25th
February. It has not been possible to discover whether the appointment was cancelled and, if so, at what time.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
On 24th
February, Shipman had morning surgery as usual, followed by an open surgery at 10.15am. Eleven patients attended that surgery so it was unlikely to have finished until at least 11.30am, probably nearer 11.45am. Shipman would then have paperwork to do. He would then go out on his rounds before the vaccinations clinic at 2pm. Eleven patients attended that clinic. The penultimate patient was timed at 2.50pm so he would not have finished that clinic until about 3pm. There was then a gap until afternoon surgery at 4pm during which further visits could be made.
Shipman's red visits book for 24th
February shows four visits, including those to Mrs Heginbotham and Mrs Couzens. Mrs Heginbotham and Mrs Couzens lived on the south side of Hyde, no more than about three minutes' drive apart.
After 4pm, Shipman had appointments until after 5pm and his open surgery started at 5.15pm. He had 16 patients at that clinic and a new patient to see afterwards. It is unlikely that he would have finished in surgery before 7.15pm to 7.30pm.
On 25th
February, there was morning surgery followed by open surgery at 10.30am at which there were ten patients; it seems likely therefore that Shipman was fully occupied from 8.45am until at least 11.30am. He had an appointment at noon with Hardy & Co, his accountant. It is possible that he went to Mrs Heginbotham's house before that appointment. That would account for his unwillingness to stay with Mr Bowers. Otherwise it would appear that he would not have been free until after his appointment with Hardy & Co, however long that lasted.
Diamorphine Supplies
The controlled drugs register of the Norwest Co-op, the pharmacy next door to the Market Street Surgery, reveals that, on 26th
February 1993, a single ampoule of 30mg of morphine was dispensed in Mrs Heginbotham's name against a prescription issued by Shipman. There is no record in her medical notes of diamorphine having been given on 24th
February or at any other time and, whether Mrs Heginbotham died on 24th
or 25th
February, this prescription plainly post-dated her death. It should be noted that there were two instances of single ampoules of diamorphine being obtained in the name of patients to whom there is no record of their administration on 22nd
February 1993 and two further instances (one of which is Mrs Heginbotham) on 26th
February 1993.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the information supplied in the cremation forms.
I have dealt with the evidence of Dr Grenville above.
Conclusion
From the circumstances surrounding the death, it seems highly likely to me that Mrs Heginbotham died during the hours of daylight on 24th
February. The overwhelming likelihood is that, if she had been alive as darkness fell, Mrs Heginbotham would have switched on the lights and closed the curtains. Even if she had left her curtains open, she would have put the lights on.
Shipman visited Mrs Heginbotham on 24th
February. There is no evidence that anyone saw or spoke to Mrs Heginbotham after Shipman's visit. In many cases, this factor carries great probative force. However, it does not in this case, as Mrs Heginbotham did not often go out. Nor did she often receive visitors, and her family did not telephone her every day. So the fact that she was not seen alive that afternoon does not prove that she was already dead. Having said that, whether Shipman visited her between noon and 2pm or between 3pm and 4pm, it would appear that she was probably dead within a couple of hours of his visit, at the most; this is evidenced by the fact that her curtains were open and the lights were off. It is something of a coincidence that she should die so soon after his visit.
Mrs Heginbotham had been suffering from quite severe cardiac failure. This seemed to have been brought under control with appropriate medication but was liable to recur. When her son visited her on the Saturday before her death, he did not notice anything unusual about her state of health. Mrs Heginbotham did not ask for a visit on 24th
February. Shipman visited of his own volition, apparently to follow up his previous attendance. Mrs Heginbotham was aged 86 and a sudden death from cardiac failure or heart attack was a real possibility.
When Shipman visited Mrs Heginbotham on 24th
February, he claims to have found that her condition had deteriorated since his last visit. His note does not suggest that he advised admission to hospital, rather that that question should be addressed the following day. However, he appears to have told Mrs Chapman that Mrs Heginbotham had refused to be admitted. I do appreciate that elderly people sometimes do refuse to go into hospital. However, when Shipman claims that a patient has refused admission, it raises suspicion because he is known to have made this claim in a number of cases where he had killed the patient. He often used this device as a means of explaining the death that soon followed. In practice, if an elderly patient were refusing admission, contrary to Shipman's advice, one would expect him to suggest a discussion with a relative or to make some arrangements for the patient's care. In this case, Shipman did not attempt to discuss the need for admission with a relative; nor did he make arrangements for Mrs Heginbotham's care. In my view, this gives rise to suspicion that his note of 24th
February is not genuine, but was designed to provide an explanation for Mrs Heginbotham's death, which he himself caused.
Shipman's entries on Form B are clearly designed to create the impression that Mrs Heginbotham died in the early hours of the morning. He could not have known when she died, unless he was with her. If he were not involved in her death, one would have expected him to give a bracket between the time she was last seen alive and the time when her body was found. As it is, Shipman has attempted to give a spurious authority to his estimate of the time of death. In my view, he has done this in order to distance the death from the time of his own visit.
Mrs Heginbotham's appearance in death, sitting peacefully in her chair, with her playing cards and a cup of tea at her side, is entirely typical of the appearance of many of Shipman' s victims who had died of diamorphine poisoning.
Shipman asked Mrs Chapman to arrange a domiciliary visit for Mrs Heginbotham. At the same time, he asked for such a visit for Mrs Couzens. He had visited both that day, probably within a short time of each other. He told Mrs Chapman that both had refused admission to hospital. Neither lived long enough to receive the domiciliary visit arranged. It would be a remarkable coincidence if two women died natural deaths within a short time of a visit by Shipman at which each refused admission to hospital and each was recommended a domiciliary visit.
It must be borne in mind that, during this period, Shipman was in the habit of prescribing single 30mg ampoules of diamorphine for patients who were either already dead or who did not have any requirement for the drug. A 30mg ampoule of diamorphine is a lethal dose. On 22nd
February, Shipman had obtained two ampoules. On 26th
February, he obtained two more, one of them in Mrs Heginbotham's name. There must be a real suspicion that, in obtaining diamorphine in Mrs Heginbotham's name, he was replacing the ampoule that he had used to kill her. As Dr Grenville said, if Mrs Heginbotham was in heart failure on 24th
February, it might have been appropriate to give her a very small dose of diamorphine to relieve distress. There could be no possible justification for giving anything like 30mg, which would have been a lethal dose for her. However, there is no record that the drug was given for therapeutic reasons.
Taking these factors into account and notwithstanding Mrs Heginbotham's poor state of health and her high risk of suffering a sudden cardiac death, I think it is highly likely that Shipman killed Mrs Heginbotham during his visit in the early afternoon of 24th
February 1993. Because of Mrs Heginbotham's underlying medical condition, I cannot rule out the possibility that this was a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001