The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Marion Elizabeth Higham
Introduction
Mrs Marion Elizabeth Higham died at her home, 57 Joel Lane, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 19th
July 1996 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1980 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He certified that she died of 'natural causes'.
In November 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Higham's goddaughter, Mrs Jean Hirst, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Higham's death. The police investigated and took statements from Mr Harry Miles Smith (Mrs Higham's friend and neighbour), Mrs May Clark (Mrs Higham's friend), Mr Stuart Carter (whose father was a cousin of Mrs Higham) and Dr Alan Banks.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Higham but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Hirst, Mr Carter and Mr Smith and has had access to Mrs Higham's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Higham was a widow who lived alone. She had no children but she had lived most of her life in the close community of Joel Lane. The witnesses say that she was outgoing, fit and energetic. She was always in good spirits and enjoyed a joke. As a younger woman, she had been a keen tennis player and she still enjoyed watching tennis and other sports on television. She read a lot and would complete the crossword in the newspaper every day. About three times a week, she attended the pensioners' luncheon club at Werneth House, about a quarter of a mile from her home. She used to walk there and only occasionally accepted a lift. As often as she could, she would also walk back up the hill to her home. She suffered from arthritis for which she took medication but still remained active. Once a week, Mr Carter helped with her heavy shopping.
The medical records confirm that she enjoyed good health and only occasionally consulted Shipman. She had shingles in April 1994 but made a satisfactory recovery. In January 1995, she strained her shoulder in a fall. In April 1995, she had a chest infection. On 3rd
January 1996, Mrs Higham was invited to attend for a geriatric health screen. An entry shows that she attended for that purpose on 1st
February 1996 and saw Sister Gillian Morgan, the practice nurse. No concern was expressed. Her blood pressure was noted to be 150/60.
From then on, the medical records give rise to the suspicion that they are not genuine. The next entry in the computerised records is dated 2nd
May and says
'Osteoarthritis r
(
right
)
knee'
. There is no corresponding entry in the handwritten records but, on 19th May, Shipman has written
'OA knee'
. Then for 9th
July, there are entries in both sets of records. On the Lloyd George card, Shipman has written
'OK geriatric screen'
. On the computer, the entry says:
'9/7/1996
...Had a chat to patient
not seen for some time all ok'
.
These entries give rise to suspicion for three reasons. First, screening was usually carried out by the practice nurse, as it had been in February 1996. Second, it would be unusual for Mrs Higham to be invited to attend for screening so soon after she had attended in February. If there had been any concern over her blood pressure when it was taken in February, one might have expected it to be taken on her next visit to the surgery and there is no record that it was taken on 9th
July. Third, there is no sign of the other entries which one would expect to find in the surgery records if Mrs Higham had attended the surgery that day. There is no entry recording an invitation to attend for screening, as was usual practice. There is no entry in the practice nurse's book, the visits book or the appointments sheet for 9th
July 1996. It appears to me that the entries dated 9th
July were probably fabricated by Shipman. Unfortunately, it is not possible to discover when the computerised entries were made, as the audit trail facility was not installed until October 1996. I observe that, if the entries were genuine, they suggest that Mrs Higham was fit and well on 9th
July.
There is no evidence that Mrs Higham visited the surgery or that Shipman visited Mrs Higham at home in the ten days before her death. Mr Carter thinks that Mrs Higham would only have asked Shipman to visit her at home if absolutely necessary.
Mr Carter last saw Mrs Higham alive on 18th
July 1996, when they had lunch at her house. She seemed well and did not mention having seen her doctor recently.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Higham attended the luncheon club at Werneth House on Friday, 19th
July 1996. Mrs Clark recalls speaking to Mrs Higham at the club that afternoon. She seemed well. Mrs Clark recalls that Mrs Higham left the club between 12.30 and 1pm.
As was his routine after work on a Friday, Mr Smith called at Mrs Higham's house at about 3.45pm. As he approached the front door, he noticed that it was ajar. This was unusual as it was Mrs Higham's habit to leave her front door closed but unlocked when she was expecting Mr Smith. He went in and then opened the vestibule door, calling Mrs Higham's name. As he went into the lounge, he saw Mrs Higham sitting slumped in an armchair, dressed in her normal day clothes. He called her name but there was no response. She looked extremely pale. Her right arm was hanging over the side of the armchair and her head had slumped towards her right shoulder. Her legs were crossed and Mr Smith thinks that her left hand was resting in her lap. She was dead.
Mr Smith was only in the lounge for a matter of seconds when Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mrs Higham's friend and neighbour, came to the house. Mrs Grundy looked at Mrs Higham and said, 'She's gone'. Mrs Grundy telephoned for Shipman to attend. While they were waiting, Mr Smith noticed that the door at the foot of the staircase was open. Mrs Higham always kept this door closed. Mr Smith also noticed that Mrs Higham had washed some clothes that day and had hung them out to dry on a clothes' horse in the yard.
Shipman arrived at the house within 20 minutes. He did not examine Mrs Higham but simply touched the front of her knee and then muttered something about old age. He then asked whether Mrs Higham had any relations. Mr Smith told him about Mr Carter. Shipman telephoned Mr Carter and he arrived about 30 minutes later. Mr Carter recalls that Mrs Higham looked as though she had just sat down in her normal chair and had fallen asleep.
No entry exists in the clinical records suggesting that Shipman visited Mrs Higham on the day of her death and her name does not appear in any of the practice documentation for that day.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of the Death
The appointments sheets for 19th
July show that Shipman's last morning appointment was for 11.55am and that his afternoon surgery was due to begin at 4pm. Thus, he was free to make home visits and complete his paperwork for about four hours. The visits book reveals that he was scheduled to make six home visits that day, three of which (in Foxholes Road, Kew Avenue and Newton Court, Hyde Nursing Home) were in close proximity to Joel Lane. Thus, Shipman could have easily visited Mrs Higham on the afternoon of her death.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) on 19th
July, the day of the death. He stated that he had last seen Mrs Higham alive on 9th
July 1996. He certified that the sole cause of death was
'natural causes'
. He said that he had seen the body after death and there would be no post-mortem examination. At the foot of the document, Shipman certified that he had been in medical attendance during Mrs Higham's last illness and that the particulars and cause of death were true to the best of his knowledge or belief. Quite what
'last illness'
he had in mind is difficult to imagine. However, the MCCD was accepted and the death was registered.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'about 14.30'
hours on 19th
July, although it appears that he initially wrote
'12.30'
. He said that he had attended during her last illness for ten days. What that illness was supposed to be is not clear. He said that he had last seen Mrs Higham alive ten days before her death (9th
July). He claimed to have made a complete external examination of the body about two hours after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be syncope lasting seconds. When asked to state how far his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman wrote:
'Neighbours. Found by neighbour after going shopping for her'
. He said that Mrs Higham had not been nursed by anyone during her final illness and no one had been present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
On the basis of his consideration of the cremation documentation, Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high.
Dr Banks expressed the view that the medical records did not support the cause of death as certified by Shipman.
Conclusion
There are some highly suspicious circumstances surrounding this death.
Mrs Higham enjoyed excellent health despite her advancing years. Consideration of her medical records reveals no evidence of any chronic illness which might cause sudden death, or evidence of any factors which would have put her at higher than usual risk of suffering a stroke or heart attack or a sudden death from any other cause. I accept of course that all elderly people are, on account of their age alone, at an increased risk of suffering a heart attack or stroke. However, it seems to me that this death was sudden and wholly unexpected.
In his generic evidence, Dr John Grenville has said that it is quite unacceptable for a doctor to certify that a death was due to 'natural causes'. If the doctor cannot provide a more specific cause, it must be because he does not know the cause and the death should be referred to the coroner with a view to post mortem-examination. It may be thought that 'natural causes' should be an acceptable cause of death for a person of Mrs Higham's age, being analogous to 'old age', which in some circumstances is acceptable. In Mrs Higham's case, old age would not have been acceptable as a cause of death because, although she was 84, Mrs Higham was fit and active shortly before her death.
If Mrs Higham's death was natural, as Shipman claimed, he could not possibly have known why she had died. Even according to the records he made (which I have found were fabricated), there was nothing wrong with her on 9th
July. I have said that I do not think he saw her then. Even if I were wrong about that, she was not suffering from anything which could be subsequently described as a 'last illness'. This death should have been referred to the coroner. That it was not, and that Shipman proposed 'natural causes' as the cause of death, makes me suspect that the death was not natural and that Shipman wished to avoid a post-mortem examination. I acknowledge that I have come across cases where Shipman has clearly not killed the patient yet has avoided referring the death to the coroner. It follows that Shipman's apparent wish to avoid referral in this case is not of itself probative of guilt. It does, however, raise suspicion that he might have killed Mrs Higham.
I have already indicated that I think it likely that Shipman had not seen Mrs Higham on 9th
July, as he claimed on the MCCD and Form B, and as the medical records appear to confirm. Shipman often pretended that he had seen a patient within 14 days of the death when he had not. It may be that he was under the impression that he would not be qualified to sign the MCCD unless he had seen the patient within that time. In fact, the only requirements are that he should have been in medical attendance during the last illness and that he should either have seen the patient alive within 14 days before death or seen the body after death. In the present case, it would appear that Shipman felt the need to say that he had seen Mrs Higham within 14 days either because that was necessary or because he might have to explain to someone what the last illness was. In any event, I think it likely that he had not seen Mrs Higham on 9th
July, and his claim that he had done so was related to his wish to complete the MCCD himself and avoid referral to the coroner. That Shipman's desire to avoid a referral to the coroner led him to fabricate medical records increases my suspicion that he was afraid of the results of a post-mortem examination.
Mrs Higham's position and appearance in death are not typical of what is usually seen where a patient has died suddenly from stroke or heart attack or other common cause of sudden death. In his generic evidence, Dr Grenville explained that such patients are usually found collapsed in circumstances which suggest that they have tried to summon help. On the other hand, the position in which Mrs Higham was found is entirely consistent with her having succumbed to a lethal injection of diamorphine and is typical of the appearance of many of Shipman's victims.
There is no evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Higham on the day of her death. He could have done, in that he had the time and opportunity to do so. There is a small indication that he might have done: unusually, the front door was ajar when Mr Smith arrived.
There is another feature of the evidence which gives rise to some suspicion that Shipman killed Mrs Higham. On Form B, he claimed that he knew the time of the death. He put it at 2.30pm. If this was a natural death which occurred when Mrs Higham was alone, there is no way in which he could have known when she died. He should have stated that the death had occurred some time between the time when she had last been seen (which on enquiry would have been when she left Werneth House) and the time when her body was found, which was at about 3.45pm. I cannot think of any honest reason why Shipman would wish to pretend that he knew the time of death when he did not. I have come across many cases when Shipman has stated a specific time of death in order to distance himself and his visit from the time of death. Suppose, for example, that Shipman had seen Mrs Higham walking home from Werneth House at about 1pm. By that time, he would have been out on his rounds and quite possibly in the area of Joel Lane. Suppose that he visited her soon after that time and killed her. He would not know whether he had been seen arriving at or leaving the house. It would be in his interest to create the impression that Mrs Higham had died some time after he left. I know this is speculation but it is not fanciful and it accords with what I have found to be his practice in many other cases.
Taking these factors together, I have come to the conclusion that Shipman probably did kill Mrs Higham. The evidence falls some way short of that which would make me sure that he had done so. However, I think he probably did.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001