The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Sarah Ann Hill
Introduction
Mrs Sarah Ann Hill died at the home of her daughter, Mrs Joan Rooney, on Friday, 6th
January 1995 at the age of 74. In January 1995, Mrs Hill registered as a temporary patient of Shipman, while living with her daughter. Her death was referred to the coroner who, following a post-mortem examination, certified the cause of her death to be bronchopneumonia.
In October 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, members of Mrs Hill's family expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of her death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Rooney, Mr Anthony Rooney (Mrs Hill's son-in-law) and PC Lisa Anne Surridge. The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hill but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr and Mrs Rooney and Mrs Tracey Hayes, their daughter. The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hill's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained reports from Professor Helen Whitwell.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without a full oral hearing, although Professor Whitwell and Dr Grenville gave oral evidence on Friday, 7th
December 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Hill enjoyed reasonably good health for most of her life. In January 1989, Mrs Hill's husband, Mr Joseph Hill, died. His brother, Mr John Hill, was living with the Hills at the time of the death and had done so for a number of years. Following the death of her husband, Mrs Hill became increasingly inactive and was prone to periods of depression.
In February 1994, Mrs Hill was found to have an underactive thyroid and congestive heart failure (CHF). Mrs Hill's own general practitioner treated both conditions. However, Dr Grenville is of the opinion that, although the medication prescribed was suitable, the dosages were inadequate. From entries in the records for March and December 1994, it appears that Mrs Hill sometimes had respiratory problems which were probably secondary to her CHF.
Mr John Hill became ill in November 1994 and was admitted to hospital. Soon afterwards, Mrs Hill went to stay with her daughter in Hyde. Mr John Hill died in December 1994 and Mrs Hill continued to stay with the Rooneys. At about Christmas, she became depressed and increasingly inactive. She had no appetite and lacked energy. Mrs Hill's general practitioner told Mrs Rooney that her mother lacked motivation and that there was no physical reason why she could not look after herself.
In January 1995, Mrs Rooney decided to ask Shipman, who was her general practitioner, to examine Mrs Hill and provide a second opinion. She wanted to be sure that there was nothing wrong with her mother, apart from being depressed.
The Day of the Death
On the morning of 6th
January 1995, Mrs Rooney went to see her mother in bed. She describes her mother as being her 'usual self' at that stage. Mrs Rooney told the Inquiry that she suggested that her mother should stay in bed. She telephoned Shipman and asked him to examine her mother. Shipman agreed to come. Mrs Rooney was working that day but Mr Rooney was at home and kept an eye on Mrs Hill. Mr Rooney went up to see Mrs Hill at about 10am. She told Mr Rooney that she was fine and did not want anything. Mr Rooney returned to see his mother-in-law at about 11am and, again, she seemed fine. She did not want anything to eat, but asked for a glass of water so that she could take her tablets.
Shipman arrived that afternoon at about 2pm. He had his doctor's bag with him. He was alone with Mrs Hill for about 30 minutes. When he came back downstairs, he told Mr Rooney that he had conducted a thorough examination and that there was nothing to worry about. He said that Mrs Hill was in good health and that her chest was clear. He mentioned that Mrs Hill had informed him of her thyroid problem and he said that he would make arrangements for a colleague, a consultant geriatrician, to call and see her the following Friday. The only record Shipman made of this visit is extremely scanty and does not contain the results of any examination he might have carried out. It says only:
'06/01/95 9N1C Seen in own home Ongoing episode'
.
It is not clear what was meant by 'ongoing episode'.
After Shipman had left, at about 2.30pm, Mr Rooney went up to see his mother-in-law. She complained that her feet were cold. Mr Rooney rubbed her feet and tucked them up near to the radiator. Otherwise, Mrs Hill seemed well and did not mention to Mr Rooney anything that Shipman had said or done.
Mr Rooney went out shopping and returned at about 4pm. He went up to see Mrs Hill and found her much the same as before. A while later, he went to collect his wife from work. They returned home at about 5.45pm and Mrs Rooney went up to see her mother. Mrs Rooney told the Inquiry that her mother looked 'dreadful'. Her speech was slurred and she looked very tired. Her mother was 'screwed up' as if she was cold and did not want to sit up. Also, Mrs Rooney noticed that Mrs Hill's nose was running heavily. Mrs Rooney washed her mother and dressed her in a clean nightdress before going downstairs to make her a cup of tea. Her recollection is that, when she went back upstairs, she found that her mother had died. She recalls that Mrs Hill looked as if she had fallen asleep.
Both Mr and Mrs Rooney now recall that the death occurred at about 6pm. However, I think it likely that Mrs Rooney found her mother a little later than 6pm and it appears that initially she was not sure that her mother had died. Records recovered from the Greater Manchester Ambulance Service show that Mr Rooney telephoned at 6.45pm, asking for an ambulance to attend. It is recorded that the patient was
'not responding'
. There was some delay in allocating an ambulance to this call and the paramedics did not arrive until 7.06pm. It is not clear from the record at what time Mrs Hill was declared dead. The record shows the name of her general practitioner in Gorton. There is no reference to Shipman. The paramedics called the police at 7.33pm and the police records show that an officer arrived just after 8pm.
Mrs Hayes went to see her grandmother and saw that she had bruised eyes and a bruise on her forearm. She remembers that Mr Rooney wondered whether the bruising to her eyes had been caused when the paramedics had closed them.
The police arranged for the body to be taken to the Tameside mortuary, as it was clear that the death was to be referred to the coroner.
The Police Report of Sudden Death recorded the time of death as 9.55pm. This is clearly a mistake as, within the same document, it is said that the death was discovered at 6.10pm the same day. Bearing in mind the time of the call to the ambulance service, it seems likely that Mrs Hill died at about 6.30pm, approximately four hours after Shipman had left.
The Aftermath
The following day, Mr Rooney telephoned the surgery and Shipman came out to visit Mr and Mrs Rooney. He explained that Mrs Hill had suffered a heart attack and said that, even if she had had a 'team of surgeons' present, she would still have died. He said that he had examined her very thoroughly. He said that, although there were no signs of illness when he had examined her, a heart attack could 'come on very quickly'. He also said that he had attended other patients who had presented no obvious symptoms but had then died of heart attacks in his presence.
This death was referred to the coroner and Dr David Bee conducted a post-mortem examination. The post-mortem examination report records the following findings on internal examination:
'Cranial cavity:
Skull:
Brain, meninges, etc: Little atheroma of the cerebral circulation
Thoracic cavity:
Mouth - tongue - oesophagus - larynx - trachea - lungs and pleura. Fibrosis at bases with honeycombing and foci of suppuration.
Pericardium - heart and blood vessels: Moderate atheroma of the coronary circulation. The right ventricle is moderately hypertrophied. The lower thoracic and abdominal aorta contain much thrombus'
.
Dr Bee expressed the opinion that death was due to bronchopneumonia. The coroner accepted that opinion and certified that condition as the cause of death.
After receiving notification of the coroner's finding, Mrs Rooney was shocked that the cause of death had been certified as bronchopneumonia, when Shipman had said that Mrs Hill had had a heart attack. She telephoned Shipman who came out to see Mr and Mrs Rooney. He explained to them that if the pathologist had found one thing which would account for the death, he would not have looked any further. He continued to maintain that Mrs Hill had died of a heart attack. Her chest had, he said, been clear when he examined her and she definitely did not have bronchopneumonia. He seems to have been suggesting that the pathologist had not examined the heart because he had found sufficient evidence in the lungs to explain the death. However, this was not so, as it is clear from the post-mortem report that the pathologist did examine the heart. He claimed to have found abnormalities in the lungs which he thought accounted for the death and which (if they were present) Shipman had failed to detect.
The Expert Evidence
Following a review of Mrs Hill's medical records, Dr Grenville concluded that the cause of death, as certified by the coroner, is unlikely to be correct. Dr Grenville says that a person dying of bronchopneumonia is usually ill for at least 24 hours and possibly several days before death. Usually, the patient will be weak and will have difficulty with breathing. The breathing will sound 'rattly' to observers. There is no evidence that this applied to Mrs Hill, although she was noted to be 'very frail' in the visits book and remained in bed on the day of her death. Dr Grenville thinks that Shipman might well have been right when he surmised that the death had been due to a heart attack. Dr Grenville thought that a stroke was also a real possibility, particularly in the light of Mrs Rooney's observation that her mother's speech was slurred. Dr Grenville concluded that the cause of death had not been adequately established, but that, given the lapse of time between Shipman's last visit and death, there was nothing to suggest that he had caused Mrs Hill's death. When giving oral evidence, Dr Grenville confirmed that he could not think of anything which Shipman could have done to Mrs Hill between 2pm and 2.30pm which could have caused her death, in the circumstances described, about four hours later.
In her first report, Professor Whitwell expressed her opinion that the cause of death, based on the history and the post-mortem findings, is unascertainable. She also said that, in the absence of toxicological analysis, it is not possible to say whether or not a noxious substance had been administered to Mrs Hill. In the addendum report, she reports that the macroscopic appearance of the lungs was entirely consistent with bronchopneumonia, particularly the areas of suppuration. She continues to say that the cause of death is unascertainable, but adds that:
'Whilst, in strict terms, based on the paucity of post mortem information and lack of histology the cause of death that I gave was unascertainable, however, the findings would be entirely consistent with the diagnosis as given by Dr Bee as bronchopneumonia. In addition, the history of her being incoherent and slurring her words may well be related to a degree of confusion that that produced.
It is also entirely possible that ischaemic heart disease contributed to her death. The description again contained within the post mortem report, however, is minimal'
.
She says that it may be that the bruising to the forearm noted by Mrs Hayes was in fact the senile purpura described by Dr Bee lying over the dorsum of the right hand. She says that bruising does not occur after death and so the bruising to the eyelids cannot be explained by any act of the paramedics attending after the death.
Conclusion
It is clear to me that this must have been a natural death.
It is established that Shipman visited Mrs Hill on the day of her death. He left at about 2.30pm. Mrs Hill's condition between that time and her death about four hours later is quite inconsistent with Shipman having given her an injection of diamorphine. In his evidence to the Inquiry, Professor Henry McQuay said that 30mg diamorphine would be likely to prove fatal within about five minutes if given intravenously over a period of one minute to a fit adult, not previously exposed to strong opioid drugs. A dose of about 20mg could well prove fatal within a similarly short time in the elderly, unfit and opioid naïve people. He also told the Inquiry that any dose of diamorphine over 5mg would make the victim aware that something had happened to them. They would feel strange and drowsy and, if they tried to move about, would probably feel nauseated and would vomit. In Professor McQuay's opinion, those who saw such a person would be aware that something was wrong. If Shipman had administered a lethal dose of morphine or diamorphine intramuscularly to Mrs Hill, the actual effects of the drug would have been the same. Although in the immediate post-injection period an onlooker might not observe anything strange, within about 15 minutes, and certainly within 30 minutes, it would be clear that something was seriously wrong. The opiate would reach maximal effect within an hour and death would occur within that period. Mrs Hill's demeanour after Shipman's visit excludes the possibility that Shipman administered a lethal dose of opiate. Dr Grenville cannot think of any other drug which could have been administered in the early afternoon, have allowed Mrs Hill to speak to her son-in-law and daughter as she did and then have caused death at about 6pm to 6.30pm.
Due to the paucity of information provided by the post-mortem report, there remains some uncertainty over the true cause of death. There is no evidence, however, that the death was due to unlawful activity on the part of Shipman. I can well understand why Mr and Mrs Rooney were concerned about Mrs Hill's death when they heard of Shipman's convictions for killing 15 female patients. I hope that the evidence given at the brief hearing and the contents of this decision will serve to put their minds at rest. I am sure that Shipman did not kill Mrs Hill.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001