The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Jesse Hampson
Introduction
Mr Jesse Hampson died at his home, 11 Walker Close, Hyde on Saturday, 2nd
February 1985 at the age of 92. Mr Hampson had probably been a patient of Shipman since 1977 when Shipman arrived in Hyde. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was cerebrovascular accident.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the cremation certificate, the death of Mr Hampson was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mr Hampson's son, Mr Jack Hampson. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Shipman's visits book for 1985 and the duty doctor transfer book. Mr Hampson's medical records have not survived.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
The Events of the Days Leading up to Death
At the time of his death, Mr Hampson was living alone in sheltered accommodation and had the benefit of supervision by a warden.
During the morning of Monday, 28th
January 1985, the warden service contacted Mr Jack Hampson and informed him that his father had been found in a collapsed state. He went to his father's house to look after him and stayed with him constantly until his death, which was to occur five days later. At about 10.30am on the Monday, Shipman arrived. After examining Mr Hampson, he diagnosed a stroke. Mr Jack Hampson does not recall that Shipman gave any medication. It appears that Shipman visited Mr Hampson on Tuesday, 29th
January. Mr Hampson's name appears in Shipman's visits book for that day. On Wednesday, 30th
January, Mr Hampson fell into a coma. It is possible that Shipman visited on the Thursday, as Mr Hampson's name appears in the visits book. However, Mr Jack Hampson does not recollect this. He recalls that Shipman visited again on the Friday evening and, after examining Mr Hampson, said that he would probably not survive the night. Shipman gave no medication.
The Day of the Death
Shipman called to see Mr Hampson on the morning of 2nd
February. His son was present at the consultation and says that Shipman did not administer any medication.
At 4.15pm, Mr Hampson died quietly in his bed. Mr Jack Hampson was present and has said that his father just appeared to stop breathing. He cannot remember whether Shipman came back to see the body, but it seems likely that he did.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The counterfoil has been recovered by the Inquiry, although the certificate itself has not survived. Shipman said that the cause of death was cerebrovascular accident. He said that he had last seen Mr Hampson alive on the day of death, that a post-mortem examination would not be held and that he had seen the body after death.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He said that he had attended Mr Hampson for five days in his last illness. He had last seen him about three hours before the death and saw the body about 20 minutes after death. The cause of death was stated as on the MCCD. The mode of death was said to be coma of six to nine hours' duration. This answer was based on his own observations. Mr Hampson had been nursed by his son, who was also present at the moment of death. These entries are consistent with the account given by Mr Jack Hampson, save that Shipman recorded that Mr Hampson had been in a comatose state for six to nine hours prior to death, whereas, according to Mr Jack Hampson, the period was somewhat longer.
Conclusion
I am quite satisfied that Mr Hampson died a natural death from the cause certified by Shipman. The course of events described by Mr Jack Hampson is entirely typical of a developing stroke, which culminated in death. Mr Jack Hampson was with his father throughout his illness and was present when Shipman visited. Shipman's final visit took place at least three hours before the death, possibly more. There can be no cause to suspect that Shipman was wrongfully involved in this death. He appears to have attended only to keep an eye on his patient and to give support to Mr Jack Hampson.
I can understand why Professor Baker regarded this death as moderately suspicious, when he had examined Form B. Shipman there said that he had seen Mr Hampson alive three hours before death. In isolation, this gives rise to a degree of suspicion. The Inquiry has the benefit of a witness statement from Mr Jack Hampson and it is clear that he was present throughout his father's last days and at the moment of his death, as recorded by Shipman on Form B.
Having considered the description of events provided by Mr Jack Hampson, I am entirely satisfied that Mr Hampson died a natural death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001