The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Barry Higgins
Introduction
Mr Barry Higgins died at his home, 20 Barleycroft Road, Hyde on Sunday, 5th
May 1991 at the age of 58. He lived with his wife, Mrs Frances May Higgins. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977. Shipman certified that the cause of his death was carcinoma of the bronchus.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the police that in his opinion, on the basis of the available medical records, the death of Mr Higgins was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Dawn Thomasson, Mr Higgins' daughter. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has had access to Mr Higgins' general practitioner records, Shipman's visits book for 1991 and the duty doctor diary recovered from the Donneybrook Surgery, as well as to the counterfoil of the Medical Certificate of Casue of Death (MCCD). Attempts have been made to obtain district nursing records for Mr Higgins but, if these existed, they have now been destroyed.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Higgins was very ill. He had suffered a small stroke in May 1990 and, in September 1990, had been diagnosed as suffering from carcinoma of the bronchus. He was apparently a very heavy smoker. The last entry in the Lloyd George notes is 8th
February 1991. The computerised medical records continue beyond that time and chart the deterioration in Mr Higgins' condition from March 1991 until the time of his death. Entries dated 26th
March and 10th
April simply record:
'DETERIORATION'
. An entry dated 23rd
April 1991 records:
'TERMINAL ILLNESS SKELETAL'
. The final entry, dated 30th
April 1991, records:
'TERMINAL ILLNESS NO CHANGE'
. Mr Higgins' name appears in Shipman's visits book on 26th
March, 10th
April, 23rd
April and 1st
May 1991.
The drugs history records that Mr Higgins was prescribed
'MST'
(morphine sulphate tablets) from 14th
March 1991. The final entry in the drugs history, dated 10th
April 1991, records a repeat prescription of MST. If opiates were being administered to Mr Higgins in any form other than tablets, this was not recorded in the medical notes.
Mrs Thomasson says that for some time before his death, her father had been depressed.
The Day of the Death
At about 10am on Sunday, 5th
May 1991, Mrs Thomasson received a telephone call from her mother informing her that her father had died. She immediately went to her parents' house. Mrs Higgins told her that, at about 8am, Mr Higgins had let out a cry and died. He was in bed downstairs. Mrs Higgins did not say that anyone else was in the house at the time of the death and Mrs Thomasson thinks that her mother would have mentioned if anyone else had been there. At about 11am, Mrs Thomasson telephoned the Donneybrook Surgery to request that a doctor attend at the house. An answering machine instructed her to dial a different number. Nobody appeared and Mrs Thomasson made three or four more calls. Eventually, at about 9pm, Shipman arrived. We know from the duty doctor transfer diary that Dr Napier was on duty over that weekend. It may be that he knew that Mr Higgins had been suffering from a terminal illness and referred the visit to Shipman, who would be in a position to certify the cause of death.
As far as Mrs Thomasson can recall, Shipman looked at Mr Higgins but did not carry out any examination. He was at the house for about 15 minutes.
Certification
Shipman must have completed the MCCD. Although the certificate has not survived, the counterfoil has been recovered. Shipman stated that the cause of death was carcinoma of the bronchus. He said that he had last seen Mr Higgins alive on 1st
May 1991, that a post-mortem examination would not be performed and that he had seen the body after death. Although there is no medical record of Shipman having visited Mr Higgins on 1st
May, his name does appear in the visits book for that date.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered Mr Higgins' Lloyd George notes and concluded that they gave rise to moderate suspicion. The latest entry in the handwritten notes is dated 8th
February 1991 and it may well be for that reason that Professor Baker thought that the medical records gave rise to suspicion. The history, if not complete, is much clearer when considered alongside the recently obtained computerised medical records.
Conclusion
Mr Higgins was known to be suffering from lung cancer and was extremely unwell in the period before his death. A death from that cause was to be expected.
I can well understand why Professor Baker expressed some suspicion about this case after considering the medical records. He only had access to the handwritten records and Shipman had not made any entry after 8th
February 1991. A much fuller (although probably still incomplete) picture is gathered from the computerised records.
It seems likely that Shipman would have visited Mr Higgins every few days. The last visit recorded in the visits book was on 1st
May, although this is not recorded in the medical records. It is possible that this was not Shipman's last visit to Mr Higgins, even though he said that it was. However, there is no evidence at all that Shipman visited Mr Higgins in the period shortly before his death. For that reason there is, in my view, no cause for suspicion in this case. I think it is almost certain that Mr Higgins died a natural death. I stop short of saying that I am certain that the death was natural only because it has not been possible to interview Mrs Higgins, to check the accuracy of Mrs Thomasson's impression that Shipman had not been present before the death. Mrs Thomasson should have no cause for concern.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001