The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Winifred Healey
Introduction
Mrs Winifred Healey died on Wednesday, 25th
February 1998 at the age of 82. She was a widow and died at her ground floor, warden-controlled flat at 80 Brunswick Street, Dukinfield where she lived alone. She had been Shipman's patient since the late 1970s and had a high regard for his medical skills. He certified that the cause of her death was congestive heart failure due to ischaemic heart disease.
Mrs Healey's death was one of those brought to the attention of the police during the March 1998 investigation and was one of the first to be investigated in August 1998. The police took a statement from Mrs Healey's daughter, Mrs Norma Brown.
An inquest was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Brown, Mr Peter Whittle (Mrs Healey's son), Mrs Patricia Whittle (the widow of Mrs Healey's eldest son, Mr Bernard Whittle) and Mr Ernest Stafford (one of Mrs Healey's friends). Mrs Brown, Mr Whittle and Mr Stafford gave oral evidence at a hearing on 18th
October 2001. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Healey's general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents covering the relevant period. The Inquiry has also obtained a report from Dr John Grenville who gave oral evidence at a hearing on 12th
November 2001.
Personal Background
Mrs Healey's medical records disclose that she had suffered from episodes of vertigo for many years. She also suffered frequently from upper and lower respiratory tract infections and signs of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) were found on x-ray. However, no firm diagnosis of COPD was made and Mrs Healey was not receiving long-term treatment for the condition.
Mrs Healey had been diagnosed with long-standing congestive heart failure, the symptoms of which were recorded in her medical notes on many occasions. In 1979, she was referred to Dr M A Matin, consultant physician, for the investigation of her complaints of vertigo, palpitations, cold sweats and breathlessness. Dr Matin suggested that she might be suffering from ischaemic heart disease with paroxysmal arrhythmia. However, further investigations, including an electrocardiogram (ECG), failed to provide a clear diagnosis and Dr Matin seems to have concluded that anxiety was playing a significant role in her symptomatology. In any event, Dr Grenville, who has examined all the records, considers that there was no clear evidence of ischaemic heart disease.
From 1988 onwards, the records contain a number of references to congestive heart failure. Dr Grenville referred to a note dated 24th
August 1988, which describes Mrs Healey as having a pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, ankle oedema and breathlessness on exertion. A diagnosis of congestive heart failure was made, although Dr Grenville says that the symptoms as described were mild. Further references to the condition can be seen in a manuscript note dated 19th
January 1989 and in the computerised records on many occasions in 1994, 1995 and 1996. On 20th
May 1996, Mrs Healey had a consultation with Shipman at which it appeared that her congestive heart failure had worsened. The computerised record for that day says:
'Congestive heart failure...
Oedema creps jvp up hs gallop'
.
I interpret this to mean that Shipman found swelling of the ankles and crepitations at the base of the lungs. The jugular venous pressure was raised. The heart sounds were abnormal, having a gallop rhythm. He diagnosed congestive heart failure. If those signs were present, the diagnosis was justified. Mrs Healey's medication was altered and this change appeared to be successful. Shipman referred Mrs Healey for a chest x-ray. The x-ray revealed changes of chronic obstructive airways disease, long-standing pleural thickening and slight cardiac enlargement. According to Dr Grenville, there was no evidence of severe cardiac failure.
There were further consultations in relation to Mrs Healey's cardiac condition on 29th
May 1996, 23rd
July 1996, 3rd
September 1996 and 7th
January 1997. No recurrence of cardiac failure was reported. During 1997, Mrs Healey suffered from a number of episodes of viral illness and upper respiratory tract infection. The last manuscript note was made on 5th
June 1997 and related to a chest infection. In July 1997, Mrs Healey had another episode of vertigo. She was examined on 2nd
September 1997, when her blood pressure was 140/80. She had no oedema and normal heart sounds. On 2nd
December 1997, she appears to have undergone a general check-up when her height, weight and body mass index were recorded and her blood pressure was taken. At this time, she appears to have been in reasonably good health. However, it would appear that congestive heart failure was kept under control by a range of different drugs.
Mrs Healey's family knew that she suffered from glaucoma and wore a hearing aid. They were aware that she suffered sometimes from vertigo. They also thought that she had angina. Her daughter had noticed that she became short of breath when walking up the hill. However, they describe her as mentally alert and generally well. She did her own cooking, washing and ironing and often cooked for a friend as well as herself. She always looked smart. She had suffered considerable distress when her eldest son died suddenly of a heart attack but had appeared to recover. In June 1996, she had signed an Advance Directive. It is plain that the conditions set out in the Directive had not been fulfilled at the time of her death.
The Events of the Weeks Leading up to Death
Mrs Norma Brown and Mrs Healey's daughter-in-law, Mrs Patricia Whittle, were aware that Mrs Healey had been somewhat 'under the weather' for a few weeks prior to her death. They believed that she was suffering from a virus. The visits book records an intention to visit Mrs Healey at 2.30pm on Friday, 13th February 1998, and it appears from the computerised record of that day that she was complaining of flu-like symptoms on that occasion:
'H/O: viral illness...
chest odd rhonci nil els e
(
sic
)
tored
(
tired?
)
fever etc amoxil cocod
(
Co-codamol, an analgesic
)
'
.
I interpret that entry to mean that Shipman heard some abnormal sounds in the chest but nothing else. Mrs Healey complained of tiredness and fever. She was prescribed Amoxil (an antibiotic) and Co-codamol.
Mrs Brown saw Mrs Healey during the weekend before she died. Although she was not her usual self, she was up and dressed and declined any offer of help. She had cancelled a hairdresser's appointment on the previous Friday but apparently felt well enough to reinstate it for the Monday. Mrs Healey's son, Mr Peter Whittle, saw her on the day before she died, by which time she had picked up and said that she was much better.
There is no evidence in the surgery records of any visit to Mrs Healey between 13th
February and the day of her death, nor of any intention to visit on the day of death. Mr Whittle saw Shipman at his mother's flat on a Friday shortly before her death but he is not sure whether it was on 13th
or 20th
February. As there was a recorded visit on 13th
February, it seems likely to have been on that day.
Mr Ernest Stafford lived only a short distance from Mrs Healey. They had become friendly and he saw her several times a day. She sometimes cooked for him and he would take her in his car to see her daughter and to doctor's appointments.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Norma Brown says that she telephoned her mother and spoke to her for about ten minutes at lunchtime on the day of her death. It has not been possible to establish the time of this call from billing records, as it appears possible that the call was made either from Mrs Brown's place of work or from a public telephone.
On the day of Mrs Healey's death, Mr Stafford recalls that he saw her at about 12.15pm. He now recollects that she was in her garden pruning roses and called him across. I am doubtful about that aspect of his recollection. She asked him to buy some birthday cards for her and he went off to do so. One of the reasons I doubt that she was outside is that if she were well enough to be pruning her roses (at a time of year when the task would not be urgent) I think she would have been well enough to buy birthday cards herself.
In any event, Mr Stafford says that he left Mrs Healey at about 12.30pm and returned at about 2pm. He rang the doorbell but there was no reply. He assumed that Mrs Healey had gone for a nap, as she frequently did after lunch. He continued to try to contact her throughout the afternoon and, when he still had no success, eventually decided to gain entry using a set of keys which he kept in the event of an emergency. He was unable to open the door. There were two locks on the door, a Yale lock and a mortise lock, the latter of which Mrs Healey hardly ever used. The evidence was that Mrs Healey did not usually put the snick down on the Yale lock during the day, only at night. However, on this occasion the snick on the Yale lock had been put down, so that the key would not open it. The snick can only be put down from inside. Mr Stafford attempted to telephone Mrs Healey's son but there was no reply.
Having failed to make contact with the family, Mr Stafford rang the police. The call was timed at 8.44pm. The message noted by the police was:
'CONCERN FOR WELFARE WINNIE HEALEY 82 YRS. CURTAINS SHUT ALL DAY
TEL NO ... (NO REPLY)
UNABLE TO CONTACT SON OR DAUGHTER IN LAW ON TEL ...'
.
The police contacted Mrs Patricia Whittle just before 9pm and met her at Mrs Healey's flat at 9.49pm. A message reached Mr Whittle during the evening at the restaurant where he was dining.
The police discovered that the bedroom window, which was on the ground floor, was open and managed to climb through. Mrs Healey was dead on her bed, lying back, propped up with her pillows. Mr Whittle and Mrs Brown say that she appeared entirely peaceful, as if asleep. Mrs Whittle described her appearance as 'awful' and neither peaceful nor as if asleep. She was fully dressed.
Shipman was called and arrived between 10.30pm and 11pm. By that time, Mr Peter Whittle and Mrs Brown were there, as well as Mr Stafford. Without examining Mrs Healey, Shipman told them that Mrs Healey had died of heart disease and there was no need for a post-mortem examination. Throughout the conversation, his manner was cold and uncaring.
Later, when the body had been removed, the family found one or more handkerchiefs on the bed, which were stained with blood or lipstick. I think it unlikely that the handkerchief was marked with lipstick. I think it more likely that it was stained with blood. All members of the family agree that there was evidence that Mrs Healey had changed the kitchen curtains and had cleaned the windows. She had left out the cleaning materials. This suggested to the family that she had been disturbed during or very soon after cleaning the windows.
Shipman made an entry in Mrs Healey's records which said only:
'O/E dead on bed afternoon nap 1600 hours cert at 2240'
.
This would indicate that he was called out at about 10.40pm and found her to be dead. He came to the conclusion that she had died during an afternoon nap.
Certification
Shipman completed the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD), stating that he had last seen Mrs Healey alive on 13th
February 1998. It is clear from the medical records that he did indeed see her on that occasion, and there is no evidence that he had seen her since that day. He gave the cause of death as congestive heart failure and the approximate interval between the onset of the condition and death as nine years, with the secondary cause being ischaemic heart disease, which had been present for 20 years. Mrs Healey was buried so there is no cremation certificate.
Shipman's Movements on the Day of Death
There is no direct evidence that Shipman visited Mrs Healey's home on the day of her death. The Inquiry has written to the present occupants of all the nearby houses on Brunswick Street and the end of Cecil Street, which was opposite to Mrs Healey's flat. There has been no positive response. It is a quiet area in which one might expect a strange vehicle to be noticed. Shipman did not have many patients in this area and would not be as well known as in Hyde. This would mean that neighbours were unlikely to recognise him but perhaps more likely to notice him.
The appointments sheet shows that Shipman held his usual morning surgery starting at 8.45am; the last patient is timed at 10am. Open surgery was due to start at 10.15am and he had eight patients, the last appointment being timed for 11.30am. After the end of the open surgery, Shipman would usually do paperwork before going out on some visits before the vaccinations clinic at 2pm. He could therefore have visited Mrs Healey between 12.30pm, when Mr Stafford left her, and 2pm, when he returned to the surgery. The visits book lists two patients to be visited. Mrs Healey was not one of them. There does not appear to be any reason why Shipman might have wished to visit her or any clue as to an incident that could have acted as a prompt to bring Mrs Healey to Shipman's mind. One of the patients to be visited that day was in Dukinfield and not far from Mrs Healey's home, but Mrs Healey's home was further from the surgery and Shipman was unlikely to have passed close by Mrs Healey's flat.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville observes that Mrs Healey's position and appearance are consistent with death from natural causes and death from a lethal injection of opiate. I observe that there is some conflict of recollection between the witnesses as to whether Mrs Healey looked peaceful. If she did not, death from opiate overdose would be unlikely.
Dr Grenville thinks that the most likely explanation for the bloodstained handkerchief is that Mrs Healey had suffered a nosebleed at some time before her death. There is no reason to suppose that this must have been on the day of her death. He has also considered the possibility that the handkerchief had been used to staunch bleeding after an injection had been given. He thinks that possible but unlikely. He has also considered whether the blood might have been bloodstained fluid brought up from Mrs Healey's lungs during a terminal episode of left ventricular failure. Had that been the explanation, he thinks that the fluid would not have looked like blood, and he considers that there would have been fluid on Mrs Healey's face after death. There was no report of that.
Dr Grenville also considers that this death ought to have been referred to the coroner. Shipman could not have known the cause of death, even accepting that the cause was natural. When Shipman had last seen Mrs Healey on 13th
February, she had no condition that presaged her death. The viral infection, which he then diagnosed, was unrelated to the condition that he later certified had caused her death. However, Dr Grenville accepts that there are some doctors who would certify the cause of death in circumstances such as this, to save the family the distress of a post-mortem examination. Such conduct would be unorthodox but not necessarily sinister.
Upon his consideration of the medical records, Professor Richard Baker assessed the level of suspicion in this case to be high.
Conclusion
Although Mrs Healey's death was sudden and unexpected and although the cause of her death has not been adequately established, it does not seem to me that there is any reliable evidence to show that it was caused by Shipman.
There is no evidence that Shipman went to Mrs Healey's flat on the day of her death. No one saw him there. He did not claim to have been there. There is no record of an intention to visit in the surgery records. These matters are not conclusive, of course. A visit is still a possibility.
Mrs Healey's body was found locked inside her flat. The snick on the Yale lock was on and the key would not open the door. Although it is thought that Mrs Healey did not usually put the snick on during the day, it appears that she must have done on this occasion. If one postulates that Shipman had visited her and had given her a lethal injection of opiate, he must have left her at a time when she was able to accompany him to the door, lock it and go to her bed before lapsing into unconsciousness and death. As Professor Henry McQuay and Dr Grenville have explained, a lethal dose of opiate, given intravenously, would act so quickly that such movements would not be possible. If Shipman had given an intravenous injection, which was his usual and apparently preferred method of killing, he would not have been able to leave the house with the snick of the Yale in the locked position. If Shipman had given Mrs Healey a lethal injection intramuscularly, she would have been able to remain upright and mobile for a few minutes. It is therefore physically possible that she could have let him out, locked herself in and gone to bed. If he did not do that, it would appear that her death must have been natural. I am satisfied that there was no other means by which Shipman could have let himself out of the house, leaving Mrs Healey locked inside. There was no practicable means of egress besides the front door. I was told that there was a patio door but that this was never used. It would seem likely that the police officer would have tried the patio door to see if that was open before climbing in through a window. Although it is possible that Shipman gave Mrs Healey an intramuscular injection, that was not his usual method of operation.
Mrs Healey appears to have been in good health on the morning of the day of her death. However, her medical history was such that she was at an increased risk of a sudden death from a heart attack. Although her congestive heart disease had been well controlled by medication, it seems to me that, at her age, a sudden cardiac death could not be described as wholly unexpected.
The evidence about Mrs Healey's appearance in death is conflicting. Dr Grenville has said that no clear conclusions can be drawn from the medical evidence. Nor can any inferences be drawn from the MCCD. Although Dr Grenville has said that Shipman should not have certified the cause of death, as he had insufficient information to reach a diagnosis, I cannot draw a clear inference that he must have wished to avoid a referral to the coroner so as to avoid detection of an unlawful act. He might have certified the death on inadequate material to save the family the distress of a post-mortem examination.
Bearing in mind these various factors, it seems to me that the death was probably natural. I cannot say with certainty that the cause was a natural one; nor can I say what the natural cause probably was. However, I think it unlikely that Shipman played any part in the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001