The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Clara Hackney
Introduction
Mrs Clara Hackney died at her home, 13 Booth Street, Hyde on Good Friday, 14th
April 1995 at the age of 84. She had been a patient of Shipman since his arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. She thought highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was carcinomatosis due to carcinoma of the stomach.
Mrs Hackney's death came to the attention of the police in the course of their enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy because on 13th
April 1995, Shipman had obtained a large quantity of diamorphine in Mrs Hackney's name. The police investigated the death and took statements from Nurse Marion Gilchrist, pharmacist Mrs Ghislaine Brant, Detective Sergeant John Ashley and Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hackney and no inquest into her death has been opened.
The Inquiry has taken witness statements from Mr Roy Collins (Mrs Hackney's nephew), Mrs Catherine Stockman (Mr Collins' daughter), Miss Clare Collins (Mrs Hackney's niece) and Nurse Gilchrist. The Inquiry has also had access to Mrs Hackney's general practitioner, district nursing and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). Dr Grenville has provided two further reports.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hackney was a widow and, in April 1995, was living alone in first floor sheltered accommodation on Booth Street. For most of her life, she had enjoyed excellent health and was fit and active.
On 20th
February 1995, however, Mrs Hackney was admitted to Tameside General Hospital with a history of jaundice and weight loss. Investigations revealed a primary cancer in the stomach with metastatic disease in the liver. No treatment was offered and she was discharged home and returned to Shipman's care. It is apparent that the prognosis was not good.
The district nursing service became involved and first visited Mrs Hackney on 5th
April 1995. The evidence of Nurse Gilchrist and the community nursing notes suggest that Mrs Hackney was capable of caring for herself but that she nevertheless benefited from assistance provided by health care aides and a night sitter. The district nurses tended to a pressure sore and provided emotional support. Mrs Hackney was noted to be oedematous in both legs and was taking frusemide, a diuretic.
Mr Collins recalls that he saw his aunt about a week before her death, when she seemed quite cheerful.
Shipman made handwritten and computerised entries recording that he saw Mrs Hackney on 4th
April and 11th
April 1995. The entries are brief but are consistent with the general picture painted by the other documentary material available. On 11th
April, Shipman wrote that Mrs Hackney was jaundiced and frail, though her oedema was less, and that he would review her seven days later.
The district nurse visited on Wednesday, 12th
April and recorded that Mrs Hackney had a small sore on her sacrum. A granuflex dressing was applied. This was to be checked on the Friday, two days later.
The district nurse visited again on 13th
April and noted that Mrs Hackney was sleeping more.
On that day, there is an entry in the surgery acute prescriptions book, which suggests that someone had requested a prescription for Mrs Hackney for granuflex dressings. It is likely that this request was made by the district nurse.
Despite the fact that Mrs Hackney was apparently pain-free, Shipman obtained from the Norwest Co-op Pharmacy, on the day before her death, ten 100mg ampoules of diamorphine in her name. He did not record the prescription in her medical notes or on the computer.
The Day of the Death
Nurse Gilchrist told the police that she visited Mrs Hackney on Good Friday, 14th
April 1995, to deliver a sheepskin, to help with Mrs Hackney's pressure sores and to monitor her condition. When she arrived at the house she saw that a permalux mattress had been delivered. She found that Mrs Hackney's condition had deteriorated. Mrs Hackney said that she was tired and was now staying in bed most of the time. Nurse Gilchrist made a brief entry to that effect. Nurse Gilchrist gave a slightly different account to the Inquiry but it appears that her first account to the police is consistent with her contemporaneous note.
Mr Collins recalls he spoke to his father by telephone on 14th
April and learned that his mother, Mrs Alma Collins, had gone to see Mrs Hackney as she had deteriorated. Mr Collins went to his aunt's house where he found his mother and Shipman. Mr Collins is unsure of the circumstances leading to Shipman's attendance. It is possible that either the district nurse or Mrs Hackney herself had called him out. It is also possible that he had decided to visit of his own volition. It appears from the surgery records that the surgery was closed for the day. There are no names in Shipman's visits book. Mrs Hackney's name appears in the duty doctor transfer diary but the entry gives no clue as to how or why Shipman came to attend.
When Mr Collins arrived, Shipman was in Mrs Hackney's bedroom and Mrs Collins was on her way from the kitchen to the bedroom. Mrs Collins told her son that Mrs Hackney had died. Mr Collins' knowledge of the circumstances of his aunt's death came from his mother, who is now dead. Mrs Collins also gave similar accounts to her granddaughter, Mrs Stockman, and her daughter, Miss Clare Collins. Their recollections now vary slightly.
Mr Collins recalls that his mother told him that, while she and Shipman had been sitting with Mrs Hackney, she had gone to the kitchen to make a cup of tea. Shipman called to her and said that Mrs Hackney was 'going'. She had gone back in and she and Shipman had held Mrs Hackney's hands as she died. Shipman left soon after Mr Collins arrived.
It would appear that Mr Collins' recollection of these events has been prompted or assisted by Mrs Stockman. She remembers that the description of events given at the time by her grandmother was that Mrs Collins was making a cup of tea when Mrs Hackney was dying and that she and Shipman held her hands as she went.
Miss Clare Collins, Mr Roy Collins' sister, lives in Holland. She learned of the death from her mother in the early evening of 14th
April 1995. She was told that Mrs Hackney had been unwell on the day that she died and that Mrs Alma Collins had gone to see her at her flat. When she arrived, Shipman was already there. Miss Collins understood that her mother had not called Shipman out and her mother did not mention that Mrs Hackney had called him, so she believes that he had called of his own volition. Shipman then told Mrs Collins that he was going to examine Mrs Hackney and that she should go and make a cup of tea whilst he did so. While she was away, Shipman called her back, saying, 'come, come, she is going'. Mrs Collins went into Mrs Hackney's bedroom and both she and Shipman held Mrs Hackney's hands as she died. Miss Collins remembers that her mother was extremely shocked at Mrs Hackney's death because, although she knew that her sister was ill, she did not expect her to die so suddenly. The documentation reveals that the family was aware that Mrs Hackney had cancer although Mrs Hackney herself was not.
Nurse Gilchrist says that she was not at all surprised when Mrs Hackney died. She had been receiving a high level of nursing care, was staying in bed most of the time and had jaundice. Some doubt must exist over the accuracy of this part of Mrs Gilchrist's evidence, as it would appear from the contemporaneous notes that it was only on the day of her death that Mrs Hackney had begun to spend most of her time in bed.
Shipman's handwritten entry in the clinical notes for the day of death reads:
'14/4/95
15.00
Carcinomatosis
Ca stomach
sister self
present
'
.
This brief note confirms the stated causes of death and the fact that Shipman and Mrs Collins were present at the death. The computerised record is equally brief. The essential words entered are:
'...Terminal care...O/E - dead...carcinomatosis ca stomach...'
. It is not possible to infer from either the handwritten note or the computerised record the circumstances in which Shipman came to attend.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD. He certified that the immediate cause of death was carcinomatosis which was due to carcinoma of the stomach, from which Mrs Hackney had been suffering for two months. He said that he had last seen Mrs Hackney alive on the day of her death.
Mrs Hackney's family believes that Shipman was wrong in stating that Mrs Hackney had stomach cancer. They believe that she had liver cancer. In fact, it would appear from the hospital documentation referred to that the primary cancer was in the stomach, although it had also spread to Mrs Hackney's liver.
Mrs Hackney was buried in Hyde Cemetery and there are no cremation documents.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville notes that Shipman had obtained a large quantity of diamorphine in Mrs Hackney's name on 13th
April but that there was no reference to this in her medical records. He says that it is possible that Mrs Hackney died peacefully due to her cancer without developing pain and without needing the prescription of opiate analgesia.
At the same time, Dr Grenville recognises that the fact that Mrs Hackney suddenly deteriorated and died rapidly in Shipman's presence suggests the possibility that he may have administered a strong opiate in a lethal dose.
Conclusion
Although it is clear that Mrs Hackney was suffering from terminal cancer and had not long to live, there are good reasons to suspect that her death was hastened by Shipman's intervention.
It would appear from the contemporaneous records that Mrs Hackney was not in pain and had not been receiving pain-relieving drugs. Probably pain was not to be expected from this type of cancer. Nor had Mrs Hackney been confined to bed for long. On the day before her death, she told the nurse that she was very tired and was sleeping more. On the day of her death, she said that she was staying in bed for most of the time. It was only for the last day or two that the district nurses had started to visit daily. It appears that Mrs Hackney might have had a night sitter for the first time on the night before her death. The general impression I have is not one of a woman whose death was imminent. That also seems to have been the impression of Mrs Alma Collins, her sister. I accept of course that cancer patients can deteriorate very quickly and die suddenly. There is evidence that Mrs Hackney had deteriorated on 14th
April and seems to have sent for her sister. It seems to me that it is medically possible that she died a natural death on that day.
The main cause for suspicion is that the death took place in Shipman's presence and followed immediately after a period of a few minutes in which Mrs Collins left Shipman alone with Mrs Hackney, at his request. In these few minutes, Shipman had the opportunity to give Mrs Hackney a lethal dose of opiate. If he gave it intravenously, as was his usual method of killing, Mrs Hackney would die within a few minutes. It seems to me that it would be an enormous coincidence if Mrs Hackney died naturally shortly after Shipman arrived and very shortly indeed after Mrs Collins had been asked to leave the room.
It seems to me that it is likely that Shipman injected Mrs Hackney and hastened her death. I think the timing of her death is too great a coincidence to admit of any other explanation. It may well be that he injected her with some of the diamorphine he had obtained in her name the day before. Certainly, the fact that he obtained that drug indicates he had on his mind that day both Mrs Hackney and diamorphine, which she did not need, at any rate in the large quantities he obtained.
This case bears a considerable resemblance to the case of Mr Harold Bramwell who died in Shipman's presence very shortly after Shipman had asked the relatives to leave the room.
The overwhelming probability is that Shipman gave Mrs Hackney a lethal dose of diamorphine which hastened her death. Despite Mrs Hackney's serious ill health, I do not think there is room for doubt about this. I am sure that Mrs Hackney's relatives appreciate that she had not long to live.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001