The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Dorothy Doretta Hopkins
Introduction
Miss Dorothy Doretta Hopkins died at her home, 18 Darwin Street, Hyde on Sunday, 10th
August 1997 at the age of 72. She had been a patient of Shipman since 1980. She thought very highly of him. He certified that the cause of her death was cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension.
The copy entry in the register of deaths ('death certificate') relating to Miss Hopkins' death was one of a number recovered by the police from the register office in August 1998 and, after a preliminary assessment, it was decided that the death should be investigated. The police took statements from Mr Robert Raymond Bridge (Miss Hopkins' brother-in-law), Dr Linda June Reynolds (a general practitioner at the Brooke Surgery) and Detective Sergeant John Ashley, who conducted an audit trail of the Market Street Surgery computer.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Miss Hopkins but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mr Bridge and Mrs Dorothy Haywood (Miss Hopkins' neighbour and friend) and three mobile wardens, Miss Alison Kelly, Mrs Karen Lyons and Mrs Margaret Veronica Wilde. The Inquiry has also had access to Miss Hopkins' general practitioner and hospital records and to appointments sheets, visits books and the duty doctor diary for the relevant period, the cremation documentation and the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD). The Inquiry has obtained a report from Dr John Grenville.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Miss Hopkins had never married and was living alone at the time of her death. She had previously lived with her sister, Mrs Nellie Bridge, and her husband. She was a keen churchgoer and had been a Sunday school teacher until it 'became too much' because of her angina. She had worked as a volunteer for Age Concern. Her accommodation was served by a mobile warden service. The mobile wardens would visit residents routinely about once a month and would come if called out in an emergency. Miss Hopkins' flat had an emergency pull cord by which she could summon help.
Miss Hopkins' computerised medical records confirm that she had angina, diagnosed in 1986. In 1989 and 1990, she was reviewed at Tameside General Hospital, when it was found that her symptoms were infrequent and resolved rapidly on rest. In May 1990, she was discharged from routine follow-up at the clinic. Miss Hopkins was able to do all her shopping and household chores despite her angina, although she was reliant upon her sister and brother-in-law to do her washing and heavier work around the house. Mr Bridge recalls that his sister-in-law also had problems with her legs, which restricted her walking to short distances only.
The Days Leading up to Death
Mrs Haywood last saw Miss Hopkins alive on Tuesday, 5th
August 1997. On that day, Miss Hopkins said she felt tired and lethargic; her flat needed decorating but she could not summon the energy to arrange for someone to do it. She said that Shipman had given her some tablets for her nerves but they did not seem to agree with her. She said that she was thinking of stopping the medication but would consult Shipman before doing so.
Mr Bridge and his wife, Nellie, visited Miss Hopkins on Thursday, 7th
August, when she seemed well and made no complaint about feeling unwell.
On the morning of Saturday, 9th
August, Mrs Haywood walked past Miss Hopkins' flat and noticed that the windows were wide open. It was unusual for Miss Hopkins to have her windows open in this way, although it was a very hot day.
The warden service records reveal that Miss Hopkins activated the emergency pull cord in her flat at 6.21pm on Saturday, 9th
August. In response to this, Mrs Lyons attended at Miss Hopkins' flat at 6.37pm and re-attended at 9.30pm. Mrs Lyons' report of these two visits reads as follows:
'Code 1 18.21
Code 4 18.37
lady being sick & c/o of
headache. explained that
it may be due to the heat
Doctor requested Via Control
Visited later 9.30pm lady
felt better doctor still hadn't
been.
Karen'
.
Unfortunately, Mrs Lyons is unable to recall the details of these two visits. She says that she would have made contact with the doctor via the mobile warden control room. The documentation recovered from Healthcall, the deputising service utilised by Shipman, records that they were contacted by the warden service at 6.47pm. Miss Hopkins' complaint was recorded to be
'vom'
which I interpret to mean vomiting. Had Mrs Lyons still been concerned about Miss Hopkins by the end of her shift at 11pm, she would have made an entry in the diary for 10th
August so that the warden on the next shift could call to visit. The circumstances of urgency in which the warden attended the next day would suggest Mrs Lyons had made no such diary entry, so it does not seem that she can have been very concerned about Miss Hopkins' condition.
When Mrs Haywood returned home at about 10pm that evening, she noticed that Miss Hopkins' windows were still wide open and she went to the rear of Miss Hopkins' property. She found that all was quiet and assumed that Miss Hopkins had gone to bed.
The Healthcall documentation records that the request to visit Miss Hopkins was passed to Shipman at 9.59pm. The duty doctor diary for 9th
August records that Shipman visited at 10.30pm.
The computerised medical records contain two entries for 9th
August. The first was made, according to an audit trail conducted by DS Ashley, at 8.33am on Monday, 11th
August 1997. It reads:
'H/O: vertigo
falls to r 150/100 r leg ? weak plantar ? left all ok
Stemeil
(
sic
)
sachets tluk
(
to let us know
)
if alters'
.
This would suggest that Shipman recorded a history of vertigo and falls to the right. Miss Hopkins' blood pressure was 150/100. Shipman queried whether Miss Hopkins might have weak plantar reflexes on the right side but the reflexes on the left side were all satisfactory. He recommended or prescribed Stemetil sachets, which are given for vertigo, and noted that Miss Hopkins was to let him know if her condition changed. Shipman had recorded Miss Hopkins' blood pressure on a number of occasions between 1989 and 1997, all of which recordings were entirely normal. Dr Grenville has observed that the blood pressure reading of 150/100, recorded on 9th
August, is significantly higher than previously recorded blood pressures.
The second entry for 9th
August 1997 relates to the same night visit. It seems likely that this was an administrative entry, probably created by one of Shipman's staff. The audit trail shows that it was made at 9.08am on 16th
August.
There are no entries for 9th
August in the handwritten general practitioner records.
The Day of the Death
It would appear that Miss Hopkins activated the emergency pull cord for a second time at about 9.30am on the morning of Sunday, 10th
August. Mrs Wilde, who was on duty, reached the flat at 9.44am and was let in by Miss Hopkins. Miss Hopkins asked her to collect a prescription that had been issued by the emergency doctor who had visited her the previous evening. Mrs Wilde recalls that Miss Hopkins appeared to have influenza, although her condition did not seem to be particularly serious. Mrs Wilde thought that Miss Hopkins appeared otherwise fit and well and she had no concerns over her health. Mrs Wilde returned from the chemist at about noon. She does not know what medication had been prescribed for Miss Hopkins but she recalls that Miss Hopkins said that she was going to stay in bed and rest. Miss Hopkins did not say which doctor had called on the previous evening. Mrs Wilde did not notice any signs of a stroke. Mrs Wilde does not mention that Miss Hopkins said that Shipman had called that morning.
Mrs Haywood was at home during the afternoon of 10th
August when, between about 4pm and 4.30pm, Miss Hopkins' next door neighbour, a woman who has since died and is known to the Inquiry only as Lottie, called at Mrs Haywood's house. She said that she had found Miss Hopkins dead in bed. Mrs Haywood accompanied Lottie to Miss Hopkins' flat. Miss Hopkins was in bed, propped up by pillows, with the bed covers over her chest. She looked as if she was sleeping and her body was still warm. There were wet handkerchiefs in the bedroom, suggesting that Miss Hopkins had recently done some washing and there was a covered glass of orange juice on her bedside table. Mrs Haywood recalls that they pulled the cord to summon the warden and that Miss Kelly arrived. Mrs Haywood also telephoned Mr and Mrs Bridge to inform them of the death.
According to Mrs Haywood, while they were in the bedroom together, Lottie told her that, at about 10am that morning, she had looked out of her kitchen window and had seen Shipman speaking to Miss Hopkins at her front door. It appeared that he had been to see her and was just leaving. Lottie was concerned and went to see Miss Hopkins, who appeared flushed. Miss Hopkins said that she was suffering from vertigo and had been sick. She wanted an orange drink and Lottie went to buy one from a local shop, returning with it about ten minutes later. Miss Hopkins told Lottie that she felt tired and said that she was going to lie down. She gave Lottie the keys to her flat and her handbag and asked to be 'locked in' her flat, because she did not want to be disturbed. She also asked Lottie to come back in a few hours after she had rested. Lottie said that she returned to Miss Hopkins' house at about 4pm and found Miss Hopkins dead in bed.
Miss Kelly initially told the Inquiry that she was summoned to 18 Darwin Street at about 8.30am on Sunday, 10th
August 1997. However, on being shown a copy of the report she made after her visit, Miss Kelly has accepted that she must have visited Miss Hopkins' flat at 4.52pm. She now accepts that events, which she originally suggested had happened during the morning, must have happened in the late afternoon. Her report reads as follows:
'Pulled by neighbour who'd
found Mrs H deceased
contacted G.P. as she was
seen by him last night.
No problem with death
Certificate NOK had been
Contacted. Left them
waiting for funeral
Directors'
.
This report suggests that Miss Kelly attended in response to a pull on the emergency cord by a neighbour who had found Miss Hopkins dead. Miss Kelly had contacted the general practitioner as he had seen Miss Hopkins the previous night. He had said that he would be able to provide a certificate of cause of death. The next of kin, Mr and Mrs Bridge, had been contacted. They must have arrived, as Miss Kelly left them waiting for the arrival of the funeral directors.
I note that someone must have told Miss Kelly that Miss Hopkins had seen her doctor the night before. Since the most likely sources of that information are Lottie and Mrs Haywood, some doubt is cast on the evidence that Lottie had told Mrs Haywood that Shipman had visited that morning. It is possible, however, that Lottie or Mrs Haywood had not explained clearly to Miss Kelly about Shipman's visit. Mrs Haywood was almost incoherent when she spoke to Mr Bridge on the telephone and may have still been upset when she spoke to Miss Kelly.
Miss Kelly now recalls that, on her arrival at the house, she was met by a lady with a German accent who lived in the flat above Miss Hopkins' flat. This lady, who was with another female neighbour, told Miss Kelly that she had been concerned about Miss Hopkins because she had been unwell the previous evening, the doctor had been to see her that evening, she had not been seen that morning and the curtains to her flat were still drawn. Miss Kelly does not recall that the lady with the German accent had a key to Miss Hopkins' flat and thinks that she may have called out a joiner to break into the flat. She recalls that Miss Hopkins was seated in bed, propped up by pillows. She had her arms in front of her with her hands loosely clasped on top of the bed covers and looked very peaceful. Her colouring was normal and she did not look as though she was dead. Miss Kelly checked for a pulse but could not find one. She says that Miss Hopkins' body must have felt cold because otherwise she would have called for an ambulance. She telephoned Shipman so that he could see the body. Shipman arrived at the flat very promptly. He said that he would 'sort everything out'.
Mr Bridge recalls that he received the telephone call from Mrs Haywood at about 10am, although the billing records for Mrs Haywood's telephone line reveal that the call to his house was made at 4.36pm. He went to Miss Hopkins' flat where he found Mrs Haywood, Lottie and the mobile warden. Mr Bridge recalls that Miss Hopkins was in bed, sitting upright and wearing her nightclothes. She looked peaceful. Shipman said that Miss Hopkins had died of heart trouble, aggravated by her legs. He did not mention the signs of possible stroke that he had apparently detected the previous evening. Mr Bridge asked whether he ought to report the death to the authorities and Shipman said that there was no need.
Mr Bridge later spoke with Lottie. She told him that she had last seen Miss Hopkins alive the previous evening. She also said that she had seen Shipman leaving Miss Hopkins' home some time between then and the time when the death was discovered. It is not known at what time Lottie saw Miss Hopkins on the evening of 9th
August nor what time she was referring to when she told Mr Bridge that she had seen Shipman leaving. Lottie also told Mr Bridge that, as Miss Hopkins did not have a telephone, she would usually ask Lottie to telephone for the doctor if he was required. She had not asked her to telephone for the doctor on this occasion.
There is no reference to Miss Hopkins' name in the visits book for 9th
or 10th
August 1997, although her name does appear in the duty doctor diary for 9th
August 1997.
There first computer entry for 10th
August 1997 reads as follows:
'O/E - dead
neighbour saw at 1400 ok found 1500 in bed dead cva bp'
.
This note indicates that Shipman understood that Miss Hopkins had been seen alive at 2pm and had been found dead in bed at 3pm. He was to certify the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident due to hypertension. The entry was made at 8.34am, immediately after the entry relating to the visit on the evening of 10th
August. Other entries, one relating to 10th
August and two relating to 11th
August, are administrative in nature.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, recording that Miss Hopkins had died at home on 10th
August 1997. He said that he had last seen her alive on 9th
August. He gave the cause of death as cerebrovascular accident which had come on three hours before death. He said that the underlying cause was hypertension from which Miss Hopkins had suffered for more than ten years. He said he had seen the body after death and that there would not be a post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed cremation Form B, where he recorded that death had occurred at
'1400hrs'
on 11th
August 1997, although this date was subsequently corrected to 10th
August. Shipman claimed that he had attended Miss Hopkins during her last illness for a period of 24 hours and had last seen her alive 24 hours before her death. The mode of death was said to be a coma of two to three hours' duration, which would suggest, consistent with what he wrote on the MCCD, that the stroke had come on at about 11am that day. In response to the question asking how far Shipman's answers as to mode and cause of death were based on his own observations or on statements made by others, Shipman did not answer the question but wrote,
'neighbour saw her at 14.00 hrs found her dead 3 hrs later'
. This is not consistent with his earlier entry where he had said that the time of death was 2pm. Shipman went on to say that no one was present at the death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Richard Baker found the death highly suspicious on account of the contents of the cremation documentation and the medical records.
Dr Grenville says that there is no evidence that Miss Hopkins had previously been suffering from hypertension, although he did not see the computerised records from 1993 to 3rd
July 1997. I have seen the computerised records for this period and they show continuing satisfactory levels of blood pressure.
Dr Grenville says that, if Shipman saw Miss Hopkins late in the evening of Saturday, 9th
August 1997 with vertigo and right-sided weakness, it would have been appropriate for him to certify the cause of her death as cerebrovascular accident.
According to Dr Grenville, the position in which Miss Hopkins was found is consistent with her having died from an injection of opiate. It is possible, but unlikely, that she died of a heart attack or haemorrhagic stroke while deeply asleep but her death occurred in the afternoon, not at night, and sudden death by such mechanism is not, of course, what Shipman certified.
Conclusion
The evidence suggests that Shipman visited Miss Hopkins at about 10.30pm on the eve of her death. He cannot have killed her then, as she was alive the following morning.
The evidence in support of a visit late on the Saturday evening is very strong. First, there are the contemporaneous records made by Mrs Lyons on 9th
August which suggest that she asked for the doctor to visit Miss Hopkins and that he had not yet visited by 9.30pm. Second, there is the evidence of Mrs Wilde, who called on Miss Hopkins at about 9.30am on Sunday, 10th
August and took her prescription to the pharmacy. That prescription must have been written the previous evening. Third, there is the record made by Miss Kelly, the warden who attended after the death, which suggests that she was told that the doctor had visited the night before the death. Fourth, there is the Healthcall documentation which records that at 9.59pm Shipman was asked to visit Miss Hopkins. Fifth, there is Shipman's own record of the visit and his claim, entered in the duty doctor diary, which suggests that he visited Miss Hopkins at 10.30pm.
There is very little evidence that Shipman visited Miss Hopkins on 10th
August. It is clear that a return visit was a real possibility following the visit late the previous evening. However, that is not evidence of a visit. The witness evidence is conflicting and vague. There is the hearsay account of what Lottie supposedly told Mrs Haywood. That suggests that Shipman visited at about 10am, after which Miss Hopkins was alive but not entirely well and was looking forward to a sleep. She is said to have handed her keys to Lottie and asked her to return later. It is not clear when this conversation is supposed to have taken place. There is the account of what Lottie supposedly told Mr Bridge, which was that she had seen Shipman leaving Miss Hopkins' flat, but it is not clear whether this visit had taken place in the evening of 9th
or the morning of 10th
August. There is the evidence of Mrs Wilde, who last saw Miss Hopkins around noon, at which time she was in her nightdress but was able to answer the door and appeared to be not particularly unwell. She did not tell Mrs Wilde that Shipman had been that morning or was expected later that day. Shipman himself made no record relating to a visit on 10th
August. There is therefore no direct evidence to show that Shipman visited Miss Hopkins at a time when he might have killed her.
However, there remain causes to suspect that Shipman might have visited Miss Hopkins and have killed her. If he did so, it must have been at some time after Mrs Wilde's second visit. This would mean that Mrs Haywood's account of what Lottie told her was not accurate. I do not regard the reported accounts of what Lottie said to Mrs Haywood or Mr Bridge as particularly reliable. The maker of the hearsay statements is dead. It is entirely possible that Mrs Haywood and Mr Bridge are confused about what they were told.
There are four separate reasons why I suspect that Shipman might have killed Miss Hopkins. The first reason is because I suspect that Shipman's medical record is not genuine. The contents of the medical record cannot be accepted as a genuine record unless supported by other evidence. Shipman often fabricated medical records to provide a plausible explanation for a death he had caused. This entry was not made until the early morning of Monday, 11th
August, the day after the death. Although I accept that the record is genuine in that Shipman did visit in the late evening of Saturday, 9th
August, I am by no means satisfied that the record was a true account of what he found. I say that for the following reasons. First, the medical record, taken in conjunction with the duty doctor diary, suggests that Shipman visited at 10.30pm on 9th
August and found that Miss Hopkins had signs of a stroke. This is not consistent with the observations of Mrs Lyons, who had first seen Miss Hopkins at about 6.30pm, found her to be feeling sick and dizzy, called for the doctor to visit, did not record any signs of a stroke and found that she was feeling better by 9.30pm. It would be surprising, although not impossible, if Miss Hopkins had developed the signs and symptoms of a stroke some hours after the warden service contacted Healthcall requesting that a doctor visit her on account of sickness. Second, Shipman said on Form B and on the MCCD that the stroke of which Miss Hopkins was supposed to have died began three hours before her death, that is at about 11am on 10th
August, whereas according to the medical record it had already begun at 10.30pm. Third, I am suspicious of the claim that Miss Hopkins' blood pressure was raised. Shipman claimed on the MCCD that Miss Hopkins had had hypertension for ten years but the medical records do not confirm this. Fourth, I am suspicious of his claim that she had been falling to the right. If that were true, I would have expected Mrs Lyons to mention it in at least one of her records of 9th
August and for this information to be passed on to Healthcall. Moreover, if Miss Hopkins had a developing stroke, I would have expected Mrs Wilde to observe some signs of it on the morning of 10th
August. It appears that she did not. Fifth, if Miss Hopkins really was showing signs of a stroke, I do not think a competent doctor, acting honestly in the interests of his patient, would leave her alone overnight without ensuring that a relative or friend was aware of the situation and could keep an eye on her. Sixth, Shipman's note that Miss Hopkins was to let him know if her condition were to alter, is typical of notes I have seen in many cases in which Shipman has killed his patient. In general, he used this device to make it appear that the patient had been quite ill when last seen by him so that the subsequent death was explicable, but not so ill as to require admission to hospital or the summoning of a relative. Considering these factors, I think it likely that this computerised entry is false. I think it unlikely that Miss Hopkins showed any signs of a stroke on 9th
August or, for that matter, on 10th
August.
The second reason why I suspect that Shipman might have killed Miss Hopkins is because the contents of the certificates are suspicious. I have already mentioned that there is an inconsistency between Shipman's claim on the MCCD that the stroke began three hours before death and his medical note, which suggests that it had begun the previous evening. There are several suspicious features on Form B. First, Shipman claims to know at what time Miss Hopkins died, although he also said that no one was present with her at the death. He could not possibly have known. If this had been a natural death occurring in the absence of any witness, Shipman could only have given the bracket within which the death must have occurred. Shipman often pretended to know the time of a death when he wanted to distance the time of his visit from the death. He frequently placed the death several hours after his own last visit and, especially in the later years when his devices became more elaborate, he often claimed that someone had seen the patient alive since his last visit. Here, I suspect that he has done both. If we postulate that Shipman visited Miss Hopkins at, say, between noon and 1pm and killed her, he would wish to distance the death from his visit. He might not know whether his visit had been observed. Here he said that the death occurred at 2pm. He also claimed that someone had seen Miss Hopkins alive at 2pm, an inconsistency which seems to demonstrate a degree of carelessness on his part, whether guilty of killing Miss Hopkins or not. There is no evidence available to the Inquiry to suggest that a neighbour saw Miss Hopkins alive at 2pm. It is possible that Shipman is right and that Lottie had seen Miss Hopkins alive at that time and had told Shipman so. However, the making of a false entry of this nature would be entirely typical of Shipman's practice in the late 1990s. Second, on Form B Shipman claimed that he had last seen Miss Hopkins alive about 24 hours before death, which would suggest that he had seen her in the early afternoon of 9th
August. There is no other evidence to support that and it is inconsistent with his own medical note. Third, I am also suspicious of Shipman's claim that Miss Hopkins had been in a coma for two to three hours before her death. There is no way in which he could have known that and no one who could have given him that information. It is not something which a doctor could infer from the circumstances. In any event, that entry is inconsistent with the entry below it, where Shipman says that Miss Hopkins was seen by a neighbour at 2pm. That implies that the neighbour saw her in a coma but went away and did not find her dead until three hours later. That seems rather unlikely. There is also an inconsistency between the time at which Shipman said in his medical record that the body had been found and the time stated on Form B.
In short, the certificates present a confused and inconsistent picture of the timing of events. I accept that these inconsistencies might be explained by mere carelessness on Shipman's part. However, they are also consistent with a desire to present a picture of the circumstances which will not cast suspicion on him. If he had visited and killed Miss Hopkins at, say, between noon and 1pm, he would wish to create the impression that she had died some time later and had been seen alive by another after his visit. If he were seeking to present the picture of a stroke death, he might well wish to suggest a period of coma. I suspect that his desire to create the desired impressions led him into making inconsistent statements.
The third reason why I suspect that Shipman might have killed Miss Hopkins is that I am also slightly suspicious about the position in which Miss Hopkins was found. It appears that she was lying propped up on her pillows with the covers brought up over her chest. It seems rather unlikely that she could have gone to bed, then had a stroke and fallen into a coma and died and yet have remained so neatly arranged in bed. Yet her position and appearance in bed were very much what one might expect if she had been given an injection of strong opiate and had died in Shipman's presence. However, it is possible that she fell into a deep sleep on the afternoon of 10th
August and suffered a sudden heart attack or haemorrhagic stroke while asleep.
The fourth reason is that it would not be at all surprising if Shipman had killed Miss Hopkins. I take into account that, in 1997, Shipman was killing patients at a very high rate. This death has some of Shipman's hallmarks.
This is not an easy case to decide. In favour of a natural death, there is evidence that Miss Hopkins was unwell, although those who saw her did not have the impression that she was seriously ill. It is possible that she died a natural death during the afternoon of 10th
August. There is no direct evidence of a visit by Shipman after Mrs Wilde's departure, although an unsolicited second visit would not have been atypical of him. In favour of Shipman's unlawful involvement, there is the creation of a false medical record and a series of conflicting and, I think, self-serving entries on the MCCD and Form B. After some hesitation, I have come to the conclusion that it is likely that Shipman killed Miss Hopkins.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001