The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
John Hilton
Introduction
Mr John Hilton died at his home, 13 Queens Drive, Gee Cross, Hyde on Friday, 4th
November 1994 at the age of 64. He had been a patient of Shipman since Shipman's arrival in Hyde in 1977 and had followed him when he moved to the Market Street Surgery. He thought very highly of Shipman, who certified that the cause of his death was congestive heart failure due to hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
In January 2001, Professor Richard Baker informed the Greater Manchester Police that, in his opinion, on the basis of the information contained in the medical records, Mr Hilton's death was highly suspicious and that, on the basis of the information recorded in the cremation certificate, the death was moderately suspicious. The police investigated the death and took a statement from Mrs Hilda Mary Barton, Mr Hilton's sister-in-law. An inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
The Inquiry has taken statements from Mrs Barton, Mrs Brenda Wigley, a neighbour of Mr Hilton, and Mr Keith Porter, one of Mr Hilton's friends. The Inquiry has also had access to Mr Hilton's general practitioner, community nursing and hospital records, the appointments sheets, visits books, the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been written following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
At the time of his death, Mr Hilton was living with his wife, Mrs Joyce Hilton, who died in September 1997. Mrs Barton recalls that he worked in the engineering trade until he was made redundant in his late forties or early fifties. He then worked as a car salesman until he retired at the age of 58, following a heart attack and stroke. Mr Hilton had not enjoyed good health for some time before that. He did not have a healthy diet and was always overweight. He smoked very heavily and would frequently drink as much as 14 pints of beer in an evening. At one stage, he weighed 23 stone.
Mr Hilton's medical records reveal a history of obesity, excessive alcohol consumption, high blood pressure, heart disease, epilepsy and diabetes. In October 1987, he had a heart attack and, two months later, he suffered a cerebrovascular accident. This left him with left-sided hemiplegia and he remained in hospital for two months. In 1988, he was found to have pernicious anaemia.
On 16th
November 1990, Mr Hilton was admitted to Tameside General Hospital complaining of increased dyspnoea, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea and ankle oedema. An electrocardiograph (ECG) examination revealed left bundle branch block and a chest x-ray confirmed a diagnosis of left ventricular failure with a right plural effusion. Whilst in hospital, he suffered a grand mal convulsion, which was thought to be due to his existing cerebral vascular disease. He made good progress and was discharged home on 22nd
November 1990.
In May 1991, Mr Hilton was readmitted to Tameside General Hospital with a history of pain and swelling in the left leg. A clinical diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis was made and he was treated with anticoagulants. He improved and was discharged home on 24th
May 1991.
In September 1994, he was admitted again to Tameside General Hospital for several days, complaining of shortness of breath. A diagnosis of atrial fibrillation was made and it was noted that his right foot was ischaemic.
Mrs Barton recalls that, following his heart attack, Mr Hilton became virtually housebound. He put on more weight because he took no exercise. He could not climb the stairs at home and a stairlift was installed. For the last six to 12 months of his life, he was confined to bed, was often tired and became very depressed. Shipman visited him frequently, as can be seen from the records. Mrs Barton says that Mr and Mrs Hilton thought Shipman was wonderful because of the way he cared for Mr Hilton during this very difficult period.
By October 1994, Mr Hilton was suffering from advanced ischaemia in his legs. He was seen at home by Mr A B Woodyer, consultant surgeon. On 21st
October 1994, Mr Woodyer wrote to Shipman to advise that Mr Hilton was not a suitable candidate for arterial reconstruction because the ischaemia in his right leg was too advanced. It appears that Mr Hilton was in a great deal of pain. Mr Woodyer told Shipman that he had explained to Mr and Mrs Hilton that the only available alternatives were an above-knee amputation of the right leg or increasing doses of opiate analgesia. It is apparent from this letter that Mr Hilton was at this stage taking some analgesics. The computerised records suggest that he was taking 30mg morphine sulphate twice daily in a slow-release tablet.
It appears from the records that Shipman was visiting Mr Hilton weekly to take a blood sample, which was to be sent to the hospital for testing of the prothrombin time, which is a test of the degree of coagulation. In October, he took samples on the 6th
, 13th
, 20th
and 27th
.
Mrs Barton is under the impression that Mr Hilton did not wish to undergo an amputation. It appears that Shipman visited on 31st
October to talk to Mr Hilton about it. There is a Post-it note attached to Mr Woodyer's letter, indicating that Mr Hilton had decided to have his leg amputated.
The Events of the Day before Death
The district nursing records reveal that Nurse Clegg saw Mr Hilton at home on 3rd
November 1994. The following entry appears:
'Gangrene travelling fast-
Is for admission next week-
Leg leaking serous fluid
John is confused
quite immobile
today - has been incontinent
Attempted to make comfortable
S. Clegg'
.
The following entry appears in Shipman's visits book for Thursday, 3rd November:
'John Hilton -
-BLOODS-
'
.
Thus, it appears that Shipman was due to visit Mr Hilton to take blood on the day before he died. Whether he did in fact take a blood sample is not clear. There is no entry for this day in the handwritten records. The computerised medical records contain the following entries, which suggest that Shipman visited that day:
'Had a chat to patient...
going in next weeek
(
sic
)
fo
(
sic
)
op...
Trauma self-referral...
Hypoglyiacemic
(
sic
)
attack...
Trauma self-referral...
Referral no. 94/1034...'
.
These entries suggest that Shipman saw Mr Hilton at home and spoke to him about his forthcoming operation. There is no record that he took a blood sample. The note also suggests, as was the case, that Mr Hilton suffered a hypoglycaemic attack and was admitted to hospital. However, that was much later in the day.
The hospital records show that Mr Hilton was taken to the Accident and Emergency department at Tameside General Hospital, arriving at about 10.30pm. He was found to be in a diabetic coma and had suffered a hypoglycaemic attack. The Triage Nurse Report indicates that he was given an intramuscular injection of glucose but that this had no effect. As glucose cannot be given by the intramuscular route, he was probably given glucagon, a preparation used in hypoglycaemic attacks. He was then given an intravenous injection of glucose and responded immediately. An ambulance was booked to take him home at 12.52am on 4th
November.
Because the audit trail facility had not been installed on the computer at this time, it is not possible to discover when Shipman made any of the 3rd
November entries. One would expect that the first two entries were made in the afternoon of 3rd
November following a visit during Shipman's usual visiting time. He usually returned to the surgery by about 3.30pm to make up the records before starting afternoon surgery at 4pm or a little earlier.
The Day of the Death
Shipman's visits book for 4th
November contains an entry as follows:
'John Hilton
Urgent'
.
The words have been struck through. That entry suggests that Shipman was asked to go or decided to go to Mr Hilton's house while he was still alive. Whether he was informed by the hospital of the emergency attendance of the night before or whether Mrs Hilton summoned him is not known. Shipman would not normally go out on his rounds until about noon. However, in an emergency, he would occasionally leave the surgery to make an urgent visit.
Mrs Wigley says that she visited Mr and Mrs Hilton on the day of Mr Hilton's death (although she mistakenly refers to 5th
November rather than the 4th
). She arrived during the morning and, as she approached the house, found the front door open. She went inside and saw Mrs Hilton standing at the top of the stairs with another elderly lady, whom Mrs Wigley did not know. Mrs Hilton told Mrs Wigley that she thought her husband had died. Mrs Wigley does not say that she saw Shipman at the house. However, she did not go into the bedroom or ask whether anyone else was there so it is possible that he was. Mrs Wigley cannot remember what happened next.
Mrs Barton recalls that she received a telephone call from her sister at about 11am on 4th
November 1984 to say that Mr Hilton had died. Mrs Barton recalls that her sister was with a home help. The Inquiry has been unable to locate this person. Mrs Barton told the police that her sister told her that she had called for the doctor, although it is not clear whether this was done before or after Mr Hilton died. Mrs Barton recalls that her sister was very upset because Mr Hilton had bruises on his face. Shipman reassured Mrs Hilton that they were a natural occurrence caused by Mr Hilton having suffered a heart attack or a stroke.
Mr Hilton's handwritten general practitioner records contain the following entry for that day:
'4/11/94
V
(
visit
)
1.00
Collapse Heart Failure
1a hypertension
diabetes
2 gangrene ®
foot
'
.
The computerised records contain a similar entry.
Certification
The MCCD, completed by Shipman, records that he last saw Mr Hilton alive on 3rd
November 1994. The causes of death were stated to be congestive heart failure, hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Gangrene of the right foot was certified to be a significant condition contributing to the death but not related to the disease or condition causing it.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He certified that death had occurred at 11am on 4th
November 1994. He recorded that he had attended Mr Hilton during his last illness for two months and that he last saw him alive
'within 24 hours'
of his death. Shipman stated that he made a complete external examination of the body within half an hour after the death. The mode of death was said to be collapse lasting only seconds. He said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on statements made by Mr Hilton's wife and a home help who were said also to have been present at the moment of death.
The Expert Evidence
Professor Baker considered the death highly suspicious because the medical records contained so little detail and because it was not clear whether or not Shipman was present at the death. Professor Baker considered the death moderately suspicious on his consideration of the information supplied in the cremation documentation.
Conclusion
It is clear that Mr Hilton had gangrene in his right foot and leg and that he was doomed to die very soon unless he had his leg amputated. However, it appears that the consultant surgeon did not expect him to die as the result of gangrene as early as 4th
November. Shipman does not suggest that gangrene was the direct cause of death.
Mr Hilton had many other underlying conditions, any one of which could have been fatal. Only the day before his death, he had a hypoglycaemic attack. He could have had another, which could have been fatal, but it appears that he did not. According to Shipman, the death was due to congestive heart failure. Yet there is no indication in the medical records that Mr Hilton's underlying heart failure was reaching a critical stage. There is no description of the process of death in the medical records. This causes me (as it caused Professor Baker) to suspect that the death might not have been natural. Congestive heart failure was one of the causes of death most frequently relied on by Shipman when he had killed a patient.
Mr Hilton was, in some respects, typical of Shipman's victims. True, he was not an elderly woman, living alone. However, he was in very poor health, had been receiving a very high level of medical and nursing care and was about to undergo an operation which would probably prolong his life but which would result in the prolongation of the high level of care. I think it likely that Shipman took the view that Mr Hilton's quality of life would never be good. I have come across a number of cases where Shipman killed patients whose quality of life he knew was poor or who were causing difficulties for their carer or were expensive to the National Health Service. Mr Hilton fell into that category.
There is no clear evidence that Shipman was at Mr Hilton's house on the morning of 4th
November while he was still alive. The visits book suggests that Shipman was aware that he was needed urgently at Mr Hilton's house. There is no urgency after death. There is other evidence to suggest that Shipman did not attend at the house that morning, while Mr Hilton was alive. Shipman himself said in the computerised medical records, on the MCCD and on Form B that he had last seen Mr Hilton alive on 3rd
November. I do not attach great weight to anything Shipman says unless corroborated by others, as he frequently told lies in medical records and certification documents. There is no convincing corroboration of his claim. Mrs Wigley did not see him when she arrived at the Hiltons' house on 4th
November. That proves nothing. Shipman could have been there earlier and have given Mr Hilton a lethal injection. He was held in such high regard by Mrs Hilton that he could easily have given her a plausible account of his intentions.
I regret to say that I do not feel able to reach a positive conclusion in this case. A natural death was entirely possible and would not have been wholly unexpected. On the other hand, there are real causes for concern and suspicion that Shipman might have caused the death.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001