The Shipman Inquiry - Case Decision
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
The First Report
>
Chronological List of Cases
>
Ada Matley Hilton
Introduction
Mrs Ada Matley Hilton died at her home, 31 St John's Drive, Godley, Hyde on Wednesday, 12th
July 1995 at the age of 88. She had been a patient of Shipman probably since his arrival in Hyde in 1977. He certified that the cause of her death was cardiac arrest due to cardiac arrhythmia and ischaemic heart disease.
In August 1998, following the publicity surrounding the police enquiries into the death of Mrs Kathleen Grundy, Mr John Shaw, a taxi driver based in Hyde, expressed concern to the police about the circumstances of Mrs Hilton's death. The police investigated the death and took statements from Mrs Alice Godley (Mrs Hilton's sister), Ms Kathleen Grimshaw (the partner of Mr Derek Godley, Mrs Godley's son) and Mrs Susan Graves (Mrs Hilton's home care worker). The police also took a statement from Dr John Grenville.
Shipman was not prosecuted for causing the death of Mrs Hilton but an inquest into the death was opened and adjourned by the South Manchester Coroner on 18th
May 2001.
On 13th
March 2000, Mr Godley wrote to the Laming Inquiry stating that neither he nor his family wished to receive any more correspondence regarding the 'Dr Shipman Inquiry'. This wish has been respected and the Inquiry has not taken any further witness statements.
The Inquiry has had access to Mrs Hilton's general practitioner records and to appointments sheets, visits books and other practice documents for the relevant period, as well as to the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and the cremation documentation.
This decision has been made following consideration of the papers and without an oral hearing.
Personal Background
Mrs Hilton was widowed in 1991 and lived alone. Her sister, Mrs Godley, lived nearby. According to Mrs Godley, Mrs Hilton became quite infirm in the last few years of her life but she remained independent with the assistance of her sister and her home care worker. Mrs Graves visited every day to do shopping and would clean the flat every two weeks. Mrs Godley would make lunch for both of them each day to ensure that Mrs Hilton had a cooked meal. Mrs Graves was aware that Mrs Hilton had poor eyesight due to cataracts and a heart condition for which she took medication. Her recollection is that Mrs Hilton did not see her doctor very often.
Mrs Hilton's medical records show that she began to suffer blackouts in 1988. In 1991, it was discovered that these were due to an intermittently irregular heartbeat for which she was prescribed medication. She also suffered from cataracts in both eyes. She had surgery on the right eye in 1993 but declined surgery on the left.
The handwritten medical records indicate that Shipman visited Mrs Hilton on 25th
April 1994. His note describes an episode of congestive heart failure (CHF) and, in Dr Grenville's opinion, she was treated appropriately for this. She was then reviewed on 4th
May 1994 when there was still some evidence of cardiac failure, but she was said to be much improved when Shipman saw her on 19th
May 1994 and again on 14th
June 1994, by which time her cardiac failure appeared to have settled. However, her treatment for this condition was continued and it appears that Shipman visited Mrs Hilton periodically for review. Visits are recorded on 13th
September 1994, 31st
January 1995, 22nd
March 1995 and 12th
April 1995. It appears that Mrs Hilton's condition was well managed. The note for 12th
April 1995 suggests that she was to be reviewed routinely three months later.
About two weeks before her death, Mrs Hilton told Mrs Graves that she was feeling run down and asked her to buy some multivitamins.
The Day of the Death
Mrs Graves visited Mrs Hilton at about midday on 12th
July and stayed for about 15 minutes. She found Mrs Hilton to be her normal self. A short time later, Mrs Godley came to the house to cook lunch. She made bacon, egg, sausage and tomatoes, which they both ate. Mrs Hilton ate all her meal. Mrs Godley washed the pots and went back home at about 2pm. Mrs Hilton did not say that she felt unwell; nor did she mention that she was expecting a visit from Shipman.
The practice visits book for 12th
July 1995 contains the following entry, which suggests that Shipman intended to make a routine visit to Mrs Hilton:
'Ada Hilton 31 St Johns Drive Hyde CHF re-visit'
.
At about 3pm, Ms Grimshaw arrived at Mrs Hilton's flat. She looked through the living room window and could see Mrs Hilton sitting on an upright chair at her dining table. She appeared to be sleeping. Ms Grimshaw knocked on the front door but there was no reply. She then knocked on the living room window, but again there was no response. Ms Grimshaw went to Mrs Godley's house to fetch a key. Together the two women returned to Mrs Hilton's flat and let themselves in. In the living room they found Mrs Hilton sitting at the table near the window. She was fully dressed in her day clothes. Her legs were crossed and her head was leaning over to her left side. Her hands were clasped together on her lap. Mrs Godley thinks that her sister was in the same position as she had been when she left her earlier that day. Ms Grimshaw checked for a pulse but could not find one and concluded that Mrs Hilton had died.
Ms Grimshaw contacted Shipman, who arrived about 30 minutes later. On his arrival, he went to Mrs Hilton and examined her. Then he said, 'I was only here half an hour ago, I asked her to go into hospital for angina problems'. Ms Grimshaw cannot recall the rest of the conversation but Shipman left about ten minutes later. Ms Grimshaw telephoned the undertakers, who came to remove the body.
Shipman recorded the following entry in Mrs Hilton's handwritten medical records:
'12/7/95 V
(
visit
)
CHF OK pulse very irregular
? AF ? Heart block
D/V Dr Matin ECG'
.
Dr Grenville interpreted this to suggest that Shipman found no sign of congestive heart failure. He found her pulse to be irregular. In Dr Grenville's view, it appears that Shipman was unsure whether Mrs Hilton was in atrial fibrillation or in heart block. It appears that Shipman intended to arrange for Mrs Hilton to be visited by a consultant physician, Dr Matin, for an electrocardiogram (ECG). I note that there is no reference to advice that Mrs Hilton should be admitted to hospital or that Mrs Hilton had rejected the advice. There is no reference to the provision of any care for Mrs Hilton.
The only entry in the computerised records for the day of death reads:
'12/7/95 O/E dead
cardiac arryth cardiac arrest'
.
Certification
Shipman completed the MCCD, giving the immediate cause of death as cardiac arrest, which he said was due to cardiac arrhythmia, which in turn was due to ischaemic heart disease. He said that Mrs Hilton had had cardiac arrhythmia for five years and ischaemic heart disease for six years. He said he had last seen Mrs Hilton alive on the day of her death. He had seen the body after death. There would be no post-mortem examination.
Shipman also completed Form B of the cremation certificate. He stated that death had occurred at
'15.30 hrs'
on 12th
July 1995. He said that he had attended Mrs Hilton for two hours during her last illness. He said that he had last seen her alive about one hour before her death. He said he had seen the body about an hour after death, when he carried out a complete external examination. He gave the cause of death as on the MCCD and said that the mode of death was
'collapse'
lasting seconds. He said that his answers relating to the cause and mode of death were based on his own observations and the statements made by
'neighbours'
. Shipman stated that no one was present at the moment of death and wrote that Mrs Hilton had been
'found by neighbours dead'
. I assume that the reference to neighbours is intended to refer to Ms Grimshaw and Mrs Godley. It is hard to imagine what they could have said to Shipman from which he could draw any inferences as to the mode or duration of Mrs Hilton's death.
The Expert Evidence
Dr Grenville found no evidence of ischaemic heart disease in Mrs Hilton's medical records and has observed that the cause of her original irregular heartbeat in 1991 was not elucidated. In Dr Grenville's view, Shipman's diagnosis as to the cause of death was inadequate, because although he found her pulse to be irregular, he
'clearly had no idea of the nature of the irregularity, nor of its cause'
. Dr Grenville told the police that Shipman should have reported this sudden and unexpected death to the coroner with a view to a post-mortem examination being held. Dr Grenville does comment, however, that Mrs Hilton's previous heart irregularities had been fast ones and as such were more likely to lead to sudden death.
Conclusion
There are several suspicious circumstances surrounding this death. First and most obvious, Mrs Hilton was found dead very shortly after a visit by Shipman. Shipman would have us believe that she died a sudden but natural death about an hour after he left. Mrs Hilton had not asked for Shipman to visit that day on account of any illness. He was paying a routine visit of his own volition. Mrs Hilton was well at about midday and ate a good lunch. Although I accept that she was very frail and also was at an increased risk of a cardiac death, it would seem to me to a quite remarkable coincidence if she died naturally soon after he left. I could accept that such a coincidence might happen very occasionally but with Shipman it seems to have happened quite frequently. I do not accept that such frequent coincidences happen and I regard the temporal connection between Shipman's visit and the death as highly suspicious.
In the medical records Shipman claimed that Mrs Hilton had cardiac problems when he saw her. After the death, he told Ms Grimshaw that he had asked Mrs Hilton to go into hospital for treatment of her heart problems. He implied that she had refused. There is no reference to the advice or the refusal. Nor is there any record of the treatment he arranged or the care to be provided. There are two causes for suspicion arising from this aspect of the evidence. First, it is a common feature of many cases in which Shipman killed that he would claim that he had found a patient unwell, had advised admission to hospital but the patient had refused. The patient had then died, shortly afterwards, of the condition for which he or she had (as Shipman would suggest) effectively refused treatment. That Shipman made the suggestion here is a cause for suspicion. However, I am also suspicious in any case where I find that Shipman's note reflects a course of action which no reasonable and competent doctor would follow. No reasonable and competent doctor would leave a woman of 88 years of age alone in the house if she were in need of hospital treatment or care. If there were no relative or neighbour who could provide care, he would have to make arrangements with the district nursing service and possibly Social Services. That would not have been necessary in this case, as Mrs Godley lived nearby. That Shipman left without making arrangements for Mrs Hilton's care leads me to the conclusion that she did not need care as she was already dead.
On Form B, Shipman claimed to know the time of death. Unless he was present at the death, there would be no way in which he could know or assess when Mrs Hilton had died. Shipman very frequently claimed to know the time of death, which he always stated was an appreciable time after his own visit. Usually (although not always), I think he was fairly accurate when stating the time of his own visit. Occasionally he would say it was a little earlier than it had been. But his claim to know the time of death was very often an attempt to create the impression that a substantial time had elapsed between his visit and the death. I think he did that in this case.
Finally, the circumstances in which Mrs Hilton's body were found and her peaceful appearance in death were not typical of death by cardiac arrest, but wholly consistent with death by lethal injection of diamorphine.
The overwhelming likelihood in this case is that Shipman killed Mrs Hilton, almost certainly by lethal injection of diamorphine. Notwithstanding her great age, her frail condition and her past history of heart problems, I am able to say that I feel sure of this conclusion.
Click here
to view the evidence in this case
Previous
Back to Chronological List
Next
Published by The Shipman Inquiry
© Crown Copyright 2001